Adult means anyone aged years of age or older.
Agreement means this Information Sharing Agreement as amended from time to
Before I started my finance journey, I studied and graduated with a Master of Professional Accounting. In the Programme, I started in financial accounting at DIA, and then the tax team at Kinga Ora. Im consistently provided with new opportunities for ongoing professional development. One of the best parts about being in the Public Sector as a finance graduate is that my work helps support Kiwis across New Zealand.
Borrower means a student loan borrower whose location is overseas or unknown.
Budgeting, forecasting, business advisory, analysing, and sorting data, there is a bottomless pit of opportunities to learn and grow from here. I love the exposure to the different areas of accounting, and the people you meet and get to work with
CIR means the Commissioner of IR and has the same meaning as in section of the
Chief Executive means the Chief Executive, Secretary for Internal Affairs.
Child support means any payment required to be made under the Child Support Act
Commissioner means Office of the Privacy Commissioner.
DIA means the Department of Internal Affairs.
I am authorised to represent this person or organisation.
I have the skills and qualifications required.
I love being able to develop skills in many areas and being able to meet and collaborate with people from all of Government. Its been invaluable attending events to listen to leaders in the field talk give career advice and learn from that. But one of the best things is being able to relate the work we do in the office to impacts for New Zealand and being able to transform messy data into something meaningful.
I love the fact that we are getting rotated between some of the largest and most complex government agencies. The variety of the work I do and the available opportunities to learn new skills are what make this programme remarkable.
I love the variety of work that I have been given and have enjoyed contributing to the New Zealand public sector. So far, Ive worked in tax and financial accounting at Kinga Ora, procurement at Department of Internal Affairs, and management accounting at Oranga Tamariki. The highlight of the graduate program for me is the wide range of teams you get to work with and the people you meet.
I meet the criteria to access a product or service.
I was born and bred in Wellington, studied at Victoria University, and I joined the Finance Graduate Programme in . So far, I have worked at Kinga Ora, The Ministry of Social Development and Department of Internal Affairs. My favourite part of being a Public Sector Finance Graduate is definitely the variety offered by the rotations. The ability to work in different accounting roles across different government agencies has been invaluable for my development.
IR means the Inland Revenue Department, including the CIR.
ISA means Information Sharing Agreement.
In my time here the best part of being in the public sector is the focus on people. Ive felt like all the people Ive worked with so far have all been really supportive and helpful and this has provided a great platform for my transition into a professional environment.
Ive had the opportunity to understand different ministries, their structures and how they contribute to the bigger picture. On top of that, the people that Ive met along the way have been nothing but spectacular. Its amazing to know that Im making a difference for future generations.
Liable Parent has the meaning given to it by section of the Child Support Act ,
Listen to our voices and help us solve problems together
MFT means Managed File Transfer process which is a secure automated data transfer
MOU means the Memorandum of Understanding between Inland Revenue and the
Match refers to personal information supplied by DIA which corresponds with
My favourite thing about the public sector is the fact that our contributions in Finance will go towards helping people within the country. Its great to know we are making a difference in New Zealand.
Order in Council means the making of regulations by Ministers of the Crown.
Overseas Based means anyone whose location is overseas or unknown.
Party means IR or DIA, and Parties has a corresponding meaning.
Passport means all adult passports at issue (new and renewal passport applications).
Person record means all information provided on passport applications that is held by
Personal Information means information about a person provided by DIA to IR
Pleasure from watching abuse of babies and children
Programme means the IRDIA passport information sharing programme authorised
Security provisions means the standards and requirements that all government
TAA means the Tax Administration Act .
. million (or percent) contingency. This represents the cumulative increase of
, , , , , , , , , , Average upgrade cost per rateable property for wastewater plants that discharge to coastal and freshwater I I I I I I I UNCLASSIFIED . There is a risk that rural regional water service providers with smaller p opulations will struggle financially and continue to underinvest in three waters infrastructure. Smaller regions are also less likely to be able to take advantage of new technologies, or meet goals such as carbon neutrality. . The significant difference in t he size and scale of different regional water service providers would make benchmarking difficult. There are also likely to be higher regulatory costs due to the significant number of providers and the large variation between them. . The alternative option o f one, national water provider is also not a preferred option. This has a number of weaknesses, relative to the preferred multi regional provider model. In January , Cabinet Business Committee agreed that further work with local government on the design of new service arrangements would focus on multi regional and regional models for service delivery. This effectively ruled out a single provider as an option. Statutory entities . The preferred approach is that the new multi regional water providers would be statutory entities. This would require legislation. . Statutory entities have boards , but are not companies. Each statutory entity usually has its own establishing legislation that contains entity specific objectives that could be a mix of social, cultural, public policy, or commercial. Statutory entities can have noncommercial functions or commercial imperatives. . The main alternative to this approach would be for the new multi regional providers to be council controlled organisations (CCOs) . This is an organisational form that is provided for in the Local Government Act , and which is used regularly by local authorities. Department of Internal Affa irs Supplementary information Page of rnfoawab Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
annual wellbeing allowance.
, Fine Plus , Costs For Child Pornography Charges
m increase(decrease) Vote Internal Affairs Minister of Local Government Outyears Benefits or Related Expenses: Rates Rebate Scheme
m increase(decrease) Vote Internal Affairs Minister of Local Government Outyears Benefits or Related Expenses: Rates Rebate Scheme . .
m increase(decrease) Vote Internal Affairs Minister of Local Government Outyears Departmental Output Expenses: Local Government Policy and Related Services (funded by revenue Crown) . . . Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
million increase(decrease)
million increase(decrease) Vote Internal Affairs Minister for Government Digital Services Outyears Multi Category Expenses and Capital Expenditure: Government Digital Services MCA Departmental Output Expense: System Capabilities, Services and Platforms (funded by revenue Crown)
of population who download the app Compliant adoption (n) Contacts recorded (n ) . . .
of population who download the app Compliant use (n) Contacts recorded (n) . . .
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
This includes conducting searches to ensure that NZSIS or the Government Communications
AA rat ing to provi de the country w ith the flexibility to address potential risks associated with
AA rating to provide the country with t he flexibility to address potential risk s associated with
Boating on Taupo Moana and other downloadable resources.
balance. This will make it explicit the regulator must consider costs to suppliers, but in
(the Act) regulates how publications such as films, including commercial video ondemand content and games are classified in New Zealand. The Department makes sure that the Act is enforced to help protect people from material that is injurious to the public good.
() refers. The intent was to encourage agencies to use common cross
(), CAB () B and CABMIN refers.
(). Accompanying this document is a Cloud Risk Assessment (CRA) tool in the
(AWS), and Google Cloud) and several other specialist hyperscale data centre
(Accident Compensation Corporation, Te Whatu Ora, the Earthquake Commission, Kihga Ora, the New Zealand
(Beehive website, PDF, MB)
(CIPU) at DIA was established by the
(Canada) that resulted in cases of illness, and deaths. The subsequent inquiry found
(Click on image to open a larger version of this diagram PNG, KB)
(Decommissioned December )
(Effective from July )
(Extract regarding credit card use) (.pdf) k
(GETS). Its free for suppliers to access and respond. Suppliers need a Real Me login to respond.
(Indicative) , , (the cost impact i.e. is it highmediumlow is subjective and, as such, is difficult to state definitively. It will be determined by factors such as the size of the participant and the maturity of the Trust Framework).
(Indicative) b etween , per annum . (The cost impact i.e. is it highmediumlow is subjective and, as such, is difficu lt to state definitively. It will be determined by factors such as the size of the participant and the maturity of the Trust Framework).
(Information Sharing Agreement Facilitating Access to Information
(Internal Affairs website)
(July to September )
(Local Government Act LongTerm Plan) Order to the Executive
(MBIE), and DIA to work with IwiMori to develop highlevel principles that would
(MSD), New Zealand Customs Service (NZCS), New Zealand Defence Force
(March to June )
(Mil. NZ) A A A A A
(Ministerial Accommodation Review and Executive Travel and Accommodation Determinations)
(Ministry for the Environment website)
(Ministry of Health website)
(MoU) that was signed between local authorities and the Department of Internal Affairs (DIA) in late . This included a commitment to openly sharing information and analysis undertaken to on the state of the system for delivering three waters services and the quality of the asset base.
(Mori wards) from the Local Electoral Act was a first step to improving the
(NZDF), New Zealand Police (NZP), New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA),
(New Zealand Parliament website), the Committee agreed to approximately amendments to the Bill. Given the Bill has clauses (plus schedules), the number of changes to address feedback is substantial and significant.
(New Zealand Parliament website, PDF, .MB).
(Note: This page still in progress)
(OIA) helps New Zealand Citizens, permanent residents and anyone in New Zealand access information held by Government organisations and Ministers. This promotes openness and transparency and enables greater public participation in government..
(OPC), Government Chief Privacy Officer guidance is expected to be
(Office forms), including when the Select Committee process starts.
(Ombudsman website), or the
(PDF, .MB) and related schedules
(PDF, KB) with all eligible Local Authorities to support the improvement in three waters service delivery for communities with the aim of realising significant public health, environmental, economic, and other benefits over the medium to long term.
(PDF, MB) February
(PSC website) explaining how agencies will respond to requesters. This guidance explains the process in more detail.
(Personal Information Management Limited)
(Phase of the Royal Commission ), with new membership and an additional
(Procurement System Lead) and DIA (Digital System Lead) officials to produce
(SWERL Act) to support eight councils to meet their statutory planning
(Services listed alphabetically)
(The Minister is the settler, but does not make appointments to this trust)
( December )
(WSE) of implementing the proposed scenario s described below. SP Global Ratings has
(Western Samoa) Act , Citizenship Act or another Act.
(XLXS, MB) December
(YouTube, minutes seconds)
(a) In relation to prosecutions brought under the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act :
(a) if the statement is an accurate record of all transactions the cardholder shall certify the statement as correct for payment and shall forward the statement together with:
(a) the efficient provision of Identity Services; and
(across suppliers) of suppliers exceeding the acceptable level of chlorate in drinking
(administered jointly with Department of Conservation)
(administered jointly with Parliamentary Service)
(administered jointly with the Ministry for Culture and Heritage)
(all funded by revenue Crown)
(all funded by revenue Crown) (.)
(also referred to as Bill ).
(as established by the New Zealand Tourism Board Act
(b) Compliance and enforcement of obligations under the Bill will primarily be overseen by OFLC. Users of CVoD services will be able to report non compliance to OFLC, and the Chief Censor will have powers to call in content that is considered inappropriately rated, or content that is not rated at all. The Bill also provides for the Classification Office to monitor specified CVoD providers use of self rating systems and the costs associated with this may increase if there are high levels of non compliance. Engagement with CVoD providers through consultation on this Bill indicates that they are willing to comply and do the right thing.
(b) In relation to prosecutions brought under the Gambling Act , and the Crimes Act (in relation to crimes of dishonesty related to gambling):
(b) Neither the number nor seriousness of charges should be decided by having regard to the impact of that decision on the likelihood of an offer by the defendant to plead guilty to lesser charges.
(b) if the cardholder denies any transaction as being a valid charge to his or her statement he or she shall inform the Company and Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs the Departments relevant accounting unit in writing thereof within five days of the of that statement.
(b) the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences; and
(c) Identity Investigations, Charities Services Investigations and Grant Audit and Review (Service Delivery and Operations).
(c) In relation to prosecutions under the AntiMoney Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism Act :
(c) the conduct of civil proceedings.
(d) In relation to prosecutions under the Passports Act :
(d) act in accordance with any ethical obligations that apply specifically to prosecutors acting for the Crown.
(decommissioned August )
(decommissioned August )
(decommissioned December )
(decommissioned July )
(decommissioned June )
(decommissioned May )
(decommissioned Novermber )
(decommissioned September )
(decommissioned September )
(decommissioned September )
(described at https:aws.amazon.com). Any access or use of the AWS services will be in
(e) In relation to prosecutions under the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Act :
(e.g., cloud bursting for load balancing between clouds).
(f) In relation to prosecutions under the Citizenship Act :
(f) To underpin the Departments compliance objectives.
(funded by Revenue Crown) (.)
(funded by revenue Crown)
(funded by revenue crown)
(g) In relation to prosecutions under the Charities Act :
(h) In relation to civil enforcement action under the Unsolicited Electronic Messages Act :
(health) and well being as a
(i) a covering expense claim form, including all relevant receipts and documentation; and (ii) reimbursement for any use of the card for personal emergency transactions under clause hereof
(i) before being signed by the cardholder; (ii) before or after the period for which it is stated to be valid; (iii) after notification of the cancellation of the card.
(including a map of Lake Taup)
(including policy relating to citizenship, passports and the registration of births, deaths, marriages and civil unions)
(including policy relating to daylight saving, and public and government inquiries)
(iv) To deter people from using information and communications technologies inappropriately.
(k) Civil Union Act .
(onpremiseinhouse) approaches to Information Technology (IT).
(our spiritual wellbeing), taha
(private, community, or public) that remain unique entities, but are bound together by
(public, private, community, and hybrid). The image below depicts how cloud works
(released September )
(released November )
(report released September )
(report released December )
(report released April )
(report released July )
(report released July )
(report released December )
(report released April )
(report released on June )
(reported November )
(reported Part on June , Part on October , and Part on November )
(reported Stage on May , Stage on December )
(reported on November )
(reported on April )
(reported on March )
(reported on October )
(reported on March )
(reported on August )
(richard.whatmantaumataarowa i.govt.nz)
(such as Te Tiriti and sustainability); make it fit for purpose in terms of security in an
( December )
( September )
(where relevant) unlock housing growth;
(AWS ) and its affiliates. This MoU reflects the sh ared intention to pursue development of the
) and the Minister of Finance to coordinate budget planning and reporting and for reaching collective decisions about resource allocations.
) and those established through legislation (
) at the Ministry of Justice. It also established the CIPU to carry out investigations on behalf of the Licensing Authority and, where appropriate, take part in hearings or institute prosecutions for contraventions of the Act.
) governs how objectionable content is to be dealt with in New Zealand. When an online content host becomes aware of objectionable content being stored on its platform by users, for example through a takedown notice, the online content host must remove, or prevent access by the public to, all copies of the online publication that is the subject of the notice to or over which it has access or control as soon as is reasonably practicable after receipt of the notice but no later than the end of the period specified in the notice. An online content host may also retain those files for evidential purposes in criminal investigations andor prosecutions.
) supports the retention by online content hosts of files relating to objectionable content for the purpose of supportingassisting the investigation and prosecution of criminal conduct as long as the relevant provisions of the FVPCA, including any takedown notices, are complied with.
). In , the Working Group provided the Minister of Internal Affairs with a report and recommendations on practical improvements to the current process to change sex information on birth certificates. In April , the government released its response to the Working Groups report.
). Please note that neither the DIA logo nor the New Zealand Government logo may be used in any way which infringes any provision of the Flags, Emblems, and Names Protection Act attribution to the DIA should be in written form and not by reproduction of the DIA logo or New Zealand Government logo.
) . At the time the Partnership was signed in May the previous Government announced it agreed in principle to TAB NZ having an online monopoly, subject to further work being undertaken. This decision was the subject of a RI A at the time, which can be found on DIAs website . To a degree this RI A builds on that earlier RI A. . While revenue from the partnership with Entain is expected to increase TAB NZ distributions to racing and sport much more than it would have without the partnership, it is too soon to see the full impact as the partnership is still just over a year old. Despite the success of those measures TAB NZs returns the industry are increasingly under threat from offshore online betting operators . Despite the overall success of the post Messara report reforms, the significant cash injection because of the recent TAB NZ Entain partnership and various recent TAB NZ initiatives such as the launch of new products and a second brand Betcha , TAB NZs distributions to sporting organisations and the racing codes, are under threat from the loss of revenue to offshore operators. TAB NZ estimates that around million a year is being lost to overseas operators by New Zealanders betting offshore and
This file is in Microsoft Excel (.xlsx) format. If you do not have access to Excel or higher you may use the
You need Microsoft Excel installed on your computer to view these files. If you do not have access to Excel or higher you may use the
If you are already a Provisional Member of CA ANZ or an Associate Member of CPA Australia, you meet the academic requirement
LC Local Cu rrency. FC Foreign Currency . NA: Not applica ble as feedback on this entity und er this scenario
Support person is welcomed to join your interview and presentation.
The Internal Affairs portfolio includes responsibility for Archives New Zealand and the New Zealand National Library.
There is no data from Bluetooth cards on Day due to firmware error described in section . Firmware error described in section . resulted in cards being recalled and re distributed throughout day . Ther e was reduced observation time as a result. Table provides a comparison between the Bluetooth card and clo se contact survey on the median duration of each close contact by day of the week. In general, the duration of time reported by participants in the surveys were less than the amount of time re gistered by the card. The median duration of time spent with a c lose contact was mins for the self report surveys compared to mins for the Bluetooth card. This is somewhat unsurprising given the limitations in participant recall, especially when requir ed to recall a complex concept such as the time spent with a par ticular person during the day. Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
This document is in Adobe Acrobat (.pdf) format. To read or print these files, you need to have the Adobe Acrobat Reader installed on your computer. You can download a free version from the
You need Adobe Reader installed on your computer to view our files. If you are unable to open the files we recommend you get the latest version of Adobe Reader. You can
You need Adobe Reader installed on your computer to view these files. If you are unable to open the files we recommend you get the latest version of Adobe Reader. You can download and install Acrobat Reader for free from the Adobe website.
You need Adobe Reader installed on your computer to view this type of document. If you are unable to open the document, we recommend you get the latest version of Adobe Reader.
Council decisions to establish Mori wards since would be subject to the same petition requirements for binding polls that would apply to councils under the restored legislation. Councils would be required to hold polls without a petition being required. Council decisions to establish Mori wards since would be subject to the same petition requirements for binding polls that would apply to councils under the restored legislation.
, all TF providers are required to report to the Trust Framework Authority at the end of each month period on the use of their accredited services during that period.
, an independent research company, to conduct this research on our behalf. The results help us develop our services and ensure that they are meeting the needs of New Zealanders.
, and Cabinet Office circulars
, and for further information on performance results see Nonfinancial Performance Statements section.
, and the Lawyers and Conveyancers Act (Lawyers: Conduct and Client Care) Rules , available online at
, as the agencys response will then automatically be on that website.
, as the functional lead agency for government procurement. The suppliers of these contracts can expect a high level of engagement from contract owners and the commercial team within the Department.
, consisting of the National Librarian of the National Library, the Chief Librarian of the Alexander Turnbull Library, and other senior staff members. The Minister responsible for the National Library is the Minister of Internal Affairs.
, drawing on lessons learned and incorporating new perspectives. Guided by the principles of manaakitanga, whanaungatanga, and kotahitanga, we will prioritise inclusive leadership, cultural competency, and the elimination of systemic inequities. This renewed focus will empower all kaimahi to thrive, ensuring that Te Tari Taiwhenua is not only a reflection of the diversity of Aotearoa New Zealand but also a champion of equity and inclusion in the public service.
, enables us to work effectively with Mori.
, established in . The Historic Places Trust is now responsible to the Minister for Arts, Culture and Heritage.
, for further information on performance results see
, objectionable material, and what to do if you accidentally find it.
, there is information available to assist you.
, to ensure that peoples information and privacy is protected.
, we will be in touch by phone if further information is needed.
, were actively working to implement strategies to ensure we are meeting the commitments outlined in the CNGP.
, which also absorbed the
, which establishes the regulatory framework for information and records management across the public sector in New Zealand.
,i Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
million departmental funding to support the continued delivery of the reform programme in and , and to further progress the public information and education campaign. . million of this allocation is currently undrawn. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of
Other specific groups at risk of harm include international students (primarily from Asia) and youth (particularly in terms of risk through online gambling and gaming convergence) and children. Table : Objective priorities for action Objective : There is a reduction in gambling harm related inequities between population groups Priorities for action Short to medium term priorities Long term priorities Provide and monitor dedicated services for Mori, Pacific and Asian peoples where appropriate, including services for gamblers and their families , whanau and communities . Ensure that all services provided to prevent and minimise gambling harm are culturally appropriate and all services are health literate, high quality and effective. Continue monitoring gambling harm related inequities (eg, the disproportionate prevalence of harm within some populations) and identify factors that contribute to these inequities (eg, differences in the gambling environment by geographical area). Develop, pilot, evaluate and implement one or more initiatives specifically focused on reducing gambling harm related inequities, particularly among Mori , Pacific and Asian peoples Underlying principles: value and high performance te whinga hua me te tika o ng mahi We need to do better for the population groups that do not enjoy the same health as the general New Zealand population. In relation to gambling harm, these groups include Mori and Pacific peoples and the growing Asian population in particular. To achieve better outcomes, our focus must be on removing barriers to delivering high quality health services, including cultural, language, physical and financial barriers. The Ministry will consider tailoring services so that they are available in more accessible places or at more suitable times and are delivered in more culturally appropriate ways. The Health Quality Safety Commission s Triple Aim framework provides a systems approach to improving the quality of health services for individuals and populations. It can help us balance our goals to achieve the New Zealand Triple Aim of improved health and equity for all populations; improved quality, safety and experience of care; and best value for public resources. Objective : Mori have healthier futures Objective aims to improve Mori health through the prevention and minimisation of gambling harm. This objective reflects the rel ationship between the Crown and Mori under Te Tiriti o Waitangi. It aligns with objective and is supported by all the other objectives. This objective recognises gamblingharm related inequities both for Mori as a population and within the Mori popul ation group. For example, while the prevalence of moderaterisk (problem) gambling is relatively high for both Mori men and Mori women, Mori women are more likely than Mori men to experience harm from someone else s gambling. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
UNCLASSIFIED . funding and financing arrangements (including the fees and charges faced by consumers) ; . mechanisms that provide for local community input and local service delivery ; . the nature and extent of the legislative framework that would be required to regulate the new entities, including economic regulation and mechanisms to protect consumer interests; . the scope of the new water entities remit, particularly regarding the provision of stormwater services, and drinking water and wastewater services that are currently the responsibility of privatecommunity suppliers ; . the potential use of instruments like government policy statements to guidedirect the new water entities . . more detailed proposals in . This second report back will also inform our appetite to release the earmarked investment stimulus beyond tranche one to the ()(f)(iv) sector. . One of the points we will need to consider is charging arrangements for water services . I am aware that councils currently use a variet y of approaches , including fixed rates, volumetric charges, and general rates . It will be important to ensure consumers experience minimal disrupt ion during the transition to, and implementation of, new multi regional water entities. I anticipate consumers would continue to be charged on a similar basis to their existing arrangements, at least in the initial years of the entities operations . Volu metric charging is something that could be consider ed in future , but only when it makes sense to do so . I note that Scott ish Water still raises its charges via local council rates notices. . We will also need to consider and address Treaty related rights and interests , including in the design of the new water entities . A preliminary analysis has been undertaken, ()(f)(iv) and is attached at Appendix C. I will report back with further advice in . This preliminary analysis has been informed by previous engagement with iwiMori, in relation to proposals for the new drinking water regulatory framework and creation of Taumata Arowai. During these engagement sessions, a number of comments were made that are relevant to reforms to service delivery arran gements. . The potential for reform of water service providers is likely to present a different range of Treaty interests, though, which will need to be identified and explored further . An engagement strategy will be prepared to inform this work. Engagemen t and analysis will be informed by guidance material that has been prepared through the Te Arawhiti portfolio, and intersections with our response to WAI and WAI . When engaging with iwiMori, we will seek to use existing platforms and relationsh ips, such as the National Iwi Chairs Forum, to minimise the consultation fatigue iwi may be experiencing. Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED . Finally, I am aware that several government agencies are facing significant costs to These sites are generally small and spread out. upgrade their water infrastructure . DOC has a significant number of sites around the country, many of which will require water infrastructure upgrades. ()(f)(iv) . ()(f)(iv) . The stimulus package in this paper is targeted at local government water infrastructure . I do not want to diminish the amount of investment that would be directed at improving local infrastructure and incentivising sector support for service delivery reform. This could happen if Crown owned water infrastructure was included in this stimulus package. . However, I recognise the challenges that DOC and other Crown water service providers , such as the Department of Corrections and New Zealand Defence Force , are facing and the implications this may h ave. Officials from the relevant agencies will do further work to explore the options for addressing these challenges. This could include the potential for the water investment stimulus package to be broadened, and options for Crown water supplies to be included within the scope of the new multi regional entities. I am advised that some agencies have expressed an interest in transferring responsibility for some of their water assets to the new water entities, if this was a ()(f)(iv) possibility . I will report back with further advice in I am proposing a three year reform programme and three tranches of investment but the substantive work would begin immediately . Maintaining momentum is critical. If my proposed approach is agreed, we will need to move quickly to develop and agree detailed policy proposals, engage with key stakeholders, and begin releasing the stimulus package . . With this in mind, I intend to seek policy decisions in view to legislation being introduc ed in early . . Overall, I consider that a three year programme is needed to design and implement the reforms effectively. This approach reflects that it will take time to : . engage meaningfully with local authorities, and for them to understand and com e on board with the reforms, and adapt their organisations ; . engage meaningfully with iwiMori, and consider Treaty of Waitangi rights and interests; . communicate and socialise the reforms with the public; . develop and enact the legislation needed to establish new water entities, and the associated regulatory framework ; , with a ()(f)(iv) Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED . work through the complex transactional issues related to the aggregation of water services and assets from individual entities into a small number of multi regional entities, particularly as information about assets and revenue is poor. . I am proposing that investment is released in three tranches, broadly aligned with the investment waves of COVID recovery. This investment is a vital tool to incentivise buyin from the local government sector, and ensure support is maintain ed. A single tranche of funding , of a size that is able to be immediately deployed, is unlikely to achieve the desired structural reforms. . The diagram at Appendix A provides a high level indicative timeframe for th e proposed three year programme. . My officials have also been developing the work programme needed to develop and implement the service delivery reforms . An initial programme structure includes the followin g workstreams : . Stakeholder engagement and communications; . Policy, legislation, and sector guidance; . Structuring the new entities ; . Establishment and implementation; . Project management, reporting, and programme development. . The workstreams and structure are being designed to ensure that the programme can move at pace, is responsive (particularly to any further potential changes in the environment as a result of ongoing COVID impact), connected to the stimulus and regulatory reform activities, and suitably resourced. Commencing the front end work as soon as possible, to enable negotiations with local authorities and development of policy positions, will be key to enabling programme acceleration. . It will take significant resources to administer and implement a reform programme of this magnitude and complexity . The financial implications section of this paper sets out the funding being sought to resource the programme . . Subject to this funding being agreed , I am proposing the Department of Internal Affairs (DIA) leads the service delivery reform programme . The Department is the agency responsible for , and has primary relationship with , local government , and has been leading the Three Waters Review for the past three years . Officials would work closely with other key agencies, including The Treasury, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, Ministry of Health, and Ministry for the Environment, as they have been throughout the Review. . I am proposing that programme governance would continue to be provided by the group of Three Waters Ministers. These Ministers will meet regularly to guide the direction of this work, discuss policy options, and ensure momentum is being maintained and all aspects of the programme are on track. . The reform programme will have a close relationship with the oversight and release of the wider economic stimulus package. The detail of this work will need to be included in advice from The Treasury, Crown Infrast ructure Partners, and the Department of Internal Affairs, in the context of other stimulus approaches. Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED . My officials would be involved in designing the stimulus package and deciding how it would be spent, given this relates to the local government sector and our water service reform objectives. Once agreement has been reached with local government about the specific reform and funding package that councils would be opting in to, I anticipate Crown Infrastructure Partners would have oversight of the alloca tion and use of the three waters stimulus funding in accordance with th e agreements . It is important to get support from local government, but there would be a deadline and agreed mechanisms for demonstrating that support . Support from local government is vital if we are to deliver the proposals in this paper, and achieve our short and long term goals. However, there is a need to move quickly to develop agreements with the sector, shape the broad reform agenda, and undertake detailed policy design work. It will not be helpful to our reform objectives, or community interests, to enter into protracted negotiations before the policy reform work can begin . . I have already had initial conversations with the Local Government New Zealand (LGNZ) National Council , and the Central Local Government Forum. It is clear that local government recognise s the opportunities of service delivery reform, and benefits of infrastructure investment. The sector has expressed a willingness to work with us to design a reform prog ramme , on a high trust and opt in basis . To achieve this, a joint working group will be formed between DIA, The Treasury, LGNZ and SOLGM. . I am proposing that the joint working group will prepare an initial high level agreement in June , on how loc al government will work with government on the reform agenda. This group would then work to prepare a more detailed agreement ( a memorandum of understanding) that councils across New Zealand would have the opportunity to opt in to . . Initial funding from th e economic stimulus package would be released to those councils that agree to the memorandum of understanding in August . Councils that do not opt in at this point would still be able to do so at a later , but would miss the first wave of stimulus investment. . In parallel, the joint working group will also explore the detailed policy reform matters referred to earlier in this paper, with a view to providing advice on these matters to Ministers by December . . I am planning further engagement with local government, both in this early, strategic phase, and on an ongoing basis as the reforms are developed and implemented. My approach to engagement will involve a combination of discussions with sector representati ve bodies and direct engagement with councils. . Officials will also engage with representative bodies and councils building on existing relationships between the Department of Internal Affairs and the sector, through the CentralLocal Government Partnerships team and Three Waters Review . A sector engagement strategy is being developed to guide this work. To support this process, I recommend that we immediately resource councils and their representative bodies, so they are able to engage in the reform programme . Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED . As noted, I am recommending we use tranches of investment, released at key milestones, to achieve our multiple goals of ensur ing sector support for the reform agenda is sustained, the stimulus has the desired impact, and our reform objectives are progressed. . It will be important that each council has a good indication of what the stimulus will mean for its community , and how much funding they are likely to receive if they opt in to the reform programme. . A detailed approach to allocation would be worked through with the local government sector. However, I anticipate the allocation could be based on a combination of geographical size, population , and asset information, and would be consistent with the proposed Framework for aligning stimulus spending with the transition to a clean, green and carbon neutral New Zealand, once adopted by Cabinet. . I also expect conditions will be attached to the funding. These conditions are still being developed, but are likely to include factors such as: . the funding must be spent on three waters investment though councils would be best placed to decide how to prioritise this investment in their districts; . avoiding white elephant infrastructure projects; . investing in a way that is cognisant of climate c hange impacts; and . prioritising job intensive activities (including creating local jobs). . I will report back on progress with sector engagement, the memorandum of understanding , and funding allocation criteria and conditions, in . ()(f)(iv) Funding for Taumata Arowai . In September , Cabinet agreed to establish a new Waters Services Regulator, Taumata Arowai, as a Crown agent. Taumata Arowai will become responsible for regulating our drinking water system , and for a small number of complementary functions relating to wastewater and stormwater. . Legislation to establish Taumata Arowai is due to be reported back by the Health Committee by June . Work to establish Taumata Arowai within the Department of Internal Affairs is also progressing well. This work is now paused, though, pending a decision on future funding. The establishment team currently has only million in . . Further funding is required to progress establishment, and then operate Taumata Arowai, including moving to a perman ent staffing structure. I note that it is expected that Taumata Arowai will include a significant regional footprint, through its frontline staff. . I am seeking agreement to investment of . million over four years to provide ongoing funding for Taumata Arowai, and the work associated with monitoring this Crown agent . . ()(f)(iv) Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED Implementation of the service delivery reform programme . I propose that the workstreams outlined earlier in this paper will be delivered over a three year period , split into the following three consecutive phases: . Phase ( June December ) Programme initiation, preparation of memoranda of understanding, policy development, and initial entity structuring work. . Phase () Legislative process; detailed due diligence work and entity structuring work . . Phase () Entity establishment and implementation. . Key milestones are as follows: . ()(f)(iv) . August : Local government agreement to memorandum of understanding, linked to release of initial stimulus funding . . ()(f)(iv) . Early mid : Legislative drafting process , and Bill introduced. . Early : Legislation enacted. . Early : New entities legally established and transfer of assets and liabilities complete. . July : Full operations of new entities from the beginning of the financial year. . As proposed above, a programme team led by the Department of Internal Affairs will provide the resource for the project management, local government engagement (leveragin g the CentralLocal Government Partnership team), policy design, legislative phase, iwiMori engagement, and stakeholder engagement. This team will work with representatives from LGNZ and SOLGM, through a joint working group . . The complexity of the programme, and speed at which it must progress, will result in the need to source external advice to support policy development. This advice is likely to consist of legal, commercial, financial, taxation, and governance advice, as req uired. This will be most intensive during the first to months of the programme, as structural considerations and policy and legislative developments peak. . To ensure continued local authority engagement in the process, I anticipate that some of the w ork required to inform the structuring and financial considerations will be undertaken by local authorities directly. Officials will provide local authorities with clear guidance on these activities to ensure efficiency and consistency. A portion of the o utlined funding allocation will be to fund these activities . . Programme monitoring and governance arrangements are being developed. These will include mechanisms for monitoring local spending decisions, to ensure these align with the parameters and intentions of the economic stimulus package, and for tracking progress with projects. Three Waters Ministers will receive regular updates, to provide assurances about how the Crowns investment is being spent. Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED Financial implications ()(f)(iv) Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED ()(f)(iv) . This paper also seeks funding to support the establishment and operation of Taumata Arowai, the new Water Services Regulator, an associated monitoring costs, as per the table below : Table : Taumata Arowai and associated monitoring costs million outyears Taumata Arowai . . . . Department of Internal Affairs monitoring costs . . . Total operating . . . . Total capital . Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED . ()(f)(iv) Legislative implications . This paper does not have any immediate legislative implic ations. However, if the proposed approach is agreed to, it will result in the development of policy proposals that require legislation to implement . I anticipate that policy decisions resulting in drafting instructions would be made in December , and Parliamentary Counsel Office would be asked to begin drafting the Bill in early . Impact analysis Regulatory Impact Statement . The Treasury has asked that the following statement is included in this paper: . No Regulatory Impact Analysis has been provided with this proposal. The Department of Internal Affairs has requested the Regulatory Impact Assessment ( RIA) requirement is suspended, but the Treasury does not consider this proposal to be a direct response to COVID . The RIA needs to be prepared. While under normal situations we would recommend a supplementary analysis for the overall program, in this case the RIA can be provided at a later stage when individual proposals from the Three Waters package are submitted to the Cabinet. Delaying the RIA is consistent with the integration of this proposal to the Wave and recovery program that responds to C OVID . . The Department has provided a reduced form of RIA (Appendix D), which covers proble m definition and objectives, identifies a range of options to address the key issues, and explains clearly how the preferred option has emerged. At the same time, the timeline of investments remains unclear and the proposal does not discuss potential alte rnatives , such as increasing the borrowing thresholds of local authorities that can be more flexible during the economic recovery. There is also a lot of uncertainty about the decreased revenue due to COVID , which is a crucial parameter for determining immediate funding needs. Climate Implications of Policy Assessment . None . Population i mplications . None . Human Rights . None . Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED Consultation . Ministry for the Environment, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment; The Treasury; New Zealand Transport Agency; Ministry for Primary Industries; Ministry of Civil Defence and Emergency Management; Ministry of Housing and Urban Development; Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet; Te Puni Kkiri; and Te Arawhiti have been consulted on this Cabinet paper. . The Department of Conservation, Ministry of Education, New Zealand Defence Force, and Department of Corrections have operational responsibility for three waters services and have been consulted on this Cabinet paper in this capacity. Communications . A plan for communicating the decisions in this paper is being prepared, and will be discussed with the Prime Minister and appropriate Ministers . Proactive Release . I intend to proactively release this paper, subject to any redactions, upon th e conclusion of discussions with local government and when a decision is reached on reform. Recommendations . The Minister of Local Government recommends that Cabinet Economic Development Committee : . note that, in January , we considered reforms to local government water service delivery and funding arrangements , agree d to support local authorities to make voluntary changes, and set a one year deadline for demonstrating progress CBC MIN refers; . note that since those decisions were made, COVID has exacerbated the three waters challenges facing the local government sector and, w ithout support, investment will not occur to the levels required, the condition of infrastructure will continue to decline , sector capability , capacity and funding issues will remain , and there could be negative implications for public health and environmental outcomes ; . note that to respond to, and recover from, COVID we need to identify opportunities for investment, such as water infrastructure, to cushion the blow and help to kick start the economy , and need to reconsider the approach to restructuring water services ; . note that in April , the Ministers offor Local Government, Health , Environment , Infrastructure , Rural Communities , Conservation , Climate Change , Commerce and Consumer Affairs , and Urban Development (Three Waters Ministers ) discussed opportunities to support economic recovery post COVID , and identified a dual approac h of: . stimulating investment, to assist economic recovery through job creation, and maintain investment in water infrastructure renewals and maintenance; and Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED . fundamentally reforming the water service delivery sector, to realise significant economic, environmental, public health, and other benefits over the medium to long term ; . agree to proceed with a three year programme for reforming three waters service delivery arrangements, to be delivered in parallel with an economic stimulus package of Crown investment in local authority water infrastructure , which together could: . protect or create at least , jobs, and generate an estimated . billion in additional GDP ; . ensure planned investments in water infrastructure continue ; . incentivise the local governmen t sector to support the reform agenda; . agree that provision of the economic stimulus is conditional on local authorities opting in to service delivery reform and, specifically , the creation of a small number of multi regional water service providers ; . agree there will be further discussions with Three Waters Ministers and local government about the exact number and boundaries of the multi regional water service providers , and final decisions would be based on the following factors: . achieving scale benefits including at least one very large urban centre within each entity, to ensure the full benefits of scale are achieved through a larger network and population base; . communities of interest; . relationships with other jurisdictional boundaries, including catchments ; . agree that the following high level design objectives would be reflected in the new multi regional models for water service delivery : . financial sustainability, affordability, and resilience; . effective, efficient, and reliable services; . enable an effective, efficient regulatory system; . minimise the negative impact of reform, where possible ; . agree that the new multi regional models for water service delivery would include the following safeguards: . mechanisms that provide for continue d public ownership of water infrastructure, and protect against privatisation; . mechanisms that provide for community input and local service delivery; . agree in principle that, subject to discussions with local government and detailed policy design work, th e new multi regional water providers would be: . statutory, asset owning entities, with commercial disciplines, and a competency based board; . owned by local authorities, as shareholders, but with sufficient legal separation to ensure there are no restrictio ns on the entities ability to borrow on similar lines to other utilities; . note that a number of related matters would need to be explored through further policy development and design work, including: . the nature of local government shareholding arrangements; Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
UNCLASSIFIED Office of the Minister of Local Government Chair Cabinet Economic Development Committee Investing in water infrastructure to accelerate reform and support economic recovery post COVID Proposal . T his paper proposes a three year programme for reforming three waters service delivery arrangements, which would be delivered in parallel with a n economic stimulus package of Crown investment in water infrastructure. . The proposed approach is designed to support economic recovery post COV ID, and address persistent systemic issues facing the three waters , through a combination of: . stimulating investment , to assist economic recovery through job creation, and maintain investment in water infrastructure renewals and maintenance ; and . fundamentally reforming the water service delivery sector, into large scale multi regional providers, to realise significant e conomic , public health, environmental, and other benefits over the medium to long term. ( This would be an opt in reform programme, in which councils that choose to participate would be eligible for stimulus funding , provid ed there are sufficient numbers of councils to provide entity scale .) . The paper seeks agreement to : . the o verall approach to the reform and investment programme s; . the scope , nature , timing, and key components of the service delivery reforms ; . the appropriation of funding of to resource the work programme, both within the Department of Internal Affairs, and across ()(f)(iv) territorial authorities and supporting sector organisations; . establish a tagged operating contingency of up to over three years to provide for an economic stimulus package of Crown investment in ()(f)(iv) water infrastructure, and reform programme costs, comprising: .. an early injection of to support the local government sector to maintain planned investment and asset quality in the face o f ()(f)(iv) significant declines in council revenue (the release of which would be conditional on sector support for service delivery reforms ); .. a second, more scalable stimulus of up to to support large scale asset replacements, and the bringing forward of no regrets ()(f)(iv) investment in the latter half of the reform period ; .. programme reform and support costs of , including funding to enable the local government sector to participate in the ()(f)(iv) service delivery reform process , and to conduct the highly complex legal, accountancy, and due diligence work associated with implementing the reforms (given councils would be involved) . Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED . Appendix A provide s a two page overview of the proposals and reform timetable. . This paper also seeks agreement to investment of . million over four years to provide ongoing funding to Taumata Arowai, the new Water Services Regulator, and for the monitoring work associ ated with this Crown agent. Relation to Government priorities . The propos als in this paper relate to the Governments response to COVID . The initial phases of economic stimulus directly support Wave : kickstarting the economy . Later stages of the stimulus, and the service delivery reform programme , support Wave : reset and rebuild . Any short term stimulus will also support local authority balance sheets, which is well aligned to Wave : cushioning the blow . . The proposals also relate t o core components of the Three Waters Review : reforming water service delivery and fundin g. In April , it was agreed that the Three Waters Review is a Government priority. In January , we acknowledged that there is a strong case for change to ser vice delivery arrangements , and agreed to support local authorities to make voluntary changes in the first instance . . The dual approach I am proposing in this paper is designed to address the persistent systemic issues and infrastructure deficits identified throughout the Three Waters Review. We have an opportunity to achieve transformational changes to three waters services, to deliver significant long term benefits to consumers and the economy . Executive summary . A lot has changed in the past three months. COVID has exacerbated the three waters challenges already facing the local government sector. Many councils and communities will struggle to respond to these challenges. Without support, investment will not occur to the levels required, and the condition of infrastructure is expected to continue to decline as councils prioritise other areas of investment. Sector capability , capacity and funding issues will remain. Progress with voluntary service delivery reforms is unlikely to be made at the level and pace required. . To respond to, and recover from, COVID we need to identify opportunities for investment, such as water infrastructure, to help to kick start the economy. We also need to reconsider the approa ch to restructuring water service s. . During April , Three Waters Ministers met to discuss three waters infrastructure investment and reform opportunities , in light of the COVID situation, and to agree a way forward . This paper reflects these discus sions , and the consensus that emerged. Three Waters Ministers include the Ministers offor: Local Government; Health; Environment; Infrastructure; Rural Communitie s; Conservation; Climate Change; Commerce and Consumer Affairs; and Urban Development. The Ministers of Finance and Treaty of Waitangi Negotiations also received material relating to the meetings that were held in April . Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED . I am seeking agreement to proceed with a three year programme for reforming three waters service delivery arrangements, to be delivered in parallel with an economic stimulus package of Crown investment in water infras tructure. This investment also needs to be aligned with any investment s we are considering making in local government more generally, and the parallel processes underway through the Provincial Growth Fund and Crown Infrastructure Partners regarding shove lready programmes. . For local government water infrastructure, I propose a dual approach , which is designed to: . stimulate investment, to assist economic recovery through job creation, and maintain investment in water infrastructure renewals and maintenanc e; and . fundamentally reform the water service delivery sector, to realise significant economic, public health, environmental, and other benefits over the medium to long term. (This would be an opt in reform programme, in which councils that choose to participate would be eligible for stimulus funding, provided there are sufficient numbers of councils to provide entity scale .) . It is estimated that t he economic stimulus would protect and create at least , jobs directly, and a total of , jobs on ce indirect effects are taken into account . It would generate . billion in additional GDP. Targeted investment would also ensure planned investments in water infrastructure continue and three waters reform objectives are met . . I am proposing that prov ision of the economic stimulus is conditional on local authorities opting in to service delivery reform, specifically the creation of large scale multi regional water providers. The exact numbers and boundaries would be finalised following discussions wit h Ministers and local government, with decisions based on factors such as scale, communities of interest, and catchments . . This approach would realise a number of economic and other benefits associated with large scale water providers, address many of the systemic issues and infrastructure deficits facing the three waters system, and help us to deliver our reform objectives. Creating large providers with strong balance sheets should also support the supply of housing by enabl ing water infrastructure to be provided to new developments, which has been a big constraint for debt limited councils in high growth areas . . maintain planned investment and asset quality in the face of significant declines in council revenue the release of which would be conditional on the sector supporting the service delivery reform programme (on an op t in basis) ; . a second, more scalable stimulus of up to to support large scale asset replacements and the bringing forward of no regrets investment in the latter ()(f)(iv) half of the reform period; . programme reform and support costs of , including funding to enable the local government sector to participate in the reform pro cess, and to ()(f)(iv) conduct the highly complex legal, accountancy, taxation, and due diligence work associated with implementing the reforms (involving councils). The proposed economic stimulus of up to comprises t hree parts: . an early injection of to support the local government sector to ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED . The stimulus would be released in tranches, broadly aligned with COVID recovery waves, to ensure th ere is sustained support from local government for the service ()(f)(iv) delivery reforms . Approximately of the stimulus would be set aside for rural drinking water supplies, to help to address the specific challenges these suppliers are facing in delivering safe drinking water to consumers . . This paper sets out the objectives, benefits, and key features of the proposed multi regional wate r providers building on previous discussions with Three Waters Ministers, and my paper on service delivery reform in January . It also confirms the Governments bottom line that public ownership of water infrastructure must continue, and there must be protections against privatisation. . I am seeking agreement to specific components of the new water service delivery model, subject to discussions with local government and detailed policy work. I propose the new multi regional water providers would be: . statutory, asset owning entities, with commercial disciplines, and a competency based board; . owned by local authorities, as shareholders, but with sufficient legal separation to ensure there are no restrictions on the entities ability to borrow . . A large number of other policy matters need to be explored further, including confirming the proposed multi regional boundaries; the nature of local government shareholding arrangements; potential for Crown ownership; funding and financing arrangements; and th e legislative framework that would be required to regulate the new entities (including economic regulation and mechanisms to protect consumer interests ). We will need to consider and address Treaty related rights and interests , and engage with iwiMori. We also need to consider options for addressing the funding challenges facing Crown water infrastructure providers within the context of these reforms. . I am proposing to report back with initial advice on all of these matters in ()(f)(iv) followed by mor e detailed policy proposals in . I anticipate the ()(f)(iv) legislation needed to implement the reforms would be introduced in early , and the new water entities would be ready to operate from . . It will take significant resources to administer and implement a reform programme of this magnitude and complexity, and to incentivise and enable the local government sector to support the reforms . I am seeking funding in to resource the first year of this large scale transformation programme. This funding includes programme costs at a national and regional level, as well funding to ensure the transition for local authorities is well supported and other services are not compromised through the initial period of reform. . Subject to this funding being agreed, I am proposing the Department of Internal Affairs (DIA) leads the service delivery reform programme working closely with local government representative bodies . It would be supported by the agencies that have been involved in the Three Waters Review to , including The Treasury, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, Ministry of Health, and Ministry for the Environment. Programme governance would continue to be provided by the large group of Three Waters Ministers. Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED . I have already had initial conversation s with representatives of the local government sector , including at the Central Local Government Forum. It is clear that local government recognises th e opportunities of reform, and the sector has expressed a willingness to work with us to design a reform programme. A joint working group will be formed between DIA, The Treasury, Local Government New Zealand , and the Society of Local Government Managers . . I am proposing that the joint working group would prepa re an initial high level agreement in June , on how local government will work with government on the reform agenda. This group would then work to prepare a more detailed agreement (memorandum of understanding) that councils across New Zealand would have the opportunity to opt in to. . Initial funding from the economic stimulus package would be released to those council s that agree to th e memorandum of understanding in August . Councils that do not opt in at this point would still be able to do so at a later , but would miss the first wave of stimulus investment. . The joint working group will also work on polic y matters, with a view to providing detailed advice on these matters to Ministers by December . . Once agreement has been reached with councils, I anticipate that Crown Infrastructure Partners would have an oversight role in relation to allocation and use of the stimulus funding , in accordance with the agreements . . I am planning engagement with local government throughout this process. A sector engagement strategy is being developed to guide this work. I am also recommending we immediately resource co uncils and their representative bodies, so they are able to engage in the reform programme. . Finally, this paper also seeks agreement to investment of . million over four years to provide ongoing funding to Taumata Arowai, the new Water Services Regul ator, and for the monitoring work associated with this Crown agent . Taumata Arowai will be responsible for regulating drinking water, and for a small number of complementary functions relating to wastewater and stormwater. This funding is needed to ensure work to establish and then operate Taumata Arowai can occur. Background . Since late , we have considered a series of papers relating to the system for regulating and managing the three waters , and the response to the Havelock North drinking water contamination event . These papers highlighted that, in many parts of the country, communities cannot be confident that drinking water is safe, or that good environmental outcomes are being achieved. They also raised concerns about the regulation, sustainability, capacity and capability of a system with a large number of localised providers, many of which are funded by relatively small populations. . We have already made considerable progress with regulatory reform. Legislation to create Taumata Arowai is c urrently being considered by the Health Committee, and work to build this new Crown agent is underway. Drafting of a separate Water Services Bill is nearly completed, and will give effect to our decisions to significantly strengthen the drinking water reg ulatory framework. Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED . In January , we considered the other main component of the Three Waters Review: reforms to service delivery and funding arrangements. We noted that the case for change continues to build, that there are particular objectives and bottom lines that need to be considered as part of any reforms, and that initial analysis indicate s multi regional or regional delivery models appear to perform best across these objectives and bottom lines . We agreed to continue to support local governmen t to make voluntary changes to service delivery arrangements, and to set a one year deadline for demonstrating progress has been made CBC MIN refers. . While the f undamental, underlying reasons for service delivery reform remain, a lot has change d since those decisions were made. W e are now in the midst of a global pandemic , and experiencing a once in a century economic shock . The challenges facing the local government sector, which provides the majority of three waters services, have been com pounded by this event. . Respond ing to, and recovering from, COVID means we must reconsider the position we took in January , and explore other approaches to three waters reform. We also need to consider how to support the local government sector, enable economic recovery, and ensure much needed investment in three waters infrastructure occurs at a time when many ratepayers will be experiencing financial hardship. . Over recent weeks, Ministers have been asked to identify immediate opportunities for investment to cushion the blow of COVID , and help to kick start the economy. Investment in water infrastructure is an area with significant potential to contribute to economic stimulus in the short term . . We are also being asked to consider the challenges facing our sectors, now and in coming years . We need to examine the opportunities that exist to address the long term issues the country faces, and how we can recover from the impacts of COVID to transition to a productive, sustainable economy. This could include reconsidering traditional institutional structures, and asset ownership arrangements, for example. . During April , Three Waters Ministers met to discuss th ree waters investment and reform opportunities in light of the COVID situation. These discussions built on the significant work and prior conversations over the past two and a half years . The approach I am proposing in this paper reflects the tenor of these discussions, and the consensus reached . Analysis Local government three waters providers are facing significant challenges, whic h are being exacerbated due to COVID . Throughout t he Three Waters Review , we have heard about a number of systemic challenges facing the three waters sector , including : . significant investment requirements to address infrastructures deficits, and associated risks to public health and the environment; . capacity and capability issues relating to asset management and governance of water infrastructure, and service delivery ; The paper, Three waters service delivery and funding arrangements: approach to reform, was considered by the Cabinet Business Committee on January . Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED . funding and affordability issues, particularly for smaller communities, driven by matters such as : .. community expectations and regulatory requirements relating to water quality, treatment and management; .. the need to replace ageing infrastructure , build re silience to climate change and natural hazards , and innovate; .. increasing demand for water infrastructure in high growth areas; .. delivering regional economic growth, including by sustaining local employment across distributed water networks; . the lack of alig nment between the development and operation of wastewater systems and a catchment based regulatory system; . the impact on local government of transition to new three waters service providers, particularly the reduction in operational budgets that would occu r if water assets were transferred . . The situation caused by COVID means the local government sector is facing a series of additional issues and challenges, many of which relate to the three waters. . Prior to COVID , territorial authorities were plannin g on spending up to . billion in capital over the next five years on water infrastructure . However, COVID is likely to cause significant decreases in revenue in territorial authorities over the short te rm. Revenues could declin e by between and per cent over the next financial year, and local authorities are facing increased cost pressures . As a result, borrowing will be constrained due to lower debt limits that flow from lower revenues , and opportunities to raise revenue through rates , fees a nd charges will be extremely limited . . Investment in water infrastructure has traditionally been an area where councils have constrained spending in response to financial pressure s. This is because investment in water infrastructure is long term, and has a less visible impact on communities than other forms of council expenditure. The Three Waters Review has highlighted that New Zealands water infrastructure already carries a burden of underinvestment. This is likely to worsen in response to COVID . . Officials have estimated that, in the absence of support from the Crown, territorial authorities will face pressure to reduce planned capital investment in three waters infrastructure by approximately . billion over the next three years . . Three waters providers will also be facing other pressures over the next few years , as our regulatory reforms begin to take effect, and communities increasingly experience the impact of climate change . For example, there will be more emphasis on compliance with drinking water regulatory requirements, and greater transparency about the environmental performance of wastewater and stormwater networks. The recent drought has demonstrated the significant issues, costs , and risks to public health associated with water short ages. Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED I am proposing a combination of Crown investment and fundamental service delivery reform to address these challenges , and support short and long term economic recovery . Many councils and communities will struggle to respond to these challenges . Without support, investment will not occur to the levels required, the condition of infrastructure will continue to decline , and t here could be negative implications for public health and environmental outcomes . Sector capability and capacity issues will remain, and funding problems will progressively worsen . . The COVID situation has also affected progress with voluntary service delivery reforms. Understandably, councils and communities have other prioritie s. It appears unlikely that we will be able to regain momentum to achieve voluntary reforms in the shortmedium term, to the extent that is needed to deliver widespread improvements across the country . . We are presented with an opportunity to consider how to improve this situation , and to address a number of significant issues , both entrenched and new. We need to act now to respond to the immediate challenges , and to ensure current settings are not locked in for years to come, causing problems to re emerge . . Following discussions with other Three Waters Ministers, I am seeking agreement to proceed with a three year reform programme to address th e issues facing the three waters sector and support economic recovery post COVID . My proposed approach has two, inter related components, and is designed to : . stimulat e investment, to assist economic recovery through job creation, and maintain investment in water infrastructure renewals and maintenance; and . fundamentally reform the water service delivery sector, to realise significant economic, environmental, health, and other benefits over the medium to long term. (This would be an opt in reform programme, in which councils that choose to participate would be eligible for stimulus funding, provided there are sufficient numbers of councils to provide entity scale.) . This dual approach would be structured to achieve multiple objectives both in relation to economic recovery, and delivering the multiple benefits that are associated with three waters reform. . To support COVID recovery, we would be seeking to m aximis e the positive impact that any stimulus could provide to local economi es and jobs , and address the impact of the change process during transition. The i nvestment type and procurement support could be targeted at retaining local and lower skill jobs , prevent ing further deterioration in water infrastructure as council finances decrease, and avoid ing invest ment in assets that may become stranded in future entities . . Through this proposal, we can also achieve the objectives for reforming the three waters system that were outlined in my January paper: . significantly improving the safety and quality of drinking water services, and the environmental performance of wastewater and stormwater systems (whi ch are crucial to good public health and wellbeing , and achieving good environmental outcomes ); . ensuring all New Zealanders have equitable access to affordable three waters services; Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED . improving the coordination of resources and unlocking strategic opportuni ties to consider New Zealands infrastructure needs at a larger scale; . increasing the resilience of three waters service provision to both short and long term risks and events, particularly climate change and natural hazards; . moving the supply of three wa ters services to a more financially sustainable footing, and addressing the affordability and capability challenges faced by small suppliers and councils; . improving transparency about, and accountability for, the delivery and costs of three waters services, including the ability to benchmark the performance of service providers CBC MIN refers. In the short term, t argeted fiscal stimulus would help councils to fund asset renewals, create jobs, and generate additional GDP . I am proposing a targeted stimulus package of up to to invest in water infrastructure and support service delivery reform. This package comprises: ()(f)(iv) . an early injection of to maintain planned investment and asset quality in the face of significant declines in council revenue; ()(f)(iv) . a second, more scalable stimulus of up to to support large scale asset replacements, and the bri nging forward of no regrets investment in the latter ()(f)(iv) half of the reform period . . The fiscal profile of the proposed investment is based on achievement of both stimulus and reform objectives. I propose that we progressively release funding to the local government sector, following demonstration of support for the reform programme and progress against well defined milestones. The mechanisms for demonstrating support will be discussed with the sector shortly . . To provide fiscal certainty and confidence tha t we can achieve the reform objectives, I ()(f)(iv) propose that a total funding envelope of is established to support this reform process. ()(f)(iv) In this paper, I am seeking agreement to an allocation for tranche one ()(f)(iv) of from the allocation , with delegation to the Minister of Finance , Minister of Local Government, Minister for Infrastructure, and Minister of Internal Affairs to release the funding to the sector, following demonstration of an agreed pathway to reform and subject to their satisfaction that the necessary conditions have been met. . Although this financial commitment from the Crown is substantial, this level of investment needs to be compared to the value of water assets that sit on council balance sheets. In total, councils have approximately billion in total assets, of which billion are three waters assets. Total depreciation expense on these three waters assets is million per annum. ()(f)(iv) Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED part of my engagement in the next month. I note that the total quantum for subsequent tranches is scalable, and will need to be informed by our success with the ()(f)(iv). Commitment to proceed with subsequent tranches would be signalled to the sector as sector in meeting milestones and the size of incentive required to secure reform . . Analysis indicates that this fiscal stimulus would protect and create at least , jobs directly, and a total of , jobs once indirect effects are accounted for. It would also generate an estimated . billion in additional GDP . . This investment would achieve : . programme level support for major service delivery reforms across territorial authorities (and water related council controlled organisations) ; . renewals to core water infrastructure, such as wastewater treatment plants and drinking water, wastewater and stormwater pipes (including depreciation) , to prevent the further deterioration of assets particularly in response to COVID and declining council revenues ; . the best ideas from shovel worthy project initiatives, and new investments that emerge from combined multi region asset management plans ; . upgrad es to noncompliant drinking water supplies , with an appropriate amount of funding tagged to upgrade marae based water supplies (contributing to public health benefits associated with safe drinking water) . . Specifically, I am proposing that approximately of the stimulus would be set aside for rural drinking water supplies, to help to address the challenges these ()(f)(iv) suppliers are facing in delivering safe drinking water to consumers. There are a range of supply arrangements in rural and remote areas, including council and private providers, and further work is needed to establish how the funding would be targeted. I will explore how best to allocate the funding with the Minister for Infrastructure, and ()(f)(iv) report back with further details in . I have considered alternatives to targeted investment of this kind , but there are significant challenges associated with other approaches. . One alternative would be to ask councils to fund further investments on their balance sheets, by utilising further borrowing. Additional borrowing of around million per year was planned prior to COVID to fund capital investment. However, the decrease in revenues will severely constrain councils ability to take on more debt, and some councils (particularly in high growth areas) will quickly reach debt limits. . The reduction in revenue will mean most councils will need to curtail almost all of their borrowing programmes . It is estimated that, i n aggregate, councils will only be able to borrow an additional million per annum without breaching debt torevenue limits. ()(f)(iv) This is insufficient to bridge the expected investment gap. Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED . A variation of this option would be to support council debt through issuing some form of government bond. This would provide councils with the ability to borrow at rates closer to the Crown cost of borrowing, rather than prevailing rates available to them through the Local Government Funding Agency. This option is only attractive if the differential is large and councils have a greater ability to take on debt than current circumstances allow. Overall, the likelihood of this occurring is low , and unlikely to be sufficiently attractive to the sector nor sufficient to prevent deterioration of the infrastructure . . Another option would be to use alternative funding or financing arrangements to support further investment in three waters assets, such a s Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs). Th ese vehicles could seek up front capital from sources other than the Crown. . There are several challenges with this approach, particularly from an immediate response perspective, and they would not incentivise structural reform. The main issue is that SPVs and similar funding mechanisms are best suited to green field developments or new asset construction. SPVs are not well suited to brown field development or renewal of assets, which is what the bulk of this program me of work is looking to support in the short to medium term. . In addition, SPVs typically rely heavily on private or overseas equity investment to fund upfront capital costs. Due to the economic shock relating to COVID , it is likely that ready access to private equity and capital will be limited, and the Crown will need to step in to help fill this gap in the short term. Even in instances where private equity is available, borrowing costs are likely to escalate substantially for firms to access this form of capital. Provision of the stimulus would be conditional on local government opting in to service delivery reforms , to create multi regional water service providers . In April , Three Waters Ministers were asked to consider how water investment opportunities could support reform and be used to provide for economic stimulus in the context of COVID . . Ministers were presented with several options for providing investment, ranging from investment with no conditions, to investment that is condi tional on aggregation of water services. There was a strong preference for providing a f inancial contribution that is conditional on aggregation , and for the creation of four or five multi regional water service providers. . Our rationale for four or five entities relates to evidence about the size (population and customer density) over which scale efficiencies are likely to be achieved. This analysis has been supported by assistance from the Water Industry Commission for Scotland. Scotland is considered an exemplar in water reform internationally . . The preferred approach recognise s that fundamental reforms to the water service delivery sector are needed to address the challenges and achieve the objectives described earlier, and to ensure investment in infrastructure continues. This is an opportunity to deliver broader economic, health, environmental, and other benefits over the medium to long term, across the country . Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED . The alternative options, such as unconditional investment, or investment that is conditional on best endeavours or on each individual council agreeing to a reform pathway, were not preferred. These options are unlikely to be effective, feasible, or have the desired level of impact. There is also a risk that unconditional investment would reduce sector interest in voluntary reform, may exacerbate regional inequities, and close the window of opportunity for many years . . It is important to recognise the significant amount of Crown investment that is proposed. We need to ensure the reforms are commensurate with the investment, value for money can be demonstrated, and the impacts are felt across the country . Without consistent and widespread service delive ry reform, it is likely that any infrastructure deficits will only be resolved temporarily , and entrenched structural and funding issues will remain in many places. . My proposal involves transformational structural reform and the creation of multi regional, asset owning water service providers. This would realise a number of economic and other benefits associated with large scale providers, address many of the systemic issues and infrastructure deficits facing the three waters system, and help us to deliver our reform objectives . Benefits include : . increased financial capacity and capability, with stronger, more flexible and resilient balance sheets, greater access to capital, and a more reliable investment pipeline; . opportunities to take a strategic and coordinated approach, to consider infrastructure needs at a larger scale and in the context of wider catchment outcomes ; . building technical capabilities, with access to a larger, more specialist workforce , and the ability to innovate and make use of new technology ; . enabling financial efficiencies and lower operating costs, by consolidating administration and overhead costs, and improving organisational capabilities; . enabling more consistent water charges, with the ability to harmonise tariffs across much larger areas . . Creating large scale providers with strong balance sheets should contribute positively to the supply of housing by enabl ing water infrastructure to be provided to new developments, which has been a big constraint for debt limited councils in high growth areas . The existing urban growth partnerships , and spatial planning, also provide an opportunity for integrating and coordinating large, multi regional water providers with priority development areas and other key projects . . From a regulatory perspective, this approach would be beneficial in terms of operating and funding Taumata Arowai, the new Water Services Regulator. It would significantly reduce the number of regulated parties, while increasing the capacity and expertise within those entities. This would mean Taumata Arowai would work with four or five large scale , dedicated water entities, instead of councils (some of which may need support to comply with the new drinking water regulatory system) . It also makes it feasible to cover a sizeable portion of the organisations costs through levying the new, wellresourced water entities . Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED . The b enefits should not be overstated in the short term . While s ome benefits , such as stronger balance sheets, will be realisable immediately , others will take time . This is illustrated in Appendix B. We will need to support sustainable change, good long term investm ent decision making, and a supported transition for councils and consumers . . I have considered alternative options to structural reform , but these options have disadvantage s, do not deliver our reform objectives, or fail to address key challenges. For example, shared services models that do not involve asset ownership have a number of shortcomings, including the inability to access scale or scope efficiencies, and split accountabilities. The recent example of Wellington Water illustrates the need for new w ater entities to make their own funding and investment decisions, rather than relying on individual council owners for investment. The new service delivery model would include the safeguards and design objective s we have considered previously . I am p ropo sing the creation of a small number of multi regional water service providers. ()(f)(iv) . There will be further discussions with Ministers and local government about the exact number of new entities, and their boundaries . I am proposing that final decisions on these matters would be based on the following factors : . scale benefits including at least one very large urban centre within each entity, to en sure the full benefits of scale are achieved through a larger network and population base ; . communities of interest; . relationship s with other jurisdictional boundaries, including catchments . . Earlier in the Three Waters Review, we agreed that, if a new model for water service delivery is created , this must include certain high level design objectives: . financial sustainability, affordability, and resilience ; . effective, efficient, and reliable services ; . enable an effective, efficient regulatory system ; and . minimise the negative impact of reform, where possible . . We have also expressed a clear and consistent message that public ownership of water infrastructure must continue, and there must be protections against privatisation. This has always been, and will continue to be, a bottom line. There has a lso been an ongoing interest in mechanisms that provide for local community input and local service delivery , opportunities for iwiMori participation, and expectations around how new multi regional entities could better contribute to health and environme ntal outcomes . . If the approach in this paper is agreed, I am proposing that these design objectives and bottom lines would be an integral part of the policy development process, and would be reflected in legislation . Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED . There are a number of options for pr otecting public ownership of water assets. This is already a feature of local government legislation, which prohibits the sale of water infrastructure and the divestment of ownership of water services . Similar protections would be carried into the legislation that creates new water entities. I would also expect officials to identify additional mechanisms for providing assurances about this important matter. This could be achieved through ownership arra ngements, andor forms of social outcome obligations (such as kiwishare, for example ). I am also seeking agreement to core components of the service delivery model . I am seeking in principle agreement to core components of the new water service delivery model, subject to detailed policy design work and discussions with local government. I am proposing that the new water entities would be: . statutory, asset owning entities, with commercial disciplines , and a competency based board; . owned by local authorities, as shareholders, but with sufficient legal separation to ensure there are no restrictions on the entities ability to borrow on similar lines to other utilities. . Establishing the new entities in statute is essential if we are going to create an effective, enduring ownership, governance, and service delivery model, and provide an appropriate regulatory framework (to protect the interests of consumers, for example) . I do not consider existi ng institutional arrangements , such as council controlled organisations , would be fit forpurpose in these circumstances. . Providing for local authorities to be shareholders in the new entities is also important. This would be structured in a way that main tains and protects community ownership, but enables assets to be transferred to the new public entities . The basis for shareholding will need careful consideration and financial analysis. It could be possible to apportion shares on the basis of the condi tion of the assets that are transferred, to reward previous investment and good asset maintenance. There could also be potential to provide for some form of annual return to shareholders councils . . If local authorities were to retain asset ownership, this would limit the new entities ability to borrow, as limits would be constrained by council debt limits or attitudes to debt. This could also result in sub optional investment decisions about assets that would benefit from a mu ltiregional (not district) solution. . Professional governance arrangements are essential to create some of the capability improvements that are required. This would separate the ownership and governance roles, and bring in specialist expertise. Further advice and decisions will follow in ()(f)(iv) . A number of highly complex matters would need to be explored further during policy development and design work for the new service delivery model. These include: . the nature of local government shareh olding arrangements; . the potential for the Crown to be a sharehold er (for example, in recognition of stimulus funding) , and for other investors to be party to financing (but not ownershipequity) arrangements ; Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government I am proposing to report back with initial advice on these matters by , alongside progress with r eform discussions with local government, followed by ()(f)(iv)
. Agree that the proposed change to appropriations for and above be included in the Supplementary Estimates and that, in the interim, the increase be met from Imprest Supply; . Agree that the expenses incurred under recommendation above be charged against the between Budget contingency established as part of Budget ; . Note that a detailed implementation plan and costings will be refined following confirmation of the preferred approach; . Note that a cost recovery model will be developed as part of the policy and legislative programme for the statutory Trust Framework, and advice will be provided in the second Cabinet paper referred to in recommendation above; INCONFIDENCE Page of . Note that a Budget Bid will be submitted for Budget for phas e : the formal establishment of the Trust Framework in legislation; . Agree that a Cabinet paper is provided after the General Election, outlining operational decisions for supporting digital identity transformation, including system wide investment op tions, including the RealMe services; and . Agree that the Cabinet paper on operational decisions is jointly led by the Minister for Government Digital Services and the Minister of Internal Affairs.
August (Beehive website)
July (Beehive website)
Comply with best practice data security and privacy practices. This should include anonymisation of identity and very clear limitations on how data can be used.
Funds allocated to PB may be restrictive. In this case, Sect funds that were initially allocated were problematic as the city did not control when the funds would be received making it hard to schedule and im plement projects PB requires a large time commitment Process can often be unequal, may also be used by govt or elites to serve own interests Focus on public works may reduce impact of public learning and means other community issues such as equity, r ecreation, public safety and youth issues are not always addressed Strictnarrow eligibility criteria for potential projects can cause frustrations Can be heavy dependence on mayor or city councillor to drive initiative The focus on short to mediu m term public works can make it difficult to discuss long term goals for a city Participation does not always translate into influence over decisions Ballot selection and voting process created competition between residents which amplified differences among the community rather than creating an inclusive process. Low participation rates, high operating cost per participant . Very few residents make decisions for the whole ward. In small geographic areas, PB processes over several years may lead to over investment in some public spaces. Learning for all those involved Build interest of community engagement in future city decision making opportunities Dialogue and capacity and trust between community and govt built Eligibility to participat e in PB is wider than general elections Spending is more equitable and efficient as people look for best ways to get things done with limited resources Good way for local authority to understand communitys priorities Centralisation in City office w ith office staff added to consistency of Citys approach across Toronto Pitch PB in a way that makes it clear that government needs a helping hand in decisions (dont have all the answers) Needs investment from authorities for PB to be wide scale large capital and operating budget required Most successful cases of PB done where city councillors have bridged divide between govt and community takes deep theoretical shift in how role of elected officials are viewed Politicians championing program increases involvement Consider aligning PB with community organisations as an engagement and leadership building tool Voting by public is binding Funds to be allocated are pre authorised by Council to ensure voting results are not reopened or reversed by council. Resources and guidance to support community through PB process
Have easily triaging rules and resultant messages that can be quickly and easily modified, based on the latest protocols and strategies. These will evolve but should be authored or signed off by health authorities.
May be susceptible to co option by powerful interests Need careful consideration for power and knowledge dynamics for full inclusion can be an instrument simply to get things done aimed largely at those willing to engage on limited terms offered in a way that suits the organiser rather than serving wider public interest small group of people usually force behind progress with NDP they often had key skills or professional backgrounds planning skills crucial for progress consultants brought it if not available in NDP group Most difficultly in plan writing stage slow and required lots of expertise and time commitment Need to call on Local Authority and advisors may make neighbourhood volunteers feel as though they have lost some ownership of the plan Frustrations on restrictions regulation impose community may have limited autonomy At beginning seen as co production process, community discussion and engagement but then quickly became resource intensive and technical Contentions between locals and experts ideas and advice experts less creativeinnov ative and flexible in their approach Community aspirations continually needed to be re worked into planning language NDP are at risk of being resource focused rather than issue or idea focused Barrier to entry might be the need to set up a neighbou rhood forum if not suitable for council to take on A collaborative planning form Create platform for agenda setting and voice for community views great for bringing people together key stages provided for motivation e.g draft plan, sections of de cisions that were made NDPs may act as catalyst and focal point for further democratic engagement and participation Participation not to be entirely open ended otherwise consensus will never be reached Heavily prescriptive environment clear legis lation guidance on what, who and when yet freedom for community flexibility outcomes are better when expectations are managed and good preparation is made especially related timeframes and the way they operate Need clarity and guidance on process and scope of action in NDP. Careful consideration for neighbourhood and where this boundary endedbegins and may change Local authorities capacity, attituded and behaviours towards NDP must be considered Clarity on duty to support on local autho rities develop protocol memoranda of understanding between local authority and the steering committee Must be seen as key part of longterm plans not just a subset plan integration is key Put in Statement of Community Involvement (released by local authority) how neighbourhood planning is to be supported by the local authority Key need for local authorities to support the process at all stages
Ministers are provided with the use of an official residence in Wellington. If a Minister chooses not to take up an official residence they are entitled to claim actual and reasonable expenses up to the limit specified by the Speaker, as for ordinary members of Parliament.
Ministers are provided with the use of an official residence in Wellington. If a Minister chooses not to take up an official residence they are entitled to claim actual and reasonable expenses up to the limit specified in the the Speakers Directions, as for ordinary members of Parliament.
Triage symptomatic people into testing. At this stage, getting symptomatic people into testing early is the highest value benefit. The messages to users should be clear.
a week long promotion of health and wellness throughout the Department
a week to celebrate the beauty of Te Reo Mori and promote the importance of keeping it alive and vibrant in everyday life
includes Internal Affairs news releases.
midwinter celebration of the Mori New Year
December (PDF, MB)
million Yncrease(derease)
Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs Strengthening our Approach to Volunteering The volunteering sector makes a significant contribution to Aotearoa . Aotearoa is a volunteering nation almost half of the population volunteer with organisations or directly in their communities. . The economic value of volunteering is estimated at billion per year , but volunteering goes beyond financial impacts it connects c ommunities and strengthens peoples sense of belonging to an inclusive society where people can make a difference. The volunteering sector is experiencing workforce and funding issues . Volunteering numbers are reportedly falling, and the sector has concer ns about volunteer wellbeing and funding sustainability and access. For example , in a survey , difficulty recruiting new volunteers was reported as the biggest challenge for the sector , with almost per cent reporting they needed more volunteers. In another survey, only per cent of respondents reported having funding for more than one year. These issues have been exacerbated by COVID and related work force dynamics . There are opportunities for Gover nment to help address these issues . Govern ment has a role to play in helping to address these issu es as volunteering shoulder s civic responsibilities that sup port government services , which reduces the fiscal burden on tax payers. . I am considering how I can support existing sector initiatives and have developed a draft work programme that can be delivered within existing resources , including : . These actions will only go so far. These include : ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv). champion ing National Volunteer Week ( June ): ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector . supporting the development of best practice guidance for volunteer management, pending confirmation that this is a priority for volunteering organisations; . reviewing the funding formula for the existing Support for Volunteering Fund to ensure that funding recognises the diversity of the volunteering sector; and . establish ing a cross agency steering group t o provide a strategic, joined up and practical approach to tackling volunteering problems . . targeting support to Mori, Pacific, ethnic and youth volunteers and communities, as government funding does not always meet the needs of these groups; . reimbursing outofpocket expenses for volunteers, to remove financial barriers and increase recognition of volunteering; State of Volunteering in New Zealand Report , Volunteering New Zealand. COVID Hauora Wellbeing Survey , Hui E and Volunteering New Zealand. INCONFIDENCE Page of
Be designed for the broadest possible adoption and be as accessible as possible. Factors reducing accessibility would include requiring users to download an app or registering personal information. Being made available in other languages would somewhat increase adoption. While wider adoption is best, valuable insights would come as soon as each postcode had statistically significant participation.
Provide useful insights. This can inform decision making, including where to deploy testing or other resources.
UNCLASSIFIED . the potential for the Crown to be a shareholder, and for other investors in the new entities; . funding and financing arrangements; . mechanisms that provide for local community input and local servic e delivery; . the nature and extent of the legislative framework that would be required to regulate the new entities, including economic regulation and mechanisms to protect consumer interests; . the scope of the new water entities remit, particularly regarding the provision of stormwater services, and drinking water and wastewater services that are currently the responsibility of privatecommunity suppliers; . the potential use of instruments like a government policy statement to guidedirect the new water enti ties; . the options for addressing the funding challenges facing Crown water infrastructure providers within the context of these reforms ; . note that there will also need to be further work to consider and address Treaty related rights and interests, including in the design of the new water entities , and a strategy for engaging with iwiMori is being prepared to inform this work; . invite the Minister of Local Government to report back in: . , with further advice on the matters in reco mmendations to ()(f)(iv) above, and on the allocation of funding to rural drinking water suppliers as referred to in recommendation below; and , with detai led policy proposals relating to the matters in recommendations to , to inform the preparation of legislation to give effect to the reforms during ; . note that an initial work programme has been identified to implement the proposed reforms to water service delivery arrangements, including the following workstreams : . stakeholder engagement and communications ; . policy, legislation, and guidance; . structuring the new multi regional water entities; . establishment and implementation; . project management, reporting, and programme development; . note that, subject to agreement to funding in the financial recommendation s below, the Department of Internal Affairs will lead the service delivery reform work programme, working closely with other agencies including The Treasury, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, Ministry of Health, and Ministry for the Environme nt, and with sector representative bodies ; . agree that governance for the service delivery reform programme will be provided by the group of Three Waters Ministers , as referred to in recommendation ; . ()(f)(iv) Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED Engagement with the local government sector . note that, while gaining support from local government is vital, it is important to move quickly to develop agreements with the sector, shape the br oad reform agenda , and to undertake detailed policy design work , and it will not be helpful to enter into protracted negotiations with the sector before this work can begin ; . note that officials from the Department of Internal Affairs (DIA), The Treasury , Local Government New Zealand (LGNZ), and the Society of Local Government Managers (SOLGM) will form a joint working group, which will prepare: . an initial high level agreement on how local government will work with government on the service delivery reform and investment stimulus agenda, in June ; . a more detailed agreement (memorandum of understanding) that councils across New Zealand would have the opportunity to opt in to in August ; and . advice on the policy matters referred to in recommendations to above, including the suggested number and structure of the new multi regional water entities, by December ; . agree that: . initial funding from the economic stimulus package would be released to those councils that agree to the memorandum of understanding referred to in recommendation ., in August , provided that a sufficien t number of councils opt in to make relevant new service delivery entity viable ; and . councils that do not opt in at this point would still be able to do so at a later , but would not receive the first amount of stimulus investment; . note that once agr eement has been reached with councils, it is anticipated that Crown Infrastructure Partners would have an oversight role in relation to the allocation and use of the economic stimulus, in accordance with the agreements ; . note that there will be continued engagement with local government, including direct engagement with councils , and an engagement strategy will be developed to guide this work ; . invite the Minister of Local Government to report back on progress with sect or ()(f)(iv) engagement in ; Financial implications . note that it will take significant resources to administer and implement the complex service delivery reform and investment programme described above, incentivise and enable the local government sector to support the reforms, address infrastructure deficits, and provide an appropriate economic stimulus; ()(f)(iv) Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED ()(f)(iv) . agree to invest . millio n over four years to provide ongoing funding to the new Water Services Regulator, Taumata Arowai, the new Crown agent responsible for overseeing the drinking water regulatory systems and the delivery of a small number of centralised wastewater and stormwat er functions; and cover the costs associated with monitoring this entity; . agree to increase funding in Vote Internal Affairs to meet the costs associated with the three waters reform programme , and the ongoing operations of Taumata Arowai; . note that the funding to deliver the three waters reform programme will support local government recovery from COVID and contribute to the revitalisation of the economy; ()(f)(iv) Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED . agree to add the following new category to the multi category appropriate Local Government Administration to support the new Crown agent, Taumata Arowai: Title Type Scope Taumata Arowai Nondepartmental Output Expense This category is limited to supporting Taumata Arowai in meeting its statutory responsibilities to regulate New Zealands water supplies. ()(f)(iv) Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED ()(f)(iv) Publicity . note that the Minister of Local Government intend s to proactively release this paper, subject to any redactions, upon the conclusion of discussions with local government and when a decision is reached on reform. Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED Authorised for lodgement Hon Nanaia Mahuta Minister of Local Governmen t Appendix A redacted under section ()(f)(iv) Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government APPENDIX B Indicative benefits of large scale, multiregional water providers over time Benefit Current state description Strategic shift Short term Medium term Long term years Syears years Improved financing Most councils finance waterrelated investments Aggregated entities would have greater capacity from a mix of rates and borrowing . to borrow against assets. arrangements Realised (i) Sustained Sustained Current performance information is limited, leading Introduction of performance measures related to to poor quality investment decisions by both current asset performance, consumer choices and Improved performance Realised (ii) Sustained Sustainedsuppliers and consumers. efficiency (including losses). Technology may information have a role in supporting improved performance. Improved funding Mixed understanding among consumers about the A greater range of funding instruments would be and pricing arrangement s cost of water service provision, and a lack of transparency. A range offunding instruments are use d with inconsistent application of good funding principles (e.g. efficiency, equity and fairness). There are incentives biases toward shortterm decision making. introduced through time, including the potential to consider use of volumetric charges (e.g. for industrial users). It is important to differentiate chargesfor waterversus charges to recover costs for waterservices. Unrealised Realised (iii) Sustained Levels of capability generally correlate with scale. Increased levels of specialisatio n and expertise as Many councils have relatively limited capacity, a result of aggregation. Improved opportunities Improved expertise and capability Realised Sustained Sustainedexpertise , technology and systems. to innovate and use new technology. Improved other Poor information about levels of general operating Greater focus on scale efficiencies will result. efficiency, although we are aware that there are operating Unrealised Unrealised Realised (iv)some examples ofcross subsidy between waterefficiencies services and other services. Poor information about the overall state of assets Increased scale is expected to result in improved across the country, including the likely investment asset management through longer term and Improved asset managemen t Unrealised Unrealised Sustainedrequirements. larger scale investment choices including across catchments. Particularly the case for water treatmen t investme nt and use of alternative technologies. Absence of scale efficiencies means procurement Scale efficiencies in contracting practices. benefit is not realised. Many councils have realised Improved procurement Realised (v) Sustained Sustainedeconomies of scope with contracted services forpractice treatmentand distribution, but providers have significant leverage. Improved safety, Governmen t has taken steps to improve regulatory Structural aggregation will support a functional practice related to water quality. A further separation of regulatory and ownership interestsquality and Unrealised Realised (vi) Sustaineddistancing ofprovision from regulatory function may in addition to increased scale and specialisation environmental also improve practice with respect to environmenta l in good regulatory compliance within individual outcomes outcomes (including consenting). entities. (i) Potential for extra borrowing capacity between SOM M per year, starting in year if entity increases gearing ratio to against net asset value. (iij Improved asset performance could lead to better capital allocation, reducing capital plan costs by SOOM . across L TP forecast period for investment in infrastructure, with a per year reduction of approximately M starting in year . (iii) Potential for additional borrowing capacity and increases in revenue that is allocated to new entities, butdifficult to quantify at this point. (iv) other operating efficiency improvement are difficult to estimate and may be modest in the short term particularly jf a transition is supported for territorial authorities. rnfoawab (v) Improved procurement practise could lead to bettercapital allocation, reducing capital plan costs by SM .B across the LTP forecast period for investment in Waters, with a per year reduction ofapproximately M starting in year . (vi) The range of benefits is difficult to estimate at this stage. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
UNCLASSIFIED Investing in water infrastructure t o accelerate refor m and support economic recovery post COVID Supplementary informati on context and options analysis Overview o f proposed approach . The proposal involves the development and implementation of a three year programme for reforming three waters service delivery arrangements, which would be delivered in parallel with a ()(f)(iv) economic stimulus package of Crown invest ment in water infrastructure. . The proposed approach is designed to achieve dual goals: support ing economic recovery post COVID , and address ing persistent systemic issues facing three waters infrastructure and services. This would be done through a com bination of : . stimulating investment, to assist economic recovery through job creation, and maintain investment in water infrastructure renewals and maintenance; and . fundamentally reforming the water service delivery sector, into a small number of multi regional providers, to realise significant economic, environmental, and other benefits over the medium to long term. . Regarding the service delivery reform s, the proposed approach involves: . the creation of a small number of multi regional, asset owning water providers, which would be statutory entities; . protecting public ownership within the new service delivery models , and developing ownership arrangements that involve local government. . This supplementary information paper provides the context for these prop osals, and explains the alternative options that have been considered. It is informed by the work and stakeholder engagement undertaken to in the Three Waters Review , and previous decisions taken by Cabinet . . If the overall approach is agreed to, a large number of related matters would need to be explored further during policy development and design work . These matters would be the subject of further advice and report backs, following detailed options identification and analysis, and stakeholder en gagement. They are not considered in this document. Department of Internal Affa irs Supplementary information Page of rnfoawab Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
strategic plan. This objective acknowledges the important role of people and communities participating in decisi onmaking about local activities that prevent and minimise gambling harm . It also recognises the important role of Mori in providing leadership in community decisionmaking. The Ministry expects a high level of interaction among services, their client populations (particularly Mori , Asian and Pacific peoples, as the populations that are most vulnerable to gambling harm), other public and mental health and addiction treatment services, and community groups to prevent and minimise gambling harm. The local government gambling venue policy process (set out in sections to of the Act) allows communities to address their councils and discuss the effectiveness of councils venue policies. This includes the availability and accessibility of class gambli ng in the community. Community ownership and empowerment are important aspects of healthy and responsive communities, and are key aspects of a public health approach. The Ministry and DIA play an important role in providing relevant, timely information to communities, to empower them to participate effectively in decisions about their communities. Table : Objective priorities for action Objective : People participate in decision making about activities in their communities that prevent and minimise gambling harm Priorities for action Short to medium term priorities Long term priorities Enhance the capacity and capability of communities (particularly those communities that are most vulnerable to gambling harm) to: participate in decision making about the availability and accessibility of gambling and the allocation of gambling profits in their areas develop and implement policies that prevent and minimise gambling harm to individuals, families , whnau and communities take acti on on gambling harm related issues in their areas. Provide relevant timely information to local communities about gambling activities and the location of gambling venues, the allocation of gambling profits and gambling related harms in their communities. Underlying principles: peoplepoweredm te iwi hei kawe Language barriers, different worldviews, lack of knowledge and lack of understanding all affect people s opportunities to participate meaningfully in New Zealand s range of formal decisionmaking processes to improve outcomes that contribute to the prevention and minimisation of gambling harm. We need to address these and other barriers to empower individuals and their communities to engage and participate effectively in gamblingharmrelated responses in their local communities. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
. CABMIN, CAB MIN, CAB MIN (dia.govt.nz) Section of the Gambling Act . Source: TAB NZ . qwkdm ()(a) ()(b)(ii) ()(b)(ii) ()(b)(ii) ()(b)(ii) Regulatory Impact Assessment .
. . The cash injection has had a significant impact, and the agreement has been well received by much of the industry. However, the increased returns from the Entain partnership are only guaranteed until . After this time TAB NZ will receive a share of the revenue with no guaranteed minimum funding. It is difficult to assess whether Entain can grow TAB NZs market share and revenue enough to maintain the current level of returns from , particularly without increased protection from the substantial and currently legal operations of offshore competitors. . The partnership agreement also includes several conditional payments from Entain to TAB NZ if legislation is enacted making TAB NZ the only legal provider of online sports and racing betting in New Zealand. These payments are: a. a one off upfront payment of million, payment within working days of the legislation being enacted; and
. Accounts payable queries should be sent to
. All suppliers, supplying to New Zealand Government, are expected to comply with.
. For further information see our
. From July , postsettlement governance entities will have full access to Te Haeata. The information recorded to reflects not only the nature of our relationship with hap, iwi and Mori, but is an integral part of the settlement process to ensure positive Treaty of Waitangi Te Tiriti o Waitangi partnerships.
. Head to our information for councils page for information about how proposals will be assessed:
. If you already know the organisation you need, you can find contact information for them on their website.
. In a joint nomination with the Ministry of Justice, Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Financial Markets Authority, New Zealand Customs and Inland Revenue, we took home the win for our work in combatting money laundering. These awards celebrate outstanding performances and achievements in the New Zealand public service. As an AML supervisor, Internal Affairs protects New Zealand businesses from being used by criminals to launder money and finance terrorism.
. In the aftermath of war, it was necessary to set up a
. Internal Affairs is also a signatory to the
. Our responsibilities include:
. Please note that neither the Department of Internal Affairs emblem nor the New Zealand Government logo may be used in any way which infringes any provision of the Flags, Emblems, and Names Protection Act . Attribution to the Department of Internal Affairs should be in written form and not by reproducing of the Department of Internal Affairs emblem or the New Zealand Government logo.
. Please visit our website or call to book an appointment.
. Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs . Library staff have also contributed to the development of the draft policy, including via an internal working group of subject matter experts. Allof staff presentations and meetings also have elicited good feedback. Relationship to Overseas Collections (OPC . In December the then Minister of Internal Affairs, Hon Tracey Martin, approved the removal of selected titles from the OPC. The next step is the disposal decision what will happen to the titles that have been removed from the collection. This decision will be made by the National Librarian. . The review of the OPC and development of the removal and disposal policy have public and media interest. (Appendix A provides further background and a timeline on OPC decisions). Next steps . Public engagement is the next step in the National Librarys development of this policy, and we will inform you about the outcome of this work. . Stakeholders will have an opportunity to provide feedback on a public draft of the policy, starting in late March . There will be a mixture of proactive engagement with known interested stakeholders and general calls for feedback. (Appendix B provides an overview of planned stakeholder engagement.) . The Library will then consider all feedback and progress and finalise the policy, with input from the Advisory Group. . The Library and Information Advisory Committee, the Guardians Kaitiaki of the Alexander Turnbull Library, and Komiti Maori will be briefed prior to completion of the final draft and will have an opportunity to provide feedback. . We will keep you informed about the policy development, which we expect to finalise in the first half of . We will work with your office to provide you with talking points should you receive questions. As this is an operational matter you may want to refer queries to Te Pouhuaki National Librarian. . The implementation of the policy for titles from the OPC that have already been removed from the general collection will follow. . Once the policy is complete, if necessary we will seek your approval for any future removals under s() of the Act. Recommendations . We recommend that you: a) note the National Library is developing a removal B and disposal policy b) note the policy will cover physical and digital J items in the general and research collections of C the National Library, including the Alexander Turnbull Library UNCLASS IFIED Page of Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua c) note the National Library will begin engaging with :)of Internal Affairs key stakeholders and the public on the draft policy in late March d) note that disposal of remaining items removed from the OPC will be informed by the final policy ,, . e) approve the proactive release ofthis briefing in v;;lfao line with the policies of Te Tari Taiwhenua ( Department of Internal Affairs. Rachel Esson Te Pouhuaki National Librarian Hon Barbara Edmonds Minister of Internal Affairs IL g I UNCLASSIFIED Pageof Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
. The Ombudsman will decide whether to investigate and review our decision and may make a recommendation to us.
. The Open Source Use in Government award was for their multiagency work on Rates Rebates and Family Services Directory API (Application Programming Interface) and for working openly and collaboratively.
. The rise in offshore operators popularity has in part come about from many of these being onestop shops (operators offering more than one type of gambling on the same website , e.g. casino games ), which are increasingly popular , where as TAB NZ can only legally offer betting on racing and sports . . TAB NZ estimates that , New Zealanders placed a bet with an offshore operator in the months between and with an average of , active each month. In , out of first time bettors started with an offshore operator. Five years prior, it was in bettors. The Government s recent decisions about online casinos indirectly impact TAB NZ . In July CAB MINECO MIN refers Cabinet agreed to establish a new online casino gambling regulatory system which would among other things: a) be regulated by the Department of Internal Affairs; b) be initially limited to licensed platforms, with the allocation of three year licences being made through an auction process; c) allow licensed operators to advertise, within limits, in order to maximise revenue and minimise the risk of harm by encouraging customers to gamble with licensed providers (channelling of customers to the regulated market); d) require operators to meet age verification and harm minimisation requirements as conditions of their licences; e) regulatory costs will be cost recovered form operators, who would also be required to meet tax obligations and pay the Problem Gambling Levy;
. The survey measures public trust and satisfaction across public services to provide information about how theyre performing, from the people who are using them.
. These performance measures assess whether we have achieved specific services or functions that collectively support the overall achievement of our outcomes.
. This strategy provided a roadmap for addressing gender and ethnic pay gaps, enhancing cultural competency, and developing inclusive leadership. As the programme has come to an end, we are entering an exciting phase of reflection and renewal that will ensure our approach to diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) remains effective and impactful.
. We are committed to maintaining and improving all the regulatory regimes for which we have responsibility, using a regulatory stewardship approach.
. We use the June quarter results.
. the dispute or difference as quickly as possible.
.pdf (k) Decisions of the Accommodation Review (released )
.pdf (k) Terms of Reference for the Review of the Provision of Ministerial Accommodation Services in Wellington (released )
. .. i. ,V agreed that . million be repriii: :.:. :: : .: :::h ::.:.:. owing
. . agree that the expenses incurred under recommendation above be charged against the between Budget contingency established as part of Budget ; . agree that water services entities will be required to share billing information about Rates Rebate Scheme applica nts directly with territorial authorities; . agree to make consequential amendments to the Social Security Act and associated regulations to ensure that water charges from a water services entity, like local government rates, are also included in the definition of accommodation costs; . agree that further targeted financial assistance to households facing material hardship from water bills is unnecessary, at this time;
z NZRacingBoard(TAB) NZ Lotteries Commission Casinos Gaming machines (outside casinos) Expenditure on NZLC products in increased significantly, after a number of years averaging smaller increases (note: annual expenditure on Lotto products is volatile, depending on the number and size of Powerball jackpots). In contrast, annual expenditure on casinos and NZRB products remains fairly steady; both experienced small reductions in . Figure below shows the average percapita gambling expenditure for each of the four main forms of gambling. Note that actual expenditure levels are higher than the figure suggests, since the levels in the figure apply to all people in New Zealand, including the percent of the population who report that they do not gamble. While gambling expenditure trends show an increase in real terms across all four gambling sectors, adjusting for inflation by type of gambling shows that spending levels have remained relatively unchanged in recent years, except for the most recent period, in which inflationadjusted spending on NZLC products increased and on NCGMs decreased. Most casino gambling expenditure also derives from gaming machines. Comparing the gambling participation and expenditure information confirms that most of the money spent on gambling in New Zealand comes from the relatively limited number of people who play noncasino or casino gaming machines, or both . This has been the case for more than a decade. Figure : Inflation ( )adjusted expenditure per capita (adults aged over years), by type of gambling, DIA. Gambling Expenditure Statistics. URL: www.dia.govt.nzdiawebsite.nsfwpgURLResource materialInformationWe ProvideGamblingExpenditureStatistics (accessed May ). STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
NZD (Millions) Year Reform Scenario (timing profile removed) with efficiency gains Reform Scenario with Efficiency gains removed Reform Scenario as modelled by WICS Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia WDCs OptOut household bills are likely to be much low er than government estimates The governments analysis of the benefits of reform compare s the Reform Scenario to a situation where no reform and no service improvement takes place (the Opt Out Scenario) . This is an incorrect assumption and leads to signif icant overstate ment of the modelled and claimed benefits. In the OptOut Scenario , several factors are likely to lead to improved water services, as well as efficiencies, even if m ore investment is required. . WICS overlooks WDC s current high relative perfo rmance WICS have overlooked WDCs current performance relative to other water service providers across a range of measures . Because WICS s analysis is conducted at a top down, nati onal level, it cannot incorporate WDC s current high relative performance. WICS prediction of WDCs performance under the OptOut Scenario is much worse than the performance WDC can actua lly expect, given its track record . WDC is performing well compared to other Entity A water providers WDC is already meeting high performance st andards for drinking water quality, environmental outcomes and economic performance. WDC had only drinking water complaints per , properties compared to , and for Watercare, Kaipara District and Far North District respectively. WDC has signifi cantly fewer wastewater complaints than Watercare , Kaipara District and Far North District per , properties in FY FFF. WDC water services continued to produce A grade water from all seven water treatment plants FFF achieving Heal th Act compliance in FY . WDC had . discharge permit compliance compared to in Auckland in FY . Non compliance was r elated to smaller schemes reflected by a . population equivalent metric. WDC also recorded wastewater sewer collapses i n FY FFF. Whangrei has significantly lower levels of three waters debt compared to Auckland Far North and Kaipara. WDC retained a Standard and Poors credit rating of AA , on par with the Crown . FFF WDC is expected to increase capex by million until under cu rrent capital expenditure plans. WDC has close to percent metering unlike other parts of New Zealand and unlike Scotland Water meters enable service providers to monitor consumption, detect leaks, and target investment wher e it is most needed. Water meters enable opex efficiency savings and can lower overall capex. Demand management initiatives are enabled . Demand management can
(New Zealand only)
TRANSLATE ( ) or ()
November , IA Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE Page of Opportunities There is work we need to continue with across legislation, systems and operations . We welcome your direction to develop a work programme for identity policy for this parliamentary term . We need to ensure that we reform both legislation and systems to get the best out of our investments, and ensure the systems have the capacity to implement innovative legislative change. Key opportunities are: a) modernising the BDMRR Act and integrating digital opportunities in a way that recognises privacy and security which will: i) modernise the way the Crown records, stores, uses, and makes available identity information, to enable effective government; ii) make it easier for New Zealanders to access and share their information and control how much is shared; iii) reduce the transaction costs of interacting with government ; and iv) address the concerns of marginalised and minority communities through: consideration of changes to sex and gender requirements in the BDMRR Act; and making sure people without digital capability have equal access to government services and civil participation; and b) consultation with Mori to u phold our obligations under Te Tiriti o Waitangi t o observe Mori data sovereignty and recognise data and identity records as taonga . . Later in your term as Minister, depending on you other portfolio priorities, you may also wish to consider reviewing other identity legislation to reflect social change which could include: a) supporting work by the Ministry of Justice to reform the Adoption Act , including consequential changes to the relevant legislation we administer; and b) modifying the complex citizenship presence requirements in the Citizenship Act, which make it difficult for some people with a close connection to New Zealand to attain citizenship. Work on digital identity may require policy support and legislative amendments . Demand for services is shifting online. Since the Department has had a Digital Identity work programme that recognises the wider importance of digital identity for citizens, government, the economy and wider society. As part of the Digital Identity work, Cabinet directed the Department to establish a Digital Identity Trust Framework (Trust Framework); and to report back on the future role of government as a provider of digital identity products and services.
Any reference to DIA Information includes: a. the data held in the BDM and Citizenship databases (including information related to request for particular information held on those databases); and b. all of its computer components, including software, underlying data repositories, and any system interface required to access the database information. Before entering into a DAA, both Ministers must be satisfied that direct access to the information is necessary to enable NZSIS to perform any of its functions, there are adequate safeguards to protect the privacy of individuals and the agreement will include appropriate procedures for direct access, use, disclosure, and retention of the information. Access to or use of DIA Information includes any activity requiring the user to log in to the DIA system, even if the only action is the log in itself.
April to June
April to June
April to June
April to June
April to June :
April to June
April to June :
April to June
April to June :
April to June
April to June :
April to June
April to June
April to June
April to June
April to June
April Update from the Chair Rural Water Supplies Technical Working Group meeting
April meeting agenda and material Rural Group material
April meeting notes from the
April to June
April to June
April to June
August to August
Background . Rationale Existing contact tracing practices are resource intensive, slow, and often subject to recall bias (Kretzschmar, Rozhnova , van Boven, ). There are many areas digital solutions are required to improve existing contact tracing efforts. First, contact t racing for a single individual can take a team of contact tracers several days. These days to identify and infor m close contacts to selfisolate is a major concern for the COVID response as potentially infected people (both with and without symp toms) could be unknowingly infecting others. Second, there is currently no systematic way of prioritising close contacts outside of classifying close contacts by household and non household contacts (Verrall, ). Third, current systems are prone to reca ll bias as cases fail to recall every personal interaction during the period when they are likely to have been infectiou s (which may have been for up to two days before they developed clearly recognised symptoms (Ferretti et al., )). Fourth, there is a high degree of incomplete and out of contact information, even with possible National Health Index (NHI) integrati on in New Zealand (Verrall, ). In response, many software based digital contact tracing solutions are being developed to improve and supplement existing systems (Ferretti et al., ). However, software based solutions present major technological, p ublic uptake, and equity challenges. To support its bold elimination strategy (Baker, Kvalsvig, Verrall, Telfar Barnard, Wilson, ) , the New Zealand Government through the DIA is currently supporting the development of a Bluetooth enabled hardware solution, a CovidCard , for mass distribution (Wiltshire, ). Digital contact tracing using Bluetooth technology enables the identificat ion of close contacts (known or unknown) of cases and the automation of some contact tracing procedures (Ferretti et al., ). The CovidCard is a Bluetooth enabled card that automatically logs interactions with other cards based on hardwired proximity pa rameters (a close contact algorithm). Refined exposure parameters can be calculated during the post processing stage to enable flexibility in close contact definitions. Upon testing positive for COVID , the cases card data would be processed to yield al l close contacts within a predetermined amount of time prior to the onset of symptoms. These close contacts would be con tacted initially through an automated message to inform them to self isolate, drastically reducing the lag time in the current system. T hen, close contacts would be contacted via traditional public health contact tracing procedures using the contact number s of CovidCard owners stored in a secure, national level central registry. The CovidCard information could be used to create a risk prof ile based on the proximity information Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Beca, Capability of Drinking Woter Suppliers in New Zealand ( June ).
Building Bill, Report of Internal Affairs and Local Government Committee, Hansard (vol ), October . On average for a standard LIM request based on LIM processing fees information available on council websites in September . Ombudsmen Act , section . This process is distinct from the Ombudsman review of local government provisions of official information under LGOIMA. Ombudsmen Act , Section . For example, where a local authority unreasonably failed to provide information about an outstanding capital contribution for a sewer on a LIM the Ombudsman recommended that the Council make an exgratia payment of (Case number , January ).
Clause () is a legislative provision to remedy non compliance in relation to the statutory obligation to make an Order in Council in the Water Services Entities Act . The latest for the Order in Council to be made is February . Whilst it is anticipated the Repeal Bill will have Royal assent by February , clause () sets the commencement for the specific provision as the of introduction to the House to avoid a statutory breach. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of e) note the Department will continue to work with Parliamentary Counsel Office on minor and technical drafting changes to the Repeal Bill up until consideration by Cabinet . Hamiora Bowkett Executive Director, Water Services Reform Programme Hon Minister of Local Government Appendices Appendi x A Repea l Bill Ap pendi x B Cabine t paper Appendi x C Talkin g Points Appendix D draft Departmental Disclosure Statement and General Policy Statement Appendices A, B, and D are withheld under s( )(d) of the Act. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Cloud does have a number of attributes that can make it less secure than more
Content that is shown on television then available for rewatching online, such as TVNZ OnDemand.
Contents . Introduction . . . . Purpose . . . . Overview . . . . How to have your say . . . Use of Information . . . Release of Informat ion . . . Next Steps . . . . . Context . . . . Digital identity and online service delivery . . Trust Framework Purpose and benefits . . Uptake strategy . . . Trust Frame work parameters . . . Government services . . . International Alignment . . . Enabling Regulations . . . Further Information . . . Figure : Digital Identity Services Trust Framework . . . Accredited Services . . . Overview . . . . Proposed Regulations . . . . Accreditation Requirements . . . Overview . . . . Proposed regulations . . . Assessment criteria . . . Duration . . . . Renewal . . . . Accreditation mark . . . Provisional accreditation . . . International participation . . . . Service Levels . . . . Overview . . . . Proposed regulations . . . Benefits . . . . . Complaints and dispute resolution . . . Overview . . . . Proposed regulations TF Provider internal complaints process . Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government ii Potential future regulations for a dispute resolution scheme . Complaints and dispute resolution process . . Redress through the courts . . . . Recordkeeping . . . . Overview . . . . Proposed regulations . . . . Reporting . . . . Overview . . . . Proposed regulations . . . . Co st Recovery . . . . Context . . . . Appendix A Glossary of key terms . . . Appendix B Further information on the Trust Framework . . Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government .Introduction Purpose The Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) seeks your views on the proposals outlined in this discussion paper for the development of regulations required to enable the establishment of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework. Overview In a world where digital services are increasingly prevalent, it is important people can prove who they are online in a trusted, safe and consistent way. Digital identity services give people the ability to securely share information about themselves (for example , a persons name, age, of birth, qualifications, employment history or medical records) to access both online and face toface services . New Zealands digital identity environment currently lacks consistent standards. This makes it difficult to provide genuine and secure services people feel they can trust. To provide New Zealanders with more confidence in using online identity services, Parliament has passed the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act (the Act). The Act come s into force on July and enables the introduction of a new regulatory Trust Framework , which will establish rules and regulations for the provision of secure digital identity services. The Act provides for a Trust Framework Board (TF Board) and a Tru st Framework Authority (TF Authority) to administer the legislation. The Act also provides for a Mori Advisory Group to provide advice to the TF Board on issues that raise matters of tikanga M ori, and to jointl y establish with the TF Board an engagement p olicy covering how the two groups will work together and consult with iwi and hap when necessary . The Trust Framework will give people more control over their own data, including what they choose to share about themselves and who they share it with. We anticipate this will increase consumer confidence in digital identity services, as well as encourage innovation in the technol ogy industry more broadly. The rules will establish the technical service requirements that providers will need to meet when designing and delivering accredited services. The rules have already been the subject of early consultation with key stakeholders a nd will be the subject of a further final round of consultation , likely in the first quarter of . They cover identification management ; privacy and confidentiality ; security and risk ; information and data management ; and information sharing and facilit ating arrangements. The regulations will complement the rules by establishing broader legal and administrative process requirements that either need to be met by regulated parties or clarify how the TF Board and the TF Authority will manage aspects of the regulatory system. Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government
Data Iwi Leaders have authority to represent National Iwi Chairs Forum in respect of digital and data
December December
Details on the Strategy can be found here: https:www.digital.govt.nzdigital governmentstrategystrategy summarystrategy foradigital public service . When the Strategy was considered by the Cabinet Government Administration and Expenditure Review Committee (GOV) Minute of Decision GOV MIN , the Minister for Government Digital Services was invited to report back on ke y milestones and significant decisions. https:www.beehive.govt.nzreleasejoint statement prime ministers jacinda ardern andscott morrison sydney february INCONFIDENCE Page of reasons why government should accelerate its ability to assure that digital identity services bring consistency, improve trust, reduce the chances of breaches and support New Zealands economic recovery. We propose establishing a Digital Identity Trust Framework to address regulatory gaps and accelerate the development of trusted and people centred digital identity services . A trust framework is a set of best practice standards based rules that ensure minimum requirements are met for security, privacy, identification management and interoperabil ity through accreditation and governance. Implementing a trust framework would support increased public trust (and uptake) of online services from both public and private sector providers and enable the wider use of trusted government information sources. . We propose a two phased approach to developing and implementing the Trust Framework, reflecting that there will likely be a sustained increase in demand for trusted digital identity services. As a first step, officials will develop an interim Trust Framew ork, which means that standards and rules can be developed and tested with providers in . Subject to Cabinet agreement, the development of a Bill will also occur, which will establish the Trust Framework and its core functions in legislation by . W e seek . million for and . million in to undertake this first phase. . Subject to Cabinets approval of this paper, we propose coming back to Cabinet with two further papers on digital identity: a detailed policy Cabinet paper to fo rm the basis for drafting instructions for a Trust Framework Bill, provided by the end of and led by the Minister of Government Digital Services; and a Cabinet paper focused on operational options for digital identity (including funding) for the imple mentation of the Trust Framework, and RealMe as a government owned and operated identity service. This paper would be provided early in and jointly led by the Minister for Government Digital Services and the Minister of Internal Affairs. The Cabinet p aper on operational response options will include options on the future of the RealMe services . Currently the main way people can assert their identity online is through the government provided RealMe service. RealMe is a centralised model of digital identi ty, which has been Crown funded since its inception. The number of people with a RealMe verified identity has been significantly boosted by initiatives such as Passport co apply and Studylink. Currently there are over , verified identities. . Since Re alMe was introduced, the digital identity environment has changed significantly. Globally and in New Zealand there has been an emergence of digital identity service providers, which are developing decentralised approaches that allow the customercitizen to have greater control of their information. These new approaches seek to realise the economic benefits of digital identity while minimising data transfer and enhancing security and privacy. . Redacted consistent with sections ()(f)(iv) and ()(i) of the Official Information Act . INCONFIDENCE Page of Background . In this paper, we define digital identity as the user consented, digitally enabled sharing of personal and organisational information. This sharing of information allows people to assert their personal attributes , such as their income, qualifications, of birth, or proof of eligibility, online, in order to access services and entitlements. Digital identity services rely on relationships between individuals and service providers, as part of a digital identity ecosystem, as outlined in Figure below. Figure : potential future trusted digital identity ecosystem for New Zealand
February February
Focus area one: Embedding our regulatory foundations This focus area is all about ensuring each system has in place agreed foundational systems and processes such as a regulatory charter which demonstrates a clear and shared understanding of the regulatory system, and an assurance plan setting out how we will know if the system is effective. This starts the process of defining what RSG means by regulatory excellence. Strategic initiatives To be a system regulator, there needs to be a shared understanding of the system who is in it, what is their role, what are the risks and opportunities, etc. System groups have differing levels of information about this some systems are more straightforward to describe than others however, describing a system is just the beginning getting agreement to the scope and shared outcomes of a system by key participants is the real goal as that will enable the system participants to share information, collaborate on initiatives and share in the achievement of system outcomes. Likewise, the development of system group assurance plans is dependent on identifying what the most important performance measures are for the system and being able to answer the question, How will we know if our system groups are effective The initiative above, and the development of system groupspecific operating models, supports greater transparency of regulatory systems. Clearly articulated operating models also ensure that system groups have considered what capabilities (people, processes and systems) they need to achieve their objectives, who their stakeholders are, and what channels they will use to deliver their regulatory functions. The documentation of operating procedures supports consistency of practice, outlines timeliness and quality standard expectations (where relevant) and provides clarity to kaimahi new and longstanding. months (July December )Agree and articulate scope, roles and responsibilities, opportunities and risks for each system Document and consistently implement operating procedures across all system groups Align system groups operating models to the RSG strategy Develop and implement RSG assurance plans months (January June )Finalise system descriptions with key participants T argets Key Focus Area Embedding our regulatory foundations FiveYear Success Measures Four or five regulatory foundations, and target dates for the embedding of these in system groups, will be agreed in conjunction with DIA Regulatory Stewardship and Assurance Baseline To be established in
Frontier Economics (). Productivity improvement in the water and sewerage industry in England since privatization. Available at https:www.water.or g.ukwp contentuploadsWater UKFrontier Productivity.pdf Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua
Home AI Forum About Us NZTech ()(b)(ii) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs UNCLASSIFIED Page of Academia providing advice on approaches to trustworthy AI use . We are engaging with various thought leaders to inform our thinking about the actions that could support trustworthy Public Service AI uptake. . Sir Peter Gluckman we have met with Sir Peter to discuss the work Koi T has done to develop a framework for evaluating rapidly developing technologies, including AI. The Framework was released by the International Science Council ahead of the UK AI Safety Summit held at the beginning of November. .
I have carefully considered the Petition Committees referral of the Petition of
Introduction Role of the Ministry of Health Since July , the Ministry has been responsible for developing and implementing the integrated problem gambling strategy focused on public health that is described in section of the Gambling Act . The Act states that the strategy must include: measures to promote public health by preventing and minimising the harm from gambling (see below for a definition of harm) services to treat and assist problem gamblers and their families and whnau independent scientific research associated with gambling, including (for example) longitudinal research on the social and economic impacts of gambling, particularly the impacts of gambling on different cultural groups evaluation. The Act defines a problem gambler as a person whose gambling causes harm or may cause harm. Its further states that harm : a) means harm or distress of any kind arising from, or caused or exacerbated by, a person s gambling; and b) includ es personal, social, or economic harm suffered i) by the person; or ii) by the person s spouse, civil union partner, de facto partner, family, whnau, or wider community; or iii) in the workplace; or iv) by society at large. The Ministry receives funding through Vote Health to develop and implement the strategy. The Crown then recovers the cost of this appropriation through a problem gambling levy paid by the main gambling operators. Role of the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs (DIA) is the main gambling regulator and policy advisor to the Government on gambling regulatory issues. DIA administers the Act and its regulations, issues licences for gambling activities, ensures compliance with the legislation, works with the gambling sector to encourage best practice and publishes statistical and other information concerning gambling. It is also responsible for limiting the opportunities for crime and dishonesty associated with gambling and ensuring gambling proceeds benefit the community. DIAs role includes key regulatory aspects of gamblingharm prevention and minimisation. It works with a range of stakeholders, including the gambling industry STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
January to June
January to March
January to March
January to March
January to March
January to March :
January to March
January to March :
January to March
January to March :
January to March
January to March :
January to March
January to March
January to March
January to March
January to March
January to March
January to March
January to February
January to March
January January
January to June
January to June
July to September
July to September
July to September
July to September
July to September
July to September :
July to September
July to September :
July to September
July to September :
July to September
July to September :
July to September
July to September
July to September
July to September
July to September
July to September
July to September
July to September
June to July
Local Government Portfolio Weekly Report Week ending ( August ) Recipient HON SIMEON BROWN MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT M ichael Lovett Deputy Chief Executive, Local Government Ministers comments: Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Local Government Portfolio Weekly Report Week ending ( August ) Recipient HON SIMEON BROWN MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT Hamiora Bowkett Executive Director , Water Services Policy Ministers comments: Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Local authorities have a partial income tax exemption. They are exempt from tax on income, e xcept for certain amounts of income earned from council controlled organisations (CCOs) such as interest or management fees . This policy setting prevents councils from profit shifting, i.e. a taxable CCO making tax deductible payments to a tax exempt council to reduce the CCOs tax liabilities. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of a public purpose based income tax exemption, as this undermines the fairness and integrity of the tax system. . If a tax exempt water organisation has a taxable shareholder (e.g. a consumer trust that is not a registered charity ), and the organisation is making a taxable profit, there will be a strong incentive for income to be retained in the water organisation. This would result in a deferral benefit for the consumer trust because the water organisation can reinvest and accumulate income tax free. A later dividend will be taxable to the consumer trust , but it does not claw back the deferral benefit of the tax exemp tion. . There are no tax issues if the water organisation earns income and distributes that income to a taxable consumer trust within the same tax year . The distributions will be either subject to the trustee tax rate if retained in the consumer trust or subject to tax at the consumers personal tax rate s if distributed by the trust to consumers. There are no tax issues with either outcome . . Any income that is retained in the water organisation beyond the year it is earned, and then subsequently distributed to a taxable consumer trust , will result in a deferral benefit to the trust or consumers. It is not always feasible to distribute all income in the year it is earned . . To ensure that private individuals cannot obtain a deferral benefit from a water organisations income tax exemption , we recommend that income taxexempt status should be granted to water organisations that meet the minimum requirements, provided all of the shareholders are also income taxexempt . Tax status of water organisations that have an exemption from minimum requirements . Councils can apply for exemptions from three of the minimum requirements that apply to water organisations . The exemption can apply to the requirement that : . only councils or consumer trusts can be shareholders of a water organisation ; . the activities of water organisations are limited to the provision of water services, and directly related activities; and . water organisations must be companies . . The implications of each minimum requirement exemption on a water organisations tax status are discussed below. Exemption from the shareholder requirement . This exemption will allow water organisations to have shareholders other than councils and consumer trusts . As per the instruction from the Minister of Local Government the exemption will be limited to co operative companies wishing to have consumer shareholders. . These co operative companies serve a similar function to energy trusts in that they allow an amount of income earned by the company to be distributed back to the consumers, normally via a discount on services. This has the effect of using water organisation income to provide a private benefit to individuals. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of . As such, we recommend that water organisations that are granted an exemption from the shareholder requirement should not be granted income taxexempt status. This is consistent with the tax settings for energy trusts, which are also subject to tax. Exemption from the limitation on activities requirement . This exemption will allow water organisation s to carry out activities other than the provision of water services and directly related activities. As discussed above , water services provide a public good in a monopoly market and fall within the policy intent of a tax exemption . . A water organisation that also undertak es other activities, such as general contracting or electricity network provision, would be competing with the taxable private sector entities . Allowing a tax exemption in these circumstances would provide the water organisation with an unfair advantage with respect to its non water activities. . We recommend that water organisation s that are granted an exemption from the limitation on activities requirement should not be granted income taxexempt status. Exemption from the company structure requirement . This exemption will allow water organisations to adopt a structure or form other than a company. There is nothing intrinsic about a structure other than a company which would suggest that it should or shouldnt be taxexempt . . However, consideration needs to be given to whether these different structures could allow distributions to be made to taxable entities. For example, a council may apply to set up a water organisation that uses a trust structure instead of a company. Under the trust deed it would be possible for individuals to be named as beneficiaries and to obtain a private benefit via a distribution. . Providing an income tax exemption for a water organisation that is structured as a trust would pose a significant risk to the tax base. Unlike companies, income can easily be extracted tax free as capital distributions from a tax exempt trust, regardless of who the beneficiaries of the trust are. The beneficiaries of a taxexempt water organisation trust would not be subject to tax on any capital distributions. . We recommend that water organisations that are not companies should be granted income taxexempt status provided the water organisation is restricted from making distributions to taxable persons . Financial implications . Agreeing to the recommendations in this briefing will not have any fiscal implications because it will only apply the tax exempt status to water organisations where the shareholders or beneficiaries of the organisation are already tax exempt. Consultation . The Treasury has been consulted on this briefing and agrees with the recommendations. Next steps . A copy of this briefing will be provided to the Minister of Finance for her information. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of . The Department of Internal Affairs will consult with Inland Revenue to draft the necessary instructions for Bill to reflect the decisions made by Ministers. . Subject to your decisions on this briefing the necessary legislati ve provisions will be included in the Local Government (Water Services) Bill (Bill ) , planned for introduction in December . Recommendations . We recommend that you: a) agree that income taxexempt status should be granted to water organisations that meet the minimum requirements, provided all of the shareholders are also income taxexempt ; YesNo YesNo b) agree that water organisations that are granted an exemption from the shareholder requirement should not be granted income tax exempt status; YesNo YesNo c) agree that water organisations that are granted an exemption from the limitation on activities requirement should not be granted income tax exempt status; YesNo YesNo d) agree that water organisations that are not companies should be granted income taxexempt status provided the water organisation is restricted from making distributions to taxable persons ;
Local elections include local government elections, alcohol licensing trust elections and elections to certain charitable trusts and other entities. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E
Local government electoral subdivisions are known as wards at city and district councils and
May to May
Morrison Low ( ), Clutha Mixed Use Rural Water Schemes , Clutha Rural Water Assessment Report.pdf (cluthadc.govt.nz) Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of .. extend infrastructure to enable growth and change in farming activity and residential expansion into rural areas (for example t he Clutha schemes supply outlying rural villages and towns including Milton ); . the challenges and costs of meeting regulatory requirements for safe drinking water for schemes that also provide large volumes of water for farming purposes ; and . small numbers of commercial and residential consumers to spread costs across . Submitters on the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill raised concerns about regulatory requirements driving up costs for mixed use rural schemes . We received a group submission from the chairpersons of mixed use rural water schemes in the Clutha District . The submitters had concerns about the impacts of new regulatory standards on the affordability of their schemes for consumers. The submitters said the new water standards and the cost of new water infrastructure is a real financial burden on rural communities . . The submitters raised concerns about the Greenfield Bore Project which is designed to use a high quality shallow ground water source near the Clutha River . The Clutha District Council has approved funding for the new scheme which will cost million . The scheme will primarily supply water for farming purposes, but it must meet the Taumata Arowai drinking water standards. . The submitters are concerned that ensuring compliance with the regulatory standards will result in cost increases, which will make the scheme unaffordable for local consumers. They expect the water rate for this scheme in the next five years will rise from per unit to per unit (one unit is , litres of water per day ). . The submitters said the bulk of this water is used for farming purposes and with these cost increases, primarily to see new human drinking water standards, water will be unaffordable and consumers will leave the scheme in droves simply because of cost and seek more cost effect ive options. All this will do is lumber higher cost on those that have no option but to stay connected. . The submitters recommended rural water schemes like the Greenfield Bore Project need central government help and assistance to comply with the new water standards, such as subsidies. They recommended financial sustainability should include the best interests for affordability of consumers and ratepayers. The previous government undertook reviews of mixed use rural schemes . The previous government established a Rural Supplies Technical Working Group to advise the Department on the impacts of the previous governments reforms for mixed use rural water schemes. . The group considered regulatory issues for mixed use rural supplies and found that: . one size does not fit all regulatory interventions should recognise that mixeduse rural supplies are varied, and each has its own complexities and risks ;
NISTs Special Publication refers:
New Zealand Infrastructure Commission, Te Waihanga. (). The cost of consenting infrastructure projects in New Zealand. https:media.umbraco.iote waihanga year strategypypwthe costofconsenting infrastructure projects innew zealand.pdf ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE
Nine out of Kiwis want more control of their digital identity Digital Identity New Zealand A rely ing party is an individual or an organisation that relies on personal or organisational information shared with them before being able to provide the products or services they offer . Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government
November to November
October to December
October to December
October to December
October to December
October to December
October to December :
October to December
October to December :
October to December
October to December :
October to December
October to December :
October to December
October to December
October to December
October to December
October to December
October to December
October to December
October to December
October to October
October to December
Oliver Escobar, What Are Mini Publics, Citizen Participation Network (Citizen Participation Network, ), https:oliversdialogue.wordpress.comwhat areminipublics. The Irish Citizens Assemblys ruling on the th Amendment to the Constitution (decriminalization of abortion) was thought to be overly liberal, but was confirmed when the public voted in favour during the referendum. Because the Assembly accurately captured pu blic opinion almost a year before the issue went to popular vote, the method is a valuable way for politicians to gauge p ublic opinion and to proper action before a decision is made. Jack Bridgewater, The Irish Citizens Assembly on the th Amendment Is a Model for Participatory Democracy, Which Other Democratic Countries Should Follow, Democratic Audit , , http:www.democraticaudit.comthe irishcitizens assembly onthethamendment isamodel forparticipatory democracy which other democratic countries should follow . Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Otherwise known as Electronic Gaming Machines in pubs and clubs (not in casinos), or Class gambling under the Gambling Act . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
Purpose of the collection of personal information
Remote payments include sales o ver the phone. This financial year, the regulator has approved Class licences , of which have been for large scale lotteries . ()(g)(i) ()(ba)(ii) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of lost profits , due to the additional resource required to manually handle ticket purchases, the cost of printing a nd increased postage as NZ Post winds down its postal delivery service in favour of courier delivery, and increased safety risks for volunteers selling tickets door todoor or on the streets . . The money raised by Class operators goes towards worthy commun ity causes. The ability to fundraise will be more difficult once the exemption expires, and negatively impact an important revenue stream at a time when faced with rising operational costs . Class gambling is considered low risk . From a gambling harm pers pective, large scale lotteries present a low risk in terms of potential harm . This is because th is form of gambling is noncontinuous i.e. you cannot continue to play because there is a delay between purchasing a ticket and waiting for the result , and people cannot immediately reinvest any winnings. . The Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) regulates Class lotteries and has been monitoring activity since the temporary exemption came in to effect . There has been no noticeable increase in applications during this time . The exemption has resulted in less work for the regulator , as they have not had to enforce the old rules or educate applicants that they cannot take online or remote sales. This frees the regulator up to concentrate on the more harmful forms of gambling i.e. Class and casino gambling . . The regulator would continue to monitor activity in this class if the exemption became permanent . Licence holders would still have to apply for a licence for each individual lottery they wish to conduct , and comply with the Act s Lottery Game Rules , the rules by which lotteries and sweepstakes follow . . If appropriate , the regulator can place conditions on a Class licence if it has any concerns. As evidenced recently, the regulator has the power to deal with bad actors. There are limited options available to make the exemption permanent . The barrier for making this exemption permanent has been finding an appropriate vehicle to make the legislative change. The existing options are: . adopt the Gambling (Enabling Remote Interactive Gambling for Class Operators) Amendment Members Bill , which is sponsored by Hon Barbara Edmonds and not yet been drawn from the ballot , or . seek Cabinet approval prior to the expiry to make the exemption permanent when a suitable legislative vehicle becomes available i.e. Statutes Amendment Bill, online gambling , or the Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill . . Adopting the Members Bill is the best option in terms of legislative surety . However , it is unlikely it would be passed before the end of October unless you sought approval for it to be passed under urgency. Passing it under urgency would mean it is the most expedient option as well. . While it doesnt give immediate legislative surety, s eeking Cabinet approval under Option would enable us to act quickly when a legislative vehicle becomes available . Signall ing the Governments intention to change the policy when a suitable legislative vehicle becomes available will be helpful for both the regulator and Class operators . It would also help any further attempts to have the exemption included in the next Statutes Amendment Bill. Without a Cabinet decision, we consider it likely the exemption would be rejected again on the same grounds, furthe r delaying resolution of the issue.
September to September
Social bots automatically produce, share, and like content on media platforms. Fake profiles are operated manually, and in some cases by paid workers. Recommendation systems on online platforms refer to the ordering or visibility of content to users. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of are more likely to be engaged with and therefore this type of content is given more visibility on platforms. Overseas Governments are considering more comprehensive regulatory frameworks for online content, in response to the risk this content poses . Against this backdrop of serious societal harm arising from online media content and greater insight into the online environment propensity to spread harmful media content, there have been several recent regulatory proposals for comprehensive frameworks for online content across Europe. Appendix B outlines and compares several international policy initiatives to regulate online content, which place greater accountability on online platforms. While these overseas policy initiatives offer learning opportunities, the success of these regulatory frameworks remains to be seen . Overseas online content policy initiatives provide useful models for considering greater regulatory and nonregulatory responses to the increase risk of harm online media content poses to New Zealanders . . Despite recent regulatory initiatives, comprehensive regulation of online content is still an unprecedented feat, and the effectiveness and unintended consequences of these overseas regulatory frameworks are still unknown. Regulating online content is complex: the borderless nature of the online environment poses compliance challenges; the scale of online content makes it administratively challenging to apply rules consistently and quickly; and online contentsharing platforms resemble public spheres they are the primary point of access to information, political discussion and political organisation for many people as a result there are intricate challenges to prohibiting certain types of content whilst preserving freedom of expression. . However, there is opportunity to manage these complexities through aligning any potential regulatory framework for online content with that of other jurisdictions, thereby increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of regulation. For example, aligning online content regulations with other jurisdictions existing regulations may increase compliance as regulated entities already have policies in place to adhere to similar regulatory requirements. . However, there is a tradeoff between the benefits of a more efficient regime through regulatory alignment and being able to tailor a response to New Zealand circumstances. For example, New Zealand values and norms differ to those held in other countries and as a result, aligning our regulatory framework for online content may mean compromises regarding normative decisions over what speech is permissible. Other jurisdictions approaches to regulating online content will be considered in the media content regulatory review . We will consider international regulatory frameworks for online content in our advice on the proposed media content regulatory review. As international proposals for Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of comprehensive regulatory frameworks progress, we will assess the desirability in copying and aligning our recommendations with these approaches. Recommendations . We recommend that you: a) Note that you requested information from officials on recent international proposal to regulate online content; b) note that other jurisdictions regulatory frameworks for online content offer opportunities for lessons in best practice and alignment; c) note that regulating online platforms is complex and there are intricate challenges to making online platforms accountable for the content they host while still protecting the freedom of expression of users; and d) note that international approaches to comprehensively regulating online content will be considered as part of the media content regulatory review.
Specific provision in Health Act s()(g) for bylaws regulating drainage and the collection and disposal of sewage, and prescribing conditions to be observed in the construction of approved drains. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of . There are a range of offences under the L GA (and the Act) to regulate activity in relation to water services and infrastructure (including a breach of a bylaw). Water services bylaws currently make up approximately percent of all bylaws. . The compliance, monitoring, and enforcement of those offences is currently undertaken by local authority officers, who have the necessary powers delegated to them through the LGA. These powers to operate bylaws can be delegated to water organisations under existing legislation. . However, i mportant context for any legislative provisions is the general principle that exercise of coercive powers requires democratic accountability. This implies limits for the use of some council powers by those water organisations which may be several steps rem oved from their elected owners. . There are a range of intended accountability mechanisms in the Local Water Done Well system which will supplement the ownership control of councils: . Councils contracting and commissioning arrangements ; . Requirements for competency based governance, including expertise in network infrastructure industries (particularly water), public health and environment, and perspectives of mana whenua, consumers and communities ; . Regulators Commerce Commission (economic); Taumata Arowai (water quality, national oversight of wastewater and stormwater systems) and regional councils (environmental) ; . Consumer contracts and protection mechanisms (MBIEs policy responsibility) ; . Transparency mechanisms including the Local Government Official Information and Meetings Act ; and . Office of the Auditor General oversight. . Further detailed design work will be undertaken during the legislation development stage to ensure the intent to allow councils to devolve powers to water organisations under the LGA will work effectively to achieve the Local Water Done Well objectives . This design work will also confirm other details regarding functioning water organisations , including regulatory functions and powers for joint council owners , and ensuring that water organisations will be required to uphold Treaty settlements where councils have existing obligations . .
Subject to Cabinet agreement to the proposals outlined in the Cabinet paper, the
That is, . of New Zealand adults , according to the HLS (. from pokies alone). Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Statement damage to relationships, including neglect of dependents ; emotional and psychological distress ; disruptions to work or study ; financial distress and loss of income; fraud and related crimes; and family violence . . Second hand harm from gambling is where the harm does not just affect the gambler, but also affects their whnau, friends, and the wider community. Other impacts include: the direct impacts can include neglect of dependents, financial and emotional distress ; there is also a strong correlation between gambling and family, whnau or partner violence for women and children; and harm caused by gambling may also have broader economic effects, such as for employers and businesses due to lack of productivity or fraud. Sector composition . As of June , t he Class gambling sector currently comprises : corporate societies ( clubs and non club) ; with , venues operating a combined total of , machines. . Societies operate pokie machines out of clubs and pubs and must distribute their net proceeds to community recipients. Examples include Pub Charity and the Lion Foundation. Their peak body is the Gaming Machine Association of New Zealand (GMANZ), though not all societies are members of GMANZ. . Clubs are organisations such as RSAs, working mens clubs and cosmopolitan clubs. They run pokie machines within the clubs, and the net proceeds are usually returned to their own operations. The Department requires there to be rules about membership, election of officers, and purposes and operations of the club. Their peak body is Clubs New Zealand. . Some systemic aspects may impact on harm minimisation, namely: operators are intended to be not forprofit with a strong local community focus and yet most operate their machines in a competitive commercial environment with all the attendant commercial imperatives and consequences (e.g. societies compete for good venues ); and tension between generating gambling revenue and harm minimisation measures (i.e. reduced gambling due to increased harm minimisation means less harm but results in less funding) . Agencies and services involved in gambling harm prevention and reduction . The Ministry of Health develops and administers the three yearly strategy to prevent and minimise gambling harm. This includes funding gambling harm prevention and minimisation services (including gambling treatment providers), set ting the problem gambling levy and research and evaluation. . Te Hiringa H auora Health Promotion Agency (funded by the Ministry of Health) provides information and education services that aims to support New Zealand communities to prevent and respond to harmful gambling. . A range of gambling harm service providers, such as PGF Services, Salvation Army Oasis and Asian Family Services provide intervention andor public health services (contracted by the Ministry of Health). They offer a range of intervention services from helpline and information services through to full treatment services. Some providers are universal , and others focus on population groups such as Mori, Pacific, and Asian gamblers and their family and friends . The current state Pokies contribute to a concerning level of harm . There is already a concerning level of harm associated with pokies while the number of EGMs has been steadily reducing over time but the amount being spent by New Zealanders is Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Statement increasing over time, and pokies rem ain the most common type of gambling harm for clients accessing intervention services. . This level of harm will continue to increase if left unchecked. The HLS indicates that one in five pokie players are considered at risk gamblers (this is an increase from the HLS which indicated one in six). This suggests that some people are experiencing a level of harm that has worsened over time. Regulatory requirements to prevent and minimise harm are relatively limited . The current regulations cover a limited number of topics, with a low level of prescription. They : do not specify procedures for harm minimisation policies, such as how and when venue staff should check on players; have few restrictions on the gam e features known to attract players and encourage continuous play; and have no associated infringement offences. . For example, some of the key inadequacies identified in the current regulations include: staff who work at pubs and clubs lack the tools to identify problem gambling and intervene effectively ; the criteria for interventions by venue staff are either not prescribed, or not clearly prescribed in the society policy or venue statement; and harm minimisation regulations assign some responsibilities only to venue managers meaning societies are not accountable. . There are no offences and infringement fees for the requirements in the current R egulations. The only options to address non compliance are prosecution, or suspensioncancellation of a licence (which is often suspended, as societies appeal to the Gambling Commission) . This means that a significant level of resources is required to act on a breach, and small breaches that do not justify this action in and of themselves are not formally recorded against a society or venue, so they do not receive any penalty. . The current settings provide minimal guidance on the practical aspects of harm minimisation that we know are important (e.g. what signs of harm must be recorded which could help identify someone as a harmful gambler or supporting measures like penalties) and have no associated offences and penalties for lower level intervention. There have been developments in harm minimisation practices and processes since the re gulations were created in . There has been a significant amount of recent research on the best modes of recognising, recording and intervening in harmful gambling. Current advice on best practice recommends: m ore prescriptive tools could be developed to enable venue staff to identify and then know what to do when a patrons gambling becomes harmful ; m ore concentrated training, for all staff who supervise pokies; and more consistent and detailed guidance on the signs of harmful gambling. . Technology is continuing to increase the machines addictive power. Game features have evolved significantly since the Act and the Regulations were introduced. There are features within games that are specifically designed to keep people paying continuously . There have been no corresponding regulatory changes to prevent or restrict these features . . Adverse aspects of jackpots are being increasingly observed. There are reports of gaming machines becoming highly sought after in venues where a jackpot level appears close to being won. It is common for gaming venues to see marked increases in the number of people gambling, the amounts being gambled each play, and to the speed at which people play. There have been instances of stand over tactics and violence to force users to abandon a machine, and of groups taking charge of all machines in a venue to ensure they share in a jackpot win.
The Manifesto notes that the Labour Party will cont inue to protect the integrity of New Zealand elections and voters access to the polls. The Coop eration Agreement signals an interest in working with parties from across Parliament on issues that affect our democracy. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E usoq
The Manifesto notes that the Labour Party will continue to protect the integrity of New Zealand elections and voters access to the polls. The Cooperation Agreement signals an interest in working with parties from across Parliament on issues that affect our democracy. Section ()()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of usoq
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), United States Commerce
The State of Victoria in Australia requires and year olds to have guardian consent. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Appendix A : Cabinet paper Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Registering Nominated Sex) Regulations
The Technical Advisory Group was established through the Day Plan: Repeal of the Water Services Entities Act CAB MIN . Their purpose is to provide independent expert help on the formation of advice for Local Water Done Well. The members are: Andreas Heuser, Raveen Jaduram, Wendy Walker, Simon Weston and Mark Rees e. Combined, they have expertise in financ e, governance and local government. enkv Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE
The intention for community priority statements is to allow them to be made by any person . The term legal person is a legal entity that can do anything a natural person can do, such as a company, an incorporated society, or a trust. It also includes in dividuals (natural persons). Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
The legislative requirements for special category CCOs may include requirements for the preparation of establishment plans for ministerial approval . This approach was taken when the operations of electric power boards were transferred to new energy companies, and when commercial operations of Harbour Boards were transferred to new port companies. If ultimately required, these establishment plans could be submitted in lieu of water services delivery plans to streamline the process for establishment of new water entities. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of proposing to retain their existing model , their Plans could instead be focused on the changes they are making (for example their approach to funding and pricing) . Flexibility may also be useful in setting expectations for detail from some smaller councils. . We are seeking to understand your preference for pursu ing a more rigid approach that applies equally to all councils, or a more flexible approach to reflect individual circumstances. . Your role in the draft Plans. LWDW indicates a direct role for the responsible minister in assessing and approving the Plans. Given relationship levers are likely to be important for compliance with the draft Plans (ahead of backstop powers being introduced), there is value in you playing an active role in the draft Plan process, whether that be in meeting with councils, being the source of the feedback on their draft Plans, or other mechanisms. The Department would provide support for the role you would prefer, including undertaking activities directly if your preference is to be more removed from the process. . We are seeking to understand what level of involvement you want to have in the development of the Plans . . Collecti ng baseline information through Plans or an information disclosure regime . Collecting key baseline information will be important to develop and implement economic regulation. While baseline information could be requested in the Plans, an information disclosure regime is also being considered for inclusion in the first replacement Bill that could be used to achieve the same aim . A broader information disclosure regime would give more flexibility in requesting information, as the requirements for inclusion in the Plan would likely need to be set out in the first replacement Bill. . We are seeking to understand if you have a preference for seeking baseline information through the Plans or through information disclosures . . When first Plans are due . LWDW indicated that Plans would be required within months of the repeal of the water services entities , however , the legislative powers to require provision of the Plans, and the necessary contents, will only be included in the first replacement Bill (expected to be passed by June ) . This difference means councils will only have complete confidence in what is required of them for a reduce time perio d, though e arly and clear communication of expectations will help to reduce this issue . . We are seeking to confirm if the Plans should be due months from repeal, months from the first replacement Bill, or another could be considered . . Support from the Department . There is a spectrum of support that the Department could provide to support councils in the development of the Plans. In all cases, the Department would expect to develop and provide templates to standardise information and give clear guidance to councils on how to complete them . Risks . Some councils may seek to use the draft Plans to argue for greater Crown funding support . For example, they may include modelling of the rate increases needed to meet the expected new requirements at a level that is clearly unaffordable . To mitigate this, it will be important to communicate the new vehicles central Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of government is making available to councils to support delivery, and the expectation that water services are financially sustainable independent of central government support. . Councils may pursue different levels of ambition within their Plans. Some councils may opt for a more ambitious timeline or scale to demonstrate their ability to meet the expected end state in a reasonable time, but may do so in the knowledge that they may not be able to deliver on the Plan. Given the acco untability to the Plan, other councils may set a more conservative path that they are confident in meeting , but which does not drive a fast transition . Central government, as assessors and approvers, will need to help guide councils to adopting an appropriate pathway. . Despite the range of relief that the two step approach would provide, some councils may still be unable to deliver a Plan in the time available. If warranted, consideration may need to be given to any direct support that could be provided to them, or further relief that could be provided ( for example, the timeline or detail required) . Next steps . We are seeking your decision on the approach to the Plans, and your views on the considerations identified to inform a briefing in January seeking policy decisions on the Plans . This will include decisions on the content of the Plans, confirm opportunities for councils to jointly submit Plans, obligations for engagement, and options for the assessment process . . To support further policy development, w e will be seeking opportunities to engage with the Technical Advisory Group (when appointed) , Communities for Local Democracy , Taituar and Local Government New Zealand on some of these proposals to understand their views and any issues with the proposed approach. We are seeking your permission to this engagement. Recommendations . We recommend that you: a) note that Local Water Done Well (LWDW) sets out requirements for councils to submit water service delivery plans ( Plans ) within months of repeal of the Water Services Entities Act for how they will transition their water services to a new model that meets quality standards and is financially sustainable ; b) note that there are options on whether councils are required to deliver all the content in a single Plan or in a two stage approach that builds requirements over time ; c) note that the Department of Internal Affairs recommends a two stage approach, as this option would enable more flexibility for councils who wish to move quickly to do so, and relieve some pressure on councils to deliver complete plans several months after completing their long term plans ; Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of d) EITHER i. agree to progress advice on a plan delivered in a single stage within months , as described in LWDW ; YesNo OR ii. agree to progress advice on a two stage planning process that builds requirements over time; YesNo e) note that some councils may seek to meet all requirements in a single plan, and that the Department will work to enable this flexibility; f) note that there are other key considerations for the Plans where we are seeking your view to inform further advice ; g) indicate your preference on rigid Plan requirements that apply equally to all councils, or allowing flexibility that may better enable groups that are ready to go sooner ; h) agree that the Department can begin engagement with local government sector groups to further develop proposals. YesNo Hamiora Bowkett Acting Deputy Chief Executive, Local Government
The nature of the economic regulator is covered in more detail in the companion paper Economic regulation and consumer protection in the three waters sector s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . To recap, water service entities will be responsible for setting prices in line with the regional representative groups statement of strategic and performance expectations. They will be required to do this in accordance with: . principles embedded in the legislation and any directions included in a Government Policy Statement; and . regulatory measures to control price changes during the transition period and other central government intervention mechanisms enabled by the legislation. . The roles of the different decision makers are set out in the following table:
The term transgender is used in this paper to refer to all people whose gender does not align with their assigned sex at birth this includes people who identify as non binary. Intersex is an umbrella term for people born with a variation of sex characteristics (such as sexual anatomy, reproductive organs, hormonal andor chromosome patterns). Intersex people are born with sex characteristics that do not fit typical binary notions of male or female bodies. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Page of . At the time, the legislative timetable did not provide enough time to seek Cabinet approval of the policy changes recommended at the select committee stage. When the Bill was deferred in , these changes were put on hold. We have been advised by Cabinet Office that to progress with the selfidentification provisions now will require Cabinet approval. . We are proposing several changes to the selfidentification provisions from what the select committee recommended in . These changes will be made through a supplementary order paper (SOP) . You have indicated your preference to refer this selfidentification SOP to select committee. We are planning for this to occur in June . . You recently agreed to present a paper to Cabinet in May seeking policy agreements for the Bill. We will advise and seek further policy decisions from you prior to this and provide a draft Cabinet paper in April . Selfidentification will support people to have their gender identity recognised on their birth certificate . Gender is distinct from sex: gender refers to a persons social and personal ide ntity as a male, female, or another gender; sex refers to a persons biological and physiological characteristics that characterise people as male or female. In contrast to sex, gender relies on how people perceive themselves. . Society is changing to recognise the difference between sex and gender and that a persons gender may not be the same as their sex. In line with this shift, there is an increasing expectation that the Government should enable people to have their gender recognised on birth certificates, like they can on driver licences and passports . . The current settings recognis e that a persons gender can be different to their sex, but do not recognise a persons autonomy in determining their gender identity o n their birth certificates . This is out of step with human rights discourse on recognising gender identity. The process for changing sex on a birth certificate is inaccessible for many people which affects transgender and intersex people using birth certificates . People use birth certificates to show they are a New Zealand citizen with the right to work and study in New Zealand. There are many processes where birth certificates can be requested, including setting up a bank account, applying to university or enrolling a child in school. . While other documents can be used in many of the same processes (such as passports or driver licences), birth certificates are often more practical as they are low cost and do not expire. They are also more commonly used by children a nd young people who may not be entitled to a driver licence, for example. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Page of . Any situation where a birth certificate is requested can be distressing for transgender and intersex people if the sex recorded does not align with their gender. There is a risk of being outed as transgender or intersex, being addressed as the wrong gender, and at times being subject to discrimination. These experiences impact the mental health and wellbeing of transgender and intersex people, which contributes to higher rates of psychological distress, harmful substance use, and suicidal ideation and behaviour. We consider ed three options for the process to have gender recognised on a birth certificate . The Department supports the objective of making it easier for people to have their gender identity recognised on their birth certificate. We are recommending policy changes to achieve this. . In considering our options to achieve this we have taken into account: . the need to maintain the integrity of registered birth records: a registered birth record is a source for other official documents including passports and driver licences; . developments in international human rights discourse and the progress of other countries who have adopted or considered a selfidentification process; . submissions to the select committee in ; and . ways the process can be improved to increase accessibility and reduce the barriers to changing registered sex on a birth certificate. . In developing advice about recognising gender on a birth certificate we considered three options: . Option one : status quo Family Court process with a medical evidence requirement . Option two: remove Family Court process, but retain medical evidence requirement . Option three: introduce a selfidentification process (preferred option) . Option one (status quo) is perceived as medicalising a deeply personal expression of selfidentity. This was confirm ed in the report of the Working Group for reducing barriers to changing registered sex. While it recommend ed changes to improve the status quo, the report was clear that the Family Court process does not support individuals autonomy about their gender identity and expression. The W orking Group identified that barriers associated with the status quo include the time and cost of applying for a Family Court declaration and the intrusiveness of the medical requirement. . Option two significantly reduces the time and administrative burden, and the cost of navigating the Family Court process. However, a significant part of the cost and effort of applying is gathering evidence of medical treatment. Maintaining the medical evidence requirement is also out of step with international human rights discourse around removing any eligibility criteria for registering sex and gender information. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Page of . Option three is our preferred option. Selfidentification will require a statutory declaration to be provided to the RegistrarGeneral. The RegistrarGeneral will update the individuals registered birth record so the sex marker that appears on their birth cer tificate reflects the individuals preferred gender identity. A self identification process recognises a persons ability to decide their gender and provides a simplified process to have this recognised on a birth certificate. It also demedicalises the process. Policy approvals required to introduce a selfidentification process for changing sex on a birth certificate . This section outlines the policy changes required to begin implementing a self identification process. We consider these changes are practicable to introduce within the time constraints of enacting the Bill this year. . The recommendations assume other requirements for registering a birth will not change. For example, the original birth record (and original birth certificate) would continue to record a childs biological sex. Replacing the requirements for a Family Court process and the provision of medical evidence with a selfidentification process Status quo . To change the sex on a birth certificate, applicants must provide evidence that they have undertaken medical treatment to physically conform with the sex they want recorded . This evidence is assessed by a Family Court judge who decides whether the application should be supported. Select committee recommendation . The select committee recommended a selfidentification application process to replace the Family Court process. To enact this, the select committee recommended amendments to: . remove the requirement to obtain a declaration from the Family Court supporting an application to change sex on a birth certificate; . remove the requirement to provide evidence of medical treatment to physically conform with the sex the applicant wants recorded; . enable people to apply directly to the RegistrarGeneral to change the sex on their birth certificate. Department s advice agree with the select committee recommendations . These changes would mean the applicant would be the only authority determining what sex is represented on their birth certificate (within the range of markers available (see discussion below) ). . Removing the Family Court assessment and the medical evidence requirement and introducing a selfidentification process will result in positive outcomes such as: . better enabling transgender and intersex New Zealanders to access services with less risk of being outed or being subject to discrimination; Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Page of . demedicalises and normalises the experience of being transgender or intersex; . validates transgender and intersex people, which contributes to positive mental health and wellbeing ; and . greater accessibility to a birth certificate that reflects a persons gender, due to lower costs and reduced administration involved in an application. . At least countries have adopted a selfidentification process since . It is also increasingly supported within international organisations such as the OECD, the United Nations and the World Health Organisation. . Introducing a self identification process will require IT changes, the costs of which are still being assessed. Our initial estimate for updating the Departments data systems is million.
The term hyperscale refers to significantly scalable cloud computing systems in which a very large number of
The terms of reference for Phase of the Royal Commission are available at:
These are the North Island c ouncils that do not already have Mori wards, and that are on the current representation review cycle. Proactively released by the Minister of Local GovernmentINCONFIDENCE
These areas are called wards in territorial authorities (district councils) and constituencies in regional counc ils. This paper uses the term wards as shorthand to refer to both. The Mori electoral r oll is the same one used for Parliamentary elections. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE . Thirty two councils resolved to establish Mori wards for the local elections , and without a poll. Fourteen additional councils have resolved to establish Mori wards for the local elections , and of these councils did not hold a poll . . Following the removal of binding polls, the Local Government Electoral Legislation Act introduced a new process for councils to consider Mori wards . Significantly , from October the Act will require councils to make a n active decision regarding Mori wards during the representation review process. Proposal one: Reintroduce polling mechanisms for Mori wards . In alignment with coalition agreements, I propose reinstating the poll requirements with the poll policy settings as they were before , including the: .. threshold for petitioning the council ( of electors on the councils roll at the last local elections ); .. eligibility to vote ( any person on the electoral roll for that council ); .. percentage required to bind the council to the outcome ( simple majority ); and .. binding length ( two local government terms ). . I also propose removing the requirement for councils to consider Mori wards every six years during their representation reviews if they have not established Mori wards. Proposal two: Require local authorities to hold a poll if they did not hold one when establis hing their Mori wards (four options) . Requiring councils to hold a poll , if they established Mori wards without one , is a commitment in both coalition agreements. . I propose to include a mechanism in the Bill for councils that have established, or resolved to establish, Mori wards since (without holding a poll) to reverse that decision. This would involve rescinding the decision if it has not yet been implement ed, or disestablishing Mori wards if they are already in place. . My proposal will give councils the choice to avoid the cost of a poll, and the associated work involved in holding a poll, at a time when many councils in the sector are already dealing with a heavy workload and projected large rates increases. . Councils would have a short statutory timeframe to decide whether to take the option to rescind or disestablish, so that there is still enough time for councils to make changes to their representation arrangements before the elections, if this is the option they choose.
This paper seeks agreement to a refreshed Cloud First Policy and agreement to
This paper: . updates you on the Governments progress to improve the governance system for local government and get councils back to basics; and . seeks policy approvals for the first tranche of drafting instructions for the first Local Government System Improvements bill. Relation to government priorities
This proposal will remove the requirement in section A of the Local Government Act for councils to undertake reviews of the cost effectiveness of service delivery arrangements at specific times.
Total investment for WDC unconstrained scenario is derived from their Long Term plans until . After , the investment requirements for years moving forw ard are projected as an average of total inve stment from adjusted for inflation. It has been noted in the RFI that a further investment of million, million, and million will be required for wastewater, water, and stormwater projects respectively. These figures have also been ad ded to the projected investment requirements for . Amalgamated entity investment attributable to Whangrei has been calculated by attributing the net investment from the WICS models for Entity A prop ortionate to the total number of connections for Whangrei. NZD (millions) Year WICS standalone Capex for WDC WDC YP and Castalia modelling for Amalgamated Entity Capex attributatble to Whangrei (by connections) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia Figure . : Asset value per connected citizen for selected water utilities
Water service providers includes water organisations and councils providing water services inhouse. ()(f)(iv) ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . Producing stand alone financial statements for water supply, wastewater, and stormwater; . Further restrictions on privatisation: a. A prohibition on losing control, selling and disposing of significant infrastructure; b. Ensuring shares do not give rights, title, interests in assets, securities or liabilities ; c. Ensuring water services assets cannot be used as security (but revenue can). . Cabinet agreed to additional legislative requirements relating to separate water organisations focusing the ownership, governance and structural arrangements. These included: . Current council staff and elected members cannot be appointed to boards ; . Water organisations must be companies ; . Activities of water organisations will be limited to the provision of water services, and directly related activities . Only councils or consumer trusts can be shareholders of a water organisation; . Competency based board appointments and appropriate mix of skills, knowledge and experience . . Cabinet also agreed to additional requirements for water organisations that involve consumer trusts . These requirements place reasonably significant controls on the consumer trust as it would have effective control of water services and assets. They include: . Consumer trusts must represent consumers and their interests ; . Consumer trusts will be responsible for appointing and removing board, and overseeing performance ; . Restrictions on consumer trusts transferring shares ; . Consumer trust trustees will be elected by consumers . . Lastly there is one additional requirement which you have agreed to but which has yet to be considered by Cabinet as it is in your July Cabinet paper.
We will update this section and send through refreshed talking points to your office on February . Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
compared to our current assessment . We consider that operatin g ma rgins woul d be
https:www.publicservice.govt.nzresearchanddataworkforcedataremunerationpaywagetrends Section Three: Final Decisions The final decisions presented in this section have been informed by the feedback received during consultation, which is summarised in Section Four: Feedback and Responses. Overview of confirmed changes The final decision is to implement the proposals, as outlined in the Consultation Document, with some changes as a result of feedback. An overview of the confirmed change decisions is set out below, followed by organisational charts showing the future organisational structure. Changes to the proposals made as a result of feedback are highlighted in bold. . Direct reports to the Deputy Chief Executive, Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Change in reporting line for the Chief Advisor, Regulatory Assurance and Stewardship to the General Manager, Policy Group. Change in job title for the Director, Ministerial, Monitoring and Capability to Director, Ministerial and Monitoring. Retain the job title for the General Manager, Regulatory Services . No other changes for this group. . Regulatory Assurance and Stewardship unit Disestablishment of the Senior Advisor position. . Strategy and Branch Services Disestablishment of Business Advisor positions in Accountability, Performance and Assurance. Reduction of Data Analyst positions from three to one in the Data Analysis and Insights team. Disestablishment of the Business Advisor position in the Digital Strategy and Assurance team, and reduction in Senior Business Analyst positions from two to one in that team. Closing fixed term positions in this group, once the employment engagement comes to an end. A change in reporting line for the two Business Support Administrators from Ministerial Monitoring and Capability to the Manager, Accountability, Performance and Assurance, as noted below in .. No other changes for this group. . Ministerial, Monitoring and Capability Disestablishment of the Senior Advisor Policy Capability position. In the Ministerial and Official Correspondence team, the disestablishment of the Graduate Advisor positions, reduction in Advisor positions from six to four (not six to three, as proposed), and a reduction of Senior Advisor positions from five to four. A vacant analyst role has been transferred from the Policy Group. In the Business Support team, disestablishment of the Team Leader position and the vacant Business Support Administrator position and a change in reporting line for the two remaining Business Support Administrators to Accountability, Performance and Assurance in the Strategy and Branch Services group. Disestablishment of the Personal Assistant position. Closing fixed term positions in this group, once the employment engagement comes to an end. No other changes for this group. . Policy Group Reduction in the number of Senior Policy Analysts in the Gambling and Racing team from four to three, and the number of Policy Analysts from five to four. Reduction in the number of Policy Analysts in the Media Content and Online Safety team from five to three. Reduction in the number of Senior Policy Analysts in the Digital team from three to two, and the number of Policy Analysts from three to one. Reduction in the number of Senior Policy Analysts in the Community Wellbeing team from three to two, and the number of Policy Analysts from three to one (not three to two, as proposed) . A vacant analyst role in this team has been transferred to the Ministerial and Official Correspondence team. Reduction in the number of Personal Assistants from two to one Group Personal Assistant. Closing fixed term positions in this group, once the employment engagement comes to an end. As noted in the change proposal document, Policy Group will continue its usual practice of reassigning people across teams, and adjusting numbers of people within teams, on an ongoing basis to align with ministerial priorities. No other changes for this group. . Digital Safety Disestablishment of the Principal Advisor, Lead Operational Advisor, and Principal Advisor CVE positions. Establishment of a year fixed term Relationship Manager, Pacific until June . The title of this position has changed to Relationship Manager, Pacific, as a result of feedback received. The fixed term has been extended to align with the expiry of the relevant appropriation, as funding for digital safety in the Pacific is ringfenced and timelimited. A reduction in the number of Senior Investigator positions from two to one in the Digital Messaging Systems team. Disestablishment of the Lead Online Investigator position in the Digital Child Exploitation team. Disestablishment of the two Intelligence Analyst positions and the Lead Intelligence Analyst position in the Intelligence and Insights team. A reduction in the number of Senior Advisor, Engagement and Innovation roles from three to one in the Design, Engagement and Innovation team. Disestablishment of the Operational Policy Analyst position in the Design, Engagement and Innovation team. A fixed term Operational Policy Analyst until June will be established , to be funded from timelimited funding. No other changes for this group. . Regulatory Services Direct reports to the General Manager, Regulatory Services Disestablishment of the Director, AML; National Manager, Engagement; National Manager, Intelligence, Insights and Risk; National Manager, Strategy and Capability; and Principal Advisor, Regulatory Strategy positions. Establishment of the new Director, AMLCFT position. Establishment of a new Director, Regulatory Enablement that incorporates the Strategy, Intelligence and Insights, Operational Policy, Engagement, Information and Education, Business Services and Planning and Risk functions. This change is a result of the feedback received to merge the proposed Implementation and Strategy, Intelligence and Risk functions. The Heads of Implementation; Strategy, Intelligence and Risk; and Investigations and Prosecutions will not be established. The Investigations functions will remain as at present in the AMLCFT and Gambling directorates; see further below. Change in title for the Director, Regulatory System (Gambling) to Director, Gambling.
note agencies face several interdependent and complex challenges when
note that Cabinet has previously agreed to introduce legislation to lower the voting age for local elections (other than alcohol licensing trust elections) to yearsold CABMIN and CBC MIN;
note that changing the voting ag e for parliamentary electi ons would trigger two reserved provisions in the Electoral Ac t, requiring percent majority in the House, or a majority in a referendum;
note that on March Cabinet invi ted the Ministers of Local Government and Justice to report back to Cabinet in June with a draft of a bill to lower the local el ection voting age to years old with the intention of seeki ng agreement to share this with other political parties prior to introduction;
note that on August , the Petitions Committee referred the Petition of
note that this paper is intended to be read alongside the paper from the Minister of Justice and the Minist er of Local Government entitled Government Response to the Declaration of Inconsistency: Voting age in the Electoral Act and the Local Electoral Act ;
note that this paper is intended to be read alongside the paper from the Minister of Justice and the Minister of Local Government entitled Elections (Lowering the Voting Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill: Approval for Introduction;
noted that agencies face several interdependent and complex challenges when considering
noted that in , Cabinet agreed to introduce legislation to lo wer the voting age for local elections (other than alcohol licensing trust elections) to yearsold CABMIN, CABMIN;
noted that in August , ECO noted the Minister of Local Governments proposed work programme for the local government portfolio and invited him to report back seeking agreement to policy decisions on a first tranche for the work programme ECO MIN ;
noted that on March , Cabinet invited th e Ministers of Local Government and Justice to report back in June with a draft of a bill to lower the local election voting age to years old, with the intention of seeki ng agreement to share this with other political parties prior to intr oduction CABMIN;
noted that on August , the Petitions Committee referred the Petition of Reality
noted that the Royal Commission oflnquiry into the TetTorist Attack on Christchurch
noted that this paper is intended to be r ead alongside the paper under LEGSUB from the Minister of Lo cal Government entitled Electoral (Lowering Voting Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill: Approval for Introduction ;
noted the November declaration of the Supreme Court stating that th e provisions of the Electoral Act and of the Local Elector al Act which provide for a minimum voting age of years are incons istent with the right in s of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act to be free from di scrimination on the basis of age;
page , Compliance with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act : Local Government Bill ( NZ BORA Advice Local Government Billfinal .pdf (justice.govt.nz) ). ()(h) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
https:www.who.intemergenciesdiseasesnovelcoronavirus (nd June )
) Speed up how fast symptomatic people get tested (and then, if positive, isolated). ) Provide insights and help identify where people are reporting as symptomatic; ) Inform where to focus testing resources;
) To add close contacts into contact tracing centres that would otherwise be missed; and
,J,.theabe..refle.cte.d.iLothedeislaticu uacludimube Wateueniices AcL..
. A copy of the Strategic Intentions document can be found at
. Accurately identify of close contacts with false positives estimated at around in a wide variety of environments.
. Bank of New Zealand (hereinafter referred to as the Company) has agreed with the Department of Internal Affairs (hereinafter referred as the Department) to issue corporate credit cards to authorised employees of the Department upon certain conditions as to the use of such cards, and
. Cabinet Committee Paper and Minute record the approval of the first of three proposals to progress the third stage of the Local Water Done Well programme
. Define the mission in one sentence. Save lives by stopping COVID infections.
. Defined terms .
. EXCEPT as may be otherwise provided the cardholder shall use the card for the sole purpose of the payment of official expenses.
. Executive Summary . .. Introduction . .. Inherent risk level . .. Residual risk level . . Project Summary . .. Problem Statement . .. Identity Check Service . . PIA Scope . . Applicable Legislation . .. Privacy legislation . .. Identity Information Confirmation Act . .. Land Transport Act . . Architecture . .. High level process . .. Information exchanges . .. Passive liveness detection . .. Key stage limitation . . Collection . .. Notice . .. Collection whilst using the service . .. Collection of driver licence information from Waka Kotahi. .. Metadata . .. Google Analytics . . Use . .. Use of the live photo . .. Use of the comparison frames . .. Use of the selfie . .. Use o f New Zealand passport information . .. Use of New Zealand driver licence information . .. Use of metadata and Google Analytics information . .. Use by other DIA Identity products . .. Use by third parties . . Accuracy . .. Ability to compare accurately . .. Passive Liveness detection . .. Human oversight . .. Impact of errors on individuals . Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
. Increasing the total number of clinically relevant close contacts identified.
. Marilyn Little was Deputy Chief Executive until February .
. Objectives of the Information Sharing programme
. Objectives of the information sharing programme
. Online application form (youll be asked to upload your CV, cover letter, proof of right to work in NZ
. Preparation and Discovery commencing circa March
. Public health advice . Systems and capacity building . Testing . Contact tracing
. Purpose In midMarch , a group of private sector individuals (the Private Sector Group) joined together to assist the Government with the COVID response under the coordination of Rob Fyfe, who was based inside the National Crisis Management Centre alongside former Police Commissioner Mike Bush.
. Repeal of previous water services legislation
. Scenarios Presented . . . .
. Statements of council priorities and objectives for their delivery of water services a statement of a councils priorities and
. That CovidCard is considered for population wide deployment in advance of relaxing border settings, particularly to countries where COVID levels are above zero. . That recursive contact tracing is considered alongside CovidCard as a way to enhance the effectiveness of contact tracing. We consider recursive contact tracing to only be achievable with the assistance of digital contact tracing technology. . That further modelling work is conducted to quantify the degree to which CovidCard is able to slow the spread of COVID, over and above manual contact tracing, both including and excluding recursive contact tracing. . We recommend that further work, including largescale field trials only proceed alongside inprinciple support for a populationwide deployment.
. The DIA Customer Satisfaction Survey is run annually by NielsenIQ on behalf of the Department using a sample of customers who have used services in the previous months.
. The DIA Customer Satisfaction Survey is run annually by NielsenIQ on behalf of the Department using a sample of customers who have used services in the previous months. For the survey a total of , customers were interviewed (across all services being surveyed) between July and June . Further information on this survey can be found at
. The Government has agreed to undertake two stages of legislative changes to improve
. The Stats NZ General Social Survey is generally carried out every two years. The survey was delayed until and the results were not available in time for inclusion in the Annual Report. The results will be included in our Annual Report. The data for the and results were collected as part of the Stats NZ Household Economic Survey (household income and housing cost statistics) rather than through the General Social Survey. The Household Economic Survey has differences in its collection method, sampled population, and reporting periods, among other things, that may affect comparability. This result is not able to be directly compared with results from prior years. We used the number of households across all income groups who rated their overall life satisfaction at or above.
. The parties involved and the Lead Agency
. The parties involved and the lead agency .
. The purpose of this briefing is to provide a summary of the agreed amendments to the
. This aide memoire attaches a table of the policy decisions needed for the Cabinet
. This briefing provides additional advice on the risks, benefits, and tradeoffs of two
. This paper seeks agreement to make out of cycle changes to budget baselines within
. This policy sets out the Department of Internal Affairs (Department) policy on prosecutions. It applies to any prosecution action being considered or undertaken by the Department, including prosecutions under the following enactments:
. Tier and above is defined as the top four tiers of managers and leaders that lead people within the Department with the Chief Executive being tier .
. Transparency Internationals Corruptions Perceptions Index and results for all years can be found by visiting
. We are seeking your approval to remove the current statutory timeframe for local
. What are the indicative dates of the twophased Implementation Programme
. What segments of society may be excluded from broad participation given the prerequisites owning a modern smartphone, having a dataplan, etc
. note that repealing the provisions for binding polls on Mori wards and Mori
. note that the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Terrorist Attack on the
. Keep the border closed and persist with a strategy of elimination. This strategy will impose significant economic costs for an indefinite period.
. during and early , Cabinet made a series of decisions to transform the three waters service delivery system, and agreed to create four new water services entities CAB MIN , CAB MIN , CAB MIN , CAB MIN ;
. in June , Cabinet established the million Three Waters Infrastructure Investment and Service Delivery Reform Programme tagged operating contingency, a portion of whi ch remains unallocated DEV MIN ;
. lack of control over the systems holding and processing your data;
. on November , Cabinet agreed that legislation be prepared lowering the voting age from to years, for Parliaments consideration (the Bill) CABMIN;
. provides an update on the implementation of the first stage of reforms; and
. repealing the provisions for binding polls on Mori wards and Mori constituencies
. seeks agreement to start crosspart y consultation on the attached draft of the Electoral (Lowering Voting Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill (the Bill), ahead of introduction planned for August ;
.. This direct access agreement (DAA) is between the Minister Responsible for the New
. Scenario Very low degree of Governor influence
. changing the voting age for parliamentary elections would tri gger two reserved provisions in the Electoral Act , requi ring percent majority in the House or a majority in a referendum;
. cloud capabilities being directly accessible over the (insecure and hostile)
. further changes are necessary to better align councils Mori wards processes with
. in Budget , a Transforming Three Waters Service Delivery for New Zealanders: Transition and Implementation tagged operating contingency of million was established to provide for establishment and transition costs;
. seeks Cabinet agreement to release a discussion document and consult publicly
. seeks additional policy approval s on prisoner enrolment and the commencement timing for the Bill; and
. these decisions are to be given effect through an initial piece of legislation the Water Services Entities Bill;
.. This DAD comes into force on the of the last signature.
. Scenario Very high degree of Governor influence
. reports back on the financ ial implications of the proposals to lower the voting age.
. the rapid rate of change and the complexity of cloud environments can make it
. Scenario Central Gover nment suppor t vari ant
. a false sense of security can arise from an (incorrect) assumption that
., Cabinet Minute of Decision CABMIN , Cabinet Office
. Scenario Number of entities vari ant
.Except for the obligations of the parties set forth in sections VII (Communications and
.I seek Cabinet agreement to submit the Severe Weather Emergency Recovery
.Our GRE assess ments under scenario for the Crown applies to all WSEs.
.note that the Local Government Act (LGA), requires all councils to adopt a
. Accreditation Requirements Overview Any digital identity service provider that wants to deliver one or more of the services prescribed in the regulations as an accredited service will need to apply and demonstrate to the TF Authority that they can meet the accreditation requirements specifie d in the Act, rules and regulations. The Act establishes certain requirements that applications for accreditation must meet. These include: being in a form, and made in a manner, approved by the TF Authority; containing information prescribed in regulations; and providing the information required by section (), which includes whether the applicant has: o been convicted of a criminal offence in New Zealand or overseas ; o been, or is, the subject of a formal Privacy Commission investigation or proceeding ; o previously had an application for accreditation for themselves or a service they provided declined; o had their accreditation as a TF provider or of a service they provided suspended or cancelled; or o not complied with additional record keeping or reporting requirements or a compliance order imposed or issued under section of the Act. Proposed regulations General requirements In addition to meeting the specific requirements specified s ection () of the Act, we propose that the regulations i ncorporate the following requirements that TF providers would need to meet when applying for accreditation of a service or services. Incorporation in New Zealand We want to ensure the enforceability and integrity of the Trust Framework. Therefore, TF provi ders need to be subject to New Zealand law. Companies that wish to provide accredited services will need to be incorporated in New Zealand to apply for accreditation. If an international company wants to apply for accreditation, they must have a New Zealan d subsidiary. Organisations that are registered as Incorporated Societies in New Zealand will also be eligible to apply for accreditation as will New Zealand Crown agencies and government departments.
Auditing BDMI and Citizenship access by NZSIS Authorised Officers SOP For example to verify an individuals identity or in support of joint investigative work. NZSIS Policy Data Retention Disposal under the ISA
December meeting agenda, papers and notes
December Meeting Summary
In March , Cabinet agreed that, given the changed context, including the need to respond to a national emergency, the Government would focus its legislative response to the Declaration of Inconsistency on lowering the voting age for local elections only CABMI N. Cabinet also invited the Ministers of Local Government and Just ice to report back to Cabinet in June with a draft of the Bill with the in tention of seeking agreement to share this with other political parties prior to introduction.
In addition to security issues and the expected new jurisdictional risk preference, the
January to February
Limits on use of personal information
Mar Update from the Chair Rural Supplies Technical Working Group
Mar meeting notes from the rd Rural Water Supplies Technical Working Group meeting
March Rural supplies working group presentation Tim Cadogan
March meeting agenda and material Rural Group material rd meeting
Ministry of Business Innovation and Employment (MBIE), Department of Internal Affairs (DIA), Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFAT), Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet National Cyber Policy Office (DPMCNCPO) Statistics New Zealand (StatsNZ) and other relevant agencies System Leads for Digital, Data and Information Security Joint System Leads advice on Public Service Use of GenAI Advice Document (digital.govt.nz) ()(f)(ii) ()(f)(ii) ()(f)(ii) ()(f)(ii) ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs UNCLASSIFIED Page of .
Mulgrave Street, Wellington
Only onshore hyperscale providers i.e., large onshore data centres with public cloud characteristics, hyperscale
Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E usoq
The Government Response needs to be tabled no later than August . The House debate must take place withi n six sitting days of the Government Response being tabled.
The Justice Committee presented its r eport on the DOI to the House on May . The Committee recommended, by ma jority, that the Government:
The Ministerial response is required to be presented to the House by
The claim that cloud is more secure can seem counter intuitive. However, more
The cloud infrastructure is provisioned for exclusive use by a specific community of
Three new Commissioners have been appointed to conduct the I nquiry . They
We seek a decision from Cabinet on whether to retain the differentiated ages as previously agreed, or change some or all of the ages to to match the voting eligibility age.
agreed that the age of serving on a jury remain at ; Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN I N C O N F I D E N C E usoq Financial implications
agreed that the expenses incurred under paragraph above be charged against the between Budget contingency established as part of Budget ;
http:pubdocs.worldbank.orgenPublicSectorSavingsandRevenueIDSyst ems Web.pdf INCONFIDENCE Page of . Setting fees will require finding a balance between recoveri ng costs and ensuring that services are inclusive and in demand. Setting fees for accreditation too high may suppress demand and increase exclusion, working against the Trust Frameworks principles. Further work on quantifying the respective public and pri vate benefits of the Trust Framework (and their implications for cost recovery models) will be progressed as part of the detailed policy Cabinet Paper (see legislative implications below). Legislative Implications . Subject to Cabinet approval, implementing the preferred option would require the development of new legislation to establish the Trust Framework. We anticipate requesting a Category priority for this Bill in the Legislation Programme. We will agree a range of subsequent commencement dates d epending on transition planning and timing for implementation. This Bill will also outline subsequent amendments to existing legislation to align with the Trust Framework . . We propose that the Minister of Government Digital Services return to Cabinet with a detailed policy paper before the end of . That paper will form the basis for drafting instructions for a Trust Framework Bill and would include options for: the organisational form of the Trust Framework; who would have responsibility for legally enf orcing the Trust Framework; and addressing the legislative barriers and enablers for the Trust Framework. . During the development of the legislative policy paper, work will be undertaken to ensure that the Trust Framework and any associated legislative ch anges do not inadvertently inhibit the ability of the Government Statistician to acquire and use data to produce official statistics. Impact Analysis Regulatory Impact Statement . The Regulatory Impact Analysis requirements apply to the proposals in this pa per and a Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS) has been prepared and is attached. The Regulatory Impact Analysis quality assurance panel at the Department of Internal Affairs has reviewed the RIS, and considers that the information and analysis summarised in the RIS meets the quality assurance criteria. Climate Implications of Policy Assessment . The Ministry for the Environment has been consulted and confirms that the CIPA requirements do not apply to this proposal as the threshold for significance is not met. Human Rights . There are no human rights implications from this paper. Publicity . Pending Cabinet decisions, we intend to release a press statement indicating our intent to establish a Trust Framework through legislation, with an interim Trust Framework to be set up while the legislation is developed. Additionally, officials are develop ing a public INCONFIDENCE Page of engagement plan centred around emphasising the trust and security aspects of the Trust Framework and the benefits for New Zealanders. Recommendations The Minister for Government Digital Services and the Minister of Internal Affairs recommends that the Committee: . Note that digital identity is a key enabler of digital transformation across the public sector and the economy, and is a foundation in Rautaki m ttahi Rngai Kwanatanga Matihiko , the Strategy for a Digital Public Service; . Note that demand for digital identity services has increased during the Covid pandemic, which has prompted the acceleration of the creation of a Digital Identity Trust Framework (Trust Framework) to support New Zealands economic recovery; . Note that digital iden tity has the potential to deliver significant economic and societal benefits with the potential benefit of enabling digital identity in a mature economy estimated to be worth between . and of GDP (approximately . to billion in NZD); . Note that t here are regulatory and operational gaps in the provision of digital identity services, including the lack of a regime that regulates those services; . Note that the establishment of a Trust Framework in legislation is proposed to address the regulatory and operational gaps, with an interim Trust Framework to be established while the legislation is developed; . Note that establishing a Trust Framework in New Zealand will help deliver on the Prime Ministers commitment under the Single Economic Market agenda for mutual recognition of digital identity services with Australia; . Agree , subject to funding being made available for this purpose, to the establishment of an interim Trust Framework consisting of: . an interim Trust Framework team, established within the Depa rtment of Internal Affairs, who will develop and test the Trust Framework rules; and . a transitionary governance group, including representatives from the Government Chief Digital Officer, the Government Chief Information Security Officer, the Government Ch ief Data Steward, the Office of the Privacy Commissioner and Mori to approve the Trust Framework rules; . Agree , subject to funding being made available for this purpose, to create a statutory Trust Framework in legislation which would include: . the approval of the principles that guide the development of the Trust Framework; . the development of a Bill to establish the Trust Framework in legislation; . the establishment of a representative governance board appointed by a Minister; and . the establishment of a depa rtment based team to undertake accreditation of potential Trust Framework participants; . Agree that the Minister for Government Digital Services will report back to Cabinet with a detailed policy paper to form the basis for drafting instructions for a Trust Framework Bill before the end of ; INCONFIDENCE Page of . Note that the Minister for Government Digital Services will seek a legislative bid for establishing the formal Trust Framework in with a Category priority ; . Note that we intend to release a press statement indicating our intent to establish a Trust Framework through legislation and to engage with the public as this is developed; . Agree to increase funding in Vote Internal Affairs in and for the establishment and imple mentation of an interim Trust Framework and to develop a Trust Framework Bill; . Approve the following change to appropriations to give effect to the decisions in recommendations , and above, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance and ne t core Crown debt:
note that, to successfully implement the Bill, civics education is likely to be required .
noted that the cost for the Electoral Commission to implement the Bill will not be known before the Bill is introduced, but the Commission will need additional funding to implement the changes;
reconfirm the existing Cloud First Policy, that directs agencies to:
reconfirmed the existing Cloud First Policy, that directs agencies to:
reduction for departmental air travel compared to budget
update emails to mana whenua contacts o update emails to Mayors and CEs These are also available online See: Updates from the Steering Committee
year longterm plan by June ;
. Adverse Actions ...
. Following consultation, I propose that legislative change for the Mori wards process is
. Given the interlinked nature of the two options, any preferred approach would also
. How DIA may use the personal information and
. How DIA may use the personal information and expected Adverse Actions .
. Overview of the operational details
. Overview of the operational details
. Records to be keptin relation to each occasion a databaseis accessed
. Some specific objectives that apply to particular prosecution action taken by the Department include:
. THE cardholder may at any time terminate his or her right to use the card by cutting it in two and returning it to either the Company or the Departments relevant accounting unit. If the card holder returns the card to the Company he or she will notify the relevant accounting unit immediately. If the cardholder returns the card to the relevant accounting unit he or she shall be issued with a receipt.
. The Royal Commission was established on April and reported back on
. There is a risk without a change to the statutory timeframe and the requirements are
. To meet the transition provision in the Act with sufficient time for operator training to
. note that the Minister of Internal Affairs will proactively publish this Cabinet
. Privacy Act : With support from the Office of the Privacy Commissioner
. adopt public cloud services in preference to traditional ICT systems;
. amend the Local Electoral Act , and any other necessary laws and regulations, to provide for a minimum voting age of years in local elections; and
.. Access to and use of DA information itself will generate detailed audit log data within
..to suspend the legislated requirement for the eight councils to produce a
. The Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) toolkit () does not refer to the
. have a plan for how they intend to use public cloud services;
. investigate lowering the minimum voting age in general elections to years, taking into consideration t he legal consequences of a change to the minimum voting age as set out in its report (and noted below).
. make cloud adoption decisions on a casebycase basis following a risk
.. NZSIS must keep an uptoand accurate record of:
... Any records obtained by NZSIS from the relevant Database as a result of the
..to instead require the eight councils to produce an unaudited, threeyear
.. The reason the Authorised Officer accessed the above information, and the
. Public Records Act : The refreshed tool will also support agencies to
. have a plan for how they intend to use public cloud services; and
. make adoption decisions on a casebycase basis following a risk
. make adoption decisions on a casebycase basis following a risk assessment;
.. NZSIS must maintain a record of the above information in a way that can be audited by
..that the threeyear plans purpose has an explicit focus on cyclone
. only store data classified as RESTRICTED or below in a public cloud service;
. only store data classified as RESTRICTED or below in public cloud services.
.. NZSIS, the Secretary andor the RegistrarGeneral (or their nominee) will undertake a
..that the threeyear plans cover a period of not less than three years but
.. The RegistrarGeneral may review the access record at . at any time.
..that this Order include necessary consequential amendments similar to
.In its July decision, Cabinet agreed:
Sudan Terrace construction Retention pond construction Earth dam construction BCRs: .Philippines Seawall construction Dyke construction Hanging footbridge construction Floor and lahar prevention BCRs: .China Flood control measures BCR: . Nepal Flood prevention BCR: Vietnam Red Cross mangrove planting BCR: Indonesia Flood protection scheme BCR: .India Disaster mitigation preparedness BCR: ..Kazakhstan Agricultural resilience BCR: ..Davos Avalanche risk reduction BCR: .New York (Freeport): Flood mitigation BCR: . Jamaica Dominica Port retrofitting BCR: .. Peru Polder system for food management BCR: .Los Angeles Resilience adaptation for electricity outages BCR: ..Michigan (Tuscola county): Hazard mitigation BCR: . Alabama (Jefferson county): Hazard mitigation BCR: .USA National hazards reduction program Hazard mitigation BCR: .. Measures in US paper and feed industries BCR: Average benefit cost ratios from a range of infrastructure resilience projects across the world The benefit cost ratio is a simple indicator which shows how much the benefits of a project outweigh the costs. A ratio of : means the benefits equal the costs. The evidence demonstrates that preparing for disaster pays off; it generates a resilience dividend. This dividend means that resilient infrastructure is an economically logical investment. Source: Lloyds . Despite the evidence for potential longterm savings, underinvestment in reduction is a global issue. An analysis of selected disaster events by Economist Impact found that governments understandably prefer to allocate scarce funds to investments that generate immediate, tangible outcomes, rather than to risk reduction efforts whose gains are measured in events avoided. . A more local example of underinvestment in reduction is the spend on flood defences in Westport. Following the floods that struck Westport in July , IAG insurers paid out . million, with central government contributing an additional million. In June , the Buller District Council, West Coast Regional Council, and Te Rnanga Ngti Waewae submitted a coinvestment proposal to the Government seeking a . million contribution to a . million resilience programme. The Government agreed to . million to support some aspects of the resilience programme. IAGs view is that the full million spent on reducing future risk in Westport will save considerably more in the future the total identified response and recovery cost (including broader economic and social costs) for the July flooding is million. E conomist Impact, United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, Building disaster resilience: A study of disaster events and financial lending streams , February . https:www.undrr.orgpublicationbuildingdisasterresilience studydisastereventsandfinanciallendingstreams IAG, Meeting the cost of natural hazards: A briefing to the incoming government , November . CHAPTER : FUNDING SETTINGS CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsThe current government funding model puts pressure on an already strained local government sector . The current approach to funding emergency management activities is underpinned by the principle that local risks are a local responsibility, with the expectation that local authorities will be primarily responsible for bearing the financial costs of the impact of an emergency in their geographical and functional areas of responsibility. . Despite this responsibility, the Inquiry observed that in general, councils are not prioritising or investing in readiness activities. We heard from councils that a range of pressures, and the broader financial environment they operate within, affect their ability to invest adequately. The Review for the Future of Local Government found that Local government has been under significant funding pressure for several years. Councils face growing community and government expectations and the impacts of growth, tourism, and significant infrastructure failures. The Inquiry considers that without assistance, councils will continue to struggle to invest the amounts needed into readiness activities. . The Inquiry notes that even with the principle that local government is primarily responsible for costs, central government does step in to fund emergency management during and directly before events, and increasingly during the recovery phase. For example, billion of government funding was allocated after the severe weather events through the North Island Weather Events Response and Recovery Package (although the overall costs of the events is significantly higher, with damages currently estimated at between and . billion). There are also provisions for the funding of response activities, which are detailed further below. . The scale of central government funding for response and recovery is in stark contrast to the limited amount it allocates on an ongoing basis to support readiness activities. At the moment, NEMA administers , (excluding GST) annually through the permanent CDEM Resilience Fund which aims to support local and regional readiness capability and practices. The Inquiry understands this fund has remained at a similar level since it was established in the s. . The Inquiry considers the current investment in readiness and resilience activities is not sufficient to ensure councils are prepared for the next event. The significant amount of money that flows from central government during and after emergency events shows that money is available, but spending needs to be refocused. The
On August , Cabinet agreed that an all of government (AoG) cloud first
April to July
Data centres can be privately owned and operated. Change to the effective control of the owner, operator or
December to January
February meeting agenda and papers
February to March
I recommend that the Bill be intr oduced, alongside the Government Response, on August (or as soon afterwards as possible).
In May Cabinet agreed that the mi nimum age for standing as a candidate in local elections (other than alcohol lic ensing trust elections) will be lowered to years old also CABMIN. Th is amends the decis ion mentioned at paragraph . above. Cabinet agreed that the minimum ages for voting for, standing as a candidate for, or being ap pointed to, an alcohol licensing trust would remain at .
January to April
July to September
July to August
Limits on disclosure of personal information
March to April
November to December
October to October
On August , I briefed the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee on my proposed work programme for the local government portfolio this term and undertook to report back to the Committee, seeking policy decisions, by the end of the year ECO MIN. On August , the Prime Minister addressed mayors and councillors at the Local Government New Zealand conference. The Prime Minister set out our expectations that councils should get back to doing the basics, and to do them brilliantly. The role of councils is to maintain critical local infrastructure quickly, carefully, and affordably, and to deliver local services. Changes made through Local Water Done Well enable councils to make room on their balance sheets. Dedicated council controlled organisations for water services will be able to borrow almost twice the maximum available to rated councils, and councils will be able to transfer water debt to the new entities and spread the water investment more efficiently over the lifetime of the asset. These changes will create debt headroom for councils. I want council to use this newly available headroom to reduce general rates or invest in infrastructure to support growth. Our cross government work on Going for Housing Growth and improvements Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government INCONFIDEN CE around risk financing options will support the future focus of the local government sector. Regional Deals will support longterm collaboration between central and local governmen t, deliver a joint, longterm vision for the regions, and focus relentlessly on economic growth and productivity. Alongside this broader work, my Local Governmen t System Improvements programme (the programme ) will create efficiency gains for councils, get them back to basics, and get rates rises under control. Local Government System Improvement s Programme update The programme is structured in four themes: . Decisionmaking: Setting a clear role and effective legislation for local governmen t, saving time and money and balancing democratic principles. . Systems and processes: Giving councils appropriate, modern regulatory tools and balancing efficiency gains over service levels and costs. . Funding and financing: Expanding council funding options and borrowing limits so the cost of investments can be better spread over time and not just paid for upfront by increasing rates. . Transparency and accountability: Ensuring ratepayers know what theyre paying for and supporting councillors to effectively represent their communit ies. There are currently initiatives in the programme . These include work outside the scope of this paper, such as reviewing the system of bylaws and infringements , considering greater use of shared services between councils, looking at insurance , lending, and cost recovery settings, and improving governance accessibility. A progress update is attached as Appendix A. In addition, I am continuing to assess other system changes that can be made as part of this programme . Next steps In this paper, I seek Cabinet policy approval and your invitation for me to issue the first tranche of drafting instructions for an omnibus bill (the Bill) to improve the local government system, amending the Local Governmen t Act (the Act) and other legislation within the local government system. It is my intention that the Bill will have the single broad policy objective of keeping rates affordable , by refocusing councils on core services, better INCONFIDENCE aecpczkj : Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E aecpczkj
Phase of the Royal Commission will begin considering evidence and engaging with stakeholders from November . It is required to deliver a
Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Figure A.: Mean LanyardtoLanyard RSSI Values for Different Clothing Types
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE note that the voting age for local elections is not a reserved provision, and so could be changed through legislative amendment requiring only a simple majority in the House; agree that changing the voting age for local elections could pass independen tly because changes to the voting age for parliamentary elections will trigger the reserved provisions of the Electoral Act, meaning that and yearolds may be able to vote in local elections but not parliamentary elections; note that agreeing to the above recommenda tion may require the changes to be introduced in two (cognate) Bills; agree that the Bill should commence on January ; agree that the voting age for alcohol licensing trust elections be kept at ; agree that, in principle, in addition to applying to local government elections the lowered voting age will apply to all other entities that are part of local elections; authorise the Minister of Justice and Minister of Local Government to make further policy decisions, if required following consultation, relating to voting eligibility rules for entities, other than local government and alcohol licensing trusts, that are part of local elections; agree that the age of standing as a candidate for parliamentary and local elections rema in at ; O agree that the age of serving on a jury remain at ; Financial implications note that the proposals to lower the voting age have financial implications that are currently unmet, for both the Electoral Commission and for local councils (in respect of local elections); note that I will report back on the financial implications of these proposals at Cabinet Legislation Committee; note that supplementary regulatory a nalysis will be provided when approval for introducing the Bill is sought next year; Legislative drafting agree that the Bill be included in the Legislation Programme with a category of Priority (to be passed if possible before the general election); usoq Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E usoq
Since the refresh, cloud technologies and service offerings have matured
T he Department of Internal Affairs has been consulted.
The cloud infrastructure is a composition of two or more distinct cloud infrastructures
The majority cited the following reasons for their recommendations:
jurisdictional risk guidance for agencies will also be developed by DIA,
When compared to the complexity, costs and expert:fse required to upgrade security
agree that agencies consider accountability, ethics, transparency, and collaboration
agreed that agencies consider accountability, ethics, transparency, and collaboration in
agreed that water services entities will be required to share billing information about Rates Rebate Scheme applicants directly with territorial authorities;
noted that the above proposals to lo wer the voting age have financ ial implications that are currently unmet, for both the Electoral Commission and for lo cal councils (in respect of local elections);
noted that to successfully implement the Bill, up dated civics education is likely to be required .
Forewords and Statements of Responsibility Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Foreword from the Secretary for Internal Affairs Kia ora koutou Kia m te Ariki, kia m te Tauira Whia te hntore o te mauri Atua Hei oranga mo te mauri tngata Ka here tngata, ka here whenua Ka t te p, ka t te ao Hui e, tiki e T hei mauri Atua T hei mauri tngata T hei mauri ora I am pleased to present the Department of Internal Affairs Strategic Intentions for . This document outlines our priorities for the next four years, as we work to serve and connect people, communities and government to build a safe, prosperous and respected nation. Alongside our core business, we are responsible for delivering our Ministers priorities, and have several major initiatives currently in progress. Local Water Done Well is the Governments plan to address New Zealands water services infrastructure challenges. It recognises the importance of local decisionmaking and flexibility for communities and councils to determine how their water services will be delivered in the future. It restores council ownership of water assets, sets expectations for water infrastructure management, and makes it easier to operate in a financially sustainable way. The Department will continue to support inquiries and Royal Commissions , such as, the second phase of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID Lessons. This inquiry features new commissioners and expands the terms of reference. It explores vaccine efficacy and safety, the extended lockdowns in Auckland and Northland, and the extent of disruption to New Zealanders health, education and business.
,. All Authorised Officers are subject to the NZSIS and Public Service
,. Access to DA Information obtained under this DA, . will be strictly
. An overview of my intended changes is included below, including two changes to
. Following your decision on a preferred approach, we will provide further advice to
. How the Named Parties other than the RegistrarGeneral, DIA and MFAT may
. How the Named Parties other than the Registrar
. How to view this document
. How to view this document .
. Safeguards that will be applied to protect the privacy of
. Safeguards that will be applied to protect the privacy of individuals
. Safeguards to be applied for protecting particularinformation
. THE card is issued to the cardholder jointly by the Secretary and the Company. The cardholder shall immediately return the card to the Department or to the Company upon request by the Department or the Company, without the need for any reason for such request whatsoever.
. The nature of the framework is not prescribed in legislation and there are options to
. The total cost of the third and final extension is forecast at . million including
. The unit at the Department with responsibility for enforcement of a particular enactment is responsible for detection and investigation of offences relating to that enactment.
. Amend the requirements for water organisations agreed to by C abinet and yourself; or . Provide an exemption process to the requirements. Amending requirements for all water organisations (not recommended) . In this option changes would be made to two of the requirements agreed to by Cabinet in June ECOMIN and one requirement that you have decided LG ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsI Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsTe Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs which will go to Cabinet in July. The requirements which did not align with the Councils proposal would be replaced with new requirements that allowed the proposal and would apply to all water organisations . . These changes are discussed in more detail in the previous paper LG and are summarised below: Cu,,ent,equkement I Only councils and consumer trusts can be shareholders in water organisations. The activities of water organisat ions are limited to the provision of water services, and directlyrelated activities. ()(g)(i) . ( )(f)( ) . We do not recommend such an approach for the following reasons: . the amendments significantly dilute requirements Cabinet has already agreed to, particular ly in areas that may be seen as a step towards enabling privatisation ()(g)(i) or commercia l practices that may be perceived as creating incentives to drive profits rather than investing in infrastructure )g)li) . the amendments would need to be made now via your July Cabinet paper, well ahead of the Council taking decisions on whether the proposal will actually go ahead and the Local Government Water Services Bill (Bill ) being introduced; and . )(g)I) there may be proposals from other councils that we have not heard about, but which would also need amendments to the requirements . Providing an exemption process to water organisation requirements (recommended . An alternative to amending the requirements themselves would be to introduce an exemption process that councils could use if they developed proposals that did not fit the rules that will be legislated in Bill . . Such a process would introduce flexibility into the water organisation requirements which means councils would have a broader scope to develop their proposals. The flexibility can be limited by: . ensuring the appropriate level of approval for exemptions; . limiting which requirements are eligible for an exemption and which are bottom lines; and . the criteria and process for the exemptions . INCONFIDENCE Page of Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . We recommend this approach because it: . allows for a case bycase consideration of each proposal; . provides all councils with an equal opportunity to develop their proposals; and . maintains a clear set of requirements for water organisations in legislation. . The existence of an exemption process does not necessarily undermine the requirements to which it applies. For example , the Water Services Act provides exemptions to requirements from drinking water suppliers. Proposed exemption process from water organisation requirements . In developing this proposal we have considered existing exemption provisions, such as the one referenced above , and the exemption from being considered a council controlled organisation under the Local Government Act . Who should approve applications . We recommend that the exemption process should be approved by the Minister of Local Government. Some of the requirements that exemptions could be sought for touch on matters than could be seen as undermining the protections against privatisation. As such we feel that Ministerial level approval is appropriate. . An additional layer of approval could be included by legislating that the approval of an exemption must be contained in an Order in Council, which would then require Cabinet approval. We do not believe that, given the mainly technical nature of the exemptions, such a requirement is necessary. Which requirements can the exemption apply to . Under our proposals councils would be able to apply for an exemption to of the requirements that apply to water organisations: . Current council staff and elected members cannot be appointed to boards ; . Water organisations must be companies ; . Activities of water organisations will be limited to the provision of water services, and directly related activities ; . . Only councils or consumer trusts can be shareholders of a water organisation. . All of the minimum requirements that apply to all water service providers (water organisations and councils) would be mandatory and not open to the exemption process. This would include the restrictions on privatisation that ensure essential water infrastructure assets cannot be transferred or disposed of. The requirements relating to consumer trusts would also be mandatory as these extra protections are important when assets are transferred out of council ownership. . Appendix contains an A which sets out the current requirements, proposes which could be considered by the exemption process, and provides a commentary on those proposals. . ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of What should be the criteria and process for applications . The legislation providing an exemption process will need to include criteria by which an application will be considered. These criteria need to be narrow enough to ensure that intent of Local Water Done Well is preserved, but broad enough to allow for some tangible level of flexibility. . Applications will need to include details of the proposal the council is putting forward that justifies an exemption from the water organisation requirements. We recommend that an application for an exemption should be accepted if the councils proposal : . meets the legislative objectives of Local Water Done Well; . maintains the core requirements that you deem to be non negotiable bottom lines for all water organisations; . will provide water services that are financially sustainable; and . the Minister is satisfied financially sustainability of water services would be put at greater risk if the exemption were not granted. . Councils should be required to submit their applications to the Secretary for Local Government who will consult with the Commerce Commission on any impacts on economic regulation, with Taumata Arowai on any impacts on water quality regulations, and with Inland Revenue on any impacts on the tax status of the water organisations. . The Department would provide you with both the application and accompanying advice on the merits of the case. . We recommend that legislation should provide you with the discretion to not only approve or decline an application, but to also modify a requirement if a full exemption isnt required or if further safeguards are deemed necessary.
. the right to be free fr om age discrimination should only be limited by good justifications;
.. Detailed safeguards by which DA Information will be protected by NZSIS are set out in
.. I. General safeguards:DMS
.... All access to and use of NZSIS electronic systems, is logged and
.... Authorised Officers may only transfer DA Information to the NZSIS
.... DA information obtained under this DAA will only be stored on and
.. I. All Authorised Officers are security vetted to the highest level (Top
... All Authorised Officers are required to sign an information access
.. Safeguards for access to DA information obtained under this DAA and stored on
. evidence cited by the Office of the Childrens Co mmissioner in its report to the High Court that people in thei r midteens are generally able to make deliberative decisions anal ogous to voting (even if more emotionally charged decisionmaki ng remains underdeveloped); and
. the potential for a younger voting age to instil lifelong voting habits.
.I consider that the attached Order (see Appendix A) gives effect to the decisions
. ,..,.,.,c,nc.,.c
.. I. Only Authorised Officers may directly access DA Information,
... Authorised Officers may only access DA information in accordance with
. I note there are also strong protections and assurances already set out in current legislation that will ensure the Crown is maintaining good faith to uphold Treaty settlements. Implementation . The change in approach agreed through my April paper will require a change to an in flight implementation programme, which is centred around establishing four water services entities. Officials are developing a revised implementation plan to establish a greater number of entities over a longer establishment period. Advice will be provided in June . Financial implications . The extended establishment period and greater number of entities, agreed in my April paper, will necessitate additional funding of the implementation and transition programme.
. There is a risk that the beneficiaries of these deals may decide to re locate if they no longer receive a subsidised water services price. I consider this risk is low because they are unlikely to be able to obtain subsidised water anywhere else in the country. Given the substantial capital investment in a high water usage plant, it is unlikely to be cost effective to relocate until the plant is at the end of its economic life. s ()(h) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of
Section Three Appendix A: Terms of Reference for the Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events Appendix B: Contributors to the Inquiry Appendix C: Analysis of submissions Glossary of terms Appendix A: Establishment of the Government Inquiry Into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events Pursuant to section () of the Inquiries Act , I, The Honourable Kieran McAnulty, Minister for Emergency Management, hereby establish the Government Inquiry into the response to the North Island severe weather events (Inquiry). Membership The following persons are appointed to be members of the Inquiry: Sir Jeremiah Mateparae, GNZM, QSO, KStJ (Chair); John Ombler, CNZM, QSO (member); Rangimarie Hunia, Ngti Whtua (member); and Julie Greene (member). Terms of Reference Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events Background The severe weather events that impacted the North Island in January and February were of a scale and severity unprecedented in Aotearoa New Zealands recent history. Cyclone Gabrielle led to only the third declaration of a State of National Emergency in New Zealands history. These events led to deaths and widespread, significant damage including property loss, road closures, collapsed bridges, damaged power and communications infrastructure, and loss of livelihoods. Affected communities, including Mori and rural communities, across a number of regions, have raised concerns about communication and support during the response. Image: NZDF on the ground following Cyclone Gabrielle. Source: NZDF GLOSSARY OF TERMS APPENDIX C APPENDIX B APPENDIX A Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsThe impacts of these events continue to be felt across communities and will be felt for years to come as iwi, hap, whnau, communities and individuals recover. Some of the regions affected by the recent severe weather events have experienced multiple events over the past two years and will likely experience more events in future. Severe weather events are not new. Climate change is exacerbating the frequency and complexity of severe weather events across New Zealand and the world. There have been over states of local emergency declared over the past years () related to severe weather or flooding this is more than double the incidence of events in the preceding years ( states of local emergency, ) . Floods are New Zealands mostly frequent and costly natural hazard. Definitions Reduction identifying and analysing risks to life and property from hazards, taking steps to eliminate those risks if practicable, and, if not, reducing the magnitude of their impact and the likelihood of their occurrence to an acceptable level. Readiness developing operational systems and capabilities before an emergency happens; including selfhelp and response programmes for the general public, and specific programmes for emergency services, lifeline utilities and other agencies. Response actions taken immediately before, during or directly after an emergency to save lives and protect property, and to help communities recover.Recovery the coordinated efforts and processes used to bring about the immediate, mediumterm, and longterm holistic regeneration and enhancement of a community following an emergency. Civil Defence Emergency Management (CDEM) Groups are the Group established under section of the Civil Defence Emergency Management Act (CDEM Act). The representatives of the CDEM Group are the Mayor or Chairperson of the local authorities that are a member of the Group (as per section of the CDEM Act). Displaced people are people who had to leave their homes as a result of an emergency event and were provided shelter and accommodation under section () in the National Civil Defence Emergency Management Plan Order . Matter of Public Importance It is a matter of public importance to ensure that the design of New Zealands emergency management system is appropriate for responding to future emergency events because lives and livelihoods are at stake. Purpose and Objectives The purpose of this Inquiry is to ensure that the design of New Zealands emergency management system is appropriate to support readiness for, and responses to, future D eclared States of Emergency National Emergency Management Agency (http:www.civildefence.govt.nz resourcespreviousemergenciesdeclaredstatesofemergency). emergency events (such as landslides, tsunami, earthquake, volcanic activity, floods and storms) by identifying lessons from the North Island severe weather events. In order to achieve its purpose, the Inquiry will inquire into whether: the readiness activities and response to the North Island severe weather events operated as needed under current emergency management system design and if not, why not and what would enable future responses to operate as needed; the current design of the emergency management system enabled central and local government (including CDEM Groups, Crown Entities and Stateowned Enterprises) and other organisations to respond as expected during the response phase; and the system improvements already underway will be sufficient to address the identified challenges or whether additional improvements are required; this specifically includes whether the changes proposed in the Emergency Management Bill relating to the role of Mori in the emergency management system will adequately address the concerns raised by Mori in relation to the North Island severe weather event response. Scope The Inquiry will examine the response activities undertaken during the North Island Severe weather events, and the readiness activities ahead of these events. The National Crisis Management Centre stood down on March . The Inquiry must only review the response and early recovery planning up to and including March . The North Island severe weather events that are in the scope of this Inquiry are: Cyclone Hale, which crossed the North Island during the period commencing January and ending January ; heavy rainfall commencing January and ending February in the Northland, Auckland, Waikato, and Bay of Plenty regions; and Cyclone Gabrielle, which crossed the North Island during the period commencing February and ending February . The Inquiry will identify lessons from the response to, and readiness activities ahead of, the North Island severe weather events, and make recommendations that should be applied in the preparation for future emergency events in only the following areas: the legislative, regulatory and operational settings, and the implementation and execution of those settings, required to support New Zealands emergency readiness and response, relating to the roles and responsibilities of central and local government (including Crown entities and Stateowned Enterprises) and other organisations, including: M any of the emergency management systems settings are hazard agnostic, so lessons from this response may be applicable to emergencies caused by hazards other than severe weather. Thi s includes organisations outlined in the Guide to the National Civil Defence Emergency Management Plan and any other entities that had a role during the response to the North Island severe weather events. GLOSSARY OF TERMS APPENDIX C APPENDIX B APPENDIX A Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events the decisionmaking structures and arrangements that might be used or put in place during an emergency event; the coordination and collaboration involved in the response, including the interplay between national, regional and local levels as well as the role of Mori, iwi and community organisations; the legislative, regulatory and operational settings, and the implementation and execution of those settings, required to support the readiness for and response to future emergencies, relating to funding settings . This includes whether current policy funding settings and the delivery mechanisms for funding support, including to marae, iwi, rural, Pacific and other community organisations that have had a significant role in response, are fit for purpose and roles and responsibilities for these are clear across all government portfolios, including response funding settings to: care for directly affected people; take the necessary precautions or preventive actions to reduce the immediate danger to human life; enable precautions or preventive actions aimed at reducing the potential consequences of an emergency; enable immediate emergency financial support to individuals, businesses, and sectors, including how such support might be quickly implemented, appropriately and accurately distributed, monitored, and ended; the legislative, regulatory and operational settings, and the implementation and execution of those settings, required to support the immediate management of the response to future emergencies, relating to: the issuing of, and response to, public warnings and notifications; the timing and effectiveness of communication and information available for decision makers and to impacted communities; public safety and the safety of all emergency services personnel and community first responders, including local Mori responders and national Mori response networks; impacts of the severe weather events including potential public health, sediment, debris and waste issues; the legislative, regulatory, and operational settings, and the implementation and execution of those settings, needed to ensure the continued supply of goods and services (excluding cash supports) during an emergency event, relating to the provision of: lifeline utilities and other necessary services, including electricity supply, water supply, telecommunications, transport access, and waste collection and removal; shelter and accommodation for displaced people, welfare support services, and other necessary central and local government support services; welfare support services and other necessary support services provided by community groups, including iwi, marae and other Mori actors, Pacific, and other organisations in the immediate aftermath that would not otherwise have been provided, particularly for hard to reach communities; communication with, engagement of, and enabling of people and communities to prepare for an emergency event, relating to: provision of information to the public to enable readiness for emergency events in their area; what to do to prepare for an emergency event; the preparation and planning by government, other entities and the community, including provision of quality and timely meteorological and hydrological information and forecasts, emergency management plans, and practices; the coordination and provision of response services to, and the impact on, any persons and communities disproportionately impacted by the events, including Mori, Pacific and ethnic communities, disabled persons, and rural communities; and acknowledging and acting in support of the interests of Mori in the context of an emergency event, consistent with the Treaty of WaitangiTe Tiriti o Waitangi relationship. Matters Upon Which Recommendations Are Sought The Inquiry should make recommendations on changes to legislative, regulatory and operational settings and strategies and other measures that New Zealand should apply in preparation for any future emergency event, in relation to the principal matters within the Inquirys scope, by applying relevant lessons identified from New Zealands response to the North Island severe weather events. Limits to the Inquirys ScopeThe following matters are outside the scope of the Inquiry: any response activities relating to the North Island severe weather events which occurred after March ; policies and actions relating to the recovery from the North Island severe weather events, including decisions about the future of severely affected locations, and funding and coordination of recovery activity (as the recovery is anticipated to continue in the medium to long term); policies and actions relating to risk reduction and resilience building (as separate work programmes are already underway, including resource management reforms, climate adaptation reforms, Future for Local Government; Cyclone GLOSSARY OF TERMS APPENDIX C APPENDIX B APPENDIX A Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsRecovery Taskforce, and the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinets work on strengthening the resilience of New Zealands critical infrastructure system); investigation of land use causing woody debris, including forestry slash, and sedimentrelated damage (as this was covered by the Ministerial Inquiry into Land Use); investigation of the causes of deaths due to the severe weather events (as this is covered by any Coroners Inquiry); investigation into the treatment of individual cases of people or businesses affected by the severe weather events (such as insurance claims made by property owners); how and when the strategies and other measures devised in response to the North Island severe weather events were implemented or applied in particular situations or in individual cases; e.g., the amount of funding to support welfare support grants, or business grants; anything that is not required to produce the recommendations; any questions of civil, criminal, or disciplinary liability; and the judgments and decisions of any courts and tribunals and independent agencies, such as the Ombudsman, relating to the North Island severe weather events. Inquiry Procedure In accordance with section of the Inquiries Act , the Inquiry must comply with the principles of natural justice and avoid unnecessary delay or costs. The Inquiry must operate in a way that: does not take a legalistic and adversarial approach; uses the most efficient and least formal procedures to gather any additional necessary information; and ensures that any request for necessary information is specified with due particularity. The Inquiry can consult investigations, reports, and reviews (both domestic and international) and any other publicly available material relevant to these terms of reference; but should not duplicate or repeat work already undertaken in any other reports or review. In particular, the Inquiry will take into account the recommendations of the Ministerial Review, Better Responses to Natural Disasters and Other Emergencies, and the subsequent implementation of these recommendations. The Inquiry should take account of: the outcome of other investigations and reports into related matters (e.g., Civil Defence Emergency Management Group or agency reviews into their individual performance during the response) and other material that is already in the public domain; N ew Zealand Legislation (http:www.legislation.govt.nzactpubliclatestDLM.htmlsearchts regulationdeemedregcovidlessonsreselapDLM). previous reviews into the emergency management system (including design and settings) and the Government response to these; (e.g., Better Responses to Natural Disasters and Other Emergencies in New Zealand ); previous reviews of responses to emergency events (in particular, natural hazard events); and where another concurrent Inquiry may have similar issues in scope, this Inquiry should consult the other Inquiry to ensure there is no duplication of work. The Inquiry is not bound by the conclusions or recommendations of any other investigation, report, or review. The Inquiry can consider international investigations, reports, and reviews and other material, but will not travel internationally or invite persons to travel to New Zealand. The Inquiry may: engage with any organisations andor groups of individuals: affected by the North Island severe weather events; involved in preparing for and responding to North Island severe weather events; responsible for developing emergency management legislative, regulatory and operational settings, strategies and other matters; and provide opportunity for the public to participate in the Inquiry. Access to Inquiry Information The Inquiry must restrict access to Inquiry information where it considers such steps are required in order to: avoid prejudice to the maintenance of the law, including the prevention, investigation, and detection of offences; ensure that current or future criminal, civil, disciplinary, or other proceedings are not prejudiced; protect the international relations of the Government of New Zealand; protect the confidentiality of information provided to New Zealand on a basis of confidence by any other country or international organisation; protect commercially sensitive information, including commercial information subject to an obligation of confidence; and protect information for any other reason that the Inquiry considers appropriate. GLOSSARY OF TERMS APPENDIX C APPENDIX B APPENDIX A Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsReporting The Inquiry is to provide its report, including final recommendations, to the Minister for Emergency Management in writing no later than March . The Inquiry is to provide interim recommendations to the Minister for Emergency Management in writing no later than December . If the recommendations provided in December are not the same as the recommendations presented to the Minister in the Inquirys report in March , the Inquiry must ensure that the report includes an explanation of the changes made to the recommendations and the reasons for the changes. The Inquiry must support the Department of Internal Affairs (as the department responsible for administrative matters relating to the Inquiry) to meet its administrative and reporting requirements relevant to the Inquiry by providing the department with regular information and reports on the progress, administration, budget and expenditure of the Inquiry. Authority The Inquiry is established as a Government Inquiry under the Inquiries Act , with the Minister for Emergency Management as the appointing Minister. Consideration of Evidence The Inquiry may begin considering evidence on and from July . Dated at Wellington this th day of July . Hon Kieran McAnulty, Minister for Emergency Management. Appendix B: Contributors to the Inquiry Public entities Auckland Council Bay of Plenty CDEM GroupBay of Plenty Regional Council Central Hawkes Bay District CouncilCyclone Gabrielle Recovery TaskforceCyclone Response Unit Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC)Far North District CouncilFire and Emergency New Zealand (FENZ) Gisborne District Council Hastings District CouncilHawkes Bay Regional Council Kainga Ora Kaipara District CouncilMaritime New Zealand and Rescue Coordination Centre MetServiceMinistry for Ethnic CommunitiesMinistry for Pacific Peoples Ministry of Business, Innovation and EmploymentMinistry of Education Ministry of Health Ministry of JusticeMinistry of Social DevelopmentMinistry of Transport National Emergency Management AgencyNew Zealand Defence ForceNew Zealand Police New Zealand Transport AgencyNorthland Regional CouncilOfficials Committee for Domestic and External Security Coordination Opotiki District Council Radio New Zealand Tararua District Council Tauranga City CouncilTe Aka Whai Ora Mori Health AuthorityTe Puni Kkiri Ministry of Mori Development Health New Zealand Te Whatu OraThames Coromandel District CouncilThe Treasury Waikato District Council Waikato Regional Council Wairoa District Council Waitomo District CouncilWhaikaha Ministry of Disabled PeopleWhangarei District Council GLOSSARY OF TERMS APPENDIX C APPENDIX B APPENDIX A Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsOrganisations, sector representative groups, and communities Air NapierDartmoor and surrounding suburbs community representativesEsk Valley community representatives Fatimah Foundation Federated Farmers First Light Networks Foodstuffs New Zealand LandSAR MoreFM (Mediaworks) Muriwai community representativesNew Zealand Search and RescueNorthPower Oceania Group PaknSave NapierPakowhai community representatives Piha community representativesRed Cross New Zealand Rural Support Hawkes Bay Spark NZ Summerset Group Supreme Sikh Society Surf Lifesaving New ZealandTaylor Corp Telecommunications Forum Top Energy Transpower Unison Networks Waiohiki community representativesWaterNZ Woolworths New Zealand Iwi Mori, hap, marae Mori Ministerial Advisory CommitteeNgati Kahungunu Ngati Porou Ttau Ttau o Te Wairoa Taumata Koorero Te Aitanga a Mahaki Trust Te Akitai Te Hau Ora o NgapuhiTe Roroa Development Group Tuhoe Te Uru Taumatua Waipatu Marae Submitters The Inquiry received submissions from individuals and groups. Appendix C: Analysis of Submissions (prepared by FrankAdvice) . The Inquiry invited submissions from the public about their experiences of the North Island severe weather events. Submissions to the Inquiry closed on December . submissions were received through an online consultation form, by email (both text and audio submissions), and written submissions handed in to the Inquiry. . This section is an analysis of what people and groups shared in response to questions asked by the Inquiry, some of which invited selecting an answer on a scale and some of which invited openended answers. This report does not compare or corroborate what submitters may have shared through other methods or to other sources the Inquiry has access to. . The views expressed in this submissions analysis are wholly those of the submitters. While these informed the considerations of the Inquiry, they should not be interpreted as findings. Structure of this appendix . This appendix is organised in two parts: Part One provides a snapshot of the submissions analysis, highlights five key messages that emerged as important to most submitters, and an analysis of what submitters said should change to improve the response to severe weather events in future. Part Two provides a more detailed analysis of submissions including relevant statistical breakdowns across three themes: readiness, response and what submitters said should happen now. A note about privacy . We have taken care to preserve the privacy of submitters when documenting their personal stories in this document. Names, genders, and other identifying details (such as the specific location of submitters) have been removed where requested by the submitters. . Some illustrative quotes from this analysis have been incorporated into the final report. GLOSSARY OF TERMS APPENDIX C APPENDIX B APPENDIX A Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsMethodology . Submissions were compared by region and other demographics (such as age, gender, or whether a submitter was evacuated or rescued during the event) and highlighted areas where there are significant differences. . The following terms used throughout the report have the following meanings: most means or more submitters ( x) many means between and submitters ( x ) some means between and submitters ( x ) a few means less than submitters (x ). Questions asked by the Inquiry How prepared do you think local and central government agencies were How well prepared do you think necessary services were for the weather events (including services such as electricity, water, telecommunications, and waste collection) How prepared do you think your community was How well did local and central government agencies respond to the weather events How well do you think necessary services responded to the weather events (including services such as electricity, water, telecommunications, and waste collection) How well did your community respond Did you receive a warning or evacuation notice If so: When did you receive this () At what time Who was it from (E.g. neighbours, Civil Defence) How prepared did you feel in the leadup to the weather events How prepared were you during the weather events What went wrong or did not work well during the emergency response, and why (Including things such as emergency services, infrastructure and communications.) What worked well during the emergency response, and why (Including things such as emergency services, infrastructure and communications.) S ignificance testing assesses whether an observed difference between two different cohorts is due to a real difference, or due to chance based on sampling. Therefore, those differences we refer to as significant differences are those that are very likely to be a real difference rather than due to chance. What, in your view, would have been most helpful in the leadup to the weather events What, in your view, would have been most helpful during the weather events themselves What can be done to be better prepared in the future Is there anything else you would like to tell us Did you play a role in rescuing anyone as part of the severe weather events Did you play a role in evacuating anyone as part of the severe weather events Did you play one of the following support roles during one of the severe weather events Local marae support Volunteer local support services (i.e. fire brigade, evacuation centre, informal volunteer support) Paid staff seconded to support emergency services. Were you rescued as part of the severe weather events Were you evacuated as part of the severe weather events Part One: snapshot analysis and key messages . Overall, the submissions to the Inquiry tell a story of frustration, disappointment, and at times anger, about the lack of preparation and inadequate response of services to the needs of communities affected by the North Island severe weather events. Many submitters talked about wanting decision makers to be held accountable for loss of life and property and feel recovery efforts are taking too long. They also want local authorities to take a more proactive approach to readiness in the future. . In analysing the submissions, five key messages emerged as important to submitters. These were: people and services were not well prepared the response from officials was slow and inconsistent communications before and during the event were poor in many instances there were infrastructure failures, however there were also some positive experiences of infrastructure recovery communities stepped up and filled gaps left by officials. . Those messages are shared in more detail below to provide a snapshot of the submissions analysis and to highlight what submitters said should change to improve future responses to severe weather events. GLOSSARY OF TERMS APPENDIX C APPENDIX B APPENDIX A Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsPeople and services were not well prepared . Overall, submitters shared that individuals, families, communities, and in particular central and local government agencies and necessary services were not well prepared for the severe weather events. . Over of submitters said that central and local government agencies and necessary services were unprepared for how to respond to the severe weather events. . While many submitters said they were relatively prepared for a weather event on an individual family basis, many were surprised by and underprepared for the severity of the events and subsequent flooding. Some submitters said they were prepared to manage for several days after the events, not the several weeks they needed to be prepared for. . Submitters from rural isolated areas felt more prepared and had more supplies (e.g., food, water, fuel) and infrastructure (e.g., generators, water storage tanks), because they were more used to being selfreliant. Submitters suggestions for how to be better prepared next time Having more resources on standby (e.g., generators, radios, vehicles, food, water). Improving expertise when it comes to cultural considerations in emergency response planning. Having plans for what is needed in the event of a blocked road infrastructure failure (e.g., contractors on retainer). Improving Civil Defence training for Council staff to ensure adequate staffing of emergency centres for extended periods of time. The response from officials was slow and inconsistent . A common story submitters told us was that responses from central and local government agencies and emergency services were slow and inconsistent. Submitters from Hawkes Bay, and particularly the Esk Valley, painted a particularly poor picture of the response. . Most submitters mentioned the delay of official responses particularly when it came to local and central government agencies, CDEM Groups, and Group Controllers. Many said that local government support was not available in the first few days because of a lack of emergency management planning and capability. . Submitters also felt that community safety was not sufficiently prioritised, and officials did not adequately consider the diversity of communities nor take into account accessibility needs during the response. S ubmitters were told that necessary services were defined as electricity, water, telecommunications, and waste collection Submitters suggestions for how to improve the speed and consistency of official responses Better communication and coordination between emergency responders. More capacity to evacuate and rescue people, particularly in remote areas. Faster decisionmaking from local councils, including clear roles and responsibilities during an emergency. Improved access to financial compensation from both central and local government (including access to information about what is available). Using the Defence Force earlier in the response. Central government intervention where local councils are not managing. Prearranged coordination between private air resources and emergency services (e.g., who will fly where and do what in the event of an emergency). Communications before and during the event were poor . The inadequacy of communications from official sources to members of the public both before and during the events was a strong theme that emerged across the submissions. . Submitters shared that communications and warnings from official sources to the public were slow (if they came at all), indicating poor planning which impacted on the ability of communities to prepare. . Many submitters said that official communications to the public relied on mobile phones and internet some submitters were referred by Civil Defence officials or the Police to Facebook for uptoinformation, including for evacuation notices. Many of these submitters said that this was during the time when they were without power or mobile phone coverage, meaning they could not access any information. Submitters suggestions for how to improve communication Having better communication before events about risks and mitigation strategies. Earlier evacuations and warnings. Having communication infrastructure that does not rely on internet and telecommunications (e.g., Starlink, radio networks, improved Civil Defence warning alert system). Better communications from officials during events about what was happening and how agencies were responding. More communication from local councils after events about next steps and recovery. GLOSSARY OF TERMS APPENDIX C APPENDIX B APPENDIX A Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsIn many instances there were infrastructure failures, however there were also some positive experiences of infrastructure recovery . Most submitters experienced infrastructure failures during the events, such as electricity or water being cutoff, telecommunications failures (both cell phone and internet), or roads and or bridges being blocked washed away. . Many submitters identified that much of the current infrastructure was poorly planned (for example, built in the wrong place or built using the wrong materials) or is not being adequately maintained. Submitters felt that this led to infrastructure failing during the events, delaying the ability of officials and communities to effectively respond. These submitters also noted a lack of backup infrastructure (for example, generators or additional drainage). . Some submitters were pleased at how quickly infrastructure (particularly power and water) was restored and were positive about how they were treated by these services during the response and recovery. However, some other submitters had more negative experiences and were disappointed at the speed of the recovery. Submitters suggestions for how to improve infrastructure and necessary services Better environmental planning (e.g., where roads, power stations, and other types of infrastructure are built). Better maintenance of current infrastructure. Better monitoring of river and rainfall levels and monitoring and policing of slash and other flooding risks to prevent bridge failures. Better weather forecasting. More backup systems for electricity and telecommunications. Communities stepped up and filled gaps left by officials . What stood out clearly were submitters views that community, and community organisations, stepped up to fill the gap left by official responses during the events. While community champions were celebrated in many submissions, we also heard that local knowledge and expertise was undervalued by official emergency responses. . Volunteer support was highly valued by submitters, such as communityrun emergency hubs and the help from owners of private helicopters who rescued people and provided supplies to cutoff communities. On the other hand, some submitters noted that community responses were disorganised and wasted effort on things that did not help the response. . Some submitters shared that officials and government agencies did not value community enough and at times added bureaucracy and did not listen to locals about what was needed. Submitters suggestions for how to improve community response Creating preagreed communication networks between neighbours. Officials valuing and listening to those with local knowledge and expertise when planning and responding to events Appointing formal or informal community leaders responsible for Civil Defence (e.g., designating a person or group who will coordinate the community and communicate with the government response in the event of an emergency). Image: Residents in Taradale clean up silt. Source: Getty Images GLOSSARY OF TERMS APPENDIX C APPENDIX B APPENDIX A Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events Northland Tairwhiti Hawkes Bay Tararua Auckland Rest of the North Island Bay of Plenty South Island While most submitters felt that they were prepared as individuals, they felt communities and services were unprepared.VIEWS OF SUBMITTERS ON READINESS AND RESPONSE Readiness before the event Readiness during the eventIndividual Readiness Very Prepared Prepared Neutral Unprepared Very UnpreparedCommunities Necessary services Local central government agenciesReadiness of Communities and Services Communities Necessary services Local central government agencies Very Well Well Acceptably Poorly Very PoorlyResponse of Communities and ServicesMost submitters felt that their communities responded well, but necessary services and government agencies did not. DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION PkehNZ European AsianPacificMori Other Not AnsweredEthnicity of Submitters Chose not to answer Male FemaleAge and Gender of Submitters Chose not to answer or over years old years old years old years oldTYPES OF SUBMITTERS EVACUATIONS AND WARNINGS The majority of submitters who did receive a warning or evacuation notice received a Civil Defence emergency alert through textof submitters did not receive a warning or evacuation noticeof submitters were evacuated during the weather events of submitters played a role in evacuating people during the events of submitters played a role in rescuing people during the events of submitters were rescued during the weather eventssubmissions were recieved of submitters indicated that they lived in a rural or isolated area individuals organisationsbusinesses officials community groups iwipercentages add up to more than due to rounding Other support roles submitters played during the events Informal volunteer support Volunteer support Local marae support Paid staff seconded to support emergency services GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATIONThis page provides an overview of the summary statistics drawn from the submissions to the Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events (the Inquiry). It outlines demographic and geographic information and the quantitative statistics by the analysis of submissions.Summary statistics of submissions to the Inquiry JANUARY percentages add up to more than due to rounding Part Two: detailed analysis of submissions . This part is a detailed analysis of the submissions received by the Inquiry. We have grouped this analysis in four sections: Summary demographics: a summary of who submitted to the Inquiry Readiness: submitters views on how prepared people organisations were in the lead up to the events Response: submitters experiences during the events and emergency response What submitters would change: submitters recommended actions for the future. For completeness, this section includes submitters recommendations about recovery, which we note falls outside the scope of the Inquiry. . In these sections, we have conducted an analysis of each question asked by the Inquiry in their online consultation form (attached at Appendix One). Information from submissions not submitted through this form has been interwoven in the analysis where relevant. Summary of who submitted to the Inquiry . The Inquiry received a total of submissions. Table below outlines the number of submissions by type of submitter. Table : Types of submitters Type of submitter Number of submissions Individuals Organisationsbusinesses Officials (submitting on behalf of government agencies or civil defence groups) Community groups Iwi Total Location of submitters . Figure below shows the geographical distribution of submitters, with a darker colour indicating more submitters coming from that area. Most submitters came from Hawkes Bay, which likely reflects the fact that this region was more affected by Cyclone Gabrielle, the most destructive of the North Island severe weather events. . All the submitters from the South Island indicated that they were holidaying in the North Island at the time of the events. GLOSSARY OF TERMS APPENDIX C APPENDIX B APPENDIX A Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events. of submitters indicated that they lived in a rural isolated area. Most of these submitters indicated that they were in Hawkes Bay. Figure : Geographical distribution of submitters Roles submitters played during the events . Many submitters played support roles during the weather events. Table below details these roles. Northland Tairwhiti Hawkes Bay Tararua Auckland Rest of the North Island Bay of Plenty South Island Table : Roles submitters played during the events Roles submitters played during the events Number of submitters Role in evacuating people ( also played a role in rescuing people) Providing informal volunteer support e.g., cooking and delivering food, clearing roads, checking on neighbours, fundraising, supporting emergency hubs Role in rescuing people Providing formal volunteer support e.g., fire brigade, civil defence ( also played a role rescuing and evacuating people) Providing support at the local marae Council staff seconded to support emergency services Demographics of submitters . Figure and Figure below outline the ethnicity, age, and gender of submitters. Groups with small numbers have been combined to preserve the confidentiality of submitters. . The ethnicity and gender of submitters generally reflects the national distributions of ethnicity and gender. . The age distribution of submitters is slightly older than the national distribution for those over . There were no submissions from people under . Figure : Ethnicity of submitters R egional data is not readily available.PkehNZ European AsianPacific Mori Other Not AnsweredEthnicity of Submitters GLOSSARY OF TERMS APPENDIX C APPENDIX B APPENDIX A Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsFigure : Age and gender of submitters Readiness Submitters ratings of readiness of communities and services . The Inquiry asked submitters to rate the readiness of local and central government agencies, necessary services, and their community on a fivepoint scale from Very unprepared to Very prepared. . Figure and Table below shows how submitters rated the readiness of these groups. Overall, most submitters felt that all these groups were unprepared. . Submitters felt that local and central government agencies and necessary services were significantly more unprepared than their communities. Many of these submitters said that these agencies were acting without plans, even if they had recently experienced similar (albeit at a smaller scale) weather events. V ery unprepared, Unprepared, Neither prepared nor unprepared, Prepared, Very prepared S uch as electricity, water, telecommunications, and waste collectionChose not to answer Male FemaleAge and Gender of Submitters Chose not to answer or over years old years old years old years old Figure : Readiness of Communities and Services Table : Data table for readiness of Communities and Services Very unpreparedUnprepared Neither prepared nor unpreparedPrepared Very prepared Submitters communities Necessary services Local and central government agencies . Those submitters who were evacuated or rescued during the events rated the readiness of communities and services slightly, but significantly, more negatively than other submitters. This indicates that submitters experiences of the response communities and services may have affected their perceptions of the groups readiness. . Submitters ratings of the readiness of communities and services were consistent across regions, rurality (i.e., rural and nonrural submitters rated readiness similarly), and across age and gender. . Submitters ratings of readiness were significantly correlated across groups; lower ratings of one group are associated with lower ratings of the other groups, and vice versa. For example, if a submitter rated the readiness of necessary services low, they were more likely to rate local and central government agencies and their community low as well. This may be because: submitters found it difficult to differentiate between groups they may have not been able to identify whether a particular service was a necessary service, or part of local and central government agencies, leading them to rate all groups similarlyVery Prepared Prepared Neutral Unprepared Very UnpreparedCommunities Necessary services Local central government agenciesReadiness of Communities and Services GLOSSARY OF TERMS APPENDIX C APPENDIX B APPENDIX A Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events submitters did not know about the readiness of a particular group (e.g., their electricity provider), and so rated it similarly to the groups they did know about. This is supported by openended answers that accompanied the ratings most submitters only discussed the readiness of the group that they were most familiar with, rather than all three. Submitters discussion of the readiness of communities and services . The Inquiry gave submitters an opportunity to expand on their ratings of the readiness of communities an services with an openended text box. . Table below outlines what submitters said caused them to view communities and services as unprepared , in order of prevalence. Table : Submitters discussion of readiness Group What made submitters think communities and services were unprepared Local and central government agenciesLack of slow communication and warnings from official sources to the public implied poor planning Poor maintenance of infrastructure (e.g., storm drains, stopbanks, roads) Not responding to risks identified by communities Necessary servicesInaccurate weather forecastingNo riverlevel monitoring, or poor communication understanding of river levels and the risks associated with high river levels Lack of backup infrastructure (e.g., generators)Poor planning of infrastructure (e.g., a power station in known flood area) Submitters communitiesLack of communication and early warnings from official sources impacted communities ability to prepare, particularly in Hawkes Bay . It should be noted that, naturally, many submitters inferred a groups readiness from the quality of their responses, i.e., if a submitter had a poor experience of a response from a group, they used this as evidence of poor planning readiness. . A few submitters from rural areas identified that there was no local civil defence function or plan. These submitters said that there previously were community CD groups throughout the regions, but these stopped being supported by local government. These submitters felt that if these groups were still active, they would have been more prepared for the events. Th e few submitters that rated communities and services as prepared or very prepared did not provide reasons. . A few submitters noted that some communities and services were prepared had plans, but these plans were for: other types of emergencies (e.g., earthquakes or fires), but not cyclones less severe emergencies (e.g., surface flooding, rather than flash flooding) events with less impact on critical infrastructure (e.g., plans assumed that cell towers and the internet were still working). Submitters experiences of warnings and evacuations . The Inquiry asked submitters whether they received a warning or evacuation notice, and asked about the form of the warning or evacuation notice. . of submitters received a warning or evacuation notice, of submitters did not (the remaining did not answer the question). . Most submitters said they were expecting the Civil Defence emergency alert notification (e.g., sirens, Civil Defence mobile alerts, or texts) to warn them of severe weather and or the need to evacuate, and so were surprised when they did not arrive. Many of the submitters who did not receive a notice said that this was despite local and central authorities having access to the relevant information (such as weather forecasts or reports of flooding). . Most submitters who did receive a warning or evacuation notice (across all events) received a Civil Defence emergency alert through text. However, many of these submitters felt that they received these warnings too late to be sufficiently prepared. . Of those submitters that did receive a warning or an evacuation notice, many found them confusing or unclear. These submitters felt the warnings and evacuation notices did not communicate the urgency of the situation, and they therefore did not prepare or respond adequately. . There were no other significant differences between rural and nonrural submitters or between other demographic groups (e.g., age or gender). . A few submitters received warnings via their community (e.g., a neighbour), rather than officials. A few other submitters received informal warnings from officials emergency services who were in the area (e.g., local fire crews, police). GLOSSARY OF TERMS APPENDIX C APPENDIX B APPENDIX A Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsSubmitters ratings of individual preparedness . The Inquiry asked submitters to rate their individual preparedness before and during the events on a fivepoint scale from Very unprepared to Very prepared. . Figure and Table below shows how submitters rated their individual preparedness before and during the events. Many submitters felt they were individually prepared both before and during the events, and there was no significant difference overall between submitters ratings of their preparedness before and during the events. Figure : Individual preparedness Table : Data table for individual preparedness Very unpreparedUnprepared Neutral Prepared Very prepared Before the events During the events . Those submitters who said that they were unprepared or very unprepared felt that they were relatively prepared for a weather event but were not prepared enough for the extent of the events (particularly Cyclone Gabrielle). Submitters mentioned how they were unexpectedly rendered underprepared due to the extent of flooding and or how they were prepared for several days not several weeks. . Those submitters who lived in a rural isolated areas rated their individual preparedness (both before and during the events) as significantly higher than other submitters. These submitters said that this was because they had more access to supplies (e.g., food, water, fuel) and infrastructure (e.g., generators, water storage tanks) because they were more used to being selfreliant. . Those submitters who were evacuated during the events were more negative about their individual preparedness both before and during the events than other submitters. Many of these submitters indicated that this was because they were unprepared to evacuate. V ery unprepared, Unprepared, Neither prepared nor unprepared, Prepared, Very preparedVery Prepared Prepared Neutral Unprepared Very UnpreparedReadiness before the event Readiness during the eventIndividual Readiness . Those submitters who were rescued during the events were only more negative than other submitters about their individual preparedness during the events (but not before the events). These submitters indicated that this was because they felt prepared before the events but were surprised by the severity of the events or how quickly the situation escalated. . Those submitters who participated in rescuing other people rated their individual preparedness during the event as significantly higher than other submitters. This could reflect either that these submitters were operationally involved in the response and so more informed officially supplied than other submitters, or their rating is reflecting that they successfully rescued people during the events and feel that reflected their levels of preparedness. . There were no other significant differences between the ratings of submitters in different regions or between other demographic groups (e.g., age or gender). Comparison between submitters ratings of their preparedness and the readiness and response of other groups . Submitters ratings of their individual preparedness (both before and during the events) were significantly higher than their ratings for readiness and response of most other groups. However, there was no significant difference between submitters ratings of their preparedness during the response and their ratings of their communitys response. This indicates that the same experiences likely influenced submitters perceptions of their communitys response and their individual preparedness. . Submitters ratings of their individual preparedness correlated with their ratings for readiness and response of other groups; lower ratings for individual preparedness are associated with lower ratings of the readiness and response of other groups, and vice versa. This indicates that submitters perceptions of other groups may have influenced their individual preparedness (e.g., if they perceived local and central government responding poorly, they felt less prepared to deal with the events). Submitters discussion of individual preparedness before and during the events . The Inquiry gave submitters an opportunity to expand on their ratings of their individual preparedness with an openended text box. . Table below (in order of prevalence) outlines what submitters felt made them prepared or unprepared before and during the events . B oth officially and unofficially W e have not distinguished between reasons for preparedness before versus reasons for preparedness during because there was no significant difference between these two ratings. GLOSSARY OF TERMS APPENDIX C APPENDIX B APPENDIX A Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsTable Submitters discussion of individual preparedness What made submitters feel unpreparedWhat helped submitters feel prepared Lack of slow communication from official sources Late no evacuations or warnings Previous experience with less severe events meaning they became complacent, expecting them to be similar Inaccurate late weather forecasting, particularly in the Hawkes Bay Not understanding how quickly the events could escalateHad prepared supplies in advance (e.g., grabbags, food, water, generators) Personal knowledge of risks in the area General preparedness due to isolation rurality Previous experience with severe weather events . Lack of communication from official sources was the most common reason submitters gave for feeling unprepared ( of submitters gave this as a reason). Many of these submitters were unable to find information on the weather, evacuation efforts, emergency services and hubs, and what support they would receive. Some said this lack of communication caused panic and feelings of isolation as well as enabling the spread of misinformation (e.g., that stopbanks were damaged deliberately in Hawkes Bay). Response Submitters ratings of the response of communities and services . The Inquiry asked submitters to rate the response of local and central government agencies, necessary services, and their community on a fivepoint scale from Very poorly to Very well. . Figure and Table below shows how submitters rated the response of these groups. Most submitters felt that their communities responded well and were significantly more positive about the response from their community than from other groups. . While most submitters rated the response of local and central government agencies and necessary services negatively, submitters rated necessary services significantly higher than the response from local and central government agencies. V ery poorly, Poorly, Acceptably, Well, Very well. Figure : Response of Communities and Services Table Data table for response of Communities and Services Very poorly PoorlyAcceptably WellVery well Submitters communities Necessary services Local and central government agencies . Those submitters who said that their communities responded well or very well said that that the local community response consisted of independent volunteers who coordinated supplies and information in the absence of leadership or assistance from government or Civil Defence officials. Many of these submitters indicated that they expected a more official response, but that their community were the only ones able to provide assistance. . Many of the trends in submitters ratings of these groups responses are similar to those seen with their ratings for readiness: submitters ratings were significantly correlated across groups; lower ratings of one group are associated with lower ratings of the other groups, and vice versa there were no other significant differences between the ratings of submitters in different regions, between rural and nonrural submitters, or between other demographic groups (e.g., age or gender). . One difference was that those submitters who were evacuated or rescued, rated the response of local and central government agencies significantly more negatively than other submitters. Their ratings of the response of necessary services and their communities were not affected. Communities Necessary services Local Central Government agencies Very Well Well Acceptably Poorly Very PoorlyResponse of Communities and Services GLOSSARY OF TERMS APPENDIX C APPENDIX B APPENDIX A Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsComparison between submitters ratings of readiness and response . Submitters rated responses slightly but significantly more positively than they rated readiness. This may be because the responses during the events had more tangible, positive outcomes for submitters than actions to prepare for the events. . Despite this small difference, submitters ratings of readiness and response were significantly correlated lower ratings for readiness are associated with lower ratings for response, and vice versa. As discussed previously, this may be because some submitters found it difficult to differentiate between readiness and response. Submitters discussion of the response of communities and services . The Inquiry asked submitters to expand on their ratings of the response of communities and services. . Table below outlines what submitters felt went well and what went poorly during the response, in order of prevalence. Significant themes are in bold and discussed in more detail under the table. . Submitters found it easier to articulate reasons for their ratings about responses rather than readiness. As explained above, this may be because the responses during the events had more tangible outcomes for submitters than actions made to prepare for the events. Th emes mentioned by many submitters, or themes mentioned by only a few submissions that reflected their unique perspectives Table : Submitters discussion of response Group What went poorly during the responseWhat went well during the response Local and central government agenciesPoor decisionmaking during the events, leading to slow and inconsistent government actions, particularly in Hawkes Bay and Esk Valley Response did not prioritise community safety Less and slower support for rural areas Lack of coordination between agencies, including between central and local government Lack ofslow communication from official sources Lateno evacuations or warnings Response did not consider communities cultural context Response did not consider the accessibility needs of disabled people Local knowledge and expertise were undervalued during the responseInvolvement of the New Zealand Defence Force Positive oneonone engagement with government (e.g., during local council meetings, or MSD) Financial support (e.g., rates relief, oneoff payments during response recovery) Necessary servicesPoor communication from emergency services to people in need of assistance (particularly ), and poor coordination between emergency services Failure of infrastructure (e.g., roads, electricity, cell towers, and internet) Slow recovery of services (e.g., supermarkets) after the eventFast reconnection of electricity and water (in some areas) Good performance of emergency services (e.g., supply delivery by helicopter) Financial support (e.g., bill forgiveness, credits for electricity) GLOSSARY OF TERMS APPENDIX C APPENDIX B APPENDIX A Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsGroup What went poorly during the responseWhat went well during the response Submitters communities Tension between volunteer community response and government response Lack of communication from community groups, and people reporting receiving help from individuals only Uncoordinated community response leading to wasted resources Businesses acting unhelpfully (e.g., requiring evidence of peoples inability to attend work during the events)Volunteer air support during the early response (e.g., private helicopters for rescue, small, fixedwing aircraft for moving freight) Communityrun emergency hubsCommunitybased communication (e.g., through Facebook or Whatsapp) that was more accurate than official information Community members distributing supplies (e.g., food, water, clothing) Community members participating in warnings, evacuations, and rescues Community members participating in the cleanup of roads and houses Adapting previous plans (e.g., community group COVID response plans) to respond better Poor decisionmaking during the events, leading to slow and inconsistent government actions, particularly in the Hawkes Bay and Esk Valley . Many submitters generally attributed poor responses to the poor and delayed decisionmaking of CDEM Groups and Group Controllers. Many submitters said this was exacerbated by confusion about who was in charge of responding to the events. . Submitters who were involved in the Hawkes Bay CDEM response raised the following concerns: the appointed Group Controller was not in the area during the events so there was no clear decision maker and no central coordination of the response many Council staff were untrained in general emergency management (e.g., how to respond to phone calls from the public leading up to and during an event) designated emergency management staff had not completed their CIMS training and lacked the skills experience required the CDEM group had warnings forecasts about the extent of the events, but did not immediately disseminate this information to people who would be affected. . Most submitters from the Esk Valley said that they felt abandoned by the Hawkes Bay CDEM response. These submitters pointed to the lack of warning given to Esk Valley residents about potential flooding, despite submitting that the information was available to decision makers at the time. These submitters also raised the slow response, once it became clear that the event was severe these submitters felt that their region was simply ignored. . These submitters also pointed to previous flooding events in the region and the known risk areas that were not addressed by their local authorities. Many felt that the failure of their local authorities to reduce these risks and prepare appropriately contributed to the extent of the damage in the Esk Valley. Response did not consider communities cultural context . Some submitters, particularly those who identified as Mori, said that Mori taonga was not appropriately valued during the emergency response. One submission discussed the impact of Cyclone Gabrielle and the resulting floods on their local marae, including how their local Council refused to provide support and the ongoing impact of this damage on their iwi, hap, and whnau. . One submission discussed how Ola Manuia the Pacific Response which set up emergency hubs at local churches to provide culturally accessible support to Pasifika people affected by Cyclone Gabrielle was able to leverage their relationship with agencies and utilise lessons from their COVID response to provide culturally accessible support during Cyclone Gabrielle. This submission noted that the Civil Defence response did not consider how best to serve the Pacific community. The submission said the response should have leveraged the Pacific communitys expertise when developing emergency response plans to ensure that the emergency response was accessible and effective from a cultural perspective. Response did not consider the accessibility needs of disabled people . A few submissions said that Civil Defence did not consider disabled communities when planning for an emergency response. One example raised by these submissions was that initial communications from Civil Defence were not accessible (e.g., text only, or news bulletins without sign language interpreters) which meant that some disabled people were unaware of the extent of the events and received little to no warning. . One submission also raised that the response did not consider where disabled people with access needs would evacuate to, or where they would stay for a longer period if needed. Local knowledge and expertise was undervalued during the response . Some submitters said that local knowledge and expertise was undervalued in the official emergency responses (e.g., locals understanding of rivers, roads, and community needs). These submitters felt this knowledge and expertise should have been leveraged to better respond to the events. GLOSSARY OF TERMS APPENDIX C APPENDIX B APPENDIX A Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events. A few submitters said that Civil Defence and other emergency responders (including central and local government) should leverage the cultural expertise and past experiences of communities to improve the quality of both planning and the response. Response did not prioritise community safety, but this improved with the involvement of the New Zealand Defence Force . Some submitters said they felt unsafe in the immediate aftermath of the events and identified instances of people burglarising homes that were evacuated. . Of these submitters, some said that their local police did not do enough to make them feel safe. These same submitters said that they felt safer once the army was called in to the emergency response. Poor communication from emergency services to people in need of assistance (particularly ), and poor coordination between emergency services . Many submitters felt betrayed and failed by emergency services, particularly those submitters in Hawkes Bay and in rural isolated areas. These submitters relayed stories of calling and: there being no answer not receiving help or empathy being referred to an emergency service (e.g., fire and rescue) which then either did not pick up the phone or did not arrive. . Many submitters more closely involved in the response (e.g., people who were part of a community organisation assisting with the response) said the inadequacy of the emergency response was because operators had little to no communication with ontheground staff and were struggling to coordinate the emergency response. A few submitters from Hawkes Bay said that emergency services were manually comparing reports to identify doubleups and ensure that nobody had been missed, which was a timeconsuming process and affected the quality of their response. Failure of infrastructure (e.g., roads, electricity, telecommunications, and internet), but fast reconnection of electricity and water (in some areas) . Most submitters, particularly in Hawkes Bay and in rural isolated areas, lost telecommunications, electricity, and internet at some point during the events. . Of the submitters who lost necessary services during the events, many said they felt let down by how long it took to get these services reconnected. Some submitters, from across the regions, reported that it took weeks before basic amenities were restored. . Some submitters praised the efforts of local power companies to reconnect their services immediately or very shortly after the events. Most of these submitters were from Hawkes Bay. Volunteer air support during the early response . Many submitters identified volunteers with private air capacity (e.g., private helicopters or small, fixedwing aircraft from individuals or businesses) as a key part of the community response. These volunteers both rescued people and provided supplies to cutoff communities. . A few submitters said these volunteers encountered issues with air traffic (e.g., co ordinating with central and local government agencies) and the availability of fuel. Communityrun emergency hubs . Many submitters found communityrun emergency hubs a valuable support during the events, but some of these submitters found that these emergency hubs were insufficiently prepared for the extent of the events. . One submitter described their experiences with the emergency hubs Ola Manuia. They felt that it was particularly valuable for people who did not speak English and were therefore not well served through the Civil Defence response. Tension between the community response and the government response . A few submitters felt that the quality of the community response was negatively impacted by the arrival of local and central government agencies. Many of these submitters felt that local and central government agencies introduced bureaucracy which slowed down decision making (e.g., going through official procurement channels to hire contractors to clear roads rather than using available local contractors) or meant that communities were unable to continue with their response. . Some other submitters felt that government agencies abdicated responsibility for the response to communities during the event and appeared after the fact with no tangible support. What submitters want to happen now . The Inquiry asked submitters what would have been most helpful in the leadup to and during the severe weather events. Submitters also offered suggestions on what they think should change in emergency management in their discussion under the other questions. . Submitters suggestions relevant to improving readiness or response have been explored in Part One under the relevant key message. Additional recommendations that are not linked to one of the five key messages are discussed below. Th ese included communitybased hubs funded by central or local government, unofficial hubs set up and operated by community members, or marae. GLOSSARY OF TERMS APPENDIX C APPENDIX B APPENDIX A Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsMany submitters continue to be angry about the response and want decision makers to be held accountable for loss of life and property . Many submitters expressed anger towards the decisionmakers who did not call for evacuations sooner. A few of these submitters have named specific regional leaders who they believe are accountable for the poor response and the resulting loss of life and property. Other submitters blame their local government organisations for not listening to the warnings from communities locals prior to the events. . Many submitters said there was confusion about who was in charge of responding to the events. These submitters thought this lack of leadership contributed to delays, poor decision making, and confused communications. Many submitters felt that official recovery efforts are taking too long . Many submitters said that the official recovery efforts are taking too long. Specific recovery efforts identified included reconnecting necessary services (e.g., water), repairing bridges, and clearing roads. . Several submitters said that the slow official recovery has put their health and wellbeing at risk and continues to negatively impact their lives. Glossary Summary of key terms Term Definition Rs The readiness and response components of the Rs. Rs The four areas of activity used to describe New Zealands integrated approach to civil defence emergency management. The four areas of activity are reduction, readiness, response, and recovery. Appropriation The statutory mechanism by which Parliament authorises the Government to incur expense and capital expenditure. Assurer AssuranceAssurer relates to NEMAs function to provide assurance (confidence) that the emergency management system is fit for purpose. Capability The skills, experience, and abilities of people that perform functions and tasks. Capacity The quantity of people needed to perform functions and tasks. CDEM (Civil Defence Emergency Management) agencies An agency with responsibilities under the CDEM Act , including local authorities, CDEM Groups, government departments, emergency services, and lifeline utilities. CDEM Group A statutory joint standing committee that is made up of mayors or chairs of member local authorities, or a committee set up by a unitary authority that has governance responsibilities for emergency management. CDEM response Emergency response activities carried out by CDEM agencies during an emergency (or just response where appropriate). Cell sites or towers A mobile device site where antennas and electronic communications equipment are placed to transmit signals to cell phones. Civil Defence Centre (CDC)A facility established and managed by CDEM, during an emergency, to support individuals, familieswhnau and the community. GLOSSARY OF TERMS APPENDIX C APPENDIX B APPENDIX A Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsTerm Definition Command Command (authority within an agency) is executed vertically, and includes the internal ownership, administrative responsibility, and detailed supervision of an agencys personnel, tasks, and resources. Command cannot normally be exercised outside an agency. Common Operating PictureA continuously overview compiled from local, regional and national data shared between integrated communication systems. Common Operating PlatformThe technological infrastructure or system used to support the creation, management, and dissemination of the common operating picture across different stakeholders involved in the response. Community
And in the models for Entity B, Entity C and Entity D. WICS slidedeck Entity A: the us e and analysis of the RFI information and other benchmarks , available at: https:www.dia.govt.nzThree Waters Reform Individual council models andslidep acks Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia Figure .: Major citi es within the proposed Entity A and the distances between them
By March , a finalised certification process, cost model, and standardised legal
December , Memorandum o f Understanding between the G CDO, Department o f Internal A ffairs
However, security of the cloud come down to selecting a good cloud provider, and
Hybrid Cloud is not simply a mixture of public and private cloud resources to run your
I recommend that the first reading for the Bill takes place in the same sitting as the House debate on the Declaration of Inconsistency, or a sitting soon after.
It is timely to adjust the Policy to align with societal and Government commitments
On December , Cabinet agreed that legislation be introduced to lower the voting age for parliamentary and local elections from years to years CBC MIN . Subsequently, on March , Cabinet agreed to change the focus for legislative change to local elections only CABMIN .
Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs APPENDIX : SERVERSIDE MACHINE LEARNING EVALUATION The serverside priorisation used probabilities from a Random Forest model to rank potential close contacts over casual contacts. During development different machine learning models were tested, and the Random Forest model produced the highest area under the Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) curve (AUC). The AUC is the probability that a randomly chosen true close contact will rank higher than a randomly chosen noncontact. AUC values are between . (random chance) and (perfect classification). A higher AUC value indicates that the model is more effective at prioritising close contacts over casual ones.
The Government has already established a new inquiry under the Royal
The majority recognised that changing the voting age for parliamentary elections requires support from at least percent of MPs or a majority in a referendum. They did not consider a referendum was appropriate for considering this change. The majority noted certain legal consequences of lowering the parliamentary voting age includ ing legislative lin ks to qualifying as a member of parliament and jury service. They cons idered these implications could be worked through and there is an opportunity to consider any other implications raised by the Independent Revi ew of Electoral Law in the future. The ACT and National Party member s of the Committee did not support lowering the voting age for either parliamentary or local elections. The ACT party in its differing view raised questions about the age of cr iminal liability and offences and penalties, along with whether parental responsibility and liability should end at the age of y ears. The National Party in its differing view noted that the age of is set fo r many activities, rights and responsibilities, while is set for others, and the justice syst em generally treat s and yearolds very differently to the wa y it treats those and over.
There are no financial implications.
Waitangi Tribunal. September . Tauranga Moana, (chapter ). https:waitangitribunal.govt.nznewstauranga moanareleased . ()(h) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
While in the majority of systems were reported by agencies as operating adequately, there are concerns
agree that agencies make adoption decisions which consider highlevel sustainability
agreed that agencies make adoption decisions that consider highlevel sustainability
agreed to make consequential amendments to the Social Security Act and associated regulations to ensure that water charges from a water services entity, such as local government rates, are also included in the definition of accommodation costs;
noted that the Minister of Justice intends to repo rt back on the financial implications of the above proposals at the Cabinet Legislation Committee;
online clinics with open question and answer sessions
of the NZAG population
, Requirements relating to storage, retention, and disposal of
. Assistance statement
. For a file to be considered for prosecution, the investigator in charge of the file must have a reasonable suspicion that offending has occurred. If the investigator is uncertain as to whether offending has occurred, advice must be sought from Legal Services.
. How the Added Parties other than Mortality
. How the Added Parties other than Mortality Review Committees and
. If the requirements are introduced too quickly, and the sector is not equipped to
. Local authorities (councils) use ward systems to ensure that different communities of
. Many local authorities have been able to set up single and joint council owned CCOs for a variety of purposes under the current arrangements in the Act . (Appendix A provides a stocktake of current CCOs , other than Watercare, Wellington Water and Citycare , to demonstrate the diversity of existing CCOs .) However, w e understand the establishment of a joint CCO can be difficult and time consuming under the current arrangements. We have summarised the key issues and challenges below. . The proposed approach has been designed to address these issues. In developing our advice, we facilitated a workshop with the TAG to further explore the issues and options, and test the Departments understanding and approach . We also engaged with a small number of officials from councils which have attempted to set up a joint water services CCO in the past. Views from the TAG and council officials have informed the proposed approach . Issues that need to be addressed to help streamline the process for establishing water services CCOs Consultation processes can be time and resource intensive . To set up a CCO, councils must consult with their communities in accordance with the consultation principles set out in section of the Act. . Water services delivery is a significant activity. Under section of the Act, any decision to significantly alter the intended service level for any significant activity or to transfer the ownership or control of a strategic asset to or from the council cannot be made unless it is provided for in the councils long term plan (LTP). Therefore, councils would need to include the establishment of a water services CCO in their LTPs (via an LTP amendment , if out of cycle) and use the special consultative p rocedure when adopting the LTP . . We have heard that, for councils considering a joint CCO, it is likely to be more efficient and cost effective for them to undertake joint consultation potentially through a joint committee. T here do not appear to be any legislative barriers to this. Schedule , clause allows councils to delegate powers and responsibilities (with several exceptions named) to joint committees. Consultation powers are not named as an exception. . Instead, s ome of the council officials we engaged with indicated that it is the time and resources required to undertake the consultation process that presents the barrier . Some councils may consider they need to undertake multiple rounds of consultation before making the final decision to establish a water services CCO. This would likely ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua IN CONFIDENCE Page of involve an early consultation round on alternative options, and then another consultation round on the necessary LTP amendment associated with the final decision. . This process could take several years , particularly if consultation involves multiple councils , and multiple rounds of consultation . Therefore, the current process is not optimal for those who are looking to swiftly set up a water services CCO to improve their water services provision. . The TAG has indicated that, while councils may be able to undertake joint consultation under the current requirements, the process would be slow and inefficient, especially if the intention is for swift establishment. Bill presents an opportunity to make much more explicit the ability of councils to undertake joint consultation and to use a joint committee for this purpose. Decision making processes can be onerous , and councils are concerned about the risks of legal challenge . Councils must, when making decisions, seek to identify all reasonably practicable options for the achievement of the objective of a decision . . They are also required by section A to review the cost effectiveness of current arrangements for meeting the needs of communities within their district for good quality local infrastructure, local public services, and performance of regulatory functions, in conjunction with consideration of any significant change to relevant service levels. This review must include a consideration of at least six listed options for the governance, funding, and delivery of infrastructure, services, and regulatory functions , including, but not limited to using CCOs , whether singly or jointly with other councils . . A council is also required to ensure prudent stewardship and the efficient and effective use of its resources in the interests of its district . Elected members swear an oath that reflects their responsibilities to their own district. . Some councils and TAG members noted that the consideration of all reasonably practicable options in relation to the establishment of a water services CCO can be unnecessarily onerous , as well as resource and time intensive. This could require analysis and consultation on a large number of options beyond a sole or joint CCO. . Similarly, the required review under section A also involves extensive analysis of a large number of options, which can be a significant undertaking. . Councils also indicated that a key barrier and disincentive to setting up a CCO is the possibility of judicial review. This mainly relates to the interpretation of what factors can be taken into consideration in a councils decision making including that they may not have fully considered all of the reasonably practicable options . . The establishment of a joint water services CCO will likely require consideration of the collective benefits and interests of the communities in the proposed CCO area. This is not currently explicitly allowed for in the Act . Doing so may be seen as a contravention to a councils obligation to perform its role in the interests of its own district . The risk that this may result in judicial review was emphasised by several council officials and confirmed in the workshop with the TAG. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua IN CONFIDENCE Page of . A councils decision to set up a joint CCO can be contingent on the other councils decisions to go ahead with it. The potential for other councils to reject the proposal creates uncertainty and risk. It may also lead to further rounds of consultation (for example , if the timing of various council LTP decisions mean that some decisions to establish the joint CCO may need to be undone if other councils decide not to go ahead ). We recommend including bespoke arrangement s for establishing a water services CCO in the legislation . We recommend inserting into the Act a bespoke set of provisions for councils to use when considering establishing a water services CCO . Councils could choose to use the arrangements as an alternative to the current process es they are required to follow in the Act . These bespoke arrangements would achieve the objective of providing councils with a streamlined approach to consulting and deciding on whether to form a single or joint lyowned water services CCO . . The proposed arrangements, detailed further below , would include clarifying that councils can set up a joint committee , which could consult jointly and make recommendations to the participating councils. There would be clarity about minimum consultation requirements, modified information requirements , and modified considerations in the decision making process. . Providing for bespoke arrangement s in the legislation is the preferred approach . It would streamline the process for establishing a water services CCO, reduce time and resources put into consultation and decision making, and provide certainty to councils in terms of what they are able to factor in to their decision making . It would do this without u ndermin ing the importance of community consultation. This approach would also help to de risk this process and reduce the risk of legal challenge by providing a clear set of provisions in the legislation designed for this purpose. . Our engagement with the TAG and targeted engagement with several council officials supported this being the preferred option and potentially the only one that would lead to achieving the policy objective. . As these proposed bespoke arrangements would be optional for councils to use , the risk of any perception of reduced individual council autonomy would be limited . There could still be a perception of less focus on the interests of individual districts ; however, this will be mitigated through giving councils discretion as to how they weigh up various considerations in their decision making. . As part of our policy development, w e also considered other options that might address the identified challenges with the status quo. This included possible amendments to specific sections of the Act to make it explicit that councils could, for the purposes of considering forming a joint water services CCO, consult jointly and make a recommendation to the participating councils . However, we consider these options would not fully address the issues and challenges identified, and would also likely be more difficult to draft in the legislation. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua IN CONFIDENCE Page of Key components of proposed approach Establishment of joint committee . Under Schedule , councils can set up joint committees with other councils , and delegate any of their responsibilities, duties or powers to the committee except for a number of specific powers outlined in the Act (such as the power to adopt a long term plan). As noted earlier, some council officials we engaged with thought that it is not entirely clear that councils can consult jointly , or use a joint committee for this purpose, and it would be beneficial if the legislation were clearer. . We are proposing to include a provision that clarif ies that councils who are wanting to form a joint water services CCO can set up a joint committee under the relevant provisions in Schedule . The joint committees scope would include being able to recommend a proposal to the councils , undertake consultation on the proposal (if approved by all councils ) in a joint manner, and make final recommendations to the participating councils. . The TAG members have suggested clarifying that councils would effectively have two decision points: () approving the preferred option proposed by the joint committee for consultation; and () approving the final proposal to be implemented (following consu ltation). Consultation process . We are proposing that if councils are thinking of establishing a water services CCO, they only need to undertake one round of consultation on the proposal. This consultation could be carried out by a joint committee, by other collective arrangements the councils choose, or individually. . We also propose that councils would not need to consult on subsequent LTP amendment s, provided they were satisfied they understood the views of their communities from the earlier consultation process. . If a joint committee is established for this purpose, it would have flexibility around how it wants to run its public hearings and manage the consultation process, including whether to use the special consultative procedure, providing it adheres to the consultation principles se t out in section () and the requirement to have processes in place for consulting with Mori in section () . . We propose the bespoke arrangements should be flexible enough to ensure that , if changes need to be made to the proposed model after consultation , this would not generally require another round of consultation unless the changes are extensive or have significant implications. Information requirements for consultation . Under section s and A , councils must undertake and provide for consultation information on an analysis of all reasonably practicable options for the achievement of the objective of a decision. This requirement places a large burden on them. . We are proposing that in this situation, councils, or the joint committee, are only required to analyse, provide information on, and consult on two options one being the current arrangements for delivery of water services (the status quo), and the other Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua IN CONFIDENCE Page of being the preferred option (relating to a water services CCO ). The proposal for consultation would have to provide a clear rationale for the preferred option . . This would not preclude councils or the joint committee from being able to consult on more than the two options . However, it minimises the range of options they would be required to analyse and present to their communities and clarifies this in the legislation . . We also propose that the proposal put out for consultation should have to include in sufficient detail the impacts (including financial) of each option on each of the districts included with the proposed CCO, as well as the collective impacts on the community as a whole within the total CCO area. This requirement would ensure that communities would have a good understanding of the impacts on their districts and would be able to genuinely engage in the proposal. This is particularly important because we are proposing that subsequent LTP amendments would not need to be consulted on. . Finally, w e propose that, if councils are considering establishing a single or joint water services CCO, they are not required to undertake a review under section A either as part of this decision, or in the time period afterwards (if a review would ordinarily be required in that period) . As previously noted, this review requires an extensive analysis of options , and is unnecessarily time consuming and resource intensive in these circumstances. Decision making considerations . As stated above, w e propose that a joint committee is able to make recommendation s to the participating councils about whether a water services CCO should be established . However, the final decision about joining the CCO rests with each council . This would protect local autonomy and accountability, and ensure that there is buy in from all councils involved. . We propose that in their decision making processes, both the joint committee (if used) and the councils are able to consider the collective impacts on the communities as a whole in the CCO area, as well as their usual considerations. It would be up to the joint committee and the councils as to how they weigh the various considerations. . We also propose that councils are able to factor into their decision making on the proposed CCO the considerations of the other participating authorities , and the views of people outside their own district (within the new CCO area) . . The above proposals help to address the concerns that have been raised by councils regarding judicial review of their decision making as they will be given authority by the new provisions to take these factors into consideration. Longterm plan ( LTP) amendments . We propose councils are still required to amend their LTPs to include their decision to establish or join a water services CCO and reflect the implications that will have . As above, we propose that the consultation requirements for these LTP amendment s be waived . Audit requirements would still apply. . The legislation would also explicitly enable council s to conditional ly approv e their LTP amendment s. This is so that, if another participating council subsequently decides against joining the CCO and that decision impacts on the other councils decision to Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua IN CONFIDENCE Page of join, that coun cil can pull out of the proposed arrangement without needing to make another LTP amendment. Possible risks associated with the proposed approach . Under this process, councils would only be able to establish a water services CCO that is currently allowed for under the Act, as the details about financially separate council owned organisations and any other models are intended to be included in Bill in mid . From our engagement with the TAG and several councils, we understand that those wishing to move early may prefer to be able to set up a financially independent council owned organisation. Therefore, it is unclear at this stage what the uptake of these bespoke arrangements might be . . However, if sufficient detail about the new model(s) is communicated following Cabinet decisions about Bill , some councils may feel they are able to start engaging with communities about establishing a water services CCO, and provide an indication about the new model they would like to move to in the future. Next steps . If you agree to the proposals amending the Act to provide bespoke arrangements for consulting and deciding on water services CCOs, we will include them in the Bill Cabinet paper. Recommendations . We recommend that you : a) note that your legislative strategy states that Bill will provide improvements to enable early movers to start shifting water services ; YesNo b) agree that the Bill Cabinet paper includes proposals for a streamlined approach to consulting and making decisions on water services council controlled organisation under the Local Government Act ; YesNo c) subject to agreement to recommendation b), agree that the proposed arrangements can include the following key components: i. clarification that councils that are considering form ing a joint water CCO can set up a joint committee under Schedule of the Local Government Act ; YesNo ii. the joint committees scope would include being able to recommend a proposal to the participating councils for approval for consultation , undertake consultation on the proposal in a joint manner , and make final recommendations to the participating councils ; YesNo Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua IN CONFIDENCE Page of iii. only one round of consultation is required (to be carried out by either the joint committee , by other collective or individual arrangements the councils choose , or by individual councils ); YesNo iv. if a joint committee is established, it would have the flexibility around how it wants to manage the consultation process , providing it adheres to the consultation principles in section () and the requirement to have processes in place for consulting with Mori in section () of the Local Government Act ; YesNo v. the council (s), or joint committee, are only required to analyse, provide information on, and consult on two options the status quo and an alternative (preferred approach) ; YesNo vi. the proposal put out for consultation should have to include in sufficient detail the impacts (including financial) on each district within the CCO area, as well as the collective impacts on the communities within the CCO area ; vii. councils that are considering establishing a water services CCO would not be required to carry out the separate review options analysis required under section A either as part of this process or in the period following it (if a review would ordinarily be required in that period) ; YesNo
. On July , the Royal Commission wrote to the previous Minister of Internal
. Overview of operational processes
. Overview of operational processes .
. THE cardholder shall comply with all New Zealand exchange control regulations and such directions as may be issued thereunder by the Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
. We recommend that you:
.. All DA Information obtained under this DAA will be handled and stored in accordance
.. Any specific DAlnformation that is copied into NZSIS systems and is used in support of
.. Disposal of DA Information obtained under this DAA will be conducted in accordance
.The effect of this Order is to lessen the impact of regulatory requirements on
Hereford Street, Christchurch
Fenton Street, Rotorua.
. Current water services prices and pricing structures may not accurately reflect the costs of water services and m ostly reflect the accumulation of decades of political decisions regarding depreciation funding and timing of investment. Keeping existing prices and structures in place may result in insufficient revenue for the new water services, given the many challenges that they face. This deficit will need to be made up for through an increased burden on future generations. The report back will also consider the issue of revenue sufficiency for water services entities and affordability. . Controlling price increases or imposing revenue caps is a form of price quality regulation. The Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs companion paper provides a cogent argument as to why the expert economic regulator should not be undertaking price quality regulation until at least the second regulatory period. The risks are greater for Ministers exercising similar powers. Any decisions to regulate prices in the short run need to consider the risk of perpetuating problems of under funding under the status quo, and the potential for unintended consequences.
A selection of successful case studies are outlined below, demonstrating the public
For example Section of the Privacy Act requires mandatory notification to the Privacy Commissioner as soon as practicable after an agency becomes aware that a notifiable privacy breach has occurred.
MultiCloud is the deliberate use of multiple cloud computing and storage
New taskforce for government use of AI, emerging tech (themandarin.com.au) ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs UNCLASSIFIED Page of .
On December , Cabinet also agreed that: . the voting age for alcohol licensing trust elections would remain at years; and
Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE DTA Report A NR COVIDCARDTECHNOLOGYREVIEW Nathaniel de Lautour,Logan Small,AustinChamberlain, JohnHarris, Brent Martin, MattHopkins July ABSTRACT This report contains a DTA review of CovidCard, a digital contact tracing system proposed for COVID pandemic control in New Zealand. The system comprises a card with a Bluetooth Low Energy radio device that transmits pseudorandom numbers from a unique sequence, allowing other cards in range to detect and record its presence. In addition, there are multiple software service layers and a security architecture to enable the secure upload of contact data to a central server. We believe that CovidCard could provide benefit for contact tracing by reducing the time taken to identify close contacts, if there is sufficient user acceptance and the system proves reliable in practice. We also make some recommendations for modifications and additional testing, and finally highlight some potential security risks. COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE DTA Report A Defence Technology Agency Private Bag Devonport Auckland New Zealand Crown Copyright COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE EXECUTIVESUMMARY CovidCard is a digital contact tracing system designed to augment manual contact tracing for COVID pandemic control. The system comprises a card with a Bluetooth Low Energy radio device that transmits pseudorandom numbers from a unique sequence, allowing other cards in range to detect and record its presence. In addition, there are multiple software service layers and a security architecture to enable the secure upload of contact data to a central server. The server performs a process to match cards to serial numbers based on the pseudorandom number sequences emitted. This enables contact tracers to identify the owner of a card, and the identities of people the card has come into contact with. At the request of the Department of Internal Affairs (DIA), we have carried out a review of the technology underlying the CovidCard system based on documentation provided by the developer and prototype cards that were supplied for inspection and physical testing. The review was supplemented by a workshop at DTA that was attended by representatives of the CovidCard development team and DIA. In general, we were impressed with the quality of the effort put into the development of CovidCard, and in particular the attention paid to security and privacy considerations. We also note that the supplied documentation was of high quality, and that the development program has been informed by data collected during field trials. Following simulation exercises, physical tests and documentation review, we believe that memory, battery capacity, and robustness would be sufficient to meet the target design lifetime of at least one year. The security architecture of the card has been carefully designed and we believe it meets reasonable privacy expectations. However, to confirm our views we recommend that a professional security consultant be engaged to provide an additional review of the privacy and security aspects of the CovidCard system. We believe that CovidCard has the potential to detect and record close contacts to a level useful for contact tracing, but that an unknown and possibly significant number of false positive contacts will be . Increasing CovidCards detection thresholds to reduce the false positive rate is possible but this risks true positive contacts being lost. The true positive rates achieved in trials ranged from . to ., while false positive rates ranged from . to .. While it may be possible to improve card performance above what has been observed in trials, this would need to be demonstrated in a largescale trial. To mitigate possible false contacts from signal strength fluctuations we recommend that contact duration be stored along with the RPE, and we have proposed two possible modifications in contact record architecture to achieve this. When the firmware, including close contact detection thresholds, is finalized we recommend that CovidCard be run for an extended period (exceeding days) to verify software robustness and validate the battery life modelling. Given that cards may not always be worn on a lanyard, we recommend that additional tests be carried out to assess card performance when worn in alternative positions, such as a shirt pocket. Although these locations might not be ideal, it would enhance user acceptance and is likely to still provide a useful level of performance. DTAReport A COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE iii Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE DTAReport A COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE iv Redacted consistent with (a) and ()(k) Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE CONTENTS INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . CARDPERFORMANCE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Card Detection Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Exposure Tracking Subsystem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Effect of RSSI Fluctuations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Sensitivity and Specificity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . SERVERSIDEPROCESSING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . BATTERYLIFE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Battery Life Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . MEMORYCAPACITY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Contact Log Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Watchlist Memory Capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Contact Log Memory Capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ROBUSTNESSAND USABILITY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Physical Test Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Abrasion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Bending . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Immersion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Crush test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Comments on Planned Physical tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Lanyard Wearing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . SECURITYARCHITECTURE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Specification and Design Assurance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Card Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Secure Download . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Serverside Security Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . DTAReport A COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE v Redacted consistent with (a) and ()(k) Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE POTENTIALFORONGOINGNZDFINVOLVEMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . RECOMMENDATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . REFERENCES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . DTAReport A COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE vi Redacted consistent with (a) and ()(k) Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE INTRODUCTION CovidCard is a digital contact tracing system designed to augment manual contact tracing for COVID pandemic control and to speed up the notification of atrisk individuals of possible exposure to SARSCoV. The system comprises a card with a Bluetooth Low Energy radio device that transmits pseudorandom numbers from a unique sequence, allowing other cards in range to detect and record its presence. In addition, there are multiple software service layers and a security architecture to enable the secure upload of contact data to a central server. The server performs a process to match cards to serial numbers based on the pseudorandom number sequences emitted. This enables contact tracers to identify the owner of a card, and the identities of people the card has come into contact with. At the request of the Department of Internal Affairs (DIA), we have carried out a technical review of the proposed CovidCard system. The primary purpose of the review was to provide independent advice as to whether CovidCard would be able to perform as represented under the assumption that a population wide distribution is achieved. DTA was provided specific terms of reference for the review which included the card system design, the security architecture, and ongoing support that we could provide to the project . The review was undertaken based on documentation provided by the developer, and non functional cards supplied for inspection and physical robustness testing. The material submitted for review was supplemented by a workshop at DTA that was attended by representatives of the CovidCard development team and DIA. The remainder of this report details the review covering the items listed in the terms of reference. Although we have provided feedback on the security architecture as requested we recommend that a professional security consultant be engaged to provide an additional review of these aspects of CovidCard. Note that there were a number of items specifically ruled out of scope for this review, including user acceptance, project cost, and alternative contact tracing solutions, and these issues are not considered here This report is an edited version of DTAReport which was releasedto DIAin July, . Parts of theoriginal report relatingto securityaresensitive andhave been removed. CARDPERFORMANCE . Overview CovidCard is designed to assist COVID contact tracing by recording Bluetooth Low Energy advertising signals emitted by nearby CovidCards. Each signal contains a random number known as the Ephemeral Advertising Identifier (EAI) which is drawn from a pseudorandom sequence that is unique to each card. The key and initial value needed to generate the pseudorandom sequence are uploaded from the card during production and stored on a central server. When contact records containing the EAIs are uploaded to the server, the cards can be identified by a partial reconstruction of the pseudorandom number sequences they emit. To decide whether a detection should be logged as a close contact an exposure risk metric based on the RSSI is calculated. It is based on the idea that exposure risk depends inversely on the distance, and that RSSI can be used to estimate distance. In free space conditions the signal strength varies inversely with the square of the distance. In this idealised case inferring distance from RSSI is straightforward, as long as the transmitter and receiver are calibrated. Here, CovidCard has an advantage over smartphone apps for RSSI based distance estimation DTAReport A COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE because the Bluetooth radios in the cards are identical. However, there are additional factors that strongly influence signal strength multipath fading, antenna orientation, body attenuation and estimating distance based on RSSI data alone is an inherently difficult problem. . CardDetection Performance When CovidCards are in the active state, they cycle between advertising (transmitting) and scanning (receiving) modes. Assuming a Packet Error Rate (PER) of , the developers estimate that six detection opportunities a minute are needed to meet the criterion of chance of card detection in one minute (..., System Overview ). The PER assumption seems reasonable and we concur with the estimate of six detection opportunities per minute to meet the detection threshold. Scanning and advertising window durations intended to meet the six detectionsminute criterion are discussed in sections ... and ... of the SystemOverview . In advertising mode, the cards will transmit an advertising signal about every ms. The card remains in the advertising mode for seconds, after which it enters the scanning mode. In the scan mode the card listens for peer CovidCard packets for ms. We have checked and agree that these intervals enable detection of six advertising signals per minute and so meets the desired detection criterion. The performance of cards in high density environments (situations where large numbers of people are in close proximity) was considered in section .. of the System Overview by simulation. We have not been able to directly verify the results presented but the approach and underlying assumptions seem reasonable. The conclusions reached were that the CovidCard will cope with up to cards in receiver range without compromising detection performance with a ms advertising interval. Assuming a maximum density of about people per square metres, and the likely effects of body attenuation on the signal, a card density limit of is plausible. To further increase confidence in card performance a highdensity scenario could be tested as part of a field trial. . ExposureTrackingSubsystem The exposure tracking subsystem of CovidCard processes peak RSSI values, calculated over one minute intervals, for each entry in the watchlist. Exposure tracking is based on an internally calculated parameter called the Relative Proximity Estimate (RPE). The RPE is obtained by converting peak RSSI to a free space path loss estimate, and then calculating what is effectively a scaled inverse distance under the assumption of inverse square path loss. For the lifetime of a watchlist entry, the peak RPE is determined and the sum of the RPE values is accumulated. The total RPE is intended to be a measure of total exposure risk which can be used to prioritize contact tracing. Viral transmission risk is inversely dependent on the distance between two people and directly dependent on the contact duration. The exposure risk metric proposed for CovidCard seems a natural generalization of these criteria to the situation where the distance between people is varying with time. Note that this is a different approach to that taken in the GoogleApple Exposure Notification API, in which the exposure risk is dependent on attenuation, contact duration, number of days since exposure, and transmission risk . The intention is to convert the RPE into a fixedpoint representation, and scaling constants are to be defined to ensure that the range of RPE can be contained inside this value. These constants have not yet been defined, and the algorithmcode for calculation of RPE and accumulation of DTAReport A COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE total RPE is not given. If intermediate calculations are performed in fixed point then the impact of round off error should be considered. The decision to record a watchlist entry in the contact log will be determined by thresholds on the peak and total RPE, but final values of these thresholds have not yet been set. The intention is to do this following final field trials to meet target performance requirements as stated in ..Firmware Specification . The setting of these threshold values carries the risk that either valid contacts (true positives) are missed, or the cards will record too many false positives. Since this is a critical aspect of card performance, we think that additional limited trials in a variety of environments should begin as soon as possible, and that the data on which the thresholds have been based should be released for independent review. . Effect of RSSIFluctuations We note an estimated range between two devices is implicit in the calculation of the RPE (it is proportional to the inverse of the range under the assumption of inverse square path loss). However, in real environments there are reflections of the signal that combine with the direct transmission path at the receiver, and this can result in extreme fluctuations in the RSSI. While on average the RSSI declines with range, when using the peak value there is risk that close and casual contacts may not be differentiated. To illustrate this, we collected RSSI readings from Bluetooth Low Energy packets exchanged between two Raspberry Pi devices in a meeting room at DTA. The devices were suspended at a height of about .mfrom two camera tripods One thousand packets each were collected at ranges from .mtombetween the devices, with a msinterval between transmissions. The data collection process took about two minutes at each position. The raw RSSI data is shown in the left hand plot of Figure . The raw RSSI data was then filtered to simulate the effect of a msscan interval repeated every seconds, combined with a one minute peak filter. The right hand plot in Figure shows the range of peak RSSI values that could be obtained with this processing approach. There is a range because the first scan interval on the CovidCard can start at a random time in the data series. This experiment shows that there can be considerable overlap in values of peak RSSI at different ranges. Hence any metric derived solely from peak RSSI may not be able to discriminate close and casual contacts. DTAReport A COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE Figure : Left : Raw RSSI values measured at different distances between two Raspberry Pi devices. Right: The simulated range of peak RSSI values from CovidCard basedonthe Raspberry Pidata. We believe that providing contact duration information in the contact record may partially mitigate this issue. We suggest two possible approaches to incorporating contact duration in a contact record: a)Reduce the opcode to a bit field, introducing a new bit field containing the total contact duration in minutes (i.e. the number of minutes the EAI was visible), and reducing the size of the total RPE field to fit within the remaining bits. b)Replace the current bit field for total RPE with bit fields for both the time averaged RPE and contact duration. Saving the raw RSSI values and doing contact exposure processing on the server would be preferable. However, we recognize that this is not possible within the memory constraints of the device without severely impacting on the size of the watchlist. . Sensitivity andSpecificity CovidCard can be programmed to record an encounter if the received signal satisfies criteria based on duration and strength of the signal. For contact tracing the Ministry of Health defines seven scenarios with particularly high infection risk (close contacts). Two of these scenarios involve interpersonal contact within two metres for minutes or more, and these are targets for Bluetooth contact tracing systems like CovidCard. Implicit in these close contact definitions is that transmission occurs via inhalation of droplets from an infected person, and that a partition or barrier would block transmission. CovidCard can generate false positives by the same mechanisms as smartphone apps because it is also based on Bluetooth radio signals. False positive contacts fall into two categories: Acontact with correctly estimated range and duration where the signal was received through a physical barrier; A contact with an underestimated range due to Bluetooth signal strength variation. DTAReport A COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE There is no way to mitigate the first of these on the card, and this is a problem inherent in all contact tracing systems based on radio signals. False contacts obtained through walls or partitions can only be resolved at the contact tracing interview stage, i.e. there is no technological solution to this problem at present. Estimating range using Bluetooth is an inherently difficult problem due to fluctuations in signal strength. Earlier this year we conducted a literature review of distance estimation using Bluetooth signals and concluded that this can be very unreliable . Our subsequent data collection exercises performed with Raspberry Pi devices have confirmed this view. An initial trial on an early CovidCard prototype was performed at Nelson Hospital The trial report recommended that further trials be held to refine the algorithm used to determine close contact. The report noted that an effective algorithm was essential to reduce false positives and conserve battery and memory. A number of additional trials on a CovidCard prototype were performed in May . These validation trials aimed to collect card data in a number of reallife situations and use this data to test and refine close contact detection algorithms. In this trial, a contact was recorded on a card if two or more detections with RSSI were received. Bluetooth data was downloaded from the cards and compared with ground truth data obtained by observer notes and video recordings, after applying a minute duration threshold to both data sets. The true positive rates for card contacts in these trials ranged from . to ., while the false positive rates ranged from . to . (Table of ). While it may be possible to improve card performance above what was observed in trials, this would need to be demonstrated in a largescale trial implementing an improved close contact detection algorithm. SERVERSIDEPROCESSING There are multiple aspects to the serverside processing that must be considered. The first step, after uploading readout data, is the identification of cards based on the received pseudorandom identifiers (the EAI values). The matching of EAI values with card serial numbers is performed by a search through a timelimited table of EAI values that is continuously by the server. The developers have not yet implemented or tested a specific algorithm for serverside card resolution. But, based on information provided at the DTA workshop, we believe that serverside card resolution is computationally tractable and could be scaled up or parallelised if needed using cloud computing resources. In the current design approach determination of exposure risk (measured by the RPE) is performed on the card. Only the total RPE is saved in a contact record, and this is very limited information with which to identify potential false positives. To give contact tracers more information that might help to identify false positives we recommend that contact duration be stored in the contact record log as well as the RPE. Two possible approaches to incorporating contact duration were described in section .. Neither of the modifications suggested change the contact record size, and would enable a more detailed exposure risk assessment on the server. This could take into account the the additional factors of transmission risk and time since exposure, as implemented in the GoogleApple Exposure Notification API . DTAReport A COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE BATTERYLIFE . Overview It is clear from the supplied documentation that significant attention has been given to the power considerations of the CovidCard. The impact on instantaneous power consumption, battery duration and therefore indirectly, the usability of the CovidCard has been highlighted at all stages of the design. The need for such an ultralow power device has led many architectural decisions in the design of the CovidCard. It is important to note that this powerbattery assessment is based purely on a study of the CovidCard documentation since a device with fully operational firmware has not been submitted for testing. Empirical measurements have not been gathered. Given the potential consequences of mistaken power calculations, it is imperative that the power budget is accurately modelled. Such modelling commences in Section . of the System Overview with a description of the expected lifecycle of the CovidCard. Four distinct phases are considered: Production, Shelf life, Operation and Readout. Battery capacity is inherently determined by the form factor of the CovidCard and readily available battery chemistriescapacities. The limitations and realistic expectations of the selected battery are set out in Section ... and Table of the System Overview. Considering the mean annual temperatures in New Zealand, the CovidCard battery model is derated by due to temperature and manufacturing tolerances from mAh tomAh. A selfdischarge estimate of per annum is used throughout the usable life of the card For all phases the worstcase pessimistic view on battery capacity and power consumption is used in further modelling. These estimates are considered realistic. . Battery Life Modelling Production Given the high volume of manufacture, the production phase (specifically Initialisation) is very brief. The power model takes a worstcase consumption of mAh for this period. Shelf Life During storage the CovidCard is in a low power state awaiting activation. During this time, the power model assumes a maximum period of months consuming Aof current in order to maintain the realtime clock and RAM state. The quoted values of current are in line with the Apollo Blue MCU specifications stated in the device datasheet. Operation The battery model for this phase is the most complex and comprises three different states: Battery Level Check, Sleeping and ScanningAdvertising. Battery Level Check: To enable the user to check the battery of the CovidCard a button press will initiate a LED flash. This power consumption is estimated for an eager user to be no more than mAh during the month life cycle. In the current firmware version, the battery check procedure lights the red LED. This uses less power but is misleading to the user. Use of the green LED is far more intuitive and would not greatly impact power consumption. Sleep: To facilitate extended periods of low powered sleep during the Operation phase, the CovidCard utilises an accelerometer to detect card movement and wake the microprocessor. Section . of the FirmwareSpecification details the dutycycle and backoff procedure selected DTAReport A COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE to enable accurate motion detection whilst minimizing accelerometer on time, even during long periods of inactivity. Given the ability to accurately detect user motion the power consumption model assumes hours of active use per day, days per week. A value of Ais predicted for the sleep state. The design of the accelerometer subsystem and assumptions stated are reasonable. ScanningAdvertising: Following subtraction of all above overheads the remaining battery capacity ofmAh can be assigned to scanning and advertising. Section .. in the SystemOverview presents a convincing model for parameter selection of scanning and advertising. This model can be used to prove that for the parameters selected, the remaining battery capacity is sufficient to obtain contact events. This statebased simulation boosts confidence in achieving a detection target with a ms advertising interval and ms scan window at an interval of seconds. Readout Reasonable estimates for power consumption are given in the readout phase considering the duration a readout is expected to take, the higher power BLE radio state and the LED flashing current. Net energy usage is estimated at mAh per readout cycle. . Conclusion Future changes to firmware design and a lack of empirical measurements makes a definitive answer on battery duration difficult, however based on the supplied documentation, we believe that the assumptions and values pertaining to battery duration are plausible and well modelled. The estimates given for current consumption and the time spent in each phasestate are reasonable and accurately described. NotesSuggestions It may be possible for a determined malicious user to frequently enter higher power states, such as battery checking or readout in order to reduce battery lifetime. This is considered unlikely given the effort required to do so. There may be other factors to consider such as battery internal resistance growth with age, however these ages are typically greater than the expected lifetime of the CovidCard. It is likely in mass roll out that defective batteries will be encountered, these cannot be predicted and must be overcome via a replacement programme. To enable a prediction of real battery and power consumption, a longterm programme of empirical power measurement could be undertaken on initial cards to prove expected performance. In the current firmware version the red LED appears to be used to signal Good battery state. If this is the case, we recommend changing to green to avoid user confusion. Note that the battery life projections depend on estimates of current drain by final production firmware, which does not yet exist and so has not been tested. But, based on the documentation provided, we believe the projected battery life and the modelling that underlies it is plausible. DTAReport A COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE MEMORYCAPACITY The CovidCard is limited to the storage constraints of the included microcontroller unit (MCU). The CovidCard contains the Ambiq Micro Apollo Blue, specifically the part number AMABKKKBRB. This MCU has a total of MBavailable onboard storage (flash) and KBof available volatile memory (RAM). The MCU also contains KBof flash cache. The allocated storage for firmware and runtime is unknown as the firmware is not yet finalised. . Contact Log Design After activation, the CovidCard enters the Active state and the contact logging begins using the Bluetooth Low Energy Advertiser and Scanner. The size of the incoming data from the Bluetooth Scanner is variable depending on how many other cards are within Bluetooth range, unlike the Bluetooth Advertiser which transmits a static data size at a known frequency. Figure : CovidCardcontactlogdataflowfromScannertoReadoutasshownin section .ofthe FirmwareSpecification . During contact logging, the largest use of data is in managing incoming data from the Bluetooth Scanner subsystem (shown in blue in the figure above). The Tracker subsystem (shown in orange) receives all incoming data from the Scanner and must keep an ongoing watchlist for potential contacts (performed in RAM). The following Storage subsystem (shown in green) then takes confirmed contacts from the Tracker and stores them in the permanent contact log (in flash). . WatchlistMemoryCapacity The Tracker subsystem first mitigates against a flood of messages by limiting the incoming messages to per scan (in the FloodDoS protection block). The watchlist contains entries for every active unique temporary card ID (EAI) that is being received. kBof storage has been allocated in the RAM for the watchlist, an upper limit of entries (at octets per entry). We consider an extreme heavyusage scenario for the CovidCard as encountering new, unique EAIs per scan ( msevery seconds), which might occur when walking through a crowded area with many cardholders. watchlist entries would therefore be created every minute, resulting in new entries after minutes. This exceeds the maximum watchlist entries allocated in RAM. It is not specified when an EAI is considered inactive (at which point the entry is removed from the watchlist), but it is assumed this is at most minutes after the time that the EAI is first encountered (each EAI persists for to minutes). The Contact event detection block should therefore contain further logic to determine when a watchlist entry is DTAReport A COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE considered inactive, rather than purely relying on a minute timer. If the inactivity threshold time were reduced to minutes (the current duration for the definition of a close contact), this extreme example would still create entries in that time. Although this extreme scenario can saturate the watchlist, we note that the entries with the oldest last seen time are deleted, which would minimise the risk that an active contact is removed. And the entries that are deleted are also assessed for exposure risk, meaning they may still be written to the contact log if the criteria are met. We consider a worstcase scenario for the CovidCard to be incoming messages with new and unique EAIs per scan. This represents a malicious attack that would create new watchlist entries per scan (one every seconds), or entries per minute, overwhelming the watchlist in just over two minutes. Mitigation against this type of attack may require further additions to the FloodDoS protection block, or stricter logic on when an EAI is considered inactive. . Contact Log MemoryCapacity The Storage subsystem takes watchlist entries that are potential close contacts and encrypts and stores them within the permanent contact log in flash. kBof flash storage has been allocated for the contact log, an upper limit of , entries (at octets per entry). Watchlist entries that are transferred to the contact log are first placed in a FIFO ring buffer in RAM, for batchwriting contacts to flash. The kBof flash storage allocated to the contact log is also designed as a ring buffer such that the oldest entry will be overwritten upon surpassing the memory limit. The extreme heavyusage example given in Section . of the System Overview assumes new contact events every minutes for hours every day. This would result in , new contact events every day, or , contact events over the days, which is just within the storage limit of , entries. Hence, we consider it is extremely unlikely that the memory capacity will be exceeded under normal operation. The CovidCard also records the times when the card enters a sleep state and wakes from a sleep state into the contact log. These entries take up the same amount of storage as an exposure entry ( octets). Continuing the extreme heavyusage example, the CovidCard could undergo minutes of inactivity to trigger a sleep state, followed by some motion or a button press to immediately trigger an active state. After hours of repeated sleepactive state cycling, sleepwake entries will have been written to the contact log. After days of hours cycling each day, , sleepwake contact events will have been written. In the extreme heavyuse example of , exposure events, this would overwrite the oldest exposure events in the contact log. This shows that the most extreme sleepwake cycling activity has the potential to cause exposure contact events to be lost (again, under the most extreme exposure activity). One mitigation may be to reduce the size of the sleepwake entries in flash. . Conclusion Based on the documentation provided, we believe the memory capacity of the CovidCard is sufficient to capture contact records over the period of interest (prior days from the start of the readout procedure). The current design can deal with extreme examples of use, however further thought may be needed on FloodDoS attacks and the conditions on declaring a watchlist entry to be inactive. Also, a limit on the frequency of wakesleep events being written to the contact log may guard against the overwriting of exposure events, which are more important data to be captured. DTAReport A COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE ROBUSTNESSAND USABILITY . PhysicalTestResults DTAhas been able to perform some of the physical tests suggested in section . of the Hardware Specification , which are intended to assess the cards robustness, usability, and to gauge whether it can meet its intended lifetime target of at least one year. Due to time constraints and lack of suitable equipment we were not able to perform all of these tests. Note that where there was a requirement for electrical function to be working after a test this was confirmed by verifying that the two LED modes still functioned. .. Abrasion The polymeric material of the card outer case was identified by fouriertransform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) as likely to be a styrene acrylonitrile copolymer (SAN). The abrasion (alcohol) test described in section .. of the Hardware Specification was carried out using isopropanol and no deterioration of the printed label was observed. Three additional solvents were also trialled for interest: petroleum ether (hexanes), AVTUR (aviation kerosene), and acetone. Use of petroleum ether and AVTUR did not result in noticeable deterioration of the printed label but the acetone dissolved the card material resulting in a smearing of the etching. .. Bending A point bend test was also conducted, as this seemed like a potential failure mode when a user is sitting with the card placed in a back pocket. The card was placed between a mmgap, as shown in the Figure below. The card was deformed by . mm at the maximum load of .kg. Once the load was removed the card returned mostly to its original state (retaining only a mm deformation) and remained functional. Figure : point bendtest being performed onthe CovidCard. .. Immersion The ingress protection test from section .. of the Hardware Specification was carried out with the card being submerged in water at a depth of mfor minutes. The card was still functioning after the test. After the cover was removed no water was found inside the weld line. DTAReport A COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE .. Crushtest The crush test described in section .. of the Hardware Specification was carried out but a load ofkNwas applied instead of the required kN. However, despite the excess force the card still functioned. Some slight warming of the battery area was observed immediately after but this did not persist beyond a few minutes. The card thickness was reduced from .mmto .mm by the crush test. .. Impact The impact test in section .. of the Hardware Specification was carried out by dropping a .kgweight from a height of monto ammdiameter bolt placed on top of the card. The card was deformed and no longer functioned. . Commentson PlannedPhysicaltests Xenon Arc exposure more closely matches the spectra of sunlight at the earths surface. This method could give more useful results over the solely UV method proposed. Prescribing the exposure according to a known standard will give more weight to the results obtained. ASTM D (Standard Practice for XenonArc Exposure of Plastics Intended for Outdoor Applications) would be a good option as the card will be in use outdoors and polystyrene and its copolymers are susceptible to UV degradation. The use of recognised standards in the specifications will help to ensure that robust and relevant testing is undertaken. Where standards cannot be fully met or lack relevance then partial compliance or use of a subset of conditions or parameters would still be useful, if the deficiencies are noted. It is also recommended that a recognised standard of acceptance testing is used, such as the ISO or series . LanyardWearing The developers have proposed that the CovidCard be worn suspended by a lanyard on the front of the body. This aligns with the belief that maximum viral transmission risk is associated with facetoface contact. Worn in this position maximizes RSSI for facetoface contact, which is a key parameter in exposure risk calculation. Use of a lanyard would be precluded for machinery operators. But the card could be placed frontally in a shirt or overalls pocket, which should not significantly compromise performance. Surgeons and other health workers who perform procedures on patients may find lanyards too encumbering or dangerous to wear. Note also that lanyards have been identified as an infection control risk in hospitals and may not be appropriate for frontline medical workers for this reason alone Once again, in these situations the CovidCard could be placed in a pocket. Fitness instructors may find the lanyard inconvenient and uncomfortable to wear while taking classes. The nature of this work should not preclude the wearing of the card from a health safety aspect, but resistance to wearing the card on a lanyard may be encountered amongst this group. DTAReport A COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE SECURITYARCHITECTURE . Specification and DesignAssurance Robust security is critical to protecting user privacy in the CovidCard system. Specific security elements needed to achieve this are described in Section . of the Security Specification (the primary security goals). Below we consider the security of CovidCard when in the active state, the secure download procedure, and the serverside security architecture. .. Card Operation The primary threat model considered in this section is the ability of an observer to track a specific CovidCard user. This tracking could be either following the user over time and distance or locating the user at a specific location. In both cases the attack is against the pseudonymous EAI can an attacker predict the EAI in order to persistently identify a given user The EAI has several measures which will make this a difficult attack, particularly with the limited range of the hardware. The random BDADDR, short and variable lifetime of each EAS, and destruction of previous EAS in the sequence, mean that an adversary does not have a predictable signal to attack. In most scenarios where the CovidCard is required where the CovidCard user is mingling with other users isolating a given card will be impractical at the software level. Another threat model is the ability of an attacker to determine the list of associates of a given CovidCard user. Given the difficulty of tracking a single user across the EAI changes, it would be substantially more difficult to attack multiple users. Afurther threat model is whether an attacker can overwhelm a given card or all cards at a specific location. This is explicitly addressed by the DoSFlood protection. An adversary could flood a target CovidCard with replay attacks (of valid advertisements) but this would only be effective against the target card(s) while the attack is maintained. This could have the effect of masking users in a group or blinding the contact system for a specific location. The usefulness of such an attack is questionable so it can be regarded as low risk. The use of the opcode in the contact log should be used with caution for other types of events. The standard exposure event is required, but any other type of event could present a privacy risk. Even simple card sleepwake events would be sufficient to develop a pattern of life for a given CovidCard user .. Secure Download Download of contact record data takes place over a Bluetooth connection with a tablet or smartphone that runs the Secure Download Application (SDA). When new contact records are first created they are placed in a circular buffer in RAM, and when the buffer becomes full the records are written to flash memory. Contact records are encrypted before they are stored in RAM or flash using AESCBC with a bit Log Encryption Key (LEK). The LEK and the associated Log Encryption Initialization Vector (LEIV) are by CovidCard when it is first activated by the cardholder, and remain on the card in RAM. The log manager process erases any contact records in either RAM or flash that are older than days. An attacker that gains access to the cards RAM may be able to decrypt the contact records that are stored on the card. To enable readout the card readout mode must be first enabled by pressing and holding the activation button, after which CovidCard acts as a Bluetooth Low Energy peripheral device. The SDA initiates connection to the CovidCard and communicates using the Readout GATT DTAReport A COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE service. Before download can begin the SDA makes a Certificate Signing Request (CSR) to the CovidCard. The process of generating a CSR by the SDA and then submitting it to the Readout Authorisation Service is cryptographically very strong. It is normally applied on a lesser scale, for example in generating oneyear certificates for websites, but it scales well to the frequent use here. This cryptographic certificate request passed over a secure connection is a strong and fully tested process, fundamental to network security. The strongest protection against misuse of the download process is the required physical activation on the CovidCard itself. Unless the card has been maliciously modified during manufacture, there is no way to connect to the card without the physical activation. To target a given card would require theft or interference by the attacker, or subversion of the health care system by coercing a healthcare worker. The standalone Readout Authorisation Service (RAS) provides a degree of separation from the download process. This will make the RAS a target for any attacker attempting to subvert the download process, but also allows a zerotrust connection between the Secure Download Application and the RAS. The information passed to the RAS (the identity of the Healthcare Professional and the scope of the request) provides an auditable log. This will mitigate the risk of subverting the download process by persuading a healthcare worker to extract data. .. Serverside SecurityArchitecture The final design of the server components of the CovidCard system is still pending. These components consist of one mobile app (the Secure Download Application) and four serverbased systems: the Readout Authorisation Service, the Escrow Service, the Contact Analysis Service, and the Card Registry Service. The Readout Authorisation Service and the Escrow Service require some level of public access in order to allow access for the Secure DownloadApplication. Both should be designed with the key aim of limiting access solely to the SDA. The RAS already has a secure design for communication with the SDA. The Escrow Service should additionally minimise any communication back to the SDA. Since each upload instance requires coordination of the CovidCard user and a Healthcare Professional, the Escrow Service should confirm successful upload of the contact data (for Live Readout Mode) and this confirmation should be a minimal response with no further communication. Silently accepting the upload may provide marginally more security (particularly against an attacker probing the Escrow Service) but creates a significant service risk that failed uploads are lost. The remaining server components the Contact Analysis Service and the Card Registry Service are not directly exposed to public access and so can be designed according to standard system security principles. When registering cards, cardholder personal data and the CovidCard Serial Number (CSN) should be uploaded to the Card Registry Service by a oneway connection. The Card Registry Service is the most valuable target for an attacker seeking information from the CovidCard system, so there should not be any access to the public. There should be no way to check the details associated with a given card, apart from a COVID exposure alert. To minimise risk in this area, the CovidCard system should not allow cardholders to check or update their data. Users may withdraw from the system, or be issued a new card, as required. DTAReport A COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE .. Conclusions We conclude that the primary security goals of the CovidCard System are sufficiently met by the security architecture. The CovidCard system separates the security operations at each stage of CovidCard use and uses dedicated encryption for each stage. This means separate encryption keys are used at each stage and so any successful cryptographic attack will only yield a fragment of the overall information. The ciphers in use are all current to accepted cryptographic standards with appropriate key lengths. Further security is provided by the use of ephemeral keys where possible, and the storage of keys in volatile memory to ensure their destruction in the case of most forms of tampering. DTAReport A COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE Redacted consistent with (a) and ()(k) Redacted consistent with (a) and ()(k) Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE DTAReport A COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE Redacted consistent with (a) and ()(k) Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE POTENTIALFOR ONGOING NZDFINVOLVEMENT DTAcould provide further assistance to the project by carrying out a limited trial with a CovidCard prototype (using DTA personnel and unclassified areas). DTA could also investigate use of the MANA computer model, or similar agentbased models, to simulate CovidCard interactions in a phase two trial. Combined with additional smallscale trials of real cards, the simulation modelling may partially substitute for a fullscale phase two trial. DTA could provide a second review of the exposure risk procedure if this is modified, either along the lines we have suggested or in another way, andor when exposure risk thresholds are finalized. We have considered the idea of a largescale field trial at a NZDF installation, for example, Linton military camp. This would be problematic for a number of reasons: a number of individuals would not be able to participate due to security issues; there are concerns that card data could reveal pattern of life behaviour; and that interactions of personnel in the trial would not be sufficiently representative of the population as a whole. There would also be frequent occasions where the cards would have to be placed in lockboxes, since they cannot be taken into classified environments. SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS We have carried out a review of the technology underlying the CovidCard system based on documentation provided by the developer and prototype cards that were supplied for physical testing. The review was supplemented by a workshop at DTAthat was attended by representatives of the CovidCard development team and the Department of Internal affairs (DIA). Following simulation exercises, physical tests and documentation review, we believe that memory, battery capacity, and robustness would be sufficient to meet the target design lifetime of at least one year. The security architecture of the card has been carefully designed and we believe it meets reasonable privacy expectations We believe that CovidCard has the potential to detect and record close contacts to a level useful for contact tracing, but that an unknown and possibly significant number of false positive contacts will be . Increasing CovidCards detection thresholds to reduce the false positive rate is possible but this risks true positive contacts being lost. The true positive rates achieved in trials ranged from . to ., while false positive rates ranged from . to .. While it may be possible to improve card performance above what has been observed in trials, this would need to be demonstrated in a largescale trial. To mitigate possible false contacts from signal strength fluctuations we recommend that contact duration be stored along with the RPE, and we have proposed two possible modifications in contact record architecture to achieve this. When the firmware, including close contact detection thresholds, is finalized we recommend that CovidCard be run for an extended period (exceeding days) to verify software robustness and validate the battery life modelling. Given that cards may not always be worn on a lanyard, we recommend that additional tests be carried out to assess card performance when worn in alternative positions, such as a shirt pocket. Although these locations might not be ideal, it would enhance user acceptance and is likely to still provide a useful level of performance. DTAReport A COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE Redacted consistent with (a) and ()(k) Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE RECOMMENDATIONS A number of recommendations for performance improvement and risk mitigation were made throughout this report. For convenience, they are itemized here: .The contact duration should be saved on the card along with RPE to reduce false positive risk from signal strength fluctuations. We suggested two possible approaches to incorporating contact duration in a contact record: a)Reduce the opcode to a bit field, introducing a new bit field containing the total contact duration in minutes (i.e. the number of minutes the EAI was visible), and reducing the size of the total RPE field to fit within the remaining bits. b)Replace the current bit field for total RPE with bit fields for both the time averaged RPE and contact duration. .For further physical testing it is recommended that a recognised standard of acceptance testing is used, such as the ISO or series In addition, theASTM D standard should be used for testing degradation in sunlight. .The Escrow Service should minimise communication back to the Secure Download Application. The Escrow Service should confirm successful upload of the contact data and this confirmation should be a minimal response with no further communication. .The Card Registry Service is the most valuable target for an attacker seeking information from the CovidCard system. There should be no way to check the personal data associated with a given card apart from a COVID exposure alert. To minimise risk in this area, the CovidCard system should not allow cardholders to check or update their data. .A professional security consultant should be engaged to provide additional review of the privacy and security aspects of CovidCard. .The performance of the CovidCard system should be conclusively demonstrated in a largescale controlled trial. This should be conducted by independent and experienced investigators, and subject to independent review. DTAReport A COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE Redacted consistent with (a) and ()(k) Redacted consistent with (a) and ()(k) Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE References Nigel Prince, CovidCard technology review by DTA Terms of Reference (V.), July . Private communication. N. de Lautour, L. Small, A. Chamberlain, J. Harris, B. Martin, and M. Hopkins, CovidCard Technology Review, DTA Report , Defence Technology Agency, July . Exposure Notifications API. https:developers.google.comandroid exposurenotificationsexposurenotificationsapi. Accessed: N. de Lautour, L. Small, J. Harris, and M. Hopkins, Bluetooth Proximity Estimation by Signal Strength, Report to NCMC, Defence Technology Agency, May . T. Chambers and A. Anglemyer, CovidCard Phase One Report, Report to Department of Internal Affairs, Dunedin School of Medicine, May . K. Hempstalk, D. Armstrong, A. Grigg, and S. Bartels, CovidCard Validation Report, Technical Report, June . DTAReport A COMMERCIALINCONFIDENCE Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E CBCMIN Cabinet Business Committee Minute of Decision
T here are no communications planned .
The Department of Internal Affa irs prepared a supplementary regulatory impact statement which was submitted to Cabinet when final policy approvals were sought in June CABMIN. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E
The Youth survey found that per cent of transgender and gender diverse participa nts started to identify as transgender or gender diverse before the age of . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of I propose that the process for children and young people has some additional requirements . While I believe selfidentification should be available to children and young people , I propose that additional measures are in place . This ali gns with approaches taken in most other jurisdictions who have adopted a self identification process for children and young people . Additional measures will ensure the child or young person understand s the amendment and that it is based on their own decision about their gender. The focus on consent is important to protect the child or young person from undue influence (eg from guardians ) and support their autonomy over how their gender is recognised . I propose different age categories to reflect older adolescents higher level of cognitive development . For children and young people, I propose introducing two age categories with different requirements that reflect different levels of cognitive development: . I recommend that young people aged or years can apply on their own behalf and that this must be accompanied by either : .. written consent from their guardian; or .. a letter of support from a suitably qualified third party . . I recommend that applications for children and young people aged years and younger must be: .. made on behalf of the child or young person , with their consent, by their guardian; and .. be accompanied by a letter of support from a suitably qualified third party . . The additional measures for children and young people aged years and under are more stringent than those for and year old s. This reflect s that and year olds are in later adolescen ce and generally have a higher level of cognitive development and can live independently from their guardians . I acknowledge that those aged and under can have capacity to make informed decisions. However, this would require a case bycase assessment, which would be difficult to set clearly in legislati on. . Recognising and year olds as more able to provide consent is consis tent with the process for changing a young persons name under BDMRR Act . Under this process , the guardian applies on a young persons behalf but must have the young person s consent if the y are aged or over. It is also consistent with other legislation in New Zealand , for example , is the age at which you can apply for a learner driver licence , and consent to general medical procedures. It also aligns with other jurisdictions where selfidentification policies are often eased once a person turns , such as in Norway, Portugal , and Belgium. . Note , I propose to retain the existing provisions in the BDMRR Act that enable young people aged under to be treated as an adult where they are or have been in a marriage, civil union or de facto relationship. T hese young people will not need guardian consent or a letter of support from a third party.
The criteria will consider technical needs and capabilities, as well as operational and financial considerations.
The design of the system has drawn on the Australian Hosting Certification
The draft Bill: . creates a new type of elector yout h electors who are of or over the age of but under the age of , and a new youth electoral roll (which will be administered by the Electoral Commission); . creates a requirement to register as a youth elector, and an offence for failing to do so; . makes amendments so that relevant provisions of the Electoral Act apply to youth electors and the youth electoral roll; . amends the Juries Act and the Sale and Supply of Alcohol Act to ensure the relevant ages remains at ; and . makes a number of amendments to ot her Acts that ar e required as a consequence of reducing the voting age to for local elections.
These reforms were all subject to RISs at the time which can be found at https:www.dia.govt.nzdiawebsite.nsfFilesRacing ReviewfileRegulatory Impact Assessment Racing Industry Reforms May.pdf BIUC are charges required to be paid by offshore operators for the use of New Zealand racing and sports information. These charges are negotiated between the offshore provider and the relevant code or National Sporting Organisation (NSO) or, where a NSO does not exist, Sport NZ. TAB NZ latest news, https:www.tabnz.orgnews . qwkdm Regulatory Impact Assessment . In response to pressure from offshore operators, and to ensure financial impacts did not extend to the racing codes TAB NZ sought to increase their long term financial sustainability by exploring a partnership arrangement with global betting operator Entain Group Pty Ltd to leverage the expertise and economies of scale of a large international betting provider. . TAB NZ advised that if the partnership deal was not approved, TAB NZ would need to reduce distributions by approximately million in the financial year to continue operating in a financially responsible way . TAB NZ partnership arrangement with Entain Group . On June , the partnership arrangement came into effect and allowed for TAB NZs daytoday operations to be run by a newly established New Zealand subsidiary, Entain New Zealand. This required Ministerial approval and the partnership took effect in June . The previous Government also agreed in principle to extend TAB NZs monopoly online in April DEV MIN refers. . The partnership between TAB NZ and Entain is a year contractual agreement, to operate TAB NZs day today functions (excluding governance, which includes deciding distributions to the racing codes). The partnership agreement provides no opportunity for government intervention in its details or operation. The agreement stipulates a revenue share between Entain and TAB NZ, with a million upfront payment from Entain in , and minimum guaranteed payments to TAB NZ of at least million per year for the first years totalling million in guaranteed funding. . This guaranteed funding has helped in the short term. It has contributed to an increase in prize money and allowed for more certainty to make investments into events such as racing carnivals as well as infrastructure improvements. Some of the funding has also been earmarked for harm minimisation initiatives such as
We recommend four changes to the Policy: reflect societal shifts and commitment to
agree to revoke the InfrastructureasaService directive to provide greater
agreed that further targeted financial assistance to households facing material hardship f rom water bills is unnecessary, at this time;
agreed to revoke the InfrastructureasaService directive to provide greater clarity to
noted that supplementary regulatory analysis will be provided wh en approval for introducing the Bill is sought in ;
stated tha t they were somewhat willing. No pilot participant stated that they were not willing at all to use a co ntact card. Perhaps underscoring the difficulty in relying on self recall in contact tracing, in the feedback one respondent stated I think this has gr eat potential, because it just shows that on a busy ward, it is so difficult to consciously keep track o f and document your close contacts. Table : Willingness to document close contacts using various methods Not at all willing n () Somewhat willing n () Very willing n () Missing n () Method Personal diary on paper Personal diary on line Entering data yourself in book Entering data yourself in computer Use a passive app on smart phone Use an active app on smart phone Use a contact card (i.e., Bluetooth card) (.) (.) (.) (.) (.) (.) (.) (.) ( ) (.) (.) (.) (.) (.) (.) (.) (.) (.) (.) (.) (.) (.) (.) (.) (.) (.) (.) (.) Use a contact card (among participants) (.) (.) (.) (.) In addition to collecting qualitative feedback from staff , we also sought information specifically from non participating, eligible staff. Only non participating staff responded to our survey. Two of the were unaware of the pilot study, and was not based in the participating medical unit. Four of the nonparticipants stated that they would be interested in participating if given the opportunity again. Discussion and recommendations . Technological improvements Card firmware improvements are ne eded to ensure the reliability of the card. Slight changes i n the firmware installation or card use revealed major issues in the firmware that undermined the first days of the field trial and potentially the reliability of the data overall. In addition, fi rmware should be loaded with a close contact algorithm that is capable of filtering contact data based on spatio Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
. After consultation with Ministerial colleagues, the then Minister of Internal Affairs
. All files being considered for prosecution must be referred to Legal Services for assessment against the SolicitorGenerals Prosecution Guidelines. The file should be submitted to Legal Services in accordance with the investigating units internal processes (such as Advisory Group referral or manager signoff).
. Circumstances in which the information may be disclosed to another
. How Mortality Review Committees may use the
. How Mortality Review Committees may use the personal information and
. Safeguards to protect privacy
. Safeguards to protect privacy .
. THE cardholder shall comply with all conditions of use of the card imposed by the Company andor the Department.
. The legislation esta blishes the name of Taumata Arowai as Taumata Arowai the
. The success of a future authorisations framework depends on having buyin from the
. There are two types of wards under the Local Electoral Act (the Act):
. general wards (for New Zealanders on the general electoral roll), which tend to
.. The ISA provides that NZSIS may share intelligence (and any analysis of that intelligence)
. A prosecuting lawyer must act fairly and impartially at all times and in doing this must
. Mori wards (for New Zealanders on the Mori electoral roll), which ensure
. the age for standing as a candidate in local elections (including alcohol licensing trust elections) would remain at .
.. The Minister Responsible for the NZSIS has given Ministerial Authorisation to NZSIS to
... a number of specified overseas public authorities (including agencies from
.. any New Zealand Government agency including Parliament, the State Sector,
.. other specified countries or authorised persons in specified circumstances.
.. I. will contribute to one of NZSISs statutory objectives (e. g. contribute to the
.. in accordance with the ISA, NZSIS will only disclose DA information where doing so:
... falls within one of NZSISs statutory functions, duties or powers;
... is to a person or class of persons (whether in New Zealand or overseas)
... would be in compliance with all human rights obligations recognised by New
.. Disclosures of DA Information will be made in accordance with the New Zealand
.. When considering whether to share any DA Information, NZSIS must give due
.. In addition to the above, when sharing intelligence with external parties NZSIS gives
.No waiver of the day rule is sought. The Order will come into effect on
Castalia (), Analysing Economies of Scale in New Zealand Water Services: Report to Local Government New Zealand Conference call between Castalia and WICS ( Alan Sutherland ) on August WICS (), Slidedeck Entity A: the use and analysis of the RFI information and other benchmarks , available at: https: www.dia.govt.nzThree Waters Reform Individual council models andslidepacks FarrierSwier (), Three Waters Reform: Review of the methodology and assumptions underpinning economic analysis of aggregation, page FarrierSwier (), Three Water s Reform: Review of the methodology and assumptions underpinning economic analysis of aggregation, pp. iv v Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia Water. However, in , the entity was disaggregated, and Melbourne Water reformed to become a wholesale water company only . City West Water, South East Water and Yarra Valley Water became separate retail water companies . FFF Several studies confirm that the three disaggregated retail wat er entities achieved significant cost efficiencies and service level improvements compared to Australian and international water companies since the disaggregation of Melbourne Water. FFF A benchmarking analysis usi ng data from concluded th at the three separate retailers performed at or near the determined efficiency frontier. FFF It also made major improvements in customer services in comparison to major urban water authorities in Australia. Melbo urnes disaggregated water entities even performed better than UK water companies, according to Ofwat . FFF .. Opex efficiency estimates are implausible Efficiency estimates derived from econometric studies in the UK are used in the Reform Scenario to drive a claimed . percent saving in opex. WICS use econometric models to claim that o pex efficiencies of percent are possible WICS has used an Ofwat econometric model to estimate that, after reform, larger New Zealand water entities can achieve up to a . percent efficiency impro vement to operating expenditure (opex) . To estimate the opex efficiencies, WICS combined data from the UK with recent data from N ew Zealand councils to estimate a performance baseline to measure New Zealand water entities against. To ensure comp atibility of the estimates with New Zealands operating environment, the gaps in efficiency between New Zealand entities and the benchmark w ere adjusted with special factors related to regulatory, geographic and environmental factors that were considered unique to New Zealand. Based on observed efficiency gains from UK water reforms, WICS assumes that New Zealand water reforms may achieve th e same operating efficiency results roughly a percent improvement. It is important to note that these estimates are an assumed benchmark that provide s a guide to what might be possible based on experiences in the UK water sector but, as peer reviewer Farrier Swier note s, care needs to be taken as it is not possible to conclude that those efficiencies can be realised . FFF From observations of UK data, larger water entities those serving populations greater than ,, realised larger efficiency improvements than smaller entities. As such, WICS assumes
For example Section of the Privacy Act requires mandatory notification to the Privacy Commissioner as soon as practicable after an agency becomes aware that a notifiable privacy breach has occurred.
For example, unique environments andor specialist systems such as at airports, overseas operations.
Guardian will mean all guardians jointly unless one guardian is unavailable, or one guardian has applied to the Family Court , and the Family Court consented to the child or yo ung persons sex marker being amended under section R of the Care of Children Act applications can be made to the Family Court to settle disputes between guardians. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of I propose setting in regulations the third part ies who can provide the letter of support . The role of the third party would be to assess that the child or young person understands the amendment and that the decision is based on their own perceptions of their gender. It is important that the third party is suitably qualified to make this assessment but does not create a barrier by being difficult to access . Prescribing the third parties in regulations allows flexibility to experiment about how to achieve the right balance between prescribing third parties that can ensure a child and young person underst ands the decision and ensuring these third parties are accessible. . In develop ing the regulations target ed consultation will be completed with professional groups or people who may be suitable to act as the third party . These could include, for example, he alth professionals ; people outside of the health sector , such as counsellors ; or people who may know the child or young person well. The views of children and young people will also be sought on this matter. . As part of regulation development , consideration will be given to any training or guidance needed about the role of the third party. This is to mitigate the risks of transgender children and young people encountering professionals unwilling to support their transition for reasons unrelated to their cogn itive ability. I am aware that some guardians may not be accepting of their childs gender . I recognise that where there are concerns about guardians improperly influencing a child or young person to amend their registered sex , there are also concerns that guardians will prevent the amendment . Some guardians may not be accepting of their childs gender and will not consent to their child amending their registered sex . Some children and young people may not feel comfortable aski ng for their guardians consent , or may be estranged from their guardians . . The ability for and year olds to provide a letter of support from a third party instead of guardian consent should mitigate th e above risks to some extent. At this stage, I am not prepared to remove guardians from the process for those aged under years . This recognises a guardians responsibilities for their childs development and help ing their child determine important decisions. Any negative consequences of provisions requiring guardian consent can be considered as part of the proposed statutory review of the self identification provisions. . The need for a Family Court process to settle disputes between young people and guardians is likely to be a reduced if and year olds can apply with only a letter of support from a third party. However, there may still be scenarios where it is useful ( for example where the young person has trouble accessing a third party and their guardians refuse consent or disagree ). . I propose the Registrar General will be able to give effect to Family Court decisions on these matters made under the C are of Children Act . This will mitigate the risk of guardians , or disagreements between guardians , obstructing applications for children and young people.
I intend to proactively release this paper within business days of Cabinet
In that Cabinet paper, the Minister of Justice noted that introducing amendments which retain a minimum age of for candidates, and for voting in alcohol licensing trust elections, creates new agebased distinctions in the legislation. The Minister of Justice undertook to report back to the Cabinet Legislation Committee with further advice on whe ther the distinction could be justified once it had been fully assessed against the freedom from discrimination provisions in section of NZBORA.
NZIER Investment in natural hazards mitigation: Forecasts and findings about mitigation investment (July ) at pp . Auckland District Law Society Real Estate Institute of New Zealand, Agreement for Sale and Purchase of Real Estate (th edition), subclause .. Saunders, W.S.A., Mathieson, J.E. . Out on a LIM: The role of Land Information Memorandum in natural hazard management, GNS Science Miscellaneous Series . Gunnell SN, Grace ES. . A review of how Land Information Memorandum, Project Information Memorandum and Land Information Request reports for the Canterbury Region address natural hazards. Lower Hutt (NZ): GNS Science. p. (GNS Science consultancy report; ). Weir v Kpiti Coast District Council NZHC , at . Trustees of the THP Trust v Auckland Council NZHC , at . Trustees of the THP Trust, at .
November , C abinet paper Ministerial Response to the Petition of Reality Check Radio on
November , Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute LEG MIN , Ministerial Response
The Bill complies with:
The Government Chief Digital Officers (GCDO) mandate to collect information from
The Policy sets the direction for the public service but on its own, w ll not drive
We are seeking approval to table t he attached Government Response. The proposed response notes the following:
agree that over time RESTRICTED information should be hosted in a New Zealand
agreed that over time, RESTRICTED information should be hosted in a New Zealand based
agreed that the Bill be included in the Le gislation Programme with a Category Priority (to be passed if possible before the general election);
agreed to provide a statutory authority for water services entities charging for services;
inperson workshops with local government and their mana whenua partners.
. Files submitted to Legal Services must contain all evidence (whether favourable or unfavourable) in relation to the file, as well as a report andor draft Caption Sheet and Summary of Facts outlining the proposed charges. Alternative charging options may be suggested by the officerincharge.
. Following this decision, an assessment of the cumulative costs indicated that more
. How the Intermediaries may use the personal
. How the Intermediaries may use the personal information and expected Adverse
. If a council does not have Mori wards, then all electors are represented within a
. Officials consider the name in legislation would therefore be amended to The Water
. Officials recommend an amendment to the Act to repeal the transitional provision
. Relationship with other legislation
. Security provisions
. Security provisions in the event of a breach
. Security provisions in the event of a breach .
. THE cardholder shall ensure the card is held securely at all times and is only carried upon his or her person when on official business.
. the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi;
.. Nothing in this agreement affects NZSISs ability to request information or DAs ability
..the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi;
. the disclosure statem ent requirements, with a disclosure statement attached to the paper ( Appendix A );
..the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act ;
. relevant international standards and obligations; and
..relevant international standards and obligations; and
. the Legislation Guidel ines ( edition), which are maintained by the Legislation Design and Advisory Committee.
..the Legislation Guidelines ( edition), which are maintained by the
.This Order complies with:
of the Privacy Act .
Rattray Street, Dunedin
Rattray Street, Dunedin.
Alcohol licensing trusts are community owned trusts that sell alcohol and provide other hospitality related services in their area. They then distribute their profits back to their communities and are accountable through the election of their trusteesmembers. Licensing trusts were first established in the s as part of the relaxing of prohibition in New Zealand. They were a new way of licensing the sale and consumption of alcohol. They were promoted as a more responsible and accountable alternative to the private licensed sale of alcohol.
Digital SafetySpam prevention and messaging compliance Digital child exploitation ,, , , , , ,A snapshot of New Zealand extremists online in an average week in New Zealand extremist accounts have been active online posts from New Zealand extremists will be shared across Parler, Facebook, Telegram, Gab, Twitter and YouTube Email spam complaints a year SMS spam complaints in , up from referrals from the US National Centre for Missing and Exploited Children, up from shares, reposts, retweets, reblogs or other amplifications will occur from these posts (at a global level) comments and replies have been recorded on those posts (from a global audience) Likes and UpVotes have been received on those posts (from a global audience)
Harvard Avenue, Wigram, Christchurch
March (the Royal Commission) reported back on November . It was
Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
The Minister of Local Government will wr ite to the leader of each of the other political parties in Parliament on approx imately June , providing a copy of the draft Bill and an explainer note, and seek any feedback by July .
The Youth survey found that only a third of transgender and gender diverse par ticipants had told their parents or caregivers they were transgender or gender diverse. The Counting Ourselves survey found that per cent of respondents had been kicked out of home because they were transgender . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Regulation making powers are needed to give effect to my proposals . I propose a regulation making power to give full effect to the self identification proposals outlined above. This power will be to enable regulations that prescribe: . the sex marker options other than the binary; . the additional requirements where a person amend s their registered sex more than once ; . the third parties who can provide a letter of support for applications for children and young people ; and . any other matters required to give effect to a self identification process , which align with the overall intent of the proposals in this paper. There are further minor policy issues I intend to address . There are other, more minor, issues in the Bill to address. I am seeki ng Cabinets agreement that I can make decisions on the se issues . These issues include, but are not limited to: . a transition period for implementation of the self identification provisions up to months may be required to ensure the technical infrastru cture is in place to give effect to the changes with the birth register ; . how a persons previous re corded sex markers are treated on the birth register (eg are they closed or deleted); . clarify ing that section in the BDMRR Act means that birth certifica tes are not conclusive evidence of someones sex or gender ; and . clarifying that where a person has amended their registered sex , previous names and sex markers must not be shown on the amended birth certificate . . These changes will be included in the self identification SOP that I intend to bring to Cabinet in July . Minor technical and operational improvements to the wider Bill . I am also seeking Cabinet agreement that I can make decisions on minor and technical change s associated with a separate SOP unrelated to self identification. Other minor amendments will likely be needed to the Bill , which relate to the operation of and access to the Birth, Death and Marriage registers. These changes are needed to address operational issues that have been identi fied since the Bill was drafted in . These amendments will be made via a separate SOP later in the year. This SOP will not be referred to Select Committee and will be introduced at committee of the whole House stage. Addressing issues previously raised by Crown Law . The previous Minister of Internal Affairs cited and publicly released advice from Crown Law when they deferred the Bill in . Crown Law raised that section in the BDMRR Act, which states that a persons sex should be determined by the general law of New Zealand , is unclear. This provision means that birth certificates should not be the determining factor in decisions about a persons sex and that consideration should be given to other legislation and the common law. I intend for this provision to be re drafted, so its meaning is clarified. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . I believe that birth certificates should not be how a persons sex is determined. In practice birth certificates are not relied on to determine access to women only spaces (eg changing rooms or scho ols) or entitlements (eg sports teams or scholarships) and this should continue. . Related to this, Crown Law advised that clearer statutory guidance on how sex is determined could be beneficial (for example, what factors should be considered to determine a persons sex). While I agree this could be useful, the matter is broader in scope than the BDMRR Act and the Internal Affairs portfolio. Work on this matter would require a cross agency initiative as processes for determining sex are in place across numer ous institutions. Any further consideration of this matter should not delay the progress of introducing a self identification process. Crown Law also raised the placement of people in prisons . Birth certificates are rarely required in legislation to determi ne someones sex or gender. While sex is referred to across legislation, t here is only one instance where sex on a birth certificate determines a persons sex . This is the how the Department of Corrections (Corrections) determines the accommodation of peop le in male or female prisons. . Corrections determines placements in mens and womens prisons under the Corrections Regulations . These state that where there is doubt about if a person should be placed in a male or a female prison and a birth certificate is supplied, a person must be placed in accordance with the sex on the birth certificate . If a birth certificate is not provided, a review can be initiated where considerations include a persons gender, safety and wellbeing, and wider considerations. Where people have a history of prior serious sexual offending against their nominated sex, the placement cannot be reviewed. .
The establishment of the Digital Investment Office (DIO) will support the development
The response notes that the inconsistency with the right to be free from discrimination on the basis of age should be removed to the extent possible.
Walton Street, Whangarei, .
We are proposing to build upon the Policy to begin to address underlying issues
agree that agencies will not invest in onpremise ICT infrastructure unless specified
agreed that agencies will not invest in onpremise ICT infrastructure unless specified
agreed to enable water services entities to waive any charge for any individual customer at their discretion;
days sick leave annually, applicable from the first day of service.
invited the Minister of Justice to is sue drafting instructions to Parliamentary Counsel Office to give effect to the above decisions;
. A Solicitor or Team Leader in Legal Services will then review the file for evidential sufficiency and public interest considerations (see below). This review must be peerreviewed by another Solicitor or Team Leader.
. Adverse Actions Process
. Adverse Actions Process .
. Apportionment of costs
. Aside from the transition provision relating to authorisation in Schedule of the Act,
. Digital identity is central to the secure, people centred digital delivery of services such as social prote ction, health care and finance. Digital identity has the potential to deliver significant economic and societal benefits in both the public and private sectors and through commercial market development. International studies have suggested that the potenti al benefit of enabling digital identity in a mature economy is between . and of GDP (approximately . to billion in NZD). . Developing the digital identity ecosystem is also a critical component of achieving the Prime Ministers commitment in th e Single Economic Market agenda towards mutual recognition of identity services with Australia. New Zealand and Australia are developing a roadmap for cross recognition of digital identities. This process can only commence once New Zealands requirements a re confirmed. . Digital identity can also enable digital trade and other cross border transactions. One example involves the recently concluded Digital Economic Partnership Agreement (DEPA) between New Zealand, Chile and Singapore. The development of the dig ital identity ecosystem and interoperability will enable New Zealand to advance discussions on digital identity in the DEPA and other contexts as appropriate.
. Dispute resolution
. I am advised the Royal Commission has identified the drivers of cost increases relate in
. Officials will seek legal advice on all amendments to the Water Services Act and
. Reasonable assistance provided
. Reasonable assistance provided .
. The Act provides councils with different mechanisms for considering each type of
. The Minister of Finance and I support Auckland Councils recommendation. With the provisions in this Bill, Watercare will avoid significant increases in water charges through additional debt headroom. . The Bill also includes interim regulation for Watercare to ensure there is additional scrutiny on Watercares performance . This includes a Crown monitor that I will appoint when the legislation is passed. This will be a transitional measure while the Commerce Commission builds its future regulatory approach. I intend to report back to Cabinet in July on the appointment of the Crown Monitor. enkv ()(ba)(i) ()(ba)(i) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE
. The powers of clubs to deal with assets under their constitutions will be impacted by the proposed statutory restriction on club property transaction s and the proposal that agreements made between club and code should override club constitutions. .
. Lack of clarity and understanding of cloud and the Policy. Over time, the
.. All costs associated with collecting, processing and storing Registration information
..this Order allows the legislation to operate more flexibly to take account of
. a perception that security risks are significant obstacles to cloud
. Lack of capacity and capability, which combined with the above lack of
.. All costs associated with NZSISs access to Registration Information within the BDM
.. uncertainty as to how or whether agencies have the ability to
..the extent of this Order (including geographical extent) is not broader than
. Constraints on the ability to invest in cloud, including because of legacy
.. All costs associated with collecting, processing and storing Citizenship Information
..this Order does not breach the restrictions set out in section of the
.. All costs associated with NZSISs access to Citizenship Information within the Citizenship
..this Order does not limit the rights and freedoms in the New Zealand Bill of
..the consultation process described in section of the SWERL Act has been
.. All costs associated with dealing with a breach of this agreement will be met by the party
..the draft Order has been reviewed by the Severe Weather Events Recovery
.Under section of the SWERL Act, I am required to be satisfied of certain
Cavendish Business Park, Christchurch
A refresh of definitions has been completed as part of the redesign of the cloud
Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Te Pou Tarwaho Hua Outcomes Framework The Department of Internal Afairs has developed and continues to refine its organisational strategy. Called Mtou Mahi, this strategy includes our purpose, five outcomes and the priorities for how we will make a diference over time for people and society. The outcomes framework has been expanded with the addition of a new outcome for MoriCrown relationships. The other outcomes developed for the Strategic Intentions remain in place. This strategy now also includes the diference we are aiming to make over a year time horizon. These represent what success will look like over the longterm. Our purpose The Department of Internal Afairs serves and connects people, communities and government to build a safe, prosperous and respected nation. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Outcomes Framework Our Purpose To serve and c onnect people, communities and g overnment to build a safe, prosperous, respected nation Oranga hap, iwi and Iwi, hap andMori is improved equitable and thrivingpartnership New Zealand is a People can easily wellfunctioning access the services democracy across and information central and local they need government People s sense of belonging and collective memory builds an inclusive New Zealand communities across New Zealand are safe, resilient and through an enduring, positive MoriCrown Our outcomes for New Ze alanders Whia te hn tore o te mauri atua, hei oranga m te mauri tng ata Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
However, there is not currently Par liamentary support for lowering the voting age for parliamentary elections to . Pr eparing and progressing a bill that has no prospect of passing into law would be a costly and timeconsuming exercise that would not lead to practical change.
Ministerial, Monitoring and Capability Current structure
Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
The Department of Internal Affairs had discussions with the Office of the Privacy Commissioner particularly about t he availability of youth electors personal information via electoral rolls and other data sharing mechanisms in the legislation (for exam ple, access to electors information for research purposes).
Total distributions to the racing codes fell from . million in to . million in . A drop of million or .. Figures are from the TAB Annual Report , p.. The partnership was established under section () of the Racing Industry Act with Ministerial approval. qwkdm ()(b)(ii) Regulatory Impact Assessment b. an additional added to the minimum guaranteed funding,
We seek agreement to four proposals that will provide clarity to the Policy, support
agreed that water services entities must set out their charges in an annual tariff list;
approve the following increase to appropriations to implement the policy decision s in recommendation s and above; m increase(decrease) Vote Health Minister of Health (m) (m) (m) (m) out years (m) Departmental Output Expense: Managing the Purchasing of Services (funded by revenue Crown) . . . Nondepartmental Output Expense Problem Gambling Services : . . . Total Operating . . . note the following forecasting change to the problem gambling levy , as a result of the decision in recommendation above m increase(decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue (m) (m) (m) (m) out years (m) NonTax Revenue: Problem Gambling Levy (.) (.) (.) (.) Total Operating (.) (.) (.) (.) note that the above changes to appropriations are fiscally neutral to the Crown over time, as the problem gambling levy reimburses the costs of this activity ; Publication of the Ministrys Strategy approve the publication of the Ministry of Healths Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm to , after Budget day, and subject to any necessary minor editing and formatting changes ; Issuing drafting instructions invite the Minister of Internal Affairs to issue draf ting instructions for problem gambling levy regulations to be made under the Gambling Act for the to period. Authorised for lodgement Hon Tracey Martin Hon Jenny Salesa Minister of Internal Affairs Associate Minister of Health wzrxijjr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
authorised the Minister of Justice to make minor and consequen tial policy decisions that may arise during the drafting process;
invite the Minister of Justice to issue drafting instructions to give effect to the decisions in these recommendations;
note the Department of Internal Affairs, in partnership with Statistics NZ and the Data
noted that the Department of Internal Affairs, in partnership with Statistics New Zealand
service delivery offices
. Consultation with IGIS and PCDMSt
. Fees costs .
. How to view this document
. How to view this document . .
. In December , Cabinet agreed to undertake two stages of legislative change that
. In addition, there have been unforeseen andor higher costs stemming from security
. Once all legal and policy analysis has been undertaken, proposals will be included in
. Review of this Agreement
. Review of this agreement
. The Department will ensure resources are provided to support the development of an
. When assessing evidential sufficiency, Solicitors must apply the test in the SolicitorGenerals Prosecution Guidelines, namely that the evidence that can be adduced in Court is sufficient to provide a reasonable prospect of conviction.
.. Before entering into this DAA, the Parties consulted with and invited comment from the
.The Review Panel considered that the Minister might reasonably consider the
. Water Services Authority Taumata Arowai (WSA) Weekly Report Council Outreach The WSA have had strong council engagement following the launch of outreach initiated through an email from its Chief Executive, Allan Prangnell to all council m ayors and chief executives encouraging councils to engage with the WSA if they wish to clarify its regulatory approach. The Local Government New Zealand (LGNZ) conference provided an opportunity to build relationships further with elected council members and chief executives in attendance. In addition to informal discussions at the LGNZ conference, Allan Prangnell and members of the WSA team met with the following Mayors and Chief Executives while they were in Wellington during this period: Nelson City Council Mayor, Nick Smith ; Clutha District Council Mayor , Byran Cadogan; Taranaki Regional Council Chief Executive , Steve Ruru; Central Hawkes Bay District Council Mayor and LGNZ Rural Sector Chair , Alex Walker ; Matamata Piako District Council Mayor , Adrienne Wilcock , and Chief Executive,
A summary of proposed changes to the Policy and supporting arrangements are
December meeting agenda and papers
December Meeting Summary
Further work has identified the changes that need to be made in relation to enrolment for juvenile offenders. We propose that the Bill will match the current process for prisoners who are ye ars old or older, as far as possible . The only notable difference is that the responsibilities mentioned in paragraph above will sit with either the pris on manager, or the Chief Executive of Oranga Tamariki, depending on whether the or yearold is being held in prison or in a youth justice residence. The Electoral Act requires prison managers to communicate with a prisoner in a way that the prisoner can reasonab ly be expected to understand, when explaining electoral rights and collecti ng information for enrolment. The same requirement will apply to both prison managers and the Chief Executive of Oranga Tamariki when they are assisting youth electors.
Public sector capability and capacity to transition to cloud has been identified as a
The Office of the Privacy Commi ssioner understands the arguments about electoral roll information being publicly av ailable for the purposes of electoral integrity. However, the Office also encourages further consideration of whether any modifications to the exis ting settings for the electoral roll are needed for young electors, noting that their age may create particular vulnerabilities. The Office may choose to make a submission to the select committee on these matters.
The draft Bill introduces new age tiers where previously there was a single age of eligibility for all aspects of elections. This places new limits on the right to be free from discrimination on the basis of age (protected by section of NZBORA). It introduces differential treatment between people aged years and older, and people ag ed or yearsold, in relation to voting in alcohol licensing trust elections and candidacy for local elections.
The response notes that the Governm ent has decided that the best way forward is to introduce a bill to lo wer the voting age to in local elections. It also notes the other proposed age limits in the Bill (for example, a minimum age of for voting for, or being a member of, an alcohol licensing trust is to be retained).
Victoria Avenue, Palmerston North Central, Palmerston North .
agreed that some charges may be set with reference to an hourly rate;
authorise the Minister of Justice to ma ke minor and consequential policy decisions that may arise dur ing the drafting process;
direct officials from the Ministry for the Environment, Ministry for Business,
directed officials from the Ministry for the Environment, Ministry of Business, Innovation
inperson workshops with iwihap and their local govt partners
noted that the Parliamentary Couns el Office will make any t echnical or consequential amendments that may be necessary;
. Cabinet has previously agreed that statutory inquiries are an all of government
. Dispute resolution .
. If there is sufficient evidence for a prosecution, then it must be considered whether a prosecution is required in the public interest.
. If transition provisions remain, Taumata Arowai would continue to resource the
. No further consultation on these proposals in this paper has been undertaken at this
. Overview of operational processes
. Overview of operational processes .
. Publication of this agreement
. The Stage changes to support councils ahead of the local elections were
. Variations to this Agreement including the Memorandum Of
. Variations to this agreement including the Memorandum of Understanding
.. This DAA will be on the NZSIS and DA websites.
.. The PIA will be on the NZSIS and DA websites.
.The Committee recommended that I consider whether Clauses and of this
. Water Services Authority Taumata Arowai (WSA) Weekly Report
After those discussions took place, t he interim report from the Independent Review of Electoral Law was released. That report contains draft recommendations to no longer make parli amentary electoral rolls and master rolls available for public inspection. On ce the final report from the Independent Review is completed, the Govern ment may be a need to consider how electoral roll provisions for local elections should be aligned with any changes to parliamentary roll provisions. Section ()(h) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE The Office of the Privacy Commissioner has also noted that the current provisions in the Electoral Act , relating to disclosure of identifiable information about individual electors to third parties for research purposes, raise larger questions that are probably best considered as part of the Independent Review of Electoral Law. In the interim report the review panel has made a draft recommendat ion to retain access for social scientific and health research, but with tighter controls on data access and use, and a stronger ethics approval process. Consultation The Ministry of Justice, Treasury, Te Puni Kkiri, Statistics NZ, the Ministry of Education, Whaikaha Ministry for Disabled People, the Ministry for Pacific Peoples, the Ministry for Women, the Ministry for Ethnic Commun ities, the Ministry of Youth Development, Oranga Tamariki, the Department of Corrections, the Ministry for the Environment, the Electoral Commission and the Office of the Privacy Commiss ioner, were consulted on the draft Bill. The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (Policy Advisory Group) was informed. Immigration New Zealand, Waka Kotahi and the Ministry of Social Development have been consulted on the changes that are likely to be needed to information sharing arrangeme nts. Local Governme nt New Zealand, and the Taituara (Local Government Professionals) Electoral Reference Group were also consulted on the draft Bill. Bay of Plenty Regional Council, Christchurch City Council, Gore District Council, Masterton District Council, South Taranaki District Council and South Wairarapa District Council were consulted on consequential amendments to local Acts for their areas. The policy proposals in the Bill have previously been discussed with the Government caucus and the final version of the Bill will be considered by caucus prior to introduction. On June my office provided a copy of the draft Bill to the leaders of each of the other arlia t:.Mr. ide Binding on the Crown Cabinet Circular () : Acts Binding the Crown: Procedures for Cabinet Decision notes that bills that are amending existing Acts will generally follow the position of the principal Act on whether the Act is binding on the Crown. IN CONFIDENCE Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E
Allan Prangnell, supported by the WSAs operational and technical teams, will continue an active programme of engagements over the coming months as part of an effort to reset our supplier outreach. Data underpinning the Drinking Water Regulation Report Following the updat e in the last Status Report , the WSA has a list of council supplies and each supplys performance against the categories identified in the Drinking Water Regulation Report on its website. Drinking Water Quality Assurance Rules ( DWQA Rules) consultation first phase The WSA intend s to conduct targeted consultation on the changes to the DWQA Rules for supplies with fewer than people, commencing in mid September. Any changes to the DWQA Rules are proposed to take effect from January . To inform the water services sector about the upcoming first phase of the DWQA Rules review, the WSA will be sending a newsletter and an email to suppliers from its Alan Prangnell . Communications are expect ed to be sent by September . Contact: Sara McFall
Centrallocal government Steering Committee meetings
February meeting agenda and papers
Further work is required on the development of the TF Authoritys complaints and dispute resolution operating model, before we can determine whether regulations are required to support the establishment and implementation of accessible, fair, timely , and cost effective complaints and dispute resolution arrangements. This work will include considering what role, if any, an external alternative dispute resolution provider could play to support or complement the Authoritys compla ints investigation and compliance management functions. Complaints and dispute resolution process Figure highlights key elements of the complaints and dispute resolution process provided for in the Act. Complaints must be about breaches : Under the Act the TF Authority is charged with addressing complaints received from any person that believes a TF provider has breached the provisions of the Act, the rules, the regulations , or the terms of use for the accreditation mark . The Complainant must try and reso lve a complaint directly with the TF Provider before involving the TF Authority: Complainants are expected to make reasonable efforts to resolve a complaint directly with the TF provider concerned before involving the TF Authority. This should involve usi ng a TF providers internal complaints resolution process and utilise any disputes resolution scheme or process that the TF provider is a party to th rough their membership of a particular industry. Preliminary Assessment : When the TF Authority receives a c omplaint it will complete a preliminary assessment. The assessment process will include providing the TF provider with the opportunity to comment on the complaint. The preliminary assessment can result in the TF Authority: referring the complaint (in full or in part) to the Ombudsman, the Privacy Commissioner, the Inspector General of Intelligence and Security or another officeholder when, following consultation with those officeholders, the TF Authority determines the complaint falls within their jurisdi ction and would be more appropriately dealt with by them; informing the parties to the complaint that it will not consider the complaint further and explaining its reasons ( the reasons for not further considering a complaint are outlined in section of t he Act); or deciding that a breach appears to have occurred.
May , Briefing: Final Cabinet paper : Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Registering Nominated Sex) Regulations Some parts of this information would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has be en withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it.
November , CABMIN Minute, Report of the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee: Period Ended November . November , ECOMIN Minute, Local Government System Improvements: Policy Decisions. November , Cabinet paper, Local Government System Improvements: Policy Decisions.
November , Cabinet Minute CAB MIN , Report of the Cabinet Legislation
November , in accordance with Standing Order .
Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
See Prism: Human Rights issues relating to Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity and Expression, and Sex Ch aracteristics (SOGIESC) in Aotearoa New Zealand A report with recommendations https:www.hrc.co.nzfilesHRCPRISMSOGIESCReportJuneFINAL.pdf Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . the Yogyakarta Principles (a set of nonbinding international principles on sexual orientation and gender identity developed by human rights experts) principle recommends that i f sex and gender information is registered, it is based on an accessible self identification process with no eligibility criteria , such as medical treatment. . The Attorney General vetted both the Bill as introduced and, subsequently, the self identification provisions recommended by Select Committee under the Bill of Rights Act (the BORA). On both occasions the changes were assessed as consistent with the BORA adding that th e self identification provisions satisfied initial concerns that the requirement for medical treatment could constitute intra ground discrimination based on sex. A SOP would not usually require a BORA vet.
The Ministry of Justice and the Department of Internal Affairs consider that, based on the evidence and policy justifications currently available, the limits in the Bill on the right to freedom from age discrimination have not been justified. A brief summary of the analysis is attached as Appendix A.
The response encourages future Parliaments to consider lowering the voting age for parliamentary elections. It al so notes the opportunity for the Government to consider the issue agai n following the Independent Review of Electoral Laws final report which will be pr esented to the Minister of Justice by the end of the year.
There is an opportunity to include Te Ao Mori perspectives in the Policy. The current
agreed that charges which are sufficiently unusual or customised do not need to be on the tariff list;
agreed that the draft Bill be shared with Local Government New Zealand and Taituar Local Government Professionals on terms consistent with the A ttorneyGeneral Protocol for Release of Draft Government Legislation outside the Crown.
direct officials from the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, and
directed officials from the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, and the
note that the Parliamentary Counsel Offi ce will make any technical or consequential amendments t hat may be necessary; and
Year Old Convicted on Child Pornography Charge
. Consideration of public interest will include any relevant factors in the SolicitorGenerals Prosecution Guidelines, including costeffectiveness.
. I seek Cabinets agreement to out of cycle changes to budget baselines within Vote
. If you agree to remove the transition provision in the Act that requires suppliers to be
. Publics right of access
. Review of this Agreement
. Review of this Agreement . .
. Safeguards to protect privacy
. Safeguards to protect privacy . . .
. Term and Termination
. We recommend that you:
. in the event of dispute the Parties will consult, through their nominated organisational
. removed all mechanisms for binding polls to be held on the establishment of
.. Nothing in this DAA. affects an individuals right to make an information privacy re uest
. Pending resolution of any dispute the RegistrarGeneral or Secretary may, with a
. provided all councils with an extended timeframe until May in which to
., Nothing in this DAA affects an individuals right to make a complaint to the inspector
.. Information Handling
.. All Parties agree to keep each other informed of any complaints arising from the use of
.. Privacy Act Requests
.Clause of this Order still requires a statement of service provision, under
Te Tiriti o Waitangi
I recommend that the Committee: note that on December CAB MIN refers, Cabinet agreed to: . specify another gender and a non binary gender as sex and gender markers that can be nominated on a birth certificate; and . specify that suitably qualified third parties that can provide a letter of support for children and young peoples applications are registered doctors, registered psychologists, registered psychotherapists, registered nurses, registered social workers, qualifying counsellors; and a person (aged years or older) who has known the child or young person for months or more; agree to replace a non binary gender with non binary and remove another gender ; note that the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Registering Nominated Sex) Regulations will give effect to the decisions referred to in recommendation ; authorise the submission to the Executive Council of the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Registering Nominated Sex) Regulations ; ()(h) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E note that the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Registering Nominated Sex) Regulations come into force on June ; note that a waiver of the day rule is sought on the grounds that: . it needs to commence early to comply with statutory obligations; and . it only provides benefits to the public; agree to waive the day rule so that regulations can come into force on June .
In the Make it proceedings the Supreme Court did not consider the age for candidacy, because this had not been raised by Make It incorporated. However, when considering discrimination in respect of voting rights, the Court noted evidence dated August provided by the then Childrens Commissioner, in response to a request from the High Court. The Commissioners report referred to a study of over , people aged between and years across countries which:
The Government Response must be presented to the House by August .
Under DIAs Mana rite agreement, we directed officials from DIA to work in
agree that the draft Bill can be shared wit h Local Government New Zealand and Taituar Local Government Professionals on terms consistent with the AttorneyGeneral Protocol for Release of Draft Government Legislation outside the Crown.
agreed to enable passthrough billing arrangements, with territorial authorities collecting charges on behalf of the water services entity, in exchange for the reasonable costs of providing the service, similar to the Infrastructure Funding and Financing Act ;
direct the GCDO, supported by the National Cyber Policy Office, National Cyber
directed the GCDO, supported by the National Cyber Policy Office, National Cyber
drag s on co uncil revenue growth. Therefore, debt will increase, but no t materiall y weaken,
drags on council revenue gro wth. Therefore, debt will increase, but not materially weaken,
https :www.melbournewater.com.auwater data andeducationwater facts andhistoryhistory andheritagetimeline our history
Intra ground discrimination is where there is differential treatment between peopl e who exhibit the same protected ground. In this case, there is differential treatment between people who are willing and able to undergo medical treatment and those unwilling or unable to do so. ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Recommendations The Minister of Internal Affairs recommends that the Social Wellbeing Committee: . note the intention to progress the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Bill in , including the self identification provisions ; Introducing a self identification process to amend registered sex . agree that the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Bill be amended to: . remove the requirement to obtain a declaration fr om the Family Court stating it is appropriate for a persons registered sex to be amended ; . remove the requirement for applicants to provide evidence of medical treatment, that has enable d them to physically conform with the sex they want recorded on their birth certificate; . introduce a self identification process where people apply directly to the Registrar General of Births, Deaths and Marriages to amend their registered sex ; . require an application to amend registered sex to include a st atutory declaration verifying the person: .. wants the sex marker on their birth certificate to match their identified gender; .. intends to live as a person of this gender; and .. understands the consequences of the application; . allow a range of sex marker s reflecting genders other than the binary (male and female) and that these can be prescribed in regulations ; . remove the intersex marker option ; . allow people to amend their registered sex multiple times, but that subsequent applications may need to meet addi tional requirements that will be prescribed in regulations; . allow people to revert to their sex at birth without the need to meet any additional requirements that may usually be needed for subsequent amendments ; . exclude anyone whose birth cannot be registered in New Zealand from the definition of eligible person; . require a statutory review of the self identification provisions five years after enactment ; Applications to amend registered sex for children and young people . agree that the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Bill be amended to: . remove the requirement for children and young people to obtain a declaration from the Family Court stating that it is appropriate for their registered sex to be amended ; . remove the requirement f or children and young people to provide evidence of medical treatment that has enabled them to physically conform with the sex they want recorded on their birth certificate ; Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . introduce a self identification process where children and young people (under years) can apply directly to the Registrar General of Births, Deaths and Marriages to amend their registered sex ; . require that applications for children and young people years of age and under must be: .. made on behalf of the child or young person , with t heir consent, by their guardian; and .. be accompanied by a letter of support from a suitably qualified third party; . require that young people aged and years of age can apply on their own behalf and must be accompanied by: .. written consent from their guardian; or .. a letter of support from a suitably qualified third party ; . require that the third parties who can provide the letter of support must be suitably qualified and be prescribed in regulations; . clarify that the Registrar General can give effect to Family Court decisions under the Care of Children Act relating to guardians refusing consent to a or year old amending their registered sex ; . clarify that the Registrar General can give effect to Family Court decisions under the Care of Children Act where there are disputes between guardians to a child or young person changing their registered sex; Supplementary order paper to the Bill . agree to a regulation making power to give effect to the changes in recommendations ., . , . and any other matters required to give effect to a selfidentification process , which align with the overall policy intent of the proposals ; . agree to a supplementary order paper to give effect to the changes in recommendations and ; . note the self ident ification supplementary order paper will be referred to Select Committee for consideration; Issuing of drafting instructions . invite the Minister of Internal Affairs to authorise the Department of Internal Affairs to issue drafting instructions to the Parli amentary Counsel Office in accordance with the decisions in this paper; . authorise the Minister of Internal Affairs to make decisions on any minor and technical matters to do with self identification that align with the overall policy intent of the proposal s; Operational and technical amendments to the Bill unrelated to self identification . note that other minor and technical amendments to the Bill will be introduced through a second supplementary order paper to be tabled at the committee of the whole House; Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . authorise the Minister of Internal Affairs to make decisions on any minor and technical operational amendments to give effect to the parts of the Bill not associated with self identification ; . invite the Minister of Internal Affairs to authorise the Depart ment of Internal Affairs to issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office in accordance with recommendation ; Communications . note the Minister of Internal Affairs intends to announce her intent to progress the Bill, including the self identification provisions ; Implications for other portfolios . note that the Department of Internal Affairs is working with the Department of Corrections on the use of birth certificates to determine a persons placement in a male or female prison; and . note there may be financial implications across government where agencies use birth register information and need to update their IT systems. Authorised for lodgement Hon Jan Tinetti Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Appendix A: Risks and mitigations associated with introducing a self identification process Risk Likelihood Impact on introducing self identification Mitigations No broad public consultation on selfidentification High No broad public consultation has occurred. Low Broad public views have been canvased through other mediums. A good understanding of broad public views on selfidentification has been developed based on: submissions received at Select Committee in ; considerable public debate; and related work by other agencies (eg StatsNZs work updating the statistical standards for gender, sex and variations of sex ch aracteristics ). The views have been taken into account in developing the policy proposals. Referring the SOP to Select Committee will provide another opportunity for the public to provide feedback on the self identification provisions. Young people and Mori, Pacific and ethnic communities views on a self identification process have not been sought High No consultation with these communities has occurred . Medium These communities may express disappointment at not being involved in policy development , where their views would have been beneficial. Targeted efforts will be made to reach out to young people and Mori, Pacific and ethnic communities to support them to access and engage in the Select Committee process. Engagement will be undertaken with youn g people and Mori, Pacific, and ethnic communities as part of regulation development to explore options for culturally inclusive sex markers and appropriate third parties who can provide the letter of support . Opposition from some individuals and groups to a selfidentification model may affect the progression of the Bill High Opponents are critical that gender self identification: replaces a robust definition of sex; undermines sex based protections and will result in men accessing wom enonly spaces; and creates opportunities for predatory men to find ways to reach vulnerable women.Medium Groups opposed to selfidentification will likely organise public campaigns that will generate significant media interest. These could delay the progress of the Bill (eg through a substantial number of Select Committee submissions) and provide misinformation about the changes it makes. Debate on this issue is likely to be divisive and could negatively impact the wellbeing of some individuals. There is no evidence to suggest that a selfidentification process will affect how people access women only spaces (eg changing rooms) and entitlements (eg sports teams) as: o gender is already represented on passports without evidence of th is being abused; and o a birth certificate is not considered conclusive evidence of someones sex or gender and is not required to access women only spaces or entitlements. Any perceived risk that people would abuse the process is mitigated by: o the requirement to fill a statutory declaration form falsifying a statutory declaration form is a criminal offence and can lead to imprisonment for up to three years; and o making it clearer in the Bill that birth certif icates should not be taken as conclusive evidence of someones sex or gender. Communications material has been developed to manage expectations, likely questions and explain the rationale for a self identification process. Officials will be available to support Select Committee to make the submissions process safe for all parties and to support the wellbeing of those who want to submit. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Appendix B: Regulatory Impact Statement Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN Cabinet Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Introducing a SelfIdentification Process to Recognise Gender on Birth Certificates Portfolio Internal Affairs On May , following reference from the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee, Cabinet: Background noted the intention to progress the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Bill (the Bill) in , including the selfidentification provisions; Introducing a selfidentification process to amend registered sex agreed that the Bill be amended to: . remove the requirement to obtain a declaration from the Family Court stating it is appropriate for a persons registered sex to be amended; . remove the requirement for applicants to provide evidence of medical treatment that has enabled them to physically conform with the sex they want recorded on their birth certificate; . introduce a selfidentification process where people apply directly to the Registrar General of Births, Deaths and Marriages to amend their registered sex; . require an application to amend registered sex to include a statutory declaration verifying the person: .. wants the sex marker on their birth certificate to match their identified gender; .. intends to live as a person of this gender; and .. understands the consequences of the application; . allow a range of sex markers reflecting genders other than the binary (male and female) and that these can be prescribed in regulations; . remove the intersex marker option; I N C O N F I D E N C E mtyzjitr :Document Proacively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN . allow people to amend their registered sex multiple times, but that subsequent applications may need to meet additional requirements that will be prescribed in regulations; . allow people to revert to their sex at birth without the need to meet any additional requirements that may usually be needed for subsequent amendments; . exclude anyone whose birth cannot be registered in New Zealand from the definition of eligible person; . require a statutory review of the selfidentification provisions five years after enactment; Applications to amend registered sex for children and young people agreed that the Bill be amended to: . remove the requirement for children and young people to obtain a declaration from the Family Court stating that it is appropriate for their registered sex to be amended; . remove the requirement for children and young people to provide evidence of medical treatment that has enabled them to physically conform with the sex they want recorded on their birth certificate; . introduce a selfidentification process where children and young people (under years) can apply directly to the RegistrarGeneral of Births, Deaths and Marriages to amend their registered sex; . require that applications for children and young people years of age and under must be: .. made on behalf of the child or young person, with their consent, by their guardian; .. be accompanied by a letter of support from a suitably qualified third party; . require that young people aged and years of age can apply on their own behalf and must be accompanied by: .. written consent from their guardian; or .. a letter of support from a suitably qualified third party; . require that the third parties who can provide the letter of support be prescribed in regulations; . clarify that the RegistrarGeneral can give effect to Family Court decisions under the Care of Children Act relating to guardians refusing consent to a or year old amending their registered sex; . clarify that the RegistrarGeneral can give effect to Family Court decisions under the Care of Children Act where there are disputes between guardians to a child or young person changing their registered sex; I N C O N F I D E N C E mtyzjitr Proacively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN Supplementary order paper to the Bill agreed to a regulation making power to give effect to the amendments in paragraphs ., ., . and any other matters required to give effect to a selfidentification process, which align with the overall policy intent; agreed to a supplementary order paper to give effect to the changes in paragraphs and above; noted that the selfidentification supplementary order paper will be referred to a Select Committee for consideration; Issuing of drafting instructions invited the Minister of Internal Affairs to issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office to give effect to the above decisions; authorised the Minister of Internal Affairs to make decisions on any minor and technical matters to do with selfidentification that align with the overall policy intent in the submission under CABSUB; Operational and technical amendments to the Bill unrelated to selfidentification noted that other minor and technical amendments to the Bill will be introduced through a second supplementary order paper to be tabled at the committee of the whole House; authorised the Minister of Internal Affairs to make decisions on any minor and technical operational amendments to give effect to the parts of the Bill not associated with self identification; invited the Minister of Internal Affairs to issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office in accordance with paragraph above; Communications noted that the Minister of Internal Affairs intends to announce her intent to progress the Bill, including the selfidentification provisions; Implications for other portfolios noted that the Department of Internal Affairs is working with the Department of Corrections on the use of birth certificates to determine a persons placement in a male or female prison; noted that there may be financial implications across government where agencies use birth register information and need to update their IT systems. Michael Webster Secretary of the Cabinet I N C O N F I D E N C E mtyzjitr Proacively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E SWCMIN Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Introducing a SelfIdentification Process to Recognise Gender on Birth Certificates Portfolio Internal Affairs On May , the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee referred the submission under SWCSUB to Cabinet on May for further consideration. Rachel Clarke Committee Secretary Present: Officials present from: Rt Hon Jacinda Ardern Hon Grant Robertson Hon Kelvin Davis Hon Dr Megan Woods Hon Carmel Sepuloni (Chair) Hon Andrew Little Hon Kris Faafoi Hon Peeni Henare Hon Jan Tinetti Hon Dr Ayesha Verrall Hon Aupito William Sio Hon Priyanca Radhakrishnan Hon Marama DavidsonOffice of the Prime Minister Office of the SWC Chair Officials Committee for SWC Office of the Associate Minister of Housing (Homelessness) I N C O N F I D E N C E mtyzjitr :Document Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . paragraph to clarify that while no changes to the prescribed fee for changing registered sex is expected in the short term, the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Fees) Regulations will need to be reviewed following Te Ara Manaaki. The Cabinet paper needs to be accompanied by a Regulatory Impact Statement . Attached to the Cabinet Paper at Appendix A is the accompanying Regulatory Impact statement (RIS). All policy proposals taken to Cabinet that include a government regulatory proposal must be accompanied by a RIS. A RIS is a government agency document that summarises the agencys best advice on the impact of a proposal. A RIS is approved by the responsible agency and must be independently assessed. . The Departments RIS on introducing a selfidentification process has been reviewed by the Departments Regulatory Impact Analysis Panel in accordance with the quality assurance criteria set out in the CabGuide. It has been assessed as partially meeting the quality assurance criteria. The RIS did not fully meet the criteria as there has not been full public consultation on introducing selfidentification. Partially meets is sufficient to allow for the Cabinet paper to be considered by SWC. The Cabinet paper is ready for consideration by SWC . Subject to your approval, the Cabinet paper should be lodged by on May with Cabinet Office for consideration at SWC on May . Officials will be available to support you at SWC. . A quick reference guide demonstrating the key changes between the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationship Registration (BDMRR) Act , the BDMRR Bill, and the SOP, and how the process would apply to children are attached as Appendix B . Suggested talking points to complement the quick reference guide are attached at Appendix C. We recommend that you announce your intention to introduce a selfidentification process and refer the changes to Select Committee . We consider that an announcement soon after Cabinet approval is important. Proactive communications clearly setting out the rationale for the changes and what they involve will help mitigate any opposition to selfidentification. Providing information on the changes early will also be important so interested individuals and communities can prepare to engage with the changes at Select Committee. . Early communication will also provide sufficient time to implement an engagement strategy encouraging more young people and people from Mori, Pacific and ethnic communities to participate in the select committee process. On May we will provide you with a briefing seeking your agreement to our recommended engagement strategy (briefing IA refers). . Attached as Appendix D is a draft press release detailing your intention to introduce a selfidentification process to recognise gender on birth certificates.
. Although not recommended, if you wish to retain the transition provision and proceed
. At the local elections, only three councils had Mori wards or Mori
. Departmental Programme Representatives
. Departmental Programme Representatives
. I propose that the total cost of . million is provided through a combination of
. Minor amendments to the Agreement
. Minor amendments to the Agreement . . .
. Pursuant to paragraph . of the SolicitorGenerals Prosecution Guidelines, prosecution decisions must be made independently.
. Reasonable assistance provided
. Reasonable assistance provided . .
.On the other hand, having these councils provide the information that Section
, within days of Cabinets decision.
by any person towards the support of a qualifying child, whether under a formula
) on service overseas.
, Part A of the Privacy Act and Section () of the Passports Act
Data Centres and Data Transmission Networks Analysis IEA
October to December
noted that the Local Government Act (LGA), requires all councils to adopt a year
Cabinet agreed to establish Phase of the Royal Commission on June
As at June , there were , venues operating , machines. This shows a trend for venues and machines decreasing, as venues peaked at more than , in the late s and machines peaked at , in June . Despite the decline in venues and machine s, total spend continues to increase. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Statement What is the policy problem or opportunity . New Zealanders are spending almost a billion dollars every year at the pokies and t he level of harm associated with playing pokies is increasing and wi ll continue to do so without Government intervention. This gambling harm has a negative effect on individuals , t heir whnau, friends and the wider community. This harm is also disproportionately affecting Mori, Pacific peoples and other population groups. . The key reasons for harm are the time spent gambling and the money lost. These affect people differently. In , about . of New Zealand adults self reported some harm from their own gambling in the previous year. Gambling harm is widely believed to be underreported, in part due to the perceived stigma . . In addition, we know that people who have a problem with gambling on pokies are not usually identified in pubs and clubs. According to the Health and Lifestyles Survey , over of pokies reported that they had not any interaction with staff about their gambling. Interactions included: know my name or recognise me; monitor the pokie room; spoken to me with a concern about my gambling; given me a leaflet on gambling support services. . The current regulations do not ensure adequate use of some of the key levers for reducing pokies harm controls in the gam bling venue, restrictions on machine features, and enforcement tools to drive compliance. The research and practice advice, such as the guidance issued by Te Hiringa Hauora have evolved since the Regulations were created in and difference approaches are recommended as best practice in terms of venue management and game features. . S ome people are experiencing, or at risk of, a level of harm that could have been prevented or minimised. . A recent District Court decision has also identified that more prescriptive requirements are needed. A Christchurch patron with a n addiction to pokies , spent around , of earthquake insurance money on pokies over three years, before passing away suddenly. The manager of one of the venues he frequented was prosecuted for not identifying his problem. In a day period, hed spent over , there. On one single visit, he made EFTPOS withdrawals totalling ,. Towards the end, he was there every second day. The venue missed all the signs of his addiction. . The decision Department of Internal Affairs v Suppressed expendexpendNZDC has shown, the need to set more prescriptive requirements for identifying gambling harm in venues. To summarise: the venue manager was charged with failing to take reasonable steps to ensure that the venues harm minimisation policy was used to identify a problem gambler , the reasonable steps included having systems to track multiple cash withdrawals and regular long play durations , the Judge held that as these steps were not included in the harm minimisation policy, they were not self evident requirements, and the decision noted that these steps could be prescribed by regulations and that venue staff and gamblers would benefit from this. . The current light touch regulation model, where societies and venues have been expected to develop and apply strong harm minimisation measures, has not been successful . A more prescriptive approach to harm minimisation could reduce the harm New Zealanders experience from gambling on pokies. Advocates in the harm prevention and minimisation sector, as well as local authorities, have been asking for stronger measures for some time. . Preventing and minimising harm is one of the purposes of the Act and the sole purpose of the Regulations. The Act contemplates a substantially higher level of regulation in relation to Class gambling than is currently used. Detailed regulation making powers are provided for : harm prevention and minimisation (section ); gaming machines (section ); admission to, and exclusion from, gambling venues (section ); exclusion of problem gamblers (section ); and infringement offences for the breach of any regulations (section ). Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Statement . The range of regulation making powers provide an opportunity to create a stronger harm minimisation approach. Government intervention, by way of strengthening harm minimisation requirements, which could reduce the harm on individuals and their communities. In line with the scope, we could: set more explicit direction for venues and societies ; providing more player information on pokie games and make features less addictive; and providing supporting offences and penalties for the regulations. What objectives are sought in relation to th e policy problem . The core objective is to reduce the level of individual (and, by extension, second hand) gambling harm being experienced from pokies in venues. Our more specific objectives , in line with the Ministers scope decision s, are to: make it easier for venues and societies to reduce harm ; make pokie machines safer ; and creates consequences for breaches of the regulations . . The secondary objective, for the next stage of work post consultation, will be to ensure any proposed regulations are cost effective and not overburdening for the organisations impacted by them (societies, venues and the Regulator).
Australia Post has separately estimated that digital identity would be worth approximately . of Australias GDP approximately billion. In many of the countries reviewed the benefits were based on a more limited array of attributes than is being considered for digital identity in New Zealand. PROACTIVELY RELEASED INCONFIDENCE
Classification (Channel ) OR audit and review (Channels ,) . Assess items for classification (Option ) OR sample of selfrated items for accuracy and consistency see Note People , , , . Review and amend rating tool logic as necessary People , , Total costs for Activity , , ,
Contents Introduction . Introduction from Chief Executive Paul James . Introduction from Suzanne Doig, Deputy Chief Executive, Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy . Why change is necessary . Final decisions have been made . Continuing to support our kaimahi . Section Two: Branch Context and Background . Section Three: Final Decisions . Overview of confirmed changes . . Direct reports to the Deputy Chief Executive, Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy . . Regulatory Assurance and Stewardship unit . . Strategy and Branch Services . . Ministerial, Monitoring and Capability . . Policy Group . . Digital Safety . . Regulatory Services . Direct reports to the General Manager, Regulatory Services . AML Directorate . Gambling Directorate . Investigations and Prosecution function . Strategy and Capability . Strategy, Intelligence and Risk function and Implementation function . Organisation structure charts . Summary of impact on current positions . Confirmed new positions in the final structure . Section Four: Feedback and Responses . Section Five: Transition and Implementation . High Level Timeline . Employee support . Implementation High Level Plan . Section Six: Change protocol . Introduction . Principles . Who does this protocol apply to . Overview . Affected employees . Reconfirmation process . Reassignment and expressions of interest . Reconfirmation or reassignment review process . Appointment to another job permanent employees . Notice . Redundancy . Appendix A: Approach to Working through Expressions of Interest and Alternative Opportunities for Affected Kaimahi . Appendix B: Selection Criteria for Reassignment .
December , CABMIN Minute: Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Terrorist Attack on
Depending on the cloud provider, cloud services can be more secure than traditional
February meeting agenda and papers
February meeting notes
Focus area two: Strengthening our capability This focus area is about ensuring our people, processes and systems are all fit for purpose aligned to our strategy and flexible enough to accommodate change. Strategic initiatives RSGs capability initiatives reflect a strong emphasis on kaimahi development, including tools which support career progression and success planning (for example, the capability framework and workforce plan). They also identify where RSG has identified there may be gaps in terms of either capability or functions and that some work will be undertaken to more fully assess these. The development of a crossRSG ICT roadmap is about ensuring that system groups are individually equipped with the technology resources they need now and for the future, and that every opportunity is taken to maximise existing and future systems for the benefit of all RSG. Managing risk is an important part of RSGs role. An RSG risk tolerance policy will articulate the Groups risk appetite and tolerance, clarifying what constitutes acceptable risktaking so that RSG can more effectively manage risk and take advantage of opportunities as they arise. T argets Key Focus Area Strengthening our capability FiveYear Success Measures of technical capabilities are met across RSG Baseline months (July December )Complete capability framework development and implementation (note that implementation will include training, coaching and onthejob development initiatives) Develop and implement an RSG ICT roadmap Develop and implement an RSG workforce plan Address service design and engagement capability gaps in organisational design months (January June )Continue to develop and mature our capabilities
For example, section of the Commerce Act prohibits acquisitions that would, or would be likely to, substantially lessen competition in a market in N ew Zealand , and sections and allow merger parties to seek clearance or authorisation for acquisitions from the Commerce Commission. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
Frontier Economics (). Review of experience with aggregation in the water sector. Available at https:www.dia.govt.nzdiawebsite.nsfFilesThree waters documentsfileFrontier Economics review ofexperience with aggregationin thewater sector.pdf Productivity Com mission (). National Water Reform : Productivity Commission Draft Report. Available at https:www.pc.gov.auinquiriescompletedwater reform draftwater reform draft.pdf Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua
I welcome the Committees referral of this petition and thank the petitioner for bringing this matter to the Governments attention.
It is an offence under section of the Electoral Act for an eligible person to knowingly or willingly fail to enrol. Failure to enrol could result in a fine of for the first offence and for subsequent offences. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of qlgofb
Legislative objectives are expected to include enabling good governance and management practice, and the delivery of water services that are financially sustainable, safe, resilient, reliable, environmentally sound, and customer responsive. ()(g)(i) ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Next steps . Following your decisions in this paper, we will incorporate these proposals into the July Cabinet paper . We will continue to work through the issues arising from ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of integrating the Chatham Islands water services with Local Water Done Well and will report back to you later in the year. Recommendations . We recommend that you: Exemptions process a) agree that the July Cabinet paper , Local Water Done Well stage : further decisions, can propose the legislation includes an exemptions process containing the features outlined below to enable exemptions to be sought and potentially granted in relation to some of the mandatory requirements that are due to apply to water organisations; YesNo If you agree to the above recommendation b) agree that: EITHER i. exemptions would be approved by the Minister of Local Government (without the need for Cabinet approval) ; YesNo OR ii. exemption approvals would be granted through an Order in Council process, on the recommendation of the Minister of Local Government but including Cabinet approval; YesNo c) agree that the ex emption process (the ability to seekgrant and exemption) would apply to the following requirements: i. current council staff and elected members cannot be appointed to boards; YesNo ii. activities of water organisations will be limited to the provision of water services, and directly related activities; YesNo iii. only councils or consumer trusts can be shareholders of a water organisation; YesNo iv. water organisations must be companies; YesNo v. d) agree that the e xemption process would not apply to the other mandatory requirements for water organisations, which relate to : YesNo i. being s ubject to economic, environment and water quality regulation; ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of ii. being subject to planning and accountability framework for water services; iii. being financially sustainable, water services must be ring fenced; iv. acting consistently with statutory objectives; v. producing stand alone financial statements for water supply, wastewater, and stormwater ; vi. a prohibition on losing control, selling and disposing of significant infrastructure; vii. ensuring shares do not give rights, title, interests in assets, securities or liabilities; viii. ensuring water services assets cannot be used as security (but revenue can); ix. competency based board appointments and appropriate mix of skills, knowledge and experience; x. consumer trusts must represent consumers and their interests; xi. consumer trusts will be responsible for appointing and removing board, and overseeing performance; xii. restrictions on consumer trusts transferring shares; and xiii. consumer trust trustees will be elected by consumers ; e) agree that councils would be required to submit exemption applications to the Secretary for Local Government; YesNo f) agree that the Secretary for Local Government would work with the Commerce Commission, Taumata Arowai and Inland Revenue to provide advice to the Minister of Local Government on a councils exemption application; YesNo g) agree that an exemption application would be assessed based on whether the councils proposal for water services: i. meets the legislative objectives of Local Water Done Well ; YesNo ii. maintains the core requirements that the Minister deems to be non negotiable bottom lines for all water organisations; YesNo iii. will provide water services that are financially sustainable; YesNo Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of iv. satisfies the Minister of Local Government that the financially sustainability of water services would be put at greater risk if the exemption were not granted; YesNo h) agree that the Minister of Local Government, when considering an application for an exemption, can: i. grant an exemption from a requirement; YesNo ii. modify a requirement if a full exemption is not needed; YesNo iii. impose additional conditions on the water organisations; YesNo iv. decline the exemption application; YesNo i) agree that councils that have an exemption application approved and then go on to rely on that exemption when forming a new water organisation must publish the letter from the Minister approving the application; YesNo
Methods . Study procedure The study design was a short term feasibility test. Participants received one Bluetooth card with basic advertising and recording functionality. A subset of participants (n ) al so received an ultrawide band (UWB) Bluetooth device used as a form of ground truth for close cont acts (Figure ). Participants also self reported close contacts in a daily contact diary online (more details are provided in DEL Study Protocol). Figure . The ultra wide band Bluetooth device (left) and prototype Bluetooth card (right).
NISTs definition outlines the cloud model is composed of five characteristics (on
On March Cabinet invited the Mini ster of Justice and me to report back in June with a draft of a bill to lower the voting age for local elections, with the intenti on of seeking agreement to share this with other political parties prior to introduction C ABMIN. Attached to this paper is a draft of the Bill ( Appendix A ). We seek your agreement for the Minister of Local Government to commence crosspar ty consultation on the draft Bill.
On December , Cabinet also agreed that the age for jury service, and for standing as a parliamentary candidate, should remain at . The Minister of Justice noted that this was also an agebased distinction. These ages are derived from the definition of electors as set out in the Electoral Act. Since Cabinet agreed to refocus on local elections, there will be no change to the definition of electors in the Electoral Act, and these ages will remain at . Section ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of usoq
Online gambling is available hours a day via smart devices or computers, providing the ability to immediately re invest winnings and unsupervised use of alcohol, tobacco or drugs (known risk factors), and is available anywhere including in the privacy of peoples homes . DIA Gaming Machines Dashboard, quarter end September . Schu ll, D. (). Addiction by design: Machine gambling in Las Vegas. The amount gamblers pay into pokie machines, less total prizes paid has grown steadily : Reaching million in , dipping to million in ( an atypical year, with the COVID lockdown) and currently tracking at million for the first months of (another atypical year, due to COVID ). Department of Internal Affairs , GMP data. BERL (). Assessment of the effects of Class gambling on wellbeing in New Zealand. Of the million lost to pokie s in , the estimated community return was million. This is just under a percent return.
Ontario Ministry of the Attorney General, Report of the Walkerton Inquiry: A Strategy for Safe Drinking Water
Page of the Select Committees response to Local Government Bill ( No ) faddafddcccdbbaef (www.parliament.nz) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Regulatory Impact Statement What are the poll provisions . Originally, the Act provided options for Mori wards to be established by: council resolution; or majority vote in a binding poll, initiated either by the council itself, or by a petition of electors. . A petition of electors could also be used to demand a poll on a council resolution to establish Mori wards. A valid petition needed to have signatures from at least of electors who were on the electoral roll for that council area at the last triennial election. If the petition was valid, the council was required to hold the poll, and the result was binding for two local government terms. . There is a similar binding poll mechanism in the Act that applies to council decisions about which electoral system will be used (STV or FPP). There is no binding poll mechanism for decisions on other parts of representation arrangements , such as decisions to establish new general wards. . The inclusion of the poll provisions was intended as a mechanism to allow Morielectors to seek Mori wards if the council did not consider it or decided against. However, in practice , the poll provisions were used to challenge council resolutions to establish Mori wards and proved to be an almost insurmountable barrier to their establishment . Between and only two councils established Mori wards using the pr evious process under the Act. Fourteen councils attempted to establish Mori wards, some more than once. Sixteen polls were held, and only one of these was in favour of establishing Mori wards (Wairoa District Council in ). One council (Waikato Regional Council) established Mori wards without a poll beingdemanded by electors. A summary of the outcomes of the processes under the Act is attached as Appendix A. . In an estimated of elected representatives on councils were of Mori descent , compared to a Mori population estimate of .. Over the period from to overall Mori representation on councils had improved, but there was still underrepresentation. For example, following the local elections an estimated . of elected members on councils were of Mori descent , compared to a Mori population estimate of .. These figures to do not reflect substantial variations in the Mori population by region. Mori wards and legislative changes . The previous G overnment amended the Act in to remove the ability for Mori ward decisions to be subject to polls. This meant that councils had the final decision on whether Mori wards were established. That decision would continue to apply for the next two electoral terms (six years) before a council could revisit the decision. . The policy rationale for the legislative changes was to remove the effective elector veto on Mori wards. Under these changes, final responsibility for balancing the various public interests, including minority interests, w ould sit with the councils elected representatives. . Another rationale was that Mori and general wards followed different processes for establishment . A petition followed by a binding poll allowed the public to challenge wards created to represent the Mori population of a district or region. There was no LGNZ, Elected member s profile Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Please note: for individual coaching, kaimahi can access up to a total of three onehour sessions with C Consulting Please note: for individual coaching, kaimahi can access up to a total of three onehour sessions with C Consulting Early Response Team from Ministry of Social Development The Early Response Team (ERT) focuses on getting people into work, getting people the skills they need to do the work and helping them stay employed. ERT will provide support to DIA kaimahi to go through the change process, specifically: linking individuals with qualified Career Specialists free of charge ongoing contact providing access to further education and shortterm training options accessing financial support inbetween jobs. Individuals who are interested in speaking with ERT can email ERT directly for assistance at RedeploymentSupportmsd.govt.nz, with your name, your situation and contact details, and ERT will connect you with their regional team.
Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Refreshing the Cloud First Policy (the Policy) will make it easier for agencies to
Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentTable of Contents Message from Hon Tracey Martin . Introduction . How to have your say . Part I New Zealands classification system . About the Office of Film and Literature Classification . About the Film and Video Labelling Body . About the Review . Objectives . Review timeline . Current funding arrangements . The Government has recently allocated additional funding to OFLC for targeted activities . Regulations state the fees to be paid by commercial organisations, and the circumstances and fees for discounted rates . Issues with the current funding arrangements . Fees for current classification activities are not aligned with costs . Income from existing usercharges is declining . Funding for OFLCs CVoD related activities is needed . Estimates of the costs to operate the classification system . Estimated costs for OFLCs existing classification activities . Estimated OFLC costs for CVoD activities . Cost implications for the sector and organisations eligible for special rates . Part II Options for funding the classification framework . What principles will be used to assess the options . Costrecovery options . Which OFLC costs are covered by the costrecovery options . Costrecovery for current Commercial classifications . Who benefits from current Commercial classifications, and how much . Consumers value rating systems for the information they provide. . Incentives to keep costs low . Other evidence for different approaches to funding New Zealands classification system . Options for feedback . Discounted rates for costrecovery (waivers and reductions) . Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentCostrecovery for OFLCs CVoD activities . Options for feedback . Mechanisms for funding classification activities . Usercharges for current classification activities . A levy for current classification activities . Usercharges for OFLCs CVoD related activities . Levy for OFLCs CVoD related activities . Implementation of a new funding regime . Appendices . Cover photo is courtesy of Mark Tantrum for the Office of Film and Literature Classification. Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentMessage from Hon Tracey Martin Minister of Internal Affairs As New Zealanders, we rely on the Films, Videos and Publications Classification Act (the Act) to help us make choices about the programmes and movies we watch and the video games we play. Weve all seen the stickers attached to games and movie posters: G, PG, M, R, R. These classifications mean we can be confident that we dont get any unexpected surprises when we watch a movie or buy a video game for our children. Since , the classification system has been paid for by a mix of Government funding and fees from organisations that have their material classified. This model was established over years ago and a lot has changed since then. There are more ways than ever to access and view movies, video games and online streaming services have been introduced. Fees from DVD classification, for example, have shrunk by percent from . million to just under , over the last ten years. How this system is funded is being reviewed, and I want to hear from you. How do you think this system should be funded and who should pay for it Your voice and views are important. So, whether you are someone who enjoys movies and video games or a charitable, cultural or commercial organisation screening material to New Zealand audiences, make sure you have your say. Hon Tracey Martin Minister of Internal Affairs
Rural Supplies Technical Working Group ( ), Report to the Department of Internal Affairs , Rural Supplies Technical Working Group DRAFT report back May (dia.govt.nz) Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of . the schemes supply of drinking water is usually a minute volume in comparison to their primary purpose of supplying water for agricultural or horticultural purposes; . there are practical compliance considerations, for example it is impractical to use chlorination for treatment and residual disinfection in rural water schemes which use open canals to transport water, as the chlorine is rapidly destroyed by sunlight; . if regulatory requirements are perceived to be too costly or resource intensive, a potential outcome is that owners or operators of these mixed use rural supplies may choose to cease supplying drinking water to human users, as the supply of drinking water is not their primary purpose. There would not necessarily be a viable alternative drinking water supply that can be readily or costeffectively used by people who lose access to drinking water in these situations. . The group recommended that council owned mixed use rural supplies should transfer to the previous governments water services entities, but there should be a process for consumers to opt by referendum to transfer mixed use supplies to their users. . Also under the previous government, the Department worked with Clutha District Council and farmer representatives to explore potential ownership options for mixed use rural water supply schemes in the Clutha District (under the previous governments water services entities). This work helped inform the Departments understanding of these schemes, their importance to farmers and rural economies, and the economic challenges associated with the operation of these schemes. Local Water Done Well will enable councils to work with their rural communities to determine the optimal management, governance and financing arrangements for mixed use schemes . Under Local Water Done Well, councils will have increased flexibility to work with local rural communities to determine the optimal management , governance and financing arrangements for these schemes. . When developing their Water Services Delivery Plans, councils will be required to consider how they plan to fund investment requirements, and how they will address infrastructure deficits and support growth in demand on these schemes . . Councils will need to give new consideration to: . investment requirements and how best to fund these, including possibly long term borrowing to spread the costs of long life infrastructure investments ; . how best to manage these schemes including their organisational form and the involvement of farmers in their governance and management oversight; . how best to charge for these schemes including the mix of variable and fixed charges to commercial and residential consumers ; and . how best to support the schemes to meet regulatory standards, for example work ing with Taumata Arowai to identify potential exemptions as necessary . . Some councils may decide to work together in their delivery of mixed use schemes, enabling efficiencies in their management and operation and associated funding and procurement arrangements. Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of . Councils may choose to enter into a new water organisation that enables improved access to financing for water infrastructure, including by facilitating long term borrowing, so that the cost of infrastructure investments can be paid down over the life of the assets. . If councils choose to progress a standalone water organisation, the o rganisational and governance arrangements will be determined by councils in consultation with their communities . The governance arrangements could include existing or expanded roles for farmers in the governance and operation of mixed use rural schemes . . The new economic regulation regime for water services will result in strengthened incentives for councils to improve delivery of their local mixed use rural schemes. Local Water Done Well will reduce the regulatory burden for mixed use rural schemes . The proposed changes to the Water Services Act in your Cabinet paper Local Water Done Well Stage further decisions would help reduce regulatory compliance costs for these schemes. These changes include: . requir ing Taumata Arowai to explicitly consider the costs on suppliers as a key part of its regulatory approach ; . requiring Taumata Arowai to work proactively with suppliers to support them to meet r egulatory requirements ; . enabl ing Taumata Arowai to proactively issue exemptions where compliance with the Act is impractical, inefficient , unduly costly or burdensome; and . reducing regulatory burden for small supplies, such as lifting the threshold so that shared domestic supplies with under consumers would not be subject to regulation, enabling a small number of neighbouring properties who share water to be treated as domestic self suppliers . You may wish to consider further opportunities to reduce the regulatory burden for mixed use rural schemes . Mixed use rural water schemes are unique in that they provide large volumes of water across large areas for commercial farming purposes , and they also provide smaller volumes of water to rural residential properties for human drinking and sanitary purposes . . In their supply of water for human drinking and sanitary purposes, mixed use rural water schemes are required to operate to the same drinking water regulatory standards as those required of large urban schemes . Councils in their operation of mixed use schemes are also subject to the same regulatory requirements as those that apply to their operation of large urban schemes, including requirements for registration, drinking water safety plan ning , source water protection and various other testing, reporting and notification requirements. . There are existing and emerging challenges to safe supply of drinking water from mixed use rural schemes . These include known issues from animal contamination of water at source, within the distribution network and at the point of supply . Emerging issues include risks to human health from high levels of nitrates in soil and ground water . In some parts of New Zealand this is at levels close to or in excess of maximum acceptable values . Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of . Small rural councils are constrained in their capacity to proactively address these challenges , especially emerging challenges, before they become problem atic. . The Water Services Act provides Taumata Arowai with a wide range of regulatory tools and instruments that it can tailor to the regulation of rural water supply schemes. Taumata Arowai has already developed a number of acceptable solutions tailored to the particular characteristics of rural water supply schemes, with the aim of making compliance easier and more cost effective for scheme operators. . More c an be done to develop cost effective regulatory approaches and compliance solutions for mixed use rural water schemes , and to recognise the ir particular characteristics and challenges in supplying safe drinking water. Potential areas of investigation could include : . Familiarisation with the characteristics, practicalities and challenges in operating mixed use rural schemes as a basis for their improved regulation . . Consideration of the various current and emerging risks to human health associated with operation of mixed use rural water supply schemes, and consideration of : .. how these risks should be assessed for purposes of regulation ; and .. whether the same risk tolerances should apply to schemes that serve very small populations to those that serve very large populations . . Consideration of the definition of what constitutes a water supply scheme for purposes of drinking water regulation, and at what point in the supply arrangements should regulatory requirements for treatment of drinking water apply to ensure the most cost effective approach to ensuring delivery of safe water for drinking . . How to best specify regulatory requirements and use the various regulatory tools and discretions available under the Water Services Act (such as acceptable solutions , authorisations and exemptions ) to make compliance as simple and low cost as possible for operators of mixed use schemes. . How to best support councils in their operation of mixed use rural schemes, with a focus on what Taumata Arowai can do in terms of direct support and what it can do to support council and industry organisations to support cost effective operation of mixed use schemes. You may wish to establish an independent advisory group to review the regulatory settings for mixed use rural schemes . You may wish to establish an expert advisory group to advise you and the refreshed board of Taumata Arowai on the above matters. We consider this is a s an important and practical step to improve regulation of mixed use rural water schemes . . The group could be appointed by you as Minister of Local Government and be tasked with advising you directly on these matters, with the Department as secretariat (similar to the Technical Advisory Group). Alternatively, the Group could be appointed by the Department and provide the D epartment with a report on their findings. The group would be available to advise you directly if you wished. . We consider the group should comprise a small number of persons with practical experience, recognised expertise and knowledge related to: Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of . the practicalities of mixed use rural water supply schemes, their uses and importance to rural communities and the practicalities of their operation. This could be a farmer chairperson of a mixed use water supply committee , or a council officer with operational experience; . expert and practical understanding of the existing and emerging public health issues and risks associated with the operation of mixed use rural water supply schemes. This could be a public servant , for example from the Public Health Agency; . knowledge and practical understanding of industry structures, workforce capabilities and arrangements associated with the operation of mixed use rural water schemes; . expertise in the technical design and operation of mixed use rural schemes and the technologies and innovations available to ensure cost effective operation and safety of drinking from rural supply schemes; and . expertise in regulatory practice and regulatory economics with a focus on costeffective regulation. . We consider the advisory group should have a well scoped terms of reference to focus the group on its consideration of the regulatory issues discussed in this briefing. It should have a reasonable time limit to do its work, for example six months, with a v iew to ensuring its results are useful to the refreshed board of Taumata Arowai in its development of a regulatory strategy. .
See cl (), sch edule of the LGA A local authority may delegate to any other local authority, organisation, or person the enforcement, inspection, licensing, and administration related to bylaws and other regulatory matters. ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of Delegation of bylaw making power . The power to make bylaws is more complex. Currently, territorial authorities can transfer all or some of their bylaw making powers to a regional council that any part of their district falls within, or to any other territorial authority. Regional councils can transfer all or some of their bylaw making powers to a territorial authority in their region, or to any other regional council (s LGA). . Councils cannot delegate their bylaw making powers unless this is expressly provided for in legislation (Sch edule , LGA). There is not a specific provision allowing water bylaw making powers to be delegated this would need to be a new provision . . . If needed, there are several options to make any necessary new bylaws using current settings : . the council could make the bylaw then delegate associated powers to a water organisation (such as compliance, monitoring and enforcement); . Where councils are combining to provide water services (either as a joint CCO, shared services arrangements or as service agreements between councils) they could all transfer their water bylaw making powers to one of the councils, who could then make one bylaw covering all of the districts in the group ; or . Joint council owners could work together on a combinedconsolidated bylaw (e.g. the Wairarapa Consolidated Bylaw currently made by the South Wairarapa, Carterton and Masterton District Councils). . However, a simple legislative change would be to use the Watercare model (based on sections and of the Local Government (Auckland Council) Act ). This would allow water organisations to propose a bylaw to their owning councils which would then check the proposed bylaw against statutory criteria (such as cost effectiveness and consistency with existing strategies, policies, or plans). If agreed, the water organisation could then consult on the bylaw and, if the requirements are met, the owning councils mus t adopt the bylaw. This would be a useful model to adopt in the short term to enable new water organisations to operate it has good safeguards and has already been tested and found to work well . We are recommending this change for Bill because it is a simple, straightforward mechanism . Consultation with TAG and our response . The TAG indicated that while there is useful work to be done i n all the se policy areas, the majority did not see any as critical work for Bill . The highest immediate priority would be stormwater planning and management, in particular managing overland flow paths and watercourses. The TAG also noted a potential lack of clarity around the power to delegate infrastructure powers. However, t he TAG noted that Local Water Done Well is intended to be more flexible than the previous prescriptive ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of approach. The TAG therefore generally preferred not introducing new requirements where existing tools are working adequately , including standard commercial practices . . The majority of TAG members concluded that, other than any minimum vital changes, most issues could be deferred for at least months. . We consider this is a viable strategy , given that most of the areas being considered in this briefing are ancillary to the basic functioning of water organisation s. It would also offer the advantage of opportunity to learn from the experience of the early innovators within the new regime, as well as not distracting from the highest priority needs for Bill . There are also various related policy development work programmes going on which will be more advanced by next year, allowing us to avoid unnecessary duplication. . Legislative design work for Bill will focus on ensuring that current powers are able to be used effectively in the medium term. This will avoid a further risk that the detailed work required to resolve all the complex policy and legislative design issues for significant improvements to regulatory and infrastructure powers will detract from the primary focus of Bill . Discussion and Comment on specific policy areas . The discussion covers a range of ancillary areas where legislative changes could be made to support the overall objective for Local Water Done Well: to deliver safe, resilient, reliable, environmentally sound, and customer responsive water services at the least cost . . We have set out our initial recommendations on these areas, following discussion with TAG , and review of wider work programmes. For each area recommendations are in the form: . Proposed minimum changes to enable water organisations to function, regardless of delivery vehicle. . Areas where desirable improvements which could be addressed in current or pending wider reviews . Functions and powers relating to infrastructure . The policy issues arising from water services infrastructure powers concern work on land and controls over connections to infrastructure. Current powers arise from the LGA, the Local Government Act and the Health Act . Powers to carry out work on land in relation to water services infrastructure . These powers enable councils to work on land for water services infrastructure, including install ing and maintain ing infrastructure on land they do not own. Immediate change is not required because c ouncils already have the ability to retain or delegate current powers, regardless of whatever delivery vehicle they adopt. Current legislation is outdated and hard to navigate which does lead to unnecessary compliance costs and c onsolidation and modernisation is desirable , but not essential . . A more concise and coherent approach is certainly possible , including alignment with the type of access powers other utilities have, including powers such as access to Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of road reserves, providing additional safeguards for landowners (such as escalation processes for disputes), and better recognition and protection for Mori land. . However, we recommend no significant change in this area in Bill , but rather that options for improvements be considered once the initial implementation stage of Local Water Done Well is completed so we can learn from early adopters . Legislative design will consider the question raised by TAG whether greater clarity for the delegation of existing powers is needed . Power to control connections . These powers enable councils to control connections to water services infrastructure, a critical aspect of new housing developments . Immediate change is not required for Local Water Done Well because c ouncils already have the ability to retain or delegate current powers, regardless of whatever delivery vehicle they adopt. . However, as with land works discussed abov e, current provisions are outdated and hard to navigate, resulting in high compliance costs. The TAG advised improvements were desirable but that the current legislation was adequate and was able to be supported with commercial practices . . Previous work proposed a clearer process which connected to the Building Act and the RMA . The key elements were a streamlined three stage approval process and a framework for Development Codes . . Local authority regulatory powers . Power to make controlled drinking water catchments . Power to control drinking water catchments is an important tool for ensuring drinking water quality. It enables the specification of catchments and control of access into the catchments, which might be requested for a range of purposes, such as predator control or tourismrecreation. Currently it derives from a mix of statutory provisions and bylaws (LGA ss ) which means there is some inconsistency and therefore uncertainty nationally . . The Water Services Entities Act provided a new streamlined system, modelled on Victoria, Australia, which allowed water services entities to specify land a controlled drinking water catchment area and govern that area via a catchment management plan. This approach was supported by many councils in their ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of submissions, but the transition will be complex and interim transitional arrangements would be needed . . We recommend that change is not an immediate priority for Local Water Done Well , because water organisations can be expected rely on the cooperation of their council owners . Again, after the initial implementation stage, the priority for change in this area will be clearer , including whether legislative change is needed at all . Trade waste regulation . Trade waste is any commercial and industrial liquid waste disposed of and discharged into the wastewater system, above what would be disposed of in a domestic household (e.g. from breweries, laundromats, food premises, dental surgeries ). It is distinct from major commercial and industrial liquid waste disposal and discharges which are controlled by requirements under RMA plans and consents. . Trade waste systems are currently largely controlled by local bylaws . There are large variations in approaches between councils and problems arising from lack of infringement powers. Relevant powers in the LGA would benefit from modernisation and standard requirements which would support a more consistent approach to case bycase decisions across the country . . Water supply and wastewater regulation . Both LGA and the Local Government Act are regarded as functioning adequately to enable water supplies and wastewater management, largely via bylaws . Water supply bylaws are mainly used to manage demand (e.g. during droughts) and set rules for doing things like filling or emptying swimming pools. . Compliance and enforcement for regulatory functions . LGA sets out a regime with enforcement officers who have a broad mandate over all bylaws, but it is out of and patchy. Bylaws vary between councils, so some will need to standardise their regimes to enable the smooth functioning of water organisations with combined council ownership . Such changes will be possible under the existing legislation, as well as necessary delegations for compliance, monitoring and enforcement functions by water organisations , so no immediate changes are necessary for Bill . ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of . Offence regime s for water services . Offence regimes are always needed to underpin statutory or regulatory requirements, and must accompany any new statutory powers or requirements. Therefore, new offences may be required as a consequence of any decisions about new substantive powers. . Next steps . Appendix A summarizes our recommendations, following discussion with TAG. Following your decisions, a draft Cabinet paper will be prepared for consultation with TAG and relevant agencies in time for consideration by Cabinet in July . . In the many areas where there are possible improvements that are not immediately needed for water organisations to function, the Department will ensure that lessons from the initial experience of water organisations , as well as relevant previous work with necessary modifications , is fed into wider work programmes, including inter agency work such as and RMA reform . Consultation . As described above , the TAG considered an overview of this paper which covered each of the policy areas discussed above. You have already agreed to include an option to amend the infringement provisions relating to Taumata Arowai in the Water Services Act in the upcoming Local Government Water Services Bill Cabinet Paper LG April refers. ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of Recommendations . We recommend that you : a) note that we have reviewed a number of ancillary water services powers and regulations to assess whether any immediate changes are required in Bill to ensure that water organisations can function effectively; b) note that very few changes are recommended for Bill but that these policy areas will be addressed in other current work programmes or reviewed after the initial implementation of water organisation s; c) agree that bylaw making provisions based on sections and Local Government (Auckland Council) Act be included in Bill ; YesNo d) agree that that no changes be made to powers to carry out work on land in relation to water services infrastructure in Bill ; YesNo
Source of personal information
Strategic overview . The gambling environment This section provides the context and background that inform the strategy and the strategic framework and service plan that together make up the strategy. Participation in gambling Most New Zealanders gamble at least occasionally. The Health and Lifestyles Survey (HLS) showed that: percent of respondents (about . million New Zealanders aged years and older) had participated in some form of gambling in the past months. The overall pastyear gambling rate decreased between and , but remained unchanged after levels of gambling participation reduced between and across all age grou ps; rates for yearolds show ed the greatest reduction, and rates for people aged years and over show ed the least reduction. Rates for Mori and Pacific peoples also showed decreasing participation trends. The most popular forms of gambling in were New Zealand Lotteries Commission products (), followed by informal gambling (), sports, dog or horserace betting (), gaming machines at a pub or club (), gaming machines at casinos (.) and table games at casinos (.). The Act defines gambling and regulates various forms of gambling activities. It also identifies four types of gambling that contribute significantly to gambling harm and are subject to the problem gambling levy: noncasino gaming machines (NCGMs or pokies ) operated by clubs, societies and some TAB venues the mixture of table games and gaming machines provided by casinos sports and race betting provided by the New Zealand Racing Board (NZRB) at raceways and through TAB venues (some TAB venues also operate NCGM s) a range of lottery products provided by the New Zealand Lotteries Commission (NZLC), including the national lottery, Keno and Instant Kiwi (scratch) tickets. Gambling outlets Traditionally gambling has required participation at a venue or retail outlet, but this is changing as gambling providers make use of internet access and develop internet based products, as summarised below. DIA reports that, as at June , there were , licensed NCGM venues active, operating , machines. This reflects a trend of venues and machines decreasing since venues peaked at more than , in the late s and machines peaked at STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
The Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Act (the Act) established a self identification process for people to amend the sex or gender marker shown on their New Zealand birth certificate. This process will be available to the public from June (the commenc ement of the Act). Section of the Act empowers the Governor General to make regulations by Order in Council concerning certain aspects of the self identification process. Two aspects the Governor General can specify in regulations are: . Any additional sex or gender marker besides male or female that may be specified as a nominated sex on a birth certificate (section ()(c)); and . Types of persons for the purposes of the definition of a suitably qualified third party who can provide a letter of support for a child or young persons application to amend their birth certificate (section ()(e)). On December CABMIN refers , Cabinet agreed on policy decisions to: . Specify another gender and a non binary gender as sex and gender markers that can be nominated on a birth certificate, and . Specify that suitably qualified third parties that can provide a letter of support are: PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Compliance The Regulations comply with each of the following: . the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi; . the rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act or the Human Rights Act ; . the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act ; . relevant international standards and obligations; and . the Legislation Guidelines ( edition), which are maintained by the Legislation Design and Advisory Committee. Regulations Review Committee There are no grounds for the Regulations Review Committee to draw the regulations to the attention of the House of Representatives under Standing Order . Certification by Parliamentary Counsel Office The draft regulations are certified by PCO as being in order for submission to Cabinet. Impact Analysis The Department of Internal Affairs prepared and submitted a Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS) to Cabinet in relation to the proposed regulations Proposed regulations to underpin the self identification process CABMIN . A Department of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Analysis panel assessed the RIS in accordance with the quality assurance criteria set out in the CabGuide. The Panel considered the RIS met the quality assurance criteria. Publicity My office will issue a press release about the passage of the regulations and the launch of the self identification process following Cabinets decision. Debate on the self identification process was divisive during the progress of the primary legislation in . There were several groups and many individual submitters who opposed the legislation at select committee. I anticipate that people and groups opposed to the self identification process might become vocal again following the announcement of these regulations. It is also likely that intended users of the self identification process and those that have been following the development of the regulations will be disappointed that the sex and gender markers have changed following last years announcement. I have asked my officials to draft a commu nications plan in anticipation of these scenarios occurring. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Proactive release In accordance with Cabinet Office Circular CO () Proactive Release of Cabinet Material: Requirements, I intend to proactively release this document on the Department of Internal Affairs website, subject to any redactions that may be warranted under the Official Information Act , within business days of Cabinets decision. Consultation We consulted with the following agencies: Department of Corrections, St ats NZ, the Ministry for Women, the Ministry of Health, Oranga Tamariki Ministry for Children, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Social Development, the Ministry of Youth Development, the Ministry of Justice, Te Puni Kkiri, the Ministry for Pacif ic Peoples, the Ministry of Transport, Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency, New Zealand Police, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (Immigration), Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission, Whaikaha Ministry of Disabled People, the M inistry for Ethnic Communities, The Treasury, the Office of the Privacy Commissioner, the Office of the Childrens Commissioner, and Te Arawhiti. The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet has also been informed of the proposals in this paper. Recomm endations
The Governments Quarter Four (Q) Action Plan is focused on the delivery of better public services and getting councils back to basics. Proposals in this paper will help to deliver the Governments priorities by refocusing councils on core services, improving specific parts of the local government system, and ultimately seeking to control rates increases. Executive summary
The Independent Review of Electoral Law released its interim report on June , which includes a draft recommendation that the voting age for parlia mentary elections be lowered to . See draft recommendation and pages in https:electoralreview.govt.n zassetsPDFIERInterim Report.pdf See pages in Declaration of inconsistency: Voting age in the Electoral Act and the Local Electoral Act (selectc ommittees.parliament.nz) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice Proposed Government Response
The Petition of Reality Check Radio was presented to the House on May
The Policy will require public sector agencies to:
The accompanying paper Government Response to the Declaration of Inconsistency: Voting age in the Elec toral Act and the Local Electoral Act , from myself and the Minister of Justice, seeks approval of the Government Response to the Declarat ion of Inconsistency regarding the minimum voting age in the Electoral Act and the Local Electoral Act .
The application of the Policy is aligned to DIAs system leadership for digital transformation. Remit of GCDO
The modelling is WICS modelling and involves many simplifying assumptions, so this is presented for illustrative purposes only. s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . I propose prioritising limits on the rates of increase and some price stability, even if this means it takes l onger to remove distortions and cross subsidies from existing pricing structures. While cost reflective pricing is desirable, given the substantial efficiency improvements that we are expecting from the reforms, real costs may fall or at least remain stable and end up meeting prices that are increasing at a slow but steady rate. . To avoid conflicts and tensions between different pricing objectives (particularly in the short term), there will be a clear hierarchy for the implementation of different pricing policies and levers. Pricing regulations must be met as soon as reasonably practicable. There may be temporary deviations from legislative pricing principles, subject to those deviations being consistent with guidance or requirements from the economic regulator. Any pricing directions in regulation, the Government policy statement, or the regional representative groups statement of strategic and performance expectations, would need to be consistent with the overall legislative framework. Water services entities are obliged to meet both their legislative obligations and the Government policy statement. Once they have met those requirements, they can pursue any other goals within that framework. . As a general transitional measure, I also propose that water services entities be enabled to keep charging for services using the same methodologies that the relevant territorial authority had been using. Part E: Detaile d pricing and charging issues . This part sets out more detailed and discrete issues that require legislative direction.
This paper directly progresses poli cy contained in the Labour Partys Election Manifesto, and the New Zealand Labour Party and Green Party of Aotearoa New Zealand Cooperation Agreement. Executive Summary
This paper seeks your decisions on whether to confirm or alter those previous decisions.
This proposal will enable the full growth portion of costs to be recovered from development.
World Health Organisation May Digital proximity tracking technologies.
NZSC , Make it Inc v AG, November Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE Figure : Procedure for responding to a declaration of inconsistency Six months .. . i ::.lIII , . r Attorney Government General reports response to declaration to declaration House presented Report on Select Select Debate about declaration committee committee declaration and referred to select considers reports to Government committee declaration House response The AttorneyGe neral is required to notify the House about the DOis by Thursday December. I understand the DOis will then be referred to the Justice Committee the same day. Unless the House resolves otherwise, the Minister of Local Government and I will be required to present Government Responses to the DOis relating to the voting age for local elections and parliamentary elections respectively by Thursday June at the latest. Purpose of introducing a Bill On Monday Novembe r, Cabinet resolved to introduce a Bill to lower the voting age to for both parliamentary and local elections. Cabinet considered that introducing a Bill early next year will provide the House with a legislative vehicle to respond to these DOis, should it wish to do so. The steps the Government has taken to introduce this Bill will form the main part of the Government response to the DOis, in due course. In addition, I note that the Terms of Reference for the Independent Review of Electoral Law also include consideration of the voting age for Parliamentary elections CABMIN .. The Review Panel is due to publish an interim report for public consultation in May and provide its final report in November . That provides another opportunity for the Government to consider the voting age at parliamen tary elections, if it is recommended. Timeline The below timeframe shows the proposed timeframe for the Bill, and how it relates to the timeframe for responding to the DOis: us oq Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE Timeline for DOis and the Bill DOis Bill Decembe r AttorneyGeneral notification to the House and referral to Justice Committee February Cabinet approval to introduce the Bill February First reading and referral to select committee April Select committee report back on DOis (four months after notification) June Minister of Justice and Minister of Local Government to present Government response to the DOis (six months after notification) June Select committee report back on the Bill (fourmonth period) June Second reading June Debate under sessional orders (no later than six sitting days after Government response) I intend to write to the Justice Committee informing them of the Governme nts intention to introduce the Bill in the new year, and to encourage the Committee to start hearing submissions on the voting age across both parliamentary and local elections. Policy I am seeking policy decisions on a number of matters in relation to the Bill. The changes to the voting age for local elections and parliamentary elections should be considered separately The Minister of Local Government and I believe it is important that the House is free to consider the issue of the appropriate voting age for local and parliamentary elections as separately as possible. I propose that the changes be drafted in such a way as to allow the voting age to be lowered to for local elections, even if it remains at for parliamentary elections. Changing the voting age for parliamentary elections would trigger two reserved provisions in the Electoral Act, requiring percent majority in the House, or a majority in a referendum. The two reserved provisions are the definition of adult in section ( ), and section (f) relating to members of the Defence Force who are outside of New Zealand who are over the age of . us oq Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E usoq
agreed that the Electoral (Lowering Voting Age fo r Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill will provide for:
https:csrc.nist.govglossary See also https:www.digital.govt.nzstandardsandguidancetechnologyand
note if the public service is not supported to invest in and adopt cloud services there
note that Cabinet also agreed that differentiated age limits would be added to existing legislation so that CBCMIN : . the voting age for alcohol licensing trust elections would remain at years; and . the age for standing as a candidate in local elections (including alcohol licensing trust elections) would rema in at ;
note that on December t he AttorneyGeneral notified the House of the Declaration of Inconsistency: Voting age in the Electoral Act and the Local Electoral Act ;
note that petitioners request That the House of Representatives urge the
note that the Electoral (Lowering t he Voting Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill holds a category priority on the Legislation Programme (to be referred to a select committee before the general election);
noted that Cabinet also agreed that differentia ted age limits would be added to existing legislation so that:
noted that Cabinet previously agreed that statutory inquiries were an allofgovernment
noted that a change to the minimum voting age requires changes to the legislation referred to in paragraph above;
noted that if the public service is not supported to invest in and adopt cloud services, there is
noted that on December the AttorneyGeneral notified the House of the Declaration of Inconsistency: Voting age in the Elector al Act and the Local Electoral Act ;
noted that petitioners request That the House of Representatives urge the Government to
noted that the Prime Ministers speech at the Local Government New Zealand conference on August set out the Governments shared vision for local government doing the basics, brilliantly;
noted that the Water Services Entities Bill is part of a broader, comprehensive suite of proposed legislation, including two additional Bills:
noted that the original cost estimates supporting the Transforming Three Waters Service Delivery for New Zealanders: Transition and Implementation Budget initiative, although based on reasonable assumptions at the time, were made ah ead of significant policy decisions that impacted on the overall costs of delivering the three waters reform programme (the reform programme);
noted that the voting age for local elections is not a reserved provision, and so could be changed through legislative amendment requiri ng only a simple majori ty in the House;
noted that, subject to public consultation, a second stage of legislative change is proposed to
Identification management
) To accelerate how fast close contacts are quarantined.
. Background and purpose
. Cabinet Committee Paper and Minute record the approval of the second of three proposals to progress the third stage of the Local Water Done Well programme
. Context Digital identity and online service delivery Many government and private sector services are now online. In keeping with this digital environment, New Zealanders expect to be able to access services and complete transactions remotely, rapidly , and with minimal paperwork. However, many online transactions that require the provision of digital identity information such as online banking, claiming a welfare payment , or opening a utili ties account online need high levels of security to ensure users personal information is safe and their privacy is protected. While the use of digital identity services is generally seen as being efficient and provides more opportunities for individuals than paper based identity systems, it also comes with risks. Unlike written or spoken information, digital information can be more easily accessed, copied and shared from anywhere in the world. Unfortunately, we are now facing increasing fraud and securit y risks because of the rapid evolution of global digital sharing. It is important for people to feel secure and confident in using digital identity services, including being in control of their information and who has access to it. A survey by Digital Identity N ew Zealand found of New Zealanders are concerned about the protection of their identity and use of personal data by organisations. Moreover, nine out of ten New Zealanders stated the idea of being more in control of their digital identity is appealing. This suggests there is a low level of confidence in the current state of the digital identity system. Trust Framework Purpose and b enefits The Trust Framework will help ensure the provision of more secure and trusted digital identity services for New Zealanders The Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act will establish : a legal framework for the provision of secure and trusted digital identity services for individuals and organisations; and transparent governance and accreditation funct ions that incorporate te ao Mori approaches to identity. The Trust Framework will make it easier for individuals (users) to securely access and share information about themselv es with relying parties through regulated TF providers. It will also reduce transaction costs for relying parties that need verified identity and other personal information to provide their services.
. Current state of water services
. Define a singular metric Time lapsed between a positive COVID test result and the quarantining of all close contacts. Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
. Defined terms ..
. Establish framework and preliminary arrangements for the new water services system
. Executive summary The New Zealand Government has chosen a COVID strategy of elimination. The closing of our border to the majority of travelers, and the Level lockdown were our primary available tools to effect this strategy. These measures were very effective and we now see a rapid return to normalised social settings and an end to social distancing.
. Exemptions andor modifications to information privacy
. Exemptions andor modifications to information privacy principles
. Making New Zealand better for New Zealanders
. Psychometric assessment
. Reducing the time elapsed between symptoms presenting and the isolation of firstorder contacts.
. Simplified website experience
. Summary of Indicative Rating ConclusionX . . .
. THE cardholder shall sign the card immediately upon receipt.
. The result was provided by Stats NZ as a customised data set from the Stats NZ General Social Survey covering the survey period April to August . This measure is based on a scale where is no sense of belonging and is a very strong sense of belonging. The and results are based on the percentage of people aged years and over who reported their sense of belonging to New Zealand at or higher.
. The Department has authorised the cardholder to use a corporate credit card (hereinafter referred to as the card) issued by the Company and the cardholder has agreed to use the card upon the conditions stated in this agreement.
. The Economists Democracy Index can be found at
. The Parties involved and the Lead Agency
. The Parties involved and the Lead Agency .
. The Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Terrorist Attack on Christchurch Mosques on
. This indicator measures trust and confidence from customers using the Departments digital channels for births, deaths, and marriages, citizenship, and passports services. It uses the following question from the DIA Customer Experience Survey:
. This paper also signals my intention to progress, alongside any changes to Mori wards
. This policy applies to all Department staff and counsel acting on behalf of the Department in dealing with prosecutions or potential prosecutions brought by the Department (including prosecutions brought by duly appointed enforcement officers employed by the Department). In particular, it applies to (but is not limited to) the following units:
. To support your decision, this briefing outlines:
. We use the Stats NZ General Social Society survey question
. We would like to discuss these issues with you in January .
. What is the likely level of noncompliant use In the case of an app, it must be downloaded, installed, the Bluetooth radio must be on, the app must have necessary permissions to use the Bluetooth radio, the phone must not be in airplane mode, the app must be loaded to work (and reloaded after rebooting phone), the phone must be on your person, etc.
. With high adoption and effective isolation procedures, substantially reduce the number of secondary cases and drive the effective reproduction number below one in conjunction with other public health response measures.
. You have received briefings today seeking decisions to inform drafting of the Cabinet
. You have received several briefings in recent weeks regarding proposed changes to the
. note that Cabinet previously agreed that statutory inquiries were an all of
. note that the Racing Reform Bill No. has been renamed as the Racing Industry Bill; ldrz ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister for Racing IN CONFIDENCE Page of . note that the Racing Industry Bill is an omnibus Bill, repealing and replacing the Racing Act , and amending the Dog Control Act ; . note that the Racing Industry Bill empowers the industry to revitalise itself and become more sustainable and profitable, through creatin g a statutory framework that incentivises the industry to make hard decisions and pivot towards a stronger commercial orientation ; . agree to amend the definition of working dogs under section of the Dog Control Act to include any dog r egistered with Greyhound Racing New Zealand and kept solely or principally for racing; . authorise the Parliamentary Counsel Office to make technical changes to the Racing Industry Bill up to the of its introduction; . approve the Racing Industry Bill for introduction , subject to the final approval of the government caucus and sufficient support in the House of Representatives ; . agree that the Racing Industry Bill be introduced on or before December ; . agree that the Government propose the Racing Industry Bill be: . referred to the Transport and Infrastructure committee for consideration; . enacted by July .
. note that, subject to public consultation, a second stage of legislative change is
. Open the border and accept a strategy of suppression. This strategy would likely see us oscillate between levels of mandated and voluntary social distancing. Alert Level would be avoided as best as possible. This strategy implicitly accepts some level of infections.
. How well the cloud services are secured i.e. As Amazon Web Services
. policy decisions on Water Services Delivery Plans LG ;
. a Water Services Entities Amendment Bill, which will fully implement the reforms;
. a prison manager to have responsibility fo r notifying the Electoral Commission if a young person aged or years old, detain ed in a prison, is disqualified from voting because they have been sentenced to a term of imprisonmen t of three years or more;
. adopt public cloud services in preference to traditional ICT systems;
. any requirement for councils to consider establishing wards;
. the prison manager to have responsibility for notifying the Electoral Commission if a young per son aged or years old, detained in a prison, is disqua lified from voting because they have been sentenced to a term of im prisonment of three years or more; . the Chief Executive of Oranga Ta mariki to have responsibility for notifying the Electoral Commission if a young person aged or years old, detained in an Oranga Tamariki residence, is disqualified from voting becaus e they have been sentenced to a term of imprisonment of three years or more; . the prison manager to have respons ibility to have responsibility to provide enrolment advice and assistance to a young person aged or years old who is detained in a prison for a sentence of less than three years; and
. the voting age for alcohol licensing trust el ections would remain at years; and
. what an authorisations framework is and the rationale for providing one for
.. The intelligence and Security Act (the ISA) enables an intelligence and security
.. WICS required investment estimate is much higher than WDCs inve stment plans WDCs investment plans in its year plan and longer term investment planning are significantly lower than the WICS estimates for the Opt Out Scenario . WDCs RFI response reveals tha t its planned investment is orders of magnitude below the le vel that WICS model predicts. This is despite the WDC having a similar level of asset value per connected property as Auckland s Watercare , the largest water provider and, according to WICS , the most sophisticated . The net assets per connected property wa s , for Auckland and , for WDC in . FFF Moreover, WDC compares even more favourably than Scottish Water in terms of asset values per connected citizen , as illustrated in Figure . Figure . illustrates the significant difference between WICS modelled net investment needs for WDC, and WDCs own planned capital investment. FFF We also calculated the capital investment attribut able to WDC in Entity A using WICS model and find that it i s remarkably similar to WDCs own investment plans. FFF
. Efficiency estimates for Reform Scenario are implausible WICS uses efficiency assumptions in its an alysis of the amalgamated entity (Entity A). The efficiency assumptions drive significant cost savings for the Reform Scenario. WICS assumes that: Capital expenditure (capex) efficiency will reach percent Operating expenditure (opex) efficiency will re ach . percent It also assumes a t otal factor productivity efficiency improvement of . percent per annum for the Reform Scenario but not for WD C as an opt out entity. These efficiency estimates are highly implausible. .. Capex efficiency estimates are im plausible WICS claim s that the Reform Scenario will result in percent lower capital costs. WICS claims that Entity A will progressively improve its capex efficiency so that by it is saving percent per annum . That is, by , for each . inve sted , Entity A will get . of capex value. This is an implausible assumption for the following reasons: The assumption is not sourced to any credible authority or from any observed experience that is relevant to New Zealand WICS has not shown how Scott ish Water capex has any bearing on New Zealand water services and geography NZD (millions) Year WICS standalone Capex for WDC WDC YP and Castalia modelling for Amalgamated Entity Capex attributatble to Whangrei (by connections) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia Only very minor economies of scale are available i n New Zealand water services The assumption has been criticised by government appointed peer reviewers The assumption does not consider diseconomies of scale . The Entity A model results are highly sensitive to this assumption, so if it is wrong, the benefits of the Reform Scenario change drastically. WICS capex efficiency is based on a single source of information WICS capital expen diture assumption is based solely on a belief that it seems reasonable to expect a reformed three waters industry in New Zealand to match the efficiency improvement of the industry in Scotland and by the water and sewerage companies in England and Wales. The only quantitative analysis WICS says it has undertaken to support this belief is an observation that Scotland improv ed capital expenditure efficiency from . This quantitative analysis has not been substantiated in any documents released to WD C. There are many reasons why Scottish Water may have improved reported capital expenditure efficiency. These reasons are likely to be specific to Scottish Water . Decision makers need an explanation of those reasons to understand whether the same improveme nts can be achieved in New Zealand entities . WICS provides no such explanation. The citation used i n the Entity A model FFF is also misleading. WICS incorrectly cites the source for the capital efficiency improvement as based on observed experience from GB. However, the actual source of WICS capital efficiency assumption is not Great Britain at all . Rather WICS cites FFF the single observation of claimed efficiency improvements by Scottish Water from . WICS claims that the capex eff iciency will come from : Economies of scale Clarity of policy priority Robust water quality and environmental regulat ion Economic regulation Excellence in management. WICS does not disclose the relative contribution of these factors to the total percent efficiency gain. In section below, we discuss how water service providers in the Opt Out Scenario are likely to improve as a result of the improved water quality regulatory regime, how management may improve, and how it is po ssible that economic regulation could apply to other water services (not just the amalgamated entities). Scotland is an inappropriate model for Entity A Auckland, Whangrei , Kaipara and Far North The population within the Entity A boundaries almost a ll live in urban areas. There are significant distances between each urban area. Figure . illustrates the population densities and distances between Entity A towns.
. Recruitment and enro lment processes For this pilot, the staff were given short notice about participation ( days). All staff on the ward were emailed by NMDHB on the th of May. The CRC approached individuals within the ward to provide additional information about the study. The study adopted a rolling recruitment process wher e individuals could be enrolled after the start . Table outlines the total number of participants recruited each day and the cumulative total. The lead charge nurse was recruited on th of May, whi ch proved to be the key recruitment lever. Due to the rolling recruitment and time constraints of staff, there was no systematic card distribution and information dissemination processes, which increased the time burden for research staff. Researchers dist ributed cards and delivered study introductions on ward with individual participants during their first shift. Table . Recruitment totals Participants May May May May (start ) May Enrolled per day Cumulative total . Data management Data was compiled by a research team data scientist in collaboration with University of Otago researchers. The data revealed participants sometimes left their cards at work after finishing a shift, leading to false contact data. To address this, a Universi ty of Otago researcher acquired the working roster for participants from the CRC. However, due to the nature of healthcare workers shifts (e.g., last minute shift changes), the provided roster was not accurate. However, this roster wa s treated as the ground truth for participants observation time to ensure the data included for analysis represented actual observation time. A consequence of this approach is that a small amount of valid wear time could potentially be erroneously ignored , particularly if a participants changed work hours were not reflected in the research coordinators roster. On average, the iOS application could upload around , records per minute from the cards. Participants had an average of , records in thei r raw data. Eac h card took around . minutes to successfully upload the data to the iPad, which totalled around . hours for participants. The UWB device data upload took an average minutes per device, including the time to set up the application, close it down between each upload, and double check each data output. Participants regularly recorded close contacts in their daily diaries that were not participants in the study. We used a range of methods to try address this including asking participan ts ) if the contact was a participant in the study; ) if they knew the close contacts study ID number; ) the last three Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
. Regulatory backstop powers LG Initial advice assistance and
. The capabilities available to customers to secure their specific cloud
. The nature of gambling harm While most New Zealanders gamble without experiencing any apparent harm, a significant minority do experience harm from their gambling, including negative impacts on their own lives and the lives of others. Harm may include damage to relationships, emotional and psychological distress, disruptions to work or study, loss of income, the financial impacts of gambling, and potentially fraud and related crimes, which can also impact negatively on the gambler s family , whnau and community . It may also cause financial stress and anxiety and contribute to child neglect and family violence (Government Inquiry into Mental Health and Addiction ). Measurement of gambling harm We can measure gambling harm by various means. The Problem Gambling Severity Index (PGSI) differentiates between different types of harm and frequency of harm occurring, as reported by survey respondents. The PGSI is commonly used to screen and categorise three levels of harm: severe or high risk (problem gambling), moderate risk and low risk. While the proportion of the New Zealand population at risk of gambling harm as measured by the PGSI is currently at the lowest level seen for years, the level of harm in the overall population has remained relatively stable for the last five to seven years (at about ) (Abbott et al ; ThimasarnAnwar et al ). This plateau effect has also been observed overseas (Abbott ). Another measure of gambling harm is the burden of harm impact on healthrelated quality of life. Research shows that the total burden of harms gamblers experience, in terms of the decrease to healthrelated quality of life years , is greater than that people with common health conditions (such as diabetes and arthritis) experience, and approaches the levels seen with anxiety and depressive disorders. Importantly, the harm attributable to gamblers partaking in lowrisk gambling was significant, at nearly percent of all gambling harm. Recent research shows that one in five New Zealand adults () is affected some at time in their lives by their own gambling or the gambling of others. Estimates suggest that, in New Zealand in , , people aged years or older were at high risk of harm from gambling or are problem gamblers , about , were at moderate risk and a further , were at low risk but would experience gamblingrelated harm during their lifetime. Forms of gambling associated with gambling harm Some features andor modes of gambling are particularly associated with harm. Research both internationally and in New Zealand clearly shows that gambling harm is far more likely to be associated with continuous forms of gambling (in which a gambler can immediately reinvest winnings in further gambling, such as NCGMs and casino table games) than with any other mode of gambling. Online gambling and gaming The study Measuring the Burden of Gambling Harm in New Zealand estimated that years of life lost to incapacity as a result of harms from gambling was , in . Of this number, , were lost to gamblers themselves and , were lost to people effected by someone else s gambling. New Zealanders Participation in Gambling: Results from the Health and Lifestyles Survey meta analysis. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
. What regulatory system(s) are already in place A review of the legislative landscape was undertaken by the Department . The review indicated that t here ar e a variety of rules that govern the use of personal and organisational information in New Zealand. These include : overarching legislation such as the Privacy Act which con trols how agencies collect, use, disclose, store and give access to personal information . identity related legislation such as the Electronic Identity Verification Act , which regulates the operation of the governments RealMe service , and the Identity Information Confirmation Act . sector specific legislation such as the AntiMoney Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism Act which aims to prevent money laundering and terrorist financing in New Zealand . standards like the Evidence of Identity standard which outlin es requirements for consistent identity establ ishment and confirmation by agencies (currently being ) . While this current regulatory environment enables some trust in the digital identity ecosystem, it does so in a restricted fashion, for example: The different legal requirements and definitio ns (e.g. for identity) for different sectors can result in a siloed approach to services. Some legislation creates barriers to the provision of digital identity services by prohibiting the consented sharing of information held by certain government agen cies (e.g. the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Act ), or by having overly prescriptive provisions which have become out of (e.g. the Public Records Act being framed around paper based systems or statutory declaration requirements).
. a Water Regulation Bill, to provide for a new economic regulation and consumer protection framework for the three waters system;
. not invest in onpremise ICT infrastructure unless specified criteria are met or
. the Chief Executive of Oranga Tamariki to have respons ibility for notifying the Electoral Commission if a young person aged or years old, detained in an Oranga Tamariki residence, is disqualified from voting because they have been sentenced to a term of imprison ment of three years or more;
. the age for standing as a candidate in local elections (including alcohol licensing trust elections) would remain at ;
. the current legislative provisions for developing an authorisations framework.
. the timing of decisions;
.. The purpose of this agreement is to enable access by NZSIS (as an intelligence and
... If so, w as a National I nterest Analysis report prepared to inform a Parliamentary examination of the proposed New Zealand action in relation to the treaty NO Regulatory impact analysis .. Were any regulatory impact statement s provided to inform the policy decisions that led to this Bill YES Title: The Films, Videos, and Publications Classifications Amendment Bill Standardising classification for Commercial Video on Demand content ( August ) Authoring agency : Department of Internal Affairs Location : https:www.dia.govt.nzdiawebsite.nsfFilesProactive releasesfileCabinet paper Policy proposals Standardising classification forCommercial Video onDemand.pdf
. Foundational Information Disclosure decisions LG; and
. What is the policy problem or opportunity
. a prison manager to have responsibility to have responsibility to provide enrolment advice and assistance to a young person aged or years old who is detained in a prison for a sentence of less than three years; and
. have a plan for how they intend to use public cloud services;
. opportunities for public input;
.. The agreement is made under sections and of the ISA and covers access to the:
. Proposed Local Government Act amendments to support the
. decisionmaking rights and any role for the Local Government
. decisionmaking rights and any role for the Local Government Commission;
. make adoption decisions on a casebycase basis following a risk
. the Chief Executive of Oranga Ta mariki to have responsibility to provide enrolment advice and a ssistance to a young person aged or years old who is de tained in an Oranga Tamariki residence for a sentence of less than three years;
. the Chief Executive of Oranga Tamariki to have res ponsibility to provide enrolment advice and assistance to a young person aged or years old who is detained in an Oranga Tamariki residence for a sentence of less than three years; Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E SWCMIN I N C O N F I D E N C E qlgofb Commencement
.. This DA replaces the previous DAG. signed in December .
., Repo rt on Overseas Travel: Hon Nanaia Mahuta, Office of the Minister of Loc al
. consider Te Tiriti o Waitangi, Te Ao Mori, accountability, ethics, transparency
. discontinuance processes and the period decisions remain in force;
. discontinuance processes and the period decisions remain in force; and
.. For the policy to be given effect by this Bill, is there analysis available on : (a) the size of the potential costs and benefits YES (b) the potential for any group of persons to suffer a substantial unavoidable loss of income or wealth NO (a) The potential costs and benefits of this policy are considered in the Regulatory Impact Assessment of August : https:www.dia.govt.nzdiawebsite.nsfFilesProactive releasesfileCabinet paper Policy proposals Standardising classification forCommercial Video onDemand.pdf
. Gambling harm needs assessment The Act requires the Ministry to undertake a needs assessment to inform the development of the strategy. The needs assessment looks at facts and figures about gamblingrelated harm in New Zealand to highlight any gaps between the research evidence, population needs, service provision and the strategy s goal. This helps to determine the most appropriate distribution of health services to promote better health outcomes for the population. To help prepare the needs assessment, the Ministry contracted an independent research organisation, Sapere Research Group, to review needs in the sector. The Sapere needs assessment report (Rook et al ) is available on the Ministry s website together with a table listing the report s recommendations and the Ministry s proposed response to them. Together, these documents form the Ministry s needs assessment that has informed the strategy s development. In summary, the needs assessment identifies that the key needs are much the same as they were when the Ministry developed the service plan for to in . There is provision for dedicated Mori, Pacific and Asian services and activities , as these are the most vulnerable populations. The needs assessment also suggests there is value in strengthening research and evaluation and in piloting new initiatives to address harm caused by persistent and relapsed moderate to highrisk gambling. It addresses concerns about the growth of internetbased gambling and the convergence between gambling and gaming: the Ministry proposes this as a research priority. Opportunities to learn Overall, Sapere found that: There are many opportunities to learn from best practice within New Zealand and create pilot service models to address service gaps. Work is needed to improve intersectorial relationships and make best use of the skills available within the industry as a whole to support those harmed by gambling (Rook et al ). In response, the Ministry notes the strategic goal for gambling harm reduction is Government, the gambling sector, communities, families and whnau working together to prevent and minimise gambling harm, and to reduce related health inequities (Ministry of Health ). The Ministry s statutory responsibility is to promote harm minimisation through an informed, resear chbased public health approach. www.health.govt.nzpublicationgamblingharmreductionneeds assessment (accessed November ). In this context, the gambling sector includes commercial and non commercial gambling operators (including NZRB and NZLC), member associations such as Clubs New Zealand Inc and Hospitality New Zealand, operators of gambling venues (including publicans and operators of retail outlets), providers of services to prevent and minimise gambling harm, and gambling researchers. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
. make cloud adoption decisions which consider highlevel sustainability
. the types of polls that can be held on establishing wards;
. types of polls that can be held on establishing wards;
.. For the policy to be given effect by this Bill, are the potential costs or benefits likely to be impacted by: (a) the level of effective compliance or noncompliance with applicable obligations or standards YES (b) the nature and level of regulator effort put into encouraging or securing compliance YES (a) The overarching objective of the policy to be given effect by this Bill is to reduce the potential for harm to consumers from viewing inappropriate content. The success of this objective will rely on compliance with, and enforcement of, the requirements set out in the Bill. Specified CVoD providers will be required to rate and label their content to indicate what maturity level it is suitable for, and to provide info rmation about content likely to offend. Poor compliance will result in ineffective or inconsistent labelling and will require use of enforcement provisions under the Act. The costs associate d with using enforcement provisions to respond to non compliance will depend on OFLCs funding structure . This is the subject of a broader funding review of the Classifications System which is underway at present and will report to Cabinet on proposed options by April .
. only store data classified as RESTRICTED or below in a public cloud service;
. A populationbased public health approach The Act recognises the importance of prevention and a public health focus in addressing gambling harm. The Ministry proposes to continue using the continuum ofharm approach, which aligns a spectrum of gambling behaviour with a harm reduction framework, as first developed by Korn and Shaffer (). This approach recognises that people experience varying levels of harm from gambling. The framework, represented in Figure below, brings together the ideas of different levels of individual gambling behaviour, associated levels of harm and types of health intervention. The approach describes levels of gambling behaviour and associated harm as non problem (none), mild and moderate through to severe (problem) gambling. These categories can be overlaid with the three broad categories of population public health intervention s: primary , secondary and tertiary interventions. Figure also shows examples of the related types of activity that have been delivered through each current service plan. The categories of behaviour and harm have been aligned with the PGSI, which the Ministry uses to monitor the level of harmful gambling behaviour occurring in the New Zealand population. Figure includes the most robust estimates of the harm occurring for each category. The estimates are from a statistical metaanalysis of the pooled responses to the PGSI questions in the , and HLS. It is important to note that the PGSI measures the level of reported harm that is associated with the individual gambler and their immediately affected others (eg, family , whnau , employers and community groups ). While it is necessary to address the needs of those who have already developed a serious gambling problem and who need specialist help, early prevention interventions can help individuals and their family , whnau and communities avoid developing more risky gambling behaviours and associated har m. This approach aligns closely with other public health programmes in the mental health and addictions areas of alcohol, tobacco and drug use, and family, whnau and partner violence prevention. The estimates have been produced through the HLS Gambling module and the NGS, both of which the Ministry funds through the gambling levy. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
. as a preference, over time, host RESTRICTED information in a New Zealand
. Gambling harm inequality and inequity Improved health and equity for all New Zealand population groups is a government priority. To focus and prioritise gambling harm reduction activities in the next strategy period, the Ministry proposes to continue using a health inequality and inequity lens, which complements the public health approach by identifying areas where there are large differences in gambling harm experience between population groups. What the research tells us Gambling research shows there are inequalities and inequities attributable to gambling harm both in the New Zealand population and internationally (Canale et al ; KolandaiMatchett et al ; Rintoul et al ; Tu et al ; van der Maas ). An analysis of the responses to the HLS by a range of gambling predictors and population groups of interest (eg, ethnicity, gender, social deprivation) shows that inequalities and inequities have persisted for some time (ThimasarnAnwar et al ) . The HLS results for the period also show that while absolute levels of health inequ ality and inequity have reduced over time, relative levels of inequality and inequity between ethnic groups remain. In terms of overall gambling service u se, analysis indicates that there is substantive underu se of services by the Pacific and Asian groups. Similarly, an analysis using the social deprivation index shows significant inequality, disparity and inequity between New Zealand populations groups by socioeconomic status. Research also shows higher concentrations of class electronic gaming machines (NCGMs (ie, pokies) located in lower socioeconomic areas. Figure shows that approximately percent of all NCGMs (which is the source of the highest risk of harmful gambling activity) are located in the most socioeconomically deprived areas (ie, the poorest areas of the country). Economically, people in these areas can least afford financial losses from gambling. Based on NZDep census area units: University of Otago Wellington. Socioeconomic Deprivation Indexes: NZDep and NZiDep, Department of Public Health. URL: www.otago.ac.nzwellingtondepartmentspublichealthresearchhirpotago.html (accessed November ). STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
.Nothing in this MoU modifies or supersedes any agreement between the parties entered
.On July , Cabinet agreed that an Order in Council (Order) would be
.Our GRE ass essment under scenario for
.Summary of Indicative Rating Conclu sionX
.note the impact of recent severe weather events impedes the eight councils
ethics: tikanga, kawa (protocols) and mtauranga (knowledge) shall underpin
AML Directorate Current structure
April Update from the Chair th Rural Water Supplies Technical Working Group meeting
April meeting agenda and material Rural Group material
April meeting notes from the
For the local government candidacy age, and voting in alcohol licensing trust elections, there is not a rational evidence based connection between the limit on the right and the objective of the right limiting measure. For both of these instances of age differentiation, and for standing (or being appointed) as a member of an alcohol licensing trust, there are alternatives that would achieve the objective with a lesser impairment of the right.
Henrich, L., McClure, J., Crozier, M. (). Effects of risk framing on earthquake risk perception: Lifetime frequencies enhance recognition of the risk. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, , ; McClure, J., Allen, M. W., Walkey, F. (). Countering fatalism: Causal information in news reports affects judgments about earthquake damage. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, , ; Storey, Belinda, and Ilan Noy. (). Insuring Property under Climate Change. Policy Quarterly (): . O. Filippova, C. Nguyen, I. Noy and M. Rehm () Who cares Future sealevelrise and house prices (Victoria University of Wellington, Working Paper); Yang,K W. Sharp, B. (). Spatial analysis of flood risk effects on house prices in Auckland (prepared by Uniservices Centre for Infrastructure Research for Auckland Council).
Informed by those discussions, and building on Te Mana Raraunga Mori Data
The sex is recorded by a health professional based on an assessment of primary sex characteristics, namely the appearance of the external genitalia and is recorded as either female or male. Babies who have a variation of sex characteristics can be registered as indeterminate. Indeterminate is most commonly used for babies who were stillborn or die soon after birth where their sex could not be determined. It is not intended to be a nonbinary identity option.
The voting age for local elections is currently derived from the voting age in the Electoral Act. To be eligible to vote as a residential or ratepayer elector in local elections an elector must be regi stered as a parliamentary elector and living within the local gov ernment area; this means the voting age for local elections is also . However, the voting age for local elections is not a reserved provision, and so could be changed through legislative amendment requiring only a simple majority in the House.
Treasury, Te Puni K kiri, Statistics NZ, Ministry of Education, Whaikaha Ministry for Disabled People, Ministry fo r Pacific Peoples, Mi nistry for Women, Ministry for Ethnic Communities, Mini stry of Youth Development, Oranga Tamariki, Department of Corrections, and the Electoral Commission, were consulted on this paper. The Department of the Prime Mini ster and Cabinet (Policy Advisory Group) was informed.
Water Ways: Inquiry into Reform of the Metropolitan Retail Water Sector (). https:www.dtf.vic.gov.ausitesd efaultfiles reform ofthemetropolitan retail water sector inquiry.pdf Coelli and Walding (), Performance measurement in the Australian water supply industry: A preliminary analysis. Performance measurement and regulation of network utili ties, . Annual Report (Ofwat) https:assets.publishing.service.gov.ukgovernmentuploadssystemuploadsattachm entdatafile.pdf FarrierSwier (), Three Waters Reform: Review of the methodology and assumptions underpinning economic an alysis of aggregation, page Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia that given the small size of individual councils in New Z ealand , the councils will not be able to fully realise the predicted efficiency improvements if they do not amalgamate. WDC does not appear to have significant opportunity for opex savings A percent reduction in WDCs opex costs appears implausible give n the nature of those costs. Approximately percent of WDCs opex costs are made up of employment, hired and contracted services, power, and materials and consumables. Power costs will not reduce significantly as a res ult of administrative amalgamations. Some minor cost savings are possible for materials and consumables in the Reform Scenario (for example , as a result from buying in bulk) . However, none of the opex costs are likely to f all by percent. Labour cost reductions , including direct employment costs and hired and contracted services, would not be expected to decrease , based on promises of no job losses from government representatives and Three Waters Steering Committee members : Rachel Reese , Mayor of Nelson a nd Three Waters Steering Committee m ember stated: all of our staff in our organisations you will have a guaranteed role in the new service entities. The role will retain the features of your current role; your salary, your terms, and your location. FFF Grant Robertson, Minister of I nfrastructure said, The recognition of the workforce the current workforce involved in this space this is more work here, more jobs here, higher paid jobs here, that transitional process must include that workforce and must include you, and I want to gi ve that commitment to you today. FFF
We are now seeking your agreement for the Bill to commence on March in time for the local elections. We are conscious that such a long leadin time will be criticised by some. Therefore, we also recommend you agree to a mechanism in the Bill to br ing the commencement forward, via Order in Council, if the changes are able to be implemented earlier. The earliest commencement would be March . This mechanism would enable the changes to be first used in loca l byelections, before the full rollout at the triennial local elections. It w ould also demonstrate the Governments intent to have the changes in place as soon as we are operationally ready. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE Change to authorisation for minor and technical changes Cabinet previously authorised the Minister of Justice to make minor and consequential policy decisions that may arise during the drafting process CABMIN. As the Bill will now focus on local elections, we seek your authorisat ion for the Minister of Local Government to approve any additional minor and technical changes to the Bill prior to introduction. Implementation No implementation planning has been done yet It has not been possible for the Electoral Commission to commence implementation scoping and planning as they have been occupied this year with implementing the changes to the Maori Electoral Option and preparations for the General Election. Also, policy decisions on the changes to be implemented are still being finalised. The proposed longer leadin time, for implementation by , will give the Electoral Commission the time to undertake the work required to design and secure funding for implementation. It will also allow enough time for local authorities and electoral service providers to carry out their implementation steps before the lower voting and candidacy ages apply for the first time. Civics education will be required We consider that lowering the voting age to needs to be supported by relevant civics education in schools. In its submission to the Justice Committee on the Declaration of Inconsistency, the Human Rights Commission noted the intrinsic link between the right to education and the right to participation in public and political life. The Taituara (Local Government Professionals) Electoral Reference Group also stressed the need for further, local government specific, civics education if these changes are implemented. The Ministry of Education has a fiveyear programme underway to refresh the New Zealand Curriculum, aimed at ensuring all students can contribute as active citizens now and in the future. The social sciences learning area is the first learning area to be refreshed and has been released. Social sciences is the primary learning area for civics and citizenship education , however, this will also be embedded across the reset of the curriculum as the remaining learning areas are refreshed over the next two years. IN CONFIDENCE Page of qIgofb : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE Various organisations will have a role in encouraging and supporting voters and candidates In addition to civics education , implementation will need to be supported by enrolment and voting support information which is targeted to young people. The Electoral Commission conducts an enrolment update campaign prior to the triennial local elections. The Bill expands the campaign to include and yearolds. Funding for this expansion, and any additional targeted efforts to encourage young people to enrol, will be including in the implementation design and costing work to be undertaken by the Electoral Commission in . Local authorities have responsibilities to promote their elections and provide voter support. Some councils may undertake targeted efforts to inform and encourage youth participation as voters and candidates , but this will depend on the resources of individual councils. Information sharing arrangements may need to be Under the Electoral Act the Electoral Commission is able to obtain personal informatio n from the Department of Internal Affairs, Waka Kotahi, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, Immigration New Zealand and the Ministry of Social Development, for the purposes of maintaining the parliamentary electoral roll. The Bill will extend these provisions so they apply to maintaining the youth elector roll also. The information sharing arrangements the Electoral Commission has with these departments and agencies may need to be when the changes come into effect. Financial Implications The cost of implementing the Bill is unknown (I Section ()()(f)(iv) The Bill requires establishment of a separate youth electoral roll for each district which will also need to be able to integrate with the parliamentary rolls at key points in the process (for example, enrolment update processes and transferrin eo le to the arliamentar roll automaticall on their th birthday). IN CONFIDENCE Page of qIgofb : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of qlgofb
agreed that this pass through billing obligation on local government would expire on July ;
note the creation of a centralised certification process for onshore hyperscale data
noted the creation of a centralised certification process for onshore hyperscale data centres,
Mayoral Forum, Zonesector meetingsdiscussions
TechnicalMori Reference Group meetings and workshopsmeetings with industry and Mori groups
formal and multiple informal discussions hui with iwihap representatives
. All prosecutions must be initiated by referral to Legal Services and assessment of the file by Legal Services as outlined above.
. I ask that Cabinet agree that . million (representing just over a third of the total
. Major amendments to the Agreement
. Major amendments to the Agreement .
. Management of classes .
. Now that the poll provisions have been removed, it is timely to improve the processes
. Officials from the Department and Taumata Arowai are available to meet should you
. Review of this agreement
. accountability: agencies responsible for Mori data have accountabilities to
.. This DAA must be reviewed by the Minister Responsible for the NZSIS and the Minister
. transparency: security and controls demonstrate care, trust, and due diligence
. collaboration: Iwi and Mori are involved in agency decisions about the
.Clause amends section of the LGA, exempting the eight councils from
Bay of Plenty Region Act of Parliament Waikato Region Council decision (no poll was demanded) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
, and the Local Government (Auckland Council) Act . Amendments to the
, as part of North Island Weather Events Recovery works
LONGTERM PLAN) ORDER
Report of the Local Government Rates Inquiry (the Shand Report)
Disclosure of Funding Shortfall in ACC Nonearners Account
Building Failure Caused By The Canterbury Earthquake
Allegations concerning Hon. Judith Collins
Statement of Intent
, which are used to control who can do an activity, what can be used to do an activity
(ongoing) The Use of DNA in Criminal Investigations
Cathedral working group
Havelock North drinking water
Victims of family violence who commit homicide
Film Industry working group
Gambling Outcomes Monitoring Report (in publication) have all informed the development of the service plan set out below. The main changes in the service plan are to: expand the service mix to more closely match those available in the wider addiction and mental health sector (eg, peer support, residential care, consumer networks) foster codesign and establish a consumer (lived experience) network to inform services make greater use of pilot, evaluation and action research to inform service development. The service plan provides for the use of pilots to develop or trial new service models, particularly to address: gaps in current service provision public health , psychosocial and intervention services areas of systemic, persistent gambling harm, health inequities and gambling relapse technology to manage and mitigate gambling harm recovery services th at enhance the mana of service users and build their resilience. In addition, the service plan refocuses the mix of services for to: increase awareness of and engagement by those at risk (eg, by introducing a greater focus on health literacy, service responsiveness and gambling host responsibility) explore new intervention initiatives, based on learning about what works from the evaluation and research include an emphasis on addressing longstanding inequities for Mori and other ethnicities, through both culturally specific services and mainstream services maintain the emphasis on an outcomes and resultsbased approach to services, with a focus on achieving value for money alongside optimal service coverage. The service plan continues to: prioritise reducing gamblingharmrelated health inequalities and equities for vulnerable, atrisk populations; particularly Mori , Pacific and Asian communities encourage further workforce development with public health training (in core competencies and minimum qualifications) and intervention training (for DAPAANZ registration or equivalent fund the gambling helpline service, through the integrated national telehealth service explore enhancing telephone support to Pacific and Asian communities with extended hours and interpret er support. Enhanced process to develop service details In response to significant interest from a range of stakeholders, the Ministry intends to follow an open process to develop, pilot, evaluate and implement the proposals in the STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
NZ Open Source Awards
Abortion Law Reform
Review of the Property (Relationships) Act
under t he curr ent base case.
and compared to . in the current base case due to the la rge reduct ion in
Ng Takune Rautaki Strategic IntentionsG. SI () Department of Internal Affairs STRATEGIC INTENTIONS T Ttou Whainga Ko t te Tari Taiwhenua he whakarato me te hono i ng iwi, ng hapori me te kwanatanga ki te hanga motu haumaru, tnui, whai mana hoki. Our Purpose The Department of Internal Affairs serves and connects people, communities and government to build a safe, prosperous and respected nation. Presented to the House of Representatives pursuant to Section of the Public Finance Act ISSN:
, and the costs of closedown activities to December . Offsetting this
Digital Violent Extremism Transparency Report
, as listed in Appendix A, to form part of the Local
Ng Takune Rautaki G. () Strategic Intentions Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
CentralLocal Government Forum (LGNZ Sector sessions)
Digital Violent Extremism Transparency Report released
Te Rua Wnanga Archives Council appointments: commencement briefing and draft Cabinet Paper
local elections, at the beginning of the new term of local government. It is not
Digital Violent Extremism Transparency Report
Digital Violent Extremism Transparency Report released
LGFA Taituar Local Government Excellence Awards award presentation June at TSB Arena
Legislative Programme Bid for Charities Amendment Bill
Local Government Funding Agency Taituar Local Government Excellence Awards and Gala Dinner
, and with new advice being issued as required by changes in the geopolitical or
. This would be an opportunity to refocus the public sector on cloud, engage
Digital Executive Board Annual Report Prongo Tau a te Poari Whakahaere Matihiko
Inflation adjustment to the Rates Rebates Scheme
Digital Child Exploitation Transparency Report
March Baseline Update for Vote Internal Affairs
March Baseline Update for Vote Internal Affairs Digitising Government Appropriations
March Baseline Update for Vote Internal Affairs Local Government Appropriations
March Baseline Update for Vote Internal Affairs Racing Appropriations
Statement: Diversity Equity and Inclusion
Winston Churchill Memorial Trust Board Annual Report
CAB MIN. refers. This followed consultation on the Royal
performance compared to base year and and CNGP targets
with options to address these challenges;
Strategic Intentions
Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki
Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki G. () Presented to the House of Representatives pursuant to sections and of the Public Finance Act ISSN: (Print) and ISSN: (Digital) This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution . license. In essence, you are free to copy, distribute and adapt the work, as long as you attribute the work to the Department of Internal Affairs and abide by the other license terms. To view a copy of this licence, visit https:creativecommons.orglicensesby. . Please note that neither the Department of Internal Affairs emblem nor the New Zealand Government logo may be used in any way which infringes any provision of the Flags, Emblems, and Names Protection Act . Attribution to the Department of Internal Affairs should be in written form and not by reproducing of the Department of Internal Affairs emblem or the New Zealand Government logo. Our purpose The Department of Internal Affairs serves and connects people, communities and government to build a safe, prosperous and respected nation. T Ttou Whinga Ko t Te Tari Taiwhenua he whakarato me te hono i ng iwi, ng hapori me te kwanatanga ki te hanga motu haumaru, tnui, whai mana hoki. He Tngata People are important to what we do and the culture we create. This principle is about people, both internal and external, being important. Whanaungatanga Kinship and relationships. This principle is nurtured through shared experiences and working together, which provides people with a sense of belonging.Kotahitanga Expresses values of togetherness, solidarity, collective action, reciprocity and respect. Strength in unity.Manaakitanga To manaaki is to show kindness, respect and hospitality towards others. This principle is about maintaining and nurturing relationships and ensuring people are looked after.Our principles and behaviours Mtpono Were stronger together Work as a team. Value each other. We take pride in what we do Make a positive difference. Strive for excellence. We make it easy, we make it work Customer centred. Make things even better. Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Contents Foreword from the Minister of Internal Affairs . Foreword from the Secretary for Internal Affairs . Nature and scope of our functions . Strategic context and government priorities . Our outcomes framework . New Zealand is a wellfunctioning democracy across central and local government . People can easily access the services and information they need . Peoples sense of belonging and collective memory builds an inclusive New Zealand . Iwi, hap and communities across New Zealand are safe, resilient and thriving . Oranga hap, iwi and Mori is improved through an enduring, equitable and positive MoriCrown relationship . Departmental capability . Crown entities . Ministry for Ethnic Communities . Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Foreword from the Minister of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) is dedicated to the effective delivery of its core services and its regulatory functions. From supporting key life events to preserving our nations heritage, supporting inquiries into matters of national significance and regulating charities services, their work impacts every New Zealander. Given the breadth of the Departments responsibilities, it is crucial that each component operates with efficiency and effectiveness while maintaining the integrity of services. As Minister, I am committed to ensuring that taxpayers funds are spent prudently, and they receive value for money. This involves identifying and managing fiscal risks, as well as finding areas where additional savings can be achieved. I have clearly communicated to the Department that our focus should remain on delivering the core functions that only the Government can provide. I am committed to working collaboratively with the Department, to ensure that the pursuit of efficiencies is an ongoing process, and that we continue to maintain a high standard of service delivery for the benefit of all New Zealanders. Statement of Responsibility I am satisfied that the information on strategic intentions prepared by the Department of Internal Affairs is consistent with the policies and performance expectations of the Government. Hon Brooke van Velden Minister of Internal Affairs October
Examination of Estimates: Draft responses to additional (Q to Q) supplementary Standard Estimates Questionnaire
Examination of Estimates: FEC draft responses and GAC (or SSCC) hearing preparation
Examination of Estimates: Final responses to the Standard Estimates Questionnaire
Examination of Estimates: draft responses to posthearing questions
Inflation Adjustment to the Rates Rebate Scheme
Elections: Scope and process for Local Electoral Omnibus Bill
Initial Performance Plan EXP discussion
March Baseline Update for Vote Internal Affairs
March Baseline Update for Vote Internal Affairs Community and Voluntary Sector Appropriations
March Baseline Update for Vote Internal Affairs Local Government Appropriations
March Baseline Update for Vote Internal Affairs Racing Appropriations
elections: options for legislation and impacts of potential changes
Inflation Adjustment to the Rates Rebate Scheme
onwards Economic regulator Introduction of information disclosure and quality regulation.
onwards Regional representative group Sets expectation to the water services entitys board through a statement of strategic and performance expectations. Every years Water services entitys board Presents a funding and pricing plan to the regional representative group.
onwards . Part E sets out more detailed and discrete pricing issues that require decisions. . I propose some minor exceptions to the pricing principles to enable redressing service inequity experienced by Mori. I recommend that the overall policy direction on rectifying service inequity should be set out in the Government policy statement on water services. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . I propose that stormwater is charged based on the capital value of properties. There would be different allocations based on either geographic zones or connections to reticulated networks (a ruralurban split). The regional rep resentative group would make decisions on the exact method for allocating charges. . I propose enabling growth charges through a statutory mechanism that is more flexible and principle based than the current development contribution system. This approach wou ld be flexible enough to enable growth investment to be more adequately funded than though the current system. Background . During , we made a series of decisions to transform the three waters service delivery system through creation of four new water services entities. These decisions will be given effect through an initial piece of legislation the Water Services Entitie s Bill. . As signalled in my earlier papers, further policy decisions and legislation will be needed to fully develop the new system, operationalise the water services entities, and implement the reforms. These decisions are being sought through a further suite of papers, including this paper on pricing and charging arrangements for the new water services entities, an associated paper by the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs, Economic regulation and consumer protection in the three waters sector , and a paper containing the remaining service delivery reform policy proposals Policy proposals for three waters service delivery legislative settings. . The first Bill is part of a broader, comprehensive suite of legislation, including a second Water Services Entities Amendment Bill, and a possible bill to provide for a new economic regulation and consumer protection framework for the three waters system. It is intended that this legislative programme will be fully enacted before the general election, to enable the water services entities to commence operation on July . . Three waters services are currently provided by territorial authorities, who charge for them through a combination of: . general rates (including uniform annual general charges); . targeted rates; . volumetric charges; . connection charges and other fees; and . development contributions. . The various charging mechanisms are applied in different ways by different territorial authorities. Some simply include water charges within general rates, others identify the water component of general rates, and others use targeted water r ates. Some territorial authorities use more utility type charging mechanisms based on the volumetric supply of water; and others a combination of the various mechanisms. . Moving to the delivery of three waters services by water services entities requires a shift away from the use of rates and other local government funding instruments to an approach based on direct billing. The proposals in this paper provide for this shift. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of Part A: Pricing objectives and relationship to economic regulation . The proposals in this paper relate closely to those of the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs for the economic regulation of water services and should be considered alongside that paper. The proposals for economic regulation focus on ensuring that water services entities face regulatory disciplines and incentives to operate efficie ntly to minimise the long run costs of water service to consumers. The focus of this paper is on how water services entities distribute those costs between consumers. . In developing the two papers, I have worked closely with the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs to ensure alignment across the various proposals. The companion paper proposes that the economic regulation regime will initially focus on ensuring the water services entities provide robust information to support the scrutiny and benchmarking of performance of those entities, supported by quality standards and performance requirements. . While legislation will provide for the economic regulator to set an entity specific revenue cap, this is not proposed to be put in place until commencement of the second economic regulatory period, around . In the period prior to implementation of economic regulation, this paper proposes pricing controls to limit increases in prices and price shocks. Similarly, this paper proposes using many o f the same types of tools and processes as the economic regulation paper, such as input methodologies and determinations. It also proposes roles for the economic regulator in the regulation of water services entity pricing and charging. . To ensure that pric ing and economic regulation work well together, they need to have similar objectives. If not designed well, pricing and economic regulation can pull in opposite directions. In Tasmania, for example, the politicised price setting process for water services has led to prices well below the maximum allowed under regulation. This under pricing means that they have a growing gap between the revenue from water services and the investment needed to deliver reasonable quality services.
th GovernorGeneral of New Zealand ()
As a general principle, the rules fo r local and parliamentary elections are aligned as much as possible, as this ma kes it simpler for electors to understand the enrolment rules and eligibility requirements, and for the Electoral Commission to maintain a sing le set of rolls that apply to both types of election.
Gambling Directorate Current structure
November Beehive announcement:
There are no financial implications fr om tabling the Government Response. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice Publicity
We seek agreement that agencies consider the above principles when making
agreed to include the following pricing principles in legislation:
note that the GCDO will undertake, with agencies, a stocktake of current and
noted that the GCDO will undertake, with agencies, a stocktake of cunent and planned
. Fees costs . . .
. In addition, the Department is facing cost pressures within the Future for Local Government Review (the Review), driven by the number of members appointed to the Review, the tight labour market, increased engagement, and the specialist research and analysis required. The possibility of cost pressures was signalled in the Cabinet paper seeking establishment of the Review, where it was noted that additional funding may be sought through the Budget process, should this be required CAB MIN refers.
. My view is that having two separate processes for establishing general wards and
. Once the file has been assessed, the decision to prosecute or not prosecute in a particular case is to be made by the investigating unit. A decision to prosecute must not be contrary to Legal Services assessment of the file.
. Term, performance and termination
. Term, performance and termination .
. The Department has considered alternative options for the provision of this funding,
. We recommend that you:
. simplicity : tariffs should be simple, transparent and easy to understand for consumers; Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government I N C O N F I D E N C E CAB MIN I N C O N F I D E N C E omuxuzqw . nondiscrimination : no undue preference is shown to, or no undue discrimination against, any class of customers, so that purchasers of services with the same cost pay the same price (with the exception that a water services entity may charge lower, or no, water infrastructure contributions to Mori communities, if this is to remedy an historic inequity in service provision);
. full cost recovery: the price for each service reflects the full underlying cost of delivering that service (except for water infrastructure contributions);
. tariffs should promote resource efficiency;
.While providing this exemption, this Order also requires a council to use the
. Reporting Overview The Act enables the regulations to establish TF provider reporting requirements. Proposed regulations Annual Reports : The regulations wi ll require every TF provider to deliver an annual report to the TF Authority that contributes to their ability to monitor and assess the performance of each TF provider and the overall regulatory system. Annual reports will need to include information in a form specified by the TF Authority on: Organisational Governance and Management: Organisational governance and management arrangements , and the personnel responsible for them . Service use: Service transaction volumes , and the types of parties accessing each accredited service . Service Delivery: Steps taken to ensure accredited services are delivered in accord ance with required service standards ; any breaches of service standards , and actions taken to remedy them ; and s teps taken to improve service delivery . Complaints and Disputes Resolution: Number and type of complaints made to the provider ; and the outcomes achieved by internal complaints and disputes resolution processes, including instances where the TF provider has upheld the complaint and implemented remed ies to ensure its service meets compliance requirements . Fraud: Any attempted fraud events , and the actions taken to address them . Financial Performance: The TF providers financial position and performance. This is a form of self assessment and reporting , which enables the TF Authority to provide oversight of TF providers without going through a full reaccreditation process each year. Other Reporting: We also propose that t he regulations will require every TF provider to submit separate reports with in working days covering any actual or suspected fraud events, or any other events that adversely affect confidentiality, the integrity or availability of the digital identity service , and has caused or present s a risk of serious harm. For the avoidance of doubt , the regulations will also refer to TF providers obligations under the Privacy Act to report privacy breaches that have caused serious harm to the Privacy Commission and require the provider to also inform the TF Authority. These reporting requirements are designed to ensure the TF Authority is aware of significant events , and is able to intervene or assist to resolve issues where appropriate. The regulations will also require TF providers to report to the TF Authority on any changes to the orga nisations people, operating policies, processes , or systems that have a material impact on their ability to meet accreditation requirements as specified in the Act, rules , or regulations. Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government Appendix B Further information on the Trust Framework To read more about the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework and digital identity in New Zealand, please visit the links below. The Act New Zealand Legislation: Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act No , Public Act New Zealand Legislation What is digital identity Digital NZ: https:www.digital.govt.nzdigital governmentprogrammes and projectsdigital identity programmewhat isdigital identity Digital Identity NZ: https:digitalidentity.nz Background on New Zealands digital identity programme Digital NZ: https:www.digital.govt.nzdigital governmentprogrammes and projectsdigital identity programmeabout thedigitalidentity programme New Zealand Foreign Affairs and Trade the Single Economic Market agenda: https:www.mfat.govt.nzencountries andregionsaustralia andpacificaustralianew zealand high commission toaustraliasingle economic market The Trust Framework concepts and principles Digital NZ: https:www.digital.govt.nzdigital governmentprogrammes and projects digital identity programmetrust framework Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government
August Beehive announcement:
Guidance to support the public services capability to consider these principles is in
However, I have consulted with the Minist er of Local Govern ment and we agree that there is no practical reason why the voting age could not be reduced to for local elections, even if the age for parliamentary elections remains at .
In Scotland the vendor is legally required to provide a Homes Report which includes a statement by the vendor about whether the property has experienced any storm, flood, fire or other structural damage. (Housing (Scotland) Act , section ). In California vendors must provide a Natural Hazard Disclosure Statement based on the sellers knowledge of the property laying in flood, fire, or earthquake zones. Failure to make the required disclosure may make the seller or agent liable for damages suffered by the purchaser. ( Natural Hazards Disclosure Act, under section of the California Civil Code). Section A() Conveyancing Act (NSW) requires a vendor to attach certain documents to a contract for the sale of land including a planning certificate issued under section () of the Environmental Planning and Assessment Act (NSW). Scottish Environment Protection Agency Flood Risk Management Maps Flood Risk Management Maps (sepa.org.uk) . Geoscience Australia. Australian Hazards Interactive Maps http:maps.ga.gov.auinteractive mapsthemehazards See sections ()(c)(iv), (d)(v) and (g)(iv) for regional council and section (b)(i) for territorial authority responsibilities for natural hazard management under the RMA.
We intend to issue a press release w hen the Government Response is tabled and the Bill is introduced.
note the challenges of limited capacity and capability, financial resourcing and
noted that customers in different places are not different classes of customer, if a decision has been made to geographically average their prices;
noted that the challenges of limited capacity and capability, financial resourcing and
. Departmental representatives
. Departmental representatives .
. Dispute resolution . . . .
. I intend for the Stage changes to provide an enduring solution that better aligns, or
. If the test in the SolicitorGenerals Prosecution Guidelines is not met, a decision of no prosecution must be taken.
. Treasury recommends that the additional funding required is fully funded from
.The Committee also provided a few technical comments and I have made
February Overview of the iwiMori rights and interests in the Three Waters Reform Programme
I also note that the Review into the Futu re for Local Governme nts draft report, released on October He mata wh riki, he matawh nui, notes that the Panel strongly supports lowering the eligible voting age for local body elections to (and) sees fundamental value in ensuring our youth are represented in local democracy . The Report includes a (draft) recommendation that the voting age for local elections be lowered to .
June PROACTIVELY RELEASED INCONFIDENCE
October to December
The slow decline of TAB NZ and the racing industry started in the s. TAB NZ profits in was almost three times higher than in (inflation adjusted). Sources: Kupe Data Explorer, Health and Lifestyle Survey , Kupe Data Explorer (hpa.org.nz) ; Sports betting Te Ara Encyclopedia of New Zealand and NZRB Annual Report .pdf (tabnz.org) . Estimate provided by TAB NZ in a letter to Minister of Sport and Recreation in December . Estimates provided by TAB NZ in December . qwkdm ()(b)(ii) ()(b)(ii) ()(b)(ii) Regulatory Impact Assessment f) not require operators to make funding returns to the community; and g) require strong enforcement levers, including the ability for the regulator to take enforcement action against non licensed operators to maximise compliance. . The Minister of Internal Affairs is to report back to Cabinet in October on further details on these proposals. . These proposals however only cover online casino gambling (e.g. online casino table games and online pokies) and do not cover online sports and race wagering. . For TAB NZ to enter into the online casino market would require amendment to the Racing Act. The Minister for Racing has ruled out making such a change and consider s TAB NZ should only operate in its traditional wagering space. . While there will not be a direct impact on the way TAB NZ operates under the online casino proposal as licenced operators will not be able to offer or advertise sports or racing betting , the changes are still likely to strengthen the position of some of TABs closest competitors in New Zealand. This is due to the proposal for licensed operators to be able to advertise as part of licensing conditions. Most of the global operators, who currently are not permitted to advertise to New Zealanders, offer one stopshops (casino, sports and lottery products) so it is possible that sports and racing products offered by licensed casino operators may benefit from increased brand recognition, even if permitted advertising is limited to solely casino products (and licenced operators are not permitted to cross pollinate and use casino products to promote sports and race wagering in offshore related companies ). . These risks heighten the need to ensure legislative settings protect the financial sustainability of TAB NZ in order to improve the long term of the financial sustainability racing industry. What is the policy problem or opportunity . TAB NZ is increasingly under threat from the loss of revenue to offshore operators , which puts the longterm financial sustainability the New Zealand racing industry at risk from the period (when minimum guaranteed payments in the Entain agreement cease) . . The New Zealand racing industry is almost wholly reliant on TAB NZ for funding . Despite TAB NZs monopoly on land based sports and racing betting in New Zealand and the significant cash injection because of the recent TAB NZ Entain partnership, TAB NZ s distributions to the racing industry (and sporting organisations) are increasingly under threat from offshore operators which threatens the racing industrys ongoing financial sustainability. . Many of these offshore operators are larger than TAB NZ, with greater product range, better odds , and crucially, have no overall financial obligations to the racing industry (besides paying the Point of Consumption and Betting Information Use Charges ). There also will be other offshore operators offering sports and racing betting to New Zealanders, who are not paying GST or the POCC.
We propose to release this Cabinet paper and the related Minute with any necessary redactions in accordance with Cabinet Office Circular CO () , following the introduction of the Bill in the House.
While defining Mori data and Mori data sovereignty is outside the scope of the
invite the Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications and the Minister
invited the Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications and the Minister ,.. ,C::J
noted that more than half of households already pay some form of volumetric charge for their water;
. Acceptance .
. Decisions must be made independently and be free from any undue or improper pressure (such as political pressure). A prosecution decision in respect of a case should not be made by the investigator in charge of that case. If a person making a prosecution decision is concerned about undue or improper pressure, the Chief Legal Advisor should be consulted.
. I note that Cabinet has also agreed that statutory inquiries do not compromise other
. Review of this Agreement
. Review of this Agreement .
. The poll provision was the most significant barrier to improving Mori representation
.Parliamentary Counsel has certified this Order for submission to Cabinet.
. Water Services Authority Taumata Arowai (WSA) Weekly Report Drinking Water Quality Assurance Rules consultation The consultation on the Drinking Water Quality Assurance Rules proposed for supplies with fewer than people was launched on September . The consultation page can be accessed from the WSAs website. WSA are also notifying suppliers of the consultation through social media channels. Follow up communications will go out during the four week consultation period to encourage engagement. Water New Zealand conference The WSA is participating in the Water New Zealand conference from September in Hamilton. Members of their Technical and Operations teams are presenting on the findings of our public reporting and will be available throughout the conference to engage with attendees. WSA Chief Executive, Allan Prangnell will be participating in the regulators panel discussion session on September and will be doing a keynote address on wastewater standards on September . Levy consultation planning Pending Cabinets decision, the WSA are preparing to support a launch of consultation with Councils and Council controlled organisations (CCOs) on the levy. They are planning a five week consultation running from October to November . Feedback will be sought from Councils and CCOs on a discussion paper presenting the proposed design and structure of the levy. Contact: Sara McFall
Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Mtauranga Mori is respected and valued Developing our approach to Mtauranga Mori We recognise that we need to develop our own approach and understanding of mtauranga Mori. We want our engagement with Mori, their taonga and mtauranga to be genuine, meaningful and live up to the commitments under Te Tiriti o Waitangi. In the culture, heritage and information management sectors, we want to ensure that we understand what mtauranga Mori is, what it means for the work that we do, how we can see ourselves in this work, and what our collective contribution will be. This will inform the way that we partner with Mori to support them to reach their aspirations in caring for their mtauranga. We are also supporting the revitalisation of te reo Mori through our shared commitment under Maihi Karauna. We will be looking at ways to develop staf capability, enabling kura and iwi to engage with us in te reo me na tikanga Mori and having more resources available for learning. Te Ara Taonga and Treaty Settlement obligations To better support iwi, hap and Mori aspirations in the culture and heritage space, agencies in the sector made a commitment to approach Treaty settlements collectively through Te Ara Taonga (led by the Ministry for Culture and Heritage). As New Zealand begins to move towards an increasingly postsettlement world, we recognise the opportunity that Te Ara Taonga provides to be proactive in our future thinking on MoriCrown partnerships as a sector. We understand the barriers and frustrations that many hap, iwi and Mori face having to engage on the same kaupapa with a range of diferent ministries and departments within the same sector. As a sector we want to work beyond Treaty settlements to create an approach that focuses on fostering efective, practical and sustainable partnerships with Mori, and supports their future aspirations for their mtauranga and taonga. The interagency relationships created through Te Ara Taonga provide a significant platform for pursuing opportunities to support iwi researchers and students to engage in, and with, the culture and heritage sector. Together with Ng Taonga Sound Vision and Te Papa Tongarewa we will work together to design and develop a week experience for iwi researchersstudents that supports them to meet the culture and heritage aspirations of their iwi and tell their stories. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
February Three Waters Reform Programme overview and preworkshop refresher
I seek your agreement for the draft B ill to be shared with Local Government New Zealand and Taituar Local Government Professionals (their Electoral Reference Group) to confirm the workabi lity of the proposed changes and to help estimate the cost implications. The draft would be shared in accordance with the AttorneyGenerals Protocol for Release of Draft Government Legislation outside the Crown.
Rachel Reese, Mayor of Nelson and Three Waters Steering Committee member Thursday th July , LGNZ Conferenc e Speech : , available at https:www.lgnz.co.nzaboutlgnz conference lgnzconferencevideo sconference Grant Robertson, Minister of Infrastructure Thursday th July , LGNZ Conference Speech : , available at https:www.lgnz.co.nzaboutlgnz conference lgnzconferencevideos conference , , , , , , Percent of operating expenditureNZD (thousands)Employment Power Hired and contracted services Materials and Consumables Other direct costs General and support costs Scientific services Local Authority rates Other Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia WDCs opex costs are similar to Watercares suggesting WDC is already performing efficiently Despite serving a significantly smaller customer base compared to Auckland (, compared to , connected properties) WDC has similar ope x per connected property for water as Watercare in Auckland: compared to . The relative difference in opex per connected property for wastewater is even lower for WDC and Watercare : compared to . This suggests that Whangrei is already operating to a level of efficiency close to that of Watercare, which already represents percent of the conn ections of the Reform Scenario Entity A . It is difficult to understand how scale could improve opex efficiency at WDC given t hat it has comparable opex costs to Watercare .
Subject to Cabinets agreement, I will issue the first tranche of drafting instructions for the first Local Government System Improvements bill. The specific policy proposals for these instructions are set out below. This section also sets out some of the issues that will be the focus of the second tranche. Streamlining the purpose of local government and getting councils back to basics
The Ministers of Justice and Local Go vernment recommend that the Cabinet Legislation Committee:
The linkages and relationships between the role of the GCDO, the Government Chief
note further detailed investigation will seek to address barriers raised by agencies
noted that all decisions about the use of volumetric charging will be made by water services entities, in consultation with their regional representatives group, consumers and communities;
noted that finiher detailed investigation will seek to address baniers raised b gencies, and
. As noted above, the increase in forecast costs was not included in the October
. DIA Information assessed as relevant to NZSISs statutory functions is transferred by the Authorised Officer to NZSISs security accredited Top Secret network for processing, storage and future use. . Access to the NZSIS network is strictly controlled in accordance with international security standards for intelligence and security agencies. It is only accessible by staff who have been security vetted to the highest level (Top Secret Special). Access to DIA Information . NZSIS staff may access DIA Information in two ways: i. Direct access to DIA Information via a DIA terminal; and
. I propose consulting on ways to address these differences and align the two processes
. If in Legal Services assessment, the prosecution does not meet the evidential standard for prosecution, the investigating unit may choose to gather further evidence and refer the case back to Legal Services for reconsideration.
. Minor amendments to this Agreement
. Minor amendments to this Agreement . .
. Smaller councils are very concerned about their financial position and how they will fund for maintenance and long term investment in infrastructure. Proposed rate rises are estimated to be at least percent, with many of these rises only maintaining levels of service. Meeting regulatory responsibilities , inflation and cost of borrowing have been cited as areas contributing to the increased cost of existing assets and services. .
.The Treasurys Regulatory Impact Analysis team has determined that this Order
PCO .Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order Order in Council At Wellington this day of Present: in Council This order is made under section () of the Rates Rebate Act on the advice and with the consent of the Executive Council. Contents Page Title Commencement Section of Rates Rebate Act amended Revocation Saving Order Title This order is the Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order . Commencement This order comes into force on July . xxjx Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Feb Update from the Rural Water Supplies Technical Working Group Chair
Feb meeting agenda and papers Rural Group material for nd meeting
Feb meeting notes from the nd Rural Water Supplies Technical Working Group meeting
February meeting agenda and papers
Historical average rates revenue increases have been around higher when the four wellbeings were in the purpose than when they were not, suggesting that, alongside other factors, they may contribute to rates revenue increases (Chart refers).
I have considered, but do not recommend, th at a referendum clause is included in the Bill. As noted above, changing t he voting age for parliamentary elections would trigger the reserved provisions in the Electoral Act, requiring percent majority in the House, or a majority in a referendum.
In alignment with Governments aim to transition New Zealand to netzero emissions
We note that allowing yearolds to stand as candidates for local government and alcohol licensing trusts will be criticised by some. Section ()()(f)(iv) Section ()()(f)(iv), Section ()(h) Section ()()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of usoq
agreed to provide in legislation for two regulationmaking powers to protect vulnerable consumers, in areas where volumetric charging is used:
note that delivery of some elements of Phase Two of the Cloud First Policy will
noted that the delivey of some elements of Phase Two of the qoud First Policy will require
, in June . Despite the decline in venue and machine numbers, total NCGM expenditure continues to increase. NZLC s annual report states that in that year there were , lottery outlets in its retail network and , registered MyLotto account holders. NZRB s annual report states that in that year there were retail TAB outlets, and that more than , TAB account holders plac ed a bet in . It also reports that of the TAB operated venues hosted gaming machines (compared with TAB venues hosting gaming machines in ). There are six casinos in New Zealand: one each in Auckland, Hamilton, Christchurch and Dunedin and two in Queenstown. They operate a total of just over , gaming machines and just under table games. The Christchurch Casino was the first to open, in . The Hamilton casino was the last, in . The Act prohibits any more casinos. The Auckland casino generates approximately threequarters of New Zealand s casino gambling expenditure. Since , several analyses have shown an association between numbers of NCGM venues, numbers of NCGMs and NCGM expenditure on the one hand and higher deprivation on the other. Most recently, the Gambling Harm Reduction Needs Assessment (Rook et al ) shows that gambling outlets tend to be located in areas with a higher social deprivation rating; for example, about percent of all NCGMs are located in areas with a high social deprivation rating. Section . discusses this further. Online gambling Significantly, as shown above, an increasing number of people in New Zealand purchase NZLC products or place bets on NZRB products online. There are concerns about the growing opportunities for online gambling, including those offered by overseasbased gambling operators, and their potential to increase harmful gambling behaviour. Submissions on the strategy from service providers and health groups expressed concerns about the ubiquitous nature of online gambling and gaming convergence (see below): particularly in terms of the potential impact on vulnerable groups including Mori and Pacific youth. Observation of patterns of online gambling in overseas jurisdictions has led to stakeholders expressing concerns that New Zealanders participation in online gambling may dramatically increase. An increase in online gambling overseas is attributed to the growth in online providers and products facilitated by rapid changes in technology, increasing ease of access to the internet, and the widespread prevalence of digital devices. Previous research into New Zealanders overseas gambling patterns has shown very low participation rates and low levels of reported expenditure. More recently, however, the availability of smart, internetbased technologies and devices (and In , and , AUT reported rates of ., . and . respectively. For the same years Bellringer et al () found a nationwide self reported annual expenditure on offshore onlineremote gambling of . million, . million and . million respectively. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
. If Cabinet agrees with my proposal, the cost will be . million, with the remaining
. In the case of any dispute between Legal Services and the investigating unit as to evidential sufficiency, public interest, or the particular charges to be filed in respect of the file, the Solicitor and the appropriate person from the investigating unit will attempt to resolve the dispute through discussion.
. Major amendments to this Agreement
. The consultation is not intended to be a firstprinciples review of Mori representation
. a regulation making power to limit the ratio between fixed and volumetric water revenues;
. a regulation making power to regulate or prohibit water services entities from using pricing structures, such as block tariffs or low user charges, that vary the unit price of a volumetric charge based on the level of consumption, for residential customers;
.This Order will have no impacts on the cost of living for New Zealanders as a
very small schools received books as part of a new targeted lending service, removing barriers and encouraging reading.
Castalia review of local authority and water provider annual reports. Whangrei District Council Annual Report , p. Castalia review of local authority and water provider annual reports. Local Government Funding Authority, List of LGFA Guarantors, available at: https :www.lgfa.co.nzfilesdocumentsListofL GFAGuarantorsMarchCURRENT.pdf Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia include peak demand pricing, or pricing during period s of drought or other water scarcity. Demand side management can reduce a providers need to invest in additional capacity, thereby reducing overall investment requirements. Very few households have water meters in Scotland. data reported to the Scottish Parliament states that only . pe rcent of all househol ds in Scotland had water meters ( out of . million households) . FFF In England ( which has been subject to regulation and a privatised sector since ) and Wales (subject to regulation, owned by a not forprofit corporation ) only around half of all households have water meters. FFF Therefore, the claim that WDC cannot match the improvements WICS claims to observe in Scotland and elsewhere in the UK is likely wrong. . Improved r egulat ory regimes will incentivise improved performance by WDC The New Zealand regulatory regime for water services has been suboptimal. The government is reforming water quality regulation to improve compliance and lift the performance of water providers. The Reform Scenario also proposes to create a new economic regulator. Environmental outcome regulation will remain the responsibility of regional councils. The government and WICS have assumed that WDC and other co uncils that opt out of the Reform Scenario will not improve performance because of the new regulatory regimes, or that regulation will not apply. These underlying assumptions are flawed. .. Water quality regulation will likely lead to improved performance by WDC The New Zealand water reforms also involve significant change to the water qual ity regulatory regime. The Ministry of Health has been responsible for water quality regulation over the past years (and pursued a solitary prosecution) . The government introduced the Water Services Bill in July . It is at the second reading stage. The Bill will formally establish the drinking water quality regulator Taumata Arowai. The governments objective for the Bill is to set a clear national policy direction for the three waters sector , ensure people can access water that is safe to drink, effectively manage risks to drinking water safety , and strengthen compliance, monitoring and enforcement FFF. The government claims the new regulator will provid e sector leadership, technical and scientific expertise , greater clarity on what is expected of councils and increased support for compliance . Specifically, the government claims that WDC, and other water service providers will improve performan ce as a result of Taumata Arowais assistance and intervention . The government notes that Taumata Arowa i will:
However, it is a feature of our electoral system that we leave it to voters to determine who is best to represent them. New Zealand has a very narrow range of grounds for disqualification from standing for both parliamentary and local elections.
Note: this RI A is not public yet and will eventually be accessible at Proactive Releases dia.govt.nz qwkdm ()(b)(ii) Regulatory Impact Assessment Sporting codes are also likely being negatively affected by declining TAB NZ revenue . The exact impacts of a declining TAB commercial position on sporting codes is unknown. Payments to sports from betting revenue are mostly based on fixed contractual rates, but actual amounts received by a sporting code change depending on the amount and value of the bets taken by TAB NZ on their sport. While all sporting codes benefit from TAB NZs payments, a small number of major sports receive returns that are financially significant, and some sports would also receive a major proportion of their revenue through TAB payments. These sports would be significantly impacted if TAB NZ payment were to decline. . We understand overall Sport NZ is less reliant on funding from TAB NZ compared to racing but is described by Sport NZ as highly reliant on the proceeds from gambling more generally (especially the Lottery Grants Board and Class pokies returns). Sport NZ notes that sports betting is a still critical revenue source for many NSOs and that that with overall sport funding down since . This revenue stream is more important than ever. . Sport NZ supports extending TAB NZs online wagering monopoly to protect community interests and minimise gambling harm. Sport NZ notes that sports betting is a rapidly growing segment of TABs business which relies on continued cooperation from the sports sector. Assumptions, risks , and uncertainties Assumptions . We have made several overall assumptions in our analysis. While they are based on the available evidence, there is still a lot of uncertainty around the online betting market, such as its true size. Our assumptions are: protecting TAB NZ is the best way to protect the long term viability of the racing industry due to time constraints and Ministerial direction there has been no opportunity to determine whether this premise is correct; there will be no change of overall model industry funding andor TAB product expansion (e.g. TAB in expanding into casinos) as discussed in the scope section ; the impact to TAB NZs revenue is predominantly due to competition from offshore operators and no other reasons (or a combination of them) , such as people betting less due to the rising cost ofliving, TAB NZs business model, or internal business decisions and the quality of products provided ; the changes need to be implemented a s quickly as possible in order to address problems identified and meet Ministerial expectations ; Some other assumptions specific to specific options are outlined in those sections.
November . It was established with a budget of . million. The for
November meeting agenda, papers and notes
The Bill could contain a commencement clause that would be triggered either by reaching the percent majority, or by a referendum passed by a majority
There is an opportunity to incorporate mtauranga taiao (environmental knowledge)
We have undertaken to repeal the four wellbeing provisions from legislation and restore focus on local services and infrastructure. I propose that:
agreed that the regulationmaking powers set out in paragraph . will come into effect on July ;
note officials will undertake targeted engagement with agencies and relevant groups
noted that officials will undeiake targeted engagement with agencies and relevant groups,
. As noted above, a decision on funding is required in December to avoid a
. Beyond these initial interventions , there will be a range of policy and regulatory options to support AI stewardship in the public service. You could lead work with your colleagues on key AI issues including adoption of AI across the wider economy. We would welcomea deeper discussion with you on your priorities, preferences and areas of focus forGCDOs Public Service AI work programme. Consultation . This advice has been consulted with MBIE. Recommendations . We recommend that you: a. Agree to meet with officials to discuss your priorities for GCDOs Public Service AI work programme .YesNo b. Direct officials to report to you c. d. AnnMarie Cavanagh Deputy Chief Executive Digital Public Service Minister for Digitising Government Digitising Government Portfolio ()(f)(ii) ()(f)(ii) ()(f)(ii) ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Priority Routine UNCLASSIFIED Page of Appendix A: ()(f)(ii) ()(f)(ii) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Priority Routine UNCLASSIFIED Page of Appendix B: Public Service AI Key Benefits and Risks Areas AI could deliver substantial benefits for our Public Services: Enhanced efficiency and productivity: assistive AI systems can support productivity through automating repetitive tasks and streamlining processes, freeing up resources for higher valueactivities. Service modernisation: AIpowered chatbots and virtual assistants are already supporting personalised service delivery. Additionally,AI can enable predictive maintenance and improved channel management that can enhance service performance and customer satisfaction. Enhanced cyber monitoring and defence : AI can support resilience through advanced predictive analysis, vulnerability assessment andthreat detection. Policy analysis : AIbased analysis and modelling could play a role in supporting policy development for sectors that rely on pattern based insights (e.g., healthcare, justice or reducing onlineharmcrime). It also provides the ability to explain complexconcepts in pla in language. Science and research AI data analysis, pattern recognition and predictive modellingsimulation is providing new insight intocomplex problems. Emergency readinessresponse: AI based monitoring, analytics and modelling can help to identify potential patterns and risks thatcan support early intervention in areas like public safety andemergency response.However, the risks are significant and could lead to serious harm if not well managed: Governance : because AI has the potential to produce erroneous or inaccurate results, it is vital that any input into AI or use of its outputs should be activelygoverned by accountable humans. Privacy and security : the risks to people and their trust in government could be significant if personal or sensitive information is compromised by AI tools. Werecommend agencies exercise carry out risk and impact assessments, andextreme caution where personal or sensitive information is involved. Ethicsbias : AI can perpetuate bias and misdis information. Agencies must understand the limitations of AI tools and their outputs and take active steps tocheck for accuracy to avoid harm. Mori interests : Iwi and Mori have expressed varying views in relation to AI. We recommend agencies work with their Treaty partners where AI may bebeing used for Mori data, andor its use impacts Mori. Openness and explainability : New Zealanders are interested in and concerned about how their Public Services are engaging with AI. We recommend thatagencies are open about their use of AI, and ensure processes are in place torespond to citizen requests to accesscorrect informatio n. Procurement : AI tools can be expensive with increased risk of vendor over reliance andor lock in, particularly as providers build AI capability into the tools we use. We encourage agencies to consider the risks and adhere togovernments procurement rules when seek ing to source AI. Safe testing AI outputs have the potential to cause serious harm. We recommend agencies create spaces to enable teams to safely trial and learnabout AI tools, and to ensure outputs are as expected Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
. Committing to a go live of July will provide much needed certainty to staff of Watercare and Auckland Council, and will ensure benefits to customers and communities are realised as quickly as possible. I seek Cabinets agreement to confirm and announce this , and to include it in legislation . . This decision will have implications for the timing of the introduction of economic regulation , and for the interim monitoring arrangements that will need to be in place for Entity A in advance of bringing price quality regulation into force. . I have been working closely with the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs on the implications of the April decisions for the Water Services Economic Efficiency and Consumer Pro tection Bill. This includ es considering the potential to apply economic regulation to Entity A earlier than for the remaining entities. . We consider that early application of economic regulation will help to achieve faster realisation of the benefits the Government is seeking from these reforms, being more affordable, efficient and higher quality water services fo r our communities. . Ensuring there is early regulatory discipline on Entity A will be important for ensuring consumers benefit from reform, through lower charges than they would otherwise have faced, and increased investment and service levels. ()(f)(iv) ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
. Equally, the consultation does not propose new mechanisms for Mori participation in
. If the dispute is not able to be resolved, the final decision will be made by the Chief Legal Advisor, following an independent review of the file. The Chief Legal Advisor may seek external advice from Crown Law or a Crown Solicitor in making this assessment.
. It should be expected that councils who have been transparent about the fiscal challenges they face in the development of their long term plans are likely to seek extra support and assistance when developing their water service delivery models.
. Term, performance and termination
. Term, performance and termination ....
. The Gambling Act (Gambling Act) continued TAB NZs domestic landbased monopoly on betting. However, advances in technology and people increasingly shifting their activities online have created growth in online gambling with an increasing number of offshore operators offering their products online to New Zealanders. TAB NZs advantages as a monopoly provider do not apply in the online environment. Its not for profit funding model has made it difficult to compete with other for profit gambling operators . The partnership with Entain aims to address this as Entain brings the capital and betting infrastructure for TAB NZ to compete on a global scale required in the online market. . New Zealand is one of the few OECD countries that does not regulate online gambling. While the Racing and Gambling Acts place strict parameters around how betting can be conducted by TAB NZ, there are no restrictions on offshore operators, apart from prohibiting them from advertising in New Zealand . . There has been a steady decline in retail in relation to digital over the years. However, TAB NZ has been facing stiff competition from offshore operators . Many of these operators offer more competitive odds and sign up bonuses, as well providing platforms that offer different types of gambling. TAB NZ is restricted to offering betting products and cannot expand to become a onestop shop .
. All references to the four well beings, including in the purpose of local government, are removed and largely replaced with previous legislation (from the Better Local Government reform programme), with some modernisations along the lines set out in Appendix B (exact wording to be determined in consultation with the Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) during drafting). . The statutory description of core services, which was repealed in , is reinstated with amendments along the lines set out in Appendix B (exact wording to be determined in consultation with PCO during drafting). . . . . . . . . . . . Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E aecpczkj
.I propose to publish this Cabinet paper on the Department of Internal Affairs
Agencies have indicated their support to adopt cloud in sustainable ways but
All sports with a national body or recognition from Sport NZ receive funding if bets are taken on their code if they have a funding agreement with TAB NZ. Some sports are bet on more than others, so some codes receive significant amount of funding . For example, New Zealand Rugby, New Zealand Football, Basketball New Zealand, New Zealand Rugby League. qwkdm Regulatory Impact Assessment Risks . All the options present risks, for the financial sustainability of the racing industry, the Government, or New Zealanders who gamble with either TAB NZ or offshore operators. These are outlined under the analysis of each option in section . What objectives are sought in relation to the policy problem . The object ive we are seeking is securing the financial sustainability of the racing industry in the long term . By this we mean ensuring that the racing industry stays at least as big as it currently is in terms of economic contribution to the economy (adjusted for CPI) and numbers of industry employees; from the period (when minimum guaranteed payments in the Entain agreement cease) and onwards for the foreseeable future. . Achieving this is a prerequisite for the Minister s stated overarching goal for the racing industry , the ideal objective, which is to double its value to the New Zealand economy within the term, mirroring the success of Irelands racing industry. . Given that TAB NZ is the primary funding source for the industry (and keeping in mind the limitations and constraints outlined earlier in the document) secur ing the financial sustainabi lity of racing industry in the long term needs to be done via the means protecting financial returns to industry through TAB NZ.
I note that including a re ferendum clause within the commencement provisions does not mean that a referendum must be held. A separate referendum Bill would still be required to actually tr igger a referendum, and provide for the mechanics of holding the referendum , and set out the referendum question. The referendum bill would only need a simple majority to pass.
The Local Electoral Act is binding on the Crow n and the proposed amendments to that Act in the Bill will also be binding.
The purpose of the reform was to provide a means for councils core activities to be prioritised. The reinstatement of the four wellbeings in has come at a significant cost to ratepayers. By removing the four well beings and reinstating the statement of core services, I aim to ensure councils keep cost growth under tighter control and deliver better infrastructure and public services. To support council efficiency and reduce costs, I am also proposing regulatory relief to councils by modernising outdated law through: . Making six yearly service delivery reviews optional. I am also considering potential changes to council long term plans more broadly, including audit requirements. My intention is to make the longterm plan process more efficient and reduce unnecessary cost burden on councils. I will report back to Cabinet on this proposal in Quarter , . . Clarifying that third party contributions to capital projects for which development contributions are charged can be targeted to specific project drivers. This will enable the full growth portion of costs to be recovered from development, so growth will pay for growth. This aligns with reforms the Minister of Housing and I are proposing under the Infrastructure Pillar of the Going for Housing Growth programme which will make the recovery of growth costs more efficient and effective. . Modernising public notice requirements across multiple Acts (including the Local Government Official Information and Meetings Act ) so councils are not compelled to publish public notices in newspapers. . Enabling chief executives authority to sign certificates of compliance for lending arrangements to be delegated when they are unavailable or the office is vacant. Further information about these proposals is set out in Appendix C. Measuring and reporting council performance
agreed that the economic regulator would be able to issue guidance, input methodologies andor determinations to the water services entities on how to implement the legislative pricing principles and any pricing regulations;
note the GCDO will lead, supported by relevant agencies, engagement with the
noted that the CDO will lead, suizy d by elevant agencies, engagement with the public
. I consider that the Ministerial review into the Future for Local Government, which I
. If a decision is made to prosecute, the Solicitor and the appropriate person in the investigating unit will discuss the proposed charges and come to an agreement about appropriate charges.
. No external resources were engaged in the development of this Order.
. Only Authorised Officers have access to DIA terminals. Both access methods have unique access restriction mechanisms, to ensure DIA Information is accessed by those authorised to do so for the purposes of undertaking NZSISs statutory functions. . Direct access to DIA Information via a DIA terminal is limited to Authorised Officers only. . Authorised Officers are those NZSIS staff issued with a designated user profile and log in credentials for the DIA terminal. The number of user profiles is limited and additional profiles are subject to approval by both NZSIS and DIA. . NZSIS has clear operational procedures for Authorised Officers regarding when and how they may access DIA Information. . Access to DIA Information is controlled by a defined query, Authorised Officers will not have access to browse DIA Information. Access to DIA Information held within NZSIS intelligence systems . Access to DIA Information held within NZSIS systems is limited to NZSIS employees working directly in intelligence and security roles as well as a small number of staff in enabling functions (compliance, information management, legal advisors, IT administration, etc.). This access is not authorised until the employee has successfully completed mandatory Direct Access compliance training, obtained sign off from their Line Manager and confirmation from the NZSIS Compliance and Risk team. Access auditing . User access to DIA Information is captured in two ways: i. the DIA Register of Use for information accessed via a DIA terminal; and ii. automated audit log data for DIA Information obtained under the DAA accessed via NZSIS intelligence systems. . DIA Register of Use: each instance of access to DIA Information via a DIA terminal must be recorded in the DIA Register of Use by the Authorised Officer. Failure to record activity in the DIA Register of Use may result in a breach of the conditions of use of DIA system, which may result in the termination of the Authorised Officers DIA account andor access privileges. . The DIA Register of Use is held on the NZSIS system and is audited by the NZSIS Compliance and Risk team on a quarterly basis to ensure that Authorised Officers are
. Representatives .
. There are no legislative implications.
th New Zealand High Commissioner to the United Kingdom ().
(all on the Mandatory register)
A binding referendum to lower the voti ng age for parliamentary elections could only be for currently eligible voters to vo te in (i.e., years and older, not or yearolds), under the re served provision requirement s in the Electoral Act.
Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsChapter : Introduction We need to prepare for significant emergencies . Cyclone Hale, the Auckland Anniversary heavy rainfall, and Cyclone Gabrielle hit Aotearoa New Zealand in January and February three severe weather events in a sixweek period. These events impacted many regions at once and put significant strain on the operation of the emergency management system. . The severe weather events resulted in deaths, and one person remains missing. They caused loss, anguish and mental distress, and billions of dollars in damage. A year on, communities and businesses around the North Island are still dealing with the wideranging impacts of the events. months on. where shall I start the nightmares occur frequently. The tears happen when I least expect it. I have to live on my category three property because I cant afford to go elsewhere. I still mourn for my lost dead animals I am sick of meetings. I hate silt. Pakowhai, Hawkes Bay resident . Severe weather events are becoming more frequent and intense with climate change. Over states of local emergency were declared for severe weather or flooding in the five years from to , more than double the number of declarations compared with the five preceding years. In addition to severe weather events, natural hazards like earthquakes, tsunami, and volcanic activity can occur with very little warning. The National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) has warned that, While devastating to the communities impacted, Cyclone Gabrielle can be considered as a moderate scale event when compared to what New Zealand could experience. . Everyone living in New Zealand needs to be prepared for large scale emergencies. The next event could affect any community, turning lives and businesses upside down. By making the system fit for purpose and prepared during peacetime, we will be much better placed to respond in a crisis. Th e Treasury, Impacts from the North Island weather events, April , . M inistry for the Environment, Our atmosphere and climate , . https:environment.govt.nzpublicationsour atmosphereandclimatestateofouratmosphereandclimate N ew Zealand Gazette, Establishment of the Government Inquiry Into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events , July . https:gazette.govt.nznoticeidgo N ational Emergency Management Agency, Briefing to the Incoming Minister for Emergency Management and Recovery , . https:www.dpmc.govt.nzsitesdefaultfilesbimnema.pdf Waimrama is focused on readiness Twelve years ago, after a flood in Waimrama, Richard Red Gaddum saw a need for communities to better prepare for emergencies. At the time, Hastings District Council led the civil defence function for its district. Red played an active role in building resilience in communities around Hawkes Bay, creating to community civil defence groups, each with an identified leader. The groups met monthly to discuss civil defence matters including how communities could be more resilient, what resources and information would be needed, how communities would cope in an emergency, how to help each other, and how to communicate better. The groups had a strong bond, a good working relationship with Hastings District Council Civil Defence and felt wellprepared. In , reforms in the area saw civil defence responsibility move from the district councils to the Hawkes Bay Regional Council. Red continued with Waimramas focus on civil defence. He still works closely with the Waimrama community, which has a civil defence shed with a vehicle, a stinger (a civil defence alert system attached to a vehicle), a satellite phone, and evacuation plans. This includes tsunami evacuation plans, with four marked escape routes. Red continues to seek funding support for emergency container pods for the community. He is a strong advocate for communities to be actively involved in civil defence readiness planning and response. The severe weather events and their impacts were the most serious in recent history . Together, the severe weather events most heavily impacted the Northland, Auckland, Waikato, Bay of Plenty, Gisborne (Tairwhiti), and Hawkes Bay regions, and the Tararua district. Each region was affected differently depending on the specific weather patterns and geography in the area and the reduction, readiness and response activities undertaken. The events within the scope of the Inquiry were not the only instances of severe weather in recent years. In the most affected areas, we were told that earlier events had cumulative effects on communities, land, and infrastructure. VOICES CHAPTER : INTRODUCTION CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsDeclarations of emergency for the North Island severe weather events TARARUA DISTRICT Tararua District February Overridden by national State of Emergency Coastal risk and severe flooding National (Tararua District) February March Cyclone GabrielleWAIKATO REGION Waitomo District January January Flooding ThamesCoromandel District February Overridden by national State of Emergency Land instability that endangers safety of public and property Waikato (across region) February Overridden by national State of Emergency Land instability, flooding coastal erosion National February March Cyclone GabrielleAUCKLAND REGION Auckland January Overridden by national State of Emergency Severe weather National February March Cyclone Gabrielle HAWKES BA Y REGION Hawkes Bay January February Cyclone Hale National February March Cyclone GabrielleTAIRWHITI REGION Tairwhiti January January Cyclone Hale Tairwhiti February Overridden by national State of Emergency Cyclone Gabrielle National February March Cyclone GabrielleBA Y OF PLENTY REGION Whakatne District February Overridden by national State of Emergency Coastal flooding in parts of hope ptiki District February Overridden by national State of Emergency Coastal inundation Western Bay of Plenty District January Overridden by national State of Emergency Coastal inundation high winds National February March Cyclone GabrielleNORTHLAND REGION Northland Region January February Severe weather National February March Cyclone Gabrielle Cyclone Flood Severe weather High winds Land instability Coastal inundation Declarations of emergency for the North Island severe weather events TARARUA DISTRICT Tararua District February Overridden by national State of Emergency Coastal risk and severe flooding National (Tararua District) February March Cyclone GabrielleWAIKATO REGION Waitomo District January January Flooding ThamesCoromandel District February Overridden by national State of Emergency Land instability that endangers safety of public and property Waikato (across region) February Overridden by national State of Emergency Land instability, flooding coastal erosion National February March Cyclone GabrielleAUCKLAND REGION Auckland January Overridden by national State of Emergency Severe weather National February March Cyclone Gabrielle HAWKES BA Y REGION Hawkes Bay January February Cyclone Hale National February March Cyclone GabrielleTAIRWHITI REGION Tairwhiti January January Cyclone Hale Tairwhiti February Overridden by national State of Emergency Cyclone Gabrielle National February March Cyclone GabrielleBA Y OF PLENTY REGION Whakatne District February Overridden by national State of Emergency Coastal flooding in parts of hope ptiki District February Overridden by national State of Emergency Coastal inundation Western Bay of Plenty District January Overridden by national State of Emergency Coastal inundation high winds National February March Cyclone GabrielleNORTHLAND REGION Northland Region January February Severe weather National February March Cyclone Gabrielle Cyclone Flood Severe weather High winds Land instability Coastal inundation. The severe weather events and the impacts were enormous. Cyclone Hale caused widespread flooding and slips, and washedaway slash clogged many rivers in Tairwhiti. The Auckland Anniversary heavy rainfall brought mm of rain to Auckland, overburdening the stormwater system and leading to flooding in adjacent areas. Parts of Northland had mm of rain, and some higher elevations on the Coromandel Peninsula had mm. Cyclone Gabrielle was one of the worst storms to hit New Zealand in living history, with a state of national emergency declared only the third since the Civil Defence Emergency Management Act (CDEM Act) came into force. . The Auckland Anniversary heavy rainfall and Cyclone Gabrielle were both underforecasted, exacerbating their impacts and hampering the response. The Auckland Anniversary heavy rainfall was extremely fastmoving and sporadic, with intense rainfall that arrived like a series of flash floods around the city. Cyclone Gabrielle was forecast well in advance but its impacts, including around flooding and river levels, were severely underestimated in some areas. . The human toll of the severe weather events, and the longlasting effects in communities, is significant. The experience of responding to the events left people traumatised and broken some people told the Inquiry they did not expect to survive. Four people died during the Auckland Anniversary heavy rainfall. A further died during Cyclone Gabrielle, and one person remains missing a year on. Figures from the Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) show that as of June , nearly , claims had been accepted for injuries related to Cyclone Gabrielle. . Thousands evacuated their homes, many of which suffered significant damage. At the time of writing, houses were redstickered and deemed unsafe and , houses were yellowstickered with access restricted following the three weather events. A further , require flood mitigation to protect them from future events., The Inquiry was told that homeless people and other vulnerable groups were disproportionately affected during the events, which exacerbated existing inequality. R ainfall statistic provided to the Inquiry by MetService. A uckland Council, Auckland Council Summary Annual Report , September . https:www. aucklandcouncil.govt.nzplansprojectspoliciesreportsbylawsourannualreportsPagescurrentannualreport. aspx Inf ormation provided to the Inquiry by MetService. M etService, Tropical Cyclone Gabrielle Event summary February , MetService Blog, February . https: blog.metservice.comTropicalCycloneGabrielleSummary N ational Emergency Management Agency, Declared States of Emergency. Retrieved March . https:www. civildefence.govt.nzresourcespreviousemergenciesdeclaredstatesofemergency. Inf ormation provided to the Inquiry by MetService. P ublic Health Communication Centre Aotearoa, Cyclone Gabrielle by the numbers A review at six months, Appendix , August . https:www.phcc.org.nzbriefingcyclonegabriellenumbersreviewsixmonths D ata on red placarded houses provided to the Inquiry by MBIE. D ata on flood mitigation of properties from The New Zealand Government, June . https:www.beehive.govt.nz releasegovtsupportcouncilsbuyoutandbetterprotectioncycloneandfloodaffectedproperties CHAPTER : INTRODUCTION CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsThe storms highlighted the double whammy of the ongoing housing crisis and the lack of accessible dwellings as when emergencies strike, there are few alternative options for disabled people to turn to, especially if their homes are rendered uninhabitable. A community group that supported disabled persons during the weather events . The recovery from the severe weather events is ongoing, and the effects are farreaching. As of December , the Treasury estimates damages to households, businesses, and infrastructure of between and . billion. Initial estimates suggest about half of this relates to public infrastructure, like bridges and water assets. Huge losses suffered by primary industries were the dominant driver of an estimated to million loss of economic output over the first half of . The financial impacts will be ongoing, with an estimated average million per annum loss in coming years due to factors like the loss of orchards and damage to crops. Image: NZDF rescues people from the roof of a house in Hawkes Bay. Source: NZDF Th e Treasury, Half Year Economic and Fiscal Update , December . https:www.treasury.govt.nz publicationsefuhalfyeareconomicandfiscalupdate Th e Treasury, Impacts from the North Island weather events, April . https:www.treasury.govt.nzsites defaultfilesimpactsfromthenorthislandweatherevents.pdf Ibid. Key impacts of the severe weather events, as at March TAIRWHITI GISBORNE SH closed Major slips cause road damage flooding Slips damage homes lead to evacuations redstickered houses Slash other debris cause damage to pipes Main water treatment plant down (Waingake) creating water supply crisis Widespread power outages of cell sites offline for daysNo internet, landlines, cellphones, fibre or for part of Feb Airport closed redstickered housesNORTHLAND SH Brynderwyns access restricted Access restricted through SH Dome Valley, Brynderwyns, multiple locations across SH Slip closes main rail line between Auckland Northland , people affected, with , people without power at one time dairy farms without power, people without mobile coverage , without fibre internet communications towers nonfunctional for days SH restricted into Northland local roads damaged Interrupted delivery of food other essential items to grocery stores supermarkets schools damaged redstickered housesAUCKLAND redstickered houses redstickered housesRaw sewage flows on Hibiscus Coast Stormwater system floodedWater wastewater impacted; some residents without water for hours , houses without power slips affect transport water networks Northern motorway blocked by flooding Road closures to SH roadsAirport floods closes for all flights Loss of rail service due to slips subsidence BA Y OF PLENTY , homes lost power Bridge washed away at Te PukeSH over Kaimai Ranges closed Road bridge washoutsDamage to rail networkTrain derails at Te Puke schools closed HAWKES BA Y Widespread boil water noticesWastewater systems at capacity. Napier plant inundated. Rain gauge failure impacted decisionmaking Central Hawkes Bay water treatment plant damages boil water notice in place for nearly month , houses without power , in Hastings Napier Redclyffe Whirinaki substations flooded Widespread cellphone outages cell sites offline on FebFibre linking Taup to Napier damaged s of roads impacted kms of roads damaged (mostly rural areas) including SH SH in out of the region. Towns cut offRoads from Napier to Wairoa, Taup, Gisborne closed bridges impacted, and bridges needed to be completely rebuilt , culverts blocked with damaged beyond repair Tutaekuri Ngaruroro Rivers breached km of stopbanks breached in Hastings Airport closedExtensive damage to rail lines from washouts slips between NapierWairoa and NapierHastings Widespread school closures. million m of silt and debrisNumerous landslides redstickered housesTARARUA DISTRICT redstickered housesWAIKATO Slips close part of SHHeightened risk of landslides coastal erosion in ThamesCoromandel Lake Taup full Waikato River drainage systems struggle to cope Localised flooding in Waitomo Multiple roads closed due to slips fallen trees SH, SHA collapse, restricting access to Coromandel Heightened risk of landslides Kerephi Water Treatment Plant not working during power outages until generator activated , without powerSH, SH closed,ha forestry damaged in Taup redstickered houses Cyclone Hale Auckland Anniversary Rainfall Cyclone Gabrielle CHAPTER : INTRODUCTION CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events. The facts above illustrate the scope and scale of the severe weather events. They are not exhaustive, and we acknowledge the individual experiences of the many thousands of people affected. . Throughout this report, examples from people and organisations affected by the events provide further detail about the devastating impacts and the heroic actions of the many people who stepped up. The Chief Ombudsmans report on the extreme weather events includes many more accounts from affected people and communities, further emphasising the toll on people and infrastructure. The emergency management system faltered under pressure and failed in places . Thousands of people contributed to the response to the severe weather events. A huge range of actions were required to save lives, coordinate the response, support displaced people, and restore critical infrastructure. The Inquiry recognises the efforts made by all those who had a role in such difficult circumstances. . The events stretched the emergency management system beyond its limits. The Inquiry considers that, as a country, we are not adequately prepared for severe weather events or largescale emergencies affecting multiple regions at once. Complacency among the public remains high. Organisations with legislated civil defence emergency management responsibilities lack the depth and breadth of necessary skills and experience to adequately respond in a significant event. More information about the organisational structure of the emergency management system is provided in Chapter . . Many of the issues that arose during the severe weather events stemmed from a lack of focus on, and investment in, reduction and readiness activities during peacetime. Readiness activities across the system can significantly alleviate the harm and adverse consequences of an emergency event and enable a smoother transition into recovery. . The emergency management response relied heavily on the goodwill and effort of communities. Neighbours, iwi Mori, faithbased groups, and local businesspeople were often the first to respond. They stepped up to raise warnings, assist with evacuations, rescue people and animals, and provide supplies to people in need. Many people carried out these tasks in what they perceived was an absence of formal response, while Civil Defence Emergency Management (CDEM) agencies considered many of these actions part of communities emergency management role. Living through this experience has brought me closer to my community but really shown me how disjointed, dysfunctional, selfcentred, selfserving local and central government and all the groups that are supposed to help us are. Hawkes Bay resident P eter Boshier, Insights and Observations: The Chief Ombudsmans report on extreme weather events , Office of the Ombudsman, December . https:www.ombudsman.parliament.nzresourcesinsightsandobservationschiefombudsmansreportextremeweatherevents . The official emergency management response at a local, regional, and national level varied between regions and across the events. The Inquiry observed that those CDEM agencies that had carried out effective readiness planning activities prior to the events were better able to respond under the challenging circumstances. CDEM agencies in Waikato, Tairwhiti, and Bay of Plenty implemented their predeveloped plans and processes, worked from existing dedicated spaces, and had the tools to build effective situational awareness. They were also able to draw on their existing relationships and experience from previous events and exercises. . There were, however, also significant issues in some places. The Inquiry found that CDEM readiness and response activities failed to perform as needed in Auckland for the Auckland Anniversary heavy rainfall, and in Hawkes Bay for Cyclone Gabrielle. In Auckland, the lack of planning for the immediate response of a largescale event exacerbated an already stressful situation. In Hawkes Bay, a lack of public warning systems and public notifications, including evacuation alerts, significantly impacted communities. These issues, and the contributing factors, are discussed further in Chapter . In both regions, specific reviews of the immediate response were initiated, and we expect these to contribute to improving future responses. , Some ethnic and faith communities did not feel supported During the Auckland Anniversary heavy rainfall, some local ethnic and faith communities told the Inquiry they did not know what to do or where to seek help. Some communities in South Auckland found their local evacuation and information centres were not responsive to language and cultural needs or faith practices, such as women having to share sleeping facilities with men. The barriers meant some people chose to remain in their flooded homes, isolated from help and support, and unable to access food and warmth. Local community groups, like the Fatimah Foundation, stepped in to address some of these gaps. In a South Auckland evacuation centre, they provided translation support across multiple languages, established processes to contact families to ensure updates and instructions were understood, worked with evacuation centres to be culturally responsive, checked on peoples wellbeing, and sourced help where needed. The Fatimah Foundations efforts made a notable difference in assisting local ethnic and faith communities, particularly women. However, the organisation reflected that its effort was not considered or recognised as a part of the official response. B ush International Consulting, Auckland Flood Response Review: Independent External Review of Events, January , , March . https:ourauckland.aucklandcouncil.govt.nzmediajepotlnaucklandfloodresponse reviewjanuary.pdf H awkes Bay Civil Defence Emergency Management Group, Independent Review into the Hawkes Bay Civil Defence Emergency Management Response into Cyclone Gabrielle , Hawkes Bay CDEM website, n.d. https:www. hbemergency.govt.nzcyclonegabriellereview VOICES CHAPTER : INTRODUCTION CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events. The Inquiry found public trust and confidence in civil defence was undermined for people impacted by the weather events and those who responded in an official capacity. We heard from many people who believed their civic leaders and the CDEM response failed them. People from vulnerable communities were more impacted than the general population due to Civil Defence Centres that lacked accessibility and did not accommodate language and cultural differences, as discussed in Chapter . There is a major disconnect between communities and CDEM agencies . Over the course of the Inquiry, we observed a disconnect between the way communities and CDEM agencies particularly councils and CDEM Groups viewed the response to the severe weather events. . We heard repeatedly from people in affected areas that they felt let down by the response. People we talked to had expected their councils and emergency services to respond quickly to provide resources, share clear information and warnings, and lead rescue efforts. In many cases, these actions were not visible at the community level, or took a long time to arrive. This left people feeling abandoned. . In contrast, many councils told us they responded appropriately and to the best of their capability given the extreme conditions and, in the case of the Auckland Anniversary heavy rainfall and Cyclone Gabrielle, unexpected severity of the weather events. We heard and observed that staff in CDEM agencies worked hard to support communities in their areas, sometimes leaving their families for extended periods. We also learned that councils capacity, and understanding of their emergency management role, is significantly different from what many communities expect. Theres a widespread assumption that Civil Defence is a standing army that will come rushing out of the woodwork when the balloon goes up. Thats not how it works. John Price, Director Civil Defence Emergency Management (NEMA) . CDEM agencies told us they consider individuals and communities to be part of the emergency management system. They are relied upon, in particular, to respond to the immediate impacts of an emergency while the CDEM response stands up. However, it seems many people are not aware of this expectation. NEMA also told us that many individuals, communities, and nongovernmental actors are not aware they have a role, or of what role they should play. This was illustrated by some community members we spoke to who felt their actions to help were due to a failure of the official response, rather than because they were a part of it. . For many people in affected areas, the CDEM response was either absent or woefully inadequate. Emergencies happen in communities, and peoples Ju lie Jacobson, NZs disaster readiness red flagged, February , The Post . https:www.thepost.co.nznz newsnzsdisasterreadinessredflagged experiences of the events are informed by their interactions or lack of interactions with CDEM agencies and emergency responders over the vital first to hours. If people are expecting help and it does not arrive, it is inevitable they will feel let down. . There is an opportunity to strengthen public awareness of the critical role communities play in an emergency response. There is also room for significant improvement within CDEM agencies, especially regarding their readiness activities and engagement with the communities they serve. Affected aged care facilities during Cyclone Gabrielle Retirement villages and rest homes faced some common challenges supporting their residents during Cyclone Gabrielle. Some residents in rest homes and retirement villages were without power and unable to adjust beds, store food and medication safely, or have oxygen administered. Some had trouble opening their garage doors to evacuate. The Oceania Group and the Summerset Group operate retirement villages in Hawkes Bay. Oceanias Atawhai Village Rest Home and the Summerset Palms in Te Awa, Napier had to be evacuated due to flooding. Both Summerset and Oceania had plans in place prior to Cyclone Gabrielle for managing an emergency or evacuation, along with resources like food supplies and backup generators. However, the evacuation of residents posed difficulties. Many Summerset Palms residents had moved to Hawkes Bay from other places, and were not familiar with the route to evacuation centres. Some residents in independent living could not find an evacuation centre so returned to their homes. Others returned home as the evacuation centre was crowded and did not cater well for the requirements of older people, with a lack of specialised food, sanitary supplies, appropriate seating, and mental health support. Atawhai residents were evacuated to two different locations, stretching the capacity of staff to provide appropriate care for bedbound patients. Summerset suggested that alternative evacuation plans might be more appropriate for different situations. For example, it might be safer to move residents upstairs in the event of a flood, rather than transporting them to different locations. Staffing was also a challenge, with some workers not able to reach work with bridges and roads closed. These workers were not considered to be essential workers and could not use restricted access routes between Napier and Hastings. Staff also had difficulty accessing fuel, or cash to pay for fuel. These challenges increased the risks to the safety of residents who needed specialist care. VOICES CHAPTER : INTRODUCTION CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsUrgent system change is required . The emergency management system must evolve to meet the reality that New Zealand is facing more frequent and severe weather events. The requirements of communities should be at the heart of how New Zealand prepares for and responds to emergency events. The system needs to enable resources and skilled people from across the country to be drawn on as necessary. . The current emergency management system is intended to be locally led, regionally coordinated, and nationally supported, with delivery of emergency management devolved to a local level. This is sound in principle but overly simplistic. The current application of this approach simply does not work for severe or large scale events. . The Inquiry proposes significant enhancements across the system, including: people and their communities as an active, purposeful, and legislated fourth sphere of the system alongside local, regional, and central government a comprehensive public education programme and warning system that includes manual systems for when digital technology fails a recalibration of NEMAs primary function to lead readiness and response, with additional roles to support recovery, and provide assurance across all Rs an increase in capability at all levels of the system to build depth and breadth of skills and experience, and a leadership framework focused on strong, visible command and control a nationally mandated common operating platform and picture to provide realtime situational awareness across the system that can integrate with tasking better use of the skills and expertise already in central government, which can be drawn on to bolster local responses as required, and a shift in funding and general effort towards reduction and readiness activities. . These actions and others are outlined in our recommendations to the Minister for Emergency Management and Recovery. A few of the recommendations will need legislation to mandate actions by some parties, including CDEM agencies. Others will need legislation to enable actions or further clarify roles and accountabilities. We have also identified many necessary changes that are operational and can be done within the current settings. This guidance to the sector is included at the end of Chapters to . . The Inquirys scope is not to provide specific advice about how to legislate. However, we note that in June , the Government introduced the Emergency Management Bill (the Bill) which would, if passed, repeal and replace the CDEM Act. The Inquiry considers the Bill, as drafted, does not go far enough, and will not elicit the systemwide change required. . We did not consider it appropriate to include an indepth analysis of the Bill. However, two aspects of the Bill warrant specific note. First, the Bill uses different terminology to previous Acts. While some of the wording changes are well explained and appropriate, the inconsistent nomenclature could cause confusion. This includes the change from using the terms local and regional which aligns with the Local Government Act to using area. Secondly, the Inquiry suggests the Bill is amended to remove the Planning Emergency Levels of Service provision, (section of the Bill). This reflects industry feedback that the provision will be unworkable in practice. Image: Damage to Waikare Gorge, Hawkes Bay. Source: NZTA Uplifting the entire system . Changes to legislation alone will not result in a fitforpurpose system many tools and levers will be required. This includes increasing capability, implementing clear operational processes, addressing funding issues, and shifting mindsets. This report outlines a suite of changes at both the system design and operational level. This will make sure we have a more coordinated, responsive, wellled system that better supports people and their communities. . Overall, the changes we outline are intended to elicit an uplift across the entire system, from the community to the national level. This uplifted system will have: community groups and individuals educated and prepared on how to respond in an emergency event councils with sufficient staff wellversed in emergency management specialists that can be deployed to train and support local CDEM responses, and competence throughout the system strengthened by assurance and stewardship. CHAPTER : INTRODUCTION CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsThinking beyond readiness and response . The focus of the Inquiry is on readiness and response. These are vital parts of a bigger picture of how we prepare for and react to emergencies. With good readiness and response systems, some devastating impacts of an emergency can be mitigated. They should provide effective warnings, evacuations, emergency supplies, and a place to keep people and animals safe. . But even with a goldstandard system, readiness and response can only do so much. If people build on flood plains, houses will flood. If buildings are not up to standard or poorly located, safety will be compromised and repairing and rebuilding after an emergency will be more expensive. If critical infrastructure is inadequately designed or maintained, it will fail. . New Zealand needs a holistic and comprehensive approach to emergency management that extends beyond readiness and response. This includes ensuring critical infrastructure is resilient, climate change adaptation activity is planned and carried out, and local government has sustainable funding. . Despite the limitations to what the emergency management system alone can achieve, it is essential we make it as strong and capable as possible. It is a case of when, not if, the next severe weather event happens. Emergency management needs to be embedded in everyones daily lives, now and for future generations. Image: A major slip on SH. Source: NZTA Chapter : Emergency management system design and structure Overview . Aotearoa New Zealands hazardscape and small size requires an approach to emergency management that harnesses the countrys collective knowledge and capability. It will not be sufficient to rely solely on specialised emergency management capability everyone has a role to play. . To ensure the emergency management system is fitforpurpose and can cope with future events, underlying changes to the system design and structure are needed to: put people and their communities at the centre recognise and enable the role of iwi Mori throughout the system increase local government capability and resources, and more effectively organise and deploy nationallevel emergency management functions and capability, including by refocusing the role of NEMA. . These systemlevel shifts need to be supported by a broad range of operational changes at all levels. This chapter focuses on the structural and design changes needed to the system. The operational changes required are covered in the remaining chapters of the report. The current emergency management organisational structure . The current emergency management approach is underpinned by the idea that it is locally led, regionally coordinated, and centrally supported. It is a devolved model with three formal levels, outlined at a high level below. Local: local authorities (councils) have responsibility for reduction, readiness, response, and recovery activities in their areas. In an emergency caused by a natural hazard like a flood or earthquake, the relevant council is in charge. If an event is beyond the district or citys ability to manage, they can declare a local state of emergency. CHAPTER : EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM DESIGN AND STRUCTURE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events Regional: each region must have a CDEM Group to provide for and coordinate emergency management in the region. The CDEM Group is formed by all the councils in a region (district, city, regional, unitary). Membership consists of the mayor or chair of each council, or a delegated elected representative. Regional councils also have a role in taking a coordinated approach to managing natural hazards in their regions. National: NEMA provides strategic leadership across the Rs of risk reduction, readiness, response, and recovery. It also has responsibility for coordinating across local, regional, and national levels during an emergency along with other specific roles outlined in the CDEM Act. . In the CDEM Act, emergency management roles are distributed across many organisations with shared and collective responsibility. In addition to councils and NEMA, these include lifeline utility providers, government agencies, health and disability services, and emergency services like the New Zealand Police, Fire and Emergency New Zealand (FENZ). In this report, we refer to organisations with legislated emergency management responsibilities as CDEM agencies. . CDEM agencies collaborate in a number of ways. For example, each CDEM Group has a Coordinating Executive Group (CEG) which comprises local authority chief executives, a senior representative from the New Zealand Police, FENZ, and a provider of health and disability services, and other members as agreed by the CDEM Group. . The work of CDEM agencies is guided by the CDEM Act and various supporting rules, plans and guides, including the National Civil Defence Emergency Management Plan (National CDEM Plan) and the Coordinated Incident Management System (CIMS). . Overall, the Inquiry felt the system and the networks of roles, responsibilities, and authorities are complex and hard to navigate. Some of our recommendations aim to address this complexity. The guidance to the sector provided at the end of each chapter includes actions that could improve practice. A note on local government terminology . The CDEM Act places various roles and responsibilities on local authorities (city, district and regional councils, and unitary authorities) that relate to emergency management. These roles are not the same across council types. In practice, the structure of local government varies widely across the country. Given the variability in structure across the areas affected by the severe weather events, the term councils in this report refers to all types of local government councils that hold some responsibility for emergency management readiness and response activities in a region. Where comments in this report relate only to a specific category of council, this is clearly stated. Coastguard New Zealand Local Regional Government (CDEM)Surf Life SavingRescue Coordination Centre (Maritime NZ) Aviation Rescue Services New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) BroadcastingElectricity gas suppliers Transportation network providers Telecommunication service suppliersSupermarkets food suppliersFaithbased groupsNational Emergency Management AgencyDepartment of the Prime Minister Cabinet (DPMC) Conduct Search RescueProvide essential infrastructure and servicesCoordinate and deliver emergency management at local, regional or national levelEmergency services Coordinate Search RescueProvide welfare and psychosocial support All of Government coordinationThe complex relationships of key organisations with emergency management responsibilities during response phases The following diagram gives an impression of the complex relationship in the emergency management system. The diagram is indicative, not definitive. The complexity of the system makes it critical there are clear roles and, responsibilities, accountabilities, command and control lines, consistent and shared communications and information, and everyone involved participates in emergency management exercises and practice scenarios. Fire and Emergency New Zealand (FENZ)Emergency Medical Evacuations Ambulance services Land Search Rescue Groups Local community groupsMinistry of Social Development (MSD)Ministry of Business, Innovation Employment (MBIE) Iwi Mori Reporting lines during a National State of Emergency Reporting lines during a Local State of EmergencyNew Zealand Defence Force Health New Zealand Ministry of HealthMinistry for Primary Industries (MPI) Red CrossNew Zealand Police Coastguard New Zealand Local Regional Government (CDEM)Surf Life SavingRescue Coordination Centre (Maritime NZ) Aviation Rescue Services New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) BroadcastingElectricity gas suppliers Transportation network providers Telecommunication service suppliersSupermarkets food suppliersFaithbased groupsNational Emergency Management AgencyDepartment of the Prime Minister Cabinet (DPMC) Conduct Search RescueProvide essential infrastructure and servicesCoordinate and deliver emergency management at local, regional or national levelEmergency services Coordinate Search RescueProvide welfare and psychosocial support All of Government coordinationThe complex relationships of key organisations with emergency management responsibilities during response phases The following diagram gives an impression of the complex relationship in the emergency management system. The diagram is indicative, not definitive. The complexity of the system makes it critical there are clear roles and, responsibilities, accountabilities, command and control lines, consistent and shared communications and information, and everyone involved participates in emergency management exercises and practice scenarios. Fire and Emergency New Zealand (FENZ)Emergency Medical Evacuations Ambulance services Land Search Rescue Groups Local community groupsMinistry of Social Development (MSD)Ministry of Business, Innovation Employment (MBIE) Iwi Mori Reporting lines during a National State of Emergency Reporting lines during a Local State of EmergencyNew Zealand Defence Force Health New Zealand Ministry of HealthMinistry for Primary Industries (MPI) Red CrossNew Zealand Police CHAPTER : EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM DESIGN AND STRUCTURE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsShift : Put people and their communities at the heart of the emergency management system . People and their communities have a significant role to play in the readiness and response to an emergency event. The impacts occur, and the response starts, on the ground: in neighbourhoods, homes, schools, marae, farms, and offices. Every community has specific needs and context that will impact how an emergency is experienced. Relevant factors include the local geography, condition of infrastructure, local government structures, number of shortterm residents like tourists or Recognised Seasonal Employer (RSE) workers, socioeconomic factors, and other pressures such as housing shortages. . The Inquiry heard CDEM agencies consider communities part of the emergency management system and assume they will step up and fulfil a vital role, especially during the immediate response period. However, people and their communities are often not aware they are expected to be part of the system, leaving them feeling underprepared and underserved by the emergency response. . Relationships between communities and CDEM agencies are also critical to ensure a strong response. We observed that the response to the severe weather events was most effective where communities and entities were involved in readiness activities and knew what was expected of them when the emergencies started. We heard that enhancing local relationships and building resilience, particularly within rural communities, remains a critical part of the future readiness work of Police (and other agencies) and New Zealands ability to navigate a future event. . The resources and capabilities already in communities deployed by neighbours, community groups, iwi, volunteers, and businesses are essential to the immediate response. If people have what they need to survive and support their own wellbeing without help during the initial emergency response, they can free up the time and energy of emergency services to attend to the most severely affected people and communities. It is important that people know what types of situations they need to prepare for, and that there are plans in place for making best use of community resources in an emergency. . We heard from many affected communities that, after the experiences of the severe weather events, they have a strong desire to build their own emergency resilience, undertake readiness planning, and prepare for response. In some towns and cities, we heard this desire for selfsufficiency stems from a perceived lack of leadership or response from authorities. In more rural areas, communities know they must be selfreliant as help is likely to take a long time to arrive. The Inquiry recommends utilising existing communitybased emergency management structures and systems, such as those built through COVID, to ensure participation in planning and response. In this leadership lull, communities grouped and found their own solutions. Tukituki Landcare, Hawkes Bay . Community planning work is already happening in some areas, often supported by councils. For example, community response plans have been developed in Northland, iwi have developed plans in Tairwhiti, and communities in the Wellington region and Hastings district have established plans for community emergency hubs. To support further community readiness, the Inquiry recommends a public education and awareness programme to ensure people have a common understanding of preparedness and expectations in an emergency. In addition, networks of trained local and community volunteer leaders could strengthen community capacity and capability. These networks should extend beyond leadership of currently recognised volunteer groups. Community planning in the Northland region There are over local community plans tailored to local risk factors across the Northland region. These plans strengthen the response to repeated weather events. Thirtyfour of these plans are specific to the Far North District Council and are regarded by the Council as a key to successful readiness and response. Across the Northland region, emergency management specialists work with communities to develop plans and build readiness through local planning, despite limited funding and resources. The Far North District Council works with communities to update their local plans annually, with some community response groups selfmanaging and updating their plans more frequently. The Council feels the communities are well engaged, particularly in remote areas, but it can be challenging when key stakeholders move on. Kaipara District Council staff support communities to create Community Response Plans to prepare for local risks and hazards and increase their resilience using community ideas. As with the Far North District Council, this is done with limited funding and resources in the readiness phase. Formally add a community layer to the system . In order to prepare and act locally, the emergency management system itself also needs to be based on a model that has people and their communities at its heart. It needs to explicitly recognise the roles and responsibilities of people and their communities in both readiness and response. . This includes elevating and making visible the roles of communities, and ensuring they have the knowledge to make informed decisions before and during an emergency. To support this, the emergency management system needs to be described in a way that clearly articulates the role that communities have. The Inquiry recommends there is a legislative basis and investment for an inclusive, communityled emergency management model so all parts of the system are geared towards supporting community outcomes. VOICES CHAPTER : EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM DESIGN AND STRUCTURE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events. The diagram below illustrates the four levels of response the Inquiry proposes. This approach draws on the localfirst framework developed by the Future for Local Government Review in its final report to the Government, He piki tranga, he piki ktuku . The localfirst framework is based on the idea that roles and functions should be led and managed as close to communities as possible, unless there is a good reason not to. Recommended emergency management structure: a fourtier model placing communities at the centre Prepare and act locally Init ial bespoke responses Prepare and coordinate regionally U nderstand regionwide hazardscape D rive consistent emergency management framework and approaches Prepare and support nationally S ystem stewardship and assurance D rive consistent emergency management framework and approachesSUPPORTCOMMUNITIES marae, business, neighbourhoods, volunteer groups LOCAL local authoritiesboards, emergency services, iwi, community boards REGIONAL regional council unitary authority, iwi, government agencies NATIONAL NEMA, government led agencies, iwi networks, Minister EM Takanini Gurdwara supporting all communities The Takanini Gurdwara is New Zealands largest Sikh temple. When the Auckland Anniversary rainfall hit, members drew on their vast volunteer network and connected with other local volunteer groups such as David Leteles Buttabean Motivation community health service, and the Manukau Mori Urban Authority. This meant resources and meals could be targeted to reach those in greatest need. Funding for the initiative was primarily through contributions from the Sikh community, with additional funding support from Ministry of Social Development. The Gurdwaras response was not limited to Auckland. Recognising that communities in Hawkes Bay needed support during Cyclone Gabrielle, they sent pallets of food, supplies, and funding. A large outreach programme was provided in Hawkes Bay. Daljit Singh, President of the Sikh Supreme Society, said while the Takanini Gurdwara had lots of resources to draw on, it could benefit from better connections with local and central government. When crisis hits, our community, like many others, will step up to do whatever is needed. During the Auckland heavy rain event we had many volunteers working huge hours every day you could find over forty women here from until preparing food. We need local and central government to work with us and include us in preparation and planning before its needed to better leverage off our resources, people, and community knowledge. Imagine what we could achieve if we all worked together Shift : Recognise the role of iwi Mori throughout the system . Iwi Mori play a vital role in emergency management to support the needs of people, both within their rohe and across the motu. This includes iwi, hap, marae, taiwhenua, trusts, incorporations and whnau. During the severe weather events they provided manaakitanga, critical equipment, response and wellbeing expertise, money, and facilities for welfare and other services, to people in their areas. Iwi also supported communities that have high deprivation and isolation, and utilised broad iwi networks to deploy supplies. We heard some of the community infrastructure and networks mobilised during the events were builtup during COVID and were able to be activated more quickly than local and regional authority responses. . Iwi Mori that opened emergency centres drew on tikanga and kawa already in place. Marae are able to accommodate large numbers of people at very short notice, with everyone having a clear and understood role to play. Manaaki hubs at marae were open to anyone in the area who needed them. They offered a range of services to meet the needs of local communities, including food and hot drinks, phone charging stations, and emotional support. Waipatu marae in the Hawkes Bay, VOICES CHAPTER : EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM DESIGN AND STRUCTURE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Eventswas a manaaki hub that continued to provide support until early , to people who were unable to return to their homes. . Despite their capability and expertise, Mori do not have a formal legislated role in emergency management. Their inclusion in local government emergency management structures is discretionary. We heard that, in some places, the role of Mori is well recognised but in others it is nonexistent. The relationships CDEM Groups and councils have with iwi Mori are not uniform. We heard there is a sense of distrust by some iwi Mori towards CDEM Groups and CDEM agencies. In contrast, we note there was considerable Mori support for aspects of the civil defence emergency management response to COVID. . Iwiled readiness, response and recovery efforts are already in effect, and provide a living example of what could be done in an emergency. The system needs to support the significant capacity and capability of iwi Mori to be deployed in an emergency. The experience of Ngti Porou In Tairwhiti, Ngti Porou took what they learnt from Cyclone Bola () and previous weather events to prepare their iwi and wider community for Cyclone Gabrielle and future disasters. When Cyclone Gabrielle hit their region, Ngti Porou mobilised quickly. They activated emergency hubs based with key marae, coordinated the efforts of local civil defence teams across their rohe, and stood up hap response teams that had previously been mobilised for the COVID response. Wider iwi infrastructure was also activated, such as the utilisation of Ngti Porou farming and fishing entities for food and essential supply lines, and outreach to iwi across New Zealand for financial support, emergency equipment, fuel, and supplies. This included organising Starlink internet access to ensure communication could continue, and arranging for a credit system so people could access goods when Eftpos facilities were down. Former Ngti Porou Chair, Sir Selwyn Parata, said for a region like Tairwhiti, an iwi led emergency response approach makes sense for everyone in their community, regardless of culture. Events on this scale need leaders . We have a responsibility to look after our people and those that live among us in an emergency. We should be given the authority to do so. Gisborne Civil Defence and District Council dont have the resources or outreach to provide sufficient support to the Coast. Notable in Tairwhiti was the support that was galvanised from outside the region, with iwi and whnau relationships leveraged across the country. In Ruatria, people put together a list of what was needed and, between intermittent communication outages, texted a photo of the list to whnau in Wellington. This was sent on to whnau, iwi and whanaunga (relatives) across the country who sourced or purchased the supplies. The community also coordinated its own transport and logistics to get the supplies to Ruatria. The Inquiry was told that with no bureaucratic hurdles, the items reached people quickly and efficiently. VOICES . Aotearoa New Zealands emergency management system needs to create and shape stronger alliances with iwi Mori to optimise efforts across the system to the benefit of everyone. The Inquiry considers the role of iwi Mori in readiness, response and recovery must be embedded within one emergency management system, so it is reflected throughout community, local, regional, and national structures. . The Inquiry endorses the recommendations from the Ministerial Review: Better Responses to Natural Disasters and Other Emergencies () to recognise iwi contributions and legislate for iwi participation in readiness, response, and recovery. Overall, iwi Mori who have the capacity, capability, and desire to be part of the emergency management system should be empowered to take on a greater role. Shift : Councils must give full effect to their emergency management responsibilities . Local government has significant emergency management responsibilities. The statutory functions of CDEM Groups include identifying and managing hazards and risks, risk reduction, developing and implementing CDEM Group plans, and raising awareness and promoting civil defence emergency management in their areas. CDEM Groups are required to provide trained and competent personnel and the supporting organisational structure for effective civil defence emergency management in their area. . Fulfilling these functions can place heavy demands on councils, especially in regions where there are regular weather events which require preparation and response. As weather events become more frequent or severe, councils will be under increasing pressure. We heard that emergency management expectations on councils have increased in the recent decade due to severe weather and earthquakes, and the operating environment has become more complex, such as heightened health and safety risks to navigate. . Despite the pressures, some councils have embedded emergency management as a core part of their work and are wellprepared for emergency events. This is particularly the case in areas where severe weather events already happen frequently. However, we also observed that some councils have not taken their emergency management role seriously, including not sufficiently implementing and investing in readiness activities. The Inquiry considers all councils around the country need to fully enact their emergency management function. This will include ensuring they have appropriately trained staff and enough capacity to carry out the required roles, as described further in Chapter . . Councils need support to fully enact their emergency management responsibilities. We recognise that many councils have significant funding pressures and competing priorities. Additional funding is required, particularly to support councils readiness activities, as discussed further in Chapter . In addition, the Inquiry considers local capacity should also be strengthened through an expansion of the EMAT approach, CHAPTER : EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM DESIGN AND STRUCTURE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Eventswith fulltime teams of specialist emergency management personnel available to be deployed around the country as needed. This is discussed further in Chapter and Chapter . . The Inquiry heard from some councils that they have reservations about local government being tasked with leading emergency management, given the constraints, funding challenges, and health and safety compliance requirements they already face. Nonetheless, the Inquiry considers it is important for the current locally led approach to be maintained. This ensures a local first approach to emergency management that centres the specific needs, knowledge, and assets of each community. Our recommendations aim to ensure locally led solutions can be retained while leveraging additional expertise and economies of scale as required. Shift : Make the most of nationallevel capability and capacity . There are some circumstances when it is appropriate and necessary to have nationallevel support in an emergency, including support to sustain the local responses. NEMA is a small agency with a broad remit, meaning it cannot realistically deliver on aspects of its current roles and cannot make the most of its strengths. It is the Inquirys view that NEMAs role needs to be refocused, and the skills and resources of other government agencies should be drawn on more comprehensively. Refocus and invest in the functions of the national agency . NEMA is a departmental agency hosted within the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC) and the operational lead on natural hazards and infrastructure failure. It is also the steward and assurer of the emergency management system across all natural hazards and risks. NEMA has undergone rapid growth since it was established to replace the Ministry of Civil Defence and Emergency Management in December . By February , it had tripled its staffing levels to full time equivalents. . During the severe weather events, the emergency management system, including NEMA, was overwhelmed and unable to respond as needed. We heard from a range of organisations, including some CDEM Groups and central government agencies, that NEMA lacked visible command, control, and coordination of the national response during Cyclone Gabrielle. . Part of the challenge for NEMA, and CDEM agencies generally, was the lack of realtime situational awareness about what was happening in affected regions. In part, this was due to communications being down during Cyclone Gabrielle. Of greater concern is the lack of investment in the technology to build a common operating platform that would provide realtime situational awareness. This issue, which is further discussed in Chapter , is not new. For too long this matter has sat in the too hardbasket it needs addressing urgently. Focus NEMAs primary leadership function on Rs rather than Rs . NEMAs current staffing levels are inadequate to manage this countrys natural hazardscape with confidence. At the time of the events, over half its staff had less than two years experience in emergency management. Accordingly, NEMAs ability to influence the system and effect change is limited. It is time to be realistic about what can be asked of NEMA across the Rs. This inquiry recommends that NEMAs primary responsibility is to lead and direct across readiness and response. . We note that NEMA describes its key functions as steward, operator and assurer of the system. As steward it provides strategic leadership for risk reduction, readiness, response and recovery activities, and emergency management capability and capacity. As operator, it leads or supports the response to and recovery from emergencies while also supporting the operation of the system. As assurer it provides assurance that the system is fitforpurpose. . The Inquiry agrees with NEMAs assessment that its lead roles in readiness and response are primarily operative and therefore directive. For reduction and recovery, its role is largely consultative and supportive not directive. . The Inquiry considers there is a gap for strong directive leadership across reduction and recovery, and this role should be played by an entity other than NEMA. For small events, we note that the lead for recovery is usually the responsible local, regional or unitary authority with NEMA providing advice, coordination, and support. In large or severe events, recovery has been led by a separate government agency like the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (CERA) and the Cyclone Recovery Unit (established following Cyclone Gabrielle). We also heard from critical infrastructure entities who told us of their frustration at the lack of government leadership for infrastructure and reduction activities. At present, regulatory responsibilities are dispersed across multiple government agencies. . The Inquiry recommends that DPMC tasks the Hazard Risk Board to consider where the primary responsibility sits for the functional leadership of recovery and reduction. This should happen ahead of the Emergency Management Bill being reintroduced to the House. Integrate the Rs through assurance and stewardship . It is important that the Rs are not in themselves siloed. NEMAs steward and assurance functions across the whole system are critical to maintaining the integrity and coherence of the emergency management system and ensuring that the Rs remain connected and integrated. These functions and proposals to further bolster them, are discussed in Chapter . Investment in capability is urgently needed, alongside a strengthened mandate that gives NEMA powers to build deep and R efer: Technical Advisory Group, Ministerial Review: Better Responses to Natural Disasters and Other Emergencies , Chapter , November . https:www.dpmc.govt.nzsitesdefaultfilesministerialreviewbetter responsesnaturaldisasterotheremergencies.pdf N ational Emergency Management Agency, About the National Emergency Management Agency, NEMA website, n.d.. https:www.civildefence.govt.nzaboutaboutnema CHAPTER : EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM DESIGN AND STRUCTURE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Eventsbroad capability internally and across the system. If implemented well, system assurance will build public trust, confidence, and social licence. Effectively organise and deploy other nationallevel capacity and capability . There is significant capability and capacity across New Zealand that can be drawn on to support the wide range of activities to be carried out during an emergency, including from a range of central government agencies and from the private and nonprofit sectors. By drawing on this expertise and leveraging existing capability and resources, the system will be better placed to respond in an emergency. . There are specific areas where centralised expertise and coordination could be better utilised in the system. These are described elsewhere in the report: New Zealand Defence Force (NZDF) having specialist expertise, especially around logistics and operations during a crisis, and providing emergency management support ( Chapter ) Ministry of Social Development (MSD) taking on leadership for welfare coordination, including funding functions ( Chapter and ) delivery of enhanced weather and hydrological forecasting to all councils and government agencies ( Chapter ), and DPMC taking a leadership role in the uplift of the countrys critical infrastructure (Chapter ). Guidance to the sector CDEM agencies should build strong relationships with local communities to assist them in preparing for a local emergency or to support an adjacent community. This will require a community development approach, including: sharing expert knowledge and information on known local natural hazards and risks (for example, land weaknesses, flood plains) with communities so they can develop effective, wellinformed readiness plans building a framework of local community leadership, and funding to train and run exercises with local community volunteers so they know what to do in an emergency. Chapter : Leadership, roles, and responsibilities Overview . In an emergency, the many people and organisations with a role to play must be clear on what they need to do. Personnel with emergency management responsibilities should be trained and empowered to carry out their roles, and clearly understand how their role works with other emergency management response roles. . The response to the severe weather events exposed capability and capacity gaps in many councils, making it harder for the CDEM response to be effectively managed and coordinated. There is significant confusion about roles and responsibilities throughout all levels of the system, along with gaps in governance, consequence management, and system assurance. . An uplift of emergency management capability is needed across the system. A focus on building strong relationships during the readiness phase will ensure roles and responsibilities are clearly understood. Clarity in how regional coordination and local delivery work together is necessary, and the relationship between the two tiers needs to be tightened. . For some roles and functions, other government agencies have capabilities that could be better utilised to enable effective emergency management. For example, the role of NZDF should be expanded to utilise its expertise including in logistics and air coordination. The leadership of welfare coordination should be moved from NEMA to MSD. . Active leadership and stewardship across the system is needed to ensure people and organisations are prepared, equipped, and resourced. This will provide assurance that councils, organisations, and agencies are fulfilling their emergency management responsibilities. Strengthen locally led emergency management . The Inquiry considers emergency management roles and responsibilities across local government are appropriate for the most part, although senior management and governance roles need clarifying and refining. It is the operationalisation of councils emergency management roles that needs particular attention and investment. Councils need to increase their capability and capacity, and ensure staff are appropriately trained and wellversed in the CIMS framework and other key guidance. CHAPTER : LEADERSHIP, ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events. There is significant variation in how local, regional, and unitary authorities implement their emergency management functions. Some regions, like the Bay of Plenty, Tairwhiti, and Waikato, had relatively well established and embedded emergency management processes and ways of working at the time of the severe weather events. . In other regions, these processes and systems were virtually nonexistent, as in Auckland during the Auckland Anniversary heavy rainfall. The Auckland Flood Response Review commissioned after the Auckland Anniversary heavy rainfall found the Councils emergency management team appeared to lack the command, crisis leadership skills and operational experience to deal with an event of this complexity, particularly in driving mission clarity and taskings during the initial response. The Inquiry found this sentiment was confirmed by what it heard. Wairoa cut off and isolated for several days Originally a Mori settlement, Wairoa remains predominantly Mori with of the population of Mori descent at the census. Over the years, the Wairoa district has faced regional decline, socioeconomic challenges, and lack of investment. Cyclone Gabrielle wreaked havoc in Wairoa, severely impacting the roading network and leaving the town cut off. With no food, water, power, fuel, road access or communications, the residents of Wairoa knew they were on their own and that no one was coming any time soon. Mayor Craig Little issued a personal message to those desperate for news of trapped family members. Facebook me, private message me, text me. At the time of this report, the Mayor told the Inquiry that he remains unhappy with the lack of support provided to Wairoa at the time. Ttau Ttau o Te Wairoa mobilised its resources and launched an emergency management response for Wairoa using its own funds. Working with the Wairoa District Council, Ttau Ttau organised a private helicopter to carry supplies into Wairoa over the first four weeks. Board Director, Shayne Walker, sourced helicopters, food, water, fuel, generators, Starlinks, clothes and storage. Much of what was organised was through personal, iwi, and professional networks and distributed in Wairoa to those that needed help. Ttau Ttau felt it was effective because it wasnt hampered by the red tape of the official emergency response. According to Shayne, the COVID standups with Region Leads (mayors, iwi chairs, council chairs, chief executives, government agencies, emergency services, and community leaders) kept everyone on what needed to happen and who was doing what. Shayne reflected this did not occur over the period he was involved in the response. B ush International Consulting, Auckland Flood Response Review: Independent External Review of Events, January , , March . https:ourauckland.aucklandcouncil.govt.nzmediajepotlnaucklandfloodresponse reviewjanuary.pdf VOICES Build local capability and capacity to carry out roles effectively . Specialist emergency management capability is needed to effectively deliver readiness and response functions and activities at both a local and regional level. When a council stands up a response to an emergency, there are a broad range of functions that need to be carried out. . The Inquiry heard that most councils have limited fulltime emergency management capability and rely on staff from across the council to deliver an emergency response. These staff, who are typically in other substantive roles, have varying levels of training and emergency management experience. The Inquiry heard that councils capability is impacted by this lack of dedicated emergency management workforce, especially in small councils that cannot hire people in these roles on a fulltime basis. For example, Central Hawkes Bay District Council had no fulltime emergency management positions for the months prior to the centralisation of Hawkes Bay emergency management in . It currently has access to an Emergency Management Advisor for three days each week employed by the Hawkes Bay CDEM Group, as well as access to Hawkes Bay CDEM staff for other emergency management activities. . Most councils struggle to ensure that staff with parttime emergency management responsibilities are trained to the level needed. We heard that high turnover makes it harder to keep staff adequately trained in some councils. Without training, staff can be deployed into highly complex and difficult situations without the skills required to carry out the tasks expected of them. We observed that taking on these responsibilities can have significant mental health impacts. We heard the more serious and prolonged the emergency, the more nontrained staff are relied on to support the response. . Councils that had experienced multiple emergencies and developed embedded plans and relationships were better able to respond during the severe weather events. This included councils in the Bay of Plenty and Tairwhiti, which have experienced CDEM Groups and CEGs respectively, and have implemented lessons from the many previous events that have affected the regions. In many councils, however, there is a lack of emergency management training, worstcase scenario planning and exercising, or work to clarify roles and relationships. This leaves people less wellprepared to execute their responsibilities in an emergency. . To improve emergency management at a local level, each council should identify the minimum level of capability and capacity needed to ensure an effective exercise of the emergency management function. It should be standard practice for staff to be recruited knowing that part of their role will be in emergency management. These staff should receive appropriate, ongoing training, including exercises that simulate the experience of operating in an emergency. . The emergency management system also needs to be sustainable, which means staff are supported to carry out their roles without burning out. Staff with emergency management duties often work very long hours in highly stressful situations, which can take a considerable toll on wellbeing. CHAPTER : LEADERSHIP, ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events. Recognising this, increased surge capacity should be provided to councils by emergency management specialists. Some capacity is already available through the Emergency Management Assistance Team (EMAT), a group of experienced on call personnel with substantive roles in other CDEM agencies. EMAT personnel have expertise in a range of areas and can be deployed around the country, as needed, on a shortterm basis. Currently, people from around the country are part of the EMAT team. The EMAT system is administered by NEMA. . The Inquiry considers the EMAT approach should be expanded to include fulltime personnel with the ability to provide assistance to responses, as required. We recommend at least three new teams of fulltime personnel are established. These teams should be based in main centres and have skills and expertise in a range of areas related to emergency management. In addition to providing surge capacity as needed, fulltime EMAT personnel would train others domestically to grow capability across the system. These fulltime EMAT personnel would be in addition to the role of the oncall personnel who make an important contribution to emergency management. . To enable scaling up an emergency management response, at short notice, councils could also look beyond the staff and expertise available in house. There is significant knowledge in the private sector and communities that could be further drawn on as required. This could include private companies with vehicles or craft (and fuel supplies) that could transport people or equipment. Plans and memoranda of understanding should be put in place during the readiness phase to enable these skills to be drawn on, as required. Build understanding of CIMS across local government . Council officials understanding of emergency management roles and responsibilities could be strengthened and clarified through available guidance from the Director of Civil Defence Emergency Management, the CDEM Act and CIMS. At present, there is significant variation in the extent to which this guidance is understood and followed, both between and within regions. A lack of understanding or implementation of these frameworks can impact the ability of the response to function well. . CIMS is the official framework for coordinated emergency management across all responding agencies. All staff with emergency management roles should be familiar with the framework. The Inquiry considers the CIMS structure should be embedded into councils way of working to reinforce training and build shared understanding and familiarity around how to operate during an event. . For example, the CIMS framework is embedded into the way Central Hawkes Bay District Council manages a wide range of incidents, such as infrastructure issues. This means staff, mayors, and councillors are familiar and practised with their roles and functions ahead of an emergency. This was not the case for all councils in Hawkes Bay. In USAIDs technical report debriefing its support for the N ational Emergency Management Agency, Resources for elected officials, NEMA website, n.d.. https:www. civildefence.govt.nzresourcesresourcesforelectedofficials severe weather events, it identified that many responders in the National Crisis Management Centre (NCMC) and Hawkes Bay Emergency Coordination Centre were not familiar with CIMS. This lack of knowledge and standardization is likely the most detrimental issue the USAID team witnessed on this response; there was no common understanding amongst the New Zealand responders of how a response team was supposed to operate. USAID Emergency Management Support to New Zealand Technical Report, Councils need strong relationships with others who have a role including communities . The emergency management system works best where there are strong pre existing relationships between all those involved in readiness and response activities and functions at a local level and beyond. The includes interpersonal and organisational relationships that are embedded and formalised through agreements during the readiness phase. . Councils should build strong relationships with local communities (whether cultural, business, or geographic) and involve them in planning, readiness, and response activities. This is fundamental to supporting a more effective communitycentred response to emergency management. Councils also need a broad range of relationships with other organisations prior to an emergency. This includes iwi, central government agencies, critical infrastructure providers and organisations that have skills and resources that can be drawn on in an emergency. . Relationships between CDEM agencies are also vital. The Panel observed that effective CEGs have well established relationships and a wide range of discretionary members. During the severe weather events, CEGs that had strong relationships executed their roles quickly and effectively. The Tairwhiti CEG is an example of the benefit of role clarity, strong relationships, candid conversations, and a strong knowledge of local communities. It has a wide range of discretionary members including iwi chief executives and officials from the harbourmaster, Kinga Ora, and MSD. The strong relationships built before the event were particularly important given the many intersecting roles of the CEG members during an emergency. We observed that members of the Tairwhiti CEG knew each other well and were used to working together, making it easier for leaders and their teams to be effective, even when communications systems were compromised. USAID, Emergency Management Support To New Zealand Technical Report , March . CHAPTER : LEADERSHIP, ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsRoles and responsibilities need to be clearly understood and executed . Elected officials, council staff and controllers have a critical role to play in emergency management. However, we heard there is not a consistent and shared understanding of what their roles, responsibilities and accountabilities are during an emergency response. These need to be clarified at a local and regional level so everyone involved in emergency response is ready to execute their roles in a coordinated fashion.
However, age limits on consuming and purchasing alcohol are set based on the potential for harm to the young person. Those harms do not arise from voting and candidacy.
In , as part of accelerating the functional leadership for better public services,
January meeting agenda and papers
June , DEV MIN Minute: Changes to Mori Ward and Mori Con stituency Processes:
June , Cabinet Paper: Public consultation on changes to Mori ward and Mori constituency
The Bill also contains some amendm ents to the Electoral Act . Those amended provisions will not be binding on the Crown.
This approach will enable the Ministry to refocus the mix of services in order to : . increase awareness and engagement by those at risk , with a greater focus on health literacy, service responsiveness and gambling host responsibility ; . explore new intervention initiatives and learn what works best ; . address long standing inequities for Mori and other ethnicities ; and . emphasise achieving health outcomes and value for money. In addition , the Ministry will continue to: . prioritise reducing gambling harm related health inequalities and equities for vulnerable, atrisk populations; particularly Mori, Pacific and Asian communities ; . encourage further workforce development , with public health and intervention training; . fund the gambling helpline service, through the integrated national telehealth service ; and enhanc e telephone support to Pacific and Asian communities The Act requires the Strategy to also provide independent scientific gambling research , which came in for some criticism during consultation . The revised Strategy signals a move towards targeted action research, pilots and evaluations to inform policy and operational decision making. The key research aims are to understand addictive gambling behaviour s and monitor population prevalence and the impacts on vulnerable groups, particularly M ori and Pacific families and youth. The Gambling Commission has endorsed several aspects of the Ministry s proposed Strategy and the amount the Minis try proposes spending , and also noted concerns about cost pressures impacting on the sustainability of services. The Ministry is monitoring these pressures and will make a djustments as require d through its procurement process es. Alignment with the Government Inquiry into Mental Health and Addiction The Strategy s proposals align strongly with He Ara Oranga , the report of the Government Inquiry into Mental Health and Addiction . Examples include : the importance of placing people at the centre using service codesign , lived experience and consumer networks ; expanding the range and choice of services to be more holistic and culturally appropriate ; and strengthening the mix of peer and cultural, support , clinical workforces, communities, tngata whaiora and whnau. He Ara Oranga notes harmful gambling behaviours often co exist with other forms of addiction and should be considered as a risk factor. The Ministry is conside ring broader mental health and addiction service responses as part of the response to the Inquiry. Decisions about the problem gambling levy Decisions are required about levy paying sectors and the levy rate to be set in regulations. A detailed description and analysis of the levy formula, the levy components and weighting options , which affect levy rates , is provided in the attached Cost Recovery Impact Statement. For training equivalent to registration with the Drug and Alcohol Practitioners Association Aotearoa New Zealand. wzrxijjr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Under the partnership agreement the one off upfront payment of million and an additional million to the minimum guaranteed funding, pro rated is conditional on the monopoly being enforceable . qwkdm Regulatory Impact Assessment . Once the online casino regulator takes on responsibility for overseeing the sports and race wagering monopoly it is expect ed relevant regulations for online casinos (for example advertising restrictions) to be considered for application to TAB and its products. Enforcement of the monopoly . In the longterm enforcement powers for the Department of Internal Affairs that reflect the extra jurisdictional nature of the legislation will be needed and legislated. While policy decision s on this are yet to be made if the current POCC was used as a basis regime
agreed that the economic regulator be given the ability to issue guidance, input methodologies, andor determinations on other pricing matters not covered by legislative pricing principles or regulations, so long as this is consistent with the overall statutory scheme and contributes to the purpose of economic regulation;
note communication of the refresh will include explaining the benefits of cloud,
noted that communicatio f he refresh will include explaining the benefits of cloud,
. A Regulatory Impact Statement is not required.
. Acceptance .
. If a decision to prosecute is made, then appropriate charges must be selected. This will be done by Legal Services in consultation with the investigating unit.
. The six key issues to be consulted on are summarised below.
. The water services delivery plans may also be seen as causing additional resourcing strain on councils in an already fiscally challenging environment. Councils are incentivised to deliver a compliant plan, or they may be faced with Minister ial assistance and intervention mechanisms result ing in a Crown facilitator or Ministerial appointee acting on their behalf. Any expenses incurred through a facilitation or intervention will be recoverable as debt to the Crown . There is a possibility that some council s will not have adequate internal capability to prepare and deliver their plans, and would need to seek external or specialised assistance, which would come at further expense to the council. . The Auckland Council and Watercare decisions are likely to receive substantial attention because they impact a significant portion of the population. The advice is that the options will provide a reduction in the proposed increases to water charges. I expect this to be a topic that will be closely looked at by members of the community . . The amendments to the Water Services Act , to remove the requirement for Taumata Arowai to consider and give effect to the hierarchy of obligations within Te Mana o te Wai when setting wastewater environmental performance standards , are likely to be contentious to iwiM ori, particularly when considered alongside the proposed amendments to remove the hierarchy of obligations from resource consenting in the RMA . Impact analysis . A regulatory impact statement for the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill was submitted at the time that Cabinet approv ed policy decisions ECO MIN . Compliance . The Bill complies with: . the rights and freedoms contained in the Human Rights Act ; enkv ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE
. The study advocates for two different legal age boundaries. One for decisions typically made with deliberation, with a suggested designation at years of age, and a second for decisions made in emotionally charged situations in which psychosocial immaturity may compromise judgement, with a suggested designation at years or older.
. There are a number of cost pressures associated with the three waters reform programme and the parallel Future for Local Government Review to be addressed, which cannot be met from reprioritisation of existing baseline funding within Vote Internal Affairs. These are explained in the paragraphs below.
.Sections and of the SWERL Act require that I must undertake engagement
(all on the Voluntary register)
A referendum would also have significant funding implications for the Electoral Commission.
Cloud services represent an opportunity to increase the digital capabilities of
M any of the proposals that are included in Part (options for better controls in the gam bling venue) directly address the deficiencies noted in the Judges recommendations in the legal action referred to in paragraph . C onsultation on these proposals will inform our thinking before decisions on the detailed regulations are made. It will allow those involved to submit on what they think would be most effective . It will also help to identify any operational solutions and foreseeable implementation issues to improve the workability of regulations we decide to make. Officials will consult with Mori, Pacific peoples, and other key population groups disproportionately impacted by gambling . Consultati on with Mori will also include a focus on the governments obligations under Te Tiriti o Waitangi . Views will also be sought from the clubs, venues, and societies that provide pokies, gambling harm treatment services, Territorial Authorities, individuals who gamble and their whnau and friends and from the public generally . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
Section Racing Industry Act . Only operators with Gross Betting Revenue over , from sports and racing betting from New Zealanders are required to pay the POCC (this is consistent with GST rules). This calculation is based on actual revenue received and distribution payments in the Departments financial year. This differs from the figures which were calculated based on the first year of operation. Source: Department of Internal Affairs data. qwkdm Regulatory Impact Assessment . There are risks associated with this option. These are: offshore operators may not pay the POCC (if increased) higher POCC rates will result in less revenue if operators choose to exit the market or no longer pay it. It is unlikely that offshore operators will suddenly start paying POCC if they are not already. If a POCC rate increase were to result in most or all of TAB NZ s major competitors exiting the New Zealand market; while this would be more favourable to TAB NZ s position; it would still not maximise the value of the Entain partnership agreement as again the additional payments would not be realised ; gamblers will continue to gamble with offshore operators while there is no prohibition for gamblers to circumvent, gamblers will continue to have extensive choice for sports and racing betting. If gamblers do not return to betting with TAB NZ, its financial situation would not improve, and the racing industry would face continued uncertainty; and lack of consistency with New Zealands international obligations see below .
The Bill does not cr eate new agencies or am end existing agencies.
agreed to enable the economic regulator to amend the funding and pricing plan or the tariff list if they are inconsistent with legislative pricing principles or regulations, or any other constraints set by the regulator;
. Councils are not currently required to consider Mori wards when they review their
. The proposals in this paper are consistent with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act
. The selection of charges must follow the guidance in the SolicitorGenerals Prosecution Guidelines, particularly:
.The Department consulted on the proposed policy changes in this Order on my
enkv Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)
The Digital Identity Trust Framework will be regulatory regime that accredits digital identity providers to ensure that requirements are met for security, privacy, identification management and interoperability. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE Page of . The Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications leads this work. You have an interest because of your role overseeing key aspects of New Zealands identity system, including your responsibility for the legislation authorising RealMe services delivered by the Department . The Trust Framework may result in significant changes to bo th the Electronic Identity Verification Act which underpins RealMe, and the Identity Information Confirmation Act . . We have provided the Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications with a briefing with further information on digital identity. We expect this briefing will be forwarded to you shortly. It includes information on both the Trust Framework and proposals for the future of the RealMe services and government interventions for digital identity. The Trust Framework will be established in legislation and you will be briefed as work on the Bill progresses . You are the lead Minister for any Ministerial decisions required on the future of RealMe. . Information in the registers of births, deaths, marriages civil unions and citizenship , and the passport and travel document database will be necessary for trusted digital identity credentials to be issued under the Trust Framework. To realise the benefits of the Digital Identity work, reform is urgently needed to modernise the BDMRR Act. . While we recognise the benefits of digital identity and moving systems online, we are aware that we must consider the needs of all New Zealanders. This means every time we improve functionality and privacy protections through initiatives like the Trust Framework, we will consider how digitally excluded people can access the same protections and services. Developing channelneutral products for people who are excluded from digital channels may require further policy considerati on. We will continue to brief you on the impact this would have on your work programme as the work progresses. It is important that we continue work to modernise the BDMRR Act . The BDMRR Bill was introduced shortly before the election and supported by all parties at first reading. It aimed to: a) improve the way people can digitally access information held on the registers of births, deaths, marriages and relationships; b) implement operational improvements from an internal review; c) simplify the language and align it with other legislation; and d) include amendments arising from the Law Commission report, Death Burial and Cremation: A new law for Contemporary New Zealand . . Although t he BDMRR Bill was not the conclusion of a wholesale review of the BDMRR Act, the variety of changes and updates means it reenacts the Act in full. This brought every section of the Act within the scope of the Select Committees consideration, not just the parts that had been substantially changed.
noted the impact of recent severe weather events impedes the ability of eight councils to
oapovkh
oapovkh
approve the Ministerial response, attached to this submission, to the Petition
Australia Post has separately estimated that digital identity would be worth approximately . of Australias GDP approximately billion. In many of the countries reviewed the benefits were based on a more limited array of attributes than is being considered for digital identity in New Zealand.
Babies who have a variation of sex characteristics can be registered as indeterminate. Indeterminate is most commonly used for babies who were still born or who die soon after birth where the sex of the baby could not be determined. Indeterminate was not intended to be a nonbinary identity option. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Page of . Delegating decisionmaking to the Executive or to the RegistrarGeneral ensures the legislation is future proofed gender theory and terminology evolves rapidly what was appropriate five years ago may not be reflected in todays communities. For example, X (unspecified) was proposed by the select committee and was intended to align with the non binary option available for passports. We understand that X (unspecified) is no longer considered appropriate terminology for people who identify outside of the binary. We are considering these options and will provide further advice on this in April. . We acknowledge that using a sex marker to represent gender conflates someones gender with their sex. Creating a separate gender marker in addition to the sex marker has wider cost and timing implications for data collection, IT systems changes and the presentation of information on certificates and has been ruled out of scope of this work given timing constraints. and we recommend the intersex option should be removed . We propose removing the intersex option recommended by the select committee, consistent with the advice to not specify the form of nonbinary marker(s) in legislation. We consider it unlikely that intersex will be included as a result of further consultation on alternative markers. Intersex is a loose biological categorisation describing a wide range of variations in sex characteristics which do not fit in the typical definitions of male or female bodies. . As put in the Darlington Statement (a joint statement of Australian and New Zealand intersex advocates), attempts to classify intersex people as a third sexgender do not respect our diversity or right to self determination. . We therefore consider that it would be more appropriate for people who fall into the intersex category to have sex marker options that reflect their gender identity (including male, female and nonbinary options ). Only those whose birth is (or could be) registered in New Zealand are eligible to use the selfidentification process Status quo . The definition of eligible person in the BDMRR Act includes overseasborn citizens and permanent residents. Select committee s recommendation . The definition of eligible person should exclude anyone whose birth is registered overseas.
Based on a count of systems as indicated by agencies in the investment intentions survey. The
Below is my response to the referral of the Petition in accordance with Standing Order .
Cloud computing enables new ways of working and can provide improved security,
Collection of information from subject
Counting Ourselves. https:countingourselves.nzindex.phpcommunityreport Human Rights Commission. PRISM: Human Rights issues relating to Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity and Expression, and Sex Characteristics (SOGIESC) in Aotearoa New Zealand June (). https:www.hrc.co.nzfilesHRC PRISM SOGIESC Report June FINAL.pdf Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
Hartz Karp, J Carson, L () Putting citizens in charge: Comparing the Australian Citizens Parliament and the Australi a Summit. In Carson, L, Gastil, J, Hartz Karp, J, Lubensky, R (Eds) The Australian Citizens Parliament and the future of deliberative democracy. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
IaaS is a capability provided to the consumer to provision processing, storage,
In August, at the Local Government New Zealand conference, the Prime Minister set out this Governments expectations for the local government sector: do the basics, brilliantly. The Prime Minister and I see the main roles of councils as maintaining and investing in critical local infrastructure quickly, carefully, and affordably, with appropriate oversight, and delivering local services like waste disposal. I am concerned that rates have been increasing faster than inflation and ratepayers are not seeing value for money. I am leading work to improve the local government system and implement our vision for local government across several work programmes. Work to refocus the local government sector is underway. My Local Water Done Well programme, particularly work done with the Local Government Funding Agency, is enabling councils to increase borrowing capacity through the creation of new, standalone water services entities. I want councils to use this additional borrowing capacity to lower rates bills or invest in critical infrastructure to support growth. My Local Government System Improvements programme (the programme) will make sure that councils are focused on their core functions, spending within their means, and subject to the appropriate scrutiny. Ultimately, the Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E aecpczkj
In September , the Australian G overnment announced investment of an additional . million into the governments digital identity programme. This is on top of previous investment of . million. s()(f)(iv) Proactively Released INCONFIDENCE Page of We propose g overnmen t investment aligns with the new digital identity approach underpinned by the Trust Framework . Government investment needs to support a fundamentally different approach to digital identity enabled by the Trust Framework to increase utility and realise benef its. We need to take advantage of the innovation offered by private sector providers . At the same time, we also need to consider the trust provided by a Government branded service as well as how the technical infrastructure that underpins RealMe services can be repurposed to support the new approach. . Future government provided digital identity services and technical infrastructure needs to be modernise d to ensure interoperability with other digital identity solutions operating under the upcoming Trust Framework . This will enable greater collaboration as well as wider choice for users, agencies and organisations about the digital identity services they use. As with private providers, future government digital identity services accredited under the Trust Framework will need to meet the rules currently being developed , including for security and information management. As part of this change , there would also be an opportunity to rebrand as well as reposition government provided RealMe serv ices. . Officials have engaged with stakeholders (including public agencies, Crown agents and entities, private digital service providers, financial institutions and academic institutions) and looked internationally to identify the infrastructure needed for the digital identity system to function effectively and to realise the benefits for people, government and the economy. A key change to increase utility is modifying the digital identity credentials issued by government to verifia ble identity credentials that will comply with future standards under the Trust Framework. . People that choose to use these verifiable identity credentials issued by government will be able to store the credentials on their personal device via an a pp or in an online account . They could then choose to share them to show who they are to access services. People will also be able to use a verifiable identity credential to identify and link other information about them held by agencies and organisations. This will provide a foundation to enable people to share more information about themselves in a safe and secure way. For example, a builder or electrician that needs to show their professional credentials to access a site could use the verifiable identity credential to establish who they are . They could then link their identity to other information such as their professional registration and share it using a digital tool, probably on a mobile phone, enabling them to start work on the sit e faster. . Further details about the verifiable identity credential and the other key technical components required, which include a common verification service as well as solutions to enable people to claim information about themselves and share it to access services (such as a digital wallet), are attached as Appendix C. Alternative directions have been considered and discounted . We consider that government has a continued role in providing digital identity services and infrastructure. The alternative of government exiting the provision of digital identity services has been discounted for the reasons set out below. Proactively Released Proactively Released Proactively Released Proactively Released INCONFIDENCE Page of . While initial investment would be required for the Department to develop services and for agencies to tr ansition to greater use of digital identity to improve their services, the re would be opportunities for cost saving in the long term from more efficient processes to verify identity and prove eligibility for services . Additionally, a ll three investment options could have significant benefits compared to costs . The Department has identified these benefits by working with a range of agencies to identify potential use cases where digital identity solutions could help deliver better services. The Department will work with early adopter agencies . To realise these benefits, regardless of the investment option chosen, organisations and agencies will need to make attributes they hold available and be ready to receive attributes digitally to provide services . We propose a staged approach based on what changes would add value to people and what agencies are ready to make a change. As a first step, the Department will work with the Accident Compensation Corporation, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, the Ministry of Social Development, the Ministry of Health and Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency (Waka Kotahi) to investigate mak ing more attributes available by consent andor change how they receive information to provide better digital services. . Working with these early adopter agencies will help seed the digital identity system. This will then position the digital identity system to grow more rapidly in the future with a range of public and private organisations using the digital identity system to deliver more online services. . To support this transition, the Government Chief Digital Officer will also work with agencies to ensure that their digital investment plans support this change . In time a gencies will be expected to participate in the digital identity system underpinned by the Trust Framework to improve the services they provide to people. . This will be a significant transformation for agencies and different sectors, with funding and resources , and legislative changes in some instances required to enable this change. For example, Waka Kotahi could undertake a greater role in the digital identity system by providing greater access to driver licencing information while also relying on modernised digital identity services to improve its identity verification proc esses when issuing licences. This would involve significant changes to Waka Kotahis technology systems, application processes and the legislation that governs some of its services. This means that appropriate funding and prioritisation for related changes will be critical because the driver licensing regime is funded on a cost recovery basis through regulated driver licensing fees paid by licence applicants. Waka Kotahi has indicate d that it is not in a good position to pay for this transformation out of existing funding . . Given the impact on agencies, it will be important for them to actively participate in this system transformation . Cross agency governance arrangements will be impo rtant to ensuring that this is achieved.
Information providers supply personal and organisational information that they hold. Infrastructure providers enable people to disclose their information and consent to share it. PROACTIVELY RELEASED INCONFIDENCE
Make It Incorporated v AttorneyGeneral NZSC Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of usoq
Officials are still working through the implications for the definition of M ori electoral population in the Local Electoral Act if the voting age is only lowered for local elections. This definition impacts on the calculation of M ori wards. Draft report He mata wh riki, he matawh nui (futureforlocalgovernment.govt.nz) . The Panel is currently consulting on its draft report and will pr ovide its final report to the Minister of Local Government in June . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E usoq
On Monday November , the Suprem e Court granted two Declarations of Inconsistency (DOIs). The Court declar ed that the provisions in the Electoral Act and the Local Electoral Act setting the voting age at have yet to be justified against t he New Zealand Bill of Right s Act protection from age discrimination for persons years and older.
Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Cafe The cafe trial (cafe, n) was performed on Friday th May, at a local cafe in Hamilton, New Zealand. This trial was a minute set of scripted interactions between nine participants, however, the cafe was also open to the public and there were customers present who were not participating in the trial. These customers did not affect the planned scripted interactions in any way. The scripted interactions included queuing to make an order, serving customers, bringing an order to a table, oneonone , passing by outside the restaurant. Unlike the office scenario where all participants were within m of each other at least once during each run, the cafe trial had the potential to produce false positive contacts because there were participants that did not interact with each other for the entire duration. For example, the chef only interacted with the frontofhouse server, and none of the (participant) customers.
Public information and inquiries . Respond to public inquiries People , , , . Respond to public complaints about ratings incl review of provider selfratingsPeople , , Total costs for Activity , , , Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation document Provider engagement . Provider service and enquiries People , , , . Provider onboarding and training People , , . Assessment of ratings systems embedded in a provider systemPeople , . Dispute resolution (includes FVLB and OFLC costs) People , , , Total costs for Activity ,
Results . Technical challenges Card firmware was one of the major challenges encountered during the study period. A full description of these issues can be seen in Appendix . The first major firmware issue was caused by putting the cards into sleep mode immediately after updating the f irmware (before seeing other cards), which caused the cards to not roll their card logging process. Consequently, all cards had to be re written before the study period, which delayed card distribution by sev eral hours on May . The second major firmware i ssue was a flash memory write exception that caused a card reset after the flash write, leading to cards capping their records at a certain point. All cards had to be recalled on the morning of May and re written with a new firmware v... Due to parti cipants working schedule, the last cards were not returned until May Consequently, all data before the rewrite was removed and the start time for each participant is staggered. UWB devices also had som e minor technical difficulties that lead to some initial data loss. One issue was the bespoke application sometimes crashed when a UWB device was attached. There was reoccurring problem with UWB device that was unable to write its data to a file. Finall y, on Day UWB device power buttons came loo se from the circuit board. For each problem, the research team provided timely troubleshooting that enabled all five UWB devices to stay in the field for the duration of the study. Additionally, in post proce ssing, the missing data was reconstructed using data from the other devices. With regards to the Qualtrics daily diary survey, there were two small technical problems encountered by participants on the Day survey. These included a character entry error message that was stored in the cache and would n ot let participants finish the survey, even if it was corrected. A University of Otago researcher addressed this by making the box free text so it would accept any response. The second technical problem arose from an error message not found and Qualtrics tech support suggested the link may have been cut off in a multi page SMS. As a result, we placed the link very early in the SMS message to avoid issues around page cut offscharacter limit per page. . Descrip tive results In total, there were participan ts included in the study (and an additional static cards). The majority of our sample was NZ European (.), with the remaining participants being Asian (.), Other European (.), and NZ EuropeanMo ri (.) (see Table ). The most common role in the sample was nurse with . of the sample, followed by Junior Doctors (.), Allied Health Team Members (.), and Senior Doctors (.). Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Section () of the Local Government Act limits when a council can require a development contribution. Section ()(c) states that a council:
Section () of the Electoral Act . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of qlgofb
The European migrant crisis (also known as the refugee crisis). David Kaye, Speech Police: The Global Struggle to Govern the Internet, . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of content by private companies to avoid the possibility of being sanctioned. However, the extent of the laws impact on freedom of expression is not yet clear. The United Kingdoms (UK) Online Safety Bill (proposed legislation) . On December , the UK released its Full Government Response to the Online Harms White Paper and has since announced an Online Safety Bill will be introduced in . The Response paper builds on the Online Harms White Paper in April , which proposed a comprehensive regulatory framework, addressing a spectrum of online harms from illegal to legal but harmful content. . The Bill proposes a new regulatory system for online content, which creates a duty of care on online platform operators to protect their users. Platforms in scope are hosts of usercontent which can be accessed by users in the UK; andor facilitate public or private online interaction between service users, one or more of whom is in the UK; and search engines. . The duty of care framework is aimed to be proportionate and risk based, ensuring companies in scope have the appropriate systems and processes in place to respond to harmful content and activity, while protecting users rights. The regulatory framework will be set out and overseen by its existing communications regulator (Ofcom), which will be given broad powers, including the ability to enforce fines of up to million or annual turnover. . The regulatory framework will have a twotiered approach, imposing additional requirements on the most highrisk, highreach services (category ), to the requirements of most services (category ). The European Union (EU) Digital Services Act (proposed legislation) . The EU Digital Services Act proposes to impose a uniform set of obligations on all online platform operators. These obligations are procedural rather than outcome focused, for example social media companies must have a complaints system. Platforms only have obligations to remove illegal content once they have knowledge of it on their platform. . Platforms with more than million EU users ( of the EU population) have additional requirements to smaller platforms. The Irish Online Safety and Media Regulation Bill (proposed legislation) . The Irish Online Safety and Media Regulation Bill proposes: to replace the existing broadcasting regulator with a new regulatory agency that will have responsibility for both traditional and new media; to update and align the way traditional television broadcasting and video on demand services are regulated; and to establish a regulatory framework to control the spread and amplification of defined categories of harmful online content. . The regulator will be given the power to set codes to govern the standards and practice of regulated entities.
The Ministry of Health support this risk assessment . Man and company charged with conducting illegal lottery generating over m . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . Alternatively , you could allow the exemption to expire and pick this up later. We do not consider this to be a viable option given the imminent expiry of the exemption and the significant impact on Class operators. You are meeting with some Class operators next week . You have agreed to meet with the Chief Executives of the Heart Foundation , Coastguard and Auckland Rescue Helicopter Trust on Thursday, June at .pm . Officials are available to support you at this meeting if needed. . These organisations are directly impacted by this issue and will be advocating strongly to make this exemption permanent. Their profile s are attached in Appendix A . In the past, both the Heart Foundation and Coastguard have been very good at mobilising their supporter base to advocate for change in this area . Next steps . Should you wish, w e can draft a Cabinet paper for your approval, based on your preferred option. If needed, we are also available to meet with you to discuss these options further. Recommendations . To address the negative impacts of the exemption allowing Class operators to take online or remote payments expiring in October this year, w e recommend you agree to: a) EITHER adopt the Gambling (Enabling Remote Interactive Gambling for Class Operators) Amendment Members Bill YesNo OR seek Cabinet approval to change the law as soon as an appropriate legislative vehicle becomes available i.e. online gambling or the Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill YesNo OR allow the exemption to expire ; YesNo b) direct officials (if relevant) to draft a Cabinet paper based on your preferred option in recommendation a). YesNo
The Ministry of Health support this risk assessment. ()(ba)(ii) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E I am advised that officials have tried to find a legislative vehicle to make this permanent, but none have been suitable and timely . Given the urgency, I consider there is a need to pass a standalone amendment to allow Class operators to continue to sell lottery tickets remotely and continue their important work in the community . A permanent provision would continue the arrangement that has been in place for the last four years , as well as being an appropriat e response to the change to the fundraising environment i.e. New Zealanders wanting to buy tickets without cash . It means there is no additional call on other community funding sources , for example, lottery grants, Class (pokies) gambling, and other phil anthropic sources, or on the Government to support these causes. Implementation My intention is for the permanent provision to be in place by October , before the temporary exemption expires. This is the only way to provide the most certainty for Class operators, who do not want to break the law and want to raise money in the most efficient and effective way possible . As the proposal simply makes the current arrangement permanent, there are no implementation implications for the regulator . Cost ofliving Implications There are no cost ofliving implications associated with this proposal. Buying lottery tickets from Class operators is a discretionary decision for individuals. Financial Impli cations There are no financial implications associate d with this proposal. Funding of the gambling regulator that grants Class licences is covered by fees from the operators. Legislative Implications I am seeking Cabinet approval to amend the Act to enable Class lotteries to be conducted remotely, by permitting those licence holders to receiv e payments via the internet or over the phone . As this Bill does not currently have a slot on the Legislation Programme, I am also seeking Cabi net approval to place a Bill on the Legislative Programme with a priority rating (to be passed this year). To enact a Bill before the temporary exemption expires, there will need to be some compress ion of the usual processes i.e. shorter Select Comm ittee process and some stages of the Bill to be heard under urgency . This may attract some criticism but, given the very simple nature of the proposed Bill, I expect a short Select Committee process would be sufficient to enable all those who wish to be he ard to have their say. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E The Act is binding on the Crown, and so the amendments to enact this proposal will also bind the Crown. Impact A nalysis Regulatory Impact Statement The Ministry for Regulation has determined that the proposal to permanently enable Class lotteries to be conducted remotely is exempt from the requirement to provide a Regulatory Impact Statement on the grounds that it has no or only minor impacts on businesses, individuals, and not forprofit entities . Climate Implications of Policy Assessment The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team has been consulted and confirms that the CIPA requirements do not apply to this proposal as the threshold for significance is not met. Population Implications There are no population impl ications associated with this proposal, which makes the status quo permanent. Human Rights There are no human rights implications associated with this proposal. Use of External Resources No external resources were used for this policy development process. Consultation The Ministry of Health, The Treasury, Inland Revenue, Office of the Privacy Commissioner, and the Ministry for Regulation were consulted. The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet was informed. As this proposal involves adding this Bil l onto the Legislative Programme, the Leader of the House and the Parliamentary Counsel Office have been consulted. Communications If Cabinet agrees to this proposal, I plan to announce that Cabinet has agreed to make the exemption for large scale lo tteries permanent. Proactive Release As per Cabinet Office Circular CO () Proactive Release of Cabinet Material: Requirements, I intend to proactively release this paper, subject to any redactions that may be warranted under the Official Information Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Act , within business days of decisions being taken. The associated minutes and key advice papers will also be at the same time. Recommendations The Minister of Internal Affairs recommends the Committee: note the temporary exemption allowing Class lotteries to be conducted remotely is due to expire in October ; agree the Gambling Act should be amended to permanently enable Class lotteries to be conducted remotely; approve this amendment being added to the Legislation Programme with a priority rating (to be passed this year) ; authorise the Minister of Internal Affairs to make final decisions on minor and technical policy changes consistent with the policy intent of the proposals in this paper; invite the Minister of Internal Affairs to issue instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office to give effect to the recommendations in this paper; and note there are no financial or implementation implications associated with this proposal.
The petition requests That the House of Representatives urge the
The sex is recorded by a health professional based on an assessment of primary sex characteristics, namely the appear ance of the external genitalia and is recorded as either female or male. Babies who have a variation of sex characteristics can be registered as indeterminate. Indeterminate is most commonly used for babies who were stillborn or die soon after birth where their sex could not be determined. It is not intended to be a non binary identity option. See section of the BDMRR Act and clause I of the Bill, which state that a persons sex should be determined by the general law of New Zealand. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . The Government response to the report of the Working Group for Reducing Barriers to Changing Registered Sex, approved by Cabinet on April , goes so me way to removing some of the access barriers. I have acknowledged, however, that that Working Group report was clear that its proposed improvements were not a substitute for law change in this area . An accessible process that works for transgender and intersex New Zealanders is important . Birth certificates are not intended to provide conclusive evidence of someones identity. However, they are often used by people to prove they are New Zealand citizen s with the right to work and study i n New Zealand. There are many p rocesses where birth certificate s can be requested , includ ing setting up a bank account or enrolling a child in school. While other documents can be used in man y of the same processes (such as a passport or driver licen ce), birth certificates are often more practical as they are low cost and do not expire. . Any situation where a birth certificate is requested can be distressing for transgender and intersex people if the sex recorded does not align with their gender. It can pla ce an extra administrative burden on transgender and intersex people to prove who they are. It creates a risk of people being outed as transgender or intersex or subject to discrimination. These experiences impact the wellbeing of transgender and interse x people , which contributes to higher rates of psychological distress, harmful substance use, and suicidal ideation and behaviour . . Being able to have their gender recognised on a birth certificate is likely to have symbolic importance to transgender and in tersex New Zealanders. It shows that the government recognises who they are, supporting their sense of belong ing and wider social cohesion. I have considered options to improve the process to amend registered sex . I have considered alternative options to improv ing the process to amend registered sex, such as: . removing the Family Court from the process but still requiring evidence of medical treatment ; or . making improvements to the existing process , while retaining the Family Court and medical evidence re quirements. . On assessment, my preferred approach is a self identification process. It best meets my objectives for improving the process, including: . better reflect ing societ ys changing views on gender diversity ; . improving peoples control of how their gender is recognised , a deeply personal part of how a person understands and perceive s themselves ; . improving peoples sense of social belonging and their general wellbeing ; and . maintain ing public trust and confidence in how birth register information is used and maintained .
This review considers matters such as the number of councillors, the number and location of wards, and whether there will be community boards. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE
Threeyear service plan . Background This section provides backgroun d context to the service plan, including: a summary of developments in the service environment brief comments on service delivery points to note from the previous service plan key factors contributing to the new service plan. .. Developments in the service environment to There were a number of significant developments in the service environment over the to period, including the following. Service providers made public health presentations to hundreds of organisations, and conducted hundreds of workshops on reducing gambling harm and related risks. There was growth in venue development and the implementation of host responsibility policies and practices, and related staff awareness of gambling harm minimisation. Many workplaces have implemented gambling harm reduction policies ( eg, no gambling while at work, no gambling on workplace technologies ). Officials reviewed the multivenue exclusion (MVE) processes, leading to a pilot of a national standardised process. Thirtyone percent of local authorities had sinkinglid policies in place for NCGMs , and a further fiftyfive percent had caps on the number of venues andor machines in their area. (While the numbers of NCGM venues and machines have decreased, the average spending on NCGMs has increased.) The Ministry introduced group therapy into service contracts, recognising the value of this form of treatment. Analysis of Pacific peoples gambling behaviours, using the Pacific Island Families Study, identified particular areas of risk for mothers and children. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Total investment is calculated adding enhancement and growth estimates taken from estimates after applying a cap of NZ, per connected citizen and the asset replacement and refurbishment e xpenditures. The range represents the modelled low and high val ues of investment requirements. This approach is briefly explained by WICS to use projected investment that is required to match the levels of asset values per connected citizen in the UK a nd Scotland for after adjusting for depreciation and conne ction differences. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia WICS Step and Step adjustments to its models are unsound WICS enha ncement and growth investment model s in approaches and are apparently driven by population density. FFF That is to say, t he models should automatically predict the required level of investment, given population density in New Zealand . However, WICS has manually increased the required level of investment to adjust for differences in growth . WICS then make a further manual adjustment and impose an investment constraint cap of , per connected citizen due to affordability concerns, because mechanistically applying the Scotland comparator (Step ) and manual adjustments (Step ) lead s to even high er and even more implausi ble levels of investment. WICS ignored local authorities own estimates of required investment All local authorities in New Zealand agreed to provide the government with comprehensive information about water services during the Request for Information (RFI ) phase in mid . The R FI responses included a full picture of all local authorities planned water sector investment. Local authorities, as asset owners with accountability to local communities, have a sound understanding of the investment needs requi red in three waters servi ces. WICS could have used this detailed and rich data source to estimate the required investment levels . WICS could have made adjustments to the RFI data to account for any conservatism, or to account for differences in the sophis tication of management in estimating investment needs. However , WICS preferred topdown modelling using overseas compar ators. .. Required investment level is based on inappropriate Scottish comparators WICS estimate of New Zealands water investment needs is based on an assumption th at it must match investment levels in Scotland . This is justified on the grounds that NZ has a relatively lower level of urbani sation . FFF However, WICS does not use urbanisation figures in its analysis. Instead, it uses popula tion density, which is a different concept. WICS concludes that Scotland is the most appropriate guide for the required level of investment because of New Zealands low population density compared to other areas in the United Kingdom . WICS predicts New Ze alands water investment needs based on correlation with population density WICS identifies a correlation between English and Scottish drinking water and wastewater asset value levels and population density. This is illustrated in Figure ., which we reproduced from WICS report . Based on the correlation between asset val ue levels and population density, WICS suggests that NZ investment needs to rise significantly. According to th is correlation, New Zealands top down, national level required investment is , lower than it should be.
Under DIAs Mana rite agreement, officials from DIA and Stats NZ have worked in
Using cloud enables agencies to focus their limited security resources on security in
We also seek your agreement to po licy decisions on how responsibilities for supporting prisoner enrolm ent and providing information to the Electoral Commission, that currently sit wit h prisoner managers, will be managed for youth offenders. We recommend that these responsib ilities either sit with prison managers, or with the Chief Executive of Oranga Tamariki, depending on whether the youth offender is loca ted in a prison or a youth justice residence. This has been incorporated in the attached draft Bill. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE Commencement timing for the Bill In March Cabinet was provided with initial advice that it may be more feasible to implement the changes for the local elections than for . It is not possible for implementation scoping and costing to be completed before October . This scoping will then be followed by Budget process to fund the implementation work. Therefore, we recommend that the commencement for the Bill will be March . We also propose to include a mechanism enabling the commencement to be brought forward by up to one year, by Order in Council. If the changes can feasibly be implemented earlier this would enable and yearolds to vote in local government byelections before the triennial local elections. Cost implications for the legislative changes There is significant administrative complexity for the Electoral Commission to design and deliver a separate but integrated electoral roll for youth electors. Additional funding will be required, but it is not possible for the Electoral Commission to undertake implementation scoping and costing work prior to the Bills introduction , before the General Election. Background In November , Cabinet agreed that legislation be prepared lowering the voting age from to years for parliamentary and local elections CAB MIN. The Cabinet decision was in response to the November Supreme Court declaration that the voting age of is inconsistent with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act , and the inconsistency had not been justified (the Declaration of Inconsistency) . In December , Cabinet made further policy decisions needed to draft the legislation, including that CABM IN: . the voting age for alcohol licensing trust elections would remain at ; . the lowered voting age will apply to all other entities that are part of local elections ; . the age for standing as an election candidate would remain at ; . the age for jury service would remain at ; and . the legislat,ion would commence on January . Local elections encapsulates local government elections , licencing trust elections, and elections to certain charitable trusts and other entities. IN CONFIDENCE Page of qIgofb : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of qlgofb
agreed that changing the voting age for local el ections could pass independently because changes to the voting age for parliamentary elec tions will trigger the reserved provisions of the Electoral Act , meaning that and yearolds may be able to vote in local elections but not par liamentary elections;
agreed that legislation be prepared lowering the voting age from years to years, for Parliaments consideration;
agreed that out ofcycle budget changes to Vote Internal Affairs are required to en ure
agreed to the release of the discussion document Changes to Mori Ward and Constituency
approved the Ministerial response, attached to the paper under LEGSUB, to the
https:council.sciencepublicationsframework digital technologies Artificial Intelligence Prime Ministers Chief Science Advisor (pmcsa.ac.nz) Mana rite Relationship Agreement NZ Digital government Countries at a UK summit pledge to tackle AIs potentially catastrophic risks The Post Artificial intelligence OECD ()(ba)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs UNCLASSIFIED Page of . We also engage regularly with international counterparts to share knowledge, learnings and resources about AI in the Public Service: . Australias Digital Transformation Office we engage in two way dialogue to share insights particularly in the areas of AI system settings, governance, procurement and the progress of the Australian AI Taskforce. . Digital Nations we participate in the Digital Nations AI Working Group, to share learnings and resources in responsible Public Service use of AI. The group is in the process of setting its work programme for the year ahead. . OECD eLeaders we also participate in OECD eLeaders emerging discussions on AI. Recent discussions focussed on guardrails in known risk areas (e.g., privacy, security, ethics etc.) but also on harm reduction, human rights protection and avoiding creating an AI div ide, that is utilisation of AI in ways that could cause worsen our current digital divide. . If desired, we could brief you further on opportunities to re position New Zealand s Public Service as a global innovator andor enabler of trustworthy AI systems.
note that the Bill will lowe r the minimum voting age for local elections (except for elections under the Sa le and Supply of Alcohol Act ) from years to years;
note that the Justice Committee re commended that the Government:
note that the new differentiated age limits would limit the right to be free from discrimination on the basis of age in a way that has not been able to be justified, under section of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act , based on current known evidence and policy justifications;
note the Cloud First Policy has become diluted in focus and policy does not reflect
noted that the Bill holds a category four priority (to be referred to select committee before the general election) on th e Legislation Programme;
noted that the Cloud First Policy has become diluted in focus, and the policy does not
noted that the Justice Committee recommended that the government:
noted that the new differentiated age limits would limit the right to be free from discrimination on the basis of age in a way th at has not been able to be justified, under section of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act , based on current known evidence and policy justifications;
noted that the paper under CAB SUB is seeking policy decisions on the matters to be included in the Water Services Entities Amendment Bill or the Water Regulation Bill, which are needed to fully develop and implement the new system, and operationalise the water services entities by providing them with all the necessary powers, functions and responsibilities;
noted that, since the decision to proceed with the reforms was taken in October CAB MIN , the Depa rtment of Internal Affairs (the Department) has undertaken comprehensive planning and budgeting exercises, and identified several areas of cost pressures, including:
noted the update on progress made as part of the Local Government System Improvements programme, attached as Appendix A under ECO SUB ;
paid departmental holidays between Christmas and New Year.
,. Search the database; or
. A highperforming organisation and a great place to work
. Ability to update gender on passport
. Background .
. Background .. New Zealands Elimination Strategy New Zealand is pursuing an elimination strategy for COVID. On May , the Ministry of Healths COVID Public Health Response Strategy Team Case and contact management: monitoring and reporting to achieve and sustain elimination of COVID. This document considered how COVID elimination would be operationalised:
. Competencybased video interview
. Drinking water and wastewater services infrastructure, including treatment plants and
. Enabling recursive contact tracing, the isolation of secondorder contacts.
. Establish enduring settings
. Implementation Planning
. In December , Cabinet agreed to undertake a twostage legislative process in the
. Maintain New Zealands Elimination Strategy in the event of a COVID outbreak, even with significantly relaxed border settings, if combined with recursive contact tracing (the isolation of secondorder contacts).
. On December we provided you with a briefing seeking your decisions on
. Plans to achieve financially sustainable delivery to regulated quality standards, including, for
. Pricing and charging decisions are closely connected to economic regulation. This paper should be considered alongside an associated paper by the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs, Economic regulation and consumer protection in the three waters sector . It is also accompanied by a further paper, Policy proposals for three waters service delivery legislative settings , which contains the remaining policy proposals needed to implement the service delivery reforms. Relation to government priorities . This Government has ambitions to significantly improve the safety, quality, resilience, accessibility, and performance of three waters services, in a manner that is efficient and affordable for New Zealanders. . This is critical for public health and wellbeing, environmental outcomes, economic growth and job creation, housing and urban development, adapting to the impacts of climate change, building resilience to natural hazards, and improving outcomes relating to water services for iwiMori. s ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . The status quo (with three waters services provided by local authorities) has resulted in poor health and environmental standards, deteriorating infrastructure due to sustained underinvestment, and wide variation in service quality. It has also resulted in a wide range of different approaches to charging for water services, including historic cross subsidies between different classes of consumers. Maintaining the current service delivery arrangements no longer represents a financially sustainable option for funding significant infrastructure costs. This is recognised as a key challenge by the local government sector, which the reforms, set out in a suite of papers last year, are intended to address. . In April , it was agreed that the Three Waters Review is a Government priority. The Labour Party Manifesto committed to reforming New Zealands drinking water and wastewater system and upgrading water infrastructure to create jobs across the country. These reforms are anticipated to occur in parallel with reforms to the resource management system. Executive summary . During and early , we made a series of decisions on a comprehensive package of proposals to transform the three waters service delivery system. This involves the creation of four publicly owned water services entities, which would take over responsibilities for service delivery and infrastructure from local authorities from July . These decisions are due to be given effect through an initial piece of legislation the Water Services Entities Bill. . The Water Services Entities Bill also sets out the process for water services entities to develop their funding and pricing plans, in consultation with local communities. The entity boards will present these plans to their regional representative groups. . As signalled in my earlier papers, further policy decisions and legislation will be needed to fully develop the new system, operationalise the water services entities, and implement the reforms. I am now presenting additional papers to seek those policy decisions, and to obtain legislative drafting authority relating to a second piece of legislation the Water Services Entities Amendment Bill. . This paper sets out my proposals for pricing and charging by the new water services entities. The entities need legislative authority to charge for their services and this paper seeks agreement to that. I am also proposing high level legislative principles to guide the development of their funding and pricing plans. . I have also sought to create options to manage specific issues, such as protecting vulnerable consumers and minimising price shocks to consumers through the initial transition period before the implementation of economic regulation. These options could be given effect through regulation making powers andor the Government policy statement on water services. I am also proposing further work on whether and how we should use these tools. . The paper is set out in five parts. . Part A covers the objectives for pricing and charging and the relationship between pricing and the broader economic regulation framework. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . I am proposing a set of objectives to inform our decisions on pricing and charging. These objectives relate to economic efficiency, affordability, price stability, cost sharing, horizontal equity, intergenerational equity, giving effect to Te Mana o te Wai, and consistency with other government goals. . Part B addresses who should be liable for water services bills and how the interests of financially distressed consumers will be protected. . Currently, the owner of a property pays rates, which include a component for three waters services, albeit that the water related component is not separately identified in many districts. I am proposing that property owners will continue to be liable for the payment of water services bills, with owners of residential properties able to continue to pass through any consumption based charges to tenants. More than half of New Zealand households currently pay some form of volumetric water charge. . I am recommending regulation making powers to protect vulnerable consumers, in situations where they pay a volumetric water charge. These include a discretionary power to set a limit on the ratio between fixed and volumetric water revenues, so the total amount to be rec overed through volumetric charges can be capped to remain affordable for most low income households. The regulations could also create a prohibition on the use of block tariffs or low user charges for residential households. I am not recommending that it be mandatory that these regulations be made. . I am also proposing changes to the Rates Rebate Scheme to take account of water charges after these are split out from rates bills; and to include water charges in the definition of accommodation cost, which is used to determine the level of Accommodation Supplement. . I propose to monitor the adequacy of these measures and, if they are deemed insufficient, to consider further changes to support vulnerable consumers to pay their water bills. However, I do not think this is necessary at this stage. . Part C covers the price setting process, including the statutory provisions necessary for the pricing and charging of water services and other types of direction and decision making that will influence pricing and charging. . I am proposing a statutory basis for c harging, tariff lists, and a price setting process. Water services entities will have a variety of charges and a general statutory authority to charge. Their funding and pricing plans will set out prices, and these will be detailed in an annual tariff list . The legislation will provide that the water services entities can either bill customers directly, or the territorial authority can collect water charges on behalf of the entities. . I am also proposing a set of pricing principles be included in the legislation, to guide price setting. These would include that tariffs should be simple, transparent and easy to understand for users, be non discriminatory, reflect full cost recovery, and promote resource efficiency. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . I am recommending that the economic regulator would be able to issue guidance, input methodologies, andor determinations to the water services entities on how to implement the legislative pricing principles and any regulations. The economic regulator would also have the power to alter tariffs if an entity were not implementing the legislative pricing principles or regulations appropriately. . Ensuring that the investment required to maintain, and upgrade water infrastructure is affordable for small communities is an important objective of the reform, and the sharing of costs between communities has featured strongly in the case for change. Geographically averaged prices can be used to smooth and share costs across communities, thereby contributing to more affordable services for all. It is a feature of the approach to charging for a range of different utilities, such as ultra fast broadband. I am proposing that the legislation enable geographic averaging of prices by water services entities. I am also proposing that the Government policy statement can be used to provide direction to water services entities on geographic averaging. This geographic averaging would be within a water services entitys boundary and could only be applied to residential customers receiving a similar level of service. Moving to harmonised prices will inevitably take several years, to smooth the impact of changes on individual customers. For that reason, I do not anticipate that entities would operate geographic averaging of prices in the early years of operation. . Part D discusses issues that will arise from the shift to more standardised, principles based pricing, and reg ulation making powers that could be used to manage prices and smooth price shocks over this transition. . Currently there are high levels of cross subsidy between different user groups, such as households and commercial users. I am proposing that all drinking water supply and wastewater removal contracts that are transferred to the water services entities will have their current pricing provisions expire after five years. The decision to override preexisting contracts is likely to attract some scrutiny. . To mitigate the risk of price shocks in the first few years, I am proposing a regulation making power to enable the Minister to directly regulate the rate of price increase. These powers would expire when the proposed approach to economic regulation is fully implemented in . Ultimately, some price increases are likely to be necessary to address decades of underinvestment. Decisions on the possible use of these powers requires further work, informed by more detailed analysis of current prices, and would be subject to a report back by December .
. Proactive release of Local Water Done Well stage further decisions
. Public services that this agreement intends to facilitate
. Public services that this agreement intends to facilitate
. Rationale for the RES Outcomes . . .
. Rigorously map the pathway to impact Identify all the things that need to happen in order for your widget programme to achieve impact. The more steps there are, the more complex it is, the more leaps of faith, the more unlikely it is to work.
. THE card shall not be used:
. The Classes of Agencies involved
. The Classes of Agencies involved . .
. The Kiwi Counts Survey can be found at
. The Stats NZ General Social Survey is generally carried out every two years. The survey was delayed until and the results were not available in time for inclusion in the Annual Report. The results will be included in our Annual Report.
. The table at Appendix A sets out the recommendations from all briefings. This is
. The total cost of the third and final extension is forecast at . million. This includes
. This policy does not apply to infringement notices. It also does not apply to prosecutions that are handled by other government agencies (such as the New Zealand Police or the Serious Fraud Office) on referral from the Department.
. What is the level of false positives to be expected Contacts wrongly considered to be close contacts are a false positive.
. You have asked officials to reconsider the recommendation contained in the briefing
. agree that out of cycle budget changes to Vote Internal Affairs are required to
. agree to the Minister of Local Government releasing the attached discussion
. Open the border while maintaining a strategy of elimination. This approach is not considered viable with our existing capabilities. An open border will inevitably result in infected persons entering New Zealand and lockdowns would be required to continue with an elimination strategy.
. Scenario Base Ca se: Rationale for the RES Outcome . .
. Scenario Base Case: Rational e for the RES Outcome
. amend the Local Electoral Act , and a ny other necessary laws and regulations, to provide for a minimum voting ag e of years in local elections;
. amend the Local Electoral Act , and any other necessary laws and regulations, to provide for a minimum voting age of years in local elections; and
. policy advice, legislation, ministerial services, and communications;
.. I, Authorised Officers means any NZSIS staff member (including NZSIS
.. Terms relevant to this DAA are defined as follows:
.. Government Related Entity Assessment for the WSEs . .
.. RES outcome: WSE rating of A Stable . . .
.. RES outcome: WSE rating of AStable
.. RES outcome: The Crown s current ratings are unc hanged
.. RES outcome: The Crowns current ratings are unchanged . .
... DA Information means Registration Information andor Citizenship
.. RES outcome: current ratings: AStableA . Ratings under scenario :
.. RES outcome: current ratings: AStableA . Ratings under scenario :
... Direct Access, in relation to the BDM and Citizenship Databases, means to do
.... Copy any information stored on the database (including by previewing,
.. RES outcome: current ratings are unc hanged
.. RES outcome: current ratings are unchanged . .
.. RES outcome: current ratings are unc hanged
.. RES outcome: current ratings are unchanged . .
.. RES outcome: LGFA s curre nt ratin gs are unchanged
.. RES outcome: LGFAs current ratings are unchanged . .
... Registration Information:
.... means the following information as defined in section of the
... Secretary means the Secretary for internal Affairs.
..this Order is necessary or desirable for or more purposes of the SWERL
.. Citizenship Information means information that relates to the acquisition or
.. Registration Act means, as the context requires, the Births, Deaths, Marriages
.the Severe Weather Emergency Recovery (Local Government Act Longterm
. Scenario Very low degree of governor in fluence
. Scenario Very low degree of governor influence . .
. investigate lowering the minimum vo ting age in parliamentary elections to years, taking into consideration the legal consequences of a change to the minimum voting age as set out in its report.
. investigate lowering the minimum voting age in parliamentary elec tions to years, taking into consideration the legal conseque nces of a change to the minimum voting age as set out in its report.
. scope and level of support to iwiMori to participate in three waters service delivery;
.. All of the other terms in this DAA have the meaning as described in the ISA unless
.. Met with Australian Department Environment, Land, Water and Planning
.. Governmen tRelated Ent ity Assessment of WSEs
.. Government Related E ntity Assessment of WSEs . .
.. RES outcome: WSE rating of A Stable . . .
.. RES outcome: WSE rating of AStable
.. RES outcome: current rating s: AStableA . Ratings under scenario
.. RES outcome: current ratings: AStableA . Ratings under scenario :
.. RES outcome: current rating s are unc hanged
.. RES outcome: current ratings are unchanged . .
.. RES outcome: current rating s are unc hanged
.. RES outcome: current ratings are unchanged . . SP Global R atings
..the extent of this Order is not broader (including geographically broader in
.the extent of the Order is not broader (including geographically broader in
. Participation rates The number of participants who were actively working each day during Phase ranged from to across all six days (see Table ). The day with the highest participation was th e first day, while the day with the lowest participation was during the weeke nd roster on day . The mean number of participants across all days was (SD.). Similarly, the proportion of participants who completed the daily diaries ranged from to across all days. Days and had the highest response rate, while day had the lowest. The mean response rate across all six days was . (SD.). Lastly, UWB devices were distributed to different participants each day. Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
. Scenario Very high d egree of governor infl uence
. What other options have been ruled out of scope, or not considered, and why
. scope and level of support to councils and the wider local government sector to engage with the reforms and enable a smooth transition;
.. Site visit to Kyneton Water Treatment Plant and meeting with Colliban Water
.. Governm entRelated Entity Assessment of WSEs
.. Government Related Entity Assessment of WSEs . .
.. RES outcome: WSE rating of A Stable . . .
.. RES outcome: WSE rating of AStable
.. RES outc ome: current ratings: AStableA . Ratings under scenario :
.. RES outcome: current rating s: ASta bleA . Ratings under scenario :
.. RES outcome: current ratings unchanged
.. RES outcome: current ratings unchanged . .
.. RES outcome: current ra tings are uncha nged
.. RES outcome: current ratings are unchanged . .
..this Order does not breach the restrictions set out in section of the
. Ministerial Services issues: a BNZ Visa card (with expenditure limits as agreed by GM EGS) . When an office makes application, Ministerial Services arranges for corporate credit cards to be issued to Ministers and selected staff for official expenditure . Unless an emergency, use of staff credit cards for other expenditure should not occur without prior approval of the AGM. . Use of a credit card for personal expenditure (regardless of the intent to reimburse) is not permitted . If inadvertent use for personal expenditure occurs reimbursement is to be made at the earliest opportunity . The cardholder must:
.pm (arrive back at leaner) Movement Seated: meets at desk and they both walk out the side door, up stairs, to L reception then walk through bluesky office directly above participants ,,, then down stairs and back to original seat. Kitchen leaner L Reception Kitchen Leaner
.the Order does not breach the restrictions set out in section of the SWERL Act;
. Scenario Central governme nt support vari ant
. Scenario Central government support variant . .
. three waters system stewardship functions, which Cabinet noted in June are a critical part of the reform package CAB MIN ;
.. Roundtable meeting with Environmental Protection Authority and Essential
.. Govern men tRelated Entity Assessment of WSEs
.. Government Related Entity Assessment of WSEs . .
.. RES outcome: WSE rating of AAStable
.. RES outcome: WSE rating of AAStable . . .
.. RES outcome: The Crown s current ratings are unchanged
.. RES outcome: The Crowns current ratings are unchanged . .
.. RES outcome: current rating s: AStableA . Ratings under scenario :
.. RES outcome: current ratings: AStableA . Ratings under scenario :
.. RES outcome: current ratings are unchanged
.. RES outcome: current ratings are unchanged . .
.. RES outcome: current ratings are unc hanged
.. RES outcome: current ratings are unchanged . .
.. RES outcome: LGFA s current ratings are unc hanged
.. RES outcome: LGFAs current ratings are unchanged . .
..this Order does not limit the rights and freedoms in the New Zealand Bill of
.the Order does not limit the rights and freedoms in the New Zealand Bill of Rights
. Preliminary Results on Concordance Between Data Sources .. Concordance between Bluetooth cards and UWB devices There were UWB entries in the simplified data from days. Fifty () of these entries matched Bluetooth records. Of the unmatched records, () were from the th of May for which there was no valid Bluetooth card data. The remaining () unmatched entries (from different participants) were from participants who had no Bluetooth card data on those days. Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
. Scena rio Ownership structure variant
. Scenario Ownership structure variant . . .
. new wastewater regulatory functions for Taumata Arowai, which were agreed by Cabinet in July CAB MIN ; Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government I N C O N F I D E N C E DEVMIN I N C O N F I D E N C E emppemb noted that:
.. Compliant adoption Digital contact tracing relies on very high levels of compliant adoption, particularly in places where transmission of COVID is a risk. Even seemingly impressive levels of compliant adoption are inadequate to have a material impact on stopping COVID. Digital contact tracing technology is subject to a network effect where the value of the network increases at the square of its number of participants.
.. Governmen tRelated Ent ity Assessment of WSE s
.. Government Related Entity Assessment of WSEs . .
.. RES outcome: WSE rating of A Stable . . .
.. RES outcome: WSE rating of AStable
.. RES outc ome: current ratings: AStableA . Ratings under scenario :
.. RES outcome: current rating s: AStableA . Ratings under scenario :
.. RES outcome: curren t ratings are unchanged . .
.. RES outcome: current ratings are unc hanged
.. RES outcome: current ratings are unc hanged
.. RES outcome: current ratings are unchanged . .
..the consultation process described in section of the SWERL Act has been
.the consultation process described in section of the SWERL Act has been complied
. Scenario Number of WSE variant . . .
.. Governmen tRelated E ntity Assessment of WSEs
.. Government Related Entity Assessment of WSEs . .
.. RES outcome: WSE rating of BBB Stable
.. RES outcome: WSE rating of BBBStable . . .
.. RES outcome: current rating s: AStableA . Ratings under scenario :
.. RES outcome: current ratings: AStableA . Ratings under scenario :
.. RES outcome: current r atings are unchanged
.. RES outcome: current ratings are unchanged . .
.. RES outcome: current ratings are unchang ed
.. RES outcome: current ratings are unchanged . .
.As agreed by Cabinet and required under the SWERL Act, I instructed the
.Our GRE ass essment under scenario for applied to the
.Rational e for the RES Ou tcomes
.note I am satisfied that:
August , Cabine t Paper: Severe Weather Emergency Recover y (Local Government Act Long
Cabinet has agreed that any changes to t he voting age will not come into effect until after the General Election. I propose a single commencement of January that would apply to local elections and parliamentary elections (including byelections). A commencement of January m eans that if the voting age is lowered for local elections, and yea rolds will be able to vote in the local elections. If the voting age is also lowered for parliamentary elections, this commencement will mean that and yearolds will also be able to vote in any parliamentary by elections from January . Lowering the age for all types of local elections, except for licencing trusts
Commitee on Climate Change () , Scottish Climate Change Adaptation Programme : An Independent Assessment for Scottish Parliament, available at: https:www.climatexchange.org.ukmediabw briefing note uptake ofwater metering .pdf Water UK website: https:www.water.org.ukadvice forcustomerswater meters July , Cabinet Paper: Strengthening the Regulation of Drinking Water, Wastewater and Stormwater, Offices of the Ministers offo r Local Government, Health and Environment, pg , available at: Cabinet Paper andminute Strengthening regula tion.pdf (dia.govt.nz) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia be responsible for oversight and monitoring of drinking water safety , public communications , ensuring coordination across the sector , leading or overseeing the response to drinking water emergencies , and emergency response planning FFF. strengthen the approach to drinking water compliance, monitoring and enforcement by centralising the se functions and responsibilities leading to more consistent application FFF. work with suppliers and training providers to ensure suitable trainin g is available and being taken up, and ensure the sector has sufficient capability to fulfil its responsibilities . FFF become a centre of technical and scientific expert ise. It would provide best practice advice and guidance to suppliers, counc ils, and other entities involved in drinking water safety, supply and management; and facilitate research into drinking water science . FFF The government also notes that it will ensure the new regulator has the powers and resources needed to perf orm these functions consistently and effectively . FFF. Water quality regulation will improve the performance of WDC and other councils in s upplying water services . There will be greater clarity regarding what requirements WDC must fulfil and resour ces to assist WDC in meet ing these requirements. .. Possible improvements from e conomic regulation regime have been overlooked The proposed economic regulation regime could improve WDCs performance . Economic regulation, if well designed, can enable benchmar king between providers and incentivise water service providers to improve service quality and lower costs. The details of the economic regulation regime have not been designed, and only high level descriptions of the regime are available . However, t he government and WICS have assumed that the proposed economic regulation regime either cannot apply to councils that opt out of the Reform Scenario , or will have no material effect on the performance of those councils . This assumption is flawed. Even if WDC is not subjected to econo mic regulation, it is likely to make improvements based on benchmarking and performance comparisons . Governments assumption that economic regulation cannot apply to numerous council owned water services is seriously flawed The govern ment assume s that it i s not feasible to regulate water service providers. The government and its advisors at Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment and
Jurisdictional risk is the potential for foreign governments to compel access to, or
The Bill does not involve the alloca tion of decisionmaking powers between the Executive, the Courts and Tribunals.
The average fee is approximately for a standard LIM or for a fasttracked LIM based on LIM processing fees information available on council websites in September .
We also note that having differentiated ages of eligibility adds an extra layer of administrative complexity to local elections. For example: . when the Electoral Commission provides elector information to local electoral officers, they need to identify which electors are under (youth markers); . extra steps are required to remove the youth marke rs in most cases when electoral rolls are made publicly available (to minimise safety and privacy risks for youth); . local authorities that have licensing trusts will need to prepare additional permutations of their voting papers, including for each special voting location, adding to the cost and logistics for the elections; . voters who turn in the three months before polling day will need to cast a special vote for an alcohol licensing trust election if they live in a trust area (they will be posted their other voting papers); and . local authorities will need to provide additional support to voters and candidates to understand their entitlements.
noted that any geographic averaging would need to be introduced slowly, over a long period, to avoid significant price shocks;
. In the case where two different charges under different legislation could apply to the same offence (for example a choice between proceeding under the Gambling Act or the Crimes Act ), consideration should be given to which charge is more suitable in the context of the particular offending (including its nature and seriousness).
. The Treasury has been consulted on the proposals in this paper. Treasury recommends
. This inconsistency with the general wards process reduces opportunities to increase
.The Department attended a webinar with mayors and chief executives of those
th donorconceived childs record added to HART register
. However, the RIA identifies these constraints, limitations and uncertainty with regards to these proposals. In particular, the panel notes that the RIA acknowledges: .
. With regards to Part B, the Ministerial directives have resulted in the constraints on the problem definition, the options able to be assessed and the recommended options. . For proposal , the Department does not have a recommended option given the potential implications on consent decision making and issues identified in the Treaty impact analysis. ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) IN CONFIDENCE Page of . As with the earlier RIAs, the panels assessment was limited by timeframe constraints and the assessment was more truncated than usual. The panel provided comments on two drafts of the RIA, and on a third draft but did not see the final version. The panel were however of the view that this would not alter its overall assessment. . Climate Implications of Policy Assessment . The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team has been consulted and confirms that the CIPA requirements do not apply to this proposal as the threshold for significance is not met. Population implications . Proposals in the suite of Local Water Done Well paper s are seeking to ensure there is greater transparency to local communities about the current state of local government water services and councils proposed arrangements for delivering and funding these services in a financially sustainable way. Human Rights . The proposals across the suite of papers are intended to improve water services and therefore the right to access safe drinking water and sanitation, and the right to a health y environment. . Further work on the specific proposals in this paper relating to land access powers would consider the rights to respect for property. As noted earlier, currently there are powers to access land , but they are outdated, spread across multiple Acts and therefore uncertain in their application . The proposed approach is to simplify and clarify these matters, which supports respect for property rights by making those powers more certain and predictable in their use . Use of external resources . External support was provided in relation to the development of the Regulatory Impact Statement associated with this paper. ()(g)(i) IN CONFIDENCE Page of Consultation . The following agencies were consulted on a draft of this paper: Commerce Commission, Department of Conservation, Department of Corrections, Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, Inland Revenue Department, Land Information New Zealand, Ministry for Prim ary Industries, Ministry for the Environment, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Housing and Urban Development, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Social Development, Ministry of Transport, National Emergency Management Agency, New Zealand Defence Force, New Zealand Infrastructure CommissionTe Waihanga, Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator, Te Arawhiti Office for Mori Crown Relations, Te Puni Kkiri Ministry of Mori Developme nt, and the Treasury. . Communications . I expect to communicate decisions on all three papers that give effect to stage of the Local Water Done Well programme around the same time as the second Bill the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill is enacted (August ). Proactive release . It is anticipated this paper will be proactively released to align with announcements about all of the Local Water Done Well: stage policy decisions, as referred to above. Recommendations . The Minister of Local Government recommend s that the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee : Background . note that, as agreed in the Minister of Local Governments paper Water Services Acts Repeal Bill: Approval for Introduction CAB MIN , the legislative strategy involved in implementing Local Water Done Well includes three pieces of legislation: . the Water Services Acts Repeal Act passed in February which repealed the previous governments legislation and restored ownership and responsibility for water services to local government; . the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill introduced in May which will establish initial components of the new framework and transitional arrangements; and ()(g)(i) IN CONFIDENCE Page of . the Local Government Water Services Bill anticipated for introduction in December and enactment in mid which will provide enduring settings and frameworks (with policy decisions to be sought in mid ) ; . note that policy decisions for the third Bill are being sought through a suite of three papers , the first two of which have already been agreed : . Local Water Done Well stage : water services delivery system ECO MIN ; . Local Water Done Well stage : water services regulatory system ECO MIN ; . this paper Local Water Done Well stage : further decisions ; Further decisions relating to local government water service s delivery arrangements . authorise the Minister of Local Government and the Minister of Finance to make final decisions on the design features of the new water organisations . . Appointment of a Crown monitor for the interim economic regulation of Watercare . note that the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill will give the Minister of Local Government the authority to appoint a Crown monitor for the interim economic regulation of Watercare; . Further decisions relating to local government water services delivery arrangements Powers relating to water infrastructure and services . agree to provide in the legislation for modernised powers relating to water services infrastructure, including powers for water service providers (councils and water organisations) to: . carry out work on land relating to water services infrastructure , including appropriate protections for landowners ; . control connections to water services infrastructure ; . agree to provide in the legislation for a modernised approach to the current bylaw related regime for water services, including statutory provisions to : . control drinking water catchments; . manage trade waste; . manage water supply and wastewater services ; ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) IN CONFIDENCE Page of . agree the legislation will also provide for other matters associated with the above proposals, including: . an offence regime (including infringements) to enable appropriate and effective enforcement ; . detailed requirements for the new control and management regimes (through secondary legislation) ; . transitional arrangements , including timeframes , and the revocation of bylaws (if relevant) ; Supporting long term contracting arrangements . note that, under sections and of the Local Government Act , local government organisations (councils and council controlled organisations) can enter into contracts and joint arrangements relating to water services with bodies that are not local government organisations for a maximum of years; . agree to: EITHER . retain the current year maximum length of contracts and joint arrangements for water services; OR . extend the permitted maximum length of contracts and joint arrangement s for water services to years; Improving how s tormwater networks are manage d . agree the legislation will provide that territorial authorities are responsible for managing and maintaining stormwater networks in their city or district, including overland flow paths and urban watercourses that are both on private land and related to the operation of the stormwat er network in urban areas ; . agree the legislation will include provisions that require territorial authorities to: . develop a stormwater network r isk management plan to identify risk s and hazards related to stormwater network s; . work with private landowners as required to protect and maintain the conveyance capacity of overland flow paths and urban watercourses; . develop (as required) stormwater rules that would provide direction to private landowners on their responsibilities for maintenance and protection of the conveyance capacity of overland flow paths and urban watercourses on their land ; . agree the legislation will provide for stormwater rules and rule making powers to support the management of overland flow paths and urban watercourses on private land , including that t he rules (and rule making powers, as the case may be) will: . be made pursuant to stormwater network risk management plans; . set out landowner duties including access to land, and notification requirements; IN CONFIDENCE Page of . replace current bylaw making powers as they relate to urban stormwater network s; . agree the legislation will include requirements relating to stormwater network risk management plans , including that these plans will : . identify any hazards that relate to a stormwater network, including (without limitation) emerging or potential hazards; . assess any risks that are associated with those hazards; . identify how those risks are to be managed, controlled, monitored, or eliminated ; . be provided to Taumata Arowai for review and comment , prior to being finalised; . agree the legislation w ill set out private landowners statutory rights and responsibilities in relation to overland flow paths or urban watercourses that are on their land , including provisions to the effect that: . where a landowner impairs or alters an overland flow path or watercourse, without resource consent or in breach of a stormwater rule they would be responsible for either eliminating the impairment or meeting the costs of the territorial authority, if they do that on the landowner s behalf; . a private landowner would not be responsible for an impairment or alteration of a stormwater network if that impairment or alteration was caused by the act or omission of another person; . a private landowner would be required to notify the relevant territorial authority before undertaking any work that might affect the stormwater network ; . agree the legislation will provide for an enabling framework for the development of service agreements, which can be used by territorial authorities, water organisations and other agencies to support the integrated management of the stormwater network ; . agree the legislation will reflect the complex relationship between stormwater networks and transport corridor stormwater infrastructure , and defin e transport stormwater infrastructure as includ ing the infrastructure that is owned or operated by a transport corridor manager to collect or discharge stormwater relating to a transport function of the corridor ; Charging and billing for water services , by water organisations . agree the new legislation will include a suitably modified version of the current legislative framework for local government rating, to enable water organisations to identify which ratepayers should be charged for water services; . agree the legislation will require councils to share relevant billing information with water organisations (to enable the identification of ratepayers), and allow councils to charge a reasonable fee for this service; IN CONFIDENCE Page of . agree the legislation can include any technical amendments that are needed to cater for situations where consumers may have to pay both water organisations and councils for water services at the same time, due to water organisations being formed part way through a rating year; . agree the legislation will allow water organisations to charge a serviceability fee to properties that could be, but are not, connected to the water network; Rates Rebate Scheme and associated financial implications . note that: . except for ratepayers in Auckland, who pay water charges to Watercare, water costs are included as part of council rates under current arrangements; . under the current approach in the Rates Rebate Act , rebate s are applied to the rates bill only and not water charges (which are not considered rates and so are not eligible for the rates rebate); . if water charges are split out from rates bills and charged by new water organisations rather than councils, some recipients of a rates rebate would receive a lower rebate, even though their total expenses (rates and water) may not have changed; . agree to amend the definition of rates in the Rates Rebate Act to include water charges, so that ratepayers will not receive different levels of rebate depending on whether they are billed for water charges as part of their rates bill, or separately throug h a water organisation; . note that this amendment will result in a per annum increase in the cost of the Rates Rebate Scheme, because water charges paid to Watercare would now be considered rates and would be eligible for the rebate; . note that the additional costs can be met from within the existing Rates Rebate Scheme appropriation for the immediate future, meaning there is no current impact on the Crown s fiscal forecasts; . note the Rates Rebate Scheme is a demand based scheme that is periodically adjusted to reflect macroeconomic factors and that the new definition of rates will capture the additional in the calculation of adjustments required over the longer term, contributing to an increase in adjustments made ; . note that the Treasury has been consulted on this impact and is comfortable with the proposed amendment to the definition of rates in the Rate Rebate Act ; . agree the legislation will require water organisation s to provide information to the relevant council (s) on the amount of water charges paid by a consumer during the year , in order to facilitate the administration of the Rates Rebate Scheme by the council(s) ; Charging for growth by water organisations . note that under Local Water Done Well, some councils will choose to shift their water services delivery into separate water organisations, and those water organisations will need a specific mechanism to directly charge for new or additional demand on water inf rastructure; ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) IN CONFIDENCE Page of . agree water organisations will be enabled to use the development contributions regime in the Local Government Act , with the necessary modifications as an interim measure pending any future changes that may be made following work on development contributions settings as part of the Governments Going for Housing Growth policy ; . agree the legislation can enable a flexible approach in which: . water organisations are able to develop their own development contributions policy; . as an alternative to a separate water organisation development contributions policy, a water organisation and a council within its service area could agree to development contributions set by the water organisation being included in the councils policy; . a council within a water organisations service area can administer the organisations development contributions policy on its behalf ; . agree that the legislation will include appropriate transitional arrangements, to ensure a smooth transition to charging for the growth related costs of water services infrastructure from a council to a water organisation; . agree that the Infrastructure Funding and Financing Act be amended so that the Infrastructure Funding and Financing model can be used for water services infrastructure that is to be vested with a water organisation; Powers of receivers in relation to water organisations . note that in situations where new water organisations achieve financial separation from their parent councils, the legislation will need to include provisions to ensure receivers can act appropriately in the event that a water organisation defaults on a debt; . agree the legislation will include provisions to: . allow the receiver to assess and collect for a given financial year both the amounts owed by the water organisation for that year and the reasonable costs incurred in collecting that amount; . prohibit the receiver from having any interest or security in water services infrastructure assets; . allow the receiver to collect the amount through water services charges assessed on consumers; Enabling exemptions from some of the minimum requirements that will apply to water organisations . agree the legislation will include a process that enables councils to seek an exemption from some of the minimum requirements that are due to apply to water organisations (as agreed in ECOMIN ); . agree that the ability to seek and grant an exemption would apply to the following requirements , only : . water organisations must be companies; . activities of water organisations will be limited to the provision of water services, and directly related activities; IN CONFIDENCE Page of . ; . only councils or consumer trusts can be shareholders of a water organisation. . agree that legislation will provide that: . councils that wish to seek an exemption would do so by submit ting an application to the Secretary for Local Government , . the Secretary for Local Government would assess applications, and work with the Commerce Commission, Taumata Arowai and Inland Revenue to provide advice to the Minister of Local Government; . the assessment and advice would be based on whether the councils proposal for water services: .. meets the legislative objectives of Local Water Done Well; .. maintains the core requirements that the Minister of Local Government deems to be non negotiable for all water organisations including that the proposal and scope of the exemption do not involve any form of privatisation ; .. will provide water services that are financially sustainable; .. satisfies the Minister of Local Government that the financially sustainability of water services would be put at greater risk if the exemption were not granted ; . exemption approvals would be granted through Order in Council, made on the recommendation of the Minister of Local Government ; . the exemptions process would include the ability to as the case may be : .. grant an exemption from a requirement through Order in Council; .. modify a requirement if a full exemption is not needed; .. impose additional conditions on water organisations; .. decline the exemption application ; . councils that have an exemption application approved and then go on to rely on that exemption when forming a new water organisation would be required to provide information on this matter on their websites ; ()(f)(iv), ()(b)(ii) ()(g)(i) IN CONFIDENCE Page of Transitional tax issues affecting water organisations . agree the legislation will include provisions that treat the transferor and transferee as the same person for the purposes of the Income Tax Act and Goods and Services Tax Act when councils transfer water services to a water organisation, or when water services are transferred from a single council water organisation to a multi council water organisation , to p rovide a tax neutral result ; . agree these transfer provisions should be available for a period of five years from enactment of the legislation, as they are transitional in nature; Tax exemptions for water organisations . agree to grant tax exempt status to water organisations ; . agree the legislation will provide that, if a water organisation is wound up, there will be a requirement that assets must be transferred to another water organisation or to a council on wind up; Borrowing in foreign currency . agree the legislation will explicitly allow water organisations to borrow in foreign currency, to ensure they have access to the borrowing that may be required to meet the significant costs associated with water infrastructure; . agree the legislation will also allow water organisations to enter into incidental arrangements, which allow water organisations to reduce their exposure to currency volatility; Rateability of land and assets owned by water organisations . agree the legislation will provide that land owned by water organisations should be rateable; . agree the legislation will require assets that are owned by a water organisation , but located on or under land the organisation does not own , should be rateable; . note that changes are not being proposed to the bespoke arrangements for the rateability of Watercares land and assets that apply under the Local Government (Auckland Council) Act ; Civil Defence Emergency Management cost sharing arrangements . agree the current Civil Defence Emergency Management cost sharing arrangements with the Crown will apply directly to water organisations, to ensure financial separation of water organisations and allow them to directly seek partial reimbursement from the Crown for emergency expenses; . note that f urther policy decisions will be required prior to the establishment of any financially independent water organisation (including Watercare) to ensure these arrangements apply appropriately to the water organisations and local authorities , with no material fiscal impacts for the Crown ; ()(f)(iv), ()(b)(ii) IN CONFIDENCE Page of . authorise the Minister of Local Government , the Minister of Finance, and the Minister for Emergency Management and Recovery to make further policy decisions on the application of costsharing arrangements ;
Councils are already required to publish a set of financial information and benchmarks in their planning documents, but this information is not brought together in any central location and does not cover all relevant matters. To that end, I propose to: . Publish key council performance indicators on the Department of Internal Affairs website starting mid . These council report cards will empower ratepayers with information, enabling them to hold their local leaders to account. In addition to population based statistics, the initial focus will be on council financial performance, including forecast and actual rates, debt and capital expenditure (per rating unit), using public data. Reporting on service delivery and other activities will follow but requires legislative change (see paragraph .). . Transfer the list of activity groups in the Act that underpin council Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E aecpczkj
Local Government New Zealand (October ) Managing natural hazard risk in New Zealand towards more resilient communities at p. ; W.S.A. Saunders and J.E. Mathieson Out on a LIM: The role of Land Information Memorandum in natural hazard management (October ). GNS Science Miscellaneous Series ; Gunnell SN, Grace ES. . A review of how Land Information Memorandum, Project Information Memorandum and Land Information Request reports for the Canterbury Region address natural hazards . Lower Hutt (NZ): GNS Science. p. (GNS Science consultancy report; ). LGNZ and the Department held joint workshops with local and central government LIM experts in November and October . Findings from the October workshop can be found in LGNZ Review of Land Information Memorandums: Achieving best practice (February ). To supplement previous research, the Department analysed a small survey of LIMs from nine councils: Auckland Council, Christchurch City Council, Far North District Council, Kaikura District Council, Kpiti Coast District Council, Nelson City Council, Queenstown Lakes District Council, Tauranga City Council, and Whakatne District Council. These councils were selected due to their differing size, geographical location and exposure to different natural hazards. Councils were asked to provide a sample of five to LIMs for properties impacted by a range of natural hazards. A total of LIMs were received and reviewed, including two LIM templates. This analysis was intended to provide a snapshot of natural hazard information being provided by councils and is limited in that it is not a statistically significant sample size, does not cover all territorial authorities, and includes council selected LIMs. W.S.A. Saunders and J.E. Mathieson Out on a LIM: The role of Land Information Memorandum in natural hazard management (October ). GNS Science Miscellaneous Series ; local government workshop; and Department analysis of LIMs. Community Resilience Workshop, November .
The Bill does not include any provision for making regulations. The Bill makes some consequential amendments to the Local Electoral Regulations .
The POCC charged in Australian states is .
The level of jurisdictional risk can vary depending on:
agreed to any necessary legislative provisions to enable geographic averaging of residential drinking and wastewater service prices, and other forms of geographic averaging, by the water services entities, in consultation with their regional representative groups, consumers and communities; Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government I N C O N F I D E N C E CAB MIN I N C O N F I D E N C E omuxuzqw agreed that the economic regulator could not override geographic averaging decisions made by the water services entities;
. As the decisions are technical in nature no public communication is required.
. For files from Charities Services, before a prosecution decision is finalised, the file must be certified by a Crown Solicitor as having reasonable grounds for prosecution, in accordance with section () of the Charities Act . Legal Services will refer the file to the appropriate Crown Solicitor.
. Groups opposed to selfidentification are also critical of the policy process in developing the selfidentification provisions, particularly the level of public consultation. For example, the selfidentification provisions were added to the Bill after public submissions closed, meaning people were unable to comment on the process recommended by the Select Committee or on selfidentification generally. Groups https:www.hrc.co.nznewsbirthcertificatechangeswelcomedtakatapuitransandnonbinarypeople ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
. I would like to consult on whether councils should be required to consider Mori wards
. Once a decision has been made the Department would draft a letter for you to sign that outlined which exemptions, if any, have been granted, whether any modifications to requirements had been made, and if any additional conditions have been set (such as a review after a certain period of time). . We recommend the legislation require that a successful exemption application, which is then relied on in the formation of a water organisation, must be by the council.
. the nature of the information being placed in the jurisdiction;
. the type of service;
. the ease with which an agency can bring information back to New Zealand;
. changes in legal frameworks or political leadership of a nationState (which
.. international security standards for intelligence and security agencies
.. RegistrarGeneral, means the RegistiarGeneral appointed undei the Public
.A full list of the parties approached for feedback is included as Appendix B. The
Any jurisdictional risk needs to be considered alongside other risks and benefits
Councils all over the country have increased their rates significantly in recent times. In some Australian states, rates increases are controlled by caps on noncore council activities. I have investigated the rate peg mechanism used in New South Wales, which regulates the total income councils can raise through rates by: . allowing councils to automatically increase their rates each year to keep pace with the estimated change in the costs of providing their current services and service levels to households, businesses and the broader community (their base costs); and . limiting the impact of rates increases on ratepayers, by ensuring councils cannot increase their rates income by more than the estimated change in their base costs, and that they engage with their communities if they propose a change in their rates income to fund improvements in the scope, quantity or quality of their services. I want to investigate a similar system for New Zealand that will protect ratepayers from excessive rates increases. This will significantly change the funding system for councils, but it will take time to design it in a way that has a meaningful impact on New Zealand communities and avoids unintended consequences. For any new system to be effective, it needs to balance the longterm interests of ratepayers, by having a positive effect on rates affordability, with the financial sustainability of councils, so they can continue delivering for their communities. I will report back to Cabinet in Quarter of seeking policy approval to lay the foundation for a system to limit councils rates revenue. Reviewing the transparency and accountability rules that apply to councils
If the AttorneyGeneral determines that the Bill requires a section report, and Cabinet wishes to make changes to the Bill at that point to address this, there will not be sufficient time to redraft the Bill and still introduce the Bill within this parliamentary term.
The Bill does not include any provision empowering the making of other instruments that are deem ed to be legislative instruments or disallowable instruments.
. As the largest entity , serving . million customers ( around a third of New Zealanders ), Entity A affords the opportunity to establish robust benchmarks by which the performance and efficiency of other entities can be compared over time, and by which its own perfor mance improvement can be measured. . While economic regulation will come into force over time, it will be important to invest early in improving the information base that provides the foundation for effective regulation.
. For files in respect of offences against sections to , or A of the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act , consent of the Attorney General to prosecute is currently required to be obtained prior to charges being filed pursuant to section of that Act. Legal Services will refer the file to Crown Law prior to charges being filed.
. Mori wards decisions are made in two stages over two years. Decisions to establish
. The Minister of Internal Affairs will proactively publish this Cabinet paper and other
.The feedback received from councils and other stakeholders was broadly
July , Cabinet Paper: Strengthen ing the Regulation of Drinking Water, Wastewater and Stormwater, Offices of the Ministers offor Local Government, Health and Environment, page July , Cabinet Paper: Strengthening the Regulation of Drinking Water, Wastewater and Stormwater, Offices of the Ministers offor Local Government, Health and Environment, page July , Cabinet Paper: Strengthening the Regulation of Drinking Water, Wastewater and Stormwater, Offices of the Ministers offor Local Government, Health and Environment, page July , Cabinet Paper: Strengthening the Regulation of Drinking Water, Wastewater and Stormwater, Offices of the Ministers offor Local Government, Health and Environment, pag e July , Cabinet Paper: Strengthening the Regulation of Drinking Water, Wastewater and Stormwater, Offices of the Ministers offor Local Government, Health and Environment, page Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia Department of Internal Affairs have not identified a maximum number that would be feasible . FFF The government and its advisors have overlooked the global evidence of effective regulation applied to multiple water service entities . Some examples include: In Florida, the Public Service Commission regulates investor owned water utilitie s FFF. In Victoria, the Essential Services Commission regulates businesses providing urban water and sewerage services to residential customers FFF. In Western Australia, the Economic Regulation Authority regulates licensed water service providers FFF. Columbia has a regulatory regime sp anning , municipalities that provide water services either directly or via public service companies . It is a much less developed country than New Zealand , with a GDP per capita of just over , US FFF and has experienced benefits of economic regulation. The resources available for investment in the water service provisions have increased significantly over the last years since regulation began FFF. New Zealands Commerce Commis sion already has experience regulating multiple electricity distribution businesses . The Commerce Commission regulates electricity distribution under Part of the Commerce Act . It sets price and quality controls for local lines companies and set s quality stand ards in the form of annual limits for the average number and duration of power outages across the region. The Commission applies information disclosure regulation to a further consumer owned lines companies, thus having oversight for entities. In the period following the electricity reforms of the late s until , the Commission undertook price regulation of all electricity distribution businesses (even consumer owned ones). The Commerce Commission is likely to be the institution t hat regulat es the water sector (adding to electricity distribution , gas pipelines , airports, dairy and telecommunications). It has demonstrated an ability to regulate more than four entities concurrently, and therefore the assumption that it could not regu late more t han the four proposed water entities is mistaken. Benchmarking and performance comparisons with regulated water corporations possible Even if regulation is not applied to WDC and other councils that opt out, benchmarking and performance compari sons will be possible. Until now, the only benchmarking tools available to council owned water providers have been WaterNZs annual performance report and high
DIA and Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC) promulgated advice to
On balance, because we do not expect the analysis to change, we recommend making a decision now on whether to address the NZBORA inconsistency.
The Bill does not contain a definition of Minister, department (or equivalent government agency), or chief execut ive of a department (or equivalent position).
Under the partnership agreement the one off upfront payment of million and an additional million to the minimum guaranteed funding, pro rated is conditional on the monopoly being enforceable qwkdm
agreed that the economic regulator may provide guidance on the implementation of geographic averaging;
Strategic context and government priorities Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Our strategic context Our strategic context has an impact on what we need to do to develop and evolve the services and functions we provide. Changes to our context can happen quickly, so we need to anticipate as much as possible to ensure we are wellplaced to adjust our goals and objectives. The key features of our current strategic context include: Economy New Zealands economy has faced several challenges in recent years, including rising inflation, higher unemployment, increased costs and slower growth. Global geopolitical issues have also caused impacts. Many New Zealanders are currently facing tough times, and the public service needs to assist by delivering more efficient, effective and responsive services. Government expectations Government expects public service agencies to deliver highquality, efficient and responsive services while managing costs effectively. The Government has emphasised the importance of fiscal discipline, innovation and collaboration to achieve better outcomes for New Zealanders. These expectations aim to ensure that public services remain trusted, highperforming and capable of meeting the needs of all New Zealanders. Extreme weather changes Extreme weather events are becoming increasingly frequent and intense due to climate change. Rising global temperatures contribute to more severe heatwaves, prolonged droughts and wildfires. The atmospheres increased capacity to hold moisture leads to heavier rainfall and more severe flooding. These changes pose significant risks to infrastructure, agriculture, health and communities in general, necessitating strategic planning and adaptation measures to mitigate their impacts. Understanding these impact trends is crucial for developing resilient systems and policies to protect communities and economies from the growing threat of extreme weather.Central and local government cooperation Central and local government cooperation in New Zealand is crucial for effective governance and delivery of public services. Neither central nor local government can effectively meet current challenges (such as infrastructure investment, the changing economic environment and impacts of climate change) that New Zealand faces over the coming decades on their own. Joinedup solutions, greater partnership and system side approaches to deliver services and infrastructure of national significance will be a feature of the coming years. Cybersecurity Technology provides opportunities within government for innovation, efficiencies and productivity gains. However, the vulnerability of critical services and personal data to disruption is a growing issue, whether through deliberate or inadvertent actions. The number of cybersecurity incidents is growing, and they range in scale from localised, specific attacks to global incidents affecting multiple countries simultaneously. Protecting against, and responding to, cybersecurity incidents is a challenge for all businesses, organisations and government. Digitising government Digital technologies underpin our economy and are driving global change across society and government. They offer significant opportunities for innovation, stronger productivity and more efficient people focused customer services. New Zealanders want to have choice and engage as easily and efficiently with government as they do with the private sector. People also expect government services to be safe and secure. To maintain the publics trust and confidence in government services, a joinedup service delivery and a seamless customer service experience is needed. Strategic context and government priorities Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki How we support the Governments priorities As part of the New Zealand public service, the Department of Internal Affairs contributes towards the Governments outcomes and objectives. This means we focus our efforts to support the Government to achieve its priorities. The Governments priorities are to: Build a stronger, more productive economy that lifts real incomes and increases opportunities for New Zealanders Deliver more efficient, effective and responsive public services to all who need and use them in particular to restore law and order, and improve health outcomes and educational achievement Get the Governments books back in order and restore discipline to public spending Strengthen democracy in New Zealand. What this means for us Our outcomes are broad because of the diverse range of responsibilities we have and the variety of ways in which we contribute to and support government priorities. Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Our outcomes framework He papa whinga Our outcomes framework Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Our performance framework We use outcome indicators to demonstrate the impact of the work we do to benefit New Zealand and those who live here. We use statistical surveys and other research from local and international sources to see whether trends over time represent good progress towards achieving the outcomes. Our performance measures assess whether we have achieved the desired results in specific services or functions that collectively support the overall achievement of our outcomes. These performance measures are set out in the Estimates of Appropriations for Vote Internal Affairs and are reported on each year in our Annual Report. We regularly review our outcome indicators and performance measures to ensure they remain relevant and meaningful. Mtou Mahi is our organisational strategy which includes our purpose, five outcomes and our priorities for making a difference over time for people and society. Our outcomes are encompassed by the following statement, which reinforces our commitment to and encourages better understanding and capability of te ao Mori. Whia te hntore o te mauri atua, hei oranga m te mauri tngata The pursuit of environmental sustenance and potential enhances the wellbeing and life essence of people and place. We have five outcomes to achieve our purpose, which support and bolster each other. New Zealand is a wellfunctioning democracy across central and local government People can easily access the services and information they need Peoples sense of belonging and collective memory builds an inclusive New Zealand Iwi, hap and communities across New Zealand are safe, resilient and thriving Oranga hap, iwi and Mori is improved through an enduring, equitable and positive MoriCrown relationship Our outcomes framework Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Outcome: New Zealand is a wellfunctioning democracy across central and local government Why this is important Both central and local government have big impacts on the lives of New Zealanders and are an essential part of our democracy. Ensuring that government is accountable and transparent builds trust and confidence in central and local government and contributes to peoples willingness and ability to participate in society. Cooperation and coordination across central and local government is critical to address complex issues that have both local and national implications and solutions. Contributing to the achievement of this outcome we have four intermediate outcomes that represent more specifically the impact we will have: Executive Government functions well through support, services and advice Government transparency is upheld Engagement between Mori and Government is strengthened Local government works collectively to address national objectives. What success will look like Success will mean that by we will see: Our people being provided with tools and knowledge to support a highly functioning Executive Government Building confidence, participation and engagement in democratic processes Building confidence in, and understanding of local government to enable greater productivity. How we will drive change to deliver this outcome Our key priorities and initiatives over the next four years include: Executive Government functions well through support, services and advice Delivering the transition programme to ensure the changes in the Executive Government through elections are wellsupported Providing staff and resources to ensure the Executive Government and its offices are well supported to operate efficiently and effectively, including implementing the ministerial information management programme, to ensure the Executive Government functions well Delivering safe, secure and trusted VIP transport services to Ministers, official Guests of Government visitors and dignitaries, ensuring they have access to these services when they need them (including progressively transitioning to a modern, diverse and low emissions fleet) Our outcomes framework Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Providing public sector agencies and organisations with access to a range of reliable, fitforpurpose digital products and ICT services Providing the Government Chief Digital Officers guidance and direction to the public service on digital investments and service delivery. Government transparency is upheld Monitor the performance of FENZ to ensure services are delivered in an effective and efficient manner Administration and support of public and government inquiries and Royal Commissions Embed the use of the Information Management Maturity Assessment tool across central and local government under the Public Records Act , including setting target levels of maturity to enable selfassessment and results to be tracked and acted on. Engagement between Mori and Government is strengthened Support the ongoing relationship with Te Hiku Iwi through the annual Taumata Rangatira Accord that provides opportunity for iwi leaders to engage and commit Ministers on particular matters. The Government has agreed to reprioritise unspent Three Waters iwiMori funding to support rural marae drinking water infrastructure. We will work with iwi in relevant regions as well as Te Puni Kokiri and Crown Infrastructure Partners to identify potential sites to upgrade infrastructure to make drinking water safe. Local government works collectively to address national objectives Design and deliver policy and planning for the implementation of Local Water Done Well and other key parts of the water system, including developing the water system steward, monitoring of the Water Services Authority Taumata Arowai, and setting up new systems and legislation to support local communities to manage water services and infrastructure Provide policy advice and strategic support informed by local government sector knowledge and a longterm view of the sector. Key priority areas include: local electoral changes and policy, system improvements for local government, supporting and reviewing the operation of local government, support to the Chatham Islands council and oversight of offshore islands Partner with local government to achieve the Governments policy objectives for the sector, and collaborate with other agencies to support policy design and implementation where this relies on or impacts on local government Support for reform to improve the housing and urban development system. This includes options for funding and financing the infrastructure needed for housing development, development incentives for local government, and other support to help local government deliver on their role in the system. Our outcomes framework Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki How we will know we have made a difference We will use the following outcome indicators to demonstrate the impact of the work we do to support this outcome: Outcome indicator Source Frequency Perceptions of corruption are maintained or decreasedTransparency Internationals Corruptions Perceptions IndexAnnually New Zealands global ranking in the Democracy Index is maintained or increasedThe Economists Democracy IndexAnnually New Zealanders trust in public services based on personal experience is maintained or increasedKiwi Counts Survey Public Service CommissionAnnually Who we partner with to deliver this outcome We have a system leadership role which means we work with other agencies, both in central and local government, to deliver this outcome. As the Governments primary department responsible for the local government system, we work closely with local authorities across New Zealand (and their peak bodies Local Government New Zealand and Taituar where appropriate), the Water Services Authority Taumata Arowai and the Local Government Commission to support local government. We also engage with iwi and hap to deliver our work Archives New Zealand works closely with public offices and across the public service to ensure that a full and accurate public record is created, maintained and accessible The Government Chief Digital Officer works with strategic oversight and governance groups consisting of various system leads andor chief executives with an interest in digital and data transformation across government We work closely with The Treasury to support their Investment Management System and advise Ministers on prioritising and sequencing the Governments digital investment We work closely with central and oversight agencies to ensure that our financial and corporate services meet expectations and comply with legislation. This includes The Treasury, the Public Service Commission and the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC), Audit New Zealand and the Office of the AuditorGeneral. Our outcomes framework Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Outcome: People can easily access the services and information they need About this outcome Peoples ability to access services and information affects their lives and wellbeing. We work across government to identify opportunities to make services and information more easily accessible to those who need them. Making it easy for people to verify their identity and reducing or eliminating digital barriers enhances peoples ability to participate in society through jobs, education, community work and recreation. Contributing to the achievement of this outcome we have four intermediate outcomes that represent more specifically the impact we will have: Peoples identity can be easily and securely verified Barriers to digital inclusion are reduced Peoples access to government is enhanced Taonga tuku iho rights are protected. What success will look like Success will mean that by we will see: People having more control of their data, which is accessed with their consent Peoples circumstances driving automated, transparent public sector services The public sector operating on standardised, interoperable and common digital systems All people having access to highperforming infrastructure services All New Zealanders having what they need in an increasingly digital world to fully participate in and benefit from New Zealand society. Our outcomes framework Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki How we will drive change to deliver this outcome Our key priorities and initiatives over the next four years include: Peoples identity can be easily and securely verified Enable people to access their identity information via a digital Verifiable Identity Credential they hold Enable other government agencies and businesses to use the Identity Check service to verify peoples identity safely online in realtime Extend our existing technology capabilities to enable government agencies to digitally onboard and identify their customers online with minimal inperson verification The Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Authority is the regulator for accrediting digital identity services and providers in New Zealand. This includes establishing and embedding appropriate rules and regulations, to ensure that participants in the digital identity services ecosystem can trust that the digital identity information they provide or receive is accurate and secure. Barriers to digital inclusion are reduced People can access our services through multiple channels, and we use plain language and test designs with a range of people. Services are designed for any device and forms show only the necessary information this makes it easier for everyone. For people using nondigital services we provide downloadable forms, print on demand and support via phone, email or at counters to guide customers. We use translation services when needed to support customers. Peoples access to government is enhanced Lead and facilitate the delivery of a unified customer experience for digital government services. This will include implementing a Roadmap for modernising services, along with a work programme and a new approach to digital investment. This work will improve how New Zealanders experience digital government services, and help people and businesses quickly and conveniently access government services and information Work with government agencies to improve customer digital identity onboarding processes across service channels Emerging technologies like AI have the potential to revolutionise public services for New Zealanders. We will support government agencies to trial and safely use these emerging technologies, in ways that build system capability and confidence, while maintaining public trust in the public service. Taonga tuku iho rights are protected Through the Departments Mana rite Relationship Agreement we aim to codevelop responsive and accessible digital public services for Mori, supporting data sovereignty and collaborating with other agencies on Mori data governance. Our outcomes framework Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki How we will know we have made a difference We will use the following outcome indicators to demonstrate the impact of the work we do to support this outcome: Outcome indicator Source Frequency Ease of getting passport services is maintained or increasedDIA Customer Experience SurveyAnnually Ease of getting birth, death and marriage services is maintained or increasedDIA Customer Experience SurveyAnnually Ease of getting citizenship services is maintained or increasedDIA Customer Experience SurveyAnnually Peoples trust and confidence in digital identity is improvedDIA Customer Experience SurveyAnnually The Digital Identity Services Trust Framework commenced on July , and we have identified the need to establish a further indicator focusing on digital identity regulation. We are considering ways to capture and monitor this. Who we partner with to deliver this outcome We are responsible for reliable, authentic identity information and keeping this information accurate, secure and available in a lawful manner. Establishing a robust identity online is fundamental to growing the digital economy and improving digital inclusion. We work with a variety of other agencies that have appropriate and controlled access to identity information to support the delivery of their services and functions We partner with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, to ensure New Zealanders around the world have access to identity documents in times of need We partner with Immigration New Zealand to make it easier for people to confirm their eligibility for citizenship, and to confirm their identity The National Library partners with public libraries across New Zealand for shared services and bibliographic information for the benefit of communities. Digital New Zealand (as a National Library service) has partnerships with over organisations to make our unique documentary heritage more accessible digitally Close collaboration and partnership across and with public sector agencies is a key aspect in the delivery of a unified customer experience for digital government services, and in the adoption of emerging technologies Under the Mana rite Relationship Agreement we partner with the Data Iwi Leaders Group, a subgroup of the National Iwi Chairs Forum authorised to speak on matters relating to data and digital, and their operational arm, Te Khui Raraunga. Our outcomes framework Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Outcome: Peoples sense of belonging and collective memory builds an inclusive New Zealand Why this is important A strong sense of belonging is important for New Zealand to be a welcoming and inclusive place for everyone. Many factors influence peoples sense of belonging and connection. When people lack a sense of belonging and feel excluded there are high social costs for individuals, communities and society. A collective memory contributes to a sense of belonging through knowledge and understanding of our history and culture. A vibrant cultural and national identity also helps to give a collective sense of belonging. People benefit from the social capital that documentary heritage, symbols of national identity, national events and culture provide. Contributing to the achievement of this outcome we have five intermediate outcomes that represent more specifically the impact we will have: Collective memory is enhanced by New Zealands documentary heritage A culture of reading enhances literacy and knowledge New Zealands national and cultural identity is fostered and respected Trusted citizenship and identity documents contribute to a sense of belonging Taonga tuku iho is preserved and valued. What success will look like Success will mean that by we will see: The embracing of diverse communities strengthening our identity as a nation New Zealand stories being celebrated, accessible, shared and understood Government information, websites and public portals that are reflective of our unique communities and te ao Mori as a matter of course.
Local elections encapsulates local government elections, licencing trust elections, and elections to certain charit able trusts and other entities. These
. For files in respect of offences against the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Act , the prior consent of the RegistrarGeneral must be obtained for a prosecution to be initiated.
. The Minister of Internal Affairs recommends that Cabinet:
. The reason for this timing is because the Act previously needed to provide time for
.Iwihap were contacted but did not provide feedback on the proposals.
I am seeking Cabinets agreem ent in principle that the lower voting age applies to voting and standing in all local elec tions, with one exception relating to licencing trusts.
Other jurisdictions include Australia, the UK and Finland. qwkdm ()(f)(iv)
The Bill will commence by default on March .
The advice on jurisdictional risk is the public service can continue to manage
agreed that the government policy statement can be used to require the geographic averaging of residential drinking and wastewater service prices across a water services entitys service area, after June ;
. All Department of Internal Affairs prosecutions must be conducted by properly qualified legal counsel. Prosecutions may be done by inhouse solicitors (for nonCrown prosecutions) or by Crown Solicitors under instruction from Legal Services.
. It could be possible that all decisions are made at the same time. Alternatively,
In addition to the costs outlined above, there will be additional costs for the Electoral Commission to register and maintain electors registration information if the voting population is increased.
In the time available it has not been possibl e to look into the implications for the other smaller entities or undertake any c onsultation about the lower voting age applying to those elections. Department of Internal Affairs officials will consult with the relevant local author ities and other entities on t hese matters in the next few weeks. I will report back to the C abinet Legislation Committee with further advice on this when seeking approval to introduce the Bill.
RIB funding for season is now taken out of TAB NZ revenue and reserves and no longer out of Class Gaming . qwkdm
The Bill also provides that an earli er , on or afte r March , may be set by Order in Council. This is to enable earlier commencement if the changes can be implemented sooner.
We consider the main impact of jurisdictional risk relates to RESTRICTED
agreed that where the government policy statement requires geographic averaging, the policy statement can also provide direction on the timeframe for implementing geographic averaging to avoid price shocks;
. I propose to consult on options for timing sequencing decisions on Mori and general
. Legal Services will conduct the prosecution in consultation with the investigating unit, and will keep the investigating unit informed of progress. The responsibility for instructing Crown Solicitors (including providing instructions throughout the course of a prosecution) remains with Legal Services.
. standing as a candidate in local elections (other than alcohol licensing trust elections);
. standing as a candidate in alcohol licensing trust elections, or being appointed to an alcohol licensing trust; and
. voting in alcohol licensing trust elections.
A single age of for participation in all aspects of local elections would be consistent with the current single age of eligibility for local (and parliamentary) elections, and address each instance of the NZBORA inconsistency.
Licencing trusts set limits on the sale and supply of alcohol. I consider that as and yearolds cannot purchase alcohol, the voting age for these elections should remain at . This will, however, create an agebased distinction though, whic h will need to be fully assessed against the freedom from discrimination on the basis of age in the NZBORA.
Local Government New Zealand (October ) Managing natural hazard risk in New Zealand towards more resilient communities ; Community Resilience Workshop, November . Local Government New Zealand (October ) Managing natural hazard risk in New Zealand towards more resilient communities. Australian Productivity Commission . Barriers to Effective Climate Change Adaptation, Report No. , Final Inquiry Report, Canberra, at p. Department of Environment, Food and Rural Affairs () Managing Adaptation: Linking Theory and Practice. Community Resilience workshop, November .
Mathews Avenue, Kaitaia.
My recommended approach to timing fo r introduction and first reading is outlined in paragraphs above.
The governance framework for councils includes governance principles and requirements around codes of conduct, standing orders, and conflicts of interest. This framework has not been reviewed or in decades. The lack of direction from previous governments has left a vacuum that has been filled by the elected member advocacy group Local Government New Zealand, which has developed various templates for councils to adopt. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government INCONFIDEN CE My observation is that council governance tools are vague and open to interpretation. We see costly code of conduct complaints being made against elected members , often by their colleagues. At the other end of the spectrum, codes of conduct have been used in some instances by council staff to prevent elected members from accessing information. I propose a legislative change so that the Secretary for Local Governme nt can approve and issue a standardised code of conduct that councils will be required to follow. made in the Bill next year. I am giving further consideration to how a written questions system for local governmen t elected members could be implemented , to support their access to information. Implementation An indicative timeline for the Bill and its implementation is: Milestone (s) Cabinet report back second tranche policy approvals Quarter , Bill introduced June local elections October Bill enacted Late Implementation From early Costofliving implications This programme exists to achieve savings and address costs of living. Financial implications Generally, policies proposed through the Bill should reduce, not add to, costs. INCONFIDENCE aecpczkj : Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E aecpczkj
This new policy preference will set a clear expectation with agencies that, while they
agreed that exceptions to geographic averaging would include:
. All prosecutors appearing for the Department of Internal Affairs must comply with the requirements of the SolicitorGenerals Prosecution Guidelines and the relevant rules in the Lawyers and Conveyancers Act (Lawyers: Conduct and Client Care) Rules , particularly rule . which states:
. Councils are required to consult their communities on general ward proposals during a
. where communities have sought a higher level of service than is provided elsewhere in the water services area or where communities receive a lower level of service than what is generally provided in the water services area;
. new growth areas (where a levy is in place under the Infrastructure Funding and Financing Act );
. water infrastructure contributions (growth charges);
. failing drinking water supplies that have been taken over by a water services entity;
Continued change in technology and geopolitics means uptoguidance on
I note having a different voting age for t he licencing trust elections against the other local elections will make administra tion of local elections more complex. Officials will need to work with local electoral officers on how this can be managed. I also note that some amendm ents will be required to the Sale and Supply of Alcohol Act to support this change.
I seek Cabinet approval for the B ill to be introduced on approximately August (but by August ).
agreed that the Bill will cancel the pricing and charging provisions in any contract with a commercial entity, for the supply of water services (including trade waste services) by a water services entity (this would take effect five years after the establishment of the water services entity);
. The poll provisions were, in a sense, a retrospective engagement opportunity for the
. June July crossparty consultation on the draft Bill; . July Cabinet Legislation Committee meeting seeking approval to introduce the Bill and to table the Government response to the Supreme Courts declaration of inconsistency; . August Bill introduced and Government response tabled; and . between August first reading.
.This policy should be read together with the SolicitorGenerals Prosecution Guidelines, available online at
Castalia email correspondence with MBIE and DIA . Florida Public Service Comission Annual Report (), available a t www.floridapsc.comFilesPDFPublicationsReportsGeneralAnnualreports.pdf ESC website, https:www.esc.vic.gov.auwaterwater prices tariffs andspecial drainageaverage househol dwater bills victoria On Tap: Water Consumers Guide Economic Regulation Authority Western Australia (erawa.com.au) World Bank Data (), Available at: h ttps:data.worldb ank.orgindicatorNY.GDP.PCAP.CDlocations CO World Bank Report, c harting a New Course: Structural Reforms in Colombias Water Supply and Sanitation Sector (), edited by Luis A. Andres, David Sislen and Philippe Marin , Bogota, Colombia
Halifax Street, Nelson
In order to meet the Governments objective to introduce the Bill before the general election, costing work will need to be undertaken after the Bill is introduced.
The Bill will need to be enacted by Oc tober to be able to apply to the local elections.
To manage risks and make good, informed decisions, agencies need support and
While not within scope of the DOIs, lowering the voting age requires consideration of whether and year old citizens should also be able to stand as candidates for parliament and local body positions and sit on juries.
agreed to create a regulation making power, to limit the rate of increase in prices, maintain existing tariff structures, and cap revenue from a particular service or class of customers, for household consumers;
. I intend to consult on how councils should engage with their communities when
.This policy is consistent with, and should be read together with the Regulatory Services Compliance Statement
Having a single age of eligibility will make the voting age change somewhat easier for local electoral officers to implement because it will avoid the additional complexity outlined in paragraph .
I propose that the Bill be referred to the Justice Committee for consideration. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E
Section of the Electoral Act provides that any r egistered elector who is a New Zealand citizen is eligible to be elected as a member of Parliament. Section of the Local Electoral Act pr ovides that parliamentary electors who are also citizens can qualify as a candidate for local elections (including alcohol licencing trusts).
Under the Cloud First policy, agencies are required to complete a risk assessment.
agreed that these regulationmaking powers would expire at the commencement of the first economic regulation period;
. The Local Government Commission is the independent body which hears appeals and
.This policy will be reviewed by January and annually thereafter. It will be made available publically on the Departments website.
The RealMe services are the all ofgovernment identity services and include the RealMe log on (account and password) and the RealMe Verified Identity. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE Page of . In considering the Bill, the Select Committee had separately heard a petition proposing a selfidentification process for changing sex on a birth certificate. The BDMRR Act allows people to change the sex on their birth certificate through the Family Court, but the Select Committee heard this process is inaccessible for many people. The Act requires a person undergo medical treatment that meets certain criteria and identify as male or female (there is no nonbinary option). The Select Committee agreed with the concerns raised in the petition and amended the Bill accordingly. . The BDMRR Bill was deferred in February because of the selfidentification provisions the Select Committee introduced to amend the process for changing the sex recorded on birth certificates . The previous Minister set up a Working Group to recommend operational improvements ahead of legislative reform . When the previous Minister of Internal Affairs deferred the BDMRR Bill, she announced work to make practical improvements to the current process to change the sex recorded on birth certificates . The Working Group for Reducing Barriers to Changing Registered Sex (the Working Group) was appointed to advise on non legislative improvements. . The Working Group delivered its report in early . A Government response to the report was drafted by the Department in consultation with the Ministries of Justice, Education and Health, the Public Service Commission, and SportNZ. Consideration of the report and proposed response by relevant Ministers was delayed by the response to COVID . . The Working Group do es not consider its changes to be an alternative to legislative reform. This is because operational changes cannot change the medical treatment requirements, introduce a non binary option, or make the process accessible to those unable to meet requirements due to poor access to treatment or legal resources . Structuring the work programme for the next three years . The table below outlines suggested sequencing for work in this parliamentary term , although we outline some other options later in this briefing. Timing and scope will also be dependent on your priorities across the portfolio.
noted the Minister of Local Government (the Minister) is satisfied that:
pm, Thursday March to am, Monday March (AEDT)
waterssteeringgroupdia.govt.nz
x D , Pacific peoples and other communities to achieve their digital
Accredited participants will be publicly recognised as such (e.g. by providing a trust mark to show that the participant has been accredited). INCONFIDENCE Page of is governed by a body that will maintain and update the Trust Framework and ensure it continues to protect the user consented sharing of information. . The establishment of a governance body will also help to ensure that the Trust Framework will continue to evolve an d iterate over time, along with the needs and expectations of participants. For example, Australias Trusted Digital Identity Framework is currently undergoing its fourth iteration since its establishment in . . A Trust Framework will create an enablin g regulatory environment that will support better information sharing and management practices, by establishing commonly adhered to best practice rules and standards in New Zealand. Principles would guide the development of the Trust Framework . Eight princi ples would guide the development of the Trust Framework in New Zealand. They are: people centred, inclusive, secure, privacy enabling, enabling of Te Ao Mori approaches to identity, sustainable, interoperable, and open and transparent. These principles al ign with the principles in the Data Protection and Use Policy (DPUP), developed by the Social Wellbeing Agency and work will continue to ensure ongoing alignment between the DPUP and the Trust Framework. Accelerating the implementation of the Trust Framewo rk in response to Covid Phase : an interim Trust Framework to allow compliance testing of digital solutions and the development of legislation ( to ) . We propose the establishment of an interim Trust Framework to allow compliance testing of dig ital identity solutions to begin in , while Trust Framework legislation is developed. Officials will develop the Trust Framework rules (largely based on existing and developing standards and legislation) and work with a limited number of entities to test their systems against the rules. This will allow providers to align their systems with the Trust Framework and ensure they are well positioned to become formally accredited once the Trust Framework is established in legislation. This interim function w ould be established in the Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) with the Government Chief Digital Officer (GCDO) but could move to another agency or organisation once the Bill is passed. . The interim Trust Framework would provide government with the ability to assess existing and emerging digital identity solutions to ensure they are meeting best practice. RealMe is likely to be one of the first services to be subject to a compliance test under the interim Trust Framework. RealMe will provide a t est case for how effectively the interim Trust Frameworks rules work. An interim cross agency governance group will approve standards and the compliance testing process . The interim Trust Framework governance group will be supported by a team based in the Department of Internal Affairs, who will continue to engage closely with stakeholders to develop the rules and continue to build relationships with communities, industry and Mori. The Department considered whether existing governance bodies that oversee t he management of data could take this role. However, it was determined
April , Cabinet Paper: Proposals for refreshing the Cloud First Policy and strengthening cloud
April , ERS MIN Minute.
Cloud providers use consistent, repeated technology in building their services:
Contact: Hamiora Bowkett
February meeting agenda and papers
Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsPreface John Ombler CNZM, QSO, Julie Greene, Sir Jerry Mateparae GNZM, QSO, KStJ (Chair), Rangimarie Hunia . In early , three devastating weather events struck the North Island of New Zealand within a sixweek period. The impacts of Cyclone Hale, the Auckland Anniversary heavy rainfall, and Cyclone Gabrielle will be felt for years to come. Fifteen people died, one person is still missing, and the lives of many more were forever changed. We acknowledge the gravity of these events, and the seriousness of our task. . Over the past eight months, our role was to identify lessons from the severe weather events, and to make recommendations for the design of New Zealands emergency management system. The aim is to improve our countrys readiness for, and response to, future emergencies. . The Inquiry takes a highlevel view and does not seek to apportion blame to individuals or entities. Where necessary to identify lessons, we have made it clear where we found the actions of those involved fell below what was needed. In doing so, we equally acknowledge that many who had a role in the response did their job with the best of intentions. . Seen as a whole, the emergency management system did not enable people to prepare for and respond to the severe weather events as needed. In some places, it failed. Many communities and CDEM agencies were not adequately prepared, communication and warnings were nonexistent or insufficient, and the capability and capacity of people and infrastructure was overestimated or lacking. . There were some successful aspects of the response, particularly in the way communities courageously supported each other. Councils, communities, and organisations that had planned and prepared ahead of time were better placed to respond effectively under the challenging circumstances. . As a country, we are not ready to respond to largescale emergencies. Significant changes to the design, funding and operation of our emergency management system are needed. . The wideranging recommendations in this report are interconnected and should be considered as a package. We are frustrated that many of these recommendations are not new and are suggested in previous reviews. . Even if fully implemented, these recommendations alone will not result in a fitforpurpose emergency management system. Without adequate investment in risk reduction and readiness, the impacts of disasters will continue to be devastating. . We gratefully acknowledge the individuals, communities, businesses, and government agencies who contributed to the Inquiry and shared their experiences. For many, the conversations evoked deep hurt, grief, and frustration. Your contributions were open, honest, and insightful, and we appreciate your generosity. . We also thank the Inquirys secretariat led by Anita Balakrishnan, and Counsel Assisting Esther Watt, who supported us in our engagements and the preparation of this report. . It was a privilege to undertake this Inquiry. This report reflects the voices we heard, encourages the change that is needed, and proposes an approach to emergency management that puts people and their communities at its heart. John Ombler CNZM, QSOJulie Greene Rangimarie Hunia Sir Jerry Mateparae GNZM, QSO, KStJ (Chair) EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ABOUT THE INQUIRY PREFACE RECOMMENDATIONS Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsAbout the Inquiry . In July , the Minister for Emergency Management established the Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events under section () of the Inquiries Act . . The Inquirys Terms of Reference state its purpose is to ensure that the design of New Zealands emergency management system is appropriate to support readiness for, and responses to, future emergency events by identifying lessons from the following three events: Cyclone Hale, to January heavy rainfall from January to February in the Northland, Auckland, Waikato and Bay of Plenty regions (hereafter referred to as the Auckland Anniversary heavy rainfall), and Cyclone Gabrielle, to February . . A copy of the Terms of Reference is attached as Appendix A. . As required by the Terms of Reference, interim recommendations were provided to the Minister for Emergency Management and Recovery by December . The recommendations in the final report are largely the same in their intent. Any changes improved clarity and accuracy following further considerations and fact checking processes. . The Inquirys findings are based on common or systemic themes. In places, this report comments on the common experiences, challenges or actions of groups or organisations involved in emergency management readiness and response activities. These comments should not be read as referring to all organisations or groups falling within the relevant category. Examples include councils, CDEM Groups, CDEM agencies or iwi. The Inquiry focused on readiness and response . New Zealands approach to emergency management is based on four areas of interconnected activity known as the Rs: (risk) reduction, readiness, response, and recovery. . While reduction and recovery are not within the scope of this Inquiry, we have commented on these areas where there is a compelling reason to do so. This reflects that the Rs are part of an integrated approach to emergency management, and improvements in one area can lift performance in other parts. N ew Zealand Gazette, Establishment of the Government Inquiry Into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events. July . https:gazette.govt.nznoticeidgo The Rs are: Reduction Identifying and analysing risks to life and property from hazards, taking steps to eliminate those risks if practicable, and, if not, reducing the magnitude of their impact and the likelihood of their occurrence to an acceptable level. For example, flood protection infrastructure such as stopbanks. Readiness Developing operational systems and capabilities before an emergency happens; including selfhelp and response programmes for the public, and specific programmes for emergency services, lifeline utilities and other agencies. For example, community plans. Response Actions taken immediately before, during or directly after an emergency to save lives and protect property. For example, swift water rescues. Recovery The coordinated efforts and processes used to bring about the immediate, mediumterm, and longterm holistic regeneration and enhancement of a community following an emergency. For example, rebuilding a bridge. Evidence was gathered through meetings and written information . The Inquiry started considering evidence on July , and presented its report to the Minister for Emergency Management and Recovery on March . . Between August and February , we considered over interviews and information requests, received submissions, and conducted desktop research. Appendix B provides a list of those who contributed to the Inquiry. . Engagement was a significant part of our process. We visited the regions most affected by the weather events and met with community groups, volunteers, iwi, hap, sector representatives, and businesses. We interviewed leaders, experts and other staff from the entities involved in the emergency management system, including government agencies, councils, and emergency services. National Civil Defence Emergency Management Plan Order , section , . EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ABOUT THE INQUIRY PREFACE RECOMMENDATIONS Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events. Multiple reviews, undertaken and underway, touch on matters relevant to this Inquiry. We met with the leads of these reviews to ensure we were learning from, and not replicating, the work relevant to this Inquiry. These reviews include: Ministerial Review into Better Responses to Natural Disasters and Other Emergencies (), chaired by Hon Roger Sowry Ministerial Inquiry into Land Use in TairwhitiGisborne and Wairoa (), chaired by Hon Hekia Parata Auckland Flood Response Review: Independent Review into Auckland Councils response to the January floods (), undertaken by Mike Bush, Bush International Consulting Independent Review into the Hawkes Bay Civil Defence Emergency Management Response into Cyclone Gabrielle (due ), undertaken by Mike Bush, Bush International Consulting Royal Commission of Inquiry into Lessons Learned from New Zealands Response to COVID (due ), chaired by Tony Blakely, and Project Hau Nuku: Weather Forecasting System Review (due ), led by the Treasury and Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment. READINESS RESPONSE Ministerial Review: Better Responses to Natural Disasters and Other Emergencies Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events RESPONSE March Auckland Flood Response review August Review of Hawkes Bay Civil Defence Emergency Management NEMA North Island Severe Weather Event After Action Review REDUCTION June DPMC Lifting the resilience of NZs critical infrastructure Discussion Document. (Current) RECOVERY March Cyclone Gabrielle Recovery Taskforce chaired by Sir Brian Roche March Cyclone Recovery Unit led by Katrina Casey DPMC established to support locally led engagement. (current)Reform of the emergency management sector Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID Lessons Learned (current) Review into the Future for Local GovernmentMBIE Review of the Electricity (Hazards from Trees) Regulation (current) Report of the Expert Working Group on Managed Retreat Insights and Observations: The Chief Ombudsmans report on extreme Weather events .Battening down the hatches: the Telco sectors response to Cyclone Gabrielle March Project Hau Nuku: Weather Forecasting System Review (Current) Outrage to Optimism : Report of the Ministerial Inquiry into land uses associated with the mobilisation of woody debris (including forestry slash) and sediment in TairwhitiGisborne district and Wairoa District FENZ Accident investigation into fatal landslide incident at Muriwai on February Telecommunications Emergency Forum Cyclone Gabrielle Post Incident Report May Reviews or work that came as a direct result of NI Severe Weather events. Could have implications for EMS.Reviewsworkinquiries that could have a bearing on the EM System Emergency Management and the Wider Inquiry Ecosystem Readiness ResponseRecoveryReduction
IA Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE Page of . You are likely to be contacted by groups with disparate views on sex and gender who anticipate further work on these issues. The Department can support you in responses to stakeholders and any proactive communications you require . Discharging the BDMRR Bill currently before the house is likely to generate publicity . If you choose to discharge the BDMRR Bill and replace it with two separate Bills, we will work with your office regarding messaging on the change. We recommend that work on both aspects, modernisation and a review of sex and gender related requirements, are announced together, even if the work needs to proceed on different timeframes . Failure to review the process to change the sex recorded on a birth certificate would disappoint affected communities and likely gain significant public attention. Potential other work on the identity system beyond BDMRR Act reform . Other issues with the broader identity system may be brought to your attention. This includes work that is driven by the Departments regulatory stewardship responsibility or a need to update our operational systems. It also includes work that is comparatively minor and may be needed to support work in other portfolios where it affects the identity system. If the Ministry of Justice reviews the Adoption Act, this could be leveraged to review and improve our legislation . In early the Ministry of Justice proposed a review of the Adoption Act . The Department strongly supports this. We administer the day today systems relating to registering adoptions and provide access to information about adoptees and their birth parents under the Adult Adoption Information Act provisions. . Changes to the Adoption Act may result in changes to the way adoptions are registered under the BDMRR Act. This could provide an opportunity to rethink what information is recorded on a birth record, and which information is available to whom and when (as an adult or a child). This could also include different ways to record and report parental, family and iwi relationships for children adopted or born of surrogacy in New Zealand or born or adopted to New Zealand from overseas. The way we record relationships is changing and our systems may need to change too In a child was registered with both her biological mother (who provided the egg) and her gestational mother (who gave birth to her) listed on the birth certificate. The child was conceived using assisted reproductive technologies. Current ly only two parents can be included on a birth certificate. If the above family intended for a third parent, for example the biological father, to be an active part of the childs life, there is currently no way he could be included on the birth certificat e. . If the Ministry of Justice includes a review of the Adoption Act in its work programme during this parliamentary term, we will provide you with advice regarding the implications for BDMRR Act reform. Timing for this would depend on the priority it is given in the Justice work programme. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Impact Summary: Changes to the process for establishing Mori wards and constituencies LGNZ, Elected members census Amendments to the Local Electoral Act made through the the Local Government Electoral Legislation Act (the LGEL Act). Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Regulatory Impact Statement have resolved to establish Mori wards have chosen to engage with the community on this topic before making the decision. . The additional consultation requirements will : require councils that do not already have Mori wards to, at least every six years, consider whether to establish specific Mori representation; and require councils to engage with Mori and other communities , and have regard to their views , before making the decision. . These changes are due to come into force from October . The enhanced consultation requirements do not apply to council decisions on Mori wards between the period of the legislative amendment and these sections of the Act coming into force. . Under the st atus quo, we would expect a small number of additional councils to resolve to establish Mori wards over the next years, and those resolutions would not be subject to binding polls. Some councils may choose to conduct non binding polls. It is also possible that some councils may choose to disestablish their Mori wards. . We would only expect a small number of additional councils to establish Mori wards because of the constraints of the formula in the Act for calculating the number of Mori ward councillor positions. This makes it unlikely that councils with a very low Mori electoral population, particularly in the South Island, will establish Mori wards. What is the policy problem or opportunity Government priorities . On March , the mechanism for councils to conduct binding polls on whether to establish Mori wards was removed through an amendment to the Local Electoral Act allowing councils discretion to resolve to establish a Mori ward. Following thesechanges, councils resolved to establish Mori wards for the first time, with of those councils implementing that change at the local elections. . Coalition agreements include a commitment to: restore the right to local referendums on the establishment or ongoing use of Mori wards, including requiring a referendum on any wards established without referendum at the next local body elections. . The Government considers that there is an imbalance between the ability for electors to determine their representation arrangements and Mori representation in local government. The proposed solution is that the community should be able to make the final decision on whether Mori wards are established, based on a majority vote, ratherthan the elected representatives making the final decision. This comes from a commitment to ensure that the public has a greater opportunity to have their views reflected in l ocal representation arrangements. . Current Mori wards legislation and the councils that have previously resolved to establish Mori wards under the amendment , without holding a poll, are inconsistent with Government objectives . . The coalition agreement indicates Government objectives for the councils to hold binding polls during the local elections. The Minister of Local Government has The Regulatory Impact Statements for these amendments are available on the Department of Internal Affairs website at https:www.dia.govt.nzdiawebsite.nsfFilesRegulatory Impa ct fileRegulatory Impact Statement Maori electoral representation.pdf Schedule A, Local Electoral Act Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Regulatory Impact Statement further decided to consider holding standalone binding polls in so that the outcomes can apply from the local elections. The Minister has indicated that this is his preferred option. . The Government also intends to offer councils options to avoid the poll process, if they choose to. For councils that have resolved to create Mori wards but not yet implemented them, they will have the option to rescind these decisions, and forcouncils that have existing Mori wards, they will have the option to resolve todisestablish them. Removing the poll provisions has increased Mori representation on local authorities . Removing the poll provisions has enabled a significant number of councils to establishspecific Mori representation in their elected membership for the first time. . Feedback from councils indicates that the risk of triggering a poll, and the community division that the polls tended to create, act ed as a deterrent to promoting the option of Mori wards. Since the poll provisions were removed, council uptake of the Moriwards option increased by more than three times the number that had previously tried to establish Mori wards. There is very little time to conduct and implement polls before the local elections . Councils representation review processes for the current local government term are already under way. Some councils have already started early engagement with their communities prior to issuing their initial proposal s. There would be significant work needed, after legislation is enacted, for affected councils to carry out polls. Following that, if required, councils would implement changes through a truncated representation review. These steps need to be completed by April before pre election processes start. . The limited time available for polls and completing representation review process es may be challenging for councils to manage. T runcating the representation review involves effectively remov ing the role of the Local Government Commission in hearing appeals and objections. This could lead to poorer representation arrangements and or ongoing community dissatisfaction with council decision making. Stakeholders . There are a number of key stakeholders, including: Current and future electors of Mori descent (who are currently on the Mori electoral roll or may choose to be in the future) the Mori wards poll provisions affect the likelihood of this group having the option of specific Mori representation on their local councils, and they are likely to be affected if petitions and polls become a contentious issue within the local community. Mana whenua iwi and hap relationships with local authorities can be affected by decisions on Mori wards, and they tend to be the groups most affected ifpetitions and polls become a contentious issue within the local community . Current and future non Mori electors these electors have an interest in the general composition of the representation arrangements for their local councils, and may also be negatively affected by social division around contentious issues . Local authorities councils are responsible for delivering Mori ward polls and implementing the outcomes, including funding these processes. Councils also have responsibilities to consult with their communities on key decisions. The councils which have recently resolved to establish Mori wards, without holding a poll, are most immediately affected by the options in this analysis. The Local Government Commission has an appeal and determination function forall councils representation reviews. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Regulatory Impact Statement A number of other agencies and entities are involved in delivering the polls and supporting implementation of representation review outcomes , including the Electoral Commission, N ew Zealand Post and other postal service providers, election service providers, Stat istics New Zealand, and Land Information New Zealand. . Due to time constraints and confidentiality requirements , the Department of Internal Affairs has not consulted on options for implementing these changes outside government departments and Crown entities. The Department has had preliminarydiscussions with the Local Government Commission, the Electoral Commission,Statistics New Zealand, and Land Information New Zealand. Views on the poll provisions have been well canvassed previously . Although there has been no specific public consultation on the coalition agreement commitments, there have been other opportunities for public consultation on the topicof the Mori ward polls in the past, including: submissions on a petition by Andrew Judd that the House of Representatives consider a law change to make the establishment of Mori wards on district councils follow the same legal framework as establishing other wards on districtcouncils (which was considered as part of the Inquiry into the General Election and the Local Elections); the Tauranga Moana claim to the Waitangi Tribunal; and the Human Rights Commission report , Mori representation in local government. . Many of the arguments for and against polls on Mori wards were summed up in the Departmental Report to the Mori Affairs Committee on submissions on the Local Electoral (Mori Wards and Mori Constituencies) Amendment Bill , as summarised below : Support for removing the poll provisions Removing the polls provides for fairer electoral representation of Mori at local government. Removing the polls supports the Crowns obligations under te Tiriti o Waitangi the Treaty of Waitangi. Councillors are elected to make decisions, and as elected representatives theyshould be trusted with balancing the respective community interests involved. Removing the polls would avoid the community division that is heightened by Mori ward polls. Removing the polls addresses a discrepancy between the way that Mori wards and general wards are treated in law. Opposition to removing the poll provisions and to councils having Mori wards more generally The community should have a say on whether a council adopts Mori wards. Mori wards are undemocratic or divisive. There is already sufficient representation of Mori in local government. Petition Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Regulatory Impact Statement If there is separate representation for Mori then there should be separate representation for other ethnicities. Previous Mori ward poll results have shown they are not wanted by communities. We lack i nformation on the implications of requiring polls in . As the Department has not had opportunity to consult with affected councils on these proposals, we have limited information about the impact of requiring councils that have resolved to establish Mori wards since to hold a binding poll to take effect for the term commencing in October . There are a number of implementation challenges to achieve the coalition agreement commitment s, however it is possible that unforeseen challenges to implementation can be resolved through future consultation with co uncils and affected parties . Conclusion . The policy problem is therefore determining the correct balance between public input in council representation decisions and facilitating Mori representation and participation in local government. What objectives are sought in relation to th e policy problem . The primary objective of the policy changes is to ensure the local community has a greater say about the shape of their representation arrangements, both on recent decisions and for decisions about Mori wards in future. Objectives for section A : Long term changes to the process for Mori wards . The objective for changes to the Mori wards poll provisions are to ensure that local communities have a greater say in decisions about council representation arrangements , while also supporting councils to facilitate Mori representation and participation in a way that is consistent with the Local Electoral Act and Local Government Act , and is consistent with other similar council decision making processes. . A secondary objective is to reflect New Zealands unique constitutional framework byconsidering how to maintain local democracy in a way that reflects the partnership between the Crown and Mori that is inherent in te Tiritithe Treaty. Mori wards are one way, but not the only way, that rights and responsibilities under te Tiritithe Treatycan be implemented. . Any changes should aim to ensure consistency in council decision making about representation arrangements as far as is practicable. Objecti ves for section B : Transitional changes for councils . Transitional changes will inevitably have an impact on councils. The objective of policyin this area should be to implement the long term changes around Mori wards legislation efficiently and inexpensively in a way that minimises disruption for affected councils while maintaining the integrity of local government processes . . The implementation should give effect to the objectives around balance between public input into representation arrangements and Mori representation in local government. Both of these should be consider ations in the implementation of policy objectives. Departmental Report to the Mori Affairs Committee on submissions on the Local Electoral (Mori Wards and Mori Constituencies) Amendment Bill , February , bafbffbabacc (www.parliament.nz) , pages Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Regulatory Impact Statement Section : Deciding upon an option to address the policy problem For this section we have considered the two parts of the Governments preferred approach to the policy problem separately: Section A: Long term changes to the process for Mori wards . This section deals with options to make enduring changes to council decision making processes about Mori wards . Section B: Transitional changes for councils. This section deals with consistency for the councils that created a Mori ward while the poll provisions were not in place. A: Long term changes to the process for M ori wards What criteria will be used to compare options to the status quo . The criteria used to assess the options are to ask whether the policy : supports adequate public input into decisions about local representation; supports councils to facilitate Mori representation and participation in local government ; enables balancing of various community interests (including minority interests) ; support s consistency of council decision making about representation arrangements ; and minimise s fiscal andor compliance costs . . There is some tension between these criteria and the Governments objectives . Options that support the Governments objectives of ensuring the public has access to binding polls in response to council decisions to establish Mori wards are likely to conflict with the criteria of minimising costs, and facilitating increased Mori representation in local government . Supporting adequate public input into decisions about local representation . It is important that there is an opportunity for all members of councils communities to contribute to discussion and debate on decisions on Mori wards . While the decision primarily affects electors on the Mori electoral roll and mana whenua, all constituentshave an interest in council representation arrangements. A binding poll is one way for members of the public to have direct control over council decisions. Supporting councils to f acilitat e Mori representation and participation . The Crown requires local authorities to facilitate Mori participation in local governmentdecision making processes, to give effect to the Crowns TiritiTreaty obligations. Section of the Local Government Act gives explicit recognition to the Crowns obligations for local authorities in this respect. In the Waitangi Tribunal commented that, where the Crown has delegated functions to local authorities, it muststill ensure that the Crowns obligations of active protection under Ko te TuaruaArticle of te Tiritithe Treaty must be fulfilled. Waitangi Tribunal. The Ngawha Geothermal Resource Report . page https:forms.justice.govt.nzsearchDocumentsWTwtDOCNgawhaGeothermalResour ces.pdf Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Introduction Introduction from Chief Executive Paul James Kia ora koutou, Over the past few months, kaimahi at Te Tari Taiwhenua have worked hard to deliver their mahi, despite dealing with the uncertainty of proposed organisational change and what it may mean for you, your mahi and your colleagues. For many, uncertainty now comes to an end with the release of final decisions for Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Branch. Thank you everyone who provided feedback on what I know were challenging proposals. Having your input and opinions is important to me as it helps shape these decisions and ensures we remain an open, transparent and upfront organisation. To affected kaimahi, I have been impressed by your mahi and commitment to delivering for our customers as you also grapple with the stress and uncertainty of whats happening. I would like to acknowledge the impact this process has had on you. It hasnt been easy for you. Please know we will do what we can to support you into a new role, either within Te Tari Taiwhenua or elsewhere. Te Tari is committed to helping you during this period and immediate support is available to you. For kaimahi who will remain at Te Tari Taiwhenua in your existing or new roles, I know from personal experience how hard it is to farewell colleagues and continue delivering the mahi. What we do for New Zealanders is important. Its what drives us to be a highperforming organisation by delivering every day for Kiwis. This is not the end of the organisational change process: the decisions contained in this document now need to be implemented. This next step will be led by your Branch Leadership Team. Thank you for your professionalism, manaakitanga, and kindness to each other throughout this process.
Later that same day, Cabi net agreed to introduce a Bill that would lower the voting age to for parliamentary and local elections, to take effect after the General Election.
Levy rates for . Background Section () of the Act states that the purpose of the problem gambling levy is to recover the cost of developing, managing, and delivering the integrated problem gambling strategy . The levy rates are set by regulation at least every three years. The next levy period is from July to June to match the next strategy. Since the levy was first set in , it has applied to gambling operators in four sectors: NCGM operators, casinos , NZRB and NZLC. There have been suggestions for some years that spending on NCGMs in clubs or venues operated by NZRB should be levied separately from the rest of the NCGM sector. The consultation document indicated that the Ministry and DIA would consider changes to the number, size or composition of each gambling sector used to calculate the levy in the context of possible changes to the levy formula after decisions about the next levy period, which would be made using the current policy settings. Officials will inform stakeholders of potential changes to the levy formula in due course. . Process for setting the levy rates The Act sets out the process for developing and setting the levy rates needed to recover the cost of the strategy (refer to sections of the Act). As part of this process, the Ministry consulted extensively on its estimated annual funding requirements, and four alternative sets of estimated levy rates. After considering submissions, the Ministry revised its consultation document as it considered appropriate and submitted these proposals to the Gambling Commission a nd responsible Ministers. The Gambling Commission obtained its own advice and convened a consultation meeting on January . It submitted its report to responsible Ministers on February . After considering the Gambling Commission report, the responsible Ministers recommend ed new problem gambling levy rates and regulations to the Governor General . STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
Manner of collection of personal information
Noncitizens cannot stand as candidates in parliamentary or local elections. People in highranking electoral administration positions cannot stand as candidates in parliamentary elections. Someone who has an interest in a contract with a council valued at more than , in a financial year cannot stand as a candidate for that council. Every one else wh o is able to register to vote, can stand as a candidate. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of usoq
PaaS is a capability provided to the consumer to deploy onto the cloud infrastructure,
Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Table : Trial Overview Trial Length Type Participants Observers Cards per Participant Cards Used for Analysis office mins Scripted office mins Scripted cafe mins Scripted construction mins Unscripted taxi mins Scripted party mins Partially scripted party mins Unscripted
See page and of the PRISM report https:www.hrc.co.nzfilesPRISMSummaryV.pdf See paragraph of the Darlington Statement (). The Darlington Statement was a joint statement between Australian and New Zealand intersex community organisations and individual advocates (including Intersex Trust Aotearoa New Zealand). Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Page of Departments advice agree with the select committees recommendation . In , the definition of eligible person was amended to allow overseasborn citizens and permanent residents to apply for a Family Court declaration. The amendment responded to a recommendation in the HRCs report To be who I am on the rights of transgender individuals. At the time, overseasborn transgender individuals had no way to update the sex on official documentation to reflect their preferred gender identity. . Overseasborn New Zealanders now no longer need a Family Court declaration to update other official documentation, such as passports and driver licences, to reflect their preferred gender identity. . A selfidentification process does not produce a declaration like the Family Court process did. The outcome is a change reflect ed on a birth certificate. The Department does not support extending eligibility to someone whose birth is registered in another country. The Bill does not have extraterritorial jurisdiction . It would not be appropriate to legislate for a process that involves the Registrar General in births not registered in New Zealand (e.g. acting as an intermediary with an overseas authority). . In the Departments view, replacing the Family Court process w ith a self identification model that does not apply to overseasborn transgender or intersex New Zealanders will have limited implications for their existing rights and obligations. For example, it will not affect their ability to update their passport, or driver licence to reflect their preferred gender identity. .
September , CAB MIN Minute: Severe Weather Emergency Recovery (Local Government
Technical debt occurs when there is a tendency to prefer shortterm solutions when developing and
The Cloud First Policy is no longer in sync with either the advancements in
The Cabinet decision was in respons e to the November Supreme Court declaration that the voting age of is inconsistent with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act , and t hat the inconsistency had not been justified (the Declaration of Inconsistency).
The Petition requests That the House of Representatives urge the
The petitioners reasoning for this request is stated as follows :
The toolkit outlines steps agencies can take to build their capability to understand te
This covers the entirety of the information management lifecycle (receipt, storage, access, use, retention and disposal) of DIA Information by NZSIS.
agree that the Bill will contain a mechanism to bring the commencement forward, to no earlier than March , if the Bill is able to be implemented earlier; Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of qlgofb
agree that the minimum age for standing as a candidate in local elections (other than alcohol licensing trust elections) will be: EITHER . lowered to yearsold;
agreed that the Bills default comm encement will be March ;
agreed that the minimum age for standing as a ca ndidate in local elections (other than alcohol licensing trust elections) will be lowered to yearsold;
agreed that the total additional cost of . million be met through a combination of
agreed to amend the Local Government Act , and other local government legislation as required, to give effect to the policy proposals described in the paper under ECO SUB that will:
agreed to the following policy objectives for pricing of water services:
approve the Government Response, attac hed to this submission, entitled Government Response to Declaration of Inconsistency: Voting age in the Electoral Act and the Local Electoral Act ;
approved the government response, attached to the submission under LEGSUB, entitled Government Response to Declaration of Inconsistency: Voting age in the Electoral Act and the Local Electoral Act ;
invited the Minister of Justice to issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office to give effect to the above decision.
note that the Ministerial response must be presented to the House by
note that the minimum age for standing as a candidate for local elections will continue to be the same as the minimum voting age for each election type;
note the refresh of the Cloud First Policy represents a significant opportunity to
noted that Chief Executives of agencies undertaking payroll system replacement projects should remain focussed on these projects and ensure they are being well managed.
noted that agreeing to the above recommendation may require the changes to be introduced in two (cognate) bills;
noted that the Ministerial response must be presented to the House by November ;
noted that the public consultation on the discussion document is intended to take place for
noted that the refresh of the Cloud First Policy represents a significant opportunity to
. A summary of key initiatives to achieve financially sustainable delivery of quality water services with a focus on what will be
. At that meeting the proposed twostep approach to amending New Zealands media
. Background .
. Cabinet previously agreed that statutory inquiries were an all of government
. CovidCard Project Findings .. Overview CovidCard is a Bluetooth Low Energy (Bluetooth LE) device with the dimensions of a credit card. It is designed to be worn on a lanyard around the neck when you are in environments where people congregate. This includes public transport, workplaces, bars, restaurants, gyms, hospitals, large gatherings and events. Openly wearing a CovidCard contributes to easily assessing and enforcing compliant use, as required. Wearing it under clothing does not impact the function of the card.
. General Assumptions . . . .
. Get real numbers Real numbers can be attained through empirical studies but there will also be proxy data for many things you dont need to get every data point, but you need to understand how it all fits together and have a compelling case for impact.
. MoriCrown relations capability
. Objectives and purpose of this Agreement
. Objectives and purpose of this Agreement .
. On further consideration, and based on your feedback, officials recommend that
. Personal information to be shared under this agreement
. Personal information to be shared under this agreement
. Reducing some obstacles
. Rollout and Execution commencing early FY
. Suitably trained and experienced professionals are needed to deliver safe, efficient,
. THE cardholder shall not use the card if the outstanding balance of his or her account with the Company will thereby exceed the credit limit imposed by the Company applicable to the cardholders account.
. The proposals that are to be consulted on will support the Governments
. This policy sets out the procedures and expectations for Departmental staff and counsel when dealing with potential prosecutions. It sets out the process to be followed in assessing a file for prosecution, and how the prosecution decision is to be made. It then sets out how prosecutions are to be conducted.
. Virtual session (day ) and virtual panel interview and presentation (day ).
. What are the levels of false negatives and true close contacts that are missed by the technology
. agree that the total cost of . million is through a combination of additional
. note that the public consultation is intended to take place for up to eight weeks
. economic efficien cy: prices reflect the underlying costs of services and support the financial sustainability of water services entities in the longrun;
. refocus the purpose of local government;
. the Department is also facing cost pressures of . million in the Future for Local Government Review, driven by the number of members appointed to the review, the tight labour market, increased engagement, and requirements for specialist research and a nalysis;
.. I. BDM Database means the series of statutory registers held by the Registrar
.. Objectives .
.. The databases to be accessed are:Databases to be accessed
.. Citizenship Database means the series of statutory registers held by the
. Regulatory Assurance and Stewardship As noted above, it is proposed that the Chief Advisors reporting line move to the General Manager, Policy Group, to align the function more closely with other levers to improve the Departments delivery of its regulatory stewardship obligations. The assurance function will remain independent and continue to work across all regulatory systems in the Department, not just those in the Branch. It is proposed to disestablish the Senior Advisor in this team. This means that the regulatory assurance work will be scaled back and refocused. Current structure and proposed changes Proposed future structure
. affordability : water is an essential service and people on reticulated networks should be able to access water services regardless of their financial circumstances;
. provide regulatory relief to councils;
. the possibility of cost pressures was signalled in the April Cabinet paper establishing the Review CAB MIN ;
.. Purposes .
. Data management and analysis One major issue for data management and analysis was the contact event structure provided by SafeDome for the Bluetooth card. This involved the Bluetooth cards registering every adverti sed card with no temporal or RSSI thresholds. Further, each contact event was recorded at the minute level so duration could not be distinguished between one and seconds. For example, a contact duration of seven mins with seven interactions could in re al terms be as little as seven seconds or as m uch as seven mins of contact time. The lack of granularity becomes more problematic with increases in contact frequencies relative to duration. It was possible participants left their cards at work which led t o recording false contact events. These false contacts could be corrected with real time working rosters. However, such rosters were not available to the research staff for this trial. The best alternative was a manual register recorded by the research coo rdinator on Day of the study. The lack of a realtime roster of participants observation time led to a slight loss of data and impacted the comparability between contact data. As noted earlier, there were a number of people in the medical unit that were not participants of the study but were record ed as close contacts by participants. This will be a continued problem in the full scale trial. To mitigate this, a new process for identifying close contacts and automating the process of de identifying survey data is required. One option would be to use the hospital staff details from the emailing system to create a drop down option for participants in the survey. Close contacts could be automatically de identifying by matching on first name and last initial. Recommendations: Create a data management and analysis strategy. Obtain a real time roster of participants observation time. Develop an automated system to de identify close contact survey data. . Concordance between data sources The low number of close co ntacts recorded in the survey data reinforces the weaknesses of self report data collection methods compared to technology based objective measures. However, it is possible the detail and changing structure of the surveys over the study period led to parti cipant fatigue. The research team w ill investigate ways to improve the user experience of the survey to reduce participant burden and encourage the reporting of more contacts. We want to retrieve self report contact data above and beyond what is possible w ith traditional contact tracing int erviewing to ensure the best possible self report results to compare against the Bluetooth card. The real world field trial did not permit the close surveillance of card interactions. As such, there was limited visibility of the environmental factors that could have be impacting the Bluetooth card and UWB device performance. However, the high proportion of cards detected each day suggests the Bluetooth cards were detecting most interactions. Further, our analysis demonstra ted that Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
. Strategy and Branch Services The changes proposed for the Strategy and Branch Services group take into account the capability that is required on an ongoing basis to deliver branch wide strategy, accountability reporting, performance reporting, data analysis and insights, and to ensure the investments in our digital platforms are working well. While what is being proposed reduces some capacity within each team, the proposal is to retain senior level capability. Work that is currently being done by analysts and advisors will either be scaled back or deprioritised.
. The levy formula The formula in section of the Act provides a mechanism for allocating among gambling operators, and collecting from them, the approximate cost of the strategy. The formula is: Levy rate for each sector (A x W B x W x C) plus or minus R D where: A the estimated current expenditure in a sector divided by the total estimated current player expenditure in all sectors subject to the levy B the number of customer presentations to problem gambling services that can be attributed to gambling in a sector divided by the total number of customer presentations to problem gambling services in which a sector that is subject to the levy can be identified C the funding requirement for the period for which the levy is payable D the forecast player expenditure in a sector for the period for which the levy is payable R the estimated underrecovery or overrecovery of levy from a sector in the previous levy periods W and W are weights, the sum of which is . The top line of the formula determines the dollar amount to be paid by each sector as its share of the total levy amount, taking into account any over or underrecovery in previous levy periods. The bottom line of the formula ( D, forecast player expenditure in the sector) determines the levy rate that is necessary for a sector to pay its required contribution (the dollar amount) determined by the top line of the formula. All other things being equal, the higher the forecast player expenditure for a sector, the lower will be its levy rate. Player expenditure for each sector is defined in section () of the Act. Each levy rate is the amount per dollar of player expenditure a sector must pay. A rate of . means a sector must pay . cents per dollar for every dollar of player expenditure in the levy period to which the rate applies. Estimated current player expenditure (A) The formula in the Act requires the levy rate calculation to take into account the latest, most reliable and most appropriate sources of information on player expenditure. The figures used are DIA estimates of player expenditure for each sector for . The estimates for each sector take into account the latest, most reliable and most appropriate sources of information, including DIAs NCGM electronic monitoring R was added to the formula by section of the Gambling Amendment Act , which came into effect on March . STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
. ensure consistent, comparable information about how councils are actually performing is made available;
. price stability : the rates of change in prices are not too high and price changes are clearly signalled in advance and smoothed over time; Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government I N C O N F I D E N C E CAB MIN I N C O N F I D E N C E omuxuzqw . costsharing: a key driver of the reforms is to address affordability issues, particularly for customers in smaller communities. Entities could use geographic average pricing to smooth costs across communities, thereby ensuring more affordable services for all;
. Ministerial, Monitoring and Capability The changes proposed to the Ministerial, Monitoring and Capability group ensure that the teams concerned can continue to support their core responsibilities to Ministers through the provision of ministerial advice to all our portfolio Ministers, managing appointments for statutory boards and maintaining oversight of Crown entities. The proposal to reduce some capacity within teams reflects that some anticipated work has already been downscaled, but there will be a requirement for higher prioritisation of incoming work in some areas. The work required to respond to a review of Fire and Emergency NZ is less than anticipated and has already been absorbed into the Monitoring and Appointments team and Policy Group. Therefore, the temporary roles of FENZ Taskforce Lead and Principal Advisor established to support this work will discontinue. It is proposed that the Senior Advisor Policy Capability position be disestablished. The policy capability function moved to the Policy Group in and will be delivered by the Principal Advisor, Policy and Capability role. A reduction in the Ministerial and Official Correspondence team is proposed, with the proposed disestablishment of the Graduate Advisor position, a reduction of Advisors from six to three Advisors and a reduction of Senior Advisors from five to four. The proposal recognises that there needs to be continuation of the senior advisor level capability to deliver on core services. There will be a need for prioritisation of work across the team and to utilise support from the rest of the Group for periods of high demand. The work in the Business Support space has significantly scaled down over the last few years with the team operating at reduced capacity for a while. Therefore, the proposal is to disestablish the team, and the Team Leader position, reduce the number of Business Support Administrators from three to two and change the reporting line for the two Business Support Administrators roles to the Manager, Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of Accountability, Performance and Assurance in the Strategy and Branch Services group. The position of Personal Assistant is proposed to be disestablished and, where appropriate, the administrative support being provided by this role to various teams across the Ministerial, Monitoring and Capability group will be picked up by other administrative support roles across the Branch. No other changes are proposed for the group. There are no changes proposed for the Lake Taup Harbourmaster function as most of its activity is funded by fees paid by lake users via the memorandum account, not Crown funding. Current structure and proposed changes
. improve transparency and accountability;
. Policy Group The changes proposed in the Policy Group are to reduce the number of Analyst and Senior Analyst roles across the group. The proposed reduction in each team reflects where there are existing vacancies that can be disestablished with least disruption. It is therefore proposed to: Reduce the number of Senior Policy Analysts in the Gambling and Racing team from four to three and reduce the number of Policy Analysts in the Gambling and Racing team from five to four. Reduce the number of Policy Analysts in the Media Content and Online Safety team from five to three. Reduce the number of Senior Policy Analysts in the Digital team from three to two and the number of Policy Analysts from three to one. Reduce the number of Senior Policy Analysts in the Community Wellbeing team from three to two and the number of Policy Analysts from three to two. In line with longstanding practice, the Policy Group will continue to review the span of work of each policy team and allocation of Analysts and Senior Analysts within those teams to align with the demand for policy advice and analysis in the areas that are a priority for the current Government. In addition to the proposed reduction to Analyst and Senior Analyst roles, the following changes are proposed for the group: Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of Closing the one temporary Chief Advisor and the one temporary Principal Policy Analyst roles once the work has ceased and support is no longer needed. Closing the Intern Policy Analyst Tupu Tai Pasifika positions as we will be unable to support this programme in the current financial environment. Reducing the administrative support across the group from two to one Personal Assistant reporting to the General Manager, Policy Group, with the proposal for the role to provide administrative support across the group and not solely to the General Manager. No other changes are proposed for the group. Current structure and proposed changes
. horizontal equity : consumers in similar positions pay similar prices;
.. Distribution Achieving mass adoption to achieve sufficient coverage of highrisk encounters would require both a national marketing and distribution campaign, as well as usage to be mandated in high risk settings. Populationwide campaigns have been successfully executed for general elections and censuses. In the General Election, .m advance votes were taken in the two week advance voting period, with a further .m votes taken on election day. Nearly , enrolments were also with , of those made during a week campaign. A campaign to distribute the CovidCard would be a significant undertaking, comparable to the enrollment update and advance voting activities undertaken by the Electoral Commission. Experience gained from general elections and the census suggest success would require four key components: () a massmarket advertising campaign; () an online channel where people can register for a card to be mailed to them; () an over the counter channel, involving physical station setup in high traffic areas, such as shopping centres and supermarkets; and () a proactive community engagement campaign for communities that are harder to reach (e.g. Maori, Pasifika, Ethnic Communities). After a short planning period, these streams of work could be executed in weeks. Opportunities may exist to use employers as a means of distribution also. Marketing messages will materially influence adoption and social acceptance. A combination of messages that appeal to a sense of community (Were all in this together) and individual motives (Get notified if youre exposed so you can protect your loved ones) are likely to drive greater acceptance than government mandate, particularly in Maori and Pasifika communities with their strong values around the collective Any campaign will also need to address potential objections to the campaign, including privacy p otections, and practical information on how to obtain and use the card.
. intergenerational equity : every generation (which can be thought of as being as small as the annual cohort of ratepayers) should be paying its fair share for assets and not requiring future generations to pay substantially more or less than their fair share through either over or under investment. Historically, funding and water infrastructure investment decisions have tended to favour current over future generations;
. giving effect to Te Mana o te Wai and respecting Treaty of Waitangi principles: pricing can support Te Mana o te Wai by encouraging efficient usage of water. Pricing can also engage Article of the Treaty, and support equitable water service access and quality of service provision;
. consistency with other government goals : pricing issues should support, or at least not undermine, government goals in other domains. For example, growth charges can have an impact on housing goals, and water services pricing c an influence levels of water use which affects climate change goals including resilience and adaptation;
. of operat ing revenues betwee n and under scenario com pared to . from
.. Risks and mitigations
.Feedback received from councils and other stakeholders was broadly supportive
.Help address health inequities by protecting atrisk populations with limited access to technology (smart phones, mobile service or internet) and healthcare.
.There would be no change to liquidity and treasury m anagemen t policies including use
.note the draft Order was reviewed by the Severe Weather Events Recovery
A centralised certification process for new hyperscale cloud data centres in
I consider that the age for standing as a candidate in parliamentary, local government and alcohol licencing trust el ections should remain at . This reflects that fact that serving as an MP or local elected offici al carries a different level of ongoing responsibility and expectation than voting.
I propose to release this Cabinet paper and the related Minute with any necessary redactions in accordance wit h Cabinet Office Circular CO () , following the introduction of the Bill in the House.
Manager, Investigations AMLCFT The Manager, Investigations AMLCFT, is responsible for the dayto day management of a frontline investigation team, ensuring a strategically targeted, consistent, and outcome focused driven approach to serious, complex andor highrisk investigations and prosecutions under the AntiMoney Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism Act (AMLCFT Act). Senior Investigator AMLCFT The Senior Investigator AMLCFT is responsible for leading high quality investigations and prosecutions into serious, complex, and harmful noncompliance by businesses we supervise (our regulated sector) under the AntiMoney Laundering and Countering and Financing of Terrorism Act (AMLCFT Act). Director, Regulatory Enablement The Director, Regulatory Enablement plays a key role in supporting the General Manager, Regulatory Services to drive the setting of the Regulatory Services groups strategic direction and ensures the individual regulatory systems have enabling services such as intelligence, insights, risk, operational policy, education, information and engagement, that focuses regulatory stewardship activities and meets strategic objectives. Team Leader, Business Services The Team Leader, Business Services manages a team to provide support across the Regulatory Services group on business operational and financial planning, reporting, risk and governance activities. Manager, Intelligence and Insights The Manager, Intelligence and Insights is responsible for the delivery of strategic and tactical intelligence led ways of working (including tools) and leading and managing a team of intelligence practitioners, to ensure that intelligence, analysis, products and services are delivered consistently and to high quality standards across Regulatory Services enabling them to make informed, riskbased strategic, operational, and tactical decisions. Principal Advisor, Strategy and Business Planning The Principal Advisor, Strategy and Business Planning is responsible for the development and maintenance of the overall Regulatory Services group annual strategic plan and the translation of the groups strategy into business plans that are measurable. This position will also support the development of accountability documents, lead the development of integrated performance reporting framework and cycle, and drive business planning activities. This includes development, implementation and monitoring of strategic initiatives in support of the overarching strategic direction of the group. Senior Advisor, Risk The Senior Advisor, Risk will work across the Regulatory Services group to provide risk thought leadership, analysis, and advice. Intelligence Coordinator The Intelligence Coordinator will support the Intelligence and Insights team through coordinating information for analysis and reporting purposes, helping Regulatory Services improve their understanding of harm and risks. Manager, Engagement, Information and Education The Manager Engagement, Information and Education is responsible for the delivery of strategic and tactical intelligence led ways of working (including tools) and develops and manages effective and influential relationships across our regulatory systems and deliver excellent results through collaboration, project management, innovation, engagement and effective communication. They lead a highly capable team to identify and deliver smart initiatives that support and elevate our regulatory effort.
agreed that the economic regulator must be consulted in the development of these regulations;
. This distinction adds confusion to the representation review process about what is and
Continuing with the current decentralised approach would mean each agency would
I recommend that the Cabi net Legislation Committee:
Section of the Juries Act states that any person eligible as an elector is also eligible as a juror. I consider main taining the age for jury service at is necessary to minimise disruption to schooling for and yearolds and the potential harm of exposing young people t he types of matters disclosed in criminal trials.
The Supreme Court in Marlborough District Council v Altimarloch Joint Venture Ltd NZSC found that a person requesting a LIM from a territorial authority is clearly in a position of proximity to the authority and the relationship between the parties is closely analogous to a contractual one. See also Trustees of the THP Trust v Auckland Council NZHC . A breach of statutory duty will rarely add much to a claim in negligence. See Trustees of the THP Trust v Auckland Council NZHC . See Weir v Kpiti Coast District Council NZHC . Weir v Kpiti Coast District Council NZHC . York v Westland District Council NZSC ; Trustees of the THP Trust v Auckland Council NZHC ; Resource Planning and Management Ltd v Marlborough District Council (Resource Planning) HC Blenheim CIV October ; Monticello Holdings Ltd v Selwyn District Council NZHC . Saunders, W.S.A., Mathieson, J.E. . Out on a LIM: The role of Land Information Memorandum in natural hazard management, GNS Science Miscellaneous Series ; Iorns Magallanes, CJ J Watts, Adaptation to SeaLevel Rise: Local Government Liability Issues (Deep South National Science Challenge, Wellington, ). Iorns Magallanes, CJ J Watts, Adaptation to SeaLevel Rise: Local Government Liability Issues (Deep South National Science Challenge, Wellington, ). Monticello Holdings Ltd v Selwyn District Council NZHC , NZLR , at . Ministry for the Environment. . National Climate Change Risk Assessment for Aotearoa New Zealand: Main report Arotakenga Traru m te Huringa huarangi o otearoa : Prongo whakatp . Wellington: Ministry for the Environment citing Iorns C. (). Treaty of Waitangi duties relevant to adaptation to coastal hazards from sealevel rise. June, ; Iorns C, James V and Stuart T. (). Courts as decisionmakers on sealevel rise adaptation measures: Lessons from New Zealand, in W Leal Filho (ed) Climate change impacts and adaptation strategies for coastal communities. Springer International Publishing.
agreed to the following measures to avoid conflict and tension between legislative pricing principles and regulations, and enable a smooth transition:
. I intend to ask about whether the creation of Mori wards should be appealable, and if
. the pricing regulations must be met as soon as reasonably practicable after they come into effect;
. there may be temporary deviations from legislative pricing principles, subject to deviations being consistent with guidance or requirements from the economic regulator; Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government I N C O N F I D E N C E CAB MIN I N C O N F I D E N C E omuxuzqw . any pricing direction in regulations, the government policy statement, or the regional representative groups statement of strategic and performance expectations must be consistent with the overall legislative framework;
. water services entities must meet obligations in primary legislation, regulation and the government policy statement;
. once legislative and government policy statement obligations are met, a water services entity can pursue other goals;
Victoria Street, Hamilton
Victoria Street, Hamilton.
I note that of all comparable jurisdictions where the voting age is , there is a higher age for standing as a candidate or sitting on a jury.
Legacy systems, in particular onpremise, can present multiple challenges, such as
The Minister of Local Government has submitted a legislative bid for the Legislation Programme with a category of Priority (to be referred to select committee before the general election). Section ()()(f)(iv) Section ()()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of qlgofb
agreed that as a general transitional measure, water services entities may keep charging for services using the same methodologies that the relevant territorial authority had been using;
. General wards may be established and disestablished by councils every three years. On
. We are also considering how treaty settlem ent agreements will be provided for if a councils ownership interest in its water assets is transferred to a consumer trust. The basic principle is to ensure an identical level of protection to Mori interests currently in treaty settlement arrangements. You will receive this advic e on September .
I also note that introducing amendments which retain a minimum age of for candidates and jurors does create an agebased distinction. This will need to be fully assessed against the freedom from discrimination on the basis of age in the NZBORA. I will report back to the Cabinet Legislation Committee with further advice on whether this distincti on can be justified w hen seeking approval to introduce the Bill to next year.
In line with the cloud first default intent of the Policy, we propose an additional
The Bill is likely to have a sixmont h consideration at select committee, and return to the House in , subject to decisions on reinstatement following the General Election.
The Minister of Local Government has submitted a legislative bid for the Legislation Programme with a category of Priority (to be referred to select committee before the general election).
noted that Cabinet previously invited the Minister of Local Government to report back on the outcomes of the collection of detailed pricing information from local authorities by June ;
. Councils currently lack certainty about the disestablishment process. I would like to
LGFA Annual Report ( ), page , Available online at: https:www.lgfa.co.nzfilesdocumentsLGFAAnnualReportwebversion.pdf Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia Table .: Average bill per household under different financing options for Reform Scenario Average bill per household Change (Increase in costs . Debt to revenue limit ( WICS model assumption ) ,. Debt to reven ue limit ,. . Debt to revenue limit ,. .
Lowering the voting age will require a num ber of consequential changes. The following changes will apply even if the voting age is only lowered for local elections: . Enrolment is currently compulsory. Failure to register could result in a fine of for the first offence and for subsequent offences. This offence will apply to and yearolds if the voting age is lowered; . Currently yearolds are able to enr ol in advance of becoming eligible to vote at . The Bill will lower t he age at which people can enrol to years of age; . The age at which people can nominate candidates is currently aligned to the voting age, and will also be lowered to ; and . Officials are still finalising potentia l changes to accommodate voting conditions for people under w ho have been sentenced; these changes will aim to broadly replicate the current rules that apply to people aged over who are sentenc ed to less than three years imprisonment and are eligible to vote. If the voting age is also lowered for parlia mentary elections, in addition to the changes noted above, there will be consequential amendments to, or flowon impacts on, other electoral law, includ ing the Citizens Initiated Referenda Act and the Referenda (Postal Voting) Act . This will apply the lower voting age so that and yearolds can both present or sign a petition for a citizensinitiated referendum (which are always indicative referendums), and vote in future referend ums held under these Acts.
The Bill is likely to have a sixmonth consideration at select committee, and return to the House in , subject to decisions on reinstatement following the general election. Section ()()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of usoq
The proposed default position of cloud over onpremise investment signals the need
agreed that the reporting referred to in paragraph above be extended to December , along with proposals on the best way of using regulationmaking powers to manage price shocks;
Our outcomes framework Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki How we will drive change to deliver this outcome Our key priorities and initiatives over the next four years include: Collective memory is enhanced by New Zealands documentary heritage Deliver a new, resilient and fitforpurpose archival facility in Wellington connected to the existing National Library building Support communities with ongoing preservation, accessibility and sustainability we will lead and collaborate on this across the public sector and documentary heritage sector. This includes supporting communities to respond to the impacts of climate change. A culture of reading enhances literacy and knowledge Deliver library services for young people, working with government, library and literacy partners, to build a culture of reading and support the Governments literacy goals. New Zealands national and cultural identity is fostered and respected Maintain and consider options to enhance Premier House to increase its utilisation as an official residence and support the longterm stewardship of it as a national heritage asset Deliver the Governments programme of official visits and national commemorative events. Events promote our national and cultural identity and build the collective memory of an inclusive New Zealand Enable New Zealanders to engage with key foundational documents via the He Tohu exhibition, which presents He Whakaputanga, the Treaty of WaitangiTe Tiriti o Waitangi and the Womens Suffrage Petition. Trusted citizenship and identity documents contribute to a sense of belonging Improve the security features and design of the New Zealand passport. New designs will reflect New Zealand and our people. Taonga tuku iho is preserved and valued Improve access and preservation of our national collections and taonga Deliver a sector review of information disposal authorities and improved systems that enable access, retention, and disposal of care records. How we will know we have made a difference We will use the following outcome indicators to demonstrate the impact of the work we do to support this outcome: Outcome indicator Source Frequency Satisfaction with citizenship services is maintained or increasedDIA Customer Experience SurveyAnnually Peoples sense of belonging to New Zealand is maintained or increasedGeneral Social Survey Stats NZEvery two years Our outcomes framework Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Who we partner with to deliver this outcome We work with a variety of other agencies and groups, including the Prime Ministers Office, the Ministry for Culture and Heritage, and the DPMC on arrangements for national commemorative events or tragedies The National Library works closely with schools, public libraries and the Ministry of Education to support childrens reading initiatives We work with Ng Taonga Sound Vision and the Ministry for Culture and Heritage on the safe, secure storage of documentary heritage, including the provision of specialist storage repositories and equipment We partner with a security document vendor, work with local advisors and designers from New Zealand, and engage with a community of experts in the International Civil Aviation Organisation. This is to ensure the New Zealand passport is highly secure and reflects the uniqueness of our people, culture and environment The National Library and Archives New Zealand are building strong partnerships with whnau, hap and iwi to support them to care for their mtauranga. These institutions work across the wider culture and heritage sector to improve resource sharing, collective thought leadership and innovation.
Our outcomes framework Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Outcome: Iwi, hap and communities across New Zealand are safe, resilient and thriving Why this is important Communities are important to peoples wellbeing. People have the best opportunity to thrive and prosper when the communities they live in are safe and resilient. Communities can be supported to manage risks and challenges and empowered to form and realise their own aspirations, despite adversity they might face over time. Across New Zealand there are many different communities, and we need to work with them in different and unique ways, including with iwi, hap and Mori. The Crown can support their aspirations alongside our associated Treaty of WaitangiTe Tiriti o Waitangi obligations and settlements. While many aspirations are common among iwi Mori, we also recognise that unique needs exist and we are working in different ways to support individual iwi. Resilient infrastructure is important to communities and their longterm wellbeing. Addressing the planning for and funding of infrastructure ensures communities have the facilities that allow our regions to thrive and prosper. Contributing to the achievement of this outcome we have three intermediate outcomes that represent more specifically the impact we will have: Regulated activities minimise harm and maximise benefits to people and communities Mori are supported to realise their aspirations Communities are supported to develop and prosper. What success will look like Success will mean that by we will see: Well informed communityled decisionmaking enables people to develop their own futures and place Diversity is embraced in New Zealand so that all people (iwi, hap and communities) are included and visible Partnering for direct delivery by iwi, hap and communities Reducing harm, both on and offline, through ongoing improvement in prevention and response Funding and granting mechanisms resulting in positive outcomes for all iwi, hap and communities.
Our outcomes framework Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki How we will drive change to deliver this outcome Our key priorities and initiatives over the next four years include: Regulated activities minimise harm and maximise benefits to people and communities Reduce regulatory barriers and promote increased charitable giving by implementing changes to improve registered charities governance. This includes making it easier for small charities to report on the use of their charitable funds Protect communities by delivering effective regulatory and policy initiatives Work with domestic and international agencies to prevent online harm in relation to child sexual exploitation, violent extremist content and harmful digital messaging. This includes collaboration on an interagency approach to tackling scams Ensure the gambling system operates with integrity and prevents harms as much as possible. This includes strengthening casino industry compliance and maximising community funding from licensed gambling Establish an online casino regulatory system Implement the Financial Action Taskforce supervisory recommendations. Mori are supported to realise their aspirations Review the Oranga Marae Fund to ensure it is effective in contributing to marae, hap and iwi to realise their aspirations Support the Lottery Grants Board to evolve their funding system, to ensure it funds more strategically and equitably, and is outcomes driven. Part of this is responsiveness to Mori communities and respect for the Treaty of WaitangiTe Tiriti o Waitangi. This will include finalising its first Statement of Intent and an outcomes framework to provide direction and ensure greater transparency for its grants distribution. Communities are supported to develop and prosper Deliver community advisory expertise in regions across Aotearoa New Zealand that contributes to communities, hap and iwi accessing support andor funding to assist in achieving their aspirations Work with local government to improve community resilience by reducing risks from natural hazards and climate change. This includes support to local government recovery from severe weather events Establish and maintain a framework for local and central government to agree regional deals that build economic growth, deliver connected and resilient infrastructure, and improve the supply of affordable, quality housing Provide a safe, supportive, confidential place where survivors of state and faith based care abuse and their whnau can share their experiences through the Survivor Experiences Service. The Service will run through to the introduction of a new, independent redress system in . With the addition of a records function to assist survivors in requesting, receiving and understanding their care records, it remains committed to providing spaces to continue facilitating healing Support the longterm financial sustainability of the racing industry. Our outcomes framework Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki How we will know we have made a difference We will use the following outcome indicators to demonstrate the impact of the work we do to support this outcome: Outcome indicator Source Frequency Overall life satisfaction is maintained or increasedGeneral Social Survey Stats NZEvery two years Peoples sense of purpose is maintained or increasedGeneral Social Survey Stats NZEvery two years Who we partner with to deliver this outcome We work with other agencies in their regulatory and enforcement roles, including the New Zealand Police, the New Zealand Customs Service, international law enforcement agencies and other regulators We work with a broad range of stakeholders involved in regulated systems, including regulated parties, as well as other individuals and organisations that contribute to effective regulatory outcomes We work alongside iwi, hap and community groups, the Lottery Grants Board, other funders and local and central government agencies through our partnership approach to community development across New Zealand.
Our outcomes framework Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Outcome: Oranga hap, iwi and Mori is improved through an enduring, equitable and positive MoriCrown relationship Why this is important The Department has Treaty of WaitangiTe Tiriti o Waitangi obligations that require strong partnerships, engagement and consultation with Mori to be effective. The Department has commitments across Treaty of WaitangiTe Tiriti o Waitangi Settlements and is also party to Accord Agreements. This outcome places our relationship with hap, iwi and Mori at the centre of our decisionmaking in matters relating to Mori. It requires us to build our capability in te ao Mori, te reo me na tikanga and Te Tiriti to help achieve improved, enduring and equitable outcomes for Mori. The term oranga can be translated as wellbeing but from a te ao Mori perspective it encompasses much more, including the connection between peoples health and wellbeing and the whenua (land) and taiao (environment) around them. Contributing to the achievement of this outcome we have two intermediate outcomes that represent more specifically the impact we will have: Mtauranga Mori is respected and valued Mori, iwi and hap aspirations, interests and rights are understood and respected. Te Kai Atihau , carved by Bernard Makaore, represents the relationship between National LibraryDIA and Ngti Whtua rkei, and the original aspirations asserted by Apihau Te Kawau and his nephew Paora Tuhaere. Our outcomes framework Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki What success will look like Success will mean that by we will see: Te ao Mori capabilities in the Department are lifted Mtauranga Mori is respected, valued and protected Mori, iwi and hap aspirations, interests and rights are understood and reflected in our work programmes Strengthened Treaty of WaitangiTe Tiriti o Waitangi partnership with Mori through a mix of codesign, management and governance The Department can report on outcomes and impacts for Mori. How we will drive change to deliver this outcome Our key priorities and initiatives over the next four years include: Mtauranga Mori is respected and valued Increased engagement by the Department with Mori, in a mana enhancing way utilising mtauranga Mori held by our staff. We support continuing to develop relationships held across branches with members of hapori Mori and associated networks. Crown Iwi accords, Mana rite and Memorandums of Understandings also support recognition of mtauranga Mori where trusted relationships exist particularly at manatomana levels Manage collections, holdings, information and taonga, to support communities, whnau, hap, iwi and Mori to easily access, use and reuse these. Mori, iwi and hap aspirations, interests and rights are understood and respected Adhere to existing and new legislated obligations with external Mori representative organisations by leveraging regular reporting to contribute to the oranga hap, iwi and Mori outcome The Mana rite Relationship Agreement commits to enhancing te oranga whnui o Aotearoa through strategic digital systems and innovations that uplift iwi, hap and whnau. Through our fiveyear joint work programme, we will foster a sustainable and equitable digital future for Mori and all people of Aotearoa Implement a competency uplift programme (He Waka Eke Noa) to build strong enduring MoriCrown relationships. Our outcomes framework Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki How we will know we have made a difference We will use the following outcome indicators to demonstrate the impact of the work we do to support this outcome: Outcome indicator Source Frequency Mori leaders in the Department at tier level and above is maintained or increasedDIA Annually The Departments settlement commitments as reported in Te Haeata is maintained or increased DIA Annually Who we partner with to deliver this outcome The Department is committed to our legislative obligations to Mori. We currently partner with over PostSettlement Governance Entities to meet our Treaty of WaitangiTe Tiriti o Waitangi settlement commitments and deliver on our Accord Agreements. Examples include the partnership with Ngti Twharetoa in the exercise of the Departments responsibilities as Lake Taup Harbourmaster, and the relationship with Taranaki Whnui, as owners and mana whenua of the land that the National Library and Archives New Zealand buildings sit on The Ngi Tahu Archives team is colocated with Archives New Zealand in Christchurch. These two teams work together to preserve taonga, and to create and share stories from across the Ngi Tahu rohe Under the Mana rite Relationship Agreement we partner with the Data Iwi Leaders Group, a subgroup of the National Iwi Chairs Forum authorised to speak on matters relating to data and digital. Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Departmental capability He whi rawe ki te mahi, , he whakahaere e eke ana ki te taumata teitei We continue to build on the strong organisational capabilities that support us to deliver results for New Zealanders and make the Department a great place to work. The Department has locations nationwide and two international offices (Sydney and London), and approximately , permanent employees. Departmental capability Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Our leadership and governance The Departments Executive Leadership Team (EL T) includes our Chief Executive, seven Deputy Chief Executives and the Director of the Office of the Chief Executive. EL Ts operating model supports it to undertake a strategic governance role and lead the Department to be a highperforming organisation and a great place to work. The governance model focuses on organisational strategy, performance, management of risk and assurance, and investment. It ensures the Department is positioned to deliver on its priorities and purpose, and that EL T has the capacity to strategically govern the Department and take a system leadership view. Risk and assurance We continue to integrate and embed risk management practice across the Department. As risks are best managed close to the source, everyone needs to be responsible for identifying, understanding, managing and escalating their business risks. This means everyone contributes to effective risk management. Our risk management framework ensures that good risk management is consistent, repeatable and is in line with international standards and best practice. Assurance is a key component of our effective governance. It provides evidence of how well business risks are being managed, opportunities are being taken and the business is performing. Good assurance supports governance bodies in their decisionmaking, helps identify key risks to delivery and enables early intervention before they start to impact on outcomes. Our Assurance Framework supports an integrated view of assurance activity over identified risks across the Department. Building our organisational capability The collective skills and expertise of our people are our greatest asset. We are investing in our leadership capability by refreshing our Leadership Development System. Through a leadership development framework and set of programmes, we will support our leaders to put He Tangata, our people, at the centre of everything we do. We will equip leaders with the skills they need, to ensure the Department is a highperforming organisation and a great place to work, where people feel connected, empowered and valued. Our continuous improvement mindset drives regular review of our systems and processes, supporting our people to deliver our services efficiently and achieve great outcomes for New Zealand. For our property portfolio, the focus for the next four years is a transition to mature asset management plans and a proactive property asset capital programme. This will support the Departments environmental sustainability Roadmap and cost reduction objectives, alongside ensuring our workplaces continue to meet the Departments needs. Building a healthy and safe culture Over the next four years our focus is on embedding our wellbeing, health and safety management plan to align with best practice and legislative compliance. Our goal is to create a mentally and physically healthy workplace that supports our kaimahi (staff) to thrive. Departmental capability Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki The Wellbeing Health and Safety Maturity Uplift Programme has developed tools and systems to empower our kamahi to keep themselves and each other safe. Moving forward we will engage with kamahi to integrate these resources and strengthen existing risk controls. Furthermore, we will strengthen the Departments capability through ongoing training, communication and continuous improvements in systems and resources. Equal employment opportunities Our inclusion and diversity strategy, Taura Herenga Waka, is aligned with our principles (mtpono). It reflects the five priority areas of Papa Pounamu, a comprehensive programme of work led by the Public Service Commission. We are committed to delivering this strategy which includes our Kia Toipoto Closing Gender, Mori, Pacific and Ethnic Pay Gaps Action Plan. Environmental sustainability Reducing our emissions enhances operational efficiency and presents an opportunity to transform the way we think about the use of resources to make better decisions for our planet and people. This needs to be carefully balanced against economic outcomes and delivering our services to the people of New Zealand. We have made good progress reducing emissions from air travel, optimising fleet numbers and transitioning to electric vehicles where possible, investing in energy efficient lighting upgrades and limiting freight emissions per passport. Our focus for the next four years will be on energy efficiency in our property portfolio as this is our biggest opportunity for carbon reduction and savings. This will require proactive planning and investment. We will continue to refine our data collection and reporting processes, enhancing accuracy and transparency. This empowers our kaimahi with knowledge, data and tools that help to guide business decisions with datadriven carbon insights and facilitates deliberate action aimed at reducing carbon. Investment and asset performance Our assets support our ability to deliver successfully against our strategic intentions. The fouryear capital plan is focused on keeping existing systems and infrastructure working well. The Department has limited capacity for further transformative investment at the present time and will prioritise carefully to make the best use of existing resources to maintain existing assets. We strive to have better outcomes for New Zealanders who use our services by investing in making it easier for people to access and use them. Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Crown entities He Hinonga Karauna The Department monitors three Crown entities and is responsible for managing the Governments relationship with them. Crown entities Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Office of Film and Literature Classification (OFLC) The OFLC is an independent Crown entity under the Crown Entities Act . This means it performs its functions at arms length from the Government. The Offices primary functions are to: Classify publications such as films, books, images or computer files as restricted (usually by age rating) or objectionable (which means illegal to possess or distribute) Provide information about classification decisions and about the classification system as a whole Support and facilitate the development of selfrating systems used by streaming providers Support New Zealands response to online violent extremist content. More information can be found at www.classificationoffice.govt.nz Fire and Emergency New Zealand (FENZ) FENZ is a Crown agent under the Crown Entities Act . This means it is required to follow government policies. It is responsible for delivering fire and emergency services throughout New Zealand by both career and volunteer firefighters. FENZ is also responsible for over , staff and volunteers and is therefore one of the largest organisations in the public service. Its main functions are to: Promote fire safety Provide fire prevention, response and suppression services Provide for the safety of persons and property endangered by incidents involving hazardous substances Rescue people trapped because of transport accidents and other incidents Provide urban search and rescue services. More information can be found at www.fireandemergency.nz The Water Services Authority Taumata Arowai The Water Services Authority Taumata Arowai is a Crown entity, enabled through the Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act . Its objectives are: Protecting and promoting drinking water safety and related public health outcomes Effectively administering the drinking water regulatory system Building and maintaining capability among drinking water suppliers and across the wider industry Giving effect to Te Mana o te Wai, to the extent that Te Mana o te Wai applies to the functions and duties of the Water Services Authority Taumata Arowai Providing oversight of environmental performance of wastewater and stormwater networks Promoting public understanding of the environmental performance of wastewater and storm water networks. More information can be found at www.taumataarowai.govt.nz Ministry for Ethnic Communities Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Ministry for Ethnic Communities Overview from the Chief Executive Since our inception on July , we have embraced our role as the Governments lead for supporting Ethnic Communities and working to maximise the benefits of diversity and inclusion for all people in New Zealand. We are the Governments chief advisor on Ethnic Communities, ethnic diversity and the inclusion of Ethnic Communities in wider society. Our Ethnic Communities make up around percent of New Zealands population, an increase of percent since the Census. Ethnic Communities in New Zealand are the fastestgrowing populations and are becoming more diverse, tripling in size since . Within the next decade, Ethnic Communities will make up more than percent of the population, as New Zealands Asian population reaches one million people. There is a correlation between economic performance and social cohesion in any society. Our aim is to be an inclusive New Zealand, where Ethnic Communities are empowered to contribute their skills, culture and voice. We will do this through our four enduring strategic priorities: Promoting the value of diversity and improving the inclusion of Ethnic Communities in wider society Ensuring government services are accessible for Ethnic Communities Improving economic outcomes for Ethnic Communities, including addressing barriers to employment Connecting and empowering ethnic community groups. Today, Ethnic Communities are employees, employers and business owners across New Zealand. They are involved in a range of sectors from technology, primary industries, manufacturing and exports. From an economic point of view, New Zealands superdiversity offers up a refreshing opportunity to positively respond to and navigate the changing economic environment. Diverse communities contribute to New Zealands economy in a myriad of ways. Ethnic businesses are uniquely placed to positively contribute to international trade by fostering relationships and opportunities between New Zealand and the countries they have migrated from and still have connections with. They can also support innovation in all sectors of our society by bringing new ideas and ways of solving problems to New Zealand. The Ministry is uniquely positioned to facilitate and mediate in all these spheres, with deep and trusted relationships that have been established since the Ministry was created. Mervin Singham Chief Executive Ministry for Ethnic Communities Te Tari Mtwaka October Ministry for Ethnic Communities Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Nature of scope and functions Our vision and direction reflect the priorities of the communities we serve. When we were shaping our strategy, Ethnic Communities told us that their main priorities included education, health and economic development, and that their contribution to New Zealands economic and social fabric is seen and valued. As we have matured as a Ministry, we have continued to build our capability to support and empower our Ethnic Communities, and raise the visibility of these and other issues that impact their contribution and potential in New Zealand. Our remit includes people who identify as African, Asian, Continental European, Latin American or Middle Eastern. They include former refugees, asylum seekers, new and temporary migrants, longterm settlers and multigenerational New Zealanders. As New Zealands diversity increases and our Ethnic Communities grow and develop, more focus needs to be put on building social cohesion and supporting Ethnic Communities to integrate successfully into their host community. This is especially important with the everchanging local, national and international environment, in particular overseas conflicts and tensions that are having on impact on social cohesion internationally as well as in New Zealand. In this context it is important that diversity be considered a strength and is valued in areas such as education, employment and business opportunities. The Ministry is directing its efforts to support newcomers to navigate obtaining government services that differ from their countries of origin. It is also supporting ethnic people to contribute to the New Zealand economy through active participation in employment, and small and largescale businesses, and to tap into the networks they have in their home countries to expand business and trade opportunities. Finally, foreign interference is a core national security issue in New Zealand. The Ministry is leading engagement with a selection of Ethnic Communities to determine the impact of foreign interference on Ethnic Communities, build resilience in those communities impacted by this, and build the capability of the public sector to respond to foreign interference in Ethnic Communities. By focusing on supporting our Ethnic Communities we will contribute to building an inclusive, resilient society for all New Zealanders. Ministry for Ethnic Communities Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Strategic priorities We work with communities, other government agencies and a range of organisations to help increase social cohesion and ensure New Zealand is a place where everyone feels welcome, valued and empowered. Our mandate comes from the communities we engage with and their priorities are ours: Promoting the value of diversity and improving the inclusion of Ethnic Communities in wider society Ensuring government services are accessible for Ethnic Communities Improving economic outcomes for Ethnic Communities, including addressing barriers to employment Connecting and empowering ethnic community groups. The Ministry is the chief advisor to the Government on Ethnic Communities and does not directly provide services to Ethnic Communities. However, to focus on the above priorities we have agreed to the following: Influence changes in policy by providing advice to government agencies and decision makers on issues that impact on Ethnic Communities Collect and analyse data so that we can demonstrate where government policies are not working well for Ethnic Communities. This includes analysing evidence to identify systemic issues Work with ethnic businesses, economic development agencies and government to realise the economic potential of Ethnic Communities so they can make a stronger contribution. In the Ministry is organising an inaugural business symposium that brings together Government Ministers, policymakers, investors, business leaders and entrepreneurs to discuss how Ethnic Communities can add more to New Zealands economy Work to build intercultural capability within government that leads to positive change for all New Zealanders Use our connections into Ethnic Communities who see us as impartial, to bring communities together Provide funding and other support to enable communities to grow their skills, celebrate their culture and take part productively in society. These areas will be our focus now and into the future. As well as our enduring priorities we are, as already noted, also engaged in a programme to improve the security and resilience of Ethnic Communities to foreign interference. Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs Pipitea Street, PO Box Wellington Telephone For more information on the work of the Department of Internal Affairs please visit our website dia.govt.nz
. The Act also provides a generic polling mechanism for any topic and the council can
qwkdm
qwkdm ()(b)(ii)
qwkdm ()(b)(ii) ()(h) Regulatory Impact Assessment Stakeholder Views Public consultation . Public consultation on regulating online gambling in asked submitters about the counterfactual, of which some were in favour. However, the consultation was in the context of regulating the entire online gambling market and reducing harm from online gambling. It did not consider the viability of TAB NZ or supporting the racing industry. Further consultation is required to determine public and stakeholder opinion. Assessment against objective . This option does not meet the objective. As discussed earlier in section , the racing industry is reliant on TAB NZ funding , and competition from offshore operators has reduced its market share and threatened distributions to the industry in recent years . The partnership has strengthened the financial position of the industry in the short term. However, the benefits of the partnership long term are untested at this early stage in the partnership. This means the risk of offshore competition eroding the revenue flow of the TAB NZ remains, thus a risk to future distributions . Option Two TAB NZ online monopoly . This option would extend TAB NZs land based monopoly to the online environment. TAB NZ would be the only operator that could legally offer racing and sport betting to people resi ding in New Zealand. . Specifically, this option would: make it illegal for any entity other than TAB NZ to offer betting on sporting or racing events to a New Zealand based customer; repeal the POCC sections within the Racing Act as it will no longer be collectable under a monopoly model; establish the Department of Internal Affairs as an interim regulator, in anticipation of this function being transferred permanently to the online casino regulator when it is established in CAB MIN. refers; strengthen the governance and government oversight provisions for TAB NZ; and strengthening harm minimisation and consumer protection regulation making powers in the Racing Act. . Expanding TAB NZs monopoly to online settings by prohibiting all other forms of online sports and racing betting is a significant consolidation of the revenue gathering channels for the sporting and racing industries. There are some risks to providing a monopoly to TAB NZ without sufficient oversight and monitoring by Government, and protections for customers. Therefore, these components are to be treated as a single package for this option. The intent to have this overall framework in place with the passing of the legislation, however as with POCC regime, some detailed aspects may require regulations. Overall Approach to the Monopoly . This option will mean that the POCC regime in the Racing Act (which prohibits offshore operators from taking bets from New Zealander unless they pay the POCC charges) is no longer be required. However, the key features of the POCC regime remain appropriate to underpin the monopoly (which would prohibit offshore operators from taking bets from New Zealander altogether), these being: The Department of Internal Affairs being the default regulator with a power to delegate this in the future if needed. qwkdm Regulatory Impact Assessment The costs of administering and enforcing the regime being cost recovered in this case from TAB NZ. . As with POCC regime, some detailed aspects of this overall package may require regulations. However, we do not consider any uncertainty in this regard will impact the overall analysis in this RIS. For example, the key issue for this analysis around paying for enforcement is that these costs will be cost recovered from TAB NZ, and the exact mechanism for this and whether is placed in primary or secondary legislation does not influence this analysis A two phased approach to enforcement regulation . As noted, the Minister of Internal Affairs is reporting back to Cabinet in October seeking decisions on the detailed design of the regulatory system for online casino gambling. This new system will address similar issues to the online sports and racing monopoly, such as the oversight of online operators and enforcement. However, at this stage this system will not be in place until which is not soon enough to enable TAB NZ to grow and embed its market share before guaranteed returns from Entain cease in . . The Minister for Racing has directed that the monopoly be implemented quickly and ahead of the broader regulation of online gambling generally. However, this will require a two phased approach to enforcement regulation. Long term the monopoly should be enforced by the new online casino gambling regulator . Once established in , t he new online casino gambling regulator will be the most appropriate long term body to oversee and enforce the TAB NZs online sports and race wagering monopoly. With Ministerial approval, the Department will c ontinu e to work on online casino regulation; with the intent that the dedicated online casino regulator (currently also proposed to be established within the Department of Internal Affairs) will eventually take on these responsibilities. Prior to this, the Department of Internal Affairs will enforce the monopoly as an interim step . Until full enforcement and oversight of the online monopoly is able be transferred to the dedicated online regulator, the Department of Internal Affairs would undertake an interim regulator role. This is intended to assure Entain that the monopoly is being regulated and therefore release the payment to TAB NZ as per the partnership agreement . As noted, any costs the Department incurs for this function would be recovered from TAB NZ. . While the interim framework will be place with the passing of the legislation and any associated regulations; the degree to which any powers are utilised and the resources dedicated to this function during the interim period will be an operational matter for the Department, given this arrangement would likely only be required for months. It is expected that the Department will take a pragmatic approach to establishing and implementing this interim role, while still ensuring adequate enforcement. This could involve the Department intervening with operators breaching the monopoly issuing initial warning when breaches are brought to its attention and raise issues with regulators in other jurisdictions. . The Department would also monitor TABs compliance with ministerial expectations of performance reporting alongside its monopoly regulation role (refer later discussion).
qwkdm ()(b)(ii) Regulatory Impact Assessment Option Wait and See . This option would defer a decision on the monopoly until the impact of the partnership on the racing industrys long term financial viability is better understood. The partnership with Entain New Zealand is in its early stages and insufficient information is currently available on the performance of the partnership agreement. This option would give more time which might enable Ministers to have access to better information when making decisions on some of the settingssecond order policy decisions relating to a monopoly (or perhaps develop an alternative solution) . A deferred decision would give time for the partnership to embed and any improvements on TAB NZs market share and revenue to realise. . To protect the revenue for the racing industry in the interim, raising the POCC rate on offshore operators would provide another means of income for the industry. The Racing Act established the POCC. The POCC applies to bets taken by offshore betting providers on racing and sporting events from people resid ing in New Zealand and is returned to the sports and racing industry. The charge is currently set at of Gross Betting Revenue. Twelve operators paid POCC in . The Minister for Racing can adjust the rates as needed . A review of the POCC rate is statutorily required every five years (by ). . Raising the POCC would go a small way in improving the financial viability of the industry while the other work was under way, particularly if POCC payers exited the market. However, it would not generate an equivalent level of income as the additional payments provided for in the Entain partnership agreement for monopoly and does not solve TAB NZs struggles with offshore competition or provide a longer term solution. In the financial year, the total POCC revenue was . million, collected from offshore betting operators, which is a relatively small amount. . The advantages of this option are: The online monopoly could still be implemented later, and TAB NZ would likely still receive the one off payment of million if created within the required year timeframe, and some of the minimum guaranteed uplift may be received; depending on when an online gambling regulatory system would be implemented it would mean the online monopoly could be enforced via this regulator from the outset without an interim regulator step; it would enable more time to assess what other measures could mitigate the risks that may arise from extending TAB NZs monopoly to online settings ; it would be quicker to implement than option , as no legislative change is needed. Regulatory changes to increase the POCC rate could be in place in months if needed. POCC payments are made quarterly, so racing and sporting codes could receive increased funding quite soon after implementation.
qwkdm ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) Regulatory Impact Assessment Governance and oversight improvements . The Entain partnership (which introduces a for profit business into the equation alongside a return toindustry model) marks a significant change in the New Zealand gambling landscape and requires the Act to still ensure TAB NZ has appropriate strong governance to enable it to deliver on its statutory objectives, functions and purposes. . Therefore, this option includes as part of the package of improved requirements, updating the skills required on the TAB NZ Board under s() of the Racing Act to also include: contract monitoring, legal and financial monitoring, in light of Entain partnership to ensure it can better provide governance and oversight of Entain. . New Ministerial powers would also be introduced to require additional reporting and information gathering from TAB NZ to better ensure that Government has sufficient oversight to respond to any future risk, including to racing industry distributions. While some Ministerial reporting is currently undertaken on a voluntary basis by TAB NZ; there are no powers to compel this, nor specify the information to reported or the level andor standard to which this is to be reported . The Department of Internal Affairs would monitor TAB NZs compliance with these reporting requirements as part of its role as interim regulator. Expanded harm minimisation regulation making powers . This proposal means TAB NZ would be the only legal provider of online sports and racing betting in New Zealand. Given this restriction of choice, it is important to ensure there are adequate harm minimisation protections for domestic TAB NZ consumers. The existing harm minimisation regulation making powers only relate to landbased TAB venues. Therefore, this option includes expanding the harm minimisation regulation making power are to also cover TAB NZs online operations. . The intent of a new regulation making power would be to ensure international best practice harm minimisation standards for online products can be included as part of the monopoly. This work will happen after the legislation is passed and the monopoly is established. It would also allow any online harm minimisation requirements imposed on TAB NZ to be aligned as required with those placed on online casino operators. . TAB NZ was aware at the time the Entain partnership was signed that further harm minimisation regulation s were likely, and the agreement anticipates this. The partnership agreement also requires Entain to provide industry best practice harm minimisation, which includes compliance with all laws and refers to standards of service equal to or better than what is provided by the best global wagering organisations. Additional consumer protection regulation making powers . As with harm minimisation, the restriction of choice for New Zealand with the online monopoly means it is important that there are appropriate consumer protections for domestic TAB NZ consumers. In particular, it is important to ensure that New Zealanders are not excluded from accessing TAB NZ services without an appropriate reason, such as having an identified gambling problem, as opposed to restrictions being placed on someone simply because they are too successful at wagering. We understand this practice occurs with many betting operators. . Therefore , this option includes the creat ion of a new regulation making power to ensure TAB NZ cannot restrict otherwise lawful customers from accessing its online products without an appropriate reason. The intent of this would be to act as a backup reserve power if usual consumer protections were insufficient.
qwkdm ()(h) ()( ()(b)(ii) Regulatory Impact Assessment Assessment against objective . This option only partially meets the objective (sustainable revenue streams for the racing industry). While preferable to the counterfactual, this option offer less certainty of outcome and lower returns in the short term compared to Option . For example, while raising the POCC rate will generate more income for the racing codes if offshore operators comply; it would still likely not generate the equivalent revenue as a monopoly; especially given the additional payments provided for in the Entain partnership agreement. Alternatively, if a POCC rate increase were to result in most or all of TAB NZs major competitors exiting the New Zealand market; while this would be more favourable to TAB NZs position; it would still not maximise the value of the Entain partnership agreement as again the additional payments would not be realised.
qwkdm ()(h) ()(b)(ii) Regulatory Impact Assessment
qwkdm ()(h) Regulatory Impact Assessment . Also, TAB NZ and the racing codes are highly supportive of TAB NZ having an online monopoly. While not having been directly consulted on the overall package in Option , some other elements of the package have been signalled with them and we believe they will be generally supportive of the optionpackage. For example, as noted TAB NZ was aware at the time the Entain partnership was signed that further harm minimisation regulation s were likely , and the agreement anticipates this; and the proposal updating the skills required on the TAB NZ Board has already been sounded out informally with racing codes who appeared supportive of this move. . As previously noted, Sport NZ supports extending TAB NZs online wagering monopoly to protect community interests and minimise gambling harm. However, the views of individual NSOs are not known. The financial impact on specific NSOs is uncertain and likely to depend on the individual sports . Assumption s specific to this option . Most offshore operators will adhere to a prohibition and leave the New Zealand market it is likely the more reputable , large operators, which we assume are responsible for most of TAB NZs competition by revenue, will leave the New Zealand market. Operators do not want to risk their licence(s) to operate in larger markets by disregarding the law in other jurisdictions . Regulators look at an operators conduct in other jurisdictions when they apply for a licence or a licence renewal. Despite that, a black market will remain with operators who are either unlicensed or licensed only in jurisdictions with less stringent licence requirements. . Reduced consumer choice will lead to people returning to bet with TAB NZ if offshore operators are prohibited from offering their products to New Zealanders, some New Zealanders will bet with TAB NZ. However, those determined to bet offshore will circumvent a ny prohibition. If offshore operators continue to offer more attractive odds, for example, some consumers will likely be more motivated to circumvent any restrictions. Consumer behaviour is difficult to predict, and we have no evidence that could suggest how many people would choose to bet with TAB NZ. Assessment against objective . This option bests meets the objective as is outlined in the next section. This option should also realise the immediate capital injection from the million payment within working days of the legislation being enacted. Depending on the enactment, TAB NZ would also receive an uplift in the minimum guaranteed funding of an a .
qwkdm Regulatory Impact Assessment . In addition, Cabinets recently agreed proposals to establish a new online casino gambling regulatory system presents indirect risks to TAB NZ as they are likely to strengthen the position of some of TAB NZs closest competitors in New Zealand. This is due to the proposal for licensed operators to be able to advertise as part of licensing conditions. These risks heighten the need to ensure legislative settings protect the viability of TAB NZ in order to improve the long term financial sustainability of the racing industry. The RI A for the online casino regulatory system noted one risk as being : If regulated operators are considered more trustworthy than currently, and can promote themselves more effectively, this may result in an increase in participation and an increase in overall harm from online gambling. Furthermore, if a shift to online gambling on offshore operators results in a move away from other forms of gambling like TAB NZ or Lotto NZ, there could be a negative impact on current community funding streams . . Given the New Zealand racing industry is almost wholly reliant on TAB NZ for funding; this loss of revenue to offshore providers threatens TAB NZs and the racing industrys ongoing financial sustainability. The New Zealand racing industry was responsible for generating close to . billion in value added contribution to the New Zealand economy in the racing year and for sustaining , full time equivalent jobs across the country. . The Entain partnership addresses some elements of TAB NZs competitiveness through leveraging off Entains betting infrastructure and expertise , and the additional revenue it has (a million one off upfront payment million per year for the first years of the agreement) has provided help in the short term. . The arrangement has mitigated the short term risk through lost revenue while the guaranteed minimum payment of million per year is available. Yet the financial sustainability risk to the industry remains in the long term, as the industry will be ultimately dependent on the competitive performance of Entain after if the counterfactual continues (of a strongly competitive online market). . However , uncertainty remains with respect to long term distributions to the racing industry, especially after the guaranteed return period concludes in in the face of increasing competition from offshore operators, especially given they can offer a more attractive product because they make no or minimal contribution to the racing sector. Although TAB NZ modelling has indicated greater revenue will be by Entain, than if no partnership had been signed, some level of risk remains without further protection. . A potential opportunity cost is that th ere is a provision in the agreement for another upfront payment of million if there is legislative change to extend TAB NZs land based monopoly to online settings, as well as
qwkdm Regulatory Impact Assessment exploring a TAB NZ monopoly as part of expanded online casino reforms (as opposed to a separate solution progress discretely and faster . We have not investigated the option of giving TAB NZ an online monopoly on racing only not sports. As a specific matter relating to option Reinstating the Gaming Duty to account for the loss in GST was also considered, however IRD advised that the capital and administrative costs of doing so would likely be over .m and therefore it would not be practical or cost efficient to do so. Additionally, it is expected that the drop in GST would be minimal as gamblers shift their betting activity from offshore operators to the TAB NZ once the monopoly is in place and offshore operators withdraw from the New Zealand market. What options are being considered . Three options have been considered: Option : Counterfactual TAB NZ remains the only authorised operator of betting products in New Zealand, the Governments online casino regulation regime is put in place, but offshore online operators can continue to offer their sporting and racing products to New Zealanders, so long as they do not advertise . Option : TAB NZ hold an online monopoly TAB NZs land based betting monopoly is extended to the online environment. Offshore operators would be prohibited from offering betting products to New Zealanders ; alongside a package of measures to give the required oversight and monitoring of TAB NZ protections for customers in light of this monopoly to TAB NZ . Option : Wait and see while increasing POCC This option would immediate ly delay legislation change in order to gather more information on the partnerships performance and make an informed decision on a monopoly; potentially after an online casino regulation regime is established. However, in the interim, raise the POCC to address revenue concerns. This means offshore operators that take bets from New Zealanders, would be required to pay increased charges. . Options and are not fully mutually exclusive. If Cabinet decides to extend TAB NZs monopoly online , a higher POCC could be introduced in the interim as a way of either collecting more money from offshore operators or encouraging them to leave the market in advance of the monopoly taking effect . However, this may not be practical depending on how fast the monopoly is implemented . Similarly , under option , if after a wait period a decision was made not to progress with a monopoly, the governance and oversight improvements, and expanded regulat ion making powers of option could still be looked at for implementation .
qwkdm Regulatory Impact Assessment This proposal comes with risk s . There are specific risks to this option, namely:
A Supplementary Regulator y Impact Statement (SRIS) has been completed and is attached as Appendix B . A joint Ministry of Justice and Department of Internal Affairs Quality Assurance Panel (QA Panel) has reviewed the Supplementary Regulatory Impact Statement prepared by the Department of Internal Affairs. The QA Panel consi ders that the information and analysis summarised in the RIA partially meet s the QA criteria. The QA Panels comment is below:
Legislation is needed to implement these proposals. The Parliamentary Counsel Office has been consulted. A bill to amend the purpose of local government has Category in the Legislation Programme (drafting instructions to be issued by the end of ). The Bill will primarily propose changes to the Local Government Act , parts of which bind the Crown. Because the primary legislation binds the Crown, the amendments will also bind the Crown. Impact analysis
Minister for Urban Development statement, July : https:www.beehive.govt.nzreleaselaw help infrastructure financing passes Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia WDC residents face risks and costs from Reform Scenario There are risks and co sts to the Whangrei community from the Reform Scenario . . Local accountability for significant public asset and public service will be lost Accountability to customers is important for water service performance. Under the Reform Proposal, Whangrei water customers wil l lose the ability to hold those tasked with governing water services to account. Elected councillors are accountable to voters, and water issues can be election issues. Under the Reform scenario, local governments autonomy to appoint board members to wa ter utilities will be constrained, thus accountability to customers and coordination in planning will be mostly lost. It is more difficult for the local community to have any issues heard at the regio nal or national political level i n the Reform Scenario . If there are management or governance problems, it is more difficult for the Whangrei community to influence the indirectly appointed board . Whangrei s representation for water services will be dilu ted. . Local variability in service and quality levels wil l be lost The regional Entity A is likely to be managed from Auckland . This reduces the ability for the service provider to reflect local differences in service expectations. Wastewater services often need to consider local needs. There are different optio ns of treating and discharging treated wastewater. Some communities, including local hapu, may have different expectations and needs in respect of wastewater . A water services entity headquartered in Auckland is unlikely to have the same ability to reflect these local variations in demands . . Loss of economies of scope increases average cost of remaining council services by . million per annum WDC currently incurs a range of costs sh ared across a range of services (water, transport, parks and recreation, and other services). WDC achieves economies of scope by providing these services together; it lowers costs for WDC to provide all the services together compared to if these were provi ded separately. Following reform, WDC will continue to incur fixed costs related to nonwater council services. WDC s RFI reports that for FY , the total operating cost for water services was , ,. There are multiple overhead cost items that will not reduce even when WDC provides no water services. As estimated from the RFI, t hese include nine indirect general Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia management and support employees and square metres of office laboratory space. This shared overhead cost amounts to . million FFF per annum . Recommended next steps This report has shown that the Reform Scenario is founded on unsound evidence and faulty analysis. The promised benefits of reform are unlikely to materialise. There are risks to the Whangrei community from losing control of water services, and accountability of those tasked with gover nance to local customers. Water services are critical to wellbeing, so it is very important that the full range of options are considered that are locally appropriate. Other than opting out, the Reform Scenario is the only option that has been presented t o WDC and other local authorities. Water services should be safe, resilient, reliable, and customer responsive, at least cost. Some reform of the sector is necessary in so me parts of New Zealand. However, the analysis needs to done to determine where water services fall short of this objective, and for what reasons. We recommend that WDC carry out a proper net benefit analysis, potentially with other local authorities that have a similar viewpoint. This is likely to be many councils, since the WICS analysis has consistent faults that apply to all local authorities. Such an analysis should include the full range of options together with transparent data and s ound and contestable analysis so these options can be properly evaluated. T here is plenty of analysis, evidence and now a rich data set in the RFI responses for WDC and like minded local authorities to be able to identify alternative and better reform opti ons. WDC could prepare a constructive counterproposal that achieves desirable objectives, while avoidi ng the risks and costs of the Reform Scenario .
Pipitea Street, Wellington
Pipitea Street, Wellington (National)
There will be cases where continued, or new investment in onpremise infrastructure
Yarrow Street, Invercargill.
agreed that water services entities are able to keep charging for services using the same methodologies that the relevant territorial authority had been using until July ;
. This created an inconsistency between the Mori wards and general wards process
pzrrb Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Recommendations The Minister of Internal Affairs recommend s that the C abinet Legislation C ommittee: . note that the Minister of Internal Affairs approved the policy to amend the Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire Safety , Evacuation Procedures, and Evacuation Schemes) Regulations to include : . reference to the New Zealand Standard for Automatic Sprinkler Systems : NZS :; and . a requirement for hand operated fire fighting equipment that is compliant with the New Zealand Standard for Hand Operated Fire fighting Equipment, NZS : to be installed in buildings where the automatic sprinkler system complies with the New Zealand Standard for Automatic Sprinkler Sys tems : NZS :; . note that the Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire Safety, Evacuation Procedures, and Evacuation Schemes) Amendment Regulations will give effect to the decision referred to in recommendation above; . authorise the submission to th e Executive Council of the Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire Safety, Evacuation Procedures, and Evacuation Schemes) Amendment Regulations on June ; . note that the amendment to the Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire Safety,Evacuation Procedures, and Evacuation Schemes) Regulations will be publiclynotified in the Gazette on June ; and . note that the Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire Saf ety, Evacuation Procedures, and Evacuation Schemes) Amendment Regulations will come into force on August . Authorised for lodgement Hon Jan Tin etti Minister of Internal Affairs pzrrb Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Appendix A: Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire Safety, Evacuation Procedures, and Evacuation Schemes) Amendment Regulations pzrrb Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Average salary for Whangrei District Council Employee NZ , Cost of each employee Assuming annual rent of per sq. m. Economies of scope lost ,, Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Bloomfield Terrace, Lower Hutt
I will update Cabinet on any further operat ional implications and minor and technical amendments, when I bring the Bill to Cabinet for approval to introduce next year.
In May , Cabinet expanded GCDOs mandate over digital investment. This
N ew Zealand Lifelines Council, Aotearoa New Zealands Critical Infrastructure: A National Vulnerability Assessment , Edition, . https:www.nzlifelines.org.nzsiteassetsfilesnvapartasummaryvsept.pdf CHAPTER : SUPPLY OF GOODS AND SERVICES AND THE PLACE OF CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events. The Inquiry endorses the work that DPMC is leading to increase the resilience of New Zealands critical infrastructure to be ready for natural and other hazards, and to support wellbeing, economic growth and save money. DPMC references that the New Zealand Institute of Economic Research has found that early investment in infrastructure resilience is cheaper than the cost to repair after an event. , . Before the weather events, Lloyds assessed New Zealand to have the secondhighest disaster loss risk as a percentage of GDP in the world, behind Bangladesh. DPMC is developing options to improve the governments regulatory approach to delivering resilient infrastructure, given there are limited tools available now. This will also support the Infrastructure Commissions first Infrastructure Strategy. Effectively coordinate and prioritise the restoration of critical infrastructure . The emergency response to Cyclone Gabrielle was hampered by ineffective prioritisation of some critical infrastructure restoration activities, and gaps in communication throughout the system. This was particularly evident in the Hawkes Bay. . Decisionmakers need to be ready to restore critical infrastructure in an order that best serves the system and communities. To identify priorities, they need uptoinformation on key locations such as first responder bases, hospitals, rest homes, and other critical infrastructure. During the events, information on key locations was not always available and restoration decisions were sometimes ad hoc. Restore telecommunications and power early . The Inquiry heard that during the response to Cyclone Gabrielle, NEMA and CDEM controllers sometimes prioritised the provision of nonurgent supplies to communities over the timely restoration of power and communications. This order of operations made it harder to determine what help was needed where, and who was providing it. . After addressing immediate risks to safety and providing the necessities of life, restoring telecommunications and power should be the next priority. These utilities enable other aspects of the response to occur and allow for the flow of essential goods and services, such as prescription medicines. Electricity and fibre networks keep phone services and the internet running and allow electronic payment DPMC, Strengthening the resilience of Aotearoa New Zealands critical infrastructure system Summary discussion document , . https:consultation.dpmc.govt.nznationalsecuritygroupcriticalinfrastucturephasepublic consultationuseruploadsdpmcsummaryddstrengtheningtheresilienceofci.pdf N ew Zealand Institute of Economic Research, Investment in natural hazards mitigation Forecasts and findings about mitigation investment, Report to the Department of Internal Affairs , August . NZIERNaturalhazardsmitigation report.pdf (dia.govt.nz) dpmcsummaryddstrengtheningtheresilienceofci.pdf Lloyds, A world at risk: Closing the insurance gap , . Accessed from https:www.lloyds.comworldatrisk systems to stay online. Telecommunications improve situational awareness and allow teams to coordinate an effective response and share vital information between communities, responders, and officials. Communications also help people confirm that their loved ones are safe, get clarity on the number of people missing and reduce panic and anxiety. . Many power outages were caused by trees falling on power lines, particularly in Tairwhiti and Northland during Cyclone Gabrielle. Trees planted too close to powerlines increases the risk of outages. The Inquiry suggests strengthening the Electricity (Hazards from Trees) Regulations . Image: Uprooted trees damaged power utilties in Pouto, Northland. Source: Northpower Improve coordination across the system . Much of the work to restore critical infrastructure is already coordinated at a regional and local level by utility providers and their various Sector Coordinating Entities covering cash, fuel, gas, transport, telecommunications, electricity and water. Sector Coordinating Entities can draw on utility providers from one region to provide support in another region. Additional local, regional, and national resources are sometimes deployed to support the restoration of infrastructure. Overall, the weather events showed that better preplanning and communication between utility providers, Sector Coordinating Entities and emergency management decisionmakers improves coordination across the emergency management system. . NEMA does not have the capacity or depth of technical or local knowledge to effectively manage and coordinate critical infrastructure restoration across the country. Sector Coordinating Entities and critical infrastructure entities can assist in organising timely restoration in a way that responds to local conditions and CHAPTER : SUPPLY OF GOODS AND SERVICES AND THE PLACE OF CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Eventspopulations, with the support of local Emergency Operations Centres. The Inquiry proposes that NEMA retains oversight for leadership and coordination of the critical infrastructure response with operational support from the relevant Sector Coordinating Entities. . During the severe weather events, lifeline utilities with obligations under the CDEM Act worked hard to restore services. They often went beyond their obligations to do the right thing for their communities. They prioritised reinstatement of services for large population centres and medically vulnerable communities before moving outward to restore service in other areas. . Many lifeline utilities already have business continuity plans in place, and some established additional strategies for Cyclone Gabrielle. This advance planning was vital to enabling a rapid and effective response. For example, Unison a Hawkes Baybased fibre and electricity company placed staff, vehicles, and equipment on both sides of rivers before the cyclone in Hawkes Bay to speed up responses if bridges were unusable. However, lack of communication and coordination between different parts of the system slowed down utility providers. Unisons experience in Hawkes Bay Unison reported that staff in branded vehicles in Hawkes Bay were repeatedly turned away from routes only accessible by first responders. This slowed Unisons ability to restore power after major outages occurred following Cyclone Gabrielle. Unison staff were able to get accredited by CDEM to use the access routes after hours. However, this information was not passed on as shifts changed at the access routes, which led to further delays for Unison staff. Advance accreditation for Unison personnel would have assisted. . It is important the CDEM response recognises that utilities staff (and other essential workers) may need special access in an emergency, along with the likes of Police and FENZ. To enable an effective response, infrastructure providers need to be included in planning processes, with a seat at the table during emergency readiness and response coordination. Lifeline utility providers also need to be supported by an accreditation system that verifies their role as essential workers. . Sector Coordinating Entities can be drawn on to play a more active coordination and advisory role in the civil defence emergency management system before and during an event. Sector Coordinating Entities and others involved in coordination should ideally have a clear plan for where initial effort should be prioritised after the preservation of safety and provision of essential supplies. . We heard the Emergency Management Bills proposed critical infrastructure Planning Emergency Levels of Service, currently in section , are unworkable and found this would likely lead to the lowest possible standards being set. The Inquiry suggests the Emergency Management Bill is amended to remove this provision. VOICES Invest in resilience . Investing in resilient infrastructure is not only important to ensure the ongoing supply of goods and services to communities but is also vital for business continuity and the economic health of regions and the country. In , thenpresident of Local Government New Zealand (LGNZ) Stuart Crosby stated, Reliable infrastructure is the backbone to creating healthy, thriving communities and a resilient local economy. Crosby was emphasising the importance of a proactive approach to infrastructure. . Underinvestment in publicly and privately provided infrastructure meant many critical systems were less robust during the severe weather events. Aotearoa New Zealands Critical Infrastructure: A National Vulnerability Assessment noted that resilience projects that would have mitigated many of the infrastructural failures during the severe weather events had been identified, but not prioritised or funded. For publicly funded and maintained infrastructure, many councils have existing funding challenges that make it difficult for them to prioritise resilience investments in their area, bringing additional vulnerability to the system. . The levers for critical infrastructure often fall outside the emergency management system, possibly because of commercial drivers. It may not be in commercial interests to invest in improved resilience and readiness. Ageing infrastructure built to lower standards or in unsuitable locations is costly to replace and companies may have other pressing priorities. The government may need to look at ways to incentivise, support or require this investment when considering amendments to the current design of the emergency management system. . Central government has a key role in providing certainty of requirements and standards, so companies can invest in more resilient infrastructure with confidence. Many infrastructure providers are eager to invest in resilience or new technology to be better prepared for future emergencies. However, resilience activities are often costly, and the private companies that provide lifeline utilities need certainty that their infrastructure improvements will meet standards set by the government. . The resilience of supermarkets is also important as they play a key role in supplying goods and services to the public and responders during severe emergencies. The Inquiry considers supermarkets should be treated as critical infrastructure providers. The Inquiry heard from several supermarkets that operated during, and immediately after, the severe weather events. Some had invested in their resilience and backup plans. PaknSave Tamatea in the Hawkes Bay was able to open and operate smoothly the day after Cyclone Gabrielle due to its investment in a large and new generator, fuel, and working fuel pumps. . Those supermarkets that did open initiated COVID protocols such as purchase limits and limiting the number of people inside the store. By doing so, some L GNZ Infrastructure thinking must be long term, LGNZ website, May . https:www.lgnz.co.nznewsmedia releasesinfrastructurethinkingmustbelongterm New Zealand Lifelines Council, Aotearoa New Zealands Critical Infrastructure: A National Vulnerability Assessment, Edition , . https:www.nzlifelines.org.nzsiteassetsfilesnvapartasummaryvsept.pdf CHAPTER : SUPPLY OF GOODS AND SERVICES AND THE PLACE OF CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Eventssupermarkets were able to actively manage and prioritise the distribution of goods and fuel (where it was available), to support emergency workers. In some areas, memoranda of understanding between supermarkets and local CDEM Groups helped establish expectations about stocking up prior to emergency events, and the requirement that supermarkets will stay open wherever possible following an event. Organisations should be prepared to operate until services are restored . Extended outages to power, communication, roading, waste, and other systems are to be expected during some emergencies, even with best efforts to get them reinstated. Organisations must prepare for infrastructure outages, particularly to be without power and communications. As demonstrated by the severe weather events, organisations may need to operate for a week without these services in urban centres, or two weeks in rural or remote areas. Planning and preparation are particularly important for essential services (such as hospitals, fire and police stations, councils, and government departments), medically vulnerable populations, and remote communities. . The Inquiry found a lack of preparedness for communications and power outages by some CDEM agencies, including government departments, emergency services, local authorities, and lifeline utility providers. Many organisations did not have the assets needed for business continuity following power and telecommunications outages. For example, some Police stations had business continuity plans in place, but did not have back up communications systems or generators on site, despite their key role in emergencies. In some cases, power and communication backup tools that were previously available had been withdrawn. . The Inquiry was told this lack of readiness was often due to financial pressures faced by organisations and local authorities. We heard that, since the severe weather events, many organisations have invested in improved backup telecommunications equipment such as Starlinks, newer satellite phones, and very high frequency (VHF) radios. This should be encouraged, and progress checked as part of an enhanced monitoring and assurance function by NEMA. Communities also need to undertake readiness activities, as further outlined in Chapter . . To improve preparedness, organisations such as government agencies, supermarkets, petrol stations, rest homes, and hospitals should be aware of their local hazardscapes and have longterm strategic plans in place that include planning for emergencies. They should be prepared with their own adequate source of emergency backup power, means of communication, and access to food and water. Councils need to have sufficient backup power and communications to ensure Civil Defence Centres can be stood up, and to support iwi and community organisations to have the infrastructure they need to operate as communityled centres. Challenges and opportunities across different sectors . Each critical infrastructure sector faced different challenges during the severe weather events. The work to reinstate service and restore the flow of goods and services depended on the resilience of the infrastructure, the specific weather impacts in places across the country, geography and coordination between the sector and other groups. Telecommunications What happened: Telecommunications infrastructure is vulnerable to power outages, slips, and damage to roads and bridges. Many regions lost phone and internet connectivity during the events which was detrimental to the response and created panic and anxiety. The service uses the same networks, and people in affected areas were temporarily unable to get through. Access to communications via satellite phones, VHF radios, marine radios, satellite internet, satellite messengers, and personal locator beacons was not readily available, including for some first responders. What worked well: Cell tower battery backups were useful in providing connectivity in the first eight hours immediately after power went out. The Telecommunications Emergency Forum was activated during Cyclone Gabrielle to coordinate restoring connectivity as fast as possible, with telecommunications companies around New Zealand supporting each other. Power companies that have a telecommunications arm informally provided information about where power was due to be restored, which was useful in deciding the cell sites to place generators. What did not work well: NEMA and CDEM groups sometimes prioritised the provision of nonurgent supplies to communities over the timely restoration of power and communications. Some generators placed at cell towers were stolen. Looking forward: The NZ Lifelines Council National Vulnerability Assessment identified rapidly evolving technology and power dependence as the key vulnerabilities for telecommunications. The sector wants to pursue investment in longerlasting cell site batteries but needs government direction on the standards. Providers need access to realtime information about where and when power is likely to be restored to enable them to prioritise placement of generators at cell sites, and they need access to the sites via road, air, or by boat. It is pleasing to see that business continuity planning to operate during telecommunications outages has improved in many places following the events. CHAPTER : SUPPLY OF GOODS AND SERVICES AND THE PLACE OF CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events Image: Broken road sign next to rail line on SH at Esk Valley between Wairoa and Napier. Source: NZDF Transport What happened: Many state highways, bridges and local roads were closed following Cyclone Gabrielle. Closures enabled the NZTA and council staff to undertake safety checks and repairs, and clear downed trees. Bailey bridges (portable, prefabricated, truss bridges) were used as temporary replacements, including those which were damaged by slash. Some communities were cut off for extended periods, for example in Wairoa and Northland. The rail system was damaged in many locations, and the Northland to Auckland line is still closed following the events. This has had flowon effects for ports and the economy. Rail and state highway damage has put additional pressure on local roads, many of which were already in poor condition, on unstable land, and under pressure from forestry activity. Some state highways are particularly vulnerable, such as SH at the Brynderwyns which connects Auckland and Northland and SH in Tairwhiti. Airports were closed in the Auckland Anniversary heavy rainfall and Cyclone Gabrielle. What worked well: Preagreed detour routes, empowered local teams, and clear online information from NZTA proved useful during the events. Two teams working in hour shifts were able to build Taparahi bridge and reopen a safer and more resilient SHA to quickly reconnect the Coromandel by Christmas. The Northern Transport Alliance proved a useful mechanism for the four Northland councils and NZTA to deliver roading services strategically in the region, including in the recovery from the events. What did not work well: Roading repairs following severe weather events are undertaken in a highrisk environment and require care and time to undertake safely. We were told that pressure to speed up the response could create conflict for local decisionmakers when balancing against health and safety considerations. Separately we also heard that some airports did not have alternative means to pump fuel during power outages. Looking forward: The NZ Lifelines Council National Vulnerability Assessment identified land stability as the key risk for roads and rail. It commented on the inadequate state of local roads as viable alternative routes to state highways. We heard there is economic pressure to improve transport infrastructure, such as roads, to allow for the transport of goods and services in areas like Northland (some of which is partially funded by local councils who are struggling financially). We heard that building back better is not financially viable for many routes. With regards to air, we also heard that the aviation response relied too heavily on helicopters. Fixed wing operators said they should have been better utilised, to free up helicopters and reduce the tasking backlog. Electricity What happened: During Cyclone Gabrielle over , homes were without electricity, some for more than ten days the largest interruption for years. Companies tend to restore power to main centres first, meaning remote communities can be without power for quite some time. Power outages are particularly problematic for first responders, local government, hospitals, rest homes, the medically vulnerable, prisons, dairy farms, essential businesses, and telecommunications. Many of these entities and individuals were not prepared for outages. Power cuts were the main cause of telecommunications interruptions. Trees falling on power lines and slips were the main causes of electricity outages, particularly in Tairwhiti and Northland. The floodhit Redclyffe substation failure heavily impacted Hawkes Bay, despite it previously being identified as needing improved flood protection. What worked well: Power companies generally had good business continuity plans in place and worked quickly to restore power, but it can take some time to restore electricity to areas at the margins of the network. Transpower was able to rapidly reconfigure the network to work around the Redclyffe substation failure. Locations with alternative power sources automatically became hubs. What did not work well: Many organisations did not have alternative power sources in case of electricity outages. Sourcing generators was problematic as they were in high demand. Some power company staff were turned away from restricted access roads as they werent seen as critical or preaccredited as essential workers. Looking forward: The NZ Lifelines Council National Vulnerability Assessment identified trees as a risk for electricity. Many trees are planted too close to powerlines which increases the risk of outages, and power companies are seeking a change in the Electricity (Hazards from Trees) Regulations to increase the corridor around power lines and put more responsibility onto forestry owners. Power providers whose staff are vital to restore power need to be recognised as essential workers. A process to have accredited workers identified ahead of an emergency is needed. Improved business continuity planning is needed for electricity users to prepare for power outages. Image: Power lines down in Napier. Source: Unison CHAPTER : SUPPLY OF GOODS AND SERVICES AND THE PLACE OF CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsGas What happened: The natural gas transmission network did not suffer any breakages during the events. Gas continued to be transmitted to critical users such as hospitals. Some households could continue cooking and heating water, where ignition was not reliant on electricity. Gaspowered electricity generators were used in some places. What worked well: LPG tanks were portable and easy alternatives to electricity during the events. They were wellused by marae and proved to be a useful food preparation and heating back up for those who could use them. The LPG sector donated LPG and gas cookers in Tairwhiti and Hawkes Bay following Cyclone Gabrielle. NZDF transported LPG cylinders into inaccessible areas. What did not work well: People reported that they had not considered storing full LPG tanks for an emergency. The rush to fill tanks resulted in long queues when the roading network was already under pressure. Looking forward: The NZ Lifelines Council National Vulnerability Assessment identified the Maui gas line as a possible single point of failure. Underground gas pipelines are remarkably resilient during severe weather and earthquakes as they are generally shielded from high winds, rainfall and falling debris (except when carried over bridges or in some cases where land is moving or unstable). Bridges are a key shared risk across many types of infrastructure. Image: Moving supplies (including LPG bottles) across floodwaters in Hawkes Bay. Source: NEMA New Zealand Lifelines Council, Aotearoa New Zealands Critical Infrastructure: A National Vulnerability Assessment, Edition , . https:www.nzlifelines.org.nzsiteassetsfilesnvapartasummaryvsept.pdf Fuel What happened: There was difficulty accessing both aviation fuel and diesel to supply generators during power outages. Power outages hindered access to fuel as pumps and Eftpos facilities require power for fuel payment. As regulations prevent fuel being transported inside helicopters, some pilots flew fuel in drums carried underneath, but there was a shortage of the drums needed to do this. What worked well: Some petrol stations were prepared and had generators onsite or were wired to receive a generator if needed. Some organisations included fuelling vehicles and storing fuel prior to emergencies as part of their planning. The Fuel Sector Coordinating Entity was activated for Cyclone Gabrielle and was able to draw on the National Fuel Plan which provided a readiness and response framework. What did not work well: Many organisations and communities did not store fuel for emergencies. Businesses did not have sufficient business continuity plans in place to deliver services for extended periods of time without networked power supplies. The impact of power outages on the ability to pump fuel came as a surprise to some petrol stations and airports which were unprepared for operations during extended outages. Looking forward: The NZ Lifelines Council National Vulnerability Assessment identified limited fuel storage and dependence on electricity and road networks as key fuel sector vulnerability points. MBIE is working on a package of fuel resilience policies. Improved business continuity planning is needed by fuel retailers and users of fuel, and cash held to pay for fuel. A store of drums ready to transport fuel in emergencies would be useful for future events. Diversity in types of fuel available can increase resilience. Image: Petrol station buried under silt in Esk Valley, Hawkes Bay. Source: NZDF CHAPTER : SUPPLY OF GOODS AND SERVICES AND THE PLACE OF CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsSupply of goods What happened: Many New Zealanders were not able to purchase food and other necessities while stores were closed or Eftpos was down. Some open supermarkets faced additional challenges with increased antisocial and criminal behaviour. Some stores, retirement villages, iwi and banks flew in cash until electronic payments resumed. It is difficult for some households to afford to hold enough food and water to be selfsufficient in anticipation of an emergency event. Additional preparedness support for these households is needed. What worked well: Some CDEM groups have close relationships and memoranda of understanding with local supermarkets, which meant additional stock could be arranged prior to events through their expertise and networks. Many iwi were exceptionally effective at using their networks (including paniwi networks) and resources to support those in their communities. They sourced and purchased food and other basic supplies during the events, and in some cases guaranteed the repayment of tabs at local shops. Wider community groups also played crucial and important roles to support people with the supply of food and means of payment. What did not work well: Many supermarkets were not asked to stock up or have agreed opening hours prior to the events and some did not feel supported by civil defence or first responders. Looking forward: There are opportunities to improve business continuity planning, including by banks, and to remind households to hold small quantities of cash for emergencies. There is also an opportunity for supermarkets to be defined as critical infrastructure with requirements to open wherever possible or when required, and to be included in readiness planning. NEMA has set up a Cash Industry Sector Coordination Entity to support the provision of cash to affected communities. Image: Puketitiri popup supermarket. Source: NEMA Water and waste What happened: Water infrastructure lacks resilience. Properties were inundated with thousands of cubic metres of silt following Cyclone Gabrielle. In Gisborne the main water treatment plant pipes were damaged in multiple places and repaired in just six weeks. What worked well: Water New Zealand, supported by the Water Services Managers Group, was activated for the first time for Cyclone Gabrielle, helping coordinate and access resources. The water treatment plant in Napier which was inundated in Cyclone Gabrielle has been repaired in a way that adds resilience. What did not work well: Potable water was a challenge, particularly in rural areas, and some septic tanks failed. Where tank water was compromised people had to boil water. While rural water is considered part of the water to be managed in an emergency, there are funding challenges. In the short term this is covered by welfare funding, but longerterm potable water solutions are the responsibility of property owners in rural areas. Stopbanks are also absent from the current lifeline utility definitions, despite being critical in lessening the impacts from severe weather events. The high water levels maintained by dam owners and hydropower operators prior to and following the events were criticised by some downstream local communities who were flooded. An independent review is underway in Wairoa. Looking forward: The NZ Lifelines Council National Vulnerability Assessment identified asset resilience and climate change as the key sector vulnerabilities for three waters (storm, water and waste). Current threats to water infrastructure are many: older pipe networks are highly vulnerable to seismic events, wastewater sites are vulnerable to power outages (with only with standby generators), and intense rainfall makes it hard to treat water. Water preparedness plans, asset lists, and lists of key customers such as hospitals and dialysis patients, are needed in more places. Backup generators are needed for of wastewater sites. The Emergency Management Bill would allow the Minister to recognise three waters providers as critical infrastructure entities. It is important that flood protection and stopbanks are also viewed as critical, with commensurate planning and informationsharing requirements around them. CHAPTER : SUPPLY OF GOODS AND SERVICES AND THE PLACE OF CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsBroadcasts What happened: Television and radio broadcasts were critical for passing on information and providing reassurance. In Hawkes Bay and Tairwhiti radio broadcasts were a key mechanism for communities to find out what was happening while other communications were down. What worked well: The combination of national and local broadcasts worked well. NEMA has memoranda of understanding with radio and TV broadcasters to publicise emergency information and public safety messages before, during, and after emergencies. Radio New Zealand provided essential lifeline information via FM and AM transmissions, through their website, and social media. AM transmissions can be more resilient during an emergency. Television New Zealand shared messages about how to be prepared, how to keep safe, and how to seek help. We heard that national broadcasts were insufficient for local needs and local radio stations provided useful community specific and frequent updates without telecommunications. For example, consistent and clear messages were broadcast on local radio in Gisborne, supported by a good relationship with the local mayor. What didnt work well: Rumours and disinformation were spread in Hawkes Bay, undermining community confidence. It is important that CDEM groups and NEMAs Public Information Management teams provide accurate, verified, timely, and frequently messages for broadcasters to share with communities. This wasnt always the case. Many New Zealanders could only listen for short periods in their cars if they didnt have battery powered radios. Looking forward: Relationships could be strengthened and formalised between local broadcasters and CDEM groups so that there is clarity and consistency on how to operate during emergencies to ensure good trusted local information is broadcast and dis and misinformation countered. The Code of Broadcasting Standards in New Zealand requires balanced and accurate reporting and creates the expectation that broadcasters will provide accurate information and take care to avoid misinforming the public. Guidance to the sector Improve business continuity plans and invest in assets Invest in business continuity plans and assets: Organisations with responsibilities under civil defence legislation, such as local authorities, emergency services, government departments, and lifeline utilities should have business continuity plans and assets in place that allow them to continue operating if power and communications are down during an emergency. Examples include investing in solar power, generators with appropriate connections, and satellite communications. Wastewater sites should invest in backup generators, for instance. Improve business continuity for fuel retailers and users: Fuel retailers could be better prepared to pump fuel without electricity and to sell fuel to customers while electronic payments are not available. Fuel users could be encouraged to buy fuel in preparation for emergency events. Consider purchasing a supply of drums to transport fuel under helicopters in emergencies. Improve business continuity for airports: Airports should be ready to operate in emergencies, for example refuelling planes and powering terminals. This could also support fixed wing aircraft to play a bigger role in emergency responses, alongside helicopters.Update Police business continuity plans: Police should consider, as part of their business continuity planning, how to both support the emergency response and to also maintain business as usual. Improve preparedness for water outages: The water sector should develop water preparedness plans, asset lists, and lists of key customers such as hospitals and dialysis patients. Secure access to food and other supplies Help supermarkets in their essential role: CDEM Groups should work with local supermarkets to agree expectations on stocking up prior to and opening hours during and after emergency events. The civil defence system should encourage supermarkets to put in place effective business continuity plans and assets prior to events and support them to provide their essential service in the response phase. Provide roading information: NZTA to provide information to support delivery of essential goods and maintain supply chains, linking with local councils and iwi where appropriate. For example, supported freight convoys. Support lowincome households with emergency supplies: Support preparedness for lowincome households who cannot afford to hold seven days (or days for isolated communities) worth of emergency supplies. CHAPTER : SUPPLY OF GOODS AND SERVICES AND THE PLACE OF CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsDraw more on Sector Coordinating Entities A stronger role for Sector Coordinating Entities: Draw on Sector Coordinating Entities to play a stronger and more active coordination and advisory role in the civil defence emergency management system before and during an event. Investigate how to continue electronic payments and provide cash: The Cash Industry Sector Coordination Entity could investigate how the banking sector can support business continuity through the provision of cash and the ability to continue to use electronic payments while power andor communications are down. Guidance to communities should include holding some cash in small denominations to purchase food, fuel and other necessities in emergencies if electronic payments arent available. Support infrastructure resilience Provide certainty of standards for infrastructure investment: Central government should provide certainty around infrastructure requirements and standards, so that companies can invest in more resilient infrastructure with confidence. For example, cell site battery standards. Preaccredit essential workers to access first responder routes: During the readiness phase, roll out an accreditation system for lifeline utility providers such as electricity companies, fuel truck drivers and other identified essential workers to access first responder routes. Support broadcasters to share information with communities Support broadcasters to share trusted information: Strengthen and formalise relationships between local broadcasters and CDEM so that there is clarity and consistency on how to operate during emergencies to ensure good trusted local information is broadcast. NEMA and CDEM groups and their PIM functions should provide accurate, verified information that is frequently as a proactive way to support broadcasters to provide trusted and critical information to communities and counter misinformation. They should involve broadcasters in regular scheduled briefings, nominate a point person to verify information and give advice on how to report safely in emergency situations. Chapter : Funding settings Overview . An effective emergency management funding system looks across all Rs and takes a longterm view to support communities to prepare for, and respond to, emergencies. While the Inquirys remit is funding settings for readiness and response, the emergency management funding system is much broader than this. . It is the Inquirys view that there needs to be greater focus and action on reducing New Zealands risk related to natural hazards and improving resilience. In the past decade, central government has spent billions on the response to and recovery from our most significant emergencies, but its investment in reduction pales in comparison. The approach is akin to the ambulance at the bottom of the cliff the funding comes too late to effectively minimise the impact of events. . Local councils are largely responsible for funding their own readiness activities. However, most councils have strained resources and competing priorities, making it difficult to invest in maintaining infrastructure and much needed activities like readiness planning, capability building and preparation of emergency centres. Councils have told us they cannot afford the cost of continual events. . The Inquiry considers the Government should proactively invest in reduction and readiness activities. This shift in focus will help reduce negative impacts for communities during and after emergencies and may also reduce future spending required on response and recovery. Across the funding system, change is needed to ensure money can be spent effectively during the critical first days of an emergency response. . Central government does fund councils for a range of activities related to response, and for readiness activities that take place immediately before an emergency event. The current funding system for these activities is outdated and not fitforpurpose, especially given the expected increase in the occurrence and severity of weather events in coming years. Councils are eligible for reimbursement of welfare costs, but the current process requires considerable time and effort by councils, it slows down action on the ground, and means some people making essential contributions to the response are unable to be reimbursed for costs incurred. CHAPTER : FUNDING SETTINGS CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsImage: A section of SH between Napier and Wairoa was washed out. Source: NZTA Shift to a preventative model of funding emergency management . The Government needs to shift its focus to invest in the CDEM system before emergencies happen. As described throughout this report, the adverse impacts of underinvestment in reduction and readiness activities were very clear during the severe weather events. A shift in focus towards funding reduction and readiness would enable councils and communities to better prepare and build resilience with the aim of reducing negative impacts on people, property, and businesses. We note that while reduction is out of scope of this Inquiry, it is important we discuss the investment required in this area. Without it, the impacts of emergency events will continue to be devastating. . The costs of paying for emergency recovery activities are significant. IAG New Zealand, the countrys largest general insurer, estimates that Aotearoa New Zealand has spent more than of GDP per year for the past years recovering from natural disasters (due in large part to the Canterbury earthquakes). As IAG notes, this is almost as much as was spent on education, superannuation or purchasing health services. It therefore should be of national significance. . Risk reduction actions can have higher upfront costs than the other components of emergency management, but they tend to be more cost effective than disaster relief over the longer term. A range of studies suggest that on average, the benefits of resilience (broadly defined, and including aspects like risk reduction infrastructure) outweigh the costs fourfold. The diagram below illustrates a range of infrastructure resilience projects across the world, with the average benefit cost ratio significantly exceeding one. For example, flood control measures in China provided . in benefits for every spent. IAG, Meeting the cost of natural hazards: A briefing to the incoming government , November . Lloyds, Innovation Report , Understanding Risk: Innovative finance for resilience infrastructure , . https:assets. lloyds.comassetspdfinnovativefinancefinalwebpdfInnovativeFinanceFINALweb.pdf
New Zealand Lifelines Council, Aotearoa New Zealands Critical Infrastructure: A National Vulnerability Assessment , Edition, . https:www.nzlifelines.org.nzsiteassetsfilesnvapartasummaryvsept.pdf Earthquake Sabotagethird party Common mode failure Wind Space weather Lightning Bushfire Flood Snow Te Awamutu lightning MWhHawkes Bay Snow MWh Cyclone Gabrielle incl. Whirinaki , MWhCyclone Gabrielle excl. Whirinaki , MWhKopuHinuera wind MWhKaipara Harbour wind MWh Half Way Bush .MPort Hills fire MWhNelson floods MCanterbury floods .M Rangitata flood .MCyclone Gita MWhCyclone Cook MWh Central North Island snow MWh Irrigator Waitaki MWhInsulators shot MWh Tekapo snow MWhHawkes Bay lightning MWhPenrose cable fire , MWhKaikura earthquake MWh Waikato lightning MWhpunake Wellington snow MWhHuntly relay design MWhChristchurch earthquakes MWhChristchurch earthquake MWh Tararua lightning MWhForklift flashover MWhthuhu earthwire , MWh Manawat flood MWhSouthdown incident MWh Wairarapa snow MWhHawkes Bay snow MWh Central North Island snow MWhResilience history The bubbles indicate the amount of energy unserved, which is a measure of the energy demand that could not be met due to the event. Where there was no loss of service the cost of the impact is shown. The bubble size is made relative using a standard value of lost load of , per MWh. Source: Transpower . The New Zealand Lifelines Council notes that many of the damaged critical infrastructure assets were already known to be vulnerable. In addition, less well resourced regions tend to have poor infrastructure, making them more vulnerable in emergencies, for example the road networks in Northland and Tairwhiti. . The Inquiry heard from several infrastructure entities that the central government approach to infrastructure lacks coherence. The policy, regulatory, and operational responsibilities are scattered across core public service departments and Crown entities. This includes DPMC, NEMA, MBIE, Ministry of Transport, New Zealand Infrastructure Commission Te Waihanga, and the New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA). The distributed nature of these responsibilities may be appropriate. However, at present, leadership is unclear, and the Inquiry heard that the sector has difficulty engaging with central government without a single point of contact.
On behalf of respective Ministers, the Regulatory Impact Analysis team at the Treasury and the Ministry of Justice previously agreed that supplementary analysis will be provided when approval for introduction is sought later this year.
agreed that specific directions on redressing inequities in the servicing of Mori communities can be addressed through the government policy statement;
. I would like to consult on whether the local government sector would support an
As you will be aware, an Independent Revi ew of Electoral law is currently underway. The Review Panel recently completed its first stage of engagement. In May , the Panel will produce an interim report with its draft
The proposal is not intended to conflict with the requirements and accountabilities of
agreed that all properties that are serviceable by water services entities networks, but not currently receiving those services, should have to pay a contribution to those networks, except for nonrateable land (land that is percent nonrateable would pay percent of the charge) and Mori freehold land;
. I seek Cabinet approval to release for public consultation a discussion document (draft
Building on existing requirements, the proposed additions to the Policy will require
Impact analysis requirements apply to some of the policies proposed in this paper. Two regulatory impact statements (RISs), on Refocusing the purpose of local government and Discrete Interventions , have been prepared and are attached. The Ministry for Regulation has determined the proposal relating to council performance measurement is exempt from the requirement to provide a RIS on the grounds that it has no or only minor impacts on businesses, individuals, and not forprofit entities. The Department of Internal Affairs regulatory impact analysis panel has reviewed the two RISs in accordance with the quality assurance criteria set out in the CabGuide. The panel considers that the information and analysis summarised in the Purpose RIS partially meets the quality assurance criteria. The panel stated that the RIS appropriately determines that refocusing the purpose of local government will likely have limited impact on its own and may complement planned work on council performance measurement and limiting council revenue from rates, but would be more convincing if it included evidence and analysis of issues driving rates increases and on the relationship between rates and other measures, such as the consumers price index. The panel considers that the information and analysis summarised in the Discrete Interventions RIS partially meets the quality assurance criteria. The panel noted that the RIS was developed within a tight timeframe. The panel stated that the RIS does an adequate job of explaining the nature and context of the proposed changes but, due to limited research, analysis and consultation, contains little evidence of the potential benefits, costs and risks associated with the proposals. Mitigations to these concerns include the role that Taituar has played in raising some of the issues that will be addressed, and the relatively modest and discrete nature of the proposals. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E aecpczkj
The M ori population is younger on av erage than the general population. Statistics NZ latest data from June estimates that , and yearolds are of M ori descent. This is approximately of the total and yearold New Zealand resident population.
noted that stormw ater is a public good;
. The discussion document describes the separate processes and uses question prompts
. adopt public cloud services in preference to traditional ICT systems;
. not invest in onpremise ICT infrastructure unless specified criteria are met or
. have a plan for how they intend to use public cloud services;
. make adoption decisions on a casebycase basis following a risk
. consider Te Tiriti o Waitangi, Te Ao Mori, accountability, ethics,
. make cloud adoption decisions which consider highlevel sustainability
. only store data classified as RESTRICTED or below in a public cloud service;
. as a preference, over time, host RESTRICTED information in a New Zealand
The proposals above will provide greater clarity and focus on the policy, as well as
agreed that stormwater be funded through a charge on ratepayers;
. The Department of Internal Affairs will run a public consultation process which will
am, Thursday March to pm, Sunday March (GMT)
noted the draft Order was reviewed by the Severe Weather Events Recovery Review Panel
other party notice, to the extent permitted by the applicable law, of the requirement as
An excerpt from the Childrens Commissioners report is noted in Make It Incorporated v AttorneyGeneral NZSC , paragraph . The Governor General may appoint as many members of a licensing trust as are required if at any election of members for the trust, fewer than the required number of members are elected. If a vacancy occurs less than months before a triennial local election the trust can choose to appoint a repla c ement. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of usoq
At that time the Minister of Justice undertook to report back to the Cabinet Legislation Committee with further advice on whether the distinction could be justified once it had been fully assessed against the freedom from discrimination provisions in section of NZBORA.
Consistent patching and security management practices: keeping systems up to
Focus area five: Maximising our relationships We cannot work in isolation our system strategy is about partnering to achieve more. To do that, we need to understand who our key stakeholders and potential partners are and how we can work together. Strategic initiatives Our initiatives for this focus area are all about identifying our stakeholders and partners, understanding who they are, what their experience of us is, and determining what kind of relationship we want to have with them (including for some how we could work together). Understanding how hap, iwi and Mori experience our regulatory systems is a priority. The more we know about this, the better we can target our regulatory activities toward better outcomes for hap, iwi and Mori and jointly identify opportunities for partnering or collaborating. While it is expected that each system group will have a stakeholder engagement plan, RSG also needs a stakeholder engagement plan one which identifies those stakeholders held in common and how we will jointly work with them. In the first months of this strategy, RSG will commission an external stakeholder survey to understand how effectively system groups are working as system regulators with other participants. months (July December )Partner with hap, iwi and Mori to understand their experience with RSG regulatory systems and jointly identify priority areas for improvements Develop RSG and system specific stakeholder engagement plans with a key focus on identifying and collaborating with partners and influencers Develop scope for external stakeholder engagement surveyresearch months (January June )Undertake external stakeholder engagement surveyresearch, develop and implement plan in responseT argets Key Focus Area Maximising our relationships FiveYear Success Measures Regulatory partner stakeholder engagement survey Baseline Baseline survey to be undertaken in
For example; providing national security advice correspondence to partner agencies such as Immigration New Zealand (INZ), Department of Internal Affairs (DIA) and Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFAT) in support of their decision making functions for visa, citizenship, refugee andor diplomat applications; providing security checks to New Zealand Police to enhance the security planning for major events such as APEC, Rugby World Cup etc.
Four changes to the Policy are recommended: reflect societal shifts and commitment
IN CONFI ENCE LEGMIN a roved the SOP PCO . to the Bill for release to the Ho se, s bject to the final approval of the government ca c s and s fficient s pport in the Ho se of Repres entatives; agreed tha t the SOP be released on A g st ; agreed tha t the committee of the whole Ho se may take place on the first available after the SOP is released; agreed tha t the Bill be enacted by September . Vivien Meek Commi ttee Secretary Present: Hon Andrew Little Officials present from: Off ice of the Prime Minister Hon St art Nash Officials Committee for LEG Hon Iain LeesGalloway (Chair) Hon Jenny Salesa Hon Damien OConnor Hon Ron Mark Hon Tracey Martin Hon J lie Anne Genter Michael Wood MP (Senior Government Whip) Hardcopy distribution: Minis ter of Local Government IN CONFI ENCE Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
In March , Cabinet agreed that, gi ven the changed context, including the need to respond to a national emergency, the Government would focus its legislative response to the Declaration of Inconsistency on lowering the voting age for local elections only CABMIN.
In particular , a specific focus on supporting Mori in leadership and decision making roles will help ensure Maori perspectives about data and identity are embedded in the trusted digital identity ecosystem. Redacted consistent with s(b)(i) of the Official Informati on Act INCONFIDENCE Page of that the creation of a new regulatory regime, with associated compliance testing and (in the longer term) accreditation functions, will require its own board. . The governance group woul d consist of representatives from the GCDO, the Government Chief Information Security Officer, the Government Chief Data Steward, the Office of the Privacy Commissioner and Mori. The group would also have the authority to co opt non voting members, and t o appoint an advisory body comprised of government and non government experts and stakeholders. Options for closer participation of non government partners in the governance of the Trust Framework would also be considered during the legislative process. . Given Mori are Treaty partners, officials will actively build the capability required to enable effective partnership with Mori. Partnering with Iwi and Mori organisations, post settlement governance entities and other runanga, and key influential Mori stakeholder groups could help increase trust and participation levels amongst Mori communities and meet the Crowns Treaty of Waitangi obligations. While establishing the interim Trust Framework, officials will develop a Bill to give the Trust Framework legal effect . Work will also start during to develop a Bill to formally establish the Trust Framework and make consequential amendments to pre existing legislation. This Bill is likely to be introduced to the House of Representatives in . During t his time, the GCDO and supporting agencies would continue to refine governance and accreditation arrangements, update rules as required and identify further potential providers over the course of . The anticipated cost of this phase (including the cost s of establishing the interim Trust Framework) is . million for the financial year and . million for . . Prior to the development of the Bill, a legislative review programme would identify consequential amendments to other statutes needed to support the creation of the Trust Framework. Areas of focus are likely to include: Acts that prohibit the consented sharing of information (e.g. the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Act ); Acts that relate to the conf irmation and sharing of identity information particularly through digital mechanisms (e.g. the Electronic Identity Verification Act ); Acts that contain overly prescriptive provisions that do not permit digital solutions (e.g. being required to send a physical letter and statutory declaration requirements under the Summary Proceedings Act ); and ensuring consistency in legal definitions of identity, information and other relevant terminology in the statute book. . This legislative review will also consider wider matters of law and policy, such as efficiency and coordination issues. This will include potential alignment with other areas of legal reform, such as the development of new data and statistics legislation by Stats NZ. Officials will also c onsider the alignment of the Trust Framework with existing regulatory and accreditation schemes in order to avoid creating unnecessary costs for small to medium enterprises and agencies.
Initial cost benefits analysis showed a positive ratio of between and across all the option s relative to the costs and benefits of continuing RealMe services as they are. I t is based on potential use cases and a range of assumptions, including consume r uptake of digital identity services, and agencies being positioned to participate in the digital identity system within certain timeframes. This will apply to Health New Zealand as future operational responsibilities become clear. Proactively Released Proactively Released Proactively Released INCONFIDENCE Page of Climate Implications of Policy Assessment . The Climate Implications of Policy Ass essment (CIPA) team has been consulted and confirms that the CIPA requirements do not apply to this proposal as the threshold for significance is not met. While there are no significant climate implications from this paper there could be minor climate bene fits from digital identity enabling greater online interactions, including : . enabling people to access services remotely rather than in person; and . supporting the growth of the digital economy, including the trade of digital services and products, in propor tion to other more emission intensive industries. Te Tiriti o Waitangi . We recognise that work on digital identity will be of interest to Mori and we are committed to delivering digital identity services that are inclusive of Te Ao Mori perspectives , and support Mori to have control of their personal information and identity . The approach proposed in this paper will support a broader range of innovative and responsive digital identity services to be developed and will enable a wider range of identify ing attributes to be considered as part of a persons digital identity. If Cabinet agrees to the recommendations in this paper, officials will consult with Mori on the development of further proposals a s part of a Detailed Business Case. . Mori have partic ular interests and relationships with their data, and the concept of Mori data sovereignty seeks to enable Mori collective governance and agency over data. We recognise that Mori Data Governance is an approach that government is working towards. Therefo re, future development of investment options further to this paper will consider how to support Mori Data Governance. . Officials are also engaging with Mori at a programme level through the Data Iwi Leaders Group , with pan Iwi groups and development of th e Mana rite relationship between the Department and iwi. A partnership approach is being adopted for the development of Trust Framework rules, through the establishment of a Technical Working Group dedicated to reviewing draft rules and providing feedback to ensure Mori tikanga is recognised. Human Rights . There are no immediate impacts on human rights arising from the proposal outlined in this paper. However, it is important that any government digital identity services are implemented in alignment with ongoing work to improve digital inclusion across government and to support Article of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (everyone has the right of equal access to public service in his country). Other civil society frameworks include the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the New Zealand Disability Strategy and the Disability Action Plan. These identify accessibility of information as a fundamental priority. Population implications . As the digital identity system evolves it will provide a variety of benefits through greater access to services, including to people who struggle with proving who they are online and in the real world. For example, enabling people to access services through widely used mobile devices could improve accessibility to services. Proactively Released INCONFIDENCE Page of . However, these may be inequitably realised due to variable levels of digital inclusion in New Zealand. Ensuring accessibility for groups that have been identified as most at risk of not being digitally included ( including Mori, Pacific peoples, seniors, a nd people with disabilities ) will be critical. For example, for people with disabilities, accessibility begins at the point of entry into any digital identity system, so it will be important to ensure there are accessible ways to obtain a digital identity. Additionally, many people living in rural areas will have limited broadband which will impact their access to digital services. . From th is wider Mahi Tahi (Inclusion) perspective, we will need to address four key barriers to inclusion: motivation, access through affordability and accessibility , skills and trust. This is important to ensure there is a just transition to a digital nation. . For the digital identity services outlined in this paper, accessibility will need to be considered in the design and implementation stages. Additionally, accessibility requirements , such as ease of access and opportunities to participate (inclusion) will be considered in the development of the framework rules, in collaboration with Mori partners, advisory groups and other stakeholders. . It will also be important to maintain trust by enabling safe and secure ways to access services. For example, privacy enhancing digital identity services will be important , particularly in circumstances such as when women need to access services as they are experiencing family violence. Consultation . The Department of Internal Affairs consulted with the Accident Compensation Corporation, New Zealand Customs Service, Department of Corrections, Department of Conservation, Ministry of Education, National Cyber Security Centre, Ministry of Health, Inland R evenue Department, Ministry of Justice, Land Information New Zealand, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Ministry for Primary Industries, Ministry of Social Development, Ministry for Pacific Peoples, Min istry of Transport, Ministry of Youth Development, Ministry for Women, New Zealand Transport Agency, Office of the Privacy Commissioner, Office for Disability Issues, Office for Seniors, the New Zealand Qualification Authority, the Police, Oranga Tamariki, Social Wellbeing Agency, Public Service Commission, Stats NZ, Te Arawhiti, Te Puni Kkiri, the Tertiary Education Commission and the Treasury. The Department of Internal Affairs informed the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet. Communications . We do not propose any public announcements for policy proposals in this paper. Proactive Release . As per Cabinet Office Circular CO () : Proactive Release of Cabinet Material Requirements, this Cabinet paper will be proactively released subject to any redactions that may be warranted under the Official Information Act . Recommendations The Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications recommends that the Cabinet Economic Development Committee: . note that further investment is required to continue to operate and modernise government digital identity services to provide greater utility for people ; . direct the Department of Internal Affairs to develop a Detailed Business Case to assess the investment options for modernising government digital identity infrastructure ; Proactively Released Proactively Released INCONFIDENCE Page of Appendix A: Glossary of key terms
International studies h ave suggested that the potential benefit of enabling trusted digital identity in a mature economy is between . and of GDP equivalent. If these figures are applied to New Zealand, the potential value is between . billion and . billion NZD (bas ed on figures). We anticipate that the approximate value of digital identity to the New Zealand economy is up to . billion NZD of GDP equivalent per annum . PROACTIVELY RELEASED INCONFIDENCE
Minister of Internal Affairs response to the referral of the Petition of
Ministerial signout will be required for codes covering child sexual exploitation and terrorism material. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . The Bill covers defined categories of harmful online content, which are: content which it is a criminal offence to share; serious cyberbullying material; material promoting eating disorders; and material promoting selfharm and suicide. Other judications where online regulation is on the policy agenda . Australia Online Safety Bill. . Canada Broadcasting and Telecommunications Legislative Review. . France Fighting Hate on the Internet Bill.
On August , the Petitions Committee referred the petition to the
Osterley Way, Manukau, Auckland.
Overheads People , , Operat ing, , Total costs for Activity , Notes: . This table shows the estimated additional costs to OFLC of administering the new CVoD regime, plus overheads. . Channel costs reflect the current manual system but do not factor in the current operating deficit of that system. Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentAppendix D: Costrecovery options and mechanisms assessed against principles LEGEND TO TABLE Likely to support the principleNeutral (depends on design detail)Unlikely to support the principle PRINCIPLES FUNDING OPTIONS: CURRENT ACTIVITIESEquity Simplicity Stakeholder supportEfficiency Transparency Option : full costrecovery from user chargesDistributors benefit from classification and give rise to risks of harm arising from media content; they should pay the full costsStraightforward, easy to understand; fee paying system already in place and functioningRepresents a significant change from the status quo. Unlikely to receive widespread stakeholder supportNote the risk that increased charges may result in user non complianceUsers have an incentivising interest in OFLCs cost efficiencyNo significant difference between options Option : no costrecovery Government meets all costsThe community pays for a service providing significant benefits to private businessesStraightforward, easy to implementLikely to be acceptable to the sectorCan achieve objectivesWeaker incentives for cost efficiencyNo significant difference between options Option : user charges plus Government fundingThe community and the sector both receive significant benefits from classification; both should payStraightforward to administer; a mixed funding system is already in place and functioning. Arriving at the right mix may not be straightforwardFamiliar to the sector. Acceptability to stakeholders likely to depend on the level of usercharges.Depends on level of user chargesUsers have an incentivising interest in OFLCs cost efficiencyNo significant difference between options Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentFUNDING OPTIONS: CVOD Option : full costrecovery from user chargesDistributors benefit from classification and give rise to risks of harm arising from media content; they should pay the full costsStraightforward, easy to implementFamiliar to, accepted by, some distributors (noting the UK and Australian parallels). Likely to be less acceptable to the sector than a cost sharing approachNo significant difference between optionsUsers have an incentivising interest in OFLCs cost efficiencyNo significant difference between options Option : No costrecovery Government meets all costsThe community pays for a service providing significant benefits to private businessesStraightforward, easy to implementLikely to be acceptable to the sectorNo significant difference between optionsWeaker incentives for cost efficiencyNo significant difference between options Option : user charges plus Government fundingThe community and the sector both benefit from classification; both should payStraightforward to administer. Arriving at the right mix may not be straightforwardLikely to be more acceptable to the sector than Option .No significant difference between optionsUsers have an incentivising interest in OFLCs cost efficiencyNo significant difference between options FUNDING MECHANISMS Option : user charges Individual users pay for the costs they create Straightforward, easy to implementFeepaying systems will be familiar and acceptable to most distributorsNo significant difference between optionsIncentive effects towards cost efficiency may be strongerNo significant difference between options Option : levy Note challenges to designing and administering a fair and flexible levy system for such a fluid industry.Note challenges to designing and administering a fair and flexible levy system for such a fluid industry. Acceptability to stakeholders is likely to depend on the basis for and quantum of the levy No significant difference between optionsIncentive effects towards cost efficiency may be weakerNo significant difference between options Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentAppendix E: Schedule of questions Question : What are the implications for your business or activity arising from additional costs Would you con duct your business or activity differently Would additional costs affect the content your business offers, or be transferred to consumers Question : Are there other objectives or principles that the Department should take into account when deciding which option and the level of any charges to progress Question : What is your preferred costrecovery option for OFLCs existing classification activities and why Option Full costrecovery from submitters Option : No costrecovery from users. The Government meets all costs arising from OFLCs classification activities covered by existing Regulations Option : Partial costrecovery from usercharges and Government funding Question : If option is your preferred option, do you agree with a split between the Government and the sector If not, what proportion of costs should Government and the sector pay Question : What impact would the cost implications in the scenarios under each option have on your business or activity Question : Do you agree or disagree with concessions being offered in circumstances where media content has significant cultural benefits, or in circumstances where there are lower administrative cost than others Please tell us why you agree or disagree. Question : Do you have any comments on the present rates of concessions offered by OFLC Question : Do you have any suggestions for an appropriate concession rate or rates Question : Do you think concessions should be offered for CVoD classification If so, why Question : What is your preferred costrecovery option for OFLCs CVoD related classification activities and why Option Full costrecovery from submitters Option : No costrecovery from users. The Government meets all costs arising from OFLCs CVoD related activities Option : Partial costrecovery from usercharges and Government funding Question : If option is your preferred option, do you agree with a split between Government and the sector If not what proportion of costs should users and the Government pay Question : What impact would the cost implications in the scenarios under each option have on your business or activity Question : Do you have feedback on the level of charges in any of the scenarios Question : Do you have a preference for usercharges or a levy for OFLCs current classification activities Please comment on the reasons for your preferred choice. Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentQuestion : Do you have a preference for how fees or a levy may be set for OFLCs current activities If so, please explain your preference. Question : Do you have a preference for usercharges or a levy for OFLCs CVoD related activities Please comment on the reasons for your preferred choice. Question : Do you have a preference for how fees or a levy may be set for CVoD related activities If so, please ex plain your preference. Question : Should there be a staggered implementation of a new funding regime, and what would the justification for a staggered implementation be Question : What is your preferred period of time to transition to a new funding regime, and why Question : Are there any other comments, or suggestions relevant to this consultation you would like to make This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution . licence. In essence, you are free to copy, distribute and adapt the work as long as you attribute the work to the Department of Internal Affairs (and abide by the other licence terms see the plain English licence terms at creativecommons.orglicensesby.). Please note that neither the DIA logo nor the New Zealand Government logo may be used in any way which infringes any provision of the Flags, Emblems, and Names Protection Act attribution to the DIA should be in written form and not by reproduction of the DIA logo or New Zealand Government logo.
Passports have a self identification process for changing the gender printed in the passport. While gender is not displayed on a driver licence, this information can be changed on the driver licence record via a self identification process. Maintaining trust in and the integrity of the birth register is important. Other agencies and other parts of the Department of Internal Affairs rely on information contained in the birth register to confirm a persons identity and provide services. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . While other options considered may support public trust in the birth register better , this is at the expense of all other objectives and would result in a process that does not work for the transgender and intersex New Zealanders who need it . Selfidentification is the most inclusive and accessible process for amending registered sex . Under a self identification process a persons gender will be recognised based on their selfperception. This change will: . better enabl e transgende r and intersex New Zealanders to access services with less risk of being outed or experiencing discrimination; . demedicalise the experience of being transgender or intersex; . validate transgender and intersex people contributing to a greater sense of soc ial belonging and improving their wellbeing; . provide greater accessibility to a birth certificate that reflects a persons gender due to lower costs and reduced administration involved in an application ; and . enhances privacy as a person no longer must prov ide sensitive medical information to amend their registered sex. Selfidentification is increasingly supported internationally . International h uman rights discourse recommends that where sex and gender information is registered it should be based on an acce ssible self identification process with no eligibility criteria , such as medical treatment. Since , at least other countries have adopted a self identification process, as well as the Australian states of Tasmania and Victoria. There has not been ev idence found of any serious unmanageable consequences of introducing a self identification process. Decisions on a range of proposals are needed to enable a self identification process . To introduce a self identification process, I propose the removal of the requirement s to apply to the Family Court and to provide evidence of medical treatment . Instead people would apply to the Registrar General of Births, Deaths and Marriages to amend their registered sex to reflect their gender. Further decisions are re quired to enable a selfidentification process, which are discussed below. I propose a statutory declaration requirement to ensure people understand the decision . To achieve this the statutory declaration will require applicants to indicate that they : .. want the sex marker on their birth certificate to match their gender; .. intend to live as a person of this gender; and .. understand the consequences of the application . . Requiring applicants to verify the above requirements balances the interests of transgender and intersex individuals with the need to protect the integrity of the birth register . It will help ensure applications are treated consistently and fairly . It will also reduce the risk of fraudulent applications . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of I propose that people can amend their registe red sex more than once, but that subsequent amendments may need to meet additional requirements . Gender can be fluid and how a person identifies may change over time. This may be particularly true for younger people as childhood and adolescence is a time o f development. I propose allowing a person to amend their registered sex multiple times in recognition that people may identify differently at different stages of life. . Allowing only one amendment would be out of step with a true self identification mode l. If a persons gender changes and they cannot amend their registered sex to reflect this, they no longer have control of how their gender is officially recognised. . People will be able to change their name at the same time as their registered sex if required. To accurately reflect their identity, where a person amends their registered sex, their previous sex and name are not displayed on their new birth certificate. This has the potential to increase the risk of identity fraud as a person cannot be easil y linked to their previous identity. This risk is exacerbated if people amend their registered sex multiple times, particularly as birth certificate s are fundamentally different to transactional documents , such as a passport or driver licences , which can be revoked and must be renewed periodically. Worst case scenarios of fraudulent behaviour include, for example, a person receiving multiple benefits or circumventing safe guards preventing money laundering and terrorism financing. . I propose t hat where a person makes subsequent amendments to their registered sex they may have to meet requirements to ensure their application is genuine. These will be in addition to the statutory declaration, which already acts to mitigate the risk of identity fr aud. False declarations are a criminal offence that can lead to imprisonment for up to three years. . Any requirements in addition to the statutory declaration will be set in regulations and designed to not be overly burdensome or reinstate the barriers th at the self identification process aims to remove. For example, extra requirements could include returning any previous birth certificates, provision of an identity referee or a letter of support from an adult who has known the applicant for over a year. M y officials will engage with other agencies in the development of the regulations, particularly agencies working in the justice sector, to ensure the extra requirements sufficiently mitigate the risk of identity fraud. . Changing registered sex multiple tim es relates to an existing issue with inaccuracy of information across justice sector agencies (such as the New Zealand Customs Service, New Zealand Police and Department of Corrections). There is already a risk of inaccurate information across this sector when name change information is not shared. This could result in a person having multiple identities and their offences not being linked. I am responsible for work developing a Justice Sector Identity Management Strategy to address this risk ; the impact of amending registered sex will be considered as part of this.
Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentIntroduction The Office of Film and Literature Classification (OFLC) enables New Zealanders to make informed viewing choices about the media content they watch and interact with. OFLC supports public wellbeing and harm prevention by ensuring potentially harmful material is restricted to appropriate audiences. OFLC also provides a research and education programme. Currently, OFLC is mainly funded by the Government and fees from commercial organisations who screen material to New Zealand audiences. The Government is seeking your views on options for costrecovery (full, partial, or no costrecovery) from the sector, and mechanisms (fees andor a levy) to fund OFLCs:
SaaS is a capability provided to the consumer to use the providers applications
Storage and security of personal information
Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Forewords and Statements of ResponsibilityThrough the Digitising Government portfolio, we support the Minister for Digitising Government with delivery of the Governments digital strategy, digital services delivery, and more. As Government Chief Digital Officer, part of my role is to support the safe and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in the public service. We are encouraging government agencies to safely adopt AI for its benefits while managing the risks. The new archival building in Wellington is on track to be opened in . It will provide a stateoftheart archives repository, including digitisation and conservation facilities, and will ensure precious taonga are kept in the most modern facilities for conservation and care. The new building will be a collaborative workspace for the National Library of New Zealand, Archives New Zealand and Ng Taonga Sound Vision. The Department has a wide range of duties and responsibilities. We recognise the continued need to support the Governments efficiency and effectiveness goals. We are focused on our core business and key priorities and are open to doing things differently; this is how we will continue to perform and deliver services to New Zealanders. In all our work we are focusing our intentions on making progress towards achieving five broad outcomes for the benefit of people, communities and the Government. New Zealand is a wellfunctioning democracy across central and local government People can easily access the services and information they need Peoples sense of belonging and collective memory builds an inclusive New Zealand Iwi, hap and communities across New Zealand are safe, resilient and thriving Oranga hap, iwi and Mori is improved through an enduring, equitable and positive MoriCrown relationship. I am committed to driving forward our work to make progress towards achieving our outcomes over the next four years. I am confident that the Department is wellplaced to continue to make a positive difference to the wellbeing of people and communities. Statement of Responsibility In signing this statement, I acknowledge that I am responsible for the information on strategic intentions contained in the Statement of Intent for the Department of Internal Affairs. This information has been prepared in accordance with sections and of the Public Finance Act . Ng mihi nui Paul James Secretary for Internal Affairs, Secretary for Local Government, Government Chief Digital Officer, Chief Executive of the Department of Internal Affairs October
Subject to further development between agencies and Iwi and Mori, the expectation
The agreement was signed by representatives from the DILG and DIA in . It supports partnership in digital
The parties involved and the agency to lead
The reason for the petition is stated as follows : We believe this would ensure
This paper seeks agreement to: . changes to the voting age for local el ections and parliamentary elections being considered separately; . a commencement for the Bill; . lowering the age for all types of local elections, except licencing trusts; . retaining the current age of year s for standing as a candidate in an election and sitting on a jury; and . retaining the current age of y ears for voting in and standing as a candidate for alcohol licencing trust elections. The proposals in this paper have significant financial implications that are currently unmet, for both the Electora l Commission and for local councils (in respect of local elections). Officials wil l work through these costings and I will report back further on this when seeking approval to introduce the Bill.
This proposal will clarify that all third party funding would be able to be targeted to a particular driver, or particular drivers, of an infrastructure project.
This was the approach taken to the commencement of the End of Life Choice Act , which came into force only after receiving majority support in the EndofLife Choice referendum held alongside the General Election. Such a clause would open a pathway in the future for the Government, or Member of Parliament (though a Members bill), to put the question of the voting age to a referendum, as the alternative pathway to change envisaged by the reserved provisions. It would be operationally complex for the Electoral Commission to manage separate commencement dates for local and parliamentary elections with and yearolds voting in the local election but not voting in any parliamentary byelections leading up to the subsequent general election. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E usoq
WICS supporting material required investment (slide ), https:www.dia.govt.nzdiawebsite.nsfFilesThree waters reform programmefilewics supporting material required investment.pdf
agree that the minimum age for standing as a candidate in alcohol licensing trust elections, or being appointed to an alcohol licensing trust will be: EITHER . lowered to yearsold;
agreed that the Bill will contain a mechanism to bring the commencement forward, to no earlier than March , if the Bill is able to be implemented earlier;
agreed that the commencement for the Bill should be January ;
agreed that the minimum age for standing as a candidate in alcohol licensing trust elections, or being appointed to an alcohol licensing tr ust will be separated from the voting age and remain at yearsold;
agreed that the residential property owner will be responsible for paying the water services entity in full for al l charges;
approved additional funding ofl. million to the following appropriations within Vote
https:www.health.govt.nzsystemfilesdocumentspublicationscovidcaseandcontactmanagementm onitoringandreportingtoachieveandsustaineliminationofcovidmay.pdf
invite the Minister of Internal Affairs to present the Ministerial response to the
invite the Ministers of Justice and Local Government to present the Government Response to the House in accordance with accordance with section B of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act and the rules and practices of the House;
invited the Minister of Internal Affairs to present the Ministerial response to the House in
invited the Minister of Justice and Minister of Local Government to present the government response to the House in accordance with accord ance with section B of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act and the rules and practices of the House;
invited the Minister of Local Government to issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office for a bill to give effect to the above decision;
note if utilised well, cloud offers the potential to contribute to achieving the carbon
noted that during this period, the Department of Internal Affairs will also lead targeted
noted that if utilised well, cloud offers the potential to contribute to achieving the carbon
noted that the Minister of Finance and Minister of Local Government have been working with officials to fully understand these cost pressures, determine which areas it is appropriate to fund and by how much, and to develop an approach to funding the priority areas;
year summary of annual expenditure all gambling activities
. A third paper will follow shortly on matters that do not need to be included in the proposed legislation particularly regarding programme funding and the revised implementation approach. Relation to government priorities . This Government has a mbitions to significantly improve the safety, quality, resilience, accessibility, and performance of three waters services, in a manner that is efficient and affordable for New Zealanders. This is critical for public health and wellbeing, environmental ou tcomes, economic growth and job creation, housing and urban development, adapting to the impacts of climate change, building resilience to natural hazards, and improving outcomes relating to water services for iwiMori. . The Labour Party Manifesto co mmitted to reform New Zealands drinking water and wastewater system, and upgrade water infrastructure to create jobs across the country. ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
. Appendix . . . .
. Be ready for distribution at population scale in around months. CovidCard is not able to be used as a reactive solution it must be deployed in advance of any outbreak.
. Carbon Neutral Government Programme
. Coapply for RealMe Verified
. Conclusions New Zealand lacks the advanced technologies and broader social license of other Governments battling COVID (China, South Korea, Taiwan) With our existing technology, manual contact tracing is simply not fast enough or scalable enough to materially slow the spread of COVID under normalised social settings with an open border, so the border remains closed.
. Consultation Various stakeholders have been engaged as part of soliciting feedback during the development of the CovidCard , including:
. Effective screening environments: Individuals at risk of experiencing harm from gambling are identified as early as possible, and are made aware of where to access appropriate minimising gambling harm intervention services. Based on its current experience and the needs assessment, the Ministry intends to maintain funding for existing services at broadly the same level as in the previous funding period. However, it intends to explore the potential for innovation within that overall budget, particularly taking a community mobilisation approach, and drawing on successful models across the wider health system. Workforce development (public health) In the period, the Ministry s gambling harm public health workforce development provider identified the core competencies (including the cultural competencies) required for that workforce. In the most recent period, public health core competency assessment tools were developed to enable the public health workforce to assess their competency levels and associated training and development needs. The focus in the period will be increasing uptake of a training programme to help the workforce identify and achieve appropriate formal qualifications. In addition, submissions identified that there needs to be greater emphasis on understanding different worldviews in cultural competence training, including training for health support people working with Mori, Pacific and Asian communities. Awareness and behaviour change programme The Ministry expects that health promotion programmes will continue to raise awareness and educate about the signs and risks of harmful gambling, and how people can respond and seek help, by: promoting risk awareness and positive action messages that encourage positive behaviour change encouraging the development and promotion of selfhelp digital tools to improve access to relevant information, help and online support improving the reach of services to M ori, Pacific, Asian and other vulnerable groups , and the associated uptake of treatment and support. HPA will continue to actively promote the Gambling Helpline, Choice Not Chance (www.choicenotchance.org.nz ) and face toface services, with a renewed focus on Mori, Pacific and Asian audiences and other vulnerable groups, for the period. HPA will also develop and promote selfhelp digital tools to increase accessibility to help and provide online support information. It will also continue to work in partnership with DIA and the Ministry to promote safer gambling environments and host responsibility, including embedding work with class venues and expanding these activities to address other modes of gambling. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
. Evaluate bang for bucks Effort should be made to understand the cost per impact achieved. This can be used to evaluate alternatives promising the same impact. An app might be cheap, but only if it works.
. Exemptions to information privacy principles
. Exemptions to information privacy principles .
. How is data privacy being considered and managed, including the risk of new versions of any app expanding the functions of the app or what happens after the pandemic
. I therefore seek Cabinees agreement to make out of cycle changes to budget baselines
. In addition, regulatory tools encompasses the setting of standards and rules; as well
. MCH suggested considering all potential changes to the Classifications Act and the
. Mori wards provide guaranteed representation of Mori in local government.
. Objectives and purpose of this Agreement
. Objectives and purpose of this Agreement .
. THE cardholder shall be personally liable for all debts incurred through unauthorised use of the card by him or her.
. The existing approach to operator training, skills, and experience is fragmented and
. This policy is intended to comply with the Cabinet direction of July that government agencies with prosecution functions have in place policies that identify the objectives of the agencys prosecution activity, determine the circumstances in which a prosecution is appropriate rather than some less punitive action, and ensures that prosecution decisions are costeffective and in the public interest.
. Upcoming Local Government Cabinet Papers ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
. approve additional funding of . million to the following appropriations
. note that during this period the Department of Internal Affairs will also lead
.pm, Friday, April
.pm, Friday, October
.pm, Monday April
.pm, Monday, October
.pm, Tuesday March
.pm, Wednesday April
. Increased risks to drinking water quality and sufficiency of supply.
. regulate SVoD content and free to air television ondemand content at the
.. I recommend that Cabinet:
. Inconsistent training and practices across the county.
. ensure proposals for legislative reform are subject to a full Cabinet paper
. avoid officials making short term amendments to part of the media content
. low levels of water system operator competency and vocation progression.
.. Passive l iveness detection While facial recognition technology is mature, liveness testing has undergone significant developments over recent years in the arms race against bad actors attempting to impersonate others. Current spoofing techniques include digital masks, deep fake videos, and screen replay video attacks, as well as two dimensional printed mask attacks. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
. Difficulty in attracting and retaining people to work in the water industry, and
. Poor environmental outcomes from wastewater overflows and breaches of
. lack of public confidence in drinking water and wastewater service providers .
.The Insti tutional Fr amewo rk Assessment remains a because t he local counci l sector s
.The Order will come into effect on October .
.authorise the submission of the Severe Weather Emergency Recovery (Local
Ministry for the Environment. . Coastal Hazards and Climate Change guidance for local government.
The Mori population is younger on average than the general population. Statistics NZ latest data from June estimates that , and yearolds are of Mori descent. This is approximately of the total and yearold New Zealand resident population.
To comprehensively realise the benefits of the Policy, consideration of other possible
We consider the other provisions of the Bill to be consistent with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act and the Human Rights Act . The Crown Law Office will vet the final version of the Bill prior to introduction.
agreed that the total amount recoverable by the charge in a water services entities service delivery area is calculated by the water services entity on the basis of input methodology(ies) set by the economic regulator;
. My officials are considering opportunities for any hui to be aligned or sequenced with
Building act , section . Health Act , section . Local Government Act (NSW), section . See the recent High Court decision of Williams v Commissioner of Police NZHC , which found that the analogous section under the Official Information Act acted as an affirmative defence to an action where official information was provided in good faith, rather than a requirement to be established by the plaintiff as part of a claim.
The Bills reliance on the existing Electo ral Act enrolment provisions means it has some shortcomings in terms of New Zealands obligations under the United Nations Convention of the Ri ghts of Persons wit h Disabilities. Whaikaha Ministry of Disabled Peopl e have highlighted, for example, the need to update the legislation to reflect the current understandi ngs of disability and supported decisionmaking, and to explic itly include accessible formats for application forms and processes. These ar e issues that should be considered in the future through a combination of legislative change (following the independent electoral review) and operational policy improvements.
We are seeking Cabinet agreement for the Minister of the Digital Economy and
agreed that the charge be apportioned to rateable properties in the service delivery area on the basis of:
. While I had originally intended for the Stage Mori wards changes to be a standalone
. the capital value of the property (this is the same methodology as general rates);
. whether or not the property is serviceable by a reticulated stormwater network, or on the basis of geographic zones;
For proposals one to three, the GCDO will communicate the changes to agencies
Principal Advisor, Strategy and Business Planning The Principal Advisor, Strategy and Business Planning is responsible for the development and maintenance of the overall Regulatory Systems group annual strategic plan and the translation of the groups strategy into business plans that are measurable. This position will also support the development of accountability documents, lead the development of integrated performance reporting framework and cycle, and drive business planning activities. This includes development, implementation and monitoring of strategic initiatives in support of the overarching strategic direction of the group. Senior Advisor, Risk The Senior Advisor, Risk will work alongside the regulatory system, and provides intelligence and risk thought leadership, analysis, and advice to the intelligence function and Regulatory Services Group. Intelligence Coordinator The Intelligence Coordinator will support the Intelligence and Insights team through coordinating information for analysis and reporting purposes, helping Regulatory System improve their understanding of harm and risks. Head of Investigations and Prosecutions The Head of Investigations and Prosecutions leads the Groups investigation and prosecution function, setting its strategic direction and ensuring efficient management of the investigation and prosecution process that are strategically aligned to the Regulatory Services strategic outcomes and with the aim to protect New Zealand and prevent harm in communities. Investigations Coordinator The Investigations Coordinator will have responsibility and oversight for the coordination of investigation information for analysis and reporting purposes, administration, and support services to ensure the smooth functioning of the Investigations and Prosecutions function. Manager, Investigations AMLCFT The Manager, Investigations AMLCFT, is responsible for the dayto day management of a frontline investigation team, ensuring a strategically targeted, consistent, and outcome focused driven approach to serious, complex andor highrisk investigations and prosecutions under the AntiMoney Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism Act (AMLCFT Act). Senior Investigator AMLCFT The Senior Investigator AMLCFT is responsible for leading high quality investigations and prosecutions into serious, complex, and harmful noncompliance by businesses we supervise (our regulated sector) under the AntiMoney Laundering and Countering and Financing of Terrorism Act (AMLCFT Act). Head of Implementation The Head of Implementation leads the Groups operational policy and engagement function, setting its strategic direction and ensuring efficient management and successful implementation of existing and new policy and regulation changes, in an approach that is strategically aligned to the Regulatory Systems strategic outcomes and with the aim to protect New Zealand and prevent harm in communities. Released under the Official Information Act
The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team has been consulted and confirms that CIPA requirements do not apply to this policy proposal as it is not expected to result in any significant, direct emissions impacts. Population implications
agreed that the regional representative group, in consulta tion with the water services entity, can determine the apportionment of costs and the choice of methods set out in paragraph . above; Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government I N C O N F I D E N C E CAB MIN I N C O N F I D E N C E omuxuzqw agreed that legislation will require territorial authorities to share their rating information with water services entities on a reasonable cost basis (this cost excludes the costs of establishing rateable values);
. I propose that this Bill will be an omnibus Bill on the single interrelated topic of
For proposal four, the GCDO will communicate the new expectations regarding on
Team Leader, Operational Policy The Team Leader, Operational Policy is responsible for providing day today leadership, direction and oversight to team members focused on the provision of quality operational policy advice, products and fit forpurpose guidance converting legislative policy to operational policy, enabling our Regulators to regulate their sectors effectively. The team will also work alongside the Engagement and Education team providing support and advice to ensure external guidance and information to sector is clear and effective. This position will play a lead role during the development and implementation of key legislative changes ensuring that plans are in place to keep Regulators abreast of the upcoming changes and implementation of new regulations are rolled out in a timely manner. Team Leader, Engagement, Information and Education The Team Leader, Engagement, Information and Education is responsible for leading a team of professionals to deliver information and education resources, products and services, that enable the delivery of regulatory system strategies, and drives impactful change in stakeholder behaviour and their interaction with regulatory systems. This position will also work alongside the Operational Policy team, playing a lead role during the development and implementation of key legislative changes ensuring that plans are in place to roll out guidance relating to legislative changes to the sector in a timely manner. Senior Project Manager The Senior Project Manager is responsible for effective project management of assigned project or workstream(s) to deliver project based work for the Regulatory Systems group. This includes planning, scheduling, reporting and effective risk and issue management.
The Office of the Privacy Commissioner, Local Government New Zealand, and the Taituar (Local Government Professionals) Electoral Reference Group were consulted on the draft Bill.
These policy proposals are not expected to have significant negative population implications. Treaty of Waitangi
. As well as any changes to the Mori wards process that arise from consultation, I
. removing the councillor limit on the Auckland Council governing body;
. improving the process for amending local board boundaries in Auckland to
. updating nomination requirements to provide legislative clarity concerning
. enabling councils to provide secure telephone voting (which is already available
. updating the special vote verification process to reduce the workload on the
. updating the processes for declaring the outcomes of elections with tied results
Immigration New Zealand, Waka Ko tahi and the Ministry of Social Development have been consulted on t he changes that are likely to be needed to information sharing arrangements. The Ministry for the Environment have been consulted on the proposed co nsequential amendments to the Soil Conservation and Rivers Control Act . Officials have commenced consultation wit h relevant local authorities where the Bill will make consequential amendments to local Acts. This consultation will be completed before the Bill is introduced.
Section Five: Proposed change protocol Introduction This protocol sets out the proposed approach to managing the implementation of the structural changes arising from the Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change. This Protocol is consistent with all individual employment agreements and the Collective Agreement between the Public Service Association and the Department of Internal Affairs. Principles The process is designed to: ensure a fair and transparent process; maximise the placement of employees into available positions; ensure minimum disruption to business as usual; observe the provisions contained in the relevant employment agreements and organisational policy; and minimise uncertainty for employees. Who does this protocol apply to The protocol applies to all permanent employees of the department including: permanent fulltime and parttime employees employees currently on all forms of leave including leave without pay and parental leave For employees currently seconded to other positions the process will apply to their permanent substantive position. Fixed term (temporary) or casual staff are not covered by the protocol even though their position may be affected by any restructure. In this case the relevant provision of their employment agreement will apply. Overview Employees are affected if their current position is changing materially or is being disestablished. If there is no significant change to the position, and there are the same number, or fewer, employees than positions in the new structure, employees will be reconfirmed. Employees who are not reconfirmed will be considered for reassignment. This involves considering whether affected employees skills can be matched to alternative positions that require similar skills in the new structure. Released under the Official Information Act
Some Treaty of Waitangi settlement arrangements with councils have links to the four aspects of community well being currently in the Act. My officials advise me they do not consider that removing the four wellbeings from the Act will impact other legislation (including current and future settlement legislation), as the statutes are independent of one another. Removing the wellbeings from the purpose of local government in the Act does not change the responsibilities of local authorities under other legislation. Well being principles continued in, or were added to, other legislation during the previous period they were absent from the purpose statement for local government. Work on Local Government System Improvements will uphold existing Treaty settlement arrangements. Council participation in and obligations under Treaty settlement arrangements will be considered in the programme. Existing requirements under the Act relating to the contribution to decision making by Mori, and processes for consulting with Mori, will continue to apply. Human rights
Subject to Cabinet approval, the Minister for the Digital Economy and
noted that land that is exempted from rates can currently be charged for drinking and wastewater services by territorial authorities;
. These are mostly technical changes, but they will have a meaningful impact on the
Affected employees who are not reassigned will be consulted individually about other options. If no other options are identified, notice will be given and redundancy provisions apply. Affected employees Before final decisions are announced, all potentially affected employees will be notified individually. Employees may be informed that they: have been reconfirmed in a position and are no longer affected, or are affected and will be considered for reassignment. Reconfirmation process Prior to announcement of the final decisions, an assessment will be made to determine if employees meet the criteria for reconfirmation. This assessment will be made by the group General ManagerDirector, with support from HR, and approved by the Deputy Chief Executive, Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy. The reconfirmation process requires a comparison between existing positions and those in the new structure to determine if they are the same or nearly the same. The criteria for reconfirmation are: the new job description is the same or nearly the same as the job the affected employee currently does; the salary is the same; the terms and conditions, including career prospects are no less favourable; and the location is the same or in the same vicinity.
I am proposing that the Bill be included in the Legislation Programme with a category of Priority (to be pass ed if possible before the general election).
There are no immediate financial implications associated with this paper. The
Weir v Kpiti Coast District Council NZHC . Section () of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act provides that any person has the right to apply for judicial review of a determination by a public authority.
. The Auckland Council changes are intended to give Auckland Council the same
George Street, Dunedin
However, these proposals will require agencies to apply the Policy to their Digital and
If Cabinet agrees that the House should be able to consider the voting age for local and parliamentary elections separately, this may mean the introduction of two cognate Bills to refl ect a dual pathway; the first will lower the voting age for both parliamentary an d local elections, and the second will lower the voting age for local elections only. Officials are still working through the best way to draft the changes with Parliamentary Counsel Office.
No potential human rights implications or inconsistencies with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act or Human Rights Act have been identified as resulting from the proposals in this paper. Use of external resources
Reassignment process The purpose of the reassignment process is to place affected employees, who have not been reconfirmed into positions in the new structure, into suitable alternative positions. A suitable alternative position is one that involves duties that are not unreasonable taking into account the employees skills, knowledge, qualifications and experience, and where the employee could reasonably be expected to carry out those duties with a reasonable amount of training and development. A reassignment panel of the group General Manager or Director and a representative from Human Resources will consider all expressions of interest and seek to reassign employees based on a balance of: the employees preference(s) suitability for the position placing as many employees as possible.
. The consultation proposed in this paper is limited to the Mori ward changes because
. Affected employees may be invited to submit an Expression of Interest (EOI) for ringfenced vacancies. . A process for identifying the affected employees suitability for the ring fenced vacancy then takes place. This may include a range of selection activities for example, paperbased EOI form, or an interview. . The reassignment panel will assess the expression of interest against the reassignment options and to make recommendations to the Deputy Chief Executive, Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy. . Once approved, formal offers of reassignment will be made to individuals. Upon acceptance of reassignment, individuals are no longer affected by the review. An employee who declines reassignment to a suitable alternative position is deemed to have resigned. If an employee is reassigned to a position with a lower salary, an equalisation allowance will be paid. Reconfirmation or reassignment review process Employees have the right to seek a review of the reconfirmation decision where they do not consider that the criteria have been applied correctly. Employees who register a preference or preferences for reassignment also have the right to seek a review of the reassignment decision where they are not offered reassignment to any of the positions for which they registered a preference. Employees who do not register a preference for reassignment cannot seek a review of reassignment decisions. Any request for a review, including the grounds for the review, must be communicated in writing to the Deputy Chief Executive, Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy within working days of the reconfirmation or reassignment decision being communicated. If requested, employees will be provided with the documentation associated with the reconfirmation or reassignment decision under review that relates directly to them. They will not be provided with specific information or documentation regarding other affected employees. Reviewers will be independent of the original reconfirmation or reassignment panel and will be agreed by the Deputy Chief Executive, Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy and the employee andor their representative. Any recommendations made by the reviewer will be considered by the Deputy Chief Executive, Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy, who will decide whether any recommendations made by the reviewer will be implemented. Review decisions are final there is no internal appeal process. Released under the Official Information Act
A broad range of agencies have noted constraints of the current CAPEX IT
Cabinets impact analysis requirements apply to the proposal to lower the voting age for general and local elections to , but there is no accompanying Regulatory Impact Statement and the Treasury has not exempted the proposal from the impact analysis requirements. Th erefore, it does not meet Cabinets requirements for regulatory proposals.
National Civil Defence Emergency Management Plan Order , Section () and (), . R eview into the Future for Local Government, He piki tranga, he piki ktuku The Future for Local Government , . https:www.dia.govt.nzdiawebsite.nsfFilesFutureforLocalGovernmentfileTeArotakeFinalreport.pdf N ational Emergency Management Agency, Weekly Update from the Cyclone Recovery Unit May , NEMA website, n.d. https:www.civildefence.govt.nzresourcesnewsandeventsnewsandeventsweeklyupdatefrom thecyclonerecoveryunitmay Th e Treasury, Half Year Economic and Fiscal Update , December . https:www.treasury.govt.nz publicationsefuhalfyeareconomicandfiscalupdate N ational Emergency Management Agency, CDEM Resilience Fund, NEMA website, n.d.. https:www.civildefence. govt.nzcdemsectorcdemresiliencefund Inquiry recommends the Government increase the appropriation for the existing contestable fund to support a significant uplift in community readiness and resilience across New Zealand. A refreshed approach to funding during and immediately after an emergency . In addition to an overall shift in the investment approach to emergency management, there needs to be some specific changes to the way funds for response activities are administered and a reappraisal of which costs are eligible. The current state for funding response and immediate readiness activities . The current objectives of government financial support for local government during and immediately before an emergency focus on caring for directly affected people, and preventative actions to reduce immediate danger to human life or to reduce the potential consequences of an emergency. Current government policy is that councils can apply for reimbursement of of welfare costs they incur in caring for displaced people. Central government will fund of other eligible activities above a threshold based on the net capital value of the council. Eligible activities include the repair of essential infrastructure like water, storm water, electrical, sewerage and gas assets as well as other councilowned structures like retaining walls and tunnels upon which essential services depend. Both these funding functions (welfare, and other response costs) are administered by NEMA. . Councils are responsible for most other response costs, including for example repairs to local roads. In practice, government funding is made available to councils and communities to support this response spending through a range of government agencies. Increasingly, it is also provided through eventspecific bespoke government funds like the North Island Weather Events funding package. In addition, different government agencies provide funding for specific activities or sectors, ranging from support for farmers to silt removal following Cyclone Gabrielle. . Councils can also request reimbursement of funds that were incurred by iwi and other organisations with a formalised role in providing welfare services after an emergency. The Emergency Management Bill includes provisions for iwi and Mori organisations to be directly reimbursed for welfare costs within the criteria set at the time of the emergency. We support the intent of this provision, reflecting the key role of iwi Mori organisations in providing welfare services.
No external resources were used in developing the proposals in this paper. Consultation
We understand this concern. However, because the penalties would mirror the existing penalties for everyone eligible to vote, we recommend retaining these provisions in the Bill for introducti on and leaving this as a matter to be considered at select committee.
. The omnibus Bill would amend the Local Electoral Act , the Local Government Act
I have consulted with the following agencies and ministers on the proposal in this Cabinet paper: the Ministry for Business, Innovation and Employment (Auckland, Building and Construction, and Regional Development); the Department of Conservation; the Ministry for the Environment (RMA reform and waste minimisation); the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development; Kanga Ora Homes and Communities; the New Zealand Infrastructure Commission Te Waihanga; the Ministry of Justice; the Office of Mori Crown Relations Te Arawhiti; the Ministry of Mori Development Te Puni Kkiri; the National Emergency Management Agency; the Parliamentary Counsel Office, the Ministry for Primary Industries (Biosecurity); the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (Policy Advisory Group and Risk and Systems Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E aecpczkj
On behalf of respective Ministers, the Regulatory Impact Analysis team at the Treasury and the Ministry of Justice have agreed t hat supplementary analysis will be provided when approval for introduction is sought next year.
Prosecutions are rare. The Electoral Commission has not referred anyone to the Police for failing to enrol in the la st years. Under the Electoral Act, a person who applies for registration as an elector cannot be prosecuted for their earlier failure to do so. The Commission prefers to put its effort and resources into encouraging people to enrol and vote.
Remaining affected employees Employees who remain affected following the Branch reassignment process will be notified of this, and the Department will work with the employee to identify other potential reassignment opportunities elsewhere in the Department. Affected employees may then apply and be considered for any potentially suitable vacancies. Affected employees will have preferential right of appointment over nonaffected employees and external candidates in the event that their suitability for the position is assessed as being the same. Other options Employees not placed through reassignment are advised in writing that they are surplus and will be consulted individually about the potential for other options to be agreed. There may be vacancies within the wider Department which could be considered suitable for employees affected by this change process. Affected employees may apply and be considered for any potentially suitable vacancies. Affected employees will have preferential right of appointment over nonaffected employees and external candidates in the event that their suitability for the position is assessed as being the same. Upon acceptance of appointment to another position within the Department, employees are no longer affected by the review. Where another option is agreed with the affected employee, this will be confirmed in writing and the employee will no longer be considered affected. Notice If the Department determines that no other option can be agreed, the affected employee will be provided notice in line with their employment agreement. Where a longer notice period is preferred for operational transition reasons, this may be agreed between the Department and the affected employee. During the notice period, the Department and the employee may consider any opportunities for other options that may arise. If an affected employee is appointed to another position within the Department during the notice period, the notice is withdrawn in writing. The employees employment is not, therefore, severed. Redundancy Where the affected employee has not been appointed to another position within the Department during the notice period and no other option is agreed, redundancy Released under the Official Information Act
The consideration of the preference, over time, for RESTRICTED information to be
agreed that properties that are non rateable be exempted from the stormwater charge, and that properties that are percent non rateable be charged percent of what they would otherwise be charged;
. I will report back to the relevant Cabinet committee with detailed policy decisions for
. agree that properties that are nonrateable are exempted from the stormwater charge, and properties that are percent non rateable be charged percent of what they would otherwise be charged; . agree that Mori freehold land that currently does not receive either drinking or wastewater services from a water services entity would also be exempt from any stormwater charge; . agree that land transferred to water services entities should become rateable; . agree that water services entities will not be liable for rates on their pipes which run through land that they do not own (an interest in land); s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . agree that water services entities will not be liable for rates on any assets which they own which are located on land that they do not own;
Finally, we note that t he Independent Review of Elec toral Law is considering enrolment, and offences and penalties for parliamentary elections. The Governments response to that review will provide the best place to consider offences and penalties relating to enrolment.
There are no immediate financial implications associated with Phase Two. However,
agreed that Mori freehold land that currently does not receive either drinking or wastewater services from a water services entity also be exempt from any stormwater charge;
compensation will be paid at the end of the notice period in accordance with the affected employees employment agreement. With effect from July , redundancy compensation is not payable where an employee is appointed to or offered another position in the State Sector as provided for in section A of the State Sector Act.
. Cabinet has previously approved the Local Electoral (Mori Wards and Mori
. a priority of Category (instructions to be provided to PCO within the year);
. introduction and referral to select committee in March ; and
. completion of all remaining House stages by November .
: Carbon Neutral Government Programme
authorised the submission of the Order PCO . to the Executive Council.
ezprxq
pm, Thursday March to am, Monday March (NZDT)
On August , Cabinet agreed the terms of reference for Phase of the
Access to personal information
Cabinet made a series of policy decis ions, including some modifications of earlier decisions, on November CABMIN, December CABMIN, May CABMIN and J une CABMIN. These combined po licy decisions are that the Bill will:
For the first five years this is subject to the minimum gua rantee for TAB NZ i.e. if of revenue is less than million, Entain will ensure TAB NZ receives million, with the difference coming at its expense.
I note that the Government has already established a new inquiry under the
I note that, on June , Cabinet agreed to establish a second phase of
Incremental security improvements are easier: security services are built into the
NZSIS functions include intelligence collection and analysis (s of the ISA), protective security services, advice and assistance (s of the ISA), , cooperation with other public authorities to facilitate their functions (s of the ISA) and cooperation with other entities to respond to imminent threat (s ISA).
OFLC fees: https:www.classificationoffice.govt.nzassets PDFsfeesforclassification.pdf. This total includes income from low volumelow revenue items, such as book classifications, not listed in the table.Table : Principal sources of OFLC income from fees in Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentIssues with the current funding arrangements Fees for current classification activities are not aligned with costs The fees prescribed in the Regulations have not been reviewed since and are no longer aligned with costs incurred by OFLC. Inflation has also eroded the value of the fees. Over time, the income foregone from the fee levels not being regularly adjusted is significant. Expenditure associated with OFLCs classification activities has regularly exceeded income and this is projected to continue. Table shows the deficits based on fees for existing classification activities at current levels. Funding Crown revenue, , , , , , , , , , Usercharges , , , , , Other (including interest) Total revenue, , , , , , , , , , Personnel , , , , , , , , , , Operating , , , , TBC Depreciation TBC Total expenses, , , , , , , , , , Net surplus (deficit)() () () () () () () ()Table : OFLCs financial position June June Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentIncome from existing usercharges is declining The size of the DVD market has decreased as media content is increasingly made available online through On Demand and streaming services. The number of DVD rental stores has declined from in , to in . Retail stores selling DVDs has declined from in , to in . Revenue from usercharges arising from the classification of DVDs have also reduced. Over the last ten years, income from classifying commercial publications such as DVDs and films for release in theatres has reduced by percent. Due to the decreasing market for physical material, such as DVDs, increasing fees for the classification of physical media content may cause this classification activity to further decline. DVD distributers may not be able to sustain increased charges and there may be a flowon effect for consumers and viewers if less content is made available. Funding for OFLCs CVoD related activities is needed The classification of CVoD content is currently unregulated and there is no charging regime in place. This has created uneven business costs between distributors of media content such as DVDs and distributers of media content screened via online platforms. The Government is progressing an amendment to the Classification Act that will require CVoD content to be classified and allow CVoD providers to selfrate their content. The classification of CVoD content before screening will minimise the risk of harm to children and young people. It will support informed viewing choices by all New Zealanders by ensuring content has the appropriate classification, rating and advisory notes consistent with the New Zealand classification regime. The Amendment Bill is expected to be passed into law by mid. CVoD providers will be able to classify their material in three ways: using a selfclassification Rating Tool designed by OFLC and cocreated with industry; by using an OFLC approved and accredited system to selfrate content; and by submitting material to the FVLB. Further information about the Amendment Bill is available from the Departments website. OFLC will be undertaking new activities related to regulating CVoD content. The CVoD related activities are outlined in Table . Funding for the costs of these activities is needed. Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentActivity Description Maintenance and enhancements of the selfclassification Rating Tool and systems support self classification. Maintaining and enhancing the technical interface. Maintaining and enhancing infrastructure. Audit and or review of self classification outputs. Regular audit by OFLC of selfclassification outputs and processes to ensure the Rating Tool or a CVoD providers systems are being used correctly. Regular review by OFLC of selfclassification systems and processes to ensure the Rating Tool or a CVoD provider system are operating consistently and being used correctly. CVoD provider engagement. Approval of a system to selfrate content. CVoD provider training in use of selfclassification Rating Tool and in New Zealand classification standards for other approved provider based systems. Dispute resolution. Public information and inquiries. Public enquiries and complaints regarding CVoD classifications, ratings and content. Internal services (overheads). A contribution to overhead costs (accommodation, depreciation, administration) will be applied to each of the CVoD related activities. Estimates of the costs to operate the classification system Overheads (accommodation, depreciation, administration, and executive salaries not directly attributable to OFLCs classification or information activities) represent OFLCs main expenditure. Overall, OFLCs largest expenditure item is personnel. In , it cost OFLC . million to carry out its statutory functions. OFLC completed a restructure during which reduced its costs as far as practicable while maintaining its ability to meet its statutory obligations. OFLCs workforce reduced by percent as result of the restructure. OFLC now operates with full time staff. Current fee levels are causing OFLC to project ongoing deficits. There is also the need to take into account the costs associated with OFLCs new activities related to regulating CVoD material. OFLC has identified additional funding needs of approximately million over the three years from to . These costs arise from forecast volumes related to existing classification activities and new activities related to CVoD material. Part II of this consultation document, Options for funding the classification framework, provides options for funding these costs. Estimated costs for OFLCs existing classification activities Forecast revenue and expenses for OFLCs current classification activities are summarised in Table . The forecast revenue is based on OFLCs current charges and assumes usercharges from DVD classification will continue to decline over time. Table excludes income and expenditure for CVoD activities. Table : OFLCs CVoD related activities Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation document Revenue Crown Appropriation , , , Usercharges Other revenue (including interest income) Total revenue , , , Less expenses Personnel , , , Operating Depreciation Total expenditure , , , Net operating surplus(deficit)() () () Net profit(loss) () () () Estimated OFLC costs for CVoD activities OFLCs estimated costs for its CVoD activities are based on establishing the activities required for regulating CVoD content and providers, and projected volumes for each activity. A breakdown of the estimated costs per method of classification are provided in Tables . Appendix C has the detailed estimated costings. All costings are based on the following approach and assumptions: Projections of CVoD classifications were arrived at using historical data for CVoD classifications prior to mid, before a legal ruling determined that online content was not subject to the Classification Act, and observations of trends in the CVoD market. A projected total of , items are expected to be submitted for classification in , comprising films and series averaging episodes. The costs for each method of classification are based on detailed estimated costings of the activities involved. Fixed costs are allocated between different methods of classification in proportion to the number of items classified by each. The costs in Table (classification of CVoD items by submitting content to the FVLB) do not factor in the current operating deficit of that system. The costs in Tables are based on percent of providers submitting content to the FVLB for classifying their CVoD items; percent using the OFLC Rating Tool; percent using an inhouse Rating Tool approved by OFLC. These percentages were arrived at on the basis of preliminary discussions with the sector. They are likely to change as patterns of actual usage are established. If more or fewer providers use a channel than anticipated, the costs to be recovered will decrease or increase in that channel. Any subsequent charges that are designed based on the costs could be tailored according to the type of media, for example a series, film or advertising material. excludes additional funding agreed for OFLC to respond to increased demand following the Christchurch terror attacksTable : OFLCs forecast income and expenditure Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentTable Activities, estimated OFLC costs for submitting content to the FVLB to classify (channel ) Activity , Assessing items submitted for classification , Public information and inquiries , Provider engagement , Overheads , Total , Number of items classified Cost of classification per item Table Activities, estimated OFLC costs for using OFLC Rating Tool (channel ) Activity , Maintenance and enhancements of the Rating Tool , Audit and review costs , Public information and inquiries , Provider engagement , Overheads , Total , Number of items classified , Cost of classification per item Table Activities, estimated OFLC costs for using inhouse Rating Tool (channel ) Activity , Maintenance of OFLCs systems to interface with providers inhouse Rating Tool, Audit and review costs , Public information and inquiries , Provider engagement , Overheads , Total , Number of items classified , Cost of classification per item Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentTable Activities, estimated OFLC costs for submitting content to the FVLB to classify (channel ) Activity , Assessing items submitted for classification , Public information and inquiries , Provider engagement , Overheads , Total , Number of items classified Cost of classification per item Table Activities, estimated OFLC costs for using OFLC Rating Tool (channel ) Activity , Maintenance and enhancements of the Rating Tool , Audit and review costs , Public information and inquiries , Provider engagement , Overheads , Total , Number of items classified , Cost of classification per item Table Activities, estimated OFLC costs for using inhouse Rating Tool (channel ) Activity , Maintenance of OFLCs systems to interface with providers inhouse Rating Tool, Audit and review costs , Public information and inquiries , Provider engagement , Overheads , Total , Number of items classified , Cost of classification per item Cost implications for the sector and organisations eligible for special rates There are cost implications for the Government and all submitters of media content for classification arising from all of the options presented in this consultation document. For CVoD providers, there are likely to be costs arising from establishing the systems and processes to comply with the requirement to classify CVoD content before it is screened. Information about how providers will manage additional costs will help inform final funding decisions. If your business is small and emerging, or you are a charitable organisation arranging film festivals, how you manage the implications from additional costs may be different to how a large established international provider treats additional costs. An estimate of CVoD income in New Zealand is that it generates revenue of million annually from New Zealand based subscribers. OFLCs CVoD related costs are estimated to be approximately . million annually. This is less than percent of the annual CVoD income from New Zealand based subscribers. The exact costs that an individual industry provider incurs will depend on the cost recovery selected by the Government. Feedback submitted as part of this consultation will help inform the Governments decisions about cost recovery. Responses to additional costs may include reducing the media content available to view in New Zealand and passing on some costs to consumers. Additional costs may impact on your ability to continue to provide services or activities. This estimate is based on the number of New Zealand based subscribers to Netflix, Sky TV, Lightbox, Vodafone TV, Youtube Premium and Amazon Prime in . http:www. roymorgan.comfindingsnetflixfoxtelstanyoutube amazonfebruary . QUESTION : What are the implications for your business or activity arising from additional costs For example: would you conduct your business or activity differently, would it affect the content your business offers, or would additional costs be transferred to consumers Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentPart II Options for funding the classification framework In Part II, we are seeking your feedback on three costrecovery options for OFLCs classification activities and two funding mechanisms. Costrecovery options Option : full costrecovery from usercharges; Option : no costrecovery from usercharges and the Government meets all costs from OFLCs classification activities; and Option : partial costrecovery from usercharges and Government funding. Funding mechanisms Option : usercharges; andor Option : a levy. Table Principles for assessing options Principle Comment Effectiveness How well does the funding option achieve the Reviews objective Does it produce any unwanted consequences Efficiency The services provided by OFLC are produced to the required standard at the least cost. Transparency means operating in such a way that it is easy for others to see what and how many activities OFLC is carrying out, why, and at what cost. It implies openness, communication, and accountability. Equity and fairnessThis criterion asks whether stakeholders will be treated fairly and reasonably under the options being tested. Simplicity Is the costrecovery option easy to understand and work with for stakeholders Is it administratively simple and cost effective to administer Stakeholder engagementHave stakeholders been involved in the process of informing the Governments decision QUESTION : Are there other objectives or principles that the Department should take into account when deciding which option and the level of any charges to progress What principles will be used to assess the options The principles in Table were developed using The Treasurys Guidelines for Setting Charges in the Public Sector and the Controller and Auditor Generals advice, Charging Fees for Public Sector Goods and Services . These principles have been used for a preliminary assessment of the options outlined in Part II. A full assessment of the options will be conducted using the results from this consultation. These principles are embedded in the discussion of options that follows. A summary of options assessed against principles is provided as Appendix D . Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentCostrecovery options Which OFLC costs are covered by the costrecovery options The costrecovery options discussed below refer only to the costs of Commercial classifications, including the costs of CVoD classifications. Classifications in this category make up approximately percent of OFLCs current annual budget (an estimated . million in ). For the purpose of this consultation and the setting of any subsequent charges, the following costs will be met by the Crown and are not included in the costrecovery options: Crown classifications; OFLCs information services, including a proportion of research costs; and fee waivers for the purposes of cultural benefits. The rationale for this approach is that the New Zealand community is the principal beneficiary of those activities not included in costrecovery proposals. Considerations of effectiveness, equity and fairness indicate that the Government should bear the costs involved, which make up approximately percent of OFLCs current annual budget (an estimated . million in , not including the funding agreed by the Government in September for OFLC to respond to increased demand for its services following the Christchurch terror attacks). Costrecovery for current Commercial classifications The current approach to funding Commercial classifications was established in . It involves the Crown and submitters sharing the costs. The options below step back from the current approach and ask: who should pay for current Commercial classifications, and how much each party should pay Who benefits from current Commercial classifications, and how much A key question in considering costrecovery options for classification is: who benefits Considerations of equity and fairness in particular suggest that the main beneficiaries should meet the costs, although a number of other factors (for example, ability to pay) may need to be taken into account. New Zealands classification system creates significant benefits for distributors, consumers, and the wider community. Rating systems are widely used by commercial distributors, whether or not there is any government involvement. Rating systems provide information which helps to define and promote the distributors products. By doing so, they help consumers make informed choices. Consumers value rating systems for the information they provide. The wider community benefits from rating systems, particularly because they help to protect individuals from the harm which arises from people viewing material that is inappropriate for their level of maturity. If the viewer doesnt have the psychological resources needed to take a healthy perspective on what they see, they may suffer personal harm or inflict harm on others. Government involvement in the provision of a New Zealand classification system reflects the fact that the community as a whole prefers a rating system that is different for example, more stringent, more informative, than what would be produced as a result of private arrangements between distributors and consumers. Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentIncentives to keep costs low While equity and fairness may suggest that the Government and the sector should pay for the costs of classification, quantifying respective benefits can be challenging and may also be complicated by other considerations. The activities of distributors give rise to the risk of harm from media content, indicating that their share of the costs of classification should reflect this. Conversely, our classification system only exists in its present form because this is what the community wants, which supports the view that the Government should take responsibility for meeting the costs of the system. Any contribution to funding from the sector may produce benefits in terms of incentivising the provider to minimise costs. New Zealand distributors display a keen awareness of the cost of classification and a preference for those costs, or at least their contribution, being kept as low as possible. The degree of distributor influence on our systems cost efficiency will be enhanced by making the operations of OFLC as transparent as possible, through continued, regular review and setting of charges. Other evidence for different approaches to funding New Zealands classification system There is evidence that private distributors would prefer to use their own systems rather than participate in the official New Zealand system (suggesting that distributors may need to incur net costs to meet the requirements of the New Zealand system). However, this evidence is fragmented. Applications for CVoD classification fell significantly after a legal ruling which said that CVoD content was not covered by the Classification Act. Nevertheless, some distributors such as Google and Sony have continued to voluntarily submit CVoD items for classification. The fact that the sector and the community receive benefits from classification does not dictate what approach should be taken to costrecovery. For example, the federal Australian equivalent to our For example, a major distributor of CVoD material submitted items to OFLC for classification in the months leading up to August . The same distributor has submitted no items since the legal ruling.classification system is largely funded by the sector through classification fees and the British equivalent is percent sectorfunded. By comparison, the New Zealand sector is currently paying approximately percent of the costs of OFLC activities. Past patterns of funding for the New Zealand system also offer minimal guidance about how responsibility for the cost of the system should be divided between the Crown and the sector. Classification costs overall have varied over the years, as has income from the sector. Options for feedback Options discussed in Tables focus on the potential roles of the sector and the Government in funding current Commercial classifications. Comments on the advantages and disadvantages of individual options are principlesbased. The scenarios included in the tables are intended to be illustrative only. They do not represent a recommended approach, although all can be supported by principlesbased arguments. For example, a split of costs between the Crown and the sector can be justified as a pragmatic solution in the absence of evidence to support an alternative approach. In , for example, distributors paid for per cent of the cost of Australias National Classifications Board. The Board operates on a qualified full cost recovery basis, recognising that in some circumstances, for example because of a policy rationale, full cost recovery may not be appropriate. Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation document Table Option existing classification activities Option : Full costrecovery from submitters for costs arising from classification activities covered by the existing Regulations This option applies to DVDs, films in theatres, some games and booksmagazines Financial impact A large percentage increase in the costs to submitters: percent from across the sector if submitters pay for the full cost of their applications, an increase in total annual revenue from fees from , to . million ( estimates). Advantages Costs are recovered from submitters who are major beneficiaries of classification and whose activities give rise to the risk of harm from some types of media content. Disadvantages The community receives benefits from classification over and above the private benefits to submitters but would not pay for the benefits it receives. The market for physical media material is in decline; an increase in fees would have negative impacts on some in the sector because their ability to pay andor pass on costs is limited. Some DVD distributers may cease trading, reducing consumer choice. Others may evade classification. Some film festivals may not be able to afford increased costs, even with a waiver, reducing the variety of material available. Implementation Transition to full costrecovery could be: implemented as a oneoff increase; or phased in over two or three years this option would produce budget shortfalls in the period leading up to full costrecovery, which would need to be funded. Sample scenarios (assumes that fees are increased by percent to recover the full costs of classification from submitters)A distributor applies for classification of fulllength films per year (paying full fees): pays a total of , in fees, an increase of ,. A distributor applies for classification of five games per year (paying full fees): pays a total of , in fees, an increase of ,. A film festival committee applies for classification of fulllength films (receives a percent fee waiver): pays a total of , in fees, an increase of ,. Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation document Table Option existing classification activities Option : No costrecovery from users. The Government meets all the costs arising from classification activities covered by existing Regulations This option applies to DVDs, films in theatres, some games and books Financial impact An increase in the costs of classification to the taxpayer from . million to . million, an increase of . million, or percent. The sector would no longer pay a contribution (thirdparty contributions for are currently projected to total ,). Advantages Recognises that the classification system only exists because the community wants to ensure that its preferred amount and type of classification is provided. Disadvantages Users in the sector would pay less than the costs they create. Inequities may be created if partial or full costrecovery is sought from CVoD providers. It is likely that a shift to full Crown funding would not be opposed by the sector, suggesting that it could be implemented as a oneoff increase (with the new funding level being reviewed periodically). The figures cited do not factor in funding received by OFLC in for responding to increased demand for its services following the Christchurch terrorist attacks. (see Table ). Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation document Table Option existing classification activities Option : Partial costrecovery from usercharges and Government funding This option applies to DVDs, films in theatres, some games and books Financial impact The financial impact of this option depends on the percentage contribution from each party ( split: percent from the Government and percent from the sector). Advantages Broad industry acceptance of a mixed costrecovery system. This approach recognises that both the sector and the community receive benefits from classification. Users pay the costs they give rise to. Disadvantages Challenges in finding an evidential base for the right mix of public and private funding; not getting the right mix means that for both parties, payments and benefits received are not aligned. Implementation Transition to new charging regime could be: implemented as a oneoff increase; or phased in over two or three years. Sample scenarios (assumes fees are set to recover percent of the full costs of classification from the sector)A distributor applies for classification of fulllength films per year (paying fees): pays a total of , in fees, an increase of . A distributor applies for classification of five games per year (paying fees): pays a total of , in fees, an increase of . A film festival committee applies for classification of fulllength films (receives a percent fee waiver): pays a total of , in fees, an increase of . QUESTION : What is your preferred costrecovery option for OFLCs existing classification activities and why Option : Full costrecovery from submitters Option : No costrecovery from users. The Government meets all costs arising from OFLCs classification activities covered by existing Regulations Option : Partial costrecovery from usercharges and Government funding Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentQUESTION : If option is your preferred option, do you agree with a split between the Government and the sector If not, what proportion of costs should Government and the sector pay QUESTION : What impact would the cost implications in the scenarios under each option have on your business or activity Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentDiscounted rates for costrecovery (waivers and reductions) This section addresses the question: should reduced rates of costrecovery apply to certain groups and classification activities At present, certain categories of distributor and classification activities qualify for lower rates of cost recovery. Current Regulations give the Chief Censor wide discretion to reduce or waive fees. For example, fees can be reduced for special interest groups and charitable organisations, and up to percent of the fee can be waived in situations where the charging of the full fee would be unreasonable, unfair or unduly burdensome. In terms of volume and income foregone, these provisions are mainly applied to film festivals and groupings of films and DVDs. Film festivals may have up to percent of classification fees waived on grounds of the cultural benefits to the community arising from their activities. Publications submitted as a group are required to pay only one classification fee, even though multiple items (for example, a box set of DVDs) are involved. The grouping provision recognises that classifying a group of similar items (for example, multiple episodes of a television series) takes less time than classifying the equivalent number of unrelated items such as films, and that the full fee applied to groups of DVDs and some films such as groups of short films would be unduly burdensome. The level of fee revenue forgone under current waiver and reductions provisions is projected as , in . Table Waivers and reductions Waivers and reductions Financial impact Waivers and reductions currently impact on the amount paid by submitters for classification services. A film festival, for example, may pay to have one film classified. This represents a reduction of from the standard fee. Projected income foregone in through cultural benefit waivers is approximately ,, or percent of the shortfall in revenue for that year. The operation of waiver and reduction provisions affect the quantum of costs that must be recovered either from those who dont qualify, or from the Crown. Advantages Waivers and reductions recognise that some media content provides significant cultural benefits and the cost of classifying some items are lower than for others or would otherwise be unduly burdensome for some providers. Disadvantages If the sector has to pick up the costs of concessions relating to cultural benefits, crosssubsidisation would be involved (crosssubsidisation can be associated with inefficiency, inequity and lack of transparency). Challenges in quantifying cultural benefits of media content, with associated risks of overpayment or underpayment. The current waivers and reductions system involves significant handling costs for OFLC, the FVLB and distributors. Implementation A system of concessionary rates could be developed for CVoD classification. If the present system of concessionary rates is retained no implementation issues. QUESTION : Do you agree or disagree with concessions being offered in circumstances where media content has significant cultural benefits, or in circumstances where there are lower administrative cost than others Please tell us why you agree or disagree. Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentQUESTION : Do you have any suggestions for an appropriate concession rate or rates QUESTION : Do you think concessions should be offered for CVoD classification If so, why Costrecovery for OFLCs CVoD activities This section addresses the question: who should pay for OFLCs CVoD related activities, and how much should each party pay The arguments for Crown versus sector funding of CVoD classification are similar to those for funding classifications under the existing Regulations. The funding approaches chosen for the traditional media such as DVDs, games, films in theatres and CVoD content therefore need to be consistent. Any difference between the two approaches would need to be clearly justified. The options discussed below assess whether the Crown, the sector, or a mix should fund the classification system. Options for feedback The CVoD costs, estimated fees and levies are estimates and should be treated as indicative only. The funding levels ( percent and percent costrecovery) chosen for scenarios are illustrative and do not represent a preferred solution. We are seeking your views on the level of costrecovery. Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentOption : Full costrecovery for OFLCs CVoD related activities Financial impact Most CVoD distributors would go from not using, and not paying for, New Zealand classifications to a costrecovery regime that reflects their share of the responsibility for providing New Zealanders with accurate, consistent consumer information. Advantages Costs are recovered from submitters who are major beneficiaries of classification and whose activities give rise to the risk of harm from some types of media content. Users pay the costs they give rise to. Disadvantages The community receives significant benefits from classification over and above the private benefits to submitters, by way of harm reduction and increased information to support consumption choices but would not pay for the benefits it receives. Implementation Transition to full costrecovery could be: implemented as a oneoff increase; or phased in over two to three years (this option would produce budget shortfalls in the period leading up to full costrecovery, which would need to be funded). Sample scenarios A distributor who applies for classification of CVoD items per year Distributor who uses the present classification system pays , in fees. Distributor who uses the OFLC Rating Tool pays , in fees. Distributor who uses an approved inhouse Rating Tool pays , in fees.
Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Some local government legislation specifies that public notices must be placed in newspapers.
Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Nature and scope of our functions Te hua me te momo o mtau mahi
The IaaS panel agreements will expire in and . It is recognised it will take
The Inspector General of Intelligence and Security provides independent oversight of the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service and the Government Communications Security Bureau. The Inspector General can investigate complaints against the intelligence agencies.
The cloud infrastructure is provisioned for open use by the general public. It may be
These age differentiations will introduce new age discrimination into the relevant Acts. Officials have not been able to identify evidential or policy arguments that are sufficient to justify, under section of the NZBORA, the limits on the right to be free from age discrimination.
To enable systemwide transformation and tackling of deeper barriers to adoption of
WICS supporting material required investment ( slide ), https:www.dia.go vt.nzdiawebsite.nsfFilesThree waters reform programmefilewics supporting material required investment.pdf Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia Figure .: New Zealands asset gap according to WICS
We do not have accurate numbers because the RegistrarGeneral is not directly involved. However, we are aware of such applications (around two each year) since . ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Page of Further policy decisions are required, which we will provide advice on in April Determine the process for children and young people . Children and young people can change the sex on their birth certificate using the Family Court process. We recommend replacing the Family Court process with a selfidentification process for children and young people. Children and young people are high users of birth certificates as a form of identity as they often do not have entitlement or access to a driver license or passport. It is important that they can feel safe using their birth certificates and feel accepted for who they are as they grow up. . The policy changes required to introduce selfidentification for children and young people are more complex and potentially controversial. We have not had time to fully assess the implications and impacts of introducing a selfidentification process for children. We are still considering the requirements for: . parent al or guardian consent for example, ensuring we have policy around children or young people who are unable to gain consent, are wards of the state, or have multiple parents or guardians ; . differentiating requirements for different age groups the current drafting creates a separate category for or year olds that may add unnecessary complexity to the process ; and . requiring letters of support, for example from a health professional further work is required to determine what assurances we would be seeking through a letter of support and who would be best placed to provide that. . We are seeking an inprinciple agreement to introduce a selfidentification process for children and young people to change the sex on their birth certificates. We will provide further advice on the details set out above in April. Further consideration is needed on establishing a limit to the number of changes allowed . The select committee recommended only allowing for one change of gender (except under special circumstances). Agency feedback clearly argued against this, particularly for children, as gender is a deeply personal choice that can change over time. We will consider this issue further and provide advice in April. Selfidentification has implications for Corrections regulations . Birth certificates are rarely used to determine someones sex or gender. There is only one instance we have found where changing sex on a birth certificate would have implications for other legislation. Sex on a birth certificate will not override agency discretion to determine the accommodation of prisoners . The Department of Corrections makes decisions about the accommodation of male and female prisoners. Currently, if a birth certificate is supplied a placement must be made in accordance with the sex listed on the certificate (unless the person seeks a review of the determination). Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Page of . When the select committee considered the Bill, an issue was raised about the implications of a selfidentification process on accommodating transgender prisoners. There was a concern that removing judicial oversight could potentially enable prisoners to falsely claim a gender identity to change where they are placed. . We are working with officials at the Department of Corrections on this issue.
agree that the minimum age for voting in alcohol licensing trust elections will be: EITHER . lowered to yearsold;
agreed that for non residential property, the owner is responsible for paying the water services entity in full for all charges, unless:
agreed that the minimum age for voting in alcohol licensing trust elections will be separated from the voting age for othe r local elections, and remain at yearsold;
agreed that the voting age for alcohol licensi ng trust elections be kept at ;
agreed to crossparty consultation being undertaken on the draft of the Bill attached under SWCSUB;
approve the Electoral (Lowering the Voti ng Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill for introduction, subject to the final approval of the government caucus and sufficient support in the House of Representatives;
authorised the Minister of Local Government to make decisions on subsequent matters arising from legislative drafting that align with the overall policy intent;
https:www.temanararaunga.maori.nz
invite the Minister of Internal Affairs to write to the petitioner enclosing a copy
invited the Minister of Internal Affairs to write to the petitioner enclosing a copy of the
note that the directive on the use of InfrastructureasaService is out of step
note that the Government Response must be presented to the House by August ;
noted that the directive on the use of InfrastructureasaService is out of step with
noted that the Minister of Local Government intends that legislative amendments arising
noted that the government response must be pr esented to the House by August ;
noted that, of the million Three Waters Infrastructure Investment and Service Delivery Reform Programme tagged operating contingency established in June and expiring on July CAB MIN ., . million has not been drawn down, of which . million is unallocated;
Providing a Benchmark Understanding of Digital Identity Among New Zealanders, DINZ (Apri l )
monthly stakeholder meeting with Taituara, April
. . . U N C L A S S I F I E D Ministry for Pacifc Peoples Ministry for Women Ministry of Foreign Afairs and Trade Veterans Afairs Te Tumu Paeroa The Mori Trustee The RegistrarGeneral of Births, Deaths and Marriages WorkSafe New Zealand. The Death AISA will also allow for a broader range of organisatons in New Zealand to have a ccess to DIA held death informaton as members of classes of partes to the Death AISA. The classes of partes are: charitable enttes credit unions, friendly societes, incorporated societes, partnerships, registered limi ted partnerships, and registered New Zealand companies Crown enttes independent advisory commitees and statutory supervisory authorites independent statutory bodies intermediaries iwi organisatons and other Mori organisatons local authorites mortality review commitees occupa tonal regulatory bodies public tertary insttutons registrars trustee corporatons. I have approved some minor technical amendments to the AISA since the draf was consi dered by Cabinet in November . These include: Alignment of the language of the AISA with the Order in Council which hasbeen dr afed by Parliamentary Counsel Ofce. An additonal purpose of informaton sharing has been included to clearlyartc ul ate one of the reasons for sharing death informaton is to prevent an individual having to provide a copy of a death certfcate. This was implied aspart of the previous drafing of the AISA, and does not imply any new policy. Strengthening the provisions to make it explicit that intermediaries are notprov i ded authority under the Death AISA to share informaton received with their clients and must instead have an alternate authority in accordance withthe Privacy Act . No further policy decisions are required. Page of ikudgtnr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
. Annual Report of the Ministry for Ethnic Communities
. Apply online with endorsements
. As advised in our briefing to you of December we identified two broad options
. Description of personal information to be shared between
. Description of personal information to be shared between agencies
. Exemptions to information privacy principles
. Exemptions to information privacy principles . .
. I seek Cabinets agreement that the total cost of . million is provided through a
. If the regulator is always required to consider cost to suppliers in compliance and
. In response to the Havelock North Drinking Water Inquiry recommendations, the Act
. The Department enforces a large number of enactments, and as such the objectives of particular prosecutions may vary depending on the purpose of those enactments.
. The first step was taken to align these processes when the Government repealed the
. The public service or public services facilitated
. The public service or public services facilitated .
. You have requested further advice on how the legislation can enable structures such as
. agree that . million is to be reprioritised through fiscally neutral
. note that the Minister of Local Government intends that legislative amendments
. lower the minimum voting age for all local elections (except for elections under the Sa le and Supply of Alcohol Act ) to years old;
. the charge is for trade waste, in which case the liability attaches to the person creating the trade waste;
.. Customer Single View
.. Customer Single View .
... searching DA Information to ensure NZSIS does not create or amend an
. retain the current approach that the minimum candidacy age will be the same as the minimum voting age fo r each type of local election (i.e. years old for elections under the Sale and Supply of Alcohol Act and years old for all other local elections); and
. there is a lease on the property meeting the conditions of section ()(b) of the Local Government (Rating) Act , in which case the liability attaches to the lessee;
.. Verifying relationships and connections between
.. Verifying relationships and connections between individuals .
. have a commencement of March (which can be brought forward by up to one year if implem entation can be completed sooner).
. the land is Mori freehold land, in which case provisions replicating section of the Local Government (Rating) Act should apply (section will also be replicated);
.. Prepopulation of personal information in an
.. Prepopulation of personal information in an application .
.. Promoting additional Identity Services
.. Promoting additional Identity Services . . .
.. Preferred communication channels
.. Preferred communication channels . . .
.On July Cabinet agreed that an Order in Council (Order) be prepared
.Particular information that may be accessed
.The LGFA s customer base and number of guarantors a re unaffec ted by the three waters
The paper makes assumptions about the availability of new funding in future
The proposals in this paper have no impacts relating to Te Tiriti o Waitangi the Treaty of Waitangi beyond the impacts on all eligible and yearolds. The proposal will increase the populati on eligible to enrol on the M ori roll through the Mori Electoral Option. Population Implications
agreed that land transferred to water services entities should become rateable;
. I consider that combining these two legislative processes into a single Bill would use
The proposals in this paper do not have any legislative implications.
The proposals in this paper have impacts on the and yea rold population. Statistics New Zealand estimates for t he third quarter of show there are approximately , and yearolds living in Ne w Zealand. Not all of these will necessarily meet t he other voter eligibility cr iteria (such as being a New Zealand citizen or permanent resident), but the majority likely will.
agreed that water services entities will not be liable for rates on their pipes which run through land that they do not own (an interest in land);
. The cost of running the engagement on the attached discussion document will be met
Councillors . The Inquiry heard councillors face some of the same challenges and confusion as mayors, including a lack of clarity around their role. Councillors can perform many of the same visible community leadership and communication tasks as mayors and need to have clarity about their governance role in an emergency. They are expected to provide reassurance to communities and dispel misinformation, as well as identify highlevel community needs, serve as a conduit between communities and emergency management, and liaise with other groups. Controllers . The operational response to an emergency is led by a controller. Controllers provide advice to the person responsible for declaring an emergency. Following a declaration, they become responsible for the operational response. This includes directing and coordinating the use of personnel, information, services, and other resources. They have powers of evacuation, requisition, tasking, entry, and transport control. . The roles and accountability lines of the local controllers and group controllers are confusing and convoluted, reflecting their multiple reporting lines and layers of accountability. For example, group and local controllers are appointed by a CDEM Group and employed by the relevant local authority. Group controllers are often employed by a regional council, while local controllers are usually a local council employee with controller responsibilities in addition to their substantive role. This means controllers are accountable to the CDEM Group for their emergency management responsibilities but also have an employment relationship with the local authority that employs them. In addition, the Director of Civil Defence Emergency Management has a role in monitoring the performance of group controllers. In a national state of emergency, the Director and the National Controller can set the priorities to be followed regionally and locally. . In general, controllers with senior management roles had more effective working relationships with mayors and the council. The Inquiry heard they were able to lead more effectively and exert sufficient authority with senior managers and elected officials. In addition, controllers need to take account of the management of future consequences of their decisions, which means they need to understand budgetary management and the ongoing responsibilities of elected officials. . The Inquiry recommends that council chief executives become their organisations primary controller, having overall responsibility and oversight for emergency management responses. Chief executives should set their response approach with the mayor or chair and retain overall accountability for the councils emergency response. However, they can delegate operational responsibility to other controllers. We saw this approach used by the Tararua District Council and consider this should be standard practice nationally. Along with additional clarity around roles and accountability, support pathways for controllers are needed to build their emergency management skill set, including command, crisis leadership, and operational training. Image: Search and Rescue and Surf Life Saving New Zealand carry out a rooftop rescue in Hawkes Bay. Source: NZ Police CHAPTER : LEADERSHIP, ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsClarity of official roles helped the Tararua District The Mayor of the Tararua District, Tracey Collis, reflected that the councils clearly defined roles for staff and officials helped the district operate smoothly during Cyclone Gabrielle. Her role as Mayor and spokesperson remained unchanged from a nonemergency arrangement, while the Chief Executive took on the role of primary controller. The Chief Executive set up the arrangements for managing the emergency, before delegating to an experienced staff member to lead the ongoing emergency response. Relevant staff are trained in CIMS and use it on a regular basis on a range of incidents. This means they are familiar with roles and can move smoothly into an emergency management response. Elected councillors know they are responsible for ensuring twoway communication between communities and the emergency operations centre. During Cyclone Gabrielle, this helped communities to have accurate and regular updates on the emergency and response. Clarity of roles between local and regional tiers of response . There also needs to be clarity about roles and accountabilities between the regional and local levels, including group controllers, CDEM Groups, regional council chief executives and chairs. This lack of clarity reduced the regional oversight of hazards and muddled effective implementation of the emergency management system. Clear and empowered roles across the system . In addition to local governments responsibilities for emergency management, many other groups and organisations have vital roles to play to support the safety and wellbeing of people and communities. These include iwi, emergency services, health and disability services, lifeline utilities companies, search and rescue groups, government agencies, goods and services suppliers, and community organisations. . During the severe weather events, there was a lack of clarity about the specific roles of some groups and whether the response made best use of the expertise and resources available. Knowing where the key skills are in the community is essential to build readiness and trust. This includes having connections around food chain logistics, water infrastructure, engineering needs and equipment provision. . To ensure CDEM responses can draw on capability and capacity from groups and organisations around the country during an emergency, relationships and agreements should be set up ahead of time. Two specific areas where capability can be better recognised, and roles clarified, are set out below. More information about the role of iwi Mori in the system, and the need for this role to be better recognised and supported, is in Chapter . VOICES Utilise New Zealand Defence Force capability . The NZDF made a valuable contribution during Cyclone Gabrielle, carrying out a wide range of tasks including planning, and were also embedded in incident management teams. At the height of the emergency, the NZDF had over , personnel involved in the response. We heard from communities that these personnel were a reassuring presence. . The NZDF is recognised as a support agency in the National CDEM Plan. There are provisions for it to provide appropriate support to government authorities during an emergency, while maintaining its other operational outputs and missions. The NZDF has highly skilled personnel across a broad range of areas including intelligence, logistics, planning, operations, and aviation and temporary forward airbase coordination (see Chapter ). . The NZDF expressed frustration in relation to the lack of clarity about its roles in the response. It noted to the Inquiry, a lack of clarity in command and control in the locally led and nationally supported emergency response framework created confusion, at times it was unclear who was the lead and responsible. It also felt there was a mismatch between councils and communities expectations of the NZDF and what the NZDF had the capacity to provide. . The NZDF also told the Inquiry it received short notice requests for support when Emergency Coordination Centre (ECC) shifts were ending, as ECCs were not set up to be staffed for long duration operations. It noted this could have been mitigated through a formalised handover process that, after a predetermined period of time, staff could have seen staff deployed from around New Zealand to support the local response. . There needs to be greater clarity and agreement prior to an emergency about what roles and types of tasks the NZDF is equipped to carry out, and the process for making the most of the resources available. The Inquiry recommends the Government establishes a stronger mandate for the NZDF to provide emergency response specialist skill sets during severe weather events and other emergencies related to natural hazards and infrastructure failure. We also recommend establishing the NZDF as the agency responsible for temporary forward airbase coordination in severe emergencies. Shift leadership for the welfare function . Welfare services support individuals, whnau, and communities to be ready for, respond to, and recover from, emergencies. There are many groups that coordinate or deliver welfare services. Specific welfare responsibilities and processes are set out in the National Civil Defence Emergency Management Plan and CIMS. The provision of welfare services begins in response and continues into recovery. N ew Zealand Defence Force, Response to Cyclone Gabrielle, NZDF website, n.d.. https:www.nzdf.mil.nzmedia centrestorycollectionsresponsetocyclonegabrielle National Civil Defence Emergency Management Plan Order , Section (). CHAPTER : LEADERSHIP, ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events. Welfare services are delivered at the local level and coordinated and supported at CDEM Group and national levels. At a national level, there are a range of agencies with a role to play. NEMA is responsible for leadership of the welfare function, supported by other agencies with specific areas of responsibility. For example, the Ministry for Primary Industries (MPI) is the support agency for animal welfare, and the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) is the agency responsible for the coordination of the provision of temporary accommodation for people who must leave their homes as the result of an emergency. . It is currently confusing to understand which agencies and organisations are involved in undertaking welfare activities, both during and immediately after an emergency. In particular, it can be unclear how the leadership of the welfare function and delivery of welfare services fit together. There is an opportunity to strengthen national and local levels of service delivery, clarify interdependencies, and increase coordination to ensure the model for providing services is sustainable and coordinated. . There are some challenges with NEMA being the agency responsible for the coordination of all welfare services. It has a wide remit, making its capacity for carrying out this function limited. It currently takes a narrow view of welfare which does not include the wide range of welfare needs and considerations for communities. This means that gaps are filled by other agencies. . There is an opportunity to better utilise the expertise and capacity already in the public service to carry out leadership of welfare coordination. MSD already has a regional presence and memoranda of understanding with service providers across the country. The Inquiry heard that MSD has the capacity to respond at scale across multiple geographic regions using systems already in place. MSD also has strong links to government agencies and iwi and can distribute funds at speed in an accountable manner. . The Inquiry recommends that MSD is given responsibility for the leadership of welfare coordination. This responsibility would not replace the need for locally led provision of the welfare function but would support a joinedup approach and help to build system capability. With this shift of leadership responsibility to MSD, it may be appropriate that NEMA retains some specific areas of responsibility for welfare delivery. By removing leadership of welfare coordination from NEMA, capacity would be freed up for NEMA to focus on readiness and response, as outlined in Chapter . Embed health and disability services . Health and disability providers have a role at a local, regional, and national level before, during, and after emergencies. This role includes ensuring the continuity of care for patients, supporting surging demand for physical care, providing psychosocial and mental health services, and leading the response for secondary health impacts. The role of health and disability services continues into recovery and beyond. The health and wellbeing impacts of emergencies on people and their communities are longlasting. For example, in February , a year after the severe weather events, Hawkes Bay Health announced a million health and wellbeing package for Hawkes Bay residents affected by Cyclone Gabrielle. . Health and disability services have a legislated role in emergency management, but the Inquiry heard there is a need to strengthen the way this role is carried out and integrated into the wider system. The chief executive or a senior member of a provider of health and disability services is required to be a member of the CEG in each council or unitary authority. Relationships in the health and disability sector (including Health New Zealand) and other CDEM agencies need to be well established before an emergency event. This was not always the case during the severe weather events. The Inquiry heard there was a particular breakdown of the relationship between Health New Zealand and the Hawkes Bay CDEM Group Emergency Coordination Centre during Cyclone Gabrielle, which led to a critical gap in situational awareness for health officials. . We note at the time of the severe weather events, there was transitional change happening in the health sector, following the establishment of Health New Zealand in July . This meant some key national and regional roles were still being developed. This timing impacted the organisations ability to respond, and the relationships and communications with other organisations were not as strong as they should have been. In its postincident report, Health New Zealand noted to the Inquiry that, Participants were in new roles with new responsibilities, and it can be assumed that some internal and external relationships between individuals and departments were not as strong or as organised as they would have been otherwise. In some cases, relationships were formed during the emergency response itself. . We consider that the role of the health and disability sector needs to be strengthened and better integrated into the emergency management system prior to the next emergency event. This includes ensuring the roles and responsibilities of sector organisations are clarified ahead of time and they have strong relationships with local CDEM Groups. Systemwide leadership and stewardship . Emergency management is a complex system with many people and organisations, each with differing and intersecting roles and responsibilities. For it to work well, there needs to be a steward of the system that has line of sight across all CDEM agencies, can provide support for locally delivered approaches, and gives assurance that the different parts are all performing as they should. . NEMA has responsibility for monitoring and assurance that CDEM Groups and people with responsibilities under the CDEM Act, such as lifeline utilities, have the systems in place to carry out their emergency management responsibilities. However, this function is not currently being undertaken or resourced by NEMA due T e Whatu Ora Health New Zealand, Over m Of Health Funding For Hawkes Bay As Anniversary Looms, Scoop, February . https:m.scoop.co.nzstoriesGESovermofhealthfundingforhawkesbayas anniversarylooms.htm CHAPTER : LEADERSHIP, ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Eventsto other priorities. . The Inquiry considers NEMA needs to significantly increase its focus on system assurance, including identifying improvements local councils, agencies, and other organisations can make to build their emergency management capability and fulfil their responsibilities. This will support NEMA to set standards and build a national picture of how well the emergency management system is working, and where there are gaps and good practice. The Inquiry considers NEMA should have sufficient authority and powers to enable it to fulfil its assurance function. Guidance to the sector CDEM Groups and councils should ensure they have internal clarity on how they manage their joint accountability responsibilities for controllers. A strong, effective CEG is critical to managing the response to an emergency. CDEM Groups need to ensure their CEG members are practised in large scale emergency scenarios and have a strong understanding of each others roles. The NEMA website contains useful guidance for mayors and councillors that helps clarify roles and expectations before, during and after emergencies. CIMS is the official framework for effective coordinated emergency management across all responding agencies, and its structure should be embedded into councils way of working. As part of readiness planning: CDEM Groups need to ensure all essential workers are identified during readiness, and systems are set up for their easy identification as essential workers once an event has happened. This includes residential care workers and utility repair crews, councils need to consider how they prioritise training for staff with emergency management responsibilities, and plan how to manage staff fatigue during an emergency, and relationships should be formalised (for example, through publicly available memoranda of understanding) between government agencies, local and regional councils, CDEM Groups, communities, iwi Mori, Sector Coordinating Entities, critical infrastructure entities, and local businesses. Chapter : Management of the immediate response Overview . The actions taken in the lead up to an emergency, and the first hours after it starts, are critical in establishing how effective the response will be. It is often in this window that decisions are made about declaring an emergency, warnings and information are sent to communities, emergency centres are activated to provide shelter and services, and evacuations and rescues take place. . Overall, a piecemeal approach was taken during the immediate response to the severe weather events many aspects lacked coordination and situational awareness was poor. The Inquiry found that some immediate response activities failed to perform as needed in Auckland for the Auckland Anniversary heavy rainfall, and in Hawkes Bay for Cyclone Gabrielle, exacerbating the trauma felt by communities. Many people we heard from, particularly in Auckland and Hawkes Bay, felt abandoned and let down by their council and the immediate CDEM response. Some councils pushed back against this perception. The Inquiry observed that there is a striking disconnect between communities and their councils in some places. . Councils and communities that had carried out effective readiness planning activities prior to the events were better able to respond under the challenging circumstances. To ensure an effective response to future emergencies, CDEM agencies need to make coordinated, timely decisions, supported by accurate information and common operating procedures. Communities need to be empowered to act based on clear, timely warnings and information and have resources to support themselves for days or weeks after an emergency. . Over the course of the Inquiry, most of our engagements with communities pertained to the immediate response. We heard repeatedly about the trauma people faced, especially in the first few days of the emergency. The disconnect described in Chapter between the views of some community members and those of many CDEM agencies, highlights the need for education, better relationships between communities and councils, and more focus on readiness throughout the system. . There is significant room for improvement of readiness activities to support the management of the immediate response to significant emergencies. However, it is important to note the severe weather events subject to this Inquiry happened at a speed and scale that would have resulted in significant damage and stress regardless of how well the immediate response went. CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsDefinition of immediate response . For the purposes of this report, the immediate response to an emergency starts when notice is given that an event is likely and preparatory actions begin. The immediate response finishes when the threat to life has passed and the situation has reached the point of stability. Rescued from floodwaters in Pakowhai Pakowhai, between Napier and Hastings in Hawkes Bay, sits between the Tutaekuri and Ngaruroro rivers. When Cyclone Gabrielle hit, the rivers burst their banks, flooding the fertile plains and submerging houses. On the morning of February , Pakowhai resident Lynley Halpin checked the local Facebook page and saw the bridge on the Tutaekuri River at Vicarage Road in Puketapu had washed away at . Lynley and her husband, Dave, headed up the road to check on their horses, only to be faced by a wall of water. Having received no warning, Dave went to help his parents who lived nearby, while Lynley did what she could do to prepare their home for flooding. Dave soon found he was unable to return home through the flooded roads. With still no warnings issued, Lynley became aware that the opportunity to evacuate had likely gone, and her neighbours wouldnt know about the imminent risk. She alerted as many neighbours as she could and opened the gates to give her horses the best chance of survival. At , as floodwaters rose, Lynley and her teenage daughters made their way onto the roof of their twostorey shed and waited to be rescued. Just after , they saw the horses swim past them in the flooded waters below. Lynley and her daughters were finally rescued by a jet boat at . Image: Lynley Halpins horses survived being carried away through floodwaters. Source: Dave Halpin Thi s is based on the definition of immediate response in CIMS rd edition, August . VOICES Esk Valley community action central to the response During the early hours of , the Esk River burst its banks. A flash flood swept through the valley, submerging properties under seven metres of water, and burying homes in silt up to roof lines. Local LandSAR and Hawkes Bay Coastguard volunteers, Jessie Kyle and Henry van Tuel, were on the frontline of the emergency response from the early hours of the morning until late at night. They had to quickly adapt to the constantly changing situation and felt they were responsible for potentially lifechanging decisions. Jessie reflected that the situation was worse than any scenario that could have happened. It would have helped to have access to situational information to direct where people needed to go and what hazards to avoid. Training exercises with all the agencies that I would work with in an emergency prior to the flooding would have been really helpful to build those relationships and understand how we can work together as a team, before we needed it. Henry agrees. There are so many things that I think everyone who helped respond to the emergency needs to be praised for, and the sense of our community working together was phenomenal. Communication is key in any crisis, and at times we struggled with receiving the right information at the right time. Ensuring were all working from the same page within a cohesive structure like CIMS, using trusted and checked information flows, is vital. On day three of the emergency response, with power still out and people isolated, Quent Swayn attended a meeting at the King George Hall, along with over a thousand other locals. Quent quickly found himself taking a leadership role when it became clear there was no clear plan or way forward for the Esk Valley. I looked at the skills and resources we had across our community. We started mapping out where we knew people were, what they needed, and how we were going to get supplies in. We knew we needed some coordination. Other community members also stepped up. Paul Simmonds used his local knowledge to evacuate and rescue people, deliver supplies, and check on people who were cutoff. Paul worked closely with emergency management response teams like the NZDF and Police to help them navigate their way around the Valley. He expressed frustration that some response teams from outside Esk Valley did not draw on community members local knowledge. Those of us that have lived here for a while know this valley like the back of our hand. We knew the best way for the army Unimogs to get through to isolated people, but they didnt always take our advice which was really frustrating, when we knew people needed help urgently. There was no time to waste, but thats what it felt like happened. VOICES CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsThe public needs accurate, timely warnings and information . The public needs to receive timely, accurate warnings and information they can understand and act on during an emergency. For a severe weather event, this includes information about potential weather and flooding, whether evacuation is required, infrastructure issues, areas to avoid, and where people can go if they cannot return or stay home. . Public warnings and information about severe weather events primarily come from: local or national CDEM who provide hazard warnings (with NEMA providing information to CDEM to share with their communities), and MetService, which is the sole governmentcontracted provider of severe weather warnings and gives orange or red warnings depending on the severity and expected impact of events. . Warnings can be communicated through a range of channels including broadcast and print media, official websites, social media, and the Emergency Mobile Alert system. The Public Information Management function of CIMS manages information for the response and shares relevant messages with the public through a range of channels. . The Inquiry notes the transmission of warnings and information during Cyclone Gabrielle was made much harder by widespread internet and mobile outages. Consequently, people in unaffected parts of New Zealand often had a better idea about the severity and impacts of the events as they transpired than those in many affected areas. Warnings were insufficient and ad hoc in places . The Inquiry heard that the public considered the CDEM warnings, notifications, and provision of information were insufficient in Auckland during the Auckland Anniversary heavy rainfall and in Hawkes Bay during Cyclone Gabrielle. Issues included an ad hoc approach to delivering evacuation advice and notices (for example, notices to prepare for evacuation or to evacuate), advice being issued too late to be safely actioned, and advice not being translated into languages relevant to the affected communities. Evacuation alerts were unclear, hard to interpret, and didnt really indicate the seriousness of what was happening and what could happen the notice didnt communicate the damage and danger. Hawkes Bay resident . In some places, peoples expectations regarding warnings and what they received were mismatched. For example, some communities were expecting Emergency Mobile Alerts or tsunami warning sirens to signal action was required, but these were not deployed. In most cases, there were no manual backup systems for circumstances where communications systems were compromised to the level experienced during Cyclone Gabrielle. . Having emergency support information and communication only in English made a challenging experience even harder for mainly RSE scheme workers supporting orchardists in Hawkes Bay. With information not available in other languages, some RSE workers did not understand what was happening, what they needed to do and where they needed to go during the crisis. . The Inquiry heard about the challenges faced by the Hawkes Bay CDEM Group when making decisions and communicating warnings in an event of the scale and speed of Cyclone Gabrielle. To issue evacuation warnings to floodaffected residents, they needed credible information to justify the decision, the means to issue the warning in an effective manner, and confidence that evacuation was the safer course of action. In Hawkes Bay, the forecast rainfall for Cyclone Gabrielle was much less than what fell, and the systems that capture rainfall data and water levels (and which inform emergency management staff to a change in the situation) were compromised by loss of internet and power outages. The loss of internet service and power outages also compromised some channels through which warnings or notifications were communicated. . Beyond the warnings themselves, weather forecasts sometimes included technical or unclear language. For example, terms like in year storm and atmospheric river were used without further clarification about what it meant in practice. Simplifying this language would be useful for the public and those working in emergency management. Some council staff the Inquiry spoke with did not understand what this terminology was trying to convey. Image: Severe flooding in Northland. Source: NZ Police CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsThe Tairwhiti regions DJ Bevan Chapman DJ Bevan Chapman hosts the Bevan for Breakfast show on More FMs Gisborne station. During Cyclone Gabrielle he stayed on air to keep Tairwhiti communities informed while telecommunications were down. He was the only announcer on air for four days, sleeping on a mattress on the floor of the station. Bevan read out locally specific civil defence media releases, business updates, and community messages that were passed under the door of the station. By doing so, he provided information and comfort to locals who had no other way to get information about what was happening. He worked closely with council staff who were based nearby and arranged for the Mayor to speak on air regularly. Bevan received a Civic Award from Gisborne District Council, which called him a radio legend and said he was instrumental in keeping Gisborne locals connected, informed and after Cyclone Gabrielle wiped out telecommunications. A comprehensive and consistent approach to warnings is required . The Inquiry considers councils should issue warnings and public information to communities as early as possible when a potential hazard is identified. A comprehensive warning system is needed that is flexible enough to cover most, if not all, natural hazards, with a consistent approach to warnings across the country. The Inquiry considers this should be developed as a priority for implementation across the country. . A comprehensive warning system should see a consistent but locally tailored approach implemented across the country. It should enable messages to be sent as early as possible after a potential hazard has been identified, have one source of truth from authorities and be clear on what actions are required from community members. Trusted messengers like mayors, chairs, councillors and community leaders should be utilised to share messages, which should be translated into languages spoken in the community. There needs to be a range of channels for sharing warnings, including welltested manual systems to use if communications are down. There also needs to be an ongoing national public education programme to ensure people know what kinds of warnings to expect and the actions required in severe weather events. . Consideration should be given to ensure regular, locally specific updates are available. Nationallevel radio broadcasts provide vital advice and information. However, communities also need specific detail about what is happening in their local area. The Inquiry heard from some communities that they were often not provided with detailed regular information. Mis and disinformation sometimes filled that void, particularly via social media. For example, rumours spread that the Waitangi bridge in Hawkes Bay had collapsed, and that people were trapped or injured, when in fact the bridge was closed for a safety assessment. It is important to have a reliable source of truth for information about local impacts. The Public Information Management function needs to proactively provide truthful and regular information to the media and others, and correct rumours if needed. VOICES The amount of misinformation spread, largely via social media, was destructive, unhelpful and genuinely counterproductive. Hawkes Bay resident . While an effective warning system is important, the Auckland Anniversary heavy rainfall showed that the onset of a weather event can be rapid and hard to forecast. In other emergencies like an earthquake, there may be no warning at all. Therefore, councils need to ensure their communities understand the local hazardscape and know what to do ahead of time so they can take immediate action. Timely council decisions support communication with the public . An effective warning system relies on timely decisionmaking, including decisions about whether to declare a state of emergency and if evacuation is required. To support this, decisionmakers need accurate and current advice and information. . There are many readiness activities that need to be carried out before an emergency that can support timely decisionmaking during an event including: having maps of evacuation areas prepared and ready to be deployed when needed, and ensuring the mayor or delegated person is clear on the process for declaring a state of emergency and the key considerations they need to make. . We heard from several councils that the requirement for a physical signature on the declaration of emergency paperwork led to difficulties, especially in situations where travel was unsafe. The process for declaring a state of emergency should be reviewed to ensure it can work smoothly in all circumstances. This includes when a physical signature is not practical to obtain, or telecommunications are not working. . There are a range of other factors throughout the highly interconnected emergency management system that impacted councils ability to make decisions and provide warnings to the public in a timely manner. This includes the capability and capacity issues outlined in Chapter and the need for accurate weather and hydrology information outlined later in this chapter. Empower the public to act on information they receive . Warnings are more effective if people know ahead of time what information they can expect and how to act on it. To ensure people are ready and able to act in an emergency, planning is required by councils, CDEM Groups and communities during the readiness phase. This can include ensuring councils and communities are ready to standup civil defence and communityled centres when required, that people have plans for their families and pets, and that people have the resources to leave their homes and get to safety when necessary. People may CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Eventsface barriers to taking the recommended action, which should be recognised and planned for where possible. Build community resilience and preparedness . During a largescale emergency, whnau, neighbours and the wider community will need to rely on themselves as the first line of response. There are not enough resources for the formal system to individually support everyone, and some critical infrastructure takes time to be reestablished. . A year on many impacted communities have a strong desire to build their own emergency resilience and readiness plans. This communityled activity should be supported and encouraged. CDEM should lean into this readiness work as they have technical information and specialist knowledge to assist community plans to be as robust and as effective as possible. In some remote communities these plans need to include back up electricity and communications systems (to replace phone and internet) for situations where infrastructure damage means communities need to rely on their own resources for extended periods of time. . Communities will need to have the resources to look after themselves if goods and services are not available for a prolonged period. The ontheground response will be more effective if there are strong relationships between neighbours and within communities ahead of time. This includes people having awareness of who in the community can contribute different resources, like generators and tools, and skills like first aid expertise. . The Inquiry heard that emergency pods were extremely useful to the marae and communities that had them. The pods included provisions like tents, water treatment supplies, generators, medical supplies, and food for people for up to four weeks. Several agencies commissioned pods, including Te Puni Kkiri (TPK), Whnau Ora, and MPI. For some iwi, including Ngti Porou and Ngti Kahungunu, these were established as part of their planned readiness activities. Image: An example of an emergency pod. Source: EPOD New Zealand Limited . However, not all communities will have the resources and capacity to lead readiness work or afford individual preparedness supplies. There needs to be coordinated, funded readiness initiatives to ensure people who cannot afford to build up emergency food and water supplies, and people who are displaced from their homes, are appropriately supported in an emergency. Revisit the threeday rule . Many people affected by Cyclone Gabrielle had three days worth of food and water available at their homes, reflecting the guidance people are familiar with. However, these supplies alone were not always sufficient, either because communities were cut off from supply routes for longer periods of time or because people were displaced from their homes where supplies were kept. . The experience from Cyclone Gabrielle demonstrated that the commonly understood advice to have three days of emergency food and water available may not be sufficient and needs review. The Inquiry considers at least one week of emergency provisions is more appropriate for urban areas and two weeks for more remote or rural areas. Preplan centres to meet specific community needs . In an emergency, councils and communities can establish centres for people who cannot return home or need to access information and welfare services. While these are referred to by many different names, there are two main types, as set out in the Director of Civil Defence Emergency Management Guideline: Civil Defence Centre: facility established and managed by CDEM to support the community. These may be used for any purpose depending on the needs of the community. This includes providing public information, evacuation and welfare or recovery services. Communityled centres: communitybased organisations may establish and operate other centres that offer support to the community. These centres do not fall under the direction of CDEM but may operate alongside. . During the severe weather events, a combination of Civil Defence Centres and communityled centres were established. The Inquiry recognises the contribution of iwi and many other community and faithbased groups who established centres across affected areas to meet the specific needs of their communities. In particular, the communityled centres established by many iwi at marae provided substantial value to communities and the response more broadly. Pacific community groups also stepped up to provide culturally appropriate support to affected people in their communities, at times leveraging relationships with agencies and using lessons from their COVID response. More information about the role of iwi in providing communityled centres is in Chapter . F or example, the NEMA website states Aim for a minimum of three days food and water on its web page about emergency supplies. https:www.civildefence.govt.nzcdemsectorconsistentmessagesreadinesshave emergencysupplies M inistry for Civil Defence and Emergency Management, Welfare Services in an Emergency Directors Guideline for CDEM Groups and agencies with responsibilities for welfare services in an emergency, . https:www.civildefence.govt.nzcdemsectorguidelineswelfareservicesinanemergencywelfareservicesinanemergencydirectorsguideline CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsOur own whnau and community opened wardrobes, linen cupboards, pantries, water tanks and anything we could to support anyone in need. Waipatu Marae Response Lead, Hawkes Bay . The Inquiry heard there were a range of issues with Civil Defence Centres in places, including: some were planned in areas that became flooded, meaning delays in being able to support evacuated people some were not adequately provisioned to meet community needs, including those of diverse communities the needs of elderly people and those with dementia and other complex health needs were not properly planned or catered for, and delayed establishment of centres due to staff not being available to open them. . The Inquiry found serious shortcomings in Auckland Emergency Managements planning of Civil Defence Centres prior to the Auckland Anniversary heavy rainfall. The Auckland Flood Response Review report, completed by Bush International Consulting, found that some potential Civil Defence Centre locations on a preprepared list were not sorted for specific hazard contingencies. Some were clearly unsuitable locations in a flood or storm event. The Inquiry considers the failure to identify suitable locations for centres ahead of a potential flooding event was unsatisfactory. However, we recognise that the flooding that occurred including the flash flooding was unprecedented and unpredictable. The Inquiry heard from Auckland Council that sites that had not experienced flooding in previous events were compromised. . We note that Auckland, as a super city with one unitary council, has a strongly centralised model of local governance which differs from other parts of the country. While local boards provide governance at a local level, the councils emergency management function was heavily centralised at the time of the Auckland Anniversary heavy rainfall. Local Police noted there was no sense of them knowing the ground. Theyve lost local knowledge, such as what schools were flooded and if the roads were flooded. This was because the control has been centralised. It is the Inquirys view that Aucklands local boards should be funded and supported to develop and implement their community plans in more meaningful ways. B ush International Consulting, A uckland Flood Response Review: Independent External Review of Events, January , , March . https:ourauckland.aucklandcouncil.govt.nzmediajepotlnaucklandfloodresponse reviewjanuary.pdf . Selection and preparation of Civil Defence and communityled centres need to be thought out as part of council and community readiness activities. This includes planning locations that are appropriate in a range of emergencies and ensuring people know about them. It also includes ensuring that resources and people are available to activate them at short notice. . In addition, a onesizefits all approach is not appropriate, and plans need to be in place for centres that meet the specific cultural and practical needs of communities. For example, this could include planning for the needs of elderly or disabled people who require specific care, ethnic and faith communities, or workers hired under the RSE scheme. We also heard examples where the CDEM response did not consider how best to serve the Pacific community and should have leveraged the communitys expertise when developing emergency response plans, to ensure the emergency response would be accessible and effective from a cultural perspective. . Councils have responsibility for establishing Civil Defence Centres in their area. Their planning should include iwi, community and faithbased groups, retirement communities, and members of the public. Councils should enable a network of communityled and Civil Defence Centres that can be scaled depending on the emergency. This will allow communities to make the most of resources and skill sets and empower groups to act. It will also ensure the specific needs of local communities can be identified and planned for. Mngere evacuation centres in the Auckland Anniversary rainfall event The Mngere Memorial Hall was initially set up by Auckland Council as a Civil Defence Centre to provide information and services to the community, with opening hours between am and pm. Local Councillor Alf Filipaina quickly realised this was not suitable, and repeatedly asked Auckland Emergency Management to provide hour access to the centre as a place for people to shelter, as homes were flooded and uninhabitable. Auckland Emergency Management did not extend the opening hours. Two days after the flooding, Councillor Filipaina and Local Board Chair Tauanuu Nick Backulich, with support from Pacific health leaders, converted the venue into an emergency response centre with space to house those who were displaced. Demand was so high that on the third day the response centre was moved to a larger venue at the Mngere Moana NuiaKiwa Pool and Leisure Centre. Eventually, Auckland Emergency Management provided funding for water coolers, food, and air conditioning. The centre provided clothes, food, and help from support services, including government agencies like the MSD and Kinga Ora. It also provided a place to sleep for people whose homes had flooded. MSD brought in its own generator for computers, and employees worked for days at the centre. VOICES CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsInformation for decisionmakers Improve real time situational awareness for authorities . The Inquiry heard that a lack of situational awareness and timely, complete, and consistent information contributed to problems with the immediate management of the response in some areas. CDEM agencies and responders require timely and accurate information about what is happening across their areas to respond quickly and effectively. NEMA also needs information across all affected regions so it can fulfil its role in either supporting or directing the response and keeping Government ministers and the Prime Minister informed and . . Reliable situational awareness comprises endtoend capacity for data collection, reliable and efficient data communication, common platforms for data processing and interaction, and trained staff with capabilities to interface with this data and interpret it for the relevant purpose. A common operating picture a continuously overview compiled from local, regional, and national data shared between integrated communication systems is a vital part of enabling situational awareness needed during an emergency. The Inquiry considers the system design does not currently enable this kind of coordinated information collection, interpretation, and sharing. . Currently, NEMA and councils collect information in a range of ways, resulting in information sets that are not easily compared or collated. They then use a range of different operating platforms to collate data and information to form operating pictures of what is happening in districts and regions. This approach may be adequate for smallscale locallevel events but causes difficulties when trying to piece together an understanding at a regional or national level. For example, the differences in how welfare needs assessments are made across regions means information cannot be easily aggregated to aid planning or to build a national picture. . The lack of coherence across the system also made it more challenging for EMAT personnel, brought in from outside affected areas, to access the information they required to hit the ground running. For example, a South Island CDEM group manager was seconded to act as local controller for part of the Far North District Councils Cyclone Gabrielle response. Despite being an experienced controller, he found it difficult to use the Far North District Councils operating model and reporting frameworks as they were different from what he was used to. It took time to get up to speed and be effective in the role, and he had to lean more on the local team. . We heard that NEMA made regular requests for information from regional and local CDEM coordination centres and authorities to meet the legitimate information needs of Ministers and other decisionmakers. Without a common operating picture, information had to be repeatedly requested rather than being provided automatically. We heard these requests swamped many regional and local coordination centres, drew capacity from elsewhere and affected their ability to manage their crisis response. Image on left: Search and Rescue check a house in Hawkes Bay. Source: NEMA Image on right: A team coordinating response efforts. Source: NEMA . The Inquiry strongly recommends the Government invest in a common operating platform for CDEM agencies and NEMA to use. A common operating platform is the technological infrastructure or system used to support the creation, management, and dissemination of the common operating picture across different stakeholders involved in the response. There should be central funding for this platform, and its use should be legally mandated. . The common operating platform needs to be supported by consistent information management practices and capabilities across the sector, while supporting privacy and intellectual property requirements. This would ensure councils have equitable access to effective systems as well as supporting good situational awareness at a multiregional and national level. Where possible and appropriate, relevant information from emergency services including Police and FENZ should be incorporated into the system. . It is out of scope for the Inquiry to provide specific advice about the type of technology and supporting information standards that would make up a common operating platform. However, we suggest the Government considers scaling systems that have already been developed and adopted by some councils, rather than building a new bespoke technical system. . Establishing a common operating picture was a recommendation of the Ministerial Review into Better Responses to Natural Disasters and Other Emergencies. The then Government agreed to invest in the technology to ensure a fitforpurpose common operating picture, however, the Inquiry understands that a business case developed in was not progressed. CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsBuild a fitforpurpose National Crisis Management Centre . Allofgovernment emergency responses are led from the NCMC, situated in the subbasement level of the Beehive. The Inquiry considers the NCMC is not fitforpurpose, with issues including ineffective physical layout, size, communications, and connectivity. . The Ministerial Review into Better Responses to Natural Disasters and Other Emergencies recommended the development of a new NCMC facility. We endorse the recommendations and would like to see progress in the actions agreed by the Government in its formal response. The backup National Crisis Management Centre. Source: NEMA . There is a backup arrangement for a NCMC to be stood up in Auckland if the Wellington venue is inoperable. The Inquiry considers these provisions are inadequate and will not meet requirements. The back up arrangements only provide for computer hardware and desks, in a venue that requires four hours notice to set up. In addition, there are insufficient trained staff ready to standup an alternate NCMC at short notice. . The Inquiry recommends an appropriate backup NCMC centre is established in a location other than Wellington. This does not need to be a purposebuilt facility. There is the potential to use an established regional centre that can quickly take on the role of the NCMC if required. For example, Hamilton has an established centre and is in a lowhazard location. In addition, we consider that councils should, where possible, consider investing in purposebuilt emergency operations centres. Provide and use enhanced weather and hydrological information . In an emergency, people leading councils emergency management responses need to make a wide range of decisions and communicate key information to the public in an everchanging environment. To make good decisions and communicate effectively, councils require timely, accurate information about hazards and their potential impacts, and the capability to interpret this data and apply it to the local context. For weatherrelated emergencies, weather and hydrological information are particularly important. . A high number of emergency events in New Zealand are due to extreme weather and flooding. Weather and hydrology forecasts are two of the most important types of information councils need to inform their decision making. Local expertise and capability are needed for accurate interpretation of forecasts, and assessments of localised impacts. . Councils receive information about weather and nationallevel hydrology from a variety of sources which may include MetService, NIWA, and others including private weather modelling companies. This information is analysed and translated by councilemployed hydrologists, who can provide context about locallevel impacts on river levels, tidal impacts, runoff, and flooding risks. Some councils have access to better or more accurate information sources than others, including different access to forecasting from MetService and NIWA, depending on the level of information they purchase. . During the severe weather events, there were issues with access to accurate information to inform decisionmaking. All participants in the weather forecasting system significantly underestimated the amount of rain for the Auckland Anniversary heavy rainfall, including MetServices severe weather warnings. MetService advises us that this reflects weaknesses in all known weather prediction models (both local and international) during the event and limitations in scientific understanding of this type of weather system. . The United Nations World Meteorological Service stresses the importance of the single authoritative voice of a national meteorological service. At the time of writing, there is a review underway led by the Treasury and MBIE to identify and recommend the optimal arrangements and allocation of responsibilities for the weather forecasting system. To improve the quality of information that councils receive and ensure they can make well informed decisions, the Inquiry recommends that all councils NEMA and relevant government agencies have access to the best available weather and hydrological information. . In addition to adequate weather forecasting, the design of the emergency management system needs to provide for sufficient specialised hydrologist expertise with locallevel knowledge. Supporting and providing access to a nationallevel networked pool of hydrologists is likely to alleviate pressure on individuals and improve the quality of skills and resources nationwide. Hydrologists need to be sufficiently integrated into civil defence emergency management systems to ensure there is an effective feedback loop between hydrologists and CDEM responses. CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsHourly Actual Hourly Forecast Wind Adjusted () Cumulative Actual Cumulative Forecast Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb :Hourly Rainfall Depth (mm) Cumulative Rainfall Depth (mm)Possible (wind adj.) Measured Forecast Time Forecast Rainfall Total mm Actual Rainfall Total mmfrom Feb , am to Feb , am ( hours) Rainfall total likely underestimated due to wind effectsAn example of the difference between forecast, possible, and actual rainfall during Cyclone Gabrielle taken from rainfall measurements at Glengarry, Hawkes Bay Hydrotel not reportingHYDROTEL OUTAGE Source: Hawkes Bay Regional Council Having the most accurate and uptorainfall information is imperative for decisionmakers in emergency situations. The graph shows the speed and scale of rainfall in Cyclone Gabrielle over a hour period, and the difference between what was expected and what eventuated, coupled with an outage of a key system that captures rainfall data. The lack of access to accurate information had an impact on the quality of decisions that were able to be made. Managing the impact of lawlessness . The Inquiry heard multiple reports of lawless and antisocial behaviour in Hawkes Bay following Cyclone Gabrielle. These included looting of businesses and homes, fights breaking out between members of the public and patched gang members, and individuals using standover tactics towards customers exiting supermarkets. We heard that looting was a particular issue in some rural areas. At least one business had to hire additional security to prevent further looting from its premises. Those affected told us these experiences caused additional trauma for people in what was already a very stressful situation. . We were advised that the Police were not anticipating people to take advantage of the situation as quickly as they did. During an emergency, Police decide how to prioritise deployment of local resources between emergency service activities and business as usual activities. In the early days of Cyclone Gabrielle, due to the loss of communications infrastructure in Hawkes Bay, Police did not have a clear picture of the scale of theft and antisocial behaviour. As the need for additional resourcing, Hourly Actual Hourly Forecast Wind Adjusted () Cumulative Actual Cumulative Forecast Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb Feb :Hourly Rainfall Depth (mm) Cumulative Rainfall Depth (mm)Possible (wind adj.) Measured Forecast Time Forecast Rainfall Total mm Actual Rainfall Total mmfrom Feb , am to Feb , am ( hours) Rainfall total likely underestimated due to wind effectsAn example of the difference between forecast, possible, and actual rainfall during Cyclone Gabrielle taken from rainfall measurements at Glengarry, Hawkes Bay Hydrotel not reportingHYDROTEL OUTAGE Source: Hawkes Bay Regional Council Having the most accurate and uptorainfall information is imperative for decisionmakers in emergency situations. The graph shows the speed and scale of rainfall in Cyclone Gabrielle over a hour period, and the difference between what was expected and what eventuated, coupled with an outage of a key system that captures rainfall data. The lack of access to accurate information had an impact on the quality of decisions that were able to be made. Managing the impact of lawlessness . The Inquiry heard multiple reports of lawless and antisocial behaviour in Hawkes Bay following Cyclone Gabrielle. These included looting of businesses and homes, fights breaking out between members of the public and patched gang members, and individuals using standover tactics towards customers exiting supermarkets. We heard that looting was a particular issue in some rural areas. At least one business had to hire additional security to prevent further looting from its premises. Those affected told us these experiences caused additional trauma for people in what was already a very stressful situation. . We were advised that the Police were not anticipating people to take advantage of the situation as quickly as they did. During an emergency, Police decide how to prioritise deployment of local resources between emergency service activities and business as usual activities. In the early days of Cyclone Gabrielle, due to the loss of communications infrastructure in Hawkes Bay, Police did not have a clear picture of the scale of theft and antisocial behaviour. As the need for additional resourcing, particularly in relation to missing persons and community reassurance, became clear, police mobilised additional staff into the region. . Police have advised that, for future similar situations, proactive deployment of staff for community reassurance will be an early priority. The Inquiry endorses this approach. Improving coordination of rescue efforts . There was a significant search and rescue component to the response to the severe weather events. People involved in these efforts included personnel from professional and voluntary organisations, and members of the public. The Inquiry notes the risk involved in undertaking rescues and the importance of preserving the safety of rescuers and those being rescued. . Professional and volunteer organisations that may be involved in search and rescue operations during an emergency include Police, FENZ, search and rescue organisations, Surf Lifesaving New Zealand, and NZDF. During Cyclone Gabrielle, the rescue requirements were particularly broad and complex, with land, water and air rescue expertise all required. Many community members who did not have a formal role in the response also assisted in the rescue effort, using boats and helicopters to bring people to safety. . Due to the many organisations involved and the different protocols and processes they followed, there was some duplication of effort and lack of clarity around priorities. The Inquiry considers there needs to be clarity of roles and responsibilities at local, regional, and national levels, in relation to the search and rescue function. Where possible, there should be common processes in place and shared terminology and national standards for training. In addition, all the organisations with a role to play during the search and rescue operations need to be involved in the CDEM planning and readiness activities. . There is a growing need for specialist flood rescue capability. FENZ has some specialist expertise in swift water rescue that it is developing. Surf Lifesaving New Zealand has some expertise in floodwater rescues that were deployed in the severe weather events. However, as a volunteer organisation, Surf Lifesaving needs the appropriate support to ensure it has the capability and resources to sustainably contribute to emergency efforts. Chapter further discusses the need for funding to be available to reimburse relevant costs that organisations such as theirs incur during an emergency response. Coordination of the aviation response after Cyclone Gabrielle . The aviation response during Cyclone Gabrielle was the largest in the countrys history, and it took place under very challenging circumstances. A rescue operation of the scale seen in Hawkes Bay had not been planned for or practised. Many flights were required to conduct urgent rescues, send crews to repair critical infrastructure, and deliver goods and personnel to affected areas. We heard from CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Eventsa range of people about the management of the airspace and aerial operations. While the operation was ultimately successful, the Inquiry considers it did not go as well as it should. The lack of communications exacerbated the issue, as did a lack of preestablished roles, processes, and planning for this scale of event. Air rescues . A wide range of CDEM agencies were involved in coordinating aviation activity in Hawkes Bay. There was also a significant contribution made by people outside the emergency management system especially for air rescues. . For the CDEM response, FENZ initially undertook the coordination of air rescues and deliveries tasked through the emergency management system, which is outside FENZs general responsibilities. Air rescue coordination was later transferred to Maritime New Zealands (Maritime NZ) Rescue Coordination Centre in Lower Hutt, at the request of the Police and National Controller, with urgent aeromedical response remaining the responsibility of the Hato Hone St John airdesk. . The Rescue Coordination Centres usual focus is on Category search and rescue such as missing aircraft or ship, landbased emergency locator beaches, and offshore searches. The transfer of air rescue coordination to Maritime NZ meant it also took over Category search and rescue operations from Police which is usually a locally coordinated role that includes rescues on land, inland waterways, and closetoshore. Therefore, the Rescue Coordination Centre became the overall lead coordination agency for aviation supporting search and rescue across the country, and in particular in the Hawkes Bay region. They did this for a hour period starting midday on February . . Maritime NZ told the Inquiry that the situation on the ground was incredibly challenging by late morning of February . It noted that urgent rescue needs were at an unprecedented level, communications were severely impacted, and local actions to meet urgent rescue needs were well underway but lacked overall direction and coordination. Maritime NZs Rescue Coordination Centre, with the assistance of other key search and rescue partners, established a process to collect and triage calls for assistance, and then tasked the carrying out of rescues. By late evening on February , the Rescue Coordination Centre was confident all requests for assistance had been actioned. . The Inquiry also heard from those at the forward operating base in the Hawkes Bay, who had a different view of the situation. They told us that the process of transferring airspace coordination responsibility for search and rescue to Maritime NZ also caused a lot of confusion for those in the air and on the ground. Delivery of goods and personnel coordination . In addition to urgent rescues, multiple flights were needed for the delivery of goods and personnel to affected areas and the repair of critical infrastructure. This requires the ability to set up air bases, organise transportation of goods and personnel, and to control and coordinate the flow of urgent supplies that are needed into regions affected by emergencies. In Hawkes Bay following Cyclone Gabrielle, FENZ took on the role of managing temporary forward airbase assets and deliveries, despite this not being part of their core function. . The Inquiry considers that the NZDF should have overall responsibility for establishing temporary forward airbases and for logistics and coordination of deliveries during a large emergency event, and this should be part of readiness planning. There also needs to be clear delineation of roles at a local, regional, and national level, including clear coordination of movement of goods by flight and effective communication between the three levels to ensure it is clear who is the lead at any point. In future, there should also be consideration of the use of all available resources during an aviation response at scale, including the use of fixedwing aircraft where they can be utilised effectively. Review the system to ensure it is effective in an emergency . The Auckland Anniversary heavy rainfall and Cyclone Gabrielle stretched emergency services beyond their ability to adequately respond. During both events, there were more calls than emergency services were able to respond to. In Hawkes Bay, some people could not connect to the calltaking service when outages were experienced across the power and fibre networks. . We heard from many community members in Hawkes Bay that they felt let down by the emergency services response system. They told us that: some calls were not answered by emergency services operators emergency services operators told callers You are on your own people were told help was coming and it never arrived there was no indication given of when help could be expected, and a lack of empathy or information was provided to callers by emergency services operators. . Spark NZ is responsible for the Initial Call Answering Platform, which answers all calls to . It then forwards calls to the appropriate emergency service: Police, FENZ, or Hato Hone St John. Spark NZ advised the Inquiry that , calls were taken between on February and midnight on February . Ninetyfour percent of those calls were answered within seconds, with the longest caller wait time before a response being seconds. Almost of calls directed to Police were answered within seconds. It is apparent that, due to the volume of calls, the capacity of emergency service providers was exhausted and the ability to have a coordinated response was severely constrained. . These issues were further exacerbated as each emergency provider has their own system with no way of integrating or reconciling tasking between them. Police have advised they use a ComputerAided Dispatch (CAD) system where all requests for help and events from the service can be recorded and prioritised. Similarly, each emergency service provider has their own events recorded in their own systems. . The emergency management systems utilised in a civil defence emergency do not have access to emergency service providers CAD systems or vice versa adding complexity to the situation. In Hawkes Bay, requests for help came through many channels: , walkins to both police and fire stations, social media, and through CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Eventsemergency locator beacons, with no systems in place to collate information from these channels. This made it difficult to identify new tasks, such as notifications of missing persons. Those seeking help (and not receiving it) were trying all avenues available to them to get urgent assistance. This saw the same requests going to multiple organisations, including different emergency service providers, and it was not clear which requests were being actioned or by whom. . The Inquirys observation is that the emergency system is complex and confusing. It is difficult to ascertain where responsibility for ownership of the system sits. The problem is not in the disaggregation of calls to Police, FENZ and Hato Hone St John, but rather the lack of interoperability between these systems in a major or severe event. Situational awareness and the ability to respond was compromised leaving many people and communities fearing for their safety and that of their families. . A better system, and improved planning and testing of that system, needs to occur in the readiness phase to ensure it can manage in largescale events. In addition, FENZ, Police, and ambulance services should be able to share information relevant to the emergency response to the maximum extent possible. . The Inquiry recommends the Government commission a comprehensive review of the system to ensure an effective, transparent, and interoperable service that can effectively draw on the resources of all emergency services, even in times of high demand. Any improved system should be able to interface with the common operating platform for emergency management that the Inquiry is recommending. This will ensure the best situational awareness possible in emergency events. Image: Cyclone relief distribution centre at Hastings Showgrounds. Source: NEMA Guidance to the sector Government agencies should take a joinedup approach (coordinated by NEMA) to supporting the readiness needs of communities. Councils should develop an effective needs assessment and registration, with guidance from NEMA, for Civil Defence Centres, using good examples already in use. Councils need to plan and establish Civil Defence Centres that reflect the needs and makeup of their communities. An effective warning system should include consideration of the following components: start as early as possible once a potential hazard has been identified be based on a well understood community plan have one clear source of truth from authorities tell people when to evacuate and where they can go utilise trusted messengers like mayors, chairs and councillors ensure messages are understandable in the languages widely spoken in the community, and use multiple channels with clear plans in place in the case of phone and internet outages. The PIM should ensure all the appropriate public communication channels, including social media channels, are being used and proactively monitored in an event. The roles and responsibilities across search and rescue organisations need to be clarified as part of readiness planning. This includes airspace management and temporary forward airbase coordination in emergency management planning, and scenario and exercise planning. The process for declaring a state of emergency should be reviewed to ensure it can work smoothly in all circumstances. This includes amending the template for declaring a state of emergency to allow for simpler ways of obtaining authorisation. CHAPTER : SUPPLY OF GOODS AND SERVICES AND THE PLACE OF CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsChapter : Supply of goods and services and the place of critical infrastructure Overview . Critical infrastructure like roads, telecommunications and electricity are key components of a wellfunctioning emergency management response. They enable information to be shared, help with resource coordination, support businesses to keep operating, and allow the movement of people, goods, and services. Critical infrastructure systems are complex and interdependent outages in one sector can quickly cascade across the entire system. Source: DPMC D epartment of Prime Minister and Cabinet. Lifting the resilience of New Zealands critical infrastructure, DPMC website, June . https:www.dpmc.govt.nznewsliftingresiliencenewzealandscriticalinfrastructureFragility of an interconnected system Cyclone Gabrielle Landslides Road and bridge collapse Disruption to fuel transportFibre cables cutFlooding Payment services disruptedAccess limited for emergency servicesEmergency services unable to communicate Transport of generators to cell towers disrupted Fuel required for generators Inability to pay for fuelElectricity outages Telecommunications towers lost power Chapter : Supply of goods and services and the place of critical infrastructure Overview . Critical infrastructure like roads, telecommunications and electricity are key components of a wellfunctioning emergency management response. They enable information to be shared, help with resource coordination, support businesses to keep operating, and allow the movement of people, goods, and services. Critical infrastructure systems are complex and interdependent outages in one sector can quickly cascade across the entire system. Source: DPMC Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet. Lifting the resilience of New Zealands critical infrastructure, DPMC website, June . https:www.dpmc.govt.nznewsliftingresiliencenewzealandscriticalinfrastructureFragility of an interconnected system Cyclone Gabrielle Landslides Road and bridge collapse Disruption to fuel transportFibre cables cutFlooding Payment services disruptedAccess limited for emergency servicesEmergency services unable to communicate Transport of generators to cell towers disrupted Fuel required for generators Inability to pay for fuelElectricity outages Telecommunications towers lost power. Aotearoa New Zealands infrastructure is ageing, and much of it is not sufficiently resilient to handle extreme weather or even day to day wear and tear. The Inquiry was told that continued underinvestment in roading and rail makes it more fragile in emergencies. During the severe weather events, there were significant critical infrastructure failures and outages particularly electricity, telecommunications, bridges and roading. This hindered the emergency response and affected community wellbeing. . The impacts of infrastructure failures and outages were exacerbated by insufficient joint readiness planning between CDEM agencies and critical infrastructure entities. Ineffective prioritisation of some critical infrastructure restoration activities led to delays in the timely restoration of power and communications. Gaps in communication meant critical infrastructure providers were at times disconnected from or frustrated by CDEM agencies. The frustration was shared by NEMA during the national state of emergency. . Better coordination and prioritisation of critical infrastructure restoration should be incorporated into response plans. Critical infrastructure entities need to be included in planning and readiness activities. . Organisations must also be prepared to continue their operations until services are reinstated. This includes having strategic plans for emergencies, backup options for power, fuel and communication, and appropriate supplies to fill the gap while network services are down. For example, the New Zealand Lifelines Council suggests having local alternatives to lifelines services at customer sites (e.g., rainwater tanks, barbeque gas bottles, battery packs for cell phones) and at community level (e.g., emergency water storage sites). People and communities also need to have plans in place so they can survive until help arrives. . As part of a robust emergency management system, infrastructure resilience needs to be improved and invested in. These changes are essential to ensure communities can get access to the help, goods and services they need after an emergency, and so businesses can continue to operate and support economic continuity and recovery. New Zealand Lifelines Council, Aotearoa New Zealands Critical Infrastructure: A National Vulnerability Assessment , Edition, . https:www.nzlifelines.org.nzsiteassetsfilesnvapartasummaryvsept.pdf CHAPTER : SUPPLY OF GOODS AND SERVICES AND THE PLACE OF CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsNew Zealands ageing and interdependent infrastructure exacerbates risks . There were many infrastructure failures and outages during the severe weather events, which had compounding and overlapping impacts. For example: In Northland , houses were without power and in the Far North, some households were without power for a week or more. Damage to the North Auckland rail line led to its extended closure. In Auckland , the Auckland Anniversary heavy rainfall led to: multiple road closures due to slips and flooding , homes across the city left without power, and Auckland Airport being closed due to flooding. In Waikato, State Highway A between Kp and Hikuai a key route into the Coromandel suffered significant damage during Cyclone Hale. Hawkes Bay experienced severe and widespread infrastructure failures following Cyclone Gabrielle: the Redclyffe substation failure and other outages left , households without power, some for a week km of stopbanks were breached widespread road closures cut off Wairoa and Napier over bridges were impacted and bridges needed to be completely rebuilt cell sites were out on February , and the Napier wastewater treatment plant was inundated. In Tairwhiti, the Waingake Water Treatment plant and pipes were damaged, reducing the available water to of normal supply. For two days, of the regions cell sites were offline and residents faced widespread power outages. . The power outages following Cyclone Gabrielle were the longest associated interruption to supply that New Zealand has experienced. N orthland Civil Defence Emergency Management, Cyclone Gabrielle and Tai Tokerau Northland Stories of community resilience and messages of support for the rest of Aotearoa New Zealand , . https:www.nrc.govt.nzmedia dqvgudncyclonegabriellestoriesofresilienceuvn.pdf W aka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency,. n.d. SHA Taparahi rebuild, Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency website, n.d.. https:www.nzta.govt.nzprojectsshshathamescoromandelshataparahirebuild Accessed March . H astings District Council, Bridge Information Ng prongo o te ara whakawhiti wai, Hastings District Council website, n.d.. https:www.hastingsdc.govt.nzservicesroadsandstreetsbridgeinformation Accessed March . NZ T elecommunications Forum. . T elecommunications Emergency Forum Cyclone Gabrielle Post Incident Report May , . https:www.tcf.org.nznewstefincidentreportcyclonegabrielle Earthquake Sabotagethird party Common mode failure Wind Space weather Lightning Bushfire Flood Snow Te Awamutu lightning MWhHawkes Bay Snow MWh Cyclone Gabrielle incl. Whirinaki , MWhCyclone Gabrielle excl. Whirinaki , MWhKopuHinuera wind MWhKaipara Harbour wind MWh Half Way Bush .MPort Hills fire MWhNelson floods MCanterbury floods .M Rangitata flood .MCyclone Gita MWhCyclone Cook MWh Central North Island snow MWh Irrigator Waitaki MWhInsulators shot MWh Tekapo snow MWhHawkes Bay lightning MWhPenrose cable fire , MWhKaikura earthquake MWh Waikato lightning MWhpunake Wellington snow MWhHuntly relay design MWhChristchurch earthquakes MWhChristchurch earthquake MWh Tararua lightning MWhForklift flashover MWhthuhu earthwire , MWh Manawat flood MWhSouthdown incident MWh Wairarapa snow MWhHawkes Bay snow MWh Central North Island snow MWhResilience history The bubbles indicate the amount of energy unserved, which is a measure of the energy demand that could not be met due to the event. Where there was no loss of service the cost of the impact is shown. The bubble size is made relative using a standard value of lost load of , per MWh. Source: Transpower . The New Zealand Lifelines Council notes that many of the damaged critical infrastructure assets were already known to be vulnerable. In addition, less well resourced regions tend to have poor infrastructure, making them more vulnerable in emergencies, for example the road networks in Northland and Tairwhiti. . The Inquiry heard from several infrastructure entities that the central government approach to infrastructure lacks coherence. The policy, regulatory, and operational responsibilities are scattered across core public service departments and Crown entities. This includes DPMC, NEMA, MBIE, Ministry of Transport, New Zealand Infrastructure Commission Te Waihanga, and the New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA). The distributed nature of these responsibilities may be appropriate. However, at present, leadership is unclear, and the Inquiry heard that the sector has difficulty engaging with central government without a single point of contact.
A Regulatory Impact Analysis is not required for this paper.
Th e National Civil Defence Emergency Management Plan Order , Section . Th e Guide to the National Civil Defence Emergency Management Plan , Section .. Em ergency Management Bill, Section . Accessed from: https:legislation.govt.nzbillgovernment latestwhole.htmlLMS CHAPTER : FUNDING SETTINGS CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsOverhaul the system for distributing funding to councils . The Inquiry heard from most councils affected by the severe weather events that current processes for accessing this funding are a pain point. In particular, the processes are based on a lowtrust, high compliance model and take up significant staff resources for both NEMA and councils. The claims process includes a review of eligible costs and invoices at a lineitem level, and signoff from the local authoritys chief executive certifying all elements of the claim are true and correct. . Councils spoke of a nickel and diming approach taken by NEMA, with each line item being checked and each expense requiring an invoice, which can be difficult to ensure happens in emergency conditions. Councils told us working out the payments can be an expensive and timeconsuming process, and that this can put strain on already limited resources. The current approach has led to tension in relationships between NEMA and councils, with councils frustrated by the protracted to and fro process required to obtain reimbursement. . A more permissive approach has been taken in oneoff situations, including for the bespoke welfare fund set up for Cyclone Gabrielle. The Inquiry considers funding should move permanently from a model based on reimbursement and tight control of eligibility criteria to a model which enables funds to flow more freely while ensuring accountability of spending. This approach would be particularly appropriate in the first two weeks of any immediate response, rather than during the recovery phase where the amounts involved will be much larger. In March , the Office of the Auditor General guidance on managing public funding in an emergency response or recovery. This could guide future processes for emergency welfare funding. . As discussed in Chapter , NEMA has a broad range of roles with limited capacity, and the Inquiry recommends focusing their responsibilities where most value can be added. The Inquiry recommends the administration of welfare related costs should be moved to MSD as it takes over responsibility for leadership of welfare coordination. MSD already has the necessary systems and capability for distributing funding at scale through its role in distributing Civil Defence funding to individuals. MSD officials have told us they are able to scale further as required. Revisit the criteria for what central government funds Welfare . As noted above, councils can apply for reimbursement of of eligible welfare costs they incur in caring for displaced people. This includes direct costs of accommodating, transporting, feeding, and clothing people who cannot continue to live in their usual place of residence because of the threat to property and personal safety in an emergency. The welfare fund NEMA administers allows response and N ational Emergency Management Agency, Response, other response and recovery claims following an emergency event, NEMA website, n.d.. https:www.civildefence.govt.nzcdemsectorguidelinesclaimsfactsheetsresponse otherresponseandrecoveryclaimsfollowinganemergencyevent Th e Guide to the National Civil Defence Emergency Management Plan , Section .. Th e Guide to the National Civil Defence Emergency Management Plan , Section .. recovery costs of million to be paid in any fiscal year. We note that following Cyclone Gabrielle, a welfare support fund was established, with an additional million of funding to cover costs that were not covered by normal reimbursement criteria. . We heard from councils, iwi, Pacific peoples, and ethnic communities that the criteria for what is reimbursed is restrictive and not sufficiently flexible to ensure immediate community needs can be met in an emergency. For example, the cost of hiring equipment to deliver welfare services could be reimbursed, but the purchase of the same items would not because they become an asset of the council. This can cause unforeseen issues. We were told many times by councils that during Cyclone Gabrielle the demand for generator hire outstripped supply but the cost of buying a generator was ineligible for reimbursement. The Inquiry considers that as part of reconsidering the criteria for welfare funding, Section of the Guide to the National CDEM Plan, should be reviewed in light of experiences during the weather events and to consider allowing for the purchase of capital items up to a maximum amount. . Some councils and iwi also found it frustrating that operational costs are not covered by the strict criteria for reimbursement, despite the significant outlay required to coordinate welfare response activities. These restrictions meant that in some cases, spending on vital response activities were not able to be reimbursed afterwards. . The Inquiry recommends the welfare funding criteria are reassessed to ensure a broad view of welfare is covered, based on a model where organisations are commissioned to meet outcomes. The new approach should allow for flexibility, for example through establishing a commissioning model in the readiness phase. Memoranda of understanding could be used as the method for formalising the commissioning model. Nonwelfare response and immediate readiness . The government will reimburse of other response costs incurred by councils if: the costs meet the appropriate funding criteria, and councils reach a threshold calculated based on their net capital value (this is like an excess and can disadvantage smaller councils). . As discussed earlier in the chapter, the types of costs covered by this funding include temporary repairs to critical infrastructure assets owned by the council like stopbanks and river management systems. . The requirement that councils contribute to this funding was originally put in place to require them to have a stake in maintaining and investing in their assets. However, with the funding pressures many councils are under, we were told some have very little flexibility to initiate significant readiness projects. Th e Guide to the National Civil Defence Emergency Management Plan , Section .. Th e Guide to the National Civil Defence Emergency Management Plan , Section ... CHAPTER : FUNDING SETTINGS CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events. The requirement that councils pay of eligible response costs can lead to regional variations in council spending on response, which can exacerbate inequalities that are already present. For example, larger councils with a larger ratepayer and asset base have access to more funding to pay for response costs and have more ability to absorb costs incurred following an emergency. . The reimbursement model means that some councils need to take out loans to cover the costs incurred before they can be reimbursed. The interest payments on these loans can start immediately. We also heard that councils may incur a range of costs after an emergency that are not in scope for reimbursement under this provision, such as rubbish and silt removal and the repair of local roads. Overall, some councils are not in the financial position to afford the response and recovery costs. One District Mayor has noted, its just too hard on us and were just going to go broke. . The Inquiry recommends that the Government review the settings, criteria, process, and mechanism for funding response costs, to allow funding to flow more freely, with appropriate oversight. Communityled welfare responses . The current system provides government funding for local government or groups (including iwi) that are officially tasked with roles during an emergency. During the severe weather events, many businesses and voluntary organisations also stepped up to provide services for their community without being part of the official CDEM structure. This included helicopter owners providing rescue services and community groups providing meals. . These types of contributions brought significant benefit to the response effort. They also come with costs for the groups involved, even though people provided their time on a voluntary basis. For example, Surf Lifesaving had to replace contaminated wetsuits and other gear that had been used in floodwaters after Cyclone Gabrielle, and private helicopter owners that undertook rescues incurred significant fuel costs. Currently, there are no formalised systems in place for businesses or volunteer organisations to be reimbursed for unforeseen expenses incurred during an emergency to support the wellbeing of communities. . In some cases, councils and communities will be able to identify before an emergency when services may be needed during a response. In these cases, they should be encouraged to enter or update a current memorandum of understanding ahead of time to add clarity to who will pay for services. This could include agreements between councils and community groups wellequipped to provide hot meals at scale, or social housing providers who may be able to step into the welfare space if required. For cases where groups step up to provide services for their communities without a formal agreement already in place, there should be some discretionary mechanism for exgratia payments to be made within agreed criteria. Clarify the funding sources available for councils and communities . There are a range of other central government funding sources available to support communities and local government during a response, including funding from TPK, MPI, and MBIE. This also includes Mayoral Funds and bespoke funds set up for specific activities like the Hawkes Bay Sediment and Silt Recovery Fund, administered by the Department of Internal Affairs. Some nongovernmental organisations like the Red Cross also administer funds. . The current approach sees siloed pots of money across government and nongovernment sectors, and it is often unclear what funding is available to individuals and communities. The Inquiry was told this leads to inefficient and ineffective public spending and has the potential to cost more. In addition, community groups and providers can become frustrated when a funding flow stops as it has been exhausted, and new permissions or sources of funding have to be sought. There is an opportunity to bring clarity to the funding system, so people and communities can easily understand what funding they might be eligible for. Guidance to the sector Establish Memoranda of Understanding with welfare providers in the readiness phase, as part of moving to a commissioning model for these services. Provide and accessible guidance about what activities Mayoral Funds can be used for, and how organisations can apply and access funding following an emergency. Ensure all Government funds are well signposted and communicated to councils and NGOs helping with response and readiness activities, to ensure efficient and effective use of these funds. CHAPTER : FUNDING SETTINGS CHAPTER : MANAGEMENT OF THE IMMEDIATE RESPONSE CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Section Three Appendix A: Terms of Reference for the Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events Appendix B: Contributors to the Inquiry Appendix C: Analysis of submissions Glossary of terms
The Mori population is younger on average than the gener al population; Stats NZ latest data from June estimates that , and yearolds are of Maori descent; this is approximately of the total and yearold New Zealand resident population.
agreed that water services entities will not be liable for rates on any assets which they own which are located on land that they do not own;
. Any financial implications of the Governments preferred approach to improving the
Following Cabinet approval, I intend to issue a media release about policies that will be proposed through the Bill, to be introduced in June . This will reinforce my top priorities for the Local Government System Improvements programme, as well as the Prime Ministers message to councils at the Local Government New Zealand conference in August . Proactive release
In addition, some and yearolds livi ng overseas may also qualify; officials have not been able to estimate the size of this population in the time available.
The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team has been consulted and
noted that growth charges currently play a significant role in funding investment in new three waters assets;
. Subject to the outcomes of the consultation, I expect to seek Cabinet agreement for
I intend to proactively release this Cabinet paper within business days of decisions being confirmed by Cabinet, unless there is a good reason not to publish all or part of the material. Recommendations
The proposed Policy refresh, and phase two approach have no direct impacts on
This Bill is intended to be considered alongside the DOIs relating to the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act. Officials consi der the proposal to keep the eligibility age for candidacy and jury service at will require justification with respect to section of the Bill of Rights.
noted that growth charges for infrastructure have several benefits, including:
brokering relationships across the public service, through the Agency Workforce Leads, to facilitate redeployment placement of affected kaimahi into new roles. targeted sharing of available talent through the Agency Workforce Lead network. affected employees can register interest via AskHR. Early Response Team from Ministry of Social Development The Early Response Team (ERT) focuses on getting people into work, getting people the skills they need to do the work and helping them stay employed. ERT will provide support to DIA kaimahi to go through the change process, specifically: linking individuals with qualified Career Specialists free of charge ongoing contact providing access to further education and shortterm training options accessing financial support inbetween jobs. Individuals who are interested in speaking with ERT can email ERT directly for assistance at RedeploymentSupportmsd.govt.nz, with your name, your situation and contact details, and ERT will connect you with their regional team.
. As discussed above, this Bill should be introduced and referred to select committee in
. ensuring that new residential and commercial development is economically efficient;
. mitigating concerns of existing users around growth investment;
. reducing the financing burden for water service providers;
. avoiding windfall gains to landowners when decisions to expand networks are made;
Appendix B: Proposed Regulatory Systems Group Operating Model and Ways of Working Introduction The proposal for change to the Regulatory Services Groups operating model completes our shift from a selfcontained singular systembased model to a multidisciplinary functional operating model. It recognises the need for a broad suite of professional inputs to deliver system outcomes.
Officials are still working through the pr ivacy implications arising from the Privacy Act associated with personal information of and yearolds being publicly available on the electoral roll. Consultation
The benefits to population groups will likely compound over time as agencies learn to
agreed to enable growth charging for water services entities for drinking water, wastewater and stormwater;
. An interim Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS) on the issues proposed for consultation
. The appropriate financing strategy will differ from entity to entity , and will depend on the outcome of engagement with banks and institutional lenders to determine their appetite for lending. Entity A is expected to be attractive to lenders from the outset, with initial financing likely via bank borrowing, debt capital markets, and deferred debt settlement with Auckland Council.
Our core activities are our basic regulatory obligations licensing, audit, inspections, education and information, enforcement and prosecution.
The Electoral Commission, the Department of Internal Affairs, Treasury, and the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet have been consulted. Treasury comment Treasury has not been provided sufficient time to consider the proposal but notes that agreeing to policy decisions with potentially significant financial implications when these have not ye t been costed or funded creates a fiscal risk that will need to be managed. Department of Internal Affairs comment The Department of Internal Affairs is not convinced that a strong argument has yet been made for the age for ca ndidacy to remain at . This distinction would need to able to be justified as a limitati on on the right to be free from age discrimination. Assessments of responsib ility are not appl ied to people from other age groups that wish to stand as ca ndidates, and our pre liminary view is that this assessment is best made by vo ters. However, we note that due to the time constraints there has not been robust analysis of this point.
There are no human rights implications resulting from the decisions in this Cabinet
agreed that growth charging be enabled through a statutory instrument called a water infrastructure contribution; s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government I N C O N F I D E N C E CAB MIN I N C O N F I D E N C E omuxuzqw agreed that water infrastructure contributions operate on a principlesbased model rather than the more prescriptive development contribution model;
. Final regulatory impact analysis for all aspects of the proposed omnibus Bill will be
The following agencies were consulted on this paper: Accident Compensation
success. As well as the structural changes that being proposing, a series of nonstructural changes are required that will complement any new structure, to support our effectiveness:
. Given the initially w eak financial posit ion of some of the entities, the tight timeframes for establishing them, I consider it would be prudent to provide in legislation for the establishment of a backstop financing mechanism. . Specifically, I seek Cabinets agreement to provide for the establishment of a dedicated Water Services Funding Agency. The relevant statutory provisions would be modelled on the Local Government Borrowing Act (whic h established the LGFA) . . The decision to provide for this backstop financing mechanism in legislation does not commit the Government to establish the WSFA. A future decision to establish the WSFA would require Cabinet agreement. The commencement of the enabling legislative provisions would be made subject to Order in Council or notification by its shareholding Minister, with the provisions expiring if no regulation to establish the WSFA is made within a certain timeframe. ()(b)(ii) ()(b)(ii) ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
. The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team has been consulted and
The majority of agencies endorsed the general direction and support for public cloud
agreed that water services entities be required to issue and consult on a water infrastructure contributions policy that sets out the schedule of charges and the methodology used to set those charges (either separate from, or included in, the funding and pricing plan);
. Improving the process for councils to consider Mori wards is intended to create more
A public launch of the Cloud First Policy Refresh is planned for the second quarter of
I intend to issue a media releas e when the Bill is introduced.
agreed to provide for transitional arrangements that allow water services entities to apply existing growth charges, without the need to set a new methodology for up to three years;
. These actions are consistent with the Crowns obligations under Ko te TuaruaArticle
dfjicsa
mewtojp
A project to design a replacement for the IaaS panel agreements that has a more
Cloud enables the delivery and management of technology solutions over the
Correction of personal information
December , CABMIN OSOJ Minute; Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Terrorist Attack on
December , Cabinet paper: Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Terrorist Attack on Christchurch
June , Cabinet Paper: Pricing and charging for t hree waters service s.
May Pipitea Street
Months Jail for Child Sex Abuse Images; Interim Name Suppression Order Ends
NZSIS Policy Use and obligations under direct access agreements This includes security clearance vetting. Access refers to any activity requiring the user to log in to the DIA terminal; this includes each search undertaken by the Authorised Officer and also captures the action of the log in itself.
Note there are obligations under Treaty settlement legislation that Taumata Arowai must uphold, as well as Regional Councils when issuing consents. This would mean within areas in already agreed settlements, there may have to be an exception that goes beyond the standard (see further information in LG). Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of
On Monday November , the Supr eme Court issued it s judgment in Make It Incorporated v Attorney General. The Court declared that the provisions of the Electora l Act and the Local Electoral Act, which provide for a minimum voting age of years, are incons istent with the right to be free from age discrimination for pers ons years and older.
Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Table : Performance of Basic Card Algorithm with Minute Contact Duration Dataset n Recall FPR Rank Correlation Mean Std. Dev. Mean Std. Dev. Mean Std. Dev. office . . . . . . office . . . . . . cafe . . . . . . construction . . . . . . taxi party . . . . . . party . . . . . . The taxi trial was not long enough to generate any minute contacts.
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E usoq
Public Cloud services are those offered widely through the Internet and available to
Talented cyber security professionals are attracted to work in cloud: due to the
Te Khui Raraunga is the operational arm, a Charitable Trust, that works on behalf of Data Iwi Leaders Group.
The Cabinet Office have indicated that the Cabinet Legislation Committee will consider the legislative bids in the next couple of weeks. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Page of v. remove the intersex marker option; Yes No vi. exclude anyone whose birth is registered overseas from the definition of eligible person ; and Yes No vii. require a statutory review of the self identification provisions five years after enactment; Yes No b) agree in principle to: i. remove the requirement for children and young people to obtain a declaration from the Family Court stating that it is appropriate for the sex on a persons birth certificate to be changed; Yes No ii. remove the requirement for children and young people to provide evidence of medical treatment that has enabled them to physically conform with the sex they want recorded on th eir birth certificate; Yes No iii. introduce a self identification process where children and young people can apply directly to the Registrar General of Births, Deaths and Marriages to change the sex recorded on their birth certificate; and Yes No iv. make one or more markers reflecting genders outside of the binary (male and female) available and set out in regulations or operational policy ; Yes No c) note further work is required to determine: i. specific policies for changing sex on a birth certificate for children and young people; ii. whether to establish a limit on the number of times a sex marker on a birth certificate can be changed; iii. how we legislat e for the number of and terminology for a range of sex marker options; and iv. actions required to manage t he implications for the Department of Corrections; d) note we will provide advice on the issues listed in recommendation (c) in April ; e) note we will prepare a draft Cabinet paper for you to take to Cabinet in May seeking agreement on selfidentification policy for inclusion in the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Bill; Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Page of f) note the all the changes to the self identification provisions will be made through a supplementary order paper; g) note the self identification supplementary order paper will be referred to select committee for consideration; and h) note the Cabinet paper will seek agreement for you to make decisions on any minor and technical matters to do with self identification that align with the overall policy intent of the proposals.
The Local Electoral Act currently specif ies that anyone eligible to vote in parliamentary elections is also eligib le as a residential elector for local elections. Therefore, to give effect to the policy decisions above, amendments are needed to the Local Electoral Act to provide for youth elector enrolment processes and voting eligibi lity. The amendment s to the Local Electoral Act only require a simple majority in the House to be enacted.
The arguments in favour of a single eligibility age (ie. age ) for all aspects of local elections are: . it would not place limits on the right to freedom from age discrimination; . it would be administratively simpler and cost local authorities less; and . it would be less confusing for voters and candidates to understand when they can vote and stand.
This follows commitments in both the ACTNational and NZ First National
This is also the proposed representative structure for the formal Trust Framework that would be established in legislation. INCONFIDENCE Page of Phase : the formal establishment of the Trust Framework in legislati on . In this phase, the Trust Framework is established in legislation, with the governance board and compliance testing teams transitioning into formal legal entities with statutory powers and responsibilities. Establishing the Trust Framework accreditation and governance bodies in legislation would provide a clear mechanism for making the Trust Framework legally enforceable upon system participants. This will help to engender greater trust from the public and improve the Trust Frameworks sustainability. We will report back to Cabinet on operational options to deliver digital identity after the General Election . The operational options Cabinet paper will discuss the governments ongoing role as a provider of digital identity services, which includes cons ideration of the RealMe services alongside market based options. It will also outline options for government investment that may be required for agencies to transition their systems, such as the costs of government agencies becoming accredited providers. W e recommend that this Cabinet paper is jointly lead by the Minister for Government Digital Services and the Minister of Internal Affairs. Implications for Mori . Article two of Te Tiriti o Waitangi references he taonga o te ao Mori. Whakapapa, blood lines, identity and all things connected to these attributes are taonga for Mori. The proposed principles for the Trust Framework include Enabling of Te Ao Mori approaches to identity. For example, interdependencies between the all ofGovernment work progr amme being developed to address the issues raised by the Wai claim and the Trust Framework will need to be understood. . During engagement, iwi have shown a desire to work collaboratively with Government, for example, to enhance digital iwi registration processes in line with tikanga Mori. . In March , the GCDO hosted a hui with members of the Iwi Chairs Forum, the Iwi Leaders Group and the Data Iwi Leaders Group to establish an enduring relationship with Mori. Digital identity was discussed at a high level during this meeting. . The GCDOs engagement with iwi groups will continue; there is also an opportunity to facilitat e iwi relationships with private sector digital identity service providers. Advice on Mori representation in the governance of the Trust Framework will be a priority in future engagement with iwi. Consultation . The following agencies were consulted and are in general agreement with this paper: Accident Compensation Corporation, Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Government Communications Security Bureau, Inland Revenue Department, Land Information New Zealand, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Primary Industries, Ministry of Social Development, New Zealand Customs Service, New Zealand Transport Agency, Office of D isability Issues, Office of the Privacy Commissioner, Social Wellbeing Agency, State Services Commission, Statistics New Zealand, Te Arawhiti, Te Puni Kkiri and The Treasury. INCONFIDENCE Page of . Officials engaged consistently with a working group that included a wide variety of key public and private sector stakeholders. As well as public agencies, the working group included representatives from: ANZ, ASB, Auckland University, MATTR, Payments NZ, Planit, Sphere Identity, SSS IT Security Experts, Two Black Labs, Westpac and X ero. . Officials have also regularly engaged with the GCDOs digital inclusion workstream to ensure alignment with the Trust Framework. This engagement will continue throughout the development and implementation of the rules and standards to ensure that all New Zealanders will be able to access essential goods and services under a trust framework. . We are committed to ensuring that the constructive dialogue with stakeholders remains a key feature of the work towards a new approach to digital identity, includi ng future planning and implementation of the proposed reforms. The working group will continue to be consulted on the development of the interim Trust Framework rules and the deployment of new digital identity services under the proposed approach. This wil l include working with agencies to identify and co develop implementation plans and avoid potential duplication in efforts (e.g. developing data standards with Stats NZ). Comment from the Office of the Privacy Commissioner . The Privacy Commissioner support s the continued development of the Digital Identity Trust Framework and considers that it has great potential. The Commissioner looks forward to continuing to work closely with officials to ensure the Trust Framework gives New Zealanders greater and more e fficient control over the sharing of their personal information. Comment from the Office of Disability Issues . There is the opportunity for disabled people to benefit from the development of the Trust Framework. Disabled people are one of the population gro ups that sit on the wrong side of the digital divide and have not had access to the same range of proof of identity mechanisms as non disabled people. Accessibility will need to be considered in the development of the Trust Framework as well as consideri ng representatives from the disabled community in advisory groups and governance mechanisms. This approach is consistent with the intent of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the New Zealand Disability Strategy. It also aligns with the inclusive Trust Framework principle and the ongoing work to address digital inclusion issues.
This proposal will remove the definitions of public notice from a range of local government legislation. When there is not a specific definition of public notice in legislation, the definition of public notice from the Legislation Act applies. This would offer the choice of publication in newspapers, on the council website, or the New Zealand Gazette.
Work and Income i dentification guidance enables a person to apply for a benefit using a birth certificate and a utility bill. The Ministry of Social Development can access previous records for people who changed their name and gender, but only if the person is being invest igated. People can obtain a Kiwi Access card with a birth certificate and confirmation from another person who can prove your identity. A Kiwi Access card in combination with a birth certificate meets the identification guidance set out in the Anti Money Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism Identity Verification Code of Practice. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . I also intend to retain an existing provision in the Bill that enables previous registered sex and name change information to be provided to another agency where they have an interest in ensuring a person has one identity. This will enable some justice sector agencies to access a persons previous name and sex where this is necessary. . I acknowledge that there are situations where people de transition and decide that they do identify with the sex they were assigned at birth. I propose that where a person wishes to revert to their sex at birth, they will not need to meet any additional requirements. I propose setting in regulations a range of sex marker s to be inclusive of diverse genders . The curre nt sex marker options on a birth certificate are male and female . These are used to register children at birth. As discussed above, the sex markers used in the birth registration process will not change. . To allow different gender s to be recognised, I seek agreement to include sex markers other than the binary options of male and female . This is required to give effect to a true selfidentification model limiting sex markers to the binary would exclude people who identify as non binary or as a culturally specific gender. . The Select Committee recommended the following sex markers for the Bill male , female, intersex, or X(unspecified). Instead of X(unspecified) , I propose that a range of nonbinary sex markers be available, but that these will be set in regulations. This will bring our legislation in line with human rights discourse, which recommends that a multiplicity of markers be available. . I propose that the intersex option is removed from the Bill . Advocates for the rights of intersex people oppose having the intersex option on birth certificates as it categori ses intersex people as a third sex and does not respect their diversity or right to self determination . The Human Rights Commission recommends the removal of intersex as it is not a gender but a n umbrella term for people born with a variation of sex characteristics , which is not in line with a self determination model. . Engagement will be completed as part of regulation development to gauge transgender and intersex peoples perspectives and the perspectives of specific population groups, such as young people and Mori, Pacific peoples and ethnic communities. As part of this I want to explore including culturally inclusive markers such as takatpui (Mori), faafafine (Samoan), or fakaleit (Tongan). . Engagement with M ori on recognising genders other than the binary could support the Government to uphold our obligations under Te Tiriti o Waitangi. Te Tiriti o Waitangi provides for ensuring the equal rights and privile ges of Mori , this should include the equal right of transgender and intersex Mori to be recognised under a selfidentification process. This is particularly important as research suggests that there was gender diversity within te ao M ori that has dimini shed with colo nisation . This has negatively affected the acceptance and participation of gender diverse M ori in their own communities.
agree for the Minister of Local Government to have delegated authority to make minor and consequential policy decisions that may arise during the drafting process instead of the Minister of Justice;
agree that the Bill be introduced on appr oximately August ;
agree that the Government Response be presented on approximately August ; Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice note that the Minister of Local Governm ent is proposing that the Elections (Lowering the Voting Age for Local El ections and Polls) Legislation Bill be introduced on the same day as the Government Response; and
agreed in principle, subject to paragraph below, that in addition to applying to local government elections, the lowered voting age will apply to all othe r entities that are part of local elections;
agreed that the . milion referred to in paragraph above be charged against the
agreed that the government response be presen ted during the week of A ugust ;
agreed to fund the following cost pressures totalling . million through reprioritisation of the residual unallocated balance of the Three Waters Infrastructure Investment and Service Delivery Reform Programme tagged operating contingency:
agreed to leave section the Residential Tenancies Act unchanged so that tenants are responsible for reimbursing the landlord for volumetric water charges;
https:www.gov.scotpublicationsrural scotland keyfacts pages Urban population as a percent of total population has decreased by . percent between and . https:www.nrscotland.gov.ukstatistics anddatastatisticsstatistics bythemepopulationpopulation estimates based special area population estimatespopulation estimates byurban rural classification Calculated from WDC and Auckland Councils RF I responses . Total investment for WDC unconstrained scenario is derived from their Long Term plans until . After , the investment requirements for years moving forward are projected as an average of total investment from adjusted for inflation. It has been noted in the RFI that a further investment of million, million, and million will be required for wastewater, water, and stormwater projects respectively. These figures have also be en added to the projected investment requirements for . Amalgamated entity investment attributable to Whangrei has been cal culated by attributing the net investment from the WICS models for Entity A proportionate to the total number of connections for Whangrei . Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia Figure .: Total Net Investment scenarios
note addressing security, including jurisdictional risk concerns, actual and perceived,
note that the Minister of Local Government and the Minister of Justice will report back to the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee in June with an update on implementation costings and timing, and seeking approval to undertake cross party consultation on the draft Bill; and
noted that Cabinet previously authorised the Minister of Justice to make minor and consequential policy decisions that may arise during the drafting process CABMIN;
noted that addressing security, including jurisdictional risk concerns, actual and perceived,
noted that the Minister of Local Government and the Minister of Justice intend to report back to SWC in June with an update on implementation cos tings and timing, and seeking approval to undertake cross pa rty consultation on the draft Bill; Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E SWCMIN I N C O N F I D E N C E qlgofb noted that the Minister of Local Government and the Minister of Justice intend to report back to the Cabinet Legislation Committee by July seeking approval to introduce the Bill within this Parliamentary term.
noted that the Minister of Local Government intends to report back to Cabinet by
noted that the first Local Government System Improvements Bill (the Bill) holds a category priority on the Legislation Programme (drafting instructions to be issued by the end of ) and is tentatively scheduled to be introduced in June and enacted in late ; Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Second tranche of drafting instructions ECOMIN noted that the Minister of Local Government intends to repot back to ECO in early to seek approval to a second tranche of drafting instmctions for the Bill, which will include proposals to: . limit council expenditure, possibly by implementing a similar system to the New South Wales rate peg; . reduce council costs by simplifying the planning and repoting framework; Rachel Clarke Committee Secretaiy Present: Hon David Seymour Hon Nicola Willis (Chair) Hon Shane Jones Hon Brooke van Velden Hon Simeon Brown Hon Erica Stanford Hon Paul Goldsmith Hon Louise Upston Hon Judith Collins KC Hon Tama Potaka Hon Matt Doocey Hon Melissa Lee Hon Penny Simmonds Hon Chris Penk Hon Nicola Grigg Hon Andrew Bayly Hon Andrew Hoggard Hon Mark Patterson aecpczkj Officials present from: Office of the Prime Minister Office of Hon Judith Collins KC Officials Committee for ECO IN CONFIDENCE Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E aecpczkj
. A table setting out the risks, benefits and tradeoffs of the two options is attached at
. Cabinet has agreed that there will be a second stage of legislative reforms to the Mori
. Digital Executive Board Annual Report
. Given the substantive nature of the r eforms, a new Act will provide the clearest articulation of the Governments intentions. Cabinet agreed to creat e a new Act CAB MIN . refers . Therefore , this Bill will repeal the Racing Act and create a new Racing Industry Act , that amalgamates the existing provisions from the Racing Act with the policy decisions agreed by Cabinet in November . This paper considers the elements of the Bill that relate to policy decisions made by Cabinet in November , rather than the Bill in i ts entirety . Change of name of the Bill . The papers considered by the Cabinet Economic Development Committee in October and by Cabinet in November , referred to the Bill as the Racing Reform Bill No. . However, subsequently the Bill has been renam ed as the Racing Industry Bill . Defining greyhounds as w orking dogs . The Dog Control Act treats racing greyhounds as domestic dogs, rather than working dogs. It generally costs more to register a domestic dog than a working dog. In Rodney Hansen CNZM QC provided a report to the NZRB on welfare issues in greyhound racing in New Zealand . It identified an inconsistency in approaches to greyhound registration taken by territorial authorities as a barrier to achieving a uniform approach to dog registr ation , and accurately recording greyhound numbers. . With support from the Minister of Local Government, it is proposed that the definition of working dog in the Dog Control Act be amended to include any dog registered with Greyhound Racing New Zealand and kept solely or principally for racing . This amendment will recognise the role that greyhounds fulfil in the racing industry, which is sufficiently different from a domestic animal to support separate treatment under the Act. It will result in territorial authorities, by default , charging the same fee for greyhound registration as working dog registration . ldrz ()(h) Proactively released by the Minister for Racing IN CONFIDENCE Page of Regulatory impact analysis . The Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) prepared a Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA) for the policy proposals, i n accordance with the necessary requirements. The Department assessed that the RIA partially meets the requirements. The RIA was submitted at the time that Cabinet approval of the policy relating to the Bill was sought. A RIA has also been prepared on defining greyhounds as working dogs. The Department assessed that the RIA partially meets the requirements. This is attached as Appendix A. Compliance . The Bill complies with: . the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi; . disclosure statement requirements (refer to the statement attached to this paper) ; . the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act ; and . relevant international standards and obligations. . The property sections of the Bill are likely to be contentious . They have been considered in relati on to whether the Bill is consistent with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act (NZBORA), the Human Rights Act , and the legislation guidelines which are maintained by the Legislation Design and Advisory Committee . .
. How the parties may use the personal information
. How the parties may use the personal information
. Officials therefore recommend if an amendment is to be made for the regulator to
. Sections to of the Act empower the Crown to prescribe matters relating to
. THE cardholder shall not use the card for the purpose of ensuring that payment of a personal cheque is guaranteed by the issuing Company, or for any personal expenses, or to obtain any cash advances for personal expenses. Provided that in an emergency the cardholder may use the card for the aforesaid personal purposes whilst on official business in which case the cardholder shall reimburse the Departments accountant for the amount so spent or borrowed in accordance with clause nine hereof.
. The Department had identified alternative options for the provision of this funding,
. The public services facilitated
. The public services facilitated .
. There are some general objectives in undertaking prosecution activity that apply across all the Departments prosecutions. These general objectives should be read in conjunction with specific objectives relating to prosecutions under specific enactments.
. Type of personal information to be shared
. Type of personal information to be shared .
. agree that the reduction in revenue incurred under recommendations and above be charged against the between Budget contingency established as part of Budget ; and . note that the Minister of Local Government is liaising with the member in charge of the local Bill to have the committee of the whole House and third reading stages take place together on December to achieve enactment by the end of the year.
. agree to fund the following cost pressures totalling . million through reprioritisation of the residual unallocated balance of the Three Waters Infrastructure Investment and Service Delivery Reform Programme tagged operating contingency: . policy advice, legislation, and ministerial services until , and the most urgent communications activities: . million; . increase investment by the Crown in supporting iwiMori to participate in three waters service delivery: . million; . increase investment by the Crown in supporting the wider local government sector to participate in three waters service delivery: . million; . funding to ensure the Future for Local Government Review can fulfil its terms of reference, on time and to a high standard: . million; . approve a drawdown of . million from the Three Waters Infrastructure Investment and Service Delivery Reform Programme tagged contingency: . . million being the residual balance of the allocation agreed by Cabinet in December for policy and related services CAB MIN . refers; . . million to meet the most urgent cost pressures in policy advice, legislation, ministerial services, and communications; and . . million to meet cost pressures in the Future for Local Government Review; . agree to transfer . million from the Three Waters Infrastructure Investment and Service Delivery Reform Programme tagged operating contingency to the Transforming Three Waters Service Delivery for New Zealanders: Transition and Implementation tagged operating contingency to: . increase investment by the Crown in supporting iwiMori to participate in three waters service delivery: . million; . increase investment by the Crown in supporting the wider local government sector to participate in three waters service delivery: . million; . approve the follow ing changes to appropriations to provide for the decision in recommendation above, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance and net core Crown debt:
. approve that . million proposed in recommendation above be charged
. note that the Minister of Local Government intends to seek final policy approvals
. Other Portfolio Cabinet Papers with Local Government Implications Cont act: Frdrique Bertrand
. a short term fix to in order to address the emergent harm identified by the
. policy advice, legislation, and ministerial services until , and the most urgent communications activities: . million;
.. I. Intelligence collection and analysis;
.. Acquisition, use or maintenance of an assumed identity (for both NZSIS and the
. When and how will the new arrangements be reviewed
. ensuring sufficient time for policy development through a first principles
. increase investment by the Crown in supporting iwiMori to participate in three waters service delivery: . million;
.. Additional information on how DA information will be used to support these functions,
. increase investment by the Crown in supporting the wider local government sector to participate in three waters service delivery: . million;
. funding to ensure the Future for Local Government Review can fulfil its terms of reference, on time and to a high standard: . million;
.The weight edaverage credit quality of LGFA s loan book and its guara ntors will remain
.Under the Local Government Act (LGA), local authorities must always have
GCDO, with the support of relevant agencies, will host a public sector focussed event
I propose to release this Cabinet paper and related Minute with any necessary redactions in accordance with Cabinet Offi ce Circular CO () , following the introduction of the Bill in the House.
agreed that the tools under the Infrastructure Funding and Financing Act be used to provide infrastructure vested with water services entities;
. Extending telephone voting to local elections will give councils more options to reduce
Communications will also aim to ensure the Policy remains distinct from other issues
The Minister of Justice recommends that Cabinet:
agreed that water services entities not have access to financial contributions under the Resource Management Act ;
Individual coaching with C Consulting (external provider), where you can choose from topics that suit your situation, these topics include: Working through change Career options what drives and fulfils you in work CV development Interview strategies If you would like to access any of the above support, you can speak with your manager who can contact HR on your behalf, or by emailing EOIRecruitmentSupportdia.govt.nz .
. All these proposals appear to be consistent with the rights or freedoms affirmed in the
.. Protective security services, advice and assistance. The use of DA information in
In accordance with Cabinet Office Circular CO () Proactive Release of Cabinet
agreed that water infrastructure contributions be able to be charged at resource consent, building consent, service connection or due to an increase in demand;
. The following agencies were consulted on this paper: the Ministry for the
kzzqft Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E SWCSUB Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee Summary This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill: Proposed Amendments Portfolio Internal Affairs Purpose This paper seeks agreement to remove sections L to O (the filter provisions) from the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill (the Bill) which is currently at Select Committee. Previous DecisionsIn in December , SWC agreed to the policy proposals to be included in the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill SWCMIN; Proposal The Bill was developed in response to the Christchurch terror attacks and addresses inefficiencies and ambiguities in the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act . The filter provisions have been the most submitted upon aspect of the Bill, with most opposed in their current form. Progressing work now to refine these risks delaying the other key enforcement provisions in the Bill. Agreement is sought to remove the filtering provisions and instead investigate a voluntary approach to filtering. Impact Analysis Not required. Financial ImplicationsNone from this paper. Legislative ImplicationsThese proposals will amend clause , part A of the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill (the Bill). Timing Matters An extension to June for the final report back to Select Committee has been requested to allow for redrafting. Communications The Minister intends to announce the amendments. I N C O N F I D E N C E jxgzkrs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E SWCSUB Consultation Paper prepared by DIA. Customs, MoE, Treasury, MFAT, GCSB, NZSIS, MoJ, TPK, Police, DPMC (Prime Minister), MfW, MSD (Youth), MPP, Oranga Tamariki, MCH (Broadcasting and Media) and MBIE (Broadcasting and Media) were consulted. The Minister indicates that SWC Ministers were consulted and that discussion has occurred with the government caucus. The Minister of Internal Affairs recommends that the Committee: note that in December , SWC agreed to the policy proposals to be included in the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill SWCMIN; note that the filter provisions contained in clause , Part A of the Bill require additional consideration to address issues around the proposed design and operation of a filter; agree to amend clause , Part A of the Bill by removing: . section L; Electronic system to prevent public access to objectionable online publications; . section M; Establishment of electronic system; . section N; Approval of electronic system for operation; and . section O: Review of decisions and actions relating to operation of electronic system; note that the Department of Internal Affairs has written to the Governance and Administration Select Committee to request an extension to the report back of the Departmental Report to June to allow time for the amendments to be made. Rachel Clarke Committee Secretary Hardcopy distribution: Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee I N C O N F I D E N C E jxgzkrs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E SWCMIN Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill: Proposed Amendments Portfolio Internal Affairs On June , the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee (SWC): noted that in December , SWC agreed to the policy proposals for inclusion in the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill (the Bill) SWCMIN; noted that the filter provisions contained in clause , Part A of the Bill require additional consideration to address issues around the proposed design and operation of a filter; agreed to amend clause , Part A of the Bill by removing: . section L; Electronic system to prevent public access to objectionable online publications; . section M; Establishment of electronic system; . section N; Approval of electronic system for operation; and . section O: Review of decisions and actions relating to operation of electronic system; directed Department of Internal Affairs officials, alongside other relevant agencies, to consider the design requirements for effective web filtering for objectionable content including possible regulatory settings and sanctions through the media and online content regulatory system review; noted that Department of Internal Affairs officials have written to the Governance and Administration Select Committee to request an extension to the report back of the Departmental Report to June to allow time for the amendments in paragraph above to be made. Rachel Clarke Committee Secretary Present: (see over) I N C O N F I D E N C E jxgzkrs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E SWCMIN Present: Officials present from: Rt Hon Jacinda Ardern Hon Carmel Sepuloni (Chair) Hon Andrew Little Hon Nanaia Mahuta Hon Willie Jackson Hon Jan Tinetti Hon Dr Ayesha Verrall Hon Aupito William Sio Hon Meka Whaitiri Hon Priyanca RadhakrishnanOffice of the Prime Minister Office of the SWC Chair Officials Committee for SWC I N C O N F I D E N C E jxgzkrs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN CabinetRevised Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Report of the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee: Period Ended June On June , Cabinet made the following decisions on the work of the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee for the period ended June : SWCMIN Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill: Proposed Amendments Portfolio: Internal AffairsCONFIRMED Michael Webster Secretary of the Cabinet I N C O N F I D E N C E kzzqft Out of scope Out of scope Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Priority Urgent INCONFIDENCE Page of Internal Affairs briefing Hon Jan Tinetti Minister of Internal Affairs Title: Draft Cabinet paper: Proposed amendments to the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill May Key issues On May you agreed to remove sections L O (the filtering provisions) from the Bill and investigate a voluntary approach to filtering objectionable violent extremist content IA refers. As Cabinet approval is required for this polic y change, we have prepared a draft Cabinet paper seeking agreement to remove the filtering provisions from the Bill (Appendix A) . The Departmental consultation has been completed and the majority of agencies were supportive of the approach . To enable lodge ment of the paper with Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee by June , Ministerial consultation for this Cabinet paper needs to take place between May and May . We have written to the Chair of the Governance and Administration Committee requesting an extension to the submission of the Departmental Report ( the letter is attached as Appendix B ). The extension is to allow time for the Cabinet paper to be considered and amendments to be drafted that remove the filtering provisions from the Bi ll. Action sought Timeframe Agree to begin Ministerial consultation on the attached draft Cabinet paper by May . By May Contact for telephone discussions (if required) Name Position Contact Number Suggested st contact Michael Woodside Policy Director Nick Law Policy Manager Return electronic document to: Cohesion reference SSWDQEKHX Ministerial database reference IA S.()(a) S.()(a) S.()(a) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Purpose . We seek your approval to Ministerial consultation on the attached Cabinet paper proposing to amend t he Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill (the Bill) . Background . On May you agreed to remove sections L O (the filtering provisions) from the Bill and investigate a voluntary approach to filtering objectionable violent extremist content IA refers. This approach changes Government policy and so require s Cabinet approval. A draft of a paper seeking Cabinet approval to remove the filtering provisions is attached a s Appendix A . . Officials have written to the Chair of the Governance and Administr ation Committee (the Committee) requesting an extension to the Departmental Report from June to June (letter attached as Appendix B). This extension is needed to allow time for the paper to be considered by Cabinet and for the amendments to be drafted to remove the filtering provisions from the Bill . This delay will also impact on the final report back of the Bill . The draft Cabinet paper recommends removing the filtering provisions from the Bill and for officials to investigate a voluntary approach . The Cabinet paper notes that internet filtering can be a useful tool to prevent access and mitigate harms from objectionable content online. An example of this is the current Digital Child Exploitation Filtering System (DCEFS), which spe cifically filters child sexual abuse material. However, the Cabinet paper acknowledges that the submissions received on the Bill have indicated that there is a lack of public mandate to progress with the current filtering provisions at this time. . Accordin gly, the Cabinet paper recommends amending clause , Part A of the Bill by removing: . section L: Electronic system to prevent public access to objectionable online publications; . section M: Establishment of electronic system; . section N: Approval o f electronic system for operation; and . section O: Review of decisions and actions relating to operation of electronic system. . Furthermore, the Cabinet paper indicates that you have directed officials to investigate a voluntary approach to filtering objectionable content online, as filtering can be a useful tool to assist in mitigating harms of objectionable content online . There also is some support for the concept of filtering objectionable content, particularly among Internet Service Providers (ISP). This is important as any filtering would work at the ISP level. Departmental Consultation resulted in some minor changes . Officials have conducted agency consultation on the draft Cabinet paper with Ministry for Culture and Heritage , Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment , Ministry of Justice , the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Ministry of Education, the Treasury, Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of New Zealand Police, the Government Communications Security Bureau, New Zealand Security and Intelligence Service, Oranga Tamariki Ministry for Children , Te Puni Kkiri, Ministry for Pacific Peoples, Ministry for Women, Ministry for Youth Development, the New Zealand Customs Service and the Department for the Prime Minister and Cabinet . The majority of agencies were supportive of the approach and had no substantive comments to make on the draft Cabinet paper.
The Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications, and the Minister
agreed that water infrastructure contributions be able to be charged at a single point in time or as annual or quarterly charges for a set period;
. The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (Policy Advisory Group) and the
agreed that the Crown be exempt from paying water infrastructure contributions, in the same way that it is currently exempt from paying development contributions;
. The Department of Internal Affairs will run an eightweek long public consultation
Redoubt Street, Taup
agreed that water services entities will use standard commercial procedures for collecting unpaid debt;
. I intend to issue a press release and video message announcing the consultation.
. I intend to proactively release this Cabinet paper, with any appropriate redactions,
. ICT and digital infrastructure procurement and management, by applying scale to some elements of ICT and digital support, including the system of record (and a national data platform), and for some specialised function s such as cyber security, to reduce initial build and ongoing operating costs, simplify Day requirements and reduce implementation risk, enable all entities to benefit from access to digital technologies, and facilitate interoperability across entities and reduce barriers to future mergers. The current business case and approach to providing ICT services to entities is based on some shared digital infrastructure and services. . Procurement, capital investment delivery and supply chain management, by adopting more effective, systematic, coordinated and best practice approaches to procurement, to better leverage purchasing power, to take a coordinated approach to supply chain management, and to better coordinate and sequence approaches to large investments in infrastructure. . Major natural hazard risk management and insurance, through the internal mutualisation of risk enabling better access to insurance at lower prices than would be available to smaller councils or entities. . Workforce development and management, by taking a scale and sector approach to building and developing the workforce, to identifying talent and capability, and to planning, designing, and delivering workforce development, and partnering with other national organisations to deliver tra ining. . Shared services and collaborative arrangements between entities provide a means to retain efficiency gains under a entity model. . The operating principles in the Water Services Entities Act already provide for water services entities to develop and share capability and technical expertise, and to enter joint arrangements in their employment, and in their procurement (including by way of contractual arrangements, joint arrangements, or joint water services entity arrangements). The Water Services Legislation Bill includes provisions that allow water services entities to enter joint arrangements, including the joint ownership of subsidiary companies. . The Water Services Entities Act also provides for Government policy statements, which can be used to direct water services entities on the Governments overall direction and priorities for water services, and expectations in relation to the contribution of water services entities to the outcomes sought by the Government. ()(b)(ii) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
invited the Minister of Local Government to issue drafting instructions to the Parli amentary Counsel Office in accordance with the above paragraphs;
. The Minister of Local Government recommends that the Cabinet Economic
. invite the Minister of Local Government to issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office in accordance with the above decisions; .
authorised the Minister of Local Government and the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs to make any minor or technical changes (including the development of further detail) to the agreed policy to enable drafting instructions to be issued to the Parliamentary Counsel Office, with any significant policy changes being referred back to Cabinet for approval;
. authorise the Minister of Local Government and the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs to make any minor or technical changes (including the development of further detail) to the agreed policy to enable drafting instructions to be issued to the Parliamentary C ounsel Office, but that any significant policy changes be referred back to Cabinet for approval; . agree that technical experts can be consulted, if needed, during the drafting process.
d. working together in support of cybersecurity capability
qlgofb I N C O N F I D E N C E Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN I N C O N F I D E N C E usoq Cabinet
qlgofb I N C O N F I D E N C E Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice usoq In Confidence Office of the Minister of Justice Cabinet
Accuracy etc. of personal information to be checked before use
CABMIN, CAB MIN, CAB MIN (dia.govt.nz) qwkdm ()(b)(ii) ()(b)(ii) ()(b)(ii) ()(b)(ii) Regulatory Impact Assessment term, which is to be done by sustaining TAB NZs revenue stream (refer constraints section) . By long term sustainability we mean ensuring that the racing industry stays at least as big as it currently is in terms of economic contribution to the economy (adjusted for CPI) and numbers of industry employees; from the period (when minimum guaranteed payments in the Entain agreement cease) and onwards for the foreseeable future. To achieve this objective, the following options were considered: Option : Counterfactual TAB NZ remains the only authorised operator of betting products in New Zealand, the government s online casino regulation regime is put in place, but offshore online operators can continue to offer their sporting and racing products to New Zealanders, so long as they do not advertise . Option : TAB NZ hold an online monopoly TAB NZs land based betting monopoly is extended to the online environment. Offshore operators would be prohibited from offering betting products to New Zealanders ; alongside a package of measures to give the required oversight and monitoring of TAB NZ protections for customers in light of this monopoly to TAB NZ . Option : Wait and see while increasing POCC This option would delay immediate legislati ve change to gather more information on the partnerships performance and make an informed decision on a monopoly; potentially after an online casino regulation regime is established. However, in the interim, raise the POCC to address revenue concerns. This means offshore operators that take bets from New Zealanders, would be required to pay increased POCC charges . Our analysis shows that option (counterfactual) is not viable . Although TAB NZs financial situation is stable in the short term, there is uncertainty about what might happen after the guaranteed payments expire. The partnership has strengthened the financial position of the industry in the short term. However, the benefits of the partnership long term are untested at this early stage in the partnership. This means the risk of offshore competition eroding the revenue flow of the TAB NZ remains, thus a risk to future distributions. Option (wait and see), is preferable to doing nothing but still does not achieve objectives . This option means we can take the time to gather more information on how the partnership is working and can see what impact it is having on TAB NZs market share and revenue. Depending on when an online gambling regulatory system is implemented it would mean the online monopoly could be enforced via this regulator from the outset without an interim regulator step . This option would give more time which might enable Ministers to have access to better information when making decisions on some of t he settingssecond order policy decisions relating to a monopoly (or perhaps develop an alternative solution) . In the interim, the POCC could be raised to help boost revenue. This means offshore operators that take bets from New Zealanders, would be required to pay increased charges. The guaranteed payments to mean there is time to do the work and see what option is adopted in terms of regulating online gambling. However, it does mean if a monopoly was eventually implemented after , TAB NZ would miss out on the additional payments from Entain if the monopoly is not realised. Thus , this known benefit would be forgone for uncertain future potential benefit s. Option (online monopoly) is the preferred option as it is only option that could meet the objective of sustaining TAB NZ revenue, and in turn the racing industry , in the long term. In addition , this option , if implemented prior to June , should realise the immediate capital injection from the million payment and TAB NZ would also receive an uplift in the minimum guaranteed funding each month this guaranteed return period. qwkdm ()(b)(ii) Regulatory Impact Assessment likely require changes to the Gambling Act . However, due to the time constraints, the Minister for Racing does not intend to wait for that work to progress. This means any changes must be within the purview of the Racing Industry Act. Limited consultation on options the public and stakeholders were not consulted on the specific options in this RI A due to the time constraints discussed above. However, the issue of regulation of online gambling and sports and racing betting has been actively discussed for some years and the previous Government announced in May i t agreed in principle to TAB NZ having an online monopoly, subject to further work being undertaken. We anticipate there are likely to be a range of views on the options. For example, offshore operators are likely to be in favour of a regulated online gambling market they can legitimately enter and participate in and opposed to TAB NZ being given an online sports and racing betting monopoly andor a raised POCC rate. Conversely , TAB NZ and the racing codes are highly supportive of TAB NZ having an online monopoly. While not having been directly consulted on the overall package in Option , some other elements of the package have been signalled with them and we believe they will be generally supportive of the option package. In particular it should be noted that while we have consulted Sport NZ on extending TAB NZs online wagering monopoly , we have not consulted individual NSOs , hence their views and the financial impact on specific NSOs is uncertain. Quality of data and evidence there is a lot we do not know about the true nature and extent of existing betting by New Zealanders with offshore operators. We cannot identify exactly how many people are betting offshore and how many would return to betting with TAB NZ if an online monopoly was introduced. Analysis relies on data and forecasting provided by TAB NZ as well as other industry and government figures. Much of the data we have reviewed for this RI A predates the TABEntain partnership that came into effect in June . The estimates and forecasting provided by TAB NZ not been independently verified due to time constraints. We note that estimates provided by TAB NZ about the size of the offshore sports and racing betting market are not in line with our projections based on POCC. We have not been able to investigate the reasons for this difference, however a portion of this is like ly to be TAB NZ s estimate considering operators who do not pay the POCC (but this is unlikely to account for the full difference). The Entain deal is expected to result in a bigger market share and revenue for TAB NZ than what would have occurred without the partnership , through offering a better wagering product but, under current regulatory settings, revenue will continue to flow offshore and not contribute to racing and sporting industries (except through BIUC charges and relatively modest POCC takings). Analysis of options has been particularly impacted by these constraints and is based on several overall assumptions (summarised below). Assumptions We have made several overall assumptions in our analysis. While they are based on the available evidence, there is still a lot of uncertainty around the online betting market, such as its true size. Our a ssumptions are detailed further in section . These are: TAB NZs financial situation will be uncertain in the long term once the guaranteed payments expire in ; securing TAB NZs long term financial viability is the best way of protectin g the long term sustainability of the racing industry; due to time constraints and Ministerial direction there has been no opportunity to determine whether this premise is correct the single biggest current threat to TAB NZs longterm financial viability is competition from offshore operators and no t other reason s such as people betting qwkdm Regulatory Impact Assessment Section : Diagnosing the policy problem What is the context behind the policy problem and how is the status quo expected to develop The racing industry is a longstanding contributor to New Zealands economy . The racing industrys economic contribution to New Zealand was recently estimated at close to . billion. It employs approximately , full time equivalent positions, with , people participating in racing annually. . The racing industry comprises of racing codes: New Zealand Thoroughbred Racing, Harness Racing New Zealand , and Greyhound Racing New Zealand. Each code is responsible for its respective industry which includes race clubs, courses, trainers, jockeys, breeders , and owners. Racing New Zealand (Racing NZ) is the umbrella body that enables collaboration and collective decision making between the racing codes. TAB NZ, as the only domestic provider of landbased racing and sports betting, is a key funding source to the sector . Totalisator Agency Board (now known as TAB NZ ) was established in as the sole betting provider for racing in New Zealand (sport was included in the s). TAB NZ was intended to be the sole provider of sports and racing betting with a not forprofit funding model. Its purpose is to maximis e profits for the long term benefit of the New Zealand racing industry and New Zealand sports , as well as minimising gambling harm. . The racing industry relies heavily on TAB NZ for its income. The racing codes receive over of their income from TAB NZ. In TAB NZ returned approximately million to the racing codes from its betting revenue. . The racing c odes distribute the funds they receive from TAB NZ to the various racing clubs. The clubs in turn use these funds, to maintain their club and offer more prize money for example . Prize money plays a significant role as it supports owners, trainers, jockeys, stable hands, and the entire supply chain including breeders, vets, farriers , and feed merchants. A reduction in funding would reduce prizes, which in turn would limit the industrys ability to maintain (or grow) its size. . While participants in the racing industry may also have other income streams (e.g. owners who export horses), we expect a significant proportion of their income come s from participating in races. . The racing industry also receives a small amount (approximately million annually) from offshore operators who take bets from New Zealanders via the POCC (with a similar distribution going to sports).
February Update from the Rural Water Supplies Technical Working Group Chair
Figure : Digital Identity Services Trust Framework This Framework outlines the relationship between users, information provide rs, infrastructure providers , and relying parties.
For example, Wales and Austria have no the reta ined a minimum age of for candidates and jurors, despite lowering their voting age to ; Scotland is currently considering lowering the age for candidacy. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE recommendat ions, followed by a second round of public engagement. The Panel is expected to provide its final recommendations to the Government in November . I draw Cabinets attention to the fact that voting age is within the Reviews Terms of Reference and the interim report will be shortly before Parliament is due to debate the DOI and the Bill (scheduled for late June ). Implementation The Electoral Commission will be responsible for implementing a lower voting age. The Commission will need to update the roll to include eligible people in this age group. There will be more complex administrative changes if the voting age is only lowered for local and not parliamentary elections. Financial Implications The proposals in this paper have significant financial implications that are currently unmet, for both the Electoral Commission and for local councils (in respect of local elections). The Electoral Commission has not had time to develop detailed costings for both the implementation of any changes, and ongoing costs associated with an increased electoral roll size, and enrolment and other romotional activities tar eted to the to earold demo ra hie. Local authorities fund the costs of local elections from their own budgets. Due to the time constraints, we have not sought information from local authorities about the cost implications of these changes. However, we note that adding extra electors will slightly increase administration costs for councils (such as costs for producing voting papers, postage, and counting votes). Those councils with the means to may also wish to undertake promotional activities which are targeted to the and yearold demographic at extra cost as well. The Ministry of Justice will engage with the Electoral Commission and Treasury on the financial implications. I will update Cabinet Legislation Committee on these financial implications when I seek approval to introduce the Bill in February. Legislative Implications The Bill will amend the Electoral Act and the Local Electoral Act, as well as other statutes that use the definition of electors set out in the Electoral Act. usoq Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E usoq
MATTR is an independent, stand alone subsidiary of Spark established in February . It is a software company with a research and development focus specifically looking at decentralised identity solutions which provide people with greater control over their personal information. INCONFIDENCE Page of Financial Implications We are seeking funding for the implementation of the interim Trust Framework and the development of the Trust Fr amework Bill . Our proposal for implementing an interim Trust Framework in and accelerating the development of a statutory Trust Framework will require additional funding of . million for and . million in . This cost includes t he costs of a standards and approvals team, a governance secretariat and payments for possible non government board members for the interim Trust Framework. It also includes the cost of developing legislation to formally establish the Trust Framework and t he costs to coordinate investment in the development of digital identity common capabilities across government. We propose that these costs are charged against the between Budget contingency established as part of Budget . . Cost recovery models were not considered feasible for the interim Trust Framework due to the risk that the costs of accreditation could discourage early testing and adoption of the Trust Framework. Indicative estimates of the costs on providers to meet the accreditation requirements c urrently range from , to ,, with additional ongoing compliance costs of up to , per annum. Avoiding early implementation of cost recovery under the interim Trust Framework will help to drive involvement by initial participants. Higher initial participation in the interim Trust Framework will allow us to more effectively test whether it meets the needs of participants. Funding is sought through the between Budget contingency for and . Cabinet Office Circular CO () Propo sals with Financial Implications and Financial Authorities requires that proposals for funding from the between Budget contingency demonstrate that the proposal cannot be funded through reprioritisation, cannot be deferred until the next Budget, and should be supported with the same degree of information as a Budget proposal. . The Department of Internal Affairs has reviewed options for reprioritising funding from within Vote Internal Affairs baselines. It is unable to identify reprioritisation option s while maintaining current service delivery and a committed programme of works. It is also deploying significant resources into the COVID response to support local government, communities and the Government Chief Digital Officers response. This effort may require the Department of Internal Affairs to reprioritise resources away from other programmes. . If the funding proposal outlined in this Cabinet paper was deferred until , officials would be unable to prepare the development of an interim Trust Framework until the end of the calendar year at the earliest.
Months Jail for Child Sex Abuse Images
New Zealand Institute of Economic Research Investment in natural hazards mitigation forecasts and findings about mitigation investment August . See Ministry for the Environment. . National Climate Change Risk Assessment for Aotearoa New Zealand: Main report Arotakenga Traru m te Huringa huarangi o otearoa: Prongo whakatp. Wellington: Ministry for the Environment. at p ; NIWA. . New Zealand Fluvial and Pluvial Flood Exposure. Wellington. Ministry for the Environment. . National Climate Change Risk Assessment for Aotearoa New Zealand: Main report Arotakenga Traru m te Huringa huarangi o otearoa: Prongo whakatp. Wellington: Ministry for the Environment. Saunders, W.S.A., Mathieson, J.E. . Out on a LIM: The role of Land Information Memorandum in natural hazard management, GNS Science Miscellaneous Series . Australian Productivity Commission . Barriers to Effective Climate Change Adaptation, Report No. , Final Inquiry Report, Canberra, at p. . New Zealands National Natural Disaster Resilience Strategy NationalDisasterResilienceStrategyApril.pdf (civildefence.govt.nz); EQCs Resilience Strategy for Natural Hazard Risk Reduction EQC Resilience Strategy .pdf which includes a goal that homeowners are riskaware and understand the choices they can make to become more resilient to natural hazards; United Nations Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction supports increasing public understanding of natural hazard risk.
Officials advise replacing the IaaS agreements will not significantly impact agency
On August , Cabinet agreed the final detailed terms of reference for
Regulatory compliance: cloud operators must comply with various regulatory
Second hand gambling harm is the impact of an individuals gambling on those who live in the same household, or their wider family and community. Thimasarn Anwar et al. (). Gambling report: Results from the Health and Lifestyles Survey. Wellington: Health Promotion Agency Research and Evaluation Unit. The majority of pokie venues are located in the most deprived communities, and expenditure is high. NZIER (). The retail employment and tax costs of Class gambling in New Zealand. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
Stanley Street, Parnell.
T he Government consulted the public o n the Royal Commissions terms of
The AI in Government Taskforce: examining use and governance of AI by the APS Digital Transformation Agency (dta.gov.au) Digital Nations AI Working Group includes representatives from Canada (Chair), New Zealand, Israel, South Korea, Mexico, Portugal, UK, Uruguay, Denmark ()(f)(ii) ()(f)(ii) ()(f)(ii) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs UNCLASSIFIED Page of .
The Bill also contains consequent ial amendments to a number of Acts, including the Electoral Act and some local Acts. Many of these consequential amendments are to align the eligibility rules for other local government electoral processes (such as special issue referendums) with the new local government voting and candidacy ages.
The Court held that the inconsistency wit h section of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act had not been just ified, leaving open the question of whether the minimum voting age of could be justified in the future.
The affected Acts will be:
The arguments in favour of a higher age for voting for alcohol licensing trusts, standing as a candidate in local elections (including alcohol licensing trusts), and being appointed to an alcohol licensing trust are: . some New Zealanders may have concerns about the possibility that and yearolds could be elected or appointed to lo cal government or other representative positions, and may lack the competence to perform their functions; and . some New Zealanders may consider it is unusual for and yearolds to be alcohol licensing trust members when they are not old enough to purchase alcohol.
The cloud infrastructure is provisioned for exclusive use by a single organization
The development of a model for Mori data governance (MDG) is a Stats NZ and the DILG workstream.
The levy weighting s that determine the share that each levy paying sector will pay towards the cost of the Strategy will be set at percent on player expenditure , and percent on presentations to problem gambling services , attributable to each levy paying sector . The Ministry and the Gambling Commission have met the detailed requirements specified in the Act to refresh the Strategy and develop new levy rates . A broad range of industry, service provider and community stakeholders were consulted and made submissions , including Mori, Pacific and Asian service providers and commu nity representatives . While most submissions supported the new proposals, noncasino gaming machine operators were critical of the need for extra funding, research and new services. Historically there is a risk of judicial review of the levy or strategy p rocess . While the Ministry cannot eliminate this risk , it is confident that it has done everything reasonable to develop the Strategy and levy as required under the Act . Background Previous Cabinet consideration On August , Cabinet : . approved the release of a Ministry of Healths (the Ministrys) consultation document on the proposed Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm to (the Strategy) ; and . invited the Associate Minister of Health with responsibility for Problem G ambling and the Minister of Internal Affairs to report to Cabinet Wellbeing Policy Committee, following the required consultation process, seeking policy approval s for the Strategy , the Ministrys appropriation, and the problem gambling levy rates for the per iod from July to June SWC MIN refers . This paper is that report back and takes into account feedback from consultation. Gambling harm The Act defines gambling harm broadly and includes harm from another persons gambling. Gambling harm can include depression, suicide , relationship breakdown, reduced work productivity, job loss, bankruptcy and crime. Harm can extend to family, wh nau, friends, employers, colleagues, and whole communities. He Ara Oranga noted Gambling was also seen as harmful due to its addictive nature and the financial stress and anxiety it causes families, contributing to neglect of children and family violence. Research shows that children in families affected by harmful gamb ling are more likely to develop risky gambling behaviours. While reported rates of gambling harm are at their lowest levels in years, the number of people affected has increased in line with population growth over the past seven years. Gambling harm a ffects percent of the New Zealand population, while one in five will be affected at some time in their lives by their own or someone elses gambling. Research estimates about , people aged years or older are at high risk of harm or problem gamblers, , are at moderate risk and , are at low risk , but would experience gambling related harm . Importantly, the burden of harm attributable to low risk gambling is wzrxijjr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
agreed that the changes to appropriations for above be included in the
agreed to amend the Rates Rebate Act so that water bills will be included in the definition of rates under Rates Rebate Scheme (leaving current beneficiaries of the scheme unaffected by the change in water service provider), with a consequential increase in expenses; Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government I N C O N F I D E N C E CAB MIN I N C O N F I D E N C E omuxuzqw agreed the following changes to appropriations in accordance with section of the Rates Rebate Act , reflecting the changed expenses described in paragraph above, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance andor net core Crown debt:
approved a drawdown of . million from the Three Waters Infrastructure Investment and Service Delivery Reform Programme tagged contingency, as follows:
authorised the Minister of Justice and Minister of Local Government to make further policy decisions, if required following consultation, relating to voting e ligibility rules for entities, other than local government and alcohol licensing trusts, that are part of local elections;
authorised the Minister of Local Government to make minor and consequential policy decisions that may arise during the drafting process instead of the Minister of Justice;
inperson workshops with iwihap and local govt
note legacy, onpremise infrastructure can pose challenges to management of
note that I propose that t he Bill be introduced on the same day as the Government Response to the Declar ation of Inconsistency regarding the minimum voting age in the Local Electoral Act and the Electoral Act ; and Section ()(h) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E
note that the Minister of Local Government and the Minister of Justice will report back to the Cabinet Legislation Committee in late July seeking approval to introduce the Bill within this Parliament term.
noted that legacy, onpremise infrastructure can pose challenges to the management of
noted that the Minister of Local Government is proposing that the Elections (Lowering the Voting Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legisl ation Bill be introduced on the same day as the government response;
noted that, at this time and subject to final policy approvals, the Omnibus Bill is intended
am Tues December
am Tues November
am Tues November
am Tues November
am Tues December
.am Tues January
.am Tues December
.am Tues November
.am Tues January
. As set out in this paper, there are six key differences between the Mori wards process
. Description of personal information to be shared
. Description of personal information to be shared .
. Early engagement with drinking water and wastewater operators confirms this sub
. IF the card is lost or stolen the cardholder shall immediately notify the Company and the Department either personally or by telephone with written confirmation. If the cardholder does not notify the Company of such loss or theft he or she shall be personally liable for all debts incurred as a result of the unauthorised use of that card.
. Local and global CloudAI providers are actively seeking to influence the governments approach to AI. Some providers are already introducing AI capability into the products public servants use daily, and others are seeking to influence Government AI policy. We understand some providers will seek to brief you directly, and should you choose to engage, we would welcome the opportunity to support you in these meetings .
. Mechanism by which information is accessed
. Officials would like to discuss the risks, benefits, and tradeoffs of the two options with
. On March , you agreed to amend the current statutory timeframe requiring all
. These objectives must be taken into account when considering taking prosecution action.
. Treasury recommends that the additional funding required is fully funded from
. Type of personal information to be shared
. Type of personal information to be shared .
. agree that the proposed changes to appropriations for above be
. note that, at this time and subject to final policy approvals, this Omnibus Bill is
. . million being the residual balance of the allocation agreed by Cabinet in December for policy and related services CAB MIN .;
. deliver other improvements to the local electoral framework as outlined
. deliver other improvements to the local electoral framework, as outlined in the paper
.. NZSIS may have Direct Access to DA information through dedicated DA terminals
. . million to meet the most urgent cost pressures in policy advice, legislation, ministerial services , and communications;
. consolidate two Bills currently on the Legislative Programme: the Local
. consolidate two Bills on the Legislative Programme: the Local
.. Detailed mechanisms by which NZSIS may have Direct Access to DA Information are set
. . million to meet cost pressures in the Future for Local Government Review;
. progress on the same timeframes accorded to the Local Electoral (Mori
. progress on the same timeframes accorded to the Local Electoral (Mori Wards and
.. Any material changes to these access mechanisms or the PIA must be notified to the
. be introduced to the House and referred to a select committee in March and
.The severe weather events in early placed significant pressure on council
agreed that technical experts can be consulted, if needed, during the drafting process.
. I propose to report back to Cabinet by July , on how digital shared services will be established and organised for transfer to water services entities. . I also note that officials will be giving ongoing consideration , through the entity establishment process, to issues relating to major natural hazard risk management and insurance . This will include whether early direction might be required to entities on the need for a cross entity approach to management of major natural hazard risks and insurance. ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
. Until that time, in the interim period it is intended a light touch enforcement approach is used. A likely bigger deterrent to reputable providers than is the risk of losing their licences in larger more profitable jurisdictions by breaching New Zealands prohibition. This is because in some cases, licences in other jurisdictions, which are likely to have more profitable markets, are at risk if licence holders intentionally breach laws in other jurisdictions. . In addition, it is proposed that the criteria for an operator to gain a licence for an online casino will involve the operators track record of legislative compliance. Breaching the sporting and racing online monopoly would therefore jeopardise an operators chance of gaining an online casino licence and the significant financial benefits that would bring. . The enforcement powers are not expected to include internet blocking of offshore providers. This is an expensive and inefficient tool for enforcement. Internet filters are easily circumnavigated by consumers and less reputable providers, and are considered an intrusion on the principles of a free and open internet. Most reputable providers prohibited from operating in New Zealand will institute geoblocking on their platforms. . Enforcement action would be targeted at offshore operators. We do not propose banning or criminalising New Zealanders who gamble with offshore operators, as this could discourage people from seeking help if they are at risk of or experiencing gambling harm. The online monopoly, combined with the Entain partnership, will require greater oversight of TAB NZ and protections for customers . Expanding TAB NZs monopoly to online settings by prohibiting all other forms of online sports and racing betting is a significant consolidation of the revenue gathering channels for the sporting and racing industries. . There are some risks to providing a monopoly to TAB NZ without sufficient oversight and monitoring by Government, including the possibility that the mechanisms in place to support the racing industry continue to fail, following the guaranteed return period in the partnership with Entain.
. The Local Government Commission acts as a safeguard during the appeals and objections stage of the representation review process . Their role is to ensure councils are applying representation principles appropriately and complying with legislative requirements , as well as providing a mediation process between councils and members of the public regarding any disagreements. Removing it as part of this option could lead to poorer representation arrangements and or ongoing community dissatisfaction with council decision making.
. The Local Government Commission provides an apolitical review role over the representation review process . Without it, there may be a perception that councils have incentives to choose representation arrangements that suit the current elected members. This is important in the context of the publics trust and confidence in local elections. What scope will options be considered within . The Minister of Local Governments policy direction limits the scope of options that can be considered to address this objective. Non regulatory options were not considered as Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
drmjmmn
drmjmmn
drmjmmn Inland Revenue s (IR) previous investment in becoming a digitally
drmjmmn
drmjmmn Officials present from:
drmjmmn :
drmjmmn
for example, with the industrygovernm ent collaboration on the Cyber Skills
March , Cabinet paper: Reducing Pokies Harm: Approval to consult and Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee Minutes of Decision SWC MIN ; and December , Regulatory Impact Statement: Interim assessment for Reducing Pokies Harm
Before agencies move to cloud, they must undertake a risk assessment. Guidance is
For example, by using more sustainable data centres or efficient use of cloud resources or applications.
Increased cyber resilience: cloud platforms are highly visible and valuable targets
Not to keep personal information for longer than necessary
Participants include employees, trainers, breeders, owners, and volunteers with varying levels of engagement. Around , people attend race meetings annually. Source: Size and Scope of the New Zealand Racing Industry, prepared by IER for the Racing Codes, January , provided to the Department. Section , Racing Industry Act . Other sources of income for the Codes may include interest income, operating revenue, and sale of goods and services. Sources Figure calculated from the racing codes annual reports: GRNZ Annual Report .pdf; Annual Report .pdf (hrnz.co.nz); and NZTR AR FINAL.pdf This number distributions based only on betting revenue. It does not include Gaming duty savings and racing betting information use charges , or distributions from Class gambling (pokies) revenue. Source: TAB NZ Annual Report . qwkdm Regulatory Impact Assessment . Appendix A outlines the flow of income to the racing industry (excluding the flow of income to sporting organisations). The diagram reflects the new operating environment under the TAB NZ Entain partnership. However, the values are from financial year, prior to the commencement of the partnership. The racing industry has been through a period of significant reforms since . In response to concerns about the racing industry declining , in April the Minister for Racing, Rt Hon Winston Peters appointed senior Australian racing expert John Messara to review the New Zealand racing industrys governance structures and provide recommendations on future directions for the industry. The Minister released the report on August which made a package of sweeping recommendation s for reform of the industry. . Following the release Messara report , a significant process of legislative reform was undertaken in to respond to the reports findings . These culminated with the enact ment of the new Racing Industry Act ( Racing Act ) which established a new industry structure . . A major change was to establish TAB NZ as a statutory entity focused on wagering and responsibility for running the industry was devolved to the racing codes. . The reforms also: progressively repealed the Gaming Duty on TAB NZ (redirecting funds to the racing industry); established offshore charges to provide additional sources of revenue to the racing industry (Betting Information Use Charges (BIUC) and POCC); and allowed TAB NZ to partner with offshore betting operators. . It should be noted that the Messara report; while making recommendation s on TAB NZ outsourcing its functions to an overseas provider, and introducing offshore changes did not make any specific recommendations around an online monopoly. . In the Government also provided a support package of .m to the racing industry to support its recovery from COVID . Due to pandemic restrictions limiting sporting and racing events in New Zealand and internationally, the industry (and TAB NZ) lost revenue. In early , TAB NZ was facing a rapid and ongoing drop in its revenue, which affected their distributions to racing industry . By early , TAB NZ was facing a rapid and ongoing decline in its revenue due to competition from offshore operators. From May to November , TAB NZ missed its betting profits target by an average of . million each month (the worst performance was a . million shortfall in just one month), meaning profits were running on average . below target .
Phase of the Royal Commission will begin considering evidence and engaging with stakeholders from November . It is required to deliver a
Private Cloud services are only available to a specificdefined set of users who are on
Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
See footnote about the use of indeterminate. This was intended to be an option for people who do not identify their gender as male or female. See paragraph of the Darlington Statement (a joint statement of Australian and New Zealand intersex advocates) See page of the Human Rights Commissions PRISM report () Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . A key consideration has been ensuring we can future proof the legislation. Gender theory and terminology evolves rapidly what was appropriate five years ago may not be what is used today . Setting the sex markers in regulations will mean they can be more easily reviewed and to ensure they meet the needs of transgender and intersex people. I propose amending the definition of eligible person to exclude people whose birth cannot be registered in New Zealand . . The Family Court process includes overseas born citizens and permanent residents whose birth cannot be registered in New Zealand in the definition of eligibl e person. This dates from when overseas born New Zealanders needed a Family Court declaration to update their gender on other official documentation, such as passports and driver licences. Overseas born New Zealanders now no longer need a Family Court declaration to update these documents in New Zealand . . The Bill does not have extra territorial jurisdiction. It would not be appropriate to legislate a process to amend information for births registered overseas. The impact of the change in definition on those born overseas but who reside in New Zealand is expected to be minimal. However, I am considering whether a process needs to be available to allow overseas born residents (including M ori) to have the ir gende r recognised on an official document . I propose a statutory review of the self identification provisions five years after enactment . The complexity of the policy and the sensitivity of this issue will make it important that the legislative settings are eva luated after enactment. A review would provide a transparent assessment of whether the policy settings supporting a self identification process are functioning well in practice. It would not include reviewing the basic change to a self identification proce ss. The statutory review would involve engagement with transgender and intersex communities and require developing a report to present to Parliament. The self identification process should apply to c hildren and young people . Children and young people unde r years can already access the Family Court process to amend their registered sex . Like adults, I want them to have access to a self identification process. It is important to ensure that children and young people can use their birth certificate without stress or discrimination and feel accepted for who they are as they grow up. A process for children and young people recognises that people are aware of their gender from a young age . . It is important that the process applies to children and young people as birth certificates may be one of the only forms of identification available to them and are used to enrol in education or apply for jobs . Other forms of identification are more expensive (eg passpor ts) or age restrictive (eg driver licences). As children and young people more frequently rely on birth certificates , they will face more daily stressors when th e sex recorded does not align with their gender, such as outing, invasive questions, discrimi nation or bullying.
The Government can choose to introduce a Bill even though it is inconsistent with NZBORA.
The accompanying paper, Government Response to the Declaration of Inconsistency: Voting age in the Electoral Act and the Local Electoral Act , from myself and the Minister of Justice, proposes that the Government Response to the Declarati on of Inconsistency be tabled at the same time the Bill is introduced. This means the Bill can form part of the Government Response, and can be discu ssed as part of the House debate on the Declaration of Inconsistency.
The wide variance in the cost estimate is because costs can only be established once t he Trust Framework rules, compliance process and accreditation obligations are established . The Department currently has no method by which to determine how many entities will be in each category, or if the costs will vary significantly depending on the na ture of the participant (public sector versus private sector), or the role a participant plays in the ecosystem (e.g. information provider vs infrastructure provider). INCONFIDENCE Page of . If the implementation of the interim Trust Framework and development of the legislation is deferred, the problems with the current system will be perpetuated as new services arise. It will be harder to back fill compliance requirements after the services are built, and we may lose opportunities for innovation and collaboration if there are not ways for key information sources to be accessed appropriately. These risks, already present prior to Covid , are exacerbated by the current increase in use of digital services and the proliferation of new digital identity services. A Budget Bid will be made in for phase : the formal establishment of the Trust Framework in legislation . Indicative costings of implementing the formal Trust Framework amount to . million in total from to . This includes the co st of supporting and accrediting potential Trust Framework participants, providing governance and updating and maintaining the Trust Framework and supporting operational policies. The costs and funding sources will be refined to take into account the cost recovery model for the Trust Framework and detailed in a Budget bid, pending Cabinet agreement. A cost recovery model will be developed for the statutory Trust Framework, which will be in effect once the legislation is passed . A cost recovery model will be developed as part the legislative programme for the formal Trust Framework, and the Bill will p rovide the accreditation body with the power to charge for accreditation. The Department will first need to finalise the Trust Framework rules and accreditation processes before it can determine what kind of cost recovery model should be established. . Cost recovery will likely be nominal for participating agencies (to avoid the inefficiencies of government charging government) and actual for private sector entities. Work on potential cost recovery models for the formal Trust Framework will be progressed as part of the transitional policy and legislative development programme in the financial year. . Any system of cost recovery will need to consider the respective public and private benefits conferred by the Trust Framework. While some benefits may be f inancial and private in nature, many are not. The World Bank has stated that identification should be treated as a public good, provided to facilitate the rights and inclusion of individuals and to improve administration and service delivery. . A Trust Fra mework is critical infrastructure for the delivery of this public good, and will confer benefits to a wide range of system participants including regulators (e.g. by improving compliance monitoring, data collection and storage standards), the private secto r (through the provision of more valuable services, leading to increased revenue and greater compliance) and the public (e.g. through greater privacy, security and transparency around data use).
These are the first DOIs issued since the New Zealand Bill of Rights (Declarations of Inconsistency) Amendment Act came into effect. The Bill of Rights and sessional orders outline the procedure for the Government and Parliament to respond to t he DOIs as set out below:
This proposal will allow chief executives to delegate the ability to sign certificates of compliance under section of the Local Government Act to ensure that lending arrangements are not delayed. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
agree that the government propos e that the Bill be:
agreed that the age of standing as a candidate for parliamentary and local elections remain at ;
agreed to transfer . million from the Three Waters Infrastructure Investment and Service Delivery Reform Programme tagged operating contingency to the Transforming Three Waters Service Delivery for New Zealanders: Transition and Implementation tagged operating contingency to:
https:www.dia.govt.nzBDMReviewWorkingGroupforreducingbarrierstochangingregistered sexReport Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
note that a debate on the DOI, select committee report and Government Response must take place within six si tting days of the response being tabled.
note that the proposals in the paper are not intended to conflict with the Public
note the cost for the Electoral Commission to implement the Bill will not be known before the Bill is intro duced, but the Commission will need additional funding to implement the changes; and
noted that a debate on the DOI, se lect committee report and Government Response must take place within six sitting days of the response being tabled. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E LEGMIN I N C O N F I D E N C E akgmm
noted that addressing some ofthe total cost through reprioritisation within Vote Internal
noted that the proposals in the paper under ERSSUB are not intended to conflict
noted there is significant administrative complexi ty in reducing the voting age for local elections only;
https:science.sciencemag.orgcontenteabb.abstract
.am Friday December
am Wed October
()(a) ()(a) ()(a) ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
()(a) ()(a) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
()(a) ()(b)(ii) ()(f)(iv) ()(g) (i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
()(a) ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
()(a) ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
()(a) ()(f)(iv), ()(g)(i) ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
()(a) ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
()(a) ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
()(a) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
()(a) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs ()(b)(ii) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs ()(b)(ii) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs ()(b)(ii) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs ()(b)(ii) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs ()(b)(ii) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs ()(b)(ii) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs ()(b)(ii) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
()(a) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
()(a) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
()(a) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsUpcoming Meetings and Engagements Paul James, Chief Executive and Michael Lovett, Deputy Chief Executive Time I General Meetings and Engagements I Attending Thursday June pm to David Langford, Chief Executive Michael Lovett (DCE) and pm Whanganui District Council Caroline Dumas (Partnersh ip Director) Wednesday July am to Dame Karen Poutasi and Allan Prangnell Paul James .am Taumata Arowa i Briefings and Cabinet papers to the Minister Nga Panuitanga Whakamohio me Runanga Minita hoki Title I to M;n;ste, IAcUon for I Key Contact I Respons;ble Minister DCEManager Briefing: joint briefing with June For agreement Tom Bex Sullivan IRD on the tax status for Broadhead I RD S()(a I water service delivery vehicles Briefing: Disability assist dog June For noting Jorge Bolanos Anthea Oliver system Lopez ((a I Aide Memoire: summary of June For noting Erica Bex Sullivan decisions requested for Bill SeftonElzani ()(a) I Viljoen Aide Memoire: Meeting with June For noting Milan Magan Stacey Hayward David Langford CEO, Deputy Sa I Mayor Helen Craig, Whanganu i District Council with Carl Bates Briefing: Development June For agreement Anna Barry Bex Sullivan contributions for water ((a I organisations Briefing: pricing and June For agreement Tom Broadhead Bex Sullivan charging ()(a) I Briefing: Use of standard and June For noting Pam Johnston Bex Sullivan modular design for water ((a I infrastructure Briefing: Stormwater further June For agreement Phil Eyles Bex Sullivan matters for Bill ((a I Page of INCONFIDENCE Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsTitle I to M;n;ste, IAcUon for I Key Contact I Respons;ble Minister DCEManager Briefing: Appointment June For noting Victor Lam Ben Leggett decisions for the Taumata ()(a) I Arowai Board Briefing: stock take of local June For noting James Stratford Rowan Burns authority activities )(a) I Briefing: Further advice on June For Margaret Bex Sullivan regulatory and agreement McArthur ()(a) I infrastructure powers Briefing: Implementing June For approval Becky Abley Bex Sullivan Local Water Done Well: ()(a) I transfer of funding to support the Commerce Commission Briefing: Implemen tation of June For Michael Bex Sullivan water service delivery plans agreement Pet he rick )(a) I Briefing: Local government June For noting Renee Duffel Mark Tregurtha retention payments ((a I Briefing: Enabling longterm June For agreement Hamed Shafiee Bex Sullivan contracting arrangements ((a I Local Government (Electoral June For noting Amanda Shaw Rowan Burns Legislation and Maori )() I Wards and Maori Constituencies) Amendment Bill materials for second reading Briefing: Appointment of June For f(a) Bex Sullivan the Watercare Crown agreement ()(a) I Monitor Briefing: Wastewater June For Felicity Lawlor Bex Sullivan environmental performance agreement ()(a) I standards minimum and maximum range approach )(f)(iv) I June For Victor Lam Bex Sullivan agreement ((a I I Briefing: next steps on local June For noting Daniel Bellam Rowan Burns government efficiencies ()(a) I project Page of INCONFIDENCE Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairsrecommendat ions on Taumata Arowa i Board appointments lodged Joint Briefing with NEMA: Monitoring of WhakaariWh ite Island ()(f)( . iv, Aide Memoire: Monthly meeting with LGNZ on July Briefing: Draft cabinet paper APH Watercare Crown monitor appointment Aide memoire: Meeting with Marie Black, Mayor of Hurunui, Craig Mackle, Mayor of Kaikoura Dan Gordon, Mayor of Waimakariri June June June June June July agreement For noting Lauren Anthea Oliver Thompson a For decision Sara Hames Fergus Broom ()(a For noting Olivia Ryan Stacey Hayward Ha For Nathan Croft Bex Sullivan agreement For noting Jade Badcock Jade Badcock ()(a) For noting Daniela Orru Jade Badcock ((a Bills before the House I Nga Pire kei te aroaro o te Whare Title I Purpose I Stage Local Government (Electoral Legislation and Maori Wards and Maori Constituencies) Amendment Bill Member in charge: Hon Simeon Brown This Bill reinstates binding polls on Maori wards and requires councils to hold a poll if they establish Maori wards without holding a binding poll. This Bill also makes changes to the timeframes for local elections to give more time for the postal delivery of voting papers. INCONFIDENCE The Bill completed its first reading and has been referred to the Justice Committee. The Committee Report is due June . Page of Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsLocal Government (Water Services This bill establishes preliminary The Bill completed Preliminary Arrangements) Bill arrangements for local government its first reading and water services delivery. has been referred to Member in charge: the Finance and Hon Simeon Brown Expenditure Committee. The Committee Report is due July . Ministerial Official Information Act requests Nga Tono i raro i te Ture Mohiohio Okawa aMinita Name I Request I to I Last fa, Minister reply r)(S) Information regarding June June Maori Ward referendums Departmental Official Information Act requests Nga Tono i raro i te Ture Mohiohio Okawa aTari Name I Request I to I Last fa, Minister reply )(a) Request for June June information relating to TAG Infrastructure Request for Briefings June June related to economic regulation of water services Information regarding June June Impact Assessment of Local Government (Rating) Act Request for information June June relating to LWDW Auckland City and June June Regional Deals INCONFIDENCE I Key contact (DDI) Stacey Hayward ()(a) I I Key contact (DOI) Jade Badcock ()(a) I Jade Badcock ()(a) I Stacey Hayward Ha I Jade Badcock ()(a) I Stacey Hayward ()(a) I Page of Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsName I Request I to I last lo, I Key contact Minister reply (DDI) ()(a) Copies all decisions by June June Stacey Hayward development ()(a) I contributions commissioners made under the Local Government Act , after Mar Request for Briefings to June June Jade Badcock the Minister of Local ()(a) I Govt on National Transition Unit All performance plans in June June Stacey Hayward the Local Government )a) I Portfolio since November and any briefings on impacts to service delivery in LG branch in same timeframe Request for information June June Jade Badcock relating to expenditure )(a) I on consultancy for Three Waters Request for information June June Jade Badcock regarding amendment l()(a) I proposals to scope of work better off funding Request for documents June July Jade Badcock developed by DIA Three )(a) I Waters Reform NTU Copies of June July Stacey Hayward correspondence with ()(a) I Buller District Council that requires it to incur extra expenses to comply with government requirements Request for Auckland June July Jade Badcock Watercare briefings )(a) I Page of INCONFIDENCE Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairsthe Minister for Local Government related to the announcement of a water agreement for Auckland to the applicability of the Auckland deal to other councils or regions. Request for LWDW TAG Correspondence Request for informati on held on the NTU information management system Request for financial information regarding the Local Government Funding Agency Question about Chatham Islands Stakeholder Forum June July July July INCONFIDENCE July Jade Badcock ((a July Jade Badcock ()(a) July Stacey Hayward a July Stacey Hayward Page of
()(a) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of Appendix A: Water services regulatory context December
()(b)(ii) ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
()(ba)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of k) l) note that a specific amendment is being made to infringement provisions that relate to Taumata Arowai.
()(f)(iv) ()(g)(i) IN CONFIDENCE Page of Approach to consumer protection . The Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs and I have been developing an appropriate approach to consumer protection, to complement t he new economic regulation regime and local government water services delivery system. . We do not consider t here is a compelling case to introduce new, mandatory consumer protection measures into the primary legislation , particularly given the costs and bureaucracy that could be associated with such measures. It is currently unclear that there are problems with existing consumer protection measures, or whether any problems will emerge with the new local government service delivery arrangements. . Local government water service providers already have systems and processes in place for proposing and reporting on levels of service relating to water services, and for dealing with complaints about the services they provide. As drinking water suppliers, they are also subject to requirements to have complaints processes, under the Water Services Act. . If new water organisations are established, we expect these arrangements will apply. As owners of these organisations, councils will also be able to set any additional expectations that may be relevant locally such as requirements to have processes for collecting and responding to customer feedback on an organisations water services, or to undertake engagement with consumers. . We do not want to impose new statutory requirements on water service providers unless it is clear that further intervention is needed, and any costs can be justified. For example, if providers were required by the legislation to become members of an external dispute resolution bodyscheme, this would incur costs that would likely be passed on to consumers. These are identified as matters that ownersshareholders could include in a statement of expectations, referred to in the paper Local Water Done Well stage : water services delivery system . ()(g)(i) IN CONFIDENCE Page of . Instead, w e are proposing to take a pragmatic approach, which would leverage existing mechanisms, and enable further consumer protection measures to be considered later if these are needed to improve existing processes and settings. This approach is outlined below. Provision should be made for consumer protection measures to be included through regulations , if needed . As agreed through our joint paper, Local Water Done Well stage : water services regulatory system ECO MIN , information disclosure will be a key component of the new economic regulation regime that will apply to local government water service providers . . We consider information disclosure could be used to oversee aspects of the consumer experience, such as the number and themes arising in consumer complaints relating to local government water service providers . This would enable the Commerce Commission to learn more about how existing consumer protection settings are working in practice, and identify potential shortcomings. . To facilitate this, we are seeking a gree ment that the legislation clearly enable s the Commerce Commission to require public reporting from water service providers on consumer protection issues , and to publicly summarise and analyse the information disclosed. . We are also proposing the legislation includes the power for the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs to make regulations relating to consumer protection measures. This will provide flexibility to consider what may be needed in the future particularly if information disclosure reveals that issues exist . The focus of these measures would be on providing protections for individual consumers primarily households and small businesses. . This power could be used to propose make regulations on any matters that relate to consumer protection measures. In particular , the provisions will allow for requirements that may be needed in the future relating to: . complaint processes, the provision of information, the recording of complaints, andor reporting ; andor . providing access to an external consumer dispute resolution process ; . other matters relating to consumer protections that the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs considers necessary and appropriate . . The proposed approach does not affect or amend the consumer complaints provisions that apply to drinking water suppliers in the Water Services Act , or the role Taumata Arowai has in relation to those provisions. The Commerce Commissions role would be complementary, and put an additional and enhanced focus on local government water services providers providing transparency about all t heir services. The Commission and Taumata Arowai should be able to share information with each other on these matters , where relevant . . If regulations are made, we would expect them to be designed in a way that ensures there is no unnecessary duplication across the regulatory systems and local government water service providers are not covered in the scope of two different sets of requirements. IN CONFIDENCE Page of Service quality codes could be a useful addition, but should be sector led in the first instance . Service quality codes are common in other domestic and international markets, and may be a useful addition to the new water services system. These codes tend to cover matters such as customer service, billing transparency, and communication about network outages. . If it became clear that a service quality code was required for the water services system, we would expect it to be sector led in the first instance. This might be done by individual or group s of water service providers, or by an industrysector body. . To support this approach , we propos e the Commerce Commission should be able to issue guidelines to water service providers on matters relating to a service quality code. . We are also proposing t he legislation enable s the Commerce Commission to make a service quality code in relation to the provision of water services, where no sector developed code exists or , in the opinion of the Commission , the purpose of Part of the Commerce Act could be better met by a mandatory code . This would allow the Commission to specify minimum requirements in relation to consumer experience. . Before making a code, the Commission w ill be required to provide a report to the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs containing the reasons for doing this . The legislation should also provide for appropriate mechanisms relating to enforcement and cost recovery . If the above proposals are agreed, the legislation will need to provide for associated compliance and enforcement provisions, to allow the Commerce Commission to take action should any consumer protections be brought into effect. We also need to consider how costs related to consumer protection s will be dealt with. . As noted in Local Water Done Well stage : water services regulatory system ECO MIN , the Commerce Act contains a range of compliance, enforcement and investigation powers for use under Part of that Act. . Through th at paper, i t was agreed similar mechanisms would be applied to the economic regulation of water services. I am proposing to extend these types of powers and tools to the enforcement of consumer protection regulation. The level of any penalties would be determined in consultation with the Ministry of Justice, and informed by similar requirements in other statutes. . It was also agreed recovery of costs for the economic regulation regime would be through levies, and that the legislation will include provisions that enable this. I am proposing to extend this recommendation so that costs related to consumer protections ma y also be recovered through levies (if needed) . Service quality codes are sometimes referred to as minimum service level standards or consumer care guidelines. IN CONFIDENCE Page of . The consumer protection proposals are designed to provide a scaled approach, so costs will only be imposed if there is evidence that a stronger means of regulation is justified. Initially, costs associated with consumer protection will be those incurred by the Commerce Commission when designing and monitoring consumer protection related information disclosure requirements . This will be part of the Commerce Commissions activities under the economic regulation regime. . If further consumer protection requirements are introduced through regulations, there would be costs associated with their implementation , and with compliance and monitoring activities carried out by the Commission. These costs w ill be considered as part of the analysis of costs and benefits when a decision is taken on their introduction. Amendments affecting Taumata Arowai and water quality regulat ion . As indicated in my previous paper ECOMIN , I have been exploring potential amendments to the water quality framework in the Water Services Act, and the legislation and practices relating to Taumata Arowai . . Decisions on an initial set of amendments were sought in th at paper, and a dditional proposals are set out below . I am proposing some changes relating to Taumata Arowai and how it operates Board appointments . Section of the Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act provides for the appointment of the board of Taumata Arowai. . Currently, under section (), the responsible Minister must appoint members to the board who, collectively, have knowledge and experience of, and capability in : . the compliance, monitoring, and enforcement activities of regulatory agencies; . public health; . the Treaty of Waitangi (Te Tiriti o Waitangi) and its principles; . perspectives of Mori and tikanga Mori; . performance monitoring and governance. . I consider this list is overly prescriptive and may hinder my ability to consider appointees who could make a valuable contribution to the board. I would prefer a more flexible approach, which would allow other attributes to be taken into account and provide access to a wider pool of potential members. . I am seeking agreement to amend section () to remove this list of specific attributes, and replace it with a more general provision to the effect that the Minister must only appoint people who, in the responsible Ministers opinion, have the appropriate knowledge, skills and experience to assis t the board to perform its role. IN CONFIDENCE Page of Ensuring cost considerations are more clearly incorporated into Taumata Arowais regulatory framework . Currently, consideration of cost is not explicitly mentioned in legislation, although it does form part of the p roportionate approach to regulat ion Taumata Arowai refers to in its regulatory documents. . As part of my focus on reducing the regulatory burden and the cost of compliance, I am seeking agreement to a mend the legislation to ensure consideration of cost is a clear part of Taumata Arowais legislative framework . This would need to be balanced alongside public health outcomes . . Section of t he Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act includes a list of operating principles that guide and inform Taumata Arowai in its performance and delivery of its objectives, functions, and duties . . I am proposing to include new operating principle s so that Taumata Arowai is expected to: . consider the cost of compliance on suppliers when performing and delivering its objectives, functions and duties , including an appropriate balance between public health outcomes and reasonable costs to suppliers. . ensure the regulatory framework is proportionate to the scale, complexity, and risk profile of each drinking water supply (and wastewater and stormwater networks, as the case may be), including the consideration of cost and affordability for the users of the supplies ; . proactively engage with suppliers and network operators to ensure that there is a path to compliance that takes into account the risk profile and capacity of the supplier or network operator itself. ()(f)(iv) IN CONFIDENCE Page of . This would provide Taumata Arowai with a clear legislative direction, which would then flow through into its operations, and the regulatory policy and guidance that it applies when regulating the sector. . I am also proposing to amend the operating principles of Taumata Arowai regarding Te Mana o te Wai to align with the proposed changes discussed later in this paper . Working pr oactively alongside Crown and local government suppliers . Currently, it is an express purpose of the Water Services Act that regulation is proportionate to the scale, complexity and risk profile of each drinking water supply. This has allowed Taumata Arowai to undertake targeted approaches to ensuring compliance with regulatory requirements wherever possible. . I want to ensure Taumata Arowai is directing its limited resources , and all available regulatory tools, to where they will have the most impact . I consider there should be a particular focus on larger drinking water suppliers (including Crown and local government suppliers), given the widespread consequences for public health if there is noncompliance and unsafe drinking water is supplied. . To help do this, I am propos ing to add a further operating principle into the Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act to ensure there is a clear legislative direction for Taumata Arowai to work proactively with suppliers, particularly larger suppliers, to ensure a path to regulatory compliance . I am also proposing some changes to the Water Services Act Ensuring it is clear Taumata Arowai can proactively issue exemptions , and improving alignment with other regulatory regimes . Section of the Water Services Act allow s the Chief Executive of Taumata Arowai to grant exemptions to any drinking water supplier or class of drinking water supplier from complying with nine requirements of the Act. This can be done if the exemption is consistent with the main purpose of the Act and , in the case of a class exemption, there has been public consult ation . . The Act is currently unclear about whether or not the Chief Executive can issue an exemption proactively that is, without the need for an application from a supplier. . I consider it is desirable to provide clarity about this, and am proposing the legislation enables exemptions to be issued proactively. This would provide flexibility to deal with situations where it is clear to the Chief Executive that an exemption is des irable and warranted . It would remove unnecessary costs and bureaucracy associated with submitting and assessing applications for exemptions. . I am also proposing to amend section () of the Act to allow exemptions to be granted for any one or more of the nine requirements that are currently specified. The current approach is all or nothing , which means the Chief Executive can only grant exemptions that apply to all nine of the listed regulatory requirements . IN CONFIDENCE Page of . Changing this approach would be consistent with other regulatory regimes that provide for exemptions, and provide additional flexibility. This is beneficial given the wide range of regulatory requirements listed in section ( ), and the fact that it may be appropriate to only provide exemptions relating to some of these requirements. . I am also seeking agreement to include a further item in the list in section ( ), so that exemption s may apply to requirements in section of the Act to notify Taumata Arowai of notifiable risk s or hazard s. Small suppliers , in particular , may benefit from an exemption from this duty. . My propos ed amendments w ill include additional statutory limitations and considerations that are found in other regimes . The amendments would provide for : . an express statement setting out the purpose of exemptions ; . flexibility to issue exemptions proactively, where compliance with th e relevant provisions referred to in section () of the Water Services Act is impractical, inefficient, unduly costly, or unduly burdensome (taking into account the nature of the specific issues ), or for matters that are minor or technical; . a requirement that the extent of the exemption granted cannot be broader than is reasonably necessary to address the matters that gave rise to the exemption. . Coupled with the existing requirement to publicly consult where class exemptions are being considered, and the need to publish the reasons for granting any exemption, the additional requirements should provide greater transparency , and safeguards for the Chief Executive and Taumata Arowai from perceptions of conflict of interests, inappropriate decision making , and industry capture . National engineering design standards . The provision of infrastructure is a key component of land use development. Councils develop and use Codes of Practice for Land Development to guide those people doing land developments on technical standards for network infrastructure. There are different standards in New Zealand providing information on how to design and construct water network infra structure. . Some work was undertaken during the previous governments reforms to develop national engineering design standards to provide the local government and the development sector with consistent national standard s. These would have been adopted on a voluntary basis. . I can see the potential benefits of national engineering design standards , which include consistent standards for design and construction of network infrastructure . This would support the Government s aim to increase standardisation to lower the costs on providing infrastructure. . Benefits are likely to include: For example, the list of requirements covered in section ( ) range from the duty to supply safe drinking water and comply with drinking water standards, to requirements to keep records and have consumer complaints processes. Similar to section B of the Overseas Investment Act , for example . IN CONFIDENCE Page of . greater efficiencies for the design, approval, procurement, construction , maintenance and renewal of network infrastructure; . the ability to use the national engineering design standards for construction and renewal contracts; . a common technical reference for the development of industry training and skills. accreditation programs for private sector suppliers. . National engineering design standards would provide regulatory engineers, design engineers, developers, and contractors servicing the land development industry with one common set of engineering design standards across New Zealand. They would not override any other regulatory requirements in relation to land development (such as Resource Management Act requirements ), but are intended to support the consenting process by providing the technical requirements for the planning, design, construction, and handove r of network infrastructure. . The primary purpose of these standards is to document technical best practice for design and construction of drinking water, wastewater and stormwater network or reticulation infrastructure. I anticipate they w ill include a mixture of mandatory minimum engineering design standards, and informative statements to provide context and enable better understanding of the mandatory requirements. They w ill be developed with appropriate technical and sector input, and reviewed regularly as new engineering methodolog y and products are developed. . I am proposing national engineering design standards are progressed and should be a mandatory requirement , provided for in legislation . However, further work is required to confirm the detailed scope, content and transitional arrangements needed to enable th is approach to be implemented. . To reflect the further work required, and the potential difficulties of providing for these matters in primary legislation, I am seeking agreement to include regulation making powers in the legislation relating to national engineering design standards . . The regulations would cover matters such as the detailed scope and content of these standards, the process for developing them, the relationship with other regulatory requirements, and any relevant transitional arrangements and timeframes. Extending the scope and transitional timeframes for an authorisation framework . The Water Services Act provi des for an authorisation framework to be developed and implemented through regulations . Once in place, th is framework will introduce requirements relating to the training, skills, or experience needed by operators of drinking water and wastewater networks , to help ensure these networks are operated safely. The Act provides discretion about how the framework should be designed and delivered, and details will be set out in the regulations. . Under transitional provisions in c lause of Schedule of the Act , all local authorit ies and CCOs that operate drinking water supplies are required to be authorised under the proposed authorisations framework within five years after the commencement of the Act (that is, by November ). IN CONFIDENCE Page of . I am seeking agreement to amend these transitional provisions, so councils and CCOs are required to be authorised within years after the commencement (November ). The provisions w ould also be to incorporate any new water organisations established by councils. . Work is currently underway to develop th e new authorisations framework, and no regulations have been made yet. This is a complex area , which includes a wide range of components and considerations including designing and putting in place mechanisms for delivering training and authorising particular operators. . Without this change to the statutory timeframes , there is a significant risk that the new requirements will be developed and introduced too quickly before the water sector is equipped to deliver and take up the necessary training . There may be unintended consequences , such as significant cost increases or difficulty maintaining safe staffing levels. . This longer timeframe w ill allow for essential collaborative work with the water sector on the design and implementation of an authorisations framework including the necessary training and support mechanisms . It will also ensure councils and CCOs that operate drinking water supplies and any new water organisations that councils may establish have sufficient time to become compliant with any new requirements . . I am also seeking agreement to expand the scope of the authorisation framework, and any regulations that may be made. The legislation currently refers to persons who operate, certify, test or assess drinking water supplies and wastewater networks. I consid er there should also be appropriate references to the work involved in the maintenance , repair or renewal of supplies andor networks (or parts, thereof ), and the Water Services Act should be amended to provide for this . . I want to ensure there is clarity that the new framework that will be developed and implemented can include persons such as plumbers who may be involved in working on these supplies and networks. . This will mean the qualifications and experience required for persons doing relevant work c an be provided for in a nationally consistent approach , through regulations which individual councils , water organisations , and other suppliers would then be expected to take into account at a local level. Requiring Taumata Arowai to provide acceptable solutions for suppliers . Under Section of the Water Services Act, Taumata Arowai may , by notice, issue a drinking water acceptable solution or verification method for use in establishing compliance with legislative requirements. . Acceptable solutions are a ready made option (template) to help drinking water suppliers meet standards. They apply to specific supply types and remove the need to submit a drinking water safety plan, if implemented in their entirety. Currently there are three acceptable solutions: Roof Water Supplies , Spring and Bore Drinking Water Supplies , and Mixed Use Rural Water Supplies. IN CONFIDENCE Page of . I am proposing to amend the Water Services Act to require Taumata Arowai to issue drinking water acceptable solutions (rather than this being a may in the legislation) . Ensuring these templates are readily available to a greater number of suppliers will help reduce the regulatory burden and costs for suppliers, by reducing the need for suppliers to develop their own bespoke solutions at cost to them . Changes relating to wastewater environmental performance standards . Taumata Arowai is currently developing national wastewater environmental performance standards under section of the Water Services Act. This provision empowers Taumata Arowai, following consultation, to make wastewater standards for the activities asso ciated with wastewater networks, like discharges to land or water. . Under current legislative settings, the standards are minimum standards. A regional council considering an application for a resource consent that relates to a wastewater network cannot grant a consent that has conditions that are less restrictive than the wastewater standards, but they may impose conditions that impose a higher standard. . I consider there should be a single standard, rather than a minimum or maximum. A single standard approach is consistent with international best practice. In other jurisdictions where a standard is set, plants are consented to a national standard. It is not a minimum standard it is just the standard. . I am proposing to amend the legislation to provide for a single standard approach. These amendments would be designed to ensure regional councils implement a single standard approach in resource consents, and cannot exceed the standard in consenting condit ions apart from on an exceptions basis. . This does not mean that th e environmental requirements for discharges to freshwater or coastal water will be lower. What it does mean is that we will enable a consistent approach for consenting the discharge of wastewater from treatment plants, which will reduce the regulatory burde n by ensuring environmental regulation in water services legislation is proportionate to risk and benefit. . This change will deliver much greater standardisation of treatment systems and related infrastructure, enable material cost efficiencies in the design, build and operation of wastewater systems , and provide councils greater certainty of costs. All of these outcomes are aligned with the objectives of Local Water Done Well. . Making this change is critical if we are going to support councils to address challenges in the reconsenting bow wave. Around percent of wastewater treatment plants will require reconsenting in the next years, with the most challenging issues arising where plants discharge to freshwater or low mixing environments like estuaries or bays close to the coast. . I note that around half of the wastewater treatment plants that will require reconsenting in the next decade provide services to populations of , people or fewer. These plants make up around percent of the total number of council owned wastewater pl ants in New Zealand. IN CONFIDENCE Page of . While there will be local differences, industry estimates of the costs of the design, consent and construction of these smaller plants are up to million and, in some cases, up to half of those costs relate to design and consenting issues. In contrast , a modular off theshelf wastewater treatment plant that was designed to meet the standard could be constructed and be operational for around million to million. . These proposals will require changes to the Water Services Act and the Resource Management Act, which could be progressed through the Local Government Water Services Bill. For example, these changes are needed to: . provide more directive provisions that ensure regional councils cannot set additional or higher requirements than the standard (allowing for some specific exceptions); . allow Taumata Arowai to be able to set infrastructure and operating requirements that, if implemented by a wastewater operator, will meet the treatment requirements in the standard; . allow an easier resource consenting path or pre consented option for lower risk small scale modular wastewater treatment plants that meet the wastewater environmental performance standard. . Further work is needed to develop and agree the appropriate policy approach and specific nature of the legislative changes. I am seeking delegated authority to work with and agree the correct approach with the Minister Responsible for RMA Reform and other Ministers as appropriate (such as the Minister for the Environment). . I am also seeking approval to issue drafting instructions once this group of Ministers has made decisions . I will include an update on this matter in the paper to the Cabinet Legislation Committee that seeks approval to introduce the Bill, in late . Process for making wastewater and stormwater environmental performance standards . Currently, Taumata Arowai is able to make wastewater andor stormwater environmental performance standards (under sections and A of the Water Services Act), through a process that includes public consultation but does not include Cabinet oversight. . I note that this is different from the approach to making drinking water standards in section of the Water Services Act, which are regulations made by Order in Council and do, therefore, involve Cabinet processes (as well as public consultation). . Given the importance of the wastewater and stormwater environmental performance standards, and the interest Cabinet is likely to have in the proposals, I consider these standards should be made through a process that includes Cabinet consideration and the associated requirements . This will ensure there is a regulatory impact analysis , which includes details about the costs, benefit s and risks of the proposals . . I am seeking agreement to amend the Water Services Act so that the power and process associated with making wastewater environmental performance standards and stormwater environmental performance standards is consistent with the power and process for makin g drinking water standards . IN CONFIDENCE Page of Mixed use rural water schemes . There are around mixed use rural water schemes across New Zealand. The se schemes are unique as they provide large volumes of water across large areas for commercial farming purposes, and they also provide smaller volumes of water to rural residential properties for human drinking and sanitary purposes. . While mixed use rural water schemes primarily supply water for agricultural or horticultural purposes, they are subject to the same regulatory requirements as other drinking water supplies including the supplies to large urban populations. . I am aware of concerns that complying with these requirements is driving up costs for mixed use rural water schemes , and can be burdensome and impractical . This was comment ed on by s ubmitters on the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill , for example. . My recent paper, Local Water Done Well stage : water services regulatory system ECO MIN , include d proposals that are likely to reduce the costs for some of these schemes. In particular, the Water Services Act will be amended to exclude shared domestic drinking water supplies serving consumers or fewer from the regulation. Shared domestic supplies will include farm s that suppl y drinking water to a small number of nearby properties. . The additional proposals in this paper, outlined above, should provide further reduc tions to the compliance costs and regulatory burdens faced by mixed use rural water schemes. . I have also been considering other changes that could be made to ensure the unique characteristics of these schemes are reflected, both in the legislation and in the approach Taumata Arowai takes to regulation. My intention is that Taumata Arowai should support the se schemes to achieve compliance in a way that is appropriate and proportionate to their particular circumstances . . I am proposing to amend the operating principles that apply to Taumata Arowai (in section of the Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act) to specifically refer to mixed use rural schemes . These changes build on and supplement the other changes to the operating principles proposed earlier. . I am also proposing to amend sections and of the Water Services Act to require Taumata Arowai to: . include specific information on mixed use rural water schemes in its drinking water compliance, monitoring, and enforcement strategy; and . comment on mixed use rural water schemes in its annual drinking water regulation report. . In addition, I will be proceeding with some non legislative measures to ensure there is an appropriate focus on mixed use rural water schemes and affordability is being considered. They are often small, the risk is low, and they can find other ways to make water safe , which are cost effective for the small amount of water that is used by people . These measures include : IN CONFIDENCE Page of . communicating my expectations to the Taumata Arowai board that they ensure the regulatory response for mixed use rural water schemes is proportionate to the scale, complexity and risk profile of each supply and affordability is being given appropriate consideration ; and . encourag ing the board to consider establishing a technical advisory group to provide independent advice on the regulatory settings for mixed use rural water schemes . . I note that councils will be expected to include information on any mixed use rural water schemes that are part of their water services networks in the water services delivery plans that will be prepared under the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill , once it is enacted . The guidance material provided by the Department of Internal Affairs will also encourage councils to include information in their plans on the schemes that are not part of their networks but where other support arrangements may be in place. I am proposing to amend the Water Services Act and Taumata Arowai Act relating to Te Mana o te Wai . I am proposing to amend the arrangements relating to Te Mana o te Wai in the Water Services Act and the Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act . . Section of the Water Services Act provides that when exercising or performing a function, power or duty under this Act, a person must give effect to Te Mana o te Wai, to the extent that Te Mana o te Wai applies to its functions, powers and duties. . The Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act requires Taumata Arowai to: . as one of its objectives, give effect to Te Mana o te Wai, to the extent that Te Mana o te Wai applies the functions and duties of Taumata Arowai (section (d)); and . as an operating principle, to partner and engaging early and meaningfully with Mori, including to inform how Taumata Arowai can give effect to Te Mana o te Wai (section ()(e)(i)). . These are general prov isions , and they apply to a broad range of parties who have a variety of differing roles under the legislation, including: . Taumata Arowai in relation to all of its functions under both Acts; . regional councils in relation to their source water risk management functions; . territorial authorities and Crown suppliers in their role as drinking water suppliers; and . a very broad range of private drinking water suppliers (includ ing, for example, farmers, bach communities, campgrounds , or cafes where they supply drinking water ). . One of the ongoing unresolved areas with the legislation is how these parties are expected to meet these obligations. Private drinking water suppliers in particular will often lack the capability to engage with Mori and comply with these obligations. IN CONFIDENCE Page of . This has been an ongoing area of ambiguity since the legislation was enacted. It is also not clear how the obligations to give effect to Te Mana o te Wai in water services legislation relate to the concept of Te Mana o te Wai in the National Policy Stateme nt for Freshwater Management and regional plans prepared under the RMA that relate to freshwater . . I am propos ing to repeal the requirements to give effect to Te Mana o te Wai in the Water Services Act and the Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act. . I am also propos ing to include a new operating principle in the Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act, which would require Taumata Arowai to take account of the National Policy Statement for Freshwater Management , and any regional plans prepared under the RMA that relate to freshwater , as part of the exercise of its functions, duties and powers. . These changes will provide much clearer direction to all parties about how they are expected to discharge their obligations in this area. Te Mana o te Wai is integrated in the National Policy Statement for Freshwater Management and regional plans prepared under the RMA that relate to freshwater . Taumata Arowai will continue to play the lead role in determining how the regulatory regime incorporates this concept. It also has the benefit of linking Taumata Arowais decision making to broader freshwater plann ing, of which Te Mana o te Wai is only one aspect. . This approach is consistent with the commitment the Government has made as part of its coalition agreements to rebalancing Te Mana o te Wai in the National Policy Statement for Freshwater Management. The new operating principle will require Taumata Arowai to take account of any changes to a rebalanced Te Mana o te Wai once this process is complete. Implementation . Proposals will be implemented by the Department of Internal Affairs , Taumata Arowai, and the Commerce Commission, as relevant. Financial implications Rates Rebate Scheme . The proposed amendment to the definition of rates in the Rates Rebate Act to include water charges, will include an additional approximately per annum being captured in the Rates Rebate Scheme. . The additional costs can be met from within the existing Rates Rebate Scheme, Benefit or Related Expenses appropriation for the immediate future, meaning no immediate changes to appropriations or the Crowns fiscal forecasts are required. . The Rates Rebate Scheme is a demand based scheme that is periodically adjusted to reflect macroeconomic factors, such as CPI movements and changes to the number of eligible rat e payers. Changes to the appropriation, including increases, are actioned through forecast adjustments , rather than Cabinet approval. . The new definition of rates will capture the additional in the calculation of adjustments over the longer term, contributing to an increas e in adjustments required . As the Scheme is demand driven and subject to multiple other macroeconomic influences , it is not certain whether this will occur within the forecast period. ()(b)(ii) ()(b)(ii) IN CONFIDENCE Page of . The Treasury ha s been consulted on this impact and is comfortable with the proposed amendment to the definition of rates in the Rates Rebate Act . Costs related to consumer protections . The proposed approach to consumer protection is designed so that additional costs are not incurred at the outset. The initial monitoring through information disclosure will be part of the Commerce Commissions proposed activities under the economic regulation regime that will apply to local government water service providers . . Where monitoring leads to significant escalation and follow up or if regulations are made to introduce further requirements relating to consumer protections , this w ould result in additional costs to the Commerce Commission. For example, there w ould be costs associated with the development and maintenance of a mandatory service quality code, and with work required to undertake compliance monitoring and enforcement activities. . If future costs are incurred, these are proposed to be recovered through levies. This would be consistent with the approach that has already been agreed for the new economic regulation regime in Local Water Done Well stage : water services regulatory system ECO MIN . Legislative implications . Legislation is required to give effect to the proposals in this paper and, if agreed, they will be included in the Local Government Water Services Bill, . I am seeking approval to issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office to prepare this Bill. I am also seeking authority to approve matters that may arise during the course of drafting and that may be required to align with the decisions in this paper. I will report back to the Cabinet Legislation Committee on any substantive matters that have been considered and approved during the legislative drafting process, when approval to introduce the Bill is sought. . I will engage with the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs when issuing drafting instructions in relation to the proposals relating to consumer protection and amendments to the Commerce Act . . I anticipate amendments may be required to a number of other pieces of legislation, including: . the Local Government Act ; . the Local Government (Rating) Act ; . the Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act ; . the Water Services Act ; . the Rates Rebate Act . ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) IN CONFIDENCE Page of . As noted earlier, I expect the proposed amendments to the Infrastructure Funding and Financing Act , to enable th e infrastructure funding and financing model to be used for water services infrastructure that is to be vested with a water organisation , will b e progressed as part of the Infrastructure Funding and Financing Act Amendment Bill. Impact analysis Regulatory Impact Statement . A document titled Regulatory Impact Statement: Local Government Water Services Bill ()accompanies this paper . . The Departments Regulatory Impact Analysis (RIA) panel (the panel) has reviewed the Local Government Water Services Bill RIA () in accordance with the criteria set out in the CabGuide. The panel provided the following comments: . The panel consider the information and analysis summarised in the RIA partially meets the quality assurance criteria. . This RIA, in particular, Part A, builds upon both the March RIA for the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill, as well as the June RIA for the first tranche of the policy decisions for the Local Government Water Service s Bill. The panels comments largely mirror the assessment of those two earlier RIAs. . The RIA provides, within the set context of Government policy, Ministers directions and the agreed strategic approach to the Local Water Done Well programme reforms, a description of the problem, objectives, options, and assessment criteria. The RIA also identifies the scope and other constraints on the analysis arising from these factors. In particular: . the timeframe constraints arising from Government direction have again resulted in insufficient consultation on the proposals, as required by the Cabinet criteria; and .
()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsMinimum requirements for all water service providers Requirement Minimum requirements for all water service providers Subject to economic , environment and water quality regulation Subject to planning and accountab ility framework for water services Financially sustainable, water services must be ringfenced Must act consistent ly with statutory objectives Standalone financial statements for water supply, wastewater, and stormwater Restrictions on privatisation Prohibition on losing control, selling and disposing of significant infrastructure Shares dont give rights, title, interests in assets, securities, liabilities Water services assets cannot be used as security (but revenue can) Additional requirements Current council staff and elected members cannot be appointed to boards Water organisations must be companies Activities of water organisations will be limited to the provision of water services, and directlyrelated activities Shareholders requirements Mandatory Exemption Mandatory Mandatory Mandatory Mandatory Mandatory Mandatory Mandatory Mandatory Could be exempt Could be exempt Could be exempt g)i) r(gr(i) Only councils or consumer trusts can be shareholders of a water organisation Could be exempt Competency based board appointments and appropriate mix of skills, Mandatory knowledge and experience Consumer trust requirements Consumer trusts must represent consumers and their interests Consumer trusts (if used) will be responsib le for appointing and removing board, and overseeing performance Restrictions on consumer trusts transferr ing shares Consumer trust trustees will be elected by consumers (ie account holders) ()(gr(I) Mandatory Mandatory Mandatory Mandatory These are the requirements that were described in the Cabinet paper as minimum requirements which were to apply to all water service providers. That includes new water organisations, existing CCOs providing water services, and inhouse council provided water services. Each of these contributes to a core LWDW outcome and making them all mandatory (ie not open to exemption applications) seems justified and tidy. Note the statutory objectives havent been drafted yet but are expected to comprise a list of objectives in legislation for the provision of water services will help to achieve the objectives of LWDW, including enabling good governance and management practice, and the delivery of water services that are financially sustainable, safe, resilient, reliable, environmenta lly sound, and customer responsive. Some councils may struggle to fill boards with the necessary experience if the prohibition on council staff is keep in the early years. Exemptions could be granted on a transitional (ie timelimited) based. While we think it unlikely that a new water organisation will be set up using something other than a company structure , it is possible that councils may have existing CCOs that use other structures (such as trusts) which they may want use to deliver water services. Ringfencing and the fact that we will permit councils to provide water services along with all their other activities suggests that activity restrictions, while valuable, should be eligible for exemption. ()(g)(i) The last requirement should remain a bottom line as this as councils and consumer trusts will be able to judge who is competent and what the appropriate mix of skills etc is. The first two consumer trust requirements help make the case that the water organisation should be considered financially separate to the council. As financial separation is a key outcome that the consumer trust is trying to achieve these requirements should be mandatory. The third requirement is a safeguard against privatisat ion and so like privatisation requirements should be mandatory. The final requirement ensures that commun ities have a say in who is represent ing their interests in the consumer trust. These elections are commonp lace in electricity trusts.
()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . There have already been two BORA reviews that found the Bill is consistent with the rights and freedoms in the BORA: . an original BORA review in for the entire Bill, including provisions that re enacted the existing Family Court process for changing sex on birth certificates; and . a supplementary BORA review in for the selfidentification provisions recommended by Select Committee. . The original BORA review raised a concern with the Family Court process. This was that the requirement for medical treatment could constitute intraground discrimination based on sex, but this was weighed against the importance of maintaining the integrity of birth certificates. The supplementary BORA review considered that the self identification provisions satisfied this concern. Next Steps . We are recommending a new timeframe for the Bill, which we will be ready to discuss with you at officials on May . This is in response to recent feedback from the Parliamentary Counsel Office that they will need more time to draft the SOP and because the House is not sitting over most of July. We will discuss alternative timeframes if you wish. Intraground discrimination is where there is differential treatment between people who exhibit the same protected ground. In this case, there is differential treatment between people who are willing and able to undergo medical treatment and those unwilling or unable to do so. ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . Subject to your approval to lodge the Cabinet paper, we propose the next steps for the SOP process are: Proactive release of Cabinet paper . The Cabinet paper will be proactively released within days of final decisions being taken. You also agreed in principle to proactively releasing policy briefings provided to you on the Bill and selfidentification. We will provide you further advice in June on the proactive releases of the Cabinet paper and related briefings, including on any redactions that may be warranted under the Official Information Act . s()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Appendix A: Cabinet Paper for introducing a selfidentification process to recognise gender on birth certificate This Cabinet paper is not being released as it was a draft version Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Appendix B: Quick reference guides Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Regulatory Impact Statement consent of their guardian or a letter of support from a third party. The third party would be assessing if the child or young person understands and that the decision is based on their own perceptions of their gender. Why government intervention is required This RIS proposes that the selfidentification process replaces the existing process under the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Act (the BDMRR Act). The existing process is not inclusive and fails to support peoples autonomy over how their gender is recognised. It medicalises a deeply personal expression of selfidentity by requiring applicants to provide evidence of medical treatment. This requirement excludes those who cannot or choose not to undertake medical treatment. This evidence is then assessed by a Family Court judge who determines if the amendment can be made. The Family Court process is perceived to be costly, intimidating and difficult to navigate, making it inaccessible for many people. It also excludes those who identify outside of the binary options of male or female or whose gender changes over time. Government intervention is required as a legislative amendment is needed to resolve the above issues. The other option considered An alternative option to a selfidentification process or the existing process (status quo) is assessed in this RIS. This would require a person to provide a statutory declaration and medical evidence they have undergone treatment to physically conform with their gender. A selfidentification process is preferred ahead of this option and status quo. The impact of the preferred option a selfidentification process A selfidentification process will provide for a more accessible and inclusive process that enables birth certificates to reflect a persons gender. The change will: align better with human rights discourse and societys understanding of sex and gender, including by demedicalising the experience of being transgender or intersex; better enable transgender and intersex New Zealanders to access services with less risk of being outed or experiencing discrimination; support the validation of transgender and intersex people, contributing to a greater sense of social belonging and improving their wellbeing; provide greater accessibility to a birth certificate that reflects a persons gender due to lower costs and reduced administration involved in an application; and Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
()(f)(iv), ()(g)(i) ()(f)(iv), ()(g)(i) ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
()(f)(iv), ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i), ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
()(g)(i) ()(a) ()(f)(iv), ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Other interested groups . Prior to the public announcement, you are recommended to provide notice to sector groups such as WaterNZ, L ocal Government New Zealand and Taituar . . It is also recommended to inform Iwi Collectives of the changes to their funding arrangements.
()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Any changes that councils wish to make to their Better Off funded projects, to invest in water infrastructure or use some of this funding to help establish water services delivery organisations, would be done by mutual agreement between councils and the Department of Internal Affairs. Cabinet has also agreed to retain current Council Transition Support funding so that this funding can be used by councils for work relating to Local Water Done Well, including supporting the establishment of new water services delivery organisations, or to develop Water Services Delivery Plans . The Department will follow up directly with councils with further information. . The Government is currently working with Auckland Council on options to create a financially sustainable model for Watercare. Cabinet has agreed a path which would allow necessary legislative changes for a financially sustainable model for Watercare to be included in the Transitional Provisions Bill. Auckland is unique in that it is governed by its own legislation that includes a specific statutory role for Watercare. Given it provides water services to one of our largest urban populations, I am keen to ensure Auckland Council is well supported in determining how they wish to create a financially sustainable model for Watercare going forward. This work is being led by Auckland Council, and I look forward to seeing progress. . Finally, I wanted to talk through the timings and process around these next stages. Todays announcement is about Cabinet decisions for the second stage of Local Water Done Well. These decisions will be given effect in legislation, which is expected to be introduced and enacted around the middle of the year, subject to Parliamentary timelines. There will be an opportunity to provide feedback as part of the select committee process. Around the middle of this year is also when I expect to announce the next stage of Cabinet decisions, setting out the enduring framework for Local Water Done Well.
()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of
()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua
()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Page of Provide sex markers options that are inclusive of a range of gender identities Status quo . The Family Court process allows people to show the binary sex markers on their birth certificates: female or male. Select c ommittees recommendation . The select c ommittees recommendations sought to incorporate sex marker options outside of the binary. I t recommended that people could apply to change the sex marker to male, or female, or to two new options intersex , or X (unspecified). Departments advice agree that a sex marker option outside the binary should be provided but should be provided for outside the primary legislation . We su pport the inclusion of a nonbinary option to be available to show gender identities outside of the binary male and female as it helps to give effect to a self identification process. . A single umbrella term under which all nonbinary gender identities are captured fails to adequately recognise and provide for an inclusive selfidentification process. We advise that an appropriate mechanism be placed in the legislation to enable a more inclusive and flexible process where the spectrum of gender identities can be agreed and used by applicants. . We propose replacing the single umbrella X (unspecified) , proposed by select committee to represent all nonbinary gender identities, with a mechanism that enables publicly informed decisions about the number of sex markers and the terminology used to represent nonbinary genders. This mechanism will need to be able to be provide the necessary assurances around maintaining the integrity of the birth register, balanced with a need to ensure changes can be made through an open consultation process, relatively quickly. . We are considering two options for the mechanism to determine the number of and terminology used for the nonbinary options. These are: . setting them in regulations ; or . providing the RegistrarGeneral with the ability to set the number and terminology following a public consultation process. The RegistrarGeneral would also be given the power to review the settings at any time but at least every four years. . The main benefits to delegating this ability to the RegistrarGeneral over having this determined under a normal regulation making process would be that it would likely be quicker to complete and implement and likely slightly less costly.
()(g)(i), ()(ba)(i) ()(a) Proactively Released by the Department of Internal AffairsTe Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs,:.Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Taumata Arowai Official Information Act requests to I Decision I Action I Requester I Summary of I Key Contact Ministers Due to Required Request (DOI) Office Requestor July July For lRa Information on Aimee van Barneveld information annual drinking Ra water qua lity report and recent data on water testing findings in Whangare i July July For Information on byAimee van information products that exceed Barneveld MAVs July July For Information about information suppliers selling water to the public August August For Information on all information reports and test results for trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) August August For Information on Aimee van information water analysis of Barneveld Waikouaiti and cna Dunedin water supplies and exceedances of the lead MAVin Waikouaiti August For Aimee van August information Barneveld Ka Page of
. Given the constrained timeframes for progressing option one (standalone Bill) as
. How the RegistrarGeneral may use the personal
. How the RegistrarGeneral may use the personal information and expected
. I note that Cabinet also previously agreed that statutory inquiries do not compromise
. Officials recommend that the transitional provision is changed to come into force in
. Positions of persons who may access the information
. Subject to Cabinet agreement, public consultation will last for up to eight weeks in July
. THE cardholder shall be responsible for examining all individual statements sent by the Company in respect of his or her account and
. The general objectives that apply across all prosecutions taken by the Department are:
. Under the transition provisions in Schedule , Clause of the Act, all local authorities
. Use of identity and Life Event information
. Use of identity and life event information .
. Where you can view this document
. Where you can view this document
. note that addressing some of the total cost through reprioritisation within Vote
. The AttorneyGeneral must notify the House of R epresentatives of a DOI within six sitting days of the DOI becoming final;
. increase investment by the Crown in supporting iwiMori to participate in three waters service delivery: . million; Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of
. referred to the Justice Co mmittee for consideration; and
.. Direct Access to Registration or Citizenship Information will be limited to persons who
. The DOI is referred to a select commi ttee allocated by the Clerk of the House;
. enacted by October .
.. I. complete training on access to, use and disclosure of Registration Information
.. Prior to having Direct Access to DA information, each NZSIS Authorised Officer must:
.... have completed the necessary training;
.... will maintain the integrity of their individual access; andDNSi
.... will advise the NZSIS Compliance Manager if their need for access
. Col in van Noordt and Luca Tangi have developed a discussion paper on public value creation of AI within public administrations. The paper focusses on capability, both technical and also the role of leaders in aligning AI use with wider organisational objectives. They also observe that more digitally mature organisations are likely to understand and take advantage of AI opportunities. Iwi and Mori representatives wish to work actively with the Government on AI. . Our Briefing for the Incoming Minister for Digitising Government included context about our approach to engaging with Iwi and Mori on digital government matters, including our Mana rite Agreement with the Data Iwi Leaders Group (Data ILG). We understand Data ILG may also seek to brief you directly on their interests in digital. . Data ILG has expressed to us strong interest in working with the government both on the opportunities that AI presents to Mori, and also on the risks of AI for Mori. These could include risk of bias andor lack of protection of Mori data that Mori consider to be a taonga (treasure). We see significant opportunity in working with Data ILG on AI work that will benefit Mori and the Crown and we will continue to engage actively as we progress the AI work programme. We participate actively in international AI collectives . While we are cautious about comparing ourselves to other jurisdictions as political settings, legislative reach, social licence and AI capabilities differ, other nations seem to be facing similar issues in respect of AI benefits and risks. Some comparator nations, such as the United Kingdom, Australia and the European Union are developing regulatory frameworks for AI. Singapore has issued a National AI Strategy. Like New Zealand, Australia and Canada have released guidance supporting Public Service use of AI. Global collaboration on AI issues is increasing through initiatives like the UK AI Safety Summit and its Bletchley Declaration . The OECD has also AI principles and a classification framework for AI systems.
. The select committee is required to consider, and report on, the declaration within four months (unless the Business Committee determines a different deadline);
.. A Joint Standard Operating Procedure (Sop) whereby NZSISs Authorised Officer
. The Minister responsible for the admin istration of the relevant enactment must present a Government Response to the DOI to the House; this Government Response must be pr esented within six months of the AttorneyGeneral notifying the House of the DOI, unless an earlier or later for the Response is reso lved or determined by the House; and
.. NZSIS will maintain an uptoand accurate record of the identities of all Authorised
. A debate is held in the House on the declaration, the select committee report, and the Governments res ponse to the declaration, upon presentation of the latter.
.. DA will only be advised of the NZSIS code for Authorised Officers, and will create
.The SWERL Act enables certain legislation, including the LGA, to be amended
. Multiple reviews, undertaken and underway, touch on matters relevant to this Inquiry. We met with the leads of these reviews to ensure we were learning from, and not replicating, the work relevant to this Inquiry. These reviews include: Ministerial Review into Better Responses to Natural Disasters and Other Emergencies (), chaired by Hon Roger Sowry Ministerial Inquiry into Land Use in TairwhitiGisborne and Wairoa (), chaired by Hon Hekia Parata Auckland Flood Response Review: Independent Review into Auckland Councils response to the January floods (), undertaken by Mike Bush, Bush International Consulting Independent Review into the Hawkes Bay Civil Defence Emergency Management Response into Cyclone Gabrielle (due ), undertaken by Mike Bush, Bush International Consulting Royal Commission of Inquiry into Lessons Learned from New Zealands Response to COVID (due ), chaired by Tony Blakely, and Project Hau Nuku: Weather Forecasting System Review (due ), led by the Treasury and Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment. READINESS RESPONSE Ministerial Review: Better Responses to Natural Disasters and Other Emergencies Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events RESPONSE March Auckland Flood Response review August Review of Hawkes Bay Civil Defence Emergency Management NEMA North Island Severe Weather Event After Action Review REDUCTION June DPMC Lifting the resilience of NZs critical infrastructure Discussion Document. (Current) RECOVERY March Cyclone Gabrielle Recovery Taskforce chaired by Sir Brian Roche March Cyclone Recovery Unit led by Katrina Casey DPMC established to support locally led engagement. (current)Reform of the emergency management sector Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID Lessons Learned (current) Review into the Future for Local GovernmentMBIE Review of the Electricity (Hazards from Trees) Regulation (current) Report of the Expert Working Group on Managed Retreat Insights and Observations: The Chief Ombudsmans report on extreme Weather events .Battening down the hatches: the Telco sectors response to Cyclone Gabrielle March Project Hau Nuku: Weather Forecasting System Review (Current) Outrage to Optimism : Report of the Ministerial Inquiry into land uses associated with the mobilisation of woody debris (including forestry slash) and sediment in TairwhitiGisborne district and Wairoa District FENZ Accident investigation into fatal landslide incident at Muriwai on February Telecommunications Emergency Forum Cyclone Gabrielle Post Incident Report May Reviews or work that came as a direct result of NI Severe Weather events. Could have implications for EMS.Reviewsworkinquiries that could have a bearing on the EM System Emergency Management and the Wider Inquiry Ecosystem Readiness ResponseRecoveryReduction EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ABOUT THE INQUIRY PREFACE RECOMMENDATIONS Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsMethodology, natural justice, and fact checking . Under section of the Inquiries Act , the Inquiry records are subject to the Official Information Act , except for material that is subject to a nonpublication order, and documents that relate to the internal deliberations of the Inquiry. This is necessary to ensure people feel safe to contribute to the Inquiry in confidence. A nonpublication order applies to: all material in written submissions that identifies individuals or discloses confidential information all written submissions where confidentiality is granted or requested notes taken at interviews any communication or material provided to or created by the Inquiry that contains personal information adverse comments of persons or organisations who have not had the opportunity to respond, and commercially sensitive material. . Section of the Inquiries Act requires the Inquiry to take every reasonable step to ensure the report is fair and accurate. A natural justice process provided excerpts containing findings and statements that could be considered adverse were provided to those identified for an opportunity to respond before we finalised the report. No person or organisation received a complete copy of the Inquirys draft report. . The Inquiry has carefully considered all the responses and comments received on the extracts of the preliminary draft report and made amendments as appropriate when producing this report. . The Inquiry considered it important to highlight community voices throughout the report. We did this by including peoples experiences and observations, with their permission. We acknowledge that others may have differing views. . To ensure the accuracy of the information contained in the report, we checked material with identified government agencies, community groups, organisations, and submitters. The natural justice and factchecking processes refined the accuracy and clarity of the report, while reinforcing our analysis of the evidence. Alternative approaches to the design of an emergency management system . The Inquirys preferred approach for the design of the emergency management system is to put communities and people at its heart. The Inquiry briefly discussed other approaches that could improve the design of the emergency management system. . Examples of other approaches include combining NEMA and Fire and Emergency (FENZ) into a new agency to deliver emergency management, creating a fully professionalised civil defence arm of the New Zealand Defence Force to deliver emergency management, emergency management responsibility being undertaken in its entirety by New Zealand Police, or assigning NEMA a permanent presence in each of the regions. This last approach could be by NEMA becoming responsible for management of CDEM Groups within regional structures or, alternatively, NEMA having staff permanently embedded within CDEM Groups. . The challenge with these approaches is that they ignore the reality that emergencies happen in, and most affect, communities. They would likely create structural upheaval, shift leadership and management of roles and functions further away from communities, be ineffective, and not generate the necessary system shift. Therefore, the Inquiry did not explore the feasibility with the agencies mentioned. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ABOUT THE INQUIRY PREFACE RECOMMENDATIONS Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsExecutive summary The severe weather events caused devastation . Aotearoa New Zealand uncomfortably sits second on Lloyds of Londons list of most exposed countries to natural hazards. It estimates the average cost of natural disasters to New Zealands economy is . of gross domestic product (GDP) per year. When taken over the past years, noting the impact of the Canterbury and Kaikoura earthquakes, the cost recovering from natural hazards is . of GDP per year. This cost is forecast to grow. Past and current planning decisions to allow development in medium to highrisk sites means more of our built environment is at risk from earthquakes, tsunami, sea level rise, eruptions, and unpredictable and more frequent severe weather. . Cyclone Hale, the Auckland Anniversary heavy rainfall, and Cyclone Gabrielle were collectively the most severe and destructive weather events in New Zealands recent history. They resulted in significant devastation to property and ongoing trauma for communities. Most tragically, people died, and a year on one person remains missing. The Treasury estimates the events caused between and . billion of physical damage to households, businesses, and infrastructure. , . For those outside affected regions, it is hard to comprehend the pace, severity, and scale at which the weather events unfolded, or the fear and uncertainty people felt as flooding, landslides, slash, heavy rain, and winds swept through homes, businesses, towns and cities. We heard many harrowing stories of peoples efforts to assist others and survive in the immediate aftermath. We saw the ongoing and devastating grief suffered by so many people, affecting their families, livelihoods, and mental wellbeing. These costs are difficult to quantify and will be felt for a long time. The emergency management system is not fitforpurpose . Thousands of people participated in the response to the severe weather events. In challenging conditions, the actions taken at a community level were powerful. Iwi, hap, community groups, businesses, voluntary organisations, and individuals rescued people and animals, repaired infrastructure, cleaned up properties and public spaces, and provided practical and emotional support. At the Civil Defence Ll oyds, A world at risk: Closing the insurance gap , . https:www.lloyds.comworldatrisk IA G, Meeting the cost of natural hazards: A briefing to the incoming government , November . Th e Treasury, Impacts from the North Island weather events , April , . https:www.treasury.govt.nzsites defaultfilesimpactsfromthenorthislandweatherevents.pdf Th e Treasury, Half Year Economic and Fiscal Update , December . https:www.treasury.govt.nz publicationsefuhalfyeareconomicandfiscalupdate Emergency Management (CDEM) level, the Inquiry observed that those agencies that had carried out effective readiness planning activities prior to the events were better able to respond under the challenging circumstances. . Overall, however, there were significant shortcomings in the way the emergency management system functioned. The effectiveness of the response in each region varied substantially. In some places, warnings were received too late or not at all, Civil Defence Centres were not set up fast enough or did not meet the needs of communities, there was a lack of coordination between key organisations, and communication and decisionmaking was slow or nonexistent. Ultimately, the system did not meet the needs of many New Zealanders. . Underlying the issues experienced during the response were several factors, including: a lack of focus on and investment in readiness planning, activities, equipment, and supplies limited emergency management experience, capacity, and capability, including experience managing largescale events councils not prioritising emergency management as a core function a lack of shared situational awareness across councils, National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA), and emergency responders communities and key organisations not being involved in planning activities an adhoc approach to bringing in expertise from around the country, and a significant mismatch between community expectations about what the emergency management response should offer and what it is able to deliver. . The Inquiry found the current emergency management system is not fit for purpose. It does not have the capacity or capability to deal with significant, widespread events that impact multiple regions at once. There is a major disconnect between communities and CDEM agencies . We observed a striking disconnect between the way communities and CDEM agencies particularly councils and CDEM Groups viewed the response to the severe weather events. Many CDEM agencies had a perception or assumption that communities and volunteer groups knew their role in the immediate response. Often these expectations did not seem to be evident to the communities themselves. . Many CDEM agencies told us they already consider communities to be part of the emergency management system. They rely on communities to respond to the immediate impacts of an emergency while the CDEM response stands up. Many councils told us they responded appropriately and to the best of their capability given the extreme conditions and, in the case of the Auckland Anniversary heavy EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ABOUT THE INQUIRY PREFACE RECOMMENDATIONS Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Eventsrainfall and Cyclone Gabrielle, unexpected speed and severity of the weather events. We heard and observed that staff in councils and CDEM agencies worked hard to support communities in their areas, sometimes leaving their families for extended periods. . We heard from many community groups who stepped up to support their own communities needs and gave their support to others without hesitation. This included efforts from Pacific communities and churches, and other ethnic community groups supporting a range of language and cultural needs. Whaikaha Ministry of Disabled People told us that disabled communities were often well supported by local iwi, who were highly responsive through marae and provided support with minimal, if any, barriers. . However, many impacted people and communities told the Inquiry they were not aware they had a part to play. Most had no local community plans to put into action and, for those that did, there was a lack of worstcase scenario planning. We heard repeatedly from many people in affected areas that they felt let down by the CDEM response. Many community leaders told us they did not feel like they were a part of a formal response and were simply stepping up because they saw a need. . For many communities and individuals, the CDEM response was perceived to be absent or inadequate. Emergencies happen in communities, and peoples experiences of the events are informed by their perceptions or interactions or lack of with CDEM agencies and emergency responders over the vital first to hours. There is an opportunity to strengthen the critical role communities play in an emergency response, including through ongoing public education programmes. There is also need for significant improvement within CDEM agencies, especially in readiness activities and community engagement. Urgent system change is required . There is an urgent need for improvement. The emergency management system must change to meet the reality that Aotearoa New Zealand is facing more frequent and severe weather events. . The Inquiry supports the continuation of locally led emergency management, with regional and national entities playing support and coordination roles. However, our recommendations are for significant enhancements, including: people and their communities as an active, purposeful, and legislated fourth sphere of the system alongside local, regional, and central government a comprehensive and inclusive public education programme and warning system that is easy to understand and includes manual systems when digital technology fails a recalibration of NEMAs primary function to lead readiness and response, with additional roles to support recovery, and provide assurance across all Rs an increase in capability at all levels of the system to build depth and breadth of skills and experience, and a leadership framework focused on strong, visible command and control a nationally mandated common operating platform and picture to provide realtime situational awareness across the system that can integrate with tasking better use of the skills and expertise already in central government, that are drawn on to bolster local responses as required, and a shift in funding and general effort towards reduction and readiness activities. . Overall, the changes we propose will elicit an uplift across the entire system, at the community, local, regional, and national levels. This means: community groups and individuals are educated and prepared on how to respond in an emergency event councils have sufficient staff wellversed in emergency management more specialists that can be deployed to train and support local CDEM responses, and competence throughout the system strengthened by assurance and stewardship. . As drafted, the Emergency Management Bill introduced to repeal and replace the decadesold Civil Defence Emergency Management Act (CDEM Act) is insufficient as a legislative basis for an effective, futureproof system. Changes to legislation alone will not result in a fitforpurpose system many tools and levers will be required. . This report sets out the findings of the Inquiry and makes recommendations to the Government to ensure the emergency management system is fit for the future. It includes guidance to the sector at the end of each chapter which can be implemented within the current legislative and organisational framework. Key structural shifts Put people and their communities at the heart of emergency management . Communities have a significant role to play in the readiness and response to emergency events in their area. They have a deep understanding of their local people, land, and history and are the first to bear the impact of an emergency event. The emergency management system is most effective when individuals, communities and entities are wellinformed about local hazards, involved in readiness activities, and embedded in the official response. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ABOUT THE INQUIRY PREFACE RECOMMENDATIONS Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events. The locally led, regionally coordinated, and nationally supported approach to emergency management is sound in principle, but overly simplistic. The current application of this approach simply does not work for severe or largescale events. An inclusive, communityled emergency management model, grounded in legislation and supported by appropriate investment is needed. Local communities should be empowered, educated, and supported to build their own emergency resilience and readiness, including having suitable plans, supplies and assets. Recognise the role of iwi Mori throughout the system . Some of the most effective and rapid responses to the severe weather events were coordinated and carried out by iwi Mori, including iwi, hap, marae, taiwhenua, trusts, incorporations and whnau. They provided manaakitanga, critical equipment, response and wellbeing support, money, and facilities for welfare to all people in their rohe. Early activation of marae and community structures and networks meant iwi Mori responded more effectively than some councils. In places where the CDEM response was slow or lacking, and in communities of high poverty and isolation, they often stepped in to support the needs of people and utilised broad iwi networks to deploy supplies. . Iwiled civil defence readiness, response and recovery are already in effect, and provide a living example of what can be done in an emergency. However, the inclusion of iwi Mori in formal local government emergency management structures is discretionary and, in some regions, nonexistent. . Iwi Mori who have the capacity, capability, and desire to be involved in emergency readiness and response should be empowered to take on a greater role. To give effect to this, the role of iwi Mori in emergency management should be formalised and embedded within the one emergency management system, so it is reflected throughout the community, local, regional, and national structures. We endorse the recommendations of the Ministerial Review into Better Responses to Natural Disasters to recognise iwi contributions and legislate for iwi participation in readiness, response, and recovery. Local government is at the coalface of readiness and response . Under the CDEM Act, local authorities (councils) must plan and provide for civil defence emergency management within their regions. We heard and observed that councils worked hard to support communities in their areas. Staff with emergency management duties often worked long hours in highly stressful situations, which took a considerable toll on their wellbeing and that of their families. . The Inquiry considers councils are best placed to understand and respond to the needs of people in their district or region. Local government must therefore continue to hold this important function. However, we observed some councils are actively choosing not to make their emergency management function a priority, and there is not enough focus on readiness activities across the board. . Councils need to fully deliver on their responsibilities and prioritise emergency management as a core part of their work. To do this, barriers need to be addressed, including a lack of capability and capacity, clarity about key roles and how they interact, and financial pressures. Some of these can be addressed through effective governance and leadership. However, councils cannot do this alone and support is required from central government. Make better use of national resources . During largescale emergencies, the emergency response draws on capacity and capability from across central government. Nonetheless, the Inquiry considers this system expertise is underutilised. For example, the logistics and operations capability of the New Zealand Defence Force, and the Ministry of Social Developments (MSD) capacity to coordinate and target welfare support at scale and speed should be drawn upon further. . The role of NEMA needs reassessment. It is a small agency that does not have the funding or expertise to undertake the full breadth of activities it is currently tasked with across the Rs. We consider NEMA would operate more effectively if its primary focus was on leading and directing readiness and response activities. This includes setting standards, training, and leading worstcase scenario planning. Functional leadership for reduction and recovery should rest elsewhere. NEMA should retain its system assurance role across the Rs but needs support to build its capacity and capability to do this effectively. Increase the focus on readiness and risk reduction . Readiness is about developing operational systems and capabilities before an emergency happens. Many issues that arose during the response stemmed from a lack of focus on, and investment in, readiness activities prior to the emergency events. It is an area of activity that should be carried out on an ongoing basis, not just immediately before the storm arrives. . The levels of readiness prior to the severe weather events varied across councils and other responding agencies. Those that had done more preparation were better off during the response. There needs to be greater emphasis on readiness activities across the entire emergency management system. . Increasing the focus on readiness requires intentional and deliberate actions by stakeholders. Councils and other organisations need uptoemergency plans. Effective system assurance would ensure plans are in place, achievable and reviewed regularly. A shift in investment towards reduction and readiness would enable councils and communities to better prepare, reduce risk, and build resilience. Targeted investment in reduction and community readiness would lessen the negative impacts on people, property, and businesses during and after an emergency. National Civil Defence Emergency Management Plan Order , section , . EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ABOUT THE INQUIRY PREFACE RECOMMENDATIONS Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events. The focus of this Inquiry is on readiness and response efforts. However, even with a goldstandard system, readiness and response can only do so much. If homes are built on flood plains, they will flood. If critical infrastructure is inadequately designed or maintained, it will fail. As such, readiness and response need to be considered as part of an approach that prioritises risk reduction and takes a long term view of infrastructure, community resilience, and environmental needs. Immediate actions to support system level shifts Build capability and capacity across the system . Specialised skills are needed in an emergency. This includes operational proficiencies like response logistics, welfare coordination, and public information management. It also includes specific skills like carrying out rescues, operating temporary forward airbases, repairing infrastructure, and removing waste. Weather emergencies require specific technical expertise in meteorology and hydrology. . There are significant gaps in capability and capacity throughout all parts of the emergency management system, particularly at the local government level. Many councils rely heavily on staff who are not employed in emergency management roles to support an emergency response, some of whom are not sufficiently trained for these duties. Building capability and capacity needs to be a priority for the government, councils, and communities. . Even with welltrained staff, additional specialist capacity will need to be brought in to support councils during largescale emergencies. The Inquiry considers this capacity should be provided through an expansion of the Emergency Management Assistance Team (EMAT). At least three fulltime EMAT teams, located in key areas across the country, should be available to support councils and CDEM Groups to sustain the emergency response and provide relief for frontline staff. These specialists would help councils build capability by supporting training activities during the readiness phase. . People throughout the system also need the skills and training to ensure all aspects of an emergency response are inclusive, delivered with empathy, and address the practical and cultural needs of diverse communities. Appropriately skilled social and welfare support needs to be available in the months following a severe event. Provide effective warnings to communities . There were issues with the information received by decision makers and the warnings received by the public. The lack of adequate communication between parts of the emergency response meant decisions were not timely, and the public did not always receive the necessary warnings to ensure physical safety and protect property. The challenges were exacerbated by the loss of some communications systems during Cyclone Gabrielle and the lack of backup systems in places. . The sense that warnings were insufficient has undermined public confidence in councils, weather forecasting, and the wider emergency management system. A comprehensive warning system is needed that is flexible enough to cover most, if not all, natural hazards, with a consistent approach across the country. To support the warning system, communities should be empowered with the knowledge and resources to make locally specific decisions about when evacuation or other action is required and appropriate, while having regard to necessary safety considerations. Improve situational awareness for decision makers . The Inquiry heard that a lack of situational awareness and timely, complete, and consistent information contributed to problems with the immediate management of the response in some areas, exacerbated by the lack of a common operating platform. . Organisations that had good systems were better able to keep track of the moving parts of the emergency response and deploy resources and expertise effectively. Those that did not have good situational awareness struggled to understand what was happening and where resources should be or were being deployed. This led to confusion, duplication of effort, the inability to get a true picture of the events unfolding in the region, a lack of timely communication to the public, and onerous reporting requirements. . A nationally consistent common operating platform is required that is mandated through legislation, funded, and used by all councils and government agencies. It is important that information is consolidated at local, regional, and national levels and shared in realtime between councils, emergency agencies, and NEMA. Relevant tasking from the system also needs to be integrated. . The current National Crisis Management Centre (NCMC) is not fitforpurpose and the backup NCMC is totally inadequate. A large, purposebuilt NCMC is required, with an appropriate backup centre established outside of Wellington. The back up centre could build off existing facilities that councils have for their emergency response. Regardless of where it is, the backup centre must have sufficient provisions to operate as a fully functioning NCMC if the primary centre is unusable. Restore critical infrastructure and enable the flow of goods and services . Cyclone Gabrielle caused significant damage to electricity infrastructure, telecommunications, bridges, roading, water services, and other critical infrastructure. This hampered coordination of the rescue effort. It also caused great distress for isolated communities and made it difficult for goods to be moved in and out of affected regions. . Quickly restoring critical infrastructure will better enable rescue efforts and the coordination and supply of emergency provisions. It would also minimise the disruption to domestic and international food and other supply chains and the general continuity of economic activity after an emergency, limiting the impact on New Zealand more broadly. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ABOUT THE INQUIRY PREFACE RECOMMENDATIONS Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events. Some positive stories emerged following Cyclone Gabrielle, of utility companies quickly coordinating and dispatching staff, working on a high trust model to enable repairs when communications were down. The challenge arose where some parts of the system prioritised the delivery of nonurgent supplies over the restoration of electricity and communications, without awareness of the negative flowon effects. The restoration of telecommunications and electricity should be prioritised after addressing safety, food, water, and other urgent needs. . The events highlighted the importance for CDEM agencies and other organisations to plan for largescale emergencies. Councils, key businesses, and critical services such as health providers will be more resilient if plans are in place to function for a time without utilities like communications or electricity. Fund readiness activities and improve the flow of response funding . Councils are largely responsible for funding emergency management activities in their areas. Central governments contribution, while substantial, primarily comes after an event has occurred, rather than to support readiness activities. Councils are already stretched financially, and so the focus is on response spending rather than readiness and reduction investment. . The Government needs to focus on funding reduction and readiness activities. Investing before an emergency will help build local resilience, reduce the scale and cost of the response, and ease the transition into recovery. It is the Inquirys view that the Government should considerably increase the appropriation for the existing contestable fund that NEMA administers, which at the time of this report was just under ,, to better enable councils and communities to build readiness and resilience. . Councils can apply for reimbursement of of eligible welfare costs they incur in caring for displaced people. At present, these criteria are too narrow, and the process cumbersome. The welfare funding criteria should be reassessed. The funding could be more successfully administered by MSD, which has the necessary systems and expertise in place. Image: Damage to Waikare Gorge, Hawkes Bay. Source: NZTA EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ABOUT THE INQUIRY PREFACE RECOMMENDATIONS Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsRecommendations Emergency management system design and structure Recommendation : Put people and their communities at the heart of an integrated emergency management system A. Legislate for and invest in an inclusive, communityled emergency management model that explicitly recognises the knowledge and capability of iwi Mori, businesses, and local communities in emergency management. B. Utilise existing communitybased emergency management structures and systems, such as those built through the COVID response, to ensure community participation in planning and response. C. Build networks of trained and accredited local community leaders and volunteers, which extends beyond the currently recognised volunteer groups. D. Develop and invest in a comprehensive and ongoing education and public awareness programme to ensure people have a common understanding of how to prepare for (readiness planning) and what to do in an emergency. Recommendation : Utilise the value of the wider government ecosystem A. Expand the New Zealand Defence Forces role to make better use of specialist skills (such as logistics and air coordination) during a significant civil defence emergency. B. Note the Inquiry endorses the Weather Forecasting System Review to (among other matters) identify changes in access to weather data. C. Require that timely and enhanced weather and hydrological forecasting is provided to and used by all councils and government agencies. D. Note the Inquiry endorses the work of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC) to lift the resilience of New Zealands critical infrastructure. Recommendation : Optimise the effort of iwi Mori to benefit all people in an emergency A. Note the Inquiry endorses the Ministerial Review into Better Responses to Natural Disasters and Other Emergencies recommendations: I. Recognise the capability that iwi bring to emergency management; II. Legislate to enable iwi to participate in planning for and responding to a natural disaster or other emergency, and to bring more clarity to their role: Appropriate iwi representatives to be part of the Groups Coordinating Executive Group; Appropriate iwi representatives to be included on the Group Joint Committee. B. Empower iwi Mori who have the capacity, capability, and desire to contribute to emergency management. Recommendation : Invest in a refocused National Emergency Management Agency A. Legislate for and invest in the National Emergency Management Agencys (NEMA) primary function and purpose to hold system leadership for emergency readiness and response. In making these changes: I. responsibility for leadership and coordination of critical infrastructure remains with NEMA for readiness and response only II. leadership for reduction and recovery to be referred to DPMC to request that the Hazard Risk Board considers which agency should hold functional leadership responsibility, and to ensure there is a single point of contact for critical infrastructure entities on reduction III. leadership for welfare coordination should sit with the Ministry of Social Development and NEMAs welfare responsibilities be clarified, and IV. leadership for natural hazards and support for other emergencies remains with NEMA. B. Strengthen monitoring and assurance of the system: I. provide NEMA with the necessary authority and powers to set standards and fulfil its assurance functions II. invest in NEMAs monitoring and assurance function to ensure roles, responsibilities, and functions at all levels of the system are performed, and III. require that organisations with responsibilities under emergency management legislation have effective business continuity plans and assets in place, and report to NEMA annually for review. Leadership, roles, and responsibilities Recommendation : Clarify roles in emergency management A. Explicitly clarify the roles of central, regional, and local levels of government in a national state of emergency. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ABOUT THE INQUIRY PREFACE RECOMMENDATIONS Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsB. Clarify and strengthen, in legislation, the governance role of mayors and chairs during an emergency. C. To strengthen regional and local council governance accountability for readiness and leading response, require that: I. the chair of the Civil Defence Emergency Management Group is the chair of the regional council, or the mayor in the case of a unitary council (noting that a chair or mayor can delegate within the regional or unitary council) II. regional and local authority chief executives become the primary controller and can delegate to suitably qualified individuals, while retaining overall accountability, and III. controllers acting under delegation are employed by, or seconded to, the council, and accountable to the council through the chief executive. Recommendation : Increase capability and capacity in civil defence emergency management across New Zealand A. Increase command and control capability in emergency management governance, leadership, and controller roles. B. Implement a national programme for emergency management capabilitybuilding across New Zealand. C. Build a larger pool of skilled and experienced controllers, hydrologists, and other specialists, who provide expert information and can be seconded across New Zealand. D. Establish at least three fulltime Emergency Management Assistance Teams (EMAT), that can be deployed to emergencies or to build wider sector capability. Management of the immediate response Recommendation : Build fitforpurpose National Crisis Management Centres A. Move the National Crisis Management Centre to a new, improved, purposebuilt facility. B. Identify and invest in a backup National Crisis Management Centre in a city other than Wellington, potentially using an existing purposebuilt civil defence emergency management facility. Recommendation : Improve real time situational awareness for authorities in emergency events A. Legislate for and invest in a single common operating platform and picture for emergency management to be adopted by every council and NEMA. B. Review the system to ensure information relevant to the emergency is shared between New Zealand Police, Fire and Emergency New Zealand, and ambulance providers, and supports efficient tasking across emergency response services. Recommendation : Develop a comprehensive warning system for the public A. Develop a comprehensive warning system that is flexible enough to cover all natural hazards and empowers the public to act, even when technology fails. Recommendation : Amend the threeday selfsufficiency guidance A. Improve and promote guidance that people and communities need to be selfsufficient for at least seven days (or days for isolated communities). Supply of goods and services and the place of critical infrastructure Recommendation : Restore power and telecommunications early and improve electricity resilience A. Ensure controllers prioritise early restoration of power and telecommunications as a key enabler of the coordination and delivery of emergency services. B. Strengthen the Electricity (Hazards from Trees) Regulations to improve the resilience of the electricity network. Recommendation : Recognise a wider group of critical infrastructure entities A. Formally recognise the following as necessary critical infrastructure sectors (in addition to current lifeline utilities): I. supermarkets II. waste management III. stopbank and flood protection systems IV. rural water, and V. river management systems. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ABOUT THE INQUIRY PREFACE RECOMMENDATIONS Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsFunding settings Recommendation : Prioritise strategic investment in reduction and readiness activities A. Increase the appropriation for the existing contestable fund that is administered by NEMA to support a significant uplift in community readiness and resilience across New Zealand. B. Note the Inquiry endorses recommendation b of the report by the Future for Local Government Review: I. In order to prioritise and deliver on wellbeing, central government makes a greater investment in local government through significant funding to support local priorities, placebased agreements, and devolution of roles. Recommendation : Update the policy settings, criteria, and process for funding and distributing response costs A. Move the administration of welfare related costs to the Ministry of Social Development as the proposed leader for welfare coordination and reassess welfare funding criteria to cover a broader definition of welfare. B. Review the current reimbursement process for distribution of nonwelfare related response and immediate readiness costs to allow funds to flow more freely (with appropriate oversight). C. Allow the Director of Civil Defence Emergency Management to approve exgratia payments (subject to clear criteria) for those situations where individualsgroups incurred costs during an emergency. Image: Flooding across Tangiteroria, Northland. Source: NZ Police Section Two Chapter : Introduction Chapter : Emergency management system design and structure Chapter : Leadership, roles, and responsibilities Chapter : Management of the immediate response Chapter : Supply of goods and services and the place of critical infrastructure Chapter : Funding settings
.. understand and will comply with all of their obligations;
Richard Pearse Drive, Mangere.
: Engaging with industry, public health experts and community stakeholders to shape the legislation.
: Ensuring consumer protection, responsible gambling measures and industry integrity.
: Ensuring the public understands the risks associated with gambling and the benefits of using licensed platforms.
: Establishing processes for operators to apply for and maintain a New Zealand online gambling licence.
: Opening applications and assessing applicants.
: Please be aware of planned outages to our online passport and citizenship by grant application services from January to March .
: Setting up mechanisms to monitor operator behaviour, handle complaints, and address noncompliance.
: online content is objectionable if it describes, depicts, expresses, or otherwise deals with matters such as sex, horror, crime, cruelty, or violence in such a manner that the availability of the publication is likely to be injurious to the public good.
A yearold may have slightly less life experience than an yearold (for example, knowledge of how tax works, how legislation is passed, or how councils work) but they are both likely to need to learn about this if they stand as a candidate (as are many older candidates).
A : facial recognition algorithm that matches the image captured during the verification process with a passport or driver licence image.
A Management and Leadership Development Framework sets out opportunities for the development of managers in the Department.
A Minister can approach the appropriate Select Committee chair with a view to exploring the viability of this option given, for example, the workload priorities and composition of that Select Committee.
A Mori consultative group, Te Pae Whakawairua, provides the Chief Archivist with independent advice to ensure all our services meet the needs of Mori now and in the future.
A Table A, A and Ab guide
A Travel Document (other than a New Zealand Passport or New Zealand
A Trust Framework provider is one who is listed on the Trust Framework register and has been accredited by the Trust Framework Authority.
A bank statement which includes the full bank account number (bank, bank logo, branch, account number and suffix) and the account holders name.
A brief Privacy Assessment was completed for the Service Delivery Platform. The solution holds limited personal data which is not connected to any national register. Uploaded card data is stored encrypted and held separately to personal data. Authorised access of close contacts data would only be available through the Ministry of Health systems following a positive test result.
A brief summary of the purpose, content and history of each website is provided, along with links to an archived version of the site in the National Digital Heritage Archive.
A change in approach to Te Mana o te Wai
A clear and consistent communications strategy is required. Minimising the other technology that is promoted will assist in adoption and reduce confusion.
A clear strategy that is repeated over and over again is part of driving adoption. At this point, messaging is confused and the general public have no idea of what the governments specific plans are with respect to digital technologies for population level deployment, if any.
A collective memory contributes to a sense of belonging through knowledge and understanding of our history and culture. A vibrant cultural and national identity also helps to give a collective sense of belonging. People benefit from the social capital that documentary heritage, symbols of national identity, national events and culture provide.
A combination of measures are required to reduce the R value hand washing, social distancing, isolating infected individuals, quarantining their close contacts, banning large events, etc. COVID has different characteristics to other similar diseases (SARS, MERS), which have caused it to spread quickly around the world. In particular, many infected individuals with no symptoms, or very mild symptoms, can unknowingly be spreading the virus for many days after initial exposure. People who dont feel very sick dont tend to get tested or isolated.
A compliance, monitoring and enforcement regime.
A cookie is a piece of code that creates a file on your computer to track the pages that you view on our website. Turning off cookies may affect your ability to use all or part of the website.
A culture of reading enhances literacy and knowledge
A current Bill before Parliament seeks to repeal section . If this provision is repealed, then this paragraph will no longer apply.
A description of the complaint. This should cover what happened, when it happened, and why you were not satisfied with the service or standard of service provided.
A detailed request to a sample of Local Authorities to supply further information (in addition to that above) to enable more detailed economic analysis to inform the options for reform without placing significant demands on the resources of all authorities.
A direct impact of reducing the tracing lag is the reduction in secondary cases and R eff . The impact of reducing the tracing delay through digital contact tracing has been estimated to reduce R eff by (Kucharski ; Plank ; Ferretti ). However, these same studies, and others (Hinch ), also show that reducing the firstorder tracing delay is insufficient to reverse the epidemic growth without substantial social distancing restrictions. However, some (Ferretti ; Grice ; Vaithianathan ; Kucharski ) have found that digital contact tracing, together
A document (other than a New Zealand Passport, New Zealand Certificate
A draft of the Bill is attached for crossparty consultation
A forum for people who have concerns about their time in state care prior to .
A full copy of the Committees Report and the bill is available on the Parliament website here:
A general request to all Local Authorities to supply information that will be used to inform advice and commercial and financial analysis
A highperforming organisation and a great place to work
A holistic understanding of the life cycle of
A joint review of the Agreement must be undertaken whenever any party believes that such
A joint review of this Agreement must be undertaken whenever any Party not included within a Class
A joint review of this agreement may be undertaken whenever either Party
A leading cause of violence being normalised
A letter from the bank which includes the full bank account number (bank, bank logo, branch, account number and suffix) and the account holders name. This must be signed and stamped by the bank.
A level of adoption that is modest when it comes to contact tracing technologies will have much the same impact as no adoption at all. Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
A liveness algorithm, which tests the images of the applicant to detect false presentations such as a person holding up a photo of someone else or a deepfake.
A member of an adult gang on working togetherFor communities
A member of an adult gangs views
A model for Ttai Tupuna
A model for change: our interagency
A model for impact Impact models are commonly used by the worlds leading strategic philanthropists in international development. A lot of philanthropists still measure outputs (how many cookstoves did you distribute) rather than measuring actual impact (lives saved, deforestation averted, etc). The most useful models of impact are simple, and using them can greatly improve your chances of achieving impact.
A multiagency team focused on better understanding the
A new Power BI version of the Annual Gambling Expenditure Statistics Report is now available through data.govt.nz. This dashboard will replace the current excel dashboard in future updates:
A new Power BI version of the Class Gambling Key Performance Indicators Report is now available through data.govt.nz. This dashboard will replace the current excel report in future updates:
A new Power BI version of the Quarterly GMP dashboard is now available through data.govt.nz. This dashboard has now prepaced the previous Excel dashboard:
A new data standard for sharing information between Government and Third Parties
A new economic regulation and consumer protection regime based on the existing economic regulation regime in Part of the Commerce Act which currently applies to electricity lines services, gas pipeline services, and airport services.
A new single standard for wastewater and stormwater environmental performance.
A nonstatutory inquiry would have greater flexibility about its procedures.
A onetomany algorithm which searches for matches of an image against the records held in the DIA passport database to find if a face exists.
A pathway for mixeduse rural water supplies to transfer from the water services entities into community ownership.
A person holds New Zealand citizenship if they have obtained New Zealand
A person is a New Zealand citizen by birth if:
A position which is more than one level or tier below an employees previous position will not generally be considered a suitable alternative, however each situation will be considered on its merits based on the requirements of the new position and the employees skills, knowledge, qualifications and experience. Note that there are two types of reassignment: noncontestable reassignments occur when there are an equal number of affected employees (or less employees) to suitable vacancies. Affected employees will be asked to submit an EOI to demonstrate that they have the skills required to fill a ring fenced vacancy. Where their skills match the requirements of the vacancy they will be reassigned to that position. An interview andor other form of assessment may also be used to identify that they have the skills required to fill a ringfenced vacancy. a contestable reassignment process is required when there are more affected employees than suitable vacancies. Affected employees will be asked to submit an EOI to demonstrate they have the skills required to fill the vacancy(s). An interview andor other form of assessment may also be used to identify which employees are best suited for reassignment to available vacancies Also, in order to maximise the appointment and retention of employees through the reassignment process and to take account of overall Department needs, reassignments may be offered to positions that are not the individuals preference. Furthermore, an employee may be offered a reassignment even if they have not submitted any preferences at all. The steps in the reassignment process are as follows: . Vacancies within the business groupBranch are often ringfenced, or held, for affected employees to express interest in. Released under the Official Information Act
A preprinted deposit slip which includes the full bank account number (bank, bank logo, branch, account number and suffix) and the account holders name.
A purely commercial model , in which the private sector assumes full responsibility for establishing and administering a framework for digital identity , was not considered because: Neither government nor stakeholders expressed an appetite for such an option . Such a model would not necessarily improve consumer confidence in digital identity services. The public rema ins wary of private sect or exploit ation of their information for commercial gain, but generally views the government as a reliable actor. A purely commercial model would probably rely on best practice guidelines (which are currently mandated and non mandated standards and legisl ation) and have limited enforcement capabilities. This would not be as effective as a government led Trust Framework backed by legislation at bringing consistency and structure to the digital identity ecosystem.
A quick checklist is also included, to support providers with their application.
A randomised controlled trial conducted between families with or without one of the stoves show there is no difference in indoor air quality and therefore no prospect of change to morbidity and mortality data. While the stoves appeared cleaner you were sadly measuring the wrong thing
A record of press releases issued by the Digital Safety team of the Department of Internal Affairs.
A refresh of the Policy is required
A robust network of colleagues across the public service.
A sample is provided to illustrate what the register may contain.
A secure platform for businesses to engage with DIA, manage their details, delegate access to others, submit documents and send queries.
A selection of useful links to other websites about Internet safety.
A selfidentification process would eventually make some of the Working Groups recommendations redundant. Progressing operational improvements will provide valuable support to transgender and intersex people until decisions can be made about introducing a selfidentification process. Some of the Working Groups recommendations also address issues outside of the process for changing sex on a birth certificate.
A shift from focusing on preventing gang
A shift in the mindsets towards gang
A strong sense of belonging is important for New Zealand to be a welcoming and inclusive place for everyone.
A subscription based library management and resource service available to public libraries.
A summary of results is below:
A supportive environment to develop or grow your knowledge of Te Tiriti o Waitangi, Tikanga Mori, te reo and te ao Mori.
A technical matter is investigated by a consultant with relevant expertise
A technical matter or issue is reviewed by a group of experts
A third Bill will set the longterm rules for water services in New Zealand. The Minister will introduce the Bill in December and it will become law by mid.
A travel document (other than a New Zealand Passport, New Zealand
A travel document issued by the Government of New Zealand to a New
A valid tax invoice is one that meets the requirements of the Goods Services Tax Act . If your business is registered for GST your invoices should include your GST number and state the words Tax Invoice as well as comply with all other aspects of the Act.
ANegativeA . . . .
ANegativeA . . . .
ANegativeA . . . .
ANegativeA . . . .
ANegativeA . . . .
AStableA . . . .
A National and Regional Environmental Scan July
A Summary of Three Waters Reform Programme July
A: Taura Herenga Waka Strategy
ABOUT THE DIGITAL MESSAGING SYSTEMS TEAM
ABOUT THE DIGITAL SAFETY GROUP
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The technical team would like to acknowledge the efforts of Rachel Adams and Karla Randrup for their invaluable assistance organising and supporting the field trials. Thanks to Tim Chambers and Andrew Anglemyer from the University of Otago for their advice and support. Lastly, thanks to the participants from our field trials for their patience and cooperation.
AGREEMENT REGARDING USE OF CORPORATE CREDIT CARD
AI Talking Points Newstalk ZB th Jan
AM for meeting with Data Iwi Leaders Group
AM for the Minister for her meeting with Dr Claire Achmad, CE of SSPA in February
AML Directorate Disestablishment of the Deputy Director, Operations AML. Change in reporting line for Personal Assistant, and the Manager, Operations in Auckland, Wellington and Christchurch to the Director, AMLCFT. Merger of the two Auckland teams under a single Manager, Operations in Auckland. The retention of the Principal Advisor, AMLCFT . This role was previously proposed to be disestablished. Establishment of an additional Principal Advisor, AMLCFT , to address the feedback that further capacity was needed to support the Director with capability uplift and international relationships. The Lead Regulator positions will not be established. These roles have been repurposed to the two Principal Advisor roles. A reduction in the Practice Lead positions from two to one and a change in reporting line to the Director AMLCFT. A reduction in the number of Senior Regulators from six to four, and Regulators from six to five in the Auckland Operations team. A reduction in the number of Senior Regulators from three to two and Regulators from five to three, in the Wellington Operations team. The retention of two Graduate Regulator positions one in Wellington and one in Auckland. These roles were previously proposed to be disestablished. Disestablishment of the Business Advisor, one Operational Policy Analyst, and one Forensic Accountant positions in the Service Design team. Move the remaining Operational Policy positions (one Operational Policy Analyst and two Senior Operational Policy Analysts) into the centralised Regulatory Enablement team reporting to the Manager, Operational Policy . This is a change of title for the reporting line and the scope of the centralised function. A reduction in the number of Manager, Service Design positions between the AML and Gambling group from two to one with a change in title to Manager, Operational Policy and a change in reporting line to the Director, Regulatory Enablement . Initially the new role was proposed to be a Team Leader, and there is a change of reporting line for the role. The permanent establishment of an AMLCFT Investigations function with a Manager and two Senior Investigators. The Manager, Investigations AMLCFT will report to the Director AMLCFT. This function remains in the AMLCFT directorate, rather than moving to under a Head of Investigations and Prosecutions as initially proposed.
AML team wins big at IPANZ
AND (Accessibility, Neurodiversity, Disability) Network
AND Amazon Web Services New Zealand Limited (AWS)
AND supported Human Resources with reviewing its recruitment process.
ANTIMONEY LAUNDERING AND COUNTERING FINANCING OF TERRORISM
API Application Programming Interface.
APPENDIX : PROXIMITY TRIAL In addition to the seven scenariobased trials, a further trial was performed to test specific concerns about card performance. This trial was evaluated separately from the others as it was not a scenariobased trial, but included here to help validate the efficacy of the card.
APPENDIX C Preliminary analysis of Treaty of Waitangi considerations Rights Considerations Preliminary interest analysis (informed by prior engagement about three waters reforms and creation of Taumata Arowai) Commentary Article two Are there options for Mori to Introduction of new governance Further work is required on the impact of Rangatiratanga exercise rangatiratanga while arrangements will give rise to the potential of asset transfer and Treaty Mori will have the right to make decisions over resources and taonga which recognising the right of the Crown (including through local government) to govern interests in co governance opportunities. Iwi have expressed an appetite issues. Cogovernance can occur in several areas outside of those related to continued they wish to retain. What role is there for Mori in to have a role in water service public ownership to better reflect local design and implementation delivery. and iwi interests. Does the reform offer an IwiMori have expressed Opportunities will exist to materially opportunity to enhance Mori dissatisfaction with the Treaty improve the connection between wellbeing or build Mori partnership approach and iwiMori rights and interests in the capability and capacity cultural responsiveness of application of mtauranga and in better current territorial authority application of regulatory instruments service delivery. This includes related to water quality and RMA understanding and application obligations to support kaitiakitanga. This of mtauranga Mori will align with the statutory objective of frameworks. Taumata Arowai to give effect to Te Mana o te Wai. Article three Rights as What are the implications for IwiMori raised the importance Consumer protections will need to ensure Citizens equitable outcomes of ensuring that water services issues of equity, particularly as it applies to Implicit assurance that rights will be enjoyed equally by Mori with all New Zealanders. This may What considerations should support legal values including natural justice, due process, fairness and equity including are affordable for all and equitably provide for safe drinking water that contributes to improved health outcomes. rural and remote communities, are adequately addressed. Fiscal stimulus should be designed to encourage maximum local job creation warrant special measures to through regulatory processes Iwi organisations have raised the and support mechanisms such as social attain that equal enjoyment of benefits. What does a tikanga lens bring to consideration of the issues potential for Mori to more directly benefit from alternative delivery mechanisms (e.g. jobs, social enterprise). procurement and skills matching services. Issues related to how multi regional entities are able access funding including equity partnersinvestment sources. Iwi organisations have also expressed a desire to invest in the water infrastructure sector. rnfoawab Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
APPOINTMENTS to STATUTORY BODIES
ASSUMPTIONS Channel : Existing processes Channel : OFLC Self Rating Channel : Inhouse Rating tool Assumed proportion of CVoD distributors using channel Items classified (total , films, series episodes per series) , , Total cost per channel for , , , Unit cost for each channel ACTIVITY Ongoing Maintenance . Maintain technical infrastructure People , , Operating , , Capital , , . Maintain interface browser based People , Operating , . Maintain interface Application Programming Interface People , Operating , . Refinemaintain algorithms and tools logic People , , Operating Total costs for Activity , ,
ATM printout must show the bank logo and the full bank account number (bank, branch, account number and suffix) and the account holders full name.
AUCKLAND FUEL SUPPLY DISRUPTION INQUIRY
AWS training initiatives, could be developed so that these initiatives result injob opportunities and successful digital career transitions for diversecandidates, including in the public sector. dW
AWSs objective is to deliver long term positive impacts from AWS infrastructure and other investments and engagement in New Zealand by:
About appointments to statutory bodies
About data tracking and personal information.
About dia.govt.nz as a New Zealand government website.
About digital identity services
About external links and references on this website.
About reproducing information from this website.
About the Digital Child Exploitation Team
About the Digital Messaging and Systems Team
About the Digital Safety Group
About the Digital Violent Extremism Team
About the Trust Framework Authority
About the application form
About the reform programme
Accelerate the speed with which venues of transmission and additional contacts are identified. Users will scan into venues, the contact tracing centre will receive a list of venues instantly at the time a person tests positive. We expect some additional venues and individuals to be identified through this process but cannot quantify. Minimise false positive quarantine of people Reliable accurate and consistent data from the bluetooth proximity solution, supported by outlier identification and a health risk scoring matrix. Number of people manually traced and quarantined does not change materially. Minimise the levels of false negatives (close contacts missed by the technology) Selecting a solution with the best consistency of bluetooth proximity and time estimation Measure the level of people found by manual contact tracing not recorded by the solution. Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Accelerating the benefits of Cloud computing for the Public Service
Accelerating the digitising of government services
Accelerating the distribution of the local government resilience coinvestment fund
Access auditing all access by NZSIS staff (including system administrator access) to DIA Information generates detailed audit log data, and this will be the same for investigative analysis searches conducted on DIA Information the audit log data controlled by NZSIS is available to support security and compliance auditing, both by NZSIS security or compliance officers and the IGIS
Access auditing the Authorised Officer must record each search they undertake of DIA Information through the DIA terminal in the DIA Register of Use. the DIA Register of Use is maintained by the NZSIS Compliance and Risk team and is audited on a regular basis to ensure that Authorised Officers are compliant with the record keeping requirements outlined in ID Using the DIA System SOP NZSIS will provide the DIA Register of Use to DIA on an annual basis for additional auditing against DIA system records, to ensure NZSIS access to DIA Information is in keeping with the DAA any misuse of the DIA terminal, including inappropriate access to DIA Information by a NZSIS employee, will be reported to the Inspector General of Intelligence and Security (IGIS) and DIA in line with NZSIS processes for compliance incidents failure to record use could result in a breach of the conditions of use of the DIA terminal and termination of the users andor NZSISs access privileges.
Access government services.
Access subscription databases
Access to DIA Information held in NZSIS systems is limited by Access Control Group (ACG) settings
Access to Information about Deaths) Order
Access to the DIA terminal (Authorised Officer) access to DIA Information is strictly limited to Authorised Officers only (See Appendix for definition)
Accessibility instructions for DIAs design suppliers
Accessibility tips for using this website
Accidentsincidents must be reported to the Harbourmaster. A Maritime New Zealand form must also be completed.
Account details, and information about the individuals preferred
Accounting processes mean that costs in the financial system for each month do not always reflect expenses incurred in that month.
Accreditation maintenance
Accreditation and maintenance
Accreditation is not mandatory. While digital identity service providers do not need to become accredited to deliver a service, there are benefits. Users can be more confident that accredited services are trustworthy and will protect their personal information. Additionally, replying parties have confidence in the information that they receive.
Accreditation of a Trust Framework provider or service expires three years after the accreditation was granted by the Trust Framework Authority.
Accreditation of digital identity providers
Accreditation of digital identity providers and services
Accreditation under the framework
Accreditations of digital identity providers
Accredited Services and Level
Accredited digital identity services allow you to easily do so in a way that is safer, trusted and more secure. You have control over how, when and how much of your information is shared.
Across New Zealand there are many different communities, and we need to work with them in different and unique ways, including with iwi, hap and Mori. The Crown can support their aspirations alongside our associated Treaty of Waitangi Te Tiriti o Waitangi obligations and settlements. While many aspirations are common among iwi Mori, we also recognise that unique needs exist and we are working in different ways to support individual iwi.
Across Te Tari Taiwhenua, cohorts in each branch convene on their own accord to develop plans to embed the Mori strategic framework, these are known as Te Aka Taiwhenua Cohorts.
Across the Public Service
Across the country, information on the health and performance of three waters infrastructure has historically been limited and of variable quality. The need to improve information about three waters service delivery was jointly identified as part of the
Across three years you will have month placements, having the opportunity to rotate through a range of different government agencies that the programme is partnered with, providing you experience and exposure in different accounting roles. Training and development opportunities are provided to support your development.
Act (TAA), the Student Loan Scheme Act , the Child Support Act
Act Longterm Plan) Order ,
Act Kaikura District Year Plan) Order .
Act), to allow further work with the sector.
Act, namely s()(b) and ()(a);
Act, to fulfil coalition Government commitments to reflect the English name of government agencies first
Acting Executive Director, Department of Internal Affairs
Acting Executive Director, Water Services Reform
Acting General Manager Digital Services and Solutions
Acting General Manager Ministerial Services
Acting General Manager Workplace Services
Acting Secretary and Chief Executive
Action Against Child Pornography Continues, Second Conviction in a Week
Action Plan: Develop a detailed work plan with clear goals, timelines, and assigned responsibilities for each DEI initiative.
Action sought Timeframe
Action sought I Timeframe
Action sought Timeframe Note that you requested information from officials on recent international proposal to regulat e online content; and Note that other jurisdictions regulatory frameworks for online content offer opportunities for lessons in best practice and alignment . At your convenience
Actions .
Acts as a landing page for historical and nonhistorical records. Includes the nonhistorical section where users can login via RealMe and order records.
Actual (nominal) statistics Table showing actual expenditure, prizes and turnover statistics for the four main types of gambling activity.
Added Party A member of a class of agency specified in clause that becomes a
Addendum to Statement of Work
Addition ally, t he outlook s would remain stable.
Additional Cabinet decision relating to reducing the voting age.
Additional Item: Supreme Court Decision on Voting Age
Additional Item: Supreme Court Decision on Voting Age Cabinet Minute CAB MIN Cabinet Office November
Additional advice on quorum and remote participation in council meetings
Additional costs of proposed approach compared to taking no action Regulated parties Oneoff cost which would cover application fee, initial compliance testing and, potentially, minor amendments to information systems (Note: this would be covered by government in phase one, but not phase two) Ongoing maintenance of compliance obligations.
Additional factor s
Additional information about the local government portfolio and priorities letter to the Prime Minister
Additional ly, the outlooks would be affirmed at Stable .
Additional policy decisions to be included in the Bill
Additional requirements for particular types of prosecutions
Additional service application
Additionally, the branch has oversight of Ministerial and Monitoring functions and our MoriCrown relationships and Treaty Settlements.
Additionally, the branch oversees various commissions including timelimited (
Additionally, the outloo ks would remain stable .
Additionally, close contact false positive rates for the oncard algorithms are encouragingly low and largely meet the definition of a casual contact (being any other contact who has had exposure but does not meet the clinical definition for a close contact). We expect these casual contacts will be further deprioritised and categorised as such in serverside processing, resulting in an estimated close contact false rate of around .
Addressing bias and discrimination
Addressing cloud security and jurisdictional risk concerns to support cloud uptake
Addressing regulatory barriers to accepting digital identity credentials
Addressing the expected undersubscription to commercial grants for sediment and debris management in the Hawkes Bay
Addressing the remaining differences between the two processes is an opportunity to
Administer and enforce casino and noncasino gambling regulation in New Zealand.
Administer funding to support Cyclone Gabrielle recovery and empower communities with resilience against future natural disaster events.
Administering a range of statutory functions for the Minister of Local Government, including for Lake Taup and offshore islands
Administering bodies are decisionmaking bodies under the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act . Each group has a role in making sure the digital identity environment is effective.
Administering bodies are established under the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act . Each group has a role in making sure the digital identity system is effective.
Administering bodies for digital identity services
Administering bodies under the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act .
Administering grant funding schemes, as well as promoting trust and confidence in the charitable sector
Administrati on of Grants
Administration and Expenditure Review Committee meeting on June
Administrative Communications Information Customer Single
Adrian.Jarvisdia.govt.nz
Advancing Digital Societies NonBinding Memorandum of Understanding between New Zealand Government Chief Technology Officer and Microsoft New Zealand Limited (), and Variation to NonBinding Memorandum of Understanding for Advancing Digital Societies () April
Adverse Action Any action that may adversely affect the rights, benefits, obligations, or
Adverse Actions .
Adverse action Any action that may adversely affect the rights, benefits, privileges,
Advertising and Timeline for Appointments to the Taumata Arowai Mori Advisory Group, Te Puna
Advice on Water Reform OptOut Report to Whangrei District Council AUGUST Copyright Castalia Lim ited. All rights reserved. Casta lia is not liable for any loss caused by reliance on this document. Castalia is a part of the worldwide Castalia Advisor y Group. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia Table of contents Executive summary Introduction Governments Reform Scenario produces implausible household bill estimates . Required investment estimate is overstated .. WICS approach to estimating required investment is unsound .. Required investment level is based on inappropriate Scottish comparators .. WICS required investment estimate is much higher than WDCs investment plans . Efficiency estimates for Reform Scenario are implausible .. Capex efficiency estimates are implausible .. Opex efficiency estimates are implausible . WICS anal ytical approach has other methodological flaws WDCs Opt Out household bills are likely to be much lower than government estima tes . WICS overlooks WDCs current high relative performance . Improved regulatory regimes will incentivise improved performance by WDC .. Water quality regulation will likely lead to improved performance by WDC .. Possible improvements from economic regulation regime have been overlooked .. WDC management and operational competence likely to improve with competition between entities for staff . WDC can increase access to finance to lower short term costs WDC residents face risks and costs from Reform Scenario . Local accountability for significant public asset and public service w ill be lost . Local variability in service and quality levels will be lost . Loss of economies of scope increases average cost of remaining council services by . million per annum Recommended next steps
Advice on finding the information your business needs
Advice on modernising the bylaws regime
Advice on proactive release of volunteering oral item: Strengthening our Approach to Volunteering
Advice on the Public Service Commissions Cabinet paper
Advice relating to the Departmental Report and Amendment Paper to the Taxation (Annual Rates for , Multinational Tax and Remedial Matters) Bill
Advice to Minister on next Letter of Expectations
Advising on, establishing and supporting the operation of public and government inquiries and reviews, including Royal Commissions of Inquiry
Advisory Group gives advice to the Trust Framework Board on
Advisory Group to the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Board
Advisory and Informatio n Services
Advisory and Information Services to
Affairs requesting a third and final extension to October . It noted that while an
Affairs will have a manageable impact on the Crown funded services that the Department of
Affected councils will find it hard to complete this LTP to a reasonable standard. Those councils are, and will be, struggling to obtain good information and make assumptions to make quality plans. This is because the level of cyclone damage has created uncertainty about costs, funding, and the timing and extent of recovery work they need to do.
Affected parties (identify) Comment : nature of cost or benefit (eg, ongoing, oneoff), evidence and assumption (eg, compliance rates), risks Impact m present value where appropriate, for monetised impacts; high, medium or low for non monetised impacts Evidence certainty (High, medium or low)
After capit al account balance () ( of total reven ues) (.) (.) (.) (.) (.)
After capital acco unt balance (.) (.) (.) (.) (.)
After capital account balance () ( of total revenues) (.) (.) (.) (.) (.)
After capital account balance () ( of total revenues) (.) . (.) (.) (.)
After capital account balance (.) (.) (.) (.) (.)
After capital account balance (.) . (.) (.) (.)
After downloading card data it was discovered that two cards from the first runthrough were only turned on at the end of that trial (IDs ), and three cards from the second runthrough were only turned on for read out at the end (IDs , , ). Although all cards would flash an LED when being turned on, the cards were not doublechecked as they were allocated to participants. These five cards were excluded from the relevant trial runthroughs and trial setup procedures were adjusted to prevent similar problems in later trials.
After the Bills first reading on June , it was referred to Parliaments Finance and Expenditure Committee. The Committee considered over , submissions on this legislation including oral submissions heard during hearings in Wellington and around the country.
Agencies celebrate tikanga, kawa and mtauranga Mori, and taonga such as te reo Mori
Agency As defined in section () of the Privacy Act .
Agency Partnerships and Capability
Agency or an Overseas Agency that lawfully receives death information
Agree to repeal the transition provision in Schedule , clause of the
Agreement DIA will include the New Zealand Agencys name in the appropriate schedule and
Agreement This information sharing agreement, including any amendment made by the
Agreement This information sharing agreement, which is approved by the Privacy
Agreement and the Memorandum of Understanding.
Agreement despite the existence of any dispute.
Agreement except as required by law or in order to comply with a court order.
Agreement if they are not those set out above.
Agreement is transferred separately from information transferred under other agreements.
Agreement signed by all Ministers and staff who receive a credit card
Agreement the matter will be dealt with in accordance with clause above.
Agreement to Clients for one or more of the purposes specified in Clause except as
Agreement to conclude the review of councilcontrolled organisations accountability, planning and reporting framework
Agreement to enable Clients to use it for one or more of the purposes specified in the relevant
Agreement to lodge Cabinet paper appointment to the Taumata Arowai Mori Advisory Group
Agreement to lodge Cabinet paper Appointment to the Taumata Arowai Board
Agreement to lodge Cabinet paper Water Services Entities Bill: Approval for introduction
Agreement to other parts of DIA that are not responsible for providing Identity
Agreement to proactive release of Cabinet material and public communications relating to the Rates Rebates adjustment
Agreement to proactive release of Cabinet material relating to Chatham Islands Shipping and Livestock Issues
Agreement to publish the Cabinet paper Gambling (Fees) Amendment Regulations and related Cabinet minute
Agreement to publish the Cabinet paper entitled Classification for Commercial Video onDemand Content: Release of Discussion Document and related documents March
Agreement to sign Five Country statement marking the second anniversary of the voluntary principles to counter child sexual exploitation and abuse
Agreement will hold all necessary statutory powers and or delegations required for
Agreement, a oneoff bulk exchange of information already collected may occur to allow the
Agreement, then they must advise DIA in writing. Upon receipt of this notification, DIA will remove
Agreement. The schedule will be circulated to all Parties and the removed New Zealand
Ahmed.ElAshmawyaxenic.co.nz
Aide Memoire Material to support your attendance at the launch event for the Content Regulatory Review discussion document on September
Aide Memoire Phone call with Whangarei District Mayor Vince Cocurullo
Aide Memoire Ngi Tahu September
Aide Memoire Overseas adoption and the role of the Department of Internal Affairs
Aide Memoire Request: Construction Sector Accord Ministers Meetings
Aide Memoire Request: Meeting with Mayor Brown at Auckland Council, Albert St, Auckland
Aide Memoire Request: Meeting with Mayor Smith at Civic House, Trafalgar St, Nelson
Aide Memoire Request: Minister meeting with Mayor Wayne Brown April
Aide Memoire Request: Successful Delivery of the Three Waters Stimulus Programme
Aide Memoire Request: alternative interview panel members (Establishment Boards)
Aide Memoire Te Tau Ihu Iwi September
Aide Memoire Visit to Tauranga on March
Aide Memoire for Auckland Council Citizenship Ceremony
Aide Memoire for Meeting with Digital Safety Carlaw Park
Aide Memoire for Meeting with InternetNZ
Aide Memoire for Meeting with Whanganui District Council Representatives and Carl Bates
Aide Memoire for Ministers Meeting with Richard De Cani
Aide Memoire for PSA Quarterly Meeting
Aide Memoire for the Future Proof Implementation Committee meeting on Thursday June
Aide Memoire for the Future Proof Implementation Committee meeting on Thursday March
Aide Memoire to support City and Regional Deals discussion at February Infrastructure and Investment Ministers Group meeting
Aide Memoire to support your submission of the Racing Industry Amendment Bill at the Governance and Administration Committee
Aide Memoire Hosting the St John District Service Awards
Aide Memoire Material to support your attendance at Kpuia
Aide Memoire Visiting Trees for Canterbury
Aide Memoire: Community Organisations Grants Scheme Funding Round Annual Report
Aide Memoire: Meeting with Bruce Holland from Parkinson Holland and the NZ Trade Industrial Waters Forum (NZTIWF)
Aide Memoire: Meeting with Raveen Jaduram, Chair, Water Services Authority
Aide Memoire: Meeting with Sam Mikaere, Group CEO, Te Nehenehenui on September at am
Aide Memoire: Meeting with Veolia May
Aide Memoire: Minister meeting with Mayor Craig Jepson on March
Aide Memoire: Ministerial Forum with the Twharetoa Mori Trust Board
Aide Memoire: PSA Local Government Delegates Conference
Aide Memoire: Water New Zealand Conference and Expo
Aide mem for LGNZ conference from July
Aide mem for upcoming meetings
Aide memoire Meeting with TAB New Zealand Chief Executive, October
Aide memoire and speech notes for the Digital Councils networking event
Aide memoire for April meeting with Taituar
Aide memoire for your meeting with the Classification Office
Aide memoire request Meeting with Wairoa Mayor (Craig Little)
Aide memoire request: Marae event for Rural Drinking Water Programme announcemen
Aide memoire request: Meeting with Christchurch Mayor Phil Mauger
Aide memoire request: Meeting with Dunedin City Council Mayor Jules Radich
Aide memoire request: Ministers meeting with Watercare
Aide memoire request: Stormwater Conference
Aide memoire request: Water New Zealand Conference and Expo
Aide memoire to support the Minister visiting Fair Food
Aide memoire to support the Ministers visit to Roskill Together
Aide memoire to support your attendance at the Community Networks Aotearoa Conference
Aide memoire to support your attendance at the Fieldays Society Annual Awards Dinner
Aide memoire to support your attendance at the Volunteering New Zealand National Changemakers Hui
Aide memoire to support your meeting with Clubs NZ
Aide memoire to support your meeting with the Free Speech Union on May
Aide memoire to support your visit to Te Kauwhata Community House
Aide memoire to support your visit to the Wellington City Mission
Aide memoire Greyhound Racing NZ meeting Aug
Aide memoire: Minister meeting with Alan Sutherland
Aide memoire: Ministers meeting with Volunteering New Plymouth
Aide memoire: Ministers meeting with the National COGS Committee
Aide memoire: Review of National Volunteer Week and the Big Shoutout campaign
Aide memoire: The Ministers meeting with kina Foundation, Community Networks Aotearoa, NZ Council of Christian Social Services and Social Service Providers Aotearoa.
Aide memoire: To support your attendance at the Project Tongariro Celebration Dinner
Aide memoire: Visit to communityled development partner Fab Feathy
Aide memoire: Ministers meeting with Aotea CLDP
Al has the potential to revolutionise public services for New Zealanders. The Department is exploring the use of AI, and supporting agencies to deploy AI safely and responsibly.The Government Chief Digital Officer (GCDO) provides AI system leadership for the public sector, which includes providing guidance, stewarding agency uptake, and working with providers to access AI services. The GCDO Interim Generative AI guidance for the public service in July and is developing an AI framework and work programme to support responsible AI innovation in government. The National Library is investigating the use of AI to improve searchability of the Papers Past collection. This proofofconcept project is helping us understand how AI can improve accessibility to documentary heritage, not just within collections but across collections and entities. Archives NZ has developed guidance to support the use of AI to create and maintain accurate and accessible public sector records. Work continues to understand how AI can enable automated information classification and enhance the efficient management of information.
Alan Bell , Director , Digital Identity Transition Programme Department of Internal Affairs
Alexander Turnbull Library
Alexander Turnbull Library to National Library
Alignment with other health and social services Rates of harmful drinking, tobacco use, other drug use and psychological distress tend to be much higher among people experiencing problem gambling (a high risk of gambling harm) and, to a lesser extent, among moderate and lowrisk gamblers , than they are among the general population. Those living in areas with a higher social deprivation score are also more likely to experience gambling harm. The service plan will continue to promote actions that better align services that prevent and minimise gambling harm with other health and social services in the period. Where gamblers experience significant comorbidities, we will also explore options for developing more holistic packages of care. Outcomesfocused agreements The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment has incorporated ResultsBased Accountability principles into a streamlined contract framework that government agencies and NGOs can use to identify, measure and monitor achievement of outcomes. The Ministry implemented outcomesfocused agreements incorporating these principles for its preventing and minimising gambling harm contracts in January , and expects to refine these based on learning from audit, evaluation and research in the period. Changes in gambling participation and expenditure While the overall gambling participation rates as a percentage of the population have been static over the past five years or so, the total numbers of atrisk gamblers in the population have increased in line with population growth. Changes in gambling participation and expenditure tend to have longterm flowon effects on the prevalence of gambling harm and the number of people seeking help for gambling problems, although the causes of harmful gambling behaviour are complex. The overall amount gamblers spent on the four main forms of gambling in New Zealand has increased each year since , most recently from . billion in the financial year to . billion in . Adjusting for the effects of inflation and changes to the New Zealand population (aged years and over), this was an overall increase of . percent over the sixyear time period. Section . outlines changes in player expenditure and player expenditure forecasts, for each of the main forms of gambling. Online gambling and gaming convergence Health provider and service provider submissions on the draft strategy observed that there appears to be an increased prevalence of and risks associated with online gambling and gaming convergence, particularly for youth and young adults. This has implications for public health. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
All BDM service information is now part of www.govt.nz.
All DIA Information is ingested and stored on a fully security accredited Top Secret network. NZSIS take extensive measures to ensure storage and access to DIA Information is secure. Compliant
All Parties to this Agreement will provide each other with any reasonable assistance that is necessary
All about New Zealands classification regime.
All applicants must be legally entitled to work within New Zealand prior to being confirmed into a position.
All application templates and guidance can be found on the
All candidates for appointment to a statutory body need to complete a nomination form, provide a current curriculum vitae, and ideally, provide a cover letter explaining how their skills and experience are relevant.
All changes are in effect from December , including:
All deals are required to honour preexisting Te Tiriti o Waitangi obligations.
All discussions will be conducted in good faith, with a focus on factfinding and operational development.
All eligible councils signed the
All employees are encouraged to participate in our celebration weeks:
All employees are entitled to an annual eye examination paid for by the Department. Where the examination identifies the requirement for correction, a maximum of will be paid once every two years for the cost of glasses or contact lenses.
All engagement will be impartial and fair.
All expenses are exclusive of GST, FBT (Fringe Benefit Tax) and depreciation as applicable.
All expenses are exclusive of GST, Fringe Benefit Tax (FBT) and depreciation as applicable.
All figures have been manually collated, and as such, small variation to alternate publications may be present
All information gathering by DIA is governed by an information gathering framework, including an information gathering policy. Information gathering must be authorised according to our internal authorisation processes. These processes may vary within various teams in DIA according to their regulatory function and the severity of the potential harm caused by the noncompliance or offending. Each of our internal authorisation processes, and the related activities, are regularly reviewed to ensure compliance with the law, our internal policies, and our risk management requirements.
All inquiries established under the Inquiries Act have statutory independence; the power to take evidence on oath or affirmation; and to require any person to provide information to the inquiry and to summon witnesses.
All invoices should clearly detail the goods or services provided and match the purchase order and what was delivered.
All kaimahi complete annual Information Management and Privacy training.
All models were tested using tentimes tenfold crossvalidation ( folds). Each run was initialised with the same random seed (so the fold selection is identical for different models). Models were built using the scikit learn library with default parameters unless otherwise specified.
All notices and other communication between the Parties under this Agreement
All notices and other communications between the Parties under this Agreement shall be sent to the
All notices and other communications between the parties under the Agreement shall be
All of Government Portfolio of digital products and ICT services
All our buildings have current building warrant of fitness certifications. This ensures compliance with fire safety regulations and the Building Act .
All parties to the Agreement will provide each other with any reasonable assistance that is
All relevant parties shall ensure that reasonable assistance is provided to the investigation .
All times are New Zealand Daylight Time (NZDT).
AllofGovernment Services Delivery
AllofGovernment websites
Allofgovernment services and information
Allan Prangnell Chief Executive Taumata Arowai
Allan Prangnell Chief Executive, Taumata Arowai
Allocation minute for Te Puna Tahua Lottery Grants Board allocation decisions
Allocation of deci sionmaking powers
Allowing public submissions to refine the Bill before it becomes law.
Allows businesses to offer their products and services directly to New Zealand government agencies.
Also introduced to Parliament in December , the Water Services Economic Efficiency and Consumer Protection Bill implements Cabinets agreement to establish an economic regulation and consumer protection regime as part of water services reform.
Alternative ly, o ur vie w of financial ma nagement could weaken if contingent l iabili ties present a
Alternatively, if a customer has a New Zealand Passport which is nearing expiry, DIA will be
Alternatively, we can send by normal post free of charge, or by email.
Alternatively, you can post your invoice to:
Although a specialist in communications, public relations and social marketing, Hoani has had a diverse range of professional roles. He has worked in parliament, directed biosecurity border operations and worked as a diplomat with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
Although larger shareholding results in a higher likelihood of extraordinary
Although not all violent individuals join a gang,
Although the existence of objectionable (illegal) violent extremist material online is not new, it has become an increasing problem over the past number of years. In the aftermath of the attacks on two Christchurch Mosques, the Department established a new team in the Digital Safety Group focused on addressing violent extremist material online.
Aluminium is used to treat water and should be removed completely after it is used to treat
Amazon Web Services New Zealand Limited
Amended Second Reading Speech Local Government Electoral Legislation Bill
Amended copy of proposed amendments to Citizenship Guidance Document
Amending the NonFinancial Performance Measure Rules
Amendments to the Mori Advisory Group under the Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act
Among Rangimaries governance roles, she is Chair of Te Ohu Kaimoanas (a charitable trust working for the collective interests of iwi organisations in fishing and fisheriesrelated activities) Board of Directors and Te Ptea Whakatupu Trust (promoting Mori education, training, and research), a Director of Moana New Zealand, and is on the Advisory Committee for Auckland Art Gallery Toi o Tmaki.
Among its many duties, the Colonial Secretarys Office ran prisons, supervised government printing, licensed auctioneers, registered births, deaths and marriages, and collected statistics. Its responsibilities for constitutional matters and for the naturalisation of aliens both began in the s.
An Approved Information Sharing Agreement (AISA) is a legal instrument under the Privacy Act that permits information sharing with multiple parties for aligned purposes. AISAs are created through a robust process that includes Cabinet consideration at key points and public consultation. They are approved in law through an Order in Council.
An apps plus wearables strategy can possibly work but there are a number of issues to consider:
An assessment of the provider, including their operational capability, confirming they meet the requirements set out in the Act, Regulations and Rules.
An assessment of the providers compliance with the rules for security, information and data management, using relevant standards where applicable.
An authorisations framework should cover:
An independent evaluation of the digital identity service against the New Zealand Identification Standards completed by the identification team at the Department of Internal Affairs.
An independent evaluation of the providers compliance with the privacybased rules and information privacy principles of the Privacy Act .
An independent evaluator is an individual or organisation considered by the Trust Framework Authority to have the skills, knowledge, and experience necessary to carry out evaluations in that discipline.
An individual or organisation may apply in writing to the Trust Framework Authority to be approved as an independent evaluator for security and privacy. An application must specify the area to which it relates; and include information showing the applicant has the skills, knowledge and experience necessary to carry out accreditation evaluations in that area to a reasonable standard.
An initial , in funding support from a collaboration between a local funder and the Lottery Emergency Natural Disaster Relief (ENDR) fund enabled the purchase of satellitebased internet, traffic management and recovery equipment. This was crucial to support the communitys safety and immediate response.
An inquiry may designate any person to be a core participant in an inquiry. A core participant has the right to give evidence and make submissions to the inquiry.
An inquiry should not usually be appointed, however, where an existing body has jurisdiction to carry out the investigation (according to the Law Commission).
An internet and website filtering system to block websites that host child sexual abuse images made available voluntarily to New Zealand Internet Service Providers (ISPs).
An internet printout which includes the full bank account number (bank, bank logo, branch, account number and suffix) and the account holders name and the bank web address along the top or bottom of the page. This does not need to be signed and stamped by the bank unless all of the above is not provided on the printout.
An overview of greywater and water reuse in New Zealand
An overview of how the Department identifies and responds to online child sexual exploitation.
An overview of how we regulate spam, and New Zealands spam law.
An overview of the classification services we provide including Commercial Video OnDemand.
Analysis Overall, t he monetary and non monetary benefits of implementing a Trust Framework are likely to exceed the costs. If the Trust Framework enabled even . of digital identitys . billion per annum potential, the total cost of the programme at . million would be substantially less than . million per annum of benefits . Over years this would mean that for every invested into the Trust Framework, approximately . of value would be on average. PROACTIVELY RELEASED INCONFIDENCE
Analysis of Long Term Plans
And clouds security should be compared to current state
And the more that people believe their concerns have been heard and their histories acknowledged whether by government or even within their own communities the greater their trust in the solutions, and the greater their willingness to participate in the future. Its a process that reinforces and renews itself again and again.
Annotated agenda for April meeting of Three Waters Ministers
Annotations have been made to the documents where necessary to provide clarity.
Announcement of Inquiry news release
Announcement of funding for the Three Waters Services Reform
Announcements and proactive releases
Annual Gambling Expenditure Statistics Report
Annual Report of the Ministry for Ethnic Communities
Annual Review Min CVS prehearing responses
Annual Review Min DG prehearing responses
Annual Review Min IA prehearing responses
Annual Review Min LG prehearing responses
Annual Review Min Racing prehearing responses
Annual Review Debate Draft Hearing Pack
Annual Review: Opening statement and hot topics
Annual expenditure all gambling activities
Annual figures all gambling activity
Another jailing for child sex abuse collection
Another jailing for child sex abuse images
Another jailing for child sex abuse pictures
Another jailing for objectionable images
Another tipoff leads to jailing
Anthony Wilson is an independent consultant specialising in municipal infrastructure. Until June he was the City Engineer at the Wellington City Council, a Group Controller for the Wellington Civil Defence and Emergency Management Group and the Chief Engineer for the Lets Get Wellington Moving Alliance. Mr Wilson is a past president of both the Institution of Professional Engineers New Zealand and Water New Zealand. He has led the New Zealand water sector in the development of Best Practice and has extensive experience in municipal infrastructure, both in New Zealand and overseas. Mr Wilson holds professional qualifications and memberships in the fields of engineering and infrastructure management from New Zealand, Australia and the United Kingdom.
AntiMoney Laundering Countering Financing of Terrorism
AntiMoney Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism
AntiMoney Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism Act
AntiMoney Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism These businesses need to assess their risk of money laundering and terrorism financing and put in place measures to mitigate these risks. This includes identifying their customers, keeping records, and submitting reports to the Police Financial Intelligence Unit for any suspicious activity or prescribed transaction. In entities supervised by DIA submit the following number of reports per month:An estimated . billion from the proceeds of crime is laundered in New Zealand every year from: million million million Drug offending suspicious activity reports International funds transfers Large cash transactionsFraud Other offences such as burglary DIA supervises more than , financial institutions and other nonfinancial businesses and professions for compliance with measures to detect and deter money laundering and terrorism financing. This includes: Money remitters Law firms and conveyancers Virtual asset service providers Accountants Other financial institutions Real estate agents Casinos Highvalue dealers , , , , , We take an educationfirst approach to regulation and in we engaged with people in the following ways: Roadshow attendees Education event attendees Number of phone and email queries ,
AntiMoney Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism Unit
AntiMoney Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism media releases
AntiSpam Compliance media releases
Antimoney Laundering and Countering Financing Terrorism
Antimoney laundering and countering financing of terrorism (AMLCFT)
Antispam Compliance Unit
Any DIA Information that is brought into the main NZSIS intelligence analysis system following an investigative analysis query is maintained as a business record of NZSIS, with disposal arrangements as agreed in disposal authority DA. Compliant
Any Ministry publication that outlines the concepts and evidence from research to inform the approach to reducing gambling harm will help raise awareness in the gambling sector of the knowledge base that informs the strategy. .Strategic framework The Ministry has made relatively minor changes to the strategic planframework that was in , to better target reductions in health inequities. The strategic framework is based on an outcomes framework agreed by both the gambling industry and gambling harm services in . The Ministry expects to revisit the strategic aim and objectives during the next levy period, to ensure they remain fit for purpose. Most submissions the Ministry received on the consultation document supported the general direction of the strategy and strategic objectives; many also commented in detail on matters that were of particular importance to them. The Ministry has made some changes to the strategic priorities and actions, with the aim of highlighting specific matters, while bearing in mind the objectives are intended to be set at a high level, and the service plan in Section addresses operational matters. Overall goal of the strategic plan The Ministry is committed to a longterm approach that has not significantly changed from the approach outlined in its first sixyear strategic plan in . The overall goal is: Government, the gambling sector, communities and familieswhnau working together to prevent and minimise gambling harm, and to reduce related health inequities. Eleven strategic objectives The following strategic objectives guide the strategic direction for the actions in the service plan. Objective : There is a reduction in gamblingharmrelated inequities between population groups (particularly Mori , Pacific and Asian peoples, as the populations that are most vulnerable to gambling harm). Objective : Mori have healthier futures, through the prevention and minimisation of gambling harm. Objective : People participate in decisionmaking about activities in their communities that prevent and minimise gambling harm. Objective : Healthy policy at the national, regional and local level prevents and minimises gambling harm. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Any Party may suspend, limit, or terminate their participation under this Agreement if it appears to
Any data or reports shared by stakeholders should align with applicable privacy and confidentiality laws.
Any external security consultant engaged by DIA to gather information for regulatory compliance purposes will have the necessary licenses; will be compliant with the Private Security Personnel and Private Investigators (Code of Conduct Surveillance of Individuals) Regulations ; will be required to ensure that conflicts of interest are declared and managed appropriately, and are required to comply with DIA policies and procedures.
Any goods or services valued over (plus GST) require a purchase order number. Please ask our staff member for one if its not provided unless it has been paid with a credit card.
Any information sharing undertaken by NZSIS is conducted in accordance with the DAA, as well as Ministerial Policy Statements and NZSIS policies.
Any inquiries should be directed to
Any other unusual provisions or features .. Does this Bill contain any provisions (other than those noted above) that are unusual or call for special comment NO
Any party may suspend its participation in this Agreement to allow time for a security breach
Any party may suspend, limit, or terminate their participation in this Agreement if it appears
Any person can make a complaint to the Trust Framework Authority if they think that a Trust Framework provider has breached the Trust Framework rules, regulations, terms of use of the accreditation mark, or provisions of the
Any personal andor official information requests to NZSIS regarding DIA Information not held by NZSIS will be transferred to DIA. Any DIA Information that is brought into the main NZSIS intelligence analysis system following an investigative analysis query will be considered by NZSIS through their standard information request process. Any requests to DIA regarding access to DIA information by NZSIS should be transferred to, or consulted with, NZSIS as appropriate to mitigate any potential risk to national security.
Any queries should be directed to
Any solution should be able to be adopted to high levels regardless of ethnicity, age, socioeconomic level, the type of phone you have or your ability to use it. If any community has low levels of adoption, it would impair our ability to slow the spread of the virus. This situation occurred in Singapore, where migrant workers were effectively excluded as a result of the smartphone app approach taken and this is where a new wave of the disease took hold.
Any such information gathering must be approved according to our internal authorisation process. That process, and any related activities, are required to be regularly reviewed to ensure compliance with the law, our internal policies, and our risk management requirements.
Any use outside this purpose must first be discussed with the Ministerial Services Administration and Finance team Form signed by ministerial office staff upon receipt of credit card Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Any variations to this Agreement or the Memorandum of Understanding must be
AnyQuestions and ManyAnswers
AnyQuestions is a service for New Zealand children to get help with homework questions from librarians.
Anyone that has control over the part of an electronic retrieval system on which files can be stored from New Zealand or from which files can be accessed from New Zealand must comply with the FVPC Act.
Aotearoa AI Summit September
Aotearoa Reorua pipeline for FY
Aotearoa Reorua update ahead of Te Wiki o Te Reo Mori
Appeal of Judicial Review
Appendix Summary of report from Dr Ayesha Verrall On the th April the Ministry of Health commissioned an independent Rapid Audit of Contact Tracing for Covid in New Zealand by Dr Ayesha Verrall from the University of Otago.
Appendix Farrierswier letter to DIA on earlier Castalia report
Appendix Evaluation criteria for contact tracing technology
Appendix Responses to claims made by Castalia
Appendix Departmental Statement on the Castalia Report for Whangrei District Council
Appendix Alan Sutherland letter to Minister Mahuta
Appendix A Budget significant initiatives
Appendix A Examples of how parties may use the
Appendix A Examples of how parties may use the personal information .
Appendix A includes examples of how the above table works in practice.
Appendix A Budget significant initiatives
Appendix A Summary of NZBORA analysis to The assessment considered the following questions:
Appendix A. It is designed to assist you in weighing up the merits of:
Appendix A: Capability levels in the water services sector and themes from
Appendix A: Defining Cloud Computing
Appendix A: Defining greyhounds as working dogs Regulatory Impact Assessment ldrz Proactively released by the Minister for Racing
Appendix A: List of councils with M ori wards in the local elections by region
Appendix A: Proposed amendments to legislation to be included the Cabinet paper for the Local Government Water Services Bill Bill )
Appendix A: Pros and cons of options Te Tari Taiwhenua
Appendix A: Table of recommendations to support your Bill Cabinet paper
Appendix B Statistical information about the employees of Te Tari Taiwhenua
Appendix B : Future digital identity system
Appendix B Benefits of cloud computing and New Zealand
Appendix B: Letter to the Chief Executive, Westland District Council
Appendix B: Summary of differences between ward processes
Appendix C Asset performance
Appendix C: Draft discussion document (separate attachment)
Appendix C: Summary of proposed changes to the Cloud First
Appendix D Approved Information Sharing Agreement reporting
Appendix D: Regulatory impact statement (separate attachment)
Appendix E Report of the Government Inquiry into the Appointment Process
Appendix E Search and surveillance
Appendix E Search and surveillance reporting
Appendix to the Journals of the House of Representatives
Apple Googles Exposure Notification API may have an important role to play. Specifically, if phones default to collecting close contact data at the operating system level it may be possible to use this to identify additional close contacts by installing an app on the users phone at the time of testing. This is worth exploring further. Privacy and security considerations and risks This paper does not address security or privacy issues in detail. It is clear, however, that the social license to deploy such technology in New Zealand will be very sensitive to the way privacy, security and trust that is embedded in the solution.
Applicants are encouraged to contact the Trust Framework Authority at
Application form for digital identity service providers seeking accreditation under the Trust Framework. The application form is a Word document that must be completed and returned to the Trust Framework Authority with relevant documents.
Application to operate gaming machines following the merger of Hamilton Combined Returned Services Club Inc and Hamilton Workingmens Club Inc
Applied to the Gambling Commission to suspend New Zealands largest casino operators licence as we uncovered significant breaches of licence obligations. The operator has volunteered to close their gambling area for five consecutive days, which is an unprecedented move
Apply consistent, good practice methods of identification management to protect people from fraud and keep their information safe.
Apply for a passport or check on the status of a current application.
Apply for a rates rebate: application forms
Applying for or renewing a NZ passport ranked top of the charts in the
Appointed by GovernorGeneral on the advice of the Executive Council
Appointment decisions for the Taumata Arowai Board
Appointment of Crown Manager to Wairoa District Council and Hawkes Bay
Appointment of Crown Manager to Wairoa District Council and Hawkes Bay Regional Council
Appointment of Crown Observer to Wellington City Council
Appointment of Crown facilitators: framework to support appointments and supporting material for Cabinet
Appointment of Racing Integrity Board Chairperson: Talking Points for APH March
Appointment of Racing Integrity Board Chairperson: Talking points for Cabinet Appointments and Honours Committee
Appointment of Water Services Policy Technical Advisory Group
Appointment of a Crown monitor for Watercare initial list of nominees and next steps
Appointment of the Chair of the Racing Safety Development Fund Industry Working Group: Appointment documents, March
Appointment of the Chief Censor: approval of candidate to appoint, April
Appointment to Te Puna board for position expiring May
Appointment to the Charities Registration Board: Commencement briefing
Appointment to the Charities Registration Board: Talking points
Appointment to the Charities Registration Board: decision and draft Cabinet paper
Appointment to the Local Government Commission lodgement of Cabinet Appointments and Honours Committee (APH) paper
Appointment to the Racing Integrity Board decision on nominations
Appointment to the Taumata Arowai Mori Advisory Group decisions briefing and draft Cabinet paper
Appointments Required for the Taumata Arowai Mori Advisory Group
Appointments to Racing Integrity Board Decision on nominations
Appointments to Statutory Bodies
Appointments to statutory bodies
Appointments to the Film and Literature Board of Review Letters Seeking Concurrence to Appointments and Draft APH Paper for Consultation
Appointments to the Film and Literature Board of Review Amended Letters Seeking Concurrence to Appointments and Draft APH Paper for Consultation
Appointments to the Oranga Marae Committee: decision briefing and draft Cabinet paper
Appointments to the Winston Churchill Memorial Trust Board: Draft Cabinet paper for the Cabinet Appointments and Honours Committee
Appointments to the Winston Churchill memorial Trust Board: Commencement Briefing
Appointments to the boards of select Crown entities and statutory bodies.
Approach to Budget for the local government portfolio
Approach to change The strategy will result in some ongoing refinement for RSG. RSG leaders are committed to managing this in a considered and transparent way, ensuring planning, implementation and evaluation of change are factored into the implementation of the strategy. This change is likely to take place over time. RSG will put people at the heart of the change; peoplecentric change is about ensuring the full participation of our people in the design and implementation of change initiatives. It is also important to acknowledge that change happens at an individual level, which means finding different ways to seek to involve everyone starting with ensuring a shared understanding of why and how we are changing, what needs to happen for the change to be effective and enduring, and how we will practically implement it.On this basis, the RSG approach to managing change is likely to include some of the following: Using a change methodology that puts people at the centre of the change (for example, Prosci ADKAR) Ensuring RSG leaders are engaged and prepared to successfully lead and support the change Engaging with everyone in RSG early and communicating often along the way Working collaboratively and sharing ideas Sharing plans to get different perspectives from different stakeholders on different things Learning from each other Preparing RSG people well, to be ready for change Celebrating successes along the way Learning from experiences by listening to leaders and kaimahi Our approach to change Understand the change Involve people early to understand why we are making the change, who is impacted and what is needed to support them Connecting people Working together and involving all key stakeholders is critical to ensure the needs of our people are met, and a smooth transition for everyoneAwareness Desire Knowledge Ability ReinforcementIdentify gaps Analysing the impacts from several perspectives to understand what supports, connections, and resources are needed Embedding Ask impacted people what they think and how they are feeling about the change. Continue to engage and support. Ensure benefits are realised and positive stories are shared Planning and integration Ensuring the right people and change activities are coordinated and integrated where possible, in a sequence that makes sense Engagement Engage and support our people. Our engagement will help our people understand whats in it for me and the end goal Readiness Check that everyone feels comfortable, things are ready to go and the right people know whats happening
Approach to consumer protection . note that: . as agreed in the paper, Local Water Done Well stage : water services regulatory system ECO MIN , information disclosure will be part of the new economic regulation regime for local government water services ; and . information disclosure could be used to oversee aspects of the consumer experience, and enable the Commerce Commission to learn more about how existing consumer protection settings are working in practice, and identify potential shortcomings; . agree that the legislation should clearly enable the Commerce Commission to require public reporting from water service providers on consumer protection issues, and to publicly summarise and analyse the information disclosed ; . agree the legislation will also include the power for the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs to make regulations relating to consumer protection measures, to provide flexibility to consider what may be needed in the future particularly if information disclosure reveals that issues exist; . agree that regulations could be used to specify requirements relating to: . complaint processes, the provision of information, the recording of complaints, andor reporting; . providing access to an external consumer dispute resolution process; andor . other matters relating to consumer protections that the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs considers necessary and appropriate; . note that service quality codes could be a useful consumer protection mechanism, but the development of such codes should be sector led in the first instance; . agree the Commerce Commission will be able to issue guidelines to water service providers on matters relating to a service quality code; . agree the legislation will enable the Commerce Commission to make a service quality code in relation to the provision of water services, where no sector developed code exists or, in the opinion of the Commission, the purpose of Part of the Commerce Act could be better met by a mandatory code; ()(g)(i) IN CONFIDENCE Page of . agree that, before making a mandatory service quality code, the Commerce Commission will be required to provide a report to the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs containing the reasons for doing this; Compliance and e nforcement relating to consumer protections . note that: . the Commerce Act contains a range of compliance, enforcement and investigation powers for use under Part of that Act, including enforceable undertakings, pecuniary penalties, offences, orders, injunctions, and the ability to require information for statutory purposes; and . through ECOMIN it was agreed that compliance, enforcement and investigation powers similar to those under Part of the Commerce Act be applied to the economic regulation of water services; and . agree the legislation will enable similar compliance and enforcement powers and mechanisms to be applied to consumer protection requirements , to ensure the Commerce Commission has access to adequate and appropriate tools, and provide consistency across regimes ; Cost recovery through levies . note that: . the proposed approach to consumer protection is designed so that additional costs are not incurred at the outset, and the initial monitoring through information disclosure will be part of the Commerce Commissions proposed activities under the economic regulation regime; . if regulations are made to introduce further requirements relating to consumer protections, this would result in additional costs to the Commerce Commission ; . agree that the legislation will include provisions that enable regulations to be made providing for levies, to enable costs to be recovered for work associated with consumer protection requirements , through Orders in Council made on the recommendation of the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs; . note that this approach would be consistent with the decisions made in relation to the new economic regulation regime for water services, in ECOMIN ; Amendments to the Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act . agree to amend section of the Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act to: . repeal the list of requirements relating to the appointment of board members in section (); and . replace this list with a general requirement to the effect that the Minister must only appoint people who, in the responsible Ministers opinion, have the appropriate knowledge, skills and experience to assist the board to perform its role ; IN CONFIDENCE Page of . . agree to amend section of the Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act to include new operating principles covering the following matters , to guide and inform Taumata Arowai in its performance and delivery of its objectives, functions, and duties: . considering the cost of compliance on suppliers, so there is an appropriate balance between public health outcomes and reasonable costs to suppliers; . ensuring that the regulatory framework is proportionate to the scale, complexity, and risk profile of each drinking water supply (and wastewater and stormwater networks, as the case may be), including the consideration of cost and affordability for the use rs of the supplies ; . proactively engaging with drinking water suppliers and wastewater and stormwater network operators to ensure that there is a path to compliance that takes into account the risk profile and capacity of the supplier or network operator itself; . work ing proactively with suppliers, particularly larger suppliers, to ensure a path to regulatory compliance ; Amendments to the Water Services Act Exemptions . note that s ection of the Water Services Act allows the Chief Executive of Taumata Arowai to grant exemptions to any drinking water supplier or class of drinking water supplier from complying with nine requirements of the Act ; . agree to amend the provisions in the Water Services Act relating to exemptions, so that: . there is flexibility to enable exemptions to be issued proactively, without the need for an application; . exemptions may be granted for any one or more of the nine requirements that are currently specified in section ( ) of the Act; . a further item is included in the list in section ( ), so that exemptions may apply to requirements in section of the Act to notify Taumata Arowai of notifiable risks or hazards; . the legislation includes: .. an express statement setting out the purpose of exemptions; .. flexibility to issue exemptions proactively, where compliance with any of the matters referred to in section () of the Water Services Act is impractical, inefficient, unduly costly, or unduly burdensome (taking into account the nature of the specific issues), or for matters that are minor or technical; ()(f)(iv) IN CONFIDENCE Page of .. a requirement that the extent of the exemption granted cannot be broader than is reasonably necessary to address the matters that gave rise to the exemption; National engineering design standards . note there are benefits of introducing requirements relating to national engineering design standards, which include consistent standards for design and construction of network infrastructure, and would support the Governments aim to increase standardisation to lower the costs o f providing infrastructure; . agree to provide in the legislation for mandatory requirements relating to national engineering design standards ; . agree to include in the legislation the ability to make regulations relating to national engineering design standards, including the detailed scope and content of these standards , the process for developing them, timeframes, and transitional and implementation arrangements; Authorisations . agree to amend clause of Schedule of the Water Services Act so that: . every local authority and council controlled organisation that operates a drinking water supply must be authorised, or have its drinking water supply operated by an authorised supplier, within years after the commencement (instead of five years, as currently); . the drafting of this clause includes appropriate references to any new form of water organisation that might be established by a local authority; . agree to expand the scope of the authorisation provisions in subpart of Part of the Water Services Act to include persons who are involved in carrying out work relating to drinking water supplies andor wastewater networks (or parts, thereof) such as work on maintenance, r epairs , or renewals ; Acceptable solutions . agree to amend section of the Water Services Act to change the requirement on Taumata Arowai to issue drinking water acceptable solutions from may to must ; Changes relating to national wastewater standards . note that Taumata Arowai is currently developing national wastewater environmental performance standards under section of the Water Services Act, which involves making minimum standards for the activities associated with wastewater networks, like dischar ges to land or water; . note that a preferrable approach and one that is consistent with international best practice would involve a single standard, rather than a minimum (or maximum); . agree the legislation will be amended to provide for an approach that involves: . making a single standard for national wastewater standards (rather than minimum or maximum standards) ; and IN CONFIDENCE Page of . ensuring regional councils implement a single standard approach in resource consents, and cannot exceed the standard in consenting conditions apart from on an exceptions basis; . note that implementing these proposals will require changes to the Water Services Act and the Resource Management Act, which could be progressed through the Local Government Water Services Bill but f urther work is needed to develop and agree the appropriate policy approach and specific nature of the legislative changes ; . authorise the Minister of Local Government to: . work with and agree the correct approach with the Minister Responsible for RMA Reform and other Ministers as appropriate (such as the Minister for the Environment) ; and . issue drafting instructions to Parliamentary Counsel Office once this group of Ministers has made decisions ; . note the Minister of Local Government will include information on the decisions that were made in the paper seeking approval to introduce the Local Government Water Services Bill; . note that currently Taumata Arowai may make wastewater andor stormwater environmental performance standards under sections and A of the Water Services Act, through a process that includes public consultation but does not include Cabinet oversight or a regulatory impact analysis; . note that this is different from the approach to making drinking water standards in section of the Water Services Act, which are regulations made by Order in Council and do, therefore, involve Cabinet processes; . agree to amend the Water Services Act so that the power and process associated with making wastewater environmental performance standards (section ) and stormwater environmental performance standards (section A) is consistent with the power and process for making drinking water standards (in section ), which includes an Order in Council process ; Amendments relating to mixed use rural water schemes . agree to amend the operating principles in section of the Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act to include refer ences to mixed use rural schemes ; . agree to amend sections and of the Water Services Act to require Taumata Arowai to: . include specific information on mixed use rural water schemes in its drinking water compliance, monitoring, and enforcement strategy; . comment on mixed use rural water schemes in its annual drinking water regulation report; References to Te Mana o te Wai in the Water Services Act and Taumata Arowai Act . agree to repeal obligations relating to Te Mana o te Wai in section of the Water Services Act and sections (d) and ()(e)(i) of the Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act (and associated provisions) ; IN CONFIDENCE Page of . agree to include a new operating principle in section of the Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act, requiring Taumata Arowai to take account of the National Policy Statement for Freshwater Management , and any regional plans prepared under the R esource Management Act that relate to freshwater , as part of the exercise of its functions, duties and powers; Legislative implications . note that legislation is required to give effect to the proposals in this paper and, if agreed, they would be included in the Local Government Water Services Bill, . invite the Minister of Local Government to issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office to prepare the Local Government Water Services Bill, in accordance with decisions in this paper, including amendments that may be required to : . the Local Government Act ; . the Local Government (Rating) Act ; . the Commerce Act ; . the Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act ; . the Water Services Act ; . the Rates Rebate Act ; . note that the Minister of Local Government will engage with the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs when issuing drafting instructions in relation to the proposals relating to consumer protection and amendments to the Commerce Act; . authorise the Minister of Local Government , in discussion with the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs where appropriate , to approve matters that may arise during the course of drafting and may be required to align with the decisions in this paper; . invite the Minister of Local Government to report back to the Cabinet Legislation Committee on any substantive matters that have been considered and approved during the legislative drafting process , when approval to introduce the Local Government Water Services Bill is sought . Authorised for lodgement Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Local Government ()(f)(iv)
Approach to progressing Recommendation of the Royal Commission of Inquiry Report into the Christchurch terror attacks
Approach to regulations for online casino gambling
Approach to the response to Taumata Arowais draft Statement of Intent and Statement of Performance Expectations
Approaches to enabling . There are broadly two approaches which could achieve the desired outcome
Approval of Racing Integrity Boards budget and tabling of Statement of Intent
Approval of the Ptaringamotu Riccarton Bush Bylaw We have been contacted by the Riccarton House and Bush Trust (the Trust) who need decisions from you and the Governor General to make a new bylaw operative. The Trust is a council controlled organisation of the Christchurch City Council. It was established by the Riccarton Bush Act (the Act) to manage hectares of land gifted to the people of Canterbury. T he property includes Riccarton House and Deans Cottage, the first house built on the Canterbury Plains. The Act enables the Trust to make, alter and repeal bylaws for the operation and management of the property. Bylaws made by the Trust must be approved b y the Governor General and gazetted before becoming operative. The Trust adopted the Ptaringamotu Riccarton Bush Bylaw at a meeting on June . It is intended to replace the Riccarton Bush By laws and is the first amendment to the trusts b ylaws since . The Cabinet Office has advised that the Governor General can approve the Trusts bylaw on advice from a Minister. In your role as Minister of Local Government you are considered the most appropriate Minister to advise the Governor General on this as the Trust is a council controlled organisation and the Department administers both the Riccarton Bush Act and the Bylaws Act . This is a procedural matter of low priority that we will advise you on as resourcing allows. We are conscio us that the Trust first raised this with the Department on July and resolution has been delayed because of the election and higher priority work. To avoid unreasonable further delay for the Trust we will aim to have this advice to you by May . Officials have been communicating with the Trust, so it is aware that this is being actioned. Contact: Rachel Townrow
Approval of the Racing Integrity Boards budget and tabling of the Statement of Intent
Approval to issue drafting instructions to Parliamentary Counsel Office for changes to Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Prescribed Information) Regulations
Approval to lodge Legislation Committee paper: Gambling (Definition of Remote Interactive Gambling) Amendment Bill
Approval to lodge for Cabinet: Revised Water Services Entities Bill and associated Cabinet paper
Approval to lodge the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Fees) Amendment Regulations
Approval to proactively release Going For Housing Growth: Improving infrastructure funding and financing to support urban growth
Approval to release draft Local Electoral Amendment Regulations to key local government stakeholders
Approval to remove the revocation in the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Commercial Video onDemand Levy Regulations
Approval to send draft Order in Council to Review Panel
Approval to send draft Order in Council to the Review Panel
Approval to upload the Cabinet Legislation Committee paper and Agreement to release Cabinet material and additional documents relating to the Rates Rebates Order
Approvals and Monitoring: At relevant points throughout, relevant stakeholders will be engaged for feedback and approval.
Approved Information An information sharing agreement approved by an Order in Council that
Approving the Riccarton Bush Bylaw
Approximately attendees
Approximately attendees
Approximately attendees
April General Election
April illegal possession of firearms
Archived Documents section
Archived Three Waters Reform Programme information and key documents
Archived Water Services Reform Programme information
Archives Council Te Rua Wnanga
Archives Council Te Rua Wnanga
Archives Council Te Rua Wnanga: Commencement of the appointment process for
Archives Council Te Rua Wnanga: decision briefing and draft Cabinet paper for the appointments round
Archives Council Te Rua Wnanga appointment documents
Archives Council Documentation to finalise appointments
Archives Council Te Rua Wnanga: Commencement of the appointments round
Archives Council Te Rua Wnanga: Documents to complete reappointments
Archives Council: Draft Cabinet paper
Archives Council: Selection of preferred appointees
Archives New Zealand Te Rua Mahara o te Kwanatanga
Archives New Zealand administers the
Archives New Zealand news
Archives New Zealand serves as the official guardian of New Zealands public archives and works to enhance their accessibility and promote good information management by regulating government recordkeeping.
Archives New Zealand websites
Archives New Zealands online finding aid.
Archives New Zealands primary website.
Archives New Zealands websites
Archives New Zealand, Te Rua Mahara o te Kwanatanga
Archives, Culture, and Heritage Reform Act
Are living in, or willing to relocate to Wellington
Are nominated beneficiaries.
Are you a victim of identity theft
Are you applying for citizenship or immigration or are you an immigration consultant
Are you interested in working for us or would you like information on becoming a translator or on whats happening in the world of translation
Are you travelling or moving overseas and need your documents translated into a foreign language
Around , worth of luxury items
Arowaithe Water Services Regulator Act . There will also be consequential
Arrangements for an Acting Chief Censor
Arrangements for the new water services delivery system, including:
Artificial intelligence and its implications for digital public services
As Deputy Secretary Digital Services, Murray has the following positions reporting to him:
As Deputy Secretary for Enterprise Services, Darrin has the following positions reporting to him:
As Deputy Secretary for Partnerships and Commissions, Hoani has the following positions reporting to him:
As Deputy Secretary for Policy and Te Tiriti, Michael has the following positions reporting to him:
As Deputy Secretary for Regulatory and Identity Services, Briget has the following positions reporting to her:
As a business or organisation, you might need to:
As a department, we always put the people of New Zealand at the forefront of our decision making. This is the golden thread that runs through each of these core pou.
As a large and complex department, we take many actions every day that positively impact our five outcomes. This section explains our outcomes framework and the work the Department carried out in to contribute towards the achievement of our outcomes.
As a new organisation, HUD experienced the benefits of being
As a part of the project, the CovidCard security architecture has been submitted for initial review by the National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC), who have expressed satisfaction with the approach taken whilst noting the need for final overall review in the context of a broader card deployment and usage model. .. Card manufacture and supply chain Two preferred CovidCard hardware manufacturing providers have been engaged in the prototype development project:
As a result of sharing personal information under the agreement, Inland Revenue
As at September , the following is a list of legislation that we administer, or enforce, classified by subject area. Please note that the list only includes primary instruments and does not include amendment acts or regulations. Some secondary legislation is not yet included in this list and will be progressively added over coming months:
As at the time of signing this MoU, the parties anticipate working together on the following
As clearly documented, there are seve ral factors which constrained the analysis. Cabinet Ministers had alr eady made decisions defining the scope of the proposed changes befor e a regulatory impact analysis could be completed and Treasur y officials agreed that this supplementary analysis should focus on the options agreed by Ministers. Work to assess the cost implications of lowering the voting age for local elections has not yet been completed. The process and timeframes for the decisions did no t allow for public consultation, although the Panel notes there will be the usual opportunity to make submissions on the Bill through the parliamentary process.
As daily activities move increasingly online, it makes sense that many of the products and services we rely on move online too. Having the ability to prove who we are safely and securely online will make accessing public and private sector services, such as welfare payments, opening a bank account and doctor visits, easier.
As explained above WICS have perf ormed sensitivity analysis using the unconstrained investment provided by councils. It also used the investment set out in the RFI as the bottom line of the range of the investment used for modelling purposes.
As of December we are now hosting these files on
As of September we provide one list each quarter that combines the data from the older reports.
As of September over , people have successfully used the Identity Check service across both the Ministry of Social Development and Hospitality New Zealand. Identity Check system data, held by DIA, shows a percent success rate for users who complete the biometric processes.
As part of Local Water Done Well, using information developed under the previous governments Three Waters programme, the Department provided guidance to councils via a secure portal to successfully roll out Local Water Done Well.
As part of developing final Plans, councils will be required to respond to any feedback provided by the Department of Internal Affairs on
As part of his previous review experience, John has conducted an inquiry into financial irregularities at the Waikato District Health Board and carried out an investigation into the actions and statements of a former Treasury chief executive.
As part of the Departments focus on baseline reduction, we have made changes to reduce the costs of technology. At the same time, we are focused on maintaining and modernising our systems to ensure they remain stable and secure
As part of the Three Waters Reform Programme MoU, the Crown has provided
As part of the recruitment process, we may contact your referees and discuss your previous experience and suitability for the role you applied for. Prior to us contacting your references you will be advised.
As part of the use of our statutory powers and to gather and preserve information and evidence, we may:
As part of this upgrade, we will be deleting draft passport applications that have been saved but not paid for and not submitted to the passport office. This will be done in two stages, starting from pm on Thursday March.
As part of undertaking these reviews, the Department of Internal Affairs may consult as necessary with the Commerce Commission,
As such, there is a need to consider alternative options: . utilising the existing Local Government Funding Agency (LGFA), which would need to be modified to enable lending to water services entities and would require support from LGFAs shareholding councils; ()(b)(ii) ()(b)(ii) ()(b)(ii) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
As the information received from DIA will be used to contact the individuals by
As the world becomes increasingly digitised, every country around the world is having to come to terms with the emerging issues around the sharing, usage, and storage of information in a digital manner. G iven these issues are relatively new, this placed some key limitation and constraints on the Departments analysis. These limitati ons and constraints are outlined below. The variety in comparable jurisdictions The Department consulted with a wide variety of international partners, including comparable jurisdictions such as the United Kingdom, Canada and Australia, to identify and assess intervention options. While there was broad agreement with establishing a Trust Framework, each country has to contend with certain unique features (e.g. federal structure, constitutional constraints) . This created minor differences in approaches to the implementation of a Trust Framework which meant that lessons identified, and implementation options , could not always be readily adopted in the Departments options analysis. Sometimes assumptions had to be made regarding options in a New Zealand context, for example, as a unitary state New Zealand has national standards for identification management, whereas federal jurisdictions such as Australia need to align the identification standards and approaches of each state with a federal approach . The limi tations around consultation All stakeholders were consulted on their views regarding the challenges with digital identity services and how they thought these could be addressed, but not all stakeholders were directly consulted on the options that are prese nted in this assessment. Additionally, engagement with Mori stakeholders remains in its infancy. Iwi have shown a desire to work collaboratively with government to enhance digital iwi registration processes in line with tikanga Mori, however, it takes ti me to establish enduring relationships. As a result of these challenges, some of the options analysis is based on assumptions that proposals would match to, and deliver on, the feedback received.
As water infrastructure is a key component of the planning system water services entities will need to interact with the resource management system to deliver on the outcomes set by councils through their planning documents.
As we have learned through recent national emergency events, it is critical New Zealanders have confidence that their democratically elected leaders are able to make and communicate decisions to support an effective response.
As we transition to a refreshed strategy, we recognise the importance of building on these achievements while addressing areas of improvement. We will continue to prioritise inclusive leadership, increasing the representation of Mori, Pasifika, and ethnic kaimahi in senior roles, and further closing gender and ethnic pay gaps. To determine the additional steps we need to take, we will focus on codesigning initiatives alongside our people and leveraging datadriven insights, so that we create a strategy that is both sustainable and reflective of the values of Te Tari Taiwhenua.
As with all inquiries, some matters are excluded. The Inquiry Terms of Reference lists the matters that are outside the scope of the Inquiry. For example, policies and actions relating to risk reduction and resilience building are excluded because separate programmes of work are already underway. Investigations into the treatment of individual cases of people or businesses affected by the severe weather events are also excluded from the scope of the Inquiry.
Ashburton District Council
Ashburton model WICS report
Ashburton slide pack WICS report
Ashley River Improvement Act
Asian comics part of child sex abuse image collection
Assessment and the Memorandum of Understanding between Inland Revenue and
Assessment criteria: In reviewing Plans, the Department must take into account whether the Plan has provided all the information as
Asset condition performance for ICT and Property assets is detailed in Appendix C Asset performance.
Assetscapital (x)
Assisted the Royal Commission of Inquiry into Historical Abuse in State Care and in the Care of Faithbased Institutions in their work to produce their final report
Associate Minister of Finance
Associate Professor Peter Adds
At DIA we have a small, dedicated team (the Regulatory Assurance and Stewardship Unit, or RASU) that is tasked with supporting regulatory stewardship activity across DIAs regulatory systems. RASU works with regulatory system leaders at DIA to highlight good practice and provide assurance about system performance. We also work with the growing network of stewardship staff in other agencies to share expertise and collaborate on crossagency issues.
At Internal Affairs, our people are at the heart of everything we do. Were committed to the wellbeing of our people and in we were recognised for this commitment when we received highly commended in the Work Life Balance category at the Diversity Works Awards.
At June the average salary for women was ,. The gender pay gap was . percent. This represents a slight increase of . percentage points from the previous year and a reduction of . percentage points over the last five years.
At Te Tari Taiwhenua we offer an annual Summer Internship programme to provide those studying towards a degree or higher qualification the opportunity to gain experience in their desired area of work.
At a technical level, the security model of the AppleGoogle system is such that the tracking messages (Bluetooth advertisements) of phones are unable to be reconciled with a user. As CovidCard is not a network connected device, it is unable to integrate with the AppleGoogle API. We do not consider it technically possible to effectively integrate hardware with the AppleGoogle Exposure Notification system.
At any time, DIA may agree to a New Zealand Agency becoming a member of a Class of Agencies
At the May CentralLocal Government Forum, central and local government leadership discussed challenges facing New Zealands water service delivery and infrastructure, and committed to working jointly on reform.
At the time of the Kaikoura earthquake in November , IR wasnt
At this stage, with very low prevalence of COVID in New Zealand, we should be aiming to get everyone who is symptomatic tested as soon as they identify with symptoms consistent with COVID. Typically up to of those that should be getting tested are not proactively presenting to get tested. Any delays in getting people tested, or getting test results results in more new infections.
Attack on online child sexual abuse network saves children
Attendance at Fire and Emergency New Zealands Annual Review hearing on December
Attending Auckland City Hospital Volunteers in Action Day
Attending Auckland Volunteering Event
Attending Taupo Volunteer Expo
Attending Volunteer Wellington Mahi Aroha Volunteer Awards
Attending the Volunteer Wellington International Volunteer Day celebration
Attribute: An item of information that describes something about an individual or organisation (such as an individuals name or address, or a companys registration number or New Zealand business number) . This definition may change as part of work to develop the Digital Identity Trust Framework. Authenticator: one or more things known andor possessed by a user (such as a login, a code, a piece of software, or a device) . This definition may change as part of work to develop the Digital Identity Trust Framework. Credential: A record kept in digital form that: (a) is issued to an individual or an organisation by an infrastructure provider; (b) describes one or more identity or other attributes about the individual or organisation; and (c) is usually bound to an authenticator . This definition may change as part of work to develop the Digital Identity Trust Framework. Confirmation Service: The Confirmation Service allows organisations to validate biographic identity information against the source databaseregister. Retrieval Service: The Retrieval Service allows the Police and potentially the Ministry of Justice in the future, to enter biographic data and then access the photo of that individual for law enforcement purpose . RealMe services: There are two elements to the RealMe service. The RealMe login service allows people to access multiple online services with a common username and password. A RealMe verified identity allows people to securely prove who they are online when applying for services and products from participating organisations .
Auckland Community Committee
Auckland Council legislation that I previously indicated would be a separate Bill. I will
Auckland Council torohanga District Council
Auckland District Council
Auckland Harbour Board and Takapuna Borough Council Empowering Act Amendment Bill response to select committee
Auckland man, , sentenced to months home detention for the possession and distribution of child sexual abuse material
Auckland model WICS report
Auckland slide pack WICS report
Audit log A nonrepudiable collection of records to support the formal inspection and
Auditor Generals response to accountability and independent audit proposals
Audits The Ministrys audit team will undertake audits of contracted services in line with the Ministrys audit policy. The Ministry has increased the evaluation budget to accommodate an increased evaluation programme. This may also include periodic audits from time to time where the audit requires clinical independence. Where appropriate, the Ministry will apply lessons learned from audits or evaluations to future contracts. For example, a governance and financial audit of intervention and public health service providers undertaken during the financial year provides a baseline for assessing progress to strengthen the governance of funding agreements. . New service and innovation pilots The Ministry intends to develop new service models to address areas of persistent harm and improve service effectiveness. As a priority, it will pilot and assess: new ways of providing public health and intervention services in geographical areas or communities that are currently underserviced, to address inequities innovative uses of technology to manage or mitigate gambling harm peersupport services and a small amount of residential care for gambling harm. Table : Budget for new service and innovation pilots (GST exclusive), Service area Total (m) (m) (m) (m) Pilots to address inequity (public he alth and . . . . intervention services) Technology related innovation covering MVE, . . . . online support and machine related contro lsmonitoring (harm prevention) Peer support pilot . . . . Residential care pilot . . . . Total (m) . . . . STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
August Mori Television Service
August Steering Committee workshop: summary report
August , Report: Vulnerable Communities Exposed to Flood Hazard
August Te Tari Taiwhenua identifies groups within the organisation that will offer job opportunities for this years Summer Intern cohort
Australasia Chartered Institute of Procurement and Supply (CIPS) Award
Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom and the United States of America); and
Authenticated users can login and add identity records
Authentication and Translations
Authorisation A licence, permit, certificate, or other authorisation (whether issued
Authorisation for water service professionals repeal of statutory timeframes (LG)
Authorisation to act as a celebrant.
Authorisations framework timeline
Authorisations frameworks are a common tool to manage human factors risks in other
Authorise d for lodgement
Authorise d for lodgement Nanaia Mahuta Minister of Local Government Proactively released from the Department of Internal Affairs
Authorised by Part A of the Privacy Act and
Authorised for lodgemen t Hon Nanaia Mahuta Minister of Local Government
Authorised for lodgement Hon Barbara Edmonds Minister of Internal Affairs PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN. Cabinet Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Registering Nominated Sex) Regulations Portfolio Internal Affairs On June , following reference from the Cabinet Legislation Committee, Cabinet: noted that in December , the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee agreed to: . specify another gender and a nonbinary gender as sex and gender markers other than male and female that can be nominated on a birth certificate under the selfidentification process; . specify that suitably qualified third parties that can provide a letter of support for children and young peoples applications are registered doctors, registered psychologists, registered psychotherapists, registered nurses, registered social workers, qualifying counsellors; and a person (aged years or older) who has known the child or young person for months or more; SWCMIN; . rescinded the decision referred to in paragraph . above; and instead . agreed to specify nonbinary as a sex and gender marker other than male and female that can be nominated on a birth certificate under the selfidentification process; noted that the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Registering Nominated Sex) Regulations (the Regulations) give effect to the decisions above; authorised the submission to the Executive Council of the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Registering Nominated Sex) Regulations PCO .; noted that the Regulations come into force on June ; I N C O N F I D E N C E henfd PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN. noted that a waiver of the day rule is sought on the grounds that the Regulations: . need to commence early to comply with statutory obligations; . only provides benefits to the public; agreed to waive the day rule so that the Regulations can come into force on June . Rachel Hayward Secretary of the Cabinet Secretarys Note: This minute replaces LEGMIN. Cabinet agreed to the rescinding decision in paragraph . I N C O N F I D E N C E henfd PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Purpose . This briefing seeks your agreement to lodge the attached Cabinet paper Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Registering Nominated Sex) Regulations for consideration at the Cabinet Legislative Committee (LEG) meeting on June . The Cabinet paper is a final version of a draft you have already seen No significant feedback was received on the Cabinet paper . On May , we provided you with a draft of the Cabinet paper for ministerial consultation IA refers. The period for ministerial consultation ended on May . This paper incorporated recent changes to the regulation for the sex and gender markers including removing another gender and amending a non binary gender to non binary IA refers. . We rec eived no significant feedback from ministerial consultation , however, we have made a few minor and technical amendments to the Cabinet paper including: . updating the publicity section to confirm that your office will issue a press release following the p assage of regulations and the launch of the self identification process; and . a noting recommendation has been added to align with the requirements of the official D epartment of Prime Minister and C abinet template for submitting regulations to the Executive Council. The recommendation asks Cabinet to note that a waiver of the day rule is sought and on what grounds. Ministry of Justice raised a concern about the process for year olds that is outside the scope of the proposals in the paper . During agency consultation, Ministry of Justice (MoJ) recommended the paper provide rationale for why and year olds need to provide a letter of support from a third party . MoJ are concerned the process for and year olds is inconsistent with the Care of Children Act (CoCA) and is potentially discriminatory based on age under the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act . . The policy decision to have the extra requirement for applications from and year olds was made during the development of the self identification provisions under the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Act back in . We have clarified with MoJ that we have not added this rationale to th is paper as their concer ns are not within scope of the regulatory powers under the Act which are exclusive to determining sex and gender markers (other than male or female) and specifying who can be a third party to support children and young peoples applications. This issue is addressed further in the talking points to support you at LEG (Appendix C). Next steps . The final version of the Cabinet paper is attached as Appendix A and the final version of the regulations are attached as Appendix B . Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) will lodge the final version of the regulations with the Cabinet Office.
Authorised for lodgement Hon Dr David Clark Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E GOV MIN I N C O N F I D E N C E iuuzhyv
Authorised for lodgement Hon Jan Tinetti Minister of Internal Affairs
Authorised for lodgement Hon Kieran McAnulty Minister of Local Government
Authorised for lodgement Hon Kieran McAnulty Minister of Local Government Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Authorised for lodgement Hon Kiri Allan Minister of Justice Hon Kieran McAnulty Mini ster of Local Government Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E LEGMIN I N C O N F I D E N C E akgmm Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute of Decision
Authorised for lodgement Hon Kris Faafoi Minister for Gov ernment Digital Services
Authorised for lodgement Hon Nanaia Mahuta Minister of Local Govern ment s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Authorised for lodgement Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Local Government
Authorised for lodgement Hon Simon Watts Minister of Local Government
Authorised for lodgement Rt Hon Winston Peters Minister for Racing
Authorising additional private sector organisations to use the RealMe Identity Verification Service
Authorising additional private sector organisations to use the RealMe Identity Verification Service.
Authorising an additional private sector organisation to use the RealMe Identity Verification Service
Authorities . : .
Authority A board, committee, or other group established by or under
Authors and contributors: Sam Morgan, Dr Tim Chambers, Dr Andy Anglemyer, Rob Fyfe, Alastair Grigg, Chris Teeling, Alexander Fala, Dr Dean Armstrong, Paul Scott, Bain Hollister.
Awardwinning He Tohu scoops accolades
Ayesha Verralls report stated that the ambition for New Zealands Contact Tracing solution is to contact and quarantine of close contacts within four days.
B Table B and B guide
B Table Ba, Bb and Bc guide
B Table B, B and B guide
B U D G E T : S E N S I T I V E SWC MIN approved the following increase to appropriations to implement the policy decisions in paragraphs and above: m increase (decrease) Vote Health Minister of Health (m) (m) (m) (m) out years (m) Departmental Output Expense: Managing the Purchasing of Services (funded by revenue Crown) . . . Nondepartmental Output Expense Problem Gambling Services : . . . Total Operating . . . noted the following forecasting change to the problem gambling levy, as a result of the decision in paragraph above m increase(decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue (m) (m) (m) (m) out years (m) NonTax Revenue: Problem Gambling Levy (.) (.) (.) (.) Total Operating (.) (.) (.) (.) noted that the above changes to appropriations are fiscally neutral to the Crown over time, as the problem gambling levy reimburses the costs of this activity ; Publication of the Ministrys Strategy approved the publication of the Strategy after Budget day, subject to any necessary minor editing and formatting changes; Issuing drafting instructions invited the Minister of Internal Affairs to issue drafting instructions for problem gambling levy regulations to be made under the Gambling Act for the to period. Jenny Vickers Committee Secretary Hard copy distribution: (see over) agvxbup B U D G E T : S E N S I T I V E Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
B U D G E T : S E N S I T I V E SWC MIN Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The informat ion can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm to Portfolio s Health Internal Affairs On April , the Cabinet S ocial Wellbeing Committee (SWC) : noted that in August , SWC approved the release of the Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm to : Consultation Document , and invited the Ministers responsible to report back by March se eking approval for the Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm to (the Strategy) and a new problem gambling levy rate SWC MIN ; noted that the problem gambling levy is intended to recover the cost of developing, managing and delivering an integrated problem gambling strategy focused on public health; noted that the Ministry of Health and the Gambling Commission have met the consultation requirements in the Gambling Act ; noted that the Strategy meets all the statutory r equirements for an integrated problem gambling strategy, and is the proposed integrated problem gambling strategy for the to period; noted that the Strategy proposes to refocus and develop services to better meet the needs of people affecte d by harmful gambling by: . improving the range of, and access to, services; . using co design and consumer networks to develop more effective services; and . strengthening enablers that support these objectives; noted that the changes proposed in the Strategy strongly align with the recommendations of He Ara Oranga , the report of the Government Inquiry into Mental Health and Addiction; approved the Strategy; noted that the cost of implement ing the Strategy is . million, which is partially offset by an ex pense transfer of million from the appropriation; agvxbup B U D G E T : S E N S I T I V E Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
B U D G E T : S E N S I T I V E SWC MIN Decisions on the problem gambling levy noted that the problem gambling levy is forecast to collect . million in excess of costs for the current levy period ending June , further redu cing the amount of additional funding required for the Strategy for the to period; agreed that the problem gambling levy recovers . million (GST exclusive) over the years to ; noted that officials are reviewing the broa der polic y settings for class gambling and related issues such as online gambling and the levy formula, which may result in changes to levypaying sectors in due course, but no changes are proposed for the levy paying sectors for the levy period commenci ng on July ; agreed that the four levy paying sectors remain as non casino gaming machines, casinos, the New Zealand Racing Board, and the New Zealand Lotteries Commission; agreed to apply weightings of percent on player expenditure and perce nt on customer presentations in the problem gambling levy formula for the new levy period; approved the resulting levy rates (which are percentages of player expenditure in each sector over the period from July to June inclusive), as set out in the table below , to take effect on July : to levy rates (GST excl) Weighting NonCasino Gaming Machines . of player expenditure Casinos . of player expenditure New Zealand Racing Board . of player expend iture New Zealand Lotteries Commission . of player expenditure Changes to Vote Health appropriations noted the Vote Health baseline for developing, managing and delivering the Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm to in the table below : Vote Health Minister of Health (m) (m) (m) (m) out years (m) Nondepartmental Output Expense: Problem Gambling Services . . . . . Departmental Output Expense: Managing the Purchasing of services (funded by revenue Crown) . . . . . Total . . . . . agvxbup B U D G E T : S E N S I T I V E Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
B U D G E T : S E N S I T I V E SWC MIN Present: Officials present from: Rt Hon Jacinda Ardern Office of the Prime Minister Rt Hon Winston Peters Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet Hon Grant Robertson Office of the Chair Hon Phil Twyford Officials Committee for SWC Hon Chris Hipkins Hon Andrew Little Hon Carmel Se puloni (Chair) Hon Dr David Clark Hon Nanaia Mahuta Hon Stuart Nash Hon Jenny Salesa Hon Damien OConnor Hon Tracey Martin Hon Aupito William Sio Hon Julie Anne Genter Jan Logie, MP Hard copy distribution: Associate Minister of Health (Hon Jenny Salesa) Minister of Internal Affairs agvxbup B U D G E T : S E N S I T I V E Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
B) from . Therefore, we excluded the WSE s revenues, expenditure and debt f rom
B: Taura Herenga Waka Work Programme
BDMRR Act Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Act
BDMRRAct The Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Act .
BENEFITS OF WORKING WITH US
BETWEEN THE SECRETARY FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS
BETWEEN The Sovereign in right of New Zealand acting by and through the Chief Executive of Te
BNZ Contact: From overseas: call collect , in NZ:
BUSINESS RIS K Excellent Excellent Strong
Bachelor of Business (Hons), AUT
Bachelor of Business Analysis, University of Waikato
Bachelor of Commerce, University of Otago
Bachelor of Commerce, Victoria University of Wellington
BackEnd Testing: The systems matching engine was tested by comparing the selfie images against the stored passport photos, including both matches of the correct person and nonmatches where the selfie and the passport photo were of different people.
Background Currently the Local Electoral Act has a single age of eligibility ( years) that applies to voting, candidacy, nominating a candidate, and being a scrutineer.
Background . In our previous paper we noted that the proposal did not meet several of the requirements for new water organisations. Specifically, the proposal included transferring water services to a company which: . . . . We provided you with advice on how the requirements could be amended to fit the proposal;
Background and potential benefits of cloud computing for the New Zealand public
Background on changes to Local Legislation Bills in the Standing Orders
Balancing of community interests . Elected members are required to act in the best interests of their district and region, and that role requires some balancing of interests in decision making, including taking into account minority interests. Polls are an instrument of majority rule, and the outcome will always depend on the majoritys perception of the minority interests . Consistency of council decision making about representation arrangements . Currently a council can decide to establish a ward that is representative of a significant community of interest (e.g., a rural ward) and the public has no ability to overturn this decision through the use of a poll. It may, however, appeal to the Local Government Commission for a review of the decision. The ability for a poll of electors to overturn a council resolution is also unusual in the context of council decision making. F or most council decision making processes, the public does not have this level of influence over the decision. . The Mori ward poll process was identical to th at for council resolutions on which electoral system to use (STV or FPP). While these issues are both electoral, the impact of these decisions is not equal. Decisions about the electoral system apply equally to all voters, while decisions about Mori wards disproportionately affect Mori. . This criterion considers whether the option establishes additional barriers to Mori representation that do not apply to other communities. . Neither the status quo nor any of the proposed options involve fully aligning the process of creating Mori wards with the process for creating general wards through the representation review process.
Barbara Kuriger Chairperson Governance and Administration Committee Bowen House Wellington Dear Ms Kuriger RE: Films, Videos, and Publications (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill referral to the Governance and Administration Committee. The Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) would like to thank the Committee for their work to on the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill (the Bill). Offic ials at the Department have kept the Minister of Internal Affairs (the Minister) appraised on submitter feedback on the Bill. We have raised with the Minister that there is strong opposition for the type of legislatively mandated filter of objectionable co ntent online that is currently prescribed in the Bill. The Minister would like to discuss the se submissions at Cabinet, ahead of informing the Committee of the Governments policy position on this issue. This process will require a delay in the submission of the Departmental report to the Committee by approximately one month , which the Minister is supportive of . This will allow time for Cabinet consideration and for any appropriate amendments to be drafted. Accordingly, we ask that the Committee authorise an extension to the submission for the Departmental Report to the Committee, from the current of June , to June . The Minister understand s that this may also have an impact on the final report back . Yours sincerely
Barriers to digital inclusion are reduced
Based on Councils LTP data, the Financial Impact Tool has been developed to help provide some high level insights to local authorities with respect to:
Baseline Reduction Exercise for Vote Internal Affairs Racing portfolio
Baseline Update. The Department advises me that it is not prudent to wait for the
Baseline cost savings discussion with MoF
Bay of Plenty Community Trust
Bay of Plenty Harbour Board Order
Bay of Plenty Mayoral Forum May
Bay of Plenty Regional Council Rangitikei District Council
Bay of PlentyGisborne Community Committee
Be fair and not overly intrusive in how you collect the information
Be sure to apply when applications open to start your journey with us and help shape the future of Aotearoas digital public service.
Because of the phased transition, accommodation payments to individual Ministers for the quarter in some cases include a mix of costs associated with the previous accommodation regime and the new.
Because you should If you are communityminded, resilient, and curious to learn about how you can apply your knowledge and skills to a digital and technological environment, you have come to the right place. GovTechTalent is one of the most flexible and varied graduate programmes available giving you the opportunity to explore a range of career paths, projects, and organisations throughout the programme.
Becoming an accredited Trust Framework Provider
Beehive The official website of the New Zealand Government
Beehive website media release
Before being appointed to the High Court Bench in , he was a Crown Prosecutor and partner at Meredith Connell Co from , leaving to join Russell McVeagh McKenzie Bartleet Co as a partner in . He was appointed as a Prosecutor on the Serious Fraud Office Panel in . He joined the Independent Bar in and was appointed Queens Counsel in . He was a Judge of the High Court for four years before being appointed as a Judge of the Court of Appeal of New Zealand in .
Before using the accreditation mark for the first time or in a way that has not yet been approved by the Trust Framework Authority, the Trust Framework Provider must supply drafts of any new or different materials containing proposed use of the accreditation mark to the Authority for its review and approval. The Trust Framework Authority will check the proposed use against these terms of use. Amendments to proposed use of the accreditation mark may be required before approval is granted.
Began replacing the critical mechanical plant at the National Library in Wellington to mitigate risks to the collections
Being digitally mature means being focused not only on technology, but also governance, capability, and other attributes to deliver outcomes and better value for customers. The branch supports and enables agencies and Te Tari through providing strategy, advice, and delivery to progress modern and adaptive public services.
Ben Leggett Policy Manager, Monitoring Jii) I and Stewardship
Benchmarking local authorities on key metrics
Beneficiary fined , for possession of child sex images
Benefits and entitlements can be adjusted promptly.
Benefits and entitlements can be offered to surviving spouses and dependents of veterans.
Benefits of digital identity
Benefits of using digital identity services
Benefits of working at Internal Affairs
Best Design Awards Silver Pin
Better Dog Control Safer Communities
Better Off Funding and Transitioning to Local Water Done Well
Better Off funding has been used to support water services projects such as:
Better Off funding was set up as part of the previous governments Three Waters programme, allowing councils to invest in projects that support the wellbeing and aspirations of their communities. We allocated million using a consistent formula and appointed Crown Infrastructure Partners (CIP) to oversee the use of funding. The current Minister of Local Government has asked territorial authorities to use the unspent funding on water infrastructure or to help roll out Local Water Done Well.
Betting Rules Amendment Notices (No. No.) for presentation to the House, March
Between October and December , Taumata Arowai carried out a number of initial
Between the ages of approximately and ,
Beware of overseas phishing scams impersonating Department of Internal Affairs Anti Money LaunderingCountering Financing of Terrorism Group (AMLCFT Group).
Bex Sullivan Acting Executive Director, ;()() I
Bex Sullivan Acting Executive Director, Policy , Legislation and Stewardship
Bex Sullivan Deputy Executive Director, Water Services Policy Department of Internal Affairs
Bex Sullivan Deputy Executive Director, Water Services Policy, Legislation and Stewardship
Bex Sullivan Deputy Executive Director, Xa) I
Bex Sullivan Deputy Executive Director; Water Services Policy, Legislation and Stewardship
Bex Sullivan Policy Director r)la) I
Bill (the standalone Bill) as a standalone Bill in conjunction with a broader review of
Bill : Material for remaining House stages
Bill remaining policy decisions for stage Cabinet paper
Bill summary of policy decisions to for stage July Cabinet paper
Bill : Legislative options for functions and powers relating to infrastructure and local authority regulatory powers
Bill : Local Government Water Services Bill scope and process
Bill of Rights considerations
Bill, my current preference is that these reforms are part of a package of minor and
Billing customers for three waters services . There are two possible arrangements for billing customers for three waters services: . direct billing by the water services entity; or . collection via territorial authorities. . These different arrangements could be used for some or all types of charges, some types of customers, during the initial period of operation of water services entities, or on an enduring basis. . The National Transition Unit is working towards water services entities being able to charge for all three waters services on day one ( July ). However, if this cannot be set up in time, the entities may need to use existing territorial authority billing systems for billing in the short term. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . A critical issue is how the collection of payments on behalf of the water services e ntity may be treated when assessing the credit rating of local authorities. Pass through charging is unlikely to impact the financial ratios of territorial authorities, especially if only a short term transitional measure. A pass through arrangement where territorial authorities do not take collection risk is relatively straightforward and lik e the current Infrastructure Funding and Financing Act arrangements. . Pass through arrangements would not typically be expected to compromise the balance sheet separation. However, when considered in the context of an enduring pass through charging arrangement and the institutional and governance arrangements between local authorities and water services entities, ongoing pass through charging could impact the balance sheet separation. . I recommend that the legislation should enable pass through billing arrangements with territorial authorities, like the Infrastructure Funding and Financing Act . With these arrangements enabled, water services entities would be able to use them on a temporary basis. We are however proposing that these legislative provisions expire on July . This would not prevent water services entities negotiating directly with local authorities after that , but local authorities would not be obliged to prov ide the services. . Collection via territorial authorities may be particularly desirable for stormwater charges, especially if the water services entity does not provide drinking water or wastewater services to the property. The property would pay for stormwater services provided by the water services entity through the local authorities rates invoice, and the relevant stormwater revenue would be transferred to the entity.
Biographies for potential Inquiry members ( and July )
Biographies of our Deputy Chief Executives. Whos who in our senior management team.
Biography of our Secretary for Internal Affairs.
Biometric information is personal information and is regulated by the Privacy Act.
Biometric information, such as photographs, play a crucial role in verifying a persons identity and preventing fraud. Biometric information protects the integrity of New Zealands identity products and services.
Biometrics enhance the security of personal information by using physical traits which are unique to individuals.
Birth Death and Marriages (BDM) Database to collect and use Registration .. I.
Birth Information Information relating to the individuals birth that is maintained by the
Birth Information, excluding the Registrar Mortality Review
Birth information ,.
Birth, Death and Marriage Historical Records
Births Deaths and Marriages
Births, Death and Marriages
Births, Deaths and Marriages
Births, Deaths and Marriages (BDM) registers and maintains New Zealand birth, death, marriage and name change information, and issues certificates and printouts.
Births, Deaths, Marriages
Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration (Fees) Regulations
Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration (Prescribed Information and Forms) Regulations
Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration (Registering Nominated Sex) Regulations
Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Act
Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Act
Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships (NonDisclosure Direction) Regulations
Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Fees) Amendment Regulations
Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Registering Nominated Sex) Regulations
Births, deaths and marriages
Births, deaths and marriages Whanautanga, matenga, marenatanga
BixeLab, an accredited biometric evaluation company, was commissioned to assess Identity Check for any potential bias. This is the first time a government biometric system has been tested for bias using a representative sample of New Zealanders. The results show no evidence of significant bias.
Blocked over million attempts to access harmful digital content online
Bluetooth cards registered the same number of contacts as the UWB devices. This is somewhat expected given the lack of precision of the Bluetooth cards which detected every nearby advertisement of another card with no filtering algorithm. The Blue tooth card will require substantial testing to improve the precision of the close contact definition to limit the number of false positives recorded. While promising, these results prevent any significant inference about the card effectiveness as the trial lacked a reliable ground truth and precision. In light of the need for closed field trials to answer crucial questions related to card sensitivity and the close contact algorithm, the Phase Two field trial should focus on tackling the logistic, recruitme nt and technology challenges of rol ling out the Bluetooth card solution in a complex real world use case. These challenges include developing and implementing the systems for participant recruitment, communication and card distribution. They also should ai m to develop processes for dealing with hospital visitors and patients to cover the widest possible range of potential interactions. Recommendations: Refine the survey to improve participant reporting of close contacts. Test Bluetooth card sensitivity an d performance in highly controlled closed field trials. Phase Two field trial should focus on logistic, recruitment and technology challenges of a complex real world use case. Summary of Recommendations The field trial highlighted many areas a future trial could improve. These re commendations are summarised below: Improving card firmware and software. Refining the close contact algorithm. Improving data upload time and processes. Implementing an opt out consenting approach to improve participation rates. Establishing multiple st reams of communication to inform participants of the study. Empowering unit team leaders to inform and distribute Bluetooth cards to participants. Creating a data analysis and management strategy. Integrating a real time roster of participants observation time. Developing an automated system to de identify close contact survey data. Refining the daily diary survey to improve participant reporting. Increasing closed field trial evaluations of Bluetooth card sensitivity and performan ce. Refocusing the Phase Two field trial on logistic, recruitment and technology challenges of a complex real world use case. Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Board of Trustees of the National Provident Fund
Boat Ramp ePermit our online permit purchasing solution
Body is established under legislation;
Both central and local government have big impacts on the lives of New Zealanders and are an essential part of our democracy. Ensuring that government is accountable and transparent builds trust and confidence in central and local government and contributes to peoples willingness and ability to participate in society.
Both government and nongovernment Organisations need to have stringent processes in place to
Both manufacturers are capable of producing tooling and scaling up card hardware manufacturing to meet our largescale card volume and supply timeframes. Supply of key electronics components have been assessed by both manufacturers and (as of the time of this report) there is adequate component stock available. Alternatives for some components have also been identified to provide further supply chain redundancy. Supply of hardware components may be adversely affected if other large countries pursue hardware based contact tracing solutions.
Both types of Inquiry have the same legal powers.
Boxing and Wrestling Act
Boxing and Wrestling Regulations
Briefing Entity scenarios revised for Ministerial meeting
Briefing Titles: Community and Voluntary Sector
Briefing Titles: Internal Affairs
Briefing Titles: Local Government
Briefing and Talking Points: Support for Fire and Emergency Collective Bargaining
Briefing for New Plymouth District Council (Perpetual Investment Fund) Bill Departmental Report
Briefing for Proactive Release of T BIM Dec
Briefing for meeting with HARC Chair August
Briefing for meeting with HARC Commissioners November
Briefing for premeet with Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs
Briefing on Letter of Expectations for the Water Services Authority Taumata Arowai
Briefing on the Makes Sense Petition to Mandate and Expand the Digital Child Exploitation Filter System
Briefing pack Content regulatory review Study Trip
Briefing papers relating to the policy work to modernise the Charities Act
Briefing regarding the Removal and Disposal Policy of the National Library of New Zealand Te Puna Mtauranga o Aotearoa April
Briefing titles: Community and Voluntary Sector
Briefing titles: Digitising Government
Briefing titles: Internal Affairs
Briefing titles: Local Government
Briefing to AMoLG Three waters reforms additional information for your visit to Clutha District Council
Briefing to Delegate Minister Introduction to Citizenship
Briefing to support lodgement of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Regulations
Briefing to the Incoming Associate Minister of Local Government
Briefing Revised letters of expectation to FENZ Board and Chair December
Briefing Three Waters Review Castalia report for Whangrei District Council
Briefing recommendations for interview panellists for appointments to Entity Establishment boards
Briefing: A Threshold Framework for Considering Crown Intervention in Local Government August
Briefing: Approval to upload the Cabinet Business Committee paper: Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order
Briefing: Capacity constraints on Watercares network
Briefing: Digital Identify Services Trust Framework Authority Rules
Briefing: Documentation to complete the establishment of the Government Inquiry into the Appointment Process of a Deputy Commissioner of Police and proactive release of establishment material ( July )
Briefing: Finalised Initial Baseline Performance Report
Briefing: Further decisions on Transparency and Accountability
Briefing: Growing Philanthropic Giving Campaign
Briefing: Lottery Ministers Discretionary Fund November
Briefing: Wastewater standards Amendments to the Water Services Act
Briefing: Wellington drinking water supply request for information
Briefings about Local Government (Rating of Whenua Mori) Amendment Bill
Briefings about Local Government (Rating of Whenua Mori) Amendment Bill (Part )
Briefings relating the establishment of the Working Group for Reducing Barriers to Changing Registered Sex September
Briefings relating to the establishment of the Working Group for Reducing Barriers to Changing Registered Sex
Briefings to Incoming Ministers
Briefings to incoming ministers
Briget Ridden Deputy Secretary Regulatory and Identity Services (Acting)
Briget Ridden is Acting Deputy Secretary for Regulatory and Identity Services. In this role Briget has responsibility for the delivery of identity and life event products and services (passports, births, deaths and marriages), as well as ensuring best practice across several regulatory systems, including charities, gambling, AML, digital child exploitation, violent extremism and digital messaging.
Broadcasting Act as part of the broader review. They state that this approach
Brochures, pamphlets and other publications
Brothers fined total of , for collecting child sex abuse images
Bryan.lePatoureltetumupaeroa.co.nz
Budget Baseline Reduction Exercise for Vote Internal Affairs Digitising Government portfolio
Budget Baseline Reduction Exercise for Vote Internal Affairs Local Government portfolio
Budget draft local government budget initiatives
Budget : Update and timing of Cabinet policy decisions
Budget Sensitive Office of the Minister of Internal Affairs and Office of the Associate Minister of Health Chair, Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm to Proposal This paper reports back on and seeks approval for the Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm to (attached), for changes to the Ministry of Health s appropriations to f und the Strategy , and for a problem gambling levy and levy rates to recover the cost of the Strategy from levy paying gambling sectors . Executive Summary Gambling harm is a significant social and economic issue. Measures to prevent and minimise gambling harm contribute to several government priorities , including supporting improved mental health and health equities and reducing child poverty. The Ministry of Health (the Ministry) is responsible for the Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm to (the Strategy), which is the integrated problem gambling strategy focused on public health described in section of the Gambling Act (the Act). This is a revised Strategy prepared for to . The revised Strategy proposes to refocus and develop service s to better meet the needs of people affected by harmful gambling by: . improving the range of, and access to, services, facilitat ing codesign and use of consumer networks to de velop more targeted and appropriate services ; and . strengthening enablers that support these including : workforce training , addressing cultural and language barriers, use of technology, and action oriented research and evaluation . These changes strongly align with the types of service changes recommended b y He Ara Oranga , the report of the Mental Health and Addiction Inquiry. He Ar a Oranga notes harmful gambling is often associated with other forms of addiction and mental health issues . The total cost for the Ministry to implement its Strategy for to , is . million. This is an increase of million from the previous levy period, to invest in expanding access to , and choice of , services. The cost of the Strategy is recovered by a problem gambling levy (the levy) set by regulation at dif ferent rates on the profits of specified gambling operators, so the Strategy will be fiscally neutral over time. The current levy regulations expire after June . If the revised Strategy and new levy regulations are not in place from July , until the they are in place the cost of any Ministry funded services to prevent and minimise gambling harm will not be recovered . wzrxijjr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Budgetary performance
Budgetary performance
Budgets. If assumed funding is not included in the Budget package, elements of
Building , Nicholls Lane, Parnell, Auckland.
Building , Nicholls Lane, Parnell, Auckland. By appointment only.
Building Nations Conference
Building a safe, prosperous and respected nation
Building inclusive leadership
Building regulatory infrastructure:
Buller District Councils Westport Stormwater and Wastewater Separation and CriticalEmergency Water Supply projects.
Buller flood resilience coinvestment proposals: next steps
Buller model WICS report
Buller slide pack WICS report
Business Case A new drinking water regulator August
Business and organisational benefits
Business branch within DIA responsible for Identity and Passport Services,
Business position Very Strong () Very Strong () Very St rong ()
Business units who do not receive or have a need for information regarding a child or young persons wellbeing and safety will not be able to use the information sharing provisions as they do not meet the criteria under the provisions of the Oranga Tamariki Act .
Businesses can benefit from using accredited digital identity services too.
Buy alcohol if youre over years old.
By having access to address and contact information recorded on New Zealand
C O M M E R C I A L : I N C O N F I D E N C E ECOMIN Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Supporting the Longterm Financial Sustainability of the Racing Industry Portfolio Racing On September , the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee: noted that the New Zealand racing industry, which contributed . billion to the New Zealand economy in the racing year and sustained , fulltime equivalent jobs across the country, is almost wholly reliant on TAB NZ for funding; noted that while TAB NZ has a monopoly on landbased sports and racing betting, New Zealands gambling legislation allows offshore online gambling operators to offer sports and racing betting to New Zealandbased customers, which threatens TAB NZs and the racing industrys ongoing financial sustainability; noted that in June , TAB NZ entered a year partnership agreement with global betting operator Entain, which provides for revenue sharing for the term of the agreement, guaranteed returns to TAB NZ until , and a conditional payment should the Government legislate to provide TAB NZ with an online monopoly; noted that while the partnership has helped in the shortterm, uncertainty remains with respect to longterm distributions to the racing industry, especially after the guaranteed return period concludes; noted that: .in July , Cabinet agreed to establish a new online casino gambling regulatory system CABMIN.; .the above decisions present indirect risks to TAB NZs longterm financial sustainability and the Minister for Racing intends to work with the Minister of Internal Affairs on areas of common interest between the portfolios on these matters; agreed to amend the Racing Industry Act to: .make it illegal for any entity other than TAB NZ to offer betting on sporting or racing events to a New Zealandbased customer; .repeal the Point of Consumption Charge (POCC) and associated regulations; C O M M E R C I A L : I N C O N F I D E N C E qwkdm C O M M E R C I A L : I N C O N F I D E N C E ECOMIN .create an interim enforcement regime with key features of this regime being: ..the Department of Internal Affairs being the default regulator with a power to delegate to another government department or crown entity in the future if required (in anticipation of this being transferred to a broader online gambling regulator once established); ..the costs of administering and enforcing the regime being cost recovered from TAB NZ; .strengthen TAB NZs governance and government oversight provisions; by: ..updating the list of skills required on the TAB NZ Board to include contract monitoring, legal and financial monitoring, to ensure it can better provide governance and oversight of Entain; ..introducing ministerial powers to require additional reporting from TAB NZ to better ensure that the Government has sufficient oversight to respond to any future risk, including to racing industry distributions and sports payments; .expand harm minimisation regulationmaking powers to cover TAB NZs online operations; .create a new regulationmaking power to ensure TAB NZ cannot restrict otherwise lawful customers from accessing its online products without an appropriate reason; authorised the Minister for Racing to make final decisions on minor and technical policy changes consistent with the policy intent in the paper under ECOSUB; approved the following fiscally neutral adjustments to provide for effective delivery and regulatory function and service for TAB NZ, with no impact on the operating balance andor net core Crown debt: m increase(decrease) V ote Internal Affairs Minister of Internal Affairs Outyears MultiCategory Expenses and Capital Expenditure: Regulatory Services MCA Departmental Output Expense: Regulatory Services (funded by revenue other)... . agreed that the changes to appropriations for above be included in the Supplementary Estimates and that, in the interim, the increase be met from Imprest Supply; authorised the Minister for Racing, the Minister of Finance, and the Minister of Internal Affairs to make the required changes to the Department of Internal Affairs appropriations to allow it to be the interim regulator of the monopoly with these costs recovered from TAB NZ; invited the Minister for Racing to issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office to give effect to the above paragraphs; C O M M E R C I A L : I N C O N F I D E N C E qwkdm C O M M E R C I A L : I N C O N F I D E N C E ECOMIN agreed that while the Racing Industry Amendment Bill is on the Legislation Programme, with a category priority (to proceed to select committee by the end of ), the Bill should be progressed faster if practical. Rachel Clarke Committee Secretary Present: Officials present from: Rt Hon Winston Peters Hon David Seymour Hon Nicola Willis (Chair) Hon Chris Bishop Hon Erica Stanford Hon Paul Goldsmith Hon Tama Potaka Hon Matt Doocey Hon Simon Watts Hon Casey Costello Hon Melissa Lee Hon Penny Simmonds Hon Chris Penk Hon Nicola Grigg Hon Andrew Bayly Hon Andrew Hoggard Hon Mark Patterson Simon Court MPOffice of the Prime Minister Officials Committee for ECO C O M M E R C I A L : I N C O N F I D E N C E qwkdm I N C O N F I D E N C E InConfidence Office of the Minister for Racing Cabinet Legislation Committee Racing Industry Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction Proposal This paper seeks approval for the introduction of the Racing Industry Amendment Bill (the Bill) to the House. This Bill introduces legislation to improve the financial sustainability of the New Zealand racing industry and features on the Coalition Governments Q Action Plan for New Zealand. The Minister for Racing proposes that the Bill is introduced on December and enacted by May . Policy On September , Cabinet agreed to make it illegal for any entity other than TAB NZ to offer sports and race wagering to persons in New Zealand, effectively extending TAB NZs landbased monopoly to onlineprovided wagering CABMIN. This Bill is required to maintain and improve the longterm financial sustainability of the New Zealand racing industry. The New Zealand racing industry, which is worth . billion to the New Zealand economy and employs nearly , people, is reliant on TAB NZ funding. Over of their income comes from TAB NZ. TAB NZs distributions to the racing codes are increasingly under threat from the loss of revenue to offshore online operators, despite TAB NZs monopoly on landbased sports and racing betting and the cash injection from the recent TAB NZ Entain partnership. In addition, Cabinets recently agreed proposals to establish a new online casino gambling regulatory system CABMIN refers presents indirect risk to TAB NZs longterm financial sustainability because the proposals potentially strengthen the market position of TAB NZs biggest competitors. This Bill proposes to amend the Racing Industry Act (the Racing Act) to extend TAB NZs monopoly to all sports and racing betting offered online to New Zealanders. The Bill will: . make it illegal for any entity other than TAB NZ to offer betting on sports or racing events to a New Zealandbased customer; I N C O N F I D E N C E qwkdm I N C O N F I D E N C E . restrict or prohibit inducements to engage in betting; and . regulate the intensity of betting by a person using an online betting system provided by TAB NZ, including how frequently successive bets may be placed. The Bill also creates a new regulationmaking power to ensure TAB NZ cannot restrict otherwise lawful customers from accessing its online products without an appropriate reason. It is anticipated that some aspects of the interim framework may be placed in regulations. Other instruments This Bill will introduce new Ministerial powers to require additional reporting and informationgathering from TAB NZ to ensure that the Government has sufficient oversight and can respond to any future risk. Definition of Ministerdepartment The Bill does not create a new definition or amend an existing definition of Minister or Department. Commencement of legislation The Bill will come into force on the day after Royal Assent. Parliamentary stages The Bill is intended to be introduced on December and passed by May . The Bill is on the Legislation Programme, with a Priority (to proceed to select committee by the end of ). It is proposed for the Bill to be referred to the Governance and Administration Select Committee for a consideration period of months (December to April ). To support passing the Bill in this timeframe, it is proposed that the first reading occurs on December . Proactive Release As per Cabinet Circular CO () , the Minister for Racing intends to proactively release this Cabinet paper subject to any redactions that may be justified under the Official Information Act , within days of decisions being made. I N C O N F I D E N C E qwkdm I N C O N F I D E N C E Recommendations The Minister for Racing recommends that the Cabinet Legislation Committee: note that the Racing Industry Amendment Bill holds a category priority on the Legislation Programme (to proceed to select committee by the end of ); note that the Racing Industry Amendment Bill will extend TAB NZs existing landbased monopoly for sports and racing betting to onlineprovided sports and racing betting; note that future legislative work may be necessary to give full effect to certain regulatory functions; approve the Racing Industry Amendment Bill for introduction, subject to the final approval of the Government caucuses and sufficient support in the House of Representatives; agree that the Racing Industry Amendment Bill be introduced on December ; and agree that the Government propose that the Racing Industry Amendment Bill be: . referred to the Governance and Administration Select Committee for consideration; and . enacted by May . Authorised for lodgement Rt Hon Winston Peters Minister for Racing I N C O N F I D E N C E qwkdm I N C O N F I D E N C E Appendix A: Disclosure Statement I N C O N F I D E N C E qwkdm L E G A L L Y P R I V I L E G E D : I N C O N F I D E N C E LEGMIN Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Racing Industry Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction Portfolio Racing On November , the Cabinet Legislation Committee: noted that the Racing Industry Amendment Bill (the Bill) holds a category priority on the Legislation Programme (to proceed to a select committee by the end of ); noted that the Bill will extend TAB NZs existing landbased monopoly for sports and racing betting to onlineprovided sports and racing betting; noted that future legislative work may be necessary to give full effect to certain regulatory functions; approved the Racing Industry Amendment Bill PCO . for introduction, subject to the final approval of the Government caucuses and sufficient support in the House of Representatives; agreed that the Bill be introduced by December ; agreed that the Government propose that the Bill be: .referred to the Governance and Administration Select Committee for consideration; .enacted by May . Janine Harvey Committee Secretary Present: (see over) L E G A L L Y P R I V I L E G E D : I N C O N F I D E N C E qwkdm L E G A L L Y P R I V I L E G E D : I N C O N F I D E N C E LEGMIN Present: Officials present from: Rt Hon Winston Peters Hon Chris Bishop Hon Simeon Brown (Chair) Hon Erica Stanford Hon Paul Goldsmith Hon Brooke van Velden Hon Casey Costello Hon Andrew Bayly Hon Nicole McKee Hon Penny Simmonds Hon Andrew Hoggard Hon Scott Simpson, MP Todd Stephenson, MP Jamie Arbuckle, MP Officials Committee for LEG Leader of the Houses Office L E G A L L Y P R I V I L E G E D : I N C O N F I D E N C E qwkdm Regulatory Impact Assessment agreement saw Entain take over the day today operations of TAB NZ in return for a revenue spilt between Entain and TAB NZ. This arrangement has put the racing industry in a strong financial position for the short term due to the following provisions: a minimum guarantee of million per year to TAB NZ for the first years of the agreement (up to ); and a one off upfront payment of million . There is also a one off upfront payment of million, payable within working days of the legislation enabling the TAB NZ to become the only legal provider of online sports and racing betting in New Zealand being enacted; and an additional , if the monopoly legislation is enacted (meaning the total funding available from that the legislation is not enacted ). At the time the Partnership was signed in May , the previous Government announced it agreed in principle to TAB NZ having an online monopoly, subject to further work being undertaken. This was the subject of a RI A at the time, which can be found on DIAs website. To a degree , this RI A builds on that earlier RI A. There is long term uncertainty for the industry given TAB NZs financial situation Despite the overall success of the post Messara report reforms, the significant cash injection because of the recent TAB NZ Entain partnership and various recent TAB NZ initiatives such as the launch of new products and a second brand Betcha , TAB NZs longterm distributions to the racing industry are still under threat from the loss of revenue to offshore online operators . TAB NZ relies heavily on its revenue from online betting and in , . The level of distributions to the industry after this year period are uncertain , and although TAB NZ s modelling indicate s greater revenue will be by Entain than without the partnership , revenue will continue to flow offshore via offshore online operators . Many of these offshore operators are larger than TAB NZ (with greater product range and better odds ) and crucially have no financial obligations to the racing industry, beyond paying the relatively modest POCC takings (the racing codes collected approximately million from POCC in the financial year ) and BIUC (the racing codes collected . million the financial year from BIUC agreements ). In addition, Cabinet s recently agreed proposals to establish a new online casino gambling regulatory system presents indirect risks to TAB NZ as they are likely to strengthen the position of some of TAB NZs closest competit ors in New Zealand. This is due to the proposal for licensed operators to be able to advertise as part of licensing conditions. These risks heighten the need to ensure legislative settings protect the viability of TAB NZ in order to improve the long term financial sustainability of the racing industry . We have considered options to address the loss of offshore revenue problem The objective of this proposal is to protect the sustainability racing industry over the long
C Table C, C and C guide
C Table C, C and C guide
C Table C, C and Cb guide
CASE STUDIES ENFORCEMENT
CBCSUB to Cabinet on December for further consideration.
CLASSIFICATION CHANNEL OPTIONS
CLASSIFICATION IN NEW ZEALAND
CO () : Appointment of Public Servants to Statutory Board
CO () () especially paragraphs
COGS Memorandum of Understanding
CONCLUSION The eight closed field trials demonstrated that the Bluetoothbased CovidCard contact tracing card has an ability to recall a high proportion of ground truth close contacts, and even a basic oncard contact algorithm is able to rank potential closecontacts in an order that positively correlates with ground truth ranking. Serverside prioritisation of contacts achieved no false positives in the top of ranked contacts. Further work such as a larger open trial and ongoing development of postdownload contact prioritisation algorithms will ensure the cards are fitforpurpose for deployment on a national scale.
COVID Research Group Health, Environment Infection Research Unit (HEIRU) Department of Public Health University of Otago, Wellington
COVID Recovery (Fasttrack Consenting) Act process
COVID elimination will be achieved through three key systems:
COVID is a unique virus with a long incubation period and high rates of asymptomatic transmission meaning a few cases are able to rapidly overwhelm manual contact t acing efforts and can result in the deployment of the only tool we know that works a Level lockdown. We should expect future waves of COVID and invest in any tools we believe can reduce the chances of a lockdown which will cost tens of billions of dollars every time it occurs.
COVID is now globally endemic, with over million reported cases , and may remain so for years to come. As a globally connected trading nation, the economic and social impact of an elimination strategy are severe. It is not certain that such an approach is economically and politically sustainable over the longer term.
COVID presented HUD with the opportunity to start using a wider
CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE SURVEY
CVS Aide Memoire Meeting with Community Governance Aotearoa
CVS Proposals for the Law Commission Work Programme
CVS Status Report
CVS Status Report WE November
CVS Status Report WE November
CVS Status Report WE December
CVS Status Report and Work Programme WE October
CVS Status Report and Work Programme WE April
CVS Status Report and Work Programme WE September
CVS Status Report and Work Programme WE March
CVS Status Report and Work Programme WE June
CVS Status Report and Work Programme WE February
CVS Status Report and Work Programme WE January
CVS Status Report and Work Programme WE May
CVS Status Report and Work Programme WE February
CVS Status Report and Work Programme WE March
CVS Status Report and Work Programme WE February
CVS Status Report and Work Programme WE February
CVS Status Report and Work Programme WE June
CVS Status Report and Work Programme WE May
CVS proposal for Te Aka Matua o Te Ture The Law Commissions Work Programme , March
Ca:uocm e I el lhlka to SUBAlit draft Plans te ffieeiiartliieiil of IAttJ:.:lffuifJ nithiR AtRli ef Hua Aet F(;iilliA lil. a,,e, jl :
Cabinet (DPMC), NCSC, CERT NZ and Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) to collaborate on some of these activities.
Cabinet Business Committee
Cabinet Business Committee October
Cabinet Economic Development Committee
Cabinet Economic Development Committee by November ; and
Cabinet External Relations
Cabinet External Relations and Security Committee
Cabinet I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN
Cabinet Le gislation C ommittee
Cabinet Legislation Committee material for the Lake Taupo fees review
Cabinet Legislation Committee material for the Local Government Act Amendment Bill (No ) Supplementary Order Paper
Cabinet Legislation Committee material for the Rates Rebate Amendment Bill
Cabinet Legislation Committee paper and Bill Approval for lodgement
Cabinet Material about Privacy (Information Sharing Agreement Facilitating
Cabinet Material about Privacy (Information Sharing Agreement facilitating Customer Nominated Services) Order
Cabinet Material about the Class Lottery exemption to conduct remote interactive gambling
Cabinet Material about the proposed regulations to underpin the SelfIdentification process
Cabinet Material on design of the online casino gambling regulatory design
Cabinet Material on proposals to amend the Gambling Act to exempt class lotteries from the prohibition on remote interactive gambling
Cabinet Minute National Remembrance Service for the Christchurch Mosques Terror Attack
Cabinet Minute Proactive Release of Ministerial Diary Information
Cabinet Minute SWC MIN Cabinet Office June
Cabinet Minute: CABMIN ( September )
Cabinet Minute: GOVMIN
Cabinet Minute: LEGMIN
Cabinet Minute: Using Data Insights to Make Better Digital Investments
Cabinet Oral item: Proposals to amend Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act to include Subscription Video onDemand content January
Cabinet Paper Managing cost pressures associated with implementing the three waters reform programme
Cabinet Paper Strengthening representation, governance and accountability of the new water services entities April
Cabinet Paper Three Waters Reforms Further Decisions October
Cabinet Paper Water Services (Drinking Water Standards forNew Zealand) Regulations June
Cabinet Paper Four and minute Delivering the Three Waters Reforms July
Cabinet Paper National Library Te Puna Foundation
Cabinet Paper One and minute A new system for three waters service delivery June
Cabinet Paper Three and minute Protecting and promoting iwiMori rights and interests June
Cabinet Paper Two and minute Designing the new three waters service delivery entities June
Cabinet Paper and Minute of Decision: Appointment of Crown Observer to the Wellington City Council
Cabinet Paper and Minute: Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill: Approval for Introduction
Cabinet Paper for Lodgement Accelerating the digitising of government services
Cabinet Paper on the Strategy to prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm
Cabinet Paper Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Approval to develop regulation
Cabinet Paper: Developing Options for a New Approach to Digital Identity
Cabinet Papers and Minutes
Cabinet Senior Advisor, Legal and Constitutional
Cabinet agreement on final authorisations framework NovemberDecember
Cabinet and LGNZ National Council agree partnership approach to progress three waters services delivery reform.
Cabinet could proceed with the Bill despite the NZBORA inconsistency The Government has the option to proceed to introduce the Bill despite the NZBORA inconsistency and any section report. Likewise, Parliament can also choose to enact the legislation regardless.
Cabinet could wait for the final vet of the Bill, but this may delay introduction The final vet of the Bill for consistency with NZBORA will be undertaken by Crown Law. Although Crown Law will review drafts of the Bill, the final vet will not take place until two weeks before we seek the Cabinet Legislation Committees approval to introduce the Bill. On the current timeline, this means the final vet will be completed in late July, after crossparty consultation.
Cabinet decisions on first regions to progress into MOUs
Cabinet directed agencies to use services from the IaaS panel agreement CAB Min
Cabinet documents related to Reducing Pokies Harm: Proposals to strengthen regulations
Cabinet following the outcome of the investigation.
Cabinet has agreed that Ministers should not generally appoint public servants to statutory bodies but that there may be special circumstances in which employees of Public Service departments can be appointed. Further information is provided in
Cabinet material Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Bill: Approval for Introduction September
Cabinet material Proposal to fund a shared approach to backoffice transformation via proportional transfer October
Cabinet material Proposals for refreshing the Cloud First Policy and strengthening cloud adoption across the public service May
Cabinet material about Addressing Urgent Gaps in Digital Skills for Individuals and Whnau
Cabinet material about Government Payroll Programme: Final Report, April
Cabinet material about Information Sharing for Customer Nominated Services
Cabinet material about Local Government (Rating of Whenua Mori) Amendment Bill
Cabinet material about Repealing the Canterbury Regional Council (Ngi Tahu Representation) Act
Cabinet material about Strengthening the mandate of the Government Chief Digital Officer over government digital investment, May
Cabinet material about an oral item: Update on Central Government Reforms Impacting Local Government, February
Cabinet material about developments on a framework for a national network of high specification public bathroom facilities
Cabinet material about funding the Office of Film and Literature Classification
Cabinet material about introduction of the Taumata Arowai Water Services Regulator Bill
Cabinet material about out of cycle changes to budget baselines for the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Terrorist Attack on Christchurch Mosques on March
Cabinet material about regulations to enable appeals to the Taxation and Charities Review Authority
Cabinet material about the Addressing Urgent Gaps in Digital Skills Funding
Cabinet material about the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Prescribed Information) Amendment Regulations
Cabinet material about the Death Approved Information Sharing Agreement: Policy Decisions
Cabinet material about the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Regulations
Cabinet material about the Digital Identity Trust Framework
Cabinet material about the Electronic Identity Verification Amendment Regulations
Cabinet material about the Establishment of the Cyclone Gabrielle Appeal Trust May
Cabinet material about the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commercial Video onDemand) Amendment Bill
Cabinet material about the Gambling (Problem Gambling Levy) Regulations
Cabinet material about the Internal Affairs Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill: Policy Proposals
Cabinet material about the Local Government Official Information and Meetings Amendment Bill
Cabinet material about the Online Casino Gambling Phase Decisions and the Regulatory Impact Statement on Phase Cabinet decisions
Cabinet material about the Privacy (information Sharing Agreement to Facilitate Efficient Provision of Identity Services) Order
Cabinet material about the Proposed changes to the Births, Deaths,
Cabinet material about the Public Lending Right for New Zealand Authors Regulations
Cabinet material about the Regulations addressing harm minimisation in Class gambling venues, and associated infringement regulations; and miscellaneous oral item
Cabinet material about the Review of options for funding the classification framework under the Films, Videos, Publications and Classification Act
Cabinet material about the Royal Commission of Inquiry into Historical Abuse in State Care and in the Care of Faithbased Institutions: funding for legal assistance and fit out costs
Cabinet material about the Strategy for a Digital Public Service
Cabinet material about the changes to Public Lending Right for New Zealand Authors Regulations
Cabinet material about the crossgovernment community resilience work programme
Cabinet material about the detailed policy proposals for a Digital Identity Trust Framework Bill
Cabinet material about the disestablishment of the Digital Council for Aotearoa New Zealand, January
Cabinet material about the transfer of surplus racing venue negotiation regulations
Cabinet material and additional documents related to Local Government Electoral Legislation Bill
Cabinet material and additional documents relating to the Rates Rebate Order
Cabinet material and additional documents relating to the Rates Rebates Order
Cabinet material and additional documents relating to the Rates Rebates Order
Cabinet material and any public service departmental advice use this copyright statement
Cabinet material and associated briefing about the Gambling (Reinstating COVID Modification) Amendment Bill
Cabinet material and associated briefings about the Next Steps for the Royal
Cabinet material and key advice papers relating to Hon Jan Tinetti, Minister of Internal Affairs overseas travel to Europe on September October
Cabinet material approving the introduction of the Charities Amendment Bill
Cabinet material for Electronic Identity Verification Amendment Regulations
Cabinet material for Fire and Emergency (Levy) Amendment Bill
Cabinet material for Fire and Emergency New Zealand (COVID Fire Safety, Evacuation Procedures, and Evacuation Schemes) Amendment Regulations (No )
Cabinet material on proposals for regulations for natural hazard information in land information memoranda
Cabinet material on the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Attack on Christchurch Mosques on March : Extension to the final report back and additional funding
Cabinet material regarding the decisions for the Crown Manager in Wairoa
Cabinet material regarding the introduction of the Racing Reform Bill
Cabinet material related to Reducing Pokies Harm: Approval to consult
Cabinet material related to Local Electoral (Tauranga City Council Te Awanui Mori Ward Election) Validation Order
Cabinet material related to amendments to Schedule of the Dog Control Act
Cabinet material related to developing a new system for three waters service delivery:
Cabinet material related to introduction of the Water Services Bill, July
Cabinet material related to regulations for the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Amendment Act
Cabinet material related to the Cabinet paper Options for restricting the online gambling market
Cabinet material related to the Government response to the select committee inquiry into the selfidentification supplementary order paper
Cabinet material related to the Ministerial Response to the Petition of Aly Cook on a Royal Commission of Inquiry into the safety and efficacy of the Covid vaccines
Cabinet material related to the Ministerial Response to the Petition of Reality Check Radio on Accept Reality Check Radios Peoples Terms for the Covid Inquiry
Cabinet material related to the National Wastewater Environmental Performance Standards: Approval to Consult
Cabinet material related to the establishment of Phase of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID Lessons
Cabinet material related to the establishment of Phase of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID Lessons and Full analysis of public consultation results; Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID Lessons; Terms of Reference:
Cabinet material related to the establishment of a Ministerial review into the future for local government
Cabinet material relating to Countering Violent Extremism Online
Cabinet material relating to changes to Fire and Emergencys funding regime
Cabinet material relating to the Local Electoral (Advertising) Bill
Cabinet material relating to the Order revoking the Commercial Use of Royal Photographs Rules , , and
Cabinet material relating to the oral item: Update on the Improving Government Payroll Systems Programme
Cabinet material relating to the removal of the filtering provisions from the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill
Cabinet material relating to: Interim Economic Regulation of Watercare: Policy Decisions for the Charter
Cabinet material relating to: Local Government Water Services Bill: Approval for Introduction
Cabinet material: Policy proposals to enable appeals to the taxation and Charities Appeals Authority
Cabinet material: Strengthening Our Approach to Volunteering
Cabinet materials relating to Local Government System Improvements: Policy Decisions
Cabinet minute: New Plymouth District Council (Waitara Lands) Bill progress of local bill and inclusion of Crown interest
Cabinet minutes and material relating to the oral item: Future for Local Government Interim Report
Cabinet paper National Memorial Service for the Christchurch Attacks
Cabinet paper Proactive Release of Ministerial Diary Information
Cabinet paper about changes to the Order in Council (including the terms of reference) for the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Terrorist Attack on Christchurch Mosques on March
Cabinet paper and Minute Policy proposals for three waters service delivery legislative settings, June
Cabinet paper and Minute Pricing and charging for three waters services, June
Cabinet paper and Minute Refocusing the water services reforms further decisions
Cabinet paper and Minute Refocusing the water services reforms strategy and urgent decisions
Cabinet paper and Minute Water Services Legislation Bill Approval for introduction, November
Cabinet paper and Regulatory Impact Assessment for ministerial consultation: Online Casino Gambling Phase Decisions
Cabinet paper and associated briefings related to the release of the Discussion Document: selfidentification regulations and registering gender for people born overseas
Cabinet paper and associated briefings Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Bill
Cabinet paper and associated documents related to Royal Commission of Inquiry into Abuse in Care: Faithbased Institutions and Informal or Pastoral Care Settings
Cabinet paper and associated minutes Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Levy) Regulations
Cabinet paper and associated minutes concerning the Royal Commission into Abuse in State Care and in the Care of Faithbased Institutions Amendment Order
Cabinet paper and associated minutes Overview of Governments gambling harm prevention and minimisation measures
Cabinet paper and minute COVID Risk Mitigation Planning for the Local Elections
Cabinet paper and minute Community resilience programme report back and future focus
Cabinet paper and minute Final Government Response to the Report of the Social Services and Community Committees Report on Petition
Cabinet paper and minute Government Response to the Justice Committee report Inquiry into the General Election and Local Elections
Cabinet paper and minute Government Response to the Report of the Justice Committee Inquiry into the Local Elections and Liquor Licensing Trust Elections, and Recent Energy Trust Elections
Cabinet paper and minute Proactive release of the Report back on the settings and uptake of the Rates Rebate Scheme September
Cabinet paper and minute
Cabinet paper and minute A plan for three waters reform July
Cabinet paper and minute Approval of the Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act Commencement Order , February
Cabinet paper and minute Enabling a coordinated approach to reforms impacting local government
Cabinet paper and minute Financial assistance relating to the North Island drought
Cabinet paper and minute Institutional arrangements for a drinking water regulator September
Cabinet paper and minute Investing in water infrastructure to accelerate reform and support economic recovery post COVID June
Cabinet paper and minute Local Government (Rating of Whenua Mori) Amendment Bill: Approval for Supplementary Order Paper, February
Cabinet paper and minute Progressing the three waters service delivery reforms December
Cabinet paper and minute Proposals for changes to the land information memorandum November
Cabinet paper and minute Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order
Cabinet paper and minute Supporting a Response to Natural Hazard risktolife in Matat
Cabinet paper and minute Water Services Act Commencement Order and Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act Commencement Order (No )
Cabinet paper and minute Water Services Entities Bill: Exposure draft and Working Group Process December
Cabinet paper and minute Working with local government on community wellbeing August
Cabinet paper and minute: Dog Control (Schedule ) Order
Cabinet paper and minute: Dog Control (Schedule ) Order
Cabinet paper and minute: Facilitating adaptive responses for community resilience alongside local government
Cabinet paper and minute: Report on Overseas Travel: Hon Nanaia Mahuta
Cabinet paper and minutes water services act commencement order and taumata arowai the water services regulator act commencement order no
Cabinet paper entitled Films, Videos, Publications (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction and related minutes
Cabinet paper for lodgement: Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act : approval to develop regulations
Cabinet paper for lodgement: Report back on online casino gambling regulatory design
Cabinet paper for lodging Reducing Pokies Harm: Proposals to strengthen regulations
Cabinet paper for lodging: Gambling (Reinstating COVID Modification) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction
Cabinet paper for lodging: Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm to , March
Cabinet paper seeking approval to consult July
Cabinet paper Accelerating the digitising of government services
Cabinet paper, committee minutes, briefings councilcontrolled organisations June
Cabinet paper, minute and independent report: Changes to the role of the Local Government Commission and reorganisation provisions in the Local Government Act
Cabinet paper, minute, and Regulatory Impact Assessment Strengthening the regulation of drinking water, wastewater and stormwater July
Cabinet paper: Chatham Islands Investment Strategy Update
Cabinet paper: Gambling (Problem Gambling Levy) Regulations
Cabinet paper: New Plymouth District Council (Waitara Lands) Bill progress of local bill and inclusion of Crown interests
Cabinet paper: Preserving the Nations Memory
Cabinet paper: Proposed changes to passport and travel fees
Cabinet papers and associated documents related to the establishment of
Cabinet papers and associated minutes Proposals for Fire and Emergency levy rates and other levy matters
Cabinet papers and briefings for policy decisions on exemptions from the insurance levy to fund Fire and Emergency New Zealand
Cabinet papers and minute Lake Taupo Fees Review: Final Policy Proposals
Cabinet papers and minutes of decision for Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID Lessons Extension of Time
Cabinet papers and minutes on Overseas Travel: Hon Kris Faafoi November
Cabinet papers and minutes on Overseas Travel: Hon Tracey Martin March
Cabinet papers on reducing harm from gambling for lodging
Cabinet papers related to the Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire Safety, Evacuation Procedures, and Evacuation Schemes) Amendment Regulations
Call for nominations for the Local Government Commission appointment round
Calling all Tngata whenua and Pacific peoples
Canadian arrest follows DIA investigation
Candidate Information Sheet PDF
Candidate Information Sheet PDF (PDF, KB)
Candidate Information Sheet PDF (PDF, KB)
Candidate Information Sheet PDF (PDF, KB)
Candidate Information Sheet PDF (PDF, KB)
Candidate Information Sheet PDF (PDF, KB)
Candidate Information Sheet PDF (PDF, KB)
Candidate Information Sheet PDF (PDF, KB)
Candidate Information Sheet PDF (PDF, KB)
Candidate Information Sheet PDF (PDF, KB)
Candidate Information Sheet PDF (PDF, KB)
Candidate Information Sheet PDF (PDF, KB)
Candidate Information Sheet PDF (PDF, KB)
Candidate Information Sheet PDF (PDF, KB)
Candidate Information Sheet Word (DOCX, KB)
Candidate Information Sheet Word (DOCX, KB)
Candidate Information Sheet Word (DOCX, KB)
Candidate Information Sheet Word (DOCX, KB)
Candidate Information Sheet Word (DOCX, KB)
Candidate Information Sheet Word (DOCX. KB)
Candidate information sheet and nomination form WORD (DOCX, KB)
Candidate information sheet Mori Advisory Group member PDF (PDF, KB)
Candidate information sheet Mori Advisory Group member Word (DOCX, KB)
Candidate nominations and the local government elections
Canterbury Earthquakes Royal Commission Te Komihana Rwhenua o Waitaha
Canterbury Mayoral Forum, July
CanterburyKaikoura Community Committee
Capital Structure Neutral Neutral Neutral
Capital ade quacy Moderate () Moderate () Moderate ()
Capital and risk position
Capital expenditure (.) (.) (. ) (.) (.)
Capital expenditure (.) (.) (.) (.) (.)
Capital expenditure (.) (.) (.) (.) (.)
Capital revenue . . . . .
Capital revenue . . . . .
Capital revenue . . . . .
Capital structure and financing costs
Carbon Neutral Government Programme
Carbon Neutral Government Programme (CNGP)
Card Technical Method The trials used Minew C Bluetooth Low Energy cards with custom firmware implemented by the CovidCard product development team. This firmware provided low radio operating duty cycles that satisfied the needs and power consumption constraints of the system under design.
Card advertising packet lengths were set near the maximum permitted by the technology ( octets advertising payload; likely longer than would be the case in the ultimate system) and included a static card identifierserial number (in the range for these trials). No privacy features (e.g., rotation of pseudonymous advertising identifiers) were implemented Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs sometimes referred to as the True Positive Rate. b. False Positive Rate (FPR): the number of contacts seen by the card that were not ground truth contacts, as a proportion of card contacts. c. Spearman Rank Correlation (Rank Correlation) : the measure of how strongly correlated the order of the ground truth contact list (using time multiplied by intensity to determine order) versus the order of the predicted contact list from the card (using time multiplied by RSSI). A perfect ordering match scores , for no correlation and for reversed order. Since both lists must have the same length in order to calculate the rank correlation, only the recalled (true positive) contacts were used for this metric.
Cards setup . The cards were distributed to Tim Chambers . Tim received the iPad on May . Matt Denton provided him with instructions and walked through the setup of the cards on the evening of May : a. Updating firmware b. Downloading the App c. Setting up the card
Carterton District Council
Carterton District Council Rotorua District Council
Carterton model WICS report
Carterton slide pack WICS report
Case study of our commitment to culture change July
Cash FlowLeve rage Aggressive Aggressive Aggressive
Castalia also reference slide of WICS supporting material required investment which exhibits an even stronger explanatory relationships for the enhancement investment models used in DIA Phase .
Castalia is a global strategic advisory firm. We design innovative solutions to the worlds most complex infrastructure, resource, and policy problems. We are expe rts in the finance, economics, and policy o f infrastructure, natural resources, and social service provision. We apply our economic, financial, and regulatory expertise to the energy, water, transportation, telecommunications, natural resources, and social services sectors. We help governments and companies to transform sectors and enterprises, design markets and regulation, set utility tariffs and service standards, and appraise and finance projects. We deliver concrete measurable results applying our th inking to make a better world. WASHINGTON, DC Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Suite Washington, DC United States of America () SYDNEY Suite ., Level , Elizabeth Street Sydney NSW Australia () AUCKLAND D France Street, Newton South Auckland New Zealand () WELLINGTON Level , The Terrace Wellington New Zealand () PARIS Rue des Archives Paris France ()
Castalia report Advice on Water Reform OptOut
Castalias interpretation of the economic literature is not consistent with the Departments, or those of reputable economic advisors including Frontier Economics and Farrierswier . There are many examples in the literature of water service s aggregation , alongside governance and regulatory reform, leading to efficiency gains : A Frontier Economics report for t he UK water trade association, which found that reform of the water industr y in England resulted in annual productivity growth of . or over years when adjusted for service quality improvements . Australian water utilities are typically set targets for efficiency improvement of between per annum. This is in a more mature sector with less opportunity for catch up efficiency. For example, the Western Australian Water Corporation has been set an efficiency challenge of more than over the years to . Frontier Economics, in its review of the experience with water services aggregation in Australia, Great Britain, Ireland and New Zealand (Auckland and Wellington) finds that there is strong and consistent evidence that reforms have led to significant improvements in productivity and efficiency. The Productivi ty Commission in Australia, that service delivery reform has helped to improve efficiency and deliver significant benefits for water users
Cataloguing in Publication
Category I includes I Data Set Source
Category I includes I Providing Party I Receiving Party
Category J ncludes J Data Set Source
Celebrant Information Births, Deaths and
Celebrant Information relating to the individuals appointment or authorisation to act
Cell phone evidence a first
Central Hawkes Bay slide pack WICS report
Central Hawkes Bay WICS report
Central Hawkes Bay District Council
Central Hawkes Bay District Council South Waikato District Council
Central Otago District Council
Central Otago slide pack WICS report
Central Otago WICS report
Central and Local Government considered it timely to apply targeted infrastructure stimulus investment to enable improvements to water service delivery, progress reform in partnership, and ensure the period of economic recovery following COVID supports a transition to a productive, sustainable economy.
Central and local government
CentralLocal Government Forum Plenary Session
Centralising data centre certification to support providers to meet requirements
Certain staff working in Ministers offices have permission to charge items to the ministerial credit card. Staff are required to abide by the guidelines as outlined in the Ministerial Office Handbook when using ministerial credit cards. You can find guidance on use of credit cards and the Minister and staff agreement on credit card use under
Certification by Parliamentary Counsel
Certified Practising Accountancy (CPA) Australia
Chair Cabinet Business Committee
Chair Cabinet Economic Development Committee
Chair Cabinet Legislation Committee Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill: Approval for Introduction Proposal . This paper seeks approval to introduce the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill which will give effect to stage two of the Local Water Done Well reform programme . This Bill holds a category priority on the Legislation Programme (must be passed within the year). . The Bill provides for the preliminary and foundational provisions relating to the new framework proposed in Local Water Done Well which will enable councils to self determine how they wish to transition to the new , long term water services delivery model. The enduring settings are proposed to be given effect in a further bill the Local Government ( Water Services ) Bill to be introduced in December . . I propose that the Bill is introduced on May , be referred to the Finance and Expenditure Committee and be enacted by early August . Policy . In February , we fulfilled our commitments to repeal the previous governments unpopular water services entities regime , restoring local government responsibilities for water services delivery, and halt the establishment of the mega entities. Cabinet also agreed to begin work on the new policy proposals for Local Water Done Well, to be implemented in two further Bills CAB MIN . Local Water Done Well provides a new approach to local government water services delivery, with a critical emphasis on financial sustainability a nd funding for growth. . In March , m y policy paper Local Water Done Well stage : Establishing the framework and transitional arrangements was approved by Cabinet. It contained the first set of proposals for the new framework . These proposals are preliminary in nature and set expectations on councils to present their intentions to transition from their current service delivery models to financially sustainable water service delivery models that meet water quality regulatory standards ECO MIN . . The Bill imposes requirements on councils in the near term, which will prepare them for water services delivery under the long term settings. Requirements include foundational information disclosure, firstly through the preparation and delivery of water services delivery plans , and then later through a more formal regime if the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs and I determine that one or more councils are ready to provide enhanced information in prepar ation for the long term economic regulatory framework. . To enhance flexibility during the transitional period, streamlined consultation and decision making requirements are made available for councils who wish to establish or amend water services council controlled organisations under Local Government Act provisions . enkv Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE
Chair Cabinet Mori Crown Relations C ommitt ee New Plymouth District Council (Waitara Lands) Bill progress of local bill and inclusion of Crown interests Proposal . This paper updates the Committee on progress of the New Plymouth District Council (Waitara Lands) Bill. It: . informs the Committee about the local Bill; . seeks Cabinets approval to advising the Governor General of the inclusion of Crown interests in the local Bill, being the Crowns underlying title to reserves in Waitara; and . seeks Cabinets agreement to a time limited tax exemption of six months for the Waitara hap entity (as defined in the local Bill as the entity representing the Waitara hap). . The local Bill provides the opportunity to resolve the longstanding issues at Waitara and to make a positive contribution to the relationship between local government and Mori. Executive summary . The New Plymouth District Council (Waitara Lands) Bill (the local Bill) provides an opportunity for the Government to support the efforts of New Plymouth District Council (the District Council) to strengthen local government Mori relations. The local Bill seeks to resolve the longstanding issues at Waitara which result from the confiscation of Mori land in the nineteenth century, which is today owned by the District Council (the Waitara Endowment Land) and leased to residents and businesses with perpetual rights of renewal. Proceeds from the Waitara Endowment Land may only be used at present for a limited range of activities, and the aim of the local Bill is to unlock the funds for the benefit of Ng Manukorihi and Otaraua (the Waitara hap) and the wider Waitara community. . There are two critical issues without which the Waitara hap will not support the local Bill. This paper seeks your agreement to the steps necessary to resolve those issues. . First, the hap seek the inclusion of Crown underlying title to six District Council reserves which the D istrict Council proposes to transfer to the Waitara hap entity (upon payment of their value through a valuation mechanism in the Bill). The transfer of underlying title has been agreed by the Minister of Conservation. This paper seeks Cabinets agreement to advise the Governor General of the Crowns agreement to the inclusion of Crown interests in a local Bill. It is a procedural requirement of the Standing Orders that a message from the Governor General to the House confirm the inclusion of Crown interests in a local Bill before the Bill may be passed. Proactively released from the Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . Secondly, I propose that the Waitara hap entity be given a six month time limited tax exemption from the of commencement of the local Bill. This will provide time for the Waitara hap entity or its subsidiary to obtain a determination of its status as a charitable entity. . The Waitara hap have agreed to support the Bill. My officials are working with the Waitara hap and the District Council to finalise redrafting of the local Bill, including a preamble that tells the historical story of the Waitara hap, and a side agreement between the Waitara hap and the District Council that will support the implementation of the local Bill. . I consider that Government support for the local Bill will make a valuable contribution to improving local government Mori relations and confer wider benefits on the Mori Crown relationship. The local Bill represents an innovative resolution to longstanding issues by the District Council. . If this Bill were not to pass, the local Waitara community will miss the opportunity to benefit from million in funding which is unlocked by the Bill. Under the local Bill, the sums will be applied to housing development and associated growth and job creation, hap development and hap and community health and wellbeing initiatives, and the restoration of the Waitara River. Background . The local Bill broadens the purposes for which the District Council can apply re ntal income and proceeds of sale of Waitara Endowment Land. The local Bill was reported back to the House by the Mori Affairs Committee on August with significant amendments from the version as introduced. Following further negotiations between the District Council and the Waitara hap, significant changes are proposed to be made at committee of the whole House via a Supplementary Order Paper (SOP) in the name of Jonathan Young MP, the member in charge of the Bill. This local Bill will bring wider b enefits to both the Waitara community as a whole and the Mori Crown relationship more broadly. The local Bill relates to hectares of land confiscated from Te Atiawa in . Waitara, North Taranaki, is a place of historical importance to Mori and all New Zealanders. The first shots in the New Zealand Land Wars were fired on the Pekapeka block at Waitara in , due to escalating tensions regarding contested land purchases. . All of the land at Waitara was confiscated from Mori in under the New Zealand Settlements Act . Much of the land was vested in the local authorities in and this is today owned by successor local authorities. Perpetual leases (long leases with an automatic right of renewal) were created over approximately hectares o f the land (the Waitara Endowment Land) and these leases remain in place today, administered by the District Council. . In the census, . per cent of Waitara residents identified as Mori. Te Atiawa is the local iwi, and Waitara is home to Manukorihi and Otaraua hap. Proactively released from the Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Te Atiawa Treaty settlement negotiators elected not to purchase the land, leaving issues unresolved . In the early s, the District Council resolved to make the Waitara Endowment Land available for Te Atiawa for Treaty settlement purpos es. This was disputed by leaseholders who instigated legal action against the District Council. After a lengthy court dispute, the Court of Appeal confirmed the District Councils right to sell the land. . For a number of reasons, Te Atiawa Treaty settlement negotiators elected not to purchase the land. This created divisions within Te Atiawa and the Waitara hap tried to withdraw from the iwi and the Treaty settlement. Ultimately, the Treaty settlement was finalised with the Waitara hap included but the iss ue of Waitara lands unresolved. New leadership at the District Council has prioritised resolving ownership of the Waitara Endowment Land . The District Council, under new leadership, has worked hard over the past months to build a relationship with the Wa itara hap and wider iwi. The Mayor and Chief Executive of the District Council see the local Bill as a way to move forward, bring benefits to the Waitara hap and for the District Council and Waitara hap to work together to improve wellbeing for the Waitara community. . The District Council perceives the local Bill as a once in a generation opportunity to resolve ownership of the Waitara Endowment Land, clean up the Waitara River and to provide opportunities for the Waitara hap and community. They are publ icising their promotion of the local Bill in these terms among the local community. The local Bill seeks to resolve the longstanding issues at Waitara Progress . In , the District Council promoted the local Bill sponsored by Jonathan Young, MP for New P lymouth. The local Bill as introduced transferred some land to the local iwi trust, Te Kotahitanga o Te Atiawa, and enabled leaseholders on the Waitara Endowment Land to purchase the freehold title to the same land. . The local Bill was referred to the Mori Affairs Committee. At the public hearings of submissions on the local Bill it became clear that neither the iwi, Te Atiawa, nor the Waitara hap supported the local Bill. The Mori Affairs Committee recommended substantial changes, with the agreement of t he District Council, to enable more equitable outcomes for the local Waitara hap and wider iwi. The Mori Affairs Committee report on the Bill to the House on August foreshadowed further changes being necessary and noted that the Waitara hap were due to enter further discussions with both the District Council and Taranaki Regional Council (the Regional Council). The local Bill had its second reading on August . Proactively released from the Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Recent changes raise a procedural issue around the scope of the Bill which needs to be addressed . Further negotiations took place between the Waitara hap and both the District Council and the Regional Council. This led to the SOP now proposed which further amends the local Bill as reported back by the Mori Affairs Committee. It remains within the intention and spirit of the Mori Affairs Committee commentary on the local Bill as reported back to the House. . Some of the changes proposed by SOP are out of scope of the original Notice of Intention to promote the local Bill publicised by the District Council. Standing Order () provides that no am endment may be made to a local B ill that is outside the scope of the notices advertising the intention to introduce or promote the local B ill. Jonathan Young MP has written to the House Business C ommittee asking them to waive Standing Order () to enable these changes to be made through the SOP. Additionally, from November the District Council is publishing a revised Notice setting out the changes to the scope of the local Bill. The changes ar e critical to the Waitara haps support for the local Bill. Unanimous agreement of the House is needed to waive Standing Order () which may be indicated by the House Business Committee. . Jonathan Young MP and I have also written to the Mori Affairs Co mmittee to inform them of the further changes to the Bill since their commentary. I am satisfied that while these changes were not in the Mori Affairs Committees commentary, they are within the spirit of that report and will therefore be acceptable to the Mori Affairs Committee. The local Bill will not proceed to further House stages until the Mori Affairs Committee has endorsed the Bills progression. Provisions in the local Bill and the substantial Supplementary Order Paper . The proposed SOP substantia lly refines the local Bill. The SOP makes significant improvements to the way the local Bill seeks to provide an adequate resolution to the longstanding issues faced by the Waitara hap while also resolving the concerns of leaseholders in the Waitara Endow ment Land. It achieves an effective balance between the interests of the Waitara hap and leaseholders of the Waitara Endowment Land and it brings benefits to the wider community in Waitara and the Taranaki region. . The local Bill returns or enables the return of all District Council reserves (including some with Crown underlying title) in Waitara to the Waitara hap and some other District Council land. It also enables leaseholders of Waitara Endowment Land to purchase the freehold title to the same land. Proactively released from the Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . The proceeds of sale of freehold and income from leaseholds are divided equally between the District Council and the Regional Council as follows: . The District Councils proceeds are further divided equally between the Waitara Community Fund and the Hap Land Fund, overseen by an independent statutory Board. The Board makes determinations as to distributions from the Waitara Community Fund, for the benefit of the Waitara community. The local Bill establishes the Hap Land Fund Committee as a committee of t he Board. The Hap Land Fund Committee comprises members of the Waitara hap and determines the Boards spending of the Hap Land Fund which must be for the purpose of buying, developing and managing land in and adjacent to Waitara for the benefit of the W aitara hap; and . The Regional Councils proceeds fund the work of the Waitara River Committee, a council committee with equal membership between the Regional Council and iwi authorities of any iwi with mana whenua over the river catchment. The Waitara Rive r Committee is to distribute per cent of funds toward the environmental, cultural and spiritual health and wellbeing of the Waitara River and per cent toward any matter in Waitara or the lower catchment of the river within the Regional Councils responsibility. . The refinements to the Bill, agreed through extensive discussions between the District Council, the Waitara hap and Te Atiawa iwi trustees, and proposed to be implemented by the SOP include: . all of the land to be transferred in the local Bill will be transferred to the Waitara hap rather than the iwi trustees; . the inclusion in the local Bill of all of the Council owned reserves in Waitara, should the hap elect to initiate the transfer; . the potential for transfer of six reserves that have a pa rtial or whole Crown underlying title to the hap at the haps election and on terms that the Crown is reimbursed for the value of the underlying title; . a time limited tax exemption of six months for the Waitara hap entity; . should the District Council ever sell its interests in the leased land, it must offer these rights to the hap first. Valuation instructions for these interests have been agreed between the District Council and the hap; and . a preamble that tells the haps story of Waitara and its con nection to the whenua. . Both the inclusion of the Crown underlying titles and the tax exemption were critical in ensuring the hap remained in negotiations with the District Council. For example, one of these reserves, Pukekohe Domain, is an original p sit e and was also the location of the constabulary quartering during the New Zealand Land Wars. This site is culturally significant to both hap and they aspire to establish a cultural base at the site. . The District Council and the Waitara hap will conclude a binding side agreement to support the implementation of the local Bill. This will set out how the mechanisms in the local Bill will be applied in practice, including for example arrangements for governance of the reserves and an agreement that neither t he Waitara hap nor the District Council will seek a change to the reserve status of land without the others consent. Proactively released from the Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Outstanding issues critical to retaining hap support for the local Bill Crown underlying title . The District Council has agreed to transfer title to reserve land in Waitara to the Waitara hap. Six of the reserves are wholly or partly derived from the Crown and the Crown retains underlying title. This means that, should the District Council seek to divest its interests in the land, title r everts to the Crown. . The inclusion of the Crown underlying title to six reserves in Waitara enables the hap to elect to purchase those reserves at any time in the next years. Cabinets agreement is sought to including the Crown underlying title to the se six reserves. . The transfer will be fiscally neutral to the Crown as the value of the Crown underlying title will be paid by the District Council or the Waitara hap. The underlying titles have been valued at . million. As the value is greater than in itially anticipated, one reserve will be purchased on enactment of the Bill. Agreement has been given by the Minister of Conservation for the local Bill to provide the perpetual right for the Waitara hap to purchase the remaining five reserves. If the transfer of the five remaining reserves is made after November , an market valuation will be required through a mechanism provided for in the Bill. . Under Standing Order , no local Bill may contain any provision that affects the rights and priv ileges of the Crown unless the Crown has given its consent. The consent of the Crown is given by a message from the Governor General in accordance with Standing Order . I seek Cabinets agreement to advise the Governor General that the Crown consents to the inclusion of Crown interests in this local Bill. In this case, the Crown interest is in the potential sale of the underlying Crown title to six reserves in Waitara to the Waitara hap. Tax exemption . The Minister of Revenue and I have agreed that transfers of land from the District Council to the Waitara hap entity under the arrangements in the local Bill should not be subject to income tax. The District Council as a local authority is exempt from income tax and the disposal of land by the District Council would therefore not be subject to income tax. Nevertheless, I recommend that a specific provision be included in the local Bill for the avoidance of doubt. . The Minister of Revenue and I have also agreed to propose to Cabinet a temporary tax exemption for transfers from the Hap Land Fund to the Waitara hap entity in the local Bill. The temporary tax exemption will be in place for six months from the of commencement of the Bill. The tax exemption is critical to obtaining the support of the hap t o the arrangements in the local Bill. It will provide a bridging mechanism, giving the Waitara hap entity or its subsidiary enough time to obtain charitable status. Following the expiry of the six month temporary exemption, the prevailing tax rules will apply on a go forward basis. . Cabinets agreement is sought to account for the temporary tax exemption through the between Budget contingency. The fiscal implications of the temporary tax exemption are likely to be small. The Hap Land Fund is expected to total no more than . million in the initial six month period. This would lead to maximum potential tax revenue of . million each year. Proactively released from the Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page o f . I do not consider that the temporary tax exemption risks setting a precedent. The circumstances in Waitara are uniq ue. In addition to the historical factors, the unique circumstances include that this is endowment land, so the funds provided under theBill are not obtained from rates and are not otherwise available for general use, andthat the interests of the leaseho lders are protected by the local Bill. My officials are not aware of any comparable circumstances and I consider the likelihood of similararrangements emerging is low. The proposed tax exemption is a pragmatic response tounique circumstances and does not provide a precedent for other local authorities. . The District Council expects that the arrangements in the local Bill will unlock fundingof million over the next twenty years as leaseholders purchase freehold title. The District and Regional Councils have agreed that all of this money should be used inWaitara to build the local economy and benefit the wellbeing of the Waitaracommunity. The arrangements in the local Bill would distribute this funding in the formof: . million to restore the health and wellbeing of the Waitara River; . million in a Waitara Community Fund for the general benefit of the Waitara community; and . million in a Hap Land Fund for the purchase, development or management of land at Waitara. Missed opport unity . The Waitara hap will not support the Bill if the underlying Crown title is not included in the transfer of the reserves, and the tax exemption issue is not resolved. If this Billwere not to pass, the local Waitara community will miss the opportunity to benefit from million. Under the local Bill, the sums will be applied to housing development and associated growth and job creation, hap development and hapand community health and wellbeing initiatives, and the restoration of the W aitara River. . Should the local Bill not pass, we will lose the opportunity to support local governmentas it finds innovative solutions to longstanding issues, bringing improvements to therelationship between local government and Mori. I recommend that the Crown undertakes all steps necessary to enable the local Bill to succeed. Next steps . Jonathan Young and I have written to the House Business Committee to request a thirdreading immediately following the committee of the whole House stage on themembers day on December . . Officials will work with the Clerk of the House to meet the procedural requirements forthe message from the Governor General indicating the Crowns consent to the inclusion of Crown interests in a local Bill. . The Waitara hap a re finalising the preamble for inclusion in the local Bill. Parliamentary Counsel is working with the Waitara hap to ensure that the preambleis consistent with bill drafting standards and with the Te Atiawa historical account inthe Te Atiawa Claims Sett lement Act . The side agreement between the Waitara hap and the District Council will also be concluded prior to the further legislativestages intended to take place on December . Proactively released from the Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Consultation . This paper was prepared by the Department of Inter nal Affairs in consultation with the Mori Crown Relations Roopu in the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry for the Environment, the Department of Conservation, Te Puni Kkiri, Inland Revenue and the Treasury. . The Minister of Finance has been consulted in re lation to the financial implications. Inland Revenue and Treasury comment . Inland Revenue and Treasury officials are of the view that the temporary tax exemption should not be provided for the transfers from the Hap Land Fund to theWaitara hap entity. Providing tax relief in this situation would not be consistent with general tax policy principles and could represent a precedent for others to lobby forsimilar treatment, which would present a risk to the revenue base. . Inland Revenue and Treasury officials also note that Charities Services can back charitable status to the of the application. If the application is successful then the Waitara hap entity or its subsidiary would be exempt from tax as a charity from thedate the application was lodge d with Charities Services.
Chair Cabinet Refocusing the water services reforms: further decisions Proposal . This is the second in a series of papers on proposals to refocus the water services reforms and achieve this Governments intentions to deliver more affordable water. . The first paper obtained agreement to a new strategic and legislative approach, and to key changes to the reform model including increasing the number of water services entities from four to , and amending the establishment timeframes. It also noted that a second paper would follow in May to provide further advice on some matters. . This paper reports back on those matters, and seeks agreement to proposals for: . the approach to the entity go live dates; . community priority statements; . a locally led, voluntary merger process; . entity financing arrangements; . shared services arrangements. . If agreed, most of the proposals will be included in drafting instructions for a Water Services Entities Amendment Bill. This paper seeks approval to include this Bill on the legislation programme,
Chair Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committ ee Proposed amendments to the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill Proposal . This paper seeks agreement to amend clause of the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill ( the Bill) . The proposed amendment w ould remove sections L O (the filtering provisions) from the Bill. Relation to government priorities . The proposals in this Bill are a direct response to the Christchurch terror attack s and address some gaps and limitations in our classification legislation . Executive summary . The proposals in the Bill w ere developed as a direct response to the Christchurch terror attacks and address specific inefficiencies and ambiguities in our classification legislation. On December , Cabinet agreed to the proposals set out for the Bill CAB MIN refers. . The Bill was introduced to Parliament in May and was referred to the Governance and Administration Committee (the Committee) at its First Reading on February . I inherited the Bill from the previous Minister of Internal Affairs and have previousl y indicated that I was open to refining the Bills filtering provisions depending on what came out of the Select Committee stage , given the strong views in this area . . Internet filtering can be a useful tool to prevent access to and mitigate harms from obje ctionable (illegal) content online. An example of this is the current Digital Child Exploitation System (DCEFS), which specifically filters child sexual abuse material. Child sexual abuse material is universally accepted as abhorrent and blocking this type of material has not been challenged. Further expansion of the categories of illegal material to be filtered needs detailed consideration to ensure the proper safeguards are there to prevent abuse of this power. . The current proposals leave this detail to b e determined in regulations to allow flexibility for new technologies. On balance a statutory filter provision needs more detail about the safeguards. To achieve that , the detailed work that was planned following enactment of the Bill would need to be brou ght forward. Progressing this work now would risk a further delay to the implementation of the other key regulatory and enforcement provisions of the Bill. This is consistent with the advice that I have received from my officials. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . Submitters also acknowled ged that more detail is needed before progressing the filtering provisions. T he submissions received on the Bill throughout the Select Committee stage have indicated that there is a lack of public mandate to progress with the current filtering provisions a t this time. Submissions highlighted the need to set out the specific scope of the filter in primary legislation and emphasised the need for further public consultation and community engagement . . These submissions are consistent with wider community feedback received during huis held on the report of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the terrorist attack on Christchurch masjidain on March . Feedback from those huis emphasised the need for greater community engagement and co design of policie s on a wide range of areas relevant to the classification and censorship system such as hate speech and balancing reform in that area with the right to freedom of expression, as well as greater scrutiny of the standards of media and online reporting on m inority and faith communit y issues . . This paper therefore, seeks agreement to remove the current filtering provisions from the Bill and investigate a voluntary approach to filtering . Background . In the aftermath of the Christchurch terror attacks, internet service providers (ISPs) and online content hosts worked collaboratively with Government to prevent people from spreading and accessing online footage of the attacks. While these efforts were largely effective, the experience highlighted inefficiencies and ambiguities in our censorship system for responding to objectionable online content. This Bill was developed as a direct response to the Christchurch terror attacks by addressing these inefficiencies and ambiguities in the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act (the FVPC Act . . On December , Cabinet agreed to the following policy proposals in the Bill CAB MIN refers : . knowingly livestreaming objectionable content will become a criminal offence punishable by up to years in prison; . allowing the Chief Censor to make interim classification decisions; . allowing take down notices to be issued to require the removal of objectionable online content; . making online content hosts subj ect to a civil pecuniary penalty of up to ,, if they do not comply with an issued take down notice; . ensuring safe harbour provisions in the Harmful Digital Communications Act would not apply to objectionable online content; and . enabling the e stablishment of regulations that would allow the government to implement web filtering of objectionable content if required. . The Bill updates the FVPC Act to allow for urgent prevention and mitigation of harms caused by objectionable content online. The te rm objectionable refers to already illegal content as defined in the FVPC Act ; this includes content which describes, depicts or expresses, or otherwise deals with matters such as sex, horror, crime, cruelty or violence in such a manner that the availab ility of publication is likely to be injurious to the public good. It is an offence to make, possess, supply or distribute objectionable content. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . The Bill will improve the way we regulate objectionable content, including violent extremist and terrorist co ntent found online. Specifically, the Bill amends the Act to: . criminalise knowingly livestreaming objectionable content; . allow the Chief Censor to make interim classification assessments in relation to publications (both physical as well as online) likely to be found objectionable in urgent situations; . allow take down notices to be issued to require the removal of objectionable online content; . make online content hosts subject to a civil pecuniary penalty of up to ,, if they do not comply with an is sued take down notice; . ensure the safe harbour provisions in the Harmful Digital Communications Act would not apply to objectionable online content; and . enable the establishment of regulations that would allow the Government to implement filtering o f objectionable content online if required (the filtering provisions) . . I inherited the Bill from the previous Minister of Internal Affairs and was keen to progress it to Select Committee stage to hear views on the filtering provisions, as there were arguments for and against. . The Bill was introduced to Parliament in May and was referred to the Committee at its First Reading on February . On April I attended t he presentation of the initial briefing on the Bill and signalled to the Committee that I was particularly interested in submissions and discussions on the filtering provisions . . Since then, the filtering provisions have been the most submitted upon aspect of the Bill. The majority of the submissions that mentioned the filtering provisions were opposed to it. In contra st, the submissions that touched on other provisions of the Bill were mostly supportive and only recommended some minor technical changes. . The views expressed by submitters on the Bill align with community feedback from huis on the report of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the terrorist attack on Christchurch masj idain on March , specifically that proposals relating to freedom of expression should be developed through co design and engagement with communities. Internet filtering can be a useful tool to prevent access and mitigate harms from objectionable co ntent online . In New Zealand, internet filtering already takes place without a legislative mandate or regulatory framework. This currently include s the voluntary DCEFS , which specifically filters child sexual abuse material . This filter is run by the Department of Internal Affairs ( DIA). While the DECFS is voluntary for ISPs, the majority of ISPs in New Zealand use the filter, which means that approximately per cent of New Zealand internet users are protected from child sexual abuse material. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . The p roposed internet filtering provisions in the Bill provide an enabling framework and set out obligations on Government when implementing any mechanism to prevent access to other kind s of objectionable content , outside of child sexual abuse material and imag ery. The filtering provisions would not establish a filter but would give Government explicit statutory authority to explore and implement such mechanisms through regulations in the future. The filtering provisions are in clause of the Bill under new sec tions L to O . . If established, the purpose of a filter would be to prevent access to content that is already illegal to possess or distribute. It is one of a range of tools that can be used to assist in mitigating the harms of objectionable content online. These harms can include revictimization for example, recurring distress and trauma to victims from viewing an incident again or having others see footage of their experiences and being unintentionally exposed to this type of footage . Some of the most objectionable content on the internet is pe ddled by sites that will never respond to New Zealands or any other jurisdictions request to remove such content . A filter c ould act as a last line of defence when other approaches to remove this content ha ve failed. Submissions indicate that there is a lack of public mandate to progress with the current filtering provisions at this time . On April , written submissions closed for the Bill and the Committee received a total of unique written submissi ons. The Committee received submissions that specifically referred to the filtering provisions in the Bill. Out of those, four submitters supported filtering and submitters were against filtering. A further submissions, while not referenc ing the f iltering provisions specifically, were opposed to the Bill in full due to concerns that the Bill w ould impose on New Zealanders freedom of expression , which is the predominant reason for opposing the filter . . Some submitters acknowledged that there may be benefits to filtering objectionable content . However, this support was qualified by the need to clarify the detail and scope of any proposed filter. The filter being set in regulations was not seen as the best approach as there would be a lack of Parliamen tary oversight into the development of the filter, and a risk of insufficient legal safeguards. As currently drafted, the legislation is not intended to be too prescriptive in order to provide sufficient flexibility so that developments in technology do not undermine the policy intent. . However, s ubmitters opposed to filtering noted that there is a need for more specific detail on the scope, design and operation of the filter in the Bill. Submissions from academics, the tech nology sector , ethnic commu nity groups and interest bodies prefer that the Government consult on these aspects of any potential filter before finalising proposals and progressing legislation to implement a filter. This was reflected specifically by those in vulnerable groups that th e filtering provisions are intended to protect. There were also concerns raised about the potential infringement o n freedom of expression and the effectiveness of a filter , as it can be easily circumvented. . Several submissions suggested that the filter pr ovisions be removed from the Bill and be progressed as a stand alone legislation so that there is appropriate Parliamentary decision making and oversight of this issue. There was some commentary that any work on filtering should be considered as part of a wider review of the media regulatory landscape. There have also been suggestions of a voluntary approach like the existing DCEFS. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . I did consider options to redraft so that the filter is not set in regulations but primary legislation. However, I decided aga inst this as it would not address the issues of a lack of detail about the propose d design and operation of the filter. It would also not address concerns about the potential infringement on freedom of expression and the effectiveness of a filter. . While there appears to be a lack of public mandate to progress the filter, there are also additional issues to consider. This includes ensuring that the creation of a filter is fit for purpose, which would require setting out the exact scope of the filter and br oader public consultation. There is also the risk of the Bill being further delayed to allow time to determine technical specifications of the filter, which would mean other key regulatory and enforcement proposals in the Bill that are needed now would be unable to be progressed. My preferred approach is to remove the current filtering provisions from the Bill and investigate a voluntary filter . As noted above in paragraphs to , filtering can be a useful tool to prevent access to and mitigate harms from objectionable content online noting that this is content that is already illegal . However , having heard from submitters throughout the select committee process, it appears that there is strong opposition for a statutory mandated filter for objectionable content online and more work is required in this area . Therefore, my preferred approach is to remove the filtering provisions from the Bill and investigate a voluntary approach to filtering. This approach would amend clause , Part A of the Bill by removing: . section L: Electronic system to prevent public access to objectionable online publications; . section M: Establishment of electronic system; . section N: Approval of electronic system for operation; and . section O: Review of decisions and actions relating to operation of electronic system. . To allow for Cabinet consideration of the above proposal s, I have written to and obtained permission from the Committee Chair to exten d the report back of the Departmental Report to June . The Department of Internal Affairs will continue to investigate a voluntary filter . There is some support for the concept of filtering objectionable content , particularly among Internet Service Providers (ISP). This is important as any filtering would work at the ISP level. I also think that there is a place for filtering as it can reduce harm for the most vulnerable, such as young people, from inadvertent access to objectionable content. However, I acknowledge that setting the filter in regulations is not the best approach. I have therefore directed my officials to investigate and provide me with advice on alternative options for progressing a voluntary approach to filtering for ISPs . A voluntary approach would align with the existing mechanism in place to filter child sexual abuse material and imagery . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . I do not recommend removing the provisions and progressing stand alone legislation to implement filtering objectionable content at this stage. Submitters who suggested this approach str essed that the legislation would need to set out specific details, such as the exact scope of the filter, technical capability details as well as governance and technical oversight arrangements. I anticipate these issues will be within scope of work to pro gress a voluntary filter. Stand alone legislation to provide statutory authority to a voluntary filter can be explored in due course if there is evidence of sufficient public mandate for this to occur or a voluntary approach is unsuccessful . . In relation t o submissions suggesting this issue be considered within the wider media review (the review) , I note that the purpose of the review is to dev elop and establish an overarching framework for regulating and moderating media and online content. Proposals devel oped within th at broader framework may have potential cascading implications on aspects of work to progress a voluntary filter. I have been advised by my officials that they will remain mindful of possible links between proposals developed as part of the r eview and filtering options, and where appropriate align these workstreams as necessary . Next steps . If Cabinet approval the removal of the filtering provisions , the Bill will be amended to remove sections L to O in clause , Part A. This will requi re a delay to the final report back of the Departmental Report to allow time for the amendments to be drafted. Financial implications . There are no financial implications. Legislative implications . Subject to Cabinet approval t he Bill will be amended to remove sections L to O in clause , Part A. This will require a delay to the final report back of the Departmental Report to allow time for the amendments to be drafted. Impact analysis Regulatory Impact Statement . Treasurys Regulatory Impact Analysis team has determined that this proposal is exempt from the requirement to provide a Regulatory Impact Statement on the grounds that it has been addressed by existing impact analysis CAB MIN refers. It does not re present a new change to existing regulatory arrangements and is solely intended to withdraw a previous policy decision before it is implemented. Climate Implications of Policy Assessment . The Ministry for the Environment climate implications of policy asse ssment (CIPA) team were consulted on the previous Cabinet paper seeking agreement to the policy proposals in the Bill CAB MIN refers and confirm ed the CIPA requirement did not apply. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Population Implications . The population implications have previously been stated in the previous Cabinet paper CAB MIN refers, which acknowledges that to the extent that any groups are disproportionately impacted by exposure to violent extremist and terrorist content online, the proposals aim to reduce that harm. These groups include ethnic communities, women, and people with disabilities. Human Rights . The proposals in this paper have previously been addressed in the initial Cabinet paper CAB MIN refers which , acknowledged that r egulating obje ctionable content that involves violent extremist and terrorist online content raises issues of consistency with the right to freedom of expression, recognised in section of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act (NZBORA). . The proposals in this paper do not change the current definition of objectionable under the FVPC Act. While freedom of expression is not an absolute right, limits should not be imposed on it unless justified. New Zealand law already limits freedom of expression in this area by imposi ng a range of legal restrictions on the publication of objectionable content (which cover acts of terrorism). These limitations are reasonably justified because of the potential harm this content may pose to New Zealanders, as well as the wider direct or i ndirect harms to our communitie s. The proposals in this paper do not negatively impact on freedom of expression. Consultation . Ministry for Culture and Heritage , Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment , Ministry of Justice , the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Ministry of Education, the Treasury, New Zealand Police, the Government Communications Security Bureau, New Zealand Security and Intelligence Service, Oranga Tamariki Ministry for Children , Te Puni Kkiri, Minis try for Pacific Peoples, Ministry for Women, Ministry for Youth Development, the New Zealand Customs Service , and the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet were consulted on this Cabinet paper. . Subject to Cabinet approval, I intend to make a public announcement on the amendments to the Bill. Proactive Release . As per Cabinet Office Circular () , this Cabinet paper will be proactively released, with redactions made consistent with the Official Information Act . Recommendations The Minister of Internal Affairs recommends that the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee : . note that in December Cabinet agreed to the policy proposals contained in the Bill CAB MIN refers ; . agree to amend clause , Part A of the Bill by removing: S.()(f)(iv), S.()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . section L: Electronic system to prevent public access to objectionable online publications; . section M: Establishment of electronic system; . section N: Approval of electronic system for operation; and . section O: Review of decisions and actions relating to operation of electronic system ; and . note that DIA has written to the Governance and Administration Select Committee to request an exten sion to the report back of the Departmental Report to June to allow time for the amendments to be made .
Chair Industry Working Group.
Chair of the joint CentralLocal Government Three Waters Steering Committee
Chair, Cabinet Government Administration and Expenditure Review Committee
Challenges of EndtoEnd Encryption (EEE) for Digital Safety
Change needs to come from within
Change to the legislated name of Taumata Arowai to reflect coalition Government
Changes to Mori Ward and Mori Constituency Processes: Release of Discussion Document
Changes to Mori Ward and Mori Constituency Processes: Update and
Changes to financing arrangements for the Opt Out Scenario cannot be ruled out There are other ways that access to finance by New Zealand water providers can be improved. The government s Opt Out Scenario does not consider these other options. Currently, almost all three waters services are provided by local authorities. Local authorities borrowing limits, whether imposed by LGFA or due to ratings agency policies, are generally consider ed to impose limits on optimal investment planning in the water sector. In the Reform Scenario, the new statutory corporations will have separate balance sheets to lo cal authorities, and will be able to raise finance without being impacted by these borrowi ng limits. A number of other financing arrangements are already available for the water sector and could apply in the Opt Out Scenario. Other financing changes could be implemented with law and other institutional reform: Central government has recently i ntroduced the Infrastructure Financing Facility FFF which enables finance to be raised from the private sector, ringfenced from eligible local authorities balance sheets Long term concession contracts have been used in New Zealand (in Papakura, sig ned by Papakura Council prior to the creation of Auckland Council) under which a third party provides water services for a fixed term ( years in Pap akura) and collects water rates or tariffs directly from customers. Usually, the concession contract requi res the third party to invest in and maintain the water assets and network and meet certain performance metrics . The third party provider accesses pri vate capital markets to finance the capital investment needs (growth, renewals and maintenance) Revenue bo nds are a common way for municipal government entities in the United States to raise finance for infrastructure investment, often in the water sector . Investors in these bonds are repaid from income created by the projects the bonds fund. These are separat e from the general obligations debt raised by the municipal government .
Changes to problem gambling awareness training, including:
Changes to the Water Services Act to reduce the regulatory burden of the drinking water quality regime and improve proportionality in the application of regulatory powers.
Changes to the water quality regulatory framework and the water services regulator, including:
Changing contracted prices
Changing contracted prices . agree that the Bill will cancel the pricing and charging provisions in any contract with a commercial entity, for the supply of water services (including trade waste services) by a water services entity. This would take effect years after the establishment of the water services entity; Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of Transition issues . agree to create a regulation making power, to limit the rate of increase in prices, maintain existing tariff structures, and cap revenue from a particular service or class of customers, for household consumers; . agree that these regulation making powers would expire at the commencement of the first economic regulation period; . agree that the economic regulator must be consulted in the development of these regulations; . agree to the following measures to avoid conflict and tension between legislative pricing principl es and regulations, and enable a smooth transition: . the pricing regulations must be met as soon as reasonably practicable after they come into effect; . there may be temporary deviations from legislative pricing principles, subject to deviations being consistent with guidance or requirements from the economic regulator; . any pricing direction in regulations, the Government policy statement, or the regional representative groups statement of strategic and performance expectations must be consistent with the overall legislative framework; . water services entities must meet o bligations in primary legislation, regulation and the Government policy statement; and . once legislative and Government policy statement obligations are met, a water services entity can pursue other goals; . agree that as a general transitional measure, water services entities may keep charging for services using the same methodologies that the relevant territorial authority had been using; . note that Cabinet previously invited the Minister of Local Government to report back on the outcomes of the collection of detailed pricing information from local authorities by June ; . agree to receive the report back in recommendation by December , along with proposals on the best way of using regulation making powers to manage price shocks; . agree that water services entities are able to keep charging for services using the same methodologies that the relevant territorial authority had been using until July ;
Chapter RIA Water Services Entities Implementation Arrangements
Charging undevel oped properties
Charging undeveloped properties . agree that all properties that are serviceable by water services entities networks, but not currently receiving those services, should have to pay a contribution to those networks, except for non rateable land (land that is per cent non rateable would pay per cent of the charge) and Mori freehold land; Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of Stormwater charging . note that stormwater is a public good; . agree that stormwater be funded through a charge on ratepayers; . agree that the total amount recoverable by the charge in a water services entities service delivery area is calculated by the water services entity on the basis of input methodology(ies) set by the economic regulator; . agree that the charge is apportioned to rateable properties in the service delivery area on the basis of: . the c apital value of the property (this is the same methodology as general rates); and . whether or not the property is serviceable by a reticulated stormwater network, or on the basis of geographic zones; and . agree that the regional representative group, in consultation with the water services entity, can determine the apportionment of costs and the choice of methods set out in recommendation .; . agree that legislation will require territorial authorities to share their rating information with water service s entities on a reasonable cost basis. This cost excludes the costs of establishing rateable values;
Charitable Entity As defined in section () of the Charities Act .
Charities (Fees, and Other Matters) Regulations
Charities (Taxation and Charities Review AuthoritiesAppeals Process) Regulations
Charities Amendment Bill Draft Bill and Cabinet Legislation paper for Ministerial consultation
Charities Amendment Bill Final Bill and Cabinet Legislation paper
Charities Amendment Bill First reading package
Charities Amendment Bill Second Reading Package
Charities Amendment Bill recap of stakeholder feedback on proposed policy changes
Charities Amendment Bill: Committee of the whole House materials
Charities Amendment Bill: Final Initial Briefing to Select Committee
Charities Amendment Bill: advice on proactive release of Cabinet paper and Cabinet LEG Minute
Charities Amendment Bill: third reading speech and supporting information
Charities Registration Board
Charities Registration Board (Round )
Charities Registration Board Te Rt Arawhai
Charities Registration Board Chair
Charities Registration Board Te Rta Atawhai Documentation to finalise the reappointment of the Board Chair
Charities Registration Board Documentation to finalise appointment
Charities Registration Board Documents to finalise appointments
Charities Registration Board Draft Cabinet paper
Charities Registration Board: Charities Registration Board Decision for appointments
Charities Regulation Considerations about enforcement and compliance
Charities Services Annual Meeting
Charities Services Annual Meeting, October
Charities Services work to support more than , registered charities in Aotearoa by administering the Charities Act . We promote public trust and confidence in the charitable sector and encourage the effective use of charitable resources.
Charities Services, Births, Deaths, Marriages, Citizenship, Authentications
Chart : Rates revenue change ( change from previous year) when four well beings are in the Act (red) versus not (blue). Black line shows linear average.
Chartered Accountants Australia New Zealand (CA ANZ)
Charts Visuals showing actual and adjusted expenditure for the four main types of gambling.
Chatham Islands All of Government Work Programmes Briefing
Chatham Islands Council Act
Chatham Islands Enterprise Trust
Chatham Islands Livestock Issues: talking points for Cabinet
Chatham Islands Shipping and Livestock Issues
Chatham Islands Shipping and Livestock Issues Cabinet minute
Chatham Islands Shipping and Livestock Issues Cabinet paper
Chatham Islands Tourism bid
Chatham Islands meeting regarding shipping outages and livestock issues
Chatham Islands slide pack WICS report
Chatham Islands WICS report
Check R adios P eoples Terms f or the C ovid Inquiry
Check Radio to the Minister of Internal Affairs for response;
Checking for a deceased person or someone you act for
Chief Archivists annual report on the state of government recordkeeping
Chief Archivists Annual Report on the state of government recordkeeping
Chief ArchivistGeneral Manager
Chief Censor (within the current regulatory settings which are recognised as
Chief Censor Appointment Talking points for APH May
Chief Censor appointment documents
Chief Censor short listing briefing
Chief Executive of DIAs nominated representative for resolution.
Child Pornograhy Trader Who Denied All, Then Absconded, Sentenced To Months Jail
Child Pornography Conviction: Third in NZ, Second in Hutt Valley in a Week
Child Pornography Trader who Boasted About Hiding on the Internet Convicted
Child Pornography is Not Victimless
Child Sex Abuse Material Included Instructions About How to Seduce Children
Child Sexual Exploitation Terminology Factsheets
Child sex abuse images bring Christmas in prison
Child sex abuse images bring jail
Child sex abuse images uncovered
Child sex abuse images: third sentencing in two weeks
Child sex abuse network kingpin jailed
Child sex abuse pictures and videos earn jail time
Child sex abuse pictures bring jail term
Child sex abuse pictures detected
Child sex abuse sites bookmarked as favourites
Child sexual exploitation terminology factsheet
Children Raped to Make Child Pornography
Chinese New Year Charity Event
Chinese Poll Tax Heritage Trust
Choosing this approach introduces some new risks, such as making it more difficult to assess or enforce compliance checking that the app is installed and running as intended rather than simply sighting a wearable. We havent considered these issues of compliant usage in detail. We have considered whether it is technically feasible to have wearables and apps interoperate.
Chr;stchurch Mosques on March : Out of Cycle Changes to Budget Baselines;
Christchurch City Council
Christchurch City slide pack WICS report
Christchurch City WICS report
Christchurch Earthquake Appeal Trust
Christchurch Mosques on March (the Royal Commission) reported back
Christchurch Mosques on March : Out of Cycle Changes to Budget Baselines; and
Christchurch man sentenced to years months for child sexual exploitation material
Christchurch man sentenced to years for possession of child sexual exploitation material
Chrome: Zoom in or out on your current page Google
Chronological timeline (Chinese language translation) (PDF kb)
Chronological timeline (PDF kb)
Cianaa Technologies Limited
Citizenship (Western Samoa) Act
Citizenship Database to collect and use Citizenship information. ..
Citizenship Information Citizenship
Citizenship Information held by the Secretary for Internal Affairs.
Citizenship Information relating to an individuals citizenship history and current status,
Citizenship Regulations
Citizenship and Immigration
Citizenship is an important marker of peoples sense belonging in New Zealand. The high level of satisfaction with citizenship services shows that we are making the process as positive and engaging as possible for people acquiring citizenship. Over the past year, we have maintained the satisfaction with citizenship services most likely due to efforts in decreasing processing timeframes, improving clarity for customers, reducing manual work for staff and enhancing our automated checks.
City and Regional Deals February lighttouch proposal submissions
City and Regional Deals is the Governments initiative for establishing longterm agreements between central and local government. The programme unlocks funding and resource opportunities to support councils to make improvements in their region, for example to roads, infrastructure, and the supply of quality housing.
City and Regional Deals primarily involve partnerships between local councils and central government. There is significant opportunity for collaboration from the private sector and iwiMori organisations. Local government is responsible for identifying opportunities for involvement and engaging with private sector entities and Mori organisations.
City and Regional deals will be enduring and will provide the certainty needed to attract and retain the necessary investments to deliver change. Deals make use of existing resources rather than relying solely on new funding, with central and local governments aligning our budget cycles and investment strategies to ensure resources can be used effectively.
Civic Information Services MCA
Civic Information Services MCA (.)
Civil Aviation Authority of New Zealand
Civil Aviation Authority of New Zealand Claire Mistry
Civil Union (Prescribed Information, Fees, and Forms) Regulations
Civil Union Information Births, Deaths and
Civil Union Information Information relating to the individuals civil union that is maintained by
Civil Union Information New Zealand or dissolution of the individuals marriage or civil union
Civil Union Information relating to the individuals civil union that is maintained by the
Civil Union Information, excluding Registrar Mortality Review
Civil Union Licence A licence issued under section of the Civil Union Act .
Civil Union Zealand or the dissolution of an individuals marriage or civil union outside
Civil defence and translations acquired
Civil union information ...
Claire.mistrycaa.govt.nz
Clare Allison Policy Director, Gambling, Racing and Media Content
Clari ying trustee obligatons This proposal should assist local authorites to collect rates rom land administered by trustees. It has no impact on local authority costs, but quant ying the amount o improved rates collecton is not practcable. IN CONFI ENCE For example, i a council oregoes uni orm charges o , per annum on ratng units, the cost to the council is , per annum. Far North District Council has rates revenue o . million in ; Gisborne District Council has rates revenue o . million in . The impact o oregone revenue rom this proposal on local authority incomes would there ore be small. Local authorites would likely engage their valuaton service providers to carry out the apportonment. This can be done as a desktop exercise, so the cost would be small. The outcome o the proposal should be improved rates collecton on these propertes, which will fnancially beneft the local authority. Providing access to the rates rebate scheme will help low income homeowners on Mori land to pay their rates. Simpli ying the administraton o rates payment or homeowners should also improve collecton. Local authorites are not typically treatng marae and urup as exe mpt now, rather than applying the existng law strictly. For that reason, the cost o this proposal to local authorites should be immaterial. Given the limited in ormaton on the amount o this land lef, qua nt ying the cost o this proposal Is not possible. A key aspect o this proposal is that, i the land is occupied, the occupier o the land becomes liable or the rates on the land, which should assist local authorites in collectng rates or this land. Apportoning rates or homes on Mori land Removing twohectare limits on exemptons or marae and urupa Protectng Mori land rec lassifed as general land rom abandoned land and ratng sales Page f fdorymq Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Clarification of consultation requirements for specified councils
Clarification of the Governments intention that water services entities will pay rates.
Clarification to Earlier Media Release on Child Pornography: Conviction Highlights True Nature of Child Pornography
Clarifying consultation requirements for Water Service Delivery Plans
Clarifying that only councilcontrolled organisations (CCOs) and councilcontrolled trading organisations (CCTOs) whose predominant purpose is to support territorial authorities in their management and operation of water services will transfer to the new water services entities. Predominant purpose is defined as or more of revenue from provisions of water related services. The Committee has also exempted Citycare Water from the transfer provisions. This means that only Watercare and Wellington Water will transfer over.
Clarifying that third party contributions to capital projects for which development contributions are charged can be targeted to specific project drivers.
Class . Named Party
Class Gambling Key Performance Indicators
Class Gambling Key Performance Indicators Report
Class Key Statistics Key stats about the current quarter, filterable by location
Class gambling expenditure A machine readable dataset including quarterly GMP figures from June to the present, by district.
Class gambling Harm minimisation regulations
Class licence holders, venue operators, and venue managers have responsibilities to identify and address gambling harm in their venues. Existing requirements had not done enough to identify, prevent and minimise harm, or to incentivise compliance. In some cases, people have suffered financial and other harms from gambling at pokies venues, yet these harms were not being consistently identified by venue managers and staff.
Class of Agency A group of Agencies.
Classification Office third quarter report
Classification in New Zealand
Clause is subject to either Partys obligations under the TAA (which may limit
Click here to enter text.
Click here to enter text. DMS
Client In relation to an Intermediary that is an Added Party, a New Zealand
Clients will cease sending communications, invoices or, subscription reminders to deceased individuals or their families.
Clients will not require survivors of the deceased individual to produce a death certificate.
Clients will proactively identify beneficiaries and life insurance policy owners to begin the process of paying appropriate entitlements.
Clients will use this information to wash against their own data to ensure they do not communicate with deceased individuals.
Clients, as far as reasonably practicable. This does not apply to information supplied for the
Climate Implications of Policy Assessment
Climate Implications of Policy Assessment . None Population Implications . Vulnerable consumers, those experiencing material hardship, including disabled people, are most likely to struggle to pay their water bills. About eight percent of the population are estimated to face material hardship, but the proportion of households with people facing material hardship is likely to be less than that. Households experiencing material hardship are more likely to be younger, single parent, on a benefit as their main source of income, renters, Mori, or Pacific peoples, and people with disabilities. The proposals in this paper are intended to reduce the burden of water bills on vulnerable consumers. Human Rights . There are no human rights or gender implications arising from the proposals in this paper. Consultation . The Ministry for the Environment; Ministry of Health; Taumata Arowai, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment; the Commerce Commission, the Treasury; Ministry for Primary Industries; National Emergency Management Agency; Toit Te Whenua Land Information New Zealand; Ministry of Housing and Urban Development; Ministry of Education; Ministry of Transport; Te Puni Kkiri; Te Arawhiti; Te Waihanga; Te Kawa Mataaho; Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade; Ministry of Social Development; Office for Disability Issues; and Inland Revenue Department have been consulted on this paper. . The Department of Conservation, New Zealand Defence Force, the Ministry of Education, and Department of Corrections have operational responsibility for three waters services and have been consulted in this capacity. . The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinets Policy Advisory Group has been informed. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . The Central Local Government Joint Three Waters Steering Committee and Rural Supplies Technical Working Group were consulted on these proposals at a high level. The Rural Supplies Technical Working Group highlighted the importance of being able to charge for water supplied for agricultural use on a different basis to drinking water, where both are supplied by the same scheme. This is consistent with the proposals in this paper. Targeted engagement on growth charging has also occurred with high growth territ orial authorities and the Property Council. Communications . As this paper forms part of a comprehensive set of proposals to transform the delivery of three waters services, communications will be part of the wider communications strategy for these reforms. . In April , in relation to my paper Strengthening Representation, Governance and Accountability of the New Water Services Entities Cabinet agreed that the Department of Internal Affairs will continue to provide information about the case for change and explain Government policy to help better inform the public about the reforms CAB MIN . The Department will also encourage an d inform the public about the opportunity to make submissions during the select committee process for the Water Services Entities Bill and the Amendment Bill. . My Office will play a key role in the development and rollout of communications to ensure message s are clear and appropriately tailored for the intended audiences. . My Office and the Department will also work alongside the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs and the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment to develop external communications about pricing and charging, and the links to economic regulation and consumer protection, and ensure that this is aligned and consistent. Proactive Release . I intend to release this paper (subject to any redactions) to coincide with further announcements on the reforms. I note that this may occur outside of the usual timeframes in Cabinet Office circular CO () . Recommendations . The Minister of Local Governm ent recommends that Cabinet: . note that, during and early , Cabinet made a series of decisions to transform the three waters service delivery system, and create four new water services entities, and that these decisions are to be given effect through an initial piece of legislation the Water Services Entities Bill; . note that the Water Services Entities Bill is part of a broader, comprehensive suite of proposed legislation, including two additional bills: . a Water Services Entities Amendment Bill, which will fully implement the reforms; and . a Water Regulation Bill, to provide for a new economic regulation and consumer protection framework for the three waters system; Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . note that this paper is seeking policy decisions on the matters to be included in the Water Services Entities Amendment Bill or the Water Regulation Bill, which are needed to fully develop and implement the new system, and operationalise the water services entities by providing them with all the necessary powers, functions and responsibilities; . agree to the following policy objectives for pricing of water services: . economic efficiency : prices reflect the underlying costs of services and support the financial sustainability of water services entities in the long run; . affordability : water is an essential service and people on reticulated networks should be able to access water services regardless of their financial circumstances; . price stability : the rates of change in prices are not too high and price changes are clearly signalled in advance and smoothed over time; . costsharing: a key driver of the reforms is to address affordability issues, particularly for customers in smaller communities. Entities could use geographic average pricing to smooth costs across communities, thereby ensuring more affordable services for all; . horizontal equity : consumers in similar positions pay similar prices; . intergenerational equity : every generation (which can be thought of as being as small as the annual cohort of ratepayers) should be paying its fair share for assets and not requiring future generations to pay substantially more or less than their fair share through either over or under investment. Historically, funding and w ater infrastructure investment decisions have tended to favour current over future generations; . giving effect to Te Mana o te Wai and respecting Treaty of Waitangi principles: pricing can support Te Mana o te Wai by encouraging efficient usage of water. Pricing can also engage Article of the Treaty, and support equitable water service access and quality of service provision; . consistency with other government goals : pricing issues should support, or at least not undermine, government goals in other domains. For example, growth charges can have an impact on housing goals. Water services pricing can influence levels of water use which affects climate change goals including resilience and adaptation;
Climate Implications of Policy Assessment The Climate Implications of Policy Asse ssment (CIPA) team was consulted on the December poli cy decisions and confi rmed that the CIPA requirements do not apply to these proposals as the threshold for significance is not met. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of qlgofb
Climate Implications of Policy Assessment The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team was consulted on the December policy decisions and confirmed that the CIPA requirements do not apply to these proposals as the threshold for significance is not met.
Climate Implications of Policy Assessment . NA Population Implications . None Human Rights . None Consultation . The Ministry for the Environment; Ministry of Health; Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment; The Treasury; Ministry for Primary Industries; National Emergency Management Agency; Ministry of Housing and Urban Development; Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet; Ministry of Transport; Te Puni Kkiri; Te Arawhiti; New Zealand Transport Agency; Public Services Commission; Inland Revenue Department; the Department of Conservation, Ministry of Educa tion, New Zealand Defence Force, and Department of Corrections were consulted on an earlier version of this paper. Communications . If agreed, a portion of the funding discussed in this paper would be used to support communications and engagement. The approach to announcing further policy decisions relating to the Governments response to the recommendations of the Working Group on Representation, Governance and Accountability will be addressed in a subsequent paper. Proactive release . I intend to release this paper, subject to any redactions, to coincide with further announcements on the three waters reforms. I note that this may occur outside of the usual timeframes in Cabinet Office circular CO () . Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of
Climate Implications of Policy Assessment The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team has been consulted and confirms that the CIPA requi rements do not apply to this proposal as the threshold for significance is not met.
Climate Response Ministerial Group meeting on November
Climate change is exacerbating the frequency and complexity of severe weather events across Aotearoa New Zealand. Recognising the impact on peoples lives and livelihoods, it is important to ensure that our emergency management system is fit for purpose and ready to respond to future emergency events.
Clinic summary Dec PDF
Clinic summary Dec WORD
Clinic summary Nov PDF
Clinic summary Nov WORD
Clinic summary Jan PDF
Clinic summary Jan WORD
Clinic summary Dec PDF
Clinic summary Dec WORD
Clinic summary Nov PDF
Clinic summary Nov WORD
Clinic summary Jan PDF
Clinic summary Jan WORD
Clinic summary Nov PDF
Clinic summary Nov WORD
Clinic summary Nov PDF
Clinic summary Nov WORD
Clinic summary Dec PDF
Clinic summary Dec WORD
Clinic summary Dec PDF
Clinic summary Dec WORD
Close contacts data must get to the contact tracers in a timely fashion and be used .
Close contacts will be It takes days to identify contacts and isolate. Average . days. We expect to reduce this to hour for of contacts, hours for of contacts and hours for the remaining based on adoption Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Close contacts will be notified by SMS instantly and asked to selfisolate. It takes days to identify contacts and isolate. Average . days. We expect to reduce this to hour for of contacts, hours for of contacts and hours for the remaining based on adoption
Closing Gender, Mori, Pacific, and Ethnic Pay Gaps Action Plan :
Cloud Capabilities Network (CCN)
Cloud Capabilities Network community of practice.
Cloud First Policy, Te Khui Raraungas definitions and perspectives, such as on
Cloud Security Guidance: Cloud Risk Discovery Tool
Cloud also supports responding to volumebased cyberattacks at
Cloud can be more secure
Cloud enabled a seamless transition without the need for expensive
Clutha model WICS report
Clutha slide pack WICS report
Cnr Molesworth Street Aitken Street, Wellington
Code of Practice for Organisations
Code of Practice for organisations
Cohesion document reference FZVSSSNRNZNU
Cohesion document reference CEBCAfFDEAFFl
Cohesion document references WDURAJSR
Cohesion reference SSWDQEKHX Suggested
Collaborating with a New Zealandbased international vendor, , items will be digitised, making them easier for New Zealanders to access.
Collaborative digitisation venture funded by National Library and other organisations. Contains digitised reports from selected volumes of the Appendix to the Journals of the House of Representatives.
Collection by third parties
Collection in these circumstances is subject to enhanced levels of oversight and increased internal controls to ensure it is conducted appropriately.
Collection of personal information by an agency must be lawful and necessary to the function of the agency NZSIS has access to DIA Information for the purpose of undertaking its statutory functions. NZSIS access to DIA Information is lawfully authorised under the Schedule of the Intelligence and Security Act (ISA) .
Collections processes and policies. Processes and policies can be changed over
Collective memory is enhanced by New Zealands documentary heritage
Combatting digital child exploitation
Combatting online child exploitation this Child Safeguarding Week
Commencement briefing Film and Literature Board of Review
Commencement briefing for the Lottery distribution committee appointments round
Commencement briefing for the appointments round for the New Zealand Lottery Grants Board Te Puna Tahua, April
Commencement briefing for the Film and Literature Board of Review appointment rounds
Commencement briefing: Appointment of a Director to the TAB New Zealand Board
Commencement briefing: Gambling Commission appointments
Commencement briefing: Guardians Kaitiaki of the Alexander Turnbull Library appointment
Commencement briefing: Library and Information Advisory Commission Ng
Commencement briefing: appointment of the Deputy Chief Censor
Commencement agree that the Bills default commencement will be March ;
Commencement of legislation
Comment on petitions request and Ministerial response
Commerce Department definitions.
Commercial In Co nfidence Table : Citizen jury Devon (England) Background Description Costs involved Relevance for NZ context Feasibility for different individuals and community types Risks Benefits Design choices The CJ was sponsored by the Water Quality Division of the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra), the government department with responsibility for fostering sustainable rural development in England and Wales. Objective : policy on effective livestock management around water ways Necessary preconditions : rules of procedure provided; background information on the issue at hand provided to jurors and witnesses. Process : jurors were recruited and witnesses to the jury process. Jury was chaired by member of CJ project team as had most experience in chairing policy development and partnership working process in the environmental context The rules of procedure were discussed among jurors, and witnesses provided statements on this. Event held two weeks before the main jury proceedings. Main jury proceedings were held across three days in two locations; a civic space i n the city and a scientific research institute in the countryside with a working livestock farm. Jurors had a walking tour of the farm and the microbiology lab to gain extra context around the issue. Jury verdict was built around the sequential explora tion of issues of acceptability, culpability, necessity and responsibility to deliver clear outcomes and recommendations. The jury proceedings were formal with witness processes treated similarly to a legal jury. After each exploratory theme ( o f them) jurors developed partial verdictsresponses in closed discussions The total cost to run the jury process was , pounds (in pounds). Very formal process, unclear how this would transfer to NZ without further exploration into the mechanisms used (detail not available in literature) Not clear beyond general community involvement. Easy for participants to start to go beyond the questions asked of them due to personal thoughts and topical social affairs. Scope of issue jury is debating must be well defined to mitigate this The need for advertising the jury, its proceedings, decisions and its support by local government poses the risk of influencing the jurys decision (must be balanced) Good way to bring together and frame differing perspec tives from science, policy and practice into one agreed lens Nature of jury itself enables different community members to come together on single issue academic, scientists, policy makers, interest groups, general. Greater understanding gained by each party of each other (including between other witnesses) A way of building confidence in the public image of policy makers Structured process helped people to see final jury decisions as credible In this instance the jury verdict ultimately consider ed as a formal submission to this consultation CJ cuts across disparate domains of responsibility and expertise for the governance of environmental risks. It challenges decision makers to think more broadly about the political, moral and economic framin gs of otherwise narrowly conceived science policy problems CJs used to bring together both scientific and non scientific forms of expertise Jury is balanced in terms of age, gender, ethnicity and area of residence (urban and rural) and also expertise o r experience surrounding the issues (none to plenty of knowledge) Acceptance and recognition that all jury members will bring their own opinion to the issue Advertise in local media to ask for jury participants. Especially in the local newspaper as thi s is very effective. Advertise in strategic locations for participants where missing demographics e.g universities for young people
Commercial In Co nfidence Table : Participatory Budgeting Example Fresno , California (USA) Background Description Costs involved Relevance for NZ context Feasibility for different individuals and community types Risks Benefits Design choices Fresno is a town of demographic divides, made worse by past planning infrastructure and zoning decisions. It employed PB to allocate funds for climate and environmental projects. Fresno has a population of about half a million. Participatory budgeting was introduced into the climate action by the local government after a series of initial meetings and sustained pressure by com munity leaders. Objective : joint allocation of m for climate and environmental projects. Necessary preconditions : steering group of people appointed by councillors; Staff support provided by a foundation (CVCF) partner who had good state and local contacts, dedication to stay involved and staff capacity to support Process and structures : Project eligibility funding guidelines developed through continual feedback from community steering committee (CSC) meetings open meetings attended by hundred s. Specifics decided on from outset were voting eligibility, process and lines of authority. City and CVCF staff assess project submissions and cut ineligible ones. Eligible projects presented to community members and community steering committee (CSC). rd binding vote by community to accept a proposal. th CSC meeting given more in depth info on eligible projects and asked to rank. CVCF and city staff ranked and created four proposed packages then presented at further CSC meeting. Minority communi ty also developed a th package on their own accord so another CSC meeting held to present this. th package got overwhelming support. Innovative engagement methods : town hall meetings at minority run churches with Q A sessions Preengagement : public bu lletin announcements and mailed announcements to neighbourhood residents as well as town hall type church meetings early in the process (right after the decision on the involvement of the public in climate action was taken). Generally higher costs than traditional public involvement k (USD) provided by city for professional facilitator, venue costs, marketing, printing costs, translation services for the year process (but was said that operating funding was insufficient) The culture of philanthropy in the US mean that there is more resource available for such projects compared to what is likely in NZ Relies on broad based, member led organisations that have the capacity and capability to engage large numbers of long excluded citizens The steeri ng group appointments by councillors is less likely to be acceptable in NZ could be seen as jobs for friends. Engagement with ethnic minorities through meetings in minority run churches (QA sessions) Ethnic minorities developing a separate eligibilit y package (which ultimately won the funding). Key set of design principles must be used otherwise fail at implementation Marginalised populations not always involved Risk of PB becoming participatory grant writing rather than fullfledged PB when specific funding requirements have to be met Token attempt at true community participation if trust not built distrust that packages not created with communitys direct involvement Reliance on existing community organisations to be a stable base means often same people engaging PB as those in traditional democratic participation practices Increased trust in government Creative solutions often more effective than elites ideas Clear up front commitment from public entity for specific or of funds Binding public vote Delegate unconditional decision making authority to community Community members engaged early on to define and shape process often rules written through steering committees Clear and easy rules and way of community engagement Leverage resources to target and engage typically marginalised populations Continual encouragement of participation Reduce barriers to participation childcare and food at meetings, transport stipends Small detai ls are important e.g meeting room is comfortable, no one dominating voice in the room Identify priorities first then projects Longer timeline for high quality process Dedicated operating funds for PB process itself Institutionalisation of PB with paid staff needed for broader implementation Flexibility of budget: what to spend on and quantity (in US range from k in Long Beach to m in NYC). Larger budgets improve participation ratesinterest and have greater ability to address redistrib utive goals Areas with traditionally stronger base of civil engagement and organisations more likely to have successful long term PB institutional change Needs to be a wider part of community engagement practices so not just token nor onetime fun ding allocation
Commercial In Co nfidence Table : Participatory budgeting Paris (FR) Background Description Costs involved Relevance for NZ context Feasibility for different individuals and community types Risks Benefits Design choices In Paris, participatory budgeting was introduced in by then newly elected mayor Anne Hidalgo against the backdrop of declining voters participation. Politically, Paris has been known for giving little space for citizens participation in government. The Paris PB is the largest in scale and scope in the world . The number of people voting is increasing every year at a significant r ate. In , , people voted, , in , and close to , in , which represents about of the Parisian population. The funds involved are considerable as well. I n , . million euros were allocated to projects . In , . milli on euros went to city wide projects and boroughs projects. In , . million euros went to city wide projects and boroughs projects. A total of million has been earmarked for PB for . Objectives : to rebuild public trust by in creasing the role citizens have in governance and political decision making . Necessary preconditions : clear rules of engagement and criteria for eligible projects; Structures : City Evaluation Committee (Mayor, elected officials, technical experts and randomly selected group of citizens ); borough level committees to evaluate borough level projects (similar composition). Process : There is an annual cycle repeated every year: January February: proposals are submitted by individual Parisians or groups (no limi tation on age or nationality). This is supported by a variety of meetings, and resources are provided to help develop projects. March April: initial evaluation of feasibility and cost and co construction and collective discussion between citizens, NGOs and neighbourhood councils with a view to improve them AprilMay: finalised project submissions and their technical evaluation by Citys experts June August: projects are assessed and approved by city and borough level ad hoc Evaluation Committees August September: selected projects are announced, and citizens are encouraged to organize public campaigns to draw voters September: two weeks for online and in person voting by Parisians (no limitations on age or nationality) December: Winning projects are announ ced and added to the budget for the next financial year to be passed by the City Council of Paris Project implementation begins immediately in the new FY. The website has a track progress feature for citizens to monitor this. Funding allocation informat ion only, no information found on cost to administrate. Regular repetitive programme could be replicated, however likely to involve high costs to communicate, advertise and administer. It would be worth investigating to get a better understanding of the system for voting on projects and any security measures taken to restrict voting from outside the area or multiple votes by one person. Scale is much larger than would be able to be supported by NZ LG, especially in education Participa tion is open to any resident of Paris, there are no limitations on age or nationality. This encourages participation of youth and migrants. Targeting youth and children by reserving a certain amount of budget ( million euros) for children to vote on proj ects for youth children and education. This may encourage family participation in general. Targeting underrepresented and marginalised populations by reserving a certain budget ( million euros) for projects in deprived areas. Engagement and participat ion of marginalised populations is low because many projects are seen as lifestyle ideas and are not treating actual social problems Projects do not tackle more complex social issues because only the investment budget is available for PB (i.e. no long term large costs can be incurred for the city). Only a small number of ideas are in areas of solidarity, security or cleanliness. Information overload of citizens due to the large number of ideas and amount of information they need to make an informed decision. This may discourage participation. Work overload of the team and systems running the PB due to the need of processing and managing of a large number of ideas Encouragement of horizontal cooperation between institutions and people Promotion of constructive dialogue between citizens and government and among citizens Bringing new perspectives and fresh ideas to city management and development Better prioritisation of budgetary allocations by the government following the citizens needs Government opening up to citizens and introducing more flexibility in its processes Citizens being educated about public budget processes Citizens more empowered both through their better knowledge of the government, public finance and project manage ment and through gaining agency over the development of their communities Tangible results of civic engagement in every neighbourhood Political buy in and commitment from the senior officials and politicians allows to leverage the necessary resources to deliver and grow the programme and raises its profile among the population and overall. Support from the civil society helps the promotion of the initiative and increases awareness and participation. Comprehensive promotional campaign through multip le channels (online and offline) improves awareness and engagement and ensure high participation. Transparency of the process ensure credibility and legitimacy of the process. Ongoing engagement with the citizens, especially after the voting, ensures t hat citizens see and understand the tangible results of the PB they were involved in. This motivates them for participation in the next round, confirms credibility of the process and inspires more participation. While the use of new technologies is impor tant, offline activities are indispensable to galvanise participation. Respect for deadlines and quick realisation of winning projects are critical to maintain legitimacy and accountability. Continuity (i.e. repetition of PB every year) has impacted awareness and familiarisation and ensured PBs becoming a popular practice.
Commercial In Co nfidence Table : Participatory budgeti ng City of Toronto (CA) Background Description Costs involved Relevance for NZ context Feasibility for different individuals and community types Risks Benefits Design choices In instituted a PB pilot in ward (Don Valley East). Section funds were allocated. In extended pilot for another years, added Neighbourhood improvement areas Oakridge, ward and Rustic, ward . Funding source changes from Sect fun ds to city reserve funds to ensure greater predictability in process. , , per year was given to each ward to deliberate on and put towards projects. For every allocated through PB processes, residents may bring in an additional in matching funds for their community . Between and , , residents interacted with the PB processes in the City of Toronto, ideas were submitted, and capital projects were voted for worth . million collectively. Objective : Residents to prop ose and vote on capital improvement projects to improve their neighbourhood. Necessary preconditions : Process centralised in the City Managers Office, used staff resources to pilot PB . Structures: Councillors and city staff convene community meetings and oversee the process. They work with community delegates who volunteer and are selected by their community to represent them in the process. Process : Public info sessions, communications and outrea ch, community meetings held to select community delegate and brainstorm ideas. Community delegates work with council staff to develop project proposals. Ideas are shortlisted for a ballot, public votes on proposals and wining projects are implemented by co uncil. Process run each year, typically months from initial engagement to voting. Innovative engagement methods : Site meetings were held for potential projects to brainstorm and help draft proposals. Preengagement : Community outreach and engagement meetings were held to inform people of the PB process. , was spent per annum on operating costs including a temporary staff position in the City Managers Office to implement the PB pilot (in ). It is estimated that . million per year wo uld need to be allocated for operating costs if the pilot was to run across all wards in the City of Toronto. With a capital cost of . million for capital improvements per ward). This example looks reasonably transferable to the NZ context, noting the long time ( months) for engagement would mean additional cost and length of time to see progress. The greater communication campaign via various media attracted a lot of participants, including from underrepresented population of you th and newcomers. More suitable for small geographic areas: in large areas residents may feel too distanced and not connected to the result process . Idea project pitching and voting for projects are competitive, which may lead to reinforcing the existing demographic divisions and inequalities
Commercial In Co nfidence Table : Joint planning Development of Imagine Austin (USA), a year long term plan Background Description Costs involved Relevance for NZ context Feasibility for different individuals an d community types Risks Benefits Design choices City of Austin worked with citizens to develop a long term plan. , resident s were involved in the creation of the plan. Objectives : To develop a years city development plan; to involve members of the public who are not usually involved in such planning decisions . Necessary preconditions : wide stakeholder involvement (Councillors, businesses, general community members, city planning department ) with city planning department providing main technical support. Structures : Task force of stakeholders from key constituencies and sectors in city to guide the plan and to develop the strategies of how to engage. Citizens Advisory T ask Force was appointed to help guide future engagement efforts. Process : Started with a workshop in community attended by people who helped establish broad public participation plan. Four sets of community forms held. Attended by between , , people per forum. Forum: ) To establish year vision )To narrow options on how and where city would grow, using different maps of Austin developed by city planning department in response to visions brainstormed in forum . ) Planning dept to furt her narrow options in to growth scenarios that reflect community values and preferences in forum . Four scenarios deliberated on in forum, survey to supplement. Final scenario developed into draft plan by planning department. Working groups formed for each element of the plan (mix of citizens and experts) to develop action plans to put in draft comprehensive plan. ) Draft plan complete and deliberated on. Release party then held, asking for online public input across priority areas in the plan. Comm ents received were further deliberated on by the task force. Final plan approved by taskforce. Innovative engagement methods : Use of various social media (facebook, twitter, emails, youtube, city and council websites). min overview video and second a d aired regularly on citys public access channel on Youtube. Online forum for input by citizens. Bi lingual meetings were held. Developed meeting ina box options online or hardcopy, for people to hold their own meetings on the plan . Informational meeti ngs on PB were held in to locations around the city . Preengagement : The city of Austin has an underlying culture of strong community engagement having previously undertaken successful engagement activities on a range of other issues. This aided the engagement process. .m spent over years ( ) This is an ongoing process for Austin. It may be that NZ would be better to start smaller and work up to LTP development. Or start with a section or sections of the Long Term Plan. Inclusion of ethn ic minorities by holding by lingual meetings. Inclusion of youth by working with the school system. Inclusion of families and youth by designing special events only for them. Lengthy engagement timeframe difficult to sustain constant engagement with certain groups e.g Hispanic in this specific example Plan itself might not actually end up addressing long term civic infrastructure needs (Imagine Austin plan is far reaching bu t failed to cover this). Challenged citizens understandings about land use, population growth and the state of their community Despite difficult trade offs people left process engaged and invigorated High participation rate Using the planning depar tment writing the report reduces the burden on participants and need for technical skills from citizens or external consultants Balanced in timeframe (not too long nor too short). Use various engagement methods for participation Ensure lots of prom otion by council Using the planning department to write the report reduces the burden on participants and need for technical skills from citizens or external consultants but it must be balanced with giving enough power to the community for making the ac tual decisions Take power away from groups that typically dominate the conversation and engage with local government regularly Each phase of engagement participation to have educational and engagement element
Commercial In Co nfidence Table : Citizen jury Italy Background Description Costs involved Relevance for NZ context Feasibility for different individuals and community types Risks Benefits Design choices CJ and were conducted in in Turin. CJ based in Castelfranco, a small town in Tuscany. The town is situated in the important industrial district specialised in leather treatment and processing, where more than factories are located. Waste management is a crucial and divisive issue. CJ Objective : examined devolution and how to implement at the local level including its consequences. Specific focus on impacts on health and education systems. Process : a jury of people ( male and female split) met for two days in December and March . Over the two days had plenary meetings (mins each) and small assisted group discussions (mins). Experts gave technical, legal, political and social advi ce and perspectives on devolution. Jurors gave recommendations at end of day process. CJ Objective : examined devolution and how to implement at the local level including its consequences. Process: the same as above, the jury (made up of males, f emales) was not able to come to conclusive position on the matter. CJ Objective : planned construction of a biomass gasification plant. Process : the jury made up of people ( males and females) met for days over February and April . Also had plenary meetings ( mins) and group discussions ( mins) with experts. At the end of the days of deliberation they provided recommendations. Innovative engagement method : Participants were randomly selected using LAPS University of Sienas Random Digit Dialling (RDD) system from the resident population of the citytown where the jury was to be held. RDD system ensured a non proportional stratified sample of participants by sex, age, education and area of residence. For CJ, the commune estimated the cost of , euro (human resources and materials, e.g. equipment, premises). NZ Councils do not have responsibility for health and education. Adaptation to other areas possible would need to develop a compelling case for jury involvement. Significant pre work to enable good decisions in short time frames ( day sessions) CJ were run in both a large city (Turin) and a relatively small mountainous commune (Castelfranco) of . Self selective participation of community can affect the degree of accessibility for inclusion in the participatory process Structured setting of CJ well served the purpose of accomplishment but not the purpose of learning Heavy reliance on information experts provided to make decisions, not so much innovati ve thought, knowledge nor arguments between jurors to share and come to decisions Facilitators and experts may get more speaking time than actual jury members Tendency for certain jury members to dominate the conversation, may lead to group thinkpres sures to adopt originally dominating viewpoint Communication and collaboration between stakeholders may not always be constructive If already well established community opinion on issue CJs may be used by political powers to simply re affirm their p osition, as jury members are likely to be influenced by external community context. CJs become a political tool not true participatory democracy mechanism. CJ was financed by the proponent of the pyro gasification plant which was a risk factor that it could manipulate the jury. (the risk did not materialise.) The implementation of CJs leads to greater direct involvement of citizens to inform policy planning in a variety of sectors, e.g., environment, public health, social services, and urban renewal. Despite differing degrees of participation and influence in conversations CJs were still perceived by participants as a democratic and open process where they could freely express their opinions Overall deliberation atmosphere of CJs is cooperative Facts given by experts on situations have tendency to change participants perceptions on issues meaning better informed decisions by community Build trust with community as jurors feel they are directly asked for their participation, opinions and de cision on topical issues Participants find overall experience interesting and a good learning experience Design of the participatory setting important (task, time, roles, rules, facilitating style) to avoid unintended consequence Participants must have equal opportunity to speak and mutual obligations of respect for other participants Process must be democratic. Quality of process effects quality of deliberation (but is not the only factor) Random selection of participants to be balanced with the need for differing initial opinions on the jury i.e participants may need to be targeted Decisions made by jury must be legitimized by council Due to reliance on experts information, experts and others heard by jury must be balanced and represent di verse stakeholders and perspectives vetting is important must be balance between need for efficient deliberations (structured settingprocess) and the opportunity for collective learning and creative thought (unstructured settingprocess) Evaluation of CJ and its processes are key for learning
Commercial In Confidence CASE STUDIES Introduction In consultation with the Department of Internal Affairs we first undertook one case study on a citizen jury example ( the Victorias Citizens Jury on Obesity) and one on participatory budgeting (Participatory budgeting in Reykjavik ). Following a discussion w ith the working group we added a study on engagement with a strong need to involve Mori or Pacific people ( Out of the Shadows Bringing Waips Heritage to Life ) and a further one evidencing models for investing in the underlying relationships between lo cal government and communities with examples of soft infrastructure (Neighbourhood Empowerment Network in San Francisco ). Victorias Citizens Jury on Obesity Background The Victorias Citizens Jury on Obesity was initiated by Victorian Health Promotion F oundation (VicHealth) a statutory authority in the Australian state of Victoria with a mandate to promote good health of all Victorians. VicHealth identified obesity as a significant health challenge impacting the Victorians (and Australians more general ly) and decided to design an innovative collaborative response to achieve a high impact and wide support. The organisation newDemocracy Foundation, which is a leading Australian research institute specializing in democratic innovation, developed and imple mented the process of citizens jury. One of the design objectives was to give a random sample of everyday citizens a journey of discovery about their food choices. The citizens jury was focused only on food and the way we eat. The specific question w as formulated for the jury: We have a problem with obesity. How can we make it easier to eat better The complete process took place from August till October and resulted in asks (recommendations) for government, industry and the communit y to work together to tackle the obesity crisis. Specific objectives of the citizens jury For this jury, two objectives were central: Build trust through public accountability and accessibility, and Build consensus and provide recommendations how poor ea ting behaviours could be addressed. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence CONTENTS Introduction New Zealand Context Key Features and Success Factors Features and rationale Attributes of effective formal participation models Success factors Engagement and communication Case Studies Introduction Victorias Citizens Jury on Obesity Participatory budgeting in Reykjavik Out of the Shadows Bringing Waip s Heritage to Life Neighbourhood Empowerment Network in San Francisco Online case studies Overview of Popular Participatory Practices Literature Review
Commercial In Confidence Centre, Support Partners and Block Support Partners). They identify individual and collective investments necessary for disaster resilience. After their formation, these smaller networks are encouraged and supported by NEN to meet regularl y to discuss their operations. The Neighborfest is essentially a block parties programme that adds resilience preparation aspects to a pleasant social event. This is also a pre engagement activity that allows all stakeholders (including local government) t o learn residents and neighbourhoods. NEN created a detailed toolkit for holding block parties (empowersf.orgneighborfest), especially helpful for guidance on putting together a large event. NEN also partially funds Neighborfests. The Vulnerable Populati ons Resilience Program support the development and implementation of strategies, trainings and resources for vulnerable populations (elderly, disabled etc). NEN works with HUBs to develop higher interoperability among stakeholders, improve capacity (e.g. t rain staff) and procure essential resources. NEN efforts also support individual residents by providing streamlining relevant information and funding one time investments in the necessary equipment. Through the Neighbourhood Support Centre resource, NEN s upports organisations of private and public sector to implement their resilience goals. The programme Stronger Congregation is designed to support resilience of faith based organisations. The newest addition to the NEN programmes is the Strong Home Program , which is currently being developed with the help of the community engagement and participation method charrette. Costs NEN is fully funded by the City Council. The NEN permanent staff consists of people. Risks The success of the model depends on the existence of neighbourhood organisations . In the case of San Francisco, the neighbourhood resilience organisations were established by local communities encouraged and supported by NEN. The initial cost of the establishment of the programme and its element s may be relatively high as well as ongoing operational costs, although the wide network of stakeholders may be shouldering a lot of financial burden. The financing needs to be secured on the permanent basis because otherwise this resilience model is les s sustainable and effective. Benefits The whole community approach is inclusive and significantly strengthens the relationships between the local government and the community and within the community (e.g. residents, NGOs, businesses, police etc), incre ases mutual trust and enhances the understanding within the community. Residents are better educated and acquire skills necessary in stress situations. Community as a whole is strengthened due to better connections and knowledge of community residents, res ources and networks. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence Design choices The important design choices that made this engagement a success are: Explanation: A lot of effort was spent at the early engagement stage to explain people why a certain plan was made , or a certain policy measure was proposed. The Discovery Bus Tours primarily aimed to show the rich local history and the immense interest of the public i n this history, which could be used to attract more visitors and boost local economy. At the same time, the proposed measures were directed at preservation and study of local history. The use of engaging language (plain English) and accessible visual produ cts is important to bring the point across. Clear vision of what the Council wants to achieve helped to frame the discussion and engage with the Councils proposals. Focus on the people: The engagement campaign put people in the centre. Council staff went where people were, both to physical locations and online locations. For instance, the Council realised early on that Facebook is the main channel of communication with the residents and provided most content and communication over its Facebook account and not via other social media. In terms of physical locations, instead of inviting people to the Councils premises, the Councils staff went on a road tour and met people at schools, shops and other places. This approach significantly increased the outreach and draw in some residents who are usually less involved in Councils matters (e.g. youth). Iwi involvement was (and continues to be) critical for the project, adding the valuable perspective and credibility to the process. Equal partnership: treating the community as equal partners in the process increases the credibility of the process and enhances engagement. Feedback: reporting back to the community is a part of the engagement process. People need to know what happened to their submissions, what decis ions were taken and why. This may increase their willingness to participate in the future local government activities and increases trust. Ongoing process: public engagement is an ongoing process that did not end with the adoption of the Year Plan. The Future Waip website is being used to inform about the decisions taken and the actions of the Council. The Councils website continuously informs about the progress in the implementation of the Plan. Sources Interview with Natalie Palmer. Waip District Co uncils application for LGNZ Awards (confidential). Waip District Council website: https:www.waipadc.govt.nzyour waipamajorprojectswaipa discovery centre Waip District Council Extra ordinary meeting of May , report available at: https:docplayer.net Council chambers waipa districtcouncil bank street te awamutu.html Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence Design choices The important design choices that made this engagement a success are: political and financial commitment of the local government to the cause and the approach; whole community approach that is inclusive and allows to draw on strengths of all community members; partnership with education, research, business and non profit organisations allows to use the necessary expertise; constant dialogue with the community and support of the constant dialogue within the community; involvement of a large number of stakeholders and giving ownership to the community probably keeps the costs relatively low. Sources NEN website: https:www.empowersf.orgecp communities NEN, Empowered Communities Program, Toolkit : https:www.emp owersf.orgwp contentuploadsECP Introduction.pdf Jennifer Shea (). Sustainable engagement Reflections on the development of a creative community university partnership. Gateways: International Journal of Community Research and Engagement, Vo l : . Online case studies As well as the case studies we have examined here there are several interesting examples on the Participedia site. The following are links to some that might be of interest, noting that the site, like Wikipedia, is a fluid information source that can be edited by anyone. Deliberative Participatory Budgeting in Puxing Subdistrict, Shanghai https:participedia.netcase Operation Modulus: Castlefern and Govan https:participedia.netcase Collaborative Development of Glasgows Participatory Budgeting Evaluation Toolkit https:participedia.netcase G Citizens Summit in Amersfoort, Netherlands https:participedia.netcase Large Scale Participatory Budgeting in Chengdu (China) https:participed ia.netcase Edmonton Citizens Jury on Internet Voting https:participedia.netcase Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence ENGAGEMENT AND COMMUNICATION While our research is focussed on participatory practices, it is worth acknowledging the innovative ways local governments are communicating and engaging with their communities . This is particularly important as participatory processes are more effective in contexts where there is strong engagement between councils and communities. In the process of our research and from our own experience, we have several examples that are innovative in terms of approach: How New York Participatory Budgeting used d igital technology and in person interactive experience s involving around , participants , social media presence and online surveys . After election day the community was able to sh are their priorities with the incoming Mayor. Recently , an interactive online map was developed giving information on all projects that are being implemented in N ew York as a result of Participatory Budgeting http:ideas.pbnyc.orgpageabout (see Table : Participatory budgeting New York ) Voting online, using GIS mapping tools to show how potential projects might affect the ward, budget simulators, offer online team management tools, create network for online neighbourhoods, create portal for participants to gather and analyse data on the process. (see e democracy.org). Austin participatory budget project used various social media ( Facebook, Twitter, emails, YouTube, city and council websites) , minute overview video s and second ad vertisements aired regularly on citys public access channel on You Tube. They produced an o nline forum for input by citizens and he ld bilingual meetings. They also developed a meeting inabox tool online and in hardcopy to assist people to hold their own meetings on the plan. Informational meetings on Participatory Budgeting were held in to locations around the city (see Table : Joint planning Development of Imagine Austin (USA) , a year long term plan ) Neighbourhood develop plans in the UK typically use a neighbourhood plan website including contact details with the overseeing committee so people can provide their feedback. Other engagement techniques used are workshops, shop unitsstreet stalls, questionnaires, model making, school or college projects and digital or social media. (see Table : Joint planning production of Neighbourhood Development Plans in neighbourhoods England ) Where Innovation in engagement isnt always about new or di fferent technologies . Sometimes it can be about finding different places to talk to people or ways of showing people context: Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence Future Waip website: http:futurewaipa.co.nz LGNZ (). Waipa District Council Heritage project a winner in LGNZ EXCELLENCE Awards . Available at: https:www.lgnz.co.nznews andmedia media releaseswaipa district council heritage project awinner inlgnzexcellen ceawards Waipa District Council (). Annual report summary : https:www.waipadc.govt.nzrepositorylibrariesid:zgzoscxbykhfohierarchyour councildocumentsandpublicationsannual reportdocumentsWaipaDCAnnualReportSummaryWEB.pdf Presentation by Natalie P almer at the Far North District Council meeting of October . Available at: https:infocouncil.fndc.govt.nzOpen COAGNATfilesCOAG NATAttachment.PDF Claire Robson (). Bus trip through history. Cambridge news. Available at: https:www.c ambridgenews.nzbus tripthrough history Neighbourhood Empowerment Network in San Francisco Background The Neighbourhood Empowerment Network (NEN) was launched by the Mayor of San Francisco, Ed Lee, in response to the difficulties experienced by communities in New Orleans through hurricane Katrina. The analysis of the response to (and preventive measures in anticipation of) hurricane Katrina by Harvard Kennedy School of Government showed the complete breakdown of the working relationships between the residents and the government. The analysis issued several recommendations focused on increasing capacities of local residents. These recommendations were implemented by San Francisco in the form of NEN. NEN has been operating since supporting a mi x of community needs (development strategies, public health and safety and emergency management). It employs community development approach and leverages such techniques as place based planning, human c entred design, asset based organising and servant lead ership to engage communities and ensure the transfer of ownership back to the n eighbourhoods of their resilience. NEN has created a range of tools, programs, and technical resources that can be considered soft infrastructure that is necessary to support grassroots resilience building efforts that are applicable in the City of San Francisco and beyond. Specific objectives NEN aims to empower communities (neighbourhoods) to craft and implement culturally competent strategies that strengthen their capacity to negotiate times of stress and to protect the health and well Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence INTRODUCTION MartinJenkins has been contracted by the Department of Internal Affairs to provide research and analysis of participatory practices in local government, in the context of the recent amendment to the Local Government Act to restore the promotion of com munity wellbeing to the statutory purpose of local government. Local government across comparable jurisdictions has evolved over recent years. The top down systems that support an elected representative system are still strong . However , there is an increas ing shift to include more active, ongoing citizen participation in local decision making and budget setting. Many citizens are no longer content to simply vote every three or four years and leave local governance to elected members in between elections . The range and scope of participatory practices internationally is enormous, as can be seen in this participedia https:participedia.net . The advent of new technologies and expectations of anywhere, anytime data and communication have presented both opportunities and challenges for local government. While on one hand technology can enable better participation, in some cases it can also exclude people and increase the division between people who are able to pa rticipate easily and those are not. Good participatory practices are designed to enable engagement from divers e groups of people to ensure that they are properly representative of local demographics . Practices strongly centred around a new technology can be difficult for older citizens to participate in , and practices with significant time demands could exclude people with multiple jobs and high family demands . There is emerging understanding in some of the international examples we looked at, that unless t here is some form of remuneration attached to participation, it can exclude large sections of society that simply cannot afford to participat e at the expense of actual or potential loss of income. This report looks at some of the literature on participato ry practices , as well as describing our own knowledge and understanding of examples we have come across. Th is is necessarily selective, as it is beyond the scope of th is project to find and document every method and incident of citizen participation , and t he methods are still evolving. We have sought to find examples where there is credible analysis of the practice , and an indication of its efficiency and effectiveness. We have found that much of the available academi c literature is focused on the theories of participation rather than on practical examples, or is about consultation and engagement, not participation. As with many emerging practices , there is a tendency to adopt the title with a loose interpretation and we have sought to identify practices tha t are truly participatory .
Commercial In Confidence In late , the virtual reality (VR) footage was launch ed aiming to: () push the common heritage theme by providing a birds eye view on the historical sites in Waip and () provide a real life experience of what the results of the proposed heritage investment will be (e.g. redevelopment of Te Awamutu town centre). To demonstrate the VR footage, VR goggles were taken to schools, used at information events and a small number even provided to people to use at home. In September , community groups were invited to develop and put forward project applicatio ns as a part of the Year Plan budget. In March , the draft year Plan was released. Waip heritage was in the centre of the Plan (e.g. it started detailing Waip s history and its place in New Zealand history). In March April , the Council r an a broad advertising campaign on radio, in local newspapers (ads and articles) and online to support the release of the draft Plan and inform about it. This campaign also had a strong focus on heritage and history and was hugely successful. V ideos develo ped by the Council around the heritage project were viewed nearly , times; social media posts reached nearly , people over six weeks in . The media advertising campaign was supported by boots on the ground action. stakeholder meetings were held by the Mayor or Deputy Mayor, of them as a part of the so called road show (i.e. travelling to different locations in the district). The online engagement included the specially created Future Waip website (http:futurewaipa.co.nz ) and engagement via social media. The website hosted the consultation document of the Year Plan and offered an interactive area have your say, information videos and rates calculator. Visitors to the website could complete online submissions and track their numbers. They also could track how the public support for Councils issues was tracking. The Facebook was the main social media channel, and it was intensely used to share a mix of content (statistics, videos, photos, us eful links), educate on Councils issue and to encourage feedback in form of comments and questions. Other social media (Twitter, YouTube and Instagram) were mainly used to promote the issue to the direct people to the Future Waip website. As a result of the engagement campaign, submissions were received with submitters indicating that they wanted to be heard . The majority of submissions was received through the Future Waip website ( submissions), followed by hardcopy () and email (). Engaging the local iwi was the cornerstone of the process. An ongoing discussion and consultation were ensured from the early engagement stage (and is continuing now during the implementation stage). The iwi w as involved both through the Waip Iwi Consultative Committee at the District Council and thanks to the efforts of Waip s Iwi Relationships Advisor Shane Te Ruki. The Iwi Relationship Advisor was the main liaison and worked directly with key iwi leaders, including King Tuheitia. The Iwi Relationship Adviso r attended poukai on behalf of the Council, ensured that iwi were informed about the Councils strategy and plans, discussed heritage investment and brought the feedback from iwi back to the Council, including how to better tell the Mori story of the Land Wars. The involvement of mana whenua representative in the Discovery Tours improved credibility of the engagement with the community. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence Julie Simon, Theo Bass, Victo ria Boelman and Geoff Mulgan (). Digital Democracy: The tools transforming political engagement. Available at: https:media.nesta.org.ukdocumentsdigitaldemocracy.pdf . Participedia (). My Neighbourhood: Online Participatory Budgeting in Reykjavik, Iceland . Available at: https:participedia.netcase Out of the Shadows Bringing Waip s Heritage to Life Background The project Out of the Shadows was a part of the Waip District Councils campaign Whats the story in preparation of the draft Year Plan. The project was explicitly designed for the pre engagement stage of the community engagement, meaning it engag ed people in the preparatory stage of the Year Plan. The project began in April , while the submissions for the draft year Plan were closed in April . The project was developed to inspire a conversation with and among the community about Waip s rich history and to position common Waip s heritage as a guide for its common future. Waip District Council won the Local Government New Zealand Fulton Hogan Excellence Award in for its successful campaign to highlight the districts heritage, including its role in the New Zealand Land Wars. The project has been widely discussed by local councils all around New Zealand. Specific objectives The Out of the Shadows project had many specific objectives: to increase the knowledge of the districts h istory by districts residents; more generally the council also intended to raise national awareness of Waip s heritage and Waip s role in the New Zealand Land Wars ; to start a community discussion about the past before talking about the future; to creat e environment where all people are comfortable to discuss their heritage and what it meant to them knowing that all perspectives are valued; to create a platform for local iwi to share their stories and to ensure their voices are heard and considered; to contribute to local iwis economic development objectives; to obtain informed inputs from the community for the proposed increase in heritage investment (i.e. three major heritage proposals) for the Year Plan; to make the proposed heritage investment tra nsparent and real, including its impact. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence KEY FEATURES AND SUCCESS FACTORS This section sets out the common features and success factors in effective community p articipation practices. Community participation is through different forms of a deliberative mini public, defined by political scientist Robert Dahl as an assembly of citizens, demographically representative of the larger population, brought together to l earn and deliberate on a topic in order to inform public opinion and decision making. Features and rationale The exact mandate and model of a participatory practice can vary. Whilst all feature a body of citizens who come together to deliberate on a given issue , this can range from providing a set of recommendations or options , through to formulating a proposal to put to popular referendum , and ultimately to making a collective decision on an identified topic that the convening body has already agreed it will accept. Their common feature is that they go beyond community consultation to a practice whereby citizens directly contribut e to decision making. It is reported in overseas jurisdictions t hat mini publics significantly increase tr ust in the decision making of a council. In a local government context, t he rationale underpinning mini publics is that they enable councils to engage citizens meaningfully in decision making , and can be designed to represent the demographic or demographics whose voices a council wants to hear on the topic. Research has concluded that that a group of randomly selected citizens, when given the information, resources and time to deliberate on a given topic, can produce an informed public judgement . They can also signal real public opinion on a policy issue. Minipublics provide a broader model of governance, expanding from a representative democracy where deliberation and decision making rests with elected representa tives alone, to one where decision making is shared. Elected politicians may not necessarily reflect the communities they serve,
Commercial In Confidence LITERATURE REVIEW We undertook a review of academic literature on participatory practices. The matrix below sets out our findings . Much of the literature is on the theory of participatory practice, describing the behavioural aspects that it responds to , and why it should or should not work. We focused on literature that examined the practices themselves , analyse d real examples , and examine d evidence of what works in different contexts .
Commercial In Confidence NEW ZEALAND CONTEXT Local government in New Zealand differs from many other countries in several ways , and participatory processes need to be selected which are appropriate , or can be adapted to this context: it does not operate core social services such as housing and benefit administration (although there are exceptions where, for example, Wellington City Council operate city housing on behalf of central government) it does not have responsibility for core emer gency services such as fire, police and ambulance it does not have responsibility for education most of its funding is from property tax ( in many other countries it is funded by central government) the role of Mayor is consistent across New Zealand, is ele cted by popular vote and is a functional role (some countries vary from area to area, have a system of rotation for the Mayoral role or it is elected by the Councillors and the role is ceremonial only i.e., has no voting rights or involvement in administer ing by laws or regulations) Like other countries New Zealand is experiencing decline in local government voting participation, particularly from youth and diverse communities. This voter apathy, as it is often called, is thought to be caused by the impre ssion that there is little ability to affect outcomes. Participatory practices have emerged as a response to this, although we have been unable to find strong evidence that they have increased voter numbers yet. There is evidence that New Zealand local gov ernment has been experimenting with participatory practices, especially with planning and spending prioritisation. Examples of efforts to include citizens in participation can be seen in Auckland Council s codesign lab, Wellington City Council s trials using Loomio to develop its Alcohol Management strategy and Waip a District Council s approach to engagement for its Te r Wai initiative. The limitation on local government adopting more participatory practices, appears to be the associated costs and the a dditional time they involve, which needs to be resourced . Changes to the Local Government Act have focused on increasing consultation for long term plans but have not fully anticipated the trajectory of public participation. The legislation is now se en by some as a barrier to more fluid, consistent participatory practices due to the: focus on point intime engagement guidance toward consultation based on pre established council policies and positions requirement for document type consultation material expectations of councils to allow people to present to them (reinforcing the engagement settings that some councils have , expect ing people to come to them to present) We note that these were all appropriate at the time of legislation and that at the time, it did a good job of setting the expectation of much stronger engagement practice around long term plan development. The comments we make on this are simply to point out that there could be more flexible expectations Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence OVERVIEW OF POPULAR PARTICIPATORY PRACTICES Practice Description Relevance for NZ Risks Benefits Participatory budgeting This practice allows citizens to make decisions on how funding is used. This is mostly practiced in Europe with limited examples in New Zealand but can be applied to ring fenced funds in NZ. Takes longer and costs more. Harder for some communities to participate, especially groups that have less available time, poorer communication ability or lack tech skills. Improved levels of trust in local government, if done well. Better spend on th ings that matter to community. Improved connection between local government and community. Citizen juries Decisions made by a jury that is representative usually on a single , significant topicissue. May not be compatible with NZ top down structures as genuine juries have full delegated decision making (as in a court ). Would only be practical in larger cities. Takes longer and costs more. Harder for lower socio economic participants. Can produce poor decisions if training and familiarisatio n is insufficient. Difficult to get true representation without power to require it ( like court juries) Decisions are more likely to be acceptable or explainable across the full range of community groups. Improves connections between local government and all communities
Commercial In Confidence PREFACE This report has been prepared for Department of Internal Affairs by Philippa Bowron, Joanna Collinge, Olga Batura and Jessica Black from MartinJenkins (Martin, Jenkins Associates Limited). MartinJenkins advises clients in the public, private and notforprofit sectors. Our work in the public sector spans a wide range of central and local government agencies. We provide advice and support to clients in the following areas: public policy evaluation and research strategy and investment performance im provement and monitoring business improvement organisational improvement employment relations economic development financial and economic analysis. Our aim is to provide an integrated and comprehensive response to client needs connecting our skill sets a nd applying fresh thinking to lift performance. MartinJenkins is a privately owned New Zealand limited liability company. We have offices in Wellington and Auckland. The company was established in and is governed by a Board made up of executive direc tors Kevin Jenkins, Michael Mills, Nick Davis, Allana Coulon and Richard Tait, plus independent director Sophia Gunn .
Commercial In Confidence Postengagement actions In May , hearings o n the submissions were held. The submitters could present additional information, elaborate their submissions and answer questions of the Councillors. After the hearings, the Council held deliberations on the submissions. At deliberations, all submissions were considered taking into account such factors as the number of submiss ions per issue, the opinions expressed, knowledge of the district etc. After that, a workshop was held to review the financial implications resulting from deliberations. The submitters received feedback on what happened to their submission. A summary report on decision s taken during the deliberations was released and distributed through the media, the Future Waip website and Council website and offices. In addition, a letter or email was sent to those submitters who provided input that was not included in the summary report. This individual feedback included the record of decision made on the submission. Risks Local heritage is a risky topic for engagement. On the one hand, it may be of little interest f or the residents and require a lot of promotion and education. On the other hand, it is a very sensitive and even controversial topic. For example, the Council was accused by different sides of telling their version of truth. In , the Councils pro posal for a museum and theatre complex failed and was strongly criticised. A lot of patience, understanding and cultural competence are key mitigation measures. Advice from local iwi and history experts was sought were appropriate. Investment in local heri tage is not considered the core Council business by some residents who strongly and very vocally opposed the campaign. The complex project with many fast moving elements is at risk of getting messy and fail. The mitigation measure was to have very clear distribution of tasks and responsibilities and a robust time plan The cost may run high both due to the amount of materials produced and events conducted and due to the bilingualism (i.e. learning the correct pronunciation of all Mori words, creating bili ngual materials and checking them all takes time and money). Benefits The following benefits have been identified: Local residents and Council staff developed better knowledge and understanding of the local history, pertinent to New Zealands history, especially through uncovering different (Mori and Pkeh) perspectives. The engagement linked the local history to the future planning. The broad engagement of the community and receiving inputs from the community ensure a higher buy in support for the Councils investment plans. It was reported that the Councils proposal to invest in Waip heritage sites was supported by per cent of submitters. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence Practice Description Relevance for NZ Risks Benefits Citizen Panel or Forum This is similar to a citizen jury but less formal. It brings together diverse representatives in a deliberate manner to gain a wide range of perspectives on a variety of matters. It can be single issue or ongoing. I t doesnt typically involve decision making. We are aware of examples of New Zealand Councils using citizen panels including Hutt City, Dunedin City and New Plymouth District Councils. Wellington City launched a citizen panel in , however we were unabl e find evidence of it operating today. If not properly structured, can become a group of people taking to each other with no mechanism to influence or inform decision makers. Is usually online which can restrict some groups participation. Quick and easy way to get feedback on ideas, issues or policies. Low cost and can be effective if proper structures for disseminating information, taking feedback into the council and providing feedback loops to the group are in place. Joint planning Planning (e.g., long term annual plans) in collaboration with communities, (including groups that do not typically get involved). This is relevant to NZ. Some councils make efforts to do this now. Can be difficult to sustain with some groups over long periods. Can miss less obvious considerations like hidden assets and infrastructure. More involvement and inclusion . Better connections between LG and hard to reach groups. Neighbourhood plans Collaborative planning for a specific area or aspect that the community prioritises. Can be a physical area plan or on specific issues like More likely to be relevant for the larger cities requires a strong community group, preferably already established. Relies on exi sting positive relationship between community groups and councils. Strengthens connections between the community group and local government. Empowers communities to own and plan for its own challenges. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence Practice Description Relevance for NZ Risks Benefits Collaborative or participatory decision making tools A technology tool that facilitates decision making between a large group of dispersed (time and place) people. Used in New Zealand occasionally Costs more and takes more time. Difficult to involve some groups like elderly that may not have tech skills, or multiple job holders that may not have time. Brings everyone along in making the decision. Allows peers to moderate behaviour that sometimes councils find challenging. Allows everyone to have a say and explain their perspective Moving engagement to where affected parties or people who dont typically engage are This can be as simple as engaging about a playground, at the playground . Or can mean taking discussions about plans or significant decisions to fairs, schools, cafes, festivals, markets, churches, small villages etc Can be, and is sometimes, used in New Zealand Can be intrusive if not done sensitively Takes sustained time and effort Minimises the power imbalance between council and citizens . Allows input from people who are most likely to be impacted, and often most likely to have practical input . Demonstrates a genuine willingness to listen. Good way to get views fro m har to reach groups.
Commercial In Confidence Practice Description Relevance for NZ Risks Benefits resilience, homelessness, vandalism etc. Can be damaging if insufficient resource applied to it. Idea collation and vote up technology Tech tools that allow people to submit ideas, and others to vote up the ones they like. Some NZ councils have used a p etition process to do similar. Can be done in NZ. These generally do not have a mechanism for the public to understand the cost or other consequence of the idea. Can be disappointing if no feedback loop as to why an idea was adopted or not. Can bring to light simple ways to improve service to communities. Can improve relationships with communities where a popular idea is adopted. Innovative discussion tools An (often) branded discussion format that draws in people to have open discussions about issues that are important to them. These are used in NZ to a degree e.g., Conversation Station in Wha nganui . Can work in both large cities and smaller rural communities. Best if situated in a place often frequented by the communities whose views are sought. Can easily go off topic if not carefully facilitated. Can cause dissatisfaction if feedback loops a nd transparency around how the output from the conversations will be treated. With good planning can allow multiple voices, ideas and opinions to surface. Strengthens relationships between community and council and can also strengthen relationships across different communities. Works in small townships. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence Stakeholders involved A number of stakeholders worked together to ensure the successful outcome of the jury process: VicHealth managed the supplier consortium, handled stakeholder relations, chaired the steering group, defined the jurys remit, provided an overview of obesity and food in Victoria, drafted the final insights report (jointly with newDemocracy Foundation). Multidisciplinary supplier consortium of suppliers to be key creation and delivery partners of the jury process, combining leading expertise in democratic research, large scale deliberative facilitation, user experience design and social technologies. newDemocracy Foundation developed and implemented the complete citizens jury process, starting with the selection of jurors and finishing with co producing the insights report. Steering group was created to include key public health organisations that would be potentially involved in implementing the jurys recommendations. The group included key decision makers in government, industry and the community , namely the Department of Premier and Cabinet of Victoria , the Australian Food and Grocery Council, Australian Beverages Council, Australian Medical Association Victoria, Foodbank Victoria, Coles (major superm arket chain), Melbourne city council , Obesity Policy Coalition, CHOICE (consumer advocacy group), CPAN Deakin University and Tennis Australia. Media partners with regional newspapers to boost awareness and legitimacy of the initiative (The Herald Sun . million readers in Victoria every week day and Sunday Herald Sun by .m every Sunday) Jury: jurors started online process, participated in the face toface event (largest scale citizens jury in Australia). Process Jurors were recruited using stratified random selection . First, , invitations were sent, both by regular mail and electronically, to candidates drawn from two student databases and the VoteCompass database (VoteCompass is an interactive, online voting advice application; citizen s interested in public policy events register there). These sources were chosen to ensure a varies sample and to reach the young people who are typically a low response group. In the second selection round, jurors were selected to provide a representat ive sample of Victorian residents. Over a period of six weeks, the jurors engaged in online deliberation in a facilitated forum. In this way, they reviewed and discussed written submissions evidence ( items) presented by stakeholders, experts, indiv iduals and organisations as well as the steering group on the topic of the jury. The submissions included the readers poll in the Herald Sun and a youth poll. All submissions were made public. Following the online deliberations, jurors met in person for face toface deliberations. This stage lasted two days and was facilitated by an independent engagement expert and facilitator . The main objective at this stage was to collectively produce a report with recommendations to present to the steering group. T he deliberation was held in small groups, groups in total. Each group was tasked Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence Stakeholders involved The main stakeholder involved was the District Council. The Council staff planned and carried out the engagement campaign. Local iwi w as involved starting from the early engagement throughout the whole process. The Waip community as a whole can be considered as a stakeholder because the Council treated it as a partner in this process. Process of engagement The project carried out a broad community engagement programme through a variety of channels and with a great number of various elements, mixing traditional approaches with highly innovative ideas. The early engagement process started in April . Sharing memories and stories was the central element of the early engagement campaign. Th e idea was to capture stories and visions of different generations, told from different perspectives, and to create a shared memory and understanding of Waip . Council staff visited rest homes and interviewed older residents. They also went to schools and asked their students about their hopes and dreams linked to Waip and to memories captured. Simple cost effective photo booths were installed to capture memories of Waip . Council used all imagery (photos, interviews) on its social media channels, which en couraged more people to share their stories and photos. The Council also ran print ads in local newspapers focused on key aspects of Waip s history (in ) and on Mori history (early ). Discovery Bus Tours started in autumn . Discovery Bus Tou rs were free bus tours, run by the Council, to heritage sites and places of historical significance, including battle sites of Land Wars of s. The bus tours proved extremely popular and were all booked out within days after being announced. Initially, seven , hours bus tours were offered in , and people participated in them. The bus tours had a professional guide on board who encouraged passengers to share their stories and knowledge. A local iwi member welcomed passengers on sites and told th e Mori history linked to the sites and Land Wars. At the end of each tour, participants were encouraged to get involved in the community discussion around heritage and make a submission towards the Year Plan. The bus tours returned in and cov ered new areas of the Waip district. Funding from the Ministry for Culture and Heritage was obtained for the additional bus tours in . In , people participated in bus tours. An interactive online map was created (discoverwaipa.co.nz) to explore the Waip district and its heritage sites as well as to discover the history around them. In October , Waip District Council was the only Council to officially commemorate the Land Wars. Local hap, schools, community and Council representatives participated in the ceremony. After months of the broad pre engagement, more focused engagement with the draft Year Plan started. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence TABLES Table : Participatory Budgeting Example Fresno, California (USA) Table : Participatory budgeting New York Table : Participatory budgeting Paris (FR) Table : Participatory budgeting Toronto Housing Community (CA) Table : Participatory budgeting City of Toronto (CA) Table : Participatory budgeting Chicago (USA) Table : Joint planning Development of Imagine Austin (USA), a year long term plan Table : Joint planning production of Neighbourhood Development Plans in neighbourhoods England Table : Citizen jury Italy Table : Overview of Citizens Juries in health policy decisions Table : Citizen jury Devon (England) Table : Citizen jury and Joint planning Future Melbourne Plan Melbourne (AU) Table : World Cafes Table : InstaBooth: interactive methodology for community involvement and place making Pomona, Queensland (AU) Table : Neighbourhood decision making Quarter associations and quarter contracts Switzerland Table : Tables Toronto (CA) Table : Conversation station e.g., Whanganui (NZ) Table : Collaborative decision making tools e.g., Loomio Wellington (NZ) Table : Structured participation in decision making using decision making tools e.g., CONSUL Madrid Decide (ES) Table : Tools for collating citizens ideas and ranking them or voting them up e.g., Ethelo
Commercial In Confidence Table : Overview of Citizens Juries in health policy decisions Background Description Costs involv ed Relevance for NZ context Feasibility for different individuals and community types Risks Benefits Design choices The overview looked into CJs of which were in Canada, in UK, seven in Australia or New Zealand, three in USA, one in Brazil and Italy. Objective : various health policy decisions Necessary preconditions : Establishment of rules of conduct between jurors; an external facilitator supporting the jurors; the precise formulation of the topic, charge or question provided by organisers; s teering committees or advisory groups (in cases) made up of policy makers, discipline experts, advocacy group representatives, clinical practitioners, patients, caregivers. Process : recruitment of jurors (most had participants and three had participants). Nearly two thirds of the juries took place over days, usually on a weekend. Written material as well as expert presentations given to juries, after which deliberations were held. The evidence provided by expert witnesses (in two cases re source persons were used in addition to investigate any questions the jury needed addressing). Expert presentations and deliberations were guided and overseen by steering committees groups. They also helped to engage participants. The main method through which recommendations were developed was consensus or consensus with minority opinion or voting. Steering committees groups helped spread and implement findings. Innovative engagement methods : different recruitment strategies were used to recruit juror s. Most common method was stratified random sampling. Other methods included: through the electoral roll, random digit dialling or commercial database of registered telephone numbers or national polling institute, non stratified random sampling through ele ctoral roll, random digit dialling or survey response, recruitment by a market research company or a professional recruiter. In cases, honorariums were offered to jurors. Facilitator fee Fee for the resource person, where used Would need to be trialled . Short duration may be workable, significant pre work needed to ensure jury can come up to speed quickly on unfamiliar subject matter. Specific criteria for recruitment were often used to ensure marginalised or typically underrepresented groups in decisio n making were recruited onto the jury Shorter than recommended juries may limit opportunity for constructive dialogue and some participants complained of insufficient time to explore issues, but brief daylong juries still delivered outcomes Mixed results for recruitment strategies to get fair representation despite best efforts Attrition important factor in bias as those who drop out tend to be those harder to recruit initially CJs often biased (only six of the studies were found to be unbiased) Juries held in staggered fashion encountered problems associated with the disjointed nature of multiple sessions held over a long period. Public policy process may limit use of most ideal from of CJ Ability for citizens to engage with and learn from others in their community in a structured manner Provided the research question is tightly defined and concrete in nature, even brief one day citizens juries can deliver useable outcomes to inform poli cy and practice. CJ can enhance the citizens role, particularly in capacity building for empowered citizens Jury length did not appear to impact on recruitment bias CJs tend to be small enough ( people or less) to achieve effective deliberation but still large enough to achieve diversity CJs are relatively inexpensive compared to larger deliberation methods Special attention should be paid to recruitment, methods, independent oversight by a steering committee, jury duration, moderation and respec t for the participant volunteer To reduce bias use stratified sampling with broad range of criteria; recruitment through market research company or by telephone, letter or door knocking ; and a substantial honorarium Juries should be held over days (as recommended by the Jefferson Centre) to give participants more control over the report and provide opportunities to engage with different forms of evidence (video, witnesses, a creative writing exercise) Hold juries in succession so not disjointed ov er long periods of time Allow juries the opportunity to challenge the evidence presented and to seek more information to ensure diversity in witness composition in addition to jury composition Consider withholding the topic of the jury until the jury d ay to reduce recruitment of participants with strongly held beliefs Deliberation should be supported through the use of steering committees and independent, expert facilitators to aid interactions between jury members Must have buy in from policy and practice decision makers to implement jury recommendations May consider Pre jury contracts binding commissioning organisations to respond to jury recommendations
Commercial In Confidence Table : Citizen jury and Joint planning Future Melbourne Plan Melbourne (AU) Background Description Costs involved Relevance for NZ context Feasibility for different individuals and community types Risks Benefits Design choices Over December to August , the city council of Melbourne conducted a joint development of a city plan that was to refresh the previous Future of Melbourne Plan. Objective : to adopt a year plan for Melbourne; to unite community and ensure support for the city development Preengagement strategy : City of Melbou rne appointed leaders from Melbournes community to guide and lead the project (called ambassador group). Their role was to make sure it was an authentic vision of community and engagement process was inclusive Engagement objectives: work with communi ty to identify and prioritise topics, innovate and testprototype new ideas creative and accessible opportunities to deliberate and learn from each other giving people means to effectively participate in plans development and transparency on how commun ity input will influence Future Melbourne Process : facetoface workshops, forums, seminars, interactive website and surveys Ambassadors and thought leaders in city stimulated and informed ideas Future trend papers about Melbourne released At end o f ideas phase: ideas, surveys, more than people involved at events, including targeted events at different demographics Popup events also held for engagement Independent company contracted to bring all community ideas together into a repo rt In deliberative phase, City of Melbourne appointed a citizens jury of people to review and revise Future Melbourne plan. Jury was selected from the respondents to invitations sent to people in the municipality. Jury used ideas to refresh the o ld plan to create the new. They deliberated for weeks in private online forum and in face toface workshops held over three and a half days. Jury then presented a draft reaching consensus through a voting process ( voting agreement threshold for plan elements to be accepted). Jury could submit minority report if they disagreed with an element that passed. These were included in in final draft report. Report shown to ambassadors group for review, amendments and comments. Then ambassadors group and jurors commended Future Melbourne to Council. Plan used as basis for councils year plan and as a resource for other Council initiatives Funding allocation information only, no information found on cost to administrate. Appointment process of lea ders may need to be different to gain public trust of the process and decision making. Jury phase could be replicated, but not clear on advantages over NZ current LTP engagements No clear information on efforts to reach particular groups beyond communitie s Too short a time for the process Obtain early warning of problems Greater problem solving capacity facilitate wide range of involvement acknowledge and build on existing relationships to enable strong implementation flexible engagement approa ch by using many approaches work with range of stakeholders to be creative, innovative and test new ideas Everyone believed process was worthwhile and final plan reflected communities vision Expectations of those involves must be managed undertake a risk analysis at outset of engagement project Commit necessary resources at an organisational level to support planning and execution of engagement plan Embed engagement at all stages of project (including evaluation) Define clear and specific engag ement objectives and communicate these to all create meaningful opportunities for public participation Provide support and information to community members
Commercial In Confidence Table : World Cafes Background Description Costs involved Relevance for NZ context Feasibility for different individuals and community types Risks Benefits Design choices The World Caf is a methodology for hosting conversations about relevant questions and themes. The ideal is that there are multiple conversations that build of f of each other to explore the issue deeply. Objectives : to explore, develop and rehabilitate own opinions through engagement with others in the community. Process : the time and place of the caf as well as the topic can be announced in local media and social media. The size of the group depends on the size of the place and time available (can be from to participants). At the start the host defines the purpos e of the caf to the participants and divides them into groups of people per table. The groups will be rotating between tables in conversational rounds of minutes. During each round, participants discuss progressively deepening questions re lated to the issue. The questions should be prepared by the hosts in advance and clearly stated to the participants at each table at the beginning of each round by a table host. Table hosts facilitates the discussion of the group and summarises the results to the next group coming to hisher table. This next group then starts off where the previous finished, learning from and building on them. At the end of the conversational rounds, groups summari se their key findings and present them to the entire group. At the end, the entire group of participants convenes to connect all of the ideas into just a few shared key points. The cost of a World Caf is only as much as the host s would like to spend , so can be kept to a minimum. Generally the costs include the materials neededdesired (table cloths, markers, paper, name tags ), food and drink. World Caf is a relatively simple idea and format that could easily work in a New Zealand context. While the Caf label could create a preconception about the type of person who would be comfortable in that setting, it is not necessary to use that label or indeed host it in a Caf. The format could be adapted to work in a number of different environments so it could be used in contexts that are more familiar to the specific population types being targeted. Representation of underrepresented populations need to be encouraged both through the selection process and during the conversation in the cafe Can be used for a range of different topics and inputs Can be encouraged as a community led engagement Is able to be carried out in many locations that suit the communities Set a clear context of what is discussed and why Envisage the desired outcomes and design questions and processes to ensure the caf arrives to these outcomes Invest in the design of questions: the central questions need to be clear and matter to the participants Create a hospitable place, with food and drinks Use facilitators to encourage contributions from everyone (e.g. Talking Object technique is recommended) Use interactive and playful methods (e.g. use different colours for different issues and opinions, allow participants to draw on the tablecloth etc) Active listening and connecting different perspectives
Commercial In Confidence Table : InstaBooth: interactive methodology for community involvement and place making Pomona, Que ensland (AU) Background Description Costs involved Relevance for NZ context Feasibility for different individuals and community types Risks Benefits Design choices InstaBooth is a telephone booth inspired temporary portable structure used since . It combines physical and digital interactive media . It is essentially a wooden photo booth or in some cases a lit up telephone box. Inside participants browse media, write a note or draw pictures to provide feedback various en gagementfeedback tools . Outside, urban design proposals are projected onto adjacent buildings and pavements. Over , InstaBooth was successfully implemented in different countries (e.g. Peru, Uk, USA) in a variety of settings: policy development, arts festival, survey of student experience on campuses, community engagement and community group advocacy. Objective : To move from consultation to active involvement engagement of the community to jointly develop solutions. Necessary preconditions : design thinking to create the booth, co creation with community group; clear plan of engagement tools, deployment, resourcing and data analysis developed together. Conclusions also drawn together. Process : Phase the community group Heart of Pomona (H oP) led the planning of engagement on the new masterplan for the town. It instituted the implementation group consisting of the HoP, InstaBooth consultants (university researchers) and local government. The group discussed the purpose, design and questions for the project. The promotion was done via the local paper. Phase The booth is installed in the locations where the issues under discussion actually matter and where the people care about them (place specific engagement) . Within the InstaBooth: Interactive wall surface for completing survey Pin board questions to put answers to Put a pin on a scale how participant feels about certain issues Responding to questions and issues with drawings Voting on photos of what makes the community via Instagra m Hugging a fluffy balloon if you love the city Maps Google maps and physical maps, participants identify what areas in community are important to them The booth remained installed for days, over which approx. people on average engaged with it eve ry day. Phase The collected data was sorted and then summarised by the InstaBooth team (researchers and senior university students). On this basis, data analysis took place in a workshop of the implementation group. Workshop participants browsed the d ata and brainstormed initial themes. These themes were used to develop a draft masterplan for the town. Innovative engagement : the InstaBooth itself is an innovative form of engagement. Design Thinking used to ensure maximum and wide ranging involvement. D iscussions In Space systems survey answers and comments displayed publicly on big screens . Blended digital and non digital interaction tools in physical space as described above. Exact costs not known, but the InstaBooth was funded by a grant from QUT s Engagement Innovation Grants (EIG) over . These grants are between AUD , and AUD , . This can work in New Zealand as it is, or can be further adapted by incorporating local design into the booth Pomona is a small town of population. The booth is portable and should be located where the issues under discussion matters. More of a way to foster debate than providing definitive answers . Questions need to be designed carefully to get necessary answers. If the engagement interfa ce of the InstaBooth is too unfamiliar, participants may have difficulty to engage. Direct and interactive engagement Fun Sharing of ideas and engagement with ideas of different community members Learn from each other Different interaction components capture wide range of opinions and ideas Continuous engagement tool, ongoing dialogue with the government Ability to capturerecord peoples ideas and thoughts Good way to both inform and gain feedback Evoke thoughts and curiousity , being physical is obvious and gets immediate attention rather than online platforms Able to reach those that dont have internet accesscapabilities Gave people sense of community and a place and space to reflect Codesign and co analysis of InstaBooth enabled it to be community owned Design thinking, participatory design and co design principles used to co design InstaBooth across several workshops Media architects and designers involved in co creation of mechanism Staffing and resourcing Keep placeme nt period short days max to ensure curiosity maximised Be strategic about physical location of booth Announce deployment of structure in newspaper in advance Evaluation of interactive tool (through interviews) and improve the design of InstaBooth if necessary Share findings with the community Codesign and co analysis of mechanism means its community owned (not run by experts) Clarify what data gathered will be used for
Commercial In Confidence Table : Neighbourhood decision making Quarter associations and quarter contracts Switzerland Background Description Costs involved Relevance for NZ context Feasibility for different individuals and community types Risks Benefits Design choices Switzerland has a range of informal participatory structures in addition to formal local government. Quarter association and quarter contracts are a widespread form in smaller towns and villages. Quarters are basically defined neighbourhoods. Quarter assoc iations are territorially defined non governmental organisations and an informal form of community governance. Quarter contracts rely on citizen participation in individual quarters to identify priority projects and quarter community centres that organise social and cultural activities. Quarter association Objectives : protection of interests of the quarter residents and engagement with the local government on behalf of resident on planning issues . They see themselves as a counterpoint to the local administr ation. Necessary preconditions : legal basis in the Civil Code that made quarter associations legal entities, subject to certain requirements (e.g. regular reporting). Structures : Head committee for association elected by members. Process : Quarter statutes are passed by the members to define purpose of association and their work. Associations run own physical meeting points in their areas and websites. Association made up of members can be admitted or resign at any time who can be natural or legal perso ns residing in the quarter . In some cases they collect small annual membership fee. Citizens come to local association with issues, may use as an official contact point through which to contact local government . Not liable to local government but can inte ract frequently based on local policy or a memorandum of understanding . Quarter associations may also procure fuel, fertilizer etc on behalf of their members as well as run community libraries and centres. Quarter contracts Objectives : engage locals in planning processes and promote projects to locals . Structures : specific bodies that work on defining development priorities for their areas. Process : a bit similar to PB process , but with more decision making powers delegated to residents . Municipal Council designates a budget each year for (typically small) projects in a given quarter . Interested residents submit a project proposal . Project group (made up of quarter residents) assess project against contract aims, analyses project, contacts partners, drafts a budget and an action plan . A piloting committee (made up of mayor and another councillor, and reps from other party members on council, tenants association, traders association, social workers, another association and a resident all from the quarter (area), chosen on annual basis by municipal decision) supports the project, implementation and evaluation occur. na Something similar could be adapted to be workable in New Zealand. It is similar to Business Improvement Districts model in use by Auckland and Wellington City Councils albeit with a more social focus. These forms are used specifically in the settlements with smaller populations (less than ,). Per town, there are typically several such organisations ( e.g. the town of Aarau has , population and quarter associations). Strengthens sense of community Improve the knowledge of self government, interaction with the government and project management These are forms of self government that are complet ely selforganised. Making room for the community and support of their decisions by the local administration
Commercial In Confidence Table : Tables Toronto (CA) Background Description Costs involved Relevance for NZ context Feasibility for different individuals and community types Risks Benefits Design choices Tables, or working groups, are viewed as being highly effective in that they involve citizens in both th e design and implementation of initiatives. The topics can be demographic or social. They are credited with building relationships between Council officials and the community which enabled the successful settlement of a large influx of Syrian refugees in . Objectives : joint planning and implementation of initiatives Process : Tables are established on identified topics that the council seeks to advance. The local government approves the establishment of each Table, which relates to an identified priority . The Table is the responsibility of a Council Executive Leadership Team (ELT) member. This could either be in the Governance or Community Engagement Division, with strong links to the councils social policy function. The ELT member facilitates the Table, and is responsible for ensuring appropriate connections across the ELT to drive implementation of the work of the Table. Membership of the Table is determined by the senior officer and consists of representatives from NGOs, CCOs, central government agenci es and council staff whose substantive work relates to the topic of the Table. Experts can be added to the Table as an advisory body to the Table, drawn from NGO connections and supported by them. The role of the Table is to develop strategy, support strategic implementation through developing a work plan including community engagement strategies, and to monitor and evaluate. The extent of the involvement of people with lived experience can vary fro m providing advice to co design. The Table incorporates extensive community engagement to inform its work. No information found on costs This could be adopted for a specific purpose in New Zealand. Due to the administration and formality, it is more likel y to be of use for a nationally significant issue, or for a large council like Auckland. The tables tend to be made up of representatives from NGOs associated with the relevant sectors so is not typically a direct engagement. The table members then enga ge with he relevant communities. The effectiveness of the model is dependent on the skills of the facilitator. Without this: All the parties required for the shared outcomes may not be willing to participate The Table becomes a place for talking without a dvancing anything People involved in the Table are not solution focused. It brings together all parties required to advance a particular topic, connecting them to work for shared outcomes It has flexibility of membership according to requirements, and can be enhanced with additional membership of groups and individuals if they are required as the direction of the work becomes clearer It builds relationships that creating a capacity to coordinate responses to complex issues of the day beyond the work of the Table It is embedded in the executive and driven by the leadership team so the advice provided is implemented It provides a monitoring and evaluation function. Endorsement by the local government and strong support of Tables by elected members of the local government. Participation of NGO s (rather than individual representation ) because parties to the Table are responsible for contributing to the delivery of the work plan in their substantive role, and it is through these existing mechanisms that the Tables engage with communities.
Commercial In Confidence Table : Conversation station e.g., Whanganui (NZ) Background Description Costs involved Relevance for NZ context Feasibility for different individuals and community types Risks Benefits Design choices Conversation station is an open structure for investigating culture on a personal scale in public places . Conversation stations usually investigate personal, difficult, even uncomfortable issues (e.g. euthanasia). Whanganui Distric t Council implemented one in . Objective : to investigate difficult issues in an informal situation on a personal level; to investigate possibilities of public dialogue, explore social dynamics, and question who we are to each other as strangers and as members of our common society . Necessary preconditions : a large dice with discussion questions written on each side; a dialogue facilitator. Process : In a public, but fairly private space (e.g. street caf) a table(s) with a large dice is set up. The dice have discussions questions written on its sides. The questions can be interchangeably personal social political. Once two persons sit down at the table(s), the facilitator invites them to start a conversation. The facilitator is not present on site, bu t is in a car nearby, able to observe and hear the dialogue. The facilitator asks people to throw the dice and discuss the question selected in this manner. The facilitator announces the end of the conversation. Currently, permanent audio has been installed that can be activated by pushing a button. It prompts people to spin a wheel to start conversation. A version of this practice is: a person (e.g. elected local government member) is sitting at the station awaiting a second person to join. We hav e not ascertained the cost . It would vary depending on the type of set up. In Whanganui they have utilised a small park area:
Commercial In Confidence Table : Collaborative decision making tools e.g., Loomio Wellington (NZ) Background Description Costs involved Relevance for NZ context Feasibility for different individuals and community types Risks Benefits Design choices Loomio is a collaborative decision making tool built in Wellington New Zealand https:www.loomio.org . It was started as part of the Occupy protest movement and developed into a more general use communication too l afterwards. Process : First, a group is created that poses one or multiple discussion questions. Groups can be set as either public or private, the former meaning that anyone can participate in the discussion and deliberation, and the latter meaning that only invited members may participate. Participants can contribute their opinions, respond to polls, and elaborate on their stance. All interactions and discussions are archived for record and further analysis. Loomio also offers scheduling tools, polls, pr ioritization, and Slack integration for business use. There are two plans: Basic plan: NZD per month per person (min. NZD ) Pro plan: NZD per month per person (min. NZD ) There are many examples of Loomio successfully facilitating decision making articulated in the blog section of the website. In the tool was used by Wellington City Council to develop its Alcohol Management Strategy https:blog.loomio.orgw ellington citycouncil uses loomio and more recently it was used by NZEI to facilitation communication between members during the teachers strike https:blog.loomio.orgre solving theeducation crisis innew zealand Online decision making tools can increase engagement by providing an option to engage when peopl e have time and without them having to leave their home. However, it can limit engagement to those who are technically able and can reduce engagement by older people or people who are not connected to internet. Risks depend on the specific engagement but c an include: Difficult for people who are not connected to engage Can take a lot of time and therefore restrict participation from time poor people Established successful tool for collaborative decision making across a large body of people with a process th at clearly works.
Commercial In Confidence Table : Tools for collating citizens ideas and ranking them or voting them up e.g., Ethelo Background Description Costs involved Relevance for NZ context Feasibility for different individuals and community types Risks Benefits Design choices Ethelo https:ethelo.com is an online engagement and decision making platform. Ethelo is comprised of two entities: Ethelo Decisions a technology company dedicated to helping organizations focus collective intelligence to make the best decisions more quickly and Ethelo Democr acy a non profit society dedicated to a more effective, citizen engaged democracy. Ethelo Decisions undertakes commercial projects to fund the development of the Ethelo technology, which is provided to Ethelo Democracy and its partners for the cost of hardware. The Ethelo algorithm was developed to enable fair outcomes in complex multi stakeholder negotiations. Objectives : to harness the power of collective wisdom for governance and group decisions. Process : Ethelo is a patented algorithm that uses an extension of morphological analysis. It is compatible with and a complement to processes such as conjoint analysis, the Monte Carlo Method and decision trees. It incorporates a novel approach to liquid democrac y using trust networks . The algorithm combine s various decision parameters (options, issues, criteria, constraints, influence, and fairness ) and build s a space of potential outcomes . These are evaluated and ranked according to aggregated analysis of the participants. It finds outcomes with high average support and low variance in satisfaction among participants .
Commercial In Confidence Table : Participatory budgeting New York Background Description Costs involve d Relevance for NZ context Feasibility for different individuals and community types Risks Benefits Design choices The Participatory Budgeting Project (PBP) is a not for profit pioneering PB in various NY districts. In four City Councillors put capital discretionary funds of m up for PB for community to decide on. PBNYC then set up from this pilot and continued since. The Council Districts are free to participate in the programme, and in Council Districts participated. This means that m of New York Citys billion budget roughly . was put to direct vote. In over , people across New York voted on the allocation of million for neighbourhood improvement projects as part of the PB process in NY . The participation has been increasing steadily. In , more than , voted to distribute m. In , more than , New Yorkers voted to allocate over m. Citizens can vote for categories of project: Housing, Transit Transport ation, Art Culture, Libraries Schools, Parks Environment, Streets Sidewalks, Public Health, Public Safety, Seniors, Youth, Sanitation. Objective : allocation of capital funds for diverse projects of at least k in cost and have a lifespan past se t up of at least years. Expense funds also to be allocated in some districts. Other aims include; opening up government, expanding civic engagement, developing community leaders, building the community and making public spending more equitable. Necessar y preconditions : PBP brings technical assistance and CVH brings community contacts to strengthen and create stability in PB process. Resources required throughout from: Community Service Organisations, council members, citizens. Lots of voluntary time comm itment from all parties. Structures : A steering committee of community members lead by PBP and CVH decided on PB process. Each district to have its own district committee decided where to hold own neighbourhood assembly, how to do outreach and mobilisati on. Process : Planning citywide steering committee designs PB process, materials, funding and local partnerships acquired. Info sessions community learn about process of PB, how to get involved. Neighbourhood assemblies each neighbourhood has a repres entative to be a budget delegate, brainstorm spending ideas in and as a neighbourhood (given a budget). Budget Delegates were split into thematic groups to reflect community priorities Budget delegate (BD) meetings all delegates meet to review ideas, get govt expert advice, a feasibility assessment and to develop full proposals Second round neighbourhood assemblies BDs present proposal presentations to neighbourhood in science fair format, residents walk around, give feedback, ask questions, BDs incorp orate feedback Voting residents vote on which project to fund. Evaluation, implementation and monitoring of project by council members (alongside community) Innovative engagement methods : Digital and in person (a tent) interactive experience (k peo ple shared experience), robust social media presence, online surveys, after election day community was able to share their priorities for the next mayor . Recently an interactive online map was developed giving information on all projects that are being imp lemented in NY as a result of PB: http:ideas.pbnyc.orgpageabout . Funding allocation information only, no information found on cost to administrate. US context is not directly transferable to NZ. A mor e formal resource is likely here as we are less engaged in volunteering and philanthropy. The categorisation of spend and the voting mechanism are transferable with some NZ Councils having done similar work in their Long Term Plan engagements albeit with a less formal structure and fewer feedback loops. The voting age being set at gives the opportunity to get schools involved and introduce the concept of voting importance to youth, early on. It does appear that this involved a substantial budget for engagement and consultation that NZ councils cant easily replicate. Opportunity for several different types of engagement throughout the year so can get participation from different levels of civil background and interests Much higher voter turn out rates for marginalised populations and people on low incomes in PB than in traditional elections (rates are even higher when bilingual voting is used). Youth as young as can vote and participate in PB in some districts. The results show that voter in was under years old. Assemblies can be held to specifically cater for youth or non English speakers. This increased turnout. A large percentage of PB voters were people of colour. More than were born abroad. voter in was reported to be not a US citizen, which would have been a barrier for participation in regular elections. of PB voters were not part of a community group or organisation. Process requires robust civil society support, political buy in, managing political motivations Need federal support for bottom up driven initiatives Projects have additional degree of legitimacy citizens involved in every stage of process Civic rewards and learning from the process, community inclusion, relationships with elected officials , leadership and skill development Participation is maintained because of this reward said to be very fulfilling Flexibility in degree of citizen participation Results from the PB process itself can provide opportunities and motivation for those less well off groups to seek better life outcomes (e.g gaining skills by helping to implement a project they suggested) Facilitates constructive dialogue between different socio economic groups During pilot informal information sessions to explain PB with community A core staffing, technical and community lead to drive the PB process Large funds from council for community to allocate (ideally flexible funding pools such as capital funding) Support from government as part of Open Government Partnerships (as of has member nations) and Second Government National Action Plan greater citizen participation and increase govt transparency and accountability, empowers Community Service Organisations greater CSOs link with govt Meetings must be accessible. e.g varied timings so different groups can attend, childcare and interpreters provided at each meeting
Commercial In Confidence Table : Participatory budgeting Toronto Housing Community (CA) Background Description Costs involved Relevance for NZ context Feasibility for different individuals and community types Risks Benefits Design choices Toronto Community Housing (TCH) the largest social housing provider in Canada (approximately , tenants) uses PB to allow tenants to decide how to spend a portion of TCHs capital budget. Process started in . Budget varies each year: m in , m in and m in . Each year of budget was distributed to TCHs community housing units based on their size, split equally among CHUs and distributed based on residents decisions. Objectives : Build and maintain a sense of community and cooperative spirit a mong tenants, staff and management; Cocreate solutions to local housing concerns by developing business plans and allocating funding. Necessary preconditions : Staff as on the ground facilitators and organisers of the process. A monitoring review committee to plan and oversee the process. Structures : Formal community based governance structure called the Tenant Participation System a partnership between mana gement, staff, and tenants in each designated community housing. Tenant representatives are elected by their community. They participate in community councils and city wide PB. Community councils develop their own accountability framework so that tenants can hold TCH to account on decisions made and arising issues. A joint monitoring committee overseas whole PB process to ensure transparency and there is strong communication between residents and staff during the process. Process : Three phases to PB process : ) Between May June brainstorming workshops held by TCH with tenants to identify issues and priorities in each building complex. All residents encouraged to attend. ) July August tenant representatives identify top priorities and projects to match. R esidents choose a voting delegate and an alternative delegate to represent their community at an allocation meeting. ) Allocation meeting where all delegates from city communities present their proposals for projects and vote on projects to receive fundi ng. Innovative engagement methods : To achieve a high degree of inclusion and solve logistical difficulties, the staff provided reimbursement for day care and transportation, provided lunches and snacks. In buildings with historically low participation, the y provided flipcharts for residents to record their views at their convenience. Preengagement : Extensive planning occurs before PB activities begin. A joint monitoring committee reviews the PB process before and during the process for transparency and to ensure healthy communication between staff and residents. The TCH runs a Tenant Engagement System since , which has created a basis for an ongoing engagement in the community. Capacity building in communities : Staff provided support and guidance to res idents on the PB process but a lack of trust between residents and staff along with poor staff attitudes and a lack of training meant capacity building was poor in many cases. Staff cost Reimbursement for transportation and day care Cost of lunches and sn acks Administration budget is not quantified. Most NZ Councils are not involved in City Housing. The financial incentives and reimbursements are seen as critical when engaging less affluent citizens, however, interestingly this still did not always guarantee good participation levels. Inclusion of the hard to reach populations by design as many tenants wereare poorer community members, refugees and immigrants (although despite this, participation wa s still low in some buildings ). Collectively, residents speak over languages. Not clearly defining how goals of PB are to be achieved. If not defined and agreed upon by all parties at outside confusion over what participation means leads to unclear and false expectations. This hinders effective participation processes and leads to inconsistent participation. Staff find it difficult to build capacity in community members (staff attitudes and their capability to provide guidance can be poor). Lack of trust in those giving decision making power to community dont believe they will make the best decision. Community participation and managerial efficiency perceived as mutually exclusive Often PB process puts organisations not community member s needs first Achieving a fair mix of community representatives through an election process is almost impossible to achieve and can cause unrest Resource intensive process, lots of staff time is spent planning and attending these meetings which added t o their standard workload Allowed those citizens participating to learn new skills: budgeting, project development, leadership, advocacy and governance Gives a sense of empowerment to vulnerable communities. In this case it gave them some ownership o ver their place of residence. Provides a strong foundation for information sharing between parties Must have participatory vision all stakeholders must know their rights and responsibilities to participation and what is trying to be achieved through their participation Formal structures around process to create partnerships, multiple opportunities for engagement, accountability and a transparent process Trust must be developed between all parties Provide appropriate training and support for st aff overseeing the process so they can build appropriate capacity in community participants Provide clarity on rules of engagement and overall process Continually evaluate and improve on the PB process
Commercial In Confidence Table : Participatory budgeting Chicago (USA) Background Description Costs involved Relevance for NZ context Feasibility for different individuals and community types Risks Benefits Design choices Participatory budgeting strategy in Ward was introduced in to reach underserved populations. A budget of .m was set aside for community to allocate on local infrastructure projects.
Commercial In Confidence Table : Joint planning production of Neighbourhood Development Plans in neighbourhoods England Background Description Costs involved Relevance for NZ context Feasibility for different individuals and community types Risks Benefits Design choices The collaborative development of Neighbourhood Development Plans (NDPs) is not mandatory for local councils, but once developed and successfully passed at referendum ( threshold) the Neighbourhood plan becomes part of the statutory development plan for the area. In well over , groups were using neighbourhood planning tools Objectives : reinvigorate local area ; protect desirable characteristics of neighbourhood ; greater influence in planningdevelopment and future vision on their neighbourhood gain a degree of community control Necessary preconditions : steering group overseeing the process (can be town or parish council or specially formed Neighbourhood Forum); the formation of NDPs and their support by local authorities need to follow nationa l and EU legislation (Localism Act of , National Policy Planning Framework and the strategic policies of the Local Plan). Structures : Neighbourhood forums may be created to lead and co ordinate the planning process. The forums are typically made up of around community members. They are usually designated by the local planning authority and provide a mechanism for the community to engage with the Local Authority. Key groups involved : Department of Communities and Local Govt (DCLG) for research and guidance on emerging planning practices Planning Aid and Locality for advice and funding (National organisations which support local community organisations). NP steering group Community members Independent examiners Process : Neighbou rhood planning usually instigated by the Local Authority, the Parish, Town Councils or by individuals or existing community groups. Those wishing to submit a plan send their proposed neighbourhood area to get approved by the local planning authority. A ste ering group is often created of local stakeholders. Local partnerships are developed, community engagement and consultation occur, and an evidence base is built. The plan is developed through continuous consultation with the community. Local planning auth ority and an independent body review and modify the plan to ensure it meets all legal planning requirements. The plan is publicised. The plan is then put to a public referendum. The plan is adopted by a simple majority vote. Generally whole planning develo pment process takes between months. Innovative engagement methods : Many media forms were used, including digital and social . A neighbourhood plan website is usually developed including contact details with the overseeing committee so people can provi de their feedback. Other engagement techniques used are workshops, shop units street stalls, questionnaires, model making, school or college projects. Capacity building : Local authorities have a duty to support neighbourhood planning under the Localism Act (). Consultants often brought in when internal capacity was lacking for community members involved. Due to the novelty of the process, both consultants and local authorities were learning on the. National organisations (e.g. Planning Aid and Local ity) provide resources for capacity building , also for local authorities . Neighbourhoods draw on governmen t funded support to help develop their neighbourhood plans. Most used these funds to access planning consultancy support to supplement local authority support mainly at the plan writing stage The UK govt has set aside m between to support the development of neighbourhood plans or neighbourhood development orders. Eligible community organisations neighbourhoods can apply for grant funding of up to ,, as well as technical support. An additional , is available for certain groups (such as neighbourhood area with population of , plus, involves a designated business neighbourhood plan, includes design codes, housing a llocations or three or more Parishes are jointly writing a plan). General estimates to create a NDP can range from less than , to more than three times this depending on complexity and the area. Local planning authority is typically responsible for the costs of independently reviewing the plan and of holding the referendum
Commercial In Confidence The second stage is an assessment of the proposed ideas by the citys Construction Board (i.e. professi onal engineers, architects, builders etc.). They look into the feasibility of the projects and estimate their costs. The feasibility criteria are pre determined and include: fit in the budget, projects are on the city land, projects do not require extensiv e planning or consultation. The Construction Board discards ideas that are beyond the scope of the process and informs the participants about the reasons for rejection by email. The Construction Board also consults with Neighbourhood Councils on the feasib ility and costs. For example, in , the Construction Board assessed ideas and left over most popular ideas that also met criteria for the online vote. This stage takes three months and ends in June. The third stage is voting (in October). First, the voters need to be authenticated via the National Voters Registry (online). Voters also need to choose online, in which of the districts (neighbourhoods) they will vote. Each resident has one vote. To cast a vote, a re sident divides the available budget up between hisher favourite projects. As a resident vote, heshe will see how the overall budget is reduced, and the remaining projects that are over budget are greyed out. To prevent against bias in voting, e very time a voter clicks on the site , ideas are presented in a random order. The vote is electronic, secure and binding. Voter can go back and correct their votes several times; only the final vote counts. A dvanced security measures are utilized to protect user and website information (for instance, the technology provider does not have access to personal data). The software used for the vote is open source (Open Active Voting ). The tallying is done by the City Council, and winners are announced through a special cer emony. Results are also emailed to participants of the voting. The final decision on the implementation of projects is taken by the City Council, who committed to formally process the highest voted proposal on a monthly basis and implement them (in , of proposals were implemented). Each year around ideas are implemented by the City Council and Neighbourhood Councils . Execution of projects starts shortly after the voting is finalised; construction projects usually start the year following the voting (in summer). While most projects relate to construction and infrastructure (e.g. improvements to parks, playgrounds, roads) and are relatively small, there are examples of other projects. For instance, one of the early successes was an idea put for ward by a nine yearold girl requesting more school field trips. Larger scale projects included renovation of a small disused power station into a youth centre and an increased provision of shelters for homeless people. Engagement Reykjaviks City Council invests heavily in the promotion of participatory budgeting. The campaign was opened in Reykjaviks main cultural centre. Posters and billboards were used all over the city. It has used professional marketing companies and a multi channel marketing campai gn to make people aware of the participatory budgeting process. This has included Google and Facebook ads, Twitter and advertisement on radio and TV. Comedians have been hired as the face of the process. In addition, an extensive outreach campaign took pla ce offline in places, like shopping malls, schools, retirement homes and other. The My Neighbourhood website has an automatic translation to over a dozen languages. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence These engagement efforts resulted in more than , participants (overall) of My Neighbourhood over half of Reykjaviks population (with , unique visitors in alone). The percentage of voters has been around of the population. The age profile and corresponding participation remained consistent over time. The highest participation is observed in the age group years at ., followed by year olds at . and over year olds at . Cost The project starting with private financing by two Reykjavik citizens, who are also founders of Citizens Foundation. Currently, the project management team consists of people. Two project managers deal with PR, evaluate incoming ideas, and maintain communication between the citizens and the government. One communications expert works with the news. One project coordinat or oversees the execution of all projects and works in the Environmental and Planning department of the City Council. In addition, there are neighbourhood Councils staff, Construction Board staff and other. It is estimated that around to people in ea ch council committee that are involved in My Neighbourhood project parttime. For , the cost of Better Reykjavik (of which My Neighbourhood is roughly half) was about NZD million (. billion Icelandic krona). The expenses included the salari es of project managers, advertising and promotional costs as well as service agreement for the online platform ( euro per month or NZD ). Risks Ensuring broad participation and especially representation may be a challenge, despite wide campaigning and creative use of media. At the moment, relatively little is known about the demographics of the participants of the budgeting process. A small recent evaluation suggested that the participation is biased towards those who are university educated, those on higher incomes and people aged to . Citizen participants do not have ultimate decision making authority, which could lead to frustration, especially as not all proposals can be implemented by the City Council. Small budget available for allocation through the participatory budgeting may discourage participation as people feel that this budget will not create meaningful changes and that only small projects will be implemented. The large number of ideas places a strain on both city officials , in terms of their capacity to manage and assess them, and on the IT systems. Benefits The following benefits have been identified: Citizens receive a voice within the policy making process and the power to influence the outcome of budgetary issues, devel op better understanding of budgetary policies and see tangible results of their engagement. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence Timing Processes should be c arried out during the term of council and not near an election in order to reduce politicizing issues The time commitment required from citizens needs to be considered carefully. Requiring substantive amounts of time can be a barrier to participation, but enough time needs to be allowed so that people can access and understand enough information and deliberate it. In all instances, ti me frames need to be defined and explained. Deliberation s of a citizens jury take place over a short intensive time period This encourages participation , as it is a short term commitment for each individual . The recommended duration of citizens juries is four to five days but may be shorter depending on the issue at hand. Key considerations are to allow time for participants to engage and assess the evidence (including hearing witnesses , and studying written ev idence ), the oppo rtunity to receive expert advice and additional research if necessary , and sufficient time for deliberation and decision making. Part of a wider and longer term strategy of trust building Participatory processes are part of wider community engagement . They work best in places with a strong culture of community engagement , and when the process, the proceedings and the final decisions are publicly available. If the process is repeated regularly, people become more fami liar with it and participation increases, especially as the decisions taken in the process are implemented. Evaluation and feedback mechanisms are built in to the design of the process from the beginning, and the learnings incorporated into the design of future processes
Commercial In Confidence around engagement now that there is more information available on the types of practice that can reach diverse community groups and address perception s of power imbalance between Councils and some residents. The reintroduction of wellbeings into the Local Government Act, provide s new context for the relationship between Local Government elected members and officials and the public. In this report we explore some of the ways this has been approached internationally. These differences between local government in New Zealand and its international counterparts have an impact on the type and scale of participatory practices they can adopt. In considering examples, we need to be cognisant that often local government in other counties operate at a different scale, have higher overall budgets , more diversity of expertise and increased ability to address the needs of community in a holistic manner.
Commercial In Confidence being of residents, especially the vulnerable. A more narrow goal is to advance neighbourhoods disaster resilience in the first days after its occurrence. Stakeholders involved NEN has a whole community approach to stakeholder engagement and involves all types of organisations, networks and individuals located in a specific neig hbourhood. It is an alliance of residents, neighbourhoods (neighbourhood organisations), business associations and businesses, nonprofits and charitable foundations, faith based organisations, civic agencies, government and academic institutions. Examples of soft infrastructure NEN has developed nine programmes targeting different aspects of community resilience. Each of the programmes provides a framework for community action and a variety of resources, such as templates and guides that can be used by n eighbourhoods and smaller communities. NEN also provides technical support to communities in the form of workshops, seminars and other informational, educational and training events. In collaboration with the Institute for Civic and Community Engagement (I CCE) at San Francisco State University, the NEN created a NEN university that aims to improve local communities through resilience education. Students earn class credit for projects, such as community asset mapping and leadership training, that make commun ities more resilient and better places to live. In addition, there are two NEN Leadership Academies (one for youth) that equip participants with skills to advance resilience in their communities. NEN also facilitates the engagement between communities and its leaders (including local government). The engagement focuses on risks shocks that communities are likely to experience and how they can work together to develop and implement mitigating strategies. This pre engagement is an investment in the relatio nships between leadership and communities and helps to higher levels of trust and reciprocity with communities, which will increase cooperation during disasters and accelerate recovery from them. Empowered Communities Program (ECP) is an umbrella programme for resilience building. ECP harnesses the expertise and resources of all stakeholders to develop and implement overall resilience plans in each neighbourhood. Under ECP, NEN provides the communities with templates for resilience plans and guides them thr ough the process to develop their own plans. NEN takes an advisory and facilitator role in this process, while the community drives the development of all plans and makes decisions on leadership and operations. NEN supports the four working groups that wer e set up in each neighbourhood: ) children and their families; ) seniors and people living with disabilities; ) immigrant communities; and ) small business and non profit organizations. These groups meet monthly for discussions, while NEN provides tech nical expert advice, helps with advocacy and investment planning. The Steering Group of NEN oversees the implementation of the neighbourhood plans. The HUB Program is a part of ECP and supports communitys overall preparedness on a daily basis. NEN conduc ts workshops with local organisations to help them understand their role in the community, their community needs in case of disaster and realise the benefits of teamwork. At workshops robust smaller networks are established with clearly assigned roles (Eme rgency Operation Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence can make decisions that favour their own political interests and are subject to pressure and influence from interest and lobby groups. Even if this is not the case, trust in politicians is low and declining. Decisions made a by a cross section of society that the broader public can identify with may seem more acceptable or even more legitimate. The approach does require a deep theoretical shift in how the role of elected members is viewed. Research by Professor Lyn Carson of the University of Sydney Business School has further concluded that a well facilitated group of citizens can make better decisions than a group of experts as they are coming to the topic with an open mind. She also provided evidence that the approach builds trust in local government, for example where a mayor in one local authority that used deliberative dialogue increased their percentag e share of the vote at the next election, in contrast to the declining vote their party had for the position of mayor in all other parts of the state. Minipublics are a stronger mechanism tha n advisory models, such as panels. Such mechanisms can contrib ute to this broader governance, particularly when they are formal mechanisms with established channels to decision makers. However, they do not transfer decision making to the citizens. F ormal long standing mechanisms are also not accessible for all divers e communities as they may not be culturally appropriate and require members to have capacity to participate and to be comfortable engaging directly with authority. They also invest power in a small number of people, whereas m ini publics depoliticise issue s by involving interested individuals, not advocates , and different individuals over time . Attributes of effective formal participation models The context in which participatory processes operate is important. Our r esearch confirm s a range of engagement and participation mechanisms are required for diverse voices to be heard , and to build the credibility of each mechanism . One mechanism is rarely sufficient. Within this context, c ommon themes were that participatory models: are more effective when the council adopt s a broader view of governance , and actively supported mechanisms which engage its diverse populations meaningfully in its decision making. are more effective when they are endorsed by the elected members, from where they derive their status and authority, but primarily work with the council organisation to ensure a link between policy and implementation are more effective when participants are perceived as ordinary citizens, reflective of the community , rather than as lobby groups , and the selection process and outcomes are transparently communicated are more credible when they allow for the participation of many individuals over time , and of different individuals and different demographics who are selected according to the voices needed for each topic
Commercial In Confidence participants . Citizens are involved in making and agreeing these rules of engagement. For example, in joint planning: There is a clear understanding on the scope of the planning , the legal force of the final plan , how it will be implemented and by whom, and how this will be supervised There are clear rules for the planning process, including the timeframe and what should be achieved, roles and responsibilities, how the plan will be agreed , including who can vote Participatory processes are designed to be transparent to and share information with the wider community, which creates legitimacy and acceptance of the decisions . Once a participatory process is established, citizens agree on the process and decision making criteria . They are supported by external experts as required, and by local government staff who can provide technical expertise , an understand ing of how council operates, and a secretariat function where required . However, the council has delegated decision making to the citizens. For example , in participatory budgeting, participants decide on appropriate proposals and projects if council officials did this it would simply be grant giving . Participation, recruitment and selection Once the council has decided to establish a participatory process , the purpose and the way citizens can get involved are widely promoted using a variety of media, channels and methods which are both digital and non digital. This increases participation in collective processes such as participatory budgeting and increases the pool of people willing to serve on a citizens jury. It i s the first step in transparency and increases the legitimacy of the decision s taken at the end of the process . This is further enhanced when: Participation is extended to groups who cannot vote in elections , for example young people between and new migrants Strategies are designed and implemented to reach marginalised and under represented populations, and people not otherwise involved in civil society organisations. This can include special events for families and youth, multi lingual tools, and visits to community meeting places such as places of worship Participatory budgeting and joint planning do not normally require a selection process as usually anyone can participate. However, a selection process is required for citizens juries. To reduce bias and ensure a jury that is reflective of its community, participants are chosen from the positive responses by stratified random selection . Participants can be selected to match the demographic of the whole city or community , or on selected demographic s. Enablers and incentives Participatory processes should be designed and promoted so that : Potential participants feel it is worth the ir time and effort . The greatest incentive is that it will be a fulfilling experience that will make a positive difference , with tangible results . Fundamentally this is achieved by the council communicating that it will accept the outcome of the process. Other motivating factors can include scale, for example that the funds available for allocation in a Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence participatory budgeting process are reasonably large , or that participation is a development opportunity, with participants learning new skills such as project management . Barriers to participation are minimised . This can include providing stipends or an honorarium for citizens jurors. For participatory processes that require meetings, it can include food, childcare, transport , meeting locations that are easily accessib le (including remotely ), varied meeting times . interpreters and multi lingual documents, and a defined time commitment . Adequate s upport for participation The processes are wellresourced, with a commitment in advance to funding , and adequate time from council staff Council staff are trained well in advance to be able to run an effective promotion, recruitment and selection process es, and to provide technical support throughout the participatory process . Staff also play a role in helping participants to understand how local government works. Subject matter advice is also available from independent external experts where appropriate . For example with citizens juries, there should be a diverse range of experts and witnesses to support varied and balanced perspectives on the issue. Eviden ce considered must be made public to ensure transparency and increase the legitimacy and acceptance of the jury. Citizens juries have a facilitator with the expertise to run a deliberative dialogue process, including supporting all participants to contribute and to critically assess complex information. This ensures participants can contribute effectively even when they have no prior knowledge or experience of the topic. The facilitator helps the group to weigh up strengths and weakn esses of options and make some decisions. Independent oversight by a steering group is also advisable to prepare the jury proceedings . This also supports a process that facilitates quality decision making, i ncreas ing the legitimacy and recognition of the j ury. Council staff also act as a secretariat . This may range from note taking, to writing the outcomes document for a citizens jury on behalf of the citizens. This improve s the efficiency of the process and reduce s the burden on participants. For joint pl anning processes, the plan a can be written by a specially created committee of community or neighbourhood representatives. Scale and reach Participatory budgeting in particular works best in small scale environments, so that participants have a rich understanding of the community to inform their choices , and also experience its results. There should be transparent and regular communication and information provided to citizens during the exercise. This can be two way: t he use of on line too ls and open data can expand participation, with a wider group of citizens providing ideas and opinions to inform the deliberation of participants. Tools that have been used successfully include Twitter, Facebook, emails, web site, online forums, special o nline platforms and online ideation tools, and also face toface meetings, and physical stalls. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence with producing one recommendation. At this stage, the jurors heard testimony in addition to the written submission they already reviewed. Based on their knowledge, the jury could select witnesses they wanted to hear from. The additional evidence and the jury deliberation were made public. The decisions on what to include in the final jury report were made by supermajoritarian voting (). To ensure the minority views and dissenting voice are heard, the jurors could write minority reports that were also included in the final report. To facilitate consensus, the jurors were sometimes asked to vote on can you live with the recommendation instead of a simple yes or no to a recommendation. In total, the jury considered asks, but settled on to include in the final report. The online and offline work was organised in small groups that were regularly mixed to avoid factions. To help jurors analyse the large amount of information, the mix of synchronous (webinars) and asynchronous (example) learning approaches was used. The jurors had access to expert opinions throughout the entire process. The steering group witnessed the entire process, but jury was able to reques t periods where no observers were present. Engagement Once selected, the jurors received a welcome email and pack in the mail, orientation into online platform, the process and introductions. Technology played a key part in collaboration. An online platfor m was created specifically for this process and was used up until the face toface deliberations of the jurors finalized the process. In addition, facilitators used email, news groups, chat rooms, blogs, wikis and podcasts to share info and facilitate inte ractions. The jury process was highly publicised and received media mentions in print, online and radio. The readers poll in the Herald Sun received responses and its results were presented to the jury as a submission. Costs The process reported ly cost about ,, which include d the commissioning of original research, international evidence reviews, research design and implementation, the publishing of a final report and a honorarium for the jurors. Accommodation was offered to those tra velling from regional areas to attend the in person deliberations. Risks The following risks were identified for the approach used: An electronic focus in the jury processes limits the ability for some groups to engage in the process Public perception of t he issues and the self selection of jurors presents challenges to having fair representation on jury Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence Immediate actions must be implemented based on jury recommendations to ensure jury feels empowered and credible (even if the majority will actually be implemented long term). Sources : VicHealth and newDemocracy Foundation () Victorias Citizens Jury on Obesity Insights Report , available at: https:www.vichealth.vic.gov.aupr ograms andprojectscitizens juryinsights The Guardian (). Health experts doubtful citizens jury on obesity will address problem in Victoria , available at: https:www.theguardian.comsocietyaughealth experts doubtful citizens jury onobesity willaddress problem invictoria Lucy Parry (). Victorias Citizens Jury on Obesity , in: Participedi a, available at: https:participedia.netcase Participatory budgeting in Reykjavik Background In the wake of the financial crisis in Iceland, Icelanders political trust plummeted from in to just in . There was a sense of urgency in the society for more transparency of the government and a greater role for citizens in the decision making. Against this backdrop, a not for profit civic technology provider Citizens Foundation was s et up. On the request from Best Party (a protest party that won municipal elections in Reykjavik in ), Citizens Foundation developed a platform Better Reykjavik that can be used for crowdsourcing political ideas and consultation. The platform was thoug ht a tool to rebuild the relationship between elected officials and their constituents. Later in , a tool My Neighbourhood (initially called Better Neighbourhoods) was added to the platform designed specifically for annual participatory budgeting in di stricts across the city. The software is open source. The first round of participatory budgeting took place in . In , Reykjaviks Better Reykjavik and My Neighbourhood projects received the European Award in the E Democracy Awards. In , they we re among the final candidates for the Green Digital Charter award for Citizen participation impact on society . It was praised by the Council of Europe as an example of how thousands of citizens having had a real influence on their environment. All neighbourhoods of Reykjavk have been visibly improved through the My Neighbourhood project . Many European cities (e.g. in Norway, Slovakia) are looking replicating Icelandic experience. Specific objectives The objectives of the participatory budgeting process (and the inspiration for the custom made software) were strongly influenced by the described political context. They are, however, valid for non crisis situations: to build a different way for politics to be done, where engagement was mo re fun, and where the effects of taking part were really tangible to citizens ; Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence May not always provide innovative new solutions as sometimes hoped Might not be able to clearly (or immediately) implement jury recommendations especially if multiple stakeholders needing to deliver them (as in this case), so jury may feel as if the process was all for nothing Benefits The benefits of the citizens jury were identified as: Building community consensus on best actions to reduce obesity; Citizens developed greater understanding on public issues and the policy surrounding that; Opportunity for public sector to learn what expectations community holds around issues; Topical issues that jury deliberated on typically get more engagement from community in a well structured and less opinionated manner; By engaging in the process, participants were more likely to take personal actions to help resolve community issues; The jury used the power of collective intelligence to produce c redible recommendations; of Victorians saw the citizens jury as an effective way to involve public. Design choices The design choices that made this citizens jury a success story can be summarised as follows: Establish key delivery partners and clea rly outline their roles; Independent and apolitical body to front and run the process; Provide good levels of resourcing (including a honorarium for the jurors), structure and support around the group. This leads to high levels of engagement and dedicatio n to the process; Consider recruiting more jurors than you actually need to allow for people who may drop out of the process or to have alternates; Create a steering group of key decision makers that acts as a responsive authority to the jury and will imp lement the jurys recommendations; Establish a clear remit (ideally a singular question) and demonstrate an authorizing environment. Assert jurors have authority and are clearly in the drivers seat, balanced range of perspectives are presented to the jury and jury itself is representative of the wider community; Ensure a transparent public process by making everything provided to jury accessible for all, including being in plain English. This will increase the legitimacy and acceptance of the jury and its recommendations; Accessible technology platform and face toface used to create an efficient and engaging process (both aspects need ed); Partner with media to boost the awareness and legitimacy of the initiative; Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence Participatory budgeting project contributed to building up political trust and increasing voters participation in local elections. Local residents better understan d their needs and those of their communities. It has been widely acknowledged that every neighbourhood in Reykjavik has seen improvement and investment in facilities and infrastructure desired by the residents and that would not have been conceived otherw ise. The organisation of the process (i.e. dedicated project management, expert resources for projects vetting and improving) guarantees high quality of projects. Design choices The design choices that made participatory budgeting in Reykjavik a success s tory are: Strong support and commitment from the City Council to the participatory budgeting process and its clear integration in the local government processes (i.e. the City Council is committed to review, discuss and implement the most popular proposals on a monthly basis); Clear feedback loops between the City Council and citizens (e.g. participants are informed by email about the reasons why their proposals were rejected). This increases the acceptance of the voting results and motivates people to part icipate; Extensive promotion through multiple channels, online and offline, including employing marketing experts and celebrities; Custom made software designed to encourage engagement. Sources Project website: https:hverfid mitt.betrireykjavik.iscommunity My Neighbourhood: https:citizens.isportfoliopagemy neighbourhood Mat Basford (). Online PB in Reykjavik: making democracy easier and more fun . Available at: https:www.demsoc.orgonline pbinreykjavik making democracy easier andmore fun Unnur Margrt Arnardttir (). Better Reykjavik: Digital Tools for Citizens Participation. Available at: https:www.regjeringen.nocontentassetsabbdafbbbfbeacfunnur arnardottir better reykjavik.pdf Reykjavik Budget and Five Year Plan , available at: https:reykjavik.issitesdefaultfilesymisskjolskjolutgefidefnireykjavikcitybudget.pd f GovLab. Better Reykjavik: Municipal Open Innovation. Available at: https:congress.crowd.lawfilesbetter reykjavik case study.pdf Green Digital Charter (). Reykjavik, Utrecht and Zaragoza are finalists for the GDC Award on Citizen participation impact on society . Available at: http:www.greendigitalcharter.eufinalists for thegdcaward forcitizen participation impact onsociety Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence To engage hard to reach groups in participatory budgeting, Fresno conducted town hall meetings at minority run churches with Q A sessions (see Table : Participatory Budgeting Example Fresno , California (USA)) Waip a District Council wanted to understand the publics views for a potentially difficult project showcasing Waips hist ory and historical sites. To facilitate proper community engagement, they organised bus tours to the sites. The bus tours were sold out quickly and so they applied for and received funding to do additional tours. With a similar mindset, the staff of Mas terton District Council took to the road in the days prior to the election to take the ballot box to the voters. Other examples of innovative engagement and communication we are aware of include: Apps for reporting faults, such as Wellington Citys FIXIT or Snap, Send Solve which is an Australian based app used by Christchurch City Council, Nelson City Council and Palmerston North City Council. This a llows people to take a picture and upload it with a geo location, meaning the council can see exactl y what needs to be fixed and where it is. Some councils have set up labs to engage with communities on different projects and co design solutions. Examples include New York City https:council.nyc.govlabs , Auckland City https:www.aucklandco lab.nz , Tauranga City also had a co design lab up until last year. Wellington City Councils engagement on its year strategy used a number of walk through shipping con tainers with activities prompts and different ways of collecting feedback including boards for post it notes, forms, on thespot interviews and a web based discussion forum. A number of New Zealand Councils have used web sites to get the public to vote on priorities . Auckland Council, in its Unitary Plan consultation, developed a tool that enabled people to alter the build densities in different areas to different levels and see the consequent effect on other aspects, such as environment and infrastructure costs. Increased levels of engagement and use of innovative engagement tools does increase the cost of the engagement , and a number of the examples noted above have drawn public criticism about the money spent. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence To ensure that the reduced financial resources of the city are put to their best use. Stakeholders involved The main stakeholders participating in the process are: Reykjavik C ity Council has formally accepted the platform as a collaborator and provided initial investment. It also operates the voting and provides a part of an investment budget to be allocated through the process. It implements the projects voted by the citizens. Citizens Foundation is the technology provider. Project Management Team at the Mayors office runs the Better Reykjavik project (including My Neighbourhood) on the day today basis, including its promotion and engagement campaigns. Citys Construction Boa rd reviews the projects suggested for funding via the process for feasibility and cost. Internal Audit monitors the election and does a security audit of the system each year, before, during and after the vote. Neighbourhood Councils support the process by advising the Construction Board on the feasibility and cost. They also participate in the implementation of the projected selected. Citizens: different groups of people participate in the discussions of projects and voting. Basically, anyone can register on the platform to submit project ideas and discuss them (the authentication process is via a verified social media account or email password). Authentication for voting on projects is run by the National Voter Registry, so that only those eligible to vot e in Reykjavik can participate. Voting age is (which is years lower than for national and local elections). Process Each year, the City Council allocated a certain amount of citys investment budget for the allocation through participatory budgeting. Initially, it was million Icelandic krona (approximately NZD million, about . of the city total budget) and in amounted million Icelandic krona (NZD . million, about . of the city total budget), divided between districts (neigh bourhoods) of Reykjavik. The participatory budgeting process can be roughly divided into three stages: generating ideas, assessment and voting. The first stage starts in March with a call for ideas for improvement projects and their refining and discussin g online. The idea can be submitted to the platform by any registered participant (as mentioned, authentication with a Facebook account or email password suffice). The pitch needs to contain a short description and an image of the location as well as shar e the exact location on a digital map. Registered participants can like and comment on other proposed ideas, add points for or against them. The city also runs face toface meetings to generate ideas. The meetings are run everywhere, from shopping malls t o retirement homes to schools. The staff uses tablets and feeds the put forward straight into the online process. The first stage lasts about one month. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial In Confidence stand or fall on the quality of their support and facilitation , including the provision of technical information and the input of a range of informed viewpoints require time to build, with about a decade being required to reach maturity. We identified four attributes that are present within effective participation models : draw information and perspectives in from the community are credible with communities are well supported and facilitated are influential with elected members and departmen ts of the council Risks of participatory processes are: they are more expensive than traditional decision making processes, and the choice to spend rate payers money in this way can be open to criticism if the facilitator is not skilled enough to manage the process, this can result in poor decisions the breadth of th e topic is narrow, and the community does not set the agenda . The quality of the process is critical to ensure acceptance and legitimacy it is highly dependent on buy in from the governing body trust in the council would be detrimentally affected if the g overning body did not accept the recommendations of the group. Success factors Whilst many details vary across the settings and methodologies of the participatory processes we have reviewed , there are some common factors that contribute to the ir success . We have set these out below, including s pecific success factors for citizens juries , participatory budgeting and joint planning . Settings The community does not set the agenda. A topic is selected by the council and a question is carefully framed for the group to consider . However, a n important feature of the most effective participatory processes is that the council has at the outset agreed that it will accept the recommendations of the group . Participatory processes are further strengthened when they are actively promoted by elected members. The council take s responsibility for endorsing and communicating the outcomes of the process , which provide s decisions with authority . National and local policy provides clear guidance yet flexibility to participatory processes . This includes mechanisms so that the council is held to account, the community can access pre approved funding to support the process , and there is a framework th at creates clarity around roles, responsibilities and decision making rights which help manage the expectations of all Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Commercial video ondemand classification
Commission Codes of Conduct.
Commission cannot undo a councils
Commission of Inquiry into COVID Lessons to broaden the set of issues
Commission of Inquiry into Historical Abuse in State Care and in the Care of Faithbased Institutions
Commission of Inquiry into Police Conduct
Commission of Inquiry into Police Conduct website
Commission) to broaden the set of issues covered by its original terms of
Commission. This is required to ensure sufficient funding is available within the
CommissionThe council is the decisionmaker and
Commissioner (OPC) is planning to make a small update to the toolkit in the
Commissioner under the Privacy Act.
Commissions of Inquiry Act
Commissions of Inquiry and Similar
Commissions of Inquiry and Similar .
Commissions terms of reference between February to March .
Committee Establishing Act
Committee Futures) Act .
Committee advice to a Minister or the Government on any matter relevant to the
Committee of the whole House stage of the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill
Committee schedule for will be issued later in CO Notice () . t do not
Committee: Period Ended November
Common questions about spam complaints
Common terms you will come across on this website.
Communi ty Funding Schemes MCA (.)
Communicating the start of engagement on selfidentification regulations and registering gender for people born overseas
Communication of Fire and Emergency levy decisions
Communication of refreshed policy
Communication of refreshed policy :)c,
Communications We do not propose to issue any proactive communications on the matters in this paper.
Communications We do not propose to issue any proac tive communications relating to commencing crossparty consultation. We will provide information on the proposed communications plan for the Bill when we seek approval for introduction.
Communications Details of communications an individual has had with the RegistrarGeneral
Communications and Engagement Plan for Caucus Big Shoutout Campaign
Communications and the Minister Responsible for the Government Communications
Communications with the deceased are ceased.
Communications: Create an internal communication plan to announce and roll out the refreshed strategy.
Communities across New Zealand are safe, resilient and thriving Regulated activities minimise harm and maximise benefits to people and communities Three Waters Reform Building an efective, afordable, resilient and sustainable three waters system (drinking water, stormwater and wastewater) will provide lasting benefits for our communities our economy, and the environment. We are responsible for leading the reform of the three waters system, and for monitoring the performance of Taumata Arowai the new waters services regulator. The service delivery reforms involve a systemwide transformation of the way three waters services are regulated and provided to communities. A comprehensive, integrated package of reform proposals and a support package for local government have been proposed. A key system change is the active recognition and provision of te mana o wai statements that proposed water services entities will be required to embed into their operations from governance to delivery. We will support the Government in making its final decisions on the reform proposals and will implement the reforms that are agreed. We will support the Government to implement the reforms, and lead the significant work required to design and transition to the new system. This includes working with the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment to establish new economic regulation and consumer protection regimes necessary to ensure three waters services are delivered eficiently, efectively and afordably to consumers. The Department will also monitor Taumata Arowai to ensure water services are provided to standards necessary to achieve improved and more consistent public health and environmental outcomes for the benefit of all consumers and communities. Regulatory system stewardship We have developed a strategy to move our regulatory services from a focus on compliance, to a focus on regulatory system stewardship so that communities in New Zealand are safe, and the wellbeing of iwi is improved. The strategy positions our regulatory services to be at the forefront of regulatory excellence. We are concurrently implementing a new strategic direction for gambling that emphasises community wellbeing aligning to our outcomes and the Governments wellbeing agenda. We will continue to focus our gambling advice on the regulatory settings needed to manage harm from online gambling by New Zealanders, along with improved measures to minimise harm from Class Gambling (pokie machines). This work will ensure New Zealanders who choose to gamble are protected, especially those most vulnerable to gambling harm. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Modernising content regulation and providing greater protection against online harms We will be modernising the media content regulatory system and providing greater protection against online harms through the content regulation review. The review will be supported by the Ministry for Culture and Heritage and will lead to a modern, flexible and coherent regulatory framework to address all harmful impacts of media content, regardless of the way the content is delivered. We will complete the legislative process to amend the Films, Videos and Publications Classifications Act to ensure prevention and mitigation of harms caused by objectionable publications. The Department is also progressing recommendation of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the terrorist attack on Christchurch masjidain to make further amendments to that Act in relation to racism. Embedding the Countering Violent Extremisms (CVE) Online team and reduction of online harmful content We will help facilitate the swif removal of online violent extremist content from platforms and continue to build strong working relationships with government agency partners, overseas law enforcement and technology platforms. In doing so, we will ensure New Zealanders know where and how to report online violent extremist content. This will require a community approach and trusted relationships with civil society. As our capability grows, we will explore further online prevention initiatives, in consultation with relevant government and nongovernment agencies. AntiMoney Laundering (AML) implement mutual evaluation recommendations We will support the statutory review of the AntiMoney Laundering Countering the Financing of Terrorism Act. The review will result in recommendations for regulatory and legislative change to strengthen the AML framework. We will also focus on implementing the Financial Action Taskforce Mutual Evaluations recommendations to strengthen the AMLCFT framework and our delivery of services to ensure the integrity of and public trust in New Zealands financial system. Privacy leadership and facial recognition The Department is responsible for providing privacy leadership in government though the role of the Government Chief Privacy Oficer (GCPO). We set standards and guidance, build capability within government agencies, and provide assurance to Ministers on privacy matters. Inappropriate use of facial recognition technology by government agencies poses a risk to New Zealanders. We will provide improved tools and guidance to better manage this risk for current users of this technology, while supporting continued innovation in how it is used in government. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Mori are supported to realise their aspirations Creating an indigenous approach to communityled development The Department is working with hap to codevelop a framework for hapled development. The Department has identified gaps in the way Mori access our existing funds and the Communityled Development Programme. There is a need and opportunity to scope a new tikanga Mori approach that better supports Mori to lead their own development. Hapled development is about supporting Mori to achieve their aspirations, on their own terms and in their own time. The Department is starting a hapled development journey from a place of mana motuhake selfdetermination, recognising the need to codevelop a strengths and Tiritibased approach. This is an opportunity for the Department to learn from existing programmes, such as the Communityled Development Programme, to better support hap in a te ao Mori way. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Communities are supported to develop and prosper Community resilience to natural hazards and climate change New Zealand communities are exposed to a wide range of natural hazards which are being exacerbated by the efects of climate change. The Community Resilience work programme is a partnership working with local government to help better manage these risks through investing in risk reduction measures and supporting councils to manage natural hazards and the efects of climate change. The programme will provide the Government with options for reforming the Land Information Memorandum (LIM) system by which local government discloses information on natural hazard risk to property buyers and sellers. We are also contributing a community resilience perspective to the Governments work programme on the reform of the Resource Management System and the development of the National Adaptation Plan. A community funding system that is inclusive and flexible The Department is undertaking a review of Crown community funding with the objective to support a community funding system that is more flexible, inclusive and honours Te Tiriti o Waitangi. Findings from an analysis into community funding identified the current system to be complex and adhoc with limited strategic direction. This has resulted in barriers for communities, ineficiencies in the system and inequitable funding outcomes. We will identify potential options for a funding system that represents the most efective investment in community development and has a longterm intergenerational impact for iwi, hap and communities, utilising goodpractice principles. This review will align with changes being considered in the distribution of Lottery funding to ensure consistency and allow for more efective outcomes across community funding. Charities Act Review We have resumed the work to modernise the Charities Act by addressing practical issues that impede the efective functioning of charities, while ensuring the necessary transparency for public trust and overall confidence in the sector. This work is expected to lead to legislative proposals in . Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Racing industry recovery We will complete the implementation of the racing industry reforms, working alongside key industry stakeholders such as Racing New Zealand to support a sustainable racing industry. The Racing Integrity Board (RIB) and the TAB NZ Board have been established as per the Racing Industry Act . The newly appointed RIB will promote and ensure high standards of animal welfare, integrity and professionalism by those in the racing industry. Hon Sir Bruce Robertson was commissioned to review the greyhound industrys response to the recommendations in Hon Rodney Hansens report on animal welfare. Sir Bruce found that improvements in animal welfare and transparency should be made but the point has not been reached where immediate action by the Minister must be taken. We will support the Minister of Racing and Minister of Primary Industries with work required to follow up on the recommendations outlined in the review. This will include the RIB monitoring progress and reporting back to the Minister of Racing by the end of on the implementation of the recommendations. New Zealand Libraries Partnership programme Local libraries are safe spaces that support lifelong learning and ofer access to essential online services. The New Zealand Libraries Partnership programme supports libraries to play a role in supporting their communities and people seeking jobs as part of the COVID recovery. The programme is leveraging strategic partnerships to develop a foundation upon which the longterm sustainability of libraries can be achieved. Strengthening the library workforce is a key factor in achieving this outcome, and the programme is ofering professional development to ensure that libraries continue to be able to support the communities that depend on them. Supporting implementation of new requirements of the Aotearoa New Zealand Histories curriculum The introduction of the new compulsory history curriculum in presents an opportunity to connect young people with the histories and stories of Aotearoa New Zealand. We are working across the heritage system to determine how agencies can collectively support communities to tell their own local history to meet the new requirements. The role of the National Library and Archives New Zealand is to support teachers, students, hap, marae and local libraries to access their collections, resources and services to support locally led story telling. This includes the development of local resources for students working with public and school libraries and professional development and support. This approach will help to grow enquiring New Zealanders who are knowledgeable about the people, places and events that have shaped Aotearoa New Zealand. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
Communities are important to peoples wellbeing. People have the best opportunity to thrive and prosper when the communities they live in are safe and resilient.
Communities are supported to develop and prosper.
Communities can be supported to manage risks and challenges and empowered to form and realise their own aspirations, despite adversity they might face over time.
Communities we spoke to said that they want a future where they would know their views made an impact.
Community Foundation New Zealand conference
Community Funding Schemes MCA
Community Information and Advisory
Community Information and Advisory (.)
Community Operations Hpai Hapori leads the Departments direct interface with New Zealand communities, primarily by providing information, resources and advice to communities and the administration of grant funding.
Community Operations leads the Departments direct interface with New Zealand communities, primarily by providing information, resources and advice to communities and the administration of grant funding. We are responsible for delivering community advisory and funding administration services throughout New Zealand and supporting communities to be resilient and achieve their aspirations.
Community Organisation Grants Scheme (COGS)
Community Organisation Grants Scheme further information and National COGS Committee Annual Report
Community Outcomes website
Community Trust of Mid and South Canterbury
Community Trusts (Boundary Adjustment) Order
Community Trusts (Boundary Adjustment) Order
Community Trusts (Fees) Regulations
Community Trusts Appointments: Bay of Plenty Community Trust
Community Trusts Appointments: Community Trust South
Community Trusts Appointments: Eastern and Central Community Trust
Community Trusts Appointments: Foundation North
Community Trusts Appointments: Otago Community Trust
Community Trusts Appointments: Rata Foundation
Community Trusts Appointments: The Community Trust of Mid and South Canterbury
Community Trusts Appointments: Toi Foundation
Community Trusts Appointments: Waikato Community Trust
Community Trusts Appointments: Wellington Community Fund
Community Trusts Appointments: West Coast Community Trust
Community Trusts Appointments: Whanganui Community Foundation
Community Trusts Act
Community Trusts and Lottery Grants Board candidate nominations are now open. See
Community advice and grants
Community and Voluntary Sector
Community and Voluntary Sector Status Report WE March
Community and Voluntary Sector Status Report WE May
Community and Voluntary Sector Status Report WE April
Community and Voluntary Sector Status Report WE October
Community and Voluntary Sector Status Report WE February
Community and Voluntary Sector Status Report WE September
Community and Voluntary Sector Status Report WE February
Community and Voluntary Sector Status Report WE March
Community and Voluntary Sector Status Report WE August
Community and Voluntary Sector Status Report WE January
Community and Voluntary Sector Status Report WE June
Community and Voluntary Sector Status Report WE January
Community and Voluntary Sector Status Report WE May
Community and Voluntary Sector Status Report WE April
Community and Voluntary Sector Status Report WE October
Community and Voluntary Sector Status Report WE September
Community and Voluntary Sector Status Report WE March
Community and Voluntary Sector Status Report WE February
Community and Voluntary Sector Status Report WE June
Community and Voluntary Sector Status Report Week Ending July
Community and Voluntary Sector Status Report Week Ending June
Community and Voluntary Sector Status Report Week Ending July
Community and Voluntary Sector portfolio resourcing
Community and Voluntary Sector portfolio resourcing, March
Community grant empowering Tokomaru Bay to take early control of Cyclone response
Community grants, funding and advisory services
Community participation, technology and decisionmaking are at the heart of much of Te Tari Taiwhenuas mandate and mahi, playing a key role in how we serve and connect people, communities and government to build a safe, prosperous, respected nation.
Community with graduates and alumni
Communityled Development Programme Impact Evaluation Report June
Comparable Rating Analy sis Neutral Neutral Positive
Competitive position Strong Strong Satisfac tory
Complaints about government agencies Ombudsman
Complaints and prosecution
Complaints, Investigation and Prosecution Unit
Complete the form below and return it with relevant documentation to
Completed over , advisory services and processed over , grants for communities, hpu and iwi across New Zealand
Complian ce with Privacy Principle
Compliance and monitoring NZSIS Privacy Officers are responsible for advising the NZSIS Chief Privacy Officer and the SLT on the adequacy of NZSIS systems for dealing with personal information and compliance with the Privacy Act and steps to be taken to promote robust privacy practices. a dedicated NZSIS Compliance Team oversees the development, implementation and compliance with relevant policies, including information management and access policies NZSIS has a dedicated security team with full access to all audit log data, whose responsibilities include investigating anomalous access to any NZSIS information unauthorised andor inappropriate access to DIA Information will be treated as a security breach and a compliance incident.
Compliance and monitoring NZSIS Privacy Officers are responsible for advising the NZSIS Chief Privacy Officer and the SLT on the adequacy of NZSIS systems for dealing with personal information and compliance with the Privacy Act and steps to be taken to promote robust privacy practices. a dedicated NZSIS Compliance Team oversees the development, implementation and compliance with relevant policies, including information management and access policies NZSIS has a dedicated security team with full access to all audit log data, whose responsibilities include investigating anomalous access to any NZSIS information unauthorised andor inappropriate access to DIA Information will be treated as a security breach and a compliance incident. Where an internal investigation confirms a privacy breach, and it is considered necessary or required by law, the relevant affected parties (including NZSIS and DIA) andor the Office of the Privacy Commissioner will be notified as soon as possible. NZSIS will also inform the Inspector General of Intelligence and Security.
Compliance with the SWERL Act
Computer repair company helps convict collector of sex pictures of young children
Computer repair company helps convict collector of sex pictures of young girls
Computer repair reveals porn
Computer repairers uncover offending
Concentrating on securing a relatively small amount of different technology
Conclusions . As indicated by the analysis table above, the preferred process option is option three: a selfidentification process that requires a statutory declaration process without evidence of medical treatment. When compared, this option meets all the criteria (except integrity) better or much better than the status quo and is better at meeting the criteria than option two. . A selfidentification process is worse than the status quo in respect of the integrity criterion because of the removal of any form of third party assurance that can act to mitigate fraudulent applications. However, unlike the other options, this option provides a process that is primarily based on selfidentification and is likely to better meet the needs of transgender and intersex people. . We consider the risk of the preferred process option being used for unlawful reasons is sufficiently mitigated by the requirement for a statutory declaration and additional requirements where a person applies more than once. . The selfidentification process is beneficial for children and young people. This option increases the accessibility and inclusivity of the process for children and young people and mitigates risk that and year olds may not be able to obtain guardian consent. It is flexible and recognises existing views that gender is not age restrictive and that older adolescents are more able to understand important decisions. Lastly this option supports the integrity of birth register information and the autonomy of children and young people through requirements that focus on ensuring the child or young person understands the decision and it is based on their selfidentified gender. Example key for qualitative judgements: much better than doing nothingthe status quocounterfactual better than doing nothingthe status quocounterfactual about the same as doing nothingthe status quocounterfactual worse than doing nothingthe status quocounterfactual much worse than doing nothingthe status quocounterfactual Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Conduct set by the Public Service Commissioner.
Conference support The Ministry contributes part of the funding for a biennial international gambling conference held in New Zealand and an associated international think tank. The conference will take place twice in the period, in February and . The Ministry is budgeting for an , contribution towards the costs of each conference and think tank. Holding international conferences on gambling harm in New Zealand promotes the country as a world leader in preventing and minimising gambling harm. It also enables practitioners, researchers, industry representatives and government officials from around the world to meet and exchange ideas specific to gambling harm. . Intervention services The Ministry has increased the indicative budget for the period from the previous period to accommodate an increased focus on service development to address persistent gambling harm (see Table ). Section . describes additional funding for piloting new intervention services. Within th is budget, the Ministry intends to explore the potential for more innovative intervention services. In particular, it will seek to fund or develop services that are clientcentred and enhance the mana of consumers. The Ministry will base new approaches on successful regional or local models, where they exist, and will codesign them with stakeholders, and particularly with consumers. Indicative priority areas for to are to: explore innovative ways to treat the whole person through joinedup gambling, drug, alcohol and mental health services pilot and evaluate new service models to address gaps in current service provision . The pilots will focus on delivering both public health and intervention services across regions (particularly rural regions) and responsiveness to Mori lay the foundations to pilot and introduce residential care and peer support into the intervention service mix in the medium term develop the range of online selfhelp available deliver services that are responsive to the needs of different population groups; in particular, those groups where there is strong evidence of inequality and inequity in gambling harm. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
Confidential Supporting points for Cabinet on May
Confidential Di sseminati on of the Eval uation. The evaluation, including th is letter, is pro vided
Confidential Forum website
Confidential Listening Assistance Service
Confidential Listening Assistance Service website
Confidentiality and information sharing
Confirm the further proposed amendment s so these can be considered for May
Confirm to Immigration NZ Citizenship has been granted to or confirmed for an individual to allow Immigration NZ to cancel their visa as required by the Immigration Act
Confirmation of design of online casino gambling regulatory system
Confirmation of tax treatment of water organisations
Conformance with the New Zealand Identification Standards
Confused messaging from the Government around using various apps, scanning QR codes, keeping diaries, or completing registers when entering venues, etc remains a risk to peoples receptivity to the promotion of CovidCard.
Congratulatory message service
Connection with the Government response to the Declaration of Inconsistency
Consequently, the rolling month total for GMP has continued to decrease. In nominal terms, it has fallen by . percent vs. the year ending September , from ,,, to ,,,. When adjusted for inflation this is a percent decrease.
Considerations for hosting the Regional Deals secretariat
Constituencies) Amendment Act (the Amendment Act).
Constituencies) Amendment Bill (No. ) and the Local Government (Auckland
Construction Site The first unscripted trial (construction, n) was held at a construction (house build) site in Raglan, New Zealand. Five tradesmen and two trial technicians acting as tradesmen were asked to perform their normal duties whilst wearing a single card on a lanyard around their neck. A single person and two video cameras observed the tradesmen for minutes. Card IDs were in the range .
Consultation . The following agencies have been consulted on this paper and the draft Bill : Treasury, State Services Commission, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Justice, Land In formation New Zealand, Ministry for Business Innovation and Employment , Inland Revenue, Ministry for Primary Industries and Sport New Zealand. RITA has also been consulted on the draft Bill. Minor changes have been made to the Bill following consultation. ldrz ()(h) ()(h) Proactively released by the Minister for Racing IN CONFIDENCE Page of Binding on the Crown . The Racing Industry Bill will bind the Crown. Creating new agencies and amending law relating to existing agencies . The Bill disestablishes RITA and creates TAB NZ, with the objectives of facilitating and promoting racing and sports be tting , maximising its profits for the long term benefit of New Zealand racing and maximising returns to sports , while ensuring harm minimisation is prioritised . The Bill also creates the RIB, a single entity responsible for the investigative and adjudicative functions of racing, while maintain ing independence between these functions. The current integrity system, the Judicial Control Authority and the Racing Integrity Unit, will be disestablis hed at the point the RIB is established. . TAB NZ and the RIB will be established as statutory bodies, each with board s of up to seven members appointed by the Minister for Racing . Both agencies will be required to present their statement s of intent (SOIs) and business plan s to the Minister for Racing, for tabling in Parliament. . The Bill transfers racing responsibilities held by RITA , to the three racing code bodies (Thoroughbred Racing New Zealand, Harness Racing New Zealand and Greyhound Racing New Zealand) . The Bill amends the accountability requirements of the codes, requiring them to submit their SOIs and business plans to the Minister, for tabling in Parliament. Allocation of decision making powers . The draft legislation does not involve the allocation of decision making powers between the executive, the courts, and tribunals. The Bill creates powers to make regulations to specify further detail related to the operation of the RIB, including the judicial committees and appeals tribunals. Associated regulat ions . The clauses which relate to the establishment of the RIB (clauses to ) will come into force on a to be made by Order in Council . The following Order in Council powers are also included: . ending the statutory restriction on club property transactions without the club first obtaining code approval; and . enabling the transfer of club property to the code, with payments to the club and local community where warranted. . In addition, given the scale of the changes , the Bill creates powers to make regulations if required , in the following ways : . if a commissioner is appointed to resolve a significant disagreement between the codes , whose decision would be binding on those involved, levying the codes for the associated costs ; . specifying further detai l related to the operation of the RIB, including the judicial committees and appeals tribunals; . setting the level of funding for the RIB if a funding agreement cannot be reached; ldrz Proactively released by the Minister for Racing IN CONFIDENCE Page of . prescribing the independent body responsible for assessing and approving TAB NZs request to introduce new betting products; . setting the decision making framework and fee arrangements for the independent body responsible for assessing and approving TAB NZs request to introduce new betting products ; and . prescribing a process and criteria that codes must apply when negotiating with clubs about the use of surplus venues, having due regard to any community interests in the venue. Other instruments . The Bill does not include any provision empowering the making of other instruments deemed to be legislative instruments or disallowable instruments . Definition of Ministerdepartment . The Bill continues the definition of Department within the Racing Act . It includes the option for the Department to be the designated agency that will admin ister the levy relating to the appointment of a Commissioner in clause . Commencement of legislation . Except for clauses , , to , and clause in Schedule , the Bill will come into force on July . Clauses , and clause in Schedule , will come into force the day after Royal assent. Clauses to will come into force on a to be determined by Order in Council. It is anticipated this will take place within months of the Bill being enacted. A deferre d commencement i s required to prepare the current integrity system for the transition. Parliamentary stages . It is intended the Bill be introduced on or before December and referred to the Transport and Infrastructure select committee, for a select committee process of four months. Given the timeframes, approval is being sought for PCO to make any technical changes to the Bill prior to introduction. The Bill must be passed on, or before, June . Proactive release . Consistent with Cabinet Office Circular CO () Proactive Release of Cabinet Material: Requirements, the Minister for Racing intends to proactively release this paper, subject to any redactions that may be warranted under the Official Information Act , within busines s days of decisions being taken. Recommendations . The Minister for Racing recommends the Cabinet Legislation Committee : .
Consultation Crown Law has been consulted on this paper. Treasury and the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (Policy Advisory Group) have been informed.
Consultation Treasury, Te Puni K kiri, Statistics NZ, Ministry of Education, Whaikaha Ministry for Disabled People, Ministry for Pacific Peoples, Mi nistry for Women, Ministry for Ethnic Communities, Mini stry of Youth Development, Oranga Tamariki, Department of Corrections and the Electoral Commission were consulted on this Cabinet paper and the draft Bill. The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (Policy Advisory Group) was informed. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of qlgofb
Consultation . The Department of Internal Affairs prepared this paper in consultation with Department of Corrections, StatsNZ, Crown Law, Ministry for Women, Ministry of Health, Oranga Tamariki Ministry for Children , Ministry of Education, Ministry of Social Development, Ministry of Youth Development, Ministry of Justice, Te Puni Kkiri, Ministry for Pacific Peoples, Sport NZ, New Zealand Transport Agency, New Zealand Police, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employ ment (Immigration) , Inland Revenue, Public Service Commission, Office of Ethnic Communities , Human Rights Commission, Office of the Privacy Commissioner, and Treasury . The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet have been informed . Communications . Once Cabinet has considered this paper , I intend to announce my intent ion to progress with a selfidentification pro cess . The associated media release will outline my intention to refer the self identification SOP to Select Committee. . Selfidentification has pr eviously attracted significant media attention. Officials have developed a communications plan with key messages and frequently asked questions to ensure people understand the changes and the rationale behind them . This material will be made available on t he Department of Internal Affairs website. . Officials are developing an engagement plan focussed on supporting young people, Mori, Pacific peoples and ethnic communities to participate in the Select Committee process. This will include providing written in formation about the Bill to Iwi authorities, community organisations and media networks that have reach in these communities. Officials are working with Te Puni K kiri, the Ministry for Pacific Peoples, and the Office for Ethnic Communities to identify rep resentatives who should be informed and for ways to expand outreach. Proactive Release . As per Cabinet Office Circular CO () , I intend to proactively release this paper , subject to any redactions that may be warranted under the Official Information Act , within business days of decisions being taken .
Consultation and agency feedback We have consulted with the following agencies: Department of Corrections, StatsNZ, Crown Law, Ministry for Women, Ministry of Health, Oranga Tamariki Ministry for Children, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Social Development, Ministry of Youth Development, Ministry of Justice, Te Puni K kiri, Ministry for Pacific Peoples, Sport NZ, New Zealand Transport Agency, New Zealand Police, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (Immigration), Inland Revenue, Public Service Commission, Office of See section of the BDMRR Act and clause I of the Bill, which state that a persons sex should be determined by the general law of New Zealand. ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Ethnic Communities, Human Rights Commission, Office of the Privacy Commissioner, and Treasury. The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet has been informed. The above agencies are generally supportive of selfidentification, for example, the Office of the Privacy Commissioner stated: The Privacy Commissioner supports the proposal to introduce a self identification process to enable a persons gender to be recognised on their birth certificate. The Commissioner notes that the proposal would create consistency between birth certificates, and passports and driver licences which are more commonly used as identity documents and have a selfidentification process for recognising gender. The Commissioner considers the proposed self identification process to be privacy enhancing as a person is no longer required to provide sensitive medical information to change their registered sex. We have addressed many of these agencies previous concerns, including around the previously proposed onetime limit on changing sex markers and the requirements for children to access selfidentification. Some concerns remain around requirements for guardian consent as described in paragraphs and above. During consultation agencies raised new concerns about how people who were born overseas but now reside in New Zealand will access official documents that recognise their gender. For example, transgender asylum seekers or transgender M ori who were born overseas and whose birth cannot be registered in New Zealand. We recognise this is an issue but consider it outside of scope of the selfidentification proposals discussed in this paper it would not be appropriate to legislate a process to amend information for births registered overseas. We will consider if and how this matter could be resolved and provide you with further advice. As requested by your office, a summary of the agency feedback received during the development of the advice about selfidentification is included at Appendix B . Communications We have provided your office with a communications plan and frequently asked questions to support work on introducing a selfidentification process. We are ready to work with your office on an announcement following Cabinet of your intention to progress the Bill with selfidentification and refer the selfidentification SOP to Select Committee. We will provide yo u material to support this announceme nt along with the final Cabinet paper in early May . We consider that an announcement soon after Cabinet approval is important. Proactive communications clearly setting out the rationale for the changes and what they involve will preempt and potentially mitigate opposition to selfidentification. Providing information on the changes early will also be important so interested individuals and communities can prepare to engage with the changes at Select Committee. We will provide you with separate advice ahead of Cabinet on engagement to support young people and Mori, Pacific peoples and ethnic communities , who have not been heard from, to participate in the Select Committee process. For example, this could include providing written information about the Bill to iwi authorities, community organisations and media networks that have reach in these communities and with young people . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Recommendations . We recommend that you: a)agree that the Births Deaths, Marriages , and Relationships Registra tion Bill be amended to: i. allow a range of sex marker s reflecting genders other than the binary (male and female) and that these can be prescribed in regulations;Yes No ii. allow people to amend their registered sex multiple times, but that subsequent applications may need to meet additional requirements that can be prescribed in regulations ;Yes No iii. allow people to revert to their sex at birth without the need to meet any additional requiremen ts that may usually be needed for subsequent amendment s;Yes No iv. remove the requirement for children and young people to obtain a declaration from the Family Court stating that it is appropriate for the sex on a persons birth certificate to be amende d;Yes No v. remove the requirement for children and young people to provide evidence of medical treatment that has enabled them to physically conform with the sex they want recorded on their birth certificate;Yes No vi. introduce a self identification process where children and young people can apply directly to the Registrar General of Births, Deaths and Marriages to amend their registered sex ;Yes No vii. require applications for children and young people aged years an d under to be: made on behalf of the child or young person by their guardian; and be accompanied by a letter of support from a third party;Yes No viii. require young people aged and years of age to apply on their own behalf with either : written consent from their guardian; or a letter of support from a third party;Yes No ix. require that the third parties who can provide the letter of support to be prescribed in regulations;Yes No Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of x. clarify that the Regist rarGeneral can give effect to Family Court decisions under the Children of Care Act relating to guardians refusing consent to a or year old changing their registered sex;Yes No xi. clarify that the Registrar General can give effect to Family Court decisions under the Children of Care Act where there are disputes between guardians to a child or young person changing their registered sex;Yes No xii. introduce a regulation making power to give effect to the changes in recommendations i, ii, ix and any other matters required to give effect to a self identification process;Yes No b)advise the Department if you require any changes to the draft Cabinet paper; c)agree to consult your ministerial colleagues on the draft Cabinet paper;Yes No d)note we will provide you wit h material to support your announcement of progressing self identification when we provide the final Cabinet paper; e)note we will provide you with separate advice on engagement to support participation at Select Committee ahead of Cabinet in May; and f)agree in principle to proactively releas ing policy briefings provided to you on the Bill and self identification .Yes No Suzanne Doig General Manager, Policy Group Hon Jan Tinetti Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Appendix B: Summary of feedback from agency consultation Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Page of Appendix B: Summary of feedback from agency consultation Agencies were generally supportive of the proposal to introduce a self identification process for amending sex on a birth certificate. We have addressed most of their feedback , including their feedback on the process for introducing a self identification process for children and young people . Concern Agencies raising Key points Concern addressed in revised Cab inet paper Selfidentification process for children Human Rights Commission Extra r equirements for and year olds potentially breach section of N ew Zealand Bill of Rights Act (discrimination based on age). Suggests the Cabinet paper should demonstrate how this is not the case under s ection of the Act.This will be considered as part of Bill of Rights Act vet . The selfidentification provisions passed this vet previously. Crown Law Extra requirements for and year olds should be justified as it may be construed as age based discrimination. Office for the Childrens Commissioner Suggested engagement with children should be a focus. Yes, the engagement plan to encourage participation at Select Committee will now include reaching out to young people. Te Puni Kkiri Suggest ed we consult with Whnau Ora providers on who should be a third party provider In part: Whnau Ora providers will be included in engagement plan to encourage participation at Select Committee . Requiring guardian consent Ministry of Social Development Concern about guardian consent for children and young people changing registered sex. This creates space for parents to discourage changing registered sex.Yes, for year olds. The requirement for c onsent remains for year olds and younger. Oranga Tamariki Ministry for Children Noted that parents and guardians may not be supportive of transgender and gender diverse children. Transgender and gender diverse children are subject to high rates of abuse from their parentsguardians and parentsguardians are often the first to police their childs gender expression Ministry of Health Requirement for guardian consent goes beyond what is required for medical procedures. Would have negative effect on minors who are estranged from their guardian (suggests another avenue should be available in these situations). Should provide more information about financial implications MBIE Immigration Suggested the p aper should include estimated costs to other agencies to update systems where N ew Zealand citizen s identity information is held (e g Immigration New Zealand).Have added a general statement in the financial implications section about expected costs to other agencies . Where costs have been provided, these have been included (e g Ministry of Education). We continue to work with other agencies to assess if there will be any other additional costs. NZ Police Should note that there may be costs for Police in changing information systems . Treasury Requested that savings for individuals and Vote Courts (from removing the Family Court process ) be quantified. Requested further detail on Ministry of Education requiring . million when will this be sought where will it come from And it would be useful to note th is potential future cost pressure in the recommendations . Ministry of Education The paper should advise that there will be costs for the Ministry of Education to implement changes to their data systems. Risks around identity MBIE Immigration Suggests further consultation with agencies about risks of identity fraud. The paper is clearer about the level of risk associated with Document Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Consultation document Archives New Zealand
Consultation document Digital Public Service
Consultation document He Pou Aronui Organisational Capability and Services
Consultation document Indexing Team, National Library
Consultation document National Library
Consultation document Office of the Chief Executive
Consultation document Te Urungi Mori, Strategy and Performance
Consultation document Toi Hiranga Regulation and Policy
Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of Consultation document: Organisational Change Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of Contents Contents Introduction . Introduction from Chief Executive Paul James . Introduction from Suzanne Doig, Deputy Chief Executive, Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy . Section Two: Consultation Process . Purpose of consultation document . Timeline . Process for providing feedback . What happens after the consultation period . Employee support . Section Three: Branch Context and Environment . Section Four: Proposed changes to structure and positions . . Direct reports to the Deputy Chief Executive, Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy . . Regulatory Assurance and Stewardship . . Strategy and Branch Services . . Ministerial, Monitoring and Capability . . Policy Group . . Digital Safety . . Regulatory Services . Summary of proposed impact on current positions . Proposed new role summaries . Section Five: Proposed change protocol . Introduction . Principles . Who does this protocol apply to . Overview . Affected employees . Reconfirmation process . Reassignment process . Reconfirmation or reassignment review process . Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of Remaining affected employees . Other options . Notice . Redundancy . Appendix A: Approach to Working through Expressions of Interest and Alternative Opportunities for Affected Kaimahi . Appendix B: Proposed Regulatory Systems Group Operating Model and Ways of Working .
Consultation for Severe weather recovery: Preparation of an OiC to replace the longterm plan with a threeyear plan for eight local authorities.
Consultation for proposed Order in Council: Severe Weather Emergency Recovery Legislation Act :
Consultation is now closed.
Consultation on introduction of minimum standards for mandatory accountbased play in New Zealand casinos
Consultation on the terms of reference for the Royal Commission into COVID Lessons: report on public submissions
Consultations across government
Consumer representation and protection is provided through the Energy and Water
Contact Information Information that may be used to contact an individual, including any
Contact Information Phone number(s) Births, Deaths and
Contact Tracing Technologies Prototype Research Programme key documents
Contact Tracing is a public health method which identifies persons who may have come into contact with an infected person and subsequently collects further information about these contacts. By tracing contacts and isolating them, public health authorities aim to reduce further infections in the population. Contact tracing in New Zealand is performed by our public health authorities. Sources of infection The base reproduction rate, or R (R nought), for COVID is around .. Each infected person infects, on average, . other people. Newly infected persons then each infect another . people, causing exponential growth in infections if left unchecked.
Contact address(es) Births, Deaths and
Contact for telephone discussions (if required)
Contact for telephone discussions (if required) .a...,,,
Contact for telephone discussions (if required) Name Position Contact Numbe r Suggested st contact Nick Law Policy Manager Lucy Gentles Policy Analyst
Contact for telephone discussions (if required
Contact other New Zealand government agencies
Contact the Archives Council:
Contact the Digital Messaging and Systems team by email, phone, fax or post.
Contact the Trust Framework Authority
Contact them directly for more information.
Contact us and let us know in the first instance so that we can try to resolve the issue immediately.
Contact us for a variety of professional translation and language services.
Contact us using the form above as soon as possible so we can confirm if youre affected, verify any changes to bank account details or tax code, and arrange payment to you.
Contact with individuals will be attempted using:
Contacting the Department about opportunities
Contacts for Cabinet Ministers are also found on the Beehive website
Content of the Plans: Councils will need to include the following information:
Content regulatory review engagement summary
Contents Foreword iii Contents v Introduction Strategic overview . The gambling environment . The nature of gambling harm . Intervention service data . Key principles underpinning the strategy . Functions of the strategy . Gambling harm needs assessment . Outcomes monitoring . A populationbased public health approach . Gambling harm inequality and inequity . Strategic framework . Outline of each of the strategic objectives . Aligning the strategy with He Korowai Oranga . Aligning the strategy with Ala Moui: Pathways to Pacific Health and Wellbeing Threeyear service plan . Background . Service plan for to . Public health services . Intervention services . Research and evaluation . New service and innovation pilots . Ministry of Health operating costs Levy rates for . Background . Process for setting the levy rates . The levy formula . Levy rates References STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO v Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Contents and directions instructions for how to navigate the dashboard and view the information you need. It covers how to:
Continued optimisation and transition of remaining fleet to EV where possible
Continued the seismic uplift of our Archives building in Wellington and began assessing how to make the National Library building in Wellington more resilient to withstand earthquakes
Continued to promote a workplace culture that prioritises wellbeing, health and safety, with ongoing engagement and training opportunities.
Continuum of gambling behaviour and harm, from no gambling no harm to severe behaviour severe harm. None NonProblem Gambler PGSI Score O (Out of ) Metaana lysis , , HPA HLS Survey . of Population PGSI Score ( Cl: .. .) NonGambler .. of Population ( Cl: ..) Low Mild PGSI Score (Out of ) Metaanalysis , , HPA HLS Survey . of Population ( Cl: ..) Approx. , people over yrs : Probability of other addictions being present increases with severity of gambling behaviour Moderate PGSI Score (Out of ) Metaanalysis , , HPA HLS Survey . of Population ( Cl: ..) Approx. , people over yrs Severe (Problem) PGSI Score (out of ) Metaanalysis , , HPA HLS Survey . of Population ( Cl: ..) Approx. , people over yrs Continuum of intervention from public health and primary care to the intensive tertiary level.. Health Promotion (Spectrum of Activity: Primary prevention Awareness raising, : Early intervention, Relapse preventionmaintenance) Examples Social Marketing, Education, Support and Activity Groups, Sorted Whanau Financial Capability, Screening tools Harm Reduction (Spectrum of Activity: Secondary: Prevention Brief and Early intervention treatment) Examples Therapy Groups (e.g. CBT) Intensive Treatment (Spectrum of Activity: Tertiary Prevention Intensive Clinical treatment) Examples Individual CBT and Intensive Counselling Clinical Figure : Gambling behaviour and harm: the continuum of prevention and harm reduction STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Contract opportunities at the Department
Contracts and tenders awarded by the Department of Internal Affairs are posted at:
Contributes to the successful service delivery outcomes for whnau, hap, iwi and Mori organisations by improving capability, visibility, service improvement relationships.
Contributing to the achievement of this outcome we have five
Contributing to the achievement of this outcome we have four
Contributing to the achievement of this outcome we have three
Contributing to the achievement of this outcome we have two
Control Onshore cloud provides stronger control as the data is located within
Conviction Highlights True Nature of Child Pornography
Conviction for Electronic Pictures of Children
Cook Islands, Niue, or Tokelau.
Cooperation and coordination across central and local government is critical to address complex issues that have both local and national implications and solutions.
Coordinating and managing official Guest of Government visits to New Zealand, and arranging national commemorative events
Copyright and Licensing For material created by other parties, copyright is held by them and they must be consulted on the licensing terms that they apply to their material.
Corner Bates Street and Somme Parade, Whanganui
Corporate information on the Gambling Commission.
Corporation (ACC), DPMC, Inland Revenue (IR), Kinga Ora, Land Information
Correction to Annual Gambling Expenditure Statistics Report
Correspondence between the Minister of Local Government and Mayor Tory Whanau
Correspondence from the Minister of Local Government to Lindsay McKenzie
Corrina Charlotte GestroBest
Cost ofliving implications . The proposals in this paper will require unplanned spending for a number of councils in the financial year. Relative to total council spending , this will be small expenditure and have little effect on ratepayers for larger councils . It will have a more significant impact on small er councils. Financial implications Restoring polls on Mori wards . The permanent reinstatement of the poll mechanism for Mori wards has no notable financial implications for the Crown. Councils would need to fund the cost of standalone polls on Mori wards when a petition is received. Estimated costs for these polls are , for a council with an electoral population of ,. Based on previous experience, councils will factor the risk s and cost of polls into decisions on whether to attempt to establish Mori wards. ()(f)(iv), ()(g)(i) ()(f)(iv), ()(g)(i) ()(f)(iv), ()(g)(i) ()(f)(iv), ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Mori wards Option A . The transitional mechanism in Option A requiring up to councils to hold polls in late will have financial implications for both the Crown and councils : .. Between and councils will need to fund standalone polls (estimated cost , for a council with an electoral population of ,) . .. Some of these councils will also need to complete expedited representation reviews. Due to the time constraints , it is likely that many councils will need to prepare two representation arrangement proposals in advance for both possible poll outcomes. For most of the affected councils , this will be unplanned expenditure (estimated cost from , to , for a council with an electoral population of ,) . .. The Electoral Commission will need to provide additional processing of data extracts and information technology support for a large number of polls in a compressed timeframe the estimated cost is ,. Mori wards Option B . The financial implications for Option B are similar to A, except that only councils that receive a valid petition for a poll will incur the unplanned costs . Mori wards Option A . The financial implications will be less by more than half for councils that hold a poll alongside the local elections. . Financial implications for the Electoral Commission will be minimal under A . Mori wards Option B . The financial implications for Option B are similar to Opt ion A except that only councils that receive a valid petition will incur the unplanned costs . Fixing postal voting timeframes . This proposal has minor financial implications for councils because they will need to provide special voting facilities over a longer voting period. . There are cost implications for the Electoral Commission because the enrolment update campaign will need to start earlier, and the additional enrolment support will need to be in place over a longer period. Overall financial implications comment . Due to the pace of developing this policy advice, I only have a preliminary view on the financial implications at this time. As the details for the proposals in the Bill are developed and consulted on, I will be able to report back to the Cabinet Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE
Cost Does the option minimise fiscal andor compliance costs counc i ls could continue with their current representation arrangements, or planned and budgeted representation review processes, until they are due for review under the standard process. Creates a new obligation for up to councils to fund standalone polls, and in some cases an out ofcycle representation review process . The inclusion of the opportunity to rescind decisions about Mori wards or disestablish existing Mori wards would save councils the cost of holding a poll. Up to councils that can be presented with a petition signed by at least of electors will be required to hold a binding poll during the local elections. While this represents an increased cost, combining the poll with the local elections is substantially cheaper Up to councils will be required to hold a binding poll during the local elections. While this represents an increased cost, combining the poll with the local elections is substantially cheaper than holding a standalone poll.
Cost Does the option minimise fiscal andor compliance costs Counci l s without Mori wards will incur costs at least every six years for public engagement on whether to establish Mori wards . The extent of the engagement will depend on individual council policies. Councils with Mori wards are not required to continue to consider whether to disestablish existing Mori wards. Any council that proposes establishing Mori wards is likely to incur the cost of conducting a poll , including costs relating to community engagement . If a council chooses to hold a poll with the triennial local elections they can reduce their costs, vs holding a standalone poll. Under this option councils would not be required to consider Mori representation at least every six years, which would reduce the cost of consultation on proposals. Overall assessment Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Cost pressures within the Three Waters Reform Programme
Cost savings and reprioritisation paper for Minister
Costofliving Implications
Costs incurred to remediate or update new system to meet the required standard. Lowhigh depending on the nature and functions of the software.
Costs likely to be integrated into the project itself. Lowhigh depending on the project. Officials have low confidence in the indicative figures (and their impact) as the true cost can only be estab lished once the compliance process, the rules that govern it, and the ongoing accreditation obligations are finalised. The Department currently has no method by which to determine how many entities will be in each category, or if the costs will vary signif icantly depending on the nature of the participant (public sector versus private sector), or the role a participant plays in the ecosystem (e.g. information provider vs infrastructure provider). All of this will, however, be clarified during phase one of t he Trust Framework ( ).
Costs Medium. Estimated costs approximately to million per annum. Timeframe Medium. Could be stood up with transitionary arrangements in the near future but would not be fully stood up until new legislation established (likely ). up andor maintain, increasing overall costs and discouraging participation. Low probability scenario: accreditation costs might be too high discouraging entities from becoming part of trusted digital identity ecosystem. Costs High. Estimated costs approximately to million per annum. Timeframe High. It will take some time to establish an entirely new entity and get it operational and this would be at odds for a requirement to establish a solution in the near future, especially now that the C ovid pandemic has accelerate d digitalisation in all spheres of life .
Council and GovernorGeneral for enactment.
Council feedback . Several councils have indicated they are in early discussions with other s in forming joint regional water services delivery models or shared service agreements . Various grou p combinations are being explored, including councils in the; . Bay of Plenty region Kawerau, Opotiki, Rotorua Lakes, Tauranga, Western Bay of Plenty and Whakatane ; . Hawkes Bay region Central Hawkes Bay, Hastings, Napier and Wairoa ; . Taranaki region New Plymouth, Stratford, and South Taranaki ; . Top of the South Island Tasman, Marlborough and Nelson; ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . West Coast region Buller, Grey and Westland; . North and East Canterbury region Hurunui, Kaikura and Waimakariri; and . Central Canterbury region Christchurch City, Selwyn and Waimakariri . . Councils in the Waikato region including Hamiton City, Hauraki, Matamata Piako, Otorohanga, South Waikato, Taupo, Thames Coromandel, Waikato, Waipa and Waitomo are in joint discussions and intend to prepare a proposed model by mid . From then, the pro posals will return to their councils for a formal decision on membership determined by resolution. . It is understood councils in the Wellington, Wairarapa and Horowhenua region have agreed to collaborate on a unified approach to a new affordable and sustainable water services delivery model . .
Council feedback submissions
Council models and slide packs
Council shareholding in Water Service Entities
Council, in the manner set out below, for the purpose of this approved information
Councils are required to submit final Plans to the Department of Internal Affairs within imonths of the Act receiving Royal assent
Councils must assess all relevant gambling applications against their local gambling policy and make a decision as to whether to grant or decline their consent. Then the Department makes an assessment before issuing the licence.
Councils that have already started a LTP amendment process on voluntary buyout proposals are not prevented from continuing, and any council that wishes to consult on this matter through a LTP amendment process are not prevented from doing so.
Councils were not expected to make any formal decisions regarding the reform through this period, as such this period did not trigger the need for formal consultation. See
Counsel of NZSIS or the Chief Executives for resolution.
Countering Online Child Sexual Exploitation
Countering Violent Extremism Online
Countering digital violent extremism
Couple connected to paedophile network jailed for online child sexual exploitation and abuse charges
Court Prosecution for Auckland Bollywood DVD Store
Court Upholds Departments View
Cover Briefing Approval to consult on levy rates
Cover Briefing Final Cabinet paper: Proposals for Exemptions to the Fire and Emergency Levy
Cover Briefing Proposals for Exemptions to the Fire and Emergency Levy
Cover briefing LGE Legislation Bill August
Cover briefing: Cabinet paper for lodging: Regulations addressing harm minimisation in Class gambling venues, and associated infringement regulations
Cover briefing: Consultation package and Cabinet paper on changes to the Films, Videos, and Publications Act February
Cover briefing: Letter of appreciation for Presiding Member of the Lotteries Community Research Committee
Coverage of key segments of the community Solution design and ease of use drives high adoption across our vulnerable and at risk people. Compliant usage across at risk segments as good as or better than the average adoption. Degree of expected compliant or noncompliant usage This can be hardwired into physical hardware but is discretionary by app users. Statistical sampling of segments of users and confirming the solution is activated and working. This can be instrumented into the solution design. Extrapolation of non compliant use must keep us above the critical mass of adoption.
CovidCard CovidCard is a dedicated hardware device which performs much the same function as an app, but can potentially achieve the necessary levels of compliant adoption across broader segments of society. CovidCard is designed to be worn on a lanyard around the neck, for both easy compliance monitoring in venues where it might be required, but also to enable optimal device function.
CovidCard Design The CovidCard is a Bluetooth Low Energy (Bluetooth LE) device approximately the size of a credit card. It is designed to be worn on a lanyard around the neck when you are in environments where people congregate. This includes public transport, workplaces, bars, restaurants, gyms, hospitals, large gatherings and events. Openly wearing a CovidCard contributes to easily assessing and enforcing compliant use, as required.
CovidCard does not store any personal information on the card itself, and no card data is automatically stored in the cloud or elsewhere. A cards own broadcast identifier is cryptographically , and rotated approximately every fifteen minutes to ensure anonymity of the cardholder. Only the aforementioned Crown Entity has the ability to decrypt IDs and associate them with a cardholder. Cards cannot track user location as they do not contain locationaware technology such as GPS. Only days of data is stored on the card and the battery for each card will only last for approximately months.
CovidCard detects and records close contacts using Bluetooth LE and stores this data securely on a persons card. No contact data is automatically stored in the cloud or elsewhere and only days of close contacts will be stored. Cards do not track user location as they do not contain GPS capability.
CovidCard exists within a system of policies, operational management and other tools and should be considered as such. A detailed assessment of existing contact tracing capabilities is not within the scope of this document. Consideration has been given to the wider strategic context into which the CovidCard might be deployed.
CovidCard has a nonrechargeable battery with a typical month battery life. Once the battery is depleted contact records are lost and become irretrievable as records are encrypted using a key held in volatile memory which is lost if power is lost. At that point, cards are recycled or disposed of.
CovidCard has no notion of location as it does not use GPS or have a network connection. Cards simply receive and record properlyformed transmissions from other nearby cards and use this information to help determine close or casual contacts. Records of other cards are retained on the card, not on any phones, computers or servers elsewhere, for a maximum of days.
CovidCard is designed as a temporary solution for COVID. The battery on the device will only last around months Deploying CovidCard in New Zealand in advance of relaxing border restrictions is likely the time when CovidCard is able to deliver the greatest value as this will be a time of elevated risk.
CovidCard makes contact tracing faster, more accurate, and more scalable if effectively integrated with existing contact tracing efforts. The main benefits of CovidCard are:
CovidCard must be deployed in advance of any second wave of COVID. Otherwise, by the time we distributed cards to everyone we would have already had our second Level lockdown and would have been moving down the Alert Levels again. While CovidCard could play a role with essential workers during a Level lockdown, lockdown alone can control the spread of the virus in the wider community. The time when CovidCard should be deployed will likely be characterised by complacency in the community regarding COVID.
CovidCard should be evaluated against its ability to meaningfully slow the spread of COVID. An ongoing Cochrane Review of digital contact tracing solutions identified multiple modelling studies that can inform the evaluation of the CovidCard (including Kucharski ; Ferreti ; Hinch ; Plank ; Grice ; Vaithianathan ). Three of these studies focus specifically on the New Zealand context (Plank ; Grice ; Vaithianathan ).
CovidCard would enable close contacts to be immediately notified and asked to selfisolate and could immediately provide contact details of close contacts to contact tracing teams. Four days, on average, can likely be saved between potential exposure and isolation, thus reducing tertiary infections. Downloading the cards of close contacts would also enable rapid isolation of secondorder contacts which we consider a necessary further step if elimination is the goal.
Craft Copywriting film and video silver
Craft Direction bronze
Created a Workplace Health and Safety Assurance Framework to monitor how well our Health and Safety Management System is working and for continuous improvement
Creates annual tariff list that clearly sets out prices for each year, as agreed in the funding and pricing plan.
Creating awareness by celebrating cultural events, such as Matariki, Te Wiki o te Reo Mori and Pasifika Language Weeks, and taking part in activities such as Sweat With Pride, Pink Shirt Day and Sign Language Week
Creating new agencies or amending la w relating to existing agencies.
Credit Union As defined in section of the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions Act
Crossagency services and information related to the death of a loved one, and to help you create and share a personalised plan of what you want to happen when you die.
Crown ) New Zealand Local
Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .)
Crown Entities, State Owned Enterprises, local government, and other specified
Crown Entity An entity or office named in Schedule of the Crown Entities Act, but
Crown Entity monitoring overview
Crown Observer appointed to Wellington City Council
Crown Observers December Report to the Minister
Crown Observers Interim Report to the Minister
Crown and the WSEs. This is stronger than sce nario due to the presence of the
Crown as it was unable to be transferred between financial years (consistent with the
Crown copyright . Gaming machine and gambling expenditure statistics owned and administered by the New Zealand Public Sector by Department of Internal Affairs is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribute . New Zealand Licence.
Crown entities and other statutory bodies
Crown funded services that the Department provides for seven portfolios. Although
Crown intervention in local authorities
Crown to l end mone y to WSE s if it is in the pu blic interest to do so, or to meet a
Crowns liquidity facilit y. This provides for explicit Crown support for the WSEs . While
Cultural conservation in another sense was fostered by the establishment in of the State Literary Fund, a precursor of the Queen Elizabeth II Arts Council () and a separate Ministry of Cultural Affairs (). A parallel development has been the progression from the National Council of Physical Welfare and Recreation () to the Council for Recreation and Sport () and the Hillary Commission ().
Cumulative annual statistics from a variety of sources to show class gambling key expenditure and GMP figures, against returns to the community and problem gambling presentations.
Cumulative annual statistics from a variety of sources to show key expenditure and GMP figures against returns to the community and problem gambling presentations.
Cumulative key reports will continue to be provided, in accessible datasets.
Curious and eager to learn
Current Quarter Venues A list of venues licenced at the end of the quarter.
Current Visa Information Schedule Clause (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i) and (j) Schedule Clause (b), (c), (e) and (f) Historic Visa Information Schedule Clause (b), (d), (e), (g), (h) and (i) Details of known or suspected offending relevant to consideration of an individual s liability for deportation Schedule Clause (d), (g), (h) and (i) Information relating to the individuals English language proficiency Schedule Clause (b), (d ) and (g) Good Character Additional Information Notification Schedule Clause (d), (g), (h) and (i) An individuals general history relevant to an assessment of the individuals character Schedule Clause (d), (g), (h) and (i) Travel Movement Travel movements of an individual Schedule Clause (b), (d), (e) and (g) Schedule Clause (b) and (f) Identity Documents
Current and historic legislative reviews, including
Current calls for nominations
Current calls for nominations for appointment to a statutory body can be found at:
Current debt to the Crown Schedule Clause (b) and (c) Historical debt to the Crown Schedule Clause (b) and (c) . How the RUC Collector may use Personal Information provided by DIA The Personal Information received by the RUC Collector from DIA may be used to: a) ensure that an individual applying for or utilising public service s is not required to provide identity and Life Event records that DIA holds. b) assist in the location of individuals . c) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences, and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review. . How the RUC Collector may use Personal Information provided by the Registrar General The Personal Information received by the RUC Collector from the Registrar General may be used to: a) ensure that an individual applying for or utilising public services is not required to provide identity and Life Event records that the Registrar General holds. b) update the records of an individual upon their death. c) update the records of an individual upon a name change. d) update the records of an individual upon their marriage or civil union. e) contact individuals who ma y wish to update the name on their account to a different name. f) provide additional protection to information provided by the Registrar General where the individual concerned has an active Non Disclosure Direction under the BDMRR Act. Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of g) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences, and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review. . Adverse Actions The RUC Collector can reasonably be expected to potentially take any of the following Adverse Action s based on the information received from another party : a) decline to provide requested public services. b) update the known names associated with a n individual . c) engage in the collection of debt to the Crown . d) investigate any matter that may constitute an offence under any legislation it administers and prosecute the offence or report any suspected offence to the New Zealand Police. e) engage in civil proceedings.
Current structure and proposed changes
Current vacancies (Rehutai)
Currently the Customer Nominated Services AISA is used to:
Currently, the contact tracing process is entirely manual: patients are asked to recall their close contacts over the last few weeks, and these are followed up with phone calls from contact tracing teams based at each district health board (DHB). Aside from being labourintensive, the process relies on human recall, which may be unreliable particularly for interactions that occurred further into the past.
Currently, the intense physical distancing measures implemented at Alert Level are acting as a strong safety net for cases not detected at the border and the case and contact management system. If the intensity of physical distancing decreases (by deescalating to Alert Level or by a decrease in compliance), this lowering of protection will induce a critical reliance on effective case management (including detection) for stopping existing transmission and any new transmission associated with a leaky border.
Customer Alert An alert that indicates that the RegistrarGeneral or DIA holds personal
Customer Alerts Births, Deaths and
Customer An individual using any of DIAs or the RegistrarGenerals services.
Customer Centred A specific approach to doing business that focuses on the customer when
Customer Centred DIAs solution to provide a single view of the customer, in order to manage
Customer Experience Survey
Customer Experience Survey , Service Delivery and Operations (January )
Customer Experience Survey , Service Delivery and Operations (January )
Customer Experience Survey , Service Delivery and Operations (January )
Customer Experience Survey , Service Delivery and Operations (March )
Customer Experience Survey , Service Delivery and Operations (March )
Customer Experience Survey , Service Delivery and Operations (March )
Customer Experience Survey , Service Delivery and Operations (June )
Customer Experience Survey , Service Delivery and Operations (June )
Customer Experience Survey , Service Delivery and Operations (August )
Customer Experience Survey , Service Delivery and Operations (October )
Customer Identifier the RegistrarGeneral and a Party to identify an individual.
Customer Identity A solution to manage customers identity data and access requirements.
Customer Nominated Services AISA
Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Appendix A
Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Information Sharing Agreement This Agreement is established under Part A of the Privacy Act to enable the parties to share Personal Information about individuals . This Agreement assist s with the provision of public services that the individual has chosen to appl y for where the delivery of those services is: supported by the identity information held by the Department of Internal Affairs (DIA) or the Registrar General , Births, Deaths and Marriages (Registrar General) ; provided by DIA; or provided by the Registrar General. This Agreement replaces the following agreements , which will be revoked once this Agreement is fully operational including the existence of operational procedures to share the required information : BDM (Births)MoE Student Birth Confirmation BDM (Deaths) MSD Deceased Persons Programme BDM (Deaths)INZ Deceased Temporary Visa Holders Programme BDM (Deaths)NZTA Deceased Driver Licence Holders Programme BDM (Marriages)MSD Married Persons Programme BDMMSD Identity Verification Programme BDMMSD Overseas Born Name Change Programme CitizenshipINZ Entitlement to Reside Programme Information Matching Agreement between DIA and MoE Births Information Matching Programme. (This is not currently active) Information Matching Agreement between The Chief Executive, Department of Internal Affairs and The Chief Executive of the Ministry of B usiness, Innovation and Employment for the Disclosure of Immigration Information to Support the Issuance of Electronic Identity Credentials Information Matching Agreement between The Chief Executive, Department of Internal Affairs and The Registrar General , Births, Deaths and Marriages for the Disclosure of Birth, Death, Marriage, Civil Union and Change of Name Information to Support the Issuance of Electronic Identity Credentials Information Matching Agreement between The Chief Executive, Department of Int ernal Affairs and The Chief Executive Department of Internal Affairs for the Disclosure of Citizenship Information Supporting Issuance for Electronic Identity Credentials Information Matching Agreement between The Chief Executive, Department of Internal Affairs and The Chief Executive, Department of Internal Affairs for the Disclosure of Passport Information to Support the Issuance of Electronic Identity Credentials Memorandum of Understanding Between The Department of Internal Affairs Citizenship Office and the Department of Labour Memorandum of Understanding for the Integration of the Passport Data Validation Service with VisaView Memorandum of Understanding on disclosure of citizenship information to verify a persons citizenship status andor verify a persons entitlement to reside in New Zealand Memorandum of Understanding: SmartStart Photo Driver Licence Card Verification Licence Agreement Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Contents . Defined terms . . . . . The parties involved and the Lead Agency . . . Background . . . . . Objectives and purposes of this Agreement . . .. Objectives . . . . .. Purposes . . . . . Exemptions to information privacy principles . . . The public services facilitated . . . . Type of Personal Information to be shared . . . How parties may use the Personal Information . . . Adverse Actions . . . . How to view this Agreement . . . . Overview of operational processes . . . . Safeguards to protect privacy . . . .. Staff . . . . .. Information handling . . . .. Accuracy . . . . .. Privacy Act requests . . . .. Privacy Breach . . . . .. Audit . . . . .. Security . . . . . Reasonable assistance provided . . . . Fees costs . . . . . Dispute reso lution . . . . Review of this Agreement . . . . Minor amendments to this Agreement . . . Major amendments to this Agreement . . . Term, performance and termination . . . . Party representatives . . . . Acceptance . . . . Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Schedule DIA . . . . Schedule Registrar General . . . Schedule NZTA . . . .. Schedule MSD . . . . Schedule MBI E . . . .. Schedule MoE . . . . Schedule ACC . . . . Schedule Registrar of Motor Vehicles . . Schedule RUC Collector . . .
Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of
Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of
Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Schedule DIA . Description of Personal Information to be shared Personal Information that can be shared by DIA under this Agreement falls into the general categories below: Category Includes Uses Identifying Information
Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Schedule Registrar General . Description of Personal Information to be shared Personal Information that can be shared by the Registrar General with all parties under this Agreement falls into the general categories below: Category Includes Uses Identifying Information Information to identify the individual including: current name previous names of birth place of birth Partner Specific Customer Identifier All Registered Information Birth Information , excluding the following records: Preadoptive birth registrations Presexual assignment or reassignment birth registrations Records with a Family Violence Act Non Disclosure Directive Schedule Clause ( c), (e), (f), (g), (h) and ( j) Schedule Clause (a), ( b), (d), (f) and ( i) Schedule Clause (a), (c), (g) and (i) Schedule Clause (a), (c) and (g) Schedule Clause (a), (b), (c), (d), (g) and ( i) Schedule Clause (a), (c) and (f) Schedule Clause (a), (c), (e) and (h) Schedule Clause (a), (c), (e) and (g) An individuals new name and previous name contained with in the register maintained by the Registrar General relating to births when a pre sexual assignment or reassignment has occurred. This excludes records with a Family Violence Act Non Disclosure Directive Schedule Clause ( c), (e), (f) and (j) Schedule Clause ( d) and ( i) Schedule Clause (c ) and (i) Schedule Clause (c) and (g) Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Category Includes Uses Death Information Schedule Clause (b), (e), (f) and ( j) Schedule Clause (a), ( c) and ( i) Schedule Clause (a), (b), (f) and (i) Schedule Clause (a), (b), (e) and (g) Schedule Clause (a), (b), (f) and ( i) Schedule Clause (a), (b) and (f) Schedule Clause (a), (b) and (h) Schedule Clause (a), (b) and (g) Marriage Information, excluding records with a Family Violence Act NonDisclosure Directive Schedule Clause (d), (e), (f), (g), (h) and ( j) Schedule Clause (a), ( e), (f) and ( i) Schedule Clause (a), (d), (e) and (i) Schedule Clause (a), (d) and (g) Schedule Clause (a), (h) and ( i) Schedule Clause (a), (d) and (f) Schedule Clause (a), (d), (e) and (h) Schedule Clause (a), (d), (e) and (g) Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Category Includes Uses Civil Union Information , excluding records with a Family Violence Act Non Disclosure Directive Schedule Clause (d), (e), (f), (g), (h) and ( j) Schedule Clause (a), ( e), (f) and ( i) Schedule Clause (a), (d), (e) and (i) Schedule Clause (a), (d) and (g) Schedule Clause (a), (h) and ( i) Schedule Clause (a), (d) and (f) Schedule Clause (a), (d), (e) and (h) Schedule Clause (a), (d), (e) and (g) Name Change Information , excluding records with a Family Violence Act Non Disclosure Directive Schedule Clause ( c), (e), (f), (g), (h) and ( j) Schedule Clause (a), ( d), (f) and ( i) Schedule Clause (a), (c) and (i) Schedule Clause (a), (c) and (g ) Schedule Clause (a), (g) and ( i) Schedule Clause (a), (c) and (f) Schedule Clause (a), (c), (e) and (h) Schedule Clause (a), (c), (e) and (g) Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Category Includes Uses Information contained within Name Change Lodgements, excluding records with a Family Violence Act Non Disclosure Directive Schedule Clause (e), (f), (g), (h) and ( j) Schedule Clause (a) and ( i) Schedule Clause (a), (c) and (i) Schedule Clause (a), (c) and (g) Schedule Clause (a) and ( i) Schedule Clause (a), (c) and (f) Schedule Clause (a), (c), (e) and (h) Schedule Clause (a) and (g) Overseas Information Overseas Death Information Schedule Clause (b), (e), (f) and ( j) Schedule Clause (a), ( c) and ( i) Schedule Clau se (a), (b), (f) and (i) Schedule Clause (a), (b), (e) and (g) Schedule Clause (a), (b), (f) and ( i) Schedule Clause (a), (b) and (f) Schedule Clause (a), (b) and (h) Schedule Clause (a), (b) and (g) Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Category Includes Uses Overseas Name Change Information Schedule Clause ( c), (e), (f), (g), (h) and ( j) Schedule Clause (a), ( d), (f) and ( i) Schedule Clause (a), (c) and (i) Schedule Clause (a), (c) and (g) Schedule Clause (a), (g) and ( i) Schedule Clause (a), (c) and (f) Schedule Clause (a), (c), (e) and (h) Schedule Clause (a), (c), (e) and (g) Overseas Marriage and Civil Union Information Schedule Clause (d), (e), (f), (g), (h) and ( j) Schedule Clause (a), (e), (f) and ( i) Schedule Clause (a), (d), (e) and (i) Schedule Clause (a), (d) and (g) Schedule Clause (a), (h) and ( i) Schedule Clause (a), (d) and (f) Schedule Clause (a), (d), (e) and (h) Schedule Clause (a), (d), (e) and (g) Non Disclosure Direction Information contained within the NonDisclosure Direction Application , under the B DMRR Act, including the it came into force Schedule Clause ( i) and ( j) Schedule Clause ( g), (h) and ( i) Schedule Clause (h) and (i) Schedule Clause (f) and (g) Schedule Clause ( e) and ( i) Schedule Clause (e) and (f) Schedule Clause (f), (g) and (h) Schedule Clause (f) and (g) Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of . How the Registrar General may use Personal Information provided by DIA The Personal Information received by the Registrar General from DIA may be used to: a) identify the individual about whom information is requested and issue a Partner Specific Customer Identifier if one does not already exist. b) verify an individuals identity when applying for Identity Services. c) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences under Relevant Legislation , and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review in relation to Identity Services . . How the Registrar General may use Personal Information provided by NZTA The Personal Information received by the Registrar General from NZTA may be used to: a) identify the individual about whom information is requested and issue a Partner Specific Customer Identifier if one does not already exist. b) verify an individuals identity when applying for Identity S ervices. c) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences under Relevant Legislation , and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review in relation to Identity Services . . How the Registrar General may use Personal Information provided by MSD The Personal Information received by the Registrar General from MSD may be used to: a) identify the individual about whom information is requested and issue a Partner Specific Customer Identifier if one does not already exist. b) assist with the location of a parent for unregistered births. c) verify an individuals identity when applying for Identity Services. d) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences under Relevant Legislation , and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review in relation to Identity Services . . How the Registrar General may use Personal Information provided by MBIE The Personal Information recei ved by the Registrar General from MBIE may be used to: a) identify the individual about whom information is requested and issue a Partner Specific Customer Identifier if one does not already exist. Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of b) confirm the eligibility of a child to be registered as a citizen by birth based on their parents residency status. c) confirm the eligibility of a n individual when applying for or utilising Identity Services. d) assist with the location of a parent for unregistered births. e) verify an individuals identity when applyin g for Identity Services. f) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences under Relevant Legislation , and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review in relation to Identity Services . . How the Registrar General may use Personal Information provided by MoE The Personal Information received by the Registrar General from MoE may be used to: a) identify the individual about whom information is requested and issue a Partner Specific Customer Identifier if one does not a lready exist. b) verify an individuals identity when applying for Identity Services. c) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences under Relevant Legislation , and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review in rel ation to Identity Services . . How the Registrar General may use Personal Information provided by ACC The Personal Information received by the Registrar General from ACC may be used to identify the individual about whom information is requested and issue a Partner Specific Customer Identifier if one does not already exist. . How the Registrar General may use Personal Information provided by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles The Personal Information received by the Registrar General from the Registrar of Motor Ve hicles may be used to identify the individual about whom information is requested and issue a Partner Specific Customer Identifier if one does not already exist. . How the Registrar General may use Personal Information provided by the RUC Collector The Perso nal Information received by the Registrar General from the RUC Collector may be used to identify the individual about whom inform ation is requested and issue a Partner Specific Customer Identifier if one does not already exist. Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of . Adverse Actions The Registrar General can reasonably be expected to potentially take any of the following Adverse Action s based on the information received from another party : a) decline to register an individual as a New Zealand citizen by birth . b) decline to register parents details in certain circumstances . c) decline to accept a registration of birth in certain circumstances . d) decline to issue a certificate or copy of a source document . e) decline to issue a marriage or civil union licence . f) decline to accept a name in relation to a birth recorded in certain circumstances . g) decline to accept a name change in certain circumstances. h) investigate any matter that may constitute an offence under any Relevant Legislation and prosecute the offence or report any suspected offence to the New Zealand Police. i) engage in civil proceedings in relation to Life Event s.
Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Schedule NZTA . Description of Personal Information to be shared Personal Information that can be shared by NZTA with DIA andor the Registrar General under this Agreement falls into the general categories below: Category Includes Uses Identifying Information
Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Schedule MSD . Description of Personal Information to be shared Personal Information that can be shared by MSD with DIA andor the Registrar General under this Agreement falls into the general categories below: Category Includes Uses Identifying Information Information to identify the individual including: current name previous names of birth place of birth Partner Specific Customer Identifier Schedule Clause (a) Schedule Clause (a) Debt Current debt to the Crown Schedule Clause (b) and (d) Historic debt to the Crown Schedule Clause (b) and (d) Parents or Caregivers Contact Details Information to contact the parents or caregivers of an individual including name, address, phone numbers and email address Schedule Clause (b) and (d) Status Confirmation individual known to MSD Schedule Clause (c) and (d) Schedule Clause (c) and (d) . How MSD may use Personal Information provided by DIA The Personal Information received by MSD from DIA may be used to: a) ensure that an individual applying for or utilising MSD Services is not required to provide identity and Life Event records that DIA holds. b) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences, and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review. . How MSD may use Personal Information provided by the Registrar General The Personal Information received by MSD from the Registrar General may be used to: a) ensure that an individual applying for or utilising MSD Services is not required to provide identity and Life Event records that the Registrar General holds. Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of b) update the records of an individual or persons associated with the individual upon an individuals death. c) update the records of an individual upon a name change. d) update the records of an individual upon their marriage or civil union. e) assess or reassess the eligibility for and entitlement to benefits, allowances a nd services on the marriage or civil union of an individual. f) assess or reassess the eligibility for and entitlement to benefits, allowances and services on the death of an individual or a person associated with the individual . g) assess or reassess the eligibility for and entitlement to benefits , allowances and services on the birth of a child. h) provide additional protection to information provided by the Registrar General where the individual concerned has an active Non Disclosure Direction under the BDMRR Act. i) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences, and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review. . Adverse Actions MSD can reasonably be expected to potentially take any of the following Adver se Action s based on the information received from another party: a) decline to provide requested public services. b) suspend payment of benefits to deceased individuals. c) update the known names associated with a n individual . d) decline to grant a benefit or allowance applied for. e) reassess an individuals eligibility for and entitlement to benefits and allowances. f) investigate any matter that may constitute an offence under any legislation it administers and prosecute the offence or report any suspected offence to the New Zealand Police. g) engage in civil proceedings. Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Schedule MBIE . Description of Personal Information to be shared Personal Information that can be shared by MBIE with DIA andor the Registrar General under this Agreement falls into the general categories below: Category Includes Uses Identifying Information Information to identify the individual including: current name previous names of birth place of birth Partner Specific Customer Identifier Schedule Clause (a) Schedule Clause (a) Visa Information
Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Schedule MoE . Description of Personal Information to be shared Personal Information that can be shared by MoE with DIA andor the Registrar General under this Agreement falls into the general categories below: Category Includes Uses Identifying information Information to identify the individual including: current name previous names of birth place of birth Partner Specific Customer Identifier Schedule Clause (a) Schedule Clause (a) Status Confirmation individual known to MoE Schedule Clause (b) and (c) Schedule Clause (b) and (c) . How MoE may use Personal Information provided by DIA The Personal Information received by MoE from DIA may be used to: a) ensure that an individual applying , directly or indirectly, for, or utilising Education Services is not required to provide identity and Life Event records that DIA holds. b) assess or reassess an individuals eligibility for and entitlement to Education Services. c) assist in the location of children not enrolled in school , or their parents or their caregivers. d) enable MoE to pro actively contact parents or caregivers of children to provide assistance and information to help get children enrolled in Education Services. e) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences, and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review. . How MoE may use Personal Information provided by the Registrar General The Personal Information received by MoE from the Registrar General may be used to: a) ensure that an individual applying , directly or indirectly, for, or utilising Education Services is not required to provide identity and Life Event records that the Registrar General holds. b) assess or reassess an individuals eligibility for and entitlement to Education Services. c) assist in the location of children not enrolled in school , or their parents or their caregivers. d) enable MoE to pro actively contact parents or caregivers of children to pro vide assistance and information to help get children enrolled in E ducation Services. Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of e) provide additional protection to information provided by the Registrar General where the individual concerned has an active Non Disclosure Direction under the BDMRR Act. f) update the records of an individual upon their death. g) update the records of an individual upon a name change. h) update the records of an individual upon their marriage or civil union. i) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offence s, and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review. . Adverse Actions MoE can reasonably be expected to potentially take any of the following Adverse Action s based on the information received from another party: a) decline to fund a students edu cation in certain circumstances. b) investigate any matter that may constitute an offence under any legislation it administers and prosecute the offence or report any suspected offence to the New Zealand Police. c) engage in civil proceeding s.
Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Schedule ACC . Description of Personal Information to be shared Personal Information that can be shared by ACC with DIA andor the Registrar General under this Agreement falls into the general categories below: Category Includes Uses Identifying information Information to identify the individual including: current name previous names of birth place of birth Partner Specific Customer Identifier Schedule Clause (a) Schedule Clause Debt Current debt to ACC Schedule Clause (b) and (c) Historical debt to ACC Schedule Clause (b) and (c) . How ACC may use Personal Information provided by DIA The Personal Information received by ACC from DIA may be used to: a) ensure that an individual applying for or utilising ACC services is not required to provide identity and Life Event records that DIA holds. b) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences, and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review. . How ACC may use Personal Information provided by the Registrar General The Personal Information received by ACC from the Registrar General may be used to: a) ensure that an individual applying for or utilising ACC services is not required to provide identity and Life Event records that the Regi strar General holds. b) update the records of an individual upon their death. c) update the records of an individual upon a name change. d) assess or reassess the eligibility for and entitlement to public services on the marriage or civil union of an individual. e) provide additional protection to information provided by the Registrar General where the individual concerned has an active Non Disclosure Direction under the BDMRR Act. f) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences, and the c onduct of civil proceedings including judicial review. Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of . Adverse Actions ACC can reasonably be expected to potentially take any of the following Adverse Action s based on the information received from another party: a) decline to provide requested public service s. b) cease to pay deceased individuals. c) update the known names associated with a n individual . d) Reassess an individuals eligibility for and entitlement to public services. e) investigate any matter that may constitute an offence under any legislation it administers and prosecute the offence or report any suspected offence to the New Zealand Police. f) engage in civil proceedings.
Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Schedule Registrar of Motor Vehicles . Description of Personal Information to be shared Personal Information that can be shared by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles with DIA andor the Registrar General under this Agreement falls into the general categories below: Category Includes Uses Identifying Information
Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of . Defined terms Term Definition ACC the Accident Compensation Corporation. Additional Information Notification A notification from MBIE that more information exists in relation to a n individual s character that is potentially relevant to a good character assessment . Adverse Action Any action that may adversely affect the rights, benefits, privileges, obligations, or interests of any specific individual. Agreement This information sharing agreement . Application The submission of a formal request for the provision of a public service. Approved Information Sharing Agreement (AISA) An information sharing agreement approved by an Order in Council that is for the time being in force. BDMRR Act Births, Death, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Act . Birth Information Information relating to the individuals birth that is maintained by the Registrar General under the BDMRR Act excluding information protected by sections to . Citizenship Information Information relating to the individuals citizenship history and current status, as maintained by the Secretary for Internal Affairs under the Citizenship (Western Samoa) Act , Citizenship Act or another Act. Civil Union Information Information relating to the individuals civil union that is maintained by the Registrar General under the BDMRR Act. Death In formation Information relating to the individuals death that is maintained by the Registrar General under the BDMRR Act. Demerit Points All demerit points recorded under section of the LTA , including demerit points that subsequently cease to have effect under section () of the LTA are cancelled by the NZTA under section s () or () of the LTA are reinstated by the NZTA under section () of the LTA . Deprivation The formal act of removing an individuals right to New Zealand Citizenship under section or of the Citizenship Act . DIA Department of Internal Affairs. Driver Licence A licence to drive that is issued or has effect under the LTA, and includes an Endorsement on a driver licence. Driver Licence Images Photographic images of Driver Licence holders stored under section () of the LTA. Driver Licence Information Current information held on the national register of Driver Licences for each Driver Licence maintained by the NZTA under section of the LTA. Education Services Public services provided to individuals within the legislative responsibilities of MoE. Electronic Identity Credential As defined in section of the Electronic Identity Verification Act . Endorsement As defined in Clause of the Land Transport (Driver Licensing) Rule . Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Term Definition Identity Services All public services provided by the Department of Internal Affairs or the Registrar General under the Relevant Legislation including the registration or recording of Life Events; the issuing of Travel Documents; and the provision of access to information relating to Life Events and Travel Documents. Lead Agency The lead agency for this Agreement for the purposes of section H() of the Privacy Act . Life Event A birth, death, marriage, civil union, name change, acquisition or grant of New Zealand Citizenship, change of citizenship status, or appointment or authorisation to act as a celebrant. LTA Land Transport Act . Marriage Information Information relati ng to the individuals marriage that is maintained by the Registrar General under the BDMRR Act. MBIE the Ministry of Business, Innovation, and Employment. MoE the Ministry of Education. MSD the Ministry of Social Development. MSD Services Public services provided to individuals within the legislative responsibilities of MSD. Name Change Information Information relating to the individuals name change that is maintained by the Registrar General under the BDMRR Act. Name Change Lodgements All deed poll name changes lodged with the Registrar General that are included in the Birth Information or Name Change Information (as applicable) for the individual . New Zealand Certificat e of Identity A Travel Document (other than a New Zealand Passport or New Zealand Refugee Travel Document) issued by the Government of New Zealand to an individual not a New Zealand citizen for the purposes of facilitating their entry into or exit from any country. This document states the known identity but not the nationality of that individual . New Zealand Certificat e of Identity Information Information relating to the individuals New Zealand Certificate of Identity history, including any information relating to any applications by the individual for a New Zealand certificate of identity . New Zealand Citizenship An individual holds New Zealand citizenship if they have obtained New Zealand citizenship under the Citizenship Act or the Citizenship (Western Samoa) Act whether by birth, descent, grant, or othe rwise than by descent, and it has neither been renounced or deprived. Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Term Definition New Zealand Citizenship by Birth An individual is a New Zealand citizen by birth if: the individual was born in New Zealand on or after January and before January ; or the individual was born in New Zealand on or after January , and, at the time of the individual s birth, at least one of the individual s parents was: a New Zealand citizen; or entitled in terms of the Immigration Act to be in New Zealand indefinitely, or entitled to reside indefinitely in the Cook Islands, Niue, or Tokelau. New Zealand Citizenship by Descent The process for obtaining New Zealand citizenship when the individual is born overseas and at least one parent is a New Zealand Citizen by Birth or grant (except where the individual is entitled to New Zealand Citizenship Otherwise than by Descent). New Zealand Citizenship by Grant The process for obtaining New Zealand citizenship when the individual is born overseas, applies for citi zenship by grant, and satisfies the Minister that the individual meets the statutory requirements of the Citizenship Act or the Citizenship (Western Samoa) Act and attends a ceremony if required. New Zealand Citizenship Otherwise than by Descent An individual born outside New Zealand shall be deemed to be a New Zealand citizen otherwise than by descent if that individuals father or mother is then: a New Zealand citizen, or a New Zealand citizen by Descent, pursuant to the Citizenship Act ; a nd either: a head of mission or head of post within the meaning of the Foreign Affairs Act ; an employee in any part of the State services, or a member of the Armed Forces, on service overseas; a person working overseas for the public service of Niue, Tokelau, or the Cook Islands; an officer or employee of New Zealand Trade and Enterprise (as established by the New Zealand Trade and Enterprise Act ) on service overseas; an officer or employee of the New Zealand Tourism Board (as established by the N ew Zealand Tourism Board Act ) on service overseas. New Zealand Passport A Travel Document issued by the Government of New Zealand to a New Zealand citizen. New Zealand Passport Information Information relating to an individuals New Zealand Passport history , including any information relating to any applications by the individual (including any supporting documents provided by the individual) for a New Zealand Passport. New Zealand Refugee Travel Document A travel document (other than a New Zealand Passport, New Zealand Emergency Travel Document or a New Zealand Certificate of Identity) issued by the Government of New Zealand to a refugee to facilitate international travel. Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Term Definition New Zealand Refugee Travel Document Information Information relating to an i ndividuals New Zealand Refugee Travel Document history, including any information relating to any Applications by the individual (including any supporting documents provided by the individual) for a New Zealand Refugee Travel Document. Non Disclosure Direction As defined in section of the BDMRR Act. NZTA the New Zealand Transport Agency. Overseas Birth Information Information relating to the birth of an individual outside New Zealand. Overseas Citizenship Information Information relating to an indi viduals citizenship history and current status excluding New Zealand Citizenship Information. Overseas Death Information Information relating to the death of an individual outside New Zealand . Overseas Marriage and Civil Union Information Information relating to the individuals marriage or civil union outside New Zealand or the dissolution of the individuals marriage or civil union outside New Zealand . Overseas Name Change Information Information relating to the name change of an individual outside New Zealand . Overseas Passport and Certificate of Identity Information Information relating to an individuals passport or certificate of identity excluding New Zealand Passport Information. Partner An agency, business, or non government organisation tha t: is authorised to provide DIA or Registrar General public services to individuals under the Relevant Legislation ; and records information about the individual; and uses DIA or Registrar General information to assist with delivery of its services. Partner Specific Customer Identifier (PSCID) In relation to an individual to whom a DIA or Registrar General public service under the Relevant Legislation is provided by a partner, is the unique identifier as used between DIA or the Registrar General and the partner to identify that individual . Personal Information Information about an identifiable individual; and includes information relating to a death that is maintained by the Registrar General pursuant to the BDMRR Act or any former Act. Privacy Breach Any privacy breach that the Privacy Act may require be reported to the Privacy Commissioner or that in the judgement of DIA does or may constitute an interference with privacy. Registered Information Person al Information recorded on a register held and maintained under an Act or Regulation. Registrar General The Registrar General appointed under section () of the BDMRR Act . Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Term Definition Relevant Legislation The following acts: BDMRR Act Citizenship Act Citizenship (Western Samoa) Act Civil Union Act Marriage Act Passport Act Renunciation The formal act of giving up an individuals right to New Zealand Citizenship under section of the Citizenship Act . RUC Collector As defined in section () of the Road User Charges Act . SDO Service Delivery and Operations Business branch within DIA responsible for Identity and Passport Services, Charities Services, Births, Deaths, Marriages, Citizenship, Authentications and Translations , Community Operations, Customer Services and Pou rahi. Security Breach An event in which sensitive, protected or confidential information is copied, transmitted, viewed, stolen or used by an unauthorised individual. Travel Document A document that is a New Zealand Passport, a New Zealand Certificate of Identity, a New Zealand Emergency Travel Document or a New Zealand Refugee Travel Document. Transport Service Licence As defined in section () of the LTA. Visa A visa a s defined in section of the Immigration Act . Visa Information Information relating to any application(s) by the individual (including any supporting documents provided by the individual) for a Visa. Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of . The parties involved and the Lead Agency The parties to this Agreement are: Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) ; Ministry of Business, Innovation, and Employment (MBIE) , including Immigration New Zealand ; Ministry of Education (MoE) ; Ministry of Social Development (MSD) ; New Zealand Transport A gency (NZTA) ; the Department of I nternal Affairs (DIA) ; the Registrar of Motor Vehicles ; the Registrar General of Births, Deaths and Marriages (Registrar General) ; and the Road User Charges (RUC) Collector (RUC Collector) .
Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Schedule RUC Collector . Description of Personal Information to be shared Personal Information that can be shared by the RUC Collector with DIA andor the Registrar General under this Agreement falls into the general categories below: Category Includes Uses Identifying Information
Customer Nominated Services Approved Information Sharing Agreement
Customer Nominated Services Information Sharing Agreement
Customer Object A unique identifier for a person who is a DIA RegistrarGeneral customer .
Customer Segment Lead, Individuals
Customer Single An ondemand view created of a customers information that enables them
Customer centred. Make things even better.
Customer experience survey
Customer loans (gross) , , , , ,
Customer unconnected Life Events and Travel Documents.
Customers can easily report a lost or stolen passport and use a seamless identity referee or witness portal. Identity proofing is now automated. We used to do this by crossreferencing multiple sources of data to verify a person. Identity proofing forms a cornerstone in the move to digital identity credentials.
Customers can now track their passport application, and make family and group applications online, irrespective of whether they are adult, child, firsttime or renewal applicants.
Customers now have a onestop shop for lodging and tracking their applications progress, saving time and effort in applying for a passport.
CyberCX New Zealand Limited
Cyclone Appeal Trust website
Cyclone Gabrielle from to February
Cyclone Gabrielle Supporting local government into recovery
Cyclone Hale, from to January
D D The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Order in Council is pub lished in the New Zealand Gazette June Order in Council comes into effect July . To meet the implementation deadline of July and still give you time to consult with your Ministerial colleagues, the Department proposes waiving the day rule forpublishing a notice in the New Zealand Gazette on the grounds that this will convey only benefits to the public. This is consistent with practice in previous years. . Subject to your agreement, the final paper will be proactively released on the Departments website, within business days of decisions being taken. The proactive release will contain any redactions that may be warranted under the Official Information Act . This is in accordance with the Cabinet Office Circular CO () . Recommendations . We recommend that you: a)consult with your M inisterial colleagues to obtain their YesNo feedback regarding the proposed adjustments to the Rates Rebate Scheme; and b)provide feedback from Minist erial consultation to the YesNo Department of Internal Affairs to incorporate in the Cabinet paper by April . Martyn Pinckard General Manager Policy and Operations Hon Nanaia Mahuta Minister of Local Government INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Appendix A: Draft Cabinet Paper: Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Priority Routine Local Government briefing Hon Nanaia Mahuta Minister of Local Government Title: Approval to upload the Cabinet Legislation Committee paper: Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order May Key issues On March , you agreed to adjust two key settings of the Rates Rebate Scheme for the financial year, and to proceed to the Cabinet Legislation Committee to seek approval o f an Order in Council. During Ministerial consultation o ne change to the Cabinet paper has been proposed . Your approval is now required to upload the Cabinet Legislation Committee paper : Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order to CabNet. Your Office will need to complete the lodge ment process by am, May . The Cabinet Legislation Committee is scheduled to consider the paper on June . Talking points for the Cabinet Legislation Committee meeting and a draft press release are attached for your consideration. Action so ught Timeframe Note that a change was proposed from your Cabinet colleagues on the Cabinet Legislation Committee paper: Rates Rebate (Speci fied Amounts) Order ; approve the Cabinet Legislation Committee paper: Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order for uploading to CabNet; and agree to the Department of Internal Affairs proactively releasing this briefing on its website, within working days of the Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order being in the New Zealand Gazette . Before May Contact for telephone discussions (if required) Name Position Contact Number Suggested st contact Richard Hardie Manager Operational Policy Martyn Pi nckard General Manager Policy and Operations Return electronic document to: Fergus Campbell, Fergus.Campbelldia.govt.nz Cohesion reference FAAE EDE AA DDADCADA Ministerial database reference LG INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Purpose . This briefing seeks your approval to upload the final version of the Cabinet Legislation Committee paper: Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order (the paper) to CabNet. The paper is attached as Appendix A . Background . On March , you agreed to adjust two key settings of the Rates Rebate Scheme(the Scheme) for the financial year LG refers. These adjustmentsreflect CPI (Consumer Price Index) inflation of . percent for the year ended December by: a)raising the maximum rebate available from to ; and b)raising the income abatement threshold from , to ,. . You also agreed to proceed to the Cabinet Legislation Committee, to seek approval ofan Order in Council which adjusts the two key settings of the Scheme. The Order inCouncil has been drafted by the Parliamentary Counsel Office and is provided withinAppendix A of the paper. During consultation a change was proposed to the Cabinet Paper . Hon Grant Robertson, Minister of Finance, Hon Carmel Sepuloni, Minister for SocialDevelopment, and Hon Dr Ayesha Verrall, Minister for Seniors were consulted on theproposals. . During Ministerial consultation, Minister Sepuloni asked if the proposed increase in theScheme was sufficient given the anticipated high rate increases expected this year in most councils. She also made a specific suggestion to adjust the two key settings of the Scheme using the average wage (as with Superannuation) rather than CPI. . The Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) notes that while the Scheme provides a modest amount of financial assistance, other cost of living subsidies (suchas the Accommodation Supplement) and adjustments to income support remain moreeffective at insulating lowincome ratepayers from high rate rises . . The Department considers that if you were to proceed with Minister Sepulonis recommendation, you would need to review the Scheme at a more strategic level inthe context of other subsidies and supplements that are available to lowincom e households. This could not be completed in time for an adjustment to the Scheme totake effect on July . . Adjusting the Scheme by more than CPI would also likely exceed the currentappropriation for the financial year . . Talking points on the adjustment level are provided to assist you in the CabinetLegislation Committee meeting on June should questions arise ( Appendix B ). Next steps . Following your approval, the Department will upload the paper to CabNet by May. Your Office will complete the lodgement process. . The Cabinet Legislation Committee is scheduled to consider the paper on June . . Cabinet and the Executive Council are scheduled to consider the Order in Council on June . INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua . If Cabinet approves the papers recommendation to waive the day rule, the Order in Council will be in the New Zealand Gazette on June , with the Order in Council taking effect from July . . The Department will inform councils of the upcoming changes, and work with them to ensure the seamless adoption of the annual adjustments to the Scheme. . The Department will also write to Grey Power and Age Concern, as representatives ofthe largest rates rebate applicant group about the adjustments. . A draft press release on the adjustments to the Scheme is attached for yourconsideration in Appendix C . Recommendations . The Department of Internal Affairs recommends that you: a)note that a change w as proposed from your Cabinet colleagues on the Cabinet Legislation Committee paper: Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order ; b)approve the Cabinet Legislation Committee paper: Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order for uploading to CabNet YesNo by May ; and c)agree to the Department proactively releasing this brief ing on its website, within working days of the Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order being in the New YesNo Zealand Gazette . Richard Hardie Manager Operational Policy Hon Nanaia Mahuta Minister of Local Government INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Appendix A: Cabinet Legislation Committee paper: Rates Rebate ( Specified Amounts ) Order INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
DA information will be accessed by NZSIS for the following statutory functions, duties
DCE Systems Capability and Programmes
DEL: CovidCard Phase One Report
DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS, WELLINGTON
DG Minister Status Report May
DG Minister Status Report March
DG Minister Status Report March
DG Minister Status Report WE April
DG Minister Status report WE April
DG Ministers Status Report July
DIA (Citizenship) Citizenship Information DIA (Passports) Clause .
DIA (Citizenship) DIA (Citizenship)
DIA (Citizenship) communication mediums, DIA (Citizenship)
DIA (Citizenship) paragraphs (a), (c)
DIA (Passports) Communications Information DIA (Passports) All
DIA (Passports) Contact address(es) DIA (Passports) All
DIA (Passports) Customer Alerts DIA (Passports) All
DIA (Passports) Details regarding preferred DIA (Passports) All
DIA (Passports) Email address(es) DIA (Passports) All
DIA (Passports) Mailing address(es) DIA (Passports) All
DIA (Passports) New Zealand Certificate of Identity DIA (Citizenship) Clause .
DIA (Passports) New Zealand Emergency Travel RegistrarGeneral Clause .
DIA (Passports) New Zealand Passport information DIA (Citizenship) Clause .
DIA (Passports) New Zealand Refugee Travel DIA (Citizenship) Clause .
DIA (Passports) Phone number(s) DIA (Passports) All
DIA Department of Internal Affairs
DIA Department of Internal Affairs.
DIA Engagement Survey Results Report
DIA Engagement Survey Results Report
DIA Engagement Survey Results Report
DIA Engagement Survey Results Report
DIA Engagement Survey Results Report
DIA Engagement Survey Results Report
DIA Engagement Survey Results Report
DIA Engagement survey results
DIA Information captures a large volume of personal information about New Zealand citizens and foreign nationals.
DIA Information obtained under the DAA and transferred into NZSISs main intelligence analysis system will be identifiable as personal information; no unique identifiers will be except those required by the intelligence analysis system to function as a database
DIA Success Child Abuser Jailed in Scotland, Child Pornograhy Dealer Jailed in New Zealand
DIA access the driver licence photograph under section () of the LTA , which authorises a person who is acting in the course of the persons official duties as an employee of the Department of Internal Affairs to access and use driver licence photograph s from Waka Kotahi to verify the identity of a particular individual. The access and use of the driver licence photographs are controlled through the API , which is programmed in accordance with the instructions of an employee of DIA acting in the course of their official duties. The API is configured to access and use the driver licence photographs for the verification of the identity of the person using the Identity Check service. Therefore, the DIA employee effectively dictates the way in which the driver licence photograph s are accessed or used by setting the parameters wi thin which the Identity Check service submits the request for the ()(k) This section describes the application programming interfaces used by the Department of Internal Affairs to access information from Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
DIA also shares information with the following:
DIA and any unique identifiers applied by DIA to that information.
DIA and or the RegistrarGeneral will internally share personal information relating to Life
DIA can reasonably be expected to take any of the following Adverse Actions based on the personal
DIA continues to innovate and aims to digitise many of our existing products such as the Birth, Deaths and Marriage registry and citizenship as well as develop new products which will put your digital identity at your fingertips.
DIA does not need to obtain any other consent from any other Party prior to approval of the
DIA endeavour to pay all invoices within days of the data entry of the invoice regardless of payment terms.
DIA for confirmation of contact information. This will occur in situations
DIA has a responsibility to keep people in New Zealand safe, such as in the financial, identity, and consumer protection contexts. In situations where DIA is seeking to prevent, or address, significant harm we may consider it appropriate to undertake information gathering activity that has an increased impact on an individual.
DIA has approved the following Intermediary organisations whom the department provides death information to.
DIA is leading the development of a small number of AISAs which are intended to replace the existing
DIA is the guardian of core identity and life event information held on behalf of New Zealanders, and the provider of services such as registration of New Zealand births, deaths, marriages, civil unions, name changes, citizenship, and issuance of New Zealand travel documents. DIA is transforming the way New Zealanders access identity and life event services, making it easier for everyone, including those most in need, to access the services that theyre entitled to.
DIA is transforming the way New Zealanders access Identity Services putting customers
DIA launch first NZ Government Transparency report
DIA may publicly share aggregated insights to ensure transparency but will not disclose commercially sensitive information or proprietary information.
DIA may use the personal information received under this Agreement from MFAT for one or more of
DIA may use the personal information received under this Agreement from the RegistrarGeneral for
DIA retains ownership and control of the original record of business, the
DIA services biometrics are use in:
DIA shall conduct a review annually or at intervals specified by the Privacy Commissioner as
DIA shall conduct a review annually or at intervals specified by the Privacy Commissioner as specified
DIA strengthens international partnership to combat online child sexual exploitation and abuse
DIA undercover investigation leads to jailing
DIA uses biometric information to make it easier and faster to verify peoples identity and issue passports and other identity documents. Facial recognition, through photographs or video, is the biometric information DIA uses to do verify a persons identity.
DIA uses information that it already holds to streamline processes for its customers. For
DIA will advise Parties included within a Class of Agencies a minimum of days prior to an
DIA will continue to monitor the performance of the Identity Check service and adjust and improve the technology to ensure the system is fair for all users.
DIA will ensure that the Privacy Commissioner is informed of the current contact persons for this
DIA will provide regular updates on key regulatory milestones to maintain transparency.
DIA will provide the personal information described at point from the person
DIA will share with IR information held on individual person records relating to
DIAs Privacy Officer as soon as possible.
DIAs executive leadership team
DIAs use of external security consultants
DIA, including any requirement for the records to be maintained in recoverable
DIA the RegistrarGeneral can streamline the application process and ensure that
DIA the RegistrarGeneral to access a service they will be treated as a unique person, rather
DIA the RegistrarGeneral will be able to notify customers who might meet eligibility
DIA the RegistrarGeneral will dispense with the notice requirements under section Q if
DIA the RegistrarGeneral will use a temporary joined up view to link all of the customers
DIAs Christchurch public counter for Citizenship enquiries is open
DIAs Christchurch public counter for Passports and Births, Deaths and Marriages enquiries
DIAs Wellington public counter for Citizenship enquiries has
DIAs Wellington public counter for Passports
DIAs approach to compliant online content hosts
DIAs biometrics systems can identify or verify an identity in seconds. When the system cannot make a match, trained staff assess the image.
DIGITAL IDENTITY SERVICES
DIGITAL.GOVT grammar and punctuation guide
DIRECT ACCESS BY NZSiS To CITIZENSHIP INFORMATION HELD BY
DIRECT ACCESS BY Nzsis To BIRTH, DEATH, MARRIAGE, CIVIL
DISCUSSION The results show that the card, even with a basic algorithm, is capable of performing recall greater than of contacts in most situations. The two office trials (which were different runthroughs of the same scripts with different cards) showed similar results. There is no significant difference between the means at a confidence (P .), demonstrating that the results were repeatable despite a small number of cards not being activated. As the required contact duration to be considered a close contact increases, false positive rates fall in more sparse environments (cafe) and increase in denser ones (construction, party).
DRAFT Water Service Entities: Corporate Systems and Operational Technology Detailed Business Case and Cabinet paper
DW Safety Joint Working Group Minutes
Dan.Richardsoncybercx.co.nz
Dannevirke man sentenced for child sexual abuse material
Darrin Sykes Deputy Secretary Enterprise Services
Darrin Sykes MNZM JP CMInstD is Deputy Secretary Enterprise Services. This role spans strategy, implementation and performance for the branch, organisational capability and culture development, organisational infrastructure and system investment, and smart delivery of core organisational services. Core organisational services are delivered by the following teams: Workplace Services Group He Ringa Manaaki; Human Resources Pmanawa Tangata; Finance Kkiri Turu; Communications Te Manu Karere and Branch Development Support Te Waka Aukaha.
Darrin also comes from a strong sports and recreation background including being director and Chair for a Touch Rugby NZ for years. Darrins service and contribution to the sport of Touch Rugby in New Zealand was recognised in when he was awarded a Member of the New Zealand Order of Merit (MNZM). Darrin was also a Board Member of Sport WellingtonNuku Ora from to .
Darrin also has held several directorships on governing boards; Capital Coast District Coast Board Government appointee from , where he was Deputy Chair and then Chair of the Finance, Risk and Audit Committee; and Sport New Zealand Board Member Government appointee from . Darrin was an external reviewer for the Performance Improvement Framework selfreview of the Health Quality and Safety Commission (HQSC) and is again a reviewer assisting the Commission in . Darrin has been a member of the Institute of Directors of NZ since and has been a Chartered Member (CMInstD) of the Institute since .
Darrin is Ngti RangitihiNgti Awa and brings a strong set of public service skills and experiences to Te Tari Taiwhenua. Darrin joined Te Tari from the Office of Mori Crown Relations Te Arawhiti where he was the Deputy Chief Executive, Organisational Services. Darrin has worked in the MoriCrown Relations space for over years including his role as Acting Deputy Chief Executive People, Culture and Enabling Services, Oranga Tamariki; Chief Executive CFRT; Acting Deputy Secretary Support Services Te Puni Kkiri and as the Director Waitangi Tribunal. Darrin is a current Public Service Commission Corporate Development Board Member appointed back in .
Darrin is the Touch NZ National Director of Referees and is also a member of the Federation of International Touch Rugby Referee Commission where he has served continuously since . Darrin was awarded Life Membership of the Federation of International Touch in January .
Dashboard file showing current quarter, and historic data for the numbers of electronic gaming machines (EGMs)and licenced premises in each council area, reported since .
Dashboard file showing current quarter, and historic data for the numbers of gaming machines and licenced premises in each council area, tracked since .
Data Centre Certification
Data Collection: Conduct surveys (for example, employee feedback, diversity metrics) and gather data from existing reports (for example, Whakahoki Krero) to identify successes, gaps, and areas for improvement.
Data Source : https:www.worldpop.org (D map by Castalia)
Data Steward (GCDS), Iwi and Mori and cloud providers is evolving. Digital and
Data and Digital Ministers Meeting, February, Sydney Australia
Data from the Health and Lifestyle Survey shows that the proportion of the population betting with TAB NZ steadily declined from . in to . in . . It is difficult to determine the total value of offshore online sports and racing betting by New Zealand residents. As noted , TAB NZ estimates that around million a year is being lost to overseas operators by New Zealanders betting offshore . However, based on POCC figures, in the reputable online market was worth a minimum of million . We have not been able to investigate the reasons for this difference, however a portion of this is like to be TAB NZs estimate taking into account operators who do not pay the POCC (but this is unlikely to account for the full difference). . Numbers of people betting offshore are growing and predicted to increas e even more over time.
Data on travel and accommodation expenses for Ministers of the Crown is released quarterly. Expenses for Ministers are administered by the Department of Internal Affairs.
Data storage systems access all DIA Information retention and access is conducted on NZSISs Top Secret network access to DIA systems is controlled with user login by Authorised Officers only. access to the NZSIS network is strictly controlled in accordance with New Zealand and Five Eyes security standards for Top Secret networks access is only granted to people working for NZSIS, all of whom have been security vetted to the highest level (Top Secret Special)
Data transfer transfer of DIA Information from DIA to NZSIS is conducted via an encrypted virtual private network (VPN). the VPN provides an additional layer of security and encryption for DIA Information.
Database, including any costs associated with building a user interface, will be the joint
Dataset Data that sits behind all the dynamic tables and dashboards.
Dataset for Class expenditure by district, as well as annual figures for the four main types of gambling activity TAB racing and sports betting, NZ Lotteries products, gaming machines (outside casinos) and casino gambling.
Dataset showing the amount of grant funding and applied funds from class societies being returned to authorised community purposes. Figures are biannually.
Datasets currently available
Signed :I ZO Z, C. ,.
Signed:zz. .Honjan Tinetti
approved: October
of Issue: July
of birth Any Party RegistrarGeneral
of death Any Party RegistrarGeneral
of issue: August
Dated: b If .. Registr rGeneral Births, Deaths and
Dated: o.
David.nielsensaara.co.nz
Day data is partial after collection of cards and at page roll. Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Page of CONFIDENTAL Day data was uploaded by Tim. This data needs to be appended to any new uploads as this data was removed from the cards in this upgrade process. Status The issue was resolved.
Day : May Issues overview Some issues were identified early on in the process and resolved before the start of the trial. Other issues were discovered when the trial went to a liv e environment.
Day : Thursday Day : Friday Day : Saturday Day : Sunday Day : Monday Day : Tuesday Total ( ) ( ) () ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) No Data ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) There is no data from Bluetooth cards on Day due to firmware error described in section . Firmware error de scribed in section . resulted in cards being recalled and re distributed throughou t day . There was reduced observation time as a result. . Summary of qualitative feedback At the conclusion of the pilot, we distributed a brief, anonymous survey soliciting information about willingness to document personal contacts using various method s and general feedback on the pilot. The response rate for the exit survey among participants was less than anticipated (), and could be a reflection of the dist ribution method (daily diaries were administered via a link in an SMS, whereas the exit sur vey was fully anonymous and a link was sent out in a mass email to staff in the medical ward) Among respondents, including pilot participants and nonparticipants, stated that they currently do not keep a written record of people they are near in public places, and stated that they log their details into guest books of venues. The willingness to document personal close contacts using variou s methods is summarised in Table . Most respondents were not at all willing to keep their own personal diary on paper or on line. Similarly, were very willing to use a passive app on their smart phones, while one third were very willing to use an ac tive app. The method with the highest proportion of respondents who were very willing to use it was a co ntact card (i.e., Bluetooth card) at , which was also the method with the smallest proportion of respondents who were not at all willing to use (. ). None of the respondents who were not at all willing to use a contact card actually participated in t he pilot study. Among respondents who participated in the pilot study, stated that they were very willing to use a contact card, and Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Deals establish a framework through which new funding can be allocated as it becomes available.
Deals will rely on existing resources to achieve shared goals over new funding.
Death Approved Information Sharing Agreement
Death Approved Information Sharing Agreement (Death AISA)
Death Information Births, Deaths and
Death Information Information relating to the individuals death as maintained by the
Death Information Sharing Agreement
Death information .....
Death information Information relating to the individuals death as maintained by the
Death information is currently being shared with the following organisations:
Deaths and Marriages pursuant to the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and
Debt bu rden
Debt burden
DebtEBITDA .x .x .x .x .x
DebtEBITDA .x .x .x .x .x
DebtEBITDA .x .x .x .x .x
Dec legislative response to future national emergencies
December Rolling up of Central Hawkes Bay District to Hastings District
Decision maker Pricing Tool Timing Parliament Pricing principles set in the legislation to guide the water services entities. onwards Minister, following consultation Discretionary ability to regulate rate of change of prices during transition period
Decision on the Progression of Recommendation of the Royal Commission of Inquiry report into the terrorist attack on Christchurch mosques
Decision table and draft Cabinet paper Lottery distribution committee appointments round
Decision to amend the expiring Commercial Video onDemand Levy Regulations
Decisions document Digital Public Service Te Ktui Whitiwhiti
Decisions document He Pou Aronui Organisational Capability and Services
Decisions document Office of the Chief Executive
Decisions document Te Puna Mtauranga o Aotearoa National Library
Decisions document Te Rua Mahara Archives New Zealand
Decisions document Te Urungi Mori Strategy and Performance
Decisions document Toi Hiranga Regulation and Policy
Decisions document Indexing Team National Library
Decisions document: Organisational Change Office of the Chief Executive Released under the Official Information Act Contents Introduction . . . . Introduction from Chief Executive Paul James . . . Introduction from Director Office of the Chief Executive . . Why change is necessary . . . Final decisions have been made . . . Continuing to support our kaimahi . . . Section Two: Branch Context and Background . . . Current context for change . . . . Branch approach to change . . . Future Direction . . . . Section Three: Final Decisions . . . Overview of confirmed changes . . . Office of the Chief Executive . . . New Organisation Structure . . . Summary of impact on current positions . . . Section Four: Feedback and Responses . . . Section Five: Transition and Implementation . . . High Level Timeline . . . . Employee support . . . . Implementation High Level Plan . . . Section Six: Change protocol . . . Introduction . . . . Principles . . . . Who does this protocol apply to . . . Overview . . . . Affected employees . . . . Reconfirmation process . . . . Reassignment and expressions of interest . . . Appointment to another job permanent employees . . Notice . . . . Redundancy . . . . Released under the Official Information Act Appendix A: Approach to Working through Expressions of Interest and Alternative Opportunities for Affected Kaimahi . . .
Decisions document: Organisational Change Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy
Decisions of the Accommodation Review (on the beehive website)
Decisions on a permanent secretariat for City and Regional Deals
Decisions on the problem gambling levy note that the problem gambling levy is forecast to collect . million in excess of costs for the current levy period ending June , further reducing the amount of additional funding required for the Strategy for the to period; agree that the problem gambling levy recover s . million (GST exclusive) over the years to ; note that officials are reviewing the broader policy settings for class gambling , and related issues such as online gambling and the levy formula , that may result in changes to levy paying sectors in due course, but no changes are proposed for the levy paying sectors for the levy period commencing on July agree that the four levy paying sectors remain as non casino gaming machines, casinos, the New Zealand Racing Board, and the New Zealand Lotteries Commission; agree to apply weightings of percent on player expenditure and percent on customer presen tations in the problem gambling levy formula for the new levy period ; approve the resulting levy rates (which are percentages of player expenditure in each sector over the period from July to June inclusive), as set out in the table below, t o take effect on July ; to levy rates (GST excl) Weighting NonCasino Gaming Machines . of player expenditure Casinos . of player expenditure New Zealand Racing Board . of player expenditure New Zealand Lotteries Commission . of player expenditure Changes to Vote Health appropriations note that the Vote Health baseline for developing, managing and delivering the Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm to is in the table below CAB Min () refers; Vote Health Minister of Health (m) (m) (m) (m) out years (m) Nondepartmental Output Expense: Problem Gambling Services . . . . . Departmental Output Expense: Managing the Purchasing of services (funded by revenue Crown) . . . . . Total . . . . . wzrxijjr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Dedicated Taituar Account Manager and WICS supporting contacts
Dedicated mentor supporting your journey
Deferring the Office of Film and Literature Classification fees review
Define the important questions In addition to the above, we need to identify the key questions to better understand impact:
Defining Regulatory Objectives
Definition of Ministerdepartment
Definition of region for Regional Deals
Deliberate focus on decision making around air travel in has resulted in a reduction for departmental air travel. This surpasses the reduction target set for and demonstrates real buy in from kaimahi to reduce emissions.
Deliver a smooth transition for all incoming and outgoing members of the Executive and staff following the General Election, and ensure the th Executive was wellfunctioning from day one.
Delivered a Due Diligence Framework so our leaders understand all aspects of health and safety and are accountable for ensuring their kaimahi are safe and well
Delivering our Above the Line, Below the Line workshops about managing unacceptable behaviour
Delivering reimagined life event and identity services (births, deaths, marriages and civil unions, citizenship, and passports) through the Te Ara Manaaki programme. Our vision is to put customers and their whnau at the heart of everything the Department does and to continuously make it easier for people to access these services. Thuhu, the development of a national documentary heritage hub and the provision of safe, secure storage for the nations documentary heritage past . This will benefit our diverse audiences and provide improved public services through access to the collections in one location. Moving our regulatory focus from compliance, to include regulatory system stewardship so that communities in New Zealand are safe, and the wellbeing of iwi is improved. We are implementing a new strategic direction for gambling that emphasises community wellbeing aligning to our outcomes and the Governments wellbeing priorities. I am committed to driving forward our mahi to make progress towards achieving our outcomes over the next four years. I am confident that the Department is well placed to continue to make a positive diference to the wellbeing of people and communities. Statement of Responsibility In signing this statement, I acknowledge that I am responsible for the information on strategic intentions contained in the Statement of Intent for the Department of Internal Afairs. This information has been prepared in accordance with sections and of the Public Finance Act . Tauk Kawenga I te waitohutanga o tnei tauk, e mhio ana ahau kei ahau te kawenga m ng mhiohio m ng koronga rautaki kei te Tauk Whakamaunga Atu m Te Tari Taiwhenua. He mea whakarite nei mhiohio e ai ki te Whanga me te o te Ture Ptea Tmatanui . Paul James Secretary for Internal Afairs, Secretary for Local Government, Secretary for Racing, Government Chief Digital Oficer, Chief Executive of the Department of Internal Afairs October Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
Delivers clear and accurate operational policy, a customercentric approach to processingproduction of identity and life events service (including Apostilles), rostering, investigations, and managementmaintenance of information systems for an endtoend customer experience. This team also manages official correspondence, OIA and Privacy requests for the branch. The General Manager of this group is also the RegistrarGeneral of Birth, Death and Marriages.
Delivery Plan Default Addendum October
Delivery of the archival facility, and closer collaboration between the institutions, will help to ensure our valuable heritage is protected for future generations. It is an important step towards making it easier for researchers, iwi and the public to connect with and influence the care and access to the record of government, collections and taonga of interest to them.
Deloitte IPANZ Public Sector Excellence Awards
Deloitte report into the investigation of Patten reports unauthorised disclosure
Democracy was restored to Tauranga City Council
Demonstrating benefits for consumers and communities from independent scrutiny of Entity A in the establishment period
Departme ntal Output Expense:
Department As defined in section of the Privacy Act.
Department Continues Action Against Child Pornography
Department Will Not Close Cases If Offenders Flee NZ
Department naming convention
Department of Conservation
Department of Conservation and the Historic Places Trust
Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning. This includes monitoring
Department of Hospitals and Charitable Institutions
Department of Internal Affairs
Department of Internal Affairs (DIA)
Department of Internal Affairs Annual Review Local Government Position Statements
Department of Internal Affairs Department of Internal Affairs
Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Our Purpose T Ttou Whinga The Department of Internal Afairs serves and Ko t Te Tari Taiwhenua he whakarato me te connects people, communities and government to hono i ng iwi, ng hapori me te kwanatanga ki build a safe, prosperous and respected nation. te hanga motu haumaru, tnui, whai mana hoki. Our Mtpono Our principles and behaviours. Kotahitanga Expresses values of togetherness, solidarity, collective action, reciprocity and respect. Strength in unity. Manaakitanga We make it easy, we make it work To manaaki is to show kindness, respect and Customer centred hospitality towards others. This principle is about Make things even better maintaining and nurturing relationships and ensuring people are looked afer. He Tangata Were stronger together People are important to what we do and the culture Work as a team we create. This principle is about people, both Value each other internal and external, being important. Whanaungatanga We take pride in what we do Kinship and relationships. This principle is Make a positive diference nurtured through shared experiences and Strive for excellence working together, which provides people with a sense of belonging. Presented to the House of Representatives pursuant to section and of the Public Finance Act ISSN:
Department of Internal Affairs Proactive release of Privacy Impact Assessment: Full Report Identity Check May
Department of Internal Affairs PRONGO TAU ANNUAL REPORT Te Tari Taiwhenua Pipitea Street Wellington PO Box Wellington Telephone For more information on the work of the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua please visit our website www.dia.govt.nz
Department of Internal Affairs STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Ng Whakaarotau Kwanatanga Government priorities T mtou ki te tautoko i ng whakaarotau a te Kwanatanga How we support the Governments priorities As part of the New Zealand public service, the Department contributes towards Governments outcomes and objectives. This means we focus our efforts to support the Government to achieve its priorities. The Governments priorities fall under three broad themes and we support aspects of all three. An economy that is growing and working for all of us Support thriving, sustainable regions Govern responsibly Improving the wellbeing of New Zealanders and their families Ensure that everyone who is able to is earning, learning, caring or volunteering Support healthier, safer and more connected communities Make New Zealand the best place in the world to be a child Making New Zealand proud Deliver open, transformative and compassionate Government Build closer partnerships with Mori Value who we are as a country Create an international reputation we can be proud of Department of Internal Affairs TE MAHI KIA PAI AKE A AOTEAROA M TE IWI O AOTEAROA MAKING NEW ZEALAND BETTER FOR NEW ZEALANDERS Living Standards Framework The Government has put wellbeing at the centre of its decision making and has adopted the Living Standards Framework to examine and analyse the factors that affect wellbeing. This is an analytical tool to help assess the potential for policies and programmes to increase wellbeing. In the Living Standards framework there are four capitals presented. To generate the most wellbeing each capital needs to be strong and they need to work well together. The Four Capitals (natural, human social, and financial and physical) are the assets that generate wellbeing now and into the future Looking after intergenerational wellbeing means maintaining, nourishing and growing the capitals The norms, rules and institutions that in uence the way in which people live and work together and experience a sense of belonging. Includes trust, reciprocity , the rule of law , cultural and community identity , traditions and customs, common values and interests.All aspects of the natural environment that support life and human activity . Includes land, soil, water , plants and animals, minerals and energy resources.Natural Capital Social Capital Financial and humanmade (produced) physical assets, usually closely associated with supporting material living conditions. Includes factories, equipment, houses, roads, buildings, hospitals, nancial securities .The capabilities and capacities of people to engage in work, study , recreation, and social activities. Includes skills, knowledge, physical and mental health.Human Capital Financial and Physical Capital
Department of Internal Affairs TE MAHI KIA PAI AKE A AOTEAROA M TE IWI O AOTEAROA MAKING NEW ZEALAND BETTER FOR NEW ZEALANDERS Tirohanga Whnui mai i te Pou Whakahaere Overview from the Chief Executive Kia tuia te rangi ki te whenua, te whenua ki te rangi M te mahi tahi e rangonahia ai te whanaungatanga M te whanaungatanga e t mai i te manaakitanga N te manaakitanga ka pup ake te kaitiakitanga Mna e rarau ake, ktahi ka puta te kotahitanga Tau, tau, tau ana e I am pleased to present the Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs Strategic Intentions for . This document outlines our priority areas for the next four years, as we aim to serve and connect people, communities and government to build a safe, prosperous and respected nation. The Department of Internal Affairs has an incredibly varied remit with many responsibilities and functions for example, our worldleading online passports service, protecting the nations precious taonga, maintenance of the charities register, administration of births, deaths and marriages, censorship compliance and gambling regulation are just part of what we do. As we look to , we are focusing our efforts towards progressing four broad outcomes for the benefit and wellbeing of all people. People can easily access the services and information they need We provide important services to New Zealanders throughout their lives, and we are making our services easier to access and use. We are continually working to integrate services across multiple agencies, designed around the needs of our customers not us as a Department. Utilising our system leadership roles, the Government Chief Digital Officer and the Government Chief Privacy Officer, we drive digital transformation across the public sector, and make sure the digital world is a safe environment for New Zealanders to participate in. Iwi, hap and communities across New Zealand are safe, resilient and thriving Communities are the cornerstone of our society and their wellbeing is vital in making New Zealand a great place to live, work and play. We regulate, to keep New Zealanders and their communities safe from harm. This will include establishing a new water regulator and strengthening our work in minimising the distribution of objectionable material. Our Office of Ethnic Communities strives to ensure diversity is celebrated, respected and embraced in New Zealand. We will also continue to support communities to lead their development and achieve their aspirations, through initiatives such as the Communityled Development Programme. Peoples sense of belonging and collective memory builds an inclusive New Zealand Through Archives New Zealand and the National Library of New Zealand, we are the privileged guardians of our nations most precious taonga, including Te Tiriti o Waitangi. Protecting New Zealands heritage for now and for future generations continues to be a strong focus for us. We are investing in significant new storage infrastructure, more effective ways to manage electronic records and improvement of online access to our collections. As Crown partners to the Treaty of Waitangi, as well as guardians of the physical Treaty document, we will work to strengthen MoriCrown relationships by engaging effectively with Mori and contributing to Maihi Karauna, the Crowns strategy for Mori language revitalisation. Department of Internal Affairs STRATEGIC INTENTIONS New Zealand is a wellfunctioning democracy, across central and local government We strive to support effective partnerships between central and local government, addressing regional and Government objectives and to enable the system to work cohesively. We do this by taking a collaborative approach to community resilience, supporting the urban growth agenda, and local government financing and funding. We also support members of the Executive to ensure they can carry out their duties effectively. Our outcomes are aligned with the Governments priorities and will guide the direction of our work over the coming years. We have many areas in which we can focus our efforts, but will also need to adapt our ways of working to deliver our many diverse functions effectively for both New Zealanders and the wider public service. Within our Department, he tngata, our people are the heart of our organisation and we will continue to make sure our Department is a place where everyone feels safe, healthy and respected. Celebrating our people, supporting their development and fostering a culture rich in wellbeing, inclusion and diversity will continue to be a priority for us because we know our people are at their best when they can bring their whole selves to work. Our outcomes are aligned with the Governments priorities and will guide the direction of our work over the coming years. I look forward to seeing our progress in achieving our outcomes over the next four years, and I know our people will work with a spirit of service and a commitment to making New Zealand better for New Zealanders. Statement of Responsibility In signing this statement, I acknowledge that I am responsible for the information on strategic intentions contained in the Statement of Intent for the Department of Internal Affairs. This information has been prepared in accordance with Sections and of the Public Finance Act . Heoi an, kre e t roahia te krero, ko ng mihi kua mihia, kua tautokotia, kua ea Ko t ttau mahi inianei he whakatutuki i runga i te tika me te pono. Paul James Chief Executive October Department of Internal Affairs TE MAHI KIA PAI AKE A AOTEAROA M TE IWI O AOTEAROA MAKING NEW ZEALAND BETTER FOR NEW ZEALANDERS Te huatanga me te Hkai o ng Mahi Nature and Scope of Functions T Ttou Whainga Ko t te Tari Taiwhenua he whakarato me te hono i ng iwi, ng hapori me te kwanatanga ki te hanga motu haumaru, tnui, whai mana hoki.Our Purpose The Department of Internal Affairs serves and connects people, communities and government to build a safe, prosperous and respected nation. Our purpose remains consistent, even as the functions and services we perform evolve and develop to meet the changing needs and expectations of people and the Government. We aim to make New Zealand a better place to live and to enhance the lives of New Zealanders. We work with people, communities, and other parts of government both central and local, to build a safe, prosperous and respected nation. Our Ministerial Portfolios We are responsible to eight Ministers, administering seven Portfolios within the single Vote Internal Affairs. The Minister of Internal Affairs is the Vote Minister and the Responsible Minister overseeing the Governments ownership interests in the Department. Portfolios and Responsible Ministers are: Internal Affairs Hon. Tracey Martin Community and Voluntary Sector Hon. Poto Williams Ethnic Communities Hon. Jenny Salesa Government Digital Services Hon. Kris Faafoi Local Government Hon. Nanaia Mahuta Ministerial Services Hon. Chris Hipkins Racing Rt. Hon. Winston Peters Treaty of Waitangi Negotiations Hon. Andrew Little We also support the Associate Minister of Finance, Hon. Dr David Clark to fulfil his responsibilities in the appointment of community trusts. Department of Internal Affairs STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Mtou Kawenga me Mtou Mahi Our roles and functions The Department operates under a single Vote of million (operating expenditure) to support activities under the seven Portfolios. We have a broad range of responsibilities and functions that span information and communication technologies (ICT) investment, information management, working with communities, ensuring effective regulatory frameworks are in place, supporting the Executive and local government and delivering a range of services to support and foster New Zealands cultural identity. Our system leadership roles include the Government Chief Digital Officer (GCDO) and the Government Chief Privacy Officer (GCPO) to lead the digital transformation of government across the State Sector. In this respect, we support our State sector colleagues to transform their services through better investment in ICT and to maintain the privacy of New Zealanders governmentheld information. We also play a system leadership role with respect to local government. We are responsible for linking central and local government more effectively to achieve improved outcomes for citizens and communities. The Department is responsible for the National Library of New Zealand and Archives New Zealand. These institutions play an important role in preserving New Zealands documentary heritage and ensuring a full and accurate public record is created and maintained. We are also responsible for the Office of Ethnic Communities, which supports the many diverse ethnic communities that make New Zealand their home and the benefits that diversity brings to New Zealand society. Our specific functions include: Managing and protecting the integrity of national identity information, including life events such as births, deaths, marriages, citizenship and issuing passports Regulating activities in several sectors including: gambling, censorship, government recordkeeping, charities, unsolicited electronic messages, antimoney laundering, private security personnel and private investigators Providing policy advice to government on local government, ethnic communities, community and voluntary sector, fire and emergency services, identity, information and communications technology, information management, digital safety, gambling and racing Building, preserving and making accessible New Zealands information, documentary heritage and public records Providing information, resources and advice to communities to support their aspirations Administering grant funding schemes and promoting trust and confidence in the charitable sector Supporting the effective operation of government and the Executive Coordinating and managing official guests of government visits to New Zealand Supporting public and government inquiries and reviews Department of Internal Affairs TE MAHI KIA PAI AKE A AOTEAROA M TE IWI O AOTEAROA MAKING NEW ZEALAND BETTER FOR NEW ZEALANDERS Administering a range of statutory functions for the Minister of Local Government, including for Lake Taup and offshore islands Leadership in the direction and operational approach for digital across the core public service. We administer pieces of legislation or regulation. We monitor the performance of two Crown entities (Fire and Emergency New Zealand and the Office of Film and Literature Classification) and manage the appointment process for members of a range of trusts, committees and boards. The legislation administered by the Department can be found at the Departments website at https:www.dia.govt.nzAboutInternalAffairsOurportfolios Legislation
Department of Internal Affairs corporate media releases
Department of Internal Affairs to produce guidance in line with the highlevel
Department of Internal Affairs to undertake consultation as, on the draft Order
Department of Internal Affairs which details all operational and technical aspects of the
Department of Internal Affairs DIA) and the RegistrarGeneral to share personal information
Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua
Department of Internal Affairs Digital Child Exploitation Team, Digital Safety Group
Department of Internal Affairs website, subject to any redactions that may be
Department of Preventive and Social Medicine Dunedin School of Medicine University of Otago, Dunedin
Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet National Emergency Management Agency
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
Department of the Prime Minister and Rose Goss
Department or a Specified Organisation) or a New Zealand private
Department to avoid industry capture.
Department, defines cloud computing (cloud) as a model for enabling ubiquitous,
Departmenta l Output Expense:
Departmenta l Output Expense: (.)
Departmental Appropriations
Departmental Output Expense:
Departmental Output Expense: (.)
Departmental Output Expense: (.)
Departmental Output Expense: (.)
Departmental Output Expense: (.)
Departmental Output Expense: (.)
Departmental Output Expense: .
Departmental Report on the Charities Amendment Bill
Departmental Report on the Local Government (Electoral Legislation and Mori Wards and Mori Constituencies) Amendment Bill
Departmental and Ministerial consultation for the draft Water Services Legislation Repeal Bill and draft Cabinet Legislation Committee paper
Departmental and nondepartmental activities are separately disclosed as our ability to influence these activities is limited.
Departmental report on the local Electoral (Advertising) Amendment Bill
Departmental response to the recommendations received in the Planning Technical Working Group Report
Departments and Specified Organisations cannot be contained with a Class of Agencies. The details
Depending on their need, they are able to cease communication to the deceased and undertake actions required on the account for example closing the account or paying out life insurance policies.
Deprivation The formal act of removing an individuals right to New Zealand Citizenship
Deprivation creates significant barriers, particularly for tamariki.
Deprivation of New Zealand Citizenship;
Deprivation or Renunciation of their New Zealand Citizenship; and
Deputy Executive Director, Water Services Policy
Deputy Head of Veterans Affairs
Description of the Rates Rebates Scheme: enactment, uptake and administration
Designing the licensing system
Designing three waters system stewardship arrangements initial advice, proposed approach, and next steps
Despite these constraints, the analysi s clearly outlines the relevant arguments supporting the S upreme Courts declaration of inconsistency and assesses the likely impact of the proposed changes to the extent they can be known.
Detailed Information to Support Submissions on Water Services Entities Bill
Detailed explanation of policy
Details of independent evaluators who have been approved by the Trust Framework Authority for security and privacy can be found below (by alphabetical listing).
Details regarding preferred communication mediums,
Determining the accuracy of information, binding that information to the correct individual or organisation, and enabling the secure reuse of the information.
Developing Governance in the Community and Voluntary Sector: letter from Jo Cribb
Developing a digital passport
Developing a process for people born overseas to register their gender: proposed approach to engagement, April
Developing an Internal Affairs policy work programme for
Developing regulations for
Developing the digital systems and compliance frameworks to monitor licensed operators.
Device configuration and assistive technology support
Devon Street East, New Plymouth.
Did the Inquiry consider other reviews of these events
Did the public participate
Different types of government reviews
Digital Child Exploitation
Digital Child Exploitation Filtering System
Digital Child Exploitation Team
Digital Child Exploitation office
Digital Councils Advice to Government Addressing the digital divide the economic case for increasing digital inclusion May
Digital Councils Research Report Addressing the digital divide the economic case for increasing digital inclusion May
Digital Economy and Communications
Digital Executive Board Annual Report
Digital Executive Board Annual Report
Digital Government website
Digital Idenitity Services Trust Framework Consultation Plan
Digital Identity Services
Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act
Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act Regulations Summary of submissions February
Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act New Zealand Legislation (
Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act New Zealand Legislation website
Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act Parliamentary Counsel Office
Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Board and Mori Advisory Group
Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Regulations
Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Regulations (SL )
Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Regulations New Zealand Legislation website
Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Regulations Submissions received September
Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Regulatory proposals, Engagement materials Cabinet paper, related minutes and discussion paper
Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Rules
Digital Identity Services TrustFramework Regulations submissions received September
Digital Identity Trust Framework
Digital Messaging and Systems
Digital Messaging and Systems team
Digital Ministers Meeting, Thursday December
Digital Ministers Meeting, Wednesday March , March
Digital Public Service Branch of the DIA, and Amazon Web Services New Zealand Limited
Digital Public Service branch (Te Ktui Whitiwhiti) introduced a Te Matahiko Reo Plan in July to help lift competency
Digital Public Service news and updates
Digital Public Service supports governments digital transformation and focuses on how government can meet the needs of people using emerging technologies, data and changes to government culture, practices and processes.
Digital Safety Current structure Future structure
Digital Safety media releases
Digital Services and Solutions
Digital Violent Extremism
Digital Violent Extremism Team
Digital child exploitation
Digital craft Digital copywriting silver
Digital identity is proof of who you are online. It is a digital representation of your identity information, and other attributes which may include biometrics, that you can use to prove who you are online, to access services digitally.
Digital identity service providers accredited under the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework have shown that their services meet certain requirements, including privacy and security.
Digital identity service providers can apply to be accredited under the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework.
Digital identity service providers can become accredited under the Framework. This means they have proven that they meet, and continue to meet, the standards for using, storing and sharing personal and organisational information.
Digital identity services
Digital identity services Trust Framework Authority
Digital identity services are services that allow you to share information digitally.
Digital identity services provide another way to identify who we are, and things about ourselves. Using trusted digital identity services means less reliance on facetoface interactions or physical documents.
Digital identity, or digital identification, is information about you in a digital format. You can use your digital identity information to easily access services in person and online.
Digital investment data insights and opportunities
Digital sexual abuse material terminology factsheet
Digital technologies designed for populationwide deployment are new to the playbook. There is, as yet, limited evidence of how these tools may help. This is the first global pandemic since the advent of the smartphone.
Digital technologies hold some promise for accelerating symptomatic people into testing and both broadening and accelerating the quarantining of close contacts. Do both exceptionally well and the virus can be contained. Apps have been rolled out in a number of countries already but despite reasonable numbers of people downloading tools ( in Singapore and Australia), compliant use lags and any contribution made to manual contact tracing efforts so far is insignificant.
Digital technologies hold some promise of helping to fight COVID. In practical terms, the big potential levers are in getting people tested faster, isolating infected people quickly, and quarantining close contacts.
Digital technologies must be assessed rigorously in order to estimate the possible impact of these tools. Impact does not come from the mere existence of tools they must be promoted, downloaded and used as intended at an absolute minimum. Any tool must work as intended and we must take a clear headed view of what our embedded assumptions are on the path to impact.
Digital violent extremism
DigitalNZ is a metadata aggregation service and provides public APIs for developers to interface with the service.
Digitising Government Ministerial Oversight Group meeting agenda and draft terms of reference
Digitising Government portfolio priorities: response to request from the Prime Minister
Digitising Government portfolio targets: response to request from the Prime Minister
Diplosphere AI Conference August
Direct Access Agreement under the Intelligence and Security Act October
Direct marketing Direct campaign bronze
Direction Disclosure Direction Application, General Committees
Director Branch Performance
Director Generals Commendation
Director Ministerial and Monitoring
Director Mori Digital Crown RelationshipsTe Pou Matihiko
Director Policy Services Direct phone After hours
Director Strategy Governance and Risk
Director Te Tiriti and Partnerships
Directory and search across all of the New Zealand government agencies and services.
Directory of publiclyavailable, nonpersonal New Zealand government held datasets.
Disability Perspective The mix of services currently funded by the Ministry, and that the Ministry proposes to fund in future, is sufficiently comprehensive and flexible to address any disa bility issues. For example, a helpline is available for anyone who needs help but is unable , or finds it difficult to access face toface services. Publicity and Proactive release Media statements about the Strategy and new levy rates, and proactive relea se of the Cabinet paper and impact statement, will be timed to coincide with announcements about Budget and after the regulations are made. Once the regulations are notified in the Gazette , the Ministry will inform submitters and put information on it s website, the Department will advise gambling operators, and Inland Revenue will provide information on the new levy rates via its website and other relevant communication channels. Recommendations The Minister of Internal Affairs and Associate Minister of Health recommend that the Committee: note that on August Cabinet approved the release of a consultation document and invited the Ministers responsible to report to Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee by March seeking approval for the Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm to (the Strategy) and a new problem gambling levy rate; note that the problem gambling levy is intended to recover the cost of developing, managing and delivering an integrated problem gambling strategy focused on public health; note that the Ministry of Health and the Gambling Commission have met the consultation requirements in the Gambling Act ; note that the proposed Strategy meets all the statutory requirements for an integrated problem gambling strategy, and is the proposed integrated problem gambling strategy for the to period; note that the Strategy proposes to refocus and develop services to better meet the needs of people affected by harmful gambling by: .. improving the range of, and access to, services; .. using co design and consumer networks to develop more effective services; and .. strengthening enablers that support these objectives; note that the changes proposed in the Strategy strongly align with the recommendations of He Ara Oranga , the report of the Gov ernment Inquiry into Mental Health and Addiction; approve the Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm to ; note that the cost to implement the Strategy is . million, and this cost is partially offset by an expense transfer of million from the appropriation ; wzrxijjr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Disclaimers, copyright, privacy terms of use
Disclosure of Chief Executives Expenses
Discounted health insurance
Discourages participation Reasonable costs will encourage participation During p hase one of the Trust Framework ( ) the Department will work closely with a limited number of participants to pilot processes and policies, explore the potential risks and develop appropriate mitigation strategies before moving to the formal implementation of the Trust Framework in phase two ( ). This testing and transition will allow the Department to ensure costs remain reasonable and appropriate. The mitigation measures will ensure this is a low probability risk.
Discovery Tool to better support agencies.
Discretionary ability to provide direction on geographic price averaging for residential consumers through the Government Policy Statement.
Discretionary ability to regulate ratio of volumetric to fixed pricing revenue and regulate block tariff use, to protect vulnerable consumers as a backstop measure.
Discuss templates, raise questions or specific issues
Discuss the options in this briefing with officials in January .
Distributor of Child Sex Images Offered NZ Child for Sex
Distributor of Objectionable Videos Fined ,
Diversification Neutral Neutral Neutral
Diversity among senior leaders
Diversity information (can select preference not to answer)
Diversity of people leaders
Diversity, Equity and Inclusion
Diversity, equity and inclusion
Diversity, equity and inclusion in our workforce
Do you need a foreign drivers licence translated so you can drive in New Zealand
Do you need material translated in order to reach ethnic communities in New Zealand or for marketing use overseas
Do you see yourself in Government
Document Information RegistrarGeneral paragraphs (a)
Document Information paragraphs (a) (d),
Document Version . May, AuthorOwner Matt Denton Anthony Merry and Gordon Spremic Update Original document
Document authentication Apostilles
Document history, including any information relating to any applications by
Document relating to the investigation of the Patten reports unauthorised disclosure
Documents are in Adobe PDF format and are listed in releaseorder, with the most recent responses at the top.
Documents for consultation on the Reappointment of the Deputy Chief Censor
Documents related to COVID
Documents related to COVID decision making by Cabinet (released May )
Documents related to the closure of Tokaanu Marina (Taupo) and associated assessment reports (released July )
Documents related to the closure of Tokaanu Marina (Taupo) and associated assessment reports second release (released September )
Documents related to this release can be found
Documents relating to the State Services Commissions Inquiry into use of Private Investigators (released December )
Documents relating to the decision on the future of Tokaanu Marina (Lake Taup) third release (released July )
Documents relating to the investigation of the Hon Whaitiri incident October
Documents to Finalise the appointment of the Deputy Chief Censor
Documents to finalise appointments to the Film and Literature Board of Review
Documents to finalise the appointment of the Chief Gambling Commissioner and a Gambling Commissioner
Dog Control (Certifying Organisations for Disability Assist Dogs) Order
Dog Control (Microchip Transponder) Regulations
Dog Control (National Dog Control Information Database Levy) Order
Dog Control (Prescribed Forms) Regulations
Don McLeod; Marlborough District Council Mayor , Nadine Taylor and Chief Executive, John Boswell; Waitaki District Council Mayor , Gary Kircher ; Waimate District Council Mayor , Craig Rowley ; and Palmerston North City Council Mayor , Grant Smith, and Chief Executive, Waid Crockett . On August , WSA Head of O perations, Steve Taylor and Chief Advisor Water Science, Jim Graham, met with Thames Coromandel District Council to discuss a way forward for treating water at Thames South. Treatment scaling and cost effectiveness was discussed. On September , Allan Prangnell, Steve Taylor, and Jim Graham travelled to the West Coast to meet with the mayors and Chair of the four West Coast councils. This meeting was to follow up on issues raised during your recent meeting with the West Coast Mayors. On September , Allan Prangnell, Steve Taylor and Jim Graham met with Ashburton District Council s elected members, Chief Executive, and Assets Team to discuss challenges it is facing to improve drinking water safety for their small, rural supplies. The feedback and insights provided through the above meetings will inform the review of Acceptable Solutions and options for mixed use rural supplies, and they will be considered when we prepare to utilise proactive exemption provisions under Local Water Done Well.
Donors can ask for the names of any children born from their donation, but the child must be or over and give permission.
Dow nward pressure could occur if financial met rics weakened resulting i n lower
Download Archives NZ Visual Identity Guide
Download Internal Affairs Visual Identity Guide
Download Lottery Grants Board Visual Identity Guide
Download National Library Visual Identity Guide
Download Office apps on the App Store for Apple devices
Download Office apps on the Play Store for Android devices
Download PhotoVideo Consent Form PDF
Download Visual Identity Guide
Download a PDF version of the
Download or print out a PDF version of this information:
Download or print out an explanation and description of the information above:
Download our Taup Moana Boating Guide
Download the full Report (released December )
Downward pressu re could occur if financial metr ics weakened resultin g in lo wer
Dr Astin has extensive scientific and management experience, including years as the Chief Executive Officer who developed, established and led the startup of a government statutory authority for dairy food safety in Victoria, Australia.
Dr Deborah Russell MPOffice of the Prime Minister
Dr Karen Poutasi is a medical graduate specialising in public health. She has previously served as the DirectorGeneral of Health, and has extensive experience in senior management roles across the health sector. Dr Poutasi is currently the Chief Executive of the New Zealand Qualifications Authority, a Director of The Network For Learning Limited, the Chair of Basketball New Zealand and Chair of the New Zealand Committee for Harkness Fellowships. Dr Poutasi received a Companion of the New Zealand Order of Merit for services to health in , and holds management qualifications from the University of Otago and Harvard University.
Dr Kathryn Hempstalk Wellington, New Zealand katsmoothsensors.io Dr Dean Armstrong Virscient Limited Hamilton, New Zealand Dr Sam Bartels Virscient Limited Hamilton, New Zealand Alastair Grigg Gordonton, New Zealand
Dr Sharon Ellen Barcello Gemmell MNZM JP
Dr Tupailevaililigi Ridvan Firestone
Draft Bill and draft Cabinet Legislation Committee Paper
Draft Bill consultation with key stakeholders and approach to Bill Cabinet papers
Draft Bill for crossparty consultation
Draft Bill for crossparty consultation agree to crossparty consultation being undertaken on the attached draft of the Bill;
Draft Cabinet Business Committee paper Annual adjustment to the Rates Rebate Scheme
Draft Cabinet Legislation Committee paper: Clarification of consultation requirements for specified councils (SWERLA OIC)
Draft Cabinet Legislation Committee paper: Public Lending Right for New Zealand Authors Amendment Regulations
Draft Cabinet Paper Register of Development Contribution Commissioner reappointments
Draft Cabinet Paper for Ministerial Consultation Internal Affairs Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill: Policy Proposals
Draft Cabinet Paper for Ministerial consultation: Accelerating the digitising of government services.
Draft Cabinet paper and Regulatory Impact Assessment for Ministerial consultation: Report back on online casino gambling regulatory design
Draft Cabinet paper and discussion document for public consultation: Proposed changes to gambling fees
Draft Cabinet paper and discussion document: Lake Taup fees review
Draft Cabinet paper for Ministerial consultation: Enabling a coordinated approach to reforms impacting local government
Draft Cabinet paper for Ministerial consultation: Local Government Amendment Bill
Draft Cabinet paper for Ministerial consultation: Royal Commission of Inquiry into Abuse in Care Extension of time
Draft Cabinet paper for Ministerial consultation: Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm to
Draft Cabinet paper for feedback Local Water Done Well stage : establishing the framework and transitional arrangements
Draft Cabinet paper for feedback Local Water Done Well stage : further decisions
Draft Cabinet paper for feedback Refocusing the water services reforms: further decisions
Draft Cabinet paper for ministerial consultation Local Government (Electoral Legislation and Mori Wards and Mori Constituencies) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction
Draft Cabinet paper for ministerial consultation Local Government Electoral Legislation Bill: Approval for tabling Supplementary Order Paper
Draft Cabinet paper for ministerial consultation: Racing Industry (Negotiations relating to Transfer of Surplus Venue) Regulations
Draft Cabinet paper for review and consultation Taumata Arowai Board: Reappointment
Draft Cabinet paper for review and consultation Te Puna Reappointment
Draft Cabinet paper on local government system improvements
Draft Cabinet paper annual adjustment to the Rates Rebate Scheme
Draft Cabinet paper COVID risk mitigation planning for the local elections
Draft Cabinet paper Lowering the voting age for local elections differentiated age limits
Draft Cabinet paper Policy decisions for Local Government System Improvements
Draft Cabinet paper Reducing Pokies Harm: Proposals to strengthen regulations
Draft Cabinet paper Regulations for the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Amendment Act
Draft Cabinet paper Transfer of surplus racing venue negotiation regulations: policy proposal
Draft Cabinet paper, for agreement to lodge Local Water Done Well stage
Draft Cabinet paper Severe weather recovery: Preparation of an OiC to suspend the requirements for Auckland Council to complete a longterm plan amendment before making FOSAL offers
Draft Cabinet paper: Crossparty engagement on voting age Bill
Draft Cabinet paper: Electronic Identity Verification Amendment Regulations
Draft Cabinet paper: Electronic Identity Verification Amendment Regulations
Draft Cabinet paper: Establishment of the Royal Commission into New Zealands COVID response and preparation for a future pandemic
Draft Cabinet paper: Ministerial consultation on draft regulations for appeals to the Taxation and Charities Review Authority
Draft Cabinet paper: Ministerial consultation on proposed changes to the BDMRR (Prescribed Information) Regulations
Draft Cabinet paper: Phase of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID Lessons
Draft Cabinet paper: Proposals for Fire and Emergency New Zealand Levy
Draft Cabinet paper: Public Lending Right for New Zealand Authors Amendment Regulations
Draft Cabinet paper: Restricting online gambling in New Zealand
Draft Cabinet paper: Royal Commission into COVID Lessons: oral item at Cabinet
Draft Cabinet paper: Royal Commission of Inquiry into Abuse in Care: Extension of Time
Draft Cabinet paper: Tauranga Commission and transition to democracy
Draft Crown entity letters of expectation for
Draft Government response to the Governance and Administration Committees inquiry into the selfidentification SOP
Draft Internal Affairs policy work programme
Draft LEG paper for Ministerial consultation Local Government Electoral Amendment Regulations
Draft Racing portfolio position statements for Annual Review
Draft Water Services Entities Amendment Bill and draft Cabinet Legislation Committee Paper for departmental and ministerial consultation
Draft Water Services Entities Amendment Bill and draft Cabinet Legislation Committee paper for feedback for Ministerial consultation
Draft engagement strategy selfidentification regulations and registering a nominated sex for overseasborn New Zealanders
Draft letter for Te Maruata Roopu Whakahaere
Draft media release ( July )
Draft response to letter from KiwiRail, dated May
Drafting the Online Gambling Bill:
Drawdown and extension of the Taumata Arowai, New Crown Agent Regulator for Water Services tagged operating contingency
Drinking water and wastewater operators strongly support a new framework being set up as
Drinking water supplies across New Zealand rely on different methods of take and treatment, depending on the nature and security of the water source. Drinking water supplies are regulated under the Health Act and the source of drinking water is regulated under the Resource Management Act and National Environmental Standards for sources of drinking water. The National Environmental Standards are given effect to by the Hawkes Bay Regional Council.
Drivers of cost increases
Dropin room at WaterNZ Conference
Due to excesively large file size, this release has been divided into four parts)
Dunedin model WICS report
Dunedin slide pack WICS report
During , Hpai Hapori completed over , advisory services and processed over , grant requests, which contributed to iwi, hap and communities across New Zealand being safe, resilient and thriving. An example is a grant made in July was to Whitianga Volunteer Coastguard to assist in the running of the Alan Jackson Memorial Cadetship week programme. The cadetship introduces year olds to leadership, selfdiscipline, responsibility, and health and safety on the water and in the workplace. Thirtyseven graduates have completed the cadetship in the past four years. The cadetship also offers insight into how the Coastguard works and sets the students up for a lifetime of safe boating knowledge. The grant contributed to the Community Organisation Grants Scheme Hauraki Committee outcome of strengthening tngata, whnau, families and community wellbeing through locally grown strategies and activities.
During January and February , Aotearoa New Zealand experienced several severe weather events Cyclone Hale, heavy rainfall in the Northland, Auckland, Waikato, and Bay of Plenty regions, and Cyclone Gabrielle. These events caused impacts which were more severe and more complex than we have ever experienced.
During a project, the Commission researches the current law, policy and issues before preparing an Issues Paper for consultation with interested parties (including the public). The Commission then produces a Final report with recommendations, which is tabled in Parliament. The Government must respond to the Final Report within six months. The Government then decides whether it will amend the law and, if so, how.
During accreditation, the Trust Framework Authority will monitor provider compliance and the performance and effectiveness of the accreditation regime. The Trust Framework Authority will recieve and assess any complaints, and also has the power to investigate breaches and issues of noncompliance with the Act, Rules and Regulations.
During early engagement, sector representatives noted administration of the scheme should
During the week programme you will have an excellent opportunity to gain work experience and obtain exposure to the workings of New Zealands public sector.
During the period, the Ministry will research current online gambling behaviour and convergence risks and the implications for child wellbeing, for example; this may result in specific public health support based on this research. It will also assess the need for further controls, with DIA as the regulatory authority. Technologybased and other innovative interventions There was broad support in submissions to increase funding for technology to manage gambling harm. In previous years, the Ministry commissioned a feasibility study on a smartphone application to prevent and minimise gambling harm. In it conducted a clinical trial of the app (the SPAGeTTI Trial ). The Ministry has also funded a national MVE administration service, part of the remit of which is to manage a secure database for all MVEs. During the period, the Ministry will develop a technology innovation fund to pilot technologybased interventions and implement them, where pilot projects show that such interventions are costeffective. Industry support has grown for facial recognition software to be incorporated into MVE processes within NCGM venues. The Ministry will continue its planned trial of an MVE database to evaluate its effectiveness in preventing or minimising gambling harm. Legislative changes There have been no recent amendments to the Act. Although changes to the Act may be made in the period, none is yet confirmed. Operating costs Service provider submissions noted the draft service plan did not provide an increase in funding for existing services, leading to concerns that funding would not increase to address cost pressures on existing services . The Ministry intends to manage this issue through the funding available. It will consider the costs of delivering specific services when it runs its requestforproposals processes for new contracts (including pilots). The Ministry s focus is on funding outcomes and results. The proposed increase in evaluations together with the new pilot trials will give a better indication of where the Ministry should target resources to address gambling harm in future levy periods and the likely cost of delivering these future services. . Service plan for to Change in focus The Gambling Harm Reduction Needs Assessment, submissions on the strategy consultation document, insights from the HLS , the NGS and the STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
During the December quarter, a venue in the Central Hawkes Bay District surrendered its venue licence and was no longer licenced to operate class gaming machines as at the end of the quarter. This dropped the number of venues in the Central Hawkes Bay District to one. As with similar scenarios (Kaikoura District, Stratford District) in the past, we have combinedrolled up this Territorial Authority with Hastings District, as not to expose venuelevel GMP of this single venue, as per departmental policy that we do not publish venuelevel GMP. We have chosen to combine Central Hawkes Bay District with Hastings District due to the geographic proximity of the venues and the deprivation levels of the venues being relatively similar.
During the first five years of the initiative, projects were completed in six communities. Research findings from the six projects included: strengthened connections and growing community support for reading for pleasure; and more support for the cultures and identities of children and young people, their families and communities through reading.
During the preparation phase, it is proposed that some technical support will be available, and information will likely be shared
During their fiveday visit to Wellington, the researchers spent nearly hours exploring archives. They accessed Sir pirana Ngatas files, and listened to sound recordings taken by Ngti Porou kaumtua and Mori education pioneer Koro Dewes. They examined records of the Mori Purposes Board, East Coast Commission, as well as letters, newspaper articles and photographs.
E Table E, E and Eb guide
E Table E and E guide
E Table E and Eb guide
E Table E and E guide
E ora ai a Aotearoa, ka ora ai ttou
EAP is a free, confidential counseling service available to all employees, and their immediate families to help deal with issues that are affecting their work or personal life.
ENGAGEMENT and CONSULTATION
Each Named Party will appoint a contact person to coordinate the operation of this Agreement with
Each deal is unique and built around the shared goal of supporting communities across New Zealand to grow and thrive. By forging partnerships between councils, and engaging private sector and Mori organisations, each region can prioritise its unique needs to work towards longterm and localised economic resilience and growth.
Each deal will be based on a year vision for the region.
Each deal will cater to local priorities while sharing the following foundational components:
Each deal will have a year strategic plan with clear outcomes and actions required to achieve them.
Each party will appoint a contact person to coordinate the operation of this Agreement with
Each CovidCard is registered to an individual. Minimal personal details consisting primarily of cardholders contact details would be stored in a database administered by a dedicated Crown Entity established for the purposes of administering the card. Keeping data independent of other Government databases is considered a critical plank to establishing public trust and confidence in the scheme.
Each CovidCard is registered to an individual. Minimal personal details consisting primarily of cardholders contact details would be stored in a database administered Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs by a dedicated Crown Entity established for the purposes of administering the card.
Each CovidCard is both advertising its presence and scanning for the presence of other CovidCards . Algorithms on the card assess the radio signal strength (the RSSI) and accelerometer outputs over the duration of the encounter to accurately identify close contact events.
Each CovidCard is both advertising its presence and scanning for the presence of other CovidCards. Algorithms on the card assess the radio signal strength (the RSSI) over the duration of the encounter to identify close contact events. The current clinical definition of a close contact is an encounter of fifteen minutes within two metres of the contact . Additionally, cards would record casual contacts who do not fit the definition of a close contact and a list of these could also be provided to contact tracers.
Earlier Strategic Intentions documents
Earlier disclosures (since ) of Ministers travel and accommodation expenses are available here:
Earlier gender pay gap action plans:
Early detection and rapid response A key mantra of pandemic response is Early Detection and Rapid Response. For COVID, this means:
Earthquakes Recovery (Local Government Act Kaikura District Year
Easily share your organisational information.
Easing Regulatory Burden (LG LG)
Easing Regulatory Burden on water services operations: potential amendments to the
Eastern and Central Community Trust
Eastland Group Rongowhakaata Iwi Trust
Eastland Wood Council Sport Gisborne Tairwhiti
Economic analysis of water services aggregation Briefing to the Minister
Economic analysis of water services aggregation Stage One Report
Economic analysis of water services aggregation Frequently Asked Questions
Economic assessment
Economic regulation and consumer protection regime for water services
Edge: Increase default text size Microsoft
Education Commission) covered by the existing ICT direction under section of the Crown Entities Act .
Education history and qualifications
Effective border controls presently involve a day mandatory quarantining period in a Government managed facility at significant cost to the New Zealand Government. New Zealand is now experiencing largely normalised social settings, meaning there is limited physical distancing. The remaining plank of the strategy is the management of cases and contacts.
Effective communicators and critical thinkers
Effective risk and assurance systems and good practices are key components of effective governance. Good risk management practice helps to identify key risks to delivery and enables early intervention before risks impact on outcomes. Assurance supports governance bodies in their decisionmaking, provides evidence of how well business risks are being managed, whether opportunities are being taken, and how well the business is performing. Applying more consistent risk and assurance advice and support over priority andor higherrisk projects and programmes is helping to further embed good risk management practices as integral to the Departments mahi, and ensure we focus on the right things. The Departments Assurance Policy and Framework supports an integrated view of assurance.
Effic iency assumptions are implausible WICS modelling makes implausible as sumptions about the efficiency in the Reform Scenario. The government assumes that the Reform Scenario will deliver percent capital expenditure (capex) savings and percent operatin g expenditure (opex) savings. The capex saving is not grounded in any actual evidence, but rather on WICS observations. The implausibility of capex savings has also been addressed in previous analysis by Castalia for Local Government New Zealand and the Joint Steering Committee . Economies of scale in capex are not availabl e in New Zealand water services, except for minor potential cost savings in procurement . The opex saving is also derived from Ofwat and Scottish observations. However, for WDC the opex e fficiency is implausible because WDC already has comparable opex to Watercare . Furthermore, the government and LGNZ representatives have assured councils that no jobs will be lost in the water sector. Given the profile of WDCs opex ( mostly power , labour a nd outsourced services), it seems unlikely that significant further savings are possible. WDC is likely to improve water service delivery if it op ts out, yet WICS assumes no such improvements In any case, WDC is likely to improve its services ove r the next years, yet WICS modelling assumes that WDC will make no efficiency gains under the Opt Out scenario . As a result, the OptOut scenario , as modelled by WICS, likely overstates WDCs costs . WDC will be subjected to water quality regulation, a nd obtain guidance and expertise from Taumata Arowai. Corporatisation and improved performance of other water service providers will lead to changes at WDC that drive better performance as WDC seeks to match the benchmarks set. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia Economic regulation is likel y to apply across the sector, not just to four amalgamated entities. The governments assumption that it cannot regulate all council owned water services is inconsistent with the Commerce Commissions regulation of electricity distribution businesses and i nconsisten t with the experience in multiple overseas jurisdictions where economic regulators are capable of regulat ing many entities. Economic regulation is also likely to enable benchmarking and comparisons. WDC should examine how it can provide a constru ctive coun terproposal to the government Water services are critical to wellbeing, so it is very important that options are considered that are locally appropriate. Water services should be safe, resilient, reliable, and customer responsive, at least cost. Some ref orm of the sector is necessary i n some parts of New Zealand. However, the analysis needs to done to determine where water services fall short of this objective, and for what reasons. Other than opting out, the Reform Scenario is the only option that has be en presented to WDC and other lo cal authorities. This report has shown that the Reform Scenario is founded on unsound evidence and faulty analysis. The promised benefits of reform are unlikely to materialise. There are risks to the Whangrei community fro m losing control of water servic es, and accountability of those tasked with governance to local customers. We recommend that WDC carry out a proper net benefit analysis, potentially with other local authorities that have a similar viewpoint. This is likel y to be many councils, since the WICS analysis has consistent faults that apply to all local authorities. Such an analysis should include the full range of options together with transparent data and sound and contestable analysis so these options can be pr operly evaluated. T here is plent y of analysis, evidence and now a rich data set in the RFI responses for WDC and like minded local authorities to be able to identify alternative and better reform options. WDC could prepare a constructive counterproposal th at achieves desirable objectives , while avoiding the risks and costs of the Reform Scenario .
Efficiencies and effectiveness across the Department National Library and Archives New Zealand services
Efficiencies and effectiveness across the Department Service Delivery and Operations functions and programmes
Efficiency assumptions WICS capex efficiency is based on a single source of information (Scottish Water) p. This is incorrect. The analysis relies on observed ex post levels of cost efficiencies achieved in England and Wales. WICS claims that the capex efficiency will come from: Econo mies of scale, Clarity of policy priority, Robust water quality and environmental regulation, Economic regulation, Excellence in management.
Either Party may suspend, limit, or terminate this Agreement if it appears to that
Either party may suspend this programme to allow time for a security breach to
Elected members of local authorities ( from each entity)
Elections and Local Elections that the Government agreed to consider SWC
Electoral (Lowering Voting Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill: Approval for Introduction Cabinet Minute LEG MIN Cabinet Office July
Electoral (Lowering Voting Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill: Approval for Introduction Cabinet Paper Office of the Minister of Local Government July
Electoral (Lowering Voting Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill: Approval for Introduction Proposal This paper seeks approval for the introduction of the Elec toral (Lowering the Voting Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill (the Bill).
Electoral (Lowering Voting Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill: Crossparty Consultation and Addi tional Policy Approvals
Electoral (Lowering Voting Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill: cross party consultation draft and additional policy approvals Cabinet Paper
Electoral (Lowering Voting Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill: crossparty consultation draft and additional policy approvals
Electoral (Lowering Voting Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill: first reading materials
Electoral (Mori Wards and Mori Constituencies) Amendment Bill (No. )
Electoral (Mori Wards and Mori Constituencies) Amendment Bill (No. ) and the
Electoral Commission; and
Electoral Office to Department of Justice
Electoral Omnibus Bill: Approval of Draft Select Committee Initial Briefing
Electronic Identity Verification Act
Electronic Identity Verification Act Commencement Order
Electronic Identity Verification Amendment Regulations : Proactive release of Cabinet documents
Electronic Identity Verification Regulations
Electronic Messaging (spam)
Electronic Monitoring System
Eliminating bias and discrimination from recruitment policies and practices
Eliminating unconscious bias through online elearning and resources for our leaders
Elimination is not considered compatible with an open border as it would lead to regular Level lockdowns to preserve elimination. Opening the border, with existing contact tracing tools, would entail a transition to a strategy of suppression.
Ellesmere Lands Drainage Act
Email address(es) Births, Deaths and
Embedding our regulatory foundations Strengthening our capability Aligning our culture and purpose Harnessing our evidence, insights and evaluation Maximising our relationshipsOur Mtpono Principles Kotahitanga Expresses values of togetherness, solidarity, collective action, reciprocity and respect. Strength in unity He Tngata People are important to what we do and the culture we create. This principle is about all people, both internal and external, being important Whanaungatanga Kinship and relationships. This principle is nurtured through shared experiences and working together, which provides people with a sense of belonging Manaakitanga To manaaki is to show kindness, respect and hospitality towards others. This principle is about maintaining and nurturing relationships and ensuring people are looked after Gambling We deliver community wellbeing through reducing gambling related harmsOur groups AntiMoney Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism We protect the trust in New Zealands financial systemDigital Safety We make the digital world safer for New ZealandersRegulatory Strategy and Performance We enrich expertise and decisionmaking across RSG T Ttou Mahi outcomes Iwi, hap and communities across New Zealand are safe, resilient and thriving The wellbeing of hap, iwi and Mori is improved through a strong and enduring MoriCrown partnership that is equitable and positiveDIA purpose To serve and connect people, communities and government to build a safe, prosperous and respected nation
Emergency Management Act (CDEM Act) arrangements , and if it is in the public
Emergency Travel Document or a New Zealand Certificate of Identity)
Emergency information for DIA staff
Emerging themes following early engagement with the sector
Emissions from Business Travel, Energy and Freight make up make up of our total Carbon footprint
Employee Assistance Programme (EAP)
Employeeled networks are groups of likeminded kaimahi who come together with common interests or lived experiences. They help kaimahi to connect, share ideas and support each other in reaching their potential. We have five employeeled networks.
Enables local people to have a say in how the new water services entities operate and their impact on local waterways, via Community Priority Statements
Enables shared services arrangements, including a provision for the responsible Minister to direct entities where collaboration or a whole of sector approach is required
Enabling a coordinated approach to reforms impacting local government: talking points for the Cabinet Government
Enabling activities are equally key in delivering our regulatory stewardship responsibilities; they enable us to be: intelligence led and risk based in executing our core regulatory activities; planned, purposeful and proactive in our engagement with the sector, agency partners and nonregulated parties to meet our regulatory stewardship obligations and leverage of partnerships; and impactful in our guidance for both kaimahi and regulated parties.
Enabling pass through billing arrangements
End of Life Service Te Hokinga Wairua
End of year report on Aotearoa Reorua and proposed Hui Taumata
Endoflife.services.govt.nz
Energy efficiencies, research and development, and demonstration
Enforcement Guidelines under the Dog Control Act
Enforcing compliance and consumer protections
Engagement Survey Results
Engagement between Mori and local government is strengthened
Engagement policy: trust framework for digital identity service
Engagement will be focused on gathering and sharing information.
Engagement with water industry on lead levels in drinking water
Engaging with gang communities to understand
Enrolment and disqualification for juvenile offenders Currently under the Electoral Act , a prison manager mu st inform the Electoral Commission of prisoners who ar e disqualified for r egistration. They must also facilitate the enrolment of prisoners who: . when received into a prison, are years or older and who are serving a sentence of imprisonment for a te rm of less than three years; or . turn while serving a sentence of less than three years; or . are released after serving a s entence of more than three years.
Enrolment for juvenile offenders
Enrolment for juvenile offenders agree that the Electoral (Lowering Vo ting Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill will provide for:
Ensuring any technology has the minimal imposition on our freedoms and privacy and strict limits on downstream use are key. This must be a temporary solution to a temporary problem, not permanent infrastructure. Widespread voluntary use is preferable to using mandating and punitive enforcement measures. Policy levers for driving adoption We are currently between waves of COVID. It may be necessary, in future, to require a degree of defacto mandating such as requiring New Zealanders to use this technology in public venues bars, restaurants, cinemas, at sporting events.
Ensuring continuity of Executive Government in a disaster
Ensuring our people have what they need to work effectively
Ensuring that information is secure and protected from unauthorised modification, use, or loss.
Ensuring the integrity of the New Zealand passport
Ensuring the integrity, intent, and effect of Treaty settlement obligations are upheld by the entities, and providing a process for amending Treaty settlement Acts that are impacted by the water services reform.
Ensuring water services are financially sustainable
Enterprise (as established by the New Zealand Trade and
Enterprise Act ) on service overseas; or
Enterprise risk profile Very Strong () Very St rong () Very Strong ()
Entities t hat want to be accredited to participate in the trusted digital identity ecosystem are likely to fall into the following categories with the following costs:
Entities will be required to develop rural supply plans for mixeduse rural water supplies. The rural supply plan is intended to provide better recognition of the special nature of these schemes and to ensure that farming communities can continue to be involved in mixeduse rural water supply schemes.
Entitlement Includes a monetary payment.
Entity A slide pack WICS report
Entity B slide pack WICS report
Entity C slide pack WICS report
Entity D slide pack WICS report
Entity models and slide packs
Environment, the Ministry of Justice, Te Arawhiti and Te Puni Kkiri. Agencies
Establish enduring settings
Establish framework and preliminary arrangements for the new water services system
Established by GovernorGeneral by Order in Council
Established the Trust Framework Authority as the new regulator for accrediting digital identity services in New Zealand
Establishing Act The Act referred to in relation to the New Zealand Agency set out in the
Establishing a Working Group for reducing barriers to changing registered sex
Establishing a ministerial group for the content regulatory review
Establishing trusted spaces, online and offline.
Establishment Director Trust Framework
Establishment of Office of Colonial Affairs forerunner of the Department of Internal Affairs
Establishment of a crossagency steering group on volunteering
Establishment of monitoring and reporting
Establishment of the Government Inquiry Into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events New Zealand Gazette
Estimates draft responses to additional supplementary questions from Governance and Administration Committee
Estimates draft responses to supplementary questions from Governance and Administration Committee
Estimates draft responses to supplementary questions from Social Services and Community Committee
Estimates final responses to supplementary questions from Governance and Administration Committee
Estimates Debate pack
Estimates vary, but between and of COVID infections are understood to occur before symptom onset and the delays intrinsic to manual contact tracing from initial symptoms to presenting for a test, to getting the result, to identifying, contacting and isolating close contacts mean that the secondary cases have already both become infectious and, in most cases, finished their virus shedding cycle before they are isolated. A strategy that relies solely on New Zealands ability to rapidly test and trace, absent enforced social distancing and a closed border, is simply not credible It will not prevent the spread of the virus should it arrive again in New Zealand unless changed fundamentally.
Ethelo plans to release the algorithm under an Affero Copyleft GPL with a public Application Programming Interface . Currently being used in NZ Crux Local Democracy project in Wanaka, using Ethelo, was launched in April : The goal will be to give residents the power to set the agenda for this years local body elections, rather than the agenda being set by the candidates themselves. Online d ecision making tools can increase engagement by providing an option to engage when people have time and without them having to leave their home. However, it can limit engagement to those who are technically able and can reduce engagement by older people or people who are not connected to internet. Risks depend on the specific engagement but can include: Difficult for people who are not connected to engage Can take a lot of time and therefore restrict participation from time poor people Established successful tool for collaborative decision making across a large body of people with a process that clearly works.
Ethnic pay gaps are calculated as the difference between the average salary for an ethnic group and the average salary of those not in that ethnic group, expressed as a percentage of the average salary of those not in the ethnic group. Kaimahi who disclose an ethnicity are included in every ethnic pay gap calculation. Kaimahi who disclose more than one ethnicity are included in more than one ethnic pay gap calculation. Kaimahi who did not disclose their ethnicity are excluded from the calculation. A negative pay gap is where the average salary for that ethnic group is higher than the average salary of those not in that ethnic group.
Evaluatio n Service (RES) on the indicative credit rating implications to the New Zealand
Evaluation Report: Coinvestment in Westports Resilience (September ) and an incorporated technical review
Event briefing for meeting with ASB on March
Events and Travel Documents about an identifiable individual.
Every graduates experience is different, and the Public Sector Finance Programme is designed to give you a variety of options and pathways to explore.
Every layer of the funnel will present opportunities to improve your impact a better app, more users, faster transfer of close contact data into contact tracing centres, etc. A clear definition of your mission and your singular metric keeps you focussed on what matters.
Every quarter we collate information about the numbers of venues and gaming machines licensed to each society, in each council area (or territorial authority). This is along with the relative gaming machine profits, to facilitate the analysis of trends across the gambling sector in New Zealand.
Everything we do is underpinned by three principles
Evidence of Identity Evidence that provides confidence that an individual is who they claim to
Evidence of your ability to work for the Department
Examination of Estimates Draft responses to Finance and Expenditure Committee (FEC) questions
Examination of Estimates draft support pack for select committee hearing
Examination of Estimates hearing support options
Examiners and Operational Support
Example s Enabling trusted digital identity will improve the ability of public and p rivate sector entities to combat identification fraud and the crimes that are perpetuated by it . Improved outcomes for Mori resulting from a strong commitment to partner working with Mori in the development of the Trust Framework. International studies have suggested that the potential benefit of enabling digital identity services in a mature economy is between . and of GDP (approximately . to billion in NZD).
Examples businesses using accredited digital identity services
Examples PROACTIVELY RELEASED INCONFIDENCE
Examples of how the digital identity system could enable access to services
Examples of inperson use of digital identity information
Examples of online use of digital identity information
Exclusive rights given to owners of original works.
Executive Director, Water Services Reform Programme
Executive Government functions well through support, services and advice
Executive Leadership Team
Executive Services Officer to the Secretary
Executive Summary COVID is globally endemic and New Zealand is almost free of COVID with a strategy of elimination. New Zealands plan is to stay covidfree, which implicitly accepts an almost closed border until we see highly accurate rapid testing or a widely deployed vaccine in New Zealand. Meanwhile, all arrivals will continue to require a quarantine period.
Executive Summary This report outlines the findings from a feasibility trial of an early prototype of the Bluetooth enabled CovidCard in a single medical ward in Nelson Hospital. The Bluetooth card used in this field trial did n ot contain a close contact algorithm to filter RSSI values and does not fully reflect the final CovidCard product. The feasibility trial aimed to test, refine, and evaluate the data collection procedures, card firmware and software, and determine the accep tability of a Bluetooth card for contact tracin g in a real world setting. The six day trial started on the May and concluded on May . Forty two participants were recruited into the study who wore the devices for every working hour. The Bluetooth card registered a median of close contacts per da y compared to only three per day for the self report surveys. The recorded median duration of time spent with a close contact was mins for the self report surveys and mins for the Bluetooth card. The discre pancy between survey and card data reinforces existing critiques of self reported close contact data There was high concordance of reported close contacts reported between the Bluetooth card and ultra wide band devices suggesting close contacts are bein g accurately detected by the Bluetooth card, a lbeit with little precision. The large majority () of participants reported they would be very or somewhat willing to use a contact tracing card in the future However, the nature and extent of the feasibili ty trial prevents any substantive conclusions about the effectiveness of the Bluetooth card given the relatively weak ground truth (survey data and a limited number of UWB devices) and absence of a close contact algorithm installed on the card firmware . The feasibility trial did highlight a number of areas that require improvement before larger field trials are considered. There were substantial challenges with the card firmware and software that led to data loss and increased participant burden. The lack o f intensive surveillance methods prevented a detailed analysis of card performance in different environments (e.g. a robust ground truth). Recruitment and enrolment processes were developed and conducted ad hoc. Substantial improvements are required to se cure the uptake necessary to conduct a full scale field trial. Limited visibility and coordination between partners due to the time constrains resulted in an ad hoc approach to data management and analysis which has limited the extent of some analyses and increased researcher burden . Based on the o utcomes from the Phase One feasibility trial of the prototype Bluetooth card , we recommend: Major improvements to card firmware and software, including integration of a close contact algorithm. Conducting closed f ield trials to evaluate card sensitivity an d performance in different settings with robust ground truthing. Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Executive Travel, Accommodation, Attendance, and Communications Services Determination (No ) Amendment Determination
Executive Travel, Accommodation, Attendance, and Communications Services Determination (SR ) (as at September )
Executive Travel, Accommodation, Attendance, and Communications Services Determination (SR ) (as at May )
Executive summary Cabinet has previously decided to lower the voting age for most local elections to , but keep the eligibility age at for CBCMIN: . voting in alcohol licensing trust elections; and . standing as a candidate in local elections (including alcohol licensing trust elections).
Executive summary . In June , Cabinet established the million Three Waters Infrastructure Investment and Service Delivery Reform Programme tagged operating contingency, a portion of which remains unallocated. In Budget , a Transforming Three Waters Service Delivery for New Zealanders: Transition and Implementation tagged operating contingency of million was established to provide for establishment and transition costs. . The original cost estimates supporting the Transforming Three Waters Service Delivery for New Zealanders: Transition and Implementation Budget initiative, although based on reasonable assumptions at the time, were made ahead of significant policy decisions that impacted on the overal l costs of delivering the three waters reform programme. . The October decision to proceed with reform CAB MIN means there is now more certainty regarding the three waters reform work programme through to July and beyond. Following further detailed planning, the Department of Internal Affairs now needs to increase its capacity and capability to deliver and implement the reform programme. This includes a significant policy and legislative programme, a large programme of entity establishment and transition activity, and ongoing engagement and public information activity. . Other notable cost pressures relate to key judgements about the best approach to transition, in particular the scope and level of support available to iwiMori and the local government sector to participate meaningfully in the transition process. This is an area where additional investment can help to derisk the transition process and ensure entities are set up with the best chance of success. . I have worked with the Minister of Finance and our officials to fully understand these cost pressures, determine which areas it is appropriate to fund, and develop an approach to funding the priority areas. . I consider the Three Waters Infrastructure Investment and Service Delive ry Reform Programme tagged contingency to be an appropriate avenue for funding the most critical and urgent cost pressures, an approach that has been supported by the Minister of Finance. . I am seeking agreement to reallocate . million of the unallocated portion of the Three Waters Infrastructure Investment and Service Delivery Reform Programme tagged operating contingency to address cost pressures and fund additional investment in the following areas: . policy advice, legislation, ministerial services, and the most urgent communications activities: . million; . supporting iwiMori to participate in the three waters service delivery system: . million; . supporting the local government sector to engage with the reforms and enable a smooth transition: S. million; . the Future for Local G overnment Review: . million. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of
Executive summary Starting crossparty consultation on the draft Bill
Exempt from PP(b) under s of the Privacy Act
Exempt under s of the Privacy Act
Exemptions from minimum requirements for water organisations
Existing COVID response measures may drive inequities or disproportionately affect atrisk populations. For example, the current appbased solutions such as the NZ COVID Tracer app are likely to exacerbate these inequities as atrisk populations have limited access to smartphones and may live in areas with low connectivity (Digital Inclusion Research Group). While the lockdown may have disproportionately benefited these populations from a COVID infection perspective, it has worsened existing economic and other health inequities (e.g. Rheumatic fever). The Government cannot pursue COVID response measures that may exacerbate health inequities caused by established systematic problems in the health system. For Mori, this would represent a failing to uphold the principles of Te Tiriti o Waitangi.
Existing information systems andor processes that do not meet the Trust Framework criteria: costs incurred to remediate or update to meet required standard. Huge range depending on the nature and functions o f the software.
Existing information systems that do not meet the Trust Framework criteria
Existing information systems that meet the Trust Framework criteria
Existing information systems that meet the Trust Framework criteria: no costs incurred.
Expansion of the Colonial Secretarys Office
Expectations . Repeal of the transition provision would allow for flexibility in allocating
Expense categories for members of the Executive include:
Experiences of Gang Members are Unique
Experiences of youth justice and state care,
Explains Single Transferable Vote or STV voting system.
Explanations for some of the terms used throughout this guidance.
Explanations Definitions and context for wording used in the reports.
Explore the mahi and progress were making towards a more sustainable future:
Exploring new ways to bring people together to reach consensus through technology
Exposure draft Water Services Entities Bill
Exposure draft of Fire and Emergency (Levy) Amendment Bill
Exposure draft of LIM regulations for consultation
Expresion of Interest Form Word
Expresion of Interest Form Word (DOCX, KB)
Expresion of Interest Form Word (DOCX, KB)
Expresion of Interest Form Word (DOCX, KB)
Expresses values of togetherness, solidarity, collective action, reciprocity and respect. Strength in unity.
Expression of Interest Form Word
Expression of Interest Form Word (DOCX, KB)
Expression of Interest Form Word (DOCX, KB)
Expression of Interest Form Word (DOCX, KB)
Expression of Interest Form Word (DOCX, KB)
Expression of Interest Form Word (DOCX, KB)
Expression of Interest Form Word (DOCX, KB)
Expression of Interest Form Word (DOCX, KB)
Expression of Interest Form Word (DOCX, KB)
Extending the timeframes for the Future for Local Government Review
Extension of timeframes for remediation of earthquake prone buildings Hon Chris Penk, in his capacity as Minister for Building and Construction, is expected to ta ke a Cabinet paper titled Proposal to form Building (Earthquake prone building deadlines and other matters) Amendment Bill to the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee on March and Cabinet on April . The paper seeks agreement to bring forward a review of the building seismic risk framework. It also seeks agreement to a four year extension to the by which earthquake prone buildings must have completed their seismic remediation work. The extension a pplies to buildings with remediation dates ending from April onwards. The proposed extension is expected to come into force through legislative amendment late and to apply retrospective ly. This means some building owners may be in breach of their seismic strengthening obligations for several months. The paper proposes encouraging territorial authorities to take a considered approach to enforcement during this period, as buildings that have not completed the required remediation will be conside red compliant again within a few months , once the legislation comes into force. Most of the affected buildings are priority buildings which are considered highest risk under the framework. We are concerned that the proposed approach to the interim peri od creates risks for territorial authorities , compromising the integrity of the ir statutory enforcement role. They may be exposed to legal liability if an earthquake happens during that period the likelihood may be relatively low, but the consequences co uld be significant . The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment have included a short paragraph highlighting these concerns . Contact: Frdrique Bertrand
Extent of impact analysis available .. Has further impact analysis become available for any aspects of the policy to be given effect by this Bill NO
External Affairs to Prime Ministers Department
External Benchmarks: Review industry best practices and frameworks to ensure the refreshed strategy is up to .
External assessment
External security consultants
F Table F and F guide
F Table F and Fa guide
F Table F, Fa, Fc, F, Fa, Fb, Fc, F and F guide
F Table Tables F, F, F, F guide
FAQs from CFOs webinar August
FC rating AAStable A AAStable A AStableA AAStableA
FEES FOR BOATING FACILITIES
FENZ Board meeting July
FENZ Board meeting with Minister, May
FENZ board meeting on September
FFO cash inter est c over .x .x .x .x .x
FFO cash interes t cover .x .x .x .x .x
FFO cash interest cover .x .x .x .x .x
FFOtodebt in the first couple of years of its operations based on proposed capit alization.
FFODebt . . . . .
FFODebt . . . . .
FFODebt . . . . .
FINANCIAL R ISK Aggress ive Aggre ssive Aggressive
FOCFDebt . . . . .
FOCFDebt . . . . .
FOCFDebt . . . . .
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Facial recognition, through photographs or video, is the biometric information we use to verify a persons identity. Modern facial recognition systems are fast, accurate and secure, reducing the time and cost of identity verification.
Facilitate a safer and compliant regulated online gambling market.
Fact Sheet (accompanying January to June disclosure)
Factsheet Water Services Entities Bill employment
Factsheet Water Services Entities Bill governance, accountability and consumer engagement
Factsheet Water Services Entities Bill overview
Factsheet Water Services Entities Bill ownership and protections against privatisation
Factsheet Water Services Entities Bill transitional arrangements
Failing to achieve a very high adoption rate, after adjusting for noncompliant use (the app not being loaded on a users phone, say) is why we have seen no evidence as yet of apps achieving their stated goals of assisting contact tracing efforts.
Families in Africa cook with multiple stoves one for rice, one for beans, one for greens they only got one stove, so kept using their three rock fire to cook alongside their new stove. Indoor smoke did not meaningfully reduce. Even worse, the research shows that it is the gases and very finer particulates that cause the main burden of disease. Your stove didnt impact those numbers.
Far North District Council
Far North District Council South Wairarapa District Council
Far North District Councils Drinking Water Reliability and Safety Risk Reduction Programme and its Rwene Wastewater Improvements
Far North model WICS report
Far North slide pack WICS report
Father jailed for possessing child sex abuse images
Faaolofaiva Setefano SiuMagele
Feasibility This option generates (social, economic, fiscal) value for participants in the ecosystem. This option encourages participation in the ecosystem. The estimated costs (set up, ongoing) for government and other ecosystem participants are reasonable. This could be implemented wit hin a reasonable timeframe. Value Low. Limited value continues for those that can interact with RealMe services. Low value for most of the population, as no ability to share information across sectors in a trusted way. Potential value undermined, with duplication of costs and over investment. Possible lost opportunity cost to the New Zealand economy of up to .b of GDP equivalent per annum , according to international studies . Participation Low. Little incentive to trust and interact with other participants in the ecosystem as no clear parame ters for how this should occur. Costs Low. Existing costs to run regulatory regime continue, approximately , per annum Value Medium. A consistent compliance testing regime that can help to promote better standards for information security and privacy in the ecosystem. Having undergone compliance testing could be a reputational benefit for businesses, however without a means to enforce compliance, this may be limited. Participation Medium. Moderate incentive to trust and interact with participants in the ecosystem. Costs of compliance testing may also act as a barrier to participation, especially if a lack of enforcement options is perceived to reduce the credibility of compliance testing. Value Medium. Improved value for those that interact with RealMe services as greater flexibility. Low value for most of the population, as no ability to share information across sectors in a trusted way. Potential value under mined, with duplication of costs and over investment. Possible lost opportunity cost to the New Zealand economy of up to . billion of GDP equivalent per annum , according to international studies based on figures . Participation Low. Little incenti ve to trust and interact with other participants in the ecosystem as no clear parameters for how this should occur. Costs Medium. Approximately . million per annum over to years. Value High. A consistent compliance regime that improves information security and privacy for all, with flow on effects into public and private sector service deli very. Holding accreditation would be a reputational benefit for businesses and potentially open up new revenue opportunities. Participation High. Likely to encourage participation given government is generally viewed as a reliable partner. However, the extent to which it encourages participation will almost certainly be dependent on the accreditation burden (costs, time, resources) imposed. Low probability risk that the Trust Framework requires more resources than anticipated to set up andor maintain, in creasing overall costs and discouraging participation. Low probability scenario: accreditation costs might be too high discouraging entities from becoming part of trusted digital identity ecosystem. Value High. A consistent compliance regime that improves info rmation security and privacy for all, with flow on effects into public and private sector service delivery. Holding accreditation would be a reputational benefit for businesses and potentially open up new revenue opportunities. Allows for scalability. Econ omic value may be low though as the cost to establish this would be much higher than option but it is not clear if the benefits such a system would outweigh the costs. Participation unclear . Allows for high uptake. Ultimately, however, the extent to which this option encourages participation will almost certainly be dependent on the accreditation burden (costs, time, resources) imposed which are currently unknown . Low probability risk that the Trust Framework requires more resources than anticipated t o set PROACTIVELY RELEASED
February Summer Internship ends
FebruaryMarch with subsequent governance meetings to be held at least twice yearly aspart of the quarterly meetings between the partie s described in section a. of the Schedule. Any
Federated Farmers meeting, June
Federated Farmers of New Zealand Gisborne
Fee options for Lake Taup fees review
Feedback indicates operators consider a regulated authorisations framework will support
Feedback on the Departments strategic intentions storyboard
Fees associated with this Agreement, if any, as agreed will be notified by the RegistrarGeneral, or
Fees associated with this Agreement, if any, will be agreed by the relevant parties.
Fees for Lake Taupo boating facilities including ramps, moorings temporary berthings.
Fees for boating facilities
Figure , adapted from Vaithianathan (), provides a visualisation of the cumulative increase of cases transmitted by firstorder close contacts from the day the index case develops symptoms. For example, for R ., we would expect new infection from firstorder contacts (i.e., tertiary case) before the index case even showed symptoms. Based on the cumulative delays cited above, we can see there is limited capacity of the current manual contact tracing system to substantially impact the number of secondary infections under normal social conditions (R .). Figure . Expected Infections transmitted by First Order Contacts to Second Order Contacts (tertiary cases) Compared to Time Since Index Case Becomes Symptomatic. Adapted from Vaithianathan ().
Figure : Example Script From Office Trial Time Who Action Location .pm Seated: Sitting at marked desks Desk .pm Movement Seated: Walk in from foyer, marked desk, kitchen and sits at marked desk Desk .pm Short Repeating Interactions: Walk in from foyer, kitchen and go into L meeting room Meeting room .pm (leave leaner)
Figure : Share of water revenue from household and nonhousehold properties
Figure .: Populat ion density (persons per square kilomet re) in Scotland
Figure .: WDC three waters operating expenditure breakdown
Figure .: Operating expenditure cost per connected property
Figure : Cafe Trial Scenario
Figure : Example timeline of a Bluetooth card (ID ) daily contacts with other Bluetooth cards
Figure , illustrates three different CovidCards with positive results have a number of close or casual contacts. While some close contacts are shared between two CovidCards , there are also close contacts shared by all three, indicating a possible common event or location.
Figure . Network relationship diagram based on CovidCard data .. The Health Case: Assessing impact on the spread of COVID This section investigates the possible impact that CovidCard might have on the spread of COVID and the results we might expect assuming target levels of adoption are able to be achieved.
Figure : Comparison of reported number of close contac ts per day (Bluetooth card vs daily diary)
Figure : Ground truth scoring spreadsheet
Figure , provides a visualisation of the potential benefit of digital contact tracing compared to manual contact tracing based on a reduction in the tracing delay. Depending on key assumptions, digital contact tracing could reduce the tracing lag by up to days, which in turn could prevent a larger fraction of tertiary cases than manual contact tracing would
Figure . Potential benefit of digital contact tracing
Figure : Summary of He Korowai Oranga STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Figures include registrations still in progress.
Film and Literature Board of Review
Film and Literature Board of Review Cabinet Honours and Appointment Committee Paper for Approval to Lodge
Film and Literature Board of Review documents for preferred candidate selection
Film and Literature Board of Review reappointment and appointments: talking points for the Cabinet Appointment and Honours Committee
Film and Literature Board of Review: Documentation for GovernorGeneral to sign
Film and Literature Board of Review: Preferred candidate selection
Film and Literature Board of Review: Shortlisted Candidates for Appointment
Film and Literature Board of Review: appointment documents
Film and Video Classification
Film and Video Labelling Body
Film and Video Labelling Body results of the review of community representative appointments
Film and Video Labelling Body proposed review of community representative appointments in
Film and video TV broadcast seconds over bronze
Film and video classification
Film and video classifications, ratings and display conditions.
Film and video Branded content campaign silver
Film and video Long form campaign gold
Film and video TV cinema online over seconds (campaign) silver
Film and video TV cinema online over seconds (single) silver
Films, Videos and Publications Classification (Fees) Regulations
Films, Videos and Publications Classification Act
Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Takedown Notices) Regulations
Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act
Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Commercial Video onDemand Levy Regulations
Films, Videos, and Publications Classifications Regulations
Final Cabinet Paper for your approval: Racing Industry (Negotiations for Transfer of Surplus Venue) Regulations
Final Cabinet paper Enabling a coordinated approach to reforms impacting local government
Final Cabinet paper for the Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Levy) Amendment Bill
Final Cabinet paper on Tauranga elections decisions
Final Cabinet paper on policy proposals for regulations to enable appeals to the Taxation and Charities Review Authority
Final Cabinet paper Discussion Document: selfidentification regulations and recognising gender for people born overseas
Final Cabinet paper Local Government (Electoral Legislation and Mori Wards and Mori Constituencies) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction
Final Cabinet paper Local Government Electoral Legislation Bill approval to table Supplementary Order Paper
Final Cabinet paper Local Government Electoral Legislation Bill: Approval for introduction
Final Cabinet paper Lowering the voting age for local elections differentiated age limits
Final Cabinet paper: Approval to Consult on Rates for the Fire and Emergency Levy
Final Cabinet paper: Approval to introduce the Electoral (Lowering Voting Age for Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill
Final Cabinet paper: Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Registering Nominated Sex) Regulations
Final Cabinet paper: Electronic Identity Verification Amendment Regulations
Final Cabinet paper: Electronic Identity Verification Amendment Regulations
Final Cabinet paper: Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Levy) Regulations
Final Cabinet paper: Government response to the Justice Committees report on its inquiry into the local elections
Final Cabinet paper: Internal Affairs Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill
Final Cabinet paper: Proposals for Fire and Emergency levy rates and other levy matters
Final Cabinet paper: Proposed changes to Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Prescribed Information) Regulations
Final Cabinet paper: Regulations to enable appeals to the Taxation and Charities Review Authority
Final Government response to the Governance and Administration Committees inquiry into the selfidentification SOP
Final LEG paper Local Electoral Amendment Regulations
Final Policy proposals to amend the FVPCA to classify CVoD
Final Report of the Government Inquiry into the Auckland Fuel Supply Disruption
Final Report of the Tauranga City Council Commission
Final Update on the LGNZ Vote Campaign
Final documentation appointment to the Taumata Arowai Mori Advisory Group
Final documentation appointments to the Taumata Arowai Board
Final documentation appointments to the Mori Advisory Group Te Puna
Final documentation: Appointment of a members to the Fire and Emergency New Zealand Board
Final draft Cabinet paper for approval: Royal Commission of Inquiry into Abuse in Care Extension of time
Final draft Cabinet papers for agreement to lodge Local Water Done Well stage : further decisions
Final draft Cabinet papers for lodgement with Cabinet Local Water Done Well stage : water services delivery system and regulatory system
Final policy proposals for regulations to enable appeals to the Taxation and Charities Review Authority
Final report of WPC inquiry received
Final report of the Government Inquiry into the Appointment Process for a Deputy Commissioner of Police
Final report of the Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events
Final responses to posthearing questions for Annual Review
Final responses to prehearing questions for Annual Review
Finalisation of the Chatham Islands Strategy refresh
Finally, the prioritisation algorithm used to rank reidentified card contact data has potential to impact false positive rates with further work. Additional features such as number of cards in range when a card event is seen (card density) and timeofday could be used to train the model. Unfortunately these features are not effective in our field testing both would be contrived in the field trials and are only meaningful when considered over a longer period of time with a greater number of cardholders. Other machine learning models were tested (see Appendix ), and there is potential for greater optimisation of their parameters to better prioritise close contacts over casual ones.
Finally, the rank correlation showed a positive correlation between the order of the ground truth contacts, when ordered by duration multiplied by intensity or RSSI, for all trials. This shows that even with a basic algorithm on the card, the card is able to rank contacts in a broadly similar order to ground truth rankings. However, given the limited processing power and security controls on the card, ranking of contacts would be more suitable to be performed after the card data is downloaded. Ranking contacts offcard will allow other features to be included which may increase accuracy, and for prioritisation algorithms to be modified as the needs of health services change.
Finance Act requirements related to responsibilities and accountabilities of
Finance and Performance Governance Committee:
Financial Implications The financial implications of lowering the voting age for local elections have not been estimated. The Electoral Commission has been implementing the recent changes to the Mori Electoral Option and preparing for the general election. Consequently, they have not been able to dedicate resources to estimating the cost of the change. In our June report back to Cabinet we will update you on timing and next steps for implementatio n costing work.
Financial Policy Negative Negative Negative
Financial Potential for reduced capital outlay as cloud hardware is maintained
Financial Statements Departmental
Financial Statements NonDepartmental
Financial and Commercial Workstream update
Financial and nonfinancial results
Financial implications . The only financial implications arising from this local Bill are related to the taxexemption and the inclusion of Crown reversionary interests. . The tax exemption for distributions from the Hap Land Fund to the Waitara hapentity has estimated fiscal implications through foregone tax revenue of . million. . The estimated fiscal implications of the tax exemption are illustrated in Table . Thisfiscal estimate is made on the assumption that all of the distributions from the HapLand Fund to the Waitara hap entity will be taxable income for the entity, and that allof the income of the Fund will be distributed to the entity. This means that theestimate can be considered as an upper bound for the potential fiscal cost for theexemption.s()()(h) s()()(h) Proactively released from the Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Table : Fiscal impact of tax exemption for distributions from the Hap Land Fund to the Waitara hap entity million increase(decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue outyears Crown Revenue and Receipts: Tax Revenue (.) . The cost of the tax exemption would be a charge against the between Budget contingency established as part of Budget . This would reduce funding available for other priorities. . The District Council or the hap will pay for any Crown underlying titles so no appropriations are required and the transfer of Crown underlying titles is fiscally neutral. Human rights, gender implications and disability perspective . There are no human rights, gender or disability implications associated with this paper. Legislative implications . The local Bill is required to implement the District Councils resolutions to provide the arrangements set out in this paper. . As this Bill is a local bill, it can only be read on a members day. Jonathan Young MP and I have asked the House Business Committee that it be read on December , and that the committee of the whole House and third reading stages be run together to enable the local Bill to be passed by the end of November as requested by the District Council. Regulatory impact analysis . The regulatory impact analysis (RIA) requirements apply to the proposal to include a time limited tax exemption for the Waitara hap entity for six months. . The Department of Internal Affairs RIA panel has considered the RIA in accordance with the quality assurance criteria required in CO (): Impact Analysis Requirements. The panel considers that information and analysis summarised in the RIA meets the quality assurance criteria. Publicity . I do not propose any Government publicity given t his is a local Bill. I understand that the District Council is publicising the local Bill in the district and I am satisfied that the District Councils approach is appropriate. . I do not propose to publicly release this paper given that it relates to a loc al Bill and it would be inappropriate for a government announcement when the local Bill is appropriately publicised by the District Council. Proactively released from the Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Recommendations . The Minister of Local Government recommends that the Cabinet Mori Crown Relations Committee : . note that the New Plymouth District Council (Waitara Lands) Bill (the local Bill) is a local Bill which provides an opportunity for the Government to support the efforts of New Plymouth District Council (the District Council) to strengthen local government Mo ri relations by providing a way forward on a longstanding issue; . agree to the inclusion of Crown interests in regard to the potential sale of the Crown underlying title to six District Council reserves which the District Council proposes to transfer to the Waitara hap entity upon payment of their value; . agree to advise the Governor General that the Crown supports the inclusion of powers relating to the potential sale of the Crown underlying title to those reserves in the local Bill; . agree that the transfe r of land from the Waitara Land Fund to the Waitara hap entity should not give rise to any tax consequences; . agree that the Waitara hap entity be granted a time limited tax exemption for six months from the of commencement subject to the Bills enactment; . note that if the Waitara hap entity is granted a tax exemption under recommendation it has the following estimated fiscal cost; million increase(decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue outyears Crown Revenue and Receipts: Tax Revenue (.)
Financial managemen t
Financial management
Financial management
Financial risk management
Financial risk pr ofile Adequate () Adequate () Adequate ()
Financial sustainability is a key element of our strategy. We recognise the importance of balancing responsible financial practices with carbon reductions to ensure the longevity and effectiveness of our sustainability initiatives.
Financial sustainability of the racing industry
Find out how Apple supports inclusive use of Mac computers and portable devices like iPhone, iPad, Apple Watch, Apple TV and HomePod.
Find out more about Water Services Delivery Plans
Find out more about foundational information disclosure on the Commerce Commissions website
Find out more about key aspect of the Bill:
Find out more about the CIPU
Find out more about the enduring economic regulation regime on the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment website
Find out what a rates rebate is, if you qualify and how much you might get off your rates. See how and when to apply and download the application form.
Find out what the eligibility requirements are and work out if you can get a rebate.
Find out what we do, who we are, the languages we speak, and the different backgrounds we come from.
Find the Oranga Tamariki Guidelines here:
Find the list of CWPAs that can request or share information under the Oranga Tamariki Act here:
Find the new regulation designating Te Tari Taiwhenua as a CWPA under the Oranga Tamariki Act here:
Fined for child sex abuse movies
Fire and Emergence SPE
Fire and Emergency New Zealand
Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire Permits) Regulations
Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire Plans) Regulations
Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire Safety, Evacuation, Procedures, and Evacuation Schemes) Regulations
Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Levy Rates and Information Requirements in Transitional Period) Regulations
Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Levy) Amendment Bill: Committee of the whole House pack
Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Levy) Amendment Bill: Departmental report
Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Levy) Amendment Bill: Initial Briefing
Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Levy) Amendment Bill: Introduction and First Reading Materials
Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Levy) Amendment Bill: Second Reading Materials
Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Local Advisory Committees) Regulations
Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Offences) Regulations
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Whakaratonga Iwi
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Whakaratonga Iwi Board
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Letter of Expectations
Fire and Emergency New Zealand quarter one report Minister of Internal Affairs Hon Jan Tinetti
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Accountability Documents
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Act
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Board
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Board Agreement to shortlisted candidates
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Board Appointments: Draft Cabinet paper
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Board appointment: short list briefing
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Board decisions and draft Cabinet paper
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Board Documentation to finalise appointments
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Board Eke Taumata sixmonthly report ending June
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Board: Appointment of new members
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Board: Commencement of the appointment round
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Board: Documentation to finalise appointments
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Board: Selection of preferred appointee and draft Cabinet papers
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Draft Annual Report
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Draft Statement of Performance Expectations
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Quarter Three report
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Quarter Two report, March
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Revised Statement of Performance Expectations
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Sarah Owen
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Statement of Intent and Statement of Performance Expectations
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Statement of Performance Expectations
Fire and Emergency New Zealand funding review papers
Fire and Emergency New Zealand levy exemptions
Fire and Emergency New Zealand performance: Letter to the Board
Fire and Emergency New Zealand quarter one performance report
Fire and Emergency New Zealand report for quarter
Fire and Emergency New Zealand: Draft Letter of Expectations
Fire and Emergency New Zealand: Draft Statement of Performance Expectations
Fire and Emergency New Zealand: Letter to Board Chair regarding repayable capital injection
Fire and Emergency New Zealand: Quarter Two report and Eke Taumata progress report for the six months ending December
Fire and Emergency New Zealand: Report for quarter one
Fire and Emergency New Zealand: options to address inadequate conduct complaints process
Fire and Emergency New Zealands Dispute Resolution Scheme: Release of consultation documents
Fire and Emergency Part Levy Exemptions
Fire and Emergency Quarter Two Report
Fire and Emergency levy agreement to share draft regulations
Fire and Emergency levy: oral item to Cabinet Economic Policy Committee on April
Fire and Emergency: Ministerial consultation on the transitional levy rate increase
Firefox: Increase the size of web pages Mozilla
First Te Maruata Hui after elections in Dec
First regional deal finalised
First tranche of drafting instructions for the Local Government System Improvements Bill
Fiscal Sustainability Programme: Performance Plan for the Community and Voluntary Sector portfolio
Fiscal Sustainability Programme: Performance Plan for the Digitising Government portfolio
Fiscal Sustainability Programme: Performance Plan for the Internal Affairs portfolio and Vote Internal Affairs
Fiscal Sustainability Programme: Performance Plan for the Racing portfolio
Fiscal assessment : debt burden
Fiscal assessment: flexibility and performance
Fiscally Neutral Adjustment for Offshore Betting Charges
Fitforpurpose service delivery models and financing tools
Five years jail for child abuse collection
Flat File ( September )
Flat File Request for Information Department of Internal Affairs Microsoft PowerBI
Fleur.Murrayethniccommunities.govt.nz
Flexibility This option is responsive to changes in social licence and the needs and requirements of participants. This option is responsive to the emergence of new technologies, new standards and protocols, and new approaches to the digital exchange of information. This option is scalable (i.e. able to grow). Social licence, needs and requirements Low. Limited ability to adapt to changes in social licence and participant requirements. No clear way to update and change rules on how this operates. Technology, standards, approaches Low. Limited adaptability to new technology, particularly the application of the EIV Act due to its prescriptive nature. Scalability Low. Very limited scalability as no levers to influence the wider ecosystem. Social licence, needs and requirements Medium. Government remains sensitive to public opinion, but generally slow to respond due to bureaucratic inertia. Technology, standards, approaches High. Governance board will maintain regular review Inclusion of private sectorTe Ao Mori will possibly improve responsiveness. Scalability Medium. Will depend on government f unding . Social licence, needs and requirements Low. Minor improvements for RealMe customers. Technology, standards, approaches Low. R esponsive to standards as government will mandate, review and update Identity Management standards. Scalability Low. Limited scalability. Social licence, needs and requirements Medium. Government remains sensitive to public opinion, but generally slow to respond due to bureaucratic inertia. Technology, standards, approaches High. Representative governance boa rd will maintain regular review Inclusion of industryprivate sector will possibly improve responsiveness . Scalability High. Scalable, depending on political will and government funding. Will allow for the consideration of other government solutions which may lead to a reduction in the cost of RealMe services because these could be incorporated into the Trust Framework . These solutions are currently restricted by existing legislati on. Same as Option . Overall assessment Advantages : No additional costs to government, no need for time consuming legislative action. Disadvantages : People will have little control over their information. The digital identity ecosystem remains unstructured, inconsistent and inefficient and, as a result, it is a low trust environment. The value of digital identity is not realised as there will be ongo ing duplication, ove rinvestment and lost opportunities. Constrained ability to improve service delivery, in either the public or private sector. Continues existing alienation of Mori from digital services. The accelerated adoption of digital solutions in all spheres of life resulting of the Covid Advantages : Establishes a best practice standard that could help to promote the wider adoption of practices that w ould support the development of the digital identity ecosystem and uptake of digital identity services. Disadvantages : the absence of any means of enforcing compliance with the standards and rules could quickly undermine public trust in the system, reducing uptake and the relevance of the standards to service providers. Constrained ability to improve service delivery, in either the public or private sector. Continues existing alienation of Advantages : Minor improvements to status quo with best practice clear and some enforcement mechanisms . Simple and affordable for government. Disadvantages : The limited nature of the improvements on the status quo would ensure the digital identity ecosystem continues to be a low trust environment that does little to realise the potential value of digital identity. Inefficiencies remain. Continues existing alienation of Mori from digital services . It would take time to amend legislation. Advantages : Creates a high trust environment that brings consistency and structure into digital identity in New Zealand. Could be established in a reasonable timeframe at reasonable cost, with provision to grow as required. Government maintains full control over accreditation process, ensuring consistency. Enables Mori centric ontologies and approaches to be recognised and gover nance representation. Phase one () will allow for compliance testing of digital identity systems in the near term but will also provide space for testing of Trust Framework systems and policies. Will allow for the consideration of other Similar to Option but also Advantages : Allows for greater autonomy from government, board could be more industry focused, clear lines of accountability, can react quickly to changes in industry standards, can provide a long term solution by handling a high number of accreditations. Greater autonomy for Mori to run their own systems and governance representation, more distinct from governme nt. Disadvantages : Expensive, complicated, low uptake would mean it runs inefficiently, cost model would be almost entirely dependent on crown funding in the shortmedium term, will take longer to implement than other options, rules and scope under which i t PROACTIVELY RELEASED
Flexibility Users can more easily switch between providers and services,
Flexible working environment
Focus area four: Harnessing our evidence, insights and evaluation Evidence, insights and evaluation are the basis of our regulatory interventions this focus area is about ensuring we have the information we need to make informed decisions, and support our regulatory partners and hap, iwi and Mori to do the same. Strategic initiatives RSG has already commenced this work with the development of a Data, Research and Evaluation (DRE) Strategy. Between July and June , the DRE Strategy will be implemented across RSG.Alongside the implementation of the DRE Strategy, RSG will consider whether it has the data, evaluation, insights and intelligence capability it needs for the future (i.e., people, processes and systems). If gaps andor opportunities are identified, these will be implemented before December . months (July December )Develop and implement Data, Research and Evaluation Strategy Identify data, evaluation, insights and intelligence capability requirements for the future Develop and commence implementation of plan to address data, evaluation, insights and intelligence capability requirements months (January June )Continue to implement plan to address data, evaluation, insights and intelligence capability requirementsT argets Key Focus Area Harnessing our evidence, insights and evaluation FiveYear Success Measures The Data Futures Partnership NZ Data Trust Governance of Data Guidelines Data Maturity Rubric (DMR) shows RSG has shifted from Fragmented to Partner Ready Baseline An assessment by FrankAdvice in indicated RSG currently sits at Fragmented on the DMR
Focus area one: Embedding our regulatory foundations See page Focus area two: Strengthening our capability See page Focus area three: Aligning our culture and purpose See page Focus area four: Harnessing our evidence, insights and evaluation See page Focus area five: Maximising our relationships See page
Focus area three: Aligning our culture and purpose
Focus area three: Aligning our culture and purpose Focus area five: Maximising our relationshipsFocus area four: Harnessing our evidence, insights and evaluationPulse survey feedback shows staff believe RSG is taking effective action to address feedback provided through annual Whakahoki krero surveys Regulatory partner stakeholder engagement survey The Data Futures Partnership NZ Data Trust Governance of Data Guidelines Data Maturity Rubric (DMR) shows RSG has shifted from Fragmented to Partner Ready
Focus on property portfolio for future energy efficiency and savings including proactive planning for replacement of endoflife equipment. HVAC tuning and controlled shutdowns in sites responsible for preservation of collection are also in the pipeline.
Follow the Bills progress on the Parliament website
Followup with Wairarapa Mayors on Order in Council for threeyear longterm plans for cycloneaffected councils
Following extensive work, we have not gained any confidence that voluntary contact tracing apps can meaningfully augment and accelerate contact tracing as they simply cannot reach the required level of compliant adoption.
Following the devastating impacts of Cyclone Gabrielle, the National Library supported iwi in affected communities to safeguard their taonga..
Following the initial response, we developed and delivered a sixweek training programme in Wairoa, where National Library kaimahi collaborated with other agencies to provide wellbeing training, whakapapa research, oral history training, and the preservation of disasteraffected collections.
Following the release of the Strategic Framework for Regional Deals on August , the Department of Internal Affairs presented a short series of virtual information sessions.
For BREAKDOWN assistance, please phone
For Cabinet material and any public service departme ntal advice use this copyright statement Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .)
For Cabinet material and any public service departmental advice use this copyright statement
For Cabinet material and any public service departmental advice use this copyright statement Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .)
For Cabinet material and any public service departmental advice use this copyright statement Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) v I N C O N F I D E N C E Proactively released by the Minister for Local Government I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN Cabinet Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Interim Government Response to the Social Services and Community Committees Report on Petition of Jenn Hooper Portfolio Local Government On August , Cabinet: noted that on June , the Social Services and Community Committee released its report Petition of Jenn Hooper: Develop Changing Places facilities ; noted that under Standing Order the government response to the report must be presented to the House by August ; agreed that an interim government response be provided which notes that a substantive response will be provided in ; approved the interim government response, attached as Appendix A to the submission under CABSUB, subject to amendments to the draft response agreed to by the Minister of Local Government; agreed that the Department of Internal Affairs consult with Local Government New Zealand and the Society of Local Government Managers in the preparation of the substantive response, as required. Michael Webster Secretary of the Cabinet I N C O N F I D E N C E hebouk Proactively released by the Minister for Local Government IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Office of the Minister of Local Government
For Cabinet material and any public service departmental advice use this copyright statement Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) Commercial in Confidence In addition, while Cabinets recently agreed proposals to establish a new online casino gambling regulatory system are an overall positive move, they present indirect risks to TAB NZs longterm financial sustainability because the proposals potentially strengthen the market position of TAB NZs biggest competitors. The Minister for Racing intends to work with the Minister of Internal Affairs on areas of common interest between the portfolios on these matters. It is proposed that distributions to the racing industry should be protected by extending TAB NZs monopoly to all racing and sports betting offered online to New Zealanders. Specifically, it is proposed to: . make it illegal for any entity other than TAB NZ to offer betting on sports or racing events to a New Zealandbased customer; . repeal the Point of Consumption Charge (POCC) sections within the Racing Act, as it will no longer be collectable under a monopoly model; . establish the Department of Internal Affairs as an interim regulator, in anticipation of this function being transferred permanently to the online casino regulator when it is established in CABMIN. refers; . strengthen the governance and oversight provisions for TAB NZ; and . strengthen harm minimisation and consumer protection regulationmaking powers in the Racing Act. This proposal comes with some risks, including that the proposed interim enforcement regime may not be sufficient for TAB NZ to receive the related payments from Entain. It is also possible that there will be a reduction in Crown revenue from the loss of GST paid by some offshore operators. It is estimated the amount of GST collected in from offshore operators that related to income from sports and racing wagering was approximately . million. It is expected this will be offset by increased revenue through TAB NZ or other similar GST eligible spending, though it is not guaranteed. The Racing Industry Amendment Bill is on the Legislation Programme, with a Priority (to proceed to select committee by the end of ), which would implement this proposal. However, to protect the viability of TAB NZ and longterm financial sustainability of the racing industry, this should be progressed as soon as possible. Background The New Zealand racing codes are almost wholly reliant on TAB NZ for funding. The New Zealand racing industry was responsible for generating approximately . billion in valueadded contribution to the New Zealand economy in . It is responsible for sustaining , fulltime equivalent jobs across the country, including people employed in industries that support the racing industry. Following the Messara report, the declining racing industry was reformed via the Racing Act to ensure it could be selfsustaining CABMIN. refers. A major change was to establish TAB NZ as a statutory entity focused on wagering and responsibility for running the industry was devolved to the racing codes. The reforms also: . progressively repealed the totalisator duty on TAB NZ (redirecting funds to the racing industry); Commercial in Confidence qwkdm Commercial in Confidence The Minister of Internal Affairs is to report back to Cabinet in October with further details on these proposals. The Minister for Racing intends to work with the Minister of Internal Affairs on areas of common interest between the portfolios. These proposals however only cover online casino gambling (e.g. online casino table games and online pokies) and do not cover online sports and race wagering. For TAB NZ to enter into the online casino market would require amendment to the Racing Act. However, such a change will not be pursued as it is considered that TAB NZ should only operate in its traditional wagering space, and not gambling. While there will be no direct impact on the way TAB NZ operates under the online casino proposal, the changes are likely to strengthen the position of some of TAB NZs closest competitors in New Zealand. This is due to the proposal for licensed operators to be able to advertise as part of licensing conditions. Most of the global operators, who currently are not permitted to advertise to New Zealanders, offer onestopshops (casino, sports and lottery products) so it is possible that sports and racing products offered by licensed casino operators may benefit from increased brand recognition, even if permitted advertising is limited to solely casino products (and licenced operators are not permitted to cross pollinate and use casino products to promote sports and race wagering). It is proposed to protect distributions to the racing industry by extending TAB NZs monopoly to all racing and sports betting offered online to New Zealanders The popularity of online gambling continues. The status quo, including the Entain partnership, does not protect the racing industry adequately from this trend. Offshore operators can offer an attractive product to New Zealanders but make a minimal contribution to the New Zealand racing industry. Decreasing returns will create a risk to jobs and export markets within the racing industry. There is also a risk of future requests of government financial support if legislative and regulatory settings have provided for the erosion of this income stream. Agreement is sought to address the effects of offshore online betting now and in the future by extending TAB NZs monopoly to online settings. Specifically, it is proposed to: . make it illegal for any entity other than TAB NZ to offer betting on sports or racing events to a New Zealandbased customer; . repeal the POCC sections within the Racing Act as it will no longer be collectable under a monopoly model (in the POCC revenue collected was approximately . million); . create an interim regulatory regime; . strengthen TAB NZs governance and government oversight provisions; and . strengthen harm minimisation and consumer protection regulationmaking powers in the Racing Act. To address TAB NZs current and future customer leakage and to maximise the value from the Entain partnership, this monopoly should be implemented as soon as possible. Other options to increase returns to the racing industry have been considered, but they offer less certainty of outcome and lower returns in the short to mediumterm. For Barring its Class operations, TAB NZ only offers wagering products. These involve to real world people, animals or events and result in differing odds (e.g. favourite horses or teams paying lower odds than others with worse records) as opposed to pure gambling which are more games of chance (e.g. independent of form or a track record). In May , the racing industry received a government support package of .m, to help it weather the financial difficulties caused by COVID . Commercial in Confidence qwkdm Commercial in Confidence Governance and oversight improvements The Entain partnership (which introduces a for profit business into the equation alongside a returntoindustry model) marks a significant change in the New Zealand gambling landscape and requires the Act to still ensure TAB NZ has appropriate strong governance to enable it to deliver on its statutory objectives, functions and purposes. It is therefore proposed to update the skills required on the TAB NZ Board under s() of the Racing Act to also include: contract monitoring, legal and financial monitoring, to ensure it can better provide governance and oversight of Entain. It is also proposed to introduce new ministerial powers to require additional reporting and informationgathering from TAB NZ to better ensure that the Government has sufficient oversight. While some Ministerial reporting is currently undertaken on a voluntary basis by TAB NZ, there are no powers to compel this, nor specify the information to be reported or the level andor standard of reporting. The Department of Internal Affairs would monitor TAB NZs compliance with these reporting requirements as part of its role as interim regulator. Current harm minimisation regulationmaking powers are not fitforpurpose This proposal means TAB NZ would be the only domestic legal provider of online sports and racing betting. Given this restriction of choice of operators, it is important to ensure there are adequate harm minimisation protections for domestic TAB NZ consumers. About one in five people in New Zealand experience harm as a result of their own or someone elses gambling. Among other things this includes financial harm; relationship disruption; psychological distress; reduced involvement at work and criminal activity. The existing harm minimisation regulations in the Racing Act only apply to landbased TAB NZ venues. The Minister for Racing therefore proposes to expand the harm minimisation regulationmaking power to also cover TAB NZs online operations. The intent of a new regulation making power would be to ensure international best practice harm minimisation standards for online products can be included as part of the monopoly. It would also allow any online harm minimisation requirements imposed on TAB NZ to be aligned as required with those placed on online casino operators and to ensure there are no loopholes relating to minimising the harm from gambling between the regimes. Additional consumer protection regulationmaking powers As with harm minimisation, the restriction of choice for New Zealanders with the online monopoly means it is important that there are appropriate consumer protections for domestic TAB NZ consumers. In particular, New Zealanders should not be excluded from accessing TAB NZ services without an appropriate reason, such as having an identified gambling problem, as opposed to restrictions being placed on someone simply because they are too successful at wagering. It therefore proposes to create a new regulation making power to ensure TAB NZ cannot restrict otherwise lawful customers from accessing its online products without an appropriate reason. This would act as a backup reserve power if required. Power to Act on detailed decisions Within the agreed parameters outlined in this paper, there are still detailed decisions to be made (e.g. what aspects of the interim framework are more appropriately placed in Commercial in Confidence qwkdm Commercial in Confidence noted, these costs are to be recovered from TAB NZ. Given the need to progress quickly, Cabinets agreement is sought for the Minister for Racing, the Minister of Finance and Minister of Internal Affairs to be authorised to make changes to the Department of Internal Affairs appropriations to provide for this. Legislative Implications This proposal requires amendments to the Racing Act. There is already a Racing Industry Amendment Bill on the Legislation Programme, with a priority (to proceed to select committee by the end of ). However, given the urgency, this should proceed as soon as possible. This proposal would mean the POCC sections within the Racing Act need to be repealed as it will no longer be collectable under a monopoly model. There is a minor change to the POCC provisions included in the upcoming Statutes Amendment Bill, which therefore would need to be removed from that Bill. Regulatory Impact Analysis The Regulatory Impact Analysis (RIA) for these proposals was assessed by an Internal Department of Internal Affairs panel who concluded that the information and analysis summarised in the RIA partially meets the quality assurance criteria. The Panels comments are below. The panel considers that the RIA does a good job of setting out the limitations and constraints on the analysis. In particular, uncertainty about the quantifiable benefits is clearly identified. As such, the panel considers that the analysis provides a suitable basis to support decisionmakers consideration of the policy proposal. The RIS partially meets the quality assurance criteria because there has been no opportunity to consult on the policy proposal. Information obtained from earlier consultations and the departments understanding of the sector more generally are included in the RIA, which helps to mitigate the lack of consultation on this proposal. Population Implications Extending TAB NZs monopoly to online betting will have the most impact on rural communities, through the flow on effect of sustainable returns to the racing industry which largely sits within rural and suburban settings. The impact on gambling harm experienced by particular groups of the population will largely depend on the nature of TAB NZs harm minimisation practices. This will be considered as part of the detailed work on harm minimisation regulations. Gambling related harm is not experienced evenly across our communities, and Mori, Pacific, Asian and young people are at greater risk. Human Rights The proposals in this paper are not inconsistent with the rights set out in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act and the Human Rights Act . Use of External Resources No external resources were employed in the development of the advice leading into and the drafting of this Cabinet paper. Commercial in Confidence qwkdm Commercial in Confidence Consultation This paper was consulted on with Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO), MFAT, Ministry of Health (MoH), Treasury, Inland Revenue, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), and Sport NZ. The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet was informed. MoH are supportive of the monopoly proposal subject to there being a strong harm minimisation framework in place backed by the harm minimisation regulations. Sport NZ supports extending TAB NZs online wagering monopoly to protect community interests and minimise gambling harm. Sport NZ wishes to emphasise TABs dual role in racing and sports betting and that sports betting is a rapidly growing segment of TAB NZs business which relies on continued cooperation from the sports sector. Sport NZ also notes the proposal presents risks to sport funding, including potential losses from POCC and likely declines in BIUC revenue, and that while increased TAB NZ distributions may offset these losses, this is not guaranteed. MBIE requested the following agency comment be added to this paper: MBIE (competition policy) does not support extending TAB NZs statutory monopoly to online sports and racing gambling services. Restraints on competition and consumer choice should be no more than is reasonably necessary to achieve the public interest objectives. Establishing a monopoly provider to promote the sustainability of the New Zealand racing industry appears to contravene this principle. Other options such as a licensing regime or narrowing the scope of the monopoly to the racing industry only (allowing New Zealanders to continue to bet on offshore sporting events with overseas providers) should be considered. If an online monopoly is created, we support stronger governance and reporting requirements for TAB NZ to ensure the public interest is achieved. Communications To give confidence to TAB NZ to make investments in the racing industry, and to give offshore operators time to make adjustments to business practices, if agreed, the Minister for Racing intends to make announcements shortly after Cabinet agreement is reached. The Department of Internal Affairs will ensure any communications to regulated parties and the wider public about the monopoly are clear about how these relate to the upcomin wider online gambling reforms. Proactive Release The Minister for Racing intends to proactively release this paper within business days of Cabinet decisions, subject to any redactions as appropriate under the Official Information Act (). Recommendations The Minister for Racing recommends the Committee: note that the New Zealand racing industry, which contributed . billion to the New Zealand economy in the racing year and sustained , fulltime equivalent jobs across the country; is almost wholly reliant on TAB NZ for funding; note that while TAB NZ has a monopoly on landbased sports and racing betting; New Zealands gambling legislation allows offshore online gambling operators (offshore operators) to offer sports and racing betting to New Zealandbased Commercial in Confidence qwkdm Commercial in Confidence customers, which threatens TAB NZs and the racing industrys ongoing financial sustainability; note that, in June , TAB NZ entered a year partnership agreement with global betting operator Entain, which provides for revenue sharing for the term of the agreement, guaranteed returns to TAB NZ until ; and a conditional payment should the Government legislate to provide TAB NZ with an online monopoly; note that while the partnership has helped in the shortterm, uncertainty remains with respect to longterm distributions to the racing industry, especially after the guaranteed return period concludes; note that while Cabinets recently agreed proposals to establish a new online casino gambling regulatory system are an overall positive move; they present indirect risks to TAB NZs longterm financial sustainability and the Minister for Racing intends to work with the Minister of Internal Affairs on areas of common interest between the portfolios on these matters; agree to amend the Racing Industry Act to : . make it illegal for any entity other than TAB NZ to offer betting on sporting or racing events to a New Zealandbased customer; . repeal the Point of Consumption Charge (POCC) and associated regulations; . create an interim enforcement regime with key features of this regime being: .. the Department of Internal Affairs being the default regulator with a power to delegate to another government department or crown entity in the future if required (in anticipation of this being transferred to a broader online gambling regulator once established), and .. the costs of administering and enforcing the regime being cost recovered from TAB NZ; . strengthen TAB NZs governance and government oversight provisions; by : .. updating the list of skills required on the TAB NZ Board to include: contract monitoring, legal and financial monitoring, to ensure it can better provide governance and oversight of Entain, and .. introducing Ministerial powers to require additional reporting from TAB NZ to better ensure that Government has sufficient oversight to respond to any future risk, including to racing industry distributions and sports payments; . expand harm minimisation regulationmaking powers to cover TAB NZs online operations ; . create a new regulation making power to ensure TAB NZ cannot restrict otherwise lawful customers from accessing its online products without an appropriate reason; authorise the Minister for Racing to make final decisions on minor and technical policy changes consistent with the policy intent of the proposals in this paper; approve the following fiscally neutral adjustments to provide for effective delivery and regulatory function and service for the TAB, with no impact on the operating balance andor net core Crown debt: Commercial in Confidence qwkdm Commercial in Confidence m increase(decrease) Vote Internal Affairs Minister of Internal Affairs Outyears MultiCategory Expenses and Capital Expenditure: Regulatory Services MCA Departmental Output Expense: Regulatory Services (funded by revenue other). . . . agree that the proposed changes to appropriations for above be included in the Supplementary Estimates and that, in the interim, the increase be met from Imprest Supply; authorise the Minister for Racing, the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Internal Affairs to make the required changes to the Department of Internal Affairs appropriations to allow it to be the interim regulator of the monopoly with these costs recovered from TAB NZ; invite the Minister for Racing to issue instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office to give effect to the recommendations in this paper; and agree that while the Racing Industry Amendment Bill is on the Legislation Programme, with a Priority (to proceed to select committee by the end of ) this Bill should be progressed faster if practical . Authorised for lodgement. Rt Hon Winston Peters Minister for Racing Commercial in Confidence qwkdm Commercial in Confidence Appendix A New Zealand racing industry structure This figure outlines the flow of income into the racing industry but excludes the flow of income to sporting codes. It also reflects the new operating environment under the TAB NZ Entain partnership, however, the values are from the financial year, prior to the commencement of the partnership. The Betting Levy Savings is the money TAB NZ would have paid to government in a totalisator duty, but now pays back to the racing industry. The totalisator duty was repealed as part of racing reforms in . Commercial in Confidence qwkdm
For Cabinet material and any public service departmental advice use this copyright statement Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) U N C L A S S I F I E D
For SP ( February ) for the various scenarios and are based on the best
For an archived version of this website:
For an explanation and description of the information above, see:
For an explanation and description of the information in the table above see:
For any enquiries or complaints please contact the Digital Child Exploitation Team:
For contact tracing in particular, network effects are dominant in any analysis. For any app or wearable that doesnt get to a high level of compliant usage it is mathematically impossible for it to impact the spread of COVID. Every little bit counts is empirically false in this particular domain.
For councils that are seeking to deliver water services through a joint delivery arrangement, councils may submit a single joint plan that
For current information go to:
For earler disclosures of expenses for members of the Executive see:
For example, accessing a healthcare service for people over using a service to show that you meet the age requirement.
For example, applying for a job. A digital qualification certificate can be used to show that you have the right training and experience.
For example, gaving a verifiable credential that youre a direct of a company or trustee of a trust and are authorised to make decisions for the company or trust.
For example, if a customer has recently become a New Zealand citizen, DIA will be able to
For example, if a customer is applying for a New Zealand Passport for the first time, the staff
For example, if a customer is applying for a passport on behalf of a child, this will enable DIA
For example, when a customer applies for a Marriage Licence they will be able to consent to
For example, your information may be held in a digital wallet on your mobile phone, computer or other device. Technology encrypts it and keeps it safe. This reduces the risk of it being misused.
For further information about engagement across the public sector see the
For further information, email
For guidance on the regulatory changes please refer to the Gambling Harm Prevention and Minimisation Guidance here:
For information about expenses for members of Parliament please go to:
For information about expenses for members of Parliament who are also members of the Executive (that is Ministers of the Crown) please go to:
For information on all New Zealand Government organisations and departments, you may visit New Zealand Government Online. This site provides links and information for all government, local government, crown agencies, health and education institutions.
For information on what our indicators are telling us for this outcome see
For life threatening emergencies dial for the Police.
For more detail on these numbers and trends, please
For more details on our proposal, please see the link below:
For more educational resources and guidance please see:
For more information about the programme, email the programme team:
For more information on how Identity Check works and how it keeps your information safe, read the Identity Check Privacy Impact Assessment below:
For more information on our carbon footprint
For more information on these see:
For more information please see:
For more information please visit:
For more information, visit:
For our Contact Tracing App, someone needs to find out about it, they need a compatible phone, they need to download it, they need to register, they need to keep the app running, they need their Bluetooth switched on, they need to reload the app if they reboot their phone. The app itself needs to accurately detect close contacts and not detect too many false positives Bluetooth signals vary greatly with device orientation, can pass through walls, and environments with lots of Bluetooth radio signals or lots of metal (trains, buses, etc) will reflect signals and give false readings.
For performance and additional information on Budget funded initiatives refer to
For publishers and authors
For support and help line services
For the survey a total of , customers were interviewed, , were invited, with a response rate.
For the survey a total of , customers were interviewed, , were invited, with a response rate.
For the GCDO, these outcomes are relevant to its digital system leadership mandate and role,
For the purpose of facilitating Identity Services under the following Acts:
For the purpose of facilitating access to information about deaths.
For the purposes of this Agreement Information Privacy Principles (IPP) , and which
For the purposes of this Agreement Information Privacy Principles (IPP) , and which are set
For these reasons IR will dispense with the notice requirements under section Q
Forecast underspends in the Local Government Portfolio
Foreign Affairs Act ; or
Foreign currency AA AA AA
Foreign currency AAStableA AAStabl eA AAS tableA
Forensics uncovered offending
Forest and Bird (Gisborne Branch) Tmanuhiri Tt Poroporo Trust
Foreword The Gambling Act sets out requirements for an integrated problem gambling strategy focused on public health. The Ministry of Health (the Ministry) is responsible for developing and refreshing this strategy every three years , as well as for implementing it. The Act specifies consultation requirements for developing the strategy and the levy rates. The Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm to (the strategy ) is the integrated problem gambling strategy required in the Act. This strategy sets out the Ministrys response to prevent and minimise gambling harm, after considering the: submissions on the consultation document and the Allen Clarke analysis of submissions Sapere Gambling Harm Reduction Needs Assessment (Rook et al ) (see Section .) reflections in the Progress on Gambling Harm Reduction to : Outcomes report (Ministry of Health, ) Gambling Commissions report to responsible Ministers and the independent report prepared for the Commission about the Ministrys revised strategy proposals document and associated problem gambling levy rates (Gambling Commission ) . The Ministry acknowledges that the submissions it received during its consultation presented multiple stories from a range of perspectives on gambling and minimising gambling harm. At times, these storylines came close together or even intersected, but the points of view were shaped by very different aims and objectives. The Ministry acknowledges that all these perspectives are real and valid, and the goals and outcomes of the strategy matter to all submitters. Nevertheless, differing perspectives result in different interpretations. The strategy sets out a new direction for change, to provide new and more relevant services to support the needs of people affected by gambling harm, expand the range of services and learn from people with lived experience. While gambling services were excluded from the scope of the Government Inquiry into Mental Health and Addiction Services due to the timeframes associated with the strategy refresh, the strategy proposals align strongly with the changes recommended in He Ara Oranga , the report of the Inquiry (Government Inquiry into Mental Health and Addiction ) . For example, they recognise the importance of placing people at the centre of a service, using service codesign and lived experience, having consumer networks, expanding the range and choice of services to be more holistic and culturally appropriate, and strengthening the mix of peer, cultural, support and clinical workforces, communities, tngata whaiora and whnau. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO iii Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Form signed by Ministers upon receipt of credit card Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Formal and informal mentoring as well as learning and development.
Formal warning to NZForex Limited for AntiMoney Laundering noncompliance
Former IT student jailed for hundreds of child sex abuse images
Former employee contact form
Former school principal jailed
Fostering and encouraging the positive aspects
Four Child Sex Image Cases in Tauranga District Court
Four visits on May to Western Bay of Plenty District Council, Bay of Plenty Regional Council, Tauranga City Council Commission, and Tauranga Mori Business Association
Four years jail for sex offender
Foxton man sentenced to years for creating and distributing child sexual exploitation material
Framework as well as insights from the UK Centre for the Protection of National
Framing how to assess contact tracing technology options Any technology that is supported and promoted by the New Zealand Government must make a compelling case to achieve real impact how effective will the given technology be at reducing infections under different scenarios and levels of technology adoption
Franz Josef Resilience Project: Update on funding approach
Free ebook designed for New Zealand children to help them learn how to keep themselves safe online.
Free phone: (New Zealand only)
Freephone: (New Zealand only)
Frequently Asked Questions
Frequently Asked Questions on the Working Group
Frequently Asked Questions on the funding allocation
Frequently Asked Questions Three Waters Services Reform
Frequently asked questions
Frequently asked questions will be prepared and shared with agencies to support
Friendly Societies (to Treasury)
Friendly Societies, Credit Unions, Incorporated Societies and Intermediaries may only offer
Friendly Society As defined in section of the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions Act
From , following the establishment of provinces which took over many government functions, the Colonial Secretarys Office became the channel for communication between the central and provincial governments. Because many administrative duties were carried out at provincial level, a unified departmental structure was slow to develop. The Colonial Secretary coordinated concerns as diverse as charitable aid, mental hospitals, harbourmasters and cattle inspection.
From to the Department of Internal Affairs hosted the Millennium Office, which helped distribute funding and coordinate official events to celebrate our nations entry into the third millennium. In it became the home of the newly created Office of Ethnic Affairs, now the
From , we are prioritising the strengthening of regulatory governance, through topics including risk management, assurance, performance measurement and governance methods. A diagram of our current approach to regulatory assurance and stewardship can be
From observations of UK data, larger water entities those serving populations greater than ,, realised larger ef ficiency improvements than smaller entities. As such, WICS assumes that given the small size of individual councils in New Zealand, the councils will not be able to fully realise the predicted efficiency improvements if they do not amalgamate. p. WICS ha s assumed some improvement in efficiency for a small number of councils based on size. Castalia do es not consider Farrierswiers comment that It is difficult for us to see any drivers for materially higher efficiency by small councils in the absence of a malgamation and associated reform. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua
From offices located across NZ and in Sydney and London, the branch also delivers futurefocused identity products and services that enable customers to register their life events, access services from other public and private sector agencies and businesses, and travel seamlessly overseas.
From the review of outcomes and research noted earlier, the following is evident. The number of Mori accessing intervention services has remained relatively high (in line with the relatively high vulnerability of Mori to gambling harm) since . Mori are accessing services at a rate roughly equivalent to their proportion o f r eported risky gambling behaviour and harm . The number of Pacific peoples accessing intervention services has incre ased s ubstantially since , so that the figure now more closely reflects the relativel y high v ulnerability of Pacific peoples to gambling harm . The number of Asian peoples and those under years of age reporting servic e use is l ower than one might expect based on research estima tes. S ubmissions on the strategy indicated that cultural and linguistic barriers to accessing public health and intervention services persist. Research and evaluation In the to period, work in research and evaluation included: completing the four th data collection wave and associated report for the NGS , w hich comprises a longitudinal cohort study of gambling participation and har m the biennial gambling module in the HLS (additional metaanalysis comprisin g an alysis of pooled data, change over time and evidence for inequalities in gamblin g ha rm has been commissioned and reported ) the University of Auckland s development and trial of a smartphonebased app tha t pr ovides timely messages to atrisk gamblers who have sought help (the SPAG eTTI Tr ial) clinical evaluation by AUT of a range of interventio ns the Central Queensland University Australia and AUT study on the Burden o f G ambling Harm, which used the disabilityadjusted life year measure to understan d th e level of harm associated with gambling in the population (this approach is no vel to the gambling research field, and provides an alternative measure of har m c ompared with the limited and more clinically orientated measure in the PGSI scale ) commissioning research from the Pacific Island Families Study, to study exposure to ga mbling among Pacific youth aged under years . O ther significant evaluations that have commenced in the last months include: AUT and the Problem Gambling Foundation of New Zealand (PGF) s evaluation o f th e Partners for Change Outcome Management Syst em Malatest International s evaluation of the Sorted Whnau financial literacy intervention with Mori and Pacific atrisk population group s Malatest Internation als evaluation of the efficacy of the Hawke s Bay MVE proces s f or M ori and Pacific excludees and their affected others . .. Factors considered for to This section discusses a number of factors that the Ministry considered when developing the service plan for to . Some of these factors suggest a STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
FrontEnd Testing: A group of volunteers submitted live selfie images using the Identity Check web application. This tested the systems ability to correctly detect and accept genuine users
Full Impact Statement Template To be completed by quality assurers: Quality Assurance Reviewing Agency: The Department of Internal Affairs , with a representative from Treasury supporting the panel . Quality Assurance Assessment: The panel considers that the information and analysis summarise d in the RIA meets the quality assurance criteria. Reviewer Comments and Recommendations: The RIA clearly explains complex concepts using plain English and is concise relative to the nature of the issues being discussed. It convincingly describes the issues and sets out the full range of options. Assumptions, constraints and uncertainties are c learly stated, and it provides balanced analysis. Complete information is provided by setting out likely costs, where they fall, risks and mitigation measures. The RIA also identifies the range of potential impacts from options and links to other work. The re has been appropriate consultation.
Full Impact Statement Template Impact Statement : A Digital Identity Trust Framework Section : General information . Purpose This Regulatory Impact Assessment provides an analysis of options and advice regarding interventions aimed at introducing consistency and trust into the digital identity ecosystem in New Zealand. Th e analysis and advice ha ve been produced for the purpose of informing final policy decisions to be taken by Cabinet. The Department of Internal Affairs is solely respon sible for the analysis and advice set out in this Regulatory Impact Assessment, except as otherwise explicitly indicated . . Key Limitations or Constraints on Analysis
Full Impact Statement Template The ambiguity of terminology Digital identity is an ambiguo us term. As a result, the c ompari son of terms such as dig ital identity framework, digital identity ecosystem or digital identity services can be challenging because definitions are inconsistent and sometimes conflicting . As a result, this made it challenging to compare and analyse data sets and information. The estimation of costs and benefits While the benefits of the Trust Framework are highly likely to outweigh the costs, it can be challenging to measure the costs and benefits of digital identity and thus provide accurate figures for analysis . For example, d ifferent sectors benefit in different ways banks may save money by improving inefficient onboarding processes, while government agencies may end up spending more money to provide a better service to the public. Also, a large increase in demand for compliance testing may increase costs to government, but not the benefit. As a result, The Department cannot have high confidence in its assessment of costs and benefits. The lack of reliable figures to base analysis on While officials have captured substantial anecdotal evidence regarding digital identity service challenges, it is rare for that information to be accompanied by reliable figures . For example, Non Governmental Organisations have stated that obtaining Police checks multiple times for volunteers is time consuming and a significant frustration, but they are unable to quantify the full extent of the problem. As a result , the Department has had to base some of its analysis on assumptions and cannot have high confidence in some of its assessment. The u ncertainty regarding the details of compliance testing Assessment of information systems is required to establish what should be tested for compliance and how it will be tested . This will not take place until phase one of the Trust Framework ( ). As such, the analysis in this document could only be predicated on a basic concept of compliance testing and broad estimates of the costs involved. The gaps in our evidence regarding value Evidence demonstrated that business, government, and the public were all aware of the issues around digital identity services and wanted them resolved so that the value of information could be realised. This value, however, is different for each participant in the ecosystem . For example, a builder might value the ability to digitally share the ir qualifications because that reduces the time spent gaining access to a building site, while the construction company running the site values this process because it is less resource intensive than a process requiring physical documents . As a result, it was difficult to quantify and categorise value for all the participants of the ecosystem. It was also challenging to identify which participants might look to implement solutions based on the Trust Framework first.
Full Impact Statement Template . Responsible Manager (signature and ):
Full Impact Statement Template Section : Problem definition and objectives . What is the current state within which action is proposed Digital identity is a critical enabler With more and more activities taking place online, the ability to digitally share information about oneself to access services and conduct transactions is increasingly becoming a critical enabler of daily life and a fo undation for the economy. For example, on any given day, a person might use digital identity services to: Open a bank account Pay bills Shop online Work from home Undertake education Access healthcare Access government services As a result, digital identity services have significance for individuals, businesses, organisations, government agencies, and society in general. The current state of d igital identity in New Zealand The digital identity ecosystem in New Zealand that is, the network of users, relying parties, information providers, and infrastructure providers that support the digital sharing of information for a variety of purposes has emerged in an ad hoc fashion and lacks consistently applied standards and pro cesses for sharing, storing and using personal and organisational information in a digital environment. As a result it is unstructured , and inefficient . Government plays a role, but it is not a comprehensive or overarching role. Instead government applies some rules and provides a RealMe verified identity , which is a government sponsored identity verification service among many private sector solutions. The private sector drives the marketplace, but businesses and organisations vary in how they implement identification, security and privacy, and in how they store, manage and use peoples information. All of this undermines consumer trust in digital identity services, impedes the flow of information, and prevents the realisation of the potential benefits on offer. Intervention will bring consistency and trust Almost certainly. A government intervention to imbue the digital identity ecosystem with consistency and trust would encourage the use of digital identity services, enable the flow of information, and position the digital identity ecosystem to reali se the significant social and economic benefits digital identity services can provide. The implementation of a Trust Framework would be the best option for a government intervention.
Full Impact Statement Template Without intervention the situation will not improve A private sector response that would address the aforementioned issues in a comprehensiv e fashion is highly unlikely to emerge and the private sector would continue to develop its own rules and standards without government direction . The challenges within the digital identity ecosystem would remain unchanged, but would be increasingly exacerbated by the ongoing digital transformation occurring in all spheres of life a trend recently accelerated by the Covid pandemic. Trust in digital identity services would remain low, information would remain siloed, and the flow of information impeded. Furthermore, without intervention the digital identity ecosystem in New Zealand w ould not be positioned to realise the significant opportunities trusted digital identity could offer, the economic benefits of which alone are estimate d at approximately NZD . billion per annum .
Full Impact Statement Template Some standards (e.g. t he Evidence of Identity standard) are just best practice guideline s, as opposed to mandated requirements. Some legislation prescribes outdated or onerous requirements (e.g. those organisations wanting to be verified relying parties under the Electronic Identity Verification Act are required to be listed in a schedule to the Act) . As a result, this collection of regulatory instruments is not fit for purpose in terms of imbuing the digital identity ecosystem with consistency , trust and scale . New g overnment regulation could provide the overarching structure to support the digital identity ecosystem . Government regulation would be prefe rable to private arrangements because it would bring consist ency to the ecosystem . Private arrangements tend to promote fragmentation and inconsistency since the y are usually implemented through bilateral or multilateral contracts between several parties. Furthermore, through consultation , private sector stakeholders have indicated a preference for the establishment of a government led compliance regime to consistently apply common rules across the digital identity ecosystem . Any move to advance regulation in the digital identity ecosystem will directly impac t: RealMe and its funding . RealMe is the governments foremost digital identity service . Uptake for the service has not been as high as originally anticipated and the market has changed significantly since it was introduced. While RealMe is based on a centralised model, globally and in New Zealand there has been an emergence of digital identity service providers who are developing decentralised operating approaches that allow the customercitizen to have greater control of their information . These new approaches seek to realise the economic benefits while minimising data transfer and enhancing security and privacy. It is anticipated that RealMe (or parts of it) will be brought into the Trust Framework, however, because the scope and nature of its involvement has yet to be determined, the expected impacts on its funding are currently unclear. The Electronic Identity Verification Act . It is highly likely t hat legislative amendments to the Act will be required to facilitate the practical use of the Trust Framework for agencies. Potentially, a wide r range of legislation. The Trust Framework Bill would not supersede other legislation, but minor amendments may be required to remove obstacles in other legislation and facilitate opportunities for the Trust Framework and digital solutions . This could include, for example, an amendment to allow the use of digital signatures instead of requiring a physical signature on a paper document . Amendments could be made to any Act dealing with the use of personal information and identity such as the Privacy Act , the Public Records Act , the Identity Information Co nfirmation A ct , Birth, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Act , Passports Act , Citizenship Act , Land Transport Act , The Children, Young Persons, and Their Families Act Oranga Tamariki Act , Family Violence Act , and the Vulnerable Childrens Act . Other sector specific work in digital identity is likely to complement the Trust Framework , for example: PROACTIVELY RELEASED INCONFIDENCE
Full Impact Statement Template The Ministry of Social Development is undertaking work to digitally enable people to apply for support, sharing identity credentials to show evidence of eligibility . The Ministry for Primary Industries and the Ministry for Business Innovation and Employment are undertaking work on integrated farm planning that will require standards and processes for sharing of iden tity related attributes for people and other entities in the food and fibre sector. The Ministry of Health is undertaking work to understand their requirements and barriers to implementing effective digital identity in the health sector. The Ministry of Education is undertaking early policy work in understanding what is needed to further enhance their digital systems in the future.
Full Impact Statement Template Consumers trust in digital identity s ervices was low. People were wary of providing their information online to private sector companies, out of concern this information could be exploited for commercial gain. NonGovernmental Organisations were frustrated that it was not easy to reuse information digitally, primarily because volunteers were having to undergo multiple Police check s. Public agencies find it challenging to offer digital services in instances where their customers can not easily demonstrate who they are or what they are ent itled to. Industry saw a need for greater consistency, streamlined compliance, and the simplification of processes to make identification services more efficient.
Full Impact Statement Template Anecdotal evidence suggests the desire for a government led intervention had been strengthened in both the public and private sector by the recent Covid pandemic , due to the accelerated digital transformation i t has prom pted and the need to support postCovid economic recovery. Despite this development, the Department does not anticipate conducting another round of stakeholder consultation regarding the challenges facing digital identity and possible interventions . A public engagement process will, however, be undertaken as part of the development of a Trust Framework Bill. . What are the objectives sought in relation to the identified problem To develop a trusted, consistent and sustainable digital identity ecosystem in New Zealand which will encourage the use of digital identity services to access servic es and conduct transactions .
Full Impact Statement Template The establishment of an accreditation team to ensure entities are complying with the rules of the Trust Framework . The introduction of a new Bill to establish the powers of the Trust Framework , its governance board and accreditation team , as well as introduce amend ments to preexisting legislation to ensure align ment with the Trust Framework. This would be achieved in two phases. Phase one: the implementation of an interim Trust Framework to allow compliance testing of digital solutions ( ). Under the interim Trust Framework, officials will develop the Trust Framework rules (largely based on existing and developing standards and legislation) and work with a limited number of entities to test their systems against the rules. This will provide participating entities with an opportunity to align their systems with the Trust Framework and ensure they are well positioned to become formally accredited once the Trust Framework is established in legislation (see below) . It also provides government with the ability to assess existing and emerging digital identity solutions to ensure they are meeting best practice for identification management, privacy and security while the legislation is under development. This approach aligns well with international models such as Australias Trusted Digital Identity Framework. In this interim phase, a cross agency governance group will be established to approve the rules and the compliance testing process. Work will also be initiated t o develop a Bill to formally establish the Trust Framework and make amendments to pre existing legislation necessary to give effect to the Trust Framework. This Bill is likely to be introduced to the House of Representatives in . The anticipated cost o f this phase is . million .
Full Impact Statement Template would instead serve to support trust and promote the development of efficient and interoperable services across the digital identity ecosystem. Option Legislative amendments to status quo supported by publication of best practice standards : make amendments to relevant legislation such as the Electronic Identity Verification Act (the EIV Act) and mandat e Identification Management Standards for agencies, to enable a wider range of user consented information sharing and oversight by government. The Government Chief Digital Officer (GCDO) would publish the standards that make up the proposed Trust Framework as best practice guidance for public, private and non government sector entities. Option Trust Framework: government department based gov ernance and accreditation (preferred option) : Establish a Trust Framework, overseen by a governance board established within a government department. On this board, government representati ves would have voting rights on amendments to the Trust Framework, while non government independent advisors would support their decision making. The board would be supported by a n accreditation team, based in a pre existing government department. A Bill w ould be introduced to establish the powers of the Trust Framework and its governance board, and to make any consequential amendments required. This option would be implemented in two stages phase one: interim Trust Framework ( ), which will be an i nformal testing and transition phase, and phase two ( ) which will involve the formal implementation of the Trust Framework in legislation. This option aligns with Australia which has implemented a standards based Trust Framework with government led accreditation and governance. Option Trust Framework: accreditation scheme run at a distance from primary government : Similar to Option but with an independent governance b oard established outside of an existing government department. The board would also establish a new entity responsible for accrediting participants in the Trust Framework. This would result in less government control over the governance of the Trust Framework, but would allow for representation of non government interests on the board. There would be no interim phase under this option, and it would only become operational once the new entity is established and a new Trust Framework Bill was passed. Options and are not necessarily mutually exclusive. It would be possible to start off with Option and then move to Option in the future if the government determined there would be value in such a move. The development of these options was informed by extensiv e stakeholder engagement , involving surveys, focus groups and consultation with over organisations, including public agencies, Crown entities, digital service providers, financial institutions, and academic institutions. It was clear from this consultation that the development of a trusted ecosystem would be important for both the economy and society. Consultation also too k place with a wide range of international partners, all of whom are attempting to implement national level responses to digital identity issues.
Full Impact Statement Template Outlined below are the categoriesquestions against which the options were assessed. Principles: This option is consistent with the principles that would underlie a trusted and consistent digital identity ecosystem in New Zealand (e.g. people centred , inclusive, secure, privacy enabling, sustainable, interoperable, enabling Te Ao Mori approaches , open and transparent) . Trust: This option will instil trust in digital identity . In the event an incidentbreach of responsibility undermines trust in the digital identity ecosystem there are (statutory and nonstatutory) processes in place to remediate and restore that trust . Feasibility: This option generate s (social, economic, fiscal) value for participants in the ecosystem . This option encourage s participation in the ecosystem . The estimat ed costs (setup, ongoing) for government and other ecosystem participants are reasonable. This could be implemented within a reasonable timeframe . Flexibility: This option is responsive to changes in social licence and the needs and requirements of participants . This option is responsive to the emergence of new technologies, new standards and protocols, and new approaches to the digital exchange of information . This option is scalable (i.e. able to grow) .
Full Impact Statement Template Section : Impact Analysis Marginal impact: How does each of the options identified in section . compare with taking no action under each of the criteria set out in section . Key: much better than doing nothingthe status quo better than doing nothingthe status quo about the same as doing nothingthe status quo worse than doing nothingthe status quo much worse than doing nothingthe status quo Option Status quo No change Option A nonregulatory Trust Framework Option Legislative amendments to status quo supported by publication of best practice standards Option Trust Framework with government department based governance and accreditation (preferred option ) Option Trust Framework with accreditation scheme run at a distance f rom primary government Option description Maintain the status quo in New Zealands digital identity ecosystem and continue with existing legislation, standards (both mandated and non mandated) and no overarching system oversight. Maintains the legal status quo, but establishes a set of best practice rules and standards, and a team within a government agency to carry out compliance testing against the standards. This compliance testing would not be legally binding, but would serve t o promote trust and interoperability between digital identity services. A cross agency governance body would be established to maintain and update the non regulatory Trust Framework. Largely maintain the status quo but make amendments to relevant legislati on such as the Electronic Identity Verification Act and mandate Identification Management Standards for agencies, to enable a wider range of citizen consented information sharing and oversight by government. The GCDO would also publish the standards that m ake up the proposed Trust Framework as best practice guidance for public, private and non government sector entities. Establish a Trust Framework, with rules that promote trust and enable interoperability, overseen by a statutory board established within a department. On this board, government representatives would have voting rights on amendments to the Trust Framework, while non government independent advisors would support their decision making. The board would be supported by a compliance team, based in a pre existing government department. Introduction of a new Bill to establish powers of the Trust Framework and its governance body and amendments to the Electronic Identity Verification Act and other relevant legislation. This option would be implemented in two stages: phase one: interim Trust Framework ( ), which will be an informal testing and transition phase, and phase two ( ) which will involve the formal implementation of the Trust Framework in legislation. Similar to Option but with t he governance body established outside of a department. The Board would also establish a new entity responsible for accrediting participants in the Trust Framework. This would result in less government control over the management of the Trust Framework, but would allow for wider representation of non government interests. There would be no interim phase under this option, and it would only become operational once the new entity is established and a new Trust Framework Bill was passed. Principles Is this option consistent with the principles that would underlie a consistent and trusted digital identity ecosystem in New Zealand (i.e. people centred , inclusive, secure, privacy enabling, sustainable, enabling Te Ao Mori approaches to identity , interoperable, open and transparent) People centred Inclusive Low. Not people centred , or inclusive as existing regime relates to a limited range of organisations and enables limited individual control over their own information. SecurePrivacy enabl ing Low. Limited security and privacy settings, as breaches of the Privacy Act only enforceable when significant harm occurs and no set standards across all organisations. Interoperable Low. Limited ability to establish interoperability both domestically and internationally, as no agreed way that information sharing occurs across sectors in New Zealand. Sustainable Low. Continues to produce cost inefficiencies, while People centred Medium. Could help to promote standards that improve the experience for users. Inclusive Medium. Government supports inclusivity through compliance testing. Secure Low. Standards around security will be set out, but not legally enforceable. Privacy Low. Standards around privacy w ould be set out, but not legally enforceable. Sustainable High. Few barriers to entry, and cross agency oversight would help to keep standards current. Interoperability Medium. Will promote interoperability within People centred Low. Minimal improvements to current situation for people. Inclusive Medium. W ill not impede or promote inclusivity. Secure Privacy enabling Low. Limited security and privacy settings, as breaches of th e Privacy Act only enforceable when significant harm occurs and no set standards across all organisations. Negligible improvements. Sustainable High. L ow cost, would potentially encourage greater participation in digital identity, would potentially resul t in a more effective environment. People centred High. The mandating of identity management and security standards w ould better ensure that peoples information is being shared in a manner that is consistent with standards and legislation. Inclusive High. Government intentionally promotes inclusivity. Secure High. Government oversight will ensure security requirements are bein g met, which was a key concern for focus group participants. Privacy enabling High. The Trust Framework would introduce and consistently apply privacy standards across the digital identity ecosystem. Government oversight will ensure privacy standards are being met , which was a key concern for focus group participants. Similar to though, improved inclusivity given the greater representati on on the governance board. Sustainability would be dependent on uptake. In a low uptake environment costs would significantly outweigh benefits, however, in a high uptake environment this option would allow for specialisation and scale.
Full Impact Statement Template Option Status quo No change Option A nonregulatory Trust Framework Option Legislative amendments to status quo supported by publication of best practice standards Option Trust Framework with government department based governance and accreditation (preferred option ) Option Trust Framework with accreditation scheme run at a distance f rom primary government impeding the ability to generate economic and social value. Open and transp arent Low. Little openness and transparency , with feedback revealing people perceive the lack of transparency from businesses and organisations as a key barrier to taking control of their own information. NZ by setting out interoperability sta ndards. Open and transparent High. Government is committed to transparency and subject to OIA and public scrutiny. Government will publicly publish the standards providers are expected to comply with and could officially recognise which bodies have undergone compliance testing . Interoperable Low. Gains would be minimal. Open and transparent Low. Government remains accountable to public. Sustainable High. Government oversight and consistency of accreditation would encourage participation because government is viewed as a reliable actor that has the resources to ensure that the system endures . The existence of a governance board would help to ensure that the Trust Framework remains fit for purpose and supports needs and requirements . Interoperable High. Will ensure interoperability within NZ by consistently applying interoperability standards that all accredited parties must adhere to . Government intentionally promotes interoperability with Australia, and other key international partners. Open and transparent High. Government is committed to transparency and subject to OIA and public scrutiny. Government will publicly publish the standards accredited bodies are expected to comply with and could officially recognise which bodies are accredited. Trust This option will instil trust in digital identity. In the event an incidentbreach of responsibility undermines trust in the digital identity ecosystem there are (statutory and non statutory) processes in place to remediate and restore that trust. Instil trust Low. Limited ability to create and use verified information across services, as few enforceable rules apply across services. In a study, only of NZ participants said they currently felt confident about their rights when it came to th eir digital identity and data storage. Generate challenges High. Individuals limited control of their digital information will be exacerbated by increasing digitisation of services. Remediaterestore trust Low. Limited processes to restore trust as l imited penalties and remedies in the Privacy Act and existing legislation that governs the RealMe services. Instil trust Medium. Government is generally viewed as a trusted actor, and having a centrally agreed set of best practice standards and rules will help to promote consistency across the ecosystem. However, without a means of holding participants to account, compliance with the standards would be uncertain, potentially undermining trust. Remediaterestore trust Low. Without a means to hold providers to account, trust in the best practice standards could decline. Instil trust Medium . Improved ability to create and use verified information across services, with more enabling use of RealMe services , but still limited . Improved trust in government processes, with identity assurance introduced. Generate challenges High. Individuals limited control of their digital information will be exacerbated by increasing digitisation of services. Remediaterestore trust Low. Limited processes to restore trust as limited penalties and remedies in the Privacy Act and existing legislation that governs the RealMe services. . Instil trust High. Government is generally viewed as a trusted actor and having one point of contact for accreditation will ensure consistency across the ecosystem. Focus group feedback indicated that people felt like they had lost control of their information and the application and enforcement of stronger rules would increase their trust in digital ident ity services. Stakeho lder feedback indicated a preference for government taking the lead in addressing digital identity issues as a private sector response might result in fragmentation and inconsistency across the digital identity ecosystem . Same as Option though focus group feedback specifically indicated a preference for digital identity t o be regulated and monitored by an independent agency as it would be more reliable than governments which come and go .
Full Impact Statement Template Option Status quo No change Option A nonregulatory Trust Framework Option Legislative amendments to status quo supported by publication of best practice standards Option Trust Framework with government department based governance and accreditation (preferred option ) Option Trust Framework with accreditation scheme run at a distance f rom primary government Generate challenges Low. Low probability risk that some people may view one authority having control of the entire process as potentially problematic. Low probability risk that d espite people asking for more trusted digital identity services they dont use them because its more convenient to continue using riskier services. Low probability risk that the public misperceives this as putting their information at greater risk of exposure and misuse focus group participants recognised their information had value to some organisations and were wary that advances in digital identity might result in them being targeted by advertising or result in more of their data being sold . Low probability risk that information remains siloed as entities holding informa tion do not choose to become accredited. Low probability risk that trusted systems, products and services do not improve customer experience. Low probability risk that low uptake means that the potential benefits of the Trust Framework remain unrealised. Low probability risk that Mori needs and requirements are not addressed adequately despite Treaty of Waitangi obligations Remediaterestore trust High. Government would ultimately retain the right to suspend or revoke accreditation.
Full Impact Statement Template Option Status quo No change Option A nonregulatory Trust Framework Option Legislative amendments to status quo supported by publication of best practice standards Option Trust Framework with government department based governance and accreditation (preferred option ) Option Trust Framework with accreditation scheme run at a distance f rom primary government which is currently maintained through existing agency baselines. Timeframe na. R egime already in place. Costs Medium. Estimated costs approximately million per annum, which could be recovered from service providers. Timeframe High. Could be stood up before the end of . Timeframe Medium. Could be stood up with transitionary arrangements in the near future but legislative amendments likely to take years.
Full Impact Statement Template Option Status quo No change Option A nonregulatory Trust Framework Option Legislative amendments to status quo supported by publication of best practice standards Option Trust Framework with government department based governance and accreditation (preferred option ) Option Trust Framework with accreditation scheme run at a distance f rom primary government pandemic causes the underlying issues with digital identity to be exacerbated.
Full Impact Statement Template PROACTIVELY RELEASED INCONFIDENCE
Full Impact Statement Template Section : Conclusions . What option, or combination of options is likely to best address the problem, meet the policy objectives and deliver the highest net benefits
Full Impact Statement Template information to a restricted range of organisations to electronically verify an individuals identity. Option will make some improvements to the status quo. Amendments would be made to the Electronic Identity Verification (EIV) Act to remove some of the barriers that currently create challenges for individuals and organisations that wish to engage with RealMe. Th is would likely improve the flexibility and sustainability of RealMe services. The costs of amending the EIV Act are also likely to be relatively modest (indicative cost of . million over years). Options and will do relatively little bring consi stency and trust to the wider digital identity ecosystem. They will do little to bring coherence to the application of privacy and security standards across both the public and private sectors, and will not address wider issues regarding the collection and use of peoples information. Implications for Mori Under Options and , Mori continue to have little control of their personal information. Options and provide opportunities for Mori to be in control of their data, its uses, its storage and its analys is. The Department is confident that the evidence supports the policy proposal outline d above. Our option development was informed by extensive research and stakeholder engagement, including consultation with a wide range of international partners, all of whom were attempting to implement national level responses to digital identity issues.
Full Impact Statement Template and scaled in the future, if required, whil e a larger, more expansive regulatory regime would take considerable time to establish and may not be fit for purpose . The private sector is not in a position to implement a regulatory framework itself and has requested government take the lead on this issue. A limited government intervention (e.g. the recommendation of best practice guidelines without any associated compliance mechanisms) would d o little to remedy the deficiencies within the current ecosystem.
Full Impact Statement Template . Summary table of costs and benefits of the preferred approach
Full Impact Statement Template Expected benefits of proposed approach compared to taking no action Regulated parties Improved service delivery potentially resulting in an expanding customer base; improved ease of business; improved brand reputation; greater efficiencies (e.g. less duplication, process streamlining); reduced fraud resulting from improved risk assessment; increased confidence to invest in digital solutions; potentially new revenue streams; increased ability to meet regulatory requirements; greater confidence in the validity of personal and organisational information that is being supplied for the purpose of a transaction. High
Full Impact Statement Template . What other risks impacts is this approach likely to have POTENTIAL IMPACTS EXAMPLES POTENTIAL OUTCOMES ASSUMPTIONS MITIGATION MEASURES ASESSMENT Public misconceptions The possibility that efforts to enable greater information sharing in the digital identity ecosystem result in a public misconception that information is at greater risk of exposure andor misuse. Discourages participation People are especially concerned about the security of their information Government assumes this risk. Such a scenario would be mitigated through the establishment of new legislation to govern the Trust Framework, a commitment to administer the Framework in a n open and transparent fashio n, public reports and possibly also through a public awareness campaign in the initial stages of the Trust Framework. The mitigation measures will ensure this is a low probability risk.
Full Impact Statement Template Costs to upgrade systems to meet Trust Framework requirements are significantly higher than originally estimated, adding additional strain to the budget of the private or public sector entity seeking to join the Trust Framework. The Trust Framework does not enable Te Ao Mori approaches to identity Mori do not participate equitably in the digital identity ecosystem. Mori perspectives and approach to identity are not enabled by the digital identity ecosystem. The digital identity ecosystem is not developed and maintained in partnership with Mori. Mori are not supported in leadership and decision making roles to ensure Mori perspectives about data are embedded in the trusted digital identity ecosystem . Undermines the governments commitments t o digital inclusion Discourages Mori participation in digital identity and limits the potential benefits of digital identity for Mori communities It is necessary to encourage Mori participation and better understand the opportunities for Mori in imple menting the Trust Framework. Government assumes the risk. To mitigate this t he principles of the Trust Framework, which will be enshrined in the Trust Framework Bill, will include inclusion and Enabling Te Ao Mori approaches to identity . Additionall y, there will also be a Te Ao Mori government representative on the governance board of the Trust Framework, with the ability to coopt non voting members and appoint an Advisory Board. The mitigation measures will ensure this is a low probability r isk.
Full Impact Statement Template (e.g. the elderly, refugees). unrealised for everyone in society
Full Impact Statement Template Section : Implementation and operation . How will the new arrangements work in practice The preferred option would be formally given effect through the implementation of new legislation , which will establish the powers of the Trust Framework and its governance board. It will take time to develop and pass legislation, yet there is an increasing imperative to implement some form of Trust Framework in the near future, especially as Covid is accelerating digitalis ation in all aspects of life. As a result, The Department is proposing a two phase solution : Phase one: the implementation of an interim Trust Framework ( ). In this phase there is no legislation in place and the Framework is not legally enforceabl e. Phase two: the formal establishment of the Trust Framework ( ). In this phase, the Trust Framework is established in legislation and becomes legally enforceable. This approach will allow the Department to meet the demand for a near term solution to bring trust and consistency into the digital identity ecosystem, while also providing the space to develop the Trust Framework legislation, standards and accreditation process. In phase one () a cross agency governance board will be appointed by the Department, wh ich will also establish a team to conduct compliance testing on digital identity solutions . The governance g roup w ill consist of representatives f or the Government Chief Digital Officer, the Government Chief Information Security Officer , the Government Chief Data Steward, the Office of the Privacy Commissioner and a government Te Ao Mori representative. The board would also have the ability to co opt non voting members, and to appoint an advisory body comprised of government and non government experts and stakeholders. O ptions for closer participation of non government partners in the governance of the Trust Framework could be considered during the legisl ative process . The team responsible for carrying out compliance testing would be established in the Department of Internal Affairs with the Government Chief Digital Officer . Organisations wishing to operate under the Trust Framework in phase one will do so in an informal manner in which they undertake compliance testing that will test their ability to adhere to best guidance recommendations, as there will be no legislation in place . Phase one will also present an opportunity to test operational policies and processes to ensure the Framework is appropriately positioned to bring more participants into the trusted ecosystem in the future in an efficient and effective manner . While the compliance testing will help to provide the government with assura nce in the near term, in the longer term legislation is preferred. Establishing the Trust Framework accreditation and governance bodies in legislation would give them legal enforceability thus engender ing greater trust and participation , while also supporting sustainability. Additionally, e stablishing a new mechanism for both government and non government agencies to provide digital identity services without new legislation could be viewed as running counter to the original intent of the Electronic I dentity Verification ( EIV) Act. PROACTIVELY RELEASED INCONFIDENCE
Full Impact Statement Template While the Department considered whether an independent Crown Entity could carry out the accreditation and governance, the preference was for keeping these functions within a government agency. This was because the rules for accreditation to an identity recognition system should be made and administered by the government, given that responsibility for any breach of security by a government agency would be the responsibility of the government.
Full Impact Statement Template . What are the implementation risks
Full Impact Statement Template Section : Monitoring, evaluation and review . How will the impact of the new arrangements be monitored The Minister for Government Digital Services will retain overall responsibility for the Trust Framework. In phase one of the Trust Framework ( ), the Department will establish a cross agency governance group that could include appropriate representation from the private sector and iwi in a non voting capacity . Among other duties, that group will be responsible for monitoring the performance and effectiveness of all aspects of the Trust Framework and reporting back to the Minist er for Government Digital Services on a six monthly basis. In phase two ( ), once the Trust Framework has become officially established through legislation, a governance board will be formally appointed through the standard Appointments and Honours process and will assume the aforementioned monitoring and reporting duties. Reporting requirements will be formalised in the legislation as part of phase two of the Trust Framework ( ), including which organisation will have responsibility for this (note not necessarily the Department) . The type of data that could be reported could include the number of parties accredited to the Trust Framework , the number of compliance assessments undertaken, the number of disputes that have arisen and how many have been resolved, privacy or security related issues and their resolution , and the number of active participants in the Trust Framework. The Trust Framework legislation would also likely include a requirement that the governance board must review and report on any matter relating to the Trust Framework that is specified by the Minister in a written request.
Full Impact Statement Template The sharing of trusted personal and organisational information within the digital identity ecosystem would make it easier for businesses to comply with AntiMoney LaunderingCo untering the Financing of Terrorism obligations. Customers could be onboarded more efficientl y, reducing the amount of time consumers waste on clunky processes and potentially resulting in greater levels of ecommerce spending . Government : Improve d service delivery ; greater efficiencies (e.g. less duplication) ; improved record keeping increase d confidence to invest in digital solutions ; increased opportunities to break down information silos between business units and government agencies ; improved ab ility to detect and deter security or privacy breaches of personal and organisational information ; improved digital inclusion; greater trans Tasman alignment ; expected reduction in cost of RealMe services . Examples Paper based systems can be replaced with trusted digital solutions that consume less resources (e.g. employee hours, physical storage space), while offering greater efficiency. New Zealand and Australia would be able to align our respective digital identity Trust Frameworks enabling the trans Tasman business environment. Reduced likelihood of serious data breach es, such as those experienced by the Ministry of Culture and Heritage (August ) and KiwiSaver provider Generate (February ).
Full Impact Statement Template Costs to government Estimated at . million to implement and administer the Trust Framework : . million over phase one (), and . million over phase two ( ). In phase one ( ), government will assume the oneoff cost for the initial compliance testing . The testing body will be authorised to employ a cost recovery model when formally established in phase two as a result, in this phase , the one off cost for initial compliance testing will pass to the entity seeking accreditation . For those government agencies that intend to become accredited, there is an estimated oneoff cost of between , , (indicative) for every entity undergoing compliance testing . The exact costs involved in this cannot be determined at this time, but will become clearer during phase one () when officials will have a greater understanding of the rules, who wants to be involved in the Trust Frame work and the type of system s they employ . The risk of these costs escalating exponentially beyond initial estimates will be mitigated by engaging with agencies as the rules and compliance processes are developed. Cost to entities
Full Impact Statement Template Cost to entities for ongoing compliance obligations Once approved to operate under the Trust Framework, entities will have ongoing maint enance obligations , likely to cost up to , (indicative) per annum . Exact obligations have yet to be determined but will possibly include annual reports and occasional reassessments. The cost of these obligations will not be borne by the government, but rather the entities which have successfully undertaken their initial compliance testing accreditation and are operat ing under the Trust Framework. Officials have a low confidence in the indicative cost outlined abo ve as the true cost can only be established once the compliance process , the rules that govern it , and the ongoing obligations are finalised.
Full Impact Statement Template What are the likely risks and unintended impacts how significant are they and how will they be minimised or mitigated
Full Impact Statement Template Social inequalities creep in
Full Impact Statement Template Section C : Evidence certainty and quality assurance Agency rating of evidence certainty The Departments overall evidence of certainty rating is moderate high.
Full analysis of public consultation results: Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID Lessons: Terms of Reference Pt
Full analysis of public consultation results: Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID Lessons: Terms of Reference Pt
Function Information Sheet for Minister to launch Microsofts New Zealand Datacentre Region NZ North on December
Functions relating to New Zealand citizenship, including registrations for citizenship by descent, applications for citizenship by grant, proof of citizenship and changing your citizenship status.
Funding Agreement and Delivery Plan
Funding Neutral Neutral Neutral
Funding Reporting template
Funding and liquidity (x)
Funding decisions on Cyclone Gabrielle Appeal Trust
Funding ratio ( year) . . . N.A. N.A.
Funding the cost pressures
Funeral and memorial expenses can be paid.
Furth er, the WSEs h ave clear corporate govern ance with independent management that
Further , in our view, the WSEs will be among the most important government related
Further , the Governor s do not have appr oval rights over the WS Es statement s of inte nt.
Further Advice on Water Services Entities Secondary Legislation and Compliance Activities
Further Policy Decisions on the El ectoral (Voting Age) Legislation Bill
Further Policy Decisions on the Electoral (Voting Age) Legislation Bill Cabinet Minute CAB MIN November
Further Policy Decisions on the Electoral (Voting Age) Legislation Bill Cabinet Minute CAB MIN December
Further additions to the policy in and recognised that, to maximise the
Further advice on Contractual Arrangements
Further advice on amendments to the Water Services Act : Taumata Arowai and giving effect to Te Mana o te Wai
Further advice on amendments to the Water Services Act : section Te Mana o te Wai
Further advice on entrenchment in relation to the Water Services Entities Bill (tbc)
Further advice on incorporating cost considerations into Taumata Arowai regulatory practice
Further advice on shared services arrangements . Central to the case for water services reform is the need to achieve large efficiency gains in the operation of water services through increased organisational scale. These efficiency gains a re needed to keep water services affordable to consumers , as entities take on more debt to upgrade and better provide these services. If scale efficiencies cannot be realised, the geographic communities most at risk of cost increases will be those in rural and provincial areas , with relatively small and geographically dispersed populations. . Under the four entity model, these gains were expected to have been in part achieved through the realisation of scale efficiencies in the following areas: ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
Further advice to support consideration of an inquiry related to COVID
Further advice Application of Te Mana o te Wai to Taumata Arowai and drinking water suppliers
Further advice: Appointment of a Crown monitor for Watercare
Further approvals minor and technical amendments to the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Bill
Further details about what information is shared for what purposes are available in the next
Further details regarding the operational processes are included in the operating
Further illustrating the limitations of relying solely on selfrecall of close contacts, prior research has compared the number of close contacts identified via selfrecall with close contacts identified using digital solutions (Leecaster ; Mastrandrea ; Smieszek ). Three (Leecaster ; Mastrandrea ) to times (Smieszek ) more close contacts can be expected to be identified using sensors or digital solutions when compared to selfreport data.
Further information about the baseline reduction programme is included in response to written parliamentary questions and can be found here:
Further information about the purpose of the Working Group can be found in the Cabinet paper available here:
Further information about the stewardship approach to regulatory systems can be found on
Further information and contacts
Further information on the Implementation Plan for the Wellington Accommodation Payment can be found in the Prime Minister announcement of September :
Further information on the RealMe IVS system and Digital Identity Trust Framework
Further information on the Student Loan Scheme and Child Support can be found
Further optimisation of fleet and transition to EV where possible has resulted in a reduction in fuel from fleet. At the start of Te Tari had vehicles (EV) and are now down to vehicles ( EV)
Further policy decisions for electoral omnibus bill
Further policy decisions on the Elector al (Voting Age) Legislation Bill Proposal This paper seeks decisions on some furt her detailed policy settings, following Cabinets decision on Monday November to introduce a Bill to lower the voting age to for parliamentary and local elections. Relation to government priorities
Further policy decisions on the Electoral (Voting Age) Legislation Bill Cabinet Paper Office of the Minister of Justice November
Further reductions in electricity consumption have been achieved through replacement of lighting with LED. , lights were replaced in with estimated savings of kwh of electricity. (total , lights have been replaced since )
Further to feedback on the RIA dated August , a Supplementary Analysis Report was prepared for consideration alongside the draft Bill. The Quality Assurance panel provided the following statement in respec t of this report: The Quality Assurance Panel considers that the Supplementary Analysis Report meets the Quality Assurance Criteria. The Panel considers that the Supplementary Analysis Report fully addresses the Panels concern that the original RIA did not establish the criteria which will be used to determine which providers will be regulated, and whether consideration will be given to exempting small or niche providers. The Panel also considers that the SAR goes some way to addressing the Panels concern that the regulatory proposals would increase, rather than decrease, inconsistency of classification when considered across all h ousehold video content.
Further work is required to address inconsistent uptake across the public service
Further work is underway to develop an additional indicator to measure the quality and impact of our engagement with hap, iwi and Mori. This in turn will help us understand the importance of building relationships to progress our Treaty of Waitangi Te Tiriti o Waitangi settlement commitments.
Further, once the liquidit y facility is ac cessed , the Crowns monitori ng of the WSEs may
Furthermore, we determine d that there is no impact on L GFAs role, link, or extremely high
Future Proof Implementation Committee Waikato
Future proposed structure
Future regulation of class gambling March
Future structure Regulatory Enablement
Future water services delivery system
G Table G, G and G guide
GAMING MACHINES (outside Casinos)
GCDO AI Work Programme for
GCDO will undertake a stocktake of current and proposed onpremise investment.
GDS Briefing: Digital Inclusion work programme update June
GDS Status Report June June
GDS Status Report June June
GDS Status Report June June
GDS Status Report June June
GMP per EGM broken down by territorial authority (TA) has seen Porirua City, Auckland City and Horowhenua District remain in the top Tas for GMP per EGM. Hastings District returns and continues to feature frequently. A new addition to the top this quarter is QueenstownLakes District, which is not generally this high in comparison to the other TAs. It has however reduced the number of venues and EGMs compared to the previous quarter and it could be that the venue that is no longer operating was a lower GMP venue, but further analysis would have to be conducted to confirm this. Porirua City, Hastings District and QueenstownLakes District have seen an increase in GMP per EGM compared to the last quarter, but Auckland City and Horowhenua District have seen a decrease, likely owing to the overall lower GMP, both nominally and adjusted for inflation.
GOVERNMENT PAYROLL PROGRAMME: FINAL REPORT Proposal This paper provides a final report to Cabinet on the outcome of a two year All ofGovernment programme to improve Government payroll systems. This programme ended on September . Relation to government priorities This work programme relates to the Governments Workplace Relations and Safety priority. Executive Summary In Cabinet commissioned the Government Chief Digital Officer (GCDO) in the Department of Internal Affairs (DIA) to lead a two year All of Government programme to improve Government payroll systems and simplify payroll system procurement GOV Min. Time limited funding was provided for the programme, which aimed to improve governments access to quality payroll providers, and to ensure that public service agencies have effective and consistent payroll processes that comply with the Holidays Act . The Payroll Programme was supported by a cross agency Executive Advisory Board and undertaken in conjunction with the Te Kawa Mataaho Public Services Commission (PSC) and the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE). The PSC has oversight of employment relations, and MBIE administers the Holidays Act . In line with Cabinets original mandate, the Payroll Programme was closed on September . The Programmes objectives of overs eeing agency payroll projects, improving payroll practices, and coordinating payroll procurement were achieved. However, ongoing risks and issues in the government payroll system will need continued oversight and vigilance. Background On September , Cabinet GOV MIN endorsed the establishment of a two year work programme to improve government payroll systems and simplify payroll system procurement. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Time limited funding of . million was provided for the programme, which was led by the Government Chief Digital Officer (GCDO) and delivered in conjunction with PSC and MBIE. The purpose of the Cabinet directed Programme was to provide Ministers with assurance that: . expenditure on payroll systems was warranted by providing oversight of government payroll projects, including investment and project assurance; . payroll project risks are managed; . payroll systems are fit forpurpose and are provided at a reasonable cost by providing a coordinated approach to the market for government payroll systems; and . capability is established to support the payroll community of practitioners and share good practice and guidance with agencies. A Payroll Executive Advisory Board met frequently during the two years of the programme to provide the programme with governance oversight and strategic direction. The Board was chaired by the GCDO and included finance and human resource leaders from MBIE, PSC, The Treasury, New Zealand Police and Inland Revenue. W hen it established the programme, Cabinet requested six monthly updates on progress : . the November progress report was provided GOV MIN refers ; . the May progress report was considered by Ministers outside of a Cabinet process due to the impact of COVID ; . the November report back did not progress ; . the May progress report was provided DEV MIN refers. The Payroll Programme has now closed, and t his paper provides a final report to Cabinet on its outcomes. Outcomes from the Payroll Programme In line with Cabinets original mandate, the Payroll Programme was formally closed on September and the Payroll Executive Advisory Board disestablished. The funding approved by Cabinet has now been exhausted and all Payroll Programme resources have been stood d own.
GOVTECH TALENT GRADUATE PROGRAMME
GRE Likelihood of Suppo rt High Extremely High High
GRE Link Strong Very Strong Strong
GRE Role Critical Critical Critical
Gabriel.AkindejuRisksConsult.com
Gabrielle Huria (Entity D)
Gambling (Casino Gambling Equipment) Minimum Standard
Gambling (Class Banking) Regulations
Gambling (Class Gambling Equipment) Minimum Standard
Gambling (Class Net Proceeds) Regulations
Gambling (Fees) Amendment Regulations
Gambling (Fees) Regulations
Gambling (Forms) Regulations
Gambling (Game of Chance) Game Rules
Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Regulations
Gambling (Housie) Game Rules
Gambling (Infringement Notices) Regulations
Gambling (Infringement Offences) Regulations
Gambling (Instant Games) Game Rules
Gambling (Licensed Promoters) Regulations
Gambling (Lottery) Game Rules
Gambling (Nongambling Activities) Regulations
Gambling (Prize Competition) Game Rules
Gambling (Problem Gambling Levy) Regulations
Gambling (Prohibited Property) Regulations
Gambling (Venue Payments) Regulations
Gambling Compliance media releases
Gambling Directorate The GamblingCIPU Investigations function will be retained within the Gambling Directorate. This function remains in the Gambling directorate, rather than moving under a Head of Investigations and Prosecutions as initially proposed. A change in reporting line for the Intelligence Analyst in the CIPU team to the Manager, Intelligence and Insights with the ringfenced funding for this role to move into the Intelligence and Insights team. This is a change of title for the reporting line. A reduction in the number of Manager, Service Design positions between the AML and Gambling group from two to one with a change in title to Manager, Operational Policy and a change in reporting line to the Director, Regulatory Enablement . Initially the new role was proposed to be a Team Leader, and there is a change of reporting line for the role. A reduction in the number of Operational Analyst positions from two to one and Senior Operational Policy Analyst from four positions to two. The positions will move into the centralised Regulatory Enablement team reporting to the Manager, Operational Policy. This is a change of title for the reporting line and the scope of the centralised function. A change in reporting line for the Business Advisor in the Service Design Gambling team to the Team Leader, Business Services. A change in reporting line for the Principal Advisor, Gambling Technology to the Director, Gambling. A change in reporting line for the Senior Technical Advisors to the Deputy Director Operations, Gambling. A change in title for the Director, Regulatory System (Gambling) to Director, Gambling. Investigations and Prosecution function As the proposal to establish this function will not go ahead, the new proposed position of Investigations Coordinator will not go ahead either. Investigations and Prosecutions will remain in the AMLCFT and Gambling directorates. Strategy and Capability Disestablishment of the four Senior Advisors, one Business Advisor, one Practice Lead Capability, and one Senior Capability and Training Advisor. A change in reporting line for the Senior Project Manager to the Director, Gambling. This role will now support gambling only and so will shift to the Gambling directorate. Strategy, Intelligence and Risk function and Implementation function The Strategy, Intelligence and Risk function and Implementation function will be combined to become the Regulatory Enablement team, led by a Director, Regulatory Enablement. The role of Director, Regulatory Enablement replaces the proposed two Head of roles for these functions. A reduction in the number of Lead Intelligence Analysts from two to one, Senior Intelligence Analysts from four to three, Intelligence Analysts from four to two. Disestablishment of the two Senior Data Analysts. Establishment of an Intelligence Coordinator. The roles in the Intelligence, Insight and Risk team will report to the new Manager, Intelligence and Insights . This role was initially proposed to be a Team Leader. Change of reporting line for the Manager to the Director rather than Head of Strategy, Intelligence and Risk as initially proposed. Establishment of a month fixed term Senior Advisor, Risk reporting to the Team Leader, Business Services, to develop and deliver the sector risk assessments for our AMLCFT regulatory system, across our regulated sectors. This work was initially going to be delivered by the fixed term Lead Intelligence Analyst. Establishment of the Principal Advisor, Strategy and Business Planning reporting to the Director, Regulatory Enablement . Change of reporting line to the Director rather than Head of Strategy, Intelligence and Risk as initially proposed. Establishment of the Team Leader, Business Services reporting to the Director, Regulatory Enablement . Change of reporting line to the Director rather than Head of Strategy, Intelligence and Risk as initially proposed. Establishment of the Senior Advisor, Risk reporting to the Team Leader, Business Services. The addition of the Information and Education in the title of the Engagement team. The establishment of a Manager, Engagement, Information and Education reporting to the Director, Regulatory Enablement . This role was initially proposed to be a Team Leader. Change of reporting line to the Director rather than Head of Strategy, Intelligence and Risk as initially proposed. Disestablishment of the Principal Advisor, Strategic Engagement. A reduction in the number of Senior Advisor, Engagement from five to three and the reporting line will be to the Manager, Engagement, Information and Education . This role was initially proposed to be a Team Leader. The second Senior Project Manager position will not be established. Feedback suggested a fulltime role supporting AMLCFT was not required, as project management is within scope of existing job descriptions including the Principal Advisor, AMLCFT.
Gambling Fees Review Options to inform public consultation
Gambling Harm Prevention and Minimisation Amendment Regulations
Gambling Harm Prevention and Minimisation Guidance
Gambling in Pubs and Clubs (Class )
Gambling industry, including potential licence applicants
Gambling report: A calculated injustice
Gaming Machine Profits (GMP) Dashboard
Gaming Machine Profits (GMP) dashboard
Gaming Machine Statistics Dynamic dashboard that allows you to select financial information you want to see based on time and location.
Gaming and Censorship Appointment
Gaming machine profits (GMP dashboard)
Gaming machine profits (GST included)
Gang communities are largely located in deprived areas.
Gang membership in Aotearoa is often influenced by the existence
Gang membership provided a sense
Gang whnau can reach into communities that
Gang whnau have voiced that they are
Gangs (NZAGs) only and is not
Gap Analysis: Identify what is missing in the current strategy and how it needs to evolve.
Gemtech Solutions Limited
Gender pay gap action plan
Gender pay gap action plan Full document
Gender pay gap action plan Long description Text file
Gender pay gap action plan Full document
Gender pay gap action plan Long description Text file
Gender pay gap action plan
General Manager Agency Partnerships and Capability GCPO
General Manager AoG Services Delivery
General Manager Commissions
General Manager Communications
General Manager Community Operations (Hpai Hapori)
General Manager Human Resources
General Manager Local Government Policy, Partnerships and Operations
General Manager Operations and RegistrarGeneral of Births Deaths and Marriages
General Manager Partners and Products
General Manager Planning, Design and Assurance
General Manager Regulatory Services
General Manager Services and Access
General Manager Te Ara Manaaki
General Manager Te Ara Tahi
General Manager, Partners Products
General QA, J Tabs Asset Replacement
General in accordance with the Registration Act, which contain Registration
General of Births, Deaths, and Marriages. Many services cease or commence on the death of an
General of Intelligence and Security in accordance with section of the ISA.
General to confirm that a person making an application on behalf of another person is
General under the relevant legislation including any of the following
General, DIA and MFAT may use the personal
Geographic price averaging
Geographic price averaging . note that any geographic averaging would need to be introduced slowly, over a long period, to avoid significant price shocks; . agree to any necessary legislative provisions to enable geographic averaging of residential drinking and wastewater service prices, and other forms of geographic averaging, by the water services entities, in consultation with their regional representative groups, consumers and communities; . agree that the economic regulator could not override geographic averaging decisions made by the water services entities; . agree that the economic regulator may provide guidance on the implementation of geogr aphic averaging; . agree that the Government policy statement can be used to require the geographic averaging of residential drinking and wastewater service prices across a water services entitys service area, after June ; . agree that the where the Go vernment policy statement requires geographic averaging, the policy statement can also provide direction on the timeframe for implementing geographic averaging to avoid price shocks; . agree that exceptions to geographic averaging would include: . where communities have sought a higher level of service than is provided elsewhere in the water services area or where communities receive a lower level of service than what is generally provided in the water services area; . new growth areas (where a levy is in place under the Infrastructure Funding and Financing Act ); . water infrastructure contributions (growth charges); and . failing drinking water supplies that have been taken over by a water services entity;
German tipoff sees South Auckland man convicted
Get expert advice on all kinds of topics and formats
Get it directly from the people concerned wherever possible.
Get rid of it once youre done with it.
Getting selected for a deal
Getting your documents back
Gisborne Chamber of Commerce Te Aitanga a Mahaki trust
Gisborne Cycle and Walkway Trust Te Rnanganui o Ng Ariki Kaiptahi
Gisborne District Council
Gisborne District Council Tararua District Council
Gisborne Holdings Ltd Te Rnanganui o Ngti Porou
Gisborne model WICS report
Gisborne slide pack WICS report
Given our view of the likelihood of su pport from the government, the SACP will have to fall by
Given the potential public profile of any large scale field trials, we recommend these only proceed under the current project structure if the Government intends to proceed with the recommended nationwide CovidCard programme. In the event the Government chooses not proceed, then these largescale field trials could be reframed as a research project run independently by Otago University, with the trial findings for the benefit of other Governments and private sector organisations developing Bluetooth LE hardware devices for enhanced contact tracing. .. Card security and privacy Security and privacy are critical to adoption and success of the CovidCard, and have been addressed comprehensively in the design. Only information necessary for the purposes of COVID contact tracing is gathered or stored and information is envisaged as only downloadable from the card if the cardholder consents at the time of testing.
Given the trend in the financial metrics, we view a possibility of an upgrade as highly unlike ly.
Given the trend in the financial metrics, we view a possibility of an upgrade as highly unlikely.
Given the trend in the financial metrics, we view a possibility of an upgrade in the SACP as
Given these sobering dynamics, we will divide the discussion into how to assess technologies functionally and then how to assess likely levels of adoption. Zero adoption equals zero impact, but unfortunately in this area even modest adoption also results in near zero impact. Everything hinges on the rate of adoption. Defining the functional goals of digital contact tracing technologies Technologies that profess to assist with digital contact tracing must make a credible case that they can achieve one or more of the goals in the table below. There should be a reasonable basis for any claims. The below is a tool that can be used to articulate the impact goal, how it intends to be achieved, and a high level quantification of expected impact Impact goal How it will be achieved (illustrative only) Quantification of impact (illustrative only) Add additional contacts into the manual contact tracing centres. An app will detect close contacts, whether you remember them or not, or if they are strangers. The average person contact traced in NZ has close contacts. We estimate adding new contacts per person based on .
Glossary of Internet Jargon
Glossary of internet jargon
Go to Archives New Zealands website
Go to the Commerce Commission
Go to the Ministry of Justice
Goal for contact tracing How it may be achieved (illustrative only) Quantification of impact (illustrative only) Data privacy is considered and managed, including the risk of new versions of any solution expanding the functions of the app or what happens after the pandemic Strong principles of trust, privacy and temporary nature embedded in the brand, design and ability to endoflife the solution and data. Degree to which the person has control over the datas use. (tbc) To add additional new contacts into the manual contact tracing efforts. An app will detect close contacts whether you remember them or not, or if they are strangers. The average person contact traced in NZ has close contacts. We estimate adding new contacts per person based on .
Going for Housing Growth Infrastructure funding settings workstream overview
Going for Housing Growth: Improving Infrastructure Funding and Financing to Support Urban Growth February
Going for housing growth: Infrastructure funding settings advice on option
Good Practice Funding website
Good Practice Participate website
Gore slide pack WICS report
GovInsider Asia Innovation Award
GovTechTalent Graduate Programme
GovTechTalent champions diversity in government, empowering socially and digitally minded New Zealanders from all backgrounds. We are committed to providing a supportive and inclusive workplace where everyone can thrive.
Governance Group); the Ministry for Social Development; Sport New Zealand; Statistics New Zealand; the Ministry of Transport; the New Zealand Transport Authority; and the Treasury (including the National Infrastructure Unit). Some agencies were concerned that the change to the local government purpose statement would impact statutory functions councils are responsible for or the ability for existing centrallocal government partnerships to continue. They suggested that the purpose statement or list of core services are broadened. I am advised that the amendments I am proposing do not change councils responsibilities under other legislation. Proposals in this paper that relate to transparency and accountability were informed by consultation with the Office of the Auditor General, the Office of the Ombudsman, and the Local Government Commission. Consultation with the Legislative Design and Advisory Committee is likely to be required for the proposals in this paper. My officials and I regularly meet with sector representatives including from TaituarLocal Government Professionals Aotearoa and Local Government New Zealand. Aspects of proposals in this paper have been discussed with sector representatives; however, formal consultation on the proposals has not been undertaken. The local government sector will have an opportunity to contribute during select committee consideration of the Bill. Communications
Governance Working Group Report March
Governance Working Group Report Executive Summary March
Governance and assurance framework
Governmen t Digital Services
Governmen t Digital Strategy,
Government Actuary to National Provident Department
Government Chief Digital Officer (Public Service Digital Lead)
Government Chief Digital Officer issues standard to protect governmentheld personal information
Government Chief Digital Officer, Chief Executive of the Department of Internal Affairs
Government Communications Security Bureau (GCSB)) and requests for
Government Computing Centre to State Services Commission
Government Digital Services
Government Digital Services MCA (.) .
Government Digital Services MCA (.)
Government Digital Strategy, System (.)
Government Electronic Tender Services
Government Electronic Tenders Service
Government Inquiries are appointed by and report to a Minister and the intention is that these are simpler and quicker to establish.
Government Inquiry Into the Appointment Process for a Deputy Commissioner of Police
Government Inquiry Into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events
Government Inquiry into Foreign Trust Disclosure Rules
Government Inquiry into Havelock North Drinking Water
Government Inquiry into Havelock North DrinkingWater
Government Inquiry into Matters Concerning the Escape of Phillip John SmithTraynor
Government Inquiry into Mental Health and Addiction
Government Inquiry into Mental Health and Addiction. . He Ara Oranga: Report of the Government Inquiry into Mental Health and Addiction Wellington: Government Inquiry into Mental Health and Addiction. Health Quality Safety Commission. . The Triple Aim. URL: www.hqsc.govt.nznewsandeventsnews (accessed June ). KolandaiMatchett K, Langham E, Bellringer M, et al. . How gambling harms experienced by Pacific people in New Zealand amplify when they are culturerelated. Asian Journal of Gambling Issues and Public Health (): . Korn DA, Shaffer HJ. . Gambling and the health of the public: adopting a public health perspective. Journal of Gambling Studies (). Minister of Health. . New Zealand Health Strategy: Future direction. Wellington: Ministry of Health. Ministry of Health. . Te Uru Kahikatea: Public Health Workforce Development Plan. Wellington: Ministry of Health. Ministry of Health. a. Ala Moui: Pathways to Pacific Health and Wellbeing . Wellington: Ministry of Health. Ministry of Health. b. Equity of Heal th Care for Mori: A framework. Wellington: Ministry of Health. Ministry of Health. c. He Korowai Oranga . Wellington: Ministry of Health. URL: www.health.govt.nzourworkpopulationsmaorihealthhekorowaioranga (accessed June ). Ministry of Health. . A Framework for Health Literacy. Wellington: Ministry of Health. Ministry of Health. . Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm to . Wellington: Ministry of Health. Ministry of Health. . Progress on Gambling Harm Reduction to : Outcomes report New Zealand Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm. Wellington: Ministry of Health Rintoul AC, Livingstone C, Mellor AP, et al. . Modelling vulnerability to gambling related harm: How disadvantage predicts gambling losses. Addiction Research Theory (): . Rook H, Rippon R, Pauls R, et al. . Gambling Harm Reduction Needs Assessment . Wellington: Sapere Research Group. Signal L, Smith M, Barr M, et al. . KidsCam: an objective methodology to study the world in which children live. American Journal of Preventive Medicine (): ee. ThimasarnAnwar T, Squire H, Trowland H, et al. . Gambling Report: Results from the Health and Lifestyles Survey . Wellington: Health Promotion Agency Research and Evaluation Unit. van der Maas M. . Problem gambling, anxiety and poverty: an examination of the relationship between poor mental health and gambling problems across socioeconomic status. International Gambling Studies (): . STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
Government Inquiry into Operation Burnham and Related Matters
Government Inquiry into WPC contamination incident
Government Inquiry into Whey Protein Concentrate (WPC) Contamination Incident
Government Inquiry into allegations regarding Hon. Judith Collins and a former Director of the Serious Fraud Office
Government Inquiry into the Appointment Process for a Deputy Police Commissioner
Government Inquiry into the Auckland
Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events
Government Inquiry report released
Government Printing Office
Government Programme participants, the industry, as well as the wider economy.
Government Re sponse to the Declaration of Inconsistency: Voting age in the Electoral Act and the Local Electoral Act Cabinet Minute LEG MIN Cabinet Office July
Government Response to Interim Report of the Justce Commitee on Inquiry into the Local Electons and Liquor Licensing Trust Electons, and Recent Energy Trust Electons Presented to the House of Representatves Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government in accordance with Standing Order icqnczt
Government Response to the Declaration of Inconsistency: Voting age in the Electoral Act and the Local Electoral Act Cabinet Paper Office of the Minister of Justice Office of the Minister of Local Government July
Government Response to the Interim Report of the Justce Commitee on the Inquiry into the Local Electons and Liquor Licensing Trust Electons, and Recent Energy Trust Electons Introducton . The Government welcomes the Justce Commitees interim report on its Inquiry into the Local Electons and Liquor Licensing Trust Electons, and Recent Energy Trust Electons. . The Government has considered the recommendatons and responds to the interim report in accordance with Standing Order . Background . In December , the Justce Commitee initated an inquiry into the local electons and liquor licensing trust electons, and recent energy trust electons. . Shortly before the inquiry was initated, the Commitee presented its report on its inquiry into the general electon and local electons. This report made twenty recommendatons on local electons, which the Government responded to in May . . As part of the inquiry into the local electons, the Commitee invited comment on the recommendatons in its prev ous report, including the recommendaton that the Government consider giving responsibility for running all aspects of local electons to the Electoral Commission. Interim recommendatons . The interim report makes two recommendatons that reiterate two themes of the Commitee s previous report. We reiterate our previous recommendaton that the Government consider giving responsibility for running all aspects of local electons to the Electoral Commission. We reiterate our previous recommendatons that the Government align, as much as practcable, the rules for parliamentary and local authority electon candidates concerning donatons, advertsing, campaigning, pecuniary interests, and complaints. . Additonally, the interim report noted that the Commitee was not able to consider all the issues raised in the Inquiry. It recommended that the Justce Commitee of the rd Parliament considers and reports on these issues in detail. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government icqnczt
Government Response to the Report on New Zealands Dairy Food Safety Regulatory System
Government Response to the Working Group for Reducing Barriers to changing Registered Sex
Government Response to the report on the WPC incident: Causes and Responses
Government Review will also be considered.
Government Superannuation Fund Authority
Government Water Services Bill (Bill ) in July.
Government Water Services Bill (Bill ).
Government agreements, you would like to amend the name to ensure English ls used
Government and sector contacts
Government announces all councils are invited to Regional Deals
Government announces allocation of three waters funds for councils
Government has agreed to amend the Act to improve the Mori wards process.
Government in and related to the use of vaccines and the use of
Government inquiry into Mental Health and Addiction
Government moving forward with Regional Deals
Government response . The Government thanks the Justce Commitee for the work it put into the preparaton of the interim report. The Government will consider centralisaton of local electons as other priorites allow . In responding to the Commitees report on the Inquiry into the General Electon and Local Electons, the Government noted that centralising the delivery of local electons is a fundamental change that would need to be carefully worked through The Government noted that the Commitee was consultng with stakeholders and the wider public about this recommendaton and looked forward to the Commitees further advice. . The Government previously agreed to consider the recommendaton as other priorites allow, and restates that positon in this response. The Government will consider aligning the parliament and local electoral frameworks more closely in due course . The Government agrees that broadly aligning, where possible, the principles and procedures for parliamentary and local electons can make it easy to understand and partcipate in all electons, and uphold the integrity and efectveness of electons. . The Government has agreed in principle to a review of parliamentary electoral law. It would be best to sequence changes to local electon rules so that they refect any future changes to parliamentary electon rules. The Government agrees to consider opportunites for aligning the parliamentary and local electoral frameworks more closely in due course. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government icqnczt
Government response to Working Group recommendations
Government response to the Declarati on of Inconsistency Voting age in the Electoral Act and th e Local Electoral Act
Government to accept Reality Check Radios Peoples Terms for an
Government to accept Reality Check Radios Peoples Terms for an expanded Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID Lessons; and note that
Government transparency is upheld
Government transparency is upheld Statutory inquiries: Administration and support of public and government inquiries and Royal Commissions We will continue to provide advice on, and support for, the Royal Commission of Inquiry into Abuse in State Care and the Care of FaithBased Institutions. This includes running monitoring and assurance systems to ensure the Royal Commission delivers its redress and final reports on time and within budget. Through Archives New Zealand, we also provide digitised historical records to support the Royal Commissions work. Public Records Act Regulatory Uplif Public Ofice audit programme A robust and accessible public record increases government transparency. Archives New Zealand is the regulator of public recordkeeping and its monitoring framework is a key regulatory tool in ensuring that a full and accurate public record is created and maintained. We have refreshed the public recordkeeping audit programme, aiming to improve information management maturity in the public sector. Each audited public ofice is expected to provide an action plan based on prioritised recommendations. The Chief Archivist is a statutory role under the Public Records Act with the power to set standards and direct the actions of public agency chief executives for records and information management. The Chief Archivist is dutybound to act independently in relation to the disposal of public records. This statutorily independent role is needed to assure the integrity of the record of government. Transformation of records disposal authorisation and implementation across government Archives New Zealands Appraisal, Disposal and Implementation (ADI) redesign project will fundamentally redesign our regulatory system for supporting sustainable appraisal and disposal processes and their successful implementation by public ofices in a digital environment. Robust appraisal activities ensure that an organisation has considered all requirements for the retention or destruction of information. This increases business eficiency, controls information management costs, and reduces the risks of legal breaches. Digital investment and ICT assurance The Department plays a role in coordinating government investment in digital technologies. We will use a datadriven approach to coordinate investment, develop a digital roadmap, review investment policies and guidance, and consider how to better support the investment needs of smaller agencies. A current focus for many government agencies is new payroll systems. We are providing greater oversight of these investments, supporting government payroll practitioners, and establishing a panel of payroll systems and services. Organisations are increasingly using new ways of working, but at the same time cyber threats are increasing and keeping data safe is challenging. We will gather data and insights on the level of assurance within agencies, support agencies to raise their assurance capability, and provide advice to Ministers on digital risks across government and any interventions that are needed. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
Governments Protective Security Requirements and international security standards for
Government) Order to the Executive Council and the GovernorGeneral for
Governments Three Waters and Resource Management reforms, and consultation on
Governors ). The Gover nors will provide their WSE with a letter of e xpectation that will
Govt.nz makes it easier for people to find and use government information and services. The site brings together information from across government and NGOs and organises it under topics that people search for such as:
Govt.nz wins at Plain English Awards
Greater clarity about how relationship agreements will work in practice to comprehensively manage areas where cooperation between water services entities councils and other partners is required. The changes make clear that these agreements will be enforceable and provide for a dispute resolution mechanism.
Grey slide pack WICS report
Greyhound Racing Draft Cabinet Paper with attached Racing Industry Amendment Bill
Greyhound Racing Next Steps
Gross nonperforming assetsgros s loa ns ()
Ground Truth Method The ground truth for each trial was entered into a spreadsheet by trial technicians using the handwritten logs (where applicable) and video third umpire. Each row on the spreadsheet contained a pairing of participants and columns containing minutelevel intensity. Intensity was scored on an increasing intensity scale of : . Within m. . Within m. . Within m. . Contact events.
Ground truth for all trials except taxi and proximity were scored to the nearest minute, taxi and proximity were scored to the nearest ten seconds. A snapshot of the ground truth scoring spreadsheet is shown in Figure , below. Each row represents interactions between a different pair of participants.
Group G WSE and for applied to the Group H WSE. These GRE assessments
Growing brains respond differently when under
Growth charging . note that growth charges currently play a significant role in funding investment in new three waters assets; . note that growth charges for infrastructure have several benefits including: . ensuring that new residential and commercial development is economically efficient . mitigating concerns of existing users around growth investment . reducing the financing burden for water service providers . avoiding windfall gains to landowners when decisions to expand networks are made; . agree to enable growth charging for water services entities for drinking water, wastewater and stormwater; . agree that growth charging be enabled through a statutory instrument called a water infrastructure contribution; . agree that water infrastructure contributions operate on a principles based model rather than the more prescriptive development contribution model; . agree that water services entities be required to issue and consult on a water infrastructure contributions policy that sets out the schedule of charges and the methodology used to set those charges (either separate from or included in the funding and pricing plan); . agree to provide for transitional arrangements that allow water services entities to apply existing growth charges, without the need to set a new methodology for up to three years; . agree that the tools under the Infrastructure Funding and Financing Ac t be used to provide infrastructure vested with water services entities; . agree that water services entities not have access to financial contributions under the Resource Management Act ; . agree that water infrastructure contributions be able to be charged at resource consent, building consent, service connection or due to an increase in demand; . agree that water infrastructure contributions be able to be charged at a single point in time or as annual or quarterly charges for a set period; . agree that the Crown be exempt from paying water infrastructure contributions, in the same way that it is currently exempt from paying development contributions;
Growth charging by water organisations
Growth in loans ()
Guardian of the New Zealand government record and manager of the Public Records Act . Archives New Zealands holdings include the originals of the Treaty of Waitangi, government documents, maps, plans, paintings, film and sound recordings. The General Manager is the Chief Archivist.
Guardians Kaitiaki of the Alexander Turnbull Library
Guardians Kaitiaki of the Alexander Turnbull Library (re)appointments Draft Cabinet paper
Guardians Kaitiaki of the Alexander Turnbull Library: Documentation to finalise (re)appointments
Guardians Kaitiaki of the Alexander Turnbull Library: Documents to finalise appointment
Guardians Kaitiaki of the Alexander Turnbull Library: Draft Cabinet paper
Guardians Kaitiaki of the Alexander Turnbull Library: Preferred candidate selection
Guardians Kaitiaki of the Alexander Turnbull Library: Selection of preferred appointees
Guidance and information for councils about developing Water Services Delivery Plans.
Guidance document for digital identity service providers seeking accreditation under the Trust Framework. Guidance must be read in conjunction with the application form.
Guidance for evaluation of conformance with the New Zealand Identification Standards
Guidance for online content hosts
Guidance for online content hosts retaining illegal content for evidential purposes
Guidance for operators of R adult websites
Guidance for sharing information Oranga Tamariki Ministry for Children
Guidance on certain topics such as how to maintain records, and privacy of information.
Guidance to support independent evaluators to understand the Trust Framework evaluation process. The evaluator will agree pricing directly with the provider.
Guidance to support providers in preparing for their Identity Standards independent evaluation.
Guidelines to help you review your familys Internet activity.
HARC Quarterly report to Dec
HISTORY OF THE DEPARTMENT
HONORARY ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
HOW NEW ZEALAND REGULATES SPAM
HOW TO PAY FOR TRANSLATIONS
HTTP Web Server: IBM Notes Exception File does not exist
Haley Philippa Van Leeuwen
Hamilton City Council Taupo District Council
Hamilton model WICS report
Hamilton slide pack WICS report
Hamiora Bowkett Executive Director, Water
Hamiora Bowkett Executive Director, Water Services Policy, Legislation and Steward ship
Hamiora Bowkett Executive Director, Water Services Policy, Legislation and Stewardship
Hamiora Bowkett Executive Director, Water Services Policy, Legislation and Stewardship , Department of Internal Affairs
Hamiora Bowkett Executive Director, Water Services Policy, Legislation and Stewardship Department of Internal Affairs
Handwritten bank account evidence as long as it includes the full bank account number (bank, branch, account number and suffix) and the account holders name. This must be signed and stamped by the bank.
Harbourmaster Service at Lake Taup
Hardcopy distribution: Prime Minister Minister for Racing Leader of the House I N C O N F I D E N C E ldrz Proactively released by the Minister for Racing IN CONFIDENCE Page of Office of the Minister for Racing Chair Cabinet Business Committee Racing Industry Bill: Approval for introduction Proposal . This paper seeks approval for the introduction of the Racing Industry Bill (the Bill). The Bill provides the Governments final legislative response to the recommendations of the Review of the New Zealand Racing Industry (the Messara Report). Policy . On November Cabinet agreed policy proposals for the first stage of work to reform the New Zealand racing industry CAB MIN refers. A key element was establish ing the Ministerial Advisory Committee for Racing (MAC) to drive and inform government decisions on the Messara Report recommendations . The MAC provided an interim report to the Minister for Racing on February , and a final report on June . . On April Cabinet agreed to a stepped change, with two Bills proposed for DEVMIN , DEV MIN , CAB MIN . refer. The Racing Reform Act came into force on July . It put into place transitional arrangements , including reconstituting the New Zealand Racing Board (NZRB) as the Racing Industry Transiti on Agency (RITA) and measures to increase the financial sustainability of the industry. . In November Cabinet agreed to further policy proposals for inclusion in a second Racing Bill. A key proposal is the separation of the racing and betting functions. The revised governance structure will empower the racing codes to manage the industry and set its direction for the future . A separate entity (TAB NZ) will have a sole focus on providing betting on racing and sports. In addition, Cabinet agreed policy proposals to maximise the contribution of racing industry property to the revitalisation of the industry, and the introduction of an approval mechanism to enable consideration of new betting products, while ensur ing that harm minimisation is prioritised DEV MIN , DEV MIN , CAB MIN ., CAB MIN refer. . Legislation is required to implement Cabinets policy decisions. The Racing Industry Bill will empower the industry to revitalise itsel f and become more sustainable and profitable . It creates a statutory framework that incentivises the industry to make hard decisions and pivot towards a stronger commercial orientation. The Bill: . disestablishes RITA and transfers RITAs betting functions t o TAB NZ , a new entity created as the sole betting operator for racing and sports, with RITAs racing responsibilities transferring to the racing codes; . creates the Racing Integrity Board (RIB) , a single entity responsible for all integrity functions, incl uding investigative and adjudicative functions; Review of the New Zealand Racing Industry, John Messara, July . ldrz Proactively released by the Minister for Racing IN CONFIDENCE Page of . creates a statutory process that can be used if a club and its code cannot agree the utilisation of surplus venues through the industry led Future Venues Plan process ; . introduces an approval mechanism for new wagering products, while balancing the Governments responsibility to prevent and minimise harm from gambling; and . refreshes the purpose of the Act to provide a high level overview of the overall racing industry, recognition of the potential harm from gam bling products, and recognition that racing property should remain in the racing industry and be used for maximum industry benefit. . The property proposals within the Bill are significant and are likely to be contentious.
Hardcopy permits can still be purchased from many agents around Lake Taup. Find more information here:
Harm caused to youth in gang environments
Harm within familial and peer environments is not
Harmful digital messaging
Hastings District Council
Hastings District Council Tauranga City Council
Hastings District Councils Cyclone Gabrielle Recovery Three Waters Assets Restoration Programme
Hastings man sentenced to three and half years for possession and distribution of child sexual exploitation material
Hastings model WICS report
Hastings slide pack WICS report
Hauraki District Council ThamesCoromandel District Council
Hauraki model WICS report
Hauraki slide pack WICS report
Have the Working Groups recommendations changed the process to a selfidentification system
Have you started a passport application
Have you thought about a career in Government
Having delivered the report, the Inquiry office has now closed. Enquiries can be emailed to
Having more secure and trusted digital identity services wi ll also: build New Zealands resilience to unexpected events by enabling secure digital access to essential identity documents and personal information ; support New Zealands long term economic growth and development; and enable digital trade and other cross border transactions. Uptake strategy Realising the benefits from the Trust Framework enables requires buy in and uptake from users, TF providers , and relying parties , as it is an opt in regulatory system. This will be a key challenge and focus fo r the TF Board and TF Authority who are responsible for promoting use of the system and ensuring effective regulatory management of it.
Having the right technology ensures we deliver our services efficiently as technological tools and software help improve our processes and save time. We have continued to support kaimahi with reliable IT so they can collaborate and work effectively, wherever they are located.
Hawkes Bay Community Committee
Hawkes Bay Regional Visit
Hawkes Bay Regional Council Waikato District Council
Hawkes Bay, Far North, Gisborne, Hastings, Kaipara, Wairoa District Councils,
He Aratohu Kapua Cloud Toolkit
He Hinonga Karauna Crown entities The Department of Internal Afairs monitors three Crown entities and is responsible for managing the Governments relationship with them. Ofice of Film and Literature Classification The Ofice of Film and Literature Classification (OFLC) is an independent Crown entity under the Crown Entities Act . This means it performs its functions at arms length from the Government. The ofice has two primary functions: to classify publications such as films, books or computer files which may need to be restricted or banned to provide information about classification decisions and about the classification system as a whole. Fire and Emergency New Zealand Fire and Emergency New Zealand (FENZ) is a Crown agent under the Crown Entities Act . This means it is required to follow government policies. It is responsible for delivering both rural and urban fire and emergency services throughout New Zealand. FENZ is responsible for over , staf and volunteers and is therefore one of the largest organisations in the state sector. FENZs main functions are to: promote fire safety provide fire prevention, response and suppression services stabilise or render safe incidents that involve hazardous substances provide for the safety of persons and property endangered by incidents involving hazardous substances rescuing people trapped because of transport accidents and other incidents provide urban search and rescue services. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
He Korowai Oranga Examples of the strategys alignment Core components Principles of Te Tiriti o Waitangi Partnership Mori representation on key forums and bodies Participation dedicated Mori services using Mori derived beliefs, values and practices Protection objective : priority actions related to health equity for Mori Knowledge Gambli ng Act requirement for independent, scientific research Objective A national coordination service and service provider hui to share best practice examples and stories of innovation The Ministry s Client Information Collection (CLIC) database includes accurate ethnicity information Funding for provider initiated research projects that address issues of equity for Mori Funding for research scholarships for Mori researchers Quality improvement Infrastructure intervention and public health service specification purchase unit (workforce development) Overall goal of the strategy, principles underpinning the strategy and objective The Acts requirements for a specified consultation process to de velop the strategy and the problem gambling levy rates to ensure best value for resources Leadership Mori representation on key forums and bodies Health system leadership an expectation that all New Zealanders will have health equity Infrastructure int ervention and public health service specification purchase unit (workforce development) Planning , resourcing and evaluation The Acts requirements for the process to develop the strategy a consultative process for planning and resourcing The Acts requirement for evaluation Research and audit projects evaluating intervention and public health services , which assess effectiveness and responsiveness for Mori Outcomeperformance and monitoring Outcomes framework baseline and update reports, which sp ecifically address outcomes for Mori STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
He Korowai Oranga Examples of the strategys alignment Key threads Rangatiratanga Dedicated Mori services using Mori derived beliefs, values and practices Building on the gains Principles underpinning the strategy a focus on improving Mori health gains Objective a specifi c Pae Ora objective Equity Overall goal of the strategy a reduction in health inequities related to gambling harm and a principle underpinning the strategy health equity Reference in health equity discussion to Equity of Health Care for Mori: A framework (Ministry of Health b) Objective a specific health equity objective Objective a specific Pae Ora objective priority actions related to health equity for Mori Objectives and , which require a health equity focus Planning and priorit isation processes mapping need based on population specific prevalence and access rates Pathways for action Whnau, hap, iwi, community development Principles underpinning the strategy strengthen communities and public health service specification purchase units and (aware and supportive communities) Requi rements for services to be free Mori participation Mori representation on key forums and bodies and dedicated Mori services Infrastructure intervention and public health service specificati on purchase unit (workforce development) Effective service delivery Dedicated Mori services Requirements for general services Mori responsiveness, support for access to dedicated Mori services where available and a focus on health literacy Infrastructure intervention and public health service specification purchase unit (kaumtua consultation and liaison) Working across sectors Principles underpinning the strategy intersectoral approach Objectives and Public health service specifica tion purchase units (policy development and implementation), (safe gambling environments) and (effective screening environments) Intervention service specification purchase unit (facilitation services) STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
He Korowai Whakamana,a Cabinet agreed framework requires Crown agencies to record, track, and report annually on the status of Treaty of Waitangi Te Tiriti o Waitangi settlement commitments. We have participated in the settlement process of historical claims with hap, iwi, and Mori and are responsible for a diverse range of commitments.
He Tohu is a permanent, free exhibition, led by Te Tari Taiwhenua in partnership with Mori and a collaboration between The National Library of New Zealand and Archives New Zealand, who are the statutory guardians of the taonga.
He Waka Eke Noa has three pou (workstreams), each representing a foundational part of our journey. Kaimahi are supported to build their cultural capability in te reo Mori me na tikanga (Mori language and practices), te ao Mori (Mori worldview), and Te Tiriti o Waitangi. This will assist kaimahi to apply their learnings to their daily mahi (work). The work programme will improve our MoriCrown relationships and work towards our strategic outcomes in Mtou Mahi.
He cochaired the New Zealand Governments Food and Beverage Task Force in and currently represents New Zealand on the APEC Policy Partnership for Food Security.
He tirohanga arotake ki te tau kua hipa
He was admitted as a Barrister and Solicitor of the Australian Capital Territory and the States of Victoria and New South Wales. He was also a Barrister in Samoa and the Cook Islands.
He whi rawe ki te mahi, , he whakahaere e eke ana ki te taumata teitei
He whi rawe ki te mahi, , he whakahaere e eke ana ki te taumata teitei Departmental Capability Ng hoa rangap Partners He Hinonga Karauna Crown Entities Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
Head of Systems, Strategy and Performance, Taumata Arowai
Head of Veterans Affairs
Hear from our previous interns
Hefty fine for Auckland video store
Hefty fine for possessing sexual abuse images
Helpful information sharing
Helping children stay safe when using smart devices
Here are a few of the benefits available to employees of the Department:
Here are some tips that may help to make your experience on this website more accessible.
Here you can find our most recent Digital Violent Extremism Transparency Reports, research, and other downloadable resources.
Heretaunga Ararau Te Aupouri
High Court Names Auckland Company Director Convicted of Distributing Images
High Court Sets Important Precedent for Internet Child Pornography
High Court Sets Precedent Against Home Detention for Traders of Child Sex Images
High Court on points of law.On the decision to introduce Mori
High Regulators NA Mori Likely less representation of Mori and Mori interests in local government as fewer polls held or result in yes results. Reports from councils who attempted to create a Mori ward before the poll provisions were removed indicates polls result in increased community and social division . Lack of understanding about Mori wards results in in accurate perception Mori have more rights or get more representation. Medium
High court upholds important Internet decision, reinforces New Zealand law
High level sustainability principles
High levels of usage resulting in few positive cases is the expected outcome, but this can take each user (assuming theyre healthy) just seconds a day. This is a very low cost tool for disease surveillance and triaging some people into care. Assessing symptom checker apps The promise of this technology is to reduce the R by getting symptomatic people tested faster, ideally soon after developing any symptoms.
Highlights Ng tpako
Historic snapshot datasets
History of the Department
History of the Gambling Act
Hoani Lambert (Ngti Kahungunu, Ngti Porou) is Haut Deputy Secretary for Partnerships and Commissions. In this role, Hoani oversees a number of important functions and entities, including the National Library, Archives New Zealand and Ministerial Services. He also is responsible for Commissions and Inquiries, as well as Hpai Hapori Community Operations and the Te Ara Tahi Programme, which is delivering the new archival building in Wellington.
Hoani Lambert Deputy Secretary Partnerships and Commissions
Hoani holds an Executive Masters in Public Administration (EMPA) through the Australia and New Zealand School of Government (ANZSOG).
Home detention after victimising children
Home detention and community work for child sex abuse materials
Home detention for child abuse collection
Home detention for child sex abuse images and video
Home detention for child sex criminal
Home detention for sex abuse image collection
Home detention for sharing child sex abuse images
Home detention on birthday
Home of the Royal Commission investigating events relating to the attacks on March , including the performance of State sector agencies.
Hon Barbara Edmonds , Minister of Internal Affairs Proactive release of a Department of Internal Affairs briefing regarding the Removal and Disposal Policy of the National Library of New Zealand Te Puna Mtauranga o Aotearoa April
Hon Barbara Edmonds Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister for Racing
Hon Barbara Edmonds, Minister of Internal Affairs Hon Kieran McAnulty, Minister for Racing Proactive release of Cabinet material about the Regulations addressing harm minimisation in Class gambling venues, and associated infringe ment regulations; and miscellaneous oral item July
Hon Brooke van Velden Minister of Internal Affairs
Hon Brooke van Velden Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs Appendix A: Profile of Class Operator s you are meeting on June Clive Nelson, Heart Foundation Clive Nelson has been the Chief Executive of the Heart Foundation since August . Prior to joining the Heart Foundation , Clive was the inaugural Chief Executive of the Health Promotion Agency from to . Clive has also held management roles in the private sector, including Watercare Services Limited, the Auckland Transition Agency and Fairfax New Zealand. Clive is MBAqua lified and a Chartered Member of the Institute of Directors. To , the Heart Foundation has run largescale lotteries this year. Callum Gillespie, Coastguard Callum Gillespie has been the Chief Executive of Coastguard since February . Prior to that he managed the organisations Northern Region for years. After leaving a year career in the British Navy, Callum moved into project management roles in the private sector in the United Kingdom before moving to New Zealand. To , the Coastgua rd has run largesca le lotteries this year. Shaan Hulena, Auckland Rescue Helicopter Trust Shaan has been at the Trust since . He was appointed Chief Executive in , and prior to that he was the Trusts Corporate Fundraising Manager. To , the Auckland Rescue Helicopter Trust has run large scale lotteries this year. INCONFIDEN CE Pages of Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C EIn Confidence Office of the Minister of Internal Affairs Cabinet Business Committee Proposal This paper seeks agreement to amend the Gambling Act (the Act) to exempt licensed Class lotteries from the prohibition on selling their lottery tickets online or by phone . Relation to government priorities This proposal resolves a long standing trouble for approved charity and non commercial fund raising. In , a temporary exemption was given to Class lotteries Class lotteries are those with prizes that exceed , that are used to fundraise for charitable or non commercial purposes. In , Class licenses were granted to the likes of Coastguard New Zealand, the Heart Foundation, sports and surf lifesaving clubs, local hospices, the Cancer Society, Southland Charitable Hospital Trust, Rotary Clubs, and the Auckland Rescue Helicopter Trust. Section of the Act prohibits and makes it illegal to offer remote interactive gambling . This is gambling by a person at a distance through a communication device. There are four exceptions : gambling conducted by Lotto NZ and TAB NZ , sales promotion schemes , and gambling offered by offshore gambling operators . This limits Class operators to selling lottery tickets via post or in person and receiving payment by cash or cheque. However, New Zealanders are using cash less often to purchase goods and services , and cheques are no longer an option as they have been phased out by banks. There is also a security risk of sending cash or credit card details in the mail. In , as part of the COVID response, Class lotteries were exempted from the prohibition on remote interactive gambling . This mean t that tickets could be sold online and remotely. Due to the emergency nature of the COVID related legislation, all amendments had an expiry . For Class lotteries the exemption expires on October . Class gambling includes large scale lotteries, housie (otherwise known as bingo), instant games and other forms of gambling run by incorporated societies. This financial year, the regulator has approved Class licences, of which have been for large scale lotteries. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E I am concerned about the prospect of Class operators having to return to nondigital sales or being in breach of the law if they do not. R emoving digital or remote sales will likely result in: a loss of customers, both existing and new, because purchasing lottery tickets will become too hard under the old rules ; less money for community purposes , due to the additional resource required to manually handle ticket purchases, the cost of printing and increased postage as NZ Post winds down its postal delivery service in favour of courier delivery ; increased safety risks for volunteers selling tickets doortodoor or on the streets ; and a negative impact on an important revenue stream at a time when faced with rising operational costs . Organisations such as the Heart Foundation and Coastguard rely on these lotteries to raise money for their work in the community. For the Coastguard, its lottery programme is its second largest fundraising stream. It runs lotteries per year which generate about .m per annum ( about of its annual income in FY). This was only possible because of the temporary exemption. The best option is to make the exemption permanent From a gambling harm perspective, Class lotteries present a relatively low risk. This is because this form of gambling is non continuous i.e. you cannot continue to play because there is a delay between purchasing a ticket and waiting for the result, and people cannot immediately reinvest any winnings. In the time that th e temporary amendments have been in place, examination of harm treatment data showed that people were not presenting for Class gambling harm . The Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) regulates Class lotteries and has been monitoring activit y since the temporary exemption came into effect. During this time, t here has been no noticeable increase in applications. The exemption has resulted in less work for the regulator, as they have not had to enforce the old rules or educate applicants that t hey cannot take online or remote sales. This frees the regulator up to concentrate on more harmful forms of gambling i.e. Class (pokies) and casino gambling. If the provision became permanent, t he regulator would continue to monitor activity in this area. Licence holders would still have to apply for a licence for each individual lottery they wish to conduct, and comply with the Lottery Game Rules , the rules by which lotteries and sweepstakes follow. If appropriate, the regulator can place conditions on a Class licence to address any concerns.
Hon Brooke van Velden, Minister of Internal Aairs
Hon Ginny Andersen Minister of Justice
Hon Grant Robertson (Cbair)
Hon Grant Robertson (Chair)
Hon Jan Tinetti , Minister OF Internal Affairs Proactive release of Cabinet material about the initiation of the media content regulatory review July
Hon Jan Tinetti , Minister of Internal Affairs Hon Dr David Clark, Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications Proactive release of Cabinet material about investing in infrastructure for the digital identity system August
Hon Jan Tinetti Minister of Internal Affairs
Hon Jan Tinetti Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Appendix A: Final Cabinet Paper Proposed amendments to the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill for lodgement (clean copy)
Hon Jan Tinetti Officials present from:
Hon Jan Tinetti, Minister of Internal Affairs
Hon Jan Tinetti, Minister of Internal Affairs Proactive release of Cabinet material about the Reducing Pokies Harm approval to consult Cabinet paper May
Hon Kieran McAnu lty, Minister of Local Government
Hon Kieran McAnulty Minis ter of Local Government
Hon Kieran McAnulty Minister of Local Government
Hon Kieran McAnulty Minister of Local Government Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDE NCE Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute of Decision LEGMIN This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification , or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Electoral (Lowering Voting Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill: Approval for Introduction Portfolio Local Government On July , the Cabinet Legislation Committee: noted that this paper is intended to be read alongside the paper under LEGSUB from the Minister of Justice and the Minister of Local Government entitled Government response to the Declaration of Inconsistenc y Voting age in the Electoral Act and the Local Electoral Act ; noted that the Electoral (Lowering the Voting Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill holds (the Bill) a categoy priority on the Legislation Programme (to be refeITed to a select collllnittee before the general election); noted that the Bill will lower the minimum voting age for local elections ( except for elections under the Sale and Supply of Alcohol Act ) from years to years; noted that the minimum age for standing as a candidate for local elections will continue to be the same as the minimum voting age for each election type; approved the Electoral (Lowering Voting Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill PCO . for introduction, subject to the fmal approval of the government caucus and sufficient support in the House of Representatives ; agreed that the Bill be introduced in the week of August ; noted that the Minister of Local Government proposes that the Bill be introduced on the same day as the government response to the Declaration of Inconsistency regarding the minimum voting age in the Local Electoral Act and the Electoral Act ; agreed that the government propose that the Bill be: . refeITed to the Justice Collllnittee for consideration ; and . enacted by October . akgmm : IN CONFIDENCE Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E LEGMIN I N C O N F I D E N C E akgmm
Hon Kiri Allan Hon Kieran McAnulty
Hon Kiri Allan Hon Kieran McAnulty Minister of Justice Minist er of Local Government Section ()()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E SWCMIN I N C O N F I D E N C E qlgofb Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee Minute of Decision
Hon Kiri Allan Minister of Justice
Hon N anaia Mahuta, Minister of Local Government
Hon Nanaia Mahuta Minister of Local Government
Hon Nanaia Mahuta, Minister for Local Government Proactive release of Cabinet material about the Interim Government Response to the Social Services and Community Committees Report on Petition of Jenn Hooper August
Hon Nanaia Mahuta, Minister for Local Government, Minister for Mori Development Proactive release of Cabinet material about Local Government (Rating of Whenua Mori) Amendment Bill February
Hon Nanaia Mahuta, Minister of Local Government
Hon Nanaia Mahuta, Minister of Local Government Dog Control (Schedule ) Order Cabinet paper July
Hon Nanaia Mahuta, Minister of Local Government Proactive release of Cabinet material regarding funding issues and cost pressures relating to the policy, legislation and transition work in the three waters reform programme April
Hon Nanaia Mahuta, Minister of Local Government Proactive release of Cabinet material related to progressing the three waters service delivery reforms, June
Hon Priyanca Radhakrishnan Proactive release of Cabinet material approving the introduction of the Charities Amendment Bill October
Hon Priyanca Radhakrishnan Proactive release of Cabinet material regarding Modernising the Charities Act May
Hon Priyanca Radhakrishnan, Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector Proactive release of Cabinet material : Strengthening Our Approach to Volunteering November
Hon Simeon Brown , Minister of Local Government Proactive release of Local Government Weekly Status Reports for the period: week ending August to week ending August .
Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Local Government
Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Local Government Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Hon Simon Watts , Minister of Local Government Proactive release of Cabinet material related to the National Wastewater Environmental Performance Standards: Approval to Consult
Hon Simon Watts Minister of Revenue
Hon Simon Watts, Minister of Local Government Proactive release of Cabinet material about Local Government System Improvements February
Hon Tracey Martin Minister of Internal Affairs
Honorary Enforcement Officers
Honorary enforcement officers
Honourable Lynton Stevens QC (Chair)
Hopes story individual signing a lease on behalf of a business
Horowhenua District Council
Horowhenua model WICS report
Horowhenua slide pack WICS report
Horticulture New Zealand Te Whnau a Kai Iwi Trust
House Party The house party trial was a single event divided into two: a twohour long semiscripted scenario (party, n) and a onehour long unscripted scenario (party, n). The first scenario involved guests mingling normally, followed by a seated restaurantstyle dinner and pub quiz. Participants were assigned seating positions but were free to move around the house. The second scenario was unscripted and participants mingled freely. There was an hour between scenarios where cards were collected from the first scenario and new cards handed out for the second. Participants were randomly assigned a single card, worn on a lanyard and had IDs in the range . Some participants arrived late (e.g. Card IDs , ,) and others left early (e.g. Card IDs , , ,,) so were not present for the entire event, and their cards were only turned onoff when they arrivedleft respectively. Furthermore, because some participants left between the first and second scenarios, there were participants in the first scenario (party, n), and participants in the second (party, n).
House in accordance with Standing Order ;
House time more efficiently. The changes would come into effect after the October
How Aotearoa Gambled During COVID
How DIA inspector helped rescue American sex abuse victim
How NZ responds to online child sexual exploitation
How NZ responds to violent extremism online
How New Zealand regulates spam
How businesses, schools and universities can implement a Code of Practice.
How can community participation and decisionmaking be better enabled by technology Me phea te whakapai ake i te whai whitanga me te tukanga whakatau a te hapori m te whakamahinga o te hangarau
How did the Government respond to the Working Groups recommendations
How do we collect information
How do we collect information
How does identity theft happen
How does the programme work
How long will the request take
How the training must be delivered. Certain topics must be covered in practical and interactive sessions
How to Report Online Child Exploitation
How to access information held by government agencies.
How to become an independent evaluator for security and privacy
How to have your say Written submissions on the proposals outlined in this discussion paper are due by pm, Wednesday, September . Please refer to the key questions throughout the discussion document to help guide your feedback on the proposed Trust Framework regulations. Your input will play an important role in ensuring the final regulations are effective in supporting the gr owth of trusted and secure digital identity services for New Zealanders. Please send your submission to Digital.Identitydia.govt.nz Use of Information The information provided in your submission will be used to inform the development of the regulations, including advice provided to the Minister. We may contact you directly if we need to clarify any matters raised in your submission . Release of Informati on It is usual practice for all submissions made to the Department to be on its website. We may also publish our submissions analysis, which will include a summary of submitters views and the names of individuals or organisations that have made submissions. Submissions may also be subject to a request made under the Official Information Act . The Privacy Act governs how the Department collects, holds, uses, and discloses personal information about submitters and the information they ha ve provided. Submitters have the right to access and correct personal information. Any personal information you supply to us in your submission will only be used for the purpose of assisting in the development of policy advice associated with the issues an d proposals canvassed in this discussion paper. Please clearly state in your submission or covering email or letter, if you do not wish to have your name, or any other personal information . In addition, if there is information in your submission you do not want released, please make this clear in your submission or associated covering letter or email and explain why. For example, some information may be confidential because it is commercially sensitive or personal. You may also ask for your detai ls to be withheld if your submission is requested under the Official Information Act . We will take your statement into account and will consult with submitters when responding to requests under the Official Information Act. Next Steps When the submiss ions period closes on September , we will analyse the submissions and use the findings to inform the development of final advice on the regulations for consideration by the TF Board and the Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications. We ant icipate the regulations will be developed and gazetted in . Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government
How to keep your child safe on Roblox
How to keep your child safe on YouTube Kids
How to keep your family safe online
How to locate and contact official Marriage andor Civil Union Celebrants.
How to protect yourself from identity theft
How to reach the Departments Digital Messaging and Systems team.
How to reach the Harbourmasters Office at Lake Taupo. The Harbourmaster is on call hours a day.
How to reduce the risks of being online and safety guidelines for children.
How to report email, fax, SMS text and other instant messaging scams.
How to report online child exploitation
How to review Internet activity
How to safely use Facebook Messenger
How to safely use Facebook Messenger Kids
How we can help Human Rights Commission
How we collect, use and share information when carrying out our functions.
How we will work Delivering on its strategy requires RSG to develop and implement an operating model which supports system collaboration, and adopting common approaches across systems where this makes sense. Effective implementation of the strategy is heavily dependent on RSG having the right capabilities, at the right time, in the right place. This means RSG needs to consider if the current type and configuration of functions and capabilities is optimal. For example, does the existing organisational design free up system groups to focus on driving regulatory excellence through their compliance and enforcement, investigation, licensing, and information and education functions Does it provide the right combination of business support functions at the required level of expertise Does it ensure access to the necessary expertise to drive regulatory excellence Does it facilitate ease of embedding new regulatory functions RSG will consider these questions in terms of strategy alignment during the coming year.Business capabilities RSG has identified that one of the most critical elements of its strategy is the development of a crossRSG culture, unifying and strengthening the RSG identity. This is key to RSG becoming more than the sum of its parts , and a desirable place for people to work. The strategy also signals a shift in workforce capability requirements this is evident in the increased emphasis on the collection, analysis and dissemination of data and information; identifying new and better ways to achieve our outcomes; making more use of digital technologies; and being able to provide assurance that regulatory functions are safe and effective. Channels There is an opportunity for RSG to review the use of its current channels to assess how well they support the achievement of regulatory outcomes. While the extent to which each channel is used will differ by regulatory system, the rationale for the use of each is likely to be similar (providing information on the internet when it is easily communicated and often accessed, facetoface for more complex communication, social media andor social marketing for driving social change, etc.). Strategyrelated changes which will underpin the operating model include: Assurance plans will enable realtime, meaningful information about system performanceTimely and accurate data and insights gathered by RSG will support evidencedriven regulatory interventions and inform sound policy design Longstanding, active and trusting relationships will ensure hap, iwi and Mori have a say in how we work Stakeholders engaging with more than one RSG regulatory group will be able to navigate seamlessly between themRegulated parties, coregulators, partners and others who access or provide RSG with data and information will do this with ease Welldefined and consistent business processes will identify the tasks that are most important to RSG and system groups, and streamline these to improve efficiency and effectiveness RSG kaimahi will have core capabilities which support them to add value across RSG and DIA regulatory systemsThe RSG operating model will facilitate the embedding of new regulatory functions regardless of the nature of the system
How were Working Group members selected
How will the new arrangements be m onitored, evaluated, and r eviewed . As with the implementation requirements, it is not practicable to develop a detailed monitoring and evaluation plan yet. . However, having specific requirements in place will greatly increase our ability to monitor venue compliance as, depending on the final options, there will be some observable actions. The impact of any game features that reduce excessive gambling can be monitored through the electronic reporting system , which looks at items such as average and maximum spend, and average and maximum player duration. Enforcement actions can also be reported on by the Department . . D ata collection will face some of the same issues as research in this space, in that the private nature of the activity limits both the quantitative and qualitative data available . . Evaluation may be based on trends in presentations at gambling harm services, whereby qualitative research would be needed to determine if a presentation is a positive or negative outcome (e.g. is someone seeking help who would not have before, or have the measures not significantly reduced harmful gambling).
How will this Inquiry benefit New Zealanders
How you attempted to resolve the issue directly with the provider.
However , this ratio is expected to weaken as leverage increases in response to the capex needs.
However, for the purpose of our WSE analysis we are assu ming that the entities will
However, in modelling the Opt Out Scenario, WICS claims that WDC needs large capital investment increases from because WICS selectively and mechanistically applies a model base d on Scotland , that WICS suggests shows that New Zealand requires water asset capital stock of up to , per capita. However, there is no strong evi dence that Scottish asset levels are relevant to New Zealand in general , or to Whangrei in particular. When we compare asset levels per capita to a wider range of water entities in Australia , which has closer similarities to New Zealands urban geography than Scotl and, the choice of the Scottish model is less clear.
However, individuals who are not immersed in these communities
However, new reporting requirements may add to costs for councils, and new functions for the Department of Internal Affairs in collating, analysing, and publishing council data will add to costs for the Crown. Legislative implications
However, provided an online content host takes the steps set out above, the FVPCA provides for some protection for online content hosts where the relevant requirements have been met:
However, some are not equipped with the right
However, the influence of the younger generation
However, the processes that councils are obliged to follow in considering the
However, this timeframe is at risk of not being
However, we lowered our debt burden assessment to from reflect ing the higher
However, we lowered our debt burden assessment to from reflecting the highe r
However, we lowered our debt burden assessment to from reflecting the higher
However, where we require information that is relevant to us considering and investigating compliance breaches, complaints, and initiating our own investigations or inquiries, we may gather information from people or entities using our statutory powers.
However, whnau and peer influence can
Hui te ora, Hui te mrama
Human Assisted Reproductive Technology (Fees) Regulations
Human Assisted Reproductive Technology Act
Human Assisted Reproductive Technology Act Statistics
Human Rights The human rights implications of these policy decisions are outlined in this paper. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of usoq
Human rights The draft Bill includes amendments to the Sale and Supply of Alcohol Act which would retain the current years minimum age for voting for, standing as a candidate for, or being appointed to, an al cohol licensing trust or community trust under that Act. The Mini stry of Justice and the Department of Internal Affairs consider that, based on the evidence and policy justifications currently available, these lim its in the draft Bill on the right to freedom from age discrimination have not been justified in accordance with section of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act . Cabi net has considered this issue and agreed to proceed with the age dist inction CABMIN.
Hurunui model WICS report
Hurunui slide pack WICS report
Hutt Valley Rocketguy jailed
Hpai Hapori Community Operations
Hpai Hapori Community Operations kaimahi are in the forefront of supporting communities to improve outcomes. The Funding for Change programme in the Waikato region is making an impact by supporting Waahi P (Marae) with mobile digital kiosks and a mtauranga (knowledge) succession repository. This approach preserves and shares the rich cultural heritage of Waahi P with younger generations. By providing access to prkau (traditional stories), waiata (songs or chants), interviews with kaumtua (elders), and the history of Waahi P, the project ensures that these valuable resources are accessible and engaging for current and future beneficiaries of Waahi P.
Hpai Hapori Community Operations
Hpaitia te ara tika pmau ai te rangatiratanga m ng uri whakatipu Foster the pathway of knowledge to strength, independence and growth for future generations.
I .... All Authorised Officers receive training on their privacy and official
I U ,. lI U I I n C t.l ,. C
I I Gambling Harm to (attached) . The Strategy builds on five previous strategies and consists of a strategic framework and a t hreeyear Service Plan that sets out the activities the Ministry considers are required for the to period , to make further progress towards preventing and minimising gambling harm. The Ministrys budget ed spending for to is . million (Table refers) . This represents a million () increase compared with the average cost of the preceding three levy periods (which averag ed an appropriation of . million each) , but is less than one percent of the . billion forecast player expenditure over the same period . Table Ministry of Health Budget (GST exclusive), to Service (m) (m) (m) Total (m) Public health services . . . . Intervention services . . . . Research and evaluation . . . . New service and technology pilots . . . . Ministry operating costs . . . . Total (m) . . . . The investment in the Strategy is necessary because the gambling harm needs assessment required under the Act to inform the Strategy found that significant changes were necessary to make inroads into reducing gambling harm. For example, it found the number of people affected by gambling harm continues to increase in line with population growth, harm reduction impacts have plateaued over the past seven years, service use rates have declined and systemic inequities persist for the most affected at risk population groups. Key proposals for the Strategy and Service Plan The Strategy propose s to refocus and revitalise activities to better meet the needs of people affected by harmful gambling and achieve further gains in gambling harm reduction . This is in line with the needs assessment and the recommendations of He Ara Oranga (see below ). Key changes include : . expand ing the mix of services to more closely match those available for addictions generally (by a dding residential care and peer support ), facilitat ing codesign and use of consumer networks to de velop more targeted and appropriate service models; . strengthen ing enablers t o su pport the se services such as workforce development, training , addressing cultural and language barriers, and the use of technology ; and . using pilots, evaluation and action research to inform decision making . The additional million will be invested in piloting new service models and technology to manage and mitigate gambling harm , covering public health and intervention services co designed with stakeholders and consumers , and seek ing to build resilience by enhancing the mana of service users . The pilots will also address service gaps and areas of systemic, persistent gambling harm and would be evaluated and supported by action research. This investment will enable current levels of se rvice to be maintained while the Ministry tests new service models and identif ies those activities that more effective ly address gambling harm . Sapere Research Group. . Gambling Harm Reduction Needs Assessment . Wellington: Ministry of Health. wzrxijjr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
I I I I h) i) Te Tari Taiwhenua
I I. .. Access to DA information:
I N C O N F I D E N C E
I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E InConfidence Office of the Minister of Internal Affairs Cabinet Legislation Committee
I N C O N F I D E N C E oapovkh
I N C O N F I D E N C E mewtojp
I N C O N F I D E N C E drmjmmn
I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN
I N C O N F I D E N C E CBCMIN Cabinet Business Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Government Response to the Interim Report of the Justice Committee Inquiry into the Local Elections and Liquor Licensing TrustElections, and Recent Energy Trust Elections Portfolio Local Government On January , the Cabinet Business Committee: noted that in August , the Justice Committee released an interim report on its Inquiry into the Local Elections and Liquor Licensing Trust Elections, and Recent Energy Trust Elections ; noted that the Governments response to the Justice Committees interim report is due to be tabled in Parliament by February in accordance with Standing Order ; noted that the Government response to the interim report of the Justice Committees Inquiry into the Local Elections and Liquor Licensing Trust Elections, and Recent Energy Trust Elections (the Government response), attached under CBCSUB, indicates that the government will: . continue to consider centralised management of local elections as other priorities allow; . continue to consider opportunities for aligning the parliamentary and local electoral frameworks more closely in due course; a thorised the Minister of Local Government to table the Government response in Parliament. Rachel Clarke Committee Secretary Present: (see over) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government aecpczkj I N C O N F I D E N C E
I N C O N F I D E N C E CBCMIN Present: Rt Hon Jacinda Ardern Hon Grant Robertson Hon Kelvin Davis Hon Dr Megan Woods Hon Chris Hipkins Officials present from: Office of the Prime Minister Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet Hon Carmel Sepuloni Hon Andrew Little Hon David Parker Hon Nanaia Mahuta Hon Poto Williams Hon Damien OConnor Hon Stuart Nash Hon Kris Faafoi Hon Jan Tinetti Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government aecpczkj I N C O N F I D E N C E
I N C O N F I D E N C E CBCMIN Cabinet Business Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Class Lotteries Online Payments Portfolio Internal Affairs On July , the Cabinet Business Committee: noted that t he temporary exemption allowing Class lotteries to be conducted remotely is due to expire in October ; a reed that t he Gambling Act should be amended to permanently enable Class lotteries to be conducted remotely; a reed that t he amendment be added to the Legislation Programme with a category priority (must be passed by the end of ); authorised the Mi nister of Internal Affairs to make final decisions on minor and technical policy changes, consistent with the policy intent of the decisions under CBCMIN; invited the Mi nister of Internal Affairs to issue instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office to give effect to the decisions in the paper under CBCSUB; noted that t here are no financial or implementation implications associated with the proposal to allow Class lotteries to be permanently conducted remotely. Com mitt ee Secretary Present: Officials present from: Hon David Seymour (Chair) Depar tment of the Prime Minister and Cabinet Hon Brooke van Velden Hon Simeon Brown Hon Simon Watts qwkdm I N C O N F I D E N C E ()(a) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE CABMIN Cabinet Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification , or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Report of the Cabinet Business Committee: Period Ended July On July , Cabinet made the following decisions on the work of the Cabinet Business Committee for the period ended July : Out of scope CBCMIN Class Lotteries Online Payments Poifolio: Internal Affairs Out of scope Out of scope ()(a) Secretay of the Cabinet qwkdm IN CONFIDENCE CONFIRMED Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
I N C O N F I D E N C E DEVMIN I N C O N F I D E N C E emppemb Cabinet Economic Development Committee Minute of Decision
I N C O N F I D E N C E Hon Simeon Brown , Minister of Local Government Proactive release of Local Water Done Well stage further decisions . This is the third and final paper in a series of papers seeking decisions on proposals to progress the third stage of the Local Water Done Well programme.
I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN. Cabinet Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Local Water Done Well Stage : Further Decisions Portfolio Local Government On July , following reference from the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee, Cabinet: Background noted that, as agreed by Cabinet in February CABMIN, the legislative strategy involved in implementing Local Water Done Well includes three pieces of legislation: . the Water Services Acts Repeal Act passed in February which repealed the previous governments legislation and restored ownership and responsibility for water services to local government; . the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill introduced in May which will establish initial components of the new framework and transitional arrangements; . the Local Government Water Services Bill anticipated for introduction in December and enactment in mid which will provide enduring settings and frameworks; noted that policy decisions for the third Bill above are being sought through a suite of three papers, the first two of which have already been agreed: . Local Water Done Well Stage : Water Services Delivery System ECOMIN; . Local Water Done Well Stage : Water Services Regulatory System ECOMIN; . Local Water Done Well Stage : Further Decisions attached under ECOSUB; Further decisions relating to local government water services delivery arrangements authorised the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Local Government to make final decisions on the design features of the new water organisations I N C O N F I D E N C E sshjfdn ()(f)(iv) I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN. Supporting longterm contracting arrangements noted that, under sections and of the Local Government Act , local government organisations (councils and councilcontrolled organisations) can enter into contracts and joint arrangements relating to water services with bodies that are not local government organisations for a maximum of years; agreed to extend the permitted maximum length of contracts and joint arrangements for water services from to years; Improving how stormwater networks are managed agreed that the legislation will provide that territorial authorities are responsible for managing and maintaining stormwater networks in their city or district, including overland flow paths and urban watercourses that are both on private land and related to the operation of the stormwater network in urban areas; agreed that the legislation will include provisions that require territorial authorities to: . develop a stormwater network risk management plan to identify risks and hazards related to stormwater networks; . work with private landowners as required to protect and maintain the conveyance capacity of overland flow paths and urban watercourses; . develop (as required) stormwater rules that would provide direction to private landowners on their responsibilities for maintenance and protection of the conveyance capacity of overland flow paths and urban watercourses on their land; agreed that the legislation will provide for stormwater rules and rulemaking powers to support the management of overland flow paths and urban watercourses on private land, including that the rules (and rulemaking powers, as the case may be) will: . be made pursuant to stormwater network risk management plans; . set out landowner duties, including access to land, and notification requirements; . replace current bylaw making powers as they relate to urban stormwater networks; agreed that the legislation will include requirements relating to stormwater network risk management plans, including that these plans will: . identify any hazards that relate to a stormwater network, including (without limitation) emerging or potential hazards; . assess any risks that are associated with those hazards; . identify how those risks are to be managed, controlled, monitored, or eliminated; . be provided to Taumata Arowai for review and comment, prior to being finalised; agreed that the legislation will set out private landowners statutory rights and responsibilities in relation to overland flow paths or urban watercourses that are on their land, including provisions to the effect that: . where a landowner impairs or alters an overland flow path or watercourse, without resource consent or in breach of a stormwater rule, they would be responsible for either eliminating the impairment or meeting the costs of the territorial authority, if they do that on the landowners behalf; I N C O N F I D E N C E sshjfdn I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN. . a private landowner would not be responsible for an impairment or alteration of a stormwater network if that impairment or alteration was caused by the act or omission of another person; . a private landowner would be required to notify the relevant territorial authority before undertaking any work that might affect the stormwater network; agreed that the legislation will provide for an enabling framework for the development of service agreements, which can be used by territorial authorities, water organisations and other agencies to support the integrated management of the stormwater network; agreed that the legislation will reflect the complex relationship between stormwater networks and transport corridor stormwater infrastructure, and define transport stormwater infrastructure as including the infrastructure that is owned or operated by a transport corridor manager to collect or discharge stormwater relating to a transport function of the corridor; Charging and billing for water services, by water organisations agreed that the new legislation will include a suitably modified version of the current legislative framework for local government rating, to enable water organisations to identify which ratepayers should be charged for water services; agreed that the legislation will require councils to share relevant billing information with water organisations (to enable the identification of ratepayers), and allow councils to charge a reasonable fee for this service; agreed that the legislation can include any technical amendments that are needed to cater for situations where consumers may have to pay both water organisations and councils for water services at the same time, due to water organisations being formed partway through a rating year; agreed that the legislation will allow water organisations to charge a serviceability fee to properties that could be, but are not, connected to the water network; Rates Rebate Scheme and associated financial implications noted that: . except for ratepayers in Auckland, who pay water charges to Watercare, water costs are included as part of council rates under current arrangements; . under the current approach in the Rates Rebate Act , rebates are applied to the rates bill only and not water charges (which are not considered rates and so are not eligible for the rates rebate); . if water charges are split out from rates bills and charged by new water organisations rather than councils, some recipients of a rates rebate would receive a lower rebate, even though their total expenses (rates and water) may not have changed; agreed to amend the definition of rates in the Rates Rebate Act to include water charges, so that ratepayers will not receive different levels of rebate depending on whether they are billed for water charges as part of their rates bill, or separately through a water organisation; I N C O N F I D E N C E sshjfdn I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN. noted that the above amendment will result in a per annum increase in the cost of the Rates Rebate Scheme, because water charges paid to Watercare would now be considered rates and would be eligible for the rebate; noted that the additional costs can be met from within the existing Rates Rebate Scheme appropriation for the immediate future, meaning there is no current impact on the Crowns fiscal forecasts; noted that the Rates Rebate Scheme is a demandbased scheme that is periodically adjusted to reflect macroeconomic factors, and that the new definition of rates will capture the additional in the calculation of adjustments required over the longer term, contributing to an increase in adjustments made; noted that the Treasury has been consulted on the above impact and is comfortable with the proposed amendment to the definition of rates in the Rate Rebate Act ; agreed that the legislation will require water organisations to provide information to the relevant council(s) on the amount of water charges paid by a consumer during the year, in order to facilitate the administration of the Rates Rebate Scheme by the council(s); Charging for growth by water organisations noted that under Local Water Done Well, some councils will choose to shift their water services delivery into separate water organisations, and that those water organisations will need a specific mechanism to directly charge for new or additional demand on water infrastructure; agreed that water organisations will be enabled to use the development contributions regime in the Local Government Act , with the necessary modifications as an interim measure pending any future changes that may be made following work on development contributions settings as part of the Governments Going for Housing Growth policy; agreed that the legislation can enable a flexible approach in which: . water organisations are able to develop their own development contributions policy; . as an alternative to a separate water organisation development contributions policy, a water organisation and a council within its service area could agree to development contributions set by the water organisation being included in the councils policy; . a council within a water organisations service area can administer the organisations development contributions policy on its behalf; agreed that the legislation will include appropriate transitional arrangements, to ensure a smooth transition to charging for the growthrelated costs of water services infrastructure from a council to a water organisation; agreed that the Infrastructure Funding and Financing Act be amended so that the Infrastructure Funding and Financing model can be used for water services infrastructure that is to be vested with a water organisation; Powers of receivers in relation to water organisations noted that in situations where new water organisations achieve financial separation from their parent councils, the legislation will need to include provisions to ensure receivers can act appropriately in the event that a water organisation defaults on a debt; I N C O N F I D E N C E sshjfdn ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN. agreed that the legislation will include provisions to: . allow the receiver to assess and collect for a given financial year both the amounts owed by the water organisation for that year and the reasonable costs incurred in collecting that amount; . prohibit the receiver from having any interest or security in water services infrastructure assets; . allow the receiver to collect the amount through water services charges assessed on consumers; Enabling exemptions from some of the minimum requirements that will apply to water organisations agreed that the legislation will include a process that enables councils to seek an exemption from some of the minimum requirements that are due to apply to water organisations, as agreed by Cabinet in June ECOMIN; agreed that the ability to seek and grant an exemption would apply to the following requirements only: . water organisations must be companies; . activities of water organisations will be limited to the provision of water services, and directlyrelated activities; . ; . only councils or consumer trusts can be shareholders of a water organisation; agreed that the legislation will provide that: . councils that wish to seek an exemption would do so by submitting an application to the Secretary for Local Government, . the Secretary for Local Government would assess applications, and work with the Commerce Commission, Taumata Arowai, and Inland Revenue to provide advice to the Minister of Local Government; . the assessment and advice would be based on whether the councils proposal for water services: .. meets the legislative objectives of Local Water Done Well; .. maintains the core requirements that the Minister of Local Government deems to be nonnegotiable for all water organisations, including that the proposal and scope of the exemption do not involve any form of privatisation; .. will provide water services that are financially sustainable; .. satisfies the Minister of Local Government that the financial sustainability of water services would be put at greater risk if the exemption were not granted; . exemption approvals would be granted through an Order in Council, made on the recommendation of the Minister of Local Government; I N C O N F I D E N C E sshjfdn ()(g)(i) I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN. Tax exemptions for water organisations agreed to grant taxexempt status to water organisations; agreed that the legislation will provide that, if a water organisation is wound up, there will be a requirement that assets must be transferred to another water organisation or to a council on windup; Borrowing in foreign currency agreed that the legislation will explicitly allow water organisations to borrow in foreign currency, to ensure they have access to the borrowing that may be required to meet the significant costs associated with water infrastructure; agreed that the legislation will also allow water organisations to enter into incidental arrangements, which allow water organisations to reduce their exposure to currency volatility; Rateability of land and assets owned by water organisations agreed that the legislation will provide that land owned by water organisations should be rateable; agreed that the legislation will require assets that are owned by a water organisation, but located on or under land the organisation does not own, should be rateable; noted that changes are not being proposed to the bespoke arrangements for the rateability of Watercares land and assets that apply under the Local Government (Auckland Council) Act ; Civil Defence Emergency Management costsharing arrangements agreed that the current Civil Defence Emergency Management costsharing arrangements with the Crown will apply directly to water organisations, to ensure financial separation of water organisations and allow them to directly seek partial reimbursement from the Crown for emergency expenses; noted that further policy decisions will be required prior to the establishment of any financially independent water organisation (including Watercare) to ensure these arrangements apply appropriately to the water organisations and local authorities, with no material fiscal impacts for the Crown; authorised the Minister of Local Government, the Minister of Finance, and the Minister for Emergency Management and Recovery to make further policy decisions on the application of costsharing arrangements; Approach to consumer protection noted that: . information disclosure will be part of the new economic regulation regime for local government water services, as agreed by Cabinet in June ECOMIN; . information disclosure could be used to oversee aspects of the consumer experience, and enable the Commerce Commission to learn more about how existing consumer protection settings are working in practice, and identify potential shortcomings; I N C O N F I D E N C E sshjfdn I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN. agreed that the legislation should clearly enable the Commerce Commission to require public reporting from water service providers on consumer protection issues, and to publicly summarise and analyse the information disclosed; agreed that the legislation will also include the power for the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs to make regulations relating to consumer protection measures, to provide flexibility to consider what may be needed in the future, particularly if information disclosure reveals that issues exist; agreed that regulations could be used to specify requirements relating to: . complaint processes, the provision of information, the recording of complaints, andor reporting; . providing access to an external consumer dispute resolution process; andor . other matters relating to consumer protections that the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs considers necessary and appropriate; noted that service quality codes could be a useful consumer protection mechanism, but that the development of such codes should be sectorled in the first instance; agreed that the Commerce Commission will be able to issue guidelines to water service providers on matters relating to a service quality code; agreed that the legislation will enable the Commerce Commission to make a service quality code in relation to the provision of water services, where no sectordeveloped code exists or, in the opinion of the Commission, the purpose of Part of the Commerce Act could be better met by a mandatory code; agreed that, before making a mandatory service quality code, the Commerce Commission will be required to provide a report to the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs containing the reasons for doing this; Compliance and enforcement relating to consumer protections noted that: . the Commerce Act contains a range of compliance, enforcement and investigation powers for use under Part of that Act, including enforceable undertakings, pecuniary penalties, offences, orders, injunctions, and the ability to require information for statutory purposes; . compliance, enforcement, and investigation powers similar to those under Part of the Commerce Act will be applied to the economic regulation of water services, as agreed by Cabinet in June ECOMIN; agreed that the legislation will enable similar compliance and enforcement powers and mechanisms to be applied to consumer protection requirements, to ensure the Commerce Commission has access to adequate and appropriate tools, and provide consistency across regimes; I N C O N F I D E N C E sshjfdn I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN. Amendments to the Water Services Act Exemptions noted that section of the Water Services Act allows the Chief Executive of Taumata Arowai to grant exemptions to any drinking water supplier or class of drinking water supplier from complying with nine requirements of the Act; agreed to amend the provisions in the Water Services Act relating to exemptions, so that: . there is flexibility to enable exemptions to be issued proactively, without the need for an application; . exemptions may be granted for any one or more of the nine requirements that are currently specified in section () of the Act; . a further item is included in the list in section (), so that exemptions may apply to requirements in section of the Act to notify Taumata Arowai of notifiable risks or hazards; . the legislation includes: .. an express statement setting out the purpose of exemptions; .. flexibility to issue exemptions proactively, where compliance with any of the matters referred to in section () of the Water Services Act is impractical, inefficient, unduly costly, or unduly burdensome (taking into account the nature of the specific issues), or for matters that are minor or technical; .. a requirement that the extent of the exemption granted cannot be broader than is reasonably necessary to address the matters that gave rise to the exemption; National engineering design standards noted that there are benefits to introducing requirements relating to national engineering design standards, which include consistent standards for design and construction of network infrastructure, and would support the Governments aim to increase standardisation to lower the costs of providing infrastructure; agreed to provide in the legislation mandatory requirements relating to national engineering design standards; agreed to include in the legislation the ability to make regulations relating to national engineering design standards, including the detailed scope and content of these standards, the process for developing them, timeframes, and transitional and implementation arrangements; Authorisations agreed to amend clause of Schedule of the Water Services Act so that: . every local authority and councilcontrolled organisation that operates a drinking water supply must be authorised, or have its drinking water supply operated by an authorised supplier, within years after the commencement (instead of five years, as currently); I N C O N F I D E N C E sshjfdn I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN. . the drafting of this clause includes appropriate references to any new form of water organisation that might be established by a local authority; agreed to expand the scope of the authorisation provisions in subpart of Part of the Water Services Act to include persons who are involved in carrying out work relating to drinking water supplies andor wastewater networks (or parts, thereof), such as work on maintenance, repairs, or renewals; Acceptable solutions agreed to amend section of the Water Services Act to change the requirement on Taumata Arowai to issue drinking water acceptable solutions from may to must; Changes relating to national wastewater and stormwater standards noted that Taumata Arowai is currently developing national wastewater environmental performance standards under section of the Water Services Act, which involves making minimum standards for the activities associated with wastewater networks, like discharges to land or water; noted that a preferrable approach, and one that is consistent with international best practice, would involve a single standard, rather than a minimum (or maximum); agreed that the legislation be amended to provide for an approach that involves: . making a single standard for national wastewater standards (rather than minimum or maximum standards); . ensuring regional councils implement a single standard approach in resource consents, and cannot exceed the standard in consenting conditions apart from on an exceptions basis; noted that implementing these proposals will require changes to the Water Services Act and the Resource Management Act , which could be progressed through the Local Government Water Services Bill, but that further work is needed to develop and agree the appropriate policy approach and specific nature of the legislative changes; authorised the Minister of Local Government to: . work with the Minister Responsible for RMA Reform, and other Ministers as appropriate (such as the Minister for the Environment), to develop and agree: .. the appropriate policy approach and specific nature of the legislative changes in relation to the wastewater and stormwater standards; .. an appropriate approach for the stormwater standards (developed under the Water Services Act), and any associated legislative changes; . issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office to give legislative effect to the decisions made by the above Ministers; noted that the Minister of Local Government will report back to the Cabinet Legislation Committee on the decisions made above when approval to introduce the Bill is sought; noted that currently Taumata Arowai may make wastewater andor stormwater environmental performance standards under sections and A of the Water Services I N C O N F I D E N C E sshjfdn I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN. . the Water Services Act ; . the Rates Rebate Act ; noted that the Minister of Local Government will engage with the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs when issuing drafting instructions in relation to the proposals relating to consumer protection and amendments to the Commerce Act; authorised the Minister of Local Government, in discussion with the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs where appropriate, to approve matters that may arise during the course of drafting and may be required to align with the above decisions; invited the Minister of Local Government to report back to the Cabinet Legislation Committee on any substantive matters that have been considered and approved during the legislative drafting process, when approval to introduce the Bill is sought. Rachel Hayward Secretary of the Cabinet Secretarys Note: This minute replaces ECOMIN. Cabinet agreed to amend paragraphs and ... I N C O N F I D E N C E sshjfdn I N C O N F I D E N C E ECOMIN Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Local Water Done Well Stage : Further Decisions Portfolio Local Government On July , the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee: Background noted that, as agreed by Cabinet in February CABMIN, the legislative strategy involved in implementing Local Water Done Well includes three pieces of legislation: . the Water Services Acts Repeal Act passed in February which repealed the previous governments legislation and restored ownership and responsibility for water services to local government; . the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill introduced in May which will establish initial components of the new framework and transitional arrangements; . the Local Government Water Services Bill anticipated for introduction in December and enactment in mid which will provide enduring settings and frameworks; noted that policy decisions for the third Bill above are being sought through a suite of three papers, the first two of which have already been agreed: . Local Water Done Well Stage : Water Services Delivery System ECOMIN; . Local Water Done Well Stage : Water Services Regulatory System ECOMIN; . Local Water Done Well Stage : Further Decisions attached under ECOSUB; Further decisions relating to local government water services delivery arrangements authorised the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Local Government to make final decisions on the design features of the new water organisations ; I N C O N F I D E N C E emppemb ()(f)(iv) I N C O N F I D E N C E ECOMIN Supporting longterm contracting arrangements noted that, under sections and of the Local Government Act , local government organisations (councils and councilcontrolled organisations) can enter into contracts and joint arrangements relating to water services with bodies that are not local government organisations for a maximum of years; agreed to extend the permitted maximum length of contracts and joint arrangements for water services from to years; Improving how stormwater networks are managed agreed that the legislation will provide that territorial authorities are responsible for managing and maintaining stormwater networks in their city or district, including overland flow paths and urban watercourses that are both on private land and related to the operation of the stormwater network in urban areas; agreed that the legislation will include provisions that require territorial authorities to: . develop a stormwater network risk management plan to identify risks and hazards related to stormwater networks; . work with private landowners as required to protect and maintain the conveyance capacity of overland flow paths and urban watercourses; . develop (as required) stormwater rules that would provide direction to private landowners on their responsibilities for maintenance and protection of the conveyance capacity of overland flow paths and urban watercourses on their land; agreed that the legislation will provide for stormwater rules and rulemaking powers to support the management of overland flow paths and urban watercourses on private land, including that the rules (and rulemaking powers, as the case may be) will: . be made pursuant to stormwater network risk management plans; . set out landowner duties, including access to land, and notification requirements; . replace current bylaw making powers as they relate to urban stormwater networks; agreed that the legislation will include requirements relating to stormwater network risk management plans, including that these plans will: . identify any hazards that relate to a stormwater network, including (without limitation) emerging or potential hazards; . assess any risks that are associated with those hazards; . identify how those risks are to be managed, controlled, monitored, or eliminated; . be provided to Taumata Arowai for review and comment, prior to being finalised; agreed that the legislation will set out private landowners statutory rights and responsibilities in relation to overland flow paths or urban watercourses that are on their land, including provisions to the effect that: . where a landowner impairs or alters an overland flow path or watercourse, without resource consent or in breach of a stormwater rule, they would be responsible for either eliminating the impairment or meeting the costs of the territorial authority, if they do that on the landowners behalf; I N C O N F I D E N C E emppemb I N C O N F I D E N C E ECOMIN . a private landowner would not be responsible for an impairment or alteration of a stormwater network if that impairment or alteration was caused by the act or omission of another person; . a private landowner would be required to notify the relevant territorial authority before undertaking any work that might affect the stormwater network; agreed that the legislation will provide for an enabling framework for the development of service agreements, which can be used by territorial authorities, water organisations and other agencies to support the integrated management of the stormwater network; agreed that the legislation will reflect the complex relationship between stormwater networks and transport corridor stormwater infrastructure, and define transport stormwater infrastructure as including the infrastructure that is owned or operated by a transport corridor manager to collect or discharge stormwater relating to a transport function of the corridor; Charging and billing for water services, by water organisations agreed that the new legislation will include a suitably modified version of the current legislative framework for local government rating, to enable water organisations to identify which ratepayers should be charged for water services; agreed that the legislation will require councils to share relevant billing information with water organisations (to enable the identification of ratepayers), and allow councils to charge a reasonable fee for this service; agreed that the legislation can include any technical amendments that are needed to cater for situations where consumers may have to pay both water organisations and councils for water services at the same time, due to water organisations being formed partway through a rating year; agreed that the legislation will allow water organisations to charge a serviceability fee to properties that could be, but are not, connected to the water network; Rates Rebate Scheme and associated financial implications noted that: . except for ratepayers in Auckland, who pay water charges to Watercare, water costs are included as part of council rates under current arrangements; . under the current approach in the Rates Rebate Act , rebates are applied to the rates bill only and not water charges (which are not considered rates and so are not eligible for the rates rebate); . if water charges are split out from rates bills and charged by new water organisations rather than councils, some recipients of a rates rebate would receive a lower rebate, even though their total expenses (rates and water) may not have changed; agreed to amend the definition of rates in the Rates Rebate Act to include water charges, so that ratepayers will not receive different levels of rebate depending on whether they are billed for water charges as part of their rates bill, or separately through a water organisation; I N C O N F I D E N C E emppemb I N C O N F I D E N C E ECOMIN noted that the above amendment will result in a per annum increase in the cost of the Rates Rebate Scheme, because water charges paid to Watercare would now be considered rates and would be eligible for the rebate; noted that the additional costs can be met from within the existing Rates Rebate Scheme appropriation for the immediate future, meaning there is no current impact on the Crowns fiscal forecasts; noted that the Rates Rebate Scheme is a demandbased scheme that is periodically adjusted to reflect macroeconomic factors, and that the new definition of rates will capture the additional in the calculation of adjustments required over the longer term, contributing to an increase in adjustments made; noted that the Treasury has been consulted on the above impact and is comfortable with the proposed amendment to the definition of rates in the Rate Rebate Act ; agreed that the legislation will require water organisations to provide information to the relevant council(s) on the amount of water charges paid by a consumer during the year, in order to facilitate the administration of the Rates Rebate Scheme by the council(s); Charging for growth by water organisations noted that under Local Water Done Well, some councils will choose to shift their water services delivery into separate water organisations, and that those water organisations will need a specific mechanism to directly charge for new or additional demand on water infrastructure; agreed that water organisations will be enabled to use the development contributions regime in the Local Government Act , with the necessary modifications as an interim measure pending any future changes that may be made following work on development contributions settings as part of the Governments Going for Housing Growth policy; agreed that the legislation can enable a flexible approach in which: . water organisations are able to develop their own development contributions policy; . as an alternative to a separate water organisation development contributions policy, a water organisation and a council within its service area could agree to development contributions set by the water organisation being included in the councils policy; . a council within a water organisations service area can administer the organisations development contributions policy on its behalf; agreed that the legislation will include appropriate transitional arrangements, to ensure a smooth transition to charging for the growthrelated costs of water services infrastructure from a council to a water organisation; agreed that the Infrastructure Funding and Financing Act be amended so that the Infrastructure Funding and Financing model can be used for water services infrastructure that is to be vested with a water organisation; Powers of receivers in relation to water organisations noted that in situations where new water organisations achieve financial separation from their parent councils, the legislation will need to include provisions to ensure receivers can act appropriately in the event that a water organisation defaults on a debt; I N C O N F I D E N C E emppemb ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) I N C O N F I D E N C E ECOMIN agreed that the legislation will include provisions to: . allow the receiver to assess and collect for a given financial year both the amounts owed by the water organisation for that year and the reasonable costs incurred in collecting that amount; . prohibit the receiver from having any interest or security in water services infrastructure assets; . allow the receiver to collect the amount through water services charges assessed on consumers; Enabling exemptions from some of the minimum requirements that will apply to water organisations agreed that the legislation will include a process that enables councils to seek an exemption from some of the minimum requirements that are due to apply to water organisations, as agreed by Cabinet in June ECOMIN; agreed that the ability to seek and grant an exemption would apply to the following requirements only: . water organisations must be companies; . activities of water organisations will be limited to the provision of water services, and directlyrelated activities; . ; . only councils or consumer trusts can be shareholders of a water organisation; agreed that the legislation will provide that: . councils that wish to seek an exemption would do so by submitting an application to the Secretary for Local Government, . the Secretary for Local Government would assess applications, and work with the Commerce Commission, Taumata Arowai, and Inland Revenue to provide advice to the Minister of Local Government; . the assessment and advice would be based on whether the councils proposal for water services: .. meets the legislative objectives of Local Water Done Well; .. maintains the core requirements that the Minister of Local Government deems to be nonnegotiable for all water organisations, including that the proposal and scope of the exemption do not involve any form of privatisation; .. will provide water services that are financially sustainable; .. satisfies the Minister of Local Government that the financial sustainability of water services would be put at greater risk if the exemption were not granted; . exemption approvals would be granted through an Order in Council, made on the recommendation of the Minister of Local Government; I N C O N F I D E N C E emppemb ()(g)(i) I N C O N F I D E N C E ECOMIN agreed that the legislation will provide that, if a water organisation is wound up, there will be a requirement that assets must be transferred to another water organisation or to a council on windup; Borrowing in foreign currency agreed that the legislation will explicitly allow water organisations to borrow in foreign currency, to ensure they have access to the borrowing that may be required to meet the significant costs associated with water infrastructure; agreed that the legislation will also allow water organisations to enter into incidental arrangements, which allow water organisations to reduce their exposure to currency volatility; Rateability of land and assets owned by water organisations agreed that the legislation will provide that land owned by water organisations should be rateable; agreed that the legislation will require assets that are owned by a water organisation, but located on or under land the organisation does not own, should be rateable; noted that changes are not being proposed to the bespoke arrangements for the rateability of Watercares land and assets that apply under the Local Government (Auckland Council) Act ; Civil Defence Emergency Management costsharing arrangements agreed that the current Civil Defence Emergency Management costsharing arrangements with the Crown will apply directly to water organisations, to ensure financial separation of water organisations and allow them to directly seek partial reimbursement from the Crown for emergency expenses; noted that further policy decisions will be required prior to the establishment of any financially independent water organisation (including Watercare) to ensure these arrangements apply appropriately to the water organisations and local authorities, with no material fiscal impacts for the Crown; authorised the Minister of Local Government, the Minister of Finance, and the Minister for Emergency Management and Recovery to make further policy decisions on the application of costsharing arrangements; Approach to consumer protection noted that: . information disclosure will be part of the new economic regulation regime for local government water services, as agreed by Cabinet in June ECOMIN; . information disclosure could be used to oversee aspects of the consumer experience, and enable the Commerce Commission to learn more about how existing consumer protection settings are working in practice, and identify potential shortcomings; agreed that the legislation should clearly enable the Commerce Commission to require public reporting from water service providers on consumer protection issues, and to publicly summarise and analyse the information disclosed; I N C O N F I D E N C E emppemb I N C O N F I D E N C E ECOMIN agreed that the legislation will also include the power for the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs to make regulations relating to consumer protection measures, to provide flexibility to consider what may be needed in the future, particularly if information disclosure reveals that issues exist; agreed that regulations could be used to specify requirements relating to: . complaint processes, the provision of information, the recording of complaints, andor reporting; . providing access to an external consumer dispute resolution process; andor . other matters relating to consumer protections that the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs considers necessary and appropriate; noted that service quality codes could be a useful consumer protection mechanism, but that the development of such codes should be sectorled in the first instance; agreed that the Commerce Commission will be able to issue guidelines to water service providers on matters relating to a service quality code; agreed that the legislation will enable the Commerce Commission to make a service quality code in relation to the provision of water services, where no sectordeveloped code exists or, in the opinion of the Commission, the purpose of Part of the Commerce Act could be better met by a mandatory code; agreed that, before making a mandatory service quality code, the Commerce Commission will be required to provide a report to the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs containing the reasons for doing this; Compliance and enforcement relating to consumer protections noted that: . the Commerce Act contains a range of compliance, enforcement and investigation powers for use under Part of that Act, including enforceable undertakings, pecuniary penalties, offences, orders, injunctions, and the ability to require information for statutory purposes; . compliance, enforcement, and investigation powers similar to those under Part of the Commerce Act will be applied to the economic regulation of water services, as agreed by Cabinet in June ECOMIN; agreed that the legislation will enable similar compliance and enforcement powers and mechanisms to be applied to consumer protection requirements, to ensure the Commerce Commission has access to adequate and appropriate tools, and provide consistency across regimes; Costrecovery through levies noted that: . the above approach to consumer protection is designed so that additional costs are not incurred at the outset, and that the initial monitoring through information disclosure will be part of the Commerce Commissions proposed activities under the economic regulation regime; I N C O N F I D E N C E emppemb I N C O N F I D E N C E ECOMIN . exemptions may be granted for any one or more of the nine requirements that are currently specified in section () of the Act; . a further item is included in the list in section (), so that exemptions may apply to requirements in section of the Act to notify Taumata Arowai of notifiable risks or hazards; . the legislation includes: .. an express statement setting out the purpose of exemptions; .. flexibility to issue exemptions proactively, where compliance with any of the matters referred to in section () of the Water Services Act is impractical, inefficient, unduly costly, or unduly burdensome (taking into account the nature of the specific issues), or for matters that are minor or technical; .. a requirement that the extent of the exemption granted cannot be broader than is reasonably necessary to address the matters that gave rise to the exemption; National engineering design standards noted that there are benefits of introducing requirements relating to national engineering design standards, which include consistent standards for design and construction of network infrastructure, and would support the Governments aim to increase standardisation to lower the costs of providing infrastructure; agreed to provide in the legislation mandatory requirements relating to national engineering design standards; agreed to include in the legislation the ability to make regulations relating to national engineering design standards, including the detailed scope and content of these standards, the process for developing them, timeframes, and transitional and implementation arrangements; Authorisations agreed to amend clause of Schedule of the Water Services Act so that: . every local authority and councilcontrolled organisation that operates a drinking water supply must be authorised, or have its drinking water supply operated by an authorised supplier, within years after the commencement (instead of five years, as currently); . the drafting of this clause includes appropriate references to any new form of water organisation that might be established by a local authority; agreed to expand the scope of the authorisation provisions in subpart of Part of the Water Services Act to include persons who are involved in carrying out work relating to drinking water supplies andor wastewater networks (or parts, thereof), such as work on maintenance, repairs, or renewals; Acceptable solutions agreed to amend section of the Water Services Act to change the requirement on Taumata Arowai to issue drinking water acceptable solutions from may to must; I N C O N F I D E N C E emppemb I N C O N F I D E N C E ECOMIN Changes relating to national wastewater and stormwater standards noted that Taumata Arowai is currently developing national wastewater environmental performance standards under section of the Water Services Act, which involves making minimum standards for the activities associated with wastewater networks, like discharges to land or water; noted that a preferrable approach, and one that is consistent with international best practice, would involve a single standard, rather than a minimum (or maximum); agreed that the legislation be amended to provide for an approach that involves: . making a single standard for national wastewater standards (rather than minimum or maximum standards); . ensuring regional councils implement a single standard approach in resource consents, and cannot exceed the standard in consenting conditions apart from on an exceptions basis; noted that implementing these proposals will require changes to the Water Services Act and the Resource Management Act , which could be progressed through the Local Government Water Services Bill, but that further work is needed to develop and agree the appropriate policy approach and specific nature of the legislative changes; authorised the Minister of Local Government to: . work with the Minister Responsible for RMA Reform, and other Ministers as appropriate (such as the Minister for the Environment), to develop and agree: .. the appropriate policy approach and specific nature of the legislative changes in relation to the wastewater standards; .. an appropriate approach for the stormwater standards (developed under the Water Services Act), and any associated legislative changes; . issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office to give legislative effect to the decisions made by the above Ministers; noted that the Minister of Local Government will report back to the Cabinet Legislation Committee on the decisions made above when approval to introduce the Bill is sought; noted that currently Taumata Arowai may make wastewater andor stormwater environmental performance standards under sections and A of the Water Services Act, through a process that includes public consultation but does not include Cabinet oversight or a regulatory impact analysis; noted that this is different from the approach to making drinking water standards in section of the Water Services Act, which are regulations made by Order in Council, and do, therefore, involve Cabinet processes; agreed to amend the Water Services Act so that the power and process associated with making wastewater environmental performance standards (section ) and stormwater environmental performance standards (section A) is consistent with the power and process for making drinking water standards (in section ), which includes an Order in Council process; I N C O N F I D E N C E emppemb I N C O N F I D E N C E ECOMIN invited the Minister of Local Government to report back to the Cabinet Legislation Committee on any substantive matters that have been considered and approved during the legislative drafting process, when approval to introduce the Bill is sought. Rachel Clarke Committee Secretary Present: Officials present from: Hon David Seymour Hon Nicola Willis (Chair) Hon Chris Bishop Hon Simeon Brown Hon Erica Stanford Hon Paul Goldsmith Hon Mark Mitchell Hon Tama Potaka Hon Matt Doocey Hon Melissa Lee Hon Penny Simmonds Hon Nicola Grigg Hon Mark Patterson Simon Court MPOffice of the Prime Minister Office of Hon Simeon Brown Department of Internal Affairs Taumata Arowai Officials Committee for ECO I N C O N F I D E N C E emppemb IN CONFIDENCE Page of Office of the Minister of Local Government Chair Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Local Water Done Well stage : further decisions Proposal . This is the third paper in a series of papers seek ing decisions on proposals to progress the third stage of the Local Water Done Well programme following on from the two papers that were considered in June . . This paper seeks the remaining policy decisions for the Local Government Water Services Bill, The proposals relate to t hree main areas : . additional proposals relating to local government water service s arrangements , to support and enable the approach set out in my paper, Local Water Done Well stage : water services delivery system ECOMIN affecting : .. powers relating to water infrastructure and services; .. how stormwater networks are managed; .. charging arrangements for new water organisations, including ensuring they can charge for growth; .. other matters relating to water organisations; . an approach to consumer protection, to complement the new economic regulation regime agreed for local government water services through the paper Local Water Done Well stage : water services regulatory system ECO MIN ; . changes to how Taumata Arowai operates , the water quality regulatory framework , and to address other drivers of cost and regulatory burden through the water system . This includes changing the requirements relating to Te Mana o te Wai in the Water Services Act and the Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act . Relation to government priorities . The Speech from the Throne, in December , stated that the Government w ould repeal the Three Waters legislation and restore council ownership and control, with stronger central government oversight, and strict rules for water quality and ongoing investment. . Moving towards sustainable long term investment in water services infrastructure through Local Water Done Well will play a critical role in supporting housing growth. ()(f)(iv) IN CONFIDENCE Page of Executive summary . Local Water Done Well sets out a clear direction for financially sustainable water services, underpinned by a robust regulatory system. It puts an emphasis on meeting regulatory standards, and the transparent and sustainable performance of these services but provides for local choice about the form of service delivery structures. . During June and July , I am seeking decisions on three papers, which together will give effect to the third stage of the Local Water Done Well programme: . Local Water Done Well stage : water services delivery system ECOMIN , June ; . Local Water Done Well stage : water services regulatory system ECOMIN , June ; . this paper Local Water Done Well stage : further decisions . . I expect to make announcements shortly, once decisions have been made on this final paper . This is likely to be around the same time as my second Bill , the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill, is enacted (August ). . This paper seeks the remaining policy decisions needed for legislative drafting for my third Bill the Local Government Water Services Bill proposed for introduction in December and enactment in mid . The proposals cover three main areas . . Firstly, there are additional proposals relating to local government water service s arrangements . These support and enable the approach set out in my paper, Local Water Done Well stage : water services delivery system ECOMIN . These proposals: . provide for modernised powers relating to water infrastructure and services, which are fit forpurpose for local government water service providers; . improve how stormwater networks are managed; . equip new water organisations with appropriate charging arrangements, including ensuring they can charge for growth; . address other miscellaneous matters relating to water organisations, including their tax status and transitional tax arrangements , and providing for an exemptions process relating to certain requirements that will apply to these organisations . . Second ly, I am seeking agreement to a proposed approach to consumer protection, which would complement the new economic regulation regime for local government water services . This approach has been developed with the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs . . Third ly, I am proposing further changes affecting Taumata Arowai and the water quality regulatory framework in the Water Services Act. These proposals include : . chang es to the criteria that are considered when appointing board members to Taumata Arowai; . ; ()(f)(iv) IN CONFIDENCE Page of . adding new statutory operating principles that apply to Taumata Arowai, so it focuses on cost considerations and works proactively with suppliers to ensure an appropriate path to regulatory compliance; . improv ing the arrangements that apply when Taumata Arowai considers general exemptions from aspects of the Water Services Act, including enabling exemptions to be issued proactively without the need for an application; . extending the scope and transitional timeframes associated with the authorisations fram ework provided for in the Water Services Act ; . an approach to mixed use rural drinking water supplies; . change s to provisions relating to the national wastewater network performance standards made by Taumata Arowai , to ensur e regional councils implement a single standard approach in resource consents, and cannot exceed the standard in consenting conditions apart from on an exceptions basis . . I am also proposing c hanges to the legislation to provide much clearer direction to all parties including Taumata Arowai, regional councils, territorial authorities, Crown suppliers and private drinking water suppliers about how they are expected to discharge their obligations in relation to Te Mana o te Wai . This involves: . repealing the requirements to give effect to Te Mana o te Wai in the Water Services Act and the Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act; and . including a new statutory operating principle that requires Taumata Arowai to take account of the National Policy Statement for Freshwater Management (NPS FM) and any regional freshwater plans as part of the exercise of its functions, duties and powers. . The National Policy Statement for Freshwater Management sets out the framework for Te Mana o te Wai, along with other frameworks, objectives and requirements related to freshwater management. Lifting the link to refer to the National Policy Statement for F reshwater Management has the benefit of linking Taumata Arowais decision making to broader freshwater planning, of which Te Mana o te Wai is only one aspect . Background . In February , we enacted the Water Services Acts Repeal Act . This fulfilled our commitments to repeal the previous governments unpopular water services legislation, restore local government responsibilities for water services, and put a halt to the establishment of the mega entities. . That was the first stage of the Local Water Done Well programme. As outlined in my February paper, Water Services Acts Repeal Bill: Approval for Introduction CAB MIN , the policy and legislative approach for implementing the new water services system will be progressed through two further Bills . . In March , I report ed back to the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) with the first set of policy proposals for the replacement regime . The Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill was introduced in May , and is expected to be enacted in August . That Bill sets the early foundations for the new system, and support s and progress es some initial activities . IN CONFIDENCE Page of . Through the February paper, I was invited to report back to ECO with the second set of policy proposals for the replacement regime, to inform a Bill to be passed in the second quarter of . It was noted that Bill will include provisions relating to long term requirements for financial sustainability, provide for a complete economic regulation regime, make amendments to the water quality regulato rs empowering legislation, and make refinements to the water services delivery system settings. . This is the third paper of a suite of papers, i n June and July , that reports back and seeks decisions on these matters. The first two papers sought agreement to: . a new approach to local government water service s delivery arrangements; . the establishment of a new economic regulation regime for local government water service providers; . some initial changes to the Water Services Act, to help reduce the regulatory compliance burden on small drinking water suppliers. . If agreed, the proposals in these papers will inform the development of the Local Government Water Services Bill . Once in place, this package of legislation will implement this Governments Local Water Done Well policy , and bring about a new approach to water services delivery and regulation . Report back and updates on matters in previous paper s . Following discussions about my June paper Local Water Done Well stage : water services regulatory system ECO MIN , I was invited to report back in this paper with further detail on the role and powers of the Crown facilitator and on drinking water standards. I have also included an update on some matters that were referred to in my other papers. Crown facilitator . The June paper included my proposals for a new assistance and intervention framework for water services. T hese will expand the range of Ministerial bodies that can be appointed under Part of the Local Government Act (LGA) to include two new bodies: a Crown facilitator water services, and Water Services Commissioners. . The role of the Crown facilitator water services is intended to build on a similar role that has been provided for in the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill, and extend s this role so it does not relate solely to the water services delivery plans provided for under that Bill. . I am anticipating a Crown facilitator water services could be appointed to deal with a range of situations that might arise with local government water service providers , both in the short and longer term . The legislation would be designed in a way that enables flexibility to determine what might be needed on a case bycase basis, depending on the circumstances. The specific nature of the role and powers would be set out in the appointees terms of referen ce, in accordance with the legislative framework. . The Crown facilitator may be particularly helpful in situations that involve identifying, negotiating and agreeing solutions across more than one council , and where councils would benefit from external assistance, expertise, and innovative thinking . IN CONFIDENCE Page of . This may be needed, for example, if councils are having difficulties finding financially sustainable water service delivery arrangements , and need help working with other councils in the region or negotiating appropriate long term contracts. It may be useful if relationships are breaking down between councils during the process for forming a jointly owned water organisation, or after such an organisa tion has begun operating. . An external expert, in the form of a Crown facilitator or a Water Services Commissioner , could bring councils together and help them to reach mutually agreeable terms. Depending on the situation, the y could be given powers to direct councils to take certain actions or decisions. This would be consistent with the powers that can be held by some other Ministerial appointees under Part of the LGA. Drinking water standards . The June paper ECOMIN proposed some initial amendments to the drinking water quality regulatory framework to help reduce the regulatory burden on drinking water suppliers. . Under o ne of the amendments , shared domestic drinking water suppliers serving consumers or fewer would be excluded from the regulation. This means the se suppliers would not be subject to the drinking water standards, or the wider Water Services Act under which those standards are made. These suppliers include those supplying nearby domestic properties such as where a farm supplies its neighbours. . Later in this paper, I am proposing further changes to the water regulatory framework, and to how Taumata Arowai operates . This includes a proposed approach to mixed use rural drinking water supplies. . Through these changes, I am seeking to ensure Taumata Arowai focuses on cost considerations , works proactively with suppliers to ensure an appropriate path to regulatory compliance, and has greater flexibility to consider exemptions from aspects of the regulatory framework (including, but not limited to, compliance with drinking water standards) . ()(f)(iv) IN CONFIDENCE Page of I have asked the Local Government Funding Agency to develop appropriate financing options for new water organisations . I have asked the LGFA and the Treasury to develop options that would enable the LGFA to lend to the new water organisations, to provide confidence to councils that suitable financial solutions will be available. The LGFA are considering how they can provid e increased lending flexibility and lending to new water organisations. This includes an assessment of the LGFAs lending policies and covenants, lending margins, the form and level of shareholder and guarantor support, and the form and scope of Crown supp ort including the level of the Crown Standby Liquidity Facility. . Without borrowing from the LGFA (with the support of shareholding councils), many new water organisations would otherwise struggle to access finance until they have transitioned to a state of revenue sufficiency and a proven operating history. A transition path can allow councils to progress, on timelines pegged to the strengthening financial sustainability of their water organisation, from council guaranteed LGFA lending to non council guaranteed LGFA lending. Such a moderated timeline is likely to be need ed for councils that wish to progress financially independent water organisations . . The LGFA work programme will not be completed until November . However, the LGFA can already provide financing to council guaranteed council controlled organisations, . . In discussions with officials from the Treasury and the Department of Internal Affairs , the LGFA has indicated they can support higher leverage for water CCOs up to around twice that of existing councils, subject to their meeting prudent credit criteria. I am advised this would be around percent of revenue akin to the level of leverage y ou would expect see for water utilities of this type. Councils will also benefit as they can reduce their exposure to water debt. The LGFA will also look at extending its lending to higher growth councils up to percent of revenue . . . . The outcomes of both the rating agency evaluation of water organisation design features and the LGFA work programme will form part of the Governments wider suite of policy announcements related to Local Water Done Well in August . As part of the announcement, I will provide a roadmap for councils on future financing options for new financially independent water organisations. Engagement with iwiMori and Treaty analysis . My June paper ECOMIN included a section on the Treaty of Waitangi and Treaty settlement obligations . It noted that I have asked the Department of Internal Affairs to engage with iwi to ensure the potential impacts of Local Water Done Well on Mori interests and Post Settlement Governance Entities are understood . . I was invited to report back on the outcomes of this engagement as part of the paper that seeks Cabinet approval to introduce the Local Government Water Services Bill, anticipated in November . ()(g)(i) ()(f)(iv) IN CONFIDENCE Page of . The LGA provides for councils to recognise and respect the Crowns Treaty obligations, including providing for specific responsibilities to Mori communities. Councils also have specific obligations under Treaty settlement arrangements. It is my intentio n that these obligations will continue to apply regardless of the future arrangements that councils choose to use for their water services delivery . . As part of its coalition agreements, the Government intends to rebalance Te Mana o te Wai as part of the National Policy Statement for Freshwater Management. The proposals in this paper are not intended to affect this process, nor to limit broader rights and interests that iwi and Mori have in freshwater. . The regulatory impact statement that accompanies this paper includes an analysis of the proposals from a Treaty of Waitangi perspective. Appointment of a Crown monitor for the interim economic regulation of Watercare . The Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill will give me the authority to appoint a Crown monitor for the interim economic regulation of Watercare (Crown monitor), as soon as the Bill is enacted. . . . . . I have discussed this matter with the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs . Analysis Further decisions relating to local government water service s delivery arrangements . In my p revious paper , Local Water Done Well stage : water services delivery system , decisions were made on my proposals for local government water service s provision. . These decisions pave the way for the legislation to enable councils to choose to deliver water services through a range of models, including: . direct delivery by councils with services provided in house; . separate council owned water organisations, which could include: .. water council controlled organisations and water council controlled trading organisations (CCOs and CCTOs) owned by single or multiple councils, building on models currently in the LGA; ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) IN CONFIDENCE Page of .. organisations owned by multiple councils, which are intended to be financially independent from a credit rating perspective; . separate water organisations owned by consumer trusts or with mixed ownership (by councils and consumer trusts), which are intended to be financially independent from a credit rating perspective. . That paper also sought agreement to the minimum requirements that would apply to all water service providers (that is, all of the above models , and any alternative arrangements chosen by councils ), and some additional requirements relating to the ownership, governance and structural arrangements of water organisations. . As I indicated in that paper, additional provisions will be needed in the legislation to support and enable the proposed approach to water service s delivery arrangements relating to new water organisations, in particular. There are also a number of areas that councils and water organisations will be able to determine for themselves. . I have been considering advice on a range of detailed and technical matters, and am now seeking decisions on the proposals that need to be given effect through legislation. These are discussed further below. . It is important to address many of these matters because water organisations will be separate from the councils that establish and own them. The legislation and standard approaches that currently apply to councils will not and, in some respects, should not automatically apply to water organisations . We need to equip water service providers with modern and fit forpurpose powers relating to water infrastructure and services Modernised powers to carry out work on land, control connections, and manage other issues . Current legislation relating to water services has often fallen behind similar legislation that applies to other utilities in New Zealand or other jurisdictions. It is generally old, often contains gaps, and is spread across multiple Acts. The application of this legislation can be challenging for some councils, particularly where they lack capability or ready access to legal advice. . I have identified several areas in which modernising the legislation relating to water service providers functions and powers would enable more effective delivery of water services. This would help to reduce costs, streamline processes, and support priori ties such as urban development. . I am proposing changes in the following areas: . Powers for water service providers to control connections to water services and infrastructure. These are powers that enable councils to approve connections by private individuals or businesses to water supply, wastewater andor stormwater infrastructure, and include the ability to set design or engineering requirements. These powers are a critical part of urban development. Modernisation should reduce compliance costs by providing greater certainty and consistency. Water organisations is the general term used to refer to all of the models of water service provider except where councils continue with direct in house delivery. The term water service provider includes all forms of water service provider and councils. IN CONFIDENCE Page of . Powers for water service providers to carry out work on land in relation to water services infrastructure . These are powers that are required by all kinds of utility providers (water, telecommunications, electricity, and gas) to ensure infrastructure can be constructed or maintained, particularly where it is on private property or underground. The proposed ch anges will simplify and streamline the use of these powers, while providing appropriate protections for all parties, and are important for both ongoing maintenance and new development. . A modernised approach t o the current bylaw regime relating to water services . Councils use bylaws to control water catchments (such as reservoirs), manage trade waste, and to set restrictions relating water supply or wastewater infrastructure use (for example, sprinkler use during droughts, or disposing of toxic substances in toil ets or drains). I am proposing the current system is replaced or supplemented with new, fitforpurpose statutory provisions , including requirements for management plans and enforc ement rules . This will enable more effective and consistent management, while still addressing local issues and needs. . I am seeking agreement to provide in the legislation for modernised powers relating to water services infrastructure, including powers for water service providers (councils and water organisations) to: . control connections to water services infrastructure ; . carry out work on land relating to water services infrastructure . . I am also seeking agreement to provide for a modernised approach to the bylaw system relating to water services. I expect t his would include statutory provisions covering the following areas. . Firstly, the legislation will need to enable water service providers to control drinking water catchments by specifying land within a controlled drinking water catchment area , which would be covered by a water catchment management plan. . These plans would set out arrangements for the control and protection of the area, including access , activities that might be undertaken , use of water , and restrictions or prohibitions regarding contamination of water in the area. Any rules with respect to land that is not owned or controlled by the water service provider would only be by agreement with the owner. . Secondly, water service providers will need to be enabled to manage trade waste . This is commercial and industrial liquid waste that is discharged into the wastewater system. I am proposing t his would be done through trade waste plans (developed with local consultation ), and supported by a system of permits, certification and registration. Domestic customers would also be subject to this regime if discharges were beyond a normal household level (for example, a home workshop working with toxic chem icals ). This is not intended to apply in relation to Crown land. Legislation relating to Crown land in general, and public conservation land, already contains mechanisms to enable access, providing the activities and access are consistent with the lands status and legislative purposes. IN CONFIDENCE Page of . Trade waste plans would set out conditions on the quality, quantity and timing of discharges , as well as testing. Local plans will allow flexibility in controlling the thresholds and conditions for discharges to meet local conditions for example, the capacity or vulnerability of local systems. Customers will be able to seek a review of a permitting decision, possibly through the court system. . Each of t he above approaches will need to be underpinned by an offence regime to enable appropriate and effective enforcement. The legislation will also need to enable water service providers to manage water supply and wastewater services with offence and infringement tools. . I anticipate t he legislation will include necessary offences and penalties (including infringements), with penalties modelled on similar offences in other legislation . The Department of Internal Affairs will work with the Ministry of Justice to develop the details needed for legislative drafting. . The legislation will also need to provide for detailed transitional arrangements , cover ing matters such as timeframes, suspension of current mandatory bylaw revie ws during the transition period, revocation of bylaws (if relevant) , and appropriate safeguards and requirements around the forming of new management regimes (which will function as secondary legislation). . I am seeking delegated authority to approve matters that may arise during the course of drafting and may be required to align with the decisions in this paper . This would include approving detailed matters relating to these proposals. Supporting long term contracting arrangements . Sections and of the LGA relate to contracts and joint arrangements for water services. Under these provisions, local government organisations (councils and CCOs ) can enter into contracts and joint local government arrangements with one another without restriction. However, there are limitations on the length of contracts and joint arrangements that involve third parties (such as the private sector) . . The maximum length of a contract or joint arrangement for water services involving bodies that are not local government organisations is years. . I am not considering changes to these sections of the LGA other than to ensure new water organisations are also considered to be local government organisations in future. However, I am interested in views on whether the maximum length of a contract or joint arrangement should be extended to years. This woul d reflect the long lifespan of water infrastructure, and the potential opportunities to enter into longer contracts. . I am seeking a decision on whether the maximum length of contracts and joint arrangements relating to water services should remain at years or be extended to years instead. For example, the Local Government Act , the Resource Management Act , the Water Services Act , Te Ture Whenua Mori Act (where relevant) and other utilities legislation . IN CONFIDENCE Page of . There are concerns about the capacity of local government organisations to effectively design and manage long term contracts. The prevalence of information gaps on New Zealands water network further complicates effective design and management of longer term contracts. . The current year limit is consistent with the common length of public private partnership contracts globally (about to years). It is also the maximum period for which resource consent s can be granted , for taking water and discharges . This effectively puts third party providers on the same footing for recovering capital costs as councils, which typically repay debt for a new water treatment plant over a term of between and years. . An argument can be made for extending the limit to years, as this may enable certain types of public private partnerships, such as build , design and operate cont racts, for high capital expenditure assets. The development costs of the asset could be recovered over a longer period or to match the economic life of the asset, which can lead to low costs per annum for providing this infrastructure. . Regardless of whether changes are made in this respect, I am exploring potential mechanisms for providing the local government sector with support to enter into successful long term contracting arrangements. Support mechanisms could include guidance materi al and targeted assistance for councils. We also need mechanisms to improve how s tormwater networks are managed and help reduce risks to people and property . Overland flow paths and urban watercourses are an urban areas natural drainage system providing critical overflow capacity for the stormwater network. While stormwater network infrastructure has been designed to collect and divert stormwater from urban development, in almost all c ases it will discharge that stormwater to the nearest overland flow path or urban watercourse. . Private ownership, uncertainty around legal responsibilities, limited regulatory tools , and information gaps are key challenges that affect the protection and maintenance of the conveyance capacity of overland flow paths and urban watercourses . These issues are exacerbated by urban intensification and climate change. . Together , these challenges mean that initiatives to protect and maintain the conveyance capacity of urban watercourses are difficult to implement and more likely to be reactive than proactive. This can expose people and property to significant flood risks. A lack of proactive interventions and maintenance was identified as a contributing factor to flooding impacts on properties in the Auckland floods in January . . Regional councils, territorial authorities, and transport corridor managers all have overlapping responsibilities for managing the impacts of stormwater in urban areas. Stormwater network infrastructure owned by other public agencies and private property o wners is often physically connected to council stormwater network s. Local context may also affect how those responsibilities are allocated. Improving the integrated management of stormwater and its impacts relies on effective coordination across those agen cies and networks. IN CONFIDENCE Page of . I have identified some mechanisms to support integration between key agencies and improv e the management of overland flow paths and urban watercourses . My proposals fall into the following related areas: . specify ing territorial authority and private landowner statutory roles and responsibilities ; . enabling new planning and regulatory tools through stormwater network risk management plans and stormwater rules to support riskbased management of overland flow paths and urban watercourses ; . enabling territorial authorit ies, regional council s, and transport corridor managers to put in place service agreements to support the integrated management of stormwater networks. Roles, responsibilities, and new planning and regulatory tools . I am proposing to include provisions in the legislation that state that territorial authorities are responsible for managing and maintaining the stormwater network in their city or district (service areas) including overland flow paths and urban watercourses that are both on private land and related to the operation of the stormwater network in urban areas . . As part of this approach, the legislation w ill require territorial authorities to: . develop a stormwater network risk management plan to identify significant risks and hazards that impact on the function of critical stormwater network assets ; . work with private landowners as required to protect and maintain the conveyance capacity of overland flow paths and urban watercourses ; . develop (as required) stormwater rules that would provide direction to private landowners on their responsibilities for maintenance and protection of the conveyance capacity of overland flow paths and urban watercourses on their land . . The legislation w ill provide for these stormwater rules and associated rule making powers to support the management of overland flow paths and urban watercourses on private land . The se would : . be made pursuant to stormwater network risk management plans ; . set out landowner duties including access to land, and notification requirements ; . replace current bylaw making powers as they relate to the urban stormwater network. . The legislation w ill also include requirements relating to stormwater network risk management plans. These plans would have an operational focus, and require stormwater network operators to : . adopt a risk based approach to identify any hazards that would impact on critical stormwater network assets , including (without limitation) emerging or potential hazards; IN CONFIDENCE Page of . assess any risks to the operation of the network, including any risks to people or property that are associated with those hazards; . identify how those risks are to be managed, controlled, monitored, or eliminated. . The intention is that the plans will improve flood risk information , to inform proactive management of hazards and risks to the operation of the stormwater network, and to people and property. They will also provide a framework for stormwater rules to support the management of overland flow paths and urban watercourses on private land . . Prior to being finalised, stormwater network risk management plans w ill be provided by the territorial authority to Taumata Arowai for review and comment. This w ill complement the approach to risk management plans that has been adopted for drinking water and wastewater in the Water Services Act . It would provide an opportunity for Taumata Arowai to issue guidance and align environmental standards for stormwater management to improve consistency. . I am also proposing the legislation w ill set out private landowners statutory rights and responsibilities in relation to overland flow paths or urban watercourses that are on their land. This would include provisions to the effect that: . where a landowner impairs or alters an overland flow path or watercourse, without resource consent or in breach of a stormwater rule they would be responsible for either eliminating the impairment or meeting the costs of the territorial authority, if they do that on the landowner s behalf; . a private landowner would not be responsible for an impairment or alteration of a stormwater network if that impairment or alteration was caused by the act or omission of another person; . a private landowner would be required to notify the relevant territorial authority before undertaking any work that might affect the stormwater network. Service agreements . Stormwater management has a range of interfaces and overlapping jurisdictions . This means different parties need to work together to manage their respective statutory roles and functions to support the integrated management of the stormwater network . . Service agreements can be a useful mechanism for managing the interactions between these parties. Many councils already use similar service level agreements to man age cross agency interactions. T hese agreements can set out the roles and responsibilities of each party, how they will work together and share information, and a dispute resolution process. . I am seeking agreement that the legislation provides for an enabling framework for the development of service agreements , which can be used by territorial authorities , water organisations and other agencies to support the integrated management of the stormwater network . IN CONFIDENCE Page of . The legislation will include the core features of these agreements, but their use would not be mandatory. This approach reflects the cooperative nature of the agreements, and the need to provide some flexibility for the parties to adopt arrangements that are appropriate to lo cal circumstances. Definitions . Finally, I consider the legislation should reflect the complex relationship between stormwater networks and transport corridor stormwater infrastructure. . Stormwater infrastructure in transport corridors has been developed to enable the transport functions of those corridors. To protect that transport function, particularly in relation to local roads , which (apart from Auckland) are owned and operated by territorial authorities, I am propos ing the legislation define s transport stormwater infrastructure, by recognising that the primary purpose of that infrastructure is for transport purposes. . The defin ition of transport stormwater infrastructure will include the infrastructure that is owned or operated by a transport corridor manager to collect or discharge stormwater relating to a transport function of the corridor . . The intention is that the definition recognise s and protect s the transport function and investment in this infrastructure. It w ill not include matter s related to the operation, maintenance or level of service related to transport stormwater infrastructure. While these are important issues for integrated management across those stormwater networks , I consider service agreements should be the primary mechanism to ensure territorial authorities and transport corridor manage rs work effectively together within their respective statutory responsibilities . We need to consider various matters relating to c harging for water services , including ensuring water organisations can charge for growth Charg ing and billing for water services . In my previous paper, it was agreed that the legislation will enable water organisations to assess, set and collect water services charges separate from their owner councils. I am now seeking agreement to further details to support and enable this approach. . Water charges are currently included as part of council rates (except for Watercare, which bills property owners directly). The Local Government (Rating) Act provides a framework for identifying who is liable to pay rates (that is, who is the ratepaye r), which broadly aligns with who owns the property. . The new legislation will need to include a suitably modified version of the current legislative framework, to enable water organisations to identify which ratepayers should be charged for water services. . I am not proposing any changes to the way usage charges are assessed for residential properties, or changes to the existing arrangements that apply for tenants and landlord s. Current arrangements would continue, whereby bills for water charges are raised directly with the property owner, but tenants are liable for any consumption related component of that bill. IN CONFIDENCE Page of . Water organisations will need to be able to contact their customers to communicate any new arrangements, and to bill them for water charges. I am proposing the legislation require s councils to share relevant billing information with water organisations (to enable the identification of ratepayers) , and councils are allowed to charge a reasonable fee for this service. . When a new water organisation is set up, there may be a period in which the obligation to provide water services has been transferred but the necessary billing systems are not yet in place. If this occurs, the council(s) and water organisation will be willing participants who have agreed to the of transfer. It is reasonable to expect they will cooperate to develop any pass through billing arrangements that may be needed. . I do not consider the legislation needs to include transitional provisions to deal with these kinds of billing arrangements. However, there may be situations where a water organisation is formed and begins charging for services part way through a rating ye ar. This may cause issues where rates are charged over the course of the full year, even if the component of the rates related to water charges is calculated based on the part of the year the council provides water services. This may mean that a consumer i s paying for water charges to both a council and a water organisation at the same time. . I am seeking agreement that the legislation can include any technical amendments that are needed to cater for these situations . Unconnected properties . There is a question about whether properties should attract water cha rges where there is no active connection to the water supply. Under current arrangements, the treatment of these properties differs from council to council. In most cases, though, unconnected prop erties that are serviceable by the network are charged water related rates. . I am proposing the legislation allows water organisations to charge a serviceability fee to properties that could be, but are not, connected to the water network. This fee is for the option to connect to the water network, recognis ing that the owners of these properties receive a benefit from the network through increased property values, and from any fire hydrants located nearby. Interaction with the Rates Rebate Scheme . The Rates Rebate Scheme provides support to low income owner occupiers. Just over , households currently receive a rates rebate, about percent of which receive New Zealand Superannuation. The level of subsidy available to a household depends on bo th their income and their rates bill. . Councils administer the Rates Rebate Scheme, and the rebates are funded by the Crown . The a ctual costs of the Scheme fluctuate based on demand , and the Department of Internal Affairs has a statutory obligation to reimburse councils for any rebates granted to eligible ratepayers. C osts for the year were . million and an appropriation of up to million per year is in place for and outyears. . Except for ratepayers in Auckland, who pay water charges to Watercare, water costs are included as part of rates under the current arrangements. The water charges that Watercare issues are not considered rates and so are not eligible for the rates rebate. IN CONFIDENCE Page of . When water charges are split out from rates bills, some recipients of a rates rebate would receive a lower rebate, even though their total expenses (rates and water) may not have changed. This is because under current legislation the rebate would be applie d to the rates bill only, and not the water charges. . I am seeking agreement to amend the definition of rates in the Rates Rebate Act to include water charges. This will mean ratepayers will not receive different levels of rebate depending on whether they are billed for water charges as part of their rates bill, or separately th rough a water organisation. . I am advised th is amendment will result in a per annum increase in the cost of the Rates Rebate Scheme. This reflects that the Crown would need to fund additional rates rebates for Auckland ratepayers, as water charges paid to Watercare would now be considered rates and would be eligible for the rebate . The additional costs can be met from within the existing appropriation for the immediate future, meaning no immediate changes to the Crowns fiscal forecasts are required . However, as the scheme is periodically adjusted for macroeconomic factors, such as CPI, the new definition of rates will impact adjustments required over the longer term. . The proposal will create an additional administrative burden on councils who currently administer the Rates Rebate Scheme as they would have to assess water charges as well as rates bills. To mitigate this, I am proposing that water organisations should be required to share information on the amount of water charges paid by consumer s during the rating year , with the administering council . This would enable a streamlined application and assessment process for eligible ratepayers and councils . Charging for growth by water organisations . Under Local Water Done Well, some councils will choose to shift their water services delivery into separate water organisations. As agreed in my previous paper, these water organisations will be given the power to set their water charges directly and indep endently. . Water organisations will need a specific mechanism to directly charge for new or additional demand on water infrastructure. This will help to achieve financial sustainability, through funding appropriately for growth and keeping water charges to existing r atepayers lower than otherwise. It would also support the Governments housing and urban development objectives. . Wider work is underway by officials from the Minist ry of Housing and Urban Development and the Department of Internal Affairs to improve infrastructure funding settings as part of the Governments Going for Housing Growth policy . . . Until any future policy and legislative changes are made in this respect, I am proposing as an interim measure that water organisations should be enabled to use the development contributions regime in the L GA , with the necessary modifications. . I am seeking agreement that the legislation can enable a flexible approach in which: . water organisations are able to develop their own development contributions policy; ()(b)(ii) ()(f)(iv) IN CONFIDENCE Page of . as an alternative to a separate water organisation development contributions policy, a water organisation and a council within its service area could agree to development contributions set by the water organisation being included in the council s policy; . a council within a water organisations service area can administer the organisations development contributions policy on its behalf . . There will need to be appropriate transitional arrangements , to ensure a smooth transition to charging for the growth related costs of water services infrastructure from a council to a water organisation . . I am also proposing that the Infrastructure Funding and Financing Act be amended so that the Infrastructure Funding and Financing model can be used for water services infrastructure that is to be vested with a water organisation . I note that amendments to this Act to enable it to be used by water organisations will be progressed as part of the Infrastructure Funding and Financing Act Amendment Bill, and not as part of the Local Government Water Services Bill. . I am not proposing that water organisations will be able to charge financial contributions under the Resource Management Act (RMA) . Financial contributions are an unsuitable funding tool for water organisations. It is more appropriate to allow water organisations to recover the costs attributable to growth by charging development contributions instead. Debt collection and powers of receivers relating to water organisations . In my previous paper, I noted that water organisations will need the ability to collect overdue amounts. It was agreed that the legislation will include provisions to the effect that those organisations should rely on commerc ial debt practices to address this. . I also noted that additional options were being explored, and I would provide further advice in this paper. . I am not recommending that water organisations have stronger powers to collect overdue amounts from customers. However, I consider it would be desirable for the legislation to include provisions that deal with situations in which a water organisation itself defaults on a debt. . The LGA and Receiverships Act contain longstanding provisions that allow a receiver to be appointed where a council defaults on a debt. Among other things, a receiver may collect rates to repay the debt. These provisions are a modification of standa rd receivership arrangements that include safeguards reflecting the special character of local authorities for example, a receiver may not act in a way that interferes with services that are essential to public health and safety. They are necessary to pr ovide lenders confidence that, if a local authority defaults on a debt, the lender can recoup the loan. IN CONFIDENCE Page of . The Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill contains similar provisions that apply directly to Watercare if it defaults on a debt. These are needed as financial separation of Watercare and Auckland Council will mean that receivers w ill no longer be able to rely on the powers granted to them under the LGA to collect Watercare debts from Auckland Council ratepayers. The receiver will be able to levy water services charges on consumers rather than collect rates, as rating is not possi ble for Watercare. . New water organisations that achieve financial separation from their parent councils will need similar provisions to ensure receivers can act appropriately in the event that a water organisation defaults on a debt. I am proposing the legislation includes provisions that would: . allow the receiver to assess and collect for a given financial year both the amounts owed by the water organisation for that year and the reasonable costs incurred in collecting that amount ; . prohibit the receiver from having any interest or security in water services infrastructure assets; . allow the receiver to collect the amount through water services charges assessed on consumers. Other matters relating to water organisations Enabling e xemptions to be sought from some of the minimum requirements that will apply to water organisations . In my June paper ECO MIN , it was agreed the legislation will include a set of minimum requirements that w ill apply to all water service providers including water organisations, and councils that continue with in house delivery. It was also agreed there will be additional requirements for water organisations , and further requirements for water organisations that involve consumer trusts . . I am aware t here may be situations in which a council s preferred water service delivery arrangements may not meet some of these requirements. For example, one council has already approached me about transferring their water services and assets to an existing, locally owned co operative in their region. The co operative owns and operates the regions electricity distribution network and a fibre o ptic communications network. . The council in question sees several benefits arising from their proposal, including preservation of community ownership and a reflection of the districts distinct community identity, as well as significant benefits from an economic regulation perspective as the lines company is already a regulated entity. This solution shows an innovative approach from a council that is considering alternative options to achieve financial sustainability and accelerate their ability to respond to economic regulation. Howev er, the solution itself does not meet all of the minimum criteria that have been agreed for future water organisations, such as activities of water organisations will be limited to the provision of water services, and directly related activities ECO MIN . IN CONFIDENCE Page of . As important part of Local Water Done Well is providing councils with the flexibility to identify and establish the deliver y arrangements that work for them . However, I also recognis e there are some minimum requirements and expectations that are non negotiable. This is particularly the case with regard to privatisation, which will not be permitted under any circumstances , as well as requirements for financial sustainability and meeting regulatory standards . . To achieve an appropriate balance between these factors , I am proposing the legislation includes a process that enables councils to seek an exemption from some of the minimum requirements that are due to apply to water organisations. This approach w ill allow for a case bycase consideration of each proposal, and maintain a clear set of requirements for water organisations in legislation. . Having a clear process will introduce flexibility into the water organisation requirements and give councils a broader scope to develop their future service delivery arrangements. The flexibility can be balanced by: . limiting the requirements that are eligible for an exemption; . ensuring the appropriate level of approval for exemptions; . the assessment criteria and process associated with considering exemptions. . I am proposing that the ability to seek and grant an exemption w ill apply to the following legislative requirements , only : . water organisations must be companies; . activities of water organisations will be limited to the provision of water services, and directly related activities; . ; . only councils or consumer trusts can be shareholders of a water organisation. . The legislation w ill place further limits on exemptions to ensure that no form of privatisation is permitted. This w ill let councils develop proposals , similar to the energy trust model seen in consumer owned power distribution companies. . Councils w ill be required to submit exemption applications to the Secretary for Local Government (the Chief Executive of the Department of Internal Affairs ). The Secretary will assess applications, and work with the Commerce Commission, Taumata Arowai and Inland Revenue to provide advice to the Minister of Local Government . . The assessment , advice and final recommendations will be based on whether the councils proposal for water services: . meets the legislative objectives of Local Water Done Well; . maintains the core requirements that are nonnegotiable bottom lines for all water organisations , including that the proposal and scope of the exemption do not involve any form of privatisation; . will provide water services that are financially sustainable; ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) IN CONFIDENCE Page of . satisfies me th at the financial sustainability of water services would be put at greater risk if the exemption were not granted . . Exemption approvals w ill be granted through Order in Council, made on the recommendation of the Minister of Local Government . This w ill provide an appropriate level of Cabinet oversight of decisions that involve exempting councils from statutory requirements as well as public transparency about the outcome of those decisions. . The exemptions process w ill include the ability to as the case may be : . grant an exemption from a requirement through Order in Council; . modify a requirement if a full exemption is not needed; . impose additional conditions on water organisations; . decline the exemption application. . Councils that have an exemption application approved and then go on to rely on that exemption when forming a new water organisation will be required to provide information on this matter on their websites. Transitional tax issues . Currently water services are mostly supplied by councils, which are all primarily exempt from income tax under the Income Tax Act . It is expected that in future some councils will transfer water infrastructure assets, and responsibility to supply water services, to new water organisations. . If councils decide to transfer water services, they will need to consider existing legislation that applies with respect to tax obligations and employees . In the absence of any amendment to tax legislation, this may have tax implications for both the council and water organisation. . The general tax policy approach to facilitating restructuring in response to changes in Government policy is to provide specific transitional tax relief in legislation, with the broad policy objective of enabling reform to be carried out on a tax neutral b asis and to remove any tax consequences arising solely from the restructure. ()(b)(ii), ()(f)(iv) IN CONFIDENCE Page of . Consistent with this approach, I am proposing the legislation includes new provisions that treat the transferor and transferee as the same person for the purposes of the Income Tax Act and Goods and Services Tax Act . This would apply when council s transfer water services to a water organisation, or when water services are transferred from a single council water organisation to a multi council water organisation. This will allow those transfers to occur without triggering income tax or GST conseque nces and provide a tax neutral result. . This is a situation that has been dealt with a number of times in the past, such as the transfer of electricity services in , and the amalgamation of district health boards into Health New Zealand in . . A feature of these examples was that the transfers were mandatory and had to happen within a set period. There is no mandated transfer in the case of water services. I am therefore recommending making the new tax relief provisions available for a period of five years from enactment, as they are intended to be transitional provisions only. Tax status of water organisations . Councils are tax exempt, but are able to form CCOs that are subject to income tax. One of the reasons CCOs pay tax is because they may be operating in areas where they are competing with private enterprise s meaning they should be subject to the same conditions, including being subject to income tax, to allow their performance relative to private enterprise to be compared. . This will not be the case for water organisations, as water services are inherently a monopoly market with a sole provider. . Water organisations will either be owned by one or more councils, one or more consumer trusts, or potentially a combination of the two. I expect councils considering whether or not to transfer water services into a new water organisation will take tax status into account, as income from water services delivered in house by councils is not taxable. . I consider the new water organisations are similar to public purpose Crown controlled companies (e.g., Crown Infrastructure Partners, City Rail Link Limited). An income tax exemption is provided to these companies if the entity : . is solely owned by the Crown, or majority owned by the Crown with only local authorit ies or other tax exempt entities as its other shareholders; . is not engaged primarily in a commercial activity with a profit making objective. . These criteria are applied because the purpose of the exemption is to: . reduce compliance costs for the entity without reducing government revenue or creating economic distortions (meaning there should not be any private sector investors involved to benefit from the exemption ); . to exempt entities whose primary purposes are to assist in carrying out the Governments social objectives, rather than to make profits. General tax rules would continue to apply to any transactions after that timeframe, including existing rules contained in Schedule of the LGA . IN CONFIDENCE Page of . I am proposing to g rant tax exempt status to water organisations . I consider water organisations satisfy the criteria above. While it may be the case that the y will seek to make a profit from their day today operations, this will be for the purpose of funding capital expenditure on water infrastructure. . The prohibition on distributions to shareholders discussed below ensures that private individuals will not be able to receive a private pecuniary benefit or profit from the income tax exemption. . Additionally, if a water organisation is wound up, there will need to be a requirement that assets must be transferred to another water organisation or to a council on wind up. This ensures that a taxable consumer trust or private shareholder would not receive any of the water organisations assets (including any untaxed accumulated gains). . If a council applies for an exemption from a minimum requirement for water organisations (see previous section) , their tax status may be affected if they no longer meet the criteria discussed above. Ability to borrow in foreign currency . The LGA prohibits councils from borrowing in foreign currency, but is silent on whether CCOs are able to do so. In , a legislative amendment was made to allow Auckland Council, and thereby Watercare, to borrow in foreign currency due to its large bo rrowing programmes. . Many water organisations (which may include a form of CCO) will need to borrow significant amounts to meet infrastructure costs. As the total amount of borrowing required for water infrastructure is expected to exceed the amount of New Zealand based lendin g available ), I am proposing the legislation explicitly allows water organisations to borrow in foreign currency. . Water organisations would also be allowed to enter into incidental arrangements, such as derivatives and hedges, which allow water organisations to reduce their exposure to currency volatility. Rateability of land and assets owned by water organisations . I am proposing that land transferred to water organisations should be rateable. I propose the legislation requires land owned by water organisations, and assets that are owned by the organisation but located on or under land the organisation does not own, should be rateable. This aligns with the way that land and assets of other network providers, such as electricity and telecommunications, are rated. . Councils will have the option to remit those rates if they decide that the water organisation, which they will likely be shareholders in, should not have to pay them. ()(g)(i) IN CONFIDENCE Page of . Under the Local Government (Auckland Council) Act , Watercare has bespoke arrangements for rateability of its land and assets. Watercare is not required to pay rates on assets it owns, if those assets are on land that it does not own. Watercare is required to pay rates on land that it owns; however, the rates are subject to a special calculation. These rules relating to land and assets are concessionary towards Watercare and were agree d as part of the negotiations during the formation of the Auckland Co uncil in . I am not recommending changes to these rules for Watercare or extending them to other water organisations. Civil Defence Emergency Management cost sharing arrangements . I am proposing the current Civil Defence Emergency Management cost sharing arrangements with the Crown would apply directly to water organisations. This will ensure financial separation of water organisations and allow them to directly seek partial reimbur sement from the Crown for emergency expenses. . The Civil Defence Emergency Management Act (CDEM Act) enables the Crown, without further appropriation, to reimburse or pay a local authority for expenses it incurs because of an emergency, as long as the criteria in a Government policy in force befor e the emergency occurred are met. This provision of the CDEM Act will need to be amended to also refer directly to water organisations. . Objectives and principles for government financial support are in the National Civil Defence Emergency Management Plan Order (the National Plan), which is secondary legislation. The National Plan will also need to be amended to include water organisat ions. . The current financial arrangements (set by Cabinet) are in Section of the Guide to the National Plan. These arrangements include that, above a threshold, the Crown will partially reimburse local authorities at percent for certain essential infrastruc ture recovery repairs following an emergency (the cost sharing arrangements). . . For instance, the threshold that needs to be met before eligibility for reimbursement is based on a fixed percentage of the capital value of the area of the local authority. How the threshold is calculated will need to be reconsidered to ensure it is appropriate for both water organisations and local authorities after water infrastructure assets have been transferred, and remains fiscally neutral overall for the Crown. . I am seeking agreement that these further policy decisions are delegated to myself, the Minister of Finance, and the Minister for Emergency Management and Recovery.
I N C O N F I D E N C E Page of In Confidence Office of the Minister of Local Government Chair Cabinet Legislation Committee
I N C O N F I D E N C E Page of The Act allow s changes to the Schemes key settings . Section () of the Act states the maximum rebate and the income abatement threshold. Section () of the Act enables the maximum rebate and the income abatement threshold to be amended by way of Order in Council. . In , the Government agreed that the maximum rebate and income abatement threshold of the Scheme would be increased by Order in Council on July each year. The amount of the increase would reflect the upward movement of the CPI for the previous calendar y ear Cab Min () () refers . Uptake and forecast cost s (excluding GST) of the Scheme . The current appropriation for the Scheme is based on forecasts that include projected annual price and volume changes as a result of adjusting the maximum rebate and income threshold for upward movement in CPI . . The total cost of the Scheme for , the most recently completed financial year, was . million. For the Department expects to receive million worth of claims. . The appropriation for the Scheme was increased by million during the March Baseline Update. The Schemes appropriation for the remainder of the financial year and outyears is now million. The Department will continue to monitor the uptake of the Scheme for the remainder of the year and will advise you if the situation changes. . If a change to the appropriation is required over the financial year, this will be made through the October or March Budget baseline update p rocesses in consultation with the Minister of Finance MCT MIN refers. Compliance . The Order complies with the: .. principles of the Treaty of Waitangi; .. rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act and the Human Rights Act ; .. principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act ; .. relevant international standards and obligations; and .. Legislative Advisory Committee Guidelines: Guidelines on Process and Content of Legislation. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government I N C O N F I D E N C E
I N C O N F I D E N C E Page of Regulations Review Committee . I do not consider that there are grounds under Standing Order for the Regulations Review Committee to bring the Order to the attention of the House. Certification by Parliamentary Counsel . The Order has been approved by Parliamentary Counsel as being appropriate for submission to Cabinet. Climate Implications of Policy Assessment . The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team has been consulted and confirms that the CIPA requirements do not apply to this proposal as the threshold for significance is not met. Regulatory impact analysis . The Treasurys Regulatory Impact Analysis team has determined that this proposal to adjust the settings for the Rates Rebate Scheme is exempt from the requirement to provide a Regulatory Impact Statement on the g rounds that it has no or only minor impacts on businesses, individuals, and not forprofit entities. Proactive release and publicity . As per Cabinet Office Circular CO () Proactive Release of Cabinet Material: Requirements , I intend to proacti vely release this paper on the Departments website, subject to any redactions that may be warranted under the Official Information Act , within business days of decisions being taken. . The Department will inform local authorities of the changes to t he Schemes settings. Grey Power, Age Concern, and retirement village associations will also be informed as these organisations represent a significant proportion of people who receive rates rebates. Taituar will also be informed, and the new settings wil l be shown on the Departments website. Consultation . The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, the Treasury, the Ministry of Social Development, the Office for Disability Issues and the Office for Seniors were consulted on the proposal. Additionally, although this falls out of their portfolio, Te Puni Kkiri has also been informed. Recommendations . The Minister of Local Government recommends that the Cabinet Legislation Committee: . note that on April the Government agreed that the maximum rebate and income abatement threshold of the Rates Rebate Scheme would be increased by Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government I N C O N F I D E N C E
I N C O N F I D E N C E Page of Order in Council on July each year to reflect the upward movement of the All Groups Index of the Consumer Price Index CAB Min () () refers; . agree that the Rates Rebate s (Specified Amounts) Order will make the following changes to two specified amounts of the Rates Rebate Scheme from July : .. increase the maximum rebate from to ; and .. increase the income abatement threshold from , to ,; . note that, depend ing upon future demand for th e Rates Rebate Scheme, an increase to the appropria tion may be necessary in and outyears, and will be adjusted for in either the October Baseline Update or March Baseline Update process ; . authorise the submission to the Executive Council of the Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order ; and . note that the Rates Rebat e (Specified Amounts) Order will come into force on July .
I N C O N F I D E N C E Page of Appendix A: Rates Rebat e (Specified Amounts) Order
I am seeking agreement to a set of pricing objectives building on previous considerations and outcomes noted by Cabinet . In the October paper, Further decisions on the three waters reforms CAB MIN , a range of pricing outcomes were set out, but not explicitly agreed by Cabinet. From those outcomes I have developed the following objectives to inform our decisions on pricing and charging. . My proposed objectives are: . Economic efficiency : price s reflect the underlying costs of services and support the financial sustainability of water services entities in the long run. . Affordability : water is an essential service and people on reticulated networks should have access to water services regardless of their financial circumstances. . Price stability : the rates of change in prices are not too high and price changes are clearly signalled in advance and smoothed over time. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . Cost sharing : a key driver of the reforms is to address affordability issues, particularly for customers in smaller communities. Entities could use geographic average pricing to smooth costs across communities, thereby ensuring more affordable services for all. . Horizontal equity : consumers in similar positions pay similar prices. . Intergenerational equity : every generation (which can be thought of as being as small as the annual cohort of ratepayers) should be paying its fair share for assets and not requiring future generations to pay substantially more or less than their fair share through either over or under investment. Historically, funding and water infrastructure investment decisions have tended to favour current over future generations. . Giving effect to Te Mana o te Wai and respecting Treaty of Waitangi principles : pricing can support Te Mana o te Wai by encouraging efficient usage of water. Pricing c an also engage Article of the Treaty and support equitable water service access and quality of service provision. . Consistency with other government goals : pricing issues should support, or at least not undermine, government goals in other domains. For example, growth charges can have an impact on housing goals. Water services pricing can influence levels of water use which affects climate change goals including resilience and adaptation. The Government policy statement is an important tool for achieving this objective. . The October paper also referred to vertical equity, whereby consumers with a higher ability to pay (or more assets) pay progressively more than those with less ability to pay. On further consideration, I consider that a means tested system for generating water bills would be overly complex, expensive to operate and lead to further distortions in pricing. Under the status quo, rating valuations have been used as a proxy for ability to pay but can create inequities as the value of a pro perty is not always well correlated to the wealth or income of the owner. Using means testing or rating valuations would result in complex price structures that do not always relate well to the actual costs of service provision. . For these reasons I prefer affordability, rather than vertical equity, as an objective. I consider the needs of financially distressed consumers in Part B of this paper. Not all the above objectives will be reflected directly in legislation and different policy tools will be used to achieve different objectives.
I consider four councils with Mori wards should not have to hold a poll: Bay of Plenty Regional Council because their Mori constituencies are established under a local Act, not via the Local Electoral Act processes; Waikato Regional Council because their Mori constituencies were established under the previous process in the Act, and there was an opportunity for the public to demand a poll at that time; Wairoa District Council because the council conducted a binding poll at the local elections and the poll was in favour of establishing Mori wards (and is therefore out of scope of this proposal); and ptiki District Council because the Council conducted a (non binding) poll at the local elections, before resolving to establish Mori wards, and that poll was in favour of establishing Mori wards.
I have worked with the Minister of Finance on a plan for managing some of these cost pressures . I have been working with the Minister of Finance and our officials to fully understand these cost pressures, determine which areas it is appropriate to fund and by how much, and develop an approach to funding the priority areas. s ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of
I recommend that Cabinet Business Committee:
I) Include an option to amend the infringem ent provisions to enable infringements to be made against Already agreed
I) WorkSafe New Zealand I Mahi Haumaru Aotearoa
I) Written agreements between Intermediaries and Clients, and any subsequent amendments,
I) enable the prevention, detection, investigation, and prosecution of offences, and the
I) to verify and continue to confirm a persons eligibility for a Travel Document, and to
I. Background . The purpose of this MoU is to document the relationship between the government
I.. I. Every occasion each Authorised Officer accesses Registration or Citizenship
I.. The Secretary may review the access record at . at any time.
I.. All costs associated with the collection of any information obtained under this DAA
IA Status Report WE February
IA Status Report WE February
IA Status Report WE March
IA Status Report WE October
IA Status Report WE December
IA Status Report WE May
IA Status Report WE September
IA Status Report WE February
IA Status Report WE April
IA Status Report WE November
IA Status Report WE January
IA Status Report WE June
IA Status Report WE October
IA Status Report WE May
IA Status Report WE September
IA Status Report WE June
IA Status Report WE February
IA Status Report WE April
IA Status Report WE November
IA Status Report WE August
IA Status Report WE January
IA Status Report WE June
IA Status Report WE February
IA Status Report WE October
IA Status Report WE May
IA Status Report WE September
IA Status Report WE February
IA Status Report WE April
IA Status Report WE July
IA Status Report WE November
IA Status Report WE August
IA Status Report WE June
IA Status Report WE March
IA Status Report WE October
IA Status Report WE January
IA Status Report WE October
IA Status Report WE December
IA Status Report WE February
IA Status Report WE May
IA Status Report WE September
IA Status Report WE July
IA Status Report WE November
IA Status Report WE June
IBANZ Meeting on May
ICP . . . . . . .
ICP . . . . . . .
ICP . . . . . . .
ICR AA AA AA AA AA AA AA
ICT incident response The Department plays a role in supporting allofgovernment responses to cybersecurity and privacy incidents, as well as the COVID pandemic. We will continue to lead responses to allofgovernment ICT supplier outages and incidents, provide advice and assurance to Ministers on digital aspects of responses, and assist agencies leading responses by communicating advice and providing support as needed. Local government works collectively to address national objectives At a system level Our Ue te Hntore Local Government Branch aims to achieve a collaborative systemswide, public service approach in which central and local government work together for the benefit of people, communities, business and the environment. Central to our system stewardship role are our Partnership Directors. They have strengthened connections with the sector by building direct relationships with local government chief executives and mayors. They also continue to navigate and make pathways for understanding with local government and iwi Mori. This positive change is critical for the implementation of the Government reform agenda of the Three Waters Reform, Climate Change, the Resource Management Act Reform and the Future for Local Government Review. Future for Local Government Review The Minister of Local Government has established an independent review into the Future for Local Government in response to major reforms under way that will impact the sector. The Review is intended to identify how our system of local democracy and governance needs to evolve to be fit for the future. The Review will run to April . As part of our role as stewards of the local government system, we need to ensure that the reforms afecting local government are integrated and support a coherent system framework, including in its current state and any transition to a future state. This role requires the provision of policy advice to Ministers on the key strategic issues facing the local government sector, building productive partnerships with local government to achieve the Governments policy objectives for the sector, and collaborating with other central government agencies to ensure their work on local government is consistent. Following the major milestones of the Review the Department will undertake work to consider whether and how to progress the Reviews recommendations. Governance and democracy reform The regulatory framework for local government elections needs reform to ensure there is an enduring system in place. The Department will progress a programme of reform that is informed by the Future for Local Government Review. We anticipate that the Future for Local Government Review may also identify other areas of the local authority governance framework where reform should be prioritised. The Department will also complete the work currently under way to make improvements to the process for establishing Mori wards and constituencies. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
ICT strategies and there may be implications to delivery from within existing
IGIS and the PC. The Parties took into account and had regard to the comments by the
II. Strategic relationship. Both parties recognise that the joint effort outlined in this MoU is a
III. Guiding principles. In their dealings together, the partie s will be guided by principles of
IN CONFI ENCE . benefts to the district rom creatng new employment opportunites and newho mes; . benefts to the council rom longterm enhancements to its ratng base; and . benefts to Mori in the district rom providing support or marae in the dist rict; . agree that in determining the tme period over which rates are remited, and the am ount o rates remited, the local authority should seek to align the remission with the likely tme: . over which the development is expected to take place; and . economic benefts will fow to landowners rom the development andor the o wners are able to reside on the land; . agree the local authority may make remissions conditonal, in whole or in part, on partcular development milestones being met; Treatng multple M ri land bl cks as ne f r ratng purp ses . agree to permit multple blocks o Mori land as one or the purpose o ca lculatng their rates liability, provided they are used as one economic unit and come rom the same original parent land block; Supp rtng the devel pment f h using n M ri land . agree to permit the practce o apportoning rates on a Mori land ratng unit bet ween diferent homes; . agree that apportoned ratng units be treated as a single ratng unit or the purpo ses o the rates rebate scheme; . agree that liability or rates on homes on apportoned ratng units lie exclusively wi th the occupier o that home; Modernising the Ratng Act Rem ving tw hectare limits . agree to remove the twohectare limit on the rates exemptons or marae, me etng places and meetng houses; . agree to remove the twohectare limit on rates exemptons or cemeteries, burial gr ounds and urup; Updatng marae and meetng place exempt ns . agree to extend the rates exempton or marae to marae on general land; . agree to clari y the current rates exempton or meetng places to make it clear the exempton does not include land used predominantly or housing; Pr tectng M ri land reclassifed as general land fr m aband ned land and ratng sal es . note that the Mori Afairs Amendment Act required Mori land (the la nd) with less than our owners to be reclassifed as general land; . note that this change in status occurred without the knowledge or consent o the ow ners; Page f fdorymq Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE . note that one efect o this change in status was to expose the land to the ab andoned land and ratng sale provisions o the Ratng Act; . note that some o this land is stll being sold by local authorites under the Ratng Ac t; . agree that the Ratng Act be amended to exclude this land rom sale or lease under the abandoned land or ratng sale provisions; . agree that the Ratng Act provide that, as with other Mori land, the occupier o land be liable or rates on that land i the owners o the land are unknown; Clarifying trustees bligat ns . note that trustees o Mori land are liable or rates only to the extent o the mo ney derived rom the land; . agree the Ratng Act be amended to require trustees, i they claim there is insufc ient money derived rom the land to pay rates, at the request o the local authority provide copies o any accounts provided to benefciaries to support their claim; Including purp se statements in relevant legislat n . agree to amend the Local Government Act and the Ratng Act to include the purpose statement o Te Ture Whenua Mori Act as the purpose o the specifc provisions o those Acts relatng to ratng Mori land; Transiton and Imp ementaton . note that some o these proposals will require a litle tme or local authorites and owners o Mori land to prepare or their implementaton; . note that some measures need to commence at the beginning o a fnancial year; . agree that the ollowing proposals commence at the frst fnancial year that is o ur months afer the Bill is passed: . making unused land nonrateable; . treatng multple Mori land blocks as one or ratng purposes; . allowing apportonments or homes on Mori land; . clari ying the meetng place exempton; and . clari ying trustee obligatons; Financia imp icatons . note that the proposals or supportng the development o housing on Mori la nd will extend the number o homeowners that are potentally eligible or a rates rebate; . note that the existng appropriaton or the rates rebate scheme or the current ye ar and outyears will be adjusted to refect current demand in the October Baseline Update; . note that, depending upon uture demand or the scheme, an increase to the appr opriaton or the rates rebate scheme may be necessary in and outyears; Page f fdorymq Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE . Statutory rate remission process or land under development.Immediate. . Treatng multple Mori land blocks as one or ratng purposes.At the commencement o the frst fnancial year that is our months afer the Bill is passed. The provision would typically apply at the commencement o a ratng year. This gives tme to educate local authorites and owners o Mori land on the process. . Allowing apportonments or homes on Mori land.At the commencement o the frst fnancial year that is our months afer the Bill is passed. The provision would typically apply at the commencement o a ratng year. This gives tme to educate local authorites and owners o Mori land on the process. . Removing two hectare limits on rates exemptons or marae and urupa.Immediate. . Clari ying the meetng place exempton. At the commencement o the frst fnancial year that is our months afer the Bill is passed. The provision would typically apply at the commencement o a ratng year. This gives tme to educate local authorites and owners o Mori land on the process. . Protectng Mori land made general rom sale.Immediate. . Clari ying trustees obligatons. At the commencement o the frst fnancial year that is our months afer the Bill is passed. The provision would typically apply at the commencement o a ratng year. This gives tme to educate local authorites and owners o Mori land on the process. . Including purpose statements in the LGA and the Ratng Act.Immediate. M dernising the Ratng Act Treatyconsideratons . Some Mori argue that ratng Mori land is contrary to their right o ull, exclusive and undistur bed possession o their land. The Waitangi Tribunal addressed this in the Hauraki report. The Tribunal concluded that it could see no problem in Treaty termswiththe concept o ratng Mori land. . However, that conclusion was qualifed by the need or the Crown to be care ul toensure adequate assistance was ofered to Mori landowners to develop their land and avoid the problems o ragmented ttle. The Tribunal also noted the need to monitorthe implementaton o the Ratng Act to ensure it provided an equitable basis or ratng Mori land. The proposals in this paper are consistent with the Tribunals conclusions. The Hauraki Report, WAI , Vol , p , . Page f fdorymq Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE . I also considered an opton o making any part o a block o Mori land that is unused nonr ateable. I have not proposed this opton, other than where the land has a Ng Whenua Rhui kawenata, as unused land in this case is likely to have a comparatvely low value compared to land that is in use. Making this land nonrateable may have litle impact on the rates assessed. Also there are many examples in back country propertes o arms with partally unused land. It would be difcult to just y an exempton or partally unused Mori land when no such exempton is available or general land. A statutory rates remission process for and under deve opment . I propose we introduce a statutory rates remission process or Mori land under deve lopment. Currently local authorites have considerable discreton over their rate remission policies or Mori land and may not include development remissions in their policies. . A statutory remission process will provide owners o Mori land a right to apply or a rat e remission when land is under development, without having to rely on the local authoritys policy. However, the decision about whether a remission is granted, or how long it is granted, and on what conditons it is granted, will remain with the local authority. This will allow local authorites to apply a natonally consistent approach to their decisions, without each council having to develop its own policy or land under development. . Providing rate remissions during development will allow scarce capital to be devoted to deve loping land, rather than paying rates. Once development is completed, the remission would cease and the land would be rateable in the same manner as any other land. In the long run this will be benefcial to local authorites as it strengthens both their ratng base and their community. . During the development process owners are incurring the costs o development. How ever, the benefts that come rom development, either by occupying the property or housing, or generatng income i the development is or commercial purposes, are unlikely to commence untl development is complete or well advanced. Managing cash fows through the development period is challenging or any land owner and will usually be more so or Mori landowners given the restrictons on mortgaging their propertes to obtain development fnance. . This would be in additon to, rather than in place o , the existng remission policies, whi ch potentally cover a wider range o maters than land development. However, in relaton to remissions or development, the statutory obligatons I propose would take precedence over the local authoritys current policies. . I propose that: . Objectve the objectve o the remission be to acilitate the occupaton, dev elopment and utlisaton o Mori land or the beneft o its owners. This re erences the purpose o the TTWM Act. . Criteria f r assessing applicat ns appl icatons shall be assessed against the ollowing criteria: .. contributon to the objectve; .. benefts to the district rom creatng new employment opportunites and ne w homes; Page f fdorymq Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE .. benefts to the council rom longterm enhancements to its ratng base; and .. benefts to Mori in the district rom providing support or marae in the dis trict. . C nsiderat ns in determining the tme period over which rates are remited, and the amount o rates remited, the local authority should seek to align the remission with the likely tme: .. over which the development is expected to take place; and .. economic benefts will fow to landowners rom the development andor theo wners are able to reside on the land. . C ndit ns the council may make remissions conditonal, in whole or in part, on partcular development milestones being met. . The proposed criteria are designed to encourage the local authority to give balanced cons ideraton to both the benefts to the community as a whole and the benefts to the landowners rom development. The criteria relatng to support or marae encourages local authorites to consider how development can support marae as an important piece o community in rastructure in their district. Treatng mu tp e Mori and b ocks as one for ratng purposes . I propose that multple blocks o Mori land that come rom the same parent block be tre ated as one or the purpose o calculatng their rates liability, i they are used as one business unit. I there is doubt about whether any partcular block involved in such a proposal comes rom the same parent land block, the local authority may apply to the Registrar o the Mori Land Court or a ruling. This would be implemented on the applicaton o the entty or person using the land. . This will result in the same rates liability or say blocks totalling hectares in area as o ne hectare block. The Far North District Council has taken this approach with some success, including one case where it supported the establishment o an Ahu Whenua trust covering blocks o Mori land. Treatng these blocks as one or ratng purposes reduced the rates rom , to , a year. . Secton o the Ratng Act specifes that two or more ratng units must be treated as onei they are: owned by the same person or persons; and used jointly as a single unit; and contguous or separated only by a road, railway, drain, water race, river, or stream (the contguous test). . Mori land ofen ails to meet this test because progressive ownership succession mea ns blocks rarely have exactly the same ownership. Titles rom the original parent block may also have been alienated, meaning it does not meet the contguous test. Treatng blocks used as one as one ratng unit or ratng purposes will assist in making their development economic, supportng our regional development goals. Page f fdorymq Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE An abi ity to write of rates arrears . I propose that the Ratng Act be amended to enable local authorites to write of rates on: all land i it considers the rates are uncollectable; and Mori land only, where successors to interests in a block o land fnd themselves liable or rates debts o deceased owners. . The power would be an administratve power, provided to the chie executve o each loc al authority. To provide protecton rom abuse o the power, local authorites would be required to disclose the amount o rates writen of each year in the notes to fnancial statements in their annual report. . Rates arrears are a signifcant disincentve to Mori landowners engaging with and deve loping their land. The presence o large rates arrears on Mori land inhibits constructve relatonships between local authorites, iwi and Mori landowners. . Successors to interests in a block o Mori land that is in arrears efectvely inherit the arr ears. In the case o general land, i the owner passes away with debts in excess o their assets, the land would be sold and estate creditors sufer the shortall. In the case o Mori land, because o the constraints on its sale, rates arrears are shared among cur rent and uture owners. This presents an impediment to the next generaton o owners developing their whenua. . Local authorites have no statutory authority to write of rates. The LGA provides that elected members o a local authority can be held personally liable i the local authority has intentonally or negligently ailed to en orce the collecton o money it is law ully enttled to receive. The combined efect o these arrangements provides a power ul disincentve or local authorites to write of rates arrears. . The consequence is that local authorites tend to allow uncollected rates to acc umulate, with penaltes accruing, untl they are prevented by statute rom commencing collecton acton. Rates are not statute barred rom collecton untl six years afer the last payment or the various rates instalments or the year. By the tme a rate is statute barred, or every , originally assessed, with accumulated penaltes the outstanding debt will have grown to ,. Since Mori land is over represented in propertes in arrears, this tends to disproportonately infate the size o the r ates arrears actually incurred on Mori land. . Currently the only tool local authorites have to manage arrears are rates remissions. Rem ited rates are shown in the rates records as having been paid by the local authority. Local authorites can be reluctant to remit rates because that can be seen as condoning nonpayment. . While my main concern is with the efect o rates arrears on the development o Mori land, I can see no reason why this power should be constrained only to Mori land. There may be rare cases where collecton o rates on general land is impractcal. In those cases, writng of rates may be more help ul than allowing rates arrears to accumulate untl they are statute barred rom collecton. Sectons to , Local Government Act . Page f fdorymq Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE Background Mori and . Mori land is governed by TTWM Act. The preamble to that Act includes the statement it is desirable to recognise that land is a taonga tuku iho o special signifcance to Maori people and, or that reason, to promote the retenton o that land in the hands o its owners, their whanau, and their hap, and to protect whi tapu: and to acilitate the occupaton, development, and utlisaton o that land or the beneft o its owners, their whanau, and their hap. . TTWM Act places a number o restrictons on the ability o owners to deal with Mori land. The land may not be sold without the approval o the Mori Land Court, which is required to prioritse ownership remaining with people with an ancestral relatonship with the land. This makes it impractcal to mortgage the land and precludes the land being sold on the general land market. . Mori land is approximately fve per cent (about . million hectares) o the New Zea land land area and is predominately concentrated in the mid to upper North Island. Mori land is commonly held by multple owners (some blocks have more than , owners). There are about . million interests in , Mori reehold land blocks. The average Mori land block is hectares with owners. Multple ownership creates additonal costs and challenges in achieving consensus or acton, including collectng unds to pay rates. . Mori reehold land tends to be more isolated, in smaller holdings and, less useable than general land: per cent o Mori reehold land is classifed as being o lower quality and only per cent o Mori reehold land is considered suitable or arable use. Up to per cent o land is considered landlocked, and about , ( per cent) o Mori land ttles are smaller than fve hectares, with approximately , ( per cent) being smaller than one hectare. Around a third o the total indigenous vegetaton on private land is on Mori land, with approximately per cent o Mori land having indigenous orest cover. . At the same tme there are many examples o Mori land having been developed into succe ss ul arming units or being used or commercial orestry. Notwithstanding, it has been identfed, through detailed whenua block by block analysis, that there is an opportunity to improve the per ormance o Mori land. This could result in estmated benefts o . billion (present value (PV) million) . billion (PV million) over years, increasing livelihoods and wellbeing derived rom this land. . While much Mori land is in rural setngs, there are signifcant areas o Mori land in some urban communites, especially Tauranga, Rotorua, and Taup and in many smaller communites. Some o this land has been subdivided into house sites while some remains in large blocks that could, i the owners wished and were able, be substantally developed. In those locatons vacant Mori land has the potental to prov ide homes or its owners. The Whenua Mori programme . On April I reported to the Cabinet Economic Development Commitee on our prog ramme o whnau development through whenua. The Commitee agreed that Paper Two: Support or Mori reehold landowners: Whenua Mori Programme Business case and access to contngency unding, considered by Mori Crown Relatons: Te Arawhit Commitee on December , MCRSUB. Page f fdorymq Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE CABMIN Cabinet Minute of ecision This d cument c ntains inf rmati n f r the New Zealand Cabinet. Itmust be treated in c nfidence and handled in acc rdance with any security classificati n, r ther end rsement. The inf rmati n can nly be released, including under the Official Inf rmati nAct , by pers ns with the appr priate auth rity. Reportofthe CabinetLegislation Committee:PeriodEnded February On F bruary , Cabin t mad th following d cisions on th work of th Cabin t L gislation Committ for th p riod nd d F bruary : out of scope LEGMIN Local Government (Rat ng of Whenua Mor ) Amendment B ll: Approval for Introduct on Portfolio: Mori D v lopm nt Local Gov rnm nt CONFIRMED out of scope azvbzzpq IN CONFI ENCE Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE CABMIN out of scope Micha l W bst r S cr tary of th Cabin t Hardcopydistribution: Cabin t L gislation Committ Minist r of En rgy and R sourc s Minist r for Social D v lopm nt Minist r for Maori D v lopm nt Minist r of R v nu Associat Minist r of H alth (Hon J nny Sal sa) Minist r for V t rans azvbzzpq IN CONFI ENCE Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE Consultaton . The Shand Inquiry in included extensive consultaton with Mori on ratng Mori land. It held hui specifcally on that issue. In the ollow up to the Shand Inquiry in , Te Puni Kkiri ran a urther regional workshops with Mori landowners on ratng and valuaton issues. Further submissions addressed these issues in the previous Governments Te Ture Whenua Mori Bill. . For those reasons I have not consulted Mori in preparing these proposals. Mori have alr eady told us what they think o the present situaton. A thorough Select Commitee process will provide urther opportunity or input rom Mori landowners. . In preparing these proposals, my ofcials held a workshop with ratng ofcers orm loc al authorites with signifcant Mori land in their districts. This provided help ul input rom the people that have to administer the current law. . Local Government New Zealand and the Society o Local Government Managers have rev iewed a draf o this paper. Both are supportve o the proposals. . This paper was jointly prepared by the Department o Internal Afairs and Te Puni Kk iri. The Ministry o Justce, Te Arawhit, the Ministry o Housing and Urban Development, the Department o Conservaton and the Treasury have been consulted. The Department o the Prime Minister and Cabinet has been in ormed. Financial implicatons Financia imp icatons for the Crown . Enabling home owners on Mori land to access the rates rebate scheme will have fnanc ial implicatons or the Crown. Data on the number o homes on Mori land is sparse. In total there are , Mori land blocks. Available data suggests that appro ximately , o these blocks have no improvements leaving approximately , blocks which may have some development. . My ofcials inquiry into individual propertes suggests most homes are single homes on i ndividual ttles, and the occupants would already potentally quali y or the rates rebate. However, having multple homes on one ratng unit is not uncommon, especially in the vicinity o marae where they are efectvely part o the marae community. Establishing the household incomes o such homeowners, the rates charged, and there ore the potental eligibility o homeowners or rates rebates is difcult. I can see no reason why low income owners o these homes should be denied access to rates rebates simply because o the land tenure arrangements imposed through TTWM Act. . Cabinet has also recently agreed to legislatve changes that will make online appli catons or rates rebates possible. This may have a positve efect on uptake o the scheme. The appropriaton or the rates rebate scheme in is .m and the interim unaudited cost or is .m. . The Department o Internal Afairs will be recommending the appropriaton or the sche me be adjusted down in the October Baseline Update to refect current demand. This adjustment will also be refected in outyears. Depending upon uture demand or the scheme, the Department may need to seek an increase in the appropriaton or the fnancial year and subsequent years to accommodate the increased eligibility rom this proposal. Page f fdorymq Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE Financia imp icatons for oca government . The Bill has varied fnancial implicatons or local government. These are detailed in Appendi x A. Key points are: . enabling local authorites to write of rates will provide cash fow advantages to loc al authorites. They are required to pay output tax to the Inland Revenue Department (IRD) when rates are invoiced. However, they cannot recover that output tax rom the IRD untl the rates are writen of, which currently is six years afer they have been paid. Enabling local authorites to write of rates will allow earlier recovery o the GST output tax; . theoretcally other proposals, such as making unused land nonrateable and tre atng multple Mori land blocks as one or ratng purposes will reduce local authority rate revenue. In practce, rates on this land requently remain unpaid anyway. To the extent that these and my other proposals bring more land into use they will in the long run boost local authority revenue as where Mori land is used, rates are generally paid; and . the housing proposals will assist local authorites to collect rates. Low income househo lds will be beter able to access rates rebates, which will help rates collecton directly, and beter arrangements or home owners on Mori land will also help in making rates payments easier. . Overall, I consider that these proposals will, in the long run, be fnancially benefcial or loc al authorites. Humanrights,gender and disabilityissues . The proposals in this paper do not afect human rights, gender or disability issues. Legislatveimplicatons . The proposals in this paper would be implemented through a Whenua Mori (Ratng and O ther Maters) Bill. This Bill has a category in the legislaton programme to be re erred to select commitee this year. Impact analysis . A Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA) has been prepared and atached to this Cabinet paper . The Department o Internal Afairs Regulatory Impact Analysis panel (the Panel) has reviewed the RIA in accordance with the quality assurance criteria set out in the CabGuide. The Panel considers that the in ormaton and analysis summarised in the RIA meets the quality assurance criteria. Publicity . I propose to make no public announcements about this work untl the Bill is int roduced. I consider that public debate is best to occur when the specifc details o the Bill are agreed and in the public arena. Issues around Mori land always have the potental to be controversial. However, this package o proposals is clearly directed at enabling Mori land owners to develop and use their land and to support our regional development priorites. I will develop a communicatons package or the Bill that emphasises these points. Page f fdorymq Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE LEGMIN Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute of ecision This d cument c ntains inf rmati n f r the New Zealand Cabinet. Itmust be treated in c nfidence and handled in acc rdance with any security classificati n, r ther end rsement. The inf rmati n can nly be released, including under the Official Inf rmati n Act , by pers ns with the appr priate auth rity. Local Government Act Amendment Bill No : Supplementary OrderPaper Portfolio Local Government On A g st , the Cabinet Legislation Committee: noted that the Local Government Act Amendment Bill (No ) (the Bill) holds a category two priority (m st be passed in the year) on the legislation programme; noted that the S pplementary Order Paper (SOP) makes s bstantial changes to the Bill as reported back from select committee; noted that the Bill, as amended by the SOP, will; . improve the transparency and acco ntability mechanisms for co ncilcontrolled organisa tions (CCO); . no longer promote the se of m ltiply owned CCOs to provide core local a thority servic es incl ding transport and water services; . constrain the role of the Local Government Commission in largescale local government reorganisations, s ch as amalgamations and the creation of nitary a thorities; . provide for a locallyled reorganisation process; . provide a flexible reorganisation process so that it is proportional to the scope and potent ial impact of an investigation; . red ce the n mber of Commissioners req ired by the Local Government Act ; noted the additional minor and technical changes identified thro gh drafting of the SOP to: . incl de a new transitional provision deferring application of the new req irements for local a thorities to p blish CCO reports on their websites and the req irements for CCOs to engage with indirect shareholders for a threemonth period; . amend the two stage Order in Co ncil process for reorganisations to provide greater clari ty of operation; . better present cla ses and their crossreferencing in Sched le Two; IN CONFI ENCE Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE LEGMIN Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute of ecision This d cument c ntains inf rmati n f r the New Zealand Cabinet. Itmust be treated in c nfidence and handled in acc rdance with any security classificati n, r ther end rsement. The inf rmati n can nly be released, including under the Official Inf rmati n Act , by pers ns with the appr priate auth rity. Local Government (Rating of Whenua Mori) Amendment Bill: Approvalfor Introduction Portfolios Mori evelopment Local Government On F bruary , th Cabin t L gislation Committ : noted that th Local Gov rnm nt (Rating of Wh nua Mori) Am ndm nt Bill pr s nts a packag of rating m asur s to: . support th d v lopm nt of, and provision of housing on, Mori land; and . to mod rnis rating l gislation aff cting Mori land; a rove d for introduction th Local Gov rnm nt (Rating of Wh nua Mori) Am ndm nt Bill PCO ., subj ct to th final approval of th gov rnm nt caucus and suffici nt support in th Hous of R pr s ntativ s; agreed t hat th Bill b introduc d on F bruary ; agreed that th gov rnm nt propos that th Bill b : . r f rr d to th Mori Affairs committ for consid ration; . nact d b for th Hous ris s for th g n ral l ction, if possibl . G rrard Cart r Commit t S cr tary Hardcopy distribution: (see over) fdorymq IN CONFI ENCE Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE LEGMIN Present: Rt Hon W inston P t rs Officials present from: Offi c of th Prim Minist r Hon Chris Hipkins (Chair) Officials Committ for LEG Hon Andr w Littl Hon Nanaia Mahuta Hon Stuart Nash Hon Iain L sGalloway Hon J nny Sal sa Hon Dami n OConnor Hon Trac y Martin Hon Ron Mark Hon Eug ni Sag Micha l Wood MP (S nior Gov rnm nt Whip) Hardcopy distribution: Minist r for Mori D v lopm nt Minist r of Local Gov rnm nt fdorymq IN CONFI ENCE Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE Land Ratng Act .It is clear that this legislaton needs to be modernised to bring it closer to present expectatons o Mori Crown relatons. . The previous Government proposed to deal with some o these maters with its propo sals to re orm TTWM Act, but the proposals were hastly put together. We have the opportunity to develop a more considered package o measures that integrates with our wider work programme around whenua Mori development and Mori Crown relatons. Comment Overview of proposa . In summary, I propose that we sup port thedevelopment of, and provisionof housing on, Mori land by: . introducing an ability or local authorites to write of rate arrears; . making unused Mori land (including Mori land protected by Ng Whenua Rhuik awenata) ratng unitsnonrateable; . providing a statutory rate remission process or Mori land under development; . treatng multple Mori land blocks as one or ratng purposes when they are used a s one; and . enabling individual houses on Mori land to be rated as i they were one ratng unit. . I propose we mod ernise the ratng legislaton by: . removing arbitrary two hectare land area restrictons rom rates exemptons or mar ae and urup; . providing protecton to Mori land made general land by amendments to the Mo ri Afairs Act in rom the abandoned land and ratng sale provisions o the Ratng Act; . clari ying the current exempton or marae, meetng places and meetng houses; . clari ying the obligatons on trustees not liable to pay rates or lack o income deri ved rom land held in trust; and . including clear purpose statements to the provisions o the Ratng Act and the Loc al Government Act (LGA) relatng to Mori land ratng. Supportng the development of, and provision ofhousingon, Mori land . I propose fve measures to support the development o , and provision o housing on, Mo ri land. Three are ocused on removing ratng impediments to development or all Mori land. The ourth is ocused on promotng the development o small land blocks and the ffh is ocused on putng homes on Mori land on a level playing feld with homes on general land. This Act was originally ttled the Natve Land Ratng Act but has been rettled in accordance with the Mori Purposes Act . The Ratng Valuatons Act provides that where a property has a separate ttle, the land in that ttle shall be a ratng unit. There are some limited exceptons to this principle. Where relevant, they are discussed in the body o this paper. Page f fdorymq Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE MCRMIN a reed ha he following proposals commence a he firs financial year ha is four mon hs af er he Bill is passed: . making unused land nonra eable; . rea ing mul iple Mori land blocks as one for ra ing purposes; . allowing appor ionmen s for homes on Mori land; . clarifying he mee ing place exemp ion; and . clarifying rus ee obliga ions; Financialimplications noted ha he proposals for suppor ing he developmen of housing on Mori land will ex end he number of homeowners ha are po en ially eligible for a ra es reba e; noted ha he exis ing appropria ion for he ra es reba e scheme for he curren year and ou years will be adjus ed o reflec curren demand in he Oc ober Baseline Upda e; noted ha , depending upon fu ure demand for he scheme, an increase o he appropria ion for he ra es reba e scheme may be necessary in and ou years; Othermatters noted ha he Whenua Mori (Ra ing and O her Ma ers) Bill ( he Bill) has a ca egory priori y on he Legisla ion Programme ( o be referred o a selec commi ee in ); invited he M inis er of Local Governmen o issue draf ing ins ruc ions o he Parliamen ary Counsel Office o proceed wi h he Bill. Rachel Clarke Commi ee Secre ary Present: Officialspresentfrom: R Hon Wins on Pe ers Offi ce of he Prime Minis er Hon Kelvin Davis (Chair) Officials Commi ee for MCR Hon Andrew Li le Hon Nanaia Mahu a Hon Shane Jones Hon Eugenie Sage Hardcopydistribution: Minis er for Mori Developmen Minis er of Local Governmen azvbzzpq IN CONFI ENCE Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE CABMIN Cabinet Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification , or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , bypersons with the appropriate authority. Report of the Cabinet Maori Crown Relations: Te Arawhiti Committee: Period Ended October On October , Cabinet made the following decisions on the work of the Cabinet Maori Crown Relations Te Arawhiti Committee for the period ended October : u o scope MCRMIN Whanau Development Through Whenua: Rating CONFIRMED Matters Poifolios: Maori Developme nt Local Government u o scope Michael Webster Secretay of the Cabinet Hardcopy distribution: Cabinet Maori Crown Relations: Te Arawhiti Committee azvbzzpq : IN CONFIDENCE Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE MCRMIN a reed ha any exis ing ra es arrears on his land be wri enoff a he ime he land beco mes nonra eable; StatutoryratesremissionsforMoriland under development a reed ha he Ra ing Ac be amended o include a s a u ory ra e remission process for Mori land under developmen ; noted ha he remission process in paragraph above would be in addi ion o, ra her han in place of, exis ing council ra e remission policies; a reed ha he objec ive of such remissions is o facili a e he occupa ion, developmen and u ilisa ion of Mori land for he benefi of i s owners; a reed ha he cri eria for assessing applica ions be: . con ribu ion o he objec ive; . benefi s o he dis ric from crea ing new employmen oppor uni ies and new homes; . benefi s o he council from long erm enhancemen s o i s ra ing base; and . benefi s o Mori in he dis ric from providing suppor for marae in he dis ric ; a reed ha in de ermining he ime period over which ra es are remi ed, and he amoun of ra es remi ed, he local au hori y should seek o align he remission wi h he likely ime: . over which he developmen is expec ed o ake place, . ha economic benefi s will flow o landowners from he developmen andor he owners a re able o reside on he land; a reed ha he local au hori y may make remissions condi ional, in whole or in par , on par icular developmen miles ones being me ; TreatingmultipleMoriland blocksasonefor rating purposes a reed o permi mul iple blocks of Mori land as one for he purpose of calcula ing heir ra es liabili y, provided hey are used as one economic uni and come from he same original paren land block; Supporting thedevelopmentofhousing onMoriland a reed o permi he prac ice of appor ioning ra es on a Mori land ra ing uni be ween differen homes; a reed ha appor ioned ra ing uni s be rea ed as a single ra ing uni for he purposes of he ra es reba e scheme; a reed ha liabili y for ra es on homes on appor ioned ra ing uni s lie exclusively wi h he occupier of ha home; azvbzzpq IN CONFI ENCE Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE MCRMIN Cabinet Mori Crown Relations Te Arawhiti Committee Minuteof ecision This d cument c ntains inf rmati n f r the New Zealand Cabinet. Itmust be treated in c nfidence and handled in acc rdance with any security classificati n, r ther end rsement. The inf rmati n can nly be released, including under the Official Inf rmati n Act , by pers ns with the appr priate auth rity. Whnau evelopmentThroughWhenua:RatingMatters Portfolios Mori evelopmentLocalGovernment On Oc ober , he Cabine Mori Crown Rela ions Te Arawhi i Commi ee: Background noted ha ra es have long been iden ified as a barrier o owners engaging wi h and developing Mori land; noted ha addressing ra ing issues wi h Mori land will suppor he Governmen s programme o assis and improve he sys em for Mori landowners in managing Mori freehold land and, ha by doing so, addi ional economic re urns can be achieved delivering social and cul ural benefi s for Mori; noted ha much of he presen law abou ra ing Mori land is largely unchanged from and needs o be modernised o bring i closer o presen expec a ions of Mori Crown rela ions; Supportingthedevelopment of,andprovisionof housingon,Moriland Writingoffrates a reed o amend he Local Governmen (Ra ing) Ac ( he Ra ing Ac ) o enable he chief execu ive of any local au hori y o wri eoff ra es arrears: . on any land if he chief execu ive considers he ra es are uncollec able; and . on Mori freehold land only, where successors o in eres s in a block of land find hems elves liable for ra es deb s of deceased owners; a reed ha local au hori ies be required o disclose he amoun of ra es wri enoff each year in no es o he financial s a emen s in heir annual repor ; Making unused land nonrateable a reed ha Mori land ra ing uni s ha are en irely unused be made nonra eable; a reed ha Mori land subjec o Ng Whenua Rhui kawena a be made nonra eable; azvbzzpq IN CONFI ENCE Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE MCRMIN ModernisingtheRatingAct Removingtwohectarelimits a reed o remove he wohec are limi on he ra es exemp ions for marae, mee ing places and mee ing houses; a reed o rem ove he wohec are limi on ra es exemp ions for ceme eries, burial grounds and urup; Updatingmaraeand meeting placeexemptions a reed o ex end he ra es exemp ion for marae o marae on general land; a reed ha he curren ra es exemp ion for mee ing places be clarified o make i clear he exemp ion does no include land used predominan ly for housing; ProtectingMoriland reclassified asgeneralland fromabandoned land and rating sales noted ha : . he Mori Affairs Amendmen Ac required Mori land ( he land) wi h less han four owners o be reclassified as general land; . his change in s a us occurred wi hou he knowledge or consen of he owners; . one effec of his change in s a us was o expose he land o he abandoned land and ra ing sale provisions of he Ra ing Ac ; noted ha some of his land is s ill being sold by local au hori ies under he Ra ing Ac ; a reed ha he Ra ing Ac be amended o exclude his land from sale or lease under he abandoned land or ra ing sale provisions; a reed ha he Ra ing Ac provide ha , as wi h o her Mori land, he occupier of land be liable for ra es on ha land if he owners of he land are unknown; Clarifying trusteesobligations noted ha rus ees of Mori land are liable for ra es only o he ex en of he money derived from he land; a reed he Ra ing Ac be amended o require rus ees, if hey claim here is insufficien money derived from he land o pay ra es, a he reques of he local au hori y provide copies of any accoun s provided o beneficiaries o suppor heir claim; Includingpurposestatementsin relevantlegislation a reed o amend he Local Governmen Ac and he Ra ing Ac o include he purpose s a emen of Te Ture Whenua Mori Ac as he purpose of he specific provisions of hose Ac s rela ing o ra ing Mori land; Transitionand Implementation noted ha some of he proposals above will require a li le ime for local au hori ies and owners of Mori land o prepare for heir implemen a ion; noted ha some measures need o commence a he beginning of a financial year; azvbzzpq IN CONFI ENCE Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE Making unused Mori and nonrateab e . I propose that Mori land ratng units that are entrely unused and land that is subject toa Ng Whenua Rhui kawenatabe made nonrateable. At the tme this occurred, existng arrears on that land would be writenof. . To support the implementaton o this proposal, I propose as a working defniton that unused l and be defned as: Unused land: includes land that is un ccupied r is used similarly t a reserve r c nservat n area, despite any pers nal visits t the land r any pers nal c llect n f kai r cultural r medicinal material fr m the land; and excludes land that is leased r that is used f r agricultural, h rtcultural, apicultural, c mmercial f restry, residental, c mmercial, industrial r c mmunity actvity. . I expect the fnancial impact o this proposal on local authorites to be low. This type o Mo ri land is the type on which rates collecton is worst. Since the owners derive no economic beneft rom this land, it generates no income to pay rates. . Much Mori land is unused. Unused land occurs in diverse situatons, both urban and rura l and varying in size between large propertes covering hundreds o hectares and small house lots. . In some cases there is no legal or practcal access to the land. The land may be land locked, or access may be by an un ormed road or by sea with no sa e landing places. In other cases rate arrears are likely to build up as the owners derive no income or beneft rom the land that would enable or just y the payment o rates. A partcular issuew ith Mori land is the ratng treatment o land subject to Ng Whenua Rhui kawenata. These covenants cover approximately th o all Mori land, and require the owners to preserve the land in its natural state. This can provide a range o benefts to Mori landowners and to the public good by preserving indigenous biodiversity and mtauranga Mori on Mori land . . While the writeof power proposed above may reduce this problem, its use is stll depe ndent upon the local authority exercising its discreton. Making unused land non rateable provides a much stronger springboard or enabling owners to develop their land with less ear that rates arrears will be an impediment to that development. . Since all propertes, irrespectve o their ratng status, pay water, sewer and re use col lecton rates where they are assessed, making unused urban Mori land non rateable would stll leave those propertes liable or those rates. The rates arrears on those propertes would be reduced, but not eliminated. . I have considered other optons or this aspect o the proposals. We could limit an exe mpton o this nature only to land that has no legal or ormed road access. However, the impediments to access make this land the most difcult land to develop. While this would provide relie to Mori land owners rom being charged rates on land they can obtain no economic beneft rom, it would be the least efectve opton in promotng our goal o encouraging Mori land development. A Ng Whenua Rhui kawenata is a covenant between the owners o Mori land and the Crown to manage a block o Mori land to preserve and protect the natural and historic values o the land, or the spiritual and cultural values which Mori associate with the land. Page f fdorymq Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE Modernising marae, meetng p ace, meetng house and urup rates exemptons Rem ving tw hectare limits n rates exempt ns . Currently marae, meetng places, cemeteries, public crematoriums, burial grounds and urupa a re exempt rates. However, the exempton is limited to a land area o two hectares. Most rates exemptons do not have area limits. For example, there are no area limits on churches, or on the exemptons or sports clubs or land used or the arts. There are limits o . hectares on the rates exemptons or theological colleges and or insttutons that provide ree maintenance or relie or persons in need. . I propose to remove the two hectare limit on the rates exempton or marae, meetng pla ces, and meetng houses. I propose also to remove the two hectare limit on all cemeteries, burial grounds and urup.In todays world I can see no justfcaton or such an arbitrary land area exempton. My ofcials have consulted local authority ratng ofcers and it is apparent that en orcement o these limits is patchy. Extending marae exempt ns t marae n general land . I also propose to remove the limitaton that a marae must be on Mori reehold land to beex empt rom rates. Research suggests there may be as many marae that are on land with a general ttle and there ore potentally liable to pay rates. I can see no reason why the nature o the land ttle should afect the liability o a marae or rates. Clarifying the meetng place exempt n . I propose that the exempton or land reserved or a meetng place be qualifed by sta tng that where land is reserved or multple purposes, the exempton does not include land which is used predominantly or housing. . Currently land reserved or a meetng place under secton o TTWM Act, and used or the purposes o a meetng place, is nonrateable. Local authorites have encountered the situaton where some owners o homes on Mori land have had reservatons established or their home under secton . Typically, the reservaton is or multple purposes, including as a meetng place or the whnau. The homeowners then decline to pay rates as their land is a meetng place. My advice is that this is an incorrect interpretaton o the Act, but it would help local authorites to urther clari y the exempton. Protectng Mori and made genera in the s from sa e. . I propose to amend the Ratng Acts provisions enabling abandoned land sales and ratng sales to preclude the sale o Mori land (the land) arbitrarily converted to general land as a result o the Mori Afairs Amendment Act (the Amendment Act). I also propose that we prevent this land being leased by local authorites under the same provisions. I propose that or the purposes o the Ratng Act local authorites be permited, but not required, to treat this land as Mori land. This will enable local authorites to charge the occupier or rates i an adjoining land owner is using the land without any ormal agreement with the owners. . The Amendment Act required Mori reehold land with less than our owners to have its status changed to general land. This change in status was made without owner The act that the two hectare limit applies to all cemeteries and burial grounds may be an unintended consequence o law drafing changes. In the limit applied only to urup, by the law was somewhat ambiguous, and the limit was applied to all cemeteries in . This may have been drafing clarifcaton rather than policy intent. Page f fdorymq Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE Ofce o the Minister o Local Government Ofce o te Minita Whanaketanga Mori Chair Mo ri Crown Relatons: Te Arawhit Commitee Whnau evelopmentThrough Whenua: Ratng Maters Proposal . This paper seeks Cabinet policy approval to amend the Local Government (Ratng) Act (the Ratng Act) to beter enable Mori land owners to develop and use their land, including or housing, and to modernise provisions in the Ratng Act relatng to Mori reehold land (Mori land). Executvesummary . The proposals in this paper represent the next step in our programme o whnau deve lopment through whenua. We have previously agreed to invest . million over our years in a whenua Mori programme to assist owners o Mori land to develop that land. We have also agreed to proposals to amend Te Ture Whenua Mori Act (TTWM Act) to improve outcomes or Mori land owners. . This paper presents a package o ratng measures to: support the development o , and provision o housing on, Mori land; and to modernise ratng legislaton afectng Mori land. . Current ratng practces have long been recognised as an impediment to owners enga ging with and developing their land. In partcular, the accumulaton o rates arrears discourages owners rom ident ying with and putng orward proposals to use their land, or ear the local authority will frst require them to pay of rates arrears. My proposals to address this are to: provide local authorites with a power to writeof arrears; and make unused Mori land (including Mori land protected by a Ng Whenua Rahui kawenata) nonrateable. . Other key elements o my proposal are to: provide a statutory remission process to promote rates remissions or land under development; treat multple Mori land ratng units as one or the purpose o calculatng rates i they are used as one economic unit, which will reduce uni orm charges and lower the overall rates charged; and allow multple homes on a Mori land ratng unit to have separate rate accounts, which will enable the owners to access rates rebates i they meet the requirements or a rebate and simpli y the administraton o rates in those cases. . I also propose some modernisaton o the Ratng Act, including protectng Mori land made general by amendments to the Mori Afairs Amendment Act rom abandoned land or ratng sales. Page f fdorymq Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE Other maters . note that the Whenua Mori (Ratng and Other Maters) Bill has a priority in the legislaton programme; and . invite the Minister o Local Government to issue drafing instructons to the Pa rliamentary Counsel Ofce to proceed with this Bill. Authorised or lodgement Hon Nanaia Mahuta Minister o Local Government Mini ta Whanaketanga Mori Page f fdorymq Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Appendix A: Financial implications of proposals for local authorities Proposal Implications Writing off arrears. This proposal is an enabling proposal. Local authorities will not be required to writeoff rates, but may choose to do so. Therefore , the financial effects will depend upon t he decisions local authorities make. Important ly, The Department of Internal Affairs expects t hat the proposal will be used to write off rates earlier than would otherwise occur, so t hat the proposal will affect the time at which rates are written off, rather t han t he amount of rates written off. Therefore, there would be no loss of income to local authorities. There would also be a cash flow advantage to local authorities, in that an earlier writingoff of rates will result in an earlier recovery of GST input tax which the local authority has paid to the Inland revenue department when t he rates were originally invoiced. Making unused land and land subject to Nga Whenua Rahui kawenata nonrateable. This type of Maori land is the class of Maori land on which rates collection is the poorest. It includes, but is not limited to, landlocked and inaccessible Maori land. Owners are reluctant to pay rates on this land because t hey derive no economic benefits from the land and are likely to perceive themselves as not receiving benefit from council services. It is likely that local authorities do receive a small amount of income from t his land, so there would be a small financial cost to local authorities of making t his land nonrateable. There would also be an administrative cost to local authorities in identifying unused land and adjusting rating records to apply t he new law. In the cases where a Nga Whenua Rahui kawenata applied to part of a rating unit, the local authority would have to contract its valuation service provider to split the value of t he property between the rateable and nonrateable part of t he property. This would be a desktop exercise, so would have a low cost to process (likely less than per affected rating unit). A key objective of the proposed transition provisions for the Bill would be to provide local authorities with sufficient time to use existing staff resources to carry out this work. Rates remissions for land This is an enabling provision. Local authorities will not be required to under development remit rates when development occurs but may choose to do so. Therefore , the financial effects will depend upon the decisions local authorities make. There is a small risk that if a local authority remits rates, and a development does not proceed, the local authority will be unable to recover t he remitted rates. Treating multiple Maori land blocks as one for rating purposes The amount of uniform charges assessed for each rating unit varies from council to council, and can vary within different parts of a council district. Charges in the order of , per rating unit are common. While the impact on the rates for individual properties is significant, the likely impact of this proposal on local authority incomes is low, because it will take time for owners of Maori land to take advantage of t he opportun ity presented , and many properties are not suited to development. Page of fdorymq : Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE ProactveRelease . For the same reasons as outlined above, I propose to de er proactve release o this paper untl the introducton o a Bill refectng these decisions. Recommendatons . The Minister o Local Government and or Mori Development recommends that the Mo ri Crown Relatons: Te Arawhit Commitee: Background . note that rates have long been identfed as a barrier to owners engaging with and developing Mori land; . note that addressing ratng issues with Mori land will support the Governments pro gramme to assist and improve the system or Mori landowners in managing Mori reehold land and, that by doing so, additonal economic returns can be achieved delivering social and cultural benefts or Mori; . note that much o the present law about ratng Mori land is largely unchanged r om and needs to be modernised to bring it closer to present expectatons o Mori Crown relatons; Supportng the deve opment of, and provision of housing on, Mori and Writng f rates . agree to amend the Local Government (Ratng) Act (the Ratng Act) to enable the chie executve o any local authority to write of rates arrears: . On any land i the chie executve considers the rates are uncollectable; and . On Mori reehold land only, where successors to interests in a block o land fnd themselves liable or rates debts o deceased owners; . agree that local authorites be required to disclose the amount o rates writen of each year in notes to the fnancial statements in their annual report; Making unused land n nrateable . agree that Mori land ratng units that are entrely unused be made non ra teable; . agree that Mori land subject to Ng Whenua Rhui kawenata be made non ra teable; . agree that any existng rates arrears on this land be writen of at the tme the la nd becomes nonrateable; Statut ry rates remissi ns f r land under devel pment . agree that the Ratng Act be amended to include a statutory rate remission pro cess or Mori land under development; . note this remission would be in additon to, rather than in place o , existng co uncil rate remission policies; . agree that the objectve o such remissions be to acilitate the occupaton, dev elopment and utlisaton o Mori land or the beneft o its owners; . agree that the criteria or assessing applicatons be: . contributon to the objectve; Page f fdorymq Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE SWCMIN Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee Minute of ecision This d cument c ntains inf rmati n f r the New Zealand Cabinet. Itmust be treated in c nfidence and handled in acc rdance with any security classificati n, r ther end rsement. The inf rmati n can nly be released, including under the Official Inf rmati n Act , by pers ns with the appr priate auth rity. Fundingthe Classification Framework under theFilms,Videos,and Publications ClassificationAct,:Consultation ocument Portfolio InternalAffairs On De ember , the Cabinet So ial Wellbeing Committee (SWC): noted that the Offi e of Film and Literature Classifi ation (OFLC) is urrently funded through thirdparty fees, government funding, and a small amount of interest in ome; noted that in May , Cabinet agreed to initiate a review of OFLCs funding (the Review), and invited the Minister of Internal Affairs to report ba k to Cabinet by April CABMIN. ; noted that the Review is onsidering the appropriate level of ostre overy (full, partial no ostre overy) from the se tor and funding me hanism (fees andor a levy); noted that there are finan ial impli ations for the Crown from the ostre overy options (partial and no ostre overy), and a staggered implementation to a new funding regime; a reed to release the do ument Review f funding pti ns f r the classificati n framew rk under the Films, Vide s, and Publicati ns Classificati n Act, for publi onsultation, subje t to any final editorial hanges; noted that the Minister of Internal Affairs intends for publi onsultation to run from De ember to February ; noted that the Minister of Internal Affairs will seek de isions from SWC on the governments preferred funding model for OFLC in Mar h . Vivien Meek Committee Se retary Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Hardcopydistribution (see over) clwjxyyl IN CONFI ENCE
IN CONFI ENCE SWCMIN Present: Rt Hon Ja inda Ardern Officials present from: Offi e of the Prime Minister Rt Hon Winston Peters Offi ials Committee for SWC Hon Kelvin Davis Offi e of the Chair Hon Grant Robertson Hon Chris Hipkins Hon Nanaia Mahuta Hon Stuart Nash Hon Jenny Salesa Hon Kris Faafoi Hon Tra ey Martin (Chair) Hon Willie Ja kson Hon Poto Williams Jan Logie, MP Hardcopy distribution: Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs clwjxyyl IN CONFI ENCE I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN Cabinet Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Report of the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee: Period Ended December On December , Cabinet made the following decisions on the work of the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee for the period ended December : I N C O N F I D E N C E clwjxyyl Out of scope Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN SWCMIN Funding the Classification Framework under the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act, : Consultation Document Portfolio: Internal AffairsCONFIRMED Michael Webster Secretary of the Cabinet Hardcopy distribution: Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee AttorneyGeneral I N C O N F I D E N C E clwjxyyl Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
IN CONFI ENCE SWCSUB note th t the Review is considering the ppropri te level of costrecovery (full, p rti l no costrecovery) from the sector nd funding mech nism (fees ndor levy); note th t there re fin nci l implic tions for the Crown from the costrecovery options (p rti l nd no costrecovery), nd st ggered implement tion to new funding regime; gree to rele se the document Review f funding pti ns f r the classificati n framew rk under the Films, Vide s, and Publicati ns Classificati n Act, for public consult tion, subject to ny fin l editori l ch nges; note th t the Minister of Intern l Aff irs proposes public consult tion to run from December to Febru ry ; note th t the Minister of Intern l Aff irs will seek C binet decisions on the governments preferred funding model for OFLC in M rch . Vivien Meek Committee Secret ry Hardcopydistribution: C binet Soci l Wellbeing Committee Minister of St tistics Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs clwjxyyl IN CONFI ENCE
IN CONFI ENCE SWCSUB Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee Summary This d cument c ntains inf rmati n f r the New Zealand Cabinet. Itmust be treated in c nfidence and handled in acc rdance with any security classificati n, r ther end rsement. The inf rmati n can nly be released, including under the Official Inf rmati n Act , by pers ns with the appr priate auth rity. Fundingthe Classification Framework under theFilms,Videos,and Publications ClassificationAct,: Consultation ocument Portfolio InternalAffairs Purpose This p per seeks greement to rele se public consult tion document (Appendi A ) on options for funding the cl ssific tion fr mework under the Films, Videos, nd Public tions Cl ssific tion Act, (the Cl ssific tion Act). Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Previous Through Budget , C binet directed the Dep rtment of Intern l Aff irs Consideration (DIA) to review the fees p y ble under the Cl ssific tion Act by the end of April (the Review), including consider tion of whether the current ppro ch to the fee p yer couldshould be exp nded, nd whether the method for ch rging fees is still pplic ble in the current context CABMIN .. Summary The Office of Film nd Liter ture Cl ssific tion (OFLC) regul tes the cl ssific tion system nd m n ges restricted content. OFLC h s recorded deficits since which re ttributed to the decline of the physic l medi industry, outd ted thirdp rty fee levels, nd until st tic Crown ppropri tion. OFLCs existing thirdp rty fee levels h ve not been reviewed since nd re no longer fitforpurpose. The purpose of the Review is to return OFLC to fin nci lly vi ble position, so th t OFLC c n continue to support New Ze l nders to m ke informed viewing choices nd minimise the v il bility of h rmful m teri l. DIA h s commenced review (the Review) into options for funding the cl ssific tion fr mework. The consult tion mostly imp cts commerci l public tions. Also being consulted on, re the speci l fees, discounts nd reduced r tes for individu ls nd ch rit ble org nis tions, such s film festiv l org nis tions. The Minister of Intern l Aff irs (the Minister) is seeking the publics views on the ppropri te level of costrecovery (full, p rti l or no costrecovery) from the sector, nd mech nisms (fees nd or levy) to fund: current cl ssific tion ctivities prescribed under the Films, Videos, nd Public tions Cl ssific tion (Fees) Regul tions (the Regul tions); OFLCs cl ssific tion ctivities rel ted to regul ting Commerci l Video onDem nd (CVoD) visu l medi content. clwjxyyl IN CONFI ENCE
IN CONFI ENCE SWCSUB The Review is not seeking to recover the costs of items submitted by government gencies for cl ssific tion. There re sever l potenti l risks nd mitig tions det iled in paragraph . Regulatory A Qu lity Assur nce P nel from the Dep rtment of Intern l Aff irs nd the ImpactAnalysis Tre sury Regul tory Qu lity considers th t n lysis of the options to fund current nd future ctivities in light of ongoing Commerci l Video on Dem nd reform re incomplete nd in ccur te, nd therefore does not meet the Qu lity Assur nce criteri (see paragraphs ). Baseline None from this p per. Implications Legislative None. Implications Timing Issues A public consult tion process is pl nned from December to Febru ry . DIA will use the feedb ck received from the consult tion process to m ke recommend tions to the Minister in Febru ry . The Minister will then report to C binet in M rch seeking decisions. Announcement The Minister intends to issue press rele se to l unch the consult tion period on December . Proactive The tt ched p per will be pro ctively rele sed. Release Consultation P per prep red by DIA. MCH, MBIE (Commerce nd Consumer Aff irs), MoE, Tre sury, MFAT (Foreign Aff irs), MoH, TPK, MfW nd Or ng T m riki were consulted. Film nd Video L belling Body w s lso consulted. The Minister indic tes th t the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime, the Associ te Minister for Arts, Culture nd Herit ge, he Minister for Ethnic Communities, the Minister for P cific Peoples, the Minister for Women, the Minister for Youth, the Minister of Corrections, the Minister of Educ tion, the Minister of Employment, the Minister of Fin nce, the Minister of He lth, the Minister of Justice, the Minister of Loc l Government, the Minister of Revenue, the Minister of St tistics nd the P rli ment ry UnderSecret ry to the Minister of Justice J n Logie MP were consulted. The Minister lso indic tes th t New Ze l nd First nd the Green P rty nd the L bour P rty were consulted. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs The Minister of InternalAffairs recommends that the Committee: note th t the Office of Film nd Liter ture Cl ssific tion (OFLC) is currently funded through thirdp rty fees, government funding nd sm ll mount of interest income; note th t in M y , C binet greed to initi te review of OFLCs funding (the Review), nd invited the Minister of Intern l Aff irs to report b ck to C binet by April CABMIN. ; clwjxyyl IN CONFI ENCE
IN CONFI ENCE Supportng the deve opment of housing on Mori and . A key objectve o the Whenua Mori Programme is to promote the use o Mori land byi ts owners or housing. Ratng issues are requently identfed as one o the barriers to housing on Mori land. . I recommend allowing the practce o apportoning rates on a Mori land ratng unit betw een diferent homes and treatng those apportonments as a single ratng unit or the purposes o the rates rebate scheme. This will put owners o homes on Mori land on a level playing feld with other homeowners when it comes to accessing the rates rebate scheme. . Apportonment will make it easier or individual home owners to pay the rates or their home s and or local authorites to collect rates on homes on Mori land. I propose that once rates are apportoned, liability or rates on the home rests only with the home owner. . Strict applicaton o the law means that the owners have to make a collectve arr angement among themselves to collect rates rom the various home occupants on the property, pay it over to the local authority, and manage among themselves the issues that arise where some owners are unable or unwilling to contribute their share. There are many Mori land sites with multple homes on them. The extreme case ofcials have identfed is a site with homes on it. Sites with or more homes are not uncommon. Frequently owners o Mori land aspire not only to build individual homes but communites o homes on their land, where the size o the site permits it. . The current rules around the defniton o a ratng unit ocus on the individual ttle as ther atng unit. Where multple homes exist on one ttle, legally local authorites should keep them in one rate account. An excepton occurs where an occupaton order has been made under s o TTWM Act. Such an order provides the owner in whose avour the order is made exclusive use and occupaton o the whole or any part o that land as a site or a house. . I do not regard reliance on occupaton orders as a conclusive soluton to the admi nistratve problems in ratng multple homes on Mori land. Applicants have to incur costs in making such applicatons and may not be success ul. The Court may only make an order i it is satsfed that there is a sufcient degree o support or the applicaton among the owners. With multple owners who may be geographically spread ar and wide, obtaining the necessary owner support or an order may be logistcally impossible. . I note that currently there is no obligaton on the Mori Land Court to not y the rel evant territorial authority when an occupaton order is made or changed. I propose a minor amendment to TTWM Act to require the Court to not y the territorial authority o any new or changed occupaton orders so that the territorial authority can ulfl its obligatons under the Ratng Valuatons Act . Modernisingthe RatngAct . My ofcials research has shown that much o the current law relatng to Mori land ratng is litle changed rom the Mori Land Ratng Act . Page f fdorymq Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE knowledge or consent. The Amendment Act was repealed in but afected land rem ained as general land. The retenton o Mori land in Mori ownership is o undamental importance, and this is refected in TTWM Act. Had this land not been converted to general land by the Amendment Act, it would have retained its status o Mori reehold land and there ore maintained its protecton rom abandoned land and ratng sales. The efects o the Amendment Act were raised as a signifcant issue in hui around the country during the Shand Inquiry. . A Cabinet paper estmated the amount o afected land to be , hectares. The pa per noted that incomplete records made it difcult to accurately measure the amount o afected land. . The Ratng Act provides local authorites two routes to collect rates on general land. Whe re land has been abandoned, it can apply to the District Court or approval to sell the land. It can also apply to the High Court or permission to conduct a ratng sale. It is there ore necessary to close of both sale avenues to efectvely protect this land rom urther sale. . I recently enquired o local authorites o abandoned land sales in train. Waitomo Dis trict Council identfed nine sales it had in train, and investgaton showed that our o these were land. This satsfes me that this is stll a living issue that should be addressed. I consider it is contrary to the Crowns Treaty obligatons to allow these sales to contnue. . Finally, both statutory provisions allow local authorites to lease land to recover rate arr ears rather than sell it. My ofcials have been unable to ident y any situaton where local authorites have leased rather than sold land to collect arrears. However, leasing land without owner agreement is also a orm o alienaton and could create urther complicatons about compensaton or improvements made by lessees i the owners were identfed and wished to reengage with their land. . I am sympathetc to local authorites wish to collect rates on this land, partcularly whe re an adjoining land owner is actually using the land and deriving economic beneft rom it. For Mori land, the person using the land is liable or the rates unless the land is vested in trustees. . There ore, I have proposed that or ratng purposes only, local authorites may treat land as Mori land or the purposes o collectng rates rom a person other than the owner. This will allow local authorites to charge an occupier or rates on this land. C arifying trustees ob igatons . The Ratng Act provides that, i trustees are liable to pay rates, the trustees are liable or rates only to the extent o the money derived rom the land. From tme to tme local authorites are advised by trustees that the money derived rom the land is insufcient to pay the rates. Currently they have no means o veri ying that claim. . I propose that we add a provision to the Ratng Act that where trustees state there is insufc i ent money derived rom the land to pay the rates, they must, i requested by the local authority, provide copies o any accounts provided to benefciaries to support that claim. Land is considered abandoned i rates have been unpaid or three years or more and: the ratepayer is unknown; cannot be ound afer due inquiry and has no known agent in New Zealand; is deceased and has no personal representatve; or has given notce to the local authority that he or she has abandoned the land. In the Ratng Act, the term trustees covers both legal trustees and the board o an incorporaton. Page f fdorymq Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE . I see this as an obligation with a low compliance cost. The local authority will not be able to require information that is not currently prepared by the trustees. I also expect local authorities to use their judgement in making such requests. Including purpose statements . I propose that both the LGA and the Rating Act be amended to include the purpose statement of TTWM Act as the purpose of their specific provisions relating to Maori land rating. The purpose statement for the TTWM Act states it is desirable to recognise that land is a taonga tuku iho of special significance to Maori people and, for that reason, to promote the retention of that land in the hands of its owners, their whanau, and their hapu, and to protect wahi tapu: and to facilitate the occupation, development, and utilisation of that land for the benefit of its owners, their whanau, and their hapu. . Inclusion of purpose statements in statutes is an important way for Parliament to signal what legislation is intended to achieve. Section () of the Interpretation Act states The meaning of an enactment must be ascertained from its text and in the light of its purpose. Hence purpose statements can assist users and the Courts in determining the meaning of particular statutory provisions. . While the absence of purpose statements has not directly contributed to the current problems with the rating legislation , I consider inclusion of purpose statements will encourage users of the legislation to think about the application of the specific provisions relating to Maori land in a constructive manner. . I intend, subject to advice from Parliamentary Counsel, that this would be done by adding a further clause to the overall purpose of the Rating Act and to the purpose of local authority revenue and finance policies. Transition and implementation . Many of the measures I propose can be implemented immediately a Bill is passed. Some require a little time to enable local authorities to prepare their systems for the change. Some also need an educationinformation process to occur so that both owners of Maori land and local authority staff understand and are then able to successfu lly implement the proposals. Table summarises the proposals and my recommendations for transition and implementation . Table : Summary of transition proposals Proposal Recommended implementation Supporting the development of, and provision of housing on, Maori land . Ability to write off rates arrears. Immediate. . Making unused land nonrateable. At the commencement of the first financial year that is four months after the Bill is passed. The effect of this is that if the Bill is passed before the end of February, the provision would commence on the following July. If the Bill is passed between March to the end of June, commencement would be deferred by one year. This gives local authorities the time to research the current use of the land affected. Page of fdorymq : Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFI ENCE opportunites exist to assist and improve the system or Mori landowners in managing Mo ri land and, that by doing so, additonal economic returns can be achieved delivering social and cultural beneft or Mori. The paper outlined my intenton to bring urther proposals to Cabinet to make targeted amendments to other legislaton afectng whenua Mori, including ratng legislaton DEVMin re ers. This paper ulfls that intenton in relaton to ratng legislaton. . The proposals in this paper complement other measures we are taking to acilitate the use o Mori land. . In Budget we allocated . million over our years towards implementng thew henua Mori programme. This money is allocated to enable regional on theground advisory services to Mori landowners, the creaton o a Whenua Know ledge Hub and website; new and enhanced services or the Mori Land Court; the modernisaton o the Mori Land Court in ormaton systems and support or legislatve amendments to TTWM Act. . In December Cabinet approved amendments to TTWM Act MCRMIN re ers. These amendments are intended to improve outcomes or Mori land owners prosperity and intergeneratonal wellbeing, supportng both protecton and development opportunites over their land. They also seek to reduce the complexity and compliance that Mori land owners encounter when they engage with the Mori Land Court, while maintaining the overall scheme o the Mori land tenure system. This Bill is being drafed now and will be available or introducton to the House shortly. Ratng egis aton for Mori and provides a barrier to its deve opment and is in need of mod ernisaton . Rates have long been identfed as providing a barrier to owners engaging with and deve loping Mori land. The Shand Inquiry () commented on the disincentve rates arrears present to the development o potentally productve land. The Inquiry concluded the issue o ratng Mori land is integral to the use and development o Mori land, and the resoluton o ratng issues will make a positve contributon to the broader objectves o Mori land development. . The AuditorGeneral has identfed rates arrears as a barrier to owners o Mori land buil ding housing on their land. The AuditorGeneral also identfed that owners were reluctant to build houses on Mori land or ear the local authority would pursue them or the rates on the whole land block. . Issues about ratng Mori land and the barriers ratng presents to Mori lands use and deve lopment have been consistently raised during previous consultaton with Mori land owners on whenua related maters and in many claims be ore the Waitangi Tribunal. . The Tribunal has also conducted thorough research into the history and problems o ratng Mori land.It has become apparent rom a review o that material that, apart rom the prohibiton on selling Mori land to pay rates arrears introduced in , much o the present law about ratng Mori land is largely unchanged rom the Mori Funding Local Government, Report o the Local Government Rates Inquiry, August . Government planning and support or housing on Mori land, Controller and AuditorGeneral, August . Mori and Ratng Law, Tom Bennion, Waitangi Tribunal Rangahaua Whanui Series, July . Page f fdorymq Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
IN CONFIDEN CE Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector Office of the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector Chair Cabinet Legislation Committee Charities Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction Proposal I am seeking Cabinets agreement to introduce the Charities Amendment Bill. The Charities Amendment Bill is intended to be introduced in September and passed by June . Executive Summary This paper seeks Cabinets agreement to introduce the Charities Amendment Bill (the Bill). The Bill summarises a suite of proposed chang es to the Charities Act (the Act) to modernise the Act and ensure it supports charities to thrive, while ensuring sufficient public transparency. The Bill makes legislative amendments, and includes the provisions to: . Enable reduced financial reporting requirements for very small charities to mitigate compliance burden; . Clarify who an officer is and their role, and measures to improve governance; . Clarify and improve compliance and enforcement under the Act; . Increase the transparency and fairness of regulatory decision making by the Chief Executive of the Department of Internal Affairs and the Charities Registration Board ; and . Introduce a simpler appeals mechanism by e mpowering the Taxation Review Authority to hear appeals under the Act. Subject to Cabinets agreement, I intend to introduce the Bill in September . I expect that the Government will refer the Bill to be scrutinised by the Social Services and Community committee later this year. I expect that the Bill will be passed by June , subject to other Government priorities. Under the Charities Act, regulatory functions are split between two bodies, the independent Charities Registration Board and the Chief Executive of the Department of Internal Affairs . While the Board is responsible for all registration and deregistration decisions, it delegates most decisions to Charities Services (under delegat ion from the Chief Executive under the Act). IN CONFIDEN CE
IN CONFIDENCE s()(f)(iv)
IN CONFIDENCE agree that the Bill be introduced on September ; agree that the government propose that the Bill be: . referred to the Social Services and Community committee for consideration; and . enacted by June . Authorised for lodgement Hon Priyanca Radhakrishnan Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector IN CONFIDENCE
IN CONFIDENCE Allocation of decision making powers The Bill will expand the TRA , an existing tribunal, to take on a new function to hear appeals under the Charities Act . This new function requires the allocation of several decision making powers including confirming, modifying, or reversing the decision of the original decision maker; exercising powers of the original decision maker; making orders ; regulating its procedures ; conducting hearings ; hearing evidence; awarding costs; and stating cases for the High Court. These powers are consistent with the current powers of the TRA . The Bill provides the Chief Executive of the Department of Internal Affairs with a power to exempt very small charities in tier from meeting the XRB standard for reporting. The power could only be used to exempt charities that are defined by financial thresholds in regulations. The financial thresholds will then be subject to my recommendation as the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector. Associated regulations Regulations associated with the TRA may be made to enable the procedures for appeals to an Authority under the Charities Act. These regulations will include notice of claim requirements, filing fees and directions hearing procedures. These regulations will be completed within months of enacting the Bill, to align with the commencement of the appeals provisi ons. The drafting task of developing these regulations will be small as the policy and drafting on the procedures for appeals has already been completed. Regulations may be created for reducing reporting requirements for very small charities. These regulations w ould include setting maximum financial thresholds that will determine whether a charity qualifies as a very small tier chari ty. These financial thresholds will relate to the total amount of assets, and the total annual operating expenditure, o f any given charitable entity. I currently consider that appropriate thresholds to determine what a very small charity would be total assets of less than , and total expenditure of less than ,. The timing for the development of th ese regulations is largely dependent on the outcome of the XRBs consultation. If regulations are made to reduce reporting requirements, these will require consultation with the sector. Other instruments The Bill does not include any other instruments. Definition of Ministerdepartment The Bill does not contain or alter a definition of Minister, Department or Chief Executive of a department. Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector IN CONFIDENCE
IN CONFIDENCE Appendix A: Charities Amendment Bill See attachment Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector IN CONFIDENCE
IN CONFIDENCE Appendix B: Departmental Disclosure Statement See attachment Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector IN CONFIDENCE
IN CONFIDENCE Commencement of legislation Certain aspects of the Bill will require a delayed commencement of months after the of Royal Assent , including; Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector . Taxation Review Authority procedures this delay will provide the Ministry of Justice with time to prepare the Authority and its systems to hear charities appeals as well as make the associated regulations . . Provisions on the objections and decision making framework the appeals and objections provisions will need to be implemented at the same time to ensure the decision making framework is tenable . Subject to Cabinet agreement, the rest of the Bill (except for the regulation making powers) will come in to force months after the of Royal Assent. The regulation making powers in the Bill that relate to the appeals provisions , enable reduced reporting , and increase the number of members on the Charities Registration Board will come in to force immediately after the of Royal Assent . Parliamentary stages I recommend the Bill should be introduced on September and passed by June . I recommend the Bill is referred to the Social Services and Community Committee. Proactive Release As per Cabinet Office Circular CO () Proactive Release of Cabinet Material: Requirements , I intend to proactively release this paper, subject to any redactions that may be warranted under the Official Information Act , within business days of decisions being taken. Recommendations The Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector recommends that the Cabinet Legislation Committee : note that the Charities Amendment Bill holds a category priority on the Legislation Programme, (referral to a select committee this year) ; n ote that the Bil l makes legislative changes to encourag e and support charities to thrive, while ensuring sufficient public transparency ; approve Parliamentary Counsel Office to make necessary editorial amendments to the Bill before introduction; approve the Bill for introduction, subject to the final approval of the government cau cus and sufficient support in the House of Representatives; IN CONFIDENCE
IN CONFIDENCE Compliance The Bill complies with: . the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi; . the rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act and the Human Rights Act ; . the disclosure statement requirements a disclosure statement has been prepared and is attached to this paper as Appendix B ; . the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act ; . relevant international standards and obligations; and . the Legislation Guidelines ( edition) . Consultation The following government departments and public bodies were informed and consulted on a draft of the Bill and this paper : Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (Policy Advisory Group) , Inland Revenue, External Reporting Board, Ministry for Business, Innovation and Employment, Ministry of Justice, Crown Law, Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission, Ministry of Social Development, Ministry of Disabled Persons Whaikaha, Te Arawhiti Office for Mori Crown Relations, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Housing and Urban Development, Ministry of Youth Development Te Manat Whakahiato Taiohi, Ministry for Culture and Heritage, Treasury, Te Puni K kiri, Ministry for P acific Peoples, Ministry for Ethnic Communities, Ministry of Youth Development, Ministry for Women, Office of the Ombudsman, and Sport New Zealand. The final version of the Bill reflects technical changes to give effect to feedback during consultation. Binding on the Crown The Charities Act binds the Crown. The Bill does not make any amendments to that provision. The Bill will require amendments to the Taxation Review Authorities (TRA) Act. The TRA Act does not bind the Crown, therefore amendments to th at Act will not b e binding on the Crown. Creating new agencies or amending law relating to existing agencies The Bill does not create any new agencies or amend legislation covering the Ombudsmen Act , the Official Information Act , or the Local Government Official Information and Meetings Act . Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector IN CONFIDENCE
IN CONFIDENCE Page of c) note officials from the Department of Internal Affairs and Taumata Arowai are available to meet to discuss these options; EITHER d) agree to further work being done to develop and test the following options to reduce the regulatory burden faced by smaller drinking water suppliers : i. Option : very small suppliers serving up to people are not regulated , and Taumata Arowai develops education material to be used on a voluntary basis ; andor YesNo ii. Option : make it easier and less burdensome for smaller suppliers to comply, by extending the timeframes and reducing the regulatory requirements ; YesNo OR e) agree that no further work is required at this time. YesNo
IN CONFIDENCE Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector Charities currently report to one of four tiers developed by the XRB. The four tiers are based on the charities annual expenses or operating expenditure of its previous two financi al years. Each tier has its own standard with more rigorous reporting required from larger charities, while smaller charities can use more simplified reporting. Even the current simplified reporting can be burdensome for the smallest charities , which are often volunteer run and time poor. To minimise the compliance burden while balancing the benefit of transparent reporting, Cabinet has agreed to provide the ability to exempt very small charities from reporting to the XRB standard. These charities would instead report basic financial information in their annual return CAB MIN . The XRB are aware of the compliance burden on small charities and are currently consulting on proposed changes to Tier and notforprofit reporting . The objective of this work aligns with Cabinets agreement to reduce the compliance burde n on small charities. However, findings from the XRB consultation will not be available until after the consultation period, which ends on September . I have therefore included the exemption power in the Bill, in the instance the outcome of the XRB consultation does not align with this policy change. My officials will continue to work with XRB on developments following their consultation. Financial implications Th is paper does not seek new funding . As part of Budget , the Government announced funding to expand the Taxation Review Authority to hear charities appeals and fund the associated legal costs expected with a more accessible appeals body. Budget funding was also secured to cover fees for the two new Charities Registration Board members, and one FTE to support the enhanced regulatory decision making processes. A breakdown of the cost allocation is found in Table . Table : Budget Cost allocation of Charities Act Implemen tation of Changes Operating funding sought (M) outyears Total Vote Internal Affairs . . . . Vote Courts . . . . Impact analysis The Department of Internal Affairs prepared and submitted a Regulatory Impact Analysis to Cabinet in relation to the policy proposals Modernising the Charities Act : policy proposals CAB MIN refers. The Regulatory Impact Analysis met the quality assurance criteria of the Department of Internal Affairs panel. IN CONFIDENCE
IN CONFIDENCE Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector Background The Bill will modernise the Charities Act The Charities Act (the Act) provides a registration, reporting and monitoring system for entities that carry out charitable purposes and therefore have a public benefit. Registering for charitable status brings several benefits, including eligibility for tax exemptions and funding opportunities. The Act is a key piece of legislation for the not forprofit sector. The charitable sector is diverse, ranging from large iwi organisations, churches and education providers to local providers of social services, toy libraries and sports clubs. Since the Act was introduced in , the sectors operating environment has changed; including the disestablishment of the Charities Commission in and changes to the financial reporting requirements for charitable entities in . Cabinet commissioned work to modernise the Act in to ensure it was fit for purpose and suited the needs of the charitable sector SWC MIN . The fundamentals of the Act were noted to be sound. In March , Cabinet agreed to a rescoping of the programme to focus primarily on making practical improvements to the Act SWC MIN . Policy There are several policy proposals given effect to in the Bill In February , Cabinet agreed to policy proposals (outlined in Table ) to amend the Act to support charities to thrive, while ensuring sufficient public transparency CAB MIN . The Bill gives effect to the legislative changes agreed to by Cabinet and is attached as Appendix A . Cabinet also authorised me to make minor and technical changes that align with the policy intent. These are also included in the table below. Table : Summary of proposals in the Charities Amendment Bill Proposal objective Proposal detail Reducing financial reporting requirements for small charities to mitigate compliance burden Provide the Chief Executive of the Department of Internal Affairs with a power to exempt very small charities in tier from meeting the External Reporting Board (XRB) standard for financial reporting where the compl iance burden is disproportionate to the level of transparency needed from these charities See clause The fundamentals of the Act were noted to be sound. Cabinet agreed to consider substantial issues in the Act, but not first principles such as the definition of charitable purpose. IN CONFIDENCE
IN CONFIDENCE Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector Proposal objective Proposal detail Minor and technical policy changes Clarify that the Chief Executive may make a recommendation to the Charities Registration Board to deregister a charity See clause Clarify that any other information provided by a charity may be contained in the register if it will support the purposes of the register See clause Allow the Chief Executive to correct the register of genuine errors made by the charity See clause Amend the Act to provide for notices to be sent electronically See clause Clarify that the payment of a fee is to accompany an annual return See clause Some other changes are operational and do not require legislative amendment To further the policy objectives of this work, non legislative changes will also be progressed. These changes can be implemented operationally by the Chief Executive , under the existing functions and powers of the Act. The changes include clarifying regulatory decision making policy and procedures ; review ing the Departments performance measures as they relate to Charities Services to ensure they are fit for purpose ; requiring charities that report financially to tiers to report reasons for their accumulated funds in their annual return form ; and issu ing model rules as guidance for charities ., The proposal to reduce financial reporting requirements for charities relates to work being done by the External Reporting Board The Charities Act requires charities to report on their finances annually, by preparing an annual return accompanied by a copy of financial statements. These statements must be prepared in accordance with accounting standards set by the External Reporting Board (XRB), that promote transparency and consistent financial reporting. As a business unit within the Department of Internal Affairs, Charities Services public accountability measures are part of the Departments statement of performance expectations and annual reporting requi rements. Charities report to one of four tiers developed by the External Reporting Board. The tiers are: Tier Full Standards million in annual expenses or has public accountability ( percent of charities report in Tier ); Tier Reduced Disclo sure Regime under million annual expenses ( percent of charities report in Tier ); Tier Simple Format Report (Accrual) under million annual expenses ( percent of charities report in Tier ); Tier Simple Format Report (Cash) under , annual operating payments ( percent of charities report in Tier ). IN CONFIDENCE
IN CONFIDENCE Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector Proposal objective Proposal detail Provide a power to create regulations that set the financial threshold for very small charities that may be exempted from the reporting standard in ac cordance with the policy intent to have proportionate financial reporting See clause Clarifying who an officer is and their role, and measures to improve governance Amend the definition of officer to capture any persons with significant influence over the entity, whether they are a trustee or a member of the governing body or not See clause Amend who can be disqualified from being an officer by requiring at least one officer to be years or older, and continuing to disqualify indi viduals under the age of years See clause s and Amend who can be disqualified from being an officer by including financing of terrorism offences as disqualification criteria See clause Provide for the requirement that a charity must review its rules document annually, to prompt regular consideration of governance matters See clause Clarifying and improving compliance and enforcement under the Act Make explicit the current implicit obligations on charities to remain qualified for registration, which means maintaining exclusively charitable purposes, having a rules document, and having qualified officers See clause Amend the definition of serious wrongdoing to express a more consistent level of behaviour by replacing the reference to an offence with a reference to an offence that is punishable by imprisonment for a term of years or more See clause Enable the Charities Registration Board to disqualify an officer for serious wrongdoing, or for their significant or persistent breach of obligations, without having to deregister the charity first See clause Increasing the transparency and fairness of decision making by the Board and Charities Services Require the Charities Registration Board to publish decline and deregistration decisions and the grounds for those decisions See clauses and Increase the number of Charities Registration Board members from three to five people See clauses and IN CONFIDENCE
IN CONFIDENCE Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector Proposal objective Proposal detail Provide for an expansion of the current objection process in the Charities Act to apply to all Charities Registration Board decisions and significant decisions of the Chief Executive, which are: remove or omit information or documents from the register; approve a change of balance for repor ting; grant, vary or revoke an exemption from compliance requirements; and treat one or more entities as a single entity, and what terms and conditions apply to those entities See clause Provide an entitlement for charitable entities to speak in person to the decision maker as part of the objections process See clause Increase the timeframe for entities to provide information for an application or make an objection from working days to two months See clause Require the Chief Executive to consult with the sector on any significant guidance material to be developed See clause Introduce a simpler appeals mechanism Expand the decisions available for appeal to include all decisions of the Charities Registration Board and significant decisions of the Chief Executive, being decisions to: remove or omit information or documents from the register; approve a change of balance for reporting; grant, vary or revoke an exemption from compliance requirements; and treat one or more en tities as a single entity, and what terms and conditions apply to those entities See clause Increase the timeframe for entities to lodge an appeal from working days to two months See clause Empower the Taxation Review Authority to hear appeals under the Charities Act, and to confirm, cancel or vary the decision being appealed See clauses , and Require the Charities Registration Board and the Chief Executive to be party to appeals of their decisions See clause IN CONFIDENCE
IN CONFIDENCE.In line with coalition agreements, I propose councils that do not disestablish or rescind a decision to establish Mori wards will have to follow a binding poll process. . I consider that there are two key variables for possible polls on Mori wards: .. Timing: Whether the outcome of any polls should apply from the or local elections; and .. Prompt: Whether polls should be imposed on councils or occur only if communities effectively petition their councils . . I have considered four options to meet the coalition agreements that reflect different combinations of decisions on timing ( or local elections) and prompt (petition or no petition) : Option A: the outcome of polls take effect at the local elections after a mandatory poll in late ; Option B: the outcome of polls take effect at the local electionsfollowing a petitions process in late and polls in early ; Option A: the outcome of polls take effect at the local elections after a mandatory poll at the local elections ; and Option B: the outcome of polls take effect at the local elections following a petitions process in early and polls at the local elections . . T hese options and their risks are detailed below. . Option A is my preference. This option has l ower cost s for councils, as poll s held alongside the elections will be less expensive than standalone polls. This option also carries less implementation risk, as councils will have more time to implement the poll results and reconfigure their representation arrangements prior to them taking effect . However, this choice means the poll outcome will apply later, from the elections . . A list of the councils that will be affected by these proposals and four councilsthat I consider should not have to hold a poll is attached at Appendix C. Option A: the outcome of polls take effect at the local elections after a mandatory poll in late . This option would require councils to hold a poll in late if the y did not hold one when originally establishing Mori wards since . The result of this poll would be binding and determine if a council has a Mori ward (s) for the elections. These polls will take councils approximately three months to conduct. . Following mandatory polls in late , some councils will need to complete arepresentation review prior to election processes starting in April . This doesnot allow enough time for the standard representation review process . I propose Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE that, if the poll results mean a representation review is required, councils be allowed to complete a truncated representation review. This shortened representation review process will remove the Local Government Commissions appeal function. Councils will make the final decisions on their representation arrangements. . Remov ing the appeal function carries some risk that councils may fail to comply with legislative provisions, as well as risks of missed opportunities for enhancing effective representation of communities , or of incumbent councillors manipulating representation arrangements. To mitigate the non compliance aspect, I propose that the Commission be given a legislated role to provide technical guidance to councils going through this shortened representation review process. These councils will also be required to carry out a standard representation review in the next term of local government. . A no outcome in the polls will have different effects for the two categories of councils : .. Councils that established Mori wards without having held a poll would have a choice to either use their previous representation arrangements from before the establishment of Mori wards ( if viable to us e or population figures) or complete the truncated representation review process described above . .. Councils that resolved to establish Mori wards in the local government term would be able to keep their current representation arrangements or undertake the truncated representation review process. These councils will also have to complete a truncated representation review if the outcome of the poll is yes. Option B: the outcome of polls take effect at the local elections following a petitions process in late and polls in early . For the councils that have resolved to establish Mori wards since , without holding a poll, this option would allow electors to petition their council in late to hold a poll in early . The results of these polls would be reflected at the local elections. . Because of the timeframes of this option, councils would not have time to undertake a representation review and would instead only have time to make a resolution on their representation arrangements. This removes: .. the public submissions process; and .. the Local Government Commission appeals process. . Councils would have approximately six weeks to make their final decisions by early April , shortly before election processes begin. . This option has significant risk due to the tight timeframes for petitions, polls , and representation arrangement decisions , and there being no community consultation on representation arrangements. The risks posed by removing the Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE
IN CONFIDENCELegislation Committee with an view when I seek approval to introduce the Bill. . Legislative implications . . I intend to make a bid for this Bill in the Legislation Programme, with a priority of Category (to be passed within the year). . . For a Bill implementing any of the four Mori wards options, i t is likely that Business Committee agreement, or a motion in the House, w ould be required on shortened select committee consideration. Impact analysis Regulatory impact statement s . The Department of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Analysis panel (the panel) has reviewed the completed RIA in accordance with the quality assurance criteria in the CabGuide and considers that the information and analysis in: The RIS Changing timelines to enable local elections to be delivered(Appendix A) meets the quality assurance criteria. The RIS Binding polls on the establishment of Mori wards (Appendix B) partially meets the quality assurance criteria. . The panel made the following statement about the information and analysis in theRIS Binding polls on the establishment of Mori wards : .. The RIA was developed within a very tight, ministerially set, timeframe to deal with the implementation of Government a coalition commitment to undo legislative changes made by the previous government. These factors ()(f)(iv) ()(h) ()(h) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE limited the analysis and consultation that could be undertaken and the evidence available. They also required the policy problem and objectives that underlie the commitment to be backfilled . .. While these limitations are acknowledged in the RIA, their consequences could be stated more clearly and explicitly addressed. .. While the panel found the identification of policy objectives related to the stated policy problem, and the development and use of criteria based on those objectives to be useful, there was insufficient analysis of the relative value of Mori wards as a mechanism for meeting effective representation objectives. As a result, the panel did not feel the application of the criteria provided a compelling assessment of the policy commitment against the status quo. .. In relation to the transitional application of the poll provisions to existing Mori ward decisions, the panel did not believe the use of similar criteria was appropriate to assessing process and timing options to achieve the Governments objective. The panel did not find the Departments preference for the status quo to be useful in this context and felt more explicit exploration of the relative cost, timing, and process implications of the options considered (for instance, the impact on the integrity of representation reviews) would have enabled a more useful comparison of the relative merits of the other options. .. On this basis, the panel felt that the RIA failed to fully meet the complete and convincing criteria prescribed by Cabinet. The context within which the proposals were developed also precluded any meaningful consultation with affected parties. This is acknowledged in the RIA which does include some evidence of stakeholder views from previous consideration of the underlying issues. Climate implications of policy assessment . The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team ha s been consulted and confirms that the CIPA requirements do not apply to these proposals as the threshold for significance is not met. Population implications Restoring polls on Mori wards . The changes to Mori ward processes specifically affect electors of Mori descent who have chosen, or may choose in the future, to be on the Mori electoral roll. Prior to the legislation changes, Mori were typically underrepresented in local government compared to their proportion of the general population. Survey data from Local Government New Zealand indicated that after the local elections approximately . of local government elected Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE members (comprising mayors, councillors, local board members and community board members) were Mori, compared to . of the wider population in the Census. Following the local elections , the percentage of elected members who identify as M ori is now estimated at .. Fixing postal voting timeframes . Extending the voting period would particularly benefit rural voters and Mori communities and could raise the rate of voter participation in local elections . Human rights . More work needs to be done to determine if the proposals in this paper are consistent with the rights and freedoms affirmed in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act and the Human Rights Act . Reinstating polls on the establishment of Mori wards may raise issues of discrimination on the basis of ethnicity. A final determination will be possible when the legislation is drafted. Use of external resources . No external resources were used during the development of these proposals . Consultation . The following agencies were consulted during the development of these proposals : the Ministry of Justice, the Electoral Commission, Statistics NZ, Land Information New Zealand, officials from the Local Government Commission, Parliamentary Counsel Office, Te Arawhiti , and Te Puni K kiri. The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (Policy Advisory Group) and the Treasury were informed. Only officials from the Local Government Commission were consulted on Options B and A in this paper. . The Ministry of Justice has raised concerns about the remov al under Option A and B of the role of the Local Government Commission in hearing appeals in the proposed truncated representation review process . . Statistics NZ ha s raised concerns about the ability under Option A and Option B for councils to roll back to pre Mori ward representation reviews because of population data accuracy issues and difficulties where statistical boundaries have changed in the meantime. Department of Internal Affairs officials are currently working with St ats NZ officials to see how this risk can be mitigated. . Due to the time constraints, consultation with the local government sector has been very limited so far. L ocal Government New Zealand ( LGNZ ), Taituar, election service providers, and NZ Post (and their business division Datam) have been consulted on the proposed changes to election timeframes and are supportive of these changes . . There has been no public consultation and no consultation with iwi and Mori. Legislative timeframes mean this will not be possible before the Bill is introduced. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE . I seek Cabinet agreement to share t he draft B ill with the Local Government Commission, in accordance with the Attorney Generals Protocol for Release of Draft Government Legislation outside the Crown. Communications . I intend to issue a press release following Cabinet decisions on these policy proposals . Proactive release . I intend to proactively release this paper subject to any redactions made under the Official Information Act . Recommendations . The Minister of Local Government recommends that Cabinet: Restoring polls on Mori wards . note that restoring the provisions for binding polls on council establishment of Mori wards is a commitment in both coalition agreements ; . agree that the Local Electoral Act and the Local Government Act be amended so that on an ongoing basis: .. a petition by at least per cent of people on the electoral roll within a district will require the council to hold a binding poll on the establishment of Mori wards; and .. councils may also initiate a binding poll on the establishment of Mori wards; . agree that the Local Government Electoral Legislation Act be amended so that: .. councils do not need to consider establishing Mori wards every six years; Requiring councils to hold a poll if they did not hold one when establishing their Mori wards . note that since councils have established Mori wards, or have resolved to establish them, without holding a poll; . agree that the Local Electoral Act be amended so that: .. councils that established Mori wards since without a poll can make a resolution before the local elections to disestablish their Mori wards ; .. councils that have made a resolution to establish Mori wards in the term of local government can rescind this resolution before the local elections ; to Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE EITHER (Option A): . agree that the Local Electoral Act and the Local Government Act be amended so that: .. councils that established Mori wards since without a poll and did not make either of the decisions in recommendations . and . are required to hold a binding poll in ; .. the outcome of the poll referred to in recommendation . must take effect from the local elections ; .. if the outcome of a poll held in is no to establishing or keeping Mori wards, a council may: ... revert to or retain the representation arrangements in place before establishing Mori wards; or ... complete a truncated representation review which has no legislated appeal mechanism ; .. if a council has not yet implemented its Mori ward decision, and the outcome of a poll held in is yes to continuing to establish Mori wards, the council must complete a truncated representation review which has no legislated appeal mechanism ; and .. Tauranga City Council is required to hold a poll and the outcome of the poll must take effect at the local elections ; OR (Option B ): . agree that the Local Electoral Act and the Local Government Act be amended so that: .. a petition by at least per cent of people on the electoral roll within a district will require councils that established Mori wards since without a poll and did not make either of the decisions in recommendations . and ., to hold a binding poll in early (or in the term for Tauranga City Council); .. the outcome of any poll referred to in recommendation . must take effect from the local elections ; .. if the outcome of a poll held in early is no to establishing or keeping Mori wards, a council may: ... revert to or retain the representation arrangements in place before establishing Mori wards; or ... adopt new representation arrangements without a submissions process or legislated appeal mechanism; Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE .. if a council has not yet implemented its Mori ward decision, and the outcome of a poll held in early is yes to continuing to establish Mori wards, the council must adopt new representation arrangements without a submissions process or legislated appeal mechanism; OR (Option A ): . agree that the Local Electoral Act be amended so that: .. councils that established Mori wards since without a poll and did not make either of the decisions in recommendations . and . are required to hold a binding poll at the local elections ; .. the outcome of the poll referred to in recommendation . must take effect from the local elections ; and .. Tauranga City Council is required to hold a poll and the outcome of the poll must take effect at the local elections; OR (Option B): . agree that the Local Electoral Act be amended so that : .. a petition by at least per cent of people on the electoral roll within a district will require a councils that established Mori wards since without a poll and did not make either of the decisions in recommendations . and ., to hold a binding poll at the local elections (or in the term for Tauranga City Council) ; and .. the outcome of any poll referred to in recommendation . must take effect from the local elections ; Fixing p ostal voting timeframes . note that the current statutory timeframe for delivering voting papers is six calendar days ; . note that NZ Post has advised that it will be unable to deliver all voting papers within the statutory timeframe for the and future local elections ; . agree that the Local Electoral Act and Local Electoral Regulations be amended to: extend the period voting papers can be delivered to days ; bring forward the start of the voting period and delivering voting papers by approximately days; and make adjustments to other statutory dates as necessary to accommodate the extended voting period, and address other time pressures in the local electoral cycle for triennial elections, by elections and polls . Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCERemoving ability to appoint members on the Canterbury Regional Council . note that removing the legislated ability for Ngi Tahu to appoint members to the Canterbury Regional Council is a commitment in both c oalition agreements ; Legislative implications . authori se the Minister of Local Government to make further policy decisions arising from consultation or legislative drafting to be included in the Bill, subject to confirming these decisions when the Minister seeks Cabinet agreement tointroduce the Bill ; . note that the Department of Internal Affairs will work with the Legislative Design and Advisory Committee (LDAC) to ensure that the details in the proposalscomply with LDAC guidelines as much as possible ; . note that the Minister of Local Government intends to ma ke a bid for this omnibus Bill in the Legislati on Programme, with a priority of Category (to be passed within the year); . agree that the Local Government Commission may be consulted on a draft of this Bill subject to the Attorney Generals protocol for the release of draft Government legislation outside the Crown; and . authorise the Minister of Local Government to announce these policy decisions. Authorised for lodgement Hon Sim eon Brown Minister of Local Government ()(h) ()(f)(iv), ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Appendix A: Regulatory Impact Statement: Binding polls on the establishment of Mori wards
IN CONFIDENCELocal Government Commission appeals process under Option A also apply here. While there would still be a legislated role for the Commission to provide guidance, there would be a very short window of time for the Commission to work with all affected councils. . The effect of a no result from the polls will be similar to the outcomes outlined in paragraph under Option A. . While this option allows a petitions process and the outcomes of polls to take effect at the local elections, I strongly recommend against Option Bbecause of the significant risks caused by the tight timeframes and lack of scopefor consultation. . Statistics NZs implementation concerns also apply to this option. Option A: the outcome of polls take effect at the local elections after a mandatory poll at the local elections . For the councils that have resolved to establish Mori wards since , without holding a poll, this option would require councils to hold a poll at the local elections. . If the results of a poll require a representation review these would be undertaken under standard timeframes and processes in the term of local government. Option B: the outcome of polls take effect at the local elections following a petitions process in early and polls at the local elections . For the councils that have resolved to establish Mori wards since without holding a poll, this option would allow electors to petition their council tohold a poll at the local elections. A petition in early by at least per cent of electors would require a council to hold a binding poll alongside the local elections to determine if councils have Mori wards at the localelections. . If the results of a poll require a representation review these would be undertakenunder standard timeframes and processes in the term of local government. Special case: Tauranga City Council . The Tauranga City Council c ommission ers resolved last term to establish Mori wards for these elections without having held a poll . Because the Tauranga City Councils term begins in July , I propose that the Council be allowed to make a resolution to disestablish its Mori wards before the elections. If the council does not disestablish, it will be required to either hold a poll or accept petitions for a poll before the elections . The outcome of any poll would not take effect until the elections . Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Treaty of Waitangi obligations . Mori wards provide for dedicated, elected representation for New Zealanders on the Mori electoral roll . . Legally privileged An urgency application has been filed in the Waitangi Tribunal regarding these policies . As part of a broader claim relating to policies in the Coalition Governments Day Plan, it asserts that restoring binding polls on Mori wards breaches the Treaty and its principles. The Tribunal is currently considering whether the claim is suitable for an urgent hearing. Fixing postal voting timeframes Background . Under the Local Electoral Act there is a . day voting period for postal voting in local elections. Under the Local Electoral Regulations , all postal voting papers must be delivered in the first six days of the voting period. Responsibility for meeting this statutory requirement sits with local electoral officers. NZ Post provides almost all the postal services for local elections. . NZ Post has struggled to deliver voting papers within the six day window in recent elections. NZ Post has now informed the Department of Internal Affairs that it will take up to two weeks to complete nationwide delivery of voting papers for local elections for the and future local elections. This creates a risk that some voters will not have a reasonable opportunity to cast their vote. Proposal: Adjust statutory timeframes of local elections processes . I propose extending the voting period so that the delivery period for postal papers can increase from six to calendar days. The statutory for the close of voting will remain as the second Saturday in October every three years. . The extra time will come from shifting a number of statutory timeframes for local elections , including a slightly shortened nomination period and shifting the cut off for electors to be included on the printed roll earlier. . At the same time as extending the delivery period to enable people to receive their votes, I propose some other small adjustments to statutory dates to address some lingering issues in the local electoral timeframe. This will allow more time to print voting papers, and starting the mailout earlier in the week so any mistakes identified do not have to be fixed over a weekend. These timeframes would also apply to by elections and polls, where applicable. Further policy decisions may be required . The policy proposals above have been developed under time constraints in order to meet the goal of having these changes apply from the local elections. It is likely that I will need to seek a number of further policy decisions from Cabinet at the same time as seeking approval to introduce this Bill. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE . Repealing the Canterbury Regional Council (Ngi Tahu Representation) Act is a commitment in the Coalition Agreement between National and ACT . .
INCONFIDENCE Page of
INCONFI ENCE . note that the Local Government (Ratng o Whenua Mori) Amendment Bill (the Bil l) holds a Category (to be passed i possible in the year ) priority on the legislaton programme; . note that the Bill presents a package o ratng measures to: . support the development o , and provision o housing on, Mori land; and . to modernise ratng legislaton afectng Mori land; . approve the Bill or introducton, subject to the fnal approval o the government cauc us and sufcient support in the House o Representatves; . agree that the Bill be introduced on February ; . agree that the Government propose that the Bill be: . re erred to the Mori Afairs commitee or consideraton; and . enacted be ore the House rises or the general electon, i possible. Authorised or lodgement Hon Nanaia Mahuta Minister o Local Government Mini ta Whanaketanga Mori Page f fdorymq Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
INCONFI ENCE . The Shand Inquiry in included extensive consultaton with Mori on ratng Mori land. It held hui specifcally on that issue. In the ollow up to the Shand Inquiry in , Te Puni Kkiri ran a urther regional workshops with Mori landowners on ratng and valuaton issues. Further submissions addressed these issues in the previous Governments Te Ture Whenua Mori Bill. For those reasons I have not consulted Mori in preparing these proposals. Mori have already told us what they think o the present situaton. A thorough Select Commitee process will provide urther opportunity or input rom Mori landowners. . Coaliton and confdence and supply partners have been consulted. Binding on the Crown . The Bill will not change whether any o the legislaton to be amended is, or is not, bindi ng to the Crown. Creatng new agencies or amending law relatng to existng agencies . The Bill does not create new agencies or amend existng agencies. Allocaton of decision making powers . The Bill does not involve the allocaton o decision making powers between the exe cutve, the courts, and tribunals. Associated regulatons and other instruments . No regulatons or other instruments will be needed to bring the Bill into operaton. efniton of Ministerdepartment . The Bill does not provide new, or alter any existng, defnitons o Minister, department or c hie executve o a department. Commencement of legislaton . The Bill will come into orce the day afer Royal Assent. Some provisions need to com mence rom the beginning o a fnancial year and local authorites need tme to prepare or those provisions to take efect. The Bill provides that these provisions commence on July . Parliamentary stages . I propose that the Bill is introduced by February . I possible, the Bill should be passed by the tme the House rises or the electon. Failing that, to give local authorites adequate tme to prepare or provisions that take efect rom July , the Bill should be passed no later than February . . I propose to re er the Bill to the Mori Afairs Select Commitee. Proactve release . I intend to proactvely release this paper. Recommendatons . The Minister o Local Government and or Mori Development recommends that the Cabine t Legislaton Commitee: Page f fdorymq Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
INCONFI ENCE . The SOP implements interim measures to transiton rom current arrangements by con straining largescale reorganisaton applicatons. It provides or the reintroducton o the pre threshold requirement that an applicaton or reorganisaton, other than an applicaton by an afected local authority or by the Minister o Local Government, must be supported by a petton o per cent o electors o the afected area or areas. . Appropriate transitonal arrangements are provided or to apply to reorganisaton appli catons made be ore the Bill is enacted. The transitonal measures provide that any largescale reorganisaton applicatons made by members o the public afer the policy was announced on April but be ore enactment must meet the new threshold requirement in order to proceed. . The SOP also provides or the number o Commissioners to reduce to one should the wor kload o the LGC permit a reducton. This will change the current legislatve requirement that there be three Commissioners to a requirement that there be up to three Commissioners. . Some o the changes in the Bill provide greater powers to the LGC which is inconsistent wit h the wider re orm programme to disestablish the LGC in its current orm. The SOP removes the ollowing provisions: . powers or the LGC to initate reorganisaton investgatons o its own moton; . providing the LGC with a greater dispute resoluton role; . the requirement that the LGCs Chie Executve Ofcer is appointed by and repo rts directly to the LGC rather than the Department; . that relevant staf rom the Department be trans erred to the LGC; and . that equivalent protectons rom personal liability to those in the State Sector Act be specifcally applied to the Chie Executve and staf o the LGC or actons done or the purpose o the LGC in good aith as they will contnue to be protected by relevant provisions in the State Sector Act . . The Bill also provides greater accountability o the LGC to central government, which is con trary to this Governments approach. The SOP removes the ollowing provisions: . the requirement that the LGC prepares an annual work programme; . the ability or the Minister o Local Government to review the operatons and per ormance o the LGC; . the requirements that the LGC produce a statement o intent and a detailed annua l report and provide these to the Minister o Local Government; and . obligatons as to the orm and content o annual reports (the current requi rement or the LGC to report on its operatons each year will be retained). . Some current elements o the Bill will be retained. These elements provide a fexible reo rganisaton process to enable the LGC to rightsize the reorganisaton process so that it is proportonal to the scope and potental impact o an investgaton; provide or a separate and fexible councilled reorganisaton process; and give the LGC greater fexibility to decline to undertake an investgaton. Page f Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
INCONFI ENCE . no longer promote the use o multply owned CCOs to provide core local aut hority services including transport and water services; . constrain the role o the Local Government Commission in largescale local gov ernment reorganisatons, such as amalgamatons and the creaton o unitary authorites; . provide or a locallyled reorganisaton process; . provide a fexible reorganisaton process so that it is proportonal to the scope and potental impact o an investgaton; and . reduce the number o Commissioners required by the Local Government Act . . note the additonal minor and technical changes identfed through drafing o the S upplementary Order Paper to: . include a new transitonal provision de erring applicaton o the new requi rements or local authorites to publish CCO reports on their websites and the requirements or CCOs to engage with indirect shareholders or a threemonth period; . amend the two stage Order in Council process or reorganisatons to prov ide greater clarity o operaton; and . beter present clauses and their crossre erencing in Schedule Two. . approve the Supplementary Order Paper to the Bill or tabling in the House, subjec t to the fnal approval o the government caucus and sufcient support in the House o Representatves; . agree that the Supplementary Order Paper be tabled on August ; . agree that the commitee o the whole House may take place on the frst available afer the Supplementary Order Paper is tabled; and . a gree that the Bill be enacted by September . Authorised or lodgement Hon Nanaia Mahuta Minister o Local Government Page f Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
INCONFI ENCE . The Bill contains a power to give efect to a local authorityled reorganisaton by Order in Co uncil made on the recommendaton o the Minister o Local Government. The LGA currently contains a power to give efect to fnal proposals and reorganisaton schemes by Order in Council. As set out in paragraph above, the SOP makes minor technical amendments to the regulatonmaking power, to improve the practcal efect. Other instruments . The proposed SOP does not contain any provision empowering the making o other inst ruments that are deemed to be legislatve instruments or disallowable instruments. efniton of Ministerdepartment . The SOP does not contain a defniton o Minister, department or chie executve o a depar tment, or alter the defnitons in the LGA. Commencement of legislaton . The Bill and the provisions in the SOP will come into orce on the day afer Royal assen t. Parliamentary stages . The Bill is awaitng commitee o the whole House having had its second reading on J une . The Bill was reinstated to the Parliamentary Order Paper ollowing the general electon. The Bill holds a category two priority (must be passed in the year) on the legislaton programme. Although the SOP is substantal, it largely reverses existng measures which are contentous. Engagement with the local government sector on the proposed changes indicates that they are likely to be uncontroversial and supported. I see no reason to delay urther legislatve stages so that commitee o the whole House can take place soon afer tabling the SOP. I propose that the Bill be enacted by the end o September to provide certainty or the local government sector. Proactve release . In accordance with Cabinet Ofce Circular CO () Pr actv eRelease fCabinet Material: UpdatedRequirements , I intend to proactvely release this paper on the Departments website, subject to any redactons that may be warranted under the OIA, within business days o Cabinet decisions. Recommendatons . The Minister o Local Government recommends that the Cabinet Legislaton Comm itee: . note that the Local Government Act Amendment Bill (No ) (the Bill) holds a ca tegory two priority (must be passed in the year) on the legislaton programme; . note that the Supplementary Order Paper makes substantal changes to the Bill asr eported back rom select commitee; . note that the Bill, as amended by the Supplementary Order Paper, will; . improve the transparency and accountability mechanisms or council con trolled organisatons (CCO); Page f Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
INCONFI ENCE . clari ying the current exempton or marae, meetng places and meetng house s; . clari ying the obligatons on trustees not liable to pay rates or lack o income deri ved rom land held in trust; and . including clear purpose statements to the provisions o the Local Government (Ra tng) Act and the Local Government Act relatng to Mori land ratng MCRMIN re ers. . Issues around Mori land always have the potental to be controversial. However, this pack age o proposals is clearly directed at enabling Mori land owners to develop and use their land and to support our regional development priorites. My communicatons in relaton to the Bill will emphasise that point. . It is not possible to achieve our desired policy outcomes in this area without amending exi stng legislaton. It is tmely that we legislate now as this complements our other policy initatves in relaton to the development o Mori land. Regulatory impact analysis . A Regulatory impact analysis (RIA) was prepared and the Department o Internal Afa irs Regulatory impact analysis panel (the panel) reviewed the RIA in accordance with the quality assurance criteria. The panel considered that the in ormaton and analysis summarised in the RIA met the quality assurance criteria. Compliance . The Bill complies with: . The principles o the Treaty o Waitangi; . The rights and reedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill o Rights Act andt he Human Rights Act ; . The disclosure statement requirements, with a prepared disclosure statement ata ched to this paper; . The principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act ; . Relevant internatonal standards and obligatons; and . The Legislat nGuidelines ( Editon). Consultaton . The ollowing government departments have been consulted on this paper: Te Puni Kk iri; Te Arawhit; Department o Conservaton; Land In ormaton New Zealand; the Ministries o Housing and Urban Development; Justce; Business, Innovaton and Employment; Ministry or Primary Industries; and the Treasury. The Department o the Prime Minister and Cabinet has been in ormed. . Local Government New Zealand and the Society o Local Government Managers were consu lted during the policy development o these proposals and are supportve o them. Page f fdorymq Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
INCONFI ENCE . enabling local authorites to extend the tmeline or a CCO to prepare and ado pt the CCOs SOI by up to one month. The current process requires the SOI to be prepared concurrently with the local authoritys longterm plan. Allowing a de erral will enable the local authority planning process to lead and in orm the CCO planning process; . enabling local authorites to directly engage with holding company subsidiaries by re quiring subsidiaries to aford local authorites an opportunity to comment on SOIs and requiring subsidiary hal yearly and annual reports to be provided directly to the local authority as well as the holding company. Currently there is no legal ability or the local authority to engage with or require in ormaton rom CCOs where the shareholding is held indirectly through a holding company; and . enabling local authorites to impose additonal planning and reportng requi rements on CCOs, such as requiring the development o an asset management plan or a longterm plan. . The Bill as introduced provides or a local authority to set out a statement o expe ctatons or a CCO. The Bill makes a statement o expectatons mandatory or a substantve CCO. My changes will remove the classifcaton o a substantve CCO but retain the opton or shareholders in all types o CCOs to prepare a statement o expectatons. The SOP makes the statement o expectatons an enabling provision which may be deployed i local authorites choose to. The SOP also removes the inclusion o a statement o shareholders expectatons in respect o the CCOs contributons to, and alignment with, any relevant objectves and priorites o central government. . The SOP retains the current requirements in the Bill or CCOs to meet obligatons to Mo ri by: . allowing local authorites to speci y expectatons about how a CCO conducts its rel atonships with the community, stakeholders, and iwi, hap and other Mori organisatons; . applying a current decisionmaking obligaton o local authorites to CCOs. The Bil l requires CCO boards to take into account the relatonship o Mori and their culture and traditons with their ancestral land, water, sites, whi tapu, valued fora and auna, and other taonga when making decisions that may signifcantly afect land or a body o water; and . requiring local authorites to consider, when making CCO board appointments, whet her knowledge o tkanga Mori may be relevant to the governance o that CCO. . The SOP removes rom the Bill the requirement that local authorites permit CCO boar ds the opportunity to comment on the local authoritys longterm plan. Given the other changes, this provision is no longer appropriate or necessary. Local authorites can determine how best to engage with their CCOs on the development o a longterm plan. Page f Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
INCONFI ENCE Compliance . The Bill as currently drafed complies with: . the principles o the Treaty o Waitangi; . the rights and reedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill o Rights Act andt he Human Rights Act ; . the disclosure statement requirements. A disclosure statement has been prepa red by the Department o Internal Afairs and is atached to this paper; . the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act ; . relevant internatonal standards and obligatons; and . the Legislaton Design and Advisory Commitee Legislaton Guidelines. Consultaton . The ollowing departments were consulted on the policy contained in the SOP and prov ided with a consultaton draf o the SOP: Ministry o Transport, New Zealand Transport Agency, Ministry or the Environment, the Treasury, Inland Revenue Department, Land In ormaton New Zealand, Te Puni Kkiri, Ministry o Business, Innovaton and Employment, Ministry o Housing and Urban Development, Te Arawhit, Ministry or Justce, State Services Commission, the Ministry o Health and the Department o Prime Minister and Cabinet (Policy Advisory Group and Emergency Management). . My ofcials discussed the policy proposals that are implemented by this SOP with ofci als rom Local Government New Zealand, the New Zealand Society o Local Government Managers, and the LGC. Binding on the Crown . The SOP and the Bill propose to amend the LGA. The LGA binds the Crown to the lim ited extent provided or in secton o the Act. Amending law relatng to existng agencies . The Bill proposes to extend the applicaton o the Ofcial In ormaton Act (OIA) and t he Ombudsmen Act to the LGC. The LGC currently complies with the OIA but it is unclear whether this compliance is voluntary. The Bill will provide certainty as to the law, and the SOP leaves this provision intact. The Ofce o the Ombudsman supports the proposal. Allocaton of decision making powers . The SOP does not involve the allocaton o decisionmaking powers between the exe cutve, the courts, and tribunals. Associated regulatons . Regulatons are not required to bring the Bill into operaton. Page f Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
INCONFI ENCE Min r addit nalchangesidentfedthr ughSOP drafing:LGCandthere rganisat n pr c ess . I propose urther minor and technical changes through the SOP to the two stage Order in Co uncil process or implementng a reorganisaton (sectons and A o the LGA). The Bill proposes that the frst Order in Council should provide or the that the second Order in Council comes into orce, as well as the the reorganisaton takes efect. The experience o the West Coast reorganisaton has identfed practcal problems with this approach. I now propose that the or the second Order in Council and the reorganisaton itsel are identfed in the second Order in Council, not the frst. . The SOP also provides that an Order in Council is not invalid as a result o the inclusion o a dditonal provisions that are necessary to give the reorganisaton legal efect, or the omission o material that is unnecessary to give legal efect to the reorganisaton. This change resolves problems identfed through the West Coast reorganisaton process and avoids unnecessary duplicaton. . Minor changes are made through the SOP to Schedule Two o the Bill to: . correct the defniton o afected area or a reorganisaton initatve that relates sole ly to local boards so that a petton o per cent o the electors in the proposed local board area is required, not per cent o the whole district o the unitary authority; . require the LGC to take into account the objectves listed in clause , a highe r legal weightng than the current requirement to consider those objectves; . rearrange the ordering o clause so that it appropriately re ers to the obje ctves in clause ; and . correct crossre erences in clause C. Maters that may be contentous . I do not consider that the policy changes implemented by the SOP will be contentous. Mos t o the proposals are uncontroversial and will be supported by the local government sector. The SOP mostly reverses changes which themselves were contentous and atracted widespread adverse comment, partcularly rom local government. . There may be concerns rom the Auckland development community about the removal o t he proposed changes to unregulated IGCs or Watercare. I intend to provide appropriate media comment at the tme the SOP is tabled. Impact analysis . The Department o Internal Afairs prepared and submited to Cabinet two Regulatory Impa ct Analyses in relaton to the proposed SOP: . Optons or improving the way local government is reorganised CABMIN re ers; and . Local Government Act Amendment Bill (No ) councilcontrolled org anisatons CABMIN re ers. Page f Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
INCONFI ENCE Min r addit nalchangesidentfedthr ughSOP drafing:c uncilc ntr lled rganisat ns . The SOP includes a new transitonal provision applying to the new requirements or loc al authorites to publish CCO reports on their websites (outlined in paragraph .) and the requirements or CCOs to engage with indirect shareholders (outlined in paragraph .). The transiton provision gives local authorites and CCOs a threemonth grace period be ore these provisions apply. This is to allow local authorites and CCOs tme to amiliarise themselves with these provisions and prepare to meet their obligatons under those provisions. Other minor po icy maters imp emented by the SOP . The LGA provides or rules speci ying per ormance measures in relaton to the three wat ers, food protecton and control works, and the provision o roads and ootpaths. The rules were promulgated in November and the Bill provides that they be reviewed at least every years, which would require a review to commence by November . I propose to undertake urther work to consider what, i any, role there is or central government in setng nonfnancial per ormance measures or local authorites. It would be unhelp ul to review existng measures while that work is ongoing, so the SOP removes this provision rom the Bill. . The SOP also removes rom the Bill provisions to permit regulatons to set fnancial per ormance measures or local authorites and CCOs. The current LGA provision or fnancial prudence benchmarks will remain in place, but this will be subject to urther work to consider whether centrally prescribed benchmarks should be removed given the diverse size and compositon o , and circumstances aced by, local authorites. . The SOP amends clause A o Schedule o the LGA to exclude ex ofcio members ro m the membership o a joint commitee or the purposes o determining the number o members that consttutes a quorum or the commitee. Secton () o the LGA provides that the mayor o a territorial authority is an ex ofcio member o every council commitee. Including ex ofcio members or the count o quorum could there ore create difcultes achieving quorum or joint commitees involving multple local authorites. Transfer of transport functons . The SOP restores the opton o trans erring land transport unctons under the Land Tra nsport Management Act (LTMA), the Land Transport Act and the Local Government Act between regional councils and territorial authorites. Prior to , the LGA enabled such trans er o unctons by agreement. Changes made by the previous Government in had an unintended consequence o precluding such trans ers. This proposal is included in the SOP at the Minister o Transports request. The Loca Government Commission (LGC) and the reorganisaton process . The SOP implements stage one o a re orm programme to disestablish the LGC in its cur rent orm. It removes rom the Bill greater powers or the LGC and increased accountability o the LGC to central government. Given that the promoton o multply owned CCOs will be removed rom the Bill, the power o the LGC to establish multply owned CCOs through a local government reorganisaton will also be removed. The re orm programme will consider alternatve arrangements or carrying out those unctons o the LGC which need to contnue, and the appropriate role and unctons or any contnuing statutory body. Page f Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
INCONFI ENCE Ofce o the Minister o Local Government Chair Cabine t Legislaton Commitee Local Government Act Amendment Bill (No ): Approval for tabling Supplementary Order Paper Proposal . I seek approval to table a Supplementary Order Paper (SOP) to the Local Government Act Amendment Bill (No ) (the Bill). Policy . The proposed SOP enables the Bill to be aligned to our priorites or making impr ovements to the local government system. It implements legislatve policy decisions made by Cabinet on February DEVMIN and CABMIN re er and June DEVMIN and CABMIN re er. . The Bill was introduced by the previous Government to amend the Local Government Act (LGA). The intent o the Bill was to give the Local Government Commission (LGC) greater powers and to promote the use o multply owned councilcontrolled organisatons (CCOs) to provide core local authority services such as water and transport services. The SOP removes many o the Bills provisions which do not support our priorites, or example the promoton o multply owned CCOs and additonal powers or the LGC. The SOP also strengthens the accountability and transparency regime or CCOs and constrains the role o the LGC in largescale local government reorganisatons. Counci contro ed organisatons . The Bill promotes multply owned CCOs especially or water and transport. To support that objectve, it contains detailed unding and fnancing provisions or multply owned CCOs. The SOP removes these provisions rom the Bill as they are inconsistent with this Governments enabling approach to empowering local government to improve local services. . The Bill also seeks to prohibit Watercare Services Limiteds (Watercare) in rastructure gro wth charges (IGCs) and replace them with development contributons. The SOP withdraws the provisions relatng to IGCs or urther consideraton as part o uture work on development contributons and targeted rates, under the in rastructure unding and fnancing workstream o the urban growth agenda. . In additon, the SOP provides or enhanced accountability, planning and reportng arr angements or CCOs by: . requiring local authorites to publish CCO statements o intent (SOI), and hal yearly and annual reports on their websites; . retaining the Bills requirement that not or proft CCOs include orecast fnanc ial statements (budgets) in their SOIs; Page f Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
INCONFI ENCE Ofce o the Minister o Local Government Ofce o te Minita Whanaketanga Mori Chair Cabine t Legislaton Commitee Local Government (Ratng of Whenua Mori) Amendment Bill: Approval for introducton Proposal . I propose Cabinet agrees to introduce the Local Government (Ratng o Whenua Mori) Amendm ent Bill (the Bill) to the House. Policy . The proposals in the Bill represent the next step in our programme o whnau devel opment through whenua. We have previously agreed to invest . million over our years in a whenua Mori programme to assist owners o Mori land to developthat land. We have also agreed to proposals to amend Te Ture Whenua Mori Act to improve outcomes or Mori land owners. . The Bill presents a package o ratng measures to: support the development o , and provision o housing on, Mori land; and to modernise ratng legislaton afectng Mori land. . Rates have been long identfed as providing a barrier to owners engaging with and devel oping Mori land. The Shand Inquiry () commented on the disincentve rates arrears present to the development o potentally productve land. The currentlegislaton about ratng Mori land is largely unchanged rom and needs to be modernised to bring it closer to present expectatons o Mori Crown relatons. . On October , Cabinet agreed to support the development o , and provision o housing o n, Mori land by: . introducing an ability or local authorites to write of rates arears; . making unused Mori land (including Mori land protected by Ng Whenua Rhui k a wenata) ratng units nonrateable; . providing a statutory rates remission process or Mori land under devel opment; . treatng multple Mori land blocks as one or ratng purposes when they are being use d as one; and . enabling individual houses on Mori land to be rated as i they were on one ratng un it. . Cabinet also agreed to modernise the ratng legislaton by: . removing arbitrary twohectare land area restrictons rom rates exemptons or mara e and urup; . providing protecton to Mori land made general land by amendments to the Mor i Afairs Act rom the abandoned land and ratng sale provisions o the Local Government (Ratng) Act ; Page f fdorymq Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
INCONFIDENCE To mitigate the risks around spoofing, D aons technology includes D facial liveness detection . This is intended to ensure that the face presented is a genuine live and present individual. .. Key stage limitation To reduce the risk of a brute force attempt, limits are in place at each stage of the process . An individual in a session may only make a limited number of attempts to enter correct identity details matching those contained within an identity document , and may only make a limited number of attempts at the passive liveness challenge before they are subject to a hour lock out. The limited number of attempts within the process reduces malicious attempt s to spoof liveness and to learn from previous failed attempts. Any individual who fails to confirm their identity within these session limitations will have to try again later after the lockout period has elapsed , if allowed by the requesting organisation, or use another method such as presenting their physical identity documents in person at a requesting organisations offices. . Collection .. Notice Prior to the collection of any information within the Identity Check service the individual is provided with the following privacy information. The Department of Internal Affairs needs your information to confirm your identity. Find out more about how your information will be used in the privacy statement .. The privacy statement and Terms of Use are displayed on the DIA interface. The privacy statement varies depending on the requesting organisation utilising the Identity Check service. The privacy statement details : how information provided will be used by DIA. that information will be shared with and by Waka Kotah i if the individual chooses to verify their identity using their driver licence . that metadata will be shared with the requesting organisation in all circumstances . that the passive liveness confirmation , result from the identity document photograph comparison and identity document confirmation will be shared with the requesting organisation with the individual s consent. if appropriate, that the selfie will be shared with the requesting organisation with the individuals consent. how to request a copy of information held by DIA. how the requesting organisation will use information provided by DIA including a link to their privacy statement. The individual is also provided a link to the Terms of Use for the Identity Check service which include s an acknowledgement of the privacy statement. The individual is not able to proceed until they have agreed to the Identity Check Terms of Use. At any time whilst using the Identity Check service the individual can access the privacy statement via a link at the bottom of the screen. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
INCONFIDENCE .. Collection whilst using the service The individual is asked to provide details of their identity document . They select the document they would like to use then provide the following information as contained on the document: document number document version number (driver licence only) name of birth . Once it has been confirmed that the information provided is valid and the document meets the validity requirement and is not lost or stolen , the individual is asked to provide access to their devices camera to take a live photo when prompted. If they do not provide access, then they will not be able to proceed to use the Identity Check service. Prior to the passive liveness check commencing a sample of the ambient light is made . If the light conditions are not sufficient the individual is advised to move to another location. The next stage is a passive liveness check, the individual is provided instructions on how to complete the passive liveness check. When the individual is ready to begin they will push a button to start, and a live photo is collected . A still photograph (selfie) is extracted from one of the frames within the live photo along with a series of other comparison frames. The individual is not able to review the selfie. The selfie and comparison frames are processed by the liveness engine. The selfie is also compare d to the document image held by DIA or Waka Kotahi. If the individual fails the passive liveness check, they can reattempt the passive liveness check a further four times. Therefore, one session may result in multiple sets of comparison frames and selfies being captured. .. Collection of driver licence information from Waka Kotahi If the individual selects to use their New Zealand driver licence for their identification, then DIA will first confirm the provided driver licence information with Waka Kotahi using the Driver Licence Verification Service.
INCONFIDENCE photograph from the database, and how the driver licence photograph (once retrieved) is to be assessed and analysed for the purposes of the comparison . That being the case, for the purpose s of section () of the LTA, the access and use of the driver licence photograph is undertaken by the employee, even if in practice, the employee does not see the driver licence photograph in question in the context of their access and use. .. Metadata For each use of the Identity Check service a new session is created, metadata about the timing of events of each stage of the process are captured by the I dentity Check service . A transaction ID is also collected from the requesting organisation when the individual is transferred to the Identity Check service. This transaction ID is used to allow the requesting organisation and DIA to know theyre communicating about the same individual for the purposes of that Identity Check transaction. An Identity Check ID is also created by DIA which is also shared with the requesting organisation to enable identification of the relevant successful transaction . .. Google Analytics Google Analytics is used within the Identity Check service to track the access and use of the various webpages. This information is collected for the purpose of identifying pain points in the individual journe y so th at improvements can be made. Although this information is collected at an identifiable level it is only used for service improvements at an aggregate level. . Use .. Use of the live photo The live photo will be used to select the appropriate frame for creation of the selfie and extraction of the comparison frames. The live photo will not be used by DIA for any purpose other than offering individuals the ability to confirm their identity to the requesting organisation . .. Use of the comparison frames A series of comparison frames are taken from the live photo automatically . These images are used to enable passive liveness detection. The comparison frames will not be used by DIA for any purpose other than offering individuals the ability to confirm their identity to the requesting organisation. .. Use of the selfie A still photograph (selfie) is taken from the live photo automatically. The selfie is used for passive liveness detection and is compared with the relevant photograph from the selected identity document. The selfie will not be used by DIA for any purpose other than offering individuals the ability to confirm their identity to the requesting organisation. .. Use of New Zealand passport information The New Zealand passport information provided by the individual at the beginning of the process is used by DIA to confirm that a unique passport can be located for the individual . At this stage the Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
INCONFIDENCE . In addressing Interim Recommendaton , the Government response agrees that aligning the two electoral frameworks would be benefcial but acknowledges that the proposed review of parliamentary electoral law may result in further rule changes being required. My view is it would be prudent to sequence changes to local electon rules so that they can refect the outcome of this review, if possible. . I seek your agreement to the proposed Government response. Financial implicatons . There are no immediate fnancial implicatons from tabling the proposed Government response. Legislatve implicatons . There are no legislatve implicatons arising directly from this paper. Changes to the Local Electoral Act may be required in due course, to create greater alignment between that Act and the Electoral Act , subject to Cabinet agreement and decisions arising from the proposed review of parliamentary electoral law. Impact analysis Regulatory impact statement . The Regulatory Impact Analysis requirements do not apply to this paper, as it does not consider regulatory optons. Climate implicatons of policy assessment . A Climate Implicatons of Policy Assessment is not required for this paper. Populaton implicatons . Local electons currently present accessibility difcultes for some groups within New Zealand including people with disabilites and those with English as a second language. Most of the improvements that the Electoral Commission has made to try and remove barriers to partcipaton in general electons are not available at local electons. Future work, as priorites allow, to consider whether there should be a more centralised model for delivering local electons may help to mitgate some of these issues. Human rights implicatons . There are no human rights implicatons arising from this paper. Consultaton . The Department of Internal Afairs has consulted with the following agencies in preparing the proposed Government response: the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (Policy Advisory Group), the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Justce, Te Puni Kkiri, and The Treasury. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Communicatons . I do not intend to issue a media release at this tme. Page of icqnczt
INCONFIDENCE issuance of the passport is used to confirm that the passport is valid or has expired within the previous two years. The status of the passport is also checked by DIA to confirm the passport is not lost or stolen. At the point where the individual has completed and passed the passive liveness check, the selfie is then compared to the passport photo . This enable s the verification of the individuals identity to allow the release of confirmation of their passport information under the Identity Information Confirmation Act (IICA). .. Use of New Zealand driver licence information The New Zealand driver licence information provided by the individual at the beginning of the process is used by D IA to confirm that a unique and current driver licence can be identified for the individual using the Waka Kotahi Driver Licence Verification Service . The status of the driver licence is also checked to confirm the driver licence is not lost or stolen. At the point where the individual has completed and passed the passive liveness check, the selfie of the individual is then compared to the driver licence photo graph that is collected by DIA from Waka Kotahi . Section () of the LTA requires that the driver licence photo graph s can only be used for the purpose of verifying the identity of a particular individual. .. Use of m etadata and Google Analytics information The metadata and Google Analytics information will be used to generate reports in aggregate form about how the Identity Check service is performing. These will be used by DIA to analyse the performance of the service and identify areas of improvement. The metadata will also be used in an identi fiable form to create the invoices for use of the Identity Check service by requesting organisations . A report will be created by DIA to support reconciliation of the invoice by the requesting organisation . The metadata will also be utilised on an annual basis to allow aggregate level reporting on the use of the IICA where the individual confirmed their identity using their New Zealand passport . .. Use by other DIA Identity p roducts The information collected about individuals for each requesting organisation using the Identity Check service is segmented by requesting organisation. Identity Check information is also held in separate systems to other DIA solution s. There is no lawfully authorised use of the Identity Check information in relation to other DIA Identity products. Furthermore, the Identity Check information is not information that can be shared under any of the DIA led AISAs. .. Use by third parties Daon do not have access to the DIA data as part of normal business. They are only provided access or given copies of DIA data where an issue has arisen. In this case the access is restricted to only the information required to resolve the identified issue. The Daon and Google contract s with DIA ha ve a requirement that they will not use any DIA data for their own purposes. Daon act as an agent of DIA in accordance with s of the Privacy Act . Therefore, information transferred to Daon is not considered a use or disclosure of the information. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
INCONFIDENCE . Accuracy .. Ability to compare accurately The facial recognition algorithm is provided by Dao n and configured by DIA based on recommendations by Daons biometric experts. Information related to the accuracy of the algorithm as independently assessed by NIST through their FRVT program is available at https:pages.nist.govfrvthtmlfrvt.html . The configuration of the system is weighted towards providing a negative comparison result if there is any doubt to ensure robust evidence of identity. The NIST results indicate with a configured threshold to accept in million chance of a false accept, they see a false reject of in every attemp ts. As DIA allow multiples attempts , this would approach closer to in , chance of a false reject in three attempts. In real world operation m any factors affect the effectiveness of facial recognition systems. Lighting conditions, like variations in light and shadow, can distort facial features and make details less visible. The angle and pose of the face also matter, as non frontal or obstructe d views can be challenging. Changes in appearance due to age ing, weight fluctuations, and cosmetic alterations can complicate matching. Movement during image capture or in real time can blur facial images, reducing system effectiveness. Additionally, image quality, resolution, noise, and compression artifacts can hinder accurate extraction and analysis of facial features. Considering these factors is crucial for developing reliable facial recognition technologies. The Identity Check process and thresholds attempt to account for these factors through customer interaction and tuning. DIA has completed testing of the facial recognition algorithm with real users. While the sample size was limited the results reflected those of the NIST testing . .. Passive Liveness detection The passive liveness algorithm is provided by Daon and configured by DIA based on recommendations by Daons biometric experts. The effectiveness of the algorithm has independently been reviewed by iBeta. iBeta is nationally accredited as a test lab by the National Voluntary Lab Accreditation Program (NVLAP Testing Lab Code ) to the requirements of ISOIEC : (General requirements for the competence of testing and calibration laboratories). They are an expert in the field of biometrics. The iBeta results showed the systems performed accurately during their testing. DIA has completed testing of the liveness algorithm with real users. W hile the sample size was limited the results reflected those of the iBeta test. .. Human oversight There is currently no ongoing human oversight as part of the photograph comparison process. However, DIA are currently exploring the need to set up a project to review the previous comparisons completed over a period. This work is intended to input into the enhancement roadmap for the product, for example if people wearing glasses are unable to use the service successfully more often instruction may be provided to remove an individuals glasses before utilising the service. .. Impact of errors on individuals The Identity Check service aims to create a convenient way for individuals to access services online where they wouldnt otherwise be able to. Each requesting organisation who uses the Identity Check Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
INCONFIDENCE .. Disclosure of driver licence information to Waka Kotahi If the individual selects to use their New Zealand driver licence for verification , then DIA will initially collect confirmation of the validity of the driver licence information from Waka Kotahi. To do so DIA will disclose the driver licence information of the individual to Waka Kotahi. After the driver licence details have been verified by Waka Kotahi, DIA will then request the related driver licence photograph. The disclosure of the individuals driver licence information to Waka Kotahi will be detailed in the privacy statement that the individual agrees with prior to being able to use the Identity Check service. .. Disclosure of New Zealand driver licence information to DIA If the individual selects to use their New Zealand driver licence for verification , then Waka Kotahi will confirm the validity of the driver licence information to DIA when requested . The T erms of Use will detail that by using the service to validate against a driver licence , that the individual has provided consent for their driver licence information to be confirmed using the Waka Kotahi Driver Licence Verification Service. Section () of the L TA authorises the disclosure of driver licence photographs by Waka Kotahi to DIA if it is within the course of a persons official duties as an employee of DIA to verify the identity of an individual. The driver licence photograph will be disclosed by Waka Kotahi to DIA on request upon the successful confirmation of the licence details . DIA use two APIs to request information about the driver licence automatically. The initial API will be used to confirm the validity of the driver licence details to DIA . When requested from Waka Kotahi, another API will then provide the photograph of the driver related to the requested driver licence. .. Disclosure of information to requesting organisations with consent At the start of the Identity Check process the individual is advised how the service works and what they will need to do. They are asked to provide consent to share the results with the requesting organisation for the purposes of verifying their identity. The individual must make an active step to check the consent box before they are able to proceed. The IICA provides authorisation for disclosing the New Zealand passport information in the form of confirmation of the match . The consent of the individual will be required as the authority to disclose their driver licence information in the form of confirmation of the match . If the individual selects to share their results with the requesting organisation, then DIA provide s to the requesting organisation the following: the transaction number confirmation the individual passed the liveness check confirmation of a successful result from the identity document photograph comparison the full name the of birth if applicable, the selfie . The fields shared with the requesting organisation are strictly limited to the information fields listed above . At no stage are the details and images held within the passport or driver licence databases released to the requesting organisation . The small number of fields being disclosed links back to the Identity Check services purpose, that being providing identity verification for a requesting organisation Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
INCONFIDENCE A Conf irmation Agreement has been consulted on with the Privacy Commissioner in relation to use of the New Zealand passport information. A boilerplate agreement has been agreed on and variations to this will be consulted with the Privacy Commissioner. The privacy statement details that the disclosure of the identity document details to the requesting organisation is at the sole discretion of the individual . If the individual selects not to share their results with the requesting organisation , then no information is provided over and above the metadata relating to the transaction. The authorised requesting organisations will utilise the provided details as part of their process for identity verification. .. Disclosure of metadata When a n individual uses the Identity Check service, details of their actions are captured in the metadata. The full details of the metadata will not be released to the requesting organisation by DIA. However, DIA will provide to the requesting organisation details on a per transaction basis about the time and and whether during the transaction the individual : completed the transaction successfully had an unsupported browser or device exceeded the timeout period exceeded the number of possible attempts to complete the liveness check chose to exit the Identity Check service did not authorise the sharing had an unsuccessful Identity Check transaction due to failing the liveness check, identity document photo graph comparison , or identity document data match. The disclosure of this information is not optional if the individual chooses to proceed to use the Identity Check service. The information is disclosed to a requesting organisation to enable the requesting organisation to evaluate how the service is functioning and any pain points that need to be addressed. The information is shared at a transaction level rather than at a summary level. This enable s a requesting organisation to augment the Identity Check information with other information, regarding the individual , to evaluate trends and issues relating to specific groups of individuals e.g., individual s who are purchasing a particular product and are more likely to have an unsupported browser or device. .. Disclosure in the event of a suspected offence The requesting organisation can make a request in writing to DIA for release of the selfie(s) , comparison frame (s) and identity document information as required under the exceptions to the Privacy Act under IPP ()(e). DIAs standard process for handling requests for disclosure under the Privacy Act will be utilised which includes a determination by DIA about whethe r the information will be released. The requesting organisation will need to be able to confirm to DIA that disclosure of the individual s identity information is necessary for one of the following reasons : Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
INCONFIDENCE to avoid prejudice to the maintenance of the law by any public sector agency, including the prejudice to the prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution, and punishment of offences for the enforcement of a law imposing a pecuniary penalty for the protection of public revenue for the conduct of proceedings before any court or tribunal (being proceedings that have been commenced or are reasonably in contemplation) . .. Disclosure of Google Analytics information The information contained within Google Analytics will not be disclosed in a form that allows identification of an individual. However aggregate level reporting regarding use of the service by the requesting organisation and individual s will be provided to the requesting organisation . This is provided for the purpose of understanding how the Identity Check service is performing . .. Disclosure for billing purposes A report containing the transaction ID and the verification will be provided to a requesting organisation by DIA on a regular basis. This report contains a subset of the information provided as part of confirming an identity. Only individual s who authorised sharing of their information with a requesting organisation will be detailed within the report. The report is utilised by requesting organisations to enable the billing amounts to be reconciled against successful verifications. A report containing the transaction ID and the a verification was attempted against a driver licence will also be provided to Waka Kotahi by DIA on a regular basis. This report will not contain any personal information and will be used for any billing or financial reconciliation purposes. .. Disclosure by Daon The Daon Master Services Agreement requires Daon to only disclose confidential information to DIA employees, agents and contractors as required and for reasonably necessary purposes. Daon , by default , do not have access to any information within Identity Check as the solution is hosted at Datacom within a DIA owned and managed tenancy . The only scenario where Daon may have access to personal information is when a defect occurs and DIA request support. In this scenario the access is limited to copies of logs or other information provided by DIA to Daon to support the resolution of the issue . Information provided to Daon is kept to the absolute minimum required for defect resolution. Daon must keep the information confidential in all other circumstances . The exception to this is where the disclosure is: required by law to the courts of any competent jurisdiction to any government regulatory or financial authority . Prior to making a disclosure Daon must consult with DIA. .. Disclosure s to law enforcement agencies DIA may voluntarily disclose, or be compelled to disclose , personal information in the Identity Check service to law enforcement agencies such as NZ Police or the Serious Fraud Office . This would occur via the maintenance of the law exception in the Privacy Act for voluntary disclosures. Compulsory disclosures occur via Production Order s under the Search and Surveillance Act and court orders. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
INCONFIDENCE . Disclosure . .. Overview of disclosure arrangements . .. Disclosure of New Zealand passport information to an individual . .. Disclosure of New Zealand driver licence information to an individual . .. Disclosure of driver licence information to Waka Kotahi. .. Disclosure of New Zealand driver licence information to DIA . .. Disclosure of information to requesting organisations with consent . .. Disclosure of metadata . .. Disclosure in the event of a suspected offence . .. Disclosure of Google Analytics information . .. Disclosure for billing purposes . .. Disclosure by Daon . .. Disclosures to law enforcement agencies . .. Disclosures relating to Privacy Act requests . . Security . . Retention and Disposal . .. Live photos . .. Successful verifications . .. Unsuccessful verifications . .. New Zealand Driver licence information . .. Metadata . .. Google Analytics . .. Information held by Daon . . Ongoing Management . .. Privacy and security breaches . .. Correction of personal information . .. Change management . .. Onboarding of requesting organisations . . Risk Assessment . . Reco m mendations to Minimise Privacy Impact . . Authorisation .
INCONFIDENCE DIAs current process for disclosing to law enforcement agencies will continue to be utilised . .. Disclosures relating to Privacy Act request s DIAs established process for handling Privacy Act requests will continue to be utilised. If requested , the selfies and comparison frame s will be released under a Privacy Act request. . Security A security risk assessment , penetration test, and Certification and Accreditation (CA) has been completed for the Identity Check service. . Retention and Disposal .. Live photos Live photos are only held until the selfie and comparison frames have been created. These are then automatically destroyed. .. Successful verifications If successful verification of identity has occurred , then the selfie(s) , comparison frames and liveness confirmation are held for days within the Daon solution hosted by Datacom New Zealand. The information is retained for this period to enable a requesting organisation to query DIA in the event of an investigation or suspected offence. There is currently no Disposal Authority under the Public Records Act that explicitly details the handling of the Identity Check information by DIA. However, DIA are in in the process of having the Disposal Authority created and this is currently in consultation with the Chief Archivist. .. Unsuccessful verifications If the individual is unable to successfully verify their identity , then the selfie(s) , comparison frames , liveness confirmation and identity document photograph comparison result will not be retained as standard. However, DIA may choose as part of an evaluation period to retain these items for up to days if investigating issues around the performance of the Identity Check service. There is currently no Disposal Authority under the Public Records Act that explicitly details the handling of the Identity Check information by DIA . However, DIA are in in the process of having the Disposal Authority created and this is currently in consultation with the Chief Archivist. .. New Zealand Driver licence information DIA collect , and will pass to Waka Kotahi, an individuals New Zealand driver licence information for the purpose of conducting an identity comparison exercise. Waka Kotahi will return New Zealand driver licence information including photographs to DIA for this purpose. Both parties will retain the driver licence information specific to this purpose for the duration of the session only. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
INCONFIDENCE .. Metadata The metadata relating to both successful and unsuccessful identity verifications will be held for months before being securely disposed of. The information is retained for this period to allow year on year analys is of the Identity Check service and to enable legislative reporting requirements to be met. There is currently no Disposal Authority under the Public Records Act that explicitly details the handling of the Identity Check information by DIA . However, DIA are in in the process of having the Disposal Authority created and this is currently in consultation with the Chief Archivist. .. Google Analytics The Google Analytics information is retained for months before being securely disposed of. The information is retained for this period to allow year on year analysis of the Identity Check service usage. There is currently no Disposal Authority under the Public Records Act that explicitly details the handling of the Google Analytics information by DIA. However, DIA are in in the process of having the Disposal Authority created. .. Information held by Daon Upon termination of the Daon Master Services Agreement, Daon are require d to return or destroy all confidential information if requested in writing by DIA. Upon completion of such a request Daon will issue a certificate to DIA stating the actions taken. . Ongoing Management .. Privacy and security breaches In the event of a privacy or security breach the standard DIA processes for handling a breach and notifying the Office of the Privacy Commissioner and impact ed individual s, if required, will be followed . In the event of Daon or Datacom becoming aware of a potential or actual privacy or security breac h they are required , in accordance with the ir respective Master Services Agreement, to notify DIA as soon as possible. They are also required to cooperate in the prevention or limitation of the breach. .. Correction of personal information DIAs existing Privacy Act request process will continue to be utilised for the correction of information. However, due to the nature of the Identity Check service it is unlikely that any requested corrections will be made to the information held within the Identity Check service as it is accurate at the time of collection. The requesting organisation is responsible for the processes where individuals wish to retake or change their selfie after it has been provided by DIA. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
INCONFIDENCE .. Change management DIA and Waka Kotahi will collaboratively work together to develop the roadmap for the Identity Check service. In the event of changes being made , this PIA will be to reflect any changes , prior to the release of the changes into production. DIA are currently developing an Identity Strategy within the Service, Delivery , and Operations Branch . Part of this strategy involves identifying how best to consult with Mori regarding the various identity products, including Identity Check. To no specific Mori engagement has been conducted regarding Identity Check. .. Onboarding of requesting organisations DIA expect to provide the Identity Check service to a range of requesting organisations including government and private organisations. Each requesting organisation will be required to enter into an agreement with DIA for the service . Standard agreements for requesting organisations entering arrangements with DIA have been developed for commercial and crown entities. T he Privacy Commissioner has been consulted on these agreements in accordance with the IICA. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
INCONFIDENCE . Executive Summary .. Introduction The Identity Check service is provided by DIA Service Delivery and Operation s to provide quick and convenient identity verification. Individuals are directed to the service from other organisations needing to confirm the individuals identity . Given that people are seeking services it is critical that barriers to access services are reduced. One such barrier for applicants is establishing their identity. The Identity Check service leverages technology to provide remote identity verification, without individuals being required to visit a requesting organisations premise s or to have a RealMe Account. The tool uses facial recognition technology and evidence of passive liveness (to prove that the captured live photo is a person and is not, for example , a deep fake ). At the start of the Identity Check process the individual is advised how the service works and what they will need to do. They are asked to provide consent to share the results with the requesting organisation for the purposes of verifying their identity. An individual using the Identity Check service is required to complete two initial steps : Provision of their identity document information Completion of a passive liveness check. The identity document details are compared to the information held in the relevant identity document database . Then the liveness check is completed using a series of comparison frames from the live photo captured. A still photograph (selfie) is also automatically extracted from the live photo , and the selfie captured is compared to the photograph held in the relevant identity document database. Currently , supported identity documents are New Zealand passports and New Zealand driver licences. When an individual is using a New Zealand passport as their identity document, the confirmation to the requesting organisation is authorised under the I ICA. When an individual uses a New Zealand driver licence as their identity document, the details are confirmed to DIA with the consent of the individual using Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agencys Driver Licence Verification Service. When the identity document details (from either their passport or driver licence ) match the information provided and a successful passive liveness check and photographic comparison has been completed , then the following information is provided to the requesting organisation: the transaction number confirmation the individual passed the passive liveness check confirmation of a successful result from the identity document photograph comparison the full name the of birth if applicable, the selfie . .. Inherent r isk level This PIA has identified twelve privacy risks as shown below. Assuming all planned controls are implemented and functioning effectively , there are no zone one risks and t wo zone two risks . Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
INCONFIDENCE March
INCONFIDENCE . Project S ummary .. Problem Statement The Identity Check service is provided by DIA Service Delivery and Operation s to provide quick and convenient verification of an individuals identity . Individual s are directed to the service from other organisations needing to confirm the individuals identity . Given the individuals using the service are seeking services , it is critical that barriers to access services are reduced. One such barrier for individuals is establishing evidence of identity. If an individual wishes to obtain services from a requesting organisation , the individual may currently be required to visit the requesting organisation in person to confirm their identity through the provision of physical identity documents , prior to being able to obtain services . A key component of organisations being able to take services fully online is the requirement to be able to confirm an individuals identity online . The purpose of the Identity Check service is to increase the ability for individuals to complete all interactions online. Organisations utilising Identity Check are required as part of their contract with DIA to provide at least one other method for individuals to confirm their identity. Individuals must still be able to confirm their identity in person if the y desire. .. Identity Check Service The Identity Check service is provided by DIA Service Delivery and Operations . Individual s are directed to the service from requesting organisations . This release of the Identity Check service will enable verification that the individual using the device is the same person as the individual whose identity document details were provided . The individual s details, passive liveness confirmation and photograph comparison result are sent to the requesting organisation with consent from the individual . Certain requesting organisations will also be provided with the individuals selfie with their consent , where the requesting organisation has a business purpose for receipt, such as inclusion of the selfie on a physical card being issued. The Identity Check service currently allows verification of an individuals identity using either a New Zealand passport or New Zealand driver licence . The individual chooses which identity document they wish to use . If a New Zealand passport is used it must be current or less than two years expired , and not be reported lost or stolen. If a New Zealand driver licence is utilised it must be current and not reported lost or stolen. The service is underpinned by a passive liveness and facial recognition solution provided by Daon and hosted in a DIA tenancy at Datacom New Zealand. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
INCONFIDENCE . PIA Scope This PIA covers : confirming the identity of individuals using their New Zealand passport or New Zealand driver licence . provision of the individual s details, passive liveness confirmation , and photograph comparison result to the requesting organisation with the consent of the individual. provision of the individuals selfie to the requesting organisation with the consent of the individual . delivery of the Identity Check service direct to the requesting organisation. This PIA does not cover : consideration of how the requesting organisation will utilise the individual s details and selfie once confirmed by DIA. the processes used by the requesting organisation for confirming the identity of individual s who do not utilise or are unsuccessful in using the Identity Check service. . Applicable Legislation .. Privacy legislation The Identity Check service is primarily intended for use by individuals within New Zealand and the service will be provided by a New Zealand Government agency therefore the New Zealand Privacy Act will apply. Currently the terms of use prohibit use of Identity Check by individuals outside of New Zealand. Therefore, this limit s exposure to additional overseas privacy legislation. .. Identity Information Confirmation Act The IICA governs the use of confirmation services. The IICA defines a confirmation service as one which confirms identity information of an individual to : contribute to the prevention of a crime (particularly identity related crimes) and ensure that agencies can use and, if necessary, record confirmed identity related information. Identity information is defined in the IICA as including New Zealand passport related information but not New Zealand driver licence information. The IICA is not a complete code and information that is not covered by it can still be shared, but that sharing needs to be lawful in its own right. Where there is an inconsistency between the IICA and other relevant legislation, including the Privacy Ac t and the Passports Act , the IICA prevails (s of the IICA). This means where the IICA applies, it needs to be complied with where it deviates from the requirements of that other legislation . Because the purpose of the Identity Check s ervice is to confirm the identity of the individual for a requesting organisations purposes, it falls within the definition of a confirmation service when a New Zealand passport is used for verification purposes . Therefore, where the IICA applies (the sharing of passport details, other personal information and the result of the identity verification) the IICA needs to be complied with. Where other personal information is shared that sits outside the IICA (the driver licenc e confirmation ), sharing needs to be lawful in some other way, for example, by being authorised in accordance with the Privacy Act . Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
INCONFIDENCE .. Land Transport Act The Land Transport Act (LTA) sets out the responsibilities and general requirements for all individual s in the land transport system and associated agencies such as Waka Kotahi. The LTA includes a requirement that all drivers must be licensed. It also governs the issuance and management of driver licences and the licensing system. The LTA requires that d river licences have a photographic image of the holder (s()) . Whilst there are tight restrictions on the access to d river licence images (s), the LTA expressly provides for the use of d river licence images for the purpose of verification of a persons identity by DIA (s() ). Therefore, the LTA directly provides for a service, such as Identity Check , that permits DIA to use driver licence photo graph s to verify the identity of a particular individual when facilitating an identity verification service for other organisatio ns. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
INCONFIDENCE . Architecture .. High level process The Identity Check service involves an identity verification workflow which includes several key stages : the individual consents to the results being shared with the requesting organisation. the individual chooses the type of identity document they would like to use to confirm their identity. the individual enters their identity document details as contained on their identity document. the identity document details are either retrieved from the New Zealand passport database or queried with NZTA and confirmed to match those provided. a live photo is captured of the individual. a still photograph (selfie) and a series of comparison frames are taken from the live photo and used to complete a passive liveness challenge to provide assurance that the live photo is of a live and present individual . the selfie is compared to the photograph held in relat ion to the identity document provided . A back end record stores each attempted Identity Check verification and the outcomes of each stage. If multiple live photos are captured as part of the process , each series of selfies and comparison frames will be stored. The live photo is not stored. Where a successful verification is made the Identity Document Federated ID is stored . .. Information exchanges The following shows the flow of information exchanges between the parties involved in delivery of the Identity Check service.
INCONFIDENCE Appendix A Proposed Government Response to the Interim Report of the Justce Commitee on the Inquiry into the Local Electons and Liquor Licensing Trust Electons, and Recent Energy Trust Electons Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Page of icqnczt
INCONFIDENCE Full Impact Statement Template Coversheet : Progressing Digital Identity : Establishing a Trust Framework Advising agencies Department of Internal Affairs Decision sought Approval to proceed with the preferred option Proposing Ministers Minister for Government Digital Services Minister of Internal Affairs Summary: Problem and Proposed Approach Problem Definition What problem or opportunity does this proposal seek to address Why is Government intervention required New Zealand lacks consistently applied standards and processes for sharing, storing and using personal and organisational information in a digital environment. As a result, systems and services have been developed in an unstructured and inconsis tent manner that creates inefficiencies, increases security and privacy risks and hinders interoperability. This is undermining consumer trust and confidence in digital identity services at a time when more and more transactions are taking place online, a nd the ability to share information digitally to assert ones information is becoming increasingly vital to daily life and a key foundation for the economy. A governance and compliance regime is required to ensure that those who are providing digital ident ity services consistently meet legislation and standards for using, storing and sharing personal and organisational information. This will imbue the ecosystem with consistency and trust, encourage uptake, enable the flow of information, improve user experi ence, reduce identity theft, and position the digital identity ecosystem to realise the significant social and economic benefits digital identity services can provide. Summary of Preferred Option or Conclusion (if no preferred option) How will the agencys preferred approach work to bring about the desired change Why is this the preferred option Why is it feasible Is the preferred approach likely to be reflected in the Cabinet paper The preferred government intervention, as outlined in the Cabinet paper, is the implementation of a regulatory framework to ensure minimum standards are consistently applied across the digital identity ecosystem . This intervention would include : The establishment of a Digital Identity Trust Framework (Trust Frame work) to set the rules (standards, legislation) for those participat ing in New Zealands digital identity ecosystem. The establishment of a governance board to exercise control over the Trust Framework and to update and maintain its rules as required . Digital identity is defined as user initiated, digitally enabled sharing of personal and organisational information. PROACTIVELY RELEASED INCONFIDENCE
INCONFIDENCE Ofce of the Minister of Local Government Chair Cabinet Business Commitee Government Response to the Interim Report of the Justce Commitee Inquiry into the Local Electons and Liquor Licensing Trust Electons, and Recent Energy Trust Electons Proposal . This paper seeks approval for the atached Government response to the interim report of the Justce Commitees Inquiry into the Local Electons and Liquor Licensing Trust Electons, and Recent Energy Trust Electons . Relaton to government priorites . The Government is required to respond to the interim report by February in accordance with Standing Order . Cabinet approval is needed to confrm the Governments positon. The Justce Commitee has released an interim report on the local electons . On December , the Justce Commitee initated an inquiry into the local electons (the Inquiry). These inquiries have routnely been conducted afer each triennial general electon of local authority members since . . The Inquiry sought feedback from New Zealanders on a range of local electoral issues, including the Justce Commitee s previous recommendaton that the Government consider giving responsibility for running all aspects of local electons to the Electoral Commission. . The Justce Commitee was not able to conclude the Inquiry into the electons before the closing of the nd Parliament. It recommended that the Justce Commitee of the rd Parliament contnue the Inquiry. The new Justce Commitee has not yet indicated whether the Inquiry will be contnued. . The Justce Commitee made two interim recommendatons to the Government that reiterate two previous recommendatons presented as part of the Justce Commitees report on the local electons: We reiterate our previous recommendaton that the Government consider giving responsibility for running all aspects of local electons to the Electoral Commission. . We reiterate our previous recommendatons that the Government align, as much as practcable, the rules for parliamentary and local authority electon candidates concerning donatons, advertsing, campaigning, pecuniary interests, and complaints. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government This recommendaton formed part of the Justce Commitees report on the local electons, which was released on December . Page of icqnczt
INCONFIDENCE Office of the Minister of Local Government Cabinet Economic Policy Committee
INCONFIDENCE Page of Office of the Minister of Local Government
INCONFIDENCE Page of Responses to claims made by Castalia Claim Response Investment estimates WICS modelling is entirely based on a top down, New Zealand wide assumption that a massive nationwide investment programme is necessary for all council water services. This is despite WDC and all other local authorities submitting detailed bottom up information about planne d capital investment. (page ) This is incorrect. The WICS modelling takes information councils provided (through the Request for Information process) on asset values , lives and valuations and projects future renewals investment based on industry standard rates of economic depreciation, making adjustments for differences in input costs (e.g., relative wages and material costs) between New Zealand and the UK. It uses council supplied populati on growth projections to estimate the future capital costs of providing for growth. In assessing the likely costs of meeting water quality and environmental standards, WICS uses council population density, topography and other geographic variables to model the likely scale of investment required based on what water services providers that operate across the United Kingdom, and which share similar population and geographic characteristics, have made to achieve current levels of compliance with EU standards. The applicability of these standards to New Zealand was reviewed by Beca New Zealand who found that the investment projections from the WICS modelling may well underestimate the necessary investment costs given the pressures of managing and delivering impr ovement and asset renewals backlogs simultaneously, the higher seismic risk profile of New Zealand, and cost pressures associated with climate change and iwiMori aspirations that are not quantified in the WICS investment projections. WICS makes no adju stment for the overlapping nature of growth and replacement investment (page ) The replacement investment represents the cost of replacing the asset base with a modern equivalent of that asset whilst providing the same or higher level of service in the long run. Growth investment to meet new demand will increase the asset base, therefore, increasing (rather than reducing) the future replacement need. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of Claim Response WICS preferred model appears highly selective (choosing the Scottish comparator model over the other approaches) p.This is factually incorrect. WICS has not selected an individual model to provide a point estimate but rather derived a range for investment requirements based on a suite of differen t models. WICS has also performed sensitivity analysis through Montecarlo modelling using the investment unconstrained numbers provided by the council in the RFI. The Scotland comparator model has been used to derive one side of the investment range and it displayed the s trongest relationship (R of ) between considered variables and made use of bottom up investment and geographic information . Arguably this model best captures the geography and topography of New Zealand (e.g. central belt with Greater Glasgow Edinburgh and Lothian as a proxy for the Auckland region, and more northern rural areas as a proxy for the northland areas in New Zealand). WICS Step (growth adjustment) and Step (investment cap) adjustments to its models are unsound p.It is not clear why these adjustments are considered unsound. WICS adjusts its estimates for growth using Council supplied growth information as its econometric models either do not take growth into account or accounts for UKScottish growth which is less than the projected growth in New Zealand The NZ, cap per connected citizen is derived from observed investment expenditure in the most rural council area of Scotland. By imposing this cap, WICS ensures that no council exceeds this per capita investment value and may, in fact, be underestimating required investment. Notably, Whangrei District Council does not have the , per connected citizen cap applied in any scenario. The highest value observed is , per head after all ad justments are made, and the value used in WICSs financial models is around ,. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua
INCONFIDENCE Page of
INCONFIDENCE Page of Office of the Minister of Internal Affairs Chair Cabinet Legislation Committ ee Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commercial Video on Demand) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction Proposal . This paper seeks Cabinet Legislation Committee approval for the introduction of the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commercial Video on Demand) Amendment Bill (the Bill). Policy . The policy relating to the content of th e Bill was agreed by Cabinet on September CAB MIN . The Bill was given a priority of Category for the Legislation Programme, and Cabinet has indicated an intention to have it introduced into the House in CAB MIN refers . The Bill is attached as Appendix A . . The purpose of the Bill is to address a regulatory gap where Commercial Video on Demand (CVoD) content is not currently subject to mandatory classification requirements prior to being made available in New Zealand. . The Bill will enable CVoD content to be rated and labelled in the same way that films are already regulated under the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act (the Act) . Regulated CVoD providers will be required to label content by: . selfrating content using their own systems that have been approved by the Office of Film and Literature Classification (the Classification Office) ; . selfrating content using the Classification Offices online tool and resources; or . submitting content to the F ilm and Video Labelling Body (the Labelling Body) for rating and labelling, with certain content to be referred to the Classification Office for classification where appropriate . . Nothing in the Bill will prevent the Chief Censor from calling in CVoD cont ent for classification on an as necessary basis , in accordance with the powers afforded by section () of the Act. This is consistent with the treatment of all publications in New Zealand. . Cabinet also authorised me to take remaining policy decisions necessary to enable final drafting of the Bill. The final Bill provides that only CVoD providers who are specified in a Schedule to the Bill will be subject to the new requirements. This Schedule will be ame ndable by Order in Council upon the recommendation of the Minister of Internal Affairs. The principal consideration for whether a CVoD provider should be specified in the Schedule will be the potential for risk of harm, as established by assessment again st three criteria prescribed in the Bill. Regulatory impact analysis . A Quality Assurance Panel with representatives from the Department of Internal Affairs and the Treasury considers that the Supplementary Analysis Report meets the Quality Assurance crite ria. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . The Quality Assurance statement for the original Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA) was that it did not meet the Quality Assurance criteria. In particular, the Quality Assurance Panel considered that there was limited analysis of the size of the probl em, and limited evidence that the problem needs addressing now instead of waiting for the intended wider review of the media content regulat ion regime . The Panel also considered that the RIA did not establish the criteria that will be used to determine which providers will be regulated, provided little information about the costs to providers, and whether the preferred option (Option ) would increase inconsistency of classification when considered across all household video content. . The Minister of Finance and I agreed that the Department of Internal Affairs would do supplementary analysis of the above issues, including the Supplementary Analysis Report attached to this Cabinet paper which addresses the definition of CVoD. . The Panel c onsiders that the Supplementary Analysis Report fully addresses the Panels concern that the original RIA did not establish the criteria which will be used to determine which providers will be regulated, and whether consideration will be given to exemptin g small or niche providers. The Panel also considers that the Supplementary Analysis Report goes some way to addressing the Panels concern that the regulatory proposals would increase, rather than decrease, inconsistency of classification when considere d across all household video content. . The RIA, with Supplementary Analysis Report , is attached as Appendix B . Further supplementary analysis will be part of other Departmental workstreams . The remaining two matters highlighted by the RIA Panel in September will be addressed as part of two different workstreams officials have underway. These are: . consideration of this proposals impact on providers, including costs of compliance and the extent to which these are likely to be passed on to consume rs. This will be part of the Departments review of the Classification Offices fees. This review will report back to Cabinet by April ; and . further analysis on the consistency of consumer information across all household video content will be consider ed under the planned broader reform of New Zealands media content regulation regime. Cabinet has invited me and the Minister of Broadcasting, Communications and Digital Media, Hon Kris Faafoi, to report to Cabinet in early with a proposed term s of re ference, engagement approach and timeline for this review CAB MIN refers. Compliance . The Bill compl ies with: . the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi; . the rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act and the Human Rights Act ; . disclosure statement requirements (attached as Appendix C ); . the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act ; . the relevant international standards and guidelines; and . the Legislation Guidelines ( edition), which are maint ained by the Legislation Design and Advisory Committee. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Consultation . The following consultation has been undertaken on the policy contained in the Bill: . Public c onsultation on policy proposals was undertaken from April to May . Twenty four writte n submissions were received from a range of stakeholders including CVoD providers, other industry bodies, non government organisations, regulators and members of the public. There was no formal consultation with iwi or hapu on proposals in the Bill before policy decisions were made. . The paper outlining policy proposals and recommended amendment to the Act (in September ) was consulted with the Ministry of Health, Ministry for Women, Te Puni Kkiri, Ministry for Culture and Heritage, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, The Treasury, the Policy Advisory Group at the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC) and the Offi ce of Film and Literature Classification. The Ministry for Pacific Peoples, Oranga Tamariki and the Ministry of Social Development were notified. . Further to the direction of Cabinet CAB MIN , t argeted consultation was undertaken with key industry groups including CVoD providers and relevant statutory bodies on the definition of CVoD provider. The outcomes of this consultation informed the development of the Supplementary Analysis Report and the Bill. Consultation on the Bill . The Bill was not refe rred to the Legislation Design and Advisory Commit tee. . The Government caucus , and coalition and confidence and supply partners have been consulted on the Bill. . The Bill wa s consulted with the Ministry for Culture and Heritage, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, the Ministry for Women, Ministry of Health . Te Puni Kkiri, The Treasury, the Policy Advisory Group at the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet , the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Minist ry for Pacific Peoples, Oranga Tamariki and the Ministry of Social Development were informed of the Bill. . The Office of Film and Literature Classification and the Broadcasting Standards Authority were also consulted during the Bills development. . The Bill reflects consideration of the feedback received through the consultation process. Binding on the Crown . The Act is binding on the Crown. . The Bill enables some existing rating functions to be carried out by specified providers of CVoD content. The treatment of the se functions should be symmetrical to existing legislation. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Creating new agencies or amending law relating to existing agencies . The Bill will not create any new agencies. . The Bill will amend the law relating to the Classification Office and will enable providers of CVoD content , that are specified in the schedule to the Bill, to self rate their content using systems that have been approved by the Classification Office . This includes using their own approved syst ems or the Classification Offices online tool. . The Bill will not remove any existing powers held by the Classification Office or the Chief Censor. Allocation of decision making powers . The Bill does not involve the allocation of decision making powers bet ween the Executive, the Courts and Tribunals. Associated regulations . The following regulations will need to be amended to clearly apply to CVoD content: . The Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Regulations will be to include detail on the selfrating requirements that is not covered by the Bill, and to set out specific conditions for CVoD content . This is likely to include requirements for the display of labels on CVoD platforms and treatment of trailers. These regulations may also i nclude specifying factors that the Minister can consider in determining which providers should be listed as part of the Schedule of regulated providers; and . The Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Fees) Regulations will need to be to amend the current fee levels and to set new charges that will apply to CVoD content . These amendments will be carried out pursuant to recommendations from the Departments review of fees for the Classification Office, as recommended by Cabinet CAB MIN. refers. Other instruments . The Bill contains provisions empowering the making of other instruments that are deemed to be legislative, and disallowable. . The Order in Council that authorises amendment of the Schedule to add or remove a CVoD provider who is regulated by the Bill is a legislative instrument and not disallowable as defined in the Legislation Act . Definition of Ministerdepartment . The Bill does not create a new definition of Minister or Department. Commencement of legislation . The Bill will be enacted by July , subject to its priority in the House programme. Section states that an instrument made under an enactment is a disallowable instrument if the instrument is a legislative instrument. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . Sections , , and of the Bill will come into force on January . The rest of the Bill will come into force on July . Parliamentary stages . I intend to introduce the Bill on December following its approval by Cabinet and, depending on the availability of the House programme, I will move First Re ading durin g the following week on December . . The Bill should be passed by June . . I will propose that the Bill be referred to the Government Administration Select Committee for a consideration period of four months. Proactive Release . I propose to issue a p ress release once the Bill has been introduced into the House. . This paper with its attachments will be proactively released and on the Departments website. Recommendations . The Minister of Internal Affairs recommends that the Cabinet Legislation Committee : . note that the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commercial Video onDemand) Amendment Bill holds a category priority on the Legislation Programme ; . note that the Bill will address a regulatory gap by enabling mandatory labelling for Commercial Video on Demand (CVoD) content under the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act (the Act) as it currently does for films ; . approve the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commercial Video on Demand) Amendment Bill for introduction , subject to the final approval of the government caucus and sufficient support in the House of Representatives ; . agree that the Bill be introduced on December ; . agree that the government propose that the Bill be: . referred to the Government Administration Select Committee for consideration; and . enacted by mid ; and . agree that the Minister of Internal Affairs may authorise Parliamentary Counsel Office to make any minor changes to the Bill following consideration by the Cabinet Legislation Committee. Authorised for lodgement Hon Tracey Martin Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commer cial V ideo onDemand) Amendment Bill Government Bill Explanatory note General policy statement The objective of this Bill is to reduce the potential for harm to consumers from view ing inappropriate content. The Bill will do this by requiring that commercial video ondemand ( CVoD ) content that is made available in New Zealand display appropri ate and consistent labelling, if the provider is specified in the Schedule to the Bill. This labelling will provide information about that contents rating and a description so that consumers can make an informed decision on whether to view it. Providers of commercial (subscription and transactional) video ondemand content are displaying inconsistent ratings and descriptive notes (or no ratings at all) for con tent available on their platforms. This is because of the gap in current legislation where ondemand online content in New Zealand is not subject to mandatory rating requirements, as films for cinematic or DVD release are. This Bill will ensure that consumers see more consistent ratings and descriptive notes across the main CV oD platforms in New Zealand. The Bill will amend the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act (the Act) to clearly address the identified regulatory gap. Key changes that the Bill will implement are set out below. Requirements for specified CVoD providers to label content before it is available in New Zealand Providers of CV oD content will be required to comply by following the current process for the labelling of a film. This involves provid ing content to the Film and Video Labelling Body (the labelling body) for rat ing and labelling. The labelling body will refer certain content to the Office of Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Film and Literature Classification (the Classification Office ) for classification, before issuing a label; or selfrating content that they make available using systems that have been approved by the Classification Office. This can be achieved either by using the Classification Offices rating tool or using their own system, with approval from the Classification Office. Once content is labelled under the Act, that label must be used by any other provider providing that content. These labelling decisions can be reconsidered by the Classifi cation Office where necessary. Establishment of criteria and process to identify and list regulated providers Providers that are required to comply under the new requirements will be listed in a schedule of the Act. The schedule can be amended by an Order in Council, with the final decision being made by the GovernorGeneral on the recommendation of the Minister of Internal Affairs. The Minister will need to consult the Chief Censor before making a recommendation to amend the schedule. The Ministers recommendation will be based on an assess ment of the potential risk of harm to consumers from CV oD content being made available without appropriate labels. The Bill sets the following criteria that the Minister must consider in determining the potential risk of harm: market presencethe share of the New Zealand market that a provider cur rently has or is expected to have; and nature of contentthe nature of content being offered by a provider, or inten ded to be offered by a provider, and the potential of that content to cause harm to consumers; and compliance with and commitment to another recognised classification frame work in New Zealandwhether a provider is using a classification framework that is recognised as being effective in ensuring that consistent and appropriate information is provided to consumers, and the extent and reliability of the pro viders commitment to that framework. functions of Classification Office The Bill will update the functions of the Classification Office to ensure that the new requirements for CV oD content are clearly within the scope of its operational work. The Classification Office will have the following new functions and powers: providing an online rating tool that specified CV oD providers may use to rate and label content they make available; and approving selfrating systems that are developed by specified CV oD providers to rate and label their content; and reviewing and monitoring the operation and outputs of both the online rating tool and any selfrating systems.Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commer cial V ideo onDemand) Amendment Bill Explanatory note Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Amendment to definition of film to clarify that it includes video ondemand content V ideo ondemand content falls within the existing definition of a publication, but does not clearly fall within the definition of a film (which is a subset of publications). The Bill replaces the definition of film in the Act to clarify that it includes video on demand content. (CV oD is a subset of video ondemand content that is made available to consumers on a subscription or transaction basis.) Clarifying that video ondemand content is a film means that the requirements in rela tion to classifying and rating films will apply to any video ondemand content that is not specifically exempted from those requirements (eg, video ondemand content that is not provided by a specified CV oD provider is exempted through an amendment to section ). The Classification Offices powers in respect of publications (eg, com plaints process, enforcement provisions, and offences and penalties) will also apply. Anticipated introduction of new fees for use of CVoD rating and labelling tools The new regime introduced by the Bill will also permit new fees to be set for the use and review of CV oD rating and labelling tools. Fees under the Act are set in the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Fees) Regulations . Work is underway to update the fees framework, including the level of the CV oD fees for specified CV oD providers. Departmental disclosure statement The Department of Internal Affairs is required to prepare a disclosure statement to assist with the scrutiny of this Bill. The disclosure statement provides access to infor mation about the policy development of the Bill and identifies any significant or unusual legislative features of the Bill. A copy of the statement can be found at http:legislation.govt.nzdisclosure.aspx typebillsubtypegovernmentyearno Regulatory impact assessment The Department of Internal Affairs produced a regulatory impact assessment on November to help inform the main policy decisions taken by the Govern ment relating to the contents of this Bill. A copy of this regulatory impact assessment can be found at https:www.dia.govt.nzResourcematerialRegulatoryImpactStatements Index http:www.treasury.govt.nzpublicationsinformationreleasesria Clause by clause analysis Clause is the T itle clause.Explanatory noteFilms, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commer cial Video onDemand) Amendment Bill Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Clause sets out when the Bill will come into force. The substantive amendments that create the new requirements to rate and label commercial video ondemand con tent made available by specified CV oD providers will come into force on January . However, the following provisions come into force earlier, on July : the machinery clauses that set out the title, commencement, and principal Act details: the amendments to the interpretation provision set out in clause () that insert new defined terms relating to video ondemand: the new provisions that insert a schedule of transitional provisions (which pro vides for rating decisions made under the broadcasting codes to be treated as ratings made under new Part A): the provisions that insert new Schedule (which lists specified CV oD provid ers), and that enable that schedule to be amended by Order in Council. Clause states that the Bill amends the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act (the principal Act). Part New rating and labelling requirements for specified providers commercial video ondemand content Clause amends section (which defines terms used in the Act) to insert new defini tions of approved selfrating system, CV oD online rating tool, commercial video on demand content, selfrating tool, specified CV oD provider, and video ondemand con tent. It also amends the definition of film to provide that video ondemand content comes within the definition. This will have the effect that the existing requirements that apply in relation to classifying and rating films apply to video ondemand content (unless an exemption applies). The definition of specified CV oD provider refers to new Schedule (inserted by clause ). That schedule lists the companies to whom the new requirements will apply. The definition ensures that subsidiaries and affiliated companies of the listed companies are also specified CV oD providers if they provide commercial video on demand content in New Zealand. The companies listed in new Schedule are Alphabet Inc., a company registered and based in the United States of America (which is the parent company of Google LLC which provides the Google Play service): Amazon.com, Inc., a company registered and based in the United States of America (which provides Amazon Prime Video through an af filiate): Apple Inc., a company registered and based in the United States of America (which provides Apple TV and iTunes services); Lightbox New Zealand Limited, a company registered and based in New Zea land:Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commer cial V ideo onDemand) Amendment Bill Explanatory note Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Microsoft Corp, a company registered and based in the United States of Amer ica (which provides Microsoft Films and T elevision): Netflix, Inc., a company registered and based in the United States of America: Sky Network Television Limited, a company registered and based in New Zea land (which includes its division that provides NEON): Sony Interactive Entertainment Europe Limited, a company registered and based in the United Kingdom (which provides the PlayStation Store service): The Walt Disney Company, a company registered and based in the United States of America (which includes its business unit that provides Disney). Clause inserts new section A, which is about new Schedule AA (transitional, sav ings, and related provisions) inserted by clause . Clause amends section , which lists certain types of film that are exempt from labelling requirements. The amendment adds to that list any video ondemand content made available by a person who is not a specified CV oD provider. The effect of this amendment is that the requirements to rate and label video ondemand content will only apply to the providers listed in new Schedule . Section () currently provides that the Chief Censor may require films that would otherwise be exempt to be labelled. An amendment is also made to that subsection to clarify how it applies in the case of video ondemand content. If video ondemand content is made available, or proposed to be made available, in New Zealand by a person who is not listed in new Schedule , the Chief Censor may require the person to apply for the issue of a label in respect of that content. Clause inserts new Part A , which deals with rating and labelling commercial video ondemand content made available by specified providers. New section A provides that the requirements in the Act and regulations apply in respect of commercial video ondemand content that is made available in New Zea land by specified CV oD providers, even if those providers are not resident or incorp orated in New Zealand. New section B imposes a duty on specified CV oD providers to rate and label the commercial video ondemand content that they make available in New Zealand. It sets out the following methods that a CV oD provider may use to comply: rating and labelling the content using an approved selfrating system; or rating and labelling the content using the CV oD online rating tool provided by the Classification Of fice; or applying to the labelling body for the issue of a label. New section C applies if commercial video ondemand content has previously been rated. It requires specified CV oD providers and the labelling body to apply the same rating, classification, and description to the content. New section D requires a specified CV oD provider who is selfrating video on demand content that has not previously been rated toExplanatory noteFilms, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commer cial Video onDemand) Amendment Bill Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs label the content in accordance with the rating by the selfrating tool; or if the tool identifies the content as potentially being objectionable, refer the content to the Classification Of fice for classification. New section E provides for specified CV oD providers to apply to the Chief Censor for approval of a system to rate and label commercial video ondemand content. The Chief Censor may enter into an agreement with a specified CV oD provider that sets out the terms and conditions on which the provider is approved to use their own sys tem to rate and label the content they make available in New Zealand. New section F requires the Classification Office to annually review specified CV oD providers use of selfrating systems, and enables regulations to prescribe fees to be paid by the providers to meet the cost of those reviews. New section G provides that any person may complain to the Chief Censor about the rating that a specified CV oD provider has assigned to commercial video on demand content. The Chief Censor may refer a complaint to the provider, or classify the content, or refuse to take action if the Chief Censor considers the content has been correctly rated. Clause inserts a new provision that allows the list of persons who are specified CV oD providers in new Schedule to be amended by Order in Council, made on the recommendation of the Minister. Before making an Order in Council, the Minister must consult the Chief Censor. The main criterion for recommending an order amend ing new Schedule is whether the deletion or addition of a persons name will increase or reduce the risk of harm to viewers of commercial video ondemand con tent made available by the person. Clause inserts new Schedule AA (transitional, savings, and related provisions). See also new section A inserted by clause . Clause inserts new Schedule , which lists the commercial video ondemand pro viders to whom the new rating and labelling requirements will apply . Part Related amendments Clause amends section , which deals with labelling of films. The amendment clarifies that the section applies to video ondemand content that is made available to persons in New Zealand. Clause amends section , which deals with applications to the labelling body for the issue of a label. The amendment clarifies that the section does not apply to com mercial video ondemand content that a specified CV oD provider has already rated using a selfrating tool. Clause replaces section (), which deals with the issue of labels in cases where the Classification Office has examined a film. The amendment makes it possible for the Classification Office to direct a specified CV oD provider to issue a label.Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commer cial Video onDemand) Amendment Bill Explanatory note Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Clause amends section to add the following new functions of the Classification Office: to develop, provide, and maintain the CV oD online rating tool for use by speci fied CV oD providers: to approve selfrating systems developed by specified CV oD providers: to review the use of selfrating tools by specified CV oD providers. Clause amends section , which creates an offence for issuing labels that may cause a person to believe they were issued under this Act when they were not. The amendment ensures that specified CV oD providers using approved selfrating systems are excluded from the offence provision. Clause amends section , which defines the term distribute. The amendment is to an example and is designed to make it clear that the terms provide access and make available, when used in the Act, mean the same thing.Explanatory noteFilms, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commer cial Video onDemand) Amendment Bill Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Hon Tracey Martin Films, V ideos, and Publications Classification (Commercial Video onDemand) Amendment Bill Government Bill Contents Page Title Commencement Principal Act Part New rating and labelling r equirements for specified CVoD providers commercial video ondemand content Section amended (Interpretation) New section A inserted (Transitional, savings, and related provisions) A Transitional, savings, and related provisions Section amended (Films exempt from labelling requirements) New Part A inserted Part A Rating and labelling r equirements for specified CVoD providers commercial video ondemand content A Extraterritorial application to specified CV oD providers B Duty to rate and label commercial video ondemand content C Content previously rated or classified D Selfrating by specified CV oD provider E Approval of providers selfrating systems F Classification Office must annually review use of approved selfrating systems G Complaints process Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs New section A inserted (Amendment of Schedule by Order in Council) A Amendment of Schedule by Order in Council New Schedule AA inserted New Schedule inserted Part Related amendments Section amended (Films to be labelled) Section amended (Applications for issue of label) Section amended (Issue of labels in respect of films) Section amended (Functions of Classification Office) Section amended (Unlawful issue of labels) Section amended (Meaning of distribute in sections to ) Schedule New Schedule AA inserted Schedule New Schedule inserted The Parliament of New Zealand enacts as follows: Title This Act is the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commercial V ideo onDemand) Amendment Act . Commencement () Sections (), , , and to come into force on J anuary . () The rest of this Act comes into force on J uly . Principal Act This Act amends the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act (the principal Act). Part New rating and labelling r equirements for specified CVoD providers commercial video ondemand content Section amended (Interpretation) () In section , insert in their appropriate alphabetical order: cl Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commer cial Video onDemand) Amendment Bill Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs approved selfrating system means a system approved by the Classification Office under section E that is to be used by a specified CV oD provider to rate and label the providers commercial video ondemand content commercial video ondemand content means video ondemand content that is made available to persons in New Zealand for a fee or other consideration, whether or not it is packaged with another service Examples A movie that can be downloaded from the Internet by a person who pays a oneoff fee to access that movie. A series made available to a person who paid a subscription fee for access to a catalogue of content to be accessed through a computer or other electronic device. A short film made available to a person who has been given access to a catalogue of online content as part of a package of services supplied by an Internet provider . CVoD online rating tool means the online rating tool provided by the Classifi cation Office for use by specified CV oD providers to rate their commercial video ondemand content selfrating tool means (a) an approved selfrating system: (b) the CV oD online rating tool specified CVoD provider means (a) a company listed in Schedule , to the extent that the company makes commercial video ondemand content available in New Zealand whether directly (including through a division of the company) or indirectly through a subsidiary or an affiliated company; and (b) a subsidiary or affiliated company of a company listed in Schedule , if that subsidiary or affiliate makes commercial video ondemand content available in New Zealand video ondemand content means content, in the form of visual images pro duced electronically and shown as a moving picture, that is made available to persons ondemand using a computer or other electronic device () In section , replace the definition of film with: film (a) means a cinematograph film, a video recording, and any other material record of visual moving images that is capable of being used for the sub sequent display of those images, and includes any part of any film, and any copy or part of a copy of the whole or any part of a film; and (b) includes video ondemand contentFilms, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commer cial Video onDemand) Amendment Bill Part cl Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs New section A inserted (Transitional, savings, and related provisions) After section , insert: A Transitional, savings, and related provisions The transitional, savings, and related provisions set out in Schedule AA have effect according to their terms. Section amended (Films exempt from labelling requirements) () After section ()(q), insert: (r) any video ondemand content made available by a person who is not a specified CV oD provider. () Replace section () with: () The Chief Censor may, at any time, require any person to make an application under section for the issue of a label in respect of a film of a class mentioned in subsection () if, (a) in the case of video ondemand content, the person has made the content available to persons in New Zealand, or proposes to do so; or (b) in any other case, the person has exhibited or supplied the film to the public, or proposes to do so. New Part A inserted After section , insert: Part A Rating and labelling r equirements for specified CVoD providers commercial video ondemand content A Extraterritorial application to specified CVoD providers This Act, and any regulations made under it, apply in respect of commercial video ondemand content that is made available in New Zealand by a specified CV oD provider, regardless of whether the provider is resident or incorporated in New Zealand or outside New Zealand. B Duty to rate and label commercial video ondemand content () Before making commercial video ondemand content available to persons in New Zealand, a specified CV oD provider must ensure that the content has been (a) rated in accordance with this Act; and (b) labelled in accordance with section and subsection (). () The label must be in the prescribed form and must contain (a) the rating assigned to the content; and Part cl Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commer cial Video onDemand) Amendment Bill Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs (b) any description assigned to the content under this Act. () A specified CV oD provider must comply with subsection () by one of the following methods: (a) rating and labelling the commercial video ondemand content using the provider s approved selfrating system in accordance with section D: (b) rating and labelling the commercial video ondemand content using the CV oD online rating tool in accordance with section D: (c) rating and labelling the commercial video ondemand content by apply ing to the labelling body under section () for the issue of a label in respect of that content. () Subsection () is subject to section C. C Content previously rated or classified () If a specified CV oD provider intends to make commercial video ondemand content available to persons in New Zealand and that content has previously been rated under this Act, the provider (or the labelling body in the case of con tent referred to it under section ()) must apply the same rating and the same description (if any) to the content. () If a specified CV oD provider intends to make commercial video ondemand content available to persons in New Zealand and that content has previously been classified under this Act, the provider (or the labelling body in the case of content referred to it under section ()) must apply the same classification and the same description (if any) to the content. () Subsections () and () apply irrespective of whether the content is in the same technical format or a different technical format. D Selfrating by specified CVoD provider () Subsections () and () apply to a specified CV oD provider who intends to make available in New Zealand commercial video ondemand content that has not previously been rated. () Unless the selfrating tool used by the provider identifies the commercial video ondemand content as potentially being objectionable, the provider must apply the label by the selfrating tool. () If the selfrating tool used by the provider identifies the commercial video on demand content as potentially being objectionable, the provider must refer that content to the Classification Office for classification. E Approval of providers selfrating systems () A specified CV oD provider may apply to the Chief Censor for approval of a system to be used to rate and label the providers commercial video ondemand content.Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commer cial Video onDemand) Amendment Bill Part cl Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs () Every application must contain the prescribed information and be accompanied by the prescribed fee (if any). () After considering the application, the Chief Censor may enter into an agree ment with the specified CV oD provider that sets out the terms and conditions on which the provider is approved to use the system to rate and label the pro viders commercial video ondemand content. () The Chief Censor may cancel an agreement under subsection () at any time if the specified CV oD provider fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the agreement. () If an agreement is cancelled under subsection () , the system to which the agreement relates is not an approved selfrating system from the of the cancellation of the agreement. F Classification Office must annually review use of approved selfrating systems () The Chief Censor must annually review each specified CV oD providers use of the providers approved selfrating system or the CV oD online rating tool (as applicable). () After a review, the Chief Censor may suspend approval of a providers selfrat ing system until amendments are made to that system or to the agreement that sets out the terms and conditions of its use. () If an approval is suspended under subsection (), the system to which the approval relates is not an approved selfrating system for the duration of the suspension. () Regulations under section may prescribe fees that must be paid by provid ers to meet the costs of the Chief Censors annual review. G Complaints process () Any person may complain to the Chief Censor about the rating assigned by a specified CV oD provider to commercial video ondemand content. () After receiving a complaint, the Chief Censor may (a) refer the complaint to the provider and require the provider to consider the complaint and respond to the complainant; or (b) classify the content under section (); or (c) decline to take further action, if the Chief Censor considers that the con tent has been correctly rated. () After making a decision in accordance with subsection () , the Chief Censor must advise the person who made the complaint of the decision and the reasons for the decision.Part cl Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commer cial Video onDemand) Amendment Bill Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs New section A inserted (Amendment of Schedule by Order in Council) After section , insert: A Amendment of Schedule by Order in Council () The GovernorGeneral, by Order in Council made on the recommendation of the Minister , may amend Schedule by (a) adding the name of any person; or (b) deleting the name of any person. () The Minister must not recommend that an order be made under subsection ()(a) unless (a) the Minister has consulted the Chief Censor on the proposal that the order be made; and (b) the Minister is satisfied, on reasonable grounds, that adding the name of the person will reduce the risk of harm to viewers of commercial video ondemand content; () The Minister must not recommend that an order be made under subsection ()(b) unless (a) the Minister has consulted the Chief Censor on the proposal that the order be made; and (b) the Minister is satisfied, on reasonable grounds, that deleting the name of the person will not materially increase the risk of harm to viewers of commercial video ondemand content. () For the purposes of subsections ()(b) and ()(b) , the Minister (a) must consider (i) available evidence of the current or likely extent of public sub scriptions to, or use of, commercial video ondemand services and products provided by the person; and (ii) available evidence of the nature of the commercial video on demand content made available, or intended to be made available, by the person and the potential of that content to cause harm; and (iii) available evidence of the persons commitment to a classification framework recognised in New Zealand as being effective in ensur ing that persons in New Zealand who are likely to be harmed by viewing the commercial video ondemand content are warned of the nature of that content by means of clear and consistent label ling; and (b) may consider any other factors that the Minister thinks relevant. () An order under subsection ()(a) must not come into force earlier than months after the on which it is .Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commer cial Video onDemand) Amendment Bill Part cl Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs () An order made under subsection () is a legislative instrument for the pur poses of the Legislation Act and must be presented to the House of Rep resentatives under section of that Act. New Schedule AA inserted Insert the Sc hedule AA set out in Schedule of this Act as the first sched ule to appear after the last section of the principal Act. New Schedule inserted After Schedule , insert the Sc hedule set out in Schedule of this Act. Part Related amendments Section amended (Films to be labelled) In section (), after of fered for supply to the public, insert , or, in the case of video ondemand content, made available to persons in New Zealand, . Section amended (Applications for issue of label) Replace section () with: () Subsection () does not apply to (a) any film in respect of which a label has already been issued under this Act (including any commercial video ondemand content that a specified CV oD provider has rated and labelled using a selfrating tool); or (b) any film that has been classified under this Act as objectionable. Section amended (Issue of labels in respect of films) Replace section () with: () If the Classification Office has examined and classified a film submitted to it under section or , or referred to it under section () or (), the Classi fication Office may, (a) in the case of commercial video ondemand content made available, or intended to be made available, by a specified CV oD provider, direct the provider to issue a label in respect of that content; or (b) in any other case, if the Classification Office is satisfied that the film is available for public supply or public exhibition, or is intended to be made available for public supply or public exhibition, direct the labelling body to issue a label in respect of that film. (A) Subsection () is subject to section (b). Section amended (Functions of Classification Office) After section ()(a), insert: Part cl Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commer cial Video onDemand) Amendment Bill Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs (aa) to develop, provide, and maintain the CV oD online rating tool for use by specified CV oD providers to selfrate and label commercial video on demand content in accordance with Part A : (ab) to approve selfrating systems developed by specified CV oD providers for their use to selfrate and label commercial video ondemand content: (ac) to review the use of selfrating tools by specified CV oD providers: Section amended (Unlawful issue of labels) In section (), replace not being the labelling body, with not being the labelling body or a specified CV oD provider using an approved selfrating sys tem. Section amended (Meaning of distribute in sections to ) In section ()(b), replace (for example, to provide access by means of a public data network to digital content that is or includes the publication) with (for example, to make available digital content that is or includes the publica tion by means of a public data network). Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commer cial Video onDemand) Amendment Bill Part cl Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Schedule New Schedule AA inserted s Schedule AA T ransitional, savings, and related provisions s A Part Pr ovisions relating to Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commercial Video onDemand) Amendment Act Classifications made under code before July () If, before July , a specified CV oD provider rated commercial video on demand content in accordance with a code of broadcasting practice issued or approved by the Broadcasting Standards Authority under section () of the Broadcasting Act , that rating must be treated as if it were a rating made by the provider using the CV oD online rating tool. () A reference to a rating using the CV oD online rating tool must be treated as if it also included a reference to a rating described in subclause () . () However, despite subclause (), content referred to in that subclause has not been rated under this Act for the purposes of section C. Unrated commercial video ondemand content made available before January () This clause applies to commercial video ondemand content made available in New Zealand by a specified CV oD provider before January with out (a) a rating under this Act; or (b) a rating determined in accordance with a code of broadcasting practice issued or approved by the Broadcasting Standards Authority under sec tion () of the Broadcasting Act . () The requirements in sections and B to rate and label commercial video ondemand content do not apply to commercial video ondemand content referred to in subclause () until July . () However, despite subclause () , the Chief Censor may require a specified CV oD provider to issue a label in respect of commercial video ondemand con tent referred to in subclause () before July .Schedule Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commer cial Video onDemand) Amendment Bill Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Schedule New Schedule inserted s Schedule Specified CV oD providers s , A Alphabet Inc., a company registered and based in the United States of America Amazon.com, Inc., a company registered and based in the United States of America Apple Inc., a company registered and based in the United States of America Lightbox New Zealand Limited, a company registered and based in New Zealand Microsoft Corp, a company registered and based in the United States of America Netflix, Inc., a company registered and based in the United States of America Sky Network Television Limited, a company registered and based in New Zealand Sony Interactive Entertainment Europe Limited, a company registered and based in the United Kingdom The Walt Disney Company, a company registered and based in the United States of America Wellington, New Zealand: under the authority of the New Zealand GovernmentFilms, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commer cial Video onDemand) Amendment Bill Schedule Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate Supplementary Analysis Report: Update to the standardising classification for Commercial Video on Demand content Regulatory Impact Assessment On September , Cabinet approved key policy proposals to amend the Films, Videos, and Publications Classifica tion Act (the Classification Act) to require the classification of CVoD content prior to its availability in New Zealand CAB MIN refers. This included allowing providers to self classify content using their own systems approved by OFLC or on line tools and resources provided by OFLC. Instructions were issued to the Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) to draft an amendment Bill with the aim of introduction in November . The Quality Assurance panel considered that the Regulatory Impact Assess ment (RI A), which accompanied the policy proposals at the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee (SWC) , did not meet the Quality Assurance criteri a. This Supplementary Analysis Report (SAR) has been undertaken to address the panels assessment that the RIA did not establish the criteria which will be used to determine which providers will be regulated, and whether consideration will be given to exempting small or niche providers. This was, effectively, uncertainty about the definition of CVoD. Following c onsideration of policy proposals by SWC, Cabinet authorised the Minister of Internal Affairs to undertake targeted consultation on the CVoD definition, and the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Internal Affairs agreed that a SAR addressing the CVoD d efinition would be provided to Cabinet prior to Cabinet considering the Bill in November . Because the supplementary analysis work on the CVoD definition does not present major changes to the original policy objectives or their expected regulatory impa ct, DIA has proceeded by updating the existing RIS rather than undertaking a new one. New material is incorporated in italics. The additional analysis included in th is RIA covers: Background information ( page ) Three objectives identified to assess the propo sed recommended approach on the CVoD definition criteria ( page ) Two options that were considered for clarifying the CVoD definition, and assessment against the three objectives ( page s ) Information about the targeted consultation that was conducted , and the four key themes that emerged from submissions ( page s ) Information about market research that was considered as part of our analysis ( page ) Analysis of submissions received ( page s ) Refined objectives for assessing our re commended approach ( page ) Our recommended approach to clarify the CVoD defin ition and providers ( page s ) Assessment of our recommended approach against the Option prop osal that we consulted on (page ) Assessment of recommended approach against the thre e refined objectives ( page s ) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate Analysis of how the recommended approach affects different types of providers ( pages ) An explanation on further analysis to be undertaken as part of a separate DIA workstre am (page ) Limitations to supplementary a nalysis: Time constraints due to Ministerial direction , and targeted consultation undertaken on only one option. The Minister of Internal Affairs has required CVoD content to be brought under the Classification Act regime this term. In order to meet this t imeframe, we conducted a condensed two week targeted consultation on the CVoD definition and invited written submissions from specific industry and regulatory stakeholders. The condensed consultation timeframe may have meant that some stakeh olders did not have enough time to make a submission, so did not provide feedback. However, three submitters we engaged with were given additional time (of up to week) to provide their feedback. We accommodated these requests where we were able to. Targe ted consultatio n was al so only undertaken on one proposed approach (Option ) . While it would have bee n preferable to consult on more than one option, we determined that the Option proposal clearly fell short of meeting our objectives when compared to Op tion . As such , we provided this advice to the Minister and received direction from the Minister to undertake targeted consultation on only one option. We are confident that our recommended approach has been developed and refined in consideration of feedback received f rom consultation on the proposed CVoD definition. Raj Krishnan General Manager Policy Policy, Regulation and Communities Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate objectives. Our concerns are summarised under the quality assurance criteria of complete and convincing, and consulted. Com plete and convincing There is limited analysis of the size of the problem, particularly the magnitude of the risk from misclassifying content and the degree to which other information offered by commercial video on demand providers (e.g. in the synopsis an d genre label that a consumer sees before viewing) mitigates the risk. There is also limited evidence that the problem needs addressing now, instead of waiting for the intended wider review. The RIA does not establish the criteria which will be used to det ermine which providers will be regulated, and whether consideration will be given to exempting small or niche providers. Other options could have been considered. For example, encouraging providers to join the voluntary system, with the chance that regulat ion might follow if that was unsuccessful. Information about impacts of options is light. Two examples are: Little information about the costs to providers, and the extent to which costs will be passed onto consumers whether through higher prices or redu ctions in content (lower profitability minority audien ce content might be at greater risk). Whether Option would increase, rather than decrease, inconsistency of classification when considered across all household video content a point raised in submis sions. The RIA identifies risks of non compliance with Option but is not convincing that these risks will not also manifest for Option . The RIA could have assessed what factors might lead providers to comply and had an implementation plan for gaining compliance. Consulted The RIA generally summarises and responds to the feedback from public consultation well. Consultation elicited many issues, and providers said they required more information before they could estimate the cost of options and the time r equired to implement them. Further, targeted, consulta tion would likely help, and ultimately result in sufficient analysis to inform Ministers decisions. Supplementary Analysis Report The Minister of Finance and the Minister of Internal Affairs agreed th at the Department of Internal Affairs would do supplementary analysis of the above is sues, including the Supplementary Analysis Report attached to this Cabinet paper which addresses the definition of CVoD. The Panel considers that the Supplementary Analysi s Report fully addresses the Panels concern that the original RIA did not establis h the criteria which will be used to determine which providers will be regulated, and whether consideration will be given to exempting small or niche providers. The Panel also considers that the SAR goes some way to addressing the Panels concern that the regulatory proposals would increase, rather than decrease, inconsistency of classification when considered across all household video content. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate Impact Statement: The F ilms, Videos, and Publications Classification Amendment Bill standardising classification for Commercial Video on Demand content Section : General information Purpose . This Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS) has been prepared by the Department of Interna l Affairs ( DIA). DIA is solely responsible for the analysis and advice set out in this RIS except as otherwise explicitly indicated. This analysis and advice has been produced for informing policy decisions to be taken by Cabinet. . This RIS provides analysi s of the proposed amendment to the Films, Videos and Publicatio ns Classification Act (the Classification Act). This amendment requires Commercial Video onDemand (CVoD) content, which is accessed online on demand after payment of a fee, to be classifi ed in accordance with the Classification Act. This proposal is being made following public consultation. Limitations to analysis: Scope, delivery pressures due to Ministerial priority, and lack of financial information to accurately assess financial implic ations for providers . The scope has been narrowed to only includ e visual media content that is accessed online on demand by a user who has paid a fee. Usercontent (e .g. YouTube free content) and Free Video on Demand ( FVoD, e.g. TVNZ on Demand ) services are out of scope for this proposal. Including other form s of visual media content within this proposed change, while desirable, is not preferred as doing so could add additional complexity and delays in bringing CVoD content within the classificatio n regime. Out of scope content would also be addressed as part of the upcoming broader reform of New Zealands media content regulation regime. . Addressing a regulatory gap that creates a risk of harm to children and young people, from watching inappropria te CVoD con tent , is a priority for the Minister of Internal Affairs . The Minister has required proposals to be enacted before the end of this term . DIA and MCH are currently undertaking scoping work on a broader reform which will mitigate any risks arising from this change . An extensive reform of the current regime w ill take at least to months to complete and is largely dependent on Government priorities. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate . Due to time constraints we have been unable to conduct an extensive analysis of the current rese arch regard ing content classification and harm reduction. We are confident that the research we have found indicates a real risk of harm to children and young people regarding insufficient information and warnings provided for visual media content. There i s a lack of financial information from the industry to accurately gauge financial or cost implications for CVoD providers from the proposed change . We were hoping to receive this information during consultation . However, only one provider supplied estimate d costs to help us with our impact analysis for the preferred approach . Raj Krishnan General Manager Policy Policy, Regulation and Communities Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate Section : Problem definition and objectives . What is the context withi n which action is proposed . There is inconsistent and inadequate information being provided to New Zealand consumers of Video on Demand content. This makes it difficult for parents and caregivers as well as children and young people to make informed decisi ons about what content is appropriate to view. There is evidence to show that viewing inappropriate content can lead to the risk of harm. This creates a risk of har m to children and young people, as well as other vulnerable groups of society such as peopl e with mental health issues, eating disorders or people still traumatised by suicide. . The current system provides this information through classifications and consumer warnings provided by OFLC under the Classification Act. Classifications provided by OFLC have been tailored over the years to provide clear and concise information to New Zealanders which highlights topics that are of concern. OFLC also utilises its Youth Advisory Panel which helps them understand the topics that are of concern for younger vi ewers. This information can then be used by other organisations to provide advice and support to consumers who find the content distressing. . An example of this is the Mental Health Foundations advice for viewers of Reasons Why . The show depicted scene s of rape and suicide which had not been made clear by the warning labels provided by Netflix at the time of release. The Foundation now has advice on its website for parents and caregivers to discuss the themes in the show as well as for younger viewers w ho may wish to watch or have been affected by the show. There is a risk of harm to children from watching inappropriate content . New Zealanders are concerned about what children and teens are watching. An OFLC study showed per cent of New Zealand respond ents were moderately to highly concerned about children and teens exposure to content. Likewise, parents of participants in a UK study by OfCom were more worried about what their children watched on Netflix on personal devices, than on public broadcast t elevision. . Research has found that children viewing vi olent media content showed long term increase in aggressive thoughts, behaviour and angry feelings. The producers of the Netflix series Reasons Why were warned against the graphic portrayal of suic ide in the show. . The study by Ofcom has shown that children are increasingly more interested in content that they can view on their own devices. As this removes a degree of parental discretion it shows the need for up front classifications that can inform a child or young persons decision making. Short term and long term effects of violent media on aggression in children and adults (). Retrieved from: https:research.vu.nlenpublicationsshort term andlong term effects ofviolent media onaggression i OfCom is the UK regulator for communications services including broadband, televisio n, radio and on demand content. Life on the small screen: What children are watching and why (). Ofcom. Retrieved from: https:www. ofcom.org.ukdataassetspdffileOfcom childrens content review Publish.pdf Short term and long term effects of violent media on aggression in children and adults (). https:research.vu.nlenpublicationsshort termandlongtermeffectsofviolent media onaggression i Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate . New Zealand has one of the highest youth suicide rate s in the Organisation for Economic Co operation and Development. Organisations with a focus on the welfare a nd wellbeing of New Zealand youth release guidance and information about certain content that have strong adult themes like suicide. This is to help young people and parents navigate sensitive issues due to the number of complaints these organisations rece ive about films and certain CVoD shows (e.g. Re asons Why ). Commercial video on demand is an increasing market in New Zealand . CVoD services entered the New Zealand market in and have continued to see increases in the number of providers and viewers due to their popularity. In , nearly two in fi ve New Zealand homes had a subscription to a CVoD service , with an increasing number having more than one CVoD provider. Providers produce and release a lot of original content, with Netflix reportedly for ecast to spend billion on original content in . . The cost for a monthly subscription or a transactional payment for CVoD content is usually comparable to or less than a cinema ticket. With a monthly subscription to access CVoD content, consumers can choose from a variety of content to watch when ever and wherever they want. . Netflix was the most popular CVoD service by the end of with nearly two million New Zealanders having a subscription in their household, followed by Sparks Lightbox with , users. Other notable industry names have also announced intentions to enter the global CVoD market like Disney , Apple, Warner Media and NBC Universal. . Children and young people prefer to watch content online on demand, with provider s like Netflix becoming increasingly popular due to the instant availability and vast choice of content. Studies have noted that children and young people are most attracted to interesting content they can view on their own device and at their own choosing. The widespread use of the Internet and smart devices make s it easier for consumers, especially young people and children, to view and interact with content without parental or adult supervision. The Social Report, . The Ministry of Social Development . Retrieved from: http: socialreport.msd.govt.nzhealthsuicide.html Nearly in Kiwi s now have Subscription Video on Demand in the home () Roy Morgan. Retrieved from: http:www.roymorgan.comfindings netflix andlightbox svod new zealand december News article (): https:variety.comdigitalnewsnetflix content spending billion Netflix NZ subscription plans range between . . per month. Cinema tickets from Event Cinema cost . (child), . (student) and . (adult). Netflix on verge of million viewers in New Zealand () Roy Morgan. Retrieved from: http:www.roymorgan.comfindings roymorgan paytvsubscription tvnetflix lightbox skytv neon vodafonetv youtube june Life on the sma ll screen: What children are watching and why (). Ofcom. Retrieved from: https:www.ofcom.org.uk dataassetspdf file Ofcom childrens content review Publish.pdf Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate . As the market expands there is a greater risk of fragmenta tion. With a rise in the number of platforms and increasing amounts of original content provided on these platforms, insufficient or inconsistent consumer warnings and information will increase the ri sk of harm to vulne rable groups . . The Media Councils vol untary scheme will continue to provide some guidance for its members (who can also use their own classifications) , while non members continue to provide their own classifications for content or not at all . The Chief C ensors reactive power to call in pub lications for classification will continue to be relied on as a government backstop. Without reliable and complete information about content that may be viewed , consumers will have difficulty making informed decisions a nd education programmes will be less effective. . There is potential for non government led regulation as the market continues to increase . However, this would require industry buy in that could delay making the current environment more consistent . . What regulatory system, or systems, are al ready in place Key features and objectives of current regulatory system . The current media content regulation regime comprises the Classification Act and the Broadcasting Act (the Broadcasting Act). The Classificat ion Act provides for the classification of films (e .g. cinema and DVD release) and was transferred to DIA in August from the Ministry of Justice. The Broadcasting Act is administered by MCH and provides for the establishment of the four broadcasting c odes : Pay Television , Free to Air Television, Radio and Election Programmes. Each code has its own set of classificat ions and audience advisories . . The objectives of the current regulatory system are to provide accurate and reliable information to New Zeala nd consumers of medi a content. This is achieved using standards and classifications with advisory notes for content across platforms with some tools tailored to particular platforms (e .g. the free toair television watershed). The intention was for a consi stent and well under stood media content regulation regime , which has been developed and en hanced over the last few decades. This system is trusted by New Zealanders as a means of understanding what is present in media content but is now failing to keep up with modern changes in technology because of its age. . The two Acts are based on viewing platforms that were available at the time they were designed more than years ago. This has resulted in areas of regulatory uncertainty around media content availabl e on new and emerging platforms (e .g. online and on demand). The current regime did not anticipate technological change, or the shifting ways New Zealanders now view, consume and interact with media content. This means that content that is broadcasted (Pay Television, Free to Air Television and Radio) is covered by the Broadcasting Act while Cinema and DVDs are covered by the Classification Act. . Both regulators under the ir Acts are required to conduct research into media content and the use of the regulatio ns. OFLC als o provide educational material for use in schools to enable better understanding of classifications and media use. This helps support use of the classifications and informs their application by regulators. Understandin g the classification system: New Zealanders Views, . Colmar Br unton. Retrieved from https:www.classificationoffice.govt.nzassetsPDFsresearc hpublic understanding .pdf Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate . The Mental Health Foundation has provi ded suppleme ntary education material following the release of Reasons Why . This material is to help caregivers have discussions with children and young people about the material in the show as well as help children and young people when struggling with the content. The Classification Act regulates films, videos and publications . The Classification Act is administered by DIA and establishes the following regulatory and statutory bodies: a.OFLC, an independent Crown Entity responsible for classifying films, v ideos and publications, which is led by the Chief Censor (and Deputy Censor); b.The Labelling Body which rates unrestricted films and issues labels; and c.The Film and Literature Board of Review which can review classification decisions made by OFLC , upon appl ication. . DIA has an enforcement role under this Act as the Secretary of Internal Affairs appoints inspectors of publications (with search and seizure powers). DIAs Digital Safety Inspectorate focusses on addressing content that has been classified as obje ctionable, o r content that is clearly objectionable (e .g. child exploitation material). . DIA also monitors and supports OFLC in carrying out its statutory functions on behalf of the Minister of Internal Affairs . The Minister appoints the Chief Censor , the Deputy Chief Censor, community representatives for the Labelling Body, and members of the Film and Literature Board of Review. . The Classification Act allows the Labelling Body and OFLC to proactively classify film content and call in publications that req uire potential classification due to the nature of their content. The Chief Censor can pr ovide an age restriction with content warnings to inform consumers as to the type of content that a film or publication contains. The Chief Censor can also classify content as objectionable making it illegal to view or distribute in New Zealand. Classific ation process for films under the Classification Act . Film distributors submit films (for example cinematic or DVD release s) to the Labelling Body that can rate a film and issue a label if the film has : a.previously been rated or classified in NZ; b.an Australi an rating of G , PG or M (suitable for general to mature audiences) ; c.a UK rating of U, PG, or A (suitable for general to years and over) ; or d.upon viewing the fi lm, the Labelling Body assesses the content as being unrestricted. . The Labelling Body wil l refer a film to OFLC if the film has been : a.classified as MA or higher in Australia (suitable for years and over) ; b.classified as or higher in the UK (suitabl e for years and over); The Governor General appoints the Chief Censor and Deputy Chief Censor upon recommendation from the Minister of Internal Affairs. Films that have a restricted UK rating and an unrestricted Australian rating, are curre ntly not referred to OFLC. Priority is given to the Australian rating over the UK rating. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate c.refused approval for supply or exhibition in Australia or the UK; or d.upon viewing the film, the Labelling Body assesses the content as being restricted. . This process may take about four weeks from submission to the Labelling Bod y to the provision of a label . Once a film is classified and appropriately labelled it ca n then be made available to the New Zealand public. Once the self classification tool is completed, OFLC expect manual operation would take at most , five minutes to pr oduce a label, assuming the operator is familiar with the content being classified. . New Zealand classifications and labels provided under this Act are: G, PG, M, R, R, R, R, RP, RP, and RP. Descriptive notes that accompany label s are designed to help people when they are deciding whether to watch a film. These notes indicate whether there is content in a film such as offensive language, sex scenes, violence, cruelty , suicide or other potentially disturbing or offensive material. These descript ive notes are generally more detailed than what is currently provided on the Media Councils VoD code and by CVoD providers. An example of this is the movie Suicide Squad which has descri ptive notes from OFLC stating v iolence, horror crue lty. The same movie appears on Lightbox with the descriptive note V. The Broadcasting Act regulates broadcast content . While not directly affected by the proposed amendment to require CVoD to classify under the Classification Act, the Broadcasting Act h as an importan t role in New Zealands regulatory regime. It provides a framework to regulate broadcast content (including election programmes) on freetoair television and pay television and radio. . The Broadcasting Act requires broadcast content to meet eleven standar ds outlined in the Act such as good taste and decency, chi ldrens interests, violence , balance, accuracy and privacy . The Broadcasting Act allows for the free toair television Adults Only watershed. The watershed generally restricts broadcasting of Adults Only content to time slots when children are significantly less likely to be watching TV, taking into consideration public holidays and school holidays. . It establishes the Broadcasting Standards Authority (the BSA), an independent Cr own entity that provid es an independent complaints service and oversees the development and guidance of broadcasting standards. The BSA works with industry bodies to develop the four codes which govern broadcast content. Sky Televisions Neon service curr ently adheres to the Pay Television Code through a Memorandum of Understanding with the BSA. Commercial video on demand content is not regulated under either Act . As mentioned in the previous section, CVoD content is not clearly regulated under either legis lation, leading to the status quo where providers self regulate in two ways by: a.selfclassifying on their own volition (usually by using overseas ratings); or b.using the Media Councils VoD Code to self classify their own content. Media Councils VoD Code has visual warning symbols that indicate whether content , language, violence and sexual m aterial may offend (C, L, V, S). Netflix has five advisory no tes for content: Language, Sex, Nudity, Violence and Use of Drugs. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate . The Media Council is an independent industry body that established the VoD Code in to provide some guidance around New Zealand classifications for CVoD and FVoD members. This voluntary scheme provides classifications that are based on the Pay Television Code which are also fam iliar to New Zealander s. With approval from the Media Council, members of this scheme can use alternative classifications and warning symbols. . The Media Council also acts as an independent body when considering complaints regarding its members . If New Zealand consumers wish to complain about any of the VoD members, they need to raise the issue directly with the member first . If the issue is not resolved, the complaint can then be considered by the Media Council. All members are required to comply with the Media Councils direct ion if content needs to be re classified. Other members are also required to adopt the new classification on their services. Why is Government regulation preferable to private arrangements in this area . Government reg ulation for visual media content ensur es that content is classified in a way that is consistent with New Zealand standards and concerns. The system provides consistent classifications, ratings and descriptive notes for consumers to make informed decisions on what to view and watch. Content pro vided to the New Zealand market (traditionally movies and DVDs) is most often created overseas. If this content were to carry an overseas rating it may not be tailored to the specific standards of New Zealanders. Incre asing numbers of self produced content is being made available on CVoD platforms. . For private arrangements to be a workable solution, there would need to be full buyin from industry members (e .g. all CVoD providers to be a member of the Media Council and abide by its VoD Code). A voluntary c ode of compliance lacks some of the benefits of an overarching regulatory framework. This includes enforceability for non compliance from providers and consist ency of information across a broader range of media types. The voluntary nature of current indust ry regulation means that providers, such as Amazon Prime, which has around , subscribers in New Zealand, are not required to comply with any form of New Zealand regulation. . We believe that overseas content providers will comply with regulation as th ey have a history of co operation with regulators. Netflix already uses local classification schemes in several countries including Singapore, Germany and Brazi l. To mitigate the risk of non compliance the ability to use the OFLC self classification tool or a system accredited by OFLC internal process for self classification tool is being provided for. Utilising self classification in this way allows the New Zeal and classification regime to be imbedded in a providers current processes potentially minimising monetary and time costs. What other agencies have a role or other substantive interest in that system . Organisations with a focus on the welfare and wellbeing of New Zealand children and young people have a substantive interest in any related proposals . This includes organisations like the Office of the Childrens Commissioner and the Mental Health Foundation. Their interest lies in ensuring that children and y oung people are protected from viewing inappropriate content that may cause them psychological an d physical harm. Pay TV classifications display General, Parental Guidance, Mature and age related ratings ( and ). Content warnings allude to content that may offend and language, violence and sexual references. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate Has the overall fitness forpurpose of the system as a whole been assessed When, and with what result . The overall fitness forpurpose of the system has been assessed previously , resulting in many attempts to update the system since with the most recent work conducted by MCH in mid . The increasing convergence between telecommunications, information technology, media and entertainme nt sectors in New Zealand has been a concern to Government and industry for the past years. Ch anges in Government and shifts in Government priorities over that time have meant a constant movement in scope and work undertaken without a lasting solution. . In December , the Minister of Broadcasting, Communications and Digital Media announced that work on the previous Governments Digital Convergence Bill (which was being led by MCH) was being put on hold to ensure the draft bill was fit for purpose. Fol lowing this announcement, MCH led a workshop in May with content providers, regulators and public interest groups. The outcome of this workshop was support (although not full consensus) for a new media content regulation system rather than further pie cemeal change. The exact scope of what this new system would look like is unclear but was intende d to provide one set of classifications and standards with industry self classifying and a government regulator as a backstop. . DIA and MCH are jointly scoping work to reform New Zealands media content regulation regime. This is expected to be a medium to long term project that could take at least to months. It is an opportunity to ensure a fit for purpose system that is future focusse d and addresses all other gaps in the regulatory regime that cannot be addressed by this discrete proposal. Any decisi ons about the broader reform will be made jointly by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister for Broadcasting, Communications an d Digital Media. . What is the policy problem or opportunity Why does the Counterfactual constitute a problem . The specific issue which this proposal is attempting to address is inadequate and inconsistent content warnings and classifications being p rovided to consumers of CVoD content. This problem presents a risk of psychological and physical harm to New Zealande rs, particularly children and young people, from viewing inappropriate conte nt. The risk of harm may be minimised if consumers are present ed with standardised classifications and consumer warnings that are consistent across CVoD platforms as well as other forms of media and are well understood by the public . The lack of clarity and process for providers to classify using New Zealand appropri ate classifications or ratings, has resulted in a self regulating industry and reliance on the Chief Censors powers a s a government backstop. For example, DCs film Suicide Squad has been classified in New Zealand as R with descriptive notes warning of violence, horror and cruelty. It is currently labelled as R on iTunes, and M on Google Play with no content warning s. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate . Industry has attempted to address this problem (for e .g. the Media Councils VoD Code) . This is a voluntary scheme and only has partial buy in from CVoD providers. As the scheme has no standing in law, refusal by the provider to c omply with a direction by the Media Council would have little to no ramifications. It relies on members cooperating with the scheme and as mentioned earlier, does not include all the CVoD providers that provide services to New Zealanders . Its current CVoD membership include s Lightbox, Netflix and Stuff (StuffPix). TVNZ which runs the FVoD service TVNZ onDemand is also a member. Sky Televisions Neon uses Pay Television Code classifications through a Memorandum of Understanding with the BSA. . The Online Medi a Association, a member of the New Zealand Media Association (which operates the Media Council) noted in its submis sion that the Media Council has not been referred any complaints about any of their CVoD members sin ce its VoD Code was established in . However, the reason for this is unclear. . At present, consumers who are dissatisfied with the classification (or lac k thereof) on CVoD content can complain directly to the Chief Censor who calls in the publication for classification. This is not an ideal situation beca use the call in power is reactive, and harm may have already been caused to the viewer from seeing inappropriate content . Consumers can also complain directly to the CVoD provider, but no verifiable information is available on this. . It can also take time for the Chief Censor to appropriately classify a publication, which would remain available for cons umption or viewing during this time. The publicity towards the relevant CVoD content could then result in more consumers watching the televis ion series or movie before it is properly classified. This also tends to attract media attention especially when th e Chief Censor reaches a classification decision and directs the CVoD provider to display the appropriate classification. . In recommending ch anges to the classification and warnings for the Netflix film The Perfection , the Chief Censor acknowledged that mid teens will essentially watch what they want and will not necessarily turn away from an R rating, making it even more important that clear consumer information is displayed so they can make informed viewing decisions. More c onsisten t classification would provide protections through concise information without denying access to content. What is the nature, scope and scale of harm being exper ienced, or the opportunity for improvement . Children and young people are at most risk of har m from viewing inappropriate cont ent. The widespread use of the I nternet and prevalence of smart devices (e .g. mobile phones and tablets, smart TVs) make CVoD co ntent, and access to potentially inappropriate content, a lot easier. Retrieved from: https:www.rnz.co.nznationalprogrammesninetonoonaudionetflix stheperfection reignites classification storm Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate . A UK report released in February concluded that children are most attracted to content they can view on their own device, at their own choosing and directly related to the things that interest them. It also highlighted that children and young people prefer subscription vide o on demand services like Netflix, user content on YouTube and associate watching public broadcast television as a family time activity. Most of the content consumed by study participants was online and on demand, mostly on their own without pare ntal supervision. . The effect s of children and young people watching inappropriate content is an important focus of research overseas. International studies not ed that children viewing viol ent media content showed a long term increase in aggressive though ts and behaviour, and angry feelings. . An OFLC study showed about per cent of New Zealand respondents were moderately to highly concerned about children and t eens exposure to content. Likewise, parents of participants in the UK study were more worried about what their children watched on Netflix on personal devices, than on public broadcast television. . Broader Reform which installs a platform neutral approach to content regulation is the preferred means for properly addressing the gaps in the current r egulatory regime. Broader reform will take at least to months. In the meantime, an identified risk to children and young people would remain while the refo rm is underway. How important is this to the achievement (or not) of the overall system objectives . The objective of this work is to ensure that New Zealanders, particularly young people, children and their parents, are provided with consistent and truste d information to assist informed viewing decisions. Providing clear requirements for prov iders and industry to consistently adhere to, within an established classification regime that N ew Zealanders are familiar with, would help achieve the overall system s objective which ultimately seeks to prevent harm to consumers. . OFLC currently produce e ducation resources to help students better understand the classification system and how it works. This allows students to better understand the classifications and how they can inform viewing decisions. By having these classifications used on CVoD platform s a better understood classification system can be extended to a greater range of platforms. This would include Amazon Prime which typically does not display any warni ng notes. Life on the small screen: What children are watching and why (). Ofc om. Retrieved from: https:www.ofcom.org.uk dataassetspdf fileOfcom childrens content review Publish.pdf Short term and long term effects of violent me dia on aggression in c hildren and adults (). https:research.vu.nlenpublicationsshort termandlongtermeffects ofviolent media onaggression i Children and teen exposure to media content, (). https:www.classificationoffice.govt.nzassets PDFsresearch UMR media content exposure .pdf Life on the small screen: What children are watching and w hy (). Ofc om. Retrieved from: https:www.of com.org.uk dataassetspdf fileOfcom childrens content review Publish.pdf Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate What is the underlying cause of the problem . The underlying cause of th e prob lem is content on new platform types not being subject to the New Zealand media content classification regime . CVoD p roviders are not required to display age rating la bels or content warnings on their content . The ratings they do show can be inconsistent w ith New Zealand standards and recognised classifications . Inconsistencies result , and a resultant potential for harm from viewing inappropriate content. It also means caregivers are also not properly informed when making viewing decisions for children and young people. . The increase of the CVoD market and original CVoD content is reflective of th e trend of online and on demand content becoming a preferred choice for ente rtainment. Some providers have been accused of tailoring original content to attract younger audiences . For example, shows starring teens in high school but exploring and depicting themes that are appropriate for older audiences than the obvious target mar ket. If the advisory notes that accompany ratings for these shows do not mak e apparent that potentially harmful material is present in the content, then viewers will not know about it until they see it. . Big m ultinational CVoD providers like Netflix and Ama zon Prime are available in around countries. In comparison to other coun tries with larger CVoD subscription bases, New Zealand s CVoD market is relatively small . There may not be much of an incentive for these big providers to tailor their classificati ons or ratings for New Zealanders or to reflect particular concerns that New Zealanders care about (e .g. advisory notes for suicide themes) . Why cannot individuals or firms be expected to resolve the problem themselves under existing arrangements . Und er existing arrangements, CVoD content will remain outside of the classification regime for films (e .g. cinema and DVD release ) and CVoD content available to New Zealanders would continue to have inconsistent and varying classifications. Voluntary particip ation in the Classification Act regime is disincentivised due to t he time it takes to complete which can be about four weeks . When content needs to be made available on a platform the same day it is received, this can be a significant barrier. . CVoD provide rs using the Media Councils VoD Code would continue to provide either the stipulated classifications or their own , while non members would conti nue to self label thei r own content based on overseas classifications. This would be further exacerbated as the CVoD market increases in New Zealand. . The N ew Zealand media content regulation regime seeks to prevent harm to New Zealanders from viewing inappropriate or harmful content. We acknowledge that the Media Councils Video on demand Classification Code is bas ed on the Pay Television Code, with classifications that New Zealanders are also familiar with. However, this scheme is voluntary, and members can opt out. It also does not include all CVoD providers that have a presence in the New Zealand market . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate How robu st is the evidence supporting this assessment . There is evidence to show a risk of harm to children and young people from the media content they can access . This type of content can involve such themes as suicide, physical violence and sexual violence. There is sufficient research to show that media content can cause harm . . The evidence includes New Zealand based research carried out by OFLC on children and teen exposure to media content , and overseas based studies on the effect s of media content on childre n. UK regulator Ofc om released a report in January which focussed on what children are watching and why. . We also carried out public consultation on proposed options to regulate CVoD content from April to May and received a range of views fr om industry, regulators, CVoD providers, ot her organisations and members of the public . Submissions from the Mental Health Foundation and the Office of the Childrens Commissioner provided local experience that supported evidence from international researc h. . There is evidence of an increasing amou nt of content being viewed on CVoD platforms accessed from personal devices which changes the location of risk. . Gaps do exist in the evidence. For example, w e have been unable to find evidence to prove definitivel y that classification of media content is an effective way of preventing harm. Due to the constraints on time we hav e not been able to address this gap but rather have relied on the policy basis for New Zealand s and other jurisdictions classification sys tems . This is something the broader reform could investigate further. . Are there any constraints on the scope for decision making What constraints are there on the scope, or what is out of scope . Addressing the risk of harm to children and young peop le is one of the main priorities for the Minister of Internal Affairs . The Minister has directed DIA to progress work, including consultation, on options to address this regulatory gap immediately rather than wai t for a broader reform of the media content regulation system . . The Minister of Internal Affairs has made implementing a solution to the gap in CVoD regulation a priority to be implemented within this parliamentary term. Broader reform which installs a pla tform neutral approach to content regulation is preferred but will take at least to months . In the meantime, an identified risk to children and young people would remain while the reform is underway. . The scope has been restricted to only content meet ing the definition of Commercial Video onDemand . This is any visual media content that is accessed online on demand by a user who has paid a fee. This definition includes Subscription Video on Demand which is visual media content that is accessed online ondemand by a user who pays an on going fee for access (e .g. Netflix or Lightbox) and Transactional Video on Demand which is visual media content that is accessed online on demand by a user who pays a one off fee for access (e .g. Google Play or YouTube Mo vies). Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate . FVoD services such as ThreeNow and TV NZ OnDemand are excluded from the scope. There is not a simple way to distinguish between these free services (that have a nominally commercial element), and all other free video on demand on the internet (for ex ample travel video blogs). The additional co mplexity introduced by covering this free content would require a significant extension to the timeframes of this project. . FVoD is also accessed online and providers are not required to classif y content prior to making it available to consumers . FVoD does not require any payment to access and can be hard to define without also including free user content on YouTube or any other free online video content . Providers or platforms such as TVNZ OnDemand and ThreeNow mostly provide content that has been previously aired and classified for television which , if inappropriate, is subject to a complaint process within days of original airing. However, we note that content is increasingly stream ed on these platforms without airing on television first. . We believe including user content would require a longer timeframe due to the complexities around regulating such content. User content is largely created by individuals for the platform they are using. This content is found on sites like YouTube and Facebook and usually contains individuals expressing their thoughts and ideas or sharing their interests. There would likely be significant considerations around the freedom of speech principles under the Bill of Rights Act as a consequenc e of trying to regulate this content , which could impact on delivering this Ministerial priority. . Cabinet agreed that the discussion document would seek feedback on three options. These options w ere subjecting CVoD content to the current film classificatio n process, subjecting CVoD content to the current film classification process but allowing for self classification and a third option of enhancing the current voluntary scheme and use of the Chie f Censors call in power. This has meant that the stakeholder feedback we have received and analysed has largely focused on these three options. What interdependencies or connections are there to other existing issues or ongoing work . The underlying cause of this problem is an outdated New Zealand media regulation regime that cannot easily adapt to cover con tent from emerging platforms (e .g. online and on Demand) . DIA and MCH are jointly working on scoping a broader reform of New Zealands media content regulation regime. The scope for this work is likely to be quite broad and we expect will consider FVoD and user content, including currently regulated content under both the Classification Act and the Broadcasting Act. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate . What do stakeholders think Who are the stakeholders What is the nature of their int erest . Stakeholders for this work include the relevant regulators such as OFLC , the Labelling Body , the Film and Literature Board of Review and the Broadcasting Standards Authori ty. Other important stakeholders include the CVoD providers who may be faced w ith co mpliance requirements and costs, organisations with a relevant focus on children and young people, other industry bodies with an interest in video on demand ser vices, and New Zealand consumers. . We carried out public consultation between April to May . Key stakeholders were contacted directly to advise them of the process and the consultation document was on the DIA website inviting submissions on the proposed options . Prior to consultation, we worked closely with OFLC to determin e context and background of the problem, and the three proposed options for consultation. There were s ubmissions received including from five CVoD providers. . Following initial consultation, we hosted a workshop with industry to discuss the definition of CVoD and how implementation of self classification under option might affect them. No changes were mad e to the definition of CVoD because of this worksho p. There was some discussion around time allowances for implementation. There will need to be furthe r discussion on this to find a sufficient time period. . We also consulted the problem definition and proposed options with other government agencies p rior to seeking Cabinet agreement to the release of the consultation document . These agencies have a releva nt interest in this work an d included the Ministry for Culture and Heritage, Treasury, Ministry of Health, Te Puni Kkiri, Ministry for Pacific Peoples, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, Ministry for Women, Oranga Tama riki, and the Policy Advisory Group at the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet. Which stakeholders share the Agencys view of the problem and its causes Some Government agencies expressed support to address the problem and its causes . The Ministry for Pacific Peoples, Te Puni Kkiri , the Ministry of Education and the Min istry of Health expressed their support for this work to consult on the proposed options to standardise classifications for CVoD content. . The Ministry for Pacific Peoples specifically noted that Pasifika people have the fastest growing youth population i n New Zealand and that on average, Pasifika people report higher psychological distress and depressive symptoms than others. Providing consistent classifications for CVoD content would mean Pasifika children and young people are better informed about conte nt which may have the potential to cause psychological, physical or emotional harm . . The Ministry o f Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) did have reservations regarding the scope of the project and whether it wa s necessary to do this work separate fr om the broader reform . However, MBIE is broadly supportive of what this policy is attempting to do. Such as the Mental Health Foundation and Office of the Childrens Commissioner. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate Certain stakeholders expressed agreement for the problem and its causes during consultation . There was general stakeh older support for the DIA s assessment of the problem. This included current regulators and sta tutory bodies under the Act: OFLC, the Labelling Body and the Film and Literature Board of Review. . The Office of the Childrens Commissioner , the Mental Health Foundation, Family Planning New Zealand and other organisations that focus on the welfare and wellbeing of youth and childr en agreed that there needs to be better information and warnings provided to viewers of CVoD content . . The Mental Health Foundation s submission emphasised the potential ha rm that viewing inappropriate content can have on young people , specifically content with strong themes like suicide (e.g. Netflixs Reasons Why ). It has been releasing guidance for parents and young people to help them navigate sensitive issues . This i ncludes warning s on its website and social media channels for certain CVoD content and films to alert consumers to content that may cause harm to them (e.g. suicide themes) . Which stakeholders do not share the Agencys view in this regard, and why Some industry representative bodies and providers did not fully share our view of the problem . There was general agreement from CVoD providers and industry representatives that New Zealands overall media content regulation regime is inconsistent as it is based on the platform on which media conten t is be ing shown (e.g. films, Pay TV, Free TV, and CVoD self regulation). However, there was disagreement with the claim that CVoD content is providing inconsistent information to consumers creating a risk of harm . . Industry providers and the BSA are supportive o f broader reform of New Zealands media content regulation regime. There is very little support for this discrete fix. Reasons for this were the absence of complaints to the Media Council for its Video on Demand Code as well as a concern that a legislative change now would create legislative fatigue when the broader reform takes place. . Some industry representative bodies and the BSA noted the Media Councils VoD C ode is based on Pay TV Code classifications which are also familiar to New Zealanders. Viewers of content on platforms using the code will be as well informed as someone viewing traditional pay TV programming. Membership of the VoD C ode is voluntary , and providers are able to use their own ratings . . This partial fix is not considered by DIA to be sufficient for removin g the identified risk. The current system is voluntary which allows providers to opt out as Amazon Prime has. Ratings displayed by providers can be different from those prescribed by the Media Council (as is the case for Netflix) which means the ratings an d content warnings are s till inconsistent . Lastly, the Media Councils VoD C ode, despite requiring use of the Pay TV classifications does not require providers to base these classifications on the BSAs eleven broadcasting standards which diminishes the ef fectiveness of these cla ssifications. S.()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate . There were further questions from industry participants about the evidence of harm being caused due to CVoD content. Lightbox s submission noted that initial issues with CVoD classification were possibly teething issue s as new providers got used to the New Zealand market . As providers learn what is appropriate , Lightbox expect s instances of insufficient content warnings to become increasingly rare. There is no indication that instances such as the re classificatio n of Reasons Why have led to any significant procedural changes that would avoid future risk. Some submissions noted the lack of complaints received by the Media Council about its CVoD members , since the VoD Codes release in . As far as DIA is able to ascertain, complaints about CVoD classification are likely to be made to OFLC. . A workshop has since been held with i ndustry to discuss the definition of CVoD and how self classification can be achieved within their systems. Industry raised many of the concer ns noted above at this workshop. The most notable concern raised here was the need for a broader reform instead of small changes. . The workshop did not result in any major changes to the CVoD definition. Some providers note d that a way to manage unint ended capture , would be to list providers andor services via a schedule or list that is maintained by DIA. Providers also advised they would require more information before they could estimate the cost and time requirement for implementing changes. This i nforma tion is expected to be provided before final legislation drafting is completed by the Parliamentary Council Office. Members of the public . We received four submissions from individuals who generally did not support Government intervention. Some noted that t he responsibility should be on parents or caregivers to determine what to allow their children to watch, not Government. Does the issue affect Mori in particular Have iwi hap been consulted, and if not, should they be . This problem and recommended proposal will affect all New Zealand communities including iwi and hap. We consulted Te Puni Kkiri on final policy proposal s. They were supportive of this proposal and did not raise any concerns with the problem definition or options to address the issues. Our public consultation did not result in any submissions from specific Mori groups, iwi or hap . Section : Options ide ntification . What options ar e available to address the problem . We identified and publicly consulted on the following three options to address the gap in the current media content regulation regime. Two of these options require legislative change (optio ns and ) and option mainta ins the status quo while allowing for any enhancements to it. . Consultation received submissions including five from content providers, six from other organisations (such as the Office of t he Childrens Commissioner and t he Better Public Media Trust), four from regulators , four from other industry (such as TVNZ and the Interactive Games Entertainment Association) and the remaining five were members of the public. Members of the public were general ly against any form of g overnment intervention. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate Option : Subject CVoDs to current New Zealand Classification process . Under this option, CVoD content would be requi red to display classifications ( ratings and descriptive notes ) that are familiar to New Zealanders. CVoD providers w ould have to follow the current process and submit material to the Labelling Body for rating, which then forwards restricted content to OFLC for classification. . For the classification of films under the Classification Act, the Labelling Body cross rates content that : a.has been previously rated in New Zealand; or b.has an unrestricted rating in the United Kingdom or Australia (giving priority to an unrestricted Australian rating). . The Labelling Body would also rate CVoD content which, upon viewing, is classif ied as unrestricted. CVoD content that the Labelling Body deems to be restricted would be referred to OFLC for classification. This process currently takes about four weeks and will require CVoD providers to pay the current fees for film classification . These fees could impact the profitability of content which could then affect its availability to New Zealanders. However, no content providers mentioned this possibility in their submission. Option received little support during consultat ion . Submitters note d the following concerns with subjecting CVoD content to the current process : a.Costly for providers : current fees charged for the classification and rating of content, combined with the large library of CVoD content , would see providers costs increase significantly. Prior to , CVoD providers were classifying content using this process and a submitter noted that this process, despite efforts by regulators to streamline the process, was time consuming and costly for its size. b.CVoD provi ders may leave the New Zealand market : Some submitters, particularly members of the public, had concerns about CVoD providers leaving the New Zealand market under this option due to increased compliance burdens (e.g. costs and operationally). c.Costly for regulators : CVoD prov iders and industry bodies had concerns about OFLC and the Labelling Bodys ability to handle the additional workload. d.Slow processing due to additional workload for regulators : CVoD providers and industry bod ies had concerns about the current processing times which they considered to be very slow . With the additional workload, CVoD content would be at risk of not being available to New Zealand consumers at the same time as international releases (e.g. the final season episodes of Game of Thrones were releas ed on the same day on Sky TVs Neon as in the United States ). Consumers expect content to be available at the same time as overseas . This option may mean even slower pr ocessing, resulting in delays to CVoD co ntent being available on time to meet consumer e xpectations . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate e.Enforcement issues with overseas providers : Some CVoD providers are based overseas and do not have a physical presence in New Zealand (e.g. Amazon Prime, Netflix). This could create extra territorial issues with enforcement especially when overseas based providers fail to properly classify or display classifications on CVoD content avai lable in New Zealand. f.One potential unintended impact of this option may be CVoD providers passing on costs to consumers, as cost recovery for complying under the proposed system. There has been no indication from the large providers that this is likely t o happen. This may be an issue for smaller providers. Support for option was for differing reasons . The Labelling Body expressed support for option as they be lieve CVoD content does meet the definition of a film and therefore is subject to the current c lassification process. The Labelling Body noted that they have been classifying digital content since . As they are currently classifying some CVoD content , the Labelling Body believes option would be easy to implement and would provide the best leve l of protection from harm for children and young people. . The Office of the Childrens Commissioner supports option as it will require a regulator to view and c lassify all CVoD content before it enters the market. By ensuring that no content is misclassified , option is the best way to maximise prevention of harm through informed choices. No changes were made to Option after consultation. Option : Establish a mechanism for CVoDs to self classify under the official regime . Similar to option , this option means CVoD content would be required to display classifications (ratings and descriptive notes) that are familiar to New Zealanders . The difference is that CVoD providers would be able to classify their own content. . Content that has previously been classified in New Zealand would use that previous classification. Self classification ratings would be consistent with general classification standards as OFLC is p rototyping and testing an online tool, which would allow CV oD providers to self classify in a simple, cost effective way. They may also be able to use their own system to self classify content, subject to authorisation by OFLC. . CVoD providers that do not w ish to self classify under this option, would be able to me et compliance requirements by submitting content to the Labelling Body, as per current classification process for films (and outlined in option ). Option addresses concerns highlighted by submit ters regarding option . Consultation resulted in significan tly more support for this option compared to option . Submitters from industry prefer self classification in any form considerably more than being subjected to the current classification process. Nonindustry supported this options capability to provide classifications that are consistent with the New Zealand classification scheme , therefore reducing the risk of harm to children and young people . In their submissions, both Netflix and Apple expres sed support for option two. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate . This option address es some key concerns highlighted with option , particularly the cost and time pressures for both CVoD providers and regulators. Like option , jurisdiction issues were raised for enforcing the classification regime against a foreign provider. Submitters doubted that regulators would be able to hold overseas companies to account for CVoD content they provide to New Zealand audiences without an approved label. . The Chief Censor has already used th e call in pow er for content on an overseas based CVoD providers platform . These instances have seen positive collaboration with the Chief Censor and adjustment to the content s classification in line with the Chief Censors decision. Overseas based providers have shown that having a good reputation is important to them and being provided with a clear regulatory framework will allow them to maintain their reputation . There will also be clear support and pathways to compliance with regulations. We do not believe extraterr itoriality will be an issue due to the sector s willingness to collaborate and comply. . Selfclassification would reduce the time required to obtain a classification under the Classification Act. CVoD providers have a large volume of c ontent frequently ent ering their platforms. Adding this content to the Labelling Body and OFLCs current workload would result in delays to content release. Self classification will allow content to be released at the same time as international releases an d avoid strain on the current classification system. . Compared to option , this option could minimise compliance costs for CVoD providers as classification can be a streamlined process . As mentioned previously, p roviders that do not wish to self classify w ould be able to use t he current process of submitting content to the Labelling Body. This would incur the regular fees charged. Selfclassification under the classification regime can be adaptable and flexible . The consultation document, under option , onl y specified one manne r of self classification through using OFLCs self classification tool that was under development at the time . Submitters noted they would need more information about the selfclassification tool in order to provide insights into costs . However, the Chief Censors submission noted that in addition to the self classification tool, OFLC was open to working with providers to enable provider systems to meet compliance requirements. . Therefore, w e have further determined under option that CVoD providers would be able to classify content by using a self classification tool administered by OFLC or an alternative means that is approved by OFLC. A system approved by OFLC could be an internal system that providers already use which has been adjusted to provide accur ate classifications and advisory notes under the Classification Act . The OFLC self classification tool is expected to be a quick manual system which can be used to acquire a classification which is then easily replicated onto provi ders platforms. . These m ethods would produce official classifications under the Classification Act without requiring providers to submit content to the Labelling body or to OFLC . However, content that presents objectionable publication characteristics w ould be submitted to OFLC for full classification . Any issues with either system would be corrected through ongoing dialogue between OFLC and providers and updates to the tool. OFLC will work with providers to ensure compliance under the Act whether it is selfclassifying using th e tool or its own systems. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate . A reduction in the amount of content that is provided under this option is less likely. This would depend on results of a fees review also being conducted by DIA which could increase costs for providers . Any fees would be on a c ost recovery basis and should therefore be minimal. However, this may affect the ability of smaller providers to acquire new content. Option received equal support to Option , with some reservations from industry and providers . As well as concerns about extraterritoriality, some submitters noted the following reservations with this option: a.Lack of information about OFLC self classification tool : Some industry bodies and CVoD providers submitted that although they support the idea of allowing providers to selfclassify their own content, the lack of information about the OFLC self classification tool meant they were unable to comment fully. Lightbox noted from their use of the current version of the test version of the tool that it is a time consuming and m anual process that is likely to require extra staffing to ensure classification is done properly. b.Potential for human error due to human input required : Lightbox also noted that the selfclassification prototype tool s manual input required created the pot ential for human errors when classifying using the tool. . This option would create more consistent classification for CVoD content. It is acknowledged that there will still be consistency issues with New Zealands media content regulation regime , including FVoD content not being covered by the regime. This option ma y cause regulatory fatigue that may negatively affect attempts at broader reform in the future. This fatigue would be dependent on how soon broader reform is c onducted after this change. . As with o ption , an impact of this option may be CVoD providers passing on costs to consumers, as cost recovery for complying under the proposed system. There has not been indication from the large providers that this is likely to happen, which may be an issue for smaller providers. Option : Identifying enhancements to the voluntary self classification scheme and callin power and operating them in tandem . This option proposes maintaining the status quo while looking to improve how the Media Council s voluntary VoD Code and the Chief Censors call in power operate in tandem . This would provide a system that resembles a statutory scheme, without requirin g legislative change. . OFLC could work with the Media Council to improve the voluntary scheme. This could mean ame nding the Media Councils VoD Code to reflect classifications used for fil ms rather than using the Pay Television Code, including using descriptive notes used by the Labelling Body and OFLC. The Chief Censors call in powers would be relied on as the enforcement avenue for CVoD providers . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate . This option would have a considerable amount of buy in from industry members, many of which are already members of the scheme. This option also covers FVoD providers as they are already part of the Media Council s schem e. Regulatory fatigue would not be an issue for the broader reform as this is a non legislative option. There would not be any content that is not provided to New Zealanders as a consequence of this option because this is very close to the status quo. Option had equal support to option . Option is well supported by industry. Industry representative bodies have pointed to the lack o f complaints received by the Media Council since the VoD C ode was implemented in . However, CVoD content such as The Per fection has been classified after complaints to the Chief Censor, not the content provider. This indicates a lack of visibility of the Media Council complaints process in place. It could also show that there is an established understanding that OFLC is the organisation to approach w ith a classification issue instead of content providers. . Option could address the recognised problem, but it would largely depend on what changes to the VoD Code the Media Council and CVoD providers would be willing to adopt. The Online Media Association has recommended the following changes to the current scheme: a.Change the current VoD C lassification C ode to require advisories about sexual violence and suicide; and b.Publishing annual reports about the number of complaints and th e outcomes of them . . Option is still a voluntary scheme , and participation would be at the discretion of each content provider. If content providers continue to collaborate with OFLC as Netflix has done for the classification of Reasons Why and The Pe rfection , this option could be sufficient to address the potential harms of CVoD classification until a broader reform is underway . However, relying on the Chief Censors call in power as a regulatory and enforcement avenue is not sustainable for OFLC . This additional work does not generate revenue to support this function and the current legislative settings do not allow for any related costs to be recovered from providers or complainants. Enhancing the current powers or requiring a means of payment or funding for this proc ess would require legislative change . . The call in power also relies on the willingness of offshore providers to work with OFLC to amend their ratings and advisory warnings appropriately. There is a n ongoing concern that offshore prov iders can choose not to work with OFLC to address any mis classified or un classified content. The Classification Act does not currently specify extra territorial effect and does not offer a clear enforcement pathway for regulators to follow, especially in situations where providers are not based in New Zealand. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate What relevant experience from other countries has been considered . In Australia, a recent two year trial has led to the approval of self classification for Netflix, in accordance with the Austra lian classification system. When the trial period finished it was found that in per cent of cases the Netflix self classification system produced ratings the same or one level higher than the Australian Classification Board. Although w e do not know for what reason four per cent of content was not classified properly, we believe t his is evidence of the industrys ability to work with regulators to self classify in accordance with an official regime, in response t o the large volume of original content (such as what is available on Netflix ). . A similar approach is being trialled in the UK. This is in response to the volume of content available on CVoD platforms as well as an acknowledgment that current UK legislation does not cover CVoD content. The proposed selfclassificat ion system would bring New Zealand in line with these overseas developments. . What criteria, in addition to monetary costs and benefits, have been used to assess the likely impacts of the options under consideration . Our assessment of each option used the following criteria: a.Ability to provide appropriate information to consumers : if and how each option effectively addresses the risk of harm to children and young people (e.g. ensuring content has ratings and advisory notes that provide clear and consis tent information to consumers across platforms ); b.Timeliness: how efficient it is to set up and establish the regime to ensure that the risk of harm is addressed (e.g. how quickly each option can be e stablished ); c.Timeliness in providing co ntent to New Zealanders market impact analysis : how each option can ensure efficient classification processing, so content is not delayed for consumers; d.Impact on CVoD providers : how each option impacts CVoD providers (e.g. financial, operational and ot her costs); a nd e.Impact on regulators : how each option impacts current regulators like OFLC and the Labelling Body (e.g. financial, operational and other costs). . The highest priority criteria are the ability to provide appropriate information to consumers and the timeli ness in providing content to New Zealanders . However, the overall impact of each option on the remaining two criteria (impact on providers and regulators) will need to be considered when assessing the effectiveness of an option . Netflix gets approval to classify own shows after two year tr ial, . Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved from https:www.smh.com.aubusinesscompaniesnetflix getsapproval toclassify ownshows aftertwoyeartrial psim.html Netflix to set its own age ratings for film and television programmes, . The Guardian. Retrieved from: https:www.theguardian.commediamarnetflix tosetitsownageratings forfilmandtelevision programmes Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs RIA : CVoD definition analysis Impact Statement T emplate . What othe r options hav e been ruled out of scope, or not considered, and why Including the Media Council into option was considered . Consideration has been given to a hybrid opti on that would includ e the Media Council in option . This would include a requirement under the Classification Act for CVoD providers to selfclassify their content, with the Media Council administering the self classification tool. Members hip of the Media Council would be mandatory but CVoD providers would be able to classify content in whichever way works for their systems and processes . . The Media Council will ensure the correct ratings are created by all providers. Quality checks would be achieved by using the OFLC selfclassification tool to test some of the ratings for accuracy. The Med ia Council could then be a conduit for streamlined communication between OFLC and the CVoD industry. . This option would allow for an independent complaints process through the Media Council . The Media Council would be the first point of escalation for any c omplaints by consumers that are not initially resolved by CVoD providers. As an independent body , the Media Council could provide a free service for consumers who are dissatisfied by the classification of co ntent. Further escalation of consumer complaints and issues that providers have with the Media Council would be through OFLC and the Film and Literature Board of Review . . This option was ruled out as it would make the classification process more complicated than it would otherwise be. The need for an int ermediary for communication between industry and OFLC appears unwarranted. Having a third party administer the self classification tool may also hinder streamlining of the classification process an d attempts to improve the tool . Utilising the Mental Health Foundation s education role to inform consumers of potentially harmful media content . Although the information provided by the Mental Health Foundation is helpful for viewers of potentially harmful content, this education method cannot be relied upon going forward. The reach of the Foundation s social media presence would not be significant enough to be known by all potential viewers of content. Universal provision of information about potentially harmful content is covered by the classifications and adviso ry notes provided under the Classification Act. Classifications have the benefit of being on the platform and visible before watching where Mental Health Foundation educational material would need to be actively searched for to find. . OFLC have a legislativ e requirement to conduct research and provide education relating to media content. Entry of the Mental Health Foundation into this space could mean a doubling of effort that would take valuable res ources away from other areas of the Foundation s work. Exte nding the scope to cover FVoD services . Consideration was given to extending the scope to cover FVoD services. Including FVoD into this work adds the complexity of defining FVoD content in a way tha t would only capture services that would warrant classifica tion. Creating a regulatory system for this material would add extra complexity that would require significant time and resource investment. It is not considered possible to achieve this within the timeframes DIA are working to with this project. Complaints to OFLC are also free for both viewers making complaints and providers pote ntially subject to reclassification. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Impact Statement Template Section : Conclusi ons . What option, or combination of options, is likely best to address the problem, meet the policy objectives and deliver the highest net benefits Where a conclusion as to preferred option is reached, identify it and set out reasons for considering it to be the best approach (by reference to the assessment criteria). . Option is most likely to address the identified problem, while addressing anticipated concerns CVoD providers and industry would have around costs, processing and delivery. Establishing a mechanism to allow providers to self classify under the current regime mee ts the criteria set out in Section . better than the other options , as noted in the table in Section . . Option provides for CVoD content to be clearly regulated under New Zealan d legislation and the regulatory framework. This approach helps minimise th e risk of harm to children and young people by ensuring CVoD content is labelled consistently. It also provides the ability for CVoD providers to self classify their own content, us ing OFLCs self classification tool or their own OFLC approved systems, whi ch could make it quicker for them to process classifications and ratings. . We consider the costs to providers and regulators are reasonable, considering this approachs ability to b etter provide for the wellbeing and safety of children and young people. Th ere may also be potential reputational benefits for CVoD providers utilising a trusted and familiar classification system, as viewers and consumers can trust their content is classi fied under New Zealands classification regime. . We do not believe the risks identified outweigh the benefits of having consistent CVoD classifications that enable New Zealanders, particularly children, young people and their caregivers, to make informed de cisions on what to consume. A broader reform would take between to mo nths to complete, depending on Government priorities. The risk of inconsistent classifications for CVoD content is real and needs to be addressed immediately, rather than be delayed to accommodate the expected broader reform. . This approach is also consist ent with Government priorities regarding the welfare of children and young people and meets New Zealands obligations under the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Impact Statement Template How much confidence do you have in the assumptions and evidence . We are co nfident in the evidence showing the potential harm that can be inflicted from CVoD content. We do not have direct evidence to show that Government regulation will prevent this harm completely. As per the Chief Censors comments regarding The Perfection , midteens will essentially watch what they want and will not necessarily turn away from an R rating. However, they may pay attention to specific warnings about the type of content they may not wish to see, making it even more important that clear consumer information is displayed. We are confident consistent classification would provide protections through concise information without denying access to content. . Due to time constraint s the level of research h as not been as extensive as it could have been. The evidence we do have indicates that there is a real risk of harm. We are confident that requiring self classification under the Classification Act will reduce the risk of harm to c hildren and young people as well as other vulnerable groups within New Zealand. Although this will not be a perfect solution, it will provide a good level of protection until a broader reform can be completed . . Based on preliminary analysis we are confident the impact on industry w ill be manageable . Selfclassification is intended to streamline classification and reduce costs which we believe will be well received by industry. What do stakeholders think in particular, those opposed Why are they concerne d, and why has it not bee n possible to accommodate their concerns . The biggest concern for stakeholders that opposed option (as well as some that supported it) was the need for the broader reform. Broader reform will address the issues this policy propos al is trying to resolve, as well as fix issues that submitters believe will occur from option . DIA and MCH are currently undertaking scoping work for a broader reform. However, the identified gap is considered too important to leave until the proposed reform is completed. . Option received almost as many expressions of support as option . Other organisations (organisations that operate outside of content provision or regulation , which includes the Mental Health Foundation, Family Planning and others with a focus on children welf are) were the biggest stakeholder group to support this option. Submitters noted the practicality and efficiency of the option with it being a balance between providing classifications under the Classification Act while not burdeni ng content providers with undue compliance cost. . Some support also came from content providers and regulators. Netflix noted that they already self classify under official regimes in other countries and are happy to do it here if provided clarity and direc tion as to how it is to be done. OFLC were appreciative of the cost in time that the current classification process can require. The regulator supports option due to the efficiencies it will provide while still creating accurate classifications. Netflixs The Perfection reignites classification storm, . Radio New Zealand. Retrieved from: https:www.rnz.co.nznationalprogrammesninetonoonaudionetflix stheperfection reignites classific ation storm Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Impact Statement Template . Those op posed to option were l argely other industry members (those that provide media content but not specifically CVoD) . Some of these submitters felt that option was not the most cost effective and would only cement the current inconsistencies of classificat ion approach across the media content regulation system. . The BSA is the regulator for broadcasters under the Broadcasting Act. The BSA is opposed to this discrete fix and prefer s a broader reform of media content regulation instead . The BSA noted in their submission that the inconsistency with labels provided by CVoD providers shows a need to provide support to the sector to provide a better understanding of appropriate classification settings in New Zealand. There is concern from the BSA that subjecting CV oD content to the Cl assification Act will further increase fragmentation by requiring film labels on content that is provided on televisions and mobile devices. . The Labelling Body also expressed opposition to option , noting it would create an uneven play ing field favouring CVoD providers over traditional distributors (for cinema and DVDs) . This would leave traditional content with a lengthy process and high compliance costs while CVoD providers have a streamlined self classification process. . Some stakehol ders believe this fi x will further entrench inconsistency of information across media types. We do not believe this to be the case as a greater number of platforms will be covered by the Classification Act making it more likely for consumers to be viewing content classified b y the regime. Some stakeholders questioned the robustness of the CVoD definition . Four stakeholders expressed concerns with the definition of CVoD. These concerns range from issues with the current definition, to providing ways it can be further enhanced to capture more of the market. Concerns were as follows: a.Lightbox questioned how well the definition holds up when services are packaged in alternative ways. In their example, Lightbox and Netflix are bundled as part of Sparks Unplan ent ertainment plan. Being provided free would mean these services are not CVoD as they lack a fee under this model. b.Google raised the issue of paying a fee to remove ad vertisement s from otherwise free content. YouTube premium allows users to access the trad itionally free user content without ads by paying a monthly fee. This brings user content within scope of the current CVoD definition. c.InternetNZ suggested defining content by whether they require a user login to access content. This wo uld create issues wi th determining what would count as CVoD as many sites, including Facebook, require a log in and have video content on their services. Sparks Unplan Entertainment costs from a month and includes Netflix Standard (HD) and Lightb ox Standard. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Impact Statement Template . We acknowledge how important it is to have a clear definition for CVoD content and have hosted a works hop involving OFLC, the Labelling Body and members of the industry to e nsure we have a clear definition that does not unintentionally capture content we have determined to be out of scope (e.g. FVoD and user content). . To address these concerns, we conducted supplem entary analysis to clarify the CVoD definition, which involved two weeks of targeted consultation with key industry and regulatory stakeholders. Our findings from supplementary analysis are outlined below. Supplementary analysis : clari fying the CVoD definition . In the initial proposal presented to Cabinet, i t was not clear which CVoD providers would be regulated under the new requirements. The Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Finance agreed to officials doing more work in identifying and establishing criteria to determine which CVoD services should be regulated . This included considering how small andor niche providers would be impacted. This additional analysis will accompany the Bill when it is considered by Cabi net in November . We identified three objectives to assess our approa ch . We identified three objectives to assess our recommended approach on the CVoD definition , based on the agreement between the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Finance, and our discussions with Treasury . These objectives are: a)Fair and appropriate : Consider s the prevalence of online and on demand services in New Zealand and ensure that content likely to be accessed by New Zealand based consumers displays appropriate ratings and descriptive notes; b)Clear for industry and regulators : Clearly indicate which providers and types of content are covered by the requirement to display adequate consumer information for New Zealand consumers; and c)Cost effective : Consider the compliance r equirements for all stakeholders, including regulated parties and regulators (e.g. ease of compliance and administration under the new regime). We considered consulting on two options to CVoD provider criteria . We identified two options for clarifying the C VoD definition. These two options are described below, with our initial assumptions on how each would impact provider s. Option : Criteria based on business characteristics . This option focusses on providers that are active in the New Zealand market and li sting them in a Schedule to make it clear which providers are regulated. The criteria to determine which provider is listed would be based on the providers a vailability of services to the New Zealand public , and their market reach (below ) which would have set thresholds : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Impact Statement Template a)Presence in New Zealand to make it clear that providers that do not actively operate in New Zealand (but whose content is accessible by N ew Zealand based consumers via V irtual Private Network VPN ) are not regulated or required to com ply under the new requirements. The expectation is that providers that operate within the New Zealand market should comply with domestic media regulations. b)Market reach to help confirm a providers presence in New Zealand. We proposed that market reach have thresholds based on subscription numbers or in relation to GST registration . Providers that meet either threshold would be required to classify conten t (both of these thres holds were included in targeted consultation). This would likely capture main providers with a significant consumer base in New Zealand and ensure that they are displaying appropriate ratings and descriptive notes on their content. . Providers that meet the criteria and are then listed in the Schedule would not be required to label the following content : a)Content that is described under the labelling ex emptions for films outlined in sectio n of the Classification Act (s ection exemption s); b)Content that fits the definition of broadcasting under the Broadcasting Act (including online live streaming) . This would mean that broadcast content is not captured by the new labelling requirements, and is aligned with what is currently in place for films ; and c)Content that is available for free with advertisements but can be accessed witho ut ads with payment . This would mean that YouTube Premium, which may meet the criteria and be listed in the Schedule, would not be required to label user content on its platform. Our a ssumptions on how Option impacts providers . Smaller providers would not be regulated , as they are unlikely to meet the market reach thresholds. Providers that offer nic he content (e.g. a selection of art hous e films ) may be required to label content but that would be dependent on whether or not they meet the mark et reach thresholds. . The proposal would also mean that advertising funded providers or niche content providers could meet the criteria and threshol ds but would not be required to label the content that they provide because this content comes under the specified exemption s (e.g. a niche provider of documentaries would not be required to label this content because it is an exemption under section ). . The Chief C ensors call in powers under s ection of the Classification Act has been used to call in cont ent for classification ( e.g. Reasons Why ) and would continue to be applicable to providers that are not listed (e.g. small andor niche providers). Section provides for Films exempt from labelling requirements . This exempts any films that mainly or wholly depict documentary, travel, religious conte nt and other types of content from labelling requirements (which activate the rating and classification processes that need to take place beforehand) before it i s available in New Zealand. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Impact Statement Template . As discussed earlier in this RIA (refer to paras ), reliance on the Chief Censors call in power is not sustainable in the long term as it tends to be used after the content has bee n made available. The Classification Office would also carry the cost every time the Chief Censor calls in content . We do not think that the Chief Censors call in power would be used extensively for small andor niche providers . The Chief Censor has only used it to call in content from providers that are likely to meet the criteria and any set thresholds (e.g. Netflix). Option : Criteria based on content . This option focus ses on content and uses s ection exemptions as a basis to determine which providers need to adhere to the new requirements. It aligns with the current process and the treatment of films which industry would be familiar with. Section exemptions include content that tends to traditionally be broadcast (e.g. newssports) or user (e.g. home videos) . . The proposal is for p roviders that primarily offer content described under the section exemptions (e.g. newsdocumentaries) to not be required to l abel any of their conte nt, even if they offer some content not described under s ection . . Provider s that do no t fit the above description (para ) would need to label their content. But they would not be required to label content described under s ection . Our assumptions on how Option impacts providers . Providers that offer niche content may be regulated depending on the type of content they offer. This option would exclude providers that primar ily offer documentaries andor travel shows (described un der section ) from the labelling requirements . Providers that primarily offer niche content that i s not currently exempted under section (e.g. horror genre films) would likely need to label their content. . Providers that offer a variety of content woul d likely be regulated under this option , regardless of size . For example, a provider that offers a variety of content (e.g. LightboxNetflix) would likely be regulated unless they can prove that the majority of their content fits the exemptions under s ection . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Impact Statement Template We identified four key themes from t argeted consultation Theme : The new requirements will increase inconsistencies in the application of the Broadcasting Act and the Classification Act to content . Submissions note that some providers are operating under the Broadcasting Act, and there will be challenges and increased costs in being required to comply with both regimes. For example, Sky NZ has pointed out that it currently applies the BSAs Pay Television Code across all of its services (including on its streaming service, NEON ), but would be required to apply two classification systems to the same content depending on which service the conten t is shown on. Theme : The proposed market reach criteria could create an unequal r egulatory environment . Some submissions acknowledged that a market reach threshold would make the new requirements workable, and setting a threshold may be needed so sma ller or new providers are not deterred from entering the New Zealand market. However, submissions also pointed out that small er or niche providers will gain a competitive advantage because of the market reach threshold (e.g. no compliance costs). Theme : The proposed exemption of free and advertising funded content from labelling require ments gives these providers an unfair advantage . Most submissions questioned the rationale for excluding free and or advertising funded video on demand (FVoD andor AVoD) content from the new requirements. They are concerned that this exemption unfairly benefits one business model (monetisation through advertising) over another (monetisation through paid subscription or transaction). Submissions note that a providers busin ess model has no bearing on the potential harm that content on their platf orms could cause to New Zealand consumers. Theme : The broader reform of the media content regulation system will better address existing inconsistencies and achieve policy intent . Submitters questioned why the new requirements only focuses on one subset o f content. They note that a broader reform that looks at modernising the whole system would better provide consumers with consistent and clear classifications to help them make infor med viewing choices. In addition to targeted consultation, OFLC commission ed market research . OFLC commissioned a market survey from UMR of the paid subscription and transactional on demand market in New Zealand in September . The online general public survey sought responses from a representative group of , New Zealander s aged and over on what on demand services they use . Key findings from this survey are: a)More than per cent of respondents use video on demand or streaming services . Over per cent of respondents aged use these services ; b)Only five subscription based providers were used by per cent or more of respondents (Netflix : per cent; Lightbox : per cent; YouTube Premium : per cent; Amazon Prime Video : per cent; and NEON : per cent ); The total percentage exceeds per cent as some respondents had more than one subscription. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Impact Statement Template c)Transaction based providers (e.g. iTunes, Lightbox, Google Play Movies TVYouTube s paid content , and the PlayStation Store) have a lower, but still notable, level of market presence compared to subscription based providers. Only four out of nine providers listed in the survey were used by per c ent or more of respondents at least once during a monthly period. We u sed feedback from submitters and the UMR market survey to inform our analysis and reco mmended CVoD definition Having e xemptions to the requirements will add to inconsistencies in the current regulator y environment , but are necessary to enact discrete change this term . Most submissions expressed concern about the new requirements including exemptions for smaller or niche CVo D providers as well as free and or advertis ingfunded providers (FVoD andor AVoD). This is because they believe that a providers market size or business model has no bearing on the potential for the content on their platforms to cause harm to New Zealand consumers. . Although submitters raised valid points, explicitly capturing FVoD and AVoD as well as smaller or niche providers would significantly broaden the scale of the policy work. It is not possible to undertake this broader scale of policy work within the timeframe for intro duction of the Bill in . . Furthermore, we do consider that a providers market size has an impact on the potential for content on their platform to cause harm. Because bigger platforms are used by more of the New Zealand popu lation, their wider reach means that t here is a higher risk that mor e people may be harmed by viewing inappropriate content on their platforms as a result of inadequate labelling . We have factored this in to our recommended approach . . In addition , the UMR mark et survey has found that less than two per cent of respondents who use streaming services subscribe to smaller or niche providers. We therefore consider that the risk of not including smaller or niche providers in the new regime is small because they do no t have large consumer bases in New Zealand, and the content on their platforms does not present the highest and most immediate risk of harm to New Zealanders . The Chief Censors call in power can also be used to call in any problematic content provided on these smaller platforms , which further mitigates the risk. There will still be inconsistencies with ratings across all content , but providers with services likely accessed by most households will be required to display consistent ratings . We acknowledge tha t exemptions mean that there will still be classification and rating inconsistencies for content made available in N ew Zealand. However, the providers that are likely being accessed by the majority of New Zeala nders , and show more popular content on their platforms , will be required to classify their content according to a classification regime that is recognised and understood by New Zealanders. iTunes had the highest percentage of users in this period, with per cent of respondents indicating that they rented or bought a movie or show from iTunes at least once in the past month. This was followed by Lightbox with per cent, Google Play Movies TVYouTube (paid content) with per cent, and the PlayStation Store with per cent. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Impact Statement Template . As such, w e consider that the new requirements will still promote the policys fundamental objective of reducing the risk of harm to New Zealanders from viewing inappropriate content online through ensuring that consumers have enough information to make informed viewing choices. It does this by capturing the providers that the majority of New Zealand consumers are l ikely to use. The new requirements will not address some concerns raised by submitters , which strengthens the need for a broader reform of the media content regulation system . Submissions from both p rovider s and regulator s expressed concerns about the new requirements only addressing a specific part of the online media envi ronment, and not the broader media regulation system. We agree that the broad scope of a first principles review of the media regu lation system would better address issues relating to the regulation of providers that are operating in an evolving media landscape. However, the intent of the CVoD proposal is to require the content that is likely to be most accessed by New Zealanders to be adequatel y classified in order to reduce the risk of harm from viewing inappropriate content. . We also acknowledge that our proposal is a discrete amendment to an Act that is outdated and is not fit for the increasingly dig ital media environment. However, we consider that the amendm ent is necessary to address t he potential for harm to New Zealanders from t he current gap where there is no requirement for ondemand content providers to classify content that they make available in New Zealand . We consider that this cannot wait until the broader reform to be address ed, as the broader reform will likely take at least to months to complete and is de pendent on Government priorities. We refined our three objectives for assessing our recommended approach following consultation feedback and further analysis . We assess ed the proposed CVoD provider criteria and pro posed labelling exemptions for targeted consultation against the three objectives of fair and appropriate, clear for industry and regulators, and cost effective (refer to para ). . In light of feedback that w e received from submissions on these objectives, as well as our further analysis of the CVoD definition, we refined our objectives to: a)Proportionate to risk of harm : Our recommended approach should consider where the most benefit to New Zealanders will be from having trusted classifications t o help them make informed viewing choices. It should also consider where the potential for most harm would be from having insufficient consumer information ; b)Clear for industry, regulators and consumers: Our recommended approach needs to be clear on which providers are covered by the new requirements. Providers that are regulated should clearly understand their obligations, classifications should be clear and consistent to benefit consumers; and c)Cost effectiv e and proport ionate to provider size: Our recommended approach should consider compliance and implementatio n requirements for both providers and regulators (e.g. ease of compliance, regulation and administration). It should not unduly act as a barrier to c ompetition . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Impact Statement Template Our recommended approach to clarify the CVoD definition and providers . Our findings confirmed the need to have a clear definition for CVoD content and a clear process to identify which providers would be required to label their content. Our recommendations to clarify these two matters are as follows : a)Define CVoD content to focus on video on demand content that is accessed by users in New Zealand through payment of a fee or as a reward (e.g. as part of a bundle offered by Spark). This will include subscripti on and transaction based video on demand services. It will exclude free and advertisement based video on demand services , which will be considered as part of the broader review work programme ; and b)Set a Schedule to the Classification Act that will specify which providers of CVoD content are required to label content. Specifying providers in a Schedule provides clarity for all parties . We think the best way to make it clear which providers are regulated (and required to label their content) is by listing the m in a Schedule. Amending the Schedule will be done via Order in Council (OIC) with the final decision being made by the Governor General, upon recommendation from the Minister of Internal Affairs. Amending the Schedule will be done on an asneeded basis a nd the Minister will need to consult the Chief Censor before making recommendation s. . There needs to be a basis for determining whether a provider should be added (or removed) from the Schedule. Findings from our targeted consultation hav e helped us shape what we think should be key considerations in this process. The key consideration should be the perceived risk of harm to consumers due to CVoD content being available without appropriate labels under the Classification Act . The main ob jective for this c hange to the Classification Act is to ensure that New Zealand consumers have enough trusted information to make informed viewing choices. This helps mitigate the potential risk of harm to consumers, including children and young people, fr om viewing inappro priate content. . We recommend that the principal consideration for whether a provider should be included or excluded in the Schedule should b e the potential risk of harm to consumers due to CVoD content not being appropriate ly labelled under the Classif ication Act . . To determine this , the Minister should consider the following criteria when amending the Schedule: a)Market presence: refers to a providers existing or expected share of th e CVoD market in New Zealand . Existing market presence can be indicate d through a survey asking consumers which CVoD providers they use. Such a survey was commissioned by OFLC during September (outlined in para ). Based on the outcomes of this survey, providers could be considered to have a sizeable market presence if approximately per cent or more of survey respondents indicated they use that providers service. However, this assessment is limited as it is ba sed on a single data point and therefore can be considered indicative only. Other useful sources of data that may be used to consider market presence include providers user numbers, and their revenues from providing their services in New Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Impact Statement Template Zealand. However , this data is highly commercially sensitive and may be difficult to obtain. Evaluating market presence may also include consideration of whether the provider is registered for GST in New Zealand, but this will not be a determining factor as previously pr oposed (refer to para b). The various ways that existing market presence can be determined, and the limitations involved in each, demonstrate the difficulties in establishing a definitive market presence for each provider currently operating in New Zealand. W e will continue to work with providers on implementation and will seek their views to ascertain th e best met hodology for sizing market presence. However, we do not propose including any specific or fixed thresholds for market presence. This approach will allow flexibility for the Minister to consider several data sources . It will also enable the Minist er to cons ider the market presence criterion alongside the other two criteria outlined below when making a recommendation to amend the Schedule . In addition to considering existing market presence , the m arket presence criterion will also consider a provide rs expect ed market presence in New Zealand . This will enable the Minister to recommend adding a provider to the Schedule in anticipation of their likely high market impact in New Zealand. It reflects a likelihood that providers tha t have a large market presence overseas will also reach a sizeable presence in New Zealand ; and b)Compliance and commitment to another classification framework in New Zealand: considers whether a provider is using a classification framework that provides consistent and appropriat e information to consumers, as well as the extent and reliability of their commitment to that framework. For example, t his enables the Minister to consider whether a provider is satisfactorily complying under the BSAs regime , and whether this compliance is evidence of a reliable com mitment to informing consumers about potentially harmful content through providing clear and consistent labelling of that content . This consideration addresses concerns outlined by industry about compliance under two regimes . In particular, situations wher e a bro adcaster in New Zealand has taken steps to formalise its CVoD service s compliance under the Pay Free toair Television regime ; and c)Nature of content: considers the nature of the content being offered by a provider, and th e potential for this content to ca use harm. It will enable the Minister to consider listing niche providers that provide content with a high risk of harm despite the provider having a very small market presence in New Zealand . This consideration is informe d by feedback we received from con sultation which note that a providers business model has no bearing to the potential for their content to cause harm to consumers. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Impact Statement Template Specified providers in the Schedule will not be required to label all content . Providers th at are specified in the Schedule will not be required to label s ection exempted content. This will align the new requirements with what is already in place for films. Content that is wholly or ma inly of a certain type (e.g. news, most documentaries, spor ting events, or content of a religious nature) will b e exempt from the new labelling requirements. . In addition to the Schedule, we think that section () should be amended to make it clear that CVoD content provided by non specified providers is not requi red to be labelled. This makes it clear to industry and p roviders that if they are not listed in the Schedule then there are no general requirements for them to label their content (even though it is clearly CVoD content). However, the Chief Censor s exist ing powers to require specified exempted content to be labell ed in section () and section () of the Classification Act will apply, as well as the Chief Censors ability to call in any content under section () if required. Our recommended approach is broader and more flexible than Option . Option prescribed specific criteria based on the providers availability of services to the New Zealand public and market reach (refer to para ). It also proposed setting thresholds for market reach (e.g. s ubscription numbers) where applicable. . Our recommended approach provides the Minister with three criteria to help determine whether a providers inclusion on the Sch edule mitigates their contents potential risk of harm (from lack of labelling). The three criteria allows the Minister to consider factors other than market reach (as outlined in Option ) . . Our recommended a pproach is informed by feedback received from submissions, which noted that some providers already formally comply with the broadcasting regime. For example, Sky NZ has pointed out that it has a Memorandum of Understanding with the BSA for its NEON service, which is a step that it has taken to ensure its customers have a consistent experience , and information about the content they are vie wing on all Sky services. . We refined our thinking on the proposed exemption to content that fits the definition of broadcasting in the Broadcasting Act, as set out in Option (ref er to para b). This is in response to feedback received from some submi tters, who were confused about what the proposed exemption meant and whether it would be workable. . Option s market reach criteria for listing in the Schedule also included considering whether a provider is registered for GST in New Zealand. In consulta tion with Inland Revenue (IR), we were advised that a threshold based on revenues from selling CVoD services in New Zealand would be a more appropriate measure than GST registration. IR also noted that a threshold based on GST registration could impose add itional regulatory compliance costs to providers and may make businesses less willing to comply with New Zealand regulation s. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
INCONFIDENCE Page of Internal Affairs briefing Hon Jan Tinetti Minister of Internal Affairs
INCONFIDENCE Page of Claim Response A percent reduction in WDCs opex costs appears implausible given the nature of those costs. p. In the WICS analysis, WDC are not expected to achieve a opex efficiency due to their size. Evidence from the literature has shown that efficiencies of this scale are only available when a successful reform package is implemented on entities of sufficient size. This is why this efficiency challenge has been applied to Entity A and not to WDC. In addition, the efficiency challenge will take Entity A to where the UK industry currently is on opex efficiency. A TFP efficiency has also been applied alongside this catch up efficiency as the entity is expected to improve upon productivity increases across New Zealand and to keep up with the frontier which will also improve in the next thirty years. WDC has similar opex per connected property as Watercare in Auckland: compared to . p. WDC does not have comparable opex to Watercare on an opex per connected pr operty basis it is actually higher on an annual basis. This also doesnt include the fact that Watercare also need to make efficiency savings on opex to be comparable to the level of water companies in the UK a fact accepted by the Board of Watercar e.
INCONFIDENCE Page of
INCONFIDENCE Page of Purpose . Following Cabinet decisions in June CABMIN refers , this briefing seeks decisions to enable us to prepare drafting instructions for the consumer trust mode l in the Local Government Water Services Bill (Bill ) . . We propose that the legislation should provide for high level principles, and set out required contents of the trust deed, while the trust deed will contain the detailed operative provisions. The legislati on will ensure that c onsumer trusts operate within the same parameters as other water services providers. The trust deeds will be modelled on the energy trusts approach . This will provide local flexibility in the design of consumer trusts and ensure that minimum requirements are met. . We propose t he legislation include s: . requirements for the contents of a trust deed; . requirements for the Secretary for Local Government (the Secretary) to approv e a trust deed ; . provisions that enable Ministerial p owers of assistance and intervention in Part of the Local Government Act (LGA ) to apply to consumer trusts (as well as the water organisations they own) ; and . regulation making power s if additional rules are needed . Local Water Done Well provides for a consumer trust model of water services ownership . Under Local Water Done Well policy setting s, councils may establish consumer trust s to own water organisation s. This may be a complete transfer of water services into a consumer trust, or a mixed owne rship model retaining partial council ownership . . A consumer trust will represent the interests of the consumers of the water organisation in which it has an ownership interest. The water organisation must be a company unless an exemption is given . Trustee s will be responsible for : . Appointing, monitoring, and removing board members ; . Issuing the statement of expectation for the water organisation (if the trust has a majority ownership share ); and . Monitoring the organisations performance . . Once a trust is vested with the trustees, the settlor councilcouncils will no longer have an interest in a water organisation . The interest will be held by consumers who become the beneficiaries of the trust. A consumer trust with majority ownership of a water organisation will have effective control of water services and assets. . The primary accountability mechanism for trustees will be elections by local water consumers , including commercial customers , on the basis of one vote per account . . Bill will set out requirements for a consumer trust that will need to be reflected in the trust deed. The requirements are modelled off the approach for energy trusts. In addition to meeting the specific legislative requirements, general trust law will apply. Using this mo del, councils will be able to develop the required trust deed. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua
INCONFIDENCE Page of Claim Response WICS ignored local authorities own estimates of required investment p. This statement is factually incorrect.
INCONFIDENCE Page of
INCONFIDENCE Page of Cabinet has agreed to consumer trust design requirements and more detailed decisions are needed to prepare drafting instructions . In June , Cabinet CAB MIN refers agreed to besp oke requirements for consumer trusts, including: . A consumer trust may be a minority shareholder or a majority shareholder of a water organisation with territorial authorities, or it may own of shares; . restrictions on the transferability of ownership interests; . the consumer trust must represent the consumers of the water organisation and their interests; and . consumer trustees will be elected by local consumers, and will be responsible for appointing and removing board members and overseeing performance . . We propose some additional requirements to provide a more defined boundar y on the flexibility given to councils in the design of a trust to ensure that consumer trust s act in the best interests of consumers and in line with other water services providers . A trust deed should be required to contain provisions important to the operation of the trust . We propose that Bill should set minimum requirements for the contents of a consumer trusts trust deed. These requirements will include those agreed by Cabinet. Further m inimum requirements will generally align with the approach taken for council ownership models, within parameters providing scope for local decision making and determination according to local circumstances. Minimum requirements will rely on existing trust law as much as possible. . The trust deed should contain provisions relating to all substanti ve trust arrangements. Appendix A sets out an indicative list of requirements for the contents of a trust deed based on the requirements for a n en ergy trust deed under the Electric Power Boards Amendment Act with additions where appropriate . This list may be refined through bill drafting and the select committee process. . The Bill will include a provision requiring a trust deed and any amendmen ts to be consistent with the Bill . . The sections below cover other legislative requirements that a council will need to follow when designing a trust. The general legislative requirements on water services providers will apply to consumer trusts, with appr opriate modifications. Consumer trusts should only have ownership interests in a water organisation . We propose that consumer trusts should only be able to have an interest in a water organisation and be prohibited from having an ownership interest in any other type of organisation. . This prohibition will ensure that a consumer trusts objective s are only related to the effective operation of the water organisation . The legislative provision for an exemption from minimum requirements will apply where appro priate and on a case bycase basis. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua
INCONFIDENCE Page of Claim Response Population density is not a good predictor of required asset value levels p. This is an oversimplification.
INCONFIDENCE Page of The current regulatory and operational environment for digital identity carries risks for users and government . On November , Cabinet considered the paper Developing Options for a New Approach to Digital Identity DEV MIN , CAB , and agreed that the government will continue working with citizens, agencies and the private sector to: develop options for a new approach to digital identity, including the long term role of government and the private sector in the provision of digital identity services; and identify regulatory gaps. . Cabinet invited the Minister for Gover nment Digital Services and the Minister of Internal Affairs to report back to Cabinet Economic Development Committee by October on the outcomes of this work. However, Cabinet also made provision to provide interim papers on significant issues. . We have identified three regulatory and operational gaps that obstruct innovation and the development and adoption of digital identity services: people have limited control over how their information is used and growing concerns that they are unnecessarily expose d to privacy and security risks; a lack of efficiency and coordination between organisations in the public and private sectors, making user consented information sharing more difficult and resulting in services that cannot work with each other in a truste d way; and a lack of governance and structure resulting in inconsistent laws and standards (including statutory limitations on what attributes and data sets can be shared) and their uneven application in both the public and private sectors. . Focus group res earch shows Mori have lower levels of trust than other groups over government holding and sharing information about them. Participants in the focus groups attributed this distrust to the misuse and abuse of Mori data, creating biased assumptions of Mori and a narrative not informed by Mori. There is a need to actively promote Mori involvement in digital identity and work through concerns Mori have. . Additionally, the inconsistent application of data privacy, identification and security standards can le ad to systematic issues and breaches. This poses risks to both customers and businesses, undermining trust and confidence in the digital identity ecosystem further and slowing adoption. . We recommend the immediate creation of a Trust Framework in order to address these gaps, and to ensure secure and trusted access to digital identity services in New Zealand. Comparable jurisdictions (countries such as Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom which do not have single identity registries) are choosing to deve lop trust frameworks to address regulatory gaps similar to ours. An analysis of international initiatives and approaches has informed the Trust Framework recommendations in this paper. . Officials have regularly engaged with a working group with members from a wide variety of relevant public and private sector stakeholders (as outlined in the Consultation section) to test , support and inform the analysis and evidence base for regulatory gaps and solutions. The working group are broadly supportive of the imple mentation of a Trust Framework.
INCONFIDENCE Page of Trustees should not be directors on the board of the water organisation . We propose that consumer trust s should be prohibited from appointing trustees as directors on the board of the water organisation. . This would provid e appropriate separat ion of governance and management roles for a water organisation. The prohibition will also prevent the conflicts of interest that would arise if a trustee also holds a water organisation board position. . We do not propose extending this prohibition to councillors and mayors given the separation that will exist between a water organisation and councils under the consumer trust model. The prohibition will apply to all owners, so in a mixed ownership model th e prohibition will apply to both councillors and trustees. A council should be unable to interfere in the business of a consumer trust . We propose that Bill should expressly provide that settlor councils cannot intervene in the affairs of a trust once it is settled. . Under trust law, it is possible for a settlor to design the trust deed in a way that gives them an oversight role. This would allow a council, as settlor of a trust, to define a role for itself in the trust deed, such as the power to appoint a nd remove trustees. We propose a legislative prohibition on the settlor council including any role for itself in the operation of the trust to ensure appropriate separation . Transfer restrictions should apply when a consumer t rust is being wound up . The provisions relating to the transfer of assets will apply on the wind up of a trust. Ordinary trust law will apply, subject to any legislative restrictions in Bill . . We consider that Bill should be clear that the restrictions on transferability of ownership interests will include a requirement that water services and assets must be transferred to another water organisation or to a council upon the wind up of a consumer trust. The Trusts Act also requires that the trust deed state how the trust p roperty is to be distributed upon wind up. Under both provisions, settlor councils will have to stipulate the distribution restriction. The Secretary for Local Government should approve a trust deed . We propose that Secretary must approve the trust deed be fore a consumer trust is settled to ensure that minimum legislative standards are met. . We also propose that any amendment to a trust deed must also be approved by the Secretary. Under the Trust s Act , the variation of a trust deed requires the unanimo us consent of beneficiaries or a court decision. Regulation making powers should be available if they prove necessary . We propose that Bill should include regulation making powers as a back stop power if any unexpected issues should arise. Consumer trust election rules should be made in the trust deed with backup regulation making powers . The trust deed will provide for trustee elections under our proposed approach . We propose that Bill should provide high level principles and some specific requirements Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua
INCONFIDENCE Page of Claim Response WICS required investment estimate is much higher than WDCs investment plans p. As noted above, WDCs investment plans are likely to underestimate the potential investment required .
INCONFIDENCE Page of Covid has highlighted the importance of digital identity for ensuring access to essential services . Physical distancing requirements have made it more difficult for people to access essential public and private sector s ervices (e.g. welfare payments, doctor visits), whilst placing strain on agency resources. As a result, digital capability is becoming a greater priority for public and private sector entities. Examples of how digital identity services can help the Covid recovery include: supporting a mobile and transitionary workforce by making it easier for workers (e.g. returning health care professionals) to prove their qualifications and eligibility to work; making it easier for people that rely on government servic es to prove their eligibility through secure sharing of personal information (e.g. name, of birth, Inland Revenue number, bank account, residency status); providing digital alternatives to requirements that identity documents be certified in person b y an approved practitioner (e.g. establishing a business relationship with a customer under the Anti Money Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism Act or for conveyancing property under the Land Transfer Act ); and facilitating the develo pment and maturation of open banking services. . There is an opportunity to combine innovation in the public and private sectors with the public sectors information and resources to provide trusted, integrated, people centred digital services. Covid has accelerated demand for and innovation in the private market for digital identity services. The absence of an agreed set of rules to assure the trustworthiness of digital identity services is a key barrier. A Trust Framework will establish a regulatory fram ework to provide this assurance. Establishment of the Trust Framework A trust framework is a regulatory framework that will set out rules for the delivery of digital identity services . The Trust Framework would consist of five component parts where it: defines the roles of participants involved in providing digital identity services, such as information providers (e.g. passports, utility companies ) and relying parties (services that rel y on the asserted information, such as liquor stores relying on a of birth), so that it is clear which entities should be accredited ; sets out rules that accredited participants must follow, with a focus on identification, privacy and security requir ements that are based on laws and standards that are either existing or in development ; establishes a body to accredit the participants that have demonstrated they can adhere to the rules of the Trust Framework ; makes the rules of the Trust Framework legally enforceable upon all accredited participants, who will be audited to ensure the rules are complied with ; and
INCONFIDENCE Page of
INCONFIDENCE Page of
INCONFIDENCE Page of for the elections to ensure a nationally consistent approach and support the integrity of consumer trust elections . . You have previously indicated that your preference is for each household to receive one vote. This would also apply to commercial customers . . We propose that the principles for consumer trust elections should be : . Only consumers may be elected as trustees; . Trustees are elected on a one vote peraccount basis ; . Consumer trusts must appoint an electoral officer , who will be responsible for condu cting the trusts elections ; and . Trust deed s must set out a free and fair process for electing trustees so that consumers understand and have confidence in the election process . . The trust deed will be required to include a process for elections that is consistent with these principles . Approval by the Secretary will provide a check that these principles are met. Regulation making powers would be available if necessary . We propose that Bill should also include regulation making powers to allow for new rules if it proves n ecessary to ensure th e appropriate conduct of consumer trust elections. . The regulation making powers would include powers to make regulations governing the conduct and procedure of trustee elections, including matters such as donations, expenditure, and candidate and elector qualification requirements. We considered the energy trust elections and local elections examples . We considered e nergy trust elections as an example of elections of trustees to a consumer trust . Energy trust elections are also held under the terms of the trust deed. We consider that some additional oversight requirements are appropriate here given the value and community importance of the assets a water services consumer trust would control. In contrast, e nerg y trusts have ownership in terests in electricity distribution companies but have no control over electricity generation or the national electricity transmission system. . We also considered whether consumer trust elections should be elections held under the Local Electoral Act but consider that it would be unnecessarily complex to adapt the parts of the Act needed to make this workable. An appropriate level of oversight can be achieved through regulations specific to consumer trust elections if it prove s necessary . Ministerial powers of assistance and intervention should also apply to a consumer trust . To ensure alignment with other water services delivery models, w e propose that the Ministerial powers of assistance and intervention that will be availabl e for water service providers should also apply to consumer trusts that have an ownership interest in a water organisation as well as the water organisation itself . These powers include the Part powers under the LGA , as well as two new bodies : Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua
INCONFIDENCE Page of Claim Response Scotland is an inappropriate model for Entity A Auckland, Whangrei, Kaipara and Far North most of the population in Scotland lives in the narrow band that is between and around Glasgow and Edinburgh. There is potential for agglomeration efficiencies and for networks to achieve some scale benefits based on prox imity alone. In contrast, almost percent of the total population of proposed Entity A live in urban areas with significant distances between them. This means that the asset optimisation (that is, the ability to consolidate water networks between towns ) is likely to be much lower p. Castalias analysis does not take into account Scotlands rural and island communities. The central belt in Scotland is somewhat comparable to the Auckland area whilst more rural areas in Scotland represent a useful proxy for the Northland region. The distance between the central belt area and more rural areas is comparable to the distance between Auckland and the Northland region , for example: Glasgow city connected pop density population per sq km. Auckland counc il density population for Auckland city per sq km. Far North, Whangrei density , and population per sq km. Highland, Argyll and Bute, Scottish Borders density , , population per sq km. Distance Glasgow to Inverness in a straight line km. Glasgow to Thurso in a straight line km. Distance Auckland to Keikeri km Distance Auckland Kaitaia km Castalias comments suggest that the capital efficiency gains are primarily a result of asset optimization but ignore the potential for procurement efficiencies resulting from a larger and more certain pipeline for each entity with which to engage with the construction sector. Castalia discounts the potential for asset level optimisation that may emerge in the longer term in larger and medium sized provincial cities and semi urban areas where population growth may be substantial over coming decades, and where it will be enabled through reform by supporting more efficient long term planning across local council boundaries . Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua
INCONFIDENCE Page of
INCONFIDENCE Page of . Crown f acilitator; and . Water Services Commissioner s. . Ministerial intervention powers for a consumer trust are not inconsistent with trust law. While not Ministerial intervention powers, Ministerial appointments of community trust trustees provide an example of su bstantial Ministerial involvement in a trust. . The conditions for the use of these powers would be identical to those for councils and water organisations. . The Cabinet paper Local Water Done stage water services regulatory system did not specify that Ministerial intervention powers would apply to consumer trusts . Agreement to this inclusion can be sought in the Cabinet Legislation Committee paper. Consumer trusts are unrelated to the purpose of the Local Government Act . While Bill will be local government legislation and a consumer trust will be subject to it, a consumer trust will not be a local government organisation and a water organisation will cease to be a local government organisation once the trust is vested with the trustees . Given that the purpose of the LGA is related solely to local government , and local government organisations, i t would be appropriate to duplicate the provisions in Part of the LGA and adapt them for consumer trust owned water organisatio ns in Bill . . Given t he large number of the consumer trust provisions required in Bill under the proposed approach , we will work with PCO to agree an appropriate approach to applying Part powers to consumer trusts. This may be in the LGA or in Bill . Next steps .
INCONFIDENCE Page of Claim Response Economies of scale are not available in water services from amalgamations at the level WICS claims WICS claims that the percent capex efficiency gain emerges when water entities achieve a population of , or more. It also claims that entities servi ng a minimum population of , increase capex efficiency as they approach the , population number. This claim has no basis in the economic literature. In fact, the literature that looks at the specific question of whether economies of scale are a vailable from administrative amalgamations find that there are none except in highly specific circumstances, not present in New Zealand. Economies of scale estimate is based on non credible evidence p. This statement assumes that the reforms are premised solely on amalgamation to produce efficiency savings rather than the effect of the full package of reform.
INCONFIDENCE Page of Recommendations . We recommend that you : a) agree that Bill should include legislative requirements for consumer trust deeds ; YesNo b) agree to the indicative list of trust deed content requirements ; YesNo c) note that this may be varied through drafting or select committee; d) agree that the Secretary for Local Government should approve the contents of a trust deed ; YesNo e) agree that Bill should include high level principles for consumer trust elections which should be held under terms in the trust deed; YesNo f) agree that a regulation making power should be included in Bill to make further rules should unexpected issues arise ; and YesNo g) agree that the Ministerial powers of assistance and intervention that will apply to water organisations and councils should also apply to consumer trusts. YesNo
INCONFIDENCE Page of Claim Response FarrierSwier peer reviewed WICS approach and had access to the underlying models. It found that WICS analysis cannot be used to definitively conclude that amalgamation in and of itself will lead to material efficiency gains in New Zealand. Its review did not assess whether the outputs from the WICS analysis are reasonable or free from error. FarrierSwie r also state significant care should be taken when relying on the capital efficiency gaps estimated by WICS. This is particularly important, given the significant step up in investment forecast for the year period and the role that the capex efficiency assumption plays when estimating benefits from amalgamation and associated reform. Like Castalia, FarrierSwier express concern with the sensitivity analysis approach. p. This is a highly selective reporting of the Farrierswier review. For instance, the first sentence is immediately followed by another that clarifies Farrierswiers intent, the omission of which implies a very different conclusion: the benefits estimated by WICS cannot be used to definitively conclude that amalgamation by itself will lea d to material efficiency gains in New Zealand. The associated economic and other reforms are an important contributor to the benefits estimated by WICS Farrierswier have endorsed WICS findings on the potential for significant efficiency gains from reform (not just amalgamation but the full package of measures contemplated by the Government). Farrierswier also state of the sensitivity analysis that: WICS sensitivity analysis reinforces our overall finding that, although there are some (not unexpected) lim itations with the methodology adopted by WICS to estimate the benefits from amalgamation and associated reform, these do not appear unreasonable or to otherwise undermine the conclusions that can be drawn from the analysis Castalias reporting of Farrierswiers review is incomplete and highlights specific sentences without reference back to Farrierswiers overall findings or the context in which those statements were made.
INCONFIDENCE Page of Appendix A: Indicative list of trust deed content requirements Under the proposed approach, a consumer trusts trust deed must include provisions: specifying the purpose of the establishment of the trust; specifying the term, or the maximum term limits for which every trustee of the consumer trust may be appointed; for the number of trustees; for the holding of, and voting at, meetings of trustees and specifying the quorum necessary for the holding of meeti ngs of trustees; specifying circumstances in which a trustee of the consumer vacates office; for the remuneration of trustees ; for the holding of free and fair elections for the appointment of trustees , including transitional provisions for inaugural elections ; specifying c andidate and elector requirements ; specifying the manner in which a vacancy in the office of trustee shall be filled; for the appointment of officers, employees, managers, and agents; specifying the investment powers of trustees ; specifying the powers of trustees to expend capital and income of the trust ; specifying a distributions policy , including a restriction on the payment of dividends close to an election ; for the keeping of accounts; for the appointment of an auditor; requiring the publication in each year of the financial statements of the trust and of the auditors report on those financial statements; specifying the manner in which the trust deed may be varied ; and for a mechanism to enable the consumer trust to recover reaso nable costs from the water organisation it has an ownership interest in for the trustee elections .
INCONFIDENCE Page of Claim Response Diseconomies of scale not considered Cites Melbourne example
INCONFIDENCE Page of
INCONFIDENCE Proactve release . I intend to proactvely release this Cabinet paper with appropriate redactons on the Department of Internal Afairs website as soon as practcable afer the Government response is tabled by February . . As the Government response will be tabled in Parliament, it will be a public document. Recommendatons The Minister of Local Government recommends that the Cabinet Business Commitee: . note that the Justce Commitee released an interim report on its Inquiry into the Local Electons and Liquor Licensing Trust Electons, and Recent Energy Trust Electons in August ; . note that the Governments response to the Justce Commitees interim report is due to be tabled in Parliament by February in accordance with Standing Order ; . note that the proposed Government response to the interim report of the Justce Commitees Inquiry into the Local Electons and Liquor Licensing Trust Electons, and Recent Energy Trust Electons , atached to this paper as Atachment A, indicates that the Government will: . contnue to consider centralised management of local electons as other priorites allow; and . contnue to consider opportunites for aligning the parliamentary and local electoral frameworks more closely in due course. . authorise the Minister of Local Government to table the proposed Government response in Parliament; and . note that the Minister of Local Government intends to proactvely release this Cabinet paper on the Department of Internal Afairs website, subject to any redactons justfed in accordance with the Ofcial Informaton Act . Authorised for lodgement Hon Nanaia Mahuta Minister of Local Government Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Page of icqnczt
INFORMATION FOR BUSINESSES
INFORMATION FOR TRANSLATORS
INFORMATION SHARING AGREEMENT:
INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY ACT .I
INTELLIGENCE SERVICE (NZSIS)
INTERNET WEBSITE FILTER
INTRODUCTION The global COVID pandemic has highlighted an opportunity for improved practices for tracing close contacts of known or probable cases of the virus in New Zealand. Our proposed solution is a Bluetooth Low Energy card (CovidCard) that detects and logs other cards within a close (m) radius of itself. The efficacy of the cards for recording close contacts was tested using closed validation trials where the cards were worn by participants who then acted a role in a directed scene, or were closely monitored in a closed environment. This report summarises all of the trials, the methodology used to evaluate the CovidCard performance, and presents results of the cards ability to record close contacts.
IPANZ Public Sector Excellence Award
IPP in respect of information provided under this Agreement, not covered by this Agreement,
IPWEA Conference October
IR agrees to pay all costs incurred by DIA for the design, development and
IR and DIA data. Further manual checks will be carried out by IR officers
IR and DIA shall each hold copies of the Memorandum of Understanding which
IR and DIA will provide any reasonable assistance that is necessary in the
IR products and services in accordance with Principle of the Privacy Act.
IR will use the information provided by DIA to compare first name(s), surname
IRs communications to DIA and which may limit the assistance or access that IR
IRDIA Information Sharing Agreement David Philp
IRDIA Information Sharing Agreement Department of Internal Affairs
IRDIA Information Sharing Agreement Page
IRDIA Information Sharing Agreement Page
IRDIA Information Sharing Agreement Page
IRDIA Information Sharing Agreement Page
IRDIA Information Sharing Agreement Page
IRDIA Information Sharing Agreement Page
IRDIA Information Sharing Agreement Page
IRDIA Information Sharing Agreement Page
IRDIA Information Sharing Agreement Page
IRDIA Information Sharing Agreement Page
IRDIA Information Sharing Agreement Page
IRDIA Information Sharing Agreement Page
ISP member via a speci al majority vote (say ) , but the ISP is responsible for
ISSN: (Print) and ISSN: (Digital)
ISSUER CREDIT RATING A AA BBB
IV. Desired outcomes . Both parties align with, and support, the aspirations of the Digital Strategy
IX. Confidentiality . The parties agree that the existence and terms of this MoU (and the
IaaS panel agreements now conflicts with global definitions of public cloud and is
Identification management
Identification standards Digital Government website
Identifying Name Any Party RegistrarGeneral
Identity Check Privacy Impact Assessment: Full Report May
Identity Check Bias Evaluation
Identity Check Bias Evaluation Test Report
Identity Check Bias Evaluation: Test Report
Identity Check is a quick and secure online identity validation tool. Consent is provided, passport or driver licence details added, and a photo provided to confirm identity. No personal data are shared with third parties. Instead, government records are checked to ensure a match to the data provided. Results show a percent success rate.
Identity Check is a safe and secure online identity verification service, developed by Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs.
Identity Check is a secure online identity verification service that enables you to use photo ID you already have, safely and securely online. Identity Check confirms the identity information provided by a user online against New Zealand Passport or Driver Licence official records.
Identity Check protects the private information of its users in several ways.
Identity Check service helps New Zealanders by providing easier, more secure ways of accessing services
Identity Check uses facial recognition, a type of biometric technology. While biometric technology offers security and efficiency benefits, concerns have been raised around fairness or bias in the system. In response to these concerns, DIA commissioned the Identity Check bias evaluation in .
Identity Check was developed to make it easier for people to safely verify their identity online, often a first step in accessing a service.
Identity Check works by confirming the identity information provided by a user online against the New Zealand Passport or Driver Licence databases.
Identity Information Confirmation Act
Identity Services AISA
Identity Services All services provided by the Department of Internal Affairs or the Registrar
Identity Services Approved Information Sharing Agreement
Identity crime is a global problem and New Zealanders tend to be trusting people, which could make this country appear to be a soft target. Therefore, vigilance and awareness are vital. While the methods of identity theft change frequently as the criminals adapt, there are a number of simple things you can do to
Identity crime refers to offences in which a criminal uses false or stolen identifying information in order to facilitate another crime.
Identity information to locate records in various data sets, e.g. births, deaths,
Identity theft What is identity theft
Identity theft can damage your personal and financial reputation. This can have serious impact on your life, if you can no longer prove who you are and what is yours.
Identity theft is when someone uses your personal information to pretend to be you. This could be done to commit identity crimes such as taking out loans or accumulating speeding tickets, avoiding arrest or court orders by appearing to be a different person. It could also involve maliciously impersonating you, perhaps to make it appear that you believe or think something controversial.
Identity theft prevention
Identity verification service
Identity, a New Zealand Emergency Travel Document or a New Zealand
If NZSIS were to collect DIA Information from the individual, this may be prejudicial to the maintenance of the law; prejudice the purposes of the collection; and would not be reasonable practicable in the circumstances
If a New Zealand Agency contained within a Class of Agencies wishes to no longer be Party to this
If a New Zealand Private Sector Agency is unable to be held accountable for complaints about
If a significant enough percentage of the population use a symptom checker, and user locations are captured to postcode level, we can gain valuable insights. It can help us understand potential new clusters and inform where we might wish to deploy testing resources.
If accredited, you can deliver the accredited service(s) under the Trust Framework and display an accreditation mark in relation to each accredited service.
If an application for accreditation is declined in part or in full, the provider may apply for reconsideration.
If an online content host receives a takedown notice or otherwise becomes aware that a user has uploaded objectionable content onto its platform, it must as soon as reasonably possible:
If any party has reasonable cause to believe that there has been a breach of any security
If each index case has firstorder close contacts, and each firstorder contact also has close contacts (the secondorder contacts), then you might be isolating some people when you discover a single case of COVID. If of firstorder contacts are infected (with an R eff . and contacts), and of secondorder close contacts of secondary cases were also infected, then only . of secondorder close contacts might be infected, or just of the . Refer to Section : Supporting Documentation section for papersmodels. https:www.reuters.comarticleushealthcoronaviruschinaharbinchinesecitytightenscoronavirustravelc urbsinbiggestoutbreakidUSKCND
If either Party has reasonable cause to believe that any breach of any security
If extraordinary circumstances arise (including but not limited to earthquake, volcanic
If extraordinary circumstances arise (including but not limited to earthquake, volcanic eruption,
If extraordinary circumstances arise (including but not limited to war, fire, flood,
If in the investigation we find that a breach has occurred, we can:
If notice has been dispensed under paragraph (c), notice of the Adverse Action must be provided as
If only of people have a contact tracing app functioning on their phone, then only of the people they encounter will also have a functioning app. To calculate the contacts recorded Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
If our staff are threatened or abused, or information appears to us to have been gathered unlawfully, we may refer this to the Police.
If the Parties are unable to resolve any dispute within days, the matter shall
If the Parties are unable to resolve the dispute within days, the matter will be referred to the
If the above measures prove insufficient, further support could be provided . I have outlined existing schemes and some changes to support vulnerable consumers. The proposal to adjust the ratio of fixed to volumetric revenues to reflect the underlying cost structure, will reduce the burden of water bills on vulnerable consumers, esp ecially in Auckland. . There are unlikely to be any legislative constraints preventing water services entities from delivering financial assistance schemes at their own initiative, or at the request of their regional representative group. I note, for example , that Watercare currently funds a trust that offers some financial assistance to those who are struggling to pay their bills. . If in the future, these changes are insufficient, we could consider further measures to support vulnerable households. Part C: The price setting framework . Water services entities will need statutory authority to charge for their services, particularly stormwater. I recommend that the water services entities be given statutory authority to charge, and the power to waive any charge for any customer at their discretion.
If the eval uation i s dis closed other than in accordance with the Engageme nt Letter, including the
If the identity check is successful, that person will receive a notification stating that their identity has been verified.
If the parties are unable to resolve the dispute within days, the matter will be referred to
If there are any discrepancies or changes, contact our staff member before sending your invoice so that the purchase order can be corrected. Any inconsistencies between what was delivered, the purchase order, and the invoice could result in delayed payment.
If there is an opportunity already posted on GETS, all contact must be directed to the point of contact listed.
If there is significant public interest in the topic of your request we may sometimes choose to respond by making the requested information publicly available online. If we choose to do this, we will let you know when and where the information will be made accessible.
If we can employ measures to reduce the R below , the virus selfextinguishes quite rapidly.
If we think that there may be a breach, we may progress to an investigation. We may ask you for further information where necessary. We will also ensure that you are kept informed during the complaints process and advised of the outcome.
If you apply for a role or create a profile, we will collect the following information about you:
If you are Deaf, hearing impaired, Deafblind, or speech impaired, you can use the free
If you are interested in serving on a statutory body, you can register with one or more of the following nominating agencies:
If you believe the Department has not followed the Official Information Act correctly, or you are unsatisfied with how we have responded to your request for another reason, you can:
If you believe you have received a scam call or want to verify the legitimacy of a call before you provide personal information, please hang up and call our verified phone line at
If you cannot find the team you require:
If you change your bank account information, address, company name or any other information previously provided, please email us at
If you create a profile and opt to be notified about upcoming roles, we will notify you of potential roles that we believe match your requirements.
If you dont have Microsoft Office, there are some free options to help you open them.
If you dont have a PDF reader, download the free Adobe Reader application.
If you had to rate your trust and confidence in the Department, on a scale from to where means no trust and confidence at all and means full trust and confidence, how would you rate it
If you have a complaint about a Trust Framework provider, you must first try to resolve the problem directly with them. Providers will tell you how to make a complaint. This information must be available through the providers website. If you cant find what you need, contact the provider for assistance.
If you have an unsubmitted draft application and you still wish to apply for a passport, please ensure that you submit and pay your application before these times. If you do not, you will need to start again after the upgrade is complete.
If you have any enquiries about our information gathering activities, or believe we have not acted in accordance with this statement, please contact us.
If you have any feedback or questions on this proposal, please send it to
If you have any queries, please email:
If you have any questions about the methods we use to purchase goods or services, please email our purchasing team at
If you have any questions or issues with this form, email us at
If you have any questions regarding Regional Deals, please contact
If you have applied for a role utilising a recruitment agency, we may provide them information about your application.
If you have not been able to resolve your complaint with the provider of the accredited service, ask the Trust Framework Authority to review it.
If you have raised the complaint directly with the provider and you are not satisfied with the outcome, you can ask us to review what has happened. We can provide support if you need help to submit your complaint.
If you have trouble using any aspect of this web site, please contact:
If you make a complaint and you are not satisfied with the response, you can get support. To learn about your options, see:
If you opt to receive notifications of upcoming roles that meet your requirements, we will collect information about the types of roles you would like to be notified regarding.
If you or someone you know has viewed the Christchurch video.
If you or someone you know is in immediate danger,
If you start an application between pm, Tuesday March and pm, Thursday March, you will need to submit and pay for it before pm, Thursday March.
If you start your application before pm, Tuesday March, you must submit and pay for it by noon, Thursday March.
If you think youre a little outside the box or might not typically apply for this type of opportunity, we strongly encourage you to apply. We need people like you to reflect the diversity of Aotearoa in the public service.
If you want to request statistics or datasets from any government agency, and you think they could be of value to the public, consider making your request through
If you want to sample a few different career pathways, youve come to the right place. Working in two different roles at two different government agencies, our month rotationbased programme gives you the chance to explore a range of career paths and projects within the public service, focusing on digital initiatives. You dont need an IT degree to join us
If you want to talk to someone at the Department about our requirements or possible opportunities, please email us at
If you were employed by the Department in New Zealand at any point since January , your leave and final pay may not have been calculated and paid correctly. Typically, this has affected employees who have changed the number of days they worked per week or received substantial overtime payments during their time at DIA.
If you wish to access old information or cannot find what you need please contact us at
If you wish to access old information or cannot find what you need please contact us at
If you wish to make a complaint to the Department of Internal Affairs, please contact the relevant service (see contact list
If you would like access to these use cases for educational purposes, please contact
If you would like more information on the Death AISA please contact
If youre not sure which category your request fits into,
If youre using a laptop or desktop computer you can open them using online services like:
If youre using a mobile phone or a tablet:
If your enquiry is about travelling to New Zealand during the pandemic, see
If your enquiry relates to immigration visas, travel movements, or travel requirements please contact New Zealand Immigration:
If your goal is impact, your mission should be super simple and clear. The impact metric that matters should be equally simple and you should hold yourself to account on that basis. This approach brings clarity and gives you the best chance of achieving the impact you seek.
If youre interested in following our journey as we develop and implement the new online casino gambling regulatory system you can register your interest.
If youre nodding your head to any of these questions, the Public Sector Finance Graduate Programme is for you
If CovidCard proceeds, we recommend awarding a card manufacturing contract to one or two providers. Prepayments would be required to complete tooling and to secure component supply and manufacturing production capacity.
Image: Rescuers in Hawkes Bay floodwaters. Source: NZ Police . The Inquiry heard and observed that, as elected leaders, mayors felt the pressure and weight of responsibility in the lead up to and during an emergency. There was, however, inconsistent understanding about their role and governance responsibilities once a state of emergency had been declared. We heard that controllers who did not have senior management experience were less aware of the governance roles of elected officials. We also heard that local and group controller responsibilities and accountability lines are ambiguous, convoluted, and not clearly understood. Mayors . Local authority mayors and chairs (or a delegated elected official) serve on the regional CDEM Group and are responsible for declaring a state of local emergency. During an emergency response they retain their usual governance responsibilities and accountability to communities. However, during an emergency there is variation in what the mayors governance function looks like in practice. This lack of shared understanding left some mayors feeling disempowered or superfluous. The governance role of mayors and chairs, as outlined in NEMA guidance, should be strengthened, and clarified in legislation. Presently the Chair and Mayors are the governance on the CDEM Joint Committee and are responsible for all decisions, yet once a State of Emergency has been declared we effectively become redundant All decisions are then made by the Group Controller or his offsider. So surely there must be a way to retain the governance, for checks and balances Mayor of Wairoa, Craig Little . Mayors need to be clear on the specifics of their local governance roles and how to best serve their communities during an emergency. This includes how they work with, and are supported by, the controller and other key roles, including the Public Information Management function. . Mayors are a known name and face in their communities and can provide a high level of trusted reassurance during an emergency. People look to their mayor or regional council chair for information and leadership. They need to be visible and provide good quality, timely, accurate communication to their communities and media, and respond proactively to mis or disinformation. . Some mayors leaned into this leadership role during the severe weather events. They offered strategic communications, leveraged community contact networks, their local communities and wider audiences on what was happening, gathered intelligence on local needs and situational development from their local communities, and shared information with the controller to inform tasking decisions. However, the approach of mayors was not consistent across regions, and they received differing levels of support from the Public Information Management function. CHAPTER : LEADERSHIP, ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER CHAPTER Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events
Images Amongst the Worst Kind That Could be Imaginable
Immediate Funding for the Office of Ethnic Communities in Response to the Christchurch Mosques Terror Attack
Impact Cosmetic, no impact. Status The issue was resolved.
Impact Data was not affected by this issue. This had no impact on the NZ team. Status The issue was resolved.
Impact Day data is UTCGMT format; Day data is local and time format. Status The issue was resolved.
Impact Statement Template . What other impacts is this approach likely to have Other likely i mpacts which cannot be included in the table above, e .g. because they cannot readily be assigned to a specific stakeholder group, or they cannot clearly be described as costs or benefits . Subjecting CVoD providers to a self classification scheme but excludi ng the traditional classification process would create an uneven playing field between CVoD providers and traditional film (such as cinema releases including film festivals and DVD s). The impact of this is unclear. However, the expected broader reform woul d consider traditional film and other out of scope content (e.g. user and FVoD) , in modernising New Zealands media content regulation regime. . The biggest inequality issue between these forms of classifiable content will likely be around cost. The current process of film classification can be expensive whereas the cost of self classification is currently unknown but is presumably less. This will be addressed by the work DIA is undertaking around a fees review funding model review for OFLC . Pote ntial risks and uncertainties . We considered the risk of CVoD providers withdrawing from the New Zealand market due to an increased compliance burden. We did not receive any submissions fr om industry bodies or CVoD providers that raised this as an issue. However, we believe this would be a more likely risk under option and not for our preferred option . Option allows providers to classify their own content using the self classification tool provided by OFLC or an OFLC approved method , which should strea mline and allow for an efficient process. This is in line with developments overseas which a re showing a preference for industry self classification by regulators. . There are also risks relating to the self classification tool not being ready on time for any amendments to the Classification Act to take effect by mid and OFLC not receiving fur ther funding to maintain the self classification tool and process. We understand that OFLC are continuing to refine the tool with the aim of it being ready for impl ementation and we will work with their office to ensure its readiness. We will also work wit h OFLC to determine an appropriate fee for CVoD classification during our review of all fees payable under the Classification Act, and identify other funding means to enable the successful implementation of the proposed change. Other parties; New Zealand viewers Lower risk of harm. High High Nonmonetised benefits Providers self classifying should prevent delays to content being made available to consumers. At the same time the risk of harm to children and young people from viewing inappropriate content is reduced. Medium High Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Impact Statement Template . The timing of implementati on is a risk that will need to be managed. This will be done through further consultation with industry to discuss how self classification will be achieved and how long would be required to properly implement for CVoD providers. . There is a risk of issues arising from attempting to enforce against overseas content providers. We do not believe extraterritoriality will be an issue due to the sectors willingness to col laborate and comply with OFLCs classification decisions. . As mentioned earlie r, DIA is curre ntly establishing a separate but related project to review OFLC s funding model and fees payable under the Classification Act . Establishing an appropriate CVoD fee will be part of this separate work and will be considered by Cabinet later this year. Any fe e charged for the classification of CVoD content will be set via regulations and on a cost recovery basis. . There is a potential risk of regulatory fatigue from this legislative change being followed closely by a broader reform. Requiring content providers to change their systems and get used to a new regulatory framework only to potentially have the broader review supersede that, could impact industrys willingness t o partake in future reform in this area. The likelihood of regulatory fatigue is d ependent on the timing and conclusions of a broader reform. . There is a risk that the b roader reform could not go ahead. This is a small risk however as there is Ministerial w ill to progress the reform. The reform is considered a relevant link to the curren t work being undertaken aro und Countering Violent Extremist content online. If the broader reform were to not go ahead, it would not change our analysis of the proposed optio ns for changes to CVoD Classification. . Is the preferred option compatible with the Governments Expectations for the design of regulatory systems . Yes.
Impact Statement Template Section : Implementation and operation . How will the new arrangements work in practice . Ame ndments to the Classification Act will be required to give effect to proposed legislative changes. It is intended that the changes will be in effect by July , with the Bill being passed into legislation by early . This is however largely dependent on the House programme and priorities. . We acknowledge that it would be ideal to give OFLC , the Labelling B ody and regulated bodies (CVoD providers) enough time to ensure their systems are to comply with new system requirements. . OFLC and the Label ling Body will be responsible for ongoing operation of the new arrangements. The DIA will continue to play an enforcement role under the Act and will work with OFLC to ensure a smooth implementation of new arrangements. . What are the implementation ris ks . We note that the ease of implementing this option depends on a few factors like the readiness of the self classification tool and how quickly CVoD providers can update their systems to the standard requirements. This was highlighted by submissions stating the need for providers to be given enough time to update t heir systems, should this option be progressed. Given this is a Ministerial priority with relatively short timeframes, officials would continue to work closely with OFLC and providers to ensure the tool is fit for purpose, and that providers are given enou gh information to prepare for when requirements come into effect. . The underlying assumption is that content providers will be willing and able to implement the required self classification int o their systems and processes. Overseas based providers do hav e the option of pulling out of our market entirely if they are not satisfied with their legislative obligations. We do not believe this to be particularly likely but has been considered as a ris k. . Risks will be mitigated through continuous and proactive communication with OFLC and providers. Ensuring everybody is informed will allow issues with implementation to be dealt with early and proactively.
Impact Statement Template Section : Monitoring, evaluation and review . How will the impact of the new arrangements be monitored . The current environment has different classifications across each CVoD platform. The most immediate sign of the desired impacts will be content on each platform displaying the same ratings and l abel notes. . OFLC can confirm the effectiveness of self classi fication by conducting audits of content and maintaining dialogue with providers to ensure classifications are correct. Any adjustments that need to be made to the self classification tool can b e made through discussion between OFLC and industry. . Success o f the system can be ascertained by the frequency of complaints to OFLC about the classifications from the use of the tool. These can be compared to the level of complaints received abo ut films currently classified under the Classification Act. Id eally, there would be no difference in the level of complaint. . Recording reductions in harm is less certain. As no data is currently kept measuring how many children and young people are affecte d by CVoD content there would be no data to compare. In additi on, many organisations that work with children and young people acknowledge that classification is only one aspect of protecting from harm. During a planned reform of the media content regulator y regime, organisation that focus on childrens welfare and we llbeing will have an opportunity to provide feedback on any changes they are seeing from the people they work with. . When and how will the new arrangements be reviewed . The effect of the poli cy proposal will be reviewed as part of the broader reform of the media content regulation regime , which is expected to be in place by late and could take at least to months. This reform will provide an opportunity to see if selfclassification is a valid tool and what can be done to improve the system further. Stakeholders will have an opportunity to raise their concerns during the consultation for the broader refor m.
Impact This added time to Tims proce ss. Status The issue was resolved.
Impact This added time to Tims process at the start of the day. Status The issue was resolved.
Impact analysis Regulatory Impact Statement . A Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA) was prepared to accompany the papers on refocusing the water services reforms focusing particularly on the proposals to change to a entity reform model. This RIA was reviewed for quality assurance purposes by a Department of Internal Affairs impact assessment panel, which provided the following statement. . The panel considers that the information and analysis summarised in the RIA partially meets the quality assurance criteria. . The RIA clearly explains the problem and need for action. The analysis around the benefits of the entity model compared to the status quo is compelling, with a substantial amount of supporting evidence. The analysis comparing the different new options could have been communicated more clearly at times. Including more detail around what potential shared services are being progressed in practice would also have been useful. . The RIA includes all of the necessary information or , where appropriate , makes links to previous RIA. There is a clear and concise description of the problem and the options , though much of the analysis is technical and could have been communicated in a more accessible way. There does not appear to have been direct consultation on the new options with all relevant stakeholders, but the RIA does clearly show how the new option is a direct response to stakeholder concerns , and has been informed by extensive consultation. ()(f)(iv), ()(g)(i) ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
Impact and options for implementation of Three Water transfer arrangements for Council Controlled Organisations that provide water related services
Impact of block tariffs on vulnerable consumers . Water services entities may consider the use of block tariffs or low usage charges to try and improve affordability of water. For example, under a block tariff, the first cubic metres of water is priced relatively low, but then the next cubic metres is charged at a higher price. . This type of pricing structure rewards all households with low consumption patterns with low prices, but this means that higher consumption households end up paying much more regardless of their ability to pay. . However, vulnerable households are sometimes large and possibly overcrowded. This means they sometimes consume more water, even if the amount per person is relatively low. A block tariff in a large household could lead to undesirable rationing behaviour and have a negative impact on people with specific medical conditions who require large quantities of water. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . Decisions around the use of block tariffs or low usage charges will be made by each water services entity as part of its funding and pricing plan. However, due to the significant impact these pricing structures can have on vulnerable households, I recommen d creating a regulation making power that would enable the Government to limit or prohibit or limit the use of low usage or block tariffs for residential customers, if it were necessary. I propose that these regulation making powers only come into effect from July to avoid disruption in the initial stages of the reform.
Impact of volumetric pricing on vulnerable consumers . As part of setting pricing and charging plans, water services entities may consider using volumetric charges for a portion of the overall charge residential consumers pay. With volumetric (or variable) pricing, consumers pay based on the volume of water they use. Volumetric pricing is one means water services entities could use to give effect to Te Mana of te Wai as it incentivises more efficient use of water and water conservation. More than half of households already pay some form of volumetric charge. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . The use of volumetric charges can have negative impacts on vulnerable consumers. Preliminary data (from Watercare) suggests that the biggest predictor of household water usage is the number of occupants in the household. Larger households also generally tend to have lower incomes. In addition when water costs are collected through volumetric charges, the cost is typically passed on to tenants who are much more likely to be in financial hardship. . A very high proportion of volumetric charges is not necessarily required in order to achieve efficiency gains, because there are substantial fixed costs in supplying drinking water. . As an example, Kpiti Coast District Council introduced a combination of water meters and recovering about percent of its drinking water costs from volumetric charges to achieve a reduction in water usage of about percent. Tauranga City Council achieved similar levels of water savings to Kpiti but has a tariff structure t hat recovers more than percent of its drinking water costs from volumetric charges. At the other extreme, Christchurch City Council introduced water meters but no volumetric charges and has seen relatively little improvement in water conservation. It is now planning to introduce a volumetric charge for households with high water usage patterns. . Decisions around the use of volumetric pricing will be made by each water services entity as part of their funding and pricing plan, taking into account the pricing principles and consultation with their community. It is possible some entities may set a high ratio of volumetric pricing but balance the impact of this on vulnerable consumers in other ways. . Given the significant impact volumetric pricing can have on low income households, I recommend there should be the ability to limit, through regulation, th e ratio between fixed and volumetric water revenues. This would enable the Government to put a cap on the total amount recovered through volumetric charges for residential customers if this were considered necessary in order to protect vulnerable consumers . . As a point of clarification, this regulation would not limit the volumetric charges on the bill for any individual consumer. There would be no cap on their volumetric charges. The restriction only refers to the proportion of total charges recovered by the water services entity, which is an average across all residential consumers.
Impact on sports funding . The impact on funding for sports should also be acknowledged. The loss of the Point of Consumption Charge (approximately .m per annum to sports organisations) will see a fall in revenue for National Sporting Organisations (NSOs). It is anticipated that the monopoly will, however, see an uplift for sports but this is not guaranteed. . In addition, the monopoly will also likely cause a decrease in the revenue received by NSOs and racing codes from BIUC charges for the use of their racing and sports information from offshore providers. If New Zealanders are unable to bet with offshore provider s, it can be expected the value of BIUC agreements with NSOs and racing codes will drop . We are unaware of what this decrease in value may be, however the degree of this decrease for any NSO will likely depend on the proportion of New Zealanders who bet with that offshore provider, as opposed to overseas bettors on any given sport or racing type. . Despite this impact , the racing codes (who collected . million the financial year from BIUC agreements via TAB NZ acting as an agent for them) support the monopoly proposal. However, the financial impact on NSOs is uncertain and likely to depend on the individual sports . Stakeholder ViewsPublic Consultation Public consultation . This specific option has never been consulted with the public and stakeholders. Ideally, consultation would be undertaken . However, due to the constraints and limitations listed earlier, there is no opportunity for this to occur. . However, the issue of regulation of online gambling and sports and racing betting has been actively discussed for some years and the previous Government announced in May in agreed in principle to TAB NZ having an online monopoly, subject to further work being undertaken. From this , we anticipate there are likely to be a range of views on the options. For example, offshore operators are likely to favour a regulated online gambling market they can legitimately enter and participate in , and oppose TAB NZ being given an online sports and racing betting monopoly, andor a raised POCC rate.
Impact on work programme prioritisation
Impact reporting and larger registered charities
Impact: MINOR Residual Risk Rating: MEDIUM
Implementation The Electoral Commission will be responsible for implementing enrolment for a lower voting age. Local electoral officers are responsible for administering the local elections.
Implementation Two aspects of the strategy implementation are worth noting: the extensive use of pilots to test new service and design models, and a joint work programme with DIA to address areas of mutual interest related to gambling harm. Extensive use of pilots The Ministry intends to follow an open process to develop, pilot, evaluate and implement the proposals in the strategy. In response to significant interest from stakeholders, the Ministry will hold a series of workshops to determine the size, location and characteristics of the pilots, before inviting specific proposals through a procurement process. Requests for proposals would set out more detailed funding proposals. Historically, the Ministry has offered this form of funding through a competitive tender, such as those for the research innovation rounds held under previous strategies. However, the Ministry wish es to test the opportunity for greater collaboration on some pilots, to make more effective use of resources. Pilots may include both public health and intervention components, and the Ministry will evaluate all pilots to inform future service provision. Joint work programme with the Department of Internal Affairs The proposed strategy involves areas in which DIA and the Ministry have mutual responsibilities or interests: for example, areas in which the policy or regulatory settings are outside the direct control of the Ministry , or where the Ministry s work requires input from DIA, which administers the Act and the broader regulatory and policy framework. One example is work that looks at the potential to trial and evaluate an enhanced MVE database that supports facial recognition and other administration service improvement for excludees and affected others. The Ministry would work through the details of such a project with DIA and industry, and potentially other affected stakeholders, to ensure the design was robust and likely to be effective. To provide visibility for this type of work, the two departments are establishing a joint work programme covering the priority areas. They expect the programme to include the following topics: MVE and host responsibility use of technology research into areas of mutual interest such as effectiveness of class policies, prevalence of online gambling or socioeconometric drivers of gambling expenditure NCGM locations policy potential changes to the levy formula. Some elements of this work programme will be led by DIA (eg, changes to the levy formula, which is set in legislation) and others will be led by the Ministry. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
Implementation decisions are made
Implementation of the regulatory system
Implementation of water services delivery plans
Implementing Local Water Done Well: transfer of funding to support the Commerce Commission
Implementing the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act
Important Court decision strengthens action against distributors of child sex abuse images
Impounding Regulations
Improved how people access identity and life event services such as passports and citizenship by completing the biggest set of process and technology changes in over a decade. Over percent of applications for life and identity services are now digital
Improved outcomes for communities
Improving how people access identity and life event services such as for passports and citizenship.
Improving our tools, culture and practices for managing and protecting information
Improving oversight of the disability assist dog system
In the Colonial Secretarys Office was renamed the Department of Internal Affairs when New Zealand became a Dominion. By now it was acknowledged to be the appropriate home for new government functions which were not substantial enough to justify a separate administrative structure and did not fit conveniently into another agency. This role has continued to the present day, as new tasks have been taken on and longestablished ones have been transferred elsewhere.
In National Archives left the Departments fold to become
In , there was a waterborne illness outbreak in the small town of Walkerton , Ontario
In , Cabinet directed core government agencies to implement the New Zealand Government Web Standards in a
In , changes to gambling legislation gave the Department new powers in licensing and enforcement for all types of gambling, including a prohibition on new casinos, the establishment of an independent Gambling Commission administered by the Department, and increased monitoring of gaming machines in pubs and clubs, with oversight via an electronic monitoring system from .
In the Department acquired responsibility for the Charities Commission, to monitor and maintain a register of all charitable organisations in New Zealand.
In Archives New Zealand returned to the Departments fold, along with the Alexander Turnbull Library, as part of the National Library of New Zealand.
In the Charities Commission became Charities Services, a business unit within the department.
In the Ministry of Civil Defence and Emergency Management transferred from Internal Affairs to the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet.
In , the Department moved to a continuous listening approach, instead of running an annual engagement survey. This came after input from our people, who wanted the opportunity to provide feedback more frequently and flexibly. This helps us to be a highperforming organisation and a great place to work, and to continue to make New Zealand better for New Zealanders.
In , Beca produced a report on the capability of drinking water suppliers in New
In the Office of Ethnic Communities was separated from the Department of Internal Affairs to become the
In , we our Kia Toipoto Plan, which sets out how we will reduce gender and ethnic pay gaps. The gender pay gap was . percent on June .
In , the Department purchased , carbon credits through Toit Envirocare (EnviroMark Solutions Limited) to partially offset emissions from Ministerial travel.
In , we developed a new Leadership Development Framework and programmes to support our leaders to improve their leadership skills, connect with other leaders, and be better equipped to lead our people.
In August the Crown signed a
In AugustSeptember . The Department of Internal Affairs and Taumata Arowai held a series of huimotu across New Zealand with iwihapMori groups to provide an early look at the reform programme and discuss rights and interests in the reforms ahead of policy development.
In December , the Minister of Finance announced an ongoing Fiscal Sustainability Programme to embed a culture of responsible spending across government. For Vote Internal Affairs, this meant identifying savings to deliver a permanent baseline reduction of . percent from the financial year.
In Detail Tables Quarterly and yearly tables showing financial and venueEGM information and the delta between each quarteryear that you want to see based on time and location.
In FY, public sector agenciesorganisations consumed one or more ICT services through the AllofGovernment Portfolio, and the total spend surpassed billion. This is an increase of more than million from FY, with percent of the spend with New Zealand owned businesses.
In February the Government introduced and passed legislation to repeal all legislation relating to water services entities.
In February , we worked with the Minister of Local Government to repeal the previous governments Three Waters laws.
In January , the Working Group delivered their report, which examined the barriers to people changing the sex on their birth certificate. They made recommendations to help reduce those barriers:
In July , our AntiMoney Laundering team won an excellence award in the Regulatory Systems category at the
In July , the Government announced funding to provide immediate covid stimulus package to maintain and improve water networks infrastructure, and to support a threeyear programme of reform of local government water services delivery arrangements.
In JulyAugust the Steering Committee held a series of engagements with local government and iwiMori partners to discuss the process to access the stimulus funding, and an overview of the reform programmes direction of travel.
In June the department launched an online safety campaign called Keep It Real Online. One of the campaign videos won awards at the Berlin Commercial Awards in the categories of Commercials and Branded content short and Craft: Idea.
In June Cabinet took
In June , we held regional Pasifika fono in Auckland and Wellington to bring our Pacific kaimahi together to discuss issues and challenges relating to their roles in the Department.
In March , Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs is completing a significant upgrade to the New Zealand Passports system, which will add new online functionality and provide a better experience for passport customers.
In March , we released the biggest set of changes in over a decade to passports technology, people and processes.
In New Zealand, health officials aim to notify close contacts to isolate within days symptom onset : of possible cases aim to have a swab received at a lab within hours, of swab tests being received at a lab to have results notified within hours, and notification of close contacts being completed ( of the time) within hours of result notification. Although some factors cannot be shortened, such as the time taken for a test to be completed at a lab, there is potential to shorten the time taken for isolation of close contacts.
In New Zealand, people living in high deprivation, the elderly and Mori suffer health inequities (Sheridan ). These same populations are also at the greatest risk of COVID infection or developing severe COVID symptoms (James ). Further, lower detection in these populations is likely to result in more severe outbreaks owing to lower detection capacity than in the general population.
In November , the Matamata Piako District Council water supply was interrupted
In November , Te Tiriti and Partnerships team was established as part of the Te Urungi Branch. A core aspect of this teams work has been to ensure the full and timely delivery of settlement commitments. We monitor our Treaty of Waitangi Te Tiriti o Waitangi settlement commitments through Te Haeata the Settlement Portal, which is administered by Te Arawhiti, the Office of Mori Crown Relations. Te Haeata provides an online record of all legislated settlements and related arrangements. Each commitment is listed as either:
In accordance with Standing Order
In accordance with the FVPC Act, an online content host, in relation to an online publication, refers to the person who or that has control over the part of the electronic retrieval system, such as an Internet site or an online application or similar, on which the publication is accessible
In additi on, we consider bud getary performance is sub ject to greater volatili ty
In addition , we believe debt burden assess ment would remain . We forecast
In addition to the allocation of stimulus funding for local government, Cabinet agreed to allocate million to support rural drinking water suppliers, including marae, to meet drinking water standards. We expect this funding to be allocated in .
In addition to the financial resources and support services provided to members of the Executive under this Determination, they are provided with certain entitlements as members of parliament under a determination administered by the Parliamentary Service. Information on these expenses is disclosed separately by the Parliamentary Service.
In addition to the groups and functions listed below, each branch includes a Branch Performance group, to provide direct support to the Deputy Secretary on strategic and business issues.
In addition to these models, there are accompanying slide packs for each council and amalgamated entity that set out the results of analysis to test the sensitivity of the modelling to key assumptions, including assumptions around levels of efficiency and future investment need. As the sensitivity analysis on a standalone council basis was completed prior to cabinet decisions on the preferred number and boundaries of entities, the slide packs for councils on a standalone basis report on an illustrative amalgamation scenario (either scenario or in the WICS analysis) which is slightly different to the Governments preferred scenario (scenario ). The models, slide packs and sensitivity analysis for the amalgamated entities have been prepared on the basis of the Governments preferred scenario.
In addition, Officials ran weekly technical guidance and support dropin clinics. A summary of the clinics that have already been held is linked below.
In addition, d ownward ratings pressure could emerg e if we consider LGFAs stan dalone cred it
In addition, downwa rd ratings pressure could emerge i f we c onsider LG FAs s tandalone credit
In addition, the independence of the board of the WSE from the local councils infor m our view
In all cases IR will confirm the identity of the individual whose contact details
In all cases, the material must be reproduced accurately and not be used in a misleading context. Where the material is being or issued to others, the source of the material and its copyright status must be acknowledged.
In broad terms, the proposed intervention will bring consistency, trust, structure and efficiency to the digital identity ecosystem. This will produce a wide range of benefits for individuals, businesses, organisations, government and society in general, and these benefits will likely outweigh the cos ts to government of implementing and administering a new regulatory framework . Some of the specific benefits of implementing a Trust Framework are outlined below across four categories. People : Improved access to online services ; improved customer exper ience; greater confidence that personal and organisational information is secure and private ; reduced risk and reduced identi fication fraud; greater control over personal and organisational information; greater transparency around where that information is stored and how it is used . Example s Not hav ing to be physically present to gain access to services e.g. by digitally sharing my prescriptions with a pharmacy . Not need ing to keep physical documents on your person e.g. you could maintain an electronic version of your drivers licence on your phone. Reduc ing the requirement to reproduce the same documentation every time you want to access different government services , especially when it contain s information above and beyond that needed to access the service . Reducing incidences of fraud will lower the associated costs of fraud to individuals, currently estimated at , per event with each victim having to spend on average hours responding to their incident. Businesses and organisations (both government and non government) : Improve d service delivery potentially resulting in an expanding customer base ; improved ease of business; improved brand reputation ; greater efficiencies (e.g. less duplication , process streamlining ); reduced fraud resulting from improved risk assessment ; increase d confidence to invest in digital solutions ; potentially new revenue stream s; increase d ability to meet regulatory requirements ; greater confidence in the validity of personal and organisational information that is being supplied for the purpose of a transaction .
In circumstances where disclosure of the information is not otherwise authorised by the ISA, as recognised by the Privacy Act at s (), disclosure of personal information by NZSIS comes within the following exceptions to IPP: (a) disclosure is one of the purposes (or directly related) for which information was obtained; (e) noncompliance is necessary to avoid prejudice to the maintenance of the law or for Court proceedings; (f) necessary to prevent or lessen a serious threat. (g) that the disclosure of the information is necessary to enable an intelligence and security agency to perform any of its functions.
In circumstances where disclosure of the information is not otherwise authorised by the ISA, as recognised by the Privacy Act at s (), disclosure of personal information by NZSIS outside New Zealand is for the purposes of IPP(g). However, should sharing disclosure outside of New Zealand occur in reliance on IPP (a), (c), (e), (f), (h), or (i) then IPP would apply. (g) that the disclosure of the information is necessary to enable an intelligence and security agency to perform any of its functions. Compliant
In collaboration with DIA, the Ministry aims to identify and use opportunities for diverse perspectives to clarify what gambling harm minimisation means for different parts of the health sector and to work with the health sector to implement the strategy through the future service plan. The proposed service plan provides more detail about the Ministry s response to the recommendations identified in the Sapere needs assessment. . Outcomes monitoring The Ministry has reviewed progress towards gambling harm reduction outcomes to assess what has been achieved over time in gambling harm minimisation. This review complemented the needs assessment discussed above and provides information about the nature of gambling harm in New Zealand and changes over time. Research shows that while the proportion of the population at risk of gambling harm, as measured by the PGSI is at the lowest levels seen for years, the level of harm in the overall population has remained relatively stable for the last five to seven years (at about ) (Abbott et al ; ThimasarnAnwar et al ). This plateau effect has also been observed overseas (Abbott ). Similarly, the number of people presenting for gambling support and treatment has not increased in line with population growth. Yet this figure represents only a small fraction of the estimated numbers affected by gambling harm. In fact, the overall number of at risk gamblers in the population has increased in line with population growth. Importantly, while inequalities between population groups by age, social deprivation, gender and ethnicity have reduced in absolute terms, in relative terms, disparities in exposure to gambling and experience of gamblingrelated harm persist and have been relatively static over the past five years. A refocusing and revitalisation of activities is warranted The outcomes review and the needs assessment together suggest that, while there has been some success in reducing gambling harm since the first strategy in , in the past few years, the number of people affected by gambling harm has been growing. We need to refocus and revitalise gambling harm responses in the service plans if we are to make further gains in reducing gambling harm and health inequalities and inequity in the experience of gambling harm by a range of population groups , particularly Mori and Pacific peoples . STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
In collaboration with the Ministry of Social Development, we established a Taskforce Green concept to help local marae, whnau, farmers, and others to clean up silt, houses, land, repair fences and regrow the environment. Huiterangiora Foundation was the governing body for the kaupapa (program), receiving , from the Lottery Emergency Natural Disaster Fund to support this project.
In considering how to collect information we take into account a range of factors, including:
In contrast, a lmost percent of the total population of proposed Entity A live in urban areas with significant distance s between them. This means that the asset optimi sation (that is, the ability to consolidate water networks between towns) is likely to be much lower than as claimed by WICS due to significant distances between New Zealand towns. Economies of scale are n ot available in water services from amalgamations at the level WICS claims Castalia has previously advised DIA, LGNZ and the Joint Steering Commi ttee that the economies of scale claimed in WICS slidedecks from administrative amalgamations were Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia implau sible . In New Zealand, only minor economies of scale are achievable through institutional reform , and these will be mostly in management and proc urement (not infrastructure capex). FFF Castalia showed that economies of scale are unlikely to be availa ble in New Zealand on the basis of the evidence presented by WICS, Frontier Economics and in the economic literature relied on by the government . The findings in Castalias Economies of Scale report ha ve not been rebutted . WICS claims that the perc ent capex efficiency gain emerges when water entities achieve a population of , or more. It also claims that entities serving a minimum population of , increase capex efficiency as they approach the , population number. This claim has no b asis in the economic literature. In fact, the literature that looks at the specific question of whether economies of scale are available from administrative amalgamations find that there are none except in highly specific circumstances, not present in New Zealand . Economies of scale estimate is based on non credible evidence When preparing the Economies of Scale report, Casta lia reviewed the WICS slidedecks . Access to the underlying models and assumptions was refused . In the Economies of Sca le report , we were advised FFF that the economies of scale assumption was based on England, Wales and Scotland observations. However, we now know that the supporting evidence for the percent capex efficiency is a single Scottish observation from . FFF WICS economies o f scale claims are rejected by peer reviewers FarrierSwier FarrierSwier peer reviewed WICS approach and had access to the underlying models . It found that WICS analysis cannot be used to definitively conclude that amal gamation in and of itself will lead to material efficiency gains in New Zealand . FFF Its review did not assess whether the outputs from the WICS analysis are reasonable or free from error. FFF FarrierSwier also state significant care should b e taken when relying on the capital efficiency gaps estimated by WICS. This is particularly important , given the significant step up in investment forecast for the year period and the role that the capex efficiency assumption plays when estimating benef its from amalgamation and as sociated reform. Like Castalia, FarrierSwier express concern with the sensitivity analysis approach. Diseconomies of scale not considered Diseconomies of scale can emerge from administrative amalgamations in water services. This was not considered in WIC S modelling. WICS has overlooked a relevant case from Australia. In , Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works merged with several smaller urban water authorities to form Melbourne
In early we were asked by Ministers and The Treasury to identify other possible savings options and Ministers decided to include these options in our baseline reduction. This meant Vote Internal Affairs delivered annual operating baseline savings of percent from or . million. This includes . million from the Ministry for Ethnic Communities, which receives its funding from Vote Internal Affairs.
In implementing the strategy, we developed a highlevel work programme. The work programme was:
In its current iteration, Taura Herenga Waka has come to an end. Given our context and commitment, there is a need for us to refresh it. It is important that we take the time to get it right. Below is an indicative timeline for this work.
In order to carry out our law enforcement and regulatory compliance, we may use the information we hold for analysis, risk assessment, audit or monitoring purposes.
In our role as a Crown agency, we work effectively with Mori.
In our vi ew, the WSEs do not ha ve special public statu s and are not government
In phase two, the testing body will be authorised to implement a cost recovery model. Entities will assume the initial one off testing costs assumed by government in phase one. The exact costs and the details of the cost recovery model to be implemented will be determined during phase one ( ).
In relation to density, t he regression between density and asset values exhibited a strong explanatory statistical power (R of over ) as set out in table . of Castalias report.
In releasing this information, the Department of Internal Affairs has taken into account the public interest in making the information public.
In signing this Agreement each Party acknowledges it has read and agrees to be bound by it.
In signing this Agreement each party acknowledges it has read and agrees to be bound by it.
In support of He Waka Eke Noa, Mori Capability Uplift dashboards have been produced by our Mori, Strategy and Performance branch, Te Urung. These dashboards monitor our Te Tiriti Engagements (Te Ao Mori me te Tiriti), as well as our activities against the three Pou that make up He Waka Eke Noa: Te Reo me na Tikanga; Te o Mori; and Te Tiriti.
In support of Mori Capability Development across Te Tari Taiwhenua, we launched a selfassessment tool called Te Whare Kura. Te Whare Kura is anchored to the Te Ara Whiti competencies. Individuals that complete the selfassessment can use the results to identify development activities and to uplift their capability. A suite of online resources has been put in place to support this development.
In the Determination the following principles are applied in the use of publicly funded resources by members of the Executive:
In the end, regulatory outcomes have to be something the public accept as fair. If you dont have that, whatever nice theories you have, the system collapses. A big question should always be how does the public view this . Dan Corry Chief Executive, New Philanthropy Capital (former Senior Advisor to the UK Prime Minister, ) In the end, regulatory outcomes have to be something the public accept as fair. If you dont have that, whatever nice theories you have, the system collapses. A big question should always be how does the public view this Dan Corry Chief Executive, New Philanthropy Capital (former Senior Advisor to the UK Prime Minister, ) Strategic context RSG and other regulators are operating in an environment where change is the new normal and can occur rapidly and unexpectedly. COVID has prompted governments and businesses alike to reflect on how agile and adaptable they are, whether their digital platforms and services are fit for purpose, and how well they are operating in an increasingly global context. Challenges facing regulators include disruptive trends relating to the speed and scale at which technology innovations can effect change across whole sectors, the degree to which peoples views have become more polarised informed by social media and power imbalances caused when industry expertise exceeds that of the regulator. In New Zealand, health and economic outcomes are being viewed as interrelated and there is a growing concern about harms to communities and the disproportionate effects of these on some communities in particular. In this regard, there is an increasing and strongly felt desire for regulators to address inequitable outcomes for hap, iwi and Mori. There has been a significant maturing of regulatory practice and professionalism in recent years, resulting in a much greater understanding of the need for many regulators to have and maintain a social licence , to be able to anticipate and respond to industry changes (which affect their ability to regulate effectively) and to be able to show that they are making a measurable difference. For some this is easier than others. Concepts of regulatory stewardship what adopting a wholeofsystem, lifecycle view of regulation, and taking a proactive, collaborative approach, to the monitoring and care of the regulatory system(s) within which they have policy or operational responsibilities means for specific systems and regulators is increasingly well defined and understood. One size does not fit all. Related to this, many regulators are challenging the traditional siloed ways of working and are looking for partners or collaborators with whom they can identify new and more innovative interventions using different tools and approaches.
In the face of unprecedented climate challenges, we aspire to support the public service in operating sustainably and efficiently achieving reductions in Carbon emissions and cost saving.
In the settings, adjust the scale to the text size you want (scale: custom). The larger you make the scale, the larger the text on the printout will be.
In the twentieth century, the Departments core constitutional role was complemented by the gradual development of responsibility for cultural conservation, beginning with Maori antiquities in . The
In this Agreement, including the Background, unless the context otherwise requires:
In total for , there were performance measures, out of which measures produced results, six measures did not have a standard, three measures were reported in two Crown entities Annual Reports.
In total for , there were performance measures, out of which measures produced results, five measures do not have a standard, three measures are reported in two Crown entities Annual Reports, and the result for one measure was not available.
Inperson uses of digital identity information
Include the issue of This approach is a holistic and comprehensive
Included in this Annual Report is reporting for the Ministry for Ethnic Communities and the Digital Executive Board, which are included in Vote Internal Affairs.
Includes Agency Partnerships and Capability, AoG Services Delivery, Strategy, Mori Digital Crown Relationships, Trust Framework and Digital Services and Solutions.
Includes Policy Group, Local Government Policy, Ministerial and Monitoring, Te Tira Tiriti Te Tiriti and Partnerships and Water Service Reform Programme.
Includes Pmanawa Tangata Human Resources, Legal, Te Manu Karere Communications, Kkiri Turu Finance, Mori Capability Uplift, Strategy Governance and Risk and He Ringa Manaaki Workplace Services.
Includes Regulatory Services, Te Ara Manaaki, Te Pou Manawa Partners Products, Pou rahi, Te Phekoheko Operations, Te Waka Akaha Planning, Design and Assurance, Mauri o te Tangata Services and Access and Digital Safety.
Includes the National Library, Archives New Zealand, Ministerial Services, Commissions of Inquiry and Hpai Hapori among others.
Incorporated Societies Act .
Incorporated Society A society incorporated under the Incorporated Societies Act or the
Increased investment by the Crown in supporting iwiMori to participate in the three waters service delivery system: . million . The report of the Working Group on Representation, Governance and Accountability recommends that: The Crown provides equitable resourcing to enable the full and effective participation of iwi and hap in the Three Waters regime (recommendation ). . This recommendation is provided in the context of several other recommendations that are intended to ensure the Treaty and its principles are given effect to when exercising powers and functions under the legislation, and that Te Mana o te Wai is recognised as an overarching objective guiding decision making, planning, governance, accountability and service delivery by the water services entities. . The additional funding of . million will enable: . base departmental capability to support policy development, establishing mana whenua governance arrangements, specialist Treaty advic e, implementation of Te Mana o te Wai, and iwiMori engagement; and . an increase in the direct funding to iwihap to provide assistance for the establishment of the Te Mana o Te Wai mechanism for the new water services entities.
Increased investment by the Crown to support local government through the transition period: . million . The Heads of Agreement between the Crown and Local Government New Zealand (LGNZ) anticipates a close partnership between local authorities and the National Transition Unit (NTU) through the transition process, with significant council involvement in transition planning and entity establishment processes. . The Heads of Agreement recognised there will be transaction costs associated with facilitating the transfe r of assets, liabilities, revenue, staff, contracts and information that will result in councils incurring direct and indirect costs, and that provision for such costs would be made within the million Transforming Three Waters Service Delivery for New Zealanders: Transition and Implementation tagged contingency. The Head of Agreement also anticipated the Crown providing funding support to enable LGNZ and Taituar to support the Crown and the local government sector through the transition period. . Decisi ons about the appropriate level of investment in these activities represents a judgement call, balancing the risks of being perceived to underfund councils, the level of council engagement required to be full and meaningful, and the risks to the entity establishment process and councils management of business asusual activity. . The Minister of Finance and I consider that providing reasonable funding to enable council st aff to participate actively in the entity establishment process is essential for delivering four fitforpurpose water services entities by July . Investment in this activity will be important for building local momentum behind the reform process, and for managing workforce risks through the transition period. . Funding of . million is sought to increase the direct support to councils to an equivalent of approximately FTEs (from FTEs), and modestly increase the wider engagement with the sector. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of
Increasing connections between New Zealanders and our nations heritage
Increasing the total number of clinically relevant close contacts identified The full extent to which contacts are missed by manual contact tracing efforts is not well understood. In New Zealand, the current manual contact tracing system has been able to track up to of selfreported known close contacts within days, with the target of reaching of selfreported known close contacts within days. Modeling efforts assume a high percentage of close contacts will be traced (also referred to as tracing fraction), ranging from (Ferretti ) to (Kucharski and Hinch ), while others (Vaithianathan ) illustrate the impact of a range of percentages of contacts traced (). Importantly, there is a difference between assumed tracing fractions (percentage of all close contacts, known or unknown, traced) and realized tracing fractions (percentage of selfreported known close contacts ultimately traced).
Independence from the public service is achieved, along with the specific expertise being sought.
Independent Advisory A committee established by or under legislation to provide independent
Independent Audit of the Chief Archivists Recordkeeping Practices
Independent Auditors report
Independent Crown Entity that reviews, reforms and develops New Zealand law, by making recommendations to Government Also advises how to make law more accessible.
Independent Crown entity that provides advice to the Government on improving productivity.
Independent External Review for Hawkes Bay CDEM: key findings concerning volunteering
Independent Privacy Evaluators
Independent Quality Assurance Reports relating to the New Zealand Libraries Partnership Programme
Independent Review of Electoral Law
Independent Review of Marketplace Portal Data Incident
Independent Security Evaluators
Independent Statutory A body that:
Independent auditors report
Independent evaluations of privacy, security and conformance with the NZ Identification Standards
Independent peer reviewer
Independent review by Te Pou Awe Te Whare Pirimia Premier House Board on the Longterm Stewardship of Te Whare Pirimia Premier House
Independent working group
Indicativ e Rating Score Snapshot
Indicative Key Financ ial Stat istics
Indicative Rating S core Sna pshot
Indicative Rating Sc ore Snapshot
Indicative Rating Score Snap shot
Indicative Rating Score Snapshot
Indicative rating aa aa aa
Individual contributor kaimahi without direct reports
Individual council feedback submissions will be proactively released shortly on the Local Government Feedback on reform proposals page.
Individual council models and slide packs
Individual council models and slide packs page
Individual members may have individual local authority or iwi interests, but represent the interests of those facing similar issues and circumstances and consider national as well as local interests.
Individualised WICS (Water Industry Commission for Scotland) feedback sessions
Individuals are not required to obtain and lodge Death Certificates with Veterans Affairs.
Industry risk Very Low Very Low Very Low
Inequalities and inequity in health Some people experience differences in health that are not only avoidable but also unfair and unjust. Equity recognises that people with different levels of advantage require different approaches and resources to get equitable health outcomes. We usually refer to differences in health experience occurring between population groups as health inequalities . A health inequity is an inequality that we can attribute to social, cultural and economic factors, rather than biomedical ones. Inequalities and inequity in health occur between groups because of a range of wellrecognised socioeconomic, cultural and biological factors. The most common factors are sex, age, social deprivation, ethnicity and education. Similarly, the components of the service plan for the next three years focus on each service area (public health, intervention services, and research and evaluation) to support the plan s key actions and priorities. In addition, given the longterm patterns in gambling participation and harm that have been reported through the HLS, the Ministry intends that outcomes reporting on the strategy should occur every three years, to better inform the service plan. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Inflation adjusted statistics Table showing expenditure, prizes and turnover statistics adjusted for inflation for the four main types of gambling activity.
Influencing narratives: we work with
Informat ion has been released in full.
Information Briefing Draft Online Safety Code of Practice
Information DIA (Citizenship)
Information DIA (Citizenship) paragraphs (a) (f),
Information DIA will share with IR Work telephone number,
Information General Committees
Information General excluding the
Information IR will share with DIA Passport number
Information Memorandum Standard and Poors Three Waters Reform Programme
Information Privacy An information privacy principle as defined in section of the Privacy
Information RegistrarGeneral paragraphs (a)
Information RegistrarGeneral under the BDMRR Act.
Information Sharing Agreement
Information Sharing Agreement between
Information about CSAM, objectionable material, and what to do if you accidentally find it.
Information about DIAs work to help prevent New Zealandersfrom online harm in relation to child sexual exploitation, violent extremist content and unsolicited commercial electronic messages.
Information about Ministers credit card spending is released quarterly. All credit card statements and reconciliations available on the last day of the month are released. Those statements and reconciliations received after the last day of the month are released with the following months data. Where possible supporting documentation such as receipts or purchase orders are provided.
Information about New Zealands future water services delivery system under Local Water Done Well.
Information about online safety
Information about people, businesses or organisations can be shared in a digital form, including:
Information about retaining illegal
Information about retaining illegal content for evidential purposes
Information about spam including tips for avoiding spam and what NZ spam law means for businesses.
Information about spam, including the different types of spam and how to avoid it.
Information about supplying to government
Information about the Common Web Platform, allofgovernment website product, and guidance for those that are using it.
Information about the part of the gambling compliance service that regulates pokie machines.
Information about the previous Governments water services policy and legislation is accessible here:
Information about the role of the NZ Reading Ambassador, blog posts and Te Awhi Rito news and events. The Ambassador is supported by Te Puna Mtauranga o Aotearoa The National Library of New Zealand.
Information about the three stages to implement Local Water Done Well.
Information about the work of the Department of Internal Affairs and its principal services via the web. This multiagency website includes direct URLs to many services sections.
Information and Overseas Death Information for Organisations. It also provides for updating records
Information and data management
Information and guidance for councils
Information and resources to help New Zealand businesses understand and maintain their systems and processes in order to comply with their AntiMoney Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism obligations.
Information and talking points for your meeting with Lotto NZ on April , April
Information as a Celebrant as maintained by the RegistrarGeneral under the BDMRR
Information as maintained by the Secretary of Internal Affairs under the Citizenship
Information briefing Summary of Submissions Justice Committee Inquiry into the Local Elections
Information briefing Voting age inquiry submissions
Information briefing: Extending RealMe verified identity validity period
Information briefing: Pacific Economy Research Report on Unpaid Work and Volunteering in Aotearoa summary of findings
Information collected directly
Information collected from another person or agency
Information collection to prevent significant harm
Information contained within name change Births, Deaths and
Information excluding the
Information for Businesses
Information for LEG on June Water Services (Drinking Water Standards for New Zealand) Regulations
Information for businesses
Information for councils and stakeholders
Information for people who may have had their identity stolen.
Information for providers
Information for providers applying for accreditation of digital identity services, including the application process.
Information for suppliers of goods and services to the Department of Internal Affairs.
Information for the Departments reporting entities under the AMLCFT regime
Information for the Public
Information for translators
Information from member of public leads to conviction
Information is considered necessary where it is required to support the performance of NZSIS statutory functions intelligence collection and analysis protective security services, advice, and assistance cooperation with other public authorities to facilitate their functions cooperation with other entities to respond to imminent threat
Information is stored, accessed and retained in accordance with our Privacy Policy, Information Management Policy, and the DIA Code of Conduct which incorporates our ICT and security policies, and in compliance with the Privacy Act and the Public Records Act .
Information may only be received under this Agreement where the RegistrarGeneral or DIA is either
Information on applying to the Trust Framework Authority for accreditation of an additional service.
Information on how the Department identifies and responds to violent extremism online.
Information on how the Department responds to child sexual abuse material online.
Information on how the Department responds to terrorist and violent extremist content online.
Information on how the Department responds to violent extremism online.
Information on previous Orders in Council: Consultation for the Severe Weather Emergency Recovery (Local Government) Order
Information on the expenses disclosed by the Department of Internal Affairs for members of the Executive.
Information or DIA, including details of the content of any meetings, telephone calls,
Information pack: What is economic regulation
Information relating to an individuals New Zealand Certificate of Identity
Information relating to an individuals New Zealand Emergency Travel
Information relating to an individuals New Zealand Passport history,
Information relating to an individuals New Zealand Refugee Travel
Information relating to the death of an individual outside New Zealand.
Information relating to the name change of an individual outside New
Information relating to your personal and career skills
Information shared during engagement will be treated with confidentiality in line with New Zealands public sector standards.
Information sharing agreement between the NZ Gang Intelligence Centre Agencies
Information sharing as a Child Welfare and Protection Agency under the Oranga Tamariki Act
Information sharing under the Oranga Tamariki Act
Information that is not about an identifiable individual will not be shared under this
Information that is not about an identifiable individual will not be shared under this Agreement.
Information that needs to be provided when applying
Information to Parties that are New Zealand Private Sector Agencies for their use in
Information to assist New Zealand businesses and the public to comply with the Unsolicited Electronic Messages Act , the law that regulates Spam.
Information to identify the individual including : current name previous names of birth place of birth Partner Specific Customer Identifier All Registered Information Citizenship Information excluding the following: Preadoptive records Presexual assignment or reassignment records Records with a Family Violence Act Non Disclosure Directive Schedule Clause (b), (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g) Schedule Clause (a), (b) and ( d) Schedule Clause (a), (b) and ( d) Schedule Clause (a), (b) and ( e) Schedule Clause (a) and (b) Schedule Clause (a) and (c) Travel Documents
Information to identify the individual including: current name previous names of birth place of birth Partner Specific Customer Identifier Excluding records marked confidential in accordance with section of the LTA Schedule Clause (a) Schedule Clause Debt Current debt to the Crown excluding records marked confidential in accordance with section of the LTA Schedule Clause (b) and (c) Historical debt to the Crown excluding records marked confidential in accordance with section of the LTA Schedule Clause (b) and (c) . How the Registrar of Motor Vehicles may use Personal Information provided by DIA The Personal Information received by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles from DIA may be used to: a) ensure that an individual applying for or utilising public services is not required to provide identity and Life Event records that DIA holds. b) assist in the location of individuals . c) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences, and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review. . How the Registrar of Motor Vehicles may use Personal Information provided by the Registrar General The Personal Information received by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles from the Registrar General may be used to: a) ensure that an individual applying for or uti lising public services is not required to provide identity and Life Event records that the Registrar General holds. b) update the records of an individual upon their death. Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of c) update the records of an individual upon a name change. d) update the records of an individual upon their marriage or civil union. e) contact individuals who may wish to register their vehicle in a different name. f) contact individuals who may wish to have their Personal Information marked as confidential. g) provide additional protection to info rmation provided by the Registrar General where the individual concerned has an active Non Disclosure Direction under the BDMRR Act. h) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences, and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review. . Adverse Actions The Registrar of Motor Vehicles can reasonably be expected to potentially take any of the following Adverse Action s based on the information received from another party: a) decline to provide requested public services. b) cancel the registration of a motor vehicle. c) update the known names associated with a n individual . d) engage in the collection of debt to the Crown . e) investigate any matter that may constitute an offence under any legislation it administers and prosecute the of fence or report any suspected offence to the New Zealand Police. f) engage in civil proceedings.
Information to identify the individual including: current name previous names of birth place of birth Partner Specific Customer Identifier Schedule Clause (a) Schedule Clause Debt
Information to identify the individual including: current name previous names of birth place of birth Partner Specific Customer Identifier Schedule Clause (a) Schedule Clause (a) Driver Licence Records Driver Licence Information, excluding records marked confidential Schedule Clause (b), (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g) Schedule Clause (b) and (c) Driver Licence Images , excluding records marked confidential , in accordance with s() of the LTA Schedule Clause (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g) Schedule Clause (b) and (c) Demerit Points Schedule Clause (b) and (d) Debt Current debt to the Crown excluding debt under the Land Transport Management Act Schedule Clause (b) and (d) Historical debt to the Crown excluding debt under the Land Transport Management Act Schedule Clause (b) and (d) . How NZTA may use personal Information provided by DIA The Personal Information received by NZTA from DIA may be used to: a) ensure that an individual applying for or utilising public services is not required to provide identity and Life Event records that DIA holds. b) confirm that specified types of Driver L icence and Transport Service Licence holders are entitled to work in New Zealand. c) assist in the location of individuals . d) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences, and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review. e) identify an individual applying for an Electronic Identity Credential. Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of . How NZTA may use Personal Information provided by the Registrar General The Personal Information received by NZTA from the Registrar General may be used to: a) ensure that an individual applying for or utilising public services is not required to provide identity and Life Event records that the Registrar General holds. b) confirm that specified types of Driver L icence and Transport Service Licence holders are entitled to work in New Zealand. c) update the records of an individual upon their death. d) update the records of an individual upon a name change. e) update the records of an individual upon their marriage or civil union. f) contact individuals who may wish to receive a new Driver L icence or Trans port Service Licence in a different name. g) contact individuals who may wish to have their Driver Licence or Transport Service Licence details marked as confidential. h) provide additional protection to information provided by the Registrar General where the individual concerned has an active Non Disclosure Direction under the BDMRR Act. i) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences, and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review. . Adverse Actions NZTA can reasonably be expected to potentially take any of the following Adverse Action s based on the information received from another party: a) decline to provide requested public services. b) cancel the Driver L icence (s) or Transport Service Licence(s) of a deceased individual . c) update the known names associated with a n individual . d) engage in the collection of debt to the Crown . e) investigate any matter that may constitute an offence under any legislation it administers and prosecute the offence or report any suspected offence to the New Zealand Police. f) engage in civil proceedings.
Information to support the Local Government Annual Review Debate
Information under the BDMRR Act, including the
Information we release annually to Parliamentary Select Committees
Information website for Charities Services, giving the public an overview of its role. Includes the Charities register, where charities can register, view and update their details.
Information Preadoptive birth information Marriages
Information, templates and guidance for councils to inform future water services delivery arrangements.
Information, tools and advice for New Zealanders about how to keep themselves and their families safe online.
Informational site for people that want to find out about the rates rebate scheme
Infrastructure Funding and Financing System Projects Stage Two package of proposals Implications for local government work programme
Infrastructure and Assets Review draft report fiscal implications
Infrastructure and Investment Ministers Group meeting October
Infrastructure and Investment Ministers Group meeting August
Infrastructure and Investment Ministers Group meeting July
Infrastructure as a Service
Infrastructure. Engagement with key agencies (GCSB, NZSIS, DPMC, DIA, OIO,
Infringement offences for noncompliance with existing regulations , and
Infringement offences have also been introduced to promote compliance. These regulatory changes have been made after a public consultation process.
Initial advice on the Ratepayers Assistance Scheme
Initial briefing for the Mori Affairs Committee on the Rotorua District Council (Representation Arrangements) Bill
Initial considerations for regulatory oversight of development levies
Initial council performance metrics
Initial policy decisions by Minister of Local Governm ent April
Initial thinking on the selfidentification regulations and proposed engagement approach
Initial views on levy revenue options to support meeting with Fire and Emergency on May
Initiating work on the expiring CVoD levy
Inland Revenue Approved Information Sharing Agreement
Inland Revenue will use this information to make contact with overseasbased student loan borrowers in default and child support liable parents living overseas (either in default or whose contact details are out of ).
Innovation Advanced, effective, and sustainable technology innovations are
Innovation and Employment (MBIE) with a channel for the COVID
Innovation and Employment, and Department of Internal Affairs to work in
Innovation and development are essential to ensure that people and organisations can prove who they are in a safe, secure, and easily accessible way. These innovations will enhance participation and improve our economy while protecting your identity information.
Inquiries are able to inquire into any matter of public importance or concern to the Government of the day. The Department of Internal Affairs provides assistance to public and Government inquiries established under the
Inquiries can also be referred by the House but are more likely to be initiated by a Select Committee if the inquiry topic relates to the subject matter in its terms of reference
Inquiries do not always result in a report to the House.
Inquiries established by a Minister into an area for which they have portfolio responsibility
Inquiry into COVID Lessons; and note that a similar online petition has received ,
Inquiry into Operation Burnham
Inquiry into the Terrorist Attack on Christchurch Mosques on March .
Inquiry will review key decisions taken by the Government in and
Insights into community funding from Class pokie machine gambling proceeds, down to a district level.
Inspection of Weights and Measures to Department of Labour
Instagram Tips on how to stay safe keep your child safe
Instead, the organisations receive a confirmation that the information provided matches the information held in the passport or driver licence database.
Insti tutional framework
Institut ional assess men t
Institutio nal fr amewor k
Institutional framework
Instrument for a loan to Fire and Emergency New Zealand
Intelligence, Insights and Risk
Intensive supervision for child sex abuse images
Interes t expe nses ( of operating revenues) . . . . .
Interest expe nses ( of operating revenues) . . . . .
Interest expenses ( of ope rating revenues) . . . . .
Interested in the why behind the numbers
Interesting work that benefits you, your community, and all of Aotearoa.
Interim Administrative Report of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into Historical Abuse in State Care and in the Care of Faithbased Institutions
Interim Government Response to Social Services and Community Committee report Petition of Jenn Hooper: Develop Changing Places facilities
Interim Government Response to the Report of the Social Services and Community Committee on Petition of Jenn Hooper Proposal . The paper seeks approval for the attached interim Government response to the Social Services and Community Committees report on Petition of Jenn Hooper. . It also seeks Cabinets agreement for the Department of Internal Affairs to consult with Local Government New Zealand and the Society of Local Government Managers on the recommendations of the Committee, before a final response is lodged with the Cabinet Office. Background . Petition of Jenn Hooper was referred to the Committee on April . The petition requested, That the House of Representatives encourage the Government to support the development of a nationwide network of Changing Places facilities. . Changing Places facilities are highspecification bathrooms designed and built to cater to the needs of people with significant physical impairments. Features include mechanical hoists and adultsized changing tables, and more space around items such as toilets and sinks, as well as wide doors. In partnership with Hamilton City Council and sponsors, in early Ms Hooper oversaw the construction of the first changing places facility in New Zealand at Hamilton Gardens. A second changing place bathroom has just been completed at Westfield Mall in Newmarket, Auckland. . On August the Committee heard from the Department of Internal Affairs (the Department), the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), the Ministry of Health (MoH) and the Office for Disability Issues (ODI). . In their oral submission to the Committee, MoH recognised that initiatives such as Changing Places bathrooms provide clear benefits to the disability community. They supported the intent of the petition, but do not have any responsibility for regulation, funding or delivery of public toilets. ODI supported this comment. MBIE noted that they provide written guidelines for minimum performance building standards. The Department in its oral submission noted that local authorities in New Zealand provide public toilets under section of the Local Government Act . The Department administers the governance framework under which local authorities operate. On this basis, the Department considered that the local government sector itself, through Local Government New Zealand, would be best placed to oversee the development of a network of fully accessible bathrooms if agreed. Proactively released by the Minister for Local Government IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Committee report and recommendations . The Committee presented its report to the House on June . The Committee made three recommendations, which support the substance of the Petition. The Committee recommended the Government: develop a nationwide network of bathroom facilities for those with extensive and complex disabilities that is based on the population density of towns and cities; make available capital funding to support smaller local councils to develop fully accessible bathroom facilities and purchase the required equipment; and require the Ministry of Health and all District Health Boards to review and make changes to policies that result in some outpatients or visitors with extensive and complex disabilities being changed on the floor of standard accessible toilets. The delay of the dissolution of Parliament means a response is due earlier than anticipated . Standing Order requires the Government response to be tabled within working days of the Committee report. . The House was due to be dissolved on August for the election, providing for a response back to the Committee days after Parliament resumed, in approximately early November. The extension of Parliament has meant the response will be instead due on August. The Government is focussed on the COVID response, and consequently, a substantive crossportfolio response cannot be achieved within the remaining timeframe. . To meet standing order requirements, I therefore recommend Cabinet agree to the interim response attached as Appendix A . . A substantive response responding to the three recommendations will be made in . Financial implications . There are no immediate financial implications from tabling the interim Government response. I will address any financial implications when I report back to you with the final response. Legislative implications . There are no legislative implications arising directly from the interim Government response. However, once further work on the Committees recommendations is undertaken, legislative change may be proposed. Again, I will report back to you on this in the final response. Population Implications . There are no immediate population implications arising from the interim Government response. I will address any implications when I report back to you with the final response. Proactively released by the Minister for Local Government IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Human Rights . There are no immediate human rights implications arising from the interim Government response. I will address any implications when I report back to you with the final response. Disability perspective . Physical and mental wellbeing is one of the top five priorities for Budget . The Petition of Jenn Hooper fits within the wellbeing priorities. There are no immediate disability implications arising directly from the interim Government response. I will address the disability perspective more when I report back to you with the final response. Consultation . The Department of Internal Affairs has consulted with the following agencies in developing the interim Government response: Ministry of Health, the Office for Disability Issues and the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment. . The Department considers that input from representatives from the local government sector will be necessary to provide a comprehensive response to the Committees first recommendation. I therefore seek your agreement for the Department to consult with Local Government New Zealand and the Society of Local Government Managers in developing the Government response. Communications and proactive release . As this is an interim Government response I do not intend to issue a media release. These will be developed in conjunction with the final response. Recommendations The Minister of Local Government recommends that the Committee: . note on June the Social Services and Community Committee released its report Petition of Jenn Hooper: Develop Changing Places facilities ; . note that under Standing Order the delay of the dissolution of Parliament means that Government response to the report is due earlier than originally expected, and must be presented to the House by August ; . agree that an interim Government response be provided now which notes that a substantive response will be provided in ; . approve the interim Government response, attached as Appendix A , which gives effect to recommendation above; and . authorise the Department of Internal Affairs to consult with Local Government New Zealand and the Society of Local Government Managers in the preparation of the substantive response, as required.
Interim changes to the Water Services Act, which mean the Te Mana o te Wai hierarchy of obligations in the National Policy Statement for Freshwater Management (NPSFM) will not apply when the Water Services Authority Taumata Arowai sets wastewater standards.
Interloaning collection items
Intermediaries may use the personal information and expected Adverse Actions .
Intermediaries may use the personal information received from the RegistrarGeneral , as specified in
Intermediaries, can reasonably be expected to take any of the following Adverse Actions based on
Intermediary A New Zealand Agency that is a public sector agency (other than a
Internal Affairs (.)
Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua
Internal Affairs Status Report WE March
Internal Affairs Status Report WE February
Internal Affairs Status Report WE March
Internal Affairs Status Report WE August
Internal Affairs Status Report WE December
Internal Affairs Status Report WE February
Internal Affairs Status Report WE June
Internal Affairs Status Report WE September
Internal Affairs Status Report WE November
Internal Affairs Status Report WE April
Internal Affairs Status Report WE August
Internal Affairs Status Report WE July
Internal Affairs Status Report WE April
Internal Affairs Status Report WE June
Internal Affairs Status Report WE October
Internal Affairs Status Report WE March
Internal Affairs Status Report WE August
Internal Affairs Status Report WE December
Internal Affairs Status Report WE February
Internal Affairs Status Report WE June
Internal Affairs Status Report WE September
Internal Affairs Status Report WE February
Internal Affairs Status Report WE May
Internal Affairs Status Report WE November
Internal Affairs Status Report WE April
Internal Affairs Status Report WE August
Internal Affairs Status Report WE July
Internal Affairs Status Report WE May
Internal Affairs Status Report WE January
Internal Affairs Status Report WE May
Internal Affairs Status Report WE April
Internal Affairs Status Report WE June
Internal Affairs Status Report WE October
Internal Affairs Status Report WE March
Internal Affairs Status Report WE February
Internal Affairs Status Report WE June
Internal Affairs Status Report WE September
Internal Affairs Status Report WE February
Internal Affairs Status Report WE March
Internal Affairs Status Report WE May
Internal Affairs Status Report WE April
Internal Affairs Status Report WE November
Internal Affairs Status Report WE August
Internal Affairs Status Report WE July
Internal Affairs Status Report WE May
Internal Affairs Status Report WE January
Internal Affairs Status Report WE April
Internal Affairs Status Report WE June
Internal Affairs Status Report WE October
Internal Affairs Status Report WE March
Internal Affairs Status Report WE February
Internal Affairs Status Report WE June
Internal Affairs Status Report WE September
Internal Affairs Status Report WE November
Internal Affairs Status Report WE March
Internal Affairs Status Report WE May
Internal Affairs Status Report WE April
Internal Affairs Status Report WE August
Internal Affairs Status Report WE July
Internal Affairs Status Report WE May
Internal Affairs Status Report WE April
Internal Affairs Status Report WE July
Internal Affairs Status Report WE June
Internal Affairs Status Report WE October
Internal Affairs Status Report WE March
Internal Affairs Status Report WE August
Internal Affairs Status Report WE December
Internal Affairs Status Report WE June
Internal Affairs Status Report WE September
Internal Affairs Status Report WE May
Internal Affairs Status Report We March
Internal Affairs Status Report Week Ending July
Internal Affairs Tip Off Leads to Huge Canadian Child Porn Seizure
Internal Affairs across portfolios. I seek agreement that the rest (. million) is
Internal Affairs across portfolios. The rest (. million) Would be additional funding
Internal Affairs and MBIE Briefing Government support for social enterprise
Internal Affairs became home to Government Technology Services in , and the Government Chief Information Officer in , both inherited from the State Services Commission, to provide operational and strategic oversight for shared information technology services to all of government.
Internal Affairs briefing
Internal Affairs briefing, and letters from the Chairs of the Council of New Zealand University Librarians (CONZUL) and Library and Information Advisory Commission (LIAC), regarding the management of the National Librarys Overseas Collections
Internal Affairs briefing: Extension of report back for Government Inquiry ( September )
Internal Affairs draft Annual Report
Internal Affairs draft Strategic Intentions
Internal Affairs investigation cracks international child abuse case
Internal Affairs is a strong organisation with a proud history and an exciting future. Within Internal Affairs you will discover a large range of functions and plenty of challenging work. Our staff are highly talented people who work in areas as diverse as citizenship, censorship, and cataloguing.
Internal Affairs provides.
Internal Affairs serves and connects people, communities and government to build a safe, prosperous and respected nation.
Internal Affairs services and information
Internal Affairs to provide funding for the completion of the Royal Commission.
Internal Affairs will have a manageable impact on the Crown funded services that
Internal Affairs, NZ Customs and US Customs Action, Months Jail for Internet Child Pornography Trader
Internal Affairs, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance and net core Crown
Internal Affairs; provided;
Internal AffairsDMS
Internal Affairs Service Innovation Lab had their work recognised at the
Internal Roads within Papakinga Developments
International Publ ic Finance Rating Eval uation Ser vice
International Regulatory Frameworks for Online Content research report
International cooperation sees NZ offender jailed
International operation targets child sexual abuse traders
International operation tracks offender
International studies have suggested that the potential benefit of enabling trusted digital identity in a mature economy is between . and of GD P equivalent. If these figures are applied to New Zealand, the potential value is between . billion and . billion NZD (based on figures). The Department anticipates that the approximate value of digital identity to the New Zealand economy is u p to . billion NZD of GDP equivalent per annum. Low Total Monetised Benefit Difficult to estimate accurately but likely to be High Low Nonmonetised benefits High Low. Digital identity trust frameworks are relatively new developments so there is not a lot of accurate and detailed international evidence around the benefits in this context to refer to. PROACTIVELY RELEASED INCONFIDENCE
International travel for members of the Executive funded from Vote Ministerial Services is approved by Cabinet or in the case of travel to Australia, by the Prime Minister. Travel expenses shown may include any costs for the Minister and any accompanying spouse, staff, Members of Parliament or students where relevant, as these costs are not recorded separately.
International travel for members of the Executive funded from Vote Ministerial Services is approved by Cabinet or in the case of travel to Australia, by the Prime Minister. Travel expenses shown may include costs for the Minister and any accompanying spouse, staff, members of Parliament or students where relevant, as these costs are not recorded separately.
Internet Child Pornography Perpetuates Abuse and Haunts Victims for Life
Internet Child Pornography Sentencing Highlights Users False Views
Internet cafe owner fined for selling and possessing objectionable movies
Internet child abuse offenders should be afraid
Internet collector exposed
Internet. Cloud computing lets an agency access services, such as computing power,
Interpreting the annualquarterly data
Intervention In the year, over , people sought help from Ministryfunded services, for problems due to their own or someone else s gambling. Most of these people were in crisis. If brief interventions in nonclinical settings are included in this analysis, the total increases to more than , people. In the three years to , there was a slight decrease in the total numbers of reported interventions. The decline over the period is attributable to fewer new clients coming forward. The numbers of existing clients receiving interventions has been relatively static over the period. Going further back, the number of people seeking interventions has been relatively stable for five to seven years. Similarly, the proportion of people reporting some form of harmful gambling behaviour in the HLS surveys remained static, at approximately percent of the population, between and . Importantly, these static rates belie the fact that the actual number of people affected by harmful gambling is increasing in line with population growth, and intervention services growth is flat. Similarly, needs assessment and outcomes monitoring reports show that only percent of potential clients for gambling support services (that is, people whose reported harm results in a moderate to high PGSI score) actually access or present at these services. This low service use is also evident for other forms of addiction. Improving intervention and service use rates remains a challenge. It will require further work to address systemic or persistent barriers to access and inequities based on ethnicity or socioeconomic factors. Accessibility for Mori , Pacific and other vulnerable grou ps Analysis of Ministry gambling service administrative data for and shows that the number of gamblers seeking treatment continues to decline, despite the increase in real numbers of people experiencing gambling harm. Table shows the composition of gamblers who sought treatment. Table : Composition of people seeking treatment for gamblingrelated harm , Year Total seeking treatment , , Percent identifying as Europeanother . . Percent identifying as Mori . . Percent identifying as Pacific . . Percent identifying as East Asian . . Percent who were male . . Kupe Data Explorer http:kupe.hpa.org.nz STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Introduced Demand Control Ventilation to reduce energy consumption without impacting the health and safety of the buildings and our taonga.
Introduced a Psychosocial Risk Management Plan to meet our obligations under the Health and Safety at Work Act, protect the mental health of our kaimahi, and improve the psychological environment kaimahi work in
Introducing Regional Deals and next steps
Introducing age differentiation makes local elections more complicated and adds cost Having different eligibility ages for local and parliamentary elections is going to make it more confusing for people to know which elections they are entitled to vote in. Having differentiated ages within the local elections will exacerbate the potential for confusion. Clear commu nications by the Electoral Commission and local authorities will be key to managing this.
Introducing greater central government oversight, economic and quality regulation.
Introduction Our goal is a COVID free New Zealand. New Zealand is presently seeing very few new cases each day. We have now had two consecutive days with zero new cases. We should, however, expect multiple waves as the virus is globally widespread. We remain vulnerable, with no acquired immunity and no firm timeline on a vaccine. We expect the border to be relaxed before we see a vaccine.
Introduction This Government is committed to putting the wellbeing of current and future generations of New Zealanders at the centre of our work. Physical and mental wellbeing is one of the top five priorities for Budget . This work includes improving the terms on which individuals and groups take part in society. Background The Social Services and Community Committee (the Committee) met between May and June to consider the petition of Jenn Hooper. On August , the Committee heard from the Department of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, the Ministry of Health, and the Ministry of Social Development. On June the Committee released its report with three recommendations that support the substance of the Petition. The Committee recommended the Government: develop a nationwide network of bathroom facilities for those with extensive and complex disabilities that is based on the population density of towns and cities; make available capital funding to support smaller local councils to develop fully accessible bathroom facilities and purchase the required equipment; and require the Ministry of Health and all District Health Boards to review and make changes to policies that result in some outpatients or visitors with extensive and complex disabilities being changed on the floor of standard accessible toilets. Government Response The Government has examined the recommendations and notes this is an important issue requiring full consideration across government agencies with disability, Health and Local Government implications. The House was due to be dissolved on August for the election, providing for a response back to the Committee days after Parliament resumed, in approximately early November. The extension of Parliament has meant the response will be instead due on August. A substantive crossportfolio response cannot be achieved within the remaining timeframe. To this end we propose to produce a substantive response in early , but have requested that the Department of Internal Affairs begin consultation with Local Government New Zealand in the meantime. Proactively released by the Minister for Local Government
Introduction from Suzanne Doig, Deputy Chief Executive, Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy I would like to present to you the final decisions of our organisational change process. I appreciate the feedback you have provided during the consultation period and the thought that went into this. It helped refine our thinking and test our assumptions and rationale for what was proposed. I would also like to thank everyone for your professionalism and for the manaakitanga you have extended to each other over the past weeks. These decisions have not been made lightly and I would like to acknowledge all those who are affected by the final decisions that have been made. Why change is necessary Late last year, the Minister of Finance announced an ongoing Fiscal Sustainability Programme to embed a culture of responsible spending across government, requiring us to make permanent baseline reductions from the financial year. In Budget , the Government implemented a reduction of . in the Departments permanent baseline, after Ministers asked us to find more than the initial . savings requested of us. Te Tari identified initiatives to enable us to meet that target. The initiatives broadly covered reducing costs, reducing discretionary spending and finding more efficient ways to deliver our mahi. While the majority of initiatives did not affect our people, some did and resulted in this organisational change that impacts positions and kaimahi. Final decisions have been made This document outlines the final decisions for the Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Branch organisational change, as well as the implementation plan for putting those changes in place. We carefully considered all the feedback received over the consultation period, and now the leadership team and I will be implementing the new structure as outlined in the consultation document with some adjustments. We received submissions of which were group submissions. The common theme of the feedback across all groups was for the retention of roles, as there are concerns that the reduction in staffing will mean that other people, teams or groups will need to pick up work. I acknowledge this, but I am clear that the reduction in capacity means that we will have to deprioritise some work and focus our mahi more narrowly where possible. We also received submissions proposing alternative changes such as reporting line changes, mergingconsolidation of teams, disestablishing vacant positions so we can retain filled positions that were proposed to be disestablished, and the need for new additional resourcing. We have made some changes as a result, but in most cases we were not able to accommodate Section Two: Branch Context and Background The Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy organisational change consultation process began on April . The financial environment we are currently in requires us to operate within reduced Crown funded baselines from July . Opportunities we identified to cut spending in non personnel related costs did not go far enough to meet the cost savings required for the Governments Fiscal Sustainability Programme and the additional emerging cost pressures we are experiencing as a Branch. We therefore had to propose some organisational structure changes to meet the spending reduction required. The following principles were used to form the consultation proposal: . Firstly, closing down vacant positions where possible, some of which have been deliberately held vacant in recent months in anticipation of baseline reductions. . Consolidating management structures and leadership positions where possible, while still ensuring the right level of technical and kaimahi oversight. . Ensuring the right level of capability is retained to deliver the core requirements of the mahi we are accountable for. You will be familiar by now with how the nature of our funding across the Branch varies; some areas are Crownfunded, while others are funded through thirdparty revenue managed through memorandum accounts, or other forms of cost recovery. We can only count reductions in Crownfunded expenditure towards the baseline reductions required of the Department. As many of you noted through the consultation process, the changes proposed for Toi Hiranga amount to more than the . initially sought by the government. That is because many parts of the Branch were already facing significant inflationary cost pressures (for example, the average salary at Te Tari Taiwhenua increased by over from to ; salary increases almost always need to be funded from existing baselines). While groups in the Branch have been absorbing these inflationary costs through savings such as reduced contractor use, reduced travel, and recruitment delays, we had reached the point where we could no longer afford all the roles in the current structure. This has been factored into the final decisions, but we have not drawn a distinction in this final decision document between unfunded roles and roles disestablished to meet baseline reduction requirements. As mentioned earlier, I know the concern remains that the reduced staffing capacity will have flow on effects for kaimahi both within the teams and across the Branch. I reiterate there will be no expectation for kaimahi to do the job of multiple people. The reduction in capacity will mean that work will need to be deprioritised.
Introduction of a revenue cap. Mid onwards
Introduction of minimum standard for Mandatory AccountBased Play in New Zealand casinos
Introduction the gambling regulatory system
Introduction to Digital Safety Operations: Key Risks and Opportunities
Introduction to Fire and Emergency New Zealand policy and monitoring work
Introduction to Offshore Islands portfolio
Introduction to identity policy: key priorities for the next six months
Introduction to local government interventions
Introduction to statutory inquiries and the current Royal Commissions of Inquiry
Introduction to the Request for Information
Introduction to volunteering
Introductory meeting with the Problem Gambling Foundation
Invaluable insights were discovered when a group of Te AitangaaHauiti researchers visited the Alexander Turnbull Library and Archives New Zealand to rediscover their history.
Invercargill City Council
Invercargill model WICS report
Invercargill slide pack WICS report
Investigating how technology could connect volunteers, charities, and funders
Investing in Critical Infrastructure Part
Investing in Critical Infrastructure Part
Investing in Critical Infrastructure Part
Investing in Critical Infrastructure Part
Investing in infrastructure for the digital identity system
Investment Governance Committee:
Investment and Leadership (.)
Invitation to speak at Taituaras Community Wellbeing Forum, May
Invitations issued to all councils
Issue dark mode in iOS resolved If the iPad was running in Dark Mode rather than Light Mode, text would not appear in the App.
Issue ssue resolved Due to time differences and formattin g, the UTCGMT () from the end of the time to rectify the issue .
Issue cache resolved Initially the various APPs had an issue with card names in the iOS Bluetooth cache, due to a slight difference in the setup environment.
Issue sleep mode resolved Putting the cards in to sleep mode immediately after updating the firmware (before seeing other cards) caused the cards to not roll their card logging process. Turning the cards back on did not start logging. (Power down was tested, but not in this precise sequence.) Turning the cards off did not retain the setting of the UTC clock when turned back on.
Issue paged flash memory resolved In some circumstances, with many cards around, a flash memory write exception caused a card reset after the Flash write. The records written were not corrupted, but less records were written, and power consumption was increased. When this issue occurred, th e LED flashed green. This was discovered overnight in two of the four test environments in Australia and the hospital environment in NZ.
Issue last log entry resolved In some circumstances, if logs were not a multiple of four, the last row sent to Dropbox was truncated. Raw, partially formatted data from the App is sent first to the Firebase database, then p assed on to Dropbox in human readable format. We also had an extra row added at the botto m. We just deleted the last two rows so bad data w as not included. Hence, record count was out by up to .
Issue Requirement to consider ward systems
Issue Timing of decisions
Issue Opportunities for community input
Issue Decisionmaking rights and role for Local Government Commission
Issue Discontinuance process and period in force
Issue General ward process Mori ward process
Issue: Experiences of service inequity . The current pattern of water service provision reflects the pattern of local political choices over many decades, which have resulted in significant service inequities for Mori. In the most egregious examples, territorial authorities have laid water pipes past predominantly Mori communities on their way to servicing predominantly Pkeh communities without making any provisions to supply the Mori communities. . This type of discrimination engages Article III of the Treaty. The Treaty obligations of water services entities have been considered by Cabinet CAB MIN and are incorporated in the Water Services Entities Bill. Given these obligations, where the costs of providing services to currently under served communities are not dissimilar to servicing other communities on the network, the water services entities should be rectifying the situation. Ideally this should be done without any additional expense for the community that has experienced this discrimination. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . This undoing of discrimination is important. The choice facing Government is whether to specifically provide for it in primary legislation (over and above the existing Treaty and Te Mana o te Wai requirements) or as a topic to be covered off in a Government policy statement. Ideally, this is not an enduring issue (as it should be rectified in the next decade or so). I propose dealing with this through the Government policy statemen t, given the general legislative Treaty obligations. I have also sought to ensure that all the other legislated policy decisions will allow and enable this redress. In addition, the entities will be required to conduct assessments of the three waters servi ces in their service areas, which I have proposed in my paper, Policy proposals for three waters service delivery legislative settings, through which they must consider equity of service provision including for iwiMori.
Issue: Growth charging . In the current system , growth charges play a significant role in funding growth infrastructure. The two most significant charges for water infrastructure are: . development contributions: a statutory charge under the Local Government Act available exclusively to territorial authorities, levied typically when a resource or building consent is issued; and . infrastructure growth charges: a contractual charge levied by Watercare for anyone connecting to its networks. . The Local Government Act provides detailed principles for the use of development contributions, at the heart of which is that they may only be used for genuine growth assets caused by the development(s) being charged. The Crown is exempt from paying development contributions, except for Kinga Ora. . While rates and volumetric charges form the large majority of revenue directed to the three waters, growth charges in their various forms still provide a significant source of revenue. In the current financial year, growth charges associated with three waters costs are expected to provide around million in revenue across the country, compared to total growth investment of around . billion. About half of that revenue is received by Watercare, broadly in line with Aucklands share of residential development. . Although the three waters reforms will likely change, and may over time reduce, the use of growth charges, the core benefits they provide in delivering infrastructure and housing outcomes will remain. The risks associated with removing them entirely are acute. Although uncertain, it could potentially slow the rate of growth investment and with it, housing development. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . I recommend that water services entities are enabled in statute to use growth charges. . The primary strengths of a statuto ry growth charge are that it: . provides more consistency and certainty across New Zealand as to the approach taken to growth charges, particularly in the near term; . mitigates risk of excessive use of such charges in response to broader system users preference; . provides the Government the ability to design the regime, and allow it to evolve over time, in a way that is supportive of broader Government priorities (relating to residential and commercial development); . removes any possible ambiguity about the appropriateness of growth charges, and thus reduces the risk of challenge of their use; and . provides a mechanism to charge for stormwater growth and to charge prior to connection. . I recommend that the statutory charge is called a Water Infrastructure Contribution (WIC). A statutory approach provides for both clarity and assurance of approach in the near term, with the ability for the system to evolve as national level policy priorities change. . There are three broad options for design of a statutory growth charge: . a development contribution like approach: one modelled closely on development contributions with minor changes a relatively prescriptive regime; . a principles based approach: providing some basic boundaries and guiding principles but providing more flexibility in methodology for water services entities; or . an unconstrained approach: no specific boundaries or direction provided in legislation (similar to Watercares infrastructure growth charges but enabled by legislation). . I am proposing a principles based regime that would sit between the current development contributions m odel and Watercares infrastructure growth charges. I further propose that water services entities be required to issue and consult on a Water Infrastructure Contribution policy that sets out the schedule of charges and the methodology used to set them. I propose that the Crown be exempt from paying water infrastructure contributions, as it is exempt from development contributions under the status quo. . Given the time it may take the newly established water services entities to develop and apply a new policy, I propose that the legislation provide for transitional arrangements that allow to water services entities to set growth charges on the basis of any existing charges used to fund growth infrastructure (including development contributions, infrastructure growth charges and financial contributions) for up to the first three years of operation. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . The principles based approach would be flexible enough to enable growth investment to be more adequately funded than though a more prescriptive regime. Without any constraints, the water services entities could charge excessively beyond what can reasonably be attributed to growth. This risk would be mitigated by a clear set of principles in legislation, the ability of the economic regulator to set guidance and rules if required, and direction through the Government policy statement if appropriate. . Under the Resource Management Act , financial contributions can be required as a condition of resource consents. I recommend that water services entities not be able to impose financial contributions under the Resource Management Act , and that councils no longer be able to impose financial contributions to fund assets vested with water services entities. . The Infrastructure Funding and Financing Act established a new funding and financing model to enable private capital to support the provision of new infrastructure for housing and urban development. I propose that the Infrastructure Funding and Financing Act be amended to enable its use to fund infrastructure to be vested with water services entities. Charging for water infrastructure contributions over time . Development contributions can only be charged at a single point in time. However, levies charged under the Infrastructure Financing and Funding Act can be charged over a period of time, rather than as a one off, and targeted ra tes can be used in a similar way. . I propose that water services entities be able to charge water infrastructure contributions as an annual or quarterly charge rather than a one off. For large growth charges, charging as an annual charge over several years, with the entity financing the upfront costs, may provide a better balance between water entity and development interests and reduce overall financing costs. Triggers for payment . Development contributions can be charged when a resource consent is granted, a building consent is granted, or a service connection is provided. In addition to these, I recommend also allowing water infrastructure contributions to be charged when water andor wastewater network demand increases absent any form of property development. This is enabled under infrastructure growth charges and primarily enables charges when commercial demand increases and would be a useful addition to accurately price increases in demand.
Issue: Should existing rating exemptions apply to water services . Currently local authorities recover the costs of providing water services through rates. . There are some types of land that do not have to pay rates. As listed in Schedule of the Local Government (Rating) Act , this includes land used for: . public gardens, reserves, public halls, land used for games and sports (except horse and greyhound r acing), museums, art galleries, swimming pools, by a local authority; . conservation land and reserves; . state run, notforprofit education; . religious purposes; . a crematorium or burial ground; . district health board land; . marae; . certain uses of Mori freehold land; . roads; . airport runways; . railways and stations; and . land used as part of a wharf. . While this land is non rateable, targeted rates can be charged on this land for water supply, sewage disposal, or refuse collection (but not stormwater). It is unclear to what extent territorial authorities actually charge targeted rates on non rateable land for drinking water and wastewater services. Officials judgement is that most territorial authorities would already be charging non rateable landowners for water services.
Issue: Should water services entity land be non rateable . The land that will be held by water services entities may currently be non rateable because it currently belongs to local authorities. The land could remain non rateable or it could become rateable when it is transferred to the water services entity. . The i ntention of the reforms is that water services are fully funded. In accordance with this general principle, water services entities should pay rates, rather than receive an implicit subsidy from local government. I recommend that land transferred to water services entities should be rateable. However, water services entities will not be required to pay rates on pipes through land they do not own (an interest in land) or on assets located on land they do not own.
Issue: Stormwater charging . Currently, local authorities predominantly charge ratepayers for stormwater services through general rates (either based on capital value or land value) or targeted rates (also often based on capital or land value). Sometimes the targeted rates are applied to specific geographic areas. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . Stormwater has public good character istics and it is difficult to identify service users, therefore it needs to be priced and charged differently to drinking water and wastewater. Stormwater systems are non excludable: it is impossible to exclude people from using and benefiting from them. This makes it difficult to create user charges for stormwater systems. . A key choice in charging for stormwater is whether all properties in a service area should contribute to its costs (at differing levels) or if it should only be paid for by properties that receive drinking water or wastewater services from a water services entity. . Charging all properties in an entitys service area, albeit at different levels, acknowledges the public good nature of stormwater systems with everyone in an area benefiting from them, though the level of benefit will vary. This is my preferred option. . Only charging properties that already receive drinking water or wastewater services would be somewhat simpler from a water services entity billing perspective. However, in most territorial authorities, all properties contribute to the cost of stormwater systems, so this approach is likely to lead to increased bills for water services entity customers compared to the status quo. . I propose the following process for determining the stormwater charge within a water services entity service area: . the water services entity calculates the total cost of delivering stormwater services in its service area based on input methodologies set by the economic regulator; . the charge is apportioned to rateable properties based on: .. the capital value of the property (this is the same methodology as general rates); and .. whether or not the property is connected to a reticulated stormwater network. This criterion enables rural properties to pay less than urban properties, reflecting the lower burden that rural properties place on stormwater systems, and the generally lower level of benefit they receive from them. Alternatively, a system based on geographic zones could be used. . The exact formula for apportioning the ruralurban split or a more fine grained zonal pricing system would be set by the regional representative group , in consultation with the water services entity. . Charging based on rateable value will have significant distributional impacts across regions. Generally, property values are highest in urban areas and lowest in small towns. . Charging properties based on their rateable value would also require that territorial authorities share their rating information with water services entities on a rea sonable cost basis. However, the water services entity would not be expected to make any contribution towards the costs of establishing rateable values. We propose including provisions in legislation to enable this information sharing. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . My officials have very poor information on current stormwater charges across this country, due to a lack of transparency and local authority data. I propose that this new system come into effect no later than July , but that it can be brought into effe ct sooner through regulation. I also propose a regulation making power so that the responsible Minister can put in place an appropriate transitional pricing approach and methodology in the first three years that water services entities are in existence.
Issue: recourse for nonpayment . While a very small sub group may be unable to afford their water bills, there will also be a very small sub group who are unwilling to pay their water bills. It is entirely appropriate that water services entities can recover non payment. Under the status quo, territorial authorities can obtain payment directly from a mortgagee or demand the sale of a property to recover unpaid rates. . I do not recommend that water services entities can obtain payment from the mortgagee or demand the sale of a property to recover unpaid water bills. These forms of recovery are relatively heavy handed and not appropriate for the recovery of water services debt alone. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . I recommend that water services entities follow standard commercial processes for recovering unpaid bills from property owners, modelled on Watercares processes. The obligation to pay a bill will be set out either in statute or in customer agreements (dependent on legal advice and drafting approach). . An escalation regime for nonpayment for domestic customers is recommended as follows: . reminder letters followed by warning notices that outline consequences of further nonpayment, and offer of payment plans; . water restrictions and use of debt collection agencies for prolonged non payment; and . legal action to recove r debts due to the water services entity. . Interest and additional administrative, collection or legal costs may be charged by a water services entity for prolonged nonpayment. . Disconnection will not be an option for dealing with unpaid debt from residential households (but flow restrictions are available). . For commercial customers, the escalation pathway for non payment would be the same as for domestic customers but would include the ability to disconnect water services for non payment. However, this should only apply where there is no domestic element to a commercial supply, and it must not apply where there are shared meters or mixed use scenarios like apartment buildings. . The economic regulator will have a general power to issue guidance on anything relevant to its statutory duties. I would expect that the consumer protectioneconomic regulator would provide guidance to the water services entities on dealing with residential water customers who are in debt, and the service quality code is expected to include the conditions for the provision of water servic es to customers experiencing a form of hardship or other vulnerability, such as obligations of suppliers in dealing with nonpayment. . Debt collection primarily contributes to economic efficiency and equity outcomes. In particular for commercial customers, it is important that prices reflect the costs of that service. If the business is unable to pay the costs of water, then its business model is inefficient and needs reconsideration. . Debt collection also contributes to equity outcomes by ensuring that ther e is not excessive bad debt which would force other consumers (including vulnerable and low income consumers) to pay more for their services than they otherwise should have to. Implementation . My previous paper, Delivering the three waters reforms (July ), explained how the reforms will be implemented. Decisions on the proposed approach were made through that paper CAB MIN . Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . The proposals in this paper, my accompanying paper, Policy proposals for three waters service delivery legislative settings, and the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs paper, Economic Regulation and Consumer Protection in the Three Waters Sector, form important parts of the comprehensive approach to implementing the three waters reform programme, which was originally considered in a suite of papers in . These proposals need to be progressed if the overall programme is to be delivered effectively and within the desired timeframe. Financial implications . The proposals made in this paper have one quantified financial implication for the Crown. The proposed legislative changes to the Rates Rebate Scheme will result in an additional . million of expenditure in that Scheme, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance and net core Crown debt. Legislative implications . Cabinet has already made several decisions that have been included in the Water Services Entities Bill. I am planning a second piece of legislation to support the three waters reform programme.
Issue: should undeveloped and unconnected properties be charged for water services . There is a question about whether properties should attract drinking water and wastewater charges situations where there is not an active connection. These situations are: . an undeveloped property that is in an area with reticulated services but that has never been connected to the network; . an unoccupied property that wishes to disconnect from services while unoccupied; and . an occupied property that chooses to disconnect for a substantial length of time and selfsupply. . I propose that all properties that are serviceable by water services entities networks should have to pay a contribution to those networks. They receive a benefit from the network in their increased property value, and from any fire hydrants near them. They should contribute to the network that creates that benefit. They could be charged at a lower rate in recognition of their non consumption, but they still ought to pay for the possibility that they can connect to the networks at any time. The water services entity also has no ability to refuse the connection (so long as there is a pre exist ing connection point such as a toby). If there is insufficient capacity in the network to connect a property, then it would not meet the definition of serviceable. . An exception to this serviceability charge should be made for non rateable land. Land that is per cent rateable should be liable to per cent of the charge. I also propose removing serviceability charges on Mori freehold land. . These exceptions would support the general policy of unrated land not being burdened with charges when they are not receiving any services.
Issues may be referred by the Responsible Minister or identified by the Commission itself.
It also establishes the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Authority (Trust Framework Authority) as the regulator for accredited digital identity service providers in Aotearoa New Zealand.
It can impact educational attainment, health, and overall wellbeing.
It contains links to old andor superseded documents for reference purposes only.
It includes Thuhu Preserving the Nations Memory delivering a fitforpurpose, resilient archival facility in Wellington to enable the preservation of collections and joinedup, collaborative services for users.
It is collectively led by the Executive Leadership Team and supported by three governance subcommittees with wellestablished governance principles and protocols. This includes clear and understood terms of reference and a comprehensive declaration of interest process.
It is critical that adoption levels are high in all communities within New Zealand. If Pasifika communities have low levels of adoption, for example, we will have reduced visibility and ability to trace contacts in these communities.
It is evident that the catchment to tap focus in the Melbourne context is supported by
It is expected that the Inquiry will conduct an initial public hearing in the Hawkes Bay in the coming weeks.
It is formatted to be easily digestible. If you require an alternative format contact
It is important this risk is not overstated.
It is important to note that while most parents
It is intended that the Department of Internal Affairs will provide future information on the expenses of members of the Executive on a quarterly basis.
It is not a breach of Information Privacy Principle if a Party uses personal information
It is not a breach of Information Privacy Principle if a Party discloses personal information
It is not a breach of Information Privacy Principle if a Party collects personal information
It is not a breach of information privacy principle for information collected by one
It is not a breach of information privacy principle for DIA to provide personal
It is not a breach of information privacy principle for one party to disclose
It is not a breach of information privacy principle if personal information is
It is not a breach of information privacy principle where IR collects personal
It is, however, technically possible to have wearables like CovidCard interoperate with Android phones when running a customised app such as Singapores TraceTogether protocol. This approach is being considered by the Singaporean Government. We consider that an approach that allows users to choose apps if they have the right phone, or hardware if they dont, would create
It noted the Melbourne example was not fully comparable to New Zealand entities as they do not provide wholesale water and waste water services. However, Melbournes population exceeds that of New Zealand.
It oversees core support services and functions for our workplaces, including property management, health and safety, information management and security. The Mori Capability Uplift Programme also sits within the branch.
It recognises the importance of local decision making and flexibility for communities and councils to determine how their water services will be delivered in the future.
It should also be noted the cited delays are optimistic estimates as many are based on contact tracing capacity during periods of low caseloads (e.g. Alert levels and ) and often exclude metrics from cases where symptom onset cannot be defined, biasing results towards lower values (when symptom onset cannot be defined it is likely due to longer delays in contact tracing performance metrics). Manual contact tracing is too slow to identify and isolate close contacts based on virus transmission characteristics and the delays in key contact tracing performance metrics. It is simply not possible for manual contact tracing to maintain New Zealands elimination strategy in the event of a major
It takes longer than initially anticipated to pass new legislation to govern the Trust Framework Legislation for other industries takes on greater urgency in the post Covid environment, delaying the Trust Framework Bill by a number of years The powers and parameters of the Trust Framework are not formalised on schedule Legislation will be necessary to formalise the Trust Framework and its parameters and powers in the long term In phase one of the Trust Framework the small number of entities participating will be doing so in an informal man ner. This is not considered a long term solution , as the Trust framework will not be legally enforceable during this phase. This informal model is intended to be employed until such time as the Framework becomes formalised in legislation. It is highly likely that this informal relationship can be sustained for a term longer than originally anticipated if there are del ays to the implementation of new legislation. This risk is considered to be low probability, low impact .
It was accompanied by a brochure called Charlies Dog Safety Tips for Kids, as part of a wider public education campaign, following several highprofile dog attacks.
It will also consider any necessary changes to prevent or minimise similar incidents in the future.
It will do this while ensuring a strong emphasis on meeting economic, environmental and water quality regulatory requirements.
Its also an opportunity to look at how we ensure the Treaty of Waitangi Te Tiriti o Waitangi is honoured and to improve how we partner with and support Mori to achieve their own aspirations.
Its difficult to get precise statistics on identity theft and crime but its estimated that thousands of New Zealanders are victims of identity theft annually and the resulting identity crimes may cost the New Zealand economy in excess of million every year. Identity theft as a crime is difficult to prosecute people for (it may have been committed overseas or online) and it can also take a long time to resolve.
Its important that people and organisations can share their digital identity information safely and securely. Organisations receiving digital identity information need to know that the information can be trusted.
Its important that people can share their digital identity information safely and securely. Accredited digital identity services have shown that they meet certain rules and regulations under the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act, to ensure that peoples privacy is protected.
Iwi Collective Workplans from Entity A and B
Iwi Leaders Group and other relevant parties. See also initiatives under section g below.
Iwi Leaders Group, is working on guidance to support the public services capability
Iwi, hap and communities across New Zealand are safe, resilient and thriving
Iwi, hap and communities across New Zealand are safe, resilient and thriving We work closely with other agencies in their regulatory and enforcement roles, including the New Zealand Police, New Zealand Customs Service, international law enforcement agencies and other regulators. Cooperation, information sharing and joint operations in areas such as the investigation and prosecution of child sexual exploitation, money laundering and illegal gambling result in perpetrators being brought before the courts and in some cases serious crimes being prevented or disrupted. This includes participation in the Violent Crimes Against Children International Task Force. We also work with a broad range of stakeholders involved in regulated systems, including regulated parties, as well as other individuals and organisations that contribute to efective regulatory outcomes. The partnership between the Lottery Grants Board (administered by the Department) and Te Puni Kkiri is aimed at supporting the cultural and physical revitalisation of marae. Further partnerships across the funding sector are being explored. We work alongside iwi, hap and community groups through our partnership approach to community development. The Department also leads a twoyear digital graduate programme with an annual intake of between and graduates from diverse cultural and social backgrounds. The goal is to create a cadre of digital leaders that spearheads culture change by embedding digital thinking, breaking down traditional job roles, and applying te ao Mori principles and practices. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
Iwi, hap and communities across New Zealand are safe, resilient and thrivingThe wellbeing of hap, iwi and Mori is improved through a strong and enduring MoriCrown partnership that is equitable and positiveAt the forefront of regulatory excellence, so that Key focus areas and strategic initiatives Focus area one: Embedding our regulatory foundations See page Focus area two: Strengthening our capability See page Focus area three: Aligning our culture and purpose See page Focus area four: Harnessing our evidence, insights and evaluation See page Focus area five: Maximising our relationships See page Contents Introduction Regulatory Services Group Our strategic direction Background . Strategic context . The Strategy . Our vision . Our purpose . Our operating principles . About RSG How we will work Business capabilities . Channels . Business processes . Business systems . Stakeholders . Measuring progress Approach to change Three year work programme
IwiMori Engagement (October )
IwiMori interests and engagement
IwiMori representatives
J Table J and J guide including stormwater
JRDIA Information Sharing Agreement Page
Jail Sentence for Child Pornography Trader
Jail Term Imposed: Department Thwarts New Technology
Jail for child sex abuse images a warning to offenders you will be caught
Jail term for child sex abuse image collection
Jail term for sexually explicit pictures
Jail term shows development of New Zealands censorship law
Jail terms for child sex abuse offences
Jail time for child exploitation collection
Jail time for distribution, making, and possession of child sexual abuse files
Jailed for child sex abuse images
Jailed for child sex abuse pictures
Jailed for child sexual abuse pictures
Jailed for offering child sex abuse movies
Jailed for online sex abuse pictures
Jailed for possessing and making child sex abuse movies
Jailed offender advised how to hide and encrypt electronic pictures
Janise HineKapetiu Eketone
John is a career public servant whose numerous roles have included: Deputy State Services Commissioner, CEO of the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (CERA), and one of the Controllers of the allofgovernment response during the COVID pandemic. He also worked for over years at the Department of Conservation.
Joint Cabinet Papers of the AttorneyGeneral and Minister of Internal Affairs Establishing the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Attack on Christchurch Mosques on March May, April and March
Joint New ZealandAustralian Operation Against Child Pornography
Joint Statement from the Prime Minister and the Speaker of the House of Representatives
Joint Three Waters Steering Committee
Joint Three Waters Steering Committee Terms of Reference
Joint operation nabbed sexual abuse image offender
Jordans story onboarding for a jobvisiting a worksite
Julie has a background in marketing, communications, funding, and sales in the horticulture industry. Julie is a member of the New Zealand Institute of Directors.
Julie is based in the Hawkes Bay and has strong experience and connections with the production and rural sector. She was a senior manager at Heinz Watties for over a decade and is currently Director of Graham Greene Limited, which owns interests in several Fruit Intellectual Property companies in China and New Zealand.
July decision to grant Peter Thiel citizenship
July to October Regular update emails, webinars, meetings and technical reference groups
JulyAugust Nationwide workshop series one: Introduction to the Reform Programme and Stimulus Package
Jurisdictions under increased monitoring
Justice (MOJ), Ministry for Primary Industry (MPI), Ministry of Social Development
Justice Cabinet paper Further policy decisions on the Electoral (Voting Age) Legislation Bill
Kaikoura District Council
Kaikoura model WICS report
Kaikoura slide pack WICS report
Kaimahi are encouraged and supported to participate in employeeled networks like the Tangata Whenua Network, Taha Moana Pacific Network, Womens Network, DIAsians and Authentic Self (LGBTQ). In , the AND (Accessibility, Neurodiversity, Disability) Network was established.
Kaimahi were encouraged to share pepeha through mihimihi and whanaungatanga, givingitago as a focus and supporting pronunciation of te reo Mori
Kaimahi were supported to attend the New Zealand history programme and wnanga on the Treaty of Waitangi Te Tiriti o Waitangi of Waitangi Wall Walks
Kaimahi were supported to enrol on free Te Ara Reo Mori (Mori language learning pathways) online classes levels with Te Wnanga o Aotearoa
Kainga Ora Trust Tairwhiti
Kaipara District Council Waikato Regional Council
Kaipara model WICS report
Kaipara slide pack WICS report
Kaitiakitanga (Guardianship): We protect the integrity of the process and handle all information with care, ensuring privacy and ethical management of complaints.
Karen Hope Cross Director Office of the Chief Executive Office of the Chief Executive
Karen HopeCross Director, Office of the Secretary
Karen HopeCross is Director, Office of the Secretary. She supports the Secretary to lead the Department and undertake his leadership responsibilities across the public sector. This includes supporting the performance of the Department as a member of the Executive Leadership Team and facilitating effective relationships with other stakeholders and agencies. The Director also provides strategic advice to the Secretary, may lead special projects, and acts as the Secretarys delegate when required.
Karen joined the Department in and has previously held roles in several branches. Prior to her time with Te Tari Taiwhenua, Karen worked at TelstraClear. Karen holds a Bachelor of Business (Management).
Kawerau Coast model WICS report
Kawerau Coast slide pack WICS report
Kawerau District Council Waipa District Council
Keep It Real Online goes multilingual
Keep an eye on our careers page for an opportunity to be part of the Summer Intern Programme .
Keep an eye on this page for more information about Regional Deals as work progresses.
Keep your family safe online
Keeping New Zealand in Business for Good
Keeping children safe and informed about events related to the US Inauguration
Keeping our people healthy, safe and well
Key Information and instructions
Key achievements in
Key areas included in the Act are:
Key assum ptions you have provided to us include:
Key components of Local Water Done Well
Key digital modernisation programmes in the public service
Key features of the new system
Key findings from the evaluation found:
Key focus area and strategic initiative Harnessing our evidence, insights and evaluation Develop and implement Data, Research and Evaluation Strategy Identify data, evaluation, insights and intelligence capability requirements for the future Develop and commence implementation of plan to address data, evaluation, insights and intelligence capability requirements Continue to implement plans to address data, evaluation, insights and intelligence capability requirements Maximising our relationships Partner with hap, iwi and Mori to understand their experience with RSG regulatory systems and jointly identify priority areas for improvement Develop RSG and systemspecific stakeholder engagement plans with a key focus on identifying and collaborating with partners and influencers Develop scope for external engagement surveyresearch, develop and implement plan in response to findings Undertake external stakeholder engagement surveyresearch, develop and implement plan in response Regulatory Services Group Strategy
Key focus areas and strategic initiatives
Key indicator reporting requirement Proposed performance Time from case symptoms onset to test, stratified by ethnicity. Proposed performance: days in Proportion of contacts quarantined within days of symptom onset of index case (or exposure to index case). Time from PHU notification of case to contact identification hours in Time from contact identification to isolation hours in
Key issues You previously requested information on international approaches to regulating online content. Internationally, governments are seeking to modernise their media content regulatory regimes to mitigate the risk of harm posed by online media con tent. Recently, there has been a proliferation of international proposals for developing new comprehensive regulatory frameworks for online content , particularly across Europe. These proposals place greater accountability on online platforms for the user content they host. International regulatory frameworks for online content offer opportunities for l essons and alignment. However, regulating online content is complex and since most of these proposals have not been enacted yet, it is like ly that the effectiveness of different approaches and any unintended consequences will not be known for some time.
Key measures The digital identity ecosystem can reflect the needs and requirements of a broad range of stakeholders. Barriers to participation in the digital identity ecosystemwhether they be social, financial, or technicalare minimised, without compromising security or privacy. Everyone is able to use digital identity services without risk of discrimination or exclusion.
Key messages about Ttai Aronga
Key performance indicators
Key points from GMANZ gambling wellbeing analysis
Key statistics based on Governing the Victorian Water Industry show that:
Key to Redaction Codes : Section ()( f)(iv) information to maintain the confidentiality of advice Section ()(b)(ii) commercially sensitive information Section ()( g)(i) information to maintain the free and frank expression of opinions
Key to Redaction Codes: Section ()( g)(i): free and frank expression of opinions
Key to Redaction or Withholding Codes: Section ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protects the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials. Section ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown. Section ()(h) to maintain legal professional privilege.
Kia Toipoto Closing Gender, Mori, Pacific, and Ethnic Pay Gaps Action Plan
Kia Toipoto Gender pay action plan
Kia whai take ng mahi katoa
Kinship and relationships. This principle is nurtured through shared experiences and working together, which provides people with a sense of belonging.
Knowledge and Information
Knowledge and Information Services
Knowledge, Information, Research Technology policy (including library, archives and public records policy)
Ko t Te Tari Taiwhenua he whakarato
Ko t te Tari Taiwhenua he whakarato me te hono i ng iwi, ng hapori me te kwanatanga ki te hanga motu haumaru, tnui, whai mana hoki.
Kohikohinga Krero appointment
Kotahitanga (Unity): We work collaboratively and ensure all parties involved in the complaints process are aligned towards resolving issues effectively.
Kupu Whakataki: Minita m Te Tari Taiwhenua Foreword: Minister of Internal Afairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Afairs plays a role in the everyday lives of New Zealanders from birth to death, touching on big life events in between. This includes managing and protecting identity information like birth and marriage certificates and passports. The Department is working to make it easier for New Zealanders to access government services as our experience from the COVID pandemic demonstrates the value and increased need for streamlining and integrating services online. It also plays a significant role in protecting New Zealanders by keeping them safe online and focusing on reducing harm in our communities through compliance work across digital safety, financial transactions, charities and gambling regulatory regimes. I know the Departments mahi will continue to provide value across its many services including public recordkeeping, preserving and making our documentary heritage accessible, library services, community advice and development and the administration of grants. I look forward to continuing to work closely with the Department as it delivers its roles and functions on behalf of the people and Government of New Zealand. Statement of Responsibility I am satisfied that the information on strategic intentions prepared by the Department of Internal Afairs is consistent with the policies and performance expectations of the Government. Tauk Kawenga Kei te rata ahau ko ng mhiohio m ng koronga rautaki kua whakaritea e Te Tari Taiwhenua kei te hngai ki ng kaupapahere me ng taumata hei whakatutuki a te Kwanatanga. Hon Jan Tinetti Minister of Internal Afairs October Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
Kpehu Marae, near Mititai in the Kaipara, was opened in . After years, it needed urgent renovation and upgrading. Due to COVID and health and safety concerns, it had been closed since November . Kpehu Marae was awarded a . million grant from the Oranga Marae Fund to complete urgent renovations and upgrades to the maraes facilities.
Kpiti Coast District Council
Kpiti Coast model WICS report
Kpiti Coast slide pack WICS report
Ktui Aotearoa peoples network kaharoa
LAKE TAUP HARBOURMASTER
LC ratin g AAAStable A AAAStable A AStableA AAStableA
LEG MIN Ministerial Response to the Petition of Reality Check
LEG Paper: Passport (Fees) Amendment Regulations
LEGMIN Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commercial Video on Demand) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction Portfolio: Internal AffairsCONFIRMED
LEGISLATION AND REGULATION
LEGISLATION WE ADMINISTER
LG Status Report WE May
LG Status Report WE April
LG Meeting day priorities repeal of water services legislation and supporting material (Nov)
LG Initial briefing responsibilities for Taumata Arowai and the Water Services Act (Dec)
LG Addressing issues relating to longterm plans, to give effect to Government policy on water services (Nov)
LG Local Water Done Well Service Delivery Models (Nov)
LG Initial draft Cabinet paper, for feedback day plan: Repeal of the Water Services Entities Act (Dec)
LG Support material for Cabinet on December (Dec)
LG Water services system future legislation (Dec)
LG Further advice on water services delivery plans (Dec)
LG Rural drinking water programme update (Dec)
LG Regulatory approach to small drinking water supplies (Dec)
LG Departmental and Ministerial consultation for the draft Water Services Legislation Repeal Bill and draft Cabinet Legislation Committee paper (Jan)
LG Water Services Legislation Repeal Bill and Cabinet Paper Approval to lodge (Jan)
LG Water Services Acts Repeal Bill: overview of House stages (Feb)
LG Options for reducing the regulatory burden on small drinking water suppliers (Feb)
LG Revision to the Water Services Acts Repeal Bill Approval to lodge (Feb)
LG Policy decisions on Water Service Delivery Plans for inclusion in Bill (Feb)
LG Foundational information disclosure regime for water services (Feb)
LG Proposed Local Government Act amendments to support the establishment of joint water services councilcontrolled organisations (Feb)
LG Summary of policy decisions for the Local Government Water Services (Transitional Provisions) Bill Cabinet paper (Feb)
LG Foundational Information Disclosure decisions for Local Government Water Services (Transitional Provisions) Bill (Feb)
LG Initial advice assistance and intervention in relation to local government water services delivery (Feb)
LG Policy decisions on Water Service Delivery Plans for inclusion in Bill (Feb)
LG Authorisation for water services professionals repeal of statutory timeframes (Mar)
LG The role of Taumata Arowai in wastewater and stormwater regulation and standard setting (Mar)
LG Online call with Mayors to discuss Bill decisions (Mar)
LG Local Government Water Services Bill scope and process (Mar)
LG Water service delivery vehicles (Apr)
LG Planning and accountability for local government water service providers (Ap)
LG Water Services Regulatory Systems Operating Model (Apr)
LG Seeking amendments to the infringement provisions in the Water Services Act (Apr)
LG Easing regulatory burden on water services operations: Potential amendments to the Water Services Act (May)
LG Summary of policy decisions to for stage Cabinet papers (Apr)
LG Reducing the regulatory burden on small drinking water suppliers (May)
LG Legislative requirements for water services delivery vehicles (May)
LG Assistance and intervention in relation to local government water services delivery proposals for Bill Cabinet paper (May)
LG Water service delivery vehicles pricing and charging (May)
LG Planning and accountability for local government water service providers further details on proposals (May)
LG Stormwater services future management arrangements (May)
LG Bill remaining policy decisions for stage Cabinet papers (May)
LG Water Services Delivery Plans: Update (May)
LG Summary of amendments to the Water Services Act and associated legislation in relation to Taumata Arowais roles and responsibilities (May)
LG Use of standard and modular design for water infrastructure (Jun)
LG Bill : Legislative options for functions and powers relating to infrastructure and local authority regulatory powers (May)
LG Bill Summary of policy decisions to for stage July Cabinet paper (Jun)
LG Longterm contractual agreements for water service providers (Jun)
LG Water service delivery vehicles remaining charging issues and other matters (Jun)
LG Tax treatment of service delivery vehicles (Jun)
LG Growth charging by water organisations (Jun)
LG Supplementary briefing on legislative options for water services functions and powers for Bill (Jun)
LG Stormwater services Further matters for Bill (Jun)
LG Mixeduse rural water schemes (Jul)
LG Options for further changes to the Taumata Arowaithe Water Services Regulator Act and Water Services Act for Cabinet consideration in July (Jul)
LG Wastewater environmental performance standards: single standard approach (Jul)
LG Mixeduse rural water schemes further advice (Jul)
LG Further advice on incorporating cost considerations into Taumata Arowai regulatory practice (Jul)
LG Exemptions from minimum requirements for water organisations (Jul)
LG Further advice Application of Te Mana o te Wai to Taumata Arowai and drinking water suppliers (Jul)
LG Amendments to the Mori Advisory Group under the Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act (Aug)
LG Objectives for local government water service providers (Aug)
LG Tax implications of water organisation distributions and exemptions from minimum requirements (Aug)
LG Agreeing the policy and legislative approach for wastewater and stormwater standards (Sep)
LG Consumer trust model for water organisation ownership (Sep)
LG Local Government (Water Services) Bill Giving effect to Treaty settlements and other Treaty obligations relating to water services (Oct)
LG Implementing the National Engineering Design Standards (Sep)
LG Wellington City Council issues and options ( October )
LGCycloneRecoverydia.govt.nz
LGFA is only assessed in s cenarios a nd ) .
LGNZ All of Local Govt meeting, February
LGNZ Combined Sector Meeting
LGNZ Combined Sector meeting on May
LGNZ Rural and Provisional Sector LGNZ Metro Sector meetings
LGNZ Zone Meeting on March
LGNZ Zone Meeting Speech and QAs
LGNZ meeting Key areas for discussion
LGNZ meeting, June
LGOIMA Bill: First reading speech, legislative statement, and proactive release
Lake Taupo (Crown Facilities, Permits and Fees) Regulations
Lake Taup Harbourmaster
Lake Taup Harbourmasters Office
Lake Taup Navigation Bylaw
Lake Taup harbourmaster
Land Access Provisions Water NZ Issues
Land access and connection powers and bylaws for new water organisations
Land information New Zealand Ministry of Transport
Last February
Later commencement After discussions between official s and the Electoral Commission on implementation timing, we do not consider it is feasible to implement the changes in the Bill in time for the loca l elections. To achieve that goal, all system changes would need to be operational by March . This does not allow enough time for im plementation scoping and des ign, budget processes to secure funding, and delivery (this is discussed further below at paragraphs , and ).
Latest proactively released information on the Department of Internal Affairs website
Latest release ( September ):
Launching the licensing process
Law Commission Review of Surrogacy
Lead Agency The lead agency for this Agreement for the purposes of section of
Lead Agency The lead agency for this Agreement for the purposes of section H() of
Leader of the Houses Office
Leaders play a critical role in creating a culture where kaimahi feel they can perform at their best.
Leadership of the overall strategy and direction for the Governments digital modernisation and digital service delivery
Learn about builtin accessibility tools and features in Microsoft technologies like Windows.
Learn about how we work to prevent online child sexual exploitation and educate people on the issue.
Learn about the Voluntary Principles.
Learn about the filtering system that blocks websites known to host child sexual abuse material.
Learn about the legislation and legal processes that underpin our response to onlinhe child sexual exploitation.
Learn more and keep up with the process by clicking the button (link) below.
Learn what a rates rebate is, how much it is and how you get it.
Leaving a gang can be a difficult and complex
Led by the Department of Internal Affairs, Operation Cargo uncovered a transnational criminal network of scammers who were responsible for most of the SMS scams in New Zealand.
Legend for outcome indicators
Legislated pricing principles would guide tariff setting decisions . I recommend setting out pricing principles in legislation. These are enduring principles that would inform price setting . The proposed principles have been drawn from a review of legislated principles in other jurisdictions, including the OECD, England, Scotland, and Ireland. . The suggested principles are: . Simplicity . Tariffs should be simple, transparent and easy to understand for consumers. . Non discrimination . No undue preference shown to or no undue discrimination against, any class of customers, so that purchasers of services with the same cost pay the same price (with the exception that a water services entity may charge lower (or no) growth charges to Mori communities, if this is to remedy an historic inequity in service provision). Customers in different places are not different classes of customer, if a decision has been made to geographically average their prices. . Full cost recovery . Tariffs should reflect full cost recovery in the long run: the price for each service reflects an appropriate contribution to the full underlying efficient cost of delivering that service so that over time the full efficient costs of providing that service across all users is recouped (except for growth charges which are not intended to fully recover costs). Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . Resource efficiency . Tariffs should promote resource efficiency: prices should generally be structured to signal to customers the costs associated with their water use decisions. Using water efficiently contributes to Te Mana o te Wai, by extracting less water from ecosystems, and reduces climate impacts. . While not requiring volumetric charging and metering, application of the resource efficiency principle will likely result in more focus on the relationship between price and consumption. I included this principle based on the advice of the Central Local Government Three Waters Steering Committee. They see resource efficiency as very important for promoting Te Mana o te Wai and better managing overall consumption of water, thereby avoiding or deferring the need for future investment. I regard this as an enabling principle. Each water services entity will make its own decision on whether to introduce meters and volumetric charges in areas where they are not already present, in consultation with communities. . I propose that the pricing principles come into effect at the same time as the information disclosure requirements are introduced through the new economic regulation regime (likely July ). This would avoid excessive change and disruption in the first few years of operation, as well as giving the economic regulator time to issue input methodologies, determinations and guidance. In the period prior to this, proposals are set out from paragraph to enable direct regulation of charges.
Legislation Committee for the period ended November :
Legislation Committee paper: seeking approval to make January
Legislation Design and Advisory Committee.
Legislation and Compliance:
Legislation and legal process
Legislation and regulation
Legislation for digital identity services makes it easier for New Zealanders to safely share information when accessing online and inperson services.
Legislation reassessment Gambling (Definition of Remote Interactive Gambling) Amendment Bill
Legislation that we administer, classified by Portfolio, as at June .
Legislation we administer
Legislation) Bill for the Legislative Programme CABMIN refers. My
Legislative Implications The Bill will amend the Local Electoral Act , and will contain consequential amendments to the Electoral Act , the Local Electoral Regulations , the Local Government Act , and the Sale and Supply of Alcohol Act . The Bill will also require amendments to some local Acts.
Legislative implications The Bill will amend the Local Electoral Act , and will contain consequential amendments to the Electo ral Act , the Local Electoral Regulations , the Local Governm ent Act the Juries Act and the Sale and Supply of Alcohol Act . The Bill will also require amendments to some local Acts.
Legislative implications . None Implementation . The funding proposals in this paper are an integral part of implementing the three waters reform programme. These proposals need to be progressed if the overall programme is to be delivered effectively and within the desired timeframe. Impact analysis
Legislative implications . The selfidentification SOP will be incorporated in the Bill, which will re enact the BDMRR Act . The Bill has a Category priority (to be passed this year if possible) in the legislation programme. . New regulations will need to be developed to give full effect to the self identification proposals. There will also be amendments to the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Prescribed Information) Regulations to match the legislative changes regarding the process for amending registered sex . Policy decisions on these regulation s will likely be sought in . . As discussed above, an amendment will be required to the Corrections Regulations . Impact analysis Regulatory Impact Statement . Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS) has been prepared and attached to this Cabinet paper (Ap pendix B). The Department of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Analysis Panel (the Panel) has reviewed the RIS in accordance with the quality assurance criteria set out in the CabGuide. The Panel considers that the information and analysis summarised in the RI S partially meet s the quality assurance criteria : ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of The RIS clearly explains complex concepts using plain English and is concise relative to the nature of the issues discussed. It convincingly describes the issues and sets out the full range of options. Assumptions, constraints and uncertainties are clearly stated and it provides balanced analysis. Complete information is provided setting out likely costs, where they fall, risks and mitigation measures. Time constrains owing to ministerial direction has meant officials have been unable to undertake full cons ultation on the preferred option, however the RIS addresses this deficiency to some extent by drawing on available research as well as previous submissions to the Select Committee on this issue. The RIS identifies a lack of full consultation as a deficienc y and aims to address it as part of further consultation when developing regulations. Within this limitation and broader context the RIS clearly articulates the risks and trade offs involved. Climate Implications of Policy Assessment . The Climate Implicatio ns of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team has been consulted and confirms that the CIPA requirements do not apply to this proposal as there is no direct emissions impact. Population Implications . Feedback from members of the public who are opposed to self identif ication suggest it may encroach on the rights of women (see Appendix A ). The Human Rights Commission recently suggest ed that the more significant concerns regarding gender impacts are the effects of the current policy settings on the lives of transgender people. . As set out above, it is important that the self identification process also applies to children and young people . The proposed additional requirements for children and young people are to ensure that they understand the amendment and that it is based on their own decision s about their gender. . As set out above, no specific consultation with population groups, including young people and Mori, Pacific and ethnic communities on introducing selfidentification has occurred. I acknowledge that this is not ideal . Efforts will be made to support young people, Mori and other communities to engage in the Select Committee process. . These communities will be engaged during regulation development. Determining the number and terminology of sex markers will he lp empower tino rangatiratanga or self determination for M ori. Human Rights Implications . Changing to a self identification process will have a positive impact on the rights of transgender and intersex people. It will bring the process to amend registered sex in line with international human rights discourse, including: . the International Covenant for Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant for Economic, Social and Cultural rights, to which New Zealand is a party these provide that all people have the right to self determination ; and
Less reliance on inperson and paperbased services.
Letter from the Controller and AuditorGeneral October
Letter from the Minister of Internal Affairs to the Acting Prime Minister and AttorneyGeneral ( July )
Letter from the Minister of Internal Affairs to the Minister of State Services ( July )
Letter from the Minister of Internal Affairs to the Ministers of Finance and State Services ( July )
Letter from the Minister of State Services to the Minister of Internal Affairs
Letter relating to the Removal and Disposal Policy Advisory Group
Letter to the Chair of the Fire and Emergency New Zealand Board on your expectations during and following mediation
Letter to the Leader of the Opposition seeking selection of a representative for the Lottery Grants Board
Letter to the Minister of Finance about Digitsing Government portfolio baseline cost savings
Letters acknowledging resignations from the Fire and Emergency Board and the appointment of two new members
Letters of Congratulation for the CVS Honours List
Level , Hastings Street, Napier South, Napier.
Level , Col lins S t
Levypaying gambling sectors Since , the levy has applied to four gambling sectors: noncasino gaming machine (NCGM) operators , casinos, the New Zealand Racing Board and the New Zealand Lotteries Commission. We recommend that these four sectors remain as the levy paying gambling sectors for the levy period commencing July . The Minister of Internal Affairs has also instructed the Department to review provisions governing online gambling and the class (NCGM) gambling regulatory framework . The Ministry is providing a harm m inimisation perspective into these reviews, which may result in changes to levy paying sectors . The Act anticipates s uch change ( section ()(a) refers). The levy rates and levy recovery Section of the Act prescribe s a relatively complex formula to calculate the share that each levypaying sector will pay towards the cost of the Strategy, and to calculate each sectors levy rate . This includes consideration of player expenditure (the money lost by players in each se ctor), presentations (the number of customer presentations for help to gambling harm services attributed to each sector) , the total cost of the Strategy to the Ministry and any over or under payment of the levy by each sector in the levy periods to . For the period to June , each gambling sector is forecast to have overpaid its share of the levy funding required when the levy was set. The levy formula treats any over recovered levy amount from a sector as a credit against that sectors levy liability in the next levy period. The overrecover ed amount is . million , made up of a forecast . million extra in levy payments to Inland Revenue and a million underspend of the current appropriation, by June . The underspent amount will be expense transferred into . Given the total cost of the Strategy for to is . million, this leaves the total amount to be raised in sector levy payments to maintain fiscal neutrality as . million. The proposed weighting s A key decision is required on the levy weighting s. The weighting s do not affect either the total levy amount require d or the Ministrys appropriation and the services it purchases. They only determine the portion of the total levy amount each levy paying sector will pay towards the total cost of the Strategy . This portion of the total levy amount is divided by that sectors forecast expenditure to derive the levy rate for that sector, which is then set in regulations. The levy formula uses weightings based on playe r expenditure and presentations, as described in paragraph , as prox ies for harm attributed to each levypaying gambling sector . Each weighting is expressed as a combination of percent expendit urepercent presentations. For example , means percent based on each sectors share of total expenditure and percent based on that sectors share of total presentations. The Ministry consulted on four weighting options : ; ; ; and . Details of these options and the ir impact s are set out in the attached Cost Recovery Impact Statement. This forecast underspend has largely accumulated as a result of a legal challenge to the procurement process early in the levy period and resulting delays in being able to let service provider contracts in the Waikato and other areas. wzrxijjr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Liability for water services bills
Liability for water services bills . agree that the residential property owner will be responsible for paying the water services entity in full for all charges; . agree that for non residential property, the owner is responsible for paying the water services entity in full for all charges, unless: . the charge is for trade waste, in which case the liability attaches to the person creating the trade waste; . there is a lease on the property meeting the conditions of section ()(b) of the Local Government (Rating) Act , in which case the liability attaches to the lessee; Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . the land is Mori freehold land, in which case provisi ons replicating section of the Local Government (Rating) Act should apply. Section will also be replicated; . agree to leave section the Residential Tenancies Act unchanged so that tenants are responsible for reimbursing the landlord for volumetric water charges;
Libraries and Mechanics Institutes Act
Library Information and Advisory Commission: Documentation to finalise (re)appointments
Library and Archives kaimahi immersed the group in materials and applied manaakitanga and tino rangatiratanga principles to offer a personalised experience that included orientation, ongoing advice, and research support.
Library and Information Advisory Commission
Library and Information Advisory Commission (re)appointments Draft Cabinet paper
Library and Information Advisory Commission Ng Kaiwhakamrama I ng Kohikohinga Krero
Library and Information Advisory Commission, Ng Kaiwhakamrama i ng Kohikohinga Krero
Library and Information Advisory Commission: Documents to finalise (re)appointments
Library and Information Advisory Commission: Draft Cabinet paper
Library and Information Advisory Commission: Preferred candidate selection and proposed reappointment
Library and Information Advisory Commission: Selection of preferred appointees
Licensing of Auctioneers to Department of Justice
Life Event A birth, death, marriage, civil union, name change, acquisition or a grant of
Life Event A birth, death, marriage, civil union, name change, or appointment or
Life Events area are created under different statutes, there is a need to clarify intended uses
Life and Identity Services Performance Measures Dashboard
Life and Identity Services monthly update December
Life and Identity Services monthly update November
Life and Identity Services monthly update October
Likelihood of sup port Extremely High Moderatel y High Moderatel y High Moderate ly High
Likelihood of sup port High Mode rately High Moderatel y High Moderatel y High
Likelihood of sup port High Moder ately High Moderat ely High High
Likelihood of sup port High Modera tely High Moderatel y High Moderat ely High
Likelihood of sup port High Moderatel y High Moderate ly High Moderatel y High
Likelihood of sup port High Very High Very High Very High
Likelihood: RARE Impact: CRITICAL Residual Risk Rating: MEDIUM
Likelihood: RARE Impact: MODERATE Residual Risk Rating: LOW
Likelihood: RARE Impact: MODERATE Residual Risk Rating: LOW RISK DIA Information is retained for longer than necessary within NZSIS systems
Limit opportunities for crime and dishonesty and provide protections within the regulated online gambling market.
Limited Partnerships, and Registered New Zealand Companies
Link Strong Limited Limite d Limited
Link Strong Limited Limited Limited
Link Strong Limited Limited Strong
Link Strong Very Stron g Very Strong Very Strong
Link Very Strong Limited Limited Limited
Link here or click on image to view PDF (KB):
Link here or click on image to view PDF (KB) on Ministry for Ethnic Communities website:
Link here or click on image to view PDF (KB):
Link here to Ministers Expenses
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses April to June :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses April to June :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses April to June :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses April to June :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses April to June :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses April to June :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses April to June :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses April to June :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses January to March :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses January to March :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses January to March :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses January to March :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses January to March :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses January to March :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses January to March :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses January to March :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses July to September :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses July to September :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses July to September :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses July to September :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses July to September :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses July to September :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses July to September :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses July to September :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses October to December :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses October to December :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses October to December :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses October to December :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses October to December :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses October to December :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses October to December :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses October to December :
Link here to spreadsheet of Ministers Expenses
Link to our standard purchase order terms and conditions:
Linked to our organisational outcome statements, Mtou Mahi.
Links to the Gambling Act , and its amendments, as well as related pieces of legislation.
Links to the Gambling Act, amendments and regulations, and information about regulatory agencies and their responsibilities.
Liqu idity Adequate Adequate Adequate
Liquidi ty ratio with lo an disbursement ( year) . . . N.A. N.A.
Liquidity ratio without loan disbursement ( year) . . . N.A. N.A.
List of New Zealand government agencies
List of Reporting Entities
List of abbreviations List of tables Table : Objective priorities for action . Table : Objective priorities for action . Table : Objective priorities for action . Table : Objective priorities for action . Table : Objective priorities for action . Table : Objective priorities for action . Table : Objective priorities for action . Table : Objective priorities for action . Table : Objective priorities for action . Table : Objective priorities for action . Table : Objective priorities for action . Table : Aligning the strategy with He Korowai Oranga . Table : Aligning the strategy with Ala Moui . Table : Composition of people seeking treatment for gamblingrelated harm, . Table : Budget to prevent and minimise gambling harm (GST exclusive), . Table : Public health budget (GST exclusive), by service area, . Table : Intervention services budget (GST exclusive), by service area, . Table : Research and evaluation budget (GST exclusive), . Table : Budget for new service and innovation pilots (GST exclusive), . Table : Budget for Ministry operating costs (GST exclusive), . Table : Forecast expenditure by sector (GSTinclusive), . Table : Estimated underpayment or overpayment of problem gambling levy, , by sector . Table : Share of presentations and expenditure by sector, . Table : Levy rates per sector: weighting (all figures GST exclusive) . List of figures Figure : Inflation ()adjusted expenditure per capita (adults aged over years), by type of gambling, . Figure : Gambling behaviour and harm: the continuum of prevention and harm reduction . Figure : Distribution of class NCGMs by low, mid and highdeprivation census area units, . Figure : Framework for organising the strategic objectives . Figure : Summary of He Korowai Oranga . Figure : Summary of Ala Moui . STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO vi Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
List of abbreviations AUT Auckland University of Technology CLIC Client Information Collection DAPAANZ Addiction Practitioners Association Aotearoa New Zealand DIA Department of Internal Affairs EGM Electronic gaming machine EMS Electronic monit oring system FTE Fulltime equivalent HLS Health and Lifestyles Survey HPA Health Promotion Agency IRD Inland Revenue Department Ministry Ministry of Health MVE Multi venue exclusion NCGM Noncasino gaming machine NGO Nongovernmental organisation NGS National Gambling Study NZLC New Zealand Lotteries Commission NZRB New Zealand Racing Board PGF Problem Gambling Foundation of New Zealand PGSI Problem gambling severity index PPGM Primary problem gambling mode WHO World Health Organization STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A Stage Cost Recovery Impact Statement Problem Gambling Levy to Agency Disclosure Statement . This statement has been prepared by the Ministry of Health the Ministry) and the Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) on the problem gambling levy and specifically the levy weighting options that affect how much of the levy each gambling sector will pay for the levy period between July and June . . The Ministry is responsible for developing and implementing an integrated problem gambling strategy focused on public health. The Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm to is this integrated strategy (the Strategy). The Department is the primary regulator of the gambling sector, administers relevant legislation (including the problem gambling levy regulations) and is the Governments key policy advisor on gambling. . The Gambling Act (the Act) constrains the nature of the options analysed as it: a. prescribes an integrated problem gambling strategy and details specific content as well as requirements for consultation on the strategy and levy sections and b. provides for a levy, set by regulation on gambling operators, to recover the cost of developing, managing and delivering the Strategy section and specifies the formula to be used in estimating the proposed levy rates payable by gambling operators section c. limits the weightings used to player expenditure and presentations. . In developing the player expenditure forecasts used in this analysis, the Department considered information from a variety of sources including annual reports, payments to Inland Revenue and expenditure trends over proceeding years. . Key limitations of the analysis are the difficulty in accurately assessing the extent to which harm is properly attributable to each levypaying gambling sector and forecasting player expenditure given the variability and volatile nature of some forms of gambling, particularly three or more years into the future. The current policy settings for the levy formula limit the types of sectors levied and the formula limits how harm is assessed . Robyn Shearer Deputy Director General, Mental Health and General Manager, Policy Addiction Ministry of Health Department of Internal Affairs b (( o. r c ( . Cost Recovery Impact Statement Problem Gambling Levy Proactively released b y the Minister of l A Executive summary . This impact statement is for a problem gambling levy (the levy) to recover the cost of the Strategy for the period from July to June . The regulatory change is to the potential weightings and conseque ntial levy rates for each of the four levypaying gambling sectors. . The Gambling Act (the Act) recognises gambling can be harmful and provides for an integrated strategy to prevent and minimise harm from gambling, that must include including public health and treatment services, independent research and evaluation. . The Act specifies a levy is to recover the Ministrys costs of developing, managing and implementing the strategy. Section () of the Act sets out a levy formula that includes a mechanism for allocating and collecting these costs from gambling operators. It uses player expenditure and helpseeking data as proxies for gambling harm that are weighted in the formula to determine each sectors levy liability. This means that a given sectors levy liability can change even if the amount of the levy does not change. Such changes in levy liability are typically relatively minor in the context of changes in sector profits. . Funding is appropriated to the Ministry through Vote Health to develop and implement the Strategy. The levy is collected by Inland Revenue and set to reimburse the Crown the amount the Ministry spends on the Strategy, so the Strategy is fiscally neutral over time. . The Act also details a two stage consultation process to develop the Strategy and associated levy rates, and limits the Strategy to three years. If new levy regulations are not put in place for onwards , Ministryfunded strategy activities would not be cost recovered. Without cost recovery provisions and ringfenced funding, these activities may not receive the same level of funding, or be provided at all. . The levy is set on operators of the four main types of gambling that contribute the most to gambling harm: noncasino gaming machines (NCGM), casinos, the New Zealand Racing Board (NZRB) and the New Zealand Lotteries Commission (NZLC). . The levy calculations are based on the following: The Strategy cost of . million for to . A levy overrecovery of . million forecast to June . Crediting the levy over recovery amount leaves a balance of . million to be collected in levy payments for the next levy period. . The cost of the Strategy represents a million increase on the current strategy. This extra funding is required to improve service access and choice by refocusing services to address persistent gambling harm, health inequities and service gaps. These issues were identified in submissions and the gambling harm needs assessment prepared to inform the Strategy. . Four levy weighting options were considered to determine the proportion of the total levy each sector should pay, based on their share of harm factors. The levy rates for each gambling sector being levied under each option are significantly lower than the rates for the current period because of the significant over recovery by each sector is credited back to that sector, reducing the amount of levy that are expected to pay. . While each levy option meets the policy guidelines and statutory requirements, the Ministry notes there is now a stronger evidencebased case to increase the weighting on expenditure from the option to the option than has historically been the case. The weighting is the Ministrys preferred option. Cost Recovery Impact Statement Problem Gambling Levy Proactively released b y the Minister of l A Status quo The Gambling Act andgambling harm . Research shows about percent of New Zealanders over the age of have participated in some form of gambling at least once in the past year. Some percent of the population gamble to the extent it causes harm to themselves and often to the people around them. Similarly of New Zealanders will be affected by their own or someone elses gambling at some time in their lives. The most popular forms of gambling are NZLC lottery products. . The Act provides the regulatory frmework for gambling and aims to control the growth of gambling and ensure that money from gambling benefits the community. It also seeks to prevent and minimise gambling harm (including problem gambling) and limit opportunities for crimes associated with gambling (section refers). The regulatory framework, with the exception of casinos, is based on the principle that community groups should benefit from gambling profits (via grants funding), while industry bears the cost of mitigating gambling harm (via the problem gambling levy). . The Ministry is responsible for an integrated strategy to prevent and minimise gambling harm (the Strategy). Section states the Strategy must include: a. measures to promote public health by preventing and minimising the harm from gambling; b. services to treat and assist problem gamblers and their familieswhanau; c. independent scientific research associated with gambling, including (for example) longitudinal research on the social and economic impacts of gambling, particularly the impacts of gambling on different cultural groups; and d. evaluation. . The Act defines harm from gambling broadly and includes harm caused as a result of another persons gambling. Importantly, the burden of harm attributable to lowrisk gambling is significant, at nearly percent of all gambling harm. Typically, people affected by harmful gambling are more likely to be Maori, Pacific, or Asian, on a low income andor living in an isolated area. . In addition the Act specifies a. a levy to recover the costs of developing and implementing the strategy (section ). b. a formula to allocate and collect that cost amongst gambling operators (section ). c. a detailed twostage consultation process to develop the Strategy and levy rates, and limits the strategy to three years (section ). . Funding is appropriated to the Ministry through Vote Health. The levy is collected by Inland Revenue and set to reimburse the Crown the cost to Ministry of the Strategy so it is fiscally neutral over time. The levypaying sectors understand well the levy and its compliance. Levy rates . The levy is set on the four main types of gambling, to recover the costs of the Strategy from those gambling operators whose activities contribute the most to gambling harm. Table shows the current levy rates, which are set out in the Gambling (Problem Gambling Levy) Regulations and expire on June . The table also shows the expected levy amounts and expected share of the total levy, by sector. The study Measuring the Burden of Gambling Harm in New Zealand used measures such as Quality Adjusted Life Years (QAL Ys) and Disability Adjusted Life Years (DAL Ys) to estimate the years of life lost due to incapacity as a result of harms from gambling. These totalled , in . Of this number, , were lost to gamblers themselves and , were lost to people affected by someone elses gambling. Cost Recovery Impact Statement Problem Gambling Levy Proactively released b y the Minister of l A Table : Levy rates for ( weighting) NCGMs Casinos NZRB NZLC Levy rate( of player net expenditure) . . . . Expected levy amount (m) . . . . Share of total expected levy amount() . . . . Share of budget() . . . . . Allowing the Strategy and levy to expire without replacing them would not be consistent with the purpose of the Act and is not recommended. If new levy regulations are not put in place, Ministryfunded Strategy activities would not be cost recovered. Without these cost recovery provisions and ringfenced funding, and despite the significant level of harm from gambling, funding constraints mean it is unlikely these Strategy activities would receive the same level of funding out of Vote Health. Levypaying gambling sectors . The levy regulations enable the responsible Ministers to specify the gambling sectors required to pay the levy. In all fiye previous occasions, the regulations have specified the same four forms of gambling that research shows contribute the most harm (based on player expenditure and presentations to gambling harm services): a. The noncasino gaming machines (NCGM) sector, which comprises about NCGM operators in pubs, clubs, and TABs. This sector currently operates more than , NCGMs in about licensed venues. b. the New Zealand Lotteries Commission (NZLC), which provides a range of lottery products through a network of retail outlets and online users. c. the New Zealand Racing Board (NZRB), which provides racing and sports betting at racetracks , through TAB agencies and online accounts. NZRB also operates NCGMs at TAB operated venues. d. the casino sector, comprising of six casinos, located in Auckland, Hamilton, Christchurch, Dunedin and Queenstown (two), which together operate just over , gaming machines and just under table games. Cost recovery (levy) charges . The Act limits the cost estimates on which the levy is based to a maximum of three years. The levy is the only source of funding for the Strategy. . The Act specifies a twostep consultation process to develop the levy that includes: a. requiring an assessment of gambling harm needs and specifying the matters that must be provided for in the Strategy b. requiring the Ministry to consulting widely on a draft strategy, estimated three year costs and the corresponding levy rates; and c. requiring the Gambling Commission to consulting on a revised set of strategy proposals (prepared by the Ministry following submissions on the above draft) and making its own recommendations on the levy rates to responsible Ministers. . Changes to the Strategy (and. hence the associated costs and levy rates) are based on a needs assessment, submissions on the draft Strategy consultation document, insights from longitudinal surveys, and research and evaluations including the Health Lifestyles Survey , the National Gambling Study and the Gambling Outcomes Monitoring Report. The Ministry also considered independent advice prepared for the Gambling Commission, submissions made at its consultation meeting and its report and recommendations to the responsible Ministers. Cost Recovery Impact Statement Problem Gambling Levy Proactively released b y the Minister of l A . Changes to the levy rates, and amounts payable by each sector, are also based on data about gambling services use, levy underrecovery or overrecovery by sector, player expenditure and forecasts of future player expenditure, by sector. Cost Recovery Principles and Objectives . If the costs of the Strategy are to be recovered by the levy, it must include all the elements that the Act requires. The Act, the Strategy and the Ministrys strategic health documents establish a policy framework within which the levy is set to recover the estimated costs to the Ministry of developing and implementing the Strategy over the next three years. The levy is the funding mechanism to deliver the Strategy, which contributes to preventing and minimising gambling harm, including problem gambling (Section (b) refers). . The policy principle in the gambling regulatory framework is that the costs of preventing and minimising gambling harm should be borne by gambling operators levied in proportion to the harm attributable to that sector. . The Strategy incorporates a strategic framework that sets out the overall goal and more detailed highlevel objectives and priorities for action, which provides the rationale for the Servic Plan. The overall goal of the Strategy is: Government, the gambling sector, communities and familieswhanau working together to prevent and minimise gambling harm, and to reduce related health inequities . . The strategic objectives are substantially unchanged from those identified in the Strategy that Cabinet approved in , and are ultimately focused on delivering on the purposes set out in section of the Act to prevent and minimise gambling harm. . In addition, any levy recommendation must be consistent with the cost recovery principles set out in the AuditorGenera l and Treasury guidelines on public sector charging. These are described in the assessment of cost recovery proposals at Appendix that shows the Strategy and levy proposals strongly comply with the guidelines. For example on measures such as legal authority, effectiveness, efficiency, transparency and consultation. Policy Rationale: Why a user charge And what type is most appropriate . The Act provides for full cost recovery by a levy on the profits from gambling operators required to pay the levy. This reflects the fact that the need for gambling harm minimisation and prevention services are directly attributable to the availability of licensed gambling operations and the nature of the gambling products they provide. . The Strategy outputs (levy funded activities) are public goods. Excluding people from the benefits would be undesirable and costly, and use by one person does not detract their use by another. . Research shows that gambling harm is far more likely to be associated with continuous forms of gambling (in which a gambler can immediately reinvest winnings in further gambling, such as gaming machines and casino table games) than with other forms of gambling. It also shows the levypaying gambling sectors noted above contribute the most harm in terms of player expenditure and presentations to services. NCGMs contribute the most on both measures, as has been the case for many years. Accordingly these four sectors are levied to recover the costs of the services to address gambling harm. The Strategy aligns with the Ministrys New Zealand Health Strategy, its Maori health strategy He Korowai Oranga, and Ala Moui: Pathways to Pacific Health and Wellbeing (Ministry of Health a). Cost Recovery Impact Statement Problem Gambling Levy Proactively released b y the Minister of l A . Private gambling and forms such as bingo and raffles with limited prize value (which are also regulated) are not charged a levy, as research shows these forms are not associated with significant harmful gambling. The level of the proposed levy and its cost components Proposed charge levels the costs ofthe Strategy . Table compares the cost of the Strategy with the cost for the current levy period. Table: Breakdown of Ministry spending by Strategy output Strategy funding (GST exclusive) current Current Levy Change and proposed m m m Public Health . . . Intervention services . . . Research and Evaluation . . Ministry of Health admin and operating costs . . New service pilots and technology fund . . . year total . . . Primary cost driver the Strategy . The Act specifies the types of activities the Strategys service plan must provide to meet the statutory requirements. A breakdown of each activity is provided in Annex . The drivers of expenditure for to are: a. intervention and support services, such as counselling and helpline support ( of the levy budget) b. public health measures (), such as those intended to raise awareness of the risks and signs of harmful gambling to foster positive behaviours to prevent or minimise harmful gambling c. independent scientific research and evaluation ( ) to monitor health inequities and prevalence rates for Maori and Pacific families and vulnerable groups, as well as more action focused research and evaluations. d. Ministry administration costs () to develop, implement and monitor the Strategy. This amount (.million) has been unchanged since and is primarily to manage service contracts and procurement, with some policy support as required to refresh the strategy every three years. . In addition the Ministry intends to increase spending by million in the next levy period ( of the planned levy budget) to pilot new services and technology development: a. to refocus and revitalise Strategy activities by improving access and choice for persons affected by harmful gambling and better meet the needs of groups vulnerable to gambling harm. For example, by developing and piloting a mana enhancing service model for Maori. b. to enable the Ministry to maintain current levels of service while investing in new intervention and service models. The Ministry will also increase its allocation to evaluate and review services to identify where resources should be targeted in the long term to better address areas of systemic, persistent gambling harm and related health inequities experienced by vulnerable communities. . The Ministry considers there is no room to fund this million in service development by productivity improvements , as Strategy funding has remained largely unchanged since Cost Recovery Impact Statement Problem Gambling Levy Proactively released b y the Minister of l A , while health costs have increased by percent over the same period. . The Ministry does not compile a breakdown of its procurement costs. However, it notes the main cost components of these contracts are salaries, which are benchmarked to comparable costs in other service areas, and for some projects, technology related costs. Levy methodology . The levy formula in section of the Act sets out how to calculate the approximate amount each levypaying gambling sector is expected to pay towards the total levy requirement. From this we can identify the levy rate necessary for each sector to make its expected contribution. . The formula is: Levy rate (((A x W) (Bx W)) x C) plus or minus R D where: A estimated current player expenditure in a sector, divided by the total estimated current player expenditure in all sectors subject to the levy B the number of customer presentations to problem gambling services that can be attributed to gambling in a sector, divided by the total number of customer presentations to problem gambling services in which a sector that is subject to the levy can be identified C the funding requirement for the period for which the levy is payable D forecast player expenditure in a sector for the period during which the levy is payable R estimated underrecovery or overrecovery oflevy from a sector in previous levy periods W and W are weights, the sum of which is . . The top line of the formula as a whole determines the approximate dollar amount each sector will be expected to pay towards the total levy requirement, taking into account any under:recovery or overrecovery of levy from that sector in prvious levy periods. . Most of the levy formula values (A, B, C, D and R) are based on actual presentations and expenditure data or forecast expenditure. These values are summarised in Tables to below and further detail is provided at Appendix . Table Levy calculations key figures Key figures m (GSTexclusive) Funding Required C () . Over recovery R () . Levy amount still to be collected (CR) . . The total amount forecast to be raised by the levy for the next three years is about . million. This sum is lower than the cost of the Strategy (C) due to an expected over recovery of levy (R) forecast for each sector. This is credited to each sector and reduces the amount each sector must pay to achieve their share of the total for the new levy period. Section of the Act defines player expenditure for each sector, which is equivalent to player losses (money spent minus winnings) Cost Recovery Impact Statement Problem Gambling Levy Proactively released b y the Minister of l A . Table shows forecast player expenditure (D) over the next three years. The levy rate to apply for each sector is determined by dividing the sectors required levy payment (top line) by the forecast player expenditure for that sector. All other things being equal, the higher the forecast player expenditure for a sector over the course of the levy period (D), the lower that sectors levy rate. Table : Forecast expenditure by sector (GSTinclusive), Forecast expenditure NCGMs Casinos NZRB NZLC (m) . . . . (m) . . . . (m) ,. . . . . Table sets out each sectors share of total player expenditure (A) and each sectors share of total presentations (B) attributed to the levypaying sectors, to apply for . These shares are based on total player expenditure of , million and total presentations of ,. Table : Percent share of expenditure (A) and presentations (B) by levypaying sector, NCGM Casinos NZRB NZLC Exp. Pres. Exp. Pres. Exp. Pres. Exp. Pres. . . . . . . . . . The levy formula uses two weightings as a proxy for harm attributed to each sector: W is for expenditure (player spending minus winnings) and W represents presentations (people seeking help). The weightings are represented in the (Ax W) (Bx W) component in the top line of the formula, which determines the share of the funding requirement (C) that each sector must pay. When a sectors share of player expenditure (A) is substantially different from its share of presentations (B), the weighting between expenditure W and presentations W, is critical to determining the share of the budget that sector will be expected to pay. The impact of the levy weightings is discussed in the next section. Impact analysis Impact of levy amounts . The level of funding raised by the levy is set to offset the cost of the Strategy. The key impacts are in providing public health services to educate about the signs and risks of harmful gambling, in order to effect positive behavioural change and the costs of clinical intervention and support services that will help , to , people annually who are affected by their own or someone elses harmful gambling. . Strategy expenditure represents value for money. A KPMG review of the costs of Ministryfunded Strategy outputs showed they provided value for money across six of the seven criteria used to assess value. In , the Australian Productivity Commission concluded that the social cost of gambling harm means that even harm minimisation measures with modest efficacy rates could generate net benefits, provided they did not generate excessive costs for gamblers or the industry generally. . The Ministry purchases services to address gambling harm using a procurement model, and where possible endeavours to ensure consistency with costs provided for comparable services for other forms of addiction. The Ministry will monitor this as it implements the evaluation of current activities and procurement for services in the next levy period. Cost Recovery Impact Statement Problem Gambling Levy Proactively released b y the Minister of l A . The levy rates and amounts paid by each sector have minimal impact on operators in each of the four levypaying gambling sectors. These sectors have a combined annual player expenditure forecast in the order of . billion for each of the next three financial years to June . Based on these forecasts, the impact of the levy will be about million per year in levy payments to Inland Revenue . This is a reduction on the . million in annual levy payments expected for the current levy period and translates to . of the sectors total forecast annual expenditure. Impact of weightings . The weighting options do not affect the total levy requirement, only the portion of the total levy amount that each levypaying sector is expected to pay, which in turn determines the levy rate to apply. . The weightings allow responsible Ministers to apportion the costs of the Strategy to the levypaying sectors in a way that they consider to be fairer than if they had to rely on either expenditure alone, or presentations alone. The weighting selected is a matter of judgment ; there is no scientifically correct answer. The levy formula does not require the inclusion of a combined weighting. Each sectors share of the budget could simply be the same as its share of either all expenditure attributed to the levypaying sectors or, alternatively, its share of all presentations. . The weighting combination chosen is not expected to have a significant impact on gambling consumers. However, it may slightly affect the amount of money that NCGM operators and NZLC have available to allocate for authorised purposes, the amount NZRB may distribute to the racing industry, and the six casinos net profits. Limitations with weightings . There are some limitations in using weightings. For example, there may be no single weighting that will result in every levypaying sector paying the amount that responsible Ministers consider to be their fairest share of the Strategys costs. Similarly, there may be no weighting that will result in a particular sector paying what responsible Ministers consider to be its fairest share of the Strategys costs. . Potential disadvantages with a very high weighting on presentations are due to the broad definition of gambling harm in the Act and the fact that presentations tend to reflect high levels of harm at the acute end of the harm continuum, such as associated with problem gambling. Presentations do not reflect the harm from low to moderate gambling. . Accordingly, each sectors share of presentations may not necessarily be a fair share for that sector to bear of low to moderate levels of harm, or of the public health, research and evaluation activities also required by the Strategy to address gambling harm. Similarly gambling sectors may not be associated with all forms of harm in the same proportions as they are associated with presentations to intervention services. The player expenditure weighting has the advantage of attributing to each sector their share of public health and other nonintervention activities covered by the Strategy. . Similarly, too high a weighting on expenditure may disadvantage gambling operators of relatively benign forms of gambling that have high expenditure, but relatively low numbers of presentations compared with others. Conversely, an advantage of the presentation weighting is that it minimises the impact of fluctuations in expenditure that some sectors experience. However, the purpose of the Strategy is to prevent and minimise gambling The Act defines an authorised purpose as one that is a charitable purpose, a noncommercial purpose beneficial to the whole or part of the community, promoting controlling or conducting a race meeting, and (except for class ) an electioneeri ng purpose Cost Recovery Impact Statement Problem Gambling Levy Proactively released b y the Minister of l A harm not player expenditure per se. . While too high a presentations weighting may disadvantage diligent host responsibility to detect problem gambling and encourage help seeking behaviour, there are other regulatory provisions in the Act to monitor compliance and address this risk. Weighting Options . The Ministry consulted on four weighting combinations for the Strategy: ; ; ; and . Historically, Ministers have chosen the weighting option. However, as previously noted, there is no correct weighting; each is a subjective judgment about how to best apportion payments to each sector. . Each weighting option is stated as a combination of percent expenditurepercent presentations . For example, means percent based on the sector share of total expenditure and percent based on the sector share of total presentations. . Table above shows sector shares of expenditure A and presentations B for . Table shows the effect of the different weighting options on each sectors share of the budget cost, their associated levy amount and the corresponding levy rate based on this amount. The corresponding values for the weighting used in the current period are shown for comparison. Table : Weighting options. Weighting Option Share of budget, levy rate and expected levy amount, under four alternative weightings Total NCGMs Casinos NZRB NZLC Share of budget () Levy rate () Expected amount (m) . . . . . . . . . . . . . Share of budget () Levy rate() Expected amount (m) . . . . . . . . . . . . . Share of budget () Levy rate () Expected amount (m) . . . . . . . . . . . . . Share of budget() Levy rate () Expected amount (m) . . . . . . . . . . . . . For to Share of current budget () Current levy rate () Current expected amount (m) . . . . . . . . . . . . Note the levy rate is the amount per dollar of expenditure (player losses) over the course of a levy period that a sector must pay. For example, a rate of . means a sector must pay . cents in levy out of every dollar of player expenditure in that sector over the threeyear levy period. Impacts of the weighting combinations . Table shows the impacts of each weighting factor as follows: a. A higher weighting on expenditure (e.g. ) means that NZLC, and to a lesser extent NZRB, pay a higher share of the budget (as their percentages of expenditure Cost Recovery Impact Statement Problem Gambling Levy Proactively released b y the Minister of l A are higher than their percentages of presentations). b. A higher weighting on presentations (e.g. ) means that NCGMs pay a higher share of the budget (as their presentations share is much greater than their expenditure share). c. The weightings make a relatively limited difference to the casino share (because that sectors share of expenditure is close to its share of presentations). . Table shows that compared with the current levy period (shown at bottom of table): a. Proposed levy rates for the next period are lower across all sectors under any option (except the NZLC levy rate for option). b. Expected levy payment amounts are lower for NCGM and casinos and higher for NZRB and NZLC, but NCGM and casinos still pay the most in levy under any option. c. Shares of the budget amounts are lower for NCGM and greater for NZLC under any option, but there is little change for casinos or NZRB. d. The NZLC levy payment amount and share of levy has increased under any option, due to increases in its shares of both player expenditure and presentations . . These changes relative to the current levy period reflect the combined effects of changes in sector shares of expenditure and presentations, forecast player expenditure and levy under or overrecovery. Preferred weighting option . The Ministry notes there is now a stronger evidencebased case to increase the weighting on expenditure from percent (the option) to (the option). Most of the submissions commenting on weighting options, from a broad range of stakeholders, including NCGM operators, research and service providers, supported an increased weighting on expenditure. They argued this option is a more current indicator of exposure to all levels of harm than presentations , which tend to reflect harm that manifests as a crisis, and is more consistent with the Strategys public health objectives. . Each presentation represents a person who is seeking help because of harm caused by their own or someone elses gambling . However, as the Gambling Commission noted in its report on the proposed problem gambling levy, a very high weighting on presentations might mean that diligent host responsibility in detecting problem gambling and encouraging the seeking of assistance is punished not rewarded . . Accordingly, the Ministrys preference is for a weighting option. The other weighting combinations would meet the statutory requirements and policy guidelines, but are considered to be relatively less likely to meet the public health objectives of the Strategy. Gambling Commissions independent advice . As required under the Act, the Gambling Commission undertook its own consultation on the proposed Strategy with invited stakeholders . It also commissioned independent advice on the Strategy and levy proposals , as the Act envisages it may do. . The Commission s consultation meeting on January was attended by officials from the Ministry and the Department, gambling industry representatives and service providers. Most of those attending were NCGM operators or related gambling industry providers . All invitees had an opportunity to make a submission. The Commission subsequently provided its report to responsible Ministers, which essentially supported the general approach to the Cost Recovery Impact Statement Problem Gambling Levy Proactively released b y the Minister of l A Strategy and total budgeted cost of . million over three years. It noted levy payments were forecast to overrecover . million, so the next levy period would need to recover . million to maintain a fiscally neutral approach over time, and concluded the most appropriate levy option was the weighting. The Commission did not support either the or options. . The rationale in favour of the weighting was: a. Presentations may be unrepresentative of all harm as they focus on high risk or problem gambling, whereas research estimates percent of the burden of harm is associated with low to moderate risk gambling. As presentations reflect high risk gambling, this means that half of the harm would not be accounted for by too high a weighting on presentations. b. Only a small and declining number of high risk gamblers appear to be receiving intervention support, which tends to focus on high levels of harm. c. Measurement of presentations is subjective and does not factor in the costs or degree of harm attributable to each of those interventions. d. A heavy weighting on presentations is inconsistent with the wider public health objectives of the Strategy, including the promotion of resilience within populations and the research and evaluation activities that generally benefit all sectors. Consultation . The Ministry undertook extensive consultation on the Strategy, its strategic direction, the service plan, related costs, the levy formula and weighting options, and on the location of NCGM venues. The Ministry consulted government agencies, the gambling industry and gambling operators, health and gambling harm service providers, researchers and local government. It the consultation document in sector newsletters , through social media and to selected community groups. Some people attended public meetings in Auckland, Wellington, Christchurch and Dunedin. Meetings included one each for Maori, Pacific, and Asian viewpoints, one for the gambling industry in each of Auckland and Wellington and one in Auckland for people with lived experience of gambling harm. . The Ministry received written submissions from a broad cross section of stakeholder groups (compared with submissions in ). Three out of five submissions indicated support for the general approach and direction of the Strategy, with a further one in five providing qualified support. Stakeholders expressed contrasting views on matters such as the level of funding or the need for new services. NCGM and some other gambling operators generally opposed any increase in Ministry spending or new services. In contrast, other stakeholders were generally in favour. Some service providers considered even more funding was necessary to address cost pressures. . In terms of the weighting options, there was no support for the option. Gambling sector organisations preferred the combination that limited their own levy liabilities. There was broad support to increase the expenditure weighting from percent to at least percent (the option) from the NCGM sector, and research and some service providers. The remaining gambling sector submissions supported the weighting and a few other submissions supported the option. . Three submissions proposed increasing the expenditure weighting to percent or more. Research such as from burden of harm noted earlier would support increasing the weighting on expenditure as it better reflects all the compone nts of the Strategy, not just harm leading to acute treatment. Cost Recovery Impact Statement Problem Gambling Levy Proactively released b y the Minister of l A The Ministry considers that any weighting of more than percent on expenditure may not be appropriate as it could unfairly penalise operators of relatively benign forms of gambling with high expenditure. . The draft Strategy also called for suggestions about how the levy formula could be changed in future to better reflect harm. There are other ways to identify harmful gambling, such as using screening instruments like the Problem Gambling Severity Index (PGSI), or survey questions that directly address the risk of harm due to particular gambling products. . The revised Strategy notes the Ministry and the Department recognise there is merit in revisiting the levy formula and will review submissions on this topic as part of an ongoing work programme , and that stakeholders will be consulted during the next levy period about any specific proposals to change the levy. . More generally, in response to submissions, the Ministry has retained the level of funding and new service development proposed , and amended the proposals to: highlight the value and need for the proposed pilots, evaluation and action research, service codesign, consumer networks, andpeer support, to inform new services to prevent and minimise gambling harm for vulnerable groups including children; clarify the purpose and impact of the additional million for piloting new service development and a new technology innovation fund; strengthen the public health and strategic priorities sections to highlight the above clarify the implementation processes would engage stakeholders regarding planned procurement activities and areas where further policy work is anticipated; and update the levy and financial calculations with latest available information . . In addition, as required under the Act, the Gambling Commission consulted with invited stakeholders on January on the Ministrys revised proposals and reported to responsible Ministers on February with its recommendations . . The Ministry subsequently prepared a final decisions paper for Cabinet on the Strategy, the problem gambling appropriation and levy rates for each sector. Conclusions and recommendations Ministry funding for to . The Ministry proposed spending on the Strategy is . million over three years. This represents a million increase over the budget for the current levy period, to enable the Ministry to pilot new services and to develop more effective services for communities at most risk of gambling harm. . To maintain fiscal neutrality , the . million cost of the Strategy will be offset by: a . million levy overpayment forecast to be collected by Inland Revenue by June ; a million transfer from the forecast underspend of the appropriation; and . million collected by the proposed levy rates and forecast payments to Inland Revenue for to (assuming actual expenditure matches the forecasts). The levypaying gambling sectors . The Ministry recommends no change to the four sectors required to pay the problem gambling levy i.e the levy paying sectors should be: Cost Recovery Impact Statement Problem Gambling Levy Proactively released b y the Minister of l A noncasino gaming machine (NCGM) operators, including pubs, clubs and the New Zealand Racing Board in respect of their NCGMs; casinos; the New Zealand Racing Boards racing betting and sports betting products; and the New Zealand Lotteries Commission. . Responsible ministers have asked officials to review submissions on the draft Strategy related to ways to improve the levy formula, including levy paying sectors and components that could be added or removed to better reflect harm. This may result in changes to apply to successive levy periods from July . Levy weightings and levy rates . The Ministry and the Gambling Commission both recommend a weighting, largely because it is seen as better reflecting all the required components of the Strategy, not just harm that results in treatment at the acute end of the harm continuum. The levy rates that would result are set out in Table . Table : Recommended levy rate for each gambling sector, Expenditure to presentation ratio Levy rate payable as a percent (GST exclusive) Noncasino gaming machines Casinos New Zealand Racing Board New Zealand Lotteries Commission . . . . Implementation plan . Assuming that the Government agrees to refresh the Strategy and put in place a new levy, the Department will incorporate these decisions into new problem gambling levy regulations, to take effect on July and remain in force until June . These regulations must be gazetted by June to comply with the day rule. . There are minimal risks to implementing the levy changes. The levy and its payment are well understood by levy administrators and gambling operators and the only change will be to the value of the levy rate payable by each sector. Implementing this change should result in minimal compliance costs for gambling operators who must pay the levy. . After the regulations are notified in the Gazette, Inland Revenue will conclude system changes to implement any changes to the levy rates, the Department will advise gambling operators of the new levy rates and the Ministry will tender intervention and public health services. The Ministry will initially exclude those that have been introduced or had changes in the last two years, followed by a tender for infrastructure services. This will provide service stability during the transition to the new levy period. . Any risks to Ministry spending are contained. The Ministry monitors its spending on the Strategy through a memorandum account and can adjust contracts as required to remain within allocated funding, for example by realigning or exiting contracts. . There are some risks to service design and delivery. For example, the needs assessment and submissions identify falling utilisation rates, cultural and language barriers, gaps in relevant information for decisionmaking and in workforce capability and capacity. Service provider submissions also expressed concern about cost pressures, risking service sustainability. The Ministry monitors cost pressures and as required can provide cost adjustments. Other delivery risks should be mitigated by the changes proposed to the Strategy. For example, the service codesign and consumer networks should help inform new service design, pilots and action research to better address client needs and Cost Recovery Impact Statement Problem Gambling Levy Proactively released b y the Minister of l A overcome barriers to access. Monitoring and evaluation . The Strategys monitoring and evaluation provisions are integral to assess its efficacy, and are complemented by the Ministrys standard contract management provisions and results based accountability model. The new pilots, action research and evaluation activities are also subject to these provisions and will contribute to our learning model of service improvement. . The Ministrys contract management process includes monthly data collection , six monthly reporting, routine audits and verification visits. For example, intervention services are monitored as data is reported monthly, typically covering the number and type of interventions , client details such as ethnicity, location and outcome. Similar monitoring occurs for public health activities, although some are population level, such as for health education activities seeking positive behavioural change. Specific monitoring and evaluation details are finalised as work is commissioned. Review . The Act requires the Strategy to be reviewed and refreshed at least every three years, including a reassessment of estimated costs and associated levy rates. The statutory process includes an assessment of gambling harm needs to inform the Strategy, the types of activities the Strategy must include and a detailed twostage consultation. It also includes reviewing and updating technical data about gambling research, service outcomes, service demand, forecast player expenditure , levy payments received and actual Ministry spending. . In , the Ministry would expect to consult again with proposals to refresh the Strategy and levy rates, with the next strategy and levy regulations being developed to come into effect on July . Cost Recovery Impact Statement Problem Gambling Levy Proactively released b y the Minister of l A Annex Cost recovery proposals assessment . Table below provides an assessment showing how the cost recovery proposals (including weighting options) align positively with the cost recovery principles. Table : Assessment of cost recovery proposals Principles to apply to cost recovery Authority. Is there legal authority to charge a fee (levy) and does it operate within the scope of the empoweri ng provision Effectiveness : Are resources allocated in a way that contributes to the outcomes sought. Is the level of funding fit for purpose Efficiency: Is the user charge no higher than necessary to produce a good or service to the desired level of quality. Does the design of the charge incentivise efficiency ie, keeping costs down and the quality of the service high Transparency. Is information about the costs available in an accessible way to all stakeholders, including information about cost drivers and components that make up the levy charge. Has cost recovery been approached in an open book manner Consultation. Has there been meaningful engagement with all stakeholders and the opportunity for them to contribute to the cost recovery proposals. Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Application to cost recovery proposals (yesno) The Act specifies the requirements for developing the Strategy and provides the legal authority for the levy. The levy proposals developed comply with these requirements and the empower ing provisions. The Strategy provides for sufficient activities to meet the purpose and requirements of the Act, to prevent and minimise harm from gambling, to give effect to the areas specified in the Strategy. The Strategy allocates sufficient activities and resources that the Ministry considers are necessary , based on available evidence , to give effect to the Strategy. The Strategy allocates sufficient resources and provides the minimum funding the Ministry considers is necessary to maintain an acceptable level of service. The levy setting process allows robust discussion about the proposed fundinglevy rates and Strategy activities. In real terms the levy rates recover amounts that represent less than one percent of each sectors reported annual profits, and the expected levy amount total is less than for the current levy period. The proposed Strategy and cost components are freely disclosed and subject to public reporting and robust debate through a two step, open book consultation process. This allows for an opportunity to reflect on and revise proposals. Information relevant to the Strategy, its costs and levy calculations is on the Ministry and Departments website. Research and evaluation reports and presentation data are also routinely by the Ministry. The Strategy and levy proposals are subject to a detailed open two step consultatio n process and independent advice from the Gambling Commission. Equity: Are stakeholders being treated fairly. Have impacts over time been identified Simplicity: Is the cost recovery regime straight forward and understandable to relevant stakeholders Yes Yes The levy formula apportions the levy amount each sector should pay according to an estimate of harm attributable to that sector. This approach is considered fair as research shows some forms of gambling are likely to be more harmful than others, and the most harmful are continuous forms of gambling such as gaming machines and casino table games. Presentation weighting helps minimise the impact of fluctuations in player expenditu re from time to time. The levy setting regime is well understood by the gambling operators required to pay the levy and clearly documented. Accountability. What is the accountability to the public and Parliament Yes The Ministrys appropriation and spending on the Strategy are reported as a separate item in the Estimates and the Ministrys annual report to Parliament. The consultat ion processes provides further transparency and accountability. Cost Recovery Impact Statemen t Problem Gambling Levy Proactively released b y the Minister of l A Annex Strategy Operating costs . The main outputs of the Strategy which the levy costrecovers are public health and intervention services, independent research and evaluation. These account for of the proposed spending on the Strategy and are purchased through a contestable procurement process. The key spending areas and costs are shown in Table and Figure . . Also included are the costs to the Ministry of developing , implementing and monitoring the Strategy. These account for of the budgeted spending . Table : Indicative budgets to prevent and minimise gambling harm (GSTexclusive), Service area Total (m) (m) (m) (m) Public health services (harm prevention and . . . . minimisation) Intervention services (to treat and help problem . . . . gamblers and their familieswhanau) Research and evaluation . . . . New service and technology pilots . . . . Ministry operating costs . . . . Total (m) . . . . Figure : Breakdown of Strategy Estimated Operating Costs Breakdown operating costs ( millions,) Public health services harm prevention and mimisaton) Intervention services gamblers and therr famrlieswhanau) Research and evaluation Service and Innovation pilots Ministry operating costs Cost Recovery Impact Statement Problem Gambling Levy Proactively released b y the Minister of l A . The following tables provide a breakdown of costs associated with each line item in Table above. Table : Breakdown of public health budget (GSTexclusive) , by service area, Service area Total (m) (m) (m) (m) Primary prevention(public health action) . . . . Workforce development (public health) . . . . Awareness and education programme . . . . National coordination service . . . . Consume r networks . . . . Conference support . . . . Total (m) . . . . Note: All service areas include provision for dedicate d Maori, Pacific and Asian services and activities. Table : Breakdown of intervention services budget (GSTexclusive), by service area, Service area Total (m) (m) (m) (m) Helpline and webbased services . . . . Psychosocial interventions and support . . . . Data collection and reporting . . . . Workforce development (intervention) . . . . Total (m) . . . . Note: All service areas include provision for dedicated Maori, Pacific and Asian services and activities. Table: Breakdown of research and evaluation budget (GSTexcl usive) Service area Total (m) (m) (m) (m) Research . . . . Evaluation (including outcomes reporting) . . . . Total (m) . . . . Table : Breakdown of new service and innovation pilots budget (GSTexclu sive), Service area Total (m) (m) (m) (m) Pilots to address inequity (public health and . . . . intervention services) Technologyrelated innovation covering MVE, . . . . online support and machinerelated controlsmonitoring harm prevention) Peer support pilot . . . . Residentia l care pilot . . . . Total (m) . . . . Cost Recovery Impact Statement Problem Gambling Levy Proactively released b y the Minister of l A Annex Components of the levy formula . This section provides additional information about selected components of the levy formula. Levy rate (A x W) (Bx W)) x C) plus or minus R D Expenditure (A) and presentations (B) . Table sets out each sectors share of total player expenditure (A) and each sectors share of the presentations (B) attributed to the levypaying sectors, for the previous two levy periods, and as set out in the proposals for . Table shows that from to , casino and NZRB shares of expenditure and presentations have been fairly constant with minimal variations while: a. NCGM shares of expenditure and presentations both decreased by . and . percentage points respective ly; b. NZLC shares of expenditure and presentations both increased by . and . percentage points respectively. Table : Percent share of expenditure (A) and presentations (B) by levypaying sector, current and previous strategies ., NCGM Casinos NZRB NZLC Year Exp. Pres. . . Exp. Pres. . . Exp. Pres. . . Exp. Pres. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Levy overrecovery (R . The levy formula provides for R to adjustment each sectors levy amount to account for any estimated underrecovery or overrecovery of levy from a sector in previous levy periods. R accounts for the difference between estimated and actual levy payments made to Inland Revenue compared with the Ministrys forecast and reported spending, to determine the estimated under or overrecovery of levy payments. The calculation is made for each sector and the value is included in determining the levy rate and expected payment share for that sector for the new levy period. . Assuming player expenditure meets the forecast amounts, D, for each sector, the levy will generate approximately . million over three years in levy payments to Inland Revenue . This is based on the cost, C, being . million and R being . million. R comprises a forecast levy overpayment to June totalling . million and an expense transfer of million unspent allocation from the appropriation. This unspent amount has accumulated largely due to delays in letting service provider contracts between and December while there was a judicial review of a procurement process. . There are limitations in the current formula due to difficulty forecasting player expenditure in outyears, given the variability and volatile nature of some forms of gambling and how gambling harm is accounted for. Cost Recovery Impact Statement Problem Gambling Levy Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
List of current job vacancies at Internal Affairs (link to apply at the bottom of each vacancy)
List of issues for Stage
List of jurisdictions under Increased Monitoring
List of organisations that DIA shares death information with directly
List of organisations that are Intermediaries to the death AISA
List of parties and addresses for service
Literature Classification.
Local Authorities (Employment Protection) Order
Local Authorities (Members Interests) Act
Local Authorities (Petroleum Tax Refund) Regulations
Local Authorities (Petroleum Tax) Regulations
Local Authority A local authority or public body named or specified in Schedule of the
Local Authority Financial Impact Tool
Local Authority Financial Impact Tool ( September )
Local Authority Financial Impact Tool (Financial Impact Tool)
Local Electoral (Advertising) Amendment Bill: First reading speech and related documents
Local Electoral (Electoral Advertising) Amendment Bill Final Cabinet paper for lodgement at Cabinet Legislation Committee
Local Electoral (Electoral Advertising) Amendment Bill Draft Cabinet paper and Bill for ministerial consultation
Local Electoral (Electoral Advertising) Amendment Bill Second reading, Committee of the Whole, and Third Reading
Local Electoral (Tauranga City Council Te Awanui Mori Ward Byelection) Validation Order
Local Electoral Legislation Bill
Local Electoral Legislation Bill
Local Electoral Regulations
Local Electoral Regulations would be required to implement some of the changes
Local Government (Alcohol Ban Breaches) Regulations
Local Government (Auckland Council) Act
Local Government (Auckland Legislation) Bill;
Local Government (Auckland Regional Parks) Order
Local Government (Auckland Transitional Provisions) Act
Local Government (Auckland Transitional Provisions) Act Regulations
Local Government (Auckland Transitional Provisions) Substitution of Single Security Document Order
Local Government (Canterbury Museum Trust Board) Exemption Order
Local Government (City Rail Link Limited) Exemption Order
Local Government (Electoral Legislation and Mori Wards and Mori Constituencies) Amendment Bill: First reading speech and related documents
Local Government (Electoral Legislation and Mori Wards and Mori Constituencies) Amendment Bill: Possible further amendments
Local Government (Electoral Legislation and Mori Wards and Mori Constituencies) Amendment Bill: Second reading materials
Local Government (Financial Reporting and Prudence) Regulations
Local Government (Financial reporting and prudence) Regulations
Local Government (Infringement Fees for Offences: Southland Regional Council Navigation Safety Bylaws ) Regulations
Local Government (Infringement Fees for Offences: Wellington Regional Navigational and Safety Bylaws) Regulations
Local Government (Infringement Fees for OffencesEnvironment Canterbury Navigation Safety Bylaws ) Regulations
Local Government (Infringement Fees for OffencesMarlborough District Council Navigation Bylaw ) Regulations
Local Government (Infringement Fees for OffencesNavigation Bylaws for Port Taranaki and its Approaches ) Regulations
Local Government (Kaipara District CouncilCancellation of Byelections) Order
Local Government (Otago Museum Trust Board) Exemption Order
Local Government (Petroleum Tax Exemption) Order
Local Government (Prescribed Form for Petition to Require Poll to Determine Whether or Not Final Proposal for Local Government Reorganisation Scheme to Proceed) Regulations
Local Government (Prescribed Form for Seizure of Property Not on Private Land) Regulations
Local Government (Rating) Act
Local Government (Remuneration Authority Levies) Regulations
Local Government (Tamaki Makaurau Reorganisation) Councilcontrolled Organisations Vesting Order
Local Government (Tamaki Makaurau Reorganisation) Establishment of Councilcontrolled Organisations Order
Local Government (Tamaki Makaurau Reorganisation) Watercare Services Limited Vesting Order
Local Government (Tauranga City Council) Order
Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) (Watercare Charter) Order
Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Act
Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill Initial briefing
Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill: Introduction and first reading
Local Government (Whanganui District Council) Order
Local Government Act
Local Government Act
Local Government Act Amendment
Local Government Act is unlikely to be sufficient in this new context and will need refinement;
Local Government Borrowing Act
Local Government Business Forum meeting, June
Local Government Commission
Local Government Commission Appointment Round: Decision table and draft Cabinet Paper
Local Government Commission: Commencement briefing for the appointments round
Local Government Commission: Commencement of Appointment Round
Local Government Commission: Draft APH Paper
Local Government Commission: Meeting with the Chair of the Commission and appointments
Local Government Cyclone Response Unit
Local Government Electoral Legislation Bill materials for second reading
Local Government Electoral Legislation Bill implementation implications
Local Government Electoral Legislation Bill Third reading materials
Local Government Electoral Legislation Bill regulatory relief in light of Cyclone Gabrielle
Local Government Electoral Legislation Bill regulatory relief in response to cyclone Gabrielle
Local Government Electoral Legislation Bill materials for committee of the whole House
Local Government Funding Agency Annual General Meeting
Local Government Legislative Bids and Priority Rankings for the Legislative Programme
Local Government New Zealand Mayoral Induction Hui, October
Local Government New Zealand SuperLocal Conference
Local Government New Zealand Taituar
Local Government New Zealand Zone (South Island councils) Conference
Local Government New Zealand regular meeting
Local Government Official Information and Meetings Act
Local Government Official Information and Meetings Act . This
Local Government Official Information and Meetings Amendment Bill draft departmental report
Local Government Official Information and Meetings Amendment Bill materials for committee of the whole House
Local Government Official Information and Meetings Amendment Bill materials for second reading
Local Government Official Information and Meetings Amendment Bill: Initial briefing and talking points for select committee
Local Government Official Information and Meetings Amendment Bill Third reading materials
Local Government Policy and
Local Government Portfolio Weekly Report
Local Government Reforms Ministerial Group meeting on July
Local Government Reforms Ministerial Group meeting on December
Local Government Resourcing Needs
Local Government Services Bill Overview
Local Government Status Report WE June
Local Government Status Report WE February
Local Government Status Report WE March
Local Government Status Report WE May
Local Government Status Report WE June
Local Government Status Report WE February
Local Government Status Report WE March
Local Government Status Report WE February
Local Government Status Report WE September
Local Government Status Report WE October
Local Government Status Report WE April
Local Government Status Report WE August
Local Government Status Report WE January
Local Government Status Report WE July
Local Government Status Report WE May
Local Government Status Report WE December
Local Government Status Report WE September
Local Government Status Report WE April
Local Government Status Report WE February
Local Government Status Report WE July
Local Government Status Report WE June
Local Government Status Report WE October
Local Government Status Report WE March
Local Government Status Report WE November
Local Government Status Report WE August
Local Government Status Report WE February
Local Government Status Report WE June
Local Government Status Report WE September
Local Government Status Report WE February
Local Government Status Report WE January
Local Government Status Report WE March
Local Government Status Report WE May
Local Government Status Report WE August
Local Government Status Report WE October
Local Government Status Report WE April
Local Government Status Report WE August
Local Government Status Report WE January
Local Government Status Report WE July
Local Government Status Report WE May
Local Government Status Report WE December
Local Government Status Report WE January
Local Government Status Report WE September
Local Government Status Report WE May
Local Government Status Report WE April
Local Government Status Report WE February
Local Government Status Report WE June
Local Government Status Report WE October
Local Government Status Report WE March
Local Government Status Report WE November
Local Government Status Report WE August
Local Government Status Report WE February
Local Government Status Report WE June
Local Government Status Report WE September
Local Government Status Report WE February
Local Government Status Report WE March
Local Government Status Report WE May
Local Government Status Report WE August
Local Government Status Report WE October
Local Government Status Report WE April
Local Government Status Report WE August
Local Government Status Report WE January
Local Government Status Report WE July
Local Government Status Report WE May
Local Government Status Report WE April
Local Government Status Report WE January
Local Government Status Report WE June
Local Government Status Report WE April
Local Government Status Report WE February
Local Government Status Report WE July
Local Government Status Report WE June
Local Government Status Report WE October
Local Government Status Report WE March
Local Government Status Report WE November
Local Government Status Report WE August
Local Government Status Report WE February
Local Government Status Report WE June
Local Government Status Report WE September
Local Government Status Report WE August
Local Government Status Report WE January
Local Government Status Report WE March
Local Government Status Report WE May
Local Government Status Report WE August
Local Government Status Report WE October
Local Government Status Report WE April
Local Government Status Report WE August
Local Government Status Report WE July
Local Government Status Report WE December
Local Government Status Report WE February
Local Government Status Report WE May
Local Government Status Report WE September
Local Government Status Report WE April
Local Government Status Report WE July
Local Government Status Report WE June
Local Government Status Report WE October
Local Government Status Report WE March
Local Government Status Report WE November
Local Government Status Report WE September
Local Government Status Report WE August
Local Government Status Report WE August Local Government Status Report WE August Local Government Status Report WE August Local Government Status Report WE August Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it.
Local Government Status Report WE February
Local Government Status Report WE September
Local Government Status Report WE May
Local Government Status Report Week Ending December
Local Government Status Report Week Ending November
Local Government Status Report Week Ending July
Local Government Status Report Week Ending December
Local Government Status Report Week Ending June
Local Government Status Report Week Ending November
Local Government Status Report Week Ending May
Local Government Status Report Week Ending June
Local Government Status Report Week Ending April
Local Government Status Report Week Ending July
Local Government Status Report Week Ending June
Local Government Status Report Week Ending November
Local Government Status Report Week Ending July
Local Government Status Report Week Ending November
Local Government Status Report Week Ending June
Local Government Status Report Week Ending July
Local Government Status Report Week Ending December
Local Government Status Report Week Ending June
Local Government System Improvements options for legislative vehicle
Local Government System Improvements: Policy Decisions
Local Government Weekly Status Reports for the period: week ending August to week ending August
Local Government activities and efficiencies
Local Government aide memoire
Local Government briefing
Local Government portfolio bids and priorities for the Legislation Programme
Local Government portfolio bids for the Legislation Programme
Local Government Council performance framework
Local Legislation Acts
Local Water Done Well Technical Advisory Group appointments and Terms of Reference
Local Water Done Well Technical Advisory Group new member appointment
Local Water Done Well is being implemented in three stages, each with its own piece of legislation.
Local Water Done Well is the Coalition Governments plan to address New Zealands longstanding water infrastructure challenges.
Local Water Done Well is the Governments plan to address New Zealands water infrastructure challenges. It restores council ownership of water assets, sets expectations for water infrastructure management, and makes it easier to operate in a financially sustainable way.
Local Water Done Well is the Governments plan to address New Zealands water services infrastructure challenges. The plan recognises the importance of local decisionmaking and flexibility for communities and councils to determine how water services will be delivered in the future.
Local Water Done Well legislation
Local Water Done Well stage : establishing the framework and transitional arrangements
Local authorities may be less likely to consider Mori representation due to the potential for a poll to be triggered, resulting in less opportunity for Mori participation and representation Medium . Costs vary depending on the size of the council but are estimated to be around , for a council with an electoral population of ,.
Local council models and slide packs
Local currency AAA AAA AAA
Local currency AAAStableA AAAStableA AAAStableA
Local dashboard key messages and FAQs released June
Local government confidence and performance framework Part of the Local Government Act provides the Minister with powers to intervene in a council if they consider that a significant problem exists. The Department supports the Minister in making these decisions by providing analysis and advice on performance issues as they arise. The Department will also continue to deliver its monitoring framework. One area of focus is to work with key stakeholders to take a sectorled approach to managing issues and concerns at an early stage in order to mitigate the need for formal government intervention. Resource Management Act (RMA) reforms The Department will continue to support the work of the Ministry for the Environment in leading the review and replacement of the Resource Management Act. The changes being proposed will have a significant impact on the local government sector, particularly local councils that will have to implement the new legislation. We play a key twoway role in highlighting the impact of the proposals on the local government sector and supporting the sector to understand the proposals being put forward. The Department will facilitate engagement for the sector across the breadth of the Resource Management reforms to support a successful transition and implementation. People can easily access services and information Peoples identity can be easily and securely verified Te Ara Manaaki is making it easier for people to access identity and life event services The Te Ara Manaaki programme is focused on delivering reimagined life event and identity services (births, deaths, marriages and civil unions, citizenship and passports), and ensuring the modernisation and security of the underlying technology well into the future. Our vision is to put customers and their whnau at the heart of everything the Department does, and to continuously make it easier for people to access these services. The modernisation of the life and identity systems will facilitate improved public services and empower New Zealanders to easily capture, navigate, access, and use their own life and identity data. By developing more consistent, linked and automated processes and providing our people with a single view of the customer to see all of their information, we will be able to provide proactive realtime assistance if customers are unable to complete an application, enabling a tailored service to meet their individual customer needs. Linked processes will also enable customers to share information across agencies and not be asked for the same information over and over. Following full implementation in , individuals and authorised parties will be able to see what information the Department holds, access and share their life event and identity data and see who has accessed it and authorise others to access their life event and identity data to improve their service experience. They will also be able to withdraw that consent. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Barriers to digital inclusion are reduced Digital Inclusion As many as one in five New Zealanders are digitally excluded which means they may be unable to readily access government services and have lower levels of social and economic participation. We will explore communityled ways to improve digital inclusion for New Zealanders, as well as better connecting the various groups that have a stake in improving digital inclusion for New Zealanders. The COVID pandemic highlighted for the Government that many individuals and whnau are struggling to survive and thrive because they are digitally excluded. We are funding a digital skills training programme for individuals and whnau through a communitybased provider. Peoples access to government is enhanced Government web standards and cloud computing Greater adoption of cloud services by government agencies will improve the way it delivers services to New Zealanders. We will provide guidance and tools, establish a network for sharing good practice, make policy and regulatory changes, and provide guidance on using cloud in the context of te ao Mori. We will also publish guidance on web accessibility and make decisions on the future of the Digital Service Design Standard and the New Zealand Government Web Standards. Government information channels Government delivers a services and information through a wide range of digital channels. We will continue to provide a portfolio of digital products to support these channels, including the oficial government newspaper (New Zealand Gazette), a guide to finding government services (Govt.nz), and a digital procurement platform (Marketplace). We also provide digital access to the history, government record and cultural heritage of our nation through Papers Past and Digital Pasifik (via National Library) and Archway (Archives New Zealand). Deliver crossagency integrated services The Department will continue to build on the success of earlier work to enable easytouse, joinedup services based on key life events, with a focus on extending SmartStart to ofer integrated services for children aged . Five agencies (MSD, MoH, IR, MoE and DIA) have been asked by central agencies to further develop integrated services into SmartStart. People and their needs will be at the centre of service design to deliver on the vision for joinedup access to government services and information. Success will be customers use of the products and services that are developed and ongoing use of SmartStart outside the registration process. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Digital Foundations programme Digital Foundations is a programme seeking to build the capacity required to transform the National Library and Archives New Zealands digital capabilities and infrastructure, while increasing the value provided to society through education and knowledge transfer. We are partnering with Ng Taonga Sound Vision to ensure that Aotearoas diversity of information, knowledge and memories is captured and preserved. Crucially, the mahi will enable easier access to information and appropriate sharing of taonga. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
Local government feedback on reform proposals
Local government sector representatives have also expressed a clear desire for more detailed modelling and analysis to understand the potential impacts and advantages of the reform at a local level.
Local government stakeholders and engagement strategy for
Local government works collectively to address national objectives.
Local or unitary councils, (also known as territorial authorities) must complete a review of their class gambling venue policy within three years of adoption, and once every years thereafter. This guidance is designed to help you assess your needs, and plan and implement a policy review, if needed.
Lodgement of Cabinet paper: Study tour report back
Lodging of Cabinet paper for approval of introduction of bill to amend LGOIMA
Logan.Fenwickdia.govt.nz
Logistic Regression ( maxiter ) . . SVC (Support Vector Machine) . . Guassian Naive Bayes . . Ada Boost (Decision Tree Base) . .
Logos, visual identity guides and Style Guide
Longterm Insights Briefing
Longterm Plan) Order
Longterm contractual agreements for water service providers
Longterm insights briefing
Looking ahead, our refreshed DEI strategy will build upon the foundations of
Looking at issues pertaining to public entities, (usage of resources, including financial, governance, management and organisational issues)
Looking back to move forward
Lord Chamberlains Office
Lottery Auckland Community Committee Rota ki te Hapori o Tmaki Makaurau
Lottery Bay of PlentyGisborne Community Committee Rota ki te Hapori o Te MoanaaToi TranganuiaKiwa
Lottery Canterbury Kaikura Community Committee Rota ki te Hapori Waitaha Kaikura
Lottery Community Facilities Committee Te Tahua Hapori Ng Whakarunga
Lottery Community Facilities Committee
Lottery Community Sector Research Committee
Lottery Distribution Committees
Lottery Distribution Committees Appointment Round: Commencement Briefing
Lottery Distribution Committees Reappointment documents briefing
Lottery Distribution Committees Talking points for APH, and documentation to complete the appointment process
Lottery Environment Heritage Committee
Lottery Environment and Heritage Committee Te Tahua Taiao Ng Taonga
Lottery Fund for Community Benefit Related to the Americas Cup Committee
Lottery Grants Board Administration budget July
Lottery Grants Board Annual Report and Lottery Grants Board Audit Completion Report
Lottery Grants Board financial statements
Lottery Grants Board: Draft Cabinet Paper
Lottery Grants distribution committee and Community Organisation Grants Scheme (COGS) grants can be applied for from this website.
Lottery Hawkes Bay Community Committee Rota ki te Hapori o Te MtauaMui
Lottery Health Research Committee
Lottery Health Research Committee Te Tahua Rangahau Hauora
Lottery Individuals with Disabilities Committee
Lottery Individuals with Disabilities Committee Te Komiti Rota m te Tangata Hautanga
Lottery ManawatuWanganui Community Committee Rota ki te Hapori o Manawat Whanganui
Lottery Ministers Discretionary Fund April
Lottery Ministers Discretionary Fund February
Lottery Ministers Discretionary Fund March
Lottery Ministers Discretionary Fund May
Lottery Ministers Discretionary Fund November
Lottery Ministers Discretionary Fund Briefing February
Lottery Ministers Discretionary Fund Briefing July
Lottery Ministers Discretionary Fund August
Lottery Ministers Discretionary Fund October
Lottery Ministers Discretionary Fund September
Lottery National Community Committee Te Tahua Hapori Ng Whakaurunga
Lottery National Community Committee
Lottery Northland Community Committee Rota ki te Hapori o Te Hiku o te Ika
Lottery OtagoSouthland Community Committee Rota ki te Hapori tkou Murihiku
Lottery Outdoor Safety Committee Te Tahua Whakaruruhau
Lottery Outdoor Safety Committee
Lottery Significant Projects Committee Kaupapa Hiranga Tahua
Lottery Significant Projects Committee
Lottery Taranaki Community Committee
Lottery Waikato Community Committee Rota ki te Hapori o Waikato
Lottery WellingtonWairarapa Community Committee Rota ki te Hapori o Te Upoko o te Ika Wairarapa
Lottery West CoastNelsonMarlborough Community Committee Rota ki te Hapori o Te Tai Poutini WhakatWairau
Lottery distribution committees appointments documents
Lottery distribution committees appointments round: APH talking points
Lotto NZ Special Purpose Lottery for cyclone relief
Lotto NZ Special Purpose Lottery fund for Cyclone Gabrielle relief and ministerial direction
Lotto NZ: Proposal for Game Changes
Lotto meeting December
Lower Hutt model WICS report
Lower Hutt slide pack WICS report
Lower risks of customer information being misused, lost or stolen.
Lowering the Voting Age for Local Elections: Differentiated Age Limits
Lowering the Voting Age for Local Elections: Differentiated Age Limits Cabinet Minute SWC MIN Cabinet Office May
Lowering the voting age for local elections differentiated age limits
Lowering the voting age for local elections: differentiated age limits Cabinet Paper Office of the Minister of Justice Office of the Minister of Local Government May
MBIE, NZDF) and providers was also undertaken.
MELAA Middle Eastern, Latin American, African
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING between
METHODOLOGY The observation data from the field trials was analysed to determine ground truth, and combined with the card data for analysis.
MFAT Ministry of Foreign Affairs Trade.
MINISTERIAL CREDIT CARD EXPENSE RELEASES
MINISTERS EXPENSE RELEASES
MINISTRY OF HEALTH MANATU HAUORA :i Citation: Ministry of Health. . Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm to . Wellington: Ministry of Health. in June by the Ministry of Health PO Box , Wellington , New Zealand ISBN (print) ISBN (online) HP This document is available at health.govt.nz This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution . International licence. In essence, you are free to: share ie, copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format; adapt ie, remix, transform and build upon the material. You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the licence and indicate if changes were made. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
MINISTRY OF HEALTH New Zealand Government MANATU HAUORA Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm to Released health.govt.nz Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
MOT raised concerns about the potential regulatory overlap for stormwater arising from powers in the Resource Management Act enforced by regional councils, stormwater environmental performance standards in the Water Services Act to be implemented by Taumata Arowai, and the inclusion of stormwater management processes signalled in the Local Water Done Well legislation. MOTs concern is driven by the enabling provisions in the Land Transport Act allowing councils to make tra nsport bylaws. Roading often serves a secondary purpose as a stormwater network in addition to its primary purpose of enabling safe and efficient transport. From an urban planning perspective, it is not necessarily easy to separate the transport network fr om the stormwater network.
Mackenzie District Council
Mackenzie model WICS report
Mackenzie slide pack WICS report
Mairiages, and Relationships Registration Act ).
Maihi Karauna is the public services strategy for Mori language revitalisation. The Department continues to revitalise te reo Mori in several ways. Here are some examples over the last year:
Mailing address(es) Births, Deaths and
Main website for the National Library of New Zealand.
Maintaining accreditation
Maintaining an external Speak Up line to give kaimahi a confidential channel for discussing workplace concerns.
Maintaining the privacy and confidentiality of the information of individuals and organisations.
Major amendments to this Agreement will be made in accordance with section () () ofthe
Major amendments to this Agreement will be made in accordance with section V () ()
Make a formal accessibility complaint
Make a positive difference. Strive for excellence.
Make an Official Information Act request
Make an information request
Make content on a web page larger
Make sure personal information is correct, relevant and up to before you use it DIA have established procedures to ensure the accuracy of DIA Information most notably that most information registered is provided by the source of the information. Usually this will be from the subjects of the information or in the case of birth registration by the parents.
Makes decisions about use of volumetric pricing, block tariffs and geographic averaging as part of funding and pricing plan within limits of any regulations set by the Minister. Every years
Making New Zealand better for New Zealanders
Making it easy for people to verify their identity and reducing or eliminating digital barriers enhances peoples ability to participate in society through jobs, education, community work and recreation.
Making official information requests A guide for requesters
Making our services accessible to all New Zealanders
Making sixyearly service delivery reviews optional
Making the digital world a safer place
Making the digital world a safer place for everyone
Man jailed for child sex abuse pictures
Man sentenced for child sex abuse collection
Man sentenced for child sexual abuse material
Man sentenced for possession of child exploitation material
Mana Orite (Equality and Fairness): We ensure that every complaint is treated with fairness and respect, giving each individual equal consideration and upholding impartiality throughout the resolution process.
Mana ki, our intercultural competence programme, helps build intercultural awareness and understanding
Manaakitanga (Care and Hospitality): We approach each complaint with care and empathy ensuring individuals feel heard and supported throughout the resolution process.
Management and leadership development
Management customer interaction and provide the services they request.
ManagementGoverna nce Fair Fair Fair
Manager Information Partnerships
Manager New Zealand Mining Board of
Manager Nominations Service
Manager Nominations and Governance
Managerial oversight NZSIS managers are responsible for ensuring employees are aware of their obligations and only access information that is reasonably required to enable them to carry out their official duties as part of NZSISs functions
Managing Cost Pressures Associated with Implementing the Three Waters Reform Programme
Managing and Accessing Identity
Managing and Accessing Identity (.)
Managing and protecting the integrity of national identity information. This includes life events such as births, deaths and marriages, citizenship and issuing passports
Managing cost pressures associated with implementing the three waters reform programme Proposal . This paper seeks decisions that will enable certain funding issues and cost pressures relating to the policy, legislation and transition work in the three waters reform programme to be managed. It is critical to address these issues if we are to deliver the reforms, and do so effectively and within the intended timeframe. . Specifically, I propose to reprioritise a portion of the remaining unallocated balance of the Three Waters Infrastructure Investment and Service Delivery Reform Programme tagged continge ncy to ensure the policy and legislative programme is sufficiently resourced, and to provide additional funding to support councils and iwiMori to participate meaningfully in the transition. . A small portion of this funding would also be provided for the Future for Local Government Review, so that it can fulfil its terms of reference, on time and to a high standard. . A further paper will follow shortly seeking decisions on my proposed response to the Working Group on Representation, Governance and Accountability of new water services entities, and providing visibility about the three waters policy and legislation timetable. Relation to government priorities . This Government has ambitions to significantly improve the safety, quality, resilience, accessibility, and performance of three waters services, in a manner that is efficient and affordable for New Zealanders. . This is critical for public health and wellbeing, environmental outcomes, econo mic growth and job creation, housing and urban development, adapting to the impacts of climate change, building resilience to natural hazards, and improving outcomes relating to water services for iwiMori. . The status quo (with three waters services provided by local authorities) has resulted in poor health and environmental outcomes for many communities, deteriorating infrastructure due to sustained underinvestment, and wide variation in service quality. Maintaining the current service delivery arrangements no longer represents a financially sustainable option for funding significant infrastructure costs. This is recognised as a key challenge by the local government sector, which the reforms are intended to address. . In April , it was agreed that the Three Waters Review is a Government priority. The Labou r Party Manifesto committed to reform New Zealands drinking water and wastewater system, and upgrade water infrastructure to create jobs across the country. These reforms are anticipated to occur in parallel with reforms to the resource management system. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of
Managing jurisdictional risk
Managing our technology and property assets to support better outcomes
Manatu Wahine Ministry for Women
Manawatu District Council
Manawatu District Council Wairoa District Council
Manawatu Harness Racing Club Season Launch
Manawatu model WICS report
Manawatu slide pack WICS report
ManawatuWhanganui Community Committee
ManawatWhanganui Regional Council Waitomo District Council
Mandatory registrations for any donations made at a fertility clinic on or after August that result in a birth.
Manual contact tracing is a very labourintensive forensic task which can take persondays of work per newly infected person. Contact tracers build relationships with covidpositive persons at a sensitive time. They seek to understand their lifestyle, friendships, who they have had close contact with in the preceding days and where they have been.
Manufacturing and distributing cards will take the better part of months and provide just one year of CovidCard national coverage for an estimated cost of nearly m, assuming no copayment by cardholders. The economic costs of lockdowns are measured in the tens of billions of dollars.
Many New Zealanders are expected to respond favourably to an appeal by the Prime Minister supported by a massmarket campaign, but mandatory usage of CovidCard in some settings would likely be required to reach adoption targets (bars, nightclubs).
Many duties were transferred to new agencies: within a decade of its creation in , the Justice Department had acquired the Colonial Secretarys Offices judicial section, lands and deeds, prisons and patents. Mental hospitals and charitable aid became the nucleus of a new department. Other tasks were moved between departments: sheep inspection was swapped between the Colonial Secretarys Office and the Lands Department, for example.
Many factors influence an individuals pathway to joining a gang,
Many factors influence peoples sense of belonging and connection. When people lack a sense of belonging and feel excluded there are high social costs for individuals, communities and society.
Many gangs are intergenerational and embedded
Many of our wellknown products such as Passports and RealMe have online automated identity verification processes which use biometrics such as facial recognition. Biometrics make it easier to access services while keeping your identity safe.
Many of these recommendations can be addressed through controlled closed field trials. Closed field trials offer the opportunity t o script scenarios with high levels of surveillance to determine the impact of environmental features on card performance. Further, closed field trials provide the opportunity to refine the close contact algorithm for card firmware. This algorithm is essen tial to decrease the rate of false positives and improve the efficiency of the cards battery and memory. The remaining recommendations can be implemented by the research team. This will involve extensive engagement between the Nelson Marlborough DHB, Virscient, the governance group and University of Otago researchers. Nelson Marlborough DHB will need to lead the implementation of the opt out recruitment approach, establishing communication channels with staff, recruiting unit team leaders and preparing a real time working roster. Virscient will lead the development of the data management and analysis strategy to facilitate the appropriate analyses and provide new card firmware tested in closed field trials. The University of Otago will lead the study d esign and coordinate the field trial in Nelson Hospital. University of Otago researchers will lead information sessions and provide overarching support to research team to ensure the successful delivery of the Phase Two trial . Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs . StoreRoom . Drug Room . Drs Room . Staff Room . Computer Room . Bed Patient Room . Bed Patient Room . Bed Patient Room Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Computer Room
Many young people receive the love,
Marae and Papakinga Rural Water Services Technical Advisory Group statement
March Nationwide workshop series three: Reform programme update and test emerging policy proposals
March Frequently asked questions
March and passed by November , so that the Mori ward changes come into
March Baseline Update as there is a risk of a breach of appropriations by April . I
Maritime Transport (Infringement Fees for Offences Lake Taup Navigation Safety Bylaw ) Regulations
Mark of an Accredited Service from the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Authority
Marketing and distribution Build an app and they will come is not a strategy that will work. Any effort must be strongly supported by marketing and promotion from the appropriate authorities, including the Director General of Health and the Prime Minister.
Marketplace Pae Hokohoko
Marlborough District Council
Marlborough model WICS report
Marlborough slide pack WICS report
Marriage Information Births, Deaths and
Marriage Information Information relating to the individuals marriage as maintained by the
Marriage Information Information relating to the individuals marriage that is maintained by
Marriage Information, excluding Registrar Mortality Review
Marriage information ....
Marriage licence A licence issued under section of the Marriage Act .
Marriages (RegistrarGeneral) Manager Information Partnerships
Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Prescribed Information) Regulations
Marriages General Manager Services and
Martin Jenkins was utilised in the Inquiry into Disclosure of Funding Shortfall in the ACC Nonearners Account
MartinJenkins December
Mary Scholtens QC, November
Master of Professional Accounting, Victoria University of Wellington
Masterton District Council
Masterton District Council Wellington Regional Council
Masterton model WICS report
Masterton slide pack WICS report
MatamataPiako District Council
MatamataPiako District Council Western Bay of Plenty District Council
MatamataPiako model WICS report
MatamataPiako slide pack WICS report
Matching Programme July
Material for April meeting of Three Waters Ministers
Material for Climate Response Ministers Group meeting August
Material for ministers meeting on climate adaptation on October
Material to support the upcoming Community Resilience Ministers meeting on Buller flood resilience
Material: Requirements, we intend to proactively release this paper on the
Materials for the August Infrastructure Funding Settings Ministers Meeting
Mauri o te Tangata Services and Access
May CentralLocal Government Forum Reform Programme Initiated
May , Privacy Impact Assessment: Full Report Identity Check
Mayor Campbell Barry, Lower Hutt (Entity C)
Mayor Dr Jason Smith, Kaipara (Entity A)
Mayor Garry Webber, Western Bay of Plenty (Entity B)
Mayor Lianne Dalziel, Christchurch (Entity D)
Mayor Lyn Patterson, Masterton (RuralProvincial sector representative)
Mayor Neil Holdom, New Plymouth (Entity B)
Mayor Phil Goff, Auckland (Entity A)
Mayor Rachel Reese, Nelson (Entity C)
Mayor Tim Cadogan, Central Otago (Entity D)
Mean Participation ( SD) (.) . (.) Denominator is day specific . Field applications of data collection tools .. Applications of the daily d iary surveys We made some non technical adjustments to the daily diaries to improve readability and data collection. One major issue we needed to overcome was a less than optimal ward coverage ( of active staff members). This was due to a limit on the number of car ds and because many staff were not necessarily assigned to the medical ward, but were still seeing patients there. As a result, there were many people active in the ward who were not participants, and participants were likely to record close contacts who were not participants in the study. To mitigate this issue, we added additional items to the daily diary to filter out non participants. This may not be an issue in Phase , when we expect much better coverage through a public recruitment pro cess, marketin g, and improved availability of cards. We instituted a number of additions to the daily diary to ensure linkage between card and survey data. We initially wanted participants to provide the study ID number of the close contacts, but particip ants often w ore the cards in a way that led to it being obscured. As a result, Otago research staff submitted an amendment to Otago Ethics outlining our aim to ask the participants to provide the final three digits of a close contacts phone number. We int ended to cro ssreference the last mobile number digits with the enrolment forms to get the ID number. However, the participants Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Measured against internal and external tools, for example, our employee experience survey (Whakahoki Krero) and the Te Taunaki Public Service Census.
Measures are in place to protect the information of people, businesses and organisations.
Measuring progress RSG has identified the following five year success measures as indicators of the Groups progress against its strategic objectives. Focus area two: Strengthening our capabilitySpecific regulatory foundations, and target dates for the embedding of these in system groups, will be agreed in conjunction with DIA Regulatory Stewardship and Assurance of technical capabilities are met across RSG Focus area one: Embedding our regulatory foundations
Mechanisms for binding polls on Mori
Media ahead of seeking Cabinets approval to that approach.
Media enquiries for all branches are handled by the Communications Group Media Team.
Media phone:
Media release and select committee timeframes
Media releases and contacts
Media. The meeting was to discuss the Telecommunications Development Levy and
Medium Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Medium Total monetised costs Medium High Nonmonetised costs Medium High Additional benefits of the preferred option compared to taking no action Regulated groups NA Regulators NA Other s (e.g., w ider govt , consumers , etc. ) Public has final say about council decisions on Mori wards Medium Low Total monetised benefits NA NA Nonmonetised benefits Medium Low Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Meeting Jana Rangooni on December
Meeting between Minister Brown and Minister Bayly on February
Meeting on September with Philanthropy New Zealand
Meeting on November with Philanthropy New Zealand
Meeting on May with the Insurance Brokers Association of New Zealand about Fire and Emergency
Meeting on March with the Taxpayers Union about Fire and Emergency New Zealand
Meeting on February with Property Council New Zealand
Meeting on August with the Insurance Council of New Zealand
Meeting on areas of joint interest in Entity D area for Three Waters
Meeting the Commerce Commission October
Meeting the immediate recovery needs of councils
Meeting with Aliya Danzeisen, National Coordinator of the Islamic Womens Council of New Zealand
Meeting with Canterbury Mayoral Forum on May
Meeting with Chair of the Waikato Mayoral Forum and members of Waikato Regional Council, February
Meeting with Chairs of the Taumata Arowai Board and Te Puna on November
Meeting with Chairs of the Taumata Arowai Board and Te Puna on August
Meeting with Chatham Islands Council
Meeting with Chatham Islands Mayor and CEO
Meeting with Commissioners of Phase of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID Lessons on November
Meeting with Crown Infrastructure Partners on October
Meeting with Crown Manager Lawrence Yule
Meeting with DPMC officials on critical infrastructure resilience on April
Meeting with Daran Ponter, Greater Wellington Regional Council Chair, and Peter Scott, Environment Canterbury Chair, on July
Meeting with Discovery NZ Senior Vice President, Glen Kyne
Meeting with Doug Leeder, Chair BoPRC
Meeting with Entity A councils and hap in Whngarei
Meeting with Fire and Emergency New Zealand
Meeting with Fire and Emergency New Zealand Board November
Meeting with Fire and Emergency New Zealand leadership on June
Meeting with Fire and Emergency New Zealand leadership on September
Meeting with Fire and Emergency New Zealand leadership on August
Meeting with Fire and Emergency New Zealand leadership on October
Meeting with Fire and Emergency New Zealand on February
Meeting with Fire and Emergency New Zealand, March , April
Meeting with Fire and Emergency New Zealand, October
Meeting with Fire and Emergency New Zealand, November
Meeting with Fire and Emergency New Zealands Financial Sustainability and Investment Subcommittee on November
Meeting with Free Speech Union
Meeting with Freshwater Iwi Leaders Group March
Meeting with GRNZ: October
Meeting with Gambling Commission February
Meeting with Google on March
Meeting with Greyhounds as Pets NZ on October
Meeting with Guyon Espiner about lotto and gambling
Meeting with Happiness House
Meeting with Heart Foundation on March
Meeting with Hon Chris Penk, Minister for Land Information (Aide Memoire)
Meeting with Hon Kelbin Davis on February
Meeting with Hon Nicole McKee on September
Meeting with IA New Zealand
Meeting with IAG on August
Meeting with IAG on May
Meeting with Ian Blair, Managing Director of WSP and Vinney Minett WSP Director Strategic Advisory Investment
Meeting with Insurance Council
Meeting with InternetNZ May
Meeting with Iwi Secretariat for Entity C
Meeting with Jamie Simmonds, Strengthening Grantham Project
Meeting with Jenn Hooper, July
Meeting with John Curtin, JC International Ltd and Harness Link, on September
Meeting with Kaikura District Council August
Meeting with Kate Hannah, Disinformation Project
Meeting with Kerry Davies and Duane Leo, New Zealand Public Service Association National Secretaries, October
Meeting with LGNZ Executive Council on July
Meeting with LGNZ Executive Leadership Team, April
Meeting with LGNZ Executive Leadership Team, August
Meeting with LGNZ and Prime Minister, September
Meeting with Lawrence Yule and Hon Mark Mitchell
Meeting with Local Government Commission, June
Meeting with Local Government New Zealand and the Prime Minister
Meeting with Local Government New Zealand, July
Meeting with Lotto NZ February, to
Meeting with Lotto NZ Chair and Chief Executive, June
Meeting with Lotto New Zealand on February
Meeting with Lotto New Zealand on August
Meeting with Makes Sense April
Meeting with Marie Black, Mayor of Hurunui, Craig Mackle, Mayor of Kaikoura Dan Gordon, Mayor of Waimakariri
Meeting with Mark Butcher CEO and the LGFA Board
Meeting with Masterton, Carterton, and South Wairarapa District Council Mayors, June
Meeting with MatamataPiako District Council Monday September
Meeting with Mayor Ben Bell, Gore District Council
Meeting with Mayor Brown March
Meeting with Mayor Campbell Barry, Daran Ponter, and Hon Chris Bishop
Meeting with Mayor Moko Tepania and Guy Holroyd
Meeting with Mayor Neil Brown on March
Meeting with Mayor Sam Broughton
Meeting with Mayor of Chatham Islands
Meeting with Minister Grant Robertson Cabinet Economic Development Committee
Meeting with Minister of Internal Affairs on June
Meeting with NZTR about thoroughbred welfare on November
Meeting with Nelson City Council September
Meeting with Netsafe and the tech signatories of the online safety code on April
Meeting with Nick Leggett, CEO Infrastructure NZ
Meeting with Oliver Hartwich and Nick Clark, Senior Fellow, Economics Advocacy, NZ Initiative on Thursday October
Meeting with One NZ Aide Memoire
Meeting with Otago Regional Council, November
Meeting with Otago and Southland mayors on February
Meeting with Pamela Storey, Chair and Chris McClay CEO of Waikato Regional Council
Meeting with Phil Holden, Chair of Harness Racing New Zealand
Meeting with Problem Gambling Foundation on August
Meeting with Richard Templer, CEO of Engineering NZ
Meeting with SAFE: October
Meeting with SPCA, October
Meeting with Sam Broughton January
Meeting with Sandra Faulkner, Board member, Federated Farmers
Meeting with SkyCity Entertainment Group on November
Meeting with TAB Chair and Chief Executive
Meeting with TAB NZ on August
Meeting with TAB NZ on May
Meeting with TAB NZ, April
Meeting with Tai Tokerau Councils
Meeting with Taumata Arowai Chairs on April
Meeting with Taumata Arowai on March
Meeting with Tauranga Mayor Elect
Meeting with Te Arawa River Iwi Trust, May
Meeting with Te Korowai Trust
Meeting with Te Manawa o Ng Wai Iwi Secretariat for Entity B
Meeting with Te Rnanga o Ngi Tahu
Meeting with Te Tumu Paeroa on July on Cyclone Gabrielle impact on whenua Mori in the Hawkes Bay
Meeting with Te Tumu Paeroa on Cyclone Gabrielle impact on whenua Mori in the Hawkes Bay
Meeting with TikTok General Manager and Director of Public Policy for New Zealand and Australia
Meeting with Tower Insurance CEO, Blair Turnbull
Meeting with Twharetoa Iwi Crown Accord
Meeting with United Fire Brigade Association
Meeting with United Fire Brigades Association
Meeting with Waipa District Council Monday September
Meeting with Wayne Brown, Mayor of Auckland on February
Meeting with Wellington Regional Council, December
Meeting with West Coast Mayors
Meeting with Zone and on November
Meeting with archival and library sector statutory body chairs, June
Meeting with class Chairs
Meeting with members of the LGNZ Electoral Reform Group
Meeting with officials in week of May: Online casino gambling regulatory design ()
Meeting with officials on May: Online casino gambling regulatory design ()
Meeting with officials on May: Online casino gambling regulatory design ()
Meeting with officials on June: Online casino gambling Cabinet paper
Meeting with officials on June: Online casino gambling regulatory design ()
Meeting with officials on Monday, April, : Online casino gambling regulatory design
Meeting with officials on Thursday, May, : Online casino gambling regulatory design ()
Meeting with officials on Wednesday, May, : Online casino gambling regulatory design ()
Meeting with the Chair and members of the Royal Commission into Lessons Learned from Aotearoa New Zealands Response to COVID That Should Be Applied in Preparation for a Future Pandemic
Meeting with the Chair of the Fire and Emergency New Zealand Board
Meeting with the Chair of the Fire and Emergency New Zealand Board on April
Meeting with the Chair of the Royal Commission: December
Meeting with the Chair of the Water Services Authority
Meeting with the Chief Censor Thursday August
Meeting with the Christchurch Casino CE, Brett Anderson
Meeting with the Fire and Emergency New Zealand Board July
Meeting with the Future for Local Government Review Panel members, July
Meeting with the Future for Local Government Review Panel on May
Meeting with the Local Government New Zealand Sector
Meeting with the Mayor of Queenstown Glyn Lewers
Meeting with the Mayors and Chief Executives of Hutt City and Porirua Councils on October
Meeting with the Minister for Media and Communications about the content regulation review
Meeting with the Minister for Racing: September, to
Meeting with the Minister of Finance and Minister of Revenue on January
Meeting with the Minister of Finance to discuss the Review into the Future for Local Government, May
Meeting with the Minister of Revenue to discuss the tax policy work programme and philanthropy
Meeting with the NZCTU Steering Group
Meeting with the Problem Gambling Foundation
Meeting with the Property Council
Meeting with the Tauranga City Council Commission July
Meeting with the Tauranga Commission Chair Anne Tolley
Meeting with the Water Services Authority Taumata Arowai Chair on August
Meeting with the former Local Water Done Well Technical Advisory Group members February
Meeting with the new Chief Censor
Meeting with torohanga District Council November
Meeting with Dame Kerry Prendergast on August
Melbou rne VIC SP Global
Melbourne water reform that were discussed in this meeting.
Members of Parliament (Remuneration and Services) Act
Members of the Executive (Ministers of the Crown) require financial resources and support services to fulfil their responsibilities and to service the public efficiently and effectively. Their entitlement to these resources and support services is specified in the Executive Travel, Accommodation, Attendance and Communications Services Determination (No ) (the Determination).
Members of the Executive (Ministers of the Crown) require financial resources and support services to fulfil their responsibilities and to service the public efficiently and effectively. Their entitlement to these resources and support services is specified in the Executive Travel, Accommodation, Attendance and Communications Services Determination (the Determination).
Members of the Executive (Ministers of the Crown) require financial resources and support services to fulfil their responsibilities and to service the public efficiently and effectively. Their entitlement to these resources and support services is specified in the Travel, Accommodation, Attendance and Communications Services Determination (the Determination).
Members of the Executive are also members of Parliament and, as such, have all the entitlements to travel, accommodation, attendance, and communications services that the Speaker determines, under section A of the Civil List Act . These entitlements are set out in the Speakers Directions.
Members of the Executive are also members of Parliament, and as such, have all the entitlements to travel, accommodation, attendance, and communications services that the Speaker determines, under section A of the Civil List Act . These entitlements are set out in the Speakers Directions.
Members of the Working Group:
Members wishing to leave their environment
Memorandum of Understanding
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)
Memorandum of Understanding between GCDO, Department of Internal Affairs and Amazon Web Services March
Memorandum of Understanding Three Waters Services Reform to sign
Memorandum of Understanding: Development of Partnering and Collaboration to support management of shared services, facilities and resources for National Library of New Zealand, Alexander Turnbull Library, Archives New Zealand and Nga Taonga Sound Vision, December
Memorandums of Understanding with strategic suppliers
Methodological Discussion Paper Analysing New Zealand Online Extremism
Methodological Discussion Paper Analysising New Zealand Online Extremism
Methodology flaws WICS uses an unconventional method that back solves the revenue path building blocks approach versus revenue approach p. This approach is not unconventional it is entirely consistent with the financeability test performed by other regulatory authorities in UK (eg Ofwat in its PR). Cost of capital is a function of the amount of debt that is available. The net investme nt profile is modelled differently in the Reform Scenario compared to the Opt Out Scenario. In the Reform Scenario, WICS has only included the large investment requirements after . Yet, in the Opt Out Scenario, WICS included the large investment requir ements from . p. The phasing of investment is consistent with achieving a long term smooth price profile with financeability constraints.
Michael Lovett Deputy Secretary Policy and Te Tiriti
Michael Lovett Deputy Chief Executive Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Michael Lovett Deputy Chief Executive, Local Government
Michael Webster Secretary of the Cabinet Hardcopy distribution: Cabinet Legislation Committee I N C O N F I D E N C E osjznc Proac ively released by the Minister of Internal ffairs
Michael Webster Secretary of the Cabinet s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of Office of the Minister of Local Government
Michael Woodside , Polic y Direct or, Policy Group, Regulation and Po licy, Department of Internal Affairs December Quality Assurance (completed by QA panel) Reviewing Agency: Department of Internal Affairs Panel Assessment Comment : The panel considers that the information and analysis summarised in the RI A partially meets the quality assurance criteria. The interim RIS does a reasonable job of identifying the gaps in data, evidence and information to support decisions about whether changes to the regulations are needed and, if so, what changes to the regulations may have the largest positive and least adverse impacts. It will be important to obtain good information through the consultation process to help to fill these gaps, including about costs and benefits and the implementation of the proposed regulatory changes. A good consultation process should help to fill gaps in the analysis of costs and benefits, both quantifiable and nonquantifiable, so that the final RIS can provide the necessary information to support decision making. It is also important for the final RIS to assess the interaction between regulatory changes, operational improvements and the role of the regulator in effective enforcement. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Statement Section : Diagnos ing the policy problem What is the context behind the policy problem and how is the Counterfactual expected to develop Context A quick overview . Class gambling (pokies) means electronic gaming machines ( EGMs ) in pubs, clubs and TABs (but not casinos, which are regulated by another part of the Act ) around New Zealand. Pokies are a form of continuous gambling, where money can immediately be reinvested to more gambling. . Pokies are operated by corporate societies who must be licens ed, operate in a not forprofit manner and return gaming machine proceeds to authorised purposes (via community grants, internal club funding or TAB racing industry funding). The key differences between pubs and clubs are that : nonclub societies (e.g. NZ Community Trust) can have multiple venues (but a venue licence must be acquired for each venue); while club societies (e.g. the RSA) have their own premises as a venue (the exception is TAB, which is a club but has many venues across NZ). . All societies and venues have obligations under the Gambling Act (the Act) and the Gambling ( Harm Prevention and Minimisation ) Regulations (see next section). This includes ensuring a ll EGMs meet the national standards and include any specified features. The Department of Internal Affairs regulates pokies . There are a number of legislative measures already in place that are intended to prevent and minimise harm from pokies. The Appendix provides an overview (colour coded) of Class Venue Requirements of the Act and the Harm Minimisation Regulations . . The Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) is responsible for regulating the Class gambling sector in New Zealand. As the r egulator , this includes the licens ing function, encouraging best practice and minimising harm caused by gambling. The current key focus of the regulator is improving harm minimisation interventions and outcomes by increased monitoring and enforcement of harm requirements. . T he regulator continually enhances operational processes to improve the transparency and accountability of Class operators and improve their understanding of the scale and nature of noncompliance with existing rules. Expenditure on pokies . Expenditure on pokies increases annually from a low of million in , to a high of million in . For , total expenditure fell to million, which can be primarily attributed to the significant loss of gaming machine profits (GMP) due to the COVID alert level restrictions. Despite this decrease, recorded GMP expenditure for was million, the highest since records began in . . Most of the money spent on gambling in New Zealand comes from the relatively limited number of people who play pokies andor casino gaming machines. Most people accessing gambling harm intervention services cite pub or club pokies as the primary problem gambling mode. Harm from gambling is wider ranging and has impacts beyond the gambler . The Act defines a problem gambler as a person whose gambling causes harm or may cause harm. Harmful gambling is now our preferred term , as it removes the onus on the individual. . The Act defines harm as harm or distress of any kind, caused or exacerbated by a persons gambling and includes personal, social or economic harm suffered by any person or society. . Individual harm from gambling is wide ranging and can include:
Michael Woodside Policy Director Policy, Regulation and Communities
Michael Woodside Policy Director, Policy Group
Michael has worked in a variety of senior management roles in operational and policy agencies across the New Zealand public sector including the Ministry of Social Development, Ministry for the Environment and Department of Corrections. He started his career as a forensic psychologist and holds a Bachelor of Science and an Executive Master of Public Administration.
Michael is Deputy Secretary for Policy and Te Tiriti.
Michael.Smithcybercx.co.nz
Microsoft Azure Microsoft , AWS, Google Cloud.
Microsoft Office are all SaaS.
Microsoft Office documents (Word, Excel, PowerPoint)
Microsoft Office documents may not be fully accessible depending on your operating system and software. If you require a specific document that is not accessible, please contact webmasterdia.govt.nz to request an accessible version of it.
Middle Eastern, Latin American, African
Minimising Harm and Maximising Benefit: The Departments Approach to Compliance and Enforcement August
Minimising Harm, Maximising Benefit
Minimising our environmental impact and where possible. We recognise the interconnectedness of our actions with the world around us.
Minimum requirements for ringfencing water service
Minimum standards for R adult websites.
Minister Bayly Business Connect September
Minister Collins at DigiGov Leaders Summit May
Minister Responsible for Ministerial Services
Minister Responsible for the Government Communications Securit Bureau
Minister Responsible for the NZSIS must be satisfied that, in providing the intelligence,
Minister f Local Government
Minister for Digitising Government
Minister for Ethnic Communities
Minister for Local Government Status Report WE September
Minister for Local Government Status Report WE September
Minister for Local Government Status Report WE September
Minister for Local Government Status Report WE September
Minister for Primary Industries Nathan Guy and Minister for Food Safety Nikki Kaye have released the first of two reports from the Government Inquiry into the Whey Protein Concentrate Contamination Incident. The report addresses Parts B and C of the Terms of Reference for the Inquiry.
Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector
Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications
Minister of Foreign Affairs
Minister of Internal Affairs
Minister of Internal Affairs
Minister of Internal Affairs
Minister of Internal Affairs for response.
Minister of Justice Minister of Local Government Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of usoq
Minister of Local Government
Minister of Local Government Minister of Revenue Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Minister of Local Government fr,. Te Tari Taiwhenua
Minister of lntemal Affairs
Minister with Sandra Faulkner, Federated Farmers
Ministers expense releases
Minister(s) initiate, with agreement from the Prime Minister
Minister(s), by notice in the New Zealand Gazette
Ministerial Accommodation Review
Ministerial Briefing GCPO State of Privacy Maturity in the Public Service
Ministerial Certification of Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets at December
Ministerial Inquiry into Land use in TairwhitiGisborne and Wairoa (MILU)
Ministerial Office Handbook
Ministerial Reporting for the period April to June
Ministerial Reporting for the period January to March
Ministerial Reporting for the period January to March
Ministerial Reporting for the period October to December
Ministerial Response t o the P etition of R eality Check Radio on Accept R eality
Ministerial Response to the Petition of Reality Check Radio: Accept
Ministerial Satisfaction Survey ( Dec June )
Ministerial Satisfaction Survey ( July December
Ministerial Satisfaction Survey ( July December )
Ministerial Satisfaction Survey July to December
Ministerial Satisfaction Survey January to June
Ministerial Satisfaction Survey
Ministerial Satisfaction Survey
Ministerial Satisfaction Survey for July to December
Ministerial Satisfaction Survey January to June
Ministerial Satisfaction Survey July to December
Ministerial Services Briefing August
Ministerial Services Briefing Accommodation Review August
Ministerial Services are responsible for providing a range of services to the Executive arm of the New Zealand Government, including:
Ministerial Services kaimahi (staff) were responsible for planning, preparing, and delivering the transition by ensuring new Ministers had access to staff, resources, entitlements, technology and offices upon swearing in. This included the recruitment and onboarding of Ministerial office staff with the right experience, knowledge, and skills.
Ministerial accommodation decisions announced
Ministerial consultation Fire and Emergency funding system Cabinet paper and Regulatory Impact Statement
Ministerial consultation on draft Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Prescribed Information) Amendment Regulations
Ministerial consultation on making Class gambling online payments permanent
Ministerial consultation Gambling (Definition of Remote Interactive Gambling) Amendment Bill
Ministerial consultation Next steps on regional deals
Ministerial credit card expenses
Ministerial credit card monthly release
Ministerial credit card statements and reconciliations
Ministerial database reference IA
Ministerial database reference LG
Ministerial database reference LG
Ministerial database reference LG
Ministerial expense reporting
Ministerial reporting for period to Dec
Ministerial response to the petition, after the response has been presented to the House.
Ministers DG meeting with DILG He Ara Pkeko cohort
Ministers Expenses January to June
Ministers Expenses January to June
Ministers and chief executives under the Public Finance Act (PFA). The GCDO
Ministers and chief executives;
Ministers Expenses April to June
Ministers Expenses April to June
Ministers Expenses April to June
Ministers Expenses April to June
Ministers Expenses April to June
Ministers Expenses April to June
Ministers Expenses April to June
Ministers Expenses April to June
Ministers Expenses July to September
Ministers Expenses July to September
Ministers Expenses July to September
Ministers Expenses July to September
Ministers Expenses July to September
Ministers Expenses July to September
Ministers Expenses July to September
Ministers Expenses July to September
Ministers Expenses July to September
Ministers Expenses October to December
Ministers Expenses October to December
Ministers Expenses October to December
Ministers Expenses October to December
Ministers Expenses October to December
Ministers Expenses October to December
Ministers Expenses October to December
Ministers Expenses October to December
Ministers Expenses October to December
Ministers Travel Services within New Zealand Determination
Ministers Travel Services within New Zealand Determination
Ministers Travel Services within New Zealand Determination
Ministers earlier news release:
Ministers expense releases
Ministers expense releases previous disclosures
Ministers expense releases recent disclosures
Ministers papers Community and Voluntary Sector
Ministers papers Digital Economy and Communications (until November )
Ministers papers Digitising Government
Ministers papers Ethnic Communities
Ministers papers Internal Affairs
Ministers Credit Card expenses quarterly release
Ministers Expenses April to June
Ministers Expenses April to June
Ministers Expenses April to June
Ministers Expenses April to June
Ministers Expenses April to June
Ministers Expenses January to March
Ministers Expenses January to March
Ministers Expenses January to March
Ministers Expenses January to March
Ministers Expenses January to March
Ministers Expenses July to September
Ministers Expenses July to September
Ministers Expenses July to September
Ministers Expenses July to September
Ministers Expenses October to December
Ministers Expenses October to December
Ministers Expenses October to December
Ministers Expenses October to December
Ministers Expenses October to December
Ministers Expenses October to December
Ministers Expenses January to March
Ministers Expenses January to March
Ministers Expenses January to March
Ministers Expenses January to March
Ministers Expenses January to March
Ministers Expenses January to March
Ministers Expenses January to March
Ministers Expenses January to March
Ministers Expenses July to September
Ministers Expenses April to June
Ministers Expenses April to June
Ministers Expenses January to March
Ministers Expenses January to March
Ministers Expenses July to September
Ministers Expenses July to September
Ministers Expenses October to December
Ministers Travel and Accommodation expenses quarterly release
Ministers papers Local Government
Ministers papers Ministerial Services
Ministers papers Racing
Ministers Cabinet paper: Consultation on Commercial Video onDemand content classification
Ministers Papers Passport and Travel Document Fee Review
Ministers meeting with Apple on Monday August
Ministers meeting with Waipatu Marae July
Ministry for Culture and Heritage
Ministry for Ethnic Communities
Ministry for Ethnic Communities Nature of scope and functions The Ministry for Ethnic Communities is the Governments chief advisor on ethnic communities, ethnic diversity and the inclusion of ethnic communities in wider society. The Ministry came into being on July and was previously part of the Department of Internal Afairs. The organisation is a departmental agency and the Department of Internal Afairs provides corporate services such as HR, IT , finance and facilities management as a host agency. This allows the Ministry to concentrate on its core role. Aotearoa New Zealands mandated ethnic communities are made up of anyone who identifies their ethnicity as: African Asian Continental European Latin American Middle Eastern. Ethnic communities are a superdiverse group, representing over ethnicities and speaking over languages. They include refugees, new migrants and multigenerational New Zealanders. Ethnic communities make a huge contribution to our economic and social fabric. Aotearoa New Zealands ethnic communities make up almost a million people and growing. We are an increasingly diverse nation and this diversity is a source of strength. It is important that diversity be considered a strength and valued in areas such as education, employment and business opportunities. We will focus on lifing the wellbeing of our ethnic communities and will work with other government agencies to efect change through the Governments policy agenda. It is critical that the vision and direction of the new Ministry should reflect the priorities of the communities it serves. Department of Internal Affairs MINISTRY FOR ETHNIC COMMUNITIES TE TARI MTWAKA
Ministry for Ethnic Communities Overview from the Chief Executive I am proud to be the inaugural Chief Executive Oficer of the Ministry for Ethnic Communities, and excited to deliver outcomes that benefit our ethnic communities in the short term while moving us to an Aotearoa New Zealand where people from ethnic communities feel safe, valued and able to participate fully. As the Governments chief advisor on ethnic communities, ethnic diversity and the inclusion of ethnic communities in wider society, the new Ministry will work with communities and in partnership with other government agencies to deliver on ongoing work to better support and respond to the needs and aspirations of our diverse ethnic communities. Our ethnic communities make up around percent of New Zealands population, an increase of percent since the Census. Our aim is to be a socially inclusive Aotearoa New Zealand where ethnic communities are empowered to contribute their skills, culture and voice. We will do this through: Promoting the value of diversity and improving the inclusion of ethnic communities in wider society. Ensuring government services are accessible for ethnic communities. Improving economic outcomes for ethnic communities, including addressing barriers to employment. Connecting and empowering ethnic community groups. An integral part of our work will be respecting the role of tangata whenua and to honour the Crowns responsibility to act in a way that is consistent with the principles under Te Tiriti o Waitangi Aotearoa. New Zealands ethnic communities acknowledge Te Tiriti o Waitangi as the foundation for the relationship with Tangata Whenua. Ethnic communities place great importance of respect on Tangata Whenua and their status as indigenous people of Aotearoa New Zealand and this is critical for our success. Department of Internal Affairs MINISTRY FOR ETHNIC COMMUNITIES TE TARI MTWAKA
Ministry for Ethnic Communities Strategic goals We work with communities, other government agencies and a range of organisations to help increase social cohesion and ensure Aotearoa is a place where everyone feels welcome, valued and empowered to be themselves. We also provide services and support directly to our communities. Our mandate comes from the communities we engage with, their priorities are ours: promoting the value of diversity and improving the inclusion of ethnic communities in wider society ensuring government services are accessible for ethnic communities improving economic outcomes for ethnic communities, including addressing barriers to employment connecting and empowering ethnic community groups. In order to deliver on our role as the Governments chief advisor on ethnic communities, we look to: advise on the impact of government policies on ethnic communities and identify opportunities to efect change improve the responsiveness of the public sector to the needs of ethnic communities understand from ethnic communities what they need to thrive and communicate this to government empower ethnic communities to achieve their aspirations. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS He whi rawe ki te mahi, , he whakahaere e eke ana ki te taumata teitei Departmental capability We continue to build on the strong organisational capabilities that support us to deliver results for New Zealanders and make the Department a great place to work. Leadership and governance The Departments Executive Leadership Team (EL T) includes our Chief Executive, seven Deputy Chief Executives (DCEs), and the Director of the Ofice of the Chief Executive. The team ensures we focus our eforts and resources in the right areas at the right time. EL Ts operating model supports it to undertake a strategic governance role. The structure of our governance model is outlined below. The governance model focuses on organisational strategy, performance, management of risk and assurance, and investment. It ensures the Department is positioned to deliver on its priorities and purpose, and that EL T has the capacity to strategically govern the Department and take a system leadership view. It allows our senior leaders to work efectively to support successful organisational leadership and performance across the Department. Good governance helps to build trust and confidence in public services. We are working to equip our leaders for a changing environment. We need to ensure our leaders are empowered, enabled, supported and informed. We do this through our Senior Leaders Cohort (SLC), succession planning and talent management. We are committed to lifing leadership capability at all levels and know this requires investment in both time and resources to be successful. Information, privacy and security We work hard to maintain staf awareness and understanding of their obligations in relation to information, privacy and security. As this is a changing environment, we need to ensure that this is embedded into our culture and how we do things at the Department. Ensuring that we value and understand the information we deal with, and know where and when to seek and act on advice, is fundamental to our success. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Risk and assurance We continue to integrate and embed risk management explicitly across our organisation. Everyone can contribute directly to good risk management. As risk is best managed close to the source, everyone needs to be responsible for identifying, understanding and managing their business risks. Our risk management framework ensures that risk management is consistent, repeatable and in line with international standards. Assurance is a key component of our efective governance. It provides evidence of how well business risks are being managed, opportunities are being taken and the business is performing. Good assurance supports governance bodies in their decisionmaking, helps identify key risks to delivery and enables early intervention before they start to impact on outcomes. Our Assurance Framework supports an integrated view of assurance across the Department. We will be applying more consistent assurance, in terms of risk and value, to our priority projects and will embed this as part of our business practice so we are focused on the right things. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Capability Enabling a more strategyled organisation The Department has been developing its organisational strategy. We will continue to build on this to ensure that strategy leads our progress in achieving our strategic goals and outcomes. This is currently focused on identifying and developing the delivery strategies that will help achieve our longterm outcomes. We are also working to ensure that our other planning activities (such as business and investment planning) are wellaligned and that they all consider the medium and longterm implications of our work and intentions. Longterm insights briefing The Department is required to produce a longterm insights briefing in that will explore a relevant topic from a year perspective. The briefing, required under the Public Service Act , will consider the range of policy responses to the topic but will not make policy recommendations. He Waka Eke Noa He Waka Eke Noa is the Departments work programme aimed at developing our capability to respond to the needs of Mori. The Phase One Whinga Amorangi Organisational Plan for the Department of Internal Afairs is focused on empowering people to support the MoriCrown relationship. This plan gives efect to the Departments responsibility under the Public Service Act for developing and maintaining the capability of the public service to engage with Mori and to understand Mori perspectives. We have also developed a te reo Mori plan for the organisation (which will contribute to Maihi Karauna, the Crowns te reo Mori strategy). T Ttou Tngata building a healthy and safe culture The focus over the next four years is to redesign our wellbeing, health and safety systems to ensure we are aligning with best practice and legislative compliance. Our overarching intention is to create a mentally and physically healthy workplace that supports our people to thrive. As part of the Wellbeing Health and Safety Maturity uplif programme, we will be developing tools and systems to empower our kaimahi to play their part in keeping themselves and each other safe. The latter half of the programme will focus on embedding these systems and engaging the hearts and minds of our people which is key to shifing behaviours that will support a proactive approach to wellbeing, health and safety. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS T Ttou Tngata building our organisational capability The collective skills and expertise of our people are our greatest asset. Over the last year we have developed a picture of what Te Tari Taiwhenua would look like as a highperforming organisation and a great place to work by . In we will begin to identify the organisational capabilities we will need to achieve our outcomes, and develop strategies to build these capabilities over time. Were continuing to invest in our leadership capability through our leadership programmes Introduction to People Leadership, Te Hunga Khuri (our core leadership programme), Te Aka Matua (our Mori leadership programme) and Aveia (our Pacific leadership and development programme). We will continue to support our kaimahi to work flexibly, encouraging a healthy worklife balance, and our work to make Te Tari Taiwhenua an inclusive and diverse workplace. T Ttou Tngata Inclusion and Diversity Our aim is that Te Tari Taiwhenua is an inclusive and diverse organisation that reflects the communities we serve. Our vision is to grow and celebrate our peoples mana by being respectful and inclusive in our diversity. Our kaimahi will experience an inclusive, highperforming workplace where they are supported to perform at their best, so they can make a diference for New Zealanders. Taura Herenga Waka, our multiyear inclusion and diversity strategy, focuses on the five Papa Pounamu priority commitments of: addressing bias and discrimination strengthening cultural competency building inclusive leadership developing relationships that are responsive to diversity supporting and engaging with employeeled networks. We are continuing work to close our gender and ethnic pay gaps through focusing on recruitment of a more diverse workforce and understanding any barriers to progression for our own diverse workforce. We encourage and will continue to support networks formed by our people such as: Womens network; Taha Moana connecting and supporting Pacific staf; Tngata Whenua Rp providing support and whakawhanaungatanga to Mori staf; and Authentic Self LGBTQ network. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
Ministry for Ethnic Communities Fleur Murray
Ministry for Ethnic Communities:
Ministry for Housing and Urban Development Office of the Auditor General
Ministry for Pacific Peoples
Ministry for Pacific Peoples Kaliti Kolinisau
Ministry for Pacific Peoples comment on offence for failing to enrol The Ministry of Pacific Peoples not ed concern about the o ffence provision and that and yearolds would be liable on conviction for failing to enrol to a fine of up to (or on a second or subsequent conviction). The Ministry noted that Pacific peoples significantly lower engagement rates for voting, coupled with the fact they are one of the most econom ically vulnerable groups in New Zealand, means these amendments will likely have negative and disproportionate impacts on Paci fic young people. We recommend moving away from a punitive approach in favour of providing comprehensive and targeted communications and educational resources in schools and communities to encourage youth elector registration.
Ministry for Women Jacinda Allwood
Ministry for the Environment (MfE), Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment
Ministry for the Environment Treasury
Ministry of Civil Defence
Ministry of Cultural Affairs
Ministry of Economic Development
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Trade (MFAT) Leitu Sa
Ministry of Health Responses to requests
Ministry of Pacific Island Affairs
Ministry of Pacific Island Affairs:
Ministry of Youth Affairs
Minor amendments to the Agreement as defined in section VS) of the Privacy Act
Minor amendments to this Agreement as defined in section () of the Privacy Act will be in
Minor and consequential policy decisions
Minor and consequential policy decisions note that Cabinet authorised the Minister of Justice to make minor and consequential policy decisions that may arise during the drafting process;
Minor boundary alteration between Kawerau and Whakatne Districts
Minute No. ( August )
Minute No. ( August )
Minute No. ( August )
Minute No. ( September )
Minute No. ( November )
Minute of Decision New Contract for Supply and Personalisation of NZ Travel Documents, Cabinet Office March
Minute of Decision: Additional Item: Proposed Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Subscription Video onDemand) Amendment Bill: Proposed Approach January
Minute of Decision: Classification for Commercial Video onDemand Content: Release of Discussion Document March
Minute of Decision: Report of the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee: Period Ended March
Minutes of the Te Puna Tahua Lottery Grants Board meeting April
Miriam Dean has extensive governance and commercial litigation experience. A former partner at Russell McVeagh, she is a Queens Counsel whose practice focuses on commercial, competition and consumer law, arbitration and mediation. She was also recently the lead reviewer for the Review of the Crown Law Office.
Mixedrural water schemes further advice
Mixeduse rural water schemes
Mobile website for lodging TXT spam complaints.
Model report for Chief Executives Produced by SOLGM August
Modernising New Zealands government digital services
Modernising government services through digital
Modernising public notice requirements across multiple Acts
Modernising the Charities Act Advice on further proactive release of briefings relating to the work programme
Modernising the Charities Act Select Committee information
Modernising the Charities Act: Summary of proposals and talking points
Monday March Cabinet paper consultation with agencies and ministers
Monday March Cabinet decisions
Monday to Friday am to pm.
Monetary Payment Includes a pension, a grant, or an allowance.
Monetary a ssessment
Monthly meeting with LGNZ on October
Monthly meeting with LGNZ on April
More Convictions, More Jail Terms, Precedent Cases for Internet Child Pornography in
More about the National Library of New Zealand
More detail, and previous years data (back to the financial year) is provided in spreadsheet form:
More detailed information about this team and the work it does.
More information about Daylight Saving
More information about Local Government Policy
More information about New Zealands classification regime can be found here:
More information about Public and Government Inquiries
More information about Visits and Ceremonial Events
More information about Water Services Policy and Legislation
More information about applying to be an accredited Trust Framework provider.
More information about each of our regulatory systems can be found on DIAs
More information about the Digital Messaging Team can be found here:
More information about the Digital Violent Extremism Team can be found here:
More information about the work of the Digital Child Exploitation Team can be found here:
More jail time for repeat offender
More registrations for donor conceived people born in are expected, as fertility clinics followup with parents to get information about their childs birth and complete the paperwork.
More services can be carried out online, whether its for:
Moreover, Castalias analysis does not provide a quantitative assessment of the extent to which the status quo or any of its proposed alternative solutions can improve efficiency in the way Whangrei District Council delivers three waters services. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua
Moreover, Supporting Material : Required Investment slides detail the conservative nature of the numbers supplied to WICS as part of the RfI process. This c entres around the estimated asset values and asset lives which are lower than expected across New Zealand and contributes to lower investment projections. WICS predicts New Zealands water investment needs based on correlation with population density p. The estimates are more sophisticated than this, as noted above.
Mortality Review A committee appointed under section of the Pae Ora (Healthy
Mortality Review A review of specified classes of deaths of persons, or deaths of persons
Mortality Review Committees may use the personal information received from the RegistrarGeneral,
Mortality Review Committees will not take any Adverse Actions based on the personal information
Mosques on March (the Royal Commission) reported back on November ;
Mosques on March : Out of Cycle Changes to Budget Baselines
Mosques on March : Out of Cycle Changes to Budget Baselines.
Mosques on March : Out of cycle changes to budget baselines
Most computers and mobile devices will open PDFs automatically.
Motor Vehicle Registration to Transport Department
Mr Nowell has extensive governance, food standards and export sector experience. He is currently the chair of Scion (New Zealand Forest Research Institute Ltd), a director of Food Standards Australia New Zealand, New Zealand Food Innovation Auckland and the National Export Advisory Board. A past chair of the New Zealand Food and Grocery Council and the former Chief Executive of Zespri International Ltd, he also previously held senior management roles with Griffins Foods Ltd and Sara Lee Corporation.
Ms Dean is a former president of the New Zealand Bar; previously also a member of the Auckland Transition Agency, the governments Electricity Market Review and the IANZ Council.
Much of the information we collect is provided directly by people or entities, or an authorised representative, as a requirement to fulfil statutory obligations and according to our powers as a regulator.
MultiCategory Expenses and Capital
MultiCategory Expenses and Capital Expenditure.
Multiple apps or an apps wearables strategy A multiapp strategy in contact tracing, in our view, will fail. It is harder to communicate, it will fragment adoption and data, it will not require the general population to pay attention. This strategy can work with apps that are not subject to such absolute network effects solutions where utility increases linearly with adoption.
Muriwai Landslide incident
Murray Davey Deputy Secretary Digital Services (Acting)
Museums Aotearoa meeting September
Must have the right to work in NZ for the full years of the programme
MyTroves customers are able to use the tool to identify deaths of their customers.
MORI STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK
Mori Digital and Crown Relationships
Mori Strategic Framework
Mori Strategic Framework, Te Aka Taiwhenua
Mori are supported to realise their aspirations
Mori language revitalisation activities remain a focus for us when working alongside our local communities. We supported the Aotearoa Reorua (bilingual) programme to enable local councils and their mana whenua partners to create more spaces, places, and opportunities where te reo Mori is seen, heard and celebrated.
Mori participation in action and monitoring
Mori, iwi and hap aspirations, interests and rights are understood and respected.
MoriCrown Relations Capability
MoriCrown relations capability
Mtauranga Mori is respected and valued
Mori Constituencies) Amendment Bill (No. );
Mori expectations and interests as part of their cloud adoption.
Mori expectations and interests in the Public Services use of cloud services as it
Mori expectations and interests in the public services use of cloud. Representatives
Mori from digital services . The accelerated adoption of digi tal solutions in all spheres of life result ing of the Covid pandemic causes the underlying issues with digital identity to be exacerbated . government solutions which may lead to a reduction in the cost of RealMe services. Disadvantages : Government assumes all compliance costs in phase one ( ). Risks that compliance costs are higher than anticipated, that trusted services do not improve customer experience , or that the public thinks the Trust F ramework makes their information less secure all of which could discourage participation . Other risks: that information remains siloe d, that overall costs for the Trust F ramework are higher than anticipated , that low uptake means that the potential benefits of the Trust Framework remain unrealised. operates remains unclear, may not provide value for money compared to other operational models, less ability for the government to intervene should something go wrong. Costs involved for Mori to develop their own interoperable systems.
Mori perspectives are more visible within council thinking and decisions.
Mori representation in local government. However, a mandatory requirement across
Mori to develop high level principles to encourage and support sustainable adoption and
Mori wards can be confusing and adds unnecessary complexity to our democracy.
Mori wards guarantee a voice for Mori in local government
Mori wards have been drafted.
Mori wards so that these polls could no longer prevent most councils to
Mori wards, there is an opportunity to reconsider how this time is used.
MoriCrown partnership The way that Mori and the Crown efect the partnership under Te Tiriti o Waitangi will continue to evolve and develop. Partnering on diferent ways to design, deliver and govern services is a greater feature of how the Crown and iwi work together to ensure that services and activities deliver results for the country. Whnau, hap and iwi have a desire to develop their own capability to ensure the future conservation and preservation of their taonga and mtauranga, in a way that is led and driven by them. Diverse communities New Zealand is an attractive place to live and people from all around the world want to live here. As a result, many diverse communities live in New Zealand and over a quarter of residents were born overseas (. in ). Superdiversity, especially in major centres, is a feature of New Zealand communities. Reaching these diverse communities, and ensuring services are accessible for them, is important for social and economic wellbeing. Supporting communityled development recognises and honours the value of diverse communities to society as a whole. Regulation in the online domain Regulated activities continue to shif into the online domain and the models and methods of regulation have not always been able to keep up with this shif. Challenges include issues of jurisdiction, regulating of shore providers or participants (such as online gambling), and the consistency and applicability of regulatory mechanisms to both onshore activities and ofshore and online equivalents. The online domain is always evolving and that means that regulatory practice needs to be forwardlooking, so that the Government can be given the best advice possible. Cybersecurity Technology will continue to provide opportunities within government for innovation, eficiencies, and productivity gains. However, the vulnerability of critical services to disruption continues to be a growing issue, whether through deliberate or inadvertent actions that impact on service availability and security of sensitive and personal information. The number of cybersecurity incidents is growing, and they range in scale from localised, specific attacks to global incidents afecting multiple countries simultaneously. Protecting against and responding to cybersecurity incidents is an allofgovernment challenge that intersects with the Chief Executives responsibilities as Government Chief Digital Oficer. Joinedup delivery and seamless access to the public Expectations for the accessibility and ease of use of services are increasing. This means people want to be able to engage with joinedup services that span across relevant agencies, rather than engaging multiple times with each diferent agency. The public service is expected to act as a cohesive system and agencies are expected to work together to a greater extent than has been the case. The systems and processes required to support allofgovernment approaches require considerable coordination and cooperation. The Department has a range of functions and responsibilities, such as the supply of identity information, that support and facilitate these types of allofgovernment or crossagency approaches. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Preserving and enhancing access to our nations documentary and recorded heritage The capacity to safely and securely store, preserve and make accessible the nations documentary heritage is limited, while the challenges and expectations for managing both physical and digital heritage materials are growing. New Zealanders expect access, either physical or digital, to the taonga held by the National Library, Archives New Zealand and Ng Taonga Sound Vision. Taonga can then be used to create knowledge and develop a sense of collective identity as a country, for the benefit of Tiriti partners, educators, researchers, children and whnau.
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF NEW ZEALAND
NEWS, RESOURCES REPORTS
NOTE: Appendix A to this Cabinet paper (the draft Bill) and Appendix B (the Regulatory Impact Statement) are not released here. The Bill as introduced can be found here: Electoral (Lowering Voting Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill. The Regulatory Impact Statement can be found here: Regulatory Impact Statements dia.govt.nz Electoral (Lowering Voting Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill: cross party consultation draft and additional policy approvals
NOTE: This Cabinet paper had the Bill and Departmental Disclosure Statement attached. Both of these documents are not being released here . The Bill as introduced can be found here Electoral (Lowering Voting Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill. The Departmental Disclosure Statement can be found here: NZ Legislation Disclosures
NOTE: This paper attached the draft Government response, which is not released here . The final Government response can be found here: Government response .
NOTIFICATION OF ACCIDENTS
NOW THEREFORE IT IS AGREED as follows:
NZ Combatting Child Pornography: New Zealands Successes
NZ Gang Intelligence Centre AISA
NZ Relay telecommunications assistance service
NZ and German Action Leads to Conviction of Paeroa Man for Trading Child Pornography
NZ tip uncovers international child porn ring
NZ mi l A A BC BC BC
NZ mil A A BC BC B C
NZ mil A A BC BC BC
NZNew Zealand dollars. N.A. Not available. E Estimate. A
NZ, Te Arawhiti, Te Puni Kokiri (TPK), Te Whatu Ora (HNZ) and The Treasury.
NZCTU National Affiliates Council Te Rnanga Hui, Wellington th November
NZISM) in September with a dedicated chapter for public cloud specific
NZSIS assessment against privacy principle
NZSIS is exempt from PP under s of the Privacy Act; however, NZSIS access to DIA Information via the DIA is lawful as per Schedule of the ISA.
NZSIS may access Citizenship information.
NZSIS may access Registration information.
NZSIS operational procedures require employees to undertake rigorous analysis of the individuals case against intelligence holdings to confirm their identity before acting on DIA Information. Compliant
NZSIS will access DA Information in support of its principal statutory objectives and the
NZSIS will be acting in accordance with New Zealand law and all human rights
NZSISs functions, duties and powers specified in clause of this DA. .
NZSISs statutory functions will be retained and managed as public records of NZSIS
NZSISs statutory functions; and
NZer caught in US Internet child pornography operation, fined ,
Name Change Information Births, Deaths and
Name Change Information relating to the individuals name change as maintained by the
Name Position Contact Number
Name Position Contact Number Suggested
Name change information, ....
Name: Paul James Na me: lilil
Named Party A Party listed in clause (a) to (I).
Named Party I Contact and Role
Napier City Council Whakatane District Council
Napier City Council, and Hawkes Bay Regional Council.
Napier man sentenced for years and months for creating and distributing child exploitation material
Napier model WICS report
Napier slide pack WICS report
National Archival and Library Services
National Archival and Library Services MCA
National COGS Committee meeting and draft COGS Strategic Plan
National Library Leadership Team
National Library Removal and Disposal Policy
National Library Requirement (Books and Periodicals) Notice
National Library Requirement (Electronic Documents) Notice
National Library Requirement (Phonographic Documents) Notice
National Library and Archives NZ:
National Library and Archives New Zealand are working in collaboration with Ng Taonga Sound Vision to digitise precious audiovisual media, preserving and making them accessible for future generations.
National Library is part of the Department of Internal Affairs Page of January Cnr Molesworth and Aitke n Streets PO Box , Wellington Phone natlib.govt.nz dia.govt.nz Tn koe The open letter from Book Guardians Aotearoa (BGA) of November , sent to the Minister of Internal Affairs , has been forwarded to me for response. Thank you for your letter and your recommendations, which I have noted. I appreciate your acknowledging the establishment of the Removal and Disposal Policy Advisory Group. Like you, we see value in the policy being developed for the National Librarys collections. To provide answers to the questions you raised in your letter, I have gathered information I hope you find helpful under headings of Advisory Group s, Interloan, Collecting, the Overseas Collectio ns, and the Removal and Disposal Policy, below. Mark Crookston , our Director of Content Services, is leading the work on our Removal and Disposal Policy and will be in contact with the He plans to engage with your group on all aspects of the policy in February or March. As this letter may be of interest to other members of the public, we intend to proactively release a copy of this response to your letter on the Department of Internal Affairs website. All requester data, including your name and contact details, will be removed prior to release. Advisory Group s Te Puna Mtauranga o Aotearoa National Library often sets up short term advisory groups to work with the library on projects. In addition to these short term advisory groups , there are three groups that provide support and advice to the N ational Librarian , the C hief Librarian, and our Minister. .The Library and Information Advisory Commission ( LIAC ) provides advice to the Minister Responsible for the National Library on library and information issues in New Zealand, including mtauranga Mori. LIAC members are independently appointed by the Minister. .The Guardians Kaitiaki of the Alexander Turnbull Library advise the Minister Responsible for the National Library on key matters relating to the operation of the Turnbull Library. Members are independently appointed by the Minister. ()(a) ()(a) ()(a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS Page of .Te Komiti Mori is an advisory group to Te Pouhuaki National Librarian and Chief Librarian of the Alexander Turnbull Library , providing advice on the National Librarys strategic direction from a Te Ao Mori perspective . We also have other friend and advisor groups, for example, on Mori subject headings and our childrens lit erature collections. These groups are comprised of historians and other specialists, researchers , qualified library professionals , and represen tatives from the broader library and information sector eco system . Interloan We agree that interloan is an important part of the library ecosystem. National Library collections are publicly accessible either in person at our reading rooms or via the inter library loan (interloan) system. The essential contribution that the Nationa l Library makes to the inter library loan system is via the Te Puna Interloan service . New Zealand libraries can become T e Puna members and use the Te Puna Interloan service to create, monitor and respond to interloan requests nationally and internationall y. More than percent of New Zealand libraries use Te Puna Interloan. While the National Library manages this service , we do not service all interloan request s from our own collections. In , the National Librarys contribution (ie items from our collections) to the total number of interloan titles exchanged between New Zealand libraries was percent. Academic libraries in New Zealand ma de up percent of national interloans in , with public and special libraries making up the diffe rence. The inter library loan system is a global network with all sorts of libraries working collaboratively to ensure peoples information needs can be met. National libraries are a key part of that global network, along with public libraries , special libraries , and tertiary libraries from around New Zealand and the world our particular role is to collect and make available New Zealand and Pacific publications. Collecting The National Library has three distinct collections created and maintained for distinct purposes : the Research Collections (including the Alexander Turnbull Library collection); the General Collections; and the Schools Collection. Our Collections Policy covers decisions on acquisition and retention for all three collections. The Research Collections are maintained permanently by the National Library. The collections contain both publi shed and unpublished digital and physical items, particularly related to New Zealand, Pacific studies , and rare books. One copy of items collected under legal deposit is included in the Research Collections . PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS Page of The General Collections (which includes the Overseas Collections ) consist of items from both New Zealand and overseas. These collections are developed and maintained for their utility value to support the library and interloan system and can be borrowed and accessed throughout the New Zealand and global library network s. One copy of physical format items collected under legal deposit is included in the General Collections . The collections also provide access to selected overseas publications online. The Schools Collection supports the development of young New Zealanders as engaged readers and digitally literate learners. The se collections also have a utility value and are disposed of when that value ceases and titles are refreshed. In we consulted on our Collections Policy with a wide range of stakeholders, including librarians and interest groups . They agreed we should be focussing our resource on safeguarding Pacific, Mori and New Zealand content for future generations as per the National Library of New Zealand Act () . I draw your attention to the following Principles, in particular, within the Collection s Policy: Principle : The Library takes into account the cost of acquiring, storing, managing, and making accessible collection items when building its collections. Principle : The National Librarys General Collections will increasingly focus on resources relating to New Zealand and the Pacific, with only se lected areas of collecting outside this. Principle : For content in the National Librarys General Collections other than New Zealand and the Pacific focus area, the Library will facilitate access for users in preference to acquiring and owning such conte nt. Our collecting plans support the implementation of our Collections Policy. The plans relate to several collecting areas and guide our decisions around what we acquire. We update these plans on an as need ed basis depending on changing trends and circumstances. The Overseas Collections Until recently, the Overseas Collections ( OPC) were not intentionally curated. They are made up of collections from a range of sources, some of which pre the National Librarys formation in , as well as donations of books no longer needed by public libraries, and purchases. The research strength of the OPC was assessed in to be at basic study level in most subject areas (equivalent to undergraduate level) with a median of publication between and . From less than one percent of books in the OPC were borrowed. Most of the titles have not been issued for the last to years. As a result of the review process, a more focused collection of overseas publications that meets our collection principles is being retained with in the National Librarys General Collections. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS
National Library of New Zealand
National Library of New Zealand (Te Puna Mtauranga o Aotearoa) Act
National Library of New Zealand contacts
National Library of New Zealand media releases
National Library of New Zealand office locations
National Library of New Zealands websites
National Library of New Zealand, Te Puna Mtauranga o Aotearoa
National Library websites
National Risk Assessment now
National Volunteer Week and Big ShoutOut Campaign Overview
National and regional service providers will continue to provide a variety of health promotion activities to minimise gamblingrelated harm in the community. These activities include advocating for healthy policies with other agencies, working with gambling venues, increasing community action and raising community awareness of gambling harm at local and regional levels. In line with the strategy s objectives, the Ministry will support service providers, including dedicated Mori, Pacific and Asian public health service provide rs, to provide appropriate services within their communities. The Ministry will encourage service providers, and the gambling sector generally, to participate in reviews of national and local council gambling venue policies, providing a community perspective to the threeyearly consultation process undertaken by territorial authorities. Previously, this process has resulted in a number of authorities introducing either gaming machine caps or sinkinglid policies in their regions. National coordination, consumer networks and conference support National coordination and conference support services support the capacity and capability of both public health and intervention services. These services have been included under public health expenditure because they align with public health principles. National coordination service The national coordination service is a key support for preventi ng and minimising gambling harm services . It informs all service providers of significant developments, facilitates training opportunities, provides regular updates and administers the National Preventing and Minimising Gambling Harm Advisory Group. Consumer network The Ministry will provide funding and support to establish a national consumer network ( experts byexperience ) during this levy period. The network will inform service design and evaluation, particularly when the Ministry is piloting innovative services, and will assist with laying the foundations for introducing peer support into intervention services over time . The intention is to provide a systematic means for consumers to inform service design and evaluationresearch. Consumer networks are common in other health service areas. Internationally, advice from consumers is considered essential to the development, delivery and evaluation of mental health and addiction services. A key consideration is ensuring that such a network can provide free and frank advice to the Ministry. The indicative costs (see Table ) cover travel, meeting and coordinator costs . This proposal aligns with the Ministry s Mental Health and Addiction Directorate goal to have consumer networks covering all of its work. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
Nature and scope of our functions
Navigation, boat speeds, using ramps, hazards, fishing, pollution, radioVHF transmissions more.
Navigational bylaws and statutory and legal policies ensure that users of Lake Taupo are safe.
Nearfinal responses to posthearing questions for Annual Review
Negative experiences with gangs are regularly
Negative public sentiment, alienation, and social
Neighbourhoods and communities where
Nelson Harbour Board Order
Nelson man sentenced to months imprisonment for possessing child sexual exploitation and bestiality material
Nelson man sentenced to two years imprisonment for possessing child sexual exploitation material
Nelson model WICS report
Nelson slide pack WICS report
Net interest revenues
Netsafe Online Reporting tool
Neurodivergent and Disabled peoples
New Contract for Supply and Personalisation of NZ Travel Documents, Department of Internal Affairs March
New Plymouth District Council
New Plymouth man pleads guilty for possession of child exploitation material
New Plymouth model WICS report
New Plymouth slide pack WICS report
New Zeal and, all else being equal.
New Zealand (LINZ), MBIE, Ministry of Education (MoE), MfE, MFAT, Ministry of
New Zealand Agency As defined in section () of the Privacy Act .
New Zealand Bill of Rights Act and the Human Rights Act . A final
New Zealand Cabinet, including Ministerial speeches, media releases and policies
New Zealand Certificate of Identity Information Passports
New Zealand Citizenship, change of citizenship status, or appointment or
New Zealand Daylight Time Order
New Zealand Department of Internal Affairs DIA Information Privacy Impact Assessment Report
New Zealand Emergency Travel Document Passports
New Zealand Fire Brigades Long Service and Good Conduct Medal ()
New Zealand Gang Intelligence Centre AISA
New Zealand Gazette Te Kahiti o Aotearoa
New Zealand Government website
New Zealand Lottery Grants Board
New Zealand Lottery Grants Board Te Puna Tahua Appointments: Adjusted Appointment Documents
New Zealand Lottery Grants Board Appointment Round: Commencement Briefing
New Zealand Lottery Grants Board Appointment: Talking points
New Zealand Lottery Grants Board and its lottery distribution committees
New Zealand Lottery Grants Board decision briefing for the appointment round
New Zealand Lottery Grants Board Te Puna Tahua Decision table briefing and draft cabinet paper for the appointments round
New Zealand Lottery Grants Board commencement briefing
New Zealand Lottery Grants Board: Documentation to finalise appointment
New Zealand Marketing Association
New Zealand Millennium Office
New Zealand Online Crisis Response Process
New Zealand Online Response Process
New Zealand Parliament website
New Zealand Passport Information excluding the following: Preadoptive records Presexual assignment or reassignment records Schedule Clause (b), (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g) Schedule Clause (a), (b), ( c) and ( d) Schedule Clause (a) and (b) Schedule Clause (a), (b) , (c) and ( d) Schedule Clause (a), (b), ( c), (d) and ( e) Schedule Clause (a) and (b) Schedule Clause (a), (b) and (c) Schedule Clause (a), (b) and (c) Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Category Includes Uses New Zealand Certificate of Identity Information Schedule Clause (b), (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g) Schedule Clause (a), (b) and ( d) Schedule Clause (a) and (b) Schedule Clause (a), (b), ( c), (d) and ( e) Schedule Clause (a) and (b) Schedule Clause (a) and (c ) Schedule Clause (a) and (c) New Zealand Refugee Travel Document Information Schedule Clause (b), (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g) Schedule Clause (a), (b) and ( d) Schedule Clause (a) and (b) Schedule Clause (a), (b), ( c), (d) and ( e) Schedule Clause (a) and (b) Schedule Clause (a) and (c ) Schedule Clause (a) and (c) Electronic Identity Credential Application Information Information provided by the individual when applying for an Electronic Identity Credential Schedule Clause (b), (c), (f) and (g) Schedule Clause (b) and (c) Schedule Clause (d) and (e) Schedule Clause (d) and (e) Note: Information shared by the Registrar General is included in Schedule . . How DIA may use Personal Information provided by DIA The Personal Information received by DIA from DIA may be used to: a) identify the individual about whom information is requested and issue a Partner Specific Customer Identifier if one does not already exist. b) confirm the validity of identity information in support of an Electronic Identity Credential. Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of c) ensure that each individual can only be issued with one valid Electronic Identity Credential. d) attribute attributes to an individuals Electronic Identity Credential. e) populate an Application for an Electronic Identity Credential when applied for at the same time as another Identity Service. f) verify an individuals identity when applying for Identity Services. g) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences under Relevant Legislation , and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review in relation to Identity Services . . How DIA may use Personal Informat ion provided by the Registrar General The Personal Information received by DIA from the Registrar General may be used to: a) identify the individual about whom information is requested and issue a Partner Specific Customer Identifier if one does not already exist. b) update the records of an individual with an Electronic Identity Credential upon their death. c) update the records of an individual with an Electronic Id entity Credential upon a name or gender change. d) update the records of an individual with an Electronic Identity Credential upon a marriage or civil union. e) confirm the validity of identity information in support of an Electronic Identity Credential. f) ensure that each individual can only be issued with one valid Electronic Identity Credential. g) attribute attributes to an individuals Electronic Identity Credential. h) populate an Application for an Electronic Identity Credential when applied for at the same time as another Identity Service. i) provide additional protection to information provided by the Registrar General where the individual concerned has an active Non Disclosure Direction under the BDMRR Act. j) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences under Relevant Legislation , and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review in relation to Identity Services . . How DIA may use Personal Information provided by NZTA The Personal Information received by DIA from NZTA may be used to: a) identify the individual about whom information is requested and issue a Partner Specific Customer Identifier if one does not already exist. b) recommend or determine the suitability of an individual for New Zealand Citizenship. c) verify an individuals identity when applying for Identity Services. d) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences under Relevant Legislation , and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review in relation to Identity Services . e) confirm the validity of identity information in support of an Electronic Identity Credential. Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of f) ensure that each individual can only be issued with one valid Electronic Identity Credential. g) attribute attributes to an indivi duals Electronic Identity Credential. . How DIA may use Personal Information provided by MSD The Personal Information received by DIA from MSD may be used to: a) identify the individual about whom information is requested and issue a Partner Specific Customer Identifier if one does not already exist. b) recommend or determine the suitability of an individual for New Zealand Citizenship. c) verify an individuals identity when applying for Identity Services. d) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences under Relevant Legislation , and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review in relation to Identity Services . . How DIA may use Personal Information provided by MBIE The Personal Information received by DIA from MB IE may be used to: a) identify the individual about whom information is requested and issue a Partner Specific Customer Identifier if one does not already exist. b) ensure that an individual applying for New Zealand C itizenship or the individuals guardians are not required to provide identity and Life Event records that Immigration New Zealand holds. c) ensure that an individual applying for a New Zealand Certificate of Identity or New Zealand Refugee Travel Document is not required to provide information that Immigration New Zealand holds. d) recommend or determine the suitability of an individual for New Zealand Citizenship. e) contact individuals who meet the presence requirements for New Zealand Citizenship. f) verify an indiv iduals identity when applying for Identity S ervices. g) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences under Relevant Legislation , and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review in relation to Identity Services . h) confirm the validity of identity information in support of an Electronic Identity Credential. i) ensure that each individual can only be issued with one valid Electronic Identity Credential. j) attribute attributes to an individuals Electronic Identity Credentia l. . How DIA may use Personal Information provided by MoE The Personal Information received by DIA from MoE may be used to: Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of a) identify the individual about whom information is requested and issue a Partner Specific Customer Identifier if one does not already exist. b) verify an individuals identity when applying for Identity Services. c) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences under Relevant Legislation , and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review in relation t o Identity Services . . How DIA may use Personal Information provided by ACC The Personal Information received by DIA from ACC may be used to: a) identify the individual about whom information is requested and issue a Partner Specific Customer Identifier if one does not already exist. b) recommend or determine the suitability of an individual for New Zealand Citizenship. c) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences under Relevant Legislation , and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review in relation to Identity Services . . How DIA may use Personal Information provided by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles The Personal Information received by DIA from the Registrar of Motor Vehicles may be used to: a) identify the individu al about whom information is re quested and issue a Partner Specific Customer Identifier if one does not already exist. b) recommend or determine the suitability of an individual for New Zealand Citizenship. c) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences under Relevant Legislation , and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review in relation to Identity Services . . How DIA may use Personal Information provided by the RUC Collector The Personal Information received b y DIA from the RUC Collector may be used to: a) identify the individual about whom information is requested and issue a Partner Specific Customer Identifier if one does not already exist. b) recommend or determine the suitability of an individual for New Zealand Citizenship. c) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences under Relevant Legislation , and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review in relation to Identity Services . Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of . Adverse Actions DIA can reasonably be expected to potentially take any of the following Adverse Action s based on the information received from a party or within DIA : a) remove an individuals name from a New Zealand Citizenship register in circumstances where it has been erroneously registered. b) decline to register an individual as a New Zealand citizen by descent . c) provide adverse advice to the Minister of Internal Affairs in relation to an Application for an evidentiary certificate of New Zealand Citizenship . d) provide adver se advice to the Minister of Internal Affairs in relation to an Application for the grant of New Zealand Citizenship. e) provide adverse advice to the Minister of Internal Affairs in relation to a potential Deprivation of New Zealand Citizenship. f) decline to i ssue a Travel Document . g) issue a New Zealand Passport for a period shorter than the standard dur ation. h) decline to issue an Electronic Identity Credential. i) cancel an Electronic Identity Credential. j) update the known names associated with an Electronic Identit y Credential. k) investigate any matter that may constitute an offence under any legislation it administers and prosecute the offence or report any suspected o ffence to the New Zealand Police. l) engage in civil proceedings in relation to Life Event s, Deprivatio ns of New Zealand Citizenship or Travel Document s.
New Zealand Private As defined in section () of the Privacy Act .
New Zealand Refugee Travel Document Information Passports
New Zealand Research Information Service
New Zealand Security Intelligence Services Direct Access Agreement
New Zealand Security Intelligence Services Privacy Impact Assessment Report
New Zealand Security and Intelligence Service
New Zealand and Taituar Local Government Professionals Aotearoa). The
New Zealand case studies from public sector
New Zealand gang environment, while focusing on the social
New Zealand government website
New Zealand is a wellfunctioning democracy across central and local government
New Zealand is a wellfunctioning democracy across central and local government Executive government functions well through support services and advice Providing support, services and advice We provide a broad range of administrative and support services to Ministers to ensure New Zealands executive government can function eficiently, efectively and transparently. As the employer of staf working in ministerial ofices we will maintain our commitment to promoting a culture of wellbeing and respect for our people working on the Parliamentary precinct. We will work with staf, union representatives and partner agencies to address issues raised in the Francis Review report, including providing appropriate resources and support for staf to manage their wellbeing and speak up when they need to. We will continue to invest in developing our people and modernising the tools, systems and processes that support Ministers ofices, so the Executive and the public can be confident they have the capability and capacity to support existing and future needs. Over the next four years we will continue to progress towards our target of a fully electric Crown fleet by , by progressively replacing our vehicles with suitable fully electric options and investing in charging infrastructure at our VIPT transport depots. Supporting the smooth transfer of government following an election is a core function for us. In the leadup to the General Election we will initiate a programme of work to ensure we are well prepared to support the incoming Executive to be operational and to begin delivering their portfolio responsibilities as quickly as possible following the election. Engagement between Mori and local government is strengthened Enhance relationships between local government and iwiMori to improve regional outcomes Two key work programmes are intended to support and enable an enhanced relationship between iwiMori and local government. We will continue to roll out the Kaupapa Reorua programme, bringing on board more centres (councils and tngata whenua) to partner on the development and implementation of a joint strategy (rautaki) to create more bilingual, reo Mori and English, public spaces that reflect the local stories and dialect of their towns and cities. The branded website (soon to be launched) will include a toolkit to support those centres that want to participate and view examples and best practice. This programme contributes to the Crowns obligations under Maihi Karauna the Governments approach to revitalisation of te reo Mori, and to the building of our national identity and more inclusive communities. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
New Zealand is one of the only countries to offer a fully online passport application made possible using biometrics. There is a range of work underway to enhance our travel documentation and keep New Zealanders trusted at overseas borders.
New Zealand is one of the only countries to offer a fully online passport application process. In March , a system upgrade was introduced to offer further online functionality to customers.
New Zealand is under development. This new system will provide clarity on
New Zealand lacks consistently applied standards and processes for sharing, storing and using personal and organisational information in a digital environment. Legislation and standards exist but they are found in a variety of places, and while some of the se requirements are legally binding and some are non binding guidance or best practice. Consequently, organisations vary in how they manage information, creat ing inefficiencies and undermin ing the trust and confidence in the digital identity ecosystem for individuals, the private sector and government agencies. Ultimately , all of this impedes peoples ability to access services online, undermines their expectations regarding privacy and security, stifles innovation in service provision, and hinders the realisation of the significant social and economic benefits digital identity services could provide. Government intervention is almost certainly required to address these issues in a comprehensive fashion. . What do stakeholders think about the problem A wide group of stakeholders are affected by the digital identity ecosystem in New Zealand , including individuals, communities, public agencies, Crown entities, digital service providers, financial institutions, academic institutions, and overseas jurisdictions. These stakeholders play various roles within the ecosystem, such as users, information providers, relying parties and infrastructure providers. They are not limited to one role , and their roles vary dependent on context, for example , a bank could be either an information provider or a relying party depending on the transaction being undertaken. To ascertain the views of these stakeholders, extensive consultation was undertaken both with individuals and over public, private and n ongovernmental entities. This was achieved through face to face meetings, regular workshops, surveys and focus groups over an month period. The key takeaways from this consultation are outlined below. Stakeholders broadly agreed on the challenges faced by the digital identity ecosystem in New Zealand . People generally felt as if they had lost control of their information, and both individuals and companies were concerned about the security of their information. PROACTIVELY RELEASED INCONFIDENCE
New Zealand led international operation into online child sexual abuse material leads to arrests across New Zealand
New Zealand needs to consider any tools that can reduce COVID infections. A return to Level costs billions of dollars per week and should be avoided at all reasonable costs given the damage to our economy and wellbeing.
New Zealand, all el se being equal.
New Zealander Jailed After NZAustralian Child Sex Abuse Investigation
New Zealander Jailed and Arrested Overseas in International Operation
New Zealanders expect that water reticulated to their homes and businesses for drinking purposes will be safe to consume and use. The Havelock North water contamination incident has risked damaging public confidence in local drinking water supplies.
New Zealanders expect to be able to contact government departments using a number of
New Zealanders should feel free to participate online and express themselves regardless of their gender, race, sexual orientation or religious background. The Digital Safety Group work to help make the digital world a safer place for everyone in New Zealand.
New Zealands jurisdiction.
New Zealands most rural areas are comparable with Scotland in terms of population density (land mass is far greater). The unit cost for supplying customers in these regions will likely be even higher than the one observed in Scotla nd. See statistics presented below. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua
New Zealands national and cultural identity is fostered and respected
New Zealands national and cultural identity is fostered and respected Archives Strategy Archives is Archives New Zealands guiding strategy. Over the next four years, Archives will leverage transformation work underway such as Thuhu to improve handling of and access to government records. This is crucial to uphold government transparency. As well as further enhancements to our online channel and social media presence, we will deliver the allnew Archival Information Management System (AIMS) in early . This will replace several legacy systems, and act as a key enabler for Archives to connect with the public and with regulated parties. The implementation of an enhanced model of digitisation will see us significantly increase the volume of digitised records available. We are partnering with the government information management sector to explore an allofgovernment ontology. This will improve how agencies describe government records, making them more accessible and easier to find including for mtauranga Mori and data of interest to Mori National Library Strategic Directions The National Library has the mission of creating cultural and economic value for New Zealanders through leadership and collaboration. The Strategic Directions signal our aim to remove barriers to knowledge, ensure New Zealanders have the skills to create knowledge, and preserve knowledge for future generations. The three primary outcomes are that New Zealanders will: trust that their documentary heritage and taonga are collected, preserved and accessible easily access, share and use New Zealands knowledge resources to innovate and create new knowledge have the literacy skills to achieve social, educational and employment success. The Library is committed to ensuring the best possible outcomes through partnership and collaboration with the library sector, local communities, iwi Mori, cultural institutions and others. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
New Zealands strategy of early detection and rapid response depends largely on widespread testing of symptomatic persons before they can spread the virus, the rapid isolation of infected persons and then the rapid identification and quarantining of close contacts.
New information systems built andor processes developed to meet Trust Framework criteria: costs likely to be integrated into the project itself.
New information systems built to meet Trust Framework criteria
New service provider for Digital Child Exploitation Filter
Newsfeed (click here for more)
Next steps . Ministerial consultation on the draft Cabinet paper needs to begin by May in order to allow two weeks for Ministerial Consultation and ensure the Cabinet paper can be lodged for consideration at the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee (SWC ) on June . We will support your office in addressing any issues or queries from your Ministerial colleagues, should they arise. . The table below shows the next steps to meet the SWC meeting of June . Step Ministerial consultation (two weeks) May May Final Cabinet paper provided to you for approval to lodge June Lodgement of Cabinet paper June SWC consideration June Cabinet confirmation June . On June we will provide your office with a revised Cabinet paper that reflects any proposed changes following Ministerial consultation. We will seek your approval to lodge the Cabinet paper for SWC and include talking points to support your attendance at the meeting. We will work with your office to support any announcements you may wish to make following Cabinet decisions. S.()(f)(iv), S.()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Recommendations . We recomm end that you: a) note that you have elected to remove the filtering provisions from the Bill , which requires Cabinet confirmation ; b) note the attached Cabinet paper recommends amending clause , Part A of the Bill by removing: i. section L: Electronic system to prevent public access to objectionable online publications; ii. section M: Establishment of electronic system; iii. section N: Approval of electro nic system for operation; and iv. section O: Review of decisions and actions relating to operation of electronic system; c) note the draft Cabinet paper has been through departmental consultation and the majority of agencies were supportive of the approach; a nd d) agree to begin Ministerial consultation on the attached draft Cabinet paper by May . Yes No
Next steps The current timing planned for this Bill is: . June Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee meeting providing an update on implementation timing and seeking approval to undertake cross party consultation on the draft Bill; Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of usoq
Next steps after the Tauranga Commissions term ends in July
Next steps for extending TAB NZs legislated monopoly to online racing and sports betting
Next steps for online gambling proposals
Next steps in the online gambling review
Ngahiwi Tomoana (Entity C)
Ng Takune Rautaki Strategic Intentions
Ng Takune Rautaki Strategic Intentions
Ng Takune Rautaki Strategic Intentions
Ng otinga ptea me te ptea kore
Ng heinga o te Hononga i waenga i ngi Mori me te Karauna
Ng Whakaarotau Kwanatanga Government Priorities and Strategic Context How we support Governments priorities As part of the New Zealand public service, the Department contributes towards the Governments outcomes and objectives. This means we focus our eforts to support the Government to achieve its priorities. The Governments current priorities fall under three broad themes: Continuing to keep New Zealand safe from COVID Accelerating the recovery and rebuild from the impacts of COVID Laying the foundations for the future, including addressing key issues such as our climate change response, housing afordability and child poverty. What this means for the Department We need to ensure that the outcomes we seek to achieve are consistent with and contribute to the Governments priorities. Our outcomes are broad because of the diverse range of responsibilities we have and the variety of ways in which we contribute to and support Government priorities. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Our strategic context Our strategic context has an impact on what we need to do to develop and evolve the services and functions we provide. Changes to our context can happen quickly and we must try to anticipate as much as possible to ensure we are wellplaced to adjust our goals and objectives. The Departments ability to respond to our strategic context and in response to emerging issues and challenges is important. The key features of our current strategic context include: Global pandemic The COVID global pandemic is having and will continue to have a major impact on peoples lives and the ways society and government operate for some time. The focus will be as much on recovery from the broad efects of the pandemic as managing the direct impacts. The pandemic creates a degree of uncertainty that requires organisations to be prepared to respond quickly to changes in public health requirements, economic conditions, travel limitations and a myriad of other factors. The Department will need to continue to support the Governments response to the pandemic and recovery from its efects. Economic recovery One of the major impacts of the pandemic for the Department has been international travel restrictions reducing demand for New Zealand passports. Uncertainty over when this demand will be restored and the possibility that demand will fluctuate when international travel reopens will pose a challenge to the resourcing of the passport service and the ability to maintain the high levels of timeliness that are expected. Central and local government cooperation Neither central nor local government can efectively meet the challenges, such as infrastructure investment, climate change, and the changing economic environment that New Zealand faces over the coming decades on their own. Joinedup solutions, greater cooperation between central and local government and systemwide approaches to how to invest in and deliver initiatives and infrastructure of national significance and importance will be a feature of the coming years. Barriers to inclusion and participation Barriers to participation exist for sections of the population, and some communities are more vulnerable to isolation than others. Reducing these barriers and supporting and enabling communities to be able to participate and contribute on their own terms is an ongoing challenge. As services and functions becoming increasingly digital, the risks that digital exclusion present are magnified. Enabling services and information to be more accessible to all will be important. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
Ngti Kahungunu Te Rarawa
Ngti Kahungunu Wairoa Taiwhenua Te Rnanga o Ngpuhi
Ngti Porou Te Taiwhenua o Whanganuiarotu
Ngti Rhia Waipuna aa Rangi
No let up in fight against child sex abuse
No personal information is ever electronically stored or printed on a CovidCard. Each CovidCard has a unique digit serial number and corresponding QR code laser etched onto the card. The card also has a signature strip for the cardholder to write their name, alias or other identifier to avoid it being inadvertently swapped with another card in their household or workplace. The serial number of each CovidCard is associated with the contact details of its cardholder as part of the card registration process and stored in a secure central register. This central register would be disconnected from any other Government agency databases, including that of the Ministry of Health.
No substantive change to the strategic objectives The Ministry has made no substantive changes to the strategic objectives. However, based on insights from the HLS , it has included a focus on reducing inequalities and inequities in objectives and , and identified Asian peoples as an atrisk group in objective . .Outline of each of the strategic objectives A more detailed description of the strategic objectives and the priority actions follows. The short, medium and longterm priorities for action have been altered; in particular: DIA activities that align with the strategic objectives are included, demonstrating DIAs increased focus on harm prevention and minimisation the underlying principles supporting each strategic objective have been to reflect the key strategic themes of the New Zealand Health Strategy (Ministry of Health ) new priority actions have been included to address areas highlighted in the strategic overview, the needs assessment and submissions some language has been from the previous strategic plan, and, in other cases, some slight alterations have been made to the language for consistency or clarity, or to better reflect current practice. Section s . and . below compare this strategy s alignment with He Korowai Oranga and Ala Moui: Pathways to Pacific Health and Wellbeing respectively. Objective : There is a reduction in gamblingharm related inequities between population groups The Ministry will enhance its focus on reducing avoidable differences in levels of gambling harm, and the determinants of gambling harm, among different population groups. The population health approach will continue to target atrisk populations, including Mori, Pacific peoples , segments of the Asian population and those living in higherdeprivation areas. The Ministry will also continue to monitor and address gamblingharmrelated issues among other key groups, such as youth. The Ministry will ensure that dedicated Mori, Pacific and Asian services are available where appropriate, and that all services are accessible; provide appropriate language support; and are culturally relevant, health literate, high quality and effective, with culturally competent staff. It will also identify factors that contribute to gambling harmrelated inequities and develop, pilot, evaluate and implement one or more initiatives specifically focused on reducing these inequities. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
No vaccine is expected in the next months. This does not mean a vaccine will be available in months. It may never come.
No. Removing the Family Court process to allow people to change the sex on their birth certificate through selfidentification would require a change in the law. The Minister of Internal Affairs has announced that she intends to progress the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Bill that is awaiting its second reading in the House of Representatives. You can find the announcement here:
Nomination Form Word (DOCX, KB)
Nomination Form Word (DOCX, KB)
Nomination Service Registration
Nomination form Mori Advisory Group PDF (PDF, KB)
Nomination form Mori Advisory Group Word (DOCX, KB)
Nominations and Interview Panel for Charities Registration Board Appointments Round
Nominations and Interview Panel for Taumata Arowai Board Appointments
Nominations to Te Puna Lottery Grants Board
Non rateable land . note that land that is exempted from rates can currently be charged for drinking and wastewater services by territorial authorities; .
NonDepartmenta l Other Expense:
NonDepartmental Appropriations
NonDepartmental Other Expense:
NonDepartmental statements and schedules
NonDisclosure As defined in section of the BDMRR Act.
NonDisclosure Information contained within the NonRegistrar Mortality Review
NonFinancial Performance Statements
Nonfinancial Performance Statements
Nonetheless, our provisional results show that the prototype CovidCard can achieve strong recall performance averaging at . over all trials. Manual contact tracing in NZ goes back to days before symptom onset.
Noninterest expenses
Norman Kirk Memorial Trust
North Island Weather Events Councils requests for changes to funding agreements
Northland Community Committee
Northland Regional Council Retreat on October
Northland Regional Council Whangarei District Council
Not only will you participate in fascinating projects that make a real difference for New Zealanders, but youll also work towards a professional accounting qualification with Certified Practising Accountancy (CPA) Australia or Chartered Accountants Australia New Zealand (CA CANZ). Well fund your course fees, membership fees, and offer paid study leave.
Notches of supplemental adju stment s and flexibility
Note our assessment of the risks and benefits, as well as tradeoffs
Note the transition provision in the Water Services Act , requiring
Note this aide memoire attaches a table of all recommendations relevant to the Cabinet paper for your convenience .
Note: Castalia could not reconcile WICS estimated asset value per connected citizen for Scottis h Water and Yorkshire Water based on those entities annual reports . It is possible that WICS may be using undepreciated replacement value s for the assets of those entities. For our analysis , we used asset values from the relevant entities annual reports. As a result, the asset value per connected citizen in this figure fo r Scottish Water and Yorkshire Water do not match the WICS figures illustrated in Figure .. We included all vertically integrated Australian water utilities where recent replacement values were available.
Note: Castalia could not reconcile WICS estimated asset value per connected citizen for Scottish Water and Yorkshire Water b ased on those entities annual report s. It is possible that WICS may be using undepreciated replacement values for the assets of th ose entities. For our analysis, we used asset values from the relevant entities annual reports. As a result, the asset value per connected citizen in this figure for Scottish Water and Yorkshire Water do not match the WICS figures illustrated in Figure . . We included all vertically integrated Australian water utilities where recent replacement values were available.
Note: If this card is lost or stolen, please contact Ministerial Services Annie Randal Phone: , Cellphone XXXXXX, email ann.randalparliament.govt.nz
Note: Te Tari Taiwhenua and the NZ Census allow more than one ethnicity choice, therefore the total may be more than .
Notes and Caveats to the Data details what is, and is not, included in the data.
Notes for meeting with Mayors Nick Smith (Nelson City Council) and Tim King (Tasman District Council)
Notes for meeting with Minister for Seniors, Hon Casey Costello
Notes to support online casino discussion at Cabinet July
Notes to the financial statements
Notifiable Privacy As defined in section of the Privacy Act .
Notification of a private bill to replace adoptive parents on birth certificate with birth parents
Notification of accidents
Notification of changes to your application
Notification of intention to appoint Crown manager Wairoa District Council and Hawkes Bay Regional Council
Notifications occurred outside New Zealand and and DIA
Notional Funding Allocations
Notwithstanding the above, the Departments interpretation of the literature is that it is well accepted that there is a U shaped average cost function (comparing average cost per unit of output), indicating an optimal range of size for water utilities. This means that aggregation of smaller water providers would be likely to result in lower average unit costs, but that at some point as a water utility becomes larger economies of scale effects may be exhausted.
November , seeing final policy approvals for the Omnibus Bill (and approval to issue
November is included in the upcoming Local Government Water Services Bill
November . This would require the transition provision to be amended to within
November Summer Internship begins
November, in the year after the last
Now that the Independent Police Conduct Authority has released its findings, it is appropriate to release Appendix E. Note that, where appropriate, the Department continues to redact references to identifiable information to protect the privacy of those concerned in this Inquiry.
Noxious Animals to Forest Service
Number of births of donorconceived people recorded
OBJECTIONABLE RESTRICTED MATERIAL
OR . separated from the voting age to remain at yearsold; Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of usoq
OR . separated from the voting age to remain at yearsold;
OR . separated from the voting age for other local elections, and remain at yearsold;
OT was able to utilise the ondemand elasticity potential of cloud to
OUR MINISTERS and GOVERNANCE
OUR ORGANISATION and ROLES
OUR PORTFOLIOS and POLICY ADVICE
OUR PURPOSE AND PRINCIPLES
OUTLOOK Stable Stable Stable
Objective : A programme of research and evaluation establishes an evidence base that underpins all activities The Ministry s research programme addresses the requirements of the Act for independent scientific research associated with gambling and for evaluation . It fulfils both short and longterm strategic research priorities, and includes longitudinal studies. The Ministry will increase its emphasis on evaluation and action research to determine what works best. This will include assessments of service design, delivery and outcomes (in terms of both public health and clinical services). This work will incorporate a consumer experience perspective and evaluation of pilots. This research and evaluation will inform best practice and future service options for both intervention and public health services. Priority areas include research or evaluation of new pilots and a number of current activities to assess: their impact on health inequities, to better understand persistent and relapse gambling behaviour the use of specific technology solutions to monitor and limit exposure to harmful gambling. Research will also focus more on current issues, such as the impact of online gambling and gaming convergence, and, potentially, the impact of local authorities policies on NCGM location and gambling harm. Table : Objective priorities for action Objective : A programme of research and evaluation establishes an evidence base that underpins all activities Priorities for action Short to medium term priorities Long term priorities Ensure that research on gambling participation, gambling behaviours, attitudes to gambling, the prevalence and incidence of gambling harm, risk and resiliency factors for gambling harm and comorbidities is available to inform policy and service development . Ensure that research and evaluation projects funded by the Ministry contribute to strategic outcomes, including supporting opportunities for innovation and enhancing the quality, responsiveness, effectiveness and value for money of services to prevent and minimise gambling harm . Ensure that all pilo ts are evaluated . Increase the evidence on why vulnerable Develop and pilot initiatives specifically focused on : groups, particularly Mori and Pacific and reducing gambling harm related inequities Asian peoples , continue to experience among Mori , Pacific peoples, Asian peoples gambling harm related inequities , and on and other vulnerable groups effective ways to reduce those inequities . addressing persistent and relapse gambling improving vulnerable groups access to services. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Objective : Healthy policy at the national, regional and local level prevents and minimises gambling harm Successfully preventing and minimising gambling harm relies on a foundation of relevant and effective public policy at the national, regional and local levels. The Ministry will continue to comment on gambling issues based on the objectives of the strategic plan and available research and, where appropriate, will work collaboratively with DIA on policy development. It will also continue to provide information to assist territorial authorities when they are reviewing their gambling venue policies. The Ministry will continue to support the prevention and minimisation of gambling harm through health promotion, supply control and treatment avenues. A public health approach will continue to be a central pillar of the Ministry s work. The Ministry will also work with DIA to provide information, clearer direction a nd guidance from central to local government about gambling impacts, and to consider whether to set minimum standards for managing gamblingrelated harm. Table : Objective priorities for action Objective : Healthy policy at t he national, regional and local level prevents and minimises gambling harm Priorities for action Short to medium term priorities Long term priorities Develop and maintain a joint work programme with DIA on significant areas of mutual interest. Work closely with DIA in developing gambling policy and regulation s to ensure that harm minimisation continues to be a core aspect in both organisations work . Continue to provide information to other government sectors and agencies (eg, Local Government New Z ealand ; Te Puni Kkiri ; Department of Corrections ; Oranga Tamariki : Ministry for Children and the Ministries of Business , Innovation and Employment , Education , Justice and Social Development) to increase understanding and acknowledge the need to link polic ies across related areas to prevent and minimise gambling harm , and work with those sectors and agencies to develop a whole ofgovernment approach to preventing and minimising gambling harm . Develop effective policy frameworks to guide the development and implementation of policies at the national, regional and local level s that prevent and minimise gambling harm . Work with DIA to ensure local authorities can access quality information to help them develop effective gambling policies at the local level. Work with DIA to assess the future levy formula Work with DIA to implement matters arising and nationallocal polic y in relation to NCGM from review of levy formula and NCGM location location. policy. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Objective : Create an opportunity for local authority and community to reconnect, especially in times of budget shortages where funding was cut and communities felt their voices werent heard in important decisions. Inclusion of hard to reach groups key aim . The community was to allocate local infrastructure funds. Structures : Leaders from civic, religious and community organisations brought together and asked to each appoint one or two reps to serve on PB steering committee. Steering committee to des ign process and timetable for allocating budget Process : . Community meetings held. Committees made up of voluntary community representatives, covering different topics were established to suggest project options that money could be allocated to. . Committees brainstormed ideas with input from community, got costings, conducted research and crafted proposals for projects over a month period. . Committees presented their proposals to the community at two ward wide assemblies, received feedback and integrated this into their proposals. . Final list of projects put to vote. Ward election was held. Voter ranked their top priorities for funding with the highest vote getters receiving funding until all funds were exhausted. (In proposals were listed, , residents voted). . Projects were implemented by elected councillors. Innovative engagement methods : voting online, using GIS mapping tools to show how potential projects might affect the ward, budget simulators, offer online team man agement tools, create network for online neighbourhoods, create portal for participants to gather and analyse data on the process. (see e democracy.org). Preengagement : In the th ward community meetings were held in eight sections of the ward to expla in what participatory budgeting is, how it works and how the community could engage in the process. Funding allocation information only, no information found on cost to administrate. The mix of sources for appointment onto committees is interesting and co uld work better than a simple political appointment process. Involvement of faith based organisations could be an effective mechanism to increase representation by Pacific communities. Again, the long timeframe will have consequences to budget and expectat ions will need to be managed in terms of overall project timing. The PB process was designed to specifically reach underserved communities in the areas where they live. A decentralised voting process was one of these design processes. Ethnic and religious minorities were explicitly included through their representation on the steering committee. However, the participation was disproportionally skewed towards middle or upper middle class and disproportionately white residents . insufficient campaigning an d outreach activities result in underrepresentation of minorities and vulnerable populations. shows residents raising money is necessary or make budget cuts less controversial Increased diversity of participants in public life of the area Citizens b ecome more active problem solvers Increased public participation in other areas of public engagement and activities in the community including increased voter turn out rates in local elections Increased trust and confidence in local government Care mu st be taken with resourcing and accessibility of hard to reach communities in respect to online BP supplementary tools Employ a full time budget director to support the local councillors as they implement PB projects Gain support from independent partie s who have expertise and resources in participatory budgeting.
Objectives and benefits of the Cloud First Policy
Objectives of the Departments prosecution activity
Observatory and Dominion Laboratory to DSIR
Obtain information from Immigration NZ relating to an individual when they apply for Citizenship by Grant to allow their identity to be verified and confirm some requirements of the Citizenship Act .
Occupational A regulatory body established by or under legislation to license, register,
Occupational Regulatory Bodies
October and November Earthquake Commission in managing the Canterbury Home Repair Programme
October February Request for Information support for council staff
Offending traced to mobile phone
Office The office trials (office, number of cards(n), office, n) were the first closed field trials for the CovidCard. These trials were performed on Thursday th May, in an empty office building in Hamilton, New Zealand. These trials were directed like a film participants were asked to act out office scenes predefined by the technical team. The script was repeated twice and the data was separated into two (office office), one dataset for each script runthrough.
Office of Ethnic Communities
Office of Film Literature Classification Quarter One Report
Office of Film and Classification SPE
Office of Film and Classification Quarter Three Report
Office of Film and Literature Classification
Office of Film and Literature Classification Draft Statement of Performance Expectations
Office of Film and Literature Classification Review of Second Quarterly report
Office of Film and Literature Classification Letter of Expectations
Office of Film and Literature Classification Board
Office of Film and Literature Classification Quarter Two Report, April
Office of Film and Literature Classification Annual Report
Office of Film and Literature Classification Financial Sustainability
Office of Film and Literature Classification Review of Second Quarterly report
Office of Film and Literature Classification Review of Second Quarterly report
Office of Film and Literature Classification Review of Third Quarterly Report
Office of Film and Literature Classification: Draft Letter of Expectations
Office of Film and Literature Classification: Letter of Expectations and Statement of Performance Expectations
Office of Tourism and Sport
Office of the AuditorGeneral
Office of the Community and Voluntary Sector website
Office of the M inister f or Internal A ffairs
Office of the Minister Responsible for the Government Communications Security Bureau
Office of the Minister for Local Government Cabinet Legislation Committee
Office of the Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications
Office of the Minister of Internal Affairs
Office of the Minister of Justice Office of the Minister of Local Government June
Office of the Minister of Local Government
Office of the Prime Minister
Office of the Privacy Commissioner will be notified as soon as possible.
Office renamed as the Department of Internal Affairs
Officers, details of all training undertaken, and copies of all certifications.
Officers (GCDO) mandate for cloud digital investment.
Offices of the Minister of Justice and the Minister of Local Government Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee
Offices of the Minister of Justice and the Minister of Local Government Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee Lowering the voting age for local elections: differentiated age limits
Official Information Act (OIA) requests
Official Information Act
Official Information Act requests
Official Residences. The Department of Internal Affairs manages, maintains and services a small number of official residences owned by the Crown and leases a number of other properties for use as Ministerial residences. Wellington accommodation expenses for leased Official Residences are paid directly by the Department of Internal Affairs to suppliers.
Official documents to be used overseas
Official visit programmes were delivered for Guests of Government from nations.
Official website of the Inquiry into Operation Burnham
Officials Committee for DEV
Officials Committee for ERS
Officials have not been able to justify the agebased distinctions under NZBORA The Department of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Justice and Crown Law have considered the current draft Bill to lower the voting age for local elections (the Bill) against NZBORA.
Officials recommend repealing the transition provision requiring an authorisations
Offshore island administration
Ombudsman Investigation complaint from Garth Mathieson concerning a decision of the former Minister under the Official Information Act
Ombudsman and by the existence of customer service codescharters that must reflect
On August The Minister of Internal Affairs announced the appointment of a Working Group for reducing barriers to changing registered sex (see:
On November Local Government Minister Nanaia Mahuta announced a working group with members from local government and iwi to recommend strengthened representation, governance and accountability arrangements for the new water services entities.
On November, the Finance and Expenditure Committee issued its
On September , the Government announced that an Inquiry into the Havelock North water supply contamination incident would be held.
On March , Cabinet agreed that, given the changed context, including the need to respond to a national emergency, the Government would focus its legislative response to the Declaration of Inconsistency on lowering the voting age for local elections only CAB MIN. This Cabinet paper is in the name of the Prime Minister and may be proactively released separately by the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet.
On November , the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO):
On November at the request of the Finance and Expenditure Committee, Controller and AuditorGeneral John Ryan wrote to the chair of the committee Barbara Edmonds to provide comment on the Department of Internal Affairs proposed changes to the Water Services Entities Bill. The Department proposed these changes in response to matters raised by the Office of the Auditor General in their submission on the Bill. These matters related to the accountability and independent audit arrangements for water services entities set out in the Bill.
On July Te Tari Taiwhenua was designated as a Child Welfare and Protection Agency (CWPA) under the Oranga Tamariki Act . This means the Department can request and disclose personal information with other CWPAs for purposes relating to the safety and wellbeing of a child or young person.
On November , the Cabinet Legislation Committee:
On May , the Cabinet Soci al Wellbeing Committee (SWC):
On November , Cabinet made the following decisions on the work of the Cabinet
On December , the Cabinet Business Committe e referred the submission under
On September Prime Minister John Key announced the establishment of a Government Inquiry into allegations regarding the Honourable Judith Collins and a former Director of the Serious Fraud Office, Adam Feeley.
On September , the GovernorGeneral approved an OrderinCouncil to revoke the redundant Commercial Use of Royal Photographs Rules , , and . These Rules, which were badly out of , have been superseded by definitive Guidelines issued by the Lord Chamberlains Office.
On June , the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee:
On November , the Cabinet:
On June , the Cabinet Economic Development Committee:
On July , the Cabi net Legislat ion Committee:
On November , the Ca binet Business Committee: referred the submission under CBCMIN to Cabinet on Decem ber , revised as appropri ate given discussion at the meeting.
On April , the Cabinet External Relations and Security Committee:
On September , Cabinet:
On December , following reference from th e Cabinet Business Committee, Cabinet:
On April , the Cabinet Economic Development Committee:
On December , following reference from the Cabinet Business Committee, Cabinet:
On June , following reference from the Cabinet Economic Development Committee, Cabinet:
On June Parliaments Finance and Expenditure Committee reported The Water Services Legislation Bill back to Parliament. Among the more than changes to the Bill recommended by the committee are:
On a Mac you can use Pages, Numbers and Keynote.
On a SACP basis, we could lower the score by one notch if WSEs ratio of FFO to debt was to
On behalf of a former employee contact form
On the implementation of Mori wards,
On this page you will find a set of guidance documents to support local authorities in completing the standardised response templates. The Department will also deliver support webinars and instructional videos throughout the RfI process. When available these will be linked below.
On this page you will find our digital child exploitation transparency reports.
On websites where Identity Check is available, people can log in, apply to access an online service or start an application as normal.
Once a card is activated, transmissions would change regularly and would be pseudonymous, meaning the card serial number would not be revealed or able to be derived. Regularly changing the data transmitted means cards cannot be tracked or used to remotely detect the presence of a given
Once activated, the cards were configured to continuously advertise (using nonconnectable, nonscannable advertising with the BLE Mbps PHY) with an advertising interval of ms and scan once every s for a duration of s (with scan windowinterval set to ms; net scan duty cycle of ).
Once an individual has been successfully contacted and their identity has been
Once the legislation is finalised and passed by Parliament, the focus shifts to implementation and preparing for operations.
Once wearing cards, participants were given a role in an hourlong directed script (example script shown in Figure ), and asked to act out the role with timing cues being given by a director (not wearing a card). The scenes included group meetings, casual office working, tea break (gathering in cafeteria), and oneonone meetings. Each participant saw every other participant at least once during the script, although there were long periods of the trial where only subsets of the participants were in contact with each other. The scenes were monitored by two trial technicians (not wearing cards) who recorded the time when participants entered or exited a scene or close proximity to other participants. The entire trial was also filmed on two video cameras placed in different vantage points around the office. The cards were activated by the participants before the first run of the script began. One full run of the script was completed (office), then two of each participants cards were handed in to trial technicians to download the captured data. A single new card was given to each participant and a second run of the script was completed (office). In the second run (n ( participants with cards each)) each participant was wearing one card that had also been in the first run, as well as a fresh card, whereas the first run they were wearing three fresh cards (n ( participants with cards each)). After completing the second runthrough, participants then returned both their cards to the technicians.
Once you receive your rates bill, you can apply for a rebate for the current rating year period July to June . You must return your application to the council by June .
One UK study (Keeling, ) estimated that only of a persons close contacts were known to the individual. Additionally, the researchers estimated of all primary cases would generate at least one secondary case that cannot be identified. By augmenting the manual contact tracing system, which focuses on selfreported known close contacts, and adding close contacts not recalled or unknown to the case, the CovidCard could bridge the gap between these two tracing fraction constructs and increase the total number of clinically relevant close contacts identified.
One additional sheet provides help for reading the data:
One difference is that and yearolds may be unable to effectively carry out the role if they cannot legally enter some licensed premises because of their age. However, this can be addressed through amendments to allow trust members to enter those restricted premises while carrying out their functions.
One of the purposes of the Gambling Act is to ensure community input into decisions about the provision of gambling in their area. There are provisions within the Gambling Act for councils to manage the impacts and limit the opportunities for gambling in their communities. There are similar provisions in the Racing Act which should be considered at the same time.
One recommendation is to both the Ministry of Health and the Judiciary, so is counted twice. Other agencies such as Sport New Zealand and Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission will also be involved in the work to respond to the recommendations.
Oneonone support sessions with councils
Online Casino Gambling Regulatory Scheme: Drawdown of Tagged Contingency Funds and proposed name of memorandum account
Online Casino Gambling Development of Regulations
Online Gambling Further Information
Online Gambling Implementation Programme
Online Gambling Regulatory Implementation
Online Gambling in New Zealand: Release of Discussion Document
Online booking request, to access Alexander Turnbull collection items.
Online casino gambling engagement approach for second Cabinet paper
Online casino gambling: additional information for October Cabinet paper
Online casino gambling: further decisions
Online casino gambling: last decisions for October Cabinet paper
Online digital child exploitation
Online scams and spam pose a great risk to New Zealand consumers. The Department takes enforcement action against those who breach the UEMA, facilitates international and local industryagency liaison, monitors emerging technologies, and advises public and private agencies on spam matters
Online service channel for Services to Schools. Includes resources for teachers, blogs, online communities and professional development courses.
Online source of information, tools and guidance to support digital transformation across the public sector, including Web Standards and the Government domain name (.govt.nz) registrar
Online uses of digital identity information
Online version of one of New Zealands most important research publications, particularly for science. Contributors to the Transactions include James Hector, William Colenso, Charles Fleming, Thomas Hocken, and Ernest Rutherford.
Only disclose it if youve got a good reason, unless one of the exceptions applies Under s of the ISA, NZSIS is authorised to provide any intelligence collected and any analysis of that intelligence to the Minister, the Chief Executive of DPMC, and any person or class of persons (whether in New Zealand or overseas) authorised by the Minister to receive the intelligence and any analysis.
Open Data Directory (a database of released datasets and statistical information)
Open by appointment only.
Open hours: Monday to Friday ampm
Oper ating balance . . . . .
Operati ng balance () ( of operating revenues) . . . . .
Operati ng expenditure . . . . .
Operating Model The proposed shift recognises that in order to deliver our regulatory stewardship obligations, we need key functions with their own professional discipline oversight and strategic direction, to deliver our core, enabling and supporting activities that makes us effective as regulators.
Operating assets and liabilities
Operating balanc e ( ) (.) . (.) (.) .
Operating balance () ( of operatin g revenues) (.) . (.) (.) .
Operating balance () ( of operating revenues) . . . . .
Operating balance . . . . .
Operating expenditure . . . . .
Operating expenditure . . . . .
Operating revenue . . . . .
Operating revenue . . . . .
Operating revenue . . . . .
Operation Cargo was the first of its kind in New Zealand. The Department executed search warrants and seized over , items used by scammers, including:
Operation into NZ online paedophile network identified , pieces of illegal child abuse material
Operational matters such as arrangements for charging, bylaws, and management of stormwater networks
Opportunities and next steps for the Digitising Government portfolio
Option : No costrecovery from users. The Government meets all costs arising from OFLCs CVoD related activities Financial impact Increased government funding required. The estimated annual cost of CVoD classification is approximately . million. Advantages Recognises that the classification system only exists because the community wants to ensure that its preferred amount and type of classification is provided. Disadvantages Users in the sector would pay less than the costs they create. Implementation It is likely that a shift to full Crown funding would not be opposed by the sector, suggesting that it could be implemented as a oneoff increase (with the new funding level being reviewed periodically). All calculations in Tables are based on projections and on the unit costs for CVoD classifications in Tables . Items for classification comprise a bundle of fulllength features and series episodes. Estimates assume percent compliance with the new charging regime across the CVoD sector and a total volume of CVoD activities per year of fulllength features and series averaging episodes per series. Table Option OFLCs CVoD related activities Table Option OFLCs CVoD related activities Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation document Table Option OFLCs CVoD related activities Option : A mix of Government funding and usercharges Financial impact The financial implications for the Government and for the sector depend on the level of the mix of Government funding and user charges. Advantages This approach recognises that both the sector and the community receive benefits from classification. Users pay the costs they give rise to. Disadvantages Challenges in finding an evidential base for the right mix of public and private funding. Transition to full costrecovery could be: implemented as a oneoff increase; or phased in over two or three years. Sample scenarios; (Assumes a split between Crown and sector funding)A distributor who applies for classification of CVoD items per year Distributor who uses the present classification system pays , in fees. Distributor who uses the OFLC Rating Tool pays , in fees. Distributor who uses an approved inhouse Rating Tool pays , in fees. QUESTION : What is your preferred costrecovery option for OFLCs CVoD related classification activities and why Option : Full costrecovery from submitters Option : No costrecovery from users. The Government meets all costs arising from OFLCs classification activities covered by existing Regulations Option : Partial costrecovery from usercharges and Government funding QUESTION : If option is your preferred option, do you agree with a split between Government and the sector If not what proportion of costs should users and the Government pay Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentQUESTION : What impact would the cost implications in the scenarios under each option have on your business or activity QUESTION : Do you have feedback on the level of charges in any of the scenarios Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentMechanisms for funding classification activities This section addresses the question: if the sector pays any of the cost of classification, how should it pay its contribution There are two main mechanisms available: fees or levies. A fee is a defined payment from one party to another in return for a specific good or service, for example, a film distributor pays OFLC a fee for classifying a DVD. A levy is a defined payment from one party to another for a specific purpose, but not necessarily for a particular good or service. A levy is closer to a dedicated tax, with the money received from the levy usually being dedicated to a purpose that is directly relevant to those paying. For example, the Health Promotion Levy on alcohol funds the work of the Health Promotion Agency on preventing harm from alcohol. A classification levy would offset the harm created from the media content distributed by the sector. Option : Costrecovery via usercharges for current classification activities covered by existing Regulations Financial impact Submitters will pay charges at levels (see Tables for illustrative scenarios) Advantages Equitable, transparent; directly links use of a good or service with the amount paid by the user. Disadvantages Operating a fee payment system is likely to involve higher handling costs for OFLC than a levy. A fee, if applied to each piece of classified content, may disproportionately impact smaller distributers and smaller CVoD providers. Implementation Present fee structure retained, fee levels .The impacts from usercharges and a levy are presented for OFLCs existing activities and CVoD related activities. A combination of usercharges and a levy may be appropriate for collecting charges. Usercharges for current classification activities Usercharges continues the existing mechanism for funding the classification system. This option would see the existing fee framework under the Regulations to be aligned with costs. The existing fee framework is based on fees set for the classification of different types of media, and this could continue. Table Usercharges for current classification activities Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentA levy for current classification activities An annual levy could be charged for OFLCs regulatory and prevention of harm activities. A range of approaches can be used when setting levies. The Treasury suggests using the best available proxy for the resources used by individual members of the target group. Measures that could be used for an OFLC levy include: company revenue from current classificationrelated activities; customer base such as the number of current subscriptions; or numbers of classifications sought in the past. A levy could be implemented alongside usercharges, or instead of usercharges. Option : Costrecovery via a levy for current classification activities covered by existing Regulations Financial impact The financial impact for individual submitters will be determined by how the levy is set and the amount the levy is set to recover (see Tables for illustrative scenarios). It is likely that the amount paid by individuals will differ from what they are paying under a fee structure. Advantages Levies provide a way of gathering a predetermined amount of revenue from a narrowly defined group for a specific purpose, particularly where charging fees is not a practicable or equitable option. Handling costs for levies may be lower than for a fee system, because typically fewer payments per year are involved. Disadvantages A levy is unlikely to provide the transparency, direct, immediate link between resources used and cost recovered you get from using a fee; some of those paying the levy will pay more than they would under a userbased system, some less. One of the challenges of setting up levy involves ensuring that all members of the group that is liable for the levy are paying their share. This may be difficult in a sector as fluid as that for media content, where distributors are entering or leaving the sector regularly. Implementation Implementing a levy requires identifying the preferred basis for the levy and the level at which the levy is to be set, and setting up and operating a levy mechanism (which would include provision for periodic reviews). Table Levy for current classification activities Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentUsercharges for OFLCs CVoD related activities Usercharges would be set based on OFLCs CVoD related activities and costs for auditing and review selfclassification outputs, engaging with providers and responding to public enquiries. There would also be a contribution to overheads. Usercharges could operate in a manner similar to the existing fees for current activities, whereby different activities attract different charges Option : Costrecovery via fees for OFLCs CVoD related activities Financial impact CVoD providers will commence paying fees for classification activities (see Tables for illustrative scenarios). Advantages A practicable approach which will be familiar to the majority of CVoD distributors (Australia and the UK both charge fees for CVoD classification). Usually considered to be an equitable approach. Disadvantages The community receives benefits from classification over and above the private benefits to submitters, but would not pay for the benefits it receives. Implementation Transition to full costrecovery could be: implemented as a oneoff increase; or phased in over two to three years (this option would produce budget shortfalls in the period leading up to full costrecovery, which would need to be funded).Table Usercharges for OFLCs CVoD related activities Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentLevy for OFLCs CVoD related activities This option would bundle OFLCs CVoD related activities into an annual levy. As for a levy for existing classification activities, the purpose of a levy for CVoD related activities would be for OFLCs regulation of the classification system and prevention of harm activities. Option : Costrecovery via a levy for OFLCs CVoD related activities Financial impact The financial impact for individual submitters will be determined by how the levy is set and the amount the levy is set to recover (see Tables for illustrative scenarios). It is likely that the amount paid by individuals will differ from what they are paying under a fee structure. Advantages Some providers may prefer a levy for its convenience and simplicity. Disadvantages Equity issues: some of those paying the levy will pay more than they would under a userbased system, some less. the challenges of ensuring that all members of a particularly fluid industry are paying their share. Implementation Implementing a levy requires identifying the preferred basis for the levy and the level at which the levy is to be set, and setting up and operating a levy mechanism (which would include provision for periodic reviews).
Option development was informed by extensive stakeholder engagement over the past months. This involved not only surveys and focus groups, but also consultation with over organisations, in cluding public agencies, Crown entities, digital service providers, finan cial institution s, academic institutions and a wide range of international partners. The Department has high confidence that the evidence base supports the implementation of a trust framework in the near future. It was clear from this consultation that stakeholders broadly supporte d the development of a trusted ecosystem, that this would be important for both the economy and society, and that government should tak e the lead on this issue. Comparable jurisdictions (Canada, Australia, the United Kingdom) have chosen to develop trust f rameworks. Australia already has a digital identity trust framework in place and is in the process of formalising this framework in legislation . New Zealand seeks to establish a Trust Framework to help align with these jurisdictions. Recent meetings have indicated an increasing interest from public and private sector stakeholders in a near term government led intervention to bring trust and consistency to the digital identity ecosystem. This has been prompted by the Covid pandemic, the resulting acceler ation in digital transformation in all spheres of life, and the need to support post Covid economic recovery. The Department has moderate confidence that the evidence base supports the specific details of the preferred option outlined in this document. The Department has moderate confidence in the evidence supporting some aspects of the preferred option because the exact nature of the compliance testing and costs involved will not be determined until phase one of the Trust Framework ( ), and the details of the proposed Trust Framework Bill have yet to be finalised . Similarly, while international partners are also implementing frameworks this is a new development and there is not a significant body of historical evidence regarding what works and wh at does not .
Options Report (released September )
Options for Formal Inquiry
Options for Progressing Legislative Amendments for Water Services Reform and Entities
Options for Supporting Water Industry Transformation
Options for a voluntary filtering system to prevent access to objectionable digital terrorist and violent extremist content (TVEC), March
Options for age restrictions of Lotto NZ lottery products
Options for further changes to the Taumata Arowaithe Water Services Regulator Act and Water Services Act for Cabinet consideration in July
Options for how to proceed
Options for local electoral system improvement
Options for making Class gambling online payments permanent
Options for ownership of the Waitangi Wharf
Options for providing additional support to the local body elections
Options for refreshing the Departments Strategic Intentions
Options for the Local Government NZ Heads of Agreement and funding agreement
Options for the approach to levying mixeduse buildings for new Fire and Emergency levy
Options to achieve better resilience and security of fuel supply for Auckland, in particular for jet fuel HTML version
Options to achieve better resilience and security of fuel supply for Auckland, in particular for jet fuel PDF version
Options to achieve better resilience and security of fuel supply for Auckland, in particular for jet fuel WORD version
Options to address the expected undersubscription to commercial grants for sediment and debris management in the Hawkes Bay
Options to progress potential amendments to the Fire and Emergency New Zealand Act
Or a Microsoft Word version of this information:
Oral item at Cabinet Mori Electoral Option
Oran a Tamariki OT was able to take advanta
Oranga Marae Committee: appointment documents
Oranga Marae Fund: Kpehu Marae ensuring sustainability for the future
Oranga Tamariki (Designation of Child Welfare and Protection Agencies) Regulations (SL ) Contents New Zealand Legislation
Oranga Tamariki, Parliamentary Service, Public Service Commission (PSC), Stats
Oranga hap, iwi and Mori is improved through an enduring, equitable and positive MoriCrown partnership
Oranga hap, iwi and Mori is improved through an enduring, equitable and positive MoriCrown relationship
Oranga hap, iwi, and Mori is improved through an ensuring, equitable and positive MoriCrown partnership Partnership between Mori and the Crown is an important feature of much of the Departments work. Examples include the partnership with Ngti Twharetoa in the exercise of the Departments responsibilities as Lake Taup Harbourmaster and the relationship with Taranaki Whnui, as owners and mana whenua of the land that the National Library and Archives New Zealand buildings sit on. We are also building a partnership with Muapoko for the Regional Shared Repository in TaitokoLevin to ensure mana whenua are guiding the use of their land. The Ngi Tahu Archives team has colocated with Archives New Zealand in Christchurch. These two teams work actively together to preserve taonga, and to create and share stories from across the Ngi Tahu rohe. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
Order are broader than reasonably necessary given that some time has passed
Order in Council At Wellington this day of Present: in Council These regulations are made under section ()(c) of the Fire and Emergency New Zealand Act (a) on the advice and with the consent of the Executive Council; and (b) on the recommendation of the Minister of Internal Affairs. Contents Page Title Commencement Principal regulations Regulation amended (Automatic sprinkler systems) Regulations Title These regulations are the Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire Safety, Evacuation Procedures, and Evacuation Schemes) Amendment Regulations .Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire Safety, Evacuation Pr ocedures, and Evacuation Schemes) Amendment Regulations PCO . pzrrb Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs The main amendment updates the list of automatic sprinkler standards in regulation of the principal regulations by adding NZS :Automatic fire sprinkler systems (the new sprinkler standard ). The effect of the addition is that, if the owners of certain buildings used as workplaces or accommodation install automatic sprinkler systems meeting the new sprinkler standard (and if various other require ments are met), the owners are exempt from the usual requirements under the Fire and Emergency New Zealand Act to provide and maintain evacuation schemes for their buildings. Any building owner relying on the new sprinkler standard to qualify for the exemp tion is required to ensure that the sprinkler system is complemented by handoperated firefighting equipment complying with NZS :Hand operated firefight ing equipment (the handoperated equipment standard ). The reason for this requirement is that, unlike the last New Zealand standard for automatic fire sprinkler systems, the new sprinkler standard does not itself include a requirement for the building to have equipment complying with the handoperated equipment standard. Issued under the authority of the Legislation Act . of notification in Gazette: These regulations are administered by the Department of Internal Affairs.Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire Safety, Evacuation Procedures, and Evacuation Schemes) Amendment Regulations Explanatory note pzrrb Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Appendix B: W hen building owner s must install an automatic sprinkler system and hand operated fire fighting equipment Automatic sprinkler systems are required as an alternative to an evacuation scheme, or as part of a place of safety inside a building . There are two situations in which Fire Safety Regulations require building owners to install automatic sprinkler systems , either : . as an alternative to maintaining an evacuation scheme, where the building is a relevant building ; or . if the building has an evacuation scheme, with a place of safety inside th at building. . In both these situations, the Fire Safety Regulations , require hand operated fire fighting equipment to be installed in the building, as part of compliance with theStandard. . The situations where an automatic sprinkler system must be installed are explained more fully below. The Fire and Emergency legislation requires relevant buildings to pr epare and maintain evacuation schemes . The Fire and Emergency New Zealand Act (the Act) establishes the fire and emergency regulatory system . The Act specifies that the owner of a relevant building must provide and maintain an evacuation scheme for the building. The definition ofrelevant building captures buildings that present comparatively greater risk tooccupants in the event of fire than buildings used for other purposes. Where an evacuation scheme is used, an automatic sprinkler system allows for a place of safety inside the building . The owner of a building must provide and maintain an evacuation scheme that enable s evacuation to a place of safety within a reasonable time. . Regulation ()(a) of the Fire Safety Regulations allows for the place of safety to be inside the building , only if the building meets certain requirements. One of these requirements is an automatic sprinkler system. Without an automatic sprinkler system,the place of safety must be outside of the building. There are two exceptions to the requirement to prepare and maintain an evacuation scheme . Section () of the Act provides for two exceptions , where a relevant building owner is not required to provide and maintain an evacuation scheme. This occurs when: . the relevant building provides employment facilities for or more people and it is not used for any other purposes that would bring it within the definition of a relevant building; OR . the relevant building provides accommodation for six or more people (other than in three or fewer household units) and it is not used for any other purposes that would bring it within the definition of a relevant building ; AND, in either case, pzrrb Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . the relevant building also has an automatic sprinkler system that complies with the Fire Safety Regulations. . When a n automatic sprinkler system and hand operated fire fighting equipment is installed in this subcategory of relevant building s, Fire and Emergency has confidence that the fire safety is high enough that an evacuation scheme is not required. Additionally, the owner of the relevant building must notif y Fire and Emergency , in writing and in the prescribed form (if any), that the building does not require an evacuation scheme . pzrrb Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Order in Council to give effect to final proposal for reorganisation between Kawerau and Whakatane Districts
Order in Council to give effect to reorganisation implementation scheme between Kawerau and Whakatne Districts
Order in Council to give effect to the reorganisation scheme for boundary alterations between Western Bay of Plenty District and Tauranga City
Order in Council to replace the Long Term Plan with a threeyear plan for seven local authorities
Organisation A New Zealand Agency or an Overseas Agency.
Organisational change March to June
Organisational change overseen by Internal Affairs
Organisations that DIA shares death information with directly
Organisations that are Intermediaries to the death AISA
Organisations that they are, in fact, alive.
Organisations using Identity Check are not permitted access to the users official passport or driver licence records.
OtagoSouthland Community Committee
Other Thing thing that a Party is required to or may grant, issue, confer, or provide
Other analysis The public may have concerns about the potential for very young elected members On December , Cabinet agreed that the lower voting age would not apply to standing as a candidate in all local government elections CABMIN .
Other avenues for improvement to the CovidCard system include testing other oncard contact recording algorithms (beyond the basic algorithm evaluated here), and producing a more effective contact prioritisation algorithm from reidentified card contact data. The oncard recording algorithm used in these trials waits for a contact to be deemed close before recording them as a potential contact on a watchlist, and waits for them to stay close for at least one minute before moving them to the actual contact log. Other algorithms that could improve on this include moving a potential contact to the watchlist more leniently, and to the contact list only when they are sufficiently close (i.e. reversing the thresholds). The thresholds could also be dynamically modified on card depending on the number of cards in range, and duration of contact could also be extended to reduce the likelihood of short interactions being logged as potential close contacts.
Other bodies associated with the regulation of restricted and objectionable (banned) material.
Other credit factors are unchanged from scenario .
Other incidental matters such as screen resolution and the language setting used.
Other organisations and websites provide useful information to support your policy review and decision making processes.
Other recent Royal Commissions and statutory inquiries have predominantly provided electronic reports only
Other recent calls for nominations are detailed in the following table:
Other s (eg, wider gov t, consumers, etc. ) Less Mori representation is also a loss to local communities as a whole . Low Low Total monetised costs NA NA Nonmonetised costs Medium High Additional benefits of the preferred option compared to taking no action Regulated groups Local authorities can defer decision to a binding poll, saving a varying amount of money on community engagement depending on council size. Low Low Regulators NA Other s (eg, wider govt, consumers, etc. ) Public has final say in council decisions on Mori wards . Low Medium Total monetised benefits NA NA Nonmonetised benefits Low Low Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Other work to reduce gambling harm The Strategy consultation document canvassed other matters relevant to gambling harm, such as the location of class gaming machines and whether the levy formula could be improved . It also identified important areas such as online gambling that are currently out of scope of this levy setting process, but we feel need to be addressed . We have instructed Ministry and Department officials to report on these matters separately as part of a programme of work covering gambling harm, in the context of wider reform s of the gambling sector. Risks Historically , there is a risk of judicial review of the levy setting or strategy development process , most likely from the gambling secto r. While this risk cannot be eliminated, the Ministry is confident that it has done everything reasonable to develop and consult on the Strategy and levy proposals as required under the Act. Some of this risk may be mitigated by the w ork programme noted above. Consultation The following agencies were consulted in the preparation of this paper: Ministries of Business Innovation and Employment, Social Development, Pacific Peoples, Education, Justice , Women and Youth Development; Oranga Tamariki Ministry for Children, the Departments of Internal Affairs, the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Inland Revenue, Corrections; New Zealand Police, Office of Disability Issues, Office of Ethnic Communities, Office for Seniors, Treasury, Te Puni Kkiri, the Health Promotio n Agency and Sport New Zealand. The Ministry of Health and Gambling Commission have met the consultation requirements in section of the Gambling Act . Gambling operators and other industry groups, gambling harm service providers, health sector gro ups, researchers, l ocal government authorities, consumers and affected community organisations, were given the opportunity to comment on the draft Strategy and levy proposals, the n eeds assessment and proposed costs to be recovered by the new problem gambling levy. Mori, Pacific and Asian service providers and community representatives were specifically invited to meetings to provide Mori, Pacific and Asian viewpoints respectively , and to make submissions. Financial Implications The problem gambling levy is set to recover the costs of the Strategy, so it is fiscally neutral over time to the Crown. The Ministry proposes to spend . million to implement the Strategy over the next levy period from to , which is an increase in mill ion over the cost of the Strategy for the current period ( to ) . For the current levy period there is also a forecast levy overrecovery o f . million . This over recovery comprises a million underspend by the Ministry of its appropriation and a . million overpayment to Inland Revenue by the levy paying gambling sectors . The . million cost is offset by a transfer of million of ring fenced funding into the year , reducing the levy funding requirement to . million. To reflect the increase in the cost of implementing the Strategy from , we recommend that the Committee approves the increases in appropriations for to , as set out in Table (with no impact on the operating balance). The budget for problem gambling wzrxijjr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Our Approach to Compliance and Enforcement
Our Bond Street office is open by appointment. Head to our website to
Our London office is open by appointment only
Our Ministerial Portfolios
Our Ministers and governance
Our Strategic Intentions
Our ageing gang population and influx of younger
Our aim is for our people to experience an inclusive workplace where they feel supported, connected, and empowered to be themselves and deliver what New Zealanders need.
Our approach to regulation will aim to be more than simply compliance, but is centred on achieving the benefits of the regulated activities while minimising harm to individuals and communities. Success will mean that by we will see: well informed communityled decisionmaking enables people to develop their own futures and place diversity is embraced in New Zealand so that all people (iwi, hap and communities) are included and visible partnering for direct delivery by iwi, hap and communities reducing harm, both on and of line, through ongoing improvement in prevention and response funding and granting mechanisms resulting in positive outcomes for all iwi, hap and communities. Outcome: Peoples sense of belonging and collective memory builds an inclusive New Zealand Intermediate Outcomes Collective memory is enhanced by New Zealands documentary heritage A culture of reading enhances literacy and knowledge New Zealands national and cultural identity is fostered and respected Trusted citizenship and identity documents contribute to a sense of belonging Taonga tuku iho rights are protected We hold a lot of information that is important to collective memory and our care of that is excellent, but it is not as easily accessible as it could be and there are gaps in what is collected. In the future, we will ensure the breadth of New Zealands stories is captured and kept alive as accessible, shared and understood narratives across communities in Aotearoa. We will also recognise and acknowledge the diversity of New Zealand communities, which is important for fostering social inclusion. There will always be many New Zealand stories from diferent perspectives. Success will mean that by we will see: the embracing of diverse communities strengthening our identity as a nation New Zealand stories being celebrated, accessible, shared and understood government information, websites and public portals that are reflective of te ao Mori as a matter of course. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
Our assessment that there will be a high likelihood of extraordi nary suppor t from th e Cro wn
Our assessment that there will be a moderately high likelihood of extraordinary support f rom
Our commitment to DEI remains steadfast, and the refreshed
Our commitment to accessibility
Our commitment to sustainability includes giving our people what they need to flourish. We believe that a sustainable workplace fosters a culture of wellbeing and growth.
Our community advisors worked hard well after the devastating impact of Cyclone Gabrielle to ensure Marae, hap and iwi are safe, resilient and thriving. This has been from being actively involved in collective interagency approaches, to connecting iwi with relevant agencies for direct support, through to assessing marae and community needs and matching it with the required support. It is testament to the kaimahi who continue to ensure communities are safe and thriving.
Our contribution is strongest in Social and Human Capital, with a contributing impact on the development of Natural Capital and Financial and Physical Capital. There are wellbeing domains in the Living Standards Framework. Our work has the most impact on the following five wellbeing domains: Civic engagement and governance Safety and security Social connections Knowledge and skills Cultural identity. The Four Capitals of the Treasurys Living Standards Framework (image courtesy of The Treasury). Department of Internal Affairs STRATEGIC INTENTIONS What this means for the Department We need to ensure that the outcomes we seek to achieve are consistent with and contribute to the Governments priorities and the Living Standards Framework. Our work aligns well across all the Governments priorities and our outcomes are therefore broad. Our Context There are many things that affect the environment we operate in and the expectations we face. Our operating context has an impact on what we need to do to continue to develop and evolve the services and functions we provide. Changes to our context can happen quickly and we must try to anticipate as much as possible to ensure we are wellplaced to change and adjust how we operate in response. We must partner with Mori The Government takes a partnership approach with Mori to nurture and maintain the strong relationships between Mori and the Crown. Policies and services will reflect an understanding of Te Ao Mori and the role of Mori in decisionmaking to ensure they are effective and will deliver for New Zealanders. Fulfilling Treaty settlement obligations as agreed with Iwi is a clear expectation for all government departments, including the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua. and support an inclusive New Zealand While New Zealand overall has relatively high levels of civic engagement and social inclusion this is not evenly spread throughout the population. There are barriers to inclusion and participation that disproportionately affect some parts of the population more than others. This has a significant impact on wellbeing, including employment, housing, education, healthcare, travel and recreation. New Zealands ethnic diversity continues to grow, with resulting challenges to how government must operate to enhance inclusivity. making our services available to everyone Expectations on all government agencies are that services are widely accessible and are not delivered in isolation. The public expects government agencies to work cooperatively and in a coordinated fashion to deliver joinedup services where it makes sense to do so. Which agency delivers a service matters less than how well it is delivered. Responding to this expectation requires actively seeking out opportunities to improve customer experience and reduce complexities in peoples engagement with government. responding to a changing technological landscape The changing technological landscape presents a range of operational, system and policy challenges. Greater standardisation and interoperability in information and communication technologies, cloud computing, artificial intelligence and machine learning present opportunities for government agencies. These opportunities have to be balanced with addressing issues of variable digital inclusion, protection of peoples privacy and minimising the risks of harm from unlawful behaviour online. helping to keep New Zealanders safe We are responsible for censorship enforcement and support the Office of Film and Literature Classification. The growth in and danger posed by violent extremist content online presents a unique regulatory challenge. This is highlighted by the uploading and sharing of objectionable content from the March terror attacks in Christchurch but is not limited to this material. There are other challenges posed by criminal or problematic online behaviour, including scams, fraud, identity theft, spam, money laundering, unauthorised release of sensitive information and intimate recordings, harassment and bullying. Digital safety encompasses the protection from, and minimisation of, all these aspects of behaviour. Department of Internal Affairs TE MAHI KIA PAI AKE A AOTEAROA M TE IWI O AOTEAROA MAKING NEW ZEALAND BETTER FOR NEW ZEALANDERS The regulatory structures and settings that currently exist are not always applicable or appropriate for the online domain. There is a need to continually monitor and update regulatory functions to ensure they are fit for purpose in the future. Regulating activities that cross borders complicates questions of jurisdiction and regulating actors who are not easily identifiable to any jurisdiction. International cooperation and coordination by regulators in the online domain are important. embracing our diversity as a country New Zealand is diverse and is forecast to continue to become more diverse. This means the needs and expectations of different communities will become more complex. Responding appropriately to the diversity of needs from within communities will be challenging in the future and there is a risk that some communities do not get the support they need to thrive and prosper. and playing our part so future New Zealanders can thrive. Climate change presents many challenges to how people live their lives both now and in the future. Increasing incidences of extreme weather events and issues such as coastal erosion and flooding will affect many people over time. This is already evident with some areas of housing becoming hard to insure, risks to peoples safety and the viability of current land and water use over time. Many of these issues particularly affect local government but require a response that is consistent nationally. Department of Internal Affairs STRATEGIC INTENTIONS People can easily access the services and information they needIwi, hap and communities across New Zealand are safe, resilient and thriving Peoples sense of belonging and collective memory builds an inclusive New Zealand Outcome Outcome Outcome Outcome New Zealand is a wellfunctioning democracy across central and local governmentTe Pou Tarwaho Hua Outcomes Framework What we seek to achieve and why We are working towards four outcomes to achieve our common purpose. These outcomes support and overlap each other. Contributing to the achievement of the outcomes are contributing outcomes that represent more specifically the impact of our major functions. We are considering developing a fifth outcome that outlines our commitment to MoriCrown relationships. This will be considered for future versions of the Strategic Intentions, when further work has been done on the contributing outcomes and sources for indicators to measure whether the outcome is being achieved. We use indicators to demonstrate the impact of the work we do to benefit New Zealand and those who live here. While the Department is only one of many organisations that affect whether the indicators may move, we use them as the best means available for demonstrating if outcomes are being achieved or not at the macro level. Intermediate Outcomes Barriers to digital inclusion are reduced People s access to government is enhanced Peoples identity can be easily and securely verified Taonga tuku iho rights are protected Intermediate Outcomes Executive Government functions well through support, services and advice Engagement between Mori and local government is strengthened Government transparency is upheld Local government works collectively to address national objectives Intermediate Outcomes Collective memory is enhanced by New Zealands documentary heritage A culture of reading enhances literacy and knowledge New Zealands national and cultural identity is fostered and respected Trusted citizenship and identity documents contribute to a sense of belonging Taonga tuku iho is preserved and valuedIntermediate Outcomes Regulated activities minimise harm and maximise benefits to people and communities Mori are supported to realise their aspirations Communities are supported to develop and prosper The Department of Internal Affairs serves and connects people, communities and government to build a safe, prosperous and respected nation. Department of Internal Affairs TE MAHI KIA PAI AKE A AOTEAROA M TE IWI O AOTEAROA MAKING NEW ZEALAND BETTER FOR NEW ZEALANDERS Outcome : People can easily access the services and information they need Intermediate Outcomes Barriers to digital inclusion are reduced Peoples access to government is enhanced Peoples identity can be easily and securely verified Taonga tuku iho rights are protected Why is this important Peoples ability to participate in society through jobs, education, community work, recreation is made easier when their identity can be easily and reliably verified, and when barriers to participation are eliminated or eased. Peoples ability to access services and information affects their lives and ability to control their destiny. We work across government to find opportunities to make government services and information more easily accessible to those who need them. Our own services seek to help people engage with the world around them. How do we know we have made a difference Outcome Indicator Source The percentage of people whose expectations are met when transacting online with the public services increases Kiwis Count Met expectations by channel Ease of getting passport services is maintained or increases DIA Customer Experience Survey Ease of getting BDM services is maintained or increases DIA Customer Experience Survey Ease of getting citizenship services is maintained or increases DIA Customer Experience Survey Peoples trust and confidence in digital identity is improved DIA Customer Experience Survey We aim to increase the proportion of people who can transact with government online. This indicates how accessible services are and is a proxy indicator for digital inclusion. If more people are transacting with government online, the number of people who find barriers to digital inclusion too hard to overcome should reduce. The Department has progressed work to build evidence around digital inclusion. This includes the development of a Blueprint and outcomes framework. There are measures associated with the framework, but there have not yet been data sources identified. We aim to make a plan to source data before the end of this year. The ease with which people use our key services, such as applying for passports and registering life events, eg, births and deaths, is also a useful indicator of whether we are making a difference to how easily people can access our services and the value that people ascribe to them. Department of Internal Affairs STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Outcome : Iwi, hap and communities across New Zealand are safe, resilient and thriving Intermediate Outcomes Regulated activities minimise harm and maximise benefits to people and communities Mori are supported to realise their aspirations Communities are supported to develop and prosper Why is this important Communities are important to peoples wellbeing. People have the best opportunity to thrive and prosper when the communities they live in are safe and resilient. While risk and harm cannot be eliminated completely, they can be reduced, and communities can be supported to manage risks and challenges. Equally important is the ability of communities to form and realise their own aspirations. The aspirations of iwi, hap and Mori are important for social wellbeing and the Crown has a responsibility to support those aspirations as a partner in the Treaty of Waitangi. Resilient infrastructure is important to communities and their longterm wellbeing. Addressing the planning for and funding of infrastructure ensures communities have the facilities that make our regions thrive and prosper. Our work in this area contributes to the overall work programme of a group of Ministers on resilience. How do we know we have made a difference Outcome Indicator Source Public perception of crime is reducing Ministry of Justice Perceptions of Crime Survey The rate of volunteers and donation is maintained or increases Statistics NZ General Social Survey Overall life satisfaction is maintained or increases Statistics NZ General Social Survey Experience of discrimination decreases Statistics NZ General Social Survey Peoples sense of purpose is maintained or increased Statistics NZ General Social Survey Our regulatory work aims to maximise benefits and minimise harm including using enforcement and compliance activities to identify and prevent crime and criminality. The perception of crime is therefore a useful indicator to help determine whether our efforts are effective, even though our work is only a modest contributor. We will explore other sources of data to find more specific indicators for our regulatory work. Department of Internal Affairs TE MAHI KIA PAI AKE A AOTEAROA M TE IWI O AOTEAROA MAKING NEW ZEALAND BETTER FOR NEW ZEALANDERS Our regulatory efforts also maximise benefits to communities of regulated activities by improving trust and confidence that these activities are wellregulated and effective. For example, the rate of donations and volunteering indicates the level of peoples engagement with community and charitable activities. If this rate is high, then it signifies trust and confidence in the charitable sector and in community organisations. Peoples overall life satisfaction is an important gauge of wellbeing both for individuals and communities. While many factors influence life satisfaction, if communities are thriving, it is likely that this indicator will be high. Peoples experience of discrimination is a harm we aim to minimise. If people experience discrimination, their ability to participate in society and the economy is damaged and this has a negative impact on wellbeing. The extent to which people report experience of discrimination is an important indicator of how inclusive New Zealand is. Outcome : Peoples sense of belonging and collective memory builds an inclusive New Zealand Intermediate Outcomes Collective memory is enhanced by New Zealands documentary heritage A culture of reading enhances literacy and knowledge New Zealands national and cultural identity is fostered and respected Trusted citizenship and identity documents contribute to a sense of belonging Taonga tuku iho is preserved and valued Why is this important Many factors influence peoples sense of belonging and connection. A strong sense of belonging is important for New Zealand to be a welcoming and inclusive place for everyone here. When people lack a sense of belonging and feel excluded there are high social costs, not just for individuals but for communities and society as a whole. A collective memory contributes to a sense of belonging through knowledge and understanding of our history and culture. A vibrant cultural and national identity also helps to give a collective sense of belonging. People benefit through the social capital that documentary heritage, symbols of national identity, national events and culture make tangible. Department of Internal Affairs STRATEGIC INTENTIONS How do we know we have made a difference Outcome Indicator Source Peoples sense of belonging to New Zealand increases Statistics NZ General Social Survey People spend more time reading Time Use Survey Peoples participation in cultural activities increases Statistics NZ General Social Survey Satisfaction with citizenship services is maintained or increases DIA Customer Experience Survey Peoples sense of belonging can be measured, and this is a useful indicator of this outcome. Applying for citizenship is often driven by a sense of belonging. Collective memory is harder to demonstrate through an indicator and there is a lack of robust indicators and sources of data for inclusion at this point. Peoples participation in cultural activities shows to an extent whether there is acceptance and inclusion of Te Ao Mori in the population and recognition of the distinctive aspects of our culture. The amount of time people spend reading indicates the extent of a culture of reading in New Zealand, which helps to demonstrate the level of literacy. There are well documented social and economic benefits to reading, including improved functional literacy leading to better employment and social participation. Outcome : New Zealand is a wellfunctioning democracy, across central and local government Intermediate Outcomes Executive government functions well through support, services and advice Engagement between Mori and local government is strengthened Government transparency is upheld Local government works collectively to address national objectives Why is this important Both central and local government have big impacts on the lives of people living in New Zealand. The smooth functioning of New Zealands democratic institutions is important to the accountability and transparency that give people trust and confidence in democracy. The mechanisms and support needed to make government functional contribute to peoples willingness and ability to participate in democracy. Addressing complex issues requires cooperation and coordination across the whole system of government. When this system is supported and facilitated, it is better able to tackle issues and pursue national objectives. Department of Internal Affairs TE MAHI KIA PAI AKE A AOTEAROA M TE IWI O AOTEAROA MAKING NEW ZEALAND BETTER FOR NEW ZEALANDERS How do we know we have made a difference Outcome Indicator Source The level of institutional trust is maintained or increasedInstitutional Trust: Parliament Statistics NZ General Social Survey Perceptions of government effectiveness are maintained or increased University of Oxford International Civil Service Effectiveness Index Perceptions of corruption are maintained or decreasedTransparency International Corruptions Perceptions Index Satisfaction with local governance is maintained or increased Kiwis Count sector score Local Government Perceptions of Open Government are maintained or increased Open Data Barometer Report Perceptions of open government, government effectiveness and corruption are indicators of how transparent government is and how smoothly it is viewed as functioning on behalf of the population. Peoples satisfaction with local government reflects the value people perceive from the system. While this satisfaction will be influenced by peoples direct interaction with local authorities, it is still useful when considering the system of local government as a key part of New Zealands democracy. Department of Internal Affairs STRATEGIC INTENTIONS T mtou kkiri i te panonitanga hei whakatutuki i mtou whinga How we will drive change to deliver our goals Over the coming years, the Department will be tackling a wide range of issues. It is important for us to understand the impact of our services and functions, so we can improve them, and so they make the best contribution to improving wellbeing in society. Our services and functions need to continue to be delivered consistently and reliably so people can trust what we provide on a daytoday basis. People can easily access the services and information they need At the system level We are developing a Digital Public Service Strategy to provide an overarching strategy for how government approaches digital engagement and the development of digital services to enhance wellbeing. Accelerating government digital transformation will help people access personalised services when and where they need them, engage in decisions about issues they care about, and trust in an open, transparent and inclusive government. In supporting the Chief Executives role as Government Chief Digital Officer, we help other agencies to work together to enhance the digital delivery of services. There is a need to balance being innovative and responsive to peoples needs and expectations with protecting privacy and maintaining trust and confidence in the integrity of information. The Government Chief Privacy Officer works to advise government agencies on building privacy into how the public sector works and delivers for people and communities. We need to make sure everyone shares the benefits of digital transformation and has access to services and information delivered digitally. The Digital Inclusion Blueprint sets out what digital inclusion means, highlights the barriers and identifies groups most at risk of exclusion. The coming years will be focused on building on the foundations already set and developing new approaches to facilitate inclusion and measure progress. What this means for people Ensuring New Zealanders can operate safely in a digital world, with regard for one anothers views and human dignity, is important to achieving a digitally inclusive society. We will work across agencies and with other countries on approaches to human rights in the digital environment and we will continue to work on directly addressing issues affecting digital safety. Te Ara Manaaki is our programme to accelerate digital transformation in the life events and identity sphere to increase digital uptake, improve the customer experience and reduce cost. Ultimately, it puts people at the centre of our services by allowing them to access what they need, when they need it, without having to come into a government office or call a contact centre to carry out their transactions. This programme is delivering benefits through better integration of technology and information. It pulls together a more joinedup and consolidated picture of our customers and their Department of Internal Affairs TE MAHI KIA PAI AKE A AOTEAROA M TE IWI O AOTEAROA MAKING NEW ZEALAND BETTER FOR NEW ZEALANDERS information. People can now order life event certificates online, saving them time and cost. Over the coming years we plan for Te Ara Manaaki to provide enhancements such as realtime sharing of information with other agencies (in compliance with informationsharing agreements) and continued protection of New Zealanders life events and identity information. Our work on digital identity will enable the development of new approaches to digital identity and produce an identity trust framework by October . We will continue to provide the RealMe digital identity verification service while the identity trust framework is developed and options for continued provision of reliable, authentic identity verification to enable digital and online service delivery across government are considered. We plan to build on the progress and momentum established through earlier work to enable easy to use, joinedup services based on key life events ( Smartstart for the birth of a child and Te Hokinga Wairua for end of life services). Working with other agencies to provide services designed around the needs of people is an important part of our vision for access to government services and information. Underpinned by common ways of operating to support portability across life events, joinedup services spanning across agencies puts people and their needs at the centre of service design rather than the agencies delivering the services. The National Librarys Services to Schools facilitates childrens access to information in both hardcopy form and digitally. These services link to our approach to building a community of readers. Iwi, hap and communities across New Zealand are safe, resilient and thriving At the system level Our various regulatory activities must continue to evolve to meet new challenges. An example is our response to the March terror attacks in Christchurch, when footage of the attacks was uploaded and widely shared online. These attacks highlighted the dangers of content that encourages violent extremism, especially online. Countering violent extremism online is an area of increased attention and effort, without any diminishing of focus on the vital work to prevent the spread of child sexual exploitation content. We play an important role alongside international partners and other agencies in bringing to justice perpetrators of abuse and in minimising exposure to harm. We also face challenges in the digital environment with the application of our regulatory regimes. An ongoing policy and operational challenge is to ensure regulatory systems and processes are suitable for activities that are increasingly delivered in an online and digital environment, including gambling and media content. Our work to protect the trust in New Zealands financial system and maintain and enhance New Zealands international reputation, as one of three AntiMoney Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism Act regulators, will continue. This includes supporting businesses to protect themselves from these illegal activities. What this means for people The Office of Ethnic Communities is adopting a refreshed strategy to meet the challenges of the needs of the increasingly diverse population in New Zealand. This strategy targets four outcome areas. Wellbeing is improved through inclusion Ethnic communities have a voice and feel connected to, and valued by, Government Government policies and service delivery meet the needs of ethnically diverse communities and ensure equity of opportunity and outcomes Broader New Zealand feels enriched by diversity and ethnically diverse communities are valued as part of our national identity There will be a focus on education, employment and youth, including contributions to the key Government work programmes. This includes a wholeofgovernment Employment Strategy and Action Plan for refugees, migrants and ethnic communities, education system transformation and a Child and Youth Wellbeing StrategyAction Plan: Children live free from racism and discrimination. Department of Internal Affairs STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Keeping our communities safe Building an effective, affordable, resilient and sustainable Three Waters (drinking, storm and waste water) system will make a significant contribution to intergenerational wellbeing. We are responsible for establishing a new dedicated water regulator for the Three Waters system, following a crossagency review over (subject to Cabinet decisions). The regulatory regime will encompass the extension of regulatory coverage, stronger risk management obligations on water suppliers and local authorities, strengthened compliance, monitoring and enforcement including a requirement for water and storm water operators to report annually on a set of environmental performance measures, and national guidelines for good practices in the design and management of water and storm water networks. Leading system reforms We will continue to focus on implementing reforms in the racing industry. A transitional agency has been established to implement current reforms. The governance arrangements for racing industry entities following the transition period, when responsibility for racing will be transferred to the three racing codes (horse racing, trotting and greyhound racing), will be developed. Options for creating new wagering products will also be developed, which will balance harm minimisation from problem gambling with increasing revenue for the racing industry. Regulations for offshore betting charges are also in development. A review into the funding of Fire and Emergency New Zealand is taking place. We will support and facilitate this review, which will look to recommend a funding model that is stable, universal, equitable, predictable and flexible. This is important to achieve a sustainably resourced fire and emergency services system to protect people and communities. A wellgoverned, transparent and thriving charitable sector contributes to community wellbeing. Work is under way to modernise the Charities Act . Our regulatory approach aims to be modern, responsive and proportionate to the risk being managed for the sector. Improvements to the processes and systems that are used for charities regulation should also serve the needs of registered charities and the public as well as facilitating transparency and accountability. Supporting communities to thrive Encouraging and supporting volunteering is a priority. Volunteering benefits communities and individuals though both the valuable work that volunteers do for others and by providing a sense of purpose and connection for those doing voluntary work. Volunteering is also a useful pathway into employment. Support for volunteering, community organisations and social enterprise through advice, partnering and funding will be a focus for us. Communityled development is central to empowerment and enabling communities and hap to realise their own aspirations. We work alongside communities and hap to assist them to develop, plan for and achieve their goals and initiatives. Working alongside communities is based upon a genuine partnership approach and can involve tangata whenua, local authorities, funders, businesses and local organisations to support locally led initiatives. Continued enhancement of the Communityled Development Programme will allow more partnerships to be formed and to increase the reach and coverage of the assistance we provide. Working with Local Government on Community Wellbeing Building on the reinstatement of wellbeing in the statutory purpose of the Local Government Act, we are considering the future of local governance in New Zealand to deliver intergenerational wellbeing, strengthen local democracy, and instil greater trust and confidence in local government. We are working with local government practitioners to develop options around: More inclusive and effective community participation and partnership with Mori More specific prioritisation and use of wellbeing data in local authority plans Greater collaboration and alignment between local and central government in public service provision This is intended to broaden and accelerate the uptake of outstanding council practice and deepen the relationship between central and local government in the provision of public services. Department of Internal Affairs TE MAHI KIA PAI AKE A AOTEAROA M TE IWI O AOTEAROA MAKING NEW ZEALAND BETTER FOR NEW ZEALANDERS Peoples sense of belonging and collective memory builds an inclusive New Zealand At the strategic level Archives New Zealand and the National Library of New Zealand both have welldeveloped delivery strategies ( Archives and T urning Knowledge into Value National Library Strategic Directions to ) that set out the strategic challenges for these vital institutions in coming years. Archives New Zealands strategic response is centred around the concepts of upholding transparency, taking archives to the people and building systems together. Key components of implementing Archives in coming years are the transformation of services to increasingly digital modes of delivery, the revitalisation of programmes for the audit and monitoring of public recordkeeping and working with public offices to build systems that will provide an ongoing electronic record of government. The National Librarys strategic response is centred on the concepts of taonga, knowledge and reading. The National Library Strategic Directions has a central aspiration to grow a nation of readers. Research tells us that people reading for pleasure has proven benefits for both individual and collective wellbeing, including comprehensive literacy, increased social and cultural capital, educational success and economic opportunity. The Community of Readers initiative is the first of the programmes to realise this aspiration. Preserving our collective memory A major priority for us for the next four years is Preserving the Nations Memory , which will (subject to Budget funding) develop a new Wellington building for Archives New Zealand to ensure the archives are preserved and made accessible in purposebuilt, specialised facilities that will ensure the best standards of care. This is essential because the current Archives New Zealand building in Wellington is at full capacity and transfers of public archives cannot currently take place. The Preserving the Nations Memory programme will ensure that both Archives New Zealand and the National Library have adequate storage capacity for the next years through the new Wellington Archives building. The new building will connect to the National Library to create a national documentary heritage hub. A new shared regional storage facility for holdings and collections that do not need to be located in Wellington is also planned over the next four years. The programme will also replace technology near the end of its working life that is essential to the management of the Archives New Zealand holdings. Protecting Mori taonga Maihi Karauna is the Crowns strategy for Mori language revitalisation. As the holders of a wealth of historic te reo resources, we will support this strategy. The development of Mori metadata, exploration and development of machine learning for automatic transcription of te reo content, and discovery and accessibility of te reo content over multiple channels will be pursued. We will be contributing to the wholeofgovernment response to the Wai report Ko Aotearoa Tni: A report into claims concerning New Zealand law and policy affecting Mori culture and identity. The response is based around three broad kete of issues and the Department plays a significant role in Kete : Taonga works me te Mtauranga Mori. We hold extensive collections of taonga, especially at the National Library of New Zealand and Archives New Zealand for which the Department has a stewardship responsibility. We also need to ensure that the Government Digital Strategy encompasses Te Ao Mori principles and concepts so that digital government is inclusive for Mori. Protecting authors rights Also planned is a review of the Public Lending Right for New Zealand Authors scheme that compensates authors for copies of their books held in libraries. The review will examine options for ways to recognise authors and the coverage of the scheme, including the treatment of electronic publications. The scheme is important for the sustainability of and recognition for New Zealand writing and authors. Department of Internal Affairs STRATEGIC INTENTIONS New Zealand is a wellfunctioning democracy, across central and local government At the system level Our CentralLocal Government Partnerships function aims to achieve a collaborative systemwide, public service approach in which central and local government work together for the benefit of people, communities, business and the environment. Our work aims to not only meets local priorities but also contributes collectively to national objectives. Key focuses of attention include: Local Government Funding and Financing Urban Growth Agenda MoriCrownLocal Government Relationships Community resilience Supporting a wellfunctioning democracy The regulatory framework for local government elections will be examined to modernise the voting process. An enduring framework is needed for local government elections. The local government election process needs to keep pace with improvements in the Parliamentary elections framework. We administer and support government and public inquiries and reviews. The current Royal Commission of Inquiry into Historical Abuse in State Care and in the Care of Faithbased Institutions is the largest Royal Commission undertaken to . Ensuring this and other inquiries established in the coming years are well supported remains a priority. Maintaining the capability to quickly establish and support inquiries requires investment in ongoing systems, processes and expertise. We provide a broad range of administrative and support services to Ministers to ensure the executive government can function efficiently, effectively and transparently. Over the next several years we intend to further modernise and diversify the Crown fleet to improve its flexibility for users, while progressing towards the Governments goal of an emissionfree government vehicle fleet by . As the employer of most staff working in Ministers offices, we will deliver the first phase of a multiyear programme of work designed to address issues raised in the Francis Review report, working with partners to create a parliamentary workplace where people feel respected, supported, empowered and safe. We are committed to supporting the development of a shared culture, created with our people and others working on the parliamentary precinct, where improvements made are enduring. Supporting the smooth transfer of Government following an election is a core function for us. Over the next year we will complete a programme of work to ensure we are well prepared to support the incoming Executive to be operational and to deliver their portfolio responsibilities as quickly as possible following the General Election. Supporting across government agencies With the Chief Executive as the Government Chief Digital Officer, we will continue to work across government to develop systemwide approaches to how technology can make government more effective and efficient, better able to deliver to people and communities and able to access the best technology at the best cost. Marketplace, the digital market that simplifies and makes government procurement easier, will continue to be developed. As an online model Marketplace automates many aspects of traditional procurement processes. This innovative application reduces the time, cost and complexity that comes with government procurement. It currently focuses on public cloud softwareasaservice applications. Expanding Marketplace to include other allofgovernment services is planned, including its use by other agencies, sectors and industries. Department of Internal Affairs TE MAHI KIA PAI AKE A AOTEAROA M TE IWI O AOTEAROA MAKING NEW ZEALAND BETTER FOR NEW ZEALANDERS Ng hoa rangap Partners We have allofgovernment roles which means we work with a vast number of other agencies, both in central and local government. People can easily access the services and information they need We are responsible for reliable, authentic identity information and keeping this information accurate, secure and available in a lawful manner. We work with a variety of other agencies that have appropriate and controlled access to identity information to support the delivery of their services and functions. This includes sharing information in a controlled manner with other government agencies. Working with agencies to improve access to services and information across government through common operating approaches is also a feature of our work. The National Library of New Zealand partners with public libraries across New Zealand for shared services and bibliographic information for the benefit of communities. Digital New Zealand (as National Library of New Zealand service) has partnerships with over organisations to make more accessible our unique documentary heritage. Iwi, hap and communities across New Zealand are safe, resilient and thriving We work closely with other agencies in their regulatory and enforcement roles, including the New Zealand Police, New Zealand Customs Service, international law enforcement agencies and other regulators. The cooperation, information sharing and joint operations in areas such as the investigation and prosecution of child sexual exploitation, money laundering and illegal gambling result in perpetrators being brought before the courts and in some cases serious crimes being prevented or disrupted. This includes participation in the Violent Crimes Against Children International Task Force. We also work with a broad range of stakeholders involved in regulated systems including regulated parties as well as other individuals and organisations that contribute to effective regulatory outcomes. The partnership between the Lottery Grants Board (administered by the Department) and Te Puni Kkiri is aimed at supporting the cultural and physical revitalisation of marae. Further partnerships across the funding sector are being explored. We work alongside iwi, hap and community groups through our partnership approach to community development. The Office of Ethnic Communities works with groups representing many different ethnic groups to assist and support them. Peoples sense of belonging and collective memory builds an inclusive New Zealand We work with Ng Taonga Sound and Vision and the Ministry of Culture and Heritage on the safe, secure storage of documentary heritage, including the provision of specialist storage repositories and equipment. This includes providing space for Ng Taonga Sound and Vision to operate from in the National Library building. With the closure of the Wellington Public Library, the National Library building in Wellington is being used to temporarily provide some public library services that would otherwise not be available. The He Matapihi Molesworth Library will provide a diverse collection of resources from the Wellington Public Library over the next few years. As the Department responsible for coordinating arrangements for official visitors to New Zealand who are accorded Guest of Government or Guest of Parliament status, we work closely with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, and the Office of the Clerk of the House of Representitives. We also work closely with a variety of other agencies and groups, including the Prime Ministers Office, the Ministry of Culture and Heritage, and the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet on arrangements for national commemorative events, and visits by members of the Royal Family. There will also be the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation meeting in New Zealand, which will involve visits by Guests of Government from countries. Department of Internal Affairs STRATEGIC INTENTIONS New Zealand is a wellfunctioning democracy, across central and local government The Government Chief Digital Officer established the Digital Government Partnership, alongside the Government Chief Data Steward (the Government Statistician) to bring agencies together to support the goal of a coherent, allofgovernment digital system. The Partnership provides leadership across the public sector and brings together experts across four working groups to advance implementation of the Government ICT Strategy. As the Crown agency primarily responsible for local government, we work closely with local authorities across New Zealand and the Local Government Commission. We have a strong relationship with Inland Revenue, which processes the Departments financial transactions. We also work closely with other agencies to ensure that our financial and corporate services meet expectations and comply with relevant legislation. This includes the central agencies such as the Treasury, the State Services Commission and the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, and oversight agencies such as Audit New Zealand and the Office of the AuditorGeneral. Crown entities We monitor two Crown entities and are responsible for managing the Governments relationship with them. The Office of Film and Literature Classification is an independent Crown entity under the Crown Entities Act . This means it performs its functions at arms length from the Government. The office has two primary functions: To classify publications such as films, books or computer files which may need to be restricted or banned To provide information about classification decisions and about the classification system as a whole Fire and Emergency New Zealand (FENZ) is a Crown agent under the Crown Entities Act . This means it is required to follow government policies. It is responsible for the delivery of both rural and urban fire and emergency services throughout New Zealand. FENZ is responsible for over , staff and is therefore one of the largest organisations in the State sector. Department of Internal Affairs TE MAHI KIA PAI AKE A AOTEAROA M TE IWI O AOTEAROA MAKING NEW ZEALAND BETTER FOR NEW ZEALANDERS He whi rawe ki te mahi, , he whakahaere e eke ana ki te taumata teitei A highperforming organisation and a great place to work We continue to build on the strong organisational capabilities which support us to deliver results for New Zealanders and make the Department a great place to work. New Zealands population is changing and the people we serve are becoming increasingly diverse. Building a diverse workforce that reflects the communities we serve and puts our customers at the centre, supports us to fulfil our spirit of service and make New Zealand better for New Zealanders. Our leadership and governance The Departments Executive Leadership Team (EL T) includes our Chief Executive, seven Deputy Chief Executives, and the Director of the Office of the Chief Executive. The EL T ensures we focus our efforts and resources in the right areas at the right time. Its operating model supports it to undertake a strategic governance role. The structure of our governance model is outlined below. The governance model focuses on organisational performance, management of risk and assurance and ensures the Department is positioned to deliver on its priorities and purpose. It ensures EL T has the capacity to strategically govern the Department and take a system leadership view. It allows our senior leaders (EL T and the Senior Leaders Cohort) to work effectively to support successful organisational leadership and performance across the Department. Good governance helps to build trust and confidence in public services. We are working to equip our leaders for a changing environment. We need to ensure our leaders are empowered, enabled, supported and informed. We do this through our Senior Leaders Cohort, succession planning and talent management. We are committed to lifting leadership capability at all levels and know this requires investment in both time and resources to be successful. Information, privacy and security We need to raise staff awareness and ensure they understand their obligations in relation to information, privacy and security. As this is a changing environment, we need to ensure that this is embedded into our culture and how we do things at the Department. Ensuring that we value and understand the information we deal with and know where and when to seek and act on advice, is fundamental to our success. Risk and assurance We need to integrate and embed risk management explicitly across our organisation. Everyone can contribute directly to good risk management. As risk is best managed close to the source, everyone needs to be responsible for identifying, understanding and managing their business risks. Our risk management framework ensures that risk management is consistent, repeatable and in line with international standards. Department of Internal Affairs STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Assurance is a key component of our effective governance. It provides evidence of how well business risks are being managed, opportunities are being taken and the business is performing. Good assurance supports governance bodies in their decisionmaking, helps identify key risks to delivery and enables early intervention before they start to impact on outcomes. Our Assurance Framework supports an integrated view of assurance across the Department. We will be applying more consistent assurance, in terms of risk and value, to our priority projects and will embed this as part of our business practices so we are focused on the right things. Our capability We value the diversity, talent and integrity of our people. By reflecting the communities we serve, we can deliver great results for all New Zealanders. We want to make sure our Department is a great place to work. He Tngata, our people, are key in delivering T Ttou Mahi our Outcomes Framework. Spirit of Service Making New Zealand better for New Zealanders is a strong motivator for our people. We recognise and celebrate the success of our people through our He Iti Kahurangi Awards. The award categories are modelled on our Spirit of Service, mtpono and our principles and behaviours. We also recognise individuals and business groups who have demonstrated commitment and achievement in improving health, safety and wellbeing in our workplace, and people who have contributed to the Department through long service. We are focused on growing strong, capable and confident leaders and identifying and designing development activities that support the skills needed to adapt to workforce changes over the next decade. We continue to run T e Hunga Khuri , our Core Leadership Programme, and are developing further leadership capability offerings. All our people have talent and potential. We are committed to providing all our people with opportunities to build on their talents and grow their capabilities. We also have a targeted leadership programme, Te Kurutao for our Mori staff and we are soon to pilot a recently developed Pacific Leadership Programme for Pacific staff. Wellbeing, health and safety Wellbeing, health and safety are key areas of focus in how we work. Our Wellness roadmap guides our journey for our place to be a positive, healthy and caring place where our people feel supported and safe. We were recently awarded highly commended (a silver) by Diversity Works in the Work Life Balance section for development of our Wellbeing Hub and actively encourage our people to embed the five ways to wellbeing into their lives. The Wellbeing Hub covers Speaking Up, building an inclusive workplace, stress and trauma support, and mental health. Inclusion and diversity The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua is diverse by default and aims to be inclusive by design. We encourage a positive workplace culture where we welcome diversity. Our Inclusion and Diversity working group is shaping up a specific work programme. We are working on closing our gender and ethnic pay gaps and making sure we have fitforpurpose facilities, technology and resources to allow us to be more accessible and adaptable in how we work. We are also focusing on recruitment of a more diverse workforce, including inclusive leadership training, as well as understanding any barriers to progression for our own diverse workforce. We encourage networks formed by our people and the following ones are active: Womens network Taha Moana connecting and supporting Pacific staff Tangata Whenua Rp providing support and whakawhanaungatanga to Mori staff Authentic Self LGBTQ network Department of Internal Affairs TE MAHI KIA PAI AKE A AOTEAROA M TE IWI O AOTEAROA MAKING NEW ZEALAND BETTER FOR NEW ZEALANDERS Growing great talent for our future workforce To deliver T Ttou Mahi it is crucial that we develop and support our greatest asset T Ttou Tangata Our People. We attract diverse talent so that we can adapt to our changing environment and deliver effectively to the diverse communities we serve. To support personal and professional development and to have the right capability we also need to invest in the infrastructure, systems and tools to support this. Our investment and asset performance Our assets support our ability to deliver successfully against our strategic intentions. To achieve the level of support required, we are developing a LongTerm Investment Plan . The plan sets out our commitment and direction for investment and asset management and defines the principles that underpin our investment and asset management practices. It is important that our investment decisions are sustainable and wellmanaged. We do this by ensuring we understand the external environment and the drivers for change, including the challenges of increasing costs when delivering complex systemwide services, staff wellbeing, a diverse workforce and being a fitforpurpose flexible organisation. Opportunities, and the risks that comes with them, can often require prioritisation and tradeoffs, while continuing to maintain core services to New Zealanders. Resources and ensuring value for money We are improving our capability and will be updating our financial management information system. This forms part of our LongTerm Investment Plan . Our decisions always take into consideration the wellbeing, and health and safety of our people. To maximise our coverage and impact we need the right information, technology and systems to enable our people to work in an integrated and flexible way. Technology plays an important role in connecting our people, enabling us to operate as one connected organisation across our work locations. We also strive to have better outcomes for New Zealanders who use our services by making it easier for them to access and use them. Our assets consist mainly of property, and information, communications and technology (ICT) assets. The asset performance measures for these are set out below as reported in the Departments Annual Report and to the Treasury via the Investor Confidence Rating (ICR). Department of Internal Affairs STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Property asset management performance measures Measure Indicator Target The percentage of buildings that are not earthquakeprone (NBS of at least or have a structural performance scoring of at least a seismic grade C)Condition Percentage of owned buildings that have maintained their annual Building Warrant of Fitness where requiredCondition Office space density Functionality sqm per person Archive storage environments maintained to required standards : Humidity and TemperatureFunctionality Information Communications Technology (ICT) asset performance measures Measure Indicator Target Average percentage of time our IT business services are available Availability . Percentage of incidents restored within SLA timeframes (all incidents PP)Condition Percentage of workstation devices in use Utilisation Percentage of successful changes Functionality The Department of Internal Affairs Department of Internal Affairs TE MAHI KIA PAI AKE A AOTEAROA M TE IWI O AOTEAROA MAKING NEW ZEALAND BETTER FOR NEW ZEALANDERS
Our customer service complaints policy.
Our employees can take advantage of discounted health insurance with
Our focus is on managing our property assets to ensure our buildings comply with legislative and health and safety regulations and provide an efficient environment for kaimahi to work and a safe place for visitors. We do this by setting and monitoring key asset performance indicators. Work deliver over the last year:
Our governance system ensures the Department delivers on its purpose, strategic priorities and focus on stewardship, through sound and sustainable longterm decisionmaking.
Our government is made up of a wide range of diverse and passionate people who all care deeply about making a real difference in our communities and New Zealand. Do you want to
Our graduates come from various fields of study, including psychology, linguistics, political science, business analysis, cybersecurity, design, software development, and more, working in roles such as project manager, data analyst, scrum master, policy analyst, developer, UX design, cloud specialist and cyber, just to name a few.
Our hope is that New Zealand will eventually see a vaccine and emerge in good shape. Until then, we need effective tools to improve our chances as we face future waves.
Our indicators tell us that the level of trust in the New Zealand Parliament has been maintained. This is reflected internationally in Transparency Internationals Corruptions Perceptions Index, where New Zealand remains one of the countries with the lowest perceived levels of corruption, ranking third equal in the world with Denmark and Finland. While this is a slight decrease from last year, the longerterm trend shows New Zealand has maintained its position in this index. This continues to be supported by The Economists Democracy Index as number two in the world, with a full democracy regime in place.
Our initial evaluations are focused on the recall performance of the CovidCard hardware and firmware As noted above, we seek to maximise recall performance so our evaluation is deliberately biased against the CovidCard : our observed reality is absolute and highly precise (recorded with minute or subminute accuracy) in comparison to human recall of the last days or so, as manual contact tracing requires .
Our intention is to proactively release this paper in full
Our internal mentoring scheme aims to develop and support managers and team leaders.
Our kaimahi are clear on the role they have and have the tools, support and motivation to prioritise sustainability.
Our kaimahis service recognised by the Public Service Commissioners Commendation:
Our leadership and governance
Our leave provisions are generous. In addition to the four week annual leave entitlement, most employees have three departmental holidays between Christmas and New Year. The annual sick leave provision is generous and is applicable from the first day of service. Some employees can also negotiate to purchase up to two weeks extra leave in July of each year.
Our legislation empowers us to request or require the information we need to give effect to that legislation, including to monitor and ensure compliance, as well as carry out investigations where we believe people or organisations may be in breach.
Our mobile application Tai Ako is used by kaimahi as a resource to build te ao Mori and te reo Mori capability
Our organisation and roles
Our payment method is electronic funds transfer (EFT). This means payments can be electronically deposited directly into your designated bank account. We will endeavour to email a remittance advice confirming the EFT payment on the day the payment is made.
Our payment run days are every Wednesday and Friday and the first and last days of each month.
Our people and management team
Our people are passionate about the work they do and the difference we make
Our plan to lift and maintain capability is called He Waka Eke Noa. This is our implementation plan that also gives effect to Mtou Mahi (our strategic outcomes) and Te Aka Taiwhenua (strategic framework for working effectively with Mori).
Our policy on prosecutions.
Our portfolios and policy advice
Our principles and behaviours Mtpono
Our public counters are open for appointment only. To book an appointment, please visit our websites below. We encourage you to apply wherever possible using our online services:
Our public office locations
Our purpose Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua serves and connects people, communities and government to build a safe, prosperous and respected nation. Ko t Te Tari Taiwhenua he whakarato me te hono i ng iwi, ng hapori me te kwanatanga ki te hanga motu haumaru, tnui, whai mana hoki Our purpose remains consistent, even as the functions and services we perform evolve to meet the changing needs and expectations of New Zealanders and the Government. We work with people, communities and government both central and local to make New Zealand better for New Zealanders. Our Ministerial portfolios The Department is responsible to six Ministers, administering six portfolios within Vote Internal Affairs. The Ministry for Ethnic Communities, a departmental agency hosted by the Department, also administers one portfolio and is responsible to one Minister. The Minister of Internal Affairs is the Vote Minister and the responsible Minister overseeing the Governments ownership interests in Internal Affairs. The portfolios and responsible Ministers as at June were: Department of Internal Affairs Internal Affairs Hon Brooke van Velden Ministerial Services Rt Hon Christopher Luxon Racing Rt Hon Winston Peters Local Government Hon Simeon Brown Community and Voluntary Sector Hon Louise Upston Digitising Government Hon Judith Collins KC Ministry for Ethnic Communities Ethnic Communities Hon Melissa Lee Nature and scope of functions Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Our roles and responsibilities The Department has a broad range of roles, responsibilities and functions that include working with communities, ensuring effective regulatory frameworks are in place, supporting the Executive and local government, and delivering a range of services to support New Zealands identity. The Department has administrative responsibility for approximately Acts (plus an additional historic Local Legislation Acts) and about pieces of secondary legislation. We also have functional regulatory roles or share responsibility under six other pieces of legislation. The Chief Executive of the Department of Internal Affairs also holds the role of Government Chief Digital Officer (GCDO), a system leadership position. The GCDO is designated as a system leader under section of the Public Service Act , leading the digital transformation of government across the public sector. As the public service lead for Digital, the GCDO is responsible for setting the direction for and supporting the development of a modern, efficient and adaptive public service that operates as a unified whole. We also play a system leadership role for local government. We link central and local government more effectively to achieve improved outcomes for citizens and communities. The Department is the home of the National Library of New Zealand and Archives New Zealand, which act as the memory of society and the memory of government, respectively. These institutions play an important role in preserving New Zealands documentary heritage and ensuring a full and accurate public record is created and maintained. In particular: The Chief Archivist has a system leadership and regulatory role in administering the Public Records Act , which establishes the statutory framework for information and records management across the public sector The National Librarian has a system leadership role in the preservation, protection, development and accessibility of New Zealands documentary heritage. Our wider functions Our wider functions include: Managing and protecting the integrity of national identity information. This includes life events such as births, deaths and marriages, citizenship and issuing passports Regulating activities in several sectors, including gambling, online child exploitation material and violent extremism material. We also regulate government record keeping, charities, unsolicited electronic messages, money laundering and financing of terrorism, private security personnel and private investigators Providing policy advice to the Government on: local government, the community and voluntary sector, fire and emergency services, identity, digitising government, National Library and public records management, digital safety, gambling and racing Nature and scope of functions Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Providing information, resources and advice to communities to support their aspirations Administering grant funding schemes, as well as promoting trust and confidence in the charitable sector Supporting Ministers to ensure the Executive Government operates efficiently and effectively. This includes providing transport services for members of the Executive Government, overseas Guests of Government and a range of other dignitaries Coordinating and managing official Guest of Government visits to New Zealand and arranging national commemorative events Advising on, establishing and supporting the operation of commissions, public and government inquiries and reviews, including Royal Commissions of Inquiry Administering a range of statutory functions for the Minister of Local Government, including for Lake Taup and offshore islands Leadership of the overall strategy and direction for the Governments digital modernisation and digital service delivery. Our monitoring responsibilities We monitor the performance of three Crown entities Fire and Emergency New Zealand (FENZ), the Office of Film and Literature Classification and the Water Services Authority Taumata Arowai. We also manage the appointment process for members of a range of trusts, committees and boards. Further information on Crown entities can be found on page . Our hosting responsibilities The Ministry for Ethnic Communities is an independent departmental agency hosted within the Department. It is the Governments chief advisor on Ethnic Communities, ethnic diversity, and the inclusion of Ethnic Communities in wider society. Information about the Ministry is included in this document from page . The Digital Executive Board is an interdepartmental Executive Board serviced by the Department of Internal Affairs. The Board is accountable for supporting the digitisation and integration of public services around common citizens, clients and customers. Further information on the Board can be found at www.digital.govt.nz . Nature and scope of functions Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki Strategic context and government priorities Ng Whakaarotau Kwanatanga
Our purpose and principles
Our purpose and principles underpin everything we do.
Our purpose captures why we exist as a Department
Our purpose remains consistent, even as the functions and services we perform evolve to meet the changing needs and expectations of New Zealanders and the Government.
Our purpose T Ttou Whinga
Our questions about accommodations were rewritten to focus on needs rather than impairments.
Our research and development efforts, including fieldtrials, demonstrate that a highfunctioning contact tracing system that utilised CovidCard could:
Our role in digital identity services
Our services support communities, hap and iwi, organisations and networks to identify their priorities and to develop strategies for achieving them. For more information see
Our staff enjoy a positive working environment and
Our strategic direction At the time of developing the RSG strategy the wording of this outcome was yet to be finalised.Background In , the Regulatory Services Group (RSG) embarked upon a strategic journey which resulted in a fundamental shift from regime to system leadership. This new strategic direction was designed to enable RSG to effectively deliver on its stewardship responsibilities in a future that anticipated rapid change and significant digitalisation. RSG is continuing its transformation journey through the development of the RSG Strategy to: Realise RSG s ambition to be highly effective regulators Articulate RSGs vision and the outcomes it aims to deliver for New Zealanders Realise RSG s ambition to provide leadership to the systems it regulates (current and future) Enable RSG to be futurefocused, innovative and adaptable in how it delivers services Collaborate across the RSG regulatory systems to leverage learnings, experience and expertise Build a culture of growing kaimahi (staff) and leadership capability and make RSG a great place to work Articulate compelling and measurable markers of success.Alongside the strategy, a threeyear work programme has been developed, setting out the key initiatives that will be undertaken across RSG. The RSG strategy is strongly aligned to the DIA T Ttou Mahi outcomes: Hap, iwi, and communities across New Zealand are safe, resilient and thriving and The wellbeing of hap, iwi and Mori is improved through a strong and enduring MoriCrown partnership that is equitable and positive The RSG strategy aims to maximise the effectiveness of RSGs current and future regulatory systems through establishing a shared view of what regulatory excellence looks like and enabling systems to consistently excel. The strategy sits across existing (and yettobe developed) system group operating models. Each system group has a clear outcome focus and will have its own operating model which sets out how it undertakes its regulatory work. RSG is at the forefront of regulatory excellence Our groupsWho we are DIA purpose To serve and connect people, communities and government to build a safe, prosperous and respected nation Gambling We deliver community wellbeing through reducing gamblingrelated harmsAntiMoney Laundering and Countering Financing of T errorism We protect the trust in New Zealands financial systemDigital Safety We make the digital world safer for New ZealandersSystem X Purpose X Regulatory Strategy and Performance We enrich expertise and decisionmaking across RSG
Our strategic implementation plan, He Waka Eke Noa, has been soft launched, with a capability development and monitoring plan to be fully launched in . He Waka Eke Noa speaks to our commitment to fostering enduring, equitable, and positive relationships between Iwi, Hap, Mori and the Crown, through meaningful engagement, cultural competence, and partnership. By building our cultural capability in Te Reo Mori, Te Ao Mori, and Te Tiriti o Waitangi, we will improve our relationships with Iwi, Hap, and Mori communities, and achieve our strategic outcomes outlined in Mtou Mahi.
Our sustainability vision
Our technology assets play a critical role in enabling kaimahi to work efficiently and ensure that the Department is a modern and responsive public service. Our ICT asset performance measures provide information on how our internal and customerfacing systems are performing. We monitor and report on the condition, use and functionality of our key assets.
Our terms of use for this website.
Our vision RSG is at the forefront of regulatory excellence The RSG vision sets out the common objective to which RSG regulatory groups aspire. The achievement of this vision requires RSG to clearly outline what regulatory excellence looks like, and for each system group to achieve that. Our purpose RSG enhances the individual and collective effectiveness of its regulatory systems The value of RSG lies in the potential for system groups both singly and in combination to be more effective than they would otherwise, as a consequence of being able to learn from and collaborate with other RSG system groups. The Regulatory Strategy and Performance Group is responsible for supporting and advancing the strategy, including the provision of specialist services and advice to the system groups. Our operating principles The RSG operating principles sit alongside the DIA Mtpono which express DIAs fundamental values. The operating principles are specific to RSG and describe how we aspire to work as regulators. We inspire trust and confidence We generate new and better ways of achieving our outcomes We are focused on making a difference We work with and through others We take a common approach What we will invest in RSG has identified the following priorities for investment over the coming three to five years. These will guide decisions on investment (money, time, resources): Establish strong regulatory foundations Align our capabilities (people, processes and systems) with our vision and purpose Prioritise the development of our evidence, insights and evaluation base Understand the future and what it means for regulation and regulatory systems Identify and build deliberate relationships with key stakeholders Establish systems and processes for ongoing innovation Develop a Group culture that supports regulatory excellence
Our work in this space is ongoing and will inform future disaster responses.
Our workplace demographics reveal areas of success and room for improvement. Women continue to be strongly represented across Te Tari Taiwhenua, though we acknowledge the persistent gender pay gap driven by their concentration in lower and midlevel positions. Similarly, while our workforce is becoming more ethnically diverse, this diversity is not yet proportionately reflected in senior leadership roles. By leveraging datadriven insights and employee feedback, we are identifying opportunities to strengthen representation and equity across all levels of the organisation.
Ourdata, systems and processes support us to use resources efficiently and effectively to minimise environmental harm and deliver longterm social and environmental benefits.
Out of Scope Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . If you agree, we will start policy work on the SOP to the Bill . By May we will provide you with further advice: . on the scope of refinements to the selfidentification provisions and approaches to targeted consultation; . on what updates to the operational and access provisions are necessary; and . providing a more detailed overview of the provisions in the Bill. . We will start scoping work on incorporating M ori perspectives in identity legislation and provide you with further advice in mid . Recommendations . We recommend that you: a) Note the risks with progressing the Bill , including not having time to incorporate te ao M ori perspectives on identity ; b) note we will provide further advice on work considering M ori perspectives of identity ; c) confirm your decision to progress the Bill and seek Cabinet approval of this decision ;YesNo d) agree to the development of proposals for inclusion in a Supplementary Order Paper to the Bill that will : i. refine the self identification provision s; and YesNo ii. make updates to the operational and access provisions; and YesNo e) agree to meet with officials to discuss progressing the Bill in more detail .YesNo Suzanne Doig General Manger Policy Hon Jan Tinetti Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Priority Routine INCONFIDENCE Page of Document Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Priority Routine INCONFIDENCE Page of Appendix B : Overview of the Crown Laws advice In February , Crown Law provided advice on three issues related to the self identification provisions in the Bill . The first two issues from Crown Law relate to determining a persons sex under the law The Crown Law advice did not express significant concern about the selfidentification clauses. Its main query was whether there could be more guidance on how sex and gender is determined by the law generally. Both the Bill and the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Act have a provision stating that a persons sex should be determined by reference to the general law of New Zealand. Crown law raised two issues about this: oThe scope of application of the general law of New Zealand. Who is required to determine sex by reference to the general law of New Zealand oThe distinction between registered sex (e.g. in a birth record), and sex for other purposes. Do we want sex for all purposes to be determined by what is on a birth record As noted by Crown Law, it is not clear how sex is determined by the general law of New Zealand. It advised that clearer guidance in the Bill could be beneficial. We agree that providing clearer guidance for determining sex or gender may be warranted but this work is broader than the Internal Affairs Portfolio. The third issue from Crown Law is about the consequences of a selfidentification model on the placement of transgender people in prison Corrections Regulation () states that if a person in prison supplies a copy of their birth certificate they must be placed in a prison that accords with the sex on this document. This overrides all other considerations, including a history of sexual offending. Crown Law suggested Corrections consider modifying the regulations as the selfidentification process would remove judicial oversight for changing sex on a birth certificate. The concern was that men, particularly those who have committed sexual offences, would take advantage of the selfidentification process to change their recorded sex and be placed in a female prison. Document Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Purpose . This briefing provides information on potential changes that could be considered for inclusion in a new Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Bill (BDMRR Bill). Potential updates for inclusion in a new BDMRR Bill We have previously recommended discharging the BDMRR Bill . We previously recommend ed that you discharge the BDMRR Bill and replace it with two separate pieces of work: . a new BDMRR Bill focusing on modernisation, access provisions and operational improvements; and . a review of the process set out in legislation for changing the sex recorded on birth certificates IA refers. . You r office has asked for further details on what changes would be included in a new BDMRR Bill that are not in the current version. This information is set out in the sections below and can inform your decisions on next steps for the BDMRR Bill. We suggest considering this information ahead of the work programme discussion scheduled for January . A new BDMRR Bill could incorporate changes that better meet the needs of M ori . A new BDMRR Bill would provide an opportunity for consultation with M ori about access to births, deaths, marriages and civil union registers (BDM registers) to ensure that the Crown is fulfilling its obligations under Te Tiriti o Waitangi. This is important as there was no targeted consultation with M ori in the development of the BDMRR Bill. . We are aware that the BDMRR Bill does not incorporate M ori perspectives of identity effectively. For example, the current access provisions can be a barrier to whakapapa research for iwi authorities and individuals. Iwi authorities have a strong interest in being able to identify people who whakapapa to their iwi as this data helps them to provide support and plan for iwi development. Individuals have an interest in knowing their whakapapa, so they can claim support, participate in iwirelated matters, connect with others (whakawhanaungatanga) and affirm their identity. Through the BDM registers the Department directly impacts M ori knowledge of their whakapapa. Because of this, and as the Departments Letters of Commitment with Thoe and Ngti Kahungunu ki Te Wairoa directly reference access to BDM registers, further consultation with iwi is recommended. and operational improvements identified since the original Bill was introduced in . A new BDMRR Bill would enable additional legislative changes to address operational issues identified since the BDMRR Bill was drafted in . Changes could be made to ensure the BDMRR Act is channel neutral. Work that is underway to enable digital channels and digital identity verification, could be complemented with work to promote equity of access for those who have difficulty using digital technology. Changes could ensure that where there are digital advancements, similar advancements are made where practical for inperson or paper based processes.Out of Scope Out of Scope Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE Page of Purpose . This briefing sets out opportunities to modernise the legislation that sits behind New Zealands identity services. It also provides you with information about the ongoing operational and regulatory stewardship work to maintain our identity systems. . We propose a meeting with you to discuss a threeyear policy work programme for the Internal Affairs portfolio. This briefing informs that discussion. Executive summary . You are responsible for the legislation which sets the requirements for maintaining New Zealands primary identity records. As we move into an increasin gly connected and digital world, we need to modernis e our systems for recording, storing, accessing and confirming the identity information held by the Department. There is work that we need to continue across legislation, systems and operations to ensure they remain fit for purpose. . The first piece of work we would like to discuss with you concerns the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Bill (the BDMRR Bill). The BDMRR Bill was introduced in to improve the way people can digitally access information held on the registers of births, deaths, marriages and relationships. It was deferred in after the Select Committee expanded the scope of changes in the Bill to include amendments to the process for changing the sex recorded on a birth certificate. . It is important that work on modernising the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Act (the BDMRR Act) is continued as soon as possible to realise the benefits of the systems modernisation work . You could choose to also consider changes to the way sex is recorded on birth certificates to allow for greater consultation on this issue and further work on the recording of gender identity on official documents. There is strong public engagement and interest in changes regarding sex and gender, but these can be pursued separately from the system modernisations. . Other legislative amendments may also be required to support operational and systems change. This will include supporting digital identity work, continuing to update our systems and practices, and may include work to support changes under the Adoption Act (which is administered by the Ministry of Justice) . You are responsible for the legislation governing primary identity records . As the Minister of Internal Affairs, you are responsible for the legislation which sets the requirements for many of New Zealands identity records. Together the identity related legislation within your portfolio allows for the: a) registering of births, deaths, marriages, civil unions, adoptions and name changes; b) granting and recognising citizenship; c) issuing passports; and d) digital sharing of identity credentials through RealMe, the allofgovernment system providing authentication and identity assertion services . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE Page of . You are responsible for the direction of policy development, reviews of legislation and, under some legislation, you have direct decisionmaking responsibilities. The Department is the kaipupuri, or guardian, of New Zealands identity records, and administrator of the legislation. You have received a briefing on your role regarding the Citizenship Act . You will be briefed separately about the operation of the Civil Registration system (which includes births, deaths, marriages, relationships and passports) . . The Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) holds the registers of births, deaths, marriages and civil unions . The registers are administered by the Registrar General of Births, Deaths and Marriages (the RegistrarGeneral), who is appointed under the BDMRR Act. The RegistrarGeneral is also responsible for operational policy developed under this Act. . The identity services the Department provides are critical for enabling people in New Zealand to establish their identity in order to access services and take part in society. Our records allow people to establish their right to publicly funded services and benefits and apply for citizenship in New Zealand or another country. Many other government agencies and organisations rely on t he Departments records to establish the identity and identity history of people accessing services. . In Cabinet approved funding for a programme to adapt many of the Departments identity services to todays digital world through a programme called Te Ara Manaaki. Te Ara Manaaki is moving all the data and services managed by the Department from outdated, increasingly risky databases on to one, integrated platform. Work on Te Ara Manaaki is well advanced, but the potential of the new system to deliver better outcomes for New Zealanders cannot be fulfilled without legislative reform. Identity systems and legislation need to be modernised over this term of government . New Zealand does not have a national identity document or a single system that records the identity of every person with the right to remain permanently in New Zealand. As a proxy for an identity document, people in New Zealand use a range of official documents to verify their identity, such as a birth certificate, driver licence, passport or marriage certificate. In many situations, someone will use a combination of these documents. . Policy work is needed to ensure that New Zealand s legislation governing identity data: a) is ready for a digital future; b) upholds the Crowns obligations under Te Tiriti o Waitangi; and c) serves the needs of all New Zealanders.
Out of Wellington accommodation
Out of cycle baseline changes are required
Outages to passports and citizenship by grant application services
Outcome indicators and performance measures
Outcome: New Zealand is a wellfunctioning democracy across central and local government
Outcome: New Zealand is a wellfunctioning democracy across central and local government Intermediate Outcomes Executive government functions well through support services and advice Engagement between Mori and local government is strengthened Government transparency is upheld Local government works collectively to address national objectives The Department has a wide range of relationships across central and local government. We will develop creative ways of working in partnership that enable us both to better reflect and respond to the communities we serve. The Department also plays an important role in fostering allofgovernment solutions, especially in the information and data realm. The reach and complexity of allofgovernment information, communications and technology systems will continue to grow over time as eficiencies and productivity gains are striven for across government. We also provide support services and resources to Ministers (and Parliamentary UnderSecretaries) to perform their duties as members of the Executive. This includes ministerial ofice stafing arrangements, entitlements, such as VIP transport and Crownowned ministerial residences, and the use and disclosure of ministerial expenses and allowances. Success will mean that by we will see: our people being provided with the tools and knowledge to support a highly functioning Executive building confidence, participation and engagement in democratic processes building confidence in, and understanding of, local government to enable greater productivity. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
Outcome: Oranga hap, iwi and Mori is improved through an enduring, equitable and positive MoriCrown partnership Tpapa Whia te hntore o te mauri atua, hei oranga m te mauri tngata The pursuit of environmental sustenance and potential, enhances the wellbeing and life essence of people and place. Intermediate Outcomes Mtauranga Mori is respected and valued Mori, iwi and hapu aspirations, interests and rights are understood and respected This outcome derives from concepts in the Mori account of Ranginui and Papatnuku. At the heart of this statement is the word mauri or the life force, linking the mauri of our environment with the mauri of people and place. This is consistent with the view shared in Moridom that if the land and waters are well, so too are the people and community they live in. Making the link between the land and waters, people and community, and wellbeing will guide our engagement with hap, iwi and Mori on outcomes and Treaty rights and interests. This concept of oranga or wellbeing also aligns well with our other outcomes. Incorporating these concepts into our strategic framework signals our commitment to lifing our capability to engage with te ao Mori. Success will mean that by we will see: te ao Mori capabilities in Te Tari Taiwhenua are lifed mtauranga Mori is respected, valued and protected Mori, iwi and hap aspirations, interests and rights are understood and reflected in our work programmes strengthened Treaty partnership with Mori through a mix of codesign, management and governance Te Tari Taiwhenua can report on outcomes and impact for Mori. Outcome: Communities across New Zealand are safe, resilient and thriving Intermediate Outcomes Regulated activities minimise harm and maximise benefits to people and communities Mori are supported to realise their aspirations Communities are supported to develop and prosper The Department is good at responding to events and incidents that impact on communities and in providing practical support. In the future, we will proactively identify and work with iwi, hap and communities to build their own capability to make decisions locally for greatest impact on what afects them. The unique characteristics of diverse communities means that a one size fits all approach is unlikely to be successful. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
Outcome: People can easily access services and information Intermediate Outcomes Peoples identity can be easily and securely verified Barriers to digital inclusion are reduced Peoples access to government is enhanced Taonga tuku iho rights are protected The Department is eficient at processing peoples requests for services and information. In the future, we will go beyond just service provision to enable people to get to the outcome they need to fully participate in and benefit from New Zealand society (eg from delivering passports to enabling travel). With greater control over their own data individuals will be able to opt in to more allofgovernment or cross government services and systems. They will receive faster and more eficient provision, including greater automation, while also respecting privacy and security. Ensuring that the opportunities and gains of digital service provision are realised is important, but equally vital is ensuring services and information are accessible to all and that barriers to inclusion are reduced over time. Success will mean that by we will see: people having more control of their data, which is accessed with their consent peoples circumstances driving automated, transparent public sector services the public sector operating of standardised, interoperable, and common digital systems all people having access to highperforming infrastructure services all New Zealanders having what they need in an increasingly digital world to fully participate in and benefit from New Zealand society. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
Outlines a process and guidance to enable locallyled, voluntary mergers of entities
Outlook Stable Negati ve Negative Stable Negative Negative Negative
Outlook Stable Stable Stable Stable Stable Stable Stable
Outplacement Support There is also support available for kaimahi who are not reassigned or appointed to a position within Te Tari, or who prefer to seek a new job outside of Te Tari: Group workshop focused on job search Individual coaching with C Consulting (external provider), where you can choose from topics that suit your situation, these topics include: o Any of the above listed topics and o Approaching the job market o Networking making networking vital to your job search o Financial options on redundancy o Retirement Please note: for individual coaching, kaimahi can access up to a total of three one hour sessions with C Consulting. If you would like to access any of the above support, you can speak with your manager who can contact HR on your behalf, or by emailing EOIRecruitmentSupportdia.govt.nz . Other Opportunities in the Public Service There are job opportunities across the public service that kaimahi may be interested in applying for. Current vacancies across the public service are advertised via jobs.govt.nz . Te Kawa Mataaho (Public Service Commission) also has a mobility hub that lists available vacancies and available talent (i.e. skillsets of individuals who are affected by change). You can see the vacant positions here and if you are interested in providing your details to the mobility hub contact EOIRecruitmentSupportdia.govt.nz . Early Response Team from Ministry of Social Development The Early Response Team (ERT) focuses on getting people into work, getting people the skills they need to do the work and helping them stay employed. ERT will provide support to DIA kaimahi to go through the change process, specifically: linking individuals with qualified Career Specialists free of charge ongoing contact Released under the Official Information Act provid ing access to further education and short term training options accessing financial support in between jobs. Individuals who are interested in speaking with ERT can e mail ERT directly for assistance at RedeploymentSupportmsd.govt.nz , with your name, your situation and contact details, and ERT will connect you with their regional team.
Outplacement Support There is also support available for kaimahi who are not reassigned or appointed to a position within Te Tari, or who prefer to seek a new job outside of Te Tari: Group workshop focused on job search Individual coaching with C Consulting (external provider), where you can choose from topics that suit your situation, these topics include: o Any of the above listed topics and o Approaching the job market o Networking making networking vital to your job search o Financial options on redundancy o Retirement If you would like to access any of the above support, you can speak with your manager who can contact HR on your behalf, or by emailing EOIRecruitmentSupportdia.govt.nz . Other Opportunities in the Public Service There are job opportunities across the public service that kaimahi may be interested in applying for. Current vacancies across the public service are advertised via jobs.govt.nz . Te Kawa Mataaho (Public Service Commission) also has a mobility hub that lists available vacancies and available talent (i.e. skillsets of individuals who are affected by change). You can see the vacant positions here and if you are interested in providing your details to the mobility hub contact EOIRecruitmentSupportdia.govt.nz .
Outside normal office hours: leave a message or note after hours contact numbers.
Over , worth of SIM cards and hardware
Over million websites blocked, and investigations conducted in , finds DIA Digital Child Exploitation Team end of year reporting
Over , New Zealanders use the Departments Identity Check service each month to apply for a Hospitality New Zealand (HNZ) Kiwi Access Card, and Work and Income services.
Over August and September , central and local government agreed to pause on taking decisions on reform next steps to enable local government time to consider the reform proposals. This was an opportunity for the local government sector to engage with the model and the proposal and provide feedback, at both the national level and as it relates to your community. Local Government New Zealand led this engagement with the local government sector, with support from the Department and Taituar.
Over and above this, our work will continue to ensure:
Over one million attempts to access child sexual exploitation material blocked in
Over the last ten years Briget has held a number of leadership roles within the Department of Internal Affairs, both in the community or identity services spheres, more recently leading the Ministerial Services business group. Prior to this, she held several leadership positions within the Ministry of Justice, specifically in the area of legal aid entitlements. A qualified lawyer, Briget is currently working towards an Executive Masters in Public Administration (EMPA) through the Australia and New Zealand School of Government (ANZSOG).
Over the past years at least ot her wards in Chicago have followed the th wards lead and engaged in participatory budgeting. As of participatory budgeting in Chicago had engaged over , residents in different communities to decide how to spend m of public funds.
Over three years, youll gain experience and exposure in a wide range of accounting roles across several government agencies.
Overall life satisfaction is maintained or increases
Overall numbers recorded at November :
Overall, the signal strength was weaker when clothing was worn over the cards, when compared to the same positions without clothing interference (i.e. the card was over the top of the clothing). The mean RSSI decreased as the wear position deviated from optimal positioning, or clothing was introduced, and typically decreased further if both were true.
Overall, there was broad support for the approach. The primary concerns relate to concerns about outofpocket costs, privacy, data security and the risk of Government misuse of any information such as linking the data to other Government databases IRD, MSD, Police, etc.
Overall, these initial results give us strong confidence that the CovidCard system will be capable of generating an accurate digital record of close contacts that can be used to augment and accelerate manual contact tracing processes.
Overseas Agency An overseas person, body corporate, or unincorporated body that is
Overseas Birth Information Registrar Mortality Review
Overseas Birth Information Schedule Clause (b) and (g) Schedule Clause (f) Overseas Marriage and Civil Union Information Schedule Clause (b) and (g) Schedule Clause (f) Overseas Citizenship Information Schedule Clause (b) and (g) Schedule Clause (f) Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Category Includes Uses Overseas Passport and Certificate of Identity Information Schedule Clause (b), (g), (h), (i) and (j) Schedule Clause (f) Information contained within Police reports issued outside of New Zealand Schedule Clause (b), (d) and (g) Schedule Clause (f) Overseas Death Information Schedule Clause (b), (g), (h) and (i) Schedule Clause (f) Parents or Caregivers Contact Details Information to contact the parents or caregivers of an individual including name, address, phone numbers and email address Schedule Clause (d) and (f) . How MBIE may use Personal Information provided by DIA The Personal Information received by MBIE from DIA may be used to: a) ensure that an individual applying for or utilising MBIE services is not required to provide identity and Life Event records that DIA h olds. b) update an individuals I mmigration New Zealand records . c) update new passport information for N ew Zealand citizens to ensure identities are accurately maintained . d) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences, and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review. e) identify an individual applying for an Electronic Identity Credential. . How MBIE may use Personal Information provided by the Registrar General The Personal Inform ation received by MBIE from the Registrar General may be used to: a) ensure that an individual applying for or utilising MBIE services is not required to provide identity and Life Event records that the Registrar General holds. b) update the records of an individual or persons associated with the individual upon an individuals death. c) update the records of an individual upon a name change. d) update the records of an individual or persons associated with the individual upon a marriage or civil union. e) cease enforcement actions against deceased individuals or persons associated with the individual . f) provide additional protection to information provided by the Registrar General where the individual concerned has an active NonDisclosure Direction under the BDMRR Act. Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of g) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences, and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review. . Adverse Actions MBIE can reasonably be expected to potentially take any of the following Adverse Action s based on the information received from another party: a) decline to provide requested public services . b) cancel the visa of deceased visa holders. c) cancel the visa of associated persons of a deceased visa holder. d) update the known names associated with a visa holder or associated person (s). e) commence deportation activities . f) investigate any matter that may constitute an offence under any legislation it administers and prosecute any immigration related offence or report any suspe cted offence to the New Zealand Police. g) engage in civil proceedings.
Overseas Birth Information relating to the birth of an individual outside New Zealand.
Overseas Death Information in respect of a death that MFAT RegistrarGeneral
Overseas Death Information relating to the death of an individual outside New Zealand.
Overseas Marriage and Civil Union Registrar Mortality Review
Overseas Marriage or Civil Union Information Births, Deaths and
Overseas Marriage or Information relating to an individuals marriage or civil union outside New
Overseas Name Change Information Births, Deaths and
Overseas Overseas Death Information Births, Deaths and
Overseas Overseas Death Information Registrar Any Party
Overseas surrogacy an outstanding matter arising from the Law Commissions report
Overseas voting in local elections
Oversas Marriage and Information relating to the individuals marriage or civil union outside
Overview and next steps Local Government System Improvements
Overview of Regulatory Models for Discussion on Online Gambling
Overview of Response to COVID Protection Framework
Overview of rating systems in Australia
Overview of the Community Trusts in New Zealand
Overview of the Bill The Bill is an omnibus bill that makes changes primarily to the Local Electoral Act to allow and yearolds to vote in local elections (except for alcohol licensing trust elections). The Bill consequentially amends a number of other Acts, including the Electoral Act . The Bill is in the name of the Minister of Local Government.
Overview of the Digital Safety Group
Overview of the Water Services Bill
Overview of charitable purpose under the Charities Act
Owner Knowledge Manager Approved By Chief Privacy Officer Approval October Review October
PARTICIPATORY PRACTICES IN LOCAL GOVERNMENT Final Report Research and Analysis December Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
PDF documents may not be fully accessible depending on your operating system and software. If you require a specific document that is not accessible, please contact
PDF version of this document
PDFs (Portable Document Format)
PICRA Strong () Strong () Strong ()
PM at the LGNZ Conference July
POWeis specified in clause of this DAP. , and for the purposes specified in clause of
PP(a): NZSIS access to DIA Information is lawful as per Schedule of the ISA
PP(b): NZSIS access to DIA Information is exempt from PP(b) under s of the Privacy Act Compliant with PP(a)
PR Cabinet Minute and Cabinet Legislation Committee Paper to support the introduction of the Water Services Entities Amendment Bill
PREVENTING ONLINE CHILD SEXUAL EXPLOITATION
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS Te Tari Taiwhenua Dep artment of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Appendix C: Talking points for Cabinet LEG Committee Changes to the available sex and gender markers The initial expectation of what sex and gender markers would be available under the selfidentification was set differently . This outcome may disappoint s ome people. My officials are engaging with the community to test whether there are other sex and gender markers that could be made available under the self identification process. Any replacement term(s) will be umbrella sex or gender markers, to align with the overarching policy decisions presented to Cabinet in December . If an appropriate term(s) has been identified following the period of engagement, I will come back to Cabinet to seek approval to update the regulations. Waiver to day rule A waiver to the day rule is being sought because addressing the issue at such a late stage impacted the original timeframe to have the regulations in place by June . A waiver is being sought on the grounds that the re gulations need to come into effect by June to comply with the statutory obligations in the Act, and that the regulations primarily provide a benefit, which is to operationalise a process that supports a small proportion of the population to amend their birth certificate. Additional requirements for and year olds The process and requirements for and year olds is not within scope of the regulations being considered today. Any change to the process for and year olds would need to be via an amendment to the primary legislation. The process for and year olds for amending registered sex are consistent with how name change applications from and year olds are treated in the Act. They are also not unusually restrictive compared to other jurisdictions that have enacted a selfidentification process. For instance, the State of Victoria in Australia requires and year olds to have guardian consent. The process for amending registered sex is not a medical process (as specified in the Care of Children Act (CoCA)), so the BDMRR Act does not contradict or undermine the CoCA. ()(h) ()(h) ()(h) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Appendix B : Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Registering Nominated Sex) Regulations
PROACTIVELY RELEASED I N C O N F I D E N C E GOVMIN Cabinet Government Administration and Expenditure Review Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Digital Identity: Establishing a Trust Framework Portfolio Government Digital Services Internal Affairs On July , the Cabinet Government Administration and Expenditure Review Committee: noted that digital identity is a key enabler of digital transformation across the public sector and the economy, and is a foundation in Rautaki m ttahi Rngai Kwanatanga Matihiko , the Strategy for a Digital Public Service; noted that demand for digital identity services has increased during the Covid pandemic, which has prompted the acceleration of the creation of a Digital Identity Trust Framework (Trust Framework) to support New Zealands economic recovery; noted that digital identity has the potential to deliver significant economic and societal benefits with the potential benefit of enabling digital identity in a mature economy estimated to be worth between . percent and percent of GDP (approximately . to billion in NZD); noted that there are regulatory and operational gaps in the provision of digital identity services, including the lack of a regulatory regime; noted that the establishment of a Trust Framework in legislation is proposed to address the regulatory and operational gaps, with an interim Trust Framework to be established while the legislation is developed; noted that establishing a Trust Framework in New Zealand will help deliver on the Prime Ministers commitment under the Single Economic Market agenda for mutual recognition of digital identity services with Australia; agreed to the establishment of an interim Trust Framework consisting of: . an interim Trust Framework team, established within the Department of Internal Affairs, who will develop and test the Trust Framework rules; and . a transitionary governance group, including representatives from the Government Chief Digital Officer, the Government Chief Information Security Officer, the Government Chief Data Steward, the Office of the Privacy Commissioner and Mori to approve the Trust Framework rules; I N C O N F I D E N C E slcblhwr PROACTIVELY RELEASED I N C O N F I D E N C E GOVMIN agreed to create a statutory Trust Framework in legislation which would include: . the approval of the principles that guide the development of the Trust Framework; . the development of a Bill to establish the Trust Framework in legislation; . the establishment of a representative governance board appointed by a Minister; and . the establishment of a departmentbased team to undertake accreditation of potential Trust Framework participants; invited the Minister for Government Digital Services to report back to the appropriate Cabinet Committee before the end of with a detailed policy paper to form the basis for drafting instructions for a Trust Framework Bill; noted that the Minister for Government Digital Services intends to seek inclusion in the Legislation Programme for a Trust Framework Bill to establish the formal Trust Framework, with a Category priority ; noted that the Minister for Government Digital Services and Minister of Internal Affairs intend to issue a press statement indicating their intent to establish a Trust Framework through legislation and to engage with the public as this is developed; agreed to increase funding in Vote Internal Affairs in and for the establishment and implementation of an interim Trust Framework and to develop a Trust Framework Bill; approved the following change to appropriations to give effect to the decisions in recommendations , and above, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance and net core Crown debt: million increase(decrease) Vote Internal Affairs Minister for Government Digital Services Outyears MultiCategory Expenses and Capital Expenditure: Government Digital Services MCA Departmental Output Expense: System Capabilities, Services and Platforms (funded by revenue Crown) . . agreed that the change to appropriations for and above be included in the Supplementary Estimates and that, in the interim, the increase be met from Imprest Supply; agreed that the expenses incurred under paragraph above be charged against the betweenBudget contingency established as part of Budget ; noted that a detailed implementation plan and costings will be refined following confirmation of the preferred approach; I N C O N F I D E N C E slcblhwr PROACTIVELY RELEASED I N C O N F I D E N C E GOVMIN noted that a cost recovery model will be developed as part of the policy and legislative programme for the statutory Trust Framework, and advice will be provided in report back referred to in paragraph above; noted the intention to submit a Budget Bid for phase : the formal establishment of the Trust Framework in legislation; invited the Minister for Government Digital Services and Minister of Internal Affairs to submit a paper to the appropriate Cabinet Committee after the General Election, outlining operational decisions for supporting digital identity transformation, including systemwide investment options, including the RealMe services. Rachel Clarke Committee Secretary Present: Officials present from: Rt Hon Winston Peters Hon Grant Robertson (Chair) Hon Phil Twyford Hon Stuart Nash Hon Kris Faafoi Hon Ron Mark Hon James Shaw Hon Julie Anne GenterOffice of the Prime Minister Officials Committee for GOV I N C O N F I D E N C E slcblhwr PROACTIVELY RELEASED U N C L A S S I FI E D CABMIN Cabinet Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Report of the Cabinet Government Administration and Expenditure Review Committee: Period Ended July On July , Cabinet made the following decisions on the work of the Cabinet Government Administration and Expenditure Review Committee for the period ended July : )f)(iv) JfJiv) f(f)(iv) r)(fJiv )f)(iv) I Separate minute: ()(f)(iv) CONFIRNED CONFIRMED CONFIRMED CONFIRMED GOVMIN Digital Identity: Establishing a Trust Framework CONFIRMED Portfolios: Government Digital Sevices Internal Affairs (Xf)(iv Michael Webster Secretay of the Cabinet slcblhwr :: CONFIRMED IN CONFIDENCE Proactively released by the Minister for Government Digital Services
PROACTIVELY RELEASED INCONFIDENCE
PSCID will be used after this by the Party and the RegistrarGeneral when conversing about the
PTWG hui , March slidepack
PTWG hui , March summary notes
PTWG hui , April slidepack
PTWG hui , April summary notes
PTWG hui , May slidepack
PTWG hui , May summary notes
PTWG hui , May slidepack
PTWG hui , May summary notes
PTWG hui , June slidepack
PTWG hui , June summary notes
PTWG hui , July slidepack
PTWG hui , July summary notes
PTWG hui , August slidepack
PUBLCL Y AVAILABLE Page of
PUBLCL Y AVAILABLE Page o
PUBLCl Y AVAILABLE Page of
PUBLIC SECTOR FINANCE GRADUATE PROGRAMME
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE A person born outside New Zealand shall be deemed to be a New Zealand
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE All deed poll name changes lodged with the RegistrarGeneral that are
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE Page of
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE Page of
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE Page of
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE Page of
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE Page of
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE Page of
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE Page of
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE Page of
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE Page of
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE Page of
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE Page of
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE Pageof
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE Page of
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE Page of
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE Page of
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE Page of
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE Page of
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE Pageof
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE Pages o
Pacific Development and Conservation Trust
Package in support of the Future for Local Government Reviews final report release
Page of Schedule C Crown Entities This Class of Agencies , as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Crown Entities. The following table details New Zealand Agencies included in this class , and in respect of each, the specified fields to be shared with the New Zealand Agency and the specified uses of the information . New Zealand Agency Establishing Act Use(s) Field(s) Signatory Name Signature of Authority of acceptance of the Agreement of exit from the Agreeme nt Government Superannuation Fund Authority Government Superannuation Fund Act The purpose of disclosing Death Information is to assist GSFA to: limit the financial exposure and fiscal cost to GSFA and the Crown caused by overpayment of entitlements to deceased members. confirm whether any persons receiving entitlements from GSFA have died. increase and streamline the payment of entitlements to the relatives andor dependants of deceased members. increase the payment of entitlements to missing members and to the relatives and dependents of deceased members (other beneficiaries). Death Information as specified in related Operating Procedures Tim Mitchell
Page of Schedule E Independent Statutory Bodies This Class of Agencies , as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Independent Statutory Bodies. The following table details New Zealand Agencies included in this class , and in respect of each, the specified fields to be shared with the New Zealand Agency and the specified uses of the information . New Zealand Agency Establishing Act Use(s) Field(s) Signatory Name Signature of Authority of acceptance of the Agreement of exit from the Agreement Board of Trustees of the National Provident Fund National Provident Fund Restructuring Act The purpose of disclosing Death Information is to assist NPF to: limit the financial exposure and fiscal cost to NPF and the Crown caused by overpayment of entitlements to deceased members. confirm whether any persons receiving entitlements from NPF have died. increase and streamline the payment of entitlements to the relatives andor dependants of deceased members. increase the payment of entitlements to missing members and to the relatives and dependents of deceased members (other beneficiaries). Death Information as specified in related Operating Procedures Tim Mitchell
Page of U N C L A S S I F I E D
Page of U N C L A S S I F I E D Hon Kris Faafoi, Minister for Government Digital Services Hon Tracey Martin, Minister of Internal Affairs Proactive Release Progressing Digital Identity: Establishing a Trust Framework Cabinet Paper These documents have been proactively released. July , Progressing Digital Identity: Establishing a Trust Framework Cabinet paper, Department of Internal Affairs July , Progressing Digital Identity: Establishing a Trust Framework Regulatory Impact Statement, Department of Internal Affairs July , Cabinet Government Administration and Expenditure Review Committee Minute of Decision, Digital Identity: Establishing a Trust Framework, Cabinet Office July , Cabinet Minute of Decision, Report of the Cabinet Government Administration and Expenditure Review Committee: Period Ended July , Cabinet Office Parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Key to Redaction Codes: ()(f)(iv) maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officia ls; and ()(i) enable a Minister of the Crown or any department or organisation holding the information to carry out, without prejudice or disadvantage, commercial activities. (b))(i) prejudice the entrusting of information to the Government of New Z ealand by the Government of another country.
Page of Office of the Minister of Local Government
Page of INCONFIDENCE
Page of Office of the Minister of Internal Affairs Chair, Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee
Page of Local Government Portfolio Weekly Report Week end ing ( July ) Recipient HON SIMEON BROWN MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT Michael Lovett Deputy Chief Executive, Local Government Ministers comments: Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairsi Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Proactively Released by the Department of Internal AffairsI . Updates on Agency Activities Local Water Done Well ,.i Te Tari Taiwhenua H Internal Affairs Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements Bill (Bill ) Update: On July , the Finance and Expenditure Committee (the Committee ) deliberated on the Bill and is on track to report back to the House by July . Both the Green and Labour Parties oppose the Bill and are adding minority views to the Committee report back. The changes proposed to the Bill, through the select committee process, were therefore agreed by majority. We are preparing materials to support the further House stages, due to be provided to you on July . Contact: Bex Sullivan Ra lJfiv) Contact: Hamiora Bowkettp(Xa , Page of Proactively Released by the Department of Internal AffairsfJIJ J. T T . h :I II i ,e an aw enua ,; l ff . , : :; u lnterna A airs ()iJ Z)(f)(iv) Contact: Hamiora BowkettRaJ Page of Proactively Released by the Department of Internal AffairslKffliv) Operational and Policy Updates ,.i Te Tari Taiwhenua H Internal Affairs Local Government (Electoral Legislation and Maori Wards and Maori Constituencies) Amendment Bill (the Bill) Update: The Bill is awaiting further House stages, which are scheduled to take place over the final two weeks of July . On July , we provided you with a pack of material to support the remaining House stages, including draft speaking notes, clause notes, and a copy of an Amendment Paper for the committee of the whole House stage, for your approval. On July , we are scheduled to have a pre briefing with you to discuss the further House stages. Contact: Mark Tregurtha )la . Update: On July , we provided your Office with a draft Cabinet paper on support to progress flood protection in Wairoa. The paper is due to be considered at Cabinet on Monday July. We will work with your office on any support materials you may require. The media is reporting that a Wairoa business and a landowner are taking the Hawkes Bay Regional Council to court seeking compensat ion for the recent flooding. In discussions around cleanup funding, the Regional Council and Recovery Agency have now reconfirmed that their previous proposal to use an existing underspend to provide commercial grant funding to farmers remains a priority and that the flooding in Wairoa has not changed their position. We will provide Joint Ministers with a briefing on this proposal in the coming weeks. This work was temporarily paused while our team focussed on the urgent funding issues in Wairoa . Contact: Fergus Broom )(a) Page of Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairsnll,ini,,.i Te Tari Taiwhenua H Internal Affairs Council Updates Update: Long term plan adoptions Of those councils doing a year Longterm Plan that did not previously indicate a post June adoption: Southland Regional Council, Whangare i District Council, and Whanganui District Council will have adopted their plans by July ; Carterton District Council has deferred adoption to September (further details below); and Whakatane District Council delayed its longterm plan adoption in late June and has yet to schedule a new adoption . Wairoa District Councils year plan adoption has been deferred as a result of the severe weather event in June . A new has not been set. Tauranga City Council (the Council) election Voting closes at noon on July , with progress results expected later that afternoon . Final results will be announced by July . The new Council will consist of a mayor and nine councillors. The electoral officer has indicated voting returns are progressing favourably compared to past elections, and the orange voting bins across the city have been a popular way for voters to cast their vote. As of July , the electoral officer had received . percent of eligible votes. JiJ I Council Monitoring dJi) Contact: Anthea OliverrlKaJ Page of Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs,:,. Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs . Local Government Stakeholder Updates NIA . Upcoming Minister of Local Government Meetings Meeting I Meeting I Details Monday Meeting With: DIA officials Briefing Number: NIA July Topics to Discuss (if known): Briefing Due: NA Officials Attending: Michael Lovett and relevant team members as per agenda. Wednesday Meeting With: Mayor Nick Briefing Number: Event briefing to be July Smith and members of the provided to office on July LGNZ Electoral Reform group Briefing Due: July Topics to Discuss if known): Discuss work of the LGNZ Electoral Reform Group Officials Attending: Michael Lovett Informal chat Page of Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs. Chief Executive and Deputy Chief Executive Meetings and Engagements Meeting I Meeting Thursday, July Meeting with: Michael Quinn, Head of Auckland Policy .am to .am Officials attending: Michael Lovett Thursday, July Meeting with: Phil Wilson, Chief Executive, Auckland Council .am to .am Officials attending: Michael Lovett Wednesday July Meeting with: Nick Leggett, Chief Executive Infrastructure NZ .pm to .pm Officials attending: Michael Lovett Monday, July Meeting with: Canterbury Chief Executives Forum .am to .am Officials attending: Michael Lovett Tuesday, July Meeting with: Max Hardy, Megan Tyler, Auckland City Council .pm to .pm Officials attending: Michael Lovett, Hamiora Bowkett and Vanessa Blakelock Tuesday, July Meeting with: Max Hardy, Megan Tyler, Auckland City Council .pm to .pm Officials attending: Paul James Wednesday, July Meeting with: Suzanne Boyd, Chief Executive, Taituara .am to .am Officials attending: Michael Lovett Wednesday, August Meeting with: Graham Mitchell. Chief Executive, Crown .pm to .pm Infrastructure Partners Officials attending: Michael Lovett Wednesday, August Meeting with: Gareth Green, Chief Executive, New Plymouth .pm to .pm District Council Officials attending: Michael Lovett and Caroline Dumas Thursday, August Meeting with: Steve Ruru, Chief Executive, Taranaki Regional .am to .am Council Officials attending: Michael Lovett and Caroline Dumas Thursday, August Meeting with: Fiona Aitken, Chief Executive, South Taranaki .am to .pm District Council Officials attending: Michael Lovett and Caroline Dumas Tuesday August Meeting with: Growth Councils Roundtable Discussion (CEs .pm to .pm from Hamilton City, Tauranga City and Queensto wn Lakes District) Officials attending: Michael Lovett Wednesday to Friday Meeting with: LGNZ Conference August Officials attending : Michael Lovett and officials from DIA Page of Proactively Released by the Department of Internal AffairsI ,all,:,. Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs . Upcoming Local Government Cabinet Papers Local Government Forward Work Programme Purpose: This paper asks Cabinet to note your proposed areas of focus for the Local Government portfolios forward work programme. Progress Update: We have provided you with a draft of the Cabinet paper to commence preCabinet consultation To Minister: July To Lodge: August To Committee (ECO): August Local Water Done Well stage : further decisions Purpose: This paper seeks the remaining policy decisions for the Local Government Water Services Bill Progress Update: Ministerial and agency consultation completed on Monday July . Briefing seeking approval to lodge provided July . To Minister: June To Lodge: July To Committee (ECO): July ()(g)(i) )(f)(iv) Page of Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs,:.Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs . Other Briefings and Aide Memoires Due to Minister of Local Government Due to I Title I Action I Key I Responsible Office Required Contact DCE I Manager July Representation arrangements For noting Michelle Rowan Burns in local legislation Walsh a) I LG Options for fulfilling the broader policy intent of the coalition agreement commitme nt to repeal the Canterbury Regional Council (Ngai Tahu Representation) Act July Briefing: ECO support For noting Jane Bex Sullivan material Local Water Done Fleetwood )a) I Well stage : further decisions LG Commentary: NIA July Briefing: Bill : Material for all For noting Sam Miles Bex Sullivan remaining House stages l)a, I TBC Commentary : NIA August Aide Memoire: Meeting with For noting Jennifer Jade Badcock Dame Kerry Prendergast on Dixon )a) I August LG Commentary : NIA Page of Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs. Proactive Releases Due to Office I Title I Planned for Release August Title: Proposals for regulations for natural hazard information in land memoranda Commentary : Release of Cabinet minute of decision, Cabinet paper and regulatory impact statement August Title: Repealing the Canterbury Regional Council (Ngai Tahu Representation) Act Commentary : Includes Cabinet material related to the coalition commitment to repeal this local act. August Status Reports to the Minister from May to June (TBC) August Proactive release of briefings and Cabinet papers about Bill . Other Portfolio Cabinet Papers with Local Government Implications This section captures other Portfolio Cabinet papers that the Department is abreast of and its role with these papers. It is not designed to be an exhaustive list. Committees Economic Policy Committee July Final Decisions on the International Visitor Conservation and Tourism Levy Amount The paper reports back on the Internation al Visitor Conservation and Tourism Levy (IVL) following public consultation and seeks Cabinet agreement to increase the amount of the IVL. Department Role and Position The Department supports the proposal; however, we note the likely amount of revenue raised and alocation of revenue is not expected to sufficiently reduce the infrastructure deficit for tourists (for example, local roads, water services, toilets). Page of Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs,, Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs . Other Portfolio Activities with Local Government Implications NA . Ministerial Correspondence and OIAs Ministerial Correspondence: NIA Written Parliamentary Questions Summary Analysis Numer I Topic I Key themes I Member(s) Received Redundancies and Redundancies, Baseline Hon Dr Ayesha Verrall Cost Saving Savings, Demographic Initiatives Information of Affected Staff Ministerial Official Information Act Requests: to I Decision I Action I Requester I Summary of Request I Key Contact Ministers Due to Required (DOI) Office Requestor July July Send )a Documents regarding Stacey information Crown oversight of Hayward by July Wellington City Council )iij July July Send Request for information Stacey information about Wellington Hayward by July regional council )(a) amalgamation July July Send Future for Local Stacey information Government Review Hayward by July Recommendations iJa) Page of Proactively Released by the Department of Internal AffairsDepartmental Official Information Act Requests to I Decision I Action I Requester I Summary of I Key Contact Requester Due to Required Request (DOI) Requestor July July Send )a) Insight on level of Jade Badcock information engagement T(a byJuly between PCC and Central Government July July Send )la) Request for Jade Badcock information stormwater GIS T(a) by July data and standards for assets July July Send Records of all Stacey Hayward information commissioners by July appointed by the Ra Minister for Local Government July July Send Information Stacey Hayward information regarding councils, a by July longterm plans, and Crown intervention Page of
Page of Proposal to amend long term plan requirements for specified councils We are consulting on a proposed temporary change to the Local Government Act (LGA) allowing specified council s to decide on mak ing voluntary buyouts to owners of properties that have been severely impacted by weather events in , without having to amend their long term plan s (LTPs) as required by the LGA. The change will also clarify that the exemption provided to specified councils by clause of the Severe Weather Emergency Recovery (Local Government) Order applies to decisions about FOSAL buyouts and a LTP amendment is not required. We are preparing an Order in Council (Order), unde r the Severe Weather Emergency Recovery Legislation Act (SWERL A), to clarify that Auckland Council, Central Hawkes Bay District Council, Gisborne District Council, Hastings District Council, Thames Coromandel District Council, Wairoa District Council, Hawkes Bay Regional Council (the specified councils) are not required to amend their LTP to accommodate buyouts . Section of the LGA prevents a council from starting a new significant activity or significantly changing existing service levels if these were not included in the councils LTP . Given their scale and costs, land purchases could be a new significant activity for the specified councils above or would significantly impact some of the councils existing services. Public consultation on this pr oposal and the draft Order will be open on August . Why is this change necessary The proposed Order is needed to enable the specified local authorities to act quickly on making buyout offers to property owners severely impacted by recent weather events . It would provide certainty f or these specified homeowners and communities , many of who m have been unable to occupy their properties for several months . It would also ensure that the process to resolve the future of damaged and at risk land progresses without additional delays . Temporarily suspending the requirement to amend the LTP for the buyout process provides regulatory relief to the specified councils . There is also limited benefit in requiring the specified councils to complete the LTP amendment process with the information currently available. Background to the issues requiring an Order in Council Under section of the LGA , councils may not commence a new significant activity or significantly change service levels of an existing activity if these were not provided for in the councils LTP. This would require councils to go through a LTP amendment process before undertaking a ny new activities or changing service levels.
Page of Office of the Minister of Local Government
Page of Proposal to amend e ight c ouncils long term planning requirements : We are consulting on a proposed temporary change to the following councils planning requirements in response to the effects of Cyclones Hale and Gabrielle and heavy rain events early this year: Central Hawkes Bay District Council; Far North District Co uncil; Gisborne District Council; Hastings District Council; Hawkes Bay Regional Council; Kaipara District Council; Napier City Council; and Wairoa District Council. We are preparing an Order in Council (Order), under the Severe Weather Emergenc y Recovery Legislation Act (SWERL Act), to allow for a three year plan instead of the statutory year long term plan. This would be a temporary change to support local authorities during the recovery from the recent extreme weather events. The draft Order is attached for you to review. We have provided some supporting information on the proposal below, including an explanation of why this Order is considered necessary. Public consultation on this proposal will be open on July August . If you have any feedback or questions on this proposal, please send it to LGCycloneRecoverydia.govt.nz. Why is this change necessary To be able to do long term planning, councils must have a detailed understanding of the present situation of their communities. This includes knowing the condition of infrastructure like roading and the funding available for their maintenance and operation . Councils are still assessing the extent of the damage from severe weather. They still need to confirm the funding required, when that funding will be needed and when that funding will be received. Given the very limited information, planning for the nex t years is likely to be inaccurate. Without the proposed change, c ouncils would have to develop and consult on long term plans that do not reflect the longer term impacts arising from the weather events. In addition, c ouncil staff who would normally wor k on the preparation of a long term plan are deployed on recovery efforts. Requiring councils to do a long term plan means having to pull these people out of this task, which at this point has a higher priority. However, planning is still very important. A recovery focused, three year plan would strike a balance between the need for planning and the uncertainties arising from the weather events. A similar measure was taken following the Canterbury and Kaikura earthquakes.
Page of Understanding Ministers Expenses (after ) Information on the expenses disclosed by the Department of Internal Affairs for members of the Executive. Statutory framewor k Members of the Executive (Ministers of the Crown) require financial resources and support services to fulfil their responsibilities and to service the public efficiently and effectively . Under the provisions of the Members of Parliament (Remuneration and Services ) Act , services for Ministers are determined variously by the Remune ration Authority, the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Minister Responsible for Ministerial Services. Where no additional or alternative provision is made for Ministers under the Remuneration Authoritys, or the Minister Responsible for Ministerial Services determinations, Ministers entitlements are as for those members of Parliament who are also not ministers.
Page of
Page of Cloud enables the delivery and
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of . agree that the discussion document on the proposed wastewater standards Appendix A can be released on February ; . authorise the Minister of Local Government to make minor amendments and refinements to the discussion document before it is released; . note the Water Services Authority Taumata Arowai will publish the interim Regulatory Impact Statement on its website to support public consultation on the proposed wastewater standards draft attached at Appendix B ; . note that the Local Government (Water Services) Bill (the Bill) affects the approach being taken to the proposed wastewater standards and how they are made ; . note the intention is to make the new wastewater standards as soon as possible after the Bill is passed ); . authorise the Minister of Local Government to: . issue drafting instructions (in consultation with the Minister Responsible for RMA Reform) to Parliamentary Counsel Office to prepare the draft Order in Council making the wastewater standards, after consultation on the discussion document closes and any feedback has been considered; . approve matters that may arise during the course of drafting and may be required to align with the decisions in this paper and the Governments intentions for the national wastewater standards; . invite the Minister of Local Government to report back to the Cabinet Legislation Committee in (following the enactment of the Local Government (Water Services) Bill) to: . seek agreement to a proposed Order in Council to bring the wastewater standards into force and authorisation for submission of the Order to the Executive Council; and . inform the Committee of any significant matters raised in feedback on the discussion document and any significant decisions that were made during the course of drafting the proposed Order in Council.
Page of . note that in March , the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee agreed to exclude the hierarchy of obligations contained in the National Policy Statement for Freshwater Management from resource consent application and decision making processes; . note that on April , Cabinet delegated the Minister Responsible for RMA Reform and the Minister of Local Government to determine if amendments to the Water Services Act are required to ensure the hierarchy of obligations will not apply to the development of wastewater standards; . note that I and the Minister Responsible for RMA Reform have determined minor amendments should be made to the Water Services Act to remove the hierarchy of obligations so that there is consistent application during standards setting and resource consenting; . agree that an outofscope Amendment Paper will be tabled to add provisions to the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill to amend the Water Services Act and give effect to the decisions above; . note the Amendment Paper will require a debatable motion , which can be debated along with a debatable motion for a truncated select committee process ; . approve Parliamentary Counsel Office to make minor and technical changes to the Bill up to its introduction to the House of Representatives; . approve the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill for introduction, subject to the final approval of the government caucus and sufficient support in the House of Representatives; . agree that the Bill be introduced on the May ; . agree that the Government propose the Bill to be: . referred to the Finance and Expenditure Committee ; and . enacted by August ; . note that further policy decisions will be made in June and July that will comprise long term settings of Local Water Done Well to be set out in a third Bill, intended to be introduced in December .
Page of j) agree that National Engineering Design Standards will include minimum design, construction, operational, data standards, and requirements for vesting water services network infrastructure and for connections to the publicly owned network drinking water, wastewater and stormwater water services network infrastructure. YesNo
Page of agree to the release of the discussion document for public consultation, by the end of March ; note that the Minister for Internal Affairs intend s to return to the Committee by September with proposals to amend the current regulations; and note work to minimise harm from pokies gambling is part of the broader work programme underway to prevent and minimise harm from gambling , including online gambling and implementing the new Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm .
Page of INCONFIDENCE Contact: Mark Tregurtha
Page of . In the limited situations described above, we consider the Crown intervention bodies should be able to initiate merger investigations and the development of proposals, by entities that woul d potentially benefit from merging. This would occur through a recommendation to the regional representative group by the relevant Crown intervention body. In these circumstances, it would also be desirable for there to be a lower threshold for a merger proceeding. I consider per cent of each regional representative group would need to agree to the merger for it to go ahead. Entity financing arrangements . In my earlier paper, I noted a consequence of moving to a entity model is that some entities will have weaker standalone credit profiles (due to these entities more concentrated assets, less diversified customer base, and weaker financial ratios), and that this may limit their borrowing capacity and raise their borrowing costs. Smaller entities might find it more challenging to raise competitively priced debt from banks and capital markets due to the weaker credit quality and financial resilience of some entities, and the increased number of borrowers in the market. . Reflecting the above, Cabinet invited me to report back with advice and proposals for suitable financing mechanisms, including consideration of mechanisms that vary from entity to entity, and a backstop central financing facility that could operate on a near commercial basis, enable the pooling of risk and provision of credit enhancement, and achieve economies of scale and market access benefits CAB MIN . . Officials have since undertaken further work to better understand the credit quality and financial resilience of the proposed water services entities, and the implications for their ability to access cost effective finance.
Page of revenu es between and compared t o . in the current base ca se due to th e
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of r) agree that Water Services Authority can make recommendations to the Minister for responsible for the Water Services Authority on when the National Engineering Design Standards will take effect in different regions; YesNo
Page of Appendix A: Current harm minimisation r egulations The Gambling Act provides for a substantial level of regulation in relation to Class gambling: harm prevention and minimisation (section ); gaming machines (section ); admission to, and exclusion from, gam bling venues (section ); exclusion of problem gamblers (section ) ; and infringement offences for the breach of any regulations (section ). The table below shows the key requirements for Class gambling in the current Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Regulations (note: administrative clauses are not shown) . Table: Key requirements in the current Harm Minimisation regulations Regulation . Venues that are declared unsuitable to be a Class venue. Regulation . No ATMs are permitted in the gambling area of a venue. Regulation . Stake and prize limits for C lass gambling. Regulation . Gaming machine must display certain messages at the election of the player, specifically: game information (odds, average winnings, player spend rates) player information (duration, amount spent, net winslosses). Regulation . Gaming machine must include feature that interrupts play every minutes and provide player information (duration, amount spent, net winslosses). Machine must include a feature that automatically pays out any winnings and credits to the player, if they do not wish to continue. Regulation . Jackpot advertising cannot be visible from outside the venue. Regulation . Any advertising related to a venue must not convey the impression that there is a gaming machine jackpot at the venue. Regulation . The following must be available: pamphlets containing information about the odds of winning on gaming machines and the characteristics of problem gambling, including the recognised signs of harmful gambling and how to seek advice; and visible s ignage that clearly encourage players to gamble only at levels they can afford and contains advice about how to seek assistance for problem gambling. Regulation . There is always a staff member who has received problem gambling awareness training at the venue at all times when gambling is available. A trained staff member must be able to approach a player and provide appropriate information about problem gambling. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E SWCMIN Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Reducing Pokies Harm: Approval to Consult Portfolio Internal Affairs On March , the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee (SWC): noted that Class gambling (pokies in pubs, clubs and TAB NZ venues) is the most harmful form of landbased gambling in New Zealand, with approximately one in five pokie players being considered atrisk gamblers and nearly billion lost on pokie machines per annum; noted that the current Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Regulations have some gaps that could easily be addressed to do more to reduce harmful pokies gambling and improve the enforceability of the regulations; noted that the Gambling Act contemplates a substantially more detailed approach to regulation of Class gambling and there is an opportunity to develop a much stronger harm reduction approach; agreed to the release of the discussion document, Reducing Pokies Harm , attached to the submission under SWCSUB, which outlines some regulatory proposals to better reduce harm in three key areas (the gambling venue, the gaming machine, and compliance tools); noted that the Minister for Internal Affairs intends to return to SWC by September with proposals to amend the current regulations; noted that work to minimise harm from pokies gambling is part of the broader work programme underway to prevent and minimise harm from gambling. Rachel Clarke Committee Secretary Attendance: (see over) I N C O N F I D E N C E hppsdx Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E SWCMIN Present: Officials present from: Rt Hon Jacinda Ardern Hon Grant Robertson Hon Kelvin Davis Hon Dr Megan Woods Hon Chris Hipkins Hon Carmel Sepuloni (Chair) Hon Andrew Little Hon Poto Williams Hon Stuart Nash Hon Kris Faafoi Hon Peeni Henare Hon Willie Jackson Hon Jan Tinetti Hon Dr Ayesha Verrall Hon Aupito Williams Sio Hon Meka Whaitiri Hon Priyanca RadhakrishnanOffice of the Prime Minister Office of the Chair Officials Committee for SWC I N C O N F I D E N C E hppsdx Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Pa ge of Appendix B: Draft Discussion Document This document is already publicly available at: www.dia.govt .nz diawebsite.nsfFilesGamblingReducingPokiesHarmfileReduci ng PokiesHarmPublicDiscussionDocument.pdf Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
Page of INCONFIDENCE The Department is beginning very initial engagement with representatives of Te Patuwai Tribal, as well as commissioning first steps advice from BECCA who are currently contracted to undertake any technical resource planning activities on the Island. As any district plan review is likely to take at least two years, we consider that this would be an appropriate time to begin scoping a prospective process. We will be providing further advice as this progresses. Contact: Anthea Oliver
Page of RISK Unauthorised andor inappropriate access to DIA Information by an NZSIS employee
Page of . establishing a dedicated Water Services Funding Agency , which could operate on a similar basis to the LGFA; and . direct l ending by the Crown (as the last resort) . . Several of the se options present challenges that would need to be overcome to provide confidence that the required funding can be raised: . LGFA option : Ther e would be transitional advantages (such as simpler debt settlement processes with councils) and potential longer term advantages in water services entities borrowing via a modified LGFA. However, there are significant barriers to progressing this option, because of the requirement for unanimous agreement by shareholding councils. The different risk profiles of councils and water services entities, and the weaker initial financial positions of some of the entities, also complicates this option. . A dedicated Water Services Funding Agency (WSFA) : This would operate on a similar basis to the LGFA , by pooling risk and achieving scale and market access benefits. This option could be enabled through legislation, but any decision to establish a WSFA would require further Cabinet consideration. The existence of a credible WSFA backstop option gives the Crown greater leverage when engaging with banks, institutional lenders and the LGFA for private market financing solutions. If required, this option would be preferable to the Crown providing direct lending to entities,
Page of In addition , we be lieve debt burden assess ment would remain . We forecast
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of INCONFIDENCE section () of the Water Services Act to replace the word does with do to correct a grammatical error; section ()(b) and section ()(c) of the Water Services Act to replace the State Sector Act with the Public Service Act to refer to the current Act; section of the Water Services Act to replace the word issue with serve in the heading of the section to make the language consistent in the section and aid interpretation of the legislation; section ()(b) and section () of the Water Services Act to replace the Education Act with the Education and Training Act to refer to the current Act; and section ()(c) of the Water Services Act to replace the word changes with charges to make the wording consistent with sections ()(f), section ()(a) and section ()(b). The Department worked with Taumata Ar owai to agree to the amendments in the Water Services Act . The Bill is waiting for its introduction to the House. Contact: Richard Ward
Page of Specific training on identifying Direct Access information is mandatory for all NZSIS staff who need to access intelligence i nformation as part of their role Authorised Officers receive additional rolespecific training, which includes detailed instruction relating to accessing and using DIA Information
Page of . Due to the technical nature of the legislative provisions to give effect to this option, and the implications for Crown support, I seek authorisation from Cabinet for the Minister of Finance and I to approve policy and technical matters that may arise during legislative drafting. . The Minister of Finance and I consider the Treasury should play a stronger role in leading the development and implementation of a financing strategy for the entities, given the Crowns likely role in ensuring suitable financing mechanisms are in place for the entities upon establishment. This will require the Treasury, and the National Transition Unit within the Department of Internal Affairs, to work closely together given the interdependencies with other aspects of the transition programme (such as determi ning the amount of the payments water services entities will make to local authorities in respect of water infrastructure debt). . Further work on financing strategy will require market engagement to test lender appetite for the different options with banks and other institutional lenders, including the LGFA. This work will include further consideration of the LGFA and WSFA options. In considering Entity As financing arrangements, officials will work closely with the establishment board and chief executive to ensure any solution works for Entity A, and the other nine entities. . The tight timeframes for entity establishment mean it will be necessary to move swiftly to ensure suitable arrangements are in place by the proposed July go live for Entity A , and for any other entities that will go live at that time or s hortly after. To enable this, I seek authorisation for the Minister of Finance and I to make further policy and technical decisions required to identify and execute the preferred funding options. We will keep Cabinet informed of progress with this work. . The Treasury will likely engage further specialist investment banking support for this work andor use the advisors that the Department of Internal Affairs has developed good working relat ionships with.
Page of Country Risk Assessment ), which remains strong . Although councils are likely to have smaller
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of Appendix C: Interim Regulat ory Impact Statement
Page of NZSIS has an ongoing work programme regarding unauthorised andor inappropriate access to information that includes reviewing user and system administrator accesses to ensure the appropriate level of restrictions are in place; ongoing review and improvement of security controls relating to accessremoval of information from NZSIS systems; and reviewing audit log data requirements relating to system usage.
Page of . Debt funding and its management, by utilising the stronger balance sheets of a small number of large organisations to raise more debt at lower cost than would be possible through smaller territorial authorities or entities.
Page of Upside s cenario
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of Appendix D: Population impacts Who is more likely to experience gambling harm Mori are more likely to experience gambling harm, especially from pokies Mori make up of all high risk gamblers despite only making up . of the overall adult population. Some level of gambling harm was experienced by of Mori pokie players compared to of non Mori pokie players. Mori are also over five times more likely to be high risk gamblers than the general population, suggesting that Mori are more likely to experience gambling harm as a result of their own gambling, or someone elses. This is a result of numerous causes, including the number of gaming m achines and venues in areas of high deprivation areas where Mori are more likely to live, as well as reflecting the wider inequities faced by Mori. Pacific peoples also face disproportionate gambling harm Although Pacific peoples are less likely to part icipate in gambling ( in comparison to the national average of .), they experience higher rates of harmful gambling (. compared to the national average of .). Pacific peoples have the lowest median income (,) compared to other population groups and are more likely to live in higher deprivation areas and therefore have greater access to pokie machines. This proximity can lead to increased time and money spent gambling. Asian communities are also at greater risk Research also shows that some Asian communities disproportionately experience gambling harm. The proportion of Asians who gamble is relatively low when compared to Mori, Pacific people and EuropeanOther; however, those who do gamble are more likely to experience harm compared to E uropeanOther. The Health and Lifestyles Survey found that Asian people were more likely to be moderate riskproblem gamblers (.) compared with people of EuropeanOther ethnicity (.). For women , pokies can be a double edged sword Although being male has generally been considered a risk factor for gambling harm, recent studies have shown that when New Zealand women gamble, it is to a similar extent to men. Gambling on pokies in local communities appears to offer women especially respite, distraction, comfort and time out from family, while placing them at a heightened risk of experiencing problems and harm. For disabled people, the impacts are not known Little is known regarding the extent to which disabled people experience gambling related harm. This is an area that is not well covered in current research.
Page of . Taumata Arowai Weekly Report
Page of RISK Unauthorised andor inappropriate sharing of DIA Information with a domestic or international agency
Page of . I propose to introduce additional direction making provisions into the Water Services Entities Act, to allow the responsible Minister to direct entities where collaboration or a whole of sector approach is required. These direction making powers would be subject to consultation with entitie s, and Cabinet decision making processes. The directions would need to be presented to the House of Representative s and would be disallowable instruments . . The direction making powers would be modelled on those available to responsible Ministers of Crown entities under the Crown Entities Act, and would be limited to the following purposes: . to improve (directly or i ndirectly) the provision of water services ; . to secure economies or efficiencies through the provision of shared services ; . to borrow through the WSFA (acting jointly with the Minister of Finance) ; . to develop expertise and capability ; . to ensure business co ntinuity; . to manage risks to the Governments financial position . . The direction could be given to one or more entities , or their subsidiaries. Before giving the direction, the Minister would be required, to the extent that the Minister considers necessary in the circumstances, to: . consult with those entities to which the direction is proposed to apply; and . consult with persons that the Minister considers are representative of the interests of persons likely to be substantially affected by the proposed direc tion. . The Minister would also be required, as soon as practicable after giving a direction, to: . notify the entities to which the direction will apply that the direction has been given and when it will come into force; and . present the direction to the House of Representatives. . I also seek agreement to the establishment of digital services solutions, platforms and technology as shared services that will transfer to water services entities to collectively own and govern once established.
Page of See appendi x for key financial statistics and a summary of the individual credit metri c outcomes
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of significant negative impact on public trust and confidence in NZSIS and the reputation of NZSIS
Page of . This is an important consideration because water services entities will be highly exposed to natural hazard events. Advice commissioned from Aon concludes that r isk sharing across entities (mutualisation of risk) is desirable to ensuring adequate and affordable risk management . Without a shared approach, entities with concentrated exposure to natural hazard risks may struggle to manage and insure these risks . . In addition to the above shared services, water services entities will also be free to choose to enter into : . Voluntary collaborative arrangements when they decide it is their mutual interest to do so , such as in support of specific initiative and might be more important during the establishment period. For example, e ntities might choose to collaborate in the development of trade waste and other rules , and their approaches to administering these rules, or in their approaches to working with councils and others to managing stormwater . . Intra service agreements to provide for entities to support each other in their operation of water service s. This would see one entity agreeing to provide maintenance or operatio nal support to another entity when it is in their mutual interest to do so. This could include agreement for one entity to maintain infrastructure or network services that cross entity boundaries. . I note that the Water Services Entities Act already allows for such collaborative and intra service arrangements. Expectations on entities to collaborate for mutual benefit could be reinforced through the Government p olicy statements. This could, for example, be in the development of rules and their approaches to the regulation of trade waste , so as to ensure a consistent approach for industry and businesses across service areas. Confirming arrangements for City care Water . To simplify establishment and to reduce risks to continuity of service delivery, I recommend that Christchurch City Council owned Cityc are Water be exempted from the Water Services Entities Act transfer provisions. . In , Cabinet agreed that water servi ces entities will be responsible for all service delivery arrangements and infrastructure relating to drinking water and wastewater, including taking over the related services and assets currently held by (or managed on behalf of) local authorities Reco mmendation , CAB MIN . This decision was neutral to how different local authorities have organised themselves to deliver water services , and captured council controlled organisations (CCOs). . The select committee in its consideration of the application of the Water Services Entities Act transfer provisions is likely to recommend that the transfer provisions only be applied to CCOs whose predominant purpose is to provide support to local authorities for their maintenance and operation of water se rvices. The application of this test will mean that most CCOS who provide a range of general contracting services to local authorities will not be affected by the transfer provisions. . Cityc are Water, like Watercare and Wellington Water, and unlike other mixed purpose CCOs, has the predominant purpose of providing support to local authorities for their operation of water services. Because of this , its staff and assets are set to transfer to new water services entities. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
Page of of intent and ap point board members . Further , councils, via t he Governor s, have
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of Part : Compliance and Audit Requirements . DIA and NZSIS will undertake a joint audit of the operation of this DAA at least once per year, in accordance with a jointly agreed audit procedure. A copy of this audit report will be provided to the InspectorGeneral of Intelligence and Security and also to the Office of the Privacy Commissioner if there are any significant privacy concerns. . DIA can also review access by Authorised Officers to the DIA terminal at any time. . The information provided to DIA will not include details of NZSIS operations and investigations but will include the statutory functions being exercised and the purposes for which DIA Information was accessed. ENDS
Page of . In my view, the application of the transfer provisions to Cityc are Water , and the associated unbundling of staff and equipment and their transfer to different water services entities , together with them being detached from existing management structures and systems, would result in unacceptable risks to service continuity. . I have considered the option of retaining Cityc are water as a shared service general company, that would be owned by all water services entities. However, i t would be problematic for the realisation of efficiency gains to do so. This would result i n water services entities having an ownership interest in one of a number of general contracting business that will be competing to sell services to water services entities. . For the above reasons, I propose to amend the Water Serv ices Entities Act to exempt Cityc are Water from its transfer provisions. This means that Cityc are Water will continue to exist as a Christchurch City Council owned water services contracting business. . Existing contracts to local authorities will be novat ed to apply to water services entities. Over time, through the course of contract expiries and renewals, water services entities will decide, through management decisions and contestable procurement processes, whether or not to continue to purchase service s from Cityc are Water. Regional representative group arrangements for the AucklandNorthland Water Services Entity . On April , Cabinet considered the paper Strengthening representation, governance and accountability of the new water services entities CAB MIN . That paper responded to the report of the Working Group on Representation, Governance and Accountability, which made recommendations for a strengthened approach to the governance framework for the new water services entities. . As noted in that paper, the Working Group recommended bespoke arrangements for the regional representative group of Entity A , covering Auckland and Northland. That recommendation was prepared with the involvement of the then Mayors of Auckland, Far North, Kaipara and Whangarei, and the iwiMori leaders from the Entity A service area on the Working Group. . Cabinet agreed that first constitution for Entity A would provide for the regional representative group to be comprised of: . four Auckland Council representatives; . four Tmaki Makaurau representatives; . one council representative for each of the other territorial authorities in the entity service area; and . three mana whenua representatives from Te Tai Tokerau. . Advic e from Standard Poors , in May , confirmed that a regional representative group comprising four Auckland Council representatives, one representative each from the Northland Councils, and seven mana whenua representatives , would achieve balance sheet separation . Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
Page of We determined the budgeta ry performance , financia l manag ement, economic, and liquidity
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of Appendix : NZSIS Roles and Responsibilities . The DirectorGeneral of Security is responsible for stewardship of all NZSIS information assets, with the authority to delegate ownership to the Knowledge Manager. . The Knowledge Manager is responsible for: i. the management and flow of information, including DIA Information management; ii. ensuring the risk mitigations outlined in this Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) report are implemented across NZSIS. . The NZSIS Chief Privacy Officer is responsible for: i. advising NZSIS Senior Leadership on the adequacy of NZSIS systems for storing, managing and protecting DIA Information; ii. monitoring compliance with the Privacy Act, in conjunction with the Compliance and Risk Manager; iii. promoting robust privacy practices across NZSIS; and iv. overseeing investigations into complaints lodged with the Privacy Commissioner regarding NZSIS access to or use of DIA Information. . The Manager Strategy and Accountability is responsible for: i. managing and responding to Official Information Act (OIA) requests and Privacy Act requests on behalf of NZSIS; and ii. managing privacy issues in conjunction with other relevant business units. . The Compliance and Risk Manager is responsible for: i. acting as the operational lead for access to and use of DIA Information by NZSIS teams; and ii. liaising with the DIA Service Delivery and Operations Risk and Assurance staff to conduct the annual joint audit of NZSIS access to DIA Information under the DAA. . An Authorised Officer is as defined in the DAA.
Page of . Given our recent decisions to change the number of entities did not affect the composition of the AucklandNorthland entity, I do not see any need to reconsider or amend the specific regional representative group arrangements that were agreed last year. These arrangements would continue to be provided for in the first constitution for that entity , which is made by Order in Council on recommendation of the responsible Minister . Legislative implications and next steps . Legislation is required to give effect to most of the decisions in this and my previous paper. This legislation needs to be progressed quickly, and enacted during this term . . I am seeking agreement for the Water Services Entities Amendment Bill to be included on the legislation programme. I consider the Bill is of medium complexity and priority category two must be passed before the general election. . I am intending to seek agreement to introduce the Amendment Bill in June . Drafting is already underway and, subject to the decisions on this paper, I will issue the remaining instructions to Parliamentary Counsel Office as quickly as possible. . . . Treaty settlements update .
Page of We determined the budge tary performance , financial management , economic, and liquidity
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of Appendix : Privacy Principles . NZSIS will take all reasonable and necessary steps to minimise the privacy impacts associated with the ingestion and use of DIA Information obtained under the Direct Access Agreement (DAA) in order to i. fulfil our obligations under the DAA; ii. fulfil our obligations under the Privacy Act ; iii. maintain credibility and public confidence in NZSIS privacy standards. . Table provides an assessment of NZSIS compliance with the privacy principles outlined in the Privacy Act , in relation to the use of DIA Information obtained under the DAA for NZSIS statutory functions.
Page of We determined the budgeta ry performance , financial management, economic, and liquidity
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of Table . NZSIS Privacy Principles Assessment
Page of Climate Implications of Policy Assessment . This assessment has not been undertaken, but the proposals in this package of paper s would help improve the resilience of critical water infrastructure to the implications of climate change. Population Implications . The proposals in the package of paper s seek to address cost of living issues faced by New Zealanders by lowering household bills relating to water services Human Rights . None Consultation . The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, the Treasury, and the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment have been consulted throughout the process for preparing this paper. There has also been engagement with the Commerce Commission and Taumata Arowai on matters that are relevant to those regulators . . Discussions are ongoing with the Ministry for the Environment and Te Arawhiti regarding the work relating to Treaty settlements. Communications . I anticipate communicating the decisions in this paper when the proposed Water Services Entities Amendment Bill is introduced. Proactive r elease . I intend to proactively release, in whole or in part, the package of papers on refocusing the water services reforms to coincide with the introduction of the Water Services Entities Amendment Bill. Depending on timing, this may mean some of the papers are released beyond the standard business days. Recommendations . The Minister of Local Government recommends that Cabinet: . note that, on April , Cabinet considered the paper , Refocusing the water services reforms: strategy and urgent decisions CAB MIN , which obtained agreement to key changes to the reform model including increasing the number of water services entities from four to , and amending the establishment timeframes; . note that, in that paper, the Minister of Local Government indicated that a second paper would follow in May to seek decisions on some matters that were still in development , and which would also need to be given effect through legislation; Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
Page of A critical role. Th is is based on the same factors as scenario .
Page of . This Bill reflects the principles that underpin Local Water Done Well. It highlights the importance of decision making proximate to affected communities, long term strategic planning and high quality, responsive, resilient and sustainable water management throughout New Zealand. Key to the framework is bolstered central government oversight, which will ensure efficiency and accountability within the sector. We have encouraged collaboration where possible, while leaving decision making at a local level, as l ocal decision makers know their communities best. A new financially sustainable model for Watercare . This Bill will also implement Auckland Councils recommendation for a new financially sustainable model for Watercare. . Watercare and Auckland Council proposed in their draft long term plan to increase water charges by . percent from July with further significant increases projected in future years. This has been reported publicly as costing an average Auckland household an additional per year in water char ges (an increase from , to ,). . Earlier this year I agreed to undertake a process with Auckland Council to develop a policy solution that would enable Watercare to take on more debt, ideally without adversely impacting Auckland Councils borrowing capacity or credit rating. Auckland Council has developed a range of alternative service delivery models aligned with Local Water Done Well, supported by the Department of Internal Affairs and Crown Infrastructure Partners, and review ed by the Treasury. . In March , Cabinet delegated final policy decision s on the future of Watercare to the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Local Government, in consultation with coalition partners . .
Page of . While all public wastewater treatment plants have resource consents, approximately percent of plants are currently operating on expired consents and have been doing so for an average of four years and almost percent of these plants will come up for consent renewal in the next years. . Wastewater standards will directly address this infrastructure challenge by reducing regulatory burden; delivering much greater standardisation of treatment systems and related infrastructure; enabling cost efficiencies in the design, consenting, build and operation of wastewater systems; and providing councils with greater certainty of costs through standardisation and longer term consent durations. . Based on case study, cost savings of up to percent for consenting processes could be realised, depending on the type of plant and consents required. Moving from shorter term consents to mandatory year duration consents will mean that reconsenting costs are not incurred as frequently. Further cost efficiencies will be achieved through infrastructure design solutions that will introduce greater standardisation. . The Local Government (Water Services) Bill (the Bill) will introduce a new approach to wastewater standards, in terms of the standards themselves and how they are made. The Bill proposes that the wastewater standards are a single standard rather than a minimum (or maximum) that must be implemented by regional councils in resource consents and cannot be exceeded, apart from on an exceptions basis. . The Bill also proposes to align the process for making wastewater and stormwater environmental performance standards with the process for making drinking water standards. This will involve the standards being made through an Order in Council (as regulation s), on the recommendation of the Minister of Local Government. Stormwater standards will be made at a later . . The intention is to make the new standards as soon as possible after the enabling legislation is passed so that the many councils that have treatment plants requiring consent renewals can accrue certainty and cost effectiveness benefits from the new standa rds. . The introduction of wastewater environmental performance standards is the first stage of a new wastewater regulatory system. Once the wastewater standards are in place this will enable the second stage of wastewater regulatory reform the introduction of infrastructure design solutions. . Infrastructure design solutions are a new tool provided for in the Bill that will help to further reduce the costs of design and consenting of wastewater treatment plants in particular for the smaller scale plants that make up approximately percent of council owned wastewater treatment plants in New Zealand. . I have requested that the Authority work at pace to ensure the Order in Council relating to the standards is made as a priority by . The proposed standards will cover discharge of wastewater to land, discharge of wastewater to water, beneficial reuse of biosolids, and risk based monitoring and reporting requirements for wastewater network overflows. . To expedite this process, I am seeking delegated authority to issue drafting instructions to Parliamentary Counsel Office to prepare the draft Order in Council, after public consultation is completed. ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE
Page of Purpose . In August , Cabinet agreed that the National Engineering Design Standards (NEDS) should be a mandatory requirement for water services providers ECOMIN refers. This briefing sets out our proposed approach to implement the NEDS. Background Scope and purpose of the National Engineering Design Standards . The proposed National Engineering Design Standards (NEDS) provide technical standards for design and construction of drinking, wastewater and stormwater reticulation network infrastructure (water services network infrastructure). . The NEDS are intended to provide a consistent set of design standards to developers, contractors, water service providers (currently councils and CCOs) and regulatory engineers on how to design, construct and commission public three waters water services network infrastructure. . Currently, the technical standards for design and construction are set out in council engineering codes of practice (codes). These codes provide guidance to developers and contractors on the design and construction of water services network infrastructure. . The codes also provide guidance on products that will meet the standards and requirements. This approved products register (e.g. pipes and inlets) is a key feature of the codes, and functions in a similar way to approved products under the Building Code. The approved products register also supports developers and contractors to practically implement councils codes. . Developers and contractors must demonstrate that the water services network infrastructure they are proposing to vest in the council (e.g. the transfer of ownership and ongoing maintenance and renewal obligations of those assets,) or connect to the public three waters network, meets the technical standards in the relevant code. Councils also use the technical standards in the codes to guide the maintenance, renewal, upgrade or decommissioning of the new or existing public water services network infrastructure. . Currently, there are up to different engineering codes in use nationally. Although there is a degree of commonality between codes, the differences between regional, city, and district requirements for reticulation networks have created small, fragmented markets, and hindered the mobility of suppliers, potentially leading to higher costs than necessary. . The current arrangements also create challenges for councils. Where they can, councils do work with others or borrow standards but reviewing and updating councils engineering codes is an ongoing task that requires significant expertise and resource. This is significant challenge for smaller councils. In this context this includes three waters network as defined in the Water Services Act . This includes drinking water, wastewater and stormwater network infrastructure that is owned and operated by a water services provider, which could include Council, Water Services Organisation or a Government Department. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua
Page of help to ensure successful enforcement action can be taken where harmful gamblin g is not identified by the venue. I propose to amend the Regulations to make them c learer , wider and more detailed to address these regulatory deficiencies and further reduce pokies harm . I intend to consult with New Zealanders first, about how we could better use our existing regulatory powers to reduce pokies harm in three areas : venue practices, gaming machine features and enforcement tools . The discussion document attached as Appe ndix B, Reducing Pokies Harm , focuses on reducing the risks of pokies harm in venues quickly using the regulation making powers contained in the Act. The discussion document presents some options for the public to comment on, including : setting more explicit direction for venues and societies to identify and deal with people experiencing gambling harm ; requiring technical changes to pokie machines to reduce the risk of harm whilst playing ; and introducing more offences and penalties to expand the regulator s enforcement tools . I seek C abinets agreement to release the discussion document for public consultation in March . I intend to report back to the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee in September with final regulatory proposals. Background The Government has committed, in Kia Manawanui Aotearoa: Long term pathway to mental wellbeing , to a review of the Gambling Act in the medium term, with a particular focus on reducing harm from online gambling and pokies. This paper is one of the three priority measures to reduce gambling harm in New Zealand communities which I outlined in my paper of August , Overview of Governments gambling harm prevention and minimisation measures SWC MIN refers . The two other priorities are the regulation of online gambling and the Minister of Healths review of the Strategy to Prevent a nd Minimise Gambling Harm to . T his paper seeks agreement to consult the public on ways to reduce harm from pokie machines and is accompanied by the paper Options for restricting the online gambling market, which is focused on approaches for restricting online gambling . Pokies are the most harmful form of land based gambling Gambling can cause harm for some people it can be a highly addictive activity and, aside from the financial impact, it can create feelings of shame or low self este em for gamblers. There can also be wider reaching impacts of gambling harm far beyond the financial impact for gamblers and their families, whnau and wider community. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
Page of .. notes that stage one of this work focuses on more practical issues to improve the operations of the charitable sector with fundamental matters to be consi dered as part of a later stage; and .. notes that the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector intends to publicly announce the resumption of the work to modernise the Charities Act shortly.
Page of As part of its cyclone recovery efforts, Auckland Council intends to start making buyout offers t o the owners of Category propert ies under the Future of Severely Affected Land (FOSAL) programme before the end of . However, there are concerns that FOSAL purchases would trigger section of the LGA. The Department of Internal Affairs (DIA) considers that this is likely , due to estimates of the costs involved and the number of properties affec ted. DIA would also like to clarify that the existing exemption for the specified councils outside of Auckland continues to apply. Having to amend the LTP requires consultation using the special consultative procedure and an audit review of both the consultation document for the amendment and the final amendment itself. Satisfying these requirements would take a considerable amount of time, effectively delaying the work on FOSAL purchases. Proceeding without complying with these requirements would expose the effected local authorities to the risk of its decision being challenged in the Courts for not being consistent with section . DIA investigated different options to support the specified councils in providing certainty to impacted property owners as soon as possible. Of these options, the proposed Order will enable the effected councils to act sooner on its buyout decisions without exposing themselves to unnecessary legal risks. What would the proposed Order include The proposed Order would exempt the specified councils from section of the LGA until June . The purpose of this amendment is to enable the specified councils to make decisions on whether to make voluntary buyouts to property owners for properties that have been severely impacted by severe weather ev ents in , without having to go through the prescribed process for amending its LTP. The specified councils would not be exempted from all consultation requirements in the LGA. The specified council s would still be required to consult in a way that c omplies with the LGA. The proposed Order would not require a particular consultation procedure to be followed. It is for each Council to determine what form of consultation is appropriate in the circumstances.
Page of Contents Part : Relevant Legislation . Part : NZSIS Responsibilities . Using DIA Information. Protecting DIA Information . NZSIS ownership . Part : Scope . Part : Use of DIA Information . NZSIS will only use DIA Information to fulfil its statutory functions . NZSIS will use DIA Information in a way that is necessary and proportionate . Part : Protecting DIA Information . Secure data ingestion and storage . Access to DIA Information . Disclosure of DIA Information to other parties . Retention deletion of DIA Information . Part : Privacy risks and mitigations . RISK . RISK . RISK . RISK . Part : Compliance and Audit Requirements . Appendix : NZSIS Roles and Responsibilities . Appendix : Privacy Principles .
Page of Executive summary . On April , Cabinet considered my paper Refocusing the water services reforms: strategy and urgent decisions CAB MIN . This was the first in a series of papers reporting back on options and proposals to refocus the reforms, to achieve our intentions to deliver more affordable water services and infrastructure. . Through that paper, I obtained agreement to a new strategic and legislative approach, and to key changes to the reform model including increasing the number of water services entities from four to , and amending the establishment timeframes. . At that time, I noted that a second paper would follow in May to provide further advice on some matters. In this paper, I am seeking to confirm the detailed proposals relating to: . the approach to the entity go live dates including confirming that the Auckland and Northl and Water Services Entity would go live on July ; and the timing for establishing the other entities and applying economic regulation ; . community priority statements which would be new instruments (distinct from Te Mana o te Wai statements) to provide communities with an avenue to communicate their interests in a body of water, and their priorities for how the environmental impacts of the entities activities on that body of water might be managed ; . a legislative process to support and guide locally led, voluntary mergers between entities to recognise that, in time, councils and communities in higher cost regions may wish to see the benefits of further amalgamation; . entity financing arrangements including provid ing in legislation for the establishment of a backstop financing mechanism, through the establishment of a dedicated Water Services Funding Agency ; . shared services arrangement s including providing in legislation for the responsible Minister to be able to di rect water services entities where collaboration or a whole of sector approach is required, and seeking agreement to the establishment of a digital shared service , which would be owned and governed by the entities . . As discussed in the April paper, leg islation is required to give effect to most of the decisions in that paper as well as the decisions in this follow up paper. In recognition that this legislation needs to be progressed quickly, I am seek ing approval to include a Water Services Entities Amendment Bill on the legislation programme, with a priority category two must be passed before the general election. . Drafting is already underway for this Bill. I am seeking agreement to issue the remaining instructions on the matters in this paper as soon as possible. . I am intending to submit a third paper in June on matters that do not need to be included in the proposed legislation but are still necessary to give effect to the new model . This will consider the implications of the change in approach on programme funding, implementation , and the reforms more broadly
Page of Planning for the next three inste ad of years will reduce the burden on these councils. By focusing on recovery, a three year plan would offer their communities more useful information and strategic direction than a year plan could. It will provide a basis for financial planning, and future council decisions. It would deliver accountability to communities. In addition, the consultation requirements related to Long Term Plans will be carried over to the proposed three year plan. This preserves the interests of stakeholders and ensures that council planning can capture the views of stakeholders. Councils would also be encouraged to plan for the longer term implications of decisions in the three year plan, where practicable. Background to the issues requiring an Order in Council Under the Local Government Act (LGA ), local authorities must always have a long term plan covering consecutive years. Councils prepare and adopt a long term plan every three years, in consultation with their communities. They are required to adopt a long term plan by June , to come into effect on July . Severe weather events early this year have resulted in high pressures on council resources from recovery efforts and uncertainty on the scale of infrastructure damage and recovery funding. These constraints are impeding these councils ability to meet their planning obligations under the LGA . Given these challenges, we consider that the proposed O rder achieves the purpose of the SWERL Act. Its purpose is to assist councils and communities to respond to, and recover from, the impacts of severe weather events. It also ensures that activities normally undertaken by councils and their communities, such as planning, continue to be undertaken. DIA investigated different options for long term planning to support these councils achieve uninterrupted recovery and functional plans. Of these options, the proposed Order will require the least council resources while still providing future direction and a basis for decision making in the me dium term, despite the uncertainties over infrastructure damage and recovery funding. It also retains community consultation on the councils intended direction for the next three years. What would the proposed three year plan include Under the draft Order, the three year plan will provide most of the same information as a long term plan, but for at least three instead of ten years. Councils will be allowed to forecast further if they wish. The three year plan will identify key challeng es for the coming years, describe the councils intentions to deal with these, and discuss how this will be funded. The plan will also discuss things that are expected to have a significant impact on councils during the next three years, including levels o f service to be delivered during the recovery. Councils will still need to prepare and adopt an annual plan for each financial year, with the three year plan acting as the annual plan for . The proposed Order does not include audit requirements for the three year plan, as this is impractical given the quality of the information available at this time and the content of the plan. Annual reports will continue to be audited.
Page of Services determined by the Minister Responsible for Ministeri al Services The Minister Responsible for Ministerial Services determines the entitlement of Ministers to all travel services within New Zealand that are additional or alternative to the travel services for members o f Parliament set out in the Speakers Directions. These are specified in the Ministers Travel Services within New Zealand Determination . Travel services for members of the Executive travelling within New Zealand are provides by virtue of the Speakers Directions with costs met from Vote I nternal Affairs. The summary of expenses does not include expenses paid f or by the Parliamentary Service. Information on these is disclosed separately by the Parliamentary Service at: http:w ww.parliament.nzen nzmppmpsexpenses
Page of fraud should be further assessed NZ Police Concern that the change could increase potential inaccuracy of information Police holds on individuals. May make it more difficult to locate persons of interest. Will Approved Information Sharing Agreement ( AISA ) still include changes in sex information in the same way as a name change. (Could help with accuracy of i nformation issue) . Thinks there should be careful consideration about identity fraud issue and managing the risk. Concerns about being able to easily link a person to their previous identity. amending sex on a birth certificate e.g. it is equivalent to the risk associated with chan ging your name. We have advised the J ustice Sector Identity Management Project and amending sex will be considered as part of the J ustice Sector Identity Management Strategy. The paper now notes that a section in the Bill will be retained that enables previous registered sex and name change information to be provided to another agency where they have an interest in ensuring a person has one identity. Department of Corrections Should be more depth around the risks related to identity fraud further consult J ustice Sector Identity Management Project team at the Department . Lack of targeted consultation with Mori, Pacific peoples and ethnic communities Office of Ethnic Communities Noted the limited opportunity for consultation and suggested engaging with New Zealands ethnic communities, especially rainbow communities. In part, by planned engagement to encourage participation at Select Committee and as part of developing regulation s.
Page of . Scenario Very high degree of governor influence . .
Page of The proposed adjustments will take effect from July . The Scheme is not the only form of accommodation support The Rates Rebate Scheme is one of a suite of policy instruments designed to support households to meet their living costs. Other cost of living subsidies (such as the Accommodation Supplement) and adjustments to income support remain more effective at insulating low income ratepayers from rate rises than the Rate Rebate Scheme. Th ese mechanisms are also more effective at addressing equity concerns between renters and homeowners. In response to questions What are the financial implications on the appropriation In , the Scheme is estimated to co st million. This estimate is within the appropriation of million for the financial year. It is difficult to predict the impact that the increase in the cost of living will have on the uptake of the Scheme, so the Department will monitor th e appropriation through . In the last three years, the appropriation for the Scheme has increased by million. For this reason, the uptake will be closely monitored, and remedial action will be taken if necessary. Any increased uptake of the Sche me will be accounted for in the October or March baseline updates. How will people find out about the adjustments to the Scheme The adjustments to the key settings will be in the New Zealand Gazette . I will also issue a press release. The Depart ment will inform councils and key interest groups, such as Grey Power and Age Concern, of the adjustments to the Scheme. Details of the adjustments will also be shown on the Departments Rates Rebate webpage. Why not adjust the Scheme by using the average wage (as with Superannuation) rather than with increases to the Consumer Price Index (CPI) If I was to adjust the Scheme using the average wage, we would need to review the Scheme at a more strategic level . This would need to be a comprehensive re view in the context of other subsidies and supplements that are currently available to low income households. Such a review could not be completed in time for an adjustment to the Sche me to take effect on July . Adjusting the Scheme with average wag e growth would also likely exceed the current appropr iation for . Why does the adjustment need Cabinet approval every year In , Cabinet decided that the two key settings of the Scheme should be adjusted each year to reflect the increase in CPI for the previous calendar year. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Page of The enactment of the Bill is delayed and this is presenting implementation challeng es for councils The Bill is currently awaiting its second reading. While Cabinet had previously agreed for the Bill to be enacted by February LEG MIN , limitations on House time following Cyclone Gabrielle meant this was not possible. Und er the proposals in the Bill, councils will have to begin a process in April to lead into decisions about Mori representation before a new statutory deadline of December . The later the Bill is enacted, the more challenging it will become for councils to complete this process . Other decisions about representation (such as ward boundaries) would be made in . Councils that are affected by the cyclone would need to implement the new legislation Under the proposals in the Bill, the following councils in the North Island would have to review Mori representation this year, beginning the process in April : Auckland Council Carterton District Council Central Hawkes Bay District Council Hauraki District Council Hutt City Council Napier City Council South Wairarapa District Council Upper Hutt City Council Waitomo District Council Western Bay of Plenty District Council Whanganui District Council. Several of these councils have been severely impacted by Cyclone Gabrielle. More broadly, the wider sector is leaning in to support those affected councils, which will put pressure on peak body support in terms of producing guidance for the new processes and the ability of other councils to engage. Actively deferring the commencement of the Mori representation provisions would be consistent with providing regulatory relief The Bill would put in place a new process that councils would have to familiarise themselves with and put into practice from April . At the current time, I think it is important to reduce any new regulatory requirements on cyclone affected councils and communities if possible, to enable them to focus on recovery.
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of Early establishment of the Auckland and Northland Water Services Entity . note the April decisions to change the number of entities, and the services areas they will cover, did not affect the composition of the Auckland and Northland Water Services Entity comprising the councils in Auckland, Far North, Kaipara and Whangarei; . note there is a strong case for establishing the Auckland and Northland Water Services Entity earlier than the other new entities, and this would deliver tangible and immediate benefits for Auckland and N orthland customers and communities; . agree that the go live for the Auckland and Northland Water Services Entity will be July , and this will be included in legislation ; . note this decision will have implications for the timing of the introduction of economic regulation and for the interim monitoring arrangements that will need to be in place for the Auckland and Northland Water Services Entity in advance of bringing price quality regulation into force; . note that the Minister of Local Government and Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs are proposing to apply economic regulation to the Auckland and Northland Water Services Entity earlier than for the other entities, to help ensure consumers benefit from reform, through lower charges than they would otherwise have faced, and increased investment and service levels; Timetable for establishing the other entities and applying economic regulation . agree that a flexible approach will be taken regarding the go live dates for the other nine water services entities, in which: . an Order in Council process is used to set these dates, instead of primary legislation; and . the timeframes would reflect when each entity and its council owners are ready for go live to occur based on them demonstrating this readiness in a number of critical areas; . note that the Minister of Local Government is proposing to develop and communicate the process that would enable an entity to go live, including which factors would need to be demonstrated for this to occur , and the minimum notice period between agreeing the go live and the day on which the entity will begin operating; . note that: . the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs and Minister of Local Government consider economic regulation for the other nine entities should commence on July ; and . the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs has delegated authority under CAB MIN to progress drafting instructions to amend the implementation dates for the economic regulation regime in the Water Services Economic Efficiency and Consumer Protection Bill; Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
Page of In addition, a material departure from our assumed regulatory construct could also result in a
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of Proposals for community priority statements . note that, on April , the Minister of Local Government was invited to report back with proposals for a new instrument, which would give community groups who have an interest in a water body an opportunity to make statements to their water services entity about their priorities for that water body CAB MIN ; . agree that provisions for community priority statements would be included in the legislation, to provide communities with an avenue to communicate their interests in a body of water, and their priorities for how the environmental impacts of the entities activities on that body of water might be managed; . agree that the legislation provides that: . community priority statements can be made by any legal person, providing that person has a local connection with the water body and entity service area; . national level bodies would not be able to make one of these statements, unless they can demonstrate a local presence and connection; . community priority statements would be submitted to regional representative groups, which may seek advice and support from the consumer forums that must be established by the entities (under the Water Services Entities Act ); . the legislative role of the consumer forums would include responsibilities to advise regional representative groups and the entities on any community priority statements they have received ; . regional representative groups could consider the themes raised in the community priority statements when providing direction to the entities and commenting on planning documents ; . the chief executive of a water services entity would set out how the entity will respond to community priority statements through the annual consumer engagement stocktak e; and . the consumer engagement stocktake would include reporting on matters such as the number of community priority statements that have been submitted, key themes, and actions the entity will take or has taken in response to them; . note that the community priority statement is a distinct instrument from the Te Mana o te Wai statement, and there will be no change s to the legislative requirements to give effect to Te Mana o te Wai, or the ability of mana whenua to make Te Mana o te Wai statements under the Water Services Entities Act; A locally led, voluntary merger process . note it is desirable to provide for a legislative process that allows water services entities to merge to recognise that, in time, councils and communities in higher cost regions may wish to see the benefits of further amalgamation; Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
Page of headroom at the current ra ting to address potential macroeconomic and f inancial sector ri sks,
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of . agree to amend the Water Services Entities Act to include provisions for a locally led, voluntary merger process, in which the regional representative groups of two or more water services entities may agree to initiate and proceed with a merger of their entities; . agree to include procedural requirements in the legislation for a merger process, relating to the following steps and components: . internal investigations by an entity of the merits of a merger including informal discussions with the other entity (or entities) about this proposal, and reaching an agreement on whether to proceed to the next step; . formal initiation of a merger proposal, which would involve: .. agreement by the regional representative group ; .. formal identification of the other entity (or entities) that would be party to the merger and an obligation on that entity (or entities) to consider the proposal; .. notifying the responsible Minister and monitor (under the Water Services Entities Act) of the proposal, and public notification; . development of a merger proposal by the entities involved, which would: .. include the critical details around the proposed future new entity, such as the case for merging, associated costs, benefits and risks, and the current picture within each entity; .. be shared with the responsible Minister , monitor, and regulators for feedbac k; .. include, as appropriate, consideration by the Commerce Commission in accordance with the business acquisition provisions in Parts and of the Commerce Act ; . decisions on the merger proposal with mergers proceeding if agreed by per cent of each regional representative group; . development of an implementation plan (if there is a decision to proceed with the merger), including the change management strategy for the new merged entity, transi tion steps (outlining transfer of staff, financial reconciliation, accountability documents and constitution development), a strategy to ensure continuity of services, risk mitigation, and governance arrangements; . note that there may be situations in which an entity is under significant financial stress, experiencing irreparable governance difficulties, or unable to deliver minimum levels of service to consumers , and a merger is identified as a potential solution by a Crown intervention body (Crown Observer , Crown Review Team, or Crown Manager ) appointed under the Water Services Entities Act; . agree that the legislation provides that, in the limited situations described above : . a Crown intervention body should be able to initiate merger investigations and the development of proposals , by making a recommendation to the relevant regional representative group (s); and . there would be a lower threshold for a merger proceeding requiring agreement by per cent of each regional representative group ; Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
Page Redacted consistent with ()(b)(ii) Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of . agree that entity mergers would be given effect through Order in Council, which would amend Schedule of the Water Services Entities Act to reflect the new entity name and service area; Entity financing arrangements . note that Cabinet invited the Minister of Local Government to report back with advice and proposals for suitable financing mechanisms, including consideration of mechanisms that vary from entity to entity, and a backstop central financing facility that could operate on a near commercial basis, enable the pooling of risk and provision of credit enhancement, and achieve economies of scale and market access benefits CAB MIN ; . note that a range of financing options are being considered for water services entities, with the likelihood that different options may be used at different points in time, including: . utilising the existing Local Government Funding Agency (LGFA), which would need to be modified to enable lending to water entities and would require support from LGFAs shareholding councils; . establishing a dedicated Water Services Funding Agency , which could operate on a similar basis to the LGFA; and . . note it is prudent to provide in legislation for the establishment of a backstop financing mechanism, in the event this is required to ensure cost effective financing for entities upon establishment; . agree to provide in legislation for the establishment of a dedicated Water Services Funding Agency, as a backstop entity financing mec hanism; . agree that the relevant statutory provisions for the Water Services Funding Agency would: . be modelled on the Local Government Borrowing Act ; . commence subject to Order in Council or notification by its shareholding Minister, with the provisions expiring if no regulation to establish the Water Services Funding Agency is made within a certain timeframe; . note that on June , Cabinet agreed that: . the Civil Defence and Emergency Management Act arrangements will be extended to apply to water service entities, such that the arrangements continue to apply to water services assets once the assets are transferred to the water services entities from local authorities; and . a Crown liquidity facility will be available to water services entities, which can be accessed if certain trigger events occur, on similar terms to those available to the Local Government Funding Agency CAB MIN ; . agree that, on the basis of the above financing mechanisms, the Crown will not provide any financial support to water services entities in addition to that previously agreed by Cabinet, and water services entities will assume full responsibility for servicing any borrowing , and meeting financing terms and conditions they agree with their lenders; ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
Page of A very important role. The rationale behind this assessment is the same a s scenario .
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of Disclosure of personal information outside New Zealand Under s of the ISA, NZSIS is authorised to provide any intelligence collected and any analysis of that intelligence to the Minister, the Chief Executive of DPMC, and any person or class of persons (whether in New Zealand or overseas) authorised by the Minister to receive the intelligence and any analysis.
Page of . Scena rio Number of WSE variant
Page of addition, a material departure from our assumed regu latory construct could also result in a
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of . note it is anticipated that : . the other Bills on the water services reforms the Water Services Legislation Bill and the Water Servic es Economic Efficiency and Consumer Protection Bill will be enacted before the end of August ; and . the impact of the Water Services Entities Amendment Bill on these two Bills will be limited , and any necessary changes will be made via Supplementary O rder Paper .
Page of The WSE is expected to be est ablished a nd become operational from or .
Page Proactively Released by the D me t o I airs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of When removing water related revenues and expenditure s from loca l councils financial
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of Indicative Key Financ ial Stat istics
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of . I expect to provide the proposed Order to the Cabinet Legislation Committee (LEG) in (following the enactment of the Local Government (Water Services) Bill) to seek authorisation for submission to the Executive Council. Background Why are national wastewater standards needed . Much of the wastewater infrastructure in New Zealand was built to years ago and is approaching the end of its useful life. Around percent of New Zealands wastewater treatment plants service populations of or less, meaning the costs are disproportionately spread across a smaller ratepayer base. . A report prepared by the New Zealand Infrastructure Commission Te Waihanga looked at the cost of consenting infrastructure projects in New Zealand. The report found the cost of consenting to be considerably higher in the waste and water sectors, which was largely driven by the amount of expert advice and intensive engagement required. The report also found that the most significant indirect costs we re those associated with delay. Funding is often set aside for infrastructure upgrades, yet unable to be used due to significant delays in the consenting stage. The cost of construction and availability of resource may change considerably in the meantime, resulting in higher costs. . New Zealand lacks a national approach to managing wastewater discharges and overflows, as well as to monitoring and reporting. The current system: results in expensive and inconsistent bespoke arrangements for wastewater discharge consents and consent conditions, with a lack of certainty for network operators when they plan and fund individual plants; adds expense and time to consent processes involving multiple rounds of engagement; and disincentivises councils from addressing wastewater overflows, due to inconsistent definitions and approaches that impact the management of the scale and frequency of overflows. . Approximately percent of wastewater treatment plants will require reconsenting in the next years, including approximately percent of plants already operating on expired consents. Implementing improvements to consenting processes now will ensure the benefits can be quickly realised by a large number of wastewater network operators, the majority of whom are councils. What benefits will the wastewater standards provide . Establishing national wastewater standards will set clear requirements that must be met by wastewater infrastructure. The standards will provide a framework which broadly takes into account the receiving environment (e.g. ocean, freshwater, high and low mixing environments, and land). . This enables some flexibility for councils to make decisions locally about where they should discharge wastewater (e.g. water or land), and then apply the relevant standard in their consent application. The standards will provide a clear consenting pathway for each wastewater network.
Page of Local Government ( Water Services ) Bill policy dec isions . While the Bill goes through its select committee process , further policy proposals for Local Water Done Well are due to be considered by Cabinet in June and July . They will be presented in the Local Government ( Water Services ) Bill and will provide for the long term replacement regime , including new service delivery models, the planning framework, economic regulation , consumer protection and refinements to the current water service regulatory system settings. These will all be underpinned by the requirements to achieve financial sustainability and will be supported by an assistance and intervention regime . Overview of the Bill s key components . The Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill will set up the preliminary arrangements for councils to transition from their current arrangements to their future, financially sustainable models. . The Bill contains three substantive parts : . Part includes requirements for councils to submit water services delivery plans within months of the Act coming into force. These plans will provide information on councils current water services arrangements and detail a strategy for how they will achieve the delivery of financially sustainable and resilient water services (subpart ) . Cabinet has previously agreed that Councils can use repurposed Better Off funding to support the implementation of Local Water Done Well, which will include using some of their existing funding to support the development of water services delivery plans ECO MIN ; . bespoke Ministerial powers in relation to the statutory deadlines and requirements of the water services delivery plans (subpart ); and . provision for certain councils to be required to provide further information in relation to water services. This information will be collected by the Commerce Commission and be used to inform long term economic regulation. Councils will be subject to this enhanced requirement via an Order in Council upon Ministerial recommendation (subpart ) . . Part provides for streamlined consultation and decision making processes which territorial authorities may voluntarily take up if they wish to establish or amend water services council controlled organisations. These streamlined requirements compl ement and modify the relevant provisions in the Local Government Act . . Part provides the legislative provisions for a financially separate Watercare . The Bill: .. places a statutory prohibition o n financial support from Auckland Council to Watercare; .. imposes the statutory obligation to continue to provide water supply and wastewater services on Watercare, together with statutory protections from privatisation; .. gives the Minister of Local Government powers to appoint a Crown Review Team, Crown Monitor, or Crown Manager to Watercare in the event of a significant problem; enkv Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE
Page of . The NEDS would enable a national approach to standards and requirement for the design and construction of water services network infrastructure (e.g. similar sized manhole covers for drains across New Zealand). While the transition from the existing codes to the NEDS will be challenging, councils and the water sector have been calling for national standards for water for many years. . The National Transition Unit (NTU) under the previous three waters reform was progressing work on NEDS and had developed and consulted on four NEDS for drinking water networks, wastewater gravity networks, wastewater pumped systems, and stormwater networks. The four draft NEDS were circulated to the sector in September .While sector feedback was received and recorded, the draft NEDS were not and finalised. . We provided you with advice LG on the cost of finalising the four draft NEDS, so that they would be available as a voluntary standard, which was estimated to be around K K. While we believe this still reflects the costs to finalise the existing drafts, further work and costs will be incurred to provide for the additional requirements to implement the mandatory NEDS. Proposed Approach to implement National Engineering Design Standards . The following sets out our proposed approach to establish the regulatory power to implement mandatory NEDS. These proposals will be used to inform drafting instructions to Parliamentary Counsel Office. The detailed matters that need to be addressed include: . the purpose and effect of the NEDS and who they apply to; . their oversight and administration; . their development, content and review, including: .. enabling variations to account for geographicgeological differences and alternative solutions; and .. approving processes and products; . funding; and . transition from the existing engineering codes of practice. . The following paragraphs set out our detailed proposals to address those issues. The proposed approach is summarised in the attached A in Appendix . The purpose and effect of National Engineering Design Standards and who they apply to . The NEDS will be a mandatory national standard for any current or future publicly owned water services network infrastructure. The NEDS will not apply to private infrastructure, treatment plants and reservoirs. . Water service providers (councils or water services organisations) will be required to incorporate the NEDS into their engineering codes of practice (as they apply to water services water services network infrastructure). Subject to transitional arrangements discussed below, the NEDS will replace all locally developed engineering codes of practice. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua
Page of Pokies are the most harmful form of land based gambling in our country (with online gambling is thought to be as harmful as land based pokies). This harm is evidenced in: the needs assessments conducted for the Ministry of Healths triennial Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm (and why pokies incur a higher Problem Gambling Levy than other forms of gambling), gambling surveys from Te Hiringa HauoraHealth Promot ion Agency, and research from Auckland Universitys Gambling and Addictions Research Centre (which identified disproportionate problem gambling harm and service representations). As of September , there were around , pokie machines operating across , venues throughout New Zealand . These pokie machines are specifically designed to captivate their audience and keep them playing continuously. The fast, provoking and continuous play is proven to be associated with problem gambling. D ata from the Health and Lifestyles Survey indicates that about percent of New Zealanders play pokies, and one in five pokie players are considered at risk gamblers. Ministry of Health intervention data from the year shows pokies account for over percent of clients seeking help from gambling harm treatment services. New Zealanders lose nearly a billion dollars a year playing pokies in pubs and clubs. The majority of this expenditure comes from people in high deprivation areas, who can least afford it. While a community benefit is derived from land based pokies gambling (by way of community grants and clubs) it does not negate the level of harm that is being experienced by some New Zealanders. I am not expecting any propos als arising from the consultation to have a significant impact on the amount of community funding available, but I anticipate this issue will be raised as part of the consultation. Mori and Pacific peoples are likely to be experiencing a disproportionate level of harm from pokies. Mori and Pacific peoples have the highest
Page of INCONFIDENCE Water Services Policy, Legislation and Stewardship Local Government Water Services (Transitional Provisions) Bill (Bill ) On March , we issued drafting instructions to Parliamentary Counsel Office for Bill . We will keep you on the Bills drafting progress and inform you if any substantive issues arise. ()(b)(ii) ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Page of INCONFIDENCE Local Water Done Well Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill (Bill ) We are preparing to present the initial briefing for Bill to the Finance and Expenditure Committee (the Committee) on June . On the same day, the Committee will decide the timetable, including oral hearing of submissions and their schedule of meetings. The Committee will also consider the appointment of the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment and Taumata Arowa i as joint advisers on the Bill. Public submissions are open until midnight on June . The Committee has already received extension requests so it is likely that the Committee will be receiving submissions beyond this . Only a small number of sub missions have been received so far and we expect that most submitters will submit on the final , or later if an extension is provided. We will be considering the submissions and appropriate responses including any recommended changes to be made to Bill through the Departmental report, which we expect will be due to the Committee on July . Ministerial intervention advice We are preparing advice to update you on whether councils are required to implement water services delivery plans, together with the pathway for Ministerial intervention if they do not. This briefing will also cover whether any changes to the Local Government Water Services (Preliminary Arrangements) Bill might be required to ensure this outcome is part of the legislation. We e xpect to provide your office with this briefing by June . ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv), ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Page of Part : Relevant Legislation . Under section () and Schedule of the Intelligence and Security Act (ISA) , the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service (NZSIS) is authorised to have direct access to certain information held by other agencies. . An update to the Direct Access Agreement (DAA) between the Minister Responsible for NZSIS and the Minister of Internal Affairs came into effect on October after being signed by both parties on October . . The DAA enables NZSIS to access Registration Information stored on the BDM Database (held by the RegistrarGeneral) and Citizenship Information stored on the Citizenship Database (held by the Secretary for Internal Affairs). Both databases are stored by the Department of Internal Affairs (DIA), will be accessed by NZSIS in the same way, and subject to the same safeguards, and will collectively be referred to as DIA Information . Part : NZSIS Responsibilities . NZSIS direct access to DIA Information must comply with the terms of the DAA, as signed by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister responsible for NZSIS. Using DIA Information . In accordance with terms of the DAA and the legislative requirements of the ISA, NZSIS must ensure that: i. any DIA Information is used only for the purposes of NZSIS statutory functions as set out in the ISA; and ii. any DIA Information obtained under the DAA is used in a way that is necessary and proportionate to NZSIS functions. Protecting DIA Information . In accordance with terms of the DAA and the legislative requirements of the ISA, NZSIS must ensure there are adequate safeguards in place to protect DIA Information. This includes ensuring that there are: i. clear procedures for accessing, using, disclosing and retaining DIA Information;
Page of Background . Earlier this year, I was asked to report back to Cabinet with options to refocus the water services reforms, looking particularly at three priority areas: . the number of entities and their boundaries; . how Mori rights and interests are reflected in the new system; . the timing and sequencing of implementation. . On April , Cabinet considered the first of a series of paper s reporting back on these areas, Refocusing the water services reforms: strategy and urgent decisions CAB MIN . . In that paper, I explained that, while there continues to be a strong rationale for reform, it ha s become clear that the fourentity reform model presents challenges for community acceptability . There continue to be concerns across local communities that this model for water service delivery results in loss of local influen ce and voice. . To help address this issue, I obtained agreement to proceed with a new model, in which there will be water services entities instead of four. The new entities will be more closely based around existing regions, and every territorial autho rity owner will be represented on the regional representative group. This approach will better align the entities to communities of interest, thereby strengthening local representation and influence . . I also explained that moving to a model involving more entities would have a number of implications, and mean s we will forgo some of the economic benefits associated with the four entity model . However, there are ways to recoup some of the scale economies that might otherwise be lost due to smaller entities, such as through financing mechanisms and shared servicesfunctions across entities . . Further work has been undertaken to develop proposals on entity financing mechanisms and shared services arrangements. I am seeking decisions on these proposals through this paper. . I am also seeking to confirm the detailed proposals on the other matters that were signalled in my previous paper where these need to be given effect through legislation. The remaining areas will be included in a third paper, in June , cove ring implementation and financial implications. Analysis Proposed approach to the entity go live dates Early establishment of the Auckland and Northland Water Services Entity . The April decisions to change the number of entities, and the services areas they will cover, did not affect the composition of the Auckland and Northland Water Services Entity (Entity A ) comprising the councils in Auckland, Far North, Kaipara and Whangarei . Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
Page of Community consultation during the long term planning process will remain par t of the process for adopting the three year plan. Councils will be required to use what is known as the special consultative procedure as part of the process for adopting the three year plan. Under the Order, this means c ouncils will make available pres cribed information on the three year plan and will provide an opportunity for their communities to present their views on the plan to their council. Consultation is open: Consultation is open from July to August . If you have any feedback or que stions on this proposal, please send it to LGCycloneRecoverydia.govt.nz.
Page of sex marker Ministry of Education Suggested that the one time change is inconsistent with self identification and gender fluidity. Noted that the Department places no restriction on the number of times an individual can change their name. When individuals change their name, they can still be traced back to an anchor name limiting the risk of identity fraud. Ministry for Women Suggest ed that the one time change may be unduly restrictive of individuals expressing their gender since their understanding of th eir gender can change over time. Ministry of Social Development Queried the consequences of one time change on people who wish to de transition. Ministry of Health Argued that the one time limit contradicts gender fluidity. Policy should be more flexible and explain the special circumstances the Registrar General would consider in a second change. People born overseas Department of Internal Affairs (Service Delivery and Operations) Making people who were born overseas ineligible may exclude children who were adopted from overseas. These people are included in our birth register. Yes, the paper has been amended so that an eligible person only excludes people whose birth cannot be registered in New Zealand. Te Puni Kkiri Suggested including a position on the idea of dual citizenship of Mori who were bornlive overseas (i.e. reflect that they are tangata whenua which has special significance). No, this is not within scope of the Bill. Further work is required to determine whether a process is required for those whose birth is not registered in New Zealand. Human Rights Commission Recommends that transgenderintersex asylum seekers should receive identity documents early on that reflect their gender. The use of sex and gender as interchangeable terms is confusing Department of Corrections Notes advice elsewhere from Crown Law that there is no distinction between sex and gender in NZ law and these terms are used interchangeably. Wonders about the consequences of this for the proposed BDMRR Bill. Expresses concern that distinguishing sex from gender may not appropriately capture the nuances of the conversation. When simplified, information about sex and gender may no longer be accurate. We have clarified the use of sex and gender in the Cabinet paper noting our deliberate conflation for the purposes of introducing a self identification process in a timely way. Ministry of Education Suggests that the terms sex and gender be used more consistently throughout the cabinet paper. Even though they are defined at the beginning, they are used interchangeably throughout. Wonders if there is any scope to include gender instead of sex on birth certificates . Gender should be determined by the general law of New Zealand provision (clarifying that birth certificates should not be considered conclusive evidence of sex) Department of Corrections Suggested clarifying the existing provision in the BDMRR Act, which implies birth certificates should not be considered conclusive evidence of a persons sex and linking this t o the issue with the Corrections regulations. Yes, the paper clarifies that section of the BDMRR Act, which states that a persons sex should be determined by the general law of New Zealand , infers that birth certificates should not be considered as conclusive evidence of a persons sex.
Page of .Scenario s Presented
Page of The Rates Rebate Act (the Act), specifies that adjustments to the key settings of the Scheme should be made by way of Order in Council by substituting any amount for any amount specified in subsection of the Act. Adjusting the two key settings of the Scheme each year ensures that Cabinet is responsive to cost of living changes. What impact will the Future for Local Government review have on the Scheme The review is wide ranging in scope and has proposed that a ke y shift is required to support more equitable funding and may identify specific mechanisms for supporting lowincome households. The reviews equitable funding shift and other feedback on the Schemes efficacy present an opportunity for me to assess th e strategic issues of the Scheme. Whilst this is ongoing, maintenance of the Scheme as is proposed in this paper remains prudent. My officials have informed me that they will be assessing the strategic issues facing the Scheme in the latter half of this year and will report back to me with any recommendations to consider in the context of the Future for Local Government review. What impact will the Water Services Reform Programme have on the Scheme Clause new section of the Water Services Leg islation Bill would amend the definition of rates to include water service entities charges. Amending the Act to include water charges is likely to be fiscally neutral, except in Auckland where the council currently tops up the central government f unded rebate as if Watercare bills were a rate. This costs Auckland Council about , per year. The changes are planned to come into effect in July when the water services entities go live, and so at this stage will have no impact on the uptake o f the Scheme for the rating year. What impact will the high level of inflation have on the Scheme Adjusting the settings of the Scheme to reflect the high level of inflation will help provide support to recipients with the impacts of the increase in the cost of living. The adjustment to the key settings of the Scheme reflects the increase of . per cent of the CPI. The Schemes appropriation takes this into account and the total cost of rebates paid for is expected to fall with in it. The adjustment of the Scheme is consistent with the raise in Superannuation for , which was also at the same percentage. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government section ()(a) section ()(a) section ()(a) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Priority Routine Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Local Government briefing Hon Kieran McAnulty Minister of Local Government Title: Inflation Adjustment to the Rates Rebate Scheme March Key issues The Rates Rebates Scheme (the Scheme) assists some lowincome homeowners to pay their rates. Since , adjustments to the Schemes two key settings (the maximum rebate available and the income abatement threshold) have been made annually to account for the increase of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) CAB Min () () refers. The adjustments are made , Order in Council. The increase in CPI for the year ended December was . per cent. To reflect this, the Department of Internal Affairs seeks your agreement to raise the Schemes maximum rates rebate from to , and the income abatement threshold from , to ,. Action sought Timeframe Agree to adjust the settings for the Rates Rebate Scheme (the Scheme) By March to reflect percentage changes to the Consumer Price Index of. per cent for the year ended December by: (i) increasing the maximum rebate from to. ; and (ii) increasing the income abatement threshold from , to ,; agree to proceed directly to the Cabinet Legislation Committee on May to seek approval of an Order in Council to adjust the tMJ key settings of the Scheme; and agree that officials instruct the Partiamentary Counsel Office to prepare the Order in Council. Contact fortele hone discussions if required) Name Position Contact Number Anthea Oliver Manager Operational Policy Jorge Bolanos Lopez Policy Analyst Return electronic document to: Cohesion reference FSOCDBB CBCEBFDB Ministeri database reference LG INCONFIOEN CE Suggested st contact Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Purpose The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua . This briefing seeks your agreement to adjust the maximum rates rebate and income abatement threshold for the Rates Rebate Scheme (the Scheme) in line with the . percent increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPl). Background . The Scheme allows lowincome ratepayers to access a rebate on their council rates. . Applicants apply for a rebate directly to their council and, if successful, they either have their rebate applied to their rates account or are paid a cash refund if their rate:s have been paid in full. The Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) then reimburses the council. . Eligible applicants include: . residents who are ratepayers for the property to which the rebate is being claimed; and . residents who own a nonseparately rated unit in a retirement village, and who contribute to the outgoings of the retirement village; and . on Maori land, residents of individual houses on the same block (upon request). . The applicants income used in the assessment is that earned from the previous tax year. For example, a person applying for a rebate in the year from July to June is assessed on their income for the financial year ending March :. The definition of income also includes an applicants partners income. Adjustment history . In , Cabinet agreed that the maximum rebate and income abatement threshold should be adjusted annually, in line with movements in the CPI for the previous calendar year CAB Min () () refers. The maximum rebate available and the income abatement threshold have been adjusted in most years since . . In , you agreed to adjust the Schemes key settings by . percent, in line with CPI. The maximum rebate increased from to , and the maximum income abatement threshold increased from , to ,, as stated in section () of the Rates Rebate Act (the Act). Previously identified issues with the Rates Rebates Scheme . In December , we informed you that the Department has been preparing to provide advice to you to address identified issues with the Scheme. Given the complexity and overlapping mandate with other government departments, and the full work programme of the Branch, this has not been a priority. We expect to finalise our advice providing options through the Briefing to the Incoming Minister at the end of this year. The CPI number is the percentage movement in the all groups index for the calendar year. There was no adjustment made to the maximum rebate available for the rating year. The CPI for the year ended December was . per cent which was too low to result in an adjustment to the maximum rebate available, rounded to the nearest . INCONFIDENCE Page oj( Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Comment The Departme nt of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua The maximum rebate and income abatement threshold should be adjusted to reflect the increase In the CPI . The Department recommend s proceeding with the annual adjustment for the financial year. . The CPI increase for the year ended December was . per cent. In line with this, the revised settings would be: . an increase in the maximum rebate from to ; and . an increase in the income abatement threshold from , to ,. . Two examples showing the estimated rebate for different living arrangements are included in Appendix A. Overall uptake of the Scheme is expected to remain within the appropriation for . The Vote Internal Affairs appropriation for the Scheme in is million (excl.GST). The cost of rebates in is estimated to be approximately million (excl.GST). . The appropriation for the Scheme was increased by million during the March Baseline Update. The Schemes appropriation for the remainder of the financial year and outyears is now million. The Department will continue to monitor the uptake of the Scheme for the remainder of the year and will advise you if the situation changes. . Table shows the expected change in the cost and uptake of the Scheme for a threeyear period between and under the existing settings. It is difficult to predict the impact that the Cyclone Gabrielle recovery will have on the uptake of the Scheme in . Table : Change in total cost of rebates paid and number of recipients by financial year Year I Total cost of rebates paid I Number of recipients (excl. GST) . million (actual) , (actual) million (forecast) , (forecast) million (forecast) , (forecast) If you agree, the proposed adjustments will take effect on l July . Section () of the Act provides for adjustments to the Schemes settings by way of an Order in Council. Should you agree to the adjustments reflecting the increase in CPI, the Department will instruct the Parliamentary Counsel Office to prepare an Order in Council. Uptake and expenditure are based on average annual uptake over the previous two financial years. Expenditure is estimated by taking into account the proposed maximum rebate value for , the estimated number of rebates, the estimated average number of full rebates granted and the average proportion, compared to the maximum rebate, of rebates less than the maximum. INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua . Should you agree with the recommended timelines, the changes will take effect from July . Historically, a third of all rates rebate applications are received in the first two months of the new financial year. If the annual adjustment is not in place by July , then anyone applying for a rates rebate after that would be assessed using the settings. A review of the Scheme is underway . The Department is carrying out work in further assessing how the Scheme can be strategically improved. However, a comprehens ive review process cannot be completed before the July deadline for the annual adjustment Order in Council to take effect for the rating year. . Note that the Independent Panels (the Panel) scope for the Review into the Future for Local Government (the Review) includes a review of funding and financing systems in local government. However, although the Panel acknowledges a range of variables that make local governments funding systems unsustainab le, there is no comment in relation to the challenges facing the Scheme. . The Department will provide you with a paper in December on options to improve the Scheme, along with potential actions you may take. This will not impact the timing of the annual adjustment to the Scheme. Next steps The Order in Council will need to go to the Cabinet Legislation Committee for approval in June . The Schemes annual inflation adjustments are routine and no new policy decisions are required within this financial year. Therefore, the Department recommends going directly to Cabinet Legislation Committee (LEG). This option is consistent with .(d) of the Cabinet Manual. . The rates rebate inflation adjustment is subject to the Budget moratorium. To take effect on July , the Order in Council will have to proceed to LEG on May . Proposed timetable for Order in Council process Products I Timeline Initial briefing March Briefing: Draft Cabinet paper for March Ministerial consultation and approval Briefing: Final Cabinet paper for April approval and upload Submission to Legislation Committee May Cabinet May Gazette publication May Regulations into effect July INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Recommendations . the Department of Internal Affairs recommends that you: a) agree to adjust the settings for the Rates Rebate Scheme cJtNo to reflect percentage changes to the Consumer Price Index of . per cent for the year ended December by: (i) increasing the maximum rates rebate from to ; and (ii) increasing the income abatement threshold from , to ,; b) agree to proceed directly to the Cabinet Legislation Committee on eNo May to seek approval of an Order in Council to adjust two key settings of the Rates Rebate Scheme; and c) agree that officials instruct the Parliamentary Counsel Office to prepare the Order in Council. Anthea Oliver Manager Operational Policy INCONFIDENCE Hon Kieran McAnulty Minister of Local Government Pages of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Appendix A: Examples of estimated rebate at various levels of rates for two different living arrangements. . A married, civil union, or de facto couple, receiving a superannuation income of ,. gross, who received no other income in , would be eligible for a rebate as shown below. Level of rates () I Estimate rebate() , or less , , , or more Note: The proposed increase of the rates rebate for is set to align with superannuation rates. However, the Department notes that in subsequent years with lower inflation increase, this might not be the case. . A single person living alone, receiving a superannuation income of ,. gross, who received no other income in , would be eligible for a rebate as shown below. Level of rates() I Estimated rebate() , , , or more Note: The average national residential rate was ,. Local councils set their rates according to their specific circumstances regarding land value, population characteristics and financial needs. It is unclear the relationship between lowincome household and rates charged. INCONFIDENCE Page o
Page of Considering Mori representation remains important. In the context of cyclone recovery, I consider that this is something that councils should be able to opt into if they consider they have the resources to undertake the process. The Supplementary Order Paper will delay the commencement of the mandatory Mori representation provisions Under my proposals in this paper, the mandatory requirement for local authorities to consider Mori representation would not come into force until the day after the local elections. The status quo would remain in the meantime in which councils can optionally consider Mori representation. In , the Government passed the Local Electoral (Mori Wards and Mori Constituencies) Amendment Act . The Act removed all mechanisms for binding polls to overturn councils decisions to introduce new Mori wards or Mori constituencies because they had become a barrier to improving Mori representation in local government. This makes it easier for councils to consider introducing Mori wards. There are still provisions in the Bill that need to come into effect this year The Bill also : makes changes to support Auckland Council to provid e for fair and effective representation of Aucklanders. The Bill aligns the membership restrictions of Auckland Council with all other territorial authorities in New Zealand. Currently, Auckland Council is limited to exactly councillors plus the mayor, while other territorial authorities can choose between five to councillors and the mayor. creates two new processes for unitary authorities to adjust local board area boundaries (one for minor changes and one for more significant changes). updates the processes for tied elections, including an automatic judicial recount before any coin toss, and enables all candidates to submit electronic nominations . These provisions will all need to come into effect this year, so the Bill should still be passed in th e current term of Parliament. Financial Implications The proposal in this Cabinet paper will not have additional costs on the Crown. Legislative Implications The proposal discussed in this Cabinet paper will be progressed through a Supplementary Order Pa per. Proactively released by the Minister of Local GovernmentINCONFIDENCE
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of Indicative Key Financ ial Stat istics
Page Redacted consistent with ()(g)(i) Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of Indicative Key Financ ial Statistics
Page of Indicative Key Financ ial Stat istics
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Redacted consistent with ()(g)(i) CovidCard Validation Report June
Page of This evaluation is both preliminary and con fiden tial. It is preli minary in that it is based on
Page of What option is likely to best address the problem, meet the policy objectives, and deliver the highest net benefits . Our analysis shows that : Option (counterfactual) is not a viable response to the problem ; and Option ( wait and see ) is a better option than the Option of doing nothing, but it is not preferred and unlikely to meet the objective as it cannot provide a sustainable revenue stream for the racing industry long term. . Option (online monopoly) is the preferred option as it bests meet s the objective and is the only option that could meet the objective of sustaining TAB NZ s revenue , and in turn provid e sustainable returns to the racing industry. While less competition would likely increase TAB NZs profits, it is unknown at this stage how much profit would remain when you consider the following: the loss of POCC revenue (approximately million annually) that would cease under a monopoly; and a larger than expected number of gamblers may choose not to return to betting with TAB NZ. . This option should realise the immediate capital injection from the million payment within working days of the legislation being enacted. Depending on the enactment, TAB NZ would also receive an While short term this would put the industry in a much stronger position at the end of the minimum guaranteed period . What are the marginal costs and benefits of the preferred option . Due to tight timeframes, we have not been able to undertake a full costing of Option . The following table below represents our best estimates at this time :
Page of Gambler s Gamblers betting with TAB NZ can expect improved products. TAB NZ will also need to comply with strengthened requirements to minimise harm. Low Low Racing industry (and sporting codes) More certainty of revenue in the short term because of the additional payments. TAB NZ would financially benefit from this option both in terms of the short term Monopoly conditional Entain payments and the longterm increase in revenue outlined above. These gains will largely pass onto racing and sporting industr ies although the exact amounts to each racing code and NSO are not known . High Medium to High Total monetised benefits Total benefits fall in a number of areas and outlined above each has differing level of confidence: Ongoing increase of TAB profits (base d on TAB NZ estimates million pa but based on POCC figures million pa). immediate capital injections from the Monopoly conditional Entain payments the million payment and uplift in the minimum guaranteed funding of an
Page of Section : Delivering an option How will the new arrangements be implemented . If Option is agreed, there would be changes to the primary legislation. The Department would be responsible for implementing this. The Minister has signalled his intention to seek to implement this monopoly as soon as possible to address TAB NZ s current and potential future loss of revenue and to maximise value from the Entain partnership . Prior to full regulation the Department will enforce the monopoly as an interim step . The Minister for Racing has directed that the monopoly be implemented quickly and ahead of the broader regulation of online gambling generally. However, this will require a two phased approach to enforcement regulation. . Until full enforcement and oversight of the online monopoly is able be transferred to the dedicated online regulator in , the Department would undertake an interim regulator role. This is intended to assure Entain that the monopoly is being regulated and therefore release the payment to TAB NZ as per the partnership agreement . . While the interim framework will be place with the passing of the legislation and any associated regulations; the degree to which any powers are utilised and the resources dedicated to this function during the interim period will be an operational matter for the Department, given this arrangement would likely only be required for months. . It is expected that the Department will take a pragmatic approach to establishing and implementing this interim role, while still ensuring adequate enforcement. This could involve the Department intervening with operators breaching the monopoly issuing initial warning when breaches are brought to its attention and rais ing issues with regulators in other jurisdictions. . We acknowledge that in the short term, until a fully empowered online gambling regulator is established under the Gambling Act enforcement in the sports and race betting space may be problematic. . As noted, w e anticipate the more reputable operators would want to avoid breaching New Zealand law, if for no other reason than to protect their ability to operate in other markets that are regulated (where the regulator in that jurisdiction would look closely at any breaches in other jurisdictions), and not jeopardise a possible future New Zealand online casino licence. We anticipate that group of offshore operators would leave the New Zealand market , including those who are most popular with New Zealanders but it will be challenging to enforce rules for other operators who may not be licensed anywhere, or only licensed in jurisdictions with minimal oversight.
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of .. implements interim economic regulation for Watercare, administered by a Crown monitor with the powers necessary to ensure compliance with the regime ; .. extends the Civil Defence and Emergency Management Act arrangements for financial reimburse ment in an emergency to Watercare . Amendments to the Water Services Act . On April , Cabinet approved the policy proposals tabled by the Minister Responsible for RMA Reform in the paper First Resource Management Act Amendment Bill: Addressing a Small Number of Time Critical Changes CAB MIN .. Cabinet agreed for the amendment of the Resource Management Act (RMA) to exclude the hierarchy of obligations contained in the National Policy Statement for Freshwater Management (NPS FM) from resource consent applications and consenting decision making processes. That Bill is due to be enacted by the end of . . Te Mana o te Wai informs how the NPS FM is implemented. Te Mana o te Wai imposes a hierarchy of obligations that prioritise the health and wellbeing of water first over the health and needs of people and the ability of people and communities to provide for their social, economic and cultural well being. . I received advice on the implications of excluding the hierarchy of obligations in the NPSFM on Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator when setting wastewater standards and on councils when issuing consents for wastewater treatment plants. Under th e Water Services Act , Taumata Arowai must give effect to Te Mana o te Wai when undertaking any function, power or duty and may develop wastewater environmental performance standards. Taumata Arowai have begun developing wastewater standards consistent with the current provisions. These standards are expected to be operational from mid and will apply when new consents are issued. If the hierarchy of obligations is removed from consenting decisions but is in place when the standards are formulated, councils will still be bound by the likely higher standard. . I was authorised by Cabinet to determine if amendments to the Water Services Act are required to ensure consistency with the proposed changes to the RMA, specifically whether the Te Mana o te Wai hierarchy of obligations should be disapplied to the setting of the wastewater standards. Interim amendments to the Water Services Act are recommended to ensure that Taumata Arowai do not apply the hierarchy of obligations when developing wastewater standards. This will mean that councils will be able to issue consents consistent with the Governments new approach to the NPS FM. I expect to provide a longer term solution through the Local Government (Water Services) Bill which will address the regulatory settings for Taumata Arowai in more detail. . I have asked officials to instruct Parliamentary Counsel Office to draft minor and transitional amendments to the Water Services Act , to align the Governments approach to hierarchy of obligations relating to Te Mana o te Wai. This is consistent with the Cabinet decisions referred to above. enkv Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE
Page of . Councils will still need to get consents for their wastewater networkstreatment plants, but the process will be much simpler as regional councils will not need to create bespoke sets of consent conditions for each networkplant. Instead, all parties will know the requirements from the outset and once granted, all consents that the standards apply to will be for a year period. This standardisation and longer consent duration will eliminate some consenting costs as many plants are currently granted with s hort to medium term consent durations. It will also enable greater certainty of costs for councils in the management of their wastewater networks and in consenting processes. . Wastewater standards provide an opportunity to: give clear environmental performance expectations to communities for wastewater infrastructure; streamline consent processes; provide certainty to councils as network owners about the costs of infrastructure investments and upgrades; ta ke advantage of economies of scale in plant design, procurement and operator capability training; make compliance and enforcement more achievable and transparent; and enable performance benchmarking, to drive improved efficiencies and environmental outco mes over time. There will be further benefits once infrastructure design solutions are in place . The Bill provides for a new discretionary regulatory tool infrastructure design solutions which will support the use of modular infrastructure for waste water treatment plants. The solutions will set out the design and operating requirements for standardised modular wastewater treatment plants or components that are deemed to meet the wastewater standards. The infrastructure design solutions will be simila r to Acceptable Solutions, such as those relating to drinking water (under the Water Services Act ), and under the Building Act . . Infrastructure design solutions will result in faster consenting processes and potentially significant cost savings, and over time will enable network operators to standardise the design and procurement of infrastructure, and enable modular, off theshelf solutions to be installed. . The infrastructure design solutions are initially likely to focus on small treatment plants. They are not in the scope of consultation on proposed wastewater standards. They will be developed and publicly consulted on once enabled through legislation as part of the implementation of the standards. What cost efficiencies will be achieved . The proposed wastewater standards are expected to deliver significant costefficiencies that may include reduced consenting costs of up to percent based on case study. This includes reductions in costs associated with the consenting process including staff time, technical assessments, feasibility assessments, legal costs and consultation and engagement costs. . In some cases, there may also be reductions to capital upgrade costs and ongoing operating costs such as staff training and maintenance. The cost savings on an individual plant will depend on specific circumstances, such as the type or size of the plant, t reatment processes, and options for where the plant discharges. However, over time, further costs savings are expected as materials are standardised, and modular options are available that comply with wastewater standards. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE
Page of . The NEDS will apply to following parties and circumstances: private developers or contractors seeking to vest (transfer ownership and responsibility for operation and maintenance of water services network infrastructure) to water services providers; private developers or contractors proposing to connect water services network infrastructure to the public network; and the maintenance, renewal, upgrade or decommissioning of new or existing public water services network infrastructure by water services providers. . The NEDS standards and requirements will sit alongside any other statutory requirements that may apply to water services providers, developers, or contractors. This could include the Resource Management Act , the Building Act , or relevant Health and Safety requirements. Oversight and administration of the National Engineering Design Standards . We are proposing that the Water Services Authority Taumata Arowai (the Authority) should provide for the oversight and administration of the NEDS. . Our view is that there is synergy between the existing functions of the Authority to set standards and approve process and products across all water services network infrastructure. We think that consolidating the NEDS with those other standards will enable all those standards to be more effective and the process for their development more efficient. Those overlaps are illustrated in the table below: Water Services Authority How are they given effect to Sets Standards Approves processes products Existing Drinking Water Standards Acceptable solutions Under the Water Services Act the WSA regulates requirements for drinking water supplies Acceptable solutions deemed to meet the requirements Agreed changes underway Wastewater Stormwater Environmental Performance Standards Infrastructure solutions Developed under the Water Services Act , environmental performance standards must be included as conditions of consent, by consent authority (regional councils) under the RMA Infrastructure solutions identify design and operating requirements for modular wastewater treatment plants Proposed National Engineering Design Standards Approved products e.g. pipes (network infrastructure) Developers and contractors must meet standards before water services providers will allow them to vest (transfer) network assets andor connect to public network Approved products deemed to meet NEDS Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua
Page of INCONFIDENCE BUDGET SENSITIVE Next steps on repurposing sector support, Better Off Funding Officials are developing proposed next steps for repurposing sector support, Better Off and Iwi Collective funding in line with Cabinet decisions. We are testing these with the Technical Advisory Group to incorporate their views and will provide an update to your office on this later this week or early next week. We would recommend that maximum flexibility is retained rather than blanket approaches to how funding is allocated. For example, it may be appropriate to provide some Councils with sector support funding now if we can reasonably as certain strong intent to progress the policy goals of Local Water Done Well. For other councils it may be more appropriate to stagger or provide tranches if this helps incentivise a better approach. As has been discussed with you , a mutual agreement on fun ding approaches is preferable to other contract interventions but these are available if necessary. For Better Off Funding , we would recommend that the Department (andor Crown Infrastructure Partners as fund monitor) engage with each council to determine what repurposing opportunities exist, with a later formal contract variation process aligned to the passage of Bill . Early engagement would signal your intention to councils, enable councils ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Page of participation levels over an annual basis and are less likely to seek help from gambling harm services than Pkeh. M uch of the second hand harm from gambling is also attributed to pokies . In the Health and Lifestyles Survey , the most commonly mentioned form of household harm from gambling (for example, an argument or going without due to gambling) was pokies in pubs and clubs () . At the community level , the research also paints a concerning picture of pokies gambling harm concentrated in communities that are already economically disadvantaged. I do not think this is the full picture. G ambling harm is widely believed to be underreported, in part due to the stigma that is felt around problem gambling, which has been identified as a barrier to people seeking help or accessing services and support . The Ministry of Healths proposed strategy for to includes new initiatives to address how stigma from gambling harm can be reduced. . I propose to do more to reduce pokies harm and do it quickly I consider the best way to tackle pokies h arm in the short term is to make regulatory changes under the Ac t. I propose to update these regulations to set stronger and clearer requirements to reduce gambling harm. We could do this quickly to reduce the level of harm being experienced. I want to start this work by consulting with the public on their views of the best way to regulate. There are gaps in the current regulations, as some key aspects of harm minimisation were not covered when the R egulations were created in . A recent decision in the District Court Department of Internal Affairs v Suppressed NZDC has shown, as outlined below, the benefits from setting more prescriptive requirements for identifying gambling harm in venues. The defendant was charged with failing to take reasonable steps to ensure that the venues harm minimisation policy was used to identify a problem gambler. The reasonable steps included having systems to track multiple cash withdrawals and regular long play durations. The Judge held that as these steps were not included in the harm minimisation policy, they were not self evident requirements. The decision noted that these steps could be prescribed by regulations and that venue staff and gamblers would benefit from this . The current regulations cover a limited number of topics , with a low level of prescription. The current Regulations and legislative framework are summarised in Appendix A. However, t he Act contemplates a substantial
Page of INCONFIDENCE Water Services Policy, Legislation and Stewardship Local Government Water Services (Transitional Provisions) Bill (Bill )
Page of INCONFIDENCE
Page of ii. clear measures for protecting the privacy of individuals identified by DIA Information; and iii. sufficient compliance and audit requirements for the direct access, use, disclosure, and retention of DIA Information. . For a more detailed description of the ways in which NZSIS will fulfil these responsibilities, see Part : Use of DIA Information and Part : Protecting DIA Information. NZSIS ownership . For a comprehensive list of NZSIS employees responsible for ensuring NZSIS is compliant with the obligations outlined in the DAA, refer to Appendix . Part : Scope In scope . This Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) report should be read in conjunction with the DAA between the Minister Responsible for NZSIS and the Minister of Internal Affairs. This PIA report: i. identifies the privacy concerns and considerations associated with NZSIS having direct access to DIA Information; and ii. outlines the ways in which NZSIS will access, use and protect DIA Information in order to adequately mitigate these privacy concerns. Out of scope . This PIA does not cover any potential access to DIA Information by the Government Communications Security Bureau (GCSB) or any other agency. Part : Use of DIA Information . DIA Information is collected for the purposes of maintaining a series of statutory registers. The nature and scope of information contained in these registers is wide ranging and includes a record of citizens by birth but for the purposes of the DAA the following are the relevant types of information with definitions as covered in the DAA: i. Registration Information; and ii. Citizenship Information. . The NZSIS utilises DIA Information for the purposes of maintaining and enhancing New Zealands national security.
Page of . There is a strong case for establishing Entity A earlier than the other new entities . It involves only four councils , and Auckland has already consolidated much of its water services provision in Watercare Services Limited provid ing a strong foundation upon which to build the new water services entity. Furthermore, Entity A affords the greatest opportunity to demonstrate the early benefits of reform. . Work undertaken to on Entity As draft initial a sset management plan and funding and pr icing plan indicates there is an opportunity to keep prices in Auckland at close to their current level in real terms (avoiding the near doubling of charges currently projected in Auckland Councils long term plan), and bring average household char ges in Northland down to near Auckland levels, while also increasing investment relative to the four councils current long term plans. This would deliver tangible and immediate benefits for Auckland and Northland customers and communities. . Through the National Transition Unit, significant work has already been undertaken in preparation for Entity A to go live from July . A chief executive has been appointed, and the processes for board appointments, preparation of a sset management plan s and funding and pricing plans, and the development of a constitution are underway. . I have had recent engagement with the Mayors and Chief Executives of Entity A councils, where a mix of views have been presented. The timeline for the establishment of their entity has not changed from what is already provided for in legislation and, as such , their views are consistent with previous positions. The Mayor of Auckland has indicated support for the proposal ,
Page of . Scenario Owner ship structu re variant
Page of Impact Analysis Regulatory Impact Statement The proposal discussed in this cabinet paper are in line with Cabinets original decisions and will not have any impact beyond the scope of the Regulatory Impact Statement submitted on introduction of the Bill. Climate Implications of Policy Assessment The requirements to conduct an assessment do not apply. Population Implications While the commencement may be delayed, the intention of the proposal is still to improve the process for councils to consider Mori wards and to support Mori to stand for election to local government and raise issues on behalf of Mori communities. Guaranteed consideration of Mori electoral representation by councils will ensure Mori have regular opportunities to engage in this process. Human Rights The proposal discussed in this Cabinet paper are consistent with previous Cabinet decisions and do not raise any additional issues of consistency with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act and the Human Rights Act . Consultation Due to the limited time available to develop these proposals there has not been time to conduct full consultation. The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet has been informed. Communications Swift c ommunication to the sector about the changes to the timing of the Bill wil l be essential . Following Cabinet agreement, the Department of Internal Affairs will communicate any decisions made. Proactive Release I intend to proactively release this Cabinet paper, with any appropriate redactions, once Cabinet decisions have been m ade. Recommendations The Minister of Local Government recommends that the Cabinet Business Committee : note the Local Government Electoral Legislation Bill would place new mandatory obligations on councils in relation to considering specific Mori representation, and some of the councils that would have to implement these new processes have been severely impact ed by Cyclone Gabrielle; Proactively released by the Minister of Local GovernmentINCONFIDENCE
Page of . If TAB NZ becomes the only authorised online betting operator , reputable gambling operators may choose to geo block to prevent New Zealand gamblers from accessing their sites. However, gamblers may be motivated to use VPNs to get around the se restrictions . We do not propose banning or criminalising New Zealanders who gamble with non authorised operators, as this could discourage people from seeking help if they are at risk of or experiencing gambling harm. . However, we do note that e ven extensive enforcement activity could not eliminate a black market completely. Most other jurisdictions we have researched have some type of black market . Cost Recovered Funding . As noted, any costs the Department incurs for this interim regulation function and onwards, would be recovered solely by TAB NZ. This is based on estimates derived from its current regulatory function , and staff levels reflecting he interim nature of this role . . TAB NZ has been consulted on and agreed to this cost recovery approach in principle and Treasury is comfortable with the proposal. The detailed mechanics of how costs are to be recorded and recovered are still to be determined , however , it appears i nvoicing TAB NZ will be an appropriate method if the necessary amendments to legislation and the appropriation have been established. The Department will work with Treasury and TAB NZ on these matters as require . . In setting its costs and the processes for recovering them , the Department will adhere to Crown cost recovery principles and ensure that what is recovered reflects the work undertaken . How will the new arrangements be monitored, evaluated, and reviewed . As the agency responsible for gambling and racing policy, the Department would, to the extent possible, monitor what happens in the market because of the monopoly change, as well as TAB NZ sEntains actions in the market. . There will be new Ministerial powers to require additional reporting and information gathering from TAB NZ to better ensure that Government has sufficient oversight to respond to any future risk, including to racing industry distributions . The Department would monitor TAB NZs compliance with these reporting requirements as part of its role as interim regulator . . This monitoring will also inform if and when the use of the new regulation making powers for harm minimisation and consumer protection should be used, and if so and how to best to do so. As noted, the intent of the consumer protection regulation making powers is to act as a backup reserve power if usual consumer protections were insufficient. The new harm minimisation regulation making power would allow any online harm minimisation requirements imposed on TAB NZ to be aligned as required with those placed on online casino operators, once this system is in place.
Page of . Under the Racing Act, TAB NZ have no advertising restrictions. However, there are some limitations placed on advertising of harmful products by the Advertising Standards Authority and TAB NZ must comply with the advertising restrictions in relation to electronic gaming machine (pokies) operations. Given the linkage to wider gambling concern, the Department also intends to work to see that that advertising provisions for TAB NZ are considered as part of the governments broader programme of work to regulate online casino gambling. . The Department is also responsible for working with the Minister of Internal Affairs on the work to implement a regulatory system for online gambling. As noted with Ministerial approval, we will c ontinu e to work on online casino regulation; with the intent that the dedicated online casino regulator (currently also proposed to be established within the Department) will eventually take on these responsibilities after and enforce the monopoly in the long term. . In addition , given the detailed design of the regulatory system for online casino gambling will address similar issues to the online sports and racing monopol y; the policy and legislative process for this gives the opportunity to make further adjustments to the monopol y oversight of and enforcement settings if required before guaranteed returns from Entain cease in .
Page of Appendix A New Zealand racing industry structure(from Brieifng to the Incoming Minister Racing)
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of . On the advice of the O ffice of the Clerk of the House of Representatives, I intend to draft these amendments as an out ofscope Amendment Paper, which will be tabled during the first reading of the Bill. This will require a debatable motion ; however, this can be combined with a motion for a truncated select committee process . Aspects of the Bill that are likely to be contentious . Water services reform has been proven to be contentious in recent years and there continue s to be different views within the local government sector and local communities. Consequentially , there are several areas of the Bill that may be controversial for councils which may be highlighted during the Bills consideration through the select committee process. .
Page of . Further cost efficiencies are expected once infrastructure design solutions are in place by enabling standardised wastewater treatment plants or components of treatment plants to be commissioned and delivered faster. . Additional information about potential cost efficiencies is provided in the discussion document, the interim Regulatory Impact Statement (attached as Appendix B )and attached factsheets: Wastewater and Stormwater Environmental Performance Standards, and Infrastructure Design Solutions (Appendix C ). What will the standards cover . I am proposing to set four sets of draft wastewater standards. The standards will cover discharge to water, discharge to land, beneficial re use of biosolids, and risk based monitoring and reporting requirements for wastewater network overflows. . The proposed standards will target cost effective ways to manage wastewater plants and networks while protecting public health and the environment. The initial tranche of standards focuses on the main contaminants from wastewater treatment plants. . The standards will also take particular account of small wastewater treatment plants (serving populations of less than ,). This is because approximately half of New Zealands treatment plants service populations of this size. These plants have characte ristics that are different to those that service larger towns and cities. . The wastewater standards proposals are only intended to apply to wastewater treatment arrangements that service communities (that is, treatment plants and significant reticulated networks). The standards may apply to all public networks (owned by a territo rial authority or its service delivery arm such as a council controlled organisation, a government department, or the New Zealand Defence Force). . The proposals are not intended to apply to privately owned networks, onsite systems that treat wastewater within the same property boundary, or small wastewater systems that service schools or camping grounds (such as those operated by the Department of Co nservation or the Ministry of Education). Treatment arrangements of this nature will be excluded as part of the drafting when the Order in Council for the wastewater standards are prepared. Nature of the standards . Under the current legislation, any standards are minimum standards, which means a regional council considering an application for a resource consent that relates to a wastewater network could not grant a consent with conditions that are less restrictive than the standards. They could impose conditions over and above the standard. . In July , Cabinet agreed to amend the Water Services Act and Resource Management Act (the RMA) to make changes to how wastewater standards will be implemented through resource consents CAB MIN . refers. The Minister of Local Governm ent was authorised to work with the Minister Responsible for RMA Reform (and other Ministers) to develop the appropriate policy approach and the necessary legislative changes. . These changes will be implemented through the Local Government (Water Services) Bill (the Bill). The Bill proposes wastewater standards are a single standard rather than a minimum (or maximum) that must be implemented by regional councils in resource consents and cannot be exceeded, apart from on an exceptions basis. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE
Page of . We think there are significant benefits for a regulatory system (both for regulators and those who are regulated) from consolidating the national oversight, performance monitoring and standard setting for wastewater, and stormwater water services network infrastructure within one regulator the Authority. . For water service providers and the water services industry, a consistent regulatory approach for three waters networks will provide clarity and certainty on network standards and requirements. Those standards and requirements will need to be consistent with the Authoritys renewed mandate, to ensure that costs are proportionate. . Consolidating all the three waters standard setting in the Authority will build stronger and more effective relationships with water sector. Through its work on wastewater standards, the Authority is already building those relationships, and these can be leveraged to support the development and implementation of the NEDS. . However, we acknowledge that administering the NEDS will require the Authority to broaden its capacity and capability from predominately sciencebased regulation to include engineeringbased regulation. While these capabilities are already required to deliver infrastructure design solutions for wastewater treatment, the inclusion of this new function for the Authority will require an uplift in that standard setting capacity and capacity. . In considering whether the Authority should administer the NEDS, we evaluated whether this task would be better allocated to Crown Infrastructure Partners (CIP). While the content requirements of the NEDS fall within their capabilities and it has synergies with their wider infrastructure and procurement roles, they do not have the same level of focus or connection to three waters services that the Authority has. . We also note that as CIP transitions to become the future National Infrastructure Agency, they will go through a period of transition and establishment as they build their full set of functions, and there is a risk that progress on the NEDS could be reprioritised as wider priorities are reallocated across the infrastructure sector (e.g. the reprioritisation of the NES on infrastructure) and subsequently delayed. . However, while we are proposing that the Authority should have the legislative accountability for administering the NEDS, we think that it is important that the development of the NEDS is aligned with wider network infrastructure standards. To provide that assurance, we propose that CIP should provide a technical review of the NEDS ahead of wider consultation (discussed below). The development, content and review of the National Engineering Design Standards . As noted above, the focus of the NEDS is public water services network infrastructure. The content for the initial draft NEDS for drinking water, wastewater (gravity and pumped systems) and stormwater networks developed by the National Transition Unit drew on best practice approaches in councils existing engineering codes of practice. We are proposing that content of those initial draft NEDS should be used as a starting point for the matters that would need to be included in the future NEDS. All the NEDS will include: Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua
Page of INCONFIDENCE to actively consider opportunities to reprioritise Better Off f unds, and provide a view as to the total quantum of funding that could be repurposed. Such engagement with councils could also inform us as to whether further incentives are required to repurpose funds towards Government priorities. Contact: Hamiora Bowkett
Page of level of regulation in relation to Class gambling in terms of both topic s covered and the level of prescription, providing the opportunity for a much stronger harm reduction approach. New Zealand takes a public health approach to reducing harm from gambling. My officials assessed the Regulations against best practice approaches for harm minimisation and identified some key gaps. The current regulations do not adequately use some of the key levers for reducing pokies harm controls in the gam bling venue, restrict ions on machine features, and enforcement tools to drive compliance. For example, the current regulations: do not specify procedures for harm minimisation policies, such as how and when venue staff should check on players ; have few restrictions on the gaming features known to attract players and encourage continuous play; and have no associated infringement offences. The legislative framework provides an opportunity to create a stronger harm minimisation approach. The matters to be covered in the discuss ion document , outlined in the next section, are expected to be relatively uncontroversial, although stakeholders will likely have different views on the optimal approach. Overview of the Discussion Document I am seeking agreement to consult with stakeholders and the public on their views on ways to strengthen the requirements in the Regulations, through the discussion document , Reducing Pokies Harm , attached to this paper as Appendix B. Comparing the current regulations against best practice approaches to harm reduction has identified the areas where improvements are needed and will be most effective. This resulted in three focus areas summarised below. The venue : Government has not stipulated specific actions that venues must undertake. Staff who work at pubs and clubs lack the tools to identify problem gambling and intervene effectively. The mechanisms and criteria for intervening are either not prescribed or not clearly prescribed in organisations harm minimisation policies and practices . Training and record keeping requirements need addressing . The machines: The number , nature and impact of gaming machine features designed to keep people playing has increased significantly as technology has developed. There are considerable opportunities to reduce harm through restricting game features and jackpot branding . Enforcement : Few of the chargeable offences and infringement offences in the Act relate to breaches of harm minimisation requirements, and there are no enforcement options for breaches of the current regulations. A strong enforcement toolkit needs a spectrum of responses, including proportionate, lower level options for small to moderate breaches . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
Page of INCONFIDENCE Implementing Local Water Done Well The Department continues to develop the operational level detail for the Water Service Delivery Plans. This includes testing of plan content with your Technical Advisory Group, and develo pment of the underlying operational processes and capability requirements within the Department to support council development of the plans over the next months, to be implemented following confirmation of Budget outcomes. The Department and Crown Infrastructure Partners also continues to support councils and council groupings ahead of enabling legislation, particularly those early mover councils focused on the establishment of multi council water service delivery organisations.
Page of INCONFIDENCE Council engagements on Local Water Done Well ()(g)(i), ()(f)(iv) ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Page of NZSIS will only use DIA Information to fulfil its statutory functions . NZSIS uses DIA Information to fulfil the following statutory functions, duties or powers, of the organisation: i. Intelligence collection and analysis; ii. Protective security services, advice and assistance; iii. Acquiring, use or maintenance of an assumed identity; and requests for assistance to acquire, use and maintain an assumed identity. Intelligence collection and analysis . In support of its Intelligence Collection and Analysis function, NZSIS will conduct investigative analysis using DIA Information: userdriven searches of DIA Information to meet general investigative, operational and security requirements. . NZSIS staff utilise DIA Information to help verify identities to enable the ability to further investigations into people of national security interest. . Investigative analysis may also be undertaken on DIA Information to complete discovery projects and generate further investigative leads. This allows NZSIS to identify additional actions NZSIS should undertake to maintainprotect the national security of New Zealand. . Staff will also use DIA Information to assist in meeting collection objectives, namely scoping, planning, carrying out and providing support to proposed or ongoing operational activity. Providing protective security services, advice and assistance to partner agencies . NZSIS may access DIA Information for the purposes of providing protective security services, advice and assistance to partner agencies. This activity includes, but is not limited to: i. advice about national security risks (for example, in support of citizenship, immigration and border security decisionmaking processes, usually by request of another agency); ii. supporting decisionmaking around the suitability of individuals to be granted a national security clearance (for example through the vetting process); and
Page of .. Govern men tRelated Entity Assessment for the WSEs
Page of note the timeframes for passing the Bill have now been delayed but the intention is still to pass the Bill before the General Election; agree to delay the commencement of the Mori representation provisions until the day after the local elections ; invite the Minister of Local Government to issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office to draft a Supplementary Order Paper to give effect to the recommendations in this paper; and authorise the Minister of Lo cal Government to make decisions on any subsequent minor or technical issues arising from legislative drafting that align with the overall policy intent of the proposals .
Page of Many of the resources required by researchers are now available digitally. We are committed to working with researchers, and with other libraries, to ensure rich collections of research materials are accessible for New Zealanders now and in the future. The research strength of the National Library is in the Alexander Turnbull Library collection, which is owned by the Crown and kept in perpetuity.
Page Redacted consistent with ()(f)(g)(i) Redacted consistent with ()(g)(i) Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of . the disclosure statement requirements; . the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act ; . relevant international standards and obligations; and . the Legislation Guidelines ( edition), which are maintained by the Legislation Design and Advisory Committee. . The Bill of Rights Act vetting is in progress with the Ministry of Justice and is due to be complete d by the time this paper is considered by Cabinet. The Bill is expected to comply with the rights and freedoms contained in the Bill of Rights Act . Treaty of Waitangi implications . Analysis to assess whether the proposals contained within the Bill or the process to develop them complies with the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi has not been conducted. . The Local Government Act requires local authorities to facilitate Mori participation in decision making processes within local government. The relationships, rights and interests that Mori have with water are often geographically or catchment specific and recognised at a local level, in agreements between mana whenua and councils. This Bill does not amend these requirements in the Local Government Act . Existing requirements in Treaty settlement and related legislation will still apply to local authorities delivering water services , together with other arrangements that councils and Mori iwi have entered about delivery of water services . . Due to limited time available, it has not been possible to engage with iwiM ori on the proposed amendments to the Water Services Act , nor conduct a Regulatory Impact Assessment. However, this policy was developed as a consequence of the proposed amendments to the RMA , which were consulted on with iwiM ori. The Ministry for the Environment has conducted Treaty impact analysis through its Regulatory Impact Statement and considered the implications for proposed amendments to the RMA against the Treaty principles of partnership and active protection of M ori rights and interests, and did not reach a conclusion on whether the Treaty principles had been met. The Amendment Paper containing the amendments to the Water Services Act will go through s elect committee consideration, and be subject to public submissions. . I note that Taumata Arowai will have an ongoing requirement to give effect to Te Mana o te Wai, and will continue to have obligations under the Te Awa Tupua (Whanganui Claims Settlement) Act , Waikato Tainui Raupatu Claims (Waikato River) Settlement Act , and Ngati Tuwharetoa, Raukawa, and Te Arawa River Iwi Waikato River Act . enkv Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE
Page of What engagement has informed the development of the standards so far . The Authority has engaged with engineering and environmental industry experts and key stakeholders to ensure the proposed standards represent a cost effective and proportionate approach to consenting. A technical review group, made up of territorial author ities and regional councils, industry experts, members of the Water Services Authority Board and Mori Adv isory Group, has also provided the Authority with external assurance. . This engagement will result in a set of standards that: reflect appropriate treatment limits for treatment plants set by councils; are applicable to all plants, including those serving , or fewer people; and support efficient and cost effective consent ing that balances risk and benefit while enabling effective environmental and public health protections. . The Authority has also engaged with a number of councils in their capacity as network operators, and with a number of regional councils as consenting authorities. This engagement has allowed the priorities and concerns of these councils to be incorporated in the proposed standards. . Feedback from smaller councils included concerns about affordability and ensuring that wastewater standards are tailored to the specific characteristics of their plants. Larger councils had a focus on planning for infrastructure resilience to support popul ation growth. Regional councils are cautiously optimistic about the proposals but wanted clear direction on how the proposed standards interact with existing national direction and regional plans this has been clarified in the Bill. . I am seeking Cabinets agreement to release a discussion document that will support public consultation on the proposed wastewater standards . Building on the constructive feedback already received, I intend to seek further input through a public consultation process. I am seeking Cabinets agreement to issue a discussion document that will support consultation. . The Authority will publish the interim Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS) to support engagement on the proposals and to provide additional detail for interested parties. The interim R IS will be and finalised further to the outcomes of consultation. . The outcome of public consultation will inform the refinement of wastewater standards to ensure they are meeting environmental performance outcomes, while improving consistency and certainty, and reducing costs for councils and ultimately consumers of wate r services. ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE
Page of . minimum technical standards for the design, construction and operational performance of three water network (reticulation) infrastructure; . information requirements (e.g. data standards) these could be included directly in the NEDS or could reference other national asset data standards to reduce disruption; and . requirements for vesting water services network infrastructure and for connections to the network. . The technical standards will be performance based and the NEDS will include commentary and guidance on how to implement the standards andor requirements. Variations . Although providing national consistency is a primary objective of the NEDS, there will be a need to enable some regional or local variations to the standards to reflect geographic, climatic and geological differences between regions that impact network performance. Potential examples of where a variation could be required include: . higher water volumes in areas subject to more extreme rainfall; . higher seismic design requirements in areas more susceptible to earthquakes; and . specific construction requirements where there may be specific soil types or geological conditions (e.g. potentially liquefiable soils). Approved products . A key feature of councils existing codes is the identification of approved products that are deemed to meet the standards and requirements in the codes. The inclusion of approved products mirrors the approach taken in the Building Code and provides a practical and costeffective pathway for developers and contractors to determine what types of water services network infrastructure will meet the codes requirements for vesting or connecting to the network. . While providing for certification of approved products centrally by the Authority would have benefits in the current New Zealand context, it would be both costly and time consuming to certify all the products that are currently in use. This could cause significant disruption for both water services providers, the wider development community and suppliers. . To address those issues, we propose that we adapt the existing approach that is used to identify that building products meet the requirements of the New Zealand Building Code. Under this model, the Authority can (subject to accreditation criteria) appoint product approval bodies. The product approval bodies would evaluate products against performance requirements of the NEDS and approve those products as suitable to be vested andor connected to the public three waters network. The https:www.building.govt.nzbuildingcodecomplianceproductassuranceandcertification schemescodemarkaboutcodemark
Page of The discussion document outlines a range of proposals to better reduce harm across these focus areas, outlined in the Table on the below . Table: Range of proposals in the Discussion Document Part : The gambling venue Identifying and responding to problem gambling mo re prescriptive tools will help venue staff to identify concerning behaviour and know what to do when a patrons gambling becomes harmful . Monitoring and recording keeping more consistent and thorough records of how long people gamble for . Wider signs of gambling could help staff build a useful picture of when they need to intervene. It could also enable the regulator to monitor a club or pub more effectively to ensure they are meeting the harm minimisation conditions of their licence. Staff training there are opportunities to improve and increase the training provided to staff who work supervising pokies. Part : The pokie machine Machine features pokies are designed to keep people playing . We could make changes to some of the machines features to discourage continuous, harmful gambling. Jackpots we could also restrict the level of advertising of, and provide better information on, jackpots . Part : Enforcement tools Offences and penalties creating penalties to enforce the existing requirements and introducing penalties for the proposed new requirements could provide the regulator with more tools and signal that harm minimisation is a key pr iority.
Page of INCONFIDENCE Taumata Arowai Assurance of ongoing supply of drinking water in the Wellington Region On February , we sent a letter to Wellington Water asking for a risk mitigation plan to ensure there will not be an imminent risk to the ongoing supply of drinking water across the summer period . On March , Taumata A rowai received a reply from Wellington Water and its council owners. On March , we wrote again to Wellington Water letting them know that the response did not set out a robust, measurable plan against which Wellington Water and its owner councils co uld be held to account. We requested specific information by March , advising that if satisfactory information was not supplied , Taumata Arowai would consider using more directive tools. We will provide you with a briefing by April setting out what has been provided by Wellington Water and our assessment of their plan to avoid a severe water shortage next year. Clutha District Councils Lawrence supply Taumata Arowai has been reviewing Clutha District Councils Drinking Water Safety Plans, including the plan for the Lawrence drinking water supply. The Lawrence supply takes water from Phoenix Dam, which is treated using filtration, chlorination, and ultraviolet disinfection before being distributed to consumers. The review of the Lawrence supply included a site visit that identified several concerns. These include highly coloured water and signs of cattle activity in the dam, insufficient infrastructure to monitor the supply, key treatment processes not working effectively (with mu ltiple activated alarms), and signs of rodent activity (coupled with open water channels) inside the treatment plant. We met with the Clutha District Mayor and Chief Executive on March , and followed up with a letter on March . Clutha Distric t Council issued a boil water notice for the Lawrence supply on March . In our letter to the Clutha District Council on March , we asked Clutha to provide a plan of how they intend to manage the risks identified by March . We will prov ide further update s to you if there are ongoing concerns. Virus prevalence in Canterbury groundwaters project In November , Christchurch City Council applied for an exemption to the contact time rule in the drinking water rules. This rule requires wate r to be held in a tank after chlorine is added, to allow time for it to kill any viruses. The exemption was not granted because it was for a process that is for primary disinfection, and exemptions can only be granted for residual (secondary) disinfection. The cost to the council to comply with this rule is hundreds of thousands of dollars, but the level of virus risk in the Canterbury groundwaters is not well understood. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Page of INCONFIDENCE Taumata Arowai Drought conditions top of the South Island On March , Agriculture Minister Todd McClay classified the drought conditions in the Marlborough, Tasman, and Nelson districts as a medium scale adverse event, acknowledging the challenging conditions facing farmers and growers in the district. Taum ata Arowai have asked for updates from the drinking water suppliers to see if the conditions were affecting their supplies: Tasman District Council and Nelson City Council have advised that they are managing the issue by using their dams to augment flows, so they are not impacted by the drought conditions at this stage ; and Marlborough District Council has advised level restrictions are in place in Picton and residents are aware of the need to conserve water. The Esson Valley Dam has a do not use water notice in place for this supply due to low level cyanobacteria (monitored weekly). However, an alternative water supply is currently meeting demand in the a rea. We will continue to monitor the situation and provide appropriate support if required. Ministry of Education Correspondence On December , Scott Evans, Deputy Secretary, Infrastructure and Digital at the Ministry of Education (MOE) , wrote to Taumata Arowai Chief Executive, Allan Prangnell outlining the MOEs commitments and intentions relating to achieving regulatory compliance for schools that are registered drinking water suppliers (as noted in the February Status Report). On March , a formal response from Taumata Arowai was sent. We have requested further information and clarification, including: where the line of responsibilities sits between MOE , school Board of Trustees and Principals ; the compliance status for each wat er supply ; and utilisation of multibarrier approach to managing risks in the supplies (previously communicated from Taumata Arowai but not covered in the Ministrys letter). It will take time for full compliance to be achieved but we are keen to ensure tha t the MOE continue s to manage risk through risk management plans and prioritise addressing higher risk compliance issues first. Taumata Arowai met with MOE throughout and will continue to meet with them in to provide support. Contact: Sara McFal l
Page of INCONFIDENCE Contact: Bex Sullivan
Page of Acquiring, use or maintenance of an assumed identity; and requests for assistance to acquire, use and maintain an assumed identity . NZSIS may access DIA Information in order to conduct checks to ensure NZSIS does not create or amend an assumed identity (or request another agency (that may include DIA) to create or amend an assumed identity) which is an exact match with someone of the same name and birth born in New Zealand. . For avoidance of doubt no requests for DIA to create or amend an assumed identity will be made under this DAA. NZSIS will use DIA Information in a way that is necessary and proportionate . NZSIS will only use DIA Information when it is necessary for the purposes of undertaking its specific statutory function(s). . The way in which the NZSIS uses DIA Information must be proportionate to the activity it is undertaking. The benefit of using the DIA Information for the purposes of undertaking NZSISs statutory functions must outweigh the potential intrusion of privacy that may result from NZSIS acquiring and retaining information extracted from the databases. Part : Protecting DIA Information Secure data ingestion and storage . NZSIS access DIA Information from DIA via standalone DIA supplied terminals located within NZSIS facilities. The terminals operate as standard remote terminals according to DIA standard remote access capabilities. The terminals operate over a fully encrypted virtual private network (VPN). The VPN provides an additional layer of security and encryption for DIA Information.
Page of . The Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs and I consider that, with the exception of Entity A, economic regulation for the other nine entities should commence on July . This recognises there is flexibility around when these entities will be stood up, ahead of the July legislative backstop . It also provides certainty to these entities about when economic regulation will apply , so they can be prepared for this. . Changes to implementation dates will require an amendment to the Water Services Econo mic Efficiency and Consumer Protection Bill. The Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs has delegated authority to progress drafting for this amendment CAB MIN . Confirming proposals for community priority statements . In the April paper, I noted that proposals are being developed for a new instrument, which would give community groups who have an interest in a water body an opportunity to make statements to their entity about their priorities for that body. I committed to report back with detailed proposals in this follow up paper. . I am proposing that provisions for community priority statements would be included in the legislation. These new instruments will provide communities with an avenue to communicate their interests in a body of water , and their priorities for how the environmental impacts of the entities activities on that body of water might be managed . These statements would be a valuable source of information for the entities, when it comes to their planning and engagement processes , and decisions about investment in infrastructure . . I am proposing the legislation clarifies that co mmunity priority statements c an be made by any legal person , providing that person has a local connection with the water body and entity service area . National level bodies would not be able to make one of these statements, unless they can demonstrate a local presence and connection. . The statements must relate to a water body in the entitys service area , and the person providing the statement must state the interest they have in the body of water. The statements would focus on priorities relating to the body of water, and are not a vehicle for c ustomers to comment on service provision or pricing. The re are separate consultation and engagement mechanisms to gather feedback on those matters . . I am proposing that the s tatements would be submitted to entities regional representative groups . They could then consider the themes raised in these statements when providing direction to the entities, and commenting on planning documents (under Schedule of the Water Services Entities Act). . Regional representative groups may wish to seek advice and support from the consumer forums that must be established by the entities (under the Act) , particularly if they need help to manage a large volume of statements . The legislative role of the consumer forums would be expanded to include responsibilities to advise regional representative groups and the entities on any community priority statements they have received.
Page of Gover nors struc ture individual councils are unlik ely to interfere more than any other
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of Consultation . The following central government agencies were consulted on a draft of this paper: Department of Conservation, Department of Corrections, Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Land Information New Zealand, Ministry for Business, Innovation and Employment, Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Education, Ministry for the Environment, Ministry for Regulation , Ministry of Health, Ministry of Justice, Ministry for Primary Industries, Ministry of Social Development, Ministry of Transport, Te Arawhiti Office for Mori Crown Relations , Te Puni K kiri Ministry of Mori Development , National Emergency Management Agency, Public Service Commission, and the Treasury . . Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator received the Bill for feedback . Provisions in the Bill relating to the additional information disclosure w ere developed in conjunction with the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment and consulted with the Commerce Commission. Work related to Watercare was carried out with Auckland Council and Crown Infrastructure Partners. . The Technical Advisory Group was involved in the development of the policy proposals and received a draft copy of the Bill and paper for feedback. . Technical feedback on relevant aspects of the Bill was sought from Taitaur Local Government Professionals New Zealand, Office of the Auditor General, Auckland Council and Crown Infrastructure Partners. Relevant p arts of the Bill w ere released to these groups in accordance with Cabinet Office guidance on the release of draft legislation outside the Crown. . There have been some changes to the Bill in response to the feedback received through consultation in relation to how the content of the w ater services delivery plans are presented. I have instructed officials at the Department to monitor feedback received in submissions during the Bills select committee stage to see whether any further changes are desirable . Binding on the Crown . The Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Act binds the Crown . Creating new agencies or amending law relating to existing agencies . The Bill enables the appointment of a Crown monitor to administer an interim economic regulation regime for Watercare . . The expenses of the Crown monitor will be recoverable from Watercare, based on a framework set by the Minister of Local Government. The Crown monitor is required to report quarterly to the Minister of Local Government on the exercise or performance of its functions, powers and duties. The regime is transitional, and will cease when full economic regulation of water services is implemented as part of the next Bill.
Page of I am also seeking delegated authority to be able to issue drafting instructions to prepare the Order in Council . I am seeking delegated authority to instruct the Parliamentary Counsel Office to draft an Order in Council for regulations prescribing wastewater standards. This would occur after the consultation on the discussion document is completed, and the feedback has been considered. . I will report back to the Cabinet Legislation Committee in August (as soon as possible after the Bill has been enacted) seeking agreement to the proposed Order in Council. That paper will also inform the Committee of any significant matters raised in feedback on the discussion document and any significant decisions I made during the course of drafting the proposed Order. Cost ofliving implications . The proposals in the discussion document are intended to lead to cost savings for councils who operate wastewater treatment plants, and for regional councils who are responsible for consenting, and ultimately for communities and ratepayers. Where the standards apply to Crown network operators, cost efficiencies are also likely to be achieved. . As well as reductions in consenting costs there may also be reductions to capital upgrade costs and ongoing operating costs such as staff training and maintenance. The costs savings on an individual plant will depend on specific circumstances, such as the type or size of the plant, treatment processes, and options for where the plant discharges. However, over time, further costs savings are expected as materials are standardised, and modular options are available that comply with wastewater standards. Financial implications . There are no Crown financial implications associated with this proposal. Legislative implications . The proposals in this Cabinet paper have no implications for primary legislation. The proposals in this paper relate to secondary legislation to put in place wastewater standards. . The Bill, which provides for the process for making the wastewater standards and their content, is expected to be enacted . Impact analysis Regulatory Impact Statement . An interim RIS has been prepared to support consultation on the proposals. The Authority intends to publish this document to support consultation on the proposed standards. . The Department of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Analysis panel (the panel) has reviewed the Interim Regulatory Impact Statement for Wastewater Standards (the interim RIS) in accordance with the quality assurance criteria set out in the CabGuide. The panel provided the following statement: ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE
Page of Authority would maintain a register of product approval bodies, and approved products. . While a product approval body could be an industry provider, we anticipate that (at least initially) they will primarily be water service providers. Water service providers are also best placed to monitor the ongoing performance of approved products. . We think it is likely that most, if not all, of the existing approved products will meet the NEDS requirement, given that the initial drafts have been drawn from best practice approaches in existing councils engineering codes of practice. This will reduce the potential disruption on suppliers and the sector of introducing the NEDS. . The national register of approved products (maintained by the Authority) will support water service providers to identify other suitable products that are used in other regions. We think that over time, the current regional differences in approved products will reduce as approved products are adopted nationally. . To ensure that new products can be identified and deployed quickly, provision should also be made in NEDS, to enable alternative solutions (like the approach in the building code), where the developers or contractors and water service providers can agree to adopt alternative processes or approaches that meet the NEDS performance standards. Review, consultation and adoption . We are proposing that Water Services Authority may review the NEDS at any time to respond to new approaches or issues but that a review should occur at least every five years. When reviewing the NEDS, the Authority should be required to consult with the public, industry bodies, the economic regulator and other relevant infrastructure agencies . The NEDS will need to be developed with appropriate technical and sector input, and reviewed regularly as new engineering methodology and products are developed. Our engagement with the water sector has highlighted the importance of ensuring that both the industry and waters services providers are well represented on any technical reference groups that may be established to support the development of the NEDS. . As we have noted above, through its work on wastewater standards, the Authority is already building relationships with the water sector. We think it is already well placed to establish the industry and water sector technical reference groups needed to support the development and implementation of the NEDS. . To ensure that there is appropriate oversight of the NEDS, we propose that their development should be subject to the same requirements as the drinking water standards and wastewater standards, which includes an Order in Council process (including the preparation of a regulatory impact assessment). Funding . We are proposing that the administration of the NEDS should be levy funded. The Water Services Act provides the Authority with the ability to recover costs Section Water Services Act Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua
Page of INCONFIDENCE Taumata Arowai, Christchurch City Council , and Environment Canterbury have agreed to collaborate and co fund research to determine the presence or absence of viruses relevant to human health in Canterbury groundwaters. We are in discussion s with Ngai Tahu who may also want to be involved. Virus research of this extent and type has not previ ously been undertaken in New Zealand. A small proof of the concept project is currently underway and will inform the wider study. The outcome of the research will inform the need for treating Canterbury groundwater for viruses, and any review of the contac t time rule for viruses. Contact: Sara McFall
Page of Next steps Subject to public consultation in March and April , and following and preliminary Cabinet decisions by September and final decisions in early , amended regulations could be in force by April . I see these proposals to reduce harm from pokies gambling in pubs and clubs as potentially a first step in more systemic reforms of the Class gambling system. There are broader issues which are likely to be more difficult to address and more contentious than the proposals in this discussion document. These issues include the concentration of gambling venues in high deprivation communities, the equity of distribution of community funding sourced from gambling, and the incentives in the system for pokies societies and venues to prioritise harm minimisation and community benefit. In raising these issues, I am mindful of how important the community funding derived from pokies is to our communities and that other portfolios such as the Community and Voluntary Sector, Racing, Sport and Recreation and Local Government will have an interest in any changes to the broader system settings for gambling in New Zealand. Some of the issues outlined above could potentially be addressed through f urther changes to regulations, while others would require legislative amendment. A wider review of the Gambling Act is a medium term action in Kia Manawanui Aotearoa: Long term pathway to mental wellbeing. Also, a s i ndicated earlier , online gambling is now considered to be at least as harmful as landbased pokies gambling. The companion paper, Options for restricting the online gambling market, presents advice on options to restrict the online gambling market in New Zealand and minimise the harm caused, particularly from offshore operators . Financial Implications There are no financial implications for this pape r, but the refined proposals I intend to bring back later this year will have financial implications for both the Department of Internal Affairs as the regulator and the sector . The costs of regulating Class gambling are recovered from the sector through fees, which are also due to be reviewed in . Legislative Implic ations We are required to consult on any changes to the current regulations, as set out in section of the Gambling Act . There are no legislative implications for this paper , but the consultation will be used to strengthen and refine the proposals to amend the Regulations which I intend to bring back to Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee later in . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
Page of INCONFIDENCE Operational and Policy Updates Contact: Richard Ward
Page of INCONFIDENCE Taumata Arowai Presentation of Secondary Legislation to the House: General exemption for the Department of Conservation On June , Taumata Arowai informed the Department of Conservation of their final decision on their general exemption application. The general exemption covers of their drinking water supplies, which includes huts and campsites that meet prescr ibed criteria such as no mains power. The exemption will take effect from June and is valid for a period of five years. The exemption will be in the Gazette and on Taumata Arowais website along with the decision paper. Taumata Arowai are working with the Department of Conservation to prepare a joint statement on this exemption. They will provide your office with draft communication material ahead of any public statements. General exemptions are secondary legislation. On June , they provided your office the exemption document to be presented to the House of Representatives to enable examination by the Regulations Review Committee within working days of the decision which is July . Taumata Arowai will follow up with your offi ce on this matter. Release of Public Reports Taumata Arowai are preparing for the release of two annual public reports on June . This includes the Drinking Water Regulation Report , the Network Environmental Performance Report and a summary report. A full briefing with the reports and a communications pack will be provided to your office on June . ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Page of ii. access to DIA Information which has been ingested into NZSIS intelligence systems.
Page of . In addition, I am proposing the legislation is amended so that the chief executive of a water services entity would have to set out how the entity will respond to community priority statements. This would occur through an annual consumer engagement stocktake, which is an existing mechanism for the entity to report on consumer and community views. These annual stocktakes would include reporting on matters such as the number of community priority statements that have been submitted, key themes, and actions the entity will take or has taken in response to them. . It is important to note that there is no change to the legislative requirements to give effect to Te Mana o te Wai, or the ability of mana whenua to make Te Mana o te Wai statements under the Water Services Entities Act. The proposed new instrument is distinct from the Te Mana o te Wai statement. . Under the Act, Te Mana o te Wai statements for water services may be provided to a water services entity by ma na whenua whose rohe or takiw includes a water body in the service area , or whose interests in the service area are recognised in a Treaty settlement a ct. Under my new proposals, Mori communities or individuals who are not mana whenua would also be able to provide a community priority statement (for example , a community group who undertake planting or restoration work on a relevant water body ). . Under the Act, all persons performing or exercising duties, functions, or powers under the A ct must give effect to Te Mana o te Wai, to the extent Te Mana o te Wai applies to those duties, functions or powers. Entities must also respond to Te Mana o te Wai statements issued to them by mana whenua. . The requirement to give effect to Te Mana o te Wai is a requirement that has been in place in the resource management system since . Te Mana o te Wai statements are a structured way to enable water services entities to give effect to Te Mana o te Wai, as they make investment decisions in areas like wastewater services where mana whenua have long standing interests. Te Mana o te Wai statements also provide a strong link to enabl e the entities to be work well with their Treaty partners , and to support Treaty settlement obligations that exist at place ( such as Waikato river settlements). . Community priority statements will not have the same legal weighting as Te Mana o te Wai statements, but will be a valuable input that I expect regional representative groups, entity boards and chief executives to consider. . The other difference is that an entity has to include information on actions it plans to take, or has taken, in response to a Te Mana o te Wai statement in its planning and reporting documents (for example, statement of intent or asset management plan). Responses to community priority statements would be included in the annual consumer engagement stocktake. As these statements are provided to regional representative groups, they may take the themes raised into account when setting the strategic direction of the entity . Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
Page of This is re flected in the use of our negative financial policy modifier which results in a one notch
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of Allocation of decision making powers . The Bill does not involve the allocation of decision making powers between the Executive, the courts and tribunals. . The Bill enables the High Court to make orders as part of the foundation information disclosure regime administered by the Commerce Commission, together with civil pecuniary penalties and a criminal offence. . The Bill also enables the High Court to make orders as part of interim economic regulation administered by the Crown monitor, together with civil pecuniary penalties where Watercare does not apply with the charter made by the Crown monitor. Secondary legislation instruments . Regulations are not required to bring the Bill into operation. . The Bill contains provisions : . that enable the Secretary for Local Government to make rules in relation to further detailed content and other requirements relating to water services delivery plans ; . allowing Orders in Council to confirm the territorial authorities that will be subject to the additional information disclosure requirement, which will enable the Commerce Commission to request and use the information for their core role as the future econ omic regulator; . that empower the Commerce Commission to specify additional information that is required, by a determination, from territorial authorities that Orders in Council apply to ; . that enable the Crown monitor to make a charter that imposes obligations on Watercare as part of interim economic regulation. . These instruments are considered secondary legislation and will be subject to consultation and publication requirements. Definition of Ministerdepartment . In accordance with drafting convention by Parliamentary Counsel Office, the Bill includes definitions of a department and Minister consistent with the definitions in the Legislation Act . . A definition of government department is also provided in the Bill as any other public service agenc y that the Secretary for Local Government may consult with when considering the acceptance of a water services delivery plan. Commencement of legislation . The Bill will commence on the day after it receives Royal assent , with the exception of the provisions relating to financial independence of Watercare from Auckland Council . These come into force on a set by Order in Council on recommendation of the Minister of Local Government , with a backstop of July . Parliamentary stages . The Bill is intended to be introduced on May . enkv Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Proactively released by the Minister of Local GovernmentIN CONFIDENCE . I propose for the Bill to be referred the Finance and Expenditure Committee for approximately six weeks. . From there, the Bill will proceed though the remaining House stages between July and August and come into force early in August . Proactive release . Subject to any redactions, I intend to release this paper in accordance with the requirements in Cabinet Office circular CO () . Recommendations . I recommend that the Cabinet Legislation Committee: . note that the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill holds a category priority on the Legislation Programme (to be enacted within the year); . note that the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill is the second Bill as part of Local Water Done Well and contains the preliminary arrangements for councils to transition into financially sustainable water services delivery models, together with arrangements for a financially sustainable Watercare; . note that the Bill will: . require councils to prepare a water services delivery plan within months of the Act coming into force; . contain bespoke Ministerial assistance and intervention powers if councils find it difficult or fail to deliver a water services delivery plan; . require councils to provide other specified information in relation to delivering water services; . contain streamlined consultation and decisionmaking requirements for the establishment or amendment of water services councilcontrolled organisations; and . provide legislative provisions for a financially sustainable Watercare, together with interim economic regulation administered by a Crown monitor; . note that in March , Cabinet delegated the Minister of Finance and Minister of Local Government to make policy decisions on a financially sustainable model for Watercare; . . agree a Crown monitor will be appointed to Watercare from the day of Royal assent; . note the Minister of Local Government will report back to Cabinet in July on the appointment of a Crown monitor; Page of e n kv :: IN CONFIDENCE
Page of The panel considers that the information and analysis summarised in the interim RIS partially meets the quality assurance criteria. The interim RIS accompanies a public consultation document on proposed national wastewater environmental performance standards (wastewater standards). The consultation document seeks views on standards covering specific areas (discharge of wastewater to la nd and water, reuse of biosolids, and monitoring and reporting requirements for wastewater network overflows). The interim RIS sets out analysis that narrows the scope of the wastewater standards to these areas. The interim RIS sets out assumptions and limitations on analysis. This includes having wastewater standards in place as soon as practicable after enactment of the Local Government (Water Services) Bill. This has impacted the assessment of the scope of the standards that can be implemented in the time available. The interim RIS also notes challenges with quantifying the savings from introducing wastewater standards. While efforts have been made to quantify savings, these are based on assumptions and will depend on the details of the wastewater standards. analysis of potential savings that is based on the details of the proposed standards will be important for final policy decisions. The interim RIS partially meets the convincing criteria. It would have been improved with further information on what aspects of the current process for consenting wastewater treatment plants are working effectively and how these have been considered in developing the proposed standards. This information would be useful for final policy decisions. The interim RIS indicates a good level of early consultation on the details of the standards, which will be supported by the planned consultation process. However, the panel considers the interim RIS is only partially consulted because narrowing the scope of the standards to specific areas has not been widely consulted. The interim RIS is clear and complete given the stage in the policy process. . A final Regulatory Impact Statement will be developed and will accompany my proposal to the Cabinet Legislation Committee for approval of the draft Order in Council enacting the standards. Climate Implications of Policy Assessment . The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team has been consulted and confirms that the CIPA requirements do not apply to this policy proposal, as the threshold for significance is not met. Population Implications . The proposals in the discussion document do not have direct population implications. Over time the proposals are likely to lead to cost savings for local government which I expect to be reflected in charges to consumers of water services. Human Rights . The proposals in this paper have no human rights implications. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE
Page of relating to the performance or exercise of its functions from drinking water suppliers, wastewater and stormwater network operators. Pending your decisions on these proposals, we will work with the Authority to ensure the proposed roles and responsibilities for the NEDS are captured in proposed work programme, and proposed levy in your upcoming Cabinet Paper. . Water service providers will also need to recover costs associated with the implementation of the NEDS, in particular the approval of products, and monitoring compliance. Our initial view is that this is already provided for within the current charging and pricing provisions. Transitional arrangements . Our engagement with water sector representatives has noted there would be significant costs for councils, and disruption to industry, as progress is made toward a national standard. While a transition period is required, there appear to be differences between regions about what is needed and the timeframes. Further engagement is required to confirm an appropriate transition approach. . To ensure the pace of the transition appropriately balances the objective to create national consistency against the local circumstances, we are proposing the Authority should be able to make recommendations to you on when the NEDS will take effect. This could be included as part of the Order in Council process, described above. Engagement . These proposals have been shared with the Authority. While they agree that there are synergies with their existing standard setting and register functions, they have noted that this is a new function that will need to be funded and resourced within their work programme. Pending your decisions on these proposals, the Department and the Authority will need to undertake further detail work to identify all the potential costs. . While we have engaged with Crown Infrastructure Partners on standards as part of wider engagement on LWDW matters, we have not engaged on the detail of these proposals. We propose as a next step to engage with them further on the work programme to develop the NEDS, as they Next Steps . We are proposing that the initial set of NEDS developed by the Authority should be based on drafts that were prepared by the NTU. While these drafts will require updating (and potentially further consultation), they are largely complete, the sector has provided initial input, and they have widespread support. This would mean that the initial set of four NEDS would cover: drinking water networks, wastewater gravity networks, wastewater pumped networks and stormwater networks.
Page of INCONFIDENCE Operational and Policy Updates Local Government (Electoral Legislation and Mori Wards and Constituencies) Amendment Bill (the Bill) Over the last week we have provided your office with draft materials for the planned announcements on the Bill (on April ). We are also preparing to provide factual information and respond to questions from the local government sector about the Bill once announcements are made. We will continue to work with your office on this package of materials. We have sent the first tranche of drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office (for the timeline changes and the permanent poll provisions). We are working with government agencies on the remaining policy and technical issues for the transitional provisions so we can finalise the second tranche of drafting instructions. We met with the Legislation Design Advisory Committee on March to d iscuss the policy proposals for the Bill. Contact: Rowan Burns
Page of Impact A nalysis An interim Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS) on the issues proposed for consultation has been completed and is attached in Appendix C. The Department of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Analysis panel (the Panel) has reviewed the interim RIS in accordance with the quality assurance criteria set out in the CabGuide. The Panel considers that the information and analysis in the interi m RIS partially meets the quality assurance criteria. The interim RIS does a reasonable job of identifying the gaps in data, evidence and information to support decisions about whether changes to the regulations are needed and, if so, what changes to the regulations may have the largest positive and least adverse impacts. It will be important to obtain good information through the consultation process to help to fill these gaps, including about costs and benefits and the implementation of the proposed regulatory changes. Climate Implications of Policy Assessment A Climate Implications of Policy Assessment is not required for this proposal as there are no climate implications. Population Implications Pokies gambling is a source of ongoing inequity between Mori and nonMori , and it has disproportionate impacts on a number of population groups. See Appendix D for more detailed information on the population implications of pokies gambling . As discussed earlier, there is also a strong correlation between community deprivation and higher numbers of gaming machines and the amount spent on them. This means gambling harm from pokie machines is experienced by those who are least resilient to impacts such as emotional and psychological distress, damage to relationships, child neglect, debt, family poverty, study and employment issues. The least resilient are less likely to be able to access services, and more likely to have other related health concerns such as those related to alcohol and smoking. There is also a strong correlation between gambling on pokies and family violence, and a link to fraud and other related crimes. Women and children are particularly vulnerable to the strain caused by gambling harm. Little is known regarding the extent to which disabled people experience gambling related harm. Human Rights There are no human rights implications for this paper. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
Page of INCONFIDENCE Wellington Water Supply Likelihood of water shortage The Wellington metropolitan drinking water supply remains at restriction Level . The dashboard released on March shows that the risk of Level restrictions being required has reduced significantly to percent and Level to five percent. The supply is nearin g the end of the modelled risk period, and Wellington Water has indicated that it is that it is likely that tighter water restrictions will be avoided. The supply remains at Level restrictions due to low river levels but is likely to move to Level restrictions in the coming weeks with cooler weather on the way.
Page of INCONFIDENCE Communication on funded plan for getting a multi barrier treatment plan In OctoberNovember , Taumata Arowai sent a letter to public (Central an d local Government) drinking water suppliers without protozoa, bacterial and residual disinfection treatment barriers, asking them to submit a funded plan by June for getting multi barrier treatment in place. They will send a reminder to these supp liers in mid June , also inviting them to get in touch if they have any concerns or considerations ahead of providing a response. Information from Wellington Water Under the monitoring programme, May was the first for Wellington Water to provide Taumata Arowai with essential information to reduce the risk of an acute water shortage next summer. The response provided by Wellington Water did not include all the necessary information and Taumata Arowai have requested a meeting with Wellington Water to discuss. Direction on Woodville water supply The Tararua District Council continues to provide weekly reports to Taumata Arowai on the Woodville reservoirs. No further reports of animals entering the reservoir have been received. Contact: Sara McFall
Page of compliant with DIA record keeping requirements. NZSIS also provide the DIA Register of Use to DIA on an annual basis for additional auditing against DIA system records. . Any misuse of the DIA system, including inappropriate access to DIA Information by an NZSIS employee, will be reported to DIA and the Inspector General of Intelligence Services (IGIS) in line with NZSIS processes for compliance incidents and will also be treated as a security breach. Any notifiable privacy breach will also be notified to the Privacy Commissioner. . Automated audit logs: All access to DIA Information by NZSIS staff is monitored by the DIA. Audit data is used to support security and compliance auditing. Disclosure of DIA Information to other parties . Authorised Officers must not access DIA Information on behalf of other agencies (with the exception for being when conducting assumed identity function noted at paras above on behalf of GCSB), except as part of a statutory NZSIS function (and this may include the provision of protective security service, advice and assistance such as when conducting preemployment checks on behalf of the New Zealand Intelligence Community (NZIC)). . DIA Information may be provided to other New Zealand government departments or overseas intelligence partners by virtue of it being incorporated into an intelligence report. Any such information sharing will be conducted in accordance with the DAA, as well as Ministerial Policy Statements and NZSIS policies. In addition when considering whether to share information, NZSIS will give due consideration to the Crowns relationships with Mori under the Treaty of Waitangi. Retention deletion of DIA Information . NZSIS will fulfil its statutory obligations and act in accordance with the Public Records Act , any Ministerial Policy Statement regarding the retention or destruction of information and as those obligations are set out in internal policy. Retaining DIA Information . Information which has been retrieved from DIA under the DAA and is required to support the statutory functions of NZSIS is ingested into NZSISs systems (for example its intelligence analysis system) and managed as a business record of NZSIS activities and subject to any Public Records Act requirements. Disposing of Information . All NZSIS business records are subject to an agreed disposal authority issued by the Chief Archivist. Part : Privacy risks and mitigations
Page of . It is my intention that the two instruments are distinct and complementary. It is important that the mana of Te Mana o te Wai statements is protected and upheld in the legislative framework for these reforms, and the way in which the future entities and regulators conduct their business. Community priority statements have been designed to be distinct from Te Mana o te Wai statements , and are a separate mechanism. The distinction between the two mechanisms recognises the special taonga of water for mana whenua. Confirming details for a locally led, voluntary merger process . As indicated in my previous paper, I consider it would be desirable to provide for a legislative process that allows water services entit ies to merge. This recognises that, in time, councils and communities in higher cost regions may wish to see the benefits of further amalgamation, in terms of greater investment, increased efficiencies and service standards , and lower charges. . I expect this to be a locally led process , with merger proposals formally initiated by regional representative groups . They could involve two or more existing entities merging to form a new entity. Mergers would proceed if agreed by per cent of the regional representative group s (the threshold for their other decisions under the Act) . As described below, these decisions would be informed by the details contained in a merger proposal, and community consultation. . The legislation would need to include a few procedural requirements relating to the merger process, to ensure there is clarity to the entities, their customers and staff, council owners, mana whenua, and financial institutions about what is involved. . I am proposing there would be several steps in this process , involving the following components: . Step : Internal investigation s by a n entity of the merits of a merger . This would include informal discussions with the other entity (or entities) about this proposal, and reaching an agreement on whether to proceed to the next step. These initial investigations could be prompted by various s ources including suggestions by an entity board, its owners, andor consumers. It could also be suggested by one of the statutory assistance and intervention bodies under the Water Services Entities Act (Crown Observer, Crown Review Team, or Crown Manage r) or through the system wide review processes in that Act. . Step : Formal initiation of a merger proposal. This would be done by agreement by the regional representative group. It would involve formal identification of the other entity (or entities) that would be party to the merger and an obligation on that entity to consider the proposal. It would also include notifying the responsible Minister and monitor (under the Water Services Entities Act) of the proposal; public notification; and notifying any other entities with which there are service agreements in place. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
Page of We consider that there could be some upside to our fiscal assessment , but no t enough to
Page Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Page of Use of External Resources . External resources were used to support the development of the proposals in the discussion document and RIS. This included specialist technical expertise from territorial authorities, regional councils, and professional industry organisations to develop ro bust and evidence based proposals tailored to council owned infrastructure, such as water engineering, environmental science and resource management expertise. The proposals were peer reviewed by a technical review group that included territorial authority infrastructure owners, regional council staff, and professional industry specialists in these areas. . External support was provided in relation to the regulatory impact of the proposals, including the estimation of cost savings, time efficiencies, and development of case examples relating to council wastewater treatment plant consenting, and to provide contractor support to the Water Services Authoritys work programme. Consultation . The following agencies were consulted on a draft of this paper: Department of Conservation, Department of Corrections, Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, Ministry for Primary Industries, Ministry for the Environment, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employme nt, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Housing and Urban Development, Ministry of Transport, National Emergency Management Agency, New Zealand Defence Force, Te Arawhiti Office for Mori Crown Relations, Te Puni Kkiri Ministry of Mori Development, and the Treasury. Communications . If Cabinet agrees to the release of the discussion document associated with this paper, the Authority will manage consultation on the discussion document, working with the Department of Internal Affairs. Proactive release . I propose to proactively release this Cabinet paper to support consultation on the discussion document. The Department of Internal Affairs will publish the Cabinet paper on its website. Recommendations . The Minister of Local Government recommends that the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee: . note that the Water Services Authority Taumata Arowai is developing proposals for New Zealands first national wastewater environmental performance standards under the Water Services Act ; . note that upgrading public wastewater treatment plants is one of the greatest infrastructure challenges facing New Zealand, and the proposals in the discussion document are designed to address this by reducing regulatory burden; delivering much greater standar disation of treatment systems and related infrastructure; enabling cost efficiencies in the design, build and operation of wastewater systems; and providing councils with greater certainty of costs through standardisation and longer term consent durati ons; Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE
Page of Recommendations . We recommend that you: a) note that Cabinet agreed that the National Engineering Design Standards should a mandatory requirement for water services providers; b) note that Cabinet has also authorised you to issue drafting instructions to give legislative effect to decisions in relation to the National Engineering Design Standards; c) note the recommendations below set out the policy and legislative approach to support drafting instructions to implement mandatory National Engineering Design Standards. d) agree that National Engineering Design Standards should apply to publicly owned drinking water, wastewater and stormwater water services network infrastructure; YesNo
Page of Consultation The Ministry of Health was closely consulted with and is supportive of these proposals. The following government agencies were also consulted: The Treasury, Inland Revenue Department, the Ministry of Justice, Te Puni Kkiri, the Ministry for Pacific Peoples, the Ministry for Women, the Ministry for Cultu re and Heritage, Ministry of Social Development, Ministry of Youth Development, Office of the Privacy Commissioner, Office of Disability Issues, Ministry of Ethnic Communities, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, and the New Zealand Police. Te Hiringa HauoraHealth Promotion Agency and Sport New Zealand were also consulted. The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet was informed. Communications Engagement with stakeholders will be conducted online using social media and targeted email s announcing the consultation period and distributing the discussion document. Further engagement will be conducted online or in person via hui and other smaller, dedicated engagements. A press release will be issued when consultation commences and details about how to engage in the consultation will be posted on the Department of Internal Affairs website and through regular communication channels with stakeholders, such as newsletters. Proactive Release I propose to proactively release this Cabinet paper within the prescribed days of these decisions being confirmed by Cabinet. Recommendations The Minister of Internal Affairs recommends the Committee: note that Class gambling (pokies in pubs, clubs and TAB NZ venues ) is the most harmful form of land based gambling in New Zealand, with approximately one in five pokie players being considered at risk gamblers and nearly billion lost on pokie machines per annum ; note that the current Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Regulations have some gaps that could easily be addressed to do more to reduce harmful pokies gambling and improve the enforceability of the regulations ; note that the Gambling Act contemplates a substantially more detailed approach to regulation of Class gambling and we have an opportunity to develop a much stronger harm reduction approach; note the attached discussion document , Reducing Pokies Harm , which outlines some regulatory proposals to better reduce harm in three key areas (the gam bling venue, the gaming machine, and compliance tools); Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
Page of INCONFIDENCE Wellington Water Supply This will be the final regular update on the current water shortage risk in the Wellington region . Any further u pdates on work to address the risk in future summers will be provided as required. Likelihood of water shortage The Wellington metropolitan drinking water supply remains at restriction Level with river levels taking time to refill, and the buffer currently at percent . The dashboard released on March shows that the risk of Level restrictions remains at percent , and Level at percent. Taumata Arowai actions We requested further information from Wellington Water on their pla n to avert a water shortage during the summer of , and expect to receive this by March . Contact: Sara McFall
Page of INCONFIDENCE Operational and Policy Updates Local Government (Electoral Legislation and Mori War ds and Mori Constituencies) Amendment Bill (the Bill) We provided the Departmental Report to the Justice Committee (the Committee) on June and presented the report to the Committee on June . The Committee accepted all the recommendations in the Departmental r eport and the Parliamentary Counsel Office is working on a revision tracked version of the Bill. The revision tracked version of the Bill will be considered by the committee on June along with the committee report on the Bill. The Committee will t hen deliberate on the commentary on the report on June . The Bill is due to be reported back to the House by June . Contact: Rowan Burns
Page of . The table below outlines the privacy risks associated with NZSISs access to DIA Information and the steps that NZSIS will take to mitigate these risks. The residual risk rating assigned to each risk is assessed using the NZIC Joint Risk Management Framework outlined in Annex .
Page of . Step : Development of a merger p roposal . The entities involved would work together to prepare a merger proposal . This would include all of the critical details around the proposed future new entity such as the case for merging, associated costs, benefits, and risks, and the current picture within each entity . The draft merger proposal would be shared with the responsible Minister , monitor, and regulators for feedback. This would enable them to consider the potential benefits and risks of the proposed merger, and any system wide implications. This would also include consideration by the Commerce Commission in accordance with the business acquisition provisions in Parts and of the Commerce Act , as appropriate . . Step : Voting by the relevant regional representative groups . Merg ers would proceed if agreed by per cent of each regional representative group. These decision s would be informed by the details in the merger proposal , as well the consultation and engagement with communities that members of these groups , or the entities themselves, have undertaken. Requirements relating to community consultation and decision making in the Local Government Act would likely apply to voting decisions by individual council members on the groups representing the views of each territorial authority owner . . Step : Impl ementation of the merger. If there is a decision to proceed with the merge r, a detailed implementation plan and proposed new entity constitution would be prepared . The implementation plan would include the change management strategy for the new merged entity, transition steps (outlining transfer of staff, financial reconciliatio n, accountability documents and constitution development), a strategy to ensure continuity of services, risk mitigation, and governance arrangements . . Step : Order in Council . Th e names and service areas of each water services entity are specified in Schedule of the Water Services Entities Act. There would need to be an Order in Council process for amending this Act to reflect the creation of a new entity through the merger process. A new entity constitution would also need to be made through regulations. . I am also proposing that the legislation provides for the Crown inter vention bodies (Crown Observer, Crown Review Team, or Crown Manager) to play a stronger role in the entity merger process . This would occur in limited situations, where an entity is under significant financial stress, experiencing irreparable governance difficulties, or not able to deliver minimum levels of service to consumers , and a merger is identified as a potential solution by a Crown intervention body . I understand from the Minister of Finance and the Treasury that this is an important risk management strategy, which seeks to improve services to consumers where an entity is unable to deliver services t o a minimum standard, and seeks to reduce the Crown fiscal risks.
Page of We believe debt bur den a ssess men t wo uld remain . We forecast total tax
Page turn for the Suffrage Petition Invitation to the Minister
Paige Harris Birth Registration Bill: Private Bill Process
Palmerston North City Council
Palmerston North model WICS report
Palmerston North slide pack WICS report
Papers Past contains more than one million pages of digitised New Zealand newspapers and periodicals. The collection covers the years to and includes publications from all regions of New Zealand.
Parents urged to be aware of harmful content on social media
Parliamentary process for addressing Declarations of Inconsistency
Parnerships and Commissions
Part A Inquiry reconvenes May
Part B Game features . Part B considers how gambling harm can be reduced at its source, by reducing harm associated with the gaming machine experience. . The proposals selected for Part B of the discussion document may help improve at risk users ability to control their gambling, reduce spending and time spent gambling. . The proposals are based on (a) information to address the fallacy of having any control in the game, and (b) removing some of the key reinforcing features that keep people gambling. Option s Description and discussion . Pokies machines could be required to display more information (such as: return to player; volatility of games; harm minimisation messages). RTP (return to player) ratio of games The r atio refers to the level of loss a player should expect on average when playing a particular game. Most games in NZ are set at the higher end of the to requirements (e.g. near , or . lost for a single game bet of ). Providing information on this aspect of the game is not likely to assist players when choosing between different games or machines. However, being informed (and reminded) of the level of loss they should expect when they gamble on a machine could assist with better decision making, for those that struggle to control thei r gambling. Volatility of games The likelihood of winning as well as the likely size of wins. A highly volatile game gives a low chance of winning, but wins are likely to be large. A low volatility game gives a high chance of winning, but wins are likely to be low. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Statement Being informed about volatility of games may help at risk players make decisions, especially those who are chasing losses, and assessing the likelihood of regaining those losses. Harm minimisation messaging Currently gaming machines are required to periodically provide information about how much money has been gambled and how much has been lost. This provides potentially useful information to the person using the machine, but also a break. Stronger messaging suggesting a break (or even offering to stop the game for a period) could be used. Messaging could also be made more prominent. . Display losses as losses Stop partial losses being presented as wins . Th at is, a user might gamble . on a single game and have a return of . but this will usually be presented as a . win, even though the user has lost . Providing information about the amount that was lost, instead of presenting the amount of the users own money they didnt lose on a gamble as a win, could help at risk users understand and better assess their chances of winning or losing. . Prevent the ability to make multi row bets Multiple lines operate together to disguise losses as wins. Preventing multi row bets could reduce harm by not disguising losses and might make EGMs less attractive and reduce the speed at which money is spent . . Reduce maximum stake of . The current maximum stake of . is relatively low compared to s ome other jurisdictions but c onsideration could be given to reducing the maximum stake for instance , ., or . This would likely reduce the level of harmful gambling but could impact on people who currently gamble without harm, making gaming machines gambling less attractive for that group. . Prevent or limit the number of free spins Research shows that gamblers prefer to play EGMs with free spi ns. Free spins have been associated with loss of control over time and money spent gambling. Free spins have also been explicitly linked to the notion of getting value for money which was attractive both to social and problem gamblers. Preventing or limiting free spins may reduce the attractiveness of the EGM to problem gamblers, as well as others. . Maximum number of games in an hour Pokies machines have a maximum number of games that could be pl ayed in an hour . This could lead players to take a break from playing. . More information and restrictions on jackpots Pokie machines could be required to provide information about how much of any stake is being used for jackpots . Maximum jackpot size could be reduced. Signage showing jackpot levels could be prohibited. . Some of our initial thinking on the Part B proposals, below, has been provided in the discussion document for validation or feedback : These options could lead to reductions in timemoney spent gambling andor breaks in play, so gamblers get out of the gambling zone. Some changes could take longer to implement depending on the complexity (e.g. whether both current and new machines must comply with the new regulations, or just new machines). Any software changes would need to consider and be consistent with international gaming machine standards. Cost is dependent on specific changes. Changes to machine features will incur software costs which will vary depending on the option and rollout requirements. Pokie machines are becoming increasingly addictive due to technological developments and game features will become ever more sophisticated. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Statement Changes to game features will have an impact on reducing gambling harm, but the size of the impact is uncertain. Some people engage with technical information such as odds volatility more than others.
Part C Enforcement . Part C considers how society and venue compliance with gambling harm rules can be increased through lower level enforcement . . The proposals selected for Part C of the discussion document are about providing the regulator with instant enforcement tool s. This should help to ensure rules are better adhered to by societies and venues. Options Description and discussion . Create offences and infringement fees for existing requirements in the regulations Infringements are a low co st, simple way of punishing minor offending without, in most cases, recourse to the courts. Several of the current regulations have a significant impact on harm minimisation, but do not have an infringement fee attached to them. Offence for societiesvenue operatorsvenue managers of
Particular function, duty, or power being, or to be, performed or
Particular purpose or purposes for which the information may be
Parties is the most up to information available at the time it is provided.
Parties may dispense with the notice requirements under section in the following circumstances :
Parties may share personal information about an identifiable individual under this Agreement.
Parties to this Agreement may take subsequent actions based on the update of records relating to
Partner Specific Customer Identifier All excluding All excluding
Partner Specific In relation to an individual, the unique identifier used between DIA or
Partnering for smart towns
Partners Products has accountability for the design of life events products and information sharing services including legislative change, product pricing and government services bundling opportunities (such as Smartstart), and the delivery and management of information sharing products and services. They take a focused and consistent approach to product design and the management of partnering relationships and commercial arrangements.
Partnership As defined in sections () of the Partnership Law Act .
Partnerships Partnerships Act .
Partnerships and Commissions
Partnerships, and Registered New Zealand Companies
Party A Named Party or an Added Party.
Party that the statutory basis under which that Party provides information for this
Passionate about helping make New Zealand a better place
Passport (Fees) Regulations
Passport Production Update
Passport Production update
Passport and Citizenship by Grant
Passport delivery address
Passport fees to increase from May
Passport if they want to travel outside New Zealand.
Passport operational procedures and processes evolve to keep pace with changing context and legislation. For example, the transition from the five to tenyear validity period, and the development of more online services.
Passport processing update
Passport processing update due September
Passport system improvements
Passports Uruwhenua Aotearoa
Passports Processing Update May
Passports Processing Update May
Passports Processing Update May
Passports Processing Update May
Passports Processing Update May
Passports also ensure systems and technology are kept up to through regular intrusion testing, security monitoring, patching and maintenance, and the regular update of public keys.
Passports production update
Passports production update August
Passports rank number on Kiwis Count survey
Passports; Births, Deaths, Marriages
Paul James Chief Executive
Paul has extensive experience in strategic policy development, leading change, and working collaboratively and effectively across government and communities. He was appointed Secretary for Internal Affairs and Chief Executive for Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs in . Paul also holds the roles of Secretary for Local Government and Government Chief Digital Officer (GCDO). The GCDO is responsible for digital leadership across government agencies.
Paul was previously the Chief Executive for Manat Taonga Ministry for Culture and Heritage. Prior to joining Manat Taonga in , Paul was the Deputy Chief Executive, Policy, Regulatory and Ethnic Affairs at Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs from . As the Director of Office of Treaty Settlements (from to ), Paul oversaw a significant increase in the rate of settlements achieved.
Paying for water services . I recommend that residential property owners continue to be liable for water services payments, including for both fixed costs (costs of connection and maintaining the service) and consumption related charges. Currently, property owners pay rates, which include a component for three waters services. In Auckland, Watercare charges property owners for its drinking and wastewater services. . In situations where residential properties are occupied by tenants, Section of the Residential Tenancies Act provi des for the landlord to be responsible for all outgoings that are incurred whether the property is occupied, such as general rates. The same section also provides that the tenant is responsible for all outgoings that are exclusively attributable to the ten ants occupation of the premises, including charges for water provided to the premises based on consumption. . I am not recommending changes to the Residential Tenancies Act . I consider it appropriate that landlords should pay the fixed costs of water s ervices. These are a cost of property ownership that, in turn, may be reflected in the level of rent charged. Landlords should be able to pass on any variable cost directly to tenants. . I recommend that the property owner should be liable to the water services entity for the entire water bill, including consumption charges. This reflects the status quo in places that currently have volumetric water charging. My reasons for this approach are that: . requiring charges to be split between landlords and tenants would result in complex billing arrangements, and increased administrative costs that would be passed on to all consumers; Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . water is an essential service and water servic es entities will not be allowed to disconnect service for non payment. In general, property owners are good at paying their rates, with only one to two percent of rates bills unpaid. Tenants will have varying abilities to pay, and invoicing them directly f or consumption charges would result in higher collection and bad debt costs for the entities; . other things being equal, property owning landlords should realise an equivalent reduction in their rates bill when water bills are split out from rates (though t his is dependent on decisions by territorial authorities); . landlords can pass waters services costs through to tenants via rents. . For commercial properties, there are a variety of arrangements depending on lease terms. I propose replicating the relevant provisions of the Local Government (Rating) Act (with suitable modification), which outline when lessees are liable for rates instead of the property owner. Trade waste charges are billed to the business generating the waste rather than the property owners. . I also propose replicating the relevant provisions of the Local Government (Rating) Act (with suitable modification), which outline who is responsible for paying rates for Mori freehold land.
Peace Disarmament Education Trust
Peace and Disarmament Education Trust
Pending prosecution no deterrent to offending
People and businesses benefit from offering and using accredited digital identity services.
People and businesses benefit from setting up and using accredited digital identity services.
People are important to what we do and the culture we create. This principle is about people, both internal and external, being important.
People can easily access the services and information they need
People can see their personal information if they want to Under the Privacy Act , an individual has the right to seek confirmation from both DIA and NZSIS about whether personal information is held about them.
People from all communities deserve the opportunity to participate in the digital identity ecosystem Both government and private sector assume this risk. The government will mitigate this risk by ensuring th e principle of inclusion (below) will be enshrined in the Trust Framework Bill as one of the guiding principles for the Trust Framework and trusted digital identity ecosystem. Inclusive Everyone has the right to participate in the digital identity ecosystem. Key measures The digital identity ecosystem can reflect the needs and requirements of a broad range of stakeholders. Barriers to participation in the digital identity ecosystemwhether they be social, financial, or technicalare minimised, without compromising security or privacy. Everyone is able to use digital identity services without risk of discrimination or exclusion. This risk will remain a realistic po ssibility . The Framework will not raise any regulatory barriers to inclusion but while it will set the standards that private sector entities will adhere to, it will be up to private sector entities to develop, invest in and offer digital identity services .
People leader a manager or team leader with direct reports
People will have a choice about whether to use digital identity services and can continue to use physical documents if they prefer.
People with other interests are not represented, as the Working Group is only recommending changes to operational processes under current legislation. Only transgender and intersex people, and related professionals or family members are subject to the current process to change registered sex. If, and when, any changes are proposed to legislation, the wider community will have a chance to comment.
Peoples sense of belonging and collective memory builds an inclusive New Zealand
People, businesses and other organisations can use their information in a digital way to represent themselves in the digital world.
Peoples ability to access services and information affects their lives and wellbeing.
Peoples access to government is enhanced
Peoples identity can be easily and securely verified
Peoples sense of belonging also comes from a sense of cohesion in the community and connection to the local community. The Hpai Hapori team provides community development and advisory services to support hap, iwi, communities and community organisations achieve their aspirations. This includes providing financial support through grants and connection to resources, services, other organisations, local government and central government.
Peoples sense of belonging and collective memory builds an inclusive New Zealand
Peoples sense of belonging and collective memory builds an inclusive New Zealand Collective memory is enhanced by New Zealands documentary heritage Thuhu: Preserving the Nations Memory programme Thuhu: Preserving the Nations Memory includes the development of a new building in Wellington for Archives New Zealand. This will preserve and make accessible the record of government in fitforpurpose, modern and resilient facilities that will ensure the best standards of care. The new Archives building will physically connect to the National Library via an airbridge, creating a national recorded and documentary heritage campus. We are also planning for a new regional shared storage facility in TaitokoLevin for National Library, Archives NZ and Ng Taonga Sound Vision (subject to funding decisions) to provide additional storage capacity for the holdings and collections of these institutions. The recorded and documentary heritage campus creates the opportunity for the three heritage institutions to colocate, partner and collaborate. This will benefit our diverse audiences and provide improved public services through access to the collections in one location. Underpinning the development of these key infrastructure projects, we will continue to strengthen and support our ongoing relationships with mana whenua iwi across the Thuhu work programme as we recognise the significant role and place of tngata whenua. Utaina AudioVisual preservation programme Utaina is the collaborative programme between Archives New Zealand, the National Library and Ng Taonga Sound Vision to preserve the audiovisual (AV) heritage content of significance to the nation. Magnetic media used to capture defining moments in our nations history and experiences of New Zealanders through the decades is ageing and the equipment required to play it back is now rare or obsolete. Utaina will transfer AV taonga from media such as open reel tape, VHS video tapes and compact cassettes into digital formats that both support longterm preservation and ofer greater opportunities for access by New Zealanders. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS A culture of reading enhances literacy and knowledge Developing literate citizens Research shows that reading can transform peoples lives. Three national reading initiatives are underway at the National Library to grow a nation of readers. The Communities of Readers initiative Ptoi Rito was made possible with support from the Te Puna Foundation. Ptoi Rito is working with four to six communities where there are significant inequities in access to books, libraries and reading role models. Communityled, the goal is to weave a whriki of support to inspire a love of reading among tamariki and rangatahi. The newly established Te Awhi Rito New Zealand Reading Ambassador is a national role model advocating the importance of reading in the lives of young New Zealanders. Te Puna Foundation and other partners provided substantial support to make this role possible. The National Library also leads the He P Rito initiative, a crosssectoral national conversation on the value and impact of reading. A series of opportunities is being explored with the intention to build understanding and a shared national agenda. Services to Schools uplif All New Zealand children and young people should have equal opportunities to resources and knowledge that support their learning. The National Librarys Services to Schools is undertaking a significant programme of work to improve equitable access to library services and learning resources for school communities and young people with greatest need. To achieve more equitable access, the National Library is improving the reach and impact of services to school communities and developing new ways of supporting schools and kura in areas of high priority and need. This includes an increase in resources and services to support Mori learners and ensuring that services are responsive to curriculum changes and literacy priorities. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
Peoples sense of belonging and collective memory builds an inclusive New Zealand The Department is responsible for coordinating arrangements for oficial visitors to New Zealand who are accorded Guest of Government or Guest of Parliament status, including visits by members of the Royal Family. In this role we work closely with the Ministry of Foreign Afairs and Trade and the Ofice of the Clerk of the House of Representatives. We also work closely with a variety of other agencies and groups, including the Prime Ministers Ofice, the Ministry for Culture and Heritage, and the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet on arrangements for national commemorative events or tragedies. Examples of this are the annual ANZAC Day national services; the second anniversary remembrance service for the March terror attacks; and the state memorial services for HRH Prince Philip. This work brings the nation together and helps us to commemorate significant events and grieve as one when appropriate. These events become part of the fabric of Aotearoas stories. We work with Ng Taonga Sound Vision and the Ministry for Culture and Heritage on the safe, secure storage of documentary heritage, including the provision of specialist storage repositories and equipment. This includes providing space in the National Library for Ng Taonga Sound Vision to operate from and collaboration within the Thuhu programme that will develop a national recorded and documentary heritage campus in Thorndon. New Zealand is a wellfunctioning democracy, across central and local government The Government Chief Digital Oficer established the Digital Government Partnership, alongside the Government Chief Data Steward (the Government Statistician) to bring agencies together to support the goal of a coherent allofgovernment digital system. The partnership provides leadership across the public sector and brings together experts across four working groups to advance implementation of the Governments ICT Strategy. The Digital Council for Aotearoa provides independent advice to Government on maximising the benefits of digital and datadriven technologies to increase equality and inclusivity, wellbeing and community resilience. We provide secretariat services to the Digital Council, including completion of research reports and advice to Ministers. The research theme for is digital inclusion. As the Crown agency primarily responsible for local government, we work closely with local authorities across New Zealand and the Local Government Commission. Archives New Zealand works closely with public ofices across the state sector to ensure that a full and accurate public record is created and maintained. We work closely with other agencies to ensure that our financial and corporate services meet expectations and comply with relevant legislation. This includes the central agencies such as the Treasury, the Public Service Commission and the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, and oversight agencies such as Audit New Zealand and the Ofice of the AuditorGeneral. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
Peoples sense of belonging helps build cohesion and connection in communities
Performance measures status
Performance, Taumata Arowai Suggested
Personal Entitlement or Any entitlement, right, benefit, Authorisation, tangible item, or other
Personal information Information about an identifiable individual; and includes information
Personal information shall not be collected by an agency (a) by unlawful means; or (b) by means that, in the circumstances of the case (i) are unfair; or (ii) intrude to an unreasonable extent upon the personal affairs of the individual concerned.
Personal information shared under this Agreement can be used for the following purposes :
Personal information that can be shared under this Agreement falls into the general
Personal information that can be shared under this Agreement falls into the general categories
Personal information that is not recorded on a register held and maintained
Personal telephone number,
Peter Frawley Policy Lead, Legislative Drafting Business, Policy Inland Revenue
Petition of Reality Check Radio;
Phase of the Royal Commission CAB MIN refers . Phase of t he
Phase One: Proposals for a refreshed Cloud First Policy
Phase One: Proposals for refreshing the Cloud First Policy
Phase One: The proposals for refreshing the Cloud First Policy
Phase Two will need to be funded through reprioritisation of affected agencies
Phase Two: additional interventions to realise the outcomes of the
Phase Two: additional interventions to realise the outcomes of the Cloud First
Phase Two: additional interventions to realise the outcomes of the Cloud First Policy
Phased Implementation: While the strategy refresh itself might take several months, we anticipate that rolling out initiatives and embedding cultural changes would be an ongoing process spanning the lifetime of the strategy.
Philippa Drury
Philippa Drury
Photo from whanganui.govt.nz Currently working in New Zealand Helpful for reaching diverse communities. Reduces barriers by taking place in a central open space. Can be difficult to pick out the parts of the conversation relevant to council business. Can be easy to miss the conversational gems. Fun Forges the community feeling and better understanding and agreement within the communities
PhotoVideo Consent Form and Editorial Style Guide
Pilots The Ministry proposes to fund a range of new pilot service models that address inequity related public health and intervention services. Examples include cultural modelsservices, language support, online services, public health messaging and access for isolated communities. Pilot costs are based on current full time equivalent (FTE) personnel costs at about , per year. The Ministry plans between three and five pilots of various sizes each year in the second and thi rd years, but a smaller number in the first year (), to allow for phasing. The Ministry does not currently know the exact size or number of these pilots; therefore, a more precise costing is not practical. The Ministry will meet the pilot evaluation costs from the research evaluation allocation. Technology The Ministry proposes to allocate a fund to support technologyrelated innovation. There is a strong consensus from both industry and service providers that the strategy should provide for greater use of technolog y to mitigate and manage gambling harm. The Ministry could use this fund to build on an established activity such as potentially funding a database with facial recognition capabilities, or trialling venue management modules or to develop online support tools or pilot tools to monitor and manage or limit player exposure to gambling harm. The Ministry will evaluate all trials. Peer support Peer support is a model that has been proven overseas and in New Zealand for other forms of addiction ( peer in this context means a person who has had a similar kind of relevant experience to other people that has had a significant impact on their lives) . The formal evidence for peer support in mental health and addiction is growing, and shows high satisfaction from consumers of services. Outcomes from peer services are as good as if not better than conventional services, yet there currently are no funded peer support positions within gambling harm services. The Ministry proposes to encourage training for and trial the introduction of peer services during this levy period. Costs are based on providing support for workforce developmenttraining in each year, plus funding additional peer support positions in years two and three . The Ministry has taken into account a range of factors, including current FTE costs and average peer support workers salaries and training costs. There are a few ways in which the Ministry could support this aim; however, its preference is for a limited number of workforce development scholarships. The Ministry has not yet determined the workforce development component costs for this, as more investigation into potential demand and timing is necessary. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
Place of birth Any Party RegistrarGeneral
Plan for business case and approvals of corporate services and operational technology (nonSoR) ICT for water services entities.
Planning Technical Working Group
Planning Technical Working Group Meeting March
Planning Technical Working Group Meeting April
Planning Technical Working Group Meeting May
Planning Technical Working Group Meeting May
Planning Technical Working Group Meeting June
Planning Technical Working Group Meeting June
Planning Technical Working Group Meeting August
Planning Technical Working Group Final report and recommendations to the Department of Internal Affairs
Planning Technical Working Group Terms of Reference
Planning a Way Forward for New Zealands Digital Public Infrastructure
Planning and accountability for local government water service providers further details on proposal
Planning for recovery begins in the very early stages of an emergency response, and this will form part of the Inquirys investigations. However, the recovery is anticipated to continue in the medium to long term beyond the Inquirys timeframes.
Planning, Design and Assurance
Planning, reporting, and financial management
Please be aware of planned outages to our online passport and citizenship by grant application services from January to March .
Please be aware that there will be planned outages to our passport service while we complete this significant upgrade. Our online citizenship by grant application service will also be unavailable during these times. This means customers will be unable to apply for a passport or for citizenship by grant online and we are also unable to process applications during the following times. Please note we have also included times for our customers in the UK and Australia.
Please check that all line items on the purchase order and invoice match exactly to what was delivered including unit of measure, quantity and unit price.
Please click on the link below to view the Local Dashboard. Use the drop down menu to view data for your local council:
Please contact: translatedia.govt.nz or TRANSLATE ( ) or ()
Please direct any complaints about our regulatory practices to the AMLCFT Group. You will receive an acknowledgement within working days and we aim to resolve complaints within working days.
Please direct any complaints about our regulatory practices to the Digital Messaging and Systems team. You will receive an acknowledgement within working days and we aim to resolve complaints within working days.
Please direct any complaints about our regulatory practices to the digital safety team. You will receive an acknowledgement within working days and we aim to resolve complaints within working days.
Please email in the first instance, unless your request is urgent during evenings and weekends.
Please ensure that all invoices include:
Please follow guidelines for visiting
Please make sure to read these and feel free to ask us if theres anything youre unsure about.
Please make sure you include the purchase order number and the name of our staff member on your invoice.
Please note, the Department does not investigate unsolicited phone calls, postal mail or popup messages. If you have received an unsolicited phone call, please contact your telephone service provider. If you have been a victim of an online crime, please report the matter to the Police dialling (nonemergency reporting) in the first instance.
Please send a scan copy of your documents to our email address
Please visit our bookings page or call to book an appointment.
Pokies, also known as electronic gaming machines (EGMs) are one of the most harmful forms of gambling. They are the leading reason that people seek gamblingrelated help in Aotearoa.
Police Approved Information Sharing Agreement
Police acknowledge sentencing of James Nielsen
Police acknowledge sentencing of Stewart Permain
Police and Registrar General AISA
Policies, Annual Reports and other Official Information on our website
Policies, Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and user agreements all NZSIS employees with access to DIA Information must comply with the access and usage requirements outlined in NZSIS Policy and SOP documentation, which reflect the requirements of the DIA Direct Access Agreement all NZSIS employees must read and sign an Information Technology and Information Systems Agreement for General Users all NZSIS employees must read and sign the NZSIS Code of Conduct, which outlines requirements for access to sensitive information contained within NZSIS systems failure to comply with NZSIS policies, SOPs, user agreements andor the NZSIS code of conduct will be investigated and may result in disciplinary action.
Policy In November , Cabinet agreed t hat legislation be prepared lowering the voting age from to years for parlia mentary and local el ections CAB MIN.
Policy Briefing: Intervention Options for the Westland District Council
Policy Briefings: Related to the Lake Taup Navigational Safety Amendment Bylaw
Policy Briefings: Related to the appointment of a Crown Observer to the Westland District Council
Policy Group Current structure
Policy advice, legislation, ministerial services and communications until . million . The most critical cost pressure, which is unavoidable without significant impact on Cabinets agreed reform timelines, relates to the policy and legislative work programme. Since the inception of the Three Waters Review, the reform programme has operated on time limited funding. Currently agreed funding declines from . million in , to . million in , and . million in and outyears. . A significant policy and legislative programme is required to address important details necessary to enable water services entities to be operational by July . Progressing the reform programme requires a dedicated team of policy specialists and legislation experts, as well as access to specialist finance, accounting and legal expertise. . Demand is also expected to remain high for ministerial services and other related activities throughout the transition period, to support the high volume of ministerial correspondence, parliamentary questions, Official Information Act requests, media enquiries, and the administration of the various non departmental support packages. . In addition, there is significant demand to support the provision of public information about the reform proposals. Both Local Government New Zealand and the Working Group on Representation, Governance and Accountability have asked the Government to give fresh consideration to its ongoing communications and engagement with the public to build understanding of both the direct impact and the broader context of the Three Water s reforms. . The estimated cost pressure associated with policy, ministerial services and communications is estimated to be . million over the fiscal forecast period. The Minister of Finance supports funding . million of this cost pressure from the Three Waters Infrastructure Investment and Service Delivery Reform Programme tagged contingency, to support the programme until and the delivery of a public information campaign.
Policy and Related Services
Policy and Related Services (.)
Policy and Related Services (.)
Policy and Related Services (.)
Policy and Related Services (.)
Policy and Related Services MCA (.)
Policy and Rlated Services MCA (.)
Policy and terms of reference
Policy areas we provide advice on to Ministers, with links to further information.
Policy briefing: Further advice regarding proposed Films, Videos and Publications Classification Amendment Bill December
Policy briefing: Local Government Electoral Legislation Bill Committee of the Whole House
Policy briefing: Proposals to implement takedown notice provisions
Policy briefing: Update on the review of content regulation in Aotearoa New Zealand
Policy briefing: changes to New Zealands classification regime The Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Subscription Video onDemand) Amendment Bill December
Policy decisions for Local Government System Improvements Proposal
Policy decisions on Fire and Emergencys transitional levy
Policy has become disjointed, and the core focus lost. The Policy does not
Policy is silent on the Crowns Te Tiriti obligations and questions around Mori data
Policy owner: Legal Services, Strategy and Governance
Policy proposals for changes to Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Prescribed Information) Regulations
Policy proposals for your approval: details of the selfidentification process
Policy will need to be funded through reprioritisation of existing baselines or
Population Implications The proposals in this paper have impacts on the and yearold population. Statistics New Zealand estimates as at December show there are approximately , and yearolds living in New Zealand. Not all of these will necessarily meet other candidate eligibility criteria (such as being a New Zealand citizen) or other voter eligibility criteria (such as being a New Zealand citizen or permanent resident). However, the majority likely will.
Population adjusted statistics Table showing expenditure, prizes and turnover statistics adjusted for the adult population for the four main types of gambling activity.
Population density is not a good predictor of required asset valu e levels However, WICS does not show how the weak correlation in Scotland and England might predict water investment needed in New Zealand. No causal link is drawn. We were also unable to reconcile WICS Asset value per connected citizen figures for Scott ish Water and Yorkshire. They are much higher than what is implied by the asset values listed in those entities ann ual accounts. It is possible that WICS may be using undepreciated replacement values for the assets of those entities, which should not be c ompared to the optimised depreciated replacement values submitted by WDC. We analyse d other regulated water utilities , including in Australia , to determine whether there was a clear relationship between asset level per connected citizen and population d ensity . Australia has some similarities with New Zealand in that its population is highly urbanised, but overall population density is quite low, because towns are far from each other. Australias towns developed at a similar time to New Zealands and ther efore follow the same typical geography (detached houses on suburban sections). Figure . shows a plot of asset value per connected citizen for water utilities in Australia , Scottish Water, Yorkshire Water and WDC . For our analysi s, we used asset values from the relevant entities annual reports. As a result, the asset value per connected citizen in this figure for Scottish Water and Yorkshire Water do not match the WICS figures in Figure . . There is a very weak relationship betw een population density and asset value per connected citizen as identified by WICS. Figure . shows that by adding or removing comparator water providers, the correlation line could change markedly .
Population density was not the sole determinant of required investment levels. WICSs developed a set of models that account for a variety of geographic indicators in Scotland , and applied the resulting regression equation t o the explanatory New Zealand cost drivers to determine the range of investment requirement as set out in the report.
Population implications The proposals in this paper impact on the and yearold population. Statistics New Zealand estimates as at December show there are approximately , and yearolds living in Ne w Zealand. Not all of these will necessarily meet other candidate elig ibility criteria (such as being a New Zealand citizen) or other voter elig ibility criteria (such as being a New Zealand citizen or permanent resident). However, the majority likely will.
Porirua model WICS report
Porirua slide pack WICS report
Portfolio Internal Affairs
Portfolio Justice Local Government
Portfolio Local Government
Portfolio Local Government Justice
Portfolio Ministers will still be responsible for managing all expenditure and services received under appropriations or output classes relevant to their portfolio. They will work with the Minister for Internal Affairs (the
Portfolio: Internal Affairs CONFIRMED
Portfolios GCSB Digital Economy and Communications
Possessing, publishing or distributing objectionable content is an offence punishable under the FVPC Act by imprisonment for up to ten years, and fines of up to ,. DIA administers the FVPC and is one of the prosecuting agencies under the Act (including NZ Customs Service and NZ Police) and may prosecute persons in breach of the relevant provisions.
Possible Approach for engagement with Mori on Local Water Done Well
Potential candidates Wellington City Council Crown Observer
Potential impact of different options for regulating online gambling on the sports and racing industry
Potential legislative bids and policy work programme for
Prerecorded speech for Keynote address to Stormwater Conference
Preferred weighting There is no correct weighting option ; each is a subjective judgment about how to best apportion payments to each sector. There was broad support for the weighting option from the NCGM sector, two service providers, one local government and some gambling industry stakeholders. Gambling operators preferred weightings that limited their own levy liabilities. Casinos, the New Zealand Racing Board , the New Zealand Lotteries Commission and one local government stakeholder indicated support for the weighting. The Ministry notes there is now a stronger evidence based case to increase the weighting on expenditure . A broad range of submissions on the draft Strategy called for a greater weighting on expenditure, arguing it is a more current indicator of exposure to harm than presentations, which tend to be more subjective and reflect harm that has manifested as a crisis. Ministry officials consider that any weighting from to would meet the statutory weighting provisions, but note there is strong support for increasing the weight ing on expenditure to percent (the option). This support came from the NCGM sector , service providers and most other stakeholders. Casinos, the Racing Board and the Lotteries Commission all supported the status quo option, which also limits their levy liability compared to the option. The Gambling Commission also supports the option an d could see no justification for either or options . We have considered this advice and the information and analysis in the Cost Recovery Impact Statement attached to this paper. The Strategy includes public health, intervention, research and evaluation components, but ultimately it is intended to prevent and minimise gambling harm. There is now stronger evidence that a high weighting on presentations does not provide a fair allocation based on harm . Presentations tend to account for much , but not all , of the acute harm such as high risk problem gambling , but do not reflect any of the low to moderate harm that represents about half of all gambling harm . Player expenditure is more likely to attribute to a sector their share of this low to moderate harm and the nonintervention service components of the Strategy. While lowering the weighting on presentations might discourage diligent host responsibility , there are regulatory provisions in the Act that minimise th is risk. In any case, this risk is not a satisfactory reason for any sector not to pay a reasonable share of the budget. In our view, the and options both push the NCGM sectors share of the budget too far above that sectors share of expenditure while at the same time pushing the New Zealand Lotteries Commissions share of the budget too far below its share of presentations. We consider the weighting represents a suitable balance to enable the Strategy s costs to be spread fairly across all levypaying sectors. We recommend that the Committee agree s to a weighting for the problem gambling levy, for the period to . Table shows the resulting levy rates and amounts. Table : Levy rates per sector: weighting to (all figures GST exclusive) NCGMs Casinos NZRB NZLC Sector levy rates () . . . . Expected levy payment (m) . . . . Share of total expected levy amount . . . . . . . . Share of total budget cost wzrxijjr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Prepared for the Department of Internal Affairs by Dr Tim Chambers and Dr Andrew Anglemyer
Preparing for the th Executive was a monthslong programme of work and is one of the important roles we play to ensure New Zealand is a wellfunctioning democracy.
Preparing to submit a proposal
Present: Officials present from:
Present: Officials present from: Hon Carmel Sepuloni (Chair) Hon Dr Ayesha Verrall Hon Willie Jackson Hon Priyanca Radhakrishnan Hon Kieran McAnulty Hon Ginny Andersen Hon WillowJean Prime Hon Rino Tirikatene Hon Jo Luxton Office of the Prime Minister Office of the Chair of SWC Officials Committee for SWC Section ()()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice In Confidence Office of the Minister of Justice Office of the Minister of Local Governme nt Cabinet Legislation Committee Government Response to the Declaration of Inconsistency: Voting age in the Electoral Act and the Local Electoral Act Proposal This paper seeks approval of the Government Response to the Declaration of Inconsistency: Voting age in the Electoral Act and the Local Electoral Act . The accompanying paper, from the Minister of Local Government seeking approval to introduce the Electoral (Lowering Voting Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill (the Bill), forms part of the response. Background On Monday November , the Supreme Court issued its judgment in Make It Incorporated v Attorney General. The Court granted a Declaratio n of Inconsistency (DOI) in the following terms: A declaration is made that the provisions of the Electoral Act and of the Local Electoral Act which provide for a minimum voting age of years are inconsistent with the right in s of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act (NZBORA) to be free from discrimination on the basis of age; these inconsistencies have not been justified in terms of s of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act. This is the first DOI issued since the New Zealand Bill of Rights (Declarations of Inconsistency) Amendment Act came into effect. NZBORA and sessional orders outline the procedure for the Government and Parliament to respond to the DOI as set out in the table below: Step Status The AttorneyGe neral must notify December Complete the House of Representatives of a DOI within six sitting days of the DOI becoming final NZSC , Make it Inc v AG, November Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice Step Status The DOI is referred to a select December Complete committee allocated by the Clerk of the House The select committee is required to May Complete consider, and report on, the declaratio n within four months The Minister responsible for the By August In progress (note administration of the relevant the Bill is aso enactment must present a intended to be Governme nt Response to the introduced before House, within six months of the this deadline) AttorneyGene ral notifying the House of the DOI A debate is held in the House on Within six sitting To be completed the DOI, the select committee days of the report, and the Government Government Response to the DOI Response being tabled. Connection with the Elections (Lowering the Voting Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill In November and December , Cabinet agreed to introduce legislation to lower the voting age to for both parliamen tary and local elections CAB MI N and CABMIN. Cabinet considered that introducing legislation in line with the DOI timeframes would provide the House with a legislative vehicle to respond to the DOI immediately, should it wish to do so. In March , Cabinet agreed that given the changed context (including the need to respond to a national emergency ) the Government would focus its legislative response to cover local elections only CABM IN. This paper seeks approval for the Minister of Justice and the Minister of Local Governme nt to jointly table the attached Government Response to the DOI, noting the intention to introduce the Bill. The accompa nying Cabinet paper from the Minister of Local Government seeks approval to introduce the Bill. We are proposing that the Bill is introduced at the same time as the Government Response is tabled (no later than August ). This will give Parliament further opportunity to consider the Bill before the debate on the DOI must take place. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice Justice Committee recommendations
Present: Officials present from: Hon Grant Robertson (Chair) Hon Andrew Little Hon David Parker Hon Kieran McAnulty Hon Barbara Edmonds Hon Dr Duncan Webb Hon Dr Deborah Russell Tangi Utikere, MP (Chief Government Whip) Office of the Prime Minister Officials Committee for LEG Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice
Present: Officials present from: Hon Grant Robertson (Chair) Hon Andrew Little Hon David Parker Hon Kieran McAnulty Hon Barbara Edmonds Hon Dr Duncan Webb Hon Dr Deborah Russell Tangi Utikere, MP (Chief Government Whip) Office of the Prime Minister Officials Committee for LEG Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E
Present: Officials present from: Hon Grant Robertson (Chair) Hon David Parker Hon Peeni Henare Hon Michael Wood Hon Dr David Clark Office of the Prime Minister Officials Committee for GOV Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Present: Officials present from: Rt Hon Chris Hipkins Hon Carmel Sepuloni (Chair) Hon Kelvin Davis Hon Grant Robertson Hon Dr Megan Woods Hon Jan Tinetti Hon Dr Ayesha Verrall Hon Willie Jackson Hon Kiri Allan Hon Peeni Henare Hon Priyanca Radhakrishnan Hon Kieran McAnulty Hon Barbara Edmonds Hon Rino Tirikatene Hon Jo Luxton Office of the Prime Minister Office of the Chair Officials Committee for SWC Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of qlgofb
Present: Officials present from: Rt Hon Jacinda Ardern (Chair) Hon Grant Robertson Hon Kelvin Davis Hon Dr Megan Woods Hon Carmel Sepuloni Hon Andrew Little Hon David Parker Hon Nanaia Mahuta Hon Stuart Nash Hon Michael Wood Hon Kiri Allan Office of the Prime Minister Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
Presentation slides and information packs
Presentation to the House of Representatives: Fire Emergency NZ Annual Report for the year ended June
Presentation to the House of Representatives: Fire and Emergency New Zealand Annual Report for the year ended June
Presentation to the House of Representatives: Internal Affairs portfolio annual reports for the year ended June
Presented to the House of Representatives
Presented to the House of Representatives Proactively released by the Minister for Local Government Page Interim Government Response to Social Services and Community Committee report Petition of Jenn Hooper: Develop Changing Places facilities
Presented to the House of Representatives pursuant to sections and of the Public Finance Act
Press release regarding Lottery allocations
Prevent and minimise online gambling harm.
Preventing Child Exploitation Online
Preventing Online Child Sexual Exploitation
Prevention of Online Harms
Previous Cabinet Papers and Minutes
Previous engagement survey results are available below.
Previous names Any Party RegistrarGeneral
Previous testing illustrated relative performance across demographic groups. Even where differences existed, testing showed the algorithm performed well. This data was indicative only, which is why DIA commissioned New Zealandspecific analysis.
Previous water services policy and content
Previously NZs gang environment
Previously she was Chief Executive, Ngti Whtua Orakei Whai Maia, .
Price shocks and rate of increase of prices . Cabinet has previously expressed the desire to manage price shocks for consumers and communities CAB MIN . Price shocks can create affordability issues, particularly when consumers are not expecting a price increase. . Changes to household water bills will occur in two ways: . Changes to pricing structures : the wide variety in tariff structures across the territorial authorities means that changes to simplify and harmonise tariff structures will result in changes in bills for individual consumers. There will be both increases and decreases to individual household bills from almost a ny changes in tariff structure, even if the overall level of revenue collected remains the same; and . Changes to price levels : changes to the actual level of prices, driven by the need to make up for historic under investment. . In the longer term, the proposed approach to economic regulation will help to mitigate the risk of price shocks through the ability of the economic regulator to use revenue smoothing. However, this smoothing occurs at the aggregate level and does not rule out relative price changes between different groups of consumers necessary to achieve horizontal equity and other objectives. . It is likely some of the pricing principles proposed above (full cost recovery and non discrimination) support price stability, once they are fully implemented. Full cost recovery also reduces the risk that prices include a monopoly profit, as monopoly profits are not part of the underlying cost structure and any surpluses are required to be reinvested. . There is a risk that, in the absence of any other constraints, some prices could increase significantly in the short term, especially where there has been significant historic under pricing andor large cross subsidies. s ()(h) s ()(h) s ()(h) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . Officials are still in the process of collecting detailed information on current costs and prices for three waters services. The quality of this information is variable, in part because of the large variation in prices across territorial authorities, and because the revenue raised from water charges does not necessarily match the expenditure on water services. . The process of discovering current costs and charges is a major undertaking and will significantly increase transparency of existing charges, including existing inequities. Revealing the existing costs and associated charges for water services is likely to create a shock for some ratepayers, particularly if those costs have been funded through general rates. . While some price increases are likely to be both necessary and desirable to address historic underinvestment, there are three different but related regulatory powers (tools) that could be used to reduce price increases and changes in bills in the first few years: . A power to freeze existing tariff structures . This would be very effective at limiting changes in bills at the individual property level, if combined with a limit on price changes. But it would also have the effect of delaying the achievement of almost all other pricing objectives, other than price stability; . A power to regulate the rate of change in individual prices would limit price changes and generally keep the average bill stable. However, it would not be effective at reducing changes in the bills of all properties, unless combined with some sort of control of the tariff structure. It would also be ineffective for any new prices that may arise from a new tariff structure; and . A power to regulate the overall level of revenue from a particular service or customer group would enable changes in tariff structure while limiting the increase in average bills. There would still be winners and losers from the changes in tariff structures. . I recommend that the legislation include a regulation making power to freeze tariff structures, limit price increases, and regulate the overall level of revenue for particular services or classes consumer. This power would be limited to the regulation of household prices. This regulation making power would expire on the commencem ent of the first economic regulatory period, likely July . The economic regulator would need to be consulted on the making of these regulations. . Cabinet previously noted the work on collecting detailed pricing information from local authorities and i nvited me to report back on the outcomes of that work in June CAB MIN . My officials currently only have data on a small group of territorial authorities. I propose delaying this report back until November when they will have data on all territorial authorities. This report back will also include proposals on the most appropriate way to use, or not use, these regulation making powers to manage price shocks before the commencement of economic regulation. . . s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of .
Pricing and charging for three waters services Proposal . This is one of a series of papers on the reforms to the three waters service delivery system. This paper sets out the proposed approach to pricing and charging of water services by water services entities. It seeks decisions to enable the drafting of further legislation to implement these decisions. Key proposals and decisions relate to: . statutory provisions for water services entities to invoice property owners for water services charges; . support for lowincome households in material hardship; . duties on water services entities to set prices according to statutory principles and any national directions to be included in a Government policy statement; and . regulatory measures to enable the control of price changes in the transition period before the commencement of economic regulation, with decisions on the possible use of these measures subject to a further report back by December . . If agreed, it is anticipated that most of the proposals in this paper will be given effect through
Pricing disclosure options
Pricing principles . agree to include the following pricing principles in legislation: . simplicity: tariffs should be simple, transparent and easy to understand for consumers; . nondiscrimination: No undue preference is shown to or no undue discrimination against, any class of customers, so that purchasers of services with the same cost pay the same price (with the exception that a water services entity may charge lower, or no, water infrastructure contributions to Mori communities, if this is to remedy an historic inequity in service provision); and . full cost recovery: the price for each service reflects the full underlying cost of delivering that service (except for water infrastructure contributi ons); . tariffs should promote resource efficiency; . note that customers in different places are not different classes of customer, if a decision has been made to geographically average their prices; . note that more than half of households already pay some form of volumetric charge for their water; . note that all decisions about the use of volumetric charging will be made by water services entities, in consultation with their regional representatives group, consumers and communities; . agree to provide in legislation for two regulation making powers to protect vulnerable consumers, in areas where volumetric charging is used: . a regulation making power to limit the ratio between fixed and volumetric water revenues; and . a regulation making power to regulate or prohibit water services entities from using pricing structures, such as block tariffs or low user charges, that vary the unit price of a volumetric charge based on the level of consumption, for residential customers; . agree that the regulation making powers set out in recommendation . will come into effect on July ; . agree that the economic regulator would be able to issue guidance, input methodologies andor determinations to the water services entities on how to implement the legislative pricing principles and any pricing regulations; Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . agree that the economic regulator be given the ability to issue guidance, input methodologies, andor determinations on other pricing matters not covered by legislative pricing principles or regulations, so long as this is consistent with the overall statutory scheme and contributes to the purpose of economic regulation; . agree to enable the economic regulator to amend the funding and pricing plan or the tariff list if they are inconsistent with legislative pricing principles or regulations, or any other constrain ts set by the regulator;
Prime Ministers meeting with the Gisborne Mayor, Rehette Stoltz, on June
Prime Ministers visit to Chatham Islands on November
Principle (IPP) Act .
Principle : Limits on Disclosure of Personal Information
Principle : Source of Personal Information
Principles of our engagement
Print a web page in large text
Prior to including a New Zealand Agency into the Intermediary class DIA must give consideration to:
Prior to joining DIA, Hoani was Tamariki Advocate, Deputy Chief Executive Voices of Children at Oranga Tamariki Ministry for Children, a role in which he was responsible for advocating for children and young peoples interests across the government system, ensuring their voices are at the centre of government policy, service design and delivery. He was also responsible for overseeing the Ministrys implementation of new legislative duties in relation to the Treaty of Waitangi.
Prior to the commencement of regular sharing information with each Party for a purpose under this
Prioritisation: Determine key focus areas, such as inclusive leadership, talent development, and mental wellbeing.
Priority Routine . ; Te Tari Taiwhenua
Priority Routine ..;:;;;:i Te Tari Taiwhenua
Priority Routine Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Local Government briefing Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Local Government Title: Mixeduse rural water schemes July Key issues This briefing provides you with advice on mixeduse rural water schemes, and opportun ities to further reduce regulatory compliance costs for these schemes. You may wish to discuss with officials the option of establishing an independent advisory group to review the regulatory settings for mixeduse rural water schemes. Action sought I Timeframe Note that Local Water Done Well will enable councils to work with local rural commun ities to determine the optimal management , governance and financing arrangements for mixeduse rural water schemes; Note the proposed changes to the Water Services Act in your Cabinet paper Local Water Done Well Stage further decisions would help reduce regulatory compliance costs for mixeduse rural water schemes; Note submitters on the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill raised concerns that complying with drinking water regulatory standards is driving up costs for mixeduse rural water schemes, and you may wish to consider further opportun ities to reduce the regulatory burden for these schemes; Discuss with officials the option of establishing an independent advisory group to review the regulatory settings for mixeduse rural water schemes. Contact for telephone discussions (if required ) At your convenience. Name Position Contact Number Suggested st contact Bex Sullivan Deputy Executive Director Policy and pKa I Stewardship Hamiora Bowkett Executive Director, Water Services KaJ I Policy, Legislation and Stewardsh ip Return electronic document to: Daisy McElwain Daisj..McElwaindia.govt.nz Cohesion document reference LG Ministerial database reference LG IN CONFIDENCE Page of The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of Purpose . This briefing provides you with advice on mixed use rural water schemes, and opportunities to further reduce regulatory compliance costs for these schemes. Mixed use rural water schemes . There are around mixed use rural water supply schemes across New Zealand. The schemes provide rural communities with both drinking water, and water for commercial farming purposes . The schemes are essential to rural econom ies and the health and wellbeing of rural communities . . Many of the schemes were established in the s and s with central government funding from the then Ministry of Works, sweat equity and sometimes financial contributions from local farmers, and agreements with local authorities to operate and maintain the schemes (often with ratepayer funding support) . Many of the schemes were initially established as stock water schemes, and over time they have expanded to provide drinking water to households, townships, and community facilities (such as halls, schools and churches) . . Typical characteristics of mixed use rural schemes, such as those in the Clutha District , include : . their supply of treated water at an agreed quantity for both human drinking and farming purposes, often based on restricted volume (trickle feed) to point s of storage on consumer properties ; . their supply of relatively large volumes water for farming purposes and small volumes for human drinking ; . the involvement of farmers in their governance and operation , often through scheme management committees, who work in close collaboration with council staff in their ongoing operation and maintenance ; . unclear legal ownership, though in districts such as Clutha the schemes are accounted for on the councils balance sheet , operated by council staff and managed through the councils long term planning process ; . their costs are generally paid for through a mix of variable water charges (based on agreed daily volumes of water) and rates ; and . their regulation by Taumata Arowai on the same basis as other council drinking wate r schemes . The mixed use schemes face financial challenges and need investment to modernise ageing infrastructure . The mixed use schemes face issues similar to those faced more generally by small rural district councils, including : . the need for capital investment to : .. replace and modernise aging infrastructure, much of which was built in the s or earlier ;
Priority Routine UNCLASSIFIED P age of Digitising Government briefing Hon Judith Collins Minister for Digitising Government Title: Artificial intelligence and its implications for digital public services November Key issues Artificial intelligence (AI) has the potential to transform how public and private services are provided and enabled. AI technologies are evolving quickly, and the rapid rise of Generative AI tools like ChatGPT are already changing how New Zealanders interact digitally. AI could present many benefits for public service innovation, particularly in the areas of efficiency and productivity service modernisation, cyber security and incident readinessresponse. Maintaining public trust and confidence as we explore the use of AI in Public Services is essential. Government agencies must use AI systems in safe, secure and privacy protecting ways, that maintain the integrity of the Public Service as a whole. As Minister for Digitising Government, you have a key role in setting the ambition and policy direction for how the Public Service engages with AI. This could also include advocating AI issues with your colleagues and internationally as needed. We would w elcome deeper discussion with you on your priorities and preferences for taking AI forward, and for GCDOs potential AI work programme. Action sought Timeframe Agree to meet with officials to discuss your priorities for GCDOs Public Service AI work programme. Direct officials to report to you A t your convenience C ontact for telephone discussions (if required) Name Position Contact Number Suggested st contact Paul James Chief Executive AnnMarie Cavanagh Deputy Chief Executive, Digital Public Service Return electronic document to: Adrienne Moor: Adrienne.moordia.govt.nz Cohesion document reference https:dia.cohesion.net.nzSitesGCIOMPLMPOLAlayoutsDocIdRedir.aspxIDUAZYVSQRJ Ministerial database reference DG For Ministers office: Seen Approved Declined Withdrawn More information required ()(a) ()(a) ()(f)(ii) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs UNCLASSIFIED Page of Purpose . To seek direction on your ambition, priorities and way forward for New Zealand Public Service use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies. . Appendix B provides an initial framework that could support accelerated uptake and benefits of AI across the Public Service. This initial framework indicates our current thinking and could be built on with local and global best practices. Artificial Intelligence has the potential to disrupt and revolutionise public services . In recent years AI has evolved rapidly due to growing private investment, progression in Cloud computing and compute r power, and the proliferation of big data. Further, the rapid rise of freely available Generative AI tools like ChatGPT is driving unprecedented levels of public interest. AI capability is increasingly being built into many of the technologies that public servants use. . As Minister for Digitising Government, you have an important role in setting the ambition, policy direction and requirements for how the Public Service engages with AI. The implications run across public service portfolios , and your advocacy with colleagues will be essential to responsible and trustworthy AI uptake. You may also be asked to represent New Zealands interests in AI, for example through various international digital leadership fora and with global technology providers. . AI could deliver substantial benefits for our Public Services, particularly in the areas of efficiency and productivity, service modernisation, cyber security, policy analysis, science and research and emergency readinessresponse. The key anticipated benefits are further described at Appendix B . . Whilst there is certainly benefits potential, the risks of AI are significant and could lead to serious harm if they are not well managed. Risks for governance, privacy and security, ethics and bias, Mori interests, openness and explainability , and procurement should be fully analysed and actively managed. It is critical that agencies understand and make informed decisions about these risks to maintain public trust and protect the integrity of their systems and the Public Service as a whole. Key risk s are detailed at Appendix B . Interest in AI and its potential application continues to grow Industry advocates are seeking to embrace AI . Industry leaders are showing strong interest in AI, with collectives like the AI Forum actively advocating AI issues both inside and outside of Government. NZTech, who consider themselves to be the voice of the New Zealand technology ecosystem
Priority Routine Te Tari Taiwhenua lnternalAffairs ATAUMATA
Priority Routine Te Tari Taiwhenua . Internal Affairs Local Government briefing Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Local Government Title: The role of Taumata Arowai in wastewater and stormwater regulation and standard setting March Key issues You have asked officials for advice on the scope of Taumata Arowais functions that pertain to stormwater and wastewater. This briefing outlines the role of Taumata Arowai in the stormwater and wastewater system relative to other agencies and explains why Taumata Arowai was given the new stormwater and wastewater functions. We note that these functions have not yet come into force and so there is no data supporting the efficacy of the current arrangements. You have also indicated that you may wish to reconsider the placement of centralised stormwater and wastewater functions . Officials will work with other agencies to prepare a subsequent briefing providing options for changes to the current system. Action sought I Timeframe Note Taumata Arowai has a limited role in the regulation and management March of stormwater and wastewater systems. Note other options were considered where centralised stormwater and wastewater functions may be located. Note the wider system landscape has changed since decisions were initially made, and it is appropriate to reexamine the allocation of stormwater and wastewater regulatory responsibilities across system players. Direct officials to work with other agencies to explore alternative options for where the centralised stormwater and wastewater functions should sit. Contact for telephone discussions (if required) Name Position Contact Number fHa Ben Leggett Manager, Monitoring and I Stewardsh ip Bex Sullivan Acting Executive Director, Policy, legislation and ()(a) I Stewardship Return electronic document to: Jessica.duckworthdia.govt.nz Cohesion document reference IWD URAJSR Ministerial database reference LG IN CONFIDENCE Suggested st contact Page of The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Purpose . This briefing provides information about the role of Taumata Arowai in stormwater and wastewater regulation, as well as the options that were considered to arrive at the current settings. . A second briefing which considers the costs and benefits of Taumata Arowai retaining stormwater and wastewater functions as well as options for the reallocation of functions will be provided, should you wish, following this briefing. Background . The potential impact of poorly managed wastewater and stormwater on public health and the environment is significant . Urban water is the poorest quality in the country. Community views have changed since much of the infrastructure was built and consented , and sewage overflows on urban beaches are no longer acceptable. Poorly managed stormwater can exacerbate impacts of flooding or extreme weather events, as well as pollute local rivers or coastal environments . . Infrastructure is aging and in many parts of New Zealand has outlived its useful life. A large proportion of the network requires upgrades and greater investment in maintenance . Resource consenting arrangements and the corresponding monitoring or enforcement by regional councils are not transparent or consistent. Very little information is made available about whether wastewater infrastructure complies with consents, and much of our stormwater infrastructure is unconsented. At present, around percent of wastewater treatment plants are operating on expired consents. We also know wastewater infrastructur e is facing a wave of reconsenting, with percent of consents needing renewal by . . The system for managing and regulating stormwater and wastewater networks spans multiple agencies who have related and overlapping roles and responsibilities . A diagram of regulatory responsibilities can be found in Appendix A. Taumata Arowai was given a role in this system in an effort to address transparency issues through public reporting, and consistency of regulation through the setting of national baseline standards and performance measures . Taumata Arowai is not the primary actor in stormwater and wastewater management . It is worth noting that while Taumata Arowai has gained functions related to stormwater and wastewater, its functions are limited. Primary regulatory responsibility remains with regional councils and is managed mostly through consenting processes . . The functions held by Taumata Arowai are closely related to, and overlap with, the resource management and planning systems. The regulatory responsibility for stormwater and wastewater remains primarily with local government . The Ministry for the Environment (MfE) continues to play a role in the environmental management aspects of wastewater and stormwater networks through providing national direction and standards . Taumata Arowai has a limited role in the stormwater and wastewater regulatory system . The stormwater and wastewater functions Taumata Arowai holds are: . Setting national baseline standards and performan ce measures; . Holding and updating a register of networks and network operators; IN CONFIDENCE Pageof The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua . Reporting on the performance of networks and network operators in a way that allows comparisons between networks; . Coordination between other parts of the system and providing support and guidance to network operators. . Taumata Arowai has yet to establish its stormwater and wastewater functions. A timeline for the standup of these functions is attached in Appendix . Setting baseline standards . As mentioned above, Taumata Arowai is responsible for developing and consulting on wastewater and stormwater environmental standards. Standards set by Taumata Arowai are related to, but different from, those set by MfE as they are intended to supplement existing environmental standards, through setting standards on the performance of networks, not just on network outputs (e.g. standards around leakage rates, rather than around end of pipe discharge). The standards that Taumata Arowai produce are more able to be responsive to system needs than those produced in National Environmental Standards NES), being easier to update, and being directly related to the performance information produced by operators. Setting performance measures . Taumata Arowai is also responsible for developing and publishing performance measures and targets for stormwater and wastewater networks. These measures will allow uniform data collection and reporting and can help to develop nationally consistent minimum standards. . Example measures include compliance against resource consents, as well as general asset management information . The measures will be phased in across multiple years, and the information received from network operators will be summarised in an annual report for the public. Over time, the information Taumata Arowai collects through mandatory reporting will provide comparisons, trends and examples of good practice. . Performance measures will allow operators and regulators to ascertain compliance with standards in a way that: . should improve operators understanding of performance; . increase certainty around monitoring for both operators and regulators; and . increase transparency, aiding in consumers understanding of performance. . Currently there are no nationally consistent performance measures for stormwater and wastewater operators, making national oversight impossible , as well as preventing any comparative understanding of performance or effectiveness of regulatory tools. . These functions increase the public accountability of network operators to their consumers and ratepayers and increase the accountability of regional councils giving additional incentive to monitor compliance. This comparative reporting also helps build public and sector understanding of best practise and allows for future benchmarking. System coordination . Taumata Arowai also has a system coordination role. National oversight and increased transparency around network performance means that Taumata Arowai will have the ability to support and provide guidance to operators, as well as identify system issues, capability gaps, and providing insight into the efficacy of settings for other actors in the IN CONFIDENCE Page of The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua system. The role of Taumata Arowai as a water regulator means it has existing relationships with MfE, regional councils, and territorial authorities, giving it the ability to share information and feedback on the efficacy of existing system settings to inform policies developed by other actors and Ministers. . Additionally, Taumata Arowai has indicated its intention to monitor regional councils regulatory performance to get a better understanding of how regional councils are ensuring compliance and over time. Taumata Arowai has no infringement powers for stormwater and wastewater network noncompliance . Taumata Arowais functions with regards to stormwater and wastewater network non compliance are limited to reporting requirements, which support transparenc y and public trust, as well as supporting regional councils to better regulate network owners and suppliers. Specifically, its regulatory responsibilities are: . maintaining public registers of wastewater and stormwater network operators; . annual reporting on operators general performance and environmental performance to enable comparison between network operators; . producing the Annual Network Performance Report; . identifying and monitoring matters that affect the safety of drinking water, and the environmental performance of wastewater and stormwater networks; . providing oversight of, and information to central and local government in relation to the development of and compliance with, operations, standards, regulations, and other statutory requirements for wastewater and stormwater. Taumata Arowai has some general system support functions . Similarly to drinking water systems, the water reforms previously recognised a general lack of capability in New Zealand when it comes to wastewater and stormwater management expertise . In view of this, Taumata Arowai has general functions intended to support the functioning of the system as a whole. Functions specific to wastewater and stormwater include: . developing advice and guidance to enhance sector capability; . facilitating, promoting, or supporting research, education, and training, to support the environmental performance, management, and regulation of wastewater and stormwater networks , including: .. organising campaigns and promotional activities to raise awareness; .. supporting and contribute to useful research to inform decision making; .. working with education providers and sector to ensure fitforpurpose training is available to build sector capability. . identifying, preparing or promoting national guidelines and best practices that relate to wastewater and stormwater networks and network operators. Other agencies also have standard setting functions . A diagram outlining roles and responsibilities is attached in Appendix A. MfE is responsible for establishing National Direction under the RMA, in the form of National IN CONFIDENCE Page of The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Environmental Standards (NES) and National Policy Statements (NPS), or regulations. National Direction sets out how specific resources should be managed to protect the environment, strengthen the economy, and enable social and cultural wellbeing, where there are benefits of having a nationally consistent approach. The National Policy Statement for Freshwater Management (NPSFM) potentially has the greatest implications for wastewater and water quality aspects for stormwater management. . The NPSFM does not set specific standards for affected parties to meet, but rather provides an overarching approach to regulation and environmental management . Standards set by other parties should be in line with and informed by the NPSFM, including standards developed by Taumata Arowai and Regional councils in their relative roles. It is worth noting that work is being done which looks at the settings and impacts of the NPSFM, with the possibility that aspects of it will change. MfE is the agency leading this work. . Regional councils are responsible for establishing and implement ing objectives, policies and rules for natural resource management under the RMA, including for wastewater and stormwater discharges. They process resource consent applications to ensure regional requirements are met and adverse effects are avoided, remedied or mitigated. Regional councils must implement National Direction, and they are currently amending their freshwater plans to give effect to the NPSFM. After standards under the Water Services Act are made, regional councils must ensure any consents granted are not contrary to those standards. . The economic regulator is also likely to have some functions related to standard and performance measures. In its role to ascertain the financial sustainability of supplier asset management plan performanc e measures which support an understanding of levels of service that will need to be developed. Work is ongoing on the scope of the economic regulator and what its functions pertaining to stormwater and wastewater infrastructure will look like. We expect that information gathered by Taumata Arowai about network performance will be useful to the economic regulator when developing operational policies. Other options that were considered at the time of allocating stormwater and wastewater functions . To address the system issues identified earlier in this paper, Taumata Arowai was given new functions created to address the regulatory gap resulting in inconsistent and sometimes ineffective regulation of stormwater and wastewater networks . . The functions given to Taumata Arowai are directly related to increasing transparency around network performance and gaining national oversight of the function of the wider system. Several options were considered for where responsibilities should sit . Three agencies were considered as options for where the new functions would be best placed. These were: . Taumata Arowai; . Ministry for the Environment ; and . the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). IN CONFIDENCE Pageof The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua . It is important to note that at the time these considerations were taking place, work had not started on the role of the economic regulator. . Taumata Arowai was found to be the preferred option as the stormwater and wastewater functions fit most closely with the other functions of Taumata ArowaiJ including its role in increasing sector capability and public trust. . The wastewater and stormwater functions allocated to Taumata Arowai have strong synergies with the drinking water functions they hold, and will utilise many of the same systems, approaches and scientific and technical expertise. Colocating these functions was deemed to enable skills and knowledge to be pooled, shared and developed further, helping create a centre of expertise for the broader system. This approach also addresses the problem of limited capability within the sector by centralising the pool of expertise. . Locating stormwater and wastewater functions within Taumata Arowai was also found to provide an opportunity to develop a wellintegrated, consistent approach to three waters regulation, and a more capable regulator. . An independent report also found it is more costeffective, as fewer staff are needed to deliver the functions in a single regulator, compared with locating them in MfE or the EPA. The synergies between these functions provide the opportunity to leverage the skills and expertise that already sit within the drinking water regulator. MfE was considered as an option . While MfE have related functions , the additional functions did not fit in well with MfEs mostly policybased functions and would have required MfE to set up new functions and develop new capability. . MfE has historically focused on the quality of freshwater at a catchment level, across all discharge types, rather than on wastewater and stormwater infrastructure. This has meant it has not had the expertise or given priority to work on three waters infrastructure which is an area that requires dedicated oversight, given the sheer size of the sector (both in dollar value and complexity spread across all councils), and impact it has on both ratepayers and their urban water quality. . Subsequently, MfE has developed a greater focus on implementation and has progressed policy work on compliance and monitoring in the resource management system. However, as it pertains to the regulation of wastewater and stormwater network s, MfE continues to respond to issues as they arise, and there no framework for regular review of regional council performance . The EPA was considered as an option . The EPA was not considered to be a good fit primarily because its core responsibil ities do not easily align with the stormwater and wastewater functions. Placing the stormwater and wastewater functions alongside the EPAs current roles and responsibilities would mean that the functions would primarily be used in the context of environmental protection rather than to support a coherent catchment level water system. It would also potentially lose some of the public health focus from the system. . The placement of the functions in the EPA would require adding in new capabilities into the agency and was the second most expensive option considered in the independent report (MfE being the most expensive option). IN CONFIDENCE Page of The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Taumata Arowai are currently in the process of developing standards . Taumata Arowai is currently working to stand up its wastewater and stormwater functions starting with updating public registers, developing standards, and introducing performance measures which were consulted on in late ). A timeline of the development and set up of the wastewater and stormwater functions are attached in Appendix B. The role of the economic regulator . The economic regulator was not considered through the options analysis as the scope of the economic regulator was not settled when the above considerations were made. . Work is ongoing as to the scope of the economic regulator, led by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment. It is possible that there may be some overlap between the wastewater and stormwater functions Taumata Arowai currently holds and the functions of the economic regulator. This is contingent on the decision being made to include stormwater and wastewater functions in the scope of the economic regulator. . The suitability of the placement of the stormwater and wastewater functions currently held by Taumata Arowai within the economic regulator will be considered in the next briefing. There is an opportunity to reexamine allocation of environmental regulation functions for stormwater and wastewater . As Taumata Arowai are yet to establish their stormwater and wastewater functions, it is too early to assess whether the expected value and benefits of placing these functions with Taumata Arowai has been realised, or if they are better placed elsewhere . . However, there is merit in having centralised oversight within the environmental system that provides coordination, a degree of consistency and considers the environmental impacts of three waters infrastructure. For these reasons, we believe it is worth retaining Taumata Arowais performance measures, system oversight and coordination functions related to stormwater and wastewater. It is particularly important that there is a centralised place for these oversight and performance measurement functions , given the current variation in how regional councils operate and execute their regulatory responsibil ities. . There may be opportunity to look at whether standards setting functions could be consolidated or streamlined across Taumata Arowai and MfE, as part of the policy development for your next Bill, the Local Government Water Services Bill (Bill ). Next steps . If directed, officials will work with other agencies to develop alternative options for the placement of some or all of Taumata Arowais wastewater and stormwater functions. Consultation . We have worked with both Taumata Arowai and MfE in the development of this briefing, in the presentation of their suite of functions and considerations that led to their respective allocation of regulatory functions . IN CONFIDENCE Page lof The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua IN CONFIDENCE Page of Recommendations . We recommend that you : a) note Taumata Arowai has a limited role in the regulation and management of storm and wastewater system s YesNo b) note other options were considered for where centralised storm and wastewater functions may be located YesNo c) note the wider system landscape has changed since decisions were initially made , and it is appropriate to reexamine the allocation of stormwater and wastewater regulatory responsibilities across system players d) direct officials to work with other agencies to explore alternative options for where the centralised waste and storm water functions should sit YesNo
Priority Routine ir.:ii : Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Internal Affairs briefing Hon Barbara Edmonds Minister of Internal Affairs Title: National Library Removal and Disposal Policy March Key issues Te Puna Matauranga o Aotearoa National Library of New Zealand (National Library) is developing a policy for the removal and disposal of items from its research and general collections. Public engagement is set to begin in late March . An advisory group has been convened to support the development of the policy and had its second meeting in January . The disposal of items from the Overseas Collections (OPC) will be part ofthe policys implementation. There has been high interest in this work and the ongoing policy development is likely to continue to attract stakeholder and media interest. Action sought ITimeframe Note the National Library is developing a removal and disposal policy At your convenience Note the policy will cover physical and digital items in the general and research collections of the National Library, including the Alexander Turnbull Library Note the Library will begin engaging with key stakeholders and the public on the draft policy in late March Note that disposal of remaining items removed from the OPC will be informed by the final policy Approve the proactive release of this briefing in line with the policies ofTe Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs. Contact for telephone discussions (if required) Name Rachel Esson Mark Crookston Return electronic document to: Cohesion document reference Ministeria l database reference Position Te Pouhuaki National Librarian Director, Content Services Heather Mathie, ZVCSSTE KPV IA Contact Number Suggested st contact UNCLASSIFIED Pagel of Proactively sed by the Department of Internal Affairs
Prison sentence for possession of child sex abuse images
Privacy (Information Sharing Agreement Facilitating Access to Information about Deaths) Order
Privacy (Information Sharing Agreement Facilitating Customer Nominated Services) Order
Privacy (Information Sharing Agreement between Department of Internal Affairs and RegistrarGeneral) Order
Privacy (Information Sharing Agreement between Inland Revenue and Internal Affairs) Order
Privacy (Information Sharing Agreement between RegistrarGeneral and New Zealand Police) Order
Privacy (Information Sharing Agreements Facilitating Access to Information about Deaths) Order
Privacy Act and this Agreement. The initial contact persons are as follows:
Privacy Act to dispute the correctness of the information received.
Privacy Breach As defined in section of the Privacy Act .
Privacy Commissioners website
Privacy Impact Assessments are undertaken for any services involving biometrics.
Privacy Principle (relating to offshore disclosures of personal information).
Privacy Principle as per the Privacy Act
Privacy and confidentiality
PrivacyOfficerfireandemergency.nz
Private Security Personnel and Private Investigators
Private Security Personnel and Private Investigators Act
Proactiv e releas e of Cab inet material regarding an Ord er in C ouncil to a mend the Loc al Go vernmen t Act
Proactive Release We propose to release this Cabinet paper and the related Minute with any necessary redactions in accordance with Cabinet Office Circular CO () , following the introduction of the Bill in the House.
Proactive Release We propose to release this Cabinet paper and related Minute with any necessary redactions in accordance wit h Cabinet Office Circu lar CO () , following the introduction of the Bill.
Proactive Release of Briefing Titles
Proactive Release of Briefing titles
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: April to April
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: August to August
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: December December
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: February February
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: January to February
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: January January
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: June to July
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: March to March
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: March to March
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: May to May
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: November to November
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: October to October
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: January February
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: April to July
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: April to May
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: August to November
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: February March
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: July to September
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: July to August
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: June to July
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: March to April
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: May to June
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: October October
Proactive Release of Briefing titles: October December
Proactive Release of Cabinet Paper day Plan Repeal of the Water Services Entities Act
Proactive Release of Cabinet material about Online Casino Gambling Phase Decisions
Proactive Release of Cabinet material about the Future of the Greyhound Racing Industry
Proactive Release of Cabinet material about the Repeal of the Water Services Entities Act as part of the Day Plan
Proactive Release of Cabinet material and key advice papers relating to the release of discussion document on modernising the regulatory framework for media and online services September
Proactive Release of Cabinet material related to the Government response to the Justice Committees Inquiry into the Local Elections
Proactive Release of Independent CovidCard Reports
Proactive Release of Racing Cabinet Papers and Briefings
Proactive re lease o f Memorandum o f Understandin g between G CDO , Department o f Internal Affairs and
Proactive re lease of Cabinet material about consultation on changes
Proactive release Cabinet Paper Regulations addressing harm minimisation in Class gambling venues, and associated infringement regulations
Proactive release of Advancing Digital Societies NonBinding Memorandum of Understanding between New Zealand Government Chief Technology Officer and Microsoft New Zealand Limited (), and Variation to NonBinding Memorandum of Understanding for Advancing Digital Societies ()
Proactive release of Briefing Titles: December to January
Proactive release of Briefing Titles: January to April
Proactive release of Briefing Titles: January to April
Proactive release of Briefing Titles: May to July
Proactive release of Briefing Titles: November to December
Proactive release of Briefing to Incoming Minister of Internal Affairs and Welcome to the Department of Internal Affairs
Proactive release of Briefing to Incoming Minister of Local Government
Proactive release of Cabinet Material for the Extension of inkind support for foreign nationals experiencing serious hardship due to the impacts of COVID
Proactive release of Cabinet Material on design of the online casino gambling regulatory design
Proactive release of Cabinet Material related to the Local Government (Electoral Legislation and Mori Wards and Mori Constituencies) Amendment Bill
Proactive release of Cabinet Material related to the Next Steps on Regional Deals Cabinet Paper
Proactive release of Cabinet Material Fire and Emergency (Levy) Regulations
Proactive release of Cabinet Paper Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Registering Nominated Sex) Regulations and associated materials
Proactive release of Cabinet decisions relating to voting age
Proactive release of Cabinet documents related to the release of the Discussion Document: selfidentification regulations and registering gender for people born overseas
Proactive release of Cabinet material Proposals for refreshing the Cloud First Policy and strengthening
Proactive release of Cabinet material about Agreement to Share Information about Deaths
Proactive release of Cabinet material about Establishing a Strategic Framework for Regional Deals
Proactive release of Cabinet material about Improved Information Sharing for Customer Nominated Services
Proactive release of Cabinet material about Overseas Travel August
Proactive release of Cabinet material about out of cycle changes to budget baselines for the
Proactive release of Cabinet material about policy decisions on reinstating the Mori wards poll provisions
Proactive release of Cabinet material about the Betting Duty Savings and the Point of Consumption Charge Distribution Regulations
Proactive release of Cabinet material about the Future of the Greyhound Racing Industry
Proactive release of Cabinet material about the Government response to the Inquiry into the Local Elections
Proactive release of Cabinet material about the Online Casino Gambling Phase Decisions and the Regulatory Impact Statement on Phase Cabinet decisions
Proactive release of Cabinet material about the Racing Industry Amendment Bill
Proactive release of Cabinet material about the Racing Integrity Board regulations and commencement order
Proactive release of Cabinet material about the Water Services Acts Repeal Bill: Approval for Introduction
Proactive release of Cabinet material about the initiation of the media content regulatory review
Proactive release of Cabinet material about the proposed regulations for natural hazard information in LIMs
Proactive release of Cabinet material and additional documents relating to Interim response to the Report of the Social Services and Community Committee on Petition of Jenn Hooper
Proactive release of Cabinet material and additional documents relating to the Government Response to the Report of the Regulations Review Committee on Inquiry into bylaws
Proactive release of Cabinet material and additional documents relating to the Rates Rebates Order
Proactive release of Cabinet material and briefings for the Fire and Emergency New Zealand Funding Review May
Proactive release of Cabinet material and minute relating to Water Services Authority Levy: Release of discussion document
Proactive release of Cabinet material and submissions for charities appeals regulations
Proactive release of Cabinet material for the release of Government response to the final report of the working group for reducing bariers to changing registered sex
Proactive release of Cabinet material on the Conclusion of the Future for Local Government Review
Proactive release of Cabinet material providing an Overview of the gambling, racing and community funding work programme (including the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sectors oral item on community funding)
Proactive release of Cabinet material regarding Modernising the Charities Act
Proactive release of Cabinet material regarding the results of review into greyhound racing in New Zealand
Proactive release of Cabinet material related to the Government Response to the Report of the Regulations Review Committee on Inquiry into bylaws
Proactive release of Cabinet material related to the Local Government forward work programme
Proactive release of Cabinet material relating to the Government Response to the Interim Report of the Justice Committee Inquiry into the Local Elections and Liquor Licensing Trust Elections, and Recent Energy Trust Elections. January
Proactive release of Cabinet material relating to the Local Electoral (Mori Wards and Mori Constituencies) Amendment Bill
Proactive release of Cabinet material relating to the Report on Overseas Travel Hon Jan Tinetti
Proactive release of Cabinet material Films, Videos, and Publications (Commercial Video onDemand) Amendment Regulations
Proactive release of Cabinet material Films, Videos, and Publications Commercial Video onDemand Levy Regulations
Proactive release of Cabinet material Fire and Emergency levy rates and administrative regulations
Proactive release of Cabinet material: Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Regulations
Proactive release of Cabinet paper Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Registering Nominated Sex) Regulations and associated materials
Proactive release of Cabinet paper Local Government Forward Work Programme
Proactive release of Cabinet paper and associated briefings Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Bill
Proactive release of Cabinet paper and associated material Gambling (Definition of Remote Interactive Gambling) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction
Proactive release of Cabinet paper and associated materials Revocation of spent regulations: Commercial Use of Royal Photographs Rules , and
Proactive release of Cabinet paper and associated materials: Public Lending Right for New Zealand Authors Regulations .
Proactive release of Cabinet paper and minute related to the Tauranga City Council elections
Proactive release of Cabinet paper and minute relating to the Rates Rebates (Specified Amounts) Order
Proactive release of Cabinet paper on repealing the Canterbury Regional Council (Ngi Tahu Representation) Act
Proactive release of Cabinet paper Government response to inquiry into the selfidentification SOP, April
Proactive release of Cabinet papers related to the Royal Commission into COVID lessons and preparation for a future pandemic
Proactive release of Department of Internal Affairs papers regarding the Thuhu Programme
Proactive release of Evaluation Report: Coinvestment in Westports Resilience (September ) incorporating a technical review by TonkinTaylor (August )
Proactive release of Independent Quality Assurance Reports relating to the New Zealand Libraries Partnership Programme June These documents have been proactively released : May , KPMG New Zealand Libraries Partnership Programme Independent Quality Assurance report December , KPMG New Zealand Libraries Partnership Programme Independent Quality Assurance report Some parts of this information rel ease would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been with held, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Key to r edaction codes : Section ()(a) information may be withheld to protect the privacy of natural persons
Proactive release of Introductory Briefings to the Minister of Digitising Government
Proactive release of LEG Cabinet paper and associated briefings Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Bill: Approval of selfidentification supplementary order paper
Proactive release of Local Government Weekly Status Reports
Proactive release of Local Water Done Well stage water services delivery system:
Proactive release of Memorandum of Understanding between GCDO, Department of Internal Affairs and Amazon Web Services, December
Proactive release of Racing Cabinet material and briefings
Proactive release of Replacing the Longterm plan with a Three year Plan for eight local authorities
Proactive release of Report for the National Archival and Library Institutions Ministerial Group on the status of the Chief Archivist
Proactive release of SWERL (Local Government Act Longterm Plan) Order
Proactive release of SWERL (Local Government) Amendment Order
Proactive release of Sediment and Debris Management Package Report back and administrative change
Proactive release of Tokaanu marina Condition Assessments
Proactive release of Weekly Status reports for September
Proactive release of Wellington City Council Crown Observers Reports to the Minister of Local Government
Proactive release of Westland District Council performance update and Oversight Committee final report
Proactive release of a Department of Internal Affairs briefing regarding the donation of books from the Overseas Collections to the Internet Archive
Proactive release of a report into the findings and recommendations of to a direction to report to the Chief Archivist issued to the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment under section of the Public Records Act
Proactive release of briefings about the third and final extension to the report back of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Attack on Christchurch Mosques on March
Proactive release of briefings related to Local Government Water Services (Bill )
Proactive release of briefings related to Local Water Done Well
Proactive release of briefings related to the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill (Bill )
Proactive release of briefings related to the Water Services Acts Repeal Act (Bill )
Proactive release of cabinet material about an oral item at Cabinet Priorities Committee on October
Proactive release of cabinet material related to the Local Government (Electoral Legislation and Mori Wards and Mori Constituencies) Amendment Bill
Proactive release of documents related to the Ministerial response to the Aly Cook petition
Proactive release of documents related to the Ministerial response to the Reality Check Radio petition
Proactive release of final Cabinet material for charities appeals regulations
Proactive release of gambling Cabinet papers, April
Proactive release of information relating to Cabinets December decisions on Going for Housing Growth Pillar : Improving Infrastructure Funding and Financing to Support Urban Growth
Proactive release of information relating to Crown Intervention in Tauranga City Council under Part of the Local Government Act
Proactive release of information relating to Crown Intervention in Tauranga City Council under Part of the Local Government Act Appointing commissioners
Proactive release of information relating to appointing a new Commission to the Tauranga City Council, November April
Proactive release of introductory briefings to the Minister of Digitising Government
Proactive release of managing cost pressures associated with implementing the three waters reform programme Cabinet paper
Proactive release of material relating to Artificial Intelligence in the month of July
Proactive release of policy briefings relating to reinstating the Mori wards poll provisions
Proactive release of the Briefing to Incoming Minister for Racing
Proactive release of the Briefing to the Incoming Minister for Local Government
Proactive release of the Briefing to the Incoming Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector
Proactive release of the Cabinet Paper and Minute of Decision which record the approval of the Appointment of Crown Observer to the Wellington City Council and associated correspondence Cover sheet
Proactive release of the Cabinet material on exemptions from the Fire and Emergency levy
Proactive release of the Cabinet material regarding the decisions for the Crown Manager in Wairoa
Proactive release of the Cabinet material relating to levy rates consultation
Proactive release of the Cabinet paper on approval to consult on levy rates for Fire and Emergency New Zealand
Proactive release of the Cabinet paper Investing in Critical Infrastructure for Identity and Life Event Services, related papers and the Single Stage Business Case for Phase for Te Ara Manaaki.
Proactive release of the Cabinet paper: Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Prescribed Information) Amendment Regulations and associated materials
Proactive release of the Cabinet paper: Enabling a coordinated approach to reforms impacting local government
Proactive release of the Cabinet paper: Proposed changes to the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships (Prescribed Information) Regulations
Proactive release of the Cabinet paper: Reducing Pokies Harm: Approval to consult, April
Proactive release of the Cabinet papers and associated materials: Electronic Identity Verification Amendment Regulations , and Public Lending Right for New Zealand Authors Regulations
Proactive release of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Cabinet paper and associated material
Proactive release of the Racing Integrity Boards Greyhound Work Programme Quarterly Ministerial Report September
Proactive release of the accelerating the digitising of government Cabinet paper and associated minutes
Proactive release of the briefing paper seeking approval of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Rules
Proactive release of titles of Briefings received by the Minister for Digital Economy and Communications, from the Department of Internal Affairs, JanMar
Proactive release Local Government Electoral Legislation Bill
Proactive release Report back on a framework for a national network of high specification public bathroom facilities
Proactive release: Cabinet decisions relating to r educing the voting age
Proactively Released Briefings relating to the establishment of the Working Group can be found here:
Proactively Released I N C O N F I D E N C E DEVMIN . Ministry of Social Development; . Ministry of Health; . Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency. Janine Harvey Committee Secretary Present: Officials present from: Hon Grant Robertson (Chair) Hon Dr Megan Woods Hon David Parker Hon Nanaia Mahuta Hon Poto Williams Hon Stuart Nash Hon Kris Faafoi Hon Willie Jackson Hon Michael Wood Hon Dr David Clark Hon Meka Whaitiri Hon Phil Twyford Rino Tirikatene MP Dr Deborah Russell MPOffice of the Prime Minister Officials Committee for DEV I N C O N F I D E N C E wypaaxr Proactively Released Proactively Released I N C O N F I D E N C E CAB MIN DEV MIN Investing in Infrastructure for the Digital Identity CONFIRMED System Portfolios: Internal Affairs Digital Economy and Communications Michael Webster Secretary of the Cabinet Proactively Released osjznc I N C O N F I D E N C E Proactively Released Proactively Released Proactively Released Proactively Released INCONFIDENCE Page of . The Department is making some changes to modernise RealMe with the login service recently being re platformed to a Microsoft cloud based solution. The shift away from the custom built RealMe login service will reduce operating costs and the need for ongoing investments to upgrade expiring components. It is expected that Microsoft will continue investing in the product to suppor t future improvements to user experience and security. However, RealMe login is only one component of RealMe services, and much wider changes will be needed to realise the value of digital identity and drive system change. . RealMe services are currently funded at approximately million per annum (including operating and capital expenditure) until June and However , additional investment is needed to develop modernised digital identity services that realise the potential benefits . Comparable jurisdictions such as Australia are investing significantly in digital identity. The current approach of multiple time limited funding requests for RealMe services will also need to change as it has undermined certainty about long term service provision , which in turn, impacted the ability of agencies and organisations to develop their services using RealMe. . However, government needs to do more than investing in digital identity services to realise the bene fits. People need to be able to access information or attributes about themselves and reuse them to obtain more services digitally. . Government has a key role in this as it holds a wide range of identity related information and attributes about people. There are multiple examples of attributes where there could be significant benefits for people, the economy and government if investment and other changes are made (including legislation in some cases) to make these available. These include attributes related to: . driver licencing information, which people commonly use to verify their identity, particularly where they do not have a passport ; . immigration to help prove the identity and eligibility of non New Zealand citizens within New Zealand ; . health to support access to services and to enable health professionals to prove their qualifications and skills (including health records such as vaccinations, and registrations such as the Health Provider Inde x held by the Ministry of Health) ; . education to support access to learning or access to services dependent on the outcome of learning already completed (such as the Record of Achievement administered by the New Zealand Qualifications Authority and other re cords associated to the National Student Number held by the Ministry of Education) ; . eligibility to make it easier to access services (such as peoples concession entitlements held by the Ministry of Social Development) ; and . business and employment, so people can represent themselves professionally or represent their organisation when undertaking activities such as compliance (including occupational licences and authorisation to represent an organisation held by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Emplo yment). . Such information will need to be of utility for both users and receiving organisations, to encourage their participation in the digital identity system. Government will also need to change how it receives information as it is a significant user of identity services to determine who people are and their eligibility to access services (in this capacity, government is a relying party).
Proactively Released INCONFIDENCE Page of
Proactively Released INCONFIDENCE Page of
Proactively Released Proactively Released
Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Page of CONFIDENTAL
Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Page of CONFIDENTAL Table of Contents ABSTRACT VERSION CONTROL TEST EQUIPMENT TEST TEAM CARDS SETUP DAY : MAY ISSUES OVERVIEW ISSUE CACHE RESOLVED ISSUE SLEEP MODE RESOLVED ISSUE PAGED FLASH MEMORY RESOLVED ISSUE LAST LOG ENTRY RESOLVED ISSUE DARK MODE IN IOS RESOLVED ISSUE ISSUE RESOLVED
Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Page of CONFIDENTAL Test Equipment iPad Mini with VT software cards blank with lanyards Firmware for the cards Rd party software setup card in and software to DFU unload the firmware
Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Page of CONFIDENTAL
Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced contact tracing. June .
Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs V) ro , ::; ro C iC () ( ,.; m C: m I Q) ;:: ., C (I) (l) ., C lJ ,: :, I., v . lJ a (I) ,. F II a, :e :a ;:;; C Q. II a, . C n, Ill a, , ti.() C a. a. ft ;:: QI . E ns , tl.O n, c i. X C ( a. a. ( Department of Internal Affairs Taumata Arowal Ministry for the Environment Regional Councils Ministry of Health National Emergency Management Agency Te Arawhiti Health outcomes Environmental outcomes Infrastructure sustainability Financial sustainability I I , I and resilience outcomes outcomes Policy, stewardship, legislation local government system water services system Monitors Taumata Arowai Drinking water regulation (under Water Services Act ) I Oversight of performance of wastewater and stormwater networks Reviewing source water risk management drinking water safety plans NES sources of human drinking water Freshwater management regulations (inc. NPSFM) National Adaptation Plans Emissions reduction plans Administers Environmental Reporting Act Policystewardship resource management system Regulatorwastewaterstormw ater networks (in region) Policy advice public health matters relating to drinking water. ( Regional plans Administers Civil Defense Emergency Management Act . Policy lead on the Crowns Treaty of Waitangi obligationsincluding Treatv settlements w u z w Q ii: z u The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Appendix : Timeline to standup Taumata Arowais stormwater and wastewater functions Timeline of indicative Stormwater and Wastewater components zozs Context LaaJ WIier oM WeRllCillllloft .oclll lledloft JIil Public Registers TaumatatJYtai fw built alCI marntains a.public Agister of wasteNater and stormwater ne.tWql(s. This lndodes infonnation:aboutme location, consent dbdlarge .and l(Plty, .rw:iiarge pdtsc National Reporting ;rautnillil AtOli has a rOle In reporting lnsfme environmental perfor;rna)Ce of wastev,ater stonnwaier networb. Thl:s reporting only applies to pufilic i;upplles. Standards Tawnata Arowai caset staic:laids,th;R would improve consistencyinconsenting .A rangtrofstaodards are pqssibl, dlllbratea to regulauxylm, tt C)(Jld ti. ,:irogre.ssively implemented over limeour work will CO(ISidka range,et :Kenafi. Standards(cpmined with P.ubtlcreponing) wil Improve consisteocy af regional coullcit enforteme.,t;;Ktiviries.. ectendfll tlmtframe to l)otify fceshy,arer plitn chan:ei Update Wastewater Register Uptiate StOflTiwatef Register llumataAlOWlliilrtwidIUicsuppllfflto lmpra it.. data quality in the wamwar .and SrmWaUr raelsllnfNfl. Develog approach to fill gaps in network performance measures and reporting fflffllCM: ITlillldlalCIY lllltWDrt pelfonNnceaieasures tl h ldlllc Mandatory wastewater data collectton RMA rtfomu :: minuaf lmpi:ovement di both tmedon IAfvmatlan AIIIIMd dlraGp nalOlllill reponq ll)C delopol stonnwa me:asuces. fP betlSedin Jl(ililic CllSulratfon COIWtidoa, latll Ja). firstPalwmanatRapattpufllshedmld. (prilll;dyM:llqlftter second Report r. mid (rily cov,r .I DWandWW) Z, llepOlt eipldldtD ow, WWSW Develop mndards for infrastructurea nd overflows owerte nsr sa TAlntendson advallcint: a pnigrilmme of tosetstrndilnls tllat s .wfit far NtwZealandCDlldiSons arut lnfrasuumn. local Govt and lndut,y Technic.il Adviro:y Group ; ,lfOlt:,NPsfM llebal.ctltingoccurringln fel . . ., . . . . StM.,do Standards Implemented Standards w,U bJfvn ect to in new consents, and could indude a timeframe (S years) to allov, upgnde.s to meu newmndards. Standard dor trade waste.ind eMtgy use consi;dired W..neyr,ncu risk managomem pl.n:.cfesgned and registered NOTE liming discretio nary IN CONFIDENCE Page of
Proactively Released by the partment of Internal Affairs ()(b)(ii), ()(f)(iv) The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of Recommendations . We recommend that you : a) note that Local Water Done Well will enable councils to work with local rural communities to determine the optimal management , governance and financing arrangements for mixed use rural water schemes ; b) note the proposed changes to the Water Services Act in your Cabinet paper Local Water Done Well Stage further decisions would help reduce regulatory compliance costs for mixed use rural water schemes ; c) note submitters on the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill raised concerns that complying with drinking water regulatory standards is driving up costs for mixed use rural water schemes, and you may wish to consider further opportunities to reduce the regulatory burden for these schemes ; d) discuss with officials the option of establish ing an independent advisory group to review the regulatory settings for mixed use rural water schemes.
Proactively released by the
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs . THE cardholder in using the card shall comply with the Departments approval or authorisation system and all relevant Departmental Instructions.
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs AN AGREEMENT made BETWEEN THE SECRETARY FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS, (hereinafter referred to as the Secretary) of the one part AND hereinafter referred to as Cardholder) of the other part
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia Introduction The New Zealand government is proposing to reform the drinking, waste and storm water (three waters) sector. It proposes to amalgamate the three wa ters services of the local authorities into four regional public corporations . The government is proposing to amalgamate WDC s water services into a new statutory corporation called Entity A together with the water services of Far North District Counc il, Kaipara District Council and Watercare Services Limited , owned by Auckland Council (the Refo rm Scenario). The government has presented the only alternative to the Reform Scenario as being a situation where WDC remain s as a standalone water service prov ider under council control (the OptOut Scenario ). This report analyses the evidence underpinning both the Reform Scenario and the OptOut Scenario as follows : The Reform Scenario is analysed , and its underlying assumptions tested to determine whether th e stated level of household bills is robust (section ) . Specifically the analysis reviews : The estimates of the required level of assets for the Reform Scenario (section .) The estimated efficiencies apparently available in the Re form Scenario (section .) Other aspects of the methodology that raise questions (section .) . The OptOut Scenario is analysed and its underlying assumptions tested to determine whether the stated level of household bills is robust (section ) Finally, the risks and costs to the WDC community with the Reform Scenario are examined (section ). Government s Reform Scenario produces implausible household bill estimates The Reform Proposal predicts household bills for . The WICS analysis rests on two key assumptions : First, th at the capital stock invested in New Zealand water services needs to increase by a very large amount . Second, that the Reform Scenario will del iver large efficiency gains compared to the Opt Out Scenario . In our view , WIC S assumed scale of required increa se in capital stock , and of the achievable efficiency gains under the reforms, are both implausible. . Required investment estimate is overstated The governments case for reform rests on a claim that New Zealand water services require a significant capital investment over the next years. The government relies on WICS advice and analysis to set the level of investment for the Reform Scenario from to . WICS modelling is entirely based on a top down , New Zealand wide assum ption that a massive natio nwide investment programme is necessary for all council water services . This is Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia despite WDC and all other local authorities submitt ing detailed bottom up information about planned capital investment . Capital investment is needed in some parts of New Zeala nd now and in the next years to meet the dema nds of growth and due to historical deferred and underinvestment . There have been high profile asset failures. However, it is not clear that the investment is needed in all places, at the scale WICS claim. WICS are selective in estimating the nationwide re quired investment amount. WICS also use inappropriate Scottish comparators to support its claim that New Zealand needs to invest at equivalent levels. WICS estimate of required investment is significantly higher than the levels of investment that asset owner WDC has estimated will be required. WICS used projected investment requirements across three investment types that include replacement or renewal investment, enhancement investment, and growth investment projections. These projections are based on assumptions relating to asset lives, replace ment costs, inflation, population density, and projected connections growth. .. WICS approach to estimating required investment is unsound In order to estimate the requir ed investment, WICS uses English and Scottish comparators. WICS allocated New Zealand wide investment requirements for councils based on statistical relationship s and observed experiences in England and Scotland. The total investment required is made up of two key components that include enhancement and growth and asset replacement and ref urbishment . WICS model led the required investment using three approaches . WICS then cross check ed the modelled investment against information gathered from councils RFI re sponses . The modelled investment from the three approaches, plus investment specif ied in council s RFI responses are summari sed in Table .. WICS took three steps with each of its three modelling approaches : Step is to ap ply econometric models to predict New Zealands investment needs Step is to manually adjust the Step est imate for differences in growth Step is to apply a cap of , to reflect an assumption about the ability to pay for the investment. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia Table .: WICS modelling approaches for required investment Approach Enhancement and Growth Investment ( billions) Asset replacement and refurbishment ( billions) Total Investment FFF (, billions) Step : Unadjusted model output (NZ , billions) Step : Manual adjustment for differences in growth Step : Apply cap of , per connected citizen Great Britain comparative Models Scotland only comparative models (WICS preferred) Asset value comparisons with UK FFF Information included in councils RFI NA NA Source: WICS Final Report
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia Figure .: Asset value per connected ci tizen for selected water utilities
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia Table .: Urban populat ion statistics of New Zealand and Scotland Population Density(people per sq. km of land are) Urban population ( of population) Population in the largest city ( of urban p opulation) Urban population growth (annual ) New Zealand . . . (Auckland) . Scotland . FFF . (Glasgow) . FFF Source: World Bank Indicator Database,
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia Figure .: Impact of time profile adjustment on n ew investment path under the reform scenario
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia Figures Figure .: Governments predicted outcomes in Reform Scenar io and Opt Out Scenario Figure .: Net investment scenarios for Whangrei under WICS models and WDCs own plan Figure .: Asset value per connected citizen for selected water utilities Figure .: New Zealands asset gap according to WICS Figure .: Asset value per connected citizen for selected water utilities Figure .: Total Net Investme nt scenarios Figure .: Major cities within the proposed Entity A and the distances between them Figure .: Population density (persons per square kilometre) in Scotland Figure .: WDC three waters operating expenditure breakdown Figure .: Operating expenditure cost per connected property Figure .: Impact of time profile adjustment on new investment path under the reform scenario
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia level financial reporting in annual reports and statutory reporting to DIA. With a dedica ted economic regulator collecting a wider range of standardised financial performance information and with Taumata Arowai collecting performance information, WDC will be able to better assess the performance of its water services. This is likely to lead to improv ements in performance over time. .. WDC management and operational competence likely to improve with competition between entities for staff The government has noted that larger , corporat e water entities are likely to improve management and operational compete nce. If this is the case, then one should expect WDC to also lift competence of its management and operations . This is because WDC will have to match the working conditions at the larger corporate entities, leading to improvements in performance ove r time. . WDC can increase access to finance to lower short term costs WICS base assum ption is that WDCs financing headroom is . times revenue. In fact, the Local Government Funding Authority has approved WDC (and other local authorities with a credit rat ing of A or above) to borrow up to . times revenues FFF. Furthermore, the OptOut Scenario assumes that WDC can make no improvements to its financing arrangements . Efficient use of f inanc e can lower costs of service Efficient financing is an important co nsideration in investment planning for water utilities. The term of loans should ideally match the useful life of the asset the loans are financing. If the loan is repaid over a shorter period of time, then water bills after the loan is repaid will be lowe r than they otherwise would be. WICS assumes that amalgamated entities have greater access to financing and can make more efficient use of finance to lower the cost of service. We tested the change in average cost per household for across different f inancing option scenarios for both WDC in the Opt Out Scenario and for the Reform Scenario ( amalgamated entity ). Table . and Table . show that a significant proportion of the claimed reduction in averag e cost per household for the Opt Out Scenario compared to the Reform Scenario is due to changing the financ ing requirements.
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia Definitions WDC Whangrei District Council WICS Water Industry Commission for Scotland RFI Request for Information DIA Department of Internal Affairs LGNZ Local Government New Zealand IPART Indepe ndent Pricing and Regulatory Tribunal
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia Executive summary The government is proposing to reform the drinking, waste and storm water (three waters) sector . The reform will involve amalgamating the water services of the local authorities into four new r egional statutory corporations , with centr alised management and a new governance structure . The structure will have indirect Board appointment rights for local authorities to be shared with mana whenua representatives. The government proposes to amalgamat e Whangrei District Council (WDC) into a new statutory corporation called Entity A together with the water services of Far North District Council, Kaipara District Council and Watercare Services Limited (owned by Auckland Council ) (the Reform Scenario). The government has given WDC two choices, join the Reform Scenario or Opt Out. WDC, along with other local authorities, has been asked by the government to consider the evidence and whether the governments proposal to reform the water sector will delive r benefits to its residents. The government also committed to providing Whangrei with million in funding under the better off package, a n additional million for stranded overhead costs under the no worse off package, and further comp ensation for any loss in WDCs debt headroom. These amounts are to be partfunded from the balance sheet of the new entity. Key question: will the Reform Scenario deliver the claimed benefits The key question for this report is whether the benefits for W DC that are claimed by the government are robust, and whether the Whangrei communi ty is likely to be better off with the Reform Scenario. The Reform Scenario uses analysis provided by Water Industry Commission for Scotland (WICS), the Scottish government s regulator of its monopoly water provider Scottish Water. The WICS analysis and mo delling underpins the case for reform. The government has relied on WICS for the claims that significant capital investment is needed in the New Zealand water sector, and th at amalgamation in to four separate entities with accompanying institutional changes is the only way to achieve the cost efficiencies to make the reform affordable . The g overnment is promising that household bills will be four times lower in Reform Scenario than in OptOut The government is promising that the Reform Scenario will deliver household bills that are more than four times lower than the bills that would exist in the OptOut Scenario . The government claims that the Reform Scenario will deliver Whan grei residents: Household bills that average by Improvements in service delivery and affordability Improvement in the ability to raise finance In contrast, the governments WICS analysis claims that if WDC provides water services as a n optout provider, household bills will rise to , by . Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia Figure . : Governments predicted outcomes in Reform Scenario and Opt Out Scenario
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Draft Water Services Delivery Plan (first stage)Final Water Services Delivery Plan (second stage) Approach to delivery model, infrastructure pipeline and pricing path. Approach to financial ringfencing.All councils must provide a comprehensive plan that includes their infrastructure strategy, investment pipeline, and pricing path. Demonstration of financial ring fencing of water services against regulation. Reviewed by the Department and partner agencies against key criteria. Reviewed by responsible Minister.Detailed assessment of all components of the plans by Commerce Commission, Taumata Arowai and other agencies. Formal approval by responsible Minister with intervention powers available. Sets out intentions, but there is no legal accountability to the draft Plans.Plans are statutory planning documents that councils (or CCOs) will be required to give effect to and report progress against to Minister and regulators. Soft (predominantly relationship) levers.Suite of regulatory backstop powers available with clear escalation pathways informed by assessment of and compliance with delivery plans. Some reporting required. Enhanced monitoring by central government of some councils as necessary.Regular reporting requirements, including against set performance measures. Monitoring regime in place across the Department, Taumata Arowai , and Commerce Commission.Level of detail required Assessment Accountability Enforcement Monitoring and reporting Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Overview Your manifesto document Local Water Done Well sets out a clear direction for financially sustainable water services, underpinned by a strong regulatory regime. The regulatory environment for water services delivery include swater quality and environmental regulation, economic regulation and consumer protection . This slide pack provides an overview of the existing regulatory environment, opportunities to strengthen the regulatory regime, and an approach to stand up interim economic regulation over the next months. The contents of this pack are: Overview: recap of features of Local Water Done Well that support the stand up of the future regulatory environment Section : Economic regulation and Part of the Commerce Act Section : Proposed interim arrangements for economic regulation IN CONFIDENCE ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Regulatory Context IN CONFIDENCE Water services delivery by councils has a number of issues, including: In many places, investment in water services has not been prioritised and has been diverted to other priorities ; Many ratepayers not being informed on how much of their rates are being spent on water services; and It is often difficult for ratepayers and communities to make informed submissions on council proposals for water infrastructure and funding, or to hold their councils to account for poor decisions . Water services regulation already has water quality standards and some environmental standards ,but no economic regulation. There are currently few requirements on councils for the management of infrastructure, and none for infrastructure investment. There are requirements for councils to prepare an infrastructure strategy as part of their long term plans, as provided for in the Local Government Act . Existing requirements under the Act have not resulted in adequate investment in, or the substantial management of, water services infrastructure by councils. This is because while these plans are review ed by auditors, they are not reviewed by regulators and they cannot require investment. Evidence from overseas jurisdictions and other utility sectors in New Zealand indicates that economic regulation is indispensable for a well functioning water services delivery system. It plays a crucial role in safeguarding and improving the long term interests of consumers, and providing incentives and regulatory oversight to improve performance. We can provide you with an overview of economic regulation regimes in other jurisdictions. Multiple agencies will be involved in achieving comprehensive regulation of water services. Their work needs to be well connected to ensure a cohesive and effective approach to regulation. Department of Internal Affairs interim monitor and agency to provide support to councils in the development and assessment of their Water Services Delivery Plans; Taumata Arowai the water quality regulator; Commerce Commission long term economic regulator; and Regional Councils in regulation of environmental impacts . Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Features ofLocal Water Done Well IN CONFIDENCE Effective regulation of water services is critical to improved delivery. Local Water Done Well provides for this by putting a greater focus on investment levels, revenue sufficiency, and sustainable performance of water services, and introducing more transparency and direction to councils. Many of the features of your manifesto policy will set in place the foundations for a strengthened regulatory regime The requirement for councils to prepare plans for how they will transition water services delivery to new models that meet requirements for investment and financial sustainability, is an important step to setting up a future economic regulation reg ime and continuing to build on drinking water and environmental regulation (quality regulation). The development of investment rules and criteria for assessing financial sustainability of the plans will be particularly important. Other features of Local Water Done Well also support the stand up of the future regulatory regime: The Minister of Local Government signing off councils plans once satisfied they meet requirements. The Government will not mandate any specific model for water services onto councils. A regulatory backstop to ensure councils deliver a viable plan that can deliver on outcomes for water quality, infrastructure investment and financial sustainability. Repeal of the Water Services Economic Efficiency and Consumer Protection Act and instead regulation of water services delivery under Part of the Commerce Act . The Water Infrastructure Regulator will set quality standards for water infrastructure. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Section : Economic Regulation and Part of the Commerce Act Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs A comprehensive approach to economic regulation is critical to the successful delivery of water services, as outlined in Loca l Water Done Well. Economic regulation aims for efficient market and supplier operations, along with consumer protection, particularly in industries with limited competition or when businesses wield substantial market power, such as in the water industry. It also supports the achievement of various health, economic, and social goals and ensures the delivery of services at a quality and resilience level that aligns with consumer and broader community expectations. Without economic regulation the monopoly nature of water services delivery would be detrimental to consumers, as the providers would have the ability to charge higher prices than in a competitive market. In the context of water services delivery, the key questions in the economic regulation space: How does the water supplier optimise operations for efficiency, resilience and sustainability What measures are in place to ensure fair pricing How does the supplier guarantee compliance with service quality and other standards Economic r egulatory tools include: Requiring public disclosure of certain information to understand the performance of those delivering water services; Benchmarking, monitoring, analysing and reporting publicly on performance; Regulating the revenues and quality of service, including the ability to require ringfencing of revenue for specific services ; Setting minimum standards for service quality that must be met; Reviewingapproving asset management plans and funding pricing plans; Setting and enforcing a service quality code to improve the quality of water services; and Enforcing and monitoring consumer complaints processes and monitoring the consumer dispute resolution service. Regulation for water services regulation would be added into Part of the Commerce Act and would be implemented from within the Commerce Commission (and the Water Services Economic Efficiency and Consumer Protection Act repealed ). The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) is the lead agency for policy advice on economic regulation, and will be briefing the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs next week on this topic. Our initial view is that ifPart of the Commerce Act is used, it should be amended to make water services a regulated sector. There are some features of water services that may require more bespoke requirements, and further advice can be provided on these .Economic regulation of water services IN CONFIDENCE Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Overview Part of the Commerce Act provides for the Commerce Commission to regulate the price and quality of goods and services for the benefit of consumers in markets where there is little or no competition. The Act sets out the particular goods and services that are subject to regulation and the legislative rules governing that regulation. Current industries regulated under Part include electricity lines services, gas pipeline services and certain airports serv ices. The telecommunications and dairy sectors are governed by their own respective legislation. Who decides which sectors are regulated under Part Parliament decided that electricity lines services, gas pipeline services and certain airports should be regulated under Part . Regulation under Part may also be imposed by the Governor General on the recommendation of the Minister of Commerce following a Part inquiry by the Commission. However, while a this is technically feasible route to regulation, this process is not considered suitable for water services. A Part inquiry would consume significant resources to collect and analyse evidence, take considerable time, and the outcome of the process would be uncertain (e.g., at the end of the process the Commission may recommend not to proceed with regulation). In making a recommendation to proceed with regulation, the Commission needs to consider the benefit to consumers through lower prices or improved quality would be greater than the costs of regulation, which include the cost of setting up and administering a new regulatory regime (which consumers would ultimately pay for through charges). The size and structure of the industry in question will have a material bearing on this assessment of costs and benefits, wit h the costs of regulating many smaller suppliers operating with a variety of corporate and non corporate structures potentially posing challenges to a regulator. In the current circumstances, the most effective and efficient mechanism for ensuring regulation would be for Parliament to pass legislation to place the regulation of water services under Part of the Commerce Act.Part of the Commerce Act IN CONFIDENCE Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Differences between Part and the WSEECP Act IN CONFIDENCE The economic regulation parts of the WSEECP Act (as distinct from the consumer protection parts) have much in common with Part . The purpose statement and statutory objectives within the WSEECP Act are based on those in Part , with modifications made to reflect that water entities were to be publicly owned and prohibited from paying dividends. If Council owned water organisations were structured as companies with shareholdings and had the potential to pay dividends now or in future, then they would look a lot like existing companies regulated under Part . Many electricity distribution businesses have council ownership, for example. The general regulatory approach provided for in the WSEECP Act is similar to that in Part of the Commerce Act, including provision for information disclosure, quality only regulation and price quality regulation. The Act also provides envisages similar role and process for developing and applying input methodologies. However, the WSEECP Act included a broader range of regulatory tools than what is available under Part and generic competition and consumer law, reflecting the unique characteristics of the water sector. For example, the WSEECP Act included tools such as performance requirements that are broader than the Part approach of setting quality standards. The WSEECP also provided for the Commission to ring fence a portion of an entitys allowable return that would then be held in reserve in case of any unexpected investment requirements, thereby ensuring entities have the minimum required level of cash to finance their operations. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Part was designed to be flexible and adaptable to the regulation of a wide range of entities and is expected to be suitable for regulating water services. However, the effectiveness and efficiency of regulation will be very dependent on the structure of the industry. Other things being equal, regulation of a fragmented sector with many small suppliers and diverse corporate and non corporate forms is likely to be less effective and more costly than regulation of water services organisations organised into more conventional corporate structures operating at a scale suitable for the industry. Further, there are some unique features of water services that may better suit a bespoke approach to regulation not easily provided for under Part of the Commerce Act. There is a track record for industry specific regulation in New Zealand, including for example in the telecommunications industry. Sector specific regulation in the form of Part of the Telecommunications Act was brought in to remedy specific issues with customer service, fault service levels, and billing in the retail telecommunications sector. The benefits of sector specific economic regulation and consumer protection regulation could include: allowing the legislation to be designed in a way that reflects the unique characteristics of the entities compared with other monopoly businesses regulated under Part and generic consumer law, particularly that water services will be council owned and potentially delivered through a wide range of non standard corporate and non corporate forms certain regulatory approaches used under Part may not be effective or practical when applied to the council water services providers, given they will operate differently and face different incentives to other regulated businesses bespoke regulation may better reflect the need for significant improvements in efficiency. For example, Part does not allow for comparative benchmarking, which could be a useful tool in driving efficiency improvements in the industry. standalone regulation would enable a broader approach to setting performance requirements than the Part approach of setting quality standards a standalone regime could be used to place restrictions on distributions of surplus, or to ring fence funds, until such time that certain quality or service standards had been achieved it could provide for the specific consumer consultation requirements, which could then inform the setting of performance requirements, quality standards and minimum service levels. These benefits are nuanced and the relative merits of general or specific regulation are unlikely to be clear cut.Whether to use Part or sector specific regulation IN CONFIDENC E Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Section : Proposed interim arrangements Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Local Water Done Well outlines a requirement for councils to submit a Water Services Delivery Plan (plan) for how they will transition their water services that meets water quality and infrastructure investment rules. These plans, and the analysis that will underpin the plans, will be an important step to setting up a future economic regulation regime and continuing to build on drinking water and environmental regulation. The development of investment rules and criteria for assessing financial sustainability of the plans will be particularly important. There is an opportunity to use this process to support improvements in the information base, and to pave the way toward economic regulation. Content of the plans We recommend that the first plan has two component parts, with the relevant weighting to the sections dependent on whether councils are considering amending their existing delivery model or pursuing a new model, and how quickly they wish to stand up a new model: . Councils initial plans for: Intended delivery model: oE.g. direct ownership and management of services, council controlled organisation (CCO), joint CCO with other councils; existing approach or new. oTimeframe and establishment plan implementation plan and timetable to transition to the new model ( eg to stand up CCOs, or amendments to existing processes) and market capacity and local workforce assessment to deliver proposed model. Infrastructure investment pathway full accounting of the state of current assets (where known) and where they are in their lifecycle. Funding pathways: oFinancial sustainability plan proposed approach to pricing and charging consumers, and approach to finance and debt. What prices they will change their consumers How will these charges be kept separate from the rest of the rates that consumers pay oAsset management programme proposed investment path, including maintenance, replacement and renewal, building for growth and building to improve quality for consumers. . Baseline performance information: Key financials and other required information (to be developed alongside the Commerce Commission). Performance against current regulatory requirements ( eg Water Quality Plan how they will meet water quality requirements as per those issued by Taumata Arowai ). Performance against sustainable financing performance. Water Services Delivery Plans IN CONFIDENCE Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Getting to a system of full economic regulation will take time to develop and implement. There are a number of key components that need to be stood up, for example the development, consultation and implementation of input methodologies. This typically takes several years, regardless of other future legislation that the Government may choose to implement. We recommend that interim economic arrangements are put in place to support improvements in the quality of information on assets, costs, and enhancing the transparency and accountability of water services. As the steward of local government, DIA is well positioned to help facilitate and organise an interim economic regulation regime, alongside MBIE and the Commerce Commission. DIA could build on existing monitoring frameworks and work alongside councils as they develop their Water Services Plans, to begin to build the information base that will support key indicators for future economic regulation (with the Commerce Commission). Crown Infrastructure Partners will also have a key role in the interim and future arrangements. As an interim step, Crown Infrastructure Parters could monitor the execution and delivery of capital plans. A staged transition to economic regulation A staged transition to economic regulation could commence with lighter touch requirements in the first months (e.g. a focus on the level of adherence to infrastructure investment rulesthe evidence that needs to be demonstrated for water services delivery plans), that are increased over time to achieve consistent information disclosure. There are several benefits to taking a staged transition to economic regulation. The staged approach allows: Time to build the information base, while using the information as it is developed to understand current performance and areas of risk. Considered development of the new policy settings and for local authorities to respond to these and implement changes. An opportunity to incrementally build requirements for councils. Given the phasing, this also may support higher enforcement of requirements at each step a scale of enhanced monitoring of some councils could be included on the basis of their earlier reporting. May provide more space for the economic regulator to define the relevant regulations without path dependency on the measures that have already been set. A greater opportunity to work with local authorities through the transition.Commencing economic regulation IN CONFIDENCE Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Information disclosure is a key step to commencing economic regulation IN CONFIDENCE Information disclosure from councils is critical to development and implementation of economic regulation. In particular, information disclosure is needed early to inform the development of methodologies to establish price quality regulation (or similar). We recommend starting with information disclosure as a regulatory tool while councils develop their water services delivery plans. There are several options you can explore for improving transparency and quality of information during this interim period, including: Specifying information that must be included in water services delivery plans; An option to repeat the Request for Information process that DIA led previously in where councils were asked to provide information on their assets (potentially co developed with regulators and expert advisory group); Potentially introducing new planning andor reporting requirements for water services under the Local Government Act ; and Placing statutory obligations on council officers to sign off on the quality of information. To address gaps in information to inform economic regulation, we propose that DIA work alongside the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment and the Commerce Commission to establish what information can be collected through council water service delivery plans. If you agree, the following steps will form the approach to transition: We will advise you on a process to set the expectations and requirements for Water Services Delivery Plans (working with Taumata Arowai , MBIE and the Commerce Commission). As part of this process, we will work with MBIE and the Commerce Commission to specify information disclosure requirements for councils. The first Water Services Delivery Plans will be used to set expectations and to capture base line performance and financial information to inform establishment of economic regulation plus setting early expectations for performance .
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE note that Chief Executives of agencies undertaking payroll system replacement projects should remain focussed on these projects and ensure they are being well managed.
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs TOTAL: I certify that to the best of my knowledge and belief the foregoing official expenditure is Codes: true and correct. I certify that I am satisfied
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . Purpose . This aide memoire provides you with background information and talking points (Appendix A ) for your online call with mayors and the Chair of the Greater Wellington Regional Council to discuss the decisions for Bill (to be confirmed) . . You will be supported in this meeting by Department of Internal Affairs officials Hamiora Bowkett (Executive Director, Water Services Policy) and Bex Sullivan (Deputy Executive Director, Water Services Policy). Background . On Monday March , Cabinet is due to make decisions on your paper, Local Water Done Well stage : establishing the framework and transitional arrangements . Stage decisions for Local Water Done Well will be announced publicly by means of a press release . . You have signalled your preference to have a n online call with all mayors prior to the announcement. In this call, you will outline the new aspects of Local Water Done Well, and if there is time, open the call to take questions. After the call, your office will send follow up letters to councils containing key information outlined in the meeting . This will be an opportunity for mayors to get in touch with further questions , if they wish . . The Department will send the information to council chief executives and provide further operational information , as required. Matters that may arise in the meeting . On Monday February , you and the Prime Minister announced the plan to progress Local Water Done Well . Details in the announcement contained high level information about the transitional stage and the enduring framework . It is expected that councils will be interested to receive further detail about the proposals including financial implications. Requirements of the Water Services Delivery Plans (Plans) . As the preparation of the Plans may be resource intensive , it is likely that councils would like to know as much detail on the requirement s of the Plans , as soon as possible . . The Plans should demonstrate how their future water services provision will be financially sustainable. They must include an assessment of the current state of their water services infrastructure, the projected expenditure required to deliver water services that are compliant with regulations and a financing plan to demonstrate how revenue to deliver water services is funded and financed. The assessments must cover a similar period to the councils long term plans and focus on what can be done to put water services on a financially sustainable footing . . You may reiterate that councils will have a month period (from enactment of the Bill) to complete their individual or joint Plans. The key to Local Water Done Well is to retain local autonomy in the decision making for the delivery of sustainable and quality water services. Councils should determine the solutions that work best for them , or jointly with other councils . Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . There may be interest in any support available for councils who are unlikely to reach joint arrangements with other councils. You should emphasise councils should be gin having conversations with their communities and other councils about how they may approach joint arrangements and shared services. They do not need to wait. Councils will also have access to guidance and technical support from the Department to assist them with completing their Plans. Remaining sector support, Better Off and Iwi Collective funding . It is likely that councils will be interested in decisions around any unspent council and Iwi Collective funding. . The remaining unspent funding will be re priori tised to be applied towards costs directly attribute d to delivering on the policies in Local Water Done Well. Councils should be encouraged to consider how any unspent Better Off funding could be aligned with Local Water Done Well . . Officials will follow up with councils about the next steps regarding funding, including to discuss potential opportunities for aligning remaining funding with Local Water Done Well. . You will be provided with an set of talking points ahead of your Zoom meeting with councils, in order to reflect any advice. Timing and opportunity for councils to have input into Bill . Bill is expected to have a shortened select committee process in JuneJuly . You may want to communicate to councils that they will have the opportunity to submit through the select committee process. . In the past, councils have expressed concerns about short select committee timeframes. However, this Bill makes transition al provisions to set the framework for enduring reform , and to provide certainty for councils . Further details around Bill . The next stage of Cabinet decisions on the enduring framework will also take place midyear . Councils may press for further information on the detail around the policy proposals. .
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Appendix A: Suggested talking points Approx , words minutes speaking time Thank you for joining me at such short notice for this meeting today. It was important to me to provide you with a heads up regarding an announcement I will be making at time today, about the next stage of Local Water Done Well. Following todays meeting I will be sending a letter to you outlining the key areas that will be covered as part of the announcement, and which I will be speaking to today. If we have any time left at the end of todays session, I will open up to take a few questions, but otherwise I encourage you to get in touch with any questions once you have received my follow up letter. Firstly, I want to acknowledge the important role of local government in contributing to thriving communities across New Zealand. I also recognise it is a challenging time for local government. These challenges are all too often readily apparent in the potholes and leaky pipes in the streets of our communities, and prominent in the news media reports of councils considering large rates increases. Its simply not sustainable. The Coalition Government strongly believes that it is for councils and the communities they lead and represent to decide on the best way forward to address these challenges. So that brings me to why were all here today as I share the first set of policies that will establish the Local Water Done Well framework and the transitional arrangements for the new water services system. But before I get to that I want to acknowledge your contribution in getting to this point. I recognise that some communities operate and maintain efficient, high quality water services, while others are finding it increasingly challenging to maintain and upgrade critical water infrastructure and fund new investments. And while doing this as in, simply getting on with it you have been working in an environment of change, and ongoing uncertainty. This is why the Government has been moving quickly to deliver on our commitments as part of Local Water Done Well. We repealed the previous Governments three waters legislation in our first days, and last month I outlined our plan for the next months to implement Local Water Done Well through a two stage legislative process . Ive heard from councils that the change to Local Water Done Well from the previous Governments policy presented planning challenges for councils, which we acted swiftly to address through transitional support options in the repeal Act. Its been good to see councils taking up these different options based on their individual circumstances and preferences. The bottom line is, our communities have different needs. A one sizefitsall approach to meeting those needs simply wont work. This is what Local Water Done Well is all about. The Coalition Government strongly believes in empowering communities and supporting local governance in managing and delivering water services. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of We believe that communities are best placed to make decisions about things that directly affect them like the future of their water assets, and ensuring sustainable, high quality management of water services. And sitting atop all of this, we believe in setting clear expectations and bottom lines. This means stronger support and oversight from Central Government, to promote efficiency and accountability within the sector. Todays announcement is another step forward in delivering on these fundamental elements of Local Water Done Well and empowering local government to lead the way in delivering the changes required for their communities. Cabinet has agreed to the first set of policies that will establish the Local Water Done Well framework and the transitional arrangements for the new water services system. This includes streamlined processes for setting up water services council controlled organisations, new requirements for councils to develop Water Services Delivery Plans, and steps towards future economic regulation. The policies will be introduced through legislation to be passed by mid , as part of the second stage of our implementation plan. The third stage, which I expect to share key information about around the middle of this year, will form part of third Bill that will establish the enduring settings and begin the transition to the new system.
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua IN CONFIDENCE Page of Purpose . This briefing seeks decisions on amendments to the Local Government Act (the Act) to streamline the consultation and decision making requirements that councils must follow to establish a water services council controlled organisation ( water services CCO). If you agree, proposals would be included in the Cabinet paper seeking policy decisions for the Local Government Water Services (Transitional Provisions) Bill (Bill ) . Key messages . Under Local Water Done Well, councils will be required to deliver a plan for how they will transition their water services to a new model that meets water quality and infrastructure investment rules, while being financially sustainable in the long term. . The Local Government Water Services Bill (Bill ) , intended to be enacted in mid , is proposed to set out a range of structural and financing tools that councils can use, including a new class of financially independent council owned organisations. This Bill is anticipated to include provisions for the establishment and longer term oversight, management, operations and powers of all forms of council water organisations. . However, some groups of councils may wish to go early, that is to start shifting their delivery of water services into more financially sustainable configurations prior to the enactment of Bill . At this point, t his is likely to focus on joint water services CCOs that can be formed under existing provisions in the Local Government Act . .
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of Purpose . This briefing provides advice on the water service delivery plans (the Plans) that councils will need to submit on their preferred water services delivery model . . We are seeking your decision on whether to receive further advice on a one or two phased approach to the Plans, and identifies other key considerations ahead of policy decisions being sought in January . Background . Local Water Done Well (LWDW) requires councils to submit Plans within months of repeal of the Water Services Entities Act for how they will transition their water services to a new model , that meets quality standards and is financially sustainable . A range of specific parameters for the Plans including the need to meet infrastructure investment rules, and direct ministerial approval were outlined. . We provided initial advice to you on the water services regulatory context on December . This advice is attached at Appendix A for your convenience. This advice noted that: . Historically councils have faced a number of challenges with water services, including incomplete information about the true cost of delivering water services, the state of water infrastructure, competing priorities, and providing transparency to communities on the investment in water assets relative to need ; . Effective regulation of water services is critical to improved delivery; . Water services regulation already has water quality standards and some environmental standards but no economic regulation ; and . Multiple agencies will be involved in achieving comprehensive regulation of water services. . Alongside overviews of water quality, economic and interim regulation, the previous advice also set out our understanding of what the Plans need to achieve: . Set expectations for the transition of water services by councils to meet quality and financial sustainability requirements; . Provide oversight of council planning to meet safe drinking water standards, ensure sufficient investment in maintenance and replacement of assets, considering future access and growth, and that they are pricing and borrowing sufficiently to fund their investment path; and . To inform the use of any regulatory backstop powers to ensure councils deliver a viable plan that can deliver on outcomes for water quality, infrastructure investment and financial sustainability . . This advice also noted that: . The Plans could require information on both councils initial plans for delivery (including intended delivery model, and infrastructure and funding pathways) and baseline performance information (including financial information, and performance against current regulatory requirements and other measures). . Information gathered through the Plans will contribute to the design of economic regulation and other policy settings ; and Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of . An indica tive process for developing requirements for the Plans and guidance for councils, and subsequent submission and assessment timeframes. . At present, there is no legislative framework to require provision of the Plans . Based on previous experience with respect to long term plans, we expect councils will prefer a clear legislative framework setting out any requirements for the Plans, and as such we recommend that a requirement for councils to complete the Plans is set out in the replacement legislation. . Your recent Cabinet paper CAB MIN outlined the proposed approach to progress a new water services legislative regime, in two phases. This advice signalled that the framework necessary to set out the Plans would need to be included in a first replacement Bill , in order to set clear requirements quickly for councils. Broad factors relevant to the plans . Councils will be starting in different places with respect to their future water service delivery model. We expect some councils will broadly retain their existing arrangements with some amendments to meet new requirements (for example financial ring fencing and sustainability ). These c ouncils may be able to leverage existing planning material , with some modifications, from their longterm plans. . However, c ouncils seeking to progress a more substantial change to their service delivery organising structures will require more lead in time and focus on their establishment efforts . Councils opting to use financially independent council controlled organisations (CCOs) , when available, w ould need to undertake additional implementation planning for the transfer of services , revenue and assets to the new organisation. This will be more complex for multi council organisations that will also need to negotiate and agree across councils on key parameters of the CCO (for example share allocations, funding and pricing approaches ) to inform establishment. . The development of the Plans will be a new activity for all councils . While c ouncils will need to adjust and plan for meeting any requirements over time, compliance in the immediate term may pose a problem . Larger councils may be able to pivot resources to absorb this work, but some smaller councils may face significant capacity constraints. Councils will likely need to undertake public consultation on their Plans, reducing the time available to them to develop materials. . LWDW describes greater transparency and strengthened planning and reporting for water services. These Plans would represent a n initial step towards achieving this, but the longer term planning and reporting framework for water will need to be integrated with broader local government planning and reporting. A range of intersections will need to be worked through, including : . Reporting and oversight material required by the Commerce Commission to enable economic regulation (including transitional arrangements) , regulation of financial ringfencing, and any information required to inform the use of regulatory backstop powers ; . The existing local authority planning and accountability regime , includ ing how to incorporate accountability to central government within a system that is predicated on accountability to communities ; . What a fit for purpose planning and reporting framework would look like for a range of water services delivery models ; and Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of . Questions about whether councils need to consult communities before submitting a Plan to central government, and whether subsequent modifications to a Plan will mean long term plans need to be amended. . Reflecting their joint delivery intentions, some councils may seek to provide Plans together as a region. This approach poses no immediate issues and the Department will work to enable this, though we note some careful consideration of this will need to be considered when developing the regulatory backstop powers that may be informed, in part, by the Plans. . It should be noted that, besides the availability of new financially independent CCO vehicles, or other novel organisational arrangements, there is no legislative barrier to councils transitioning their water services to more sustainable models in the near term (for example, using existing CCO provisions in the Local Government Act). We expect some councils may wish to set up new organisations for water before all replacement legislation is passed, or before they complete their Plans. Where this happens, councils will be looking for clarity from the outset on the process for developing and approving Plans. Options for how the Plans should be delivered . In developing the approach to the Plans, there is a need to strike a balance between : . driving progress , with a fast transition of models, infrastructure investment lifting in the near term, and financial sustainability achieved sooner ; and . ensuring a supported transition for councils , that is responsive to their individual situations, provides a path to full compliance over time , and which does not set unreasonable expectations and planning burden on them in a short period of time . Require councils to deliver all content in a single plan, as articulated in LWDW . Councils could be required to meet all the requirements outlined in LWDW in a single plan within the original month deadline . This option would most closely align with LWDW . This would al low a more straightforward a ssessment of whether a councils Plan represents a more financially sustainable and viable model, as all supporting analysis regarding infrastructure investment pipeline, price paths and plans to meet regulatory standards would be compiled. . However, councils may experience significant issues in complying with the request within the time available, and this may be faster than all councils are able to achieve. This approach would also pose issues for the policy development process (for example, developing appropriate infrastructure investment rules for councils to respond to) , and the legislative timeframes to give effect to these . A two stage approach would allow the requirements to be built up over time . Alternatively, a twostep approach to the parameters and requirements of the Plans could be considered. In this model: . The first step would set out the foundational settings for the Plans, including that councils would be required to provide them and indicative content. These requirements would apply to a draft Plan that councils would need to submit for review . Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of . The second step would then build on and significantly tighten these settings, including increasing accountability to, and introducing regulatory backstop powers for, central government . These requirements would expect to apply to the final Plans councils would need to submit for approval . . An indicati ve approach to what would be required at each step is attached at Appendix B. . The Department recommends that a two stage approach be taken to the Plans. Th is option would enable more flexibility for councils who wish to move quickly to new service delivery models , while also reliev ing some pressure on councils to deliver complete plans several months after completing their long term plan . The submission of a draft Plan within months would continue to set expectations for the transition, and provide oversight of council planning for yourself and agencies through the process. . Some councils may seek to move quickly, and prefer to meet all requirements in a single plan . As noted, it may require time for the full regulatory regime , and the rules councils will need to meet, to be issued. The Department will work to provide as much confidence as is possible in what will be required of councils early, to help enable this flexibility . There is further optionality within a two stage approach . Within what has been proposed in Appendix B, there are opportunities to require some elements earlier (or later) as preferred. For example, setting and reporting against performance measures could be brought forward for inclusion in t he draft Plans . Conversely, some elements could only be required for the final Plans, for example funding and pric e path information. . There may also be value in not committing to the form of the second st age at this time. As noted previously, t he Plans are one part of the regulatory and oversight framework for water services that is currently being developed . In retaining flexibility, and not committing to the remaining specific requirements outlined in LWDW, there may be opportunities for reconsidering and potentially streamlining planning and reporting requirements and reducing the compliance burden on councils. Key considerations for draft water services delivery plan . In addition to the approach to the Plans , there are a range of other considerations we would like to seek your view on to inform subsequent policy advice. We would like to discuss these considerations with you at an officials meeting in January . . Flexibility in the content required . Setting requirements that apply equally to all councils provides confidence on what is required, however , there may be merit in allowing some flexibility to maximise the value of the Plans. For councils seeking to establish new CCOs, it may be most valuable for their draft Plan to focus on establishment planning and implementation timetable. For councils that are
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of Purpose . This briefing seeks your approval to lodge the Water Services Legislation Repeal Bill (the Repeal Bill) and Cabinet Business Committee (CBC) paper ( Appendix A and Appendix B ) by am on Thursday February , for consideration on February . . The Department has also prepared and appended talking points ( Appendix C ) to assist you at CBC. We have attached a draft Departmental Disclosure statement and draft General Policy Statement (Appendix D), which will be upon introduction of the Repeal Bill. . You may wish to consider inviting the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs, Hon Andrew Bayly to attend CBC and Cabinet. This is because the Repeal Bill includes a clause to repeal the Water Services Economic Efficiency and Consumer Protection Act that falls within Hon Baylys portfolio. Background . On January , you received an earlier draft of the Repeal Bill and Cabinet paper, for consideration and approval to undertake departmental, Ministerial and coalition consultation between January and January (LG). . You are formally seeking the Repeal Bill is given category on the Legislation Programme. The Repeal Bill must be passed in due to a Government commitment as outlined in the Governments Day Plan CAB MIN . It should be noted the Rep eal Bill is likely to be passed before the Legislation Programme is agreed. . An outline of the changes to the Repeal Bill and Cabinet paper as a result of further refinement by the consultation processes with departments, Ministers and external agencies is detailed below. Feedback received during c onsultation Feedback from external experts . The Office of the Auditor General and Taituar were provided with the Repeal Bill. Auckland Council was provided with the new Part in Schedule AA of the Local Government Act . . All parties provided useful technical feedback which has been incorporated into the Repeal Bill as minor and technical changes . . In their feedback, Taituar raised the connection between long term plans and development contribution policies. Legally, development contribution policies are not part of a long term plan, but : . many local authorities include them in their long term planning documents ; and . these policies fund the capital works programmes that are provided for in the long term plans. . Taituar raised the risk that existing development contribution polices would be unenforceable if the adoption of the long term plan is deferred. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of . We have issued drafting instructions to include provisions to address the risk , which are set out in paragraph s and . Changes to the draft Repeal Bill and Cabinet paper . As outlined in our briefing from January , we have continued to work alongside Parliamentary Counsel Office to develop and refine the Repeal Bill to reflect Cabinet decisions from December CAB MIN . Local Acts . Following your agreement about Local Acts (LG) w e issued drafting instructions to include a repeal clause. To support the drafting, we consulted with the: . administering territorial authorities , who confirmed the repeal of the Local Acts would not impede their statutory or operational duties; . Office of the Clerk to ensure the repeal of the Local Acts complies with Appendix C of Standing Orders , who confirmed the Repeal Bill could contain a clause to repeal the Local Acts . New Part , Schedule AA, Local Government Act . As advised by Taituar , we have issued drafting instructions to enable local authorities that defer the adoption of their long term plan (either to September or for one year) to continue with their existing policies in force until their new long term plan is adopted. . As this matter was not covered in the original policy approvals for this work, we have included material in the C abinet Business Committee paper and seek Cabinet approval for this addition to the Repeal Bill. Treaty settlement legislation . The Department will engage with iwi Mori on the proposed amendments the Waikato Tainui Raupatu Claims (Waikato River) Settlement Act , Te Arawa River Iwi Waikato River Act , and Te Awa Tupua (Whanganui Claims Settlement) Act , as suggested by Te Arawhiti and Te Puni K kiri . . The Cabinet paper notes engagement with iwiM ori is ongoing. We will update the talking points attached to this briefing and resen d them to your office before CBC next week. Feedback from departments . Where comments from departments related to the draft Cabinet paper, we incorporated the feedback as appropriate . Other comments are summarised below. Feedback on the Repeal Bill . The feedback from the Ministry of Social Development, Te Arawhiti and Te Puni K kiri focused on Treaty settlements and engagement with iwiM ori. Both Te Arawhiti and Te Puni K kiri advised the department to undertake formal engagement with iwiM ori where consequential amendments are made to Treaty settlement legislation. . Disestablishment of Northland and Auckland Water Services Entity was noted by the Ministry of Social Development. The comments focused on economic hardship that may result from higher water charges imposed by district councils. Its concern was Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of driven by Northland having the highest population receiving Job Seeker Support and Sole Parent Support. . Amendments to the Local Government Act to transition water services back to local authorities were raised by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development . The comments were about local authorities water infrastructure investments to support integrated planning for housing growth, and how local authorities would raise revenue to meet the water infrastructure development given the under investment previously. . Commencement to repeal the Minister of Local Governments statutory obligation to make an Order in Council within months of section A() in the Water Services Entities Act commencing. This is set out in (). Both the Ministry of Justice and Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator asked for technical information to support the intent of the clause. Broader policy feedback relevant for future policy development . The definition of Te Mana o te Wai, as set in the National Policy Statement Freshwater Management was identified by the Ministry for the Environment as likely to be amended. The Ministry noted the definition of Te Mana o te Wai in the Water Services Act is directly linked in statute to the national policy statement (secondary legislation). There is no legal mechanism to enable secondary legislation to amend primary legislation. In the coming months, we will advise you on references to Te Mana o te Wa i in Taumata Arowais legislation (the Water Services Entities Act and Taumata Arowai the drinking water regulation Act ). . The Ministry of Transport and Ministry for the Environment noted regional councils, local authorities, roading authorities and other agents manging stormwater will need to comply with stormwater regulations in the Resource Management Act , and in the W ater Services Act through stormwater environmental performance standards. . There was concern the two sets of stormwater requirements would not be complementary leading to a duplication of effort by the agencies subject to the regulation. The Ministry of Transport asked if it was possible to include a provision in the Repeal Bill to exclude all roading authorities from the stormwater environmental performance standards in the Water Services Act. This question will be considered in your future focussed policy programme, for bills and . . The Department advised both the Ministry of Transport and Ministry for the Environment that amending stormwater regulations will be addressed in the work programme to implement Local Water Done Well. We will work with the Ministry for the Environment on amendments to Te Mana o te Wai . Feedback from Ministers . Your office advised no feedback was received from Ministers.
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of Purpose . This paper provides advice on: . the potential tax impacts of Cabinets decision to not prohibit water organisations from making distributions; and . the interactions between exemptions from minimum requirements and the tax status of water organisations. . Ministers decisions on these matters will inform the drafting instructions for the Local Government (Water Services) Bill (Bill ). Background . In June and July this year , Cabinet approved a series of papers which set out the policy detail of Local Water Done Well, including: . restor ing council ownership and control of water services; . establish ing clear outcomes based rules and minimum requirements for water services; . strengthen ing the regulatory regime through new economic and improved water quality regulation; and . provid ing a framework for new water organisation s designed specifically for water services. . In the third and final paper, Cabinet agreed (CAB MIN .) that water organisations should be granted tax exempt status. This proposed income tax exemption was recommended on the assumption that water organisations would not be able to provide distributions to shareholders, which had been proposed in the paper. . Cabinet also agreed that councils could apply for an exemption from some of the minimum requirements applying to water organisations. The Cabinet paper noted that granting such an exemption could affect the water organisations tax status. . Due to the outstanding tax issues , Cabinet authorised the Minister of Finance, Minister of Local Government, and Minister of Revenue to make further decisions during the course of legislative drafting in relation to how any tax implications associated with water organisations, distributions made by water organisa tions, and the exemption process for water organisations may be addressed. . Cabinet invited the Minister of Local Government to report back to the Cabinet Legislation Committee on any substantive decisions made under the delegated authority when approval to introduce the bill is sought . Why tax status is important . New Zealands tax settings reflect the principle that tax should apply to a wide definition of income (broad base) so that less tax needs to be collected (low rate) from each source. Tax exemptions put pressure on tax rates as they inherently reduce the total amount of potential income that is available to be taxed. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of . The income tax exemption proposed for water organisations was justified on the basis that: . private sector investors would not be able to benefit from the tax exemption , due to the prohibition on distributions and restrictions on shareholders ; and . these organisations will have a primary public policy purpose of undertaking water related activities in a monopoly market , rather than a profit making activity in competition with the private sector. . As water organisations will be able to make distributions to shareholders, and taking into account the potential outcomes arising from exemptions from minimum requirements, we have modified our positions for consistency. . In developing a response to these issues , consideration has been given to both the impact this may have on the tax base and the precedent it may set in relation to other entities in similar circumstances. Tax status of water organisation s that meet all minimum requirements . As previously advised LG , allowing water organisations to make distributions means the tax status of the shareholders should be considered when determining the tax status of the water organisation. . Under the minimum requirements, shareholders of water organisations can either be councils or consumer trusts. Councils are broadly exempt from income tax; the income they derive, primarily through rates, is used for the benefit of their communities. . However, a consumer trust would be a taxable entity and would face no such restrictions on how it used the income it receives . A consumer trust can achieve income taxexempt status by applying for and maintaining charitable status. As previously advised LG , we believe consumer trusts created to hold shares in water organisations will easily fall within the other purposes beneficial to the community category of charitable organisations. This would both grant the water organisation a tax exemption and ensure that it only provides public, and not private, benefits. . Nevertheless, there may be good reasons that a consumer trust would not want to apply for charitable status. One reason could be if the council establishing the water organisation wanted the shareholding consumer trust to distribute income back to consumers in the same fashion that an energy trust does. Energy trusts are not able to gain charitable status, in part because of the intent to provide private benefits back to consumers , normally through a discount on lines charges . . It is important that the shareholders of a tax exempt entity are also tax exempt if there are no restrictions on distributions . Tax exemptions are primarily provided for specific public purposes. Private individuals should not be able to derive a benefit from
Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsPriority Routine
Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsPriority Routine Local Government briefing Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Local Government .A.TAUMATA WAROWAI T Title: Wastewater environmental performance standards: single standard approach July Key issues You have asked for advice on what legislative and operational impacts would be if wastewater environmental performance standards were developed as a single standard, rather than a minimum maximum range approach. You are also seeking advice on how the development of thestandards would be progressed, what legislative changes are needed to the Water Services Act (WSA) and the Resource Management Act (RMA), and what wider initiatives could be undertaken in the resource management system to increase efficiencies for consenting water infrastructure. We have also highlighted how the development of standards could be linked to greater use of modular design infrastructure to achieve cost efficiencies . Note also that the Ministry for the Environment has been consulted on the Cabinet paper which outlines the changes required to the RMA and they will provide their feedback to the Department at the end of this week. Action sought I Timeframe a) Note that the single standard approach to wastewater environmental performance standards is considered international best practice and will set clear expectation s for consent authorities and communities about the level of treatment required, and promote overall standardisation of infrastructure and qualificationcapab ility of operators. b) Note that legislative change to the WSA and RMA will be required to: ensure regional councils implement a single standard approach in resource consents, and cannot exceed the standard in consenting conditions, apart from on an exceptions basis; empower Taumata Arowai to set wastewater infrastructure requirements that, if implemented by a network owner, will meet a standard. c) Agree that the Department and Taumata Arowai will work together to progress other initiatives in the resource management system relating to achieving cost efficiencies and streamlining resource consenting for wastewater infrastructure with the Ministry for the Environment. Contact for telephone discussions (if required) Name Position Contact Number Bex Sullivan Deputy Executive Director ()(a) I Water Services Policy and Stewardship , Department of Internal Affairs July Suggested st contact Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Allan Prangnell Chief Executive , Taumata ()(a) I Arowai Return electronic document to: Pam.johnstond ia.govt.nz Cohesion document reference LG Develogment of a wastewater standard.docx cohesion.net.nzl Ministerial database reference LG Purpose . This briefing provides advice on a single standard approach to wastewater environmental performance standards (wastewater standards), where, once made by Taumata Arowai, the requirements in the standard would be implemented through resource consents. Stricter or higher requirements would only be included in a resource consent by a consent authority (regional councils) in exceptional cases. Since your last briefing outlining a minimum and maximum range approach LG refers officials have continued to develop the policy approach in relation to setting a single national standard. . This briefing outlines: . the approach taken in other jurisdictions and how wastewater standards operate; . how a similar approach might be implemented in New Zealand (including the implications for legislation, and whether changes might be required); . whether other changes could be made to incentivise use of modular design treatment plants as part of standardsetting; . how the approach would be explored and implemented through Taumata Arowais work programme; and . initiatives that could be pursued in the broader resource management system to achieve further regulatory efficiencies for wastewater treatment plants. Background . Taumata Arowai is currently developing wastewater standards covering core areas in resource consents for wastewater treatment plants. You have requested advice on your preference for a single standard rather than a minimum and maximum range approach , and information on how that could be achieved. The wastewater standards will apply to all receiving environments but will be particularly applicable for discharges to water. A single standard is consistent with international best practice and is the preferred approach . In previous advice we explored what a minimum and maximum range approach to wastewater standards might look like LG refers. . Either a minimum maximum range approach to standards or a single standard approach are possible in legislative and operational terms: A single standard approach would include tiers of standards based on characteristics such as population serviced by a plant or mixing level of a water body it discharges to. INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs . while both would require further work as part of Taumata Arowais work programme, in terms of the technical work it is much more complex to set a minimum maximum range; . both will require legislative change to the RMA, and probably the WSA, to be confident the approach can and would be implemented across the regulatory system. . On balance our advice is that a single standard is the better approach for the reasons outlined below. . A single standard approach is consistent with international best practice Taumata Arowais technical experts could not identify any other jurisdiction where a maximum standard approach was adopted. They advised that in other jurisdictions where a standard is set, plants are generally consented to a national standard. That is, it is not a minimum standard, it is the standard. . In this sense a discharge standard operates like the drinking water standards which set treatment requirements that suppliers are expected to meet. Requirements for higher levels of treatment are generally only set in exceptional cases, for example, where a wastewater plant discharges to a pristine or particularly sensitive water body. . In system terms, a single standard is a better fit with the existing RMA regime. While it will deliver standardisation in approach to resource consenting, together with the flow on standardisation of infrastructure and procurement, there will still be potential for consent authorities (regional councils) to set conditions in consents that are stricter than the standard. However, this ability will be limited through legislative change so stricter or higher requirements would only possible on an exceptions basis defined in legislation. . Taken overall, a single standard approach will allow for standardisation of treatment systems and related infrastructure, material cost efficiencies in the design, build and operation of wastewater systems and greater certainty for councils in terms of infrastructure and budget planning. The single standard approach will also allow for greater certainty, consistency, and cost control across the wastewater treatment plant consenting system. As with a minimum and maximum range approach, these outcomes are aligned with the objectives of Local Water Done Well. . The problematic areas for a minimum maximum range approach are related to the maximum standard which regional councils would not be able to go beyond when setting a resource consent. Taking expert advice, we have not been able to identify another jurisdictions that takes this approach. In system terms it is likely to present challenges for regional councils and network operators depending on how the maximum standard is configured for the following reasons: . there will be cases where a maximum standard will be inflexible to (or be perceived to be) inflexible to the water quality of a water body. Under the RMA, water quality, together with community expectations about what it should be, is the primary driver for consent limits rather than standardisation of Taumata Arowai sought advice from technical experts with experience in overseas jurisdictions such as the United Kingdom and the European Union where wastewate r standards have been in place for over years. INCONFIDENCE Page of ll Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairsinfrastructure. In a subset of cases, higher treatment than the maximum standard maybe required to deliver the right outcomes for the water body; . there is a risk a maximum standard will have unintended consequences, and will not provide flexibility where a wastewater operator voluntarily treats wastewater to a higher standard than in the resource consent (for example, to provide for reuse of wastewater), and inadvertently breaches their resource consent because wastewater is too good to discharge to water. . For iwiMaori there may be a perception that a maximum standard would cut across the health of the water body and their role as kaitiaki, by hardwiring in a maximum level of treatment that could lead to greater pollution than their aspirations. There may also be greater implications for those Treaty settlements which have catchment related requirements (such as the WaikatoWaipa or Whanganui settlements). . In order to progress a single wastewater standard approach, legislative change will be required to ensure consenting authorities implement a single standard approach in resource consents. You may also wish to consider including provisions in the WSA allowing Taumata Arowai to specify infrastructure and operating requirements that, if implemented by a wastewater operator, will meet the treatment requirements in the standard. Broader changes to the resource management framework might also be possible to streamline consenting pathways. These matters are dealt with in the remainder of this briefing. Realising the benefits of a single standard approach Regulatory efficiencies could be achieved where wastewater treatment plant design and consenting processes were aligned to a new wastewater standard . There is a significant opportunity for economies of scale and cost savings across the system if an endto end modular designconsentbuild approach was adopted for lowerrisk wastewater treatment plants for small communities (i.e. less than , people), aligned to comply with a new wastewater standard. These are likely to be smallerscale plants in provincial or rural areas with less complex treatment processes and will not generally include those with industrial discharges. . An example is where an oxidation pond may be currently used to treat wastewater. This is common throughout New Zealand, but treatment outcomes are highly variable and, as a consequence, these arrangements often breach resource consents. Reconsenting of oxidation ponds could occur with integration of a modular plant to lift treatment outcomes. This approach to upgrading plants is being implemented by some territorial authorities. Wastewater standards would incentivise the approach across New Zealand. . Of the wastewater treatment plants that will require reconsenting in the next decade, service populations of , people or less. These plants make up around percent of the total number of councilowned wastewater plants in New Zealand. . While there will be local differences, industry estimates of the costs of the design, consent and construction of those plants are up to million for plants servicing less than , people. It is estimated that, in some cases, up to half of those costs relate to design and consenting issues. In contrast, a modular offtheshelf wastewater treatment plant that was designed to meet the standard could be constructed and be operational for around million. INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs. Modular, standardi sed approaches to the provision of wastewater treatment are common internationally , but barriers to their adoption in New Zealand include: . no consistent approache s to consenting wastewater treatment plants; . councils operating in silos and rely on local consultants leading to bespoke design; and . lack of capabilityconfidence to procurement of standardised solutions internationally . . With the bow wave of wastewater treatment plants needing to be reconsented (and upgraded in the next years, the development of a pipeline of plants that could be commissioned and the use of modular design could drive these costs down further (LG refers. . The diagram in Figure below provides an example of how efficiencie s could be achieved through an endtoend process where modulardesigned wastewater plants were designed, consented and procured to meet the national wastewater standard. Figure Endtoend process to Increase efficiencies for the delivery of small wastewater treatment plants in New Zealand . New national wastewater discharge standard set by Taumata Arowal . Resource consent requirements incorporate wastewater standard (and cannot exceed) . Potential for new standardised consenting process for low risk modular design plants . Treatment plant is designed to meet the wastewater standard . Modular designed plant Is procured to meet design standard . Regional councils are able to issue discharge consents faster District Councils can issue building and land use consents faster for the plant . Procurement support provided to cover guarantees, after sales service, spare parts, and training (by CIP or similar agency) Changes to the WSA and the RMA will be needed to achieve a consistent approach across standards and consenting, and to provide for new regulatory arrangements described above . Wastewater standards under the WSA are linked in legislation to resource consenting under the RMA. Section (D) of the RMA specifies that a consent authority, when considering an application for a resource consent that relates to a wastewater network (as defined in the WSA): must not grant the consent contrary to a wastewater environmental performan ce standard made under section of that Act; and must include, as a condition of granting the consent, requirements that are no less restrictive than is necessary to give effect to the wastewater environmental performance standard. INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs. Taumata Arowai was given powers to make wastewater standards under the WSA. Once the wastewater standards are in place, resource consents must not be granted contrary to, or less restrictive than, a standard. However, a consent authority may currently impose conditions that require higher treatment requirements. . Despite the recent legislative changes to both the RMA and the WSA to remove the Te Mana o te Wai hierarchy of obligations from resource consenting processes and the development of wastewater standards, there are still provisions that allow a proposed wastewater standard to be exceeded in consenting decisions. For example, where regional council policy requirements go beyond national policy requirements (e.g. by directing all wastewater discharges to land, as is proposed in the Northland Regional Council freshwater plans), and where regional plans and policy statements and some iwi management plans have embedded Te Mana o te Wai in their planning documents and the hierarchy remains operational. . To be able to implement the changes outlined proposed in this briefing relating to a single standard, legislative changes to the WSA and RMA legislation will be needed to: . provide more directive provisions that ensure regional councils cannot set additional or higher requirements than the standard (allowing for some specific exceptions); . allow Taumata Arowai to be able to set infrastructure and operating requirements that, if implemented by a wastewater operator, will meet the treatment requirements in the standard this could be used to specify design solutions such as integration of modular plants with existing oxidation ponds; and . allow an easier consenting path or preconsented option for lowerrisk smallscale modular wastewater treatment plants that met the standard. . These changes are critical to support councils in addressing challenges in the reconsenting the bow wave of wastewater treatment plants. Around percent of wastewater treatment plants will require reconsenting in the next years, with the most challenging issues where plants discharge to freshwater or low mixing environments like estuaries or bays close to the coast. . This does not mean lower environmental requirements for discharges to fresh water or coastal water. It means that a consistent approach to consenting the discharge of wastewater from treatment plants will be provided, which reduces the regulatory burden by targeting key weaknesses in the existing resource management regime. . Further work will be needed to develop and agree the appropriate policy approach and nature of the legislative changes. In your July Cabinet paper you are seeking the following legislative changes: . delegated authority to work with and agree the appropriate approach with the Minister Responsible for RMA Reform to progress these changes; . once changes to WSA and RMA have been agreed, delegated authority for you to authorise issuing of drafting instructions to include these changes in the Local Government Water Services Bill. . Your Cabinet paper has been drafted in line with the points in paragraph , and is currently with Ministers and departments for consultation. The Ministry for the INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsEnvironment have been included in the consultation process, and are yet to provide their written feedback on these proposals. . If you agree, your Cabinet paper could also be amended to authorise changes to the WSA to allow Taumata Arowai to be able to set infrastructure and operating requirements that, if implemented by a wastewater operator, will meet the treatment requirements in a wastewater standard. Taumata Arowai has started work on developing the wastewater standards . Taumata Arowais work programme is already focused on a single standard approach of this nature, by identifying the approach taken in other jurisdictions, and considering how they might need to be adapted to the New Zealand context. . To ensure the outcomes in this briefing are achieved, further work could be commissioned to identify: . what, in practice, are the situations in other jurisdictions where wastewater plants have needed to be consented above a national standard on an exceptions basis this evidence would be used to develop changes to the RMA to ensure regional councils cannot set additional or higher requirements than the standard except on an exceptions basis that would be specified in legislation; and . infrastructure design and operating requirements that, if implemented by a wastewater operator, would meet the treatment requirements in the standard for example, modular or package plants. This information could be used to specify or incentivise standardisation in infrastructure as part of the wastewater standard. . Draft recommendations on the wastewater standards will be available in the coming months that will be tested with two groups: . a technical advisory group made up of councils and industry experts who will provide advice on whether the standards are technically fit for purpose that is, do they target the appropriate contaminants and are workable for infrastructure requirements and consenting processes; and . a reference group that will provide confidence about the regulatory impact of standards (for example, whether they promote cost efficiencies in the system) and their overall fit with Local Water Done Well priorities. . Taumata Arowai can discuss the composition and membership of these groups with you. Members of your Technical Advisory Group could also be included on one or both of these groups to provide continuity across work programmes. The wastewater standard and changes proposed above go a long way to improving regulatory efficiencies, but more could be done in the resource management system . There are a range of other opportunities to achieve greater regulatory efficiencies for water infrastructure which would require changes in the resource management system. We have previously provided you with advice on some opportunities where we could work with the Ministry for the Environment to achieve better outcomes for Local Water Done Well LG and LG refer. INCONFIDENCE Page lo Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs. Without a wastewater standard in place councils have taken an approach to consenting wastewater treatment plants under the RMA which has led to: . extensive consideration of discharge treatment options with community and iwi; . reliance on technical consultants who often drive more bespoke designs; . overdesign of plants to gain resource consents; . cultural impact assessments requiring discharges be to land, and precluding discharges to rivers or the sea; . extensive and complex conditions on resource consents; . inconsistent conditions on resource consents across regional councils; . delays and lengthy consenting processes; and . resultant high costs for consenting wastewater treatment plants. . Wastewater standards will set a baseline with clear expectations for communities and will standardise information and technical input requirements. . The key opportunities to reduce costs and timeframes associated with consenting water infrastructure in the resource management system include: .l active influencing of national direction and national environmental standards to achieve Local Water Done Well objectives; . more enabling consenting pathways for lowerrisk wastewater infrastructure activities; and . potential changes to the designation process. . These proposals are set out in Table below: Table : Potential changes to the RMA to achieve regulatory efficiencies for Local Water Done Well RMA I Change sought to achieve Local Water Done Well objectives for I instrument wastewater National policy direction National environmental standards (NESs) National Policy Statement on Freshwater Management (NPSFM) actively influencing rebalancing of the NPSFM to achieve Local Water Done Well outcomes New national direction on infrastructure better provide for needs of water infrastructure New NES for infrastructure achieve longer resource consent durations for water infrastructure projects; standard conditions of consent for wastewater treatment plants; and process improvements that reduce costs and processing time for water infrastructure projects Around percent of council wastewater treatment plants are operating on expired resource consents because reconsenting challenges and many resource consents have been declined on multiple occasions. The Palmerston North wastewater treatment resource consent is a prime example of a lengthy consent process as it began in the s. INCONFIDENCE Pageof Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsMA I Change sought to achieve Local Water Done Well objectives for I instrument wastewater , I New resource More enabling consenting pathways for lowerrisk activities, such as: consenting pathways Designations reconsenting or upgrading existing plant resource consents where environmental effects have been previously assessed in detail; modular designed infrastructure that meets wastewater standards (when developed); wastewater plant discharge consents that comply with the national wastewater standard; and bundling discharge consents on a catchment basis rather than a consent by consent basis A modified designation process for water infrastructure that provides suitable sites for water treatment plants. Discharge consents would still be required . Although the Department is participating in some of the workstreams relating to the resource management reforms, the proposals in this briefing have not been discussed with the Ministry for the Environment (and the Infrastructure Commission who are leading work on infrastructure national direction and associated NES). Most initiatives would require changes through the resource management legislative reforms. . Should you wish to take any of these ideas further we will need to work with the Ministry for the Environment to fit with the RMA reform timetable. . We recommend that the Department leads the development of a work programme with the Ministry for the Environment, with input from Taumata Arowai technical experts, to work through the policy proposals. We would then provide advice for the you and the Minister for RMA Reform that outlines the proposed policy approach and legislative amendments required. . As a first step we could socialise the RMA changes proposed in this briefing, including the potential changes in Table , with the Ministry for the Environment. The next step would be working with Taumata Arowai on their wastewater standards work programme, confirming technical advisory group membership, and further testing some of the resource management proposals with the technical experts to confirm where greatest efficiencies could be gained in the system for the delivery and upgrade of wastewater treatment plants. This pathway would be suited to lowerrisk wastewater treatment plants for small communities of or less,and could include monitoring and reporting arrangements that are tailored to these plants. It would require Taumata Arowai to commission further work as part of its wastewater standards work programme. A recent example of this approach adopted by the Waikato regional councils within the Matamata Piako catchment demonstrated that six bundled discharge consents cost . million compared to a total of million if the consents had been processed individually. Note The current reform proposals In the Public Works Act could also provide councils with increased powers to acquire public land for treatment plants. INCONFIDENCE Page of INCONFIDENCE Page of Recommendations . We recommend that you : a) Note that the single standard approach to wastewater treatment standards is considered international best practice and is likely to set clear expectations for consent authorities and communities about the level of treatment required, and promote overall standardisation of infrastructure and qualificationcapability of operators . YesNo
Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsPriority Routine Local Government briefing Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Local Government Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Title: Bill : Legislative options for functions and powers relating to infrastructure and local authority regulatory powers May Key issues This paper is supplementary to the substantial papers you have been considering about the nature and functioning of water organisations. It reviews a variety of ancillary legislative and regulatory provisions which the new water organisations will need to utilise to operate effectively, whatever form council owners have chosen. Our analysis suggests existing legislation is sufficient to allow councils to delegate the necessary powers and functions that water organisations will generally need. However, much of the current legislation relating to water services infrastructure is out of and could be improved, and there are also several areas managed by bylaws which do not work well, such as disposal of trade waste. Although Bill could provide an opportun ity to update the existing legislation, to support the objectives of Local Water Done Well we recommend that modernisation would be better addressed in the wider work on local government regulatory powers ()(f)(iv Indicate your choices with respect to specific options. Contact for telephone discussions (if required ) Name Position Contact Number Suggested st contact Bex Sullivan Deputy Executive Director, lal I Water Services Policy Sam Miles Policy Manager, Legislation ()(a) I and Regulation Return electronic document to: Margaret.mcarthu rdia.govt.nz Cohesion document reference BDF AEA EBAED FF Ministerial database reference LG INCONFIDENCE Page of The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of Purpose . The Local Government Water Services Bill (Bill ) will set out a range of new water organisations for councils to choose as their preferred delivery arrangements for water services. The Bill will include options to establish standalone water organisations, by themselves or with other councils, and either as council controlled organisations (CCOs ), council controlled trading organisations (CCTOs) or consumer trusts. . The purpose of this briefing is to give you advice and seek your decisions on options for a range of possible provisions in Bill with respect to infrastructure powers and local authority regulatory powers , and to ensure these may be used effectively by standalone water organisations . . Your decisions will be incorporated into a draft Cabinet paper in July to seek policy approval for legislation to be drafted (Bill ). Executive summary . This paper reviews a variety of ancillary legislative and regulatory provisions which water organisations will need to utilise to operate effectively, whatever form council owners cho ose. . The s pecific policy areas considered are: . Powers to carry out work on land in relation to water services infrastructure ; . Powers to control connections ; . Powers to make controlled drinking water catchments ; . Trade waste regulation ; . Water supply and wastewater regulation ; . Compliance , monitoring and enforcement for regulatory functions ; and . Offences and infringements . . Following departmental analysis and consultation with your Technical Advisory Group (TAG ), in most areas we are recommending that no changes be made in Bill to existing legislation , beyond some minimum necessary provisions . While there are many areas where m odernisation and consolidation are desirable, we consider that present settings are adequate, and improvements would be better addressed in current wider work on local government regulatory powers. . Reviewing these areas after the initial implementation of Local Water Done Well will enable better policy development based on: . actual experience with various forms of water organisations , and . Background . The focus of this paper is on what further functions and regulatory powers are needed for water organisations, in addition to the key functions and powers which ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of have been addressed in a range of briefing papers and are included in the draft Cabinet paper s for June . . Amendments to m ost of the areas covered in this paper are not critical to the initial functioning of water organisations , but there are potentially useful improvements moderni sing and addressing problems with the current system . Improvements would support the new approach of Local Water Done Well and could translate existing work on moderni sation and improvements to water systems (including aspects of the repealed Waters Services Entities Act ) into a Local Water Done Well context . . This paper identifies various relative ly minor amendments which are recommended to allow water organisations of whatever form to function , while avoid ing unnecessary duplication of work and not being over prescriptive or over regulating (minimum viable products ). Beyond that , possible improvements to the areas addressed in this briefing involve judgement call s about the priority of change to fix current issues , or whether the status quo will be sufficient for the next stage of Local Water Done Well . . Final positions on some points will depend on wider decisions concerning water organisations that are still evolving and will also be informed by the Regulatory Impact Analysis underway . Role of bylaws . Currently local authorities have the ability to regulate the activities of their water services consumers and third parties through broad bylaw making powers under the Local Government Act (LGA) , with offences and enforcement powers set out directly in the Act. There are also some relevant provisions in the Local Government Act and the Health Act . . As part of the Local Water Done Well model, the enabling legislative framework for water organisations will need to allow for them to exercise some of these regulatory powers. . Bylaws are one of the few tools available to local authorities to manage relationships with their water services consumers. They cover a wide range of matters, including: . consumer responsibilities; . infrastructure design standards; . prohibition of certain discharges; . demand management (water restrictions); . charges; and . establishing local authorities rights to access water systems and read meters. . Bylaws can also regulate actions of third parties in relation to activities that may affect water services . For example, they can make it illegal to discharge certain substances into stormwater drains, control who can access drinking water catchment areas, and regulate work on or around networks.
Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsPriority Routine Local Government briefing Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Local Government Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Title: Exemptions from minimum requirements for water organisations July Done Well. In this paper we propose an exemption process for councils who have a proposal that will meet the objectives of Local Water Done Well, but may not meet some of the more technical requirements for water organisations that Cabinet has agreed to include in the legislation ECOM IN. f(f)(iv) Action sought I Timeframe Agree that the July Cabinet paper, Local Water Done Well stage : July further decisions, can propose the legislation includes an exemptions process containing the features outlined in the paper to enable exemptions to be sought and potentially granted in relation to some of the mandator y requirements that are due to apply to water organisations. )()(f)(ivJ Contact for telephone discussions (if required) Name Position Contact Number Suggested ist contact Hamiora Bowkett Executive Director, Water p)(a) I Services Policy, Legislation and Stewardship Bex Sullivan Deputy Executive Director, p)(a) I Water Services Policy Tom Broadhead Principal Policy Analyst, pcxa, I Water Services Policy Return electronic document to: Tom Broadhead Tom.Broadheadd ia.govt.nz Cohesion document references BDA FACBCCF Ministerial database reference LG INCONFIDENCE Page of Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Purpose . This briefing builds on advice that you have received regarding a new water organisation under Local Water Done Well. . In this paper we propose an exemption process for councils who have a proposal that will meet the objectives of Local Water Done Well, but may not meet some of the more technical requirements for water organisations that Cabinet has agreed to include in the legislation ECOMIN . .
Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsPriority Routine Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Local Government briefing Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Local Government Title: Options for reducing the regulatory burden on small drinking water suppliers February Key issues You have requested further advice on the regulatory approach to smaller drinking water suppliers under the Water Services Act , including options for amending the threshold for regulating these suppliers and for reducing the regulatorycompliance burden they might face. This briefing outlines what being regulated means in practice for smaller suppliers. It sets out three options for your consideration, and the next steps involved In progressing them. We are seeking your agreement to do further work on two of the options, and to report back with further advice. Action sought I Timeframe Agree to further work being done to develop and test options to reduce the regulatory burden faced by smaller drinking water suppliers: Option : very small suppliers serving up to people are not regulated, and are supported by Taumata Arowal on a voluntary basis; Option : make it less burdensome for smaller suppliers to comply, by extending timefraines and reducing regulatory requirements . Contact for telephone discussions (if required) February Name Position Contact Number Suggested st contact Hamiora Bowkett Executive Director, Water Services Policy, ()(a) I Legislation and Stewardship, DIA Bex Sullivan Director, Water Services Policy and iTJa I Stewardship, DIA Allan Prangnell Chief Executive, Taumata Arowal TaJ I Sara McFall Head of System, Strategy and p(J(a J Performance, Taumata Arowai Return electronic document to: Jane.fleetwooddia .govt.nz and Simone.Blackburntaumataarowal .govtnz Cohesion document reference WDURAJSR DIA Ministerial database reference LG Taumata Arowai ddcument reference TMTA IN CONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsPurpose The Department of Internal Affairs Taumata Arowai . In December , we briefed you on the regulatory approach to small suppliers LG. In January , you requested further advice on this topic, including options for amending the threshold for regulating small suppliers. . We have identified three initial options for your consideration . We are seeking your agreement to do further work to develop and test two of the options. The Department would report back with advice on how to progress these options in the context of Bill of your Local Water Done Well programme. The next steps section at the end of this briefing outlines the likely work involved. Key messages . Under the Water Services Act (the Act), all drinking water suppliers (except domestic selfsuppliers) are covered by the regulatory system, and required to provide safe drinking water. This was considered the most effective and straightforward way of protecting public health, and responding to the concerns raised in the Inquiry into Havelock North Drinking Water. The new regulatory regime has been designed to tailor regulatory settings to the size, risk profile, and complexity of supplies. . We understand you may be interested in reconsidering this approach, to reduce the potential regulatory burden that may be incurred by smaller suppliers. This is something that has been advocated by some stakeholders, and by members of the National Party and ACT Party. . You could consider excluding some smaller suppliers from being regulated, based on the number of people they serve. We have outlined two possible options: a threshold of people (option ); and a threshold of people, but only for lowerrisk supplies (option ). . Our initial view is that option could be a pragmatic way to make the regulatory system less burdensome with a level of risk that could be tolerable providing Taumata Arowai is able to provide support to unregulated suppliers (that want it). We would like to do further work to develop and test this option. We do not recommend option , as this would carry much greater risk and be more difficult to implement. . We have also outlined a further option (option ), which we suggest is progressed in parallel with option . This involves minimising the requirements that apply to other smaller suppliers, and giving these suppliers a longer timeframe to be compliant with the Act (beyond the current deadline). . To provide a basis for considering which if any of these options you might like to progress further, we have provided an overview of what being regulated is likely to mean in practice for smaller suppliers. This helps to indicate how much of a burden they might face if no changes are made. . Taumata Arowai is required to regulate in a way that is proportionate to the scale, complexity and risk profile of drinking water supplies. This means many smaller suppliers will be subject to minimal obligations, and will receive advice and support both to comply, and if emergencies arise. A key feature in your Letter of Expectations to Taumata Arowai is to work with the sector to identify practical and costeffective solutions. IN CONFIDENCE Pageo Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsThe Department of Internal Affairs Taumata Arowai . A key factor when considering any potential changes is the appropriate balance between public health and regulatory requirements. There would be a tradeoff between protecting public health and reducing the compliance costsburden on small suppliers. You may wish to discuss this with the Minister of Health. . Subject to your direction, the Department will work with Taumata Arowai and the Ministry of Health (where relevant to its role) to develop further advice on the options including considering the public health and other implications, and costs, benefits and risks. . You will need to seek Cabinet decisions on policy proposals that involve changes to the Water Services Act. The Department would provide further advice on this in the context of Bill of your Local Water Done Well programme. Regulatory approach under the Water Services Act , and why it was introduced . Under the Water Services Act : . all drinking water suppliers except domestic selfsuppliers are covered by the regulatory system; and . all drinking water suppliers are required to provide safe drinking water. . This approach was taken in response to significant concerns raised through the Inquiry into Havelock North Drinking Water, and other work, about the previous drinking water regulatory regime in the Health Act. There were concerns that regime was failing to provide assurances that water supplies were safe and reliable. . The new regulatory approach sought to address two core issues with the previous arrangements: some suppliers were not being regulated effectively , and others were not regulated at all. . Advice in estimated that around , people were receiving drinking water from suppliers that were not regulated under the Health Act. The regulation of networked supplies was fragmented and weak, and many suppliers were effectively unregulated. . Under the Water Services Act, all suppliers were brought into the regulatory system. The Cabinet paper that sought the relevant policy decisions noted that: . the proposed approach would address many of the serious shortcomings with the current system, and provide New Zealanders and international visitors with the confidence that our drinking water supplies are safe and reliable. However, it involves a judgement call about how far to extend the regulatory perimeter, and the pros and cons of different options. We have approached the design of the reform proposals from the perspective that everyone should receive safe drinking water, but recognise that this will impose costs in the regulatory system that will be passed on to consumers. This included network supplies to fewer than people. It also included several kinds of specified self supply, many of which were institutions and facilities serving a lot of people (such as schools, campgrounds, universities, airports, and defence properties) . Strengthen ing the regulation of drinking water, wastewater and stormwater, Minister of Local Government , Minister of Health, and Minster for the Environmen t (July ). IN CONFIDENCE Pageof Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsThe Department of Internal Affairs Taumata Arowai . This approach was considered the most effective and straightforward way of protecting public health and addressing widespread compliance issues in suppliers of all size and type. Historically, there have been longstanding problems with non compliance as the size of the supply decreases. . It reflects that most consumers cannot assess the quality or safety of the water they drink, and have little or no choice about who supplies their water services. They have to put their trust in those responsible for supplying and regulating those services. . The Act requires suppliers to provide safe drinking water. It reflects that an essential principle of drinking water safety is that suppliers must own the safety of the water. . In practice, this means all suppliers need to identify and manage risks to their supplies, ensuring they can deliver safe drinking water on a consistent basis. . Domestic selfsuppliers are excluded from the Act because they are responsible for the supplies to their own properties, and therefore have the ability and incentive to manage risks to those supplies themselves. What does being regulated mean for smaller suppliers What do the smaller suppliers look Ike . Approximately percent of people in New Zealand receive drinking water from suppliers that are not local or central government. This includes: . Private suppliers that provide drinking water to a larger, often fluctuating, number of people, such as vacation hotspots, supplies used by water carriers, campgrounds, and rural schools. . Private suppliers that provide drinking water to more than one household or dwelling. . Domestic selfsuppliers, who are not regulated under the Act. . Many smaller supplies are located in remote communities, with poor infrastructure (including reliable electricity supplies necessary to run pumping, treatment and monitoring equipment) , limited access and greater distances to health services, and disproportionate exposure to severe weather events and their impacts. . Some smaller supplies, such as marae, campgrounds and community halls, have fluctuating populations and provide civil defence support in emergencies . This occurred in the aftermath of Cyclone Gabrielle in . Others could be characterised as shared domestic supplies providing household water; for example, where a farm supplies neighbouring properties, or a drinking water source is shared between adjacent holiday homes. This marked an important change from the previous legislative requirement to take all practicable steps to comply. That approach was highly problematic, as suppliers were deemed compliant If they started implementing a water safety plan. In effect this meant they could be technically compliant with the law, even though the water being supplied was not demonstrably safe. IN CONFIDENCE Pageof Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsThe Departme nt of Internal Affairs Taumata Arowai How are smaller suppliers regulated, and what ore they required to do . Smaller suppliers (who were not previously registered) have until November to register with Taumata Arowai through a free online selfservice portal. They then have a further three years to become compliant with the full requirements in the Act and relevant secondary legislation (including the Drinking Water Quality Assurance Rules and Drinking Water Standards). . During the transition period to November smaller suppliers are: . subject to a basic obligation to provide safe drinking water that complies with Drinking Water Standards; and . required to comply with any direction or compliance order issued by Taumata Arowai. . The Act does not distinguish drinking water suppliers by size, although it requires regulatory mechanisms to be proportionate to the scale, complexity, and risk profile of each supply. Instead, the stratification of supplies into different groups by size (or other characteristics) occurs through secondary legislation made by Taumata Arowai, particularly the Drinking Water Quality Assurance Rules. . These Rules group smaller supplies into two categories : . Very small community supplies that provide drinking water to up to consumers. (Approximately private supplies of this size have registered with Taumata Arowai, to .) . Small networked supplies that provide drinking water to to consumers. (Approximately private supplies of this size have registered.) . There are also medium networked supplies that provide drinking water to to consumers, and large networked supplies covering more than consumers. These are primarily council owned and operated supplies. . The population thresholds in the Rules were chosen to align with previous Ministry of Health thresholds that suppliers were familiar with under the Health Act. Under that regime, suppliers to or fewer people had minimal regulatory requirements outside of registering with the Ministry of Health. Very few supplies in this category did register as drinking water suppliers. How much of a compliance burden might there be for smaller suppliers, and how is Taumata Arowai mitigating this . Taumata Arowai regulates in a way that is proportionate to the scale, complexity, and risk profile of drinking water supplies. Regulatory resources are limited, and targeted to larger suppliers displaying risk. Typically, these supplies are more complex. At the smalltomedium end, Taumata Arowai will tailor any regulatory engagement to suit the needs of the supplier and community, alongside any indications of heightened public health risk. . Currently under the Drinking Water Quality Assurance Rules, the only obligations on drinking water supplies providing water to up to people are to: . test twice a year for E. coli, using an accredited laboratory to perform the testing analysis; and IN CONFIDENCE Page So Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsThe Department of Internal Affairs Taumata Arowai . make the results available to the owners and occupiers of all properties connected to the supply. . If the testing detects E. coli or other determinands that exceed maximum acceptable values, the Act requires a supplier to take certain actions, including: notifying Taumata Arowai, taking action to rectify the situation, and taking all practicable steps to advise affected consumers of the situation and what they should do to protect their health. . Once small suppliers register with Taumata Arowai, they must prepare a drinking water safety plan, which records the risks and hazards that impact a supplys drinking water and how they will be managed. Taumata Arowai has guidance and templates to make it easy to make a plan and manage the risks associated with supplying drinking water. . Acceptable solutions allow some suppliers to use offtheshelf, endpoint treatment systems (rather than centralised treatment that tends to be more expensive, labour intensive and require a higher level of maintenance) . . For a single household, an endpoint treatment system that meets acceptable solution requirements is estimated to cost ,. For a larger supply, such as a sports club or marae, this increases to an estimated ,. The costs are influenced by a range of factors, such as existing water supply configurations, location, and availability of tradespeople. . Suppliers that adopt an acceptable solution do not have to prepare a separate drinking water safety plan assessing the hazards and risks affecting their supplies. . There are currently three acceptable solutions, which relate to: . drinking water suppliers that abstract water from springs and bores; . mixeduse rural supplies (where at least of the water supplied is intended to be used for agricultural or horticultural purposes); or . supplies that rely on roof water. . Taumata Arowai will take an engagement led and educational approach to support smaller supplies coming into the regime. This will mean working with communities to understand their risks and needs, and to help them to build their capability. It will build off work already done through groups such as the Rural Supplies Technical Working Group, and the Marae and Papakainga Technical Advisory Group. . This approach will enable Taumata Arowai to further understand what the level of risk in these small supplies is, and therefore the most appropriate regulatory settings and interventions. There have been over notifications from laboratories where unregistered supplies have exceeded the maximum acceptab le levels of contaminants in drinking water since Taumata Arowai became the water services regulator in November . The acceptable solutions have been developed in collaboration with sector reference groups with experience of various supply types across New Zealand, including the rural sector. IN CONFIDENCE Pageof Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsThe Department of Internal Affairs Taumata Arowai Options for reducing the regulatory burden on smaller drinking water suppliers Relevant policy considerations . Following consideration of advice on smaller suppliers in December LG, you indicated an interest in reconsidering the regulatory approach to water suppliers in the Water Services Act. You asked for further advice on amending the thresholds for regulation. . We understand your main interest is in reducing the potential regulatory burden that could apply to smaller suppliers. The main option for achieving this could be to exclude some suppliers (in addition to domestic selfsuppliers) from the application of the Water Services Act based on the number of people they supply (population threshold). . Two variations of this option are outlined below. Both options are likely to require changes to the Act. Our initial view is that: . Option could be a pragmatic way to make the regulatory system less burdensome, with an overall level of risk that could be tolerable providing Taumata Arowai was still able to provide support to unregulated suppliers. We would like to do further work to develop and test this option. . We do not recommend proceeding with option , as this would carry much greater risk and be more difficult to implement . . We note that it is sometimes suggested that thresholds could relate to the number of connected properties or endpoint users being supplied. For example, members of the National Party and the ACT Party have previously suggested excluding supplies to endpoint users from the BillAct. (This is not terminology that has been used in legislation. The Department has interpreted it as referring to connected properties, rather than people.) . Taumata Arowai does not recommend using the number of connections as a basis for setting thresholds. This does not reflect the considerable variations in the number of people who use a connection (which could range from a person in a sole household to hundreds of people in a community facility). It would be difficult to implement and does not align with any legislative approaches that have been used previously. . We have also included a third option, which involves changing the regulatory approach andor timeframes that will apply to smaller suppliers (not amending thresholds, as such). This may be more straightforward to implement and require less legislative change and be a potentially useful addition to any attempts to make the regulatory system less burdensome. We suggest this work on this option is progressed in parallel with option . . Subject to your direction on these initial options, further work would be undertaken. We have outlined this in the next steps section. It would consider factors like how to design and implement the option(s), costs, benefits and risks, the detailed legislative amendments required, and implications for Taumata Arowai. . It would also involve engagement and testing with policy agencies with an interest in this matter, particularly the Ministry of Health, and others in the health sector. The IN CONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsThe Department of Internal Aff.irs Taumata Arowai Ministry is responsible for policy relating to public health and interests in drinking water. . A key factor when considering any potential changes to the current legislative settings would be the appropriate balance between public healthsafety and regulatory requirements. There would be a tradeoff between protecting public health something that is prioritised under the current settings and reducing the compliance costsburden on small suppliers. . Placing less emphasis on regulating smaller suppliers may mean there is a greater public health risk associated with these supplies, and raise further equity issues in small, rural communities (without council supplies). It also means Taumata Arowai, and local authorities, have limited ability to identify these supplies, and offer support when required in emergency situations and in providing tailored advice. . Continuing to require small supplies to register and undertake limited testing (paired with bespoke support and capacity building) would help to build a picture of where these supplies are located, the risks they face, and any localised source water issues. . This information would support Taumata Arowai and local authorities to ensure communities have reliable access to safe drinking water if existing suppliers face significant problems (as required in the Local Government Act ). Not collecting this data is more likely to adversely affect remote communities and those facing climate resilience challenges. . That said, removing certain small suppliers from the requirement to register and undertake limited testing does not mean Taumata Arowai could not continue to provide education and tools to support suppliers to keep their water safe. There are also provisions in the Act that seek to ensure domestic selfsuppliers are warned of potential water contamination issues, which could be applied to other nonregulated suppliers. . Taking a different approach to small supplies would provide opportunities for Taumata Arowai to place greater emphasis and focus on the larger andor higher risk suppliers. Option : very small suppliers to people and below are not regulated, and Taumata Arowal develops education material to be used on a voluntary basis . Under this option, all very small supplies to people and below would be excluded from duties and requirements in the Water Services Act. This threshold would align with how very small community supplies are defined in the Drinking Water Quality Assurance Rules. . The public health risks associated with this change could be mitigated by Taumata Arowai providing online guidance and education material to support these supplies in providing safe drinking water. Adherence to this material would be voluntary and they would not be regulated. . This would be similar to the approach that is currently taken to domestic selfsuppliers. It would recognise that very small suppliers have been subject to minimal regulation to . . Taumata Arowai recommends this option should focus on exempting supplies characterised as shared domestic supplies for example, those supplying neighbou ring IN CONFIDENCE PogeBo Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsThe Department of Internal Affairs Taumata Arowai properties. This would mean arrangements where a farm or holiday home supplies drinking water to a small number of neighbouring properties would not be regulated. . Taumata Arowai would continue to regulate small public supplies (for instance, some rural schools) and those supplying water for commercial style use, such as campgrounds and aged care facilities. . Because private supplies of this size have not been regulated, very little is known about them either in terms of how many supplies there are, their customer and risk profile, or how difficult it may or may not be for them to comply with the new regulatory environment. This makes it difficult to estimate how much impact this option would have in practice, if implement ed (potentially making it difficult to prepare a regulatory impact assessment that contains this data). . If there was an interest in knowing more about these supplies without them being regulated as such they could still be required to register with Taumata Arowai, but exempt from further requirements under the Act or secondary legislation. This would mean Taumata Arowai can collect basic information about these supplies, to inform emergency preparedness and assist local authorities to carry out assessments under the Local Government Act. Option : some small suppliers are not regulated If they are lowerrisk suppliers, serving under people NOT RECOMMENDED . Under this option, the threshold for exclusion could be extended to suppliers to a higher number of people for example, a threshold of people. . We have included this option to indicate alternative considerations, but do not suggest it is taken further. It would be a higher risk approach than option , and is likely to raise far more challenges. However, if you were interested in th is option, we have outlined some of the factors and limitations that would need to be worked through. . We would suggest it is limited to privately owned and operated schemes for domestic dwellings, where the number of people being supplied is relatively low and stable. As above, Taumata Arowai would recommend publicly operated and commercial suppliers continue to be regulated. . We do not consider this exclusion should be extended to smaller council or other public supplies, or to supplies that are serving higher risk communities or where the numbers of people drinking the water is highly variable. . There are risks with small supplies of this nature, particularly around excluding supplies that provide drinking water to vulnerable communities for example, rural schools, residential care facilities and community drinking water stations. Small supplies with fluctuating population s are also at higher risk. Campsites, marae, community halls and planned events fall into this category. . We note that this kind of approach would be a departure from the recommendations of the Inquiry into Havelock North Drinking Water, and take settings back to the situation that existed prior to the changes to the Health Act. Note that even if these supplies were not excluded from the application of the Water Services Act, they would still have the ability to seek an exemption from Taumata Arowai as per the provisions in section of the Act. IN CONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsThe Department of Internal Affairs Taumata Arowai . There could be significant implications, unintended consequences, and potential gaps, which would need to be explored further. For example, we would need to consider what would happen to these suppliers in emergency situations ifTaumata Arowai did not have a rolemandate to provide support, and neither the Ministry of Health nor local authorities are resourced or required to do this. . We would also provide further advice on the exact thresholds that could apply and how these might be set in legislation . Setting a limit of people would be similar to the neighbourhood drinking water supply under the Health Act. We understand the performance of suppliers of this size was not reported on by the Ministry of Health under that previous regime. Option : make it easier and less burdensome for smaller suppliers to comply, by extending the timeframes and reducing the regulatory requirements . This option could be an alternative to changing the thresholds, or it could be delivered in conjunction with either of the above options. As noted earlier, we suggest it is developed alongside option , as it would help to make the overall regulatory system less burdensome on smaller suppliers not captured by any other exclusions). . This option would not involve changes to who is regulated all drinking water suppliers (other than domestic selfsuppliers) would continue to be covered by the Act. However, we would consider how to further reduce or minimise the requirements that apply to smaller suppliers in the legislation andor in how Taumata Arowai applies its regulatory approach. . This would align with the current situation, in which Taumata Arowai is enabled and required to take a proportionate, riskbased approach. Taumata Arowai could be given greater flexibility and discretion when it comes to regulating smaller (lower risk) suppliers. . With this option, there would continue to be a strong emphasis on the importance of public health and drinking water safety for all suppliers, but there would be greater recognition that only a relatively light touch is likely to be warranted for very small supplies. It may be more straightforward to design and deliver than legislative changes to the thresholds affecting the sizes and types of supply being regulated. . One particular area that could be modified and where the burden on small suppliers could be reduced relates to drinking water safety plans. There are opportunit ies to amend the Act to make the requirements about what is included in these plans less prescriptive. Taumata Arowai could be given discretion to determine which supplies require a plan, and what they need to cover. . Amendments to the legislation could also be proposed to provide smaller suppliers with a longer timeframe in which to register with Taumata Arowai and to comply with the other requirements. This would give Taumata Arowai more time to provide guidance to smaller suppliers, and give those suppliers more time to understand the new regime and what it means for them. IN CONFIDENCE Page Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsThe Department of Internal Affairs Taumata Arowai Next steps . We are seeking your agreemen t to do further work to develop and test options and . The Department would report back with advice on how to progress these options in the context of Bill of your Local Water Done Well programme. . Implementing options andor and components of option would require changes to the Water Services Act. This means you would need to seek Cabinet decisions on policy proposals. The Cabinet paper would be accompani ed by a regulatory impact assessment . . The Department anticipates the work required would involve: . Departmental officials working with Taumata Arowai to identify and develop the detailed legislative andor other changes needed to deliver the option(s). This would include undertaking an options analysis, and identifying costs, benefits, risks, and implementation activities (that is, the information needed for a regulatory impact assessment ). . Departmental engagement with other key agencies particularly with the Ministry of Health, and others in the public health sector. The Ministry would need to be closely involved throughout this process, given the potential public health implications of the options. . Ministerial engagement particularly with the Minister of Health, and other interested Ministers such as the Minister for Rural Communit ies and Minister for Maori Development) . . Potential engagement with stakeholders particularly suppliers that would be affected by a change of approach. . Preparation of an advice briefing setting out the detailed policy proposals to be contained in a Cabinet paper (for options involving legislative changes). . Subject to your agreement, preparation of a Cabinet policy paper and regulatory impact assessment, to seek decisions to issue drafting instructions for components of a bill to amend the Water Services Act. . The Department will provide you with a more detailed process and timeframe s, once you have indicated your preferred direction. . If you are interested in progressing any of the options, you may wish to share this briefing andor discuss this matter further with the Minister of Health. Recommendations . We recommend that you: a) note that under the current approach in the Water Services Act , all drinking water suppliers including (thousands) of smaller suppliers are regulated; b) note there are various options that could be explored for reconsider ing the current approach and reducing the regulatory burden that may affect smaller suppliers; IN CONFIDENCE Page of The Department of Internal Affairs Taumata Arowai
Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsPriority Urgent , r.,.r. T T r. h ,,. ;; ,e ,an a,w enua f , J Internal Affairs
Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsPurpose The Department of Internal Affairs
Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsTe Tari Taiwhenua
Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsThe Department of Internal Affairs
Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairsc) d) e) ff)
Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsHI(:;:;.,; Te Tari Taiwhenua f Internal Affairs . Status Report I Purongo Tunga Minister of Local Government Prepared June for the period to June IN CONFIDENCE Richard Ward Acting Deputy Chief Executive, Local Government INCONFIDEN CE Page of Proactively released by the Department of Internal AffairsProgress on key projects I Kaupapa Whakaarotau New and content is in bold. Title I Taitara I Comment I Takupu Severe Weather Emergency Recovery Legislation Act Responsible DCE: Michael Lovett Contact: Fergus Broom ) a Recent activities I Nga ngohe inatata Report of the Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events The paper on the process for responding to the Inquiry Report was considered at Cabinet on May . We are working with other agencies to develop the Governments response to the Inquiry, and we will brief you as the local government portfolio issues are integrated into this work. Page of INCONFIDENCE
Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government Organisational Capability Applicants will need to provide information specified by the TF Authority to demonstrate that the organisation seeking accreditation : has the organisational capability including the people, policies, processes and systems required to deliver TF accredited services; is financially sustainable; can meet the standards prescribed in rules to deliver the service or services to one of the service levels provided for in regulations (refer to the following section for further information on service levels and the associated levels of assu rance they provide); and has arrangements in place to provide a complaints and dispute resolution process that meets the requirements specified in regulation (further information on these requirements are outlined in the complaints and disputes resolution section of this paper). Fit and Proper Person Requirements Applicants will be required to grant permission for the TF Authority to validate information provided by the applicant to support a fit and proper person assessment of the applicant and any officer s responsible for the governance and management of the TF provider. This will include permission for the Authority to request a Police vetting check. The applicant would also need to provide information that demonstrate s the TF provider has appropriate policies and procedures in place to ensure employees entrusted with the delivery of accredited services meet fit and proper person requirements prescribed by the Authority. Assessment criteria The Act enables the TF Authority to accredit a provider if it is satisfied that they meet the requirements in sections to of the Act, any criteria for the assessment of applications, and any other requirements set by regulations. The New Zealan d Police may release any information they hold if relevant to the purpose of the vetting request. This may include : Conviction History Report . Infringementdemerit reports . Active charges and warrants to arrest . Charges that did not result in a conviction including those that were acquitted, discharged without conviction, diverted, or withdrawn . Any interaction had with New Zealand Police considered relevant to the role being vetted, including investigations that did not result in prosecution . Information regarding family harm where the applicant was the victim, offender or witness to an incident or offence, primarily in cases where the role being vetted for takes place in the applicants home environment where exposure to physical or verbal viole nce could place vulnerable persons at emotional or physical risk . Information subject to name suppression where that information is necessary to the purpose of the vet. Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government We propose that that the regulations provide for the TF Authority t o use the following criteria to assess applications for accreditation . There is sufficient evidence to satisfy the Authority that the applicant : is a company that is incorporated in New Zealand, an incorporated society registered in New Zealand, or a New Z ealand Crown entity or government department; will deliver one or more of the digital identity services specified in regulations established under the Act; has the capability to meet the service standards specified in the rules to an appropriate level of a ssurance; has demonstrated it will provide an internal complaints and disputes resolution process that meets regulatory requirements; and officers responsible for the governance and management of the TF provider are fit and proper persons that can be entru sted with the delivery of digital identity services; has policies and processes in place to ensure its employees entrusted with the delivery of accredited services meet fit and proper person standards prescribed by the Authority; has demonstrated that it i s financially sustainable; and has provided all the information specified in s ection and addressed to the TF Authoritys satisfaction any issues of concern arising from any past practises as an identity services provider that have be en the subject of an investigation by the Privacy Commission or the Authority, or resulted in a decision to previously decline, suspend or cancel an accreditation. Duration Accreditation will be for a two year period The Act provides that the accreditation of a TF provider or service expires at the end of the relevant period set by regulations (section () ). We propose that the regulations specify that a service accreditation ends two years ( months) after the it is granted by the TF Authority . We have considered options ranging from annual through to five yearly and indefinite accreditation. In proposing a two year accreditation period, we have sought to balance the need to provide the TF Authority, users and relying parties with appropriate assurance that TF providers are meeting accreditation service standards against the compliance costs associated with renewal requirements. We consider a two year accreditation period is appropriate given we are introdu cing a new regulatory system and there are likely to be changes in service standards given the rapidly evolving nature of the industry. We anticipate the rules will be in response to technology advances and commercial practice changes. Providers wi ll, need to demonstrate they are able to meet changes in service standards. Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government We note that the Act allows for regulations to establish different expiry periods for different types of TF provider, different types of service and different levels of service. Du ring the Trust Frameworks establishment phase, we consider that a standard two year period should apply to everyone. We anticipate that this is a matter the TF Authority may wish to review based on its experience administering the regulatory system two to three years after commencement. Renewal TF providers will be able to renew their service accreditations The Act includes provisions covering the accreditation renewal process (s ection ). In effect when TF providers apply for renewal, they will need to demonstrate that they continue to meet the accreditation requirements and standards specified in the Act, rules and regulations, unless different requirements for renewal applications are established in regulations. We propose that the TF Board consider i ntroducing regulations that refine the renewal application requirements when developing the next tranche of regulations. The aim will be to establish a renewal application process that provides the TF Authority with assurance that TF providers can continue to meet accreditation requirements, in particular any changes that have been introduced since an applicants original accreditation, while minimising renewal application compliance costs. Accreditation mark Users and relying parties will be able to identi fy an accredited service through an accreditation mark If approved, a TF provider will be able to deliver the accredited service or services under the Trust Framework and display an accreditation mark that would apply to each accredited service. The accred itation mark that would be applied to each specific accredited service is an important distinguishing factor, as some organisations with accredited services could also provide non accredited services, which do not display the accreditation mark. Display of the accreditation mark will help users in making decisions about who they want to share their personal information with. If they chose to use a TF providers accredited service, they will know that the: service meets the technical standards set out in the rules that apply to that service; service is delivered to a prescribed service level (as specified in the rules and regulations and discussed further in the next section of this paper); and TF provider has undergone an assessment for security and privacy and will give the user control over the identity information they choose to share. To reduce the risk of a user or relying party misunderstanding whether a TF provider is delivering an accredited service, we propose that the regulations specify that the TF Authority will only allow accreditation marks to be displayed against specific services, rather than being displayed as a generic accreditation by the organisation. Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government . Service Levels Overview As part of the accreditation process, the regulations will enable providers systems and processes to be assessed by the TF Authority to determine what level of service they can provide when delivering information, binding, andor authentication services. Each of the ser vices will have four service levels. The service level indicates the capability that a TF provider can deliver their associated service to. Service levels will indicate to prospective users and relying parties what level of assurance a given service may a chieve. Levels of assurance are specific to attributes (or pieces of information about a person), not the service or organisation. Therefore, the service level will indicate to other people the capability of an accredited service and the expected level of assurance that service can provide. Proposed regulations The regulations will provide for the service levels that will apply to the delivery of information, binding, and authentication services. The requirements and standards TF providers will need to mee t to achieve a given service level will be set out in the rules. The rules will require compliance with the New Zealand Identification Management Standards (NZIMS ), which will be incorporated by reference. The levels of assurance set out in the NZIMS will form part of the requirements prescribed for each service level. Further details on the service levels contained in the New Zealand Identification Management Stan dards are available via this link: https:www.digital.govt.nzstandards andguidanceidentification mana gementidentification management standardsapplying thestandards Benefits In practice, service levels will help relying parties understand the outcome of assessment processes without having to know what the process was . They will give relying parties and other digital service providers an understanding of how robust the TF providers processes are. Establishing the service level through the accreditation process will also allow TF providers who rely on other providers f or information, binding , or authentication services to understand what level of assurance that provider can deliver. This increases the level of trust that relying parties and other TF providers have in the Trust Framework. Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government . Complaints and dispute resolution Overview Part of the Act establishes processes for dealing with complaints and disputes. It enables any person to complain to the TF Authority if they believe a TF provider has breached the TF rules, regulations, terms of use of accreditation marks, or provisions of the Act. The Act ( section ) also provides for regulations that set out requirements for TF providers to provide and operate their own internal complaints and disputes resolution processes. These processes can be used as a first port of call by complainants to address and resolve issues directly with the TF provider. Any complaints not resolved using this internal system can then be referred to the TF Authority for consideration. This approach is consistent with the principles established in the Act that gui de the TF Authoritys approach to complaints management , which are that : processes for complaints should be fair, accessible and have particular regard to tikanga Mori; complaints should be resolved in a timely and efficient manner; and complaints should be resolved at a level appropriate to the seriousness and nature of the complaint. Proposed regulations TF Provider internal complaints process We propose that the regulations require that every TF provider must: receive and consider complaints about any service provided by it, including complaints that the provider has failed to comply with the TF rules, regulations, terms of use of accreditation marks, or other requirements arising from provisions in the Act; establish and maintain p olicies and procedures for dealing with such complaints fairly, promptly and without undue formality; publicise its complaints policies and procedures to users, prospective users, relying parties and other stakeholders with an interest in its services; and ensure that complainants are aware that in the event they are dissatisfied with the outcome of the internal complaints process they may lodge a formal complaint with the TF Authority. The ability of an applicant to comply with these requirements will be a ssessed when they apply for accreditation. Potential future regulations for a dispute resolution scheme The Act also allows for the development of regulations to establish requirements and criteria that would enable the TF Authority to recommend a dispute resolution scheme for the Ministers approval. Any scheme would need to complement and operate alongside the TF Authoritys complaints process which can lead to the TF Authority applying a range of remedies where it finds a TF Provider has breached legisla tive requirements. Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government
Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government
Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government Figure : Trust Framework Complaints and Dispute Resolution process Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government
Proactively released by the Minister for Local Government
Proactively released by the Minister for Local Government IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Appendix A: Interim Government response to the Social Services and Community Committees report Petition of Jenn Hooper: Develop Changing Places facilities
Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Departmental D isclosure Statement Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commercial Video on Demand) Amendment Bill The departmental disclosure statement for a government Bill seeks to bring together in one place a range of information to support and enhance the Parliamentary and public scrutiny of that Bill. It identifies: the general policy intent of the Bill and other background policy material ; some of the key quality assurance products and processes used to develop and test the content of the Bill; the presence of certain significant powers or features in the Bill that m ight be of particular Parliamentary or public interest and warrant an explanation . This disclosure statement was prepared by the Department of Internal Affairs . The Department of Internal Affairs certif ies that, to the best of its knowledge and understanding , the information provided is complete and accurate at the of finalisation below. This disclosure statement was finalised on November . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Contents Contents . . . . Part One: General Policy Statement . . . Part Two: Background Material and Policy Information . . Part Three: Testing of Legislative Content . . . Part Four: Significant Legislative Features . . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Part One: General Policy Statement The objective of this Bill is to reduce t he potential for harm to consumers from viewing inappropriate content . The Bill will do this by requiring that commercial video on demand (CVoD ) content that is made available in New Zealand display s appropriate and consistent labelling , if the provider of that content is specified in the Schedule to the Bill . This labelling will provide information about that contents rating and description so that consumers can make an informed decision on whether to view it. Providers of commercial (subscription and transactional) video on demand content are displaying inconsistent ratings and descriptive note s (or no ratings at all) for content available on their platforms. This is because of the gap in current legislation where on demand online content in New Zealand is not subject to mandatory rating requirements, as films for cinematic or DVD release ar e. This Bill will ensure that consumers see more consistent ratings a nd descriptive notes across the main CVoD platforms in New Zealand. The Bill will amend the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act (the Act) to clearly address the identified regulatory gap . Key changes the Bill will implement are : Requ irements for specified CVoD providers to label content before it is available in New Zealand Providers of CVoD content will be required to comply by following the current process for the labelling of film. This involves providing content to the Film and Video Labelling Body (the labelling body) for rating and labelling. The labelling body will refer certain content to the Office of Film and Literature Classification (the Classification Office) for classifi cation , before issuing a label ; or selfrating content that they supply using systems which have been approved by the Classification Office. This can be achieved either by using the Classification Offices rating tool or using their own system, with approval from the Classification Office. Once content is labelled under the Act, that label will be included in a public regi ster and must be used by any other provider providing that content. These labelling decisions can be reconsidered by the Classification Office where necessary. Establishment of criteria and process to identify and list regulated providers Providers that are required to comply under the new requirements will be listed in a schedule of the Act. The schedule can be amended by an Order in Council , with the final decision being made by the Governor General on the recommendation of the Minister of Internal Affairs. The Minister will need to consult the Chief Censor before making a recommendation to amend the schedule . The Minister will also need to consider the potential risk of harm to consu mers from CVoD content being made available without appropriate labels before making a recommendation to amend the Schedule . The Bill sets the following criteria that the Minister must consider in determining the potential risk of harm : Market presence: the share of the New Zealand market that a provider currently has or is expected to have ; and Compliance with and commitment to another classification framework established in New Zealand: whether a provider is using a classification framework that provides consistent and appropriate information to consumers, as well as the extent and reliability of its commitment to that framework; and Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Nature of content: the nature of content being offered by a provider, and the potential of this content to cause harm to consumers. functions of Classification Office The Bill will update the functions of the Classification Office to ens ure th at the new requirements for CVoD content are clearly withi n the scope of its operational work. The Classification Office will have the following new functions and powers: providing an online rating tool that specified CVoD providers may use to rate and label content they provide ; and approving any SelfRating Systems which are developed by specified CVoD providers to rate and label their content; and reviewing and monitoring the operation and outputs of both the online rating tool and the any selfrating systems. Amendment to definition of Film t o clarify that it includes video ondemand content Video on demand content falls within the existing definition of a publication, but it does not clearly fall within the definition of a film (which is a subset of publications). The Bill replaces the defini tion of film in the Act to clarify that it includes video on demand content (CVoD is a subset of video on demand content this is provided to consumers on a subscription or transaction basis ). Clarifying that video on demand content is a film means that the requirements in relation to classifying and rating films will apply to any video on demand content that is not specifically exempted from those requirements. The Classification Offices powers in respect of publications (e.g. complaints pro cess, enforcement provisions and offences and penalties ) will also apply. Anticipated introduction of new fees for use of CVoD rating and labelling tools The new regime introduced by the Bill will also permit new fees to be set for the use and review of CVoD rating and labelling tools . Fees under the Act are set in the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Fees) Regulations . Work is underway to update the fees framework , including the level of the CVoD fees for specified CVoD providers. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Part Two : Background Material and Policy Information review s or evaluations .. Are there any publicly available inquiry, review or evaluation reports that have informed, or are relevant to, the policy to be given effect by this Bill YES Title: Young New Zealanders Viewing Sexual Violence Authoring agency : Office of Film and Literature Classification, November Location : https:www.classificationoffice.govt.nzassetsPDFsresearch young people sexual violence .pdf
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Part Four : Significant Legislative Features Compulsory acquisition of private property .. Does this Bill contain any provisions that could result in the compulsory acquisition of private property NO Charges in the nature of a tax .. Does this Bill create or amend a power to impose a fee, levy or charge in the nature of a tax NO Retrospective effect .. Does this Bill affect rights, freedoms, or impose obligations, retrospectively NO Strict liability or reversal of the usual burden of proof for offences .. Does this Bill: (a) create or amend a strict or absolute liability offence NO (b) reverse or modify the usual burden of proof for an offence or a civil pecuniary penalty proceeding NO Civil or criminal immunity .. Does this Bill c reate or amend a civil or criminal immunity for any person NO Significant decision making powers .. Does this Bill create or amend a decision making power to make a determination about a persons rights, obligations, or interests protected or recognised by law, and that could have a significant impact on those rights, obligations, or interests NO Powers to make delegated legislation .. Does this Bill create or amend a power to make delegated legislation that could ame nd an Act, define the meaning of a term in an Act, or grant an exemption from an Act or delegated legislation YES Amendments to Schedule via Order in Council Section A() provides that the Minister of Internal Affairs may recommend an amendment to Schedule via Order in Council which will have the effect of altering the list of persons who are subject to the provisions of the Bill , either by adding or removing a person fr om this list. Section A() of the Bill sets out criteria that the Minister of Internal Affairs must have regard to when exercising their power under Section A() . Section s A() and A() provide that the Minister must consult with the Chief Cens or when exercising their power under Section A() .
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs .. Does this Bill c reate or amend any other powers to make delegated legislation YES The power to make Regulations is already contained in section of the Act.
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs ... Are there aspects of the policy to be given effect by this Bill that were not addressed by, or that now vary materially from , the policy options analysed in these regulatory impact statement s NO
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Part Three : Testing of Legislative Content Consistency with New Zealands internati onal o bligations .. What steps have been taken to determine whether the policy to be given effect by this Bill is consistent with N ew Zealand s international obligations Consultation has been undertaken with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade to ensure that New Zeala nd is giving effect to its international obligations. Consistency with the g overnments Treaty of Waitangi obligations .. What steps have been taken to determine whether the policy to be given effect by this Bill is consistent with the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi IwiMori are not disproportionately affected by the provisions contained in the Bill and the Department of Internal Affairs considers that the Bill is consistent with the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi. Consistency with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act .. Has advice been provided to the Attorney General on whether any provisions of this Bill appear to limit any of the rights and freedoms affirmed in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act YES The Ministry of Justice has reviewed the Bill and has provided advice to the Attorney General who will notify the Minister of I nternal Affairs directly about the outcomes of this advice. The Department considers the provisions of this Bill to be consistent with the BORA. Offences, penalties and court j urisdictions .. Does this Bill create, a mend , or remove: (a) offences or penalties (including infringement offences or penalties and civil pecuniary penalt y regimes ) NO (b) the jurisdiction of a court or tribunal (including rights to judicial review or rights of appeal) NO Privacy issues .. Does this Bill create, amend or remove any provisions relating to the collection, storage, access to, correction of, use or disclosure of personal information NO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs External consultation .. Has there been any external consultation on the policy to be given effect by this Bill, or on a draft of this Bill YES The Department conducted public consultation on the following three options to standardise the classification of CVoD content from April to May : . Option : Subject CVoD providers to the current New Zealand classification regime that applies to films (e.g. theatrical and DVD releases); . Option : Establish a mechanism for CVoD providers to self classify their content under the classification regime that applies to films; an d . Option : Identify enhancements to the two existing regulatory mechanisms (the NZ Media Councils voluntary scheme and the Chief Censors call in powers) and operate them in tandem to achieve better outcomes. Submissions were received from CVoD provide rs, key industry stakeholders, regulators , agencies and NGOs with work that relates to the wellbeing of children and young people. Submitters were generally supportive of Options andor , they did not generally support Option . Officials held a follow up workshop with industry on July to discuss the CVoD definition and how self classification would work in practice. Results from this consultation informed the recommended proposal (progressing with Option ) which was confirmed by Cabinet on September . Officials also undertook targeted consultation from September to September on the CVoD definition supplementary analysis, to make it clear which providers will be captured as part of these new requirements. This supplementary anal ysis is included in the RIA that accompanies the Bill. Other t esting of proposals .. Have the policy details to be given effect by this Bill been otherwise tested or assessed in any way to ensure the Bills provisions are workable and complete YES The Department of Internal Affairs has worked closely with the Office of Film and Literature Classification to test the development of the policy contained in this Bill and to ensure that all proposals are workable. The Department of Internal Affairs also consulted with the following Government agencies in the process of developing this Bill: Ministry of Health Ministry for Women Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade Te Puni Kkiri Ministry for Culture and Heritage Ministry of Business, Innovation and Empl oyment The Treasury the Policy Advisory Group at the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC) Ministry for Pacific Peoples, Oranga Tamariki Ministry of Social Development The Broadcasting Standards Authority
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs ()(a) ()(a) ()(a) Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Purpose . In December you requested from officials, information on international policy initiatives to comprehensively regulate online content. There is growing international concern over the risk of harm posed by online media content . Similar to NZ, other jurisdictions are also grappling with outdated media content regulatory systems that do not have the flexibility to respond to new forms of media and the risk of harm they pose. Previously, the dominant view has been that user content should be largely left unregulated to protect freedom of expression . This view holds that freedom of expression needs to be given paramount protection to reap the benefits of the internets user participation framework. These benefits include increasing public access to information, allowing public political discussion to occur at national and global levels, and giving greater political voice to marginalised group. . Recent highprofile cases of serious harm arising from content hosted on online social networks have propelled growing international debate over the responsibilities of online platforms and governments to regulate harmful online content. These high profile cases include the streaming of the March Christchurch Terror Attack, allegations of foreign election interference, COVID misinformation, the storming of the United States Capitol and violations of data privacy . There is also growing recognition that characteristics of the online environment amplify the volume, speed, and reach of harmful media content, which increases the risk of online media content causing harm to individuals, society and democratic institutions compared to traditional media . These characteristics or the online environment include: People are less inhibited when communicating online leading them to be more likely to create and share harmful media content. This is because social and cultural constraints on speech do not operate online to the extent they do offline. Contributing to this disinhibition effect is the relative anonymity of online content creators and sharers. In addition, the decoupling of content creators and content distributors weakens accountability, contributing to the disinhibition effect; Social bots and fake profiles are being used amplify the spread of harmful content; and Social interests and commercial incentives are in conflict the business incentives of online platforms are, in some cases, misaligned with protecting users and the broader public from harm. The business models of online platforms are structured around maximising audience engagement for advertising revenue. For this reason, recommendation systems usually prioritise pages which are visited most often and have the greatest time spent on them. Content that elicits an emotional response, such as outrage, disgust and anger
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Office of the Minister of Internal Affairs
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Page of Purpose . This briefing seeks your agreement on a first tranche of policy related to introducing a selfidentification process for recognising gender on birth certificates through the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Bill (the Bill). Executiv e summary . It is important that transgender and intersex people are able to have their gender recognised on their birth certificates. Birth certificates are often used as a form of identity verification. If the sex recorded does not align with their gender, they risk being outed as transgender or intersex. These experiences have a detrimental effect on the mental health and wellbeing of transgender and intersex people . . The Family Court process for changing sex on a birth certificate is difficult to access for many people due to cost or the intrusiveness of the medical requirement. We recommend making the change more accessible by introducing a selfidentification process . This paper sets out the policy decisions required to introduce a self identific ation process. . Selfidentification would remove the requirement for a Family Court declaration and for evidence of medical treatment and would enable people to apply directly to the RegistrarGeneral with a statutory declaration form. . We think the selfi dentification process should be available for children and young people . Further work is required, however, to determine how we do that and ensure any change is in the best interest of the child or young person. We seek an inprinciple decision on this and will provide further advice in April . . There are risks, which will require mitigation measures, to progressing these policies in the Bill. These include: . a lack of consultation with Mori, Pacific peoples, and other ethnic communities; . organised opposition to a self identification process; and . not addressing broader questions about sex and gender. . Agencies that we have consulted are supportive of introducing a selfidentification process. However, they have had significant feedback on some of the specific policies we are considering. Background . You have indicated you would like to replace the Family Court process to change the sex on a birth certificate with a selfidentification process. Selfidentification was introduced to the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Bill (the Bill) in at the recommendation of the select committee.
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Purpose . This briefing provides initial advice on timing, next steps and risks for progressing the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Bill (the Bill). It also seeks your agreement to amend the Bill through a Supplementary Order Paper (SOP). Executive summary . You have directed us to develop an approach to progress the Bill in the Legislative Programme. However, t he Bill as reported back from Select Committee would benefit from updating. Without amendments, the Bill may be difficult to implement in time and not work as effectively as intended. . We are aware that the selfidentification provisions inserted by Select Committee could be better aligned to human rights discourse, so they are appropriate for people of all genders. Issues with certain operational and access provisions in the Bill have also been identified since the Bill was deferred in . . It is possible to address the above issues and amend the Bill through an SOP. With an SOP, the Bill could still be enacted at the end of or in early . If you agree, we will commence work on the SOP and provide you with advice on policy proposals by August . . All options for progressing the question of selfidentification carry some level of risk, particularly stakeholder risks . The main risk for progressing the Bill is that groups opposed to selfidentification will criticise the lack of wider public consultation. To mitigate this risk, we will develop communications material to explain the rationale for this approach. . Progressing the Bill also means that there will not be the time to fully understand te ao Mori perspectives and incorporate them in the Bill. While targeted consultation could be undertaken on any amendments made through an SOP, broad engagement with M ori stakeholders may not be possible. To ensure the Crown is fulfilling its obligations under Te Tiriti o Waitangi you may wish to consider a larger piece of work that looks to understand and incorporate M ori perspectives in identity legislation generally, not just the specific issue of selfidentification . . You agreed to seek Cabinet approval to progress the Bill at the same time as Cabinet considers the Government response to the Working Group for Reducing Barriers to Changing Registered Sex . We are drafting a Cabinet paper and expect it will be ready for Cabinet Committee consideration in March . To help us draft this material, we would like to meet with you to discuss progressing the Bill in more detail. You are interested in progressing the Bill . On January , we discussed your priorities for the policy work programme . You directed us to develop a legislative bid to progress the Bill in the legislative programme, with a request for priority three to be enacted this year if possible. There are issues with the Bills self identification provisions . You have indicated your preferred option is to progress the Bill with the self identification provisions inserted by Select Committee in . The selfidentification provisions update the process for changing the sex recorded on a birth certificate to an administrative process based on selfidentification. This will benefit transgender and Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of intersex New Zealanders and make it easier for them to obtain a birth certificate that aligns with their gender identity. However, issues with the selfidentification provisions have been identified since the Bill was deferred in . First, the terminology used for sexgender markers may not meet all peoples needs . The sexgender marker options in the selfidentification provisions include female, male, intersex or X unspecified . Intersex is not an appropriate term to include as most intersex people identify as men or women. The marker reinforces the idea that information recorded should be based on biology as opposed to a persons gender identity. This could be considered out of step with human rights discourse and not respectful of intersex peoples right to self determination. . The marker options are also not inclusive of people who identify as nonbinary. While Select Committee included the option of X unspecified to recognise non binary gender identities, this is unlikely to be non binary peoples preferred term. . Since the Bill was deferred, Statistics New Zealand have reviewed the statistical standards for sex and gender, with standards expected to be finalised in March . Further work could be done so the current marker options for birth certificates align with Statistics New Zealands findings . Second, c ontinuing to use a sex field on birth certificates can be confusing . A persons chose n marker would appear under the sex field on birth certificates. This conflates sex and gender identity and could reinforce that the information under this field should be based on biology. For clarity , further consideration could be given to the terminology used for this category. Third, recording sex and gender on birth certificates may not be best practice . Recording sex or gender on birth certificates could be considered out of step with international human rights discourse, which recommends that official identity documents exclude the registration of this information. However, this discourse also recommends that where official identity documents include sex or gender, this information is based on an accessible selfidentification process. We will consider how to resolve the above issues . We will give further consideration on how to resolve the above issues with the self identification provisions. As part of this we will develop options for the scope of any work to address these issues, considering what could reasonably be completed so the Bill can be enacted in late or early . . We are aware of general views for and against selfi dentification, which have been well canvassed in the process to . However, we recognise any work to address the above issues would benefit from a better understanding of specific population groups views, such as M ori, Pasifika, and intersex people. We will consider how to incorporate a targeted consultation process into any work on the selfidentification provisions. We will provide you with further advice on the scope of work on the self identification provisions and approaches to targeted consultation by May . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of There are also issues with the Bills operational and access provisions . Issues with certain operational and access provisions in the Bill have also been identified since the Bill was deferred in . We are determining the specific issues, which are expected to be relatively minor or technical. For example, there are clauses in the Bill that require technical system changes that may require longer implementation timeframes. . Without addressing the above issues, the Bill may be difficult to implement in time and not work as effectively as intended. We will provide you with an overview of the specific issues by May . As part of this advice we will consider if targeted consultation on any work to address the issues would be valuable, including with Mori, genealogists and historians. We recommend making amendments to update the Bill through a SOP . It is possible to progress the Bill with further amendments to address the issues with the selfidentification, and operational and access provisions through a SOP. W ith an SOP, the Bill could still be enacted at the end of or in early . . Depending on the scope of the changes to be included in the SOP, we expect policy development will take around six months. As selfidentification is a discrete and complex issue, we intend to commence policy development to update the Bill through the following two workstreams that will be conducted simultaneously: . refinements to the selfidentification provisions; and . updates to the operational and access provisions. . We recommend that the two work streams produce separate Cabinet papers seeking agreement to policy approvals. If the proposals are approved, a single SOP would then be drafted for approval by Cabinet before being tabled in the House. . The key parts of the process and estimated timing are set out below. . If you agree, we will start work to refine the selfidentification provisions and update the operational and access provisions. We intend to be able to provide you with advice on final policy proposals for the SOP by August . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of There are risks to progressing the Bill, but these can partially be mitigated . All the options available to you for the Bill carry some level of risk , such as, continued delay to provisions necessary for the effective functioning of the legislation, not reflecting te ao Mori perspectives, or stakeholder risks. . The risks to this option of progressing the Bill and making amendments through an SOP include: . groups opposed to selfidentification criticising the lack of public consultation; . delaying incorporating M ori perspectives on identity; and . not fully addressing the issues with the Bill raised by Crown Law. . Our assessment of the risks and possible mitigations are detailed below. Groups opposed to selfidentification criticising the lack of public consultation . Groups opposed to selfidentification of gender will be critical of progressing the Bill without wider public consultation and a chance to share their views. For example, these groups will argue that a persons sex is fixed, and that self identification of gender encroach es on womens rights eg, the right to sexsegregated spaces. . Opposition will likely result in: . correspondence to you and other MPs; . public campaigns, including through public events, radio, podcast, and social media; and . divisive debate on gender selfidentification that could negatively impact the wellbeing of transgender and intersex people. . Our current view is that there are unlikely to be new concerns or matters of substance raised by groups on either side of the debate on selfidentification. The exception to this is that it would be beneficial to get a deeper understanding of specific population groups perspectives, such as M ori (see below). . To further mitigate this risk, we will develop messaging and communications material to manage these groups expectations and explain the rationale for your choice of a preferred option. We will also work with your office to provide you with key messages as critical milestones are reached. . Should you decide that wider publ ic consultation is beneficial you can still rerefer the Bill to Select Committee, which can call for public submissions. There are range of options to do this set out in Appendix A . These options could all be revisited ahead of the committee of the whole House stage. Delaying incorporating M ori perspectives on identity . Progressing the Bill means that there will not be the time to fully understand and incorporate te ao Mori perspecti ves on identity and incorporate them into the Bill. Mori may express disappointment at the lack of a partnership approach in the development of the Bill. . We can consider including Mori stakeholders in any targeted consultation where it would be possible. Targeted consultation with M ori may be valuable for work on refining the selfidentification provisions , especially if incorporating Mori terminology Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of is to be considered. Work in Te Ara Manaaki and the Digital Public Service may provide opportunities for joinedup consultation with Mori . This would reduce the consultation burden on M ori stakeholders and improve levels of engagement. . Fully understanding and incorporating M ori perspectives on selfidentification will be challenging if the Bill is to be enacted in or early . This challenge was signalled through Statistics New Zealands public consultation on the statistical standards for sex and gender. While Statistics New Zealand undertook a full public consultation process, they still received feedback that further consultation with M ori is needed. . To mitigate this risk and ensure the Crown is fulfilling its obligations under Te Tiriti o Waitangi you may wish to consider a larger piece of work that looks to understand and incorporate M ori perspectives in identity legislation. We are considering the scope of this work and will provide you with further advice in mid. Any work could follow enactment of the Bill and involve a wider conversation with M ori. Not fully addressing the issues with the Bill raised by Crown Law . Another reason cited for deferring the Bill was issues raised by Crown Law in early . An overview of these issues is provided at Appendix B . Groups that are critical of progressing the Bill are likely to raise the Crown Law advice . . The Crown Law advice did not express significant concern about the selfidentification provisions. Its main query was whether there could be more guidance on how sex and gender is determined by the law generally. We agree that providing clearer guidance for determining sex or gender may be warranted but this work is broader tha n the Internal Affairs Portfolio and the B irths, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Act. To mitigate this, we can develop messaging explaining this work is beyond the scope of the Bill and the Departments role. . Another issue raised by Crown Law is about the consequences of selfidentification for the placement or transgender people in prison. Corrections Regulatio ns state that if a prisoner supplies a copy of their birth certificate they must be placed in a prison that accords with the sex on this document. This overrides all other considerations, including a history of sexual offending. The concern was that men, particularly those who have committed sexual offences, would take advantage of the selfidentification process to change their recorded sex and be placed in a female prison. . We previously worked with Corrections to resolve this issue, including looking at amending or removing the Corrections Regulation that refers to birth certificates as the deciding factor in placement of a person in prison . We will resume our work with Corrections on this issue.
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Statement Regulatory Impact Statement: Interim assessment for Reducing Pokies Harm
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Statement Appendix: Class Venue requirements of the Gambling Act and the Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Regulations The Gambling Act and the Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Regulations require: . The venue has a policy for identifying problem gamblers. The venue manager, or person acting on their behalf, must take all reasonable steps to ensure that the policy is used to identify actual or potential problem gamblers ( Section ). Failure to do so may result in a fine of up to ,. . There is always a staff member who has received problem gambling awareness training at the venue whenever gambling is available. A trained staff member must be able to approach a player and provide appropriate information about problem gambling ( Reg ). . A notice is displayed in the gambling area advising customers that you have such a policy and that a copy of the policy will be made available on request ( Section ). Failure to supply a copy of this policy when requested may result in the venue manager being fined up to ,. . Once a problem gambler has been identified, or there are reasonable grounds to believe that the person is a problem gambler, staff must approach that person and offer information or advice about problem gambling ( Section ). That information or advice must include a description of the self exclusion procedure ( Section () ). . After offering the advice and information an exclusion order may be issued by the venue manager (or person acting on their behalf). This prohibits the person from entering the gambling area for a period of up to two years ( Section () ). . An exclusion order must be issued promptly if a person has identified themselves as being a problem gambler and has requested that the venue prohibit them from entering the gambling area ( Section ). A venue manager (or person acting on their behalf) that fails to issue a self exclusion order when requested commits an offence and is liable for a fine of up to ,. . Staff must take all reasonable steps (including issuing an exclusion order) to provide continued assistance on an on going basis to a person they believe is a problem gambler after the initial approach if the persons ongoing behaviour means there are still reasonable grounds to believe the person is a problem gambler ( Section A ). . Excluded persons must not be permitted to enter the gambling area and must be removed if they do so (Section ). A venue manager (or person acting on their behalf) who allows an excluded person to enter the gambling area or fails to remove an excluded person may commit an offence and is liable for a fine of up to , ( Section ). . The venue manager must keep a record of exclusion orders ( Section A ), including: The persons name and of birth (if provided); and Whether the person self excluded, or received a venue initiated exclusion; and The which the exclusion order was issued and the of expiry; and Any conditions imposed on the persons re entry into the venue. . No one aged or under can gamble at the venue ( Section ). Offences may result in a fine of up to ,. . Providing credit for gambling is prohibited ( Section ). . No ATMs are permitted in the gambling area of a venue ( Reg ). . Class operator s must ensure that: maximum amount single play stake (for stand alone or linked machine) does not exceed .; maximum prize single play prize does not exceed , and; maximum single play jackpot prize a linked gaming machine does not exceed , ( Reg ). . Gaming machines must display certain messages at the election of the player, specifically: game information (odds, average winnings, player spend rates), player information (duration, amount spent, net winslosses). Machine must also display correct time ( Reg ). . Gaming machines must include feature that interrupts play every minutes and provides player information (duration, amount spent, net winslosses). Machine must include a feature that automatically pays out any winnings and credits to the player, if they do not wish to continue ( Reg ). . No advertising relating to a gaming machine jackpot s can be either outside the venue, or inside the venue in a way that is visible or audible to persons outside the venue ( Reg and ). . The following must be available to players ( Reg ): Pamphlets containing information about the odds of winning on gaming machines and the characteristics of problem gambling, including the recognised signs of harmful gambling and how to seek advice; and Signage that is clearly visible that encourage players to gamble only at levels they can afford and contains advice about how to seek assistance for problem gambling. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Statement Section : Deciding upon an option to address the policy problem What criteria will be used to compare options to the Counterfactual . We developed a set of criteria to select proposals for inclusion in the discussion document. The interim criteria are: that some evidence (international or local) exists of their ability to reduce harm ; or they represent a best practice (international or local) response to reducing gambling harm ; or they are recommended by the regulator, or harm minimisation providers ; and they are not evidently impractical o r unfeasible; and we have an ability to make the requirement via regulation. . All proposals in the discussion document meet the above interim criteria . However, in the discussion document, the initial thinking for each of the three sets of proposals have been annotated with our initial perceptions of: the overall effectiveness in decreasing harmful gambling; the feasibility and practicality of the proposals ; an indication of the financial costs; and any initial assumptions and uncertainties with the proposals. . The final RIS criteria (for the next stage of decision making for reporting back to Cabinet with developed options for policy approval) will likely include: effectiveness whether the intervention is likely to be effective at reducing harm ; efficiency resourcing implications ; feasibility including: a. ease and ability to change ; b. fiscal cost to the regulator and the sector viability of using operational settings, rather than regulations social acceptability (i.e. to the general p ublic). What scope will options be considered within . In defining the scope as options to reduce harm in pokies venues using regulatory powers : the problem definition has been restricted to pokies harm in pubs and clubs ; and the available options have been restricted to existing regulation making powers , limited to: harm prevention and minimisation (section ); gaming machines (section ); admission to, and exclusion from, gambling venues (section ); exclusion of problem gamblers (section ); and infringement offences for the breach of any regulations (section ). . Within the scope, and to meet the specific objectives of the work, proposals can be considered within the three focus areas summarised below : the venue society and venue manager requirements ; the machines game features and jackpot branding; and enforcement tools offences and infringement fees for breaches of the current regulations.
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Statement What options are being considered The Counterfactual . The current legislative environment presents the circumstances summarised below. O perational changes to support better harm minimisation practices are also being considered , but the work is still in the scoping and development stage (will commence after the discussion document consultation process) .
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs S.()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs S.()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs S.()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs S.()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs S.()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs S.()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs S.()(f)(iv), S.()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs S.()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of S.()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of S.()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of S.()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of S.()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs S.()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs S.()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs S.()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs S.()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs S.()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs S.()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Appendix B: Letter from the Department to the Governance and Administration Committee requesting an extensio n
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE Page of Responding to the recommendations of the Working Group . We recommend that you respond to the report of the Working Group for Reducing Barriers to Changing Registered Sex as soon as possible. The proposed Government response involves agencies who will need to brief their Ministers but does not require Cabinet approval. We will brief you on progressing this work in late November . Options for BDMRR Act reform . On November we provided you with advice on reinstating business which had lapsed upon the dissolution of the nd Parliament. We recommended you reinstate the BDMRR Bill, to allow time for a discussion of the policy issues outlined above. We were concerned that if the Bill were not reinstated, stakeholder groups would notice it was no longer on the order paper and preemptively enquire about the future of this work. . There are different ways the work to modernise the BDMRR Act can be scaled and sequenced. The simplest would be to progress immediately with the BDMRR Bill (which is not recommended) and the most complex could involve a wider review o f BDMRR Act andor how sex and gender are recorded across identity legislation and official documents . . We recommend you discharge the BDMRR Bill before the House of Representatives, and replace it with two separate pieces of work: a) a new BDMRR Bill focussing on modernisation, access provisions and operational improvements and forms part of the legislative programme, and b) a review of the process set out in legislation for changing the sex recorded on a birth certificate which could lead to legislation being introduced in . You have options about the scope and sequencing of work to modernise the BDMRR Act . The BDMRR Act requires updating to keep the legislation functional and prepare for the digital future. Consultation undertaken in on access provisions and the findings of the Law Commission report are still relevant. However, additional changes to the Bill will be needed to address operational issues identified since drafting . . This affords an opportunity for consultation with Mori about access to the registers of births, deaths and marriages to ensure that the Crown is fulfilling its obligations under Te Tiriti o Waitangi . There was no targeted consultation with Mori in the development of the proposals in the BDMRR Bill. . Work across government could require changes to the BDMRR A ct, for example, a Ministry of Justice review of adoption, or new digital formats for official information. We will brief you on any work that may impact the BDMRR Act, but do not recommend delaying reform until work in other portfolios is completed. . The above additions to the Bill should be able to be made within a short period and a new Bill introduced as part of the legislative programme. Options for progressing this work are outlined in the table below; these options can be further refined or amended.
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Appendix A: Draft Cabinet paper Proposed amendments to the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Appendix A: Significant international policy initiatives to regulate online content . This appendix outlines recent international proposed and enacted comprehensive regulatory frameworks for online content, which impose greater accountability on platforms for the content they host. These selected proposed and enacted frameworks are the German Network Enforcement Act, UK Online Safety Bill, The EU Digital Services Act, and the Irish Online Safety and Media Regulation Bill. Overseas proposed and enacted regulatory policies of online content vary in scope and design . There exists a vast breadth of design consideration for creating a regulatory framework for online content. The selected proposed and enacted frameworks for online content in this appendix vary in scope and design. For example, regulatory frameworks can be outcomefocused (i.e. requirements are to remove specified content), or procedural focused (i.e. requirements are to have processes in place to reduce harm andor illegal content (e.g. having a point of contact to regulators, enforcing their own terms of services, having a robust complaints system and transparency reporting on content moderation )). . The range of regulatory design features across different international proposed and enacted frameworks are outlined in the table below . Comparison of international proposed and enacted regulations on online content Regulatory design featur es and timing German Network Enforcement Act UK Online Safety Bill
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Appendix B: Final Cabinet paper Proposed amendments to the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill for lodgement (highlighted chang es copy)
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister for Racing I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Compliance There are no inconsistencies between the Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Amendment Regulations , Gambling (Infringement Offences) Regulations , Gambling (Infringement Offences) Amendment Regulations and: . the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi; . the rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act or the Human Righ ts Act ; . relevant international standards and obligations; . the Legislation Guidelines ( edition), which are maintained by the Legislation Design and Advisory Committee. The Department considers the regulations as compliant with the requirement of the Privacy Act . Regulations Review Committee There are no grounds identified under Standing Order where the Regulations Review Committee could draw these regulations to the special attention of the House. Certification by Parliamentary Counsel The Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) have certified these regulations as being in order for submission to Cabinet. Impact Analysis A Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS) on the proposed changes to strengthening harm minimisation regulations was prepared and provided to the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee as part of seeking approval of the policies actioned by these regulations SWC MIN . Publicity On May , I will make a press release announcing the re gulatory changes through my office, the regulations will be notified in The Gazette, and the Department will notify Class Societies and venue operators. Proactive release I propose to proactively release this Cabinet paper within the prescribed days o f these decisions being confirmed by Cabinet. Consultation The Ministry of Health was closely consulted with and is supportive of these proposals. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister for Racing I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E The following government agencies were also consulted and raised no significant issues: Te A ka Whai Ora The Mori Health Authority, Te Whatu Ora Health New Zealand, Treasury, the Ministry of Justice, Te Arawhiti, Te Puni Kkiri, the Ministry for Pacific Peoples, Office of the Privacy Commissioner, Ministry for Ethnic Communities, and the New Zealand Police. The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet was informed. Targeted consultation was undertaken with Class Societies, peak bodies representing the Class sector , Hospitality NZ , Clubs NZ and nation wide gambling harm treatment providers PGF, Salvation Army Oasis, Asian Family Services, and Mapu Maia . Feedback from this process informed changes to the regulations as outlined in paragraphs . Recommendations I recommend that the Cabinet Legislation Committee: note that on September the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee agreed to a package of regulatory changes aimed at reducing gambling harm in Class venues, and to introducing infringement offences to strengthen enforcement of the regulations SWC MIN ; note that the Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Regulations , Gambling (Infringement Offences) Regulations , and Gambling (Infringement Offences) Amendment Regulations will give effect to the decision referred to in recommendation ; agree that, in order to support venue implementation , regulation of Part of Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Regulations be amended to specify staff involved in supervising gambling instead of any staff with direct contact with playe rs; note that minor and technical changes have been made to enhance clarity and support workability of the regulations; authorise the submission to the Executive Council of the; . Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Regulations ; . Gambling (Infri ngement Notices) Amendment Regulations ; . Gambling (Infringement Offences) Regulations ; and . Gambling (Infringement Offences) Amendment Regulations ; note that; . Part of the Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Regulations , the Gambling (Infringement Offences) Regulations , and the Gambling (Infringement Notices) Amendment Regulations will come into force on June ; Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister for Racing I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E . Part of the Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Amendment Regulations will come into f orce on September ; and . Part of the Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Amendment Regulations and, Gambling (Infringement Offences) Amendment Regulations will come into force on December . Authorised for lodgement
Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government ()(h) ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv), ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCEOffice of the Minister of Local Government Chair Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Delivering on coalition agreement commitments on local government representation Proposal .This paper seeks your agreement to begin drafting legislation to reinstate the ability for : .. communities to petition their council s to hold a binding poll on Mori wards ; and .. councils to initiate binding polls on Mori wards . .The paper also seeks your agreement to a transitional mechanism for councils that have resolved to establish Mori wards without a binding poll since . .I also propose to a djust the statutory timeframes for the local elections process in the same Bill, to give more time for postal delivery of ballot papers . Relation to government priorities .The Mori wards proposals in this paper relat e to commitments in coalition agreements between the New Zealand National Party, ACT New Zealand, and New Zealand First (coalition agreements ) to Restore the right to local referendum on the establishment or ongoing use of Mori wards, including requiring a referendum on any wards established without referendum at the next Local Body elections . .The proposal related to postal voting in local elections support s the Governments commitment to ensure the local government electoral system is effective and fitfor purpose. Executive summary .Mori wards allow for specific members on councils to be elected only by people on the Mori electoral roll. Before , communities had the ability to petition their councils to hold binding polls on the establishment of Mori wards. .I propose restoring the ability for communities to petition their councils and including a mechanism for recent decisions on Mori wards to be revisited. .I consider councils that made recent decisions to establish Mori wards , without holding a poll, should be given the option to reverse their decisions before the local elections , rather than go through a poll process this term . Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE . In line with coalition agreements, I propose that councils that do not reverse their recent decisions to establish Mori wards will have to conduct a binding poll. There are two key variables for possible polls: .. Timing: Whether the outcome of any polls should apply from the or local elections ; and .. Prompt: Whether polls should be imposed on councils or occur only if communities effectively petition their councils . . This paper provides four options that reflect different combinations of decisions on timing and prompt . . Lastly, I propose allowing more time for the postal delivery of voting papers by adjusting the timeframes of several local elections processes. As the largest provider of postal voting services, NZ Post has advised that it will take up to two weeks to deliver all voting papers for the local elections. . These proposals would for m a local electoral omnibus bill scheduled to complete all House stages this year. Restoring polls on Mori wards Background . Under the Local Electoral Act , Mori wards are an opt in provision for councils that allows them to decide whether specific members will be elected only by people on the Mori electoral roll . , The effect is similar to the Mori parliamentary seats, i.e., those on the Mori electoral roll vote for candidates for Mori wards, and those on the general electoral roll vote for candidates in general wards. . Before February , councils were required to hold a binding poll on whether to establish Mori wards if a petition of at least per cent of the people on a council s electoral roll requested it. Polls could also be initiated by councils. The result of the poll was binding on a council for two local government terms . . Between and , polls were held. One poll (Wairoa District Council) resulted in Mori wards being established. Two other councils also had Mori wards prior to the legislati ve changes (one of these council s established Mori wards via a local Act before the Local Electoral Act provisions were in place). . In , the previous Government removed the mechanism for binding polls on the establishment of Mori wards (initiated by either the council itself or by a petition of electors).
Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government I N C O N F I D E N C E
Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCEAppendix B: Regulatory Impact Statement: Changing timelines to enable local elections to be delivered Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Appendix C: Councils that have established Mori wards without a binding poll since Council . Far North . Kaipara . Whangrei . Hamilton . Hauraki . Matamata Piako . torohanga . Taup . Thames Coromandel . Waikato District . Waip . Rotorua . Tauranga . Western Bay of Plenty . Whakatne . Kawerau . New Plymouth . Rangitkei . Ruapehu . South Taranaki . Stratford . Gisborne . Central Hawkes Bay . Hastings . Napier . Horowhenua . Whanganui . Manawatu . Tararua . Palmerston North . Masterton . South Wairarapa . Kpiti Coast . Porirua City . Upper Hutt Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Council . Hutt City . Wellington City . Marlborough . Nelson . Tasman . Northland . Taranaki . Horizons (Manawat Whanganui) . Hawkes Bay . Wellington Regional
Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . The revenue split between household and non household connections varies across territorial authorities. On average, househol ds contribute percent of revenue (excluding development contributions). However, some territorial authorities appear to collect almost all their revenue from households, while others appear to collect very little of their revenue from households. The data suggests (despite differences between regional economies) that there are large cross subsidies between these two groups, but the direction of the subsidy is not consistent. . It is particularly important that businesses that use larger quantities of water face cost based pricing. This incentivises businesses to use water efficiently. I am concerned that some territorial authorities may have offered large commercial water users sweetheart deals with low prices for water services, as hidden incentives to locate in their districts. There is only anecdotal evidence on the scale of this issue, mostly from the establishment of Watercare. . To address such problems, I propose including provision for all drinking water supply, and trade waste and wastewater removal contracts (and the like) that are transferred to the water services entities will have their pricing provisions expire after five years. This should be sufficient time for businesses to adapt to a different (and possibly higher) water services price and will enable the water services entities to implement nondiscriminatory pricing. However, this period may be considered too short by businesses that have made significant capital investments recently, such as new water bottling plants. . This proposal would not affect contractors providing services to the water services entities. It is only where the water services entity supplies water, trade waste or wastewater services to a com mercial entity under a contract. . The decision to override pre existing contracts is likely to attract some scrutiny. It is generally considered to be less than ideal practice for the Crown to change pre existing contracts through legislation. On the other hand, it is important that all users pay their fair share of the cost of providing water services.
Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Polls mandatory Takes effect at electionsTakes effect at electionsPolls only triggered by petition Option A : Require all councils to hold a poll in late , to take effect at local elections. If the poll goes against Mori wards, councils may revert to older representation arrangements.NEW Option B : Allow electors to petition councils in August September , to hold a poll in early , to take effect at the local elections. If the poll goes against Mori wards, councils may revert to older representation arrangements. NEW A : Require all councils to hold a poll at the local elections, to take effect at the local elections. If the poll goes against Mori wards, normal representation review processes and timeframes would apply.Option B : Allow electors to petition councils to hold a poll alongside the local elections, to take effect at the local elections. If the poll goes against Mori wards, normal representation review processes and timeframes would apply.Councils that do not choose to take this option will have to follow a binding polls process. This paper outlines four options to implement this, which stem from two fundamental questions: When will the outcome of the poll have effect Would there be value in having a petition trigger that poll Risk Criteria Detail Start Takes effect as early as possible. Cost All councils incur the poll cost. Standalone polls are more expensive. Some councils will incur representation review costs. Representation review impactLimited opportunity for public engagement as part of the representation review process. No LGC involvement in hearing appeals. Compliance risk Some risk that councils will not be able to complete their representation review in time or will be non compliant with legislation. Legal risk Higher risk of High Court challenge of council decisions. Agency impact Pressure on Local Government Commission (LGC) and StatsNZ to support councils and adjust for boundary changes. Extra Electoral Commission support for polls process.Risk Criteria Detail Start Takes effect as early as possible. Cost Councils only incur the costs of a poll if a petition is received. Representation review impactNo time for public involvement in the representation review process. No LGC involvement in hearing appeals. Compliance risk Higher risk that councils will not be able to complete their representation review in time or will be non compliant with legislation. Legal risk Higher risk of High Court challenge of council decisions. Agency impact High pressure on LGC and StatsNZ to support councils and adjust for boundary changes. Extra Electoral Commission support for polls process. Risk Criteria Detail Start Takes effect later. Cost All councils are required to hold a poll. Holding the poll alongside the elections is cheaper than a standalone poll. Representation review impactCouncils can go through a standard representation review process with opportunity to appeal to LGC. Compliance risk Low risk as LGC will have oversight role to minimise risk of non compliance. Legal risk Low risk of High Court challenge of council decisions. Agency impact Minimal impact.Risk Criteria Detail Start Takes effect later. Cost Councils only incur cost of a poll if a petition is received. Holding the poll alongside the elections is cheaper than a standalone poll. Representation review impactCouncils can go through a standard representation review process with opportunity to appeal to LGC. Compliance risk Low risk as LGC will have oversight role to minimise risk of non compliance. Legal risk Low risk of High Court challenge of council decisions. Agency impact Minimal impact.All councils who have resolved to create a Mori ward without holding a poll will first have the option to reverse their Mor i wards decision by resolution IN CONFIDENCE councils that have not yet created their Mori wards have a rescind option, to apply from the local elections councils with existing Mori wards have a disestablishment option, to apply from the local elections (or for Tauran ga) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Regulatory Impact Statement Regulatory Impact Statement: Binding Polls on the Establishment of M ori Wards Coversheet Purpose of document Decision sought: This a nalysis and advice has been produced for the purpose of informing key policy decisions to be made by Cabinet. Advising agencies : Department of Internal Affairs Proposing minister : Minister of Local Government finalised : March Problem definition The policy problem is how to ensur e that local communities have appropriate input into decisions about their local government representation arrangements , while maintaining a balance of Mori representation and participation in local government decision making. Elected members currently have the ability to make decisions about Mori representation on local authorities (councils) , on behalf of their communities. Under previous legislation, this decision was subject to being overturned by a majority vote of electors. The Governments policy is that the community should be able to make the final decision on whether Mori wards and constituencies (Mori wards) are established or not, rather than the decision sitting with elected representatives . Forty six councils resolved to establish Mori wards since March , without the decision being subject to the requirement to hold a binding poll. Between and only two councils established Mori wards using the previous process under the Local Electoral Act (the Act) . Fourteen councils attempted to establish Mori wards, some more than once. Sixteen polls were held, and only one of these was in favour (narrowly) of establishing Mori wards. One council established Mori wards without a poll being demanded by electors. Government policy is that poll provisions should afford communities a choice in the establishment of a Mori ward. Executive summary In , the requirement that council decisions to establish Mori wards be subject to opportunities for binding polls was removed through an amendment to the Act. Prior to these amendments, a council resolution to establish a M ori ward was subject to a binding poll initiated by a petition signed by at least of council electors. Under both the previous and current methods for establishment, the decision to create or not create a Mori ward is binding on the council for two electoral terms ( six years). The previous Government made this policy decision with a view that there was an imbalance between community input on representation arrangements and Mori representation in local government. The policy rationale for these changes was that council decisions to create general wards were not similarly subject to challe nge through a binding Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government In Executive Council Her Excellency the GovernorGeneral is recommended to sign the attached Order in Council making the Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order Minister of Local Government Approved in Council Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government PCO . Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order A Order in Council At Wellington this Her Exceffency the GovemorGflnr.w Z.,, day of Present: in Council This order is made under section () of the Rates Rebate Act on the advice and with the consent of the Executive Council. Title Commencement Principal Act Contents Section amended (Rates rebate) Revocation Saving Order Title This order is the Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order . Commencement This order comes into force on I July . Page .I Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government cl Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order Principal Act Clause amends the Rates Rebate Act . Section amended (Rates rebate) () In section (l)(a)(ii), replace , with ,. () In section ( )(b ), replace with . Revocation The Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order (SL ) is revoked. Saving A ratepayers entitlement to a rebate for a rating year ending before l July , and the amount (if any) of that rebate, must be determined as if this order had not been made. Explanatory note This note is not part of the order, but is intended to indicate its general effect. This order, which comes into force on July , amends section () of the Rates Rebate Act . That section provides for a rates rebate for lowincome home owners. This order increases the income threshold for a rates rebate from , to ,; and increases the maximum rates rebate from to . Issued under the authority of the Legislation Act . ofnotification in Gazelle: This order is administered by the Depatment oflnternal Affairs. section ()(a) section ()(a) section ()(a) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Priority Routine f Te Tari Taiwhenua tfl.s:illll iilJ Internal Affairs Local Government briefing Hon Kieran McAnulty Minister of Local Government rrtle: Draft Cabinet paper Annual adjustment to the Rates Rebate Scheme March Key issues You have agreed to adjust two key settings of the Rates Rebate Scheme for the rating year: the income abatement threshold and the maximum rebate paid. The adjustments are based on inflation of . percent in the All Groups Index of the Consumers Price Index for the year ended December . Adjustments are made by Order in Council, following consideration by either the Cabinet Legislation Committee or the Cabinet Business Committee. Action sought Timeframe Agree to one of the timelines provided for the implementation of the Rates Rebates Adjustment; and consult with your Ministerial colleagues on the proposed adjustments to the Rates Rebate Scheme for the rating year; and provide feedback from Ministerial consultation to the Department of Internal Affairs; and note that adjustments are made by Order in Council, folowing consideration by either the Cabinet legislation Committee or the Cabinet Business Committee. Contact for telephone discussions (if required Name Position Contact Number Anthea Oiver Manager Operationa l Policy Jorge Bolanos Lopez Policy Analyst I Return electronic document to: Cohesion document reference CADBAAFAADFS Ministerial database reference LG INCONFIDENCE By March Suggested st contact Page of S Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Purpose The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua . This briefing attaches a draft Cabinet paper (Appendix A) for Ministerial consultationi on proposed adjustments to the key settings of the Rates Rebate Scheme (the Scheme), which you have previously agreed to LG refers. Appendix A consists of a draft Cabinet paper and an Order in Council. Comment . The Parliamentary Counsel Office has drafted an Order in Council to make the annual adjustment to the Scheme. This is attached to the paper in Appendix A. . The agreement to the adjustment is subject to the Budget Moratorium . The Moratorium starts on April and ends on May , when the Minister of Finance announces the Budget for . This means that the adjustment cannot be agreed by Cabinet between those dates. . To meet the implementation deadline of July and apply the day rule, the Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) proposes that you take the attached Cabinet paper to either Cabinet Legislation Committee on April or Cabinet Business Committee on May . . The Cabinet paper proposes that the adjustment to the Rates Rebate Scheme match,es the percentage changes to the Consumer Price Index of . percent for the year end,d December . . The proposed adjustment: . increases the maximum rebate from to ; and . increases the income abatement threshold from , to ,; Proposed timeline . The Department has assessed two possible timelines for the implementation of the adjustment: It is a reauirement of Cabinet that regulations must not come into force until at least calendar days after thev have been notified in the New Zealand Gazette. The dav rule reflects the principle that the law should be publicly available and capable of being ascertained before it comes into force. INCONFIDENCE Page oif Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Proposed timelines for the implementation of the Rates Rebate Schemes adjustment Action Timeline (recommended) Timeline Consultation of the paper with your March March March May Ministerial colleagues Cabinet legislation Committee (LEG) LEG: April CBC: May meeting or Cabiness Business Committee (CBC) Cabinet Approval April May Order in Council is in the April June New Zealand Gazette The proposed adjustments take July July effect . Timeline consists of a short Ministeria l consultation period to submit the proposal to Cabinet Legislation Committee before the Budget Moratorium starts on April . This still provides ten calendar days for Ministers to consider the paper. . Timeline allows a lot more time for Ministerial consultation and aims to submit the proposal to Cabinet Business Committee after the Budget Moratorium. However, this would result in tighter timeframes for the Gazette Publication and the of implementation ( July ). . The Department believes that the proposed adjustment reflects existing policy decisions and that it does not require extensive Ministerial consultation. For this reason, we recommend you choose Time line , as this option provides sufficient time to deal with any unexpected delays. Timeline relies on the adjustment going through the last Cabinet Committee before the end of May, which means that there would only be one month left for the Gazette publication and the enactment of the adjustment. Such tight timeframes do not leave room to deal with unexpected events and may compromise meeting the intended enactment of the adjustment of July . Next steps . The Department will work with your office to progress Ministerial consultation based on your preference for Timeline or . . Depending on the option you choose, you will be provided with a briefing on March (Timeline ) or March (Timeline ) recommending you start Ministerial consultation and seeking your approval to lodge the Cabinet paper. INCONFIDENCE Pageof Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Recommendations . The Department recommends that you: a) agree to either: i. conduct a short Ministerial consultation period in order to submit the proposal to Cabinet Legislation Committee Ll before the Budget Moratorium starts on April ; c.:No OR ii. allow more time for Ministerial consultation and submit the proposal to Cabinet Business committee on May after the Budget Moratorium ends. ve b) consult with your Ministerial colleagues on the proposed adjustments to the Rates Rebate Scheme for the rating year; c) provide feedback from Ministerial consultation to the Department of Internal Affairs; and d) note that adjustments are made by Order in Council, following consideration by either the Cabinet Legislation Committee or the Cabinet Business Committee. Anthea Oliver Manager Operational Policy Hon Kieran McAnulty Minister of Local Government ti I ) INCONFIDENCE Yes Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Document A: Talking points for the Cabinet Legislation Committee meeting on May Key Messages This paper seeks agreement to adjust key settings of the Rates Rebate Scheme and seeks approval for an Order in Council to amend the Rates Rebate Act (the Act). In Cabinet agreed that regular adjustments to the Act must be made to account for inflation. The Rates Rebate Scheme is one of a suite of policy instruments designed to support househol ds to meet their living costs. Keeping the key settings at current levels will have negative effects on the value of the rebate to its recipients . Proposal I recommend that Cabinet agrees to adjust the key settings of the Rates Rebate Act The Rates Rebate Scheme (the Scheme) assists thousands of lowincome ratepayers to meet their living costs. Keeping the key settings at current levels will have negative effects on the value of the rebate to its recipients: o If the maximum rebate and income threshold remain static, inflation will diminish the value of the rebate to recipients . o If adjustments are not made every year, fewer people will meet the income threshold to qualify for the rebate. This will further diminish the intended impact of the Scheme for lowincome households. o After a period of nonadjustment , the cost of restoring the key settings to a desirable level could be considerable. Proceeding with the adjustments will also lower the risk of negative public reactions , particularly from senior citizen interest groups such as Age Concern and Grey Power. Senior citizens are the largest group of beneficiaries of the Scheme. Background and Context The Scheme assists lowincome ratepayers In , Cabinet agreed that regular adjustments to the Rates Rebate Act must be made to account for inflation. Ratepayers apply to their council for the rebate. Councils then process the applications and are reimbursed by the Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) . The proposed adjustments reflect the . per cent upward movement in the All Groups Index of the Consumer Price Index in the calendar year. The maximum rebate available will increase from to . The income abatement threshold will increase from , to ,. Page of
Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government aecpczkj Appendix C: Further detail on regulatory relief proposals
Proactively released by the Minister of Local GovernmentIN CONFIDENCE CABMIN. Cabinet Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. National Wastewater Environmental Performance Standards: Approval to Consult Portfolio Local Government On Febrnay , following reference from the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee, Cabinet: noted that the Water Services AuthorityTaumata Arowai is developing proposals for New Zealands first national wastewater environmental perfomance standards under the Water Services Act ; noted that upgrading public wastewate r treatment plants is one of the greatest infrastrncture challenges facing New Zealand, and the proposals in the discussion document on the proposed wastewate r standards, attached under ECOSUB, (the discussion document) are designed to address this by: . reducing regulatoy burden; . delivering much greater standardisation of treatment systems and related infrastructure; . enabling cost efficiencies in the design, build and operation of wastewater systems; . providing councils with greater cetainty of costs through standardisation and longer tem consent durations; approved the release of the discussion document for public consultation; authorised the Minister of Local Government (the Minister) to make minor amendme nts and refinements to the discussion document before it is released; noted that the Water Services Authority Taumata Arowai will publish the interim Regulatoy Impact Statement, attached as Appendix B under ECOSUB, on its website to suppot public consultation on the proposed wastewate r standards; noted that the Local Government (Water Services) Bill (the Bill) affects the approach being taken to the proposed wastewate r standards and how they are made; noted that the intention is to make the new wastewater standards as soon as possible after the Bill is passed v ); sshjfdn IN CONFIDENCE Proactively released by the Minister of Local GovernmentIN CONFIDENCE CABMIN. invited the Minister to further consider the legislative settings that require water service providers to adopt the least cost option to meet national environmental perfonnance standards, v , and potentially through changes being progressed through the Resource Management Act Refom; noted that in December , the Cabinet Legislation Committee agreed that councils that have wastewater consents that expire in the first two years will have the duration of those consents extended , so that they expire two years after the commencement of the Bill, and LEGMIN ; agreed that the Minister will consider the case for extending expired wastewater consents beyond two years for smallrnral councils, in consultation with the Minister Responsible for RMA Refom and other Ministers with a potfolio interest in this matter; invited the Minister: . in consultation with the Minister Responsible for RMA Refom, to issue drafting instructions to Parliamentai y Counsel Office to prepare an Order in Council making the wastewater standaids, once feedback from consultation has been considered; . to repot back to ECO on any significant matters that arise in feedback or in drafting; authorised the Minister to approve any minor and technical matters that may aiise during the course of drafting and that may be required to align with the above decisions and the Governments intention s for the national wastewater standaids; invited the Minister to repot back to the Cabinet Legislation Committee in v . .., following the enactinent of the Local Government (Water Services) Bill to: . seek agreement to an Order in Council to bring the wastewate r standards into force and authorisation for subinission of the Order to the Executive Council; and . infom the Committee of any decisions that were made in drafting the Order in Council. Rachel Haywaid Secretay of the Cabinet Secretary s Note: This minute replaces ECOMIN. Cabinet agreed to add recommendations . sshjfdn IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE P age of Office of the Minister of Local Government C hair Cabinet Economic Policy Committ ee Proposed national wastewater environmental performance standards: Approval to consult Proposal . This paper seeks agreement to release a discussion document for public consultation on New Zealands first national wastewater environmental performance standards (wastewater standards) on February . It includes proposals relating to: . discharge of wastewater to land; . discharge of wastewater to water; . the beneficial reuse of biosolids to land; and . monitoring and reporting requirements for wastewater network overflows . Relation to government priorities . This paper supports the Governments priority of rebuilding the economy anddelivering better public services. . Local Water Done Well sets clear direction for developing an enduring and sustainableframework for local council ownership and control of water services, with strict rules for water quality and ongoing investment in water infrastructure. . The approach in this paper is consistent with the objectives of Local Water Done Well.The proposed standards will reduce the regulatory burden on councils and other stakeholders and improve certainty and consistency in the regulatory system. They will also help to ensure wastewater infrastructure is cost effective, while still ensuring effective environmental and public health protections. Executive summary . I am seeking agreement to release a public discussion document on New Zealands firstnational wastewater standards. The discussion document is attached as Appendix A . . The Water Services Authority Taumata Arowai (the Authority) is developing these standards under the Water Services Act (the Water Services Act). . Upgrading public wastewater treatment plants is one of the greatest infrastructurechallenges facing New Zealand. Much of the wastewater infrastructure in New Zealand was built to years ago. It is approaching the end of its useful life and will need to be upgraded. Many networks have limited capacity to accommodate anticipated population growth. Treatment plants with capacity issues also have challenges dealing with the impacts of climate change, which is resulting in more frequent wastewater overflow s. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE
Proactively released by the Minister of Local GovernmentUNCLASSIFIED
Problem gambling and expenditure.
Procedural mitigations DIA Information may only be provided by NZSIS to other New Zealand government departments or overseas intelligence partners in accordance with the Intelligence and Security Act (ISA), NZSIS policies and SOPs and the DAA requirements. NZSIS Managers are responsible for ensuring that any information released to external agencies (both foreign and domestic) meets NZSIS information sharing requirements. Any unauthorised andor inappropriate sharing of information derived from DIA under the direct access agreement with an external agency would be treated as a security breach and prompt an investigation, in which DIA would be consulted. Security breach investigations may lead to disciplinary action.
Process for applying a gambling policy
Process for assessment of a file for prosecution
Process for future rounds of proposals and deals (TBC)
Process for providing feedback The closing for feedback is pm Wednesday, May . You are encouraged to provide feedback on any aspects of the proposals in this document. All feedback should be sent to THorganisationalchangedia.govt.nz . All submissions will be acknowledged on receipt. Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of We will also be hosting virtual dropin sessions during the feedback period where people can come along to discuss the proposals and ask questions. There will be two types of virtual dropin sessions one for all of Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy and one specific to the Regulatory Services kaimahi due to the nature and scope of the proposed changes in their group. Employees requiring any further information or clarification on the process should raise this either with their manager or General ManagerDirector or through the email address provided. Your questions will be answered as soon as possible, either directly, or by email, as appropriate. PSA members can also discuss the proposal with their delegates. The delegates who will be looking after this change are: What happens after the consultation period Once subm issions have closed, all feedback will be analysed and considered. The Chief Executive will make the final decisions on the proposed Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change change process. Once those decisions have been made, a final decisions document will be produced and presented to employees (as per the timeframe above). Employees affected by the final decisions will be advised prior to the decisions being presented to all employees. Employee support Throughout the consultation process, employees with concerns or queries should address these directly to their manager. Managers can seek guidance from Human Resources about individual queries and concerns. Te Tari also has a range of support options available for kaimahi and managers during the consultation process: ()(a) Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of Employee Assistance Programme (EAP) Ongoing support is available to employees from Vitae, through the Departments Employee Assistance Programme. This confidential service provides access to a selection of counselling providers. Vitae can be contacted by phone on or through their website at http:www.vitae.co.nz . The Vitae website can also be accessed through a link on the Employee Assistance Programme pages on the Departments intranet. Speaking Up Line The Speak Up Line, managed by Humankind provides all DIA employees and contractors with an independent and confidential avenue to: seek information about what to do about inappropriate behaviour happening at work and the options for addressing any concerns. speak up, raise concerns, or make a complaint if you or your colleagues dont feel safe. know what support is available to you.
Process for reassessment of a file for prosecution
Process for the Delivery of the Royal Commissions Interim Report on Redress
Processes (Stage ) , attached as Appendix C to the paper under DEVSUB, subject
Product A thing (whether tangible or intangible) that a Party provides to an
Productivity Commission inquiry
Professional membership and study fees funded
Professor Reilly has worked for more than years in the area of food safety. Before taking up his current role, he worked in the Food Safety Programme of the World Health Organization in Geneva. He is also the chairman of the Scientific Advisory Board of the European Food Information Council.
Professor Reilly, Chief Executive of the Food Safety Authority of Ireland, has agreed to act as expert peer reviewer for the Inquirys reports.
Programme Director, Mori Capability Uplift
Programme is not properly met for any reason.
Programme, and will ensure that the contact person is familiar with the
Progress is being made to support trustworthy Public Service AI use . Steps have been taken in respect of AI system stewardship in Aotearoa New Zealand. In July , the Public Services Commissioner assigned leadership responsibility for Public Service uptake of AI to the Government Chief Digital Officer (GCDO). As part of this role the GCDO has been asked to provide system leadership, set standards, steward agency uptake and work with providers on protections relating to AI services to government. . Whilst there is a clear AI lead for Public Service AI adoption, several other agencies also hold policy responsibilities for AI . These include MBIE (economy focus), MFAT (international trade focus), DPMCs National Cyber Policy Office (cyber policy focus), and StatsNZ (data ethics focus). We have established an interagency working group of these agencies to support collaboration . In late July , Public Sector System Leaders guidance to support government agencies seeking to use Generative AI tools to do so responsibly and in secure, transparent and privacy protecting ways. The guidance continues to be one of the most accessed resources on digital.govt.nz, attracting over , hits in its first six weeks of publication. . The GCDO is also working with a small group of agencies to pilot new, costly and highly impactful AI assistants being built into public service tools. The pilot will run until mid and its purpose is to build our collective understanding of the tools features, opportunities and risks, producing case studies, use cases and learnings to support agencies to make more informed decisions about using these types of AI tools.
Progress of Heke Rua Archives
Progress on the Draft Initial Funding and Pricing Plan for the Wai Tmaki ki te Hiku
Progressing policy work on the Ratepayers Assistance Scheme
Progressing the Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill
Progressing the three waters service delivery reforms
Progressing work on the Ratepayers Assistance Scheme
Promoting economic growth, delivering infrastructure, and improving the supply of quality housing across Aotearoa.
Proposal I am seeking the Cabinet Legislation Committee s (the Committee) authorisation to submit the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Registering Nominated Sex) Regulations (the Regulations) to the Executive Council. Policy
Proposal Previously Cabinet decided that legislation to lower the voting age for local elections would also establish differentiated eligibility ages for certain aspects of local elections. This decision was subject to further advice from the Minister of Justice on whether the age distinctions could be justified under the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act (NZBORA).
Proposal Four: strengthen the GCDO mandate for cloud digital investment
Proposal Three: addressing cloud security concerns to support cloud uptake
Proposal Two: reflect evolving cloud technology by revoking the IaaS directive
Proposal for exemptions to the Fire and Emergency New Zealand Levy
Proposal for the Legislation Programme
Proposal one: reflect societal shifts and commitment to Government priorities
Proposal to amend eight councils longterm planning requirements
Proposal to amend longterm plan requirements for specified councils PDF version
Proposal to amend longterm plan requirements for specified councils Word version
Proposals for refreshing the Cloud First Policy and strengthening
Proposals for the Legislation Programme
Proposals for the Legislation Programme
Proposals for the Legislation Programme
Proposals for the Legislation Programme
Proposed Candidate for appointment as Chief Gambling Commissioner
Proposed Cloud First Policy
Proposed Design and next steps for the Taumata Arowai Levy
Proposed Digitising Government targets for the Prime Ministers targets to drive delivery across core public services
Proposed Government Response to the Inquiry into Bylaws Report
Proposed Government response to the Justice Committees report on its inquiry into the local elections
Proposed Internal Affairs priorities
Proposed Monitoring and Evaluation Framework for City Regional Deals
Proposed Policy Work Programme for
Proposed Taumata Arowai levy design and funding arrangements, including for
Proposed amendments for inclusion in the Statutes Amendment Bill
Proposed amendments for the Statutes Amendment Bill
Proposed amendments to Racing Industry Act for inclusion in the Statutes Amendment Bill
Proposed amendments to the Citizenship Guidance Document
Proposed approach to surrogacy and adoption law reform
Proposed approach to the Future for Local Government Reviews draft report
Proposed assessment approach for Regional Deal proposals
Proposed changes to Public Lending Right regulations
Proposed changes to the BDMRR (Prescribed Information) Regulations
Proposed fees for Entity establish board directors
Proposed future structure
Proposed future structure Implementation team
Proposed nonfinancial performance measures Vote Estimates for Internal Affairs
Proposed nonfinancial performance measures Vote Estimates for Local Government portfolio
Proposed nonfinancial performance measures Vote Estimates for Racing portfolio
Proposed regulations to underpin the selfidentification process: Cabinet paper
Proposed regulations to underpin the selfidentification process: Draft Cabinet paper
Proposed response to Taumata Arowais draft Statement of Intent and Statement of Performance Expectations
Proposed wastewater standards approval to lodge Cabinet paper
Proposed work programme for the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Board
Prosecution decision making and disputes
Protecting vulnerable consumers
Protecting vulnerable consumers . agree to amend the Rates Rebate Act so that water bills will be included in the definition of rates under Rates Rebate Scheme (leaving current beneficiaries of the scheme unaffected by the change in water service provider), with a consequential increase in expenses; . agree the following changes to appropriations in accordance with section of the Rates Rebate Act , reflecting the changed expenses described in recommendation above, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance andor net core Crown debt:
Protecting yourself on YouTube
Prove you can drive in order to rent a car.
Prove your identity to open a bank account.
Prove your trade qualifications at a work site.
Provide information relating to an individuals birth, death and or marriage(s) when they apply for Citizenship by Grant to allow their identity to be verified.
Provide information to remove deceased from the expired passportholders contact initiative.
Provide your tax and bank details to a new employer.
Provided that an online content host takes the above steps, DIA will consider that the online content host has a lawful authority or excuse for possessing the objectionable content, for the purposes of section of the FVPC Act.
Provided that they are no longer accessible by the public, the Department of Internal Affairs (
Provider j nformation j Recipient I Allowable Purposes
Providers are required to inform the Trust Framework Authority of when a change takes place to information provided in the application. It is an offence under section of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act to fail to tell the Trust Framework Authority of changes to key information or specified information. Notification must be within working days of a change.
Providers must show they meet these rules and regulations to become accredited with the mark under the Trust Framework for Digital Identity Services.
Providers of digital identity services
Providers seeking accreditation under the Act must complete the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Authority application form.
Provides for a dedicated Water Services Funding Agency to be established as a backstop financing mechanism for water services entities, if required
Provides transitional arrangements, including that councils will continue to provide water services to communities during the period for establishing the new entities, including for longterm planning, reporting, and rate setting over this period.
Providing equal employment opportunities for everyone
Providing information, resources and advice to communities to support their aspirations
Providing policy advice to the Government on: local government, the community and voluntary sector, fire and emergency services, identity, ICT, information management, digital safety, gambling and racing
Providing safe and secure workspaces for our people and the public
Provision of telecommunications to new developments
Provisional List of Issues
Provisions that enable a new, financially sustainable model for Watercare, including the development of a charter and the appointment of a Crown monitor, for the interim regulation of Watercare.
Provisions to protect vulnerable consumers.
Provisions to recognise and respect the Crowns responsibility to give effect to the principles of Te Tiriti o Waitangi.
Public Authorities (Party Wall) Empowering Act
Public Bodies Contracts Act
Public Bodies Leases Act
Public Inquiries include Royal Commissions, which are appointed by and report to the GovernorGeneral, and the Inquiry report is tabled in Parliament.
Public Inquiry into the Earthquake Commission
Public Lending Right for New Zealand Authors Act
Public Lending Right for New Zealand Authors Regulations
Public Relations Institute of New Zealand (PRINZ) Supreme Award
Public Sector Finance Graduate Programme
Public Service AI use and options for accelerating AI innovation
Public Service Artificial Intelligence (AI) Framework approvals
Public Service Commission guide
Public Service Commissioners Commendation
Public Tertiary An institution as defined in section () of the Education and Training
Public and Government Inquiries
Public and stakeholder consultation
Public consultation (minimum of weeks) AugustSeptember
Public consultation on changes to Mori ward and Mori constituency processes
Public consultation on changes to Mori wards and Mori constituencies
Public education and awareness
Public health advice focuses on reducing transmission through the promotion of good health behaviours washing hands, wearing masks, social distancing and so on. Systems and capacity building are also critical more ICU beds, more ventilators, better software for contact tracing teams. Digital technologies can play a role here but are outside the scope of this document.
Public information about this inquiry into peoples stories and experiences in state care with the aim of examining ways to stop further abuse.
Public information website about New Zealand passports.
Public perception often supports the disestablishment of gangs and
Public release of the Digital Messaging Transparency report
Public release of the Reducing Pokies Harm submissions and summary report
Public submissions closed on February .
Publication of final engagement strategy: Selfidentification regulations and registering gender for people born overseas
Publications Classification Amendment Bill
collections of the Turnbull Library include books, magazines and journals, pamphlets, newspapers, maps, music, websites, and other items that are .
Purchase a hour, to consecutive days, week or month permit, pay online, receive a digital image permit to your email done No need for printing, as long as you can produce the permit on your phone or tablet when asked prior to launching. Just click on the image at right or go to
Purchase order terms and conditions
Purchase order terms and conditions DOCX
Purchase order terms and conditions PDF
Purchases madethrough the funding has left Tokomaru Bay community more resilient than before, empowering them to be better prepared for future natural disaster events. Tokomaru Bay was one of over communities that received early response grants from the Lottery ENDR fund, supporting affected communities in their response and recovery to the cyclone.
Purchases under the (plus GST) threshold can be made using a credit card if possible otherwise a purchase order is required. If you are asked to supply goods or services over the (plus GST) threshold, please be sure to ask our staff member for a purchase order. This will help us process your invoice quickly. We provide purchase orders by email.
Purpose Executive summary Background New Zealands Elimination Strategy The existing manual contact tracing process Manual contact tracing cannot stop COVID The promise of digital contact tracing Compliant adoption Equity considerations Trust, security and privacy Bluetooth contact tracing apps A notificationbased approach: Apple and Googles Exposure API Wearables and interoperability with apps The NZ COVID Tracer app CovidCard Project Findings Overview Testing and field trials results Card security and privacy Card manufacture and supply chain Distribution Service delivery platform and systems Using data for disease surveillance and research The Health Case: Assessing impact on the spread of COVID Risks and mitigations Proposed phasing and indicative timeline Cost estimates Consultation Conclusions Recommendations Supporting Documentation
Purpose Te Tari Taiwhenua
Purpose The Department of Internal Affairs
Purpose of Document Decision sought: Release of a public discussion document seek ing views on how to strengthen harm minimisation regulations for Class gambling venues . (in effect, an in principle decision to consult on strengthen ing the regulations, without knowing exactly how) . Advising agencies : Department of Internal Affairs Proposing Minister s: Minister of Internal Affairs finalised : December Problem Definition Class gambling (known as pokies, refers to electronic gaming machines in pubs, clubs and TABs) has a higher risk of harm than other forms of gambling. The current regulations around harm minimisation have not been substantively reviewed since their inception in and are limited in terms of todays known best practice harm minimisation measures which means that people could be experiencing preventable harm . The risk of h arm may not be appropriately or optimally mitigated by operators and their venues. While machine numbers are declining, they remain the most common type of gambling harm for clients accessing intervention services. Executive Summary The level of harm associated with playing pokies is increasing and will continue to do so without Government intervention. This g ambling harm has a negative effect on i ndividuals and their whnau, friends and the wider community. This harm is also disproportionately affecting Mori, Pacific peoples and other population groups. The Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Regulations are limited in scope and prescription and have not changed significantly since they were established in . The requirements in the Regulations do not correspond with the level of risk and the harm being caused . Advocates in the harm prevention and minimisation sector, as well as local authorities, have been asking for stronger measures for some time. A recent District Court decision has also identified that more prescriptive requirements might result in more effective enforcement. The regulation making powers in the Gambling Act are substantial, but the content of the current Regulations is limited. There is a significant opportunity to create a stronger harm minimisation approach by strengthening the current harm minimisation requirements . This could create a tangible reduction in level and impact of pokies harm on individuals and their communities. The discussion document sets out key information on: the pokies sector ; the current harm minimisation requirements and issues ; and the gambling harm being experienced due to pokies . The document presents some high level options for the public to comment on and asks a number of questions about the issues, the potential impact (including on different population groups) , and whether the proposals will be effective. It also seeks suggesti ons for any other solutions. This will inform the development of a formal set of regulatory proposals. An engagement plan is being designed to explicitly encourage input from the general public as well as the disproportionately affected population groups . The objectives of this project are expected to be relatively uncontroversial, as we expect that most parties would agree that reducing harm from pokies is a good objective. It is expected that key stakeholder s, including pokie operators , venues, and gambling harm treatment services , will have different views on the optimal approach. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Statement Limitations and Constraints on Analysis The Minister asked that the scope of the discussion document be restricted to options to reduce harm associated with Class gambling venues and machines (gaming venues pokies), using the regulation making powers that already exist in the Gambling Act ( the Act) . Primary legislative change and regulation addressing any wider system issues (operating environment and inequity around community funding) are out of scope. In defining the scope as options to reduce harm in pokies venues using regulatory powers , the: problem definition has been restricted to pokies harm in pubs , clubs and TABs , and options have been restricted to what is achiev able using existing regulation making powers . One of the key constraints is the limited information available on the efficacy and cost of the various proposals. The decision to progress with a high level discussion document should support us to receive a wide range of information and feedback to inform the development of a formal set of regulatory proposals. Data and information is specifically needed on the: impact of many of the harm minimisation measures in the discussion document ; and the level and type of operational implications for organisations directly impacted. The key assumptions and uncertainties underpinning the impact analysis are that: regulatory c hange will only be progressed where it is the most effective response, but at this early stage there is some uncertainly about which harm minimisation measures are best provided for in operational rules rather than regulations, we are seeking input on the practicality and acceptability of measures, as the private nature of the activity and links to comorbidities means that the data and evidence is inevitably limited , and we are taking an open approach, by setting out a relatively wide range of potential measures for information and feedback rather than offering pre evaluated measures for comment . We do not think these limitations and constraints will impact on Ministers confidence in the approach taken in the draft discussion document and their decision to release it. Responsible Manager(s) (completed by relevant manager)
Purpose of th plans: Subject to agreement through this briefing, the purpose of the Plans would be for councils to publicly demonstrate
Pwhiri to commence the highlevel redress design process on June
Prongo Tau Annual Report
Prongo Tau a te Poari Whakahaere Matihiko
QA with Govtech Talent graduate Danielle
QUESTION : Do you have a preference for usercharges or a levy for OFLCs current classification activities Please comment on the reasons for your preferred choice. QUESTION : Do you have a preference for how fees or a levy may be set If so, please explain your preference.Table Levy for OFLCs CVoD related activities Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentQUESTION : Do you have a preference for usercharges or a levy for OFLCs CVoD related activities Please comment on the reasons for your preferred choice. QUESTION : Do you have a preference for how fees or a levy may be set for CVoD related activities If so, please explain your preference. Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentImplementation of a new funding regime A new funding regime could be implemented as a one off increase or phased in over two to three years. As any interim shortfall in funding the costs of the classification system would need to be met by the Crown, there needs to be a strong justification for a transitional, or a staggered implementation of a new funding regime. QUESTION : Should there be a staggered implementation of a new funding regime, and what would the justification for a staggered implementation be QUESTION : What is your preferred period of time to transition to a new funding regime, and why The Department intends the next review of Classification Act charges to be completed by no later than July . The next review will adjust charges as necessary based on the costs incurred and projected costs. QUESTION : Are there any other comments, or suggestions relevant to this consultation you would like to make Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentAppendix A: Glossary Commercial classifications: Items submitted for classification under Section of the Classification Act. Broad ly speaking, these are mainstream commercial products distributed by commercial distributors or screened at film festivals. Crown classifications: Items submitted by government agencies under Sections and of the Classification Act for classification. These are typically not mainstream commercial products; many are privately owned such as images on computers. Commercial Video onDemand (CVoD): Visual media content that is accessed online ondemand by a user who has paid a fee, or as a reward. This includes Subscription Video onDemand and Transactional Video onDe mand. Subscription Video onDemand (SVoD): Visual media content that is accessed online ondemand by a user who is paying an ongoing fee for access. Wellknown examples of SVoD providers are Netflix and Lightbox. Transactional Video onDemand (TVoD): Visual media content that is accessed online ondemand by a user who pays a oneoff fee for access. Wellknown examples of TVoD providers include iTunes and Google Play. Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentAppendix B: Classification from thirdparties and the Crown (raw data from Figure ) Financial Year (Ending June) Thirdparty classifications Crown classifications , , , , , , , , , , , , , Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentAppendix C: projected CVoD activities and estimated itemised costs to OFLC for
Qualifications Authority, the New Zealand Transport Agency, New Zealand Trade and Enterprise and the Tertiary
Quality assurance Reviewing agency: Department of Internal Affairs Panel assessment and comment : The panel considers that the information and analysis summarised in the RIA partially meets the quality assurance criteria. The RIA was developed within a very tight, ministerially set, timeframe to deal with the implementation of Government a coalition commitment to undo legislative changes made by the previous government. These factors limited the analysis and consultation that could be undertaken and the evidence available. They also required the policy problem and objectives that underlie the commitment to be backfilled. While these limitations are acknowledged in the RIA, their consequences could be stated more clearly and explicitly addressed. While the panel found the identification of policy objectives related to the stated policy problem, and the development and use of criteria based on those objectives to be useful, there was insufficient analysis of the relative value of Mori wards as a mechanism for meeting effective representation objectives. As a result, the panel did not feel the application of the criteria provided a compelling assessment of the policy commitment against the status quo. In relation to the transitional application of the poll provisions to existing Mori ward decisions, the panel did not believe the use of similar criteria was appropriate to assessing process and timing options to achieve the Governments objective. The panel did not find the Departments preference for the status quo to be useful in this context and felt more explicit exploration of the relative cost, timing, and process implications of the options considered (for instance, the impact on the integrity of representation reviews) would have enabled a more useful comparison of the relative merits of the other options. On this basis, the panel felt that the RIA failed to fully meet the complete and convincing criteria prescribed by Cabinet. The Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Quarterly Class Gambling Expenditure (machine readable dataset)
Quarterly GMP data for October to December shows a decrease in both nominal and inflation adjusted terms, with a . percent and . percent drop respectively. Nominal GMP dropped from ,, to ,, and adjusted for inflation, this is a drop from ,, to ,,. This does follow the usual seasonal trend and the percent decreases are in line with what we usually observe. When looking at a slightly longer timeframe however, from December to December , GMP is continuing to show a slight downward trend in both nominal and inflationadjusted terms.
Quarterly GMP, Venues and EGMs A table showing a single quarter of data, showing the percentage of total GMP, EGMs and venues for the selected location(s) and quarter.
Quarterly Insights June
Quarterly lists of venues and gaming machine numbers dating back to .
Quarterly lists: Venuevenue typeGM numbersdistrict
Quarterly meeting with the Chief Censor, May
Quarterly reports class expenditure by district
Quartley Insights September
Queen Elizabeth II Arts Council
Queens Fire Service Medal Regulations
QueenstownLakes District Council
QueenstownLakes model WICS report
QueenstownLakes slide pack WICS report
Questions and answers about New Zealand spam law for consumers and businesses.
RAC ratio after diver sification () . . . . N.A.
RAC ratio before diversification () . . . . N.A.
RASU uses a range of tools and approaches to support regulatory stewardship at DIA, including:
REFERENCES New Zealand Government, : Alert system overview. https:uniteforrecovery.govt.nzcovidcovidalerts ystemalertsystemoverview (retrieved June ). New Zealand Ministry of Health, : National View Contact Tracing Metrics. https:www health.govt.nzsystemfilesdocumentspages friday afternoon national close contact tracing metric s apr may v. internet.pdf (retrieved June ). New Zealand Ministry of Health, : Contact tracing for COVID. https:www health.govt.nzourworkdiseasesandconditi onscovidnovelcoronaviruscovidhealthadviceg eneralpubliccontacttracingcovid (retrieved June ) scipy v.., : Spearman Rank Correlation. https:docs.scipy.orgdocscipyreferencescipy .stats.spearmanr html (retrieved June ).
RELEASED BY THE MINISTER OF
REPORT HARMFUL ONLINE CONTENT
REPORT ON OVERSEAS TRAVEL: HON NANAIA MAHUTA
RESTRICTED and below information;
RESTRICTED information as suitable onshore services become available. We note
RESTRICTED information should be hosted in a New Zealand based cloud service,
RESULTS The results from analysing the trials as described in the previous section are presented in Table , below. The duration of the trials were short (typically mins), so the evaluation was performed twice: once with contacts being within two metres (intensity ) for minutes (Table ), and again for a minute contact duration (Table ). The results are presented as mean and standard deviations over the cards present in each trial (n).
RFI Frequently Asked Questions by workbook schedule
RFI Webinar and clinic schedule
RISK Insecure transfer or storage of DIA Information, leading to access by an unauthorised external person
RISK EXAMPLES POTENTIAL OUTCOMES ASSUMPTIONS MITIGATION MEASURES ASSESSMENT Excessive costs The actual costs of compliance turn out to be significantly higher than the indicative cost s The Trust Framework requires more resources than anticipated, increasing overall costs Costs to upgrade systems to meet Trust Framework requirements are significant Undermines budgets
RSG ICT systems are a key enabler for more open sharing of information to support communities, hap, iwi and Mori in their decisionmaking, recognising the role these stakeholders play in the regulatory system and in delivering good outcomes in the lives of New Zealanders. Business processes Having easily accessible and uptodocumented business processes and operating procedures is a requirement across RSG. This simple activity assists with training new kaimahi, communicating timeliness and quality expectations, monitoring performance and driving consistency in regulatory service provision. This is a priority for the RSG to month work programme. Business systems Flexible, intuitive ICT systems which may have multiple users (internal and external to DIA) are one of the most exciting elements of the RSG strategy. These are fitforpurpose ICT systems that may be bespoke to the system groups they support, as well as those that enable crosssystem collaboration and transparency. RSG ICT systems are a key enabler for more open sharing of information to support communities, hap, iwi and Mori in their decisionmaking, recognising the role these stakeholders play in the regulatory system and in delivering good outcomes in the lives of New Zealanders. Stakeholders RSG system groups have stakeholders in common as well as stakeholders specific to their regulatory functions. RSG has identified that a stakeholder engagement strategy, identifying where crossover exists and how RSG will manage this (for the benefit of the stakeholders and RSG), is critical to achieving trust and confidence.
RSG enhances the effectiveness of regulatory systemsPurposeVisionRegulatory Services Group Operating principlesKey focus areas We inspire trust and confidence We generate new and better ways of achieving our outcomes We are focused on making a difference We work with and through others We take a common approach Embedding our regulatory foundations Strengthening our capability Aligning our culture and purpose Harnessing our evidence, insights and evaluation Maximising our relationships RSG is at the forefront of regulatory excellence
Rachel Clarke Committee Secretary
Rachel Hayward Secretary of the Cabinet
Rachel Hayward Secretary of the Cabinet Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of usoq
Racing (Extension of Transition Period) Order and interim TAB NZ Board
Racing (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Regulations
Racing Industry (Distribution of Betting Profits) Regulations
Racing Industry (Negotiations for Transfer of Surplus Venue) Regulations
Racing Industry (Offshore BettingConsumption Charges) Regulations
Racing Industry (Racing Integrity Board) Regulations
Racing Industry Act : Advice on the status of minimum payments to sports distribution regulations
Racing Industry Act Commencement Order
Racing Industry Bill, Legislation Paper
Racing Industry Bill, Review of Racing Paper : Overview of the Final Racing Industry Reforms
Racing Industry Bill, Review of Racing Paper : Governance of the New Zealand Racing Industry
Racing Industry Bill, Review of Racing Paper : Utilising Racing Industry Property to Support Industry Revitalisation
Racing Industry Bill, Review of Racing Paper : New Products and Strengthened Harm Prevention and Minimisation for TAB NZ
Racing Industry Transition Agency
Racing Integrity Board Chairperson Letter of appointment
Racing Integrity Board Member Letter of appointment
Racing Integrity Board: appointments
Racing Safety Development Fund Industry Working Group Talking Points for APH Meeting
Racing Safety Development FundFunding decisions round two
Racing Status Report September
Racing Status Report November
Racing Status Report October
Racing Status Report September
Racing Status Report August
Racing Status Report November
Racing Status Report October
Racing Status Report September
Racing Status Report August
Racing Status Report December
Racing Status Report WE February
Racing Status Report WE March
Racing Status Report WE August
Racing Status Report WE April
Racing Status Report WE July
Racing Status Report WE February
Racing Status Report WE March
Racing Status Report WE August
Racing Status Report WE April
Racing Status Report WE July
Racing Status Report WE September
Racing Status Report WE June
Racing Status Report Week Ending August
Racing Status Report Week Ending February
Racing Status Report Week Ending March
Racing Status Report Week Ending February
Racing Status Report Week Ending April
Racing Status Report Week Ending July
Racing Status Report Week Ending June
Racing Status Report Week Ending June
Racing Status Report Week Ending August
Racing Status Report Week Ending July
Racing Status Report Week Ending June
Racing Status Report for the week ending May
Racing Status Report for the week ending April
Racing Status Report for the week ending May
Racing Status Report for the week ending April
Racing portfolio priorities
Racing work programme overview
Radio: Accept Reality Check Radios Peoples
Radios Peoples Terms for an expanded Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID Lessons .
Rangimarie Hunia (Ngti Whtua)
Rangimarie is based in Auckland and the Director, Aotearoa Fisheries Ltd (trading as Moana NZ), since . Moana NZ is Iwi owned and is the largest Moriowned kaimoana (seafood) and kai ora (ready to eat meals) company in Aotearoa that was borne from the Mori fisheries settlement.
Rangitaiki Land Drainage Act
Rangitikei District Council
Rangitikei model WICS report
Rangitikei slide pack WICS report
Rates Rebat e (Specified Amounts) Order Proposal . I propose that the Committee authorise the submission of the Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order (the Order) ( Appendix A ) to the Executive Council. Policy . The Order prescribes an amendment to section () of the Rates Rebate Act (the Act) to increase the maximum rebate an d the income abatement threshold of the Rates Rebate Sche me (the Scheme) from July . . The Order increases : .. the maximum annual rebate from to ; and .. the incom e abatement threshold from , to , per annum. . These changes reflect the . per cent movement of the Consumer Price Index (CP I) All Groups Index for the calendar year. Background The Scheme assists low income ratepayers to meet the cost of rates . The Scheme was introduced by the Act. The amount of rebate provided to a househ old is determined by a formula based on total household income, level of rates, and the number of household dependents. . To be eligible for a rebate, the applicant must be usually resident at, and the ratepayer for, the property for which the rebate is bein g claimed. . Eligibility for a rebate is based on income for the previous tax year. Applicatio ns to the Scheme for the rating year will be based on income earned in the year up to March . . The Scheme is administered by territorial authorities and the Department of Internal Affairs (the Department). Territorial authorities accept and process applications to the Scheme and provide the rebate to recipients. The Department reimburses territorial authorities for the cost of rebates.
Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order (SL )
Rates Rebate (Witnessing of Declarations) Notice
Rates Rebate cost of living adjustment
Rates of compliant adoption of over are considered necessary for digital contact tracing to be effective . We believe compliant adoption is almost impossible for an app and no country has remotely achieved that level of compliant adoption.
Rates rebate scoping meeting with officials
Rating Evaluation Service (RES) Letter Three Waters Reform Programme
Rating differentials based on land use category
Read Mori language version
Read about Googles support for devices using the Android operating system, like smart phones and tablet computers.
Read about our Strategic Intentions :
Read about our roadmap for addressing gender and ethnic pay gaps, enhancing cultural competency, and developing inclusive leadership:
Read more about Axis awards
Read more about the Trust Framework Act, and the Trust Framework Authority:
Read more about the award
Read our latest Annual Report Prongo Tau
Read our latest Strategic Intentions document
Read our programme brochure
Read the Bill (on www.legislation.govt.nz)
Read the Bill in full on the New Zealand Legislation website
Read the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Act on the New Zealand Legislation website
Read the Water Services Acts Repeal Act on the New Zealand Legislation website
Read the full agreement here
Read then Internal Affairs Minister Peter Dunnes press release congratulating the win
Reading is a foundation for all literacies, including digital literacy. Reading for pleasure, particularly for children, provides benefits such as literacy development, improved wellbeing and education, and employment success. Increases in literacy levels will improve creativity leading to new knowledge and potential innovation.
Ready to explore your possible
RealMe Coapply Privacy Issue
RealMe login can be used to interact with Government agencies. With a RealMe verified identity you can prove your identity and access more when signing up to RealMe partners.
RealMe will have a role to play A product based solution on its own is unlikely to provide the comprehensive response required for the ecosystem , which relates to a wider sharing of attributes from both the public and private sector . As the governments foremost digital identity service, RealMe will almost certainly have a role to play under the Trust Framework. The exact nature and scope of this involvement ha s yet to be determined. PROACTIVELY RELEASED INCONFIDENCE
RealMe is a government login service that allows you to access multiple online services with one username and password. You can securely prove who you are online with your RealMe verified identity.
Reality Check Radio on August
Reality Check Radio requesting the Government to accept Reality Check
Reality Check Radio to the Minister of Internal Affairs for response;
Reality Check Radios Peoples Terms for the Covid Inquiry
Reassessment of CVS Legislation Bid
Reassessment of Proposals for the Legislation Programme
Rebecca Davies Committee Secretary
Receive safe, secure, valid and verified information from customers and other organisations using accredited services.
Recipient HON SIMEON BROWN MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Recommendation s . The Minister of Local Government recommends that the Cabinet Economic Development Committee: . note that: . in June , Cabinet established the million Three Waters Infrastructure Investment and Service Delivery Reform Programme tagged operating contingency, a portion of which remains unallocated; and . in Budget , a Transforming Three Waters Service Delivery for New Zealanders: Transition and Implementation tagged operating contingency of million was established to provide for establishmen t and transition costs; . note that the original cost estimates supporting the Transforming Three Waters Service Delivery for New Zealanders: Transition and Implementation Budget initiative, although based on reasonable assumptions at the time, were made ahead of significant policy decisions that impacted on the overall costs of delivering the three waters reform programme (the reform programme); . note that, since the decision to pr oceed with the reforms was taken in October , the Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) has undertaken comprehensive planning and budgeting exercises, and identified several areas of cost pressures, including: . policy advice, legislation, ministerial services, and communications; . scope and level of support to iwiMori to participate in three waters service delivery; . scope and level of support to councils and the wider local government sector to engage with the reforms and enable a smooth transition; . three waters system stewardship functions, which Cabinet noted in June are a critical part of the reform package CAB MIN refers; and . new wastewater regulatory functions for Taumata Arowai, which were agreed by Cabinet in July CAB MIN refers; . note that: . the Department is also facing cost pressures of . million in the Future for Local Government Review, driven by the number of members appointed to the review, the tight labour market, increased engagement, and requirements for specialist research and analysis; and . the possibility of cost pressur es was signalled in the Cabinet paper establishing the Review CAB MIN refers; . note that the Minister of Finance and Minister of Local Government have been working with officials to fully understand these cost pressures, determine which areas it is appropriate to fund and by how much, and to develop an approach to funding the priority areas; . note that, of the million Three Waters Infrastructure Investment and Service Delivery Reform Programme tagged operating contingency established in June and expiring on July CAB MIN . refers, . million has not been drawn down of which . million is unallocated; Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of
Recommendations The Minister of Local Government and the Minister of Justice recommend that the Committee:
Recommendations The Minister of Justice and the Minist er of Local Govern ment recommend that the Committee:
Recommendations COVID is globally endemic and although New Zealand is presently seeing very few cases, we should remember that the Spanish Flu of eventually got everywhere, despite countries like New Zealand and Australia being in effective lockdown at the time.
Recommendations a) note that an appropriate framework for Ministerial powers of assistance and intervention in relation to local government water
Recommendations and proposed release of the Planning Technical Working Group report on the interface between the resource management and three waters systems
Recommendations in this document include conducting rigorous analysis of tools based on an impact lens, closely following the rapidly evolving space overseas, and avoiding a proliferation of solutions that dilutes impact and will only serve to confuse the public. Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Recommended approach to delegated decisions on planning boundaries for the Top of the South Island
Recommended reappointment to the Racing Safety Development Fund Working Group
Reconciliation between total appropriations for Departmental expenses and the Departmental statement of comprehensive revenue and expense
Reconciliation between total appropriations for nonDepartmental expenses and the schedule of nonDepartmental expenditure
Reconsideration of a declined application
Reconsideration of an declined application
Recordkeeping and management of personal and organisational information, to ensure information is well and ethically managed.
Recording encounters between people relies on both persons using the technology. If only of people are compliant adopters, of their encounters will be with people without the technology. Only of encounters would be recorded at adoption ( ) Modest levels of compliant adoption render digital contact tracing technology ineffective.
Recordkeeping implications of Cabinet paper on redress processes for survivors of abuse in care
Records by year of birth of the donorconceived child (donor offspring)
Recreation and Sports to Hillary Commission
Recursive contact tracing is practiced elsewhere. In midAp il, the Chinese city of Harbin, for example, chose a strategy to quarantine and test both close contacts and the close contacts of close contacts . Recursive contact tracing would enhance a strategy of elimination or suppression. Recursive contact tracing, enabled by CovidCard , effectively makes it possible to implement a highly targeted quarantine.
Recursive contact tracing, isolating secondorder contacts We consider the rapid identification of secondorder contacts to potentially be the most impactful feature of CovidCard . In addition to isolating firstorder close contacts of the index case, the secondorder contacts could also be notified to selfisolate. Although secondorder contacts may have been infected, the majority would not have yet become infectious effectively cutting the chain of transmission. We consider the timely isolation of secondorder contacts not possible without CovidCard .
Redacted Final report of the investigation
Redacted Letter from Hon Whaitiris legal representatives
Redacted TOR of the investigation on the incident involving Hon Whaitiri and a staff member
Redressing service inequity
Redressing service inequity . agree that specific directions on redressing inequities in the servicing of Mori communities can be addressed through the Government policy statement;
Reducing Pokies Harm
Reducing Pokies Harm: Approval to consult Proposal This paper seek s agreement to consult the public on ways to reduce harm from Class pokie machines in venues throughout New Zealand by strengthening the regulatory requirements under the Gambling Act (the Act). Relation to government priorities Gambling can be a highly addictive activity. It can lead to debt, financial hardship, family violence, relationship strain and difficulties sustaining employment, among other harms. Some groups are disproportionately at risk of experiencing harm, including Mori, Pacific women and rangatahi. Stronger regulation would support the wellbeing of New Zealanders and their families by reducing the harm caused by pokies . Executive Summary New Zealand currently faces two urgent issues in the gambling environment : the growing level of online gambling with unregulated offshore operators; and harm caused by land based pokies in the domestic market. This paper is seeking approval to move swiftly on the lat ter by amending regulations made under existing legislation. Research shows that Class pokies are the most harmful form of land based gambling in our country. New Zealanders los e almost a billion dollars a year on pokies ; the majority of this comes from venues in high deprivation areas where people can least affor d it, but where many pokies venues are located. Pokie machines are designed to captivate and retain their audience , leading to continuous and addictive gambling . One in five pokie players are considered at risk gamblers. While percent of New Zealanders play pokies , pokies account for over percent of people seeking gambling harm treatment . The current Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Regulations (the Regulations) do not cover all the elements necessary for a strong harm reduction approach (see Appendix A for the current regulations ). For example, they are not explicit about how venue staff must monitor and intervene in harmful gambling . A recent District Court decision has identified that more prescriptive requirements, which can be set in regulations, would
Reducing Pokies Harm: consultation feedback and implications for casinos
Reducing harm from casino pokies, April
Reducing harmful digital messaging
Reducing incidences of fraud will lower the associated costs of fraud currently estimated at , per event with each victim having to spend on average hours responding to their incident. Low. Regulators Improved service delivery; greater inclusion; greater efficiencies (e.g. less duplication); improved record keeping, increased confidence to invest in digital solutions; increased opportunities to break down information silos between business units and government agencies. High Low Wider government Improved service delivery; greater inclusion; greater efficiencies (e.g. less duplication); improved record keeping, increased confidence to invest in digital solutions; increased opportunities to break down information silos between business units and government agencies. High Low Other parties People: Improved access to online services; improved customer experience; greater confidence that personal and organisational information is secure and private; greater control over personal and organisational information; greater transparency around where that information is stored and how it is used. Society: Greater interoperability between participants in the trusted digital identity ecosystem; clear and cons istent rules for everybody wanting to participate in the trusted digital identity ecosystem, resulting in greater confidence in digital identity services; increased effectiveness in countering certain crimes; greater economic opportunities; improved facilitation of economic transactions, social interactions, and, potentially, political involvement . High
Reducing per passport emissions through engagement with suppliers and deliberate inclusion of carbon criteria in decision making for passport design and shipment. (Passport demand fluctuations influence gross emissions)
Reducing scams in New Zealand
Reducing screen time over the holiday season
Reducing the Regulatory Burden on Small Drinking Water Suppliers (LGB)
Reducing the time elapsed between symptoms presenting and isolation of firstorder contacts, the firstorder tracing delay Close contacts of index cases are often referred to as firstorder contacts and the close contacts of close contacts are referred to as secondorder contacts. Currently, the Ministry of Health aims to
Reference has also been included that there was gender diversity within te ao M ori that has diminished with colonisation. Human Rights Commission Recognise that research shows that, prior to colonisation, takatpui were well accepted as normal parts of Te Ao Mori. Remove the onetime limit on changing a Oranga Tamariki Ministry for Children Suggested concerns that amending registered sex for frivolous or criminal reasons could be better managed. Highlighted that a persons understanding of their gender can change over time, especially among children and young people. Yes, by al lowing multiple changes with additional requirements to be prescribed in regulations. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
References Abbott M. . Gambling and Gambling Harm in New Zealand: a Year Case Study. International Journal of Mental Health and Addiction (). Abbott M, Bellringer M, Garrett N. . New Zealand National Gambling Study: Wave (). Report number . Auckland: Auckland University of Technology, Gambling and Addictions Research Centre. Auckland University of Technology. . Problem Gambling and Family Violence in Helpseeking Populations: Cooccurrence, Impact and Coping . Wellington: Ministry of Heal th. Bellringer M, Garrett N, KolandaiMatchett K, et al. . Offshore Gambling by New Zealanders Study: Final report, September . Wellington: Ministry of Health. URL: www.health.govt.nzourworkmentalhealthandaddictionsprobl em gamblingresearchandevaluationimplementation offshore gamblingnewzealandersstudy (accessed June ). Bellringer M, KolandaiMatchett K, Taylor S, et al. . Pacific Islands Families Study : Mother and youth gambling . Auckland: Auckland University of Technology, Gambling and Addictions Research Centre. Canale N, Vieno A, Lenzi M, et al. . Income inequality and adolescent gambling severity: findings from a largescale Italian representative survey. Frontiers in Psychology : . DAPAANZ. . Addiction Intervention Competency Framework: A competency framework for professionals specialising in problem gambling, alcohol and other drug and smoking cessation intervention. Wellington: Addiction Practitioners Association Aotearoa New Zealand. DIA. . Gamblers spent million more in FY . Wellington: Department of Internal Affairs. URL: www.dia.govt.nzpress.nsfddabfccacdbffcafeddcc abOpenDocument (accessed June ). DIA. . Gambling Expenditure Statistics . URL: www.dia.govt.nzdiawebsite.nsfwpgURLResourcematerialInformation WeProvide GamblingExpenditureStatistics (accessed November ). Gambling Commission New Zealand. . Report on the Proposed Problem Gambling Levy . Report to Ministers Hon Nathan Guy and Hon Peter Dunne, November. URL: www.gamblingcommission.govt.nzGCwebsite.nsfwpgURLReportsPublications ProposedProblemGamblingLevy(November)OpenDocument (accessed June ). Gambling Commission New Zealand. . Report on the Proposed Problem Gambling Levy . Report to Ministers Hon Jenny Salesa and Hon Tracey Martin, February. URL : www.gamblingcommission.govt.nzGCwebsite.nsfwpgURLReports PublicationsProblemGamblingLevy OpenDocument (accessed February ). STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
Referral and assessment of prosecution file
Reflect societal shifts and commitment to government priorities
Reflections on the NSW Rate Peg system and considerations for a NZ System
Reform Programme Engagement
Reform Programme Engagement The week period
Reform Scenario is based on faulty assumptions and flawed analysis The Reform Scenar io is based on faulty assumptions and flawed analysis. The government has not shown with sufficient certainty to WDC that the claimed benefits of the Reform Scenario will materialise. The benefits of the Reform Scenario rest on three key claims : That WDC (and New Zealand as a whole) needs to invest to match Scottish levels of water sector capital stock per resident The amalgamated entity will be able to halve its opex and capex relative to existing opt out entities WDC as an opt out entity will not improv e over the next years. Required investment for WDC and for New Zealand as a whole is overstated The Reform Scenario rests on WICS modelling and manual adjustments that assume New Zealand will need sig nificantly higher levels of capital investment over the next years than is currently estimated in local authorities own year plans. The required capital investment , compared to WDCs own planned investment is illustrated below. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia Figure . shows how WICS model s a significant difference in net investment for WDC in the OptOut Scenario compared to WDCs own planned capital investment. FFF How ever, when the capital investment attributable to WDC in Entity A is calculated using WICS model , the profile of planned investment is almost identical to WDCs own investment plans. FFF Figure . : Net investment scenarios for Whangrei under WICS models and WDCs own plan
Reform programme and funding package
Reform programme engagement
Reform timeline December
Refreshed definitions of what constitutes cloud services
Refresher webinar for iwiMori slide pack September
Refresher webinar for iwiMori webinar recording September
Refreshing the Cloud First Policy and Strengthening Cloud Adoption
Refugee Travel Document) issued by the Government of New Zealand to
Regional Deals Framework Publication Version
Regional Deals Strategic Framework
Regional Deals framework announced
RegionalDealsdia.govt.nz
Regions confirm intent to develop a lighttouch proposal
Regions for City and Regional Deals can include regional, subregional, or other suitable areas, as long as they are clearly defined economic and geographic areas with functioning local authorities.
Regions for Regional Deals can include regional, subregional, or other suitable areas, as long as they are clearly defined economic and geographic areas with functioning local authorities.
Regions submit lighttouch proposals to DIA
Regions will be selected and prioritised based on criteria outlined in the
Register of Development Contribution Commissioners reappointments: Documentation to finalise reappointments
Register of Development Contribution Commissioners: Commencement of the appointment process for
Register of Development Contribution Commissioners: Letter to extend commissioner terms of office
Register of accredited digital identity providers
Register your interest to receive updates and notifications
Registered Birth Information excluding the following records: Births, Deaths and
Registered Death Information Registrar Any Party
Registered Limited A limited partnership within the meaning of section of the Limited
Registered Limited Partnerships, and Registered New Zealand Companies
Registered Limited Partnerships, and Registered New Zealand Companies .
Registered New A company as defined in section () of the Companies Act .
Registered Personal information recorded on a register held and maintained under an
Registering with a nominating agency does not mean your name will be put forward automatically to Ministers, as agencies select suitable candidates to forward for consideration based on the appointment criteria.
Registrar A person or entity (other than the RegistrarGeneral) performing a
RegistrarGenera I As defined in section ofthe Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships
RegistrarGenera I Civil Union Information DIA (Passports) All
RegistrarGenera I Information contained within name DIA (Passports) All
RegistrarGeneral Birth Information excluding the DIA (Passports) All
RegistrarGeneral Celebrant Information DIA (Passports) Clause .
RegistrarGeneral Death Information DIA (Passports) All
RegistrarGeneral Marriage Information DIA (Passports) All
RegistrarGeneral Name Change Information DIA (Passports) All
RegistrarGeneral Overseas Death Information DIA (Passports) All
RegistrarGeneral Overseas Marriage or Civil Union DIA (Passports) Clause .
RegistrarGeneral Overseas Name Change DIA (Passports) All
RegistrarGeneral RegistrarGeneral
RegistrarGeneral The RegistrarGeneral of Births, Deaths and Marriages appointed under
RegistrarGeneral including Social Media Account RegistrarGeneral
RegistrarGeneral of Births, Deaths and
RegistrarGeneral or Secretary should require a further joint audit within a reasonable
RegistrarGeneral paragraphs (a)
RegistrarGeneral paragraphs (a) (g),
RegistrarGeneral software to correlate database records and register
RegistrarGeneral then updates as a result of a request for correction (including, where
RegistrarGeneral to Department of Justice
RegistrarGeneral to support the annual joint audit.
RegistrarGeneral under the BDMRR Act, excluding any information
RegistrarGeneral under the BDMRR Act, excluding information
RegistrarGeneral under the BDMRR Act.
RegistrarGenerals consent prior to approval of the inclusion of a New Zealand Agency within a class.
Registration of Land Agents to Department of Justice
Regular engagement with other passport services through the Passport Six group facilitates the sharing of best practices and the discussion of innovations related to the development of passport policies, products and practices.
Regular online information releases
Regulated activities minimise harm and maximise benefits to people and communities
Regulating activities in several sectors including: gambling, online child exploitation and countering violent extremism. We also regulate government recordkeeping, charities, unsolicited electronic messages, antimoney laundering and financing of terrorism, private security personnel and private investigators
Regulations Review Committee
Regulations Review Committee (the Committee). I have had regard to the
Regulations apply to individuals and organisations that are authorised to operate gambling.
Regulations for digital identity services
Regulations for natural hazard information in LIMs
Regulations have been made under theGambling Act to help achieve the objectives of the Act.
Regulations made via Order in Council February
Regulators Establishing and maintaining the Trust Framework. Medium. Current indicative cost of m per annum. Low Wider government See Regulated Parties section above. See Regulated Parties section above. Low Other parties Accredited parties may choose to pass some of their costs onto their users. Unknown. Low Total Monetised Cost Dependent on how may parties choose to become accredited under the framework. Unclear. Low Non monetised costs Dependent on how may parties choose to become accredited under the framework. Unclear. Low PROACTIVELY RELEASED INCONFIDENCE
Regulatory Body approve, provide oversight of, or otherwise regulate individuals who
Regulatory Impact Analysis
Regulatory Impact Analysis panel (the Panel) has reviewed the interim RIS in
Regulatory Impact Assessment Decision on the organisational form of a new drinking water regulator September
Regulatory Impact Statement
Regulatory Impact Statement . The Department of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Analysis (RIA) panel (the panel) has reviewed Chapter Water Services Entities Implementation Arrangements RIA (RIA) in accordance with the quality assurance criteria set out in the CabGuide. The panel provided the following comments. . The panel considers that the information and analysis summarised in the RIA meets the quality assurance criteria. s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . This RIA is an additional chapter to the substantial RIA prepared in May to support policy decisions on the reform of three waters service delivery arrangements and should be read in that context. This additional impact analysis is a complex RIA which addresses a number of disparate decisions needed to implement those decisions already made to reform water service delivery. Overall, the RIA does a good job of addressing the range of discrete issues, which are generally well explained. Mostly, constraints on the analysis are clearly set out. There remains a significant amount of work to be done through the transition to achieve smooth implementation of the reforms and to better understand the impact of changes on service delivery, including where detailed current information is not always readily available. In particular, this appl ies to the uncertain impacts of potential changes to pricing on households, including those that could experience difficulty paying their water bills.
Regulatory Impact Statement Cabinets impact analysis requirements apply to the proposal to lower the voting age for general and local elections to , but a Regulatory Impact Statement was not prepared for the November and December Cabinet decisions, due to the time constraints.
Regulatory Impact Statement Cabinets impact analysis requirements apply to the proposal to lower the voting age for general and local elections to , but a Regulatory Impact Statement was not prepared for the November and December Cabinet decisions, due to the time constraints. The Treasury has not exempted the proposal from the impact analysis requirements.
Regulatory Impact Statement . A comprehensive Regulatory Impact Assessment relating to the policy reform proposals was appended to the June paper: A new system for three waters service delivery CAB MIN .
Regulatory Impact Statement . Better purchasing decisions by the public that take into account natural hazard risks may also reduce future liability for government. Government has spent over . billion on natural hazards over the last decade. The total expected cost of all natural hazards is estimated to increase from . billion in to . billion in , or a compounding annual growth rate of .. The LIM is a key source of information for purchasers including natural hazard information . For many people, buying a property is the most significant investment decision in their lives. The LIM is one of the key information documents that prospective buyers and their advisors review when considering whether to purchase a property. Buyers commonly purchase their own LIM, but real estate agents may also provide a LIM to purchasers on behalf of vendors, particularly where a property is intended to be sold at auction. . The LIM is the main source of property information for purchasers and is currently a key tool for communicating natural hazard information to buyers, so they can make informed decisions. While there is no legal requirement to obtain a LIM, this is a common condition included in the standard Agreement for Sale and Purchase. . LIMs are recognised as a valuable information tool for communicating natural hazards information to owners and potential property purchasers, which can be as hazard data and information is received. The purpose of providing this information is to inform the market of special features or characteristics of the land that may affect value, suitability or saleability. This is a key consumer protection document for purchasers of real estate in New Zealand. . However, LIMs do not perform the same functions as a natural hazard risk assessment. Natural hazard risk involves not only understanding the hazard but also a range of other components including exposure and vulnerability. LIMs do not warrant that land is good or safe, or provide advice, but simply provide information based on which a purchaser can decide whether to buy a property. LIMs also only provide natural hazard information known to the council at the time. There are other sources of natural hazard information for purchasers and the public . LIMs are only one tool for communicating natural hazard information to the public. Other sources of councilheld natural hazard information include planning instruments (e.g. district plans), regional council land information requests, local authority websites, property files, and project information memoranda and natural hazard notices (Building Act ).
Regulatory Impact Statement an accessible selfidentification process with no eligibility criteria such as medical treatment and that a multiplicity of gender marker options are available. . In New Zealand the Human Rights Commission recommended that the process for people to update the nominated sex on a birth record is based on a rightsbased model of selfdetermination. It also recommended that people can nominate a nonbinary gender. An accessible process that works for transgender and intersex New Zealanders is important . Birth certificates are not intended to provide conclusive evidence of someones identity. However, they are often used by people to prove they are a citizen with the right to work and study in New Zealand and are listed as an acceptable form of identification in government guidance. There are many processes where birth certificates can be requested, including setting up a bank account or enrolling a child in school. While other documents can be used in many of the same processes (such as a passport or driver licence), birth certificates are often more practical as they are low cost and do not expire. Everyone born in New Zealand can access their birth certificate, including children who have limited options for documentation that enable them to prove their identity. . Any situation where a birth certificate is requested can be distressing for transgender and intersex people if the sex recorded does not align with their gender. It can place an extra administrative burden on transgender and intersex people to prove who they are. It creates a risk of people being outed as transgender or intersex or referred to as the wrong gender, leading to feelings of stress and anxiety or experiences of discrimination, such as being denied access to services or benefits, and verbal harassment. These experiences impact the wellbeing of transgender and intersex people, which contributes to higher rates of psychological distress, harmful substance use, and suicidal ideation and behaviour. . Being able to have their gender recognised on a birth certificate is likely to have symbolic importance to transgender and intersex New Zealanders. It shows that the government recognises who they are, supporting their sense of belonging and wider social cohesion. There are highly interested stakeholders with diverging views on amending sex on birth certificates Support for a selfidentification process . In support of changing to a selfidentification process are the transgender and intersex New Zealanders who are affected by this issue and the organisations who support Yogyakarta Principle recommends that if sex and gender information is registered, this is based on an accessible selfidentification process with no eligibility criteria such as medical treatment. See the Human Rights Commissions PRISM Report. For example, the antimoney laundering and countering financing of terrorism identity verification code of practice. Counting Ourselves recorded respondents experiences from not having an identity document that matched their appearance. The most common negative consequences were being denied services and being verbally harassed. Counting Ourselves found that per cent of participants had experienced high or very high psychological distress and per cent of participants had seriously thought about committing suicide in the last months.
Regulatory Impact Statement . Property purchasers can also obtain natural hazard information from site specific engineering reports, private data specialists (e.g. CoreLogic, Risk Management Solutions), EQC, advice from property and legal professionals, local community knowledge and mtauranga Mori. . There are a range of online natural hazard mapping portals which allow property buyers to access hazard information, including regional council hazard portals which currently provide information across a spectrum of natural hazards. . Current research programmes will provide significant improvements in hazard information and risk modelling over the next five to ten years that will help decision makers understand natural hazard risk, including at the property level. This includes key natural hazard research being carried out by agencies (e.g. the Earthquake Commissions (EQC) Risk and Resilience portal and
Regulatory Impact Statement them. These stakeholders support is demonstrated through public commentary and campaigns, such as Gender Minorities Aotearoas YES to BDMRR campaign in support of the selfidentification provisions. . Stakeholder support was also demonstrated through submissions received on the Bill. Of the submissions that raised the issue of selfidentification, were in support. In addition, a further form submissions promoted by the Green Party were received in support. The Human Rights Commission was one of the submitters in support and continues to express support for having a selfidentification process. . Some transgender and intersex people may oppose having sex or gender shown on birth certificates. This is while human rights discourse recommends a selfidentification process where sex or gender information is registered, it firstly recommends that official identity documents exclude the registration of sex and gender. As outlined above, wider consideration of this as an option is out of scope given previous decisions of the Minister. Opposition to a selfidentification process . There are groups and individuals who oppose changing from the Family Court process to a selfidentification model. They have demonstrated opposition through public commentary and campaigns, and submissions on the Bill. Of the submissions that raised selfidentification, were in opposition. . Groups opposed to selfidentification raise concerns that the process: replaces a robust and shared biological definition of sex with a socially constructed notion based on gender; and undermines sexbased protections in society creating opportunities for predatory men to abuse access to womenonly spaces (eg changing rooms and womens refuges) and for men to access womenonly resources and services (eg singlesex schools or sports teams). . In addition, the above concerns often go broader than the scope of the Bill as birth certificates are not the determining factor in deciding access to womenonly spaces or services. A birth certificate is not considered conclusive evidence of someones sex or gender. It is not required to access womenonly spaces, such as changing rooms or refuges. Enabling a selfidentification process will not directly affect access to women only spaces. . There is only one instance in legislation where birth certificates determine someones sex or gender. The Corrections Regulations say that where a birth certificate is supplied a person should be placed in a prison that aligns with the sex on their birth certificate. If a birth certificate is not provided, a review can be initiated where considerations include a persons gender, safety and wellbeing, and wider considerations.
Regulatory Impact Statement . In the jurisdictions reviewed, there is not a single council property information document akin to a LIM (although the planning certificate in New South Wales (NSW) comes close). In NSW, Victoria, Scotland and states in the US (including California and Florida) the vendor is responsible for providing natural hazard information to potential purchasers, with relevant natural hazard information often obtained from councils to support this disclosure. For example, in NSW the vendor must provide a planning certificate from the council that outlines a range of property and planning information, including potential natural hazards such as bush fire, flooding, land slip and inundation. . In these jurisdictions, failure to make the required disclosure may mean that the purchaser can cancel the contract, or the vendor or agent may be liable for any damages suffered by the purchaser as a result. . Central or state governments provide online hazard mapping tools in all jurisdictions reviewed. For example, in Scotland the Scottish Environment Protection Agency provides interactive flooding maps with propertylevel flood information and the Australian federal government provides online hazard tools for a wide range of natural hazards, including bushfires, flooding, earthquakes and cyclones. . Vendor disclosure requirements in other jurisdictions are a useful mechanism to ensure purchasers are informed about natural hazards impacting a property. However, New Zealands property conveyancing system differs from these jurisdictions and the introduction of a vendor disclosure requirement could have implications for property and conveyancing law. LIMs and the resource management system . Councils role in providing LIMs is closely tied to the natural hazard management functions of regional councils and territorial authorities under the Resource Management Act (RMA). Local authorities have a duty under the RMA (section ) to research and gather information about natural hazards within their geographic area. . While territorial authorities do not need to include natural hazards information that is apparent from the district plan in LIMs, they are required to include natural hazard information for a specific property collected as a result of planning and consent
Regulatory Impact Statement opposed to selfidentification will be disappointed in any progression of the Bill without wider public conversation on selfidentification of gender. Problems with the current process may disproportionately impact specific population groups . Only recognising binary genders may have had a negative impact specific to Mori. Research suggests that there was gender diversity within te ao Mori that has diminished with colonisation. This has negatively affected the acceptance and participation of gender diverse Mori in their own communities. . As noted above there are also specific impacts for children and young people. Birth certificates may be one of the only forms of identification available to children and young people and are used to enrol in education or apply for jobs. Other forms of identification are more expensive (eg passports) or age restrictive (eg driver licences). As children and young people more frequently rely on birth certificates, they will face more daily stressors when the sex recorded does not align with their gender, such as outing, invasive questions, discrimination or bullying. What objectives are you seeking in relation to this policy problem or opportunity . The objectives of improving the process to amend sex on birth certificates are to: provide a process that better reflects societys changing views on gender diversity and gender fluidity; improve peoples control over how their gender is recognised, a deeply personal part of how a person understands and perceives themselves; improve peoples sense of social belonging and their general wellbeing; and uphold public trust and confidence in how birth register information is used and maintained. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
Regulatory Impact Statement Section : Option identification and impact analysis What criteria will be used to evaluate options against the status quo . The criteria used to assess the options for improving the process to amend sex on birth certificates are: Inclusivity : The process is inclusive of all New Zealanders and promotes wider social inclusion and cohesion. It supports peoples autonomy over how their gender is recognised, improving their sense of belonging and ability to access services without stress or discrimination. Flexibility: The process can readily adjust with New Zealanders evolving views on gender. Accessibility : The process is easy to understand and access. Integrity: The integrity of the information in the birth register is accurate and protections are in place to prevent the process being used for unlawful reasons (eg identity fraud). Cost: Minimises costs and timeconsuming steps for individuals and government. . The inclusivity and accessibility criteria are different. Accessibility is about removing barriers to the process that exist for those who are technically eligible (eg, cost and time barriers). Inclusivity is about not excluding specific groups from the process (eg nonbinary people, or people who cannot undergo medical treatment) and supporting wider social cohesion. . To some extent the integrity criteria competes with the other criteria. This is because: creating requirements to maintain the integrity of a process could negatively impact its accessibility and inclusivity, including a persons control over how their gender is recognised; and the integrity criterion can increase cost and negatively impact flexibility. . In assessing the options against the criteria, the integrity criterion has been considered on balance. This is in recognition that strong measures to uphold integrity would result in a process that is not suitable for the transgender and intersex New Zealanders it is intended to assist. The cost criterion has also been considered on balance in that ensuring integrity and flexibility may give rise to additional costs. What scope are you considering options within . All options developed are mutually exclusive. Other countries models for changing gender on official documentation have informed our analysis. A range of countries have adopted a selfidentification process, including Argentina, Malta, Canada (Ontario), Belgium, Australia (Tasmania and Victoria), Ireland and Malta. Due to time constraints to develop this policy and as the selfidentification models have only recently been adopted by many jurisdictions, we have not thoroughly considered overseas experiences since they have changed to a selfidentification model. This has been influenced by the jurisdictions closest to New Zealand only introducing a self identification model in the last few years (eg Tasmania in and Victoria in ). . In February , the Minister of Internal Affairs directed the Department to progress the Bill with a selfidentification process to recognise gender on birth certificates. This Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
Regulatory Impact Statement processing functions under the RMA. This may include proposed plans and plan changes, coastal management strategies, technical reports and other research to support planning processes. . As a result, updates to LIMs can occur as a council engages with its community on the development of RMA planning instruments. Councils will sometimes notify property owners directly of new natural hazard information that will be included in LIMs, for example, the release of coastal hazard mapping in the last few years in Northland, Nelson, Auckland, and Tauranga, as part of work on coastal management plans. Cabinet requested options for substantive changes to the LIM system as part of the Community Resilience programme . The Community Resilience programme is an allofgovernment approach to reducing natural hazard risks and the impacts of climate change. Since , the Minister of Local Government has convened a group of Community Resilience Ministers to oversee the programme. Community Resilience Ministers are: Minister of Local Government; Minister of Finance; Minister for the Environment; Minister for Emergency Management; Minister for Climate Change; Minister for Economic and Regional Development; and Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector. . As a result of decisions in Budget , the programme was scaled back due to resource constraints and is currently focussed on improving natural hazard disclosure in the LIM system. In April , Cabinet invited the Minister of Local Government to reportback by September on legislative and nonlegislative options for substantive changes to the LIM system to achieve more active disclosure of natural hazard risk DEVMIN. The Cabinet paper specified that this would include investigating options to: ensure information on district plans and held by regional councils are included in LIMs remove barriers and incentivise councils to communicate natural hazard risks to the public, including addressing legal risks for councils disclosing information. Links to other work programmes . The table below summarises significant work programmes at central government agencies and crown research institutes (CRIs) that are related to LIMs.
Regulatory Impact Statement direction, in combination with time constraints, has affected our ability to develop and consider alternative options to a selfidentification process. Options ruled out . The Ministers direction to progress the Bill with a selfidentification process has excluded from consideration options that: are wider in scope than a selfidentification process; are regulatory and nonregulatory improvements to enhance the existing process (as outlined in section one, some operational improvements have already been commissioned, however the Working Group has made it clear that these cannot make the needed improvements to the process); create a separate and new gender marker to be shown on birth certificates; and remove sex or gender information from birth certificates altogether. . Considering how sex is registered at birth is also out of scope. The problem relates to the process for people to have their gender recognised on their birth certificates. It is not possible to know gender at birth and therefore the existing birth registration process based on sex will remain unchanged and was not considered. . We did consider retaining the Family Court process while not requiring any medical evidence to be produced. This would have operated as an application to the Family Court based on selfidentification. The Family Court could then grant a declaration that the RegistrarGeneral update the sex on the applicants birth certificate. This option was excluded as there was no substantive benefit to have the Family Court check the application versus the RegistrarGeneral without consideration of medical evidence. It would also fail to remove the issues identified with a Court process around time, cost and access.
Regulatory Impact Statement . The Crown has obligations under te Tiriti o Waitangithe Treaty of Waitangi to respect the right of Mori to make decisions in relation to their lands and taonga, within the context of the Crowns right to govern. Te Tiritithe Treaty also affirms that the Crowns obligations to New Zealand citizens are owed equally to Mori. . In the Waitangi Tribunal heard, through its inquiry into claims brought by tangata whenua in Tauranga Moana, that the current composition of local bodies does not adequately reflect or represent Mori interests and the Crown needs to intervene to ensure that Mori are represented on councils. The Tribunals report found that the Crown must ensure that its te TiritiTreaty obligations are upheld even when it delegates functions to local government, and that this includes the equal rights of Mori with other citizens when participating in democratic electoral processes afforded by Ko te TuatoruArticle of te Tiritithe Treaty. Mori wards are one means of fulfilling council obligations to ensure Mori can participate in local government decision making. They are not the only way for councils to achieve this. Local authorities still need to ensure that they have an understanding of Mori rights and interests and there are many ways to achieve this, including through engaging with local iwi and hap. .
Regulatory Impact Statement Describe and analyse the options . The options considered include: Option One Status quo: Family Court process with evidence of medical treatment; Option Two Statutory declaration process with evidence of medical treatment; and Option Three Selfidentification process: Statutory declaration without evidence of medical treatment ( Preferred Option ). Option One Status quo: Family Court process with evidence of medical treatment Key features . Under the status quo the Family Court process described in section one would continue with many of the operational improvements recommended by the Working Group implemented. The operational improvements would result in better guidance and support to help people understand and access the process. However, the underlying process would not be changed. This includes an intimidating court process, the medical evidence requirement, and the binary selection of sex markers. Analysis . This option does not support New Zealanders autonomy over how their gender is recognised. The decision is instead that of a Family Court judge, which is influenced by health professionals through the medical evidence provided to the Court. This removes a persons autonomy over a deeply personal issue. . The court process and medical evidence requirement mean the process is inaccessible to many transgender and intersex people. The medical evidence can be difficult, time consuming and costly to obtain. Despite planned changes in response to the Working Groups report to make the process easier to navigate, it is likely these barriers will remain, with some people continuing to see the process as intimidating and disempowering. . The process is also not inclusive of all New Zealanders. The medical evidence requirement excludes those who cannot undergo gender affirming care for medical reasons or because they are unwilling to do so. The binary options exclude those who do not identify as exclusively male or female. The requirements still lend themselves to a person making a permanent change excluding those whose gender may change over time. . The lack of autonomy, inclusivity and accessibility of the process will have negative impacts on a persons social belonging and wellbeing. This is because having the incorrect gender on a birth certificate can mean people experience stress or even discrimination when accessing services. . The inaccessibility and requirements of the court process mean it is unlikely that people would use it for unlawful reasons or unless they are confident and committed to their The Working Group made recommendations and the Government will undertake work in response to recommendations including (but not exclusive to), developing further guidance and material on the Family Court process, establishing a facetoface and call centre service to guide people through the Family Court process, and developing draft guidance about transinclusive and affirming language and behaviour for the Family Courts internal resources for staff. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
Regulatory Impact Statement What is the policy problem or opportunity LIMs do not currently deliver all key natural hazard information for properties in a way that helps support purchaser decisionmaking. This is a multifaceted problem with three key aspects: there are inconsistencies in the natural hazard information councils provide in LIMs and they may not contain all known information LIMs do not currently communicate natural hazard information in a way purchasers can easily locate and understand council concerns about legal liability can inhibit full disclosure of natural hazards information. We are addressing three key challenges that contribute to the lessthaneffective disclosure of natural hazard information by LIMs . We have identified three key challenges to the main problem of LIMs in the disclosure of natural hazard information to potential property buyers: . there are inconsistencies in the natural hazard information provided in LIMs and they may not contain all known information . LIMs do not currently communicate natural hazard information in a way purchasers can easily locate and understand . council concerns about legal liability can inhibit full disclosure of natural hazards information. . As set out in the constraints above, time and cost barriers are also an important challenge for the LIM system overall but are not limited to natural hazard disclosure. The working day time frame and fees may be barriers to a purchaser obtaining a LIM, particularly if they need to make an offer on a property quickly. . Potential options to address time and cost barriers, such as compulsory vendor disclosure of a LIM or mandatory limits on timeframes and LIM fees, warrant careful consideration as part of future policy work. A proper assessment of policy options would require specific engagement with local government and other stakeholders, and further analysis of the potential costs and impact on the wider property conveyancing system.
Regulatory Impact Statement Fiscal and compliance costs . Being required to hold standalone polls incurs a cost for councils which is largely fixed . Councils will be required to pay the costs associated with running the poll including postal costs, advertising, and contributing staff time. The Electoral Commission also incurs additional costs to supply the electoral roll data and support special vote checking processes. . Council engagement processes also incur costs to councils. What scope will options be considered within . The Minister of Local Government s proposals limit the scope of options that can be considered to address the policy problem . Nonregulatory options were not considered as an option to achieve this objective, as legislative change is needed to require councils to hold binding polls on Mori wards . . The Department briefly considered options to reinstate a modified version of the poll provisions, to mitigate the barriers created by the pre model. Possible modifications included: i ncreasing the threshold for a valid petition of electors to demand that a poll be held; increasing the vote threshold for overturning a council decision from a simple majority to a higher percentage; or removing the ability for polls to remove Mori wards once established. . Time constraints, to provide for all legislative changes to be made within a single Bill and to enable the transitional provisions to apply to the local elections (if that option is chosen ) meant we did not consider these possible variations further. It is possible that if more time had been available, investigating and testing changes to these settings may have allowed us to develop an option that achieves Government priorities but minimises some of the negative impacts of the previous arrangements. What options are being considered . This section deals with the decision to remain with the status quo or restore the poll requirements that were in place prior to the changes on a permanent basis . Option One Status QuoCounterfactual . Under the status quo a council can resolve to establish or disestablish a Mori ward with no ability for this decision to be overturned by a poll . Constituents are consulted on the boundaries and number of Mori wards . From October , councils that do not already have Mori wards will be required to follow a process to engage with Mori and other communities when making a decision on Mori wards at each stage of the decision making process . Option Two pre poll requirements are reinstated . Under Option Two, council decisions to establish Mori wards could be overturned by a binding poll triggered by a petition signed by of local electors. A petition for a poll could also be launched at any time. The poll outcome would be decided by a simple majority. Councils could also choose to initiate a binding poll themselves. Constituents will continue to be consulted on the boundaries and numbers of Mori wards. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Regulatory Impact Statement There are inconsistencies in the natural hazard information provided in LIMs and they may not contain all known information . Based on a review of research papers, local and central government workshops, a sample of LIMs, and expert engagement, there is evidence that LIMs from different territorial authorities are inconsistent in the type of natural hazard information and level of detail provided. . The key reasons identified for these inconsistencies are: LIMs may not include all relevant natural hazard information available from regional and national sources, and coverage of different national hazards is variable. Most natural hazard information is held by regional councils and CRIs (e.g. NIWA, GNS) and territorial authorities can find it difficult to keep up to and interpret new natural hazard research and datasets as they often lack staff with natural hazard expertise there is ongoing uncertainty about what information should be included in the LIM (and at what time), as well as the applicability to specific properties due to the complexity of natural hazard information LIMs are currently not required to include information about the potential for climate change to exacerbate natural hazard risks
Regulatory Impact Statement gender. However, these benefits are at the expense of a process that meets the needs of the transgender and intersex New Zealanders it is intended for. Key features how the Family Court process applies to children and young people . As described in section one, guardians must apply on behalf of a child or young person who is under years of age. The guardian must satisfy the court that they intend to bring the child up as a person of the nominated sex. They must also provide evidence the child has undergone or will undergo medical treatment to enable them to assume their nominated sex. Analysis how the Family Court process applies to children and young people . The status quo enables children and young people to amend their registered sex on their birth certificate. However, the court process and the requirement for medical evidence remains a barrier. . This option does not fully support children and young peoples autonomy over how their gender is recognised. The application is submitted by the guardian and the decision is made by a Family Court judge, which is influenced by health professionals through the medical evidence requirement. The process does not directly require evidence from the child or young person to demonstrate that they understand the decision and it is based on their own perception of their gender. . The court process excludes young people whose guardians are not willing to support them through a court process, which can result in children and young people not having their gender officially recognised. This can cause problems for children and young peoples inclusion in society when presenting a birth certificate that does not match their gender. . Applying a single process to under yearolds fails to recognise common views that older adolescents generally have a higher level of maturity and understanding. It also fails to align with other legislation that recognises older adolescents ability to make decisions. For example, is the age at which you can apply for a learner driver licence, and consent to general medical procedures. Treating everyone under yearsold the same could place barriers on older adolescents who understand the implications of the application. This is particularly true where the young persons guardian is not supportive of their gender and would refuse consent. What stakeholders might think . Transgender and intersex New Zealanders and the organisations who support them will be critical and disappointed should a Family Court process remain. Conversely, groups opposed to selfidentification would be supportive of no change. Option Two Statutory declaration process with evidence of medical treatment Key features . Under this option the Family Court process would be replaced with an application to the RegistrarGeneral. This process would require a person to provide a statutory declaration and medical evidence that they have undergone treatment to physically conform with their gender. The medical evidence would be provided via a report from a health professional. The report would detail the medical treatment undergone and be accompanied by a letter of support from the health professional. . On receiving the statutory declaration and medical evidence, it would then be up to the RegistrarGeneral to decide whether the individuals birth certificate could be Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Regulatory Impact Statement to reflect their gender. Under this option a person could choose between the binary options of male and female and would only be able to make one application in their lifetime unless they wanted to revert to their sex at birth. Analysis . This option only partly supports New Zealanders autonomy over how their gender is recognised. The removal of the court process means that the final decision is no longer that of a judge but retaining the need for medical evidence means health professionals will continue to influence the outcome of an individuals application, limiting the applicants control over a deeply personal issue. . The option is more accessible then the status quo as it will no longer involve a time consuming and costly court process. However, the medical evidence requirement will still present a barrier as: medical treatment can be difficult to obtain, is costly and can take time; it excludes those who cannot undergo gender affirming care for a medical reason or because they are unwilling to do so; it medicalises the process by implying that physical conformation is necessary for gender recognition; and it could have negative privacy implications as people need to share sensitive medical information. . Like the status quo, this process is not inclusive of nonbinary genders or people whose gender may change over time. . This option provides a high level of integrity. The medical evidence requirement and letter of support from a health professional practically limit the likelihood of fraudulent applications. The statutory declaration requirement also acts to provide integrity. Statutory declarations are already included in the BDMRR Act as one way a persons name change information can be verified. Under this process applicants will need to verify that they intend to live as their chosen gender, want that gender to appear on their birth certificate and understand the consequences of that decision. False declarations are an offence under both the Crimes Act and the BDMRR Act, punishable by a term of imprisonment. As such, there are repercussions for changing gender information where a person is not genuine or changes their gender for unlawful reasons. Key features how option two applies to children and young people . As with option one, the process will be the same for all children and young people aged years and under. The guardian will need to apply on the child or young persons behalf, completing the statutory declaration and providing evidence of medical treatment. Analysis how option two applies to children and young people . As with option one, the process enables children and young people to amend their registered sex on their birth certificate. However, the requirement for medical evidence remains a barrier. . This option does not fully support children and young peoples autonomy over how their gender is recognised. The application is submitted by the guardian and is influenced by health professionals through the medical evidence requirement. Like option one, the Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
Regulatory Impact Statement How do the options compare to the Status QuoCounterfactual Criteria Option One Status Quo Option Two pre poll requirements are reinstated Public input Does the option support adequate public participation From O ctober councils without Mori wards will be required to consult with Mori and other communities on Mori ward resolutions, and have regard to their views. Councils are not required to make a decision based on the level of public support or opposition. This option gives the most direct control over the decision to electors. Polls are usually accompanied by information produced by councils. Electors are encouraged to participate in the decision making via the poll . Facilitating Mori representation and participation Does the option support councils to facilitate Mori representation in local government The curr ent process empowers elected members to establish specific Mori representation on the governing body, if they determine this is best for their district or region. The current process does not present additional barriers to Mori representation. From October there will be specific requirements to consult with local Mori communities to ensure iwi and hap have input into the decision making process. This would ensure Mori have the opportunity to participate in these decisions. The majority of councils that have created a Mori ward have undertaken some consultation regardless of current requirements . This option makes it much more difficult to establish Mori wards. While Mori wards are not the only way for councils to facilitate Mori representation and participation, they are an option to provide for greater access to local governance mechanisms for Mori. While this option restores provisions that were previously in place, in doing so it creates a new barrier to Mori engagement and participation in local government decision making.
Regulatory Impact Statement district plan information (such as planning overlays and rules for natural hazard management) and information held by regional councils is not required to be included in a LIM there are legal incentives for councils not to release natural hazard information, such as concerns over potential exposure to legal action. LIMs do not currently communicate natural hazard information in a way purchasers can easily locate and understand . Making property decisions can be a challenging and costly process for purchasers. It takes time and effort to gather, process and analyse information when buying a house and the LIM is only one of the complex documents that a property buyer needs to review. The LIM needs to strike the right balance in providing information that is not so complex that it may be misinterpreted or lead to decision paralysis, but not so simple that it glosses over important complexities. . Based on research and engagement with the local government sector, LIMs do not always effectively communicate natural hazard information to purchasers: LIMs are required to include a wide range of property information and as a result are often lengthy and difficult to navigate. LIM content and format varies significantly across the country, making it more difficult for people to navigate if considering purchasing properties in different districts natural hazard information is often presented in multiple locations or under the ambiguous heading special features and characteristics of the land LIMs often refer the reader to publicly available natural hazard information or technical reports. However, readers may find technical reports challenging to understand in practical terms and may not follow links to further information if they do not understand their importance. Council concerns about legal liability can inhibit full disclosure of natural hazards information . If a LIM fails to properly identify natural hazards affecting a property or includes new natural hazard information that potentially impacts the value or marketability of a property, property owners may be motivated to take legal action against the council. . Property owners can bring three potential legal actions against councils relating to LIMs:
Regulatory Impact Statement Balancing interests Does the option enable balancing of various community interests (including minority interests) Balancing of interests is done by elected representatives who have the final say. This allows councils to hear a range of views and determine what they consider the best path forward. Enabling councils to develop their own community and engagement process allows for more nuanced balancing of minority interests than the poll mechanism. Elected representatives decisions may be overturned by a simple majority of electors. This option is subject to the risk that the wishes of the majority override minority interests. Consistency Does the option support consistency of decision making processes about representation arrangements There i s no poll provision attached to the process for creating any types of wards under the status quo. The decision is made in a way that is in line with the majority of other council decision making processes. Mori ward decisions will be able to be overridden by a majority of electors, whereas councils decisions on establishing new general wards cannot.
Regulatory Impact Statement process does not directly require evidence from the child or young person to demonstrate that they understand the decision and it is based on their own perception of their gender. . The medical evidence requirement excludes young people whose guardians are not willing or able to seek medical treatment for their child, which could result in children and young people not having their gender officially recognised. This can cause problems for children and young peoples inclusion in society when presenting a birth certificate that does not match their gender. . Like option one, applying a single process to under yearolds fails to recognise common views that older adolescents generally have a higher level of cognitive understanding. It could place barriers on older adolescents who understand the implications of the application, for example, where the young persons guardian is not supportive of their gender and refuses consent. . A single process is considered necessary under this option because the requirement to provide evidence of medical treatment means the consequences of an application are more significant. For example, medical treatment could result in potentially irreversible physical changes to support an application. Therefore, older adolescents may still need a guardians support to make the decision. In comparison, the selfidentification process described in option three (below) requires no medical treatment. What stakeholders might think . Transgender and intersex New Zealanders and the organisations that support them will be still be critical and disappointed should this be the new process because it medicalises gender and does not fully respect a persons autonomy to determine how their gender is recognised. . However, groups opposed to selfidentification are also unlikely to be supportive of this option as it would be perceived as a less stringent process without the Family Court and they may reiterate concerns about its impact on protections for women and womens rights. Option Three Selfidentification process statutory declaration without evidence of medical treatment (Preferred option) Key features . Like option two, this option would require a statutory declaration to be provided to the RegistrarGeneral. However, an applicant would not need to provide supporting medical evidence. . Under this option a person can amend their registered sex multiple times. However, where a person applies more than once they will have to meet additional requirements to ensure the application is genuine. These additional requirements will be prescribed in regulations. Under this option a person would be able to select markers outside the binary options of male and female. A range of nonbinary markers will be prescribed in regulations. A regulation making power to enable these regulations will be included in the Bill. Analysis . This option best supports a persons autonomy over how their gender is recognised on their birth certificate. While a person will need to make a statutory declaration in front of a person authorised to receive it, the individual is the one who makes the Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
Regulatory Impact Statement a claim in negligence for providing inaccurate information or failing to communicate known information about a natural hazard in a LIM a claim for breach of the councils statutory duty to provide natural hazard information under LGOIMA an application to the High Court for judicial review of the councils decision to include natural hazard information on a LIM, potentially on the grounds that the council has based its decision on incorrect or insufficient information. . Property owners have brought legal actions against councils for including coastal erosion hazard prediction lines on LIMs and failing to provide information in LIMs about seismic faults, land instability, flood hazards and contaminated land. . While these legal actions have largely been unsuccessful, there is some evidence that the actual or perceived threat of legal action has contributed to councils taking a risk averse approach to natural hazards information. Councils may be reluctant to provide summaries or explanations of natural hazards due to concerns over liability and all LIM notations are subjected to careful legal scrutiny. The chilling effect on sharing information and concern about liability may have been exacerbated by housing weathertightness claims, with courts observing that local authorities are attractive defendants because of their deep pockets and continuing legal existence. . As natural hazard risks are exacerbated by climate change, property owners may consider taking legal action against councils for economic loss from the effect on the value of the property where information on the likely impact of climate change has not been provided.
Regulatory Impact Statement Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Regulatory Impact Statement Without further action LIMs will continue to not meet their potential for communicating natural hazard information to the public . The current LIM regime was introduced into LGOIMA in and the requirements for providing natural hazard information have not been since. While numerous reports have identified issues with LIMs as a tool for communicating natural hazards and the courts have interpreted key legislative requirements, inconsistencies and uncertainties about natural hazard information in LIMs remain. . Without changes to the LIM system, it is likely that current inconsistent practices will continue and LIMs will not meet their potential to better inform purchasers about natural hazards. This view was strongly supported in stakeholder engagement. Stakeholder views of the problem . Any changes to council provision of property information, such as natural hazard information, will be of interest to a wide range of stakeholders. Table provides a high level overview of stakeholders and the nature of their interest.
Regulatory Impact Statement determination, it is not dependent on another partys assurance around how they identify themselves. . Accessibility would be improved as it is not dependant on a lengthy, costly and difficult to navigate court process. There is no medical treatment requirement, so people are not impeded by the cost of, or lack of access to, gender affirming care. . The process is inclusive of all people, including those who cannot or do not wish to receive medical treatment, whose gender may change over time and who identify as nonbinary genders. This supports a persons wider social inclusion and reduces transgender and intersex peoples experiences of stress, or discrimination, when accessing services. The inclusion of a range of nonbinary markers is a critical component of introducing selfidentification and would bring the process in line with the human rights discourse that recommends a multiplicity of gender markers. . Prescribing a range of nonbinary markers in regulations will also be inclusive as it allows for consultation to be undertaken on the number and terminology of markers. This will enable the Department to gauge transgender and intersex perspectives and the perspectives of specific population groups, such as young people and Mori, Pacific and ethnic communities. Setting the markers in regulation also allows for more flexibility and will futureproof the legislation. Gender theory and terminology evolves rapidly, and regulations can be more easily reviewed and than primary legislation to ensure they meet the needs of transgender and intersex people. . Like option two, the statutory declaration provides a level of integrity as it ensures the applicant understands the consequences of their decision. Criminal offences for false declarations can help to deter applications by people who are not genuine or wish to change their gender for unlawful reasons. . Integrity will also be maintained by people having to meet additional requirements where they amend their sex more than once. These additional requirements will be prescribed in regulations and act to ensure applications are genuine and mitigate a risk of identity fraud. Where a person amends their registered sex their previous name and sex are not displayed on their birth certificate. This is important as it will stop a person being outed as transgender and most accurately reflect their identity. However, it does mean a person cannot be easily linked to their previous identity. . The above risk may be exacerbated if people can amend their registered sex multiple times. This is particularly true given birth certificates are fundamentally different to transactional documents, such as a passport or driver licences, which can be revoked and must be renewed periodically. People could abuse the process to obtain birth certificates to create new identities to avoid detection or access services they are not entitled to. Worst case scenarios of fraudulent behaviour include a person receiving multiple benefits or circumventing safeguards preventing money laundering and terrorism financing. . This risk will be mitigated through the proposed additional requirements. The Bill will make it clear that any additional requirements will be to ensure an application is genuine to mitigate the risk of identity fraud. Additional requirements would not include providing evidence of medical treatment and should be designed to not be overly Work and Income identification guidance enables a person to apply for a benefit using a birth certificate and a utility bill. The Ministry of Social Development can access previous records for people who changed their name and gender, but only if the person is being investigated. People can obtain a Kiwi Access card with a birth certificate and confirmation from another person who can prove your identity. A Kiwi Access card in combination with a birth certificate meets the identification guidance set out in the Anti Money Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism Identity Verification Code of Practice. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
Regulatory Impact Statement poll, and that the poll provisions were acting as a barrier to Mori representation rather than facilitating it. Following these changes, councils resolved to establish Mori wards for the first time following council resolutions, and councils implemented these changes at the local elections. The coalition agreements between the New Zealand National Party , ACT New Zealand, and New Zealand First (the coalition agreements), outlined the Governments priority to: restore the right to local referendums on the establishment or ongoing use of Mori wards, including requiring a referendum on any wards established without referendum at the next local body elections. Restoring previous Mori wards legislation The Government proposes to reintroduc e the previous option to allow of electors to petition a council to hold a binding poll if a council decides to establish a Mori ward (or decides not to) . The scope of options to achieve this proposal in restoring the previous legislation is narrow. The only options considered to achieve this part of the coalition agreements are the status quo and the restoration of previous legislation. Other options have not been explored. Councils that have established Mori wards since For of the councils that have resolved to establish Mori wards since , while the option of a binding poll was not available, the Minister of Local Government proposes a mechanism for the councils to revisit their decisions. Four options were considered for the mechanism that are a combination of decisions about two key issues: . whether the outcome of any poll takes effect at the or local elections ; and . whether binding polls should be mandatory or only occur if an affected council receives a valid petition from its community . The Minister s preferred approach to achieve this objective is for affected councils to hold binding polls in and for the outcome of the polls to be reflected at the local elections . Under this approach, and every option considered, all councils who created or resolved to create a Mori ward without a poll would have the opportunity to rescind their decision on creating Mori wards or resolve to disestablish their existing Mori wards. There is a risk that this approach may reduce Mori representation in local government. The option that best minimise s this risk is the status quo, which would maintain the legislative amendment , enabling greater public input through additional consultation requirements that w ill come into effect in October as part of previous legislative changes . This option is not the Ministers preferred approach . Engagement on the policy issues has been minimal due to timing and confidentiality requirement s, and the general public has not yet been consulted on this work. P ublic engagement is expected to be limited , with a truncated select committee process.
Regulatory Impact Statement What option is likely to best address the problem, meet the policy objectives, and deliver the highest net benefits . The status quo is the Departments preferred option as it increas es the level of public involvement in council decisions about Mori wards from October , while also supporting councils to facilitate Mori representation and participation in local decision making. However , it does not meet the Governments objectives under the coalition agreement s. . The status quo includes additional requirements on councils to canva ss views across their communities when considering whether Mori wards are right for their district or region. These enhanced consultation requirements will come into force in October . The range of views can then be balanced by representatives elected to carry out this function, taking into account minority interests, and giving due weight to the views of those most affected by the decisions . This is a separate decision making process, but consistent with the approach currently taken to establishing new general wards, such as a rural ward, to ensure adequate representation for a community of interest. The status quo would ensure greater consistency between decision making processes for establishing new wards of different types . . Evidence from the period of to suggests that Option Two could prevent many other councils from establishing Mori wards, even if the council considered that this would strengthen its decision making processes and relationships with mana whenua. It may also result in the disestablishment of Mori wards for a number of councils , although evidence for this is limited . The Department does not hold any information on the results of polls held to disestablish an existing Mori ward as none have been held before. . By empowering councils to make Mori ward decisions this is likely to maintain recent progress in addressing historic underrepresentation of Mori in local authorities. . Although it is not the most important factor, the status quo option avoids the risk of councils having to fund the cost of polls initiated by electors. . The Governments preferred option is Option Two. T he costbenefit analysis below, and Section of this analysis , will consider that option.
Regulatory Impact Statement burdensome or reinstate the barriers that the selfidentification process aims to remove. Potential additional requirements could include requiring applicants to return any previous birth certificates, provision of an identity referee or a letter of support from an adult who has known the applicant for over a year. . Prescribing the additional requirements in regulations allows flexibility for some experimentation about how to achieve the right balance between mitigating identity fraud and making the process accessible. Achieving this balance is essential to meeting the objectives of improving the current process and realising an accessible selfidentification model. To get this balance right consultation would be beneficial, which could happen during the development of the regulations. Flexibility in the next few years is also beneficial as the requirements may need to respond to the outcomes of a Justice Sector Identity Management Strategy that is under development. . A fiveyear statutory review of the selfidentification process is proposed. At this time, consideration should be given to whether the additional requirements achieve this balance and if they can be shifted to primary legislation. Key features how the selfidentification process will apply to children and young people . The selfidentification process will apply to children and young people with additional measures in place to ensure they understand the amendment and that it is based on their own decision about their gender. The additional measures are in recognition that children and young people have differing levels of cognitive understanding and may need support to make the amendment. The requirements will differ to reflect the cognitive development of different age children and young people: young people aged or years can apply on their own behalf and this must be accompanied by either: o written consent from their guardian; or o a letter of support by a third party; applications for children and young people aged years and younger must be: o made on behalf of the child or young person by their guardian; and o be accompanied by a letter of support from a third party. . The additional measures above reflect that and year olds are in later adolescence and generally have a higher level of cognitive development and can live independently from their guardians. Requiring both consent and the letter of support for those years and under reflects that guardians have responsibilities for their childs development and are there to help them determine important decisions. This responsibility is more pronounced where children and young people are younger and less ready to make decisions on their own. . The role of the third party would be to assess that the child or young person understands the amendment and that the decision is based on their own perceptions of their gender. The people who can act as a third party will be prescribed in regulations with a regulation making power to enable this included in the Bill. Analysis how the selfidentification process will apply to children and young people . Applying a selfidentification process to children and young people reflects societys changing views that gender is not age restrictive and children can, and do, have a Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
Regulatory Impact Statement All stakeholders in targeted engagement consider that disclosure of natural hazard information in the LIM could be improved . Due to the short timeframe for policy development and engagement, the Department undertook targeted engagement to test our problem narrative and options to improve the LIM system. In April , Cabinet invited a report back, by September , on proposals for changes to the LIM system DEVMIN. To meet the report back deadline, we limited our engagement to a month and a half from late June to mid August. . We worked with Taituar Local Government Professionals Aotearoa (Taituar) and Local Government New Zealand (LGNZ) to plan engagement and seek feedback from technical experts from a range of local authorities. We did not have the opportunity to engage with the real estate industry or property purchasers, which may have provided additional insight into current barriers to obtaining and understanding LIMs. . Officials also met with stakeholders who have an active interest in LIMs including property and local government lawyers, Mori data experts, and representatives from the property investment, real estate, banking and insurance sectors. . Officials sought feedback from relevant technical experts at central government agencies MfE, LINZ and the Registrar General of Lands, the National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA), Te Puni Kkiri, Te Arawhiti the Office for Mori Crown Relations, Te Tpapa Kura Kinga Ministry of Housing and Urban Development, the Real Estate Authority, and EQC. . All stakeholders the Department engaged with consider that, while LIMs are a useful tool, they currently do not effectively communicate natural hazard information to property purchasers. . Stakeholders raised concerns about current communication of natural hazard information to other audiences, including natural hazard information for renters and the general public, as well as tools for iwihapwhnau to inform them about natural hazards affecting whenua Mori. However, this is outside of the scope of the policy problem and options to respond to these problems are not considered in this paper. Future work may be carried out to consider options to respond to these problems. Assumptions . The following assumptions have been made in this analysis: the defining characteristics of a LIM are that it is a compilation of property information held by a council at that time about a specific property provided to a requester on application current and proposed natural hazard portals will not replace the LIM as the main source of natural hazard information for purchasers in the near future while some regional councils have natural hazard platforms and national portals are being developed, the LIM is likely to remain the main property information source given the other information it contains (e.g. building and resource consents) there will continue to be significant demand for houses which will place pressure on buyers to make property purchasing decisions quickly there is likely to be continued high demand for housing, particularly in urban centres
Regulatory Impact Statement What are the marginal costs and benefits of the option Affected groups Comment nature of cost or benefit (eg, ongoing, one off), evidence and assumption ( eg, compliance rates), risks . Impact m present value where appropriate, for monetised impacts; high, medium or low for nonmonetised impacts . Evidence Certainty High, medium, or low, and explain reasoning in comment column. Additional costs of the preferred option compared to taking no action Regulated groups Local authorities additional binding polls.
Regulatory Impact Statement strong sense of their gender from an early age.A separate and less stringent process for older adolescents reflects societys views that and year olds are more able to make decisions on their own. . Recognising and year olds as more able to provide consent is consistent with the process for changing a young persons name under BDMRR Act. Under this process, the guardian applies on a young persons behalf but must have the young persons consent if they are aged or over. It is consistent with other legislation in New Zealand, for example, is the age when you can apply for a learner driver licence, and consent to general medical procedures. It also aligns with other jurisdictions where selfidentification policies are often eased once a person turns , such as in Norway, Portugal, and Belgium. . The process is more accessible and better supports the autonomy of children and young people than options one and two as there is no medical evidence requirement. Assurance is instead provided by a third party. The Bill will make it clear that the third partys role is to ensure the child or young person understands the decision and that it is based on their own selfdentification. The third party is not assessing any other factors, such as a medical assessment about if a child or young person physically conforms to their gender. However, there may still be access barriers where guardians refuse consent or if a third party is difficult to access. . The process recognises the higher cognitive ability of and year olds and empowers this age group to choose between providing guardian consent or a letter of support from a third party. This gives them more autonomy in situations where they do not feel comfortable asking a guardian for consent, where they are estranged from their guardian or where the guardian would refuse consent. The risk of these scenarios occurring still applies to children and young people aged years and under. For this age group, the risk is balanced against the need to recognise a guardians responsibilities for their childs development and to help them determine important decisions. . The process will better support transgender and intersex children and young peoples sense of belonging and wellbeing. Having their gender correctly reflected on their birth certificate would improve their ability to access services without stress or discrimination (eg enrolling in school). This is particularly important as, compared to adults, children and young people are more reliant on birth certificates to prove their identity. The process could also remove any real or perceived pressure on a guardian to get their child medical treatment to enable their child to assume and maintain their gender. . The process for children and young people upholds the integrity of birth register information as the letter of support mitigates the risk of guardians improperly influencing their child to amend their registered sex. The letter of support from a third party will ensure the child or young person has an appropriate level of understanding of what is occurring, and that it is what they want. To ensure accessibility, it is important that a variety of third parties are available who are easy to access. These could include, for example, health professionals; people outside of the health sector, such as councillors; or people who may know a child or young person well. They must also be A recent survey of New Zealand youth found that three quarters () of those who identified as transgender and gender diverse said they had started to do so before the age of . The Youth survey found that only a third of transgender and gender diverse participants had told their parents or caregivers they were transgender or gender diverse. The Counting Ourselves survey found that per cent of respondents had been kicked out of home because they were transgender. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
Regulatory Impact Statement
Regulatory Impact Statement capable of assessing if a child or young person understands the decision and that it is based on their own gender. . Prescribing the third parties in regulations allows flexibility to experiment about how to achieve the right balance between prescribing third parties that can ensure a child and young person understands the decision and ensuring these third parties are accessible. Again, achieving this balance is essential to meeting the objectives of improving the current process and realising an accessible selfidentification model. To get this balance right consultation would be beneficial which could occur during the development of the regulations. . At the proposed fiveyear review of the selfidentification process, consideration could be given to whether the right balance has been achieved and if the third parties should be set in primary legislation or if ongoing flexibility is beneficial. There made be a need for ongoing flexibility if it is found that further classes of people become able to assess if a child or young person understands the decision as society changes and people become more familiar with gender diversity. What stakeholders might think . Transgender and intersex New Zealanders and the organisations that support them will largely be supportive of the selfidentification process described. Some may prefer not recording sex or gender on birth certificates, however this option has been ruled out of scope. . It is assumed that transgender and intersex New Zealanders will be pleased that a range of nonbinary markers will be prescribed in regulations. This is based on the results of the Counting Ourselves survey, which found that the primary reason for having the incorrect gender identity on birth certificates was because existing options did not fit the respondents gender. Depending on the number and terminology of markers prescribed in regulations, some people may be disappointed at the markers available. Consultation in developing the markers will mitigate this to some extent. . Conversely, groups opposed to selfidentification will not be supportive of the change and may reiterate concerns about its impact on protections for women and womens rights. These concerns are low risk if they exist at all. As stated above, a birth certificate is not considered conclusive evidence of someones sex or gender and is not required to access womenonly spaces, such as changing rooms or refuges. Gender is already represented on passports via a selfidentification process without evidence of this being abused. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Regulatory Impact Statement the public will continue to rely on councils as the main source of natural hazard information and not pay for independent risk assessments by consultants in general, the New Zealand public relies upon councils for property information and are not accustomed to commissioning independent reports (outside of building inspections) to inform property purchasing decisions. What objectives are sought in relation to the policy problem . The policy objective is an improved LIM system that provides key natural hazard information in a clear and consistent manner, to support purchasers understanding of natural hazard risks and help them make informed property decisions.
Regulatory Impact Statement B: Transitional changes for councils . This section deals with requirements for the councils that resolved to establish Mori wards without a poll following the changes , to hold a poll as soon as reasonably practicable. What criteria will be used to compare options to the status quo . The criteria used to assess the options are to ask whether the policy : supports adequate public input into decisions about local representation; facilitates Mori representation in local government; consistency of the poll processes with long term changes; support s stability of representation arrangements ; minimise s fiscal andor compliance costs ; or preserves the integrity of the representation review process . . There is some tension between these criteria and the Governments objectives . Options that support the Governments objectives of ensuring binding polls are a public option for the establishment of any Mori wards are not necessarily consistent with the criteria of representation stability, facilitating increased Mori representation in local government , and minimising fiscal costs. This is not to say that mitigation cannot take place to minimise the impact of options considered against these criteria. . Conversely, there is congruence between the Governments objective and how an option allows for public input. The Governments objective is to increase public input on Mori wards decisions and therefore any option that meets the Governments objectives should increase public input. Supporting adequate public input into decisions about local representation . The council representation review process considers a much wider range of issues than just Mori wards. It also looks at the number of councillors, wards , and boundaries, whether some councillors should be elected at large (by all electors) and whether there should be community boards. It is very important that there is a robust process for community input and proper consideration of community views as part of the representation review process. . The options we have analysed allow electors to have direct influence on resolutions to establish Mori wards made since through a binding poll. We have not considered options to allow electors from councils who resolved not to establish Mori wards to have direct influence. Councils that resolved not to establish Mori wards since will not be subject to binding polls. Facilitating Mori representation in local government . Transitional changes for the councils that have established Mori wards since will likely have a significant impact on Mori representation arrangements across local government. Statistics from the period of to suggest it is likely that the majority of transitional polls will result in the disestablishment of Mori wards established since . . Lower Mori representation in the short term impacts councils by removing a voice of minority representation in council discussions and removes a mechanism to support councils in providing opportunities for Mori to contribute to local government decision making. There are structures that can replace these opportunities but Mori wards are a useful mechanism for the councils that resolved to establish them since . Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Regulatory Impact Statement Section : Deciding upon an option to address the policy problem What criteria will be used to compare options to the status quo . Assessment criteria have been identified based on the policy problem and objectives set out above. Criteria Explanation Fitfor purpose Does the option provide potential property buyers with natural hazard information that: o supports buyers to understand natural hazards related to a property and make good decisions o is broadly consistent in presentation and approach across local authorities Efficiency Is the option administratively efficient Is it technically feasible How long and how much would it cost to implement Does it provide certainty to local authorities on the information they need to share Does it address potential legal liability and associated legal costs Does it lower the barriers for local authorities to share information Accessibility Does the option improve the LIM as a onestopshop for the key natural hazard information for property buyers Note: this criterion was important for the assessment of potential options to improve natural hazard content, communication and accessibility in LIMs. But was not considered relevant to the assessment of options to reduce the negative impact of potential legal actions on councils sharing natural hazard information in the LIM. Futureproof Will the option be compatible with new natural hazard data and information and information sharing tools as they become available Will it work for developments in the property market and future user needs Access to justice Will the option unreasonably limit or remove the ability of a property owner to complain or take legal action for natural hazard information disclosed in a LIM Note: this criterion is only considered relevant to the assessment of options reduce the negative impact of potential legal actions on councils sharing natural hazard information in the LIM. The options considered to improve natural hazard content, communication and accessibility do not limit access to justice. What scope will options be considered within . The scope of the options considered has been limited by the following: In April , Cabinet invited a report back, by September , on legislative and nonlegislative options for substantive changes to the LIM system to achieve more active disclosure of natural hazard risk DEVMIN. This specifically included investigating options to:
Regulatory Impact Statement
Regulatory Impact Statement Consistency of the poll processes with long term changes . It is important that any changes to Mori ward s legislation are applied as evenly as possible in both the short and long term. The poll processes for councils that are subject to transitional arrangements should be as similar as possible to poll processes for councils that seek to establish a Mori ward under the rest ored legislation. Stability of representation arrangements . Under current legislation decisions to establish Mori wards are required to be in place for a minimum of two terms before they can be changed again. This is to give time for the changes to bed in, and it lines up with the requirement for councils to review their representation arrangements at least once every six years. . For councils that established Mori wards in the term beginning October , i f a poll is held in the intervening term, and the outcome is for a change, that will require the council to complete a representation review to implement the poll result. This would result in the Mori ward for the council being in place for only three years and therefore having no chance to bed in . This may also result in councils having to complete a representation review after three years instead of six years. Fiscal and compliance costs . Holding polls incurs a cost for councils (the costs associated with running the poll including postal costs, advertising and council staff time). The costs are significantly reduced if the poll is held at the same time as a district or region wide election. If the council is required to complete a representation review as a result of the poll, in a year where their representation review was not already due (i.e. an out ofcycle review), then this will incur additional costs for the council. . Other agencies also contribute staff time and resources to either the polls process andor the representation review process including the Local Government Commission, the Electoral Commission, Stat istics New Zealand, and Land Information New Zealand. Preserving the integrity of the representation review process . The representation review process and the role of the Local Government Commission would need to be truncated in order to meet timeframes for councils to hold a poll t hat will take effect at the elections. . The Local Government Commission has oversight over council representation proposals and make s final decisions if a council proposal is not compliant with the legislation, or appeals or objections have been made by the public following a councils final proposal.
Regulatory Impact Statement o ensure information on district plans and held by regional councils are included in LIMs o remove barriers and incentivise councils to communicate natural hazard risks to the public, including addressing legal risks for councils when disclosing information. To meet the report back deadline, we limited our engagement to a month and a half from late June to midAugust . The focus on the LIM system and purchasers meant we have not considered options to support communication of natural hazard information to other audiences, including existing property owners, renters and the general public. While there is an unmet need for specific information tools for iwi, hap and whanau about natural hazards affecting whenua Mori, this is also outside of the scope of the policy problem and options considered. Future work is proposed to consider options to better meet iwi, hap and whnau needs. Measures to improve the quality and coverage of natural hazards data and information across different regions, while important to the longterm usefulness of natural hazard information tools, fall outside of the scope directed by Cabinet. Time only allowed for targeted stakeholder engagement rather than full public consultation and hui with iwihap. As a result, Treaty partners and stakeholders may have raised additional options for improving the communication of natural hazards that have not been considered in this paper. We have included separate analysis of options to address legal liability issues for council in response to Cabinets directions and to enable consideration of distinct options that limit legal liability. The other aspects of the policy problem are addressed in the general consideration of options to improve natural hazard information content, communication and accessibility. What options are being considered . To address the problems identified with the current LIM system and achieve the identified objectives, we analysed options under two separate headings: improve natural hazard information content, communication and accessibility reduce the negative impact of potential legal actions on councils sharing natural hazard information in the LIM. . Options to improve natural hazard information content, communication and accessibility are intended to respond to the problems of inconsistent information and how understandable and accessible the information is for purchasers. . Options to reduce the negative impact of legal actions on councils sharing information were considered separately, given the specialised regulatory measures needed to limit liability. Table summarises the options considered:
Regulatory Impact Statement legislative change is needed to require the councils to conduct binding polls on Mori wards , and to enable councils to make changes to their representation arrangements outside the standard representation review cycle. . Under all of the proposed options for changes to the Mori wards process, the councils that resolved to establish Mori wards this term (without holding a poll), and have not yet implemented that decision, would be allowed to rescind that decision through a resolution. The Minister has also proposed that the councils that have already implemented Mori wards be allowed to resolve to dis establish their Mori ward by resolution. Tauranga City Council would also have the opportunity to disestablish its M ori ward in the term from to . Councils that do not disestablish or rescind a decision to establish Mori wards w ould have to conduct a binding poll. . We have not developed alternative options for the timing of the mandatory polls or variations on the poll process due to the time available and constraints on analysis necessary to align with c oalition agreements . What options are being considered Option One Status Quo Counterfactual . Under the status quo: of the councils that established Mori wards last term would proceed with their current representation arrangements for the local elections (unless they choose to do an out ofcycle representation review); Tauranga City Council would proceed with its current representation arrangements for its general election; and councils that resolved to establish Mori wards this term would proceed to compete their representation reviews, starting with publishing their initial proposal by August . Option Two the outcome of polls take effect at the local elections after a mandatory poll in late . Under this option, all councils who created or resolved to create a Mori ward without a poll have the opportunity to rescind their decision on creating Mori wards or resolve to disestablish their existing Mori wards. . All of the councils that chose not to rescind or disestablish their Mori wards would be required to conduct a binding poll on Mori wards by the end of . Polls take three months and would be held starting in August and would be completed by late November. If any councils have already issued an initial proposal for their representation review this would be invalidated. All councils where the poll result is negative would disestablish their Mori wards and need to complete a truncated representation review by the end of March . . The truncated representation review process removes the role of the Local Government Commission in determining councils final representation arrangements, and considering appeals and objections from the public if there are disagreements on the final proposal. The councils decision on representation arrangements would be final and members of the public will not be able to appeal their councils representation review to the Local Government Commission. . This will be mitigated to some extent by providing the Local Government Commission with specific powers to provide advice and guidance to councils during the truncated representation review period. We cannot guarantee that councils will make use of this guidance. This option removes a democratic safeguard to address the risk of elected members proposing arrangements that benefit themselves, and the guarantee that a neutral third party determines representation arrangements if there is a dispute. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Regulatory Impact Statement . It may be possible to offer councils a legislated alternative to the truncated representation review in the case where the poll result reverses previous council resolutions to establish Mori wards , which is to allow councils to either: continue with their existing representation arrangements if they have not previously established Mori wards; or roll back to their most recent representation arrangements, prior to establishing Mori wards. . This possible alternative is still under development. It is unlikely to suit some councils that have had large shifts in population growth but may be preferable for councils with a relatively stable population. . The councils that have recently resolved to establish Mori wards may have already started early engagement on their representation review process. Any of the councils where the poll results in a yes result will need to follow the truncated representation process. We are assum ing that the early engagement these councils have undertaken will assist in completing truncated representation reviews. . Councils that complete a truncated representation review will be required to complete a full representation review before the next triennial election. For some councils, this may mean reviewing their representation arrangements three terms in a row, instead of the standard once every six years. . Because Taurangas local elections are scheduled for July , before this option could be implemented, Tauranga City Council would only be required to conduct a binding poll in time for the outcome to apply to the local elections . Option Three the outcome of polls take effect at the local elections following a petitions process in late and polls in early ; . As with Option Two, all councils who created or resolved to create a Mori ward without a poll have the opportunity to rescind their decision on creating Mori wards or resolve to disestablish their existing Mori wards. . Under this option, electors of any of the councils that did not resolve to rescind or disestablish would have an opportunity to petition their council s in late to hold a binding poll on Mori wards in early . . A valid petition under this option would need to be signed by at least of council electors. Valid petitions would need to be received by councils by September and any polls completed by February . After the results of any polls are received, councils would not have time to undertake a representation review. Instead, councils would make a resolution on their representation arrangements , which would remove: the public submissions process; and the Local Government Commission appeals process. . This option has tight timeframes for the petitions process, polls, and representation arrangement decisions. Community input into representation decisions , except the Mori wards establishment decision, would be entirely removed. The risks of removing the Local Government Commission appeals process and the mitigations as described under Option Two apply to Option Three. However, there would be a very short window for the Commission to work with all affected counc ils. . Councils that issue their own representation arrangement will be required to complete a full representation review before the next triennial election. For some councils, this may mean reviewing their representation arrangements three terms in a row, instead of the standard once every six years. . Where the result of a poll reverses council resolutions to establish Mori wards, the options for councils described in paragraph under Option Two would also available Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Regulatory Impact Statement or additional explanations due to the risks of legal action by property owners. This can make it more challenging for the public to identify and understand natural hazard information, including how it relates to a specific property. . The information included in LIMs will keep evolving as significant new regional and national level data and information is developed over the next five to ten years. However, without clear guidance on what should be included in LIMs there is a risk that key information may be missed, or territorial authorities may be less able to effectively incorporate and explain this new information to assist purchaser understanding. Stakeholder views . The majority of stakeholders consider the current LIM system does not provide sufficient certainty and guidance about what natural hazard information should be included in LIMs, particularly as new data and information becomes available. . Local government sector representatives consider inconsistency issues in LIM natural hazard information result from discrepancies in data capabilities across councils and different levels for communication at the regional level. Differences between local and regional council capabilities can mean LIMs lack key natural hazard information available outside the territorial authoritys own sources. Option B Amend LGOIMA and introduce national direction . This option would amend LGOIMA to: require broader information in LIMs and provide for national direction to clearly specify natural hazard information to be included in LIMs and give regional councils statutory responsibility for providing natural hazard information to territorial authorities to include in the LIM. Key features: requiring regional councils to provide natural hazard information for LIMs . This option would give regional councils statutory responsibility under LGOIMA to provide natural hazard information (potentially including interpretation and explanations) for inclusion in the LIMs to territorial authorities. Regional councils could update natural hazard information for LIMs on a periodic basis, as data and information are , rather than being an obligation to provide specific information for each LIM request. Territorial authorities would still be required to include specific natural hazard information held at a district level. . This option would better align the LIM obligations under LGOIMA with the shared responsibilities of regional councils and territorial authorities for natural hazard management under the RMA, as well as reflecting that regional councils hold significant natural hazard information. This option could better align with proposals for RM reform that take a more regionalised approach to planning, particularly proposed regional spatial strategies under the Strategic Planning Act. Key features: broader information requirements and national direction for LIMs . LGOIMA would be amended to clearly specify the purpose of providing natural hazard information, broaden the information requirements and enable national direction on LIMs to be developed to set requirements about the type, source and format of natural hazard information included in LIMs. . A broader information requirement would also be introduced through a combination of statutory amendment and national direction. This could include:
Regulatory Impact Statement
Regulatory Impact Statement under this option. Likewise, the implications of a poll described in paragraph apply under this option. . Because Taurangas local elections are scheduled for July , before this option could be implemented , Tauranga City Council would be required to accept petitions in time for a binding poll to be held before the local elections. Option Four the outcome of polls take effect at the local elections after a mandatory poll at the local elections . As with Option Two, all councils who created or resolved to create a Mori ward without a poll have the opportunity to rescind their decision on creating Mori wards or resolve to disestablish their existing Mori wards. . Under this option, councils who did not choose the rescind or disestablish options will be required to hold a binding poll on Mori wards at the local elections. . If the outcome of the binding poll requires a representation review , this will be completed in time for the result of the poll to be implemented at the local elections using the standard representation review process and timeframes. For some councils, these representation reviews would be outside their six yearly cycle. . Because Taurangas local elections are scheduled for July , before this option could be implemented , Tauranga City Council would be required to hold a binding poll before the local elections , the outcome of which would also take effect at the local elections. Option Five the outcome of polls take effect at the local elections following a petitions process in early and polls at the local elections . As with Option Two, all councils who created or resolved to create a Mori ward without a poll have the opportunity to rescind their decision on creating Mori wards or resolve to disestablish their existing Mori wards. . Under this option, electors of any of the councils that did not resolve to rescind or disestablish would have an opportunity to petition their councils in early to hold a binding poll on Mori wards at the local elections. . A valid petition under this option would need to be signed by at least of council electors and delivered to councils by early August . . If the outcome of the binding poll requires a representation review , this will be completed in time for the result of the binding poll to be implemented at the local elections using the standard representation review process and timeframes. For some councils, these representation reviews would be outside their six yearly cycle. . Because Taurangas local elections are scheduled for July before this option could be implemented , Tauranga City Council would be required to accept petitions in time for a binding poll to be held before the local elections.
Regulatory Impact Statement district plan information (or information held in a similar planning document proposed under the Resource Management (RM) reforms) regional council information (e.g. regional plans and regional planning statements or their equivalents under the RM reforms hazard mappingreports etc) specific information held by national government agencies (e.g. EQC, MfE, FENZ, NEMA). . LGOIMA would be amended to provide a regulation making power to prescribe national direction for LIMs (similar to national environmental standards under the RMA). Provisions would also be introduced to make the preparation of national direction for LIMs mandatory and to prescribe a process for its development and consultation. . In practice, the preparation of national direction (which is a form of regulation) would likely involve Department officials working with a technical expert panel, including local government sector representatives, to draft standards for the content and presentation of national hazard information. This would be consulted on with the public before Cabinet approval and drafting by the Parliamentary Counsel Office. . National direction would likely provide: requirements to include data and information for key natural hazards requirements to incorporate or reference natural hazard information contained in district and regional planning instruments, information held by national government agencies (e.g. EQC, MfE, Fire and Emergency New Zealand, NEMA) and regional and national hazard portals principles and criteria for assessing whether and when natural hazard information should be included in a LIM requirements for communicating natural hazard information appropriate explanations of hazard and risk, visuals and mapping, discussion of assumptions and data certainty requirements for regional councils to provide information to territorial authorities for the natural hazard section of LIMs clear definitions of key terms (e.g. types of natural hazard). . To support council implementation of national direction, the Department would develop guidance in conjunction with local government, including best practice examples. Analysis . Statutory national direction would help ensure that LIMs include more consistent and comprehensive natural hazard information, and clearly communicate this information in a way that better supports purchaser property decisions. . National direction would also provide councils with greater certainty about the requirements for providing natural hazard information on LIMs. There would be improved consistency across councils when determining what natural hazard information is included in LIMs and how it should be presented, and less chance of key natural hazard information being missed. Clear regulatory direction about LIM content may also help to reduce the potential for legal action by property owners. . Requirements to incorporate natural hazard information from district and regional planning instruments and national sources would improve accessibility for purchasers
Regulatory Impact Statement How do the options compare to the Status QuoCounterfactual Criteria Option One Status Quo Option Two The outcome of polls take effect at the local elections after a mandatory poll in late Option Three The outcome of polls take effect at the local elections following a petitions process in late and polls in early Option Four The outcome of polls take effect at the local elections after a mandatory poll at the local elections; and Option Five the outcome of polls take effect at the local elections following a petitions process in early and polls at the local elections. Public input Does the option support adequate public participation Only councils would be required to undertake a representation review to incorporate the Mori ward into their representation arrangements for the elections. For these councils the community would have the standard opportunities to participate, incl uding the right of appeal to the Local Government Commission . Electors would have direct influence on the Mori wards decision via the mandatory polls. Significant changes may be made to the representation arrangements for up to councils with limited opportunity for public consultation and no right of appeal to the Local Government Commission. Public input into their changing council representation arrangements is reduced at the expense of voting on the existence of a Mori ward. Electors would have the option to directly influence Mori wards decisions if a petition is submitted for a binding poll. There is no opportunity for public consultation on representation arrangements under this option, as well as no right of appeal to the Local Government Commission. Public input into changing council representation arrangements is effectively removed under this option. Council rescind or disestablish decisions Electors would have direct influence on the Mori wards decision via the mandatory polls. Councils would have the time to complete a full representation review before the local elections regardless of poll outcome. Council rescind or disestablish decisions would not allow for community consultation. Electors would have the option to directly influence Mori wards decisions if a petition is submitted for a binding poll. Councils would have the time to complete a full representation review before the local elections regardless of poll outcome. Council rescind or disestablish decisions would not allow for community consultation. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Regulatory Impact Statement and support the LIM as a onestopshop for property information. However, inclusion of additional information will need to be balanced with the potential for LIMs to become lengthier and more expensive. This could be mitigated by guidance to ensure LIMs helpfully summarise natural hazard information, use a consistent format, and highlight key information. . National direction may provide less flexibility than nonstatutory national guidance for regional differences (e.g. regions impacted by specific hazards or with less data and information). Regulations would be harder to amend than nonstatutory national guidance and would need to be carefully drafted to ensure LIMs reflect the latest data and information. . A key risk of this option is that it may not be properly implemented by councils due to costs, a lack of supporting natural hazard data, and limited capability and capacity, particularly given other reform demands (e.g. RM and Three Waters reforms). This risk could be mitigated by ongoing monitoring by the Department and the Ombudsman, and communications with councils to ensure they have sufficient resourcing and are on track with implementation. . While territorial authorities will continue to provide the natural hazard information they hold, they will need to update current LIM systems to reflect new requirements. To give effect to their new statutory responsibility, regional councils would require additional resourcing to ensure natural hazard information is , appropriate interpretation and explanations are drafted, and information is regularly provided to territorial authorities in a compatible format. Regional councils would also be potentially liable if the natural hazard information they provide is inaccurate or does not include relevant information. . Territorial authority costs may reduce given greater support from regional councils and reduced need for legal advice when new natural hazard information is included on LIMs. . There is a risk that territorial authorities and regional councils could disagree on how to share and coordinate the provision of natural hazard information, as well as the nature and extent of natural hazard information included on the LIM. Careful consideration will need to be given to whether regional councils can recover their costs for providing natural hazards through the LIM fee and how this would be collected and transferred. . There is a risk that these changes could result in increased LIM costs for purchasers, which could negatively impact accessibility. If significant increases result, future consideration may need to be given to a maximum LIM fee or alternative funding sources. . These risks could be mitigated through: working closely with local government, LGNZ and Taituar to ensure that LIM requirements under national direction can be delivered efficiently in practice and are properly costed, including potential implications for information sharing, LIM fees and usability developing guidance in partnership with local government to support the implementation of national direction, including best practice examples and methodologies for sharing natural hazard information across councils
Regulatory Impact Statement Council rescind or disestablish decisions would not allow for community consultation. would not allow for community consultation. Facilitating Mori representation Does the option facilitate Mori representation in local government counc i ls could proceed with their decisions, following local consultation, to establish specific Mori representation. Evidence from the period of to indicates it is likely that most of the Mori wards established since the legislative amendment will be disestablished by a binding poll. Council rescind or disestablish decisions may reduce Mori representation in order to reduce costs. A requirement for a petition creates a barrier to holding binding polls that may make it less likely that all affected councils would be subject to poll processes. Evidence from the period indicates it is likely that most of the Mori wards established since the legislative amendment will be disestablished by a binding poll. Council rescind or disestablish decisions may reduce Mori representation in order to reduce costs. Evidence from the period indicates it is likely that most of the Mori wards established since the legislative amendment will be disestablished by a binding poll. Council rescind or disestablish decisions may reduce Mori representation in order to reduce costs. A requirement for a petition creates a barrier to holding binding polls that may make it less likely that all affected councils would be subject to poll processes. Evidence from the period indicates it is likely that most of the Mori wards established since the legislative amendment will be disestablished by a binding poll. Council rescind or disestablish decisions may reduce Mori representation in order to reduce costs. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Regulatory Impact Statement ensuring that an appropriate transition period is included in LGOIMA to provide sufficient time for councils to establish new systems and processes. Stakeholder views . Most stakeholders support statutory amendments and national direction as it would clarify what natural hazard information needs to be included in LIMs, would provide greater certainty for councils and would help ensure compliance by all councils. None of the stakeholders we engaged with opposed statutory clarification of the requirements to disclose natural hazard information. . A requirement to include relevant district plan, regional council and national level natural hazard data and information would improve the LIMs value as a onestopshop for property information, provided it does not become overly long and difficult for lay people to understand. . Stakeholders consider that natural hazard portals being proposed by EQC complement an improved LIM providing a summary of natural hazards affecting a property and clearly directing purchasers to hazard portals for further information. . Many stakeholders support making regional councils statutorily responsible for providing natural hazard information to territorial authorities to incorporate in the LIM. This would help ensure all relevant regional information was incorporated in the LIM and help formalise existing information sharing between regional councils and territorial authorities. However, stakeholders consider that even if regional councils are given responsibilities, territorial authorities should still be required to include natural hazard information known to them. . Local government stakeholders we engaged with are generally supportive of regional councils being responsible for providing natural hazard information they hold to territorial authorities. This would have cobenefits for other territorial functions, like infrastructure design and maintenance, and RMA functions. However, regional councils would have a duty of care over the information provided and the LIM would need to clearly identify information sourced from regional councils, so that any queries or objections could be directed to them. The practicalities of regional councils providing information updates on a regular basis and integrating this information with different systems would also need to be worked through carefully as part of implementation. . While the Department engaged with Taituar, LGNZ and representatives from territorial authorities and regional councils, this option was not tested with local authorities more broadly. If this option is advanced, the Department is seeking Cabinet approval to carry out additional consultation with local government, particularly regional councils, on the operation and implementation of the package of changes to the LIM system. Option C Nonstatutory guidance and regional council support for territorial authorities . This option would involve the preparation of nonstatutory guidance and facilitation of greater regional council support for territorial authorities to provide more consistent and helpful natural hazard information in LIMs. Key features: nonstatutory guidance . The Department, in partnership with the local government sector, develops best practice guidance on LIM content and format for territorial authorities. This could be prepared with the assistance of a panel of experts including scientists, planners, ()(f)(iv)
Regulatory Impact Statement Limitations and Constraints on Analysis Limitations affecting analysis of the long term changes to the process for establishing Mori wards Reinstating the requirement for a binding poll will need to be assessed for consistency with the right to freedom from discrimination that is affirmed in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act . When the binding poll provisions for Mori wards were added to the Local Electoral Act, the legislation was not determined to be a breach of this Act by the Attorney General. The focus of the Attorney Generals comments in this report w as on Mori wards generally rather than their specific implementation. However, statistics since then show that binding polls have acted as a barrier to the establishment of Mori wards. There is no such barrier to establishment in place for new general wards.
Regulatory Impact Statement Consistency of the poll processes with long term change Does the option support consistency of transitional poll processes with poll processes held under the restored legislation longterm Trans i tional polls would not be held. Councils would not be required to hold polls in the short or long term. Council s would be required to hold polls without a petition being required.
Regulatory Impact Statement lawyers, geographic information system (GIS) experts, and natural hazard practitioners within local authorities. The guidance would be similar to other central government non statutory guidance for local government (e.g. MfEs guidance on coastal hazards and climate change guidance). . The guidance could provide similar content to national direction discussed above, as well as including: principles for sharing data and information between national agencies, regional councils and territorial authorities advice on undertaking natural hazard modelling best practice examples and templates. Key features: regional council support for territorial authorities . As a supplement to guidance, the Department would help facilitate greater coordination, improved information sharing and natural hazard advice from national agencies and regional councils to territorial authorities. Territorial authorities would retain statutory responsibility for delivering natural hazard information in LIMs. . Regional councils could better support territorial authorities by: improving and formalising flows of natural hazard information from national agencies (including governmentfunded scienceresearch programmes) and regional councils to territorial authorities providing explanationsinterpretationsummaries of natural hazards data and information (including reports). . The Department could support regional councils by promoting regional council best practice for communicating natural hazard information to the public. Analysis . National guidance, even nonstatutory in nature, would encourage territorial authorities to take a consistent approach to the content, communication and format of natural hazard information contained in LIMs. This could better support purchaser decision making by making natural hazard content more consistent and accessible. Guidance would also be easier to update regularly than statutory national direction to reflect developments in hazard data and information, and technology. . Overall, this option would be relatively low cost to implement within a short timeframe and would be flexible to future change. Regional councils currently share natural hazard information (to varying degrees) and this would be aligned with their existing natural hazard risk management role. Additional resourcing would be required to support greater interpretation and explanation of information for LIMs and for regional councils to provide additional technical hazard support to territorial authorities. . While national guidance and facilitation of greater regional council support for territorial authorities has the potential to improve the consistency and quality of natural hazard information in LIMs across councils, it would provide less certainty than clear statutory
Regulatory Impact Statement requirements and councils would not be legally required to change their LIM systems. There is a risk that implementation may be uneven across the country depending on council priorities. Stakeholder views . While most stakeholders support the development of guidance to encourage greater certainty about what natural hazard information should be included in the LIM, many consider that nonregulatory guidance would not be sufficient to achieve greater consistency across council LIMs. . Stakeholders were positive about regional councils providing greater support for territorial authorities, particularly if more interpretation and explanation of natural hazard information is needed in LIMs to aid purchaser understanding. Support could include technical training and guidance on natural hazards for territorial authority staff. Some stakeholders consider that regional councils will be less likely to prioritise this work if voluntary, given competing demands on their resources.
Regulatory Impact Statement ward, or disestablish a current Mori ward, without public input are also likely to be highly disruptive to representation arrangements. Councils will be required to complete another representation review in the following term to ensure compliance with legislative requirements. general wards that were recently established) . The option to rescind decisions to create a Mori ward, or disestablish a current Mori ward, without public input are also likely to be highly disruptive to representation arrangements. Councils will be required to complete another representation review in the following term to ensure compliance with legislative requirements. representation arrangements.
Regulatory Impact Statement There will also be additional costs for government agencies to support these processes. These are not yet funded but agencies have expressed concerns about their ability to meet costs from baseline. Councils may find it challenging to manage a poll and a representation review process before election processes begin. Councils will be required to complete another representation review in the following term, which will present additional costs. The inclusion of the opportunity to rescind decisions about Mori wards or disestablish existing Mori wards would save councils the cost of holding a poll, should they take the opportunity. than holding a standalone poll. If a petition is received, up to councils would be required to fund standalone polls, and in some cases an out of cycle representation review process. The inclusion of the petition process means councils will only be required to absorb the costs of a standalone poll if a petition is received. The inclusion of the opportunity to rescind decisions about Mori wards or disestablish existing Mori wards would save councils the cost of holding a poll, should they take the opportunity. There will also be additional costs for government agencies to support these processes . These are not yet funded but agencies have expressed concerns wards or disestablish existing Mori wards would save councils the cost of holding a poll, should they take the opportunity. than holding a standalone poll. The inclusion of the petition process means councils will only be required to absorb any costs of a poll if a petition is received. In some cases, councils will have to hold an out ofcycle representation review process. The inclusion of the opportunity to rescind decisions about Mori wards or disestablish existing Mori wards would save councils the cost of holding a poll, should they take the opportunity. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Regulatory Impact Statement What other options have been ruled out of scope, or not considered, and why Provision of a separate regional council LIM . Under this option, purchasers could apply for a separate regional council LIM which would include regionally held natural hazard information (and other relevant property information such as regional consents). Some stakeholders considered this would provide greater clarity about the division between territorial authority and regional council roles and responsibilities for providing natural hazard information and addressing any complaints about this information. . This option was not considered as it would significantly worsen accessibility by requiring purchasers to obtain two separate LIMs and would not address current inconsistencies or improve natural hazard information flows between regional councils and territorial authorities. This would also be contrary to a consumercentred approach, as property purchasers are not concerned about which local authority provides natural hazard information. Conclusion . As indicated in the analysis table above, the preferred option for improving natural hazard information content and communication in the LIM system is option B: amend LGOIMA and introduce national direction. . This option would meet all assessment criteria better or much better than the status quo and option C. It would help ensure greater consistency and reduce the potential for missing key natural hazard information in LIMs compared to the current system. . The key benefit of option B over option C is the higher level of certainty national direction would provide to councils than nonstatutory guidance. This would result in more consistent, complete and user friendly natural hazard information in LIMs to help inform purchaser decisions. . Option B would also formalise regional council responsibilities to provide natural hazard information to territorial authorities, encouraging improved information flows and sharing of technical expertise. Reducing the negative impact of potential legal actions on councils sharing natural hazard information in the LIM Option A Status quo Key features . As set out above, currently property owners can bring legal actions against territorial authorities for negligence and breach of statutory duty where councils provide inaccurate information or fail to communicate known information in a LIM. They can seek damages for economic loss from the council as a consequence of this negligence. Property owners (and others) can also apply to the courts for judicial review of a councils decision to include natural hazard information on a LIM. Analysis . While property owners have had limited success in taking legal action against councils for disclosure of natural hazard information on LIMs, there is evidence that councils may be reluctant to provide additional information, summaries or explanations of natural hazards due to concerns over liability. This can negatively impact the clear
Regulatory Impact Statement about their ability to meet costs from baseline. Councils may find it challenging to manage a poll process and determine their own representation arrangements before election processes begin. The removal of public consultation requirements when determining representation arrangements is likely to save councils some money on consultation and engagement . Councils will be required to complete another representation review in the following term, which will present additional costs. Integrity of representation review process Does the option preserve the integrity of the representation The councils that have not yet established Mori wards would follow the standard The truncated representation review process removes the Local Government Commissions role in hearing appeals and This option removes public consultation on councils representation arrangements entirely, as well as removing the Representation reviews would proceed using the standard process before the local elections. Representation reviews would proceed using the standard process before the local elections. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Regulatory Impact Statement communication of natural hazard information and pose a barrier to realising potential benefits of LIMs in enhancing purchaser understanding of natural hazards and their potential impact on affected properties. . However, potential legal action can in some instances provide an incentive to ensure that information included on LIMs is accurate. Stakeholder views . Most stakeholders consider that potential legal liability is a concern for councils and can impact the extent of natural hazard information they include in LIMs. Stakeholders consider that the current LGOIMA provisions are ambiguous and do not provide sufficient certainty to enable councils to make confident decisions about what information to include. Option B Statutory clarification of natural hazards information disclosed in a LIM (regulatory) Key features . This option would involve clarifying the type of natural hazards information councils are required to disclose under LGOIMA. This could be provided directly in LGOIMA provisions or in national direction as set out in option B above. While this option overlaps with option B, we consider that specific analysis of whether statutory clarification could reduce the negative impact of potential legal actions is merited. . This could help reduce potential legal actions by specifying: the types of natural hazards that should be considered when preparing a LIM the types of natural hazard information that should be disclosed, including explanation or interpretation of data and information provided when this information is known to a council and should be disclosed (e.g. at what stages during hazard modelling work) the meaning of potential and enabling a precautionary approach to disclosing natural hazard information where there is uncertainty (e.g. different climate change scenarios). Analysis . Greater legislative clarity and specificity could help encourage councils to include natural hazards information on LIMs where information is less certain and support further explanation of hazard information for the public. . This option has the potential to reduce the risk of legal action compared to the status quo as it would provide a clear justification for including natural hazard information on LIMs and reduce the scope of council discretion over whether to include natural hazard information in LIMs. . Without a specific limitation on liability for councils, property owners would still be able to take legal action against councils. As a result, councils may continue to incur costs for detailed legal review of LIMs and potential litigation. Stakeholder views . Nearly all stakeholders supported amending LGOIMA to provide greater certainty for councils when deciding what natural hazard information should be included in the LIM. Local government sector representatives consider that current LIM requirements create
Regulatory Impact Statement review process representation review process, including the right of appeal to the Local Government Commission. Councils with established Mori wards would not require another representation review so would not need to deal with a truncated representation review process . objections from the public. This removes a democratic safeguard to address the risk of elected members proposing arrangements that benefit themselves. This would also remove the guarantee that a neutral third party determines compliance with Local Electoral Act requirements for fair and effective representation. There is a risk that councils will not be able to complete their representation review in time or will be inconsistent with the legislation. The Local Government Commission would be granted specific powers to provide advice and guidance to councils as they work through the truncated representation review process. Allowing councils to vote to rescind a previous resolution about Mori wards or disestablish an existing Mori ward without consultation on role of the Local Government Commission in hearing appeals and objections from the public. While the Local Government Commission would be granted specific powers to provide advice and guidance to councils, there would be an extremely short timeframe to do so for a large number of councils. There is a risk that councils self determined representation arrangements will be inconsistent with legislation. Allowing councils to vote to rescind a previous resolution about Mori wards or disestablish an existing Mori ward without consultation on representation arrangements is inconsistent with the representation review process. Allowing councils to vote to rescind a previous resolution about Mori wards or disestablish an existing Mori ward without consultation on representation arrangements is inconsistent with the representation review process. Allowing councils to vote to rescind a previous resolution about Mori wards or disestablish an existing Mori ward without consultation on representation arrangements is inconsistent with the representation review process. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Regulatory Impact Statement potential legal issues as they are uncertain and leave too much discretion to councils about what information to include. A legal expert considers that the number of legal actions being taken against councils is likely to increase as the impacts of climate change on properties become more significant. Option C Limit all council liability for providing natural hazard information in the LIM Key features . In this option either property owners would be unable to bring a claim of negligence or breach of statutory duty against a council, or council would have a good defence, for both including inaccurate information or failing to include known natural hazards information in a LIM. However, this would not prevent a person seeking judicial review of the councils decision to include or not include information on a LIM. . In practice, this would: extend to LIMs the current liability protections for councils providing official information under section of LGOIMA, or introduce a natural hazardspecific limitation of council liability clarify that this covers omissions or failures to include information as well as when providing information be subject to the requirement that the information was provided or not provided in good faith, to ensure that liability is preserved where information is withheld for an ulterior purpose. . Council liability is limited in other legislation, for example the Building Act (no civil proceedings for anything done in good faith in reliance on certain documents) and the Health Act (protection of health officers from civil liability for acting or failing to act unless in bad faith or without reasonable cause). In New South Wales councils are not liable for any advice provided in good faith about the likelihood, nature or extent of any natural hazard. . If section was extended to LIMs and expanded to include omissions, purchasers would be able to bring an action in negligence or breach of statutory duty, but the council would have an affirmative defence provided the information was disclosednot disclosed in good faith (in line with the High Courts interpretation of a comparable provision in the Official Information Act ). Another option would be to include a separate liability provision that limited liability for disclosure of natural hazards. This could act as either a good faith defence for council or more specifically limit the ability of a property owner to bring a claim.
Regulatory Impact Statement representation arrangements is inconsistent with the representation review process. Overall assessment Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Regulatory Impact Statement . This would mean that, in most circumstances, property owners would not be compensated for council failure to include natural hazard information that affected the value of the property they purchased. Property owners would also not receive compensation if their properties were devalued due to natural hazard information being included on LIMs without proper analysis. An application for judicial review of a councils decision to include natural hazard information on a LIM would be maintained and complaints could be made to the Ombudsman under the Ombudsmen Act . Analysis . This option could encourage councils to include natural hazards information on LIMs where information is less certain, such as hazards based on future climate change scenarios, and provide greater explanation or interpretation of hazard information. This would support the public interest by encouraging full disclosure of natural hazard information as part of consumer protection for real estate purchasers. Councils may reduce spending on legal advice before including natural hazards information in LIMs and litigation costs in event of legal action. . There is a risk that limiting liability would provide a disincentive for council officers to carefully consider whether natural hazard information should be included on a LIM. This could mean that either the council does not include information and a property owner suffers a loss because the risks were higher than realised, or the council includes information unnecessarily, impacting the property value. However, officers would still need to comply with the principle that information should be made available under LGOIMA and could be subject to an Ombudsman complaints process. Clearer guidance or direction on what natural hazard information should be included could also reduce the risk of omitting important information. Stakeholder views . Most stakeholders, including local government representatives, were opposed to limiting council liability for failing to include required natural hazard information on a LIM. They considered that purchasers should be able to seek compensation if they have suffered loss due to such a failure. . A legal expert suggested that, as a substitute for legal action, a LIM dispute resolution process could be established to enable property owners to contest information included on a LIM. However, local government sector representatives were concerned that this would defeat the purpose of limiting liability as a back door process could lead to greater pressure to remove natural hazard information from LIMs. The existing Ombudsman complaints process would remain. Option D Council liability limited when providing natural hazard information in good faith Key features . This option is similar to option C, but liability would only be limited for actions claiming the council has provided inaccurate natural hazard information in LIMs. . This limitation of liability would not extend to a councils failure to include natural hazard information in a LIM that caused loss and a person could still apply for judicial review of the councils decision to include information on a LIM. . Property owners could not succeed in obtaining compensation from a council for including inaccurate information in good faith on the LIM that reduced their propertys
Regulatory Impact Statement What optio n is likely to best address the problem, meet the policy objectives, and deliver the highest net benefits . The status quo is the Departments preferred option, but it does not align with the Governments preferred balance of public input in representation arrangements and Mori representation in local government. . Evidence from the period of to shows all options for change may result in Mori wards being disestablished for a number of councils where these decisions were only recently made, and where there has been limited time for electors of affected councils to assess the advantages and disadvantages . . There are also risk s that councils and government agencies will find it challenging to deliver both polls and update representation arrangements before pre election processes start in April . This may pose risks to the delivery of the local elections. This assessment is based on limited consultation, and we are not able to quantify the likelihood of this occurring. C onsultation with councils would allow evaluation of implementation risk s and mitigation. . The status quo would allow councils to proceed with existing arrangements or to implement recent decisions to establish Mori wards. Many of the councils would be required to complete their standard representation review in the next term. Truncating the representation review process reduces the opportunity for public input and removes an important check and balance on councils configuring their own representation arrangements (the Local Government Commission appeals and objections function). . While t he Local Government Commission would be granted specific powers to provide advice and guidance to councils as they develop their proposals, this is not a substitute for their independent oversight function. Option Three, which removes both the Local Government Commissions role and the opportunity for the public to make submissions, allows councils to determine their own representation arrangements without any external input or oversight. . Although it is not the most important factor, the status quo option avoids up to councils needing to fund the cost of standalone polls, and the potential cost of unplanned representation reviews if required. . Including options for councils to either rescind a previous resolution to create a Mori ward, or disestablish a current Mori ward , may help councils to reduce their costs, but it risks councils making a decision about representation based on cost rather than what they consider to be effective representation for their communities. The option to disestablish an existing Mori ward means that sitting councillors may be required to decide on disestablishing positions that some councillors are preparing to run for. . The Minister of Local Government has indicated that the Governments preferred option is Option Two and the cost benefit analysis below, and Section of this analysis , consider s that option.
Regulatory Impact Statement What are the marginal costs and benefits of the option Affected groups Comment nature of cost or benefit (eg, ongoing, one off), evidence and assumption ( eg, compliance rates), risks . Impact m present value where appropriate, for monetised impacts; high, medium or low for nonmonetised impacts . Evidence Certainty High, medium, or low, and explain reasoning in comment column. Additional costs of the preferred option compared to taking no action Regulated groups Local authorities additional costs for councils that may need to hold a binding poll in , and if an unplanned representation review is required . Costs vary between councils based on size and are estimates only. We have provided some figures for a council with an electoral population of around ,. Councils may choose to reverse their Mori wards decisions instead of conducting a poll. We do not yet have information about whether councils would wish to take up this option. Medium . Costs of a poll are estimated at around ,. Potential costs of a representation review are estimated to range from , to ,. Councils may choose to reverse their Mori wards decisions instead of conducting a poll. Medium Regulators NA Other s (e.g., w ider gov t, consumers , etc. ) Electoral Commission , Stats NZ, Local Government Commission, Land Information New Zealand additional staffing resource to support polls and representation reviews , and complete required pre election processes . Medium . While limited costing work has taken place, estimated costs for the Electoral Commission are around ,. We do not yet have information on costs to other agencies. Medium Mori Likely loss of representation on local government; potential loss of trust in central and local government . Medium Medium Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Regulatory Impact Statement value (although judicial review would still be available). Similar to option C, property owners could still have recourse through the Ombudsman process. Analysis . Similar to option C, this option could encourage councils to include natural hazards information on LIMs where information is less certain and may reduce spending on legal advice before including natural hazards information in LIMs. Potential litigation costs would not be reduced as significantly as for option C, as there would not be a defence for a failure by a council to include relevant natural hazards information on a LIM, and an application could still be made for judicial review. . As discussed in option C, there is a risk that limiting liability would provide a disincentive for council officers to carefully consider whether natural hazard information should be included on a LIM. However, this option would maintain potential liability for failing to include natural hazards information on a LIM, which should encourage careful consideration of the information available. Officers would still need to comply with the principle that information should be made available under LGOIMA. Stakeholder views . Most stakeholders support limiting council liability where they include natural hazard information on a LIM in good faith. There is general support for maintaining liability where councils do not include known natural hazard information. Some stakeholders identified that this would maintain property owners ability to seek valid relief and support the objective of incentivising councils to provide more information.
Regulatory Impact Statement Public Requiring councils to hold up to polls on Mori wards at the same time is likely to cause social division and may lead to some level of racial disharmony across New Zealand. There is a potential threat to the local elections if councils are not able to complete these processes in time, but we have limited evidence on how likely this is . Removing the Local Government Commissions role in hearing appeals and objections severely limits the publics options if they disagree with local representation arrangements . Medium
Regulatory Impact Statement Section : Delivering an option How will the new arrangements be implemented . Amendments will need to be made to legislation to implement the changes. Changes need to be enacted by the end of July to give councils time to hold a binding poll in and complete representation reviews before the beginning of the pre election processes in April . . Responsibility for holding the polls and completing the representation reviews will sit with local authorities. Plans for communicating the changes to affected councils are yet to be developed. It is likely that councils will need to start preparations for polls in the expectation that the legislation is enacted as planned. It is also likely that, due to time constraints, councils may need to prepare representation review proposals for two scenarios (both possible poll outcomes ). . The Department has commenced discussions with the Electoral Commission, Stat istics New Zealand, and Land Information New Zealand about the possible impact of proposed changes in this analysis , and proposed changes to the timeframes for the local elections (discussed in a separate Regulatory Impact Statement). . The Local Government Commission will have a limited role for councils that are required or choose to undergo a truncated representation review process or issue their own representation arrangements. The Local Government Commi ssion will not hear appeals from the public during this process but will be given increased power to support councils to ensure requirements in the Local Electoral Act are met. How will the new arrangements be m onitored, evaluated, and r eview ed . The Department will receive direct feedback from local authorities and electoral officers and through peak sector bodies, Taituar Local Government Professionals Aotearoa , and Local Government New Zealand on the effectiveness of the amendment s. The Department will also monitor the outcomes of Mori ward polls , as well as continuing to monitor Mori representation statistics and the impact that the reintroduction of binding polls has on Mori representation in local governance. . By convention , the Justice Committee has undertaken an inquiry after each triennial local election in recent years. If this occurs again after the local elections , there will be an opportunity for submitters to comment on any impact of legislati ve changes on the next triennial elections.
Regulatory Impact Statement What other options have been ruled out of scope, or not considered, and why Restricting judicial review of council decisions about natural hazard information on LIMs . This option would limit the ability of any person to bring an application to the High Court for judicial review of the exercise of a statutory power of decision. The decision by a council to include natural hazards information on a LIM is a reviewable exercise of a statutory power under LGOIMA. . This option would prevent property owners from seeking judicial review of council decisions to include natural hazard information on LIMs that could reduce property prices, as seen in Weir v Kpiti Coast District Council . While a successful judicial review application will only result in a direction from the court to reconsider the decision at issue, councils face significant costs in defending a judicial review application and this may ultimately lead to the removal of natural hazard information from LIMs due to community pressure. . This option has not been assessed, as removing the ability to seek judicial review of government decisions (known as an ouster clause) would interfere with the courts constitutional role and may be inconsistent with the right to justice in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act . Alternative LIMs complaints process for property owners . Some stakeholders suggested that, as part of any option to limit council liability for providing natural hazard information on LIMs, an alternative LIMs complaint process should be introduced for property owners. This could involve a specific ombudsman review power or separate consideration by independent commissioners. . This option was not assessed as officials consider that the current complaints process under the Ombudsmen Act is sufficient. Property owners can currently complain to the Ombudsman who can recommend councils amend LIM notations and provide an ex gratia payment to the complainant in appropriate circumstances. Conclusion . As indicated in the analysis table above, the preferred option for reducing the negative impact of potential legal actions on councils sharing natural hazard information in the LIM is option D: Councils liability limited when providing natural hazard information in good faith . Officials also recommend option B: Statutory clarification of natural hazards information disclosed in a LIM . . Options B and D would meet all assessment criteria better or much better than the status quo. Option D would help reduce barriers to councils sharing additional natural hazard information and explanations to assist purchasers compared to the current system, and reduce legal advice and potential litigation costs for councils. Option B would also help create certainty for councils about what natural hazard information to include in LIMs and would complement statutory national direction in Option B.
Regulatory Impact Statement Departments ability to undertake consultation on introducing a selfidentification process or how this may best be given effect to has been limited. While a selfidentification process was not in the Bill as introduced, of the submissions received by the Select Committee commented on selfidentification. Twentytwo submissions opposed selfidentification and were in favour of retaining the Family Court process. Twentynine were in favour, and many of those expressed support for a third sex marker to recognise nonbinary genders. These submissions informed the development of the selfidentification provisions recommended by the Select Committee. Since , there has been considerable public debate on selfidentification through public events, material and letters to Ministers. This has informed our understanding of public views on this matter. Our analysis has also been informed by recent consultation and research, particularly: StatsNZs review of its statistical standards for sex and gender; Counting Ourselves , a survey of , transgender people in New Zealand; and Human Rights Commissions report, PRISM: Human Rights issues relating to Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity and Expression, and Sex Characteristics in Aotearoa New Zealand. We have assumed that broad public views have been canvased from the above and that there are unlikely to be new concerns or substantive matters raised for or against self identification. We have also assumed that the Select Committee considered and reflected the public interest in recommending a selfidentification process, which would generally be supported by New Zealanders. Despite this, it would have been beneficial to understand specific population groups perspectives on selfidentification better, such as young people and Mori, Pacific and ethnic communities. The Minister of Internal Affairs intends to refer the selfidentification process back to Select Committee so that the public has an opportunity to comment. The Department recognises that this does not mitigate the consultation expectations during policy development. Some policy changes will be made through regulations rather than the Bill, which will allow for more time for consultation on specific issues. Making some changes through regulations works to future proof the legislation as they can be more easily .
Regulatory Impact Statement implement new representation arrangements (if required), before pre election processes start in April . This option is likely to be challenging for councils in the lead up to the local elections, as it may be necessary for a ffected councils to draft more than one set of representation review arrangements prior to poll results being confirmed to meet the strict timeframe. There is a risk that some a ffected councils may not have capacity to complete polls in and then hold truncated representation review s before pre election processes begin in April , which carries some risk relating to the local elections. Because of timing limitations , we have not completed in depth analysis of the probability that councils will miss the deadline. Although we have not consulted (other than with relevant government departments) on the proposal to reinstate the binding poll mechanism for future local government terms due to timing and confidentiality constraints, we have been able to draw on submissions and information gathered through a number of select committee processes, consultation processes , and research reports from recent years on this topic. Limitations affecting the analysis of both issues The Ministers preference is for all legislative changes required to fulfil the coalition commitment to be enacted in a single Bill, along with other priority local electoral amendments. To meet this objective and allow time for councils to complete polls to take effect before the elections, a Bill would have to be passed by the end of July . These timing and scope constraints have placed the following limits on this analysis: options to modify the pre poll mechanism have not been considered (such as changes to the threshold for a petition, eligibility to vote in polls, or whether the polls could be non binding) ; there has been limited opportunity to investigate the specific impacts on Mori, iwi , and hap, and any impacts on Treaty of Waitangi settlement agreements ; information on cost implications is limited and only indicative; and no consultation has been undertaken on the se proposal s, other than with relevant government departments and the Electoral Commission. The Cabinet paper was amended following the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee meeting on March , to modify the original options to add the ability for councils that have resolved to create Mori wards but not yet implemented them to rescind these decisions, and for councils that have existing Mori wards to resolve to disestablish them. Two additional options (Options Three and Four in section B, dealing with transitional arrangements) were also added. Time constraints have meant that these options have not been fully analysed and minimal consultation was possible.
Regulatory Impact Statement national hazard portals, which will provide uptoinformation that is accessible to a wider range of audiences. Initial engagement by Department officials indicates that the LIM is not an appropriate tool for communicating natural hazard information about whenua Mori to Mori landowners. Whnau, hap and iwi landowners are unlikely to purchase a LIM as whenua Mori is generally transferred through succession under the rules of the Mori Land Court. Future work may be carried out to consider options to respond to these problems. Analysis did not consider wider natural hazard data and information challenges The LIM work is limited to improving the communication of natural hazard information currently available and ensuring future data and information can be effectively and efficiently referenced as it becomes available. We are aware improvements are needed to natural hazard data and information currently available to inform LIMs, including the need to address critical gaps in national data. Natural hazard data and information is not equally available across regions and local authorities may not have sufficient resources or expertise to commission their own modelling. This work was originally part of the wider Community Resilience work programme but was scaled back due to the level of funding provided through Budget . Some of these issues are being addressed through other agency work programmes, including EQCs Risk and Resilience Portal, Toit Te Whenua Land Information New Zealands (LINZ) property data work, and Ministry for Business, Innovation and Employments (MBIE) Endeavour fund and National Science Challenge projects. Time and cost challenges are not addressed in this RIS Policy research and engagement identified the time and cost of obtaining a LIM as an additional challenge to the effectiveness of the LIM system at informing purchasers, alongside the inconsistency and communication of information. Pressure to make an offer on a property in the current market and the cost incurred, are barriers to purchasers obtaining a LIM. This challenge is not addressed in the current RIS and policy options, as the focus of current policy is on the natural hazard content of LIMs. Time and costs are challenges that affect the entire LIM system, not just the disclosure of natural hazards. Potential options to reduce the time and cost of LIMs were not sufficiently developed and tested with stakeholders to assess within the Cabinet report back time frame. Potential measures for future consideration include compulsory vendor provision of LIMs and reductions to the cost and statutory timeframes for LIMs. Compulsory vendor provision of a LIM to purchasers was discussed with stakeholders during engagement. However, the significant interactions with the wider property conveyancing system and potential for regulatory change outside of LGOIMA, means this change needs to be considered further as part of future work. Further assessment of any proposal to reduce the cost or time frames for councils to produce a LIMs is required, given the potential financial and resourcing implications for councils.
Regulatory Impact Statement Appendix A: Summary of outcomes of binding polls on Mori wards from to Local authority Reason for poll For Against Outcome May ptiki District Council initiated Lost October Papakura District Council initiated Lost October Taranaki Regional Council initiated Lost October Whakatane District Council initiated Lost April Waikato District Council initiated Lost May Nelson City Elector initiated (petition on Council decision to establish) Lost May Wairoa District Council initiated Lost May Hauraki District Elector initiated (petition on Council decision not to establish) Lost May Far North District Council initiated Lost May New Plymouth District Elector initiated (petition on Council decision to establish) Lost October Wairoa District Council initiated Won May Western Bay of Plenty District Elector initiated (petition on Council decision to establish) Lost May Whakatane District Elector initiated (petition on Council decision to establish) Lost May Kaikoura District Elector initiated (petition on Council decision to establish) Lost May Palmerston North City Elector initiated (petition on Council decision to establish) Lost Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Regulatory Impact Statement Local authority Reason for poll For Against Outcome May Manawatu District Elector initiated (petition on Council decision to establish) Lost
Regulatory Impact Statement Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Regulatory Impact Statement make better informed property decisions. Regulators There will not be a cost savings to the Department or Ombudsman. Others (e.g. wider govt, consumers, etc.) Better informed property purchasing decisions that reduce or avoid natural hazard risks can have significant benefits for longterm community wellbeing, as well as potentially reducing future government liability from natural hazard events. Medium Low Difficult to attribute improved decisionmaking and reduced future liability to natural hazard content on LIMs, as a small part of a suite of natural hazard information and risk reduction measures. Total monetised benefits Unknown We do not currently have sufficient information about the benefits, particularly long term, to provide monetised costs. Nonmonetised benefits Medium High
Regulatory Impact Statement Section : Delivering an option How will the new arrangements be implemented What will the implementation process look like . The changes to the LIM system will be implemented through a bill with amendments to LGOIMA including: a new statutory responsibility for regional councils a specific purpose for providing natural hazard information in LIMs broader information requirements for natural hazard information an empowering provision to set national direction for LIMs removing legal liability for the disclosure of natural hazard information in good faith clearer requirements for natural hazard disclosure. . Subject to Cabinet decisions, consultation with local government and other relevant stakeholders before drafting of legislation will inform decisions on the details of the legislative amendments including: whether specific requirements should sit in legislation or national direction timeframes for new requirements to come into effect. . Following royal assent, the processes to implement national direction will begin. Details of the process for forming national direction have not been determined. . It is likely that the process will be similar to the alternative process for developing national direction under the RMA (section A). The Minister will direct officials to form a technical working group to draft a discussion document for public consultation on the proposed national direction. The final national direction will then be approved by order in council and gazetted. . The Department will work with LGNZ, Taituar and the local government sector to draft national guidance to support territorial authorities and regional councils on the implementation and ongoing application of national direction. Who will be responsible for the ongoing operation and enforcement of the new arrangements . The ongoing operational and enforcement responsibilities as a result of the changes under the preferred package of options are summarised in table below:
Regulatory Impact Statement . Regional councils may also be reluctant to share information for the LIM due to concerns over potential legal action. . Territorial authorities and regional councils may disagree on how to share and coordinate the provision of natural hazard information, as well as the nature and extent of natural hazard information included on the LIM. . These implementation risks could be mitigated by: partnering with LGNZ and Taituar to support council implementation development of national guidance to share best practice and support territorial authorities and regional councils on how to apply national direction clear delineation of territorial authority and regional council roles and responsibilities for providing natural hazard information in national direction and best practice guidance funding and technical support from central government and regional councils for implementation careful consideration of legislative transition periods and implementation timeframes to enable improvements to territorial authorities capability and capacity and natural hazard data and information support to facilitate greater coordination and improved natural hazard information sharing between regional councils and territorial authorities including implementing data sharing systems oversight and monitoring of territorial authority performance by the Ombudsman, who currently reviews local authorities LIM practice and receives complaints. . In addition, there is a risk that fees for LIMs may increase to cover costs for territorial authorities and regional councils. This would impact the accessibility of LIMs for property buyers. . The risk of fee increases could be mitigated through: careful consideration of whether regional councils can recover their costs for providing natural hazards through the LIM fee and how this would be collected and transferred reducing costs through technical support to implement data sharing between territorials and regional authorities and for improving territorial authorities LIM processing systems.
Regulatory Impact Statement How will the new arrangements be monitored, evaluated, and reviewed . The monitoring, evaluation and review of changes to the LIM system will be integrated into preexisting regulatory systems. The Department will undertake ongoing monitoring of Ombudsman decisions and reviews of local authorities performance under the new requirements under LGOIMA. . The Department will also seek regular feedback from: the local government sector through LGNZ and Taituar on the regulatory settings relevant government agencies e.g EQC, the Ombudsman, MfE, and REA peak professonal bodies in the property conveyancing, banking and insurance systems eg property lawyers, real estate agents, banking and insurance for feedback on the effectiveness of natural hazard disclosure in the LIM. . Department monitoring will look to evaluate: local authorities performance at meeting standards under LGOIMA for natural hazard disclosure if key natural hazard information is included in LIMs if the communication and format of nautral hazard information in LIMs is fitfor purpose for property buyers the capacity and capability of territorial authorities to incorporate natural hazard information in the LIM data sharing arrangements between territorial authorities and regional councils the fees and processing times for LIM applications the level of certainty for councils over legal requirements the number of legal actions against councils. . If the Department identifies significant concerns with the settings for natural hazard disclosure in the LIM system, the Minister of Local Government may review regulatory settings for natural hazard disclosure and may as appropriate make recommendations to Cabinet to issue national guidance, amend national direction andor amend provisions in LGOIMA.
Regulatory Impact Statement Responsible Manager Mark Tregurtha Acting General Manager Local Government Branch (Ue te Hntore) Department of Internal Affairs (DIA)
Regulatory Impact Statement as well as previous submissions to the Select Committee on this issue. The RIS identifies a lack of full consultation as a deficiency and aims to address it as part of further consultation when developing regulations. Within this limitation and broader context the RIS clearly articulates the risks and tradeoffs involved. Section : Outlining the problem ContextBackground Information Sex and gender are different, and society is changing to recognise gender diversity and fluidity . Gender refers to a persons social and personal identity as male, female, or another gender, such as nonbinary. This is different to sex, which refers to a persons physiological features that characterise them as male, female or intersex. For most people, their sex matches their gender but for some, it does not, or their gender may change over time. . A persons gender is a deeply personal expression of self, forming a central part of how a person identifies and perceives themselves. New Zealand society is changing to recognise that a persons gender can differ from their sex and that it can change over time, with clear shifts in attitudes to transgender people being shown. However, there appears to be a struggle to find consensus on issues related to transgender people, including whether it should be easier for them to have their gender recognised on official documents. . Despite this, changes in social attitudes are being reflected through official processes. For example, in July StatsNZ introduced a gender diverse category as part of its statistical standard for gender identity; peoples gender can be recognised on passports and on the driver licence database via a selfidentification process; and internationally at least countries have introduced a selfidentification process to recognise gender since . The status quo: birth certificates include a persons sex and this information can be changed . Birth certificates are required to include a persons sex. A person may want to change this information where their gender does not align with the sex recorded. Since , people have been able to change the sex recorded on their birth certificates through a Family Court process. While this process is about amending sex information, its The National Council for Women Gender Attitudes study, conducted in , showed that younger people have a much stronger understanding of the terms transgender, nonbinary and cisgender than older people. The survey also indicated higher levels of acceptance than the equivalent survey for transgender people filling important roles such as being a doctor, being the prime minister, or being parents (generally being above per cent support). This includes the Australian states of Victoria and Tasmania. As prescribed in the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Prescribed Information) Regulations Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
Regulatory Impact Statement context within which the proposals were developed also precluded any meaningful consultation with affected parties. This is acknowledged in the RIA which does include some evidence of stakeholder views from previous consideration of the underlying issues.
Regulatory Impact Statement Section : Diagnosing the policy problem What is the context behind the policy problem and how is the s tatus quo expected to develop What are Mori wards and what is their function . Legislation to allow councils to introduce Mori wards was first passed in . The process for establishing Mori wards is set out in the Local Electoral Act (the Act) . Mori wards were originally introduced as an option for enhancing the representation of Mori in local government , where Mori had been historically underrepresented. . Mori wards are representative seats intended to represent a Mori population for a district council, whereas Mori constituencies represent the Mori population for a regional council. Mori wards and constituencies (Mori wards) are electoral represent ative seats created within a local authority (council) that electors on the Mori electoral roll in that area may then vote for. The number of Mori wards is set through an equation based on the Mori electoral population within the district or region. This approach is similar to th at for Mori electorate seats in parliamentary elections, except the decision of whether to establish Mori wards is optional for each council . . Mori wards are intended to : provide the option of dedicated, elected local representation for New Zealanders on the Mori electoral roll; i ncrease the diversity of representation at the council table; and increase opportunities for Mori to participate in local authority governance and decision making. . In practice, Mori wards perform a similar function to general wards. Councillors who are elected to represent a ward are responsible for communicating the interests of the community they represent , while acting in the interest of the whole district or region. . Council decisions about creating general wards could not be challenged by a poll of electors in the same way that Mori wards were, although the public could appeal these decisions to the Local Government Commission. Councils can also resolve to create general wards to represent particular communities of interest within a district, region, or city. If the representation ratios for these wards vary greatly from the other wards the Local Government Commission must review these decisions. The Local Government Commissions scope for review is narrow and set within statutory criteria. . Section of the Local Government Act acknowledges the Crowns responsibility to take appropriate account of the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi and to maintain and improve opportunities for Mori to contribute to local government decision making processes . Parts and of the Local Government Act provide principles and requirements for local authorities that are intended to facilitate participation by Mori in local authority decision making processes.
Regulatory Impact Statement Section : Diagnosing the policy problem What is the context behind the policy problem and how is the status quo expected to develop The status quo: current role of the LIM in the New Zealand property market The Local Government Official Information and Meetings Act regulates LIMs . The purpose of the Local Government Official Information and Meetings Act (LGOIMA), which is administered by the Department of Internal Affairs (the Department), is to increase the public availability of official information held by local authorities (section (a)). A key principle is that information should be made available unless there is good reason for withholding (section ). . LGOIMA was amended to provide for the Land Information Memorandum (LIM) system as part of the same statutory package as the Building Act . This was intended to provide a simple mechanism to deliver property information to potential purchasers to ensure they could make informed decisions. Under section A, a person may apply to a territorial authority for a LIM within working days on payment of a fee. . LGOIMA requires that LIMs include a wide range of information about a property, including: special features and characteristics of land (natural hazard information), building and resource consents, drainage, water supply, rates, weather tightness events (section A()). The territorial authority may also include any other information it considers relevant (section ()). The Ombudsman investigates public complaints about LIMs . Under the Ombudsmen Act , the Ombudsman can investigate complaints about information included in LIMs. The Ombudsman can recommend that the inclusion or omission of information on a LIM be cancelled, varied, rectified or reconsidered if it is: contrary to law unreasonable, unjust, or improperly discriminatory a mistake in law or fact or wrong. . The Ombudsman can also recommend that an ex gratia payment be made. While the Ombudsmans recommendations are not binding on local authorities, in practice they have significant weight and councils will usually comply.
Regulatory Impact Statement existence recognises that a persons gender can be different to their sex. While it conflates sex with gender it is a mechanism for people to have their gender recognised. . Under the Family Court process adults must satisfy the court that they are living as a person of their nominated sex and will maintain this gender. People can choose between the binary sex markers of female or male. Applicants must provide evidence that they have undergone medical treatment to physically conform with the sex they want recorded. The medical evidence is assessed by a Family Court judge who decides whether the application should be supported. Depending on the judge, the medical treatment required could be widely interpreted to be only hormone therapy through to full gender confirmation surgery. . People under years can also change the sex on their birth certificates. Their guardian must apply to the Family Court on their behalf. The Court then determines if the childs birth certificate can be changed and if it is in the best interests of the child to be raised as a person of the sex specified in the application. The guardian must satisfy the court that they intend to bring the child up as a person of the nominated sex. They must also provide evidence the child has undergone or will undergo medical treatment to enable them to assume their nominated sex. Select Committees recommended changes to the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Bill to introduce selfidentification . The Bill was introduced shortly before the election. It aimed to improve the way people can digitally access information held on the registers of births, deaths, marriages and relationships and make other enhancements. . In , the Select Committee considering the Bill recommended new provisions to replace the Family Court process for amending sex on birth certificates. Instead, people would complete a statutory declaration to have their gender recognised on their birth certificate a selfidentification process. . Select Committee made this recommendation in response to a petition that was heard separately from the Bill. Supporters of the petition submitted that the Family Court process is inaccessible for many and proposed a selfidentification process. Select Committee also considered submissions it received on the Bill. As mentioned above, while a selfidentification process was not in the Bill as introduced, of the submissions received commented on selfidentification. The new selfidentification provisions were included in the Bill as reported back by Select Committee. . The previous Minister of Internal Affairs deferred the Bill in February because of lack of consultation on the selfidentification provisions. The Minister of Internal Affairs now wishes to progress the Bill with a selfidentification process. Some operational improvements will be made to the current process to amend sex on birth certificates . When the previous Minister of Internal Affairs deferred the Bill, they announced work to make practical improvements to the Family Court process. The Working Group for Reducing Barriers to Changing Registered Sex (the Working Group) was appointed to advise on nonlegislative improvements. The Working Group made a range of recommendations covering better guidance and support to help people understand and Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE
Regulatory Impact Statement access the process. The Government has responded to these recommendations and work is underway to implement operational improvements. but operational improvements will not resolve the problem . The Working Group made it clear that it does not consider its proposed changes to be an alternative to legislative reform. This is because operational changes cannot change the medical treatment requirement or make the process accessible to those unable to access medical treatment or who are nonbinary and would not address the legal costs associated with a court process.
Regulatory Impact Statement Information tools can help raise public awareness of natural hazards and manage risks . New Zealanders properties are at risk from a range of geological and weatherrelated natural hazards, including volcanic unrest, earthquakes, land instability and flooding. Flooding is our most common natural hazard and on average a major flood event occurs every eight months. Most of New Zealands major urban centres and most of our population are located on the coast or floodplains of major rivers. . Climate change is increasing New Zealands exposure to natural hazards, putting many more properties at risk from impacts such as sea level rise, coastal inundation and storm events. Climate related natural hazards like these are projected to become more frequent and severe. . Information tools, such as LIMs, can play a role in managing natural hazards, as they can raise public awareness, are relatively inexpensive and can enable purchasers to make better informed decisions. . While it is normally the responsibility of individuals to acquire information to support their decisionmaking, Government provision of information can be justified if this is not provided in the private market or if there are significant positive spill overs i.e. the benefit to the community exceeds the benefit to individual property buyers. In the current situation, there are important public benefits to informing purchasers (and the wider public) about natural hazards. . The provision of natural hazard information supports central and local governments goals to reduce natural hazard risk for communities by incentivising better longterm investment decisions. Improving information for the public to promote better decision making around natural hazard risk is also aligned with New Zealands natural hazard resilience strategies and international obligations.
Regulatory Impact Statement What is the policy problem or opportunity The Family Court process to amend registered sex in the BDMRR Act needs reform . The Family Court process to amend registered sex is not inclusive and fails to support peoples autonomy over how their gender is recognised. It medicalises a deeply personal expression of selfidentity and is inaccessible . The process medicalises a deeply personal expression of selfidentity and is out of step with gender being about how a person perceives themselves. The process requires applicants to provide evidence they have undertaken medical treatment to physically conform with the sex they want recorded. This requirement excludes those who cannot or choose not to undertake medical treatment. For children and young people, the requirement could be seen to encourage medical treatment at a young age. Issues with the medical evidence requirement are compounded by issues with access to publicly available gender affirming care, and the cost of private gender affirming care. . The Family Court process is perceived to be costly, intimidating and difficult to navigate, making it inaccessible for many people. Counting Ourselves , a survey of transgender and nonbinary people in New Zealand, found that per cent of respondents did not have the correct gender marker on their birth certificate. This is also reflected by the low number of applications to the Family Court to amend registered sex. It excludes people who do not identify as male or female or whose gender changes . Some people are excluded from the Family Court process due to the lack of nonbinary markers. The existing options of male or female exclude people who are nonbinary or a culturally specific gender, such as takatpui (Mori), faafafine (Samoan), or fakaleiti (Tongan). The Counting Ourselves survey found the primary reason for having the incorrect gender identity on birth certificates was because existing options did not fit the respondents gender. . Others may be excluded from the Family Court process as the requirements lend themselves to the amendment being permanent. While there is no limit on the number of times a person can apply, the court must be satisfied a person intends to maintain their nominated sex. This fails to recognise that gender can be fluid and excludes people whose gender may change at different stages of life. It is out of step with international human rights discourse . The Family Court process is out of step with international human rights discourse for transgender and intersex people. While not legally binding, the Yogyakarta Principles recommend that where sex and gender information is officially registered it is based on In its PRISM report, the Human Rights Commission noted there are many delays and long waitlists for interventions, as well as demand for procedures not provided for by the public system. Further detail on the barriers within the Family Court process and issues with the medical evidence requirement are set out in the report of the Working Group for Reducing Barriers to Changing Registered Sex. This reason was more likely reported by nonbinary respondents. The Yogyakarta Principles are a set of nonbinding international principles on sexual orientation and gender identity developed by human rights experts.
Regulatory Impact Statement option for the public to challenge a councils decision establishing general wards representative of other populations through a binding poll . . Since the legislative change, councils (city, district , and regional) have voted to establish Mori wards without being subject to the poll requirements . Of these: councils resolved to establish Mori wards before the local elections, and: i. of these now have Mori wards in place; and ii. one (Tauranga City Council) is due to hold its first Mori ward election as part of its general election (postponed from ); and councils have resolved to establish Mori wards, with effect from the local elections (this includes ptiki District Council, which held a non binding poll with a result in favour of establishing Mori wards, followed by a council resolution to establish). . Following the local elections an estimated . of elected members on council s were of Mori descent . However, this is not distributed equally across all regions in New Zealand. The representation review process . In general, councils have the ability to determine their own representation arrangements, in consultation with their communities. Councils must undertake a representation review at least every six years . Through that process , they must consider matters such as the number of councillors, the number and boundaries of wards and constituencies, and whether to have community boards. A council must complete a representation review f ollowing a decision to establish or disestablish a Mori ward. . The representation review process has a number of mandated steps including: publishing an initial proposal ; considering submissions ; issuing a final proposal ; an appeals and objections process, with determinations made by the Local Government Commission ; and the option to appeal a Local Government Commission determination to the High Court. . The Act sets out specific requirements for the representation arrangements to provide fair and effective representation of communities. Councils can make special arrangements to recognise a particular community of interest , but these arrangements must be reviewed and determined by the Local Government Commission. How is the status quo expected to develop if no action is taken . If there are no changes to the status quo, additional consultation requirements on councils will come into effect in October . Councils are required to consult with the public as a part of the six yearly representation review process but are not currently required to consult on the decision to establish Mori wards . Many of the councils that
Regulatory Impact Statement: Addendum to Decision on the reform of water services delivery arrangements
Regulatory Impact Statement: Local Government Water Services Bill paper June
Regulatory Impact Statement: Local Government Water Services Bill paper July
Regulatory Impact Statements
Regulatory Impact Statements (RIS) and Cost Recovery Impact Statements (CRIS)
Regulatory Services Direct reports to the General Manager, Regulatory Services
Regulatory Services Group Strategy
Regulatory Services MCA (.)
Regulatory Services MCA (.)
Regulatory System Report Consolidated Recommendations
Regulatory System Report Executive Summary
Regulatory System Report Independent Peer Reviewers Report
Regulatory activities such as licensing, compliance and enforcement are fundamental to the success of any regulatory regime. In saying that, equally important are: the strategy that sets the direction of our work and allows us to make intelligent and informed decisions about what problems we want to fix first; the intelligence inputs that enable us to devise strategy and to direct licensing, compliance and enforcement work with maximum impact; our understanding of the system risks we are aiming to mitigate; the engagement, education and information inputs that support the sector to understand our expectations of them; the operational policy that allows our kaimahi to do their work with confidence; and the project and planning functions that enable us to plan what work we are doing to implement the strategy, and to deliver that work in a structured, timely way.
Regulatory and Identity Services
Regulatory backstop powers (Initial advice assistance and intervention in relation to local government water services delivery)
Regulatory boundaries and the effectiveness of established regulatory tools are being challenged by innovations in technology and business models, by the pace of change and scale of connectivity that these often involve, and by peoples changing views about their societies and the world around them. Examples such as cyber threats, artificial intelligence, climate change and extreme societal injustices present new types of challenge. Foresight review of the future of regulatory systems: Regulating in a disruptive world, Lloyds Register Foundation, March The goal of this strategy is to ensure Regulatory Services is at the forefront of regulatory excellence, so that hap, iwi and communities across New Zealand are safe, resilient and thriving, and the wellbeing of hap, iwi and Mori is improved. This strategy replaces the Regulatory Services Group (RSG) strategy and extends the systems approach that RSG has implemented since . It also establishes a strong regulatory stewardship approach to RSGs three current regulatory systems: Digital Safety, AntiMoney Laundering (AML) and Gambling. RSG was established in to bring together gambling, censorship compliance, antispam and AML regulatory regimes. Since then, the AML Groups remit and size has grown dramatically. More recently the Digital Safety Group, which brings together the censorship compliance and antispam functions, has also grown significantly following the introduction of an additional focus on countering violent extremism. This growth has demonstrated a recognition and confidence that RSG is able to effectively absorb, support and grow diverse regulatory functions. We developed this strategy in a rapidly evolving and digital context, where the hallmarks of effective regulation are: A clear focus on outcomes System leadership and influence based on strong relationships An agile, adaptable and capable workforce The sophisticated use of technology to target, deliver and evaluate regulatory impact. The strategy establishes RSGs regulatory stewardship approach by setting expectations regarding system leadership and delivering on system outcomes. It leverages the effectiveness of RSGs current regulatory systems by building a shared view of regulatory excellence and maximising the diverse capabilities of our systems. It supports the focus on the safety, resilience and wellbeing of hap, iwi, he tangata and communities in Aotearoa by strengthening RSGs regulatory foundations, capability and systems to ensure that RSG can readily home additional regulatory systems in the future. The strategy is a living document we have developed with input from other regulators, our staff, and internal and external stakeholders. I want to acknowledge their valuable input and their ongoing work to make Aotearoa a safer place for all of us. Maarten Quivooy General Manager Regulatory Services May Tn koutou katoa
Regulatory functions and powers, which will replace and modernise the existing bylaws framework.
Regulatory stewardship is a systembased approach to the design and maintenance of regulatory systems. It treats each regulatory system as an asset, designed with longterm sustainability in mind, and like many assets, requiring regular assessment and maintenance to ensure that it remains fit for purpose. Taking a stewardship approach helps to mitigate the risk of regulatory failure. The approach also provides insight into how systems can be strengthened and made to work better.
Rehabilitation Board to Social Security Department
Related documents on Water Services Authority
Related laws and policies
Related policies, procedures, standards, guidelines, legislation, andor websites
Relating to the supply of passport contact information
Relation to government priorities
Relation to government priorities This paper progresses policy contained in the Labour Partys Election Manifesto, and the New Zealand Labour Party and Green Party of Aotearoa New Zealand Cooperation Agreement.
Relationships Registration Act , or any former Act.
Release of Briefing papers leading to policy decisions to modernise the Charities Act
Release of Cabinet material relating to the Rates Rebate Order and letters to Local Government stakeholders
Release of Discussion Document
Release of Royal Commission of Inquiry reports relating to Lake Alice Hospital
Release of final report Strengthening our Approach to Volunteering, with letters attached for your Ministerial colleagues
Release of submissions received on the discussion document: Safer Online Services and Media Platforms
Release of the local authority election statistics
Release of day one outcomes roadmap: Communications Engagement Plan
Released guidance for public service agencies to use Artificial Intelligence in a safe and responsible way
Released under the Official Information Act
Released under the Official Information Act New Organisation Structure
Released under the Official Information Act Section Six: Change protocol Introduction This protocol sets out the approach to managing the implementation of the structural changes arising from the OCE Organisational Change . This Protocol is consistent with all individual employment agreements and the Collective Agreement between the Public Service Association and the Department of Internal Affairs. Principles The process is designed to: ensure a fair and transparent process ; maximise the placement of employees into available positions ; ensure minimum disruption to business as usual ; observe the provisions contained in the relevant employment agreements and organisational policy ; and minimise uncertainty for employees . Who does this protocol apply to The protocol applies to all permanent employees of the d epartment including: permanent f ulltime and part time employees employees currently on all forms of leave including leave without pay and parental leave . For employees currently seconded to other positions the process will apply to their permanent substantive position. Fixed term (temporary) or casua l employees are not covered by this p rotocol even though their position may be affected by the restructure. In this case the relevant provision of their employment agreement will apply. Overview Employees are affected if their current position is being disestablished or changed significantly . If there is no significant change to the ir position, and there are the same number, or fewer, employees than positions in the new structure, employees will be reconfirmed. Released under the Official Information Act Employees who are not reconfirmed will be considered for reassignment. This involves considering whether affected employees skills can be matched to alternative positions that require similar skills in the new structure. Affected employees who are not reassigned will be consulted individually about other options. If no other options are identified, notice will be given , and redundancy provisions apply. Affected employees Employees who have been identified as being affected by organisational change will be consulted over the implementation process, and the employees will have a preferential right of appointment to vacancies within the branch . Before final decisions are announced, all potentially affected employees will be notified individually. Employees will be informed if they: have been reconfirmed in a position and are no longer affected, or are affected and will be considered for reassignment. Reconfirmation process There are no new positions proposed therefore reconfirmation will not be possible. Reassignment and expressions of interest As this proposal does not have any positions for reassignment there are no reassignment processes available in accordance with the change protocols. Appointment to another job permanent employees Employees with preferential status (who have not been reconfirmed or reassigned) may apply for a job in the Department that is not a suitable alternative job. The employee will be given preference to the extent that if the employee meets the selection crit eria for the job and is of equal or greater merit than any other applicants, the employee will be appointed. The appointment will be on the terms and conditions that apply for the job. Where the terms and conditions of the new job are of lesser value than the employees previous job, confirmation of appointment and any compensatory arrangements will be subject to agreement on a case bycase basis. Released under the Official Information Act Notice If the Department determines that no other option can be agreed, the affected employee will be provided notice in line with their employment agreement. Where a longer notice period is preferred for operational transition reasons, this may be agreed between the Department and the affected employee. During the notice period, the Department and the employee may consider any opportunities for other options that may arise. If an affected employee is appointed to another position within the Department during the notice period, the notice is withdrawn in writing. The employees employment is not ceased . Redundancy Where an affected employee has not been appointed to another position within the Department during the notice period and no other option is available , redundancy compensation will be paid at the end of the notice period in accordance with the affected employees employment agreement. Redundancy compensation is not payable where an employee is appointed to or offered another position in the State Services as provided for in section of the Public Service Act.
Released under the Official Information Act Appendix A: Approach to Working through Expressions of Interest and Alternative Opportunities for Affected Kaimahi In the first instance, a ffected kaimahi will be invited to participate in an Expression of Interest (EOI) process focussed on assisting kaimahi to look for an alternative job. Affected kaimahi will have access to support to apply for positions and prepare for interview s see Support Applying for Jobs further below. Kaimahi can also speak with their manager and Human Resources to get help and support during this period . Vacan t Positions within Te Tari There may be vacancies within the employees current Branch or the wider Department which affected kaimahi can apply for via a recruitment and selection process. Vacant positions that are under active recruitment can be found through Rehutai . To support affected kaimahi to find other jobs within Te Tari, we have made some changes to our recruitment approach during this period of organisational change . The key changes are: All vacancies will be advertised internally only for a period of ten working days. If a position is not filled, it will be readvertised internally only for a further ten days on a rolling basis (unless it is identified as time critical or specialised) . After being advertised internally only , positions identified as time critical or specialised may be advertised externally as well as internally kaimahi can still apply for positions that are advertised externally. Affected kaimahi who meet the selection criteria will be given preference for interview and appointment. Affected employees will have preferential right of appointment over non affected employees and external candidates in the event that their suitability for the position is assessed as being the same. Support Applying for Jobs It is important to Te Tari that you have access to support when applying for positions, whether this is via an EOI reassignment or recruitment process. Te Tari is providing the following support for affected kaimahi: Group Interview Skills workshops Individual coaching with C Consulting (external provider), where you can choose from topics that suit your situation, these topics include: Working through change Career options what drives and fulfils you in work CV development Released under the Official Information Act Interview strategies If you would like to access any of the above support, you can speak with your manager who can contact HR on your behalf, or by emailing EOIRecruitmentSupportdia.govt.nz .
Released under the Official Information Act Introduction Introduction from Chief Executive Paul James Kia ora koutou. Over the past few months, kaimahi at Te Tari Taiwhenua have worked hard to deliver their mahi, despite dealing with the uncertainty of proposed organisational change and what it may mean for you, your mahi and your colleagues. For many , uncertainty now comes to an end with the release of final decisions for Office of the Chief Executive. Thank you everyone who provided feedback on what I know were challenging proposals. Having your input and opinions is important to me as it helps shape these decisions and ensures we remain an open, transparent and upfront organisation. To affected kaimahi, I have been impressed by your mahi and commitment to delivering for our customers as you also grapple with the stress and uncertainty of whats happening. I would like to acknowledge the impact this process has had on you. It hasnt been easy for you. Please know we will do what we can to support you into a new role, either within Te Tari Taiwhenua or elsewhere. Te Tari is committed to helping you during this period and immediate support is available to you. For kaimahi who will remain at Te Tari Taiwhenua in your existing or new roles, I know from personal experience how hard it is to farewell colleagues and continue delivering the mahi. What we do for New Zealanders is important. Its what drives us to be a high performing organisation by delivering every day for Kiwis. This is not the end of the organisational change process: the decisions contained in this document now need to be implemented. This next step will be led by your Branch Leadership Team. Thank you for your professionalism, manaakitanga and kindness to each other throughout this process. Ng mihi
Released under the Official Information Act
Released under the Official Information Act Introduction from Director Office of the Chief Executive Kia ora I would like to present to you the final decisions of our organisational change process. I appreciate the feedback provided during the consultation period and the thought that went into this. It help ed confirm our thinking and test our assumptions and rationale for what was proposed. I would also like to thank everyone for your professionalism and for the manaakitanga you have extended to each other over the past weeks . The decisions have not been made lightly and I would like to acknowledge those who are affected by the final decisions that have been made . Why change is necessary Late last year, t he Minister of Finance announced an ongoing Fiscal Sustainability Programme to embed a culture of responsible spending across government , requiring us to make permanent baseline reductions of . for the financial year. The Department identified initiatives to enable us to meet the . target. The initiatives broadly cover ed reducing costs, reducing discretionary spending and finding more efficient ways to deliver our mahi. While the majority of initiatives did not affect our people, some did and resulted in these organisational change s that impact positions and kaimahi. Final decisions have been made This document outlines the final decisions for the Office of the Chief Executive (OCE) organisational change, as well as the implementation plan for putting changes in place. From the consultation period, we received only one submission about the proposed change . After careful consideration of the feedback received, I have not made any changes to the change proposal and as such will be implementing the new structure as outlined in the consultation document . The feedback received noted two small areas of the Team Administrator job description that are not captured in the Executive Services Officer (EA) job description. In analysing this feedback and considering how the team has been functioning since August , I believe that the areas are not substantial for the team and workload of the EA and do not change the proposed way forward. The change to the Team Administrator role, as confirmed in this document, has not been made lightly. However , it is important to ensure that we are a fit for purpose team and operate as an efficient and lean model. Continuing to support our kaimahi I acknowledge change can be hard, and this is no doubt a difficult time for some of you. Te Tari will be working closely with kaimahi as we progress the organisation change s, particularly those Released under the Official Information Act affected by change. Kaimahi are encouraged to reach out to their manager and other support networks. Further information about support is provided in Section : Transition and Implementation. Thank you for your ongoing engagement with this process and for your thoughtful and insightful ideas, questions and feedback, which helped shape our final decisions.
Released under the Official Information Act Section Two : Branch Context and Background In the past, OCE informally received a small amount of administration support from the former Organisational Strategy and Performance ( OSP) Branch. This support was provided from members of their administration team and acted as an overflow to support the EA. They covered general administrative tasks including: the arrangement of domestic travel, catering, and venues, printing, CE expenses pr ocess, and some personal assistant support for the previous Director OCE (the current Director didnt use them). During the change process to establish the Te Urungi Branch it became apparent that the OSP administration team did not have the capacity to provide ongoing support to OCE so alternative arrangements for administration work needed to be considered. To provide some more consistent support for OCE and to remove the burden on the Te Urungi Branch, a hours per week Team Administrator position was established in August and recruited in September . In August , seeking more work hours, the T eam Administrator went on secondment to the Procurement team in the He Pou Aronui Branch. Current context for change The current position description of the EA covers the majority of the administration work of OCE. Since August , in conjunction with a change of kaimahi in the EA role, it was determined that it wasnt necessary to backfill the position , as the full workload was being managed by the EA. With the workload being managed within the EA role , it was decided to include the disestablishment of the Team Administrator role as part of the Baseline Reduction Programme , as it is considered that the EA role has the capacity to cover the workload . Branch approach to change OCE, like the rest of Te Tari Taiwhenua, is required to contribute to the cost savings target. Some of our contribution will come from discretionary operational funding that had traditionally been spent on small one off projects for the Chief Executive. However, OCE also needs to consider how we operate and what resourci ng is needed to support the Chief Executive , and this was the basis for change proposal . Future Direction With e very branch of Te Tari required to review their operating model to ensure they are as efficient as possible and able to absorb future cost pressures , it is especially important for the corporate functions to show they are fit for purpose and taking costs out of their operating model. Released under the Official Information Act Section Three : Final Decisions The final decisions presented in this section have been informed by the feedback received during consultation, which is summarised in Section Four: Feedback and Responses. The final decision is to implement t he proposal , as outli ned in the Consultation Document with no changes as a result of feedback . The key decisions are detailed below, followed by organisational chart s show ing the new organisational structure. Overview of confirmed changes The final decision is to implement the proposal, as outlined in the Consultation Document . The key decisions are set out below, followed by an organisational chart showing the new organisational structure organised by business group and teams . Disestablishment of the Team Administrator role in OCE. These changes do result in impacts to positions and people, which is detailed on page . In summary: One position will be disestablished . Office of the Chief Executive The role of Team Administrator will be disestablished, and the associated admin istrative duties transferred to the E A role. OCE as a team, works closely to support the Chief Executive and the wider department. It is important to ensure we operate as an efficient and lean model, which with the Director , EA and Principal Advisor roles, I believe we have the right operating model, that we are fit for purpose and able to absorb future cost pressures. As a Corporate function team, it is important to show that we are taking costs out of the operating model, being as efficient as possible and able to absorb future cost pressures.
Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of Section Three: Branch Context and Environment The financial environment that we are in requires us, as a Branch, to operate within reduced Crownfunded baselines from July . We have identified opportunities where spending can be reduced in areas such as air travel, conferences and offsite venues, some training, the use of contractors and consultants, and recruiting through agencies. After this, however, we still have to propose some organisational structure changes to meet the spending reduction required. We need to make changes because of both the Governments Fiscal Sustainability Programme, and additional emerging cost pressures such as salary rises and meeting our share of rising corporate costs beyond our control, such as rent and insurance. The following principles were used to form this proposal for change: . Firstly, closing down vacant positions where possible, some of which have been deliberately held vacant in recent months in anticipation of baseline reductions. . Consolidating management structures and leadership positions where possible, while still ensuring the right level of technical and kaimahi oversight. . Ensuring the right level of capability is retained to deliver the core requirements of the mahi we are accountable for. As you go through this document, you will see that some areas within Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy may have more changes proposed than other areas of the Branch. Some of the factors that contribute to this are the number and type of vacancies in a group, workload, and the ability to scale down, deprioritise or reprioritise mahi. In the case of the Regulatory Services group, the proposals also take into account feedback received from workshops with kaimahi last year on the needs for the group, prior to the Fiscal Sustainability Programme being announced. Additionally, as I have raised in some previous communications with you leading up to this period, the nature of our funding across the Branch varies. Some areas are Crownfunded, while others are funded through thirdparty revenue managed through memorandum accounts, or other forms of cost recovery. The focus on the Crownfunded functions to proposed cost savings can make the impact on these areas look disproportionate and may appear inequitable. We can, however, only count reductions in Crownfunded expenditure towards the baseline reductions required of the Department. This means we cannot trade off any savings made in thirdparty funded functions against savings in Crownfunded functions. I have, however, asked those with thirdparty funded functions to look at whether there are any changes needed to improve our effectiveness and efficiency within existing revenue levels, as efficiency and effectiveness are clearly stated priorities for this Government regardless of how functions are funded. Released under the Official Information Act Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of Proposed future structure
Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of Proposed future structure
Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of . Digital Safety The changes proposed for the Digital Safety group ensure that the right level of capacity and capability continues across teams to deliver their core mahi: keeping New Zealanders safe online from digital violent extremism, harmful messaging and online child exploitation, and providing regulatory stewardship responsibilities through tightly focused education and information. The proposed changes for the group are: The disestablishment of the Principal Advisor, Lead Operational Advisor and Principal Advisor CVE positions is proposed. The mahi undertaken by these roles will be absorbed within the existing remit of the roles of the leaders in the Digital Safety group as follows: The stakeholder relationship management with cross agency and international partners will sit with the Director, Digital Safety, and the Deputy Director Operations, Digital Safety. The establishment and embedding of operational practices will sit with the operational Managers and collectively as a leadership group to ensure consistent practices, where applicable. There will be more reliance on the Intelligence and Insights team providing insights on trends and risk. The establishment of a month fixed term Lead Advisor, Pacific and International to June , to lead important implementation work for online safety initiatives in specific Pacific nations and align with third party funding for this work. In the Digital Messaging Systems team, it is proposed to reduce the Senior Investigator positions from two to one, with the work being deprioritised. In the Digital Child Exploitation team, it is proposed to disestablish the Lead Online Investigator position. Online Investigators are retained in both this team and the Digital Violent Extremism team providing sufficient online investigatory capability. In the Intelligence and Insights team, it is proposed to disestablish the two Intelligence Analyst positions. Activities will be deprioritised to allow for the reduced capacity. In the Intelligence and Insights team, it is also proposed to disestablish the Lead Intelligence Analyst position, with the technical supervision being provided by the Manager of the team. In the Design, Engagement and Innovation team, it is proposed to reduce the number of Senior Advisor, Engagement and Innovation roles from three to one, with the work being deprioritised. It is also proposed that the Operational Policy Analyst position in the Design, Engagement and Innovation team be disestablished. The retention of the senior level capability will allow for core mahi required in this space to continue. No other changes are proposed for the group. Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of Current structure and proposed changes
Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of . Regulatory Services The proposed changes in the Regulatory Services group are larger, as we would be remiss to not take the opportunity to incorporate the valuable feedback received from kaimahi last year in workshops to review the Regulatory Services operating model. With the requirement to find both baseline savings and look for efficiencies more generally, the proposed changes take into consideration the refocussing on core delivery in regulatory stewardship activities and scaling back in areas where we have been able to operate beyond this for many years. The proposal takes into consideration the capability, structure and kaimahi oversight required for those delivering our regulatory stewardship activities and leveraging the benefit of being part of a group which has responsibility for more than one regulatory system, especially for the AML team. As a result, this change proposal sets out a proposed change to the operating model, to shift the group from a selfcontained singular systembased model (i.e. a selfcontained gambling system and a selfcontained AML system) to a multidisciplinary operating model, recognising the need for a broad suite of professional inputs to deliver system outcomes. Appendix B provides more information on this. The changes proposed for the group are set out below. a. Direct reports to the General Manager The proposed change in the operating model for the group requires the right oversight for each of the functions and disciplines to deliver our regulatory stewardship activities for the sectors we regulate. It is proposed to disestablish the positions of National Manager, Engagement, National Manager, Intelligence, Insights and Risk, and National Manager, Strategy and Capability and propose the establishment of new Heads of the function that deliver activities that are not core compliance and enforcement activities. It is proposed to establish a Strategy, Intelligence and Risk team led by a Head of Strategy, Intelligence and Risk. This function will be responsible for the maintenance of our regulatory strategy, turning our strategy into actionable business plans and utilising insights from intelligence and risk to help us focus our regulatory stewardship efforts. The alignment of the strategy function with the intelligence and risk functions will better allow us to create strategy and to implement it in a way that better recognises our environmental context and to respond to emerging trends and risks. It is proposed to establish an Implementation team led by a Head of Implementation. This function will establish the strategic direction and approach for the Regulatory Systems group to delivering interventions that encourage proactive compliance by regulated parties, and ensuring implementation of regulatory changes are delivered endtoend for both Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of regulated parties and our kaimahi. It is proposed that this function will have oversight of the engagement, operational policy and education activities with delivery of these activities strictly project planned, managed and delivered. It is proposed to establish an Investigations and Prosecutions team lead by a Head of Investigation and Prosecutions. This function will be responsible for setting the strategic direction for all our investigations and prosecution activities, to ensure our efforts are aimed in areas that will enhance and improve proactive regulatory compliance and practice across the sectors we regulate and prevent harm in communities. Other changes proposed for the group are: The Principal Advisor, Regulatory Strategy is proposed to be disestablished, as the responsibility for the creation and implementation of group strategy will sit with the proposed new Head of Strategy, Intelligence and Risk. It is proposed to disestablish the Director, Regulatory System (AML) and establish a new Director, AMLCFT position. Further information is provided below on the proposed change. A minor change is proposed to the Director, Regulatory System (Gambling) job title to Director, Gambling and job description to reflect the proposed change to the multidisciplinary functional operating model.
Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of b. AML directorate As mentioned earlier in this document, the baseline savings required in the Regulatory Services group are from Crownfunded areas. This has led us to make some difficult choices about the number and span of leadership roles proposed for the AML function compared to the Gambling function, which is larger in size and feesfunded. The proposed changes for the AML directorate and the proposed centralisation of functions such as Operational Policy, Investigations, Intelligence and Engagement, Information and Education, will support the AML function to retain key functions with the required level of professional oversight to deliver on regulatory stewardship for their sector. The following changes are proposed for the AML directorate. i) Director, AML, Deputy Director Operations, AML, and Principal Advisor, AML positions It is proposed to disestablish the Director, AML and Deputy Director Operations, AML positions. The proposed establishment of a centralised operational policy, intelligence, insights, engagement and investigation function, means that the AMLCFT directorates focus will be on the delivery of the core regulatory compliance and enforcement actions and lifting regulatory capability. Given the proposed size and scope of the AMLCFT function, and because it is a Crownfunded function subject to a reduction in baseline funding, having both a Director and Deputy Director is no longer affordable. It is also proposed to disestablish the position of Principal Advisor, AML, with the responsibilities of this position, such as stakeholder relationship management with cross agency and international partners, sitting with the new proposed Director, AMLCFT positions. Sector insights would sit with the new proposed Head of Strategy, Intelligence and Risk and Head of Implementation. ii) New Director, AMLCFT A new Director, AMLCFT position is proposed as a result of the proposed disestablishment of the Director, AML and Deputy Director Operations, AML and Principal Advisor, AML to reflect that the proposal creates centralised strategy, intelligence, investigations, operational policy and engagement functions. The directorates focus will be on the delivery of the core regulatory compliance and enforcement actions and lifting AMLCFT regulatory capability, and to work in collaboration with the proposed centralised functions to regulate the sector. The new proposed Director, AMLCFT, will be responsible for the AMLCFT regulatory stewardship function, setting the direction for the function and Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of ensuring it is aligned to the Regulatory Systems strategic outcomes. To do so, they will work in collaboration with the newly proposed centralised functions. This proposed change and ongoing budgetary restraints may also need us to consider scaling back some of our international engagement in the AMLCFT space, to a level that we can sustain in light of our domestic responsibilities. The new Director, AMLCFT role is proposed to have as its direct reports the Operations Managers, the newly proposed Lead Regulators and the Practice Lead. iii) Manager Operations (Auckland) It is proposed to combine the two teams and reduce the number of Manager Operations in Auckland from two to one. With the below proposed changes to the number of Regulators, Senior Regulators and Graduate Regulators, there is not sufficient justification for two teams. iv) Lead Regulator It is also proposed to establish two Lead Regulator positions to provide technical expertise, advice and regulatory interventions to ensure compliance with relevant rules, standards and guidelines. These positions will lead complex regulatory stewardship activities through compliance monitoring, coaching, investigating and auditing regulated parties. They will support Managers and Practice Leaders in implementing best practice regulatory stewardship. This proposal is made as a result of a key piece of feedback from the workshops with kaimahi in , that we need more experienced regulators in the AMLCFT space. v) Practice Leader It proposed to reduce the number of Practice Leaders from two to one and for the position to refocus on a more traditional practice lead role of lifting regulatory practice and technical capability across the AML team, through training, education and practice support. Feedback was received during the workshops for increased training for regulators to lift capability. The role of training and supporting Managers to lift regulatory capability sits with the Practice Lead position. The combination of two Lead Regulators and one Practice Leader should create the right balance of uplifting capability through onthejob and training course learning. vi) Regulators and Senior Regulators It is proposed that the number of Senior Regulator and Regulator positions in Auckland and Wellington be reduced. In Auckland, it is proposed that the number of Senior Regulators reduce from six to four, and Regulators from six to five. In Wellington, it is proposed that the number of Senior Regulators reduce from three to two and Regulators from five to three. Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of The proposal to change the number of Senior Regulators and Regulators reflects the tradeoffs that are needed to retain sufficient senior level capability within the AML team and to establish a dedicated investigations and prosecutions function for AML activity. vii) Graduate Regulators (AML) It is proposed to disestablish the one Graduate Regulator position in Auckland and one Graduate Regulator position in Wellington in the AML directorate. It is proposed to change the reporting line, job title and job description of one Graduate Regulator position in Auckland and one Graduate Regulator in Wellington to the Gambling directorate, as the Gambling directorate require some additional resourcing. As mentioned above with the proposal to retain sufficient senior level capability in the AMLCFT directorate, and the increased focus on areas of identified risk and targeted response action, experienced regulators will be better placed to respond to identified areas of risk with an effective compliance response. viii) Service Design AML team It is proposed to disestablish the service design team in the AML directorate and bring the operational policy roles under a newly proposed Implementation function. This means that it is proposed that the Operational Policy Analyst and the Senior Operational Policy Analyst roles have a change in reporting line to the Team Leader, Operational Policy. It is also proposed to reduce the Analyst level capacity from two positions to one and retain the senior level capability. As one of three regulators in the AML environment, there is opportunity to leverage off the mahi from our partner regulators. v) Investigations team It is proposed to permanently establish an AMLCFT investigation and prosecutions team, comprising a Manager and two Senior Investigators. It is also proposed that these roles sit in the newly proposed Investigations and Prosecution function, with the Manager, AMLCFT reporting to the Head of Investigations and Prosecutions. The Investigations team in AMLCFT has been a recent temporary addition. The team has undertaken some good mahi and there is a need for these efforts to continue in our regulatory stewardship of the AMLCFT sector. Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of Current structure and proposed changes
Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of Department is the lead regulator for the gambling sector and responsible for system stewardship across government. i) Investigations team (Gambling and CIPU) As with the AMLCFT Investigations and Prosecutions function, it is also proposed that the reporting line for the Manager, Investigations (Gambling and CIPU) move to report to the Head of Investigations and Prosecutions. The temporary positions of the Evidence Manager and Investigations Coordinator in the Gambling Investigations team will come to an end, either, should the proposed changes come into effect or when the employment engagement comes to its natural end, whichever comes first. The Intelligence Analyst in the CIPU team is proposed to report to the Team Leader, Intelligence and Insights, along with the ringfenced funding for this role to move into the Intelligence and Insights team. With the move to the proposed multidisciplinary functional model, it is important for the investigations function and the intelligence function to be grouped together in their respective areas of practice. This will ensure consistent practices for the group for each discipline area and will ensure efforts and resources are focused on the right mahi. ii) Service Design Gambling team It is proposed to disestablish the service design function in the Gambling directorate and bring the operational policy roles in this team under a newly proposed Implementation team. This means that it is proposed that the Operational Policy Analyst role and the Senior Operational Policy Analyst have a change in reporting line to the Team Leader, Operational Policy. It is also proposed to reduce the Analyst positions from two to one and Senior Analyst level capacity from four positions to two. With the proposed merger of the teams from AMLCFT and Gambling, there should be sufficient Analyst and Senior Analyst resourcing across the team to allow the team to assign resources during peak workload. It is proposed that the Business Advisor has a change of reporting line to the Team Leader, Business Services, because the reporting and coordination responsibilities of this position aligns with the delivery requirements of the Business Services team. It is proposed that the Principal Advisor Gaming Technology has a change in reporting line to the Director, Gambling. The thought leadership from this position will support the Director to ensure gaming insights are front of mind as regulators of the gambling sector. It is proposed that the Senior Technical Advisors have a change of reporting to the Deputy Director Operations, Gambling, as the work they do has more synergies with operational compliance and licencing work.
Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of iii) Director and Deputy Director Operations (Gambling) A minor change is proposed to the job description and job title of the Director and Deputy Director Gambling to recognise the proposed centralisation of the Investigations and Operational Policy function and the movement of the Senior Technical Advisors into the Operations team. Current structure and proposed changes
Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of d. Investigations and Prosecutions The proposed establishment of the Investigations and Prosecutions function will see the Investigations team in Gambling and a new Investigations AMLCFT team coming together, creating a centralised function that will develop a centre of excellence for regulatory investigations. With a centralised function, we can drive greater efficiency in developing our investigative expertise, share resources when appropriate and, most importantly, ensure there is robust strategic leadership of the investigation function, aligning activity with the groups longerterm strategy and ensuring appropriate decisions are made about areas of focus and prioritisation of effort. i) Investigations Coordinator Additionally, to support the team to create visibility of workflow and support tasking, an Investigations Coordinator position across AMLCFT and Gambling investigations and prosecution work is proposed to be established. This position is proposed to report to the Head of Investigations and Prosecutions. Proposed future structure
Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of Project management capability continues to be critical for the group, and therefore the reporting line for the Senior Project Manager is proposed to change to report to the Head of Implementation.
Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of iv) Lead Intelligence Analyst It is proposed that the Lead Intelligence Analyst will report to the Head of Strategy, Intelligence and Risk. The Lead Intelligence Analyst will be a technical role, looking to support the wider team with high level technical expertise and practice leadership. v) Principal Advisor, Strategy and Business Planning It is proposed to establish a new Principal Advisor, Strategy and Business Planning position for the group. This position will be responsible for the development and maintenance of the overall Regulatory Systems group annual strategic plan and support the group in translating strategy into actionable and measurable business plans. This role is proposed to report to the Head of Strategy, Intelligence and Risk Over the past few months, the Regulatory Services group has moved into a day planning cycle. Being able to plan work in our current environment is even more imperative as it will help focus efforts and resources. vi) Team Leader, Business Services It is proposed to establish a Team Leader, Business Services reporting to the Head of Strategy, Intelligence and Risk. The Regulatory Systems group will continue to require business operational and financial planning, reporting, risk, governance activities and secretariat support for the Regulatory Services Senior Leadership Group and other panels (such as the Regulatory Actions Panel) and driving SLG initiatives as required, which this position will oversee. vii) Senior Advisor, Risk With the proposed disestablishment of the National Manager, Intelligence, Insights and Risk, there is a higher need for a role dedicated to intelligence and regulatory risk thought leadership, analysis, and advice across the Regulatory Systems group. It is therefore proposed to establish a Senior Advisor, Risk reporting to the Team Leader, Business Services. Current structure and proposed change Intelligence, Insights and Risk team
Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of Proposed future structure Strategy, Intelligence and Risk team
Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of i) Engagement, Information and Education team and Team Leader With the proposed disestablishment of Manager, Engagement, and the proposed consolidation of the function into the Implementation team, it is proposed that oversight of Engagement, Information and Education comes from a newly proposed Team Leader, Engagement, Information and Education. This position will lead the team to deliver information and education resources, products and services that enable the delivery of regulatory system strategies and drive impactful change in stakeholder behaviour and their interaction with regulatory systems. ii) Principal, Advisors and Senior Advisors in the Engagement team It is proposed that the reporting line for the Advisor, Engagement and Senior Advisor, Engagement move to the Team Leader, Engagement, Information and Education. To reflect an increased focus on education and information, as well as engagement, it is proposed the job titles of the Advisor and Senior Advisors include Engagement, Education and Information. With the need to scale back and refocus work in the group, a reduction in the number of Senior Advisors from five to three is proposed. It is also proposed that the position of Principal Advisor, Strategic Engagement be disestablished, with responsibilities of this position moving to the newly proposed Head of Implementation and newly proposed Team Leader, Engagement, Information and Education. There is no change proposed to the number of Advisors. iii) Operational Policy function and Team Leader A centralised operational policy function will ensure that across the Group we are consistently applying best practice in the development and rollout of the necessary operational support to regulators, and guidance, support and clarity to the sector. With the proposed disestablishment of the two Manager, Service Design positions in AML and Gambling, it is proposed to establish a new Team Leader, Operational Policy to have oversight over the Operational Policy kaimahi. As mentioned previously, it is proposed that the operational policy kaimahi in the Gambling and AML group report into the Team Leader, Operational Policy. iv) Senior Project Manager As mentioned above it is proposed to move the Senior Project Manager from the Strategy and Capability team to the Implementation team. Additionally, it is proposed that a second Senior Project Manager position is established to allow for each role to provide support to each of the regulatory systems. Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of Current structure and proposed changes Engagement team
Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of Introduction Introduction from Chief Executive Paul James Kia ora koutou, On December , the Minister of Finance formally announced an ongoing Fiscal Sustainability Programme to embed a culture of responsible spending across government. The first step in this programme is an Initial Baseline Exercise for government agencies designed to find around . billion a year in savings to deliver the Governments policy commitments and fund critical cost pressures. The changes proposed in this document and all changes being made across the Department have not been made lightly. However, they are needed to enable us to meet the Governments Fiscal Sustainability Programme and ensure we deliver what is required of us. This is likely to be the first stage of the Governments Programme. We can expect greater focus on restraint, reprioritisation, valueformoney, alignment to priorities and efficiencies for some time, possibly years. Manaakitanga and kotahitanga are key to how we work with each other and navigate this process to deliver outcomes for the people we serve. I encourage you to participate fully in the process and make sure your views and feedback are heard.
Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of Introduction from Suzanne Doig, Deputy Chief Executive, Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Like all branches in Te Tari Taiwhenua, to deliver to the Governments requirements and to ensure our future financial sustainability, Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy, needs to make a permanent reduction in its expenditure from July . As a Branch, we have two main sources of funding: funding granted to us each year by Parliament (called Crown funding) and revenue we earn from fees and charges, in areas like gambling and the Lake Taup harbourmaster (often called thirdparty funding or in the case of Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy, memorandum account funding). Our funding covers operating expenses (also known as OPEX), such as rent on the buildings we occupy, salaries, ICT costs and grants to organisations. It also includes capital expenses (CAPEX), which are assets we buy or develop, such as laptops and vehicles. The permanent baseline reduction of . announced by the Government only relates to Crownfunded activities. Our thirdparty funded functions are, however, still within scope of the Governments overall expectation that the public sector pursues efficiencies and improves its effectiveness in delivery of all its activities. The Department has identified initiatives to enable us to meet the . baseline reductions. The initiatives broadly cover: Cost reductions, such as reviewing building leases and freight costs. Efficiency savings, such as reviewing how we manage some of our services and store information. Reviewing what we insource and outsource. Introducing investtosave measures, where we invest money now to ensure ongoing savings in the future. Looking at how some services are funded. Reducing our discretionary spending on travel, contractors, consultants and events. Reducing some of our training programmes. Reducing or closing down some of our services and scaling back programmes. Closing vacancies that have been open for a long time. The Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy leadership team has identified that we cannot meet our savings requirements only by cutting back on expenses and holding vacancies. We need to reassess how we deliver our functions in line with our new funding levels, and this will require some organisational change that impacts positions and kaimahi. We are working with the PSA and following the Management of Change clause as per the Collective Agreement. Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of This consultation document seeks your feedback about changes proposed in the Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Branch. I recognise that change affects people. As a good employer the Department aims, as much as possible, to provide new opportunities and to assist staff through the change process. Consultation will be open and genuine, but total consensus need not be achieved before decisions are made. We also need to work within the parameters that have been set for us. I encourage you to provide feedback on the proposal and the change protocol described in this document over the next weeks. I also want to draw your attention to the support available during this process. These details are laid out in section of this document.
Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of Section Two: Consultation Process Purpose of consultation document This consultation document outlines the proposal for change and the potential impacts on the Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Branch and to give you an opportunity to provide feedback before any final decisions are made. The document is structured in five sections: Section : Introduction Section : Consultation Process Section : Background Section : Current Organisation Structure and Proposed Impact Section : Proposed Change Protocol We are seeking feedback on: the proposal for change to the organisational structure and positions reporting lines, team configuration and job titles draft job descriptions timeline for the proposed change process the proposed change protocol, including approach to the reassignment processes
Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of Timeline The broad consultation and decision timeline is as follows: Event April Release embargoed consultation document to the PSA April Commence consultation April, May, May All Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Virtual Drop in sessions April, May, May Regulatory Services Virtual Dropin sessions pm, May Feedback period closes June Release embargoed final decision document to the PSA June Final decisions announced and Expressions of Interest application process commences pm, June Expression of Interest application process closes June to July Reassignment (including contestable reassignment) assessments completed July to July Affected kaimahi notified of outcome of Expression of Interest August new structure becomes effective
Released under the Official Information Act Released under the Official Information Act Consultation document: Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change Page of Proposed future structure
Released under the Official Information Act Released under the Official Information Act Released under the Official Information Act Released under the Official Information Act Released under the Official Information Act
Released under the Official Information Act Released under the Official Information Act Released under the Official Information Act Released under the Official Information Act Released under the Official Information Act Released under the Official Information Act Released under the Official Information Act Released under the Official Information Act Released under the Official Information Act Released under the Official Information Act Released under the Official Information Act Released under the Official Information Act Released under the Official Information Act Released under the Official Information Act Released under the Official Information Act Released under the Official Information Act Released under the Official Information Act Released under the Official Information Act
Relevant Legislation The following Acts:
Relevant counci ls will appoint representative s to a Governor Representative Group (the
Relevant legislation Means:
Relocations and the Waikiwi decision
Remaining materials for passage of the Local Government (Electoral Legislation and Mori Wards and Mori Constituencies) Amendment Bill
Removal and Disposal Policy The storage cost for these overseas books cost s the New Zealand taxpayer more than million a year in ongoing storage and building operation costs. However, storage is not the only reason for removing unused items from the librarys collections . It is good collection ma nagement practice to ensure that collections developed for their short term utility remain fit for purpose. Decisions around disposal of OPC items from our General Collection to , such as donating to other libraries, have been guided by our Principles for retention or deselection of the Overseas Collections held by the National Library of New Zealand PDF KB . We are now developing a new policy for removing and disposing of collection items. This will sit alongside other important policies that guide our activities, such as the Collections Policy and collection plans mentioned above. This new policy w ork will specifically inform how we make decisions about items to be removed (or deaccessioned) from collections in the future and how we dispose of these deaccessioned items. This will include decisions on whether we donate, export, or securely destroy th em, or use any other method developed as part of the policy process. Disposal of deaccessioned items from the OPC will be part of the implementation of this policy. As you have noted, I have requested that a Removal and Disposal Advisory Group be set up to advise our team during the development of this policy. Advisory Group members will bring their own expertise and the views of their organisations to the discussions . The Advisory Group comprises representative s from the Library and Information Association New Zealand Aotearoa , Te Rp Whakahau (the leading national body that represents Mori engaged in libraries, culture, knowledge, information, communication and systems technology in Aotearoa New Zealand), the New Zealand Historical Association, the Professional Historians Association of New ZealandAotearoa, Auckland Museum, and the Council of NZ University Libraries. The Advisory Group recently had its first meet ing. The Advisory Group are currently provid ing advice and input into a draft removal and disposal policy. In the first part of the new year , the library will invite a wide group of stakeholders and interested parties from the public, including researchers, authors , and publishers , to be involved in conversations about this initial draft. As I have mentioned, y ou will be invited to participate in this engagement process. We will then consider all feedback and progress the policy development. We anticipate the policy development will be completed in the first half of . PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS
Removing infected, and potentially infected, people from the community for the period that they may be infectious, the present standard being days, is the best approach for stopping the spread of the virus.
Renunciation The formal act of giving up an individuals right to New Zealand Citizenship
Renunciation or Deprivation of the individuals New Zealand Citizenship;
Reoffending Taranaki man sentenced to . years imprisonment for possessing over images of child sexual exploitation material
Repairing and regrowing Te Tairwhiti postCyclone Gabrielle
Repayable capital injection to Fire and Emergency New Zealand
Repeal of previous water services legislation
Replaced emergency lights and upgraded to LED lighting at the Archives building in Whanganui.
Replacing over , fluorescent lights with energy efficient LEDs and are gradually upgrading endoflife equipment to more energy efficient and costeffective options.
Report Commissioned by the Department of Internal Affairs from MartinJenkins: Participatory Practices in Local government
Report Commissioned by the Department of Internal Affairs from MartinJenkins: Participatory Practices in Local government ( December )
Report Commissioned by the Digital Council of Aotearoa from NZIER: Addressing the digital divide: The economic case for increasing digital inclusion (December ). The Digital Council was an advisory group providing advice to government on utilising digital and datadriven technologies for societal good in New Zealand.
Report Online Child Exploitation Material
Report Online Violent Extremist Material
Report for the National Archival and Library Institutions Ministerial Group on the status of the Chief Archivist (released May )
Report harmful online content
Report into Part A of the Governments Inquiry into the Whey Protein Concentrate Contamination Incident
Report into the findings and recommendations of a direction to report to the Chief Archivist issued to the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment December
Report of the Cabinet Legislation Committee: Period Ended
Report of the Government Inquiry into The Auckland Fuel Supply Disruption HTML version
Report of the Government Inquiry into The Auckland Fuel Supply Disruption PDF version
Report of the Government Inquiry into The Auckland Fuel Supply Disruption WORD version
Report of the Government Inquiry into the Appointment Process for a Deputy Commissioner of Police
Report of the Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events
Report of the Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events GOVERNMENT INQUIRY INTO THE RESP ONSE TO THE
Report of the Havelock North Drinking Water Inquiry: Stage
Report of the Havelock North Drinking Water Inquiry: Stage
Report of the Havelock North Drinking Water Inquiry: Stage HTML version
Report of the Havelock North Drinking Water Inquiry: Stage PDF version
Report of the Havelock North Drinking Water Inquiry: Stage WORD version
Report of the Rural Supplies Technical Working Group
Report of the Working Group for Reducing Barriers to Changing Registered Sex
Report on New Zealands Dairy Food Safety Regulatory System (PDF version) .mb
Report on New Zealands Dairy Food Safety Regulatory System Chinese translation (PDF version) .mb
Report on New Zealands Dairy Food Safety Regulatory System Consolidated Recommendations (HTML version)
Report on New Zealands Dairy Food Safety Regulatory System Executive Summary (HTML version)
Report on New Zealands Dairy Food Safety Regulatory System Independent Peer Reviewers Report (HTML version)
Report on New Zealands Dairy Food Safety Regulatory System Parts B C
Report on Overseas Travel: Rt Hon Winston Peters: Melbourne, Australia November
Report on the Associate Minister of Local Governments engagement with rural and provincial councils ( July August )
Report on the WPC incident: Causes and Responses executive summary (Chinese language translation) (PDF kb)
Report on the WPC incident: Causes and Responses full report (Chinese language translation) (PDF .mbb)
Report on the WPC incident: Causes and Responses full report (PDF .mb)
Report other harmful online Content
Report other harmful online content
Reports and downloadable resources
Representation is the primary reason for our ethnic pay gaps. We have significantly greater ethnic diversity in our lower paying jobs compared to our higher paying jobs.
Reprioritisation of funds for Wairoa in Response to the East Coast Severe Weather Events
Request Alexander Turnbull Library logo
Request Chinese Poll Tax Heritage Trust logo
Request Internal Affairs logo
Request Lottery Grants Board logo
Request National Library logo
Request Pacific Development and Conservation Trust logo
Request Peace Disarmament Education Trust logo
Request RealMe Tnei Au logo
Request a logo or visual identity guide
Request for Information (RFI)
Request for Information Supporting Schedule A PDF version
Request for Information Supporting Schedule A Word version
Request for Information Supporting Schedule AA PDF version
Request for Information Supporting Schedule AA Word version
Request for Information Supporting Schedule B PDF version
Request for Information Supporting Schedule B Word version
Request for Information Supporting Schedule C PDF version
Request for Information Supporting Schedule C Word version
Request for Information Supporting Schedule E PDF version
Request for Information Supporting Schedule E Word version
Request for Information Supporting Schedule F PDF version
Request for Information Supporting Schedule F Word version
Request for Information Supporting Schedule G PDF version
Request for Information Supporting Schedule G Word version
Request for Information Supporting Schedule J PDF version
Request for Information Supporting Schedule J Word version
Request for Information Template Workbook I
Request for Information Template Workbook II
Request for approval to advise Select Committee on the Natural and Built Environment and Spatial Planning Bills
Request for approval to advise Select Committee on the New Plymouth District Council (Perpetual Investment Fund) Bill
Request for information Guidance document
Request one of our organisations logos
Request to appoint advisers to the Mori Affairs Committee
Request to join Edgecumbe litigation as an interested party joint briefing w MfE
Request to select a process for the appointment of the Chief Gambling Commissioner
Requests may sometimes be refused, or information withheld, when a good reason exists under the OIA for not providing the information, such as to protect peoples privacy, or because the information is already publicly available. If this happens in your request, we will tell you the reason for the decision. For more information about why requests may be refused, or information withheld see
Requirements for councils to develop Water Services Delivery Plans by September
Requirements for councils to include in their Plans baseline information about their water services operations, assets, revenue, expenditure, pricing, and projected capital expenditure, as well as necessary financing arrangements, as a first step towards future economic regulation. The Act also enables some councils and councilcontrolled organisations to be subject to an early form of information disclosure by the Commerce Commission, prior to the enduring economic regulation regime.
Requirements for the Plans: Plans must:
Requirements for water organisations . In June Cabinet agreed ECOMIN to a set of minimum requirements that would apply to all water service providers. The requirements are intended to promote efficiency, improve the governance and management of financially sustainable water services, and ensure accountability within the sector . They include: . Being subject to economic, environment and water quality regulation; . Being subject to planning and accountability framework for water services ; . Being financially sustainable, water services must be ring fenced ; . Acting consistently with statutory objectives ;
Requirements that Plans outline future water services delivery arrangements, and for councils to commit to an implementation plan
Requiring a Statutory Declaration Select c ommittees recommendation . The select committee recommended requiring a statutory declaration from people applying to change the sex on their birth certificate. They recommended the following prescriptions for the statutory declaration, requiring the applicant to state that they: . want the sex marker on their birth certificate to match their identified gender; . intend to continue to identify as a person of this gender; and . understand the consequences of the application. Departments advice agree with the select c ommittees recommendations . Requiring a statutory declaration with prescribed information would provide some assurance that the applicant understands the implications of changing sex on a birth certificate. It also provides some assurance that applicants are completing this process with the intent of living in their preferred gender, and reduces the likelihood of frivolous or fraudulent applications. Falsifying a statutory declaration is a criminal offence and can lead to imprisonment for up to three years. . A statutory declaration balances the interests of transgender and intersex people and the need to protect the integrity of registered birth records. It is important to maintain the accuracy of the birth register as its information is a source for documents like passports or driver licences.
Requiring water services entities to identify deficiencies in access to water services for communities and to develop a plan to address them.
Research fellowship report on charities law released
Research online and at the Library
Residential care Overseas experience indicates that residential care i s a beneficial form of treatment for a small number of people with severe addiction behaviours, and therefore would be an option for the limited number of people in New Zealand experiencing high levels of gambling harm. The Ministry currently funds some gambling harm support to people in alcohol and other drug residential treatment; however, demand does exist for residential treatment that provides gambling support first and foremost. The Ministry will work with providers to develop and pilot a clinically robust model of care, based on intensive treatment for people experiencing severe gambling harm, but likely allowing for support for coexisting issues in addition. It will then adopt a package ofcare approach to funding, similar to the way in which it funds alcohol and drug treatment residential care. The Ministry proposes to fund a small number of packages each year in the last year of the levy, with each package supporting about five people per year, depending on complexity of need. The Ministry expects to phase in this support with an established treatment provider, and has yet to decide whether to purchase on a capacity or demand basis, via a fee for service as required. . Ministry of Health operating costs Ministry operating costs (departmental expenditure) comprise contract management, policy and service development work, management of the research and evaluation programme, and management of the Client Information Collection (CLIC) database. The budget for these components has remained at around , a year for many years now. The KPMG Value for Money Review concluded that the Ministry s operating costs were reasonable. In the past, the Ministry devised the budget for its operating costs on the assumption that more funding would be required in the final year of each threeyear period, when the strategy for the next threeyear period was being developed. In fact, much of this work occurs in the second half of the second year of each threeyear period. For , the Ministry has phased the budget accordingly. Table : Budget for Ministry operating costs (GST exclusive), Total (m) (m) (m) (m) Total operating costs (m) . . . . STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
Residual unallocated balance .
Resignation of Commissioner Steenson overseeing HARC
Resignation of TAB New Zealand Board Chair and appointment of interim Chair
Resilient Westport November update
Resilient Westport update on key issues and mitigations
Resilient Westport: Announcing drawdown of funds for structural flood protection
Resilient Westport: next release of funds for futurefocussed measures
Resilient infrastructure is important to communities and their longterm wellbeing. Addressing the planning for and funding of infrastructure ensures communities have the facilities that allow our regions to thrive and prosper.
Resolution An update to the server database. Re run the exports manually. The fix for this is in V.(). V..() fixed the issue of the app uploading incorrect data to the server.
Resolution App update to v. () v.()
Resolution Dates were incorrect due to localisation issue.
Resolution Gordon Spremic joined the call with Tim and Matt. He identified the cache issue then reset the devices to clear the caches. The VT APP and DFU tools were separated onto two different devices during the process. Gordon got Tim to use Bluetooth to connect to the old name. After disconnecting we could see the new name and it would then allow him to connect to our app.
Resolution New firmware v.. was issued during the night of May . This was written to the cards by Tim May for the cards collected overnight, then later to the other cards collected during the day. Impact This added time to Tims process during the day. Tim had to collect not only the static cards, but also the cards issued to staff.
Resolution Turning the cards back on and re writing the ID back to the cards resolved this issue.
Resource Management Reform: Meeting with the Minister for the Environment on May
Resource Management and the Mori Electoral Option, where appropriate.
Resources on pornography for parents, young people and educators.
Responding to TAB NZs Partnering Arrangement Proposal
Responding to local electoral system challenges
Responding to the Future for Local Government Review
Responding to the Governments efficiency and effectiveness priority
Responding to the Racing Integrity Boards Final Greyhound Review Report
Response to advice requests from Mori Affairs Committee on the Rotorua District Council (Representation Arrangements) Bill
Response to letter from Mayor Brown on Auckland priorities
Response to the Regulations Review Committees letter regarding Government response to Inquiry into bylaws
Response to the Three Waters Transition Gateway Review
Responses to Official Information Act requests
Responsibilities for cultural conservation
Responsibilities for prisoner enrolment
Responsibilities of the Trust Framework Authority
Responsibilities to other Ministers
Responsible Minister for the Department
Responsible dog ownership includes responsibility for the behaviour of dogs. As well as providing food, water, warmth, shelter, care and affection, this means cleaning up its faeces, preventing the dog from being a nuisance and ensuring that it is well socialised and trained. It requires an owner to obey the law and understand their dog and the reasons for its behaviour.
Responsible for the GCSB to cany out fmiher work and repoi back to Cabinet by:Aphl
Responsible for the Government Communications Security Bureau recommend the
Responsible for the Government Communications Security Bureau to carry out
Retention of DIA Information (and therefore personal information) for longer than necessary would be contrary to IPP and may constitute a moderate breach of the Privacy Act . All DIA Information that is brought into the NZSIS intelligence analysis system is information that has featured in a legitimate NZSIS function and is maintained as a business record in accordance with a disposal authority issued by the Chief Archivist.
Return electronic document to: Cohesion reference SSWDQEKHX Ministerial database reference IA
Return electronic document to: Feicity.Lawlordla.govt.nz
Return electronic document to: J() nd Richard Whatman
Return electronic document to: sam.milesdia.govt.nz
Return to Matthew Mccallum , Level , Pipitea Street, Wellington
Review Committees and lntermedia ries may use the
Review Panel (the Review Panel) and has been presented to the
Review Panel and a copy was provided to the Regulations Review Committee
Review January
Review of Content Regulation in Aotearoa New Zealand: What different approaches to engagement can deliver
Review of DIAs Orders in Council under the Severe Weather Emergency Recovery Legislation Act
Review of Mobile Application Costs
Review of Racing, Paper : Overview of the New Zealand Racing Industry and Identified Issues
Review of Racing, Paper : Policy Decisions on Transitional Governance to Drive Change
Review of Racing, Paper : Proposals for Immediately Increasing Revenue for the Racing Industry
Review of an area of law or subject of legal interest
Review of first year of Point of Consumption Charge
Review of options for funding the classification framework under the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act,
Review of the Mtt Island Environmental Management Plan Under the Local Government Act the Minister of Local Government is the territorial authority for any part of New Zealand within regional council boundaries that is not already part of a local authoritys district. This includes islands, predominantly in the Bay of Plenty. Only two islands are populated Mtt ( residents) and Thua (one resident ). As the territorial authority, you are responsible for various duties and powers across a range of functions including resource management planning. The Department supports your role as territorial authority for the Offshore Islands by facilitating district planning and consenting functions. Both Mtt and Tahua have operative distr ict plans as required under current resource management legislation, and which need to be reviewed ten years after they are first made operative. The Mtt Island Environmental Management Plan was first made operative in May , requiring a review to be initiated prior to May . The Department has been contacted by Te Patuwai Tribal, a prominent hap and landowner on Mtt, requesting to engage the plan review process.
Review of the Public Works Act Toit te Whenua Land Information New Zealand is leading work on a review of the Public Works Act (the Act) . We understand a scoping paper will be sent to Hon Chris Penk, as Minister for Land Information, and shared with yourself and Hon Chris Bishop, next week. Whil e you are more closely involved in this work from your Transport portfolio, we note that the local government sector is a bigger user of the Act than all Crown agencies combined. We will be involved in cross agency support for the review and brief you on l ocal government system implications when appropriate. Contact: Graham Nielsen
Review of the guiding principles for Ministerial intervention in a local authority in the New Zealand Gazette
Review the purchase order to ensure it matches the invoice exactly
Revised arrangements to provide greater certainty for roles and responsibilities for stormwater management including in relation to urban water courses on private land.
Revision to the Water Services Acts Repeal Bill Approval to lodge
Revocation of Commercial Use of Royal Photographs Rules Order
Revocation of Commercial Use of Royal Photographs Rules Order (SL )
Revoking spent Regulations: Commercial Use of Royal Photographs Rules , , and
Revolution Infosec Limited
Rights Act will only be possible when changes to the legislative framework for
Risk Assessment tool (also known as the questions) to make it easier for
Risk and Assurance Governance Committee:
Risks Mitigation Compliant adoption levels must be over . Any digital contact tracing technology is only effective at very high levels of compliant adoption, estimated at over and ideally over , in places where highrisk encounters are likely. Effective marketing messaging is critical, particularly to address core concerns of privacy and security, but it is expected that some level of Government mandating will be required in areas of particular risk to achieve the full benefits. Lead times to deployment. Deploying CovidCard will take months, meaning it needs to be deployed in advance of any outbreak or opening of the border. CovidCard is best deployed in advance of an outbreak or the opening of the border, which is expected to dramatically increase the risk of importing cases of COVID. CovidCard implicitly requires a strategy which considers COVID as an ongoing threat to New Zealands health and economy.
Risks to implementation note there is significant administrative complexity in reducing the voting age for local elections only;
Robert (Rob) Hohepa Hewitt
Roblox Protecting your child
Role A position established under a contract of employment, contract of service
Role Critic al Very Import ant Very Impo rtant Very Importa nt
Role Critical Very Imp ortant Very I mportant Very Impo rtant
Role Critical Very Import ant Very Imp ortant Very Imp ortant
Role Critical Very Import ant Very Important Very Imp ortant
Role Critical Very Import ant Very Important Very Important
Role Nurse (.) Junior Doctor (.) Allied Health Team Member (.) Senior Doctor (.) Ward Administrative Staff (.) Ward Domestic Staff (.) Other (CNM) (.)
Role Overview PDF (PDF, KB)
Role Overview PDF (PDF, KB)
Role Overview PDF (PDF, KB)
Role of the Trust Framework Authority
Roles and responsibilities relevant to Fire and Emergency New Zealand
Roles and responsibilities:
Rolled out a Critical Risk Management Framework to manage risks that could cause serious harm or injure kaimahi
Rotorua model WICS report
Rotorua slide pack WICS report
Royal Commission . The Inquiry will review key decisions taken by the
Royal Commission into Abuse in Care Cabinet papers related to extension of time release
Royal Commission into Abuse in Care: update on progress
Royal Commission into COVID Lessons proactive release of documents related to public consultation on expanding the terms of reference
Royal Commission into COVID Lessons: developing proposals to expand the terms of reference
Royal Commission into COVID Lessons: draft letter in response to quarterly progress report for period ending December
Royal Commission into COVID Lessons: meeting with the Chair on February
Royal Commission into COVID Lessons: next steps for expanding the terms of reference
Royal Commission into COVID Lessons: oral item at Cabinet about the phase report MinisterPortfolio: Internal Affairs
Royal Commission into COVID Lessons: process for appointing a new member
Royal Commission into Historical Abuse in State Care and in the Care of Faithbased Institutions: Quarterly report for October December
Royal Commission into Historical Abuse in State Care and in the Care of Faithbased Institutions: Technical adjustment to a multiyear appropriation
Royal Commission of Inquiry (COVID Lessons) Order
Royal Commission of Inquiry into Abuse in Care
Royal Commission of Inquiry into Abuse in Care Extension of Time: talking points for the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee
Royal Commission of Inquiry into Abuse in Care extension of time
Royal Commission of Inquiry into Abuse in Care: talking points for the Cabinet Social Outcomes Committee Minister
Royal Commission of Inquiry into Building Failure Caused by the Canterbury Earthquakes
Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID Lessons ( Phase of the Royal
Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID Lessons Cabinet minutes related to expanding the Terms of Reference
Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID Lessons Te Tira rai Urut
Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID Lessons documents related to expanding the Terms of Reference
Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID Lessons: proactive release of documents related to the establishment of Phase
Royal Commission of Inquiry into Historical Abuse in Care
Royal Commission of Inquiry into Historical Abuse in Care and in the Care of Faithbased Institutions: Quarterly Report to June
Royal Commission of Inquiry into Historical Abuse in Care and in the Care of Faithbased Institutions: Quarterly Report to September
Royal Commission of Inquiry into Historical Abuse in Care and in the Care of Faithbased Institutions: Quarterly Report to March and Upcoming Meeting with the Chair
Royal Commission of Inquiry into Historical Abuse in State Care and in the Care of FaithBased Institutions
Royal Commission of Inquiry into Historical Abuse in State Care and in the Care of Faithbased Institutions Order
Royal Commission of Inquiry into Historical Abuse in State Care and in the Care of Faithbased Institutions extension of time
Royal Commission of Inquiry into Historical Abuse in State Care and in the Care of Faithbased Institutions: draft Letter of Expectations for the Chair for
Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Attack on Christchurch Mosques
Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Attack on Christchurch Mosques on March
Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Terrorist Attack on Christchurch
Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Terrorist Attack on Christchurch Mosques on March
Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Terrorist Attack on Christchurch Mosques on March Order
Royal Commission on Auckland Governance
Royal Commission on Auckland Governance website
Royal Commission on Genetic Modification
Royal Commission on the Pike River Coal Mine Tragedy
Royal Commission on the Pike River Coal Mine tragedy
Royal Commission Draft Letter of Expectations
Royal Commissions of Inquiry
Rt Hon Chris Hipkins (Chair)
Rt Hon Winston Peters , Minister for Racing Proactive release of Cabinet material about the Racing Industry Amendment Bill December
Ruapehu model WICS report
Ruapehu slide pack WICS report
Rules and regulations for digital identity services
Rules for digital identity services
Rural Drinking Water Programme Announcement for Rural Supplies
Rural Supplies Technical Working Group
Rural Supplies Technical Working Group Recommendations
Rural Supplies Technical Working Group Report
Rural Supplies Technical Working Group Terms of Reference Feb
Rural Water Supplies Technical Working Group meeting
Rural and Provincial sector meeting on and March
Rural considerations for Three Waters
Rranga Upoko Table of Contents Kupu Whakataki: Minita m Te Tari Taiwhenua Foreword: Minister of Internal Afairs Tirohanga Whnui mai i te Pou Whakahaere Overview from the Chief Executive Te huatanga me te Hkai o ng Mahi Nature and Scope of Functions Ng Whakaarotau Kwanatanga Government Priorities and Strategic Context Te Pou Tarwaho Hua Outcomes Framework T mtou kkiri i te panonitanga hei whakatukuki mtou whinga How we will drive change to deliver our goals Tirohanga Whnui mai i te Pou Whakahaere Ministry for Ethnic Communities Overview from the Chief Executive Te huatanga me te Hkai o ng Mahi Ministry for Ethnic Communities Nature of scope and functions Ruataki Whinga Ministry for Ethnic Communities Strategic goals Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
S E N S I T I V E Hon Simeon Brown, Minister of Local Government Proactive r elease o f Cabinet mate r ial s reco rds the a pproval of the introduction of th e Bill which will give effect to stage two of Local Water Done Well May These documents have been proactively re leased : Minute of D ecision: CAB MIN . Cabinet P aper: Local G overnment ( Water Service s Preliminary Arrangements) B ill: Approval for Introduction Some parts o f this i nformation r elease would not be appropriate to r elease and, i f requested, would be withheld under th e Official I nformation Act ( the Act). W here this i s the ca se, the relevant sections of the Act t hat would a pply have been identified. Where information has b een w ithheld, no public i nterest has b een i dentified t hat w ould outweigh the reasons for w ithholding it. Where information h as been w ithheld for o ther reasons c onsistent w ith a dvice, i t has b een a nnotated w ith an a sterisk . This i nformation ma y in some cases be accessible under t he Official Information A ct . Key t o Redaction C odes : Sect ion ()(g)(i) information to maintain the free and frank expression of opinions. Section ()(ba)(i) protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely to prejudice the supply of similar information, or information from the same source, and it is in the public interest that such information shouldcontinue to be supplied. For Cabinet material and any public service departmental advice use this copyright statement Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) S E N S I T I V E S E N S I T I V E CABMIN. Cabinet Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill: Approval for Introduction Portfolio Local Government On May , following reference from the Cabinet Legislation Committee, Cabinet: noted that the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill (the Bill) holds a category priority on the Legislation Programme (must be passed by the end of ); noted that the Bill is the second bill as part of Local Water Done Well, and contains the preliminary arrangements for councils to transition into financially sustainable water services delivery models, together with arrangements for a financially sustainable Watercare; noted that the Bill will: . require councils to prepare a water services delivery plan within months of the Water Services Act coming into force; . contain bespoke Ministerial assistance and intervention powers if councils find it difficult or fail to deliver a water services delivery plan; . require councils to provide other specified information in relation to delivering water services; . contain streamlined consultation and decisionmaking requirements for the establishment or amendment of water services councilcontrolled organisations; . provide legislative provisions for a financially sustainable Watercare, together with interim economic regulation administered by a Crown monitor; noted that in March , the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee authorised the Minister of Finance and Minister of Local Government to make policy decisions on a financially sustainable model for Watercare ECOMIN; agreed that a Crown monitor will be appointed to Watercare from the day of Royal assent; S E N S I T I V E enkv ()(ba)(i) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government S E N S I T I V E CABMIN. noted that the Minister of Local Government will report back to the Cabinet Appointments and Honours Committee in July on the appointment of a Crown monitor; noted that in April , Cabinet agreed to exclude the hierarchy of obligations contained in the National Policy Statement for Freshwater Management from resource consent application and decisionmaking processes CABMIN.; noted that at that time Cabinet also authorised the Minister Responsible for RMA Reform and the Minister of Local Government to determine if amendments to the Water Services Act were required to ensure the hierarchy of obligations would not apply to the development of wastewater standards; noted that the above Ministers have determined that minor amendments should be made to the Water Services Act to remove the hierarchy of obligations so that there is consistent application during standardssetting and resource consenting; agreed that an outofscope Amendment Paper to the Bill be released, to amend the Water Services Act to give effect to the decisions above; noted that, as the Amendment Paper is out of scope of the Bill, an instruction to the select committee will be required to have it considered, which can be debated along with the instruction for a shortened reportback ; authorised the Minister of Local Government to make minor and technical changes to the Bill up to its introduction; approved the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill PCO . for introduction, subject to the final approval of the Government caucuses and sufficient support in the House of Representatives; agreed that the Bill be introduced by May ; agreed that the Government propose that the Bill be: . referred to the Finance and Expenditure Committee; . enacted by August ; noted that further policy decisions will be made in June and July , comprising the long term settings of Local Water Done Well, to be set out in a third bill intended to be introduced in December ; noted that the Minister of Local Government and the Minister for RMA Reform intend to write to local authorities and iwi to advise them of the decisions referred to in paragraph above. Diana Hawker for Secretary of the Cabinet Secretarys Note: Cabinet amended paragraph . This minute accordingly replaces LEGMIN. S E N S I T I V E enkv Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE
SP Global Ratings, actin g through
SP Global Ratings analytical jud gem ents and assumpt ions include:
S.()(a) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Priority Urgent INCONFIDENCE Page of Internal Affairs briefing Hon Jan Tinetti Minister of I nternal Affairs Title: Final Cabinet paper Proposed amendments to the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill for lodgement June Key issues You recently consulted your ministerial colleagues on the Cabinet paper Proposed amendments to the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill, which is scheduled for consideration at the Social Wellbeing Committee (SWC) on June . The Cabinet paper has been with minor changes following the feedback received from your Ministerial colleagu es. The papers overall proposals have not changed.
S.()(f)(iv), S.()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Recommendations . We recommend that you : a) note that the Cabinet paper was following Ministerial consultation, but the overall proposal has not changed; b) agree to lodge the finalised Cabinet paper ( Appendix A ) with the Cabinet Office by am on June , for consideration by SWC on June ; and YesNo c) review the suggested talking points attached at Appendix B prior to SWC.
SACP upwards if we were to believe that the regulatory framework was working as it is
SDO Service Delivery and Operations
SDOlnformationPartnershipsdia.govt.nz
SEVERE WEATHER EMERGENCY RECOVERY (LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT
SIG NED by Janice Calvert (General Manager ) Executive Government Support) ) on behalf of THE SECRETARY FOR ) INTERNAL AFFAIRS )
SIGNED AT WELLINGTON theday of
SIGNED by Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
SOLGM hosted Q and A session webinar
SOLGM hosted announcement webinar
SPAM PREVENTION MESSAGING COMPLIANCE
SUPPLYING TO THE DEPARTMENT
SYSTEM DESIGN OVERVIEW One challenge during a virus pandemic such as COVID is being able to quickly isolate known or probable cases of the virus. When no or low numbers of cases of community transmission are occurring this isolation is mostly achieved by rapidly identifying and quarantining close contacts of known or probable cases. This is followed by various levels of mass quarantine if the virus is not controlled
Safari: Zoom in on web pages Apple
Safe and trusted digital identity services
Sams story age verificationentering a bar
Sara McFall Head of Systems, Strategy and ) I
Satellite Links Auckland District Court, Internal Affairs and Norwegian Police For Child Pornography Case
Scalability Cloud services, particularly hyperscale cloud, can be quickly and
Scammers are impersonating officials, via email and phone calls, asking for personal financial info, payment or fees into cryptocurrency or different bank accounts.
Scen ario sees the Crow n liqui dity facili ty to LGFA reduced to NZ billion from NZ. billion.
Scenari o NA NA ANegativeA Same as
Scenario , Scenario Scenario
Scenario Same as curren t
Scenario will be simil ar to scenario . The key area of differentiati on is:
Scenario NA NA AStable A Same as
Scenario will be similar to scenar io . The key area s of differentiation are:
Scenario Entity A model WICS report
Scenario Entity B model WICS report
Scenario Entity C model WICS report
Scenario Entity D model WICS report
Scenario Same as current
Scenario will be similar to scenario . The key area s of differentiation are:
Scenario NA NA ANegativeA Same as
Scenario will be similar to scenario . The key area of differentiation is:
Scenario NA NA ANegativeA Same as
Scenario will be similar to scenario . The key area of differentiation is:
Schedule A Charitable Entities
Schedule A Charitable Entities .
Schedule B Credit Unions, Friendly Societies, Incorporated Societies, Partnerships,
Schedule B Credit Unions, Friendly Sociees, Incorporated Sociees, Partnerships, Registered Limited Partnerships, and Registered New Zealand Companies This Class of Agencies, as dened in secon of the Privacy Act , contains Credit Unions, Friendly Sociees, Incorporated Sociees, Partnerships, Registered Limited Partnerships, and Registered New Zealand Companies The following table details New Zealand Agencies incl uded in this class, and in respect of each, the specied elds to be shared with the New Zealand Agency and the specied uses of the informaon. New Zealand Agency Establishing Act Government Policy Use(s) Field(s) Signatory Name Signature of Authority of acceptance of the Agreement of exit from the Agreement Asteron Life Limited Government Policy To enable the proacve idencaon of customers who: Have lives insured Hold a policy Are nominated beneciaries. The idencaon of the death of lives insured will improve the process of claims management for people claiming life insurance benets by idenfying individuals whom potenal claims relate. The idencaon of the death of the policy holder or nomi nated beneciaries will allow updates to policies to occur Death Informaon as specied in related Operang Procedures Seema Bangera Seema Bangera Executive Manager Claims and Customer Solutions Unity Credit Union Government Policy To take appropriate acons on the deceased members account, this could mean freezing accounts, stopping direct debits, removing access to the funds from people who should no longer have access (such as power of atorney, Authority to Operate etc.) and cancelling products such as EFTPOS to ensure their estate is not accessed without the proper approvals Death Informaon as specied in related Operang Procedures Roanna Vining Head of Risk and Compliance
Schedule C Crown Entities
Schedule C Crown Entities . . . .
Schedule D Independent Advisory Committees and Statutory Supervisory Authorities
Schedule E Independent Statutory Bodies
Schedule E Independent Statutory Bodies .
Schedule F Intermediaries
Schedule F Intermediaries .
Schedule F Intermediaries This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Intermediaries. The following table details New Zealand Agencies included in this class, and in respect of each, the specified fields to be shared with that New Zealand Agency, and the specified uses of the information by the Intermediary and their Clients. New Zealand Agency Establishing Act Government Policy Use(s) Field(s) Signatory Name Signature of Authority of acceptance of the Agreement of exit from the Agreement New Zealand Marketing Association Government policy Clients will use this information to wash against their own data to ensure they do not communicate with deceased individuals. Clients will cease sending communications, invoices or , subscription reminders to deceased individuals or their families. Clients will proactively identify beneficiaries and life insurance policy owners to begin the process of paying appropriate entitlements. Clients will not require survivors of the deceased individual to produce a death certificate. Death Information as specified in related Operating Procedures K W Norris NoticeMATCH Limited Government policy NoticeMATCHs subscriber organisations use their matching tool to identify deaths of their customersclientssupportersdonors. Depending on their need, they are able to cease communication to the deceased and undertake whatever legal, moral or ethical obligation they may have with them or their families. Death Information as specified in related Operating Procedures S Skeet Personal Information Management Limited Government policy PIMs customers are able to use the tool to identify deaths of their customers. Depending on their need, they are able to cease communication to the deceased and undertake actions required on the account for example closing the account or paying out life insurance policies. Death Information as specified in related Operating Procedures R T Hughson
Schedule G lwi Organisations and other Maori Organisations
Schedule G lwi Organisations and other Maori Organisations .
Schedule H Local Authorities
Schedule H Local Authorities .
Schedule I Mortality Review Committees
Schedule I Mortality Review Committees .
Schedule J Occupational Regulatory Bodies
Schedule J Occupational Regulatory Bodies .
Schedule K Public Tertiary Institutions
Schedule K Public Tertiary Institutions .
Schedule L Registrars .
Schedule M Trustee Corporations
Schedule M Trustee Corporations .
Schedule of nonDepartmental assets
Schedule of nonDepartmental commitments
Schedule of nonDepartmental contingent assets and liabilities
Schedule of nonDepartmental expenditure
Schedule of nonDepartmental liabilities
Schedule of nonDepartmental revenue
Schedule to this MoU. The project deliverables in this MoU do not include delivery of skills andtraining initiatives, or participation in thes e programmes. Definitive agreements for those
Scope for first system improvements bill
Scoping a City and Regional Deals framework
Search and browse all issues of Te Ao Hou The New World magazine, by the Maori Affairs Department in to .
Search the Directory of New Zealand libraries
Search the collections of the National Library and Alexander Turnbull Library
Second Child Pornography Case in Four Days, More Before the Courts
Second flatmate jailed for porn
Second reading of the Water Services Entities Bill
Second release of Fire and Emergency New Zealand funding review papers
Second, councils will have months from the enactment of the Transitional Provisions Bill to prepare Water Services Delivery Plans to show how you plan to deliver financially sustainable water services. Water Services Delivery Plans will also include information about current water services. The purpose of the Plans is for councils individually or jointly to publicly demonstrate their intention and commitment to deliver water services in ways that are financially sustainable, meet regulatory quality standards for water network infrastructu re and water quality, and unlock housing growth. Through the development of these Plans, councils will provide an assessment of their water infrastructure, how much they need to invest, and how they plan to finance and deliver it through their preferred service delivery model. Ringfencing of water services and revenue from other council activities is a key feature of the Plans. Importantly, the Plans will be a way for you to provide transparency to your communities about the costs and financing of water services and empower you to make decisions about managing and delivering high quality water services that reflect your local nee ds and circumstances. The Plans will also support you to have conversations with other councils about joint plans for water services delivery. ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of The Government expects those discussions will, in many cases, progress to proposals for new council controlled or council owned water organisations to provide water services, the amalgamation of water services with those of other councils, or other shared services arrangements. My expectation is that those discussions and decisions are already happening at a local level, and should include mana whenua. As youll be aware, I have also asked my officials to support these early discussions that you may be having about your possible future service delivery arrangements. There are couple of key things I wanted to emphasise today about the Plans: o Plans can be developed by individual councils, or jointly where groups of councils are planning to jointly establish a water organisation o Plans are one off, transitional documents. They have no regulatory function LTPs continue to be councils primary planning and accountability document. o Plans must include drinking water, wastewater and stormwater but councils have flexibility about transferring stormwater in proposed new service delivery arrangements. o It will be up to councils to determine how best to engage with their communities as part of the Plan development process. o Plans must demonstrate how water services and their funding will be ringfenced from other council activities. The Department will be providing information and guidance to councils to support the development of Plans. The third area that Cabinet has agreed are steps towards a future economic regulation regime as part of Local Water Done Well. Economic regulation is a key feature of Local Water Done Well and is intended to ensure consumers pay efficient, cost reflective prices for water services, that those services are delivered to an acceptable quality and that water services providers are investing sufficiently in their infrastructure. Development of an economic regulation system for water services will be led by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment,
Secretary and Chief Executive
Secretary for Internal Affairs
Secretary for Internal Affairs, Secretary for Local Government,
Secretary for Internal Affairs foreword
Secretary for Women and Chief Executive, Te
Secretary in accordance with the Citizenship Act and regulations made
Secretary of Internal Affairs Chief Executive
Secretary of Internal Affairs Chief Executive RegistrarGeneral Births, Deaths and
Section of the Privacy Act requires Parties to provide written notice to individuals before
Section (d) information requested will soon become publicly available.
Section : Option identification . What options are available to address the problem
Section () of the Passports Act
Section : Implementing the preferred option How will it be implemented . The BDMRR Act will be amended to give effect to the selfidentification process. The Bill that reenacts the Act is awaiting second reading. Provisions that would introduce a selfidentification process are already in the Bill as reported back by Select Committee. It is intended that these selfidentification provisions will be amended through a supplementary order paper, which will be referred to Select Committee for further consideration. At Select Committee, the public will be able to comment on the self dentification process. It is intended that the Bill, with the selfidentification provisions, will be passed in early . . The Department is working with Te Puni Kkiri, the Ministry for Pacific Peoples, and the Office for Ethnic Communities to encourage participation in the select committee process by young people, Mori, Pacific peoples and ethnic communities. An engagement plan is being developed to support this work. This will include providing written information about the Bill to Iwi authorities, community organisations and media networks that have reach in these communities. . The Department will undertake work to update our systems, processes and application forms to implement the new selfidentification process. It is possible that this will take up to months, so delayed commencement of the provisions may be required. We are considering if transitional arrangements are required for any people who may have begun the Family Court process at the time of commencement. . The Department will undertake consultation and regulation development to determine: the number and terminology of nonbinary sex markers; the third parties who can provide the letter of support for applications for children and young people; and the extra requirements for where a person applies more than once. . The Department will work with the Department of Corrections on necessary amendments to the Corrections Regulations . The Department will also work with the Ministry of Justice and organisations that support transgender and intersex people Official recognition of transgender and intersex peoples gender will have positive impacts on their wellbeing and therefore will benefit wider society. Total monetised benefits Unknown Nonmonetised benefits Mediumhigh Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Statement to notify affected people and the courts of the change. We will work across government to update relevant websites. . Improvements to the process may trigger an increase in applications. The Department is aware of this and will prepare for this as part of implementation. . The Department is considering how to include a range of nonbinary and culturally specific markers into its applications and IT systems. We will also need to build in flexibility to allow the systems to adapt with evolving gender terminology. Monitoring, Evaluation, and Review . To ensure the objectives of changing to a selfidentification process are being met, the process will be reviewed five years from commencement of the Bill. As part of this the Minister must consult the Human Rights Commissioner, the transgender and intersex communities and any other persons and organisations considered appropriate. . Ahead of this formal review, the Department will survey applicants in the first few years after implementation to understand if the new process is meeting their needs. It is open to other stakeholders to contact the Department directly to raise any concerns they have with the new process. Depending on this feedback and these surveys the formal review could be brought forward. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs SelfIdentification Changes Act Bill SOP Status Quo in Act: Family Court process Current Bill: Selfidentification as proposed by Select Committee SOP: Preferred selfidentification clauses Application Process (Adult) Application to amend registered sex is made to the Family Court. Medical evidence is required. The Family Court judge decides if the application is successful . Application to amend registered sex is made to the RegistrarGeneral. A statutory declaration is required. The applicant decides what sex appears on their birth certificate in line with what best reflects their gender. Medical Evidence Evidence of medical treatment is required in the application. What constitutes medical evidence is decided by the judge. This can range from hormone therapy to gender affirming surgery. Medical evidence requirement removed and replaced with statutory declaration process. Statutory Declaration NAThe applicant is required to state that they: want the sex marker on their birth certificate to match their identified gender; intend to continue to identify as a person of this gender; and understand the consequences of the application. Citizenship Eligibility Overseasborn citizens and permanent residents are included in the definition of eligible person. The definition of eligible person should exclude anyone whose birth is registered overseas. Statutory Review NAA statutory review of selfidentification provisions is to be undertaken five years after they are enacted. Available Sex Markers Binary sex markers only: Male Female An indeterminate marker is available for intersex people born with a variation of sex characteristics. Nonbinary sex markers available: Male Female Intersex X (unspecified)Different sex markers available: Male Female Nonbinary marker options to be set in regulations Multiple Amendments to Sex Marker No set limit. However, a de facto limitation exists via: requiring satisfactory evidence that the applicant will maintain their nominated sex. only two sex marker options are available.Only one amendment to registered sex unless the Registered General is satisfied that there are special circumstances. Applicants reverting back to their sex assigned at birth may do so without meeting the special circumstances criteria. More than one amendment to registered sex is allowed. Applicants who make more than one amendment may need to meet additional requirements, to be set in regulations. Applicants reverting back to their sex assigned at birth are exempt from meeting these additional requirements. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs SelfIdentification Changes Process for Under s Status Quo in Act: Family Court process Current Bill: Selfidentification as proposed by Select Committee SOP: Selfidentification Age Categories All children and young people aged under apply via the same process. Children and young people aged under form one age category. and yearolds form a second age category. and yearolds who are or have been in a marriage, civil union, or de facto relationship can apply as adults. and yearolds Application ProcessThe guardian of an eligible child applies to the Family Court. Eligible or yearolds make a statutory declaration. The Court must be satisfied that: the guardian intends to raise the child as the nominated sex; and there is expert evidence that shows medical treatment affirming the nominated sex has or will be undertaken. Additional requirements: Guardian consent. Health professionals recommendation.Additional requirements: Guardian consent; OR Letter of support from a third party (to be set in regulations). Under s Application Process Same as above. Guardian of an eligible child makes a statutory declaration. Guardian consent is an inferred requirement based on the application process. Additional requirements: Health professionals recommendation.Additional requirements: Letter of support from a third party (to be stipulated in regulations). NAAt age , children whose guardian has amended their nominated sex on their behalf must reconfirm that this is the sex they wish to keep on their birth certificate. Not applicable because multiple amendments to registered sex are allowed. Further minor and technical decisions to be made: Gender selfidentifications impact on sex as determined by the general law of New Zealand: Clause I of the BDMRR Bill provides that sex of every person must continue to be determined by reference to the general law of New Zealand. This clause will be reworded to clarify that sex on a birth certificate should not be taken as conclusive evidence of a persons sex. Estimated time to implement selfidentification: Up to months may be required to ensure the technical infrastructure of the birth register is in place. Treatment of previous sex markers on birth certificates and the birth register: Where a person amends their sex marker their previous name and sex are not displayed on their birth certificate. This is important as it stops a person being outed as transgender. Previous markers will be closed rather than deleted on the birth register.Summary of changes to be stipulated in regulations: Nonbinary sex marker terminology. Additional requirements to be met if an applicant is amending their registered sex more than once. Who constitutes a third party and can provide a letter of support for under s amending their registered sex. Document Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Purpose This briefing seeks your agreement to a second tranche of policy proposals on introducing a selfidentification process for recognising gender on birth certificates through the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Bill (the Bill) . This briefing also provides you with the draft Cabinet paper, Introducing a self identification process to recognise gender on birth certificates (Appendix A ), for you r feedback and ministerial consultation. Executive summary You have agreed to seek Cabinet agreement to introduce a selfidentification process to enable people to have their gender recognised on birth certificates. This briefing provides you with the associated draft Cabinet paper for your feedback and ministerial consultation. You have agreed to a first tranche of policy proposals (IA refers). This briefing seeks your agreement to a second tranche of policy proposals. These include: . setting in regulations a range of markers to recognise nonbinary genders; . allowing people to amend their registered sex more than once, but with additional requirements for subsequent applications; . establishing different age categories with different requirements for applications for children and young people; . that most applications for children and young people need to be accompanied by a letter of support from a third party; and . guardian consent requirements for children and young people. Subject to your agreement on the above proposals and feedback on the draft Cabinet paper, we propose the Cabinet paper is considered by the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee on May . Background You have agreed to introduce a selfidentification process to enable transgender and intersex people to amend their sex on their birth certificate. Provisions that would enable a selfidentification process were added to the Bill at the recommendation of Select Committee in . Cabinet approval of selfidentification was not obtained at this time and is now required to progress the Bill with a selfidentification process. We are proposing several changes to the selfidentification provisions as reported back by Select Committee. These changes will be made via a Supplementary Order Paper (SOP). You have agreed to seek Cabinet agreement in May to introduce a self identification process and the policy decisions needed to draft the SOP. The term transgender is used in this paper to refer to all people whose gender differs from their assigned sex at birth this includes people who identify outside of the malefemale binary who may use a range of terms to describe their gender including non binary. Intersex is an umbrella term for people born with a variation of sex characteristics (such as sexual anatomy, reproductive organs, hormonal andor chromosome patterns). Intersex people are born with sex characteristics that are more diverse than narrow medical definitions of male or female bodies. Like anyone else, an intersex person may grow to identify with a different gender. To enable this the birth register must be . We are not proposing any changes to how sex is registered at birth. Gender is not known at birth, so the information collected will continue to be based on sex. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of You recently agreed to a first tranche of policy proposals on introducing self identification (IA refers), including: . requiring applicants to compete a statutory declaration; . removing the intersex marker option from the Bill; . excluding anyone whose birth cannot be registered in New Zealand from the definition of eligible person; and . requiring a statutory review of the selfidentification provisions five years after enactment. This briefing seeks your agreement to a second tranche of policy proposals that cover: . the number and terminology for a range of sex marker options; . the number of times a person can amend registered sex; and . the process for amending registered sex for children and young people. The first and second tranche of policy approvals are reflected in the draft Cabinet paper. Further policy approvals required to introduce a selfidentification process . This section outlines the remaining policy approvals required to introduce self identification. Provide sex marker options that are inclusive of nonbinary genders Status Quo The Family Court process allows people to show the binary sex markers on their birth certificate: female or male. Select Committees recommendation The Select Committee sought to add the option X (unspecified) to be inclusive of people who identify other than the binary (female and male) . Departments advice setting in regulations a range of markers to recognise nonbinary genders We proposed replacing the umbrella term X (unspecified) as it fails to adequately represent all nonbinary genders . We instead recommended a mechanism to enable a more inclusive and flexible process where a range of genders can be agreed and used by applicants. You agreed in principle to making one or more sex markers available for nonbinary gende rs and that these will be set in regulations or operational policy (IA refers). We recommend allowing a range of nonbinary sex markers that are set in regulations. Consultation can be completed when developing regulations to determine the number of and terminology used for these markers. Consultation can be used to gauge transgender and intersex perspectives and the perspectives of specific population groups, such as young people and Mori, Pacific and ethnic communities. This could include exploring culturally inclusive markers such as takatpui (Mori), faafafine (Samoan), or fakaleit (Tongan). Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Setting the nonbinary markers in regulations will futureproof the legislation. Gender theory and terminology evolves rapidly, and regulations can be more easily reviewed and than primary legislation to ensure they meet the needs of transgender and intersex people. While setting the markers in operational policy would have been easier to review and update than regulations we do not recommend this option. It would require enabling the RegistrarGeneral to set the markers following a public consultation process. This would be a new type of decisionmaking power for the Regist rarGeneral , whereas the Executive routinely makes these types of decisions. There is a high level of public interest in this issue, which means that markers would be better determined by publicly elected members of the Executive. Setting the markers in regulation will also be more transparent, as the process and available markers will be clearly established in secondary legislation. Setting the markers in operational policy would also be costlier in the short to medium term. To assist the Regist rarGeneral, a new process and capability would need to be built that replicates the Departments existing policy development capability. Development of nonbinary markers would be better incorporated into the usual government regulatory process. The number of times a person can amend registered sex Status Quo Under the Family Court process, it would be rare but not impossible for a person to amend their registered sex more than once . While there is no limit on the number of times a person can apply, the requirements lend themselves to the amendment being permanent (eg the court must be satisfied a person intends to maintain their nominated sex). Select Committees recommendation The Select Committee recommended that under a selfidentification process only one change be allowed unless the Regist rarGeneral is satisfied that there are special circumstances. The exception to this rule is that if a person wants to revert to their sex at birth, they may do so at any time. Departments advice allow for people to amend their registered sex more than once, but with additional requirements for subsequent applications . We recommend that people can amend their registered sex more than once. Gender can be fluid and how a person identifies may change over time. Allowing only one amendment would be out of step with a true selfi dentification model. If a persons gender changes and they cannot amend their registered sex to reflect this, they no longer have control of how their gender is officially recognised. . We understand th at Select Committee recommended allowing only one amendment except in special circumstances to mitigate the risk of identity fraud. Where a person amends their registered sex their previous name and sex are not displayed on their birth certificate. This means a person cannot be easily linked to their previous identity, Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Select Committees recommendation Select Committees recommended process is different depending on the age of the child or young person: . or year olds can apply on their own behalf with written consent from their guardian; and . years and under applications must be made on behalf of the child or young person by their guardian. The process only differs in who makes the application. Both age groups require guardian consent and a recommendation from a health professional. Departments advice different age categories to reflect older adolescents higher level of cognitive development We agree with the age categories recommended by Select Committee. These categories reflect that and year olds are generally more able to provide consent and can live independently from a guardian . This is consistent with other legislation in New Zealand (eg at years old a young person can consent to general medical procedures). It also aligns with other jurisdictions that ease selfidentification policies once a person turns (eg in Norway any person years of age and over can amend their recorded gender, no guardian consent is required). We recommend that the age categories have different requirements to reflect the different levels of cognitive development: . or year olds can apply on their own behalf with either : .. written consent from their guardian; or .. a letter of support by a third party. . years and under applications must be: .. made on behalf of the child or young person by their guardian; and .. be accompanied by a letter of support from a third party. Requiring third party assurance Status Quo The Family Court process requires the guardian making the application for a child or young person to provide evidence the child has undergone or will undergo medical treatment to enable them to assume their nominated sex. The purpose of the medical evidence is to assess a child or young persons physical confirmation or ability to physically conform with their preferred sex. This requirement medicalises a deeply personal expression of selfidentity and is out of step with a self identification process. Select Committees recommendation Select Committee recommended that applications for all children and young people be accompanied by a recommendation from a health professional. The recommendation from the health professional is to provide assurance that the child or young person Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of understands the consequences of the application and that the change is in their best interests. It would not be about current or planned medical treatment. The health professionals able to provide a recommendation would be medical practitioners, health practitioners registered with the P sychologists Board or the Nursing Council of New Zealand, councillors represented by certain bodies and registered social workers. Departments advice most applications need to be accompanied by a letter of support from a third party We recommend that applications be accompanied by a letter of support from a third party, with the classes of persons that can act as third parties to be prescribed in regulations. After consulting with other agencies, w e recommend that the role of the third party is different to that recommended by Select Committee with a stronger focus on informed consent. The third party would be assessing that the child or young person understands the change and that the decision is based on their own perceptions of their gender. This focus on consent is more aligned with a selfidentification process as it acts to protect the child or young person from undue influence (eg from guardians) and supports their autonomy over their gender. Given there is no need for gender affirming care under selfidentification, people outside of the health sector may be able to assess if a child or young person understands the change. In addition, restricting the third party to certain professions could mean the letter of support is difficult to access and out of step with the aim of reducing barriers to changing registered sex. We recommend the classes of people who can provide the letter of support are prescribed in regulations. This will provide time for further analysis on what classes of people will be suitable to act as a third party . In developing the regulations targeted consultation should be completed with potential professional groups or classes of people. These could include health professionals and people outside of the health sector, such as councillors or people who may know the child or young person well. The views of children and young people should also be sought on this matter. Parent or guardian consent Status Quo Under the Family Court process all applications for children and young people aged years and under need to be made by their guardians. There is no clear process in the BDMRR Act where there are disputes between guardians or where guardians refuse to apply on behalf of their child. Select Committees recommendation Select Committee recommendations require guardian consent for all age groups . However, Select Committee clarified that the Family Court can assist with disputes between guardians or where guardians refuse to apply on behalf of their or year old. In these situations, an application may be made to the Family Court to settle the dispute under the Care of Children Act . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Guardian is defined as all the guardians of a person (eg both parents jointly) unless: . one guardian is unavailable; . one guardian has applied to the Family Court, and the court has consented to the child or young persons sex marker being amended; or . if all guardians are unavailable the Chief Executive of Oranga Tamariki is the guardian. Departments advice guardian consent is not always necessary for and year olds As above, we recommend that guardians apply on behalf of children and young people aged years and under . To reflect their maturity, we recommend that guardian consent is not necessary for young people aged and , if they instead supply a letter of support from a third party. Enabling and year olds to apply with only a letter of support, partly mitigates concerns raised by other agencies about guardians not being accepting of their childs gender identity and refusing consent. It also mitigates concerns about young people who feel uncomfortable talking to their guardians about their gender, or who are estranged from their guardians. There may be a concern that the above risks are not being mitigated for children and young people years and under. We consider that guardian consent is still important for this age group. Not requiring guardian consent for this age group would be inconsistent with the process to change names under the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Act (BDMRR Act) and other legislation (eg at years a young person needs parental consent to leave school early under the Education and Training Act ). It could also be considered out of ste p with a guardians responsibilities under the Care of Children Act for their childs development and for helping their child determine important decisions. The Ministry of Social Development noted that requiring guardian consent could allow guardians to exercise their responsibility in ways that negatively impact a child or young persons wellbeing. The Counting Ourselves survey found that participants who had an unsupportive family were more likely to have attempted suicide in the last months. We understand this is a concern, but not requiring guardian consent would be a significant change. Guardians will often be integral to supporting a child or young person to amend their birth certificate. At this stage, we recommend that the guardian consent requirement for those years and under is maintained. You agreed to a statutory review of the self identification provisions five years after enactment (IA refers). As part of this, any negative consequences of requiring guardian consent can be reviewed. Departments advice keep Select Committees definition of guardian We recommended keeping Select Committees definition of guardian that means all guardians jointly except in special circumstances. Guardians acting jointly is consistent with obligations under the Care of Children Act . As part of the statutory review The Youth survey found that only a third of transgender and gender diverse participants had told their parents or caregivers they were transgender or gender diverse. The Counting Ourselves survey found that per cent of respondents had been kicked out of home because they were transgender Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of five years after enactment (IA refers) consideration can be given to any negative consequences of requiring guardians to act jointly. Departments advice keep the Family Court mechanism to resolve disputes We recommend keeping Select Committees provision that clarifies that the Registrar General can uphold Family Court decisions on disputes between guardians or where guardians refuse consent for and year olds amending registered sex. There is likely to be a reduced need for this provision as and year olds can apply with only a letter of support from a third party. However, there may still be scenarios where this is useful (eg where the young person has trouble accessing a third party and their guardians refuse consent). Regulation making powers are needed to give effect to the above proposals Regulation making powers are needed to give full effect to the selfidentification proposals outlined above. We recommend a regulation making power that will enable regulations that prescribe: . the sex marker options other than the binary; . the additional requirements where a person amends their registered sex more than once; . the third parties who can provide a letter of support for applications for children and young people; and . any other matters required to give effect to a selfidentification process, which align with the overall intent of the proposals in this paper. Selfidentification has implications for Department of Corrections regulations We previously advised that there is only one instance where changing registered sex will have implications on other legislation. This is a Department of Corrections (Corrections ) regulation that requires that where a person supplies their birth certificate they must be placed in a prison that aligns with the sex recorded. This is out of step with the BDMRR Act and the Bill, which infer that birth certificate s should not be concl usive evidence of a persons sex .
Section F( ) of the Bill adds to this power by providing that Regulations under section may prescribe fees that must be paid by providers to meet the costs of the Chief C ensors annual review. This addition is necessary to enable the Chief Censor to recover the costs of monitoring and enforcing compliance with the provisions of this Bill.
Section of the LGA, but without specifying the level of detail needed in the
Section Q of the Privacy Act requires agencies to provide written notice to
Section R allows agencies to either dispense with the requirements under
Section B : Summary Impacts: Benefits and costs Who are the main expected beneficiaries and what is the nature of the expected benefit
Section Five: Transition and Implementation High Level Timeline The next stage of the process is to implement the changes outlined in this document. This starts with working with kaimahi who are affected by the final decisions of the organisation change refer to the Change Protocol in Section Six for more information. We are aiming to provide certainty to the affected people as soon as possible. The table below outlines the timeframe for implementing the changes resulting from this organisation change process: Event June Approval of Final Decisions document June Release embargoed final decisions document to PSA June Final decisions announced June Expressions of Interest process for affected kaimahi commences .pm, June Expressions of Interest applications close June to July Reassignment (including contestable reassignment) assessments completed July to July Affected kaimahi notified of outcome of Expression of Interest July Implementation Activity commences August new structure becomes effective Employee support Throughout the organisation change process, employees with concerns or queries can address these directly with their manager. Managers can seek guidance from Human Resources about individual queries and concerns. Te Tari also has a range of support options available for kaimahi and managers during periods of change: Employee Assistance Programme (EAP) Ongoing support is also available to employees from Vitae, through Te Taris Employee Assistance Programme. This confidential service provides access to a selection of counselling providers. Vitae can be contacted by phone on or through their website at http:www.vitae.co.nz . The Vitae website can also be accessed through a link on the Employee Assistance Programme pages on the intranet. Speaking Up Line The Speak Up Line managed by Humankind provides all DIA employees and contractors with an independent and confidential avenue to: seek information about what to do about inappropriate behaviour happening at work and the options for addressing any concerns. speak up, raise concerns, or make a complaint if you or your colleagues dont feel safe. know what support is available to you.
Section Four: Feedback and Responses One submission was received , from the PSA , during the consultation period. One drop in session was planned during the consultation period and did not go ahead , as kaimahi advised that it was not required . During the consultation period, kaimahi were able to contact me to ask questions or clarify any points that they may have. Thank you again for questions and participating in the consultation process. The PSA submission was received and carefully considered. As part of the feedback, specific recommendations questions were asked , which w ere considered when determining the final changes, are summarised in the table s below. Theme Subject Summary of Feedback Response Extension of secondment Suggested e xtension of the affected kaimahis current employment arrangement to be able to participate in the EOI and recruitment process as an affected kaimahi. Noted . Plan to work with the affect ed kaimahi and secondment manager on this suggestion. Review of Executive Assistant JD Review the EA and Team Administrator JDs to ensure that kaimahi are not negatively impacted by the disestablish ment of the Team Administrator role . Noted . The EA job description will be reviewed following this change process to ensure it captures th e required range of duties and is fit for purpose. Follow the PSA CEA Clause Management of Change Acknowledgement that there are no new or vacant positions in the OCE, therefore reconfirmation or reassignment will not be possible. Noted . There are no new or vacant positions in OCE. Released under the Official Information Act Theme Subject Summary of Feedback Response Understanding the enterprise wide change proposal impacts and working to mitigate negative impacts on kaimahi and stakeholders Perceived lack of enterprise wide change impact analysis and lack of systematic view of proposed branch changes. Concerns around Business Continuity Plans and the ability to be able to respond to unexpected events. Noted. While organisational change proposals are being led by individual Deputy Chief Executives and their branches, identifying baseline reduction initiatives was the result of joint decision making by the Executive Leadership Team. These decisions werent easy and, in some cases, there are impacts on other branches from savings proposals in our corporate branches. He Pou Aronui and Te Urungi Deputy Chief Executives have discussed these impacts with their ELT colleagues. Section Five: Transition and Implementation High Level Timeline The next stage of the process is to implement the changes outlined in this document. This starts with working with kaimahi who are affected by the final decisions of the organisation change refer to the Change Protocol in Section for more information. We are aiming to provide certainty to the affected people as soon as possible. The table below outlines the timeframe for implementing the changes resulting from this organisation change process: Event Status April Embargoed consultation document released to PSA Complete April Consultation commences Complete April Planned drop in session Complete May Feedback period closes Complete May Consideration and analysis of feedback and approval for final decisions Complete May Release embargoed final decisions document to PSA Complete June Final decisions announced July new structure becomes effective Released under the Official Information Act Employee support Throughout the organisation change process , employees with concerns or queries can address these directly with their manager. Managers can seek guidance from Human Resources about individual queries and concerns. Te Tari also has a range of support options available for kaimahi and managers during periods of change: Employee Assistance Programme (E AP) Ongoing support is also available to employees from Vitae , through Te Taris Employee Assistance Programme. This confidential service provides access to a selection of counselling providers. Vitae can be contacted by phone on or through their website at http:www.vitae.co.nz . The Vitae website can also be accesse d through a link on the Employee Assistance Programme pages on the intranet. Speaking Up Line The Speak Up Line managed by Humankind provides all DIA employees and contractors with an independent and confidential avenue to: seek information about what to do about inappropriate behaviour happening at work and the options for addressing any concerns . speak up, raise concerns, or make a complaint if you or your colleagues dont feel safe . know what support is available to you .
Section One Preface About the Inquiry Executive summary Recommendations Contents Section One Preface About the Inquiry Executive summary Recommendations Section Two Chapter : Introduction Chapter : Emergency management system design and structure Chapter : Leadership, roles, and responsibilities Chapter : Management of the immediate response Chapter : Supply of goods and services and the place of critical infrastructure Chapter : Funding settings Section Three Appendix A: Terms of Reference for the Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events Appendix B: Contributors to the Inquiry Appendix C: Analysis of submissions Glossary of terms Image: Search and Rescue search a house in Hawkes Bay. Source: NEMA Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events Section One Preface About the Inquiry Executive summary Recommendations
Sector capability risks and issues in the water services sector
Sector reports and research
Security Breach An event in which sensitive, protected or confidential
Security Bureau (GCSB) does not create or amend an assumed identity which is an exact match
Security Bureau to carry out further work, informed by Phase One, to assess
Security Bureau will instruct officials to begin work to develop additional interventions
Security Centre (NCSC) and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT) to
Security Centre and Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade to produce
Security Centre and Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, to produce guidance to
Security Intelligence Service
Security Requirements (PSR) policy managed by the NZSIS.
Security considerations include the separation of components, limited access to systems, design and security patterns, and GCSB and rd party audits. Implementation is outlined as part of the proposed phases and timeline and more information is available in appendices. .. Using data for disease surveillance and research For each case, CovidCard would provide lists of close contacts and casual contacts, per clinical definitions. It could also provide a long list of other contacts not making this threshold. These contacts could be anyone detected by the card over a minimum threshold.
Sediment and Debris Management Package: Councils requests for variations to funding agreements
Sediment and Debris Management Package: Hawkes Bay Proposal for use of underspend
Sediment and debris funding supporting the Cyclone Gabrielle recovery
See Appendix A for the strategy
See Appendix B for the work programme
See also current and previous Executive Travel and Accommodation Determinations:
See also information about
See appe ndix for key financ ial statistics and a summary of the individual credit metri c outcomes
See appe ndix for key financial statistic s and a su mmary of the individua l credit metri c outcomes
See appe ndix for key financial statistics and a s ummary of the individual credit me tric outcom es
See appen dix for key financial statist ics a nd a summar y of th e individual c redit metri c outcomes
See append ix for key financial statistics and a summary of the individual credit metri c outcomes
See appendi x for key financial stati stics and a summary o f the individual credit metri c outcomes
See appendi x for key financial statistic s and a summary of the individual credit metr ic outcomes
See appendi x for key financial statistics an d a summary of the individual credit m etric outcomes
See appendi x for key financial statistics and a rating score snaps hot for all scenarios.
See appendi x for key financial statistics and a summ ary of the individ ual credit m etric ou tcomes
See appendi x for key financial statistics and a summary o f the individual credit metr ic out comes
See appendi x for key financial statistics and a summary of the individ ual credit metri c outco mes
See appendi x for key financial statistics and a summary of the individual cr edit metri c outcom es
See appendi x for key financial statistics and a summary of the individual credi t metri c outcomes
See appendi x for key financial statistics and a summary of the individual credit metr ic outcomes
See appendi x for key financial statistics and a summary of the individual credit metri c outcomes
See how you can use digital identity information to easily access services in person and online.
See some of the many awards, including the
See the award winners
Seeking agreement to commenc e crossparty consultation We are seeking agreement to circul ate the draft Bill for crossparty consultation. The draft Bill includes the additional policy matters outlined in paragraphs below.
Seeking amendment to the infringement provisions in the Water Services Act
Seeking amendment to the infringement provisions in the Water Services Act (LG )
Select Committee inquiries can range from complex and lengthy inquiries to a onemeeting briefing on a particular topic.
Select Committee process:
Select committee recommendations
Select the browsers print function
Selective and domain web harvesting
SelffocusedIrrationalImpulsiveSurvival
Selfidentification regulations and developing a process to enable transgender and intersex people born overseas to register their gender: Draft discussion document and Cabinet paper
Selfidentification regulations: policy proposals to inform a public discussion document, April
Selfidentification regulations: timing update
Selfidentification regulations: update on sex and gender markers consultation
Selfmotivated to succeed
Selwyn model WICS report
Selwyn slide pack WICS report
Send your invoice to our accounts payable team
Send your request to the right place or person
Senior leaders are defined as Tier and managers. The percentage of women senior leaders at June was . and proportionate to the number of women at Te Tari Taiwhenua. We aim to maintain a gender balanced senior leadership cohort of ( female, male and a balance of of any gender).
September Recruitment begins, jobs will be advertised on our careers page
SeptemberOctober Nationwide workshop series two: Huimotu Reform Programme overview and introduction to Taumata Arowai
Serverside Algorithm Performance The main evaluation process only performs the bareminimum of serverside processing: reidentifying the encrypted IDs to the card serial number, and filtering contacts to only those that meet the current definition of a close contact (i.e. within two metres for at least fifteen minutes). As discussed above, there is potential to further increase the accuracy of the overall system by ranking the list of contacts provided by the card. Across all trials and ground truth contacts the card achieves recall and false positive rate, and although many of our false positive contacts meet the definition of a casual contact, it would be preferable to be able to prioritise close contacts over casual ones.
Service (IaaS) Cabinet directive CAB Min () refers; refresh considerations
Service Act (as confirmed by section (I) of the Births, Deaths, Marriages,
Service Commission (Economic Regulator)
Service Delivery Operations
Service Delivery Operations branch (Kawai ki te Iwi) introduced a Te Wharekura capability uplift plan with three focus areas te reo me na tikanga, te ao Mori and Te Tiriti o Waitangi
Service Delivery Operations branch developed the Whikorero uplift programme to support kaimahi to develop confidence to speak in formal settings (such as marae).
Service Delivery and Operations
Service Innovation Lab wins Award for Open Source Use in Government
Services Access has responsibility for identity services which require customer interactions. The groups work includes registering births (including adoptions, and information for donorconceived people on the Human Assisted Reproductive Technology Register), processing applications for a change of registered name or gender, licensing marriage and civil union celebrants, determining whether people are New Zealand citizens, assessing applications for a grant of citizenship, checking applications for passports and for RealMe Verified identity credentials.
Services Act via the Local Government Water Services Bill (Bill ),
Services Bill (Bill ) to be introduced later this year.
Services Bill which will be introduced later this year;
Services Delivery Plans as an option that could be used to help bring about the successful submission of a compliant and viable
Services Policy, Legislation rxa ,
Services Regulator Taumata Arowai. On a related note, when the economic
Services Supporting the Executive
Services Supporting the Executive MCA
Services determined by the Remuneration Authority The Remuneration Authority determines entitlements to accommodation services wit hin New Zealand, including any entitlement of Ministers to accommodation services within New Zealand that are additional or alternative to those determined for members of Parliament, and travel services within New Zealand for Ministers family members ( as per the Accommodation Services for Members and Travel Services for Family Members and Former Prime Ministers) Determination ). Services and funding subject to Speakers Directions The Speakers Directions include entitlements to travel services within N ew Zealand, administrative and support services to support members parliament operations and communication services ( as per the Directions by the Speaker of the House of Representatives ).
Services for Te Puna member libraries
Services for government agencies
Services for people, communities and businesses
Services providing services.
Services, other agencies or any other third party including other parties to this
Session for consultants and private sector organisations: Regional Deals presentation Consultants
Sessions for council Mayors, Chairs and senior leadership: Regional Deals presentation Councils
Sessions with our employeeled networks have been added into our induction programme, Te Aka Tipu, to increase visibility and grow their membership(s).
Setting priorities for the local government portfolio ()
Setting strategic priorities for three waters services during the establishment phase
Setting the legal foundation for how online gambling will be regulated.
Seven recommendations are to the Judiciary and
Several agencies have regulatory responsibilities to ensure the purposes of the Gambling Act are met that communities benefit from gambling proceeds while gambling harm is minimised.
Several homes, two urup (burial ground), a marae and grounds were cleared. Those involved gained skills in fencing and chainsaw, and light digger use and maintenance.
Severe Weather Emergency Recovery (Local Government Act Longterm Plan) Order
Severe Weather Emergency Recovery (Local Government Act
Severe Weather Emergency Recovery (Local Government) Order
Severe Weather Emergency Recovery Legislation Act (SWERL Act), namely
Severe Weather Events Recovery Review Panel
Severe weather events are becoming more frequent and more complex, and we need to ensure our emergency management system is fit for purpose and ready to respond. For this reason, Cabinet has decided to establish a Government Inquiry under the Inquiries Act .
Severe weather recovery: Cabinet paper for Ministerial consultation on Tranche One of local government Orders in Council
Severe weather recovery: Draft Cabinet paper on the Longterm plan Order for Ministerial approval
Severe weather recovery: Policy approvals for Tranche one of local government Orders in council
Severe weather recovery: Policy approvals for a threeyear Long Term Plan and waived audit requirements for eight local authorities (tentative)
Sexual exploitation of children in the context of travel terminology factsheet
Sexual violence against children terminology factsheet
Share your information in a digital format
Share your new address with an internet or power company.
Share your student number and apply for a student loan.
Shared approach to backoffice transformation
Sharing Agreement is for the time being in force.
Sharing DIA Information with external agencies (both domestic and international) is routine practice for NZSIS. NZSIS share DIA Information with external agencies in order to meet a range of operational requirements, including to verify an individuals identity
Sharing information digitally remains challenging Information could remain siloed because businesses and organisations do not choose to participate in the Trust Framework The flow of information is impeded, and the potential benefits of digital identity are not realised Business and organisations are enthusiastic for government intervention to address the issue of silos Public sector and private sector service providers assume this risk. Officials are working closely with businesses and organisations to ensure their needs and requirements are met by the Trust Framework and encourage their participation. This is considered a moderate risk. Business and organisations have expressed enthusi asm for government led intervention but the full costs, policies and processes of participating in a Framework have yet to be determined Service delivery does little to improve customer experience People may not actually use the digital identity services that are more secure and private, simply because others are more convenient. Uptake remains low People prioritise service delivery Public sector and private sector service providers assume this risk. Service delivery remains the responsibility of service providers and not the Trust Framework, though bring ing consistency and trust into the digital identity ecosystem will enable service providers to improve their delivery. Unclear Costs become excessive for government andor private sector The actu al costs of compliance testing turns out to be significantly higher than the initial indicative costs. This would affect Government in phase one ( ) as government is covering the cost of this testing. In phase two ( ) the entity seeking accredi tation, whether public or private, will likely assume this cost. The Trust Framework requires more resources than anticipated to set up andor maintain, increasing overall costs for government. Budgets are undermined Costs discourage participation in the Trust Framework Reasonable costs will encourage participation Government assumes the risk with regard to the cost of testing. In order to mitigate this risk, government will cover the cost of compliance testing during phase one of the Trust Framework ( ) and work with partners to test and developed compliance processes in such a manner that compliance testing costs remain reasonable and appropriate going forward. The entity undergoing compliance testing assumes the cost of upgrading their systems. In the case of p ublic sector entities, government can mitigate this through budget planning, however, private sector entities remain responsible for their own budgets. The mitigation measures will ensure this is a low probability risk.
Sharing of Christchurch shooting video likely to be against the law
She is currently chair of both New Zealand on Air and the Banking Ombudsman Scheme. She is also a director of Crown Fibre Holdings, the Governments investment vehicle responsible for managing the introduction of ultrafast broadband to urban areas, and the Auckland Councilcontrolled organisation managing the Councils investment portfolio.
Short session, general QA, coincides with Water NZ conference opening
Should NZSIS obtain any information under the DAA for the purposes of a security clearance assessment then the limitation on further use of that information under section of the ISA will apply.
Should Parties be unable to agree on amendments to this Agreement the matter will be dealt with in
Should Parties not included within a Class of Agencies be unable to agree on the amendments to this
Should any dispute arise relating to the interpretation or application of this Agreement, the
Should any dispute or differences relating to the interpretation or application of
Should parties be unable to agree on amendments to the Agreement the matter will be dealt
Should the Parties be unable to agree on variations to this Agreement or the MOU
Should we pursue the standalone Bill followed by the broader review OR the broader
Should you have questions, p lease do not hesi tate to cont act me.
Show leadership potential
Sign up for GETS notifications
Signature for the Bay of Plenty RMA Policy and Plans Protocol
Signature:
Signature: s()(a) Signature: s()(a)
Similarly, Taumata Arowai has received notifications (across supplies) for
Similarly, a councils approach to fulfilling its statutory obligations extends logically to providing dog owners, prospective owners and the nonowning general public with key safety messages and educational material. Generally, approaches to implementing and enforcing dog control under the Dog Control Act should emphasise
Simon.robbworksafe.govt.nz
Simpson Grierson Advice to SOLGM on MOU commissioned by SOLGM
Since we have overseen the creation of the following New Zealand government agencies.
Since , RealMe has been making it easier and more secure for people and organisations to get things done online.
Since , the Portfolio has delivered approximately million in savings to the system.
Since , the National Library Ptoi Rito Communities of Readers initiative has been working to build reading engagement and address inequity of access to books. In , we the Research Report on the Dargaville Ptoi Rito Communities of Readers, which had supporting schools in building reading communities as one of its goals. Overall, research participants observed an increase in teachers reading and talking about books with each other and children, acting as reading role models, and providing children with opportunities to read for pleasure. Research participants also observed an increase in children reading, talking about books and using the library. The extent of these positive shifts varied both within and between schools.
Since becoming the water services regulator, Taumata Arowai has received notifications
Since using identity check in , HNZ application times have reduced by up to days and manual handling is down percent. The identity check service was a finalist in the innovation category at the Public Service Spirit of Service Awards. It has potential for wider application across agencies, providing an online identity verification improving access to digital services.
Singapore has abandoned apps and is now progressing a wearables strategy, very similar to that proposed with CovidCard .
Singapore is actively working on a similar solution to CovidCard and opportunities exist to establish an interoperability standard between our efforts. .. Testing and field trials results The CovidCard project team has undertaken a program of field trials and product testing to support the development of the core technology (card hardware and algorithms), and to determine the accuracy and efficacy of a Bluetooth LE card to enhance manual contact tracing.
Singapores celebrated TraceTogether app, managed to get around of the population to download it, but only half of all users ( of the population) were compliant adopters. Meaning only . of contacts are able to be recorded. At last count, .m downloads had resulted in approximately additional contacts being contributed to manual contact tracing efforts.
Sir Jerry Mateparae GNZM QSO KStJ
Sir Jerry has years of public service experience with years as an officer in the New Zealand Defence Force (NZDF), including years in senior leadership roles, culminating as Chief of Defence Force ().
Sixth Conviction This Year
Slide (referenced above) further details how these indicators are closely tied with the main drivers of cost in Scotland and it is therefore reasonable to suggest that broadly similar geographic indicators are likely to have relevance in a New Zealand context.
Slide shows the new enhancement and growth models used in DIA phase which have an R of around . Finally, on slide are models derived from regionalized Scottish investment information with explanatory strength of over . There are significant differences between Scotland and New Zealand geographies (urbanisation versus density) p. WICS provided a comparison of the relevant geographic indicators on slide of Supporting Material : Required Investment and showed the similarities.
Slide pack from JulyAugust workshops
Slide pack from the launch webinar
Slide pack from the technical overview webinar
SmartStart is a multiaward winning online platform making it easy for new and expectant parents to access services and information about the birth of their child. The Radiant Awards recognise excellence in planning, design, implementation and operation of national electronic identity schemes, applications and services. SmartStart received The Radiant Pioneer Award which recognises pioneering new uses or applications of smart technology in public sector identity schemes.
SmartStart is a multiawardwinning online platform making it easy for new and expectant parents to access services and information about the birth of their child. Parents can easily register their babys birth, find support and services in their area, update their benefit and Working for Families information and more online, any time, on any device.
SmartStart was developed in collaboration with the Department of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Social Development, Inland Revenue, Plunket and the New Zealand College of Midwives.
SmartStart wins Radiant Pioneer Award
SmartStart wins multiple awards
Snapchat Tips on how to stay safe keep your child safe
Social Impact Bonds information on their application to the CVS Portfolio
Social Media Account An account, handle or profile used by an individual or organisation for the
Social acceptance may be subdued while case numbers are low but deployment must necessarily take place in advance of any second wave. Mandated usage could be required only once risks increase, such as when border controls are relaxed or triggered by an increase in Alert Levels as first cases are identified. It is not envisaged that mandating should occur where denied entry could lead to harm (e.g. medical care, public transport).
Social and economic conditions differ across
Social and technological change led to new demands on the Colonial Secretarys Office, In it was given the power to regulate lotteries and the operation of racecourse totalisators. From local bodies could make bylaws to control the use of motor vehicles, subject to the approval of the Colonial Secretary, who in also became responsible for administering the Fire Brigades Act.
Society : Greater interoperability between participants in the trusted digital identi ty ecosystem ; clear and consistent rules for everybody wanting to participate in the trusted digital identity ecosystem , resulting in greater confidence in digital identity services ; increase d effectiveness in countering certain crimes ; greater economic opportunities; improved facilitation of economic transactions, social interactions, and (potentially ) political involvemen t.
Solving for broad adoption is the key issue to solve.
Some NZAG remain entrenched in organised crime and may be
Some changes will be paid for by the venue, from their venue commission payments, others will be paid for by the society or club. Societies can use proceeds of gambling activities on actual, necessary and reasonable costs related to meeting the new regulations. These rules may be applied to venue design changes, and training. However your costs must be both necessary to comply with the regulations and reasonable care must be taken to ensure that societies minimise expenditure to maximise community wellbeing.
Some documents may only be available in PDF format. This is usually when the information originates from outside the organisation, is released under the Official Information Act or has been proactively released and the information was scanned or marked as withheld (redacted).
Some examples of how we take action to address bias and discrimination include:
Some functions which the Department lost have since found their way back. In
Some information has been redacted from these documents under S ()(a) of the Official Information Act .
Some information has been withheld for privacy and security reasons.
Some information has been withheld on the basis that it would not, if requested under the Official Information Act (OIA), be released. Where that is the case, the relevant section of the OIA has been noted and no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it.
Some of our fantastic work recognised by awards and accolades outside of the Department.
Some of the amounts charged to ministerial credit cards relate to outofWellington accommodation, domestic travel, and Cabinetapproved international travel. These figures have also been included in the Ministers expenses for the same period; therefore these amounts on the credit card statements do not represent additional expenditure over and above that in quarterly releases in the section above.
Some of the documents on this website have been created using Microsoft Office.
Some of the recommendations cannot be implemented due to capacity, equity or resourcing reasons. More detailed responses for individual recommendations can be found in the Government response.
Some p arts o f this in formation re lease would n ot be appropriate to release an d, if requested, w ould be
Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to releas e and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been ident ified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Where information has been withheld for other reasons consistent with advice, it has been annotated with an asterisk. This information may in some cases be accessible under the Official Information Act . Key to Redaction Codes : Section ( )(f)(iv): the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials
Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Of ficial Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholdi ng it. Key to Redaction Codes : Section ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons
Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act . Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it.
Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identifie d. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Where information has been withheld for other reasons consistent with advice, it has been annotated with an asterisk. This information may in some cases be accessible under the Official Information Act . Key to Redaction Codes : Section ()(a) Telephone numbers of some Department staff
Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons f or withholding it. Where information has been withheld for other reasons consistent with advice, it has been annotated with an asterisk. This information may in some cases be accessible under the Official Information Act . In the earlier briefings , the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill was referred to as the Local Government Water Services (Transitional Provisions) Bill . Titles of Bills are finalised by the Parliamentary Counsel Office. Key to Redaction Codes : Section ()(a) to protect privacy Section ()( f)(iv) information to maintain the confidentiality of advice Section ()(b)(ii) commercially sensitive information Section ()( g)(i) information to maintain the free and frank expression of opinions Section ()( h) information to maintain legal professional privilege Section ()( j) information to carry on without prejudice or disadvantage, negotiations (including commercial and industrial negotiations)
Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it.
Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Key to Redaction Codes : ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials.
Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Where information has been withheld for other reasons consistent with advice, it has been annotated with an ast erisk. This information may in some cases be accessible under the Official Information Act . Key to Redaction Codes : Section ()( f)(iv) the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers o f the Crown and officials
Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Where information has been withheld for other reasons consistent with advice, it has been annotated with an asterisk. This information may in some cases be accessible under the Official Information Act .
Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Where information has been withheld for other reasons consistent with advice, it has been annotated with an asterisk. This information may in some cases be accessible under the Official Information Act . Key to Redaction Codes :
Some parts of this information would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Key to Redaction Codes : ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials; and ()(h) to maintain legal professional privilege.
Some trials (particularly construction and party) had a high proportion of false positives compared to the others, however: Cardholders with only a few groundtruth contacts would have a high false positive rate if even one false positive was found. This could have been mitigated by weighting results on the number of ground truth contacts for each cardholder. The basic oncard algorithm prioritises high recall since missed contacts cannot be later recovered, but there is an opportunity for filtering out or deprioritising potential false positives after downloading and reidentifying contacts, using factors such as: Time of day Density of contacts at the time a contact was recorded Overall duration of contact The ground truth, especially for the unscripted trials, were largely entered by one person per trial. Although distances (intensity ) were typically consistent when spotchecked, the approach to rating of contact events (intensity ) differed by scorer. Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs With greater consistency in scoring methodology the card contact algorithm could be tuned differently and decrease the likelihood of false positives in practice. Other yettobe tested algorithms for filtering events into a contact list on the card could potentially yield lower false positive rates.
Sometimes, your complaint may be more appropriately dealt with by an office holder. If so, we will talk to the office holder and may refer all or part of your complaint to them. For example, if you are complaining that the provider breached your privacy, the Privacy Commissioner may be able to deal with the complaint better than we can, and we will help you by referring your complaint to them.
Source : Alex Karner, Keith Brower Brown, Richard Marcantonio Louis G. Alcorn (). The View From the Top of Arnsteins Ladder, Journal of the American Planning Association, :, , DOI: .... Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Source : Gavin Parker, Tessa Lynn and Matthew Wargent (). Sticking to the script The co production of neighbourhood planning in England. TPR, () doi:.tpr.. . New Neighbourhood Planning programme changes to My Community everything you need to know . Available at: https:mycommunity.org.uknew neighbourhood planning programme changes tomycommunity everything youneed toknow Dave Chetwyn (). Neighbourhood Plans Roadmap A Step byStep Guide. Available at: https:neighbourhoodplanning.orgwp contentuploadsNPRoadmaponlinefull.pdf Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Source : Guaralda, Mirko, Mayere, Severine, Caldwell, Glenda Amayo, Donovan, Jared, Rittenbruch, Markus () The InstaBooth: An interactive methodology for community involvement and place making. Journal of Place Management and Development, (), pp. . Project web site: https:research.qut.edu.audesignlabprojectsinstabooth QUTs Engagement Innovation Grants : https:research.qut.edu.a uilaqhqut engagement innovation grant award Ben Carden (). Do Touch: The impact of tangible interaction on situated community engagement. Master Thesis: https: eprints.qut.edu.auBenjaminCardenThesis.pdf (contains the InstaBooth floor plans and details of design and technology). Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Source : Jackie Street, Katherine Duszynski, Stephanie Krawczyk a nd Annette Braunack Mayer (). The use of citizens juries in health policy decision making: A systematic review. Social Science Medicine : . Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Source : Knight Foundation (). Brigh t Spots in community engagement. Available at: https:knightfoundation.orgreportsbright spots community engagement
Source : Maria Katsonis () Designing effective public engagement: the case study of Future Melbourne , Policy Design and Practice, :, , DOI: ...
Source : Mirna Jusi, Tea Hadiristi, Emir Efendi, Aida Malki, Davor Marko and Aida Seferovi (). Rethinking Local Community in Bosnia and Herzegovina A Comparative Overview and Assessment of Community Governance Models and Practices in Croatia, Serbia, Sweden, Switzerland and Bosnia and Herzegovina . UNDP Project Report.
Source : Sam DeJohn (). Beyond Protest: Examining the Decide Madrid Platform for Public Engagement . GovLab Blog: http:thegovlab.org beyond protest examining thedecide madrid platform forpublic engagement OECD Observatory of Public Sector Information. Decide Madrid: https:oecd opsi.orginnovationsdecide madrid Participedia (). Madrid Decide: Online Participatory Planning : https:participedia.netcase Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Source for and : General Social Survey Stats NZ
Source for and : Stats NZ Household Economic Survey
Source: DIA Customer Experience Survey
Source: DIA Customer Experience Survey For the survey a total of , customers were interviewed across all services being surveyed, , were invited, with a response rate.
Source: DIA Customer Experience Survey For the survey a total of , customers were interviewed, , were invited, with a response rate.
Source: General Social Survey Stats NZ
Source: General Social Survey Stats NZ
Source: Kiwi Counts Survey Public Service Commission
Source: NZ Population in D, Stats NZ
Source: Participedia (). The World Caf: https:participedia.netmethod
Source: Te Arawhiti Office for Mori Crown Relations
Source: Te Arawhiti Office of Mori Crown Relations.
Source: Territorial authority responses to a request for information and Department of Internal Affairs analysis Share of revenue Aucklan d Bulle r Central Hawkes Bay Chatham Islands Clutha Far North Gor e Hamilton Hauraki Hurunui Kaikoura Kapiti Coast Lower Hutt Manawatu Masterton Napie r New Plymouth Otorohanga Poriru a Rangitikei Ruapehu South Taranaki South Wairarapa Stratfor d Tasman Taurang a Timaru
Source: The Economists Democracy Index
Source: Transparency Internationals Corruptions Perceptions Index
Source: WICS final report
Source: Whangrei District Council RFI , averaged data from
Source: Whangrei and Auckland RFI
Sources : Abigail Friendly (). Participatory Budgeting: The Practice and the Potential . Available at: https:www.academia.eduParticipatoryBudgetingThePracticeandthePotential Toronto Community Housing Corporation Participatory budgeting web site: https:www.torontohousing.capb Behrang Foroughi (). Reading Between the Lines of Participation: Tenant Participation and Participatory Budgeting in Toro nto Community Housing. Journal of Publ ic Deliberation :. Available at: https:www.publicdeliberation.netjpdvolissart Participatory Budgeting at Toronto Community Housing (). Evaluation Report. Available at: https:www.participatorybudgeting.orgwp contentuploadsToronto Community Housing PBEvaluation Report .pdf Democratic Illusion: Deliberative Democracy in Canadian Public Policy By Genevieve Fuji Johnson: Chapter Participatory Budgeting and the Toronto Community Housing Corporation, pp. . Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Sources : Chicagos Participatory budgeting web site: http:www.pbchicago.orgpb inchicago.html Knight Foundation (). Bright Spots in community engagement. Available at: https:knightfoundation.orgreportsbright spots community engagement Participatory Budgeting in Chicago . Available at: https:www.futurepoli cy.orglearning responsible governanceparticipatory budgeting inchicago Chicagos Participatory Budgeting Experiment . Available at: https:www.shareable.netchica gosparticipatory budgeting experiment Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Sources : PB website: https:www.paris.frpagesmadame lamaire jaiuneidee Julie Simon, Theo Bass, Victoria Boelman and Geoff Mulgan (). Digital Democracy: The tools transforming political engagement . Available at: https:www.nesta.org.ukreportdigital democracy thetools transforming political engagement APUR (). Budget participatif: a quoi revent les parisiens Analyse des projets soumis en . Available at . https:www.apur.orgfrnos travauxbudget participatif quoirevent parisiens analyse projets soumis APUR (). B udget Participatif de Paris: Qui Sont les Parisiens Available at: https:budgetparticipatif.paris.frbppluginsdownlo adAPURFINALBPParisparisiensquiparticipent.pdf Participedia (). Participatory Budgeting in Paris, France . Available at: https:participedia.netcase Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Sources : Participedia (). Ethelo Decisions: https:participedi a.netorganization The Crux Local Democracy Project Full Details : https:crux.org.nzcommunitythe cruxlocaldeomcracy project fulllaunch details
Sources : Rob D. Fish, Michael Winter, David M. Oliver , Dave R. Chadwick , Chris J. Hodgson A. Louise Heathwaite () Employing the citizens jury technique to elicit reasoned public judgments about environmental risk: insights from an inquiry into the governance of microbial water pollut ion, Journal of Environmental Planning and Management, :, , DOI: ... Contemporary livestock farming watercourse pollution: a citizen . Available at: http:sciencesearch.defra.gov.ukDefault.aspxMenuMenuModuleMoreLocationNoneCompletedProjectID Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Sources : Terri Mannarini and Angela Fedi (). Using Quali Quantitative Indicators for Assessing the Quality of Citizen Participation: A Study on Three Citizen Juries. Soc Indic Res ( ) : , https:doi.org.s Castelfrancos Council Citizens jury rules of engagement. Available at: http:www.consiglio.re Soc Indic Res ( ) : https:doi.org.s gione.toscana.ituploadPARTECIPAZIONEdocumentiCastelfrancoRF.pdf
Sources : Torontos Participatory Budgeting web site: https:www.toronto.cacommunity peopleget involvedparticipatory budgeting Torontos Participatory Budgeting Pilot Evaluation (). Available at: https:www.t oronto.calegdocsmmisbubgrdbackgroundfile .pdf Participatory Budgeting (PB) Pilot . Available at: https:www.toronto.calegdocsmmisexbgrd backgroundfile .pdf Abigail Friendly (). Participatory Budgeting: The Practice and the Potential . Available at: https:www.academia.edu ParticipatoryBudgetingThePracticeandthePotential Alexandra Flynn (). Participatory budgeting not a one sizefitsall approach. Available at: https:www.osgoo de.yorku.cawp contentuploadsFlynn.pdf Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Sources : Video presentation: https:www.youtube.comwatchvHqAPVLZCLbI Whanganui District Council: https:www.whanganui.govt.nzNewsStriking artwork added toConversation Station NZ Herald (). Projects aim to brighten Whanganui CBD and bring people into the city . https:www.nzherald.co.nzwanganui chroniclenewsarticle.cfmcidobjectid
Sources: New York City Council Participatory Budgeting web site: https:council.nyc.govpbresults New York City Council Participatory Budgeting Rulebook (). Available at: https:www.participatorybudgeting.orgwp contentuploadsPBNYC RulebookPBP.pdf Gilman, Hollie Russon (). Participatory Budgeting and Civic Tech: The Revival of Citizen Engagement. Georgetown University Press . Ginia Bellafante (). Participatory Budgeting Opens Up Voting to the Disenfranchised and Denied . New York Times. Available at: https:www.nytimes.comnyregionparticipatory budgeting opens upvoting tothe disenfranchised anddenied.html Colin OConnor . Participatory budgeting in grows in NYC Why isnt every council member doing it Gotham Gazette. Availabl e at: https:www.gothamgazette.comgovermnent participatory budget Celina Su (). Participatory Budgeting in New York City . Available at: https:www.metropolitiques.euParticipatory Budgeting inNew.html Daniel Fisher (). Map Monday: Participatory Budgeting in New York City . Available at: https:datasmart.ash.harvard.edunewsarticlemap monday participatory budgeting newyorkcity Participatory Budgeting in New York City . Available at: https:www.innovations.harvard.eduparticipatory budgeting newyorkcity Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
South Taranaki District Council
South Taranaki District Council request for validation of candidate nomination
South Taranaki model WICS report
South Taranaki slide pack WICS report
South Waikato District Council
South Waikato model WICS report
South Waikato slide pack WICS report
South Wairarapa District Council
South Wairarapa model WICS report
South Wairarapa slide pack WICS report
Southland District Council
Southland District Council (Stewart IslandRakiura Visitor Levy Infringement Fee and Form) Regulations
Southland model WICS report
Southland slide pack WICS report
Sovereignty Principles, the call for Tino Rangatiratanga, Wai, and partnership
Spam Prevention and Messaging Compliance
Spam prevention messaging compliance
Specific actions that we are responsible for include: managing and protecting the integrity of national identity information, including life events such as births, deaths, marriages, citizenship and passports regulating activities in a number of sectors including: gambling, censorship, government recordkeeping, charities, unsolicited electronic messages, antimoney laundering and private security personnel and private investigators providing policy advice to government on local government, the community and voluntary sector, the Fire Service, identity and citizenship, digital, classification and online harms, gambling and racing protecting, preserving, collecting and making accessible New Zealands information, documentary heritage and public record providing information, resources and advice to communities administering grant funding schemes and promoting trust and confidence in the charitable sector supporting Ministers to ensure executive government operates eficiently and efectively coordinating and managing oficial guest of government visits to New Zealand and arranging national commemorative events supporting public and government inquiries administering a range of statutory functions for the Minister of Local Government, including for Lake Taup and ofshore islands leadership of the public sectors investment in ICT systems and digital platforms. The Ministry for Ethnic Communities is an independent departmental agency within the Department of Internal Afairs. It is the Governments chief advisor on ethnic communities, ethnic diversity and the inclusion of ethnic communities in wider society. The Ministry is included in this document, as it is newly established and is engaging with communities to develop its own strategic goals. The Department monitors the performance of three Crown entities (the New Zealand Fire Services Commission, the Ofice of Film and Literature Classification, and Taumata Arowai, the New Zealand water regulator) and manages the appointment process for members of a range of trusts, committees and boards. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
Specific use required. CovidCard needs to be worn visibly to be optimally effective both for social signalling, ease of enforcement, and operation of the Bluetooth radio. We have modelled our work based on CovidCard being worn on a lanyard around the neck Burying the CovidCard in a handbag or similar may reduce the operating efficacy of the device. Marketing and social signalling should reinforce optimal use. Future form factors could include wristbands.
Specified Organisation As defined in section of the Privacy Act .
Speech and aide memoire for LGNZ Rural and Provincial Sector meeting, June
Speech at the LGNZ Regional Sector meeting, May
Speech for HRNZ event July
Speech for opening of the NZTR Thoroughbred Welfare Forum
Speech for presenting TIES (Thoroughbreds in Equestrian Sport) Award
Speech to the International Gambling Conference
Speech: Horse of the Year Awards September
Stability Does the option support stability of representation arrangements for individuals and communities Decis ions on Mori wards are required to remain in place for a minimum of six years to allow time for the changes to bed in before the decision can be reversed. This option is disruptive to council governance arrangements. Some councils may have Mori wards established at the local elections overturned after just one term. Truncated representation review processes, lack of an appeal right, and the possible roll back of representation arrangements may be very disruptive (e.g. , potential to remove councillor positions or general wards that were recently established) . The option to rescind decisions to create a Mori This option is disruptive to council governance arrangements. Some councils may have Mori wards established at the local elections overturned after just one term. The lack of a representation review process that includes public submissions or an appeals process , and the possible roll back of representation arrangements is likely to be very disruptive (e.g. potential to remove councillor positions or Some councils may have Mori wards established in the lead up to the local elections overturned after just one term. Councils will have the time to undertake a complete representation review. The option to rescind decisions to create a Mori ward, or disestablish a current Mori ward, without public input are also likely to be highly disruptive to representation arrangements. Some councils may have Mori wards established in the lead up to the local elections overturned after just one term. Councils will have the time to undertake a complete representation review. The option to rescind decisions to create a Mori ward, or disestablish a current Mori ward, without public input are also likely to be highly disruptive to Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
Staff in the Alexander Turnbull Library:
Stage of the Water Inquiry
Stakeholder Engagement: Involve leadership, HR, employeeled networks and the PSA to assess the current strategy and collect input.
Stakeholder Input: Get feedback from key stakeholders on the proposed updates and adjust based on their insights.
Stakeholder Views Public consultation . The public and stakeholders were not consulted on the options. However, the issue of regulation of online gambling and sports and racing wagering has been actively discussed for some years and the previous Government announced in May in agreed in principle to TAB NZ having an online monopoly, subject to further work being undertaken. . We anticipate from conversations with stakeholders , there are likely to be a range of views on the options. For example, offshore operators are likely in favour of a regulated qwkdm Regulatory Impact Assessment online gambling market they can legitimately enter and participate in. They would likely express disappointment TAB NZ is given an online sports and racing betting monopoly. Previous consultation also indicated they would not be in favour of a raised POCC rate. . TAB NZ and the racing codes are highly supportive of TAB NZ having an online monopoly. While not having been directly consulted on the overall package in Option , some other elements of the package have been signalled with them and we believe they will be generally supportive of the optionpackage. TAB NZ has also expressed its desire to have the POCC rate raised. . Sport NZ supports extending TAB NZs online wagering monopoly to protect community interests and minimise gambling harm. However, while the racing codes support the monopoly, the views of individual NSOs are not known. The financial impact on specific NSOs is uncertain and likely to depend on the individual sports. Option One Counterfactual . Option would keep New Zealands gambling market model the same as it is now. Although TAB NZ would be the only authorised operator of betting products in New Zealand, there would be no legal barriers for offshore online operators to offer their sports and race betting products to New Zealanders, or for New Zealanders to play on offshore sites , provided they do not advertise here . . As noted, under the counterfactual option, t he Governments online casino regulation regime would be put in place coming into force at this stage in . While there will not be a direct impact on the way TAB NZ operates under the online casino proposal, the changes are likely to strengthen the position of some of TAB NZs closest competitors in New Zealand who are able to advertise as part of licensing conditions . . Given these factors, we consider under the counterfactual , it is highly likely offshore competition will further erode the revenue of TAB NZ although the rate and severity of this decline are unknown. . The other risks of the counterfactual are: there continues to a large grey market a grey market means that offshore operators are neither regulated nor operating illegally. Spending on offshore online gambling (i.e. the grey market) is expected to continue to increase over time. The advertising ban is only partially effective, and it will remain almost impossible to enforce for e.g. through advertising at overseas sports events broadcast in New Zealand ; TAB NZs long term revenue sustainability remains at risk in turn, this risks the racing industrys long term viability, and could impact jobs, especially in rural communities; and in the short term the additional payments provided for in the Entain partnership agreement for an online monopoly of million and ;
Stakeholder Public consultation . Targeted consultation was conducted in April to operationalise the POCC. Consultation highlighted the need for a reasonable rate of POCC that would not unfairly inflate offshore betting providers tax burdens compared to domestic providers. Consultation on a rate (the current rate) highlighted support for a lower rate amongst offshore operators, whereas TAB NZ TAB NZ reiterated its view that the current rate is too low in a letter to the former Minister for Racing in October . Additional assumption specific to this option . Some operators will continue to pay an increased POCC If the POCC is increased, some operators will continue to pay and returns to the racing industry will increase. However, depending on the rate of increase , some operators may decide to stop paying but continue to operate in the market offering better odds than TAB NZ, or leave the market entirely. Both outcomes would impact returns to the racing industry.
Stand Alone Credit Profile bbb bbb bb
Standard Po ors Financial Services LLC
Standard has not been met
Standard is ontrack to be met
Standards of Integrity and Conduct.
Standing as a candidate for, or being appointed to, an alcohol licensing trust The analysis for standing as a candidate for an alcohol licensing trust is similar to that for local government candidates. There is no requirement in the legislation for elected or appointed members to have particular skills or competencies.
Standing as a local government candidate There is no clear evidence that the age of is a suitable or necessary proxy for competence to stand as a candidate.
State Services As defined in section of the Public Service Act .
State Services Commission
Statement of Departmental expenses and capital expenditure incurred without, or in excess of, appropriation or other authority
Statement of Responsibility
Statement of Responsibility In signing this statement, I acknowledge that I am responsible for the information on strategic intentions contained in the Statement of Intent for the Ministry for Ethnic Communities. This information has been prepared in accordance with sections and of the Public Finance Act . Mervin Singham Chief Executive October Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
Statement of Service Performance and Judgements
Statement of budgeted and actual expenses and capital expenditure incurred againstappropriations
Statement of changes in equity
Statement of comprehensive revenue and expense
Statement of contingent assets and liabilities
Statement of cost accounting policies
Statement of financial position
Statement of responsibility
Statement of trust money administered on behalf of the Crown
Statement of work Review of methodology and assumptions underpinning economic analysis of aggregation
Statements (such as the MPS on Cooperation with overseas public authorities), any
Statements of Expenses and Capital Expenditure
Statistical analyses were then performed to understand whether the users were being disadvantaged based on their Mori or Pasifika heritage as compared to users of other decent.
Statistical information collected
Statistics to Industry and Commerce
Status Report Prongo Tnga Minister of Local Government Prepared March for the period to March
Statutes Ame ndment Bill (for information only) The Statute Amendment Bill (Bill) is the legislative mechanism for technical, short and non controversial amendments to existing legislation. The Bills are used to correct drafting errors and omissions, as well as to mak e minor technical changes to legislation and do not introduce policy change. Amendments may only progress with the unanimous support of the House of Representatives. Accordingly, all parliamentary parties are consulted on proposed amendments prior to their inclusion in such a Bill. In , the Bill did not receive unanimous support in the House and did not proceed. Recently, the Ministry of Justice, as the administering agency, has supported its Minister to undertake parliamentary consultation. The Bill no w has the unanimous support required to proceed. Impact on Local Government legislation In April , the then Minister of Local Government agreed minor and technical amendments could be made under the Statutes Amendment Bill to the: Local Government Act ; Local Government Rating Act ; and Water Services Act . The amendments are to: section D of the Local Government Rating Act and Schedule of the Local Government Act to move section D to Schedule of the Local Government Act to bring all annual report requirements for local authorities into one place; sectio n ()(a) of the Water Services Act to remove the word the before drinking water supply to make the section consistent with section ()(c) and ()(e); section () of the Water Services Act to update example in section () by removing the word the before drinking water supply to make it consistent with the other examples provided; ()(a) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Statutory Supervisory Means:
Statutory basis for charging and process of price setting
Statutory basis for charging and process of price setting . agree to provide a statutory authority for water services entities charging for services; . agree to enable water services entities to waive any charge for any individual customer at their discretion; . agree that water services entities must set out their charges in an annual tariff list; . agree that some charges may be set with reference to an hourly rate; . agree that charges which are sufficiently unusual or customised do not need to be on the tariff list; Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of Enabling pass through billing arrangements . agree to enable pass through billing arrangements, with territorial authorities collecting charges on behalf of the water services entity, in exchange for the reasonable costs of providing the service, similar to the Infrastructure Funding and Financing Act ; . agree that this pass through billing obligation on local government would expire on July ;
Statutory review of the selfidentification provisions Select committee recommendation . The select committee recommended a statutory review of the selfidentification provisions five years after enactment. This would require developing a report to present to Parliament. This would not include reviewing the basic change to a self identification process. Departments advice agree with the select c ommittees recommendation . The complexity of the policy and the sensitivity of this issue will make it important that the legislative settings are evaluated after enactment. A review would provide a transparent assessment of whether the policies supporting a selfidentification process are functioning well in practice.
Stay informed about the governments carbon neutral progress:
Steering Committee Update April
Steering Committee Update December
Steering Committee Update February
Steering Committee Update November
Steering Committee Update May
Steering Committee Update April
Steering Committee Update December
Steering Committee Update February
Steering Committee Update November
Steering Committee Update October : forthcoming Request for Information
Steering Committee Update December
Steering Committee Update January
Steering Committee Update February
Steering Committee Update August
Steering Committee Update November
Steering Committee Update January
Steering Committee Update April
Steering Committee Update November
Steering Committee Update October
Steering Committee Update March
Steering Committee meeting summaries
Steering Committee update September
Steering Committee update August
Steering Committee update September
Steering Committee update August
Steering Committee update September
Steering Committee update June
Steering Committee workshop: summary report
Stephanie Ngahuia Northey
Stephen (Steve) John Napier
Stigma, discrimination, previous negative
Store contains links to the various Life Event Travel Document information related
Stores Control Board to Treasury
Stormwater Services Further matters for Bill
Stormwater services future management arrangements
Strategic Framework for Regional Deals Frequently Asked Questions October
Strategic Framework for Working Effectively with Mori
Strategic Intentions Ng Takune Rautaki
Strategic Intentions :
Strategic Intentions :
Strategy for Aotearoa and the Digital Technologies Industry Transformation Plan (ITP)
Strategy for a Digital Public Service
Stratford District Council
Stratford model WICS report
Stratford slide pack WICS report
Streamlined consultation and decisionmaking processes for setting up future water services delivery arrangements
Strengthen GCDO mandate for cloud digital investment
Strengthening cultural competence
Strengthening impact: we strengthen
Strengthening our Approach to Volunteering, March
Strengthening our approach to volunteering: oral update to Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee on April , March
Strengthening oversight of government digital investment
Strengthening the Departments Investment Management System
Strengthening the connection between Archives New Zealand and the National Library
Strong communities have active, engaged people at the centre. Active, engaged people participate in important decisions, and they share their opinions and ideas for the future. The more community voices are heard in decisionmaking, the better any solutions are likely to be.
Strong message in jailing
Structural arrangements for water services provision such as establishment, ownership, and governance of water organisations
Structure of the Department
Structure of the National Library of New Zealand
Student Jailed for Sex Abuse Pictures
Student fined , for internet collection
Student sold video CDs of women being sexually abused
Study Trip Cabinet paper for your review
Subject Select Committees may receive briefings on, or initiate inquiries into, matters related to their respective subject areas as specified in Standing Order .
Subject to these decisions , officials will provide you with more detailed advice on a work
Submission report and final amendments to the nonfinancial performance measures
Submit a complete and accurate invoice
Subscribe to the bimonthly
Subscriber organisations will use the matching tool to identify deaths of their customersclientssupportersdonors. Subscriber organisations are then are able to cease communication to the deceased and undertake whatever legal, moral or ethical obligation they may have with them or their families.
Subscription Video onDemand (SVoD) content within scope of that Act, in conjunction with a
Success against new method of trading child sex abuse images
Success of CovidCard relies on detecting a high proportion of the highrisk encounters that occur within a population. Highrisk encounters typically take place inside, at places such as bars, restaurants, at church services, at large events, or on planes or public transport. It is envisaged that CovidCard would need to be required to be worn in such settings to be effective.
Successful matches against borrowers will be categorised as:
Successful matches against liable parents will be categorised as:
Sufficiently upgraded tools can reduce the time between a positive test result and the isolation of close contacts by days and also enable the timely isolation of secondorder contacts, which is considered near impossible with existing tools and therefore generally not considered at all. Such an approach may enable a strategy to extinguish limited outbreaks and sustain elimination. Without an upgraded approach, we are left to choose between an indefinitely closed border or a shift to a strategy of suppression should the virus inevitably arrive again. Any strategy that assumes the virus will not make it through the border again, in fullness of time, does not appear a sensible strategy
Suggested talking points for the Local Government Reforms Ministerial Group meeting on July
Suggested talking points for the Local Government Reforms Ministerial Group meeting on July
Summaries with additional club and nonclub breakdowns (to June )
Summary This would not achieve the objective of a consistent and trusted digital identity ecosystem. In a scenario where there is no government intervention, a private sector response that would address the aforementioned issues in a comprehensive fashion is highly unlikely to emerge and the private sector would continue to develop its own rules and standards without government direction . The challenges within the digital identity ecosystem would remain unchanged, but would be increasingly exacerbated by the ongoing digital transformation occurring in all spheres of life a trend recently accelerated by the Covid pandemic. Trust in di gital identity services would remain low, information would remain siloed, and the flow of information impeded. Furthermore, without intervention the digital identity ecosystem in New Zealand would not be positioned to realise the significant opportunities trusted digital identity could offer. This may help to support the achievement of a more consistent and trusted digital identity ecosystem, but there remain many uncertainties about the ability and willingness of service providers to comply. This may help to support the achievement of a more consistent and trusted digital identity ecosystem, but there remain many uncertainties about the ability and willingness of service providers to comply. This would achieve the objective of a consistent and trusted di gital identity ecosystem. A government led intervention such as this would imbue the ecosystem with consistency and trust, encourage uptake, enable the flow of information, and position the digital identity ecosystem to realise the significant social and e conomic benefits digital identity services can provide. This option could be established in the near term. Phase one of the Trust Framework ( ), in which a small number of participants are informally linked to the Trust Framework, will allow for the testing of policiesprocesses and the mitigation of risks before the Trust Framework is established in legislation, giving it legal enforceability and enabling more participants into the trusted ecosystem. This phasing approach would al so allow for the Trust Framework to be scaled and transformed in the future, if required. This could be established at a reasonable cost. Estimated costs to government approximately million per annum. As a result of these factors, option is the Departments preferred option. This would achieve the objective of a consistent and trusted digital identity ecosystem . This option would almost certainly address the underlying deficiencies of the digital identity ecosystem and, unlike Option , it would be legally enforceable from the outset. It would not be established in a timely manner. It would take years to set up this regime, ensuring that the challenges in the digital identity ecosystem remain unaddressed for some time. The costs associated with this option would be higher than any of the other options. Estimated at million per annum. It is possible that the size and costs of this option might be unnecessarily out of proportion with demand, once the regime is finally implemented . Undertaking such a comprehensive approach from the outset might lead to a situation where the costs of the regime outweigh the benefits. While it may be suitable to move to a comprehensive regime like this in the future, the Department does not judge this to be the most suitable starting point for the Trust Framework. The Department notes that option has the potential to scale into a larger, more comprehensive regime like this is the future, if required. PROACTIVELY RELEASED
Summary of Greenhouse Gas (GHG) gross emissions
Summary of Philanthropy New Zealand Disaster Guide
Summary of Steering Committee meeting July
Summary of Steering Committee meeting June
Summary of Steering Committee meeting August
Summary of Steering Committee meeting June
Summary of Steering Committee meeting June
Summary of Steering Committee meeting August
Summary of Steering Committee meeting July
Summary of Steering Committee meeting September
Summary of Steering Committee meeting June
Summary of impact on current p ositions The following impact table identifies the positions that have been affected by final decisions to implement organisational change, following consultation and consideration of feedback. A current established position is identified as disestablished if, following an assessment of job content, there is not a position in the new structure that is the same or very nearly the same. It is also important to note that if your current position is identified as disestablished, this does not automatically mean you will not be placed in a position in the new structure you may be reassigned to a new position in the new structure, following the reassignment process outlined in the Change Protocol in section . Key: The changes to the team include disestablishing some existing positions, change in reporting lines and job titles new positions including positions with no changes. Reporting line New position Position disestablished No change
Summary of local government feedback on the three waters reform proposals
Summary of new water services reform policy
Summary of submissions on the selfidentification regulations discussion document
Summit for Democracy AI, Digital Technology and Democracy
Supervision and community work for offender
Supervision orders and sex offender treatment important part of sentencing
Supplementary Estimates and that, in the interim, the increase be met from Imprest Supply;
Supplementary Information PDF version
Supplementary Information WORD version
Supplementary Information to the Enforcement Guidelines (March ) :
Supplementary Order Paper and Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Levy Rates and Information Requirements in Transitional Period) Amendment Regulations
Supplementary Order Paper for the Racing Industry Bill
Supplementary Order Paper on Charities Amendment Bill Minor amendments
Supplementary Order Paper on Charities Amendment Bill Minor drafting amendment
Supplementary briefing on legislative options for water services functions and powers for Bill
Supply of passport information for the purpose of locating overseas based
Supplying to the Department
Supplying to the Department of Internal Affairs
Support HPA and DIA to embed work with class gambling operators to identify potentially harmful gambling behaviour and take effective action to prevent and minimise harm . Develop and refine guidelinestrain thetrainers training to promote host responsibility in other gamb ling environments (including online environments) so operators can identify potentially harmful gambling behaviour and take effective action to prevent and minimise gambling harm and create safer gambling environments . Underlying principles: closer to homek a aro mai kit e kinga Good health begins at home and in communities, so it makes sense to promote the development and implementation of regulatory and policy settings that create safer gambling environments, particularly for people and communities at greater risk of moderate to high levels of gambling harm. This involves enabling systemic changes to innovate and deliver more effective services that will minimise and prevent gambling harm, to keep people and communities well and to reduce the level of gambling harm people experience. Objective : Services raise awareness about the range and signs of gambling harms that affect individuals, familieswhnau and communities Families and whnau of problem gamblers can be badly affected by gambling harm. The Ministry therefore places great importance on improving health literacy, to drive behavioural change by helping families and whnau to recognise and address issues associated with gambling harm and to apply appropriate selfhelp or helpseeking behaviours. The Ministry will continue to work with HPA and other relevant organisations to target atrisk and vulnerable communities to increase awareness, reduce gambling harm and encourage associated positive behaviours. These are typically communities with a high social deprivation score, who are at increased risk because of increased access to NCGMs and vulnerable because they lack access to resources that would help improve their resiliency. The Ministry of Health will use evaluation activities, the consumer network and resultsbased accountability reporting to ensure that all organisations are working in the right way, with the right people. The Ministry expects the services it funds to have a robust health equity, cultural competency and health literacy focus, as well as input from consumer networks once established. It also expects service providers to build relationships with other relevant organisations and communities in the areas in which they operate. This is one way of sharing relevant information and increasing the overall awareness of gambling harm and indicators of potentially harmful gambling. Services need to better address the cultural and language differences of their target audiences. The Ministry expects that the proposed codesign approach and use of consumer networks will give consumers from vulnerable communities a stronger voice in the design and evaluation of services. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Support Services to Members of
Support Services to Members of the (.)
Support for Statutory and Other Bodies
Support for school libraries
Support for vulnerable consumers unable to pay water bills . Some consumers of water services will be households with inadequate income and resources to support their basic needs, including water services. Households experiencing material hardship will likely include occupants that are younger, single parents, on be nefits as their main source of income, Mori and Pacific peoples, people with disabilities, larger households, and renters. . Currently, there appears to be a very large range in average annual water charges across councils sampled by the Department of Inter nal Affairs, from a low of about to a high of about ,. The average is about , across the sample. Aucklands average is ,. In future, this range is expected to narrow as entities implement more standardised approaches to pricing, including possible geographic averaging across districts. At the low end of the range, prices almost certainly are below the long run cost of service provision and do not cover economic depreciation. . The c ombined cost of water bills and rates bills should not materially change when water services entities are initially set up, other things being equal. Over time, they should be more affordable than if the same level of services were to continue to be provid ed by councils. Rates bills should reduce to offset water being separately billed, unless territorial authorities decide to increase their revenues for other reasons.
Support for whnau, families and friends
Support information for new parents.
Support material for Cabinet Committee on June Local Water Done Well stage Cabinet papers
Support material for Cabinet Committee on July Local Water Done Well stage : further decisions
Support material for Cabinet Economic Policy Committee approval to publicly consult on proposed national wastewater environmental performance standards
Support material for Community Resilience Ministers Meeting September
Support material for DEV on June Refocusing the water services reforms: implementation
Support to complete the RfI
Supported by our obligations under the Public Service Act and Papa Pounamu.
Supported the Government to develop and implement a framework for the transition to financially sustainable water services under Local Water Done Well
Supported the transition to the th Executive after the General Election, helping to ensure New Zealand is a wellfunctioning democracy
Supporting Ministers to ensure the Executive Government operates efficiently and effectively. This includes providing Very Important Person (VIP) transport services for members of the Executive Government and other VIPs and dignitaries
Supporting assessment of City and Regional Deals proposals and work programme alignments and adjustments
Supporting material for announcement of the Regional Deals Strategic Framework
Supporting materials for Hamilton meetings June
Supporting materials for Local Government System Improvements
Supporting materials for the announcement of TAB NZ partnership arrangement with Entain, TAB NZs online monopoly and the release of the Racing Industry Boards report into the greyhound racing industry
Supporting materials on Regional Deals for Cabinet Committee
Supporting our employeeled networks
Supporting the Governments resource management reform goals
Supporting the longterm financial sustainability of the racing industry
Supporting the smooth transfer of Government is central to a wellfunctioning democracy, and promotes trust and confidence in the operation of New Zealands democratic process and Executive Government.
Supporting the transition of Executive Government following the General Election
Surrogacy law reform implications for birth registration and citizenship systems
Surrounded by a network of passionate mentors, graduates and alumni, youll be supported to achieve your goals and build your confidence. While developing your accounting and leadership skills, youll be helping to provide trusted advice that makes a difference for all of New Zealand, from Parliament to individual Kiwis.
Survivor Experiences Board meeting June
Survivor Experiences Service
Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced digital contact tracing.
Suzanne Doig Deputy Chief Executive Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy
Suzanne Doig General Manager, Policy Group
Sydney Water Background site visit August
Symptom checking apps There is a category of apps and websites broadly defined as Symptom Checkers. In New Zealand these are also promoted as a Daily Health Checkin. Symptom checkers should not be confused with tools designed for longitudinal research such as FluTracker.
System Influence and Levers
System Investment and Leadersh ip
Systemlevel report on privacy maturity in the public service
Systems Certification and Accreditation (CA) the NZSIS network is classified at Top Secret(the highest level of government network security) and is fully security accredited by GCSB
Systems mitigations NZSIS can only share information with external agencies via secure information sharing mechanisms all information sharing mechanisms generate detailed audit log data, which is available to support security and compliance auditing physical transfer of information off the network for the purposes of sharing the information with an external agency must be authorised and comply with NZSIS information security standards
Systems of Record Watercare update The work completed on Systems of Record continues to be packaged, with documents being made available to council s on March , for councils to download and utilise in the setup of their future council controlled organisations . As part of making the documents available, councils will be asked to sign an agreement containing standard clauses that indemnify the Crown from any liability. Councils will be required to sign and return the agreement before receiving access to the Systems of Record documentation.
TAB NZ Board appointment letters
TAB NZ Board appointments decision on nominations
TAB NZ Board of Directors: Recruitment and appointment process
TAB NZ Financial Sustainability: Ministerial consultation on Cabinet Legislation Committee Paper
TAB NZ Statement of Intent for presentation to the House
TAB NZ request for exemption from Cabinet Fees Framework Final Cabinet paper for lodgement
TAB NZs proposed partnering Agreement with Entain Talking Points for DEV May
TAB NZs proposed partnering arrangement with Entain
TAB New Zealand Board and Racing Integrity Board membership
TAB New Zealand Board of Directors
TCC Commissioner report quarter ended December
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS
THE MINISTER RESPONSIBLE FOR THE NEW ZEALAND SECURITY
THE SECRETARY FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRSAND
THE SOVEREIGN IN RIGHT OF NEW ZEALAND AMAZON WEB SERVICES NEW ZEALAND LIMITED
THE STRUCTURE OF THE DEPARTMENT
TRIALS Over a twoweek period in May during alert level of COVID restrictions in New Zealand , eight validation trials were performed. These trials aimed to cover a wide range of natural situations, prioritising scenarios the technical team felt covered the most challenging environments for recalling close contacts that also had high potential for spreading an infectious disease. Scenarios were also prioritised if they were in the public interest (such as large gatheringsparties which were subject to additional restrictions during New Zealands alert levels), or covered a wide range of situations (e.g. queuing, oneonone meetings, casual contact, etc.). Seven of the trials covered five scenarios: office, cafe, construction site, taxi, and a house party. One scenario was repeated twice (office), and one scenario was broken into two trials for ease of evaluation (house party). There was one additional trial proximity that was also performed but was evaluated separately as it was designed to test specific aspects of the cards performance. The proximity trial methodology and results are included in Appendix .
TRUST FRAMEWORK FOR DIGITAL IDENTITY
Table : Aligning the strategy with He Korowai Oranga He Korowai Oranga Examples of the strategys alignment Overall aim Pae ora Principles underpinning the strategy a focus on improving Mori health Objective a specific Pae Ora objective Elements Wai ora Principles underpinning the strategy public health services based on the Ottawa Charter for Health Promotion and New Zealand models ( healthy environments is a traditional element of a public health approach and a component of Te Pae Mahutonga) Objective , which has a particular focus on NCGMs; Mori women are particularly vulnerable to harm from NCGMs Public health service specification purchase unit (s afe gambling environments) Whnau ora Objectives and and public health service specification purchase unit (aware communities) Public health service specification purchase unit (supportive communities) Free intervention services for whnau, includ ing dedicated Mori services Mauri ora Public health service specification purchase unit (effective screening environments) Free intervention services for individuals harmed by their own or someone elses gambling Intervention service specification purchase units: helpline and information service helpline and information service brief interventions full interventions facilitation of access to other relevant services follow up Directions Mori aspirations and Objective a specific Pae Ora objective contributions Crown aspirations and The strategy is a Crown strategy contributions Overall goal of the strategy the Crown working with others, including families and whnau, to prevent and minimise gambling harm and to reduce related health inequities STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Table : Aligning the strategy with Ala Moui Ala Moui Examples of the strategy s alignment Overall aim Health equity for all Pacific peoples Overall goal of the strategy entails a reduction in health inequities related to gambling harm Principles underpinning the strategy reduce health inequities Objective a specific health equity objective Planning and prioritisation processes mapping need based on population specific prevalence and access rates Pacific principles Respecting Pacific Objectives and and public health service specification purchase unit culture (aware communities) Public health service specification purchase unit (supportive communities) Requirements for general services meeting cultural needs of service users and supporting them to access dedicated Pacif ic services where available Valuing Pacific iga, Objectives and and public health service specification purchase unit kiga, magafaoa, kp (aware communities) tangata, vuvale and Public health service specification purchase unit (supportive fmili communities) Free intervention services for families High q uality health care Free intervention services for individuals and families Overall goal of the strategy, principles underpinning the strategy and objective Dedicated Pacific services and requirements for general services meeting cultural needs of service users and supporting them to access dedicated Pacific services where available Infrastructure intervention and public health service specification purchase unit (workforce develop ment) The Acts requirements for research and evaluation research and audit projects evaluating intervention and public health services Working together integration Principles underpinning the strategy intersectoral approach Objectives and and associated priority actions Public health service specification purchase units (policy development and implementation), (safe gambling environments) and (effective screening environments) Intervention service specification purchase unit (facilitation services) Enablers of outcomes Pacific workforce Dedicated Pacific services based in a Pacific cultural paradigm and using supply meets demand Pacific derived beliefs, values and practices Planning and prioritisation processes mapping ne ed based on population specific prevalence and access rates Infrastructure intervention and public health service specification purchase unit (workforce development) STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Table : Budget to prevent and minimise gambling harm (GST exclusive), Service area Total (m) (m) (m) (m) Public health services (harm prevention and . . . . minimisation) Intervention services ( to treat and help problem . . . . gamblers and their families and whnau) Research and evaluation . . . . New service and technology pilots . . . . Ministry operating costs . . . . Total (m) . . . . . Public health services Internationally, New Zealand s public health approach to preventing and minimising gambling harm is seen as a strength of our integrated strategy. The overall budget proposed for public health services for the period is largely unchanged from the previous funding period (see Table ). However, the Ministry intends to explore the potential for different ways of delivering public health services (eg, using a community mobilisation approach ) and funding contracts (the budget currently assumes the use of fulltime equivalent employees (FTEs)). Section . describes additional funding for new pilots. Indicative priority areas for to are as follows: reviewing and applying knowledge from successful local models of public heal th s ervice delivery, including methods such as community mobilisation, and the w ealth o f health services research available, to provide smarter services that deli ver i mproved health outcome s increasing screening as a key tool to promot e awareness of the harm caused by ga mbling and to identify earlier harmful addictive behaviour patterns a nd ap propriate forms of treatmen t future proofing our approaches; for example, assessing whether new scree ning to ols are more appropriate for New Zealand s public health needs. This may inclu de th e short gambling harms scale, which has been suggested as a better way o f mea suring the harm caused by gambling than the PGSI (which would be maintaine d f or monitoring purposes ) improving the infrastructure that connects the gambling sector, to incr ease c ohesion and collaboration; share best practices; boost coordination; incr ease tr ansparency; support the whole gambling sector workforce, including venue staff ; an d share learning and data across the wider health sector such as with ment al hea lth and other addictio ns extending public health services to accommodate impacts on young people. T his ad dresses the strong feedback within submissions that online gambling and gamin g STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
Table : Intervention services budget (GST exclusive), by service area, Service area Total (m) (m) (m) (m) Helpline and web based services . . . . Psychosocial interventions and support . . . . Data collection and reporting . . . . Workforce development (intervention) . . . . Total (m) . . . . Note: All service areas include provision for dedicated Mori, Pacific and Asian services and activities. Helpline and webbased services Helpline and webbased services provide: information access to intervention services for people unable to access face toface services referral to other gambling harm service providers information on selfhelp, peer topeer support options and assessment guides. Currently the Ministry funds two forms of telephonebased support, as follows. The Gambling Helpline provides a free service, and is a first contact point for people in crisis as a result of harmful gambling. It also provides a backup for other services that are not available , and ensures coverage in rural areas, where there are no face toface services. This is critical to the Ministry s service delivery model. The Asian Gambling Helpline is a limited service for the Asian community, provided by the PGF, and is funded out of psychosocial interventions and support services. Submissions from health groups and service providers, particularly those serving Pacific and Asian communities, called for more languageappropriate support. Suggestions included translating key information into common languages online, and extending the hours and range of interpreter languages available. The Ministry will explore ways to extend the reach of these frontline services with Asian and Pacific providers and the consumer network. It will also explore ways to increase the general helpline referral rate: currently only . percent of calls are referred to a treatment provider. Psychosocial interventions and support Psychosocial intervention and support services include a range of interventions delivered to individuals or groups in a variety of settings (including prisons). People affected by a family or whnau member s gambling can access the same range of services that is available to the gamblers themselves. The four core intervention areas are: brief intervention, full intervention, facilitation and followup services. Brief intervention in this context refers to brief screening for STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
Table : Research and evaluation budget (GST exclusive), Service area Total (m) (m) (m) (m) Research . . . . Evaluation (including outcomes reporting) . . . . Total (m) . . . . The research and evaluation work programme Strategic priority areas for The strategic priority areas are: ongoing monitoring of the incidence of gambling behaviour and associated levels of harm through the Health and Lifestyle Survey to maintain a longitudinal timeseries and inform strategiclevel outcomes monitoring researching gamblingrelated health inequities experienced by vulnerable atrisk populations, particularly M ori, Pacific peoples, Asian peoples and youthchildren, including the barriers to service use and what might be done to remove them examining the convergence of gaming and gambling on the design and delivery of new products (eg, NZLC s online instant win and other online offerings from a variety of sources) , along with their effects on gambling participation in the population and on harm, in particular for vulnerable populations such as children and youth examining the effect of sinking lid policies on gambling harm reduction , as well as the socioeconomic distribution of gambling machines and venues in New Zealand and the social tradeoffs involved investigating the development and use of internetbased forms of gambling increasing the use of process and outcomes evaluations with new intervention service delivery models, including the use of new technology. Research and evaluation procurement approach Delivering the research and evaluation programme will involve: using the All of Government Procurement panel where possible promoting the application of new disciplinary research and evaluation perspectives to the gambling harm minimisation research field; for example, behavioural economics, econometric analysis, and operational and translational research helping build research capability and capacity in gambling harm minimisation studies, such as small projects suitable for master s or PhD students where possible promoting national and international collaboration of benefit to New Zealand procuring gambling components in existing largecohort longitudinal studies such as the Pacific Island Families Study and Growing Up in New Zealand, where appropriate. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
Table : Structured p articipation in decision making using decision making tools e.g., CONSUL Madrid Decide (ES) Background Description Costs involved Relevance for NZ context Feasibility for different individuals and community types Risks Benefits Design choices Madrid Decide was started in as a counter to the growing political mistrust caused by the austerity measures in Spain. It has since become a platform CONSUL http:consulproject.orgen developed by the municipality in Madrid, for pub lic participation. It is now used in countries. Decide Madrid received the public service prize from the United Nations in . Objectives : for citizens to comment on proposed ordinances and make suggestions for changes to those ordinances ; to increase the transparency of the government and e participation. Process : The software was developed and funded by Madrids City Council. The website based on the software has five sections: debates, proposals, voting, processes (collaborative legislation) , and pa rticipatory budgeting. The intensity of participation in decision making depends on the level of verification. All citizens of Madrid (age ) are allowed to participate on the site. Registered users who provide only a username, email address, and passwo rd can participate in discussions, create proposals, and create expenditure projects. Users who provide the previous information and verify their residence and provide a mobile phone number can participate in discussions, create proposals, create expenditu re projects, vote for proposals, and vote for expenditure projects in the support phase. Users who provide the previous information and also fully verifies their account in person at a Citizen Assistance Office or via mail, can also vote for proposals in the final decision phase . Platform users participate in the drafting and modification of regulations and give their opinions on those regulations. The opinions will be considered by the City Council. The comments are considered by th e different government sectors for the final drafting of the ordinances. Platform users can join the discussion of any of the draft ordinances or policies. The public interaction is done through different users commenting online on the ordinance and on oth er users comments. Users can upvote or downvote another users comment. All discussions and votes are available for the public to see when anyone visits the website. Proposals which gain support from one per cent of the census population are then put to a binding public vote. In addition, several face toface deliberative spaces (i.e. local forums, physical voting booths) were set up to support the platform and to cater to the different needs of stakeholders involved . The tool could support a participator y budgeting process in New Zealand it is currently used in many local governments around the world. Special engagement campaign for youth and women (under represented voters) was conducted. No proof that this practice leads to improved decisions or decis ionmaking or that the trust in government grows Citizens and communities used to facetoface interactions and other processes may be resistant to the participation in the process. Citizens give their input on local policies and regulations affecting their lives . Many different citizens have commented on many different ordinances and made suggestions for improvements (the site has , registered users of Madrid population ). Improved knowledge of the citizens about local policies and regulations Improved transparency of the local government Clear objectives of the process and clear rules Stakeholder analysis to identify different communication needs of the participants Strong political vision and leadership Work closely with the lawmak ers to align with legislative processes and to ensure necessary human and financial resources Introduce processes to allow citizens input to be considered in decision making Introduce feedback loops to demonstrate that citizens inputs are taken into acc ount
Table : Levy rates per sector: weighting ( all figures GST exclusive) NCGMs Casinos NZRB NZLC Sector levy rates () . . . . Expected levy payment (m) . . . . Share of total expected levy amount . . . . Share of budget (C) . . . . STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
Table : Demographics (n) Characteristic n () Ethnicity NZ European (.) Asian (.) Other European (.) NZ EuropeanMori (.)
Table : Performance of Basic Card Algorithm with Minute Contact Duration Dataset n Recall FPR Rank Correlation Mean Std. Dev. Mean Std. Dev. Mean Std. Dev. office . . . . . . office . . . . . . cafe . . . . . . construction . . . . . . taxi . . . . . . party . . . . . . party . . . . . .
Table .: Average bill per household under different financing options for WDC in OptOut Scenario Average bill per household Change (Decrease in costs ) Debt to revenue limit ( WICS model assumption ) ,. Debt to revenue limit ,. . Debt to revenue limit ,. .
Table : Partici pation and response rates Bluetooth Card Participants N Daily Diary Surveys (nN) UWB Devices N Participation and Response Rates Day : Thursday Day : Friday Day : Saturday Day : Sunday Day : Monday Day : Tuesday
Table : Duration (in minutes) per close contact, as reported in daily diaries and Bluetooth cards Day Median duration per self reported survey close contact in minutes by day (range) Median duration per Bluetooth card cl ose contact in minutes by day (range)
Table : False Positive Rate for Ranked Contacts using Random Forests False Positive Rate Top x Mean Std. Dev. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Table : Objective priorities for action Objective : People understand and acknowledge the range of gambling harms that affect individuals, familieswhnau and communities Priorities for action Short to medium term priorities Long term priorities Ensure education and messaging and actions cover the full spectrum of harm, including low to medium problem gambling. Increase participation in the development of, and exposure to, culturally and linguistically appropriate campaigns and communications that provide information to people on the health and social risks and signs of harmful gambling and what to do to mitigate these risks and obtain help. Identify ways to provide effective support to people who are seeking to independently moderate or manage their gambling behaviour (or the behaviour of their famil ies and whnau) in some way and provide that support . Continue to enhance the links between gambling harm services and other social and health services to ensure that services work together to support people experiencing gambl ing harm and their famil ies and whnau. This will include trialling collective impact and co llaborative approaches. Enhance communication and referral processes to ensure that other services that offer support to people experiencing harm from gambling address the needs of a referred client (and their family and whnau) . Continue to identify and monitor protective and resiliency factors for gambling harm . Develop and pilot initiatives that build protective factors, life skills and resilience for people who gamble . Increase the links between services to prevent and minimise gambling harm and b roader mental health promotion life skills and resiliency programmes . Support community based life skills and resiliency programmes that help people to make healthy choices that prevent and minimise gambling harm . Underlying principles: peoplepoweredm te iwi hei kawe The health system plays an important role in health literacy providing people with the information they need to fully understand issues to do with health and wellness, including how to be healthy, access health services and manage their own health care. To improve health literacy, service providers need to work in partnership with service users, supporting and encouraging them to be health smart . Objective : A skilled workforce is developed to deliver effective services The Ministry expects the gambling harm workforce to be diverse and have a robust health equity, cultural competency and health literacy focus. T o deliver costeffective, responsive and holistic services, alignment with other relevant services, particularly those in the wider public health, mental health and addiction fields, is essential. The Ministry has worked with the gambling harm sector to identify the core competencies (including cultural competencies) required for the public health STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Table : Objective priorities for action Objective : Services raise awareness about the range and signs of gambling harms that affect individuals, familieswhnau and communities Priorities for action Short to medium term priorities Long term priorities Target p romotional activities to reduce gambling harm and increase awareness of the range and signs of gambling harms at high risk communities. Work to increase access to services among people experiencing gambling harm and their families and whnau, including in rural areas. Develop tools and protocols to support the primary health care sector and other community services to include screening, brief assessment and brief and early intervention for gambling harm as part of general health screening and day today delivery . Underlying principles: peoplepoweredm te iwi hei kawe The health system plays an important role in providing people with the information they need to fully understand issues around health and wellness, including how to be healthy, access health services and manage their own health (health literacy). To improve health literacy, services need to work in partnership with service users, supporting and encouraging them to be health smart and to mitigate language and cultural barriers to accessing information. In this partnership between providers and users, different groups of people will need different forms of support, depending on factors such as: age; ethnicity; different worldviews, expectations and religious beliefs; location; and existing conditions or disabilities. Gambling harm can be associated with mental illness, other addictions and substance abuse, family violence and a range of other social issues. Enhancing awareness of the signs of harmful gambling, and opportunities for screening, among services that address these other health and social issues will help enhance the accessibility of services to prevent and minimise gambling harm. Objective : People access effective treatment and support services at the right time and place Provision of highquality, effective and accessible services to prevent and minimise gambling harm requires staff who are appropriately qualified and services that are culturally relevant to the communities they serve. Access to intervention services should be available in all areas where there is access to gambling venues. Continuing to provide dedicated Mori, Pacific and Asian services is crucial to help reduce gamblingharmrelated inequity and inequality. The Ministry will increase the emphasis on including consumer perspectives in service design and delivery (informed by research and evaluation). It will also explore culturespecific delivery models (where costeffective) with consumer networks and service providers. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Table A.: Trial Overview Trial Length Type Participants Observers Cards per Participant Cards Used for Analysis proximity mins x Scripted
Table A.: Mean RSSI at Metres for Different Wearing Positions (difference to RSSI at optimal position Lanyard to Lanyard Control). Standard deviations are shown in brackets. Control Sweatshirt Light Jacket Overalls Puffer Jacket Lanyard to Lanyard (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) Lanyard to Chest Pocket . (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) Lanyard to Hip . (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) Lanyard to Arm . (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) Lanyard to Wallet . (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) Chest Pocket to Chest Pocket . (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) Chest Pocket to Hip . (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) Chest Pocket to Arm . (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) Chest Pocket to Wallet . (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) Hip to Hip . (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) Hip to Arm . (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) Hip to Wallet . (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) . (.) Not enough data for Arm to Arm, Arm to Wallet or Wallet to Wallet (subject to card ID assignment error)
Table A.: AUC Results for Different Machine Learning Algorithms AUC Model Mean Std Dev. Random Forest (numestimators ) . .
Table of Contents Executive Summary . . . . Background . . . . . Rationale . . . . . Phase one feasibility trial . . . .. . . . Research aims . . . . . Methods . . . . . .. . . . Study procedure . . . . . . . Recruitment and enrolment processes . . . . . . Data management . . .. . . . Data analysis . . . . . Results . . . . . . . . Technical challenges . . . . . . . Descriptive results . . . . . . . . Participation rates . . . . . . Field applications of data collection tools . . . .. Appl ications of the daily diary surveys . . .. .. Applications of the Bluetooth card . . . .. Applications of the ultra wide band devices . . . Preliminary Results on Concordance Between Data Sources . . .. Concordance between Bluetooth cards and UWB devices . . .. Concordance between Bluetooth cards and self report daily dia ries . . Summary of qualitative feedback . . . Discussion and recommendations . . . Technological impro vements . . . . Recruitment and enrolment processes . . . . Data management and analysis . . . . Concordance between data sources . . . Summary of Recomme ndations . . . Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Tables to are all examples of participatory budgeting, tables and detail collaborative planning process, tables through to docum ent citizen jury examples and onward are examples of wider innovative engagement, communication and participation practices. Where there is reasonably widespread practice of a tool or practice, we have tried to isolate a specific example that presents a typical use of that tool or product . Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Tables Table .: WICS modelling approaches for required investment Table .: Urban population statistics of New Zealand and Scotland Table .: Average bill per household under different fina ncing options for WDC in Opt Out Scenario Table .: Average bill per household under different financing options for Reform Scenario
Tabling of the Final Report and Survivor Experiences Service Engagement Event
Taituar Annual Conference
Taituar Conference, November
Taituar meeting with Minister Brown October
Taituar Excellence Awards
Take care of it once youve got it and protect it against loss, unauthorised access, use, modification or disclosure and other misuse
Take care when using unique identifiers
Talias story opening a bank account
Talking Points Passport Cost Recovery Fee Review
Talking Points for Cabinet Legislation Committee on July : Approval to introduce voting age Bill
Talking Points Water Services Legislation Repeal Bill for Cabinet meeting Overview As part of the Governments day commitment, the Water Services Entities Act and Water Services Economic Efficiency and Consumer Protection Act will be repealed CAB MIN refers . It is my intent for Cabinet to consider the Repeal Bill in the week of February , Cabinet endorsement on February and the introduction to the House on February .
Talking points Repeal Bill The Repeal B ill will repeal the: o Water Services Entities Act (including the Water Services Entities Amendment Act and the Water Services Legislation Act ). o Water Services Economic Efficiency and Consumer Protection Act , which is administered by the Ministry for Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE). The Minister for Commerce and Consumer Protection has agreed to th e inclusion of the Water Services Economic Efficiency and Consumer Protection Act in this Repeal Bill . The Repeal Bill will: o end the entity model that was part of the water services Acts and reinstate previous legislation relating to water services that was in place, including legislation that was amended by the Water Services Entities Amendment Act and Water Services Le gislation Act ; o disestablish the Northland and Auckland Water Services Entity , its establishment board, and the chief executive of that entity. Employment arrangements with this entity will be terminated, and the employee will be entitled to any redundancy arrangements they may have in their contract; o will transfer any residual assets, liabilities, and information of that entity to the Department of Internal Affairs; o remove the statutory obligation to make an Order in Council setting the dates for establishment of water services entities. The Repeal Bill proposes that this provision commences on the of introduction of th e Repeal Bill. The Bill will retain technical amendments that improve the regulation of water services by Taumata Arowai, including the Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act , the Water Services Act , and related Acts. The Bill will repeal out of Local Acts.
Talking points for APH on December Taumata Arowai Board reappointments
Talking points for Cabinet November paper Repayable capital injection to Fire and Emergency New Zealand
Talking points for Cabinet Appointments and Honours Committee October : Appointment of the Chair of the Library and Information Advisory Commission Ng Kaiwhakakamrama i ng Kohikohinga Krero
Talking points for Cabinet Legislation Committee Electoral Advertising Bill
Talking points for EWR on May: Future of severely affected location
Talking points for Local Government Reforms Ministerial Group meeting on December
Talking points for Meeting with the Minister for Racing: June, to pm
Talking points for a meeting with the Chief Censor
Talking points for extention of time Inquiry into appointment process
Talking points for meeting with HE Mrs Lauren Beau
Talking points for meeting with Minister Stanford and Sir Ian Taylor
Talking points for the Cabinet Business Committee: Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID Lessons appointing a replacement member
Talking points for the Commercial Video onDemand Levy Regulations item at ECO on March
Talking points for the Minister of Internal Affairs use at Cabinet ( July )
Talking points for your discussions with the Chair of the Fire and Emergency New Zealand Board on intended governance changes
Talking points on release of CRR discussion document for CBC on September
Talking points on the Commerce Commission Report into Personal Banking
Talking points to support Fire and Emergency New Zealand governance decisions at Cabinet and Cabinet Committee Internal Affairs
Talking points: Report back on online casino gambling regulatory design cabinet paper
Taonga tuku iho is preserved and valued.
Taonga tuku iho rights are protected.
Taranaki Community Committee
Tararua model WICS report
Tararua slide pack WICS report
Targeted rates information request
Targets a specific group.
Tari Taiwhenua the Department of Internal Affairs (DIA)
Tasman model WICS report
Tasman slide pack WICS report
Taumata Arowai SPE and proposed response
Taumata Arowai Taumata Arowai is a new Crown entity, established on March , through the Taumata Arowai Water Services Regulator Act . It will not become fully operational until the Water Services Bill has been passed (expected in the second half of ). Taumata Arowais objectives relate to: protecting and promoting drinking water safety and related public health outcomes efectively administering the drinking water regulatory system building and maintaining capability among drinking water suppliers and across the wider industry giving efect to Te Mana o te Wai, to the extent that Te Mana o te Wai applies to the functions and duties of Taumata Arowai providing oversight of environmental performance of wastewater and stormwater networks promoting public understanding of the environmental performance of wastewater and stormwater networks.
Taumata Arowai and Three Waters Reform Programme iwiMori HuiMotu Summary Report
Taumata Arowai and Three Waters Reform Programme iwiMori hui a motu A
Taumata Arowai and Three Waters Reform Programme iwiMori hui a motu slide pack
Taumata Arowai and Three Waters Reform Programme iwiMori preworkshop Water Services Bill webinar slide pack September
Taumata Arowai and Three Waters Reform Programme iwiMori preworkshop introductory webinar Minister Mahutas Speech Notes September
Taumata Arowai and Three Waters Reform Programme iwiMori preworkshop introductory webinar recording
Taumata Arowai and Three Waters Reform Programme iwiMori preworkshop introductory webinar slide pack
Taumata Arowai and the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment on the information provided by councils) q:.P.
Taumata Arowai can operate in a way that reduces regulatory burden and compliance cost as much
Taumata Arowai costs and proposals for funding
Taumata Arowai draft Statement of Intent and Statement of Performance Expectations and proposed response
Taumata Arowai quarterly report for March
Taumata Arowai Mori Advisory Group member
Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator
Taumata Arowaithe Water Services Regulator Act , to ensure that all
Taumata Arowaithe Water Services Regulator Act Commencement Order (No )
Taumata Arowaithe Water Services Regulator Act Commencement Order
Taumata Arowaithe Water Services Regulator Act
Taumata Arowal experience
Taupiri Drainage and River District Act
Taupo model WICS report
Taupo slide pack WICS report
Taura Herenga Waka Strategy
Taura Herenga Waka Strategy
Taura Herenga Waka Work Programme
Tauranga City Council Commission report quarter ended March
Tauranga City Council Commission report quarter ended December
Tauranga City Council byelection validation Order in Council
Tauranga City Council election final results
Tauranga City Council election: Issuing an Order in Council under section of the Electoral Act
Tauranga City Council elections decisions
Tauranga Commissions Final Report and draft response letter
Tauranga Commissions quarterly report, draft press release and timeline towards Tauranga City Councils transition to democracy
Tauranga elections dates and response to Tauranga Commissioners
Tauranga man sentenced to months home detention for possessing over images of children being sexually exploited and abused
Tauranga man sentenced to months home detention for child exploitation material
Tauranga model WICS report
Tauranga slide pack WICS report
Tax Administration Act .
Tax treatment of service delivery vehicles
Taxi The taxi trial (taxi, n) was a short ( minute) scripted trial to check that passengers in a small vehicle would be seen as close contacts by the card. There was no expectation of consecutive sets of passengers being recorded by each other since pickups may be many kilometres apart; however, we would expect all passengers to show on the drivers card. There were two passengers alternated seating positions: one in front and one in back; both in back; as well as frontback seating positions for a single passenger. The three participants (n) wore a single card around their neck, IDs (driver), and (passengers).
Taxpayers Union Rates Capping
Te AitangaaHauiti researchers uncover significant history in Wellington collections
Te Aka Matua, our longrunning Mori Leadership Programme ceased in . Following a review, a new Mori Leadership Programme is under development as part of the Te Ao Mori pou of our He Waka Eke Noa strategy. The new programme is scheduled to launch in .
Te Aka Taiwhenua Mori Strategic Framework
Te Aka Taiwhenua cohorts ran Mahuru Mori activities to support kaimahi to speak Te Reo Mori throughout September.
Te Ara Manaaki Programme: Civil Registration System Replacement Financial Update
Te Ara Manaaki Programme: Pepetuna Release
Te Ara Manaaki is a business unit and programme set up to support the branch to reimagine how we deliver our services around the wants and needs of our customers. Our vision is to transform the way New Zealanders access our identity and life event services putting our customers and their whnau at the heart of everything we do, and continuously make it easier for them to access services.
Te Ara Manaaki Testing and readiness activities before March changes to passport system
Te Ara Manaaki, our programme to modernise how people access life and identity services, progressed significant changes this year. Some updates had adverse impacts on passport processing timeframes, which we are making good progress resolving.
Te Ara Tahi includes a new purposebuilt archival facility, which is on schedule and within budget, and expected to open to the public in . The facility will provide a seismically resilient building that has fitforpurpose spaces for the institutions, and our close partner, Ng Taonga Sound Vision. This will enable them to seamlessly share resources, expertise and technology. It will assist the wider heritage sector to improve longterm efficiency and access to collections.
Te Ara Tahi is a shared programme of transformation for the National Library of New Zealand, Archives New Zealand and Ng Taonga Sound Vision.
Te AraTahi is a shared journey between Archives New Zealand and the National Library, to better meet the aspirations of New Zealanders in how our nations documentary heritage is collected, preserved and accessed.
Te Awhi Rito Reading Ambassador website
Te Haeata the Settlement Portal
Te Hiku Taumata Rangatira Hui
Te Hokinga Wairua End of Life Service
Te Htaka Tukuwarokore a te Kwanatanga
Te Kawa Mataahos review of Fire and Emergencys culture and complaints handling processes: Te Tari Taiwhenuas actions, and material to support your press conference
Te Kuiti man imprisoned for images of young children
Te Mana Whakaatu The Office of Film and Literature Classification Annual Report
Te Maruata dinner on March
Te Maruata meeting on April
Te Pae rahi Nominations Service
Te Pahekoheko Operations
Te Pou Manawa Partners and Products
Te Puna Board appointments update and short list of candidates
Te Puna Mtauranga o Aotearoa the National Library of New Zealand supports literacy through its Services to Schools, which are nationwide services for school communities to improve literacy and learning through providing resources, building capability, enabling networks and crosssector leadership. Services to Schools supports young people to grow a love of reading and strengthens connections to language, culture, interests and identity. It supports educators by providing professional learning, advice and quality resources that inspire and enrich learning and literacy across the curriculum. Services to Schools also provides expert support for the development of school libraries.
Te Puna Tahua Lottery Grants Board
Te Puna Tahua Lottery Grants Board distribution committee model
Te Puna Tahua Lottery Grants Board draft meeting minutes from October and agenda for next meeting
Te Puna Tahua Lottery Grants Board draft meeting minutes from January and agenda for next meeting
Te Puna Tahua Lottery Grants Board induction April
Te Puna Tahua Lottery Grants Board member survey
Te Puna Tahua Lottery Grants Board Memorandum of Understanding, meeting minutes, letters and annual report
Te Puna Tahua Lotttery Grants Board Annual Report Presiding Members report and Ministers Discretionary Fund report
Te Puna, Mori Advisory Group to Taumata Arowai
Te Puni Kkiri Ministry of Mori Development:
Te Puni Kkiri Suggested noting how the lack of Mori consultation will be mitigated. Suggested approaching Mori LGBT organisations as part of promoting Mori engagement during the select committee process. Department of Corrections Suggested lack of Mori consultation be highlighted more strongly. For example, the paper could further discuss te ao Mori perspectives on the gender binary. Ministry of Education Suggested that to remedy lack of Mori and Pacific consultation some ke y Mori and Pacific rainbow organisations are approached, especially in relation to developing nonbinary markers. Ministry for Women Suggested the lack of consultation with Mori and Pacific communities is remedied separate from the select committee process. Suggested that consultation with Mori and Pacific communities is linked to the Child and Youth Strategy work. Ministry for Pacific Peoples Suggested there was opportunity for targeted consultation with Mori and Pacific communities whilst developing the SOP. Expressed concern about the lack of consultation opportunity outside of the select committee process given that Pacific peoples participation at select committee is generally low. Suggested targeted engagement with Pacific communities in line with the Lalanga Fou approach. Recommended consulting rainbow organisations that provide services to Pacific peoples. Ministry of Health Expressed concern about the lack of consultation particularly in relation to gendersex terminology. Ministry of Justice Expressed concern about the lack of consultation. Further develop commentary on the Treaty of Waitangi Te Puni Kkiri Could be more specific on how obligations under the Treaty of Waitangi are upheld (discuss principles of the Treaty). Discuss empowering rangatiratanga (i.e. addressing effects of colonisation on takatpui (LGBTQI). Suggests adding a Treaty of Waitangi section. In part, Treaty section not added as implications for Mori are addressed in the body of the paper and in the population implications section .
Te Prongo Tau a Te Tari Mtwaka
Te Ptahi Whakawhiti Reo The Translation Service
Te Rua Mahara o te Kwanatanga Archives New Zealand is headed by the Chief Archivist who is also the General Manager.
Te Rua Wnanga the Archives Council is an unincorporated body established under the Public Records Act to provide independent advice to the Minister responsible for Archives New Zealand on recordkeeping and archives matters including those for which tikanga Mori is relevant.
Te Rnanga Reo hui, June
Te T ari Taiwhenua The Department o f Internal Affairs
Te Tairwhiti was one of the areas hit hardest by Cyclone Gabrielle. One of our kaimahi, a local community advisor, was directly affected by both Cyclone Hale and Cyclone Gabrielle. Through personal experience and whakapapa, this gave insight and empathy into the impacts to communities. Existing relationships meant our kaimahis advice and support was accepted by communities as they planned and progressed their recovery from Cyclone Gabrielle.
Te Tari Taiwhenua The Department of Internal Affairs (DIA) is seeking to address noncompliance issues relating to the Holidays Act to ensure all current and former DIA employees receive their correct entitlements and payments for leave.
Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs . credentialing volunteers, to enhance recognition and pathway s to employment; and . developing a central clearing house of existing online platforms to make it easier for volunteers to find opportunities and therefore increase the size of the volunteer wor kforce . Recommendations . It is recommended that the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee: . notes that the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector intends to progress a work programme to strengthen volun teering , given the significant contribution of volunteering to New Zealand , which includes: .. initiatives during National Volunteer Week from June to champion the sector ; .. supporting the sector to update their best practice guidance, after testing with the sector that this is a priority; .. reviewing the Support for Volunteering Fund funding formula to improve support for diverse volunteer groups ; and .. establishing a cross agency steering group to strengthen our strategic approach to volunteering across government; . ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector
Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs Appendix A: Timeline for the Overseas Collections (OPC) The Overseas Collections (OPC) form part of the National Librarys General Collection, which is a current use collection. The OPC contains mostly English language books purchased for general interest reading, with an emphasis on the arts and the humanities and general information for a public library readership. Some books that were no longer needed by public libraries were accepted into the OPC prior to . Plans to exit Wai re re House, a regional repository, triggered a review of the OPC to reduce the volume of the collections in line with the Librarys Collections Policy. Minister of Internal Affairs, Tracey Martin, approved the removal, over time, of all publications from the OPC, excluding those in subject areas identified as collecting priorities in the Overseas Collecting Plan. National Librarian Bill Macnaught announced the start of a project to rehome books from the OPC. The first lists of books for review are on the Librarys website. Internet Archive offers to take all books remaining after the review for digitisation to provide free access from their global digital library and to preserve the physical copies. Mr Macnaught begins discussions with the Chief Executive of Copyright Licensing New Zealand (CLNZ) about a possible agreement with Internet Archive and suitable mitigations to allay copyright concerns of rights holders. Book Guardians Aotearoa formed in response to the OPC project. Around , books donated to Lions and Rotary for a special oneoff fund raiser. Rachel Esson appointed Te Pouhuaki National Librarian in December. The National Library applies for a licence from ManatO Taonga Ministry for Culture and Heritage to export parts of the OPC to Internet Archive that may be subject to the Protected Objects Act . This licence is granted but has not used due to decisions taken subsequently. By April about percent of the OPC titles had been reviewed with input from Library stakeholders, with , books transferred to libraries in the New Zealand library network. Some books were transferred to the Alexander Turnbull Librarys research collections. A smaller, more focused collection of overseas publications was retained in the National Librarys General Collections (approximately percent of the OPC). In July the library announced its agreement with Internet Archive for all books left at the end of the OPC review to be donated for digitisation and preservation. Organisations including Tohatoha Aotearoa Commons, Internet New Zealand, Museums Aotearoa, the Council of New Zealand University Librarians, LIANZA, PLNZ and the NZ Open Source Society express strong support for the initiative. The library is approached by the Publishers Association New Zealand PANZ) and the New Zealand Society of Authors (NZSA) with concerns about copyright related to the UNCLASS IFIED Page of Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs Purpose . This briefing updates you on the background and development of a removal and disposal policy for the National Library. It describes how we intend to engage with stakeholders and the connections the policy has to the Overseas Collections (OPC). Background The need for a removal and disposal policy . Under the National Library Act , the National Librarian must obtain the approval of the Minister of Internal Affairs to remove any documents from the collections (s()). The Act also introduced the legislative requirement that the Alexander Turnbull Library collections are kept in perpetuity (s(a)). . The National Library has three broad collections the general collections, the research collections, and the schools collection. The schools collection is already covered by a disposal policy introduced in . However, the general collections, maintained to support current research needs, and the research collections, maintained to support longterm research needs and required to be kept in perpetuity, are not covered by a removal and disposal policy. . This policy is intended to provide the National Library with clear parameters for when items can be recommended for removal from its research and general collections by the Minister of Internal Affairs, and how they will be disposed of. It also covers process principles the National Library needs to follow when considering removal and disposal to support clarity and transparency around decisionmaking and to provide assurance for stakeholders. . There are a range of circumstances where items are considered for removal from the National Librarys general and research collections. For example, if they have been identified as violating an individuals privacy, or where they are part of a collection that is best housed elsewhere in New Zealand. In addition, it is good collection management practice to ensure items in collections developed for their shortterm utility and never intended for permanent retention are disposed of once that purpose no longer exists. Our approach to feedback and engagement: Ensuring good expert and stakeholder input . A Removal and Disposal Advisory Group has been set up to advise our team during the development of this operational policy. Advisory Group members bring both their own expertise and the views of their organisations to the discussions. . The Advisory Group comprises representatives from the Library and Information Association New Zealand Aotearoa (LIANZA); Te Ropu Whakahau (the leading national body that represents Maori engaged in libraries, culture, knowledge, information, communication, and systems technology); the New Zealand Historical Association (NZHA); the Professional Historians Association of New ZealandAotearoa (PHANZA); Auckland Museum; and the Council of NZ University Libraries (CONZUL). The Advisory Group is currently providing advice and input into the draft policy. . The Advisory Group has meet twice, providing input as the policy was being drafted and providing feedback on the first draft. They have also had opportunity to advise the Library on key stakeholders to engage with during the policys development. UNCLASS IFIED Page of Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs donation. In October, rights holders of titles held in the OPC are given the opportunity to optout of the upcoming donation. In November, the Library announced it will reconsider its plans for the OPC in light of concerns raised by various interested parties, including issues associated with copyright. The Library pauses export of any of the OPC until it has completed its review and considered its next steps. Work begins within the Library to assess its next steps. In August, the Library announces plans for a removal and disposal policy for items deaccessioned from the National Library and signals it will invite stakeholders to be involved in conversations about the draft. In November the Library announces it will form an advisory group to provide advice and input into the policy; and signals it will begin stakeholder engagement in the new year. UNCLASS IFIED Page of Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal A.ffairs Appendix B: Planned engagement for Removal and Disposal Policy TrancheGroups I Dates I Channel Internal Working group From October until final Zoom policy approved External Advisory Group Meeting dates: November Zoom , January , April , MayJune Policy enews subscribers Ongoing updates Email Publishers Association NZ March Zoom NZ Society of Authors March Zoom Copyright Licencing NZ March Zoom Leading Library stakeholders March April Group Zoom; in person LIANZA, CONZUL, Public presentation and Libraries NZ, School Libraries discussion; listserv notice. Association, Te Ropu Whakahau Archives NZ and Nga Taonga March Next Te Ara Tahi meeting Sound and Vision Leadership Kaitiaki Guardians of the March April Next Guardians meeting Alexander Turnbull Library Library and Information March April Next LIAC meeting Advisory Council (LIAC) General public March April Social media and feedback via website Invited independent March April Zoom; in person researchers presentation and discussion Book Guardians Aotearoa March April In personZoom Selected Music Archive and March April Zoom Community groups Leading documentary heritage March April Zoom; in person organisations Te Papa, presentation and Hacken Library, Auckland discussion Museum, Museums Aotearoa, PHANZA, NZHA, NZ Society of March April Zoom Genealogists UNCLASS IFIED Page of Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs investigates all reports of harmful online content. To report harmful online content please select from the following reporting options:
Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs is committed to delivering all information on this website so that it is accessible. We want to provide our information to everyone, so we aim to meet the following New Zealand Government standards:
Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs is investigating solutions to this sites known web accessibility conformance issues. We will continue to review this site for accessibility to discover how we are doing and where we can improve.
Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Te Tari Taiwhenua The Department of Internal Affairs August Proactive release of report on Participatory Practices in Local Government
Te Tari Taiwhenua The Department of Internal Affairs Proactive release of Cabinet paper, Office of the Minister of Local Government Local Government Electoral Legislation Bill regulatory relief in light of Cyclone Gabrielle March
Te Tari Taiwhenua The Department of Internal Affairs Proactive release of titles of Briefings received by the Minister for Digital Economy and Communications, from the Department of Internal Affairs, Nov Dec . February
Te Tari Taiwhenua has been the custodian of New Zealands personal identity data for over years. As technology evolves so do the identity products and services we use.
Te Tari Taiwhenua has embraced ambitious goals set by the CNGP. By , we aim to reduce our emissions by , with a more substantial target of by from our base year of .
Te Tari Taiwhenua has significant and diverse responsibilities that require strong partnerships, engagement and consultation with Mori to be effective.
Te Tari Taiwhenua is committed to creating a workplace that values diversity, fosters equity, and promotes inclusion.
Te Tari Taiwhenua is committed to creating a workplace that values diversity, fosters equity, and promotes inclusion. Over recent years, we have worked to embed these principles into our organisational culture through the
Te Tari Taiwhenua is working with the ICAO to develop a digital passport which would transform how we travel internationally.
Te Tari Taiwhenua will ensure procedures and guidelines are followed so the appropriate type of information is shared for the correct purpose with the required protections. The requirements of the Privacy Act will continue to be maintained at all times regarding how to collect, store and use personal information.
Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs
Te Tari Taiwhenua, Department of Internal Affairs lead the programme.
Te Tiriti o Waitangi Treaty of Waitangi Implications
Te Tiriti o WaitangiTreaty of Waitangi Implications The proposals in this paper have no impacts relating to Te Tiriti o Waitangithe Treaty of Waitangi beyond the impacts on all eligible and yearolds. However, we note there is a higher proportion of Mori in the and yearold age group, compared to older population groupings. There fore, the changes in this paper would provide for slightly more accurate electoral participation through voting and candidacy. It would support the Crowns obligation to provide for equal treatment for Mori and nonMori under Ko te TuatoruArticle .
Te Tri Taiwhenua The Department of Internal Affairs Proactive release of letter relating to the Removal and Disposal Policy Advisory Group January
Te hua me te momo o mtau mahi
Te huatanga me te Hkai o ng Mahi Nature and Scope of Functions Our Purpose T Ttou Whinga The Department of Internal Afairs serves and Ko t Te Tari Taiwhenua he whakarato me te connects people, communities and government to hono i ng iwi, ng hapori me te kwanatanga ki build a safe, prosperous and respected nation. te hanga motu haumaru, tnui, whai mana hoki. The Departments purpose remains consistent, even as the functions and services we perform evolve and develop. We aim to make New Zealand a better place to live and work with people, communities, and other parts of government both central and local, to enhance the lives of the people who live in New Zealand. Our ministerial portfolios We are responsible to six Ministers, administering seven portfolios within the single Vote Internal Afairs. The Minister of Internal Afairs is the Vote Minister and the Responsible Minister overseeing the Governments ownership interests in the Department. Portfolios and Responsible Ministers are: Internal Afairs Hon Jan Tinetti Community and Voluntary Sector Hon Priyanca Radhakrishnan Diversity, Inclusion and Ethnic Communities Hon Priyanca Radhakrishnan Digital Economy and Communications Hon Dr David Clark Local Government Hon Nanaia Mahuta Ministerial Services Rt Hon Jacinda Ardern Racing Hon Grant Robertson Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Our roles and functions The Department operates under a single Vote of approximately million to support activities under the seven portfolios. The Department has a broad range of responsibilities and functions that span Information and Communications Technology (ICT) investment, information management, working with communities, ensuring efective regulatory frameworks are in place, supporting the executive and local government, and delivering a range of services to support and foster social cohesion, inclusion and a sense of belonging. The Department is the home of the Government Chief Digital Oficer (GCDO) and the Government Chief Privacy Oficer (GCPO) and leads the digital transformation of government across the state sector. In this respect, we support our state sector colleagues to meet the needs of New Zealanders and the Government through better investment in ICT and to maintain the privacy and security of New Zealanders information. The Department is the home of the National Library of New Zealand and Archives New Zealand, which act as the memory of society and the memory of government respectively. These institutions play an important role in preserving New Zealands documentary heritage and ensuring a full and accurate public record is created and maintained. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
Technical overview of the response templates
Technology (IT) resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, and
Technology and information services
Technology is changing how we interact and connect, how we make purchases and spend our spare time, and how we work. In this Briefing, we have challenged ourselves to consider what trends will have an impact on community participation and decisionmaking over the next years and what might be possible through technology.
Tell them what information you are collecting, what youre going to do with it, whether its voluntary, and the consequences if they dont provide it. The DAA between the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister Responsible for NZSIS is publicly available and makes it clear that NZSIS has access to DIA Information collected by DIA.
Template to be completed by the independent security evaluator with the findings from the evaluation. This will include the scope, controls validation, and asses sment against risks.
Templates AA and FCommercial and Financial
Templates B and CSession on standards and levels of service
Templates E and GOpex and Capex
Templates and guidance for providers of digital identity services.
Terence Reginald Joseph Nicholas
Terminology Project: Legal definitions and terminology considerations
Terminology recommendations for combatting child sexual exploitation
Terms defined in sections and of the Privacy Act shall have the same meaning
Terms of Reference HTML version
Terms of Reference PDF version
Terms of Reference for the Inquiry
Terms of Reference of Working Group on Representation, Governance and Accountability of new Water Services Entities
Terms of reference Mori Advisory Group
Terms of use of the Trust framework Authority accreditation mark for Trust Framework Providers.
Terms for the Covid Inquiry
Tertiary Education Commission (TEC) and providers to develop appropriate
Test Environment Monitoring . Multiple duplicate test environments have been running in Sydney and Melbourne and initial testing has been running for two days on e arly firmware. . Due to current lock down requirements, limited testing at scale has been available. . All data that is uploaded to the server is checked and verified against best known conditions
Test Team Carl Che firmware Gordon Spremic QA lead hardware, firmware, data Anthony Merry technical lead, hardware, QA, firmware Paddy Ramasamy iOS App Jason Price server, Firebase, Dropbox and backend Matt Denton project, QA, client, documentation David Beard QA, data analysis Sucha Perera QA (not on Day )
ThamesCoromandel District Council
ThamesCoromandel model WICS report
ThamesCoromandel slide pack WICS report
Thank you again for joining me today, and for your continued support in implementing Local Water Done Well. The policies I will be announcing today are based on localism, local autonomy over decision making and giving councils a range of options about how you organise yourselves to deliver high quality, sustainable and safe water services. I look forward to sharing further details as our policy is developed, and to seeing the progress of conversations between councils about your future service delivery arrangements. The Government recognises that certainty around timings, and details of the new regime, is needed quickly for councils, for your communities and for the water sector. Following todays meeting I will be sending you a letter based on this discussion, and including some detailed information that will be of interest to elected members. Thank you and Im happy to take a few questions now .
Thank you for requesting that SP Global Ratings provide you with feedback through its Rating
That said, we could revise the ratings upwards if WSE outperforms on its ta rgeted efficiencies
That said, we could revise the ratings upwards if WSE outperforms on its targeted efficiencies
The statutory corporations manage the infrastructure assets. Municipal councils often
The Budget introduced a significant change to the way funds for the Department of Internal Affairs are appropriated, with the shift to a single Vote for all our portfolios. The eight Votes previously administered by the Department (Internal Affairs, Community and Voluntary Sector, Emergency Management, Local Government, Ministerial Services, National Archives, National Library, Racing) have been amalgamated into one Vote for the first time (see our
The General Election saw a change of government. The transition required significant work by our Ministerial Services staff, who provide services to the Prime Minister and the Executive.
The changes to the Harm Minimisation Regulations have been designed to create clear and consistent standards that apply to all venues. They introduce new monitoring procedures at venues to support venue managers and staff identify signs of harm earlier and more consistently. They also set out clear rules for how staff must respond when signs of harm are identified.
The cost sharing framework and how it will apply to Auckland Council and Watercare under Local Water Done Well
The councils are Kaipara and Far North District Councils, Gisborne, and all councils within the Hawkes Bay Region (Central Hawkes Bay, Hastings, Wairoa District Councils, Napier City Council, and Hawkes Bay Regional Council).
The Act amends the Water Services Entities Act to establish water services entities based on existing regional boundaries, and introduces a staggered timeframe for establishing the entities, with all entities going live between July and July .
The Act includes some transitional support options to help councils complete their longterm plans, depending on their local needs and circumstances. The Act also includes transitional provisions that enable councils to defer the review of water services bylaws, under the Local Government Act .
The Act lays the foundation for a new approach to water services management and financially sustainable delivery models that meet regulatory standards.
The Act provides for every territorial authority owner and therefore every community to have at least one representative on the entitys regional representative group, with an equal number of mana whenua representatives.
The Act reinstated previous legislation related to the provision of water services (including local government legislation). This restored continued council ownership and control of water services, and responsibility for service delivery.
The Added Parties, excluding Mortality Review Committees and Intermediaries, can reasonably be
The Added Parties, excluding Mortality Review Committees and Intermediaries, may use the personal
The Agency Partnerships and Capability group brings together the functions that provide advice to support and enable agencies to plan and execute better digital public services for New Zealanders.
The Agreement shall continue to be in force until either all the parties agree to terminate
The Alexander Turnbull team develops and maintains a comprehensive collection of documents relating to New Zealand and its people. The
The AllofGovernment Portfolio of ICT services helps New Zealanders by providing public sector agenciesorganisations with access to reliable, secure, and fitforpurpose ICT products and services.
The AllofGovernment Portfolio sees significant uptake
The AllofGovernment Services Delivery Group brings together the functions that deliver a range of services to or for the public sector, including the AllofGovernment Portfolio of digital products and ICT services.
The Anti Money LaunderingCounter Financial Terrorism Group does not send requests for payments, or for individuals to transfer funds.
The AppleGoogle Exposure Notification System is contrary to New Zealands approach to contact tracing, in that it anonymously notifies close contacts that they have been exposed and relies on them to voluntarily notify the public health authorities. We consider it prima facie unsuited to use as part of augmenting and accelerating contact tracing.
The AuditorGeneral independently decides which matters the Office will investigate.
The Aveia Pacific Leadership Programme, which focuses on creating a pathway for public sector leadership development, with the goal of increasing Pacific representation in tier to roles
The Bill had its First reading on December and was referred to the Finance and Expenditure Committee for consideration.
The Bill sets out key details relating to the water services delivery system, the economic regulation and consumer protection regime for water services, and changes to the water quality regulatory framework.
The Bill should commence on January
The Bill should not include a referendum clause as an alternative to a majority in the House
The Bill was introduced to Parliament in December . It reflects key policy decisions announced by the Government in August .
The Branch Performance Group brings together the functions that connect delivery of the Digital Services branch work programme to the enterpriselevel focus for Te Tari Taiwhenua, ensuring branch strategy supports outcomes delivery.
The Briefing considers proven methods and initiatives at a national and international level that we want to expand on. It also reflects community perspectives on an ideal future state to ensure were envisaging a way forward that works for all Aotearoa.
The CIPU does not handle complaints directly from members of the public. Complaints should be directed in the first instance to the
The COVID lockdown in particular demonstrated the service
The Canterbury Earthquakes Royal Commission of inquiry on the causes of building failure as a result of the earthquakes. The inquiry reported in November .
The Chief Archivist exercises a leadership role in facilitating and coordinating archival activities in New Zealand and has statutory independence in some aspects of government recordkeeping regulation.
The Chief Archivist has a system leadership and regulatory role in administering the Public Records Act , which establishes the statutory framework for information and records management across the public sector
The Chief Executive, Secretary for Internal Affairs or his authorised delegate
The Child Support Act
The Commerce Commission oversees the
The Commission is currently inquiring into a low emissions economy (due to report in June ) and into state sector productivity (due to report in August )
The Commissioner of Inland Revenue or her authorised delegate
The Commissions group oversea and support Inquiries, Royal Commissions and a number of independent statutory entities.
The Commissions typical approach to an inquiry is to publish an issues document and a draft report before producing a final report. It invites public submissions on both the issues document and the draft report. Typically a Productivity Commission inquiry takes about a year to complete from the time it receives its terms of reference
The Communications Council Axis Awards recognise creative excellence in New Zealand advertising.
The Community Resilience Ministers meeting July
The Community Trust of Mid and South Canterbury
The Content Regulatory Review Timeline
The Content Regulatory Review in the context of the Christchurch Call and misdisinformation, April
The CovidCard project team has undertaken a program of field trials and product testing to support the development of the core technology (card hardware and algorithms), and to determine the accuracy and efficacy of this approach to enhanced manual contact tracing. The field trials have provided a highquality realworld dataset to support the evaluation of the CovidCards contact identification performance relative to a robust observed reality (ground truth), derived through a combination of video capture and detailed trial observer records.
The Crown likelih ood of support High
The Crown likelihood of support Extremely High
The Crown likelihood of support High
The Crown will establish t hree WSEs as statutory corp orations throug h legislation. The purpose
The Customer Nominated Services Approved Information sharing Agreement (AISA) enables a better customer experience and a more efficient approach to the authorised sharing of information between government agencies. The AISA reduces multiple requests for the same information by different government agencies and removes the need to provide physical copies of information. It also improves the quality and consistency of information that agencies hold about an individual and makes it easier to detect issues such as identity fraud.
The Cyclone Gabrielle Appeal was established to complement existing donation appeals, following the extreme weather events of early .
The DIA are best place to handle requests from individuals regarding corrections to their DIA Information. Any requests to NZSIS regarding corrections to an individuals DIA Information will be transferred to DIA. DIA will notify NZSIS should this result in the correction of any DIA Information obtained by NZSIS under the DAA. Compliant
The Death Approved Information sharing Agreement (AISA) facilitates access to information about deaths. The AISA assists with the provision of public services by facilitating access to accurate death information for organisations. It also provides for updating records about individuals associated with the deceased individual so that their records are also accurate. Organisations may take subsequent actions based on the update of records relating to the deceased individual or associated persons, such as the granting of benefits or entitlements, if that is the agreed purpose for receiving the information.
The Department also has an External Advisory Committee that provides independent advice to the Secretary for Internal Affairs and the Executive Leadership Team in its management and governance responsibilities. This includes guidance on strategic direction, systems of governance, risk and assurance and organisational performance, as well as the integrity of performance information.
The Department also played a critical role in the operational continuity of Executive Government during the caretaker period by maintaining services and preparing to transition the outgoing Executive. This represented a significant logistical exercise with the full change of executive, office relocations and over staff changes managed in the immediate period following the formation of the Government and confirmation of the Executive.
The Department collects nominations, undertakes a shortlisting of candidates and recommends suitable candidate(s) to the relevant Minister who will select their preferred appointee(s). Final decisions are approved by Cabinet.
The Department consulted on an Order in Council to make eight temporary amendments to three local government Acts:
The Department currently has no method by which to determine how many entities will be in each category, or if the costs will vary significantly depending on the role a participant plays in the ecosystem (e.g. information provider vs infrastructure provider). All of this will, however, be clarified during phase one ( ) when the policies and processes around compliance testing will be developed.
The Department has locations nationwide and two overseas (Sydney and London). Our focus is on sites that are fit for purpose and where staff can effectively perform their work and that are safe for visitors and the public.
The Department has Treaty of Waitangi Te Tiriti o Waitangi obligations that require strong relationships, engagement and consultation with Mori to be effective. The Department has commitments across Treaty Settlements and is also party to Accord Agreements.
The Department has administrative responsibility for approximately Acts (plus an additional historic Local Legislation Acts) and about pieces of secondary legislation. We also have functional regulatory roles or share responsibility under six other pieces of legislation.
The Department has an association with a range of Crown entities through its policy and Vote administration responsibilities. The Department also has an association with, and varying responsibilities for, many other statutory bodies and trusts. See:
The Department has developed two foundational indicators for this outcome. The first one focuses on lifting the capacity of Mori leadership at tier level and above, because when Mori are involved in decisionmaking or in leadership roles there are positive results for hap, iwi and Mori. The second indicator is designed to gain a better understanding of our Treaty of Waitangi Te Tiriti o Waitangi commitments and obligations across the organisation. These two indicators provide a solid foundation towards creating a highquality MoriCrown relationship.
The Department has five branches:
The Department has redacted references to the amounts paid to Paragon New Zealand on the grounds of commercial sensitivity and the names and contact information of people to protect the privacy of those concerned. This document is in Adobe PDF format.
The Department has redacted some information, as noted on the cover page. This document is in Adobe PDF format.
The Department is a recognised leader in public service known for innovation, essential to New Zealand, and trusted to deliver. It serves and connects people, communities and government to build a safe, prosperous and respected nation (see
The Department is committed to transparent, informed and constructive engagement. Our engagement approach is designed to gather insights, lessons learned and best practices to support the implementation of New Zealands online gambling regulatory regime.
The Department is party to Accord Agreements (that resulted from the Treaty of Waitangi Te Tiriti o Waitangi settlement process) with hap, iwi and Mori organisations. One is with Ngti Twharetoa, represented by the Twharetoa Mori Trust Board (the Trust Board). The Department supports two key projects in relation to this Accord. Project is the licensing regime and Project is the Lake Taup Harbourmaster function. To ensure a healthy and ongoing relationship, the Department is working closely with the Trust Board to complete a register that captures new structures and commercial users undertaking activities on Lake Taup. The Department continues to collaboratively build capability to devolve Harbourmaster functions and Crownowned facilities to the Trust Board in due course.
The Department is releasing this information with redactions, as noted on the cover page. These documents are in Adobe PDF format.
The Department is responsible for enforcing two pieces of legislation:
The Department is responsible for the National Library of New Zealand Te Puna Mtauranga o Aotearoa and Archives New Zealand Te Rua Mahara o te Kwanatanga. Both play an important role in preserving New Zealands documentary heritage and ensuring a full and accurate public record is created and maintained. In particular:
The Department is responsible to the Minister of Finance, Hon Nicola Willis in respect of community trusts ( regional trusts that distribute resources to local communities from the proceeds of the sale of Trustee Banks) and to the Minister Foreign Affairs, RT Hon Winston Peters for the
The Department is working on an AllofGovernment (AoG) Roadmap to modernise government digital services across New Zealand. This includes a digital investment plan to support its implementation.The goal is to improve how New Zealanders experience digital government services, and to deliver greater efficiencies and productivity. By using reusable digital components, interoperable data, strong digital security foundations, and essential capabilities (such as digital skills and new funding models), customer experiences and efficiency will improve. The Roadmap has a rolling threeyear horizon and will be regularly to reflect government priorities and available resourcing.Digitising government services offers significant opportunities to deliver more efficient, effective, and responsive public services, reduce bureaucracy, and ensure discipline in public spending. Digital done well can help people and businesses quickly and conveniently access government services and information.
The Department of Internal Afairs Pipitea Street PO Box Wellington Telephone For more information on the work of the Department of Internal Afairs please visit our website www.dia.govt.nz
The Department of Internal Affairs
The Department of Internal Affairs (DIA) Logan Fenwick
The Department of Internal Affairs a brief history
The Department of Internal Affairs Proactive release of introductory briefings to the Minister of Digitising Government listed in the Briefing to the Incoming Minister of Digitising Government
The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua
The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Appendix A: How the Rates Rebate Scheme works . Four factors affect the overall cost of the Rates Rebate Scheme (the Scheme) to the Crown. These are: the Schemes key settings (the maximum rebate available and the income abatement threshold); the level of rates charged by councils; the uptake of the Scheme; and the incomes of residential ratepayers. Of these, only the Schemes key settings are within the Governments control. . Applicants apply for a rebate directly to their council and, if successful, either havetheir rebate applied to their rates account or are paid a cash refund if their rates havebeen paid in full. The Department of Internal Affairs then reimburses the council. . Eligible applicants include: residents who are ratepayers for the property to which the rebate is beingclaimed; and residents who own a nonseparately rated unit in a retirement village, and who contribute to the outgoings of the retirement village. . Based on the rates proposed to take effect f rom July , the level of rebate an eligible applicant receives is determined by the following: the applicant must pay the first of the rates on the property; the potential rebate is twothirds of the remaining rates, up to the maximumamount; from July , if the applicant and the applicants partner, andor joint home owner living at the property, have income in excess of , gross per annum, the rebate is reduced by for every of income above that amount (the abatement threshold); for every dependant, the abatement threshold increases by ; and from July , the rebate will be capped at a maximum of . . The applicants income used in the assessment is that earned from the previous tax year. For example, a person applying for a rebate in the year from July June is assessed on their income for the financial year ending March . . The following examples show the estimated rebate at various levels of rates for two different living arrangements: INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Example : A married, civil union, or de facto couple, receiving a superannuation income of ,. gross, who received no other income in , would be eligible for a rebate as shown below. Level of rates () Estimate rebate () , , , . . Example : A single person living alone, receiving a superannuation income of ,. gross, who received no other income in , would be eligible for a rebate as shown below. Level of rates () Estimated rebate () . , , . , INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Appendix B: Proposed timetable for Order in Council process Action Briefing to the Minister seeking permission to proceed with adjustments March Briefing and Cabinet paper received April Ministerial consultation on Cabinet paper April Briefing to Minister seeking authorisation to add Cabinet Paper to CabNet and providing talking points for Cabinet Legislation Committee May The Department of Internal Affairs to lodge Cabinet Legislative Committee paper on CabN et May Cabinet Legislation Committee meeting June Cabinet meeting June Executive Council meeting June Order in Council in Gazette June Order in Council comes into effect July INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Priority Routine Local Government briefing Hon Nanaia Mahuta Minister of Local Government Title: Draft Cabinet Legislation Committee paper Annual adjustment to the Rates Rebate Scheme April Key issues You have agreed to adjust two key rating settings of the Rates Rebate Scheme: the income abatement threshold and the maximum rebate paid. The adjustments are based on inflation of . per cent in the All Groups Ind ex of the Consumers Price Index for the year ended December . Adjustments are made by Order in Council, following consideration by the Cabinet Legislation Committee. Action sought Timeframe Consult with your M inisterial colleagues on the proposed adjustments to the Rates Rebate Scheme; and Provide feedback from Ministerial consultation to the Department of Internal Affairs. By April Contact for telephone discussions (if required) Name Position Contact Number Suggested st contact Richard Hardie Manager Operational Policy Martyn Pinckard General Manager Policy and Operations Return electronic document to: Fergus Campbel l, Ferg us.Campbell dia.govt.nz Cohesion reference DEBD C BDC AAF Ministerial database reference LG INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Appendix B: Talking points for the Cabinet Legislation Committee meeting on June I have agreed to adjust key settings of the Rates Rebate Scheme and seek approval for an Order in Council to amend the Rates Rebate Act . The Scheme assists lowincome ratepayers Ratepayers apply to their council for the rebate. Councils then process the applications and are reimbursed by the Department of Internal Affairs. In Cabinet agreed that regular adjustments to the Rates Rebate Act must be made to account for inflation. The proposed adjustments reflect the . per cent upward movement in the All Groups Index of the Consumer Price Index in the calendar year. The maximum rebate available will increase from to . The income abatement threshold will increase from , to ,. The proposed adjustments will take effect from July . The Scheme is not the only form of accommodation support The Rates Rebate Scheme is one of a suite of policy instruments designed to support households to meet their living costs. Other cost of living subsidies (such as the Accommodation Supplement) and adjustments to income support remain more effective at insulating lowincome ratepayers from rate rises than the Rate Rebate Scheme. These mechanisms are also more effective at addressing equity concerns between renters and homeowners. I recommend that Cabinet agrees to adjust the key settings of the Rates Rebate Act As I have noted, the Rates Rebate Scheme assists thousands of lowincome ratepayers to meet their living costs. Keeping the key settings at current levels will have negative effects on the value of the rebate to its recipients: o If the maximum rebate and income threshold remain static, inflation will diminish the value of the rebate to recipients. o If adjustments are not made every year, fewer people will meet the income threshold to qualify for the rebate. This will further diminish the intended impact of the Scheme for lowincome households. o After a period of nonadjustment, the cost of restoring the key settings to a desirable level could be considerable. Proceeding with the adjustments will also lower the risk of negative public reactions, particularly from senior citizen interest groups such as Age Concern and Grey Power. Senior citizens are the largest group of beneficiaries of the Scheme. INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Appendix C: Draft Press Release Media release insert Annual adjustments to the Rates Rebate Scheme will assist lowincome homeowners The Minister of Local Government, Hon Nanaia Mahuta, has announced an increase to the Rates Rebate Scheme which will help ensure many lowincome New Zealanders are able to pay their rates demands this coming financial year. From tomorrow, July , the maximum rebate will increase from to . The income abatement threshold will rise from , to ,. Application forms are available from your local council and can also be downloaded from the New Zealand Government website ( www.govt.nz ) and then submitted to your local council. The changes I have announced today mean that the rebate keeps up with the cost of living and will come as a relief to those individuals and families requiring assistance to meet the cost of their rates demands. The Rates Rebate Scheme is a partial refund for people who pay rates to their council. It exists to provide financial relief for lowincome New Zealanders owning their own home. If you have any questions about your eligib ility or that of a family member, I encourage you to get in touch with your local council or retirement village operator says Minister Mahuta. The Local Government (Rating of Whenua Mori) Amendment Act was passed earlier this year and introduced pro visions to better recognise the communal ownership of Mori land, and situations where multiple houses are situated on one block of Mori land. Individual home owners on Mori land can now establish separate rate accounts for their houses, which (in the case of lowincome applicants) will give them access to the Scheme. This wi ll be hugely beneficial for low income Mori, and I encourage anyone who may benefit to contact their council for more info rmation s ays Minister Mahuta. Ends Media contact: insert contact(s) INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of water supplies to immediately notify Taumata Arowai of any changes to registration information. . Ammeding sections A and ()(b) of the Act to ensure these sections include shared domestic supplies serving or fewer consumers in addition to domestic self supplies. . Taumata Arowai would appreciate legislative clarification that it has discretion under section of the Act to be able to determine that notifiable risk and hazards can apply (or not apply) to certain classes of drinking water supply. Currently, the most persuasive interpretation of the provision is duties in relation to notifiable risks and hazards must apply equally to all drinking water suppliers, irrespective of the scale, complexity, or risk profile of their supplies. Notification obligations in relat ion to risks and hazards would be unreasonably onerous to impose on smaller drinking water supplies. . These proposed legislation changes will help ensure that the regulatory burden on drinking water suppliers particularly smaller ones is proportionate, while striking an appropriate balance with risks to public health. Ministry of Health comment . The Ministry of Health has been consulted and supports these proposals. Supplies covered by the proposed new definition of domestic selfsupplies pose minimal risk to public health. There is also minimal risk associated with these supplies being unregistered. Next steps . Should you agree to the approach, these provisions will be included in the upcoming Cabinet paper seeking decisions for the Local Government Water Services Bill as part of the Local Water Done Well programme . Officials will provide you with further advice in this context. Recommendations . We recommend that you : a) note officials f rom the Department of Internal Affairs , Ministry of Health and Taumata Arowai have considered ways to reduce the regulatory burden on small s uppliers ; b) note officia ls do not rec omme nd all sm all drinking water suppliers ar e excluded from regulation; c) agree to include a n option to increase the regula tory threshold to exclude shared domestic drink ing water supplie s servi ng or fewer cons umers in the upcoming Local Gover nment Wa ter Services Bill C abinet paper; YesNo d) note comm unity drinking water supplies to or fewer consumers would continue to be regulated by Taumata Aro wai; Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of e) note officials have identified opt ions to r educe some of the regula tory re quirements for drinking water supplies; f) indicate which of the following opt ions to reduce regulatory requirements you would like to include in an upcoming Loca l Government Water Services Bill Cabinet paper: i. Extended timeframe for unregistered drinking water supplies to register with Taumata Arowai; YesNo ii. Removal of the requirement for annual registration; YesNo iii. Notification of risks and hazards; YesNo iv. Removing the requirement for drinking water safety plans for community drinking water supplies serving consumers or fewer . YesNo
The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Purpose . This briefing attaches a draft Cabinet paper (the paper) for the Cabinet Legislation Committee ( Appendix A ). The paper is provided for consultation with your Ministerial colleagues and proposes annual adjustments to the Rates Rebate Scheme (theScheme) that you have previously agreed LG refers. Comment . The Parliamentary Counsel Office has drafted an Order in Council to make the adjustment. This is attached to the paper in Appendix A . . The adjustment is subject to the moratorium provisions for Budget so cannotbe agreed by Cabinet until June . The uptake and forecast costs (excluding GST) of the Scheme have been . The Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) previously reported the estimated spend of the Scheme for was . million LG refers.These figures were at the end of the January to March financial quarter. As at March, the spend on the appropriation was . million. The revised estimatedspend for is now . million . . For , the revised estimated uptake for the Scheme is . million. Thisestimate is above the current appropriation of . million. It is difficult to predict theimpact that the COVID lockdown and recovery period will have on the uptake of theScheme, so the Department will monitor the appropriation through . . If a change to the appropriation is required over the next financial year ( ), this will be made through the October or March Budget baseline update processes in consultation with you and the Minister of Finance MCTMIN refers . Other agencies have been consulted on the proposed amendments . The Department has consulted with the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, the Treasury, the Ministry of Social Development, the Office for DisabilitiesIssues, the Office for Seniors and Te Puni Kkiri . Next steps . The timetable to implement the adjustment is: Action Consultation with your Ministerial colleagues on the draft paper April May Provide feedback from consultation to the Department May The Department provides you with the final paper, seeking authorisation to upload the p aper to Cabnet May The Department lodges the final paper with the Cabinet Office May Cabinet Legislation Committee meets June Executive Council meets June INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Purpose . This briefing seeks your agreement to adjust the maximum rates rebate and income abatement threshold for the Rates Rebate Scheme (the Scheme) in linewith inflation. Background . The Scheme allows lowincome ratepayers to access a rebate on their council rates.More detail about how the Scheme works is included as Appendix A . . In , Cabinet agreed that the maximum rebate and income abatement thresholdshould be adjusted annually, in line with movements in the Consumer Price Index (CPI)for the previous calendar year CAB Min () () refers. The maximum rebate available and the income abatement threshold have been adjusted in most years since . The Schemes key settings were adjusted in . In , you agreed to adjust the Schemes key settings by . per cent, in line with inflation. The maximum rebate increased from to , and the maximumincome abatement threshold increased from , to ,, as stated in section() of the Rates Rebate Act (the Act). Changes to the Rating of Whenua Mori . The Local Government (Rating of Whenua Mori) Amendment Bill (the Bill) is currently progressing through Parliament. If enacted, one of the provisions of the Bill allowslocal authorities to establish separate rating accounts for individual homeowners, in circumstances where there are multiple houses on a single block of Mori land. If the houses are chosen to be rated individually, the occupant of the house becomes responsible for the rates on the house. This allows these ratepayers to apply for the Scheme, which they previously did not have access to. . There is no comprehensive dataset on the amount of housing on Mori land. This means the Department cannot be certain about the number of additional claims on the rates rebate scheme. However, the Department considers that the number ofclaims resulting from the Bill is unlikely to have a material impact on the appropriation. Comment The maximum rebate and income abatement threshold should be adjusted to reflect inflation . Inflation for the year ended December was . per cent. On this basis, the revised settings would be: a maximum rebate of ; and an income abatement threshold of ,. There was no adjustment made to the maximum rebate available for the rating year. The CPI for the year ended December was . per cent which was too low to result in an adjustment to the maximum rebate available, rounded to the nearest . INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua . Two examples showing the estimated rebate for different living arrangements are included in Appendix A . The overall uptake of the Scheme is expected to remain within the appropriation for . The Vote Internal Affairs appropriation for the Scheme in is . million(excl.GST). The cost of rebates in is estimated to be approximately .million (excl.GST). . Table shows the expected change in the cost and uptake of the Scheme for a three year period between and under the existing settings. It is difficult to predictthe impact that the COVID lockdown and recovery period will have on the uptake ofthe Scheme in . Table : Change in total cost of rebates paid and number of recipients by financial year Year Total cost of rebates paid (Excl. GST) Number of re cipients . million , . million (estimated) , (estimated) . million (estimated) , (estimated) . The Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) expects the Rates Rebate Scheme(M) appropriation to be underspent at the end of this financial year. However, theuptake of the Scheme for the remainder of the year will be closely monitored, and youwill be advised if the situation changes. If you agree to the inflation adjustments, these will take effect on July . Section () of the Rates Rebate Act (the Act) provides for adjustments to the Schemes settings by way of an Order in Council. Should you agree to the inflationadjustments, the Department will instruct the Parliamentary Counsel Office to prepare an Order in Council. . Appendix B contains a proposed timetable for the Order in Council process. Should you agree with the recommended timelines, the changes will be in force from July . . Historically, a third of all rates rebate applications are received in the first two monthsof the new financial year. If the annual adjustment is not in place by July , then anyone applying for a rates rebate after that will be assessed using the settings. Uptake and expenditure are based on average annual uptake over the previous two financial years. Expenditure is estimated by taking into account the proposed maximum rebate value for , the estimated number of rebates, the estimated average number of full rebates granted and the average proportion, compared to the maximum rebate, of rebates less than the maximum. INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Next steps The Order in Council will need to go to the Cabinet Legislation Committee for approval in June . You have the option of either going directly to the Cabinet Legislation Committee (LEG) with the Order in Council and proposed adjustments or going to the Cabinet SocialWellbeing Committee for consideration before proceeding to LEG. . The Schemes annual inflation adjustments are routine and no new policy decisions arerequired. Therefore, the Department recommends going directly to LEG. This option isconsistent with .(d) of the Cabinet Manual. . The rates rebate inflation adjustment is subject to the Budget moratorium. Totake effect on July , the Order in Council will have to proceed to LEG in June. . The Department proposes waiving the day rule for publishing a notice in theGazette before the Order in Council can take effect. This is because the impact of theadjustment will have minimal effect on the public and will result only in benefits. . The waiver of the day rule means eligible ratepayers will be able to claim the ratesrebate according to the new adjustments at the beginning of the rating year,from July . INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government D D D D The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Recommendations . The Department of Internal Affairs recommends that you: a)Agree to adjust the settings for the Rates Rebate Scheme to reflect inflation of . per cent for the year ended December by: (i)increasing the maximum rates rebate from to ; and YesNo (ii)increasing the income abatement threshold from , to ,;YesNo b)agree to proceed directly to the Cabinet L egislation Committee on June to seek approval of an Order in Cou ncil to adjust two key settings of the Rates Rebate Scheme; andYesNo c)agree that officials instruct the Parliamentary Counsel Office to prepare the Order in Council.YesNo Martyn Pinckard General Manager Policy and Operations Hon Nanaia Mahuta Minister of Local Government INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua RESPONDING TO QUESTIONS What are the financial implications on the appropriation In , the Scheme is estimated to cost . million. This estimate is above the appropriation of . million for the financial year . It is difficult to predict the impact that the COVID lockdown and recovery period will have on the uptake of the Scheme, so the Department of Internal Affairs will monitor the appropriation through . This estimate includes those now eligible through the Rating of Whenua Mori legislative change . The Department of Internal Affairs appropriation for the Scheme has historically been underspent but is nearing its limit. The uptake will be closely monitored, and remedial action will be taken if necessary. Any increased uptake of the Scheme will be accounted for in the October or March baseline updates. How will people find out about the adjustments to the Scheme The adjustments to the key settings will be in the New Zealand Gazette. I intend to issue a media release. The Department of Internal Affairs will inform councils and key interest groups, such as Grey Power and Age Concern, of the adjustments to the Scheme. Details of the adjustments will also be shown on the Departments Rates Rebate webpage. Why not adjust the Scheme by using the average wage (as with Superannuation) rather than CPI If I were to adjust the Scheme using the average wage we would need to review the Scheme at a more strategic level. This would need to be a comprehensive review in the context of other subsidies and supplements that are currently available to lowincome households. This could not be completed in time for an adjustment to the Scheme to take effect on July . Adjusting the Scheme with average wage growth would also likely exceed the current appropriation in . What impacts will the Future for Local Government review have on the Scheme The review is wideranging in scope and could consider rates affordability, as well as specific mechanisms for supporting lowincome households . Whilst this is ongoing, maintenance of the Scheme as is proposed in this paper is still prudent . What impacts will the three waters reform have on the Scheme At this stage, no changes are required to the Scheme due to the reform programme. I will receive further advice next year in advance of any financing proposals that could impact the Scheme. INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua office is located at:
The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua provides a number of benefits for all employees. By offering these benefits, it is hoped that each employee will be able to achieve their full potential in an encouraging and supportive environment.
The Department of Internal Affairs administers a very wide range of Acts and Regulations, which are listed
The Department of Internal Affairs administers national Dog Control laws. The laws are enforced by Local Councils.
The Department of Internal Affairs administers the Time Act and the New Zealand Daylight Time Order.
The Department of Internal Affairs and Crown Infrastructure Partners have reviewed and approved all Delivery Plans for councils use of Three Waters funding allocations. All councils have received an initial three waters stimulus funding instalment ( per cent of their total allocation), totalling . million.
The Department of Internal Affairs can investigate issues about the licensing of private security personnel. Examples include people working as bouncers, security guards, private investigators and repossession agents.
The Department of Internal Affairs can reasonably be expected to:
The Department of Internal Affairs commissioned work from specialist economic, financial and commercial advisors to support detailed analysis and modelling using the information gathered through this RfI.
The Department of Internal Affairs disclaims and excludes all liability for any claim, loss, demand or damages of any kind whatsoever (including for negligence) arising out of or in connection with the use of either this website or the information, content or materials included on this site or on any website to which it is linked.
The Department of Internal Affairs has redacted references to the identifiable information and other details from the document following a comprehensive due diligence process to protect the privacy of those concerned in this Inquiry and to protect and maintain legal professional privilege. Most, however, are in the appendices that relate to Operation Austin content, and this was withheld by New Zealand Police.
The Department of Internal Affairs held a series of hui and workshops with iwiMori through the Three Waters Review and the establishment of Taumata Arowai. Engagement on the proposed three waters reform built on these previous engagements with iwiMori to more fully understand Treaty rights of interests over the course of the reform period.
The Department of Internal Affairs hosts a Local Government Cyclone Response Unit. This dedicated working group comprises senior leadership from DIAs Local Government Branch, from Taituar Local Government Professionals Aotearoa and Local Government New Zealand (LGNZ).
The Department of Internal Affairs is committed to protecting the privacy of potential employees.
The Department of Internal Affairs is conscious of the significance of this request and took steps to leverage alternative data sources, to reduce the amount of information being collected, and to make support available to Local Authorities.
The Department of Internal Affairs is home to the Lake Taup Harbourmaster.
The Department of Internal Affairs is responsible for administering appointments to approximately statutory bodies. For a complete list of these organisations, see:
The Department of Internal Affairs is responsible for administering appointments, and in many cases providing secretariat services, for approximately statutory bodies.
The Department of Internal Affairs makes no warranty or representation, express or implied, as to continuity of service and reserves the right to suspend, terminate or otherwise alter access to some or all of the sites services at any time and without notice.
The Department of Internal Affairs manages, maintains and services official residences owned by the Crown.
The Department of Internal Affairs may revise these Terms of use at any time. Any such revisions will take effect upon notice to users by way of a posting to dia.govt.nz detailing the respect(s) in which the Terms have changed.
The Department of Internal Affairs must issue an acceptance of the Plans once they have been assessed as complying with statutory
The Department of Internal Affairs must review and provide comments to the Chief Executive of the councilson the draft Plans.
The Department of Internal Affairs must review final Plans submitted by councils.
The Department of Internal Affairs no longer has a role in the field which brought it the highest public profile, that of wildlife. The Department first became responsible for the protection of game in . It lost its general oversight of freshwater fisheries in , but retained this function in Rotorua, Taupo and (latterly) Southern Lakes districts until . The deer control operations of the s to s, and the struggle to save the black robin and other endangered species in the s and the s, excited enormous media interest. However, the Wildlife Branch itself became extinct in , when its functions were taken over by the new
The Department of Internal Affairs provides administrative assistance to Public and Government Inquiries established under the
The Department of Internal Affairs publishes a range of datasets across its portfolio areas. More datasets will be as they become available.
The Department of Internal Affairs reports to six Ministerial portfolios or responsibility areas, six Ministers and
The Department of Internal Affairs serves
The Department of Internal Affairs serves and connects people, communities and government to build a safe, prosperous and respected nation.
The Department of Internal Affairs touches the lives of all New Zealanders. I am proud to present this report and the stories of how we have improved the lives of New Zealanders over the last year.
The Department of Internal Affairs will provide future information on the expenses of members of the Executive on a quarterly basis.
The Department of Internal Affairs, on behalf of the Minister of State Services, the Hon Chris Hipkins, the final report of the Government Inquiry into the Appointment Process for a Deputy Commissioner of Police. At the time we redacted Appendix E as it related to the Independent Police Conduct Authority investigation into complaints about Deputy Commissioner Wallace Haumaha.
The Department of Internal Affairs policies and administrative processes provided accountability for the way in which Ministerial Services funds are appropriated.
The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet have coordinated the release of documents related to COVID decision making by Cabinet. This information is released on the request of the Prime Ministers Office. In releasing this information, Ministers have taken into account the public interest in making the information public.
The Department oversees the following statutory bodies listed by responsible Minister.
The Department posts new opportunities, where a competitive market approach is the best option, on the
The Department provides New Zealanders and New Zealand organisations with
The Department redacted references to the names, gender and other identifiable information from the documents following a due diligence process, to protect the privacy of those concerned in this employment matter.
The Department redacted references to the names, gender, identifiable information and other details from the documents following a due diligence process, to protect the privacy of those concerned in this internal investigation and to protect and maintain legal professional privilege. This document is in Adobe PDF format.
The Department remains a highperforming organisation that New Zealanders trust. This is only possible because of our dedicated team of public servants, who I would like to thank for their work over the past months.
The Department reports emissions from departmental and nondepartmental activities. Departmental activities include the Ministry for Ethnic Communities, a departmental agency hosted by the Department. Nondepartmental activities include travel by Members of the Executive and approved accompanying parties and the operation of Ministerial properties.
The Department will undertake a review of the Trust Framework and its governance arrangements at the conclusion of phase two ( i.e. ) to assess progress against the Trust Frameworks priorities and if required recommend reform. The Department will also support the Ministers office in assessing the governance boards bi annual r eports, and recommending potential areas for review.
The Department worked with other agencies to develop a plan to ensure the continuity of Executive Government following a catastrophic event in Wellington. The plan enables the standing up of Executive support functions that will enable the Prime Minister and Cabinet to make decisions and communicate effectively with the public.
The Department works with many suppliers, and there are a number that are considered core to ensuring we can deliver services to the New Zealand public. Our Significant Service Contracts, are determine based on the
The Departments Prosecution Policy
The Departments approach to Supplier Relationship (and Contract) Management
The Departments approach to compliance and enforcement in this area is set out in the document:
The Departments strategic intent for Regulatory Services is set out in the document:
The Department, Local Government New Zealand (LGNZ), and Taituar have collaborated to produce this guidance for Councils. The purpose of this period is to understand the proposal and how it affects your Council and your community, and to identify issues of local concern and suggest possible ways to address those. Its an opportunity for the sector to engage with the model and the proposal, at both the national level and as it relates to your community.
The Departments have redacted Personal phone numbersemails for privacy. These documents are in Adobe PDF format on the Ministry of Health website. A link to the reports is provided below.
The Departmentwas quick to support the Tokomaru Bay community following Cyclone Gabrielle. Department kaimahi connected with the Chair of the local distribution committee for the Community Organisation Grant Scheme (COGS) asking what support was needed.
The Departments censorship enforcement responsibilities came to incorporate Internet and email technologies with an increased focus on Internet safety and the introduction in of an AntiSpam Compliance unit.
The Departments proposed changes have been accepted by the Finance and Expenditure Committee which has recommended the Bill is amended accordingly.
The Departments recommended approach to a review of the media content regulatory system
The Digital Child Exploitation Team at DIA is responsible
The Digital Child Safety teams role under the Films, Videos and Publications Classification Act .
The Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act sets out a legal framework for providing secure and trusted digital identity services in Aotearoa New Zealand.
The Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act sets out how accredited digital identity providers and their services must provide services in
The Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Register is a register of accredited services and their providers.
The Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Regulations require that an application for accreditation include an independent evaluation in the areas of security, privacy and identification management.
The Digital Identity Services Trust Framework aims to create a digital identity environment that is safe and trusted. Its important that people can share their information safely and securely. Businesses and other who need this information need to know that the information theyre receiving can be trusted.
The Digital Messaging Systems team at DIA is responsible for keeping New Zealanders safe from online harm by investigating complaints about Spam.
The Digital Safety Group at Department of Internal Affairs responds to violent extremist content and child sexual abuse material online.
The Digital Safety Group is made up of several teams that work to address four main areas of online harm:
The Digital Safety Group work with domestic and international agencies to help prevent New Zealanders
The Digital Services Branch is made up of seven groups:
The Digital Services and Solutions Group brings together the information technology functions that enable Te Tari Taiwhenua to deliver services to our customers.
The Digital Services branch is responsible for strategy and enabling functions that lead and contribute to digital maturity for digital customercentred services, across both the public sector and Te Tari Taiwhenua.
The Digital Violent Extremism Team at DIA is responsible for keeping New Zealanders safe from online harm by responding to and preventing the spread of objectionable material that promotes or encourages violent extremism.
The Digitising Government portfolio replaces the Digital Economy and Communications portfolio which was was closed in . Earlier proactive releases may be found here:
The Dog Box teaching resource was originally distributed to all New Zealand primary schools around October . It contained a video, a set of teachers notes, a board game, stickers and a takehome information sheet, and continued to be available, and frequently requested, through the website until the it was decommissioned in . The video files were available on the website since July .
The Dog Control Act seeks to improve public safety by mitigating the risk of harm, injury or nuisance from dogs living in our communities. To this end the Act allocates responsibilities, sets out obligations and provides for a range of mechanisms, under which:
The Dog Safety website was launched in as part of a public education campaign targeting dog owners, school children, teachers, local councils, community organisations, ministers and the media. Its purpose was to raise awareness of issues around dog safety and changes to the dog control laws, and to influence public perceptions and behaviour around dogs, especially children, parents and dog owners.
The EU Digital Services Act Irish Online Safety and Media Regulation Bill Platforms in scope Commercial online social networks with at least million members Hosts of user content , including online interaction, which can be accessed by users in the UK and search engines. Differentiated obligations on platforms based on the risk of harm Any service provided to a resident in the EU Differentiated obligations on platforms based on the size of the platform All services that facilitate the dissemination of or access to user content are potentially in scope Timing Passed in June Legislation expected to come into effect Legislation expected to come into effect Not announced The German Network Enforcement Act (enacted legislation) . Germany passed the Network Enforcement Act (NetzDG) in June , which makes commercial social networks with at least two million users, liable for hate speech that violates German law. The NetzDG Act followed rampant online hate speech during the European migrant crisis, which was linked to hate crimes in the physical world. The German Government initially sought to encourage social media companies t o voluntarily apply German hate speech laws on their platforms. However, the German Government ultimately determined that the voluntary efforts of social media companies were inadequate, and sanctions were needed to enforce platforms compliance with German hate speech laws. . Online platforms in scope must set up userfriendly complaint mechanisms to report illegal hate speech. Online platforms face significant fines if they do not remove manifestly illegal content within twentyfour hours of notice and other illegal content with a week of notice. . NetzDG has drawn criticism for its potential to stifle free speech, including from the former United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Promotion and Protection of the Right to Freedom of Opinion and Expression. The main criticism is that it bestows significant control on private companies over decisions affecting free speech as companies must make determinations over what is illegal content without law enforcement. This has led to concern that NetzDG will lead to excessive removal of
The EU Digital Services Act Irish Online Safety and Media Regulation Bill Regulatory framework covers Online content only Online content only Online content only Both traditional media and online content are covered Content covered Illegal Broader set of harm Illegal Broader set of harms Procedural or outcomes focused Outcome Both Procedural Procedural Codes of Practice are set by No codes Regulator Ministerial sign out will be required for codes covering child sexual exploitation and terrorism material European Commission (executive branch of the EU) Regulator Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Regulatory design featur es and timing German Network Enforcement Act UK Online Safety Bill
The Eggplant A dramacrimecomedy online web series
The Enterprise Services branch is responsible for delivering strategic and operational functions that support the organisation at an enterprise level. These include legal, finance, human resources, communications, and strategy, governance and risk.
The Executive Leadership Team of the Department of Internal Affairs includes the Secretary for Internal Affairs, seven Deputy Chief Executives and the Director of the Office of the Chief Executive. The Executive Leadership Team ensures the focus of our efforts and resources, and our operating model, supports our strategic governance role.
The FVPCA is intended to restrict access to harmful content, prevent access to banned content and ensure that commercial films and streaming services display adequate consumer information. The Digital Safety Group enforces the FVPCA which helps ensure that the online space is made safer for New Zealanders.
The Film and Literature Board of Review
The Films Videos and Publications Classification Act (FVPCA)
The Films Videos and Publications Classification Act (the FVPCA)
The Gambling Bill was introduced in February and received Royal assent on September to become the Gambling Act .
The Gambling Group ensures gambling bodies comply with legislation and licensing regulations to help keep gambling fair and honest in New Zealand.
The Gang Harm Insights Centre (GHIC)
The Government Inquiry into the Appointment Process for a Deputy Commissioner of Police Uiui Kwanatanga m te Tukanga Whakat I ttaki Kaikmihana Tuarua o Ng Pirihimana is an independent inquiry commencing on August .
The Government Inquiry into the Auckland Fuel Supply Disruption Te Pakirehua Kwanatanga ki te Momotunga Kora ki Tmaki Makaurau was an independent inquiry that commenced on December .
The Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events commenced on July .
The Government accepted many of the Working Groups recommendations, for the specifics of the Governments decisions click here:
The Government encourages future Parliam ents to consider amending the Electoral Act
The Government has already made progress on several of the recommendations, including developing new guidance for applicants that is available online and improvements to call centre support to help to step people through the process.
The Government has initiated a new direction for water services policy and legislation Local Water Done Well.
The Government has introduced to Parliament the first piece of legislation to make these changes the Water Services Entities Bill. As well as setting up the new entities so they can be ready in two years time, the Bill locks in council ownership of the WSEs on behalf of the communities, by making councils the sole shareholders. Councils will have one share per , people in their area, rounded up so each council will have at least one share.
The Government has not articulated any longer term strategy with regard to the border or these considerations as at time of writing. However, the status quo is maintaining a strategy of elimination and means the border would be closed for an indefinite period, with all arrivals required to quarantine for days. The most likely catalyst for a broad reopening of the border would be the wide deployment of a vaccine. Vaccine timelines are uncertain and it is prudent for New Zealand to plan on the basis that it might take several years or not come at all. .. The existing manual contact tracing process Contact tracing in New Zealand is largely decentralised with Public Health Units (PHUs) being responsible for the public health management of notifiable diseases. The Public Health Unit is notified following a positive laboratory result and the case is contacted to: Conduct interviews to establish timelines of exposure and determine the infectious period, and establish links to prior cases, clusters or travel, and to identify close contacts.
The Government has released the Inquirys second report: the WPC Incident: Causes and Responses together with the Government response to the report. This is the final report to be delivered, fulfilling the Inquirys Terms of Reference.
The Government is establishing three independent working groups to refine elements of the Three Waters Reform programme.
The Government is implementing reform of water services through a suite of legislation:
The Government response agrees to consider of the recommendations in principle. These include:
The Government will introduce legislat ion to amend the Loc al Electoral Act
The Governments Response to the Working Groups report can be found here:
The Group connects and supports delivery through providing authoritative advice, undertaking partnering and engagement, and leading key initiatives.
The Group engages across the public and technology sectors to build and maintain a view of future horizons, and identify opportunities for the public sector to continue to optimise digital capability and delivery.
The Group helps drive sound digital investment decisions for the public sector and embeds integrated standards and assurance practices.
The Group supports the standardisation and consolidation of agency ICT infrastructure and services, and works with the supplier market to deliver modern digital procurement models for digital and ICT.
The Group works across the Department to provide internal technology leadership and guidance, enable the design and build of new technology services, deliver core technology services, and provide support for technology services.
The Group works across the branch and the Department to lead branchwide work planning and governance processes, corporate accountability planning and reporting, servicing of ministerial and government stakeholder needs, and the branchs international engagement.
The Guardians and LIAC Commencement of the appointments round
The HART Register can help donorconceived people to:
The Harm Minimisation Regulations are part of a set of obligations on class societies, clubs, venue operators, venue managers and venue staff to prevent and minimise problem gambling. If a person or organisation fails to comply with their obligations under the Gambling Act or its regulations, the Department can (depending on the nature of the obligation breached):
The Honourable Lynton (Lyn) Stevens QC is a retired Court of Appeal Judge. He graduated BA LLB (Hons) from the University of Auckland in and obtained a Bachelor of Civil Law from Oxford University in . He taught at the Faculty of Law, University of Auckland in and from , and was an Assistant Professor of Law at the University of British Columbia from .
The House and its Committees always have the right to inquire into agencies that are accountable to Parliament.
The Human Assisted Reproductive Technology (HART) Register is a record of people conceived from sperm or egg donations made at a New Zealand fertility clinic, and their donors.
The Identity Services Approved Information sharing Agreement (AISA) allows the Department to share an individuals personal information relating to life events and travel documents internally for the purpose of streamlining its services. Currently the Identity Services AISA is used to:
The Inquiry considered over interviews and information requests, received submissions from an online participation tool and other formats, and conducted desktop research to inform its findings and recommendations.
The Inquiry drew lessons from the event to provide recommendations for improving the resilience of fuel supply in the Auckland region. It did not look into whether issues of criminal or civil liability arose.
The Inquiry focused on whether:
The Inquiry follows the widespread outbreak of gastroenteritis in Havelock North in August , with more than people falling ill, following the confirmation of the presence of E. coli in the water supply. Testing through the health system led the Hastings District Council and the Hawkes Bay District Health Board staff to suspect that Campylobacter as the primary infectious agent.
The Inquiry has completed its work and delivered its report as required by its terms of reference.
The Inquiry has completed its work, and delivered its report as required by its terms of reference.
The Inquiry identified lessons from the North Island severe weather events to recommend how New Zealands emergency management system could support future emergencies both in terms of readiness for the events, and responses to them.
The Inquiry identified lessons from these severe weather events to recommend how the design of New Zealands emergency management system can appropriately support readiness for, and responses to, future emergency events.
The Inquiry is not bound by the conclusions or recommendations of any other investigation, report, or review.
The Inquiry is supported by a legal advisor, Simon Mount, and two policy advisors, Mark Patchett and Sally Johnston.
The Inquiry members appointed are Hon Lyn Stevens QC (chair), Dr Karen Poutasi CNZM and Anthony Wilson ED.
The Inquiry reconvened on Monday May to address Part A of the Terms of Reference. The Inquiry released a provisional list of issues:
The Inquiry reported back to the Minister for Emergency Management and Recovery on March .
The Inquiry reported back to the Minister of Energy and Resources on August .
The Inquiry will not be making any public comment on the report.
The Inquiry will report back by March and will focus on:
The Intelligence Security Act
The Joint Three Waters Steering Committee has been established to provide oversight and guidance to support progress towards reform, and to assist in engaging with local government, iwiMori and other water sector stakeholders on options and proposals.
The Judiciary has not responded to the Working Groups report through the Government response. This is because the Judiciary is distinct from the Government and is considering its recommendations separately.
The LTP will not be audited.
The Labs Technology Lead, Brenda Wallace, also won the Open Source Peoples Choice award for her work with Whare Hauora, and an Open Source special award in recognition of the breadth and depth of her community commitment and open source contributions.
The Law Commission works on several projects at once, which are agreed between the Responsible Minister and the Commission by July each year.
The Lead Agency is DIA. . Background When individuals apply for public services from New Zealand government agencies, they are frequently asked to provide evidence of their identity or other aspects of their entitlement to the public services. The relevant evidence may be supplied in the form of physical documentation (e.g. a birth certificate), but in a number of cases agencies have set up authorised arrangements to permit specific information to be shared agency to agency. These arrangements are largely information matching agreements, and the limitations of th ese instrument s have led to an environment with many agreements that are narrow, expensive to administer and difficult to adjust in response to changing needs . DIA is leading the development of a small number of AISAs which are intended to replace the existing authorised arrangements and allow new purposes to better meet the needs of individuals and Partner agencies. This AISA covers the sharing of Personal Information with Partner s for the purposes of providing Customer Nominated Services. Customer Nominated Services are public services provided by the parties that individuals wish to utilise. The parties do not require the individuals information until the individual has initiated access to the public service. Studylink is an example of a Customer Nominated Service because eligible individuals are able to apply for a student loan, but uptake of the public service is not compulsory. The individual does not always need to consent to all the information sharing as some sharing is mandated or permitted by legisl ation , and will therefore occur by virtue of a n individual s decision to utilise a particular public service. Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of . Objectives and p urpose s of this Agreement .. Objectives The objectives of this Agreement are to: a) gain customer service efficiencies and reduce the compliance load for individuals associated with provision of Personal Information through facilitating increased collaboration between parties ; b) verify aspects of an individuals identity or entitlement of a n individual applying for or receiving public services ; c) enable updating of records when an individuals circumstances change ; d) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences, and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review; and e) apply Privacy by Design princi ples to the development and operation of the information sharing . .. Purpose s The purpose s of this information shar ing are to: a) notify an individual of public services they may be eligible to access ; b) verify an individuals identity; c) ensur e that an individual is not required to provide to a party identity or Life Event records that DIA or the Registrar General already holds , when applying for or utilising public services ; d) ensure eligibility and entitlement requirements are met when an individual is applying for or receiving public services; e) enable cleansing and updating of records upon the change in circumstances of an individual ; f) enable parties to provide additional protection to the Personal Information shared by the Registrar General where the individual has an active NonDisclosure Direction ; and g) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences, and the conduct of civil proceedings , including judicial review . . Exemptions to information privacy principles For the purposes of this Agreement , Information Privacy Principles (IPPs) , and which are set out in Section of the Privacy Act are exempted (by the Order in Council) as follows: IPP : Source of Personal Information It is not a breach of information privacy principle for a party to collect Personal Information from , or within, a party in accordance with this Agreement and for one or more of the purposes specified in Clause .. IPP : Limits on the Use of Personal Information It is not a breach of information privacy principle for Personal Information collected by , or within, a party to be utilised in accordance with this Agreement and for one or more of the purposes specified in Clauses . Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of IPP : Li mits on Disclosure of Personal Information It is not a breach of information privacy principle for a party to disclose Personal Information to a party , or within, a party in accordance with this Agreement and for one or more of the purposes specified in Clause .. It is also not a breach of information privacy principle for a party to disclose Personal Information to a party as part of making a request for Personal Information . . The public s ervices f acilitate d The public services that this Agreement is intended to facilitate are the: (a) accurate and efficient assessment of eligibility for and entitlement to receive public services that an individual appl ies for or decide s to utilise ; (b) accurate and efficient delivery of public services that an individual appl ies for or decide s to utilise ; and (c) the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences, and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review. . Type of Personal Information to be shared Parties may share Personal Information about an identifiable individual under this Agreement . Information that is not about an identifiable individual will not be shared under this Agreement . Personal Information may only be shared under this Agreement where DIA the Registrar General is either the providing or receiving party. The following diagram depicts the information flows: DIA RG NZTA MSD MBIE MoE ACC RUC Collector Registrar of Motor Vehicles
The Lead Agency is the Department of Internal Affairs.
The Lead Agency is to ensure that the Privacy Commissioner is informed of the current
The Leadership Framework covers what it takes to lead at the Department of Internal Affairs and puts leaders through training that develops the competencies outlined in the Framework, including inclusive leadership.
The Local Authorities identified for the representative sample were selected to ensure an appropriate spread of council types, geographies and underlying drivers of need.
The Local Authority Financial Impact Tool (Financial Impact Tool) seeks to provide local authorities with a better understanding of the potential impact of the proposed three waters reform on their financial position.
The Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Act establishes the Local Water Done Well framework and the preliminary arrangements for the new water services system.
The Local Government (Water Services) Bill establishes the enduring settings for the new water services system.
The Local Government Commission
The Local Government Commission is an independent statutory body. They make decisions on the structure and representation requirements of local government in New Zealand.
The Local Government Rates Inquiry (the Shand Report)
The Manukau office at Ronwood Avenue has closed.
The Manukau office at Ronwood Avenue has closed. For an appointment see our
The Maori Trustee Bryan le Patourel
The Mataora Programme, a maraebased initiative designed to enhance te ao Mori capability
The Minister exercises oversight through the performance agreement with the Secretary for Internal Affairs, who is the Departments Chief Executive.
The Minister for Local Government Hon Nanaia Mahuta announced the Cabinet response to recommendations made by the Working Group on Representation, Governance and Accountability of new Water Services Entities in May .
The Minister for Primary Industries Nathan Guy and Minister for Food Safety Nikki Kaye have also released the Government response to the report.
The Minister for Racing has sent a letter to TAB New Zealand requesting quarterly updates and meetings to discuss TAB New Zealands performance and the partnering arrangement with Entain New Zealand. This is to ensure an appropriate level of reporting and oversight.
The Minister of Internal Affairs is the Vote Minister and the responsible Minister overseeing the Governments ownership interests in Internal Affairs. The portfolios and responsible Ministers as at June were:
The Minister of Internal Affairs recommends that the Cabinet Legislation Committee:
The Minister of Internal Affairs annual Letter of Expectations outlines the Governments priorities for the Boards of Crown Entities.
The Minister of Local Government recommends that the Committee: note that on August , the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee noted the Minister of Local Governments proposed work programme for the local government portfolio and invited him to report back later this year seeking agreement to policy decisions on a first tranche for the work programme ECO MIN; note that the Prime Ministers speech at the Local Government New Zealand conference on August set out our shared vision for local government doing the basics, brilliantly; note the update on progress made as part of the Local Government System Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government INCONFIDEN CE Improvements programme (Appendix A refers); First tranche drafting instructions for Local Government System Improvements bill agree to amend the Local Government Act , and other local government legislation as required, to give effect to the policy proposals described in this paper that will: . refocus the purpose of local government (paragraph ); . provide regulatory relief to councils (paragraph ); . ensure consistent, comparab le information about how councils are actually performing is made available (paragraph ); . improve transparency and accountab ility (paragraph ); invite the Minister of Local Government to issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office for the Bill to give effect to the recommendations in this paper; authorise the Minister of Local Governmen t to make decisions on subsequent matters arising from legislative drafting that align with the overall policy intent of the proposals; note that the first Local Government System Improvements bill holds a Category priority in the Legislation Programme and is tentatively scheduled to be introduced in June and enacted in late ; Second tranche drafting instructions to follow in quarter , note that the Minister of Local Government intends to report back to Cabinet in early to seek authorisation for a second tranche of drafting instructions for this Bill which will include proposals to: . limit council expenditur e, possibly by implement ing a similar system to the New South Wales rate peg; . reduce council costs by simplifying the planning and reporting framework ; and Authorised for lodgemen t Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Local Governmen t INCONFIDENCE aecpczkj : Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Appendix A: Progress update on Local Government System Improvement work programme Initiative Problem Solution Progress C) C: cu E I C: u, u G) C Refocusing the purpose of local government Consultat ion and decision making Regulatory relief Council performance measurement and reporting Bylaws and infringements Greater use of shared services Limiting council revenue from rates Cost recovery Insurance Lending Effective representatio n Governance accessibility aecpczkj : Under the four wellbeings of the current purpose of local government, councils are not focused on better and costeffective delivery of core public services. Current council consultation and decisionmaking requirements prevent councils from responding quickly to changing circumstances. Current legislation is out of and what should be simple processes are instead taking up councils time and reducing operating efficiency. Council reporting is not consistent across groups of activities and not done in a way that drives public accountability and easy assessmen t of council performance. Councils struggle to make local regulations and enforce them effectively with tools such as infringement fees. Councils are failing to generate efficiency gains that can be achieved through shared services. Council expenditure using rates revenue has caused excessive increases to costs on ratepayers. Councils struggle to recover costs effectively to ease rates burdens and are not providing sufficient information for cases where costs recovery would not be viable. Insurance risk financing is impacting ratepayers. Council borrowing limits are constrain ing on highgrowth councils. This instead encourages funding through rates revenue increases. There is a disconnect between elected members and council staff regarding access to information requirements and the ability for members to effectively represent their constituents. Elected members and local communities may have participation and engagemen t with council processes impacted by the conduct of council business inside business hours. Refocus the purpose of local government to guide council decision making, distinguish between the roles of central governme nt, local governmen t and the private sector, and help manage community expectations of core council services. Implemen t options to enable councils to adapt quickly to changing circumstances, and to save time and money while balancing democratic principles. Update local governmen t processes and modernise the law. Establish effective performance reporting and drive council accountability for communities. Provide councils with appropriate, modern tools for making and enforcing local regulations effectively. Consideration of greater delegation for councils to set infringement fees. Improve local government financial sustainability and consider options for balancing efficiency gains with local authorities over service levels and costs. Limit council expenditure on nicetohaves and consider options to protect ratepayers from excessive rates increases Remove legal constraints on cost recovery for councils (where fees have been set in statute) and require counci ls to demonstrate how they are recovering costs for certain activities, thereby supporting councils to ease the rates burden. Improve risk management practices (including approaches to insurance) and support a collective approach to insurance to minimise its impact on rates. Increase borrowing limits for highgrowth councils and improve the range of council funding tools beyond rates, thereby improving council activity funding and helping highgrowth councils to invest appropria tely. Review access to information for elected members , codes of conduct, conflicts of interest. Consider options to balance freedom of expression with the orderly conduct of council business and allowing councillors to effectively represent local communities. Ensure chief executives are aware of other commitments that elected members have on their time when considering council business and scheduling meetings. Changes to the purpose of local government (removing the four wellbeings, refocusing the purpose statemen t, and reinstating core services) are being proposed in the first system improvemen ts bill. considered as part of work to strengthen the emergency management system. Regulatory relief (relating to service delivery reviews, public notice requireme nts, and lending approval) is being proposed in the first system improvemen ts bill. To support the establishment of a council performance measurement framework (including regular information releases), new council reporting requirements and a regulationmaking power for additional benchma rks are being proposed in the first system improvements bill. DIA is working on council dashboards to be on the DIA website in . A comprehens ive review of the bylaw system is underway , with the aim of providing councils with appropriate and costeffective tools to regulate local facilities and behaviour and enforce regulations. Councils are exploring greater use of shared services as part of the Governments Local Water Done Well, building consent system reforms, and resource management system reforms. Principles for a system to limit council expenditure on certain activities are being proposed in the first system improvements bill, and the Minister of Local Governme nt will return to Cabinet early in seeking policy approval for these. Options to require councils to demonstrate how they are recovering costs for certain activities are being considered as part of council performance measurement work. Some cost recovery constraints are being considered as part of the bylaw system review. effectiveness and efficiency of risk financing outcomes across central and local governme nt. The Government is working with the Local Governmen t Funding Agency on financing councils through the Local Water Done Well, Going for Housing Growth, and Infrastructure programmes . Transparency and accountability measures relating to access to information and codes of conduct for elected members are being proposed in the first system improveme nts bill. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Appendix B: Changes to the purpose of local government and core services My proposals for the purpose of local governmen t and core services are based on legislation from the Better Local Governmen t reform programme , providing a means for council activities to be prioritised. A return to this reflects the objective of refocusing councils to deliver the basics well and costeffectively. Some language changes are proposed to modernise the legislation and to connect with other Governmen t priorities. Amendmen ts to the Local Government Act , whether to the purpose statement or reinstated core services, would not change the responsibilities of local authorities under other legislation. Purpose statement I propose amending section (b) of the Local Governmen t Act so the new purpose of local government is, to meet the current and future needs of communi ties for goodquality local infrastructure, public services, and performance of regulatory functions in a way that is most costeffective for households and businesses , therefore supporting local economic growth and developme nt. The underlined explicit reference to the role of local authorities in stimulating their local economies is a new addition to the purpose statement that is consistent with expectations of councils in the Regional Deals and Going for Housing Growth programmes. Core services I propose that the former section A of the Local Government Act is reinstated with the following amendmen ts. Exact wording would be determined in consultat ion with the Parliamentary Counsel Office during drafting. Proposed core service Rationale ( changes underlined) (a) network infrastructure (roads and to replace the provision of local other transport, water services, transport with roads and other transport, and waste management facilities) and include waste managemen t facilities. (b) public transport services No change proposed ( c) waste management Previously read solid waste collection and disposal and did not adequate ly reflect core statutory obligations under the Waste Minimisation Act . ( d) the managemen t of hazards and Previously read the avoidance or risks across the areas of mitigation of natural hazards and did not reduction readiness response specify the associated risks or and recovery: and adequate ly reflect statutory obligations of local authorities under the Civil Defence Emergency Managemen t Act . ( e) libraries, museums, reserves, and No change proposed other recreational facilities and community amenities. aecpczkj : : Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government aecpczkj
The Minister of Local Governments annual Letter of Expectations outlines the priorities and expectations relating to Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator.
The Minister proposed criteria for the selection of Working Group members to Cabinet. You can read the Cabinet paper here:
The Ministers response to the report can be found here:
The Ministers meeting with Cross Agency Steering Group on Volunteering
The Ministers meeting with the Philanthropy and Government Forum on Thursday June
The Ministers preferred option is that the poll provisions prior to the changes should be restored, and electors should have the option to petition councils to hold a binding poll on future Mori ward decisions by councils . Limitations affecting the analysis of transitional arrangements for holding binding polls on Mori wards established since The Minister of Local Government has decided to consider the following four options relating to councils that have established a Mori ward without a poll since the legislative amendments, and have not chosen to rescind their decision or disestablish their Mori wards : All councils that established or resolved to establish Mori wards since without a poll must e ither: hold a poll in early , with the results of the poll to apply from the elections (with variation in how resulting representation reviews are undertaken) ; hold a poll in early if a valid petition is received from electors in late with the results of any polls taking effect at the local elections (with variation in how resulting representation decisions are undertaken) ; hold a poll at the local elections, with the results of the poll to apply from the local elections; or hold a poll at the local elections , if a valid petition is received from electors in early . The results of the poll will apply from the elections. Options outside of the four outlined above have not been considered . The Ministers preferred option is for affected councils to hold a binding poll in late with the results of the poll to apply from the local elections. For the outcomes of the mandatory polls to apply from the term commencing October , the legislative changes would need to be enacted by the end of July . This is to enable affected councils to have time to conduct the polls ( which takes approximately three months) and develop and
The Ministry also recogni ses the role Mori women have as the cornerstone of Whnau Ora and the likely implications of this for the wellbeing of rangatahi and tamariki, in particular regarding issues such as child poverty and access to sufficient safe, nutritious food. The Ministry will enhance its focus on reducing avoidable differences in levels of gambling harm, and in the determinants of gambling harm, for Mori. The Ministry will also continue work to identify factors that contribute to gamblingharmrelated inequities for M ori and to develop, pilot, evaluate and implement one or more initiatives specifically focused on reducing these inequities. This may include piloting delivery models that incorporate te ao Mori and He Korowai Oranga. Table : Objective priorities for action Objective : Mori have healthier futures, through the prevention and minimisation of gambling harm Priorities for action Short to medium term priorities Long term priorities Continue providing dedicated services for Mori where appropriate, including services both for gamblers and for their families and whanau . Continue to ensure that the provision of all services to prevent and minimise gambling harm is culturally appropriate and ensure that all services are health literate, high quality and effective. Continue monitoring gambling harm related inequities for Mori (eg, disproportionate prevalence of harm among Mori) and identify factors that contribute to these inequities (eg, differences in the gambling environment by geographical area). Encourage all services to prevent and minimise gambling harm (both public health and intervention) to align with He Korowai Oranga, in cluding through service design, and monitor the extent of that alignment. Maintain and improve mechanisms to support a Mori voice to provide advice to the Ministry and DIA on the prevention and minimisation of gambling harm , and in developing appropriate models of care and support . Develop, pilot, evaluate and implement one or more initiatives specifically focused on reducing gambling harm related inequities for Mori. Underlying principles: Pae O ra healthy futures Pae O ra healthy futures is the Government s vision for Mori health. It provides a platform for Mori to live with good health and wellbeing in an environment that supports a good quality of life. Pae Ora is a holistic concept, and includes three interconnected and mutually reinforcing elements: mauri ora healthy individuals, whnau ora healthy families, and wai ora healthy environments. Objective : People participate in decisionmaking about activities in their communities Increased community awareness of gambling harm, grant distribution and related issues through public discussion and debate will continue to be a focus for this STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
The Ministry for Culture and Heritage (MCH) oppose this approach . MCH would prefer considering
The Ministry will continue to support intervention practitioners to: register as health practitioners permitted to practise within a relevant scope of practice under the Health Practitioners Competence Assurance Act , or register with or be endorsed by DAPAANZ as having demonstrated the relevant specific competencies, or be equivalently registered with another relevant health professional body and hold at least six months postqualification experience as an addiction practitioner. A key focus is to align the gambling harm intervention workforce with the wider addiction workforce. Research shows that alcohol and other drug problems are often an issue for those experiencing harm from gambling. Adopting workforce standards with comparable standards across the broader addiction workforce will provide greater career mobility and pathways and help build a more resilient and sustainable workforce. As noted in the discussion of public health, Mori, Pacific and Asian stakeholders and service provider submissions noted the need for more effective workforce training, includin g training in cultural competence and the importance of understanding the different worldviews of potential clients. The Ministry will also explore appropriate level of training for kaiwhina and peer support workers (but not at DAPAANZ level). . Research and evaluation There is a consensus among stakeholders that we need more actionoriented research and evaluations and less of more of the same research. Section of the Act specifies that the strategy must include independent scientific research associated with gambling, including (for example) longitudinal research on the social and economic impacts of gambling, particularly the impacts on different cultural groups. It must also include evaluation. As well as addressing these requirements, the research and evaluation proposals below were informed by a review of the Ministrys information needs for research to inform policy and operational decisionmaking, learn from past research commissioning experience and align the research delivery with the general government policy direction for governmentfunded research services and consultation with the gambling sector. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
The Ministrys Addictions Team is grateful for the passion and compassion evident in submissions from people who frankly shared their experiences of gambling harm and drew on these experiences to constructively contribute to the consultation. While it is impossible for the s trategy to reflect every individuals p oint of view, the Ministry hopes that those who participated can see themselves in the strategy. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO iv Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
The Minster of Internal Affairs annual Letter of Expectations outlines the Governments priorities for the Boards of Fire and Emergency New Zealand and the Office of Film and Literature Classification.
The MoH document comments further:
The MoU included a commitment to openly sharing information and analysis undertaken to on the state of the system for delivering three waters services and the quality of the asset base.
The Mulago Foundation has a simple model for thinking about impact that can start us off on the right track. Taking the example of a project to deploy a Contact Tracing App:
The Mori Digital and Crown Relationships Group delivers the functions that ensure IwiMori digital aspirations are embedded across Te Tari Taiwhenua, and the public sector.
The NGL was established to assist
The NZ Poet Laureate Award celebrates outstanding contributions to New Zealand poetry. A new Laureate is chosen every two years. The Poet Laureate is supported by Te Puna Mtauranga o Aotearoa The National Library of New Zealand.
The NZ Research Information Service is a gateway to the openaccess research documents produced at universities, polytechnics, and other research institutions throughout New Zealand.
The Named Parties, excluding DIA and MFAT, can reasonably be expected to take any of the
The Named Parties, excluding the RegistrarGeneral, DIA and MFAT, may use the personal
The National Librarian has a system leadership role in the preservation, protection, development and accessibility of New Zealands documentary heritage.
The National Library administers the National Library of New Zealand Te Puna Mtauranga o Aotearoa Act through the statutory roles of the National Librarian and the Chief Librarian of the Alexander Turnbull Library.
The National Library and Archives NZ digitised over , items, increasing access to our documentary heritage collections.
The National Library is led by the
The National Library provided disaster response, salvage advice and training directly to marae, in support of iwi salvaging their flooddamaged collections.
The National Library ran a series of events titled E oho These events were run internally and externally and covered a range of topics relating to Te o Mori.
The New Zealand Government is introducing new legislation to regulate online casino gambling to ensure a safe, fair and wellcontrolled online gambling environment. Online casino gambling is not new in New Zealand. Every day New Zealanders gamble on thousands of offshore gambling websites. Regulating this sector will protect consumers, minimise gambling harm, limit opportunities for crime and dishonesty, and provide regulatory oversight of online gambling providers operating in New Zealand.
The New Zealand Passport is well respected internationally and regarded as one of the most powerful passports in the world facilitating visafree or visaonarrival access to countries.
The New Zealand Wars led to the appointment of an Inspector of Old Soldiers Graves in the forerunner of a later responsibility for War Graves and to the temporary appointment of James Cowan as an historian. His successors have been the Centennial (later Historical Branch () and the War History Branch (). Dictionaries of New Zealand Biographies were produced to mark the and anniversaries. These three functions transferred to the
The OAG is not a complaints agency but can be requested to initiate an inquiry
The Office of Ethnic Communities is now the Ministry for Ethnic Communities, and no longer a part of the Department.
The Office of Film and Literature Classification
The Office of Film and Literature Classification Draft Statement of Performance Expectations
The Office of the Ombudsman
The Order will apply to the following Councils: Gisborne (Tairawhiti) District Council, Central Hawkes Bay District Council, Wairoa District Council, Hawkes Bay Regional Council and ThamesCoromandel District Council.
The PIA includes some references to Cloud and the Office of the Privacy
The Parties shall cooperate with each other in any review and will take all
The Parties shall cooperate with each other in any review and will take all reasonable actions to
The Parties shall continue to comply with their obligations under this Agreement despite the
The Parties shall continue to fully comply with their obligations under this
The Parties to this Agreement are:
The Parties will each appoint a contact person to coordinate the operation of the
The Partnerships and Commissions branch is responsible for a diverse portfolio of national institutions, commissions, Executive and communitybased services.
The Passport system upholds New Zealands reputation in a global context by providing reliable and authoritative identity information that:
The Personal Information that can be shared by each party is specified in the relevant Schedule as below: Schedule DIA Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Schedule Registrar General Schedule NZTA Schedule MSD Schedule MBIE Schedule MoE Schedule ACC Schedule Registrar of Motor Vehicle s Schedule RUC Collector . How parties may use the Personal Information Personal Information may be used by each party as specified in the relevant Schedule as below: Schedule DIA Schedule Registrar General Schedule NZTA Schedule MSD Schedule MBIE Schedule MoE Schedule ACC Schedule Registrar of Motor Vehicles Schedule RUC Collector . Adverse Actions Section Q of the Privacy Act requires parties to provide written notice to individuals before any Adverse Action is taken against them on the basis of Personal Information shared under an information sharing agreement, and give those individuals working days to dispute the information received. Parties will dispense with the notice requirements under sectio n Q if they have reasonable grounds to suspect a n offence has been committed, is being committed or will be committed and that the Personal Information is relevant to the prevention, detection, investigation or the prosecution of the offence , where advan ce notification to a suspect would be likely to prejudice the investigation or prosecution of an alleged offender or offence . Details of expected Adverse Action s as a result of information being shared under this Agreement are specified in the relevant Schedules. . How to view this Agreement This Agreement can be viewed on DIAs website www.dia.govt.nz and at: Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Department of Internal Affairs Pipi tea Street Thorndon Wellington . Overview of operational processes The first time information is shared with each par ty relating to an individual , DIA the Registrar Gene ral will automatically allocate the individual a unique Partner Specific Customer Identifier (PSCID) in relation to the requesting party . The PSCID will be used going forwards by the parties when conversing about the identified individual with that party. The operational processes associated with this Agreement will vary depending on the transfer mechanism utilised. Possible transfer options , depending on the circumstance, are likely to include: API based transfer ; Direct system access ; Email ; Paper based transfer ; and Bulk transfer . As a first step of information sharing under this Agreement , a one off bulk exchange of information collected prior may occur to allow the receiving party to do a one off update of their records for one or more of the purposes specified in Clauses . The operational procedures detail the operational processes for providing and receiving information for each party. . Safeguards to protect privacy .. Staff The following safeguards exist to protect the privacy of individuals and ensure that any interference with their privacy is minimised: a) All parties to this Agreement , including their staff , will abide by the Public Sector Standards of Integrity and Conduct. b) The staff of all parties to this Agreement performing the services set out in this Agreement will hold all necessary statutory powers and delegations required for the provision of those services , and will comply with relevant operational policy and procedures. .. Information handling The following safeguards exist to protect the privacy of individuals and ensure that any interference with their privacy is minimised: Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of a) No party to this Agreement will provide the raw Personal Information obtained under this Agreement to other agencies or any other third party including other parties to this Agreement except as required by law or in order to comply with a court order. For the avoidance of doubt this does not prevent a party that has their information based on Personal Information received under this Agreement from disclosing their information. b) Processes and procedures exist within each party to ensure that information sent under this Agreement is transferred separately from information transferred under other agreements . c) Processes and procedures exist within each party to ensure that the Personal Information is only used for the purposes specified in th is Agreement and remains protected. d) Processes and procedures exist within each party to ensure that the Personal Information is not held longer than required. e) Parties may put constraints and or caveats on information provided under this Agreement. This i ncludes but is not limited to, any constraints and or caveats that are required to comply with protections imposed by any law or statute other than the Privacy Act, or to take account of legal privilege as defined in the Evidence Act . f) Each party is responsible for ensuring constraints and or caveats are compl ied with upon receipt or disclosure of information shared under this Agreement. g) Each party will handle Adverse Action s they may take in accordance with Clause . h) The PSCID will not be used as a unique identifier by any party other than DIA and the Registrar General. i) If the individual the information relates to is resident in the U nited Kingdom or Europe and the receiving party is subject to the UK Data Protection Act or the European General Data Protection Regulation (EU) , then the receiving party will provide a copy of their privacy notice to the individual concerned on receipt of the information. j) No party is obliged to provide any of the requested information to be shared under this Agreement. k) DIAs access to and use of photographic images of driver licence holders under this agreement is enabled by section () of the LTA. Employees of DIA acting in the course of their official duties may access or use photographic image s of driver licence holders to verify the identity of a particular individual. .. Accuracy The following safeguards exist to protect the privacy of individuals and ensure that any interference with their privacy is minimised: a) Parties will use reasonable ende avours to ensure that the information provided to other parties is the most up to information available at the time it is provided. b) Appropriate mechanisms and standard procedures are implemented by each party to verify that Personal Information shared under this Agreement is of an adequate standard and quality. c) Where it is known that information has previously been shared under this Agreement then updates as a result of a request for correction by the individual (including, where applicable and reasonable, any statement requested by the individual to be attached to the information) must be communicated to the previous receiving party, as far as reasonably practicable. This does not apply to information supplied for the purposes of issuing a PSCID . Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of .. Privacy Act requests The following safeguards exist to protect the privacy of individuals and ensure that any interference with their privacy is minimised: a) Each party will be responsible for responding to Privacy Act requests relating to Personal Informa tion held by that party as appropriate in the circumstances. .. Privacy Breach The following safeguards exist to protect the privacy of individuals and ensure that any interference with their privacy is minimised: a) Where any party has reasonable cause to belie ve than an actual or suspected breach of an IPP, not exempted by this Agreement , has occurred , an inspection andor internal investigation process will be applied utilising the identifying partys standard processes. b) Where a breach of any IPP has occurred , in relation to information shared under this Agreement, and not exempted by this Agreement, the identifying party will notify DIAs Privacy Officer as soon as possible. c) All relevant parties shall ensure that reasonable assistance is provided to any inves tigation into an actual or suspected Privacy Breach in relation to information shared under this Agreement. d) Where a DIA investigation confirms actions amounting to a notifiable Privacy Breach in relation to information shared under this Agreement, in accor dance with legislation the Privacy Commissioner and individuals will be notified by DIA as required. e) Any party may suspend sharing under this Agreement to allow time for a Privacy Breach to be remedied. .. Audit The following safeguards exist to protect the p rivacy of individuals and ensure that any interference with their privacy is minimised: a) To ensure safeguards are operating as intended and are sufficient to protect the privacy of individuals, each party will conduct regular internal first line assurance and internal audit s of the operation of this Agreement . .. Security The following safeguards exist to protect the privacy of individuals and ensure that any interference with their privacy is minimised: a) All information shared under this Agreement will be appropriately secured when at rest and in transit in accordance with the New Zealand Information Security Manual (NZISM) . b) Where a Security Breach is suspected or there is concern that a breach may occur , the identifying partys internal investigation proc esses will be applied. c) Where a Security Breach is found to have occurred in relation to information shared under this Agreement , the identifying party will notify DIA s Chief Security Officer as soon as possible. Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of d) Reporting of near misses security investigations in relation to information shared under this Agreement will be provided by all parties to DIA s Chief Security Officer on the agreed schedule. e) All relevant parties shall ensure that reasonable assistance is provided to any investigation into an actual or suspected Security Breach in relation to information shared under this Agreement. f) Any party may suspend its sharing under this Agreement to allow time for a Security Breach to be remedied. . Reasonable assistance provided All parties to th is Agreement will provide each other with any reasonable assistance that is necessary in the circumstances to allow an individual to make a complaint about an interference with privacy and the Privacy Commissioner to investigate the complaint. . Fees costs Fees associated with this Agreement, if any, as agreed will be notified by DIA in writing to the other parties . . Dispute resolution Should any dispute arise relating to the interpretation or application of this Agreement , the respective parties will meet in good faith to resolv e the dispute or difference as quickly as possible. If the parties are unable to resolve the dispute within days, the matter will be referred to the Chief Executive or DIAs nominated representative for resolution. The parties shall continue to comply with their obligations under this Agreement despite the existence of any dispute. . Review of this Agreement A joint review of th is Agreement must be undertaken by all parties whenever any party believes that such a revie w is necessary. DIA shall conduct a review annually or at intervals specified by the Privacy Commissioner as specified in sections S U of the Privacy Act . The report relating to the review will be included in DIAs annual report. The parties sha ll cooperate with each other in any review and will take all reasonable actions to make the required resources available. . Minor a mendments to th is Agreement Minor amendments to th is Agreement as set out in section V() of the Privacy Act will be in writing and signed by all the parties. Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Should parties be unable to agree on amendments to th is Agreement the matter will be dealt with in accordance with Clause above. . Major amendments to th is Agreement Major a mendments to this Agreement will be made in accordance with section V () () of the Privacy Act . Should parties be unable to agree on amendments to th is Agreement the matter will be dealt with in accordance with Clause above. . Term, performance and termination This Agreement comes into force on the specified in the Order in Council giving legal effect to it . This Agreement shall continue to be in force until either all the parties agree to terminate th is Agreement , or the Order in Council is revoked. Any party may suspend, lim it, or terminate their participation under this Agreement if it appears to the party that the terms of this Agreement or the Order in Council are not being met or the Personal Information sharing under this Agreement is otherwise unlawful. The following obligations in this Agreement shall remain in force notwithstanding the termination of this Agreement : .(a), .(c), .(d), ..(f), ..(g),.(h), .(c), ., ., . and . If extraordinary circumstances arise (including but not limited to earthquake, volcanic eruption, fire, flood, storm or war) which prevent any party performing its obligations under this Agreement, the performance of that partys obligations shall be suspended for as long as those extraordinary circumstances prevail. . Party representatives Each party will appoint a contact person to co ordinate the operation of this Agreement with the other parties and will ensure that the contact person is familiar with the requirements of the Privacy Act and this Agreement. The in itial contact persons are as follows: Party Contact and Role Department of Internal Affairs (DIA) Logan Fenwick Manager Information Partnerships Service Delivery Operations Logan.Fenwickdia.govt.nz Registrar General Births, Deaths and Marriages ( Registrar General ) Adrian Jarvis Deputy Registrar General Service Delivery Operations Adrian.Jarvis dia.govt.nz New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) Sue Hardiman Senior Manager Vehicle and Driver Licensing Sue.Hardimannzta.govt.nz Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of Party Contact and Role Ministry of Social Development (MSD) Warren Hudson General Manager Integrity and Fraud warren.hudsonmsd.govt.nz Ministry of Business, Innovation, and Employment (MBIE) Jacqui Ellis General Manager, Intelligence, Data and Insights Immigration New Zealand Jacqui.Ellismbie.govt.nz Ministry of Education (MoE) Selena Smeaton Manager, Information Management Data Information and Stewardship information.sharingeducation.govt.nz Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) Sebastian Morgan Lynch Privacy Officer Sebastian.Morgan Lynchacc.co.nz Registrar of Motor Vehicles Hayley Evans Senior Manager System Integrity Hayley.Evansnzta.govt.nz Road User Charges (RUC) Collector (RUC Collector) Paul Fantham Senior Manager Commercial Licensing and Revenue Paul.Fantha mnzta.govt.nz All notices and other communications between the parties under th is Agreement shall be sent to the contact persons specified above. The contact persons set out above may be from time to time by giving written notice (which may be by email) to the Registrar General and DIA. If the contact s for the Registrar General or DIA are , then all parties will be advised. DIA will ensure that the Privacy Commissioner is informed of the current contact persons for th is Agreement if they are not those set out above. Customer Nominated Services AISA PUBLIC LY AVAILABLE of . Acceptance In signing this Agreement each party acknowledges it has read and agrees to be bound by this Agreement .
The Planning Technical Working Group has provided advice to DIA to support policy development related to the intersection between the role and functions of the new water services entities and the resource management system.
The Policy and Te Tiriti branch consists of policy, Te Tiriti, ministerial and local government capabilities.
The Policy requires agencies to:
The PowerBI dashboard contains several reports. Explanations to help you understand the information, and what it shows, are provided below
The Private Sector Group has been working alongside the Government Chief Digital Officer (GCDO) to explore the possibilities of a dedicated Bluetooth hardware device, the CovidCard , to augment and accelerate contact tracing efforts. The purpose of this document is to report back on the findings of these efforts.
The Productivity Commission (the Commission) is resourced to run two inquiries at a time.
The Programme is all about kickstarting your accounting career in the public sector.
The Property Capital Forward Works fiveyear deferred maintenance programme () continues to make progress across the Departments owned property portfolio. During the year we:
The Public Sector Intranet (PSI) is the easiest and most cost effective way to communicate across all agencies in the NZ public sector. It consists of a secure website that only government employees may use and contribute to, and purposebuilt tools for sharing our workrelated information.
The RSSI value alone is not able to reliably determine precise distances, even with homogenous and specifically calibrated hardware. Our field trials provide high confidence that a combination of inputs can accurately determine close contacts and minimise false positives.
The Rates Rebate Scheme provides support to lowincome owner occupiers . The current Rates Rebate Scheme provides support to lo income owner occupiers. Just over , households cur rently receive a rates rebate, about percent of which are recipients of New Zealand Superannuation. The level of subsidy available to a household depends on both their income and their rates bill. When water charges are split out from rates bills, some recipients of a rates rebate would receive a lower rebate, even though their total expenses (rates and water) may not have changed. . The Department of Internal Affairs estimates that about a third of the current recipients of rates rebates (, households) could be affected by the splitting off of water bills. They would be the higher income recipients of rates rebates (those with a househo ld income greater than about , per annum). The Departments analysis suggests that eligible households with a single person on superannuation would be unaffected, but that eligible households with couples on superannuation will fall into the affected group. . I propose to deal with this by amending the Rates Rebate Act to include water bills as part of the definition of rates. This would have the advantage of leaving current beneficiaries of the Scheme no worse off than they would have been without the three waters reforms. It would however create an additional administrative burden on the territorial authorities, who currently administer the Scheme, as they would have to assess water charges as well as rates bills. Amending the Rates Rebate Act will have a very small fiscal impact for the Crown, as Auckland Council currently tops up rebates as if Watercare bills were a rate. After the reforms, the Crown would need to meet the additional cost of topping up the rebates for Aucklanders, at a cost of around , per year. This amount is less than the underspend in the current appropriation, but the Treasury has advised that this is a discretionary policy decision and so the costs will need to be met from the between Budget contingency. . I am also proposing to enable the water services entities to share billing information directly with territorial authorities, where the recipient of the bill has applied for a rates rebate. This would enable a streamlined application process for beneficiaries of the scheme
The Refinery to Auckland Pipeline was shut down for days following the discovery of a leak on September . This led to rationing of jet fuel supplied to the Auckland Airport, flight cancellations, and stockouts of some ground fuels (mainly premium petrol) at a number of service stations around Auckland.
The Regional Deals Strategic Framework provides details of how Regional Deals works. The framework draws on the experiences of other countries where city and regional deal models have opened significant opportunities for economic growth.
The Register will be once accredited services are available.
The RegistrarGeneral and the Secretary for Internal Affairs are responsible for the collection of DIA Information from the source. As the holder agency, the RegistrarGeneral or the Secretary for Internal Affairs are best place to handle information requests from individuals regarding their DIA Information.
The RegistrarGeneral can reasonably be expected to take any of the following Adverse Actions based
The RegistrarGeneral can reasonably be expected to:
The RegistrarGeneral may use the personal information received under this Agreement from MFAT
The RegistrarGeneral may use the personal information received under this Agreement from a Party
The RegistrarGeneral of Births, Deaths and Logan Fenwick .
The RegistrarGeneral, Births, Deaths and Marriages regularly provides information regarding registered name changes, deaths, and
The Regulatory Services Group is made up of There are kaimahi in RSG acrossthree regulatory system groups Auckland Wellington and one strategy and performance groupAbout RSG Christchurch Gambling AntiMoney Laundering and Countering Financing of T errorismDigital Safety Regulatory Strategy and Performance Gambling in New Zealand in Community fundingGambling harm Lotto m Racingsports m including pokiesCasinos m including pokies Pokies m in pubs and clubsOffshore online mm Pokies , licenced machines in , regulated venues out of New Zealanders .b funding to communities from grants from pokie machines funding to communities from casinos funding to communities from the Lottery Grants Board. million . million millionPokies are the most harmful form of gambling, due to continuous play. Approximately one third of people who play pokies at least monthly are considered at risk of experiencing gambling harm Around of adults have reported experiencing harm from their own gambling, or from the gambling of someone in their life of adults were concerned about the level of gambling in their community Gambling
The Regulatory and Identity Services branch is responsible for regulatory systems and functions related to
The Report is released in full, as noted on the cover page.
The Report is released in full, as noted on the cover page. This document is in Adobe PDF format.
The Report is released in full. The document is in Adobe PDF format.
The Request for Information (RfI) process was signalled through the MoU that all eligible Territorial Authorities signed with the Crown.
The RfI asked councils to conduct a simplified version of this Scottish Water analysis using actual replacement values in order to determine an annual economic depr eciation allowance.
The RfI collected the information necessary to undertake detailed analysis to support advice on the options for reform to the Steering Committee, local government elected members and Ministers over the coming months.
The Royal Commission of Inquiry into Historical Abuse in State Care and in the Care of Faithbased Institutions: Amending the terms of appointment for the members
The Rural Supplies Technical Working Group developed principles and agreed how parties will work together to manage the impacts on rural drinking water suppliers and rural communities, and developed recommendations to inform advice to Ministers on proposed legislation.
The Secretary reports to seven
The State Government owns the infrastructure assets through its statutory corporations.
The Stats NZ Household Economic Survey provides an alternative source for the rating of overall life satisfaction. This survey reported that percent of households across all incomes rated their overall life satisfaction at or above. While this result is slightly lower than last year, it still shows that New Zealanders continue to rate their overall life satisfaction highly. We are not able to compare results from years before .
The Steering Committee comprises independent chair Brian Hanna, local government mayors, chairs and chief executives, representatives of Local Government New Zealand and Taituar Local Government Professionals Aotearoa (formerly SOLGM), officials and advisors from the Department of Internal Affairs, Taumata Arowai, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment and the Treasury.
The Steering Committee ensures the perspectives, interests and expertise of both central and local government, and of communities throughout New Zealand are considered, while the challenges facing water services and infrastructure are addressed.
The Steering Committee is supported by a secretariat made up of advisors and officials from Local Government New Zealand, Taituar Local Government Professionals Aotearoa, the Department of Internal Affairs, and the Treasury. This secretariat is hosted by the Department of Internal Affairs, and can be contacted via email at:
The Strategy Group brings together strategic system leadership functions to deliver the governments priorities, with a focus on modernising digital services, emerging technologies, and optimising the public sector.
The Strategy Whats changing This strategy outlines the next steps for how RSGs existing regulatory systems will move beyond simply being colocated to being jointly focused on driving regulatory excellence. RSG aspires to be a place where: The publics confidence in DIA as a trustworthy government agency grows even stronger, as DIA will be associated with successful regulatory outcomes Government can home any regulatory system with confidence that it will stay on a pathway to growing effectiveness, capability and reliability DIAs kaimahi will flourish in the regulatory craft and go on to grow the capabilities of DIA and other regulatory agencies Whats not changing Some things in the strategy are not new. The core objectives of the strategic journey embarked upon in remain relevant: System leadership lifting the focus up and out Engaging, leading and influencing the wider ecosystems that our system groups are part of Establishing relationships and partnerships; taking opportunities to collaborate or leveraging connectionsThe how The strategy will enable this by: Ensuring each system is empowered and supported to be effective Organisational design that maximises the benefit of centralised functions, and distributes others to enable innovation and agility Establishing communities of practice and practice leadership Turning data, evidence and information into insights using robust ICT platforms Getting things done Embedding robust governance mechanisms; improving project management and business change Improving systems and processes; effective decisionmaking; performance evaluation The RSG strategy builds on these and describes whats important to get right in the next few years to be better system regulators. This strategy also introduces an enhanced emphasis on outcomes for hap, iwi and Mori, including actively seeking out opportunities to work collaboratively and on harnessing data and evaluation to build our evidence base, improve our interventions and support others to make informed decisions. Regulatory Services Group Strategy
The Student Loan Scheme Act
The Tax Administration Act
The Terms of Reference for the Inquiry are set out in full below.
The Terms of Reference for the Working Group can be found here:
The Terms of Reference required the findings of the inquiry to be reported to the Prime Minister no later than November .
The Translation Service provides professional translation and other language services including quality assessment, typesetting, transcription and cultural advice to businesses, central and local government and private individuals.
The Translation Service provides professional translation services to businesses, central and local government, education providers and private individuals.
The Translation Service Te Ptahi Whakawhiti Reo
The Translation Service, Te Ptahi Whakawhiti Reo
The Treasurys regulatory stewardship webpage
The Trust Framework Authority
The Trust Framework Authority administers the accreditation process for providers of digital identity services.
The Trust Framework Authority is a separate body function within the Department of Internal Affairs.
The Trust Framework Authority is the regulator for accredited digital identity services, ensuring accredited providers continue to meet the requirements for accreditation, responding to complaints, investigating noncompliance, and making sure New Zealands digital identity environment is working as it should.
The Trust Framework Authority is the regulator of accredited digital identity services in Aotearoa. It is a separate statutory function within the Department of Internal Affairs.
The Trust Framework Authority is the regulator of accredited digital identity services.
The Trust Framework Authority is the regulator of digital identity services that are accredited. It came into effect on July .
The Trust Framework Authority was established to carry out functions set out in the Act. Its functions are to:
The Trust Framework Authority will complete a service assessment. This requires a detailed description of the service, provision of specified documentation and a live demonstration of the digital identity service. The provider may also be invited to a question and answer session to answer questions in relation to the application.
The Trust Framework Authority will review and assess your application. The Trust Framework Authority will assess the following four areas:
The Trust Framework Authority:
The Trust Framework Board
The Trust Framework Board was established to carry out the functions set out in the Act. Its responsible for:
The Trust Framework Group brings together the functions that ensure safe, accredited digital identity services, by carrying out regulation, accreditation, and market development.
The Trust Framework Provider may use the colour or black and white version of accreditation mark. The colour variants are set out below:
The Trust Framework Provider must keep detailed records about their use of the accreditation mark.
The Trust Framework Provider must not delegate or sublicence use of the accreditation mark.
The Trust Framework Provider must not use the accreditation mark in a manner that is misleading or deceptive, or otherwise contrary to these terms of use, including any use of the mark or any similar sign, that would:
The Trust Framework Provider will supply the Trust Framework Authority with the detailed records of its use of the accreditation mark on request.
The Trust Framework Providers use of the accreditation mark must be accompanied by the Trust Framework Providers accreditation number andor a hyperlink to the relevant entry on the Trust Framework Register.
The Trust Framework Rules are split into several categories. To become accredited, digital identity service providers must meet the relevant rules for the service(s) they offer. This can be more than one category of rules depending on what that service is.
The Trust Framework Rules set out the operational requirements for how accredited services are provided, in order to have a safe and trusted digital identity environment. They define how people and organisations must work together to consent to share or validate a users information.
The Trust Framework accreditation mark
The Trust Framework does not enable Te Ao Mori approaches to identity Mori do not participate equitably in the digital identity ecosystem. Mori perspectives and approach es to identity are not enabled by the digital identity ecosystem. The digital identity ecosystem is not developed and maintained in partnership with Mori. Mori are not supported in leadership and decision making roles to ensure Mori perspectives about data are embedded in the trusted digital identity ecosystem . Undermines the governments commitments to digital inclusion Discourages Mori participation in digital identity and limits the potential benefits of digital identity for Mori communities It is necessary to encourage Mori participation and better understand the opportunities for M ori in implementing the Trust Framework. Government assumes the risk. To mitigate this the principles of the Trust Framework, which will be enshrined in the Trust Framework Bill , will include inclusion and Enabling Te Ao Mori approaches to identity . Additionally, there will also be a Te Ao Mori government representative on the governance board of the Trust Framework, with the ability to coopt nonvoting members and appoint an Advisory Board . The mitigation measures will ensure this is a low probability risk.
The Trust Framework promotes growth in digital identity services, which has the unintended consequence of exacerbating the digital divide and creates barriers for disadvantaged groups (e.g. the elderly, refugees). Discourage s participation Undermines th e governments commitments to digital inclusion The potential benefits of the Trust Framework remain unrealised for everyone in society
The Trust Framework promotes growth in digital identity services, which has the unintended consequence of exacerbating the digital divide and creates barriers for disadvantaged groups Discourage s participation Undermines th e governments commitments to digital inclusion The potential benefits of the Trust Framework remain People from all communities deserve the opportunity to participate in the digital identity ecosystem Both government and private sector assume this risk. The government will mitigate this risk by ensuring the principle of inclusion (below) will be enshrined in the Trust Framework Bill as one of the guiding principles for the Trust Framework and trusted digital identity e cosystem. Inclusive Everyone has the right to participate in the digital identity ecosystem. This risk will remain a realistic po ssibility . The Framework will not raise any regulatory barriers to inclusion but while it will set the standards that private sector entities will adhere to, it will be up to private sector entities to develop, invest in and offer digital identity services . PROACTIVELY RELEASED INCONFIDENCE
The Trust Framework will enable users and relying parties to reduce the time and cost associated with a multitude of online and face toface transactions that require verification of identity and other personal information. Examples include opening new bank accounts; accessi ng and providing health services; completing property transactions; accessing N ew Zealand superannuation or other government services; completing an employee recruitment and appointment process; or verifying proof of age to enable access to age restricted products and services such as alcohol or ent ry to adult establishments such as , for example, a night club . The introduction of the Trust Framework aims to bring a stronger sense of security and increase trust and confidence in the use of d igital identity services within New Zealand. In summary, t he anticipated benefits of the Trust Framework include: enabling user controlled access to, and sharing of, personal information ; minimising identity theft and privacy breaches ; improving informatio n sharing efficiency ; reducing unnecessary sharing of information ; and improving access to online and face toface services that require the provision of identity and other personal information .
The Turnbull Librarys unpublished collections include original manuscripts, oral histories, photographs, paintings, drawings, prints, and cartoons, organised by format.
The UEMA attempts to ease the online burden for consumers and businesses by prohibiting unsolicited commercial electronic messages with a New Zealand link from being sent.
The Unsolicited Electronic Messages Act (UEMA)
The Unsolicited Electronic Messages Act (the UEMA)
The Unsolicited Electronic Messages Act (the Act) prohibits electronic spam with a New Zealand link (i.e. messages sent to, from, or within New Zealand). The Act refers to spam as unsolicited commercial electronic messages.
The Utaina Project digitised over TB of data to preserve atrisk VHS, audiocassette and vinyl recordings.
The Visits and Ceremonial Office (VCO) is responsible for the planning, administration and coordination of arrangements for visitors to New Zealand who have been accorded Guest of Government status by the Prime Minister.
The WSE , under scenario , is expected to serve around . million customers on an average,
The WSE is expected to serve around . million cust omers on an average, which represents a
The WSE s management will be responsible for day today operations including p ricing. WSE s
The Water Services Act requires all drinking water suppliers, other than domestic selfsuppliers, to provide safe drinking water and meet drinking water standards. This is to ensure all communities receive safe drinking water, no matter where they live or who supplies this service.
The Water Services Acts Repeal Act repealed the Water Services Entities Act , Water Services Legislation Act and the Water Services Economic Efficiency and Consumer Protection Act .
The Water Services Authority Levy consultation Cost Recovery Impact Statement
The Water Services Authority Levy consultation Discussion Document
The Water Services Economic Efficiency and Consumer Protection Bill
The Water Services Entities Act
The Water Services Entities Act establishes the new water services entities so they are ready to provide services from their go live dates.
The Water Services Entities Amendment Act
The Water Services Entities Amendment Act gives effect to the Governments refocus of water services reforms announced in April .
The Water Services Entities Amendment Bill: supporting documents for introduction and the first reading speech
The Water Services Entities Bill
The Water Services Legislation Bill
The Water Services Legislation Bill draft departmental report key themes and recommendations
The Watercare Charter Approval to lodge for CBC
The Watercare Charter draft Cabinet paper for LEG Committee
The Whinga Amorangi Framework was introduced through the Public Service Act to help chief executives of public service departments meet their new responsibility and to lift and maintain the capability of their people to engage with Mori.
The Working Group comprised members, including representatives of the transgender and intersex community as well as medical and legal experts with experience in transgender issues. Kate Scarlet, a lawyer with substantial expertise in the process for changing registered sex, chaired the Working Group. Other members were Jack Byrne, Mani Mitchell, Jeannie Oliphant, Fleur Fitzsimons and Ahi WiHongi. In October Georgina Beyer resigned as a member of the Working Group for personal reasons.
The Working Group delivered their report in early . The Government response to the recommendations is now available and can be found below. Previously, a redacted version of the Working Groups report was publicly available. See below for the full version of the Working Groups report and recommendations.
The Working Group held its first meeting on November and will report back in February .
The Working Group identified practical improvements within the current system and within legislation. Though it did not consider changes to the law, the Working Group was clear that the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Act () should change to best serve the people who wish to change the sex recorded on their birth certificate.
The Working Group was established to engage people with lived experience of the current process to change registered sex on a birth certificate. Working Group members are representatives of the transgender and intersex community, and people with professional expertise relevant to the current process.
The Working Group was formed by the previous Minister of Internal Affairs Hon Tracey Martin to improve the Family Court process for changing registered sex on a birth certificate. In , the Working Group provided the Minister of Internal Affairs with a report and recommendations on practical improvements to the Family Court process to change sex information on birth certificates.
The Working Groups report and the Government response are now available ( April )
The Working Groups recommendations are wellplaced to make it easier for people to change the sex on their birth certificate. In some cases, the solutions recommended by the Working Group presented funding or regulatory challenges. In these cases, agencies have suggested alternative ways of addressing the core issue. Some recommendations cannot be implemented right now for capacity, equity or resourcing reasons.
The ability to require councils to passthrough billing on behalf of entities will expire on June (instead of June ).
The above Cabinet material has been released in full.
The above is partially fictional but based on real world experience. It illustrates a common problem in development in that impact is often poorly defined and poorly measured.
The accreditation mark must be used in its original colours.
The accreditation mark must be used in its original dimensions, and orientation. The mark must never be stretched or warped.
The accreditation mark must not be used in lieu of the Trust Framework Providers trade mark(s), or be used in conjunction with any of the Trust Framework Providers trade marks in such a manner as to be dominated by, or appear to be part of, those trade marks.
The accreditation mark must only be used in relation to digital identity services which are currently accredited by the Trust Framework Authority.
The action taken by an IR Officer (Student Loans and Child Support) on the
The added advantage of secondorder contact tracing is reducing the dependency on the fixed characteristics of the contact tracing system that cause major delays: the delays between exposure to first symptoms, from first symptoms to getting tested, from getting tested to getting a test result.
The age for standing as a candidate and jury service should remain at
The analysis on the WSE will be provided separately .
The application form is structured as follows:
The audit findings included the most important indicators and therefore what good looks like. Overall:
The authors of this document recommend avoiding a haphazard or hurried approach to deploying digital technologies for contact tracing and apps in particular. We have recommended some ways to think about how to assess various tools by linking the promise of impact to metrics that really matter, in particular the impact on the rate of new infections.
The average level of adoption across the population is therefore less important than ensuring the level of adoption in each community is at a level of critical mass.
The below gives a brief overview of engagement undertaken between May and October on the three waters reform proposals. Materials from these engagements are linked below.
The benefits of biometrics
The benefits of using Identity Check means people no longer need to provide physical copies of important identity documents, which can get lost or stored in a way make them vulnerable to theft and misuse.
The border is effectively closed, with mandatory day quarantine for all arrivals. The Government is yet to articulate any longer term strategy with regard to the border but we consider there to be just three options:
The branch has a diverse, distributed workforce, large ongoing programmes of work and functions that include data analysis and insights, information sharing, forecasting, systems, service design, risk and assurance, intelligence and investigations, engagement and education, operational policy, product innovation, international product strategy and commercial.
The branch operates and influences both domestically and internationally, engaging and interacting with most New Zealanders and a large range of agencies and organisations. This includes a strong focus on cultural responsibilities to Mori and Pasifika communities. Business units include:
The branch oversees and supports the National Library and Archives New Zealand, including the delivery of a resilient and fitfprpurpose archival facility in Wellington, through the Te Ara Tahi programme.
The branch supports the role of the
The briefing is a think piece on the future, not government policy.
The briefing looks forward at least a decade. It is our chance to examine key issues, trends and different scenarios, and investigate options for navigating the years ahead.
The business units within the Department that work in relevant areas and are expected to use the information sharing provisions are Births, Deaths and Marriages (BDM) and the Digital Child Exploitation Team (DCET). BDM registers and maintains Aotearoa New Zealands birth, death, marriage, civil union and name change information and will have the ability to share this information and engage with other CWPAs where it is relevant to the safety or wellbeing of children, young people and their families. DCET works to combat online sexual exploitation of children by investigating and prosecuting those who possess, distribute and create child sexual abuse material. DCET can be expected to disclose and request information for the purpose of reducing the risk of a child being subjected to harm and assisting other CWPAs to carry out their child protection duties.
The cafe trial had lower recall rates than all the other trials, on investigation there were three cardholders that were the main contributors to these poor results. One cardholder (wearing card IDs and ) was seated alone at a table with their back to a table of three other cardholders. This cardholder was within two metres of the table at all times, met the intensity threshold being used for ground truth (intensity), but presented low transmission risk and the card had poor RSSI values which were filtered out with the basic card algorithm. This effect could have been reduced if only one card had been used per participant and instead involved a greater number of participants in the same scenario. With multiple cards there are more people occupying a space that can otherwise only physically be occupied by one. An additional participant at the same table in this scenario would have had a lower intensity score with respect to the table next to them. Also, if a higher intensity rating had been used for analysis (intensity ) the backturned participant would not have been counted as a contact. Unfortunately, the contact event scores (intensity ) were not accurate because actual contact events were often fleeting and were not consistently rated.
The change is fiscally neutral in that there has been no change to total Vote or portfolio funding.
The changing landscape has enabled many chapters
The characteristics of COVID are such that existing contact tracing, absent the intense physical distancing under Alert Level and with an open border, would be unable to prevent COVID from spreading largely unchecked once community transmission occurred. It is simply not possible to identify, contact and isolate all close contacts fast enough to prevent further transmission.
The communities that are least likely to present to health providers for testing are the same communities that will be the least able to practice social distancing, and the least likely to adopt digital technology with any complexity. They will also be the most likely place for COVID to get some momentum before it is identified.
The consultation process will take place from December to February . If you would like to make a submission but are unable to meet the deadline of February , we may be able to agree a short extension of up to five working days. Please contact the Department at classificationfundingreviewdia.govt.nz to discuss. Please note your submission will be subject to the Official Information Act, . The Department may also publish the submissions on its website, www.dia.govt.nz. If you consider that any or all of the information in your submission should be treated as confidential or is commercially sensitive, please state this clearly when you are making your submission. Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation document oversees the labelling of unrestricted content, with the ability to call in and classify unrestricted content that has been labelled or crossrated by the FVLB; provides information about classification, the Classification Act, and how OFLC operates; conducts research into the impacts of the media content regulatory regime; and provides an enquiries and complaints service. OFLC is an independent Crown entity and carries out its functions at armslength from the Government. OFLC is subject to the Crown Entities Act . Its accounts are audited by Audit New Zealand and its Annual Report is tabled in the House of Representatives. Quarterly reports are provided to the Minister of Internal Affairs to assess financial and service performance, and progress towards objectives. About the Film and Video Labelling Body The FVLB is an incorporated society and a registered charity comprised of industry representatives. The FVLB manages unrestricted physical content by assigning ratings to content with an M or lower rating. The FVLB issues labels for unrestricted and restricted physical media content. The FVLB has been appointed by the Minister of Internal Affairs, to carry out the labelling function. The FVLBs main sources of income are from rating films and DVDs submitted to it and issuing labels. The FVLB sets the level of the charge for labels and fees for its activities. The FVLBs fee structure is reviewed annually by its Board and was last amended in . The FVLBs fees are available here: http:www.fvlb.org.nznzpages forms.html. As the FVLB has responsibility for setting its own fees the funding options in this consultation apply only to OFLC. However, there may be financial implications for the FVLB, which is likely to be involved in delivering the classification system applying to CVoD. The Chief Censor has the ability to request or call in an unclassified publication in order for it to be classified (this is usually the result of complaints from members of the public). FVLB fees: http:www.fvlb.org.nznzpagesforms.html.Part I New Zealands classification system New Zealands classification system exists to support people to make informed choices about the media content they view and to minimise the availability of harmful material. New Zealands current classification system is set out in the two pieces of legislation below: The Classification Act regulates how games, films and other publications are classified. The Classification Act seeks to prevent harm to the public by restricting the availability of harmful material based on the extent, manner and degree of sex, horror, crime, cruelty and violence in a manner consistent with the right to freedom of expression. The application of the Classification Act that is most familiar to the public are the rating labels such as G, PG, M, R, R for DVDs, video games, and theatre releases. These ratings and classifications are issued under the Classification Act by the Film and Video Labelling Body (FVLB) and OFLC. The Broadcasting Act, requires classification of freetoair and pay television and creates a system of broadcasting standards. There are areas specified in the Broadcasting Act from which standards have been developed and people can complain to a broadcaster if they think these standards have been breached. The Broadcasting Act is familiar to the public through the G, PG and AO labels for freetoair and G, PG, M and for pay television. The options in this consultation only affect the Classification Act and the Regulations issued under the Classification Act. About the Office of Film and Literature Classification OFLC is responsible for regulating the classification framework set out in the Classification Act. Under the Classification Act OFLC: manages restricted content (classified as R, R, R, R or objectionable) and produces classifications to inform consumer choices; Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentAbout the Review The Government is reviewing options for funding the classification system in two stages. This consultation is Stage of the Review. Stage of the Review is developing and implementing a new charging regime. A mixed funding model of annual Government funding and usercharges currently financially supports OFLC and the classification framework provided for by the Classification Act. This model was established in . Since then, there have been significant changes in the media content environment. The funding model is being revisited to assess if there is a more effective way of funding classification activities than the status quo. Funding levels for the classification framework are also being considered as part of the Review. Funding levels also need to be set for OFLCs new CVoD activities. Objectives The Reviews objective is to identify and implement a funding model that financially supports OFLC to enable New Zealanders to make informed viewing choices and minimise the availability of harmful media content. Scope The Reviews focus is on OFLCs charges for the classification of media content for commercial purposes and its new activities related to CVoD content. Also in scope are urgent, special, reduced fees and waivers for charitable organisations and individuals. The Review is not seeking to recover the costs of items submitted by government agencies for classification.Important terms used in this document Throughout this document, we draw a distinction between the two main categories of classification: Commercial classifications and Crown classifications. Commercial classifications items submitted for classification under Section of the Classification Act. Broadly speaking, these are mainstream commercial products distributed by commercial distributors or screened at film festivals. Crown classifications items submitted by government agencies under Sections and of the Classification Act for classification. These are typically not mainstream commercial products; many are privately owned such as images on computers. Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentReview timeline It is anticipated that changes arising from this Review will be implemented alongside the Films, Videos, Publications and Classification (CVoD) Amendment Bill (Amendment Bill) that is extending the Classification Act to CVoD providers and content. The Amendment Bill and new charges are anticipated to take effect from mid. Table : Timing of milestones for implementing new funding regime Stage Milestones Approximate Stage Public consultation on options for funding the classification framework December to February Postconsultation policy work and analysis of feedback received from the consultationFebruary Cabinet approval of the preferred funding model and costrecovery levels March Stage Implementation via existing or new regulations andor changes to the Classification Act By June New funding regime commences From July Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentCurrent funding arrangements OFLCs sources of revenue are Government funding, thirdparty fees, and a small amount of interest income. The Government has recently allocated additional funding to OFLC for targeted activities Following an initially fluctuating Crown appropriation, Government funding for OFLCs core operating costs remained at . million from to . The Government has contributed additional oneoff funding for of , to support OFLCs operating and minor capital expenditure. The Government has also allocated funding of , in and , from onwards for OFLC to respond to increased demand for its services following the Christchurch terror attacks on March . Up to , has been made available to OFLC to develop and deliver a self rating system for CVoD providers to selfrate content available on their platforms. Year forecast forecast forecast and outyears Crown , , , , , , , , Crown funding for operating and capital expenditure Crown funding for Countering Violent Extremism Crown funding to develop a selfrating system Up to The Crown appropriation contributes to OFLCs information, complaint resolution activities and covers classifications arising from the Crowns enforcement activities under Sections and of the Classification Act. OFLCs information service produces research about media content, media content regulation, provides an enquiries and complaints service, and information about classification decisions. The most frequently used channels for submitting publications for classification are Sections and of the Classification Act. Section classifications are almost always submissions for classification from commercial organisations. Section of the Classification Act allows for submission of publications for classification from the Chief Executive of the New Zealand Customs Services, the Commissioner of Police and the Secretary of Internal Affairs. The Chief Censor may also determine that any publication should be received for examination and permit any other person to submit a publication for classification. Section of the Classification Act allows for submission of publications for classification by the Courts. Section of the Classification Act allows for submission of publications for classification from commercial, charitable organisations and special interest groups. Table : Crown appropriation for OFLC June June Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentSection classifications are almost always submissions for classification from the Crown. There is considerable variation in the volumes of Section and submissions from yeartoyear. Historically, the Government has shared the costs of submitting publications for classification under Section of the Classification Act with submitters. The level of subsidisation by the Government of the classification of commercial publications has varied depending on the volume of Crown and commercial submissions. The Chief Executive of New Zealand Customs, the Police, the Secretary of Internal Affairs, and the Courts may submit publications under Sections and of the Classification Act to OFLC for a decision on that publications classification. These Government agencies prevent people using the Internet and other means to share objectionable material. These Government agencies do not pay a fee per submission for the classification of their material, as the Crown appropriation covers costs arising from the classification of enforcement material. Most Section and classifications involve items which are typically not mainstream commercial products. A high proportion are privately owned.Regulations state the fees to be paid by commercial organisations, and the circumstances and fees for discounted rates There are usercharges for OFLCs existing classification activities. OFLCs current fees are prescribed by the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Fees) Regulations . Fees are charged for: Section classification of publications such as films, film trailers and posters, DVDs, some games and booksmagazines; applications for exemptions from the provisions of the Classification Act where any publication has been classified as a restricted or objectionable publication; applications for classification under Section ()(c) from individuals who do not have a commercial interest in the material; and reviews of decisions by OFLC regarding the classification of any publication. Figure : Classifications from third parties and the Crown Review of options for funding the classification framework Consultation documentThe Regulations also prescribe the circumstances and fees payable for persons and organisations with special interest that may be eligible for a special or reduced fee. The Regulations provide for reduced fees for societies, organisations or individuals that conduct activities of a charitable, philanthropic, religious, educational, recreational, cultural, or social nature. The Chief Censor must be satisfied that the primary objective of the organisation or society, or individual is not private gain. An example of such an organisation that may receive special rates is a film festival society. While provisions for special fees, discounts and waivers may be appropriate, there is a need to ensure the charge is at an appropriate level and is not comprising OFLCs ability to function. A full schedule of OFLCs fees are available here: https:www.classificationoffice.govt.nzassetsPDFs feesforclassification.pdf . The main sources of OFLC income from fees are in Table . Type of mediaFee Submissions Waivers Waivers can be up to percent of standard feeUrgents Urgent fee: half of standard feeRevenue received Film ,. , DVDOnline ,. , Film trailer . , Computer Game,. (first hours) , Totals ,
The contact person or his or her contact details set out above may be by
The contact persons set out above may be from time to time by giving written
The contact persons set out above may be from time to time by giving written notice (which
The contribution of . million is consistent with what the Department anticipated
The current clinical definition of a close contact is an encounter of minutes within metres of the contact. Additionally, cards would record casual contacts who do not fit the definition of a close contact and a list of these could also be provided to contact tracers.
The current levels of people presenting for services are substantively lower than expected, representing only percent of the number estimated to be affected by moderate to severe gambling harm. Early intervention It is apparent that a number of New Zealanders who would benefit from gambling harm intervention are not seeking help . Likely causes for this (identified in submissions to this consultation from health and service providers) are the high level of stigma associated with gambling harm and societal attitudes towards gambling, as well as cultural, language and other barriers. While it is necessary to address the needs of those who have already developed a serious gambling problem and who need specialist help, it is clear that earlier preventionfocused interventions could help individuals and their families , whnau and communities to avoid developing harmful gambling behaviours and associated higher risks of harm. This approach aligns closely with public health programmes in the mental health and addictions areas of alcohol, tobacco and drug use, and family , whnau and partner violence prevention. Conclusions The key issues underpinning the strategy include: the disproportionate levels of harm experienced by Mori and Pacific people s, and by some segments of the Asian populatio n the higher levels of exposure to gambling products and the disproportionate level s o f harm experienced by people living in areas with high social deprivation ind ex s cores the high rates of comorbidities among atrisk gamblers, and low levels of treatme nt up take and screening to minimise and prevent gambling har m the harm experienced by children and the involvement of younger people i n ga mblin g the possibility of a significant increase in online gambling . . Key principles underpinning the strategy A number of key principles have guided the development of both elements in the proposed strategy: the strategic plan and the corresponding threeyear service plan . These are: This level of service use equates to approximately of those in the moderaterisk and problem gambling categories. Estimates of the number of problem gamblers (.) and moderaterisk gamblers (.) in the total New Zealand population over years of age are approximately , and , people respectively (ThimasarnAnwar et al ). STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
The current tool is complex and we need to make it easier for agencies to understand
The current training options are voluntary, inconsistent, and often outof. These are
The cycle of abuse and harm is evident in many
The dashboard includes information for the last months and is on a monthly basis.
The dashboard shows the numbers of approved gaming machines licensed to operate at approved venues as at the last day of the current quarter.
The data from any single trial was too small to effectively train a model, so summarised data from all card contacts was collected together into a single file containing all card contacts. The summarised data was one line per card contact containing: total contact duration, maximum RSSI, mean RSSI, maximum and mean duration of nonreidentified events (i.e. at most minutes as per card ID rotation), maximum and mean intensityduration, a count of the number of card advertisements seen, and a boolean value indicating whether the contact was a close contact as identified from our ground truth. A Random Forest model (using base estimators) was evaluated using tentimes tenfold crossvalidation. During crossvalidation the dataset was randomly split into ten equallysized subsets (folds), and the model trained using nine folds and tested using the remaining heldout fold. This was repeated for every fold. The whole process was then repeated ten times ( folds evaluated) so that results were not adversely affected by a particular random selection of folds.
The data is collected from production systems and
The data used to develop these profiles came from three sources:
The and time you used the service
The definition of the ultimate impact should be quantifiable. It is not enough to say we have a widget and it will solve X. There should be a very clear understanding of the impact metric (ideally singular) you are intending to influence with whatever it is you are doing. In the case of COVID, the goal is to have fewer new infections. Public health measures achieve this, in significant part, by social distancing, isolating infected individuals and quarantining close contacts who may have been infected. The promise of any digital technologies for COVD must be able to demonstrate a pathway through to these same impact metrics.
The department has entered into an Information Sharing Agreement with Inland Revenue to provide contact details from adult passport renewals or applications.
The department holds a direct access agreement with The New Zealand Security and Intelligence Service. This allows access to Births, Deaths, Marriages, Civil Unions and Name Change information held by the RegistrarGeneral and Citizenship information held by the Secretary for Internal Affairs; under the Intelligence and Security Act .
The digital identity services in relation to which the accreditation mark is used must at all times comply with relevant legislation including the Digital Identity Services Framework Trust Act , Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Regulations , and Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Rules (as amended andor replaced from time to time).
The direction to report to the Chief Archivist was issued on December and sought information about information management at Immigration New Zealand. The report was finalised in December .
The document above applies to the following Acts and associated regulations and deemed legislation:
The drivers of youth gang membership are
The dynamics of adoption and compliant usage are critically important to understand. A population level deployment of a symptom checker increases in usefulness proportionately with usage and can quickly reach a sample size that is useful. Conversely, a contact tracing app depends on extremely high levels of adoption because everyone needs the app for it to work it is subject to a network effect and modest levels of adoption render it useless.
The economic regulator emphasised that while price settings and the negotiation of
The economic regulator would have a role in implementing legislated pricing principles and regulations . The economic regulator would be able to issue guidance, input methodologies, andor determinations to the water services entities on how to implement the pr icing principles and any regulations. The choice of instrument(s) would be at the economic regulators discretion. The regulator could also cover off issues such as appropriate transitional measures, if the water services entity is not immediately able to fully implement the principle or regulations. Determinations and guidance could also deal with relatively rare situations where there may be tensions or trade offs between the principles. . I am also proposing to give the economic regulator the ability to is sue guidance, input methodologies, andor determinations on other pricing matters not covered by principles or regulations, so long as this is consistent with the overall statutory scheme and contributes to the purpose of economic regulation. This would gi ve the economic regulator a flexible suite of tools for effectively regulating water services entities. . As outlined above, the economic regulator would also have the power to alter tariffs if it determined that a water services entity was not implementing the pricing principles or regulations appropriately. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of Geographic averaging of prices can contribute to affordability at a community level . In the October Cabinet paper, a possible pricing outcome of cost sharing was set out, with the example of geographic averaging of prices. A key driver of the reforms is to address affordability issues, particularly for customers in smaller communities. The overall reform process will improve affordability by reducing costs through the efficiency gains that will be realised from service aggregation, improved financing, and improved incentives from independent governance and economic regulation. Entities can also use geographically averaged pricing to smooth and share costs across communities, thereby contributing to more affordable services for all. . Geographic averaging can occur at a few different levels: . Within a network: this is generally used by electricity distribution companies for their local networks. . Within a territorial authority district: some territorial authorities will already have implemented geographical averaging at this le vel for ease of administration and to promote greater pricing transparency. Averaging within a district may require averaging across different networks and between urban and rural communities. . Within the service area of a water services entity: this has th e advantage of improving affordability for smaller communities. Through consultation, some territorial authorities have come out strongly against this level of geographic averaging because it represents a transfer between territorial authorities with diffe rent historic approaches to three waters infrastructure investments. Rural territorial authorities generally support it and the sector is generally expecting this level of geographic averaging. . Geographic averaging would not occur at a national level as th is would require financial transfers between water services entities. . The legislation would enable water services entities, in consultation with their regional representative groups, to make decisions about geographic averaging (consistent with any Government policy statement). The economic regulator would not be able to override geographic averaging but would be able to provide guidance on its implementation. . There would be some exceptions to geographic averaging, including: . where communities have sought a higher level of service than is provided elsewhere in the water services area, or where communities receive a lower level of service than what is generally provided in the water services area; . new growth areas (where there i s a levy in place under the Infrastructure Funding and Financing Act , discussed with growth charging from paragraph below); . Water infrastructure contributions (growth charges, discussed from paragraph below); and Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . failing drinking water supplies (water services entities will have a duty to ensure communities have access to drinking water if existing suppliers are facing significant problems). To avoid this being gamed by private suppliers, they should not automati cally receive geographically averaged prices if the water services entity steps in and provides a drinking water supply on either a temporary or permanent basis. . I also propose that the Government policy statement may be used, if considered necessary, to provide for geographic averaging of prices. This could only require geographic averaging for residential customers and only for drinking and wastewater services. T he exceptions set out above would also apply. The proposed pricing formula for stormwater charging (set out from paragraph below) already enables geographic averaging. It is unlikely to be practical to begin any form of p rice harmonisation before . For this reason, the Government policy statement will not be able to provide any direction on geographic price averaging before . . Achieving geographic averaging would first require harmonising tariff structures, as far as possible, and then harmonising the actual price levels within those structures. There will need to be a long lead in time to achieve geographic averaging without causing significant price increases in some locations. The Government policy statement would have the flexibility to set out the overall requirement for geographic averaging, as well as detail on the transition to that goal. This would enable price changes to be smoothed over time and meet the legislated pricing principles. Part D: Transition and removal of cross subsidies . The non discrimination pricing principle would remove cross subsidies between different sectors and user groups. While the exact level of cross subsidisation between different groups is not known in detail, some indicative data has been compiled. The chart below shows the share of drinking and wastewater revenue between households and nonhouseholds in a sample of districts.
The effectiveness of the apps proposed for contact tracing, for example, is entirely based on the level of adoption they achieve. Downloads of of a contact tracing app, with of users using it as intended, results in just . of contacts being traced. That translates to . of contacts for an average infected person being added to manual contact tracing efforts. At this level of success, it is as good as useless.
The entitlements for members of the Executive as specified in the Executive Travel, Accommodation, Attendance and Communications Services Determination are additional or alternative to the entitlements they receive as members of Parliament. These entitlements are determined by the Minister Responsible for Ministerial Services, under section A of the Civil List Act . Under the Public Finance Act the Minister Responsible for Ministerial Services is the Responsible Minister for Vote: Ministerial Services.
The entitlements for members of the Executive as specified in the Travel, Accommodation, Attendance and Communications Services Determination are additional or alternative to the entitlements they receive as members of Parliament. Under the Public Finance Act the Minister Responsible for Ministerial Services is the Responsible Minister for Vote: Ministerial Services.
The ethnicity of senior leaders remains disproportionately European, relative to the makeup of the population of Aotearoa New Zealand. Our Mori, Pasifika, Asian and MELAA kaimahi are not progressing to the same levels of senior leadership as European kaimahi, nor are they being hired into these roles. Our aim is to increase diversity in our leadership roles through attracting, recruiting and retaining diverse talent as well as valuing and developing the skills of people from diverse communities.
The evaluation comprised demographically diverse, volunteer test subjects recruited from within the Department.
The evaluation found that factors such as poor lighting or device quality can affect the capture of selfie images. Users with older hardware might have a higher likelihood of not meeting the minimum quality standards set by the app. The system interface provides guidance to users to help them capture quality imagessuch as ensuring good lighting and proper face positioningto improve the success rate.
The evaluation is just one step the Department is taking to ensure that our technology works fairly for everyone. DIA is committed to engaging and collaborating further with Mori and the wider community and intends to conduct further studies to ensure our systems are fair and fit for purpose.
The evaluation of the Identity Check algorithm involved both frontend and backend testing:
The examples below describe how this Agreement will enable DIA the RegistrarGeneral to
The exhibition has won awards across many categories including architecture, communications, design, marketing and many others.
The expenses shown in the attached table were brought to charge in the period January to June as per the records held in the Department of Internal Affairs financial system.
The expenses shown in the attached table were brought to charge in the period October to December as per the records held in the Department of Internal Affairs financial system.
The expenses shown in the table above were brought to charge in the period July to September as per the records held in the Department of Internal Affairs financial system.
The exploitation of children online continues to be a significant and growing problem. The Department focuses on detecting, investigating and prosecuting individuals who produce, distribute and possess illegal child sexual abuse and other illegal child abuse content. Given the borderless nature of the internet, there is a significant collaborative effort with local and international law enforcement agencies to tackle the spread of child sexual abuse material.
The figure below illustrates how getting symptomatic people tested earlier can reduce new infections by isolating positive cases earlier. Delays in testing symptomatic carriers results in new infections that could perhaps be avoided.
The figure below illustrates where new infections come from. While exact figures are still subject to debate, it illustrates how a large percentage of new infections come from presymptomatic carriers. While infectiousness may peak days or so following exposure, many presymptomatic carriers are infecting others well before this.
The finalised Cabinet paper is attached for your approval to lodge by am, June . We require Cabinet confirmation of the revised policy position by June to finalise the Departmental Report. Action sought Timeframe Agree to lodge the finalised Cabinet paper ( Appendix A ) with the Cabinet Office by am on June , for consideration by SWC on June ; and Review the suggested talking points attached at Appendix C prior to SWC. By June Contact for telephone discussions (if required) Name Position Contact Number Suggested st contact Michael Woodside Policy Director Nick Law Policy Manager Return electronic document to: Cohesion document reference SSWDQEKHX Ministerial database reference IA S.()(a) S.()(a) S.()(a) ()(g)(i), ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Purpose . This briefing seeks your approval to lodge the final Cabinet paper Proposed amendments to the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill (attached as Appendix A ), for the consideration of the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee (SWC) on June . Suggested t alking points to support your attendance at this meeting ha ve been attached at Appendix C. The final Cabinet paper is attached for your approval to lodge . Ministerial consultation took place between May and May . The Cabinet paper has been following Ministerial consultation with minor changes , but the overall proposal has not changed. A clean copy of the final Cabinet paper i s attached as Appendix A , together with a tracked changed copy of the final Cabinet paper showing the revisions made to the paper from this consultation period is attached as Appendix B . S.()(g)(i), S.()(f)(iv) S.()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Next Steps . Subject to your approval, we will lodge the Cabinet paper with the Cabinet Office by am on June , for consideration at SWC on June . We will require Cabinet confirm ation of the revised policy position by June to finalise the Departmental Report. . We have attached suggested talking points at Appendix B to support you at SWC. We will also support your office to provide you with a media release, following Cabinet confirmation on June .
The first government department
The first three parts of the IP address of the device used to access the site
The first time information is shared with each Party relating to an individual, the RegistrarGeneral
The following Classes of Agencies exist under this Agreement :
The following are Parties to this Agreement :
The following are some examples of how personal information may be used:
The following diagram depicts how information may be shared under this Agreement (does not show
The following diagram depicts the information flows:
The following document sets out our approach to compliance and enforcement in the following regulated areas:
The following document sets out the Department of Internal Affairs policy on prosecutions.
The following documents have been proacvely released:
The following documents have been released: May , Cabinet Paper: Births, Deaths , Marriages, and Relationships Registration (Registering Nominated Sex) Regulations ; and June , CAB . Minute of Decision: Births, Deaths, Marriages , and Relationships Registration (Registering Nominated Sex) Regulations ; and
The following files show:
The following infographic provides a progress update on our Treaty of Waitangi Te Tiriti o Waitangi settlement commitments for :
The following information includes simplified versions of the financial models WICS used in its analysis of the potential economic benefits of water services reform. These models demonstrate the approach WICS took to calculate average household costs for each council and amalgamated entity, including how these have been informed by the information councils provided through the
The following information privacy principles are modified, by way of an Order in
The following people work alongside Karen in the Office of the Secretary:
The following report was prepared by Fueltrac Pty Ltd for the Auckland Fuel Supply Disruption Inquiry June :
The following safeguards exist to protect the privacy of individuals and ensure that any
The following safeguards exist to protect the privacy of individuals and ensure that any interference
The following services have their own media releases page:
The following table details New Zealand Agencies included in this class, and in respect of each, the specified fields to be shared with that New Zealand Agency, and
The following table details New Zealand Agencies included in this class, and in respect of each, the specified fields to be shared with the New Zealand Agency and
The following tables show the total number of gaming machines, licensed societies, and venues.
The form requires you to gather evidence to show your service meets the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act Regulations and Rules. It should be read and completed in conjunction with the Trust Framework Authority application guidance for providers.
The four members were Sir Jerry Mateparae GNZM QSO KStJ (Chair), John Ombler CNZM QSO, Rangimarie Hunia and Julie Greene
The framework also summarised the results per trial, and enabled filtering of different contact definitions (such as the Ministry of Health definition of within two metres for fifteen minutes or more). The values of RSSI that were used for the card contact tracing algorithm were determined using approximately of the data from three of the datasets (office, office and cafe), in each case a single card was held out from the dataset to prevent overfitting.
The full news release from AttorneyGeneral, Hon Christopher Finlayson, announcing the establishment of the Inquiry on September can be found here
The full version of the Working Groups report can be found here:
The fully scoped cost of the project and first year of operation is estimated at just under m.
The functional model recognises we need a variety of specialist skill sets to deliver our regulatory stewardship activities and, moving forward, we will see strong collaboration between functions.
The funding empoweredthe community to take early control of parts of its recovery that otherwise would have not been possible. The purchase of Starlink satellite systems meant communications in and out of the community were retained. The purchase of food processing machinery meant that the community could continue to provide for itself, and the traffic management system provided security for the damaged homes and assurance to homeowners.
The goal of symptom checkers for COVID are to:
The goal of the CovidCard system is to make contact tracing faster, more accurate, and more scalable when integrated with existing contact tracing efforts. The intent is that patients will submit their CovidCard when a test is taken, the data uploaded, contacts identified by the card are prioritised, and the prioritised list provided to public health staff for notification of close contacts.
The group also handles customer queries via phone and email about all identity services (including registering marriages, ordering certificates and registration of death) along with enquiries about charities services and community grants. Counter services for identity products are available (by appointment only) at Departmental offices in Auckland (Carlaw Park), Manukau (Osterley Way), Christchurch (Hereford St), Wellington (Waterloo Quay), London (Pall Mall) and Sydney (Bond St).
The ideal candidate for our programme is curious, resilient, eager to learn, has a strong work ethic, and is motivated to make a positive impact for New Zealanders.
The identification of the death of lives insured will improve the process of claims management for people claiming life insurance benefits by identifying individuals whom potential claims relate. The identification of the death of the policy holder or nominated beneficiaries will allow updates to policies to occur.
The identifier is not exposed to customers or staff, it is only used by DIA
The impact promise of digital technology is:
The implementation of this system is a twophase process running in parallel, involving legislation development and implementation, with distinct responsibilities.
The inclusion of consideration of cost as an objective in legislation
The inclusion of the opportunity to rescind decisions about Mori Up to councils that can be presented with a petition signed by at least of electors will be required to hold a binding poll during the local elections. While this represents an increased cost, combining the poll with the local elections is substantially cheaper Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
The independent biometric testing confirms that there is no evidence of significant bias in the Identity Check service, giving DIA and New Zealand public added confidence that the service works effectively for everyone.
The independent evaluator for identity management is the Department of Internal Affairs. The evaluation centres on conformance with the New Zealand Identification Standards. The relevant DIA team can be contacted at
The information and forms on this site are provided to help citizens access the services delivered by the Department of Internal Affairs. This site also enables citizens to discover information and services on a number of other different government websites that are also managed or funded by the Department.
The information and images are then compared against the persons New Zealand Passport or New Zealand Driver Licence information.
The information gathered through this RfI is an important part of the Reform Programme. It ensures we have quality information to enable New Zealand to make appropriate decisions as the reforms progress.
The information has been taken as reported from these sources. In reviewing the information shown in these profiles readers should be mindful that the information has:
The information in this document and any accompanying attachments may be confidential, privileged and or contain proprietary intellectual property. If you are not the intended recipient, any use, dissemination, reliance or copying of this letter or any attachments is unauthorised. No part of this document or attachments (if any) should be reproduced, adapted or communicated without the written consent of the owner. If you have received this document in error, please advise the sender immediately by email or telephone and destroy all copies.
The information is broken down to show figures for:
The information is each calendar year.
The information on this site is provided to help people learn about the function of the Christchurch Earthquake Appeal Trust, its role in the ongoing recovery effort for the Canterbury region and to provide details of how the money raised by the appeal is being spent.
The information presented in the Flat File is based on submissions to a significant Request for Information (RfI) that individual local authorities undertook from October to February .
The information received from DIA as described above is given into the custody,
The information you are interested in may already be publicly available
The initiative offers a codesign approach to reflect the special character and language dialect of each community. Currently the Department supports eleven bilingual centres in AhuririNapier, Heretaunga, Kerikeri, potiki, taki, Porirua, Rotorua, Te Wairoa, Tokoroa, Whakatne and Whangrei. By , the objective is to enrol centres to coincide with the bicentennial signing of the Treaty of Waitangi Te Tiriti o Waitangi.
The inquiry will examine and report on the causes of the explosions at the mine and subsequent loss of life, and all aspects of the safety regulatory regime and rescue operations at the mine.
The inset below serves to highlight the problem of measuring the wrong thing. Clean cookstoves in Africa seem a great idea because toxic indoor smoke from cooking is a major cause of death and disease in low income countries. Distributing a clean burning cook stove to every family in Africa seems like a great way to save lives.
The interactions youth have during this time inform
The introduction of the Customer Single View will mean that when a customer interacts with
The key challenge pertains to iPhones, which do not operate reliably for Bluetooth contact tracing apps outside of the AppleGoogle Exposure API. Specifically, Apple phones cannot be relied upon to advertise their presence to other phones unless the app is open and running in the foreground which is highly unlikely to be the case under normal use.
The key metrics resulting from the evaluation are:
The key risk identified is the delivery timeframes that are implied by building pandemic software during a pandemic. Key mitigations of this risk include taking a multiteam approach and early build of a minimum viable product or MVP. Contact centre costs will be impacted by the exact mix of service channels (online, phone, overthecounter) for card issuance and ongoing support. The key external dependency will be integration with the Ministry of Healths National Contact Tracing Solution and with PHUs for the uploading of card data at the time of testing. Any recursive contact tracing will require the physical retrieval of the cards held by close contacts, in order for those cards to also be uploaded
The landscape of gangs in Aotearoa
The latest announcements about the online casino gambling regulations:
The lead agency shall conduct a review every year. The report will be included in
The legislation created a new Private Security Personnel Licensing Authority (
The legislation development is led by the Department of Internal Affairs (DIA) Policy team. They are responsible for developing the legislative framework that will govern online gambling in New Zealand.
The legislation ensures communities will have a say in the running of the new water organisations through council and iwi oversight, while giving them the financial and operational independence they need to get on with the job.
The legislation is expected to be enacted in early . Those who have registered their interest will receive the latest updates on any key announcements about timeframes, including when the Select Committee process starts (which includes formal public consultation on the Bill). To receive these updates, please register your interest (
The legislation was enacted on September .
The list below provides information about the policy areas in which we provide advice to various Ministers:
The main benefits of CovidCard are: Close contacts could be identified independently of whether the case can recall the encounter, potentially broadening the comprehensiveness of the close contacts compared to human recall. Close contacts could be notified immediately by text message, asking them to selfisolate until contacted by the health authority. Contact details of close contacts could be made immediately available to contact tracers for all close contacts and casual contacts, accelerating the speed with which close contacts can be isolated. Recursive contact tracing is also possible by downloading close contact data from the cards of firstorder close contacts who have been required to self isolate.
The main risks are primarily economic in nature. These are o utlined below and are matched against their significance and the measures intended to mitigat e these risks . RISK EXAMPLES POTENTIAL OUTCOMES ASSUMPTIONS MITIGATION MEASURES ASESSMENT Costs become excessive for governmen t andor private sector The actual costs of compliance testing turns out to be significantly higher than the initial indicative costs. This would affect Government in phase one ( ) as government is covering the cost of this testing. In phase two ( ) the entity seeking accreditation, whether public or private, w ill likely assume this cost. The Trust Framework requires more resources than anticipated to set up andor maintain, increasing overall costs for government . Costs to upgrade systems to meet Trust Framework requirements are significantly higher than originally estimated , adding additional strain to the budget of the private or public sector entity seeking to join the Trust Framework . Budgets are undermined Costs discourage participation in the Trust Framework Reasonable costs will encourage participation Government assumes th e risk with regard to the cost of testing . In order to mitigate this risk, government will cover the cost of compliance testing during p hase one of the Trust Framework ( ) and work wi th partners to test and develop compliance processes in such a manner that compliance testing costs remain reasonable and appropriate going forward . The entity undergoing compliance testing assumes the cost of upgrading their systems. In the case of public sector entities, government can mitigate this through budget planning, however, private sector entities remain responsible for their own budgets. The mitigation measures will ensure this is a low probability risk.
The majority of proposed digital technologies seen proposed are explicitly or implicitly focussed on improving outcomes in the areas of testing or contact tracing. Providing a framework for assessing such tools is the focus of this document.
The marae consulted across marae whnau and developed a year plan to ensure its future and preserve the mana, tapu and tikanga of the marae urup and papakinga. It reopened in February with a ceremony and celebrations, with upgraded facilities ready to be used by its hap and many other community groups that use their facilities.
The mark shows that the service provider has proven they meet the rules and regulations of the Framework, and have been accredited by the Trust Framework Authority.
The mark shows that the service provider has proven they meet the rules and regulations of the framework, and have been accredited by the Trust Framework Authority.
The matching engine showed reliable performance across all demographic groups for usability. Variation in the chance of false accept however was noted for Mori and Pasifika investigations showed this was partly due to image quality issues.
The mean AUC values for different machine learning models are shown in Table A. below.
The mean RSSI values at different distances for the optimal card position (lanyard around neck) is shown in Figure A.. Table A. shows the mean difference to the optimal wear position (lanyard to lanyard without any clothing interference) for different wear positions and clothing types.
The meaning of objectionable is set out in paragraph of
The media team respond to enquiries from media outlets and journalists for general enquiries please refer to the
The minimum capabilities that the training needs to cover, including how to monitor for signs of harm and conducting gambling area sweeps
The minimum information that the training needs to cover
The much lauded Singaporean TraceTogether app, has had around of the population download it, half of all users use it compliantly and only . of contacts are traced. of the contacts detected are found through manual contact tracing efforts .m downloads has resulted in approximately new contacts being contributed to manual contact tracing efforts.
The name of the provider. Check that the provider is on the Trust Framework Register, as if theyre not on the register we wont be able to consider your complaint.
The needed preparation and council resources to comply with Section would
The negativ e outlook reflects the d ownside risks to the c ouncil s liquidity coverage and fina ncial
The new archival building in Wellington reached significant milestones and is ontrack to provide a stateoftheart archives repository for Archives New Zealand, the National Library of New Zealand and Ng Taonga Sound Vision.
The new archival facility will enable us to better preserve, protect and make accessible the nations taonga for generations to come.
The new online portal makes it quicker, easier and convenient for New Zealanders to apply for their passport.
The next stage of product development would involve one or more largescale field trials using a production candidate version of the CovidCard . The largescale trials would ideally include simulated contact tracing scenarios involving the relevant regional contact tracing centre to identify the extent that CovidCard might make to manual contact tracing.
The nine participants were wearing two randomlyassigned cards (n (x)) on the outside of their clothing, each hanging on a separate lanyard around their neck. Cards were activated as they were assigned to participants, and deactivated at the end of the trial as they were returned to technicians. Card IDs were in the range . There was one development card (ID ) present. There were two observers and one scene director (not wearing cards) monitoring the trial.
The nonstatutory inquiry lacks the powers to summon witnesses and to take evidence on oath.
The notifying party shall ensure the other parties are kept informed of any developments.
The number of venues and EGMs operating at the end of the quarter have continued to drop, with the number of venues decreasing from to and EGMs dropping from , to ,. When venues and EGM numbers drop, we often see an increase in GMP per EGM, but in this case because of the corresponding decrease in GMP, average GMP per EGM has dropped from , to , in nominal terms, or from , to , when adjusted for inflation (a drop of . percent and . percent respectively).
The number of women leaders is proportionate to the number of women at Te Tari Taiwhenua (.). We aim to improve ethnic representation of our people leaders, maintaining the current representation as a minimum while targeting a yearonyear improvement to reflect communities in Aotearoa New Zealand. The table below shows the percentage of people leaders and individual contributors by ethnicity at June .
The objectives of the Bill are to ensure water services are safe, reliable, environmentally resilient, customer responsive and delivered at the least cost to consumers and businesses.
The objectives of the IRDIA passport information sharing agreement are for IR
The objectives of this Agreement are to:
The obligations in this Agreement specified in ., ., . and . shall remain in force
The obligations in this Agreement which concern confidential information and
The obligations in this Agreement which concern confidential information and secrecy shall
The official Government newspaper and authoritative journal of constitutional record.
The official newspaper of the New Zealand Government. It is divided into commercial and government notices, covering business proceedings, bankruptcies, land transfer notices, departmental and parliamentary notices.
The ongoing range of historical and bespoke applications in the public sector,
The operating environment has changed dramatically in just the last few weeks as the acute concern about COVID has waned and attention shifts to business as usual and the upcoming election. Our work has been motivated by an expectation that New Zealand will inevitably see a further incursion of COVID and that test and trace, under normal social settings, cannot possibly prevent the rapid spread of this particular virus. If it could, we could open the border.
The operating procedures will detail the operational processes for providing and receiving
The operating system (e.g., Windows , Mac OSX) on the device used
The operational processes are as follows:
The operational processes associated with this Agreement will vary depending on the transfer
The other main uses of the identity and Life Event information within DIA are related to law
The overall CovidCard system includes both oncard and serverside algorithms. The oncard firmware algorithms must achieve high levels of recall to minimise false negatives and will provide additional contextual information to support serverside processing. These algorithms need to also operate within the memory and battery lifetime constraints of the card. Once shipped, card software is unable to be .
The overarching policy is provided by the Water and Catchment Division of the
The overarching reasons for measures not being met in are due to:
The pages accessed on our site and the links clicked on
The parties acknowledge their shared desire to foster a more diverse technology sector workforce
The parties shall cooperate with each other in any review and will take all reasonable
The parties shall continue to comply with their obligations under this Agreement despite the
The performance of Taumata Arowai is monitored by the Three Waters team in the Local Government branch of the Department of Internal Affairs.
The performance of these Crown entities is monitored by the Policy, Regulation and Communities branch of the Department of Internal Affairs.
The permission to use Crown copyright material does not extend to any material on this site that is identified as being the copyright of a third party. Authorisation to reproduce any such material must be obtained from the copyright holders concerned.
The potential benefits of cloud computing (cloud) for the public sector are
The preservation and conservation of taonga is important both for iwi and for our shared history as Aotearoa New Zealand. This response has ensured precious taonga was salvaged and has provided iwi and communities with the resources, tools, and knowledge to support preservation and conservation through a disaster for years to come.
The primary driver for the gender pay gap continues to be the high proportion of women in lower and midlevel positions relative to the lower proportion of women in higherlevel positions.
The process for obtaining New Zealand citizenship when the individual is
The process for setting prices . Under provisions already contained in the Water Services Entities Bill, the entities will present a funding and pricing plan to the entitys regional representative group at least once in every three year period. The plan must cover the entitys intended a pproach to pricing its services and charging consumers. The water services entity also must engage with consumers and communities on the proposals in the plan. . Several inputs will inform the funding and pricing plan. These include: . the regional representative groups statement of strategic and performance expectations; . the entitys asset management plan, and their capital structure and borrowing costs; . any constraints from economic regulation; . legislative pricing principles and regulations (set o ut further from paragraph below); . requirements and guidance from the economic regulator on price setting (set out further from paragraph below); . any directions from the Government policy statement. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of Water services entities are likely to have a variety of charges set out in a tariff list . I propose that all water services entity charges will be set out annually with the publication of a detailed tariff list. The tariff list would be based on the funding and pricing plan. The tarif f list is likely to cover the following services: . Water supply charges: these could vary with the type of service (for example, ondemand urban water supply vs. rural trickle feed), the type of water (drinking water or not), and the capacity of the connection. They may also be a mixture of fixed and volumetric charges. The use of volumetricvariable charges will not be mandated. . Wastewater charges: these could also be a mixture of fixed and volumetric (or assessedproxy) charges, that are likely to vary with the capacity of the connection. The use of volumetric charges will not be mandated. . Trade waste charges: more detailed information on trade waste is set out in the companion paper Policy proposals f or three waters service delivery legislative settings. . Stormwater charges: the approach to stormwater charges is set out in more detail from paragraph below. . Growth charges: the approach to growth charges is set out in more detail from paragraph below. . Connection charges and other miscellaneous charges. . Some charges and prices may be set by reference to hourly rates. Other charges may be sufficiently unusual or customised that they are not on the tariff list. . The economic regulator would have the power to direct the water services entity to directly alter the funding and pricing plan or the tariff list (without any consultation requirements) if the economic regulator determined that the plan or tariff lis t was inconsistent with the pricing principles and regulations, or any other constraints set by the regulator. The economic regulator could take this action on its own initiative or based on a complaint.
The programme emphasised key outcomes such as increasing representation of Mori, Pasifika, and ethnic kaimahi in leadership roles, addressing pay gaps, promoting inclusive leadership, and enhancing cultural competency across the workforce. Initiatives included bias mitigation training, intercultural leadership development, and measures to increase awareness of systemic inequities and their impact.
The programme is built for your success, providing a supportive network, designed to grow your accounting future.
The project is over percent of the way through digitisation, and on track to complete all inscope preservation activities by June .
The promise of digital technologies is to get more people tested, and close contacts of infected individuals quarantined fast. We believe that population level deployment of a symptom checker and contact tracing technologies will be valuable at different stages of the pandemic. Tools should be pursued but rigorously evaluated, particularly through the lens of impact and by challenging the underlying assumptions.
The proximity trial (proximity) was a distancesignalstrength test to capture the signal strength of the cards at different distances with different placements of the cards. The floor of an empty office was marked with lines at onemetre intervals. Participants wore five cards: on a lanyard around their neck, on a clip at their hip, on a clip on their chest pocket, on a band around their arm, and inside a walletbag that was held at roughly waist height. Each participant stood at either end of the course, walked to the opposite end and back passing each other in the middle. The participants then stood at their ends for two minutes, before one taking a step towards the other, waiting two minutes, then the other stepping forward. Over the twenty minutes they progressed towards each other in two minuteone metre intervals before meeting in the middle (where they stood together for two minutes).
The public health playbook The public health playbook for epidemics is mostly focussed on:
The public may consider that voting and candidacy rights for alcohol licensing trusts should match the purchasing age As noted above, Cabinet agreed that the age of voting in licensing trusts would remain at , because and yearolds cannot purchase alcohol CABMIN .
The public services that this Agreement is intended to facilitate are the:
The public services that this Agreement is intended to facilitate are:
The public will be able to engage on the Online Gambling Legislation through the Select Committee process. We anticipate this to occur mid.
The purpose of the Inquiry was to ensure that the design of New Zealands emergency management system is appropriate to support readiness for, and responses to, future emergency events (landslides, tsunami, earthquake, volcanic activity, floods, and storms) by identifying lessons from three severe weather events that impacted the North Island:
The purpose of the website is to provide job seekers with access to job vacancies available within the New Zealand State Sector.
The purpose of this document is to provide the Department with an overarching strategic framework that:
The purposes of this Agreement are to:
The purposes of this information sharing are to:
The pursuit of environmental sustenance and potential enhances the wellbeing
The ranking process does not affect the recall of the overall CovidCard system since we are not removing potential contacts from the list. The machine learning model could be used to remove false positives (rather than pushing them to the bottom of the ranked list), however this will potentially remove real contacts as well. Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs FURTHER WORK A valuable next step for production testing is to run a larger field trial in a more open environment. A larger open trial would provide a more realistic context for evaluation of false positive rates: in many of the closed trials participants were close contacts, or in close proximity (i.e. casual contacts) with almost every other participant so false positives detected by the card were actually realworld near misses. The main challenge with running a large open trial is the accurate collection of ground truth (such that the closed or scripted trials allow), which exponentially increases in time to collect as the number of participants increases. This could be mitigated by asking participants to complete ground truth for their own interactions, although this may also introduce error into the ground truth data.
The reason for the twostage process was
The red area in the illustration below shows the source of new infections missed by delays in contact tracing. Under normal social conditions, without social distancing or the promise of contact tracing technology, new infections from pre and nonsymptomatic people quickly outpace manual contact tracing.
The referring site (if any) through which you clicked through to the service
The refreshed Cloud First Policy
The regulations will be developed in two phases. The first set of regulations (covered in this discussion paper ) outline the necessary legal and procedural requirements to initially stand up the regulatory system. They will cover: Accreditation Services: Definition of the types of services that will be subject to accreditation under the Act . Accreditation Process : Accreditation requirements, application assessment criteria, and accreditation duration. Service Levels: Establishment of d ifferent service levels that providers can meet when delivering accredited services. Complaints and Disputes Resolution: The internal complaints and dispute resolution process requirements TF providers need to meet. Recordkeeping : The information to be ret ained by TF providers and the period they are required to retain that information. Reporting : The reporting requirements that will apply to TF providers. We anticipate a second set of regulations will be developed and recommended to the Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications by the TF Board in to address any necessary cost recovery arrangements and other operational matters required to fra me the TF Authoritys administration of the scheme. Th ese regulations may include: Cost Recovery: The establishment of fees for the partial recovery of the TF Authoritys ongoing costs for administering the Trust Framework, including consideration of accre ditation applications or renewals . It is anticipated that the TF Authoritys initial establishment and first two years of operating costs will be met from Crown funding without a contribution from fees . Disputes Resolution Scheme: The establishment of any requirements and criteria that the TF Authority must meet should it want to recommend a disputes resolution scheme , together with any proposed fees to recover costs associated with the provision of complaints and dispute resolution services . The establishme nt of a fees regime will be considered in conjunction with the development of the TF Authoritys complaints and disputes resolution operating model, which will consider the role, if any, of an external dispute resolution service provider. Third Party Asse ssors : Arrangements for the certification of third party assessors to carry out functions relating to the accreditation of providers, including appointment criteria, recordkeeping, and reporting requirements. Other Operational Matters: Any other operationa l matters that the TF Board considers should be established in regulation s to provide greater certainty to both the Authority and regulated parties on compliance requirements and ensure the costeffective management of the regulatory system by the TF Author ity. The regulations, for example, will cover any changes to accreditation renewal requirements and compliance order forms. Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government
The regulatory role of the Digital Safety Group
The relevant agency researches and advises
The remaining . million will be released to councils in instalments, on the achievement of milestones linked to the completion of defined activities.
The remaining data will be classified as unmatched.
The report can be located on the Beehive website:
The request structure enabled a detailed economic analysis to be undertaken on a representative sample of councils. This approach ensured a robust analysis to inform the options for reform without placing significant demands on the resources of all Local Authorities.
The requirement to publish a briefing is a statutory duty on departmental chief executives, independent of ministers. It differs from the advice that the public service provides ministers, or the accountability and planning documents prepared for Parliament.
The response deadline for all local authorities to submit the completed RfI is Monday February .
The results from performing tentimes tenfold cross validation are shown in Table , and these demonstrate the value that can be added by serverside processing: the top of the ranked list contains no false positives at all, and this was true of all subsets (sd). Although on average across all folds evaluated there are false positives introduced in the top , there were some subsets that contained no false positives even in the top .
The role of a local councillor may, at times, involve more emotionally charged situations, where time for deliberation or selfrestraint is more difficult, such as during public campaign meetings. However, the examples of emotionally charged situations provided in the Report of the then Childrens Commissioner included driving and criminal behaviour. We think there is a stronger argument that the role of a local councillor is more closely aligned with deliberation in the absence of high levels of emotion, such as voting or making autonomous medical decisions.
The role of digital technology in assisting contact tracing Manual contact tracing is a critical piece of the COVID pandemic playbook and digital technologies are not a substitute.
The role of digital technology in testing Widespread testing is critical to containing the spread of COVID. Individuals testing positive need to be isolated. In an ideal world, everyone might be tested all the time but logistical realities and finite testing resources means testing is focussed on those most likely to test positive, those symptomatic or those at greatest risk. Randomised testing also plays a role in detecting COVID prevalence in the community.
The role of private and iwiMori organisations
The role of the Department of Internal Affairs in enforcing New Zealands censorship laws.
The role of the Internal Affairs Portfolio in a modern digital identity system
The role of the Minister responsible for Internal Affairs, our other Ministers and the Secretary of Internal Affairs.
The role or digital technology in testing is to get more of the right people tested earlier. That means getting mildly symptomatic people into testing when they otherwise might not consider it or know how to go about getting tested.
The scarcity of cloud skills within the public and private sector can also impact on an
The schedule below outlines the webinars and clinics undertaken throughout the RfI process.
The second Bill, the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill, requires councils to develop Water Services Delivery Plans. It establishes and embeds preliminary economic measures for a regulatory regime, making it easier for councils to set up water services councilcontrolled organisations. It also provides a mechanism for Watercare to operate in a financially independent manner to its owner Auckland Council, and operate in a financially sustainable manner.
The second and final report from the Government Inquiry into the Whey Protein Concentrate Contamination incident was delivered to Hon. Nathan Guy, Minister for Primary Industries, and Hon. Jo Goodhew, Minister for Food Safety, on November .
The sector is regulated and monitored by three bodies:
The security controls limit the effectiveness of any potential oncard algorithm for ranking contacts because the card will only see a contact for at most fifteen minutes before it appears as a new, entirely different, contact ID. Therefore, the best place to rank contacts is once the card data has been downloaded and reidentified back to card serial numbers as serverside processing: once reidentified, contact data can be aggregated to overall contact duration, and assessed for other factors such as timeofday, and number of concurrent contacts. Ranking postdownload also allows for the opportunity to present card data to a human for more nuanced ranking, and for reprioritising automatically if contact definitions or contact tracing requirements change.
The security of the application process, issuance process and document security are constantly reviewed. DIA is currently in the process of redesigning the passport booklet.
The serverside component of the CovidCard system further filters, refines, categorises, and prioritises the contact list resulting in information tailored to enhance manual contact tracing efforts. Serverside software can be improved over time to better fit the needs of the contact tracing process, including updating clinical definitions or categorisations of types of contacts.
The service is designed to automatically compare an image provided against the relevant image held in the New Zealand Passport or Driver Licence databases.
The sessions provided opportunity for attendees to ask questions. These have been compiled into a Frequently Asked Questions document:
The sharing of information with relying parties, including authorisation processes.
The shift in urbanisation, loss
The specified councils are Auckland Council, Central Hawkes Bay District Council, Gisborne District Council, Hastings District Council, ThamesCoromandel District Council, Wairoa District Council, and Hawkes Bay Regional Council.
The st able o utlook on LGFA r eflects that on the New Zealand sovereign, and our view that the
The stab le outlook reflects ou r expectati ons that will de liver capital p rojects on
The stable o utlook reflects our vi ew that financial management is successfully
The stable outl ook reflects our expectations that will deliver capital projects on
The stable outlo ok refl ects limited downside r isks to the council s rating given its already very
The stable outloo k is based on WSEs low risk, regulated water operations, which we believe
The stable outlook is based on WSEs low risk, regulated water operations, which we believe
The stable outlook on LGFA refl ects that on the New Z ealand sovereign, and our v iew that the
The stable outlook re flects our expectations that there is ample headroo m within the current
The stable outlook ref lects our view th at financial management is suc cessfully
The stable outlook reflects our ex pectati ons that there is ampl e headroom within the current
The strategy came to an end in and requires a reset to align with evolving organisational and societal needs. Moving forward, Te Tari Taiwhenua plans to build on the achievements of Taura Herenga Waka by refreshing its DEI framework to ensure a sustainable and impactful approach.
The study population for the trial included healthcare workers from a single medical unit at Nelson Hospital. All healthcare workers and employees within the unit were eligible for inclusion in this study. To ensure privacy, non hospitalised and hospitalis ed patients over this short term study were excluded. Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
The subsequent inquiry by the Council found that the incident was a result of operator
The success of Operation Cargo was attributed to collaboration with the New Zealand Police, the New Zealand Customs Service, CERT NZ, telecommunications providers and banks leading to an percent decrease in reports of scams through the free service. Reports to play a crucial role in locating scammers, ending their operations and preventing future harm and financial loss to New Zealanders.
The supporting activities recognises that, to be effective as regulators, we need to have established internal governance and hygiene practices in: prioritising our work to focus on the delivery of our strategic outcomes; and investing in our kaimahi by inducting them into their role and ensuring they have the required technical and soft skills as regulators to deliver our regulatory stewardship obligations.
The system did not reject any genuine users based on incorrectly classifying a transaction as fraud.
The system performed consistently and within acceptable limits for Mori, Pasifika, and nonMori participants. No statistically significant disadvantage was found for any of these demographic groups.
The table below compares ethnicity information from to and the New Zealand Census of , the most recent at the time of publication. The data for Te Tari Taiwhenua includes the . percent of kaimahi that have identified with at least one ethnic group. It suggests that Te Tari Taiwhenua is becoming more ethnically diverse over time but has some way to go to be truly representative of the population of Aotearoa New Zealand.
The table below illustrates the challenge for apps:
The table shows actual dollars (nonadjusted) for gambling operators financial yearend.
The template used by the provider and their agreed independent evaluator, to define and agree the scope of the security evaluation.
The term oranga can be translated as wellbeing but from a te ao Mori perspective it encompasses much more, including the connection between peoples health and wellbeing and the whenua (land) and taiao (environment) around them.
The text on this website should be easy to see and read. This means that you should be able to:
The three Inquiry members are Miriam Dean CNZM QC (chair), Tony Nowell CNZM and Dr Anne Astin PSM.
The three areas that CovidCard can claim to improve on within existing systems are:
The three inquiry members are Hon Lyn Stevens QC (Chair), Dr Karen Poutasi CNZM and Anthony Wilson.
The turnaround between the announcement of the Coalition Government and the swearing in of new Ministers was short. The quick and coordinated response ensured the successful delivery of the transition, and that Ministers had the necessary staff and resources to start delivering immediately.
The type of inquiry is decided upon after discussions between Ministers and officials, with advice from Crown Law Office and State Services Commission as required. See more about
The type of web browser used (e.g. Internet Explorer, Mozilla Firefox) and
The use of DIA Information for protective security functions and intelligence collection and analysis is necessary to enable NZSIS to perform its statutory functions. This use is therefore permitted under exemptions under IPP, including (c)(i) to avoid prejudice to the maintenance of the law; (d) public health or public safety; (e) directly related to the purpose in connection with which the information was obtained.
The use of a population wide Daily Health Checkin would triage users into different messages based on their reported symptoms and advise those at risk to get tested, call their GP, call the Healthline or otherwise.
The values used for the purpose of the graph referenced by Castalia on page take this (undepreciated) replacement cost for each council in New Zealand. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua
The volunteers completed genuine testing using the DIAs Identity Check web application. Fortytwo subjects were of Mori heritage, subjects were of Pasifika heritage, and subjects were of other heritage. Each volunteer consented to participate in the evaluation, and their results were presented and recorded in a way that ensured that each test subject remains anonymous.
The websites listed on this page have been decommissioned by the Department of Internal Affairs as a part of its web optimisation programme. These websites were decommissioned for one or more of the following reasons:
The working group met monthly.
The CovidCard could address health and economic inequities. First, the CovidCard does not require any level of technical expertise so it is user friendly for people unfamiliar with technology or smartphones. Second, the CovidCard is not reliant on existing communications infrastructure such as mobile networks or internet connectivity. Third, it is envisioned the CovidCard will come at no cost to individuals, removing the direct financial barrier. Fourth, the CovidCard could enable targeted lockdown (with recursive contact tracing) so there will be a limited economic impact on most people. Fifth, the development, testing and implementation of CovidCard is being conducted in partnership with Mori to ensure the solution is responsive to Mori, is compliant with principles of Mori data sovereignty and uploads Te Tiriti o Waitangi principles. .. Trust, security and privacy The concerns voiced during our consultations were mostly focused on privacy, security and the use of data. We consider it critical to adoption that any solution is designed to ensure limited data is collected, use of data is limited, and that once COVID is no longer a threat, data is deleted.
The CovidCard has the potential to reduce this lagtime from notification of a positive test to the isolation of the firstorder close contacts (tracing delay). Upon notification of a positive test, all firstorder close contacts would be automatically notified of their exposure and instructed to selfisolate while awaiting contact from contact tracers. Though the Ministry of Health target is of known selfreported close contacts to be traced within days, approximately of close contacts are currently traced within days.
The CovidCard system includes both oncard and serverside algorithms. The oncard firmware algorithms must achieve high levels of recall to minimise false negatives and provide additional contextual information to support serverside processing. These algorithms need to also operate within the memory and battery lifetime constraints of the card. Once shipped, card firmware is unable to be .
The extremely high likelihood of extraordinar y suppor t from the Cro wn during a distress
The high likeli hood of extra ordinary s upport from during a distress sc enario is
The high likeli hood of extraordinary s upport from the C rown during a distres s sce nario is
The high likelihood of ext raordinary support from the Cro wn during a distress sce nario is
The high likelihood of extraordina ry support from the Cro wn during a distress s cenario is
The high likelihood of extraordina ry support from the Cro wn during a distress sce nario is
The modera tely high likelihood o f extraordinary sup port from the se local counci ls during a
The moderately high likeli hood of extrao rdinary support from the se local counci ls during a
The moderately high likelihood of extraordinary support from the se local co uncils during a
The moderately high likelihood of extraordinary support from the se local councils during a
The very high likelihoo d of extraor dinary support from the se local councils durin g a distress
There are stages to our selection process:
There are a number of technology approaches conceived as ways to assist contact tracing:
There are also concerns about the risk of judicial review if councils in clude wider considerations in their decision making outside the interests of their individual districts. . You have indicated that you would like to include in Bill a streamlined process for establishing joint council controlled organisations under the Local Government Act. . We are proposing that your Cabinet paper on Bill includes bespoke consultation and decision making arrangements that councils can choose to use if they are wanting to form a joint water services CCO with other councils. As suggested by the Technical Advisory Group (TAG), most of these arrangements could also apply to single councils wishing to establish a water services CCO. Background . You will shortly be seeking Cabinet policy decisions on Bill (for enactment in mid ). You have indicated that, as part of the suite of levers to be implemented in Bill , some provisions will be introduced to enable early movers to start shifting water services into more sustainable service delivery models legislative plan refers. . You have announced that this will be done by streamlining requirements under the Act for establishing CCOs. This will allow councils to start the process of setting up joint water services CCOs under the current arrangements in the Act ahead of any further arrangements that may be introduced in Bill . . This briefing proposes a set of arrangements and modifications to the Act to support early movers . They are limited in scope to streamlining some of the processes ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua IN CONFIDENCE Page of involved in establishing a joint water services CCO (using existing CCO models) . These are intended to be transitional arrangements, for the period between the enactment of Bill and enactment of Bill . .
There are choices for you to make about our forward work programme . Whilst progress has been made , more work is needed to optimise AI benefits in safe, secure and privacy protecting ways that are governed by clear values, ethics, and laws. You have a key role to set the policy direction and requirements for how the Public Service engages with AI, and a lso for supporting the work programme. . We recommend a six point public service AI work programme that incorporates a mix of operational interventions in the nearer term and policyregulatory options over the medium longer term. .
There are cost pressures associated with implementing the three waters reform programme . In June , Cabinet established the million Three Waters Infrastructure Investment and Service Delivery Reform Programme tagged operating contingency, a portion of which remains unallocated. In Budget , a Transforming Three Waters Service Delive ry for New Zealanders: Transition and Implementation tagged operating contingency of million was established to provide for establishment and transition costs. . Decisions to allocate funding for three waters reform establishment and transition costs were made early in the policy process, prior to the full suite of proposals being developed and their financial implications being understood. This has given rise to several cost pressures. . The October decision to proceed with reform means there is now more certainty regarding the three waters reform work programme through to July and beyond. Following further detailed planning, the Department of Internal Affairs now needs to increase its capacity and capability to deliver and implement the refo rm programme. This includes a significant policy and legislative programme, a large programme of entity establishment and transition activity, ministerial services, and ongoing engagement, communications and public information activity. . Other notable cost pressures relate to key judgements about the best approach to transition, in particular the scope and level of support available to iwiMori and the local government sector to participate meaningfully in the transition process. This is an area where additional investment can help to derisk the transition process and ensure entities are set up with the best chance of success. .
There are currently no consultations.
There are currently no emergencies or announcements.
There are four components to the accreditation assessment:
There are four key areas for the assessment
There are four reports within the Annual figures all gambling activity spreadsheet:
There are man y potential benefit s of a cloud first approach, including increased
There are many everyday tasks and activities that require you to share information about yourself. Often, these tasks require you to turn up in person or provide certified copies of physical documents like a passport or bank account number. This can be time consuming and put your information at risk.
There are no organisations currently on the register.
There are r isks with a self identification process that can be partly mitigated . Risks associated with introducing a self iden tification process includ e: . opposition from some individuals and groups to a self identification model may impact the progression of the Bill ; . Mori, Pacific peoples , ethnic communities and young peoples views on a self identification process have not been sought; and . insufficient time to undertake broad public consultation on the self identification proposals . ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . The Department of Internal Affairs will need to update the IT systems that support the birth register to accommodate additional sex marker s. Depending on how this is operationalised, t he estimated cost for t echnical system updates is million . This is allocated for within baselines. . Other agencies may need to consider updating their data systems, including how these systems reco rd sex and gender, for a number of reasons. These include: . societys changing expectation s around gender; . implementing StatsNZs revised statistical standards for gender, sex and variations of sex characteristics; . to support increased use of digital identity systems, and to enable identity information they hold to be shared digitally; and . to reflect the self identification process to recognise gender on birth certificates .
There are several reports within the PowerBI version (human readable) of the GMP dashboard:
There are significant differences between Scotland and New Zealand geographies Scotland is not a relevant compar ator for New Zealand water services because of fundamental differences betwee n the two countries geography. In water services, geography is impor tant for the cost and quality o f service. Denser urban areas tend to have lower average costs of service . Water services with more dispersed customers have to distribute drinking water, and pump wastewater over longer distances with more pipes, dispersed t reatment infrastructure and higher costs. Aside from some high level discussion of available water sources, and similar populat ions, WICS has not investigated why Scotlands geography is a good predictor of New Zealands water investment needs. The total land area and the geographical distribution of the population s are very different. WICS incorrectly assumes that lower population density in New Zealand implies lower levels of urbani sation . Table . illustrates how New Zealands population is more urbani sed than Scotland s, but despite thi s, New Zealand still has a lower population density. A larger majority of New Zealands population live in urban areas and the urban population is more likely to grow in New Zealand as compared t o Scotland.
There are three key features of the new regulatory system to support a safer online gambling environment:
There are two types of records:
There has been a positive impact on customers using the new online channel. Digital uptake has increased since golive in March . As at June , percent of passport applications were made online. Thirtyfour percent of online applications were made by groups, saving customers from inputting the information multiple times and using multiple channels. Over time we expect this new functionality will also positively support our ease of getting a passport measure. Passport customer ease was impacted by temporary delays to passports issuance between April and June .
There is a strong focus around building resilience
There is a wealth of information on the New
There is also no track recor d or policy of providing support to the WSE and, in our view,
There is no evidence of diseconomies of scale at any level of scale that could be achieved in New Zealand. Thames Water, Severn Trent Water, United Util ities, Yorkshire Water, Anglian Water and Scottish Water are all around the same size or larger than the whole of New Zealand. Anglian, Yorkshire and Scottish Water have consistently been amongst the most efficient. In contrast the smaller water only compa nies in the UK ( most of which are larger than all bar NZ councils) have been much less successful in reducing their relative costs.
There is no evidence that is a suitable or necessary proxy for competence to vote in these elections. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice I N C O N F I D E N C E SWCMIN I N C O N F I D E N C E qlgofb Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee Minute of Decision
There is no fee associated with use of the accreditation mark.
There is not currently Parliamentar y support to amend the Electoral Act
There is one report within the Quarterly Class Expenditure by District dataset:
There is provision in the Water Services Act for an authorisation framework to introduce
There is significant risk of confusing the public with multiple apps there are dozens of different apps already that can be used with QR codes in different configurations, for example.
There may be public suspicion about the independence and transparency of the inquiry, but this could be managed by public commitments at the time the inquiry is established.
There may be tensions between the different pricing requirements . Some of these pricing objectives could occasionally conflict. One scenario that officials have modelled is geographic averaging for Entity D. Because there is significant variation in prices between territorial authorities, it would take up to years for some territorial authorities to reach the harmonised price, if price increases were capped at percent per annum. The graph below illustrates this scenario. For Ashburton (which currently has the lowest prices ) a percent price increase is equivalent to per household per year (or . per week). Figure : Modelled geographic averaging for Entity D with capped annual price increases . In this example, ratepayers in Ashburton would be receiving a subsidy from water users in other districts for a long time until their prices match the average.
There was also a general preference for a government led intervention to bring consistency and trust to the digital identity ecosystem. People fou nd the prospect of having greater control of their personal informati on to be appealing . Focus group participants preferred the government to take the lead on this issue because government was generall y viewed as a reliable actor motivated by public good rather than commercial gain. Industry demonstrated enthusiasm to work with government to develop a digital identity trust framework to set the rules of engagement for the digital identity ecosystem. Public agencies were keen to work together on approaches that could leverage each others insights and capabilities for efficient and consistent consented information sharing to address specific issues they each faced in delivering services to the public . Though t here were some concerns about the prospect of a government intervention . Users of digital identity services expressed concern about the potential for government to implement an intervention which might provide greater access to personal information for surveillance purposes. Mori representatives raised concerns about the establishment of a system that might see g overnment holding more information abou t them, largely due to historic m isuse and abuse of Mori data . Some individuals expressed a strong preference for tighter rules specifically for the private sector, based on an assumption that the private sector would be driven by a desire to monetise data, while public sector agencies would be focused on the delivery of public services. Further consultation PROACTIVELY RELEASED INCONFIDENCE
There was one observer taking manual notes (and camera footage) for the first scenario, and camera footage only from the second scenario. Unfortunate camera placement and the use of only one camera meant that not all participants were able to be observed at all times: when one or more participants were outofview their interactions were marked to be discarded for the time periods they could not be seen. There were some exceptions: when one participant was in view and the potential contact was in a known position offcamera these were marked as normal. For example, when one participant was on the couch in front of the camera, and the other was outside, these were marked with the appropriate label (m) in the ground truth.
There were seven participants who were each given three cards to wear, each card hanging on a separate lanyard around their neck and initially in a deactivated state. Cards were worn on the outside of clothing, but may have been worn in an overlapping fashion due to the natural Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs fall of the cards on the lanyards. In addition to the total cards that were placed on participants, two development cards were also active in the trial to support real time monitoring, and a further seven cards were reserved for a second runthrough of the script. The cards were set with an identification number in the range and the development cards were ID and ID . Cards were randomly assigned and participants may not have worn sequentially numbered cards. For example, participant A wore cards , and during the first run. Each participant was also wearing a unique coloured hat to help with identification in video footage.
There were two components to the RfI, each council was required to complete one of these:
There will be an increase in costs for councils for implement ation, and ongoing Lowering the voting age is estimated to increase local election costs for local authorities by a minimum of ,, (plus GST) shared across all local authorities for implementation, and each future triennial election. This estimate is for the base costs relating to prin ting papers, postage and processing votes. It does not take into account increases to costs for promoting elections and supporting voter turnout. For example, some councils may wish to establish additional special voting places in schools or other youth locations.
There will be ongoing costs for the Electoral Commission In addition to the oneoff implementation costs there will be additional costs for the Electoral Commission and local authori ties to run local elections with a larger electoral population. The ongoing costs have also not been estimated.
Therefore, collaboration is needed to develop
Therefore, the NZ million reduc tion has no effect on our assessment.
Therefore, the proposed age limit is not the least restrictive means to achieve the objective.
Therese Marie LaniganBehrent
These Inquiries are able to inquire into any matter of public importance or concern to the Government of the day.
These Intermediaries provide a range of products and services, tailored to meet specific business requirements.
These advantages could be seen in agency responses to COVID. Further
These amendments are intended to be made via the Local Government Water Services Bill (Bill ).
These amendments propose to simplify legislative processes, extend statutory timeframes for key documents to be , and allow councils to continue to collect rates and provide services to the community in an efficient and effective manner.
These audiovisual items capture the experiences of New Zealanders through the decades, unique events and defining moments, our environment and scenery, and successes and tragedies over the last century. The material being digitised is on obsolete media it is agreed that beyond this material will be irretrievable if not preserved now.
These communities need to be heard
These datasets are periodically. The most recent dataset is on the top of the list.
These documen ts have been proactively released in f ull.
These documen ts have been proactively released.
These documents have b een proactively r eleased :
These documents have been proactively r eleased: June , LEG MIN Minute: Dog Control (Schedule ) Order , Cabinet Office; and June , Dog Control (Schedule ) Order Cabinet paper , Office of the Minister of Local Government
These documents have been proactively released :
These documents have been proactively released : . Introductory Briefing: Opportunities and next steps for the Digitising Government portfolio (presentation) . Introductory Briefing: Implementing the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act December . Introductory Briefing: Strengthening oversight of digital investment to deliver efficiencies and create public value November . Introductory Briefing: Modernising government services through digital November . Introductory Briefing: Artificial intelligence and other emerging technologies, and their implications for digital public services November . Introductory Briefing: Cloud computing: options for accelerating the benefits of Cloud for the public service December . Introductory Briefing: AllofGovernment Portfolio of digital products and ICT services December Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons f or withholding it. Where information has been withheld for other reasons consistent with advice, it has been annotated with an asterisk. This information may in some cases be accessible under the Official Information Act . Key to Redaction Codes : Section (a) likely to prejudice the security or defence of New Zealand or the international relations of the Government of New Zealand Section ()(a) withheld to protect the privacy of natural persons, including that of deceased natural persons Section ()(b)(ii) withheld to protect information where the making available of the information would disclose a trade secret Section ()(ba)(i) withheld to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely to prejudice the supply of similar information, or information from the same source, and it is in the public interest that such information should continue to be supplied Section ()(f)(ii) withheld to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect collective and individual ministerial responsibility Section ()(f)(iv) withheld to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials Section ()(g)(i) withheld to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their duty
These documents have been proactively released : May , Oral Item on Strengthening our Approach to Volunteering; and May , SWC MIN Oral Item: Strengthening our Approach to Volunteering.
These documents have been proactively released : October , Cabinet Paper: Whnau Development Through Whenua: Rating Matters, Office of the Minister for Local GovernmentMori Development; October , MCR MIN : Whnau Development Through When ua: Rating Matters, Office of the Minister for Local GovernmentMori Development; October , CAB MIN : Whnau Development Through Whenua: Rating Matters, Office of the Minister for Local GovernmentMori Development; February , Cabinet Paper: Local Government (Rating of Whenua Mori) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction; February , LEG MIN : Local Government (Rating of Whenua Mori) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction, Office of the Minister for Local Governmen tMori Development; and February , CAB MIN : Local Government (Rating of Whenua Mori) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction, Office of the Minister for Local GovernmentMori Development. Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no publi c interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Where information has been withheld for other reasons consistent with advice, it has been annotated with an asterisk. This information may in some cases be accessible under the Official Information Act . Key to Redaction Codes : Out of scope .
These documents have been proactively released : September , LEGMIN Minute: Charities Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction; September , CAB MIN Minute: Charities Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction; and September , Cabinet Paper: Charities Amendment Bill: Approval for Introd uction.
These documents have been proactively released : March , SWC MIN Minute: Oral Item: Modernising the Charities Act ; March , Oral Item: Modernising the Charities Act .
These documents have been proactively released : May SWC MIN Minute : Initiating a Broad Review of the New Zealand Media Content Regulatory System ; May , CABMIN Minute: Report of the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee; May , Cabinet Paper: Initiating a Broad Review of the New Zealand Media Content Regulatory System ; February , Briefing: The Departments recommended approach to a review of the media content regulatory system ; and February , Briefing : International proposals for comprehensive online content regu latory frameworks . Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Where information has been withheld for other reasons consistent with advice, it has been annotated with an asterisk. This information may in some cases be accessible under the Official Information Act . Key to Redaction Codes : Section ()( g)(i) free and frank Section ()(f)(iv) the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials
These documents have been proactively released : June , Cabinet Paper: Investing in infrastructure for the digital identity system ; June , DEV MIN , Cabinet Committee Minute of Decision; and June , CAB MIN , Cabinet Minute of Decision, Report of the Cabinet Economic Development Committee: Period Ended June. Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withho lding it. Where information has been withheld for other reasons consistent with advice, it has been annotated with an asterisk. This information may in some cases be accessible under the Official Information Act . Key to Redaction Codes : ()(f)(iv) maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials
These documents have been proactively released : April , DEV MIN Minute: Managing cost pressures associated with implementing the three waters reform programme ; and April , Cabinet Paper: Managing cost pressures associated with implementing the three waters reform programme .
These documents have been proactively released : May , Privacy Impact Assessment: Full Report Identity Check Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Key to Redaction Codes : ()(h) information is withheld to maintain legal professional privilege . ()(k) Information is withheld to prevent the disclosure or use of official information for improper gain or improper advantage.
These documents have been proactively released : Minute of Cabinet Decision: CAB MIN . Minute of Economic Policy Committee: ECO MIN Cabinet Paper: Local Water Done Well stage : further decisions
These documents have been proactively released : Proactive release of titles November December Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identifie d. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. These grounds are as follows: Section (a) to avoid prejudice to the security, defence, or international relations of New Zea land Section ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons Section ()(b)(ii) to protect the commercial position of the supplier of the information Section ()(ba)(i) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence where maki ng the information available would likely prejudice the supply of similar information Section ()(ba)(ii) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence where making the information available would likely damage the public interest Section ()(f)(iv) to protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials Section ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinion Section ()(h) to maintain legal professional privilege Section ()(j) to avoid prejudice to negotiations
These documents have been proactively released : September Cabinet paper Supporting the Long term Financial Stability of the Racing Industry ECOMIN minute September CAB MIN minute November Cabinet paper Racing Industry Amendment Bill Approval for Introduction November LEG MIN minute November CAB MIN minute Regulatory Impact Statement Protecting TAB NZs from offshore online betting to ensure a sustainable racing industry Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons f or withholding it. Where information has been withheld for other reasons consistent with advice, it has been annotated with an asterisk. This information may in some cases be accessible under the Official Information Act . Key to Redaction Codes : ()(b)(ii) redacted to prevent unreasonable prejudice of commercial positions ()(ba)(i) protecting information shared under an obligation of confidence where continued supply of information is in the public interest ()(f)(iv) redacted to maintain confidentiality of advice tendered, including free and frank opinions ()(h) redacted to maintain legal professional privileg e
These documents have been proactively released : LG Local Water Done Well Service Delivery Models ( Nov) LG Initial briefing responsibilities for Taumata Arowai and the Water Services Act ( Dec) LG Rural drinking water programme update ( Dec) LG Regulatory approach to small drinking water supplies ( Dec) LG Options for reducing the regulatory burden on small drinking water suppliers ( Feb ) LG Authorisation for water services professionals repeal of statutory timeframes ( Mar ) LG The role of Taumata Arowai in wastewater and stormwater regulation and standard setting (Mar ) LG Local Government Water Services Bill scope and process (Mar ) LG Water service delivery vehicles (Apr) LG Seeking amendments to the infringement provisions in the Water Services Act ( Apr) LG Water Services Regulatory Systems Operating Model (Apr) LG Summary of policy decisions to for stage Cabinet papers (Apr) LG Reducing the regulatory burden on small drinking water suppliers (May ) LG Planning and accountability for local government water service providers further details on proposals (May ) LG Stormwater services future management arrangements (May ) LG Legislative requirements for water services delivery vehicles (May ) LG Easing regulatory burden on water services operations: Potential amendments to the Water Services Act (May ) LG Water service delivery vehicles pricing and charging (May ) LG Summary of amendments to the Water Services Act and associated legislation in relation to Taumata Arowais roles and responsibilities (May ) LG Bill : Legislative options for functions and powers relating to infrastructure and local authority regulatory powers (May ) LG Use of standard and modular design for water infrastructure (Jun) LG Growth charging by water organisations (Jun) LG Supplementary briefing on legislative options for water services functions and powers for Bill (Jun) LG Water service delivery vehicles remaining charging issues and other matters (Jun ) LG Tax treatment of service delivery vehicles ( Jun) LG Bill Summary of policy decisions to for stage July Cabinet paper (Jun) LG Stormwater services Further matters for Bill (Jun) LG Long term contractual agreements for water service providers (Jun) LG Options for further changes to the Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act and Water Services Act for Cabinet consideration in July (Jul) LG Mixed use rural water schemes (Jul) LG Wastewater environmental performance standards: single standard approach (Jul ) LG Mixed use rural water schemes further advice (Jul) LG Exemptions from minimum requirements for water organisations (Jul) LG Further advice on incorporating cost considerations into Taumata Arowai regulatory practice (Jul) LG Further advice Application of Te Mana o te Wai to Taumata Arowai and drinking water suppliers (Jul)
These documents have been proactively released : LG Initial advice assistance and intervention in relation to local government water services delivery ( Feb) LG Policy decisions on Water Service Delivery Plans for inclusion in Bill ( Feb) LG Planning and accountability for local government water service providers ( Ap) LG Assistance and intervention in relation to local government water services delivery proposals for Bill Cabinet paper ( May ) LG Bill remaining policy decisions for stage Cabinet papers ( May ) LG Water Services Delivery Plans: Update ( May ) LG Amendments to the Mori Advisory Group under the Taumata Arowai the Water Services Regulator Act ( Aug) Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons f or withholding it. Where information has been withheld for other reasons consistent with advice, it has been annotated with an asterisk. This information may in some cases be accessible under the Official Information Act . In the earlier briefings , the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements) Bill was referred to as the Local Government Water Services (Transitional Provisions) Bill . Titles of Bills are finalised by the Parliamentary Counsel Office. Key to Redaction Codes : Section ()(a) to protect privacy Section ()( f)(iv) information to maintain the confidentiality of advice Section ()( g)(i) information to maintain the free and frank expression of opinions
These documents have been proactively released.
These documents have been proactively released:
These documents have been proactively released: . May : Cabinet Paper: Films, Videos, and Publications (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction . May : LEG MIN Minute of Decision Films, Videos, and Publications (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction . May : CAB MIN Minute of Decision Films, Videos, and Publications (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction Some parts of this information release would not be appropri ate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest h as been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Key to Redaction Codes : Out of Scope Information that has been withheld is not relevant to this proactive release of documents. The Cabinet material and Department of Internal Affairs content accompanying this coversheet has been made publicly accessible, subject to copyright Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) I N C O N F I D E N C E LEGMIN Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Films, Videos, and Publications (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction Portfolio Internal Affairs On May , the Cabinet Legislation Committee: noted that in December , the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee took the following decisions: . knowingly livestreaming objectionable content will become a criminal offence punishable by up to years in prison; . allowing the Chief Censor to make interim classification decisions; . allowing takedown notices to be issued to require the removal of objectionable online content; . making online content hosts subject to a civil pecuniary penalty of up to ,, if they do not comply with an issued takedown notice; . ensuring safe harbour provisions in the Harmful Digital Communications Act would not apply to objectionable online content; and . enabling the establishment of regulations that would allow the government to implement webfiltering of objectionable content if required; SWCMIN noted that the Films, Videos, and Publications (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill: . gives effect to the above decisions; . holds a category priority on the Legislation Programme; agreed that the Bill include a liability exemption for staff and employees of Internet Service Providers and online content hosts, who in the execution of their duties, or acting on the instruction of the Government, are tasked with removing objectionable content; I N C O N F I D E N C E aheeqbzw Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E LEGMIN approved for introduction the Films, Videos, and Publications (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill PCO ., subject to the final approval of the government caucuses and sufficient support in the House of Representatives; agreed that the Bill be introduced once the House resumes normal business; noted that the Minister of Internal Affairs intends to issue a press release once the Bill has been introduced into the House; agreed that the government propose that the Bill be: . referred to the Governance and Administration Committee for consideration; . reported back six months from the of referral to the Governance and Administration Committee; authorised the Minister of Internal Affairs to make minor changes to the Bill. Gerrard Carter Committee Secretary Present: Officials present from: Rt Hon Winston Peters Hon Chris Hipkins (Chair) Hon Andrew Little Hon David Parker Hon Stuart Nash Hon Iain LeesGalloway Hon Jenny Salesa Hon Damien OConnor Hon Tracy Martin Hon Eugenie SageOffice of the Prime Minister Officials Committee for LEG I N C O N F I D E N C E aheeqbzw Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Office of the Minister of Internal Affairs Chair Cabinet Legislation Committee Films, Videos, and Publications (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction Proposal . This paper seeks approval for the introduction of the Films, Videos, and Publications (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill (the Bill). . This paper also seeks policy approval to extend the current liability exemptions for staff and employees of online content hosts and internet service providers (ISPs). Under this proposal they would be exempted from liability when executing their duties, or acting on the instruction of the Government, to remove objectionable content from their respective platforms. Policy . Cabinet agreed to the policy proposals contained in the Bill on December CABMIN refers. The Bill was given a priority of Category (must be passed this year) for the Legislation Programme and Cabinet has indicated an intention to have it introduced into the House by March SWCMIN refers. . Under the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act (the Act), it is an offence to make, possess, supply or distribute an objectionable publication (including digital content). Such an offence is based on whether the availability of a given publication or digital content is likely to be injurious to the public good. . The Bill will improve the way we regulate objectionable content, including violent extremist and terrorist content found online. Specifically, the Bill amends the Act to: . criminalise knowingly livestreaming objectionable content; . allow the Chief Censor to make interim classification assessments in relation to publications (both physical as well as online) likely to be found objectionable in urgent situations; . allow takedown notices to be issued to require the removal of objectionable online content; . make online content hosts subject to a civil pecuniary penalty of up to ,, if they do not comply with an issued takedown notice; . ensure safe harbour provisions in the Harmful Digital Communications Act would not apply to objectionable online content; and . enable the establishment of regulations that would allow the Government to implement webfiltering of objectionable content if required. . Under the Bill, the definition of online content hosts has been aligned to that contained in the Harmful Digital Communications Act . The definition covers persons who have control over electronic retrieval systems, such as a website or an online application, but excludes ISPs. Page of aheeqbzw Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Policy approval for extension of liability exemptions to ISPs and online content hosts . As per Cabinets direction, CABMIN refers, officials undertook targeted engagement on an exposure draft of the Bill with key industry groups including telecommunication companies, ISPs, technology companies and representatives as well as Government agencies. . As a result of this consultation, I seek policy approval to one further proposed change, to extend the current liability exemptions for staff and employees of online content hosts and ISPs. Under this proposal these people would be exempted from liability when executing their duties, or acting on the instruction of the Government, to remove objectionable content from their respective platforms. This ensures a consistent approach to liability exemptions under the Act. . Several industry stakeholders raised concerns about the Act making them criminally liable when identifying, moderating and removing objectionable content, either in the execution of their duties or acting on Government instructions. Possessing, distributing and supplying objectionable material is a criminal offence under the Act. While the Act provides a defence to service providers when handling objectionable material, it only applies in restricted situations. The current defence would not apply where service providers may be required to search for variations of the content and forward links onto other service providers and online content hosts for the purpose of speedily removing objectionable content across different platforms (as was required in the wake of the March terror attacks). Industry stakeholders suggested making it clear that in such situations, staff and employees of ISPs and online content hosts are exempt from liability. . This exemption currently applies to Government and Office of Film and Literature Classification (OFLC) officials tasked with removing objectionable content. The extension of this exemption as proposed, would ensure a consistent approach by exempting service providers and online contents when removing all objectionable content, and not just those subject to an interim classification assessment. Regulatory impact analysis . A Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA) was prepared to support Cabinets decision to proceed with these proposals in December CABMIN refers. . The Quality Assurance panel (the Panel) that evaluated the RIA concluded that it partially met Treasurys Quality Assurance criteria. . The Panel concluded that the RIA is complete and includes all necessary information. Consultation with stakeholders was focussed primarily on the regulatory proposals, due to the time and scope constraints on the analysis. Discussions from consultation resulted in refining the proposals and a commitment to release an exposure draft of the Bill. Climate implications of policy assessment . The Ministry for the Environment CIPA team have been consulted on this Cabinet paper and confirm the CIPA requirement does not apply. Page of aheeqbzw Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Compliance . The Bill complies with: . the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi; . the rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act and the Human Rights Act ; . disclosure statement requirements (a copy of that statement is attached to this paper); . the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act ; . the relevant international standards and guidelines; and . the Legislation Guidelines ( edition), which are maintained by the Legislation Design and Advisory Committee. Consultation Officials from the Department of Internal Affairs led engagement on the policy proposals contained in this Bill . The Department of Internal Affairs led targeted consultation on these policy proposals with key industry, community, and civil society stakeholders from October to November . This engagement process involved seven workshops across the country, including specific workshops with youth. Attendees at the main workshops included representatives from major online content hosts, ISPs, community groups, and civil society organisations. In total, approximately people attended the workshops. Stakeholders were also invited to submit written feedback, of which were received. There was no formal consultation with iwi or hap on proposals in the Bill before policy decisions were made. Following engagement on policy proposals, an exposure draft of the Bill was circulated to key stakeholders . Further to the direction of Cabinet CABMIN refers, an exposure draft of the Bill served as a basis for a targeted consultation on the legislative amendments with key industry groups including telecommunication companies, internet service providers, technology companies, a civil society group, and Government agencies. Stakeholders provided written feedback on the exposure draft and several stakeholders met with officials to discuss the exposure draft. . Stakeholder feedback focused on terminology used in the Bill, the clarification of operational provisions, and comment on the establishment and operation of the filtering system. Stakeholders also commented on the quantum of penalty for failing to comply with a takedown notice as being potentially too low. . The filtering provisions of the Bill attracted a significant proportion of feedback. Stakeholders commented that it was important to ensure sufficient legislative safeguards existed to prevent improper use of the filter system. These safeguards will also ensure that the system was used in a transparent and accountable manner and is subject to appropriate oversight. Issues relating to the filter remain likely to be of interest to industry, communities and civil society groups throughout the legislative process. Page of aheeqbzw Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE . Following stakeholder feedback, the Bill has been strengthened to more explicitly provide for appropriate checks and balances relating to the filter. Changes include lifting several provisions from regulations into the primary legislation, for example, clarifying that the filter only applied to objectionable material and identifying the full range of stakeholders that must be consulted on the design of the filter. . Stakeholder feedback also resulted in the clarification of terminology and operational sections in the Bill. Several minor changes were made to address potential inconsistencies between operational provisions. . Some agencies also queried whether the current proposed penalty level of a maximum of , for noncompliance with a takedown notice is sufficient. The penalty would apply to each takedown notice issued. . I consider that the proposed penalty level to be appropriate as it is commensurate with current penalty levels in the Act. However, officials will consider submissions on this subject and provide advice to me during the select committee process. If there is a strong case for adjusting these penalty levels, I will return to Cabinet for policy approval to adjust penalty levels and look to amend the Bill during its passage through the House. . The Bill was also referred to the Legislation Design and Advisory Committee (LDAC). LDAC made several recommendations relating to the Bill, including: . ensuring the policy objective is clearly defined and discernible; . ensuring the legislation is consistent with fundamental rights and freedoms, and any limits are appropriate and no more than reasonable limits that can be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society; and . ensuring an appropriate division between what matters are included in primary legislation and what matters are included in secondary legislation. . LDACs feedback was considered when revising the Bill. . The Government coalition and confidence and supply partners have been consulted on the Bill. . The following agencies were also consulted on this Cabinet paper: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, Ministry for Culture and Heritage, New Zealand Police, New Zealand Customs, OFLC, the Treasury, Office of Ethnic Communities, Te Puni Kkiri, Ministry for Women, Office for Disability Issues, Ministry for Pacific Peoples, and Ministry of Social Development. Binding on the Crown . The Act is binding on the Crown. Creating new agencies or amending law relating to existing agencies . The Bill will not create any new agencies. . The Bill will amend the law relating to OFLC and will enable it to issue interim classification decisions on publications that are likely to be objectionable. . The Bill will not remove any existing powers held by OFLC or the Chief Censor. Page of aheeqbzw Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Allocation of decisionmaking powers . The Bill does not involve the allocation of decisionmaking powers between the Executive, the Courts and Tribunals. Associated regulations . The Bill contains new regulationmaking powers to implement and support the establishment of an electronic system to identify and prevent access to objectionable online publications. Definition of MinisterDepartment . The Bill does not create a new definition of Minister or Department. Commencement of legislation . The Bill will commence by April . Parliamentary stages . The House Business Committee has determined its work programme for the next few weeks leading up to Budget Day. The Leader of the House has undertaken to proceed only with COVID related legislation, the annual review debate (which has to be completed preBudget) and ministerial statements as appropriate. . Consistent with this determination, I intend to introduce the Bill once Parliament resumes normal business. . I will propose that the Bill be referred to the Governance and Administration Select Committee for a consideration period of six months from this referral. Proactive Release . I propose to issue a press release once the Bill has been introduced into the House. . This paper, alongside relevant briefings and Cabinet papers will be proactively released and on the Department of Internal Affairs website. Page of aheeqbzw Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Recommendations . The Minister of Internal Affairs recommends that the Cabinet Legislation Committee: . note that the Films, Videos, and Publications (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill holds a category priority on the Legislation Programme ; . note that the Bill will improve New Zealand regulation of objectionable online content; . agree the Films, Videos, and Publications (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill includes a liability exemption for staff and employees of Internet Service Providers and online content hosts, who in the execution of their duties, or acting on the instruction of the Government, are tasked with removing objectionable content; . approve the Films, Videos, and Publications (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill for introduction, subject to the final approval of the Government caucus and sufficient support in the House of Representatives; . agree that the Bill be introduced once Parliament resumes normal business; . note that I intend to issue a press release once the Bill has been introduced into the House; . note that I intend to propose that the Bill be: . referred to the Governance and Administration Select Committee for consideration; and . reported back six months from the of referral to the Governance and Administration Select Committee ; and . agree that the Minister of Internal Affairs may authorise the Parliamentary Counsel Office to make any minor changes to the Bill following consideration by the Cabinet Legislation Committee. Authorised for lodgement Hon Tracey Martin Minister of Internal Affairs Page of aheeqbzw Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
These documents have been proactively released: June , Briefing: Options for making Class gambling online payments permanent, Office of the Department of Internal Affairs; July , Cabinet Paper: Class lottery exemption to conduct remote interactive gambling , Minister of Internal Affairs; July , CBC MIN Minute: Class lottery exemption to conduct remote interactive gambling , Cabinet Business Committee; and July , CAB MIN Minute: Class lottery exemption to conduct remote interactive gambling , Cabinet Business Committee. Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identifie d. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Key to Redaction Codes: Section ()(a): protect the privacy of natural persons ; Section ()(ba) (i): protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely to prejudice the supply of similar information, or information from the same source, and it is in the public interest that such information should continue to be supplied ; Section ()(g)(ii): the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their duty ; Information that is not in scope of the proactive release.
These documents have been proactively released: February , CABMIN . Minute: National Wastewater Environmental Performance Standards: Approval to Consult Cabinet paper Proposed n ational wastewater environmental performance standards: Approval to consult
These documents have been proactively released: March , IA briefing: National Library Removal and Disposal Policy
These documents have been proactively released: June , CAB MIN Minute: Three Waters Service s: Pricing and Charging; and
These documents have been proactively released: November , Cabinet Priorities Committee minutes , oral item online gambling, Offices of the Minister of Internal Affairs and Minister for Racing: CPCMIN November , Cabinet minutes: CABMIN May , Cabinet paper: Regulations addressing ha rm minimisation in Class gambling venues, and associated infringement regulations, Office of the Minister of Internal Affairs . May , Cabinet Legislation Committee minutes: LEGMIN May , Cabinet minutes: CABMIN Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Where information has been withheld for other reasons consistent with advice, it has been annotated with an asterisk. This information may in some cases be accessible under the Official Information Act . Key to Redaction Codes : Section ()(a) protecting the privacy of natural persons Out of scope
These documents have been proactivety released:
These files represent point in time data. Cumulative quarterly figures from have been reported within the
These gains will largely pass onto racing and sporting industr ies although the exact amounts to each racing code and NSO are not known. NA NA Non monetised benefits Governments objective of sustaining TAB NZ revenue , and in turn provid e sustainable returns to the racing industry would be meet . Gamblers betting with TAB NZ can expect improved products with strengthened requirements to harm minimis ation measures Low or High depending on affected group Medium to High qwkdm ()(b)(ii)
These pou represent taha wairua
These reports show a snapshot as at the end of the quarter. They show physical addresses and should not be used for mailout purposes.
These terms may be varied at any time. terms will be on the Trust Framework Authority website.
These use cases demonstrate using accredited digital identity credentials to safely and securely share verified personal and organisational information, in everyday scenarios.
These use cases reflect common transactions and do not relate to specific businesses, agencies, people, or products.
They are responsible for providing strategic leadership and oversight across
They can correct it if its wrong, or have a statement of correction attached.
They will be redirected to the Identity Check secure page, where theyll be guided through entering their details and having a live photo taken using the camera on their phone or computer.
Things you do in life are worthwhile
Thinking about impact by really understanding your mission and the metrics that actually matter (infections averted, in this case) is how to weigh the impact of any tool. Lasting behaviour change is the key to achieving any impact.
Thinking about making an OIA request Read this first
Third Internet Child Pornography Conviction in a Week
Third Reading Speech for Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Levy) Amendment Bill
Thirtyfive councils will have Mori wards at the local elections, as follows:
This AISA covers the sharing of information about deaths with New Zealand Agencies. The AISA is
This AISA was approved through the
This Agreement assists with the provision of public services by facilitating access to accurate Death
This Agreement comes into force on the specified in the Order in Council.
This Agreement is established under Part A of the Privacy Act to enable the
This Agreement is established under subpart of Part of the Privacy Act to enable the Parties
This Agreement outlines the basis for information sharing relating to Identity Services
This Agreement replaces the following agreements, which will be revoked once this Agreement is
This Agreement replaces the following information matching agreements, which will be
This Agreement shall continue in force until either the Chief Executive of DIA or
This Agreement shall continue to be in force until the Order in Council is revoked. All Parties may
This Agreement will ensure that personal information records held in Organisations databases or lists
This Bill establishes the detailed powers, functions and duties of the new water services entities which are necessary for them to deliver water services to communities. It also contains the mechanisms for transfer of assets and liabilities from local government to water services entities and amends local government legislation and other legislation relating to water services.
This Bill should be passed by the end of
This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Charitable Entities.
This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Credit Unions, Friendly Societies, Incorporated Societies, Partnerships, Registered
This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Crown Entities.
This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Independent Advisory Committees and Statutory Supervisory Authorities not in
This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Independent Statutory Bodies.
This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Intermediaries.
This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Local Authorities.
This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Mortality Review Committees.
This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Occupational Regulatory Bodies.
This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Public Tertiary Institutions.
This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Registrars.
This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Trustee Corporations .
This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains lwi Organisations and other Maori Organisations.
This Government Inquiry had full powers of inquiry under the Inquiries Act , and was conducted by former High Court Judge the Honourable Lester Chisholm.
This Information Sharing Agreement is made on April .
This Information Sharing Agreement replaces the existing information sharing agreement
This Inquiry closed on August
This Inquiry closed on March
This Order gives effect to Cabinet decisions
This Order in Council proposes to allow specified councils to decide on making voluntary buyout offers to owners of properties that have been severely impacted by the North Island weather events, without having to amend their longterm plans as required by the Local Government Act (the Act).
This Order will be on Parliamentary Counsels New Zealand Legislation
This also refers to the distribution of cloud infrastructure assets, software,
This analysis allows us to better understand the current state of the three waters related asset base and condition of the assets, the operating environment, commercial and financial arrangements and the forecast investment plans. It also helps us to identify the potential impacts of reform on the local government sector relative to the status quo.
This approach will form a robust and well informed legislative framework, and an implementation process that produces effective consumer protection, responsible gambling and regulatory compliance.
This briefing provides additional advice on the risks and benefits of the two potential options of
This briefing summarises the amendmen ts already agreed by you so far, and asks you to confirm
This builds a sense of shared national identity and collective belonging for all New Zealanders, who can be proud of and celebrate our heritage.
This business unit focuses on the core functions of planning, business case development, programmeproject initiation, prioritisation and dependency management, design, analytics, organisational capacity, business assurance, and performance measurement and reporting.
This consultation CLOSED on May .
This consultation CLOSED on August .
This consultation CLOSED on August .
This credit card has been issued for use while undertaking Ministerial overseas travel.
This dashboard provides information on how the Department performs against a number of key metrics across our Identity and Life Events services. This includes customer satisfaction, timeliness, accuracy, and volume.
This data could provide the ability to map connections between cases that are linked by casual contacts or the lower threshold contacts, which are likely an order of magnitude greater in number. The ability to link cases through intermediary contact events may contribute to the understanding of how the virus is spreading, and perhaps link it to specific events or venues.
This dataset shows quarterly GMP figures from June to the present. It is sorted by district.
This discussion provided context to the role and function of the environmental water
This document can be viewed on the Department of Internal Affairs website
This document can be viewed on the Department of Internal Affairs website www.dia.govt.nz and at:
This document contains information for the Ne w Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classificati on, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Ac t , by persons with t he appropriate authority.
This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and
This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority.
This document describes the technical findings Nelson Hospital , New Zealand
This document details work undertaken to:
This document ha s been proactively released: January , Response to Open Letter of November sent to the Minister of Internal Affairs
This document has been proactively released in full.
This document has been proactively released without redaction. August , CABMIN Minute: Interim Government Response to the Social Services and Community Committees Report on Petition of Jenn Hooper August , Cabinet Paper: Interim Government Response to the Social Services and Community Committees Report on Petition of Jenn Hooper August , Appendix A: Interim Government Response to the Social Services and Community Committees Report on Petition of Jenn Hooper
This document is available to the public online at www.ird.govt.nz and at:
This document may be cited as Report of the Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events March All information is accurate at the time of publication. Cover image: Hawkes Bay Flooding from the air. Source: NZ Police Tu noa ana ng maunga whakah i te riu o te whenua ia koutou ra ka ngaro i te ao Ng manu whititua ka wehe i roto o ng iwi Ng poutokomanawa o ng whare maire a o ttou mtua Ng whare kura. Ng nohoanga mreikura. E pao ai, e te ata huakirangi, i huakina mai ai te kai tiaki tatau, ng tatau maha o Tikitikiorangi I unuhia atu ai koutou te hunga mate e te tapu o Tua Whakarere.Mihi Acknowledgement Tn koutou ng mtwaka puta noa i te motu, ng rrangi maunga, t te ao, t te p. Ng iwi maha me n karangatanga maha, mai Te Hiku o te Ika tae atu ki Te Waipounamu, whakawhiti ki n taha, tn koutou, kia ora ttou katoa. We are grateful to everyone who contributed to this Inquiry. We acknowledge the courage of the people we met those who were directly affected and community leaders who wanted to help. We know you still carry the burden of the experiences. In sharing your knowledge and talking to us about what you went through, your strength and generosity shone through. The information provided by organisations and entities was valuable to understanding the systems, structures, and processes in emergency management in New Zealand. We particularly note the involvement of the National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA), key government agencies, local and regional councils and Civil Defence Emergency Management (CDEM) Groups, critical infrastructure entities, local support services, sector representatives, and local businesses. We know everyone involved in the immediate response undertook their duties with the best of intentions in difficult and complex circumstances. We also thank the leads of current and past reviews on topics relevant to this Inquiry. The openness and honesty of the conversations ensured this report aligns and complements the significant work to . Throughout the course of the Inquiry, we were reminded of the people who lost their lives or are yet to return home. To you and to your families, we give our respect.
This document outlines how digital technologies should be assessed for impact. Our focus is on providing a high level framework for how to assess digital technologies aimed at populationscale deployment to help with testing and contact tracing.
This document outlines how to go about assessing digital technologies that could be deployed at population scale. Symptom checkers, and Bluetooth contact tracing are the focus of this document as they seem the most promising, but the broader framework could be used for other technologies. This document does not seek to provide a detailed analysis of each tool but rather provides advice on how you could go about that.
This document supports independent privacy evaluators to undertake their evaluation.
This enriches the cultural and economic life of New Zealand by sharing knowledge about our nations history, providing insight into ancestors or tpuna, creating arttelling stories, while seeking evidence to enable research and investigations.
This evaluation essentially determines whether the CovidCard can accurately identify events meeting the current clinical definition of a close contact (within metre distance for minutes in total).
This fact sheet provides information on the expenses disclosed by the Department of Internal Affairs for members of the Executive under the Determination. The Department of Internal Affairs is subject to the provisions of the Official Information Act and has previously released information on expenses for members of the Executive.
This first engagement provided a forum for councils considering signing up to the reform programme to raise issues and work through questions ahead of signing the MoU.
This focus area is about developing an RSG culture that supports regulatory excellence and so the achievement of our vision and makes RSG a place that people want to join and work in. Strategic initiatives Feedback has been received from kaimahi across RSG that there is a strong desire for greater collaboration, celebration and learning across groups, and for there to be a unifying culture. This focus area is primarily about the development of a clearly defined RSG culture and the implementation of a multiyear plan to bring this to life. It will link to foundational DIA documents and ways of work such as the DIA Mtpono , and DIA Principles and Behaviours. Also identified as important, and related to the development of an RSG identity or culture, is that RSG establishes itself as a learning environment focused on building regulatory excellence. A plan to support this will be developed; this work is as much about creating a great place to work where kaimahi can learn new skills and where ideas will be welcomed as it is about the provision of training and development. months (July December )Develop RSG identity Develop RSG as a learning environment in support of regulatory excellence months (January June )Continue to strengthen RSG culture in support of the visionT argets Key Focus Area Aligning our culture and purpose FiveYear Success Measures Pulse survey feedback shows staff believe RSG is taking effective action to address feedback provided through annual Whakahoki krero surveys Baseline NA Connec ted Connect ed by working as a team and v aluing e ach o ther (strong er to gether) Empowere d Empowered to put the customer at the c entre and mak e things even better (mak e it e asy mak e it work)Valued Valued by e ach o ther for making a positive di erenc e and s triving for ex cellenc e (we take pride in wha t we do) Whanaungat anga Waiho i te toipo to, kaua i te toiroa Let us k eep close together no t far ap artManaakit anga Kia akiaki te mna o te tng ata To uplift the mana of peopleKotahitanga Ma tini, ma mano, ka rapa te whai By many , by thousands, the work will be a ccomplished. Many hands mak e light workHe T ng ata Our P eople
This form covers requirements set out in the privacy rules and must be completed and provided to an independent privacy evaluator as part of the application process.
This form ensures that applicants have the authority to submit applications on behalf of the provider and must be completed as part of the application process.
This form is for applicants applying for a reconsideration of the application and must be submitted within working days of the notice of the decision.
This guidance explains DIAs approach to the legal framework for online content hosts retaining copies of files relating to objectionable content for evidential purposes and disclosing such files to the relevant authorities in criminal investigations andor prosecutions.
This helps combat fraudulent activity such as stealing someones identity because it makes it harder for personal information to be stolen.
This history was written and compiled by David Green, Ministry for Culture and Heritage (in conjunction with the Department of Internal Affairs)
This independent working group was comprised of representatives from local government and iwiMaori, and considered how representation, governance and accountability arrangements for water services entities can be strengthened.
This information is an independent report to the Department of Internal Affairs on the status of the Chief Archivist. The information is released by the Department of Internal Affairs. In releasing this information, the Department takes into account the public interest in making the information public.
This information is at the end of each financial year, but it takes some time to collate. It is at the same time as other annual data, early in the next calendar year.
This information is jointly released by the Ministry of Health and Department of Internal Affairs. In releasing this information, the Departments take into account the public interest in making the information public.
This information is now located at:
This information is relating to Crown Intervention in Tauranga City Council under Part of the Local Government Act .
This information is released by the Department of Internal Affairs on behalf of the Digital Council of Aotearoa. In releasing this information, the Department takes into account the public interest in making the information public.
This information is released by the Department of Internal Affairs. In releasing this information, the Department takes into account the public interest in making the information public.
This information is released by the Department of Internal Affairs. In releasing this information, the Department takes into account the public interest in making the information public. See
This information is released by the Department of Internal Affairs. In releasing this information, the Department takes into account the public interest in making the information public. This document is in Adobe PDF format.
This information is released by the Minister for Emergency Management and Recovery,
This information is released by the Minister of Energy and Resources, the Hon Megan Woods.
This information is released by the Minister of State Services, the Hon Chris Hipkins.
This information is released on the request of the Minister Responsible for Ministerial Services. In releasing this information, the Minister takes into account the public interest in making the information public.
This information is released on the request of the Minister for Internal Affairs. In releasing this information, the Minister takes into account the public interest in making the information public.
This information is released on the request of the Minister of Local Government. In releasing this information, the Minister takes into account the public interest in making the information public.
This information is released on the request of the Minister of Racing. In releasing this information, the Minister takes into account the public interest in making the information public.
This information provides only guidance. The Department of Internal Affairs cannot give a legal opinion or any kind of formal approval or statement defining what is, or is not, acceptable in respect of online content hosts dealings with objectionable content. The Department is the regulator and will examine online content hosts activities as they arise, to see if they breach the FVPC Act. If you need further advice or clarification, you should seek independent legal advice.
This information sharing agreement is between IR and DIA. IR is the lead
This information sharing agreement is intended to facilitate:
This information was released on the request of the Minister for Digital Economy and Communications. In releasing this information, the Minister takes into account the public interest in making the information public.
This information was released on the request of the Minister for Digitising Government. In releasing this information, the Minister takes into account the public interest in making the information public.
This information will be shared in accordance with our statutory powers, with appropriate caveats andor controls, and in compliance with the relevant legislation and any information sharing agreements with the other agency. This may include when we are considering and investigating compliance breaches, complaints, and initiating our own investigations or inquiries. We will take all practicable steps to verify information provided to third parties.
This information will give IR the opportunity to inform individuals of their rights
This information, in a digital form, can be saved to a digital wallet on your phone, computer or other device.
This is a snapshot of the current state of affairs at a point in time. It is not conclusive and should be read in the context of the broader dataset.
This is an information sharing resource on how to be safe around dogs.
This is as per the requirement under
This is currently occurring with natural hazards and resilience work
This is different from Scotland , where most of the population lives in the narro w band that is between and around Glasgow and Edinburgh (Figure .). There is potential for agglomeration efficiencies and for networks to achieve some scale benefits based on proximity alone.
This link takes you back to the home page for the broader gambling website.
This list holds limited information
This list includes papers received from the Ministers reporting agency where he is the main recipient. Papers received from other agencies, or wh ere a paper has been referred to the Minister by another Minister, are not included in this list. The Minister also receives regular status reports from his agencies which are not included in this list.
This major innovation gives the department more flexibility in managing its budgets and contributes to better public services by improving productivity and efficiency. The structure minimises duplication of back office processes and compliance costs, while maintaining transparency and accountability.
This maximises wordofmouth promotion, establishes the official channel and prevents the fragmentation of data across multiple providers.
This may include us receiving or requesting information from other people or agencies. Any such information will be gathered in accordance with our statutory powers or other lawful authority and in compliance with the relevant legislation and any information sharing agreements, as described in the section
This meant that staff productivity was not compromised, and OT
This model describes hauora
This modification will give affected councils the time and space to focus on recovery and looking after their communities in the immediate term. Long term planning is best practice but is not practical given recent events. There is good precedent for this form of relief. A similar change was made in response to the Christchurch and Kaikura earthquakes in and respectively.
This modification would enable these councils to bring certainty to property owners and communities who have been waiting on a resolution without further delays. This change is enabling rather than mandatory and councils may continue to use LTP amendment consultation processes if they so choose.
This office is currently closed.
This outcome places our relationship with hap, iwi and Mori at the centre of our decisionmaking in matters relating to Mori. It requires us to build our capability in te ao Mori, te reo me na tikanga and Te Tiriti to help achieve improved, enduring and equitable outcomes for Mori.
This page contains resources relating to Regional Deals.
This page is a historic record.
This page provides an overview of the information provided in this section to help local and unitary councils through the processes of reviewing, developing and applying gambling policies.
This paper does not discuss the merits of any particular technology solution but rather focuses on how to think about and assess various approaches. Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
This paper focuses on legislative provisions for pricing and charging . This paper covers proposals for the statutory framework and provisions necessary for water services entities to set prices and charge for their services. This includes provision for: . Specific requirements that are so important and enduring that they need to be enshrined in primary legislation, such as the legal mandate to charge consumers for water services, and the principles to inform the development of funding and pricing plans of water services entities. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . Direction on matters of nationa l importance in pricing, including direction on geographic averaging and the treatment of costs associated with addressing historic inequities in service provision to Mori, that will be developed and given effect to through a Government policy statement. . Matters that will be dealt with by the economic regulator, including guidance, input methodologies and determinations to water services entities on how to apply pricing principles, and directions to alter funding and pricing plans to achieve consistency with pricing principles. . Matters that are best left to the boards of entities, having engaged and consulted with their communities and the regional representative group. Part B: Charging for water services and protections for vulnerable consumers . Our reform of three waters service delivery will result in better and more affordable water services than if their operation were to remain with councils. That said, there will continue to be households that will struggle to meet the costs of water services together with their other needs. The transition to more standardised prices and removal of historic subsidies and inequities will also result in gains and losses for different groups. . For this reason, I begin my discussion of pricing and charging by considering who should be charged for water services and what needs to be done to protect vulnerable consumers. In Part D, I discuss specific matters related to transition, and the provisions necessary to smooth pricing and reduce price shocks for all consumers.
This paper has been proactively released in full Proactively released by the Minister of Local GovernmentINCONFIDENCE Page o f Office of the Minister of Local Government Chair C abinet Business Committee Local Government Electoral Legislation Bill regulatory relief in light of Cyclone Gabrielle Proposal This paper seeks Cabinet approval to draft a Supplementary Order Paper (SOP) to amend the Local Government Electoral Legislation Bill (the Bill) in the Committee of the whole House . Relation to government priorities This paper concerns the Governments ongoing response to recent extreme weather events. This paper is in addition to one Cabinet is considering on proposed emergency legislation to support the extreme weather recovery. Both papers provide legislative and regulatory relief to cyclone impacted communities. The Local G overnment Electoral Legislation Bill proposes new obligations on councils to review Mori representation The Bill improves the processes by which individuals and communities are represented through, and can participate in, local government elec tions. The Bill amends the Local Electoral Act , the Local Government Act , and the Local Government (Auckland Council) Act . The key policy areas for the Bill are: . establishing a fit forpurpose process for councils to review their representation arrangements , including Mori representation; . improving governance flexibility at Auckland Council; . updating the process for tied elections; and . enabling all candidates to s ubmit electronic nominations. Reviews of representation arrangements must occur at least every six years. In each term of local government, approximately half of all local authorities must review their representation arrangements . The Bill changes the rep resentation review process to require councils to consider Mori representation as a mandatory component of those reviews unless they have already established Mori wards. Proactively released by the Minister of Local GovernmentINCONFIDENCE
This policy is being implemented through provisions in the Water Services Legislation Bill which is currently before Parliaments Finance and Expenditure Committee. You can find out more about the select committee process including how to make a submission here:
This policy, where applicable, will also be used to guide the Departments decisions in relation to civil enforcement action taken under the Unsolicited Electronic Messages Act , which is subject to a different standard of proof than a criminal prosecution.
This presents a viable alternative to Police investigations for allegations of criminal offending or Serious Fraud Office investigations in relation to potential instances of serious and complex fraud.
This prioritisation can be performed manually, but sorting through potentially large contact lists will potentially lose time savings gained by using the CovidCard system. Fortunately, it is possible to rank contacts using machine learning by training a model using data provided from the cards and our ground truth contact information. When presented with new previously unseen contact data the model is able to produce a probability that the new data belongs to a real close contact. A list of contacts from a given card can be ordered by the probabilities to produce a ranked list, ideally with close contacts near the top of the list and casual contacts closer to the bottom.
This report found that only one council owned supply met the to capability score,
This report has been jointly prepared by the Department of Internal Affairs, Local Government New Zealand, and Taituar to summarise feedback from the local government sector on the Governments three waters reform proposals that were released on June .
This report is in Microsoft PowerBI format. Click on the image or the text link below to view PowerBI file:
This response contributed to iwi being able to rescue and preserve special taonga. A quick and effective response was possible thanks to strong crossagency collaboration between the National Library, Pouhere Taonga Heritage New Zealand, and Te Papa National Services Te Paerangi.
This section explains how we collect, use and share information when we are carrying out our functions such as considering and investigating compliance breaches, complaints, initiating our own investigations or inquiries, and determining compliance strategies.
This section highlights some of the improved outcomes for our communities and outlines how we are building our capability in MoriCrown relations, to engage more effectively with our Treaty of Waitangi Te Tiriti o Waitangi partners through several initiatives. These initiatives support wider public service goals of empowering and equipping our people with knowledge and skills.
This short video explains inquiries and how they operate. It also outlines what DIA does and doesnt do with inquiries:
This site allows users to search and order historical records without being issued with an RealMe ID.
This site visit focussed on the approach to water service delivery in a perriurban rural
This statement applies to information gathered by us, our contractors, or any other third parties engaged by us. We require any third party that is carrying out information gathering on our behalf to comply with the obligations of DIA employees.
This template provides attestations that certain required activities have been completed every two years, starting from two years following the of the accreditation.
This transparency statement explains how the Department of Internal Affairs (DIA) gathers information for regulatory compliance and law enforcement purposes. DIA gathers information for these purposes in order to keep people in New Zealand safe by:
This trial was repeated four times, each successive time the variant participant added a different item of clothing over the cards whilst the control participant did not add any extra clothing. The clothing added was: sweatshirt, light jacket, puffer jacket and overalls. The trial was repeated once further with both participants wearing puffer jackets over their cards as a worst case scenario. Card IDs were in the range , however, ID (arm band, variant) and ID (wallet, variant) were accidentally programmed with the same ID and it is impossible to determine what card events are from each, these two IDs were subsequently discarded from the dataset.
This was a result of discrepancies between the work roster provided to the researchers and the true work roster. The Bluetooth card accu rately identified the same contacts as the UWB devices in this pilot. However, this is unsurprising given the lack of specificity built in to the card firmware which led to the detection of a wide definition of close contacts (e.g. likely more than m). As such, these resul ts should be interpreted with caution as the performance of the card must be tested in a controlled setting with a strong ground truth. Such settings will facilitate robust tests of the precision of the close contact identification capabi lity. .. Concordance between Bluetooth cards and self report daily diaries In this pilot, we aimed to establish whether the Bluetooth cards would capture close contacts, but we did not aim to evaluate effectiveness beyond its ability to capture any close c ontacts. In Figure we qualitatively compare the median number of close contacts between self report diaries and the Bluetooth . The median number of close co ntacts recorded per day o ver the study period was for the Bluetooth card s compared to only or the self report surveys. On the weekend, days and , the number of participants decreased with minimal staffing. Accordingly, the number of possible close contacts also decreased. This is reflected in the Bluetooth card data, as the median number of close contacts on the weekend was nearly half the median number reported on weekdays, days and . The differences in the median close contacts per participant between self report daily diaries and Bluetooth card data should be interpreted with caution: ) not all participants completed diaries each day, tho ugh Bluetooth cards were r ecording contacts each day; ) the duration of the contact for each interaction captured by Bluetooth cards was assumed to be one minute, but it could have been much less; ) diaries were reported by participants about all close c ontacts, regardless of whether those close contacts were definitively participants in the pilot. While known non participant close contacts were removed from the analysis, if the close contact was unknown, then their data was retained; and ) there were n o filtering close contact algorithm installed on the Bluetooth card, meaning that the cards may have at times applied a much wider definition of a close contact than the daily surveys (e.g., greater than m away). Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
This web site is the main portal used by the Government of the day to communicate with the Public. It is of particular interest to reporters and politically minded people.
This website for the RealMe identity verification service. It provides information about the services and contact details if help is required.
This website is the space for the panel members to engage with the public in response to widespread concern about mental health and addiction services in the mental health sector and the broader community
This will enable a regulatory approach to be cognisant of costs in an effective way.
This will ensure their needs are being targeted
This work commenced with a smallscale field trial conducted May th in Nelson Hospital using a Prototype version of the CovidCard . This was followed by a series of closed and controlled scenario tests conducted May th in the Waikato region. These tests used Prototype cards which could be , enabling iterative card embedded software (firmware) development. These closed tests simulated common interactions across a range of scenarios including an office environment, a caferestaurant, a construction site, taxiUber trips and a house partysocial function. The tests have provided a strong realworld dataset to support the evaluation of the CovidCards contact identification performance relative to a robust observed reality (ground truth), derived through a combination of video capture and detailed trial observer records.
This work is focused around understanding
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution . licence. In essence, you are free to copy, distribute and adapt the work as long as you attribute the work to the Department of Internal Affairs (and abide by the other licence terms see the plain English licence terms at
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution . licence. In essence, you are free to copy, distribute and adapt the work, as long as you attribute the work to the Department of Internal Afairs and abide by the other licence terms. To view a copy of this licence, visit https:creativecommons.orglicensesby.. Please note that neither the Department of Internal Afairs emblem nor the New Zealand Government logo may be used in any way which infringes any provision of the Flags, Emblems, and Names Protection Act . Attribution to the Department of Internal Afairs should be in written form and not by reproduction of the Department of Internal Afairs emblem or the New Zealand Government logo. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution . licence. In essence, you are free to copy, distribute and adapt the work, as long as you attribute the work to the Department of Internal Affairs and abide by the other licence terms. To view a copy of this licence, visit https:creativecommons.orglicensesby. . Please note that neither the Department of Internal Affairs emblem nor the New Zealand Government logo may be used in any way which infringes any provision of the Flags, Emblems, and Names Protection Act . Attribution to the Department of Internal Affairs should be in written form and not by reproduction of the Department of Internal Affairs emblem or the New Zealand Government logo. Mtpono Our principles and behaviours Kotahitanga Manaakitanga Whanaungatanga He TngataWe make it easy, we make it work Customer centred Make things even better Were stronger together Work as a team Value each other We take pride in what we do Make a positive difference Strive for excellence Department of Internal Affairs TE MAHI KIA PAI AKE A AOTEAROA M TE IWI O AOTEAROA MAKING NEW ZEALAND BETTER FOR NEW ZEALANDERS Contents Kupu Whakataki: Minita m Te Tari Taiwhenua Foreword: Minister of Internal Affairs Tirohanga Whnui mai i te Pou Whakahaere Overview from the Chief Executive Te huatanga me te Hkai o ng Mahi Nature and Scope of Functions Mtou Kawenga me Mtou Mahi Our roles and functions Ng Whakaarotau Kwanatanga Government priorities T mtou ki te tautoko i ng whakaarotau a te Kwanatanga How we support the Governments priorities Te Pou Tarwaho Hua Outcomes Framework T mtou e whai ana ki te whakatutuki me ng take i pnei ai What we seek to achieve and why T mtou kkiri i te panonitanga hei whakatutuki i mtou whinga How we will drive change to deliver our goals Ng hoa rangap Partners He whi rawe ki te mahi, , he whakahaere e eke ana ki te taumata teitei A highperforming organisation and a great place to work T mtou rahitanga, mana whakahaere hoki Our leadership and governance T mtou heinga Our capability Te eke o t mtou haumi me ng rawa Our investment and asset performance Department of Internal Affairs STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Kupu Whakataki: Minita m Te Tari Taiwhenua Foreword: Minister of Internal Affairs The wellbeing of New Zealanders is at the centre of the work of the Government. Ensuring that services and functions continue to enhance wellbeing over time requires anticipating how the environment we operate in may change, and positions ourselves to best meet the opportunities and challenges that arise. Building digital public services is at the forefront of our thinking so Government is as joinedup, and people centric as it can be. The Department of Internal Affairs has made great progress in making its services easier to use and more accessible and in supporting other government agencies in realising their digital ambitions. Meeting the challenges of regulation in the digital world and addressing barriers to digital inclusion will be a focus of attention in coming years. Ensuring that Government acts as a cohesive system is important and the Department will play an important role in system leadership for both central and local government. More effectively linking central and local government to address national objectives in areas such as community resilience and infrastructure is an important part of the Departments work. The Departments many and varied services will continue to provide value, including support for the Executive, registration of life events, community advice and development, public recordkeeping, library services, preserving and making accessible our documentary heritage, administration of grants, and enforcement and compliance across several regulatory regimes, including digital safety, gambling, financial transactions and charities. I believe that we are well placed to make good progress towards further developing services and activities to maximise their benefit to people, communities and the Government. I look forward to continuing to work closely with the Department as it delivers its roles and functions for the people and Government of New Zealand. Statement of Responsibility I am satisfied that the information on strategic intentions prepared by the Department of Internal Affairs is consistent with the policies and performance expectations of the Government. Hon. Tracey Martin Minister of Internal Affairs October
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution . license. In essence, you are free to copy, distribute and adapt the work, as long as you attribute the work to the Department of Internal Affairs and abide by the other license terms. To view a copy of this licence, visit
This would build on information already known to the system, such as through the
This year councils across Aotearoa New Zealand have been heavily affected by severe weather events like Cyclone Gabrielle. Now they are focused on recovering and rebuilding.
This year for the first time since the Treaty settlement process commenced over years ago, we report on progress towards our Treaty of WaitangiTe Tiriti o Waitangi claims settlement commitments.
This year we saw an increase in the average service time our ICT systems were available, reflecting an ongoing focus on service resilience. Our incident resolution timeframes measure how long it takes to resolve IT incident tickets. Our results declined this year, driven by a oneoff event following a major upgrade of the passport system. We do not expect this to have an impact in future years. Of the changes made to IT systems during the year, . percent were made successfully, exceeding our target. We measure asset utilisation by the amount of workstation devices in service. Due to significant headcount changes driven by the closure of Water Services Reform, our utilisation decreased this year. We are working on process improvements to drive efficiency in this area.
Those entities undertaking testing so that they can be authorised to participate in the trusted digital identity ecosystem are likely to fall into the following categories with the following categories of costs:
Three Waters Guidance for Councils August and September
Three Waters Investment Package Funding Allocation Spreadsheet
Three Waters National Transition Programme Council Chief Executive Roadshow Outcomes and Actions
Three Waters Programme Chief Executive and Iwi Roadshow
Three Waters Programme Status Update November
Three Waters Programme Status Update February
Three Waters Programme Status Update January
Three Waters Reform Aide memoire for Te Maruata meeting
Three Waters Reform Committee recommendations on the management of urban watercourses with a stormwater function
Three Waters Reform Controls, Governance and Assurance Framework
Three Waters Reform Draft Water Services Entities Amendment Bill and draft Cabinet Legislation Committee Paper approval to lodge
Three Waters Reform Drawdown of Tagged Contingency Funds for Transition
Three Waters Reform Programme Engagement slides
Three Waters Reform Programme Local Government Feedback on reform proposals
Three Waters Reform Programme IM For SP ( February ).
Three Waters Reform Rural Drinking Water Programme Update
Three Waters Reform Update on the Water Services Entity Establishment Boards
Three Waters Reform Water Services Entities Amendment Bill Introduction and first reading pack
Three Waters Reform Water Services Legislation Bill Select Committee report back
Three Waters Reform better off support package: Auckland Council
Three Waters Reform litigation update
Three Waters Reform: Aide Memoire Citycare Water Meeting
Three Waters Reform: Amending local authority longterm plans during the establishment period for the water services entities
Three Waters Reform: Auckland Council letter regarding water reform refocus
Three Waters Reform: Citycare Water in the new water services environment
Three Waters Reform: Drawdown of Tagged Contingency Funds for Transition
Three Waters Reform: Future ownership and operation options for councilowned mixeduse rural supplies
Three Waters Reform: Options to enable nationally consistent collective bargaining during entity establishment period
Three Waters Reform: PM visiting Mayor Mauger in Christchurch April
Three Waters Reform: Request to Extend the Expiry of the Tagged Contingency
Three Waters Reform: Shared services in a ten entity model
Three Waters Reform: Systems of record cabinet paper and business case
Three Waters Reform: Tagged Contingency Update and Drawdown for IwiMori Collectives Funding
Three Waters Reform: Transition Support Arrangements
Three Waters Reform: Update on NTU engagement at Regional Fieldays
Three Waters Reform: Update on Treaty Settlement Legislation approach
Three Waters Reform: Water Services Legislation Bill Initial briefing
Three Waters Services: Pricing and Charging
Three Waters Steering Committee
Three Waters Stimulus Delivery Plan
Three Waters Stimulus Funding Agreement
Three Waters guidance for Councils August and September
Three Waters reform: Engaging with post settlement governance entities about their Treaty settlements
Three algorithms are used when DIA verifies a customers identity across our products:
Three are directly to the Minister of Internal Affairs.
Three changes that came into effect:
Three governance committees support the Executive Leadership Team:
Three new Commissioners have been appointed to conduct the inquiry , which
Three scenarios were scripted (office, cafe, taxi), others (construction site, house party) were natural situations that were only observed. All scenarios were recorded by at least one video camera, and some were recorded by two independently placed cameras (office, cafe, construction). The scripted trials were also monitored (with handwritten notes) by one or more observers during the trial. CovidCard data was downloaded from the cards within hours of each trial (typically less than one hour afterwards), and ground truth completed within five days of each trial completion.
Three waters Cabinet papers information for DEV on June
Three waters Programme Status Update October
Three waters Programme Status Update September
Three waters governance diagram
Three waters governance diagram:
Three waters implementation approach and options for acceleration of benefits
Three waters reform case for change and summary of proposals June
Three waters reforms introduction and overview of policy and legislation work programme
Three waters reforms settlement of terms and conditions of employment for Water Services Entities staff
Three waters: briefing B on Tradeoff between revenue, capital expenditure and Crown support
Three year work programme Key focus area and strategic initiative Embedding our regulatory foundations Agree and articulate scope, roles and responsibilities, opportunities and risks for each system Document and consistently implement operating procedures across all system groups Align system group operating models to the RSG strategy Finalise system descriptions with key participants Develop and implement RSG assurance plans Key focus area and strategic initiative Strengthening our capability Complete capability framework development and implement (note that implementation of the capability framework will include training, coaching and onthejob development initiatives) Develop and implement RSG ICT roadmap Develop and implement RSG workforce plan Address service design and engagement capability gaps in organisational design Assess how effectively DIA knowledge management policies and processes have been implemented in RSG address gaps or capability requirements if required Aligning our culture and purpose Develop RSG identity Establish RSG as a learning environment in support of regulatory excellence Develop and implement Pulse surveys as per baseline measures
Three years jail for child sex abuse images
Through the new Digitising Government portfolio, we support the Minister for Digitising Government with delivery of the Governments digital strategy, digital services delivery, and more.
Through using Portfolio services, consuming agenciesorganisations avoid primary procurement and supplier management costs, access optimal pricing and commercial terms, and leverage centralised security assurance functions. This allows agenciesorganisations to implement digital solutions more quickly, securely and at a significantly reduced cost, freeing up time and resources to focus on improving public services and progressing government priorities.
Thursday March Cabinet paper lodged
Thursday March Draft Cabinet paper to you for consideration
Tik Tok Tips on how to stay safe
TikTok Tips on how to stay safe
Timaru model WICS report
Timaru slide pack WICS report
Timeframes and sequencing
Timeline and milestones for developing solutions for people born overseas to register gender
Timelines to move forward with the Rates Rebates Scheme adjustment process
Timetable for establishing the other entities and applying economic regulation . I have also been consider ing the approach to determining and communicating the go live timetable and process for the other new entities . . One option would be to include a timetable of go live dates in the Amendment B ill. However, this would be an inflexible approach, which would require a change to primary legislation if any of the dates needed to be amended during the establishment period. . My preference is to retain some flexibility around the dates , and to use an Order in Council process instead of primary legislation. The go live timeframes would reflect when each entity and its council owners are ready for this to occur based on them demonstrating this readiness in a number of critical areas . All of the entities would have to go live by July , at the latest, which is the backstop agreed by Cabinet in the April paper. . I am proposin g to develop and communicate the process that would enable an entity to go live, including which factors would need to be demonstrated for this to occur. Given all of the work that will be required to get each entity and council ready, and the impact on staff involved in the transfer, there would need to be a minimum notice period between agreeing the go live and the day on which the entity will begin operating . This will give everyone involved sufficient time to prepare , and time for staff to be transferred . . I note that some councils have already indicated they would like their entity to g o live on July , as was originally anticipated. T here are practical constraints that may make it difficult to establish a large number of entities at once, though, and not all of the councils within an entity service area may be prepared for th is. I am, however, seeking to accommodate some of these request s so New Zealanders can enjoy the benefits of reform quickly, across a number of regions. ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
Timing of decisions General ward decisions are made in one
Timing of the Government Response
Tip off from the public leads to prison for viewer of child sex abuse images
Tips on how to stay safe keep your child safe on Instagram
Tips on how to stay safe keep your child safe on Snapchat
Tips on how to stay safe using TikTok
Tirohanga Whnui mai i te Pou Whakahaere Overview from the Chief Executive Kia tuia te rangi ki te whenua, te whenua ki te rangi M te mahi tahi e rangonahia ai te whanaungatanga M te whanaungatanga e t mai i te manaakitanga N te manaakitanga ka pup ake te kaitiakitanga Mna e rarau ake, ktahi ka puta te kotahitanga Tau, tau, tau ana e I am pleased to present Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Afairs Strategic Intentions for . This document outlines our priorities for the next four years, as we aim to serve and connect people, communities and government to build a safe, prosperous and respected nation. The Department has a wide range of duties and responsibilities. We are focusing our intentions on making progress towards achieving five broad outcomes for the benefit of people, communities and the government. Oranga hap, iwi, and Mori is improved through an enduring, equitable and positive MoriCrown partnership Communities across New Zealand are safe, resilient and thriving Peoples sense of belonging and collective memory builds an inclusive New Zealand New Zealand is a wellfunctioning democracy across central and local government People can easily access services and information Some of the major initiatives we have planned or under way include: Three Waters Reforms, a systemwide transformation of the way three waters services are regulated and provided to communities. We will support the Government to implement the final decisions on the reforms, and lead the significant work required to design and transition to a new system. An independent review into the Future for Local Government in response to major reforms in the sector. The review is intended to identify how our system of local democracy and governance needs to evolve to be fit for the future and will run to April . Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
Title: Authorisation for water service professionals repeal of statutory
Title: Chief Executive, Department of Internal Affairs
Title: Fire and Emergency New Zealand Whakaratonga Iwi: Commencement briefing for appointment, April
Title: International proposals for comprehensive online content regulatory frameworks February
Title: Policy briefing: Further advice regarding proposed Films, Videos and
Title: Summary of amendments to the Water Services Act and associated
Title: Summary of policy decisions for the Local Government Water Services (Transitional Provisions) Bill Cabinet paper
Title: The Films, Videos, and Publications Classifications Amendment Bill Standardising classification for Commercial Video on Demand content with Supplementary A nalysis ( November ) Authoring agency : Department of Internal Affairs Location : https:www.dia.govt.nzResource material Regulatory Impact Statements Index Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs ... If so, did the RIA Team in the Treasury provide an independent opinion on the quality of any of these regulatory impact statement s YES For the RIA dated August , the Quality Assurance panel provided the following statement: The panel considers that the RIA does not meet the Quality Assurance criteria. The panel considers that the RIA is clearly written, and is transparent about the constraints on the analysis, and about many of the gaps in the analysis. Overall, the panel co nsiders that there is sufficient analysis for Ministers to make an informed decision not to pursue Option but does not provide sufficient analysis to inform the decision about whether Option (the preferred option) or Option is the best way of achievi ng the Governments objectives. Our concerns are summarised under the quality assurance criteria of complete and convincing, and consulted. Complete and convincing There is limited analysis of the size of the problem, particularly the magnitude of the risk from misclassifying content and the degree to which other information offered by commercial video on demand providers (e.g. in the synopsis and genre label that a consumer sees before viewing) mitigates the risk. There is also limited evidence that the problem needs addressing now, instead of waiting for the intended wider review. The RIA does not establish the criteria which will be used to determine which providers will be regulated, and whether consideration will be given to exempting small or niche pro viders. Other options could have been considered. For example, encouraging providers to join the voluntary system, with the chance that regulation might follow if that was unsuccessful. Information about impacts of options is light. Two examples are: o Little information about the costs to providers, and the extent to which costs will be passed onto consumers whether through higher prices or reductions in content (lower profitability minority audience content might be at greater risk). o Whether Option woul d increase, rather than decrease, inconsistency of classification when considered across all household video content a point raised in submissions. The RIA identifies risks of non compliance with Option but is not convincing that these risks will not a lso manifest for Option . The RIA could have assessed what factors might lead providers to comply and had an implementation plan for gaining compliance. Consulted The RIA generally summarises and responds to the feedback from public consultation well. Consultation elicited many issues, and providers said they required more information before they could estimate the cost of options and the time required to implement them. Further, targeted, consultation would likely help, and ultimately result in sufficient analysis to inform Ministers decisions.
Title: Understanding the Classification S ystem: New Zealanders Views Authoring agency : Office of Film and Literature Classification, June Location : https:www.classificationoffice.g ovt.nzassetsPDFsresearch public understanding .pdf Relevant international treaties .. Does this Bill seek to give effect to New Zealand action in relation to an international treaty NO
Titles of Briefings received by the Minister for Digital Economy and Communications, from the Department of Internal Affairs, NovDec
To accelerate the speed with which close contacts can be identified, traced and contacted and quarantined. The contact tracing centre can be provided with names and contact numbers of all close contacts instantly at the time a person tests positive.
To accelerate the speed with which close contacts can be identified, traced and contacted. The contact tracing centre can be provided with names and contact numbers of all close contacts instantly at the time a person tests positive.
To be accredited under the Trust Framework, services must meet the rules and regulations.
To be accredited, providers must demonstrate that the services they deliver meet the requirements of the:
To be considered for this programme, you must be:
To change your payment method, we need to verify your bank account details with any of the following proofs:
To check if a deceased persons estate or someone you act for is due a remediation payment, youll need to verify your identity and provide documentation confirming you are authorised to act on behalf of the estate or person.
To contact the Speak Up line, either email DIAspeakuphumankind.nz, or you can phone or text . Support for PSA Members PSA members can contact their PSA Delegate or PSA Organiser. Further information about who you are able to contact from the PSA can be found above on page or on . Support for Kaimahi Affected by Organisational Change Specific support will be available for kaimahi who are confirmed as being affected by organisational change decisions. This information can be found toward the back of this document.
To contact the speak up line either email DIAspeakuphumankind.nz or you can phone or text . Support for PSA member s PSA members can contact their PSA Delegate or PSA Organiser. Further information about who you are able to contact from the PSA can be found on . Support for kaimahi affected by organisational change Specific support will be available for kaimahi who are confirmed as being affected by organisational change decisions. This information can be found in Appendix A: Approach to Working Through Expressions of Interest and Alternative Opportunities for Affected Kaimahi toward the back of this document. Released under the Official Information Act Implementation High Level Plan Following the announcement of the final decision the new organisation structure will commence on July .
To contact the speak up line either email DIAspeakuphumankind.nz or you can phone or text . Support for PSA members PSA members can contact their PSA Delegate or PSA Organiser. The PSA Delegate supporting the change are: Support for kaimahi affected by organisational change Specific support will be available for kaimahi who are confirmed as being affected by organisational change decisions. This information can be found in Appendix A: Approach to Working Through Expressions of Interest and Alternative Opportunities for Affected Kaimahi toward the back of this document. ()(a) Section Six: Change protocol Introduction This protocol sets out the approach to managing the implementation of the structural changes arising from the Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy Organisational Change. This Protocol is consistent with all individual employment agreements and the Collective Agreement (including the Section . Management of Change provisions) between the Public Service Association and the Department of Internal Affairs, which are available to view on . Principles The process is designed to: ensure a fair and transparent process; maximise the placement of employees into available positions; ensure minimum disruption to business as usual; observe the provisions contained in the relevant employment agreements and organisational policy; and minimise uncertainty for employees. Who does this protocol apply to The protocol applies to all permanent employees of the department including: permanent fulltime and parttime employees employees currently on all forms of leave including leave without pay and parental leave. For employees currently seconded to other positions the process will apply to their permanent substantive position. Fixed term (temporary) or casual employees are not covered by this protocol even though their position may be affected by the restructure. In this case the relevant provision of their employment agreement will apply. Overview Employees are affected if their current position is being disestablished or changed significantly. If there is no significant change to their position, and there are the same number, or fewer, employees than positions in the new structure, employees will be reconfirmed. Employees who are not reconfirmed will be considered for reassignment. This involves considering whether affected employees skills can be matched to alternative positions that require similar skills in the new structure. Affected employees who are not reassigned will be consulted individually about other options. If no other options are identified, notice will be given, and redundancy provisions apply. Affected employees Employees who have been identified as being affected by organisational change will be consulted over the implementation process, and the employees will have a preferential right of appointment to vacancies within the Branch. Before final decisions are announced, all potentially affected employees will be notified individually. Employees will be informed if they: have been reconfirmed in a position and are no longer affected, or are affected and will be considered for reassignment. Reconfirmation process Prior to announcement of the final decisions, an assessment will be made to determine if employees meet the criteria for reconfirmation. This assessment will be made by the General Manager or Director (Tier leader) for the group, with support from Human Resources and approved by the Deputy Chief Executive, Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy. Reconfirmation is where an employees existing job is compared to jobs in the new structure to determine whether they are the same or nearly the same. The criteria for reconfirmation are: the new job description is the same or nearly the same as the job the affected employee currently does the salary band is the same the terms and conditions, including career prospects are no less favourable the location is the same or in the same vicinity.
To create full transparency of our decisions, the Department periodically posts the contracts it awards on GETS, where the Whole Life value is K NZD where a competitive process was not followed, and an existing supplier relationship isnt in place.
To , biometric technology currently used across a range of government services has proven to be secure safe and compliant with all data protection requirements.
To enable secondorder contacts to be traced with CovidCard , the cards would need to be retrieved from the close contacts of the index case, following which the contact details of secondorder contacts would be available to contact tracers.
To enable the proactive identification of customers who:
To ensure our people can perform their roles as effectively as possible, we are committed to providing an environment where staff are well, healthy and safe. This year we:
To find the right place or person to send your request to, you could google search the topic of your request or search
To further promote healthy lifestyles, team work and the one organisation approach, funding can be provided for sports teams that represent the Department.
To get your documents and translations back, you can either give us your own selfaddressed courier bag to use or if we use one of ours well add to the total fee.
To help make New Zealand better for New Zealanders.
To help us identify the information you are looking for, try to be as specific as you can about the documents, informationtypes or time period you need. If we are not sure what information you are looking for, we may need to contact you to ask before we can begin working on it, so please remember to include your name and a contact address (email or postal).
To identify accurately the details of a deceased person (veteran, spouse or dependent) so that:
To make a formal complaint, see our
To manaaki is to show kindness, respect and hospitality towards others. This principle is about maintaining and nurturing relationships and ensuring people are looked after.
To materially contribute to manual contact tracing, most contact tracing tools need extremely high levels of adoption. The reasons for this relate to the mathematics of networks. If you double the number of users of an app the number of contacts you will trace with increase by a factor of four. Conversely, any contact tracing app that achieves just half its projected user numbers will detect only one quarter of the contacts.
To navigate using your keyboard: TAB to jump past the slider, ARROW KEYS to move left and right, ENTER to follow a link.
To our knowledge, only one study (Hinch ) has modelled the impact of isolating secondorder household contacts. They found that even under the most pessimistic assumptions of epidemic growth, recursive contact tracing could prevent a lockdown. CovidCard would obviously enable recursive contact tracing to reach beyond the household.
To pay you, we first need to confirm and verify your information, which may take us some time.
To report violent extremist content please use the online form:
To request information about the activity of the Department of Internal Affairs:
To request information the government holds about you personally or about another person, make your request via the AboutMe tool on the
To support those acting on behalf of parents to support them in their grief.
To the extent that we can, we show the trend in movement. We use the following legend to indicate whether the outcome indicator trend is increasing, being maintained or decreasing.
To understand whether New Zealanders are satisfied with our services, each year the Department carries out a
To understand whether New Zealanders are satisfied with these services, the
Todd Stephenson, MPOfficials Committee for LEG
Tokelau, or the Cook Islands; or
Tokoroa man with extensive criminal record sentenced to over months imprisonment for possessing child sexual exploitation material
Tokoroirangi Morgan (Additional representative)
Tolling Background in New Zealand
Topics referred by the Government. Inquiries generally take months to complete and include public engagement and consultation steps as part of developing a final report
Total Operating .
Total adjusted assets , , , , ,
Total adjusted capital
Total liabilities , , , , ,
Total number of donors recorded
Total tax suppor ted debt ( of operating revenues) . . . . .
Total tax supporte d debt . . . . .
Total tax supported d ebt ( of op erating revenues) . . . . .
Total tax supported debt ( of operating revenu es) . . . . .
Total tax supported debt . . . . .
Total tax supported debt . . . . .
Town Planning to Ministry of Works
Tracking progress Carbon Neutral Government Programme
Trafficking of children terminology factsheet
Training and Resources: Prepare any new training modules (for example, unconscious bias training, cultural competence programmes) or tools needed for implementation.
Training and retention in the water services sector paper from the water workers
Training NZSIS staff must complete mandatory training regarding Information Management and Human Rights NZSIS employees must complete the Information Management training module as soon as possible following induction. NZSIS employees who regularly interact with overseas parties with must complete Human Rights risk management training following induction and must refresh their training on an annual basis; these training modules outline the human rights risk management policy which applies to the activities of NZSIS, and details how this policy is applied when data is shared with international agencies.
Training all NZSIS staff must complete information management training, including training on their responsibilities in searching for and accessing information appropriately. This training also makes NZSIS employees aware of their information management obligations under the Intelligence and Security Act , the Public Records Act , the Privacy Act , the Official Information Act and the Ministerial Policy Statement (MPS) on information management
Transactions and Proceedings of the Royal Society of New Zealand
Transfer of Netsafe contracting and funding arrangements with the department of Internal Affair
Transitional regulatory tools for residential pricing, and changes to nonresidential pricing
Translated million words and , official documents.
Translation Service Te Putahi Whakawhiti Reo
Transparency and Accountability work programme stocktake
Transparency and accountability are retained through Departmental reporting such as the Annual Report and through select committee arrangements.
Transparent and open communication.
Travel Document A document that is a New Zealand Passport, a New Zealand Certificate of
Travel Documents New Zealand Passport information Passports
Travelling Allowances Act .
Treating access to digital technology as a human right and meeting the digital inclusion goals of Aotearoa
Treaty Settlement Bill process update on legislation programme
Treaty settlements and engagement with iwiMori I have instructed officials at the Department of Internal Affairs to engage with iwi to discuss the proposed amendments to the: o Waikato Tainui Raupatu Claims (Waikato River) Settlement Act ; o Te Arawa River Iwi Waikato River Act ; and o Te Awa Tupua (Whanganui Claims Settlement) Act . The engagement follows advice the Department received from Te Arawhiti and Te Puni Kkiri during the department consultation. It is necessary to engage with iwi as the amendments will change Treaty Settlement Acts. Transitional arrangements for local authorities The Repeal B ill contain s provisions to amend the Local Government Act s, specifically the Local Government Act to reinstate local authority ownership and responsibility for the delivery of water services, including the maintenance and upgrade of water assets. The transitional provisions will allow local authorities to include water services in their long term plans and proposed charge s for water services to be collected through rates . This planning provision is currently prohibited beyond July for most local authorities and prohibited for councils in Northland and Auckland Council beyond July . By including transitional provisions, including a provision for a local authority to seek an Order in Council to defer setting their long term plans until , t he Repeal Bill provide s local authorities with much needed legislative certainty for their long term plans, by providing an extension to the legislated adoption of June . The Repeal Bill also includes a clause to enable local authorities to delay the statutory review of bylaws that relate to water services. It has been necessary to include this transition clause as local authorities with water services bylaws excluded them from work programmes following the changes introduced by the water services legislation. I am informed that with the imminent return of water services to local authorities, the current obligations set out in the Local Government Act , without transitional arrangements will place undue pressure on local authorities. The Repeal Bill will require all water services bylaws to be reviewed by June . I gave offic ials at t he Department of Internal Affairs permission to undertak e limited engage ment with the sector experts to ensure the long term plan provisions will help local authorities meet their statutory duties . As a result of feedback from Taituar , drafting instructions have been issued to enable local authorities to continue with to implement policies where development contributions are linked to long term plans.
Trend is being maintained. Movements from one year to the next are statistically insignificant.
Trend is decreasing (negative).
Trend is increasing (positive).
Trust Framework Authority
Trust Framework Authority Assessment
Trust Framework Authority accreditation mark
Trust Framework Authority additional service application
Trust Framework Authority annual report template
Trust Framework Authority application form
Trust Framework Authority application guidance for independent evaluators
Trust Framework Authority application guidance for providers
Trust Framework Authority independent security evaluation template
Trust Framework Authority monitors compliance and performance
Trust Framework Authority privacy application form
Trust Framework Authority privacy evaluation template and guidance
Trust Framework Authority scope for independent security evaluation template
Trust Framework Authority six monthly report template
Trust Framework Authority two yearly report template
Trust Framework for Digital Identity
Trust Framework legislation
Trust Framework parameters Use of the Trust Framework is opt in; personal information will not be held in a centralised database Public consultation during Parliaments consideration of the Digital Identify Services Trust Framework Bill in late highlighted some concern that the Trust Framework may be seeking to establish a mandatory and centralised identity regime. Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government The proposed system will be decentralised with no new powers for the Government to collect or share peoples information without their consent. One of the key obj ectives of the Trust Framework is to support and enable users to choose what information about themselves is being shared with third parties. Also, it will not be compulsory for people to use Trust Framework accredited digital identity services, or even t o use any digital identity services at all. To ensure access, people will still be able to apply for government services in person using paper based systems, providing physical credentials to show who they are. Operation of the Trust Framework will involve user controlled data sharing The current lack of regulation in the provision of New Zealands digital identity services means individual services are often provided directly to an individual with varying levels of security depending on the strength of the service providers systems and processes. Access to, and sharing of, information is primarily controlled by the service, rather than the user. However, under the Trust Framework individuals will be able to access, claim, and share their own information th rough accredited digital identity services (identified by accreditation marks). This will occur as part of a standardised process to ensure personal identity data is handled securely and according to the users requests, as outlined in Figure on page . Government services The Trust Framework will apply to Crown entities and government departments as well as iwi, private sector , and other non government organisations that seek accreditation The Act and its associated rules and regulations will apply to C rown entities and government departments that choose to opt in and deliver services under the Trust Framework , alongside iwi, private sector , and other non government organisations . As Figure below shows , in addition to being relying parties, some Crown entities and government departments may also seek accreditation to provide accredited services. For some, this may be limited to being an accredited information provider. For others, it could include choosing to provid e other accredited services as infrastructure providers. Crown entities and government departments that wish to provide accredited services will need to meet the requirements specified in the Act, associated rules and regulations. For example, the identity verification service RealM e will continue to be provided by the Department of Internal Affairs . To be offered as an accredited service, however, the Department will need to meet the accreditation requirements. International Alignment In , the Government committed to a programm e led by the Department to develop options for a new approach to digital identity. That programme investigated how the Government could set up the right rules and environment to take advantage of new technologies, offering a modern approach to meet the evo lving needs and expectations of New Zealanders in the digital identity landscape. Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government Throughout and , the Department undertook extensive research and engaged with key stakeholders, including equivalent agencies internationally. New Zealand is not the only country in the process of implementing legislation to modernise its digital identity system. The Trust Framework will align with similar trust frameworks being developed in Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom, and will be a key foundation in the Governments commitment to achieving mutual recognition of digital identity services with Australia under the Single Economic Market agenda. Enabling Regulations The regulations will complement the technical and operational service related requirements established in the Trust Framework rules that apply to TF providers and their delivery of accredited services. It is our intention that the regulations will provide a flexible way for Trust Framework processes to evolve over time as the digital identity sy stem matures and technology develops . The development of the rules and regulations will be informed by eight principles to ensure they are people centred; privacy enabling; security enhancing; enabling of Te Ao Mori approaches to identity; sustainable; interoperable; and open and transparent. Further Information Appendix A provides a glossary of key terms used in this paper. Appendix B contains links to further information on the Trust Framework. For further information see https:www.mfat.govt.nzencountries andregionsaustralia and pacificaustralianew zealand high commission toaustraliasingle econo micmarket For further information see Trust Framework principles NZ Digital government Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government
Trust framework for digital identity
Trust in any solution will be critical to adoption and must be at the centre of how these systems are designed. Data governance is an important aspect and Maori have specifically asked for both early engagement and involvement in considerations around data governance. More generally, New
Trusted citizenship and identity documents contribute to a sense of belonging
Trusted citizenship and identity documents contribute to sense of belonging Digital identity The Department is working with the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, and Statistics NZ to develop a strategy to enable Aotearoa New Zealand to flourish and prosper in the digital world. This strategy is built around three themes: mahi ake (growth), mahi tahi (inclusion), and mahi tika (trust). Central to this is the work we are doing to progress the development of an approach to digital identity whereby people can have more control of their data, which is accessed with their consent. A regulatory regime that will accredit digital identity services against standardsbased rules for security, privacy, identification management and interoperability will improve individual, private sector and government trust and confidence in the digital identity system. We will also support a new approach to guide government investments in digital identity technologies. Modernising the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Act Birth certificates are ofen the most accessible form of identity document for many New Zealanders. The Department is working on legislative and regulatory changes to introduce a selfidentification process for amending the sex shown on birth certificates. The Bill is currently making its way through the parliamentary process. The intent of the proposed changes is to significantly help transgender and intersex New Zealanders who need an identity document that reflects their gender in order to easily access information and services they need. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
Trustee Banks Restructuring Act Repeal Act
Trustee Companies Act .
Trustee Corporation The Public Trust and a trustee company within the meaning of the
Tuia kia rite, Tuia kia mana
Tumu Whakarae mote wahine
Twentynine recommendations fall under the remit of five government agencies: Internal Affairs, Justice (Courts), Health, Education, and Business, Innovation and Employment (Immigration).
Two Draft Cabinet Papers for ministerial consultation: Statutory decision on the proposed partnership agreement and the release of Racing Integrity Boards reports
Two National Library staff received the
Two New Zealand investigators receive commendation from UKs National Crime Agency
Two additional regional deals finalised
Two additional sheets provide help for navigating and reading the data:
Two advisory bodies established under the National Library Act , advise the National Librarian and the Minister with Responsibility for the National Library:
Two jailed for child abuse collections
Two men sentenced for trading child sex abuse images; already four New Zealanders sentenced this year
Two of our Senior Investigators received the
Two of our campaigns won the following awards in :
Two options for progressing RCOI Recommendation (amending the definition of objectionable)
Two year jail, , fine for New Zealander at centre of international internet child pornography network
Two years jail for child sex abuse pictures
Two years jail for child sex abuse images
Types of polls Binding or nonbinding polls can be held
Thuhu: Preserving the Nations Memory Programme main drawdown from tagged contingency established in Budget
Ttai Aronga Data Portal
Ttai Aronga Ministerial Consultation
T mtou kkiri i te panonitanga hei whakatukuki i mtou whinga How we will drive change to deliver our goals Oranga hap, iwi, and Mori is improved through an enduring, equitable and positive MoriCrown partnership. Mori, iwi and hapu aspirations, interests and rights are understood and respected Supporting iwi, hap and communities to lead their own development and manage their taonga as kaitiaki We strive to provide whnau, hap and iwi with easy access to collections, taonga and mtauranga held by National Library and Archives New Zealand. We also intend to understand and respond to their aspirations for caring for their own mtauranga. This may include enabling taonga to stay in communities to allow iwi and Mori to carry out their roles as kaitiaki. Whnau, hap and iwi have a desire to develop their own capability to ensure the future conservation and preservation of their taonga and mtauranga, in a way that is led and driven by them. We are working to establish internship opportunities that go beyond research to ofer skills growth and development experiences. We are also working to reduce barriers to access so that whnau, hap and iwi can actively work with their taonga and mtauranga. This includes developing a Moriled academic ofering on conservation and preservation of taonga. Iwi and hap can access whakapapa information The Department will work with iwi to understand their needs and expectations for collecting, storing and sharing iwi afiliation information, and are actively considering options that would provide the ability for Mori to selfassert whakapapa when registering a birth. If the Department were able to collect whakapapa data as part of birth registration, people could formally assert their iwi and hap afiliations, and iwi and Mori authorities could have access to that selfassertion data for their own purposes. This will support the Department in contributing to an improved MoriCrown relationship by contributing to the recognition of data sovereignty and considering better ways to support iwi afiliation. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Engagement with Mori on digital and technology Mori participation in the digital and technology sector is critically low. We will establish strong and enduring relationships with Mori, including the Data Iwi Leaders Group and settled iwi under the recentlysigned Mana rite Agreement. We will also lead and coordinate a community of practice for Mori leaders in the digital and technology sector.
T Ttou Mhiohio me Matihiko Improving our systems to enable seamless, simple and fit for purpose services The Department continues to invest in delivering digitally enabled services that meet the expectations and needs of New Zealanders, at the same time as maintaining and modernising our existing digital assets. We are addressing these challenges through cloud computing and as a service solutions that improve our agility, consolidating the overall number of applications we have and applying iterative delivery and customercentred design approaches. The next four years will focus on shifing to native cloud digital platforms to provide the digital foundations for our future services. Key investments in service delivery areas will be leveraging customer relationship management, data and analytics, and system integration capability. These will be supported by continuing investment in cloudbased collaboration and corporate systems to enable internal productivity and flexibility. We will also continue the momentum of the Te Hpai O programme, which was initiated in . Te Hpai O will secure better tools to provide joined up, transparent, fitforpurpose services and enable our people to deliver great outcomes for Aotearoa. This includes continuing the implementation of our new finance system, Rehutai, which will extend the strategic finance functionality to support human resource and recruitment management, and also replace the Departments payroll system. Te Ara Vaka strategy implementation The successful implementation of the Te Ara Vaka strategy across the Department will ensure the inclusion of Pasifika perspectives by design and the creation of safe spaces to talanoa about Aotearoas Pasifika history. It will strengthen our workforce, with greater Pasifika representation in senior leadership roles (tiers ), with equal pay across the sector, and the recognition of cultural capability as a specialised skillset. The continued investment in the Te Ara Vaka strategy will make it easier for our Pasifika customers to use our services and support the Department to build stronger communities enabling them to be resilient, thriving and selfsuficient. Investment and asset performance Our assets support our ability to delivery successfully against our strategic intentions. The LongTerm Investment Plan has set out our commitment and direction for investment and asset management. It defines the principles that underpin our investment and asset management practices. This has informed the fouryear capital plan, which is a rolling plan of our capital intentions that is twice a year. The Department plans to review and renew the LongTerm Investment Plan within the next months. The fouryear capital plan is focused on keeping existing systems and infrastructure working well. The Department has little capacity for further transformative investment at the present time and will have to prioritise carefully to make best use of existing resources. Opportunities, and the risks that come with them, can ofen require tradeofs, while continuing to maintain core services to New Zealanders. To maximse our coverage and impact we need the right information, technology and systems to enable our people to work in an integrated and flexible way. Technology plays an important role in connecting our people, enabling us to operate as one connected organisation across our work locations. We also strive to have better outcomes for New Zealanders who use our services by making it easier for people to access and use them. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Ng hoa rangap Partners We have allofgovernment roles which means we work with a vast number of other agencies, both in central and local government. People can easily access the services and information they need We are responsible for reliable, authentic identity information and keeping this information accurate, secure and available in a lawful manner. We work with a variety of other agencies that have appropriate and controlled access to identity information to support the delivery of their services and functions. This includes sharing information in a controlled manner with other government agencies. Working with agencies to improve access to services and information across government through common operating approaches is also a feature of our work. The National Library of New Zealand partners with public libraries across New Zealand for shared services and bibliographic information for the benefit of communities. Digital New Zealand (as a National Library of New Zealand service) has partnerships with over organisations to make our unique documentary heritage more accessible. With the closure of the Wellington Public Library, the National Library building in Wellington is being used to temporarily provide some public library services that would otherwise not be available. The He Matapihi Molesworth Library will provide a diverse collection of resources from the Wellington Public Library over the next few years. The National Library, Archives New Zealand and Ng Taonga Sound Vision are building strong partnerships with whnau, hap and iwi to support them to care for their mtauranga. These institutions are also working across the wider culture and heritage sector to improve resource sharing, collective thought leadership and innovation. These institutions are also working closely with Te Puna Foundation and other partners to support childrens reading initiatives. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
T Ttou Rp improving our workplace environments Te Tari Taiwhenua owns buildings across Aotearoa in Auckland, Taup, Whanganui, Wellington, Christchurch and Dunedin. These include Archival and Library facilities, a Harbourmaster site and two properties that are used as ministerial residences. We will continue delivery of a fouryear, million programme following longterm underinvestment in these owned buildings. Several buildings, assets and components have reached or passed their useful physical andor economic life. The programme responds to a recognised significant risk to service delivery and the health and safety of our people. We will also establish a workplace and occupancy strategy to accommodate the growth and changing needs of our rp across Te Tari Taiwhenua. This will be achieved by establishing a working group, consulting with the wider organisation, and providing and implementing occupancy strategy recommendations. T Ttou Rp environmental sustainability at DIA We are supporting the directive of the Carbon Neutral Government Programme to achieve carbon neutrality by with the establishment of an inhouse sustainability programme. With the help of an external specialist we will capture, analyse and report our emissions data, establishing a baseline reading. We will then set our emissions reduction targets for the next four years and develop a plan to achieve these targets. The programme will identify ways to reduce our consumption of energy and fuel across all areas of the organisation. We will communicate these findings and engage with groups across the Department to implement a strategy to reduce carbon emissions. The programme is being supported by energy eficient upgrades to our owned buildings as part of the Forward Works Programme. This includes initiatives such as replacing fluorescent bulbs with LED lighting, and upgrading HVAC and lif systems to lowerenergy usage models. To reduce CO emissions from our vehicle fleet we are developing a transition plan for the move to electric vehicles, including installing charging infrastructure at relevant sites, as well as looking at optimising our fleet size. T Ttou Mhiohio me Matihiko building our information management capability The Department is establishing a multiyear programme designed to uplif information management practices. This will be achieved through a system replacement and a focus on changing our culture and peoples behaviours. This threeyear project will enable staf to apply good information management practices irrespective of where they work or what business tools and systems they use. It will focus on delivering culture change, supported by targeted resources, training, education and awareness activities. Department of Internal Affairs NG TAKUNE RAUTAKI STRATEGIC INTENTIONS
The other two cardholders contributing to poor recall in the cafe trial were the chef and frontofhouse server (IDs , , , ). Their interactions with other cardholders during the trial were often short and barely met intensity and time thresholds. Although they were seen by their groundtruth contacts cards, the oncard algorithm filtered their interactions such that they did not always meet the contact thresholds during evaluation.
U N C L A S S I F I E D . In May , Cabinet agreed to simplify the process to amend the sex informaton on a birt h record through the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relatonships Registraton Bill CABMin refers. The Births, Deaths Marriages and Relatonships RegistratonAct will bring these changes into force by June . It is likely that more transgender people will update their birth registraton informaton, therefore going forward, there are likely to be fewer instances of transgender peoples death records not aligning with their gender. Te Tirit o Waitangi implicatons . Under Te Tirit o Waitangi the Crown is obligated to consider the Aspiratons, Rights and Int erests of Mori in its policy and legislaton. This is also consistent with the Public Sector Act . Regarding the Death AISA these have been identfed asrelatng to taonga (data as taonga), whakapapa (data assistng validaton of whakapapa) and equity (access to data). . Registered informaton about deaths is a taonga. The AISA makes proactve provisionsto pr o tect privacy and security relatng to this taonga. . Registered informaton about deaths can be used to help validate whakapapa. TheAISA makes specifc provision for this permited use of shared informaton. . The AISA provides more equitable access for Iwi Mori and Mori organisatons thatchoo se to partcipate in the informaton sharing. The informaton sharing is expected to reduce costs of accessing informaton to update iwi databases that enable access toservices and enttlements. . A small number of Iwi have specifed an interest in the records held by the RegistrarGene r al in post setlement Leters of Commitment. This specifc interest has been honoured through in person engagement with those Iwi to ensure key concerns arerefected in the AISA and Order in Council. Regulatons Review Commitee . There are no apparent grounds for the Regulatons Review Commitee to draw the regul atons to the atenton of the House of Representatves under Standing Order . Certfcaton by Parliamentary Counsel . The Order in Council has been certfed as in order for submission to Cabinet. Impact analysis . DIA submited a Regulatory Impact Assessment to Cabinet at the tme that approvalwas so ught for the policy relatng to the Death Informaton Sharing Agreement CAB MIN refers. Consultaton The requirement to consult . Secton of the Privacy Act requires that an agency proposing to enter into an AISA must consult with, and invite submissions on the proposed agreement from: the Privacy Commissioner; Page of ikudgtnr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
U N C L A S S I F I E D Authorisaton . The Privacy Act provides for the establishment of AISAs. Subpart of Part enables personal informaton to be shared between or within agencies via AISAs where it facilitates the provision of public services. Secton of the Privacy Act also authorises exemptons from, or modifcatons to, any of the informaton privacy principles (except principles and , which relate respectvely to the right to have access to, and correct, personal informaton). . Secton of the Privacy Act allows for the creaton of classes of partes to anAISA , allowing the Death AISA to extend beyond the core public service. Any organisaton wishing to join a class of partes will need to apply to DIA. Applicatonprocesses will ensure the organisatons that join a class understand their obligatons and have the capacity to meet the security and privacy protecton requirements of the AISA. . Operatonal documentaton to support the implementaton of the AISA will beprepar ed for each party in consultaton with the Ofce of the Privacy Commissioner. . The proposed Order in Council would approve the Death AISA and ensure thatperso na l informaton collected by the partes can be lawfully shared to facilitate access to death informaton, for the purposes described in the AISA. It would authorisespecifed exemptons from informaton privacy principles (source of personal informaton), (use of personal informaton) and (disclosure of personal informaton). Timing and day rule . The Order in Council will comply with the day rule and will come into force on April . Compliance . The Order in Council complies with: the rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act and t he Human Rights Act ; the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act ; and the Legislaton Design Advisory Commitees Guidelines. Gender implicatons . There are gender implicatons associated with sharing all informaton on the Death Regist er. It is DIAs current operatonal policy that sex informaton on the death record is the same as that on the birth record. Currently, few transgender people amend thesex informaton on their birth record as the existng process is difcult. Therefore, a death record for a transgender person who has not amended their birth record may not align with their gender at death, and therefore may not align with the gender by which they are known to organisatons. Page of ikudgtnr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
U N C L A S S I F I E D CABMIN Cabinet Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Report of the Cabinet Legislation Committee: Period Ended March On March , Cabinet made the following decisions on the work of the Cabinet Legislation Committee for the period ended March : Out of scope LEGMIN Privacy (Information Sharing Agreement Facilitating Access to Information about Deaths) Order Portfolio: Internal Affairs CONFIRMED Out of scope Rachel Hayward Secretary of the Cabinet ikudgtnr U N C L A S S I F I E D Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
U N C L A S S I F I E D Ho n Jan Tinetti , Minister of Internal Affairs Proactive release of Cabinet material for the Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire Safety, Evacuation Procedures, and Evacuation Schemes) Amendment Regulations April These documents have b een proactively r eleased : June , Cabinet Paper: Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire Safety, Evacuation Procedures, and E vacuation Schemes) Amendment Regulations ; June , LEG MIN : Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire Safety, Evacuation Procedures, and Evacuation Schemes) Amendment Regulations ; and June , CAB MIN Minute: Report of the Cabinet Legislation Committee: Period Ended June . Fo r Cabinet material and any public service departmental advice use this copyright statement Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) U N C L A S S I F I E D INCONFIDENCE Page of Office of the Minister of Internal Affairs Chair , Cabinet Legislation Committee Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire Safety, Evacuation Procedures, and Evacuation Schemes) Amendment Regulations Proposal . This paper seeks authorisation to submit the Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire Safety, Evacuation Procedures, and Evacuation Schemes) Amendment Regulations (the Amendment Regulations ) (Appendix A ) to the Executive Council . Executive Summary . Stand ards New Zealand has the New Zealand Standard for Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems, NZS : (the sprinkler standard), which provides the rules for design ing, install ing, and maint aining automatic sprinkler systems. . The sprinkler standard does not include a requirement for hand operated fire fighting equipment to be installed, which is an important part of fire safety equipment, when automatic sprinklers are present in a building . . The proposed regulations will: . add the sprinkler standard, to the Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire Safety, Evacuation Procedures, and Evacuation Schemes) Regulations (Fire Safety Regulations) ; and . require hand operated fire fighting equipment that is compliant with the New Zealand Standard for Hand Operated Fire fighting Equipment, NZS :, to be installed in buildings where the automatic sprinkler system complies with the sprinkler standard. . The proposed changes ensure the minimum levels of fire safety currently required by the Fire Safety Regulations are maintained and apply to new or altered buildings . . The vast majority of buildings are unaffected by these changes. Building code requirements and existing evacuation schemes are also unaffected. Fire Safety Regulations need to be . The Fire Safety Regulations prescribe the minimum requirements for an automatic sprinkler system installed in a relevant building. The Fire Safety Regulations require an automatic sprinkler system to comply with one of the listed New Zealand Standards for Automatic Sprinkler Systems, when it is installed. An automatic sprinkler system is a fire suppression or fire control device that activate s when the air reaches a certain temperature. The definition of relevant building captures buildings that present comparatively greater risk to occupants in the event of fire, than buildings used for other purposes pzrrb :Document Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of The Fire Safety Regulations should include a reference to the sprinkler standard . On May , Standards New Zealand the sprinkler standard , which provides an integrated set of rules for the design, installation, and maintenance of automatic sprinkler systems, so these systems protect against the loss of life andminimise property damage from fire. The sprinkler standard is no t currently listed in the Fire Safety Regulations. . Adding a reference in the Fire Safety Regulations to the sprinkler standard will ensure that buildings with automatic sprinkler systems installed to the specifications inthe sprinkler standard are included in the Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire and Emergency) regulatory regime. The sprinkler standard does not require hand operated fire fighting equipment to be installed ; the Fire Safety Regulations shoul d require this . Hand operated fire fighting e quipment , such as fire extinguishers, fire hoses and fire blankets , supplement the components of sprinkler systems that are a fixed part of the building and fill the performance gaps where sprinklers may fall short. . The spr inkler standard removed requirements for hand operated fire fighting equipment to be installed . This means b uildings constructed or upgraded to the sprinkler standard may not have the same level of fire protection as buildings constructed to an ear lier version of this Standard. . Standards New Zealand acknowledge that hand operated firefighting equipment is an important feature in buildings but decided that it was out of place in the automatic sprinkler standard . Instead, the New Zealand Standard for Hand Operated Fire Fighting Equipment, NZS :, should be cited for this type of equipment. Consequently, the sprinkler standard does not require hand operated fire fighting equipment to be installed. . Where an automatic sprinkler system complies with the sprinkler standard, there should be a requirement for hand operated fire fighting equipment to be installed . This will maintain the current minimum fire safety requirements in all relevant buildings with automatic sprinkler systems (old and new ). Further information on when the fire safety regime requires building owners to install an automatic sprinkler system and hand operated fire fighting equipment is provided in Appendix B . Building Code requirements and existing evacuation schemes are not affected by these changes . These changes will not affect obligations and exemptions relating to automatic sprinkler systems and hand operated fire fighting equipment under the Building Code. Existing relevant buildings that already have an approved evacuation scheme will notbe affected by these change s. Fire Safety Regulations should include the sprinkler standard and require hand operated fire fighting equipment be installed . I recommend that regulation of the Fire Safety Regulations is amended to : . refer to the sprinkler standard. This will ensure that automatic sprinkler systems installed to this Standard are included in the Fire and Emergency regulatory regime. pzrrb Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . include a requirement that where the automatic sprinkler system complies with the sprinkler standard, hand operated fire fighting equipment must be installed . The changes will come into force on August . If Cabinet agrees, the Amendment Regulations ( Appendix A ) will be submitted to the Executive Council on June . . The amendments to the Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire Safety, Evacuation Procedures, and Evacuation Schemes) Regulations will be publicly notified in the Gazette on June . Timing and day rule . No waiver of the day rule is sought. The Amendment Regulations will come into force on August . Compliance . The regulations comply with each of the following: . the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi; . the rights and freedoms contained in the New Z ealand Bill of Rights Act or the Human Rights Act ; . the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act ; . relevant international standards and obligations; and . the Legislation Guidelines ( edition), which are maintained by the Legis lation Design and Advisory Committee. Regulations Review Committee . There are no grounds for the Regulations Review Committee to draw the regulations to the attention of the House of Representatives under Standing Order . Certification by Parliamentary Counsel . The draft regulations are certified by the Parliamentary Counsel Office as being in order for submission to Cabinet, in reliance on Crown Law advice . Financial Implications . There are no financial implications. Impact Analysis . The Regulatory Quality Team at the Treasury has determined that the regulatory proposals in this paper are exempt from the requirement to provide a Regulatory Impact Statement on the basis that they have no or minor impacts on businesses, individuals or not fo r profit entities. . The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team has been consulted and confirms that the CIPA requirements do not apply to this proposal as there is no direct emissions impact. pzrrb Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Publicity . Fire and Emergency will inform the build ing sector about the changes to the Regulations. Proactive release . I intend to proactively release this paper, subject to any redactions as appropriate under the Official Information Act , within business days of decisions being confirmed by Cabinet. Consultation . The following agencies have been consulted on these amendments : The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, the Department of Corrections, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Health, Kinga Ora, and the Treasury . These agencies are supportive of the proposed changes. The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet has been informed of th e proposal. . Fire and Emergency New Zealand was involved in the drafting of these amendments and is supportive of the proposals .
U N C L A S S I F I E D Hon Barbara Edmonds , Minister of Internal Affairs Proactive release of Cabinet Material about Privacy (Information Sharing Agreement Facilitating Access to Information about Deaths ) Order May These documents have been proactively released: March , CAB MIN , Report of the Cabinet Legislati on Committee: Period Ended March March , LEG MIN , Privacy (Information Sharing Agreement Facilitating Access to Information about Deaths ) Order October , Privacy (Information Sharing Agreement Facilitating Access to Information about Deaths) Order November , Death Information Sharing Agreement October , Privacy Commissioners submission on the proposed information sharing agreement facilitating access to information about deaths Information has been withheld from item , CAB MIN , where it relates to matters unrelated to this Cabinet paper. For Cabinet material and any public service departmental advice use this copyright statement Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) U N C L A S S I F I E D Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
U N C L A S S I F I E D Hon Barbara Edmonds, Minister of Internal Affairs Proactive r elease o f Cabinet mate rial abo ut the Establishment of the Cyclone Gabrielle Appeal Trust May These documents have been proactively released: February , CAB MIN Minute: Establishing the Cyclone Gabrielle Appeal Trust, Cabinet Office and February , Cabinet Paper: Establishing the Cyclone Gabrielle Appeal Trust , Office of the Minister of Internal Affai rs. For Cabinet material and any public service departmental advice use this copyright statement Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) U N C L A S S I F I E D Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs UNCLASSIFIED CABMIN Cabinet Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Establishing the Cyclone Gabrielle Appeal Trust Portfolio Internal Affairs On February , Cabinet: noted that following the Christchurch Earthquake, the Government established a charitable trust to complement existing donation appeals and that a similar trust is proposed for Cyclone Gabrielle; noted the e stablishment of the Cyclone Gabrielle Appeal Trust (the Trust) and Cyclone Gabrielle Appeal Fund (the Fund) in line with planned Government announcements; a reed that the trustees will include the chief executive of the Department of Internal Affairs plus two others, with one to be a Mori representative; authorised the M inister of Finance, Minister of Internal Affairs, and Minister for the Community and V oluntary Sector to have power to appoint the trustees, and make decisions about the administration of the Trust and the establishment of the Advisory Board; a reed that the Trust will receive donations to be distributed through the Fund, administered by the Department of Internal Affairs; noted that a trust account is being established under section of the Public Finance Act for public donations to the Fund; noted that the Minister of Internal Affairs has directed the New Zealand Lotteries Commission to carry out a special purpose draw on March ; noted that there will be further engagement with the full Lottery Grants Board on whether the Board would consent to the proceeds of the special purpose draw being donated to the Fund for distribution by the Trust; noted that the Trust will be supported by a larger advisory board with local knowledge and exper tise; a reed to provide funding to the Department of Internal Affairs to establish a secretariat and associated administration costs to support the administration of the Fund; authorised the Mi nister of Finance and the Minister of Internal Affairs to assess the administration costs required for the decision in paragraph , and take decisions in relation to the required funding; jxzyp UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs UNCLASSIFIED CABMIN noted that further funding to support the administration of the Trust and Fund may be sought depending on the communications campaign that is yet to be agreed to, scale of donations received and the longevity of the fund, both of which are currently unknown; noted tha t further funding may be sought to cover additional costs including specialist advice, advertising, and website hosting. Rachel Hayward Sec retary of the Cabinet jxzyp UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs UNCLASSIFIED Unclassified Office of the M inister of Internal Affairs Cabinet Establishing the Cyclone Gabrielle Appeal Trust Proposal This paper provides Cabinet with information about the Cyclone Gabrielle Appeal Trust (t he Trust), seeks funding for administration of the Trust, and seeks authorisation for relevant Ministers to have power to act on future decisions about the Trust. Relation to government priorities This relates to the Governments priorities from the Prime Ministers Statement of providing strong and responsible leadership as we rebuild from Cyclone Gabrielle. The Government intends to announce the establishment of a charitable trust. Cyclone Gabrielle, along with other recent extreme weather events at the start of , has ca used significant damage to many communities. Millions of dollars have already been donated to a wide range of organisations working on the immediate response to Cyclone Gabrielle recovery. The Government can complement existing donation appeals by establishing a charit able trust called the Cyclone Gabrielle Appeal Trust. The Trust will manage the Cyclone Gabrielle Appeal Fund and make decisions on how donations to the Fund will be distributed. One of the benefits of the Trust is that it will be able to proactively seek out and manage overseas, philanthropic, and corporate donations, which can often come with strings attached (for example the donation must go to a certain project or outcome) that more locallyoriented fundraisers may struggle to accommodate. There is also an opportunity to orient the Fund towards mediumterm recovery needs, to complement the sterling work of the Red Cross, mayoral relief funds and large corporate partners such as Stuff and NZME along with many more local fundraisers in raising money to deal with the immediate response phase. Establishing the Trust will help with ensuring that donation money goes to the areas hardest hit by Cyclone Gabrielle. Money collected by mayoral relief funds and regional community trusts will likely only be able to used in that region, and more populated, wealthier regions will be in a better position to raise money. If the Government appoints trustees and advisors tasked with taking a broader and needsbased view of recovery, it can ensure that donation money is more equitably matched to need. UNCLASSIFIED ihpodtn Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
U N C L A S S I F I E D Hon Ginny Anderson, Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications Proactive release of Cabinet material about Government Payroll Programme: Final Report April These documents have been proactively released: September , Cabinet Paper: Government Payroll System: Final Report, Office of the Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications. September , CABMIN Cabinet Government Administration and Expenditure Review Committee Minute of Decision: Government Payroll System: Final Report. October , GOV SUB Cabinet Minute of Decision, Report of the Cabinet Government Administration and Expenditure Review Committee Minute: Period Ended September . Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Where information has been withheld for other reasons consistent with advice, it has been annotated with an asterisk. This information may in some cases be accessible under the Official Information Act . Key to Redaction Codes : ()(j) Release would negatively impact the ability of Ministers or Agencies to carry out commercial negotiations without prejudice or disadvantage. For Cabi net material and any public service departmental advice use this copyright statement Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) U N C L A S S I F I E D Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Office of the Minister for Digital Economy and Communications
U N C L A S S I F I E D Hon J enny S alesa , Associat e Minister f or Health and Hon Tracey Martin, Minister of Internal Affairs Proactive release of joint Cabinet Paper on the Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm to April These documents have been proactively released in full: April , SWC MIN, Cabinet Minute: Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm to April , Cabinet Paper : Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm to April , Appendix A: Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm to March , Regulatory Impact Statement: Stage Cost Recovery Impact Statement. For Cabinet material and any public service departmental advice use this copyright statement Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) U N C L A S S I F I E D
U N C L A S S I F I E D Hon Jan Tinet ti, Minister Responsible of Internal Affairs Proactive release of Cabinet paper and associated briefings Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Bill June Th ese documents have been proactively released : Title Release Status May Minor and Technical policy decisions for the self identification SOP Partial release May Cabinet paper introducing a self identification process to recognise gender on birth certificates Partial release May Cabinet Minute CABMIN Full release May SWC Minute SWC MIN Full release May Cover briefing: Final Cabinet paper introducing a self identification process to recognise gender on birth certificates Partial release May Appendix C: Suggested talking points Not releasing May Appendix D: Draft press release Not releasing May Regulatory Impact Statement introducing a self identification process to recognise gender on birth certificates Partial release May Appendix B: Quick reference guides Full release April Policy approvals (second tranche) and draft Cabinet paper: Introducing a self identification process to recognise gender on birth certificates Partial release April Appendix A: draft Cabinet paper Not releasing April Appendix B: Key themes from agency feedback Full release March Policy approvals (first tranche): Introducing a self identification process to recognise gender on birth certificates Partial release February Next steps for progressing the Births, Deaths, Marriages, an d Relationships Registration Bill Partial release February Appendix A: Options for re referring the BDMRR Bill to Select Committee Full release S ome parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Where information has been withheld for other reasons consistent with advice, it has been annotated. This information may in some cases be accessible under the Official Information Act . Key to redaction codes : a. ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons; b. ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality o f advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials; and c. ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation. Fo r Cabinet material and any public service departmental advice use this copyright statement Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) U N C L A S S I F I E D February Appendix B: Overview of Crown Laws advice Full release December Potential updates to the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships R egistration Bill and revisions to the Government response to the Working Group for Reducing Barriers to Changing Registered Sex Partial release November Issues and Opportunities for Identity Policy Partial release November Advice on business from the previous Parliament Partial release Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Purpose . This briefing seeks your agreement to minor and technical policy changes to be included in the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Bill (the Bill) . These changes would support the introduction of a self identification process. . The briefing also seeks authorisation for officials to provide confirmation of changes to the Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) for them to include in their drafting of the self identification supplementary order paper (SOP) . Executive Summary . Cabinet has ap proved your decision to introduce a self identification process to enable people to have their gender recognised on birth certificates CABMIN . Cabinet also approved associated policy decisions to update the self identification provisions briefi ngs IA and IA refer . We have provided drafting instructions to PCO for the self identification SOP. . Cabinet authorised you to make further minor and technical policy changes in line with their policy approvals. This briefing recommends the following changes: . a month delay on the commencement of the self identification provisions to provide time for technical updates and the development of regulations, with an option to change the commencement via an Order inCouncil; . retain the r ecords of all the amendments made to registered sex, but restrict access to protect sensitive information ; . redraft clause I to ensure it clearly conveys that birth certificates are not conclusive evidence of a persons sex; and . redraft clause ()(a) to clarify that where a person amends their registered sex and name, their previous name is not listed on their birth certificate. . Subject to your agreement on the above proposals , we seek your authorisation to confirm these decisions with PCO to incorporate in the self identification SOP. Cabinet has agreed to introduce a self identification process . You are introducing a self identification process to enable transgender and intersex people to amend the sex recorded on their birth certificate. Select Commit tee recommended changes to the Bill in that would enable a self identification process. However, Cabinet did not approve these changes because of the limited time available during Select Committee . . Provisions that would enable a self identification process were added to the Bill at the recommendation of Select Committee in , but were not approved by Cabinet at the time . The term transgender is used in this paper to refer to all people whose gender differs from their assigned sex at birth this includes people who identify outside of the malefemale binary who may use a range of terms to describe their gender including non binary. Intersex is an umbrella term for people born with a variation of sex characteristics (such as sexual anatomy, reproductive organs, hormonal andor chromosome patterns). Intersex people are born with sex characteristics that are more dive rse than narrow medical definitions of male or female bodies. Like anyone else, an intersex person may grow to identify with a different gender. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . You have agreed to policy changes to update the provisions recommended by Select Committee IA and IA refer . These included decisions on: . removing the intersex marker option from the Bill; . prescribing the number and terminology for a range of sex marker options in regulations; . enabling people to amend registe red sex multiple times; and . the process for amending registered sex for children and young people. . On May CABMIN , Cabinet approved your decision to introduce a selfidentification process and your policy decisions to update the provision s recommended by Select Committee. . The policy decisions will be used to revise the self identification provisions that were recommended by Select Committee in . The revised provisions will be included in a SOP that will be referred to Select Committee for consideration. Initial drafting instructions for the revised provisions have been provided to PCO. Further decisions are required for minor and technical aspects of the self identification provisions . Cabinet authorised you to make minor and technical policy decisions related to introducing a selfidentification process in line with the major policies it has already approved . . We recommend the following minor and technical policy changes to the self identification provisions : . introduce a month delay on the commencement of the self identification provisions; . retain the records of all amendments made to registered sex, but restrict access to records of previous amendments ; . clarify clause I to ensure birth certificates are not considered conclusive evidence of a persons sex; and . clarify that , where a person has amended their registered sex and changed their name , their previous name is not listed on their reissued birth certificate. Recommendation : Commenc ing the self identification provisions mon ths after enactment , but allow an Order inCouncil to change the . A Bill is enacted (becomes an Act) when it has passed through all the Parliamentary stages and has received Royal assent (given by the Governor General) . The term commencement refers to the provisions in the Act take effect . Commencement dates can be set for an entire Act, or for specific sections . . The Bill is currently drafted to commence the day after it receives Royal assent. This is often the default decision if there are no specific reasons for delaying commencement. . We recommend commencing the selfidentification provisions months after the Bill receives Royal assent , but also provide that the commencement can be change d by Order inCouncil. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Rationale for delaying co mmencement of the self identification provisions We are confident the technical updates could be implemented within months . Delayed commencement would provide the necessary time to update our IT systems. We need to update the IT system that records birt h registration details, and all the downstream systems we operate that receive, verify or share birth registration information. The proposed timeframe allows for careful scoping to capture all the necessary changes across our systems , and ensures the vendor that we engage with to maintain our systems can resource the work to make the changes. We estimate that these updates would take up to months to complete. but we are less certain about timeframes for implementing regulations, so w e recommend including the option of seeking an Order inCouncil . A delay will also enable us to develop necessary regulations for the self identification provisions. This includes taking time to consult on key issues, including: . which sex markers other than the binary will be available; . who would be authorised to provide a letter supporting applications for children and young people ; and . additional requirements where a person applies to amend their registered sex more than once. . Given the complexity and sensitivity of this work, there is a risk that developing the regulations may not be complete d within months of enacting the Bill. Including the option of changing the commencement by an Order inCouncil would allow more time if its needed . Transgender and intersex communities might be disappointed in the delay, but the extra time is needed and gives them more opportunity to contribute to the regulations . Some transgender and intersex advocates might be disappointed by the delay, especially given the delays in progressing the Bill. However, this delay is necessary to introduce a self identification process. We can provide messaging about the reasons for the delays , including your commitment to consult on the necessary regulations with these communities. Recommendation : Retain records of previous amendment s to registered sex . When a person amend s their registered sex, the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Act (the BDMRR Act) restricts access to search for that persons previously registered sex on their birth record. The Bill carries these restrictions forward (with some alterations) in clauses , and . . The restrictions are intended to protect peoples privacy, preventing them from b eing outed as transgender or intersex. The limited conditions where information can be shared includ e measures to protect against the misuse of birth certificates to create multiple identities . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . Clause F of the Bill provides a different policy for when people amend their registered sex back to what was recorded at birth. Instead of restricting access, this provision requires the Registrar General to delete the record of the initial amendment to the registered sex. In effect, the persons birth record wo uld look like it had not been amended since birth. . We disagree with th e approach in clause F . We recommend keeping the record s of all amendments to registered sex on the birth re cord , but restrict ing access in line with clauses , and . Rational e for retaining the records of previous amendment s . Deleting records of any amendment to registered sex could make it more difficult to detect when people are using birth certificates to create multiple identities. Someone could have a birth certificate derived from a record that has been deleted . Government agencies , including law enforcement agencies, would not be able to see whether people had used the birth records to create alternate identities . . We do not think this would create a privacy concern. Information about previous amendments to registered sex would be restricted. . In general, the registers should accurately reflect changes over time, with privacy risks addressed by managing access to the records. This is the approach to adoption records, an d records of people who are under witness protection both of which have very significant privacy interests . Recommendation : Clarifying that a birth certificate is not conclusive evidence of a persons sex . Section of the BDMRR Act provides that a per sons sex should be determined by reference to the general law of New Zealand. The Select Committee recommended retain ing this provision in clause I of the Bill. . We interpret this provision to mean that birth certificates should not be considered conc lusive evidence of a persons sex. We recommend re drafting clause I to clarify this meaning . We would remov e the reference to the general law of New Zealand , and instead indicat e that: . birth certificates should not be the determining factor in decisions about a persons sex ; and . consideration should be given to other legislation and the common law. . Should you agree , we will work with PCO to develop how this provision is worded. Rationale for redrafting clause I . Crown Law previously advised that it is unclear what determining sex by the general law of New Zealand entails . Crown Law also noted that the drafting of clause I makes it unclear whether the policy intent is to maintain the distinction between sex recorded on a birth certificate and sex for other purposes . (i.e. whether it is intended that information on birth certificates should be conclusive evidence of a persons sex ). Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . As discussed with you previously, we recommend maintaining the existing position that birth certificates should not provide conclusive evidence of a persons sex . This was set out in the Cabinet paper, Introducing a self identification process to recognise gender on birth certificates . The proposed redraft would clarify this position. . We are working with Corrections on a n amendment to th e relevant regulation s before the selfidentification process commences . Clarifying the provision could help mitigate some stakeholder concerns with a self identification process . Redrafting the provision will make the legislation more accessible and help people understand that birth certificates should not be the basis for determining a persons sex. The legislation would provide clarity for organisation s about not rely ing on birth certificates to determin e a persons access to women only places or services . This provides assurance that t here is little risk of information on birth certificates allow ing men to access women only places or services . . Some stakeholders may think we should go a step further and adopt Crown Laws advice that statutory guidance about how sex is de termined could be beneficial (for example, what factors should be considered to determine a persons sex). As previously advised, developing statutory guidance for how sex should be determined generally would be broader in scope than the BDMRR Act and the Internal Affairs portfolio. It would require a cross agency initiative as processes for determining sex are in place across numerous institutions. Recommendation : Clarifying that, where a person has amende d their registered sex and their name, their previous name will not appear on the birth certificate . Under regulations , where a person changes their name, the previous name would be printed on their birth certificate. Section ()(a) of the BDMRR Act and claus e () of the Bill provide an exception to this rule : where a person has amended their registered sex, their previous name is not included on the birth certificate. This helps to avoid outing a person as transgender or intersex . . However, t he way the rele vant provision is drafted in the Bill requires clarification. The Human Rights Commission advised that the provision is not entirely clear and risked misinterpretation they recommended drafting a more explicit provision . See paragraph of the Cabinet paper. See paragraph of IA Next steps for progressing the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Bill . E.g, if a person whose name was Gary amended their registered sex from male to female, and changed their name to Audrey, the fact they used to be called Gary would be omitted. If i t was not omitted, then there is a greater chance that people might think that the person is transgender. ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Recommendations . We recommend that you: a) agree to commence the self identification provisions months after the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Bill (the Bill) has received royal assent ;Yes No b) agree to enable the commencement of the self identification provisions to be changed by Order inCouncilYes No c) agree to retain the records of any previous amendment s to registered sex in the birth register, but to make access to those records restricte d in accordance with how the Bill currently treats original records ;Yes No d) agree to redraft clause I of the Bill to clarify that birth certificates should not be considered conclusive evidence of a persons sex;Yes No e) agree to redraft clause ()(a) of the Bill to clarify that, where a person has amended their registered sex and changed their name, only their new name will appear on the birth certificate ; andYes No f) authorise the Department to confirm policy decisions for drafting purposes to the Parliamentary Counsel Office to give effect to the recommendations you have agreed to above , for the supplementary order paper amending the selfidentification provisions.Yes No Sela Finau Policy Director Community, Digital, and Identity Hon Jan Tinetti Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Page of INCONFIDENCE Office of the Minister of Internal Affairs Chair Cabinet Soc ial Wellbeing Committ ee Introducing a selfidentification process t o recognise gender on birth certificates Proposal . I seek Cabinets agreement to introduce a self identification process to enable a persons gender to be recognised on their birth certificate . I intend to introduce th e selfidentification process through the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Bill. Executive summary . Since people have been able to amend their sex on their birth certificate. The process requires provid ing evidence of medical treatment to a Family Court judge who determines if an amendment to the birth register, and subsequently a birth certificate, can be made. . This process was considered progressive years ago but is now in need of improvement. It is not inclusive and fails to support peoples autonomy over how their gender is recognised . The Family Court process medicalises a deeply personal expression of self identity and is perceived as inaccessible for many people. . There is an opportunity to replace the Family Court process through the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Regis tration Bill (the Bill) . The Select Committee that consider ed the Bill proposed a new process where people would complete a statutory declaration to have their gender recognised on their birth certificate a self identification process. . Changing to a se lfidentification process will give transgender and intersex New Zealanders greater control over how their gender is officially recognised . It will enable transgender and intersex New Zealanders to use their birth certificate to access services (such as setting up a bank account or enrolling a child in school) with less risk of being outed or experiencing discrimination. It will help contribute to transgender and intersex peoples wellbeing and sense of belonging . . This paper seeks agreement to introduce a self identification process . It also proposes changes to the Bill to ensure selfidentification will reflect the needs of transgender and intersex communities as much as possible. This includes, for example, making self identification available to child ren and young people as well as adults. . These changes will be reflected in a supplementary order paper (SOP). I intend to refer this SOP to Select Committee to provide an opportunity for the public to engage on the selfidentification process . The ter m transgender is used in this paper to refer to all people whose gender differs from their assigned sex at birth this includes people who identify outside of the malefemale binary who may use a range of terms to describe their gender including non binary. Intersex is an umbrella term for people born with a variation of sex characteristics (such as sexual anatomy, reproductive organs, hormonal andor chromosome patterns). Intersex people are born with sex characteristics that are more diverse than narrow medical definitions of male or female bodies. Like anyone else, an intersex person may grow to identify with a different gender. Document Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . I am not pro posing any changes to how sex is registered at birth. Gender is not known at birth and the information collected will continue to be based on sex. My proposals relate to amending how gender is recognised on birth certificates only. I am not proposing chang es to how other agencies and organisations determine a persons sex or gender , if that is necessary . I intend to maintain the policy position that birth certificates do not provide conclusive evidence of a persons sex or gender . Background Sex and gender are different . Gender is distinct from sex . Gender refers to a persons social and personal identity as a male, female, or another gender . Sex refers to a persons physiological features that characterise people as male , female or intersex . A persons gender is not always the same as their sex . . Society is changing to recognise the difference between sex and gender and that a persons gender may not be the same as their sex. In line with this shift, there is an increasing expectation that the Government should enable people to declare their gender on their official docum entation . Amending registered sex is a way fo r people to have their gender officially recognised . A persons s ex is re gistered at birth. Since people have been able to amend their registered sex, which is printed on their birth certificate , under the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Act ( BDMRR Act ). . Under the current process, applicants need to provide evidence of medical treatment , which is then assessed by a Family Court judge who determines if the amendment can be made. While this process is about amending sex information, its existence recognises that a persons gender can be different to their sex. It is a mechanism for people to have th eir gender recognised. My proposal to introduce a self identification process for amending registered sex will make much needed improvements to this process. . I am aware that using a sex marker to represent gender conflates sex and gender . This is a compr omise I support to ensure there are no further delays to implementing a self identification process. Creating a separate gender marker on birth certificates has wider cost and timing implications for data collection and IT systems changes across government . In addition, the presentation of both sex and gender on birth certificates raises issues associated with outing a person as transgender or intersex. Improvements to the process to amend registered sex have previously been considered . The Bill was introduc ed in to re enact the BDMRR Act to modernise its drafting, and enable people to search online for birth, death and marriage records. The Select Committee considering the Bill recommended new provisions to replace the process for amending registered se x in . They proposed a process where people completed a statutory declaration to have their gender recognised on their birth certificate a self identification process. . The Bill was then deferred in February and is awaiting its second reading. In announcing their decision to defer the Bill, the previous Minister of Internal Affairs cited concern that the public had not been consulted on the self identification provision s. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Introducing a self identification process through the Bill . I intend to re sume progress on the Bill and to enact it this year if possible with a self identification process to recognise gender on birth certificates . Cabinet did not approve the introduction of a self identification process following Select Committee in . I wa nt to carry forward the Select Committees recommendation and am now seeking Cabinet agreement to the self identification provisions. . I would also like to make changes to the self identification provisions as they are drafted, to ensure they reflect the ne eds of the transgender and intersex communities. These changes will be reflected in a SOP. I intend to refer this SOP to Select Committee at the Bills second reading to provide an opportunity for the public to share their views on the self identification provisions. . I am not proposing any changes to how sex is registered at birth. Gender is not known at birth and the information collected will continue to be based on sex. . My proposals relate to amending how gender is recognised on birth certificates only . I am not proposing changes to how other agencies and organisations determine a persons sex or gender. Under the BDMRR Act, birth certificates are not intended to provide conclusive evidence of someones sex or gender. I intend to maintain this policy position. There is a strong case for introducing a self identification process The Family Court process to amend registered sex in the BDMRR Act needs reform . The Family Court proce ss to amend registered sex is not inclusive and fails to support peoples au tonomy over how their gender is recognised . It medicalises a deeply personal expression of self identity and is inaccessible . The process medicalises a deeply personal expression of self identity and is out of step with gender being about how a person perceives themselves. The process requires applicants to provide evidence they have undertaken medical treatment to physically conform with the sex they want recorded . The medical evidence is assessed by a Family Court judge who decides wheth er the application should be supported. . The medical evidence requirement excludes those who cannot or choose not to undertake medical treatment. For children and young people , the requirement could be seen to encourage medical treatment at a young age. This process was considered progressive in but is now seen as outdated and inconsistent with global developments. . The Family Court process is perceived to be costly , intimidating and difficult to navigate , making it inaccessible for many people . Countin g Ourselves , a survey of transgender and non binary people in New Zealand, found that per cent of respondents did not have the correct gender marker on their birth certificate. This is also reflected by the low number of applications to the Family Court to amend registered sex .
U N C L A S S I F I E D Hon Kieran Mc Anulty, Minister of Local Government Proactive release o f Cabinet mate rial re lated t o progressing the water services reforms , May Thes e documents have been proactively released: May , CAB MIN Minut e: Refocusing the Water Services Reforms: Further Decisions; and May , Cabinet Paper: Refocusing the Water Services Reforms: Further Decisions, Paper Two, O ffice of the M inister Local Go vernment. Some parts of this information would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections o f the Act tha t would apply have been identified. Where information has be en withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons fo r withholding it. Key to Redaction C odes: ()(b)(ii ) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information; ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and official s; and ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of anorganisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or org anisation in the course of their duty . Crow n Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN Cabinet Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Refocusing the Water Services Reforms: Further Decisions Portfolio Local Government On May , Cabinet: noted that, on April , Cabinet considered the paper, Refocusing the water services reforms: strategy and urgent decisions, which obtained agreement to key changes to the reform model including increasing the number of water services entities from four to , and amending the establishment timeframes CABMIN; noted that, in the paper referred to above, the Minister of Local Government indicated that a second paper would follow in May to seek decisions on some matters that were still in development, and which would also need to be given effect through legislation; Early establishment of the Auckland and Northland Water Services Entity noted that the April decisions CABMIN to change the number of entities, and the services areas they will cover, did not affect the composition of the Auckland and Northland Water Services Entity, comprising the councils in Auckland, Far North, Kaipara and Whangarei; noted that there is a strong case for establishing the Auckland and Northland Water Services Entity earlier than the other new entities, and that this would deliver tangible and immediate benefits for Auckland and Northland customers and communities; agreed that the go live for the Auckland and Northland Water Services Entity be July , and that this be included in legislation; noted that the decision, referred to in paragraph above, will have implications for the timing of the introduction of economic regulation and for the interim monitoring arrangements that will need to be in place for the Auckland and Northland Water Services Entity in advance of bringing pricequality regulation into force; noted that the Minister of Local Government and the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs are proposing to apply economic regulation to the Auckland and Northland Water Services Entity earlier than for the other entities, to help ensure consumers benefit from reform, through lower charges than they would otherwise have faced, and increased investment and service levels; I N C O N F I D E N C E emppemb Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN Timetable for establishing the other entities and applying economic regulation agreed that a flexible approach be taken regarding the go live dates for the other nine water services entities, in which: . an Order in Council process is used to set these dates, instead of primary legislation; . the timeframes would reflect when each entity and its council owners are ready for go live to occur, based on them demonstrating this readiness in a number of critical areas; noted that the Minister of Local Government is proposing to develop and communicate the process that would enable an entity to go live, including which factors would need to be demonstrated for this to occur, and the minimum notice period between agreeing the go live and the day on which the entity will begin operating; noted that: . the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs and the Minister of Local Government consider economic regulation for the other nine entities should commence on July ; . the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs has delegated authority CABMIN to progress drafting instructions to amend the implementation dates for the economic regulation regime in the Water Services Economic Efficiency and Consumer Protection Bill; Proposals for community priority statements noted that on April , the Minister of Local Government was invited to report back with proposals for a new instrument, which would give community groups who have an interest in a water body an opportunity to make statements to their water services entity about their priorities for that water body CAB MIN; agreed that provisions for community priority statements be included in the legislation, to provide communities with an avenue to communicate their interests in a body of water, and their priorities for how the environmental impacts of the entities activities on that body of water might be managed; agreed that the legislation provide that: . community priority statements can be made by any legal person, providing that person has a local connection with the water body and entity service area; . nationallevel bodies would not be able to make one of these statements, unless they can demonstrate a local presence and connection; . community priority statements would be submitted to regional representative groups, which may seek advice and support from the consumer forums that must be established by the entities (under the Water Services Entities Act ); . the legislative role of the consumer forums would include responsibilities to advise regional representative groups and the entities on any community priority statements they have received; I N C O N F I D E N C E emppemb Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN . regional representative groups could consider the themes raised in the community priority statements when providing direction to the entities and commenting on planning documents; . the chief executive of a water services entity would set out how the entity will respond to community priority statements through the annual consumer engagement stocktake; . the consumer engagement stocktake would include reporting on matters such as the number of community priority statements that have been submitted, key themes, and actions the entity will take or has taken in response to them; noted that the community priority statement is a distinct instrument from the Te Mana o te Wai statement, and there will be no changes to the legislative requirements to give effect to Te Mana o te Wai, or the ability of mana whenua to make Te Mana o te Wai statements under the Water Services Entities Act; A locallyled, voluntary merger process noted that it is desirable to provide for a legislative process that allows water services entities to merge, to recognise that, in time, councils and communities in higher cost regions may wish to see the benefits of further amalgamation; agreed to amend the Water Services Entities Act to include provisions for a locallyled, voluntary merger process, in which the regional representative groups of two or more water services entities may agree to initiate and proceed with a merger of their entities; agreed to include procedural requirements in the legislation for a merger process, relating to the following steps and components: . internal investigations by an entity of the merits of a merger, including informal discussions with the other entity (or entities) about this proposal, and reaching an agreement on whether to proceed to the next step; . formal initiation of a merger proposal, which would involve: .. agreement by the regional representative group; .. formal identification of the other entity (or entities) that would be party to the merger, and an obligation on that entity (or entities) to consider the proposal; .. notifying the responsible Minister and monitor (under the Water Services Entities Act) of the proposal, and public notification; . development of a merger proposal by the entities involved, which would: .. include the critical details around the proposed future new entity, such as the case for merging, associated costs, benefits and risks, and the current picture within each entity; .. be shared with the responsible Minister, monitor, and regulators for feedback; I N C O N F I D E N C E emppemb Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN .. include, as appropriate, consideration by the Commerce Commission in accordance with the business acquisition provisions in Parts and of the Commerce Act ; . decisions on the merger proposal, with mergers proceeding if agreed by per cent of each regional representative group; . development of an implementation plan (if there is a decision to proceed with the merger), including the change management strategy for the new merged entity, transition steps (outlining transfer of staff, financial reconciliation, accountability documents and constitution development), a strategy to ensure continuity of services, risk mitigation, and governance arrangements; noted that there may be situations in which an entity is under significant financial stress, experiencing irreparable governance difficulties, or unable to deliver minimum levels of service to consumers, and a merger is identified as a potential solution by a Crown intervention body (Crown Observer, Crown Review Team, or Crown Manager) appointed under the Water Services Entities Act; agreed that the legislation provide that, in the limited situations described above: . a Crown intervention body should be able to initiate merger investigations and the development of proposals, by making a recommendation to the relevant regional representative group(s); . there would be a lower threshold for a merger proceeding, requiring agreement by per cent of each regional representative group; agreed that entity mergers would be given effect through Order in Council, which would amend Schedule of the Water Services Entities Act to reflect the new entity name and service area; Entity financing arrangements noted that in April , Cabinet invited the Minister of Local Government to report back with advice and proposals for suitable financing mechanisms, including consideration of mechanisms that vary from entity to entity, and a backstop central financing facility that could operate on a near commercial basis, enable the pooling of risk and provision of credit enhancement, and achieve economies of scale and market access benefits CABMIN; noted that a range of financing options are being considered for water services entities, with the likelihood that different options may be used at different points in time, including: . utilising the existing Local Government Funding Agency (LGFA), which would need to be modified to enable lending to water entities and would require support from LGFAs shareholding councils; . establishing a dedicated Water Services Funding Agency, which could operate on a similar basis to the LGFA; . direct lending by the Crown (as a last resort); noted that it is prudent to provide in legislation for the establishment of a backstop financing mechanism, in the event this is required to ensure costeffective financing for entities upon establishment; I N C O N F I D E N C E emppemb Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN agreed to provide in legislation for the establishment of a dedicated Water Services Funding Agency, as a backstop entity financing mechanism; agreed that the relevant statutory provisions for the Water Services Funding Agency would: . be modelled on the Local Government Borrowing Act ; . commence subject to Order in Council or notification by its shareholding Minister, with the provisions expiring if no regulation to establish the Water Services Funding Agency is made within a certain timeframe; noted that on June , Cabinet agreed that: . the Civil Defence and Emergency Management Act arrangements will be extended to apply to water service entities, such that the arrangements continue to apply to water services assets once the assets are transferred to the water services entities from local authorities; . a Crown liquidity facility will be available to water services entities, which can be accessed if certain trigger events occur, on similar terms to those available to the Local Government Funding Agency; CABMIN agreed that, on the basis of the above financing mechanisms, the Crown will not provide any financial support to water services entities in addition to that previously agreed by Cabinet, and water services entities will assume full responsibility for servicing any borrowing, and meeting financing terms and conditions they agree with their lenders; noted that the Treasury will need to play a leading role in the development and implementation of a financing strategy for the water services entities, given the Crown will likely need to play a greater role in ensuring suitable financing mechanisms are in place for the entities upon establishment; directed officials from the Treasury to further explore the range of options for entity financing, including options for direct funding by banks and institutional lenders to enable the Auckland and Northland Water Services Entity to go live by July ; noted that the Minister of Local Government has agreed that any cost from specialist providers to support the Treasurys leadership of the financing strategy should be met from the relevant appropriations established for the water services reforms that are administered by the Department of Internal Affairs, and that this will be considered as part of the Minister of Local Governments June paper on programme funding; authorised the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Local Government to: . approve policy and technical matters that may arise during legislative drafting, given the technical nature of the provisions and the implications for Crown support (such as provision for a minority Crown shareholding and a standby liquidity facility); . make policy and technical decisions required to identify and execute the preferred entity fundingfinancing options, noting that further Cabinet consideration would be required to establish a Water Services Funding Agency if required; I N C O N F I D E N C E emppemb Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN Shared services arrangements noted that central to the case for water services reform is the need to achieve large efficiency gains in the operation of water services infrastructure through increased organisational scale; agreed that, to retain scale efficiency gains under a entity model, the responsible Minister (under the Water Services Entities Act) has the ability to direct water services entities where collaboration or a whole of sector approach is required to: . improve (directly or indirectly) the provision of water services; . secure economies or efficiencies through the provision of shared services; . borrow through the Water Services Funding Agency (if established, acting jointly with the Minister of Finance); . develop expertise and capability; . ensure business continuity; agreed that the above directionsetting power would: . be provided through amendments to the Water Services Entities Act; . be able to be given to one or more water services entities, and entity subsidiaries; . include requirements on the responsible Minister to: .. consult with water services entities in exercising the power, and with persons that the Minister considers are representative of the interests of persons likely to be substantially affected by the proposed direction; .. notify the entities to which the direction will apply that the direction has been given and when it will come into force; .. present the direction to the House of Representatives; agreed to the establishment of a digital shared service, with an ownership shareholding that would transfer to water services entities once they are established; invited the Minister of Local Government to report back to Cabinet by July with further details on the approach to the establishment of a digital shared service for water services entities; I N C O N F I D E N C E emppemb ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN Arrangements for Citycare Water agreed to amend the Water Services Entities Act to exempt Citycare Water (owned by Christchurch City Council) from the transfer provisions in that Act, in order to simplify establishment and reduce risks to continuity of service delivery; Legislative implications noted that legislation is required to give effect to the above decisions, as well as the decisions that were made through the April paper CABMIN, and that this legislation will need to be progressed within this Parliamentary term; invited the Minister of Local Government to issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office for a Water Services Entities Amendment Bill, covering the decisions in the paper under CABSUB relating to: . the go live for the Auckland and Northland Water Services Entity; . community priority statements; . a locallyled, voluntary merger process; . entity financing arrangements; . shared services arrangements; approved the inclusion of the Water Services Entities Amendment Bill on the Legislation Programme, with a category priority (must be passed before the general election); noted that the Water Services Entities Amendment Bill should be introduced in June and enacted before the end of July ; noted that it is anticipated that: . the other Bills on the water services reforms (the Water Services Legislation Bill and the Water Services Economic Efficiency and Consumer Protection Bill) will be enacted before the end of August ; . the impact of the Water Services Entities Amendment Bill on these two Bills will be limited, and that any necessary changes will be made via Supplementary Order Paper. Rachel Hayward Secretary of the Cabinet I N C O N F I D E N C E emppemb Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs IN CONFIDENCE
U N C L A S S I F I E D Hon Kieran McAnulty , Minister of Local Government Proactive release of Cabinet material and additional documents relating to the Rates Rebates Order . These documents are intended to be proactively released: LEG Minute: Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order ; April , Cabinet pap er Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order with Order in Council. April , Briefing: Approval to upload the Cabinet Legislation Committee paper and Agreement to release Cabinet material and additional documents relating to the Rates Rebates Order . March , Briefing: Draft Cabinet Paper Annual Adjustments to the Rates Rebate Scheme; and March , Briefing: inflation adjustments to the Rates Rebate Scheme; Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would out weigh the reasons for withholding it. Where information has been withheld for other reasons consistent with advice, it has been annotated with an asterisk. This information may in some cases be accessible under the Official Information Act . Key to Re daction Codes : Section () (f)(iv) Maintain the constitutional conventions f or the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials . Section ()(g)(i) Maintain the effective conduct of public af fairs through the free and frank expression of opinion tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials . For Cabinet material and any public service departmental advice use this copyright statement Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) I N C O N F I D E N C E LEGMIN Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order Portfolio Local Government On May , the Cabinet Legislation Committee: noted that in April , the government agreed that the maximum rebate and income abatement threshold of the Rates Rebate Scheme would be increased by Order in Council on July each year to reflect the upward movement of the All Groups Index of the Consumer Price Index CAB Min () (); agreed that the Rates Rebates (Specified Amounts) Order will make the following changes to two specified amounts of the Rates Rebate Scheme from July : . increase the maximum rebate from to ; and . increase the income abatement threshold from , to ,; noted that, depending upon future demand for the Rates Rebate Scheme, an increase to the appropriation may be necessary in and outyears, and will be adjusted for in either the October Baseline Update or March Baseline Update process; authorised the submission to the Executive Council of the Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order PCO .; noted that the Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order will come into force on July . Rebecca Davies Committee Secretary Present: Officials present from: Hon Kiri Allan Hon Andrew Little (Chair) Hon David Parker Hon Kieran McAnulty Hon Barbara Edmonds Hon WillowJean Prime Hon Dr Duncan Webb Hon Rachel Brooking Hon Jo Luxton Tangi Utikere, MPOffice of the Prime Minister Officials Committee for LEG I N C O N F I D E N C E tovwkbsl Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government section ()(a) section ()(a) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Priority Routine Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs , Local Government briefing Hon Kieran McAnulty Minister of Local Government Title: Approval to upload the Cabinet Legislation Committee paper and agreement to release Cabinet material and additional documents relating to the Rates Re bates Order April Key issues The Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) seeks your approval ofthe Cabinet Paper for the Rates Rebates Adjustment .() (Appendix A). Additionally , the Department seeks your authorisation for the proactive release of the Cabinet papers, minutes, and policy briefings relating to the Rates Rebate Order in Council (Appendix B). This briefing also attaches talking points and letters informing key stakeholders ofthe upcoming changes (Appendix C). We will work with your office to send the letters out prior to the adjustments takin effect. Action sought Timeframe Note that there were no issues raised during Ministerial consultation on the Bys May Cabinet paper Rotes Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order ; note that due to minor editing errors, the Cabinet paper was deferred to a later Cabinet Legislation Committee ( May ); note that another round of Ministerial consultation is not necessary; approve the Cabinet paper, Rotes Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order , for consideration bv either Cabinet Legislation Committee (LEG) or Cabinet Business Committee (CBC); agree to release the Cabinet paper, minutes, and policy briefings relating to the Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order with the proposed redactions; and note that the Department will work with yourofficeto inform key stakeholders on the u cominK chan s to the sett in of Rates Rebate Scheme. Contact for telephone discussions if re uired Name Position Anthea Oliver Jorge Bolanos Lopez I Manager Operational Policy r Policy Analyst I Return electronic clowment to: Cohesion document reference EEA CADS ACSCDSFO Ministerial database refererce LG INCONFIDENCE suggested contact Page o Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Purpose The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua . This briefing attaches an version of the Cabinet paper (Appendix A) on proposed adjustments to the key settings of the Rates Rebates Scheme (the Scheme), which you have previously agreed to LG refers. . Additionally, this briefing seeks your agreement to release the Cabinet paper, minutes, and policy briefings relating to the Rates Rebate Order (the Order) with the recommended redactions (attached as Appendix B). . This briefing also attaches talking points and draft letters informing key stakeholders of the upcoming changes to the settings of the Rates Rebate Scheme the Scheme) for your approval (Appendix C). Background . On March , you agreed to adjust two key settings of the Scheme for the rating year: the income abatement threshold and the maximum rebate paid. The adjustments reflect the increase in inflation of . percent in the All Groups Index of the Consumers Price Index for the year ended December by: . increasing the maximum rebate from to ; and . increasing the income abatement threshold from , to ,. . The Cabinet agreement to the adjustment is subject to the Budget Moratorium . The Moratorium started on April and will end on May , when the Minister of Finance announces the Budget for . The adjustment cannot be agreed by Cabinet between these dates. . You previously agreed to proceed to the Cabinet Legislation Committee (LEG), to seek approval of an Order in Council which adjusts the two key settings of the Scheme. The Parliamentary Counsel Office has drafted the Order in Council which is provided within Appendix A. Comment No issues were raised during consultation on the Cabinet paper . The Cabinet paper was scheduled to be considered by LEG on April . However, due to minor editing errors, it was deferred. A description of the amendments made to the Cabinet paper is provided in Appendix D. . The initial Ministerial consultation of the Cabinet paper included all LEG Ministers and the Minister of Seniors. There were no issues identified during Ministerial consultation. . The Department does not recommend sending the Cabinet paper for another round of Ministerial consultation as the amendments to the version that was consulted on are not considered substantive in the context of the decision considered. INCONFIDENCE Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua It is recommended that the Cabinet paper should be considered by Cabinet Legislation Committee . To meet the implementation deadline of July and apply the day rule, the Department recomme nds that you take the attached Cabinet paper to either LEG on May or Cabinet Business Committee (CBC) on May . . The Department has assessed tv.o possible timelines for the implementa tion of the adjustment: Proposed timelines for the Rates Rebate Schemes adjustment Action Timeline (recommended) Timeline Cabinet Legislation Committee (LEG) LEG: May CBC: May meeting or Cabinet Business Committee (CBC) Cabinet Approval May May Order in Council is in : May June the New Zealand Gazette ( calendar days) The proposed adjustments take July July effect . As outlined above, because the Cabinet paper was deferred for consideration at LEG, the Department recommend s Timelfne to maintain consistency. . The Department has provided talking points to support your presentation at the Cabinet meeting, as well as a press release announcing the adjustment (Appendix C). The Department proposes releasing the Cabinet paper, minutes and relevant policy briefings . Cabinet requires that Cabinet papers, associated minutes and any attachments or appendices to the Cabinet material must be released proactively and online, with the approval of the relevant portfolio Ministers, within business days of final decisions being made by Cabinet, unless there is a good reason not to publish all or part of the material, or to delay the release beyond business days CABMIN refers. . Previously, policy briefings were proactively released alongside the Cabinet paper and minutes for the Rates Rebate Order . For consistency, we suggest releasing all the Cabinet material and policy briefings. . Cabinet will make final decisions on your Cabinet paper, Rates Rebate Specified Amounts) Order . In the Cabiret paper, you indicate that you will publish the It Is a requirement of Cabinet that regulations rtust not come into force until at least calendar days after they have been notified in the New Zealand Gazette. The day rule reflects the principle that the law should be publicly available and capable of being ascertained before it comes Into force. lrJCONFIDENCE Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua paper, subject to any redactions. The proactive release of this material is due June . . The Department proposes to release the relevant policy briefings alongside the Cabinet paper and minutes on its website (attached as Appendix B). . The Department notes that Appendix B contains a placeholder to include the Cabinet minutes once it becomes availal::le, as well as this briefing once it has been signed by you, Minister. To maintain consistency with the proactive release of previous adjustments , the Department dces not recommend redactions to the Cabinet minutes or the text in this, and previous briefings. The Department will work with your cfice to inform key stakeholders of the adjustments . Previously, key stakeholders have been informed on the upcoming changes to the Schemes settings. These stakeholders include: Chief Executives and Directors of Grey Power, Age Concern, the Retirement Villages Association of New Zealand, Local Government New Zealand, and Taituara. . We have attached draft letters in Appendix C for your consideration. We will work with your office to send these letters to these key stakeholders prior to any announcements being made. INCONFIDENCE Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Recommendations The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua . The Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) recommends that you: a) note that there were no issues raised during Ministerial consultation on the Cabinet paper, Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order ; b) note that due to minor editing errors, the Cabinet paper was deferred to a later Cabinet Legislation Committee (LEG); c) note that another round of Ministerial consultation is not necessary; d) agree to either: i. submit the Cabinet paper to LEG on May ; OR ii. submit the Cabinet paper to Cabinet Business Committee (CBC) on May ; e) agree that the Cabinet paper, minutes and policy briefings relating to the Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order be released on the Departments website with the recommended redactions; f) note that the Department will work with your office to inform key stakeholders on the upcoming changes to the settings of Rates Rebate Scheme. Anthea Oliver Manager Operational Policy Local Government Branch Hon Kieran McAnulty Minister of Local Government Z:; INCONFIDENCE I N C O N F I D E N C E
U N C L A S S I F I E D Hon Louise Upston , Minister for t he C ommunity a nd V oluntary Sector Proactive release o f Cabinet mat erial about p olicy p roposals for re gulations t o enable appeals to the Taxation and Charities Review Authority May These documents have b een proactively r eleased : March , Cabinet P aper: Policy pr oposals f or regulations t o enable appeals t o the Taxation and Charities R eview A uthority ; March , S OUMIN Minute: Enabling Appeals to the Tax ation a nd Charities R eview Authority: P olicy Proposals f or Regulations ; and April , CAB MIN Minute: Report of t he C abinet S ocial O utcomes C ommittee: P eriod Ended March . Some p arts o f this in formation re lease would n ot be appropriate to release an d, if requested, w ould b e withheld under th e Official Information A ct (the Act). W here this i s the case, th e relevant sections of the A ct that would a pply h ave b een i dentified. W here i nformation h as been w ithheld, n o public i nterest has b een i dentified t hat w ould o utweigh t he reasons f or w ithholding it. Where i nformation h as been w ithheld f or other r easons c onsistent w ith a dvice, i t has been a nnotated with an as terisk. This in formation may in some c ases b e accessible u nder the O fficial Information A ct . Key t o Redaction Codes : O ut of scope Fo r Cabinet material and any public service departmental advice use this copyright statement Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) U N C L A S S I F I E D
U N C L A S S I F I E D Hon Louise Upston, Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector Proactive release of Cabinet material about regulations to enable appeals to the Taxation and Charities Review Authority August These documents have been proactively released: June , Cabinet Paper: Charities (Taxation and Charities Review Authorities Appeals Process) Regulations ; June , LEG MIN Minute: Charities (Taxation and Charities Review Authorities Appeals Process) Regulations ; and July , CAB MIN Minute: Report of the Cabinet Legislation Committee: Period Ended June . Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Where information has been withheld for other reasons consistent with advice, it has been annotated with an asterisk. This information may in some cases be accessible under the Official Information Act . Key to Redaction Codes : Out of sco pe Fo r Cabinet material and any public service departmental advice use this copyright statement Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .)
U N C L A S S I F I E D Hon Nanaia Mahuta , Minister of Local Government Proactive release of Cabinet material related to the Government Response to the Interim Report of the Justice Committee Inquiry into the Local Elections and Liquor Licensing Trust Elections, and Recent Energy Trust Elections April These documents have been proactively released in full : January , CBCMIN Minute: Government Response to the Interim Report of the Justice Committee Inquiry into the Local Elections and Liq uor Licensing Trust Elections, an d Recent Energy Trust Elections January Cabinet Paper: Government Response to the Interim Report of the Justice Committee Inquiry into the Local Elections and Liquor Licensing Tr ust Elections, and Recent Energy Trust Elections January , Government Response to Interim Report of the Justice Committee on Inquiry into the Local Elections and Liquor Licensing Trust Elections, and Recent Energy Trust Elections Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government U N C L A S S I F I E D
U N C L A S S I F I E D Hon Nanaia Mahuta, Minister of Local Government Proactive release of Cabinet Legislation Committee material for the Local Government Act Amendment Bill (No ) Supplementary Order Paper . October These documents have been proactively released : August , LEG MIN , Cabinet Office; and August , Local Government Act Amendment Bill (No ): Approval for tabling Supplementary Order Paper , Office of the Minister of Local Government . Some documents related to this release are publicly accessible in other location s: The Supplementary Order Paper is publicly available on the NZ Legislation Website: http:www.legislation.govt.nzbillgovernmentlatestversions.aspx A supplementary Departmental Disclosure Statement was prepared and is publicly availab le on the NZ Legislation website: http:disclosure.legislation.govt.nzsopgovernment Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY . ) U N C L A S S I F I E D
U N C L A S S I F I E D Hon Nanaia Mahuta, Minister of Local Government Proactive release of Cabinet material and additional documents relating to the Rates Rebates Order July These documents have been proactively released : June , LEG MIN Minute: Rates Rebat e (Specified Amounts) Order . June , Cabinet Paper: Rates Rebat e (Specified Amounts) Order ; March , Briefing: inflation adjustment to the Rates Rebate Scheme; April , Briefing: Cabinet Legislation Committee Paper Annual Adjustments to the Rates Rebate Scheme; and May , Briefing: Approval to upload the Cabinet Legislation Committee paper: Rates Rebat e (Specified Amounts) Order . Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) U N C L A S S I F I E D I N C O N F I D E N C E LEGMIN Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order Portfolio Local Government On June , the Cabinet Legislation Committee: noted that on April , Cabinet agreed that the maximum rebate and income abatement threshold of the Rates Rebate Scheme would be increased by Order in Council on July each year to reflect the upward movement of the All Groups Index of the Consumer Price Index CAB Min () (); a reed that the Rates Rebates (Specified Amounts) Order will make the following changes to two specified amounts of the Rates Rebate Scheme from July : . increase the maximum rebate from to ; and . increase the income abatement threshold from , to ,; noted that , depending upon future demand for the Scheme, an increase to the appropriation may be necessary in and outyears, and will be adjusted for in either the October Baseline Update or March Baseline Update process; noted that a waiver of the day rule is sought: . so that the regulations can come into force on July ; . on the grounds that this will confer only benefits to the public; a reed to w aive the day rule; authorised the submission to the Executive Council of the Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order PCO .; noted that the Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order will come into force on July . Gerra rd Carter Commit tee Secretary Present: (see over) xxjx I N C O N F I D E N C E Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government I N C O N F I D E N C E Present: Officials present from: Hon Andrew Little (Chair) Offi ce of the Prime Minister Hon David Parker Officials Committee for LEG Hon Nanaia Mahuta Hon Kris Faafoi LEGMIN xxjx I N C O N F I D E N C E Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government INCONFIDENCE Ofce of the Minister of Local Government Chair Cabinet Legislaton Commitee Rates Rebate (Specifed Amounts) Order Proposal . I propose that the Commitee authorise the submission of the Rates Rebate (Specifed Amount s) Order (the Order) ( Appendix A ) to the Executve Council. Policy . The Order prescribes an amendment to secton () of the Rates Rebate Act (the Act) to increase the maximum rebate and the income abatement threshold of the Rates Rebate Scheme (the Scheme) from July . . The Order increases: .. the maximum annual rebate from to ; and .. the income abatement threshold from , to , per annum. . These changes refect the . per cent movement of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) All Groups Index for the calendar year. Background The Scheme assists lowincome ratepayers to meet the cost of rates . The Scheme was introduced by the Act. The amount of rebate provided to a household is det ermined by a formula based on total household income, level of rates, and the number of household dependents. . To be eligible for a rebate, the applicant must be usually resident at, and the ratepayer for, the property for which the rebate is being claimed. . Eligibility for a rebate is based on income for the previous tax year. Applicatons to the Sche m e for the ratng year will be based on income earned in the year up to March . . The Scheme is administered by territorial authorites and the Department of Internal Afair s (the Department). Territorial authorites accept and process applicatons to the Scheme and provide the rebate to recipients. The Department reimburses territorial authorites for the cost of rebates. The Act allows changes to the Schemes key setngs xxjx Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government INCONFIDENCE . Secton () of the Act states the maximum rebate and the income abatement threshold. Secton () of the Act enables the maximum rebate and the income abatement threshold to be amended by way of Order in Council. .In , the Government agreed that the maximum rebate and income abatement thre shold of the Scheme would be increased by Order in Council on July each year. The amount of the increase would refect the upward movement of the CPI for the previous calendar year Cab Min () () refers. Uptake and forecast costs (excluding GST) of the Scheme .The cu r rent appropriaton for the Scheme is based on forecasts that include projected annual price and volume changes as a result of adjustng the maximum rebate and income threshold for infaton. .The total cost of the Scheme for , the most recently completed fnancial year, was . million. For the Department expects to receive . million worth of claims. .For , the estmated uptake for the Scheme is . million. This estmate is abov e the current appropriaton of . million. It is difcult to predict the impact that the COVID lockdown and recovery period will have on the uptake of the Scheme, so the Department will monitor the appropriaton through . .If a change to the appropriaton is required over the fnancial year, this will be made through the October or March Budget baseline update processes in consultaton with the Minister of Finance MCTMIN refers. Timing and day rule .I propose waiving the day rule for publishing a notce in the New Zealand Gazete on the grounds that this will have litle or no efect and will convey only benefts to the public. The reason for this is to ensure that the adjustments come into force by July . Compliance .The Order complies with the: .. principles of the Treaty of Waitangi; .. rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act and the Human Rights Act ; .. principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act ; .. relevant internatonal standards and obligatons; and .. Legislatve Advisory Commitee Guidelines: Guidelines on Process and Content of Legislaton. xxjx Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government INCONFIDENCE Regulatons Review Commitee .I do not consider that there are grounds under Standing Order for the Regulatons Review Commitee to bring the Order to the atenton of the House. Certfcaton by Parliamentary Counsel .The Order has been approved by Parliamentary Counsel as being appropriate for submission to Cabinet. Regulatory impact analysis .Treasurys Regulatory Impact Analysis team has determined that this amendment to the Rates Rebate Scheme is exempt from the requirement to provide a Regulatory Impact Statement on the grounds that it has no or only minor impacts on businesses, individuals, and notforproft enttes. Proactve release and publicity .As per Cabinet Ofce Circular CO () Proactve Release of Cabinet Material: Requirements , I intend to proactvely release this paper on the Departments website, subject to any redactons that may be warranted under the Ofcial Informaton Act , within business days of decisions being taken. .The Department will inform local authorites of the changes to the setngs. Grey Power, Age Concern, and retrement village associatons will also be informed as these organisatons represent a signifcant proporton of people who receive rates rebates. Taituar will also be informed and the new setngs will be shown on the Departments website. Consultaton .The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, the Treasury, the Ministry of Social Development, the Ofce for Disability Issues, the Ofce for Seniors and Te Puni Kkiri were consulted on the proposals. Recommendatons .The Minister of Local Government recommends that the Cabinet Legislaton Commitee: . note that on April the Government agreed that the maximum rebate and inco me abatement threshold of the Rates Rebate Scheme would be increased by Order in Council on July each year to refect the upward movement of the All Groups Index of the Consumer Price Index CAB Min () () refers; xxjx Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government INCONFIDENCE .agree that the Rates Rebates (Specifed Amounts) Order will make the foll owing changes to two specifed amounts of the Rates Rebate Scheme from July : .. increase the maximum rebate from to ; and .. inc rease the income abatement threshold from , to ,; .note t hat, depending upon future demand for the Scheme, an increase to the appro pr iaton may be necessary in and outyears, and will be adjusted for in either the October Baseline Update or March Baseline Update process ; .note that a waiver of the day rule is sought: .. sot hat the regulatons can come into force on July ; and .. on the grounds that this will confer only benefts to the public. . agre e t o waive the day rule; .authorise the submission to the Executve Council of the Rates Rebate (Specifed Amo unt s) Order ; and .note that the Rates Rebate (Specifed Amounts) Order will come into force on July . Authorised for lodgement Hon Na naia Mahuta Minister of Local Government xxjx Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government INCONFIDENCE Appendix A: Rates Rebate (Specifed Amounts) Order xxjx Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
U N C L A S S I F I E D Hon Simeon Brown , Minister of Local Government Proactive release of briefings related to Local Government Water Services (Bill )
U N C L A S S I F I E D Hon Simeon Brown , Minister of Local Government Proactive release of briefings related to Local Water Done Well
U N C L A S S I F I E D I N C O N F I D E N C E LEGMIN Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Charities Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction Portfolio Community and Voluntary Sector On September , the Cabinet Legislation Committee: noted that the Charities Amendment Bill (the Bill) holds a category priority on the Legislation Programme (to be referred to a select committee in ); noted that the Bill makes legislative changes to encourage and support charities to thrive, while ensuring sufficient public transparency; authorised the Parliamentary Counsel Office to make necessary editorial amendments to the Bill before introduction; approved the Charities Amendment Bill PCO . for introduction, subject to the final approval of the government caucus and sufficient support in the House of Representatives; agreed that the Bill be introduced to the House on September ; agreed that the government propose that the Bill be: . referred to the Social Services and Community Committee for consideration; and . enacted by June . Rebecca Davies Committee Secretary Present: Officials present from: Hon Chris Hipkins (Chair) Hon David Parker Hon Poto Williams Hon Jan Tinetti Hon Kiri Allan Hon Priyanca Radhakrishnan Hon Kieran McAnulty Dr Duncan Webb, MPOffice of the Prime Minister Officials Committee for LEG I N C O N F I D E N C E vojqlhxup Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector
U N C L A S S I F I E D I N C O N F I D E N C E LEGMIN I N C O N F I D E N C E iknavlaj Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Regulations Addressing Harm Minimisation in Class Gambling Venues, and Associated Infringement Regulations Portfolio Internal Affairs On May , the Cabinet Legislation Committee: noted that in September , the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee agreed to a package of regulatory changes aimed at reducing gambling harm in Class venues, and to introducing infringement offences to strengthen enforcement of the regulations SWC MIN ; noted that the Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Regulations , Gambling (Infringement Offences) Regulations , and Gambling (Infringement Offences) Amendment Regulations give effect to the decision referred to in paragraph ; agreed that, in order to support venue implementatio n, regulation of Part of Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Regulations be amended to specify staff involved in supervising gambling instead of any staff with direct contact with players; noted that minor and technical changes have been made by the Minister of Internal Affairs to enhance clarity and support workability of the regulations; authorised the submission to the Executive Council of the; . Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Amendment Regulations PCO .; . Gambling (Infringement Notices) Amendment Regulations PCO .; . Gambling (Infringement Offences) Regulations PCO .; . Gambling (Infringement Offences) Amendment Regulations PCO .; Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister for Racing I N C O N F I D E N C E LEGMIN I N C O N F I D E N C E iknavlaj noted that: . Part of the Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Regulations , the Gambling (Infringement Offences) Regulations , and the Gambling (Infringement Notices) Amendment Regulations come into force on June ; . Part of the Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Amendment Regulations come into force on September ; and . Part of the Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Amendment Regulations and, Gambling (Infringement Offences) Amendment Regulations come into force on December . C ommittee Secret ary Present: Officials present from: Hon Grant Robertson (Chair) Hon Michael Wood Hon Kiri Allan Hon Andrew Little Hon David Parker Hon Kieran McAnulty Hon Ginny Andersen Hon Barbara Edmonds Hon Dr Duncan Webb Tangi Utikere, MP (Chief Government Whip) Office of the Prime Minister Officials Committee for LEG ()(a) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister for Racing I N C O N F I D E N C E CPCMIN Cabinet Priorities Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Oral Item: Online Gambling Update Portfolios Internal Affairs Racing On November , the Cabinet Priorities Committee: noted the update from the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister for Racing on online gambling; invited the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister for Racing to provide further advice to the Cabinet Priorities Committee on December on options to address online gambling that focus on harm minimisation, particularly in respect of online gambling operators. C ommittee Secret ary Present: Officials present from: Rt Hon Jacinda Ardern (Chair) Hon Grant Robertson Hon Dr Megan Woods Hon Chris Hipkins Hon Carmel Sepuloni Hon Andrew Little Hon David Parker Hon Nanaia Mahuta Hon Damien OConnor Hon Stuart Nash Hon Jan Tinetti Hon Michael Wood Hon Kiri Allan Hon Dr David Clark Hon Kieran McAnulty Office of the Prime Minister Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet Officials Committee for CPC jxzyp I N C O N F I D E N C E ()(a) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister for Racing Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister for Racing Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister for Racing Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister for Racing I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E In Confidence Office of the Minister of Internal Affair s Chair, Cabinet Legislation Committee Regulations addressing harm minimisation in Class gambling venues, and associated infringement regulations Proposal I seek authorisation for submission to the Executive Council, of the: . Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Amendment Regulations ; . Gambling (Infringement Notices) Amendment Regulations ; . Gambling (Infringement Offences) Regulations ; and . Gambling (Infringement Offences) Amendment Regulations . Policy Cabinet previously endorsed regulatory changes to support harm minimisation in Class venues In March , Cabinet agreed to release the discussion document Reducing Pokies Harm, which focused on ways to strengthen the requirements in harm minimisation regulations for Class gambling (pokies in pubs, clubs and TAB venues ) SWC MIN refers. In June , this Government announced the new Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm for . It includes an action to identify improvement to the regulatory framework that could reduce gambling related harm. In September , following consultation on the discussion document, the Minister of Internal Affairs proposed a package of regulatory changes to enhance harm minimisation in Class venues, and to modernise infringemen t notice regulations related to payment of infringement offences. At that time, the Social Wellbeing Committee SWC MIN refers: . agreed to a package of regulatory amendments to improve harm minimisation in Class venues; and . agreed to introduce in fringement offences for failure to comply with the new requirements and existing provisions in the harm minimisation regulations. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister for Racing I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E I am proposing one amendment to Cabinets previous decisions I propose that the regulation determining who must receive problem gambling awareness training be adjusted from earlier decisions to specify venue staff involved in supervising gambling. This will address sector concerns regarding the workability of this requirement. The need for change arises from targeted consultation on the regulations The Department of Internal Affairs (the Depa rtment) undertook targeted consultation on an exposure draft of these regulations with the Class gambling sector and gambling harm treatment providers in December and January . This process focused on the interpretation and implementation of the regulations and has identified necessary changes. All other changes are minor and technical, and I have approved these. In summary, these changes: . adjust the regulation regarding visibility of Electronic Gaming Machines from outside the venue, to accoun t for matters such as using fire exits; and . make minor changes to the requirements to support clearer interpretation and consistent regulatory enforcement. Timing and day rule Subject to Cabinets approval, I recommend that the proposed regulations be submitted to the Executive Council on May and in the New Zealand Gazette on May . I am proposing that: . Part of the Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Amendment Regulations ; the Gambling (Infringement Offences) Regula tions ; and the Gambling (Infringement Notices) Amendment Regulations come into force on June , days after publication in the Gazette; . Part of the Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Amendment Regulations come into force on September ; and . Part of the Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Amendment Regulations and, Gambling (Infringement Offences) Amendment Regulations come into force on December . The proposed timing will allow the Clas s gambling sector appropriate time to implement changes before regulatory changes and associated infringements come into force. Some regulations will require more lead in time than others, due to requirements such as structural changes to venues. Phasing of the lead in time provides venues time to implement and ensures enforcement w ill not prematurely penalise liable persons.
U N C L A S S I F I E D IN CONFIDENCE CABMIN Cabinet Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification , or other endorsement . The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Report of the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee: Period Ended November On November , Cabinet made the following decisions on the work of the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee for the period ended November : ECOMIN Local Government System Improvements: CONFIRME D Policy Decisions Portfolio: Local Government aecpczkj IN CONFIDENCE Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Rachel Hayward Secretaiy of the Cabinet aecpczkj IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE CABMIN Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government I N C O N F I D E N C E ECO MIN I N C O N F I D E N C E aecpczkj Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Minute of Decision
U N C L A S S I F I E D INCONFIDENCE
U N C L A S S I F I E D LEGMIN Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Privacy (Information Sharing Agreement Facilitating Access toInformation about Deaths) Order Portfolio Internal Affairs On March , the Cabinet Legislation Committee: noted that in November , the Cabinet Government Administration and Expenditure Committee approved the policy approach for the Death Approved Information Sharing Agreement GOVMIN; noted that the Privacy (Information Sharing Agreement Facilitating Access to Information about Deaths) Order will give effect to the Death Approved Information Sharing Agreement; a thorised the s ubmission to the Executive Council of the Privacy (Information Sharing Agreement Facilitating Access to Information about Deaths) Order PCO .; noted that the Privacy (Information Sharing Agreement Facilitating Access to Information about Deaths) Order will come into force on April . Rebecca Davies Commit tee Secretary Present: Hon Grant Robertson Hon Mi chael Wood Hon David Parker Hon Kieran McAnulty Hon Barbara Edmonds Hon Dr Duncan Webb Hon WillowJean Prime Tangi Utikere, MP Officials present from: Office of the Prime Minister Offi cials Committee for LEG ikudgtnr U N C L A S S I F I E D Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
U N C L A S S I F I E D Ofce of the Minister of Internal Afairs Chair Ca binet Legislaton Commitee Privacy (Informaton Sharing Agreement Facilitatng Access to Informaton about Deaths) Order Proposal . I seek approval to submit the Privacy (Informaton Sharing Agreement Facilitatng Acce ss to Informaton about Deaths) Order to the Executve Council. If approved the Order will give efect to the Death Approved Informaton Sharing Agreement (AISA)atached at Appendix A. Policy Finalising the proposed Death AISA . On November Cabinet agreed to policy proposals contained in a draf Death AISA CABMIN. This AISA has now been fnalised and will be given efect by the Privacy (Informaton Sharing Agreement Facilitatng Access to Informaton aboutDeaths) Order (Order in Council). . The law under which death informaton is collected, the Births, Deaths, Marriages andRela to nships Registraton Act (BDMRRA), requires formal agreements to allow the sharing of death informaton with organisatons, and only provides very limitedaccess to death informaton . It does, however, provide for other access arrangements to be made through an AISA. Where informaton sharing is not in place, the onus fallson the bereaved whnaufamily to provide documentaton to prove that someone has died. This can cause distress and inconvenience when whnaufamilies contnue to receive unwanted communicatons from organisatons that are not aware that the person has died. . The Death AISA will facilitate the sharing of death informaton with governmentagenc ies that are partes to the AISA and with a broader range of organisatons to improve outcomes for the whnaufamilies of New Zealanders who have died. It willalso improve the integrity of the customer informaton held by a range of organisatons and provide beter protecton against fraud by preventng the use of the details or assets of a person who has died. . The Department of Internal Afairs (DIA) has worked with the following agencies todevel op the Death AISA: Civil Aviaton Authority of New Zealand Department of Internal Afairs (DIA) Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC) Fire and Emergency New Zealand Ministry for Ethnic Communites When the BDMRRA comes into force formal arrangements to allow the sharing of death informaton will stll be required Page of ikudgtnr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
U N C L A S S I F I E D Page of U N C L A S S I F I E D Te Tari Taiwhenua The Department of Internal Affairs Proactive Release of Independent CovidCard Reports Oct ober The following documents have been proactively released: May , COVID . A guid e to assessing digital technologies to assist with testing and contact tracing. Pr epared f or the Department of I nternal Affa irs by Sam Morgan and Chris Teeling. May , DEL: CovidCard Phase One Report. Pr epare d for t he Department o f Internal A ffairs by the C ovid R esearch Group. June , Sustaining el imination w ith CovidCard and e nhanced digital c ontact tracing. P repared for the D epartment of I nternal A ffairs b y Sam M organ , Dr T im Chambers, Dr Andy A nglemyer, Rob Fyfe, Alastair Grigg, Chris Teeling, Alexander F ala, Dr Dean A rmstrong, P aul S cott, and B ain Hollister. June , CovidCard Validatio n Report. Pr epared f or the Department of I nternal A ffairs by Dr Kathryn H empstalk, Dr Dean Armstrong, A lastair G rigg, an d Dr S am B artels. July , CovidCard Technology R eview. Prepared for the D epartment of I nternal A ffairs by the Defence T echnology A gency. Note: These reports w ere i ndependently p repared f or the D epartment o f Internal Affairs and reflect the situation at the time they w ere issued. The reports d o not represent t he G overnments position on these i ssues. Some parts o f this information r elease would n ot be appropriate to r elease and, i f requested, w ould be withheld under t he Of ficial Information Ac t (the Act). W here this is the case, the relevant sections o f the Act that would a pply h ave been i dentified. Wher e information h as been withheld, n o public i nterest h as been i dentified t hat would o utweigh t he reasons f or w ithholdin g it. Key t o redaction codes: Sustaining elimination w ith C ovidCar d document: Section ()(g)(i): Withholding of the information is necessary to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their duty. Section ()(b)(ii): Withholding of the information is necessary to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudicethe commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information. Defence Technology Agency document: Section (a): The making available of that information would be likely to prejudice the security or defence of New Zealand or the internationals relations of the Government of New Zealand. Section ()(k): Withholding of the information is necessary to prevent the disclosure oruse of official information for improper gain or improper advantage. U N C L A S S I F I E D U N C L A S S I F I E D Page of The copyright in Covid . A guide to assessing digital technologies to assist with testing and contact tracing is owned by the individual authors. The Department of Internal Affairs, on behalf of the Crown, has a licence to use Covid . A guide to assessing digital technologies to assist with testing and contact tracing, including the right to publish, copy, distribute and sub licence the use of the for certain purposes. These documents can be re used in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial NoDerivs (CC BY NCND) . International licence. The copyright in the DEL: CovidCard Phase One Report is owned by the Department of Internal Affairs. These documents can be reused in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial NoDerivs ( CC BY NCND) . International licence. The copyright in Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced digital contact tracing and the CovidCard Validation Report is owned by Clearpoint Limited. The Department of Internal Affairs, on behalf of the Crown, has a licence to use Sustaining elimination with CovidCard and enhanced digital contact tracing and the CovidCard Validation Report , including the right to publish, copy, distribute and sub licence the use of the for certain purposes. These documents can be re used in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial NoDerivs (CC BY NCND) . International licence. In essence the Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial NoDerivs (CC BY NCND) . International licence allows the material to be downloaded and shared with others, so long as the conditions of the licence are complied with, including attributing the creators of the material. COVID. A guide to assessing digital technologies to assist with testing and contact tracing. May Contributors: Sam Morgan, Chris Teeling. Executive Summary Introduction Early detection and rapid response Sources of infection The public health playbook A model for impact The role of digital technology in testing Symptom checking apps Assessing symptom checker apps The role of digital technology in assisting contact tracing Framing how to assess contact tracing technology options Defining the functional goals of digital contact tracing technologies Assessing adoption rates of different contact tracing technologies Marketing and distribution Multiple apps or an apps wearables strategy Privacy and security considerations and risks Policy levers for driving adoption Recommendations Appendix Summary of report from Dr Ayesha Verrall Appendix Evaluation criteria for contact tracing technology Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
U N C L A S S I F I E D Proactive release of titles February on briefing Briefings received by the Minister for Digital Economy and Communications, from the Department of Internal Affairs, NovDec . Briefing for Incoming Minister Data and Digital Ministers Meeting Improving government payroll systems Joint report to Ministers Health, Covid Response and Digital Economy. Contact Tracing Bluetooth Technologies Programme, November Digital Council for Aotearoa New Zealand membership The Strategy for a Digital Public Service Joint officials meeting Joint report to Ministers Health, Covid Response and Digital Economy. Contact Tracing Bluetooth Technologies Programme, November Joint report to Ministers Health, Covid Response and Digital Economy. Contact Tracing Bluetooth Technologies Programme , November Meeting with MATTR on November Meeting with Mitchell Pham, Chair of the Digital Council for Aotearoa NZ on November Digital Identity: deep dive session with officials Digital Inclusion (Tier BIM) Proactive release of the Briefing to the Incoming Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications Joint report to Ministers Health, Covid Response and Digital Economy. Contact Tracing Bluetooth Technologies Programme, November Governments use of Cloud technologies (Tier BIM) Department of Internal Affairs Annual Report Marketplace data incident The GCDO role in incident response Joint report to Ministers Health, Covid Response and Digital Economy. Contact Tracing Bluetooth Technologies Programme, December Meeting with Methodist Mission Southern Director, December The Digital Public Service Branch role in digital investment Ministerial Leadership Group on Disability Issues, December Draw down from the Reducing Risk of Critical Systems Critical Service Delivery Systems contingencies Draw down of contingency for Reducing risk of Critical Systems FMIS and Payroll Meeting the Citizens Advice Bureau to discuss Digital Exclusion Meeting with the Digital Council For Aotearoa New Zealand on December Options for consideration regarding trust and confidence in facial recognition technology Proactively released by the Minister for Digital Economy and Communications
U N C L A S S I F I E D Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Privacy Impact Assessment : Full Report
U N C L A S S I F I E D Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector Page of Oral item Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee: Modernising the Charities Act The Charities Act provides a registration, reporting and monitoring system to support public trust and confidence in charities .More than , charities are registered under the Charities Act (the Act). Charities spend around billion annually on charitable purposes and manage billion in assets. Some charities are widely known, such as Plunket Society or the Salvation Army. Many more are small charities that make a huge difference in communities, from maintaining marae to running toy libraries. I intend to resume policy work to modernise the Charities Act .Modernising the Act is about enabling the charities sector to thrive and to continue their valuable contribution to community wellbeing and social cohesion. .I intend to start by making practical improvements. To do so requires careful balan cing of principles like transparency with the compliance burden that small charities face from extensive annual reporting. I will take a balanced approach to looking at the business activities charities are involved in, while being mindful that the sustain ability of some charities is directly related to running successful businesses. A staged approach to deliver change and to pass an amendment bill this term .I will build on and progress the work that my colleagues launched last term. In , wide ranging and passionate views came through on the Act, through community meetings and submissions on a discussion document. .In restarting this work, I will shortly announce stage one. Stage one will lead to an amendment bill this term for a number of key areas publicly consulted on last term. .Stage one looks at: charities obligations; the regulators powers and decision making; the accessibility of appeals on decisions; and charities accumulation of funds and business activities. Progressing the re maining matters consulted on last term, such as advocacy by charities, is important. I will investigate a process for stage two next year. Targeted engagement before taking the first set of policy proposals to Cabinet .Policy development and testing wit h key stakeholders will focus first on small charities reporting requirements, and charities accumulation of funds and business activities. I will ensure that Ministers with portfolio interests in this work are kept informed of progress. Recommendation .It is recommended that the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee: .. notes that the Minist er for the Community and Voluntary Sector intends to resume work to modernise the Charities Act ; Section ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector
U N C L A S S I F I E D Publicity . Once approved, the Death AISA will be on DIAs website with hard copy avai lable at DIAs Head Ofce. This is part of DIAs commitment to providing transparent and trusted services and accords with the Privacy Act . Otheragencies that are partes to the AISA will be encouraged to publish links to relevant sectons of the AISA on their own websites. . DIA will release a media statement in consultaton with the other partes announcingthe appr oval of the Death AISA. Proactve Release . In accordance with Cabinet Ofce Circular CO () Proactve Release of Cabinet Mate rial: Requirements, I intend to proactvely release this paper on the DIA website, subject to any redactons that may be warranted under the OfcialInformaton Act , within business days of Cabinet decisions. Recommendatons . The Minister of Internal Afairs recommends that the Cabinet Legislaton Commitee: . note that Cabinet approved the policy approach for the Death Approved Info rmaton Sharing Agreement in November CABMIN; . note that the Privacy (Informaton Sharing Agreement Facilitatng Access to Info rmaton about Deaths) Order will authorise the Death Approved Informaton Sharing Agreement; . authorise the submission to the Executve Council of the above Order in Council tog ive efect to the Death Approved Informaton Sharing Agreement; and . note that the Privacy (Informaton Sharing Agreement Facilitatng Access to Info rmaton about Deaths) Order will come into efect on April . Authorised for lodgement Hon Barbara Edmonds Minister of Internal Afairs Appendix A: Death AISA. Appendi x B: Privacy Commissioners s report on the Death Approved Informaton Sharing Agreement Page of ikudgtnr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA Death Information Sharing Agreement For the purpose of facilitating access to information about deaths. UNCLASSIFIED of ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA Information Sharin.g Agreement This Agreement is established under subpart of Part of the Privacy Act to enable the Parties to share information about deaths. This Agreement assists with the provision of public services by facilitating access to accurate Death Information and Overseas Death Information for Organisations. It also provides for updating records about individuals associated with the deceased individual so that their records are also accurate. Parties to this Agreement may take subsequent actions based on the update of records relating to the deceased individual or associated persons, such as the granting of benefits or entitlements. This Agreement will ensure that personal information records held in Organisations databases or lists in electronic formats are from information held by the RegistrarGeneral when the individual in question has died. This will have a number of benefits including: Organisations having ready access to an authoritative source of registered death information in New Zealand from the Death Register. Other information currently available to Agencies may not be sufficient to clearly identify the correct individual, so having this new information avoids the risk of services and communications to a living individual being incorrectly discontinued; Organisations not having to approach the survivors of the deceased individual to require them to provide information andor a death certificate and thus placing an additional burden on people already dealing with complex issues following the death; Avoiding the risk that incorrect or false information may be provided to an Organisat ion; Organisations being aware of the death, so that whanau of the deceased individual do not receive official correspondence, subscription reminders, or invoices for charges which may cause significant upset or distress to the deceaseds family; and Organisations being able to take actions once they are aware that the individual has died, such as beginning the process to pay out an entitlement to the estate of the deceased individual, dealing with insurance, paying or changing social welfare or other benefits to survivors or changing accounts for survivors. This Agreement replaces the following agreements, which will be revoked once this Agreement is fully operational including the existence of operational procedures to share the required information: Agreement to provide birth and death information (Mortality Review Committees); AIA Services NZ Limited Information Supply Agreement; Cigna Insurance Limited Information Sharing Agreement; Domain Name Commission Information Supply Agreement; Forsyth Barr limited Information Supply Agreement; Government Superannuation Fund Information Matching Agreement; Maori Trustee Te Tumu Paeroa Information Sharing Agreement; Massey University Information Sharing Agreement; MyTrove Information.Sharing Agreement; National Provident Fund Information Matching Agreement; New Zealand Marketing Association Limited Information Sharing Agreement; University of Auckland Information Sharing Agreement; UNCLASSIFIED o ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA University of Waikato Information Sharing Agreement; Westpac New Zealand Limited Information Supply Agreement. UNCLASSIFIED of ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA Contents . Defined terms . . The Parties involved and the Lead Agency ............ . The Classes of Agencies involved . . . Background . . Objectives and purpose of this Agreement . . Exemptions to information privacy principles . . The public services facilitated . . Type of personal information to be shared . . . How the RegistrarGeneral may use the personal information and expected Adverse Actions . . How DIA may use the personal information and expected Adverse Actions . . How the Named Parties other than the RegistrarGeneral, DIA and MFAT may use the personal information and expected Adverse Actions . . How the Added Parties other than Mortality Review Committees and Intermediaries may use the personal information and expected Adverse Actions .. . How Mortality Review Committees may use the personal information and expected Adverse Actions . . How the Intermediaries may use the personal information and expected Adverse Actions . . Adverse Actions Process . . How to view this document . . Overview of operational processes . . Safeguards to protect privacy . . Reasonable assistance provided . . Management of classes . . . . Fees costs . . Dispute resolution . . Review of this Agreement . . Minor amendments to this Agreement . . Major amendments to this Agreement . UNCLASSIFIED of ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA . Term, performance and termination ............... . Representatives . . Accepta nee . Schedule B Credit Unions, Friendly Societies, Incorporated Societies, Partnerships, Schedule D Independent Advisory Committees and Statutory Supervisory Schedule A Charitable Entities . Registered Limited Partnerships, and Registered New Zealand Companies . Schedule C Crown Entities . . Authorities . : .. Schedule E Independent Statutory Bodies. Schedule F Intermediaries . Schedule G lwi Organisations and other Maori Organisations ..... Schedule H Local Authorities . Schedule I Mortality Review Committees. . Schedule J Occupational Regulatory Bodies . Schedule K Public Tertiary Institutions . Schedule L Registrars . Schedule MTrustee Corporations . . . UNCLASSIFIED So ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA . Defined terms Term IDefinition Added Party A member of a class ofagency specified in clause that becomes a Party. Adverse Action Any action that may adversely affect the rights, benefits, obligations, or interests of any specific individual. Agency As defined in section () of the Privacy Act . Authorisation A licence, permit, certificate, or other authorisation (whether issued under legislation or otherwise). Agreement This information sharing agreement, which is approved by the Privacy (Information Sharing Agreement Facilitating Access to Information about Death) Order , including any amendment made by the Parties. API Application Programming Interface. Approved Information Sharing Agreement (AISA) An information sharing agreement approved by an Order in Council that is for the time being in force. BDMRRAct The Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Act . Birth Information Information relating to the individuals birth that is maintained by the RegistrarGeneral under the BDMRR Act, excluding information protected by sections to of that Act. Charitable Entity As defined in section () of the Charities Act . Client In relation to an Intermediary that is an Added Party, a New Zealand Agency or an Overseas Agency that lawfully receives death information in accordance with an agreement between that agency and the Intermediary. Civil Union Information Information relating to the individuals civil union that is maintained by the RegistrarGeneral under the BDMRR Act. Credit Union As defined in section of the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions Act . Crown Entity An entity or office named in Schedule of the Crown Entities Act, but excludes a Specified Organisation. Class of Agency A group of Agencies. Death Information Information relating to the individuals death as maintained by the RegistrarGeneral under the BDMRR Act. Department As defined in section of the Privacy Act. DIA Department of Internal Affairs. Entitlement Includes a monetary payment. Establishing Act The Act referred to in relation to the New Zealand Agency set out in the schedules to this Agreement. Friendly Society As defined in section of the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions Act . Incorporated Society A society incorporated under the Incorporated Societies Act or the Incorporated Societies Act . UNCLASSIFIED of ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA Term IDefinition Independent Advisory A committee established by or under legislation to provide independent Committee advice to a Minister or the Government on any matter relevant to the implementation or operation of that legislation. This includes a statutory Board as defined in section of the Fees and Travelling Allowances Act . Independent Statutory A body that: Body Is established under legislation; has a regulatory or administrative role; and is not a State services agency . Information Privacy An information privacy principle as defined in section of the Privacy Principle (IPP) Act . Intermed iary A New Zealand Agency that is a public sector agency ( other than a Department or a Specified Organisation) or a New Zealand private sector agency, and whose functions or activities include the collection of death information for the purpose of lawfully disclosing that information to another New Zealand Agency or an Overseas Agency in accordance with an agreement between the Intermed iary and that other agency. lwi Organisation and Any organisation listed in the Schedule of the Electoral (lwi Organisation other Maori and Other Maori Organisation) Regulations . Organisation Life Event A birth, death, marriage, civil union, name change, or appointment or Authorisation to act as a celebrant. lead Agency The lead agency for this Agreement for the purposes of section of the Privacy Act . Local Authority A local authority or public body named or specified in Schedule of the Local Government Official Information and Meetings Act . This includes any committee, subcommittee, standing committee, special committee, joint standing committee, orjoint special committee that the local authority is empowered to appoint under its standing orders or rules of procedure or under any enactment or Order in Council constituting the local authority or regulating its proceedings; and a committee of the whole local authority . Marriage Information Information relating to the individuals marriage that is maintained by the RegistrarGeneral under the BDMRR Act. MFAT Ministry of Foreign Affairs Trade. Monetary Payment Includes a pension, a grant, or an allowance . Mortality Review A review of specified classes of deaths of persons, or deaths of persons of specified classes, with a view to reducing the numbers of deaths of those classes or persons. Mortality Review A committee appointed under section of the Pae Ora Healthy Committee Futures) Act . Named Party A Party listed in clause (a) to (I). New Zealand Agency As defined in section () of the Privacy Act . UNCLASSIFIED of ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA Term IDefinition New Zealand Private As defined in section () of the Privacy Act . Sector Agency NonDisclosure As defined in section ofthe BDMRR Act. Direction Notifiable Privacy As defined in section of the Privacy Act . Breach Occupatonal A regulatory body established by or under legislation to license, register, Regulatory Body approve, provide oversight of, or otherwise regulate individuals who belong to a particular profession, calling, trade, occupation, or industry. Organisation A New Zealand Agency or an Overseas Agency. Overseas Agency An overseas person, body corporate, or unincorporated body that is not: a New Zealand Agency; the Government of an overseas country; an overseas government entity to the extent that the entity is performing any public function on behalf ofthe overseas Government; or a news entity, to the extent that it is carrying on news activities . Overseas Birth Information relating to the birth of an individual outside New Zealand. Information Overseas Death Information relating to the death ofan individual outside New Zealand. Information Oversas Marriage and Information relating to the individuals marriage or civil union outside Civil Union Information New Zealand or dissolution of the individuals marriage or civil union outside New Zealand. Partner Specific In relation to an individual, the unique identifier used between DIA or Customer Identifier the RegistrarGeneral and a Party to identify an individual. (PSCID) Partnership As defined in sections () ofthe Partnership Law Act . Party A Named Party or an Added Party. Personal Entitlement or Any entitlement, right, benefit, Authorisation, tangible item, or other Other Thing thing that a Party is required to or may grant, issue, confer, or provide to an individual who is eligible or entitled to receive or hold that personal entitlement or other thing. Personal information Information about an identifiable individual; and includes information relating to a death that is maintained by the RegistrarGeneral of Births, Deaths and Marriages pursuant to the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Act , or any former Act. Product A thing (whether tangible or intangible) that a Party provides to an individual in conjunction with a service provided to that individua l. Privacy Breach As defined in section ofthe Privacy Act . Public Tertiary An institution as defined in section () of the Education and Training Institution Act . Registered Limited A limited partnership within the meaning ofsection of the Limited Partnerships Partnerships Act . UNCLASSIFIED Bo ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA Term IDefinition Registered New A company as defined in section () of the Companies Act . Zealand Companies Registrar A person or entity (other than the RegistrarGeneral) performing a statutory role that requires the person or entity to establish, keep, or maintain official records in the form of a register. RegistrarGeneral The RegistrarGeneral of Births, Deaths and Marriages appointed under section () ofthe BDMRR Act. Relevant legislation The following Acts: BDMRRAct Civil Union Act Mrriage Act . Security Breac An event in which sensitive, protected or confidential information is copied, transmitted, viewed, stolen or used by an unauthor ised individual. Specified Organisation As defined in section of the Privacy Act . State Services As defined in section of the Public Service Act . Statutory Supervisory Means: Authority A board, committee, or other group established by or under legislation to oversee or advise on the operation of the legislation (or secondary legislation made under the legislation); or A statutory Board as defined in section of the Fees and Travelling Allowances Act . Trustee Corporation The Public Trust and a trustee company within the meaning of the Trustee Companies Act . UNCLASSIFIED of ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA . The Parties involved and the Lead Agency The following are Parties to this Agreement : a) Civil Aviation Authority of New Zealand b) Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet c) Department of Internal Affairs (DIA) d) Fire and Emergency New Zealand e) The Maori Trustee f) Ministry for Ethnic Communities g) Ministry for Pacific Peoples h) Ministry for Women i) Ministry of Foreign Affairs Trade (MFAT) j) The RegistrarGeneral of Births, Deaths and Marriages (Registrar General) k) Veterans Affairs New Zealand I) WorkSafe New Zealand I Mahi Haumaru Aotearoa m) Any New Zealand Agency that is a member of a Class of Agencies specified in clause and named as a Party in the respective schedule to this Agreement in accordance with section of the Privacy Act . The Lead Agency is the Department of Internal Affairs. . The Classes of Agencies involved Ttie following Classes of Agencies exist under this Agreement : a) Charitable Entities b) Credit Unions, Friendly Societies, Incorporated Societies, Partnerships, Registered Limited Partnersh ips, and Registered New Zealand Companies c) Crown Entities d) Independent Advisory Committees and Statutory Supervisory Authorities e) Independent Statutory Bodies f) Intermediaries g) lwi Organisations and other Maori Organisations h) Local Authorities i) Mortality Review Committees j) Occupational Regulatory Bodies k) Public Tertiary Institutions I) Registrars m) Trustee Corporations Departments and Specified Organisations cannot be contained with a Class of Agencies. The details of the specific New Zealand Agencies contained within each Class of Agencies are specified in the respective schedule. UNCLASSIFIED of ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA . Background When people die in New Zealand, the law requires that the death is registered by the Registrar General of Births, Deaths, and Marriages. Many services cease or commence on the death of an individua l. The sharing of the information about deaths by the RegistrarGeneral helps to minimise encumbering whanau with unnecessary administrative processes at a difficult time. Both government and nongovernment Organisations need to have stringent processes in place to ensure that the correct person is noted as being deceased in their databases. If someone is mistaken ly identified as being dead, it can be very difficult for that person to convince other Organisations that they are, in fact, alive. DIA is leading the development of a small number of AISAs which are intended to replace the existing authorised information sharing arrangements and to allow new purposes to better meet the needs of individuals and Organisat ions. This AISA covers the sharing of information about deaths with New Zealand Agencies. The AISA is expected to better meet the needs of public sector agencies and Classes of Agencies and will allow more Organisations to receive information about deaths. . Objectives and purpose of this Agreement .. Objectives The objectives ofthis Agreement are to: a) enable updating of records when an individual dies; b) enable Organisat ions to gain customer service efficiencies and reduce the compliance load for individuals associated with the provision of information about deaths by facilitating increased collaboration; c) assist in the prevention of deaths; d) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences, and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review; and e) apply Privacy by Design principles to the development and operation of the information sharing. .. Purposes The purposes of this information sharing are to: a) identify an individual and issue a Partner Specific Customer Identifier ifone does not exist; b) verify the details of the death of an individual; c) ensure that a person associated with an individual is not required upon the individua ls death to provide to a Party or Client death records that the RegistrarGeneral already holds; d) update the records of an individual or person associated with the individual upon the individuals death; e) cease providing a Personal Entitlement or Other Thing to an individual upon the individuals death. UNCLASSIFIED o ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA f) cease providing a Product or service to an individual or person associated with the individual upon the individual s death; g) to alter a Product or service being provided to a person associated with an individual upon the individual s death; h) offer or provide a Product, service, and Personal Entitlement or Other Thing to a person associated with an individual upon the individuals deth; i confirm or reaffirm whakapapa relationships; j conduct Mortality Reviews; k) cease enforcement action against a deceased individual or persons associated with the individual; and I enable the prevention , detection , investigation, and prosecution of offences, and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review. . Exemptions to information privacy principles For the purposes of t his Agreeme nt Information Privacy Principles (IPP , and which are set out in subpart of Part of t he Privacy Act are exempted (by the Order in Council as fol lows: a IPP : Source of Personal Information It is not a breach of Information Privacy Principle if a Party collects personal information from a Party in accordance with this Agreement and for one or more of the purposes specified in Clause .. b) IPP : Limits on the Use of Personal Information It is not a breach of Information Privacy Principle if a Party uses personal information collected by a Party in accordance with this Agreement and for one or more of the purposes specified in Clauses to . c) IPP : Limits on Disclosure of Personal Information It is not a breach of Information Privacy Principle if a Party discloses personal information to a Party in accordance with this Agreement and for one of more purposes specified in Clause .. . The public services facilitated The public services that this Agreement is intended to facilitate are: a the accurate and efficient assessment of eligibility for and entitlement to receive public services; b) the accurate and efficient delivery of public services by the RegistrarGeneral and the other public sector agencies that are Parties; c the provision by the Registrar General of accurate Death Information and Overseas Death Information to Parties that are New Zealand Private Sector Agencies for their use in accordance with Clauses to . d Mortality Reviews and advice on how to reduce preventable deaths; and e) prevention, detection, investigation, and prosecution of offences, and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review. UNCLASSIFIED ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA . Type of personal information to be shared Parties may share personal information about an identifiable individual under this Agreement. Information that is not about an identifiable individual will not be shared under this Agreement. Information may only be received under this Agreement where the RegistrarGeneral or DIA is either the providing or receiving Party. Intermediaries may receive the raw personal information under this Agreement to enable Clients to use it for one or more of the purposes specified in the relevant schedule. Intermediaries can only onshare information with Clients if they have a legal basis to do so, other than this Agreement. Other Parties may not share personal information between themselves under this Agreement. The following diagram depicts how information may be shared under this Agreement (does not show all Parties). Class DIA Class Named Party l Class Named Party, i Class UNCLASSIFIED of ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA Personal information that can be shared under this Agreement falls into the general categories below: Category Iincludes IProviding Party IReceiving Party Identifying Name Any Party RegistrarGeneral Information excluding the Registrar General MFAT Previous names Any Party RegistrarGeneral excluding the Registrar General MFAT of birth Any Party RegistrarGeneral excluding the Registrar General and MFAT Place of birth Any Party RegistrarGeneral excluding the Registrar General and MFAT of death Any Party RegistrarGenera I excluding the Registrar General and MFAT Partner Specific Customer Identifier All excluding All excluding MFAT MFAT Registered Death Information Registrar Any Party Information General excluding the RegistrarGeneral and MFAT Birth Information , excluding the Registrar Mortality Review following records: General Committees Preadoptive birth registrations Presexual assignment or reassignment birth registrations Records with a Family Violence Act NonDisclosure Directive Marriage Information, excluding Registrar Mortality Review records with a Family Violence Act General Committees NonDisclosure Directive UNCLASSIFIED of ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA Category Iincludes IProviding Party I Receiving Party Civil Union Information, excluding Registrar Mortality Review records with a Family Violence Act General Committees NonDisclosure Directive Overseas Overseas Death Information Registrar Any Party Information General excluding the RegistrarGeneral and MFAT Overseas Birth Information Registrar Mortality Review General Committees Overseas Marriage and Civil Union Registrar Mortality Review Information General Committees Overseas Death Information in respect of a death that MFAT RegistrarGeneral Notifications occurred outside New Zealand and and DIA that has not been previously registered NonDisclosure Information contained within the NonRegistrar Mortality Review Direction Disclosure Direction Application, General Committees Information under the BDMRR Act, including the it came into force. . How the RegistrarGeneral may use the personal information and expected Adverse Actions The RegistrarGeneral may use the personal information received under this Agreement from a Party other than MFAT for the purpose specified in clause . (a). The RegistrarGeneral may use the personal information received under this Agreement from MFAT for one or more of the purposes specified in clause . (d) and (). The RegistrarGeneral can reasonably be expected to take any of the following Adverse Actions based on the personal information received from MFAT: a) update an individuals birth record to record the fact that the person is deceased. b) investigate any matter that may constitute an offence under Relevant Legislation and prosecute the offence or report any suspected offence to the New Zealand Police or other relevant authority. c) engage in civil proceeding in relation to a Life Event. . How DIA may use the personal i.nformation and expected Adverse Actions DIA may use the personal information received under this Agreement from the RegistrarGeneral for one or more of the purposes specified in clause . (b) to (h), (k), and (I). UNCLASSIFIED of ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA DIA may use the personal information received under this Agreement from MFAT for one or more of the purposes specified in clause . (d), (e) and (). DIA can reasonably be expected to take any of the following Adverse Actions based on the personal information received from another Party: a) decline to provide Product, service, or Personal Entitlement or Other Thing. b) cease to provide Personal Entitlement or Other Thing to an individual upon the individuals death. c ce.ase to provide Product or service to an individual or person associated with the individual upon the individuals death. d) alter Product or service being provided to person associated with an individual upon the individuals death. e) investigate any matter that may constitute an offence under any legislation it administers and prosecute the offence or report any suspected offence to the New Zealand Police or other relevant authority . f) engage in civil proceedings. . How the Named Parties other than the Registrar General, DIA and MFAT may use the personal information and expected Adverse Actions The Named Parties, excluding the RegistrarGeneral, DIA and MFAT, may use the personal information received from the RegistrarGeneral within the current legislative responsibilities under any establishing legislation for one or more of the purposes specified in clause . (b) to (h), (k), and (I). The Named Parties, excluding DIA and MFAT, can reasonably be expected to take any of the following Adverse Actions based on the personal information received from the RegistrarGeneral: a) decline to provide Product, service, or Personal Entitlement or Other Thing. b) cease to provide Personal Entitlement or Other Thing to an individual upon the individuals death. c) cease to provide Product or service to an individual or person associated with the individual upon the individuals death. d) alter Product or service being provided to person associated with an individual upon the individuals death. e) investigate any matter that may constitute an offence under any legislation it administers and prosecute the offence or report any suspected offence to the New Zealand Police or other relevant authority. f) engage in civil proceedings . UNCLASSIFIED of ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA . How the Added Parties other than Mortality Review Committees and Intermediaries may use the personal information and expected Adverse Actions The Added Parties, excluding Mortality Review Committees and Intermediaries, may use the personal information received from the RegistrarGeneral, as specified within the relevant schedule, for one or more of the purposes specified in clause . (b) to (i), (k), and (I) The Added Parties, excluding Mortality Review Committees and Intermediaries, can reasonably be expected to take any of the following Adverse Actions based on the personal information received from the RegistrarGeneral: a) decline to provide Product, service, or Personal Entitlement or Other Thing. b) cease to provide Personal Entitlement or Other Thing to an individual upon the individuals death. c) cease to provide Product or service to an individual or person associated with the individual upon the individuals death. d) alter Product or service being provided to person associated with an individual upon the individuals death. e) investigate any matter that may constitute an offence under any legislation it administers and prosecute the offence or report any suspected offence to the New Zealand Police or other relevant authority. f) engage in civil proceedings. . How Mortality Review Committees may use the personal information and expected Adverse Actions Mortality Review Committees may use the personal information received from the RegistrarGeneral, as specified the relevant schedule, for one or more of the purposes specified in clause . (b), (c), and (j). Mortality Review Committees will not take any Adverse Actions based on the personal information received from the RegistrarGeneral. . How the Intermediaries may use the personal information and expected Adverse Actions Intermediaries may use the personal information received from the RegistrarGeneral, as specified in the relevant schedule: a) for one or more of the purposes specified in clause . (b) to (d), (i), (k), and (I). b) to enable a Client ofthe Intermediary to: identify the individual whose information is requested; or use the information for one or more of the purposes specified in clause . (b) to (d), (i), (k) and (I). Where the Intermediary is disclosing information to a Client: UNCLASSIFIED of ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA a) this Agreement is not authority for an Intermediary to disclose to a Client the information received by the Intermediary under this Agreement; and b) for any disclosure to a Client, the Intermediary must rely on a lawful authority other than this Agreement. Intermediaries, can reasonab ly be expected to take any of the following Adverse Actions based on the personal information received from the RegistrarGeneral: a) investigate any matter that may constitute an offence under any legislation it administers and prosecute the offence or report any suspected offence to the New Zealand Police or other relevant authority. b) engage in civil proceedings. . Adverse Actions Process Section of the Privacy Act requires Parties to provide written notice to individuals before any adverse action is taken against them on the basis of personal information shared under an information sharing agreement and to give t hose individuals working days as defined in the Privacy Act to dispute the correctness ofthe information received. Parties may dispense with the notice requirements under section in the following circumstances: a) the Party has reasonable grounds to suspect an offence has been committed , is being committed or will be committed, and that the personal information is relevant to the prevention, detection, investigation or the prosecution ofthe offence, and advance notification to a suspect would be likely to prejudice the investigation or prosecution ofthe offence. b) the Adverse Actions consists only of removing the name of a deceased individual from a mailing list or a list used for marketing purposes . c) other legislation requires the Party to take immediate Adverse Action. Ifnotice has been dispensed under paragraph (c), notice of the Adverse Action must be provided as soon as practically possible, giving the individual an opportunity to dispute the correctness of the personal information relied on. . How to view this document This document can be viewed on the Department of Internal Affairs website www.dia.govt .nz and at: Department of Internal Affairs Pipitea Street Thorndon Wellington .Overview of operational processes The first time information is shared with each Party relating to an individual, the Registrar General will automatica lly allocate the individual a unique Partner Specific Customer Identifier (PSCID). The PSCID will be used after this by the Party and the RegistrarGeneral when conversing about the identified individual. UNCLASSIFIED of ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA The operational processes associated witt this Agreement will vary depending on the transfer mechanism utilised. Possible transfer options, depending on the circumstance, are likely to include: a) API based transfer b) Direct system access c) Email d) Paper based transfer e) Bulk transfer. Prior to the commencement of regular sharing information with each Party for a purpose under this Agreement, a oneoff bulk exchange of information already collected may occur to allow the receiving Party to do a oneoff update of their records. The operating procedures will detail the operational processes for providing and receiving information for each Party. At a minimum the operating procedures must include: a) Details about the proposed use of the information; b) Fields of personal informatio n to be shared by each Party; c) Details of the mechanism for transfer to be utilised; d) The process for handling Adverse Action; e) Specifics regarding retention periods; and f) Audit and reporting requirements. . Safeguards to protect privacy ..Staff The following safeguards exist to protect the privacy of individuals and ensure that any interference with their privacy is minimised : a) All Parties to this Agreement, including their staff, will abide by the Standards of Integrity and Conduct set by the Public Service Commissioner . b) The staff of all Parties to this Agreement performing the services set out in this Agreement will hold all necessary statutory powers andor delegations required for the provision of those services, and will comply with relevant operational policy and procedures. .. Information Handling The following safeguards exist to protect the privacy of individuals and ensure that any interference with their privacy is minimised: a) No Party, excluding those who are Intermediaries, will provide the raw personal information obtained under this Agreement to other Organisations or any other third party including other Parties to this Agreement except as required by law or in order to comply with a court order. For the avoidance of doubt, this does not prevent a Party that has their information based on information received under this Agreement from disclosing their own information or a Party disclosing the information to their agents. UNCLASSIFIED of ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA b) Intermediaries may only provide the raw personal information obtained under this Agreement to Clients for one or more of the purposes specified in Clause except as required by law or in order to comply with a court order. The Intermediary must have a legal basis, other than this Agreement to be able to onshare the raw personal information to Clients. c) The raw personal informat ion obtained under this Agreement must not be made publicly available, including where a fee is paid, by any Party. d) Information received by any Party underthis Agreement, other than the Registrar Genera I, can only be used within the current legislative responsibiljt ies under the establishing legislation or the relevant government policies applying to that Party. e) Processes and procedures exist within each Party to ensure that information sent under this Agreement is transferred separately from information transferred under other agreements. f) Processes and procedures exist within each Party to ensure that the personal information received under this Agreement is only used for the purposes specified in this Agreement and remains protected. g) Processes and procedures exist within each Party to ensure that the personal information is not held longer than required. h) Each Party will handle Adverse Actions they may take in accordance with Clause ofthis Agreement. i) The PSCID will not be used as a unique identifier by any Party other than DIA and the RegistrarGeneral. j) No Party is obliged to provide any of the requested information to be shared under this Agreement. k) Awritten agreement governing the safeguards for the informat ion must exist betweeA each respective Intermediary and their Client, before the Intermediary shares information they received under this Agreement with the Client. I) Written agreements between Intermediaries and Clients, and any subsequent amendments, must be consulted on with the Registrar General and the Office of the Privacy Commission er prior to signing. m) Charities, Registered New Zealand Companies, Partnerships, Registered Limited Partnershiips, Friendly Societies, Credit Unions, Incorporated Societies and Intermediaries may only offer andorcommence Products and services where the deceased individual had a prior relationship with the Party. n) Where a Party discloses information under this Agreement to that Partys agent appropriate safeguards must be in place for the information provided. o) DIA will consult with the Office of the Privacy Commissioner regarding proposed operating procedures and any subsequen t changes. .. Accuracy The following safeguards exist to protect the privacy of individuals and ensure that any interference with their privacy is minimised: a) Parties will use reasonable endeavours to ensure that the information provided to other Parties is the most up to information available at the time it is provided. b) Appropria te mechanisms and standard procedures will be implemented by each Party to verify that personal information shared underthis Agreement is ofan adequate standard and quality. UNCLASSIFIED of ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA c) Where it is known that information has previously been shared under this Agreement by the RegistrarGeneral then updates as a result of a request for correction (including, where applicable and reasonable , any statement requested by the individual to be attached to tlhe information) must be communicated to the previous receiving Party and subsequently any Clients, as far as reasonably practicable. This does not apply to information supplied for the purposes of issuing a PSCID. .. Privacy Act Requests The following safeguards exist to protect the privacy of individuals and ensure that any interference with their privacy is minimised: a) Each Party will be responsible for responding to requests for personal information held bf that Party as appropriate in the circumstances . .. Privacy Breach The following safeguards exist to protect the privacy of individuals and ensure that any interference with their privacy is minimised: a) Where any Party has reasonable cause to believe that an actual or suspected breach of an IPP in respect of information provided under this Agreement , not covered by this Agreement, has occurred, an inspection andor internal investigation process will be applied utilising the identifying Partys standard processes. b) Where a Party identifies that a breach of any IPP in respect of information provided under this Agreement, not covered by this Agreemen t has occurred, the identifying Party will notify DIAs Privacy Officer as soon as possible. c) Where DIA or the RegistrarGeneral identifies that a breach of any IPP has occurred, in relation to information shared with them under this Agreement by another Party, and not exempted by this Agreement, DIA will notify the relevant Partys Privacy Officer as soon ai, possible. d) All relevant Parties shall ensure that reasonable assistance is provided to any investigation into an actual or suspected Privacy Breach in respect of information provided under this Agreement. e) Where a Party becomes of aware of actions amounting to a Notifiable Privacy Breach in relation to information they hold that was shared under this Agreement, in accordance with the Privacy Act , the Privacy Commissioner, and individuals will be notified by the Party. f) Any Party may suspend sharing under this Agreeme nt to allow time for a Privacy Breach tl be remedied . ..Audit The following safeguards exist to protect the privacy of individuals and ensure that any interference with their privacy is minimised: a) To ensure safeguards are operating as intended and are sufficient to protect the privacy of individuals, each Party will conduct regular internal first line assurance and internal audits of the operation of this Agreement. UNCLASSIFIED o ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA ..Security The following safeguards exist to protect the privacy of individuals and ensure that any interference with their privacy is minimised: a) All information provided under this Agreement will be appropriately secured when at rest and in transit in accordance with the New Zealand Information Security Manual (NZISM). b) Where a Security Breach is suspected or there is concern that a breach may occur, the identifying Partys internal investigation processes will be applied. c) Where a Party identifies that a Security Breach has occurred in relation to information provided under this Agreement, the identifying Party will notify DIAs Chief Security Officer as soon as possible. d) Where DIA or the RegistrarGeneral identifies that a Security Breach has occurred, in relation to personal information shared with them under this Agreement by another Party, DIA will notify the relevant Partys Security Officer as soon as possible. e) Reporting of near misses security investigations in relation to information provided under this Agreement will be provided by all Parties to DIAs Chief Security Officer on the agreed schedule. f) All relevant Parties shall ensure that reasonable assistance is provided to any investigat ion into an actual or suspected Security Breach in relation to information shared under this Agreement. g) Any Party may suspend sharing under this Agreement to allow time for a Security Breach to be remedied. . Reasonable assistance provided All Parties to this Agreement will provide each other with any reasonable assistance that is necessary in the circumstances to allow an individual to make a complaint about an interference with privacy and the Privacy Commissioner to investigate the complaint. If a New Zealand Private Sector Agency is unable to be held accountable for complaints about interference with privacy in relation to this Agreement, then DIA will be responsible for dealing with these complaints. . Management of classes At any time, DIA may agree to a New Zealand Agency becoming a member of a Class of Agencies specified in this Agreement and therefore becoming a Party to this Agreement. DIA must obtain the RegistrarGenerals consent prior to approval of the inclusion of a New Zealand Agency within a class. DIA does not need to obtain any other consent from any other Party prior to approval of the inclusion or removal of a New Zealand Agency within a class. Upon becoming a Party to this Agreement DIA will include the New Zealand Agencys name in the appropriate schedule and circulate the schedule to all Parties. Prior to including a New Zealand Agency into the Intermediary class DIA must give consideration to: a) the nature of the Intermediarys undertaking or activity and whether the Intermed iary has a genuine need and lawful purpose to use the personal information in carrying out that undertaking or activity; b) the Intermediarys policies and practices in relation to UNCLASSIFIED of ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA the security ofpersonal information; and the privacy of individuals; and c) any other matterthat DIA considers to be relevant. If a New Zealand Agency contained within a Class of Agencies wishes to no longer be Party to this Agreement, then they must advise DIA in writing. Upon receipt of this notification, DIA will remove the New Zealand Agencys name from the relevant schedule and they will cease to be a Party to this Agreement. The schedule will be circulated to all Parties and the removed NewZealand Agency. . Fees costs Fees associated with this Agreement, if any, as agreed will be notified by the RegistrarGene ral, or their delegated representative, in writing to the other Parties. . Dispute resolution Should any dispute arise relating to the interpretation or application of this Agreement, the respective Parties will meet in good faith to resolve the dispute or difference as quickly as possible. Ifthe Parties are unable to resolve the dispute within days, the matter will be referred to the Chief Executive of DIAs nominated representative for resolution. The Parties shall continue to comply with their obligations under this Agreement despite the existence of any dispute. . Review of this Agreement A joint review of this Agreement must be undertaken whenever any Party not included within a Class of Agencies believes that such a review is necessary. DIA shall conduct a review annually or at intervals specified by the Privacy Commissioner as specified in section ofthe Privacy Act . The report will be included in DIAs annual report. The Parties shall cooperate with each other in any review and will take all reasonable actions to make the required resources available. . Minor amendments to this Agreement Minor amendments to this Agreement as defined in section () ofthe Privacy Act will be in writing and signed by all the Parties not included within a Class of Agencies. Should Parties not included within a Class of Agencies be unable to agree on the amendments to this Agreement the matter will be dealt with in accordance with clause above. DIA will advise Parties included within a Class of Agencies a minimum of days prior to an amendment to this Agreement. In the event that the notified Party does not agree on the amendments then they must seek to be removed as a Party to this Agreement. UNCLASSIFIED of ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA . Major amendments to this Agreement Major amendments to this Agreement will be made in accordance with section () () of the Privacy Act . Should Parties be unable to agree on amendments to this Agreement the matter will be dealt with in accordance with clause above. DIA will advise Parties included within a Class of Agencies a minimum of days prior to an amendment of this Agreement. In the event the notified Party does not agree on the amendments then they must seek to be removed as a Party to this Agreement. .Term, performance and termination This Agreement comes into force on the specified in the Order in Council. This Agreement shall continue to be in force until the Order in Council is revoked. All Parties may agree that this Agreement will cease to be used as of a particular . Any Party may suspend, limit, or terminate their participation under this Agreement if it appears to the Party that the terms of this Agreement or the Order in Council are not being met or the personal information sharing under this Agreement is otherwise unlawful. The obligations in this Agreement specified in ., ., . and . shall remain in force notwithstanding the termination of this Agreement. Ifextraordinary circumstances arise (including but not limited to earthquake, volcanic eruption, epidemic, fire, flood, storm, pandemic or war) which prevent any Party performing its obligations under this Agreement, the performance of that Partys obligations shall be suspended for as long as those extraordinary circumstances prevail. . Representatives Each Named Party will appoint a contact person to coordinate the operation of this Agreement with the other Parties and will ensure that the contact person is familiar with the requirements ofthe Privacy Act and this Agreement. The initial contact persons are as follows: Named Party IContact and Role Civil Aviation Authority of New Zealand Claire Mistry Chief Digital Officer Claire.mistrycaa.govt.nz Rose Goss Senior Advisor, Legal and Constitutional Cabinet Office rose.gossdpmc.govt.nz Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet The Department of Internal Affairs (DIA) Logan Fenwick Manager Information Partnerships Service Delivery Operations SDOlnformationPartnershipsdia.govt.nz UNCLASSIFIED o ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA Named Party IContact and Role Fire and Emergency New Zealand Sarah Owen Privacy Officer PrivacyOfficerfi reandemergency. nz The Maori Trustee Bryan le Patourel Client Services Manager Bryan .le Patoureltetumupaeroa.co.nz Ministry of Foreign Affairs Trade (MFAT) leitu Sa Unit Manager Policy (Acting) leitu.sarrifat.govt.nz Ministry for Ethnic Communities Fleur Murray DCE Systems Capability and Programmes Fleur.Murrayethniccommunities.govt.nz Ministry for Pacific Peoples Kaliti Kolinisau Manager Nominations and Governance Ministry for Pacific Peoples nominationsmpp.govt.nz Ministry for Women Jacinda Allwood Manager Nominations Service Manatu Wahine Ministry for Women nominatewomen.govt.nz The RegistrarGeneral of Births, Deaths and Logan Fenwick . Marriages (RegistrarGeneral) Manager Information Partnerships Service Delivery Operations SDOlnformationPartnershipsdia.govt.nz Veterans Affairs New Zealand Marti Eller Deputy Head of Veterans Affairs Marti.ellernzdf.mil.nz WorkSafe New Zealand Simon Robb Manager New Zealand Mining Board of Examiners and Operational Support Simon.robbworksafe.govt.nz All notices and other communications between the Parties under this Agreement shall be sent to the contact persons specified above or the person detailed within the relevant schedule. The contact persons set out above may be from time to time by giving written notice (which may be by email) to the RegistrarGeneral and DIA. If the contact for the RegistrarGeneral or DIA is , then all Parties will be advised in writing. DIA will ensure that the Privacy Commissioner is informed of the current contact persons for this Agreement ifthey are not those set out above. UNCLASSIFIED of ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA .Acceptance In signing this Agreement each Party acknowledges it has read and agrees to be bound by it. Paul James Secretary of Internal Affairs Chief Executive Registr rGeneral Births, Deaths and Marriages Department of Internal Affairs Department of Internal Affairs Keith Manch c cl Chief Executive Civil Aviation Authority of New Zealand Dated: Fire and Emergency New Zealand Dated: f: I I l. . Brook Barrington Secretary and Chief Executive . Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet Dated: f . Mewi Chief Executive Ministry for Ethnic Communities Dated: ,oz UNCLASSIFIED of ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Deaths AISA Tuaopepe Abba Fidow Kellie Coombes Acting Secretary and Chief Executive Secretary for Women and Chief Executive, Te Tumu Whakarae mo te wahine Ministry for Pcific Peoples Manatu Wahine Ministry for Women Dated t(l(..,. Bernadine Mackenzie Head ofVeterans Affairs Veterans Affairs New Zealand Dr Charlotte Severne Phil Parkes The Maori Trustee Chief Executive WorkSafe New Zealand Dated: Dated: Z c Ll... UNCLASSIFIED of ikudgtnr : Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs ., ci C a. O . c,., Schedule A Charitable Entities c,., This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Charitable Entities. ( ;,:,. c,., The following table details New Zealand Agencies included in this class, and in respect of each, the specified fields to be shared with the New Zealand Agency and CJ) the specified uses of the information. New Zealand IEstablishing Act IUse(s) IField(s) ISignatory ISignature of IDate of IDate of exit Agency Government Policy Name Authority acceptance of from the the Agreement Agreement UNCLASSIFIED of Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs C ., ci a. O . c,., Schedule B Credit Unions, Friendly Societies, Incorporated Societies, Partnerships, c,., ( Registered Limited Partnerships, and Registered New Zealand Companies ;,:,. c,., This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Credit Unions, Friendly Societies, Incorporated Societies, Partnerships, Registered limited Partnerships, and Registered New Zealand Companies CJ) The following table details New Zealand Agencies included in this class, and in respect of each, the specified fields to be shared with the New Zealand Agency and the specified uses of the information. New Zealand IEstablishing Act IUse(s) I Fields) ISignatory ISignature of I of I of exit Agency Government Policy Name Authority acceptance of from the the Agreement Agreement UNCLASSIFIED of Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs C ., ci a. O . c,., Schedule C Crown Entities c,., This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Crown Entities. ( ;,:,. c,., The following table details New Zealand Agencies included in this class, and in respect of each, the specified fields to be shared with the New Zealand Agency and CJ) the specified uses of the information. New Zealand IEstablishing Act IUse(s) IField(s) ISignatory ISignature of IDate of IDate of exit Agency Name Authority acceptance of from the the Agreement Agreement UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs C ., ci a. O . c,., Schedule DIndependent Advisory Committees and Statutory Supervisory Authorities c,., g This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Independent Advisory Committees and Statutory Supervisory Authorities not in themselves Departments or Specified Organisations . c,., CJ) The following table details New Zealand Agencies included in this class, and in respect of each, the specified fields to be shared with the New Zealand Agency and the specified uses of the information. New Zealand IEstablishing Act IUse(s IField(s) ISignatory ISignature of IDate of IDate of exit Agency Name Authority acceptance of from the the Agreement Agreement UNCLASSIFIED o Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs ., ci C a. O . c,., Schedule E Independent Statutory Bodies c,., This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Independent Statutory Bodies. ( ;,:,. c,., The following table details New Zealand Agencies included in this class, and in respect of each, the specified fields to be shared with the New Zealand Agency and CJ) the specified uses of the information . New Zealand IEstablishing Act IUse(s) IField(s) ISignatory ISignatre of IDate of IDate of exit Agency Name Authority acceptance of from the the Agreement Agreement UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs C ., ci a. O . c,., Schedule F Intermediaries c,., ( This Class of Agencies, as defined in section ofthe Privacy Act , contains Intermediaries. ;,:,. c,., The following table details New Zealand Agencies included in this class, and in respect of each, the specified fields to be shared with that New Zealand Agency, andCJ) the specified uses of the information by the Intermediary and their Clients. New Zealand IEstablishing Act I Use(s) I Field(s) ISignatory ISignature of IDate of I of exit Agency Government Policy Name Authority acceptance of from the the Agreement Agreement UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs ., ci C a. O . c,., Schedule G lwi Organisations and other Maori Organisations c,., This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains lwi Organisations and other Maori Organisations. ( ;,:,. c,., The following table details New Zealand Agencies included in this class, and in respect of each, the specified fields to be shared with the New Zealand Agency and CJ) the specified uses of the information. New Zealand IEstablishing Act IUse(s) IField(s) ISignatory ISignature of IDate of IDate of exit Agency Government Policy Name Authority acceptance of from the the Agreement Agreement UNCLASSIFIED of Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs C ., ci a. O . c,., Schedule H Local Authorities c,., ( This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Local Authorities. ;,:,. c,., The following table details New Zealand Agencies included in this class, and in respect of each, the specified fields to be shared with the New Zealand Agency andCJ) the specified uses of the information. New Zealand IEstablishing Act IUse(s) IField(s) ISignatory ISignature of IDate of IDate of exit Agency Name Authority acceptance of from the the Agreement Agreement UNCLASSIFIED o Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs C ., ci a. O . c,., Schedule I Mortality Review Committees c,., This Class of Agencies, as defined in section ofthe Privacy Act , contains Mortality Review Committees. ( ;,:,. c,., The following table details New Zealand Agencies included in this class, and in respect of each, the specified fields to be shared with the New Zealand Agency and CJ) the specified uses of the information. New Zealand IEstabl;,h;ng Act IUse(s) IField(,) ISlgnato,y ISlgnatuce of IDate of IDate of exhAgency Name Authority acceptance of from the the Agreement Agreement Perinatal Maternal New Zealand Public Mortality Review Health and Disability Committee Act Family Violence New Zealand Public Death Review Health and Disability Committee Act Suicide Mortality New Zealand Public Review Committee Health and Disability Act Child Youth New Zealand Public Mortality Review Health and Disability Committee Act Family Violence New Zealand Public Death Review Health and Disability Committee Act UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs C ., ci a. O . c,., Schedule J Occupational Regulatory Bodies c,., This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Occupational Regulatory Bodies. ( ;,:,. c,., CJ) The following table details New Zealand Agencies included in this class, and in respect of each, the specified fields to be shared with the New Zealand Agency and the specified uses of the information . New Zealand I Establishing Act I Use(s) I Field(s) I Signatory I Signature of I of I of exit Agency Name Authority acceptance of from the the Agreement Agreement . UNCLASSIFIED of Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs C ., ci a. O . c,., Schedule K Public Tertiary Institutions . c,., This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Public Tertiary Institutions. ( ;,:,. c,., The following table details New Zealand Agencies included in this class, and in respect of each, the specified fields to be shared with the New Zealand Agency and CJ) the specified uses of the information. New Zealand Agency IEstablishing Act IUse(s) IField(s) ISignatory Name ISignature of IDate of IDate of exit Authority acceptance of from the the Agreement Agreement UNCLASSIFIED of Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs ., ci C a. O . c,., Schedule L Registrars c,., This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Registrars. ( ;,:,. c,., CJ) The following table details New Zealand Agencies included in this class, and in respect of each, the specified fields to be shared with the New Zealand Agency and the specified uses of the information. New Zealand IEstablishing Act IUse(s) IField(s) ISignatory ISignature of IDate of IDate of exit Agency Name Authority acceptance of from the the Agreement Agreement UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs C ., ci a. O . c,., Schedule M Trustee Corporations c,., This Class of Agencies, as defined in section of the Privacy Act , contains Trustee Corporations. ( ;,:,. c,., The following table details New Zealand Agencies included in this class, and in respect of each, the specified fields to be shared with the New Zealand Agency and CJ) the specified uses of the information. New Zealand I Establishing Act I Use(s) I Field(s) I Signatory Name I Signatre of I of I of exit Agency Authority acceptance of from the the Agreement Agreement UNCLASSIFIED of Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
U N C L A S S I F I E D Rt. Hon Winston Peters , Minister for Racing Proactive release of Cabinet material regarding the introduction of the Racing Industry Bill December This document has been proactively released : December , CAB MIN . Minute: Racing Industry Bill: Approval for introduction; and December , Cabinet Paper: Racing Indu stry Bill: Approval for introduction . Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Key to Redaction Codes: ()(f)(iv ) maintain the constitutional conventions which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials () (h) legally privileged. Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) U N C L A S S I F I E D Proactively released by the Minister for Racing I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN. noted that approval of the House Business Committee is required for the Bill to be considered an omnibus bill; authorised the Minister for Racing and the Leader of the House to approve the content of separate bills in the event that the Business Committee declines to agree to an omnibus bill. Michael Webster Secretary of the Cabinet Secretarys Note: This minute replaces CBCMIN. Cabinet added paragraphs and .
U N C L A S S I F I E D U N C L A S S I F I E D LEGMIN Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Dog Control (Schedule ) Order Portfolio Local Government On June , the Cabinet Legislation Committee: noted that the Dog Control (Schedule ) Order will give effect to the decision to: . authorise K Medication Detection New Zealand through its medical alert function to certify disability assist dogs under the Dog Control Act ; . remove Top Dog Companion Trust as an approved organisation; . reinstate Assistance Dogs New Zealand and Perfect Partners Assistance Dogs Trust to Schedule of the Dog Control Act ; noted that a waiver of the day rule is sought: . so that the Order can come into force as soon as possible; . on the grounds that the Order will have little or no effect on the public and will result only in benefits; agreed to a waiver of the day rule so that the regulations can come into force on June ; authorised the submission to the Executive Council of the Dog Control (Schedule ) Order PCO .. Vivien Meek Committee Secretary Hardcopy distribution: (see over) U N C L A S S I F I E D hzagf Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government U N C L A S S I F I E D LEGMIN Present: Officials present from: Rt Hon Winston Peters Hon Chris Hipkins (Chair) Hon David Parker Hon Nanaia Mahuta Hon Stuart Nash Hon Jenny Salesa Hon Tracey Martin Hon Eugenie Sage Hon Ruth Dyson (Senior Government Whip)Office of the Prime Minister Officials Committee for LEG Hardcopy distribution: Minister of Local Government U N C L A S S I F I E D hzagf Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED P age of Office of the Minister of Local Government C hair Cabinet Legislation Comm ittee Dog Control (Schedule ) Order Proposal . I propose that the committee authorise the submission of the Dog Control (Schedule ) Order (the Order) to the Executive Council. This Order will add K Medical Detection New Zealand (KMD) to the list of approved organisations which have the a uthority to certi fy disability assist dogs under the Dog Control Act (the Act). This Order will also remove Top Dog Companion Trust from the list of approved organisations which have the authority to certify disability assist dogs , and correct a previous administrative error in which Assistance Dogs New Zealand , and Perfect Partners Assistance Dogs Trust were not transferred to Schedule of the Act. Policy . The Order prescribes regulations under section D of the Dog Control Act . This will enable K MD to become one of seven organisation s authorised to certify disability assist dogs. Background K Medical Detection New Zealand . On July , the Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) received and acknowledged an application from KMD seeking authorisation to certify disability assist dogs. . KMD is a registered charitable trust that is developing as an organisation . It intends to provide two distinct dog related support services: . Medical alert: This involves placing dogs with clients who live with a disabilityor illness that require a dog to assist them with their day today activities or alert them if an episode of their disorder has occurred, such as an epileptic fit; and . Medical detection: This involves assisting health and other agencies with the early detection of cancers, medical conditions, and contagious viruses, such as the norovirus. It does not involve pairing dogs with individual clients. . KMDs medical alert fun ction fits within the definition of a disability assist dog under the Act. Although medical detection dogs can be beneficial, detecting illnesses ordiseases is not assisting an individual with their disability in day today activities. I therefore do not consider KMDs medical detect service to fall within the definition of a disability assist dog. . For this reason, I have only approved the ability for KMD to certify disability assist dogs under the organisations medical alert function . Once approved, KMD will begin to provide its medical alert function to the public. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED Page of The assessment process . Officials at the Department assessed KMD on three criterions : . Is there a need for the organisations disability assist dog service . Does the organisation have appropriate training practices and resources, and support for clients . Does the organisation have a legal, management, and governance structure that will ensure it can perform its role . The Departments officials have determined that KMD meet s all three criterions. Top Dog Companion Trust . My officials at the Department also advised me that there is an opportunity to remove Top Dog Companion Trust from the list of approved organisation s which have the authority to certify disability assist dogs under the Act . Top Dog Companion Trust is no long er practis ing and providing the service for which it was originally approved. Assistance Dogs New Zealand and Perfect Partners Assistance Dogs Trust . My officials have advised that due to an administrative e rror, Assistance Dogs New Zealand and Perfect Partners Assistance Dogs Trust were not transferred to Sched ule of the Act on the passing of the Local Government Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill . I propose to re add them to the Act as the organisatio ns are active and providing the service for which they were initially approved . Consultation with the Minister for Disability Issues . Under section D () of the Act, I must consult with the Minister for Disability Issues , Hon Carmel Sepuloni. Hon Carmel Sepuloni has agreed with my decision to approve KMD under its medical function, and to remove Top Dog Companion Trust from the list of approved organisation s. . Because the removal of Assistance Dogs New Zealand and Perfect Partners Assistance Dogs Trust from the Act was an administrative error, I am not required to consult on updating the Act to fix an administrative error. The Order can proceed directly to Cabinet Legislation Committee (LEG) . Further policy decisions are not required. Therefore, the Order to add KMD to the list of approved organisation s does not need to be considered by a Cabinet committee and can proceed directly to LEG. Timing and the day rule . I propose a waiver of the day rule for publishing a notice in the New Zealand Gazette and for the O rder to take effect on June . This is on the grounds that the O rder will have little or no effect on the public and will result only in benefits. Compliance . The Order complies with the: . Principles of the Treaty of Waitangi; Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED Page of . Rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act and the Human rights Act ; . Principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act ; . Relevant international standards and obligations; and . Legislation Advisory Committee Guideline: Guidelin es on Process and Content of Legislation. Regulations Review Committee . I do not consider that there are grounds under Standing Order for the Regulations Review Committee to bring the Order to the attention of the House. Certification by Parliamentar y Counsel . The Order has been approved by Parliamentary Counsel as being appropriate for submission to Cabinet. Regulatory impact analysis . The Regulatory Quality Team at the Treasury has determined that the regulatory decisions sought in this paper are exempt from the requirement to provide a Regulatory Impact Assessment as they have no or minor impacts on businesses, individuals or not for profit entities. Publicity . The Department will update its website to include KMD as an accredited organisation and remove Top Dog Companion Trust . Consultation . The Office for Disability Issues, New Zealand Police, New Zealand Customs, Ministry of Health, and the Ministry for Primary Industries were consulted. The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet was informed . Proactive release . As per Cabinet Office Circular CO () Proactive Release of Cabinet Material: Requirements I intend to proactively release this paper, subject to any redactions that may be warranted under the Official Information Act , within business days of decisions being taken. Recommendations . The Minister of Local Government recommends that the C abinet Legislation Committee: . note that the Dog Control (Schedule ) Order will give effect to the decision to authorise K Medication Detection New Zealand through its medical alert function to certify disability assist dogs under the Dog Control Act , remove Top Dog Companion Trust as an approved organisation , and reinstate Assistance Dogs New Zealand and Perfect Partners Assistance Dogs Trust to Schedule of the Dog Control Act ; . note that a waiver of the day rule is sought: . so that the regulations can come into force as soon as possible ; and Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED Page of . on the grounds that the Order will have little or no effect on the public and will result only in benefits . . agree to waive the day rule so that the regulations can come into force on June ; and . authorise the submission to the Executive Council of the Dog Control (Schedule ) Order .
U N C L A S S I F I E D any person or organisaton that the agency considers represents the interests of the cl asses of individuals whose personal informaton will be shared under the proposed agreement; any person or organisaton that the agency considers represents the interests of any spe c ifed class of individuals whose personal informaton will be shared under the proposed agreement; and any other person or organisaton that the agency considers should be consulted. Privacy Commissioners statement . The Privacy Commissioner supports the objectves of this proposed informaton sharing agreement, notng that DIA has worked constructvely with his Ofce to include privacy protectons to minimise any foreseeable implicatons for peoples privacy. TheCommissioner welcomes the relevant ofcials to consult his Ofce again when designing the operatonal procedures which will add another critcal layer of privacy protecton. . The Privacy Commissioners report is provided in Appendix B and confrms that he issatsfe d the AISA meets the requirements set out in Subpart of Part of the Privacy Act. Public consultaton . In June Cabinet approved public consultaton on the draf Death AISA CAB MIN. Following Cabinet approval, a discussion document was released to the publ ica longside the draf Death AISA. DIA conducted public consultaton from April to June . . Informaton about the public consultaton was sent to a range of organisatons and stake holder groups with an interest in privacy and identty informaton, or that have connectons with the partes to the AISA. Groups that were expected to have aninterest in partcipatng in a class of partes to the AISA were also provided with informaton, either directly or through publicatons. . An additonal bilingual document was prepared to provide informaton about the AISAand t o address specifc issues known to be of interest to Mori. Consultaton materials were sent to all iwi organisatons, drawing on a listng held by Te Puni Kkiri, and to anumber of other Mori organisatons. Hui were held with a small group of iwi that either have post setlement documents notng an express interest in the work of, or have a recent close working relatonship with, the RegistrarGeneral. . Twenty writen submissions were received in response to public consultaton, comingfrom both organisatons and individuals, with a partcularly strong and positve response from iwi organisatons, local authorites and informaton intermediaries. Agency consultaton . Over the course of developing the Death AISA, DIA has consulted at regular intervals with the partcipatng agencies and the following agencies: the Ministry of Justce, the Treasury, Statstcs New Zealand, Te Arawhit, Te Puni Kkiri, the Public ServiceCommission and the Ofce of the Privacy Commissioner. . These agencies were also consulted on this Cabinet paper and the fnalised Death AISA. Page of ikudgtnr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
UK Neighbourhood planning is backed by legislation and funding is available for it from central government. If able to access funds and build capability especially in smaller councils, this example is transferable to the NZ context, however the value of a neighbourhood plan in relation to other potential areas for participation is questionable. In order to ensure relevance, it may be better to ask communities what they perceiv e to be the most important matters for participatory practices to be applied to, or at least provide a range of options. Successful for both urban and rural areas with different groups instigating the NDP process in each environment e.g the Parish in rural areas and town councils in urban areas.
UNCLASSIF IED Hon Jan Ti netti , Minister of Internal Affairs Proactive release of Cabinet material about the removal of the filter provisions from the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill. These docume nts have been proactively released : June Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendm ent Bill: Proposed Amendments June Cabinet SWC Summary SWC SUB June Cabinet SWC Minute SWC MIN June Cabinet Minute CABMIN May Draft Cabinet paper: Proposed amendments to the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill June Final Cabinet paper: Proposed amendments to the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm)Amendment Bill for lodgement Some part s of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act ). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified and noted. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Key to Re daction Codes: Section ()(a) private information Section ()(f)(iv) the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials Section ()(g)(i) free and frank expression of advice For Cabinet material and any public service departmental advice use this copyright statement Crown Copyright , Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Office of the Minister of Internal Affairs Chair Cabinet Social Wellbeing C ommitt ee Proposed amendments to the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill Proposal . This paper seeks agreement to amend clause of the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill (the Bill). The proposed amendment would remove sections L O (the filtering provisions) from the Bill. Relation to government priorities . The proposals in this Bill are a direct response to the Christchurch terror attacks and address some gaps and limitations in our classification legislation. Executive summary . The proposals in the Bill were developed as a direct response to the Christchurch terror attacks and address specific inefficiencies and ambiguities in our classification legislation. On December , Cabinet agreed to t he proposals set out for the Bill CAB MIN refers. . The Bill was introduced to Parliament in May and was referred to the Governance and Administration Committee (the Committee) at its First Reading on February . I inherited the Bill fro m the previous Minister of Internal Affairs and have previously indicated that I was open to refining the Bills filtering provisions depending on what came out of the Select Committee stage, given the strong views in this area. . Internet filtering can be a useful tool to prevent access to and mitigate harms from objectionable (illegal) content online. An example of this is the current Digital Child Exploitation System (DCEFS), which specifically filters child sexual abuse material. Child sexual abuse materi al is universally accepted as abhorrent and blocking this type of material has not been challenged. Further expansion of the categories of illegal material to be filtered needs detailed consideration to ensure the proper safeguards are there to prevent abu se of this power. . The current proposals leave this detail to be determined in regulations to allow flexibility for new technologies. On balance a statutory filter provision needs more detail about the safeguards. To achieve that, the detailed work that was planned following enactment of the Bill would need to be brought forward. Progressing this work now would risk a further delay to the implementation of the other key regulatory and enforcement provisions of the Bill. This is consistent with the advice tha t I have received from my officials. kzzqft Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . Submitters also acknowledged that more detail is needed before progressing the filtering provisions. The submissions received on the Bill throughout the Select Committee stage have indicated that there is a lack of public mandate to progress with the curre nt filtering provisions at this time. Submissions highlighted the need to set out the specific scope of the filter in primary legislation and emphasised the need for further public consultation and community engagement. . These submissions are consistent wi th wider community feedback received during huis held on the report of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the terrorist attack on Christchurch masjidain on March . Feedback from those huis emphasised the need for greater community engagement and c odesign of policies on a wide range of areas relevant to the classification and censorship system such as hate speech and balancing reform in that area with the right to freedom of expression, as well as greater scrutiny of the standards of media and on line reporting on minority and faith community issues. . This paper therefore, seeks agreement to remove the current filtering provisions from the Bill and investigate a voluntary approach to filtering. Background . In the aftermath of the Christchurch terror attacks, internet service providers (ISPs) and online content hosts worked collaboratively with Government to prevent people from spreading and accessing online footage of the attacks. While these efforts were largely effective, the experience highlighted inefficiencies and ambiguities in our censorship system for responding to objectionable online content. This Bill was developed as a direct response to the Christchurch terror attacks by addressing these inefficiencies and ambiguities in the Films, Videos , and Publications Classification Act (the FVPC Act. . On December , Cabinet agreed to the following policy proposals in the Bill CAB MIN refers: . knowingly livestreaming objectionable content will become a criminal offence punishable by up to years in prison; . allowing the Chief Censor to make interim classification decisions; . allowing take down notices to be issued to require the removal of objectionable online content; . making online content hosts subject to a civil pecuniary penalty of up to ,, if they do not comply with an issued take down notice; . ensuring safe harbour provisions in the Harmful Digital Communications Act would not apply to objectionable online content; and . enabling the establishment of regulations that would allow the government to implement web filtering of objectionable content if required. . The Bill updates the FVPC Act to allow for urgent prevention and mitigation of harms caused by objectionable content online. The term objectionable refers to alre ady illegal content as defined in the FVPC Act; this includes content which describes, depicts or expresses, or otherwise deals with matters such as sex, horror, crime, cruelty or violence in such a manner that the availability of publication is likely to be injurious to the public good. It is an offence to make, possess, supply or distribute objectionable content. kzzqft Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . The Bill will improve the way we regulate objectionable content, including violent extremist and terrorist content found online. Specifically, the Bill amends the Act to: . criminalise knowingly livestreaming objectionable content; . allow the Chief Censor to make interim classification assessments in relation to publications (both physical as well as online) likely to be found objectionable in urge nt situations; . allow take down notices to be issued to require the removal of objectionable online content; . make online content hosts subject to a civil pecuniary penalty of up to ,, if they do not comply with an issued take down notice; . ensure the safe harbour provisions in the Harmful Digital Communications Act would not apply to objectionable online content; and . enable the establishment of regulations that would allow the Government to implement filtering of objectionable content online if required (the filtering provisions). . I inherited the Bill from the previous Minister of Internal Affairs and was keen to progress it to Select Committee stage to hear views on the filtering provisions, as there were arguments for and against. . The Bill wa s introduced to Parliament in May and was referred to the Committee at its First Reading on February . On April I attended the presentation of the initial briefing on the Bill and signalled to the Committee that I was particularly intere sted in submissions and discussions on the filtering provisions. . Since then, the filtering provisions have been the most submitted upon aspect of the Bill. The majority of the submissions that mentioned the filtering provisions were opposed to it. In contr ast, the submissions that touched on other provisions of the Bill were mostly supportive and only recommended some minor technical changes. . The views expressed by submitters on the Bill align with community feedback from huis on the report of the Royal Com mission of Inquiry into the terrorist attack on Christchurch masjidain on March , specifically that proposals relating to freedom of expression should be developed through co design and engagement with communities. Internet filtering can be a usefu l tool to prevent access and mitigate harms from objectionable content online . In New Zealand, internet filtering already takes place without a legislative mandate or regulatory framework. This currently includes the voluntary DCEFS, which specifically filters child sexual abuse material. This filter is run by the Department of Internal Affairs (DIA). While the DECFS is voluntary for ISPs, the majority of ISPs in New Zealand use the filter, which means that approximately per cent of New Zealand internet users are protected from child sexual abuse material. kzzqft Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . The proposed internet filtering provisions in the Bill provide an enabling framework and set out obligations on Government when implementing any mechanism to prevent access to other kinds of objectionab le content, outside of child sexual abuse material and imagery. The filtering provisions would not establish a filter but would give Government explicit statutory authority to explore and implement such mechanisms through regulations in the future. The fil tering provisions are in clause of the Bill under new sections L to O. . If established, the purpose of a filter would be to prevent access to content that is already illegal to possess or distribute. It is one of a range of tools that can be used to assist in mitigating the harms of objectionable content online. These harms can include revictimization for example, recurring distress and trauma to victims from viewing an incident again or having others see footage of their experiences and bei ng unintentionally exposed to this type of footage. Some of the most objectionable content on the internet is peddled by sites that will never respond to New Zealands or any other jurisdictions request to remove such content. A filter could act as a last line of defence when other approaches to remove this content have failed. Submissions indicate that there is a lack of public mandate to progress with the current filtering provisions at this time . On April , written submissions closed for the Bill a nd the Committee received a total of unique written submissions. The Committee received submissions that specifically referred to the filtering provisions in the Bill. Out of those, four submitters supported filtering and submitters were against filtering. A further submissions, while not referencing the filtering provisions specifically, were opposed to the Bill in full due to concerns that the Bill would impose on New Zealanders freedom of expression, which is the predominant reason for oppo sing the filter. . Some submitters acknowledged that there may be benefits to filtering objectionable content. However, this support was qualified by the need to clarify the detail and scope of any proposed filter. The filter being set in regulations was not seen as the best approach as there would be a lack of Parliamentary oversight into the development of the filter, and a risk of insufficient legal safeguards. As currently drafted, the legislation is not intended to be too prescriptive in order to provide sufficient flexibility so that developments in technology do not undermine the policy intent. . However, submitters opposed to filtering noted that there is a need for more specific detail on the scope, design and operation of the filter in the Bill. Submi ssions from academics, the technology sector, ethnic community groups and interest bodies prefer that the Government consult on these aspects of any potential filter before finalising proposals and progressing legislation to implement a filter. This was re flected specifically by those in vulnerable groups that the filtering provisions are intended to protect. There were also concerns raised about the potential infringement on freedom of expression and the effectiveness of a filter, as it can be easily circu mvented. . Several submissions suggested that the filter provisions be removed from the Bill and be progressed as a stand alone legislation so that there is appropriate Parliamentary decision making and oversight of this issue. There was some commentary tha t any work on filtering should be considered as part of a wider review of the media regulatory landscape. There have also been suggestions of a voluntary approach like the existing DCEFS. kzzqft Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . I did consider options to redraft so that the filter is not set in r egulations but primary legislation. However, I decided against this as it would not address the issues of a lack of detail about the proposed design and operation of the filter. It would also not address concerns about the potential infringement on freedom of expression and the effectiveness of a filter. . While there appears to be a lack of public mandate to progress the filter, there are also additional issues to consider. This includes ensuring that the creation of a filter is fit for purpose, which would require setting out the exact scope of the filter and broader public consultation. There is also the risk of the Bill being further delayed to allow time to determine technical specifications of the filter, which would mean other key regulatory and enforce ment proposals in the Bill that are needed now would be unable to be progressed. My preferred approach is to remove the current filtering provisions from the Bill and investigate a voluntary filter . As noted above in paragraphs to , filtering can be a useful tool to prevent access to and mitigate harms from objectionable content online noting that this is content that is already illegal. However, having heard from submitters throughout the select committee process, it appears that there is strong oppo sition for a statutory mandated filter for objectionable content online and more work is required in this area. Therefore, my preferred approach is to remove the filtering provisions from the Bill and investigate a voluntary approach to filtering. This app roach would amend clause , Part A of the Bill by removing: . section L: Electronic system to prevent public access to objectionable online publications; . section M: Establishment of electronic system; . section N: Approval of electronic system for op eration; and . section O: Review of decisions and actions relating to operation of electronic system. . To allow for Cabinet consideration of the above proposals, I have written to and obtained permission from the Committee Chair to extend the report back d ate of the Departmental Report to June . The Department of Internal Affairs will continue to investigate a voluntary filter . There is some support for the concept of filtering objectionable content, particularly among Internet Service Providers (ISP) . This is important as any filtering would work at the ISP level. I also think that there is a place for filtering as it can reduce harm for the most vulnerable, such as young people, from inadvertent access to objectionable content. However, I acknowledge that setting the filter in regulations is not the best approach. I have therefore directed my officials to investigate and provide me with advice on alternative options for progressing a voluntary approach to filtering for ISPs. A voluntary approach would align with the existing mechanism in place to filter child sexual abuse material and imagery. kzzqft Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . I do not recommend removing the provisions and progressing stand alone legislation to implement filtering objectionable content at this stage. Submitters who su ggested this approach stressed that the legislation would need to set out specific details, such as the exact scope of the filter, technical capability details as well as governance and technical oversight arrangements. I anticipate these issues will be wi thin scope of work to progress a voluntary filter. Stand alone legislation to provide statutory authority to a voluntary filter can be explored in due course if there is evidence of sufficient public mandate for this to occur or a voluntary approach is uns uccessful. . In relation to submissions suggesting this issue be considered within the wider media review (the review), I note that the purpose of the review is to develop and establish an overarching framework for regulating and moderating media and online content. Proposals developed within that broader framework may have potential cascading implications on aspects of work to progress a voluntary filter. I have been advised by my officials that they will remain mindful of possible links between proposals developed as part of the review and filtering options, and where appropriate align these workstreams as necessary. Next steps . If Cabinet approval the removal of the filtering provisions, the Bill will be amended to remove sections L to O in clause , Part A. This will require a delay to the final report back of the Departmental Report to allow time for the amendments to be drafted. Financial implications . There are no financial implications. Legislative implications . Subject to Cabinet approval t he Bill will be amended to remove sections L to O in clause , Part A. This will require a delay to the final report back of the Departmental Report to allow time for the amendments to be drafted. Impact analysis Regulatory Impact Statement . Treasurys Regulatory Impact Analysis team has determined that this proposal is exempt from the requirement to provide a Regulatory Impact Statement on the grounds that it has been addressed by existing impact analysis CAB MIN refers. I t does not represent a new change to existing regulatory arrangements and is solely intended to withdraw a previous policy decision before it is implemented. Climate Implications of Policy Assessment . The Ministry for the Environment climate implications o f policy assessment (CIPA) team were consulted on the previous Cabinet paper seeking agreement to the policy proposals in the Bill CAB MIN refers and confirmed the CIPA requirement did not apply. kzzqft Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Population Implications . The population implication s have previously been stated in the previous Cabinet paper CAB MIN refers, which acknowledges that to the extent that any groups are disproportionately impacted by exposure to violent extremist and terrorist content online, the proposals aim to reduce that harm. These groups include ethnic communities, women, and people with disabilities. Human Rights . The proposals in this paper have previously been addressed in the initial Cabinet paper CAB MIN refers which, acknowledged that regulatin g objectionable content that involves violent extremist and terrorist online content raises issues of consistency with the right to freedom of expression, recognised in section of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act (NZBORA). . The proposals in this paper do not change the current definition of objectionable under the FVPC Act. While freedom of expression is not an absolute right, limits should not be imposed on it unless justified. New Zealand law already limits freedom of expression in this area by imposing a range of legal restrictions on the publication of objectionable content (which cover acts of terrorism). These limitations are reasonably justified because of the potential harm this content may pose to New Zealanders, as well as the wider direc t or indirect harms to our communities. The proposals in this paper do not negatively impact on freedom of expression. Consultation . Ministry for Culture and Heritage, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Fo reign Affairs and Trade, Ministry of Education, the Treasury, New Zealand Police, the Government Communications Security Bureau, New Zealand Security and Intelligence Service, Oranga Tamariki Ministry for Children, Te Puni Kkiri, Ministry for Pacific Peop les, Ministry for Women, Ministry for Youth Development, the New Zealand Customs Service, and the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet were consulted on this Cabinet paper. . Subject to Cabinet approval, I intend to make a public announcement on the amendments to the Bill. Proactive Release . As per Cabinet Office Circular () , this Cabinet paper w ill be proactively released, with redactions made consistent with the Official Information Act . Recommendations The Minister of Internal Affairs recommends that the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee: . note that in December Cabinet agreed to the p olicy proposals contained in the Bill CAB MIN refers ; . agree to amend clause , Part A of the Bill by removing: kzzqft S.()(f)(iv), S.()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of . section L: Electronic system to prevent public access to objectionable online publications; . section M: Establishment of electronic system; . section N: Approval of electronic system for operation; and . section O: Review of decisions and actions relating to operation of electronic system; and . note that DIA has written to the Governance and Administration Select Committee to request an extension to the report back of the Departmental Report to June to allow time for the amendments to be made.
UNCLASSIFIED . In summary, previous papers highlighted that, in many parts of the country, communities cannot be confident that their drinking water is safe, or that good environment al outcomes are being achieved from wastewater and stormwater systems. They also raised concerns about the regulation, sustainability, capacity and capability of a system with a large number of localised providers, many of which are funded by relatively s mall populations. . The papers noted that hard data on the extent of the problem is variable and, in some cases, limited, which is in itself evidence of a wider systemic issue. However, overall, the following problems affect all of the three waters: . Weakne sses across the regulatory system . Both drinking water and environmental regulation exhibit, in differing degrees, inadequate stewardship, leadership, and compliance, monitoring and enforcement practices. . Funding and financing challenges . Three waters p roviders face a range of affordability issues and financial pressures. Many councils are struggling to fund plant and pipe infrastructure to the level required to meet standards and community aspirations, keep pace with population growth, and build resilie nce against natural events. Affordability challenges are particularly acute for smaller communities, rural and provincial councils, non council drinking water suppliers, and marae. These communities are finding it difficult to afford quality infrastructur e and services, especially within current structures and funding arrangements. . Capability and capacity challenges . Good capability is the key to meeting regulatory requirements, designing, procuring, delivering and managing three waters services, and unde rtaking complex public health and environmental risk assessments. However, it is often difficult for service providers to develop the capabilities required, and to access and retain people with specialist skills. These challenges tend to be greater for s maller rural and provincial councils, and non council drinking water suppliers (such as small private and community schemes, and marae). . The Government Inquiry into Havelock North Drinking Water ( Havelock North Inquiry ) provided considerable evidence for reform. The Inquiry concluded that the problems in Havelock North are not confined to that area, and there is a widespread systemic failure of water suppliers to meet the high standards required to ensure the safe supply of drinking water to the public. If action is not taken, there are risks of similar incidents occurring elsewhere, with potentially serious consequences. . The events that led to the Havelock North contamination event in , along with the findings of the subsequent Inquiry, have demonstr ated that the existing system does not adequately safeguard against the risk of catastrophic contamination incidents, or drive improved compliance with the drinking water standards. The Department of Internal Affairs commissioned two reports to explore capability and capacity issues facing local government three waters providers Castalia Ltd: Three waters asset management maturity in New Zealand (October ); and MartinJenkins: Three Waters Review interface between asset management and council governance (December ). Department of Internal Affa irs Supplementary information Page of rnfoawab Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
UNCLASSIFIED This proposal supports access to justice, while best recognising the public and private benefit s of an appeal . A moderate fee might discourage vexatious appeals which could use up valuable tribunal time and resources . A moderate fee might also encourag e alternative avenues to resolve an issue ( for example, charities can object to an intended decision . If dissatisfied with the outcome of the objections process, they can appeal the final decision to the Authority ). To ensure the fee does not become a barrier to accessing the Authority , I am also proposing a fee waiver , which is a comm on tool to mitigate the risk that those with limited resources cannot access appeals and consider the specific public benefit of an appeal on a case bycase basis . Criteria for waiving a filing fee are discussed at paragraph .. Three other options do not recognise public and private benefit or support access to justice as well as the proposal I considered three other options that could meet the core objective to support access to justice including no fee, a low fee without a waiver, and a higher fee ( ) with a waiver. However , these options either do not appropriately acknowledge public and private benefit or do not support access to justice for all charities as well as the preferred proposal . Charging no fee or a low fee (without a waiver) assumes that the public benefit provided by appeals outweighs any private benefit to the appellant. The impact of this option is that the taxpayer would cover more of the Authority s operating costs than the proposed option . A higher fee (with a waiver) would require appellants to contribute more towards the cost of running the Authority . Most charities are small , so affording this fee may be more difficult than the other options . Therefore, relying heavily on the waiver process might still not support ac cess to justice for all charities . Proposals for procedural matters I am proposing several regulations to ensure that the Authority: . can process an appeal seamlessly from its commencement to conclusion; and . aligns with the wider tribunal system , while accounting for the charities context when appropriate ( for example, timeframes) . These procedural proposals are to: Charities can object to an intended decision by the Charities Registration Board o r the Chief Executive of the Department of Internal Affairs before appealing a decision to the Authority . The Authoritys operati ng cost is estimated as per appeal. This cost does not include a Judges sitting rate. The daily rate is estimated at (based on appeals annually and days per appeal). Most charities are small and volunteer run with annual operating payments under , . Approximately a third of these have annual income under , . UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector
UNCLASSIFIED . The CVoD Amendment Bill will enable CVoD providers to self rate their content rather than referring material to OFLC or the Film and Video Labelling Body (FVLB). The classification rating of CVoD content before screening will minimise the risk of harm to children and young people. . It will also support informed viewing choices by all New Zealanders by ensuring the content has the appropriate classificationrating and advisory notes consistent with the New Zealand classification regime. T he CVoD Amendment Bill is expected to be passed into law by mid. The Department has commenced a Review into funding options for the classification system . The purpose of the Review is to return OFLC to a financially viable position, so that OFLC can continue to support New Zealanders to make informed viewing choices and minimise the availability of harmful material. . The scope of the Review includes considering the appropriate level of cost recovery (full, partial or no cost recovery) from the sector , and whether there is a more effective mechanism (fees andor a levy) to fund the classification framework than the status quo of government funding and user charges. . Public consultation is part of Stage of the Review. Stage is d evelopment and implementation of a new funding regime for OFLCs existing and CVoD activities . Issues with the current funding arrangements . There are three main issues with the existing funding arrangement s. Fees for current classification activities are not aligned with costs . The fees prescribed in the Regulations have not been reviewed since and are no longer aligned with costs in curred by OFLC. Inflation has also eroded the value of the fees. Over time, the income foregone from the fee levels not being regularly adjusted is significant. Expenditure associated with OFLCs classification activities has regularly exceeded income and this is projected to continue. Income from existing user charges has been declining . The size of the DVD market has decreased as media content is increasingly made available online through o nDemand and streaming services. OFLCs r evenue from user charges arising from the classification of DVDs is in decline. From to , revenue from user charges from classifying commercial publications , such as DVDs and films for release in theatres , has reduced by percent , from . million to . million. A funding regime for OFLCs new CVOD related activities is needed . OFLC will perform new activi ties related to regulating CVoD content and supporting providers to self rate their material. The new activities involve maintenance and enhancements of self rating tools and resources, auditing a nd reviewing provider s selfrating outputs, engagement with providers , and information to the public. A funding regime for these activities is needed. OFLCs classifies restricted material and the FVLB rates unrestricted material. Page of
UNCLASSIFIED . The Inquiry also observed there is little understanding among the New Ze aland public about the large numbers of people who consume unsafe drinking water. Every year, around , people become ill from their drinking water, and many more must boil their water to drink it safely. This has significant implications from a publ ic health , economic, and cost perspective. (For example, the economic costs of the Havelock North waterborne disease outbreak were estimated at approximately million.) . Nationally, the estimated capital costs of upgrading networked drinking water treat ment plants to meet drinking water standards is between million and million, with an additional annual operating cost of million to million. . Council wastewater systems are also facing widespread challenges. Discharge s from wastewater plants are affecti ng freshwater and coastal water quality, and sewage overflows are occurring at a frequency that is no longer acceptable for communities, including Mori. A high number of wastewater treatment plants are legally operating on expired consents for long perio ds of time. In many regions, regional councils do not (and are not required to) publish sufficient information to provide assurance about the impact of wastewater services on the environment. . Councils will face challenges to upgrade wastewater infrastructure. Research into the costs of upgrading wastewater treatment systems to meet potential national standards for freshwater and coastal discharges identified that the indicative costs of upgrading all wastewater treatment systems over the coming years falls within a range of . billion to . billion, with an additional annual operating cost of million to million. . A significant portion of the costs to upgrade wastewater treatment systems will fall over the next decade. Just over wastewater discharges from wastewater treatment plants will need new resource consents over the next years. Upgrades to treatment plants are likely to be required to meet new consent requirements. The potential costs of those upgrades could be up to billion, with the costs of reconsenting estimated to be in the order of million. . Many rural councils and their communities are struggling to meet the costs of upgrading wastewater treatment plants. The relative costs of wastewater upgrades for metro, provincial and rural councils create an affordability challenge for small, mostly rural councils. This affordability challenge is highlighted in the chart below. The Economic cost of the Havelock North August waterborne disease outbreak , by David Moore et. al. (August ), on the Ministry of Health web site. Beca: Cost estimates for upgrading water treatment plants to meet potential changes to the New Zealand Drinking Water Standards , March . GHD, Boffa Miskell . Cost estimates for upgrading Wastewater Treatment Plants to meet Objectives of the N PS Freshwater ; GHD, Boffa Miskell . Cost Estimates for upgrading Wastewater Treatment Plants that discharge into the Ocean . November . GHD, Boffa Miskell . National stocktake (regulation) of Municipal Wastewater Treatment Plants , November . An estimate based on costs estimates developed by GHD, Boffa Miskell in reports referred to above. Department of Internal Affa irs Supplementary information Page of rnfoawab Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
UNCLASSIFIED . include the criteria for granting a filing fee waiver common to other tribunals and the courts, rather than developing criteria specific to charities appeals. The first criteri on is financial hardship, which only applies to individuals. The second is public interest ( for example, the proceeding raises a ques tion of law or issues of significant public interest). This criterion applies to individuals and entities. I note that appellants can request a review of a waiver decision (which is made by a Registrar of a tribunal ) if they are not satisfied. This review right is common practice for tribunals and the District Court ; . ensur e that a fee payment and waiver process seamlessly integrate with the overall appeals process , allowing the Authority to: .. postpone a fee payment while a waiver (or a review of the waiver decision) is being considered , so that the appeals processes can continue up to the point when a waiver decision is made; .. recover a postponed fee if a waiver is declined or a fee is only partially waived. The appellant m ust pay the fee owing before the appeal continues; and .. refund a fee to an appellant ; . allow the Authority to do the following if a party fails to attend a case management conference: .. adjourn the case management conference; or .. determine preliminary issues in the absence of the party; or .. dismiss an appeal if it is the appellant that misses the case management conference ; . allow the Authority to reinstate an appeal should the appellant miss a case management conference if excepti onal circumstances apply, or the appellant had a good reason for not attending the case management conference . In the latter case, the appellant must file their application within working days after the for the case management conference ; . define registrar because registrars commonly determine fee waivers and who can make this decision must be clear ; and Before a hearing, the Authority will usually call a case management conference between the parties to discuss preliminary issues. UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector
UNCLASSIFIED . requir e the Ministry of Justice to publish information on their website about the purpose of the Authority, requirements for commencing a proce eding, and other guidelines related to proceedings. Next steps and i mplementation Subject to Cabinet agreement, I intend to seek Cabinet Legislation Committee approval to submit regulations to the Executive Council in May this year. The table below outlines indicative timeframes: Indicative timeframes Indicative timeframe Milestone Early April Cabinet consideration of policy proposals April MidMay Parliamentary Counsel Office drafts regulations Late May Cabinet Legislation Committee approves regulations for submission to the Executive Council and Executive Council considers regulations Early June Notification in Gazette July Regulations in force The Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) will continue to work closely with the Ministry of Justice to ensure regulations are fit for purpose. Operational implementation of these regulations will be managed by the Ministry of Justice, which has existing responsibility for the Authority. The provisions allowin g the Authority to hear appeals under the Charities Act will come into force on July . Cost ofliving Implications This paper does not have cost ofliving implications . Financial Implications This paper does not seek new funding. The Ministry of Justice received funding in Budget to extend the functions of the Taxation Review Authority to hear charities appeals (.M for and .M from ) . Funding covers up to appeals per annum . The proposal for a fee wa iver process (alongside the filing fee amount of ) will not increase the costs to the Authority. Legislative Implications The regulations proposed here under the Charities Act will be required to operationalise the Taxation and Charities Review Authority when hearing charities appeals . No changes to primary legislation are required. Issues not considered by Cabinet may arise during drafting. I am seeking Cabinet agreement that I can make This information is f or all other tribunals under the Tribunals Powers and Procedures Legislation Act . UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector
UNCLASSIFIED . While the impacts will be felt unevenly across New Zealand, it is already clear that all councils will experience deterioration in their revenue and , in some cases, this will be significant. An initial report has been prepared to provide an early analysis of these impacts , which has been on the Departments website. . Prior to COVID , territorial authorities were planning on spending up to . billion in capital over the next five years on water infrastructure. However, COVID is likely to cause significant decreases in revenue in territorial authorities over the short term. Revenues could decline by between per cent and per cent o ver the next financial year, and local authorities are facing increased cost pressures. As a result, borrowing will be constrained due to lower debt limits that flow from lower revenues, and opportunities to raise revenue through rates, fees and charges w ill be extremely limited. . Previous behaviour indicates that i nvestment in water infrastructure is an area where councils have constrained spending in response to financial pressures. Investment in water infrastructure is long term, and has a less visible impact on communities than other forms of council expenditure. . The Three Waters Review has highlighted that New Zealands water infrastructure already carries a burden of underinvestment. This is likely to worsen in response to COVID , and could have serious consequences for the condition of water infrastructure . We estimate that, in the absence of support from the Crown, territorial authorities will face pressure to reduce planned capital investment in three waters infrastructure by approximately . billion over the next three years. . A lack of investment in, and deterioration of, water infrastructure will perpetuate some of the systemic problems identified above. This could also jeopardise the effectiveness of the three waters regulatory reforms if councils are unable to afford to carry out the upgrades necessary to comply with drinking water regulatory requirements, for example. Reform o bjectives . The proposed objectives for reforming the three waters system have been prepared to align and be consistent with previous objectives , including those in the recent Cabinet paper , Three waters service delivery and funding arrangements: approach to reform (January ) . The objectives are: . significantly improving the safety and quality of drinking wa ter services, and the environmental performance of wastewater and stormwater systems (to deliver widespread public health and environmental benefits) ; . ensuring all New Zealanders have equitable access to affordable three waters services; . improving the coor dination of resources and unlocking strategic opportunities to consider New Zealands infrastructure needs at a larger scale; https:www.dia.govt.nzdiawebsite.nsfFilesLG Response unitfileLocal Government Sector COVID Financial Implications Report Initial Analysis.pdf Department of Internal Affa irs Supplementary information Page of rnfoawab Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
UNCLASSIFIED . Determining an appropriate level of cost recovery from the sector can be based on considering who benefits from the classification sy stem. The public consultation document comments on ben efits to the sector and the community. Costrecovery mechanisms : fees andor a levy . There are two main mechanisms available for OFLCs cost recovery: fees or a levy , or a combination of the two. . Current fees are based on the type of item classified , the duration of that item and increased costs . processing costs . Fees for CVoD activities would be similarly based on processing costs for activities , such as auditing providers self rating outputs and contributing to the maintenance costs of the self rating tool. . A classification levy would offset the harm created from the media content distributed by the sector. A range of approaches for designing a levy are available , such as income or customer base. The consultation document invites feedback on how fees andor a levy could be set. All of the cost recovery options have implications for the sector . The lack of regular reviews and incremental increases to the existing f ees schedule mean that distributors of physical media , such as DVDs , could face high percent age increases. . The DVD market is facing significant challenges competing against providers on other platforms. They may have limited ability to sustain further co sts. CVoD providers will go from paying no charges to paying classification activity related costs . . Public information on the income of CVoD providers is not readily available. An estimate of CVoD provider s income in New Zealand is that it generates reven ue of million annually from New Zealand based subscribers. OFLCs costs for CVoD related activities are estimated to be approximately . million annually. This is less than percent of the annual CVoD income from New Zealand based subscribers. . Additional costs will have a greater impact on small companies, compared to larger companies with more market presence . Additional costs may be passed to consumers. Charitable bodies , such as film festival organisations , may experience impacts from any . The public consultation document invites feedback about how those affected by additional costs would conduct their business or activity differently as a result . The full implications of additional costs on the sector will depend on the cost recovery option to be selected by Cabinet in March . Risks and mitigations . There are several potential risks and mitigations. This estimate is based on the number of New Zealand based subscribers to Netflix, Sky TV, Lightbox, Vodafone TV, Youtube Premium and Amazon P rime in . http:www.roymorgan.comfindings netflix foxtel stanyoutube amazon february Page of
UNCLASSIFIED agree to the following procedural matte rs to ensure processes run seamlessly endtoend and the Authority is aligned with the wider tribunal system: . the criteria for granting a filing fee waiver are financial hardship and public interest; . the Taxation and Charities Review Authority ha s the power to postpone a fee payment, recover a postponed fee and refund a fee; . the Authority is able to adjourn a case management conference, determine preliminary issues in the absence of a party and dismiss an appeal if it is the appellant that misses the case management conference; . the Authority is able to reinstate an appeal after an appellant fails to attend a case management conference if exceptional circumstances apply , or the appellant ha s a good reason for not attending and files their applicati on within working days after the for the case management conference; . include a definition for registrar ; . require the Ministry of Justice to publish information on its website about the purpose of the Authority, requirements for commencing a proceeding, and other guidelines related to proceedings; authorise the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector to make decisions on minor and technical policy changes that are not inconsistent with the policy intent of the proposals in this paper; and invite the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector to authorise the Parliamentary Counsel Office to draft regulations to give effect to the recommendations in this paper . Authorised for lodgement Hon Louise Upston Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector UNCLASSIFIED Appendi x A: Regulatory Impact Statement UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector
UNCLASSIFIED . increasing the resilience of three waters service provision to both short and long term risks and events, particularly climate ch ange and natural hazards; . moving the supply of three waters services to a more financially sustainable footing, and addressing the affordability and capability challenges faced by small suppliers and councils; and . improving transparency about, and accountability for, the delivery and costs of three waters services, including the ability to benchmark the performance of service providers CBC MIN refers. . In January , the Cabinet Business Committee noted that these objectives would be impo rtant considerations for the development of new service delivery arrangements. It also noted that, in addition to the specific objectives for reform, there are some bottom lines that any changes to service delivery arrangements must meet, including: . prote cting public investment in three waters assets; . providing a customer voice; . accepting that change will have an impact on local government, but limiting the impact as much as possible. . In addition, objectives have been developed that relat e to COVID reco very that is, to ma ximise the positive impact of the stimulus on local economies and jobs, and address the impact of the change process during transition. The Cabinet paper notes that the investment type and procurement support could be targeted at reta ining local and lower skill jobs, preventing further deterioration in water infrastructure as council finances decrease, and avoiding investment in assets that may become stranded in future entities. Options identification and analysis . Three Waters Ministe rs have been considering the potential for service delivery reforms for some time , and there have been prior Cabinet decisions on this topic . The latest paper proposes certain core components of the new service delivery model , thereby setting the basic di rection for further policy development work and discussions with local government. . The proposed approach involves: . the creation of multi regional, asset owning water providers, which would be statutory entities; . protecting public ownership within new serv ice delivery models and legislation , and developing ownership arrangements that involve local government. . The rationale for these proposals, and other alternatives that have been considered, is discussed below. This is based on advice that has been developed throughout the Three Waters Review. . As noted in the Cabinet paper, a large number of related matters would need to be explored further during policy development and design work, including: . shareholding arrangements; . funding and financing arrang ements (including the fees and charges faced by consumers); Department of Internal Affa irs Supplementary information Page of rnfoawab Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
UNCLASSIFIED . mechanisms that provide for local community input and local service delivery; . the nature and extent of the legislative framework that would be required to regulate the new entities, including econ omic regulation and mechanisms to protect consumer interests; . the scope of the new water entities remit, particularly regarding the provision of stormwater services, and drinking water and wastewater services that are currently the responsibility of priva tecommunity suppliers; . the potential use of instruments like government policy statements to guidedirect the new water entities. . These matters would be the subject of further advice and report backs , following detailed options identification and analys is, and stakeholder engagement. They are not considered in this document. Approaches to service delivery reform . Previous Cabinet papers identified three potential approaches to service delivery reform: . voluntary, sector led reforms to service delivery ar rangements; . establishment of a three waters fund to support voluntary service delivery improvements; and . creation (in legislation ) of an aggregated system of dedicated, publicly owned drinking water and wastewater providers. . In January , Cabinet Business Committee noted that the case for change to the current structural arrangements for the delivery of three waters services continues to build , and that changes to how New Zealand delivers three waters services are required . . At that time, it was agreed that central government would continue to support local government to make voluntary changes to service delivery arrangements , but set a oneyear deadline for the sector to demonstrate progress. Work would also be undertaken in parallel to explore t he other options identified above. . Since those decisions were made, the COVID response and recovery work has led to a reconsideration of this process . The preferred approach is to move ahead with service delivery reform through the creation of multi regional, asset owning water entities coupled with Crown investment in water infrastructure . This is considered to be the most effective mechanism for achiev ing the dual goals and multiple objectives referred to earlier in this document. . Alternatives to the proposed approach were identified. For example, alternatives to the economic stimulus could include: . asking councils to fund further investments on their balance sheets, by utilising further borrowing ; . support ing council debt through issuing some form of government bond ; . using alternative funding or financing arrangements to support further investment in three waters assets, such as Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) . Department of Internal Affa irs Supplementary information Page of rnfoawab Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
UNCLASSIFIED . There are no financial implications for the Crown arising from this paper. However , financial implications for the Crown may arise from the cost recovery options (partial and no cost recovery) . . There is a strong likelihood of additional ongoing Crown funding being required for OFLC from July . I have requested that the Minister of Finance include funding for OFLC as a placeholder Budget initiative in the Internal Affairs portfolio for consideration as part of Budget . . The Department will have a clearer understanding of the funding requirements following the public consultation on the level of potential cost recover y. . The maximum amount the Crown may have to contribute in addition to its current funding, would be approximately . million for and outyears . . Subject to Cabinets approval of how to fund the classification system in early March , and if Cabinet agrees to a mix of Government and sector funding, the total amount of funding sought is likely to be less than . million . Human rights, gender and disability . There are no human rights, gender or disability issues with this paper. Legislative implications . There are no legislati ve implications arising from this paper. However, a mendments to the Classification Act and the Regulations may arise from the Review. Amendments to the Classification Act will be made through the CVoD Amendment Bill. Regulatory Impact analysis . The public consultation document was reviewed by a joint Department Treasury Quality Assurance Panel (the Panel) . The Panels assessment follows . The Panel has agreed the document would facilitate reasonable consultation. The Consultation Document substitutes for a Regulatory Impact Assessment. A Quality Assurance Panel with representatives from the Department of Internal Affairs and the Treasury Regulatory Quality considers that the information and analysis summarised in the C onsultation Document is likely to lead to reasonable consultation in support of Regulatory Impact Analysis to inform subsequent decisions. The Consultation Document outlines current funding arrangements and challenges well, including context for options to fund current and future activities in light of ongoing Commercial Video on Demand reform. The analysis of those options is, however, incomplete and inaccurate in some areas: Cost estimates for different activities that the Office of Film and Literature Classification will undertake are provided but in an aggregated form. To enable stakeholders to test whether these estimates are reasonable, a further breakdown of these costs should be provided, eg for people costs, hourly wage rates and the number of hou rs. The Department of Internal Affairs should consider releasing a further breakdown alongside the Consultation Document. The Consultation Document correctly identifies the main cost recovery questions (considering who benefits from the regulation, and who contributes to the need Page of
UNCLASSIFIED . We also considered whether economic stimulus could accompany voluntary service delivery reform, or could be unconditional. . These options were assessed in terms of their feasibility and effectiveness in meeting the dual goals and objectives. Considerations included the likelihood the goalsobjectives will be met, the nature and extent of the effectimpact, timeliness, and certainty of outcome. . None of the alternative approaches were considered to be as effective as the proposed approach. In summary: . Asking councils to fund further investments on their balance sheets, by utilising further bor rowing , is unlikely to be effective and would not bridge the expected investment gaps . The decrease in revenues will severely constrain councils ability to take on more debt , and mean most councils will need to curtail almost all of their borrowing progr ammes. We estimated that, in aggregate, councils will only be able to borrow an additional million per annum without breaching debt torevenue limits. This is insufficient to bridge the expected billion investment gap. . Support ing council debt thro ugh issuing some form of government bond is only an attractive option if the differential is large and councils have a greater ability to take on debt than current circumstances allow. Overall, the likelihood of this occurring is low, and unlikely to be s ufficiently attractive to the sector nor sufficient to prevent deterioration of the infrastructure. . There are several challenges with using SPVs, particularly from an immediate response perspective, and they would not incentivise structural reform. SPVs are not well suited to brown field development or renewal of assets, which is what the bulk of this programme of work is looking to support in the short to medium term. SPVs also typically rely heavily on private or overseas equity investment to fund up front capital costs. Due to the economic shock relating to COVID , it is likely that ready access to private equity and capital will be limited, and the Crown will need to step in to help fill this gap in the short term. Even in instances where private e quity is available, borrowing costs are likely to escalate substantially for firms to access this form of capital. . Evidence to suggests that the political and economic barriers to voluntary reforms are high. Proceeding with a voluntary approach to s ervice delivery reform , or unconditional investment, would not guarantee th at reform will occur or be achieved in a way that meets the objectives . This would not represent a sound investment approach or good use of public money. Number of entities . The p referred approach involves the creation of a small number of multi regional water service providers , which would be asset owning . . It is anticipated that t his would realise a number of economic and other benefits associated with large scale providers, addr ess the many of the systemic issues and infrastructure deficits facing the three waters system, and help to deliver the reform objectives. Benefits include: Department of Internal Affa irs Supplementary information Page of rnfoawab Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
UNCLASSIFIED . increased financial capacity and capability, with stronger, more flexible and resilient balance she ets, greater access to capital, and a more reliable investment pipeline; . opportunities to take a strategic and coordinated approach, to consider infrastructure needs at a larger scale and in the context of wider catchment outcomes; . building technical capab ilities, with access to a larger, more specialist workforce, and the ability to innovate and make use of new technology; . enabling financial efficiencies and lower operating costs, by consolidating administration and overhead costs, and improving organisati onal capabilities; . enabling more consistent water charges, with the ability to harmonise tariffs across much larger areas. . Many of these benefits are only realised (fully or partially) if the new entities are asset owning. Shared services models that do not involve asset ownership have a number of shortcomings, including the inability to access scale or scope efficiencies, and split accountabilities. . Wellington Water is a current example of a shared service council control led organisation that manages and operates drinking water and wastewater assets and services for its council owners. However, each of the councils continue to own water assets and raise revenue (on advice from Wellington Water) for the operation, maintenan ce and, where necessary, the upgrade of those assets. Wellington Water has no ability to make trade offs between operating and capital expenditure, nor can it cross subsidise between owners or ratepayers in different districts. . How many multi regional wat er providers would be created, and their boundaries, is a matter for discussion between Ministers and local government. However, it is proposed that f inal decisions on these matters would be based on the following factors: . scale benefits including at least one very large urban centre within each entity, to ensure the full benefits of scale are achieved through a larger network and population base; . communities of interest; . relationships with other jurisdictional boundarie s, including catchments. . The table below presents a summary of previous analysis on options for the approximate number of entities , and the strengths and weaknesses of different approaches . Department of Internal Affa irs Supplementary information Page of rnfoawab Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED regional, publicly Small number of multi national, publicly owned water providers regional, publiclyowned owned water provider water providers (e.g. ) (PREFERRED) Strengths Alignment with Large scale operations Largest scale catchments and population operations and coverage big urban concentration ofRegional identity base in each area expertise Continued Biggest population Bigger balance sheets territorial authority all areas could be self coverage and balance ownership is fundingsustainable; sheetpossible leverage greater debt Could leverage Several similar greater debt (though providers enables not significantly more benchmark ing than largerscale multiregional Continued territorial providers) authority ownership is possible Weaknesses Relatively small Harder to reflect local Requires more onerous regulation and balance sheets scale operations identity (if appropriate) though service Benchmark ing is not in many regions delivery could still have possible (so we will a local presence Very different not know how well it population sizes and May be less desirable is performing) resources to local government May need to be consistency and than a regional Crown owned; harder benchmarking approach to provide for council difficult ownership Some regions will Hard to reflect local continue to struggle identity though with funding and service delivery could infrastructure still have a local challenges (e.g. if presence they are small, Unlikely to bespread out, andor supported by local have no large urban governmentbase) . As the table indicates, there are concerns about the feasibility and viability of a purely regional model (that is, providers within current regional council unitary authority boundaries) . The reference to scale benefits in the assessment factors listed above is intended to address this point. . The January Cabinet paper noted that regions with low density or no large urban base and a relatively small ratepayer base would continue to face affordability challenges. This was illustrated in the chart below, which identifies the costs per ratepayer in each region for the capital costs of wastewater upgrades. Department ofInternal Affairs Supplementary information Page of rnfoawab Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
UNCLASSIFIED ezprxq Cabinet
UNCLASSIFIED ezprxq Rachel Hayward
UNCLASSIFIED ezprxq
UNCLASSIFIED . However, we consider that this option has a number of disadvantages and drawbacks, and would not be effective in achieving the benefits sought from multi regional models . For example: . Current provisions in the Local Government Act are not fit for this purpose, and present barriers to reform. It is likely to take as long to redesign and amend the existing legislative provisio ns, as it would to create bespoke provisions in new legislation (including some form of economic regulation). . Establishing CCOs require s the agreement of all councils , each of which would need to undertake public consultation . This would take time and c reates uncertainty about the outcome. . If the new entities were CCOs, this is likely to have implications for financing arrangements. They may not be sufficiently separate from local government to borrow at similar rates as other utilities , for example . Public ownership . Throughout the Three Waters Review, there has been a clear and explicit bottom line about public ownership. . On November , Cabinet agreed that the outcome of three waters reforms would include that existing three waters assets and services must remain in public ownership, and the system will incorporate safeguards to protect public ownership of this essential infrastructure, both now and in the future CAB MIN refers. . This decision is supported by the noting recommendatio n in January referenced earlier in this document, and recent discussions with Three Waters Ministers. . The Department strongly agrees with this position, and has not identified or assessed alternative options. There are significant disadvantages and r isks associated with privatisation , and no clear benefits . There would be extensive public and local government opposition to privatisation. . Evidence from overseas indicates that most of the similar jurisdictions that have successfully reformed their wa ter service delivery arrangements have created publicly owned entities. For example , Scottish Water is owned by the Scottish Government, while Tas mania Water (TasWater) is owned by local authorities and the Tasmanian Government. . There would be various w ays of structuring a public ownership model. The proposed approach involves local government collective ownership of the new service delivery entities, through local authority shareholders. This is the preferred approach, given local government currently owns the water assets that would be transferred to the new entities. This would enable local authorities to continue to have a strategic oversight role in relation water services, and maintain a link with other council responsibilities and local communiti es. . The basis for shareholding will need careful consideration and financial analysis. It could be possible to apportion shares on the basis of the condition of the assets that are transferred, to reward previous investment and good asset maintenance. There could also be potential to provide for some form of annual return to shareholderscouncils. Department of Internal Affa irs Supplementary information Page of rnfoawab Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
UNCLASSIFIED . There are also opportunities to consider other shareholding and investment arrangements. Further policy development work would examine the potential for : . the Crown to be a shareholder (for example, in recognition of stimulus funding) ; . other investors to be party to financing (but not ownershipequity ) arrangements . . There would be further advice to Three Waters Ministers on these matters, and proposals wo uld be in later Cabinet papers. . We note that the possibility for third party equity arrangements such as ACC and New Zealand Super was ruled out by Three Waters Ministers earlier in the Three Waters Review. This was because these kinds of organisatio ns need to be able to maximise the return on their investment, and may need to release the equity at any time. This was considered to be undesirable , and incompatible with Cabinet decisions that water services must remain in public ownership. Wider (priv ate) equity arrangements have been ruled out on the same basis. . The potential for iwi investment was left as a possibility, though, and w ill be explored further in future advice. Department of Internal Affairs May Department of Internal Affa irs Supplementary information Page of rnfoawab Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
UNCLASSIFIED In May , I intend to seek Cabinet Legislation Committee approval to submit regulations to the Ex ecutive Council so that they are in place by July . Background The Charities Amendment Act (Amendment Act) introduced changes to the Charities Act (Charities Act), including improvements to the appeals process . From July , t he Taxation Review Authoritys jurisdiction will expand to hear charities appeals to provide charities with a more accessible appeals avenue prior to the High Court. Charities will be able to appeal decisions related to their registration under the Charities Act to the Authority . The Amendment Act provid es for the key details, like the specific decisions that can be appealed and who can appeal. The Amendment Act also includes provisions for regulations to provide for the Authoritys procedures and to give full effect to the Amendment Act . Cabinet noted in February that regulations may be required SWC MIN . Without regulations, filing an appeal will be free of charge. Processes that are not provided for in the Amendment Act will follow the District Court Rules . Having an accessible appeals process is important for charities. Registration brings significant benefits to a charity such as an income tax exemption. Decisions affecting a charitys registration status (such as potential deregistration) could significant ly impact on a charitys ability to raise funds for their intended purpose. Decisions about individuals ( for example, potential serious wrongdoing by an officer of a charity) do not affect a charitys registration status but can still cause disruption and could impact a charitys ability to fundraise . Consultation with stakeholders between November and January provided valuable and varied perspectives that informed final proposals . Submitters main concern was that the appeals process be as accessible as possible. Setting regulations can reflect the importance of access to justice while acknowledging other considerations such as the public and private benefit s that appeals generate (discussed below). Regulations will also ensure seamless end toend processes of the Authority and alignment with the wider tribunal system . Proposal for a filing fee I am proposing a single filing fee of with provision of a fee waive r For filing an appeal with the Authority under the Charities Act , I am proposing a single filing fee of with provision of a fee waiver . Establishing this moderate fee is consistent with access to justice as the fee amount reflects the public benefit by the Authority (for example, clarifying unclear law and the nature of peoples rights and duties) and any private benefit to the appellant ( for example, from obtaining a decision that specifically determines the appellants issue) . All fee amounts are inclusive of GST. UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector
UNCLASSIFIED Background . OFLC regulates the classification system and manages restricted content. Under the Classification Act, OFLCs functions are: . to classify publications such as computer files, films and books; . to conduct research into the impacts of the media content regulatory regime; and . provide information about classification, the Classification Act, and how OFLC operates . Snapshot of OFLCs financial positio n and outlook . CABMIN refers ; and refers . OFLCs revenue sources comprise a Crown appropriation , third party fees , and a small amount of interest income. OFLC has recorded deficits since . Prior to , deficits were met from cash reserves built up in previous years. The deficits are attributed to the decline of the physical media industry, outdated third party fee levels , and until a static Crown appropriation. . OFLCs existing third party fee levels have not been re viewed since and are no longer fit forpurpose . Over the last ten years, OFLCs third party income has reduced by percent due to the decreasing DVD market . There is now a small DVD and physical media market that will only generate limited income. In , OFLC received . million ( percent) of its total revenue from third party fees. . Cabinet has recently agreed the following additional funding for OFLC: oneoff funding for of . million to support OFLCs operating and minor capital expenditure CABMIN. refers ; . million in , and increasing the baseline appropriation from . million to . million from onwards , to respond to increased demand for its servi ces following the Christchurch t error attacks on March up to . million for for OFLC to develop a self rating system for CVoD providers to self classify content available on their platforms CAB MIN . During , OFLC restructured its personnel to focus more on education and information activities . OFLC is operating at a lean level to meet its statutory functions. The media content regulatory regime is changing . There is a gap in the legislative framework that does not require CVoD content to be classifiedrated before it is screened in New Zealand . The Classification Act is being extended through the Films, Videos, Publications and Classification (CVoD) Amendment Bill (the CVoD Amendment Bill) to regulate CVoD content . The CVoD Amendment Bill wil l require the classification rating and display of online labels (G, PG, M, R, R) for online content prior to its screening in New Zealand . Films for cinematic release, DVDs and some games . Page of
UNCLASSIFIED Context . Over the past two and a half years, the Minister of Local Government has been leading a cross government review of the system for regulating and managing drinking water, wastewater and stormwat er (the Three Waters Review). A group of Three Waters Ministers has met regularly to discuss and provide input into this work. A large group of agencies, led and coordinated by the Department of Internal Affairs, have provided advice to these Ministers. . Cabinet has considered, and made a series of decisions on, a series of papers relating to the Three Waters Review: . Review of three waters infrastructure: key findings and next steps (April ). . Future state of the three waters system: regulation and service delivery (November ). . A Plan for Three Waters Reform (July ). . Strengthening the regulation of drinking water, wastewater and stormwater (July ) supported by a Regulatory Impact A ssessme nt. . Institutional arrangements for a drinking water regulator (September ) supported by a Regulatory Impact A ssessment and business case . . Three waters service delivery and funding arrangements: approach to reform (January ). . The current paper , Investing in water infrastructure to accelerate reform and support economic recovery post COVID (May ) , builds on and is informed by previous decisions made by Cabinet, as well as d iscussions with Three Waters Ministers about service delivery reform and infrastructure investment , and stakeholder engagement . The key decisions that are relevant to the current paper are outlined in this document . There has been no indication that these decisions need to be reconsidered. Problem definition . The problem definition is well established in previous Cabinet papers , regulatory impact analyses, and briefing material . Several of the Cabinet papers explored the problems and challenges facing the three waters system in considerable detail. The Regulatory Impact A ssessment , Strengthening the regulation of drinking water, wastewater and stormwater (July ) , also included an o verview of the key problems . . Some of these problems are already being addressed through significant legislative changes to the drinking wate r regulatory framework, and the creation of a new Water Services Regulator Taumata Arowai. The proposed programme of reforms to the service delivery system is intended to address many of the other problems, as well as supporting the long term effectiven ess and efficiency of Taumata Arowai and the new drinking water regulatory framework. Three Waters Ministers include the Ministers offor: Local Government; Health; Environment; Infrastructure; Rural Communities; Conservation; Climate Change; Commerce and Consumer Affairs; and Urban Development . Department of Internal Affa irs Supplementary information Page of rnfoawab Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
UNCLASSIFIED Costs to be recovered . OFLC s funding shortfall arising from existing classification and CVoD related activities over the three years from to is estimated to be approximately million. The shortfall will need to be funded by the Crown, the sector , or a mix of both . . Costrecovery from the sector is not sought for the following: costs arising from classifications for the Crowns enforcement activities ; OFLCs information service, including a portion of the research costs ; a portion of costs arising fr om the classification of material for cultural purposes, and for special interest groups and charitable trusts ; and the costs of OFLC responding to increased demands for its services following the Christchurch terror attacks. . The New Zealand community is the principal beneficiary of these activities, and I consider that the costs involved (approximately . million from ) should continue to be met by the Crown. . Costrecovery from the sector , the Crown or from both are appropriate option s for the following: costs arising from commercial classifications ; a portion of OFLCs research costs ; and a portion of costs arising from the classification of material for cultural purposes, and for special interest groups and charitable trusts . . These activities will incur estimated costs to OFLC of . million in . Consultation approach . A public consultation is planned from December to February . The Department is available to meet with stakeholders if request ed. Options in the public consultation document . The public consultation document is organised into two parts. Part outlines the current classification system, OFLCs operating environment , and provides estimates of the costs to operate the classification system. Part p rovides options for cost recovery and funding mechanisms. Part also includes potential financial implications for cost recovery from the sector set at different levels. Principles for assessing the cost recovery options and mechanisms have been develope d using the Treasurys Guidelines for Setting Charges in the Public Sector and the Controller and Auditor Generals advice Charging Fees for Public Sector Goods and Services ,and are included as Part of the consultation document. . Costrecovery options: full, partial or no cost recovery . Through th e planned consultation , I am looking for feedback on an appropriate level of costrecovery from the sector . The current approach to funding classification decisions was established in . It i nvolves the Crown and submitters sharing the costs. There is no agreed basis for how the costs are shared between the Crown and submitters . Page of
UNCLASSIFIED For Cabinet material and any public service departmental advice use this copyright statement Crown Copyright, Creati ve Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .)
UNCLASSIFIED Hon Brooke van Velden, Minister of Internal Affairs Proactive release of Cabinet Material on proposals to amend the Gambling Act to exempt class lotteries from the prohibition on remote interactive gambling. September
UNCLASSIFIED Hon Nanaia Mahuta, Minister of Local Government Proactive release of Cabinet material about investing in water infrastructure to accelerate reform and support economic recovery post COVID , June The following documents have been proactively released: June , DEV MIN Minute: Investing in Water Infrastructure to Accelerate Reform and Support Economic Recovery Post COVID , Cabinet Office; and June , Cabinet Paper: Investing in water infrastructure to accelerate reform and support economic recovery post COVID , Office of the Minister of Local Government . Some parts of this information would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh t he reasons for withholding it. Key to Redaction Codes : ()(f)(iv) maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED DEVMIN Cabinet Economic Development Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification , or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , bypersons with the appropriate authority. Investing in Water Infrastructure to Accelerate Reform and Support Economic Recovery PostCOVID Portfolio Local Government On June , the Cabinet Economic Development Committee: Background noted that on Januaiy , the Cabinet Business Committee considered refoms to local government water sevice delivey aid funding atTaigements , agreed to support local authorities to make voluntay changes, and agreed to set a oneyeai deadline for demonstrating progress CBCMIN ; noted that since those decisions were made, COVID has exacerbated the three waters challenges facing the local government sector and, without support: . investment will not occur to the levels required; . the condition ofinfrastrncture will continue to decline; . sector capability , capacity and funding issues will remain; . there could be negative implications for public health and envirollllle ntal outcomes ; noted that to respond to, and recover from, COVID , oppotun ities for investment need to be identified, such as water infrastructme , to cushion the blow and help to kickstart the economy, aid the approach to restructuring water sevices needs to be reconsidered ; noted that in April , the Ministers of Local Government, Health, Envirolllllent , Infrastrncture , Rural Communit ies, Consevation , Climate Change, Commerce and Consumer Affairs, and Urban Development (Three Waters Ministers) discussed opportunities to support economic recovey post COVID, and identified a dual approach of: . stimulating investment, to assist economic recovery through job creation, and maintain investment in water infrastructure renewals and maintenance ; and . fundamentally refoming the water sevice delivery sector, to realise significant economic , enviromneutal, public health, and other benefits over the medium to long tenn; rnfoawab UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED DEVMIN agreed to proceed with a threeyear programme for refonning three waters service delivey anangements , to be delivered in parallel with an economic stimulus package ofCrown investment in local authority water infrastrncture, which together cou ld: . protect or create at least , jobs, and generate an estimated . billion in additional GDP; . ensure planned investments in water infrastrncture continue; . incentivise the local governme nt sector to suppot the refom agenda; agreed that provision of the economic stimulus is conditional on local authorities opting in to service delivey refom and, specifically , the creation ofa small nmnber of multiregional water service providers; agreed that there be fmther discussio ns with Three Waters Ministers and local government about the exact number and boundaries of the multiregional water service providers , and that final decisions would be based on the following factors: . achieving scale benefit, including at least one very large urban centre within each entity, to ensure the full benefits ofscale are achieved through a larger nehvork and population base; . cmnunit ies ofinterest; . relationships with other jurisdictional boundaries , including catchments; agreed that the following highlevel design objectives would be reflected in the new multi regional models for water service delivey: . financial sustainability , affordability , and resilience ; . effective, efficient, and reliable sevices; . enable an effective, efficient regulaty system; . minimise the negative impact ofrefom , where possible; agreed that the new multiregional models for water sevice delivey would include the following safeguards: . mechanisms that provide for continued public ownership of water infrastrncture, and protect against privatisation ; . mechanisms that provide for community input and local sevice delivey; agreed in principle that, subject to discussions with local governme nt and detailed policy design work, that the new multiregional water providers would be: . statutoy, assetowning entities, with commercia l disciplines , and a competency based board; . owned by local authorities , as shareholders, but with sufficient legal separation to ensure there are no restrictions on the entities ability to bonow on similar lines to other utilities; UNCLASSIFIE D rnfoawab Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED DEVMIN noted that a number ofrelated matters would need to be explored through further policy development and design work, including: . the nature oflocal government shareholding arnngements ; . the potential for the Crown to be a shareholder, and for other investors in the new entities; . funding and financing anangements; . mechanisms that provide for local community input and local service delivey; . the nature and extent ofthe legislative framework that would be required to regulate the new entities, including economic regulation and mechanisms to protect consmner interests; . the scope ofthe new water entities remit, paticularly regarding the provision of stonnwater services, and drinking water and wastewater services that are ctmently the responsibility ofprivatecommunity suppliers; . the potential use ofiustnnnents like a government policy statement to guidedirect the new water entities; . the options for addressing the funding challenges facing Crown water infrastmcture providers within the context ofthese refoms; noted that there will also need to be ftuther work to consider and address Treatyrelated rights and interests, including in the design ofthe new water entities, and a strategy for engaging with iwiMaori is being prepared to infonn this work; invited the Minister ofLocal Government to report back in: . tv with finther advice on the matters refened to in paragraphs to above, and on the allocation offimding to nual drinking water suppliers as refened to in paragraph below; . ( f) iv with detailed policy proposals relating to the matters refened to in paragraphs to above, to iufom the preparation oflegislation to give effect to the refonns during ; noted that an initial work programme has been identified to implement the proposed refoms to water service delivey anangements , including the following workstreams: . stakeholder engagement and cmmmications ; . policy, legislation , and guidance ; . structuring the new multiregional water entities; . establishment and implementation; . project management , reporting, and programme development; noted that, subject to agreement to fimding as outlined below, the Depaitment ofInternal Affairs will lead the service delivey refom work programme, working closely with other agencies including The Treasmy, Ministiy ofBusiness , Innovation and Employment, Ministy ofHealth, and Minishy for the Environment , and with sector representative bodies; UNCLASSIFIED rnfoawa b Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED DEVMIN agreed that governance for the service delivey refonn programme be provided by the group ofThree Waters Ministers, as refened to in paragraph above; Engagement with the local government sector noted that, while gaining support from local government is vital, it is important to move quickly to develop agreements with the sector, shape the broad refonn agenda, and to undeiake detailed policy design work, and that it will not be helpful to enter into protracted negotiations with the sector before this work can begin; noted that officials from the Depament ofInternal Affairs, The Treasmy, Local Government New Zealand, and the Society ofLocal Government Managers will fm a joint working group, which will prepare: . an initial highlevel agreement on how local government will work with govemment on the service delivey refom and investment stimulus agenda, in June ; . a more detailed agreement (memorandum ofunderstanding) that councils across New Zealand would have the opportunity to opt in to in August ; . advice on the policy matters refened to in recommendations to above, including the suggested number and strncture ofthe new multiregional water entities, by December ; agreed that: . initial funding from the economic stimulus package be released to those councils that agree to the memorandum oflmderstand ing refeTed to in paragraph . above, in August , provided that a sufficient number ofcouncils opt in to make relevant new sevice delivey entity viable; . councils that do not opt in at this point would still be able to do so at a later , but would not receive the first amount ofstimulus investment ; noted that once agreement has been reached with councils, it is anticipated that Crown Infrastmcture Pruners would have ru oversight role in relation to the allocation and use of the economic stimulus, in accordance with the agreements; noted that there will be continued engagement with local government, including direct engagement with councils, and an engagement strategy will be developed to guide this work; invited the Minister ofLoe.al Government to repo back on progress with sector engagement in T(mivJ Financial implications noted that it will take significrut resomces to administer and implement the complex service delivey refom and investment programme described above, incentivise and enable the local government sector to suppo the refoms, address infrastmcture deficits, and provide an appropriate economic stimulus; rnfoawa b UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED DEVMIN agreed to invest . million over four years to provide ongoing funding to the new Water Services Regulator, Tamnata Arowai, the new Crown agent responsible for overseeing the drinking water regulaty systems and the delivey ofa small number ofcentralised wastewate r and stomwater functions, and to cover the costs associated with monitoring this entity; agreed to increase funding in Vote Internal Affairs to meet the costs associated with the three waters refonn programme , and the ongoing operations ofTaumata .Arowai; noted that the funding to deliver the three waters refom programme will support local government recovey from COVID and contribute to the revitalisation ofthe economy ; rnfoawa b UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED DEVMIN agreed to add the following new categoy to the multicategy appropriatio n Local GovernmentAdministrat ion to suppoi the new Crown agent, TaumataArowai: Tit.le Type Sc.ope Taumata Arowai Nondepartmental Output Expense This categoy is limited to suppting T aumata Arowai in meeting its statutoy responsibilities to regulate New Zealands water supplies. :t)(f)IV J rnfoawab UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government UNCLASSIFIED DEVMIN ()f(IV) Janine Havey Committee Secretaiy Present: Hon Kelvin Davis Hon Grant Robertson (Chair) Hon Phil Twyford Hon David Parker Hon Nanaia Mahuta Hon Stuat Nash Hon Iain LeesGalloway Hon Jenny Salesa Hon Damien OConnor Hon Kris Faafoi Hon Shane Jones Hon Willie Jackson Hon James Shaw Hon Eugenie Sage Officials present from: Office ofthe Prime Minister Officials Committee for DEV rnfoawab UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
UNCLASSIFIED Hon Tracey Martin, Minister of Internal Affairs Proactive release of Cabin et paper: Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commercial Video on Demand) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction Issue February These documents have been proactively released : December , LEG MIN Minute of Decision : Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commercial Video on Demand) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction , Cabinet Office; December , LEG SUB Summary: Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commercial Video on Demand) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction, Cabinet Office ; December , CAB MIN Minute of Decision : Report of the Cabinet Legislation Committee: Period Ended December , Cabinet Office; and December , Cabinet Paper: Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commercial Video on Demand) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction , Office o f the Minister of Internal Affairs. Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Key to Redaction Codes : S()(b)(ii) would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the c ommercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information. S()(f)(iv) the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials. The Cabinet material and Department of Internal Affairs content accompanying this coversheet has been made publicly accessible, subject to copyright Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) I N C O N F I D E N C E LEGMIN Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commercial Video on Demand) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction Portfolio Internal Affairs On December , the Cabinet Legislation Committee (LEG): noted that the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commercial Video on Demand) Amendment Bill (the Bill) holds a category priority on the Legislation Programme (to be passed in if possible); noted that the Bill will address a regulatory gap by enabling mandatory labelling for Commercial Video onDemand content under the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act as it currently does for films; approved the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commercial Video on Demand) Amendment Bill PCO . for introduction, subject to the final approval of the government caucuses and sufficient support in the House of Representatives; agreed that the Bill be introduced on December ; agreed that the government propose that the Bill be: . referred to the Government Administration Committee for consideration; . enacted by mid; authorised the Minister of Internal Affairs to make any minor changes to the Bill following consideration by LEG. Gerrard Carter Committee Secretary Hardcopy distribution: (see over) I N C O N F I D E N C E osjznc Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E LEGMIN Present: Officials present from: Rt Hon Winston Peters Hon Chris Hipkins (Chair) Hon Stuart Nash Hon Iain LeesGalloway Hon Kris Faafoi Hon Tracey Martin Hon Ron Mark Hon Julie Anne Genter Hon Eugenie Sage Michael Wood MP (Senior Government Whip)Officials Committee for LEG Hardcopy distribution: Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E osjznc Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E LEGSUB Cabinet Legislation Committee Summary This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commercial Video on Demand) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction Portfolio Internal Affairs Purpose This paper seeks approval for the introduction of the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commercial Video onDemand) Amendment Bill (the Bill). Previous ConsiderationOn September , Cabinet agreed to amend the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act (the Act) to incorporate Commercial Video onDemand (CVoD) into New Zealands media classification regime. CABMIN Summary The purpose of the Bill is to address a regulatory gap where CVoD content is not currently subject to mandatory classification requirements prior to being made available in New Zealand. The Bill will enable CVoD content to be rated and labelled in the same way that films are already regulated under the Act. Regulated CVoD providers will be required to label content by: selfrating content using their own systems that have been approved by the Office of Film and Literature Classification (the Classification Office); selfrating content using the Classification Offices online tool and resources; or submitting content to the Film and Video Labelling Body (the Labelling Body) for rating and labelling, with certain content to be referred to the Classification Office for classification where appropriate. Regulatory Impact AnalysisA Quality Assurance Panel with representatives from the Department of Internal Affairs and the Treasury considers that the Supplementary Analysis Report (attached as appendix B) meets the Quality Assurance criteria. Compliance A Departmental Disclosure Statement is attached. I N C O N F I D E N C E osjznc Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E LEGSUB Timing Issues Introduced: on December ; Referred: to the Government Administration Select Committee, for a consideration period of four months; Enacted: by July , subject to its priority in the House programme. Sections , , and of the Bill will come into force on January . The rest of the Bill will come into force on July . Announcement A press released will be issued once the Bill has been introduced into the House, and the paper will be on the Department of Internal Affairs website. Proactive ReleaseThis paper will be proactively released. Consultation Paper prepared by DIA (Internal Affairs). MBIE (Commerce and Consumer Affairs), the Treasury, MFAT (Foreign Affairs) and Ministry of Health (Health) TPK, MSD, MoW, MPP, MCH (Broadcasting, Communications and Digital Media) and Oranga Tamariki were consulted. DPMC (Policy Advisory Group), The Office of Film and Literature Classification and The Broadcasting Standards Authority were also consulted. The Minister indicates that the Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Education, Minister of Justice, AttorneyGeneral, Minister of Revenue, Minister for ACC, Minister of Agriculture, Minister for Women and the Minister of Conservation were consulted, and that all government parties were also consulted. The Minister of Internal Affairs recommends that the Committee: note that the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commercial Video on Demand) Amendment Bill (the Bill) holds a category priority on the Legislation Programme (to be passed in if possible); note that the Bill will address a regulatory gap by enabling mandatory labelling for Commercial Video onDemand (CVoD) content under the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act (the Act) as it currently does for films; approve the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification (Commercial Video onDemand) Amendment Bill PCO . for introduction, subject to the final approval of the government caucus and sufficient support in the House of Representatives; agree that the Bill be introduced on December ; I N C O N F I D E N C E osjznc Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E LEGSUB agree that the government propose that the Bill be: . referred to the Government Administration Select Committee for consideration; . enacted by mid; agree that the Minister of Internal Affairs may authorise Parliamentary Counsel Office to make any minor changes to the Bill following consideration by the Cabinet Legislation Committee. Jack Petterson Committee Secretary Hardcopy distribution: Cabinet Legislation Committee I N C O N F I D E N C E osjznc Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN Cabinet Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Report of the Cabinet Legislation Committee: Period Ended December On December , Cabinet made the following decisions on the work of the Cabinet Legislation Committee for the period ended December : I N C O N F I D E N C E osjznc Proac ively released by the Minister of Internal ffairsUnrelated items have been redacted
UNCLASSIFIED Hon Tracey Martin, Minister of Internal Affairs Proactive release of Cabinet material about the Review of options for funding the classification framework under the Films, Videos, Publications and Classification Act February These documents have been proactively released: Cabinet paper: Approval of public consultation document: Review of options for funding the classification framework under the Films, Videos, Publications and Classification Act SWC SUB Funding the Classification Framework under the Films, Videos and Publications and Classification Act : Consultation Document December , SWC MIN: Funding the Class ification Framework under the Films, Videos, Publications and Classification Act : Consultation Document December , CAB MlN: Report of the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee: Period ended December Information not related to the Review of options for funding the classification framework under the Films, Videos, Publications and Classification Act has been withheld from the Cabinet Minute of Decision (CAB MIN) as it is out of scope. The Cabinet material and Department of Internal Affairs content accompanying this coversheet has been publicly accessible, subject to copyright Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .)
UNCLASSIFIED I am proposing one amendment to Cabinets previous decisions Cabinet agreed to a requirement for the Ministry of Justice to publish certain information on their website to be included in regulations Cab MIN refers. I propose that the requirement is not included as th is obligation already exists in law via the Taxation Review Authorities Act section C . Timing and day rule Subject to Cabinets approval, I recommend that the proposed regulations be submitted to the Executive Council on July and in the Gazette on July . I seek Cabinet agreement to waive the day rule so that the regulations can take ef fect on July in line with the commencement of the appeals provisions in the Charities Act . The regulations impact a small number of people in a minor way, namely those wanting to appeal a decision made by the Charities Registration Board or th e Chief Executive of the Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) . Early commencement will avoid the purpose of the regulations being defeated . Compliance There are no inconsistencies between the Charities (Taxation and Charities Review Authorities Appeals Process) Regulations and: . the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi ; . the rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act or the Human Rights Act ; . the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act ; . relevant international standards and obligations; and . the Legislation Guidelines ( edition), which are maintained by the Legislation Design and Advisory Committee. Regulations Review Committee There are no grounds identified under Standing O rder where the Regulations Review Committee could draw these regulations to the special attention of the House . Certification by Parliamentary Counsel The draft regulations have been certified by the Parliamentary Counsel Office as being in order for submission to Cabinet . Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Volunytary Sector
UNCLASSIFIED Impact Analysis A Regulatory Impact Statement was prepared and submitted with the submission to the Cabinet Social Outcomes Committee SOU MIN refers. Publicity Once the regulations are notified in the Gazette on July (subject to Cabinet Legislation Committees agreement to a waiver of the day rule) , the Department will advise the charities sector through the appropriate communication channels . Proactive release As per Cabinet Office Circular CO () Proactive Release of Cabinet Material: Requirements, I intend to proactively release this paper, subject to any redactions that may be warranted under the Official Information Act , within business days of decisions being taken. Consultation The Department has worked closely with the Ministry of Justice on these regulations . The following agencies were consulted on this paper: Inland Revenue Department; the Ministries of Business, Innovation and Em ployment; Social Development; Education; Health; Housing and Urban Development; Ethnic Communities; Youth Development; Disabled People; the Ministries for Women; Pacific Peoples; Culture and Heritage; the Office for Seniors; Te Arawhiti The Office for Mori Crown Relations, Te Puni Kkiri Ministry of Mori Development; Health New Zealand, the Treasury; Sport New Zealand; the Parliamentary Counsel Office; and C rown Law. The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet has been informed. Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Volunytary Sector
UNCLASSIFIED LEGMIN Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Charities (Taxation and Charities Review Authorities Appeals Process) Regulations Portfolio Community and Voluntary Sector On June , the Cabinet Legislation Committee: noted tha t, on March , the Cabinet Social Outcomes Committee agreed to policy proposals for regulations under the Charities Act (the Act) relating to appeals to the Taxation and Charities Review Authority SOUMIN; noted tha t the Charities (Taxation and Charities Review Authorities Appeals Process) Regulations (the regulations) will give effect to the decision referred to in paragraph above; agreed tha t a requirement for the Ministry of Justice to publish certain information on its website not be included in the regulations; noted tha t a waiver of the day rule is sought: . so that the regulations can come into force at the same time as the new appeals provisi ons in the Act; and . on the grounds that only a small number of people are impacted in a minor way and a la ter commencement would defeat the purpose of the regulations; agreed to w aive the day rule so that the regulations can come into force on July ; authorised the submission to the Executive Council of Charities (Taxation and Charities Review Authorities Appeals Process) Regulations PCO .. Tom Kelly Commi ttee Secretary Attendance (see over) iknavlaj UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Volunytary Sector
UNCLASSIFIED LEGMIN Present: Rt Hon Winston Peters Hon D avid Seymour Hon Chris Bishop (Chair) Hon Judith Collins KC Hon Todd McClay Hon Tama Potaka Hon Simon Watts Hon Brooke van Velden Hon Nicole McKee Hon Shane Jones Hon Casey Costello Hon Andrew Bayly Hon Andrew Hoggard Hon Scott Simpson, MP Jamie Arbuckle, MP Officials present from: Office of the Leader of the House Off icials Committee for LEG iknavlaj UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Volunytary Sector UNCLASSIFIED CABMIN Cabinet Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Report of the Cabinet Legislation Committee: Period Ended June On July , Cabinet made the following decisions on the work of the Cabinet Legislation Committee for the period ended June : LEGMIN Charities (Taxation and Charities Review Authorities CONFIRMED Appeals Process) Regulations Portfolio: Community and Voluntaiy Sector iknavlaj UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Volunytary Sector Rachel Hayward Secretaiy of the Cabinet iknavlaj UNCLASSIFIED CABMIN UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Volunytary Sector
UNCLASSIFIED Office of the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector Cabinet Social Outcomes Committee Policy proposals for regulations to enable appeals to the Taxation and Charities Review Authority Proposal I am seeking Cabinet agreement to policy proposals for regulations for appeals under the Charities Act . Relation to government priorities This is a matter that requires Cabinet approval now to ensure necessary regulations are in pl ace for when the Taxation and Charities Review Authority start s hearing charities appeals on July . Executive Summary This paper seeks Cabinet agreement to policy proposals to provide for new regulations under the Charities Act to support the Taxation and Charities Review Authority (the Authority) to hear charities appeals. From July , charities will be able to appeal decisions related to their registration under the Charities Act to an expanded Taxation Review Authority (renam ed as the Taxation and Charities Review Authority ). Setting limited matters in regulations will support the core objective of access to justice while recognising other considerations such as the public and private benefit s by appeals , and alignment of the Authority with the wider tribunal system. The proposals include: . a single fee of to file an appeal including provision to waive the fee in specific circumstances (this proposal supports access to justice while recognising the public and private benefit s from appealing decisions ); and . procedural matters to ensure the Authoritys processes run seamlessly end toend and align with the wider tribunal system. Targeted consultation between November and January confirmed that submitters main concern was that the appeals process is as accessible as possible . Some submitters noted that a small filing fee would be reasonable for appellants to contribute to the cost burden of running the tribunal , while t axpayers larger contribut ion recognises the public benefit in an appeals process . Entities and individuals (for example, officers of a charity) can appeal decisions by the Charities Registration Board and some decisions by the Chief Executive of the Department of Internal Affairs as set out in section A of the Charities Amendment Act . UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector
UNCLASSIFIED Office of the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector Chair, Cabinet Legislation Committee Charities (Taxation and Charities Review Authorities Appeals Process) Regulations Proposal I seek authorisation for submission to the Executive Council of the Charities (Taxation and Charities Review Authorities Appeals Process) Regulations . Policy Cabinet previously agreed to policy proposals for regulations to support the hearing of charities appeals New p rovisions relating to charities appeals in the Charities Act (the Act) come into force on July . The Act provides for regulations to be made for the procedure for appeals under the Act , including setting a fee to file an appeal , and the circumstances in which any fee may be r efunded, remitted or waived, in whole or in part. In April , Cabinet agreed to policy proposals and issue d drafting instructions Cab MIN refers. Cabinet agreed to a single fee of (inclusive of GST) to file an appeal with the provision of a fee waiver, and several procedural matters to ensure processes run seamlessly end toend and the Taxation and Charities Review Authority (the Authority) is aligned with the wider tribunal system. These procedural matters are: . A def inition for Registrar; . The criteria for granting a filing fee waiver (financial hardship and public interest); and . Powers for the Authority to: .. postpone a fee payment, recover a postponed fee and refund a fee; .. adjourn a case management conference, dete rmine preliminary issues in the absence of a party and dismiss an appeal if it is the appellant that misses the case management conference; and .. reinstate an appeal after an appellant fails to attend a case management conference due to exceptional circumsta nces or another good reason for not attending. Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Volunytary Sector
UNCLASSIFIED Office of the Minister of Internal Affairs Chair Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committ ee Approval of public consultation document : Review of options for funding the classification framework under the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act , Proposal . I am seeking Cabinets agreement to release a public consultation document (Appendix A) on options for funding the classification framework under the Films, Videos, and P ublications Classification Act , (the Classification Act) . A public consultation process is planned f rom December to February . Executive summary . As part of Cabinets decision to contribute funding to the Office of Film and Literature Classification (OFLC) through Budget , Cabinet directed the Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) to: review the fees payable under the Classification Act by the end of April , including consideration of whether the current approach to the fee payer couldshould be expanded, and whether the method for charging fees is still applicable in the current context CABMIN. refers . . The Department has commenced a review (the Review) into options for funding the classification framework . The Review was prompted by Cabinets direction, OFLCs financial position, and the upcoming legislative amend ments to regulate online media content. . The consultation mostly impacts commercial publications. Also being consulted on are the special fees, discounts and reduced rates for individuals and charitable organisations, such as film festival organisation s. The Review is not seeking to recover the costs of items submitted by Government agencies for classification. . I am seeking the publics views on the appropriate level of costrecov ery (full, partial or nocostrecovery ) from the sector , and mechanisms (fees and or a levy) to fund: current classification activities prescribed under the Films, Videos, and Publications Classifications (Fees) Regulations (the Regulations); and OFLCs classification activities related to regulating Commerci al Video on Demand (CVoD) visual media content. . There are financial implications to the Crown from some of the cost recovery options (partial and no cost recovery), and from the manner of implementation of the new charging regime . I am highlighting these matters now , but I am not seeking Cabinets decisions on these matters until March . Video on Demand content accessed by a payment or a fee or as a reward or bonus. Implementation to a new charging regime could be phased over two to three years, or implemented as a one off increase. Page of
UNCLASSIFIED Page of Hon Tracey Martin, Minister of Internal Affairs Proactive release of Cabinet paper: Films, Videos, and Publications (Urgent Interim Classification of Publications and Prevention of Online Harm) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction Issue June
UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Out of scope Out of scope Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs ()(a) ()(a) ()(a) ()(a) ()(a) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) ()(f)(iv) ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
UNCLASSIFIED Recommendations I recommend that the Cabinet Legislation Committee : note that on March , the Cabinet Social Outcomes Committee agreed to policy proposals and issue drafting instructions SOU MIN refers; note that the Charities (Taxation and Charities Review Authorities Appeals Process) Regulations will give effect to the decision referred to in recommendation above; agree that a requirement for the Ministry of Justice to publish certain information on its website not be included in regulations ; note that a waiver of the day rule is sought: . so that the regulations can come into force at the same time as the new appeals provisions in the Charities Act ; and . on the grounds that only a small number of people are impacted in a minor way and a later commencement would defeat the purpose of the regulations ; agree to waive the day rule so that the regulations can come into force on July ; and authorise the submission to the Executive Council of Charities (Taxation and Charities Review Authorities Appeals Process) Regulations . Authorised for lodgement Hon Louise Upston Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Volunytary Sector
UNCLASSIFIED Recommendations The Minister of Internal Affairs recommends that the Social Wellbeing Committee : . Note that the Office of Film and Literature Classi fication (OFLC) is currently funded through third party fees, Government funding and a small amount of interest income; . Note that Cabinet agreed in May to initiate a review of OFLCs funding , and invited the Minister of Internal Affairs to report back to Cabinet by April ; . Note that the R eview is considering the appropriate level of cost recovery (full, partial no cost recovery) from the sector and funding mechanism (fees andor a levy); public consultation , subject to any final editorial changes ; Minister of Internal Affairs . Note that there are financial implications for the Crown from the cost recovery options (partial and no cost recovery) , and a staggered implem entation to a new funding re gime ; . Agree to release the document Review of funding options for the classification framework under the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act , for . Note that I propose public consultation to run from December to February ; . Note that I intend to proactively release this Cabinet paper wit hin working days of decisions being taken as per Cabinet Office Circular CO () Proactive Release of Cabinet Material: Requirements , subject to any redactions I consider to be warranted and consistent under the Official Information Act ; and . Note that I will seek Cabinet decisions on the Governments preferred funding model for OFLC in March . Authorised for lodgement Hon Tracey Martin Appendix A Draft public consultation document Review of options for funding t he classification framework unde r the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act Page of Consultation:
UNCLASSIFIED SOUMIN invited the Minister for the Community and V oluntary Sector to issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office to draft regulations to give effect to the above paragraphs. Rebecca Davies Com mittee Secretary Present: Officials present from: Rt Hon Christopher Luxon O ffice of the Prime Minister Hon David Seymour Officials Committee for SOU Hon Dr Shane Reti Hon Erica Stanford Hon Louise Upston (Chair) Hon Mark Mitchell Hon Tama Potaka Hon Nicole McKee Hon Penny Simmonds Hon Chris Penk Hon Karen Chhour iknavlaj UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector UNCLASSIFIED CABMIN Cabinet Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Report of the Cabinet Social Outcomes Committee: Period Ended March On April , Cabinet made the following decisions on the work of the Cabinet Social Outcomes Committee for the period ended March : SOUMIN Enabling Appeals to the Taxation and Charities CONFIRMED Review Authority: Policy Proposals for Regulations Potfolio: Community and Voluntaiy Sector iknavlaj UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector UNCLASSIFIED CABMIN Rachel Hayward Secretay of the Cabinet iknavlaj UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector
UNCLASSIFIED SOUMIN Cabinet Social Outcomes Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Enabling Appeals to the Taxation and Charities Review Authority: PolicyProposals for Regulations Portfolio Community and Voluntary Sector On March , the Cabinet Social Outcomes Committee: n oted that from July , charities will be able to appeal decisions under the Charities Act to the Taxation and Charities Review Authority (the Authority), and that regulations are required to support the appeals process; a r eed that regulations be made under the Charities Act to prescribe a single filing fee of , with the provision of a fee waiver; a r eed to the following procedural matters for inclusion in the regulations, to ensure processes run seamlessly endtoend and the Authority is aligned with the wider tribunal system: . provide that the criteria for granting a filing fee waiver are financial hardship a nd public interest; . provide that the Authority has the power to postpone a fee payment, recover a pos tponed fee, and refund a fee; . enable the Authority to adjourn a case management conference, determine pre liminary issues in the absence of a party, and dismiss an appeal if it is the appellant that misses the case management conference; . enable the Authority to reinstate an appeal after an appellant fails to attend a c ase management conference if exceptional circumstances apply, or the appellant has a good reason for not attending and files their application within working days after the for the case management conference; . include a definition of registrar; . require the Ministry of Justice to publish information on its website about the purpos e of the Authority, the requirements for commencing a proceeding, and other guidelines related to proceedings; authorised t he Minister for the Community and V oluntary Sector to make decisions on minor and technical policy changes that are not inconsistent with the policy intent of the above paragraphs; iknavlaj UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector
UNCLASSIFIED Sector fatigue with cons ultation, resistance to being regulated and charges . A stro ng theme identified in the c onsultation on Standardising the Classification of CVoD SWC MIN refers was the sectors preference to retain the status quo until the outcome of the broader reform is known. There may be a similar reaction to this consultation. The Department and OFLC ha ve been engaging with industry to ensure the transition to the new regime is as seamless as possible. . The Review is being conducted now due to the expansion of the Classifications Acts ambit, the need to increase equity amongst providers of media content, and as existing fees levels are no longer aligned with OFLCs costs. Financial i mplication s for the sector and organisat ions eligible for special rates . Increased costs may make it unprofitable for some businesses , particularly DVD providers, to import or screen content in New Zealand . New online companies may be discouraged from establishing. Questions to elicit information about the impact on providers and users of the classification system are included in the public consultation document. The availability of media c ontent in New Zealand could be affected . Significant increases to the operating costs of the sector may impact on the availability of arts, culture, and entertainment content in New Zealand. The consultation document includes questions to understand this issue further. Next steps . The Department will use the feedback received from the consultation process to make recommendations to me in February . I will then report to Cabinet in March and seek decision s on: decisions on the preferred level of cost recovery from the sector; decisions on the preferred mechanism for cost recovery; and approval to issue drafting instructions to include in the CVoD Amendment Bill and or new Regulations . Consultation . The Department has worked closely with OFLC to produce the draft public consultation docu ment. . The Treasury, the Ministry for Culture and Heritage, Te Puni Kkiri, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Health, Oranga Tamariki, the Min istry of Business Innovation and Employment, the Ministry of Social Development, the Ministry for Women, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, and the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet have been consulted on this Cabinet paper and public consul tation document . Financial implications . The costs associated with consultation will be met from within the Departments baseline. Page of
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Hon Barbara Edmonds, Minister of Internal Affairs
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Hon Ginny Andersen, Minister for the Digit al Economy and Communications Proactive release of Digit al Identity Se rvices Trust Framework Regulatory proposals Engagement materials: Cabinet paper, related Minutes and Discussion paper. August (Approved by Cabinet) The following documents have been proactively released: Cabinet paper: Targeted Engagement on Developing Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Regulations; Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Regulations. Discussion Paper August ; August , DEVMI N : Minute of Decision: Developing Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Regulations: Release of Discussion Paper for Targeted Engagement; August , CABMI N : Minute of Decision: Report of the Cabinet Economic Development Committee: Period Ended August . Som e parts of this i nformation would not be appropriate to release and, i f requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this i s the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it . Key to Redaction Codes: ()(f)(iv) maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials ; Out of scope. For Cabinet mat erial and any public service departmental advice use this copyright statement Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) UNCLASSIFIED Page of In Confidence Office of the Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications Chair, Cabinet Economic Development Committee Ta rgeted engagement on developing Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Regulations Proposal . I seek Cabinets approval for the Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) to release the document, Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Regulations : A discussion paper (attached as Appendix A), for targeted engagement with key stakeholders . Relation to government priorities . The proposed regulations canvassed in the discussion paper would set out legal and process requirements to enable the Digital Identity Services TrustFramework (the Trust Framework) to be established. Establishing the TrustFramework will be an enabler of digital transformation across the public sector and the economy and is a foundation in the Governments development of a Digital Strategy for Aotearoa. Executive summary . The Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act (the Act) received Royal assent on April and will come into force on July . The Trust Framework will regulate the provision of accredited digital identity services, so that users can securely share digital information about themselves to accessonline services. . Under the Trust Framework individuals will be able to access, claim and sharetheir own information through accredited digital identity services. This will occuras part of a standardised process to ensure personal identity data is beinghandled securely and according to the users requests. It will give users morecontrol over their own data, including what they choose to share aboutthemselves and who they share it with. . I propose that the Department lead a targeted engagement process on the regulations . This will in clude engagement with the Data Iwi Leaders Group and Te Mana Raraunga (the Mori Data Sovereignty Network ), the Pacific Data Sovereignty Network, key financial institutions , data infrastructure providers , industry peak bodies , citizen and consumer rights groups and government agencies . . Officials will seek targeted stakeholders views on the establish ment of regulations covering: the types of digital identity services that may be accredited, accreditation requirements, accreditation service levels, T rust Framework provider (TF provider ) service levels, and TF provider record keeping and reporting requirements. Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government UNCLASSIFIED Page of . To enable these regulations to be developed and come into force by the Acts commencement of July , the Department needs to progress the consultation process before the forthcoming general election. I seek agreement for the Department to release the attached discussion paper for targeted engagement on the initial set of regulations over a four week period commencing August and ending September . . I consider the risk of targeted engagement over this period is low because of the cross party consensus on the need for the Trust Framework, the constructive relationship with stakeholders on this work, the technical and procedural nature of the proposed regulations which are grounded in good practi ce, and because the framework is opt in. . In the event the regulations do not come into force by July , the TF Authority will be unable to accredit TF providers and their services or effectively regulate their activities. This means the delivery of the anticipated benefits associated with introducing the Trust Framework will be delayed. Background The Act will commence on July , unless brought into force earlier by Order in Council . The purposes of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act are: . To establish a legal framework for the provision of secure and trusted digital identity services for individuals and organisations; and . To establish governance and accreditation functions that are transparent and incorporate te ao Mori approaches to identity. . The Trust Framework enabled by the Act will establish a set of technical and security requirements which will protect the privacy and security of an individuals information when it is shared within the trusted environment. The requirements will apply to those organisations that choose to opt in to the Trust Framework to deliver accredited services. . The anticipated benefits of the framework include: . Enabling user controlled access to, and sharing of, personal information; . Minimising identity theft and privacy breaches ; . Improving information sharing efficiency ; . Reducing unnecessary sharing of information; and . Improving access to online and face to face services that require the provision of identity and other personal information. . Under the Trust Framework individuals will be able to access, claim, and share their own information through accredited digital identity services (identified byaccreditation marks). This will occur as part of a standardised process to ensurepersonal identity data is being handled securely and according to the usersrequests, as outlined in the diagram in Appendix B. Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government UNCLASSIFIED Page of Secondary legislation in the form of rules and regulations will enable the establishment of the Trust Framework . Regular and timely updates of trust framework regulatory requirements will benecessary to keep pace with changes in a rapidly evolving technology centred sector. Consequently, the Act enables many of the regulatory requirements to besecondary legislation as either r ules or r egulations . . The rules will establish the technical service requirements that T F providers will need to meet when designing and delivering accredited services. The rules have already been the subject of early consultation with key stakeholders and willundergo a further final round of consultation in the first quarter of . The rules cover: identification management, privacy and confidentiality, security and risk,information and data management and information sharing and facilitatingarrangements. . The regulations will complement the rules by establishing broader legal andadministrative process requirements that either need to be met by regulatedparties or clarify how the TF Board and TF Authority will manage aspects of the regulatory system. The Privacy Act continues to apply to the collection, use and retention of all personal information under the Trust Framework. . While the M ori Advisory Group appointments have been made, the TF Board appointments have not yet been completed and the TF Authority is not yetestablished. The Department will engage with both the Mori Advisory Group and the TF Board once established through the regulation development process . . The regulations will be developed in two phases. The first set of regulations which are addressed in the attached discussion paper cover the necessary legal and procedural requirements to initially stand up the regulatory system , including: . The types of digital identity services that may be accredited; . TF provider accreditation process, including accreditation requirements, application assessment criteria and accreditation periods ; . TF service levels that providers can meet when delivering accredited services; . TF provider internal complaints process requirements ; . TF provider record keeping requirements; and . TF provider reporting requirements . . It is anticipated that the development of second set of regulations will be recommended to the Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications by the TF Board in to: . Enable the introduction of fees to recover TF Authority costs associated with administering the accreditation process and the wider Trust Framework ; Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government UNCLASSIFIED Page of . Establish requirements and criteria that would enable the TF Authority to recommend enhancements to the dispute resolution scheme provided under the Act ; . Enable arrangements for the appointment and oversight of third party assessors that the TF Authority may choose to certify to carry out accreditati on functions on its behalf; and . Address other operational matters required to frame the TF Authoritys administration of the scheme. Proposed regulations Accredited services . The discussion paper proposes that the regulations specify that the following services can be delivered by TF providers as accredited services under the Act: . Digital Identity Information Service: provides an assessment of the accuracy of personal or organisational information; . Digital Identity Binding Service: ensures the connection of personal or organisational information to an individual or organisation; . Digital Identity Authentication Service: ensures the connection of a user to an authenticator and secures the sharing of personal or organisational information between Trust Framework participants by ensuring the authenticator(s) are held and controlled by an authorised holder ; . Digital Identity Credential Service: combines bound information and an authenticator to establish and maintain a reusable credential ; and . Digital Identity Facilitation Service (s): assists users to share credentials with Relying Parties. Accreditation requirements . Under the Act the TF Authority undertakes the accreditation of potential TF providers. The TF Authority will be appointed by the Chief Executive of the Department of Internal Affairs and be accountable to the responsible Minister . The discussion paper sets out the requirements that applicants for accreditation will need to meet, along with the assessment criteria the TF Authority will apply to applications . . The applicant will need to be a company incorporated in New Zealand, an Incorporated Society registered in New Zealand, a New Zealand C rown entity or a government department that intends to deliver one or more digital identity services. The organisation will need to demonstrate it is financially sustainable and can: . meet the service standards specified in the r ules; . provide an internal complaints process ; . meet fit and proper person requirements; and Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government UNCLASSIFIED Page of . address to the TF Authoritys satisfaction any issues of concern arising from any past practises as an identity services provider that have be en the subject of an investigation by the Privacy Commission or the TF Authority, or resulted in a decision to previously decline, suspend or cancel an accreditation. Length of accreditation period . The discussion paper proposes that the regulations establish an accreditation period of two years . A twoyear accreditation period is considered appropriate given we are introducing a new regulatory system and there are likely to bechanges to the service standards providers need to meet in response to therapidly evolving nature of the industry. Accreditation Mark . The proposed regulations will enable TF providers to display an accreditation mark against each of their accredited services. This will help users and providersknow that a providers service meets the standards for that service as set out inthe rules. Service Levels . The proposed regulations will also include provision for establishing service levels that TF providers meet when delivering information services, binding services andor authentication services. Service levels will not apply to credential and facilitation services as the r ules will establish a single standard for them which a provider must meet for accreditation purposes. . This feature of the regulatory system is intended to help relying parties and otherdigital service provider s understand how r obust a TF provider s processes are, facilitate cooperation between providers by reducing the time required to assess the other partys processes, and increase trust in the regulatory framework. Complaints process . The proposed regulations will set out requirements for each TF provider to operate their own complaints processes. Any complaints not resolved directly with the TF provider can be referred to the Authorit y to address as provided for in the Act . The requirement for TF providers to initially address complaints is good practi ce and will help encourage the resolution of complaints at the source wherever possible. It should also reduce the TF Authoritys workload . . Any complaints received by the TF Authority will be subject to a preliminary triaging process that enables it to identify comp laints about matters that already fall within the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman, the Privacy Commissioner; theInspector General of Intelligence and Security or another officeholder for onward referral to them . This will enable the Authority to focus on complai nts where there may be a breach of the requirements established by the Act or the associated rules and regulations. . The discussion document seeks feedback on the complaints process, particularly the internal complaints requirements TF providers would need to meet, andwhether this is a suitable mechanism to addressing complaints in the first instance. Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government UNCLASSIFIED Page of Record keeping requirements . The discussion paper sets out proposals for regulations on record keeping that will require TF providers to collect and retain information about their activities, store it in a secure database, and provide the TF Authority with access to those records at all reasonable times upon request. The regulations will require the T F provider s to retain information necessary to provide assurance that they have delivered accredited services aligned with the requirements specified in the rules and regulations. Reporting . The discussion paper proposes that the regulations establish annual reporting requirements for TF providers to help enable the TF Authority to monitor and assess their performance and that of the regulatory system. It proposes that the annual reporting requirements will cover organisational governance and management arrangements, information on service transactions, compliance and delivery, complaints and disputes resolution, f raud events, and each provider s financial performance. . In addition , it proposes that the regulations require providers to report separately and as soon as practical any actual or suspected fraud events and other events that adversely affect confidentiality, the integrity or availability of the digital identity service and have caused or present a risk of serious harm. This will helpensure the TF Authority is aware of significant events and is able to intervene or assist where necessary. Cost recovery . The discussion paper confirms that the TF Authoritys initial establishment and the first two years of operating costs will be met from Crown funding without acontribution from fees. Consequently , early entrants will not need to pay an initial accreditation fee. Later entrants and TF providers seeking to renew accreditations will incur a fee if cost recovery regulations are introduced. Fees are proposed to be introduced after two years once more information is availableabout the potential number of providers in the market. Timing of engagement on the discussion paper . To enable these regulations to be developed and come into force by the Actscommencement of July , the targeted stakeholder engagementprocess should take place before the forthcoming general election. Once engagement is completed, further Cabinet policy decisions to inform drafting instructions and Cabinet approval of the regulations are still required. . I have considered the risks associated with undertaking the engagement process prior to the forthcoming General Election and consider them to be low as: . There is broad cross party and stakeholder support for the establishment of the Trust Framework , which was demonstrated during the passage of the Bill; Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government UNCLASSIFIED Page of . The key non government stakeholders we are proposing to consult have already been engaged in the development of the associated rules and have a real interest in considering the associated regulatory requirements ; . The regulatory system is an optin arrangement which means parties are not obliged to meet TF regulatory requirements unless they choose to do so; and . The regulatory proposals are administrative in nature and reflect good practi ce in other regulatory systems . . In the event the consultation process does not take place prior to the election,officials advise that it would be unlikely that regulations will be ready before the Acts commencement of July . Therefore, the TF Authority would be unable to accredit TF providers and their services and effectively regulate theiractivities and the delivery of the anticipated benefits associated with introducing the Trust Framework will be delayed. Officials advise me that they are working through mitigations in the event of this occurring. Proposed targeted engagement . The Department will facilitate a targeted engagement process on the proposedregulations with the following non government organisation stakeholders that have also been consulted on the development of the rules. This will include: . Mori peak bodies , including the Data Iwi Leaders Group and Te Mana Raraunga (the Mori Data Sovereignty Network ); . The Pacific Data Sovereignty Network; . Financial peak bodies and institutions including the Financial Services Council, NZ Bankers Association, Payments NZ and FinTech NZ ; . Infrastructure providers including MATTR, Centrality, J NCTN, Sush Mobile, and Ahau; . Industry peak bodies including Digital Identity NZ, NZ Tech, and Internet NZ; and . Citizen and consumer groups including the Privacy Foundation and Consumer NZ. . The Department will also continue to consult with the Privacy Commissioner onthe regulations and with other government agencies that have an interest in theestablishment of the regulatory system and the delivery of online services. Thiswill extend beyond the agencies it has consulted during the development of the discussion paper to include Te Aka Whai Ora Maori Health Authority and agencies with an interest in digital inclusion and human rights including the Ministry for Disabled People, the Office for Seniors and the Human RightsCommission. . The Department will circulate the discussion paper directly to these stakeholdersand invite them to provide feedback by September . To support the Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government UNCLASSIFIED Page of engagement , the Department will also facilitate meetings to discuss the proposals . Relationship to the draft C ustomer and Product Data Bill (Consumer data right) . The Trust Framework and enabling rules and regulations will complement the draft C ustomer and Product Data Bill (Commerce and Consumer Affairs portfolio) which has been the subject of recent public consultation. . The proposed Bill intends to give consumers the ability to access and share data that is held about them with trusted third parties in a safe and secure manner.The Bill will also mean businesses have to make information about their productsavailable in a manner that will enable easy product comparison and switching.The Trust Framework will support this outcome by enabling people to securelyaccess and share their verified identity and related personal information digitally. . Officials from the Minist ry of Business, Innovation and Employment and the Department will continue to work together to ensure the alignment of bothregulatory systems . This will include assessing opportunities to reduce implementation and compliance costs potentially through the accreditation process along with other areas . Treaty of WaitangiTiriti o Waitangi Implications . The Act includes provisions to recognise and respect the Crowns responsibilityto give effect to the principles of te Tiriti o Waitangi. The legis lation recognises Mori interests in the protection and use of digital identity and provides for te aoMori approaches to be incorporated into the Trust Framework governance and decision making. Ways of embedding te ao Mori and te Tiriti o Waitangiperspectives and requirements in the regulations will be addressed during the targeted engagement process with the TF Board, the M ori Advisory Group, Data Iwi Leaders Group and Te Mana Raraunga. Cost of Living Implications . The introduction of the regulations proposed in the attached discussion paper will not have a direct or immediate impact on the cost of living. In the mediumterm the establishment and operation of the Trust Framework is expected to improve security leading to increased confidence in the use of the digital identi ty services system . This is expected to le ad to: . a reduction in costs incurred due to a reduction in fraud ulent activity ; . time and cost savings realised by users through the increased use of online services that enable them to access services remotely ; and . savings to R elying Parties through an anticipated reduction in transaction costs. Financial Implications . There are no immediate financial implications associated with initiating theengagement process on the development of the regulations. Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government UNCLASSIFIED Page o f Leg islative Implications . The regulations in the discussion paper will enable implementation of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act . I intend to seek approval of the regulations by Cabinet in the first half of , allowing for the regime to be set up in mid. Impact Analysis . The Treasurys Regulatory Impact Analysis team has determined that this proposal is exempt from the requirement to provide a Regulatory ImpactStatement on the grounds that it has been addressed by existing impact analysis related to CAB MIN. A Regulatory Impact Statement will accompany the next Cabinet paper seeking approval of the policy for the regulations. Climate Implications of Policy Assessment . The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team has been consultedand confirms that the CIPA requirements do not apply to this proposal as thethreshold for significance is not met. Population Implications . Research has identified several groups are at higher risk of not being digitally included in New Zealand including seniors, disabled people, people living in rural communities, and families with children living in low socioeconomic communities . Mori are also less likely to be digitally included than the wider population. . Several factors imp act on digital inclusion rates including motivation, access, skills, and trust. The development of the Trust Framework will help address the trust factor directly by enhancing security and enabling users to have greater control over the way their data is accessed and shared through accredited digitalidentity services . The framework is aligned with the Governments Digital Inclu sion Blueprint that aims to remove barriers to access for at risk groups in the population and ensure everyone can access and use online information, products and services. The Digital Inclusion Blueprint Te Mahere m te Whakaurunga Matihiko ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government UNCLASSIFIED Page of Human Rights . There are no immediate impacts on human rights arising from the propos ed regulations in the discussion paper. Privacy . The Privacy Commissioner was involved in the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework development process and supports consultation on the proposed regulations . The discussion paper highlights that the Office of the Privacy Commissioner will be the body that receives and considers privacy complaintsrelating to the Trust Framework. Use of External Resources . One full time equivalent contractor has been engaged to support thedevelopment of regulations. It is anticipated the contractor will be retained for upto six months while permanent staff vacancies are filled . Subject to the successful recruitment of permanent staff it is not anticipated that further externalresources will be required to support the development of the regulations. Consultation . The Department has consulted with the following agencies during the preparation of the Cabinet paper and the draft discussion paper : The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, New Zealand Treasury, Public Services Commission, Office of the Privacy Commissioner, Te Puni K kiri, Inland Revenue Department, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, Ministry of SocialDevelopment, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Education,Ministry for Primary Industries, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Ministry for Pacific People s, Statistics Ne w Zealand, Department of Corrections, Social Wellbeing Agency, Land Information New Zealand, N ational Cyber Security Centre, ACC, New Zealand Customs Service , Waka Kotahi, and the Office for Mori Crown Relations Te Arawhiti . . Agency feedback has been reflected in the papers where appropriate. Someagencies have raised operational issues or sought further information on how theTrust Framework will impact on them as service providers or relying parties.Officials have undertaken to address these matters with them during the engagement process. . Some agencies have also responded to the questions in the discussion paper. The Department will take these responses into account alongside the submissions it receives from other stakeholders during the engagement process. Communications . I do not propose any additional promotional initiatives , beyond those provided for through the targeted engagement process . Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government UNCLASSIFIED Page of Proactive Release . I propose proactively releasing this paper, subject to any redactions that may be warranted under the Official Information Act , within business days ofdecisions being taken by Cabinet . Recommendations . I recommend that the Cabinet Economic Development Committee: note that the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Act creates a new regulatory regime for the accreditation and provision of trusted digital identity services ; note that regulations are required to enable the establishment of the Trust Framework and accredit service providers ; note that targeted engagement with key stakeholder groups on the proposed regulations is required to inform the development of final advice on regulation design; note that the targeted engagement process needs to be concluded in advance of the forthcoming general election to enable the initial regulations to be developed and come into force by the Acts commencement of July ; agree to release Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Regulations : A discussion paper (attached as Appendix A) for targeted engagement over the period commencing August and ending September ; authorise the Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications to approve editorial and minor technical changes to the content of the discussion paper before it is released. Aut horised for lodgement Hon G inny Andersen Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government UNCLASSIFIED Page of Appendix A: Discussion Document: Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Regulations Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government UNCLASSIFIED Page of Appendix B: The Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Regulations Discussion paper August Proactively released by the Minister for Digitising Government
UNCLASSIFIED Use of e xternal resources The Department did not engage any external resources to prepare the policy proposals in this paper. Consultation The following agencies were consulted on the proposals in this Cabinet pa per: Inland Revenue Department ; the Ministr ies of Justice ; Business, Innovation and Employment; Social Development; Education; Health; Housing and Urban Development; Ethnic Communities; Youth Development; Ministry of Disabled People Whaikaha ; the Ministries for Women; Pacific Peoples; Culture and Heritage; the Office for Seniors; Te Arawhiti The Office for Mori Crown Relations , Te Puni K kiri Ministry of Mori Development; Health New Zealand Te Whatu Ora , the Treasury; Sport New Zealand; the Parliamentary Counsel Office ; and Cown Law . The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet has been informed. Targeted consultation was undertaken between November and January . Submissions were received from seven organisations, including legal organisations , and one from an individual (an academic specialising in charities law). While submission numbers are low, stakeholders provided valuable and varied perspectives that infor med the proposals in this paper . While some submitters favoured no fee to ensure appeals are as accessible as possible, other submitters found a small fee to be reasonable for appellants to contribute to the cost burden of running the tribunal. Communications The Department of Internal Affairs will inform those who submitted during targeted consultation, and wider stakeholders of the decisions on these proposals via the appropriate communication channels. Proactive Release As per Cabinet Office Circular CO () Proactive Release of Cabinet Material: Requirements, I intend to proactively release this paper, subject to any redactions that may be warrante d under the Official Information Act , within business days of decisions being taken. Recommendations The Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector recommends that the Committee: note that charities will be able to appeal decisions under the Charities Act to the Taxation and Charities Review Authority from July ; agree to a single filing fee of with the provision of a fee waiver ; UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector
UNCLASSIFIED for it), and turns these into funding principles. There appear to be errors in the application of these principles in the assessment of options in Appendix D. The consideration of options would also be enhanced by stronger discussi on about accountability mechanisms for the Office of Film and Literature Classification. The Department is likely to receive feedback on this from consultation. It will be important to get this analysis right for final proposals to Cabinet. . The Department s response to the Panels assessment follows . Incomplete costs . As OFLCs CVoD activities and processes are not currently carried out , and reasonable that they pay the full costs. establishing detailed hourly costings is challenging and may not be reliable. The consultation document provides costs at an activity level and this includes personnel, operating and capex costs. Errors in the application of the principles in Appendix D of the consultation document . The Panel considered the equity principle ha d been inconsistently applied to option (full cost recovery from user charges) and option ( no cost recovery from user charges ). The Department considered the Panels feedback , and notes that there is subjectivity in this area. . The Department determined that full cost recovery fr om user charges is likely to support the equity principle. This is because submitters who are major beneficiaries of the classification system are creating potential for harm. It is fair . The Department det ermined that the Government meeting the full cost of classification activities would not support the equity principle as submitters would not be contributing to any of the costs despite creating the potential for harm. . The Department did not change its assessment of how the equity principle applies to options and . Some adjustments have been made to Appendix D of the consultation document in relation to the efficiency principle. Accountability mechanisms for OFLC . This has been addressed by adding text about accountability mechanisms for Crown entities to the consultation document. This builds on the existing comments in the Incentives to keep costs low section of the public consultation document . Publicity . I intend to issue a press release to launch the consultation period on December . Proactive release . As per Cabinet Office Circular CO () Proactive Release of Cabinet Material: Requirements , I intend to proactively release this paper, subject to any redactions that may be warranted under the Official Information Act , within business days of decisions being taken . Page of
UNCLASSIFIED minor and technical policy changes consistent with the policy intent of the proposals in this paper. Impact A nalysis Regulatory Impact Statement A Regulatory Impact Statement has been completed and is attached as Appendix A. A quality assurance panel (the panel) from the Department with a panel member from the Ministry of Justice reviewed the RIS in accordance with the quality assurance criteria set out in the CabGuide. The panel considers that the information and analysis summarised in the RIS meets the quality assurance criteria. Climate Implications of Policy Assessment The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team has been consulted and confirms that the CIPA requirements do not apply to the propo sals in this paper as the threshold for significance is not met. Population Implications While the appeals process is important for access to justice, appealing decisions is not a day today issue affecting charities. Most appellants will likely be registe red charities and charities seeking registration . In some cases, appellants may be individuals ( for example, an officer of a charity) . Having an accessible appeals tribunal before the High Court will particularly benefit smaller, less well resourced charities. Most of New Zealands charities are small and volunteer run. Around one third have an annual income under ,. Among those smaller charities are kaupapa Mori charities and charities run by, and dedicated to, population groups (including Pacific peoples, youth, disabled people, kaumtuaolder New Zealanders , ethnic communities and women). Some population groups, or sections of them, depend on charities for services that either state sector services or fami ly and whnau may not provide . Human Rights No inconsistencies with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act or the Human Rights Act have been identified. Treaty Implications No inconsistencies with Te Tiriti o Waitangi Treaty of Waitangi have been identifie d. UNCLASSIFIED Proactively released by the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector
UNCLASSIFIED which replicates a charitable trust established after Christchurch Earthquake Following the devastating Christchurch Earthquake, the Government quickly esta blished a charitable trust to complement existing donation appeals. The Christchurch Earthquake Appeal Trust (CEAT) raised approximately million in donations. Most of the funding was collected in the first year of the appeal, . CEAT funded a range of projects. Some of the bigger grants given out were mill ion to the rebuild and restoration of Isaac Theatre Royal and . million for water attractions at the new Christchurch City Council Recreation and Sports Centre in the eastern suburbs. CEAT currently has around , left to distribute. CEAT expects to make a final allocation in June this year, at which stage, with no funds left to distribute, the trustees will wind up the trust. Establishment phase includes bank account, website, trust deed, trustees and regis tration as a charity The Trust is currently being established. The name has been confirmed, officials are working on a t rust deed and charitable status (which enables donors to claim a tax rebate), and working with Westpac and Clemenger BBDO on establishing a bank account, website, multiple channels for donations, and other details of how the donation appeal process will work. The pertinent clauses of the draft Trust Deed are set out in Appendix A and closely follow the language of relevant legislation such as the Charities Act . It is important that the charitable trust also be registered as a charity under the Charit ies Act (a separate process) as it is this status which allows donors to claim a tax rebate on their donations. All relevant agencies are working to expedite the required registrations in time for launch. I am proposing three trustees, which replicates CEAT. One would be the Chief Execut i ve of the Department of Internal Affairs (who will be the original trustee for purposes of establishment), with two others one of whom will be Mori. I am recommending that decisionmaking authority on the appointment of the truste es, alongside other decisions about the administration of the trust, be given to the Minister of Finance, Minister of Internal Affairs and Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector. It is proposed that these Ministers will also have authority to act on establishing a larger Advisory Board with local knowledge and expertise of the affected regions, which replicates the CEAT model. I propose that the Department provide secretariat support to the Trust and, in conjunct ion with Treasury as necessary, receive and hold donations on behalf of the Trust. Lotto will hold a fundraising lottery on March Under sec tion of the Gambling Act , the Minister of Internal Affairs may, from time to time, instruct the New Zealand Lotteries Commission to promote a lottery for any community purpose that the Minister thinks fit. On February I instructed the New Zealand Lotteries Commission to promote a special purpose UNCLASSIFIED ihpodtn Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs UNCLASSIFIED lottery for the purpose of Cyclone Gabrielle relief efforts. This special purpose lottery will be held on March . The proceeds will provide recovery funds for communities and community organisations that have been impacted by Cyclone Gabrielle. Neither I nor the Government have the authority to direct the Lotteries Grants Board on how to dis tribute the funds raised by the special draw. I do however expect that there would be a further conversation with the full Board (of which I am the presiding member) to explore whether it would consider contributing the proceeds of the special draw to the Fund, to be distributed through the Trust. Financial Implications The CEAT ensured that all donations would go towards earthquake recovery through the Gove rnment funding the cost to trustees, advisory board, and the Department of Internal Affairs secretariat. I propose the same for the Cyclone Gabrielle Appeal Trust. The secretariat for the Trust cannot be met out of baselines or with existing staff, as cost pre ssures already exist across the department. There are substantial roles for the secretariat including: . implementation (needs assessment, project research and development, imple mentation); . support for trustees and Advisory Board; . reporting, evaluation, audit and governance; . external relationships management. In the time available officials have determined that the secretariat, trustees, and advisory group will have costs of approximately . million annually. The trust and secretariat need to be operational as soon as possible, to best respond to the impact of adverse weather events. As such it is not possible to wait for the next annual Budget round to seek funding for the secretariat. The funding sought in this paper is for up to seven FTEs, board member fees and an advisory committee for up to four years. Distribution of CEAT funding is expected to conclude in , years after the fund was established, demonstrating that secretariat resource is likely to needed for several years. In addition to a Manager, Administrator and Principal Advisor, the remaining four FTE a re Advisors who could be based in the affected regions, to bring local expertise, or in Wellington. Considering regional placement of these roles will help address workforce pressures in engaging suitable resources. Costs for the administration costs of the Christchurch Earthquake Appeal for the first four financi al years was . million. For several reasons, it is considered that the costs will be substantially higher. This includes inflation since and that the advisory board will likely need to be large to reflect the wide range of regions and UNCLASSIFIED ihpodtn Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs UNCLASSIFIED communities impacted by Cyclone Gabrielle. Additionally, there are other funds being distributed across several regions, which the secretariat will have to consider. Legislative Implications There are no legislative implications from the proposals in this paper. Population Implications Many groups have been impacted by recent extreme weather events. Establishing a chari table trust will complement other donation appeals and will help rural communities, Mori, women, disabled people and other population groupings in recovering from the impact of Cyclone Gabrielle. Human Rights There are no human rights implications from the proposals in this paper. Consultation The Treasury was consulted on the financial implications. The Department of the Prim e Minister and Cabinet were informed on the proposals in this paper. Communications The Trust is planned to be announced on Monday February by the Prime Minister. A com munications plan is in development. Proactive Release I intend to release the Cabinet paper proactively with any appropriate redactions wit hin business days. Recommendations The Minister of Internal Affairs recommends that the Committee: note tha t following the Christchurch Earthquake, the Government established a charitable trust to complement existing donation appeals and that a similar trust is proposed for Cyclone Gabrielle; note the establishment of the Cyclone Gabrielle Appeal Trust (the Trust) and Cyclone Gabrielle Appeal Fund (the Fund) in line with planned Government announcements; agree that the trustees will include the chief executive of the Department of Internal Affa irs plus two others, one to be a Mori representative; authorise the Minister of Finance, Minister of Internal Affairs and Minister for the Comm unity and Voluntary Sector to have power to appoint the trustees, and make decisions about the administration of the Trust and the establishment of the Advisory Board; UNCLASSIFIED ihpodtn Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs UNCLASSIFIED agree that the Trust will receive donations to be di stributed through the F und, administered by the Department of Internal Affairs; note that a trust account is being established under section of the P ublic Finance Act for public donations to the Fund; note that the Minister of Internal Affairs has directed the N ew Zealand Lotteries Commission to carry out a special purpos e draw on March ; note that there will be furt her engagement with the ful l Lottery Grants Board on whether the Boa rd would consent to the proceeds of the special purpos e draw being donated to the Fund for distribution by the Trust; note the Trust will be supported by a larger advisory board with local know ledge and expertise; agree to provi de fundi ng to the D epartment of Internal Affairs to establish a secretariat and associated administration costs to support the administration of the Fund; approve the following changes to appropriations to provide for the costs described in recommendation above, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance and net debt: m increase(decrease) Vote Internal Affairs Mini ster of Internal Affairs Out year s MultiCategory Expenses and Capi tal Expenditure: Support for Statutory and Other Bodies MCA: Departmental Output Expense: Support for Grant Funding Bodies Internal Affairs (funded by revenue Crown) . . . . agree that the proposed change to appropriations for above be included in the Supplementary Estimates and that, in the interim, the increase be met from Imprest Supply; agree to delegate decision making on the fiscal management treatment of this expenditure to the Minister of Finance, following further advice from the Treasury; agree to transfer from to any underspends in the appropriations referred to in recommendation ) above, with the final amounts to be confirmed as part of the October Baseline Update; note tha t further funding to support the administration of the Trust and Fund may be sought depending on the communications campaign that is yet to be agreed to, scale UNCLASSIFIED ihpodtn Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs UNCLASSIFIED of donations received and the longevity of the fund, both of which are currently unknown; note that the fundi ng sought under recommendation is predominately for the establishment and operation of the secretariat only, and further funds may be sought to cover additional costs including specialist advice, advertising, and website hosting. Authorised for lodgement Hon Barbara Edmonds Minister of Internal Affairs UNCLASSIFIED ihpodtn Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs UNCLASSIFIED Appendix A: Extracts from draft Trust Deed (as at am, February ) Objects of trust . The Settlor declares that the Cyc lone Gabrielle Appeal Trust is a trust for charitable purposes and directs that the Trust Fund must be applied and used exclusively by the T rustees for such of the objects listed in clause . (the O bjects) as the Trustees from time to time decide, in their absolute di scretion, will provi de relief to the communities of districts or regions in which a civil defence emergency was declared for the effects of Cyclone Gabrielle or other severe weather events in January and February . . The specific objects of the T rust are: (a) the relief of poverty; and (b) the advancement of education; and (c) the advancement of religion; and (d) the advancement of any other purposes beneficial to the community; and (e) the advancement of any other purposes that are charitable under the law of New Ze aland. . Without either limiting the generality of or expanding on the scope of clause . and ., example s of specific activities that the Trustees may decide to undertake in order to further the Objects of the Trust are (a) payments and other support to individuals, families and householdsdemonstra ting hardship; (b) payments and other support for the creation or repair of communitybasedinfrastruc ture and facilities, such as sports grounds or facilities for community organisations; and (c) payments and other support for activities or programmes with the aim ofsupporting t he recovery of the affected regions and the rebuilding of strong sustainable communities and community selfreliance, capacity building andstability. These are the standard heads of charity as recognised in the Charities Act UNCLASSIFIED ihpodtn Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
UNION AND NAMECHANGE INFORMATION HELD BY THE
Unauthorised access to this information by an external party (a member of the public or a hostile foreign intelligence service hacking into the information) may result in the following impacts a major breach of the Privacy Act
Unauthorised andor inappropriate access to DIA Information by an NZSIS employee may have a range of impacts, depending on the nature and the extent of access. This could include, but is not limited to A breach of the Privacy Act resulting in interference with the privacy of one or more individuals moderate impact on public trust and confidence in NZSIS and the reputation of NZSIS
Unauthorised andor inappropriate sharing of DIA Information with an external agency may have a range of impacts depending on what information is shared and who it is shared with. This could include, but is not limited to: A breach of the Privacy Act resulting in serious harm to one or more individuals NZSIS takes extensive steps to ensure all information shared with external agencies, including DIA Information obtained via direct access, is shared in a way that is authorised and appropriate.
Uncover detail behind the graphs
Unde r scenario , we determ ined our ratings on would remai n unc hanged . We
Under Sc enario , we note that the local councils will have a significa nt over sight over the WSE
Under ordinary social conditions, people have meaningful and clinically relevant interactions with other people everyday, and many of these interactions would not be captured in current manual contact tracing systems.
Under s cena rio , we would remo ve the WSE related debt f rom our gen eral government net
Under s cenario , we would remove the WSE related deb t from our general gove rnment net
Under s of the ISA, NZSIS is authorised to cooperate with other New Zealand government departments
Under sc enario , we determined our ratings on would remain unchanged . We
Under scen ario , we determined our ratings on would remain unchanged . We
Under scenar io , we deter mined there woul d be no ratings implications on the Crown. We
Under scenario , we determined our ratings on LGFA would remain unc hanged . There would
Under scenario , we determined our ratings on would remain unchanged . We
Under scenario , we determined our ratin gs on would re main unchanged . We
Under scenario , we determined our rating and outlook on the WSE would be the same as
Under scenario , we determined our rating s on would remain unchanged . We
Under scenario , we determined our rat ings on would remain unchanged . The
Under scenario , we determined our rating and outlook on the WSE would be the same as
Under scenario , we determined our ratings on would rema in unc hanged. The
Under scenario , we deter mined our ratings on the Crown would remain unchanged . We
Under scenario , we determined our rating would be hig her on the WSE than und er scena rio
Under scenario , we determined our ratings on LGFA would re main unchanged . See appendi x
Under scenario , we determined our rating and outlook on the WSE would be the same as
Under scenario , we determined our ratings on would remain unch anged even
Under scenario , we determined our ratings on would remain unchanged . We
Under scenario , we determined our rating would be lower on the WSE than under scena rio
Under scenario , we determined our ratings on would remain un changed . We
Under section of the ISA, NZSIS is authorised to, amongst other things, provide advice and assistance to any public authority (whether in New Zealand or overseas), any person or class of persons (whether in New Zealand or overseas) authorised by the Minister. This protective security services, advice, and assistance includes for the purposes of providing advice and assistance around personnel, information, and physical security, as well as advice around national security risks.
Under section of the ISA, NZSIS is authorised to provide advice and assistance to anyone responding to an imminent threat to the life or safety of any person in New Zealand, or any New Zealand citizen or permanent resident overseas, any person in any area that New Zealand has search and rescue responsibilities for, or any person outside the territorial jurisdiction of any country.
Under section of the ISA, NZSIS is authorised to provide advice and assistance to anyone responding to an imminent threat to the life or safety of any person in New Zealand, or any New Zealand citizen or permanent resident overseas, any person in any area that New Zealand has search and rescue responsibilities for, or any person outside the territorial jurisdiction of any country. Should NZSIS obtain any information under the DAA for the purposes of a security clearance assessment then the limitations on further use of that information under section of the ISA will apply.
Under section of the FVPC Act, online content is deemed to be objectionable if it promotes or supports, or tends to promote or support:
Under the Act, these councils would be required to complete an amendment to their longterm plan (LTP) before making voluntary buyout offers to affected property owners. This requirement could further delay resolution for property owners and communities about the future of severely affected land.
Under the Privacy Act , an individual has the right to request that their personal information is amended if it is incorrect.
Under the Public Finance Act the Minister Responsible for Ministerial Services is the Portfolio Minister and the Minister of Internal Affairs the Vote Minister. The Department of Internal Affairs policies and administrative processes provide accountability for the way in which Ministerial Services funds are appropriated. Period of disclosure The expenses shown in the attached table were brought to charge in the period covered by the release as per the records h eld in the Department of Internal Affairs financial system. Accounting processes mean that costs in the financial system for each month do not always reflect expenses incurred in that month. Information disclosed Expen se categories for members of the Ex ecutive include: Air travel o Domestic airfares for members of the Executive . o International expenses include airfares, ac commodation, internal travel, receptions and related travel costs as these co sts are not recorded separately. Page of International travel for members of the Executive is funded from Vote Internal Affairs Members of the Executive Travel (M) is approved by Cabinet or in the case of travel to Australia, by the Prime Minister . Travel expenses shown may include costs for the Minister and any accompanying spouse, staff, m embers of Parliament or students where relevant , as these costs are not recorded separately . Surface travel expenses include VIP Transport Services (C hauffeur drive and self drive vehicles ), ferry, trains, taxis and may in clude the Minister , spousepartner, accompanying staff as these costs are not recorded separately . Wellington accommodation The Department of Internal Affairs attends to the Wellington accommodation requirements of Ministers with a nonWellington home base in two ways: . Official Residence s. The Department of Internal Affairs manages, maintains and services a small number of official residences owned by the Crown . . Wellington Accommodation Payment. Further information on the Wellington Accommodation Pay ment can be found in the Prime Ministers announcement of September : www.beehive.govt.nzreleaseministerialaccommodationdecisionsannounced Out o f Wellington Travel Expenses include s hotel, meal and incidental expenses for members of the Executive. All expenses are exclusive of GST , Fringe Benefit Tax (FBT) and depreciation as applicable . Ongoing Disclosure of members of the Executive expenses
Under this plan, a team would be stood up in Auckland following reports of a major disaster. This team will oversee the location and safe transportation of available Ministers, identify and onboard political and policy advisors, as well as media support staff.
Under this scenario, we determine d that LGFA s enterprise risk profile will remain unc hanged at
Underlying principles: closer to homeka aro mai ke te kinga Good health begins at home and in communities. Public health and populationbased strategies can help to better identify and prevent longterm conditions, provide earlier interventions, shape environments and make better quality healthier choices easier for all New Zealanders. Objective : People understand and acknowledge the range of gambling harms that affect individuals, familieswhnau and communities This objective acknowledges that people need to have the life skills and resilience to make healthy choices that prevent and minimise gambling harm. The Ministry recognises that, for most people, gambling is a recreational activity that is enjoyed safely and in moderation. However, a significant minority of people struggle with gambling. Certain groups , including Mori, Pacific peoples, Asian communities, youth, migrants and older people are particularly vulnerable to gambling harm for a variety of reasons. For example, some ethnic groups who have not been exposed to largescale, commercial gambling previously are particularly vulnerable to such forms of gambling harm. The Ministry will continue to design public health programmes, and allocate resources, for vulnerable groups in the population, including resources to raise awareness and develop resilient life skills to prevent or minimise gambling harm. The Ministry will continue to provide information to support making healthy choices at individual and community levels. This includes raising awareness about how to recognise low to moderate levels of gambling harm, the support available and the actions people can take to mitigate these risks and address this harm. The Ministry will develop and draw on learning from projects that promote related life and financial skills and resilience, such as S orted Whnau, for their potential application to people exposed to or at risk of gambling harm. The proposed codesign approach and use of consumer networks and peer support will give consumers (people with lived experience of gambling harm), including those from vulnerable communities, a stronger voice in the design and delivery of these activities. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Underlying principles: o ne teamk otahi te tma Our workforce needs the capacity and capability to meet New Zealand s current and future needs. This means developing and strengthening people s capability and skills; in particular, the capability of smaller communitybased nongovernmental organisation (NGO) providers. It involves developing both people and infrastructure to enable people to work to their full potential and deliver efficient and effective gambling harm reduction services. Objective : Services enhance people s mana and build life skills and resiliency to improve healthy choices This objective recognises that Government, the gambling sector, communities, families , whnau and individuals must understand and be able to address the range of gambling harms that can affect individuals, families , whnau and communities. Service development will reflect the principle of manaakitanga (acting in a mana enhancing way). People entering into treatment services often have a diminished sense of mana, and may feel services treat them not as part of the solution but as a problem. Services that demonstrate a shared culture of manaakitang a will benefit people and groups by: recognising and accepting people s worldviews and situatio ns informing people and developing programmes about man a ensuring interactions uplift, uphold and enhance the mana of people a nd r elationships . The Mi nistry intends that Mori informed values and principles will be guidelines for thinking and acting in ways that will benefit others, and thereby confer benefits upon individuals, groups and communities. A key aspect of the Ministry s public health activity has been raising awareness of the signs of harmful gambling. The Ministry will continue to fund a multimedia drive to raise awareness, destigmatise harmful gambling and encourage people to seek help. Highlighting the actions expected and required of gambling venues as responsible hosts will also be a key focus. The Ministry will continue to focus on increasing buyin from the wider government sector at a central level, to better address the wider issues associated with gambling harm. It will also continue to work closely with other government agencies. There is still considerable scope for wider screening of individuals and populations at risk of gambling harm, through work with other agencies. As an example, Te Rau Matatini provides a practitioner resource for mana enhancing in the area of substance addiction: Te Rau Matatini. Mana Enhancing Mana Protecting Practice. URL: http:teraumatatini.comnewsmanaenhancingmanaprotectingpractice (accessed November ). STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Underlying principles: smart systemhe atamai te whakaraupapa Research should reflect the different linguistic and cultural contexts that provide different ways of understanding gambling and its effects. Results should be communicated in a variety of ways that are appropriate for and understood by the intended audience. The Ministry will fund gambling harm minimisation research and evaluation that: is conducted with integrity, independence and accountability uses appropriate methods for the research or evaluation question and resources available is delivered in a timely manner to inform policy and operational decisionmaking and public debate is commissioned with transparency, follows best management practices and complies with the government policy direction about the ownership and use of research deliverables funded by government represents value for money encourages collaborative design and consumer input. .Aligning the strategy with He Korowai Oranga He Korowai Oranga is New Zealand s Mori Health Strategy. It is a living document that was most recently in . Figure below summarises the strategy. Pae Ora healthy futures is the Government s vision and overarch ing aim for Mori health. Pae Ora is a holistic concept that includes three interconnected and mutually reinforcing elements mauri ora (healthy individuals), w hnau ora (healthy families) and wai ora (healthy environments). The Ministry has aligned the current strategic plan with He Korowai Oranga, in acknowledgement that the Strategy to Prevent and Minimise Gambling Harm contributes to Pae Ora. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Underpinned by DEI pillars, social inclusion, inclusive culture, and inclusive leadership.
Underpinning WSEs excellent business risk profile is the company s natural monopolistic
Understanding Ministers expenses
Understanding Ministers Expenses
Understanding Ministers Expenses (after )
Understanding Ministers Expenses (prior to )
Understanding Ministers Expenses (after )
Understanding Ministers Expenses (prior to )
Understanding Ministers Expenses for the period July to September
Understanding Ministers Expenses April to June
Understanding Ministers Expenses January to March
Understanding Ministers Expenses January to March
Understanding Ministers Expenses July to September
Understanding Ministers Expenses July to September
Understanding Ministers Expenses October to December
Understanding Ministers Expenses October to December
Understanding gambling in the community
Understanding the New Zealand Online Extremist Ecosystem
Unfortunately two cards were programmed with the same ID resulting in the loss of two wear positions on the variant subject, and the video recording covered only a small fraction of the trial because the camera ran out of memory. The results also showed high variability (standard deviations ranged from . to .dBm) for RSSI in all wear positions and distances. With all these factors in consideration the results here should be considered with caution.
Unit Manager Policy (Acting)
UnitTeam Position Type of Change Office of the Chief Executive Executive Services Officer to the Chief Executive No Change Principal Advisor to the Chief Executive No Change Team Administrator Position disestablished Director Office of the Chief Executive Principal AdvisorExecutive Services Officer to the Chief Executive Released under the Official Information Act
Unpaid debt . agree th at water services entities will use standard commercial procedures for collecting unpaid debt; Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of Process and next steps . agree that the above decisions be implemented through
Unsolicited Electronic Messages Act
Until , the Department conducted annual engagement surveys to provide our people with an opportunity to tell us about their experience working at DIA.
Up to , additional URLs added to the Digital Child Exploitation Filter
Upcoming Te Puna Tahua Lottery Grants Board meeting papers
Upcoming Watercare decisions
Update and Release of Discussion Document
Update and revised approach on Ttai Aronga
Update on Aotearoa Reorua Bilingual Towns and Cities
Update on Community Hubs work programme
Update on Content Regulatory Review
Update on Cyclone Recovery Activities
Update on Digital Identity and Opportunities for Government Leadership
Update on Entity A choices for investment, borrowing and charges
Update on Queenstown local visitor levy local bill
Update on Responding to Abuse in Care Amendment Bill
Update on Taumata Arowai Board Appointments
Update on Three Waters Litigation
Update on negotiations about Sports Minima Payments
Update on surrogacy and adoption law reform
Update on the East Coast severe weather event
Update on the Government Chief Digital Officer AI Work Programme
Update on the Rates Rebates Scheme review
Update on the requested changes to the Water Services Entities Bill from the Green Party (tbc)
Update on work programme priorities May
Update process but could not provide proposals within the required timeframe.
Analysis of Long Term Plans
Policy Mandate for Crown Infrastructure Partners
draft Cabinet papers for feedback Local Water Done Well stage : water services delivery system and regulatory system
information is now available at:
ways to pay for infringement fees
December
Process and Timeline for Preparing the Asset Management Plan and Funding and Pricing Plan for the Northland and Auckland Water Services Entity
Updates from the Steering Committee
Updates on Agency Activities Local Water Done Well Local Government (Water Services) Bill (Bill ) Update: (( Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Drafting for Bill is . We have received first drafts, Yf)(iv) e are working on refining these wtnl:he Parliamentary Counse Office (PCOl and expect to receive further drafting on other elements of the Bill this week. )(f)(iv) . Xf)(iv) Contact: Bex Sullivan a Watercare Services Limited Annual Report Update: In the week beginning September , Watercare its annual report for the year to June . The Department is undertaking an analysis of the audited accounts, including considering trends over the last five years. We will provide you with a fuller briefing on this in the week beginning September . Headlines from the report include: Total revenue for the year was . billion, an increase of percent on last year. Revenue for drinking water, wastewater and infrastructure growth charges were all up between percent. Total expenses were million, an increase of percent. The main drivers of the increase were: o Operating expenses, up percent to million. This included a million unfavourable variance for maintenance costs , primarily due to the ongoing costs associated with the January flood events (. million) and temporary works associated with the Orakei Main Sewer colla se in Se tember . million . Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Upgraded CCTV cameras, installed bollards, rolled out new access cards, and provided training to improve security at our sites
Upgrades to the New Zealand Passports system
Upgrading our tools with digital contact tracing Digital contact tracing has typically been considered in the form of an app. The Singaporean approach (TraceTogether) and the Apple Google Exposure API are the most notable app frameworks. The required rate of compliant adoption for any digital contact tracing technology is in excess of . A compliant adoption rate of , which is well beyond that achieved by any contact tracing app globally thus far, would still only detect of encounters. The goal for any digital contact tracing initiative really needs to target coverage of of the most high risk encounters bars, restaurants, public transport, private parties etc.
Upon receiving a takedown notice or otherwise become aware that a user has uploaded objectionable content onto your platform, an online content host must as soon as reasonably possible:
Upper Hutt City Councils City Centre Water Main Renewal
Upper Hutt man sentenced to months home detention for possessing over , images videos of child sexual exploitation abuse
Upper Hutt model WICS report
Upper Hutt slide pack WICS report
Uptake remains low Entities judge that there is little extra to be gained by becoming part of the Trust Framework and continue to operate independently of it. People decide that it is more convenient to use digital identity services operating outside the Trust Framework, even though they are less secure. The potential benefits of the Trust Framework remain unrealised for everyone in society Ongoing government funding is committed to a regulatory framework which produces little value People want a trusted digital identity ecosystem Both government and private sector assume this risk. The government will mitigate this risk d uring phase one of the Trust Framewor k by testing processes and policies to ensure the Trust Framework is implemented in a fashion that meets the requirements and needs of all ecosystem participants. This risk will remain a realistic possibility because, although government can implement a re gulatory regime that accredits digital identity services, it remains dependent on individuals to choose to use th ose services instead of non accredited ones . Social inequalities creep in
Uptake remains low Entities judge that there is little extra to be gained by becoming part of the Trust Framework and continue to operate independently of it. People decide that it is more convenient to use digital identity services operating outside the Trust Framework, even though they are less secure. The potential benefits of the Trust Framework remain unrealised for everyone in society Ongoing government funding is committed to a regulatory framework which produces little value People want a trusted digital identity ecosystem Both government and private sector assume this risk. The government will mitigate this risk during phase one of the Trust Framewor k by testing processes and policies to ensure the Trust Framework is implemented in a fashion that meets the requirements and needs of all ecosystem participants. This risk will remain a realistic possibility because, although government can implement a re gulatory regime that accredits digital identity services, it remains dependent on individuals to choose to use th ose services instead of non accredited ones . PROACTIVELY RELEASED INCONFIDENCE
Upwa rd pressure on could occur if its finan cial metrics were to improve relative to
Upward pressure on could occur if its finan cial metrics were to improve relative to
Urban Growth Agenda Ministers Meeting, May
Use Google Docs for both Android and Apple devices
Use filtersslicers to manipulate different views
Use it for the purpose you collected it for, unless one of the exceptions applies. PP states that an intelligence and security agency that holds personal information that was obtained in connection with one purpose may use the information for any other purpose (a secondary purpose) if the agency believes on reasonable grounds that the use of the information for the secondary purpose is necessary to enable the agency to perform any of its functions.
Use of Royal Arms, Names, and Images
Use of external Resources
Use of standard and modular design for water infrastructure
Use the calculator to work out how much you might get as a rates rebate. This is an estimate only your council will assess the actual amount when you apply.
Using Artificial Intelligence (AI)
Using ISPs and Antivirus software to keep your family computer system safe.
Using accredited digital identity services helps to make sure that your information and privacy are protected.
Using biometrics makes it easier, faster, and more convenient for New Zealanders to access services and information they need.
Using digital identity information in everyday situations
Usually there will be no charge for the Departments response to an OIA request, however if there is a substantial cost to the Department for providing the information, you may be asked to meet some or all of the cost of your request. If this happens, you will be told of the charge, or given an estimate for the cost, and can choose whether or not to continue with the request. Wherever possible, we will try to help you refine your request in such a way that it will not result in a charge.
Utaina preserves the Crowns audio and visual history
Utility links and page information
V. Projects. The parties intend to work together on the interrelated projects described in the
V. quality performance measures and statistics, including leaks and water use and complaints processes;
VI. Programme governance, delivery approach and resourcing . The parties intend to each provide
VII. Communications and public announcements. AWS and the GCDO may want to engage in
VIII. Intellectual Property . Unless otherwise agreed in writing, the parties acknowledge that they are
VT Pty Ltd Level , William Street, Darlinghurst, Sydney, NSW , Australia Tel: () hellovt.co www.vt.co Sydney San Francisco Singapore
VT Technical and QA Report Day Field Trial May Nelson Hospital
Vaccinations are offered annually to all employees.
Variations to the agreement will be made in accordance with section V of the
Venue managers are no longer responsible for jackpot advertising and branding requirements. Venue operators and class licence holders remain responsible.
Venue managers have new responsibilities at venues. This includes ensuring venue staff responsible for supervising class gambling are:
Venue managers must review these records at least once per week and record their review.
Venues and EGMs Dynamic dashboard that allows you to select venue and EGM information you want to see based on time and location.
Venues and gaming machine numbers
Venues and gaming machine numbers by district (to June )
Venues and gaming machine numbers, by district
Venues operating when the Act was commissioned
Venues operating when the Gambling Act was commissioned
Verifiable Identity Credentials are secure, digitallysigned, trusted, and standardised packet of data about you that you can use to prove your identity and identifying factors such as age or name digitally.
Verification, until attempts to contact the matched individual are about to
Verifying relationships and connections between individuals will enable DIA the Registrar
Veterans Affairs New Zealand
Veterans Affairs New Zealand Marti Eller
Viability of MultiCouncil Water Organisations
Viet Nam Veterans Joint Working Group website
Viet Nam Veterans Working Group website
View Single View of to be treated as a unique person, rather than as a collection of seemingly
View Briefings for Incoming Ministers
View Pauls senior management team
View a chart of the Departments organisational structure:
View further information on the
View latest Official Information Act Releases
View or download the PDF version
View or download the document:
View our current vacancies
View our video on Te Aka Taiwhenua
View our video on how the Treaty of Waitangi gives our work meaning
View our video on what to keep in mind when providing services to Mori
View our video on why DIA should support Te Reo
View the survey results:
View the survey results:
View the survey results:
View the survey results:
View the survey results:
View the survey results:
View the survey results:
View the Charter on the New Zealand Gazette website
View the Life and Identity Services Performance Measures Dashboard dashboard (Click on image or link below):
View the Working Groups report and the Government response
View the structure of Internal Affairs
View these data sets in the data.govt.nz catalogue
View this information as a PDF
View this information as a Word document
Violence Act NonDisclosure
Virtual Roadshow of Australian reform experience
Vision or prescription lens allowance.
Visit to Carterton District Council on April
Visit to IRT NZ Trotting Cup Addington, November
Visit to Kaikoura Trotting Club Monday October
Visit to Selwyn District Council on October .
Visit to Tauranga on March
Visit to the National Library, He Tohu and Archives New Zealand, February
Visit with Tairawhiti Civil Defence
Visit with Volunteer Great Lakes Taup
Visits and Ceremonial Events
Visits and Ceremonial Office
Visits and Ceremonial office hire flags of most countries of the world for indoor or outdoor events such as conferences, functions and parades in New Zealand.
Visits and ceremonial events
Vivien Meek Committee Secretary
Voluntary Principles to Counter Online Child Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
Voluntary Principles to counter online child sexual exploitation
Voluntary principles to counter the proliferation of online child exploitation.
Voluntary registrations for donations made before August that result in a birth.
Vote Internal Affairs to provide funding for the completion of the Royal Commission of
Voting age Government response to the Declaration of Inconsistency and development of the Electoral (Lowering Voting Age for Local Elections and Polls) Legislation Bill
Voting for alcohol licensing trust members is about voting for representation and governance within the community. Although there are strong arguments about harm to young people from consuming alcohol, this does not indicate that and yearolds safety and wellbeing will be harmed if they vote in alcohol licensing trust elections.
Voting in alcohol licensing trust elections The Supreme Court in Make It considered that the evidence before the Court did not support the proposition that and yearolds lack competence to vote.
Vulnerable Communities Disproportionately impacted communitiesA broad group of people living in the same place or having a particular characteristic in common. Includes, but not restricted to, elderly, aged care facilities, disabled persons, rural communities, Mori, Pacific and ethnic communities. Controller A statutory role under the CDEM Act that is appointed at national, regional, and local levels. Control Control (authority across agencies) is executed horizontally and is the authority to direct tasks to another agency, and to coordinate that agencys actions so they are integrated with the wider response. Control authority is established in legislation or in an emergency plan. This control is to task a certain agency towards a certain outcome (achieve a managed evacuation for example). It is not control over resources (personnel, vehicles, assets). Coordinating Executive Group (CEG)A statutory committee that is made up of senior officials from each member local authority, Police, Fire and Emergency New Zealand, a provider of health and disability services, and other coopted members. It is responsible for implementing decisions of the CDEM Group. Coordinated Incident Management System (CIMS)The Coordinated Incident Management System (CIMS) is a framework of principles, structures, functions, processes, and terminology that agencies can apply in in both emergency and nonemergency incidents. Coordination Bringing together agencies and resources to ensure unified, consistent, and effective response. Command and control assist with coordination by defining authority between and within agencies. Term Definition Councils local governmentCollectively refers to regional councils, unitary councils, district councils and city councils. Also known as local authorities. Critical Infrastructure Entity (Lifeline utility in the CDEM Act)Any organisation named or described in Schedule of the CDEM Act. This includes airports, ports, railways, and providers of gas, electricity, water, wastewater or sewerage, storm water, telecommunications, roading networks and petroleum products. Declaration A formal announcement of the beginning of a state of condition made under the CDEM Act. Refer state of emergency. Departmental Agency In the context of this paper, Departmental Agency refers to NEMA. It is an operationally autonomous agency with its own chief executive, hosted by the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC). Displaced people People who have had to leave their homes as a result of an emergency event and were provided shelter and accommodation under section () in the National Civil Defence Emergency Management Plan Order . Emergency Coordination Centre (ECC)Operates at a regional level to control one or more Emergency Operation Centres. Emergency Operation Centre (EOC)A facility, usually operated by a local authority, which is a coordination and control centre for local emergency response and support. The term is used in CIMS, and CDEM guidance, but not in the CDEM Act. Emergency In general, an emergency is a situation that poses an immediate risk to life, health, property, or the environment that requires a significant and coordinated response. It has a specific meaning under section of the CDEM Act as it is relevant to the decision to declare a state of emergency. Emergency Management SystemThe overall system that includes civil defence and emergency management agencies, policies, legislation, regulations, capability, funding, operations, mindset, and culture. Emergency Management Assistance TeamAn Emergency Management Assistance Team (EMAT) is a team that can be deployed to share capability and add surge capacity with the emergency management system. Essential workers Staff who work for essential businesses such as hospitals, rest homes, supermarkets, lifeline utilities or critical infrastructure, or emergency management agencies. GLOSSARY OF TERMS APPENDIX C APPENDIX B APPENDIX A Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsTerm Definition Fibre High speed internet. Generator An alternative power source that can be used during an outage. Group Plan A statutory document produced by the CDEM Group under the CDEM Act section sets its contents. Immediate Response An immediate response to an emergency starts when notice is given that an event is likely and preparatory actions begin. Depending on the hazard, this could be three to four days before an event is likely to begin. The immediate response finishes when the threat to life has passed and the situation has reached the point of stability. Infrastructure The basic physical and organisational structures and facilities needed for the operation of a society or enterprise, such as schools, roads, bridges, and power supplies. Hap A group within an iwi (subtribe). Hazardscape An understanding of the physical nature, distribution, frequency of occurrence, impacts and consequences of key hazards that could affect a locality, region or country. Inquiry Established to inquire into any matter of public importance or concern to the Government of the day. Government inquiries are appointed by and report to a Minister. In the context of the report, the Inquiry refers to the Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events. Iwi A large group of people (or tribe) descended from a common ancestor and associated with a distinct territory in Aotearoa New Zealand. Joint Committee A standing committee under section of the CDEM Act comprising the regional council and territorial authorities within the region. Refer CDEM Group Kinga Ora A crown entity that provides social housing, urban development, and home ownership products. Kawa Protocol or etiquette, particularly in a Mori meeting place. LandSAR A national volunteer organisation that provides land search and rescue assistance across New Zealand. Local Authority A local authority is a territorial authority, a regional council, or a unitary authority. Term Definition Manaakimanaakitanga The act of showing kindness, respect, generosity, care for others, and reciprocity. Marae Meeting grounds with buildings that belong to a particular iwi (tribe), hap (subtribe), or whanau (family). Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)An agreement between two or more parties that is outlined in a formal document. It is not legally binding, but signals willingness of the parties to work together with a contract. Mihi A formal greeting or expression of acknowledgement. National Crisis Management Centre (NCMC)A secure allofgovernment facility maintained in a state of readiness to manage the national response to emergencies, sometimes colloquially referred to as the bunker. National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA)Government agency that provides leadership in reducing risk, being ready for, responding to and recovering from emergencies. Operator Operator refers to NEMAs function to lead or support the response to and recovery from emergencies, while also supporting the operation of the emergency management system. Planning Emergency Levels of ServiceService delivery goals for infrastructure providers during and after an emergency event. These goals could be delivered through the existing infrastructure (e.g., pipes, lines, cables), or through other means (trucked water or the provision of generators). Public Information Management (PIM)The function that, during an incident, prepares, distributes, and monitors information to and from the media and public. Readiness A grouping of emergency management activities that relates to developing operational systems and capabilities well before an emergency happens, including selfhelp and response programmes for the public, and specific programmes for emergency services, critical infrastructure entitieslifeline utilities and other agencies. Recognised Seasonal Employer scheme (RSE)Adminstered by Immigration New Zealand, the scheme allows horticulture and viticulture industries to bring in workers from overseas. GLOSSARY OF TERMS APPENDIX C APPENDIX B APPENDIX A Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsTerm Definition Recovery A grouping of emergency management activities that relates to the coordinated efforts and processes used to bring about the immediate, mediumterm, and longterm holistic regeneration and enhancement of a community following an emergency. Reduction A grouping of emergency management activities that relates to identification and analysis of risks to life and property from hazards, taking steps to eliminate those risks if practicable, and, if not, reducing the magnitude of their impact and the likelihood of their occurrence to an acceptable level. Regional Council A regional council named in Part of Schedule of the Local Government Act. Resilience The capacity to withstand or recover quickly from a natural hazard event. Response A grouping of emergency management activities that relates to the actions taken immediately before, during or directly after an emergency to save lives and protect property. Rohe The territory or boundary of iwi and hap Sector Coordinating Entities (SCEs)Prearranged points of contact with critical infrastructure entitieslifeline utilities to facilitate streamlined coordination and communication during emergencies. They help resolve issues, provide, and distribute information, contribute to planning, coordinate requests for help and liaise with other sectors. Severe weather event One of three weather events that impacted the North Island in : Cyclone Hale, the Auckland Anniversary heavy rainfall, and Cyclone Gabrielle. Situational awareness An understanding and appreciation of the complexities of an incident, including an understanding of the environment, the situation, likely developments, and implications. Starlink A satellite internet constellation, operated by SpaceX. State of Emergency A state of emergency is called when normal emergency services are overwhelmed, or at risk of being overwhelmed. It provides access to powers that would not normally be available. A state of emergency can be local or national and results from a declaration made under the CDEM Act . Term Definition Steward One of NEMAs core functions. As steward, NEMA provides strategic leadership for risk reduction, readiness, response, and recovery activities, and builds emergency capability and capacity. Stopbanks Compacted mounds of earth built next to rivers that help to limit the spread of floodwater onto surrounding land. Substation Part of an electrical generation, transmission, and distribution system. Taiwhenua The land and people of a specific district. Tauiwi NonMori. Telecommunications Communications over a distance, for example by cell phone, landline, or fibre internet. Territorial (Local) Authority (TLA)A city council or a district council named in Part of Schedule of the Local Government Act. Tikanga Mori customary practices or behaviours, derived from tika meaning right or correct. To act in accordance with tikanga is to behave in a way that is culturally appropriate. Unitary authority (council)A territorial authority that has the responsibilities, duties, and powers of a regional council conferred on it. Whnau Immediate and extended family group. GLOSSARY OF TERMS APPENDIX C APPENDIX B APPENDIX A Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather EventsAcronyms and abbreviations ACC Accident Compensation Corporation BCR Benefit Cost Ratio CDC Civil Defence Centre CDEM Civil Defence and Emergency Management CDEM Act Civil Defence Emergency Management Act CEG Coordinating Executive Group CIMS Coordinated Incident Management System DPMC Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet ECC Emergency Coordination Centre. EOC Emergency Operations Centre EMAT Emergency Management Assistance Team FENZ Fire and Emergency New Zealand GDP Gross Domestic Product GST Goods and Services Tax IMT Incident Management Team LGNZ Local Government New Zealand. The membership body for local authorities. LPG Liquid Petroleum Gas MNZ Maritime New Zealand MOU Memorandum of Understanding MPI Ministry for Primary Industries MSD Ministry of Social Development NCMC National Crisis Management Centre NEMA National Emergency Management Agency NZDF New Zealand Defence Force PIM Public Information Management RCC Rescue Coordination Centre managed by Maritime New Zealand RSE Recognised Seasonal Employer scheme TPK Te Puni Kkiri VHF Very High Frequency Image: Flooding near Puketapu, to the west of Napier. Source: NZDF GOVERNMENT INQUIRY INTO THE RESP ONSE TO THE
Vulnerable consumers also receive some financial support through the welfare system . Currently, water charges from territorial authorities are included in the definition of accommodation costs, which is used to determine the level of Accommodation Supplement paid to a recipient. This definition of accommodation c osts is also used for Temporary Additional Support and feeds through into various assessments of need for other supplementary support. This means that many vulnerable households currently receive support through the welfare system to meet the cost of their water bills or water charges from private landlords. Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . I recommend making consequential amendments to the Social Security Act and associated regulations, to preserve the status quo and ensure water charges from a water services entity are also included in the definition of accommodation costs. These changes are not critical, but they will ensure the law is clear.
WATER SERVICES POLICY AND LEGISLATION
WDC, and other local authorities already outsource operatio nal capability to scale providers Many New Zealand water companies already outsource operational capability to specialist providers . Several large scale providers deliver services across all of New Zealand , such as Downer, CityCare Water and Veolia (a glob al specialist water services company). Other large scale providers operate on a regional basis, s uch as Watercare (which provides services around Auckland) . Outsource d services amount to around percent of WDCs annual opex costs. Outsource providers already achieve economies of scope and scale across regions and New Zealand. This is because outsource d service providers can offer specialist expertise on a contracted basis, where fulltime employment of staff may not be warranted. Outsource providers also compete with one another for council contracts. This ensures prices tend towards costs and it incentivises efficiency improvements. Cost reductions of up to percent in the already competitive outsource service provider market is implausible. WaterWastewater Cost () per connected propertyAuckland (Watercare) Whangarei (WDC) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs CONFIDENTIAL Castalia . WICS anal ytical approach has other methodological flaws WICS analytical approach has a range of ot her flaws. WICS uses an unconventional method that back solves the revenue path Typical best practice for calculating the cost of service and tariff levels for wate r utilities and other regulated services in developed and developing countries is to use t he building blocks approach . The building blocks approach is used by the New Zealand Commerce Commission for a range of regulated infrastructure industries, Austral ian water economic regulators such as IPART and Essential Services Commission , and by Ofwat in the UK. The building blocks approach reveals a more accurate cost of service, and therefore the revenues required to meet costs. However, WICS uses a novel meth od to estimate household bill levels. The projected revenues which result in the household bills are calculated based on a hard coded revenue path. Typically, a model used to predict costs (and therefore revenues required to cover costs) should determine the revenue path as an output of the model , informed by the assumptions . Howe ver, the revenue path is back solved and has been hard coded to align with the debt ratios ( percent of revenue for the Opt Out Scenario) . Key discretionary assumptions made b y WICS inevitably lead to the Reform Scenario demonstrating superior results WICS modelling approach uses a number of key discretionary assumptions that are highly favourable for the Reform Scenario and highly unfavourable for the Opt Out Scenario . With such assumptions, it was inevitable that WICS modelling would reach the conclu sions that it did. The model assumes that capex efficiency can only begin to be reali sed if the councils population size is greater than , . The efficiency factor increases progressively to when a threshold of , population is crossed . This limit set by WICS automatically assumes that many councils, including WDC, will not realize any efficiency gains , while every amalgamated entity will realize efficiency gains of over . Further, t he net investment profile is modelled differently in the Reform Scenario compared to the Opt Out Scenario . In the Reform Scenario, WICS has only included the large investment requirements after . Yet, in the Opt Out Scenario, WICS included the large investment requirements from . The effect is that, in the Reform scenario, the benefits of the new investment are delayed by up to a decade, while the costs arrive just in time to be reduced by the maximum efficiency gains assumed in the model. We note that is the first year when the WICS model allows maximum efficiency gains to be realised. The figure below demonstrates the effect of WICS time profil e adjustment on the Reform Scenario . The solid black line shows WICS state d new investment path, while the blue dashed line shows what that path would have been without the manual adjustment WICS made to the time profile of the investment. For illustrative purposes, the black dashed line also shows what the new investment path looks like before WICS applies efficiency gains .
WICS are comparing undepreciated replacement cost values for Scottish Water to depreciated replacement cost values for Whangrei p. The asset value per connected citizen number used for Scottish Water is derived from detailed asset replacement analysis undertaken by Scottish Water. It is correct that these numbers are the true replacement cost and do not account for depreciation as thi s is the best reflection of the cost of replacing the asset at the end of its useful life.
WICS does not disclose the relative contribution of these factors to the total percent efficiency gain. p. Each of these factors cannot be considered in isolation or separated out and, even if such an exercise could be completed, it would likely be materially different for different entities. Different water entities adopt different approaches to delivering the standards set by regulators. In the UK, there have been partnerships, fully outsourced arrangement, fully in house arrangements and alliances. But the end results have been broadly similar.
WICS has made use of local authorities own estimates of required investment in several ways: The bottom end of the range of the investment used for modelling purposes used the councils unconstrained views (as provided in the RFI) plus economic depreciation. The further Montecarlo sensitivity anal ysis also used the investment figures provided by councils with no additional adjustment.
WICS makes no adjustment for the ove rlapping nature of growth and replacement investment We note that, in practice, when enhancement and growth investment takes place, the new upgraded assets often replace at least some ageing assets , thus reduci ng the need for replacement expenditure. WICS approach appears to have made no adjustment for this, since the total investment is calculated as the simple sum of enhancement and growth and asset replacement and refurbishment , and the estimates for the two categories are derived separately, with no consideration of interaction between the two. This means that WICS total investment estimate will be overstated. WICS preferred model appears highly selective WICS models in approaches (Great Britain comparative) and (comparing asset values) produce a level of enhancement and growth investment in Step that is broadly consistent with councils RFI responses. Yet despite the consistency with councils own estimates of investment , WICS preferred model is approach . Approach reports si gnificantly higher required levels of investment.
WPC
WPC
WSE (Group B) under scenario , we believe a default of the WSE would have a major
WSE (Group B). Whil e ther e is no t yet any policy or track record of pr oviding credit
WSE compared to strong fo r regulated utilities such as Transpower.
WSE forecasts to undertake sizeable long term capex program in order to meet the increasing
WSE is expected to be established by aggregating a large number of small entit ies that are
WSE on pricin g or investment decisio ns. The Governor s will app oint and r emove bo ard
WSE. The WSE s will own all relevant water ass ets.
WSEs borrow ings which we estim ate at abo ut of GDP in , the likely investme nt grade
WSEs borrowings which we estimate at about of GDP in , the likely investment grade
Waikato Community Committee
Waikato model WICS report
Waikato slide pack WICS report
WaikatoTainui Kiingitanga Accord July
Waimakariri District Council
Waimakariri model WICS report
Waimakariri slide pack WICS report
Waimate model WICS report
Waimate slide pack WICS report
Waipa model WICS report
Waipa slide pack WICS report
Wairoa Province Tairwhiti Adventure Trust
Wairoa model WICS report
Wairoa slide pack WICS report
Waitaki model WICS report
Waitaki slide pack WICS report
Waitomo model WICS report
Waitomo slide pack WICS report
Wanting to achieve their Chartered Accountancy (CA ANZ) or Certified Practising Accountancy (CPA) qualifications
Wards and Mori Constituencies) Amendment Bill (No. ) and should be
Warning Beware of Scam impersonating AMLCFT Group
Wastewater Environmental Performance Standards: Minimum and Maximum Approach
Wastewater environmental performance standards: single standard approach
Wastewater standards Amendments to the Water Services Act
Water New Zealand Water Journal Article The WSA are finalising an article for the September issue of the Water Journal by Water New Zealand. The article focuses on their proportionate regulatory approach and uses the recent Tokomaru lead Maximum Acceptable Value exceedances as an example of efforts to engage and support drinking water suppliers in a range of scenarios. A sidebar to the main article is about the importance of water suppliers using flushed samples of water for routine metal testing which was a key learning from the Tokomaru incident. Multi barrier project update By August , the WSA intend to send emails to drinking water suppliers who have confirmed that they have adopted a long term plan extension or deferral under the Water Services Acts Repeal Act . These emails will provide confirmation to drinking water suppliers that the timeframes have been adjusted to acknowledge their funding situation and to identify the appropriate pathway to compliance. Working with Whanganui District Council to clarify sampling requirements On August , the WSA identified media comments from the Whanganui District Council (W hanganui DC noting the resourcing challenges associated with meeting daily sampling requirements. The article paraphrases a staff members report that the sampling requirements stem from the WSA Drinking Water Quality Assurance Rules (the Rules). As there is no requirement in the Rules to undertake daily sampling, their regional team have reached out to Whanganui DC to understand the process the council is undertaking and whether there is a misunderstanding of the Rules. Whanganui DC have confirmed that WDC staff are undertaking more sampling than is required by the WSA and the Rules. All sampling has previously been conducted by in house staff at a low cost. However, Whanganui DC understand that recent organisational changes have meant that the staff previously carrying out this sampling are no longer available for this work. WSA will continue to work with WDC staff to consider what is the best approach for their supplies to manage their risk in a way that is proportionate and cost effective. The WSA will also write to the Whanganui DC Chief Executive to note our outreach conversations and clarify the sampling requirements that are a result of the Rules. Update on Morrinsville Water Treatment Plant Since our update to your office on August , Matamata Piako District Council (MPDC) advised that their back up bores and water treatment plants were performing well to meet the current demands in Morrinsville. MPDC were able to continue to treat wate r to standards, while advising residents to conserve water. This meant MPDC was able to maintain a sufficiency of supply while working on restoring the treatment process at the main plant to full capacity. Contact: Sara McFall ()(a) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Water Service Reform Further information on Entity A Establishment Board
Water Services (Drinking Water Standards for New Zealand) Regulations
Water Services (Drinking Water Standards for New Zealand) Regulations : Authorisation for submission to the Executive Council
Water Services (Fees and Charges) Regulations
Water Services Act (LG refers): make explicit that consideration of
Water Services Act amendments I
Water Services Act so far, and asks you to confirm two further amendments; as
Water Services Act through the upcoming Local Government Water
Water Services Act Commencement Order
Water Services Act require an authorisations framework of some
Water Services Act, relating to Taumata Arowais roles and responsibilities. These
Water Services Acts (Repeal) Act
Water Services Acts Repeal Bill Cabinet Papers for Proactive Release by March
Water Services Acts Repeal Bill: overview of House stages
Water Services Authority Taumata Arowai September
Water Services Authority Taumata Arowai Board
Water Services Authority Taumata Arowai Briefings and Aide Memoires NA
Water Services Authority Levy Cabinet Paper to be Considered by ECO on October
Water Services Delivery Plans
Water Services Entities Amendment Bill nd Reading Speech and other documents
Water Services Entities Amendment Bill Approval for Introduction
Water Services Entities Bill Update on public submissions and the departmental report (tbc)
Water Services Entities Bill materials for committee of the whole House and third reading materials
Water Services Entities Constitution Development for the Northland Auckland Water Services Entity: Update and next steps
Water Services Entities constitution development: Update and next steps
Water Services Entity A Establishment Board appointment: draft Cabinet paper
Water Services Entity Financing options
Water Services Entity establishment boards proposed approach to appointments
Water Services Legislation
Water Services Legislation Bill
Water Services Legislation Bill Options for supplementary order paper
Water Services Legislation Bill: supporting documents for introduction and first reading
Water Services Legislation Repeal Bill and Cabinet Paper Approval to lodge
Water Services Policy Technical Advisory Group scope and establishment process
Water Services Policy and Legislation
Water Services Policy, DIA
Water Services Reform Briefing on Corporate Systems and Operational Technology Cabinet paper for Cabinet on July
Water Services Reform Establishment Water Services Plans Draft Initial Plan
Water Services Reform Meeting with Raukawa Settlement Trust, July
Water Services Reform Meeting with Taumata Arowai June
Water Services Reform Process and timeline for preparing the Asset Management Plan and Funding and Pricing Plan for the Northland and Auckland Water Services Entity
Water Services Reform Speaking notes on Corporate Systems and Operational Technology Cabinet paper for DEV on June .
Water Services Reform Water Services Entities Amendment Bill Initial briefing
Water Services Reform Briefing note Final documentation Appointment to Te Puna
Water Services Reform Cabinet Paper for Lodgement: Water Services Entities Corporate Systems and Operational Technology Detailed Business Case
Water Services Reform Programme Implementation Planning (TBC)
Water Services Reform website
Water Services Regulator Act .
Water Services Regulator. Officials understand that as part of fulfilling coalition
Water Services Regulatory Systems Operating Model
Water service delivery vehicles initial advice
Water service delivery vehicles pricing and charging
Water service delivery vehicles remaining charging issues and other matters
Water services entities constitutions
Water services entities must have a development code, which must set out a series of development principles that set out how entities will support and enable urban development and growth in their service area.
Water services entities: Systems of Record investment
Watercare Central Interceptor Launch
Watercare Charter Remaining technical decisions
Watercare Initial Baseline Report
Watercare Initial Baseline Report December
Ways of working In implementing the proposed operating model, our ways of working will accordingly be based on the following principles: We will set out longer term priorities through the Regulatory Systems strategy; We will look to implement the strategy through the use of quarterly, annual and multiyear work programmes that reflect the multidisciplinary professional inputs needed; In our planning, we will be driven primarily by our agreed strategic priorities, but will be responsive to emerging intelligence and emerging risk; At an operational level, our choice and direction of interventions will be very deliberate and driven by intelligence and risk, as well as robust regulatory practice, using an evidence base to identify and fix the problems that are going to actually make a difference in light of what we know about the regulatory system. Importantly, this will also include active and deliberate decisions about what work we are choosing not to do; We will have a collective approach to planning our work, moving away from a siloed approach focussed on our own responsibilities, and moving to planning both short and longer term work alongside those who support and complement our work; The Regulatory Services Systems Leadership Group will apply effective governance and accountability over our work programmes, reviewing on a quarterly and annual basis what we have achieved and what we have yet to achieve and considering what we may need to do to facilitate work programmes that are lagging; We will look to actively build constructive relationships with key stakeholders, both as a source of intelligence but also as a key channel of influence to create a lifting platform of compliance amongst regulated parties; We will support our kaimahi with robust operational policy that guides them in the practical application of their regulatory work.
We acknowledge and participate in events such as Te R o Waitangi, Matariki, Te Wiki o Te Reo, mahuru Mori and E Oho
We actively partner to deliver holistic, actionable, and timely insights,
We aim to be responsive, helpful, and transparent, and where possible, to meet a journalists timeframe in responding to queries.
We also deter mine d that the weight edaverage cred it quality of LGFA s loan book and its
We also have a range of courses and programmes aimed at lifting cultural capability in te reo Mori, waiata, tikanga and understanding of the Treaty of WaitangiTe Tiriti o Waitangi.
We also partner with Police to produce reports focused on better understanding the New Zealand gang environment, while focusing on the social structures that underpin harmful behaviours. These quarterly reports deliver holistic, actionable, and timely insights, enabling agencies to empower communities in making a difference to gangrelated harm.
We also reduced energy consumption, costs and our carbon footprint by:
We are also required to protect that information and only disclose what we consider is necessary to give effect to our legislated responsibilities, to support other government agencies law enforcement, regulatory compliance and protective security activities, or otherwise in accordance with the law.
We are aware of a phone scam where the callers are claiming to be from the Department of Internal Affairs.
We are committed to a workplace culture that embraces diversity in all its forms and enables all our people to have a voice and feel included. Our people bring unique skill sets, diverse thinking and new perspectives that we draw on to make New Zealand even better.
We are committed to ensuring the work we do and services we provide are accessible by all New Zealanders in a way that meets their needs. Changes we have made to improve accessibility over the past year included the launch of an online accessibility learning module for staff. We also continue to improve the accessibility and plain language resources available to staff and provide training for staff to upskill in plain language.
We are constantly improving systems to ensure they are quicker and easier for kaimahi to use. For example, we have made improvements to Rehutai, our Finance and HR system. We streamlined delegation and approval workflows to support budget holders and automated the setup of user access based on an employees position, which improved data entry accuracy. Improvements have also been made to reduce the time it takes to complete recruitment requests. Further changes have improved the way we load information into the payroll system, which saves time during pay cycles.
We are dedicated to increasing the visibility and exploration of digital pathways for Mori and Pacific Peoples and actively support their success in our programme. Youll be able to use your perspective to create meaningful change, improve outcomes for family, iwi, hap, and wider community, ensuring that the voices and aspirations of Mori and Pacific Peoples are heard and valued in the digital future of Aotearoa so we can all thrive and prosper together. Believe in your potential and join us in shaping a better tomorrow for everyone.
We are however confident that CovidCard could achieve the necessary level of adoption, if some degree of Government mandating accompanied it for places that are higher risk. We have confirmed the approach is technically viable and can be manufactured and distributed to the necessary levels of scale. Our trials and product development work give us confidence that CovidCard can detect over of close contacts (relative to empirical observations, not flawed human recall) in a wide variety of simulated social settings. We have confidence that, allowing for serverside processing of data before providing contact details to contact tracers, that we could get false positives below .
We are improving our content management system and moving it to SharePoint Online in . This will deliver cost savings and kaimahi will find it easier to use, meaning they can perform their work faster.
We are looking for graduates who.
We are looking for graduates who:
We are proposing to temporarily change these requirements in the Act so that heavily affected councils be required to produce an LTP:
We are proposing to temporarily suspend the requirement for specified councils to complete an amendment to their LTPs on the topic of voluntary buyouts before making offers to property owners. These councils will still be required to consult their communities, but will not have to use the LTP amendment process to do so.
We are responsible to six Ministers, administering six portfolios within Vote Internal Affairs. The Ministry for Ethnic Communities, a departmental agency hosted by the Department, also administers one portfolio and is responsible to one Minister.
We are seeing an increase in trend in the recruitment of kaimahi Mori as leaders from people in to people in .
We are seeking your agreemen t to remove the current statutory timeframe requiring all local
We are streamlining the way we provide access to industry data. We will no longer publish data in various custom formats, or link to multiple historical copies of quarterly data.
We are the primary regulator of gambling in Aotearoa New Zealand. Our focus is on preventing and minimising the risk of harm caused by gambling, ensuring the integrity of the gambling regulatory system, and maximising the community benefit from the proceeds of gambling. We do this by carrying out our regulatory functions under the Gambling Act. This includes education, licensing, monitoring, investigation, and enforcement activities.
We are unable to report on the indicator relating to peoples sense of belonging as the results from the Stats NZ General Social Survey were not available in time for inclusion in this Annual Report.
We are unable to report on the indicators relating to peoples sense of purpose as the results from the Stats NZ General Social Survey were not available in time for inclusion in our Annual Report.
We assess t he companys financial metrics against our medial volatility table given our view of
We began exploring reasonable accommodations guidance and partnered with AND for support.
We believe a consid erable deterioration in the WSE s creditwor thiness wo uld affect
We believe budge tary perfo rmance woul d remain a under sce nario . That is, it
We believe budget ary per formance would remain a under sce nario . That is, it
We believe budget ary performance would weaken to from under sce nario
We believe the financial managemen t, econom ic, and liquidity assessment s would be
We believe the financial management , econom ic, and liquidity assessment s would be
We believe the impact of scenario on credit metrics of the Crown s rating would be relatively
We believe the impact of scenario on credit met rics of the Cro wns rat ing wo uld be relatively
We believe the ration ale behind the revised outlook is the same as that unde r scenario .
We believe the rationale be hind t he revised outlook i s the same as that under scenario .
We believe the rationale behin d the revi sed outlook is t he sam e as tha t under scenario .
We believe the rationale behind t he revised outlook is t he same as that under scenario .
We build authentic, transparent
We can only make payments to a New Zealandbased bank account. Any payments owed will be subject to tax and Kiwisaver as applicable.
We changed the law extending the delivery period for council voting papers, giving New Zealanders enough time to vote.
We collect information from a wide variety of sources in both physical and digital environments. These sources include: individuals (via inperson interview, telephone call, observation) (voluntary and compulsory); information from online sources (including websites, social media, and public registers); information from physical sources and locations (e.g. paper records, site visits, inspections); other agencies or entities (e.g. NZ government agencies, private sector companies, banks, overseas governments and agencies); information gathered from technical and scientific devices.
We completed over facilitations for Ministers and eligible Guests of Government through our airports
We consi der that there co uld be some upside to our f iscal a ssessment , but no t enough to
We consid ered the structure proposed in scenario would separate the WSE from
We consider the exposure to the WS E (Group B) would b e classified as a contingent li ability
We consider the primary project risks to be:
We consider the structure prop osed in scen ario would adequately separate the WSE (Group
We considered the structure pr oposed in scenario would separate the WSE from
We considered the structure proposed in scenario would separate the WSE from
We continue to build on the strong organisational capabilities that support us to deliver results for New Zealanders and make the Department of Internal Affairs a great place to work. The people and communities we serve are diverse. In this section, we explain how we continued to build our workforce capability in to reflect the communities we serve and put our customers at the centre. This supports the Department to fulfil a spirit of service and make New Zealand better for New Zealanders.
We continue to exceed optimal humidity and temperature targets in our Archive storage environments for the preservation of our taonga.
We continue to invest in the development of our organisational capabilities, harnessing our strengths to operate effectively and efficiently to deliver our organisational strategy, adapt to change and drive optimal performance.
We continue to refine our data collection and reporting processes, enhancing accuracy and transparency. Empowering our kaimahi with knowledge, data and tools helps to guide business decisions with datadriven carbon insights and facilitates deliberate action aimed at reducing carbon. Our policies and processes similarly are continuously reviewed to ensure that carbon considerations are integrated into everyday operations.
We continue to see a high proportion of people express trust and confidence in the Departments digital channels. However, the longerterm trend shows that this trust and confidence is declining. Trust and confidence among births, deaths and marriages () and citizenship () remain unchanged from . However, there has been a decrease in trust and confidence among passport customers compared to . This decline is likely a result of the Departments extended application processing times. We will continue to monitor the future trend of trust and confidence. With the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework coming into effect on July , we have identified the need to establish a further indicator focusing on digital identity regulation. We are considering ways to capture and monitor this.
We continue to strengthen cultural competence through a range of programmes:
We continuously improve the reliability and availability of our physical assets through regular monitoring and maintenance.
We contracted Te Wnanga o Aotearoa to deliver te reo Mori courses in November .
We could also revise the ratings upwards if we were to believe that the regulatory framework
We could low er the ratings on if its policies allowed its liquidity coverage rat io to
We could lower o ur rati ngs on New Zealand if the fiscal deficits are substantially weaker than
We could lower our ra tings on New Zealand if the fiscal defic its are substantially weak er than
We could lower our rat ings on LGFA d uring the next t wo yea rs if we perceive its public policy
We could lower our ratin gs on if the councils financi al management were to
We could lower our ratings on LGF A during the next two years if we percei ve its pub lic policy
We could lower our ratings on if the councils financial managemen t were to
We could lower the ratings if WSEs ratio of FFO to debt was to weaken bel ow . This could
We could lower the ratings if WSEs ratio of FFO to debt was to weaken below . This could
We could lower the ratings on within the next two years if its policies allowed its
We could r aise our FC rating on LGFA during the next two years if we were to do the same for
We could r aise our ratings on if contingent liabilities imp roved , or liquidity
We could raise our FC rating on LGFA during the next two years if we were to do t he same for
We could raise our ratings if New Ze alands fisc al indi cators s trength en markedly or if externa l
We could raise our ratings if New Zealands fiscal indicators s trengthen markedly or if exte rnal
We could raise our ratings on if w e were to do the s ame for New Zealand and if
We could raise our ratings on if we we re to do the same for New Ze aland and if
We could re vise our outlook on to stable if we consider liquidity covera ge is likely
We demonstrate deep conceptual knowledge,
We dete rmined that scenario would resu lt in a negative outlook on A rating .
We determ ined that scen ario would result in a n egative outlook on A rating .
We determ ined that scena rio would result in a negative outlook on A rating .
We determ ined that scenario would result in a n egative outlook on A rating .
We determ ined that scenario would result in a negative outlook on A rating .
We determ ined that scenario would result in a negative outlook on A rating .
We determ ined that scenario would result in a negative outlook on A rating.
We determ ined that scenario wou ld res ult in a negat ive outlook on A ratin g.
We determ ined that scenario would resu lt in a negative ou tlook on A rating .
We determ ined that scenario would result in a negat ive outlook on A rating .
We determine d that L GFAs funding assessme nt will remain neutral and its liquidit y
We determine d that LGFA s financial risk profil e will remain unchanged at adequate . We
We determined that scena rio would result in rating s being lowered to AA
We developed a framework for
We discussed the interdependencies between drinking water and environmental
We do not consider it possible for a voluntary app to reach the requisite levels of compliant adoption or, therefore, have any impact on contact tracing efforts or the spread of COVID. Our existing digital apps the NZ COVID Tracer app including the planned future roadmap, are almost certain to achieve nothing with regard to slowing the virus. Promoting solutions that so obviously dont work is damaging because it erodes our future ability to drive adoption tools that can be effective.
We do not provide information about your application to any other individual, company or government body, except as required by law.
We do our best to ensure that suppliers are paid on time. You can help us to avoid any payment delays by following these guidelines:
We dont have any powers to seek or require compensation from the provider.
We enable agencies to support
We encourage and value transferable skills and experience gained outside of work, and we want to hear all about it. For example, cultural activities, community work, sports, volunteering, and roles in different sectors or industries.
We encourage customers to use our online service:
We encourage customers to use our online services:
We encourage customers to use our online services: www.govt.nzcitizenship
We estimate that only around of those who download contact tracing apps overseas are using them in a compliant manner, such that it even functions.
We found very strong support for the initiative when seeking feedback from various community groups, including Iwi, Pasifika health leaders, Union leaders and business leaders. The primary concerns expressed were to do with privacy, security and the use of data. Concerns have been technically addressed but clear communication will be the key to addressing these objections.
We funded a fono led by our Pacific engagement team, Te Ara Vaka, and our employeeled network for Pacific Peoples, Taha Moana. The fono focused on supporting Pacific kaimahi with their wellbeing through change, career development, and explored the future of the Pacific strategy. To improve accessibility, we employed a regional hub model and hosted kaimahi in both Auckland and Wellington.
We funded the Tngata Whenua Hui, an initiative for Mori members of the PSA.
We have Social Events Committees in Christchurch, Wellington, Manukau and Auckland. Employees from other centres are encouraged to meet socially to build relationships and enjoy each others company.
We have a broad range of responsibilities and functions that include working with communities, ensuring effective regulatory frameworks are in place, and supporting the Executive and local government. We invest in information and communications technologies (ICT) and information management, and deliver a range of services to support and foster New Zealands cultural identity.
We have a comprehensive approach to learning and development. All employees have an individual development plan and a range of development opportunities are available for employees to build skills and enhance careers in the Department and the wider public service. Study assistance is available to support external development activities.
We have a friendly and open environment. We encourage people to work together as one organisation and we like to have fun and celebrate our achievements.
We have a holistic view of sustainability, where we define sustainability through three core pou:
We have a trusted role as the guardian of identity information, including passports, births, deaths and marriages, and citizenship information. We also collect other personal information to fulfil the wide range of functions we are responsible for. We take our obligations to keep peoples data secure seriously, so are continually improving our privacy practices and ensuring they are consistent across the Department.
We have a unique broad range of functions. All employees are encouraged to take up the many opportunities presented to them to develop their careers, including secondments across the Department.
We have captured in a few words why people throughout the Department come to work:
We have chosen not to present our own preliminary models given how sensitive (and potentially controversial) models a e with a wide array of assumptions required, including: virus transmission dynamics, tracing efficiencies, isolation efficiencies, the number of presymptomatic infections, any delay from symptom onset to testing, technology adoption rates, the country context, the assumed R eff value and much more.
We have completed seismic assessments for most of our properties. We have obtained NBS ratings for all the properties we own, and they are above the earthquake prone rating of percent New Building Standard. This supports their resilience during earthquakes and other natural disasters.
We have continued to offer an elearning module, Dont judge a book by its cover, aimed to help staff in identifying and addressing unconscious bias.
We have continued to support the Pacific Language Weeks. Leo o te Pasifika, an initiative under Te Ara Vaka, our Pasifika engagement strategy, has run several activities to observe language weeks. Activities included quizzes and newsletters and flag raising ceremonies for Pacific nations.
We have developed and soft launched a new leadership framework based around our principles, behaviours, and mtpono. This was developed in codesign with Te Ara Vaka, Pou rahi, Te Urung. The framework supports leaders to understand the expectations at their level, and this includes a focus on inclusive leadership.
We have five outcomes to achieve our purpose, which support and bolster each other.
We have identified a handful of options that governments could consider:
We have identified four options for achieving t he objective of trusted, consistent and sustainable digital identity ecosystem . Scope When developing these options, the Department did not consider: The implementation of unique national identifiers . There was no social licence for such a system and such a development would not align with principle (Unique Identifiers) of The Privacy Act . Nonconsented information sharing . The Department has defined digital identity as the user initiated, digitally enabled sharing of personal and organisational information and the promotion of non consented information sharing would be contrary to this . Options were, however, based on the assumption s that: The current digital identity ecosystem is unstructured, inconsistent and inefficient; and, as a result, it is a low trust environment. Establishing and consistently applying rules to the digital identity ecosystem would instil greater trust in digital identity services. Option A nonregulatory Trust Frame work: establish a team within a government agency to develop a set of best practice rules and standards for digital identity services. A cross agency governance group would be responsible for maintaining and updating the rules . A team within the Department of Internal Affairs would be responsible for compliance testing against the standards. This testing would have no legal effect, and PROACTIVELY RELEASED INCONFIDENCE
We have introduced new processes and controls for our leaders to reduce our use of contractors and consultants and therefore reduce costs.
We have made progress in key areas of the Papa Pounamu and Kia Toipoto work programmes. Some highlighted outcomes are listed below.
We have met the requirement for our office space use target of no more than square metres per person.
We have options to strengthen regulatory requirements . One harm minimisation intervention is not enough to reduce harm, a combination of measures is needed across complementary areas. . A suite of proposals, spanning three focus areas (venue, machines and enforcement tools ) has been created. The key information being sought through the discussion document is : the potential impacts of the proposals, or any alternatives offered, on reducing an individuals harm from pokies whilst they are in a venue; Societies and venues: Problem gamblers are not always identified or approached by venue staff, as they often have to make their own judgements about: how long is too long to be sitting uninterrupted at a pokie machine how many ATM or EFTPOS withdrawals a patron can safely make how they keep track of patrons ATM withdrawals at a venue the intensity of the gamblers pokie use what behaviour or events to note in the venues records when t o involve a manager at the venue how to intervene, such as the type of questions to ask a person about their gambling. Venues can provide ATMs on site, just not in the gaming room. Previously excluded gamblers can re enter once their stipulated time expires, regardless of whether they have sought help. Gambling rooms are normally private, with dim lighting and comfortable seating ( the ideal environment for gamblers to get in the gaming zone and continue to play). Gamblers can play without considering how much they want to spend. Training is varied as societies can devise the problem gambling training themselves , if they meet minimum content requirements . Only one person is required to be trained, but the responsibilities for supervising the gaming room are often shared by many staff. Machines and Jackpots: Much of the harm focused player information is only displayed if the player elects to see it. EGMs display a loss as a win. Many features included in the EGM games are known to cause harmful gambling or gambling addiction (e.g. free spins, multi bets). The current play interruption feature, after minutes, still allows the player to continue. Jackpots can be advertised within the venue . Jackpots are creating some adverse and aggressive behaviours . Jackpots are a significant drawcard, as the prize is twice the amount that can be won from an EGM game. But there is no relationship between the EGM being played and the jackpot. Enfor cement: There are no offences and infringement fees that relate to the requirements in the current harm minimisation regulations. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Statement the nature of any impacts on different population groups ; and the level and type of operational implications for societies and venues. . We are particularly interested in feedback and information on: what proposals are most important or effective; any alternative or operational solutions ; potential implementation issues ; unintended consequences ; and acceptability to the industry and to gamblers. Part A The Venue . Part A considers ways to strengthen harm minimisation practices by being more explicit about required procedures, actions and environments. . The proposals selected for Part A of the discussion document may help improve identification of harmful gambling, through: increased monitoring of the gaming room, record keeping of a specified range of signs of potential harm, and standardised content for training of staff . . The proposals are largely based on research and best prac tice guidelines and so directly target some of the known issues in identifying and approaching at risk or problem gamblers . Options Description and discussion . Regular sweeps of gambling room Venues could be required to monitor the gambling area at set intervals (regular sweeps) to ensure patrons are not displaying signs of gambling harm . This would also enable staff to notice and record the duration of gamblers play, supporting option below . Feedback on how often these sweeps should be will be useful. . Approach person who exceeds a specified period of gambling Venue staff could be required to talk to a person who has been gambling for a specified period (e.g. two hours) . Feedback on the frequency and type of interaction prescribed will be useful. . Recording specified events and signs Class venues could be required to record a specified range of har mrelated events and signs . This would work well in conjunction with option , regular sweeps of the gaming room. . Records required for use of Management Service Providers (MSPs) Societies could be required to keep records on their use of cont racting MSPs to deliver services to venues on behalf of the society . It is common for societies to use a MSP to discharge a range of the societys obligations, including services related to harm minimisation, particularly harm minimisation training for venue staff and compliance checks of venue performance, including venue harm minimisation performance. Societies record keeping of their use of MSPs could provide for a more consistent oversight of harm minimisation activities. . No ATMs inside premises with a gambling venue There could be no access to ATMs from inside a venue, only fr om outside. . Requirem ents for excluded gamblers to complete before they can return to a venue Excluded gamblers could be required to seek help bef ore they can return to a venue. . Venue design requirements Venue design could be considered in how gambling harm coul d be prevented or minimised. This relates to changes to reduce the opaque nature of the gambling room and its cosiness , to reduce factors that support being in the zone. For example, requirements could cover the level of light required in the room, the maximum sound level for the machines, having stand at machines instead of seated, etc. Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Statement . Mandatory pre commitment on machines All gamblers could be required to pre com mit to the amount of money or time they intend to spend prior to gambling . . Standardised content for harmful gambling awareness training Standardised content for harmful gambling awareness training coul d be established. . All staff supervising gambling must be trained All staff who have a role in supervising the gambling room coul d be required to be trained. . Some of our initial thinking on the Part A proposals, below, has been provided in the discussion document for validation or feedback : The options directly target some of the key known issues in identifying and approaching at risk or problem gamblers. Split duties of staff in venues (i.e. monitoring gaming machines and selling and serving food and alcohol) and high turnover of staff working in hospitality industry may have an impact on implementation. Some monetary cost to Class sector to implement (i.e. training and ongoing time requirements for observing and recording) . Some operational updating of systems and practices required by the regulator to determine new internal regulatory criteria, communication to sector and business implementation. What happens at one venue may only be part of a persons overall gambling activity . Greater prescription in identifying harmful gambling behaviour and consistentimproved record keeping, should largely look the same across all venues . Gambling host responsibility should more closely resemble alcohol host responsibility . Proposals s till rel y heavily on human intervention, so some variation possible in implementation.
We have previously proposed a twostep approach to progressing media content regulatory reform:
We have detailed guidance on the changes and what our recommendations are to demonstrate compliance:
We have seen no evidence that apps can meaningfully contribute to manual contact tracing efforts which is largely the result of rates of compliant adoption. .. Equity considerations It is not enough to have high levels of adoption overall. We must also achieve high levels of adoption amongst subcommunities, especially in those communities most at risk or more likely to be in overcrowded living conditions. Failure to achieve high levels of compliant adoption of any digital contact tracing technology risks the virus gathering momentum undetected in those communities. World Health Organisation Considerations for COVID digital contact tracing https:apps.who.intirishandle
We hold employeeled events throughout the year, and representatives from networks attend induction days to welcome newstarters to the Department. This ensures all kaimahi can connect to the networks that interest them at the beginning of their time with us.
We identified a wide range of initiatives to meet the Governments requirement. About percent of savings involved changes to the services we deliver and how they are delivered. This included scaling back or stopping some services, finding operating efficiency savings, reviewing funding and investments, and being more efficient in the way that we deliver our work. The remaining percent of savings impacted people and were managed through an organisational change process.
We know some parts of this website are not fully accessible. For example:
We know the majority of NZAG members desire
We launched three new programmes based on the leadership framework. These include a focus on developing inclusive leaders. More than leaders will have completed these programmes by the end of February .
We leveraged media relationships and social media channels to share critical information across the country on how to care for precious collections and salvage whnau memories and taonga. We distributed printed resources via local connections with whnau, libraries and Civil Defence.
We made this happen by building pragmatic, hightrust, and responsive working relationships with council staff. These councils know their communities best and have proven themselves to be well placed to manage locally led cleanups. We supported these programmes, with contract guidelines set by Ministers. This has allowed communities to get stuck in with the recovery work, leading to the clearance of over . million cubic metres of silt and woody debris to .
We maintain and administer a wide range of websites that include public information, independent agency and allofgovernment websites.
We make a positive difference
We make it easy, we make it work
We make things even better
We may also collect publicly available information for example from social media, news reporting, and press releases where this would assist us in carrying out any DIA functions, including to verify information that is collected by other means.
We may collect information by means in which an DIA staff member is not immediately identifiable. This may be necessary where other means of information collection would prejudice an ongoing investigation, or otherwise prevent DIA from fulfilling its responsibilities. This includes surveillance activities in accordance with the Search and Surveillance Act .
We may collect statistical information about your use of the website to help us improve it. This information does not identify individuals and makes use of cookies. The information we collect includes:
We may engage external security consultants to gather information to support our regulatory compliance activities. Any engagement of these consultants will be in consultation with the Chief Security Officer and Legal Services approved by a general manager or deputy chief executive and subject to robust contractual arrangements and regular oversight, with reporting to a governance group that is not directly involved in the decisionmaking or the result of the investigation.
We may request the assistance of another agency in relation to the exercising of our statutory powers, for example the New Zealand Police.
We may share information where necessary in order to properly carry out our legislated functions or to assist another state sector agency in fulfilling its regulatory compliance, law enforcement, or protective security responsibilities.
We may use information gathered for these purposes to inform our wider compliance and regulatory strategies. Personal information will only be used where necessary for those purposes.
We may, for example, share information with:
We met the Governments call for public sector efficiency by reducing our baseline by percent. While some services have been scaled back or stopped the Department continues to deliver high quality, efficient and responsive services while managing costs effectively. We are focused on our core business and key priorities and are open to doing things differently: this is how we will remain high performing, trusted and continue to deliver services to New Zealanders.
We monitor a number of Crown Entities, and oversee a number of Statutory Bodies and Trusts.
We monitor our Treaty of Waitangi Te Tiriti o Waitangi settlement commitments through Te Haeata a Settlement Portal administered by Te Arawhiti, the Office of Mori Crown Relations. This indicator provides an update on progress of completing our commitments. Sixtysix live commitments are captured in pieces of legislation. Of the live commitments, () are reported as complete.
We monitor the performance of three Crown entities (Fire and Emergency New Zealand, the Office of Film and Literature Classification and The Water Services Authority Taumata Arowai). We also manage the appointment process for members of a range of trusts, committees and boards.
We need to streamline and improve the cloud risk assessment guidance
We note that this figure is the maximum aggregate limit, an d not the amount LGFA would
We observed Matariki with a series of celebratory activities, including a dawn karakia in partnership with Pou rahi. Cohorts for our Mori strategic framework, Te Aka Taiwhenua, also ran series of visibility initiatives for Matariki, including hng.
We observed and celebrated Te Wiki o te Reo Mori through various events and initiatives.
We offer the Mana ki intercultural capability programme as standard in our kaimahi onboarding process.
We partner with a growing volume of government agencies to offer you rotations and placements. Some of the government agencies you could work in include:
We prefer Option for the following reasons:
We prefer to receive invoices electronically. Please send your invoices to our Accounts Payable team at
We present data and graphs to capture a visual representation of how key indicators are tracking over years.
We pride ourselves on being a supportive, inclusive and diverse organisation. We offer a flexible approach to our mahi and value diversity of thought.
We propose DIA and NCSC produce guidance to replace the current Cloud
We provide a cumulative annual summary of the amount lost by gamblers (operators profits) for the four main types of gambling activity TAB racing and sports betting, NZ Lotteries products, gaming machines (outside casinos) and casino gambling. The last years of available data are shown in the table below.
We provide a subsidy for community based school holiday programmes.
We provide policy advice and administer legislation to support the Governments objectives for drinking water, wastewater and stormwater services infrastructure.
We provide professional translation and other language services including quality assessment, typesetting, transcription and cultural advice to businesses, central and local government and private individuals.
We provide professional translation and other language services including quality assessment, typesetting, transcription and cultural advice to businesses, central and local government and private individuals:
We ran two types of sessions, and the presentations for each are linked below:
We restated the base year in due to the impacts of COVID on operations.
We recommend clear communication with the public around these technologies. A free market approach or proliferation of apps to assist contact tracing is not expected to yield anything much and will be counterproductive.
We recommend staying current with the rapidly evolving global best practice and the international evidence not the number of downloads, but the contribution to broadening and accelerating contact tracing efforts. We are very skeptical about the ability of any app to reach a level where it materially contributes to broadening or accelerating contact tracing as there is no international evidence despite some countries having or more of the population download an app.
We recommend you consider whether to alter any of the previous decisions on differentiated voting ages We seek Cabinet decisions on whether to either lower the minimum age to years old, or retain the yearold age limit, for each of the following:
We release these reports annually in support of the Governments commitment to transparency. The aim is to help the New Zealand public and organisations working on the prevention of child sexual exploitation online to understand the mahi Te Tari Taiwhenua, Department of Internal Affairs undertakes to keep people safe from harm.
We report to six Ministerial portfolios or responsibility areas, six Ministers, and one Vote.
We show data and graphs to visualise trends over time for:
We spent some time understanding within the Melbourne water context challenges of
We stand firmly behind the Governments pledge to take urgent action on greenhouse gas mitigation and climate change adaptation. Through initiatives like the
We support our public sector colleagues to transform their services through better investment in ICT and to maintain the privacy of New Zealanders governmentheld information. Our system leadership roles of Government Chief Digital Officer and the Government Chief Privacy Officer lead the digital transformation of government across the public sector. We also play a system leadership role for local government. We link central and local government more effectively to achieve improved outcomes for citizens and communities.
We supported an employeeled network for disabled and neurodivergent kaimahi, Accessibility, Neurodiversity Disability (AND). Outcomes include:
We take care to exercise our information gathering powers lawfully and appropriately and meet our obligations under the Privacy Act , State Sector Code of Conduct, and Information Gathering Policy at all times.
We take care to exercise our information gathering powers lawfully and appropriately, and meet our obligations under the Privacy Act , Search and Surveillance Act , New Zealand Bill of Rights Act , Evidence Act , DIA Code of Conduct, State Sector Code of Conduct, and other relevant legislation and DIA policies and procedures at all times.
We take pride in what we do
We take seriously our ethical
We think the opportunities are exciting, and the ideas presented here are only the start of the conversation.
We underestimated the impact on processing times as our kaimahi adapted to new systems and ways of working. Analysing data and kaimahi feedback allowed us to finetune the technology, adapt our processes and increase training to optimize processing times.
We understand that getting paid on time is important to our suppliers. Here are some things you can do when invoicing us to help make sure this happens without delay.
We use purchase orders to approve, manage and make payment for all purchases:
We value our employees and have a flexible working hours policy to provide opportunities for employees to have a balance between work and home life.
We view all property related projects through a sustainability lens and where possible we implement emissions reduction initiatives to minimise our environmental impact. Investing in better energy efficiency in our sites is not only good for the environment but also reduces operating costs in the long term.
We want a workforce that reflects the diversity of the communities we serve. Our permanent workforce includes , employees. Details of our workforce profile are contained in Appendix B.
We will also advise you on whether lighter expectations should be set for smaller councils. This is because they will face a greater administrative burden in providing the information required, depending on their number of dedicated staff and other such considerations. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of Appendix B: Staged approach to month plans
We will collect your name and contact details for the purpose of communicating with you about your complaint. Once the complaint has been closed, we will delete these details, however, retain other details of the complaint. Please dont put any personal details in your complaint such as your name or address.
We will continue to operate in a tight fiscal environment for the foreseeable future. Our core responsibilities will continue to be delivered, but some programmes have been deferred or scaled back to fit within the reduced budget. Over the coming years, we expect a greater focus on restraint, reprioritisation, valueformoney, alignment to priorities, and efficiencies.
We will make sure the information you provided is not damaged or shared inappropriately. We take care to ensure that only authorised people are able to view your information.
We will provide you with further advice about this matter and the timeframe for resolving it in April. Other minor and technical changes to the selfidentification provisions are required . There are other, more minor, changes required to the drafting of the self identification provisions in the Bill. We will draft the Cabinet paper to seek agreement for you to make decisions on these matters prior to their inclusion in the selfidentification SOP. We will provide further advice on these matters in April. They include, but are not limited to: . Transition period for implementation of the selfidentification clauses: Up to months may be required to ensure the technical infrastructure is in place to give effect to selfidentification within the Births, Deaths and Marriages register; and . Clarification of how sex is determined in reference to the general l aw of New Zealand: Clause I of the Bill provides that sex of every person must continue to be determined by reference to the general law of New Zealand. Crown Law advised that this clause did not make the policy intention clear as to whether sex under the general law was distinct from registered sex. We recommend rewording this clause to better reflect that they are distinct and that sex on a birth certificate should not be taken as conclusive evidence of a persons sex. Risks in adopting a selfidentification process and mitigations There will not be time to consult with interested community stakeholders on the self identification provisions . Given the proposed timeframe, there is not time to undertake broad community consultation in the development of the supplementary order paper. Self identification has been a very public issue since it was introduced to the Bill in . Since then, several public events have been held and material about it. We believe we have a sufficient understanding of the general views relating to self identification that would not be significantly advanced by more consultation on highlevel issues as opposed to legislative drafting. . The lack of consultation can also be partly mitigated by, for example, reviewing submissions on the Bill from (which were primarily about selfidentification) and drawing from Stats NZs work on updating the statistical standards for gender and sex identity. The select committee process will also provide an opportunity for community stakeholders to provide feedback on the selfidentification provisions. ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Page of Mori, Pacific peoples and ethnic communities views on a selfidentification process have not been sought . Given the timeframe for the Bill there will not be an opportunity to explore options for more culturallyinclusive markers such as takatpui (Mori), faafafine (Samoan), or fakaleit (Tongan) through community consultation . We also have not had time to seek the views of our ethnic communities. . We understand there is range of views among Pacific peoples, Mori and ethnic communities about the treatment of gender. One challenge is that we anticipate diverging views on selfidentification within these communities which emphasises the importance of including their voice in our policy development. . We are exploring ways to meaningfully engage with these communities prior to and during the select committee process. We are developing an engagement plan and are seeking input from other relevant agencies as to who we should engage with and what the best way to do that is given our limited timeframes and resource. There is opposition from some individuals and groups to a selfidentification process . Opponents to introducing a selfidentification process argue that selfidentification: . replaces a robust and shared biological definition of sex with a socially constructed notion based on gender; . undermines sexbased protections in society and will result in men impinging on women only spaces including changing rooms, womens refuges, gyms, hostels and prisons, and accessing womanonly resources and services such as singlesex schools or sports teams; . creates oppor tunities for predatory men to find ways to abuse such access to reach vulnerable women. . There is no evidence to suggest that the concerns outlined above will occur. People can have their gender identity represented on their passports and driver licence already and we are not aware of any evidence of that being abused. A birth certificate is also not considered conclusive evidence of someones sex or gender and is not required to access womenonly spaces such as changing rooms or refuges. Enabling a selfidentification process would not have any direct effect on accessing womenonly spaces. . Any perceived risk that people would change the sex marker on their birth certificates without intending to live as the corresponding gender is mitigated by: . the requirement to fill a statutory declaration form. Falsifying a statutory declaration form is a criminal offence and can lead to imprisonment for up to three years; and . making it clear in the Bill that birth certificates should not be taken as conclusive evidence of someones sex. . Debate on this issue will likely be divisive. Groups opposed to replacing the Family Court process with a selfidentification process will likely organise public campaigns which may generate significant media interest. To manage opposition to the self identification provisions, we have developed messaging and communications material that aims to: Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Page of . provide the rationale for progressing the Bill; . provide clarity around the reasons for adopting a selfidentification approach; and . clearly set out the uses of a birth certificate and the situations where it is not required, for example, to access womens bathrooms, refuges, gyms, hostels, or sports teams or singlesex schools. This process does not address all the questions that will be raised about sex and gender . Introducing a selfidentification process is a positive step towards making New Zealand more inclusive for our transgender and intersex communities. It is worth noting, however, that it will not address some of the bigger questions that may be raised about the treatment of sex and gender in New Zealand. For example: . Should all references to sex in New Zealand legislation be replaced with gender . Do we need to have sex and gender information on a birth certificate at all . Should nonresidents (including migrants and asylum seekers) have access to a formal gender recognition process and official identity documentation . These questions are outside the scope of the BDMRR Bill (and in some cases are outside your responsibilities in the Internal Affairs portfolio) or cannot be addressed within the timeframes of enacting the Bill this year. Agency feedback . We have consulted with other agencies about our advice on selfidentification. We received feedback from the Ministries of Education, Health, Justice and Social Development; Oranga Tamariki; Ministries for Women and Pacific Peoples; Te Puni Kkiri ; the Department of Corrections; Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency; the Office of Ethnic Communities; Statistics New Zealand; Crown Law; and Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission. . While these agencies are generally supportive of the policy intention to change to a selfidentification process, there was significant feedback on some of the specific policies involved. . The common concerns were: . Lack of targeted consultation There was general concern that Mori, Pacific peoples and ethnic communities would not be consulted prior to seeking Cabinet decisions. This included concern that the sex markers woul d not be culturally inclusive, but also a general concern that the impacts of the whole policy on these communities would not be considered; . The onetime limit on changing a sex marker Most agencies argued that a persons gender changes over time and that they should be able to change the marker on their birth certificate more than once. There was particular concern about limiting the number of times children and young people could change their marker; Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Page of . Minors not being able to make a change without guardian consent The Ministry of Health and Oranga Tamariki expressed concern about requiring parent or guardian consent for minors. For example, this would prevent access for minors who are estranged from their parent or guardian; and . Use of sex and gender as interchangeable terms as discussed above, we are proposing to recognise gender on a birth certificate using a sex marker. This is a pragmatic approach in the timeframe available, but it does lead to some confusion and conflation of sex and gender. We will endeavour to make this as clear as possible in our advice and the Cabinet paper. . Agency feedback has informed our recommendation to delay decisions around the selfidentification process for children and young people. Further work is required, particularly with Oranga Tamariki and the Ministry of Health to ensure the process reflects the best interest of children and young people. . We are also working with Te Puni Kkiri, the Ministry for Pacific Peoples and the Office of Ethnic Communities to determine how we might engage prior to select committee, and how we can encourage or facilitate participation in the select committee process by these communities. Both mechanisms we are considering for how we determine the nonbinary markers for birth certificates will also provide further opportunities to engage with these communities (see para above). . Along with seeking further feedback from the agencies above, we will seek views from the Office of the Privacy Commissioner, Office of the Childrens Commission, the Ministry of Youth Development, and Te Taura Whiri i te Reo Mori Mori Language Commission. Next steps . You have submitted a legislative bid for the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Bill, with a priority category (to be passed this year if possible). To meet this timeframe, the selfidentification SOP will need to be presented to the House and referred to select committee in June . Communications . We have developed a communications plan with key messages and Frequently Asked Questions to support this work. Officials are also developing an engagement plan which will centre around ensuring participation in the select committee process includes groups whose perspectives we have not had the opportunity to include to Mori, Pacific peoples and ethnic communities. Timeframes . The timing for achieving this is set out in the table over page:
We will respond to your request as soon as possible, and no later than working days after we receive it. If your request is very large or if it requires consultation, we may extend the time limit under section A of the Official Information Act. If this happens, we will contact you to let you know when you can expect our decision.
We will take all practicable steps to verify information received from third parties.
We wo uld also lower our ratings on if we were to take similar a ction on New
We work across government to identify opportunities to make services and information more easily accessible to those who need them.
We work with people, communities, and government both central and local to make New Zealand better for New Zealanders.
We worked alongside Hawkes Bay and Gisborne councils to secure funding to clean up sediment and debris. Our goal has been to empower local decisionmaking as rapidly as possible while ensuring appropriate financial oversight.
We worked alongside Hawkes Bay and Gisborne councils to secure funding to clean up sediment and mdebris following Cyclone Gabrielle. This has allowed communities to get stuck in with the recovery work, leading to the clearance of over . million cubic metres of silt and woody debris to .
We worked with Auckland Council to develop a financially sustainable model for Watercare. This model was unanimously approved by the Auckland Council, meaning Watercares proposed increase in water charges to ratepayers are . percentage instead of the . percent previously proposed.
We would also lower our ratings on if we were to take similar action on New
We would strongly recommend promotion of a single platform, possibly accessible through multiple channels (WhatsApp, Web, Facebook Messenger perhaps), as the best approach. Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Web Accessibility Standard .
Web Usability Standard .
Web filter code of practice available
Web filter will focus solely on child sex abuse images
Webinar and clinic schedule
Webinar clinic and time
Webinar recording February
Webinar recording February
Webmaster convicted: there is no such thing as cyberspace
Webmaster conviction upheld
Website for Taumata Arowai, the new water services regulator for Aotearoa.
Wednesday March Final Cabinet paper to you for approval for lodging
Wednesday March Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) considerat ion
Week ending ( September )
Week ending ( September )
Welcome and introduction from the Minister of Local Government Hon Nanaia Mahuta
Welcome to our Longterm Insights Briefing, which considers:
Welcome to the Department
Wellington Accommodation Payment. Commencing on November , Ministers not accommodated in a Crownowned Official Residence are being transitioned to the Wellington Accommodation Payment. Under the new arrangement the Department will cease to lease properties for Ministerial residences as current leases expire. Instead, Ministers who make their own accommodation arrangements will now receive a payment of , per year, unless they choose to stay in the same accommodation that they occupied prior to becoming a Minister, in which case they receive payment of , per year instead.
Wellington City Council Mayor Meeting
Wellington City Council issues and options
Wellington Community Fund
Wellington Community Trust
Wellington Mayoral Forum March
Wellington accommodation expenses for leased properties are paid directly by the Department of Internal Affairs to suppliers.
Wellington drinking water supply request for information
Wellington man distributed pictures of children being sexually abused
Wellington model WICS report
Wellington region supply plan for next summer On March , Wellington Water and its local authority owners provided Taumata Arowai with a copy of its plan to provide assurance of ongoing s upply of a sufficient quantity of drinking water by the next summer period. We are currently reviewing the plan and considering whether any further action will be required. We have received media interest in relation to the plan. Contact: Sara McFall
Wellington slide pack WICS report
WellingtonWairarapa Community Committee
West Coast Community Trust
West CoastNelsonMarlborough Community Committee
Western Australia Local Government Amendment Bill
Western Bay of Plenty District Council
Western Bay of Plenty model WICS report
Western Bay of Plenty slide pack WICS report
Westland District Council
Westland model WICS report
Westland slide pack WICS report
Westpacs Government Employee Pac, is available to all permanent employees offering preferential rates on personal banking.
Westport Flood Resilience: letter of expectations for steering group
Westport flood resilience proposal: Next steps
Westport flood resilience proposal: implementing the next steps
Well apply these principles when managing complaints:
Well confirm your details and let you know whether a payment is due to you, and what the next steps will be.
Were looking for graduates who are.
Weve discussed examples of what could be done. In some cases, theres more work to do.
Whaikaha Ministry for Disabled People:
Whakatne District Council
Whakatne model WICS report
Whakatne slide pack WICS report
Whanaketia the final report from the Royal Commission of Inquiry into Historical Abuse in State Care and in the Care of Faithbased Institutions was in June , with administrative support from the Department. Launched in , the inquiry heard from over , survivors who demonstrated great courage throughout, and is the longest and largest Royal Commission in New Zealands history.
Whanaungatanga (Relationships): We build and maintain respectful and supportive relationships throughout the complaints process to foster trust and understanding
Whanganui Community Foundation
Whanganui Community Trust
Whanganui District Council
Whanganui model WICS report
Whanganui slide pack WICS report
Whangarei District Council
Whangarei model WICS report
Whangarei slide pack WICS report
Whare Tapa Wh. A holistic approach to supporting
What New Zealands spam law means for businesses.
What are our outcome indicators telling us
What criteria, in addition to monetary costs and benefits have been used to assess the likely impacts of the options under consideration
What did the Inquiry not look at
What do we do with it Do we share it
What do you want to contact us about
What information is covered by this statement, and why do we collect it
What is a City and Regional deal
What is an authorisation framework and what is the rationale for providing one
What is child sexual abuse material
What is considered objectionable under the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act
What is digital identity
What is in the Working Groups report
What is terrorist and violent extremist content
What legislation applies to providers of online hosting services preserving objectionable content in New Zealand for evidential purposes in criminal investigations andor prosecutions
What optio n is likely to best address the problem, meet the policy objectives, and deliver the highest net benefits . At this stage the Department does not have any preference. Although we have done some preliminary thinking (see next section), w e have not yet determined which proposals will best address the problem, meet the objectives and deliver the highest benefits . At this stage, we need stakeholder input to determine their workability and potential impact in the New Zealand context, and cannot identify what the benefits and costs are for each option. We are also unable to identify any potential unintended consequences. The potential benefits go well beyond savings in expenditure on harm prevention, minimisation and treatment, given that some are fundamentally not monetary in nature. It may also be that the type of changes being tested may increase help seeking and uptake of clinical services (a positive outcome), and there may be no fiscal savings. . Key information being sought through the discussion document is the potential impacts of the proposals, or any alternatives offered, on reducing an individuals harm from pok ies (as well as the nature of any impacts on different population groups ), and level and type of operational implications for societies and venues. . This information will improve our understanding of the costs and benefits of these proposals or any alternat ives suggested. The Department will then be able to undertake full options development and analysis and indicate our preferred options. What are the marginal costs and benefits of the option . The tables below provide preliminary indication of the types of costs and benefits of the proposals in each of the Parts . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Statement . Final costs and benefits will be informed by industry feedback through the discussion document. The final proposals may, depending on their impact, influence the duty and levy paid by societies. Part A The Venue . Regular sweeps of gambling room . Approach person who exceeds a specified period of gambling . Recording specified events and signs . Records required for use of Management Service Providers . No ATMs inside premises with a gambling venue . Requirements for excluded gamblers to complete treatment before they can return to a venue . Venue design requirements . Standardised content for harmful gambling awareness training . All staff supervising gambling must be trained Affected groups Comment Impact Evidence Certainty Additional COSTS of the preferred option compared to taking no action Regulated groups (Societies, venues) FTE impacts from increased tasks (ongoing for training and duties) , , , , , and TBD Medium Implementation costs of new policies and processes , , , , , and TBD Medium Some minor refurbishment costs and TBD Medium Increase in training costs , TBD Medium Regulators (DIA) FTE impacts from increased compliance tasks (ongoing monitoring) TBD Medium Harm groups (MoH, HPA, service providers) Increase in treatment placements TBD Medium Gamblers Others Total monetised costs NA Unknown at present NA Nonmonetised costs Gamblers : Time involved in sourcing and attending specified treatment Medium Medium RISK R elies heavily on human intervention, so there may be variability in implementation. , , , , , and HighMediumLow Medium Additional BENEFITS of the preferred option compared to taking no action Regulated groups (Societies, venues) Regulators (DIA) FTE time savings as preparing cases for prosecution is more straightforward (ongoing) TBD Medium Harm groups (MoH, HPA, service providers) Decrease in harm minimisation treatment in the long term (more people seeking help, earlier, will reduce overall level and impact of harm TBD Medium Gamblers Reduction in expenditure on harmful gambling, monies available for other uses TBD Medium Others Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Statement Total monetised benefits NA Unknown at present NA Nonmonetised benefits (burden of harm quality of life indicators) Reduction in individuals experiencing harmful gambling. Medium Medium Reduction in second hand harm in the community. Medium Medium Clear directives will make it easier to monitor and record compliance, and so increase likelihood of successful prosecution for noncompliance High Medium Venue staff feel encouraged and empowered to intervene. Medium Medium Safer environment for people choosing to gamble Medium Medium Part B The Machine . Pokies machines could be required to display more information . Mandatory precommitment on machines . Display losses as losses . Prevent the ability to make multi row bets . Reduce maximum stake of . . Prevent or limit the number of free spins . Maximum number of games in an hour . More information and restrictions on jackpots Affected groups Comment Impact Evidence Certainty Additional COSTS of the preferred option compared to taking no action Regulated groups (Societies, venues) Software updates for machines (phased in over time) , , , , , and TBD High FTE impacts from organising phased machine updates , , , , , and TBD High Jackpot signage changes TBD High Regulators (DIA) FTE impacts from increased compliance tasks (ongoing monitoring) TBD High Harm groups (MoH, HPA, service providers) Gamblers Others Total monetised costs NA Unknown at present NA Nonmonetised costs Additional BENEFITS of the preferred option compared to taking no action Regulated groups (Societies, venues) Regulators (DIA) FTE impacts in preparing cases for prosecution (ongoing) TBD High Harm groups (MoH, HPA, service providers) Decrease in harm minimisation treatment TBD High Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Statement Gamblers Reduction in expenditure on harmful gambling, monies available for other uses TBD High Others Total monetised benefits NA Unknown at present NA Nonmonetised benefits (burden of harm quality of life indicators) Reduction in individuals experiencing harmful gambling. Medium High Reduction in second hand harm in the community. Low High Safer environment for people choosing to gamble Low High Part C Enforcement tools . Create offences and infringement fees for existing requirements in the regulations () . Create offences and infringement fees for proposed new requirements () Affected groups Comment Impact Evidence Certainty Additional COSTS of the preferred option compared to taking no action Regulated groups (Societies, venues) Infringement fees for non compliance , TBD Low FTE costs in challenging i nfringement fees , TBD Low Regulators (DIA) FTE impacts from increased compliance tasks (ongoing monitoring) , TBD Low Harm groups (MoH, HPA, service providers) Gamblers Others Total monetised costs NA Unknown at present NA Nonmonetised costs Additional BENEFITS of the preferred option compared to taking no action Regulated groups (Societies, venues) Regulators (DIA) Harm groups (MoH, HPA, service providers) Gamblers Others Crown Account : infringement fees , Low Total monetised benefits NA Unknown at present NA Nonmonetised benefits (burden of harm quality of life indicators) Increased adherence to requirements Low Low Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Statement Section : Delivering an option How will the new arrangements be implemented . We are not proposing a final set of new arrangements yet, as this is an interim RIS to support the decision to release the discussion document . As such, it is not practicable to develop a detailed plan for implementation and any transitional arrangements. . However, we can say that: the earliest that any regulatory changes can commence would be late ; the Department will be responsible for the introduction, ongoing operation and enforcement of the regulatory changes ; Class operators and venues will be responsible for meeting the new obligations from a specified (s); and depending on the type and nature of regulatory changes progressed: transitional arrangements may be required (e.g. if changes to gaming machines features are among the final proposals ); societies (either themselves or through a third party) may have to deliver new or refresher training ; and societies may incur costs for EGM provider software design and updates . . Alongside the Regulator , and as part of our implementation strategy, we would hope to have support from societies and gambling harm service providers for implementation.
What steps must online content hosts take when preserving objectionable content in New Zealand for investigative or evidential purposes in criminal investigations andor prosecutions
What the Trust Framework Authority checks requirements
What this means for New Zealanders
What was the Working Group for Reducing Barriers to Changing Registered Sex
What was the scope of the Working Group for reducing barriers to changing registered sex
What we are doing to improve the accessibility of this website
What we can determine from these results is that it is desirable for CovidCard users to wear the card on a lanyard around their neck in order to ensure contact events are correctly logged. However, if at least one cardholder is wearing the card optimally, and the other is wearing either under clothing on a lanyard, or outside of clothing in a forward facing position (e.g. on a hip clip or chest pocket), we would still expect to capture most potential contact events with a threshold of dBm (as used in the basic algorithm evaluated in the validation report).
What work is underway or completed to address the recommendations
What you need to know about this briefing
When New Zealand became a British colony in , the Colonial Secretarys Office was the first department to be established. Although separate public service agencies were created within a few months, the Colonial Secretary continued to be the Governors chief aide, and his office was the hub of the colonys administration. Until it dealt with all correspondence between the Governor and his employees, and between officials and the public.
When displaying the accreditation mark the Trust Framework Provider must ensure that no other graphic, text or colour encroaches on the minimum amount of clear space required to border the accreditation mark as set out below:
When do the amendments come into effect
When making decisions about information gathering, we take into account a range of considerations, including the impact on individuals and their privacy; the harm that DIA is responsible for preventing or addressing; the public interest in DIA fulfilling its regulatory, law enforcement and security responsibilities and to assist other state sector agencies to fulfil their responsibilities; and the obligations on DIA as a state sector agency.
When people die in New Zealand, the law requires that the death is registered by the Registrar
When someone clicks on a dia.govt.nz link on your website, they must view the site full screen, not within a frame. Using frames to display dia.govt.nz is not permitted.
When the Trust Framework Authority receives a complaint, the first thing we will do is check to make sure that it is something we can deal with. Then well make sure we understand what your complaint is about, so we may need to ask you for some more information. Well also talk to the provider to get their view about what happened.
When the previous Minister of Internal Affairs deferred the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Bill she announced she would lead work to make practical improvements to the Family Court process for changing sex on birth certificates. The Working Group helped identify and mitigate barriers to the Family Court process.
When the provinces were abolished in , many of their functions could not easily be carried out by the smaller local bodies which replaced them. Centralised departments of state developed to fill this gap, and to administer politically significant activities. The oversight of local government itself became an enduring responsibility of the Colonial Secretarys Office.
When to renew your accreditation
When we support healthy relationships, we have
When we talk about personal information that can used for identity theft, we mean all the information you have given to organisations and government agencies, as well as the information you create about yourself (e.g. information shared on social networking websites). Often, we take our information for granted but its what enables us to do many daytoday activities.
When you apply for a role, we will ensure that access to your application is only made available to appropriate people, who require the information to facilitate the recruitment process.
When you apply for a role, we will use the information provided to facilitate the recruitment process. We also use your information in an anonymous form to help us monitor and review our implementation of our Equal Employment Opportunities policy around recruitment. We will not use your information for any other purpose unless you provide your consent.
When you need to use a New Zealand document in another country, you might be asked to get the document apostilled or authenticated. Some countries call this legalisation. An apostille or authentication is an official government certificate that proves the signature, stamp or seal on a document is genuine.
When you use a digital identity service look for the accreditation mark.
Where a customer has contacted DIA using a Social Media Account, and has provided
Where all the criteria for reconfirmation are met apart from the fact that there are more candidates for a position than positions available, the reassignment process will be used to determine the appointment to the position from among those candidates. Employees who have been reconfirmed will be advised on the same day that final decisions are announced if this is practical or possible, or soon after. Employees have the right to seek a review of the reconfirmation decision where they do not consider that the criteria have been applied correctly. The process for a review is set out in section . below. Once an employee has been reconfirmed, they are not affected. Employees who meet the criteria but do not wish to be reconfirmed will be deemed to have resigned. Released under the Official Information Act
Where do the costs fall Government will largely assume the financial cost of implementing and administering the Trust Framework.
Where information gathering requires specialist capability that we dont have within our organisation, we may engage a third party to collect information for us. Such information gathering (including about individuals) is subject to standard legal limits relating to privacy, access to private property, and the privacysecurity of communications by individuals, among other things.
Where information has been withheld for other reasons consistent with advice, it has been annotated with an asterisk. This information may in some cases be accessible under the Official Information Act . Key to Redaction Codes : Section ()(a) to protect privacy Section ()(b)(ii) commercially sensitive information Section ()(ba)(i) information which is subject to an obligation of confidence where the making available of the information would be likely to prejudice the supply of similar information Section ()(f)(iv) information to maintain the confidentiality of advice Section ()(g)(i) information to maintain the free and frank expression of opinions
Where initial investigations confirm the loss of or unauthorised access to data, the
Where the Intermediary is disclosing information to a Client:
Where there is one preferential applicant who is a clear candidate for a job that is to be transferred into the new structure then the preferential applicant will be reconfirmed in that job. Where there is more than one employee for the job, the job will be advertised among the affected employees (through the reassignment process) and an appointment will be made using the appropriate appointment procedures (contestable process). Employees have the right to seek a review of the reconfirmation decision where they do not consider that the criteria have been applied correctly. The process for a review is set out in the reconfirmation or reassignment review process section below. Once an employee has been reconfirmed, they are no longer affected. Where an employee is offered reconfirmation and does not accept it, no redundancy compensation will be payable. Reassignment and expressions of interest Reassignment Reassignment is the process of placing employees who have not been reconfirmed into a job in the new structure into suitable alternative jobs. A suitable alternative job is one: that involves clearly defined duties and responsibilities that are not unreasonable taking into account the employees skills, knowledge, and experience where the employee could reasonably be expected to carry out those duties with a reasonable amount of training and development the training and development required and how this would be delivered would be discussed during the offeracceptance process where the location of the new job is in the same local area where the employees salary is in the same or a higher pay band where the other terms and conditions are no less favourable overall. Where an employees skills, knowledge and experience meet the requirements of a job in the new structure and there is no other identified employee who could fill this job, an employee may be offered direct reassignment into this job. Employees may choose to identify personal circumstances (including career aspirations) which the Department will consider before deciding to offer reassignment. A reassignment panel of the General Manager or Director of the group (or their delegate), with another leader from Te Tari, and a representative from HR, will consider all expressions of interest and seek to reassign employees based on a balance of: the employees preference(s) suitability for the position placing as many employees as possible.
Where we identify the need to use the information further, for example, to consider or investigate compliance breaches, or complaints, or initiate our own investigations or inquiries, we will only do so if required or permitted by law.
Whether there is anything you need to enable you to fully participate in the complaints process.
Whether youre applying for Immigration or Citizenship, need to communicate information to nonEnglish speaking communities in NZ or around the world, or need documents translated for legal, employment or travel purposes well be able to help you.
While a return to Level can quickly contain the spread, it is devastating to our economy and wellbeing. If the virus gets going again it will quickly outpace traditional public health measures, putting us back into Level lockdown. Evidence suggests any outbreak of COVID cannot be contained by traditional public health measures alone testing and isolating positive cases, and quarantining close contacts.
While it is not financially feasible to provide faceto face services in every location where gambling occurs, the Ministry will explore ways to provide more limited support, such as through online and telephone support and satellite clinics. New Zealand has a large rural population that does not always receive the level of service it requires . Also, many rural areas have a comparatively high Mori population. To address discrepancies, the Ministry will work with intervention and public health service providers to ensure equity of access, both fo r rural populations and for Mori and other vulnerable groups. The Ministry will look to enhance the accessibility and availability of telephonebased services, such as the tollfree helpline offering referrals to face toface services and other intervention services, for those who cannot access face toface services or prefer a helpline service. The Ministry will also explore technologybased options and work to increase the range of selfhelp online tools available, to further support hard toreach populations. The Ministry is committed to enhancement of services to prevent and minimise gambling harm and alignment with other services, strategies, obligations and bestpractice guidelines in the broader health sector. Table : Objective priorities for action Objective : People access effective treatment and support services at the right time and place Priorities for action Short to medium term priorities Long term priorities Ensure that problem gamblers and their family and whnau have access to a range of client centred culturally appropriate and responsive services, including by introducing peer support. Broaden the range of organisations and community groups screening for gambling harm , by supporting intervention pro viders to use standardised gambling screens . Continue to identify and validate best practice interventions and alignments that address the range of gambling harms that affect individuals, families , whnau and communities . Increase consumer input into the design and evaluation of services. Develop and enhance accessible and culturally responsive online tools, including self help tools, to help prevent and minimise gambling harm , for example to ensure that language is not a barrier for Asian and Pacific pe ople, including new migrants and international students . Underlying principles: value and high performancete whinga hua me te tika o ng mahi Making services more accessible and culturally appropriate will improve health service use by atrisk groups and those experiencing gambling harm. Research suggests that improving the health service experience for Mori also tends to improve service experience for other population groups. A greater community focus, delivering service interventions closer to groups at risk, is likely to improve service use. Typically those who find health services hard to access describe difficulties including time and transport issues, unresponsiveness, and discord with their worldviews where such views are different from the mainstream . STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
While it is public knowledge that NZSIS have access to DIA Information, details of exactly how NZSIS uses DIA Information are not available to the public in order to protect national security practices. For this reason, NZSIS is exempt from PP under s of the Privacy Act .
While not exhaustive, this provides a basis of questions that will need answering when assessing various technologies with some rigour. Assessing adoption rates of different contact tracing technologies It cannot be overstated how important adoption is to driving any impact for contact tracing technologies. The relationship between the two is not linear when you halve the number of users, you reduce the contacts you track by .
While the information used for identity theft often includes your name, of birth and address, it can also be account numbers, unique identifiers (such as your IR number or Driver Licence) and any other information that can be used to pretend to be you.
While the legislation development is underway, the Online Gambling implementation (OGI) team will be engaging with international regulators and equivalent systems to shape operational design. Once the legislation is in place, the
While the proposals in this document are driven largely by the efficiency and savings imperative, the current situation does nevertheless present an opportunity for us to think about how we work and how we can embed the collaborative multidisciplinary approach that will be the foundation for our Released under the Official Information Act
While they do this work, the Act requires all councils to writeup a year LTP. To do this, councils need to forecast spending and make decisions about how they will serve their communities for the next decade. These plans are then audited by the Auditor General to ensure they meet the LTP standards in the Act. They need to write these plans every years, with the next deadline in June .
While we think the best approach to gain adoption will be one of voluntary use, there may be a degree of mandating required if the situation deteriorates and we wish to stay out of Level lockdown. Legally requiring that people install an app on their phone is a nonstarter technically in New Zealand. Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Who checks and approves the applications
Who is eligible to get a rates rebate
Who is required to develop the Plans: Councils are required to provide Plans to the Department. Yes o
Why are recommendations to the Judiciary not included in the Government response
Why are these regulations changing
Why are we proposing this
Why are you not progressing some of the recommendations
Why are you progressing the Bill if the Working Group recommendations fix the problem Wont the Bill make the Working Group recommendations redundant
Why did the Government establish an Inquiry into the response to the North Island severe weather events
Why did the Inquiry only look at response, and not the recovery
Why is cloud considered more secure
Why the Public Sector Finance Graduate Programme
Why you werent satisfied with the outcome of the providers complaints process.
Whia te hntore kia mrama
Whia te hntore o te mauri atua, hei oranga m te mauri tngata
Whinga Amorangi building capability
Widespread testing and manual contact tracing can be complemented by digital tools but isolating infected individuals and quarantining their close contacts, however primitive, remains the state of the art for a novel virus like COVID.
Wildlife Service to Department of Conservation
Will all information be released
Winston Churchill Memorial Trust
Winston Churchill Memorial Trust Act
Winston Churchill Memorial Trust Appointments Draft APH Paper
Winston Churchill Memorial Trust Board Appointments: Talking Points
Winston Churchill Memorial Trust Board appointments for three positions
Winston Churchill Memorial Trust Board: Documentation to finalise appointments
With impact as our goal, first we must define the mission, the metrics that matter, and the pathway to impact your theory of change. You need to identify behaviours you need to change and the metrics that matter. Impact wont be achieved without behaviour change a widget only makes a difference if a) it works and b) if people use it as intended.
With re spect to scenario , we determined that the structure would no t result in a change in
With resp ect to scenario , we determined that the structure would not result in a change in
With respe ct to scenario , we determined that the structure would result in negative rating
With respect t o scenario , we determined that t he st ructure would no t result in a change in
With respect to sce nario , we determined th at the stru cture would not result in a change in
With respect to scen ario , we deter mined that the structur e would not resul t in a change in
With the current level of gov ernment support that we ascribe to the W SE, an upgrade is highly
With the introduction of responsible government in , the Colonial Secretary became one of several ministers. Although official correspondence was no longer channelled through a single office, ministries were small and until the Premier was usually the Colonial Secretary as well. His senior official was now known as the Colonial UnderSecretary.
Within the medical unit in Nelson Hospital, the Chief Executive of the Nelson Marlborough District Health Board ( NMDHB) and clinical research coordinator (CRC) actively recruited participants beginnin g . Information sheets and consent forms were distributed to interested staff. On May , the Principal Investigator from the University of Otago arrived with the Bluetooth cards and UWB devices. Bluetooth cards were uploaded with firmware during the night of May . On May , consenting participants provided a contact phone number, their job category and ethnicity data that was linked to their unique ID as part of their enrolment . Due to the constraints within the hospital, participants were instr ucted to wear the devices where it would not interfere with their daily activities. Cards were attached to a lanyard but often placed in their pocket, or worn around the ir neck but under their shirt. Eight Bluetooth cards were positioned near patient beds to act as surrogate patients as well as placed in high traffic areas to test the capacity and sensitivity of the cards (see Appendix ). Participants carried their Blue tooth cards only while at work. Signed informed conse nt and enrolment forms with phone numbers and ID numbers (both paper documents) were securely stored in the Nelson Hospital within the CRCs office. In addition to carrying the Bluetooth card, participan ts were asked to keep a daily diary using a standardi sed reporting form (in Qualtr ics) enumerating their close contacts throughout their day within the hospital (available in research protocol) . Participants reported their close contacts by name in the onl ine forms and these names were de identified by a res earcher. We sent participants a daily prompt to complete the daily diary via text using a mass text group SMS system provided by the University of Otago. For those participants (n ) with the UWB devi ces, their data was downloaded at the end of each day by research staff. Beginning on , after six days of data collection participants returned their cards to research staff via a sign out box placed in a high traffic area that required swipe ca rd access. Contact event data was uploaded from the c ards via an iOS application installed on a designated trial administrator iPad. Data was uploaded to SafeDome who then transferred the raw data to a designated Dropbox folder, which was AES encrypted end to end, for named project team members. The card stored no personal information. The de identified daily self report close contact data was stored in the same Dropbox folder. The close contact data from all sources was processed by Naval Postgraduate S chool researchers, data scientists from Virscient and University of Otago health researchers. The Bluetooth card data, UWB data, daily self report close contact questionnaires, and qualitative data from exit interviews were summarised. Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
Women are strongly represented at Te Tari Taiwhenua, with . (. in ) identifying as female, . (. in ) identifying as male, and . (. in ) as gender diverse or who have not provided information on their gender.
Work as a team. Value each other.
Work license attributes bound to user
Work to align Mori ward processes and general ward processes is underway
WorkSafe New Zealand Simon Robb
Worked with Hawkes Bay and Gisborne councils to secure funding to clean up sediment and debris following Cyclone Gabrielle
Working Group for Reducing Barriers to Changing Registered Sex: Terms of Reference
Working Group for reducing barriers to changing registered sex
Working Group on Representation, Governance and Accountability
Working Group on Representation, Governance and Accountability of new Water Services Entities
Working Group on Representation, Governance and Accountability of new Water Services Entities
Working group papers and agenda will be on this page.
Working group to ensure local voice in Three Waters reform
Workshop engagement slide pack summary Three Waters Reform Programme March
Workshop full report Three Waters Reform Programme March
World wars brought Internal Affairs a variety of new functions, ranging from the introduction of film censorship in to the creation of the War Funds Office and the National Patriotic Fund Board, and the Rehabilitation Board which was serviced by the Department between and . The threat of war in the late s led to the establishment of the Emergency Precautions Scheme, which by had evolved into the
Written questions New Zealand Parliament
X. Review . This MoU may be reviewed annually with the parties agreeing to any updates or
XI. Variation . This MoU may be varied at any time by agreement in writing between the parties.
XII. Termination . Either party may terminate this MoU im mediately, for any reason, upon written
XIII. Term . This MoU will be effective immediately after it is signed by both parties and will end
XIV. Counterparts . This MoU may be executed in counterparts and each counterpart together will
XL Bully dogs in New Zealand
XL Bully dogs in New Zealand Update September
XV. Governing Law. This MoU is governed by New Zealan d law. The parties submit to the non
Yes, the Inquiry considered the findings and outcomes of other investigations and reports undertaken and underway into related matters. This included agency reviews into their own performance, Civil Defence Emergency Management Group reviews into the response, and other reviews with relevance to the wider emergency management system.
YesNo YesNo Minister of Local Government Minister of Revenue Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua INCONFIDENCE Page of
YesNo viii. the final decision to join the CCO rests with each individual council ; YesNo ix. in their decision making processes, the councils (or joint committee , if appointed) are able to consider the collective interests of and impacts on communities across the CCO area, in addition to their usual statutory considerations relating to communities in their own district ; YesNo x. councils are able to factor into their decision making the consideration of the other participating councils and the views of people outside their own district ; YesNo Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua IN CONFIDENCE Page of xi. councils would still be required to amend their long term plans (LTP) if they wish to decide to join the CCO but, if they have used the proposed arrangements , they would not have to consult on their LTP amendment (if satisfied they underst and the views of their communities from the earlier consultation process ); and YesNo xii. councils would be able to conditionally approve their LTP amendment to be able to align with the other participating councils decisions . YesNo Hamiora Bowkett Executive Director, Water Services Policy, Legislation and Stewardship
You are welcome to link to our site but please follow our linking guidelines below.
You can also pay us a visit
You can also report online incidents using the
You can ask us a question, which we will publicly answer on this page to ensure transparency and access to information by all interested parties. We aim to batch publishing answers to your questions every two weeks.
You can contact the Department if you have any comments, feedback or questions about the Departments Approach to Compliance and Enforcement or the business planning. Email:
You can contribute submissions
You can download and install Acrobat Reader for free from the Adobe website.
You can email your complaint to us at
You can find more information about Better Off projects on CIPs website:
You can find more information on entitlements for Ministers and the release of Ministers expense data under
You can find proactively released information, including completed OIA requests on most organisations websites. Government Ministers also proactively release cabinet papers on their portfolio agencies websites. You may like to check out the links below, as the information you need may already be publicly available.
You can get a congratulatory message for significant birthdays and wedding anniversaries from the King and New Zealand dignitaries. This is a free service for all New Zealand citizens and permanent residents who live in New Zealand.
You can learn more about Longterm Insights Briefings through the
You can modify your device to suit your individual accessibility needs (See table below).
You can read a copy of the Customer Nominated Services AISA here:
You can read a copy of the Death AISA here:
You can read a copy of the Identity Services AISA here:
You can read a copy of the Inland Revenue AISA here:
You can read a copy of the Police AISA here:
You can read about enquiries here:
You can read about inquiries here:
You can read more about economic regulation and consumer protection in three waters services on the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employments website here:
You can read more about the Act here:
You can read the full reports below:
You can read the terms for using our online passport application service on
You can report to the Department about spam (unsolicited commercial electronic messages) you have received via email, TXT (mobilesmart phone) message, or fax (facsimile).
You can see data on the number of requests we receive each year and the timeliness of our responses in the
You can share digital identity information to show that you are one of the following:
You can use your digital identity information for inperson tasks and events.
You can use your digital identity information to help access services online.
You can view the privacy impact assessment here:
You can view the agreement here:
You can view, download, or print one of the following versions of the document:
You finalise a design, families love it, they use it, you miraculously get million cook stoves into households. Surely, great impact followed
You have received briefings seeking policy decisions to enable drafting of the Cabinet paper for the Local Government Water Services (Transitional Provisions) Bill (Bill ). This aide memoire attaches all recommendations in one place as a navigation aid for reference it does not contain new content. On receipt of policy decisions, we will draft a Cabinet paper for you to seek Cabinet approval. The draft Cabinet paper is due to be provided to you on March , for lodging with Cabinet Office on March .
You have recently agreed a number of amendments to the Water Services Act to ensure
You have the right to view any personal information about you held by us, and to ask that we correct it if its wrong. To do this, you can email us at
You must meet academic requirements to enter CA ANZ Program or CPA Australia Program
You need to complete an application form to go on the waiting list for a berth at Lake Taupo.
You or your website must not misrepresent your relationship with dia.govt.nz, or refer to dia.govt.nz as a partner site unless you have express and written permission to do so.
You presented six scenario s to SP Global Rat ings involving the prop osed implementati on of
You should make your request directly to the agency, local authority, Minister or other government entity you believe to hold the specific information you want, or to be most closely related to the topic of your request. Making your request to the incorrect place or person can contribute to delays, as your request will need to be formally transferred to the correct place or person. Transfers can take up to ten working days to be finalised and your request is not able to be progressed further until the transfer has been completed.
You will be advised who the reassignment panel is closer to the time. Where an employee is offered direct reassignment and disagrees with the suitability of the new job, they may seek urgent mediation assistance if unable to resolve with their manager in the first instance. The employee is able to be supported by a representativePSA at these discussions. If a mediation process occurs, a reasonable period of time will be given to the employee to decide whether to accept the offer. If the job is a suitable alternative and the employee does not accept the offer no redundancy compensation will be payable. Where an employee is offered an alternative job that does not meet the criteria set out above and does not accept the offer then that employee will still be entitled to receive redundancy compensation, should they remain unplaced after all other options have been exhausted. Expressions of interest (EOI) The expression of interest process is designed to support the placement of impactedaffected employees into jobs by enabling the employee to set out their preferences for vacancies that remain following the reconfirmation process. The process is designed to provide certainty as soon as possible, while maintaining fairness and transparency for employees and representatives. There are two types of expressions of interest processes: noncontestable expression of interest when there are an equal number (or less) affected employees to suitable vacancies. Affected employees may be asked to submit an expression of interest to demonstrate that they have the skills required to fill a ring fenced vacancy. Where their skills match the requirements of the vacancy, they will be offered reassignment to that job. An interview andor other form of assessment may also be used to identify that they have the skills required to fill a ringfenced vacancy. contestable expression of interest when there are more affected employees than suitable vacancies. Affected employees will be asked to submit an expression of interest to demonstrate they have the skills required to fill the vacancy(s). An interview andor other form of assessment may also be used to identify which employees are best suited for an offer of reassignment to available vacancies. Employees have an agreed period of time within which they can identify their preferences. Once this period has expired, the options identified cannot be changed, except in exceptional circumstances, which will be discussed between the Department, the PSA and the employee. The steps in the reassignment process are: . Vacancies within the business groupBranch that are ringfenced, or held, for affected employees to express interest in are provided in Appendix A. . Affected employees are invited to submit an EOI for ringfenced vacancies. . A process for identifying the affected employees suitability for the ringfenced vacancy takes place. This may include a range of selection activities, for example, paper based EOI form, or an interview. . The reassignment panel will assess the expressions of interest against the reassignment options and make recommendations to the Deputy Chief Executive, Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy. Following the selection process, impactedaffected employees may be made a provisional offer of: placement into a job they expressed an interest in another option identified through the expression of interest process. Employees will have a specified period during which they must respond to the provisional offer made to them. An employees personal circumstances, including career aspirations, should be taken into consideration in determining whether the job is a suitable alternative job. Where an employee is offered a suitable alternative job as defined above and does not accept it, no redundancy compensation will be payable. Confirmation of reassignment will be made once any review period or formal review process (see Reconfirmation or reassignment review process below) has been completed. Advertising reassignment vacancies The Department may determine that there is a need to advertise vacant jobs, which are available for reassignment, both within and outside the Department. Where this occurs, employees who are not affected by the change process may apply and be considered for the job. Employees who are affected shall have preference for appointment over a nonaffected employee, in the event that their suitability for the job is assessed as being the same. Reconfirmation or reassignment review process Employees have the right to seek a review of the reconfirmation decision where they do not consider that the criteria have been applied correctly. Employees who register a preference or preferences for reassignment also have the right to seek a review of the reassignment decision where they are not offered reassignment to any of the jobs for which they registered a preference. Employees who do not register a preference for reassignment cannot seek a review of reassignment decisions. Any request for a review, including the grounds for the review, must be communicated in writing to the employees manager within five working days of the reconfirmation or reassignment decision being communicated. In exceptional circumstances, the time allowed for raising a review may be extended by the General Manager, Human Resources. If requested, employees and their representatives will be provided with the relevant documentation associated with the reconfirmation or reassignment decision under review that relates directly to them. They will not be provided with specific information or documentation regarding other affected employees. Meetings to resolve the matter will occur as quickly as practicable. If the matter is not resolved a review will be undertaken. The reviewer will be independent of the original reconfirmation or reassignment panel and will be agreed by the Deputy Chief Executive, Toi Hiranga l Regulation and Policy and the employee andor their representative. The employee requesting the review will receive a copy of the report, subject to normal privacy considerations. Reports may include appropriate recommendations which the parties will agree on how to implement. Appointment to another job permanent employees Employees with preferential status (who have not been reconfirmed or reassigned) may apply for a job in the Department that is not a suitable alternative job. The employee will be given preference to the extent that if the employee meets the selection criteria for the job and is of equal or greater merit than any other applicants, the employee will be appointed. The appointment will be on the terms and conditions that apply for the job. Where the terms and conditions of the new job are of lesser value than the employees previous job, confirmation of appointment and any compensatory arrangements will be subject to agreement on a case bycase basis. Notice If the Department determines that no other option can be agreed, the affected employee will be provided notice in line with their employment agreement. Where a longer notice period is preferred for operational transition reasons, this may be agreed between the Department and the affected employee. During the notice period, the Department and the employee may consider any opportunities for other options that may arise. If an affected employee is appointed to another position within the Department during the notice period, the notice is withdrawn in writing. The employees employment is not ceased. Redundancy Where an affected employee has not been appointed to another position within the Department during the notice period and no other option is available, redundancy compensation will be paid at the end of the notice period in accordance with the affected employees employment agreement. Redundancy compensation is not payable where an employee is appointed to or offered another position in the State Services as provided for in section of the Public Service Act.
You will receive an obligation free quote within
YouTube Protecting yourself
YouTube protecting yourself
YouTube Kids Protecting your child
Young Elected Members Committee hui
Your first placement is carefully selected based on your skills and interests to ensure you are set up for success. In your second placement, you will have a say in choosing the departments and projects you want to be involved in, allowing you to refine your skills and become career ready.
Your journey will be fully supported by the programme, your mentor and your graduate network.
Your name and phone number.
Your policy decisions will enable drafting of the Cabinet paper for Bill
Your responsibilities as part of the Governments response to the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the terrorist attack on Christchurch Mosques on March
Youth gangs are common in Aotearoa,
Youth in gang environments were also found to
Youth that experience family dysfunction may
ZS. Major amendments to this Agreement .
Zealand Citizenship, if their Evidence of Identity has been issued under a different
Zealand Government Procurement website
Zealand Security intelligence Service (NZSIS) and the Minister of Internal Affairs
Zealand and Taituar Local Government Professionals Aotearoa) over a period of up to
Zealand citizen for the purposes of urgently facilitating their entry into or
Zealand indefinitely, or entitled to reside indefinitely in the
Zealand or overseas, authorised by the Minister Responsible for the NZSIS to receive
Zealands Institutional Framework For Local And Regional Government s, publi shed on
Zealands voluntary competency framework or Watercares dedicated training programme
Zealand, an early regulatory fix could be seen
Zealand. Overall capability in this case was assessed against five capability categories:
Zealanders do not wish to be tracked, to see any erosion of their civil liberties, to have their data matched with other agency data, or to see excessive data collected by the Government. .. Bluetooth contact tracing apps Most custom apps are designed to integrate with contact tracing efforts. A positive test ideally results in the contact details of close contacts being made available immediately to centralised contact tracing efforts. This contrasts with a notificationbased approach which would simply notify close contacts, but not health authorities, that they have been exposed to someone who has tested positive. We refer to this approach as notificationbased. An approach that seeks to integrate with contact tracing efforts has been observed in many countries, including Singapore and Australia, but no national app deployment has achieved the necessary levels of compliant adoption to contribute to manual contact tracing efforts. Australias app, with some million downloads, had only found one additional close contact at last report. One critical issue has been the inability for these integrated apps to work reliably on iPhones. Singapore has stopped developing the TraceTogether application and is now focussed on developing a wearable device similar to CovidCard . .. A notificationbased approach: Apple and Googles Exposure API Apple and Google have partnered to build a system that will be common across almost all smartphones (iOS and Android) which is designed to assist in fighting COVID. Specifically, they have created common APIs (Application Programming Interfaces) on their iOS and Android phone operating systems which Government approved apps can access. The system is known as the Exposure Notification API. The underlying technology is Bluetooth based and allows a users phone to detect the proximity of other phones. It is built within a highly secure architecture to ensure the highest levels of privacy and security. Apple and Google have effectively built what is becoming the only global standard and while it is being embraced by some countries, it is being rejected by others. The key function of the Apple Google approach is to notify close contacts of a positive case. While initially seeming promising, the primary concerns with the Apple Google approach are: The service is defaulted OFF on iPhones and can only be enabled once an approved Government app is installed on the phone. The compliant adoption levels will therefore likely be similar to any other app, which is well below the level required to contribute to manual contact tracing efforts. It is voluntary for users to notify close contacts, then voluntary for those close contacts to notify Public Health Authorities, and voluntary for those exposed to selfisolate. Close
Zone meeting on March
Zone meeting on April
Zone and meeting on April
Internal Affairs administers these regulations, but the Act is administered by the Ministry of Justice.
Internal Affairs enforces this Act, but it is administered by the Ministry of Justice.
Internal Affairs enforces this Act, but it is administered by the Ministry of Business Innovation and Employment (MBIE)
Information sharing agreement between Internal Affairs and Inland Revenue, secondary legislation administered by Inland Revenue
Information sharing agreement between Internal Affairs (RegistrarGeneral) and NZ Police, secondary legislation administered by NZ Police
Internal Affairs administers these regulations, but the Act is administered by the Ministry of Transport
Appendix B Regulatory Impact Statement Improving disclosure of natural hazard information in the land information memorandum system
External newsletter link HTML
LG) Recommendations
PDF, .MB ( July )
YouTube video, hour minutes
YouTube video, minutes seconds
pending decisions in this paper.
a Bill introduced around six months later
a New Zealand citizen, permanent resident, or Australian citizen
a Service (PaaS) and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) and four deployment models
a Social Media Account, such as Facebook or Twitter, rather than by phone, email or letter.
a brief history of the National Library of New Zealand Te Puna Mtauranga o Aotearoa
a change in business model affected the ongoing maintenance of content on the website
a demonstration of services (if required), and
a distinction between the Policy and other issues outside the scope of the refresh.
a diverse range of policy areas
a great range of benefits
a greater impact on improving youth wellbeing.Quarterly Insights September
a higher level of harm from family and peers
a longterm plan covering consecutive years. Councils prepare and adopt a
a marriage or civil union, the staff member would have access to the personal information
a normal part of life. Poverty and a
a potential outcome of the consultation.
a private, internal network, or a network for their organisation run over the Internet
a question and answer session (if required).
a risk the potential benefits of cloud computing will not be realised;
a screenshot showing your bank account details (please block out any account activity). The document must have both the banks logo and the account number. Make sure the bank account you use on the invoice is the one we will be verifying.
a similar online petition has received , signatures .
a similar online petition has received , signatures ;
a standalone Bill to amend the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act to include
a stress scenario given the impor tance of the WSE . Further, t he W SE has a clear
a way that is balanced with public health outcomes.
a) All Parties to this Agreement, including their staff, will abide by the Standards of Integrity and
a) All information provided under this Agreement will be appropriately secured when at rest
a) Amend the legal name of the organisation to Water Services Regulator Taumata Arowai throughout the
a) Civil Aviation Authority of New Zealand
a) Details about the proposed use of the information;
a) Details regarding Life Events and Travel Documents are matched using Evidence of
a) Each Party will be responsible for responding to requests for personal information held by
a) IPP : Source of Personal Information
a) No Party, excluding those who are Intermediaries, will provide the raw personal information
a) No party to this Agreement will provide personal information obtained under this
a) Note you have already agreed several amendments to the Water
a) Parties will use reasonable endeavours to ensure that the information provided to other
a) To ensure safeguards are operating as intended and are sufficient to protect the privacy of
a) Where any Party has reasonable cause to believe that an actual or suspected breach of an
a) complaints will be resolved in a timely and efficient manner.
a) decline to provide Product, service, or Personal Entitlement or Other Thing.
a) decline to register an individual as a New Zealand citizen by birth;
a) enable DIA the RegistrarGeneral to provide Customer Centred Services;
a) enable access to all personal information about an individual required to enable the
a) enable updating of records when an individual dies;
a) for one or more of the purposes specified in clause . (b) to (d), (i), (k), and ().
a) identify an individual and issue a Partner Specific Customer Identifier if one does not exist;
a) investigate any matter that may constitute an offence under any legislation it administers
a) note our assessment of the risks and benefits, as well as tradeoffs
a) remove an individuals name from a citizenship register in circumstances where it has
a) the Party has reasonable grounds to suspect an offence has been committed, is being
a) the accurate and efficient assessment of eligibility for and entitlement to receive public
a) the nature of the Intermediarys undertaking or activity and whether the Intermediary has a
a) this Agreement is not authority for an Intermediary to disclose to a Client the information
a) to identify all Life Events, Travel Documents and administrative information
a) update an individuals birth record to record the fact that the person is deceased.
a. Enabling public sector cloud uptake and innovation : developing confidence in public
a.to its directors, officers, employees, contract ors, agents, legal and accounting advisors, and
ability to meet their planning obligations as currently prescribed in the LGA.
ability to produce a year longterm plan that meets statutory obligations;
ability to use cloud services. This is because agencies typically require a wider range
able to notify the customer and remind them that they will need to renew their New Zealand
about Death) Order , including any amendment made by the
about adopting cloud services particularly for Mori data;
about individuals associated with the deceased individual so that their records are also accurate.
about individuals to enable the provision of Identity Services.
above.Binding polls have come to be seen as an
absence of shareholders , and t he structure of the WSE s govern ance arrangements
accept Reality Check Radios Peoples Terms for an expanded Royal Commission of
accepted National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), United States
accepted as difficult to do well inhouse. Cloud services homogeneity, and asset
access rights, and security authorisations proactive Iy managed and
accessed via secure networks and systems, with all user accounts,
accessed within the Customer Centred Management Solution and the relevant
accessible only to Authorised Officeis. Registration or Citizenship information must be
accessing support and services.
accordance with Clauses to .
accordance with Standing Order ;
accordance with an agreement between the Intermediary and that
accordance with clause above.
accordance with the AWS Customer Agreement, available athttps:aws.amazon.comagreement or other written agreement between the customer
accordance with the IR Customer Charter, no information will be uploaded
accordance with the IR Customer Charter, prior to entering into any
accordance with the ISA) without the requirement to wait for three years,
accordance with the New Zealand Government Protective Security Requirements.
accordance with the provisions of the ISA and the Public Records Act
accordance with the quality assurance criteria set out in the CabGuide. The Panel
account if the customer would prefer that option.
accountabilities of Ministers and chief executives;
accounts and only accessible to specifically authorised officers.
accountspayabledia.govt.nz
accredits providers and services
achieved will be determined through public consultation.
achieving consistent operating surplus es.
acknowledge the lack of guidance in this space. We propose to direct MBIE
acknowledging potential concerns and highlighting tools for mitigation while drawing
acknowledging potential concerns, and highlighting tools for mitigation, while drawing a
across Iwi and Mori, Crown agencies and cloud service providers held a series of
across both systems, including on issues such as jurisdictional risk.
across the public service, cloud uptake across the public service remains uneven and
action would be a higher priority than the public health impact on the community .
actions to make the required resources available.
active Release of Briefing titles: September to September
activities would be entered into, as and where appropriate.
activities, in accordance with the Public Recoids Act .aMS
activity or appointment which requires NZSIS (o in which NZSIS is requested) to
actually have access to. LGFA currentl y choose s a lower limit of NZ million a nd can vary the
ad hoc or inefficient lift and shift adoption. Shifting from legacy environments
addition, a material departure from our assumed regulatory construct cou ld also result in a
additional funding and fiscally neutral adjustments across appropriations within Vote
additional funding charged against the betweenBudget contingency established as
additional investment, even if temporary and there may be financial impacts from the
additional issues identified during policy development . Any additional
additional matters that might be considered as
addres sing the CO VID shock and i mproving its liquidity coverage. We expect to
address the remaining differences between the Mori wards process and the general wards
addresses the water services to be delivered through that joint arrangement. Separate additional plans would be required from .
addressing SVoD as first principles review. It would assist in
addressing long term harm and the factors
addressing the COVID shock and improving its liquidity coverage. We expect to
adjustments to the following appropriations within Vote Internal Affairs, with no
administers and prosecute the offence or report any suspected offence to the New
administrative support to the Prime Minister and Ministers of the Crown
adoption across the public service; and
adoption or use. It will be a living document that will evolve with the development of
adoption. There was strong interest and support for guidance in how agencies should
adult passport applications, IR will be able to locate those borrowers and liable
advantage of cloud technology as a cloud native. OT was able to
advice about national security risks (for example, in support of ..
advised against pursuing the Films, Videos and Publications Classification Amendment
affiliates (meaning any entity that directly or in directly controls, is controlled by, or is under
affirms our commitment to honour our Treaty obligations
after capital account balance s.
after January , for the purpose of recording the persons citizenship status on
after ad justment for si ngle name concentration.
after every election. There is a clear
after seeking support. This emphasises the need
aftermath of severe weather CABMIN refers. These are Central
against any ownership, control and supply chain risks. We note each agency will
against the betweenBudget contingency established as part of Budget ;
agespread in gangs today, resulting in younger
agenc ies. The Crow n also do es not have any sh areholding , appoint any board members,
agencies and communities to hear their
agencies and services often delays gang whnau
agencies and these communities is essential.
agencies in their consideration of cloud and cloud adoption.
agencies on jurisdictional risk of cloud by August , and thereafter as needed, and at
agencies on skills and training init iatives for New Zealanders. Existing
agencies to focus resources on improved, innovative, and more timely
agencies to more detailed guidance where needed.
agencies to understand and treat cloud risks in a consistent manner, by March .
agencies. They can also reduce risk, increase resilience, and enable agencies to
agency (whether in New Zealand or overseas), and how that disclosure
agency capability and capacity and lay the foundation for further work to support
agency to have Direct Access to certain specified information contained on certain public
agencys ability to apply the Policy.
aggregat ed operati ng balances and aftercapital ac count deficit s remain reasonabl y
agree Bill nclude a delegated power toSet the disclosure requirements in secondary legislation; esNo
agree that all councils, including councils who will provide water services directly, as well as separate but related providers that ijNo
agree that for phase Bill gives the Minister of Local Government and the Minister of Consumer and Commerce Affairs the power JfNo
agree that foundational information disclosure is delivered in two phases: No
agree that phase will be baseline information for the above, with phase requiring more detailed information; tye;JNo
agree that requirements for WSDPs should include: No
agree that small community suppliers, private schemes or selfsuppliers are excluded; (YesJ,Jo
agree that the purpose of Plans is to provide a means for councils to publicly demonstrate how they intend to deliver water services
agree that this Agreement will cease to be used as of a particular .
agreement, outlining acceptable and unacceptable uses of NZSIS
aligned decisions within specified categories and thresholds, to direct agencies to
aligned with future reforms, but will ultimately
alistairrevolutioninfosec.com
all House stages would need to be completed before July .
all government departments on their digital investment was strengthened in March
all media content issues as part of a single first principles review of the media regulatory regime to
all of local government would impose compliance costs on those councils which would
allow for more time on one process or the other.
allow local authority and councilcontrolled organisations that operate drinking water
almost insurmountable barrier to
alongside general ward decisions in the
alongside the other quarterly GMP files.
already has an existing successful collaborative relationship with AWS thatdelivers on the stated outcomes and so intend to build on and strengthen
also allows the regulator to take a compliance approach that is tailored to the
also find their way into gang life. Gangs often provide a sense
also have a number of benefits that can offset the less secure attributes. These are
amendment of this Agreement. In the event the notified Party does not agree on the amendments
amendment to this Agreement. In the event that the notified Party does not agree on the
amendment would take a considerable amount of time and prevent councils from
amendments are needed to the FVPCA
amendments have been proposed to reduce regulatory burden and ensure compliance
amendments then they must seek to be removed as a Party to this Agreement.
amendments to Taumata Arowais name when it is referred to in other legislation ,
amendments to ensure there are no perverse or unintended
amends the local electoral system;
amoun t over time. As such , we give LGFA credit for NZ million wi thin our liquidity analysis .
amount . LGFA would not hold on to the loan repayment proceeds to boost i ts liquid ity or
an asterisk. This information may in some cases be accessible under the Official Information Act .
an authorisations framework.
an independent, full scale, wide ranging inquiry. The Royal Commission
an indication of the level of government support from the no worse off funding package if local authorities ability to borrow is forecast to be negatively affected by the transfer.
an unauthorised individual.
analysis of that intelligence; and
analysis required under section A either as part of this process or in the period following it (if a review would ordinarily be
and regional committees:
and AWS or AWS affiliate, governing the customers use of AWS services.
and August and will include targeted engagement with key local government
and Births, Deaths and Marriages enquiries
and Employment, and Department of Internal Affairs to work in association with Iwi and
and I have had regard to the recommendations and comments provided by them;
and I intend these to be progressed alongside the Bill.
and IX (Confident iality), each party, their affiliates, and their personne l will have no liability
and Life Event information to be prepopulated when a customer applies for an identity or
and Mori data sovereignty. Inclusion would acknowledge Te Tiriti and would
and Mori representatives and industry.
and Relationships Act or (both of which are to some extent in force at
and Relationships Registration Act and section of the Births, Deaths,
and Translations, Community Operations, Customer Services and Pou Ara hi.
and a copy was provided to the Regulations Review Committee, and the Minister has had
and a water service enti ty
and able to be ourselves.
and address cloud considerations so they can confidently take up cloud services.
and altered ethnic makeup
and as such, there could be a likelihood of some political interfe rence in setting tariffs to
and barriers, which limits positive experiences
and better support whnau. Building mutual
and bullying in their relationships with peers.
and cloud skills for New Zealand businesses, comm unities and the public sector, including:
and collaboration with Iwi and Mori, when making decisions about adopting
and communities are assisted
and connects people, communities and
and control over the WS E. It has the administrative capacity a nd mechanisms for
and councilcontrolled organisations (CCOs) that operate a drinking water supply must
and cultural disconnection continues to exist and impact the
and data systems over the
and of birth against its overseas based student loan and child support liable
and did not warrant substantive changes on this Order.
and digital child exploitation
and effective operations . One way to ensure that water service professionals are
and foster healthy relationships.Harm occurs in family relationships in the form
and gamblingharm service providers, to encourage and support venues to provide a culture of care towards gamblers. Structure of this document This document is divided into sections as follows. Section sets out the threeyear strategic framework from to . This covers the Ministry s approach to preventi ng and minimising gambling harm, high level objectives and priorities for action. It forms the strategic context for the proposed threeyear service plan. This section also provides relevant background and context about the strategy, th e nature of gambling in New Zealand, gamblingrelated harm s and the public health approach to gambling harm. Section covers the threeyear service plan for to . The service plan sets out the Ministry s service priorities to prevent and minimise gambling harm, and the costs of those services, for the three years from July to June . Section covers the levy rates for to . This section sets out the proposed levy rates for the threeyear period corresponding to the term of the proposed service plan, and describes the process by which the rates were calculated. The strategy and new problem gambling levy regulations take effect on July . Alignment with other strategic documents The proposed strategic plan continues to align with and complement a range of other strategic documents, including: New Zealand Health Strategy (Minist er of Health ) He Korowai Oranga (refreshed in ; Ministry of Health c) Ala Moui: Pathways to Pacific Health and Wellbeing (Ministry of Health a). Alignment wit h Mental Health and Addiction Inquiry Gambling services were excluded from the scope of the Government Inquiry into Mental Health and Addiction due to the timeframes associated with the strategy refresh. However, the strategy proposals align strongly with the recommendations of He Ara Oranga , the report of the Inquiry (Government Inquiry into Mental Health and Addiction ) . For example , the strategy recognises the importance of placing people at the centre of a service , using service codesign and lived experience, having consumer networks, expanding the range and choice of services to be more holistic and culturally appropriate, and strengthening the mix of peer, cultural, support and clinical workforces , communities, tngata whaiora and whnau. He Ara Oranga notes harmful gambling behaviours often coexist with other forms of addiction and mental health issues and need to be treated as a risk factor . The Ministry considers that services to address minimise harmful gambling should be included, as changes to the wider mental health and addiction system arising from He Ara Oranga are implemented. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
and has only two commissioners. We believe our Peoples Terms would broaden the scope and ensure that all aspects of the public health response are considered.
and how to replicate them.
and impacts on communities across the CCO area, in addition to their usual statutory considerat ions relating to communitie s in
and in transit in accordance with the New Zealand Information Security Manual (NZISM).
and indicators that will be used to report on performance.
and interlinked, but broadly include:
and intervention opportunities.
and investment for planning, design and execution. This lack of capability and
and is not reflective of all mahi supporting cross
and its decision is final and not able to be
and lead to continued intergenerational trauma
and life essence of people and place.
and liquidity Strong () Strong () Strong ()
and local government representatives (including local authorities, Local Government
and make any account updates that are required.
and makes a determination. This
and may have contributed to the low speed of transition to cloud across government.
and most councils () were in the to capability range. The capability scores for
and mtauranga Mori.Ka mua, ka muri
and not all gang members are violent, if violence
and objectives of WSEs will be set by legisl ation with government polic y statement s providing
and obligations and if necessary, take administrative and legal steps to recover
and often these experiences are unique. While some factors
and operated by one or more of the organizations in the community, a third party, or
and operated by the organization, a third party, or some combination of them, and it
and organisations will want the Government to go further than simple alignment.
and our coordinator will pass your details on to the appropriate person to make contact with you.
and our roots), including the spaces
and owne rship would be prop ortiona l to t heir asset value.
and participation in local government elections.
and passed by November .
and personnel security, as well as ownership and contractual requirements to host
and possible investment to address barriers to cloud uptake. This will include working
and prosecute the offence or report any suspected offence to the New Zealand Police or
and rat ings for all scenarios.
and ratin gs for all scenari os.
and ratin gs for all scenarios.
and ratings for all sc enarios.
and ratings for all sce narios.
and ratings for all scena rios.
and ratings for all scenar ios.
and ratings for all scenari os.
and ratings for all scenarios .
and ratings for all scenarios.
and recognition of prior learning can be used to recognise learning and awardindustry cloud certifications towards nationally quality assured credentials,including the National Certificate of Educational Achievement (NCEA). This
and renewables procurement are essential to curb both energy
and safety to encourage more positive responses.Why Youth Join Gangs
and scenarios that they wish to jointly explore. Additional parties may also be identified thatGCDO and AWS may wish to also involve in this work, and some of the key success criteria under
and security agencies and subject to audit as per clause I ..
and selecting the relevant year.
and senrices meet the needs of Pacific peoples Pacific peoples are better supported to be healthy Enablers More services are delivered locally in the community and in primary care Pacific peoples experience improved broader detenninants of health P.acific workforce supply meets service demand collar is spent in the,best way to improve health outcomes .Aligning the strategy with Ala Moui: Pathways to Pacific Health and Wellbeing Ala Moui: Pathways to Pacific Health and Wellbeing is the government s plan for improving health outcomes for Pacific peoples (Ministry of Health a). The longterm vision of Ala Moui is that : Pacific iga, kiga, magafaoa, kp tangata, vuvale and fmili experience equitable health outcomes and lead independent lives (page ). Figure summarises the (most recent) version of Ala Moui. The Ministry has aligned the strategic plan with Ala Moui, in acknowledgement that the strategy to prevent and minimise gambling harm contributes to the achievement of health equity for all Pacific peoples in New Zealand. Figure : Summary of Ala Moui STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
and sequencing of cloud transitions and interventions to support upskilling of the
and shows an example of a shared responsibility model:
and small regulatory asset base. It is this reason that the WSEs business risk profile in that
and so it can maintain representation that is fair and effective. Auckland Council has
and suppliers, provide refreshed guidance and tools and support agencies on a case
and support for continued and accelerated adoption of public cloud services for
and support to agencies to achieve the aims of the Policy.
and sustained cross agency
and the Data Iwi Leaders Group, is working on guidance to support the public services
and the Digital Strategy for Aotearoa.
and the Human Rights Act .
and the Local Government (Auckland Legislation) Bill; and
and the Privacy Commissioner to investigate the complaint.
and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review, relating to Life Events
and the establishment of general wards CABMIN. refers.
and the general wards process, which are:
and the general wards process. I propose that these six issues are the focus of public
and the most significant risks are managed first.
and the need for workplaces to provide a supportive and respectful environment for currently underrepresented groups. The parties aim to lead by example e.g. showcasing examples of success that others could learn from.
and the time spent with a confirmed case during their symptomatic period to assis t prioritisation of contacts. Further, data from the CovidCard could help inform the international recommendations for the definition of a close contact to see which interactions are clinically relevant for the propagation of the virus. These recommendatio ns could also feed into other policy response measures such the nature and extent of physical distancing restrictions in public places, at work and in schools. . Phase one feasibility trial The main contribution of the University of Otago to the CovidCard project is to run a full scale field trial at Nelson Hospital (Phase Two). The Phase One trial was designed as a feasibility test of the card in a real life setting. Phase One was initially planned to be conducted after closed field trials led by SafeDome . However, prior to the Phase One trial, only basic lab based testing had been conducted. As such, the trial was vulnerable to risks associated with moderate pre trial testing. The Bluetooth card used in this feasibility trial was a basic radio measureme nt prototype that simply recorded any advertisement from another card. There was no close contact algorithm installed into the card firmware. Consequently, there was no filter for RSSI strength, resulting in overestimation of clinically relevant close con tacts. That is, contacts as far away as m could potentially have been registered as a contact event . The CovidCard will have a close contact algorithm to filter these events and create a risk profile for contact tracers. The card used in this field trial is a n early prototype and will be referred to as a Bluetooth card hereafter. . Research aims The research aims of thi s Phase One feasibility trial were to: Develop and refine the data collection procedures for a Bluetooth card. Ensure the Bluetooth card firmwa re and software are functioning as intended. Identify any unexpected overarching technology barriers. Determine the acceptability of a Bluetooth card for contact tracing. Provide a comparison of three forms of close contact data; Bluetooth card, daily self report surveys and ultra wide band (UWB) devices. Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
and their whanau at the heart of what they do. Effective information sharing is essential to
and to build workforce capability;
and to support identification of prevention
and unified through a shared history of state care,
and when services commence, it is likely to take time before a wide range of services
and where an activity can take place in various health and safety subsectors.
and will include estimating different levels of intervention and investment required;
and, at the time of the persons birth, at least one of the persons
andor commence Products and services where the deceased individual had a prior
andor p ublish this l etter.
andinnovate, and ultimately, accelerate digital transformation of the public service.
annual investment intentions survey, and seek additional information from agencies
annual statistics by the Public Service Commission
another regulator, oversight agency, or complaints body
antimoney laundering and countering financing of terrorism
any adverse action is taken against them on the basis of personal information shared under an
any establishing legislation for one or more of the purposes specified in clause . (b) to (h), (k), and
any overdue child support payments and those steps could include, but are not
any overdue student loan repayments. Those steps could include, but are not
any particular c ours e of action. Nothing in this report is intended to cr eate, or sh ould b e
any person not a New Zealand citizen for the purposes of facilitating their
any standards and conditions set by the Essential Services Commission.
anyone we believe could provide information that is relevant to whether to investigate a complaint, or to an investigation or inquiry, including witnesses to complaint matters
anyone who wants to purchase them. Typically, these services are made available by
ao Mori perspectives on cloud, to build their relationships with Iwi and Mori and
appealed (except to the High Court on
appl ied to the Group B WSE.
applicable TCs, SP Global Rati ngs r eserve s the right to publicly com ment on the evaluation
applicable and reasonable, any statement requested by the individual to be attached to the
applicable) for an individual
application) than is reasonably necessary to address the matters that gave
application) than is reasonably necessary to address the matters that gave rise to the
applications (consumercreated or acquired) created using programming languages,
applications and may control configuration settings for the applicationhosting
applications, etc. across several cloudhosting environments. It is much more
applies, o Human Assisted Reproductive Technology Act donor or
applying its regulatory tools.
appointing a nd removin g board members .
approach Mori data, the improved cloud risk assessment guidance as well as the
approach be taken for the government s cloud adoption CABMIN () A refers.
approach issues such as Mori dataMori data sovereignty.
approach that emphasises personal and financial
approach.Quarterly Insights June
approaches tailored to each unique community.
appropriate due diligence and consideration of redactions.
appropriate physical and personnel security, as well as ownership and contractual
appropriations that fund the Royal Commission (without action, a breach is forecast by
appropriations within Vote Internal Affairs will have an impact on the delivery of
appropriations within Vote Internal Affairs, with no corresponding impact on the operating
appropriations within Vote Internal Affairs. I seek Cabinets approval that .
approved information sharing programme.
architecturecloudservices
are years or under.Environments
are years or under.The Changing Generations
are available. It may be onshore hosting of information will prove to be more costly
are bound by conf identiality obligati ons; and in each case, only in ac corda nce wi th law and in its
are carried forward into adulthood. Growing the brain
are currently being progressed under the SWERL Act and across government
are fully in force from December . These regulations amend the Gambling (Harm Prevention and Minimisation) Regulations (the Harm Minimisation Regulations).
are in their final year of tertiary study or have graduated within the past months with a bachelors degree or above.
are not equipped with the right tools to create
are often similar to other adolescent
are positive, many are a result of hardships. Understanding these
are reported in Section
are required to adopt a long term plan by June , to come into
are set out in Section of the Privacy Act are excluded (by the Order in Council) as
are still relevant today.
are to ensure that the Office of the Privacy Commissioner is informed of the
arising from this consultation will be progressed as part of an Omnibus Bill that
around the AA category , supporting its current cre ditw orthiness .
arrange and describe items in the unpublished collections
as a step in the right direction
as monitoring, compliance and enforcement. If a reference to cost benefit is inserted
as per SPs definition (i.e. the WSE s sources of liquidity exceeds the use s by at least
as required by the RegistrarGeneral, and Citizenship information as required
as specified the relevant schedule, for one or more of the purposes specified in clause . (b), (c),
as the Crown has explicitly and legislatively ruled out privatization . We believe water
as well as national research (e.g. National Science Challenge projects, the NIWAled flood hazard risk model project funded by Endeavour). Some of this information will be included in LIMs as it becomes available. Understanding and assessing natural hazard risk is challenging for purchasers . While providing natural hazard information to purchasers is an important precursor for riskinformed decision making, there is evidence that information alone will not impact purchasing decisions. . Home buyer decisions are influenced by multiple factors including the character of the house and its proximity to work, schools and other amenities. These factors may outweigh considerations about natural hazards impacting a property at the time of purchase. . People have wellknown cognitive biases that negatively impact their ability to make good decisions about natural hazard risk, including discounting future risk, fatalistic attitudes and ignoring risks until they have experienced a natural hazard event. There is evidence that the public is not good at incorporating risk in their property investment decisions, for example reductions in house prices in hazard prone areas have been small. We can learn from overseas approaches to communicating natural hazard information . As part of our research, we considered approaches taken in the United Kingdom, Australia and the United States.
aspirations, and to help deliver long term social, economic and sustainability benefits.
asses sment to account for the total borrowings of the WSEs. This is based on the size o f the
assess the impact of decisions taken on inflation, debt, and business activity.
assessed at the time of access as necessary for NZSIS purposes before it can be
assesses and investigates complaints made about accredited providers or services
assessi ng the effect on the th ree lo cal cou ncils.
assessment or a voluntary agreement or an order of the Court.
assessment to ac count fo r the total borrowings of the WSEs . This is based on the size of the
assessment tool to ensure consistency across providers. This process will help
assessment will remain strong . We note that if LGFA become s significantly smaller (i.e. its
assessment, penalties and interest):
assessments would be the sam e as scenario . Further, the liquidity assessment woul d depend
assessments would be the same as scenario . Further, the liquidi ty asse ssment would depend
assessments would be the same as scenario . Further, the liquidity assessment would depend
assets ( i.e. loans to counci ls) would declin e as would the borrower notes (a com ponent of
assistance to acquire, use and maintain an assumed identity (for both NZSIS and
assisting with closing the inquiry and dealing with legacy matters
asso ciated wit h the WSEs .
asso ciated with the WSEs .
associated with an individual upon the individuals deth;
associated with provision of personal information through facilitating increased
associated with the likely breach.
association with Iwi and Mori to develop high level principles to encourage and
assume . Also, a large r ise in contingent liab ilities could place the rating under downward
assume the transfer of water related assets and responsi bilitie s, and the remov al of
assumed identity (or request the DA to create or amend an assumed identity)
assurance criteria, and that the discussion document should provide for effective
at a young age, including being in Oranga Tamariki
at least two n otches for the ratings to be impacted.
at risk of being exposed to inappropriate and harmful content
attached as Appendix C), subject to editorial, formatting and layout changes required
attributed to one individual to create a single view of the customer;
audit procedure. Should any previous audit identify issues of privacy concern the
authorisation framework. Officials note, that if the transition provision is not repealed,
authorisation to act as a Celebrant.
authorisations through an Order in Council. This enables the Crown to make
authorised by November , through the Local Government
authorised by November , officials will also ensure alignment with the
authorised by the Minister Responsible for NZSIS to receive intelligence and any
authorised information sharing arrangements and to allow new purposes to better meet the needs
authorised officers. IR will compare these details against the records of overseas
authorised under the Public Records Act .
authority and councilcontro lled organisation that operate drinking water supplies to be authorised
authority and councilcontrolled organisation (CCO) operated drinking water supplies
autonomous business decisions.
available by March . It should be noted that the Privacy Act does
available fina ncial support that the WSEs can access in most circumstance s.
available resources can be dedicated to
available, including where a fee is paid, by any Party.
average about of operat ing rev enues between and under s cenario compared
avoids the risk of services and communications to a living individual being incorrectly
away from others they may infect. Failure to comprehensively isolate close contacts in a timely manner results in ongoing chains of infection. This is particularly important for cluster management as otherwise second or third generation spread can be missed. Key to the success of contact tracing is the speed at which contacts can be traced. New Zealand is aiming to trace of close contacts within four days of a positive test result. It is highly unlikely this standard is achievable under normal social settings if there is community transmission. As identified in the above Contact Tracing Audit : As New Zealand moved to Alert Level on March nationwide daily case numbers ranged from and many PHUs were at or beyond their capacity to manage cases and contacts, even with increasing support from the newly established NCCS.
a Note under the Water Services Act , regulations can be made
b) A Customer Object is created in the Customer Identity Store. The Customer Identity
b) Agree to the further proposed changes to the Taumata Arowai No
b) All parties to this Agreement, including their staff will abide by the Public Sector
b) Appropriate mechanisms and standard procedures will be implemented by each Party to
b) Credit Unions, Friendly Societies, Incorporated Societies, Partnerships, Registered Limited
b) Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
b) Fields of personal information to be shared by each Party;
b) IPP : Limits on the Use of Personal Information
b) Intermediaries may only provide the raw personal information obtained under this
b) Note an authorisations framework is an opportunity to ensure
b) Note that legislative change to the WSA and RMA will be required to ensure regional councils implement a single standard approach in resource consents, and cannot exceed the standard in consenting conditions apart from on an exceptions basis . YesNo
b) The staff of all Parties to this Agreement performing the services set out in this Agreement
b) Where a Party identifies that a breach of any IPP in respect of information provided under
b) Where a Security Breach is suspected or there is concern that a breach may occur, the
b) agree that final Plans should be accepted within months of Bill being enacted;
b) cease to provide Personal Entitlement or Other Thing to an individual upon the individuals
b) complaints will be resolved at a level appropriate to the seriousness and nature of the complaint.
b) decline to register an individual as a New Zealand citizen by descent;
b) decline to register parents details in certain circumstances;
b) discuss the benefits and tradeoffs of the two options with officials
b) enable Organisations to gain customer service efficiencies and reduce the compliance load
b) engage in civil proceedings.
b) for any disclosure to a Client, the Intermediary must rely on a lawful authority other than this
b) gain customer service efficiencies and reduce compliance load for customers
b) investigate any matter that may constitute an offence under Relevant Legislation and
b) note that discussions between the Department and Technical Advisory Group have indicated that as a starting point it would be
b) notify an individual of an Identity Service that they may be eligible to access;
b) the Adverse Actions consists only of removing the name of a deceased individual from a
b) the Intermediarys policies and practices in relation to
b) the accurate and efficient delivery of public services by the RegistrarGeneral and the other
b) to enable a Client of the Intermediary to:
b) to verify the relationships and connections between individuals;
b) verify the details of the death of an individual;
b.D supporting D
b.No Use of AWS Services. This MoU does not govern any access or use of the AWS services
b.
balance affordability to the end consumer . While we currently do not have any evidence
balance and net core Crown debt:
balance sheet redu ces in size by about NZ billion), it may no longer be a regu lar benchmark
balance sheets under scenario , we believe LGFA will rema in the near monopoly le nder to
balance to av erage . of operatin g revenue s from compared to the curren t leve l
barriers to the participation of the blind and visually impaired community. This option
base case . This is because of a lowe r debt burden as sessm ent of compared to under
base case Scenario Scenario
base d on the same factors as scenario .
based borrowers and overseas based liable parents to determine which can be
based data centre, where a suitable onshore service exists;
based data centre, where a suitable onshore service is available.
based o n an extremely high likelihood of extraordinary suppo rt. We believe the rationale for
based on t he same factors as scenario .
based on the sam e factors as scen ario .
based on the same factors as scenario .
baseline for each agency involved, except the centralised data centre certification
baselines. This would mean a fiscally neutral adjustment across appropriations within
basic needs may risk a life trajectory
basis, including no engagement at all.
basis, other than this Agreement to be able to onshare the raw personal information to
bdmhistoricalrecords.dia.govt.nz
be (out of ) councils with guaranteed Mori electoral representation at the
be authorised or operated by authorised suppliers by November .
be based around urban, suburban or rural communities; and
be included in the omnibus Bill, will be assessed as part of the detailed policy proposals
be included in their Final Plans.
be met by providers (with the fee charged to providers based on the cost of the
be no changes to individual credit metrics. See appendi x for key financial statistics a nd a
be referred to the Chief Executive of DIA and the CIR, or their delegated
be required to undertake their own certification process. Although not mandatory, we
be shareholdin g ownershi p under s cenario up to for .
be suspended for as long as those extraordinary circumstance prevail.
be transparent and undertaken by an independent third party, Taumata Arowai, or the
because binding polls can still be held on general wards. However, the binding poll
because of the propo sed chang es to the Loca l Government Act to remove the
because of the uncertainty about timing for those Committee meetings and the risks
become available for other IR products and processes.
become operational from July .
becoming violent and perpetuating further harm.
been constructed around outstanding matters of public concern, following
been erroneously registered;
before January ; or
before I returned to Cabinet for final approval.
before or after the signature . Each party is free to change its intentions described in
behalf from July to August, which is more than the minimum period required
behalf of Mori communities. It is appropriate that Mori are consulted on the
behalf of the Government of New Zealand to any person who may be a New
behaviour is critical. This will include real life
being). These are laid on a foundation
believe that the RAC ratio will remain broadly unc hanged from current levels but note there
believe the rationa le behind the decision is the same as that under scenario .
believe the rationale be hind the decision is the same as that under scenar io .
believe the rationale beh ind the decision is the same as that under scenario .
believe the rationale behind the decision is the same as t hat u nder scenario .
believe the rationale behind the decision is the same as that und er scenario .
believe the rationale behind the decision is the same as that unde r scena rio .
believe the rationale behind the decision is the same as that under scenar io .
believe there is suff icient headroom in rating and indivi dual credit metr ics un der
believe there is suffi cient headr oom in rating and individu al cre dit me trics unde r
believe there is sufficient headr oom in the Crown s rating to ac count for the majority of risks
believe there is sufficient headroom in th e Crown s rating to account for the majority of risks
believes that such a review is necessary.
belong to a particular profession, calling, trade, occupation, or industry.
below for materials produced as part of this engagement.
below, this MoU is nonbinding and does not oblige either party to commit any funds to
below. Additional information can be obtained by emailing
beneficial to provide for a bespoke assistance and intervention option for the Water Services Delivery Plan process in Bill , to help
benefit from the efficiency and productivity of cloud which allowed
benefit s from a very high likelihood of council support in a distress scenario , was not likely to
benefits and risks for different information may change.
benefits of public cloud, consistent, secure adoption of cloud was needed CAB Min
better recognise the Crowns commitments to equity under te Tiritithe Treaty,
better utilise cloud to provide services more efficiently and take advantage of
between and compared to . in the current base case due to th e reduction in
between Inland Revenue and the Department of Internal Affairs dated June on
between July and August ;
between parents. Youth also experience violence
betweenBudget contingency established as part of Budget ;
born overseas and at least one parent is a New Zealand citizen by birth or
born overseas, applies for New Zealand citizenship by grant, and satisfies
borrowers and liable parents;
both regulators have different regulatory functions relating to water. This is something
branch carries out a continuous Customer Experience Survey of the above services. We engage
broadening of the Royal Commissions terms of reference would be subject to public consultation.
broader review of New Zealands media regulatory regime to address systemic issues (option one).
broader review of the media regulatory regime. Option two is a broader review of the
budget contingency. However, given the COVID fiscal challenges, I do not consider
build a cloud providers platform ensures that some countries regulatory standards
build and manage comprehensive collections across all formats
build your accounting career
built up and shared across agencies and projects as staff learn secure approaches
busin ess risk profile as well as the financia l risk profile of the WSE .
but are very low numbers.
but nonbinding polls may still be held.
by DIA or the RegistrarGeneral;
by November , to allow for further collaborative work with the water sector on the desi,gn and
by SP Global Ratings to you on a confidential basis. Y ou m ay not disclose the evaluation (or
by gang members and their communities. These
by instalment arrangement; or
by obtaining and corroborating their biographical or familial details andor the
by part A of the Privacy Act and operated under this Information Sharing
by the Department of Internal Affairs from within its existing funding.
by the cloud service provider. This benefit is particularly associated
by the same a mount . In turn, LGFA s own borrowin gs will be reduced by the same
bycase basis as they adopt cloud services.
bycase basis; t . , oA.. bc,v
c) Agree the requirement for all local authority and councilcontrolled organisations to be authorised or JiNo
c) Department of Internal Affairs (DIA)
c) Details of the mechanism for transfer to be utilised;
c) IPP : Limits on Disclosure of Personal Information
c) If information is required from a different data set to enable a purpose included
c) Note that to support a single standard approach, further work could be commissioned to identify: i. situations in other jurisdictions where wastewater plants have been consented above a national standard on an exceptions basis; and ii. modular infrastructure designs that would meet the treatment requirements in the standard . YesNo
c) Note the transitional provisions in Schedule , clause , of the
c) The raw personal information obtained under this Agreement must not be made publicly
c) The staff of all parties to this Agreement performing the services set out in this
c) Where DIA or the RegistrarGeneral identifies that a breach of any IPP has occurred, in
c) Where a Party identifies that a Security Breach has occurred in relation to information
c) Where it is known that information has previously been shared under this Agreement by the
c) agree that the Bill Cabinet paper can include proposals relating to the Ministerial appointment of a Crown Facilitator for Water
c) agree that the review of Plans by the Department should focus only on compliance with statutory requirements;
c) any other matter that DIA considers to be relevant.
c) assist in the prevention of deaths;
c) cease to provide Product or service to an individual or person associated with the individual
c) decline to register or record a Life Event;
c) enable an individuals identity to be verified;
c) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences and the
c) engage in civil proceeding in relation to a Life Event.
c) ensure that a person associated with an individual is not required upon the individuals death
c) other legislation requires the Party to take immediate Adverse Action.
c) our complaints process will be fair and accessible and have particular regard to tikanga Mori:
c) provide adverse advice to the Minister of Internal Affairs in relation to an application
c) the provision by the RegistrarGeneral of accurate Death Information and Overseas Death
c) to prefill application forms based on identity and Life Events information already held
c. Exclusion of Implied Terms and Warranties. Except to the extent prohibited by law, each
c. Gambling directorate Some change is also proposed in the Gambling directorate as a result of the proposed change in operating model. As discussed above, the proposal is to have different leadership structures in Gambling compared to AML, to reflect the larger size and different funding structure of the Gambling function, and also to reflect that the Key
c. remaining in discussions about sustainability related issues and
c.if the use or disclosure is required by law (inc luding under the Official Information Act ),
caitlinwrybillprivacy.co.nz
can be met for all customers (not limited sets) and also drives the regulatory bodies
can be reasonably expected to take steps to recover from the applicable person
can have significant impacts on development,
can negatively impact different aspects to their
can only be used within the current legislative responsibilities under the establishing
can provide further guidance if it is unclear whether the use of Arms and images, etc, imply a Royal connection.
can provide more specific information about what the law considers to be objectionable content, if required.
cancel the providers accreditation or the accreditation of the service they provide.
cannot be resolved, it will be escalated to the Chief Legal Advisor of DA and the Geneial
canterbury.royalcommission.govt.nz
capabilities, and requiring over MW will be covered by the new system. Existing certification with individual
capabilities, including for Mori data stewarded by Public Service departments.
capability and characteristics of the service providers to ensure costs can be minimised
capability to give effect to Mori interests when making decisions about adopting cloud;
capital) . As per table of the Information Memorandum, the relati ve con centration s of LGFA s
cardholder. The changing pseudonymous identifiers would only be able to be resolved by the approved authority.
care and protection needed from
care. It is important to note that not all gang
carry out further work to increase public sector adoption of cloud computing.
carry out other functions given by the Act.
case Scenari o Scenario
case basis and in any event will be provided by the GCDO or AWS at no cost or obligation to theother party.
case studies training events and other information sharing events.
catchment to understand the institutional arrangements between a service delivery
cause significant upset or distress to the deceaseds family; and
centralised data centre certification process. The proposed additional GCDO
centres are important considerations when assuring cloud data centres.
centres to provide confidence to providers and agencies that the facilities have
certain decisions that are not included in their longterm plan. This is intended to
certificate or citizenship certificate to prove their entitlement to a passport; the relevant
certification agreement are planned to be ready for implementation. Certification is
certification for hosting government data, with standardised requirements and an
certification from providers.
certification is implemented.
certification) and could be scaled up in the event providers seek expansion. DIA,
change colours, contrast levels, fonts and text size
change information, sexual assignment or correction information to which
change lodgements DIA (Citizenship)
changes are necessary to better align councils M ori wards processes with the
changes in government priorities and specific work being stopped.
changes in technology, society or government priorities;
changes in the requirements around venue design
changes made in the standalone Bill remain
changes or have been sufficiently narrowed to only address specific
changes that may be required in writing.
changes they would like to see made to the current system.
changes to the local electoral legislative framework by November this year. This
changes to this Order as a result.
changes. Other councils, which determine their size (between and councillors) as
changing environment and some uncertainty in service demand. Even so, the Ministry is confident that, overall, the proposed funding will be adequate to meet demand and deliver a highquality service consistent with the requirements of the Act and the Ministry s service standards and strategic requirements. The New Zealand Health Strategy The Ministry led the development of the New Zealand Health Strategy: Future Direction, which sets out a vision of the future for the health sector in the years from to and five strategic themes for the changes that will take the health system towards this future. These five strategic themes have been explicitly linked to each of the strategic objectives and priority actions described in Section .. Ongoing gamblingharmrelated inequities The number of people presenting for gambling support and treatment is consistently lower than the numbers predicted from gambling surveys that identify the population likely to be experiencing moderate to severe harm. Moreover, this number has not increased in line with population growth. Services appear to be reaching fewer people in need. This discrepancy suggests a need to reconsider the accessibility and effectiveness of current activities. There is compelling evidence that Mori and Pacific peoples are more likely to suffer gambling harm as a result of their own or someone else s gambling, and are more likely to be at risk of future harm than other ethnic groups. The HLS shows that inequities remain. Ethnic and other disparities in the burden of harm have persisted since the first gambling survey was conducted in . Reducing these health inequities will continue to be a focus in the period. Submissions to the draft strategy featured strong calls from health and service providers, particularly those identifying with M ori, Pacific and Asian communities, to: address health inequalities and inequities, and linguistic and cultural barriers to accessing information and support support youth and young adults better address the needs of vulnerable groups provide greater input into the design and delivery of public health activities. The Ministry has outlined a series of actions in the service plan, including actions to address health inequalities and inequities; develop pilots and evaluate new service models; and make greater use of technology, consumer networks and codesign, to address culture and language barriers and improve service uptake. In addition, the Ministry will reorient its strategic reporting to develop more timely and accessible data for the next strategy period, to better inform the prevalence of gambling activities and harm in New Zealand, as well as obtain better information as a result of the actions set out in the strategy. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
characteristics have merged.
charged against the betweenBudget contingency established as part of Budget .
chat, videochat, document).
child support liable parents who have been identified as being overseas or
children the longer this gap remains unaddressed
children, and significant volume of SVoD content being accessed by this
choose if it is binding or nonbinding. The Stage changes earlier this year amended
christchurchappealtrust.org.nz
circulate the schedule to all Parties.
circumstances to allow the Commissioner or an individual who wishes to make a
circumstances to support the development of an effective framework.
citizen otherwise than by descent if that persons father or mother is then:
citizenship and passports, related to the same individual.
citizenship by birth (under section of the Citizenship Act ), descent,
citizenship, immigration and border security decisionmaking processes);. .
cl Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order Section of Rates Rebate Act amended () In the Rates Rebate Act , section ()(a)(ii), replace , with ,. () In the Rates Rebate Act , section ()(b), replace with . Revocation The Rates Rebate (Specified Amounts) Order (LI ) is revoked. SavingA ratepayers entitlement to a rebate for a rating year ending before July , and the amount (if any) of that rebate, must be determined as if this orderhad not been made. Clerk of the Executive Council. Explanatory note This note is not part of the order, but is intended to indicate its general effect. This order, which comes into force on July , amends section () of the Rates Rebate Act . That section provides for a rates rebate for lowincome home owners. This order increases the income threshold for a rates rebate from , to ,; and increases the maximum rates rebate from to . Issued under the authority of the Legislation Act . of notification in Gazette: This order is administered by the Department of Internal Affairs. xxjx Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Priority Routine Local Government briefing Hon Nanaia Mahuta Minister of Local Government Title: inflation adjustment to the Rates Rebate Scheme March Key issues The Rates Rebate Scheme (the Scheme) establishes criteria to assist low income home owners to pay their rates. Adjustments to the Schemes two key settings (the maximum rebate available and the income abatement threshold) are made annually to account for inflation CAB Min () () refers . Inflation for the year ended December was . per cent. The adjustments are made by Order in Council. The Department of Internal Affairs seeks your agreement to raise the Schemes maximum rates r ebate from to , and the income abatement threshold from , to , . Action sought Timeframe Agree to adjust the settings for the Rates Rebate Scheme to reflect inflation of . per cent for the year ended December by: i. increasing the maximum rates rebate from to ; and ii. increasing the income abatement thres hold from , to , ; agree to proceed directly to the Cabinet Legislation Committee on June to seek approval of an Order in Council to adjust two key settings of the Rates Rebate Scheme; and agree that officials instruct the Parliamentary Counsel Office to prepare the Order in Council. By March Contact for telephone discussions (if required) Name Position Contact Number Suggested st contact Martyn Pinckard General Manager Policy and Operations Richard Hardie Manager Operational Policy Return electronic document to: Fergus Campbell , Fergus.Campbelldia.govt.nz Cohesion reference FDBE FD E Ministerial database reference LG INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
clarity about electronic nominations and updating the special vote verification process
clarity to the Cloud First Policy;
classification and requirements for specified CVoD Providers
classification processes, printing hundreds of physical copies of the Report and
clearly articulates the Departments roles and responsibilities under the Treaty
clearly set out in legislation.
cloning, or other forensic methods).
closed catchment and a focus on source protection.
closely with stakeholders including central government agencies, DILG and other Iwi
cloud adoption across the public service
cloud adoption across the public service.
cloud adoption path they are, provide guidance to support planningtransition, and
cloud and increased adoption. These activities will include:
cloud by the public service, a second phase of work is recommended. This phase
cloud platforms, not added later, and as such are easier to adapt and change over
cloud providers make to meet these standards. The consistent technology used to
cloud services and technologies. This is important for Carbon Neutral
cloud services particularly for Mori data;
cloud services, thereby ensuring continuity and reliability in the service Design of the
cloud technologies in sustainable ways through their procurement activities.
cloud technologies. Transformational change is unlikely to occur without some
cloud unless otherwise specified.
coagulation process which requires an in depth understanding of the operation of the
coalition agreements to broaden the set of issues that a COVID inquiry
collaboration and good faith. The parties may discover new knowledge and insights, projects
collaboration improves our understanding
collect student loan and child support payments under the Tax Administration
collected by a Party in accordance with this Agreement and for one or more of the purposes
collected from a party in accordance with and for the purposes of this Agreement.
collecting more repayments and reducing student loan and child support debt.
collecting, preserving, and protecting New Zealands documentary heritage and making it accessible
combination of additic;mal funding and fiscally neutral adjustments across
combined with analytic tradecraft and curiosity.Changing the FocusQuarterly Insights June
combined with analytic tradecraft and curiosity.Changing the FocusQuarterly Insights September
commence, when the data will be electronically transferred into a secure
commenced in the first three years of the plan, an assessment of the relative significance of each initiative and detail of measures
comments on the W SEs statement of intent. The Governors will also esta blish an independent
commitments to working to honour Te Tiriti o Waitangithe Treaty of Waitangi and to
committed or will be committed, and that the personal information is relevant to the
committee that the local authority is empowered to appoint
committee, joint standing committee, or joint special
common control with a party) and, in the case of GCDO, including any New Zealand
common in infrastructure as a service (IaaS) and converged IaaSplatform as a
communications activities (e.g. publications, semi nars, joint reports, blogs, videos) around the
communities are undeserving
communities at the centre
communities experience family harm or its impact.
communities will have the greatest
communities. Both parties intend that these activities should enable beneficial future outcomesfor the New Zealand economy and public sector and accelerate New Zealands growingtechnology sector, digital economy and the adoption of cloud services in New Zealand. TheGCDO will facilitate the engagement with New Zealand government agencies for key areas of
community consultation on Mori wards has been carried out previously.
community inputCouncils must publicise their initial
compar ed to under the current base case. Interest expenses would aver age . of
compared to our expectations.
competitive cyber security market.
complaint about an interference with privacy to determine the agency against
complete training in legal and policy obligations relating to access to, use and
completion of the audit IGIS and PC will be advised by NZSIS.
compliance with the existing legislative requirements impossible, impractical or
complied with as described below.
comply with his or her child support payment obligations.
comply with his or her student loan repayment obligations.
comply with the requirements, the regulations to establish an authorisation
comply with their obligations under section or of the TAA.
components means deeper, consistent security on narrow services, rather than thin
comprehensive output Te Tari Taiwhenua
comprising multiple consumers (e.g., business units). It may be owned, managed,
compromise other functions CABMIN refers;
concern will be provided to the PC. Should there be any significant delay to the
conclusive reason to avoid cloud services.
conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review, relating to Life Events or Travel
conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review.
conducting searches in response to other information held by NZSIS. This
confidence in the local electoral system.
confidential information that are consistent with this section IX
confidential nature of the confidential informat ion, and have obligations with respect to the
configuration or specialised connectivity to data centres. From day
configuration settings. For example, Webbased email and Google Documents or
confirm whether any persons receiving entitlements from GSFA have died.
confirm whether any persons receiving entitlements from NPF have died.
confirmed an IR officer will confirm that the details received from DIA are correct
confirms that the CIPA requirements do not apply to this proposal as the threshold for
confirms the CIPA requirements do not apply at this stage as the threshold for
conflict within the family environment.Harm
confused messaging and compromise our ability to achieve required levels of combined compliant adoption. .. The NZ COVID Tracer app On May, the New Zealand Government launched the NZ COVID Tracer application. As at May, , had registered to use the app. The focus of the application is for people to maintain an electronic diary to track their movements by scanning QR codes of the places they visit A voluntary app approach that relies on users and businesses to participate, launched before QR codes were available at premises, was always going to fail. As at May, some QR codes had been scanned, an average of . scans per registered user. We do not consider the NZ COVID Tracer app, or the future roadmap for this app, to have any prospect of materially contributing to contact tracing efforts or the slow of the spread of COVID under any conceivable circumstance. The promotion of various COVID solutions by the Government to people and businesses that so obviously dont work will not contribute to public health efforts and are considered counterproductive to the adoption of future technologies that might.
conjunction with a broader first principles
connectedness, and peer and whnau relationships.
connection with this MoU.
connection, via an internetcapable device. Users can more easily
connects the strategy to our staff, services and the work that we do
consent, DIA the RegistrarGeneral will be able to contact them in the future through that
consequential considerations are taken into account. This will also likely include a small
consider M ori wards for the local elections.
consider cost, it should be specific that it is predominantly as part of setting standards,
consider how Mori interests are reflected in decisions related to cloud service
consider there is a very high likelihoo d of extraordinary supp ort from these councils in a
consideration agencies are not equipped to address, or
consideration for the water assets that will be transferred from the local councils to the
consideration of over , public submissions. Three new Commissioners have been appointed to conduct the inquiry , which will involve hearing
consideration of redactions.
consideration to overarching principles as outlined in any relevant Ministerial Policy
consideration to the Crowns relationships with Maori undei the Treaty of Waitangi.DMSi
considered only when specified criteria are met or with the approval of the GCDO.
considering M ori wards and if so, what type of engagement is best. This is also an
considering cloud adoption;
considering if a player is showing signs of gambling harm
considering opportunities for any hui to be aligned or sequenced with related work,
considering the establishment of general wards.
considers appeals and objections, if any,
considers that the information and analysis in the interim RIS meets the quality
consistent polling options.
consistent with our expectation s outlined in the Public Finance System Overview: New
consistent with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act , Human Rights Act and
constituencies (Mori wards) from the Local Electoral Act was a first step
constituencies. As an outcome of the Amendment Act being passed under urgency in
constitute one instrument. Either party may enter this MoU by signing a counterpart copy andsending it to the other party, including by email.
constraining factor for the bus iness risk profile under scenario due to the entitys small size
constraints on these changes below.
construed as creati ng, a fiduciary relati onship be tween you and us and re cipients of the
consult on creating a clear process that provides certainty to councils and their
consultation is attached at Appendix C .
consultation materials will be hosted on the Departments website and will be tailored
consultation that will inform how council representation processes will be aligned and
consultation with NCSC will produce an and streamlined Cloud Risk
consultation with iwi, hap, wh nau and Mori voters.
consultation with key organisations, including local government, iwi and hap;
consumer does not manage or control the underlying cloud infrastructure but has
consumers from organizations that have shared concerns (e.g., mission, security
cont ingent liabilities und er sc enario compa red to scenario . Contingent liabilities were
contact persons for this Agreement if they are not those set out above.
contact persons specified above or the person detailed within the relevant schedule.
contact your local council
contacts are notified in an anonymous way, so wont know how they might have been exposed, further reducing the likelihood that they will selfisolate. The Apple Google solution is highly secure and impressive from a technical design perspective and we consider the Apple Google approach to potentially be of some incremental value in countries where manual contact tracing is not the local approach. The inability of the current Apple Google solution to integrate into Government contact tracing efforts and the fact it is highly unlikely to gain the necessary levels of compliant adoption makes it highly unlikely to materially add to New Zealands approach to fighting COVID. .. Wearables and interoperability with apps The CovidCard is an example of a wearable device that operates similar to an app, using Bluetooth Low Energy to exchange messages with other devices. It may be desirable to have wearables and apps interoperate, providing users with the ability to choose either approach and increasing overall compliant adoption levels closer to the required or greater.
content duplicated that of other websites in our register
content has been moved onto an allofgovernment services website
content of that plan Therefore, we propose to extend GCDOs investment mandate
content was outofor inaccurate
conti ngen t liabilities und er sc enario compa red to scenario . Contingent liabilities were
contioiled in accordance with intelnational security standards for
contingent liabilities un der sc enario comp ared to scenario . Contingent liabilities were
continue IaaS services beyond the current agreements and a managed transition to
continue on the same basis as the No. Bill, which is:
continue to use and adopt cloud services for RESTRICTED and below, over time
continued to provide critical services to tamariki and whnau in the
continues to be normalised, then intergenerational
continues to debt fu nd a large portion of its capital expenditures.
continues to debt fund a large portion of its capital expenditures.
contributing to inconsistent uptake of cloud technologies. These are varied, complex
control ov er the WSE . Councils will ha ve administrative capacity and mechanisms for
control over operating systems, storage, and deployed applications; and possibly
controlled in line with international security standards for intelligence
convenient, ondemand network access to a shared pool of configurable Information
convergence products usually allow a gambler the ability to play continuously, and therefore present higher risks of forming harmful gambling behaviours. Gambling provided through the four gambling sectors levied pose the greatest risks of gambling harm in New Zealand. The most harmful form of gambling in New Zealand is NCGMs at pubsclubs (defined in the Act as class ); this has been the case for many years. Most money spent on gambling in New Zealand comes from the relatively limited number of people who play NCGMs, and most clients accessing problem gambling intervention services cite pubclub pokies as a primary problem gambling mode. The National Gambling Study (NGS) found that atrisk and problem gamblers accounted for over half of total (estimated) electronic gaming machine (EGM) expenditure in (moderaterisk and problem gamblers ; lowrisk gamblers ). Similarly, the HLS found that almost half (; , ) of people who played NCGMs in pubs or clubs at least once a month had at least some level of gambling harm. Groups vulnerable to gambling harm Research shows that Mori and Pacific peoples, some Asian communities and people on lower incomes disproportionately experience gambling harm. The HLS found that gambling harm is experienced disproportionately by those living in areas with a high social deprivation index score ( or higher) , who were . times as likely to experience gamblingrelated arguments or money problems related to gambling. The study found that Mori and Pacific adults were more likely to develop problems from gambling (ie, to become a lowrisk, moderaterisk or problem gambler) than Europeanother New Zealanders. Asian people also experienced a slightly higher risk . Importantly, while inequalities between population groups by age, social deprivation, gender and ethnicity have reduced in absolute terms, in relative terms, disparities in exposure to gambling and experience of gamblingrelated harm persist, and have been relatively static over the past five years. Mori, Pacific peoples and Asian peoples are each more than twice as likely to experience moderate to severe gambling harm than the Europeanother population. Women and children Harmful gambling behaviour may impact significantly on women and children. There is a strong correlation between gambling and family , whnau or partner violence : percent of problem gamblers also experience family or whnau violence (Auckla nd University of Technology ). Women, who are common ly the primary caregivers within the ir family or whnau , are also particularly vulnerable to the economic strain caused by problem gambling. The recent Auckland University of Technology (AUT) report Pacific Islands Families Study : Mother and youth gambling found that risk factors for gambling among mothers studied included alcohol consumption, being a victim of verbal abuse, and STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
convergence, in particular, is having a harmful impact on young people. The Ministry will explore this impact with the Ministry of Youth Development and Oranga Tamariki, and related strategies such the Child and Youth Wellbeing Strategy will inform service delivery. Table : Public health budget (GST exclusive), by service area, Service area Total (m) (m) (m) (m) Primary prevention (public health action) . . . . Workforce development (public health) . . . . Awareness and education programme . . . . National coordination service . . . . Consumer network s . . . . Conference support . . . . Total (m) . . . . Note: All service areas include provision for dedicated Mori, Pacific and Asian services and activities. Primary prevention (public health action) Primary prevention services cover health promotion, increasing community action, raising community awareness about gambling and problem gambling, working with territorial authorities on their gambling venue policies and supporting the public health awareness and education programmes at a local and regional level. The Ministry will continue to fund dedicated Mori, Pacific and Asian providers to offer primary prevention services and explore further ways to reach those most at risk of gambling harm. The Ministry intends that service providers work across the five general domains listed below. However, it is clear that some behaviour change and innovation is required. The Ministry will undertake further advice and design work before it purchases services through a procurement process. . Policy development and implementation: The Ministry and service providers engage with other government agencies, social organisations and private industries and businesses to reduce gambling harm. . Safe gambling environment s: Environments that provide gambling opportunities are encouraged to actively minimise harm, and individuals are supported to recognise and seek support to minimise gambling harm. . Supportive communities: People live in communities that provide strong protective factors and that support individual and family resilience. . Aware and motivated communities: Agencies, communities, families and individuals are aware of the signs and range of harmful gambling arising from gambling and howwhere to seek suppor t. This engageme nt is a key expectation in the Ministrys contracts with service providers. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
core assessments and penalties):
corporat e govern ance s etup with an ind ependent man agement that makes
corporations, there is an increasing focus on customer expectations and the interface
corresponding impact on the operating balance and net core Crown debt:
cost for the Royal Commission will be . million.
cost increases related to legal fees, staff and Commissioner costs, classification
cost of migrations, where legacy and cloud systems may need to operate in parallel
cost) is to be reprioritised through fiscally neutral adjustments from within Vote
costs are kept as low as possible.
costs met through adjustments to current baselines within Vote Internal Affairs. Any
coul d place the rating under downwa rd pre ssure. These scenari os could cause us to reassess
could affect their interest in gaining information about New Zealand
could also include the opportunity for learners to have their knowledge andskills, based on the completion of industry cloud training and certificationprogrammes, recognised andor assessed towards the achievement ofstandards
could be evidenced by a su stained im provem ent in budge tary p erformance, leadi ng to a
could be evidenced by a sustained improvement in budgetary performance, leading to a
could present some risk. This is reflected in the regulatory assessment of strong adequate for
could reduce from current leve ls. These scenario s could cause us to reassess our view of
counc il in strategic decisions and oper ations.
council decides otherwise. The first
council manages its o perating and after capital acco unt defic its as the councils cash holding
council to understand community views on the establishment of Mori wards. Now
councilcontrolled organisations
councillors, are being considered as part of the Resource Management and Three
councils . Its market s hare, defined by how muc h lending it provides to LRGs relative to their
councils are responsible for administering, implementing and enforcing the Act, including the maintenance of a dog register.
councils are responsible to provide wa ter service s.
councils hosted by Local Government New Zealand (LGNZ). Various Orders that
councils may own or be a shareholder in, such as Wellington Water, will be subject to foundational information disclosure;
councils cash holding could reduce from current levels . Also, a large r ise in contingent liabilities
coverage structural ly strengthe ned, or if budgetary perform ance improve d including the counc il
covered by its original terms of reference . The terms of reference for Phase
covering seven Ministerial portfolios and responsibility areas and eight Votes. The
create clear progression pathways.
creating confusion for agencies who are considering transitioning to cloud. We
creativecommons.orglicensesby.
credit rating , assuming no oth er significant rating factor cha nged .
credit rating , assuming no other sign ificant rating factor changed.
creditw orthiness of LGFAs borrowers and guaranto rs.
creditworthiness of LGFAs borrowers and g uara ntors.
criminality often synonymous with gang
criteria are met or approved by the Government Chief Digital Officer (GCDO);
criteria for additional identity and Life Event services that they could apply for.
ction ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons
current and previous Executive Travel and Accommodation Determinations
current b ase case. Compar ed to our current assessment , total tax supported
current contact details for this Programme if they are not those set out above.
current leve l of . as water related operating revenu es are higher than water related
current ratin g Same as current
current rating Same a s curre nt
current rating Same as cu rrent
current rating Same as curr ent
current rating Same as current
current term of Parliament to align the processes for the establishment of Mori wards
current timeframe is pursued, and there is opportunity to repeal
currently providing the three water services in their respective regions. As suc h the WSEs are
currently sits within the Department of Health. We also discussed the oversight roles of
custodial Parent and Paying Parent have the same meanings.
customer and their children upon the Renunciation or Deprivation of that individuals
customer base with minimal concentration risk and a significant portion of revenues will be
customer complaints procedure
customer experience surveys
customers relevant personal information that will enable them to process that request. The
customers are not asked to provide information that it already holds, by enabling identity
c Note officials will be seeking legal advice on some of the proposed
d) Access to the information will be recorded in a robust nonrepudiable Audit Log and
d) All relevant Parties shall ensure that reasonable assistance is provided to any investigation
d) Fire and Emergency New Zealand
d) Independent Advisory Committees and Statutory Supervisory Authorities
d) Information received by any P.:irty under this Agreement, other than the RegistrarGeneral,
d) Mortality Reviews and advice on how to reduce preventable deaths; and
d) Note that existing Treaty settlement obligations will continue to apply, and may in some circumstances mean some local areas will require an exception to go beyond the wastewater standard . YesNo
d) Note there is significant risk of unintended consequences if the
d) The process for handling Adverse Action;
d) Undertake further analysis on including a legislative objective that consideration of costbenefit is jNo
d) Where DIA or the RegistrarGeneral identifies that a Security Breach has occurred, in relation
d) Where personal information is found to have been inappropriately accessed or
d) agree that inclusion of stormwater information in Plans by councils is optional;
d) agree that the Crown Facilitator for Water Services Delivery Plans can be a person or team whose roles and powers would include
d) alter Product or service being provided to person associated with an individual upon the
d) decline to issue a certificate or copy of a source document;
d) enable cleansing and updating of records upon the death of an individual or
d) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences, and the conduct
d) ensure, when applying for an Identity Service, that an individual is not required to
d) provide adverse advice to the Minister of Internal Affairs in relation to an application
d) to promote additional Identity Services to an individual who may meet the eligibility
d) update the records of an individual or person associated with the individual upon the
d. No liability. Except for breach of sections VII (Communications and public announcements)
d.if the information has already become public, other than through a breach of the obligation
damage and recovery funding. These constraints are impeding the eight councils
damage the integrity or reputation of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework; andor
dan.richardsoncybercx.co.nz
data are deeply connected, and it will be critical to ensure consistency with Te Tiriti
data centre, where a suitable onshore service exists;
database after determining that information to be necessary to one of
is both one of the most critically recognised security controls, and widely
day with people in at least agencies, as new services and products
daylightsavingdia.govt.nz
deactivated has been final ised by DA and NZSIS.
death information for the purpose of lawfully disclosing that
debt and the remainder by instalment arrangement; or
debt as a percentage of operatin g rev enues would ris e more r apid ly given the lower operating
debt burden assessment of the Crown s rating.
debt foreca sts and we would inc lude it within our continge nt liability assessm ent within our
debt forecasts and w e would include it within our continge nt liability assessment within our
decides its final representation proposal.There is no requirement for councils to
decisions about adopting cloud. Building and strengthening relationships between the
decisions about their resources and taonga, and the Crowns obligation to provide
decisions is not clear in the law.
decisions made by agencies.
decisions on policy matters
decisions to have or not have Mori
decisions.Mori wards stay in place until the
defence strategies across standardised services leading to a consistent Xsecurity
deliver any training requirements . There is also potential to leverage an existing
deliver on Government priorities. The work is being progressed to ensure public
deliver the required training, there is potential for unintended consequences such as
delivery benefits of cloud, and allowed MoH to quickly develop
delivery of services to citizens and businesses.
demand and emissions growth.
demand for the three water services. The WSE will fund this capex through its operating cash
demand selfservice, broad network access, resource pooling, rapid elasticity, and
demographic, could lead to increased potential risks to young people and
departments are required to meet under the Public Records Act and specifically for
dependin g on how the council manages its o perati ng and a ftercapital account deficits as the
depending on their needs.
deploy and run software, which can include operating systems and applications. The
deployment models can be found in Appendix A . In this paper, cloud refers to public
derive d from residential and small tomedium commercial customers.
describes our Outcomes Framework. We continue to develop and refine our organisational strategy, Mtou Mahi. This strategy includes our purpose, five outcomes and our priorities for making a difference over time for people and society. Our outcomes are encompassed by the following statement, which reinforces our commitment to and encourages better understanding and capability of te ao Mori.
design of a new process. Future financial implications for the Crown are likely to relate
design something targeted to the highest risk area in the first instance, to meet the
details of family members (i. e. intelligence collection and analysis);
details operational and technical aspects of this information sharing programme.
detect and contain threats.
detect fraudulent applications;
detecting, investigating and prosecuting criminal offending (e.g. publication of objectionable material, breaches of the law such as crimes of dishonesty involving or relating to gambling); and)
detection capabilities rapidly evolving through their services. Threat actors a d
determ ined to be h igher because of the very high likelihood of providing
determ ined to be higher be cause of the very high likelihood of providing
determ ined to be higher because of the very high likelihood of providing
determination as to the consistency of these proposals with the New Zealand Bill of
determination may be appealed to the
develop training regimes to ensure that staff would meet the incoming requirements .
developed (for example, Spark, Datacom, Kyndryl and Catalyst Cloud). More
developed in partnership with DILG and the guidance is expected to align to and be
developing a regulatory regime that best suits the needs of the sector. This framing
development and expected to be completed by March . This guidance has been
development and hauora (Red Brain). When engaging
development in the public sector and within the New Zealand digital economy, including:
development may be impacted by competition in the racing and sports betting market from offshore betting agencies. New Zealand Lotteries Commission Spending growth on NZLC products has been relatively high, but volatile, since . This volatility appears to relate to the number of large jackpots in a year. Strong growth has continued over recent years ; DIA notes player expenditure of million in , million in , million in and million for . The marked increase in is due to changes to Lotto games, which delivered more winners and bigger Powerball prizes (DIA ) . NZLC is also working to diversify its portfolio by introducing new games to help mitigate fluctuations in spending on its lottery products. DIA expenditure forecasts by year and sector are shown in Table . DIA forecasts that NZLC will experience flatter expenditure growth for than earlier forecast in the consultation document, but that the other three sectors will experience steadier expenditure growth over the same period. Table : Forecast expenditure by sector (GSTinclusive), Forecast expenditure NCGMs Casinos NZRB NZLC (m) . . . . (m) . . . . (m) ,. . . . Estimated levy underrecovery or overrecovery, by sector (R) Section of the Gambling Amendment Act came into effect on March and requires the calculation of each sector s levy rate to take into account any underpayment or overpayment from that sector in previous levy periods. This change ended the previous system, deemed unfair, whereby all four gambling sectors were required to meet any net underpayment or overpayment of the levy amount across all sectors from the previous levy period. During the consultation process, views were expressed about the most appropriate way to calculate R, which the Gambling Commission commented on in its report to responsible Ministers. The Commission said R should be calculated by hindsight adjustment of earlier estimates of both C and D to produce (amend) the previously expected relative contribution from each sector to a corrected calculation of the actual cost of the strategy to the end of the previous levy period. The Commission considered this approach is consistent with the objective intent of the amendments to the Act and provide s a fair er allocation of any over or underpayment, as adjustments to each sector would be made in the same proportions as received (Gambling Commission ). Accordingly, the Ministry has calculated R by calculating its projected total spending for the period to by: STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
development of a framework . A more detailed work programme can be provided in
development of the Local Government Water Services Bill. Officials will provide you
development, particularly for smaller councils.
devices through either a web browser (e g., webbased email), or a program
devise their own processes which range from wide public consultation to targeted
dia.govt.nz is a New Zealand government website
dia.govt.nz is managed and maintained by the
different channels, and also to be contacted through their preferred contact method. For
different rating outco me.
different rating outcome.
different types of government reviews
difficult to replicate this infrastructure, both physically and economically. Our expectation is
digital economy and with the arrival of billions of dollars of investment in onshore
digital identity, use of data for artificial intelligence or development of algorithms, and
digital solutions and services for all New Zealanders through improved public sector access to cloud services, skills and trusted advice.
digital transformation of the public service. It is our opinion policy alone will not be
digits of the contacts phone number; and lastly, ) the name and last initial of the close contact. It was clear participants could not reliabi lity answer the first three questions. We applied for an amendment to University of Otago Ethics requesting inclusion of first names directly, which were then de identified by a University of Otago researcher. . Data analysis The analysis from th is pilot study was limited to descriptive statistics, summarising the concordance and discordance between tools for determining close contacts. In all analyses, we have excluded the contact data from the static cards to improve compatib ility between contac t data sources. Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
dilute the distinctiveness of the accreditation mark.
directive CAB Min () refers; refresh considerations for security and
disclosed, the DIA internal investigation processes will be applied.
disclosure is agreed in writing, in advance, by both parties. Both parties will operate on a no
disclosure is authorised or required under any enactment, including the Registration Act
disclosure of DAA information, and retention and record keeping obligations as
disconnection from culture can also increase
discussed as it applied to legislated reform and regulatory powers.
discussed. We understand that officials from Ministry for Culture and Heritage (MCH)
discussions with sector representatives about the authorisations project.
disinfectant or understand that E.coli contamination can be deadly.
disproportionately affect Mori, Pacific, and other minority groups, especially
distinction between t e Policy and other issues outside the scope of the refresh;
distr ess sce nario is based on the same facto rs as scenario .
distress sce nario is based on the same fact ors as scen ario .
distress sce nario is based on the same factor s as scenario .
distress scenario . This is bec ause we believe the WSE is unlikely to require loc al councils
distress scenario is based on the same fac tors as scenario .
distribution networks, are complex to operate and carry many safety risks if not
do not appl y to other WSEs .
document ( Appendix C refers), subject to editorial, formatting and layout
documents have been proactively released in full:
does not include adoption information, witness protection name ....
dog owners are responsible for their dogs, their dogs behaviour, and fulfilling the requirements of the Act, and
dogrelated injury claims and their cost from the Accident Compensation Corporation
done through the Local Government Water Services Bill (Bill .
donor offspring information.
download and install Acrobat Reader for free from the Adobe website
downward adjustment under all the scenarios.
draft Order to be necessary or desirable and had no recommendations for
drinking water treatment industry. There were other useful insights such as innovation
drinking water. Removing aluminium depends on optimal operation of the complex
due to a rela tivel y weaker business risk profile . We believe the rationale for the WSE s SACP is
during a distress sce nario is based on:
during the COVID lockdown, IR held virtual design meetings every
duties or powers is outlined in the Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA).
e) Agree to the repeal of clause in the Water Services Act, that sets YesNo
e) Independent Statutory Bodies
e) Note that Taumata Arowai can discuss suitable membership of the technical advisory and reference groups with your office . YesNo f) Agree changes to the WSA could also be made to allow Taumata Arowai to specify infrastructure and operating requirements that, if implemented by a wastewater operator, will meet the treatment requirements in wastewater standards , and this could be included in your July Cabinet paper . YesNo
e) Processes and procedures exist within each Party to ensure that information sent under this
e) Reporting of near misses security investigations in relation to information provided under
e) Specifics regarding retention periods; and
e) Taumata Arowai to be required to proactively work alongside Crown and Council suppliers as a priority, to Already agreed
e) Where a Party becomes of aware of actions amounting to a Notifiable Privacy Breach in
e) Where an internal investigation confirms the inappropriate access, loss of, or
e) agree that National Engineering Design Standards apply to the following parties and circumstances: i. private developers or contractors seeking to vest (transfer ownership and responsibility for operation and maintenance of water services network infrastructure to water service providers; ii. private developers or contractors proposing to connect water services network infrastructure to the public water services network; and iii. the maintenance, renewal, upgrade or decommissioning of new or existing public water services network infrastructure by water services providers; YesNo
e) agree the Minister should have the discretion to grant an extension to the month Water Service Delivery Plan deadline on a case
e) apply Privacy by Design principles in the development and operation of the
e) apply Privacy by Design principles to the development and operation of the information
e) cease providing a Personal Entitlement or Other Thing to an individual upon the individuals
e) decline to issue a marriage or Civil Union Licence;
e) ensure eligibility requirements are met prior to the registration of a Life Event;
e) investigate any matter that may constitute an offence under any legislation it administers
e) note that a clarification of the power to delegate powers to carry out work on land in relation to water services infrastructure may be required in the design stage of Bill ; f) agree that no changes be made to powers to make controlled drinking water catchments in Bill ; YesNo g) agree that that no changes be made to allow water organisation s to make bylaws in Bill ; YesNo h) i) j)
e) note that agreeing to recommendations (a) to (d) will not have fiscal implications because the tax exemption will only apply where the shareholders or beneficiaries are already tax exempt ; and f) agree to forward a copy of this briefing to the Minister of Finance for her information. YesNo YesNo
e) prevention, detection, investigation, and prosecution of offences, and the conduct of civil
e) provide adverse advice to the Minister of Internal affairs in relation to a potential
e) to enable the update of Nonregistered Information across all identity and Life Event
e. engaging in support of the objectives of the Digital Strategy for Aotearoa
e. Independent Contractors. AWS and GCDO are independent contractors, and this MoU will
e. Proposed disestablishment of the Strategy and Capability team The proposal to disestablish the Strategy and Capability team has not been made lightly. As mentioned previously, in the environment that we are in, deprioritising and stopping activities in areas where we have been able to operate beyond our core delivery responsibilities is required. Some of the mahi undertaken by this team is proposed to be split and redistributed within newly proposed and existing roles, such as the Practice Lead, Lead Regulator, Principal Advisor, Strategy and Business Planning, and Team Leader, Business Services. It is therefore proposed to disestablish the positions of National Manager, Strategy and Capability, four Senior Advisors, Business Advisor, Practice Lead Capability and Senior Capability and Training Advisor. Key
e.information that was known by the receiving party prior to its receipt from the disclosing
each cou ncils reputation . This is because Govern ors will approve the WSE s statements
eager to commit to a Spirit of Service and to make a difference for Aotearoa.
easily scaled and reduced to meet changing demands.
economy, we recommend Cabinet agree to include consideration of highlevel
education outcomes. It will also assess the impact of Government decisions
education, employment, connection to whenua,
education, employment, improved health and
effectively. However, the Cloud First Policy has been in place for a decade and
efficiency for energy demand. Global demand for data services has
effort or service provider interaction .
effort) systems typically being compromised first. Cloud providers implement tiered
eight councils are facing in trying to meet their statutory requirements in the
eight weeks in July and August this year.
either or both of the following (whether remoteIy or otherwise):DMS
elections but may optionally be changed
elections. This brings the total number of councils with Mori wards to . A list of
electrical supply sector, electricians, engineers, and plumbers. The authorisations provisions
eligibility for New Zealand Citizenship by descent or a grant of citizenship other than
emergency under the C EDM Act .
emissionsCloud and hyperscale data centres typically have high operational
employ new technologies (such as cloud). These impacts begin to compound as unsupported hardware and
employees, officers, secondees, and integrated contractors) who:
employment and housing opportunities. This can
employment contracts and extensions to contracts for services.
enabled workplace positioned them well to keep business running,
enables New Zealanders to interact easily with governments, both domestic and international
enables gambling operators to manage their information and licensing application process entirely online.
enabling agencies to empower communities in making a difference
enacted by Dec (as per LEG Bid).
enactment or Order in Council constituting the local authority
encourages others to adopt similar approaches.
encumbering whanau with unnecessary administrative processes at a difficult time.
enforcement (e.g. the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences
enforcement decisions, this would likely result in an undesirable tradeoff between
engagement method on a casebycase
engagement with the public and communities.
engagement within whnau and
enquiriescastal iaadvisors.com castalia advisors.com
enriches the cultural and economic life of New Zealand and its interchanges with other nations by:
ensure consistent regulation across different platforms (option two).
ensure sufficient funding is available within the appropriations that fund the
ensure that the correct person is noted as being deceased in their databases. If someone is
ensure they align with ward boundaries as much as possible;
ensures people who are not entitled to a passport do not obtain one
ensures that New Zealand citizens who are entitled to a passport have their identity properly verified before it is issued
ensures that councils can understand, and can budget for, any new requirements.
entirety without any changes (a nd provid ed a copy of t he applic able TCs are attached there to).
entities in the country and they will play a cen tral role in meeting ke y economic, social,
entity is the appellant body.
entries to the customers identity.
entry into or exit from any country. The document states the known
environmental impacts, critically for emissions, are essential for enabling
environmental outcomes. The interface between Federal and State levers in were also
environments i.e. security in the cloud.
epidemic, fire, flood, storm, pandemic or war) which prevent any Party performing its obligations
equal rights for Mori and nonMori under Ko te TuatoruArticle .
equivalent processes for general wards and general constituencies (general
equivalent prohibition on binding polls on general ward proposals, in order to create
ere information has been withheld for other reasons consistent with advice, it has been annotated with
erial and any public service departmental advice use this copyright statement
eruption, fire, flood, storm or war) which prevent any party performing its obligations under
establish M ori wards; and
establish or not to establish new Mori wards. However, it does have a role in hearing
establish, administer, and maintain a register of TF providers and accredited services
establish, administer, and maintain an accreditation regime for digital identity service providers and digital identity services
established the legislative provision for an authorised persons framework that applies
established with a budget of . million and received an additional . million
establishment of Mori wards are inconsistent with the equivalent processes for
establishment of joint water services councilcontrolled organisations
even fewer could connect to systems at any one time. The operating
events in early CABMIN. The attached Order gives effect to this
ever been held, likely because of the
every years as part of their
evidence base for future systemwide prioritisation of investment.
evidence in public settings, when it is appropriate to do so.
evolving digital environment, and support agencies to adopt cloud solutions to
example some New Zealanders may want DIA the RegistrarGeneral to contact them using
example, a customer applying for a New Zealand Passport does not have to provide a birth
exceedances of the maximum acceptable value (MAV) of aluminium in drinking water.
except: (i ) as required by law or regu lation, or for re gulatory purp oses, o r (ii) to t hird parties that
excluded from these calculations.
excludes a Specified Organisation.
exclusion of these individuals and their whnau from society. However,
exclusion provide further obstacles for gang
exclusion. This trauma can lead to an individual
exclusive jurisdiction of the New Zealand courts in respect of any disputes relating to the binding
executive sponsorship for the work programme, and to participate equally in programme
exempted by this Agreement, DIA will notify the relevant Partys Privacy Officer as soon as
exer ted by the Governors over the WSE , such as appro ving the statement of i ntent . This
exercised by NZSIS for which the information is required
exerted by th e Governors over the WSE, such as appro ving the statement of intent . This
exerted by the Governors over the WSE , suc h as appro ving the statement of intent . This
existence of any dispute.
existing baselines or reconsidered.
existing training offerings and opportunities to support their career
exit from any country, and purporting to establish the identity but not the
expanded Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID Lessons; and note that
expect providers and agencies will support the process as centralised certification
expect the after capit al ac count defici t to be slightly stronger at of total revenues between
expected Adverse Actions .
expected to be funded by fees paid by providers (based on the cost of delivering
expected to better meet the needs of public sector agencies and Classes of Agencies and will allow
expected to realize significant operating efficiencies (both on operating costs as well as capital
expected to take any of the following Adverse Actions based on the personal information received
expenditure . Similarly, we expec t aftercapital ac count deficit s to be . of t otal revenu es
expenditure must be able to with stand audit scrutiny
expenditure must be for official ministerial purposes only
expenditure must be properly documented and supported with tax invoicesreceipts
expenditure must be reasonable for the circumstances and able to withstand taxpayers scrutiny
expenditure should represent value for money and costeffectiveness.
expenditure spend) over the next four to five yea rs. We expect that the WSEs will continue to
expenditure within specified criteria regarding onpremise infrastrncture, provide regular
expense of a general ward councillor position and trigger comprehensive boundary
experience a person or organisation operating a drinking water supply or wastewater
experience people working in the water sector should have to undertake safety critical
experience, using holistic insights to
experiences will better enable us to reduce harm for our people
experiences, and longstanding distrust of public
exploring efficiencies, and reprioritisation within the Departments baselines.
extended three times and every extension has required additional funding. It was
extended to local councils and will cover of costs where d amage is the result of an
extension of this nature will increase the costs of the Royal Commission, the costs
extension to April (agreed in November ) included an additional budget
extracted, copied, and transferred to the NZSIS classified network.
extraordinary supp ort to the WSE during a str ess s cenario , particularly given the control
extraordinary support to the WSE during a str ess s cenario , particularly given the contr ol
extraordinary support to the WSE during a str ess s cenario , particularly given the control
f) All relevant Parties shall ensure that reasonable assistance is provided to any investigation
f) Any Party may suspend sharing under this Agreement to allow time for a Privacy Breach to
f) Audit and reporting requirements.
f) Make explicit that Taumata Arowai can proactively issue exemptions from the regulatory regime, rather Already agreed
f) Ministry for Ethnic Communities
f) Note subject to your decisions above, officials will provide you
f) Processes and procedures exist within each Party to ensure that the personal information
f) To ensure safeguards are operating as intended and are sufficient to protect the
f) agree that National Engineering Design Standards will be administered by the Water Services Authority; YesNo
f) agree that the Terms Sheet will provide the basis for seeking Cabinet agreement to the Plans, for inclusion in Bill ;
f) cause an appropriate entry to be inserted on the DeprivationsRenunciations register
f) cease providing a Product or service to an individual or person associated with the individual
f) decline to accept a name in relation to a birth recorded in certain circumstances;
f) engage in civil proceedings.
f) ensure eligibility and entitlement requirements are met prior to issuing a Travel
f) to complete Evidence of Identity validation;
f.t providing information on the benefits of cloud and support for cloud
f. Strategy, Intelligence and Risk The proposed establishment of the Strategy, Intelligence and Risk function will bring together the Strategy, Intelligence, Insights, Risk and Business Planning activities under one team. This function that will be responsible for maintenance of our regulatory strategy, turning our strategy into actionable business plan and utilising insights from intelligence and risk to help us focus our regulatory stewardship efforts. Given the resourcing constraints we face, it is critical that we target our effort to address known risks and plan our activities in areas that will have significant impact in our regulated sectors. i) Team Leader, Intelligence and Insights With the proposed disestablishment of the National Manager, Intelligence, Insights and Risk, the establishment of a new Team Leader, Intelligence and Insights is proposed to lead the Analysts and Senior Analysts in the team. This means a proposed change in reporting line for this team to the Head of Strategy, Intelligence and Risk. The new proposed Team Leader, Intelligence and Insights will be responsible for leading and managing the team, to ensure that intelligence, analysis, products and services are delivered consistently and to high quality standards. ii) Intelligence, Insights and Risk team The makeup of the team is also proposed to change, with a reduction in the number of Lead Intelligence Analysts from two to one, Senior Intelligence Analysts from four to three, Intelligence Analysts from four to two, and the disestablishment of the two Senior Data Analysts. The reduced capacity means that there will a strong focus on work that is commissioned for the team and the leadership team to work together to establish collective efforts. iii) Intelligence Coordinator To support the team with prioritisation of work, it is proposed to establish an Intelligence Coordinator. The proposed position would add valuable administrative support to the Intelligence team who, as they become busier and more embedded into our regulatory operating model, are finding themselves struggling to meet the administrative demands. Key
f.information that is independently developed by the receiving party.
f::iI Privacy Commiss ioner CJ Te Mana Matapono Matatapu included in DIAs annual report. The AISA also requires that the parties conduct regular internal first line assurance and internal audits of the operation of the AISA. . I consider th ese to be important and necessary privacy protection s to ensure that the safeguards are operating as intended and are sufficient to protect the privacy of individuals. Operational protocols . My Office look s forward to reviewing the accompan ying operational protocols , which will add another critical layer of protection. I am pleased to see that , at a minimum, the protocols must include: details about the proposed use of the information; fields of personal information to be shared by each Part y; details of the mechanism for transfer to be utilised; the process for handling adverse action s; specifics regarding retention periods; and audit and reporting requirements. Conclusion . Having considered the privacy implications of this AISA, I consider that there are several privacy protections to minimise any interference with peoples privacy. I look forward to the next stage of this AISA. Michael Webster Privacy Commissioner ikudgtnr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
factor chan ged. Add itionally, our outlooks on these e ntities wo uld rem ain un changed.
factor changed. A dditionally, the outlooks woul d remain st able .
factors. However, the drivers can be broadly
family and social well being), and taha
feedback to be reflected; and
financecareersdia.govt.nz
financial forecasts . This tr eatme nt was based on our view tha t the WSE , which benefits from a
financial forecasts . This tr eatment was bas ed on our vie w tha t the WSE , which
financial forecasts . This tr eatment was based on our view tha t the WSE , which benefits from a
financial forecasts . This weaken ed th e indivi dual credit profile of the council to
financial ob ligat ion of an issuer. This letter is subject to the T erms and Conditions atta ched to
financial support in the forese eable future .
find it challenging to introduce Mori wards because of a low Mori electoral
first principles across different media sectors and platforms
first when referring to the organisation. This will involve changes to the Taumata
fiscally neutral adjustment across appropriations within Vote Internal Affairs. The
fix to reduce potential harm to young people
flexibility to respond to future population and demographic changes as other councils
flexibility, resilience, insights and innovation. Cloud will be an important feature of any
flexible set of arrangements as well as a common approach to support agencies
flows and exter nal borrowings. We beli eve that lack of access to equity capital is one of the
focused on fostering an inclusive and highperforming workplace within Te Tari Taiwhenua. Guided by principles such as manaakitanga (support), whanaungatanga (connection), and kotahitanga (unity), the strategy aimed to grow and celebrate diversity across Te Tari Taiwhenua, creating an environment where all kaimahi felt respected, valued, and empowered to perform at their best.
follow system investment priorities or adoption of crossgovernment processes, tools
followed, records are accurate, or efficiency and effectiveness targets are
following Adverse Actions based on the personal information received from the RegistrarGeneral:
following additions will be made to the existing Cloud First Policy.
following consultation. Minimising costs on local authorities is an objective for the
following its extraction from its respective database, as well as the subsequent
following records: DIA (Citizenship)
following records: General Committees
for Aotearoa () for flourishing and prosperous communities in the digital era and of theStrategy for a Digital Public Service () for a modern, agile public service.
for DIA supported by the National Cyber Policy Office (NCPO), National Cyber
for a period exerts pressure on baselines and decisions to adopt, or not adopt, cloud.
for all scena rios (noting that LG FA is only assessed in s cenarios a nd ) .
for all TF providers to report to the Trust Framework Authority about the use of their accredited services during each month period.
for an evidentiary certificate of citizenship;
for any cybersecurity threats in New Zealand.
for councils to establish and maintain Mori wards in the future, to ensure that Mori
for details on dates and times when you will be unable to apply online, along with more information about upcoming requirements to delete draft unsubmitted passport applications.
for drinking water and wastewater operators.
for further details of what information we collect and what we do with it.
for future generations. To support this, we propose Cabinet direct officials from the
for government agencies, Ministers, Local Bodies, District Health Boards and State Owned Entities is available for download.
for individuals associated with the provision of information about deaths by facilitating
for keeping New Zealanders safe from online harm by responding to and preventing the spread of child sexual exploitation material.
for key financial statistics a nd a summary of the individual credit metri c outcomes and ra tings
for key financial statistics a nd a summary of the individual credit metri c outcomes and ratings
for key financial statistics and a summary of the individual credit metri c outcom es and ratings
for one or more of the purposes specified in clause . (d) and (I).
for private security personnel. It is the first contact for complaints.
for security and jurisdictional risk; and strengthen the Government Chief Digital
for simplified versions of the financial models WICS used in its analysis of the potential economic benefits of three waters reform.
for the avoidance of do ubt, a ny ind icative rating set ou t therein) or this let ter, to t hird parties
for the first extension, and a further . million for the second extension. I now
for the first stage of the Three Waters Services Reform Programme.
for the grant of citizenship;
for their tamariki. This includes financial stability,
for this Omnibus Bill (and approval to issue drafting instructions) from the
for this indicator. This is rated on a scale where is not at all worthwhile and is completely worthwhile.
for which the confidential information is disclose d, and (ii) the recipients are informed of the
force near the beginning of the new term of local government. This enactment
forced into a stress response which is harmful to their
forecast breach of appropriations by April . The March Baseline Update would
forecast years, the amo unt of water related revenues a nd e xpend iture should b e take n
forecasts, and expenditure on NZLC products remains volatile, depending on the number of large jackpots in any given financial year. Changes to lottery products and draws have also contributed to the uncertainty of forecasts. The weights (W and W) The Act requires the Ministry to apply a weighting between current player expenditure (W) and presentations ( W) to help determine each sector s share of the cost ( C) that each sector is required to pay in levy. Table shows the proportion of expenditure ( A) and presentations ( B) attributed to each levypaying sector for , the most recent year comparative data is available for all four sectors. Table : Share of presentations and expenditure by sector, NCG Ms Casinos NZRB NZLC Presentations Expenditure Presentations Expenditure Presentations Expenditure Presentations Expenditure . . . . . . . . The top line of the levy formula determines the amount each sector shall pay. When a sector s proportion of expenditure is substantially different from its proportion of presentations ( W and W respectively), the weighting between expenditure and presentations is critical to determine how much each sector will be required to pay . . Levy rates Table sets out each sectors levy rate for to , expected payment amounts, and percent shares for the weighting. This is a change from previous levy periods that have used the weighting. The weighting reflects changing patterns of player expenditure and presentations, and recognises that too high a weighting on presentations alone does not adequately attribute to each sector its fair share of costs for low to moderate harm, or of strategy activities such as public health not covered by presentations to intervention services. The top row of the table shows the levy rate for each sector, as the percentage of player expenditure each sector must pay as a levy. For example, a rate of . means that the sector must pay . cents for each dollar of player expenditure from July to June . The second row shows the expected levy amount each sector would pay if actual player expenditure matches the forecasts. The third row shows this amount as a percentage of the total expected in levy payments (having adjusted for R). The last row shows each sectors share of the total cost to fund the strategy over the levy period . STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
form is required for local authoritys drinking water supplies by
form of an excel spreadsheet covering the questions used as a prompt for gathering
form part of all contact conversations, and no personal information may be
form, so as to be able to be used for subsequent reference, until their disposal is
forms and guidance web page
found in Appendix B. Public service transition to cloud also provides an opportunity
framework (as an Omnibus Bill).
framework . Repealing the transition provision would allow a greater opportunity to
framework developed by the Ministry of Business Innovation and Employment
framework for local authoritys drinking water supplies to be place by November
framework would need to be passed by early . This would require the following
frameworks and laws of countries they operate in. While this brings with it
frameworls) to identify previously unknown individuals of concern.
freeing up resources to deploy to other priorities
frequently asked questions section
from to users, providing the Ministry of Business,
from a Party in accordance with this Agreement and for one or more of the purposes
from accessing support. This leads to less routes
from baseline, be on an exceptions basis. Investment in onpremise IT should be
from extreme weather events.
from online harm in relation to child sexual exploitation, violent extremist content and unsolicited commercial electronic messages.
from the long term plan s.
from the RegistrarGe neral:
from the consultation referred to above will be progressed as part of an Omnibus Bill that
from viewing inappropriate content. Given that
from AA. The outlook would be stable. The individual credit profile of the council would
fulfils international obligations and security standards for passports and other travel documents set by the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO)
fully comply with their obligations towards their student loans and child
fully operational including the existence of operational procedures to share the required
functions CABMIN refers. The reprioritisation of the total costs across
functions and duties. This is consistent with other professions such as electricians,
funding and fiscally neutral adjustments across appropriations within Vote
funding model. There are opportunities for better systemwide resource
funding rules for the Governments budget for COVID related costs). The final total
funding through future Budgets for affected agencies, and that f assumed funding is not
funding would be required. The Department explored options for the October Baseline
further collaborative work with the water sector on the design and implementation of
further for potentially less functionality, higher costs and risks.
further legal analysis, and included in the Cabinet paper for the Local
further work and report back to Cabinet by April with options to address these
g) Agree that the Department and Taumata Arowai will work together to progress other initiatives in the RM system relating to achieving cost efficiencies and streamlining resource consenting for wastewater infrastructure with the Ministry for the Environment. YesNo
g) All information is appropriately secured when at rest and in transit in accordance
g) Any Party may suspend sharing under this Agreement to allow time for a Security Breach to
g) Increase the regulatory threshold to exclude shared domestic supplies service or few consumers Already agreed
g) Indicate if you wish to meet with officials to discuss.
g) Ministry for Pacific Peoples
g) Processes and procedures exist within each Party to ensure that the personal information is
g) decline to issue a Travel Document;
g) exercise the RegistrarGenerals powers to correct information held by the Registrar
g) lwi Organisations and other Maori Organisations
g) note that the administration of the National Engineering Design Standards will be a new function for the Water Services Authority; h) agree that, in line with drinking water and wastewater standards, National Engineering Design Standards will be made by Order in Council and will require preparation of a regulatory impact assessment; YesNo
g) to alter a Product or service being provided to a person associated with an individual upon
g) to verify a parents citizenship status if required for determining an applicants
g) verify an individuals Citizenship status;
g. Engagement, Operational Policy and new Implementation team The proposed establishment of an Implementation function will bring our current Engagement and Operational Policy teams that currently sit in each regulatory system under a single function. The proposed establishment of this function is informed by feedback from workshops with kaimahi that there was insufficient support for regulator kaimahi to access to an upto, single source of truth on robust policies and business processes. This has resulted in a lack of confidence in regulatory operations and a broad inconsistency of practices across regions, and even across teams within regions. The bringing together of these teams under one function will ensure that the two teams that are responsible for the information and education of both our regulatory kaimahi and our sector work together closely and provide consistent guidance to endusers. Supporting our regulators and educating and supporting our regulated sector with sound, easily understood and digestible operational policy guidance is key to our role as effective regulatory stewards. A centralised Operational Policy team, under a broader Implementation function, will ensure that across the Group we are consistently applying best practice in the development and rollout of the necessary operational support to regulators, and guidance, support and clarity to the sector. Again, in this area it becomes imperative for us to scale back work beyond our core mahi, ensure that our regulators have the right information including policies and process to do their mahi and be sharp around planning our engagement with our sector and how we inform and educate them.
g.E identifying opportunities to provide digital
gain, a flashy image, and violence. It is imperative
gaming convergence as discussed below) has steadily grown, and with it the risk of increased gambling harm. Gaming convergence For the purposes of the strategy, gaming convergence refers to the merging of gambling and gaming elements in a single product. The two main examples are where: gambling takes on the visual and aural queues associated with gaming; for example, virtual realityenabled Instant Kiwi tickets here in New Zealand. These forms of gambling are also an example of continuous gambling, which research shows poses an increased risk of harm video games include elements of what appears to be gambling (but does not currently meet the definition of gambling under the Act); for example, opening loot boxes and spinning wheels to unlock power ups . Gaming convergence, when coupled with associated increased levels of advertising and internetbased payment systems that make it easier to spend money on gambling products, represents the emergence of new levels of exposure to highrisk gambling products in New Zealand, and the associated probability of related gambling harm. Associated with gaming convergence is the potential harm from increasing opportunities to play games that simulate gambling; that is, they look and feel like gambling, but do not meet the definition under the Act (because there is no opportunity to stake, win or lose real money). For example, many online gambling websites promote their services with free toplay games that appear to be gambling , but do not involve real money These free toplay sites appear to avoid the Gambling Act prohibition on advertising as, by definition, no gambling is taking place on the site advertised. For example, SKYCITY launched a free toplay online gaming site in with virtual gaming machines (simulated pokies) and table games. Gambling providers in New Zealand, including SkyCity, have expressed interest in broadening their gambling products (eg, by moving online or increasing competitiveness with overseas markets). Submissions from service providers and health groups expressed concerns about gaming convergence, particularly in terms of the potential impact on vulnerable groups including Mori and Pacific youth. Gambling expenditure According to DIA, total gambling expenditure (player losses) on the four main forms of gambling is continuing a trend of increasing each year: refer to Section for details. In particular, it has found the following. Total gambling expenditure in (the most recent year surveyed for all four gambling sectors) was , million for the four main forms of gambling. This represented an increase of . percent on the year and an increase of approximately . percent on the year. Expenditure on NCGMs continues to increase from a low in , with increases of around percent per year since . For the total was million. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
gang communities, however, a high proportion
gang environment towards improved wellbeing,
gang families. Throughout their lifetime almost
gang members, their identities were developed
gang membership, coupled with a preventative
gangs are common make joining a gang
gangs are embedded in Aotearoa and intertwined within whnau and
gangs, their whnau and how they are treated
general wards involve one stage over one year. Mori wards decisions are made first.
generations likely having more influence.
genuine need and lawful purpose to use the personal information in carrying out that
geopolitical environment.
get in contact with their donor or donors, if all parties agree.
give a member of staff handling a customer request a temporary, dynamic view of all of the
given that under this Order, the eight councils may still provide a detailed account
given to an individual until their identity is clear. All attempts are made to
governance Very Str ong ( ) Very Strong () Very Strong ()
governance activities. The first programme governance meeting is scheduled for
governance, management, financial, technical, and systems.
government . WSEs operate essentially on behalf of the Crown and their main purp ose is
government agencies and associated entities;
government agencies often struggle to engage
government agencies on jurisdictional risk in . Changes since have
government agencies. Narratives
government agency, to the extent that (i) such disclosure is required to fulfill the purpose
government initiatives, such as enforcement activity
government priorities; reflect evolving cloud technology by revoking the IaaS Cabinet
government processes, tools or infrastructure and reduce investment in traditional in
government representatives (including local authorities, Local Government New
government responsibility, should be adequately funded and should not
government system that actively embodies the Treaty partnership, provides an
government to build a safe,
grant (except where the individual is entitled to New Zealand citizenship
grant, or otherwise than by descent, and it has neither been renounced or
greater opportunity for youth to thrive in all pou,
grounds (e.g., if they dont think their
grounds that it provides limited temporary exemptions or modifications to existing
grouped into three categories below:
growing public sector cloud knowledge and capability. It is vendor agnostic and hosts
growing risk to the cou ncils balance sheet, including the budget and debt level.
growing up in these environments is for rangatahi
grown exponentially and accounts for of electricity demand.
guarantors will r emain around the AA category , supporting its current cre ditw orthiness , based
guidance and controls. This chapter supports agencies to understand shared
guidance on Digital.govt.nz. These definitions are based on and reference the widely
guidance to agencies on jurisdictional risk of cloud by August , and thereafter as
guidance when taking up cloud services. The NCSC its advice and security
h) Appropriate mechanisms and standard procedures are implemented by each party to
h) Each Party will handle Adverse Actions they may take in accordance with Clause of this
h) Extend the timeframe for unregistered drinking water supplies to register with Taumata Arowai Already agreed
h) cancel an existing Travel Document;
h) conduct civil proceedings in relation to a refusal to provide an Identity Service.
h) offer or provide a Product, service, and Personal Entitlement or Other Thing to a person
h) to verify the name under which the applicant has applied for or renounced their New
h) update identity and Life Event records of an individual (or a person related to the
had a clear distinction between
half of NGL members have been victims of family
handled in accordance with any security classification , or other endorsement. The information can only be
handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be
harbourmasterdia.govt.nz
hard to maintain and assure security; and
harm caused and experienced by gangs,
harm. In many cases, these experiences have
harms will continue to impact future generations
has also steered some members towards an
has b een id entified t hat w ould o utweigh t he reasons for w ithholding it.
has been certified by NZSISs Compliance Manager as having a ....
has been completed and is attached in Appendix D . The Department of Internal Affairs
has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it.
has completed all necessary training and certification requirements to ..
has not been analysed or adjusted to allow comparisons between councils to be made.
has occurred, an inspection andor internal investigation process will be applied utilising the
has supported new councils to adopt Mori wards in time for the local
have a high safety record and maintain strong re liability while maintai ning good water quality
have a ripple effect throughout the community that
have access to any data under this sharing agreement understand and
have an employee act on behalf of your business or organisation
have asked to deliver recommendations by April that look to achieve a local
have been proactively released :
have been received before any education or recovery action is taken.
have earned (or will have earned) a graduate diploma or postgraduate certificate (Level or above) within the last months
have financial implications. Hyperscale cloud providers are not yet operating onshore
have good visibility of current software versions being used.
have high levels of interaction with Oranga Tamariki
have positive flow on effects to any businesses and individuals who interact with
have preferred wording at this stage, this can be incorporated into the legal advice.
have processes and procedu res in place that enable effective governan ce, monitoring
have the flexibility to choose the best
have the opportunity to design their systems and contracts in anticipation of possible
having a conversation with players showing signs of gambling harm, and that they record these conversations.
having to do an amendment when making certain decisions that are not included
hazards apply or dont apply to certain classes of drinking water supply
he following documents are proactively released without redaction:
headroom at the c urrent rat ing to a ddress potential macr oeconom ic an d financial sect or risk s,
healthy behaviours and environments, to effect
heavy rainfall from January to February and
help paying for childcare
highly unlikely too. That said , we could revise the S ACP upwards if WS E outperforms on its
hinengaro (our mental and emotional
historical Statements of Intent
history, including any information relating to any applications by the
hold the position of Authorised Officer working directly on the functions, duties or
holding people and organisations to account.
holds both and unpublished collections.
hosted in New Zealand based data centres where a suitable service exists, could
house technology in favour of cloud. Much of the technology supplied through the
how local and central government agencies responded to the public health outbreak that occurred as a result of the contamination
how the Havelock North water supply system became contaminated
how they intend to deliver water services in ways that are financially sustainable, and that meet regulatory quality standards, for water
how this was subsequently addressed
how to get married in New Zealand
how to reduce the risk of outbreaks of this nature recurring.
however, only a small proportion
http:rsnz.natlib.govt.nz
http:www.identityservices.dia.govt.nz
https:christchurchattack.royalcommission.nz
https:creativecommons.orglicensesby.
https:faeqqgsaasfaprod.fa.ocs.oraclecloud.comhcmUICandidateExperienceensitesCX
https:keepitrealonline.govt.nz
https:natlib.govt.nzrecords
https:nvlpubs.nist.govnistpubsLegacySPnistspecialpublication.pdf
https:taumataarowai.govt.nz
https:theinteryeti.govt.nz
https:wheturangitia.services.govt.nz
https:www.beehive.govt.nzreleasehavelocknorthdrinkingwaterinquiryestablished
https:www.beehive.govt.nzreleaseministerialaccommodationdecisionsannounced
https:www.dia.govt.nzCounteringViolentExtremismOnline
https:www.dia.govt.nzPreventingOnlineChildSexualExploitation
https:www.dia.govt.nzStrategicIntentions
https:www.dia.govt.nzwebsubmitforms.nsfcencomp
https:www.dia.govt.nzwebsubmitforms.nsfdigviol
https:www.eiu.comncampaignsdemocracyindex
https:www.legislation.govt.nzactpubliclatestDLM.html
https:www.legislation.govt.nzregulationpubliclatestLMS.html
https:www.nzherald.co.nznzmothballedgenderselfidlawbackasapriorityforgovtwillpassthisyearministersaysCIPLGCHFKCKOBMOBNYTQRQ
https:www.ot ago.ac.nzwellingtondepartmentspublichealthresearchheirucovid response
https:www.parliament.nzenpbparliamentaryrulesdirectionsdeterminationsministerstravelserviceswithinnewzealanddetermination
https:www.publicservice.govt.nzresearchanddatakiwiscount
https:www.transparency.orgencpi
hyperscale cloud services, there will be opportunities and options not previously
hypot hetical information presented to us by you. You unde rstan d that SP G lobal Ratings will
hpori. Instead, focus needs to be pushed towards creating better
i) Ministry of Foreign Affairs Trade (MFAT)
i) Processes and procedures exist within parties to ensure that the personal
i) Removal of the requirement for annual registration (to be replaced by fiveyearly) Already agreed
i) The PSCID will not be used as a unique identifier by any Party other than DIA and the
i) agree that the Water Services Authority will develop the National Engineering Design Standards; YesNo
i) confirm or reaffirm whakapapa relationships;
i) issue a New Zealand Passport for a period shorter than the standard duration;
i) to determine the citizenshipbybirth status of a person born in New Zealand on or
i) update identity and Life Event records of an individual and their children, upon the
i. Phase : Councils (acting solely or jointly) will prepare Water Service Delivery Plans (WSDPs) to the Department by the deadline.
i. assist, and if necessary direct, a council to prepare a draft andor final Plan if a Plan has not been provided by the deadline;
i. financial information, including expenditure, revenues and financing;
i.e. means a parent who is liable to pay child support in respect of any qualifying child
i h : Te Tan Taw enua
identification and development of specia list technical skills such as security
identified as a specific area of concern for New
identified discrete risk and allows us to act pro
identified the councillor limit as a barrier to creating a Mori ward and asked for its
identify of known selfreported close contacts within days of case notification. Reducing the delay to isolate firstorder close contacts is often one of the main objectives of modelling studies. Modeling studies which have reported assumptions regarding the time from case notification to isolation of firstorder contacts, use a day lagtime (Ferretti and Plank ).
identify and eliminate identity fraud.
identifying Partys internal investigation processes will be applied.
identifying Partys standard processes.
identifying and recommending Inquiry members for Ministers consideration
identifying broad outcomes and possible levers for change will outline whether
identifying pelsons of security or intelligence interest and their familial details .. I.
identity and Life Event information for the purpose of streamlining services. This is referred
identity but not the nationality of that person.
if a citizen has renounced or been deprived of citizenship by the Minister;
if you want to know more about donating to the collections, getting advice on preservation, see whats on, and much more.
if you want up to information about machine numbers in a district.
ii. Phase : Councils that reach the desired maturity level will graduate to a more detailed information disclosure regime led by the
ii. advise, and if necessary direct, a council on how to amend a draft andor final Plan if these have not met statutory
ii. asset information, including asset type, condition, lifespan, average life, and estimate value, asset management plans and I
iii. preventing, detecting and responding to risks to national security presented by individuals with access to sensitive or classified information (this may include maintenance of the national security clearance database).
iii. pricing practices, including metering or plans for metering; I
iii. work across a group of councils to facilitate a joint Planproposals for a joint arrangement if those councils would benefit from
immigration and economic conditions
impact for each local counci l. This is becau se t he WSE operat es essentially as an
impede councils from focusing on response and recovery. Certain information,
impl ications for . We also det ermined that the structure would not result in rating
implement achievable solutions
implementation of an authorisations framework. This would require your agreement to remove the
implementation or operation of that legislation. This includes a
implemented by a council but cannot hear objections to a councils decision to
implementi ng timely tariff increa ses to recover its capital investments.
implementing and maintaining goo security controls.
implementing technology and delaying the upgrade of infrastructure. It is often the result of complex requirements
implementing timely tariff increases to recover its capital inv estments.
implicatio ns for credit rating , assuming no oth er significant rating
implied, statutory or otherwise, regarding the scope of cooperation described in this MoU.
importance of skills training accreditation and assurance for those working in the
important during COVID lockdowns. One of the key digital capabilities that were
impose specific licence conditions
improve governance for current and future generations.
improve public understanding of local government processes, and maintain public
improve the asse ssment, as the change in general governm ent net debt per year may be
improve the assessment, as the change in genera l government net debt per year may be
improve their security posture, for example through secure configuration, cloud
improvements aimed to help the process take less time.
improving Mori representation.
improving local electoral processes by November .
improving the processes by which individuals and communities are represented
in . The Government Computing Centre, which moved to the State Services Commission in , returned to the Department as the Government Technology Service in .
in and interest expenses of . from would be the same as under scenario .
in and interest expenses of . from would be the same a s under scenario .
in compar ed to in under our current asses sment . Interest expenses would
in Aotearoa has undergone
in Aotearoa. It is used to enhance our
in July after threeandahalf years of Commissioners.
in New Zealand from the Death Register. Other information currently available to Agencies
in accordance with an agreement between that agency and the
in accordance with the Privacy Act or to make a complaint to the Privacy
in achieving their goals.
in crime to support their families.
in default of their repayment and contact obligations.
in electronic formats are from information held by the RegistrarGeneral when the
in force. The information aids Police to maintain accurate records of people that it engages with.
in forceGeneral wards stay in place for
in legacy IT environments, cloud enables agencies to leverage securebydesign
in local government. However, six key differences remain between the separate
in local government. Removing Mori wards as an option for councils to consider is not
in maintaining adequate and safe staffing levels. Qualified workers will often
in relation to Mori data, when making decisions about adopting cloud services;
in relevant ways and enable whnau to achieve
in section of the Privacy Act . The report will be included in DIAs annual report.
in smaller councils where the pool of technical staff is much shallower .
in tCOe (link opens in Excel)
in the s to majority Mori
in the Water Services Act (the Act) are modelled on the Health and Safety at Work Act
in the circumstances to allow an individual to make a complaint about an interference with privacy
in the first three years of the Plan.
in their communities. Often a natural part of
in their longterm plans. Satisfying the requirements for a longterm plan
in their own rights, and have independent govern ance arrang ements .
in their relationships with partners, and intimidation
in their use of cloud technology. It supports the Strategy for a Digital Public Service
in this Agreement as they do in that Act.
in turn will allow IR to improve compliance rates for borrowers and parents, by
in understanding the gang picture
in urban NZ. These factors
in ways that are financially sustainable, meet regulatory quality standards for water network infrastructure and water quality, and
in writing and signed by the Chief Executive of DIA and the CIR, or their
inhouse IT. There are two aspects of improved security available from cloud
inaction, a lack of clear written process, and a lack of escalation processes.
include Te Ao Mori perspectives and would represent a world first for incorporating
include Te Ao Mori perspectives, and would represent a world first for incorporating
include consideration of centralised support (technical and financial) for prioritisation
include information as to any change of gender.
include targeted engagement with key organisations, including iwi and local
included in future Budget packages, elements of Phase Two of tlie Cloud First Policy will
included in the Supplementary Estimates and that, in the interim, the
included in the SWERL Act (as described later in this paper) to facilitate recovery
included in the birth information or name change information (as
includes changes to the processes for Mori wards, changes to Auckland Council
includes target discovery, in which NZSIS would use indicators (or other relevant
including Social Media Account details Births, Deaths and
including Three Waters and the Mori Electoral Option, where appropriate. Overlap
including anxiety, depression, and posttraumatic
including any information provided in any applications by the individual for
including that, consistent with a recommendation from the Rural Supplies Technical Working Group, users of councilowned mixed use rural water can choose to directly own and operate their schemes, independent of a Water Services Entity.
including the Water Services Act .
including the total amount being funded as additional funding through the between
including their mental and physical health, social
including those critical for service delivery, presents risks that should be surfaced.
including, as far as practicable, materials demonstrating the financial and
inclusion or removal of a New Zealand Agency within a class. Upon becoming a Party to this
incorpor ates our view that the current risk of materialization , and presence of sovereign
incorporate s our view that the current risk of materialization , and presence of sovereign
incorporates our view that the current risk of materialization , and presence of sovereign
increase . Therefore , we consider there will be stronger po litical involvement and
increase and streamline the payment of entitlements to the relatives andor dependants of deceased members.
increase be met from Imprest Supply;
increase the likelihood of youth joining gangs.
increase the payment of entitlements to missing members and to the relatives and dependents of deceased members (other beneficiaries).
increased deprivation levels (Bellringer et al ). Pacific peoples make up percent of all people seeking treatment for gambling harm. There is evidence that children and young adults are exposed to considerable gambling messaging; for example, through advertising, which can help to normalise gambling behaviours (Signal et al ). As noted above , health group and service provider submissions on the draft strategy also raised concerns about the accessibility of online gambling and gaming convergence and these impacts on the wellbeing of children, youth and young adults. Comorbidities Harmful gambling typically presents with other health issues, and has been consistently associated with a range of coexisting health issues such as higher levels of smoking, hazardous alcohol consumption and other drug use, as well as higher levels of depression and poorer selfrated health. Comorbidity is an indication that a person may require holistic services (Auckland University of Technology ). . Intervention service data Every year, some of the people described abov e seek help from services funded by the Ministry of Health (the Ministry) for problems due to their own or someone else s gambling . In the year, over , people sought help from services funded by the Ministry of Health for problems due to their own or someone else s gambling. Most of these people were in crisis . If brief interventions in nonclinical settings were included in the analysis, the total would increase to more than ,. Over the last seven years gambling harm intervention services have seen approximately , clients per annum (including family , whnau and affected others). Of these, about , were for brief interventions. Analysis of Ministry gambling service administrative data shows that of the approximately , gamblers who sought treatment in : percent identified as Europeanot her percent identified as Mori percent identified as Pacific peopl es percent identified as EastAsia n percent were me n the average age was years . O f the , who were screened for coexisting problematic alcohol or drug use, percent were identified as having a coexisting issue. Ministry of Health Intervention client data website . https:www.health.govt.nzourworkmental health andaddictionsgamblingservice userdatainterventionclientdata STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
increases or difficulty maintaining safe staffing levels. This longer timeframe will also
increasingly being built from the cloud.
incur large defic its over the next few years as it increase s its capital expenditure while COV ID
incur large deficit s over the next few years as it increases its capital expenditure while COVID
independent notforprofit entity and plays a very important role in the implem entation
indicated concern the mandate will create substantial difficulties.
indicative r ating opinions. We have not c onsente d to and wi ll not consent to being named a n
indigenous considerations into national cloud policies;
individual application capabilities, except for limited userspecific application
individual councils for any stormwater or other services that are not intended to be delivered through the joint service arrangement . rL.
individual credit profile of the coun cil would weake n under s cenario to . compared to .
individual credit profile of the council would we aken u nder s cenario to . compared to .
individual for a New Zealand Certificate of Identity.
individual in conjunction with a service provided to that individual.
individual in question has died. This will have a number of benefits including:
individual issues. This option creates the risk that if that happens again,
individual) upon the death of the individual;
individual, dealing with insurance, paying or changing social welfare or other benefits to
individual. The sharing of the information about deaths by the RegistrarGeneral helps to minimise
individuals and ensure that any interference with their
individuals before any adverse action is taken against them on the basis of
individuals before any adverse action is taken against them on the basis of personal
individuals from lower socioeconomic backgrounds through their interactions with
individuals to be granted a national secuiity clearance; and
individuals, each Party will conduct regular internal first line assurance and internal audits of
industry to inform the work referred to in recommendation .
influe nce the WSE s state ment of intent. The WSE will need to consider th e Governor s
infoclassificationoffice.govt.nz
infonn the work refened to in paragraph above;
inform the development of preferred options.
information Act or Regulation.
information about an individual that is of some concern or that indicates
information about applicants for passports from DIA for the purposes of an
information about others that an individual has the authority to act on behalf of, like a child or a company.
information and expected Adverse Actions
information based on information received under this Agreement from disclosing their own
information for each Party. At a minimum the operating procedures must include:
information for the purpose of streamlining services.
information from passport applications to IR for the purposes of this information
information held by IR about an individual. Matches, Matching and Matched have
information is confirmed using an internal, behind the scenes check. We also propose to
information is copied, transmitted, viewed, stolen or used by
information is not held longer than required.
information is only used for the purposes specified in this Agreement and remains
information obtained from the database
information on the benefits of cloud computing and New Zealand case studies can be
information or a Party disclosing the information to their agents.
information previous ly pr ovided could resul t in final conclusions that dif fer from the preliminary
information received from another Party:
information received from the RegistrarGeneral within the current legislative responsibilities under
information received from the RegistrarGeneral, as specified within the relevant schedule, for one
information received is determined by Student Loan, Child Support and
information received through an ISA, and give those individuals working days
information received under this Agreement is kept separate from all other
information relating to the marriage or civil union in order to be able to process their
information shared under an information sharing Agreement, and give those individuals
information shared, and activities undertaken under this MoU) are considered confidential andmust not be disclosed to any third party during the term of the MoU other than:
information sharing agreement and to give those individuals working days as defined in the
information sharing under this Agreement is otherwise unlawful.
information supplied to Inland Revenue is a duplicate data set. Therefore any
information temporarily accessed.
information to another New Zealand Agency or an Overseas Agency in
information while it is being transferred.
information) must be communicated to the previous receiving Party and subsequently any
information. Therefore, we are proposing to modify the Cloud First policy to include a
informed by the Mori Data Governance Model in development between Stats NZ
infrastructure including network, servers, operating systems, storage, or even
infrastructure spending .
infrastructure will provide options and opportunities not previously available.
innovation, sustainability, digital skills, cyber resilience and supporting D and other
input on all the proposed changes at the select committee stage.
input on the initial decision on Mori
inquiry under the Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID Lessons
inquiry. The Royal Commission recently asked for public feedback on the scope of the Inquiry. We believe the terms of reference are inadequate and narrow, such that lessons will not be learned. We are also concerned that the Inquiry will not have public hearings and has only two commissioners. We believe our Peoples Terms would broaden the scope and ensure that all aspects of the public health response are considered.
insights, and flexibility. A more technical description of cloud, its service and
insignificant . We consider that th ere was sufficient h eadroom with in our debt burden
insignificant. We consider that there was su fficient headroom with in our debt burden
inspectorGeneral of Intelligence and Security (IGIS) and the Privacy Commissioner (PC).
instalment arrangement; or
intelligence and security agencies, and may be made verbally, electronically or in person.
intelligence and security agencies.
intelligence at the aggregate user levels, about data use, risk and
intelligence, and any analysis of that intelligence, to:
intelligenceThrough advanced analytics, providers can offer better insight and
intend for the package of changes to include:
intended as a reporting tool.
intended to be additional barriers to cloud but provide guidance and support on how
intended to help you navigate through the set of briefings, to see all the decisions in
intended to work and the company ha s developed a sol id track record of implementing timely
intention is that these two Bills will be consolidated into the omnibus Bill, which would
interact in their familial environments as adults,
interest to do so, or to mee t a temporary shortfall in a time ly manner and on
interest within their districts or regions have equitable access to elected
interested in looking at whether a hybrid cloud deployment approach
interests and knowledge as they relate to the operation of the trust framework.
interests of any specific individual.
interface. The consumer does not manage or control the underlying cloud
interfere with, information stored in the cloud through their own legal frameworks. It is
interference with privacy and the Privacy Commissioner to investigate the complaint.
interference with privacy in relation to this Agreement, then DIA will be responsible for dealing with
interference with their privacy is minimised:
internal audit of the operation of this Agreement.
internal policy, including the need to consider whether the interaction aligns with NZSIS
intervention in relation to local government water services delivery);
interventions and investment in cloud is needed. Possible areas of further work
interventions and investment to address barriers to cloud adoption across the public
into Rs primary system.
into an actual or suspected Privacy Breach in respect of information provided under this
into an actual or suspected Security Breach in relation to information shared under this
into legislation and to ensure there are no perverse or unintended outcomes. If you
into the Policy and support digital transformation in a way that promotes sustainability
into the legislation, it should be clear that the consideration of cost benefit and being
introduced to the House and referred to select committee in March
introduced too quickly, the water sector would not be equipped to deliver the required
investigate breaches of the TF rules, the regulations, the terms of use of accreditation marks and the Act
investigating party in connection with all inspections and investigations. The
investigating party will ensure that the other party is kept informed of any
investigations in relation to that actual or suspected breach as deemed necessary.
investment and funding decisions.
investment and the expected shift in mindset. As the position recognised there are
investment arrangements and the relationship with the Water Authority (Colliban) and
investment being made in security, the focus, and the innovation being used in cloud
investment in cloud infrastructure for a strong and growing New Zealand digitaltechnology sector.
investment is needed to address the challenges affecting public service adoption of
investment model slowing transitions to the OPEX cloud consumption model. The
investment to Auckland and other relevant local authorities, includ ing to help support
involve leaving behind everything they know.
involved in relation to the two options for progressing changes to
involved in relation to the two options for progressing changes to the
is a risk the potential benefits of cloud computing will not be realised;
is a significant cultural exhibition of national importance to all New Zealanders. It celebrates and protects New Zealands precious constitutional documents, telling their stories and inspiring New Zealanders.
is a standalone Bill to include Subscription VideoonDemand (SVoD) content within
is after elections have passed. However
is an independent body established under the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act . The Board reviews the classifications of various publications according to the criteria specified in the Act. Partnerships and Commissions Branch Performance teamm provide all secretariat and administrative functions to the Board. The Board does not report to, or receive direction from, the Department.
is an independent statutory body established by legislation. The Commission has specific statutory responsibilities under several statutes. These include the Local Government Act , relating to the provision of information and good practice about local government, as well as the local government reorganisation process, and the Local Electoral Act relating to local government representation arrangements. The Local Government Commission does not report to, or receive direction from, the Department.
is an independent statutory decisionmaking body established under the Gambling Act . The Gambling Commission hears casino licensing applications and appeals on licensing and enforcement decisions made by the Secretary for Internal Affairs in relation to gaming machines and other noncasino gambling activities. The Gambling Commission has the powers of a Commission of Inquiry and does not report to, or receive direction from, the Department.
is available on the Govt.nz website.
is changing and provides unique
is currently captured within New Zeal ands general government net debt foreca sts.
is currently captured within New Zealand s general government net debt foreca sts.
is exempt from the requirement to provide a Regulatory Impact Statement on the
is likely to be lower than in t he past.
is likely to be lower than in the past.
is made available within the Customer Centred Management Solution.
is not able to be appealed.
is not included in future Budget packages, elements of Phase Two of the Cloud First
is now open by appointment only
is reasonably necessary to address the matters that gave rise to this Order;
is the Secretary for Local Government and the Government Chief Digital Officer.
is the first New Zealander to lead Interpols Specialist Group on Crimes Against Children.
is the initial principles would be flexible to allow requirements to become more
is the responsible minister for the Department. The responsible minister oversees the Governments ownership interest in the Department, which encompasses its strategy, capability, integrity and financial performance.
is timely. The proposed refresh will provide greater clarity, guidance and support to
ision LG) Recommendations
issue a compliance order.
issue a private or public warning.
issue has also been discussed with the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet
issue infringement notices
issued by the Government of New Zealand to a refugee to facilitate
issuer, but this w ould no t affect our funding assessment of neutral .
issues and proactive consideration of whether there are other more appropriate cloud
issues would have to be left aside to be dealt with during the broader
it is in the combination of all these activities that we become a responsible, responsive system regulator and steward.
it is sufficient to note that the Ministerial Authorisation authorises NZSIS to provide
it may be linked or confused with, such as data sovereignty, Mori data sovereignty,
it prudent to proceed with that approach .
it prudent to proceed with that approach.
its high levels of extern al debt, its high p rivate sector d ebt, and rising property prices that could
its high levels of external debt, its high private sector debt, and rising proper ty prices that c ould
iv. financial and nonfinancial performance measures, including number of customers and connections and current governance
iwhenua The Department of Internal Affairs
ix. in their decisionmaking processes, the councils (or joint committee, if appointed) are able to consider the collective interests of SINo
j) Clarification on the regulator having discretion to determine that notifiable notification of risks and Already agreed
j) Mortality Review Committees
j) No Party is obliged to provide any of the requested information to be shared under this
j) Processes and procedures exist within parties to ensure that the personal
j) The RegistrarGeneral of Births, Deaths and Marriages (RegistrarGeneral)
j) conduct Mortality Reviews;
j) enable the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of offences; and
j) investigate any matter that may constitute an offence under any legislation it
j) to enable the update of identity and Life Event information for an individual
joint audit of the operation of this DAA at least once per year, in accordance with ajoint
journey has been a vital part of embedding DEI within Te Tari Taiwhenua, reflecting our commitment to creating a workplace where every kaimahi feels valued and empowered. Over the past three years, we have made meaningful progress through initiatives such as bias mitigation training, leadership development, and strengthened cultural competency. These efforts have fostered a more inclusive culture and have positioned us to address critical issues such as pay equity and representation across all levels of the organisation.
journey. Membership often consumes all aspects
jurisdictional risk in relation to Mori data sovereignty, including a preference for
jurisdictional risk may slow down, or stop cloud uptake. Therefore, we seek direction
jurisdictional risk will continue to be needed. Without this guidance, concerns about
jurisdictional risk, there are also significant benefits to consumers from the investment
jurisdictional risk; and strengthen the requirement for agencies to use cloud services
jurisdictional risks when using cloud services. Jurisdictional risk will very rarely be a
jurisdictions that New Zealand agencies use cloud services from, and a less benign
k) A written agreement governing the safeguards for the information must exist between each
k) Processes and procedures exist within parties to ensure that the personal
k) Public Tertiary Institutions
k) Removing the requirement for drinking water safety plans for community drinking water supplies serving Already agreed
k) Veterans Affairs New Zealand
k) agree that National Engineering Design Standards will include provision to allow for variations from the national standard, and to enable alternative solutions, where the developers or contractors and water service providers can agree to adopt alternative processes or approaches; YesNo
k) cease enforcement action against a deceased individual or persons associated with the
k) conduct civil proceedings in relation to the deprivation of an individuals citizenship
k) enable the conduct of civil proceedings.
k) to verify and continue to confirm a persons eligibility to hold a Role that requires
key insights on agency resilience are not lost.
ko t te Tari Taiwhenua he whakarato me te hono i ng iwi, ng hapori me te kwanatanga ki te hanga motu haumaru, tnui, whai mana hoki.
l) agree that the Water Services Authority may review the National Engineering Design Standard at any time but at least every five years; YesNo
languages, reflecting the diversity of those killed, those who survived, and whanau.
large service providers who are offering IaaS, PaaS and SaaS products. Examples:
lasting positive outcomes for whnau.
late February , new councils adopted Mori wards. This means that there will
laws. These apply to repossession agents.
leading to adverse outcomes.
leads the Departments direct interface with New Zealand communities by providing information, resources and advice to communities and the administration of grant funding.
leadup to the longterm plan.
learn about their genetic origins
leave for other industries for higher pay and better skill recognition.
led by the New Zealand Police. This agreement enables the sharing of information and intelligence for the purpose of reducing gangrelated harms to individuals and New Zealand society generally. This agreement came into effect on January .
legacy and onpremise environments, cloud users can pursue outcomes with speed,
legal environment, and at least every five years after that.
legislation (or secondary legislation made under the legislation);
legislation in relation to Taumata Arowais roles and responsibilities
legislation or the relevant government policies applying to that Party.
legislation to oversee or advise on the operation of the
legislation, and other technical improvements as part of an omnibus Bill.
legislative requirements or is intended to temporarily enable alternative methods
legitimate need to access DA Information in order to carry out any of
lending to different council s may vary slightly, but we believe this is unli kely to affect the RAC
levels of formal education. Despite these factors,
leveraged its cloud capabilities during COVID and adapted its use
liabil ity mismatche s without mitigating factors, LGFAs d ominant market position wane s, access
liability and the remainder by instalment arrangement; or
liability mismatches without mitigating factors, LGFAs dominant m arket position wanes, ac cess
libraries, services, and tools supported by the provider. The consumer does not
likelihoo d of support Moderate ly High
likelihood of LGFA receiv ing extr aordinary sup port from the sovereign in a stress scenario is
likelihood of LGFA receivi ng e xtraordinary support from the sove reign in a stress scenario is
likelihood of support fro m the New Ze alan d government .
likelihood of support High
likelihood of support Moderat ely High
likelihood of support Moderately Hig h
likelihood of support Moderately High
likelihood of support Very High
likely be replaced by future reforms
likely be too late to address this breach. Cabinet Office advises that the Cabinet
limit the financial exposure and fiscal cost to GSFA and the Crown caused by overpayment of entitlements to deceased members.
limit the financial exposure and fiscal cost to NPF and the Crown caused by overpayment of entitlements to deceased members.
limited control of select networking components (e.g., host firewalls).
limited specialist resources in areas of high demand,
limited. It can make minor changes to how Mori wards are proposed to be
line with our forecas ts and ensure liquidity coverage remains adequate to cov er its lar ge
line with our forecasts an d en sure liquidity coverage remains ade quate to cover its large
liquidity cove rage rat io to weaken or if operating def icits become entrenche d. This c ould occur
liquidity coverag e. This could indicate the council has less flexibilit y wi thin its budget than we
liquidity coverage . This could indicate the counc il has less flexibility within its budget than we
live in areas of high deprivation, family harm, and
living in or willing to relocate to Wellington.
local authorities in the period between the event and their planning window in the
local authority and councilcontrolled organisation that operate drinking water
local authority drinking water supplies to be authorised by November
local council s. The scenario you provided is confi ned to the Group H and G WSEs when
local elections is attached as Appendix A .
local government elections. A full list of councils that will have Mori wards in the
local government sector representatives, including from Auckland Council, to support
local government. Submissions on the Amendment Act suggest that some individuals
located from Kaitaia to Invercargill.
location, and puts in place security protections to ensure there is no
lockdowns due to a modern workplace environment.
lockdowns, in particular the extended lockdowns in Auckland and Northland. It will assess whether key decisions struck a reasonable balance between public health goals and social and economic disruption such as health and
long term change and impact a cultural shift with
long term positive changes from within.Futures
longterm plan by June ;
longterm plan every three years, in consultation with their communities. They
long. The formation of chlorate can be prevented by operators understanding the conditions
loss of citizenship by, or to the citizenship status of, any person and does not
lower cost of debt relative to scenario .
lower than expected. For example, only . percent of public service systems are
lwi Organisation and Any organisation listed in the Schedule of the Electoral (lwi Organisation
m) Any New Zealand Agency that is a member of a Class of Agencies specified in clause and
m) Charities, Registered New Zealand Companies, Partnerships, Registered Limited Partnerships,
m) agree that Crown Infrastructure Partners should undertake a technical review of any draft National Engineering Design Standards before they are consulted on; YesNo
m) to cancel a Travel Document upon the death of the holder;
made by Cabinet. I also consider that this Order is consistent with the purposes
mailing list or a list used for marketing purposes.
maintain official records in the form of a register.
maintenance of the information sharing agreement.
major weakness for the WSE and constraints its financial risk profile.
make a real difference for your community and New Zealand
make autonomous business dec isions. The Crown will provide a government policy
make the required resources available.
makes sure accredited providers consistently meet the laws, rules and regulations of the Trust Framework
making records of each sweep
making representatives available for further dialogue, to pursue the projects and activities
making urgent decisions concerning recovery.
man aged i ts new financial positi on.
man aged i ts new financial position.
man aged its new financ ial position.
mana gem ent will make these decisions independently . The Governor s may r emo ve an
mana whenua in decisionmaking, complementary to the roles of elected Mori ward
manage customer demand and support the governments response
manage flood mitigation infrastructure.
manage or control the underlying cloud infrastructure including network, servers,
manage other considerations and risks, including:
management and governance assessment would change from very strong .
management tools make it easier and faster to patch and update systems, and to
manages the accreditation mark for the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework.
managing Crownowned Ministerial residences including Premier House (the official residence of the Prime Minister)
managing Ministerial entitlements in accordance with relevant legislation (See:
mandate includes public service agencies as defined in section of the Public Service Act , and entities
mandate was considered useful in providing a clear signal discouraging onpremise
mandate, among other things, supports and enables the GCDO to drive strategically
many of our Adobe PDF and Microsoft Word documents may not be fully accessible to screen reader software (See:
margins would be somewhat weaker than under the current base case . We forecast the
matters before recommending the making of an Order in Council. I am satisfied:
maximum al lowable revenue under a regulatory building block framework similar to
may be by email) to the RegistrarGeneral and DIA. If the contact for the RegistrarGeneral or DIA is
may create barriers with learning and concentration.
may exist on or off premises.
may not be sufficient to clearly identify the correct individual, so having this new information
may occur, that party must advise the Chief Security Officer at DIA who may undertake
may only last years, then be replaced by a system developed through
may provide to DIA) and under the Privacy Act (which may limit the release
me te hono i ng iwi, ng hapori me
mea n these local counc ils will h ave limited interference with the WSE . Under t he
measure it against other regulatory measures, for example amendments
measured service), three service models (Software as a Service (SaaS), Platform as
measuring and publicising council performance, limiting council expenditure on certain activities, strengthening the connection between communities and councils through effective representation, and updating the legislative framework within which councils operate. I intend for the Bill to be introduced in June and enacted in late , so it comes into force soon after next years local government elections. I intend to return to Cabinet in Quarter , of seeking Cabinet approval for a second tranche of drafting instructions for this Bill, after completing further policy development. Other initiatives from the programme will be addressed in a second bill in the next term of Parliament and I will report to Cabinet on the progress of these initiatives in due course. Proposals for the first Local Government System Improvements bill
mechanism for binding polls to be held on Mori wards in February . This change
mechanism for contact, in accordance with IRs email policy.
mechanism for councils to establish Mori wards, and other local electoral changes to
mechanism utilised. Possible transfer options, depending on the circumstance, are likely to include:
mechanisms for councils to establish Mori wards CABMIN;
media content and online safety
media regulatory regime contained in Appendix A; and At your convenience
media regulatory regime only.
meet their obligations under the Public Records Act, including directing
meetings between industry and government, or those soon to be set updW
member of staff will not be able to view any information that is not relevant to the
member processing the application will only be shown the personal information necessary
members as t here will be no ISP.
members has resulted in a more pronounced
members of New Zealand Adult
members of the public may appeal or
members, gang whnau and their
members. This amplifies existing hardship
membership and growth, to addressing
membership. An indepth understanding
mental health and better wellbeing outcomes.
mentalhealth.inquiry.govt.nz
met if we cannot start work immediately in
methamphetamine use or violence, and focus on
million (representing just over a third of the total cost) is reprioritised from within Vote
minimum reasonable costs to suppliers. This will continue to be explored further by
minimum cost is a key legislative objective for Taumata Arowai in developing and
mistakenly identified as being dead, it can be very difficult for that person to convince other
mitigated if additional resource was obtained
model had been people in a room with a whiteboard. By contrast,
modular requirements for training, skills, and experience (to reflect size,
monitor the performance and effectiveness of the accreditation regime
monitoring and data protection. The policy refresh has identified three areas of cloud
monitoring the gambling room through regular sweeps
monitoring the performance and effectiveness of the trust framework
months after the signature .
more Organisations to receive information about deaths.
more public input is needed to develop options. My officials have been working with
most likely occur if the expected operating efficiency savings are not realized in the manner as
motorcycle based and other
moved and is now appointment only
movement of data onshore.
multiagency, community led approach
multiple allofgovernment commercial options currently available to agencies for this.
multiple properties by pipeline) were considerably lower, with of these suppliers
murray.willslivertonsecurity.com
must be consulted on with the RegistrarGeneral and the Office of the Privacy Commissioner
must be in writing and signed by the Chief Executive of DIA and the RegistrarGeneral Births,
must consider these views when it
must follow when considering the establishment of Mori wards, so most councils
my proposed funding approach will have some impact on functions I am comfortable
n) Where a Party discloses information under this Agreement to that Partys agent appropriate
n) agree that the Water Services Authority must consult with the public, industry bodies, the economic regulator and other relevant infrastructure agencies when developing or reviewing review the National Engineering Design Standards; YesNo
n) to identify applicants who have died while their application for a product or service is
name and of birth) the case will be manually checked by IR to confirm
name changes, citizenship and some other areas of personal information, and holding the
named as a Party in the respective schedule to this Agreement in accordance with section
nationality of that person.
natural hazard information in Land Information Memorandums
navigate the website using a screen reader including the most recent versions of JAWS, NVDA and VoiceOver.
navigate the website using just a keyboard, switch, or speech recognition software
necessary in the circumstances to allow an individual to make a complaint about an
necessary or desirable for meeting the purpose of the SWERL Act set out in
necessary to confirm the customers identity and eligibility in addition to personal
necessary. Both parties shall ensure that reasonable assistance is provided to the
necessityjustification for access; and
need to be funded through reprioritisation of existing baselines or be reconsidered;
need to be reframed to change
need to be supported by the Minister of Broadcasting, Communications, and Digital
needed as a response to this recommendation, but I have explained the
needed to enable economic growth and development.
needed, and at least every five years;
negotiate a specific outcome
negotiation or updating information held on the Rs primary system.
network infrastructure and water quality, and (where relevant) unlock housing growth.
network should have. The provisions are framed to allow a flexible approach to
networks meet necessary high standards to protect public health
networks should have to help ensure the safe operation of drinking water and wastewater
networks, and other fundamental computing resources where the consumer can
networks. The Act provides discretion about how the framework should be designed and delivered.
new funding will count against the between budget contingency.
new infringement offences to support compliance with the new requirements.
new service will be completed by June , with implementation to follow.
new tool and accompanying guidance will also support agencies to understand and
nicole.braunconfide.co.nz
nine years after the commencement . This longer timeframe would allow for
no binding polls on general wards have
nondisclosure directions
nor tested it adequately, because they did not understand the importance of chlorine as a
normally requires would be inconsistent with the purposes of the SWERL Act.
not be construed to create a partnership, joint venture, agency, or employment
not fit for purpose); against
not held longer than required.
not jointly developing software and not creating joint intellectual property under this MoU.
not ownership, of Inland Revenue for a fixed period of time by prior agreement.
not realized in the manner as planned which could le ad to lower EBITD A and cash flows
not reflect the Te Ao Mori concept of collective identity.
not review, modify or su rveil thi s evaluation. Subseque nt information or changes to the
not tell tracers everywhere they have been (wilful deception); and accurate contact details for close contacts are unavailable. The degree to which contact tracing and the isolation of potentially infected close contacts helps break a chain of transmission depends on the time elapsed between the index case being infected and the isolation of contacts. The key levers to speeding this up are based on: The time elapsed before someone is tested. The time to return a test result. The time taken to complete contact tracing. For technology to augment and accelerate manual contact tracing, it needs to more rapidly identify close contacts (known and unknown) and provide contact tracers with contact details as fast as practicable. Technology may also enable systems to automatically message probable close contacts, instructing them to selfisolate while awaiting contact from contact tracers. .. Manual contact tracing cannot stop COVID Ferretti et al determined that controlling the epidemic by manual contact tracing is infeasible. This is reinforced by a number of other modelling studies (Plank ; Hinch, ; Vaithianathan ) and the realities of countries around the world opting for economically crippling lockdowns, even those with more mature contact tracing systems public health capacity and pandemic preparedness than New Zealand. A strategy that relies solely on New Zealands ability to rapidly test and trace, absent enforced social distancing is simply not a credible strategy to prevent the spread of the virus. Between and of infections are understood to occur before symptom onset and inefficiencies in the manual contact tracing system result from a number of delays from the onset of symptoms: A delay from the onset of symptoms to access to a test ( days). A delay from access to a test to receiving test results ( days). A delay from notification of positive test to informing close contacts ( days). A delay from notification to isolate to full isolation ( day). The combined impact of these delays mean that the secondary cases have already both become infectious and, in most cases, finished their virus shedding cycle before isolation.
not working well for many, as there are significant barriers to participation including:
notice (which may be by email) to all other parties.
notice to the other party. Upon termination or expiry of this MoU, sections VII (Communicationsand public announcements), IX (Confidentiality), XVI.c (Exclusion of implied terms and
noticed more personal growth and achievement
notification to a suspect would be likely to prejudice the investigation or prosecution of the
notification to a suspect would likely prejudice the investigation of prosecution of an alleged
notified by SMS instantly and asked to selfisolate. Accelerate the speed with which venues that may be vectors of transmission are identified. Users will QR code scan into venues, and public health authorities will be able to retrieve attendee lists if a patron tests positive. We expect some additional venues and individuals to be identified through this process but cannot quantify. Further functional goal examples can be found in the appendices of this document.
notify the relevant Partys Security Officer as soon as possible.
notify them about their entitlement to hold a New Zealand Passport.
notwithstanding the termination of this Agreement.
number of gaming machines.
number of technical amendments to the Water Services Act.
o A description of the organisational delivery arrangements
o A description of the water services provided for in the Plan
o AWS working, as relevant, with New Ze aland Qualifications Authority (NZQA),
o An assessment of current issues, constraints and risks to achieving financially sustainable delivery to regulated quality standards
o An assessment of the current condition of water services asset
o Asset management, including for maintenance and renewal, upgrades to achieve regulated quality standards, and investments
o Funding and pricing, including for proposed user charges, borrowing and approaches to debt management including proposals
o Information on the current costs and methods of funding water services
o Organisational delivery model, including any proposed arrangements for joint approaches with other councils.
o a twiceyearly dialogue between AWS and relevant New Zealand government
o certification and accreditation processe s and regulatory changes relevant to
o commercial frameworks for modernizing public cloud adoption in support of
o cooperating on activities to map cloud training to the Skills Framework for theInformation Age (SFIA) framework, as part of the wider SFIA implementation
o exploring how AWS training initiatives, such as the AWS reStart and local
o identifying how existing mechanisms, such as credit recognition and transfer
o identifying technology tools that are designed to enable learners to navigate
o increasing industrygovernment cooperation on the promotion and roll out oftraining for skills such as core digital literacy and cybersecurity capability as,
o other activities relevant to cloud services
o supporting efforts to strengthen the technology sector through greaterdiversity, by increasing awareness and participation of thoseunderrepresented in cloud training and upskilling initiatives, such as women,DW
o supporting public sector skills and capability to use cloud technology throughtraining (including access to AWS free Skills Builder initiatives) as well as the
o) DIA will consult with the Office of the Privacy Commissioner regarding proposed operating
o) agree that the Water Services Authority can develop accreditation criteria and appoint product certification bodies, who may include water services providers and industry providers; YesNo
o) to provide information to enable the registration or correction of Life Event records;
object to its final proposal on limited
objections against councils representation reviews. Its role about Mori wards is
objections to a councils decision to establish new general wards.
objectives and NZ Government Priorities; the necessity and proportionality of sharing
objectives to achieve the financially sustainable delivery of its water services to regulated quality standards. The Plan should include
obligations and entitlements, and requiring compliance with those
obligations andor their contact information does not appear to be upto
obligations recognised by New Zealand law.
obligations under this Agreement, the performance of that Partys obligations shall
obligations without compromising their recovery work from severe weather
obligations, or interests of any specific individual.
observed in age ies better placed for remote working during COVID lockdowns
obtained under this Agreement to other Organisations or any other third party including
obtaining and corroborating the biographical or familial details of persons
occurring by, to, and within the community and ensures we can
of . million. The second extension to July (agreed in April ) was
of . as water related operating revenu es are higher th an water related operating
of Agencies believes that such a review is necessary.
of FFOdebt to be around over the next few years, howeve r, will decline towards as it
of FFOdebt to be around over the next few years, ho wever, will decline towards as it
of FFOdebt to be around over the next few years, however, will decline towards as it
of Identity or a New Zealand Refugee Travel Document) issued by or on
of Te Tiriti o Waitangithe Treaty of Waitangi, improving the ability for Mori to make
of an individuals life including family, social networks,
of an inquiry may include:
of belonging and acceptance for those
of civil proceedings including judicial review; and
of cloud services. We are proposing to update how agencies manage jurisdictional
of cloud, and appropriate protection of Mori data determined by tikanga and kawa
of confidentiality by one of the parties, provided that information that is rumoured or
of cultural connectivity and identity,
of digital tools to continue core business and connect remotely in new
of dollars of announced investments in the New Zealand cloud ecosystem, this new
of electors responding in favour of the Bill in a binding referendum. This means the Bill would remain live even if it fails to receive the percent support from the House. The commencement clause could expire in a certain time period, if a referendum has not been held (for exam ple it could be sunsetted in five years).
of family, brotherhood, status, and belonging and acceptance
of gang communities, as well as the growth of
of gangs in the wider whnau, peer groups, and community.
of individuals and Organisations.
of influence and c ontrol over the WSE th an under scenario .
of information relating to gang harm.
of internal Affairs within three years This DAA can also be reviewed or amended (in
of key regional water polic ies.
of legislative compliance in a situation where a declared emergency has made
of neglect, and physical and emotional abuse, and
of personal information, particularly in an employment investigation situation).
of providing cloud training for , people in New Zealand over a fiveyear
of public concern, following consideration of over , public submissions.
of services than those available from the IaaS panel agreements and there are
of sho rtterm paper , prefunding strat egy and bank facilities. We assume future debt
of solid baseline data for monitoring and reporting, and ongoing work to form an
of specified classes, with a view to reducing the numbers of deaths of
of the Armed Forces, on service overseas; or
of the Ministerial response to the petition, after the response has been
of the Royal Commission have been constructed around outstanding matters
of the information that go beyond the core purposes recorded in the primary statute under
of the specific New Zealand Agencies contained within each Class of Agencies are specified in the
of the stigma and barriers these communities regularly face
of these environments is needed.
of whenua (our connection to land
officials will consider as the legislation is being developed .
officials, including seeking legal advice to ensure the best approach is incorporated
on LGFA if we were to do the same for New Zeala nd.
on LGFA if we were to do the same for New Zealand.
on Mori wards. The repeal of the poll
on a specific activity to the extent they consider helpful and practicable.
on enabling a better future.
on establishing general wards. However
on how the council mana ged its new fina ncial posit ion.
on how the council managed its new financial positi on.
on how the council managed its new financial position.
on inflation, debt, and business activity.
on people already dealing with complex issues following the death;
on the impact of sc enario on . We assum e these
on the personal information received from MFAT:
on the proposed Order before I can recommend that it is made.
on the second stage of legislative changes to Mori ward processes.
ondemand content remains unregulated until the review;
once Cabinet decisions have been made to support public consultation.
one of more of the following:
one of the lockdowns, all OT staff were able to work from home.
one of the most significant brain developments.
one of the purposes set out in clause of this DAA.
one or more of the purposes specified in clause . (b) to (h), (k), and (I).
one place, and to act as a crosscheck on which, if any, matters require further
operat ing rev enues betwe en and under s cenario comp ared to . under the
operate procedures and tests for TF providers to demonstrate their compliance with the TF rules and the regulations
operated by authorised persons within nine years after the commencement
operated properly. Currently there are no requirements for what training, skills, or
operating balance to av erage . of o perati ng revenue s from compared to the
operating expenditure . Similarly, we exp ect aftercapital ac count deficit s to be . of t otal
operating re venue offset s the council s lower debt . Interest expenses would average about
operating reve nues in and interes t expenses of . from would be the same
operating reven ues are much higher than water related oper ating expendit ure. In con trast, we
operating revenue s from compared to the current level of . as water related
operating systems, or storage. However, the consumer has control over the deployed
operating the Royal Commission during the period from July to November
operation of this programme in accordance with this Agreement and the
operationburnham.inquiry.govt.nz
operations, assets, revenue, expenditure, pricing and capital. This process will not be a regulatory information gathering exercise
opportunities and support for those within gang communities to
opportunities for Mori to stand for election to local government and raise issues on
opportunities to support prosocial
opportunities under the Digital Boost initiative and Digital Boost Alliance.
opportunities, such as in renewable energy and water use, including:
opportunity for broader work. Other opportunities to provide a more strategic role for
opportunity for the council to reconsider
opportunity to review the implementation of the Stage changes by asking about how
or Cabinet material and any public service departmental advice use this copyright statement
or Citizenship Act, however access to DA Information via this DA is to be preferred
or any Act or Regulation.
or are victims of negative behaviours, they may be
or be led by, our gang communities and the
or call Coastguard Radio on VHF channel
or call to book an appointment.
or drive th e strategy or key budgetary decisions .
or email us if you have any questions at
or free phone .
or individual interagency lines of effort.
or individual interagency lines of effort.The National Gang
or infrastructure CABMIN. This extension of GCDOs mandate to on
or made under a contract or agreement.
or more of the purposes specified in clause . (b) to (i), (k), and (I)
or order of a government agency with jurisdiction over it, provided that party gives the
or pol itica l objectives of the Crown .
or regulating its proceedings; and
or the provision of an Identity Service.
order. For the avoidance of doubt, this does not prevent a Party that has their
organisational information as the verified bank account number, NZBN or IRD number of a business.
organisations that operate drinking water supplies to be
organisations to understand and manage the environmental impact from
organising and coordinating guest of government visits, state and ministerial functions, and national commemorative events such as ANZAC Day (See:
organization, or some combination of them. It exists on the premises of the cloud
oriented around customer service while supporting the governments
othe r factors c hange, the rating implications could also change. You understand and agree that
other Maori and Other Maori Organisation) Regulations .
other Parties to this Agreement except as required by law or in order to comply with a court
other elections are run at the same time as the local government elections and on the same ballot paper.
other for any purpose or has the authority to bind the other.
other functions CABMIN refers. The reprioritisation of the total costs across
other functions conferred on the board by the Act or Minister.
other possible sources of debt finance, is likely to be broadly similar . As such , there is no change
other relevant authority.
other than MFAT for the purpose specified in clause . (a).
others (Green Brain). However, when youth witness
otherwise noted.DMS
otherwise than by descent).
our Inclusion and Diversity strategy, is aligned with our principles (mtpono) and reflects the five priority areas of Papa Pounamu a comprehensive programme of work led by Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission. We are committed to delivering and implementing this strategy alongside our Kia Toipoto Closing Gender, Mori, Pacific, and Ethnic Pay Gaps Action Plan. By November , we will publish a Diversity and Inclusion plan on our website that captures our approach to inclusion and diversity and Kia Toipoto.
our forec asts, drivin g debt and inte rest ex penses higher. This would reduce the governments
our forecasts improving t he coun cils debt burden and liquidity coverage improved.
our forecasts improving the coun cils debt burden and liquidity c overage impr oved.
our forecasts, driving debt and inte rest expenses higher. This wo uld reduce the g overnme nts
our gang communities strengthens our understanding of the harm
our organisational structure
our purpose and principles
our vie w of financial management .
out a requirement for all local authorities and councilcontrolled
out in subpart of Part of the Privacy Act are exempted (by the Order in Council) as follows:
out of deprivation, causing some to engage
outbreak or indeed with any numbers of cases continually coming across the border, without border quarantines or nationwide social restrictions (e.g. full or partial lockdowns). .. The promise of digital contact tracing Many countries are investigating and deploying technology solutions to augment and accelerate manual contact tracing. For the purposes of this paper, digital contact tracing refers to a smartphone app or device that is able to detect and record close contacts through detecting the corresponding app or device of the close contact using Bluetooth LE technology. Discussion of other possible means to locate people and their close contacts (GPS, cell towers, WiFi networks, etc) are not in scope of this paper, but generally considered not particularly effective in the New Zealand context. Digital contact tracing technology can accelerate contact tracing because a list of close contacts and their contact details can be made available immediately following a positive test result. This data can be used to notify potentially exposed persons immediately (with a text message) and to make the job of manual contact tracers much faster, more efficient and scalable. Presently, close contacts only consist of those persons that the interviewee is able (and willing) to recall. Our own trials, and wider literature (see section on Health Case, later in this document), shows significant inaccuracies in the recall of encounters, including their nature (touch or no touch) and duration. Three technology approaches, all based on Bluetooth LE technology, are emerging: Apps built on top of the Apple Google Exposure Notification API. Apps that are custombuilt, typically by Governments, such as Singapores TraceTogether. Dedicated hardware devices: CovidCard . By far the most important metric is the level of compliant adoption of any of these technologies. This is covered separately further in this document. Compliant adoption is defined as a user having the technology on their person and operating as designed. There are many barriers to compliant use, particularly with apps. Apps dont work if Bluetooth is disabled (by the user or the operating system to conserve battery) or if the app is not loaded by the user following a restart of their phone, for example. The clinical definition of which (in New Zealand) is defined as being within metres for minutes.
outcomes by making these amendments .
outcomes for their families, some individuals
outcomes, and community empowerment.
outcomes, and community empowerment. An Aotearoa
outlined in the LEG Bid, we would need a decision on your preferred approach as soon
outside of the p roposed water r eforms.
outstanding debt or recall student loans in full.
outstanding student loan and child support debt.
overall work andor specific project(s) the parties undertake, subject to section IX(Confidentiality). The purpose of these communic ations is to describe, share and amplify the
overseas to provide information and education enabling them to continue to
own names. Thes e borrowin gs will be from capital and financial market s, and not the
owned, managed, and operated by a business, academic, or government
owning, buying, or maintaining physical data centres and servers. Compared to
p) agree that the Water Services Authority will maintain a register of product certification bodies and product certificates; YesNo
p) to support the prevention, detection, investigation and the prosecution of offences,
p. Farriers wier provided advice that diseconomies of scale are unlikely to be a consideration at the scale of entities the Government is considering
pages cannot be zoomed in to without requiring horizontal scrolling to see all of the content
paper and other relevant papers on the Departments website, subject to
paper for the Local Government Water Services (Transitional Provisions) Bill (Bill ) at
paper seeks approval of my response to the Petitions Committees
paper. Work undertaken as a result of decisions made will be designed to be
paperspast.natlib.govt.nz
parents who are in default of their obligations, and make contact with them. This
part of the broader reforms being applied consistently, and aligned
part of the broader review only Policy
part of their representation reviews, do not have this barrier to introducing Mori
part to the extension and in part to unforeseen andor higher costs. Those costs
participating councils; iii.
parties will meet in good faith to resolve the dispute or difference as quickly as possible.
partners, children, whnau and the wider community around them.
partnership with Statistics NZ and the Data Iwi Leaders Group (DILG) to consider
partnership with Te Khui Raraunga (representing the Data Iwi Leaders Group) on
party and its affiliates make no representations or warranties of any kind, whether express,
party to be utilised by a party in accordance with and for the purposes of this
passports under issue status.
patch wearing gangs. In recent
patterns of violence and abuse will persist.
peer groups seeking social connection.
people outside their own district; )Jv,, J f( ,fl
peoples thinking about how they could use their tools differently,
per se, but will include collection of information that will be relevant for future regulatory purposes;
percentage by gross value is .. Responses of NA (nonserver hardware), TBC or nil response are
performance and compliance by the water corporations with a set of sustainability
performing any public function on behalf of the overseas
perpetrators of harm in the community. Socioeconomic inequalities
perpetuated a cycle of intergenerational harm
personal details about an individual such as their name, birth , qualifications or address
personal entitlement or other thing.
personal information and expected Adverse Actions
personal information relied on.
personal information to a party in accordance with and for the purposes of this
personal information; human rights obligations; and whether the sharing is otherwise
phone, email or post IR will not write to the individual advising them that IR
piece of information supplied by DIA that will be provided by IR back to
pikeriver.royalcommission.govt.nz
plan for the period ;
plan) Order (the Order) is necessary or desirable for or more purposes of the
plan, make positive decisions, and empathise with
planned expenditure within specified criteria regarding onpremise infrastructure,
planned which could lead to lower EBITDA and cash flows compar ed to our expectations. In
planned which could lead to lower EBITDA and cash flows compared to our expectations. In
platform was scaled back down to users.
plumbers, and different workforces for example in the transport and electricity
policies. This has the potential to provide mutual benefits to both Iwi and Mori and
policy preference that agencies use onshore cloud services for storing and creating
policy proposals for this Order were also on the Departments website
policy will also be disseminated via other channels, such as digital.govt.nz and the
polls to be demanded and held. However, now that there are no more binding polls on
population groups. However, the benefits it confers to public services are expected to
population in their districts, or because Mori wards are not supported by local mana
portrayed within media but little focus highlights
position the public service to deliver for communities now and in the future.
position, driven by the unique nature of the companys assets. We believe that i t would be
positive outcomes for their families, particularly
possible for these changes to be in place before the local elections, as this means
possible with the process for establishing general wards and constituencies CAB
posture without weak points.
potential concerns and tools for mitigation.
potential options for progressing changes to the media regulatory regime. Option one
potential to contribute to achieving the carbon reduction aims of the Carbon Neutral
potentially control by the Crown under this scenari o . In our vie w, the Crown would
power is reactive and may not be sufficiently expedient to prevent harm
predominantly part of the standards setting approach , with the appropriate balance to be taken between
preferences.Cloud Services
premise infrastructure investment for the next budgetfinancial year (). The
premise investment aligns with this direction, and the current mandate for agencies
prepared under the Severe Weather Emergency Recovery Legislation Act
prescriptive as work in this area progresses. Methodologies to measure
present ri sks to the stability of its financial system.
present risks to the sta bility of its fina ncial system.
presented by individuals with access to sensitive or classified information;
pressur e, especially if the y mate rialized .
preventing, detecting and responding to risks to national security..
preventing, investigating and responding to regulatory noncompliance (e.g. breaches of the Gambling Act , the Unsolicited Electronic Messages Act and the AntiMoney Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism Act ).
prevention, detection, investigation or the prosecution of a crime, where advance
prevention, detection, investigation or the prosecution of the offence, and advance
previously used. The experience boosted connection and challenged
pricing prin ciples and investment decisions.
principles in the public sectors use of cloud;
principles to support agencies to adopt cloud technologies in sustainable ways
principles to support agencies to adopt cloud technologies in sustainable ways through their
principles, and managing the Victorian Water Register of all waterrelated entitlements.
privacy of individuals, DIA will conduct regular internal first line assurance and an
problems, typically in a nonclinical environment. This should not be confused with brief clinical interventions; for example, via telephone. During this period, the Ministry intends to add residential care and peer support to the service mix with pilot services (see Section . ). The Ministry is committed to improving access to services for all people adversely affected by gambling. Services and activities designed to identify people who are experiencing harm are crucial in providing early prevention and intervention treatment. This approach enables the Ministry to work actively to minimise the impact harmful gambling has on individuals, their families and whnau and others. Many people of all ethnicities will access mainstream services rather than culturally specific services. Given the long standing inequities Mori have experienced, and the Crown s responsibilities under Te Tiriti o Waitangi, the Ministry will consider how it can ensure tha t mainstream services go beyond cultural competence, and actively embed te ao Mori concepts into their clinical interventions. In addition, the Ministry notes that submissions called for more culturally accessible services. The Ministry intends to continue to work with dedicated Mori, Pacific and Asian service providers and consumer networks to explore ways to provide culturally appropriate interventions and support for those population groups. The Ministry expects all services to be clinically safe and effective. The Ministry considers it appropriate to pilot psychosocial interventions and support to address areas highlighted by the needs assessment and to test new service models: for example, to develop pilot services in areas that currently have limited access, and to explore innovation within those services. Data collection and reporting The Ministry largely carries out data collection and reporting internally. The small sum specifically budgeted each year for collecti ng and reporting on data allows for an external provider to address data collection issues that require institutional knowledge and to make small technical adjustments, if required. As of , intervention service providers are required to record and report clients National Health Index (NHI) numbers to the Ministry. These identifiers allow individual patients to be positively and uniquely identified for the purposes of treatment and care and for maintaining medical records. This will also help provide better data about services provided, treatment efficacy and outcomes. Workforce development (intervention) Workforce development will continue to be an important component to support psychosocial intervention services. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
procedures and any subsequent changes.
proceedings including judicial review.
process before any personal information is accepted as accurate.
process before consultation takes place with industry and consumers. This
process for councils to make these
process optimally. In one case an operator completely bypassed part of the process that
process that must be followed, giving councils information they need to make
process whereby IR encrypts and stores personal information in a secure
process which will include targeted engagement with key organisations, including iwi
process, which is expected to be implemented based on recovery of costs of
process. MAV exceedances indicate a failure of an operator to operate the coagulation
processes and procedures in p lace that enable effective governance, monitorin g and
processes arising from consultation, a package of minor and technical amendments to
processes for councils to consider Mori and general wards.
processes, closedown activities, printing, and translation services; as well as .
processing, storage, access and disposal within NZSIS systems remains the sole
produce a year longterm plan that meets statutory obligations;
produce the annual research publication, the Turnbull Library record.
productivityUsers benefit from significant efficiency through economies of scale,
professionalisation and raised status of the water services sector and has the potential to
professionalise the sector, and their ability to attract and retain the right capability the
profile to be weakening. This coul d occur if, for instance, we were to ob serve larger asse t
profile to be weakening. This could oc cur if, for instance, we were to o bserve l arger asset
programme already underway under the ITP, including work alreadyt
programme seeks to control rates rises and I am looking broadly at options in four areas: decision making; systems and processes; funding and financing; and transparency and accountability. This paper updates you on the programme and describes my immediate next step, which is to introduce an omnibus bill that will lay the foundations for an improved local government system. I seek Cabinets agreement for me to issue drafting instructions for a Local Government System Improvements bill (the Bill) that will: . refocus the purpose of local government and reinstate a list of core services in the Local Government Act ; . improve council performance measurement and reporting standards so that ratepayers can more easily access consistent, comparable information; . improve systems for managing conflict between elected members, by enabling a standardised code of conduct to be issued; and . provide regulatory relief to councils and modernise outdated law. It is my intention for the Bill to be introduced in June and enacted in late , not long after the local elections. There is provision in the Legislation Programme for this Bill (Category priority). Policy development for other system improvements is continuing and I will report back to Cabinet in Quarter of seeking policy approval for a second tranche of measures for inclusion in the Bill. Background: Getting councils back to basics
programme to deliver an initial set of regulation s for the framewor k.
progress to adult gangs. Youth gangs
progressed alongside other minor and technical amendments to the local electoral
progressed earlier this year through the Local Electoral (Mori Wards and Mori
progressing changes to the media regulatory regime.
project at current levels given the priority of the project in line with your Letter of
promoting good system governance.
prompted us to review our position on jurisdictional risk, including major hyperscale
proposal for at least month. The council
proposals (e.g. guidance) outlined in the refreshed Policy will be managed out of
propose that we wait until to take any funding proposals to Cabinet Committees
proposed changes to New Zealands media regulatory regime. On December
proposed conclusions. Please no te th e conc lusion s provided herein are based on assumptions
proposed solution to assess its effectiveness to address the problem or to
proposed to address remaining differences between the Mori wards process
prosecute the offence or report any suspected offence to the New Zealand Police or other
prosecutions and dog destruction orders under the Dog Control Act from the Ministry of Justice
protected by sections of the BDMRR Act.
protected by sections to of that Act.
protection of national security);
provide a visible presence around the Lake
provide access and research advice for the Turnbull Library collections
provide checks on a councils decisions, ensuring that they are not broader than
provide confidence in physical and personnel security posture, as well as mitigate
provide customer centred Identity Services.
provide education and guidance
provide leadership across strategic issues and system challenges that councils face, connecting councils, government agencies, and key stakeholders.
provide national security advice (I. e. protective security services, advice and
provide opportunities for community
provide personal information that the RegistrarGeneral or DIA already holds;
provide public service agencies with jurisdictional risk advice by August
provide regular reporting on progress and support agency transition to cloud;
provide the guidance and tools to move to cloud appropriately, securely and
provided by DIA. DIAs responsibilities include the registration of births, deaths, marriages,
provided in the Cloud Computing Information Security and Privacy Considerations
provided under this Agreement, the identifying Party will notify DIAs Chief Security Officer as
provider and the regulatory regime. We also met with the contract provider of water
providers (if required) to develop an enduring and wellsupported scheme.
providers building onshore capabilities in New Zealand, legal changes in some
providers have announced plans to create onshore cloud infrastructure. With billions
providers on a casebycase basis will continue for others if required.
providers would provide insights into any
provides a reference for our leadership role in a whole of government context, and
provides a wide range of useful services, whoever you are. These are just some of what we offer:
provides direction, approval and assurance of the health and performance of the Departments portfolio management investment system. This is achieved by regularly reviewing project and programme business cases and investment decisions, and related performance matters.
provides direction, approval and assurance of the organisations strategy and delivery through oversight of its financial sustainability and organisational performance. This is achieved by regularly monitoring and reporting on the Departments financial position, considering budget strategies and management of the integrated planning approach.
provides direction, approval and assurance on the effectiveness of the risk and assurance system, culture, and practice that serves to keep the business, people and their work safe. This is achieved by regularly monitoring internal and external assurance and audit reports and considering key organisational risk management systems and strategies.
providin g indicative rating opinions on the scenarios present ed; i t is no t endorsing or advocating
providing VIP Transport services to Ministers and others including the Leader of the Opposition, senior Judiciary, and dignitaries; and managing the Crown fleet, including Ministerial selfdrive vehicles
providing a bank deposit slip (a scanned copy will be fine), or
providing advice on approach and report creation
providing advice to the Government to help them to decide if an inquiry is necessary
providing from baselines to the Royal Commission at the time of the extension in July
providing incentives to comply with the law, including the removal of obstacles to compliance, and
providing information and education
provision has never been used. General wards have a robust public consultation
provisions in this Agreement has occurred, or may occur, that Party may
provisions means there is now a gap in
provisions of this MoU, and subject to section XVI.d (No liability).
provisions, either within or referred to in this Agreement, or there is concern that a breach
pseudonyms for use within DA systems.
public (parents and other consumers) the
public announcements), IX (Confidentiality), XII (Termination) and XVI.d (No liability)
public can submit their views on the
public cloud in growing New Zealands digital economy through:
public health outcomes and cost to suppliers. For example, the regulator would need
public health outcomes and minimum least costs to suppliers (or if you have a preference for particular
public or private disclosure or announcement or press release with respect to this MoU, theactivities contemplated or the existence or status of any discussions, except where the form of
public participation in this process is appropriate.
public regulators and senior officials, in cluding for financial services, energy and
public sector agencies that are Parties;
public sector and providers on the refreshed Cloud First Policy;
public sector in cloud technologies and operating models.
public sector, and support:
public service and iwiMori will be critical to supporting agencies consideration of
public services so that they are more responsive, accessible and enable better outcomes for Mori.
publishes the list of accredited providers and services on the Trust Framework Register
purpose of facilitating access to and participation in a social media site.
purposes of issuing a PSCID.
pursuant to section of the TAA.
pursuant to the Citizenship Act ; and
pursuant to this Agreement.
q) agree that water services providers will be responsible for approving compliance with the National Engineering Design Standards when it is the standards time of vesting or connection to network for: i. private developers or contractors seeking to vest (transfer ownership and responsibility for operation and maintenance of water services network infrastructure to Water Services Providers; and ii. private developers or contractors proposing to connect water services network infrastructure to the public water services network infrastructure; YesNo
questions about the provider
questions about the services for which the accreditation is sought
questions around the private sectors, including large multinationals, use of data.
quickly recover data systems.
quo and an alternative (preferred approach);
r , , , , , , , , I Cost per rateable property for upgrades to wastewater plants that discharge to coastal and freshwater .I I Auckland Metro Provincial Rural Average Highest UNCLASSIFIED . Collectively, the problems outlined above contribute to the current weaknesses in the three waters regulatory and service delivery system. Taken together , they mean that we cannot always be confident that drinking water will be safe to drink, and that accep table environmental outcomes are being achieved. . In addition, there will be broader national and local implications if performance improvements are not delivered across the three waters system, including: . housing infrastructure supply being unable to mee t demand in high growth areas; . failure to meet national and local environmental objectives for freshwater and the marine environment; . a constrained ability to plan and fund robust systems that can cope with climate change, emergencies, and natural hazards; . limitations on developing the regions, particularly for areas with declining rating bases, or small tourism centres with high seasonal demand. Additional challenges due to COVID . The situation caused by COVID means the local government sector is fa cing a series of additional issues and challenges, many of which relate to three waters services and infrastructure. COVID will have significant impacts on local government finances, with consequences for council service delivery and infrastructure inv estment . . The Department of Internal Affairs has worked with L ocal Government New Zealand , the Society of Local Government Manage rs, the New Zealand Local Government Funding Agency, and the Treasury to understand the impacts of COVID on local governme nt finances, and the potential implications of this for infrastructure investment and council services. Department of Internal Affa irs Supplementary information Page of rnfoawab Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government
r Responsible for the New
ramppermittaupo.dia.govt.nz
range of functions of the digital tools available to them but not
rather than just sitting in the office with a device and a headset.
rather than referring to cost, the legislation needs to refer to cost benefit and
rating ANegativeA Same as
rating set out herein is a cre dit rating, no r is it a recommendation to buy, hold or sell any
reframe gangrelated harm narratives.
reasonable actions to make the required necessary resources available.
reasonable period of notice to NZSIS, suspend any Authorised Officers access to their
reasonable population size . We believe that the WSEs will generally have a large and diverse
reasonably necessary. The same approach was used in the HurunuiKaikura
receive and assess complaints
receive identity information from employees or customers
receive in these communities.Te Whare Tapa
receive official correspondence, subscription reminders, or invoices for charges which may
received by the Intermediary under this Agreement; and
received from the RegistrarGeneral.
received under this Agreement is only used for the purposes specified in this Agreement and
received under this Agreement with the Client.
receiving Party to do a oneoff update of their records.
receiving that data, in accordance with the provisions of the MOU.
recently asked for public feedback on the scope of the Inquiry. We believe the terms of reference are inadequate and narrow, such that lessons will not be learned. We are also concerned that the Inquiry will not have public hearings
recently, three major global cloud providers (Microsoft, Amazon Web Services
recognises the skills, capabilities and resources required to ensure the Department is prepared for its roles and responsibilities.
recognising and years of service.
recommend Cabinet revoke the directive to encourage the public sector to refocus on
recommendations and comments made by the Review Panel and the
recommending draft rules to the Minister, reviewing the rules at a reasonable interval, and recommending updates to them
recommending regulations to the Minister
records for an individual customer;
records made during the two months prior to the of data transfer
records of New Zealand Passport holders. Because different data sets within the identity and
records of all adult passports issued. Once the data is loaded into IRs servers it
records with a Family Violence Act General Committees
reduce harm experienced by, to and within. This will uplift and work
reduce harm in changing gang environment.
reduced duplication of work. The costs of the centralised certification are expected to
reduction aims of the Carbon Neutral Government Programme;
reduction i n infrastructure spending.
refer the Plans to the Commerce Commission and Taumata Arowai.
refer to our Annual Report
reference between February to March . Over , public submissions were received.
reference. The terms of reference for Phase of the Royal Commission have
referral of the Petition of Reality Check Radio.
refers to the Us Committee for National Security Systems Instruction .
refers: security of the cloud.
reflect changes in technology, society or Government priorities;
reflect changes in technology, society or government priorities;
reflects the Departments independent early thinking and that there are no plans for two separate reviews.
reforms. Further , the riskadjusted capital assessment is unchanged.
regard to the recommendations and comments provided by them;
regarding patched or prospect
regime either in New Zealand or internationally .
regulating emotions, including violent outbursts, and
regulation () of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Regulations
regulation () of the Digital Identity Services Trust Framework Regulations
regulation and the role of inst tutional arrangements to drive improved health and
regulation regime at the same time as a first principles review is underway.
regulator for water is established, it will need to be clear from the entity names that
regulator within the EPA and the relationship to drinking water regulation which
regulatory approach to be proportionate to the size, risk and complexity of supplies.
regulatory impact statements
regulatory landscape. That said, this is yet to be established and proven for the WSE and hence
regulatory regime outlined in our briefing to you on December was also
regulatory regimes in New Zealand and internationally. They are commonly used in the
related public, Mori or local government sector engagement, including Three Waters,
related to the use of vaccines and the use of lockdowns, in particular the extended lockdowns in Auckland and Northland. It will assess whether key decisions struck a reasonable balance between public health goals and social and economic disruption such as health and education outcomes . It will also
relates to the storage and use, particularly of Mori data
relating to Life Events, or Travel Documents) and to improving the quality and consistency of
relating to a death that is maintained by the RegistrarGeneral of Births,
relating to cloud Using cloud services presents productivity, digital and service
relating to the extension include additional Commissioners fees, extensions of
relation to Mori data, when making decisions about adopting cloud services;
relation to information shared with them under this Agreement by another Party, and not
relation to information they hold that was shared under this Agreement, in accordance with
relationsh ip. Neither GCDO nor AWS, nor any of their respective affiliates, is an agent of the
relationship with the Party.
relationships and trust between government
relationships.Kaitiakitanga
relatively cloud native and were able to adapt quickly during
released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority
released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority.
relevant papers on the Departments website, subject to appropriate due diligence and
remain in force notwithstanding the termination of the Agreement.
renewable energy and opportunities to incentivise renewable energy investments in E
repayments are unc hanged from ou r previously b ase case for local councils .
repeal, because the addition of a Mori ward councillor position would be at the
report it and make it available to DIAs Digital Safety Group andor the New Zealand Police (unless it was DIA or the New Zealand Police who initially reported the objectionable content) andor any relevant international authorities, as applicable.
report on the Water Services Entities Bill
report the content and make it available to DIAs Digital Safety Group andor the New Zealand Police (unless it was DIA or the New Zealand Police who initially reported the objectionable content) andor any relevant international authorities, as applicable.aZ
report with recommendations by February .
reported does not become public based only on such rumours or reports
reported that they rarely knew a close contacts phone number. Further, participants reported that it was extremely difficult to record t he specific hour in which they saw a close contact, and this question added a large amount of time to complete the daily diary A second amendment was submitted (and approved) to Otago Ethics, requesting permission to ask participants to record the first na me and first initial of the family name of the close contacts. With these improvements, we were able to distinguish between people included in the study and delete extraneous non participating close contacts. This process involved an added ste p of de identifying the raw data. .. Applications of the Bluetooth card We tested the inter card reliability to determine if contact events were being mutually recorded by a pair of cards involved in a contact event. That is, to confirm whether when card A re cords an interaction with card B, that card B also records the interaction with card A. Due to timestamps not being completely synced between cards, the analysis was conducted at the day level rather than the individual contact event level. We found that o n any given day, there were no instances of card A recording an interaction with card B and card B not recording the interaction with card A. Further, we found the mean difference of the recorded duration between cards involved in the contact event over th e day was only .mins. The detection of daily interactions and small average difference in recorded overall duration suggest there was a strong inter card reliability. Beyond technical adjustments, there were no adjustments made in Phase One with the Bluetooth card. An example timeline from one Bluetooth card over multiple days is presented in Figure . Each co lour represents a unique close contact detected by the card. This participant worked every day and had a role that required a high level of interaction with other staff members. .. Applications of the ultra wide band devices The distribution of the UWB devices was delayed due to the issues w ith the Bluetooth cards cited above in the Technical Challenges section (.). As such, all data before p m on Day was disregarded as human interaction. The UWB device was attached to a lanyard for participants as they generally do not wear belts to att ach them. As a result, most participants opted to carry the UWB device in the opposite pocket to the card ( if the card was in the pocket). Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
reporting on progress, and suppoi agency transition to cloud;
reporting requirements into secondary legislation, so that the list can be maintained more effectively. A new regulation making power is needed to give effect to this. I will review the list of activity groups after the existing list has been transferred. . Expand existing regulation making powers so new benchmarking standards can be set which will support the assessment of, say, council governance, asset management and service delivery alongside the existing requirements around council financial management. . Require councils to report on their use of contractors and consultants, alongside reporting on employee headcount and remuneration. Investigating options to limit council rates rises or expenditure on noncore activities
reports and information from IRD . The reasoning behind the DIA forecast for each sector is set out below. There may be changes in gambling expenditure as a result of future changes to the Act or regulations. It is not possible to forecast the likely impact of any changes until the nature of any legislative or policy changes is clearer. Noncasino gaming machin es The number of NCGMs has declined from , in to , as of June (there are , active venues). NCGM expenditure also declined for a number of years, but has seen yearly increases since . For example, from a historical low of million in , expenditure increased to million in , million in , million in and million in . DIA forecasts expenditure to continue with small annual increases in the next three years. Some variation in expenditure from year to year is expected, but the size of that variation cannot be forecast in advance. In the NCGM sector, club expenditure continues to decrease, while nonclub expenditure has increased. Nonclub expenditure has historically been around percent of total NCGM expenditure every quarter since June , which was the first full quarter after the EMS began operating. Club expenditure has varied from around percent to around percent of the total. However, since , nonclub expenditure has increased to around percent of total expenditure; club expenditure sits at around percent of the total. Casinos Over the last three years, spending on casino gambling has fluctuated. Figures from the DIA show expenditure of million in , million in and million in . Casino expenditure is impacted by variations in international tourist numbers, including VIP gamblers. DIA anticipates some growth in expenditure for , but its forecast is relatively conservative. New Zealand Racing Board Spending on NZRB products was relatively flat for some years. However, it increased from million in to million in , with a slight decline to million in . DIA anticipates modest expenditure growth in the next threeyear period. Potential increases in expenditure brought about by technical innovation and product URL: www.dia.govt.nzdiawebsite.nsfwpgURLResourcematerialInformati onWeProvideSummary ofVenues andNumbers byTerritorialAuthorityDistrict (accessed November ). URL: www.dia.govt.nzdiawebsite.nsfwpgURLResourcematerialInformation WeProvideGambling ExpenditureStatistics (accessed November ). STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
represent a world first for incorporating indigenous considerations into national cloud
represent the Harbourmasters Office.
representation arrangements at least
representation arrangements at least every six years in a representation review
representation arrangements. However, councils are required to consider general
representation at any time.
representation in council decisionmaking.
representation in local government can be fairly considered and implemented and that
representation in local government. A discussion document to support the
representation proposal. Members of the
representation review process. There is no statutory engagement process that councils
representation reviews.Councils can optionally consider Mori
representativeness and accessibility of local elections over time. Providing legislative
representatives for resolution.
representatives, with a view to resolving any issues as soon as practicable. if the dispute
requir ed to consider the Go vernor s comment s on their statement s of intent .
require a wide range of support to work through
require financial support in the fore seeab le future. The total ta xsuppo rted d ebt of of
require funding through future Budgets for affected agencies, and if assumed funding
require the provider do extra recordkeeping or reporting.
required annual problem gambling awareness training for venue personnel who supervise gambling
required by law or in order to comply with a court order. The Intermediary must have a legal
required by the NZSIS Compliance Manager;
required in that period);
required to take a balanced approach applies predominantly to the setting of
requirement for the original record to be sighted or referenced for any subsequent
requirement such as evidential use in legal actions will be the responsibility of
requirement that future investment in onpremise ICT infrastructure, whether new or
requirements about what training, skills, or experience operators of drinking water and wastewater
requirements are set and managed, and unique access accounts are issued and
requirements for plans. Once accepted, the Department of Internal Affairs must publish the Plans in a publicly accessible format and
requirements for public cloud in the New Zealand Information Security Manual (the
requirements of the Privacy Act , this Agreement and the MOU.
requirements outlining what licences, certifications, permits, skills, qualifications or
requirements to host RESTRICTED and below information;
requirements) to update training and ensure it is fitforpurpose.
requirements, policy, and compliance considerations). It may be owned, managed,
requiring an authorisat ions framework for council drinking water supplies by
resilienceBusiness continuity is more assured through the ability to back up and
resilienceagency by starting afresh without legacy technology issues and take
resistance to authority, stigmatisation, and social
resources in the Department may have to be reprioritised to support the rapid
resources required for producing project deliverab les in this MoU will be agreed on a caseby
resourcing from recovery efforts and uncertainty about the scale of infrastructure
respective Intermediary and their Client, before the Intermediary shares information they
respective Parties will meet in good faith to resolve the dispute or difference as quickly as possible.
respond to changing requirements. This means the network can efficiently handle both large and small volumes
respondin g to the WSEs financial distress in a ti mely man ner.
responding to any financi al distress in a timely manner .
response to community expectations. The report and supporting documents are being translated into nine
response. Once MBIE had established their own contact centre, the
responsibilities and work related to the ongoin g evolution and performance of the New Zealand
responsibilities for oversight across the water service delivery system.
responsibilities under Te Tiriti o Waitangithe Treaty of Waitangi.
responsibility and should be adequately funded CABMIN refers.
responsibility and should be adequately funded CABMIN refers. This
responsibility for providing water services from local c ounc ils.
responsibility for security belongs with the service provider.
responsibility models, security governance, data protection and security monitoring
responsibility of NZSS and the RegistrarGeneral.
responsibility of NZSIS and the Secretary.
responsibility, should be adequately funded, and should not compromise other functions
responsible for the breach occurring.
restricted or prohibited in any way.
result in regulatory decisions for the WSEs that reflect a pr edictable, stable, and transparent
resulting in a boil water notice being issued and some customers being left without water.
results of the activities the parties undertake together under this MoU. Except to the extentrequired by applicable law, neither party will conduct or make any communication activities,
retailers and one bulk water company, with regional water businesses serving the
revenue fl exibility t o help fund it. T his would lead to large r deficits or could weaken its liquidity.
revenue flexibility to help fund it. This would lead to larger deficits or could weaken its liquidity.
revenue in a given period.
revenues , expenditure and de bt from the local councils financial forecasts even though we
revenues in comp ared to our current assessment . This is because the reducti on in
review which ought to provide a more enduring solution, while in the gap in
review, there would be opportunities to ensure
reviewed the scenario s you provided and the following is a summary analysis of our outcome s.
revised with optional fields
revoked once this Agreement is fully operational:
richard.bournelivertonsecurity.com
right s or the p ower to direct t he WSE on pricing or investment decisio ns. WSE
risk, guidance for the cloud risk assessment process and how data centre
rmation has been withheld for other reasons consistent with advice, it has been annotated with
roactive Release of Briefing titles: September to October
robust consultation processes described
role or links to the New Zealand government to be weak ening. W e could also lower our ratings
role or links to the New Zealand government to be weake ning . We could al so lower our ratings
roll out of new systems and processes for our work,
round the future operation for over half of systems, with more than of systems being over years old.
royal commissions and ministerial inquiries
running on a cloud infrastructure. The applications are accessible from various
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government IN CONFIDENCE Page of . I propose that properties that are non rateable are exempt from stormwater charges, and properties that are percent non rateable be charged percent of what they would otherwise be charged for stormwater. The public good nature of stormwater systems is similar to the public good benefits that these properties receive from other local government services, and the rationale for exemptions for charging should carry through (noting that these properties are still liable for drinking water and wastewater charges). . Mori freehold land that does not receive either drinking water or wastewater services from a water ser vices entity would also be exempt from any stormwater charge.
s) note that the initial National Engineering Design Standards will be focused on drinking water, wastewater (gravity and pumped systems) and stormwater networks; t) agree to forward this briefing to the Chair and Chief Executive of the Water Services Authority. YesNo
s. The parties involved and the agency to lead
safeguards must be in place for the information provided.
sambastionsecurity.co.nz
same time, providing consumers with consistent and clear information. The
scale up the capacity of the Contact Centre cloud platform overnight
scena rio . We believe the rational e beh ind the decision is the same as that under scenario .
scena rio . We believe the rationale beh ind th e decision is the same as that under scenario .
scena rio . We believe the rationale beh ind the decision is the same as that under scenario
scenario is assessed slightly lower at strong compared to excelle nt under scenario .
scenario that is under analysis, this is either an avera ge of three entities or an average of
schedule. Intermediaries can only onshare information with Clients ifthey have a legal basis to do
schedules to this Agreement.
scoring below capability. This creates a preventable set of risks to system failure and
sdoinformationpartnershipsdia.govt.nz
secondary legislation created under the Water Services Act
secrecy shall remain in force notwithstanding the termination of this Agreement.
section of the FVPC Act
section ()(b) and ()(a);
section () of the BDMRR Act.
section Q or shorten the working day period.
section below for materials produced as part of this engagement.
sections , , and of the Official Information Act
sector agency, and whose functions or activities include the collection of
sector and providers on the refreshea: Cloud Fust Pohcy;
sector and regulatory bodies
sector is very positive towards the introduction of an authorisation framework and
sector optimising the benefits of cloud. Cloud computing was found to be particularly
sectors. Further detail is provided in Appendix A.
secure onpremise systems is possible but requires active and skilled management.
secure than what is a key part of assessing cloud security. Overall, the public
security agency) to Registration Information held by the RegistrarGeneral, and to
security and reduced risk, increased continuity, resilience and flexibility for agencies
security architecture, and detect and contain threats than traditional
security on a wide variety. It also means that expertise about these services can be
security protocols and policies.
security resources, and are undergoing service and digital transformations.
security risks, transformation of service delivery and transition to cloud;
security risks, transformation of service delivery, and transition to the cloud;
security teams are in a constant arms race, with the lowest cost (in terms of time and
security that need to be addressed to allay concerns and support the secure uptake
security, interoperability, workforce development and innovation.
seek Cabinet agreement to fund the third and final extension of the Royal Commission.
seek Cabinet policy decisions for all proposals by November .
seek to encourage and support sustainable adoption and use of cloud.
seek whnau elsewhere, sometimes in gangs.
seeking a national security clearance, national security check or any other access,
seen as a risk associated with the use of public cloud for hosting government data
selection pa nel (ISP) that has the sole responsib ility for appointing and removing WSE b oard
selfsuppliers and noncouncil networks (e.g. where a person or business supplies water to
sensitivity of Mori data and storage locations, including opportunities to
sent to the contact persons specified above.
separa ted from local council s and the Cro wn, have finan cial and operationa l auto nomy , borrow
separate decision processes could be retained with adjusted timeframes, which could
sequenced. The consultation is not intended to be a firstprinciples review of Mori
sequences where possible, the processes for establishing Mori wards and general
sera.skinnermiddleware.co.nz
servers are networked together. The number of servers used at any one time can increase or decrease to
serves and connects people, communities and government to build a safe, prosperous and respected nation. The Department provides New Zealanders and New Zealand organisations with valuable services through its
service (PaaS) scenarios than SaaS.
service agencies can effectively utilise changes in technology to provide better public
service has a low cyber security maturity, many agencies bave limited IT and cyber
service implications of the plans beyond the threeyear period; and
services from multiple public cloud providers for the same general class of IT
services through out the country . The scenario s propose that the WSEs are structurally
services to more easily improve their securty posture, security architecture and
services were moved to the Department of Justice, but they returned to Internal Affairs in . In the Ministry of Commerces Tourism responsibilities were amalgamated with Internal Affairs Office of Recreation and Sport to form a new Office of Tourism and Sport. This remained with the Department for two years before being returned to the newly titled
services will be integral to the successful implementation of Local Water Done Well, but the approach currently provided in the
services would be likely conducted by a Crown entity if WSEs did not ex ist. This is
services would then be as set out in Table . The detailed budget is shown earlier in Table . Table : Proposed Ministry of Health baselines to prevent and minimise gambling harm Vote Health Minister of Health (m) (m) (m) (m) out years (m) Total baselines currently held by the Ministry of Health for Problem Gambling Services . . . . . Increase in appropriations sought . . . Total . . . . . After the transfer of million to , there is still a forecast levy over collection of . million for the current levy period to June . This reduces the amount required from the levypaying sectors to me et the remaining costs of the Strategy for the to period, to . million. On current projections, the problem gambling levy will need to be amended to collect that level of revenue (. million). Inland Revenue will absorb the cost of implementing the problem gambling levy rate change, effective from July , within its existing baseline. Current I nland Revenue forecasts are to collect approximately million per annum through the problem gambling levy . This is higher than the amount required to be collected in the new levy period, therefore the forecast will be reduced by approximately million per annum to reflect the new levy settings . Human Rights The proposals in this paper are not inconsistent with either the New Zeala nd Bill of Rights Act or the Human Rights Act . Legislative Implications Regulations are required to implement the proposal. To meet the day rule, new problem gambling levy regulations must be drafted, approved, made and notified in the Gazett e by June . Impact Analysis A panel with representatives from the Ministry of Health and the Department of Internal Affairs has reviewed the attached Cost Recovery Impact Statement and considers it meets the quality assurance criteria. Gender Impli cations Women make up most of those who seek help for problems associated with someone elses gambling, and there are some differences in problems by gender within different forms of gambling, and by gender within particular ethnic groups. For example, wo men, particularly Mori women, may now be more at risk than men from problems associated with NCGMs. The mix of services currently funded by the Ministry, and that the Ministry proposes to fund in future, is sufficiently comprehensive and flexible to addr ess any differences in gambling harm , or risk of harm , by gender. wzrxijjr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
services) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management
services, cloud providers can make a compelling case for attracting candidates in the
services, help meet emissions targets and better ensure Mori interests are reflected
set up to respond to disruption few people had mobile devices and
setting up the Inquiry and providing administrative support
several years for some agencies to fully transition to cloud services, and there will be
shall be sent to the contact persons specified above.
shape a youths involvement in gangs.
share intelligence however that authorisation is classified. For the purposes of the DAA,
share your business details like
shareholdin g and ability to appoint Go vernors or influencing Governor voting.
should cover. The ACT National coalition agreement specifies that any
show your organisation is licensed for an activity, for example, has a license to serve alcohol
signed, relating to the scope of cooperation.
significance is not met. Any emissions impacts will be reassessed and disclosed to
significant barrier. The CCN is a community of practice aimed at supporting and
significant challenges residing
significant cost increases or difficulty maintaining adequate staffing levels.
significant, at nearly percent of all gam bling harm. There are also well established inequities based on ethnicity and socioeconomic factors . People affected by gambling harm are more likely to be M ori, Pacific, or Asian, on a low income and or living in an isolated area. Most adults in New Zealand gamble at least occasionally and usually with out causing harm to themselves or others. However, most people participate only in lessharmful forms of gambling, such as occasional Lotto. By contrast, over half the money spent on gambling comes fro m a relatively limited number of people who play continuous forms of gambling such as gaming machines, which is the form of gambling most often associated with harm. Each year, some of these people seek help. For example, in , over , people sought help from Ministry funded services, for problems due to their own or someone elses gambling. Most of these people were in crisis. I f brief interventions in non clinical settings are included, the total of people seeking help is over , . The legislative context The Act provides the regulatory framework for gambling , primarily to control the growth of gambling and ensure that money from gambling benefits the community . The Act also recognises gambling can be harmful and includes a purpose to prevent and minimise harm from gambling, including problem gambling (section (b)). Several provisions are intended to help achieve this objective, including regulatory provisions administered by the Department of Internal Affairs (the Department), and an integrated problem gambling strategy focused on public health . The Act specifies the strategy must include: . measures to promote public health by preventing and minimising the harm from gamblin g; . services to treat and assist problem gamblers and their families and whnau ; . independent scientific research associated with gambling, including (for example) longitudinal research on the social and economic impacts of gambling, particularly the impacts on different cultural groups ; and . evaluation. The Ministry is funded through an appropriat ion to Vote: Health to develop and implement the Strategy . A problem gambling levy (the levy) is set by regulation at a different rate for each of the main gambling sectors , to reimburse the Crown the amount of t hat appropriation , ensuring the Strategy is broadly fiscally neutral over time. The levy is collected by Inland Revenue. The Act details a lengthy, three yearly process to refresh the Strategy and put in place a new levy. The Ministry consults gambling operators, problem gambling service providers and other affected groups on a needs assessment, draft strategy and costings, and estimated levy rates. After consulting, the Ministry revises its proposals and submit s them to the Ministers of Health and Internal Affairs, and the Gambling Commission. The Gambling Commission analyses the proposals, undertakes its own consultation and reports to the responsible Ministers. After considering advice from officials and the Gamb ling Commission, the relevant Associate Minister of Health and the Minister of Internal Affairs make recommendations on the Strategy and the levy. Comment : The proposed Strategy Decisions are required about Ministrys funding for the Strategy to Prevent and Minimise wzrxijjr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
significantSecurity Cloud enables agencies to more easily improve their security posture,
significantly. A growing New Zealand based cloud infrastructure sector has
signifies the importance of ensuring that we consider and address this funding request
since the severe weather events. I do not consider that changes to this Order are
slightl y better as th e local council sector s aggregated borrowin g needs as a p ercentage of GDP
slightly better as the loca l council sector s aggregated borrowing needs as a p ercentage of GDP
smartstart.services.govt.nz
so our purchasing team can make the necessary changes.
so that there must be a judicial recount before a coin toss determines the
so together we can identify and
so whether the Local Government Commission or some other entity should be the
so, other than this Agreement. Other Parties may not share personal information between
software components become more expensive to maintain and operate.
solutions or workloads (e.g., AWS Azure, GCP) in a single joinedup architecture.
solutions, such as the national vaccine booking system, that were
some combination of them, and it may exist on or off premises.
some instances where IaaS services are still required beyond expiry of the current
some of our online forms are difficult to use with just a keyboard
someone external to help broker and coordinate this; INCONFIDENCE jfNo
somewhat, at June , the Royal Commission returned . million to the
soon as possible, including through leveraging an existing scheme such as Water New
soon as practicable and consult in good faith wi th the other party before such disclosure is
soon as practically possible, giving the individual an opportunity to dispute the correctness of the
sovere ign, the New Zealand Local Government Funding Agency Ltd.,
special consultative procedure under Section of the LGA, when making
specified above under Contact safeguards.
specified in Clauses to .
specified in sections S U of the Privacy Act . The report will be included in the
specified in this Agreement and therefore becoming a Party to this Agreement. DIA must obtain the
ss (), () or () of the Registration Act or s of the Act
staff across the wider work programme. There would be sufficient resources in these
stage between March and August, in
stages. The initial decision (on whether
stakeholder concerns and input, including the
stakeholders and iwi Mori led by the Department of Internal Affairs. My officials are
stand alone credit pro file of th e WSEs , and that all water related debt associated with t he WSEs
stand alone credit profile of t he WSEs , and that all wate rrelated debt associ ated with the WSEs
standalone Bill only covers SVoD content and would mean free to air television
standalone Bill. For example, we have not had sufficient time to test the
standardized or proprietary technology that enables data and application portability
standards, as the standards ultimately provide the mechanisms that enable the
statement setting the ov erarching objectives for WSEs, bu t under scenario the
statements we used ac tual outcomes as rep orted in cou ncils annu al reports for
statutory Board as defined in section of the Fees and Travelling
statutory functions specified in clause of this agreement, for the following purposes:
statutory role that requires the person or entity to establish, keep, or
statutory timelines. There is a risk, however, that the sector would have limited time to
statutoryinquiriesdia.govt.nz
steve.honissbastionsecurity.co.nz
still be responsible for accreditation and management of residual and agencyspecific
storage and processing of public sector data in line with the Cloud First pol
storage, and databases, on an asneeded basis from cloud providers rather than
stories and experiences to create a holistic
storing Mori data onshore where practicable, will be presented as part of the
storm, or restraint of government) which prevent either Party from performing its
strategic collaboration to enable various acti vities relating to cloud services, including:
strategic relationship described in section II. In support of this , the parties are interested in
strategy will continue to be a central part of our organisational identity. By aligning our efforts with public servicewide priorities and integrating the principles of manaakitanga, whanaungatanga, and kotahitanga, we aim to foster a workplace where all kaimahi can thrive. This work is essential not only to achieving our internal goals but also to ensuring we deliver equitable and inclusive services for all New Zealanders. Together, we will build a stronger, more inclusive future.
strategy. This will begin with Ministryled workshops to discuss the approach, scope and priorities for pilots, followed by an invitation for specific detailed proposals through a procurement process . Pilots may include both public health and intervention components, and the Ministry will evaluate them to inform future service provision. Budget for to The service plan outlines the services that the Ministry considers it will require for the period to make further progress towards the objectives in the strategy. It also sets out the estimated costs of providing these activities to prevent and minimise gambling harm. These costs cover the four nominal budget areas, plus a line item for new services and innovation pilots: public health services intervention services research and evaluation new services and innovation pilots Ministry operating costs. Table shows the budgeted costs for . The remaining sections discuss each of the line items in Table in more detail. The strategy provides for a total estimated cost of . million in Ministry spending over the ne xt threeyear levy period . This is a million increase in threeyear funding compared with the current levy period. This extra funding is required because: funding levels and appropriations have remained largely unchanged since , but the number of people affected has steadily increased in line with population growth the Ministry proposes to change the service focus and mix to address the matters and priorities noted above and also pilot new activities and technologies the pilots will enable innovative solutions to address areas of systemic, persistent gambling harm and vulnerable communities and to target the priority areas and vulnerable groups described above it will enable the Ministry to maintain baseline services while it pilot s new interventions and service models and undertak es further evaluations , to assess where to best direct resources in the long term. The Ministry will consider whether this increase in budget should be maintained in full or in part in future years based on what it learns during implementation. If a number of pilots are evaluated as successful, the Ministry is likely to seek an increase in the level of its overall funding accordingly for the levy period. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
strengthen the M oriCrown relationship at a local level.
stress disorder. This can result in difficulties
stress. Prolonged or repeated exposure to stress
structure is set up to limit interference by the Crown in da ytoday operations,
structure. Shareholding corr esponds to asset values w ith councils having a proport ional
structures that underpin harmful behaviours.
student loan borrowers and child support liable parents living overseas who are
submission during public consultation
submissions, the Departmental Report and other advice
submitted alongside detailed policy proposals later this year.
subsequently extended the report back until November .
substa ntially weaker . We forecast operatin g balan ce to average just . of
successive governments have not yet fu ly realised the benefits from cloudbased
such as beginning the process to pay out an entitlement to the estate of the deceased
such as performance measures, is also unlikely to be accurate for the next three
such as the Data Iwi Leaders Group and other Iwi and Mori representatives and
such as the Data Iwi Leaders Group and other Iwi fuia Maori representatives and industiy, to
such that its FFO todebt was to settle ab ove and there is a c ommitment to maintain that
such that its FFO todebt was to settle above and there is a commitment to maintain that
suffi cient separation between the se local cou ncils a nd the WSE to remove the waterrelated
sufficient funding is available within the appropriations that fund the Royal Commission;
sufficient to move the dial on cloud uptake.
sufficiently competent in their roles is through an authorisation framework under
sufficiently large as to affect contingent li abilit y assessment or its individual credit
suggesting this, if such a scenario was to eventua te, it could have an impact on both the
summarise the legal position governing the use, for commercial purposes, of the Royal Arms, Royal Devices, Emblems and Titles and of photographs, portraits, engravings, effigies and busts of The King and Members of the Royal Family. Guidance on advertising in which reference is made to a Member of the Royal Family, and on the use of images of Members of the Royal Family on articles for sale, is also provided.
summary of the individual credit metri c outcomes and ratings for all scenarios (noting that
supplementing and furthering the work of other libraries in New Zealand
suppliers andor wastewater network operators;
supplies sufficient time to become compliant.
supplies to be authorised within five years after the commencement of the Act
supply chains, may result in security implications. Overseas experience shows ownership and control of data
suppor t would b e forth coming in certain circumsta nces such a s under the Civil Defence
suppor t, we believe would be more likely to provide financial support during
support . The com mittee not ed that contingent liabilities were a lready risi ng
support and enable gang communities to implement and create
support ed de bt would be lower under sce nario at about of operat ing revenues in
support in scenario than under scenario , we determined that this change was not
support in th e fores eeab le future. The total tax supported d ebt of of oper ating reve nues
support in the foreseeab le future. The to tal tax supported debt of of opera ting reve nues
support of an inclusive, productive and glob ally respected New Zealand digital economy.
support operators when shifting to other sites.
support payment obligations and entitlements, and requiring compliance
support progressing your preferred approach. We will continue to liaise with officials
support services and are less likely to seek
support sustainable adoption and use of cloud technologies;
support, t here will be a legal framework that allows the Crown to do so. We bel ieve
supported by NCPO, NCSC and MFAT.
supported by additional funding of . million from the Governments budget for
supported by subject matter experts from GCSB, NZSIS and OIO, will be the
supported the proposed engagement approach and commented that officials are
supporting Ministers to develop the terms of reference and budgets for inquiries
supporting decisionmaking around the eligibility and suitability of. ...
supporting documents, and translation services.
supportive and did not warrant substantive changes to the Order.
survivors or changing accounts for survivors.
suspend or cancel licences, or
suspend the providers accreditation or the accreditation of the service they provide until they take specified steps.
sustainability principles in the refreshed Policy. If utilised well, cloud offers the
sustainability); reflect evolving cloud technology by revoking the Infrastructureasa
system (EMS), gambling operators annual and halfyearly reports and information from the Inland Revenue Department (IRD). Other data on gambling expenditure is available on DIA s website ( www.dia.govt.nz ). Presentations (B) The formula in the Act requires the levy rate calculation to take into account the latest, most reliable and most appropriate sources of information from the Ministry on client presentations to problem gambling sources. The Ministry the presentation figures used in the levy from data collected by its psychosocial intervention service providers. The figures relate to all clients who received a full, facilitation or followup intervention session during the months from July to June . The figures exclude brief screening interventions and primary problem gambli ng modes in gambling sectors that are not subject to the levy (although these are recorded). Brief interventions essentially means brief screenings carried out in non clinical settings. They are excluded mainly because they are considered unrepresentative of a sector. This is because a sectors share of brief interventions will vary depending on the settings in which service providers decide to undertake them. Table shows each gambling sector s share of player expenditure and presentations. The funding requirement (C) The funding requirement represented by C in the formula is the total cost of the strategy for , which the Ministry estimates as . million. The service plan in Section sets out details about the . millio n cost to provide and implement the strategy. The funding required may be comprised entirely of a new appropriation or a new appropriation and an expense transfer of any underspend from a previous levy period. Forecast player expenditure (D) The amounts represented by D in the formula are sector bysector forecasts of the amounts that DIA expects gamblers to spend on the gambling products of the four levypaying gambling sectors in the period . The higher the forecast expenditure is, the lower the levy rate necessary for a sector to pay its required contribution (as determined by the top line of the formula). As noted above, these forecasts by DIA took into account the latest, most reliable and most appropriate sources of information on player expenditure, including its NCGM electronic monitoring system (EMS), gambling operators annual and halfyearly The IRD provides gaming duty and problem gambling levy data to the DIA. The Tax Administration Act requires the IRD to use its best endeavours to protect the integrity of the tax system by (among other things) maintain ing the confidentiality of the affairs of taxpayers. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
system lead for digital (the Government Chief Digital Officer or GCDO ), supported by the
systemwide interventions and investment for transformation. The proposals are not
systemwide prioritisation remain;
systems and information, prior to any system access being granted.
systems and technical debt and understanding or incentives of the current
systemsCouncils are required to consider general
taha whnau and taha wairua, enabling youth to
taken from the Water Entit y Model you provi ded. The LGFA s lending book will reduce
taking appropriate enforcement action.
taking reasonable steps to identify a player present for sweeps in a row
targeted consultation with key organisations including local government, iwi and
targeted efficiencies such that its FFO todebt was to settle above . We could also revise the
tariff increases to recover its capital investments.
te kwanatanga ki te hanga motu haumaru,
team will lead the practical rollout of the new regulatory system. This will focus on:
technical improvements to the local electoral framework.
technological change and policy aims;
technology and skills development. GCDO will s eek to facilitate introductions to the Data
technology change, due to limited funding or incentives (i.e., having mandatory
technology developments More work would need to be done to properly establish
technology or changes in societal and Government priorities. A refresh of the Policy
technologys contribution to reducing ca rbon emissions and wider sustainability
telephone numbers, postal addresses, email addresses, or Social Media
temporal parameters and RSSI values. To accomplish these firmware improvements, extensive testing in a variety of controlled environments is re quired. Controlled field trials provide the opportunity to s tructure different scenarios with appropriate surveillance to detect the cause and effect of any discrepancies in card firmware. Further, they provide an opportunity to refine the close contact al gorithm using a controlled ground truth e.g. video surveil lance of close contacts. A larger field trial requires improvements in data uploading processes. The current average upload time of minutes is untenable for a study of , participants. These improvements could come in the form of improved softwa re, upgraded firmware or a process that enables uploads from multiple cards simultaneously. Recommendations: Improve card firmware. Refine the close contact algorithm. Improve data upload time and processes. . Recruitment and enrolment processes The curr ent word ofmouth approach was necessary as the research team and NMDHB did not want wide publicity of the trial. For a full scale trial, many aspects of the recruitment process will need improvin g and scaling. First, implemented an opt out consenting proc ess, whereby all participants are automatically enrolled in the study using their staff email address. Participants would be informed that the card was being introduced as a hospital wide contact tracing measure to protect healthcare workers. Second, more systematic promotion and information dissemination processes are required to support recruitment. Establishing a dedicated page on the NMDHB intranet with videos from the Chief Executive, lead res earchers and team leaders could help drive acceptance of the solution. Information sessions with unit team leaders (UTL), then all staff, via zoom could improve support for the initiative. Third, UTL should facilitate information and card distribution with in the hospital. Even though the CRC and the NMDHB Chief Exe cutive openly endorsed and promoted the project to prospective participants in Phase One, it was the endorsement of UTL, such as the lead charge nurse, that improved recruitment efforts. Further, UTL are also well placed to distribute the cards given their knowledge of the staff. Recommendations: Optout approach to improve participation rates. Establish multiple streams of communication to inform participants. Recruit unit team leaders to facil itate information and card distribution. Proactively Released by the Department of Internal Affairs
temporarily via Orders to exempt, modify, or extend existing statutory obligations
temporary shortfall in a timely manner. This support will be th e same as currently
terms of reference constructed around outstanding matters of public concern
terry.chapmanaxenic.co.nz
than as a collection of seemingly unconnected Life Events. The Customer Single View will
than offshore services. However, by signalling this preference now, agencies will also
than relying on applications to be made
that Mori will have electoral representation in local government and reflect
that Party as appropriate in the circumstances.
that are constantly tested for vulnerabilities, leading to more refined defensive and
that are practical and appropriate for a statutory inquiry .
that cause it to form and managing liquid chlorine supplies correctly.
that enable, facilitate and reinforce harmful
that for regulated electricity TD and natural gas distribution entiti es in New Z ealand.
that gang whnau are reluctant to engage with.
that has led to a number of improvements across the system.
that has not been previously
that individual, including alerts that indicate that:
that intelligence (or analysis). The ISA imposes an additional requirement in relation to
that operators of drinking water supplies and wastewater
that particular care needs to be taken when providing an identity service to
that represent more specifically the impact we will have:
that the WSE will bene fit from the experience of the Commerce Commission, which should
that the WSE will implement tariff increases on a periodic basis to earn all of it s allowable
that the additional funding required is fully funded from baselines . This would mean a
that the impact will be manageable .
that the impact will be manageable.
that this claim is made in accordance with the Ministerial Determination (Signature of Cardholder) (Senior Private Secretary) NOTE: ORIGINAL SALES VOUCHERS MUST BE ATTACHED If this claim includes Meals for a group of people or a Ministerial Function the namesorganisation of guests are to be included Claims should be made in accordance with the Ministerial Office Handbook, Chapter , Ministerial Office Expenditure and the Executive Travel, Accommodation, Attendance, and Communications Services Determination (No ) MINISTERIAL SERVICES COR PORATE CREDIT CARD RECONCILIATION FORM Cardholders Name: Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
that were not fulfilled elsewhere.
that would enable optimisation of existing and planned new public sector transitions
the Womens Suffrage Petition Te Petihana Whakamana Poti Wahine.
the Act in full on theNew Zealand Legislation website.
the Act t hat would a pply h ave b een i dentified. W here i nformation h as been w ithheld, n o public i nterest
the Act that would apply have been identified. Where information has been withheld, no public interest
the Agreement of exit
the Agreement, or the Order in Council is revoked.
the BDM Database or Citizenship Database relating to this agreement.
the Broadcasting Levy as potential sources of funding for the Office of Film and
the CIR terminates the Agreement.
the Cabinet paper for the Local Government Water Services Bill (Bill ) in July.
the Chief Executive of DIAs nominated representative, for resolution.
the Crow n, LGFA, credit rating , assuming no other signi ficant rating
the Crown , LGFA, credit rat ing, assum ing no other sig nificant rating
the Crown is more likely to be invo lved u nder the scena rio presented. Under scenario ,
the Department of Internal Affairs
the Department of Internal Affairs and
the Department provides; and
the Director of the Government Communications Security Bureau ()
the Engagement Letter app licab le to the RE S (the applicable T Cs).
the Gambling Regulator by clicking on the options below.
the Governments c
the Human Assisted Reproductive Technology (HART) Register
the LGFA . At t he same time the LGFAs liquidity facility will be reduc ed by NZ
the Minister that the individual meets the requirements and attends a
the Ministers for Health, Water, Environment and Treasurer who hold differing
the Ministry of Justice Directory of Official Information
the Mori Data Governance model.
the Mori Electoral Option.
the National Dog Database (NDD) from the Department of Internal Affairs
the New Zealand Agencys name from the relevant schedule and they will cease to be a Party to this
the PIA. The security and privacy safeguards to be applied include:
the Party that the terms of this Agreement or the Order in Council are not being met or the personal
the Police or another government agency, if required or authorised by law (for example to assist with the investigation of a criminal offence), or to report significant misconduct or breach of duty or where there is a serious threat to health or safety.
the Prime Minister and Cabinet and any person or class of persons, whether in New
the Privacy Act and this Agreement. The initial contact persons are as follows:
the Privacy Act , the Privacy Commissioner, and individuals will be notified by the Party.
the Privacy Commissioner will be notified as soon as possible.
the RegistraiGeneral or the Secretary if requested and will be made available to the
the RegistrarGeneral under the BDMRR Act.
the RegistrarGeneral, Births, Deaths and
the Royal Commission of Inquiry into Lessons Learned from Aotearoa New Zealands response to COVID That Should Be Applied in Preparation for a Future Pandemic
the Sovereign in Right of New Zealand acting by and through the Chief Executive of Te Tari Taiwhenua
the State Services Commissions Board Appointment and Induction Guidelines (see page )
the Three Waters R eforms . The reforms involve the creation of several WSEs to provide water
the WSE s SACP is the same as that under scenario .
the Water Services Regulator Act and the Water Services Act C.,
the agencys annual report.
the changes made after consultation).
the changes when enacted.
the cloud. Cloud services, particularly cloud provided by large public cloud providers,
the communities, groups and individuals from whom the data derive;
the coun cils balance sheet .
the councils balance sheet .
the current rates of youth suicide have been
the both parties sign this agreement.
the deceased individual or associated persons, such as the granting of benefits or entitlements.
the delivery of the standalone Bill or the broader review. This could be
the detail of initiatives to deliver on a councils priorities and objectives, with a particular focus on those that would be commenced
the development of guidance for agencies in their consideration of cloud.
the drivers of harm and the barriers of support,
the equivalent processes for general wards and general constituencies (general
the factors influencing the behaviours and
the final report for the Royal Commission was amended three times. The first
the following documents also apply to independent evaluators.
the harm caused by to and within gang whnau.
the impacts on population groups.
the individual for a New Zealand Refugee Travel Document.
the individual for a New Zealand emergency travel document.
the information needed for agencies to assess their risk. Officials from DIA, in
the information that we hold.
the intended and possible outcome(s) of the information collection (for example, a prosecution or imposition of a fine or other statutory penalty).
the latest news, project updates and information directly
the likelihood of youth joining gangs.
the local government electoral legislation and regulations to improve representation
the matter shall be dealt with in accordance with the Dispute Resolution Clause of
the media regulatory regime contained in Appendix A; and
the media regulatory regime.
the name of our staff member, and
the operation of this Agreement.
the organisation that maintains or is represented by the website has ceased to exist
the original website has been significantly changed, or reinvigorated
the other Parties and will ensure that the contact person is familiar with the requirements of the
the other hand, once a Mori ward is established this change must remain in force for
the other parties and will ensure that the contact person is familiar with the requirements of
the other party or towards the scope of cooperation described in this MoU, and does notcreate any obligation on any person, whether or not definitive agreements, if any, are
the other party to a complaint, for the purpose of investigating and resolving the complaint
the perceptions that gang
the personal information received from the RegistrarGeneral:
the personal information sharing under this Agreement is otherwise unlawful.
the pro posed scenario. individual credit profile would remain .. See appendi x
the process for councils to make these
the process is the same as for general
the prop osed s cenario. individual credit profile wou ld remain .. See appendi x
the proposed arrangements, they would not have to consult on their L TP amendment (if satisfied they understand the views of No
the protection, access, and use of Mori data;
the providing or receiving Party. Intermediaries may receive the raw personal information under this
the provision of intelligence to any overseas person or class of persons, being that the
the provision of those services, and will comply with relevant operational policy and
the public service, including increased trust in public service agencies and their use
the purposes specified in clause . (d), (e) and (I).
the quality, reliability and extent
the referral of the Petition of Reality Check Radio
the regu latory environment. We believe that the WSE will have somewhat stronger ratio of
the regulatory settings in relation to SVoD continues with the potential for
the relevant BDM and Citizenship Databases.
the requirement through the upcoming Local Government Water
the role that local government has in assisting the Crown to meet its
the same a s that under scenario except for the below .
the scope of the Films, Videos, and Publications Act , in conjunction with a
the severe weather events. Hence, I am satisfied that this Order is
the social harms and barriers commonly faced
the specified uses of the information .
the specified uses of the information by the Intermediary and their Clients.
the specified uses of the information.
the system improvements already underway, such as changes proposed in the Emergency Management Bill, will be sufficient to address the identified challenges or whether additional improvements are required.
the term recruitment is considered unhelpful due
the time of signing of this agreement).
the transitional provisions in Schedule , clause of the Water Services Act to be
the types of connections made in the brain, which
the voluntary scheme is missing some notable providers and the callin
the water supply operators to have no formal training. They had not chlorinated the supply
the way that local authorities can establish Mori wards or constituencies (Mori
the website is no longer supported.
the year before the next election.Mori ward decisions are made in two
the Skip to content link at the top of each page is not visible to sighted users
the cloud first objectives of the Policy.
their birth registration entry;
their communities from the earlier consultation process); and
their delegated representative, in writing to the other Parties.
their draft Plan and must comply with any reasonable request made by the Department of Internal Affairs for additional information to
their personal information being prepopulated from their birth registration entry.
them to focus on delivering business value rather than maintaining
them to provide information andor a death certificate and thus placing an additional burden
themselves Departments or Specified Organisations.
themselves under this Agreement.
then they must seek to be removed as a Party to this Agreement.
there are significant barriers to gang whnau
there is no longer a legal or Government programme requirement for a website
there is no prescribed timeframe for the implementation of an authorisation
there is still no track record of support, under this s cenario there is an immediate ly
there were a substantial improvemen t in standalon e credit metrics. The latter
there were a substantial improvement in stand alone credit metrics. The latter
there will be Mori wards) is made by
therefore propose out of cycle changes to the Vote Internal Affairs baseline to avoid
these barriers and challenges.
these councils is attached at Appendix A .
these local coun cils during a distress sce nario is based on :
these provisions are removed, new consideration should be given to what level of
they have reasonable grounds to suspect an offence has been committed, is being
they will not be entered into IRs primary information system.
this Agreement will be provided by all Parties to DIAs Chief Security Officer on the agreed
this Agreement, not covered by this Agreement has occurred, the identifying Party will notify
this Agreement, the performance of that partys obligations shall be suspended for as long as
this DAA, where access is required to carry out that function, duty or power.
this MoU and neither party will take any actions or incur any costs in reliance on theother partys stated intentions.
this MoU may change. The parties therefore intend to remain flexible and adaptable throughout
this agreement arise; the Parties will meet in good faith with a view to resolving
this agreement; each Partys obligations under the Information Sharing Privacy Impact
this has various effects:
this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be
this mechanism so that polls on Mori wards can only be nonbinding.
this policy change would require a consequential amendment to the Protective
this regard by NZSIS includes but is not limited to:
this type of support. However, some members
those classes or persons.
those extraordinary circumstances prevail.
those in the HurunuiKaikura Earthquakes Recovery (Local Government
those services, and will comply with relevant operational policy and procedures.
those services. This covers a broad range of demographics but is likely to
though the likeli hood of support is higher t han under s cenar io .
three counc ils are broa dly repr esentative of the sector as a whole .
threeyear plan. I do not consider this to be broader than reasonably necessary
through a secure government network and is compliant with government
through positive, supportive interactions can promote
through their procurement activities;
through witnessing verbal arguments or violence
through, and can participate in, local government elections .
time and within budg et. We believe it s manag ement team should con tain debt levels broadly in
time and within budget . We believe its management team should contain d ebt levels broadly in
time for councils to make representation decisions for the local elections CAB
time to seek and address the majority of
time to time by notice (which may be by email) to the other Party. Both Parties
time, and includes its Schedules and Appendices
time. A copy of this audit report will be provided to the IGIS, and any issues of privacy
tinana (our physical health and well
to . from under the cur rent base ca se.
to Government priorities (for example, Te Tiriti o Waitangi (Te Tiriti) and
to Mori wards and Mori constituency establishment processes
to Police. They use this information to match against the identities held in Polices system. Where there is a match, they add the new name, indicate that the person is deceased, or indicate that the person has a
to a Party in accordance with this Agreement and for one of more purposes specified in
to achieve population scale deployment of a device that is required to enter public places such as bars, restaurants, and concerts, under such a scenario.
to allow time for polls to be demanded
to an individual who is eligible or entitled to receive or hold that
to any centralised appeals process and will depend on what the process is, and which
to any editorial, formatting and layout changes that may be required;
to approach issues agencies are facing or need to address.
to appropriately protect Mori data; and
to as the Customer Single View.
to assess councils readiness to graduate to phase , with decisions delegated to the Commerce Commission through Order in
to assist Inland Revenue in the administration of
to be authorised by November in Schedule of the Water Services Act (the
to be correct and whose accounts are not in debt).
to both drinking water services and wastewater networks .
to break down barriers in order to enable,
to collaborate as appropriate on national cybersecurity priorities and cybersecuritycapability development (including in the public sector), including so that AWS canprovide its views on best practice security
to confirm that they are entitled to do so.
to confirm the customers identity and eligibility to hold a New Zealand Passport. If they
to consider and plan for transition from these systems rather than continually invest
to consider whether the overall cost of a supplier being required to undertake an
to continue into these groups. In these environments,
to demonstrate the impact of the work we do to benefit New Zealand and those who live here. We use statistical surveys and other research from local and international sources to see whether trends over time represent good progress towards achieving the outcomes. We consider the trend of results over the medium and long term (five or more years) to be more informative than minor changes from one year to the next. Indicators can only illustrate an aspect of an outcome and the partial influence of Te Tari Taiwhenua.
to develop and consult on an authorisation framework this year, officials will provide
to disclose information under other provisions in the ISA or where the request or
to discuss their application prior to starting.
to dispute the information received.
to ease regulatory burden.
to funding mark ets or liquidi ty fal ls markedl y, or there is a significant decline in the underlying
to funding markets or liqu idity falls markedly, or there is a sign ificant de cline in the underlying
to gangrelated harm. Highlighting the voices and experiences of
to give effect to Mori interests when making decisions about adopting cloud;
to have plans for the use of public cloud but provides more specificity as to the
to improve cooperation between central and local government. Together we will promote growth, infrastructure and affordable housing.
to improving the mechanisms for councils to establish Mori wards, but further
to increase debt headroom through balance sheet separation from councils.
to influence negative behaviour often associated with gangs.We champion the principles of Te Tiriti o Waitangi
to justify a discrete response
to lift understanding of cloud, the Policy, guidance and tools available. The refreshed
to manage the approval of noncloud technology under the refreshed Cloud First
to meet accessibility standards and translated into te reo Mori.
to our contacts and office location details, by service (in alphabetical order), for a quicker response.
to personal information shared with them under this Agreement by another Party, DIA will
to phone any numbers on this website.
to pr ovide a ke y public se rvice tha t could not be readily undertaken by a p rivat e entity,
to provide confidence to providers and agencies that the facilities have appropriate physical
to provide for an authorisation framework for drinking water
to provide to a Party or Client death records that the RegistrarGeneral already holds;
to remain steady or if its oper ating margins streng thened and became more consist ent year to
to request an accessible version of it.
to scale and deliver services as needed, utilise new tools to gather insights
to security, continuity, resiliency and costeffectiveness. Maintaining effective and
to seek views on how these could be brought together. The responses received will
to share information about deaths.
to shift away from harmful behaviours, such as
to support and facilitate this process, and provide a clear and responsive mechanism for dealing with problems if they arise;
to support broader economic and sector development, through commercial scale,
to support economic recovery post COVID and address persistent systemic issues in the three waters sector.
to the Department of Internal Affairs.
to the Petition of Reality Check Radio on Accept Reality Check Radios Peoples Terms for the Covid
to the broadcasting regime, rather than the classifications regime
to the business position assessment of very strong . We do not see any indication that its
to the cloud often requires significant resources (including scarce cloud skills)
to the customer. This allows a single view of the customer to be created on demand
to the ext ent that w e excluded the WSEs revenues, expe nditure and debt from
to the ext ent that we excluded the WSEs revenues, exp enditu re and debt from
to the extent that we excluded the WSEs revenues, expenditure and debt from
to the other party, its affiliates or their personnel, under any cause of action, under or in
to the party that the terms of this Agreement or the Order in Council are not being met or
to the relevant accounting unit within fourteen days of the following month, or
to the whnau and support elements that youth
to verify an individuals identity.
to view, print and export the contents of this file.
to voters at general elections) as an option to support disabled electors;
to wate r infrastructure . The am ount of water related debt to be removed should be
tools to enable this success, including managing
total tax support ed de bt would be lo wer under s cenario a t about of operat ing revenues
total tax support ed de bt would be similar under scenario at about of operat ing
towards developing more consistent security standards.
towards reducing intergenerational trauma and removing some
traditional approaches to IT. These include:
training and there is potential for unintended consequences such as significant cost
training initiatives, programmes and qualif ications in digital services that lead
transformation, cost, and enables cyber security benefits.
transformationCloud enables digital transformation of delivery models, allowing
transition provision relating to authorisations in Schedule of the Water Services Act .
transparency and collaboration with Iwi and Mori, when making decisions
transport sector (for example, airline pilot licensing, seafarer certification), as well as for the
trauma, and disengagement from education also
treatment services for the Kyneton site to discuss in greater detail infrastructure
try a range of roles before you decide
turn this vision into reality.
two electoral cycles (six years) and the process for removing them entirely is not
two further amendments to related legislation, the Taumata Arowaithe Water Services Regulator
unaddressed in the immediate future, leaving young people and children
unaffected by scenario . Further , the liquidi ty assessment would depend on how the counci l
unaffected by scenario . Further, the liquidi ty assessment would depend on ho w the c ouncil
unaffected by scenario . Further, the liquidi ty assessment would depend on how the council
unauthorised access of the personal information.
unauthorised access to personal information amounting to a material privacy breach,
uncomfortable interacting with mainstream
under if the supplier cant accept credit card
under an Act or Regulation.
under its standing orders or rules of procedure or under any
under legislation or otherwise) .
under sc enario compared to the current base case as see n with large swings in operating and
under scen ario . This is becau se of a lowe r debt burden as sessme nt of compared to
under scenario . This is beca use of a lowe r debt burden as sessment of compared t o
under section () of the FVPC Act, when the online content host retains copies of files relating to objectionable content for investigative or evidential purposes in criminal investigations andor prosecutions (whether on its own initiative or at the request of law enforcement authorities), it has that objectionable content in its possession with a lawful excuse.
under section of the Citizenship Act .
under section or of the Citizenship Act .
under section or section () or section () of the Child Support Act . Non
under section of the SWERL Act to relieve some of the immediate pressure
under sections ()(e) and of the FVPC Act, the online content host does not have the objectionable material in its possession for the purposes of supply or distribution to another person (i.e. disclosing the objectionable content to law enforcement authorities does
under that Act which contain Citizenship information.
under the GCDOs mandate for cloud digital investment.
under the SWERL Act of three working days.
under the section for suppliers.
under this Agreement, the performance of that Partys obligations shall be suspended for as long as
understanding and workability of the other proposals. There will be opportunity for
understanding of the scale of social
understanding, can create uncertainty in cloud adoption, resulting in inertia, or
undertake a collaborative design process with the sector and relevant training
undertake compliance monitoring of TF providers
undertake in writing that they:
undertake investigations in relation to that actual or suspected breach as deemed
undertaking education and publication of guidance to TF providers and the public
unemployment. There is often cooccurring low
unique needs of agencies that will allow for onpremise investment, no agency
unique to people in gang communities, however,
unless it is necessary to request the information via other means.
unlikely as the SACP will need to improve by at least six notches.
up to eight weeks during July and August ;
guidance in line with the highlevel principles to support agencies to adopt
privacy principles from the Privacy Act , including the new
, then all Parties will be advised in writing.
upon the individuals death.
upon the individuals death;
use a temporary joined up view to link all of the customers identity and Life Event
use hybrid cloud to build in resilience and Disaster Recovery capability etc.
use of cloud technologies;
use specialist equipment (for example to examine computer hard drives for child sexual exploitation material)
use the personal information and expected Adverse Actions .
using cloud services has been initiated. This project will provide a pathway to
using security controls to separate it from the public Internet environment.
utilisation and outcomes.
v. the council(s), or joint committee, are only required to analyse, provide information on, and consult on two options the status JjfNo
valve in the form of the Chief Censors publication callin power. However,
varied, with interdependencies across various
venue names and addresses
verification to confirm whether a standard or set of guidelines is being
verified as the correct person and has authorised email as a preferred
verify that personal information shared under this Agreement is of an adequate
verify that personal information shared under this Agreement is of an adequate standard and
vi. assumptions, policies, and methodologies;
vi. the proposal put out for consultation should have to include in sufficient detail the impacts (including financial) on each district o
via technology, waste to energy consumption methods, and the historical journey of
vii. councils that are considering establishing a water services CCO would not be required to carry out the separate review options No
viii. the final decision to join the CCO rests with each individual council; (jlNo
want to explore how digital technology can improve the lives of New Zealanders.
ward. In many ways, the separate mechanisms for creating Mori wards and general
wards and constituencies.
wards are misaligned (see Appendix B for a summary of the differences), and the
wards except that the Local Government
wards in any particular way. Councils
wards in the future without being subject to a poll demand. Exactly how this is to be
wards process to put in place a permanent mechanism for councils to establish Mori
wards were repealed in February
wards without being subject to a poll demand. This new mechanism is to be in place in
wards, the council is the decisionmaker
wards) for electoral purposes. This paper:
warranted under the Official Information Act , within business days of Cabinet
warranties), and XVI.d (No liability), will continue to apply in accordan ce with their terms.
was a highe. evel of adoption of cloud services. It is critical that this momentum and
was established in and the Dominion Archives in . The National Art Gallery and the Dominion Museum operated under their own board from until , when they were incorporated into the Museum of New Zealand.
was fairly considered, or they dont like
was insufficient informatio n provided to recalculate the ratio . We believe the riskweighte d
was not requested or the ratings do not currently exist .
was requested by submitters during the inquiry into the local elections.
was working as it is intended to work an d the company has developed a solid track record of
was working as it is intended to work and the company has de veloped a solid track record of
was working with the Department to identify options to meet costs, including
water related revenu es and expenditure s, occur red in t he financial year . For
water scarcity and servicing small rural communities. We also discussed the
water services in New Zealand; and
water services sector, and ensuring there are sufficient capacity and capability to
water. Chlorate is a carcinogen, formed when liquid chlorine is stored incorrectly or for too
waterservicesdia.govt.nz
waterservicesreformdia.govt.nz
we are not f inanci al adv isors to you and that in performing the RES , SP Glo bal Ratings is
we believe t here is sufficien t separation between th e councils and the WSE .
we focus on our young people to prevent and
we have identified the correct individual and verify the contact details in
we may leave this gap in coverage for an extended period oftime
we simply square the percentage of the population that are compliant users. downloads at compliant use gives you just . of contacts recorded.
weak budgetary performance and debt burden.
weaken below . This could most likely occur if the expected operating efficiency savings are
weaken or if operating def icits become entrenched . This could oc cur depending on how the
weaken under s cenario to . compared to . under scenario and . under our curre nt
weaken, as demo nstrat ed by significantl y increasing capital expenditure without displaying
weaken, as demonstrated b y signific antly increasing capital expenditure without disp laying
website visitor access statistics were too low to justify its continuation
website, subject to redactions as appropriate under the Official Information Act
website. Documents are in Adobe PDF format.
website. The Department of Internal Affairs will inform councils and stakeholders of
well as asking your confirmation of two amendments to the Taumata Arowaithe
wellbeing of individuals within these communities, including their
wellbeing as highlighted through the lens of Te
wellbeing), taha whnau (our whnau,
were likely to be relatively small compared to the overall budget.,. It also noted that it
were designed and implemented to support the governments
were discussed. No significant feedback was received regarding this Order.
were keen to be involved in its development. They see it as a key part to
were recommendations of the Justice Committee in the Inquiry into the General
were requesting a change to the name recorded in their passport as a result of entering into
wharenui, or meeting house,
what future support may be required.
where necessary to support recovery in areas affected by the severe weather.
where possible. With the arrival of onshore hyperscale data centres, the balance of
where the original information received by IR from DIA is incomplete or
where there are gaps. GCDO will engage with agencies to understand where on the
where we feel comfortable, safe,
whereas the Royal Commission is providing physical copies of its report and supporting documents in
which came into force in April .
which certain organisations andor workers must be authorised to perform specific
which each data set is collected.
which has shaped the way in which gang members
which imposes secrecy obligations on every officer of that Department.
which is an exact match with someone of the same name and birth born in
which is by November (LG refers). This will require an amendment to
which represents a reasonable population size. However, this presents itself as a key
which the complaint should be made.
who are responsible for providing a range of services to the Prime Minister and the Executive, including personnel, accommodation, transport, the hosting of international guests and the delivery of national events.
who were marginalised and faced
whom that information relates under any Privacy Act request,
whose location is unknown and where they are in default of their payment
whnau within them to be supported.
whnau, and culture. These positive behaviours
whnau. However, not receiving these
widespread cloud uptake. Despite several attempts to increase cloud adoption
will align the process for establishing Mori wards and constituencies as closely as
will automatically allocate the individual a unique Partner Specific Customer Identifier (PSCID). The
will b e reg ulated by the Commerce Commission .
will be appropriate. This proposed default position will support visibility of these
will be attempted by email (if email address available).
will be segregated from the main accounts and only accessible by specifically
will continue to operate within the context of the PFA while providing clearer direction
will deliver rel atively stable and predictable cash flows. We anticipate that the companys rat io
will deliver relatively stable and predictable cash flows. We anticipate that the companys ratio
will hear evidence in public settings, when and where appropriate.
will hold all necessary statutory powers andor delegations required for the provision of
will include estimating different levels of intervention and investment required;
will involve hearing evidence in public settings, when it is appropriate to do so.
will lead to realistic opportunities to enable
will provide greater clarity about property risks to New Zealanders, helping them to make better informed decisions.
winner (like for parliamentary elections).
wish to discuss the contents of this briefing.
with a completed former employee form and evidence of your identity (e.g. a photo or scan of your driver licence or main page of your passport).
with consultation on resource management reform proposals and the Future for Local
with further advice including an outline of a proposed work programme and decisions
with further advice regarding process and timeframes to progress
with in accordance with clause above.
with information and represen tations you have provided .
with large uptake of the digital solution, ranging from (Vaithianathan ) to (Plank ) and optimistic testing and isolation assumptions, could push the R eff below one. In sum, reducing the firstorder tracing delay would substantially reduce R eff , but may not push it below one without additional social restrictions or recursive contact tracing.
with limited capability. The accumulation of technical debt can adversely affect innovation and the ability to
with providers and the public on the benefits of cloud while also acknowledging
with public cloud deployment models which offer significant
with someone of the same name and birth born in New Zealand.
with technological change and policy aims;
with the DILG and Te Khui Raraunga, the following principles for the Policy are
with the Department during that preparation period. WSDPs will include baseline information about the current state of their
with the Minister Responsible for the NZSIS, the Chief Executive of the Department of
with the New Zealand Information Security Manual (NZISM).
with the Public Finance Act requirements related to responsibilities and
with the Public Records Act and any retention and disposal schedule which governs
with the WSE. This is based on the strong political invol vement, a nd much higher degree
with the appropriate balance to be taken between public health outcomes and
with the appropriate security endorsements, caveats, and protective markings and in
with the measures around service delivery standards. This is a maturing conversation
with the private sector, public sector agenci es and regulators on the potential role for
with their privacy is minimised:
with youth we must ensure we are creating trust
with. Equally, agencies often have key resources
withheld under th e Official Information A ct (the Act). W here this i s the case, th e relevant sections of
withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of
within Vote Internal Affairs to provide funding for the completion of the Royal
within Vote Internal Affairs, with a corresponding impact on the operating
within communities. The content varies each quarter
within gangs is intergenerational trauma. For some
within society.Our Future
within the BDM Database remains the sole responsibility of the RegistrarGeneral.
within the CCO area, as well as the collective impacts on the communit ies within the CCO area;
within the Citizenship Database remains the sole responsibility of the Secretary.
within the Customer Centred Management Solution.
within the debt burden assessment for all councils . Under scenari o , we believe there i s
within the gang environment desire positive
within this Agreement then the Customer Single View relating to the individual is
without a change to the current perception of
won the best website award at the Plain English Awards in November , the second time Government Information Services has the won the award.
wording, please provide this wording to the Department) .
work across teams and organisations, through multiple means (voice,
workforce. The focus for the strategic plan is to increase uptake of a training programme to ensure that all the workforce can demonstrate those core competencies by and will have achieved, or be on a pathway to achieving, appropriate New Zealand Qualifications Authority level seven qualifications. The Ministry is currently reviewing Te Uru Kahikatea: The Public Health Workforce Development Plan (Ministry of Health ) . It will ensure that the strategic plan takes into account any changes resulting from that review. For the intervention workforce, the Ministry will prioritise new service models that address cultural barriers, such as the use of service codesign with community stakeholders, incorporating cultural models, and focus on training to ensure that all practitioners demonstrate the gambling harm competencies under the Addiction Intervention Competency Framework (DAPAANZ ). The Ministry s expectation is that all intervention practitioners will be: registered as a health practitioner permitted to practise within a relevant scope of practice under the Health Practitioners Competence Assurance Act , or registered or endorsed by the Addiction Practitioners Association Aotearoa New Zealand (DAPAANZ) as having demonstrated the relevant specific competencies, or equivalently registered with another relevant professional organisation ( eg, a counsellor registered with the New Zealand Association of Counsellors). The Ministry aims to increase the diversity of the workforce by introducing peer support in the short to medium term. While it will encourage the development of the peer support workforce, the peer support workers will not be subject to the same requirements listed above. Table : Objective priorities for action Objective : A skil led workforce is developed to del iver effective services Priorities for action Short to medium term priorities Long term priorities Continue and increase uptake of training for Identify and implement workforce development staff working within services to prevent and training, career pathways and training minimise gambling harm . opportunities for staff working within services to prevent and minimise gambling harm, so that all staff demonstrate the required competencies and have relevant qualificati ons, registration or endorsement . Support the introduction and training for peer support, other allied health workers and kaiwhina support. Work with workforce training providers and DIA to ensure cultural competence training materials are appropriate to clients most likely to be affected by gambling harm. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
working collaboratively with other institutions having similar purposes, including those forming part of the international library community.
working days to dispute the information received.
working on the review allowing for a more
working together to manage overlapping related consultations including on the
workingUsers can securely access systems from wherever there is an internet
workloads, it is about providing a connected cloud experience. Many agencies often
would also provide the opportunity for previous industry and consumer
would b e uncha nged compared to the current base case. We believe that operating margins
would be somewhat weaker than under our current assess ment . We forecast the operating
would be u ncha nged comp ared to our current assessment . The CMT noted that operating
would enable streamlining of agency certification and accreditation processes, with
would meet their service needs in the future.
would remove aluminium without understanding the consequences.
would seek to identify further Government interventions and potential investments
would support cloud adoption;
writing and signed by all the Parties not included within a Class of Agencies.
writing but if attempts at contact by telephone are unsuccessful, contact
www.bdmonline.dia.govt.nz
www.classificationoffice.govt.nz
www.communitymatters.govt.nz
www.crowninfrastructure.govt.nzwpcontentuploadsCIPBOFProjectListReportAprilFINAL.pdf
www.crowninfrastructure.govt.nzwpcontentuploadsCIPBoFReportDECFINAL.pdf
www.cycloneappeal.govt.nz
www.dia.govt.nzAntimoneylaunderingandcounteringfinancingofterrorism
www.dia.govt.nzCustomerExperienceSurvey
www.dia.govt.nzDigitalSafety
www.dia.govt.nzDogControl
www.facebook.comLakeTaupoHarbourmaster
www.gamblingcommission.govt.nz
www.immigration.govt.nzcontact
www.natlib.govt.nzschools
www.parliament.nzenNZMPPMPsExpenses
www.parliament.nzenmpsandelectoratesmpsexpenses
wnanga to explore a range of issues related to Government use of cloud
x AWS collaboration with relevant agencies to support the development, and robustness, of technology toolsservices for carbon emissions measurement, reporting and reduction.
x AWS developing and deploying training init iatives in New Zealand with the intention
x Assum es that the hypothetica l scenario submitted to SP Global Ratings by you is implemented in accordance
x a quarterly strategic dialogue between GCDO and AWS senior leaders in New Zealand to help ensure that industry perspectives and international best practices contribute to the delivery of improved outcomes for:
x a series of events and briefings by DIA to raise awareness of cloud technology for
x accelerating cloud adoption, skills development, digital innovation, growth and exports in
x an innovation dialogue between senior leaders. The dialogue would provide opportunities for the public sector and industry to explore challenges, share insights, future trends and innovative cloud developments
x communication by relevant DIA senior offici als of their confidence in cloud services
x consistency with Te Tiriti o Waitangi and it s principles to enable the digital needs and
x developing on an annual basis, specific initiatives to be prioritised to improve cloud capabilities within the New Zealand public sector, and identify appropriate new
x exploration of cybersecurity activities to support New Zealand small and mediumsized businesses, including initiatives to provide guidance and other support to Small and Medium Business (SMBs)
x exploring the potential for investment (including by AWS) in grid connected
x identifying opportunities to articulate th e benefits of, and use cases for, cloud
x progressing actions relevant to enhancing digital skills and talent in New Zealand,
x regular engagement between AWS and the National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC)
x supporting New Zealand public sector capab ility strengthening to deliver worldleading
x supporting the governmentindustry partnership approach signalled in the Digital
x supporting the small business sector to become digitally engaged, e.g. through
x the agreed areas of focus under the DIA Mana Qrite agreement with the Data Iwi Leaders
x the parties discussing their respective perspectives on new technologies andor international best practice that could inform planned and ongoing projects as appropriate.
x the parties may involve other agencies such as Department of Prime Minister and
x. councils are able to factor into their decisionmaking the consideration of the other participating councils and the views of (j)JNo
xi. councils would still be required to amend their longtJrm lans (LTP) if they wish to decide to join the CCO but, if they have used
xii. councils would be able to condition ally approve their LTP amendment to be able to align with the other participating councils No
year water infrastructure plans is core to the negotiating activity with Water
years as recovery funding flows through.
years many of these gangs
years to put water services on a financially sustainable footing
you and y our team have provided to us. To the extent that th ese assumptions, our crit eria or
you met with Hon Kris Faafoi, Minister of Broadcasting, Communications, and Digital
you with options in April in advance of a July Cabinet paper.
young people in these communities experience
your document and well give you a quote.
youth experience a shift into adolescence involving
youth that considers Te Whare Tapa Wh creates
zoom in up to without spilling off the screen or having to scroll horizontally at small resolutions
the Department of Internal Affairs
Privacy Commissioner CJ Te Mana Matapono Matatapu . . . . Organisations can act once they are aware that the individual has died, such as beginning to pay out an entitlement to the deceased individuals estate, dealing with insurance, paying or changing social welfare or other benefits to or changing accounts for survivors. The Agreement will replace a series of other agreements : Agreement to provide birth and death information (Mortality Review Committe es); AIA Services NZ Limited Information Supply Agreement; Cigna Insurance Limited Information Sharing Agreement; Domain Name Commission Information Supply Agreement; Forsyth Barr Limited Information Supply Agreement; Government Superannuation Fund Inform ation Matching Agreement; Mori Trustee Te Tumu Paeroa Information Sharing Agreement; Massey University Information Sharing Agreement; MyTrove Information Sharing Agreement; National Provident Fund Information Matching Agreement; New Zealand Marketing Association Limited Information Sharing Agreement; University of Auckland Information Sharing Agreement; University of Waikato Information Sharing Agreement; and Westpac New Zeal and Limited Information Supply Agreement. The public services that this Agreement is intended to facilitate are: the accurate and efficient assessment of eligibility for and entitlement to receive public services; the accurate and efficient delivery of pu blic services by the Registrar General and the other public sector agencies that are Parties; the provision by the Registrar General of accurate Death Information and Overseas Death Information to Parties that are New Zealand Private Sector Agencies for th eir use as per Clauses to . Mortality Reviews and advice on how to reduce preventable deaths; and prevention, detection, investigation, and prosecution of offences, and the conduct of civil proceedings including judicial review The AISA is broad in t erms of the number and types of Parties , including broad classes of agencies and an intermediary class of agencies that may on share the information with other entities, including overseas entities, under a separate agreement death information fields the Parties can obtain, use, or on share , depending on the relevant purpose ; and purposes for which these Parties can obtain, use, or on share information. Given this AISAs breadth, m y focus during consultation s with DIA has been on the nature of the privacy protections built into it. ikudgtnr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Privacy Commissioner CJ Te Mana Matapono Matatapu Classes mechanism and class es of intermediaries . The Privacy Act was amended to enable an authorised information sharing agreement to apply to classes of agency by members being added to a Schedule by the Lead Agency ( in this case , DIA), and the agreement applies to each member of the class as parties to the agreement . . This AISA will be the first agreement to apply s which allows an AISA to include classes of agencies. Under s ()(g), an AISA must specify with due particularity the class(es) of agency the agreement applies to. This ensures adequate public transparenc y concerning who may be obtaining, using, and on sharing individuals personal information, especially since classes can include private sector agencies and for whom DIA will be responsible for dealing with complaints if the private sector agency is unable to be held accountable . . Thirteen different classes of agencies are provided for under this AISA , including: Charitable entities under section () Charities Act ; Credit unions, friendly societies, incorporated societies, partnerships, registered limited partnerships and registered New Zealand companies; Crown entities listed in Schedule of the Crown Entities Act (other than specified organisations listed in secti on of the Privacy Act); Independent advisory committees and statutory supervisory authorities established under legislation to provide independent advice to a Minister or the Government on a matter relating to the implementation or operation of that legislation ; Independent statutory bodies established under legislation and having a regulatory or administrative role (other than a State services agency) ; Intermediaries New Zealand public sector or private sector agencies whose functions or activities i nclude the collection of death information to lawfully disclose that information to a New Zealand or overseas agency in accordance with an agreement ; Iwi organisations and other Mori organisations listed in the Schedule of the Electoral (Iwi Organisation and Other Mori Organisation) Regulations ; Local authorities named in Schedule to the Local Government Official Information and Meetings Act ; Mortality review committees appointed under section of the Pae Ora (Healthy Futures) Act ; Occu pational regulatory bodies established by or under legislation to license, register, approve, provide oversight of, or otherwise regulate individuals who belong to a particular profession, calling, trade, occupation, or industry ; Public tertiary institutio ns as defined in section () of the Education and Training Act . ; and The agreement has been reviewed on the basis of the proposed classes, however, the agreement has not yet been completed with the proposed members of each class as at the of review. ikudgtnr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Privacy Commissioner CJ Te Mana Matapono Matatapu Privacy Commissioners submission on the proposed information sharing agreement facilitating access to information about deaths Introduction . Under s ()(a)(i) of the Privacy Act ( Privacy Act ), the Department of Internal Affairs ( DIA ), as the lead agency , has consulted me on a proposed information sharing agreement . The agreement seek to enable twelve public sector agencies and thirteen different classes of public and private sector agencies to collect, use, and share certain personal information about deaths of individuals (AISA ) to facilitate public services . . Section ()(a) provides that I must consider the privacy implications of the proposed agreement , and ss ()(b) further provides that I may make any submissions that I consider appropriate. In considering the privacy implications under ss (a) , I have regard to the AISAs required form and content , which is set out under s , including the specified safeguards that will apply to protect the privacy of individuals and will ensure that any interference with their privacy is minimised . Background . When a person dies in New Zealand, the Registrar General of Births, Deaths, and Marriages (Registrar General ) must register the persons death. This Agreement facilitates the sharing of death information the Registrar General holds to public and private agencies that have a role in updating individuals records when they die. Parties to this Agreement may take subsequent actions based on the update of records relating to the deceased individual or associa ted persons, such as granting benefits or entitlements. . This Agreement aims to ensure that personal information records held in organisations databases or lists in electronic formats are from information held by the Registrar General when the in dividual in question has died. The intended benefits are as follows: Organisations having ready access to an authoritative source of registered death information in New Zealand from the Death Register, avoiding the risk of services and communications to a living individual being incorrectly discontinued; Organisations not having to approach the survivors of the deceased individual to require them to provide information andor a death certificate and thus placing an additional burden on people already exp eriencing other complex issues; Avoiding the risk that incorrect or false information may be provided to an organisation; Organisations being aware of the death so that whnau of the deceased individual do not receive official correspondence, subscription reminders, or invoices for charges which may cause significant upset or distress to the deceaseds family; and ikudgtnr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Privacy Commissioner CJ Te Mana Matapono Matatapu in the appropriate schedule and circulate the schedule to all Parties. This ensures further transparency for agencies and the public. Other safeguards . There are important l imits on sharing personal information under this agreement. Information may only be received under this Agreement where the Registrar General or DIA is either the providing or receiving Party. As identified, i ntermediaries can only on share information with Clients if they have a l egal basis to do so, other than this Agreement. Other Parties may not share personal information between themselves under this Agreement. This helps to ensure that once agencies receive personal information, there are protections to ensure that it is not unnecessarily diffused to other agencies. . The AISA also provides that n o Party is obliged to provide any of the requested information to be shared under this Agreement. This is an important privacy protection because it allows agencies to exercise discretion or judgement concerning personal information sharing in the interest s of an individuals privacy. An agency cannot be forced to share when they consider that sharing may constitute a breach of the agreement or a persons privacy more generally. . Another protection requires that c harities, registered New Zealand companies, partnerships, registered limited partnerships, friendly societies, credit unions, incorporated societies , and intermediaries may only offer andor commence products and services where the deceased individual had a prior relationship with the Party. I consider that this can prevent individuals personal information from being used in a way that could be considered potentially unethical during a time of distress for families. . The AISA also requires that p rocesses and procedures exist within each Party to ensure that information sent under this Agreement is transferred separately from information transferred under other agreements. This will help to ensure that p ersonal information is not inadvertently disclosed to the wrong agencies. It also means that agencies will be able to comply with privacy protective AISA obligations that apply to the information processed under this agreement, as agencies may have other r epositories of personal information outside of this agreement. Crucially, the AISA provides that p rocesses and procedures exist within each Party to ensure that the personal information received under this Agreement is only used for the purposes specified in this Agreement and remains protected. Review . This AISA provides that a joint review of this Agreement must be undertaken whenever any Party not included within a Class of Agencies believes a review is necessary. Furthermore, DIA shall conduct a review annually or at intervals specified by the Privacy Commissioner as specified in section of the Privacy Act . The report will be ikudgtnr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Privacy Commissioner CJ Te Mana Matapono Matatapu Trustee corporations within the meaning of a trustee company the Trustee Companies Act and including the Public Trust . . On its face, the intermediaries class has the potent ial to be very broad. However, I am satisfied that the proposed AISA includes appropriate safeguards . . First, intermediaries are defined as A New Zealand Agency that is a public sector agency (other than a Department or a Specified Organisation) or a New Zealand private sector agency and whose functions or activities include the collection of death information for the purpose of lawfully discl osing that information to another New Zealand Agency or an Overseas Agency in accordance with an agreement between the Intermediary and that other agency. . Intermediaries may only on share information with their clients if they have a legal basis to do so. As New Zealand agencies, intermediaries will clearly fall within the scope of the Privacy Act and must comply with the information privacy principles , including principle (security of personal information) and principle (disclosure of personal information outside New Zealand) . Intermediaries are allowed to disclose information to overseas agencies. However, this can only be done in accordance with an ag reement between the intermediary and other agency governing the safeguar ds for the information before the intermediary shares information they receive under this AISA with the client. My Office and the Registrar General will review these written agreements before signing. . Moreover, I am pleased to see that prior to including a New Zealand Agency in the Intermediary class , DIA must consider the following : The nature of the Intermediarys undertaking or activity and whether the Intermediary has a genuine ne ed and lawful purpose to use the personal information in carrying out that undertaking or activity; The Intermediarys policies and practices in relation to the security of personal information and the privacy of individuals; and Any other matter that DIA considers to be relevant. . Further, DIA will have control over the specific data fields of death information to be shared with a particular intermediary that are appropriate for the intermediarys purpose and the permitted uses of that information when adding an intermediary party to the AISA. . Regarding classes other than intermediaries, while DIA may agree that an agency may become a member of a class and , therefore , a party to the AISA, DIA must obtain the Registrar Generals consent prior to approv ing the agencies inclusion . This will help to ensure that sufficient checks are occurring prior to the admission of an agency. Upon becoming a Party to this agreement , DIA will include the New Zealand Agencys name ikudgtnr Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
New Zea and Lbrares Partnersho Programme Independent Quality Assurance Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs New Ze.aland U:braries Pertners:hi:p Programme )ril DIANZLPP IOA A contents Executive Summary . Summary of Findings Introduct ion . Scope . Approach . Background O Programme Review Findings . Programme Scope . Documentation . Equity and Library Sector Experience . Governance . Sustainab ility . Performance Monitoring . Communicat ion and Cross LibrariesCounc ils Collaboration . Programme Controls Appendix A: Documentation Reviewed Appendix B: Stakeholders Interviewed Inherent Limitations This report has been prepared in accordance with our Consultancy Services Order dated OMarch . The services provided under our engagement letter A. Outputs of the Services) have not been undertaken in accordance with any auditing, review or assurance standards. The term .. AuditReview used in this report does not relate to an AuditReview as defined under professional assurance standards. The information presented in this report is based on that made available to us in the course of our work information provided by the Department of Internal Affairs. We have indicated within this report the sources of the information provided. Unless otherwise stated in this report, we have relied upon the truth, accuracy and completeness of any information provided or made available to us in connection w ith the Services without independent ly verifying it. We do not give any warranty of completeness, accuracy or reliability in relation to the statements and representations made by, and the information and documentation provided by, the Departmen t of Internal Affairs manageme nt and personnel stakeholders consulted as part of the process. KPMG is under no obligation in any circumstance to update this report, in either oral or written form, for events occurring after the report has been issued in final form. Any redistribution of this report requires the prior written approval of KPMG and in any event is to be a complete and unaltered version of the report and accompan ied only by such other materials as KPMG may agree. No third party is entitled to rely on any information included in this report. Third Party Reliance Document Classification KPMG Confide.ntfal Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs We have documented a detailed set of recommendations tor strengthening the NZLPP. Our recommenda tions are: No. Recommendations Finding Category Management Comments The NZLPP should finalise the scope for initiatives being established as part of the Programme and develop a clear roadmap to delivery by the funding end . Programme Scope NZLPP is developing a Programme Execution Plan PEP) to reset the Programme and re baseline the projects and workstreams within. The reset introduces strategic elements to address the sustainability risk that has been identified within the library sector. The programme should introduce formal Programme A rebaselined PEP will allow the Programme controls and processes to document scope Scope to enact change control against fully scoped changes and decisions . projects and workstreams. The new Programme Board will be posit ioned to receive and approve changes to scope etc. in the delivery phase. Leverage the programme reset as an Documentation The PEP will be the core programme opportunity to update the documen tation and documen t to secure senior leadership obtain the programmes senior leadership endorsement. endorsement of the Programme s next phase. Individual project planning will also be produced tor approval by relevant Project Executives once baseline has been achieved. Define clear accountabilities for ongoing Documenta tion Noted, these accountabilities will be included maintenance of documentation. within the PEP. The programme should accelerate and prioritise Equity and Sector Te Ao Maori principles have been considered efforts to recruit Maori resources in the Experience in all programme approaches, and this will be programme team and improve Maori signif icantly enhanced by the Pou Arahi representation at the governance level. position. This role will be progressed with urgency in the delivery phase and w ill be supported by other DIAMaor i networks. Maori representation at a governance level is secured via Te Ropu W hakahau and their ongoing involvemen t at Steering Group level. However, a further Maori representative on the new Programme Board will be considered , potentially a nominated member of Te Ropu Whakahau . The programme should leverage sector Equity and Sector Noted, this is being included in Programme partnerships and relationships to hire resources Experience reset resourcing discussions and decisions . with strong library experience. We recommend that the NZLPP should leverage Governance People capability and capacity including senior the programme reset as an opportunity to leadership capacity is a recognised risk for the review the need for both an Assurance Group and a Steering Group and appoint appropriate members that can commit to the required governance duties. Programme . The reset of both the Assurance Group and the Steering Group with clear roles and responsibilities is planned and delegation to Programme leadership will be made where appropriate. OOCJment Classification KPMG Coflfide.ntial Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The NZLPP should prioritise and complete the Performance The Monitoring Evaluation Framework has implementation of the Monitoring and Monitoring been accepted by Programme governance and Evaluation Framework developed by Allen will be enacted in the next phase of the Clarke. Programme. It includes a next phase of evaluation utilising the data collection methods recommended by Allen Clarke. The NZLPP should use the programme reset as Performance Noted. Regular reporting and participat ion in an opportun ity to consider funding the councils Monitoring evaluation is a core requirement of the and public libraries to assign resources for secondee Letter of Agreement. Reporting has reporting to the programme. been designed not be onerous and support will be provided to councils on an ongoing basis by the Programme team. We recommend that the NZLPP develops and Communication Noted. This is ongoing and part of the shares positive library sector outcomes and and Cross Programme communication planning for the communities stories as a result of the librariesCouncils next phase. programme. Collaboration The NZLPP should implement the Communicat ion Communities of Practice for secondees were communication and cross collaborat ion channels and Cross launched in midMay, along w ith tools to in the library sector. LibrariesCouncils facilitate cross regional collaborat ion. Further Collaboration opportun ities for collaboration are being considered as part of Programme reset. The NZLPP should complete the identification Commun ication Noted. The Programme has a full Stakeholder and documen t the key stakeholders audience and Cross Engagement Strategy Plan w hich needs to lists. LibrariesCouncils be reviewed in light of the emergent Collaboration sustainability workstreams. During the programme reset, DIA should review Programme Noted. A delivery phase risk workshop will the risk register to ensure that any longstanding Controls enable a full review of risks and planned risks are revaluated and mitigated in a timely manner. mitigations. Once baselined, projects will maintain risk registers with a clear escalation path to the Programme Board as required. Document Oassificaoon KPMG Conrtden tial Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs . Background The government has funded a post COVID recovery initiative across New Zealands library system, especially in public libraries. with a funding package of . million over years. The New Zealand Libraries Partnership Programme will support librarians a nd library services to be retained in New Zealand libraries and assist them to support community recovery. This will enable librarians and library services to play a key role in supporting their communities and people seeking jobs as part of the recovery from COVID. The Local Government COVI Response Unit signalled in its initial analysis that all councils expected a significant reduction in nonrate revenue in the fourthquarter of and well into . Councils that have large numbers of nonessential service businesses in their district are also more likely to face delayed collection from both commercial and residential property rates. The combined effect of lowerthanplanned rates and other revenue reductions means councils are likely to reduce some operationa l expenditure and capital expenditure , which will create job losses directly or indirectly. Although all local authorities provide public library services, such services are not a legislative requirement. The National Library has received clear signals from the library sector that reductions to public library services are expected as a direct result of councils reviewing their expenditure plans. Local governme nt collective ly is the biggest employer of librarians in New Zealand. Role reductions will likely mean a permanent loss of talent to the profession and a consequent deterioration of a valued community service that will be difficult to restore to former levels once skilled workers are lost. The tertiary education sector publicly signalled it is experiencing an impact that they expect will worsen over the next year. Deficits are likely to be addressed in the short term by cutting staff salaries. Library services that can be exited to reduce costs include collaborative services provided by the National Library that are likely to impact student access to knowledge and information. This initiative is designed to support the retention of librarians in employment by public libraries over the next two years, while councils position for recovery. The initiative will provide the opportunity to improve reading, literacy and wellbeing outcomes in communities. support building digital literacy among those who have been most excluded from online services and information during the pandemic or have lost jobs as a consequence . and create new digital resources to support online learning for students. This will primarily utilise and build the skills and experience of librarians currently employed in the local government sector. particularly where they otherwise risk losing their jobs. The programme also includes funding for specialist library services for schools and young people with the greatest need, and needs to consider where to from here for all elements of the programme. The opportunities this funding presents the libraries sector are immense. therefore a key focus of the programme is to assess both the current state of the New Zealand libraries system and define the desired future state, as well as develop a strategic roadmap on how to get there. Document Classification tPMG Confidenti .al Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs The intervention logic map for the programme as shown in the Programme Initiation Document describes the programme focus areas: Current state Intervention The programme had to be set up in a short timeframe to implement the business case and demonstrate how the National Library can help lead and support COVID recovery across New Zealands library system and public libraries. The programme has been setup with defined projects. These defined projects are supported by the central National Library project team that provide strategic direction and governance. According to the Programme Initiation Document, these projects include: Secondments Project: to evaluate and support the workforce capability of the seconded library staff. Evaluation and Monitoring Workstream: to support and monitor evaluation of secondments workstream and the programme to ensure they are meeting the defined outcomes. Workforce Capability Workstream: to build on the skills gap analysis and undertake a training provision analysis to understand what current training is available in the New Zealand market and where gaps exist. Document Classification KPMG Confidential Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Maintaining of library seNices to the public during the time of community recovery. Skills enhancement in the community to support community recovery. . Focus on Matauranga Maori. . Support the communities most in need. . Leverage existing partnerships and initiatives. We understand from inteNiews that the National library wants to promote equitable outcomes for the sector and community. Rural and remote areas have a significant Maori population and an equity strategy is critical for the programme to achieve its strategic objectives in these areas. lnteNiews identified that the programme has limited Maori representat ion at the governance level and is struggling to hire Maori resources into the programme team. We did not see any evidence of a clear Maori and Pacific strategy that outlines how the programme plans to focus and help improve outcomes for Maori and Pacifica population in rural areas. We understand from the inteNiews that the library sector has a unique culture, operating model. and needs. This is accepted and recognised by the programme leadership . The programme team has limited resources with previous library sector experience which impacts the programmes ability to engage and relate with the public libraries effectively. Recommendations: The programme should accelerate and prioritise efforts to recruit Maori resources in the programme team and improve Maori representation at the governance level. The programme should leverage sector partnerships and relationships to hire resources with strong library experience . . Governance The NZLPP governance structure has been designed to cover both the programme governance and control, and sector reference group type approaches . The programme SRO is ultim ately accountable for the success of the programme and should ideally provide continuity of leadership throughout the programme. The SROs role is to: Ensure that the programme is focused on achieving its objectives and benefits. Ensure the programme gives value for money, ensuring a costconscious approach to the programme of work. Appoint the other members of relevant governance groups and programme management team. Secure funding for the programme. Hold the programme to account for the quality of the products created for any outputs created and realising the benefits, including undertaking benefits reviews. Document Classfootion KPMG Confidential Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Governanc e Groups Responsibilities Frequency Libraries Quarterly Monitor and oversee the programme direction and benefits realisation. Information Provide advice directly to the programme sponsor and minister asAdvisory Committee required. (LIAC) Other management groups or forums that support the Programme include: Governance Groups Responsibilities Frequency Training Advisory Group A small group of representatives from partners, public libraries and Monthly ITOs are available as an advisory group to the programme director and team. They will use their expertise across training, skills enhancement and the public library sector to support and guide the programme of initiatives. The responsibil ities of the Training Advisory Group are as follows: Provide input and advice to the programme team on training and capability uplift activities. Review and comment on training related documentat ion. Support the programme by sharing knowledge and helping connect the team to resources and the wider library sector. Provide an active and positive contribution to the programme. Programme Reference Group The Programme Reference Group are individuals brought together to Monthly discuss and deal with operational issues for the programme and the workstreams w ithin. They provide advice and guidance as subject matter experts to support programme delivery. The Reference Group will: Provide input and advice to the programme team. Review and comment on draft programme documents. Ensure that the views and interests of other stakeholders are represented . Provide an active and positive contribution to the programme. NZLPP Working Group The NZLPP Working Group is made up of internal National Library and Weekly programme team members. It is an extension of the programme team and meets to discuss programme progress and seek feedback and input from relevant National library subject matter experts. We understand from our interviews and review of the NZLPP Governance Member Induction Pack that the programme has a governance structure with the defined accountabilities for the Steering Group and supporting groups (Assurance Groups, Reference Group and Training Advisory Group) described above. However, a number of responsibilities of the Assurance Group and Steering Group overlap. The stakeholders indicated that the governan ce structure could be simplified for more robust decision making and that critical feedback received from the governance is limited. Doo,ment Classification KPMG Confidential Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs We understand from review of the Evaluation Plan that the programme has engaged Allen Clarke to develop a Monitoring and Evaluation Framework. The scope of engagement with Allen Clarke included: . Develop an intervention logic and a Monitoring and Evaluation (ME) Framework for the programme . This work will set out: a. expected outcomes at a programme level in the shortterm ( years) and in the longerterm ( years). b. expected outputs from the programme (where possible). c. an indicative ME Framework which will support the assessment of how well the programme is performing. As part of developing an indicative ME Framework. Allen Clarke will identify information sources which could enable the National Library to collect richer data and provide a more nuanced and variety of perspectives about the impacts of the programme and the work of the National Library. . Undertake an Aotearoa Peoples Network Kaharoa (APNK) insights analysis to identify how w ell APNK is working, what could be improved and whq is using the service. Since APNK was last reviewed in there have been a range of changes made to the network, including changing from using Windows to Chromebooks. In addition, technolog ical changes have led to the increased use of Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) The programme has an Assurance and Audit plan to support the Monitoring and Evaluation Framework. We understand that the programme is in early stages of implement ing the Monitoring and Evaluation Framework and assess its effectiveness. It was mentioned in our interviews that the programme is starting to monitor public libraries and councils progress and how the funding is being used. The stakeholde rs interview indicated that reporting from the libraries to NZLPP is ad hoc and informal and lack of councils responsiveness is a concern. Recomme ndations: The NZLPP should establish formal expectations and channels for the councils and libraries to provide regular reporting. The NZLPP should prioritise and complete the implementation of the Monitoring and Evaluation Framework developed by Allen Clarke. The NZLPP should use programme reset as an opportunity to consider funding the councils and public libraries to assign resources for reporting to the programme . . Communication and Cross LibrariesCouncils Collaboration The NZLPP has a comprehensive Stakeholder Engagemen t Strategy that defines clear communicat ion focus areas, identifies key stakeholders. communica tion channels and the audience. The six focus areas highlighted in the strategy are: . Digital inclusion, supporting and assisting job seekers and learners including digital literacy for children and young people. . Library workforce developme nt, supporting an increasingly diverse workforce including retention and development of Maori and Pasifika staff, leadership development, trainee recruitment and career progression development. . Commun ity engagement including capability building, cXlesign skills, programming and outreach and by targeting nonusers of the services. . Reading for pleasure, supporting wellbeing including local programming, partnerships and support for young people, whanau and communities. . Te Reo and matauranga Maori, supporting local iwi including staff skills development Aotearoa Peoples Network Kaharoa (APNK) offers computer hardware and highspeed internet for New Zealand public libraries. Oooumom Classification KPMG Confldentiel Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs . We note that the strategy has identified key sector, governmen t and library stakeholders and a respective engagement approach for each group. The strategy has also identified key communication messages on programme benefits for the sector and the public. However, the NZLPP does not have an audience list for key stakeholders e.g. library staff, council officers with library portfolio and school librarians etc as shown below in the diagram from Stakeholder Engagement Strategy: Programme compone nts and communic ations ff Al port of ,tok:hoJder cngagment,. lheroll out or proenmmt lnltiatlve:s nlll need to a,oa wIdf aIcnc Ind.In,i thwhO may rnt or involved with the process. The p,oeramme only hits one mom nstfor Public Libraries wh ich is the District Councils .Jba,y CC. In terms of Council communlo,lion this either needs to co through SOlGM newsletters or direct m,ail to council Chief Executives . ptNZ and UANZA both ha newslclt whlh ..,. pd for updtes, bltnot necanfv lmmodau or fmpo,n,n nformalion . . l.tabase of all llbrary branchesncl etr,e team leaders Is notavailable and Ideally needs.bollllq.ach more brarv staff andensure wider nciement. A secondee, come on board it will be straightforward to eslibllsll a contactf for them. ) ; :; ; .. ... ..h:; SLANZA i i r v::. ....::i : . library branchio:;:eacer l llrt .. ., . (. l All library j : :t.,ff : .X .. . sondeellst NZLibs i .. .. . sondee relationsiip ,:,,anaeer Newsletter OPT Ins fromwebilt. LGNZCouncil Chief f:xttU: EPICTe Puna dientUs .. u ,. ( :.. l. Quncil OffiQr wih library : portfcl . : . x ) l.istseve emails The programme has drafted a plan to promote collaborat ion between public libraries by leveraging collaboration tools and establishing communities of practices (ComPs) in the secondments project. The NZLPP is evaluating offtheshelf cloudbased applications (such as Slack, MS Tearns, or Google Hangouts) as collaboration tools between the secondees, councils and other library staff. These collaborat ion tools will be used to support the various elements of the project. We understand from our stakeholder inteNiews that the plans to establish collaborat ion channels between the libraries are in discovery stage and there is lack of evidence in how the NZLPP plans to implement the communica tion channels. Other examples of groups leveraging the collaboration tools include the proposed communities of practice and coach ing workstream. The NZLPP has proposed to establish the ComPs to promote resources and knowledge sharing. These ComPs can leverage the collaborat ion tools for: . Facilitated group conference sessions. . Oneonone chat and for asking and answering questions and supporting each other within each focus area. The coaching workstream of the project can use these collaboration tools in two ways: . Coaches and coachees can use it as their communication tool on a : basis; and . A closed ComP channel will be established for the coaches to have a space for sharing and communicati ng collectively or individually. The other library staff will be able to use these tools to access training, resources and knowledge sharing. The stakeholders inteNiewed indicated that the programme needs to promote the positive community outcomes and share positive stories to demonstrate effective use of COVID relief funding. Docvment Classification KPMG Confidentia l Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Appendix A: Documentation Reviewed No. Document Received Organisation Structure Programme BCP Plan Programme Definition Programme Initiation Doc Programme Mandate Submission to Treasury Programme Mandate The Treasury June Programme Vision Stakeholder Engagement Strategy Evaluation Plan Evaluation Strategy Governance Agenda Governance Minutes Library Sector Mahi ILM NZLPP Governance Member Induction Pack NZLPP Strategic Partnerships Grants Programme Plan Schedule Programme Status Report Programme Status Report Snapshot Quality Assurance Strategy Resource Managem ent Strategy Risk Register Detailed Risk Report March SLACK Guide for Admin and Usage SLACK Privacy Impact Assessme nt Analysis SLACK Proj Requirements for Technology J Document Classilicatioo KPMG Conlidentla l Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Aooendix B: Stakeholders Interviewed We would like to thank the following people for participating in this review: No Stakeholder Role Alex Thursby Library Sector Mahi Anahera Morehu Steering Group Member Chris Hay Steering Group Member David Reeves LIACGrants Assessmen t Panel Chair Dr Fiona ScottMe lon Allen Clarke Greg Thomas Stakeholder Engagement Manager Helen Dragten Services to Schools Helen Gray Programme Manager Jonathan Beveridge Workforce Capability Kate Macnaught External Assurance Group M ember Lewis Brown Project Executive Secondments Library Sector Mahi Lucy Liu Finance Partner Pieter Snyman Procurement Partner Rachel Esson Senior Responsi ble Owner Simon Millswell Legal Partner Steve Knight Project Executive APNK Fee waivers Document Oassificaion KPMG ConfldentiaJ Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Contact us Gina Barlow Director, Management Consulting Tabish Ghani Sen kpmg.comnz CJmJ KPMG, aNew Zealand Partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organisation of inopendentmember lbms affihated with KP.G International Limited, a private English compaoy limited by vuarantee. All rights reserved. The KPMG name and logo are Jademarks used under license by the independent member firms of the KPMG global orsation. Proactiv ely released by the Department of Internal Affairs I . . New . I Zea and brares .. . anersho Programme Independent Quality Assurance . . :,., l I r . f I o Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs New Zealand Ubruln Partnership ProJramme Oecerroer DIA NZLPP IOA Report Glossary APNK cso DIA ILM IQA LIAC NZLPP PIO SRO TOR PEP Aotearoa Peoples Network Kaharoa Client Services Order Department of Internal Affairs Investment Logic Map Independent Quality Assurance Libraries Information Advisory Committee New Zealand Libraries Partnership Programme Programme Initiation Document Senior Responsible Owner Terms of Reference Programme Execution Plan Document Classification Cliont Confidentia l Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Now Zeeland libro:rl,s Partnership Programm e Decemte, DIA NZLPP IOA AePQn contents Executive Summary . . . Introduct ion . . . . . . . Scope . . .. . . . . . . Approach . .. . . . . . Background . , . . Programme Review Findings . . . . Programme Management . . . Programme Governance . , . . Councils Progress Reporting . , . , . . Risk Managemen t . . . . . Sustainab ility . . . . . . Programme Investment Logic Map OLM) . . . . Programme Success Stories . . , . . Decision to Spend Remaining Funding . . Appendix A: IQA (Round One) Recommendations . . Appendix B: Documentation Reviewed . . Appendix C: Stakeholders lnterviewed . . Inherent Limitations This repOlt has been prepared in accordance with our Consultancy Services Order dated November . The services provided under our engagement letter(A. OUputs of the Services) have not been undertaken in accordance with any auditing. review or assurance standards. The term AuditRe view used in this report does not relate to an AuditReview as defined under professiona l assurance standards. The information presented in this report is based on that made available to us in the course of our work information provided by the Depanme nt of Internal Affairs. We have indicated within this report the sources of the information provided. Unless otherwise stated in this report, we have relied upon the truth, accuracy and completeness of any information provided or made available to us in connection with the Services without independently verifying it. We do not give any warranty of completeness. accuracy or reliability in relation to the statements and representations made by. and the information and documentation provided by, the Depanmen t of Internal Affairs management and personnel stakeholders consulted as pan of the process. KPMG is under no obligation in any circumstance to update this repon, in either oral or wntten form, for events occurring after the reporr has been issued in final form. Any redistribution of this repon requires the prior written approval of KPMG and in any event is to be a complete and unaltered version of the repon and accompanied only by such other materials as KPMG may agree. No third party is entitled to rely on any information included in this report. Third Party Reliance This report is solely tor the purpose set out in Section (refer to Scope section) of this report and for the benefit of the Department of Internal Affairs. This report is not to be used by any other person or for any other purpose or copied. distributed or quoted whether in whole or in part to any other party without KPMGs prior written consent. Other than our responsibility to the Department of Internal Affairs and to the maximum extent permitted by law, none of KPMG, its controlled entities or their respective panners, officers. employees. or contractors assumes any responsibity, or liability of any kind. to any third party in connection with the provision of this New Zealand Libraries Partnership Programme Independent Quality Assurance Repon, Accordingly. any third pany choosing to rely on this deliverable does so at their own risk. Documen t Oassrhcatk,n Client Confld,ntla l Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Executive summary The results of NZLPP IOA Round Two indicate an uplift in programme management and governance since IQA Round One conduct ed in May which focused on the assessme nt of Programme Scope, Documentation, Sustainability and Programme Controls. This is primarily reflected in the stakeholders interviews conducted during the review, during which senior programme leadership expressed a strong level of comfort in overall programme management and reporting. KPMG notes positive changes have been made to the change control process and an improved programme governance structure. In addition. the Programme has also established clear tolerance levels around time, cost, scope and risk to remain in place until April . From that the Programme will be in the final weeks of programme closure activities and will adopt a zerotolerance change threshold i.e. anyall proposed changes need to have programme board visibility. While KPMG endorses the tolerance levels being implemented, the Programme should consider reassessing the baseline April ) for the time threshold to an earier to allow sufficient runway for implementation of any changes required. The library sector is diverse with different types of libraries such as medical, law and public etc. Public libraries have been a primary focus for the Programme. Although the Programme has had a positive impact in terms of creating benefits for the broader sector, t has an important role going forward to manage sector expectations around funding and the ongoing role of the National library, post the life of the Programme. Several benefits and positive community stories created by the Programme have been shared with KPMG during our review. However, these benefits and stories need to be shared more broadly w ith the sector. governmen t bodies and NZ public more proactively to gain and demonstrate sector buy in and to demonstrate the developed capabilities within the libraries to demonstrate what has been achieved over the lifetime of the Programme. Notwithstanding positive shifts in respect of the programme management and governance. we believe risk management across the Programme has been light and requires manageme nt attention. In particular, project delivery and postdelivery risks e.g. reputational risk for National library and partners if they are unable to demonstrate a lasting positive impact from NZLPP, needs to be appropriately tracked and managed. We have raised a recommendation associated with risk management in section . of the report. Whilst a review of the Programmes transition or wind down planning has not been a focus for this review period the Programme is at a critical juncture where it must move foiward with certainty and complete all inflight projectswo rkstreams by June and develop a clear plan for the Programmes transition into business as usual (BAU) post the end . The Programme should consider its future resourcing requirements to include specialist resources with strategy, change manageme nt and policy backgrounds to support management w ith effective w ind down planning. KPMG have raised a number of recommendations throughout the report which require management attention to continue delivering successfully to programme outcome s. These recommendations are: No. Finding Recommendation Management Response Category .. Programme Recommendation ..: KPM G recommen d the Both the Chair of the Sector Reference Governance chair for Sector Reference Group and Programme Group and Chair of the Programme Board should challenge any viewpoints at the Board have noted this recommendation. meetings to ensure the discussion is focused on Governance members w ill be reminded the agenda, intended decision or outcome from of the need to advise the chair of non the meeting. Any member that is unable to attendance andor delegates. attend a meeting should nominate a delegate or provide the Chair and Programme SRO a clear rationale for absence. .. Programme Recommendation ..: KPMG recommend the The Chair of the Sector Reference Governance chair for Sector Reference Group and Programme Group and Chair of the Programme Board should take a stronger role in ensuring that Board have noted this recommendat io n. all agenda items are discussed adequately and It is acknowledged that the current any items that require additional discussion formatvirtual meetings often do not should be noted. and a follow up session is held allow time for extended discussions. to ensure miltter.s are closed to members The ro ramme is oonsiderin wa s to Oo:::ument Cfassifcaton Client Confidential Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs No. Finding Recommendation Management Response Category satisfaction. ensure sector updates and other points of interest are discussed w ith adequate time allocated. .. Programme Recommendat ion ..: We recommend the Noted. The Programme DirectorSRO is Governance Programme considers increasing Maori and in discussion w ih Te RpC W hakahau Pacifica representation at the governance around increased Maori representation. forums, to at least two members each. While this The Programme w ill also pursue a may not be practical for Programme Board given discussion w ith relevant stakeholders the remaining time left till end of the Programme around Pasifika representation. (June ), the Programme should consider this for Sector Reference Group as there is an intention for it to continue beyond the life of the Programme. .. Councils Recommendat ion ..: KPMG recommend that As secondees are operating in different Progress the Programme should setup an ongoing local contexts. the development of a Reporting reporting framework for councils. This is universal reporting framework and particularly important to ensure consistent and approach was not the intention. It is also accurate sector reporting to Sector Reference not intended that local councils continue Group as it is likely to continue beyond the reporting on secondee objectives Programmes life. The Programme Manager beyond the life of the programme. should challenge Councils on reporting to ensure Its important to note however, thethere is a sufficient level of detail included in sector data. research and evidence reports to ensure the Programmes qualitative strategy being developed through and quantitative benefits are captured. NZLPP will offer all libraries (including public libraries) a vision and roadmap towards lifting the gathering, management and use of data more generally to demonstrate the value(s) they deliver to their communities. The Programme Manager has noted this recommendation and w ill seek to challenge reporting that is not complete d, or not completed to a sufficient level of detail. It is important to note that the programmes qualitative and quantitative benefits will be captured and reported on in the Programme Evaluation Report. .. Councils Recommendation ..: KPMG recommend that The Programme believes that the best Progress quarterly reporting template is to include mechanism to highlight risks and issues Reporting an overview of the councils performance to is in the transitionhandover planning for and any risks and issues. each council. This will be discussed with our coaching and facilitation partners to see how this can be incorporated. .. Risk Recommendation . .: KPMG recommend A full risk workshop to review current Management additional focus on the Programme risk risks for the programme closure phase management. All programme risks should be was undertaken in early January. captured and included within the risk register. The risks should be reviewed regularly and All significant rated risks are included in validated and if required, escalated to issues that monthly Programme Board reporting are required to be managed by the Programme or including treatment plans. The an appropriate owner. Critical risk management Programme accepts that more regular should be prioritised ahead of the regular risk reviews are required (noting only governance forums with Treatment Plans being one focused session on risk has taken adequately documented and . place in the last quarter) and while treatment plans etc. are regularly reviewed, risks need to be more frequently in the project manement tool (Psoda) for visit:illily. .. Sustainability Recommendation ..: KPMG recomme nd that Noted. There Is a h.lll project plan in Document Classift:otior. Client Confident: ial Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs No. Finding Recommendation Category ttie Programme ensures the Services to Libraries project and associated deliverables are completed within the timefrarne. .. Sustainability Recommendation ..: KPMG recommend that the Programme increase communications with the sector on sustainability and funding e.g. fortnightly updates that provide a clear line of sight till June , which includes updates on key metrics e.g. remaining funding, what is the Programme intending to deliver in the remaining period and a forecasted benefits view to the sector, created through projects and initiatives established by the business e.g. Services to Libraries and Sector Reference Group. .. Programme Recommendation ..: The ILM should be ILM used to support the decision maling on what activities should be completed in the final six months of the Programme to ensure the maximum amount of benefits can be achieved from the investment. .. Programme Recommendation ..: The Programme should Success leverage digital channels and current sector Stories engagement to share positive stories and benefits created by the Programme. This can include developing personas (to manage privacy concerns) of community members and how they benefited through the Progamme in their local libraries. The Programme should develop a strategy to ensure the benefits from the Programme can be used to engage with the councils to demonstrate the value from the work of the secondees and to influence investment in their services in the future. Management Response place w ith our providers Allen Clarke and work s underway to align this with other projects and workstreams to manage the risk of stakeholde r fatigue. All planning indicates deliverables will be completed within the specified timeframe. Noting while this recommendation is specifically related to the Services to Libraries mahi, it is the programmes intent to manage all sustainability workstreamsprojects to deliver on time. A communications plan for the remaining months of the programme is under development, outlining clear communications activities and mechanisms to our identified stakeholder groups. Key programme deliverables, particularly on the sustainability mahi were communicated to stakeholders prior to Christmas and will continue into . A communicat ions eventHui is planned for Library Managers and Secondees in February to provide support and advice in relation to handover, capturing benefits and positioning public libraries well once the time limited funding comes to an end in June. The programme has increased communication to library managers regarding funding options in recent weeks (will also plan to brief the Minister and key department officials as required). The Programme ILM was developed specifically in relation to long term, sustainable impacts for the libraries sector and has been utilised to define the sustainability initiatives under Programme reset (Sept ). No new activitiesinitiatives are planned for the remainder of the Programme, however the ILM will be utilised to guide decision making should the opportunity arise. The planned Programme evaluation will capture qualitative success storiescase studies and will include elements of lessons learned to be and discoverable for an extended period. There is a section on our webpage NZLPP in action where success stories have been and will be continued to be shared. It is anticipated that this be added to throughout the last few months of the programme and will be included in monthly communications. The Pro ramme will also public all ocurn.ent Oass:icaton Client Confidential Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs No. Finding Category Recommendation Management Response re.levant repons aAd ous r,e, fr:i.oluGling Prorcamme otsata,a:l evalUatfori rep,,rts The pregramlilile will r,o.vide profiles baR: to eaeh tll:lfary as a summary of the wor illmlerta.ken ane sl:looesses Gf:tl:)e NZLFli Pf:lrqmme :llldin. Document Csificaton Client Confident ial Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Introduction . Scope The Client Services Order (CSO) dated November outlines the IQA scope as a formal programme level IOA Round Two. This is Round Two of three tranches of IOAs is planned to provide assurance over the overall health of the Programme, confirming appropriate controls, governance, and structure is in place to ensure success of the projects within it. This will certify that the sponsor receives independent feedback that the appropriate structure is in place across the Programme . Focus areas for IQA Round Two as agreed with NZLPP include: Programme Manageme nt Programme Governance Councils Progress Reporting Risk Manageme nt Sustainability . Approach Planning Before we commenced the review, we undertook a planning phase where we agreed the Programme stakeholders to be interviewed for the review to assess the Programmes progress in focus areas listed above. Fieldwork KPMG has achieved the scope through reviewing project documentat ion and interviewing relevant project stakeholders. The scope and approach form a broad review of project processes against accepted project management practices and the New Zealand Government guidelines for managing major project investments. Detailed analysis and collation of the programme data was undertaken by information gathering into specific themesa reas highlighted for validation, to ensure facts were confirmed and the context is fully understood to determine if the programme has adequately assessed the impact and likelihood of risks and identified appropriate responses to mitigate risks. Document Oasslficatioo Client Confidential Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs . Background The government has funded a post COVID recovery initiative across New Zealands library system. especially in public libraries. with a funding package of . million over years. The New Zealand Libraries Partnership Programme will support librarians and library seNices to be retained in New Zealand libraries and assist them to support community recovery. This will enable librarians and library services to play a key role in supporting their communities and people seeking jobs as part of the recovery from COVID. The Local Governmen t COVID Response Unit signalled in its initial analysis that all councils expected a significant reduction in nonrate revenue in the fourth quarter of and well into . Councils that have large numbers of nonessent ial seNice businesses in their district are also more likely to face delayed collection. from both commerc ial and residential property rates. The combined effect of lowerthanplanned rates and other revenue reductions means councils are likely to reduce some operational expenditure and capital expenditure. which will create job losses directly or indirectly. Although all local authorities provide public library seNices, such seNices are not a legislative requirement. The National Library has received clear signals from the library sector that reductions to public library seNices are expected as a direct result of councils reviewing their expenditure plans. Local government collectively is the biggest employer of librarians in New Zealand. Role reductions will likely mean a permanent loss of talent to the profession and a conseque nt deteriorat ion of a valued community service that will be difficult to restore to former levels once skilled workers are lost. The tertiary education sector publicly signalled it is experiencing an impact that they expect will worsen over the next year. Deficits are likely to be addressed in the short term by cutting staff salaries. Library seNices that can be exited to reduce costs include collaborat ive services provided by the National Library that are likely to impact student access to knowledge and information. This initiative is designed to support the retention of librarians in employment by public libraries over the next two years, while councils position for recovery. The initiative will provide the opportunity to improve reading, literacy and wellbeing outcomes in communi ties, support building digital literacy among those who have been most excluded from online services and information during the pandemic or have lost jobs as a consequence and create new digital resources to support online learning for students. This will primarily utilise and build the skills and exper ience of librarians currently employed in the local government sector. particular ly where they otherwise risk losing their jobs. The Programme also includes funding for specialist library services for schools and young people with the greatest need and needs to consider where to from here for all elements of the Programme. The opportunities this funding presents the libraries sector are immense, therefore a key focus of the Programme is to assess both the current state of the New Zealand libraries system and define the desired future state. as well as develop a strategic roadmap on how to get there. Oocum,,nt Classification Client Confidential Proa ctively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Programme Raviaw Findings . Programme Management NZLPP has made good progress with uplifting its programme management, documentation maintenance and addressing recommendatio ns around programme management made in IOA Round One. Senior programme stakeholders interviewed during the review expressed overall satisfaction and comfort in programme reporting, the quality of governance papers and procurement management. As indicated in Management Response to IOA Round One Recommendatio ns, the programme has developed and maintained a Programme Execution Plan (PEP) as a core programme document which provides an overview of programme operations, managemen t, scope and contractual requirements. Since the programme was rebaselined, a change control process has also been introduced which is positive. A Change Request form (template) has been developed which requires information about change request type, description. impact analysis and cost of change etc. All change requests require SRO and Business Owner approvals. KPMG has no recomme ndations in relation to Programme Management during the IQA Round Two. . Programme Governance We understand from the Project Execution Plan that NZLPP governance structure has been established to cater for programme management, governance, delivery, and ongoing quality assurance. The Senior Responsible Officer (SRO) has the overall financial accountability and responsibility for the strategic direction of the Programme . The SRO also has the accountability for programme success and continuity of leadership througho ut the Programme. The Programme governance is diagrammatically represented below: Ill I rvl lW r.nVfANNrf ( ous UW l tllftltll .TIlfl ,C,Wli,IJlll (.,. ,,..,., . f I I I I . I Document Classaication Client ConfidentialkJ,l.,b Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs GroupBoard Frequency of meetings NZLPP Once a Programme month Board Sector Once a Reference month Group Libraries Unknown Information Advisory Committee (LIAC) Training Unknown Advisory Group Purpose The purpose of the New Zealand Libraries Partnership Programme (NZLPPJ Sector Reference Group is to champion the Programme and provide advice. guidance and support during the Programmes lifecycle to ensure it remains on track to support long term sector outcomes. The purpose of the New Zealand Libraries Partnership Programme (NZLPP) Programme Board is to ensure the successfu l delivery of the Programme. In particular, the Group is to provide oversight and decision making to ensure the objectives of the Programme are achieved and longterm outcomes are on track. A small group of representatives from partners, public libraries and ITOs are available as an Advisorr: Group Responsibilities The responsibi lities of tle Programme Board are as follovvs: a. Provide governance oversight and overall direction. to ensure that the Programme is tracking as expected. b. Make decisions on matters that have been escalated by the Programme . c. Request reports and information from the Programme team, National Library staff and external advisors as required to ensure the Board has adequate visibility to make decisions, monitor performance and provide direction to the Programme. d. Ensure that programme level risks and issues are identified, managed and appropriately escalated. e. Maintain oversight of key dependencies and Library Sector activities that may impact on the Programme. f. Direct the nature of programme assurance activities. g. Approve or reject change or exception requests within the Programmes tolerance levels. The responsibilities of the Sector Reference Group are as follows: a. Provide advice and guidance to the Programme leadership and Programme team as required. b. Provide input to the Programme, this may include participation in strategic workslops andor feedack on proposals and planning documents. C. Provide feedback to support the Programme to remain aligned to Programme outcomes and consider other initiatives that may impact on delivery. d. Provide updates from the sector and raise risks and issues to the Programme in a timely manner. e. Champion the Programme and connect with stakeholders who can help support and deliver an impactful programme. LIAC are responsible for the monitoring and oversight of programme direction and benefits realisation. The Committee also provide advice directly to the Programme Sponsor and Minister as required. The responsibilities of the Training Advisory Group are as follows; Governance Groups purpose, responsibilit ies and frequency of meetings as understood from our documentation review are detailed in the table below: Oo:;.:mant Clasifk:Mb;, Client Confidential Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs GroupBoard Purpose Responsibilities to the Programme Director and team. They will use their expertise across training, skill enhancement and the public library sector to support and guide the programme of initiatives. Programme Reference Group Unknown The Programme Reference Group are individuals brought together to discuss and deal with operational issues for the Programme and the workstreams w ithin. They provide advice and guidance as subject matter experts to support programme delivery. a. Provide input and advice to the Programme team on training and capability uplift activities. b. Review and comment on training related documen tation. c. Support the Programme by sha,ing knowledge and helping connect the team to resources and the wider library sector. d. Provide an active and positive contributio n to the Programme. The Reference Group is responsible to: a. Provide input and advice to the Programme team. b. Review and comment on draft programme documents. c. Ensure that the views and interests of other stakeholders are represented. d. Provide an active and positive contribution to the Programme. KPMG acknowledges that manageme nt has leveraged the Programme reset as an opportunity to implement the recommenda tions from IOA Round One to improve governance structure. increase Maori representation in forums and disbanding of Assurance Group and Steering Group. Since IQA Round One. the Programm e has also changed responsibilities between the Programme Director and SRO. The former Programme SRO has moved to focus on the National Librarian role and the Programme Director has taken up SRO responsibilities. This has allowed the SRO role to be completely focused on the programme delivery and enabling the National Librarian to focus their attention on sector engagement and programme governance . Governance on the Programme has improved with the development of a clear Terms of Reference (ToR) for the Sector Reference Group and Programme Board that clearly outlines members roles and responsibilities. frequency of meetings and other forum details. We understand that Sector Reference Group has been established as a central forum with sector wide representation from various organisations e.g. LIANZA, Te RopO Whakahau, Public Libraries New Zealand and Local Governmen t New Zealand. to provide input and advice to the Programme. The benefits and engagemen t from the Sector Reference Group are recognised by the sector and we understand from stakeholders interviewed that there is a desire for it to continue beyond the Programme life and help sustain some of the benefits created by the Programme in the library sector. Given the broad library sector needs. expectations from National Library and varying operating models of different library types. dividing responsibility between two primary governance forums Sector Reference Group and Programme Board) should enable more effective managemen t of the Programme. Notwithstanding the enhancemen ts noted above we understand at times governance members might have competing sector interests. funding expectations and lose sight of expectations and forums purpose which is to provide advice and guidance as subject matter experts to support programme delivery. While stakeholders interviewed acknowledged that governance forums are held monthly as intended. attendance at these forums varies at times and in some instances. there is not sufficient time allocated to discuss significant programme decisions or agenda items. Recommendation ..: The chair for Sector Reference Group and Programme Board should challenge any viewpoints at the meetings to ensure the discussion is focused on the agenda, intended decision or outcome from the meeting. Any member that is unable to attend a meeting should nominate a delegate or provide the Chair and Programme SRO a clear rationale for absence. Document Cl.ssificnioo Client Confident ial Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Recommendation ..: The chair for Sector Reference Group and Programme Board should take a stronger role in ensuring that all agenda items are discussed adequately and any items that require additional discussion should be noted. and a follow up session is held to ensure matters are closed to members satisfaction. Recommendation ..: The Programme should considers increasing Maori and Pacifica representation at the governance forums, to at least two members each. While this may not be practical for Programme Board given the remaining time left till end of the Programme (June . the Programme should consider this for Sector Reference Group as there is an intention for it to continue beyond the life of the Programme. . Councils Progress Reporting Since IQA Round One. NZLPP has introduced a consistent progress reporting template for reporting on quarterly progress across various councils which is positive. The template provides clear guidance on how to report on Action Statements and Delivery Objectives. We understand that definition of success is different for each library given different internal systems, processes and delivery objectives. Due to this how libraries wanted to use the funding and improve the libraries was quite varied which has resulted in variances in the level of detail reported by councils on action statements and delivery objectives. An overall view of councils performance over the length of the Programme and risks or issues are also missing, and we were unable to see evidence of an overarching reporting framework or mechanism being used to ensure consistency in the completion percentage being reported. Recommendation ..: The Programme should setup an ongoing reporting framework for councils. This is particularly important to ensure consistent and accurate sector reporting to Sector Reference Group as it is likely to continue beyond the Programmes life. The Programme Manager should challenge Councils on reporting to ensure there is a sufficient level of detail included in reports to ensure the Programmes qualitative and quantitative benefits are captured. Recommendation ..: The quarterly reporting template should be to include an overview of the councils performance to and any risks and issues. . Risk Management In the IQA Round One, KPMG made a recommendation in relation to programme controls, that the Programme should review the risk register to ensure that any longstanding risks are revaluated and mitigated in a timely manner. We understand that in response, NZLPP was going to hold a delivery phase risk workshop and maintain risk registers with a clear escalation path to the Programme Board as required. Our testing indicated however that this process has not been adhered to in all cases. Examples of this include: We did not see evidence of some of the key programme risks such as; potential reputationa l risk to National Library if the Programme is unable to demonstrate a lasting positive impact and loss of benefits to sector after the Programme ends being appropriately tracked or managed . There was no evidence of mitigations or treatment plans being consistently or managed. Most risks are owned by the Programme Manager. Risks have been open for a significant amount of time e.g. R Sector Engagement raised on October . According to some stakeholders interviewed, the Programme has internal processes to manage risks however, the risks are not robustly discussed at governance or strategic meetings. Recommendation ..: Additional focus on the Programme risk management is required. All programme risks should be captured and included within the risk register. The risks should be reviewed regularly and validated and if required, escalated to issues that are required to be managed by the Programme or an appropriate owner. Critical risk management should be prioritised ahead of the regular governance forums with Treatment Plans being adequate ly documented and . Oocumeot Classtticatio n Client Confldentlal Z Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs . Sustainability We understand from the Project Execution Plan that the overarching objective of the second phase of the Programme is to enable a sustainab le and enduring libraries sector that meets communi ty needs and is supported by decisionmakers, by: i. Laying the foundations for a strong data culture and data. research and evidence based on the social and economic value library services deliver and building a compelling narrative on the value of libraries to communities and Aotearoa. . Building the infrastructure to support broadening and strengthening the libraries workforce capability. iii. Considering collaborative business models tor the sector, and policy and funding options that support sustainable and equitable library services across Aotearoa. The Programme also has multiple projects and workstreams underway to support sustainability of benefits created by the Programme beyond the life of the Programme as listed below: Title ProjectWorkstream Description Services to libraries Project To identify service efficiencies and inform future sustainabil ity options for National Library core services; APNK. EPIC, Te Puna and Kotui. Libraries sector data. research and evidence Project Established to work towards addressing the insufficiency of data about the libraries sector and evidence of the value of libraries, which makes it difficult to make evidencebased decisions and to convince funders Libraries Sector Workstream Established to work towards addressing the issue of libraries services Funding Policy being funded at the discretion of decisionmakers, meaning that services are vulnerable to funding cuts in times of financial constraint or competing priorities. Strategic Services Workstream To undertake a strategic review of collaborative library sector services Review beyond the scope and timeframes of the core services addressed in Services to Libraries KPMG understands the Services to Libraries is a key project to help the Programme have a clear line of sight for sector sustainability post June as it can provide some quick wins through development of recommendations for sustainability over next three to five years. The focus of this project includes: Engagemen t with key stakeholders to obtain a customer (library) view of how they perceive National Library Services to Libranes i.e. a current state analysis of services from a customer perspective. Identifying emerging areas of need. or opportunities for future development. Considering change within the wider libraries sector for example, upcoming local government and educatio n reforms and the impact this will have on National Library services. Providing recommendations tor the sustainability of services to libraries over the medium term ( years). The developmen t of a highlevel implementation plan as to how recommenda tions identified could be applied. In addition. to this key sustainability work. two further pieces of work on a more operational level have been commissioned alongside to support findings: A review of the APNK and Kotui Costing Models. The development of a Sustainability Delivery Model encompassing all four core services. As the Programme approaches the end of June , there might be an increase in secondees resignations which could create anxiety and uncertainty in the sector. We understand there is a strong desire within the sector for funding to continue post June to retain secondees and resources e.g. LMS and continue momentum gained during the last two years. However, we recognise that the Programme has significant constraints to obtain any extension to Covid O:Jmnt CJssif,:;.itbo Client Confidential Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Relief Funding which needs to be clearly communicated to the sector to manage expectations and impact after the end of the Programme. Recommendation ..: The Programme should ensure the Services to Libraries project and associated deliverables are completed within the timeframe. Recommendation ..: The Programme should increase communications with the sector on sustainability and funding e.g. fortnightly updates that provide a clear line of sight till June , which includes updates on key metrics e.g. remaining funding, what is the Programme intending to deliver in the remaining period and a forecasted benefits view to the sector, created through projects and initiatives established by the business e.g. Services to Libraries and Sector Reference Group. . Programme Investment Logic Map (ILM) We note that the Programme drafted an ILM in February . However, the ILM is incomplete e.g. percentages for Benefits. Strategic Response and Solution are not determined. Recommendation ..: The ILM should be used to support the decision making on what activities should be completed in the final six months of the Programme to ensure the maximum amount of benefits can be achieved from the investmen t. wu lnvet C., ,. iM,.fMllfiMiMullilll,HJnhmilf mnl ilmi: Llbralies sector mahl A str.,uegic lPfO,iCh toimpta,,ing U.tairtdly in Che ltfarte, ,e,aor ) N .. : ., lt,h ATIONAL LIBR ,RY ,t , :t t; ;. o Insufficient data l bOVt tht hbnrie.S: sector and evidence of the. value of libtanes setvices MAICf S it OiffiCUII to make decisions and convMlc.e funders lnadeQUilte cap.alihty wttllkl the Ubroty sector UAOS to variuiliry ., e ranee iJld aualitv of seMCes offt red by librerlcs IJlrits are furlded at the discretion of dedslon maker, which MEANS that in Umt.Sotli nandat consttaiM or comp.eing prioritit..S librarlis are wlnerabie t lose fundine, .::r,.,.,,. AmftMtf lllU Fu,td gtnecal dt,.iiOnffl .inl iuppci,ud tv ,e:,m au,;m,ll ::arid a vaiJ.tn.lfffti.. . . I ) . ..... Eauitvt. urt...cv ;,lt(tfl tO I wrtkHrc.:h Cirtil.iibt e fn,:f;h;, a.:Jcll..,. ,n..,)flr;J):: .,.:,., I tJli.,tc , tn,i,; n,UIH .eli, IOr.Alio,.OI .,.,. .. JUf::Mi ,.Jt.h l,,tlXUI Programme communications effectivenes s has not been reviewed during IOA Round Two. Document Oassification Client Confidential Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs . Programme Success Stories We understand the Programm e has created significant benefits to library sector and in communities through increasing capability and capacity in local libraries. Some of the stories that have been sared with KPMG during our review include: Local history digitalised and shared with community commun ity events held for people An aged and retired communi ty member trained to shop for groceries online Other eiamples of positive community impact highlighted in the Councils Progress Reports include: Programme Focus Council Description Area That Activity Contribute Towards Haw kes Bay Thee is an increase in Digital Inclusion We have seen growth in digital engagement in many (evaluation) forms. One form beingcommuni ty engagement through new digital direct statistics: services. As of April th : Talk Digital ( interactions) Better Digital Futures ( attendees) Stepping Up Modules ( attendees) We are currently in the process of launching a new programme Preserve Your Past in conjunction with Recollect and NZMS to promote and provide content digitisation throughout Central Hawkes Bay. Queenstown Content Creation Storytime from Space:There is an increase the Lakes number of people Reading for We connected with our home school reading both children Pleasure communities, bringing them into the library and adults. The library Commun ity and providing them a STEAM activity as well has become busier. Engagement as watching story time FROM SPACE The there is a need for more Te Reoand space book display of over books was staffing resources to Matauranga Maori completely checked out at the end of the keep up with the week. demand, the collection including eresources Sir Ed Hillary Hut Virtual Reality Event: and especially the Te Partnering with the Antarctic Heritage Trust Reo Maori collection for we provided three days of virtual reality tours children and adults has around Sir Ed Hillarys Hut in Antarctica. We had to increase due to focused our marketing at the seniors in our demand. community. but also kept this experience open to all. Each day was booked out with over patrons taking part in the experience each day. Notwithstanding the positive impact created by the Programme in communities and the benefits created for the library sector. there is an opportunity for the Programme to accelerate sharing success stories. This should also help the Programme manage some of the key programme risks e.g. demonstrating impact, reputational risk to National Library and perception of equity. Recommendation ..: The Programme should leverage digital channels and current sector engagement to share positive stories and benefits created by the Programme. This can include developing personas (to manage privacy concerns) of community members and how they benefited through the Programme in their local libraries. The Programme should develop a strategy to ensure the benefits from the Programme can be used to engage with the councils to demonstrate the value from the work of the secondees and to influence investment in their services in the future. Document Oassificat,on Client Confidential Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs . Decision to Spend Remaining Funding A key theme from our fieldwork and testing completed was stakeholders and sectors expectation from the Programme to finalise the decision on how the remaining funding will be spent. We acknowledge this is being actively worked on and KPMG has no recommendatio ns in regard to this. OocYment Classification Client Confidential Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Aooendix A: IOA (Round one) Recommenda tions No. Category Recommendation Management Response Programme Scope The NZLPP should finalise the scope for initiatives being established as part of the Programme and develop a clear roadmap to delivery by the funding end . NZLPP is developing a Programme Execution Plan (PEP) to reset the Programme and rebaseline the projects and workstreams w ithin. The reset introduces strategic elements to address the sustainab ility risk that has been identified within the library sector. Programme Scope The Programme should introduce formal controls and processes to document scope changes and decisions. A rebaselined PEP will allow the Programme to enact change control against fully scoped projects and workstreams. The new Programme Board will be positioned to receive and approve changes to scope etc. in the delivery phase. Documentation leverage the Programme reset as an opportunity to update the documentation and obtain the Programmes senior leadership endorsement . The PEP w ill be the core programme document to secure senior leadership endorsement of the Programmes next phase. Individual project planning w ill also be produced for approval by relevant Project Executives once baseline has been achieved. Documentation Define clear accountabilities for ongoing maintenance of documentation. Noted, these accountab ilities will be included within the PEP. Equity and Sector Experience The Programme should accelerate and prioritise efforts to recruit Maori resources in the Programme team and improve Maori representation at the governance level. Te Ao Maori principles have been considered in all programme approaches, and this w ill be significantly enhanced by the Pou Arahi position. This role will be progressed with urgency in the delivery phase and w ill be supported by other DIAMaori networks. Maori representation at a governance level is secured via Te Ropu Whakahau and their ongoing involvement at Steering Group level. However , a further Maori representat ive on the new Programme Board will be considered, potentially a nominated member of Te Rpu Whalahau. Equity and Sector Experience The Programme should leverage sector partnerships and relationships to hire resources with strong library experience. Noted, this is being included in Programme reset resourcing discussions and decisions. Document ClassificatlOn Client Confidential Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs No. Category Recommendation Management Response Governance We recommend that the NZLPP should People capability and capacity including leverage the Programme reset as an senior leadership capacity Is a recognised opportunity to review the need for both an risk for the Programme. The reset of both Assurance Group and a Steering Group the Assurance Group and the Steering and appoint appropriate members that can Group with clear roles and responsibilities commit to the required governance duties. ,s planned and delegation to Programme leadership w ill be made w here appropriate. The Programme team w ill continue to reinforce the importance of good governance for the success of the Programme and consider how we might support members to make their attendance easier including delegation options as appropriate. Governance The Programme should prioritise risk and Risk and issue management at a issues discussions at the governance programme level will be prioritised and meetings. The governance members regular discussions scheduled at the should provide advice and use their Programme Board throughout the delivery influence to help mitigate the risks. phase. Governance The Programme should review the The governance structure is being governance forums structures and reviewed as part of the Programme reset composition to create a simplified to ensure they are suitable for the size and governance forum that facilitates robust scale of the Programme. Clearer guidance decision making. on w hat goes to both the Assurance Group and Steering Group for approval and endorsement respectively w ill be prioritised in the next phase. The Services to Schools Uplift Programme has been endorsed to be decoupled from the NZLPP Programme, including separate governance. Governance The executive management should take a The reset of both the Assurance Group and proactive role to improve governance buy the Steering Group with clear roles and in and champion the Programme responsibil ities is planned, which will objectives at governance level. include responsibilities around championship and amplifying Programme messages around the objectives. Sustainability The Programme should codesign and The COVID Relief and Recovery implement a library sector post COVI Funding is a timebound emergency relief funding strategy and an operating response. The Programme is focussed o n model for the councils and public libraries. sustaining sector benefits via the The strategy and the operating model emergent sustainability workstreams and should provide a plan on how to sustain priorities. This includes the establishment sector benefits created by the Programme of a Strategic Partnerships function to and retain staff post COVID relief focus on sustaining sector benefits and funding. overseeing Strategic Partnership Grants including the sector initiatives and partnerships this funding will enable. While the Programme was never intended to retain staff past the funding period. we w ill consider how we might support library managers to develop plans to sustain the benefits theyve gained through the Programme within their own context. Docum ent Classitcation Client Confidential Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs No. Category Recommendat ion Management Response Performanc e Monitoring The NZLPP should establish formal expectati ons and channels for the councils and libraries to provide regular reporting. Noted. This is a work in progress with quarterly reporting being launched in March . Further guidance and support w ill be put in place to help local councils fulfil their reporting responsibilities. Performance Monitoring The NZLPP should prioritise and complete the implementation of the Monitoring and Evaluation Framework developed by Allen Clarke. The Monitoring Evaluation Framework has been accepted by Programme governance and will be enacted in the next phase of the Programme. It includes a next phase of evaluation utilising the data collection methods recommended by Allen Clarke. Performance Monitoring The NZLPP should use the Programme reset as an opportunity to consider funding the councils and public libraries to assign resources for reporting to the Programme . Noted. Regular reporting and participation in evaluation is a core requirement of the secondee Letter of Agreement. Reporting has been designed not be onerous and support will be provided to councils on an ongoing basis by the Programme team. Commun ication and Cross LibrariesCounc ils Collaboration We recommend that the NZLPP develops and shares positive library sector outcomes and communities stories as a result of the Programme. Noted. This is ongoing and part of the Programme communicat ion planning for the next phase. Commun ication and Cross LibrariesCouncils Collaboration The NZLPP should implement the communication and cross collaboration channels in the library sector. Communi ties of Practice for secondees were launched in midMay, along with tools to facilitate cross regional collaboration. Further opportun ities for collaboration are being considered as part of Programme reset. Commun ication and Cross LibrariesCouncils Collaboration The NZLPP should complete the identification and document the key stakeholders audience lists. Noted. The Programme has a full Stakeholder Engagement Strategy Plan which needs to be reviewed in light of the emergent sustainability workstreams . Programme Controls During the Programme reset, the Programme should review the risk register to ensure that any longstand ing risks are revaluated and mitigated in a timely manner. Noted. A delivery phase risk workshop will enable a full review of risks and planned mitigations. Once baselined. projects w ill maintain risk registers with a clear escalation path to the Programme Board as required. Do:::ument Cossifican;,,n Client Confidential Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Appendix B: Documentation Reviewed No. Document Received DC Central Hawkes Bay LOA Signed November DC Central Hawkes Bay Progress Report July Completed November DC Central Hawkes Bay Expression of Interest DC Central Hawkes BayLOA Contract VariationAdditional FundingSIGNED DC Dunedin Progress Report July Completed Novembe r November November DC Dunedin Expression of Interest public libraries secondments November DC DunedinLOA Contract VariationAdditional Secondment cosigned November DC DunedinLOAContract VariationAdd itional Funding November DC DunedinSi gned LOA Novembe r DC Queenstown Lakes Progress Report July Completed DC Queenstown Lakes Expression of Interest Public Libraries Secondment s DC QueenstownSigned LOAAmended DC QueenstownSigned LOACover Letter DC Tararua LOA Contract Variation Additional Funding DC Tararua Progress Report July Completed DC Tararua Expression of Interest public libraries secondments DC TararuaSigned LOA DC Whakatane Progress Report July Completed DC Whakatane Expression of Interest public libraries secondmen ts Aug DC WhakataneSigned LOA FINAL ILM libraries sector project March Memo NZLPP Programme Tolerances Nov NZLPP DRE Strategy Project Plan Allen Clarke (FINAU November November November November November November November November November Novembe r Novembe r November November Novembe r NZLPP Libraries Value Proposition Project Plan Allen Clarke (FINAU November Document Clss:ifclt:n CJient Confidentiat Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs No Document Received NZLPP Programme Board Terms of Reference Jun () November NZLPP Project f lam Se ices o Libraries . trovember NZLPP ProjectChangeRequest ( l November NZJ,.PP S.rReeri:lnce: Girollp TGrl SSPTZ Novemliler J) PID v . libraries sector project NZLPP (April ) November Programrne Exectrton P,an PRP New Zealand Libraries P,ulnershr Prgramme vr.O Nvemtler Summary risk report for October for NZLPP November Cf:a ngeRequestWorkforee Capability I e.oomher Document Classtticetion Client Confiden tlol Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Appendix C:Stakeholders Interviewed We would like to thank the following people for participating in this review: No. Stakeholder Role Rachel Esson Programme Sponsor Lwrs Bmwn Ponr.amme Drert:i,fSf Steve Knight Project Executive Services to Libraries Carla Jeffery Progra:me Beard Memerlla ohlWhaahau Dyane Hosler Sector Reference Group Member Library Manager Helentray iosirammelVana)er Document Oassification Client Confidential Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Contact us Gina Barlow Director Mana ement Consulting Tabish Ghani Senior Advisor, Management Consulting kpmg.comnz CllmllJ KPM G, a New Zealand Partnoship and a member firm of the KPMG global organisation of indepeodent member r.,ms affiliated with KPMG lnte,national Limited. a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.The KPMG name and logo are trademaks used uncle license by the inctependentmember firms or the KPMG gfobal ganisation Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
ouncil; INCONFIDENCE Page of
., i f Internal Affairs
.. Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
(( Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Y(f)iv) Contact: Theresa Roigard Xa I Annual reporting on Waitangi Tribunal recommendations Update: Under the Treaty of Waitangi Act the Minister for Maori Developmen t, Hon Tama Potaka, is required to table a report before the House each year on progress on implementing Waitangi Tribunal recommenda tions. Te Puni Kkiri are currently collating status updates from agencies from this report, due to be tabled in December . Two claims are relevant to the Local Government portfolio: WAI the Stage Report on the National Freshwater and Geothermal Resources Claim; and WAI The Maori Wards and Constituencies Urgent Inquiry Report. The recent and proposed amendmen ts to water services legislation that relate to Te Mana o te Wai are captured under the WAI claim. We will provide a factual summary of changes to the application of Te Mana o te Wai within the water services system that were made through the Water Services Entities Amendment Act , the Water Services Legislation Bill , the Water Services Acts Repeal Act, and the Local Government (Water Services Preliminary Arrangements ) Bill as at June . Regarding the Maori wards inquiry report, we will provide a factual summary of the progress on the Local Governmen t (Electoral Legislation and Maori Wards and Maori Constituencies) Amendmen t Act as at June . Contact: Sarah Camp inFordham Ya Water Services legislation Rowan Burns Xa Maori wards Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
(( Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs f(f)(iv) I Contact: Mark Tregurtha . nal . ()(g)(i) Contact: Anthea OliverFna) I Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
(( Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs . Local Government Stakeholder Updates NIA . Upcoming Minister of Local Government Meetings Meeting I Meeting I Details . Chief Executive and Deputy Chief Executive Meetings and Engagements Meeting I Meeting Tuesday October .am to Meeting with: Three monthly meeting with LGNZ, Sam .am Broughton, Susan FreemanGreen and Will Blacker Officials attending; Michael Lovett, Richard Ward and Hamiora Bowkett Tuesday October Meeting with: Taituara, Jo Miller, Suzanne Boyd and .pm to .pm Raymond Horan Officials attending: Michael Lovett and Richard Ward Tuesday October .pm to Meeting with: Mayor Paula Southgate, Mayor of Hamilton .pm Officials attending: Michael Lovett Wednesday October Meeting with: Mary Richardson , Acting Chief Executive , .pm to .pm Christchurch City council Officials attending: Michael Lovett Thursday and Friday Meeting with: Zones and conference October Officials attending: Michael Lovett, Paul Barker, Warren Ulusele and Hamiora Bowkett Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
(( Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs . Other Portfolio Cabinet Papers with Local Government Implications Lead agency I Title I DIA received I DIA Responded Ministry of Justice g(Xf)(iv) I September September I Ministry for the (XfKiv) September response Environment due October f(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
(( Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs . Other Portfolio Activities with Local Government Implications Lead agency I Title The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employm ent, and the Ministry for the Environment Ministry of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and Ministry for the Environment (MfE) Making it easier to build granny flats We understand that a Summary of Submissions from the consultation that closed in August will be sent to Ministers on October . From a Local Government system perspective , the primary concern remains whether Councils will have reliable triggers to charge development contributions, and if there will be robust enforcement mechanisms when these buildings are exempt from Building Consents and Resource Consents. Advice on Car Parking Options HUD and MfE have prepared advice to Hon Chris Bishop as Minister forof RMA Reform and Housing on options to enable better management of carparking, as directed by Cabinet CABMIN. refers. This is part of the Going for Housing Growth work programme. The options presented will impact councils as regulators and enforcers, as well as in their roles managing and providing onstreet carparking. Implementation will also fall to councils. We have concerns about the robustness and accuracy of the cost benefit figures used in the advice to support the preferred option, particularly as they relate to the impact on councils. The briefing was planned to go to the Minister on September . It is likely to be forwarded to you in your capacity as Minister of Transport. We have requested that it also be forwarded to you in your capacity as Minister of Local Government. . Ministerial Correspondence NA . Written Parliamentary Questions Summary Analysis Numer I Topic I Key themes I Member(s) Received Regional Deals Funding for infrastructure developments Hon Barbara Edmonds Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
(( Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Bylaws Work Programme Update: The Departmen t has begun work on a comprehens ive review of the local governmen t bylaw system with the aim of providing local government with appropriate and cost effective tools to: manage and control council facilities; regulate behaviours to manage harm; and appropriately enforce local regulation, including considering whether there should be greater delegation to local authorities to set infringement fees. As the work has progressed , the Departmen t believes the time is now right to make initial contact with key local governmen t stakeholders. We would like to talk to them about this work, to test our assumptions and identify any gaps in our desktop analysis .. For this initial engagemen t, the Department proposes discussing the work with the Bylaws Special Interest Group (BSIG) and the Taituara Regulations and Bylaws Reference Group (RBRG). The BSIG is made up of council staff from around New Zealand who work on all aspects of bylaws (e.g. bylaw drafting and review, compliance and enforcement ). The RBRG is a group of council regulatory managers who meet quarterly to discuss and advance council regulatory practice. Engaging with these groups would provide valuable insights from those drafting and working with bylaws to find out what is not working well and what could be done to improve the system. There is a lot of interest in the bylaws work since your announcement of the local government work programme on August . It is important that those working with bylaws can provide the Departmen t with their knowledge and expertise . We expect to brief you on policy direction later this year, and would seek agreement at that time for a wider engagement programme (including with groups and industries who are affected by or whose activities are regulated through bylaws) around policy options. Action Required: Agree that the Department can engage with the Bylaws Special Interest Group and the Taituara Regulations and Bylaws Reference Group to test assumptions and learn from their experiences about issues with the bylaws system within councils, as part of early work on the comprehens ive review of the local government bylaws system. Ministerial Signature: Contact: Frederique Bertrand ra) I Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
(( Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Due to Office I Tille I Action I Key Contact I Responsible Required DCE Manager October HalfYear Economic For noting Sharyn Darrin Sykes and Fiscal Update Specific Mitchell Fiscal Risks for the Local )(a) I Government portfolio I TBC Commentary: NA October Briefing: analysis of For noting James Stratford Anthea Oliver final Long Term ()(a) I Plans I LG Commentary: NA rY(f)(iv)i, ()(f)(iv) I For approval Theresa Karen Vercoe I Roigard r:r October Jiij I I Novembe r Briefing: Local government For Rachel Frederique bylaw system review agreement Townrow Bertrand LG r: Commentary: NA November Aide Memoire: LGFA For noting Jiij I I Stacey Shareholder Borrower Day Hayward LG r: Commentary: NA . Proactive Releases Due to Office I Title I Planned for Release September Status Reports from August to August October September policy briefings prepared for Bill and Bill over October the period February to August Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
(( Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Engagement with iwi on Local Water Done Well Update: We have continued to engage with iwi to provide briefings on Local Water Done Well. Three approaches to engagemen t have been undertaken . Engagement with iwi whose settlement s could be impacted by Local Water Done Well Briefings have been held with Ngati Maniapoto, TOwharetoa, Whanganu i and Ngati Raukawa. Further briefings have been scheduled for October with Waikato and Te Arawa. Engagement with lwi Three online briefings were held on , and September . lwi (CEOs or their representatives ) attended . These briefings provided an update on announcements to and the next steps until final legislation is enacted. Engagement with iwi through regional all of government online sessions Departmen t officials, together with the Ministry for the Environment provided updates to regional iwi on Local Water Done Well. Regional sessions for Taranaki, Northland, East Coast and Hawkes Bay were held on September . Another is scheduled for September . Contact: Hamiora Bowkett ra) I Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
(( Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Engaging with affected PostSettlement Governance Entities (PSGEs) on potential impacts of water services legislation on their settlement Acts Update: In July , Cabinet agreed to the proposals i n Local Water Done Well Stage CABMIN. that under the Local Government Water Services Bill: existing council or CCO obligations under the Local Government Act (LGA) to consider iwi Maori interests will continue to apply, regardless of service delivery model; and existing Treaty settlement obligations relating to water services that apply to councils or their CCOs will be upheld under the new arrangements. Cabinet also agreed that you will report back as part of the LEG paper for the Local Government (Water Services) Bill on engagemen t by the Departme nt of Internal Affairs with PSGEs to ensure the potential impacts of Local Water Done Well (L WOW) on Maori interests are understood . Senior officials from the Departmen t have convened online presentations and discussions on the main elements of LWDW policy and legislation. The Departmen t has also engaged with Treaty settlement specialists to undertake analysis of LWDW policy on existing Treaty settlement arrangemen ts. lwi participating in the discussions have made it clear that these engagements have been an introduction to the main elements of the LWDW policy and legislation, and they will need more time to consider the implications of the water services reform for their Treaty settlements and other rights and interests. There are eight settlement Acts across four catchments that are reasonably complex, and LWDW will have direct impacts o n the settlement (the category settlemen ts). These are: WaikatoTainui Raupatu Claims (Waikato River) Settlement Act ; Ngati Tuwharetoa, Raukawa, and Te Arawa River lwi Waikato River Act ; Nga Wai o Maniapoto (Waipa River) Act ; Te Awa Tupua (Whangan ui River Claims Settlement ) Act ; Ngati Rangi Claims Settlement Act ; Te Rohe o Rongokako Joint Redress Act ; Ngati Kahungunu ki Wairarapa Tamaki nuiaRua Claims Settlement Act ; and Rangitane TO Mai Ra (Wairarapa Tamaki nuiaRua) Claims Settlement Act . There are further Treaty settlement Acts (the category settlements ) where there the impact of LWDW is limited, and any legislation to uphold those arrangemen ts should be more straightforward. ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
(( Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Local Government Funding Agency (LGFA) Update: The LGFAs AGM will be held on November . We are preparing advice for you in consultation with the Treasury on the business tlnat will be considered and the use of shareholding Ministers proxy votes to be cast on your behalf. Together with MoF, shareholding Ministers hold percent of voting rights. Craig Stobo, Chair of the LGFA is u for reelection. Kfiv ne AGfVI wllalsoe consiaering otner Board appo intments, and the following with respect to LGFAs Foundation Policies: Changes to LGFA Foundation Policies Amendments are sought to Schedule of the Share Holders Agreement Foundation Policies. These amendmen ts are to: a) remove the A credit rating requirement , noting instead that the higher borrowing limits are available to rated councils. To assess credit quality of borrowing councils the LGFA relies upon the financial covenants and its own credit monitoring rather than the A rating required in the Foundation Policies. The LGFA notes the A rating is subjective amongst rating agencies . This change would avoid doubt as to whether the covenants would apply to A ratings, with some councils ratings potentially moving lower as council debt increases over time in response to infrastructure investment requirements. b) Allow bespoke covenants up to percent Net Debt: Total Revenue ratio for rated councils on a bespoke basis at the discretion of the Board. This proposal is to support high growth counc ils that may exceed covenants to provide growth infrastructure. The expectation of the LGFA Board is that the bespoke higher covenants would not apply to more than percent of total LGFA lending to councils. This ratio will be monitored by the LGFA Shareholders Council with a view to such covenants not exceeding percent of total counciil lending by the LGFA. A fuller discussion of the Boards recommenda tion regarding delegation to provide bespoke covenants is provided in explanatory note to the Notice of Annual Meeting. The Shareholders Council supports the proposed amendments to the Foundation Policies. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
(( Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Operational and Policy Updates Regional Deals Update: Your meeting with Local Government New Zealand (LGNZ) will be an opportunity to continue discussions on regional deals You are scheduled to meet with LGNZ on October and Regional Deals are on the agenda for the meeting. This meeting follows our engagement with councils on , , and October . We note that LGNZ President Sam Broughton was in attendance at one of the webinars. LGNZ will likely follow up on our council engagement and share some of their initial thoughts on regional deals as presented at our webinars. We have sent you advice with material to support this meeting. )(ijiv) I Contact: Mark Tregurtha :gRaJ Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
(( Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs i:r(r(f)(iv) Contact: Rowan Burns :r(Ra (r(n(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
:; . i( Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs . U comin Local Government Cabinet Pa ers Y(JY(iv) )f)(iv) Appointment of Crown facilitators for water services delivery plans Purpose: This paper seeks Cab inet approval to the selection of a pool of candidates for the role of Crown facilitators for water services delivery plans, and delegated authority for the Minister of Local Government to appoint those candidates to territorial authorities as required. Progress Update: This paper has been drafted and provided to your office on Septembe r , with a recommended Ministerial and agency consultation period of Septembe r to October . If()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) To Minister: September To lodge: October To Committee (APH): October Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
:; .. i( Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs . Other Briefings and Aide Memoires Due to Minister of Local Government Due to Office I Title I Action I Key Contact I Responsible Required DCE Manager October October October October October October October October Baseline Update for Vote Internal Affairs Local Government Appropriations LG Commentary: NA ()(f)(ivJ ()(f)(ivJ ()(f)(ivJ ()(f)(ivJ For Sharyn Mitchell Darrin Sykes agreement )(a) For Rachel Frederique agreement Townrow Bertrand For Monica Rogers agreement For Sarah Campin agreement Fordham For Tom Bex Sullivan agreement Broadhead For Tai Yochay Bex Sullivan agreement ()(a) For Nathan Croft Bex Sullivan agreement Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
:; .. i( Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Departmental Official Information Act Requests to I Decision I Action Requestor Summary of I Key Contact Ministers Due to Required Request (DOI) Office Requestor For noting Request for WICS Jade Badcock ()( ) September September data collected in ()() I I For noting Any briefings, aide Stacey Hayward September September memoires, memos, ()() notes to the Minister I (in ) discussing rate increasesrises For noting Terms of reference Stacey Hayward September September and summary reports ()) I of Commissions I appointed by the Minister for Local Government since the year October For noting Request for Jade Badcock September wastewater asset and ()() I services data I October October For noting Information about Stacey Hayward the Resilient ()) I I Westport Steering Group October October For noting Information about Stacey Hayward community boards ()) I or local boards October October For noting Council input into Stacey Hayward Budget bids ()() I I
:; .. i( Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Ministerial Official Information Act Requests to I Decision I Action I Requestor I Summary of I Key Contact (DOI) Ministers Due to Required Request Office Requestor Send ()(a) Copies of Stacey Hayward September Septembe r information by correspondence ()(a) I Septembe r regarding intervention I to appoint a Crown Manager to Hawkes Bay Regional Council and Wairoa District Council October October Send Information about Stacey Hayward information local government ()(a) I by October technical advisory I groups October October Send Request for a Stacey Hayward information by briefing: Local ()(a) I October Government I (Electoral Legislation and Maori Wards and Maori Constituenc ies) Amendment Bill: Possible further amendments October October Send Information about the Stacey Hayward information by Raukawa Ministerial ()(a) I October Forum I October October Send Information Stacey Hayward information mentioning putting ()(a) I by a central I October government oversight mechanism on Wellington City Council October October Send Documents relating Stacey Hayward information by to the regional deals ()(a) I October framework I announced on August A list of organisations engaged to develop the framework Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
:; .. i( Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs There were also several high pipeline and plant failure costs incurred along with third party damage costs (offset by revenue) during the year. o Employee benefit expenses were . million, up percent on the previous year. This is primarily due to a reduction in the proportion of salaries and wages capitalised on construction of property, plant and equipment ( percent in FY compared with percent in FY). Total salaries and wages paid to employees were . million, up . percent on the prior year and percent unfavourable to budget. o Depreciation and amortisation, up percent to million. Depreciation expense was unfavourab le to budget by percent due to the depreciation on the FY asset revaluation not being included in Watercare s budget, accelerated depreciation for assets retired as part of the renewal program, and the annual reassessment of expected asset lives. o Finance costs, up . percent to million on a like for like basis from with increase attrib utable to increases in debt and interest rates on charged from the Auckland Council treasury. Watercare changed its accuntirig for the treatment of borrowing costs related to ca ital investment. X Watercare s nt surplus after tax margin was . percent, down from . percent in the prior year. pX Infrastructure investmen t totalled . billion (up percent on the prior year). This represents the highest ever annual capital expenditure by Watercare. This amount included settlement of additiona l cost claims with the central interceptor project. Watercare reported in its (March to June) performance report for that five of projects were completed as scheduled in the quarter, whch was under the percent target. This was a new target established for . X Total borrowings increased by million to . billion, up percent on the prior year. Total borrowings to operating revenues (including infrastruct ure growth charges) increased from . times to . times over the year. Auckland ouncil agreed to lift its debttorevenue ca for the financial ear. X In a press release announcing the release of the Annual Report, Watercare indicated that it is committed to achieving a percent per annum efficiency target every year through to (compared to a baseline that recognises o erational costs will grow in line with Watercare s customer base . Ci) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
:; .. i( Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Water Services Authority Taumata Arowai Official Information Act requests to I Decision Due I Action I Requester Summary of I Key Contact Ministers to Requestor Required Request (DDI) Office For Information on Aimee van )(a) September Septembe r consultation organisat ional Barneveld change processes r)a) I for Septembe r October For Information on Aimee van information association Barneveld between Taumata )a) I Arowai and Water New Zealand Septembe r October For Information on Aimee van information Wastewater Barneveld Treatment plant )a) I discharge data October October For Information on Aimee van information increase in the Barneveld Maximum )a) I Acceptab le Value (MAV) for azinphosmethyl in drinking water October October For Public water Aimee van information quality data for Barneveld Levin )a) I October October For Guidelines on Aimee van information the Maximum Barneveld Acceptable )a) I Values in drinking water for sulphates and sulphide s October October For Information Aimee van information sharing with Barneveld Meta, Facebook )a) I and other platforms
( Te Tari Taiwhenua Xf)(ivvr) Internal Affairs Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
( Te Tari Taiwhenua pc:cilXf)(ivliv) i Internal Affairs )(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs
. L( Te Tari Taiwhenua YXg)Ci. Internal Affairs
Figure : Distribution of class NCGMs by low, mid and highdeprivation census area units, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . High () Mid () Low () as of June as of June as of June as of June as of June as of June as of June Source: Department of Internal Affairs How do inequities come about Inequities are not random; they are typically due to structural factors present in society and the local community that cannot be explained by biomedical differences between population groups. This means their causes are often complex and multifaceted and are outside the scope of the health system to address on its own. For example, income inequality (poverty) has been shown to be strongly associated with differences in health outcomes, including gambling (Canale et al ; KolandaiMatchett et al ; Rintoul et al ; Tu et al ; van der Maas ). This means that achieving equity in gambling harm minimisation requires a strong evidence base and a strategic, integrated approach from the health sector and other sectors. The Ministry will use strategies and frameworks such as He Korowai Oranga (Ministry of Health c); Equity of Health Care for Mori: A framework (Ministry of Health b); Ala Moui: Pathways to Pacific Health and Wellbeing (Ministry of Health a) and the New Zealand Health Strategy (Minister of Health ) to focus on minimising gamblingharmrelated inequities. It will support this focus through health literacy activities. The Ministry s health literacy framework and guide aim to improve the quality of services delivered to individuals, families , whnau and communities by raising awareness of issues such as the importance of screening and the presence of inequities and harm in service use (Ministry of Health ). It has applied the approach in gambling harm minimisation services; more broadly to promote screening in drug, alcohol and mental health services; and in the navigator approach to accessing health services. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Crown Co ri ht Creative Commons Attribution . International CC BY .
Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .)
Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) I N C O N F I D E N C E CAB MIN I N C O N F I D E N C E omuxuzqw Cabinet
Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) INCONFIDENCE Page of Office of the Minister for Government Digital Service s Office of the Minister of Internal Affairs Chair, Cabinet Economic Development Committee Progressing Digital Identity: Establishing a Trust Framework Proposal . Digital identity can deliver significant economic and social benefits to public and private sector organisations. The Covid pandemic has highlighted the role of digital identity as a foundation for accessing services and entitlements online. This paper recommends the creation of a Digital Identity Trust Framework (Trust Framework) to accelerate the development and uptake of digital identity services that are secure, trusted and intero perable. . This paper seeks approval for operating funding of . million in total for and to establish an interim Trust Framework and develop legislation to create a statutory Trust Framework. . The Trust Framework will align with trust frameworks in Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom, and is the basis for delivering on the Prime Ministers commitment under the Single Economic Market agenda for mutual recognition of digital identity services with Australia. Executive summary . Digital identity is the user consented sharing of personal and organisational information online to access services and complete transactions. Digital identity services are delivered by both public and private sector providers and rely on trusted information from sources such as government agencies and financial institutions. There is the potential for digital identity to play a larger role in New Zealands economy by improving service delivery and reducing inefficiencies, security risks and privacy breaches. Ther e is wide support in both the public and private sectors to ensure that digital identity services are trusted, coherent and sustainable. . Digital identity is a foundational element for enabling the integration of services and digital transformation across g overnment, as identified in Rautaki m ttahi Rngai Kwanatanga Matihiko , the Strategy for a Digital Public Service. . New Zealand has the opportunity to be a leader in digital identity. This includes delivering on the New Zealand and Australian Prime Min isters commitment to mutual recognition of identity services between Australia and New Zealand. It also includes ongoing alignment with Canada and the United Kingdom with each of these countries developing their own Trust Frameworks to clarify rules and enable interoperability. . The Covid pandemic has highlighted the importance of trusted digital identity for providing services in situations where face toface contact is difficult. This is one of the
Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) Priority Routine Internal Affairs briefing Hon Brooke van Velden Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Internal Affairs Title: Options for making Class gambling online payments permanent June Key issues A temporary exemption allowing Class operators of largescale lotteries to take online or remote payments expires in October this year. On Thursday, June you are meeting with the Chief Executives of the Heart Foundation, Coastguard, and Auckland Rescue Helicopter Trust. They will likely ask you to make the exemption permanent to make fundraising easier. These organisations are reliant on largescale lotteries to raise money for their work in the community. Reverting to inperson or postal sales will severely hamper their fundraising efforts, especially when facing increased costs. We support making the exemption permanent , but it has been challenging to find a suitable legislative vehicle. There are essentially choices to make the exemption permanent. The first is to adopt Hon Barbara Edmonds yettodra wn Gambling (Enabling Remote Interactive Gambling for Class Operator s) Amendment Members Bill, or the second is to seek Cabinet approval prior to the expiry to make the exemption permanent when a suitable legislative vehicle becomes available. The likely legislation within the Internal Affairs portfolio would be the Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill or the online casino gambling legislation. Adopting the Members Bill and passing under urgency would ensure the permanent exemption is made before October . If you were to decide on a preferred option before the meeting next week, you could communicate this to the Class operators at the meeting. Action sought I Timeframe Read this briefing ahead of your meeting with the Chief Executives of the Heart Foundation, Coastguar d and Auckland Rescue Helicopter Trust on Thursday, June . By June Direct officials to draft a Cabinet paper based on your preferred option. Contact for telephone discussions (if required) Name Position Contact Number Suggested pt contact Clare Allison Policy Director Nicola Blackburn Principal Policy Analyst Gambling Policy Return electronic document to: ()(a) Cohesion document reference YXQARPTVW H Ministerial database reference IA INCONFIDENCE Page of Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of Purpose . This briefing provides options for you r consider ation , to make the exemption allowing Class operators of large scale lotteries to take online and remote payments permanent . In , a temporary exemption was given to Class operators What is Class gambling . Class gambling includes large scale lotteri es, housie (otherwise known as bingo) , instant games and other forms of gambling run by incorporated societies . It is used to raise money for an authorised purpose , where p rizes offered exceed ,. Organisations that hold Class licences are mostly registered charities and faith based organisations . . Under section of the Gambling Act (the Act), Class lotteries cannot be run online or by phone . This limit s operators to selling lottery tickets via post or in person and receiving payment by ca sh or cheque . However, New Zealanders are using cash less often to purchase goods and services and c heques are no longer an option as they have been phased out by banks. There is also a security risk of sending cash or credit card details in the mail. A temporary exemption allowing online payments expires in October . In , a s part of the COVID response , Class operators were permitted to sell their tickets online and remotely . This is because in person sales were difficult during lockdown . Due to the emergency related nature of the COVID related legislation, all amendments had an expiry in this case, October . . Since then, w e have tried to find a suitable legislative vehicle to make this exemption permanent. In March , the Department proposed an amendment for the next Statut es Amendment Bill. However, the Ministry of Justice concluded it was not suitable for inclusion as, in its view, the proposal did not meet the criteria of being non controversial. Another option was for the online g ambling legislative process to be utilised but that has not been progressed in time to address this issue before the temporary exemption expires. . Class operators have been contacting us, your office, and other Ministers advocating for the change to be come permanent. They are understandably concerned about the prospect of returning to non digital sales or being in breach of the law if they do not . . we do not expect the proposal to be controversial exce pt to the extent that any changes to gambling provisions always attract some attention from those concerned about gambling harm, even from low risk activities . Digital payments are the norm for most New Zealanders now and this change simply brings Class into line with that . There is no evidence that the exemption caused an increase in gambling harm or additional workload for the regulator . Class organisations rely on lottery sales for their operations . Organisations , such as the Heart Foundation and Coastguard, rely on large scale lotteries to raise money for their work in the community . For the Coastguard, its lottery programme is its second largest fundraising stream . It runs lotteries per year which generates ar ound .m per annum (around of its annual income in FY). Last year, . This was only possible because of the temporary exemption . . These organisations are concerned that removing digital or remote sales will result in: a loss of customers, both existing and new, because purchasing lottery tickets will become too hard under the old rules ,
Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) U N C L A S S I F I E D
Crown Copyright, Creave Commons Atribuon . Internaonal (CC BY . )
Schedule D Independent Advisory Committees and Statutory Supervisory
b) cease to provide Personal Entitlement or Other Thing to an individual upon the individuals
. Management of classes
ptiki Coast model WICS report
ptiki District Council
ptiki slide pack WICS report
torohanga District Council
torohanga model WICS report
torohanga slide pack WICS report
Aide memoire request: Combined Sector meeting on May
Local Government Status Report WE August
Local Government Status Report WE August
Local Government Status Report WE October
(data.govt.nz website PowerBI and machinereadable formats)
Ease of getting birth, death and marriage services is maintained or increases
Ease of getting citizenship services is maintained or increases
Ease of getting passport services is maintained or increases
Mori leaders in the Department at tier level and above is maintained or increased
New Zealanders trust in public services based on personal experience is maintained or increases
New Zealands global ranking in the Democracy Index is maintained or increases
Peoples sense of belonging to New Zealand increases
Peoples sense of purpose is maintained or increased
Peoples trust and confidence in digital identity is improved
Perceptions of corruption are maintained or decreased
Satisfaction with citizenship services is maintained or increases
The Departments settlement commitments as reported in Te Haeata is maintained or increased
DE
employers, Iwi and industry
Achieving Collective Impact, Department of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Social Development, Inland Revenue
Adult applicants will be able to apply for a RealMe Verified Identity for themselves at the same as they apply for their passport.
Applicants will be able to confirm their gender when applying online, even if it is different from their previous passport.
Applicants will no longer need to provide their previous passport number when applying to replace a lost, stolen or damaged passport.
Best Citizen Engagement, SmartStart Communications team
Best Public Procurement Project, Department of Internal Affairs and Ministry of Social Development
Customers will be able to apply online with an endorsement on their passport (e.g. if they wear a head covering for religious or medical reasons, or they are unable to sign their passport) without needing a statutory declaration.
Groups will be able to use one online portal to apply for all passport application types (renewal and firsttime passports), including mixed groups (adults and children).
Marketing, Advertising and Brand Communication category, SmartStart Communications team
Ministerial Services attends to the Wellington accommodation requirements of Ministers with nonWellington primary places of residence in two ways:
New Zealand Legislation website
Public Good Award, SmartStart team, Catalyst
The website will automatically identify the appropriate application type, removing the need for customers to answer several questions before they start their application.
airfares for members of the Executive.
expenses include VIP Transport Services (Chauffeur drive and self drive vehicles), ferry, trains, taxis and may include the Minister and accompanying staff as these costs are not recorded separately.
expenses include VIP Transport Services (Chauffeur drive and self drive vehicles), ferry, trains, taxis and may include the Minister, spousepartner, accompanying staff as these costs are not recorded separately.
expenses include airfares, accommodation, internal travel, receptions and related travel costs as these costs are not recorded separately.
expenses include hotel, meal and incidental expenses for members of the Executive.
the Department of Internal Affairs Approach to Compliance and Enforcement (available at
a free opensource office software suite
requires a free Google account
requires a free Microsoft account
. compared to the c urrent base case of ..
Accept Reality Check Radios Peoples Terms for the Covid
Accept Reality Check Radios Peoples Terms for the Covid Inquiry
Accept Reality Check Radios Peoples Terms for the Covid Inquiry;
Access or use of DIA Information includes any activity requiring the user to log in to the DIA system, even if the only action is the log in itself. NZSIS takes extensive steps to ensure DIA Information is only accessed by authorised NZSIS employees for appropriate purposes.
Ala Moui Examples of the strategy s alignment Every dollar is spent in The Acts requirements for a specified consultation process to develop the the best way to strategy and the problem gambling levy rates to ensure best value for improve health resources outcomes The Acts requirements for research and evaluation research and audit projects evaluating intervention and public health services Priority outcomes Systems and services Dedicated Pacific services based in a Pacific cultural paradigm and using meet the needs of Pacific derived beliefs, values and practices Pacific peoples Requirements for general services meeting cultural needs of service users and supporting them to access dedicated Pacific services where available More services are Planning and prioritisation processes mapping need based on delivered locally in the population specific prevalence and access rates community and in primary care Pacific peoples are Overall goal of the strategy, principles underpinning the strategy and better supported to be objective healthy Pacific peoples Overa ll goal of the strategy, principles underpinning the strategy and experience improved objective broader determinants of health STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Ministerial Response to the Peon of Reality Check Radio on
We believe this would ensure an independent, full scale, wide ranging
general ward system regardless of which electoral roll they are on.
very high likelihood of council support in a distress s cenar io, was not likely to requir e financial
very high likelihood of council support in a distress scenario , was not like ly to r equire fi nancial
very strong . There is no change to the com ponent s of the PICRA ( PublicSector Industry And
Table : Objective priorities for action Objective : Services enhance people s mana and build life skills and resiliency to improve healthy choices Priorities for action Short to medium term priorities Long term priorities Identify, monitor and provide information and education on the impacts of gambling, including the signs and range of harmful gambling that affect individuals, families , whnau and communities , and how to respond. Introduce service co design and consumer n etworks to inform and evaluate activities to enhance mana and build resiliency. Support communities to incorporate a robust understanding of gambling harm into community social initiatives and public service delivery . Together with the Health Promotion Agency (HPA) and DIA, support gambling operators and gambling venue operators to incorporate a robust understanding of gambling harm into their operations and activities , to improve their ability to recognise and respond to indicators of gambling harm. Pilot initiatives that enhance people s mana and build life skills and resiliency to improve healthy choices. Underlying principles: one teamk otahi te tma The Ministry is working to build a more cohesive, integrated and collaborative approach across the health and disability system , towards shared goals and beyond organisational boundaries , to proactively help people and populations in need. Building on the experience in the addictions sector in particular (addressing harms from alcohol, tobacco and drugs), the Ministry will encourage appropriate collaborative partnerships among services providers and related stakeholders; for example, by promoting codesign and including consumer networks. Objective : Gambling environments are designed to prevent and minimise gambling harm There is compelling evidence that certain types of gambling are more likely to be associated with harm than others. The Ministry will continue to advocate for technological andor environmental changes to gambling environments that are likely to have a positive effect on reducing harmful gambling behaviour and be costeffective. It intends to focus on greater use of technology to monitor and manage gambling environments and gambling behaviours over the course of th is strategic plan, and has set aside resources to pilot new and innovative uses of technology that may include: technologybased support for people at risk of or affected by harmful gambling, such as online selfhelp and support services tools to support gamblers and host venues to monitor for signs of harmful gambling and enable gamblers to set limits on their gambling activity STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Contact event was defined as contact that we would intend a contact tracing card to record by Ministry of Health contact definition , such as hugging, touching, and talking facetoface. For example, two people standing within two metres backtoback would be scored , but facetoface would be scored as the transmission risk is different even though the relative distance is the same. Minutes where two contacts were outofrange (m) from each other were left blank. Minutes where we were unable to determine distance were scored and both card and ground truth events for those minutes were removed before evaluation. Distances were verified by using floor plans as well as physically measured space between reference points such as walls and furniture.
Start with us, and it will
constituencies at regional councils. At times, this paper uses the term wards to refer generally to both
expert under applica ble securities laws. Neither SP Glob al Rat ings RES or any indicative
failing to meet requirements in regard to restrictions on jackpot advertising andor branding at Class venues (an existing requirement) with a new infringement fee of , Offence for societiesvenue operatorsvenue managers of failing to meet requirements in regard to providing information about problem gambling to patrons and where to get help (an existing requirement) with a new infringement fee of , Offence for societies of f ailing to meet requirements in regard to required components of problem gambling awareness training to staff who supervise gambling (an existing requirement) with a new infringement fee of , . Create offences and infringement fees for proposed new requirements Infringements are a low cost, simple way of punishing minor offending without, in most cases, recourse to the courts. Any new proposed regulations should also have an infringement fee attached to them. New o f fence for venue operatorsvenue managers of failing to meet requirements in regard to monitoring and recording harm minimisation actions (a proposed new requirement) with an infringement fee of , Offence for venue operatorsvenue managers of f ailing to meet requirements in regard to harm mi nimisation machine features ( a proposed new requirement ) with an infringement fee of , . Some of our initial thinking on the Part C proposals, below, has been provided in the discussion document for validation or feedback : These options could help drive culture change in harm minimisation in pokies venues by making the consequences of breaches clear and incentivising compliance. Penalties will provide a wider range of tools in the regulators toolbox. For some venues, the infringement fees may be too low to provide an effective deterrent , but for others, they may be extremely effective. How do the options compare to the Counterfactual . As we have not yet developed set of final proposals (and as this is an Interim RIS to support the decision to release a discussion document) , we have only been able to summarise how the current proposals compare to the Counterfactual. The RIS w hich will accompany the final proposals will include a more detailed analysis, using the criteria identified in paragraph . Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs Regulatory Impact Statement . Parts are summarised separately, but it is expected that as a combined suite of changes the y would be much better than the Counterfactual. Option Overall assessment Counterfactual Limited cover in regulations in ter ms of topics and specificity. Difficult to enforce compliance in venues. Part A The Venue Better than Counterfactual: Clearer, more specific steps. Monitoring systems required. Improved andor wider training. Venue design counteracts harm. Part B The machines Better than Counterfactual: Information addresses gambling fallacies. Harm driving features reduced. Removal or restriction of Jackpots or branding. Part C Enforcement Better than Counterfactual: Improvement in compliance by creating enforcement tools. Example key for qualitative judgements: much better than doing nothingthe status quocounterfactual better than doing nothingthe status quocounterfactual about the same as doing nothingthe status quocounterfactual worse than doing nothingthe status quocounterfactual much worse than doing nothingthe status quocounterfactual
inquiring into, and reporting on, any matter of public importance
reserved for the most serious matters of public importance
. . . . . . . Sector working together to prevent and minimise gambling harm, and to reduce gambling related health inequities Objective Objective There is a reduction in gambling harm related inequities between population groups Maori have healthier futures Objective Services enhance peoples mana, and build life skills and resiliency to improve healthy choices Objective People access effective treatment and support services at the right time and place Objective A skilled workforce is developed to deliver effective services Objective People participate in decisionmaking about activities in their communities Objective Services raise awareness about the range of gambling harms that affect individuals, familieswhanau and communities Objective A programme of research and evaluation establishes an evidence base that underpins all activities Objective People understand and acknowledge the range of gambling harms that affect individuals, familieswhanau and communities Objective Gambling environments are designed to prevent and minimise gambling harm Objective Healthy policy at the national, regional and local level prevents and minimises gambling harm IWH:ti Objective : People understand and acknowledge the range of gambling harms that affect individuals, families , whnau and communities. Objective : A skilled workforce is developed to deliver effective services to prevent and minimise gambling harm. Objective : Services enhance people s mana and build life skills and resiliency to improve healthy choices that prevent and minimise gambling harm. Objective : Gambling environments are designed to prevent and minimise gambling harm. Objective : Services raise awareness about the signs and range of gambling harms that affect individuals, families , whnau and communities , and how to respond. Objective : People access effective treatment and support services at the right time and place. Objective : A programme of research and evaluation establishes an evidence base that underpins all activities to prevent and minimises gambling harm. Figure shows how the strategic objectives described above contribute to the strategy s key outcomes and goal. Figure : Framework for organising the strategic objectives STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MI NIMISE GAMBLING HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
. million Customers receive services ( served by the three metropolitan
A persons full name and of birth will be used in the match between
A statutory Board as defined in section of the Fees and
AIA Services NZ Limited Information Supply Agreement;
Agreement to provide birth and death information (Mortality Review Committees);
All requested information will be transferred between DIA and IR by MFT
All roles in drinking water and wastewater, with clear progression pathways and
As the standalone Bill would be undertaken in
As there is a lack of data, it is unclear if the magnitude of risk is sufficient
As this option will not split resources, all
Avoiding the risk that incorrect or false information may be provided to an Organisation;
Births, Deaths and Marriages DIA Passport Application Processing Information
Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Act
Both pieces of work running in tandem would split resources, impacting
Cigna Insurance Limited Information Sharing Agreement;
Citizenship (Western Samoa) Act
Citizenship Births Information Matching Programme .
Citizenship Births, Deaths and Marriages Application Processing Information
Citizenship Passport Application Processing Information Matching Programme
Consulting at an early stage with affected
Continuing professional development as a key component .
Could be seen as inefficient use of Parliamentary time if further
Current system is a voluntary selfclassification scheme which has a safety
Domain Name Commission Information Supply Agreement;
Each data extract from DIA will contain processed passport application
Every officer of IR is bound by the provisions of section of the TAA,
Final policy proposals unlikely to be presented before earlymid with
For the purposes of the above bullet point, segregated means the
Forsyth Barr Limited Information Supply Agreement;
Funding and other constraints may have created inequities in access to training and
Government Superannuation Fund Information Matching Agreement;
However, recognising that some councils may want to move quickly to start shifting the delivery of water services into more financially sustainable models, Cabinet has agreed that new legislation will include provisions that help streamline the process for establishing water services council controlled organisations as currently provided for under the Local Government Act . Since becoming Minister of Local Government I have heard that the current legislative requirements make it challenging for councils in different districts to explore joint arrangements for service delivery. ()(g)(i) ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of The Bill will contain a bespoke set of consultation and decision making arrangements that will enable councils to streamline this process while continuing to provide the opportunity for community input. These streamlined arrangements are voluntary for councils to choose to use, as an alternativ e to some of the standard requirements in the Local Government Act. The arrangements include provisions that: o Clarify that councils can set up joint committees that can consult on a proposal across multiple districts (instead of each council carrying out separate consultation), and to make recommendations to participating councils o Set minimum consultation and information requirements one round of consultation, and information only needs to be provided on the analysis of two options (status quo preferred option) o Enable councils to consider the collective benefitsimpacts of a proposal (across multiple districts), in addition to the interests of their individual districts and to factor in the view of other participating councils This is just the first step in giving councils the flexibility to identify and use the service delivery models and financing tools that are right for them and their communities.
However, recognising that some councils may want to move quickly to start shifting the delivery of water services into more financially sustainable models, Cabinet has agreed that new legislation will include provisions that help streamline the process for establishing water services council controlled organisations as currently provided for under the Local Government Act . Since becoming Minister of Local Government I have heard that the current legislative requirements make it challenging for councils in different districts to explore joint arrangements for service delivery. The Bill will contain a bespoke set of consultation and decision making arrangements that will enable councils to streamline this process while continuing to provide the opportunity for community input. These streamlined arrangements are voluntary for councils to choose to use, as an alt ernative to some of the standard requirements in the Local Government Act. The arrangements include provisions that: o Clarify that councils can set up joint committees that can consult on a proposal across multiple districts (instead of each council carrying out separate consultation), and to make recommendations to participating councils o Set minimum consultation and information requirements one round of consultation, and information only needs to be provided on the analysis of two options (status quo preferred option) o Enable councils to consider the collective benefitsimpacts of a proposal (across multiple districts), in addition to the interests of their individual districts and to factor in the view of other participating councils This is just the first step in giving councils the flexibility to identify and use the service delivery models and financing tools that are right for them and their communities.
I am seeking Cabinet agreement to the inclusion of such a clause in the Repeal Bill as this was not a policy agreed by Cabinet in December .
IPP : Limits on the Use of Personal Information
IPP : Limits on Disclosure of Personal Information
IPP : Source of Personal Information
IR shall also ensure that those employees of, or contractors to IR, who
IR will limit access to this information to specifically authorised officers.
IR will not use any shared information for any purpose other than the
IR will only perform a match against those student loan borrowers and
If multiple matches are identified (more than one person with the same
Information uploaded into Rs primary system will only be used for other
Information will be made available by IR to the borrower or parent to
Inland Revenue advising liable parents living overseas of their child
Inland Revenue advising overseas based borrowers of their student loan
Inland Revenue collecting child support liable parent debt (inclusive of
Inland Revenue collecting student loan debt (inclusive of core
Is the objective for the differential treatment sufficiently important Is there a rational connection between the limit and the objective Does the limit impair the right no more than reasonably necessary to achieve the objective Is the limit in due proportion to the importance of the objective Conclusion is there an unjustified limit on the right Below is a short summary of the NZBORA analysis. It briefly summarises the key arguments.
It would bring consistency into the digital identity ecosystem in New Zealand , enabling a high trust environment for all participants . Unlike Option , which would also enable a high trust envi ronment, it can be established in the near term and at a lower cost. It is sufficiently flexible and responsive enough to grow and develop into a larger and more complex model, if required. Government would maintain control over compliance process, ensuring consistency across the trusted digital identity ecosy stem. RealMe , or parts of it, could be incorporated into the Trust Framework . Mori representation at the governance level will ensure Mori concerns and approaches to personal information (e.g. prioritising iwi affiliation over other attributes) are given appropriate consideration . It would meet stakeholder requirements. Evidence gathered through The Departments engagement process indicated stakeholders generally wanted a government led intervention, that combined rules, compliance testing and legal enforceability, and could be established in a timely manner. The digital identity ecosystem is not at a level of maturity to allow for Option . Option would involve the establishment of a larger and more complex Trust Framework regime than Option . Similar to Option , the Trust Framework would be overseen by a governance body and supported by an accreditation regime , and it would bring trust and consistency to the digital identity ecosystem . Additionally, Option would allow for greater autonomy fr om government. It would still have clear lines of accountability and could react quickly to changes in industry standards. However, it could not be established in a timely fashion. Th is option could not be operationalised until a new entity had been created and resourced to support it, and until such time as a new Trust Framework Bill had been introduced, all of which will take years. Furthermore , there is a realistic possibility that it may not be fit for purpose when it does come on line. The size and complexit y of this option may be out of proportion with the market and requirements, especially as there will only likely be a small number of participants authorised to operate under the Trust Framework when it first comes online. As suc h, the cost of establishing a large and complex regime from the outset outweigh the benefits of such a regime. Approving Option does not preclude the possibility to moving to an Option model in the future, if the uptake and size of the ecosystem warrants such an approach. Option is preferred over Option as it enables responsive scalability. Options and will not achieve the objective of bringing trust and consistency into the digital identity ecosystem in New Zealand. Under Option , the digital identity ecosystem will continue to be afflicted by inefficiency and a lack of consumer control over their information. Legislation such as the Electronic Identity Verification (EIV) Act was designed to enable the sharing of government held PROACTIVELY RELEASED INCONFIDENCE
Lack of available time for operators to complete training this is often exacerbated
Lack of suitable training: training often doesnt keep pace with system or
Local Government Act Local Government (Rating) Act Local Government Act Local Government Official Information and Meetings Act Impounding Act Proactively released by the Minister of Local Government aecpczkj Land Drainage Act River Boards Act Dog Control Act (refers directly to the definition in the Local Government Act ) Freedom Camping Act (refers directly to the definition in the Local Government Act ) Enabling chief executives authority to sign certificates of compliance for lending arrangements to be delegated when they are unavailable or the office is vacant
MFT manages the secure transfer of data from one computer to another
Major improvements to recruitment and enrolment processes. A coordinated data management and analysis strategy. Focusing the research objectives of Phase Two on the logistic, recruitment and technology challenges posed by a large complex real world use case.
Maori Trustee Te Tumu Paeroa Information Sharing Agreement;
Massey University Information Sharing Agreement;
Matched and verified data will be uploaded into IRs primary system as
Matched but unverified data will be segregated within days of IR
Matched information will be kept secure as specified above under Data
Minimum levels of qualifications based on supply category and type.
MyTrove Information .Sharing Agreement;
National Provident Fund Information Matching Agreement;
New Zealand Marketing Association Limited Information Sharing Agreement;
No personal information may be sent by email until the individual is
Once information has been uploaded into Rs primary system it will
Once loaded onto Rs servers, the data will be segregated from Rs main
Organisations being able to take actions once they are aware that the individual has died,
Organisations being aware of the death, so that whanau of the deceased individual do not
Organisations having ready access to an authoritative source of registered death information
Organisations not having to approach the survivors of the deceased individual to require
Passport numbers will not be used as part of the matching process and
Phase two: the formal establishment of the Trust Framework ( ). In this phase, the Trust Framework is established in legislation and becomes legally enforceable. The governance board becomes formalised with its powe rs and parameters formally established in legislation. The compliance process in phase one transitions into a formal accreditation regime, where systems can be tested against legally enforceable rules, and compliance can be formally recognised. The limitat ions on the number of entities being assessed against the rules are relaxed and any entity wishing to participate in the trusted digital identity ecosystem can apply to undergo assessment. The Bill will provide the accreditation body with the power to impl ement a cost recovery model and charge for accreditation. The anticipated cost of this phase is . million . The outyear costs of running the Trust Framework will be confirmed once cost recovery policy is confirmed . The government led option outlined ab ove is preferred because: The intervention outlined above would even out the digital identity playing field, increase peoples trust and confidence in digital identity services, and position the ecosystem to realise the significant potential of trusted information sharing via digital means . There is a strong imperative to implement an intervention in the near future, especially now that Covid is accelerating demand for digital identity services and solutions . The intervention outlined above could be established in the near term PROACTIVELY RELEASED INCONFIDENCE
Presexual assignment or
Presexual assignment or reassignment birth
Previous reviews over the last decade have either not eventuated in any
Principle : Limits on Disclosure of Personal Information
Principle : Source of Personal Information
Revenue: A.b, Operational works: Ab, Capital works: A.b, Borrowings:
Rolling amendments could be seen as disruptive by the sector, and lead to
Section ()(f)(iv) information withheld to maintain the constitutional conventions which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown
Section ()(f)(iv): Maintain the constitutional convention which protects the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers and officials Section ()(g)(i): Maintain the conduct of public affairs through the protection of free and frank expression Section ()(g)(ii): Protection f rom improper pressure or harassment Section ()(h): Maintain legal professional privilege
The changes that I will be announcing today were endorsed by Cabinet on Monday. And I am announcing them today, including sharing detailed information with councils, to provide certainty about the path ahead and so you can begin discussions with your com munities about the changes required to do water well. So, to the new aspects of Local Water Done Well that I will be announcing today Cabinet has agreed to make it more straightforward for councils that want to move quickly to start shifting the delivery of water services into more financially sustainable models, to do so. Under Local Water Done Well, a range of structural and financing tools will be available to councils to use for water services including a new class of financially independent council owned organisations.
The current regulatory gap in coverage of SVoD content remains
The increasing popularity of SVoD services among young people and
The passport number is a unique identifier and as such will be the only
The primary method of contact will be by telephone followed by contact in
The standalone Bill will provide a short term
The standalone Bill would likely implement a temporary measure which
The truncated policy process risks impeding our ability to address any
These changes are currently scheduled to be
This is the quickest way to address the
This option is more likely to allow sufficient
Through the Water Service Delivery Plans, councils will be asked to provide baseline information about their water services operations, assets, revenue, expenditure, pricing, and capital. This is not a regulatory information gathering exercise, but is a useful first step to build the capability of councils and prepare the Commerce Commission ahead of the full economic regulation regime being introduced from the middle of next year. All councils that have water service delivery responsibilities (either directly or through existing council controlled organisations) will be subject to these requirements. As well as the Plans being , information collected through them will be shared with the Commerce Commission, to help them with the development of the future regulatory regime. ()(g)(i) Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua Department of Internal Affairs INCONFIDENCE Page of The Bill will also provide for some councils to be subject to an early form of information disclosure by the Commerce Commission, prior to the full economic regulation regime. This will build on the information collected through the Plans, and is intended to be for larger councils that have more advanced assetfinancial management practices, or those moved quickly to establish new organisations and are ready for a faster track t oward more detailed oversight. Finally, the third area I wanted to cover today is the changes Cabinet has agreed to make it more straightforward for councils that want to move quickly to start shifting the delivery of water services into more financially sustainable models, to do so. Under Local Water Done Well, a range of structural and financing tools will be available to councils to use for water services including a new class of financially independent council owned organisations.
Training often lacks breadth and doesnt build transferable skills or knowledge to
Truncated policy process could limit effectiveness of outcomes from the
University of Auckland Information Sharing Agreement;
University of Waikato Information Sharing Agreement;
Unmatched data will be destroyed within days of receipt from DIA in
Until IR has identified the correct individual and verified contact details in
Validation checks and verification of identity, including scripted questions,
Validation procedures and verification of identity is an integral part of Rs
Westpac New Zealand Limited Information Supply Agreement .
a New Zealand citizen, or a New Zealand citizen by descent,
a New Zealand citizen; or
a committee of the whole local authority .
a head of mission or head of post within the meaning of the
a news entity, to the extent that it is carrying on news activities .
a person working overseas for the public service of Niue,
an employee in any part of the State services, or a member
an officer or employee of New Zealand Trade and
an officer or employee of the New Zealand Tourism Board
an overseas government entity to the extent that the entity is
any committee, subcommittee, standing committee, special
appointed under section of the Civil Union Act as a civil
authorised to act as a marriage celebrant under the Marriage Act
be grounded on achieving compliance with current regulatory requirements
comes into force on the both parties sign this Agreement; and
contacting the person to ensure IR has the most uptocontact
cover a similar period to councils longterm plan, with a particular focus on what will be delivered over the first three
current classification activities prescribed under the Films, Videos, and Publications Classifications (Fees) Regulations (the Regulations); and new classification activities related to Commercial Video onDemand (CVoD) visual media content. The options in this consultation document apply to individuals and organisations whose classification activity is covered by the Regulations, and to CVoD providers. This consultation document includes questions for your consideration. Your feedback will inform the Governments decisionmaking about the level of costrecovery from users of the classification system, and a suitable mechanism for collecting charges. Your feedback will also be used to guide the design of the costrecovery mechanism chosen. The Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) administers the Classification Act and is responsible for reviewing and setting fees under the Regulations. How to have your say We value your opinion and acknowledge that you may be able to identify additional solutions. Your feedback on the options will help direct the Departments advice and the Governments decisionmaking. Please take time to make a submission. You can make a submission by emailing classificationfundingreviewdia.govt.nz If you are sending your submission in PDF format, please also send us the Word Document. Please include the following information in your submission: your name and position (if appropriate); your organisations name (if applicable); and your contact details (email address and phone number). Alternatively, you can post your submission to: Department of Internal Affairs Operational Services Directorate PO Box Wellington, If you are unable to email or post your submission to the Department, but you would still like to make a submission, you can drop your submission off at the reception of the Department of Internal Affairs, Pipitea Street, Thorndon, Wellington, .
enable the growth identified in a councils longterm plan (or other council planning documents)
entitled in terms of the Immigration Act to be in New
has a regulatory or administrative role; and
identify the individual whose information is requested; or
identify the public consultation undertaken in the development of the proposals in the Plan
include a declaration that the Plan is compliant with statutory requirements and that the information it contains can be relied upon.
include material on council owned water services drinking water, wastewater are mandatory, but stormwater is optional
information about the individuals provided has not yet been
is not a State services agency .
make contact with noncompliant borrowers and liable parents overseas to
make contact with noncompliant borrowers and liable parents who are based
mobile telephone number;
noncompliant contact (those whose contact information does not appear
noncompliant debt (those who are in default of their payment liabilities);
noncompliant debt (those who are in default of their repayment
obtain a tax invoicereceipt for all purchases complete a credit card reconciliation form promptly after each use of the card attach original tax invoices to the reconciliation form atta ch original signed credit card slips (counterfoils) to the reconciliation form include the reason for and explanation of the expenditure on the reconciliation form, especially where no receipt is available sign the reconciliation form not exceed the credit card limit (if applicable). . The Senior Private Secretary should certify all credit card reconciliation forms. . An example of the credit card reconciliation form is in Appendix D . . Safeguarding cards against loss or theft is the personal responsibility of the individual to whom the card is issued. As a protective measure, cardholders are strongly encouraged to arrange for storage of credit cards in Ministerial Office safes, when not in use. Alternatively, cards may also be deposited in the Ministerial Services safe, under the control of the EGS Finance team. . The cardholder must report a lost credit card as soon as possible to: Ministerial Services during normal working hours the credit card supplier (BNZ Visa) outside normal working hours and then advise Ministerial Services. Proactively released by the Department of Internal Affairs . Only the authorised cardholder may use the credit card. Use of a credit card by other persons is fraud. . SPSs are responsible for the collection and reconciliation of outstanding credit card issues of staff leaving their offices.
obtain reliable and timely information on the whereabouts of overseas based
passport delivery address;
personal telephone number;
reduce child support debt; and
reduce student loan debt;
requiring the person to pay a portion of his or her overdue child support
requiring the person to pay a portion of his or her overdue student loan
requiring the person to pay his or her entire overdue child support liability
requiring the person to pay his or her entire overdue student loan debt by
requiring the person to pay his or her overdue child support liability in full;
requiring the person to pay his or her overdue student loan debt in full; or
requiring the person to pay his or her student loan balance in full; or
supersedes the existing information sharing agreement between IR and DIA
take administrative and legal steps that may be necessary to recover
taking legal action against the person if he or she continues to fail to
the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Act
the Citizenship (Western Samoa) Act ;
the Citizenship Act ;
the Civil Union Act ;
the Department of Internal Affairs
the Government of an overseas country;
the Marriage Act ; and
the Passports Act .
the RegistrarGeneral, Births, Deaths and Marriages
the individual is under investigation; or
the individuals appearance has changed .
the issuing of Travel Documents; and
the person was born in New Zealand on or after January and
the person was born in New Zealand on or after January ,
the privacy of individuals; and
the provision of access to information relating to Life Events and
the registration or recording of Life Events;
the security of personal information; and
there is likely to be a reduction in revenue for sports and racing codes from the POCC removal and reductions in BI UC payments (the racing codes collected approximately million f rom POCC in the financial year and . million the financial year from BIUC agreements). The Department considers the risks of these costs outweighing the increased benefits of the monopoly are unlikely, it is not guaranteed. We also note that the racing codes support the monopoly despite these losses ; there is likely to be a reduction in GST as noted, the proposals will see a fall in GST paid as offshore operators exit the market. Officials estimate the amount of GST collected in from offshore operators that related to income from sports and racing wagering to be approximately . million. However much of the GST loss will be offset by increased TAB NZ GST revenue through the monopoly or gamblers shifting their spending to other GST registered gambling operators (e.g. casinos or pokies) or spending a similar amount of funds on other goods and services such as entertainment which are subject to GST. In addition, the payments from Entain NZ to TAB NZ that are conditional on an online mon opoly (m upfront should lead to additional spending in the New Zealand economy which would contribute to tax revenues. This positive impact of additional spending in the New Zealand economy could outweigh any GST losses from some NZ gamblers shifting to non compliant offshore operators. It is therefore assumed the impact will be minimal, but this will depend on the amount of customer s returning to TAB which is difficult to estimate ; customers may not automatically return to TAB NZ if the monopoly is established while Entain taking o ver the day today operations has resulted in improved odds and betting options, TAB NZ still offers less variety than most other online sports and racing wagering and there is a risk that a lack of competition could lower likelihood of TAB providing competitive odds and newinnovative products in future . a black market will likely remain while reputable operators are likely to prevent customers from New Zealand from accessing their sites, this is easy to circumvent using a VPN. Customers may also choose to bet with less reputable operators to access different products or more range, increasing the risk of gambling harm if they are using sites without adequate consumer protections and harm minimisation practices; there is a risk that the proposed interim enforcement regime will not be sufficient for TAB NZ to receive the payments from Entain provided. TAB NZ have advised us that they consider this risk to be minimal but as the payment is to be released it the discretion of Entain, we cannot be certain ; there is risk the that the online reforms will stall , leaving the interim regulator arrangement in place for a longer time than intended ; the monopoly favour s Entain as TAB NZ partner which some may consider inappropriate .
use the information for one or more of the purposes specified in clause . (b) to (d), (i),
with their privacy is minimised:
A critical role. We believe a default of a WSE would ha ve a critical impact fo r the
A limited link. We believe the p roposed changes t o the Local Government Act , the
A strong link. We con sider is an impor tant shareh older of the propos ed
A strong link. While there is no t ye t a tr ack re cord o f the Crown providing credit
A very im portant role. Th is is base d on the same factors as scenario .
A very important role. While these local councils will not be legally responsible for the
A very st rong link. We believe these l ocal c ouncil s have a very strong and durable link
A very strong link. We believe th ere is a very strong and durable link between t he
At the commencement of operations, the WSE will incu r external debt to pay a
Commerce Commission will look at the economic regulation of the WSE and set its
For the purposes of our analysis we are looking at an average WSE depe nding on the
Forecast financials for the WSE as presented to SP in the model Water Entity Model
In order to asses s the potential i mpact on local cou ncils credit ratin gs we shou ld
Legislation w ill be ame nded to extend CDEM arra ngeme nts to WSEs and allow th e
Local council s will re duce th eir total tax supported debt b y the am ount of debt related
No one council will hold veto ri ghts .
Ownership will be through a statutory entit y with a corp orate shareholding ownership
Section ()(f)(iv) confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers and officials .
The Governor s have approval rights over t he W SEs stat ement s of intent including
The Governors can vote to remove the WSE s chair or members .
The Loca l Government Act will be amended to remove the obliga tion that local
The WSE benefits from a NZ million Crown l iquidity facility on the same terms as
The WSE s will increase their leverage by NZ bi llion at commenc ement.
The WSE will have its own indepen dent treasu ry function . The WSEs w ill borrow in their
The reforms do not , in an d of themselves, cause any council to breach its LGFA
There will be WSEs across the country with each WS E covering a smaller gr oup of
There will be no ISPs and Governors vote on the appointment of WSE s board members .
There will be no crossguarantee provi ded by W SEs.
There will be no letter of expectations from the Gov ernor s and the WSE s are not
There will be no shar eholding ownersh ip of WSEs under scenar ios and . Th ere will
Und er scenario , the WSEs will in crease debt b y NZ billion because they will have a
Under scena rios there will be WSE s. Under scenario there will be W SEs.
Under scenario , the Governor s will have app roval rights and the p ower to direct t he
Under scenarios and , local cou ncils or the Governor s will not ha ve app roval
WSE puts in place bank credit faciliti es such that its liquidity remains at least adequate
WSE will be established as pr esented to SP in the information memorandum The
identified that when situations call for deliberation in the absence of high levels of emotion (cold cognition), such as voting, granting consent for research participation, and making autonomous medical decisions, the ability of an individual to reason and consider alternative courses of action reaches adult levels during the mid teen years. When situations that involve emotionally charged situations where time for deliberation and self restraint is unlikely or difficult (hot cognition), such as driving, co nsuming alcohol, and criminal behaviour, impulse choices are more likely and mental processes are slower to develop, reaching adult levels into adulthood.
must not require a development contribution for a reserve, network infrastructure, or community infrastructure if, and to the extent thata third party has funded or provided, or undertaken to fund or provide, the same reserve, network infrastructure, or community infrastructure. The current approach to thirdparty funding means that those who benefit from the growth portion of an infrastructure project cannot be required to pay the full growth costs.
Any device must exist in a system of policies, procedures, and tools. Achieving the desired results with the CovidCard will require modified contact tracing processes to reflect the new tools if contact tracers continue to work as before, the results will be the same as before.
Apps based on Apple Googles Exposure API are an emerging standard embraced by some countries but rejected by others. It notifies close contacts but sharing that you are a close contact with health authorities is optional, somewhat compromising the contact tracing process.
Between April and May there were cases with close contacts (avg . contacts) . This indicates that for the period April May there were just new cases with only close contacts, an average of just . contacts per case. Prior to Level each case had around close contacts. Identifying and notifying close contacts of confirmed cases is much more challenging at lower Alert Levels, because people frequently cant remember who they have been in contact with; people may https:www.health.govt.nzsystemfilesdocumentspublicationscontacttracingreportverrall.pdf https:www.health.govt.nzsystemfilesdocumentspages..nationalclosecontacttracingmetri csaprv.publish.pdf https:www.health.govt.nzsystemfilesdocumentspagesnationalclosecontacttracingmetricsapr may.pdf
Between and April the average time from referral to instructing a contact to isolate was . days.
Can wearables and apps interoperate effectively at the technology level to a similar standard minimal false positives, etc
Close contacts could be identified, independently of whether the case can recall the encounter, broadening the comprehensiveness of the close contacts.
Close contacts could be notified immediately by text message, asking them to selfisolate.
Conduct robust reallife trials of CovidCard to confirm the accuracy of identifying close contacts and casual contacts, as clinically defined.
Consult with and solicit feedback from international groups working on similar projects and local stakeholders, including Iwi, Pasifika, Union leaders, government officials and Members of Parliament and Cabinet.
Contact details of close contacts could be made immediately available to contact tracers for all close contacts and casual contacts, accelerating the speed with which close contacts can be isolated.
Custom Bluetooth apps. Users would download and run such an app which would broadcast out unique keys to others in the area. If each phone is aware of other phones it has been close to for a defined time a view of close contacts can be formed. When an app user tests positive, the unique codes stored on their phone allows close contacts (normally defined as contacts within metres for minutes or more) to be quickly notified, contacted, and quarantined, faster than manual contact tracing might otherwise allow.
Design a dedicated wearable (the CovidCard ), including the initial hardware and embedded software (firmware), with the design objectives of accurately recording close contacts and minimising the detection of false positives.
Determine the effort and investment required to build the software platforms to support a card scheme and to integrate close contact data into core contact tracing systems.
Determine the potential impact that CovidCard can have on reducing the transmission rates of the virus under different scenarios through accelerated isolation of close contacts.
Early detection and isolation of infected people. Determining who is infected requires widespread testing.
Establishment of key indicators including three critical and three urgent measures. Four of these performance indicators can be directly impacted by technology:
Evaluate costs and timelines for the manufacture and distribution of cards in volumes necessary for populationwide deployment.
False positive rate: a measure of the percentage of the CovidCard reported close contact events that did not meet the clinical criteria in the observed reality.
Hardware and wearables. The authors of this paper are involved in investigating a dedicated hardware based solution a CovidCard which works in a very similar manner to the Bluetooth contact tracing apps, with cards exchanging and storing Card IDs over Bluetooth LE. Singapore and several other governments and private companies are now known to be investigating wearables.
Identify attendance at events and places that are higher risk or associated with substantial numbers of casual or close contacts (e.g. aged residential care, hospitals, learning institutions, primary care, workplace, flights, transport, gatherings such as church or community events).
Identify key risks and considerations for a national roll out.
Is apps plus wearables inequitable We dont want the wearable to signal that you are too poor to afford a decent phone.
New Zealand needs to anticipate a new normal of local transmission and small clusters without alert level four restrictions.
New Zealands highly devolved health system, including having our contact tracing efforts rooted in the regions, may not easily or universally adapt to an upgraded approach. CovidCard needs to be deployed before it is needed, at a time where case numbers and public concern for COVID will likely be at an ebb. It will take strong political commitment Clinical definition of a close contact is someone encountered within metres for over minutes. Close contacts who are wrongly identified as meeting the clinical definition of being within metres for minutes in total.
Only of contacts could be easily reached by phone, either because of incorrect contact details in the National Health database or because calls from the NCCS went unanswered. During lock down, contact tracing was significantly simplified as the majority of close contacts were typically within the cases bubble or essential workplace. This is supported by the Ministry of Healths contact tracing metrics which state for the period of: Between April and April there were cases with close contacts (avg . contacts) .
PHUs and the newly established National Close Contact Service hub required additional resources to cope with the existing level of tracing under Level .
Provide public health management advice (i e. direction to isolate), education, and identify welfare or cultural needs. Information from interviews is predominantly paperbased. A case report form is submitted for every case to the national ESR EpiSurv platform and some PHUs have their own IT solutions to manage the investigation of cases and contacts. Following the interview, the PHU traces close contacts, provides selfisolation advice and monitors these persons regularly for symptoms. The PHU also provides advice to institutions and the public in higher risk situations around management of casual contacts (e.g. flights). Since COVID there have been some modifications to this process, including establishment of the National Close Contact Service (NCCS) and the National Contact Tracing Solution an IT platform that can be used by PHUs (although is not mandatory and some PHUs have chosen not to use it) and the Ministry of Health to manage cases and contacts. The NCCS is a Ministry of Health service that aims to help find the contact details of close contacts and highrisk casual contacts (e.g. flights). The NCCS is available at the request of PHUs for the management of individuals or clusters. These two initiatives were necessitated by rapidly increasing COVID cases and multiple complex clusters, which rapidly exceeded the capacity of PHUs. The risk of widespread transmission is reduced by shortening the time between symptoms appearing and the isolation of close contacts, such that those infected spend their infectious period
QR Codes are another commonly proposed approach mostly designed to create registers of patrons at venues. There are a few variants. One approach sees each pat on scan a venue QR code when they enter. Another approach sees a host scanning QR codes on patrons phones. Yet another approach would see people scanning QR codes on each others phones to signify that they are close contacts.
Rapid case detection and contact tracing, combined with other basic public health measures, has over efficacy against COVID at the population level, making it as effective as many vaccines.
Rapid response to identify and quarantine close contacts, which is known as Contact Tracing.
Recall: a measure of the percentage of actual close contact events that the CovidCard was able to identify.
Recursive contact tracing is made possible, but would require the cards of firstorder close contacts to be retrieved to enable this.
Representatives of the Iwi Chairs Forum. The Council of Trade Unions. The Pacific Health Response to COVID. The Privacy Commissioner. The Government Communications Security Bureau (and, in particular, the National Cyber Security Centre) who were involved with the design and development of the solution.
Would we achieve greater adoption with a wearable that embeds social signalling it is much clearer if you are compliant at a venue with a visible wearable.
management of cases and contacts to stop onward transmission from identified cases physical distancing and hygiene measures to stop onward transmission of undetected cases border controls to prevent seeding of new clusters from outside the country
NZSIS intelligence analysis systems limit access to DIA Information to NZSIS staff who have received training in the identification of data obtained by direct access and who have signed a briefing acknowledging their responsibilities in respect of this information.
The Ministry negotiated and implemented service outcome agreements, incorporating resultsbased accountability measures from January . The Ministry prepared the Gambling Outcomes Monitoring Report (in publication) , which reviewed progress towards gambling harm outcomes since . .. Service delivery in to This section discusses service delivery during the to period in terms of public health activity, intervention activity, accessibility for and responsiveness to the needs of Mori and Pacific peoples, and research and evaluation. Public health Effective health promotion is central to the Ministry s national public health activity. In the context of gambling, the Ministry s public health promotion aims are to rais e awareness of the signs of harmful gambling and encourage more atrisk people to check whether their gambling is OK before harm escalates in severity, and to motivate those who are at risk to get help earlier (or change their behaviour through selfhelp). HPAs health promotion programme focuses on encouraging positive behaviour change among atrisk gamblers and raising awareness about the signs of harmful gambling and risky gambling behaviours. H PAled developments have included enhancing national awarenessraising campaigns, developing and implementing host responsibility policies and practices, and increasing staff knowledge of gambling harm minimisation. Over , HPA continued to promote the Gambling Helpline, Choice Not Chance and face toface support services. National and regional service providers delivered a variety of health promotion activities to minimise gamblingrelated harm in communities, including advocating and supporting hundreds of organisations and workplaces to adopt reducing gambling harm policies, run workshops and presentations on recognising gambling harm and learn how to support someone who wants help to stop gambling, and thousands of awarenessraising activities in communities. A regionally led campaign to Turn Off the Pokies was well supported by class venues. Many service providers also provided a community perspective into the reviews of local gambling venue policies undertaken by territorial authorities. Currently about percent of local authorities have either gaming machine caps or sinkinglid policies in their areas. In line with the objectives of th e strategy, the Ministry funded dedicated Mori, Pacific and Asian public health services to provide appropriate and relevant services within their communities. The national Multi Venue Exclusion Advisory Group led a review of MVE processes for gamblers who want to be stopped from entering gambling venues. As a result of the review, a pilot national standardised process for supporting this process is under way. www.choicenotchance.org.nzthelatestcampaign (accessed April ). STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
We need to roll out our new threeyear strategy to the whole group to ensure that everyone within Regulatory Services understands why we are here and the impact that we are wanting to have in other words, we need to communicate our promise to Aotearoa; We need to make intelligencedriven, deliberate and visible decisions about where we are prioritising our effort which must (as noted above) also include active decisions about what work we are not doing. These decisions should be aligned to our broader strategy; We need to reflect those prioritisation decisions in our business planning, with detailed quarterly plans, and then annual plans, outlining the key focusses for the next days; We need to develop our ability to plan for the longer term as well, moving towards detailed annual plans and even threeyear strategic work programmes; We need to develop our understanding, management, and reporting of both regulatory and corporate risks; We need those in management positions to have an increased focus on actively managing their teams and, in particular, actively assessing and developing the capability of kaimahi for whom they are responsible; Leaders need to focus on governance and stewardship of their systems as well as regulatory delivery; While we are proposing a structure that recognises specialist functions, strategic planning, annual planning, quarterly planning and delivery will be done as an integrated whole, reflecting the need for collaborative multidisciplinary input to address regulatory issues.
minor impact on the relationship between NZSIS and DIA
possible that DIA Information could be used by a hostile actor to enhance their own capabilities andor undermine the national security of New Zealand NZSIS takes extensive steps to ensure DIA Information is transferred and stored securely.
revising its estimates of expenditure with the actual spending from its annual reports for (the last year of the previous period that used estimates) , and using estimated expenditure for adding these sums to the actual spending recorded for the levy period for each previous year between and . This total is . million, which becomes the target recovery amount from the four levypaying gambling sectors. The Ministry estimates the levy payments received by IRD will total . million by June . This was calculated by totalling actual payments from each sector made to IRD up to June , together with the estimates of sector payments up to June . The Ministry then calculated the amount of levy that each sector was expected to pay by: referring to the relevant Cabinetapproved strategy before the start of each levy period, to identify each sectors expected share of the levy requirement for each threeyear period using those shares to calculate the amount each sector was expected to pay as its contribution to the Ministrys spending in each levy period . totalling these amounts across all levy periods to arrive at the amount each sector was expected to pay up to June . R is the difference between the expected levy payments for each sector and the actual amount received in payments. Table shows the values of R obtained . Overpayment amounts are deducted from (credited to) the next levy period amounts required from each sector, while any underpayments are added. For each sector, the previous forecasts to varying degrees underestimated the actual gambling expenditure subject to the levy (for ). As a result, levy payments exceed ed the amount required. The amount of expected overpayment for each sector is shown in Table . This amount is deducted from each sectors allocated share of the levy payments for . Table : Estimated underpayment or overpayment of problem gambling levy, , by sector Sector m (GST exclusive ) NCGMs . Casinos . NZRB . NZLC . Nett difference (total) . Note: A negative figure indicates an expected overpayment for the levy periods to June . Note that NCGM sector and casino expenditure are tracking well ahead of forecasts made in , expenditure on NZRB products is tracking at slightly above these STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released b y the Minister of l A
significant negative impact on public trust and confidence in NZSIS and the reputation of NZSIS
significant negative impact on the relationship between NZSIS and DIA
significant negative impact on the relationship between NZSIS and DIA Where an internal investigation confirms a privacy breach, and it is considered necessary or required by law, the relevant affected parties (including NZSIS and DIA) andor the Office of the Privacy Commissioner will be notified as soon as possible. NZSIS will also inform the Inspector General of Intelligence and Security.
to obtain further details, or
to progress joint national security investigations.
to reflect the relationship between the Crown and Mori under Te Tiriti o Waitangi, and in particular to apply the principles of partnership, participation and protection to achieve health equity: to maintain a comprehensive range of public health services based on the World Health Organization s (WHO s) Ottawa Charter for Health Promotion and New Zealand models of health (particularly Mori models, such as Pae Ora healthy futures , Te Pae Mahutonga, Te Wheke and Te Whare Tapa Wh) to fund services that prevent and minimise gambling harm for priority populations to ensure culturally accessible and responsive services to ensure links between public health and intervention services to maintain a focus on healthy futures for Mori to maintain a focus on improving health outcomes for Pacific peoples to ensure services are evidencebased, effective and sustainable to develop the workforce to apply an intersectoral approach to strengthen communities. . Functions of the strategy The strategy comprises a rolling sixyear strategic plan and a threeyear service plan and is refreshed every three years. Together, the strategic and service plans set out the Ministry s approach and the range of activities it plans to undertake to minimise gambling harm from to . The strategy sets out the statutory requirements for an integrated problem gambling strategy and the aim for gambling harm minimisation, and specifies strategic objectives. It reflects the Ministry s public health approach to gambling harm minimisation and its relationship to the complementary responsibility of DIA in regulati ng gambling activity. Other key Ministry strategic documents inform the strategy and align with it. The strategic plan provides the strategic context and direction for the threeyear service plan. The Ministry has made some changes to the strategic plan to reflect changes in the minimising gambling harm and wider addiction and mental health sector landscape . Section outlines more substantial changes for the next three years of the service plan, to address areas highlighted by the needs assessment and outcomes monitoring summarised below. STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
use of facial recognition tools by industry to support MVE and other harm minimisation policies . Gambling venues are one of the best environments in which to observe, identify and intervene in potentially harmful gambling. The Ministry, DIA and HPA are committed to working with operators to maximise venues potential for offering safe gambling environments and detecting harmful gambling at an early stage. The Ministry will also support DIA to judicious ly and effective ly use its regulatory tools to deal with operators or venues that do not meet legal requirements. The location of EGMs in highrisk areas (most notably areas of high deprivation) is a longstanding area of concern. The Ministry will continue to support promoting awareness of safe gambling environments , to improve access to gambling harm prevention services in highrisk areas and to work with DIA on its riskbased regulatory approach that guides where regulatory actions should be applied. A particular focus in the next levy period will be NCGM locations and guidance to local authorities and other regulators. Host responsibility training will continue to be an important part of work under this objective. There will be a renewed emphasis on materials related to cultural competence, and how to effectively and appropriately engage with gamblers and their family and whnau from diverse cultural backgrounds. Table : Objective priorities for action Objective : Gambling environments are designed to prevent and minimise gambling harm Priorities for action Short to medium term priorities Long term priorities Continue to build strong relationships with DIA, gambling operators and gambling venue operators and communities to encourage safer gambling environments. In collaboration with DIA and other stakeholders, promote innovative use of technology (eg, such as for facial recognition) t o help monitor the gambling environment, to make gambling environments less harmful and to support gamblers at risk of or experiencing gambling harm. Support DIA in the proportionate and effective use of its regulatory tools to prevent and minimise gambling harm , including a continued focus on harm prevention and minimisation in gambling venues; for example, through inspections and DIA s Mystery Shopper campaign . Encourage consumer and service involvement in monitoring gambling operators and gambl ing venue operators compliance with their harm prevention and minimisation responsibilities . Encourage DIA and HPA to engage with the consumer network and service providers to develop and evaluate host responsibility training; particularly training in cu lturally appropriate ways to engage with gambling patrons and to recognise when this is required. Continue to work with DIA and HPA to encourage and support regional gambling harm service providers to work with venues in their area and to educate and supp ort their harm minimisation practices. Ensure training or train thetrainer materials include appropriate cultural competence and cultural awareness materials, to enable staff to intervene in a culturally appropriate manner www.dia.govt.nzdiawebsite.nsfwpgURLServicesCasino andNonCasinoGamingMysteryShopper campaign (accessed November ). STRATEGY TO PREVENT AND MINIMISE GAMBLIN G HARM TO Proactively released by the Minister of Internal Affairs
Bay of Plenty Regional Council
Department of Health and Human Services, drinking water quality regulator.
Environmental Protection Authority, environmental regulator.
Essential Services Commission, economic regulator, responsible for approving
Hawkes Bay Regional Council
Horizons Regional Council
InnovationThe Ministry of Health is fairly mature in their cloud adoption and is
InnovationThe Ministry of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) similarly
Northland Regional Council
Taranaki Regional Council
Waikato Regional Council
Whakatne DistrictGisborne Hawkes Bay
, even commercially, according to our copyright terms.
Rock wren contact call.
Making short feeding flights and giving calls.
Adult redcrowned parakeet song.
: Adult giving territorial calls while moving from perch to perch in willows.
Adult male chinging to attract females.
Female giving calls soliciting food from male.
Auckland Island teal song.
Calling at burrow entrance.
Male brown kiwi calling his mate.
Adult Western weka song.
Flock feeding in a homestead garden and trees on Little Barrier Island.
Captive juvenile female giving a call apparently used as warning or irritation.
Pair display call on Lake Alexandrina with adult male giving a growling call
Kea responding to recordings of their calls.
North Island weka giving territorial calls.
Pair giving breeding calls on territory and displaying pair bond (female has higher pitched call, male has wheezy call).
Chatham Island pigeonparea singing, eating berries, hopping between trees and occasionally flying.
Kkako song, alarm call in response to playback of recorded distress call.
New Zealand robin song at Kowhai River, Kaikouras, Marlborough.
Adult sitting in a tree near a track giving an alarm call.
Five adults singing on Little Barrier Island.
Adult pair in a stream communicating and answering tape recorded calls.
Territorial call, flying between perches, answering a tape recorder.
North Island kk song.
Two males giving territorial calls responding to playback of taped calls.
Adult male South Island tomtit on Rabbit Island, Nelson.
Weka answering recorded calls.
North Island robin song.
Singing from a song perch.
Adult male in Glory Bay, Pitt Island, Chatham Islands.
Moreporkruru song.
Rock wren chicks begging.
Saddlebackteke song.
Birds singing from silver beech trees in Abel Tasman National Park.
Three adults in song and inflight wingbeats (cicadas in the background).
Adult male territorial song.
Adult male booming to attract females.
Communication calls.
Female brown kiwi calling her mate.
Adult male blackbird and many other birds giving song in garden surroundings.
Adult male giving territorial calls (). Screaming in answer to playback of booming call played through amplifier.
Parents calling in the vicinity of the nest and feeding chicks.
Territorial and alarm calls of two adults protecting their young
South Island kk song.
Song at Apple Valley Road, west of Nelson.
In mixed forest near Mount Bruce.
Tui and a chorus of many other birds singing in mixed bush and flowering kowhai.
Adult male territorial calls.
Male territorial calls.
Chatham Island oystercatchertrea song.
Captive orangefronted parakeet giving territorial calls in response to recordings from tape recorder and other captive yellowcrowned parakeets nearby.
New Zealand dotterel song.
Adult redcrowned parakeet song.
Adult male feeding under a canopy of beech trees in Whitemans Valley, attracted by playback of calls, replying vigorously.
Adult territorial calls.
heron pairs and some whitethroated shags nesting beside a river. Male gives harsh croak, female has soft whowho call, chicks clickclick. Shags in the background make a softer call.
Two adult Westland petreltiko sitting on surface outside burrows.
: These bird songs are Crown Copyright. They may be reused, even commercially, as long as you credit the Department of Conservation (NZ).
A DOC rangers passion and innovation is driving work to restore a rare fragment of original knuka forest on the Canterbury Plains.
Adult black stiltkak song (MP, ,K)
As Jobs for Nature comes to a close, we reflect and celebrate the successes of the . billion programme for freshwater and local river communities.
Auckland Island teal song (MP, K)
Australasian bitternmatukuhrepo territorial call (MP, ,K)
Australasian crested grebe song (MP, K)
Bellbirdkorimako adult alarm call (MP, ,K)
Bellbirdkorimako adult male (MP, K)
Bellbirdkorimako group (MP, ,K)
Blue duckwhio song (MP, ,K)
Buff weka song (MP, ,K)
Chatham Island oystercatchertrea song (MP, ,K)
Chatham Island pigeonparea song (MP, ,K)
Chatham Island tomtit song (MP, ,K)
Chatham Island t song (MP, ,K)
Check the caption for credit information this is a DOC image and can be reused
Check the caption that appears with the image. It will tell you if its a DOC image, has its own Creative Commons licence, or has third party copyright.
Check the terms set by the Creative Commons licence that appears with the image. You must follow these terms.
Click Print to bring up the Print options.
Click on a link to a file to open it.
Click the Print button to confirm this is how you want the pages to print.
Complete this short form to give us feedback about the DOC website.
Content on the DOC website is designed to print on standard Asized paper.
Credit information of a hero image is located on the top righthand side this image is third party copyright and cant be used without their permission
DOC takes the security and privacy of our information seriously. If you identify a security issue with our systems, tell us so that we can get it fixed.
DOC videos on YouTube are
DOCs DirectorGeneral, Penny Nelson, has granted Whakapapa Holdings Limited (WHL) a year concession to operate Whakapapa ski field.
Dawn chorus with bellbirdkorimako in the foreground (MP, ,K)
Dawn chorus with blackbirds in the foreground (MP, ,K)
Dawn chorus with t in the foreground (MP, ,K)
Fantail: Chatham Island fantail song (MP ,K)
Fantail: North Island fantail song (MP ,K)
Fantail: North Island fantail song (MP, K)
Fantail: South Island fantail (MP, ,K)
Flags, Emblems, and Names Protection Act
Follow the five easy steps of the Land Safety Code to stay safe when youre outdoors.
For other bird calls visit
From the Print options, choose Tile larger pages. The preview will indicate how the pages will be split up and how many pieces of paper will be used.
Get a DOC open hunting permit online.
Give feedback about the DOC website and our use of plain language.
Grey warbler song (MP, K)
Have you taken a photo that captures the spirit of the Taup trout fishery If so, enter our photo competition and be in to win a free Taup fishing licence. Closing is Sunday May .
Hihistitchbird song (MP, ,)
How to print largeformat documents
Huttons shearwatertt song (MP, K)
If used outside of New Zealand, use Source: Department of Conservation (NZ).
If you find the text is too small, try adjusting your print settings to print the document on a larger scale. For example, in Acrobat Reader:
Images labelled with Creative Commons
Images labelled with DOC can be reused
Images labelled with cant be reused without permission
In all cases, the material must be reproduced accurately and not be used in a misleading context.
Its important you understand what we do with your personal information.
Kiwi: Female North Island brown kiwi song (MP, K)
Kiwi: Male North Island brown kiwi song (MP, K)
Kk: North Island kk song (MP, ,K)
Kk: South Island kk song (MP, ,K)
Kkp at Sanctuary Mountain Maungatautari have completed their first season of booming something that has not been heard on the North Island of mainland Aotearoa for more than a century.
Kkp female song (MP, ,K)
Kkp male booms (MP, ,K)
Kkp male chings (MP, K)
Kkp male territorial calls (MP, ,K)
Kkako alarm call (MP, ,K)
Kkako song (MP, ,K)
Learn how to open and save files such as publications and birdcalls, and how to print from the DOC website
Listen to and download recordings of songs and calls of New Zealand birds.
Logos, trademarks, and material covered by the
Material on this website is protected by Crown copyright unless otherwise indicated. Some of it can be reused without permission, but in some cases you must contact the copyright holder directly for permission.
Material on this website is subject to
Material with third party copyright or other licence you must get permission from the owner if necessary, and follow the specific licence terms.
More bird songs and calls
Moreporkruru song (MP, ,K)
New Zealand dottereltturiwhatu song (MP, ,K)
New Zealand falconkrearea female song (MP, K)
New Zealand falconkrearea juvenile female song (MP, K)
New Zealand parakeetkkriki: orangefronted parakeet song (MP, ,K)
New Zealand parakeetkkriki: redcrowned parakeet song (MP, ,K)
New Zealand parakeetkkriki: redcrowned parakeet song (MP, K)
New Zealand pigeonkererkkkkupa (MP, ,K)
New Zealand robintoutouwai song (MP, ,K)
North Island robintoutouwai song (MP ,K)
North Island saddlebackteke song (MP, ,K)
North Island tomtit song (MP, ,K)
North Island weka song (MP, ,K)
On this website, a link to a file shows the file name, the file format (type of file) and the size of the file in kilobytes, eg. Annual report (PDF, K).
Our bird songs can be reused
Our privacy and transparency statements will tell you:
Our reuse terms do not apply to the following:
PDF files: Install a PDF reader such as the free
Paradise duck song (MP, ,K)
Print our web pages from your browser by clicking on File in the menu, then Print (or choose Print preview to see how the printout will look first).
Printing from the DOC website
Privacy information about various parts of our website including, forms, online booking, social media, and Google Analytics.
Request to see or change personal information we hold about you.
Rightclick the song link for options to save.
Rock wren call (MP, K)
Rock wren call (MP, ,K)
See our privacy and security statement
Silvereyewaxeye song (MP, ,K)
Some documents (such as recreation brochures) may be designed for professional printing onto A or larger paper. The versions available from this website are usually scaled for printing on standard A paper.
South Island saddlebackteke song (MP, ,K)
South Island tomtit song (MP, ,K)
Taumarunui nature enthusiasts are invited to create their own predator control plan and learn how to implement it with accredited training coming to Taumarunui on and May.
The annual Pureora Hunting Competition prizegiving was held on Sunday April.
The collection and use of personal information for regulatory compliance, law enforcement and protective security purposes.
The documents on this website are mostly in PDF, DOC (MS Word) and XLS (MS Excel) formats. There are also MP sound files, images and links to videos.
These instructions are written for Internet Explorer on a Windows computer. For different browsers and operating systems, do the equivalent actions.
This has a Creative Commons licence with specific terms
This means you can copy, distribute and adapt the material as long as you credit the Department of Conservation and abide by the
To contact us about copyright, make your request through our
To process your request or information, we need to collect personal information about you. Well only use your information for this purpose and well follow the principles of the Privacy Act .
To save a file from the website to your computer, rightclick on the image or the link to a file and select the Save as (or Save target as) option.
T communication calls (MP, ,K)
T territorial calls (MP, ,K)
Unless identified as having third party copyright or other licence, the material on this website is Crown Copyright and can be reused under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution . International Licence (CC BY .).
Use text (not logos), eg Source: Department of Conservation.
Use the Print preview to see how the document will print.
We are committed to respecting and protecting the privacy of New Zealanders and visitors that use our services and our website.
We dont provide highresolution copies of images for print or other use.
We need your help to grow funding for nature. By donating to these DOC nature projects you can help protect endangered species and habitats.
Western weka song (MP, K)
Westland petreltiko song (MP, ,K)
Where relevant, link to our website (www.doc.govt.nz) or the specific source page.
White heronktuku song (MP, ,K)
Whiteheadppokotea flock (MP, K)
Whiteheadppokotea territorial call (MP, ,K)
Word and Excel files: Install a free
Yelloweyed penguinhoiho adults and chick (MP, ,K)
Yellowheadmohua song (MP, K)
You can also give feedback on the use of plain language on our website and in documents produced for the public.
You can open files for viewing or listening without saving them first, or you may want to save files to your computer for later use. A saved file can be opened any time without a web browser or Internet connection.
You can use these images, even commercially, under the terms of our copyright statement and the CC BY . licence. You must attribute the Department of Conservation. Include the photographers name if known.
You may need to install a viewer or plugin.
You must contact the copyright holder directly for permission to use their images.
YouTube videos and other media files: Follow the instructions that appear to install or activate the required plugins.
available for you to save.
how we collect your personal information
how we store your personal information
how we use or share your personal information
how you can access and change your personal information.
why we collect your personal information
Allow those mistakes to be your friend and teach you.
Children experience the world with their whole being
Once open, what salary scale described in the ECE Funding Handbook will your service be using to determine the minimum salaries paid to all employed ECE and primary qualified certificated teachers
The emphasis on creating positive experiences in maths was a real takeaway for me. The facilitator made it easy to understand, and you felt supported by the resources, material, and PLD that is out there.
The materials and resources shared were excellent.
the Minister may set fees relating to international feepaying students.
the Minister must set fees relating to international feepaying students to
per funded child hour (including GST)
per targeted hour (including GST)
. billion for education property
million over years to provide sustainable funding to playcentres.
million over years to support the ongoing delivery of period products in schools programme
million over years to increase funding for the School High Health Needs Fund
million over years to support digital services in schools, including cyber security and equipment replacement
million over years for a cost adjustment of to the Early Childhood Education (ECE) subsidy for under yearolds, ECE subsidy for yearolds and over, Hours ECE, and Equity Funding
million over years including a increase for Schools Equity and Isolation Index based components and a . increase for the remaining components of school operating grants
million for Holidays Act remediation for school employees, based on an estimate of liability
for each subsequent child.
million of operating funding over years will be redirected to frontline areas within education.
million over years to support the rapid increase in numbers of students that require English for speakers of other languages (ESOL) support
million over years for teacher supply, retention and attraction initiatives
for your third child
million over years for the implementation of structured literacy in all state primary schools
for your second child
for your first child
to describe the daytoday, collective weaving of curriculum for our
Eco or natural cleaners
Generative artificial intelligence is a term that covers a range of tools that have been trained using huge sets of data to create new content. It is also called AI and GenAI.
Kaupapa funding (ECE funding subsidy) quality funding rate requirement
Other teachers and other teacher hours
cause I was a, a deputy principal at a,
cause a lot of these are very selfexplanatory is,
cause this has been communicated via
cause we dont wanna disadvantage isolated communities.
(A computer screen appears showing an Excel worksheet for Kiwi Park School the statement of comprehensive revenue and expense)
(A computer screen appears showing an Excel worksheet for Kiwi Park School )
(A computer screen appears with a bold blue coloured rectangle drawn around the cells H to K)
(A computer screen appears with a bold blue coloured rectangle drawn around the cells H to K)
(Acting Deputy Secretary)
(Actor, facing and talking into the camera)
(An Excel screen appears on screen: the user copies and paste GL codes from one worksheet to the next worksheet until all codes are mapped (pause). The user also checks the Excel screen for any error messages):
(An Excel screen appears)
(An Excel spreadsheet appears on screen the user selects the Statement of Cash Flows; the user scrolls down the screen and moves the mouse to cell i to K)
(Chad Britton continues to present from power point presentation)
(Chad continues to present from power point presentation)
(GMA Parent involvement).
(Hamish Anton continues to present from power point presentation)
(Jane Rogers continues to present from power point presentation)
(MPI) has developed some Food Safe guidance including a Food Safety Factsheet, as well as providing tips for food safety. Check out also food safety rules on MPI website.
(MPI) has developed some food safety guidance and fact sheets for services, as well as providing tips for food safety.
(Note: see the Human Rights Act to ensure there is no discrimination in items listed in the person specifications.)
(On screen a bold blue rectangle is drawn around cells S to S, the rectangle scrolls down to cells S to S)
(On screen a bold blue rectangle is drawn around cells S to S, the user attention is also drawn, by drawing a bold blue rectangle around the sum function at the bottom of the screen)
(On screen a bold blue rectangle is drawn around cells S , the rectangle then scrolls down to cell S)
(On screen a bold blue rectangle is drawn around cells around cell S and scrolls down to S. A bold blue rectangle is drawn around cell S and the rectangle moves across to T and then D)
(On screen a bold blue rectangle is drawn around cells around cell S and then around S. The user attention is also drawn to the automatic sum function of excel at the bottom the screen. A bold blue rectangle is drawn around cell T to show the calculated receipt from the disposal. The cursor then scrolls over to Cell D to show the surplus on disposal).
(On screen a bold blue rectangle is drawn around cells around cell T)
(On screen the cursor highlights Q , pause, the cursor scrolls down to Q)
(On screen the cursor scrolls from column T to column Ai, a bold blue rectangle is drawn around cells Ai Ai )
(On screen the user highlights Column H, pause. The user moves the cursor to H and H)
(On screen the user moves the cursor to Columns Q, R and S and scrolls down to S)
(On screen the user selects the Actual CF Model CY and Budget CF Model CY worksheet, the user scrolls down the worksheets and moves the mouse to row )
(Policies) under the stewardship of the
(Provisionally Certificated Teachers) are proactively supported to become fully certificated.
(Starting power point presentation)
(The screen shows the user selecting the red coloured Title Page, scrolls over to and clicks on the Notes and Disclosures worksheet. The user selects File, Print, Printer. The user then ungroups the selected worksheets, closes and saves the spreadsheet).
(The video is divided in sections, on the left handside, the presenter is standing, facing the camera. On the right handside, the powerpoint presentation is showing the webinars title Managing School Finances Annual Reporting)
(emotional). Kaiako draw on their wide knowledge of each child to make meaning of their observations and plan for next steps.
(formerly New Zealand School Trustees Association) can also provide you with support to manage actual or suspected abuse or neglect, safety checking and child protection policies.
(formerly New Zealand School Trustees Association):
(formerly the New Zealand School Trustees Association) has a sample child protection policy and more information.
(i.e., in monthly instalments). This payment must be paid as an additional payment on top of the certificated
(no more than ) to any teacher.
(on the computer screen the user selects the Statement of Comprehensive Revenue and Expense, scrolls over to and clicks on the Notes and Disclosures worksheet)
(on the computer screen the user selects the relevant cells in Column D and enters an explanation for the Note disclosure in cells D and D)
(only ) can be allocated on a fixedterm basis, in area schools with less than allowances.
(only ) can be allocated to teachers without salary units who have curriculum or pastoral management responsibilities, in area schools with less than allowances.
(only ) to teachers with salary units who have designated curriculum or pastoral management responsibilities.
(the computer image on screen has drawn a bold blue boarder around the Annual Reporting Circular hyperlink on the webpage)
(the computer image on screen shows a user scrolling down the webpage)
(the computer screen highlights the cells on line by a bold blue coloured rectangle)
(the next computer image shows a user reading the Education Circular Filing your Annual Report)
(up to ) can be allocated to teachers without salary units who have curriculum or pastoral management responsibilities, in area schools with or more allowances.
(up to ) to teachers without salary units who have designated curriculum or pastoral management responsibilities.
(up to ) can be allocated on a fixedterm basis, in area schools with or more allowances.
(up to ) can be allocated on a fixedterm basis.
) is aligned with the Professional Growth Cycle for Teachers as required by the Teaching Council of
) need to decide which pathway to implement either:
) that are used on a regular basis in New Zealand society.
), roll data (July ), information about gaps in education pathways, and opportunities to grow and strengthen the
, Education New Zealand, Education Review Office (ERO), New Zealand Qualifications Authority (NZQA), The Teaching Council of
, NZQA, and the Tertiary Education Commission.
, National Public Health Service, Greater Wellington Region.
, a mana enhancing process for children, parents and
, and communities hold. It is therefore vital that
, and life contexts (documented and undocumented).
, and other education providers
, and others in the community.
, and postsecondary education providers.
, and students, to help prevent bullying.
, and the community are encouraged to participate in and contribute to the curriculum.
, and the wider community. An environment that is safe, respectful, and welcoming will encourage
, and to seek a living wage for all other ECE staff.
, any previous experience as an uncertificated
, as well as Pacifica languages and Polynesian cultures.
, based on the total number of hours they are employed for.
, but no Level schooling provision. Other catchments in the country have Level education available to Year , with no secondary provision. And some catchments have no Level education at all.
, but they do not get government funding.
, caregivers or any other visitors.
, choose the type you are starting.
, communities, and government agencies to work together to support and make sure students are attending school regularly. Regular attendance means the student is present for more than of the term.
, community rooms, or school sites. Think about how spaces can be used to give children a range of different activities and experiences to choose from and support adults to play with the children.
, cultural playgroups and community language playgroups.
, each service should develop processes for assessment, planning and evaluation.
, each service should develop processes for assessment, planning, and evaluation.
, early learning services,
, educators and coordinators, and communities hold. It is therefore vital that, educators, coordinators, parents and
, educators, and coordinators
, employed in a nonteaching role, engages in a teaching role regularly, for example to regularly cover breaks, they are eligible to receive the allowance for all hours they are engaged in a teaching role.
, engaged regarding the range of experiences and opportunities that are provided
, explains that everything we do has an impact on learning and teaching. We use the term
, for each gazetted school day. We also provide a perstudent amount to cover administration costs.
, formerly the Correspondence School, offers learning programmes for
, how do we acknowledge this and show it has been heard and implemented when working with their child
, in this context, means to carry or to uplift, to raise up. It is also a persons mouth, voice, and the action of speaking.
, including narrative, song, art and movement.
, management committeesstaff.
, management, families, and
, or Communities of Learning, bring together education and training providers with the aim of helping students to achieve their full potential.
, or other adults who have a designated role of providing education and care to children at a service and are included in required adult:child ratios.
, or the nearest school bus route.
, relationships should be recognised as a source of learning, empowerment, and identity for all.
, relationships should be recognised as a source of learning, empowerment, and identity for all. Educators, coordinators, and service leaders have a responsibility to engage in responsive, respectful relationships with children, parents and
, state schools that teach in
, teachers, supervisors, parent helpers,
, teaching practice, assessment, and curriculum planning should demonstrate that
, the allowances are different:
, the collective of the statutorily recognised
, the community, and children share with each other their understandings of social and emotional competence.
, the curriculum should be developed in partnership with
, they encourage mokopuna to engage in
, to carry out their work in
, use the Conditions of contract for consultancy services along with the Form of agreement and special conditions. The guidance note provides more information on this.
, who aspire to provide a full immersion environment for
, whose language is different to the predominant language used at the service
, years of experience must be counted as:
, you can request an outofcycle review of your funding. You can only request outofcycle funding review every years and it must be at least months since the latest March funding review.
, you must follow your child protection policy and other reporting requirements.
, you need to meet certain criteria. This could be living far away from your nearest early learning service.
Build a culture of care.
based or that affiliates with
led ECE services. These services must meet the requirements of the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations .
led centres like Playcentre or playgroups generally cost less than teacherled centres.
led service funded at the quality rate when a qualified reliever is not available to replace a qualified parent or
led services must meet the record keeping requirements set out in Section .
led services receiving quality funding rates.
led services that receive quality level funding must meet the record keeping requirements described in Section C.
led services that wish to become eligible for funding at the quality rates must meet the requirements of the relevant quality rate options.
. Any funding changes take effect from Quarter (April).
. Children are given the opportunity to develop knowledge and an understanding of the cultural heritages of both parties to
. Educators and coordinators should seek to develop mutually positive relationships with mokopuna and to work with parents and
. English is used as a temporary language. Not all
. If you do not have one, ask your schools ESL delegated authoriser to create one for you.
. It is used or more of the time. It is expected that
. More information about the curriculum framework can be found on the
. Note that this licence doesnt apply to logos, emblems, trademarks or design elements. These specific items may not be reused without express permission.
. Others have a specific set of beliefs about teaching and learning, for example, Rudolf Steiner and Montessori.
. Playcentres receive government funding, but may charge a fee or ask for a donation to meet extra costs. They cost less to attend than other services.
. Reviewing experiences and opportunities is a way of doing this.
. So, we can collectively support all students to achieve. This will mean:
. Some services set a minimum number of hours for a child to attend. For example, you might have to enrol your child for at least hours a day and there will be a cost for the last hour of each day.
. The Ministry of Education provides more information on job descriptions.
. The framework describes in broad terms what is seen as important learning for children as well as the kinds of environments in which this learning can occur.
. The governing bodies of these places of learning will use these priorities, alongside their own local priorities and delivering a rich local curriculum, to help every child and young person to progress and achieve to their potential.
. The school board can also propose changes.
. The way we weave together the distinct pattern of our curriculum defines what we do and how we do it.
. There are also playgroups in Pasifika languages and cultures.
. These approaches can be actioned across early learning, schooling and tertiary education.
. These options are outlined in the specific section for that service type.
. They may work with groups of teachers, with school leaders, or directly with students to support learning and behaviour needs.
. They should contribute their expert knowledge of childrens capabilities and interests at home, in other settings and the early learning service.
. They should contribute their expert knowledge of childrens capabilities and interests at home, in other settings, and the early learning service.
. This has recently been refreshed, and is available on Education Counts:
. This may include specialist support and, in some instances, paraprofessional support, which will include capability development for teachers and other adults involved.
. This research aligns with the goals of the
. This version includes more information about early learning (
. We aim to support schools and
. We have also learnt from the
. What strategies can we put in place to build our capability How will we demonstrate this knowledge in action in the environment
. Where the service provider is not
. You must check that a student meets the transport assistance eligibility criteria before they use this service.
Assessment for Learning: Early Childhood Exemplars is a bestpractice guide that will help teachers continue to improve the quality of their teaching.
Mt Wellington Residential School.
Mt Wellington Residential School. The rapid payment process offers an extra, faster option for redress for claimants who attended
Mt Wellington. You can see the amounts in the rapid payments information sheet above)
certificated teachers
. for other providers, such as universities.
. (excluding GST) of the tuition fees received from international students each trimester for PTEs
April operational funding instalment
January operational funding instalment
July operational funding instalment
October operational funding instalment
The Terrace, Mezzanine floor
half day that ends before noon, and
half day that starts after noon.
more adult (of the supervising adults, is a first aider).
person in the final year of
person in the final year of the
session or day per week
to days (average about days)
week from appearance of rash, or until all blisters have dried
How the handbook works
Quick reference directions
. Authorised signatories are linked with only one electronic signature. The means of creating each individual electronic signature is linked only to its authorised signatory or any system administrators and to no other person.
. Key Shift : Work reciprocally with diverse Pacific communities to respond to unmet needs, including growing and supporting Pacific bilingual and immersion education pathways.
. verification of identity (including previous identities)
. verification of identity (including previous identities),
October Freedom of speech in the tertiary education system
Year Property Plan steps for schools
to days after being exposed
What is equity funding
Component A: Low socioeconomic communities
Component B: Special needs and nonEnglish speaking backgrounds
Component C: Language and culture other than English (including sign language)
Component D: Isolation
. Electronic attendance records must be retained for years without any loss of integrity.
certificated teachers
Stuart Street, Dunedin
October ITP policy decisions
hours and minutes can be rounded to hours.
Record keeping requirements
Funding claim audits and record keeping audits
. All records are readily accessible so as to be usable for subsequent inspection by Ministry staff as required.
June Regulatory Impact Statement
Financial reporting: general information
Normanby Rd, Auckland
Normanby Road, Auckland
Types of financial reports
: Types of financial reports
Reporting requirements for targeted funding
Auditing financial reports
. All records can be extracted into an appropriate format for reporting purposes.
What is Targeted Funding for Disadvantage
Eligibility for Targeted Funding
How to use Targeted Funding
Reporting requirements for Targeted Funding
April A Redesigned Vocational Education and Training System: Options for Workbased Learning
Attendance and enrolment data
Early learning information (ELI) system
January Progressing changes to vocational education and training funding for
May Further revisions to the June Cabinet paper outline, and supporting material
November Draft University Freedom of Speech Cabinet Paper
December Vet Legislative framework
December Legislation and establishment timeline for vocational education entities
Home Straight Rd, Hamilton
Playcentre Practice (course of The Playcentre Diploma in Early Childhood and Adult Education).
and Overs not receiving Hours ECE
level qualifications recognised in the NZ Gazette.
signatories on the RS form and
subject or specialist level qualifications on the NZQF (as listed above) or
to days (usually to days)
The link between licensing and funding
Other sources of ECE funding
When and how funding is paid
: When and how funding is paid
The link between costs and funding rates
Recovery of early childhood education funding
way contact with parents or caregivers (that is, you can call them, and they can call you)
way contact with parents or caregivers (that is, you can call them, and they can call you).
. If usernames and passwords are used, the system must record who created them and when they were created.
. Key Shift : Confront systemic racism and discrimination in education.
. hours will be claimed as Hours ECE hours and . hours claimed as Plus ECE hours.
Hours ECE Hours are the fully subsidised hours that the child receives.
Hours ECE enables services to provide early childhood education to yearolds, yearolds and yearolds for up to a maximum of hours per child per day and hours per child per week without charging fees.
Hours ECE funding can only be claimed for children who fill a childplace and are , or years of age.
Hours ECE funding includes both the Hours ECE hours and the Plus ECE hours.
Hours ECE funding is based on the child rather than the place they occupy in the service.
Hours ECE funding is paid three times a year, along with the ECE Funding Subsidy.
Hours ECE hours are funded at a higher level because they are intended to meet the full average cost of providing ECE for each service type.
Hours ECE hours are funded at a higher level to cover the full cost of providing ECE.
Hours ECE hours are the funded child hours that services can claim per eligible child for the provision of Hours ECE.
Hours ECE hours are the hours you would claim for yearolds, yearolds and yearolds. The signed attestation part of the enrolment agreement must be completed for each child.
Hours ECE hours claimed
Hours ECE hours may be claimed for the first . hours. Services must claim Plus ECE hours for the remaining half hour.
Hours ECE hours must only be claimed for up to hours per week for each child.
Hours ECE is a higher rate of funding than the ECE Funding Subsidy for threeyearolds, fouryearolds and fiveyearolds for up to a maximum of six hours per child per day and hours per week.
Hours Early Childhood Education (ECE) is a higher rate of funding for services to cover the average full cost of providing early childhood education.
Hours Early Childhood Education (ECE) is a higher rate of funding than the ECE Subsidy.
hours funding for early childhood education
hours per week for Hours ECE per eligible child
background documents
background documents
background documents
Kiwi Park group accounts model blank
Kiwi Park group annual financial statement model
Kiwi Park group model accounts
Kiwi Park single model accounts
Kiwi Park single model accounts blank
Kiwi Park single school annual financial statement model
Vocational Education and Training reforms
to support discussions about growing this provision.
Workbased learning reforms targeted consultation
staffing and funding cycle
cohort entry dates
will be regularly reviewed to consider wider changes occurring in the system. Reviews will consider if the strategy:
June Overview of proposed new Vocational Education and Training system
May Proposed funding settings for vocational education and training
November Further advice on freedom of speech
May Arrangement and Delivery in Industry Training
January Vocational education and training redesign: Workbased learning
certificated teachers
July VET consultation comms pack and final changes to Consultation document
()(a): Person responsible (Coordinator visiting teacher) to contact each educator engaged in the service at least once every weeks.
()(b): Person responsible (Coordinator visiting teacher) to visit each educator at least once per month.
()(c ) take all reasonable steps each month to observe each child participating in the service while they are receiving education and care
July Official Information Act Request Appendix One
FA adds an extra verification step to access an account or network.
FA typically requires of the following:
a:bac:b::::
December University Freedom of Speech Cabinet paper for lodgment
July Vocational education and training reforms Revised consultation document and further advice
levels of our education system
(c): definition of person responsible and their responsibilities.
A Information for all services
A Funding eligibility
A: Information for all services
B The link between teacher certification and funding
B Education and care services
B Hospitalbased services
B Homebased ECE services
. If usernames and passwords are used, there must be adequate controls to ensure that these are not used by anyone other than the linked authorised signatory.
. Key Shift : Enable every teacher, leader and educational professional to take coordinated action to become culturally competent with diverse Pacific learners.
January Vocational Education and Training: Two stage legislation process and ITPs
hours per week for Hours ECE and Plus per eligible child.
December: End of financial year for all schools and
March: Due for submitting annual financial statements to the auditor.
March: Final for submitting the boardapproved draft financial statements to the auditor.
May: Due for submitting annual report (including the annual financial statements) to us.
May: The board submits the annual report, including the audited financial statements, to us.
for secondary and composite schools.
for primary, intermediate and specialist schools
June Draft Cabinet paper for Ministerial consultation: Consultation options for Vocational Education and Training Reforms
November University Freedom of Speech Legislation
to weeks (but if had scabies before it may develop within to days)
, , and are examples of templates or frameworks of varying degrees of detail and complexity for groups to record what experiences and opportunities have beenwill be provided on a weekly, monthly or term basis.
Fees, donations, optional charges and homebased educator top up payments
Beginning or ceasing to offer Hours ECE Funding
. Key Shift : Partner with families to design education opportunities together with teachers, leaders and educational professionals so aspirations for learning and employment can be met.
. Only a parent or guardian who is an authorised signatory can verify attendance records electronically. A parent or guardian must only use their own electronic signature to verify attendance records.
. New Zealand licence, unless otherwise indicated for specific items.
. hours on Thursday and Friday
()(d)(i): The person responsible must supervise children and educators at all times children attend the service and
: Governance, management, and administration standard.
Hereford Street, Christchurch
April Annotated Agenda: Options for advancing the VET system redesign
July Vocational education and training redesign consultation document
days after the appearance of rash. Nonimmune contacts of a case may be excluded.
days from commencing antibiotic treatment, or
sessions or days per week.
Annual TopUp for Isolated Services
Support Grant for Provisionally Registered Teachers
Allowance for teachers in bilingual or immersion services
Allowances for teachers in Pacific bilingual and immersion education and care services
. Any alteration made to any information, is evident (including who made the changes and when). This includes alterations to electronic signatures and confirmation of attendance. This also includes daily sign in and out if it is used.
. Key Shift : Grow, retain and value highly competent teachers, leaders and educational professionals of diverse Pacific heritages.
. information from any relevant professional organisation or registration body
. information from any relevant professional organisation or registration body,
qualified licensing requirements
certificated teachers
September Vocational Education and Training Redesign: Further considerations for ITPs and proposed federation
hours funding per day for Hours ECE andor Plus per eligible child
hours on Monday and Tuesday
Conditional enrolment
Three Week Rule for Continuous Absence
Three Week Rule: extension for extended nonoperation
The Frequent Absence Rule
The Frequent Absence Rule Examples
Funding for makeup days
. The verification process must:
. a New Zealand police vet and
. a New Zealand police vet, and
(): A person responsible for a licensed homebased education and care service must take all reasonable steps to observe, support, and provide guidance on the implementation of the prescribed curriculum framework by the service and keep records of these activities; and provide professional development to educators on a regular basis and keep records of any such activity.
November Further Advice on University Freedom of Speech Legislation
days from the onset of jaundice
Funding for new services
Completing the RS form
Centrebased emergency closure
Homebased emergency closure
Absence rule exemptions
Transitional school visits
The EC transitional advance form
of this total is paid as the advance payment (or for kindergartens).
March VET redesign engagement and communications plan
October VET consultation Summary of Submissions report
hours on Monday and Tuesday
hours on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday
Changing bank account details
Change of service provider
When your service is closing
. If a service uses daily electronic sign in and out then the system must record who signed the child in and out, and what day and time this happened. It is recommended that only authorised signatories sign a child in or out.
certificated teachers
April Official Information Act Request Response
August Vocational Education and Training ITP federation: fundamental settings
Calculating the ECE Funding Subsidy
Calculating Hours ECE funding
Calculating the staff hour count
Calculating advance days
Claiming the support grant for provisionally registered teachers
Monitoring progress: Teacher registration
Monitoring progress: Number of children
: the current state of the language, the demographics of the population, and their relationship to Aotearoa.
How do we evaluate the effectiveness of these
How do we measure this
How is it reflected in our service
How is this visible within our environment
How will we explore the histories of this place
In what ways is this affirmed
Think about parents and
What strategies can we put in place to build our capability How will we demonstrate this knowledge in action in the environment
A stage open tender involves requesting registrations of interest from suppliers so you can make a shortlist. You then invite only shortlisted suppliers to prepare a full offer. This is appropriate for large procurements and when or more suppliers are likely to bid for the contract.
A Pacific bilingual service where:
A Pacific immersion service where:
A Police vet is valid for years.
A Police vet must be by the employer at least every years.
A barrier is a circumstance that prevents students from achieving in and attending school or
A bleach solution may also be the most suitable to disinfect the nappy changing area, toilets and sinks. To work properly the solution needs to:
A brief explanation of the audit process and what the auditor has done to be able to give an opinion.
A budget of income and expenditure should be broken down on a monthly basis.
A bus code of conduct sets out expectations and consequences for behaviour on school transport. It should be signed by the student, their caregiver, the school, and the transport service provider.
A bus procedure can help clarify behaviour expectations for students. You can use it to set out the specific roles and responsibilities for your school staff and transport service providers.
A caregiver may want to request a review of a SESTA decision. A review might be needed if:
A category of early childhood education services where one or more qualified teachers are responsible for the overall programme in the service. They are required to have a person responsible (or homebased care coordinator) who is a qualified, certificated, teacher.
A category of early childhood services that:
A centre with several small rooms, none of which is large enough for group activities, or a centre with a very long and thin outdoor space that could severely restrict the kinds of outdoor activities that could be provided would not meet the criterion.
A certificate issued by the Teaching Council of Aotearoa, New Zealand. Holders of a current practising certificate are legally able to teach in New Zealand.
A certificated playgroup is a group that has met the curriculum, ratio, premises and facilities, health and safety practices, and administration standards set in the Education (Playgroups) Regulations
A certificated teacher must hold an early childhood education teaching or New Zealand qualified primary teacher qualification.
A certificated teacher should progress salary step when they have:
A certified copy is a photocopy that has been stamped or endorsed by a person who confirms that the copy is a true copy of the original document. Certified copies from previous employers or organisations cannot be relied on. This means you will need to see the original qualification before you can certify a copy.
A checklist of the key steps in the emergency drill, whether or not they were completed, and any comments.
A child can receive a maximum of six Hours ECE hours per day and twenty Hours ECE hours per week as a total across all services.
A child protection policy outlines how your service will:
A child will qualify for an exemption from the absence rules if:
A code of conduct sets out expectations and consequences for behaviour on school transport. It should be signed by the transport service provider, students, their caregivers, and their school.
A communication plan for families and support services.
A complainant may be a current or past parent of the service, a current or past staff member or a member of the public.
A conflict of interest can be actual, potential or perceived:
A conflict of interest is when your personal interests, obligations or relationships could influence, or could be perceived to influence, decisions you make on your schools behalf.
A conflict of interest might be a connection you have with a business or individual your school might buy something from. Some examples are:
A contact person who can respond and assist easily if any unforeseen incident occurs (for example, available to ring ambulance, talk with police and so on)
A copy of the Funding Rate Table can be found in Appendix and will be each time there is a change to the rates.
A copy of the criteria can be downloaded below.
A copy of the current certificate issued to the hospital under the Health and Disability Services (Safety) Act is required to be held by the service.
A copy of the notification sent to the specified agency is required to be sent to the Ministry of Education.
A copy of the notification sent to the specified agency.
A cot is designed for infants and is enclosed on all four sides so the infant cannot fall out. A cot is only suitable for infants who are able to be lifted out.
A crown entity established under the Education Act () and is continued under the Education and Training Act . Its functions include:
A current driver licence or passport. A passport is required for anyone currently residing overseas.
A current fire evacuation scheme approved by Fire and Emergency New Zealand.
A current practising certificate issued by the Teaching Council
A curriculum that is inclusive ensures all children know that the early childhood service they attend is a place where they belong and where they feel valued for who they are.
A day or hours for which your service is not usually licensed to operate, but for which special permission has been obtained from a Ministry local office to open, in place of opening on a licensed day.
A day that an enrolled child is not normally enrolled to attend but attends in place of an absent child.
A declaration that details what salary scale all employed ECE and primary qualified certificated teachers minimum salaries services will be paying.
A designated space is available to support the provision of restful sleep for children under the age of at any time they are attending.
A designated space is available to support the provision of restful sleep for children under the age of at any time they are attending. This space is located and designed to:
A detailed record of each component of the safety check must be kept, and the on which each step was taken must be recorded, including the of the risk assessment required to be completed after all relevant information is obtained.
A discretionary hour is an hour that a service can claim an Other Teacher as a Certificated Teacher for the purposes of the Staff Hour Count.
A discretionary situation may be either a session or a full day of operation depending on the operating structure of the service.
A document issued by the Ministry of Education detailing the hours during which an early childhood education service may operate, and the maximum number of childplaces the service may fill.
A documented risk management system.
A documented sleep procedure ensures a consistent approach by adults at the service to how they monitor the safety and wellbeing of children while sleeping. It will clearly outline the roles and responsibilities of the adults at the service when children are sleeping.
A documented sleep procedure ensures that there is a consistent approach by educators to monitor the safety and wellbeing of children while sleeping. It will clearly outline the roles and responsibilities of the educator when children are sleeping.
A donation is a voluntary payment. There is no obligation to pay and no enforcement of payment.
A donation is a voluntary payment. There is no obligation to pay and there is no enforcement of payment.
A family member is any member of the family other than the parent or caregiver of the child. Please refer to the section Funding Claim Exceptions for more information.
A fee is a payment that is required as a condition of enrolment and can be enforced.
A fee is a payment that is required as a condition of enrolment and can be enforced. It excludes homebased educator top up payments but includes any other compulsory payment regardless of the type: wages, salary or any other payments made by the parentscaregivers to either the educator or the service provider.
A form showing the actual hours worked daily by regulated (ratio) staff in an education and care service.
A formal written report will be sent to the service provider contact person.
A fridge is the most practical way of storing perishable food and drink at a safe temperature and for keeping it protected from vermin and insects. The fridge should be large enough to store perishable food (including food brought by children) and any medication that requires refrigeration.
A full allowance is based on a certificated
A full allowance is based on a certificated teacher being employed for a hour week, , hours a year. The allowance does not increase if a certificated teacher works more than , hours.
A general purpose financial report should include:
A goaldirected, interrelated series of actions, events, procedures or steps.
A goaldirected, interrelated series of actions, events, procedures, or steps.
A good business practice for community groups wanting to start a new ECE service (e.g. a university or church) is to open a separate bank account for the ECE service.
A good place to start is looking at what is available in your area.
A grandparenting clause enables siblings of current students to retain the right to enrol at the same school when the new enrolment scheme is introduced or amended, as long as other criteria are met. For example, in the case of an amended scheme, at the time of enrolment the student must live inside the home zone as it was before it was amended.
A great way to choose an early learning centre,
A guide for groups sharing learning support information
A half day is being open for instruction for a minimum of hours.
A hazard is a situation or thing that has the potential to cause death, injury or illness to a person.
A higher set of funding rates available to education and care services and hospitalbased services who pay all employed certificated teachers according to the salary scales described Appendix . This includes Parity, Extended and Full parity funding rates.
A holder of a Teaching Council approved teaching qualification who has been registered by the Teaching Council. Note: A teacher must hold a current practising certificate to be able to teach.
A home in which education and care is to be provided, and its associated outdoor space.
A homebased education and care service.
A homebased service can only claim funding for the child who is a family member for the hours a child who is not a family member attends the home.
A hospitalbased education and care service.
A key aspect of promoting health and safety of everyone at the playgroup is hazard management. A hazard is any activity, situation or substance that can cause harm. Harm can be injury, illness or both.
A key aspect of promoting the health and safety of everyone at the service is hazard and risk management.
A key aspect of promoting the health and safety of everyone in the homebased setting is hazard and risk management.
A key feature of playgroups is the high ratio of adults to children.
A level or above in early childhood qualification recognised in the NZ Gazette notice as suitable for a person responsible in Playcentres.
A level qualification recognised in the NZ Gazette, and
A level qualification recognised in the NZ Gazette, and
A level qualification recognised in the NZ Gazette, and
A list of all children plus their emergency contact details in case of any accident of emergency. Include any siblings. Use this to take periodic roll checks.
A list of all children plus their emergency contact details in case of any accident of emergency. Use this to take periodic roll checks when on a combined outing with other educators and children.
A list of all children plus their emergency contact details in case of any accident of emergency. Use this to take periodic roll checks.
A list of approved NZ teaching qualifications is available on the Education Workforce website.
A list of first aid kit contents can be found in Appendix (note that this is the minimum requirement). The first aid kit should be stored in a place where it is readily available to adults, but is secure and out of reach of children.
A list of first aid kit contents can be found in Appendix : First aid kit requirements for criterion PF.
A list of safety and emergency supplies and resources sufficient for the age and number of children and adults at the playgroup and details of how these will be maintained and accessed in an emergency.
A list of safety and emergency supplies and resources sufficient for the age and number of children and adults at the service and details of how these will be maintained and accessed in an emergency.
A list of safety and emergency supplies and resources sufficient for the age and number of children and adults present in the home and details of how these will be maintained and accessed in an emergency.
A list of safety emergency supplies and resources sufficient for the age and number of children and adults at the service and details of how these will be maintained and accessed in an emergency.
A marriage, birth or dissolution of marriage certificate if your name has changed during the period stated.
A material which does not allow water to pass through it.
A maximum of hours per day and hours per week of funding can be claimed per child.
A middle management allowance may be available for a teacher who has specific curriculum or pastoral management responsibility. This could be a head of department or dean, or responsibility for at least students funded under the Ongoing Resourcing Scheme.
A mixed service is a service licensed to offer a combination of all day and sessional provision.
A mobile phone is sufficient to meet the criterion so long as parents are happy to call a mobile number and, if prepaid, it is kept charged with credit so the educator can make calls.
A mobile phone is sufficient to meet the criterion so long as parents are happy to call a mobile number.
A mobility need may be due to challenges such as:
A moveable step andor a toilet seat insert can be helpful for young children just learning to use a toilet. They can also be easily removed when an adult needs to use the toilet.
A moveable step, andor a toilet seat insert can be helpful for young children learning to use the toilet. They can also be easily removed when an adult needs to use the toilet.
A nappy changing procedure could include:
A new service can apply for a review of their initial EQI rating once only in their first year of operation either in March or July.
A nonprescription preparation (such as arnica cream, antiseptic liquid, insect bite treatment spray and so on) that is:
A number of New Zealand education agencies provide information and resources about studying and teaching in New Zealand.
A paragraph indicating that the auditor is responsible for expressing an independent opinion on the financial statements. The auditor should also disclose whether he or she has any personal or professional interestsrelationships with the centre other than as auditor.
A particular and established way of doing something.
A passphrase is a combination of or more random words and characters. They can be used as a strong password. For example:
A password policy is a guideline that can help you create, look after, and use your password. If your school does not have a general guideline for passwords, learn how to create one using our guide below.
A password should be a minimum of characters. To make your password complex:
A pattern or trend in the occurrence of minor injuries may lead to awareness of the need to make changes at the service.
A perceived conflict means a neutral person outside of the situation could think there is a conflict even if there is not one.
A person responsible can count towards the qualification requirement provided they hold a recognised early childhood education teaching qualification.
A person who provides homebased education and care, as defined in the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations .
A person with a linked unique electronic signature.
A philosophy statement expresses the fundamental beliefs, vision, values and ideals a service operates under. It is a core document providing the basis for decisions on both how the service is managed and how the service operates on a daytoday basis.
A philosophy statement guides the services operation.
A phone at the centre allows:
A phone at the home allows:
A potential conflict means you can identify a conflict that could happen in the future.
A practising certificate can be marked:
A prescription (such as antibiotics, eyeear drops and so on) or nonprescription (such as paracetamol liquid, cough syrup and so on) medicine that is:
A prescription (such as asthma inhalers, epilepsy medication and so on) or nonprescription (such as antihistamine syrup, lanolin cream and so on) medicine that is:
A primary characteristic of playcentres is that families manage and implement the education programme.
A primary teaching qualification recognised by the Teaching Council for the purposes of registration.
A prioritised settlement payment offer includes:
A procedure for monitoring childrens sleep is displayed and implemented and a record of childrens sleep times is kept.
A procedure for monitoring childrens sleep is implemented, and information is communicated to parents about their childs daily sleep patterns.
A procedure for monitoring childrens sleep.
A procedure for monitoring childrens sleep. The procedure ensures that children:
A procedure for the changing (and disposal, if appropriate) of nappies is consistently implemented.
A procedure for the changing (and disposal, if appropriate) of nappies that aims to ensure:
A procedure for the changing (and disposal, if appropriate) of nappies.
A procedure for the hygienic laundering (offsite or onsite) of linen used by the children or adults.
A procedure outlining how the service will ensure hygiene and infection control outcomes are met when washing sick and soiled children.
A procedure outlining the services response to injury, illness and incidents, including the review and implementation of practices as required.
A procedure people should follow if they wish to complain about noncompliance with the Regulations or criteria. The procedure includes the option to contact the local Ministry of Education office and provides contact details.
A procedure people should follow if they wish to complain about noncompliance with the Regulations or criteria. The procedure includes the option to contact the regional Ministry of Education office and provides contact details.
A procedure that sets out how the service will identify and respond to suspected child abuse andor neglect.
A process for providing formal and informal opportunities for parents to:
A process for providing positive guidance to encourage social competence in children (C)
A process for providing positive guidance to encourage social competence in children (C);
A process for reviewing and evaluating the services operation (for example, learning and teaching practices, philosophy, policies and procedures) by the people involved in the service.
A process for reviewing and evaluating the services operation (for example, learning and teaching practices, philosophy, policies and procedures) by the people involved in the service. The process is consistent with criterion GMAGMA and includes a schedule showing timelines for planned review of different areas of operation.
A process for the prevention of child abuse is implemented, and a procedure for responding to suspected child abuse is followed when required.
A quiet area of the activity space needs to be set aside for use whenever children under the age of need to sleep during a session. The sleeping space should preferably be somewhere that is not a high traffic area of the centre. You can arrange furniture such as couches or shelving to control movement into the area by children, and to provide some barrier against sound.
A range of learning opportunities and experiences for children are planned for and provided that:
A recommendation report is not required unless requested by the property advisor.
A record is maintained for children participating in the service. Records are kept for at least years.
A record of all food served during the services hours of operation (other than that provided by parents for their own children). Records show the type of food provided and are available for inspection for months after the food is served.
A record of all injuries, illnesses and incidents that occur at the service. Records include:
A record of all medicine (prescription and nonprescription) given to children attending the service. Records include:
A record of all safety checks and the results.
A record of enrolments of educators in a homebased service qualification must be kept by the service provider. This must clearly show the of enrolment.
A record of excursions that includes:
A record of excursions. Records include:
A record of information and guidance sought from agencies andor services (C).
A record of serious illnesses and incidents that occur at the service (see HS for the requirement to record injuries). Records include:
A record of the emergency drills carried out and evidence of how evaluation of the drills has informed the annual review of the services emergency plan.
A record of the emergency drills carried out.
A record of the opportunities provided for participation by parents and caregivers in decision making, including any meetings held and the decisions made.
A record of the time each child attending the service sleeps, and checks made by adults during that time.
A record of the written authority from parents for the administration of medicine in accordance with the requirement for the category of medicine outlined in Appendix .
A record of the written authority from parents for the administration of medicine in accordance with the requirement for the category of medicine outlined in Appendix .
A record of training andor information provided to adults who administer medicine to children (other than their own) while at the service.
A regular appraisal system or professional growth cycle is documented and is part of an annual cycle linked to professional development and includes provision for ongoing coaching or mentoring and selfreflection.
A regulation under the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations .
A regulation under the Education (Playgroups) Regulations .
A reminder also that the consultation for Years to English stays open until June:
A reporting template is available in Appendix .
A request for a payment that parents may choose whether or not to make. There must be no penalty for parents who choose not to make the payment. Once an agreement to pay has been reached then services may enforce payment.
A safe and comfortable place to sleep (such as a bed, stretcher, mattress or couch) is available for children aged and older that require sleep or rest during a session.
A safety check is made up of components:
A safety need may be where a significant risk of harm or danger to the student, or to others, exists during the journey to and from school. This may be due to challenges such as:
A sample Staff Record is provided in Appendix .
A sample list of potential hazards is available as a starting point. Any hazards found should be documented and eliminated, isolated or minimised. Hazards in the playground are of particular concern in playgroups.
A sample procedure template is given the homebased nappy changingdisposal procedure.
A school board member has this role.
A school bus route may be moved or shortened if the location of students who are eligible to use the bus changes. It may also be stopped if not enough students are using the bus.
A school can use a Statement of Cash Flow to predict future cash flow which helps with matters of budgeting.
A school is open for instruction when compulsory organised teaching and learning is taking place for all student year levels. This can include online learning and school trips outside the classroom.
A school terms notice is normally given to your school before these changes are made.
A second recommendation report is made when stage is complete to identify the preferred supplier. This report goes to the procurement owner and procurement leader for endorsement, before the procurement sponsor approves it.
A secondary school can set up its own student exchange programme with an overseas school. We must approve the programme.
A senior advisor from the Sensitive Claims team will be available to help you through the process.
A sensitive claim is where a person believes they were abused in a New Zealand state school and would like some form of redress from the Ministry of Education. In the past, these were called historic abuse claims.
A separate sleep room is not required to meet this criterion, although some services may consider this is preferable for their infants and toddlers.
A service cannot count employer KiwiSaver contributions towards the minimum salary requirement if the service attests to paying all employed certificated teachers according to Parity, Extended Parity and Full Parity Salary scales.
A service curriculum that is inclusive ensures all children know that the early childhood service they attend is a place where they belong and where they feel valued for who they are.
A service curriculum that supports social competence and understanding of appropriate behaviour will provide ongoing opportunities within flexible settings for children to practise through actions, words and behaviours their growing development.
A service intending to close must notify the Ministry regional office of the the service will close.
A service provider that controls one or more kindergartens formerly recognised under the Kindergarten Regulations , or that has formed from a free kindergarten association or associations that controlled kindergartens recognised under these Regulations.
A service providing education and care to or more children under the age of who are also receiving health services within premises under the control of the Ministry of Health or a district health board.
A service qualifies where staff (both paid and unpaid):
A service that is a communitybased service prohibited from making financial gains that are distributed to their members including:
A service that is not communitybased. It may be owned by a private company, publicly listed company, private trust, partnership, or an individual.
A service that operates without a regular roll, for example, services at ski fields.
A service where at least child attends for more than hours on any day.
A service where no child attends for more than hours in total on any day.
A service will develop a process to assist them to meet this criterion taking into consideration the beliefs, values, knowledge, and aspirations of children, their families, staff, and community. To aid transitions, a hospitalbased process is likely to include interaction with the early childhood service that the child attends when they are not in hospital.
A session of . hours will receive funding for hours.
A session of . hours will receive funding for hours. . hours will be claimed as Hours ECE hours and . hours must be claimed as Plus ECE hours.
A short chain on the furniture connected to a metal eye on the wall, by means of a carabiner, Dbolt or similar, can be a good system. This means you can change your furniture around, and still have secure fastening for the heavy objects.
A short chain on the furniture connected to a metal eye on the wall, by means of a carabiner, Dbolt, or similar, can be a good system. This means furniture can be changed around, while still having secure fastening for heavy objects.
A shower, shub or bath is likely to be the most suitable facility depending on the age and size of the child. The need to occasionally wash or bathe older children is usually best met with a shower rather than a tub, using a handheld shower head with warm water. It is normally only needed for toileting accidents or if a child has been sick.
A single Pacific language is the principal language of communication and instruction with children used or more of the time, including in the implementation of the curriculum.
A single Pacific language is used at least of the time as the language of communication and instruction with children, including in the implementation of the curriculum.
A singlestage open tender (also known as RFT) provides all the information for suppliers to submit a detailed response. This tender approach evaluates capability and capacity before pricing is assessed. It allows each response to be evaluated thoroughly and fairly.
A special excursion requires a specific risk assessment and development of a management plan prior to the excursion because the environment and circumstances in which these occur will be different each time.
A special purpose financial statement should include:
A specified agency is any government agency or statutory body that a service provider is required to notify if there is a serious (or as defined) injury, illness, incident or allegation.
A specified agency is any government agency or statutory body. This includes:
A specified offence means an offence identified in Schedule of the Childrens Act .
A spreadsheet can be used. The IT lead can keep a track of when an access review was last completed for each system.
A staff member who declares a conflict must distance themselves from the buying process. They should not be involved in evaluating supplier offers or purchasing the goods or services.
A staffing and appointments policy and the process adhered to should document the process for developing and changing a job description.
A statement indicating to the reader that it is the services management group and not the auditor who is responsible for the preparation of the financial report.
A statement intended to influence and determine decisions, actions and other matters.
A statement intended to influence and determine decisions, actions, and other matters.
A statistical index that measures the extent to which an early childhood service draws children from low socioeconomic communities. The EQI is used to determine eligibility for Equity Funding.
A strong password is difficult for people and computers to guess, and easy for you to remember.
A student exchange is a reciprocal programme that gives students a chance to attend school in another country.
A student is eligible for a school bus conveyance allowance if they meet all transport assistance criteria and:
A student must meet criteria to be eligible for transport assistance.
A sufficient quantity and variety of (indoor and outdoor) furniture, equipment and materials is provided that is appropriate for the learning and abilities of the children attending.
A sufficient quantity and variety of (indoor and outdoor) furniture, equipment, and materials is provided that is appropriate for the learning and abilities of the children attending.
A sufficient quantity and variety of furniture, equipment, and materials is provided that is appropriate for the learning and abilities of the children participating in the service.
A supplier recommendation report is endorsed by the procurement leader and approved by the procurement sponsor. Then the contract is signed.
A table provided by the Ministry which shows the funding rates for all early childhood services.
A teacher at a teacherled centrebased service who does not hold a practising certificate issued by the Teaching Council of Aotearoa, New Zealand (Teaching Council) or does not hold a Teaching Councilapproved ECE qualification or New Zealand qualified primary teacher qualification.
A teacher becomes eligible to move up a pay step when they have completed , hours of work.
A teacher who takes a position in a lower salary scale shall receive credit in that scale for service in any higher scale.
A teacherled centrebased service controlled by a kindergarten association.
A telephone is available for calls to and from the premises.
A telephone or other means of communication is available in the ECE activity room to enable adults providing education and care to call for assistance when necessary.
A template for signin and signout records is included in Appendix in the ECE funding handbook.
A template for signinsignout records is included in Appendix .
A type of financial report. A special purpose financial report includes:
A unit of the Ministry of Education. One of the functions of Education Workforce is to assist with inquiries from members of the public who are interested in gaining teaching qualifications.
A variety of equipment and materials is provided that is appropriate for the learning and abilities of the children attending.
A variety of furniture, equipment, and materials is provided that is appropriate for the learning and abilities of the children attending.
A very large outside area may make supervision more difficult and the fencing of an enclosed smaller area adjacent to the home may be a sensible option.
A very minor injury can sometimes become more serious after a period of time, for example a minor graze becomes infected, and a child requires hospitalisation.
A way of meeting the criterion could be to provide copies of the statement of philosophy and important service policies are made available to parents after a child has enrolled or all relevant documents could be kept in one place in the centre, so that these can be easily accessed by parents.
A wide range of learning experiences are offered, from which children can choose familiar activities or try new challenges.
A written authority from a parent given at enrolment as part of an individual health plan, or whenever there is a change, detailing:
A written authority from a parent given at enrolment to the use of specific preparations on their child for the period that they are enrolled. The service must provide (at enrolment, or whenever there is a change) specific information to parents about the category (i) preparations that will be used.
A written authority from a parent given at the beginning of each day the medicine is administered, detailing:
A written child protection policy that contains:
A written emergency plan that includes at least
A written emergency plan that includes at least:
A written statement expressing the services beliefs, values and attitudes about the provision of early childhood education and care.
A written supervision plan that ensures the health, safety and wellbeing of children enrolled in the service is maintained at all times.
AI can create content that seems plausible but contains nonsensical or incorrect detail. Whenever you use AI, make sure that you are reviewing and checking the outputs.
AI in education should improve teaching and learning, supporting knowledgeable and skilled teachers.
AI models are trained on huge amounts of data from different countries and cultures. This means most AI models are built on dominant cultures and languages. The tools may not accurately reflect indigenous knowledge. From a New Zealand context, they are likely to be weak on
About National Student Numbers
About attendance records and reporting
About information gathering for regulatory compliance purposes.
About longterm insights briefings
About national student numbers
About national student numbers has more information about what NSNs are.
About official information
About our education system
About our weathertightness standards
About the Education and Training Amendment Bill (No )
About the Holidays Act programme (Ministry payroll)
About the School Transport Hub
About the advice we release
About the pay parity optin scheme
About the translated content on our website.
About the work we do, who we are, and the policies and legislation that guide the education sector.
Absence rule exemptions
Absence rule exemptions:
Absence rules exemptions apply only to the specific enrolment agreement for each child with learning support needs or health problems.
Absences can be claimed only for children who were enrolled to attend on that specific holiday.
Absences cannot be claimed for casual or conditional children who do not attend.
Acceptable optional charges
Acceptable qualifications for a person responsible are set out in a notice in the NZ Gazette. These include:
Accepted qualifications for homebased early learning education
Access education statistics and research.
Access is at Eden , Normanby Road, Mt Eden Auckland.
Access reviews should determine whether access is right for the user, or if they need permissions removed or added.
Accessible car park available
Accessible formats available
Accessible versions in Braille, PDF and Word are on this site. Future key document will be done in NZ Sign Language. For other accessible versions, email
Accessing the Ministry website for the latest Annual Reporting circular
Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC)
According to Microsoft and Google, using FA can prevent up to of untargeted attacks from happening. It is a crucial measure to protect data and information at your school.
Account security advice for IT providers or IT leads
Accountability to the Government means that
Accountability to the Ministry of Education is achieved primarily through the
Achievement and curriculum
Achievement challenges are the goals a
Acoustic materials (noise)
Act includes provisions about information sharing for the wellbeing and safety of children.
Act , the Family Violence Act , the Official Information Act , or an Approved Information Sharing Agreement) or
Action Plan for Pacific Education
Action Plan for Pacific Education
Action Plan for Pacific Education for
Action Plan for Pacific Education in and
Action Plan website helps you in identifying, supporting and protecting vulnerable children.
Active supervision of children can be achieved in a number of ways including:
Active supervision takes advantage of all available learning opportunities and means never leaving children unattended. It means being able to monitor (see or hear) all children at all times, including indoors, outdoors and when sleeping. Educators should use their professional judgment and common sense when deciding when it is appropriate to have any children out of their direct line of sight. For example, for older children who want to use the toilet with some privacy, it is appropriate to supervise by remaining in hearing distance.
Activities and equipment should reflect the cultures of
Activities can include the prosecution of parents for absences if appropriate support is offered and not taken up.
Actual contact hours for teachersstaff (start and end dates and actual contact start and finish times spent teaching children).
Actual daily absence dates and times.
Actual daily attendance dates and times.
Actual funding entitlement
Add an organisational unit Google for Education Help
Add together the FCHs for Under s for the month.
Add together the allowable discretionary hours that have been used to cover the absences of all certificated teachers for the day.
Add together the claimable hours for each day.
Add together the daily totals each month.
Add up the total actual hours worked each day by certificated teachers who were counted towards regulated (ratio) staff requirements. Write this number down.
Add up the total hours worked each day by Other Teachers who were counted towards regulated (ratio) staff requirements. Write this number down.
Additional advice and guidance on the rules can be found below.
Additional eligibility criteria for the school bus conveyance allowance
Additional guidance is available specifically for ECE services above ground level. We recommend reading High rise evacuation plans for ECE service providers (see HS Emergency plan and supplies, above).
Additional guidance is available specifically for centres above ground level (see HS Safe assembly areas, above).
Additional guidance is available specifically for centres above ground level, we recommend reading High rise evacuation plans for ECE service providers.
Additional guidance is available specifically for centres above ground level. Download High rise evacuation plans for ECE service providers (see HS Safe assembly areas, above).
Additional guidance is available specifically for centres above ground level. Download High rise evacuation plans for ECE service providers (see HS Emergency plan and supplies, above).
Additional guidance is available specifically for services above ground level, we recommend you read High rise evacuation plans for ECE service providers (see HS Safe assembly areas, above).
Additional guidance is available specifically for services above ground level, we recommend you read High rise evacuation plans for ECE service providers.
Additional guidance staffing
Additional handwashing facilities can also be provided in the kitchen setting, particularly if you are serving food.
Additional requirements for casual childrens records
Additional requirements for conditional childrens records
Additional requirements for education and care services and hospitalbased services
Additional requirements for kindergartens
Additional tools to do safety checks at your early learning service.
Address for couriers and reception
Adequate access in each situation would be determined by ensuring that the shared facilities perform their function to a similar level as if they were located on the premises and meet the following outcomes.
Adequate access in this context means that the facility:
Adequate supervision is important. Depending on the layout of the centre, a high viewing window into the bathroom area may ensure privacy for children but allows for discreet supervision.
Adequate supervision is important. The educator will need to manage this depending on where the bathroom facilities are in relation to where children are located in the home.
Administration and management
Administrative staff may need access to the finance system, but not the Student Management System (SMS).
Administrator accounts are more at risk if they are compromised and can cause more damage to your systems if a cyber criminal gains access. IT leads should have separate accounts for everyday use and administrator tasks.
Administrator accounts are more at risk if they are compromised. IT leads should have separate accounts for everyday use and administrator tasks.
Administrator tasks include:
Administrators of a system, such as Google Workspace, should not be able to reset their own password. It is good practice to have administrators, so they can reset each others passwords. Google and Microsoft explain how to do this.
Adulttochild ratios in early learning services
Adults are warm and friendly in their interactions with other adults.
Adults at the Playgroup require guidelines on:
Adults at the centre need to feel confident and capable of providing the necessary support to children when medication is administered. Because educatorsstaff do not generally have medical training, some form of training or information is required so they can do this. First aid courses do not commonly cover the correct administration of medicine, so this will not usually be sufficient.
Adults providing education and care
Adults providing education and care are familiar with relevant emergency drills and carry out each type of drill with children (as appropriate) on an, at least, monthly basis.
Adults providing education and care are familiar with relevant emergency drills and carry these out with children on an at least monthly basis emergency drills are practised.
Adults providing education and care are familiar with relevant emergency drills.
Adults providing education and care have access to information held by the hospital for each child participating in the service that includes:
Adults providing education and care must ensure any medicine given to a child is administered by authorised hospital personnel.
Adults providing education and care must not use, or be under the influence of, alcohol or any other substance that has a detrimental effect on their functioning or behaviour while responsible for children participating in the service.
Adults running your playgroup should be able to confidently and knowledgeably:
Adults should be able to scan the environment while working alongside children.
Adults should have adequate space to meet their own needs as they are working to support the education and care of the children.
Adults should have adequate space to meet their own needs as they are working to support the education and care of the children. What this space looks like, and how it is configured, will differ from centre to centre, and is dependent upon a number of factors. These include:
Adults visiting an early service to work
Adults who administer medicine to children (other than their own) are provided with information andor training relevant to the task.
Advance days determine the number of days per month for which your service will receive advance funding.
Advance funding can only be paid up to the end of the current advance funding period. Refer to Section for details on the funding cycle. Your Ministry regional office can also assist with further details.
Advance funding exceptions
Advice and resources to help if your child is being bullied, worried about bullying at school, or in some way involved in bullying.
Advice notices are available to services on the payment . Services who have access to the Secure Data Portal can download and print their notices via the Secure Data Portal from the day of payment. Notices are available on the Secure Data Portal for a limited time only.
Advice provided by the Ministry of Education to the Minister on reform to Initial Teacher Education.
Advice seen by our ministers
Advisers on Deaf children
After years, records can be disposed of. This needs to be done so that unauthorised access to the information is not possible.
After a recommendation report is approved by the procurement sponsor, schools must contact all suppliers who made offers and inform them of the outcome.
After evaluating scores individually, the evaluators meet to moderate scores and determine a preferred supplier. This process is led by the evaluation chair with support of the procurement officer.
After our visit, we will write to you to outline next steps. We will explain any requirements your service needs to meet.
After the incident has been managed on site (for example, first aid provided, parents notified, any other agencies notified if required), it is recommended that you then call your regional Ministry office to inform them of the incident. Then you should send them a copy of the notification.
After working with us, if you are still not happy with how we have handled your complaint, there are a range of options for you to consider seeking a resolution.
Age restrictions on use of AI
Agencies providing relief teachers are likely to be completing some components of the safety check. Centresservices can agree with the agency that it will complete those components on their behalf.
Agency roles and responsibilities
Agreement to optional charges
Alignment with Pacific Languages Strategy
All ATIS payments are GST inclusive.
All DHBs have emergency plans. When an evacuation does occur, the service will need to follow the guidance of the wardens of the DHB the DHB evacuation plan. The plan will include the assembly area(s) for the hospital buildings.
All ECE services (or the administrators of a service provider) must
All ECE services except privately owned services
All Equity Funding payments are GST inclusive.
All I ask is that you raise your hand
All Police vetting information must be kept confidential and managed by your early learning service in accordance with the:
All Police vetting information must be kept confidential and managed by your school in accordance with the:
All RS returns must be accompanied by a completed declaration. The wording of this declaration is shown below.
All Targeted Funding payments are GST inclusive.
All Targeted Hours in eligible early learning services generate a fixed amount of funding.
All administrator accounts must have FA enabled.
All applications are considered individually by a panel of our staff.
All areas of the premises accessible to children, both indoors and outdoors, must be smokevapefree.
All certificated teachers employed part time in a management position and part time in a teaching role, must be paid at least the applicable management salary amount on the relevant Minimum Salary Scale for Management Positions, for all hours they work in their management position, and at least the applicable salary amount on the relevant Minimum Salary Scale for Certificated Teachers when they are employed in a teaching role.
All changes to enrolment records must be dated and signed by a parentguardian of the child.
All children will enter an early childhood service with a first language. Sometimes this language is different to the language or languages used in the centre. It is important that educators work in collaboration with the parents
All children will enter an early childhood service with a first language. Sometimes this language is different to the language, or languages used in the service. It is important that
All childrens workers employed or engaged by a service must be safety checked.
All complaints about the Ministry
All criteria must be met:
All domestic students between the ages of until the end of the year in which they turn are entitled to free enrolment and education at any state school or charter school. If the student receives Ongoing Resource Scheme (ORS) funding, this entitlement extends until they are .
All early childhood education services (or the administrators of service provider) must complete an RS Return in order to receive a funding payment.
All early learning services are experienced in settling new starters and understand that all children are different. Your service will work out a plan with you for how your child will be introduced to the new environment.
All early learning services have their own emergency guide. You can ask staff to see it.
All early learning services must have a complaints policy in place that is accessible to everyone.
All early learning services must meet the requirements of:
All early learning services will be assessed for their eligibility each year. There is no application process required.
All equipment and resources available to children must be safe and able to be kept hygienic. See HS Premises and contents are safe and hygienic for how to keep equipment hygienic.
All equipment for infants and toddlers should be washable.
All equipment purchased with ministry funding must be returned to us. It is therefore very important that clear financial records and equipment inventories are kept.
All funding correspondence will be sent to the funding contact person for the service provider.
All homebased ECE services must keep records for audit purposes and in a place where they can be easily accessed by the coordinator.
All homebased early learning services must meet the requirements set out in the regulations.
All homes will be designed differently but most will have lounge or living space that can be used for a variety of activities, including where children are able to find a place for quiet activities as necessary. An area without carpet can be used for more messy activities, such as painting or clay modelling, or a coversheet can be laid down to protect flooring as necessary so that children have the ability to experience different creative activities.
All indoor and outdoor items and surfaces, furniture, equipment and materials are safe and suitable for their intended use.
All interactions should create a sense of
All interactions should create a sense of whanaungatanga in the service.
All licensed ECE services are eligible for the ATIS if they meet the following criteria:
All licensed ECE services are eligible to receive this funding (provided additional criteria are met).
All licensed early childhood services connected to the ELI system need to complete and submit the ECE Census. Funding may be withheld in part or in full if a service does not submit a complete and accurate ECE Census by the due .
All licensed early learning centres have to provide a safe dedicated sleeping area for children under the age of . For older children, a temporary sleeping area could be created each day as needed.
All licensed early learning services must have human resource management practices in place.
All licensed homebased services must have person responsible for every children in attendance and only act as a person responsible for licensed early childhood service at the same time.
All licensed services and certificated playgroups are regulated by us.
All licensed services with an Isolation Index of . or greater, and that generate less than , per annum in ECE Funding Subsidy, Hours ECE
All licensed teacherled centrebased services are required to have person responsible for every children in attendance.
All numbers are in one column (pause).
All numbers are in whole dollars and the debits and credits are equal to zero (pause).
All other term dates are set by the Minister of Education.
All parents and caregivers at the playgroup share responsibility for the safety and supervision of all children attending.
All people involved in the procurement must sign a conflict of interest declaration.
All physical restraints training resources, including those below, are available on the page below.
All playgroups require a first aid kit.
All practicable steps are taken to ensure that children do not come into contact with any person (adult or child) on the premises who is suffering from a disease or condition likely to be passed on to children and likely to have a detrimental effect on them.
All practicable steps are taken to ensure that children do not come into contact with any person on the premises who is under the influence of alcohol or any other substance that has a detrimental effect on their functioning or behaviour.
All practicable steps are taken to ensure that noise levels do not unduly interfere with normal speech andor communication or cause any child attending distress or harm.
All practicable steps are taken to ensure that noise levels in any ECE activity room do not unduly interfere with normal speech andor communication, or cause any child attending distress or harm.
All practicable steps are taken to get immediate medical assistance for a child who is seriously injured or becomes seriously ill, and to notify a parent of what has happened.
All practicable steps are taken to get immediate medical assistance for a child who is seriously injured or becomes seriously ill, and to notify a parent or caregiver of what has happened.
All practicable steps are taken to protect children from exposure to inappropriate material (for example, of an explicitly sexual or violent nature).
All private vehicles must have the appropriate safety restraints for adults and children in accordance with the NZ Transport Agency regulations.
All private vehicles must have the appropriate safety restraints for adults and children in accordance with the NZ Transport Agency regulations. For more details, see the factsheet on the NZ Transport Agency website
All private vehicles must have the appropriate safety restraints for adults and children in accordance with the NZ Transport Agency regulations. See the factsheet on the NZ Transport Agency website for more details.
All products and natural materials used with children should be nontoxic. Beware of poisonous plants and seeds. Small seeds, for example wheat, can also be dangerous if children put them up their noses.
All qualifications should be considered, even if not directly related to teaching or education. Overseas qualifications must be assessed by NZQA as comparable to a New Zealand equivalent qualification.
All records required to support funding claims must be retained for a minimum of years.
All remaining funds received from the Ministry of Education must be returned.
All right, lets kick off. So the, uh, welcome
All school transport drivers must be safety checked in accordance with the Childrens Act .
All school transport drivers must:
All schools must have a policy and practices that follow our rules and guidelines to minimise student distress and use of physical restraint.
All schools will have quality learning environments as part of a wellmanaged and sustainable portfolio.
All service providers take responsibility for ensuring all licensing requirements are met, including the person responsible requirement.
All services must have their general purpose financial statements or special purpose financial report audited by a qualified auditor who is a member of the Chartered Accountants of Australia and New Zealand (CA ANZ), or CPA Australia Limited.
All services must keep educator timesheets (attendance records) that are signed and dated by the educator.
All services must keep the records listed in the table on the next page of this chapter.
All services need to ensure confidential information and records can be kept secure. In services without a lockable staff room or office, this can be achieved through the provision of lockable cupboards andor lockable filing cabinets.
All services offering Hours ECE and all children receiving Hours ECE must meet the eligibility conditions at all times.
All services receiving quality funding rates must have parents
All services that have been in operation for a full financial year must provide the Ministry with copies of their audited financial reports. Communitybased and private services have different reporting requirements. The types of financial reports required is outlined in : Types of Financial Reports.
All services will have at least staff member with a valid first aid certificate for every children present. Educators at homebased services must have a valid first aid qualification from an accredited first aid training provider.
All staff and contractors who have unsupervised access to children at a school must be Police vetted
All staff employed or engaged in the service are provided with ongoing support and receive a documented orientation and induction into the service which outlines all policies and procedures.
All state and stateintegrated schools and
All students must have the appropriate documents to travel to and from New Zealand. This includes valid passports and visas.
All surfaces on and around the change area must be smooth, impervious and able to be easily wiped cleaned and disinfected (a towel does not meet this criterion). Any change mat or pad must have a nonporous covering or be disposed of after each child is changed.
All surfaces on and around the change area should be smooth, impervious to moisture and able to be easily wiped clean and disinfected. Any change mat or pad must have a nonporous covering or be disposed of after each child is changed. See HS Nappy changing procedure.
All teacherled services must comply with regulated qualification requirements and have a person responsible at all times of operation.
All the calendar days in a month, from the first day of the month to the last day e.g. July to July.
All the information requested is withheld under these sections of the Act.
All training modules, including the compulsory module, are listed here.
Allday and sessional education and care services each have four sets of funding rates.
Allday and sessional kindergarten
Allday education and care services and hospitalbased services Base funding rates
Allday education and care services and hospitalbased services Extended parity funding rates
Allday education and care services and hospitalbased services Full parity funding rates
Allday education and care services and hospitalbased services Parity funding rates
Allday over sleep provisions
Allday services with only children over the age of attending have a level of choice about the space they provide for sleep. Centres may choose to manage this differently according to their operation or philosophy.
Allday teacherled centrebased services.
Allow to minutes for the system to generate your certificate. You may need to log out and then log back in again for your certificate to be available.
Allow plenty of space for children to have independent access to their belongings to give them the ability to take some responsibility for their things, including choosing what to wear throughout the day. It is important to remove anything that may be harmful to children, for example, medicines.
Allow space within the sleep room for door opening and adult supervision (for example an armchair for an adult).
Allowance for travel costs
Allowances for teachers in Pacific bilingual or immersion education and care services:
Allowances for teachers in Pacific immersion and bilingual education and care services:
Allowing plenty of space between sleeping children will enable good air flow, limiting cross infection and children disturbing others. Sleep areas must be well ventilated to allow air to circulate.
Allowing these shared facilities will save unnecessary duplication of expensive facilities while still achieving health and safety outcomes for children.
Allowing young children the freedom to explore and play.
Alternative arrangements if parents are not at home when children are dropped home
Alternative arrangements if parents are not at home when children are to be dropped off.
Alternative disinfectantsproducts are to be used strictly in accordance with the manufacturer instructions.
Alternative systems may include:
Alternatively, write in the number of adults your service will need if you want fewer children per adult than is required by the regulation (note that you can have more adults working with children than required, but not the other way around).
Although it is important there is a place for people at the centre to go to when a fire breaks out or in another emergency such as an earthquake, it is just as important to ensure that this place does not put children or adults in further danger from other hazards. This can be a challenge for some centres because of the layout of their premises and proximity to main roads, car parks, waterways and so on. Young children often behave erratically when scared or distressed, and adults need to reduce stress (for themselves, as well as for the children) in these situations as much as possible.
Although it is important there is a place for people at the playgroup to go to when a fire breaks out, it is just as important to ensure that this place does not put children or adults in further danger from other hazards. This can be a challenge for some playgroups because of the layout of their premises and proximity to main roads, carparks, waterways and so on. Young children often behave erratically when scared or distressed, and adults need to reduce stress (for themselves, as well as for the children) in these situations as much as possible.
Although not part of the licensing criteria against which early childhood services are assessed, services are required to make reasonable efforts to accommodate children with medication needs arising from a disability or illness.
Although plastic products can be cheaper and easy to clean, they may not last as long or have the same aesthetic appeal as products made from natural materials. Buying quality materials at the start will save money in the long run.
Although some of them will stay as question mark.
Although the area needs to be designated as a sleep space, it can be used by children for play when no children require sleep.
Always fasten to the structure of the building. Studs are fine, but wallboards may be too weak.
Always round up to the nearest number. Therefore, this centre needs a total of toilets to meet this criterion.
Amendments to section of the Education and Training Act
Amendments to the Equal Pay Act , which came into effect on November , introduce a new process for individual employees and unions to raise a pay equity claim directly with an employer for work, which may be subject to systemic sexbased discrimination.
Amount and details of Ministry funding
An EC or other supporting documentation may also be required for the exemption to be approved.
An ECE teaching qualification or a primary teaching qualification recognised by the Teaching Council for registration purposes, and
An ECE teaching qualification recognised by the Teaching Council for the purposes of registration.
An EPO must apply to us for approval before it can start offering a student exchange programme in New Zealand.
An actual conflict means a conflict already exists.
An agreed statement about the operation of the playgroup is available for people to read.
An agreed statement of group aims and information outlining:
An agreement to pay ongoing optional charges must include information about how long the agreement will last andor what the rules are about making changes to the agreement.
An allday centre is licensed for children, including up to children under the age of . A maximum of staff are required to meet adult to child ratios ( for the older children, and for the under s).
An allday service will need to consider how they can provide an appropriate space for adults, as there are requirements for breaks under employment law.
An alternative name for a funding claim audit.
An ample supply of water that is fit to drink is available to children at all times, and older children are able to access this water independently.
An annual budget guides financial expenditure.
An annual budget must be prepared.
An annual budget setting out the services estimated revenue and expenses for the year. The budget includes at least:
An annual budget should be prepared once a year and then reviewed every months, or more frequently throughout the financial year.
An annual plan can be divided up into each month in the annual cycle, with key tasks grouped by area. The Ministry would expect each task to identify who is responsible for the task, what the task is, and when in the annual cycle the task is scheduled to be undertaken.
An annual plan guides the services operation.
An annual plan identifying who, what, and when in relation to key tasks the service intends to undertake each year, and how key tasks will have regard to the Statement of National Education and Learning Priorities (NELP).
An annual plan is part of good business practice and will show the Ministry of Education how the service intends to ensure ongoing compliance with all regulatory requirements and criteria.
An attendance record must be kept for each child attending the early childhood education and care service.
An attendance record that meets requirements outlined in the ECE funding handbook for children participating in the service, and children who have attended in the previous years.
An attendance record that meets the requirements outlined in the ECE funding handbook for children currently attending, and children who have attended in the previous years.
An attestation included in the enrolment agreement must be signed for each child receiving Hours ECE. Hours ECE funding must not be claimed for a child until the service has received a completed and signed attestation.
An audit of a centre will generally take a full day, although sometimes longer periods may be required. The Resourcing Auditor will need a quiet place in which to work and access to a staff member who can answer any questions that arise.
An early childhood education and care centre.
An early childhood education service that offers a mixture of both teacherled and parentled education and care sessions.
An emergency closure occurs when circumstances beyond the control of homebased services or individual homebased educators cause temporary closures.
An emergency closure occurs when circumstances beyond the control of individual services cause temporary closures. Closures are normally for or days only.
An employed certificated teacher should progress one salary step:
An equipment inventory maintained to at least show equipment purchased with Ministry of Education funds.
An evacuation procedure for the premises.
An example RS form can be found in Appendix .
An example enrolment form can be downloaded from Chapter in the ECE funding handbook. This form can be adapted to suit the services particular circumstances but must have at least the mandatory requirements.
An example of an emergency drill to practise is the earthquake drill.
An example of an inventory list can be found at the bottom of this section.
An example of the required attestation is shown below:
An example of this is where a school has a statutory intervention and the Ministry contributes to the cost. The adjustment is not preset in the Kiwi Park model. The level of support provided by the Ministry is confirmed by email and this should be manually adjusted in sales H and H. In our example, the Ministry provided a subsidy of ,. This is entered into Cell H, towards the expense of the intervention expense minus , is entered into cell H.
An incident is an event that caused, or may have caused, harm to a child while in care of a service.
An inclusive curriculum is strengths based and founded on
An income threshold for financial reporting is being introduced from January .
An income topup for small, licensed early childhood services, that are located in isolated areas.
An indicative hourly rate can be found by dividing the minimum salary level by ( hours x weeks), rounding is to be applied to at least decimal places.
An injury and incident procedure flowchart is available for services to use.
An introductory paragraph identifying the accounting policies used.
An inventory of systems and applications that your school uses will help aid the implementation of least privileges.
An occupied childplace that is funded for hour.
An official examination and verification of accounts and records.
An ongoing process means that scheduled selfreviews and internal evaluations are undertaken regularly and are linked to and reflect on previous reviews or evaluations. An ongoing process involves asking questions such as:
An ongoing process of selfreview and internal evaluation
An ongoing process of selfreview and internal evaluation helps the service maintain and improve the quality of its education and care.
An optional charge should only be requested for excursions if:
An overview of new requirements for schools from Term .
An overview of pay equity and the framework, as well as a guide to good practice, are available on the Employment New Zealand website.
An overview of the network of
An overview of the record keeping requirements for all services:
An untreated sore throat could lead to Rheumatic fever.
An unwell adult may need to be excluded from your premises. This is permitted by Regulation of the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations .
An uptoinventory can help you when you are buying new equipment.
And Don has given a hot topic on Facebook for principles,
And Donnas asked, uh, we mark ahead of time
And any yearold, yearold or yearolds that will not receive Hours ECE at your service (for example children who are already receiving their hours of Hours ECE at another service).
And as I said, the the way that these codes work is,
And for the SMS providers that enable this, if you want
And just further to that, the, um, the thresholds
And one thing I just wanted to state was the purpose
And one thing that I will share just to demonstrate that,
And one thing that we were not looking to do at this point,
And really the end of the day is, you know, as, as long
And should their leaving be the same last day
And so all, um, as I said,
And so as a result from term one next year, thats day one,
And so from where we are coming from,
And so if we go back up to this slide here,
And so in terms of how the codes were redesigned,
And so the, as a, the more fulsome guidelines,
And so there, this has been a, as I said, a very
And so we had a lot of school principals tell us, mark, um,
And so what we have here is
And so what we have here is a, as you can see,
And so what youre going to find on there is a lot
And so with that said, um, we did hear a number
And that way it is not reported, um, to the ministry.
And that would be a good way to, to do that, to record that.
And the previous definition, which I believe was a, um,
And then the next one you, you change.
And then weve also got a hand raised from D
And there havent been too many, um,
And we feel that on balance, what youre about to look at,
And we have tried to factor in, um,
And weve got a question from Tanya in the chat.
And what we have done here
And what we have done is we have just caught,
And yeah, so historically, um, for, for a brief presentation
And, um, so I, I use this example
And, you know, its a parent condoned absence
Animals brought to the hospital would usually be part of a formalised visiting programme.
Annoyance (external source)
Annual TopUp for Isolated Services (ATIS)
Annual financial statements
Annual financial statements must include:
Annual financial statements timeline
Annual financial statements.
Annual implementation plan template
Annual top up for isolated services
Annual topup for Isolated Services (ATIS)
Annual topup for isolated services (ATIS)
Annual topup for isolated services:
Annual topup isolated services (ATIS): Chapter
Any ECE activity room and equipment used by children as part of the ECE programme are checked on every day of operation for hazards. Hazards to the safety of children are eliminated, isolated or minimised.
Any accidents or injuries have to be recorded to identify hazards and make sure appropriate action is taken.
Any activity where children play with, near or in water poses a high safety risk. In such a situation, the educator should have constant visual contact and be in close proximity to the children at all times. If the educator needs to move away from the area they should take all children with them away from the water.
Any alcohol is to be stored in a locked cupboard.
Any change must be signed and dated by the parentguardian. Funding for the attendance of a conditionally enrolled child must not be claimed until the parentguardian has signed this record.
Any change to a school should involve discussion with the schools community before a formal consultation.
Any change to agreements on optional charges is a change to the enrolment agreement.
Any charge must be a reasonable one. You should be told of the charge, or given an estimate, before the information is provided.
Any child can enrol at an early learning service in New Zealand from birth until they turn . You can do this by contacting the service directly. They will talk you through what you need to do. If you havent visited the service, you can arrange a visit, with or without your child, before you sign up.
Any confidential administrative records kept in the home setting must be stored using a lockable cupboard, file box, file cabinet, drawer or room to ensure visitors to the home cannot access these.
Any damage to premises, furnishing or fittings should be removed or items replaced as soon as possible.
Any examples in the guidance are provided as a starting point to show how services can meet (or exceed) the requirement. Services may choose to use other approaches better suited to their needs as long as they comply with the criteria.
Any extension must be for a reasonable period of time in the circumstances.
Any external systems that connect to your school systems should have restrictive permissions. Integrations should be monitored as part of periodic reviews. Access should be revoked when no longer needed.
Any fixed outdoor equipment should meet current New Zealand safety standards.
Any food is prepared, served, and stored hygienically.
Any furnishing or fittings not fit for purpose should be removed from play areas until remedial action can be taken. Items can then be repaired or replaced as soon as possible.
Any furnishing or fittings not fit for purpose should be removed from play areas until remedial action can be taken. Items can then be repaired or replaced as soon as possible. If your playgroup is in rented premises talk to your landlord about who is responsible for repairing or replacing furniture, furnishings and fittings.
Any government agency or statutory body that a homebased education and care service is required to notify if there is a serious (or as defined) injury, illness, incident or allegation. This may include but is not limited to:
Any government agency or statutory body that an early childhood education and care service is required to notify if there is a serious (or as defined) injury, illness, incident or allegation. This may include but is not limited to:
Any handwashing facilities in the ECE activity room need to meet the particular requirements of the children using them.
Any historic documentation stored at a head office needs to be easily retrievable when required.
Any historic documentation stored offsite needs to be easily retrievable when required.
Any information gathering we carry out is done in accordance with relevant internal processes and procedures, and in accordance with internal delegations and authorisations. Our processes and activities are reviewed when required to ensure compliance with the law, and with our internal policies and procedures.
Any issues with the layout of the premises that limit supervision should be included on the hazard register.
Any optional charge for an excursion must be for the education and care of the child and be able to be separated out and measured.
Any other people present.
Any other qualification should be completed within years of enrolment.
Any over funding of Targeted Funding is repayable by the early learning service to the Ministry.
Any overpayments that occur due to overclaims on the EC form are recovered by the Ministry in the next available washup payment. If a service is not due to receive sufficient funding to cover the overpayment, the Ministry will invoice the service for the funding owed and payment is due immediately.
Any overpayments that occur due to overclaims on this RS form are repayable to the Ministry immediately.
Any personal information you supply will only be used by the Ministry and the thirdparty service providers who support the Learner Identity Broker service as permitted by the Privacy Act .
Any policy could include actions the service will take and how they will communicate with
Any potentially harmful substances or materials must be made inaccessible. This will include cleaning products and medicines, but may also include face, body andor hair products used by other members of the family.
Any previous relevant work experience that has occurred more than years ago should not be credited.
Any previous relevant work experience that has occurred within the past years should be credited as halfservice up to a maximum of years service.
Any previous relevant work experience that has occurred within the past years should be credited as halfservice up to a maximum of two steps.
Any questions, more than happy to answer them.
Any request that lacks due particularity will not be valid. If this is the case, we may contact you to clarify your request.
Any service applying for a licence to operate a homebased ECE service must provide evidence of anticipated or expected enrolments with their application.
Any sleeping child must be monitored as required by HS Sleep monitoring.
Any split of funding payments should be negotiated between past and present ownership. Legal and financial advisers should assist negotiations.
Any substance used for a therapeutic purpose and includes prescription and nonprescription preparations having the meaning assigned to these under Appendix .
Any substance used for a therapeutic purpose and includes prescription and nonprescription preparations having the meaning assigned to these under Appendix .
Any windows or other areas of glass accessible to children are either:
Anyone aged years or above who lives in a home where homebased education and care is being provided must be Police vetted:
Anyone can make a complaint if they are concerned or not satisfied with a situation, process or decision at an early learning service.
Anyone can report suspected abuse or neglect of a child or young person.
Anyone can report suspected abuse or neglect of a child.
Anyone involved in the procurement who has an actual, potential or perceived conflict of interest must sign a declaration.
Anyone should report concerns about possible abuse or neglect of a child or young person to
Anyone who is in New Zealand can request official information.
Anyone who works with children must be safety checked.
AoDC work together with a range of other agencies including:
AoDC work together with families and educators to find the best ways to support your child. They provide ongoing advice and guidance on communication, language development and learning through early childhood and into school.
Appendix : Allday and sessional kindergartens for the funding rate table
Appendix : First aid kit requirements for criterion PF
Appendix : First aid kit requirements for criterion PF
Appendix : First aid kit suggestions
Appendix : First aid requirements for criterion PF
Appendix : First aid requirements for criterion PF
Appendix : Funding rates
Appendix : Funding rates tables
Appendix : Supporting the children on session
Appendix of the ECE funding handbook
Appendix : Categories of medicine HS
Appendix : Categories of medicine for criterion HS
Appendix : Characteristics of infants, toddlers and young children
Appendix : Infectious diseases for criterion HS
Appendix : Resources and examples
Appendix : Categories of medicine for criterion HS
Appendix contains the salary scales for Education and Care and Hospitalbased services, including minimum salary scales from January as well as the updates that will be available from November .
Appendix contains the salary scales for Education and Care and Hospitalbased services, including minimum salary scales from January as well as updates that are available from November including:
Appendix : Salary scales for education and care services
Appendix : Tessa learns about physics
Application for a transitional advance.
Application for approval as an Exchange Programme Organisation NZ
Application for change of service quality rate for early childhood services.
Application for exemption from absence rule for special andor health needs.
Application form for intermediate, secondary and area schools with Years to .
Application form for primary schools with Years to .
Application of the person responsible ratio
Application to receive Equity Funding
Application to receive Equity Funding for providing early childhood education in a language and culture other than English.
Applications and online systems
Applications can also be started by parents. You will receive a notification to view and complete the application before it can be submitted to us.
Applications close in the third week of November.
Applications for Component A are not necessary. The Ministry of Education calculates the EQI for each licensed ECE service and notifies services that are eligible for funding.
Applications for Component B are not necessary. The Ministry of Education calculates the EQI for each service and notifies services that are eligible for funding.
Applications for Component C require attestation. Services that believe they are eligible for this component should complete the EC Language and Culture other than English (including sign language) Form.
Applications for Component D are not necessary. The Ministry of Education calculates the Isolation Index for each new service, using census information and the physical location of the service.
Applications for new or amended services should be submitted at least one full school term before the service is required. If the availability of transport is going to affect enrolment decisions for a family, discuss this with your learning support coordinator or manager at your regional office.
Applications for the ATIS are not necessary. The Ministry identifies eligible services using the Isolation Indices and funding data. Eligible services will be advised of their receipt of ATIS on the ECE Funding Notice that accompanies their July funding payment.
Applications must be submitted online. You must check that all the fields in the application are filled in before you send it to us. Any missing information will delay your application from being processed.
Applications open in the first week of November.
Applies only to services licensed for under yearolds
Apply absence rules when submitting the service RS Return. Retain the EC HB with the approval letter for your records.
Apply at least a full school term before the service is needed. It can take time for our transport providers to organise a vehicle and driver. We may also need to make alterations to school property.
Apply for a boarding allowance
Apply for a licence for a centrebased service
Apply for a licence for homebased service
Apply for a licence or certification
Apply for an early learning service licence
Apply for an early learning service licence or certification
Apply for extraordinary roll growth funding
Apply for school transport assistance
Apply for your boarding allowance by October.
Apply to the Teaching Council to become a certificated teacher.
Applying for a conveyance allowance
Applying for a review of your EQI
Applying for a scholarship
Applying is free and normally takes to weeks.
Applying the right levels of access
Applying to be an approved EPO
Appointment policies and procedures are clear, reflect the requirements of current legislation, provide managers with useful guidance and are regularly reviewed.
Approach to improving attendance in schools
Appropriate adult:child ratios
Appropriate adult:child ratios.
Appropriate rules and behavioural boundaries are consistently and positively applied.
Approved safety check service
Are adults able to have breaks (or noncontact time) out of sight of the children if they wish
Are different types of laundry washed separately to prevent cross infection for example kitchen and bathroom linen separated from bedding linen for example
Are different types of laundry washed separately to prevent cross infection, for example, kitchen and bathroom linen separated from bedding linen
Are our relationships with
Are soiled nappies stored and disposed of or given to parents to take home for disposal
Are the safety procedures in the building being maintained
Are they struggling with anything
Are we doing what we are required to
Are we following our policies and procedures
Area School Teachers Collective Agreement
Area school principals covered by a collective agreement from April are not eligible to get a bus controller allowance.
Areas of concrete or paving are also suitable for outdoor activity, provided they have been laid correctly. Both types generally drain well and have the advantage of needing little maintenance. However, they are hard and abrasive and cannot be used as a safety surface.
Areas of decking, concrete or paving are also suitable for outdoor activity, provided they do not pose any other hazards. Both types generally drain well and have the advantage of needing little maintenance. However, they are hard and abrasive and cannot be used as a safety surface.
Areas used for storage of sleep furniture should be dry and well aired.
Areas which are primarily for adults such as the office are sometimes used for additional storage. Care should be taken to ensure that by doing this, noone is exposed to the possibility of injury from tripping or falling over poorly stacked or stored items or resources.
Aroha is conditionally enrolled to attend from to Monday through Friday.
Arrived From Another Service flag (permanent staff only).
Artificial grass has the advantage of being lowmaintenance and, if correctly laid, usable in all weather. For safety reasons, only use artificial grass that is laid over a base of sand, not plastic beads. Artificial grass can be abrasive to bare skin and can also harbour pathogens if not cleaned regularly.
Artificial intelligence has been around for a while, powering technology like predictive text. It is quickly becoming more widely available to more people, in freetouse and paid tools and services.
As Crown entities, school boards are expected to follow government procurement rules. To simplify these rules, we have developed a procurement process for use on schoolled property projects.
As I said, mark, we are not clear about the difference
As I said, we have left that untouched.
As a general rule, things help to reduce noise.
As a general rule, things help to reduce noise:
As a general rule, public transport generally offers less risk than using private vehicles. If private vehicles are used, consider the following:
As a minimum, records should include the:
As a progress tool, it is best to save iterations of the file as you go so you can go back a step or two in case you lose track of changes and updates.
As a progress tool, it is best to save iterations of the file as you go so you can go back a step or two, if you lose track of where you are in developing the Kiwi Park model for the school.
As a service provider, you can certify a photocopy of an original qualification.
As all bathrooms are set up differently, it is important to work alongside licensing staff to meet this requirement.
As children learn to make sense of their world and develop working theories, they develop an understanding of themselves and others in social contexts, including the early childhood service.
As children learn to make sense of their world and develop working theories, they develop an understanding of themselves in social contexts including the early childhood service.
As members of an early childhood education service, we belong to a community of weavers, working together to provide the best possible learning and teaching for children.
As much as possible, the design and layout of homes should not make it too difficult for the educator (as the only adult present) to actively supervise all children attending.
As parent helpers are a key part of adult:child ratio they are critical to the success of the supervision and health and safety on an excursion. Take some time to think through what they need to know about expectations of them, and how to communicate this to them. Consider the following:
As part of Budget Minister Simmonds has announced changes relating to Fees Free, Apprenticeship Boost, Tertiary funding and Overseas student loan interest rates.
As part of the introduction of Te Kura Rau Itis enrolment scheme, some adjustments to the enrolment scheme of Te Uho o Te Nikau are also proposed.
As safe practice, have adults accompanying the children travelling in a private vehicle. The exception to this would be where a parent was transporting only their own children.
As safe practice, have two adults accompanying the children travelling in a private vehicle. The exception to this would be where a parent was transporting only their own children.
As well as being unclimbable, structures, fences and gates should not be hazardous to attending children and adults or to the public.
As well as being warm, children should be safe while they sleep. Advice on safe sleeping to reduce risk of Sudden Unexpected Death of an Infant (SUDI) is available here:
As with all child protection matters, we have a commitment to keep children safe, and this must always come first. You should carefully consider whether volunteers at school, or those participating in school activities, should be Police vetted. You should strongly consider Police vetting volunteers who have regular, overnight, or on contact with children.
As with the ECE Funding Subsidy, Equity Funding may not exceed six hours per childplace per day (or per child for Hours ECE), to a maximum of hours per childplace per week (or per child for Hours ECE).
As you are well aware, the model has been evolving and improvements have been made over the past ten years with input from the sector including changes to reporting requirements in public sector accounting standards.
As young children make sense of their world through active exploration and interaction it is important to give children real and authentic experiences with quality objects and materials.
As your stock of outdoor equipment grows it could also be useful to purchase a lockable outdoor shed.
Ashburton Kindergarten Association
Assemble the evaluation team
Assess the likelihood and impact of identified risks.
Assessment and aromatawai
Assessment for all children should be consistent with the principles of
Assets acquired by lease or higher purchase do not generate cash transactions in the bank account other than paying the periodic instalments. We need to check that the preset adjustment is working correctly in column Q. In our example, the school signed new leases for equipment worth ,. The purchase on row Q is set off against lease liabilities on row Q.
Assistance is also available from
Assurance over the procurement of bus services Tender
Assurance over the procurement of school bus services
At a minimum, the teacher must hold a current New Zealand practising certificate and a recognised ECE or primary teaching qualification. It is up to the teacher to provide evidence of their qualifications and previous work experience.
At a sessional service, there may be occasions when an older child needs to rest or sleep. Services need adequate facilities to cater for these times. How a service provides these facilities depends on what suits their particular centre layout and operation.
At least of required staff must have a recognised early learning teaching qualification.
At least of the adults who work with children at teacherled services must be qualified early learning teachers, but some may have more than this.
At other times infants need adults to talk with them, anticipate their interest, actions and requirements as well as provide new opportunities and experiences.
At schools using cohort entry, children can start on one of set dates throughout the year.
At some points in the handbook there are best practice tips your service may want to try (or may already be using).
At the afternoon session, certificated teacher (Leilani) was working. Leilani was counted towards regulated (ratio) staff for a further hours.
At the afternoon session, one certificated teacher (Leilani) was working. Leilani was counted towards regulated (ratio) staff for a further hours.
At the end of each month check the attendance pattern of each child in your service.
At the end of the day, this really is all about you
At the end of the next month
At this stage, the Ministry is taking an educative approach to assessing the NELP.
Attach a preprinted deposit slip from your bank showing the bank account number or
Attached teacher funding and staffing entitlements
Attendance Management Plans
Attendance action plan: Second phase of initiatives for school attendance
Attendance and achievement
Attendance code decision tree
Attendance codes comparison table
Attendance codes questions and answers
Attendance information collected
Attendance management plans for school boards
Attendance presentation with talking points
Attendance records also ensure that licence maximums are not exceeded.
Attendance records are used by the Ministry of Education to verify that the children have attended the service as claimed and to identify when a child is absent, and to verify that the absence rules have been applied correctly.
Attendance records may be kept in a form to suit the service. However, all services must include all of the following:
Attendance records must be marked daily for safety reasons and in order to keep accurate records for funding claims.
Attendance records serve a number of purposes for funding. They:
Attendance records which include the full name and age of each child that participated at any time during the day and the location of attendance (ward or playroom).
Attendance school newsletter template
Attending a school that is not your nearest one
Attending a stateintegrated school
Attest (Certificated teacher salary)
Attestation (of certificated teacher salaries)
Attestation for Waha Rumaki
Attestation of certificated teachers salaries
Attestation on the RS return
Attestation should be continued to acknowledge the skills of
Attestation was originally introduced as an interim measure for
Auckland Kindergarten Association
Audio summary Action Plan for Pacific Education for
Audit report prepared by a member of the New Zealand Institute of Chartered Accountants
Audited annual financial statements form part of your school or kura annual report. Learn about the timeline and process for producing them.
Audited general purpose financial statements or special purpose financial report.
Auditor must not also prepare statements
Audits and financial statements
Authorisation and acknowledgement
Avoid over stacking both on top of and inside cupboards.
Avoid using common phrases or sayings. Some examples of weak passphrases are:
Avoid using personal information
Babies are not allowed to have bottles in bed or cots at an early learning service.
Background information that explains the what, where, when and why of funding.
Balancing activities to ensure risk is minimised.
BarrierFree Access: Great education opportunities and outcomes are within reach for every learner.
Barry Avenue (Behind Cromwell College)
Base Funding Rates are available to services who pay at least Base Salary Scale (Step ).
Base Funding Rates are available to services who pay at least Step .
Base Salary Scale (Step )
Base Salary Scale (Step ).
Base funding rates which reflect the proportion of certificated teacher hours used are available to services that agree to pay all employed certificated teachers at least the amount specified at Step of the salary scale.
Base salary scale (Step )
Base salary scale example: November funding period
Based on this advice, the Government may adjust the value of some, or all, of the funding rates.
Basic elements of audit report
Basic food hygiene is important to avoid outbreaks of foodborne illness at Playgroups.
Basic food hygiene is important to avoid outbreaks of foodborne illness in ECE centres.
Basic food hygiene is important to avoid outbreaks of foodborne illness in homebased services.
Be a strong enough concentration that is, . (see table below). If there is visible contamination, then use a stronger solution.
Be a strong enough concentration, that is, . (see table below). If there is visible contamination, then use a stronger solution.
Be aware of foods which are more likely to cause choking.
Be aware of foods which are more likely to cause choking:
Be clear about what is acceptable in terms of taking photographs of children on the excursion.
Be sprayed and left on for enough time to kill the bugs before wiping away (ideally minutes contact time)
Be sprayed and left on for enough time to kill the bugs before wiping away (ideally minutes contact time).
Be used on a surface free of dirtorganic material
Be used on a surface free of dirtorganic material.
Because educators do not generally have medical training, some form of training or information is required so they can do this. First aid courses do not commonly cover the correct administration of medicine, so this will not usually be sufficient.
Because home bathrooms are not designed for the exclusive use of attending children, educators need to think about how children using these facilities can be kept safe. Cleaning procedures also need to be implemented to ensure body wash facilities are hygienic before and after use.
Beds are single level sleep furniture where the upper surface of the mattress is less than mm above the floor. Children are able to get in and out of a bed without adult assistance.
Beehive Press release (Braille)
Before a person is employed or engaged as a childrens worker, as defined in the Childrens Act , a safety check as required by that Act must be completed.
Before completing the RS Return, ensure that you have read Chapter Hours ECE.
Before establishing a programme, your school should consider:
Before issuing a NELP, the Minister must, at a minimum, consult with stakeholders in the early childhood and compulsory education sectors.
Before purchasing new equipment or safety surfacing, service providers should ensure the product has been tested against the specifications of NZS : and the manufacturer can supply a certificate of compliance for that product.
Before purchasing, request evidence from the manufacturersupplier that the product is effective against:
Before starting the application, you should read our guide (document above). This explains what information you need to provide.
Before you begin these sessions, we recommend you download a current copy of the appropriate Kiwi Park model for your school from the Ministry website.
Before you enrol, you can ask questions to make sure you understand all costs and payments.
Before you make an OIA request
Before you start making a claim
Before you start your application, check you are applying for the right type of allowance and that you meet the criteria.
Before you start, it is important to understand the different types of early learning options available. That way you can enrol your child at one that suits your
Before you undertake any building work at the centre (including the building of fences or outdoor play structures), the local council should be contacted to see if building consent is required.
Begin preparing the plan that you will follow throughout the procurement process.
Beginning and ceasing to offer Hours ECE funding:
Behaviour code of conduct
Being out of New Zealand could change what allowance you receive:
Being outside the licensed premises whilst receiving education and care from the service but does not include an outing for the purposes of:
Being outside the licensed premises whilst receiving education and care from the services but does not include an outing for the purposes of:
Below are some additional sources of information for support around hazard and risk management.
Below are some additional sources of information for support around risk management:
Below are some examples of an enrolment form and attendance record. The examples include mandatory requirement. You could consider adding information, changing the layout, wording, titles and so on to suit your own playgroup.
Below are some suggestions for uses of Component A funding:
Below are some suggestions for uses of Component B funding:
Below are some suggestions for uses of Component C funding:
Below are some suggestions for uses of Component D funding:
Below is the August attendance register for Kristen:
Below is the February attendance register for Vijay:
Below is the number of hours Sione attended each day during November:
Below shows the funding process for services claiming their first advance of Hours ECE funding.
Beware of environmental noise from outside the home such as road works or construction nearby and try to ensure that negative effects are reduced where possible. If possible, the educator should attempt to ascertain the length of time the noise might occur and if appropriate make contingency plans:
Beware of environmental noise from outside the service such as road works or construction nearby and try to ensure that the negative effect is reduced where possible.
Beware of environmental noise from outside the service such as roadworks or construction nearby and try to ensure that the negative effect is reduced where possible.
Beware of plantings (trees) and placement of moveable equipment that negate the height of the fence.
Big changes can lead to your child having strong emotions about school. If your child doesnt want to go to school, its important to offer them support as early as possible.
Black on white background
Black a on a white background
Black a on white background
Black tick on a white background
Black hash on white background
Black tick on white background
Blisters on the body which burst and turn into scabby sores
Boarding allowances application
Boarding allowances for Years to
Boards can close their school for an additional halfdays per year that need to be made up, for purposes to be determined by the board based on the criteria for closing.
Boards cannot offset under and overuse during the course of the school year.
Boards have ministerial approval to close their schools for instruction during term time for up to halfdays per year.
Boards have statutory responsibilities to operate enrolment schemes. They are governed under sections and schedule of the Education and Training Act .
Boards may vary the start and end time of the school day but must first consult with parents, staff and their community. They do not need approval from us.
Boards members of state and stateintegrated schools and
Boards must implement the finalised scheme. Enrolment schemes can be amended and remain in place until the Secretary decides that it is no longer necessary to have an enrolment scheme in place to manage overcrowding in that school. The Board remains responsible for the daytoday administration of an enrolment scheme (for example, determining the number of places available for outofzone students).
Boards of state and stateintegrated schools and kura must follow regulations when setting term dates and opening times.
Boards of state or integrated schools wishing to open an early childhood education (ECE) service must establish a separate legal entity for the ECE service.
Books or other items to entertain children if there are any delays.
Breaksabsences of minutes or more must be recorded on the Staff Record to maintain transparency and may be counted as one discretionary hour.
Breaksabsences under minutes do not need to be recorded on the Staff Record.
Briefing Note Ministry response to the ERO report on new teachers
Briefing Note: Overview of the Teaching Councils functions
Briefing note Cabinet paper August (English)
Briefing notes and reports
Broken glass presents a safety risk to children and adults. Children can be seriously injured if they fall against or strike unprotected windows, doors and mirrors. The most effective way of ensuring children and adults do not receive injuries from broken glass is to either prevent the glass from being broken or by ensuring that if the glass is broken it does not cut or pierce the skin.
Budget provides . billion in focused supports for the education sector. This funding will lift achievement and provide a world leading education for every child.
Budget provides a million investment in the teacher workforce of the future.
Building stronger links between services, parents and
Building teacher capability to meet diverse learning needs.
Buildings constructed offsite and delivered to schools are flexible and can be designed for teaching, staff and student support spaces.
Bulletins and newsletters
Bullying can be serious. You can report bullying to the police if it involves:
Bullying can be verbal, physical or involve harming peoples reputation or relationships. It can happen in person or online.
Bullying is a deliberately harmful behaviour directed at a person or group. It can be visible but often takes place out of sight. It involves a power imbalance and is usually repeated over time. It is different to
Bullying: help and support for your child
Bunk beds and elevated beds
Bunk beds are those where multiple beds are stacked on top of each other and the upper surface of the mattress is mm or more above the floor.
Bunk beds are those where multiple beds are stacked on top of each other and the upper surface of the mattress is mm or more above the floor. Elevated beds are those where the upper surface of the mattress is mm or more above the floor.
Bus controller for head schools
Bus controllers are the point of contact for students, parents or caregivers and the schools Transport Delivery Advisor (TDA) for all school transport issues. They also supervise loading and unloading of the bus at their school.
Bus controllers must be trained. This can be done online on our education learning management system.
Bus safety and behaviour management
But again, that will be down to a school,
But have a fantastic day. Thank you very much.
But in the primary setting, when youre sort
But it is, it historically has been in, in school policy.
But some schools have a policy of starting children at school together as a group at the start of each term (cohort entry).
But there is, um, for students with learning support needs,
But yeah, just a reminder, anything
But yeah, just to reiterate, three thresholds
But yeah, we would definitely do our best
But, um, so with that said,
But, um, yeah, we will look to, uh, formally
By paying at least the salary amounts specified in these four salary scales to all employed certificated teachers, Education and Care and Hospitalbased services are eligible for higher funding rates. Please note the names for the salary scales and the addition of the Full Parity Salary Scale.
By signing this declaration, I am confirming that this funding claim is made in accordance with the conditions outlined in the current Early Childhood Education Funding Handbook and that the Ministry can withhold all or some of the funding if there is a breach of any of these conditions.
By submitting, posting or displaying your content on any of our social media accounts, you grant the Ministry of Education a nonexclusive, transferable, sublicensable, royaltyfree, worldwide licence to use that content.
C Curriculum consistency
C Developing social competence
C Opportunities for parents
C Developing social competence
C Acknowledgement of tangata whenua
C Languagerich environment
CERT NZ has advice for protecting your network attached storage (NAS):
CERT NZ has guidance on how to enforce the principle of least privilege and how to decide which permissions to give.
Cabinet Paper CABMIN Minister Stanford
Cabinet Paper CABMIN University Freedom of Speech Legislation
Cabinet Paper and Minutes Scope and Terms of Reference of the Review (September )
Cabinet agreed on December to amend the Education and Training Act so that:
Cabinet paper CABMIN Minister Stanford Improved teacher training
Cabinet paper Report back and recommendations for change: Braille
Cabinet paper: Attendance action plan second phase initiatives
Cabinet paper: Report back, recommendations for change (EN)
Calculate the FCH claim using the actual booked hours for the day(s) of emergency closure.
Calculating hours ECE entitlement
Calculating advance days:
Calculating funded child hours for Hours ECE Funding:
Calculating funded child hours for the ECE Funding Subsidy:
Calculating pay parity salary steps
Calculating staff hours for the RS Return:
Calculating the Hours ECE Funding:
Calculating the ECE Funding Subsidy:
Calculating the Staff Hour Count:
Caleb is enrolled in a homebased service from .am to .pm on Mondays and Fridays, and .am to .pm on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays. He is also enrolled in kindergarten from . to .pm on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays. His parents choose to allocate Hours ECE hours to both the homebased service and the kindergarten. This might look like:
Calendar invites should be sent to the IT lead to remind them to:
Call the Ministry of Healths free helpline to enrol with your local Community Oral Health Service.
Call their parents or emergency contact to either come home or collect them as soon as possible.
Cambridge International in New Zealand
Campylobacter: to days
Can I sign up for Cloudflare
Can count staff member towards requirement
Can it be cleaned easily
Can see it Good. Okay. Cool. Bananas.
Can you just outline, um,
Canterbury Westland Kindergarten Association Incorporated
Canterbury, Chatham Islands
Careers New Zealand provides information and advice to help you make good decisions about work, study and training. It also provides information about scholarships.
Careful positioning of the educator to ensure they are observing the children and are close enough to intervene promptly to prevent injury.
Careful supervision is necessary for young children if there are hot taps in the bathroom to prevent scalding. Older children can be taught about hot water safety.
Carefully read the terms and conditions of use. Many AI models will reuse your prompts and the data you provide it to continue to learn and train. Make sure you do not enter copyright, confidential, personal, or sensitive information into these models.
Caregivers are primarily responsible for getting their children to school, but for some students, where distance is a barrier to getting to school or kura, transport assistance may be available.
Caregivers need to complete the SESTA review request form below and send it to us.
Caregivers, service providers, and the Ministry all have a role in ensuring SESTA services operate efficiently and meet the needs of students.
Caroline Adams (Palmerston North)
Carrying out daily hazard checks and addressing any identified risks is an important part of ensuring attending children experience a safe and healthy learning environment. The person responsible does not have to carry out the daily checks, but they must ensure that daytoday health and safety risks and hazards are identified, and appropriate steps are taken to ensure any associated actions to keep children safe have been taken.
Casual Education and Care Services.
Casual education and care service
Casual education and care services.
Casually and conditionally enrolled children
Catalogue of tools and online services
Catchment plans support conversations about longterm planning and investment with these stakeholders and drive greater collaboration and joined up planning.
Categories of medicine for criterion HS
Caution when completing the attestation for certificated teachers salaries
Censor classifications can be used as a guide, however material should be listened to or previewed to check for suitability before sharing it with children.
Censor classifications can be used as a guide, however you should preview or listen to material to check for suitability before sharing it with children.
Censor classifications can be used as a guide. However, any material should be checked for suitability before sharing it with children.
Censor classifications on DVDs and games can be used as a guide, however material should be listened to or previewed to check for suitability before sharing it with children.
Central Kids Kindergarten Trust
Central Pacific not further defined.
Centralised use of funding should only take place with the full agreement of the service to which the ATIS is due.
Centrebased ECE excursion planning checklist
Centrebased ECE excursion risk assessment
Centrebased ECE licensing criterion HS requires that the actions specified in this appendix are taken for any person (adult or child) suffering from particular infectious diseases.
Centrebased ECE licensing criterion HS requires parental consent for administering medicine, following the requirements for each category.
Centrebased ECE record of special excursions
Centrebased daily hazard checklist
Centrebased early learning services include:
Centrebased, teacherled services
Centres are required to keep a record of each emergency drill. At a minimum, this should record:
Centres have indoor and outdoor areas. The outdoor play areas are open all year, including in winter. The indoor spaces may be separated into activity areas such as dressup clothes, books, building blocks, or musical instruments.
Centres have to use clean sheets and blankets that are not shared between children. They must also provide safe bedding. An example is no pillows for children under .
Centres in rural or isolated areas that are not on a town water supply and use bores or water tanks must meet the Drinking Water Standards for New Zealand.
Centres must ensure that children who sit or stand when they wake have room to do so. Children who can pull themselves to a standing position should not be placed in the top cot for safety reasons.
Centres must ensure that during cooking activities children are closely supervised if they are to have access to the fridge and, if possible, any medicines are stored out of the reach of children.
Centres must have a child protection policy that meets the Childrens Acts requirements.
Centres must make the policy and information about its practices available to parents as required by criterion GMA Parent access to information.
Centres need adequate facilities to cater for occasions when an older child needs to rest or sleep. How a service provides these facilities depends on what suits their particular centre layout and operation.
Centres need to be designed and laid out so the physical environment supports the way the curriculum can be provided. Activity spaces need to be configured to allow for a range of learning experiences, as well as meeting the minimum space per child requirement. Centres must have sufficient indoor space for group learning, and outdoor space must be of a size and shape that does not restrict different kinds of physical activity.
Centres need to decide who provides any infant formula and bottles. If formula is provided, parental approval of the brandtype is required before it is used. If the usual brandtype is unavailable, parental approval of any substitute is also required prior to use.
Centres need to ensure there is adequate hygienic storage for this purpose such as wall hooks for linen bags. A cupboard or area which children cannot access is useful.
Centres need to first determine which emergency drills are relevant to their location and carry out each type of drill with children (as appropriate) on an, at least, monthly basis.
Centres need to first determine which emergency drills are relevant to their location, and then carry each of these drills out with children at least every months.
Centres should consider children with additional needs.
Centres should consider the age of the children at the service and ensure there are sufficient lowlevel cots for them to move into as they grow.
Centres should have a policy and procedure in regard to alcohol and other substances for staff, volunteers, parents and visitors to the centre.
Centres should take all reasonable steps to ensure equipment is kept in good repair and maintained regularly. A regular inspection programme to ensure equipment and surfacing are properly maintained is advised. This will ensure any necessary repairs and maintenance can be completed promptly.
Centres should talk with regional Ministry of Education ECE licensing staff and Fire and Emergency New Zealand personnel about the best options for their particular situation.
Centres will need to ensure that animals, including those brought to the centre, can be properly restrained at all times. This could include a procedure outlining:
Centres with large outdoor areas may also consider securing an additional first aid kit in an outdoor storage area for quick access.
Centresservices cannot rely on a safety check done by a different employer (either current or previous) as the check was not done on their behalf. They must carry out all of the components themselves.
Centresservices that engage a relief teacher independently (that is, not through an agency) will need to complete the safety check. Once this has been done, the completed check can be relied on for up to years by the centreservice.
Certificated (ratio) staff: B
Certificated Playgroup funding is not covered in this Handbook.
Certificated Playgroups are not eligible to receive targeted funding.
Certificated Teacher Hours are the total number of hours worked by all certificated teachers in a service at times when they were counted towards regulated (ratio) staff.
Certificated and Other Teacher Hour claims
Certificated kaiako eligibility
Certificated playgroups and licenceexempt services
Certificated playgroups are not eligible to receive equity funding.
Certificated teacher absences and discretionary hours
Certificated teacher eligibility
Certificated teacher hours
Certificated teacher hours: B
Certificated teacher: B
Certificated teachers are eligible to receive their allowance while on paid leave for their usual days worked.
Certificated teachers cannot receive more than one full allowance entitlement.
Certificated teachers in a management position will enter the salary scale on the K, K or K salary step, regardless of their qualifications or teaching experience.
Certificated teachers permanently employed in a teaching role or management position as per the all employed teacher definition, must be paid at least the applicable salary amounts on the Minimum Salary Scales for Certificated Teachers, according to their qualifications, recognised service and previous relevant work experience for all employed hours. This includes rostered hours, noncontact, staff meetings, paid professional learning and development.
Certificated teachers who are appointed to a Management Position will enter the salary scale on the management salary step.
Certificated teachers who work across more than one eligible service will receive the allowance at a prorata rate.
Certificates are issued to Playgroups under the Education (Playgroups) Regulations .
Certificates set the standard for curriculum, ratio, premises and facilities, health and safety practices and administration.
Certification Criteria for Playgroups
Certification criteria assess if playgroups meet minimum standards set by the Education (Playgroups) Regulations to retain their certificate.
Certification criteria for playgroups
Certified copies of qualifications are required. These can be certified by:
Certify that specific information is correct by signing the attestation section of the enrolment agreement form for this purpose.
Certify what criteria an education and care service or hospitalbased service is using to determine the minimum salaries it pays to all employed certificated teachers.
Change default or weak passwords to long passphrases.
Change in requirements from January
Change of bus controller form
Change of information for a SESTA student user guide
Change your bus controller
Changes that have not been signed by a parentguardian will not be considered changed for funding purposes.
Changes to a service provider bank account must be made using an RS change of bank account form.
Changes to enrolment schemes
Changes to onduty adults
Changes to the Education and Training Act to progress priorities and support the health of the education system
Changing optional charge agreements
Changing the funding rates
Chapter How to use this handbook
Chapter : Equity funding
Chapter : Record keeping
Chapter : Financial reporting
Chapter : Targeted Funding for Disadvantage
Chapter : Collection of information
Chapter Recovery of early childhood education funding
Chapter : How the Ministry funds services
Chapter contains further information on the ECE Funding Subsidy.
Chapter : The ECE Funding Subsidy
Chapter contains eligibility requirements for Hours ECE.
Chapter : Hours Early Childhood Education
Chapter contains further information on the ATIS.
Chapter : Other ECE funding
Chapter of the ECE funding handbook details what is required in keeping attendance records. Attendance records may be kept in a form to suit the service.
Chapter : Recording enrolment, attendance and absence
Chapter Emergency Closure
Chapter : Special circumstances
Chapter : Completing the RS return
Charges for enrolment and joining a waiting list are not subsidised.
Charter School Agency website
Charter schools are a new type of statefunded school operated under a contract between the Crown and a sponsor (an organisation or business approved by the independent Charter School Authorisation Board).
Chartered Accountants of Australia and New Zealand
Check for duplicate codes column G to column CR or omitted codes school trial balance input column I.
Check out our range of guides, helping you to plan for the diverse learning and wellbeing needs of all
Check out our range of online resources designed for parents and young people to build your online safety knowledge.
Check that all trial balance codes are mapped. See trial balance converters cell G and school trial balance input column I.
Check that at least person responsible is on the premises supervising the adults and children at all times.
Check that column C, D, E and F all equal zero by selecting each column header and save the blank file
Check that cups and eating utensils are washed thoroughly in hot water.
Check that the downloaded financial statements are blank.
Check the amount of your entitlement first
Check the financial statements are really blank.
Check with your service about what you need to pay if some services are not provided at times, such as food. This could be during a holiday period.
Check you are an authorized user of the School Data Portal.
Check you have the signed original documents at hand as per the checklist.
Check your figures from your worksheet section by section.
Checklist of actions for Term
Child Disability Allowance documentation
Child Matters also has information on how to handle disclosures of child abuse, and indicators of child abuse.
Child Protection Policy for the Ministry of Education
Child health and wellbeing
Child information collected
Child protection eLearning resource
Child protection in schools
Child protection online training
Child protection policies for early learning services
Child protection policies for schools
Childs Matters Creating a Safe Organisation resource has guidance on developing child protection policies and safe working practices.
Childcare centre budget template
Childcare subsidy and hours ECE
Children and adults who handle animals need to practice sound handwashing procedures afterwards.
Children and educators use their first languages and extend their vocabularies in both
Children are actively engaged in investigation and sustained exploration.
Children are allowed to stand on school buses.
Children are aware of their own ancestral heritage and the history of
Children are only offered genuine choice.
Children are seated while eating
Children are supervised and seated while eating.
Children are supervised while eating
Children are supported by educators to be actively involved in assessing their own learning, doing things such as telling their own learning stories.
Children are washed when they are soiled or pose a health risk to themselves or others.
Children can no longer attend a service after its licence is cancelled.
Children can still attend the service while the issue is addressed.
Children cannot attend a service while a licence is suspended.
Children cannot be in a position to leave the licensed premises without the knowledge of the educator.
Children display a strong sense of environmental awareness and care, including consideration of both the natural (living) world and the physical (nonliving) environment.
Children eating outside need protection from the sun during this time. If possible, locate outdoor eating places under trees, shade sails, covered decks, sun umbrellas and covered pergolas.
Children enrolled on Fridays are not automatically enrolled on Good Friday unless Good Friday is specifically cited in their enrolment agreement.
Children enrolled on Mondays are not automatically enrolled on Labour Day unless Labour Day is specifically cited in their enrolment agreement.
Children gaining confidence in, and control of their bodies, and developing an understanding of how to keep physically healthy, is an important aspect of learning which playgroups are required to support.
Children have appropriate access to varied environments that they can explore and investigate.
Children have opportunities to share aspects of their culture with others in the service.
Children interact positively with other children of different ages, backgrounds, gender, abilities andor ethnic groups.
Children know the limits and boundaries of acceptable behaviour.
Children learn about the history of local
Children learn by interacting with people and with their environment. The furniture, equipment and resources provided for children will have an impact upon their learning, and how they view themselves and others.
Children learn by interacting with people and with their environment. The furniture, equipment, and resources provided for children will have an impact upon their learning and how they view themselves and others.
Children learn by interacting with people and with their environment. The furniture, equipment, and resources provided for children will have an impact upon their learning.
Children learn by interacting with people and with their environment. The furniture, equipment, and resources you provide will influence their learning and the way they view themselves and others. Your choice of furniture, equipment and resources can help you to meet the curriculum standard.
Children learn through all their senses, so select some play items that encourage the use of smell, touch, sound and vision.
Children may be enrolled at more than early childhood education (ECE) service but funding cannot be claimed by services for the same hours of attendance. Parentsguardians must attest that their child is not enrolled at another service for the same times (see Section for more details on enrolment records).
Children may be enrolled into a service even if a parentcaregiver cannot provide identity documentation.
Children may not be counted as participating when they are in emergency attendance, in an operating theatre, in a neonatal unit or are taking part in an activity initiated by a person other than an adult providing education and care.
Children may share a childplace during the day.
Children must not be enrolled for the same times (e.g. between am and pm on Mondays) at more than service.
Children not having access to liquids or food while in bed.
Children participate in decisions that affect them, choosing their own challenges and learning opportunities from a range of resources and equipment.
Children play, grow and feel the world around them.
Children receiving Hours ECE cannot receive childcare assistance from Work and Income for the hours of Hours ECE. The only exception is when homebased educator top up payments are applied for the hours of Hours ECE. Families may be eligible for childcare assistance from Work and Income to help with the cost of homebased educator top up payments.
Children receiving any Hours ECE at your service must not be included in the and overs estimate. Count them separately as your Hours ECE funding.
Children require sufficient restful sleep to become selfmanaging, be effective learners and to make the most of the learning opportunities provided by ECE. Services are encouraged to actively engage in discussions with parents for guidance on the sleep requirements for their child and how these can best be met in a manner consistent with the regulations. The designated space(s) should recognise cultural practices of the communities.
Children should always be supervised at play, both indoors and outdoors, and especially where there are carpentry tools or water play.
Children sitting directly on grass or safety surfaces such as bark or matting should be encouraged to keep uncovered food on a plate or in their lunch box. This will reduce the chance of food becoming contaminated from contact with the ground.
Children sometimes sweat when they sleep, and bedwetting accidents do occur from time to time. Damp or soiled mattresses can be a breeding ground for bacteria.
Children under years of age who are enrolled at an ECE service may attend school as part of a transitional school visit.
Children use a variety of ways to communicate, including nonverbal communication through art, movement and music.
Children usually eat main meals together in a dedicated eating space. Some centres will also do snack time together. Others will make
Children who are years old do not legally need to be enrolled at a school yet. If your child is when you apply for an exemption, it will come into effect when they turn .
Children who are Deaf or hard of hearing can get support with their education until they leave school.
Children who are Deaf or hard of hearing have long term or permanent hearing loss. This could be in or both ears and includes auditory neuropathy disorder. We can provide support from identification of hearing loss until the end of school.
Children who are able to sit or stand up are not to be placed in the upper level of multilevel cots, as they could be injured or fall from the cot when attempting to get up. Once children are too large or mobile for the multilevel cots, they are to be moved either to a single level cot or to a stretcher or a bed.
Children who are able to stand up are not to be placed in portable cots as the portable cot could tip over when a child stands, and the child could be injured.
Children who are enrolled at more than early childhood service.
Children who have strong emotions about school or changes in their lives may start showing signs through:
Children with learning support needs or health problems may be absent more frequently. Services may apply for an exemption to the Frequent Absence Rule for these children.
Children with learning support needs or health problems may need to be absent for more than weeks. Services can apply for an exemption to the Three Week Rule for these children.
Children with learning support needs or health problems who are enrolled at services for the same hours of attendance cannot be funded for absences at both services.
Children with special health andor educational needs are fully engaged in the programme.
Children without learning support needs or health problems but who have parents or siblings with
Childrens Act guide
Childrens independence and dignity
Childrens workers who lived overseas for more than year within the last years should provide a Police certificate from the country where they lived.
Children, who can sit, are able to safely sit up in the lower level of the cots (HS).
Choosing an early learning service
Christchurch Hereford Street
Christian Education New Zealand Foundation Trust
Christmas coverage: Options for all services
Circumstances in Which Boards May Close the Schools They Administer Under the Education (When State Schools Must be Open and Closed) Regulations sl New Zealand Gazette
Claim the bus controller allowance
Claiming for hours ECE absences
Claiming the Support Grant for Provisionally Registered Teachers (removed April ):
Clean individual bedding (such as blankets, sheets, sleeping bags and pillowslips) is provided for sleeping or resting children that is sufficient to keep them warm.
Clearly identify the parent or guardian who verified the record.
Click Download certificate.
Click on File, scroll down to Print, select your preferred printer and the quantity required and click on the Print icon.
Click on the link to view the contents of the circular.
Close all Excel worksheets and open last years audited model and this years blank model.
Close contact with oral secretions. (Coughing, sneezing, and so on)
Closures are normally for or days only.
Cochlear Implant Programmes.
Code Compliance Certificate issued under Section of the Building Act for any building work undertaken, or alternatively any other documentation that shows evidence of compliance.
Code Compliance Certificate issued under Section of the Building Act for any building work undertaken, or alternatively, any other documentation that shows evidence of compliance.
Code of conduct for students
Cohort entry is where children start school for the first time in groups on set dates, rather than on or after their fifth birthday.
Cohort or group entry for children starting school
Collate the individual homebased educator absences that have occurred due to a noncontrollable health and safety issue stemming from an infectious disease, for the last calendar month into the EC HB.
Collecting daily attendance data will bring more attention to and awareness about what is happening across school attendance. It will help us identify earlier what schools might need support.
Collecting information from other sources
Collection of ECE census information as a condition of funding
Collection of attendance and enrolment information as a condition of funding
Column H is for the school to add their own noncash adjustments.
Commercial COI declaration
Common systems that use passwordless authentication include:
Communicating with parents about attendance
Communication with parents and families in newsletters or placing information on a website.
Communication with parents and families, via noticeboards and in newsletters.
Communities of Learning guide
Commuter Waka shows regional data about how people travel for work and school.
Complaints about a learning support service
Complaints about other education organisations
Complaints about the Ministry of Education
Complaints can be about a statutory appointee working in a school. This may be a specialist advisor, limited statutory manager or a commissioner.
Complaints could come from a variety of sources:
Complaints in early learning
Complaints policies and procedures
Complaints relating to employment disputes may need a different process or another agency.
Complaints will vary from minor to major and may escalate rapidly from one to the other unless they are well managed.
Complaints will vary from minor to major, and may escalate rapidly from one to the other unless they are well managed.
Complete conflict of interest declarations
Complete due diligence checks on the preferred supplier and document your findings.
Complete initial checks and evaluate the offers you have received to identify the preferred supplier.
Complete the above steps for the children who are Years and Over.
Complete the exercise until you balance the worksheet.
Completed EC and EC Forms.
Completed EC forms must be returned to the ECE Operational Funding team.
Completing the RS form:
Completing the RS return
Completing the RS return (all services): Chapter
Completing the advance days
Completing the attestation for certificated teachers salaries
Complex shapes break up and scatter sound waves, reducing noise reverberation in the room.
Complex shapes. Complex shapes break up and scatter sound waves, reducing noise reverberation in the room. Practical examples are:
Component A: Low socioeconomic communities
Component A: Low socioeconomic communities:
Component B is combined with Component A: Low Socioeconomic Communities for eligibility and entitlement purposes. This is because there is a prevalence of children from nonEnglish speaking backgrounds in low socioeconomic communities.
Component B: Special needs and nonEnglish speaking backgrounds:
Component B: Special needs, and nonEnglish speaking backgrounds (including signlanguage)
Component C: Language and culture other than English
Component C: Language and culture other than English (including sign language) provides targeted funding to support those services providing biculturalimmersion education and care programmes.
Component C: Language and culture other than English (including sign language):
Component D: Isolation recognises that isolated services will face higher costs when accessing goods and services.
Component D: Isolation:
Components of the safety check
Condition assessors visit schools and kura to assess sitewide and building elements. They make their assessment against an established condition assessment framework. Using this framework means consistent, repeatable, and comparable data is recorded across the school and portfolio.
Conditional enrolment (removed May )
Conditional or contextaware FA
Conditions of contract for consultancy services
Confirmed Auckland ballot dates for .
Conflict of Interest declaration and management plan
Conflicts of interest in property procurement
Conflicts of interest must be properly managed.
Conflicts of interest when buying goods and services
Confront systemic racism and discrimination in education.
Connections and endorsement
Connections that are easy to unclip and reclip allow furniture to be moved when needed. Consider placing fastening points at several places around the walls.
Connections that are easy to unclip and reclip allow furniture to moved when needed. Fastening points can be placed at several places around the walls (in some buildings).
Connections that are easy to unclip and reclip allow you to move furniture when you need to. You can place fastening points at several places around the walls (in some buildings).
Consecutive days, including weekends and public holidays.
Consequences of not safety checking
Consider a balance between natural products and manmade equipment and materials. Plastic products are usually cheaper and easy to clean, but they do not usually last as long or have the same aesthetic appeal as products made from natural materials.
Consider a balance between natural products and manmade equipment and materials. Quality is an important consideration when you are choosing equipment and materials. Think about the following in relation to the equipment you use:
Consider a sequential approach to hazard and risk management. For example:
Consider how the furniture, equipment and resources you provide in the centre will:
Consider how the furniture, equipment, and resources you provide in a hospitalbased service will:
Consider how the furniture, equipment, and resources you provide in the home will:
Consider in particular the style of the tap, as children bend over the hand basins often to wash hands.
Consider structuring your school AI policy to include guidance on:
Consider the travel arrangements and hazards identified at the destination when determining your adult:child ratios.
Consider the travel arrangements and hazards identified on the way to and at the destination when determining adult:child ratios.
Consider the use of software programmes available to support safe searching techniques.
Consider using more than room in the home to have children sleeping if this is possible. It can be difficult to provide undisturbed sleep for a child if other children in the same room are unsettled.
Consider what options to provide where there is a risk of injury to staff (such as lifting heavy or tall children).
Consider whether ratios need to be improved if any part of the excursion is in the vicinity of an unprotected source of water.
Consideration also needs to be given to the location of the sleep space in the home so the educator can maintain effective supervision of other children while monitoring sleeping children. See HS Sleep monitoring.
Consideration may be needed to ensure supervision requirements can be met.
Consideration needs to be given to the number of children attending each home and the probability of multiple children needing to sleeprest at the same time, particularly if there is more than one child under the age of in care at the same time.
Consideration of hazards must include but is not limited to:
Consideration of whether prosecution is an appropriate action will be in accordance with our Prosecution and Warnings Policy.
Consideration should be given as to how children will be kept warm and dry if evacuation takes place during wet or windy weather. Centres may be able to make some arrangement with a nearby business or other organisation to assist with this.
Consideration should be given as to how children will be kept warm and dry if evacuation takes place during wet or windy weather. Playgroups may be able to make some arrangement with a nearby business or other organisation to assist with this.
Considerations might vary depending on, for example:
Considerations when deciding upon the provision of staff space should include:
Considerations would need to include:
Consistent robust safety checking helps assess whether people might pose a risk to children.
Consolidated reports for service providers
Construction directory information for suppliers
Consult with key stakeholders to understand all needs. Stakeholders could include:
Consultancy services contract special conditions agreement
Consultancyprofessional services
Consultation is needed to make a decision on your request.
Consultation material provided to targeted stakeholders.
Consultation on longterm insights briefing topic
Consultation on proposals to clarify obligations and strategic priorities for school boards
Consultation open for draft relationships and sexuality education framework
Consultation: Initial Teacher Education standard settingapproval
Consulting communities about changes to schools
Consulting on draft relationships and sexuality education framework
Contact an education advisor at your regional Ministry of Education office.
Contact details for the Ministry, including regional and district offices, and learning support.
Contact information for the Ministry of Educations national office.
Contact numbers for people seeking information about the group
Contact our learning support team
Contact our media team. We monitor emails after hours.
Contact our service desk to get access.
Contact our team for support, or if you would like to apply for transport assistance funding for your
Contact the NZQA Qualification Evaluation Service on
Contact the Trust for more information on how
Contact the school transport team directly.
Contact the service to arrange a visit.
Contact the traumatic incident team if your school or ECE needs support to manage a crisis.
Contact us for more information about the EEL.
Contact us if you have not received your allowance or have a question.
Contact us through New Zealand Relay
Contact with infected skin, bedding and clothing
Contact with secretions from infected people
Contact with secretions of a sore throat. (Coughing, sneezing and so on)
Contact your Ministry regional office at the first available opportunity.
Contact your Ministry regional office for more details regarding a change of service provider or for other licensing requirements.
Contact your Ministry regional office for more details.
Contact your Ministry regional office for more information.
Contact your education advisor at your regional Ministry of Education office for more information on any of the above areas.
Contact your local public health unit for further advice about dishwashers for ECE centres.
Contact your public health service for more information and advice.
Contact your regional Ministry of Education office to determine what steps would need to be taken in exceptional circumstances such as these.
Contact your regional Ministry of Education office. They can help you work with your school if you havent been able to resolve the issue.
Contact your regional office for more information.
Contact your regional office.
Contact your school if you have any questions about transport assistance. If your school has a bus service, they will have a staff member that acts as their bus controller.
Contact your school payroll administrator.
Contaminated food or water, contact with an infected person
Contaminated food or water, direct spread from an infected person or animal
Contaminated food or water, unpasteurised milk
Continuing with learning support when moving to the next school level
Contract works price analysis workbook
Contract works registration of interest
Contract works request for tender
Contract works schedule of prices
ContractWorksRequestforQuote
ContractWorksRequestforQuote Lite
Contractors and suppliers must follow the New Zealand Building Code and also meet our schoolspecific durability requirements, including:
Contractors and suppliers must meet our weathertightness standards for new school buildings.
Contractors who are not childrens workers but are likely to have unsupervised access to students at the school during normal school hours must undergo a Police vet and risk assessment. That includes contractors who work on construction projects managed by your school or by us during school hours.
Contractors who will not have unsupervised access to students at the school during normal school hours do not need a Police vet.
Contracts for construction works
Contracts for consultancy services
Conversely, with the explained,
Conveyance Allowance change of information user guide
Cooking andor heating food
Cool. Thank you very much.
Cooperative ventures and achievements are valued and encouraged.
Coordinators and educators must not use, or be under the influence of, alcohol or any other substance that has a detrimental effect on their functioning or behaviour while responsible for children attending the service.
Copies of ECE qualifications
Copies of New Zealand primary teacher qualifications (TeacherLed services only).
Copies of Teaching Council endorsements
Copies of current first aid (or medical practicing) certificates for adults counting towards this requirement.
Copies of current first aid (or medical practising) certificates for adults counting towards this requirement.
Copies of overseas qualifications and NZQA assessment of these
Copies of overseas qualifications and the NZQA assessment of those qualifications (TeacherLed services only).
Copies of practising certificates
Copies of practising certificates and Early Childhood qualifications (TeacherLed services only).
Copies of practising certificates are used by the Ministry to:
Copies of primary qualifications
Copies of safety standards can be purchased from Standards NZ.
Copies of the letter of registration with an ECE or primary endorsement from the New Zealand Teaching Council (TeacherLed services only).
Copy of the current certificate issued to the hospital under the Health and Disability Services (Safety) Act , and
Copy of the current certificate issued to the hospital under the Health and Disability Services (Safety) Act ; and
Copy paste value the old mapping to the new template, copy paste value the previous year trial balance and align the current year trial balance and save the new mapping conversion for the auditor.
Copyright information for material on this website and social media including material with third party copyright.
Copyright of third parties
Cordless phones are one of the most popular and practical types of phone used in early childhood education centres. The main advantages of cordless phones include being able to:
Core health unit standards and may also be considered for homebased services. They cover first aid for children and adults.
Corner Guinness and Albert Street
Costs must be itemised so parents can see how the optional charge is to be spent. Requesting a nominal hourly rate for unspecified excursions and transport does not meet the intent of an optional charge.
Costs such as fees or donations
Cots are easily accessible by staff and sufficiently separated to avoid cross infection (HS)
Cots must have no gaps or protrusions that could trap an infant or catch their clothing and have no sharp edges. The sides must be high enough to stop an infant climbing out and there should be no footholds.
Coughing and sneezing. The virus may be passed from mother to child during pregnancy
Coughing, sneezing and contact with weeping blisters
Coughing, sneezing and infected saliva
Coughing, sneezing and poor hand washing
Coughing. Adults and older children can pass on the infection to babies
Count across the columns to ensure there are at least as many adults working as the number planned.
Count as and Over hours all hours you would claim for yearolds.
Counties Manukau Kindergarten Association Incorporated
Couriers, reception and postal address
CoveKinloch New Zealand Ltd ( hours, days a week)
Coverage: Entire South Island.
Craig Maclean (New Plymouth)
Create a staffing schedule to help you decide how many teachers you will need, and for what hours you will need them. This should be based on anticipated enrolments. This process will also help you decide how many of these staff must be qualified teachers.
Create the conditions for
Creating a datadriven funding model that is focused on delivering highquality interventions, programmes, and supports.
Creating a password policy for your school
Creating a password policy guidance
Creating a portfolio for each child that is readily accessible to the child and his or her parentscaregivers. For more information on child portfolios, refer to the curriculum guidance.
Creating a social media connection with someone doesnt mean the Ministry endorses them regardless of the terms used by social media providers such as follow or like.
Creating a strong password
Creation of a portfolio on each child that is readily accessible to the child and his or her parentscaregivers.
Criteria are used to assess compliance with the minimum standards set by the regulations.
Criterion aims to uphold childrens safety by ensuring that they are unable to access hazardous equipment or activities (such as hot foodliquid being transferred from the stove to the bench by a staff member whilst preparing a meal) unless adequately supervised.
Criterion ensures that there is a link between the prescribed curriculum framework and what happens at the service.
Critical health effect(s)
Crown agencies have developed a limitation policy to help protect your right to go to court from the effects of the Limitation Act and the Limitation Act while you are engaging with a Crown sensitive claims process.
Cryptosporidium: to days
Current Annual Building Warrant of Fitness (if the premises require a compliance schedule under Section of the Building Act ).
Current appointed suppliers
Current approved qualifications for early learning teachers are listed on the Teaching Council of
Current directory of construction suppliers
Currently, National Student Numbers (NSN) can only be used for the purposes specified in Schedule of the Act. Information privacy principle of the Privacy Act also requires agencies to outline the group that the unique identifier will apply to, and only assign unique identifiers (such as NSNs or IRD numbers) if the agency needs it to carry out or more of its functions efficiently.
Curriculum Insights and Progress (CIPS) Year
Curriculum criteria documentation required
Curriculum criteria for centrebased ECE services.
Curriculum criteria for homebased ECE services.
Curriculum criteria for hospitalbased ECE services.
Curriculum criteria for playgroups.
Curriculum days for sl New Zealand Gazette
Curriculum delivery staffing
Curriculum goals and assessment practices are consistent with service philosophy.
Curriculum halfdays
Curriculum is interpreted broadly. It includes all the experiences, activities, and events (both direct and indirect) that occur within the service. It provides a framework that foregrounds the
Curriculum is interpreted broadly. It includes all the experiences, activities, and events, both direct and indirect that occur within the service. It provides a framework that foregrounds the mana of the child and the importance of respectful, reciprocal, and responsive relationships.
Curriculum planning sheet
Curriculum priorities that support social competence, emotional competence, and understanding of appropriate behaviour should provide ongoing opportunities for children to practice their growing capabilities, through actions, words, and behaviours.
Curriculum priorities that support social competence, emotional competence, and understandings of appropriate behaviour should provide ongoing opportunities for children to practice their growing capabilities, through actions, words, and behaviours.
Curriculum progress tools
Curriculum staffing entitlements may be:
Cushions or low barriers around a carpeted area can provide a space for babies or toddlers.
Cyberbullying usually goes in hand with inperson bullying. Cyberbullying is bullying with the use of digital technologies like social media.
D if theyre internal appointments, then it will be n uh,
D those will be if theyre external appointments,
Daily Bus Conveyance Allowance payment rates
Daily Bus Conveyance Allowance.
Daily and tech class school bus: roles and responsibilities guide
Daily attendance reporting
Daily school bus route maps
Daily signinsignout records are recommended as best practise.
Daily technology and school bus providers
Daily ward lists with a record of the names and ages of children eligible to participate.
Dannevirke Kindergarten Association
of Parents Attestation for Hours ECE.
Wednesday May
Days and time booked (enrolled to attend).
Days and time of operation
Days in the previous or following month.
Days the child attended for fewer hours than enrolled (and the number of hours the child attended).
Days the child attended their normal enrolled hours.
Days the child was enrolled to attend and was
Days the child was enrolled to attend and was absent and funding can be claimed.
Days the child was enrolled to attend and was absent and funding cannot be claimed.
Days the child was enrolled to attend and was absent.
Days the child was enrolled to attend.
Days the child was not enrolled to attend.
Deaf Aotearoa First Signs
Deaf Children New Zealand Tamariki Turi O Aotearoa
Dealing with persistent child absence
Decide on what actions need to be taken, how they will happen and who will be involved.
Decide what other staff will need to be employed (for example, cleaner, administration staff, manager, cook, head teacher).
Deciding which glassed areas are accessible to children in the centre (and therefore need to be protected) should involve consideration of:
Decisions to seek specialist guidance is made in collaboration with others, including colleagues, parents, and medical staff, and is based on observational evidence.
Deed AttributionNon Commercial . International Creative Commons
Definition of Deaf and hard of hearing
Definition of a childrens worker
Definition of family members
Definition of homebased educator pass through
Definition of homebased educator top up payments
Definition of optional charges
Definitions in Childrens Act
Definitions of communitybased and private services are available in the Glossary.
Delegated Authorisers will need to set up the School Planning and Reporting role for users as shown below.
Delegated representatives and the attestation on the RS return
Delivering more supports to support Pacific learners to plan for study and training after high school.
Delivering new resources to support Pacific learners to plan for study and training after high school.
Delivering the Unteach Racism programme.
Dentists do not come to early learning services, as they do for some schools. You will need to make your own appointments, and the Community Oral Health Service will tell you where to go.
Depending on how close the nearest school bus route is to your house, you might receive one type of assistance or both.
Depending on the schools in your area, you may have the choice to send your child to a singlesex or coeducational school.
Describe how children (walking and nonwalking) will be managed during an emergency drill.
Design review deliverables checklist bulk and location
Design review deliverables checklist developed design
Design review deliverables checklist masterplan
Design review deliverables checklist preliminary design
Design review for new school builds and redevelopments
Design review for school builds and redevelopments
Design review is an important part of any large project. Our reviews focus on durability, resilience, and wholeoflife cost. We aim to make sure our schools meet the longterm needs of learners and teachers.
Design, strength and durability
Designated assembly areas for evacuation purposes outside the building keep children safe from further risk.
Designated assembly areas outside the building keep children safe from further risk.
Designation of the sleep space within the premises (and how nonsleeping children will be kept separate while the sleep area is in use).
Designing quality learning spaces
Designing school bus routes
Despite the fact that your playgroup may only meet once or twice a week, emergencies can occur at any time and playgroups, like all other ECE services, must be ready to respond appropriately.
Detailed guidance for Delegated Authorisers on how to set up new roles for users is available online.
Detailed guidance for home education applicants
Details of any actions that need to be taken to rectify faults discovered or to improve on the planned procedure.
Details of any actions that need to be taken to rectify faults discovered or to improve on the planned procedure. Keep the emergency drill records for years.
Details of salary steps are in chapter of the pay parity guide.
Details of the roles and responsibilities that will apply during an emergency situation.
Determining a teachers initial salary step
Develop employment documentation such as policies and procedures.
Develop job descriptions. It may be useful to look at job descriptions from other ECE services, where possible.
Developing a network plan for specialist and alternative provision.
Developing schedules is quite tricky and you may need to try lots of versions before you find one that suits your service.
Development and consultation of school enrolment schemes
Diarrhoea (may be bloody), fever, stomach pain
Diarrhoea and vomiting illnesses
Did the evaluation process follow what was described in the procurement plan
Did we answer the one from Anna
Did you consider making a code for students who left early
Did you need help with anything
Different accounts and logins must be set up for:
Different types of early learning services are open for different hours. Some are open all day while others are only open during school hours (usually am to pm) or half days.
Digital child protection resource
Direct and constant monitoring by the educator in close proximity to the children when supervising an activity with some element of risk, for example cooking experiences and any activity that is near water.
Direct any questions about the qualifications for Playcentres to your Playcentre regional support team or Ministry regional office.
Direct contact with an infected person
Direct contact with an infested persons hair, and less commonly by contact with contaminated surfaces and objects
Direct contact with animals or infected person
Direct contact with discharge from the eyes or with items contaminated by the discharge
Direct contact with infected person
Direct contact with infected sores
Direct spread from infected person
Direct, close and constant supervision by parents, caregivers and educators will be required if an activity includes an element of risk. For example, climbing, cooking, using ropes, cords or tools of any kind or activities near water.
Direct, close and constant supervision by teachers, educators and
Directed enrolments are permitted by the Education and Training Act .
Directly resourced schools: Roles and responsibilities guide
Director of Education for Canterbury, Chatham Islands: Coralanne Child
Director of Education for Nelson, Marlborough, West Coast: Andrea Williams
Director of Education for Otago, Southland: David Tapp
Director of Education for Te Tai Tokerau: Hira Gage
Director of Education for Waikato: Marcus Freke
Director of Education for Wellington: Roy Sye
Disagreeing with a decision made on your request
Discipline and dismissal policies and procedures must be clear, reflect the requirements of current legislation and provide managers with useful guidance.
Discipline and dismissal procedures
Disclosure Checklist for Tier Schools
Discretionary hours report
Discretionary hours reporting
Discretionary hours: Record keeping
Discretionary pathways registration
Discretionary situations for playcentres
Discuss exclusion of cases and contacts with public health service.
Discuss exclusion of cases and their contacts with public health service.
Discuss the procurement with your property advisor to get their support and confirm funding is available.
Discuss what visa requirement is needed with your school or the EPO.
Discuss with your staff how AI is used at your school and what rules and guidance you need to put in place for different contexts. It is best to adopt a practical, educative approach to AI and its uses.
Discussions and decisions about childrens progress and achievements should include collaboration with parents and
Display materials in boxes, containers or baskets and group similar materials together so that children can quickly choose between them. Label containers clearly so that adults know where to put equipment. When setting up a playgroup session, create areas for the different activities and interests of the children, and set them up so children can move easily from one activity to the next.
Displaying the procedure ensures that every person using the facilities is made aware of the procedure to maintain general hygiene and childrens safety and wellbeing.
Diversity is recognised. Schools and students with the greatest needs are prioritised.
Do I have to pay extra for food or nappies or supply them myself
Do I have to pay for days or hours my child does not attend (for instance, if the child is sick, you are on holiday or the service is closed)
Do all the vehicles have current registration and warrants of fitness
Do children have access to the internet when at the centre How can their learning be supported while keeping them safe
Do children have access to the internet when at the playgroup If so:
Do children have access to the internet when at the service How can their learning be supported while keeping them safe
Do initial quality checks
Do not count public holidays, even if the service will be open. Public holidays are not funded in advance.
Do not use public pool for weeks after symptoms have stopped.
Do our experiences reflect and celebrate the rich cultures of our service every day
Do our policies support us to share information in a safe way
Do the equipment and facilities reflect the culture and purpose of the playgroup
Do we code it as a form of distance learning
Do we expect all parents and caregivers to stay all the time
Do we know the history of andor understand the protocols of our local
Do we know the history of andor, understand the
Do we know the history of andor, understand the tikanga of, our local
Do we need to do some things differently
Do we notice who talks, when they talk, and what they say Do we notice who does not talk, and why
Do you have a cell phone to make an emergency call
Do you have access to torches or emergency lighting
Documentation (including copies of practising certificates) must be kept for years.
Documentation can take a variety of forms, including some or all of the following:
Documentation is kept in relation to the identification of, and the planned response to, a need to seek additional specialist information and guidance.
Documentation may take a variety of forms to suit the services operation (such as portfolios, wall displays, policies and procedures) but must include:
Documentation that provides evidence of the centrebased ECE services compliance with criteria C to C.
Documentation that provides evidence of the homebased ECE services compliance with criteria C to C.
Documentation that provides evidence of the hospitalbased ECE services compliance with criteria C to C.
Documented playground safety checks
Documenting Person responsible observations
Documents are available in Adobe PDF format only. Accessible versions, where available, can be supplied on request.
Documents are available in PDF format only. If you have any issues accessing these documents, email us.
Documents you need to provide
Does it encourage children to play
Does not meet requirement
Does the physical access support children to make choices about their movements between the indoor and outdoor environments, and provide access for children with different abilities
Doing this every few months can help identify who is still part of the group. Your group may want to develop this as part of a roster system. For example, every second month you could check enrolment records against roll books. You may also want to phone parents and caregivers who are longer attending to enable you to maintain accurate records.
Donations are voluntary. Your early learning service cant require you to pay or describe them as fees.
Double glazing can be very effective in reducing outside noise experienced inside a building, but consideration will need to be given as to how noise will be mitigated if the doors and windows are open for access and ventilation.
Double glazing can be very effective in reducing outside noise, if this is a significant problem. However, it can be expensive to retrofit into existing windows, and alternative ventilation may be needed in place of opening windows.
Dough can also be used with natural materials or collage items for creative play.
Down the Back of the Chair
Down the Back of the Chair is our online catalogue of teaching and learning resources.
Download an example of one playgroups roster and job descriptions below.
Download and complete the form.
Download the ECE funding handbook
Download the Emergency management plan template (see HS Emergency plan and supplies, above).
Download the attendance quick reference guide
Download the child protection policy.
Download the information sheet and read more about the prioritised settlement payment option.
Download the list of schools and
Download your completion certificate
Draft Cabinet paper Improved teacher training
Draft Cabinet paper: strike notification agreement for public consultation
Drafting of the second longterm insights briefing now underway
Drinking water for all children and adults
Drinking water for all children and adults.
Drinking water is always available for your child. Your centre may use cups or ask you to pack a refillable drink bottle.
Drivers cannot remove students from the bus for misbehaviour. They must finish the route so all students are taken to their destination.
Due diligence checks can include:
Due to maintenance, our Maungawhau office is currently only available for prebooked appointments.
Due to privacy laws and difficulties verifying the identity of the person calling, the Ministry of Education is no longer able to provide payment totals in advance over the telephone or via email.
Dunedin Kindergarten Association
During a playgroup session it may be necessary to reset, or refresh play materials and equipment so that they are appealing to other children. If a child has created something purposefully then it may not be necessary to reset the resources, they have used rather just refresh the area without affecting the creation. This means children can revisit their creations at a later time.
During a school term, schools will close for:
During these meetings, the board must arrange for the school to remain open for instruction.
EC TKR: Application for change of qualitystandard funding rate
EC Application for Exemption from Absence Rules for Special andor Health Needs
EC Medical Certificate to Support Application for Exemption from Absence Rule for Special andor Health Needs
EC Application to Receive Equity Funding for Providing Early Childhood Education in a Language and Culture other than English
ECE Operational Funding Mailbox
ECE Operational Funding must receive the completed RS form at least weeks before your next payment is due to be made.
ECE Services may use electronic means of verification of attendance records to satisfy the requirements of this handbook.
ECE census (also known as the ECE return)
ECE census service information collected
ECE census staff information collected
ECE centres are required to clearly display the following documents so that they are easily available to be read by anyone at the centre. These could be displayed in an entryway or on a notice board so they are clearly visible and can be read by parents
ECE centres must have an approved evacuation scheme before the Ministry of Education can grant a probationary licence. Up to working days should be allowed for a scheme to be approved as the Fire and Emergency New Zealand has working days to make a decision on an application, unless they determine that more information is needed, or that they need to observe a trial evacuation. In each of those cases the Fire and Emergency New Zealand has an additional working days to make a decision.
ECE centres need to ensure they have good supplies of linen to cover any potential shortages.
ECE centres need to have an approved fire evacuation scheme for the premises in which they operate. Fire and Emergency New Zealand provide information about the process of applying for an approved scheme and maintaining the scheme once it is in place. The application can be done online.
ECE centres should consider having a longterm maintenance plan that includes a budget for replacement of wornout flooring andor surface protection.
ECE centres should employ best practices and have procedures in place that focus on health and safety, such as
ECE centres will need to ensure that children and adults who handle animals practice thorough handwashing procedures afterwards.
ECE funding handbook: Record keeping requirements
ECE funding handbook: B Education and care services
ECE funding subsidy and hours ECE rates
ECE service completes an RS Return with:
ECE services also receive a washup payment. The washup payment makes up the difference between the advance payment made in the previous funding payment and the actual funding entitlement.
ECE services are required to clearly display the required documents so that they are easily available to be read by anyone using the activity room.
ECE services must take steps to minimise the contact of children with any person who has an infectious illness.
ECE services on notional rolls must submit paperbased RS Returns
ECE services operating from hospital premises that provide education and care to siblings of patients or children of hospital staff or patients are centrebased ECE services, not hospitalbased ECE services.
ECE services receive an advance for months. Information on initial funding for new services can be found in Section of this Handbook. The following section explains how the advance payment is calculated.
ECE services that support Teen Parent Units.
ECE services using a notional roll will need to submit their actual attendance data with their RS Returns (e.g. attendance data could be exported or printed from a Student Management System).
ELI exemptions will be given to services where the nature of their operations does not suit the regular collection of enrolment or attendance data.
ENROL privacy information
ENZ works to build awareness of New Zealand as a study destination and to pave the way for exporting education institutions and businesses.
ERO also publishes national reports on current education topics.
ERO has also prepared a set of evaluation indicators for use in its reviews of early childhood services. Services may also choose to use the indicators when reviewing their own performance. These indicators can be found at the Education Review Office.
ERO has more information about homeschooling education reviews.
ESL: Support for Online Delegated Authorisers Ministry of Education
Each Playcentre is required to send a copy of their audited financial statement of Receipts and Payments to the Ministry.
Each actual funded child hour is multiplied by the relevant funding rate.
Each board then receives , each year to help with costs relating to maintaining their Community of Learning.
Each educator must belong to a homebased service, which provides support through a Person Responsible who is a fully qualified early learning teacher. Educators must hold a homebased service qualification or within months of joining a homebased service, be enrolled in a course offering a homebased service qualification.
Each licensed service provider to whom this regulation applies must comply with the curriculum standard: general.
Each licensed service provider to whom this regulation applies must comply with the governance, management, and administration standard: general.
Each licensed service provider to whom this regulation applies must comply with the health and safety practices standard: general.
Each licensed service provider to whom this regulation applies must comply with the premises and facilities standard: general.
Each new user must have their own unique login. They should change the default password used to log in for the first time.
Each person responsible must be nominated for the role by their service provider. It is best practice for the service provider to give them enough information and support to help them understand their role and to carry out the duties expected of them.
Each person responsible must hold a current first aid qualification from a first aid training provider accredited by the New Zealand Qualifications Authority that meets the requirements of HS.
Each place for a child for which a service is licensed.
Each playgroup should be equipped to provide a range of activities at each session.
Each playgroup will do things in ways that best suit the values, beliefs and interests of their own children, families, and the resources available in the setting and local community.
Each school decides how many places are likely to be available for students who live outside its home zone. Schools with roll pressure might not want to offer outofzone enrolments.
Each section of this chapter includes information on how specific service types can become eligible for higher funding rates.
Each service is licensed to provide early childhood education to a maximum number of children at any one time.
Each service may still claim up to hours of funding per child per week, but funding must not be claimed for the same hours. The remaining hours once the Hours ECE hours are used up may be claimed as Plus ECE hours.
Each service will have its own daily routine, set around activities, meal times and nap times.
Each sibling or other relative must have their own enrolment record, signed by their parentguardian.
Each time you receive the allowance, we will ask you to declare to us that you are still home educating. The allowance is not paid unless the declaration is completed.
Each type of early learning service has different criteria.
Each vehicle must be registered and have a current warrant of fitness, and how this will be checked.
Each vehicle must be registered and have a current warrant of fitness.
Each week, we release a list of the titles of briefings and reports that the Minister received from the Ministry.
Each year the Ministry is allocated funding by the Government to progress significant initiatives across the education system. The Budget initiatives below are important to the public and Parliament.
Each year we offer scholarships for people of Pacific descent to undertake tertiary study.
Each year, Education Workforce, part of the Ministry of Education, offers scholarships to encourage people to train as teachers in the areas where there is greatest need.
Each year, early learning services are required to report to parents on how they have spent Targeted Funding and why management chose to use the funding in this way.
Each year, early learning services that received , or more in Targeted Funding must report to the Ministry on their use of Targeted Funding and how the funding benefited
Each year, services must report to the Ministry on their use of Targeted Funding and how the funding benefited
Each year, the Ministry will calculate the Targeted Funding entitlement of all eligible early learning services. Any change in funding entitlement will be effective from the start of the next funding period on March.
Earlier this year, we released a timeline for the key curriculum, assessment, and aromatawai changes happening between now and , and the supports available.
Early Childhood Education (ECE) services must be licensed under the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations in order to access government funding.
Early Childhood Education Food Programme
Early Childhood New Zealand and Safeguarding Children, have developed a digital child protection resource specifically for the early learning sector. See the instructions below to access the resource.
Early Childhood New Zealand and Safeguarding Children, have developed a digital child protection resource specifically for the early learning sector. See the instructions below to access the resource:
Early Learning Information (ELI) data
Early Learning services that have an estimated or above Targeted Hours as a proportion of total Funded Child Hours (FCH) are eligible for Targeted Funding.
Early childhood curriculum (
Early childhood education
Early childhood education (ECE) is from birth to school entry age. It is not compulsory.
Early childhood education (ECE) services must meet the conditions of their licence to be eligible for Ministry of Education funding.
Early childhood education is subsidised by the Government. Find out about the higher subsidy for children years of age and older.
Early childhood education services are eligible for the ECE Funding Subsidy if they are both:
Early childhood education services are eligible to offer Hours ECE if they:
Early childhood education services must keep enrolment records for all children who attend the service including children who attend the service on a casual basis or conditional basis.
Early childhood education.
Early childhood educators and
Early childhood services and private schools
Early childhood staff form
Early childhood statistics
Early learning centres, schools and tertiary institutions
Early learning in New Zealand does not look the same as primary school, where there are structured classes or lessons.
Early learning information (ELI)
Early learning information (ELI) system
Early learning regulations are part of the Education and Training Act .
Early learning service providers must consider that information to assess whether the person would pose a risk to the safety of children if they were to work at your service.
Early learning service providers should support
Early learning service providers should support educators and coordinators to remain current in their understanding of learning and development, theories, and practices. Regular professional learning and development (formal and informal) should support educators and coordinators to develop their knowledge and practices.
Early learning services are required to check their equipment, premises and facilities every day for hazards to children.
Early learning services are sometimes referred to as a:
Early learning services can combine their Targeted Funding with other services receiving Targeted Funding.
Early learning services can set their own enrolment processes so make sure you understand any requirements they have, for example, enrolment fees or minimum weekly hours.
Early learning services collect, hold, and use personal information. Learn how it can be safely used and shared under the Privacy Act.
Early learning services have food safety and nutrition criteria to follow.
Early learning services have to keep a record of all medicine given to children attending the service. Records include:
Early learning services may have a waiting list because they are full. If the service you want your child to go to has waiting a list, ask how long it will take before your child can attend. This may impact your choice.
Early learning services must always have a certain number of adults for the number of children attending. This is called the adulttochild ratio. The ratio varies depending on the age of the children in your care and the type of service you are.
Early learning services must always have a person who is responsible and a certain number of adults for the number of children attending. This is called the adulttochild ratio.
Early learning services must have a written child protection policy that meets the Childrens Act s requirements.
Early learning services will also have areas suitable for washing sick or soiled children.
Eating for healthy babies and toddlers outlines how to prepare foods for newborns to year olds.
Education (Domestic Tertiary Student and International Student Contract Dispute Resolution Scheme) Rules .
Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations
Education (Pastoral Care of Tertiary and International Learners) Code of Practice
Education (Physical Restraint) Rules
Education (Registration of Early Childhood Services Teachers) Regulations
Education Counts also has early learning statistics such as participation, finances, staffing and language use.
Education Counts has a map of the regions and information about each school.
Education Counts has contact details for centres and services in your area.
Education Counts has data and information about what early learning services already exist in your area, and a forecast of population growth. This can help you decide if there is demand for another service in your area.
Education New Zealand (ENZ) is the lead Government agency for the promotion of New Zealand education internationally.
Education New Zealand (ENZ).
Education Payroll (EdPay)
Education Report Minister Stanford
Education Report Minister Stanford
Education Report Minister Stanford
Education Report Confirming priorities ITEteaching profession
Education Report Current challenges and potential work programmes
Education Report: Final Cabinet paper Improved teacher training
Education Review Office (ERO)
Education Workforce (former TeachNZ)
Education agencies provide support and services tofor the education sector, and information about studying and teaching in New Zealand.
Education and Care and Hospitalbased services who pay all employed certificated teachers at least the amount described in the Base Salary Scale will be eligible to receive the Base Funding Rates
Education and Care and Hospitalbased services who pay all employed certificated teachers at least the amount described in the Full Parity Salary Scale will be eligible to receive the Full Parity Funding Rates.
Education and Care and Hospitalbased services who pay all employed certificated teachers at least the amount described in the Parity Salary Scale will be eligible to receive the Parity Funding Rates.
Education and Care and Hospitalbased services who pay all employed certificated teachers at least the amounts described in the Extended Parity Salary Scale will be eligible to receive the Extended Parity Funding Rates.
Education and Care services may record the hours worked by relievers who are Other Teachers as Certificated Teacher Hours for the purposes of the Staff Hour Count for hours during the funding period.
Education and Care services, Hospitalbased
Education and Training Act
Education and Training Amendment Bill (No )
Education and Training Amendment Bills are used regularly to progress policy proposals across early learning, schooling and tertiary education in order to be efficient with House time.
Education and care services
Education and care services and hospitalbased services that attest to paying all employed certificated teachers at least the amount specified in the Base Salary Scale described in Appendix must hold verification of this attestation. This must include copies of signed employment contracts, letter of appointment and letter(s) confirming changes in salaries paid to certificated teachers, including certificated relievers.
Education and care services and hospitalbased services will confirm what minimum salary criteria they have met when completing their RS return.
Education and care services and newly establishing education and care services that meet the description of of the new service types can change to that service type. Services selfattest to meeting the minimum language requirements.
Education and care services are required to keep a Staff Hour Count that will keep track of the number of Certificated Teacher Hours and Other Teacher Hours that make up the regulated (ratio) staff hours for their service.
Education and care services must keep a Staff Record to manage their Staff Hour Count. The Staff Record shows the actual hours worked by regulated (ratio) staff on a daily basis.
Education and care services or hospitalbased services who are found to have not met their attestation obligation for Extended Parity Salary Scale described in Appendix may have their funding adjusted.
Education and care services or hospitalbased services who are found to have not met their attestation obligation for Step to of the salary scale described in Appendix may have their funding adjusted to the applicable base funding rate.
Education and care services or hospitalbased services who are found to have not met their attestation obligation for the Full Parity Salary Scale described in Appendix may have their funding adjusted.
Education and care services that meet the required immersion or bilingual levels outlined in the next sub section will be required to attest:
Education articles to inform and inspire, plus job vacancies, notices and professional development opportunities.
Education articles to inform and inspire, plus job vacancies, notices, and professional development opportunities.
Education articles to inform, inspire, plus job vacancies, notices and PLD opportunities.
Education articles to inform, inspire, plus job vacancies, notices and PLD.
Education in New Zealand is a studentcentred pathway providing continuous learning progression and choice so that:
Education officer in Government and nonGovernment organisations.
Education providers do not pay the EEL for:
Education providers who enrol international feepaying students must pay the Export Education Levy (EEL). It is a percentage of their tuition revenue.
Education provision responds to learners within the context of their
Education snapshot by region
Education workforce payroll
Educator qualification requirements
Educators actively listen to and respond to all forms of communication from children.
Educators and coordinators are mindful of all learners when planning social, sensory, and physical environments. They are intentional and deliberate when selecting resources, teaching strategies, and learning experiences based on knowledge of the child and the local context.
Educators and coordinators require guidelines and opportunities for training to further develop their knowledge and understanding of:
Educators and coordinators should be organised with groups of children in ways that support secure and consistent care, language learning pathways, and positive transitions for children and
Educators and coordinators should enable
Educators and coordinators should purposely and intentionally respond to the strengths, interests, abilities, and needs of each child, and at times seek additional support from outside agencies in relation to learning, behaviour, development, or communication.
Educators and coordinators should share with, and support, parents and
Educators and coordinators support
Educators are familiar with relevant emergency drills and carry out each type of drill with all children present in the home (as appropriate) on an, at least, monthly basis.
Educators are required to keep a record of each emergency drill. At a minimum, this should record:
Educators consult with parents about the process to be used when sharing information and making decisions to ensure it is culturally appropriate, comfortable, and effective for all.
Educators could hold workshops for parentscaregivers to share the learning experiences of their children.
Educators could provide documents for parents to read.
Educators critically reflect on practice in the light of new information they have learnt
Educators demonstrate in practice that they regard each child as competent and assist children to make choices by giving them the information they need to make informed decisions.
Educators develop, in collaboration with parents
Educators effectively supervise children by actively watching and attending to their environment. They should avoid carrying out activities that will draw their attention away from supervision.
Educators emphasise what to do, rather than what not to do, in explanations and instructions.
Educators have a directory of specialist services and a ready network who will provide guidance and support to parents.
Educators have an important role and responsibility in fostering, role modelling, and supporting the peertopeer interactions of
Educators know and quickly recognise the factors that suggest that additional specialist information and guidance is required.
Educators listen carefully to children, asking open and searching questions to encourage complex learning and thinking.
Educators must never smoke or vape in the home while children are attending the service at any time including while children are asleep. In addition, they must never smoke or vape whilst on an excursion with the children.
Educators must notify parents as soon as possible of the event and be able to provide as much detail as possible about what happened, when, and what actions they took. Educators must also notify their coordinator or the service provider.
Educators must think about the possible emergency situations they might encounter in the home. Preparing for an emergency situation is an important part of the induction process that the coordinator carries out with each educator.
Educators need to consider the time, place, and space to develop these relationships through informal and formal opportunities. Formal opportunities will include times where communication is planned, and may involve preparation, for example, a parent interview when the child is admitted to hospital. Informal opportunities are likely to occur each day during the daily routines.
Educators need to continually scan the environment, so they know where the children are. Counting the children frequently is especially important if there is a larger number or age range of children attending.
Educators need to ensure that there is no access to any inappropriate material when completing their daily hazard check (HS).
Educators need to feel confident and capable of providing the necessary support to children when they administer medication.
Educators promote stories, songs, dance, and music from a variety of cultures.
Educators share their knowledge with parents
Educators share their understandings at staff meetings
Educators should be able to talk confidently and knowledgeably about the procedures without needing to refer to any documentation:
Educators should be aware of safe searching techniques and provide information to children on how to react and deal with unsolicited, inappropriate material.
Educators should draw on knowledge gained from the child and their parents and
Educators should ensure there are always clear paths to where children are playing, sleeping and eating so they can react quickly if needed. This is particularly important when children are attempting an activity for the first time or engaged in a highrisk activity. For example, if a child is using play equipment such as climbing apparatus, the educator should be close enough to ensure equipment is being used correctly and to reach the child if they slip or fall.
Educators should have emergency supplies on hand in the home. If providing outofschool care:
Educators should set up the environment so that they can supervise the children at all times. When activities for different children are grouped together and furniture is at waist height or shorter, educators are always able to see and hear children. Small spaces should be kept clear of clutter and larger spaces are set up so children have clear play spaces that educators can observe.
Educators use a range of conversations skills to encourage children to talk and think about relationships and the consequences of different responses to a given situation or problem.
Educators use a variety of teaching strategies that demonstrate the holistic way children learn and grow.
Educators use daily care routines as opportunities to have meaningful interactions with children.
Educators use teaching strategies which reflect
Educators who are already working in your homebased early learning service on or before January should:
Educators who are joining your licensed homebased early learning service should:
Educators will need to ensure that animals including those brought to the home can be properly restrained at all times. This could include some guidance on:
Educators will need to ensure there is a good supply of linen on hand to cover any potential shortage.
Effective for the change
Efficient heating will ensure rooms can be kept at a comfortable temperature while children are attending. See HS Room temperature.
Either a situation in a parent or
Either the child has been identified as having an ongoing learning support need, and this is supported by:
Electric fencing is unsuitable as a barrier.
Electronical attendance records criteria
Elevated beds are those where the upper surface of the mattress is mm or more above the floor.
Eligibility criteria for school transport assistance
Eligibility for Component A is based on the Equity Index (EQI). This index measures the extent to which a service draws children from low socioeconomic communities.
Eligibility for Targeted Funding
Eligibility for our process
Eligibility for transport assistance
Eligibility is determined through an attestation process.
Eligibility is not based on individual children. Your service may have children with low to moderate learning support needs in attendance, but not be eligible for funding against this component.
Eligible early learning services will receive Targeted Funding in instalments each year alongside the ECE operational funding payments (i.e. March, July and November).
Eligible education and care services
Eligible services RS return
Eligible services are services that hold a licence under the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations .
Eligible services must complete the RS return for the ECE Subsidy funding round preceding an application being submitted for the allowance.
Eligible services will receive funding along with the payment of the ECE Funding Subsidy and Hours ECE (i.e. March, July and November of each year).
Email any questions about our briefing to the Employment, Education and Training Secretariat
Email your application form to the resourcing team.
Emergency drill procedure briefing for all relieving staff and volunteers.
Emergency drill procedure briefings for all relieving staff.
Emergency management plan template
Emergency planning checklist
Emergency response coordinator contacts
Emergency response coordinators (ERC) will work with the school and the Ministry to coordinate the response effort with the relevant emergency services (Fire Emergency New Zealand (FENZ) or Police).
Emergency response coordinators are available hours a day, days a week to respond to propertyrelated damage as the result of a disaster such as fire, flood and extreme weather.
Employers will be able to confirm whether a person holds a Core Worker Exemption.
Employmentrelated complaints
Empowering students, connecting parents, and inspiring teachers. Our schools are vibrant hubs of learning, growth, and community.
Enable and use factor authentication.
Enable every teacher, leader and educational professional to take coordinated action to become culturally competent with diverse Pacific learners.
Enable failban, disable password logins (in favour of SSH keys), and turn off root login from SSH.
End of information: Action Plan for Pacific Education
Endorsement of achievement challenges
Energy survey for schools
Enforcement is when a service or educator withholds or withdraws enrolment, withholds or withdraws parts of their service (for example children not permitted to take part in certain activities) or attempts debt recovery.
Enforcement is when a service withholds or withdraws enrolment, or withholds or withdraws parts of their service (for example children not permitted to take part in certain activities), or makes debt recovery.
Engagement for school network change
Engaging on moving towards a more inclusive education system
English is accepted as a temporary language of instruction and communication.
Enquiries regarding the bulk funding payment
Enriching learning environments To provide rich learning opportunities that support the development of
Enrolling and starting your child
Enrolling and starting your child in early learning
Enrolling at a school you are not in zone for
Enrolling inbound and outbound students
Enrolment agreement template
Enrolment agreements are used by the Ministry to verify the dayssessions that each child is enrolled for and expected to attend.
Enrolment and attendance records are maintained for children attending.
Enrolment details and records must be kept upto. Parents must notify services and change the enrolment details if there is a change to the number of hours of Hours ECE their child receives at any service.
Enrolment forms need to be checked by parents at least annually to ensure all enrolment details are up to . Often service providers photocopy enrolment forms for educators to store at the home.
Enrolment information collected
Enrolment records are maintained for each child attending. Records are kept for at least years.
Enrolment records for casual children must also include:
Enrolment records for children claiming Hours ECE
Enrolment records for children receiving Hours ECE must also include:
Enrolment records for conditional children must also include:
Enrolment records for each child currently attending and for those who have attended in the previous years.
Enrolment records for each child currently attending and for those who have attended in the previous years. Records meet the requirements of the ECE funding handbook and include at least:
Enrolment records must be kept for years.
Enrolment records provide evidence that services and parentsguardians agree on the age of each child, and the number of hours for which each child is enrolled.
Enrolment records, showing at least:
Enrolment scheme for Te Kura Rau Iti and proposed amendment to Te Uho o Te Nikau.
Enrolment scheme guidelines
Enrolment scheme home zones are set by us in consultation with the school and community and managed by the school board.
Enrolment schemes are a way we make sure schools dont get overcrowded and local
Enrolment schemes are used in New Zealand schools to manage roll growth and provide priority access to students who live within a defined geographical area, known as the school zone.
Enrolment schemes at state schools set out a geographical area around the school called a home zone. The scheme also outlines any special programmes that a school might run. If you live within a schools home zone, your child automatically qualifies to enrol.
Enrolment schemes help manage overcrowding in schools. Learn how school boards operate schemes and how outofzone enrolment ballots work.
Enrolment, attendance, and absence records collected by the Ministry may be used to enable the Secretary for Education or the Minister of Education to exercise their powers or carry out their responsibilities under the Education and Training Act , and as permitted by Privacy Principles and .
Enrolments for children who will not be attending a service on a regular, ongoing basis.
Ensure that at least one person takes the role of person responsible and holds a recognised qualification, and
Ensuring children are properly restrained according to traffic law while travelling in a car is a bare minimum requirement.
Ensuring children do not have unsupervised access to hazardous equipment such as ropes, cords and tools is a key aspect of supervision. Access to any hazardous equipment must be closely monitored.
Ensuring that certificated teachers are fairly recognised and rewarded for their qualifications and experience in alignment with certificated teachers in kindergarten. This will, among other things, assist with increasing the number of certificated teachers working in early childhood education.
Enter bank account details on the RS form.
Enter the of the first day of operation. This is the on which your funding will begin.
Enter the name and contact details of your ECE service.
Entry (E) salary step for that qualification group.
Entry and maximum salary steps
Environment. For example, lacking in family and community support, having poor or negative role models, or being exposed to physical or psychological harm. Being involved with agencies such as Police,
Equally it is important to have a shared understanding of what will happen if the educator is sick or becomes ill whilst looking after children in the home.
Equipment at the centre will need to engage and challenge children and be flexible enough for children to construct their own learning. Flexible, moveable equipment allows children choice and control over how their learning environment is set up. Moveable equipment also encourages cooperation between children and provides opportunities for problem solving.
Equipment can be used in a variety of different ways.
Equipment from other areas can also be used with water for example, dolls and dolls clothes for washing, brushes for painting with water, tea set for washing.
Equipment should be safe and suitable for its purpose and the age of children using it.
Equipment used by the service will need to engage and challenge children and be flexible enough for children to construct their own learning.
Equipment, premises and facilities are checked on every day of operation for hazards to children. Accidentincident records are analysed to identify hazards and appropriate action is taken. Hazards to the safety of children are eliminated, isolated or minimised.
Equipment, premises and facilities are checked on every day of operation for hazards to children. Accidentincident records are analysed to identify hazards and appropriate action is taken. Hazards to the safety of children are eliminated, isolated or minimized.
Equipment, premises and facilities are checked on every day of operation for hazards to children. Hazards to the safety of the children are eliminated, isolated or minimised.
Equity Funding Component A: Low Socio Economic (per funded child hour)
Equity Funding Component B: Special Needs Funding (per funded child hour)
Equity Funding Component C: Language (monthly)
Equity Funding Component D: Isolation (monthly)
Equity Funding Rates (including GST)
Equity Funding is a targeted funding mechanism for all licensed ECE services. Equity Funding is paid to eligible services in addition to the ECE Funding Subsidy and Hours ECE.
Equity Funding is available to all licensed ECE services that meet certain criteria.
Equity Funding is paid three times a year, along with the ECE Funding Subsidy.
Equity Funding must be spent with the equity objectives for participation and quality in mind. Guidelines for expenditure of each component are listed in the relevant section of this chapter.
Equity Funding provides additional educational resources to targeted communities to help improve access to early childhood education.
Equity funding consists of components. Services may be eligible for funding against or more (or all) components. Each component is described in detail in this chapter, but the following provides a summary.
Equity funding for early learning services
Equity funding is a targeted funding mechanism for all licensed early childhood education (ECE) services.
Equity funding is paid to eligible services in addition to the ECE Funding Subsidy and Hours ECE.
Equity funding is targeted funding to improve access to, and participation in quality early childhood education. Equity funding is available to licensed, early childhood services that meet specific eligibility criteria.
Equity funding: Chapter
Equivalent qualifications
Erin attends hours per day, Monday to Friday.
Erin is yearold and is enrolled for four hours on Monday to Friday, from pm to pm.
Establish expectations with children about what is an acceptable level of noise inside. Early childhood education and care centres with high numbers of enrolled children may wish to have a noise level monitoring device.
Establishing a certificated playgroup
Establishing a new homebased service
Estimate how many children you think will permanently enrol in your service.
Estimating hours ECE funding
Estimating the proportion of certificated teacher hours:
Estimating your ECE funding subsidy
Evacuation procedure briefing for all parents.
Every day in early learning is different. It depends on the type of early learning service your child is at, their age and their interests.
Every day in early learning is different. It depends on the type of service your child is at, their age and interests.
Every educator must ensure that they actively supervise children at all times when children are in attendance at the service. This must be implemented in accordance with the services supervision plan.
Every employee must have a written employment agreement. It can be either an individual agreement or a collective agreement. Decide what form the draft employment agreement between staff and the service will take.
Every funded service must have a bank account into which ECE funding can be paid.
Every home will have at least one type of body wash facility available. Showers and shubs are preferred and are more hygienic as a child is not sitting in dirty water. However, if these are not available, fixed baths or baby baths are also suitable for washing sick or soiled children in the home.
Every permanent certificated
Every permanent certificated teacher employed by and teaching in a licensed Leo o Fanau Moana immersion and Leo o Fanau Moana bilingual service that receives PITA is eligible for this allowance.
Every philosophy statement will be different but could include:
Every school with a bus route funded by us must have a bus controller. This is usually a staff member at the school.
Every service that uses discretionary hours during the current funding period, must submit a record of the total number of discretionary hours used.
Every statement of philosophy will be different, but you might want to include:
Everyone involved at the service should have the opportunity to contribute to preparing and reviewing the statement, including:
Everyone understands their role in managing school property and is supported to deliver.
Evidence (such as a newsletter or enrolment pack information) of compliance with the criterion. A procedure people should follow if they wish to complain about noncompliance with the Regulations or criteria. The procedure includes the option to contact the regional Ministry of Education office and provides contact details.
Evidence of name change or use of an alternative name must be retained, where qualifications are in an alternative name (eg, maiden name).
Evidence of opportunities provided for parents and adults providing education and care to contribute to the development and review of the services operational documents.
Evidence of parental permission for any travel by motor vehicle as part of the ECE programme.
Evidence of parental permission for any travel by motor vehicle.
Evidence of parental permission for any travel by motor vehicle. In most cases, this requirement will be met by the excursion records required for criterion HS (above). However, services that provide transport for children to andor from the service must also gain written permission from a parent upon enrolment.
Evidence of parental permission for any travel by motor vehicle. In most cases, this requirement will be met by the excursion records required for criterion HS. However, services that provide transport for children to andor from the service must also gain written permission from a parent upon enrolment.
Evidence of parents having opportunities to contribute to the development and review of the services operational documents could include:
Evidence of review of the plan on an, at least, annual basis and implementation of improved practices as required.
Evidence of review of the plan on, at least, an annual basis and implementation of improved practices as required.
Evidence of review of the plan on, at least, an annual basis.
Evidence that parents have had opportunities to contribute to the development and review of the services operational documents could include the following:
Evidencebased best practices.
Exactly what type and quantity of furniture, equipment and materials provided will differ from centre to centre. Regardless of the type of equipment and materials provided, it is important there are sufficient quantities, so children do not have to wait long periods. This does not mean there has to be one of everything for each child at the centre, but children should be able to access equipment and materials that support their interests, skills and abilities.
Exactly what type and quantity of furniture, equipment, and materials provided in the activity room will differ between services.
Example Absence on a particular day
Example Enrolled day per week
Example Enrolled days a week
Example Fewer hours per day
Example Enrolled days a week
Example Fewer days per week
Example hospitalbased attendance record for enrolled children
Example of project and site constraints table
Example of the required attestation
Example of the use of Option :
Example staff record: Appendix
Example: Certificated and other teacher hours
Example: Regulated (ratio) staff
Examples of extended nonoperation
Examples of an injury or illness occurring as a result of a work activity include, but arent limited to, a child:
Examples of funded child hours
Examples of personal information are the name of your school, a pet, or a family member. This information is easily found online.
Examples of potential changes:
Examples of special services that may be eligible for notional rolls are:
Examples of what this might look like in practice:
Excel spreadsheet version of financial statements
Except in emergencies, SESTA drivers are not allowed to touch any student. They also cant give medication to students in their care. If your child needs a teacher aide with them while they travel, this needs to be provided by the school.
Exchange programme organisations
Exchange programme organisations (EPOs) are independent groups approved by us to run secondary school exchange programmes in New Zealand.
Exchange programme organisations (EPOs) are independent organisations who operate secondary school student exchange programmes.
Exchange programme requirements
Exchange students must be aged to years, and enrolled in Years to , or the overseas equivalent.
Exclude until days after facial swelling develops, or until well
Exclude until blisters have dried. If blisters are able to be covered, and child feeling well, they will not need to be excluded.
Exclude until the day after appropriate treatment
Exclude until well andor has received antibiotic treatment for at least hours
Exclusion from school, early childhood centre or work
Exclusion from school, early childhood centre, or work
Excursion means being outside the licensed premises whilst receiving education and care from the service but does not include an outing for the purposes of:
Excursions that parents have agreed to prior to the excursion taking place, that are not a regular excursion.
Exemption from frequent absence rules
Exemptions from the frequent absence rule
Existing homebased services
Existing services can opt into Hours ECE at any time but will only be advance funded for Hours ECE on one of the major funding runs ( March, July, and November).
Experiences and opportunities are taken for the modelling of nondiscriminatory practices.
Explore becoming a teacher in New Zealand and career development opportunities within our education sector.
Explore becoming a teacher in New Zealand and delve into career development opportunities within our education sector.
Explore the updates to our implementation supports hub and the year implementation timeline.
Exploring opportunities to design initiatives to grow the number of Pacific language teachers with Pacific communities.
Exposure to excess environmental noise in the outdoor space can be reduced by:
Exposure to objectionable material may occur inadvertently through normal and legitimate searching activities or by unsolicited email delivery.
Extended Parity (Partial Step Partial Management Step).
Extended Parity Funding Rates
Extended Parity Funding Rates are available to services who pay at least Steps to and the management salary step.
Extended Parity Funding Rates are available to services who pay at least the Partial Management Step of the Extended Parity Salary Scale.
Extended Parity Management Salary Scale
Extended Parity Salary Scale
Extended Parity Salary Scale (Partial Step to Partial Management Step).
Extended Parity Salary Scale (Partial Step Partial Management Step)
Extended Parity Salary Scale (Partial Step Partial Management Step).
Extended parity funding rates are available to education and care services who agree to pay all employed certificated teachers according to Step to Management Step of the Extended Parity Salary Scale.
Extended parity salary scale
Extended parity salary scale (Partial Step Partial management step)
Extended parity salary scale example: July funding period
Extending the School Strike Notification
Extension for periods of extended
Extra diligence is required by educators to ensure children are closely supervised during excursions. Advance planning of the destination, transport, meals and toilet breaks will help to identify potential hazards and to determine the level of supervision required. Children can be closely monitored by regular head counts throughout the excursion and by ensuring the educator remains in close proximity to the children.
Extraordinary roll growth funding
Extraordinary roll growth funding application
Extraordinary roll growth funding application primary schools
Extraordinary roll growth funding applications
Extraordinary roll growth funding applies to any schools where the number of students exceed real or projected roll growth. This is called the trigger point.
FCHs for children enrolled on a casual or conditional basis must be calculated based on attendance only.
Facebook (Ministry of Education NZ)
Facebook community standards
Facebook statement of rights and responsibilities
Failure to comply may in some cases affect your funding payments.
Failure to do so can result to the school or us taking legal action, including prosecution under Sections and of the Education and Training Act .
Failure to make reasonable efforts to accommodate children with disabilities could be a breach of Part of the Human Rights Act .
Failure to meet these funding conditions may result in the funding being withheld either in full or in part.
Families are confident to talk with staff, ask questions, and offer information about their child.
Families are confident to visit, talk with staff, ask questions and offer information about their child.
Families are confident to visit, talk with staff, ask questions, and offer information about their child. What informal and formal opportunities for engaging with parents are regularly taken (and recorded) to develop an understanding of their aspirations for their child In what way does our service use consultation to support change
Families are responsible for getting their child to school. You can support families to apply for SESTA or make the application on their behalf.
Family Services Directory
Family day care coordinators in licensed homebased early childhood education services.
Family harm who to report to
Family members as educators
February (payment on the first working day in March).
FebruaryMarch: The school board prepares and approves the draft annual financial statements and the annual report.
Fees, donations, optional charges and homebased educator top up payments:
Fences under metre that are made of climbable materials can be made unclimbable with the addition of shade cloth or use of additional barrier or fencing type materials, such as brushwood fencing or chicken wire.
Fever and spots with a blister on top of each spot
Fever, swollen neck glands and a rash on the face, scalp and body
Fill in the number of children (over or under ) that you have planned will be at the service every half hour (right hand column). Note that, at the start and end of the day, there are often fewer children attending. If this is the case, fewer adults may be needed at these times.
Finally, if you are populating the model for the first time save the file as Version . This will allow for easier version control.
Finally, in order to check the statement of financial position refer to check calculations on line under columns H to J.
Finally, open the saved file and check the following.
Financial Reporting Act New Zealand Legislation
Financial information required
Financial management for stateintegrated schools
Financial reports required by the Ministry
Find a list of the Ministry staff you can discuss with about all your schools property needs.
Find an early learning centre or service
Find bulletins and news for the early learning education sector.
Find contact details for your Transport Delivery Advisors, and our school transport national team.
Find documents and links to pages that relate to the Bill.
Find guidance on human resource management for different types of service:
Find information on how to start early learning services or playgroups that need to be licenced or certified.
Find instructions for using the school bus route maps site in our guide.
Find more information about our tools and applications.
Find more information about record keeping and financial reporting requirements:
Find more information here:
Find more information on school responsibilities in the guide below.
Find opportunities to strengthen teaching practice and educational leadership to support
Find our annual reports, budgets, briefing for incoming ministers, and other corporate documents.
Find out about New Zealands education system and the agencies that support it.
Find out about accessing extra support in early learning.
Find out about administration, fees and available support in tertiary education and training
Find out about being employed in early childcare centres, including employment agreements, pay, leave and personal development.
Find out about being employed in schools and kura, including employment agreements, pay equity, allowances and study awards.
Find out about best practice for managing software and devices in schools and kura, generative AI, and more.
Find out about buying goods and services for schools and kura.
Find out about buying services and supplies for schools, kura and early learning services.
Find out about careers at the Ministry of Education, and in the education sector.
Find out about changes in the education sector. Circulars cover topics including industrial relations, funding, schools and student support.
Find out about funding and reporting in early childhood education, including key dates and forms.
Find out about health and safety requirements when working with schools and kura.
Find out about how to get in touch with us.
Find out about how we collect, use, and share information gathered about individuals and organisations.
Find out about how your childs early learning service will keep them healthy and safe, manage risks and respond to any emergencies.
Find out about medium and longterm trends, risks and opportunities in the education sector, including analysis and policy options.
Find out about our attendance and achievement priorities.
Find out about our people, our leadership, and our ministers.
Find out about requirements to run school exchanges as a private exchange programme organisation (EPO).
Find out about some of the help, provisions and financial support available to your child at school.
Find out about the dates for cohort entry.
Find out about the Act which regulates our education system.
Find out about the action plan , including progress updates.
Find out about the acts and bills introducing and establishing change recently.
Find out about the advice and reports we provide to ministers.
Find out about the criteria you must meet when running any type of early learning service.
Find out about the criteria you must meet when starting early learning services of all types.
Find out about the learning support funds, schemes and services available to schools and kura, and guidance on accessing it.
Find out about the longterm direction for managing school property to support all schools having quality learning environments.
Find out about the process on how to get a Holidays Act remediation payment below.
Find out about the regulations supporting international students.
Find out about the resources, tools and assistance available if your child needs support with their learning.
Find out about the role we play in New Zealands education system, and what we are here to do.
Find out about the rules and regulations of education in New Zealand, including what you need to do as a parent.
Find out about the strategies and policies guiding agencies to deliver good outcomes for early learning education in Aotearoa New Zealand.
Find out about the strategies and policies guiding agencies to support and deliver tertiary and further education for domestic and international students.
Find out about the study awards that students can qualify for.
Find out about the topics we have released packages of information about, where there is a high degree of public interest.
Find out about the types of help available if your child needs support with their learning or development.
Find out about what happens in early learning services and what your childs learning might look like.
Find out about what help you might get to pay for the cost of an early learning service.
Find out about what your child will learn at school and how you can be involved.
Find out about what your child will need at school and how to enrol them.
Find out about working on property projects in schools and kura.
Find out about your options for early learning, how to choose a service and the process for enrolment and getting started.
Find out about your young persons career and training options after school and how to choose a programme of study.
Find out how secondary school exchange programmes work in New Zealand.
Find out how to choose a device for your child.
Find out how to complete the energy survey for operational efficiency, and what the information is used for.
Find out how to make a request, and see our responses to requests under the Official Information Act.
Find out how to prepare and submit a school annual report.
Find out how to report accidents and incidents on school transport.
Find out how to support your child with positive mental health and wellbeing.
Find out how we calculate new entrant adjustments.
Find out more about child protection policies for each service type:
Find out more about higher and vocational education.
Find out more about some of our services and the information we collect.
Find out more about the health, safety and wellbeing measures and support in your childs school.
Find out more about the information we publish:
Find out more about what is defined as official information at:
Find out more information about transporting children to and from ECE services and
Find out more information on transporting children to and from ECE services and
Find out the loans, allowances and scholarships your young person might get to help pay for the cost of tertiary study.
Find out what Tessa learnt at playgroup.
Find out what boards and education professionals need to do to plan and maintain safe school property and facilities.
Find out what boards and education professionals need to do to plan and maintain safe school transport and facilities.
Find out what bullying is and how to get help and support for your child.
Find out what education professionals do to keep children healthy and safe in early learning services.
Find out what education professionals need to do to keep students healthy and safe in schools and kura.
Find out what support is available to children that have learning support needs, and how to access it.
Find out who you must contact if you suspect a child is at risk. We provide training to recognise and respond to abuse and neglect.
Find roles in the Ministry learning support area and other roles at the Ministry of Education.
Find the Ministry of Education websites you need with this helpful directory of our sites and their purposes.
Find the digital versions here:
Find the property advisors contact details for the Central North region.
Find the property advisors contact details for the Central Southern region.
Find the property advisors contact details for the Northern region (Auckland and Te Tai Tokerau).
Find the property advisors contact details for the Southern region.
Find what scholarships are available
Finding an exchange partner
Finding contact information for your Transport Delivery Advisor
Fire and Emergency NZ has no concerns about the use of the multilevel cot (HS)
Fire and Emergency New Zealand
First advance of hours ECE
First aid kit contents and placement
First aid kit identification
First aid kit maintenance
First aid kit. Consider carrying some bags in case of travel sickness, and some portable instant ice packs.
First aid kit. Consider carrying some bags in case of travel sickness, and some portable instant icepacks.
First aid kits must be stored in a container, so it is readily available to adults but is secure and out of reach of children. If the first aid kit, or cupboard or container in which it is stored, is locked, make sure the key is kept within easy reach of adults and all staff know where it is. A sign nearby letting any adult know where to find the key in an emergency is a good idea.
First aid kits must include at least the following:
First aid kits should include the following (or these items are available on the premises):
First aid kits should include the following:
First aid qualification condition clause (HS)
First aid qualifications for early learning
First aid qualifications for early learning services and
First aid training delays for homebased educators
First aid training providers
First longterm insights briefing in about preparing all young people for satisfying and rewarding working lives
Fitness for purpose, including
Fitzgerald Construction Limited
Fixed outdoor equipment should meet the requirements of current New Zealand Standards (contact Standards New Zealand for uptoinformation), have softfall surfacing installed beneath it and be checked and maintained regularly.
Fixedterm units are for the period allocated by the board (usually for a minimum of term).
Flexible, moveable equipment allows children choice and control over how their learning environment is set up. Moveable equipment also encourages cooperation between children, and provides opportunities for problem solving.
Floor surfaces are durable, safe and suitable for the range of activities to be carried out (including wet and messy play) and can easily be kept clean.
Floor surfaces in any ECE activity room are durable, safe and suitable for the activities to be carried out at the service (including wet and messy play), and can easily be kept clean.
Floor surfaces should be easy to clean and suitable for the activities being undertaken.
Floor surfaces should be easy to clean and suitable for the activities being undertaken. Well maintained wooden, particle, cork, polished concrete, tiles or vinyl floors are most suitable in an area used for messy play, while carpet is better in a book or block area. Consider how much time children spend on the floor when choosing a floor type.
Follow the instructions below (and the examples in section ) to apply the Frequent Absence Rule:
Follow the instructions outlined in the documents below.
Follow the steps below to calculate the Hours ECE Funding:
Follow the steps below to calculate the FCHs for children aged under :
Follow the steps below to calculate the daily actual Certificated Teacher Hours for your service:
Follow the steps below to calculate the number of days that advance funding will be paid for:
Follow the steps below to estimate your children and hours for the ECE Funding Subsidy.
Follow these steps to complete the
Follow up with a formal complaint
Following a review, the notional roll may be adjusted, or the ECE service may be returned to normal funding if it no longer meets the criteria for a notional roll.
Following receipt of this payment services must pay the full allowance payment received to each certificated
Following the reintroduction of the funding band on January services will no longer be able to request additional payments from parents to help contribute the cost of having more than certificated teachers.
Food allergies and intolerances
Food is prepared, served, and stored hygienically.
Food is served at appropriate times to meet the nutritional needs of children while they are attending
Food is served at appropriate times to meet the nutritional needs of each child while they are attending. Where food is provided by the service, it is of sufficient variety, quantity and quality to meet the nutritional and developmental needs of each child. Where food is provided by parents, the service encourages and promotes healthy eating guidelines.
Food preparation and eating spaces
Food preparation surfaces
Food safety at early learning services
Foods that pose a high choking risk to children must not be served unless prepared in accordance with the Ministry of Health guidance. This guidance outlines foods that should be excluded from services and how to alter other highrisk foods for different age groups, that is, for to years old, and years up to years.
For Ministryfunded services, transport assistance can be either:
For NCEA external assessments, the use of GenAI is not permitted. The New Zealand Qualifications Authority (NZQA) has more information.
For NCEA internal assessments, teachers must be aware of any specific requirements of the Achievement Standard being assessed and its Conditions of Assessment.
For Te Marautanga o Aotearoa
For The New Zealand Curriculum
For Waikato SESTA enquiries, email
For Year to students this is at least . kilometres from the school.
For Year to students this is at least . kilometres from the school.
For a stage open tender, a recommendation report must be completed after stage . This recommends which suppliers should advance to stage and be invited to make an offer.
For a stage process, first use:
For a child with age, for example, autism, uh,
For a singlestage process, or the second stage of a stage process, use:
For a singlestage tender, you only complete recommendation report.
For a student attending a stateintegrated school, it must be the closest school of its designated character as defined under Section of the Education and Training Act . For example, the closest Catholic school. Singlesex schools and intermediate schools do not meet this criterion as they do not have a designated character as defined under the Act.
For a successful audit the board should:
For accuracy and consistency, we use the mapping software ArcGIS to measure the distance over the shortest public road or pedestrian route from the home roadside gate to the school or kura front gate.
For all early learning enquiries and licensing applications (North and West), email:
For all other changes, including if a child no longer needs to use the service, you must tell us using the email address below.
For all other changes, including if the student no longer needs a conveyance allowance, you must tell us using the email address below.
For all other changes, including if your child no longer needs SESTA, you must tell us using the email address below.
For all other changes, including if your child no longer needs a conveyance allowance, you must tell us using the email address below.
For all other enquiries, check out the contact us page.
For all other support, contact your regional office.
For all professional services including project management
For all subsequent years, Targeted Funding is provided for the period March to February the following year.
For an EQI to be calculated, each service must provide certain details about the children enrolled in the service and their families. This information is collected at points in the year. The Ministry will contact new services when the information is being collected.
For an organisation to grow and improve the quality of its services, it is important it monitors its performance.
For an update to this timeline, and for more information, including a list of changes, visit:
For any enquiries or to be added to the consultation mailing list, email
For any injuryincident that is notifiable under the Health and Safety at Work Act (HSWA), it is a requirement to keep the records for years from the of the incident.
For anything regarding this change and
For assistance with financial reporting, contact your School Finance Advisor.
For certificated teachers employed in split roles, only the hours they are employed engaging in duties and responsibilities in a teaching role should be counted as hours of work. Information on split roles can be found in B Education and care services.
For certificated teachers, any previous experience as an uncertificated teacher in Pacific immersion or bilingual environments should be credited as halfservice up to a maximum of years experience. This experience could be paid or unpaid.
For children under years, all equipment should meet the Product Safety Standards (Childrens Toys) Regulations .
For children who are , and years old, hours per week is funded by the government. If your child is at an early learning centre for more than hours, you may have to pay for the remaining hours.
For clarity, a simple summary notice about the complaints process could be displayed close to the licence. This summary notice would cover the key steps and people to contact and include details of the regional Ministry office.
For clarity, a simple summary notice about the complaints process could be displayed close to the licence. This summary notice would cover the key steps and people to contact, and include details of the regional Ministry office.
For clarity, the purpose for closing is determined by the board, so long as it meets the criteria for closing. These settings will be in place from Term of .
For common medicines administered by mouth (such as antibiotics), the level of information needed will be minimal.
For common medicines that are administered by mouth (such as antibiotics), the level of information needed will be minimal.
For each criterion there is guidance to help centres meet the required standards.
For each criterion there is guidance to help services meet the required standards.
For each criterion, there is guidance to help playgroups meet the required standards.
For each day of an average week in the advance period, services provide the number of funded child hours they would claim as:
For each day of the week deduct the Hours ECE hours (step ) from the Total Hours (step ). This is the Plus ECE hours you will claim.
For each day of the week estimate the number of Hours ECE hours each child will claim. You must not claim more than hours per day and hours per week of Hours ECE hours per child.
For each day of the week estimate the number of children receiving Hours ECE that will be permanently enrolled in your service.
For each day of the week estimate the number of hours each child is permanently enrolled in your service. For each child use the lower of the enrolled hours or hours per day up to a maximum of hours per week.
For each day of the week estimate the number of under yearold children that will be permanently enrolled in your service.
For each day of the week estimate the total number of Under Funded Child Hours you will claim.
For each group, consider:
For each offer, verify that:
For each session, all playcentres must:
For employees without a school payroll administrator, email
For enquiries about traffic management, managing traffic flows around schools and developing a car parking policy, contact your local regional or district council.
For example, additional step for every , hours (roughly one year) of additional recognised service.
For example, a handwashing basin may not be appropriate in a room that is going to be used by children who are nil by mouth (unless it is fitted with some way of ensuring children do not have independent access to the water). In this instance, the play specialist would need to be able to provide moistened individual flannels for children, and supervise handwashing to ensure the child does not try to suck them.
For example, a service that operates a Pacific immersion and bilingual room within a larger service is unlikely to be eligible for the bilingual service type.
For example, a service that operates a te reo immersion or bilingual room within a larger service is unlikely to be eligible for the bilingual service type.
For example, all records for the month of February (including temporary closures) must be confirmed as accurate and complete by March.
For example, if a pattern of frequent absence first occurred in the month of December, this would be month . If a service did not operate in January for a period of weeks or more and February was the next full month of operation, February would be month .
For example, if your service has children aged under , and children aged or older, you could count of the older children in the unders group. Then you only need staff members for the andover group and not the staff members children would usually need.
For example, many kindergartens operate for a shorter day similar to school hours, but some offer fullday options.
For example, services where you stay with your child will cost less than services that are run by employed staff.
For example, the comparisons table, um,
For example: hours and minutes would be rounded to hours whereas hours and minutes would be rounded to hours.
For examples of the Frequent Absence Rule, please refer to Section .
For families and communities, you can use this section to work with services, schools and providers to grow and support Pacific language pathways in your community and to understand what actions the Ministry of Education and partner agencies are taking.
For fire drills: A building assessment, for example:
For fire evacuations: A building assessment, for example checking that all appropriate notices were displayed, escape routes were clear, firefighting equipment serviced and so on.
For funding purposes, teacherled services include:
For funding purposes, the enrolment record for each child must include:
For funding to be delivered accurately and fairly, the following three records must be maintained: enrolment records, attendance records and absence records.
For further information on these funding types, see Chapters , and of this Handbook.
For information about advertising on GETS, use the guides below.
For information on advance funding please refer to Chapter of this Handbook.
For information on formal training courses, go to the New Zealand Qualifications Authority website.
For information regarding what records your service needs to keep see Chapter of this Handbook.
For intermediate year levels we compare the:
For material copyright to the Ministry of Education
For material with thirdparty copyright
For meetings attendance records and minutes of the meeting could be considered as evidence.
For minor injuries, staff will contact you or let you know at the end of the day. If a serious injury happens, staff will contact you straight away. All services will have documentation that must be completed, and you will be asked to sign the information.
For more help completing your RS Form, contact your Ministry regional office.
For more information about areas of play in a broadbased programme, refer to the following website.
For more information about making your space safe, visit the ACC website.
For more information about managing employment disputes, see the Labour Inspectorate website.
For more information about mixed provision contact Ministry regional office.
For more information about the audit process, watch the School Audit Process video in the resources section below.
For more information contact your local public health service office.
For more information on any of these topics, contact your Ministry regional office.
For more information on appropriate visas to enter New Zealand, see the Immigration New Zealand website.
For more information on claiming advance funding see Section Calculating Advance Days.
For more information on completing your RS Return, please see Chapter of this Handbook.
For more information on filling childplaces refer to Section of this Handbook.
For more information on the ECE Subsidy see Chapter of this Handbook.
For more information on the ECE Subsidy, see Chapter of this Handbook.
For more information on the Regulations see:
For more information on the absence rules refer to Chapter of this Handbook.
For more information on the adult:child ratios refer to the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations .
For more information on the preparation and storage of infant formula, refer to the guidance for HS Bottle feeding (below).
For more information on the quality rate, services should refer to Section C.
For more information on when and how funding is paid, see Section .
For more information or guidance on enrolling your child into qualifications or tertiary programmes, contact your regional office.
For more information or support with conflicts of interest at your school, contact us.
For more information or to submit a request, email
For more information, contact your local public health service office.
For more information, contact your regional office.
For more information, see Learning support in the early years or contact the Learning Support Information Line
For most centres, the best option is paper towels. There is a cost involved, but they have several advantages:
For noncompliance with safety checking, we may either reclassify your licence as provisional or suspend your licence. If compliance is not achieved by the we set, we may cancel your licence.
For older children, talk to your childs doctor or healthcare provider to access support.
For older, heavier children, a change mat on the floor may be more appropriate than a changing table.
For other help or advice, contact your regional office.
For other learning opportunities, you could look for groups and activities, such as sports clubs, within your own community and contact them.
For playcentres receiving quality funding, the record will indicate which quality funding rate option was being used for each session.
For playgroups, the educational programme is made up of all the things that are happening for children while they are attending playgroup. This will include:
For primary year levels we compare the:
For primary, intermediate and special schools, they are also covered in:
For procurements valued below ,, the procurement owner can be the same person as the procurement officer.
For regular excursions, the risk assessment can be a new plan or an update of a previous assessment, so any new risks are identified. The potential risks are more likely to be known to, and easily managed by, the service provider as part of their routine involvement and presence in the community.
For regular excursions, the risk assessment can be a new plan or an update of a previous assessment, so any new risks are identified. This should be made available for parents to sight at the time of enrolment.
For salary purposes, New Zealand qualifications that are registered on the New Zealand Qualifications Framework (NZQF) must be recognised.
For school payroll administrators, email
For schools and PPPM panel members, email
For schools and kura covering Years
For schools and kura covering Years
For secondary and composite schools, the requirement is half days. For primary, intermediate and special schools it can vary between a minimum of half days and a maximum of . This variable length is due to the shifting timing of Easter.
For secondary school year levels, we compare the:
For serious noncompliance with safety checking, we may consider referring to the Police for criminal investigation. This may lead to a criminal prosecution and a fine of up to , per person not safety checked.
For services applying for a first advance of Hours ECE:
For services offering outofschool care, the notice could be:
For simple procurements, this role could be done someone at the school such as a board member or caretaker.
For specific details see C.
For students travelling from some islands to mainland New Zealand for secondary school or
For students who do not have an NSN, you can create an NSN for them. Sight and verify the students official documentation before creating the NSN. We may request a copy of official documentation used to verify an NSN for data quality purposes.
For students who want to go to a special character school, the Access Barrier Allowance is available to the nearest school of that type, even if there are closer schools.
For support with your student management system (SMS), contact your provider.
For teachers, leaders and educators, you can use this section to plan for Pacific language pathways in your service, school, institute and community and to understand what actions the Ministry of Education and partner agencies are taking.
For teaching qualifications where the specialisation is not identified on the certificate itself (that is, it does not state an early childhood or primary specialty), academic transcripts or similar to show the course content must be kept as evidence that the qualification meets the requirements for homebased education.
For the Ministry of Education and partner agencies, this section sets out our commitment to grow Pacific language pathways by taking specific actions.
For the avoidance of doubt, nothing in the paragraphs above prevent the Ministry from decreasing the amount of the grant paid in advance to a service where the Ministry has reasonable grounds to believe that the matters set out in paragraphs d), g), h), i) or j) above may apply.
For the first day of the funding period, use your Staff Record to total the actual hours worked by ECE qualified certificated and New Zealand qualified certificated primary teachers who were being counted towards regulated (ratio) staff.
For the indoor and outdoor space requirements, see the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations .
For the purpose of the PITA an employed certificated teacher years of experience must be counted as:
For the purposes of the ECE Funding Subsidy, licensed ECE services are grouped into two types:
For the purposes of the Staff Hour Count the Staff Record must contain all of the following:
For the qualification groups please see B.
For this reason, it is important that the visits are scheduled for each child during their normal days and hours of enrolment, while under the care of their regular educator, and when the child is awake and engaged in the activities being provided by the educator.
Form of agreement for engagement of consultant template
Formalise the employment agreement between staff and the service prior to employment.
Formica squares, sheets of plastic or tabletops for finger painting.
Free education at state schools
Free phone (NZ only): BUSSCHOOL or
Freedom of expression in universities
Freephone (NZ only):
Freephone (NZ only):
Freephone (NZ only): TALK TEETH (
Frequently asked questions
Frequently asked questions about GenAI in NCEA assessment
Frequently asked questions for UIPs
Frequently asked questions: Playgroups Regulation
Friday August : Change of technology for application deadline.
Friday September : Provisional rolls .
Friday November : Provisional roll review applications deadline.
Friday November : Extraordinary roll growth applications deadline.
Friday November : All staffing applications and funding code changes for school year deadline.
Friday April to Sunday April .
Friday December : Quarter operational funding instalment .
Friday June : June roll return due.
Friday March : March roll return due.
From January , the new strategic planning and reporting framework was introduced, and the National Education Goals and National Administration Guidelines were removed. The then new planning and reporting framework has a clear link to the NELP and will require schools and
From January there will be one funding rate for homebased ECE services, this will be the quality funding rate.
From January , the qualification requirements for educators in every licensed homebased education and care service have been , and are set out in the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations , regulation and Schedule A.
From January , homebased educators without a current first aid certificate must complete a certificate with unit standards and to meet licensing requirements.
From May , schools and kura are required to use the new school planning and reporting application to submit their annual reports to us. These need to be submitted by May .
From October , the term all employed, in relation to the Minimum Salary Scale for Certificated Teachers, means all certificated teachers who are permanently employed either on a parttime or fulltime basis to work in a teaching or management role in the service (i.e., they are working for hire or reward under a contract of service).
From am, there are usually only a few children present. This means only person is required to meet the regulated (ratio) staff requirements.
From January , there will be a report on the following for each of these initiatives:
From Term , your school or kura must record student attendance data in your SMS every day you are open for instruction. This is a requirement of the Education and Training Act , and the Education (School Attendance) Regulations .
Full Final Cabinet Paper on Scope and Terms of Reference
Full Parity (Full Step Full Management Steps).
Full Parity Funding Rates
Full Parity Funding Rates are available to services who pay at least Full Parity Salary Scale (Full Step Full Management Steps).
Full Parity Funding Rates are available to services who pay at least the Full Management Steps of the Full Parity Salary Scale.
Full Parity Salary Scale (Full Step Full Management Steps)
Full Parity Salary Scale (Full Step Full Management Steps).
Full Parity funding rates are available to education and care services who agree to pay all employed certificated teachers according to Steps to Management steps of the Full Parity Salary Scale.
Full parity salary scale (Full Step Full management steps)
Full parity salary scale example: July funding period
Full records of both regular and special excursions should be kept for the current year plus additional year.
Full step Full management steps: Full parity funding rates. Band determined by the services certificated ratio.
Fulltime teaching equivalent (FTTE)based entitlement staffing
Funded child hours (FCHs) are the hours for which a service may claim funding and are based on:
Funding (certificated teachers)
Funding Band determined by the proportion of Certificated Teacher Hours
Funding and Equity Funding payments are eligible to receive the ATIS.
Funding and attestation adjustments
Funding and staffing adjustment
Funding and teacher certification lapses
Funding band determined by the proportion of certificated teacher hours
Funding band determined by the proportion of certificated teacher hours.
Funding can be claimed only for children who fill a childplace and are less than years of age.
Funding can only be claimed if the service is open on the day the public holiday is observed.
Funding can only be claimed to a maximum of hours per childplace per day, up to hours per childplace per week.
Funding cannot be claimed for:
Funding claim audits of homebased care networks will take place in the area in which the network operates.
Funding conditions: Chapter A
Funding eligibility: Chapter A
Funding for absences in the fourth month
Funding for an enrolled child begins on the planned start of their enrolment agreement.
Funding for casual and conditional children
Funding for casual and conditional children is based on attendance only.
Funding for casual children is based on attendance only.
Funding for makeup days:
Funding for new ownership
Funding for new services:
Funding information for playgroups.
Funding is a fixed monthly grant. It is not related to the size of the service, nor the number of funded child hours claimed.
Funding is a fixed monthly grant. There are currently payment bands, which reflect different levels of isolation. This means that more isolated services receive a higher rate of funding.
Funding is not based on the size of a service, nor the number of funded child hours claimed.
Funding is paid times a year, on the first working day of the following months.
Funding is targeted to services with a limited capacity to generate Funded Child Hours due to isolation.
Funding may be claimed for
Funding may be withheld in part or in full
Funding may be withheld in part or in full if the Ministry does not receive information from your service within weeks
Funding may continue at the standard rate for playcentres who do not have a person responsible, provided the breach of qualification requirements is being managed through a provisional licence process. This is a temporary measure (generally for up to months) and will only be considered where there is a clear action plan in place to fill the person responsible role.
Funding may not be claimed for
Funding must not be claimed for both the absence and the makeup day when the child is only fulfilling their enrolment expectation.
Funding must not be claimed for:
Funding on the basis of average actual attendance over a specified period.
Funding on the basis of enrolment ends:
Funding payments to the new owners will not be made until the change of service provider has been verified by a Ministry regional office.
Funding payments will continue once complete and accurate ECE Census data is submitted.
Funding payments will continue once:
Funding payments will not be made to the new bank account until the RS form has been received by ECE Operational Funding.
Funding rate changes for quality rate funding are effective from the the
Funding rate outcome from attestation response
Funding rates and payment
Funding rates depend on the age of children attending the service. This is measured by completion of the funded child hour entitlement section of the RS Return.
Funding rates depend on whether the service is offering Hours ECE to eligible children. This is measured by completion of the Hours ECE Hour entitlement section of the RS Return.
Funding rates for teacherled ECE services depend on five variables.
Funding resumes when the child returns to the service.
Funding that must be used to cover particular expenses or to meet particular objectives e.g. equity funding.
Funding will continue where a homebased service or individual homebased educator was forced to close for a short time, in an emergency only when funding approval for the emergency closure is obtained from the Ministry regional office.
Funding will continue where a service was forced to close for a short time, in an emergency only when funding approval for the emergency closure is obtained from the Ministry regional office.
Furniture and items intended for children to sleep on (such as cots, beds, stretchers or mattresses) are of a size that allows children using them to lie flat, and are of a design to ensure their safety.
Furniture and items intended for children to sleep on (such as cots, beds, stretchers or mattresses) must:
Furniture and items intended for children to sleep on (such as cots, beds, stretchers or mattresses) that will be used by more than one child over time are securely covered with or made of a nonporous material (that is, a material that does not allow liquid to pass through it) that:
Furniture or equipment can be set up indoors to make small challenge courses for children.
Furniture or items intended for children to sleep on (such as cots, beds, stretchers or mattresses) are available for the sleep or rest of children aged and older.
Furniture or items intended for children to sleep on (such as cots, beds, stretchers or mattresses) are provided at a ratio of at least to every children under the age of .
Furniture or items intended for children to sleep on (such as cots, beds, stretchers or mattresses) are provided at a ratio of at least to every children under the age of .
Furniture or items intended for children to sleep on (such as cots, beds, stretchers, or mattresses) are arranged and spaced when in use so that:
Furniture such as cots, beds, stretchers or mattresses and bedding that is used periodically needs to be hygienically stored when not in use to prevent crossinfection. Spraying and wiping cots, beds and mattresses with a suitable cleaning agent is needed before storage. Linen must be removed from the mattresses and not stacked in between mattresses.
Furniture, fittings and equipment
Furniture, such as cots, beds, stretchers or mattresses and bedding used periodically needs to be hygienically stored when not in use in order to prevent crossinfection.
Further details are available in Section .
Further details on the ATIS are available in Section .
Further information about Planning, Evaluation and Assessment can be found on pages to of
Further information about the school planning and reporting application is below.
Further information around multilevel cots is given in PF Design of sleep provisions.
Further record keeping requirements are set out Chapter .
Future of learning and work: Learning that is relevant to the lives of New Zealanders today and throughout their lives.
GETS is a free service designed to promote open, fair competition for New Zealand Government contract opportunities.
GETS manual Tender process guide
GETS procurement officer guide
GMA Display of information
GMA Parent access to information
GMA Availability of documentation
GMA Participation records
GMA Availability of documentation
GMA Documentation available
GMA Information provided to parents
GMA Parent access to information
GMA Information provided to parents
GMA Involving parents and educators
GMA Philosophy statement
GMA Selfreview and internal evaluation
GMA Human resource management
GMA Human resource management for homebased services
GMA Selfreview and internal evaluation
GMAA for homebased services
GMA Human resource management
GMA Human resource management for centrebased services
GMA Human resource management for hospitalbased services
GMAA for centrebased services
GMAA for hospitalbased services
GST will be charged on the levy.
Gates need to have a working locking mechanism so children cannot open them unassisted.
GenAI case study Aotea College
GenAI case study Hobsonville Point Secondary School
GenAI in NCEA assessment frequently asked questions
General Manager, Asset Management (Acting)
General education resources (for example: playground equipment and furniture).
General operating costs (for example: police vetting, teacher certification costs and electricity or water bills).
General property maintenance (for example: painting, heating systems, roofing and gardening).
General purpose financial reports
General purpose financial statements
General questions and comments
Generally unwell, fever, headache, vomiting
Generally unwell, fever, headache, vomiting, sometimes a rash. Urgent treatment is required.
Generally, if we collect information for a particular purpose, we only use it for that purpose. We can only use the information for another purpose where we are allowed or required to do so by the law, or with permission from the person in question.
Generation of between ,,. in ECE Funding Subsidy, Hours ECE funding and Equity Funding payments between June and May each year.
Geraldine District Free Kindergarten Association
Get ideas about different kinds of play.
Getting a Holidays Act remediation payment
Getting help if your child is not attending regularly
Getting on with others, managing your own impulses and understanding what are seen as appropriate behaviours are fundamental areas of learning for children. Adults in playgroups have an important role to play in providing children with consistent, sound and positive guidance as they relate to, communicate and interact with the people, places and things in their environments.
Getting support from your early learning service
Gisborne Free Kindergarten Association Incorporated
Give each user an individual login. Shared accounts make it harder to:
Give them plenty of clear fluids to drink (water). Keep them cool if there is a fever and warm if they are cold.
Glossary of terms for certification criteria for playgroups.
Glossary of terms for licensing criteria for centrebased ECE services.
Glossary of terms for licensing criteria for homebased ECE services.
Glossary of terms for licensing criteria for hospitalbased ECE services.
Go to Understanding the Rules and Guidelines
Go to Education Learning Management System at
Going to school every day is important for students to develop skills for lifelong learning.
Good access to an ample supply of water that is fit to drink needs to be provided for children attending. Older children need to be able to access this water independently.
Good morning everyone. Its, uh, its great to see.
Good planning and design will often prevent noise level concerns.
Good practice for any service provider is to have policies and procedures in place to deal with a range of complaints from a variety of sources. These may come from a parent, a member of the community or a staff member. They may be about a specific teaching practice, routine or policy, an event, a particular staff member, a member of the management team or board, or about the service in general.
Good practice for any service provider is to have policies and procedures in place to deal with a range of complaints from a variety of sources. These may come from:
Google Analytics optout browser addon
Google Analytics privacy policy
Google Smart Lock, which is available on some Android phones and Chromebook.
Google has guidance on setting up FA for Google Workspace and email.
Governance, management and administration
Governance, management and administration criteria for centrebased ECE services.
Governance, management and administration criteria for homebased ECE services.
Governance, management and administration criteria for hospitalbased ECE services.
Government Electronic Tender Service (GETS)
Government decisions on the Early Childhood Education (ECE) Regulatory Review
Government education agencies support many IT applications needed by school leaders and staff, education providers and sector suppliers. Learn about
Grass is an ideal surface for most outdoor activities. It can also be used as a safety surface for equipment under metre in height. It has the advantage of staying cool in hot weather and is suitable for both walking and crawling children.
Grass is an ideal surface for most outdoor activities. It can also be used as a safety surface for equipment under one metre in height. It has the advantage of staying cool in hot weather and is suitable for both walking and crawling children.
Ground floor and level , Rosedale Road
Ground floor, Montel Avenue
Group supervision requirements for quality funding
Group supervision requirements for standard funding
Grow, retain and value highly competent teachers, leaders and educational professionals with diverse Pacific whakapapa.
Growing Pacific Languages in Education
Guidance about information sharing under the Act is on the
Guidance about information sharing under the Family Violence Act is on the Ministry of Justice website.
Guidance and examples of conflicts of interest
Guidance and resources for contractors, providers and suppliers working on school infrastructure and property projects and planning.
Guidance and resources for education professionals managing and working in early learning services.
Guidance and resources for education professionals on the use of artificial intelligence in schools.
Guidance and resources for our education workforce, including principals, teachers and kaiako.
Guidance for Unfunded International Providers (UIPs)
Guidance for criterion PF Kitchen facilities provides information about domestic and commercial dishwashers. If your centre is considering installing a dishwasher you need to consult your local district health board public health unit for advice about dishwashers and hot water requirements for ECE centres. Guidance is also provided for centres that do not have a dishwasher and wash dishes by hand.
Guidance for developing a complaints policyprocess for ECE
Guidance for developing a complaints policyprocess for an ECE Service
Guidance for education professionals about attendance, enrolment, and managing students in schools and kura.
Guidance for education professionals about funding and staffing in schools and kura.
Guidance for education professionals about the administration and management of schools and kura.
Guidance for suppliers and providers about the administration and management of early learning services, schools and kura.
Guidance staffing is a roll component.
Guidance to support accelerating student progress
Guidance: Annual financial reporting on key areas
Guidelines concerning the provision of potable (drinkable) water should be available from your district health board.
Guidelines for Targeted Funding
Guidelines for Targeted Funding for Disadvantage
Guidelines for risk assessment
Guidelines for state school enrolment schemes
Guidelines for stateintegrated school enrolment schemes
HS Hazard and risk management
HS Hospital legislation compliance
HS Premises and contents are safe and hygienic
HS Premises maintained and hygienic
HS Hazard and risk management
HS Inappropriate material
HS Sleep furniture spacing
HS Storage of sleep furniture and bedding
HS Child protection for playgroups
HS Storage of sleep furniture and bedding
HS Hazard and risk management
HS Incident notification to the Ministry of Education
HS Medicine administration
HS Child protection for hospitalbased services
HS Temperature of hot water from taps children can access
HS Hot water cylinder temperature
HS Inappropriate material
HS Travel by motor vehicle
HS Alcohol and other substances at the service
HS Travel by motor vehicle
HS Supervision while eating
HS Premises and contents are safe and hygienic
HS Child health and wellbeing
HS First aid qualifications
HS Supervision while eating
HS Response to infectious illnesses
HS Medical assistance and incident management
HS First aid qualifications
HS Medicine administration
HS Response to infectious illnesses
HS Children washed when soiled
HS Medical assistance and incident management
HS Child protection for homebased services
HS Medicine administration
HS Inappropriate material
HS Nappy changing procedure
HS Children washed when soiled
HS Use of alcohol and other substances by coordinators and educators
HS Child protection policies for centrebased services
HS Use of alcohol and other substances by other people at the home
HS Inappropriate material
HS Alcohol and other substances
HS Incident notification to the Ministry of Education
HS Incident notification to
HS Incident notification to the Ministry of Education
HS Emergency plan and supplies
HS Fire evacuation scheme
HS Emergency plan and supplies
HS Travel by motor vehicle
HS Alcohol and other substances
HS Sleep furniture spacing
Half doors or hinged gates are effective and practical ways of restricting access to kitchen facilities. If you are considering the use of fixed barriers, such as plywood panels fitted into slots, think about how these might work in practice.
Halfcredit means that each hour worked in the relevant role should be counted as half an hour of work for salary purposes.
Halfday opening requirement
Halfday opening requirement
Halfday opening requirement
Halfservice means that each hour worked in the relevant role should be counted as half an hour of work for purposes of calculating experience in an immersion environment.
Hamish Anton (Deloitte) presentation.
Hard copies of the refreshed action plan for early learning centres, schools and tertiary institutions will be available to order from the end of September .
Hard surfaces should be kept clean, and equipment or toys should be kept hygienic. Toys and materials that children put in their mouths should be cleaned at the end of each day with hot soapy water or put in a washing machinedishwasher depending on the toy.
Hard surfaces should be kept clean, and equipment or toys should be kept hygienic. Toys and materials that children put in their mouths should be cleaned at the end of each day with hot soapy water or put in the washing machinedishwasher depending on the toy.
Has a child had a history of early reflux If so, extra vigilance over the introduction of new foods is essential.
Have some throwing and catching games with soft balls or small bean bags.
Have to travel an unreasonable distance (approximately kms) to the nearest state, stateintegrated school or
Have to travel longer than minutes one way to their nearest state, stateintegrated school or
Having a process whereby the attendance records are collected or delivered to the service provider every months (or after each funding period) could minimise the likelihood of loss or damage.
Having a roster of jobs can be helpful for the daytoday running of a playgroup. A roster lets everyone know who is doing what and helps a playgroup session run smoothly.
Having a sink with a hot water supply enables hand washing of items hygienically and to obtain hot water for other purposes, such as cleaning food preparation surfaces.
Having regard for the National Education and Learning Priorities (NELP) means being able to demonstrate in the documented annual plan how relevant key tasks for example curriculum review or policy review align with priorities to of the NELP.
Having regard for the National Education and Learning Priorities (NELP) means being able to demonstrate in the documented annual plan how relevant key tasks for example curriculum review or policy review align with priorities to of the NELP. Services will need to ensure those involved in the creation of the annual plan are familiar with priorities to of the NELP.
Having the building too warm could lead to lethargy in children and adults.
Having your playgroup education programme consistent with the curriculum framework means the principles and strands of
Hayden attends hours on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday, and . hours on Thursday and Fridays.
Hazard and risk management at early learning services
Hazards and risk management
Hazards and risks must also be managed on any excursion outside the home. See HS (below) for more guidance.
Hazards and risks must also be managed on any excursion outside the hospital. See HS for more guidance.
Hazards and risks must also be managed on any excursion when children leave the service. See HS for more guidance.
Head lice are very common in young children and are easily spread. They are very treatable, but make sure you let your early learning service know if your child has head lice. This is so they can let other families know and take steps to reduce the spread, such as removing dressup clothing until the outbreak clears.
Headache, vomiting, sore throat
Health Safety at Work Act
Health and Safety at Work Act
Health and safety at early learning
Health and safety criteria for centrebased ECE services.
Health and safety in early learning
Health and safety management
Health and safety of adults
Health and safety of educators
Health and safety practices
Health and safety practices criteria for homebased ECE services.
Health and safety practices criteria for hospitalbased ECE services.
Health and safety practices criteria for playgroups.
Health and safety standards
Health services for young children
Health, safety and wellbeing
Healthy School Lunches Programme
Hearing screening checks are available to all newborn babies to identify hearing loss early. If your child didnt have a newborn hearing check and you are concerned about their hearing, talk to your doctor. We work with families to provide supports once a need is identified.
Heavy furniture, fixtures and equipment that could fall or topple and cause serious injury or damage are secured.
Heavy furniture, fixtures, and equipment in any ECE activity room that could fall or topple and cause serious injury or damage are secured.
Help with employment issues
Helping Pacific early learning services strengthen their governance and management skills.
Helping schools provide opportunities for Year to students to become financially capable, learn about civics, and develop key workplace competencies.
Here are some quick and easy ways to implement least privilege:
Heretaunga Free Kindergarten Association
High incidence of bloody diarrhoea, stomach pain
High rate of hospitalisation and complications
High rise evacuation plans for ECE service providers
Highchairs or seats that attach to the edge of a table can be used as places for infants and young toddlers to sit while eating. Low tables and small chairs for sitting infants to eat their meals can help foster greater independence. Their use should be supervised. See the guidance for HS Supervision while eating.
Highchairs or seats that attach to the edge of a table can be used as places for infants and young toddlers to sit while eating. Their use should be supervised (see the guidance for HS Supervision while eating).
Higher funding rates are available to education and care and hospitalbased services who attest to paying all employed certificated teachers at least the amounts described in the salary scale in the next sub section.
Higher funding rates are available to education and care services that agree to pay all employed certificated teachers at or above certain minimum salary levels.
Higher funding rates are available to education and care services who pay all employed certificated teachers at least the minimum salaries described in Appendix .
Higher funding rates are available to education and care services who pay all employed certificated teachers service at or above certain minimum salary steps.
Higher funding rates are available to education and care services, who pay all certificated teachers employed in a Management Position at or above the management salary step.
Highest ECE or organization qualification held.
Highest Needs Change Programme Report Back
Highest Needs Review Minute of Decision
Highest Needs Review Change Programme Workplan
Hold a homebased service qualification or within months of joining a homebased service, be enrolled in a course offering a homebased qualification and complete the qualification within the timeframes below:
Hold a recognised homebased qualification or by July , be enrolled in a course of study offering a homebased qualification and complete the qualification within the timeframes below:
Holding a ballot for outofzone applications
Holidays Act Programme (Ministry payroll)
Holidays Act remediation payment for former Ministry employees
Holidays Act remediation: How calculations were made
Holidays and mandatory halfdays are statutory requirements for state and stateintegrated schools and kura.
Home Education application
Home and distance learning
Home based service providers can apply for emergency closure for individual educators in the following situations:
Home education is different from enrolling your child at
Home education, also known as homeschooling, can be an alternative to attending school in New Zealand. Youll need to apply for an exemption from attending school first.
Home settings provide children with opportunities to engage in experiences that are relevant to their own lives. Children should be able to access equipment and materials that support their interests, skills and abilities.
Homebased ECE excursion planning checklist
Homebased ECE excursion risk assessment
Homebased ECE licensing criterion HS requires parental consent for administering medicine, following the requirements for each category.
Homebased ECE record of special excursions
Homebased ECE services: B
Homebased attendance address.
Homebased daily hazard checklist
Homebased early learning services are moving towards a fully qualified workforce.
Homebased education and care declaration
Homebased education and care services
Homebased education and care services.
Homebased educator top up payments
Homebased educators holding a current first aid certificate with unit standard will continue to meet licensing requirements until their certificate expires. Then they must gain a new certificate with unit standards and .
Homebased service individual educators emergency closure
Homebased service providers and educators will need to work together to determine which emergency drills are relevant to their location. Relevant drills are likely to at least include fire evacuation, earthquake, shelter in place and lockdown. Tsunami drills are relevant for services in tsunami zones.
Homebased service providers and educators will need to work together to ensure there is a plan developed for dealing with emergencies.
Homebased service providers must make their Hours ECE educator pass through part of documentation provided to parentscaregivers.
Homebased service providers, who have gained emergency closure approval for individual homebased educator emergency closure, should record the children enrolled with this educator as absent. Normal absence rules apply.
Homebased services are in the process of becoming a more qualified workforce.
Homebased services are supervised by coordinators who are certificated teachers.
Homebased services may use a portable cot if it:
Homebased services must take steps to minimise the contact of children with any person who has an infectious illness.
Homebased staff qualification changes
Homes are grouped together in a service, the person or organization that operates the group of homes is the service provider.
Homes are not always designed with large storage areas. Consider how to best use existing storage areas, that is, cabinets or cupboards, to provide the storage needed.
Homes are not always designed with small groups of children in mind, and educators need to manage any difficulties presented by the configuration of the premises.
Homes in rural or isolated areas that are not on a town water supply and use springs, bores or water tanks need to ensure that the water is fit to drink.
Homes must have sufficient indoor space for group learning and homes also need to have some outdoor space to allow for physical activity. For the indoor and outdoor space requirements, see the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations .
Homes need adequate facilities to cater for occasions when a child needs to rest or sleep. How a service provides these facilities depends on what suits the home layout and parent expectations. It is preferable that a separate room is available so that, when a child chooses to sleep, there is a quiet area provided.
Homes will have different floor types. If easy to clean floors are not available, consider laying down a coversheet over existing flooring to enable children to engage in creative or messy activities.
Hospital based services need to provide evidence that there is a current certificate issued to the hospital under the Health and Disability Services Act .
Hospital managers should consult with and engage the ECE service in any budget development that may impact on the service and senior service staff should be consulted on how MOE funding is used.
Hospital play specialists kaiako, teachers, supervisors, parent helpers,
Hospital services are entitled to use notional rolls to calculate their Funded Child Hours (FCH). Please contact your regional Ministry Office to discuss or apply to be on a notional roll.
Hospitalbased ECE services
Hospitalbased services are entitled to discretionary hours per funding period, when a certificated reliever is not available. The recordkeeping requirements outlined in chapter B also apply to hospitalbased services. This includes the obligation to submit a report to the Ministry on the discretionary hours used each funding period.
Hospitalbased services are entitled to a notional roll because of the fluctuations in roll that the service is likely to encounter.
Hospitalbased services are licensed in accordance with the Education and Training Act under the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations , which prescribe minimum standards that each licensed service must meet. Licensing criteria are used to assess how the services meet the minimum standards required by the regulations.
Hospitalbased services are teacherled services that provide education and care to children under the age of who are receiving health services within premises under the control of the Ministry of Health.
Hospitalbased services have slightly different requirements; this is covered in
Hospitalbased services must keep the same staff records as education and care services.
Hospitalbased services will need to consider in advance the steps they would take if any adult providing education and care was found to be under the influence of alcohol or any other substance having a detrimental effect on their functioning or behaviour. This is a staff management issue and appropriate procedures would need to be followed.
Hours of hours ECE per week.
Hours of work relates to the total hours required for a certificated
Hours of work relates to the total hours required for a certificated kaiako to properly fulfil the duties and responsibilities connected with their employment. This will include, rostered hours, noncontact hours, staff meetings, paid professional learning and development and any paid leave
Hours of work relates to the total hours required for a teacher to properly fulfil the duties and responsibilities connected with their employment. This will include, rostered hours, noncontact hours, staff meetings, paid professional learning and development and any paid leave.
Hours that count towards an initial salary step
Hours that count towards salary progression
How Targeted Funding benefited the children in their service.
How Targeted Funding benefited the children within the service.
How Targeted Funding was spent.
How a conflict of interest happens
How about in this example, if the whanau is asking
How adults should interact with children when changing nappies.
How are all educators and coordinators supported to evaluate their role as
How are babies kept safe from other children while they are being changed
How are children and their
How are children empowered in this routinecare moment
How are children kept safe from falls or other hazards
How are children, and their parents and
How are hazard and risk identification processes and practices reviewed and
How are learning goals set for children, and who does this
How are maintenance issues communicated to the person in charge or governance committee for any repairs or replacement
How are maintenance issues communicated to the person responsible or governance committee for any repairs or replacement
How are other children at the home supervised when the educator is changing a nappy
How are reciprocal and responsive relationships fostered That is, talking to the child about what is happening
How are reciprocal relationships reflected in our setting
How are soiled nappies stored and disposed of or given to parents to take home for disposal
How are the services hazard and risk management checklists reviewed and used to inform the services management and practice, for example supervision, maintenance, repairs
How are we aware of the concepts of
How are we seeking guidance from mokopuna in creating an environment that they find comforting, engaging, and meaningful
How centres provide safe and hygienic places for children to sit while eating will differ from centre to centre. Some centres will choose to have a separate dining room, but this is not a requirement.
How children are kept safe from falls or other hazards.
How children can be empowered in this routinecare moment.
How children will be supervised while they are
How costs are turned into funding rates
How could you as the parent or caregiver help
How do children accessrevisit their learning if it is held on digital platforms
How do children have opportunities to review and extend their own learning How do our approaches to documenting childrens learning reflect our service, its philosophy and community
How do children have opportunities to review and extend their own learning How do our approaches to documenting childrens learning reflect our service, its philosophy, and the community
How do children learn what is expected of them while eating For example, to remain seated until they have finished eating
How do children learn what is expected of them while eating For example, to remain seated until they have finished eating
How do different theories that guide our practice connect with each other How are they different
How do educators and coordinators learn about the languages and cultures of all parents and
How do my own personal values impact on, and influence my teaching practice
How do our educators and coordinators support all children to develop prosocial strategies for learning with and alongside others
How do our own personal values impact on and influence our teaching practice
How do our own values and assumptions impact on our decision whether or not to seek support
How do our policies provide a clear process for identifying when additional support is needed, and for seeking that support
How do our policies provide a clear process for identifying when support is needed, and for seeking that support
How do our relationships and interactions reflect relevant theories and good practice in early childhood education
How do our selfreview processes support children knowing about and understanding their own and others culture
How do our understandings of
How do our wider relationships with colleagues, parents, and the community influence our provision of a languagerich environment What tools and strategies do we have to support the provision of a languagerich environment
How do parents and caregivers keep the areamatchange table clean between nappy changes
How do parents and caregivers nominate a caregiver
How do playgroup members find out about the emergency procedures
How do the toolsresources in your service curriculum reflect what parents and
How do we access knowledge that will assist us to supportenhance the learning for all children
How do we acknowledge the role of parents and
How do we articulate to others why we do things, and what we are doing
How do we bring our understanding of
How do we build relationships with the supports and services in our area
How do we collect parent and
How do we communicate with parents and
How do we create a sense of belonging for everyone in our service including educators, and other adults
How do we create a sense of belonging for everyone in our service, including
How do we create a supportive environment in which all children are able to access and contribute to a rich and rewarding curriculum (
How do we create an atmosphere that enables free sharing of ideas and opinions
How do we create an environment that recognises and appreciates the expertise parents and
How do we empower parents and
How do we encourage contributions from children, their families, and all staff, including medical
How do we encourage parents and
How do we ensure our processes enable initial informed consent and ongoing consent if required
How do we ensure our processes enable initial informed consent and ongoing consent, if required
How do we ensure that every child has the opportunity to develop a strong, reciprocal relationship with at least one educator
How do we ensure that every child has the opportunity to develop strong, reciprocal relationships with
How do we ensure that every child has the opportunity to develop strong, reciprocal relationships with educators
How do we ensure that management and
How do we ensure that management and educators understand the principle of partnership inherent in
How do we ensure that management, educators, and coordinators understand their role to provide mokopuna with culturally responsive environments that support their learning and ensure that they experience equitable opportunities to learn
How do we ensure that parents and
How do we ensure that parents understand the practices and procedures of our service
How do we ensure that we have an understanding of other world views and ways that these may influence learning outcomes for the child
How do we ensure the provision of meaningful and respectful cultural experiences
How do we ensure the voices and aspirations of former refugee and migrant parents and
How do we ensure there are sufficient adults in any one area to at least meet the minimum ratios standard and for meaningful interactions
How do we ensure we use a strengthsbased approach which enhances the
How do we ensure we use a strengthsbased approach which enhances the mana of all when seeking support and guidance
How do we establish a shared understanding of what social and emotional competence looks like, feels like, and sounds like in our service
How do we evaluate how effectively the curriculum is supporting the strengths, abilities, and competencies of all children
How do we evaluate how effectively we are enhancing outcomes for
How do we evaluate how our level of engagement with children and families impacts on learning outcomes for children
How do we go about making contact with specialist services Do we know where all our local community facilities are
How do we identify what works well and what the barriers are to meaningful assessment, planning, and evaluation
How do we include and respond to the diverse strengths and needs of children, parents,
How do we involve parents and
How do we involve parents when accessing specialist services
How do we know that children and
How do we know that our service curriculum is embedded in reciprocal and responsive relationships
How do we know that our service curriculum reflects the holistic way children learn and grow What does holistic learning look like
How do we know that our service empowers children
How do we make decisions about our focus for professional development
How do we manage challenging behaviours in respectful and dignified ways
How do we perceive or view children, and how do we express our perceptions or views
How do we reflect on or monitor the language we use with children, families and each other
How do we reflect the wider world of family and community within our service curriculum
How do we respond to diverse family structure and values, socioeconomic status, religion, and beliefs within our curriculum
How do we support and enable children who are nonverbal to make choices within our programme
How do we support and enable infant and toddlers who are nonverbal to make choices within our curriculum
How do we take responsibility to extend our knowledge and use of
How do we understand parents and
How do you ensure that sufficient essential resources such as nappies, food, water and essential medical supplies are available
How do you establish a shared understanding of what social and emotional competence looks like, feels like, and sounds like in your service
How do you explain to others what real choice for children is Who answers this question
How do you know that children and
How do you manage setting up and packing away if premises need to be cleared for use by other groups after each session
How do you promote academic integrity
How does Cloudflare protect email addresses on website from spammers
How does curriculum leadership happen in our team
How does curriculum leadership happen in our team How do we develop curriculum leadership
How does our behaviour demonstrate that we value and respect diversity
How does our curriculum reflect gender and ethnicity, diversity of ability and learning needs
How does our curriculum reflect gender and ethnicity, diversity of ability, and learning needs
How does our image of the child influence our teaching practice
How does our professional learning change our perspectives of
How does our professional learning change our perspectives on
How does our service curriculum include strategies to fully include all children
How does our service curriculum include strategies to understand and respond to the diverse strengths and needs of
How does our service encourage andor support educators to extend their knowledge and use of
How does our service integrate advice from specialist services into the curriculum
How does our team challenge discriminatory practices and behaviour in our service
How does our team challenge issues to do with fairness and social justice
How does our team challenge issues to do with fairness and social justice How are parents and
How does our team define an engaged learner
How does the educator interact with children when changing nappies
How does the language that we use empower children
How does the language we use demonstrate our understanding of relevant theories and good practice
How does the use of GenAI relate to academic integrity
How does the way our day is set up influence the experiences for children How are children empowered to influence how the day is organised
How does your school policy outline your preferred approach to referencing source material, including referencing GenAI
How does your school policy warn about bias and inaccurate information being by GenAI
How early learning services or service providers choose to communicate this information to parents is at their discretion.
How effective are the ways we engage with parents and
How effective are the ways we engage with parents How do we measure this
How entitlement staffing is calculated
How frequently head countsroll checks will be made during the excursion.
How have those outcomes informed the current selfreviewinternal evaluation
How hazards and risks will be identified
How hazards and risks will be identified
How independence can be fostered.
How is funding calculated
How is independence fostered
How is it reflected in our service
How is our assessment practice embedded in reciprocal and responsive relationships
How is our environment set up Who makes the decisions about how our environment is set up Where does assessment for learning figure in this
How is our service staffing organised to ensure consistent relationships
How is our understanding of what the strands mean in our service guided by the principles
How is the maintenance of premises and equipment documented, managed and budgeted for
How is the nappy changing area cleaned and disinfected Whenhow often
How is this partnership reflected in the policies and practices of the service as identified in the governance and management criteria
How long ago the safety check was done.
How long it takes to process requests
How much equipment youll need
How much notice do I have to give for holidays
How much the boarding allowance is
How much will I pay for the hours my child attends
How much you are paid depends on how many children you are taking to school and how far you have to travel. The allowance is paid at a daily rate so your payment will vary depending on how many school days are in the term.
How much you can get involved in your childs early learning centre can depend on the type they are enrolled in.
How often will review and evaluations take place
How our learning support teams work with schools and
How our learning support teams work with schools and kura
How parents of children attending the service are provided with the opportunity to contribute to the review and evaluation
How parents will be informed of this procedure (for example at point of enrolment, as part of induction process to service).
How processes for updating the identification of hazards and risks on a regular basis will be
How readily can adults provide for the safe and comfortable washing of a sick or soiled infant, toddler or child
How readily can educators provide for the safe and comfortable washing of a sick or soiled child
How reciprocal and responsive relationships are fostered, for example talking to the child about what is happening.
How satisfied are we with what is happening now
How school enrolment schemes work in Aotearoa New Zealand.
How schooltoschool exchanges work
How schools are included in the programme
How services meet the intent of all reasonable steps will be determined by their specific contexts. As a general guide, reasonable steps for the Persons responsible (Coordinator visiting teacher) to take to observe a child each month might include:
How services support and organise staff to ensure that children experience stable and predictable relationships with educators is important to enhance learning and care experiences for children.
How sleep times and checks will be recorded and the information relayed to parents and stored.
How the Education and Training Act , regulations and criteria apply to early learning services.
How the Ministry will develop and consult on enrolment schemes
How the allowance is paid
How the attendance service works
How the disease is spread
How the learning at playgroup will happen
How the nappy changing area is cleaned and disinfected, whenhow often and by whom.
How the premises will be arranged, across all indoor and outdoor spaces likely to be used at any time while children are attending the home, to enhance supervision of children.
How the risks to children and adults will be mitigated.
How they have spent Targeted Funding.
How this information will be communicated to parents.
How this links to Ka Hikitia
How this links to Tau Mai Te Reo
How to access and allocate National Student Numbers (NSNs) for new enrolments.
How to access the attendance service
How to apply the frequent absence rule
How to apply the right levels of access
How to apply to home educate your child
How to calculate pay parity salary steps
How to complete the staff record
How to find legal information
How to find the required roll information
How to find your daily school bus route map
How to have regard for the NELP
How to identify harm to children and report it
How to implement least privilege
How to make up a . bleach solution
How to report suspected abuse or neglect
How to request official information
How to set up least privilege
How to set up the School Planning and Reporting role for users on the School Planning and Reporting Application.
How to submit a roll return
How to submit data and pay
How to support families to apply for SESTA
How to technically set up least privilege
How to use Targeted Funding
How to use discretionary hours
How transitions will be managed tofrom the destination including from vehiclestransport and any parking area.
How useful is the information we gather about children
How we calculate entitlement staffing
How we calculate your funding
How we collect your information
How we investigate a complaint or incident in early learning
How we keep your information safe
How we use resourcing rolls to calculate operating funding
How we use resourcing rolls to calculate operational funding
How we will deliver this priority
How well protect information
How will body waste and wastewater be disposed of safely and hygienically
How will storage facilities be arranged to ensure easy access, minimise congestion and ensure safety
How will the educator manage getting equipment (such as buggies) and children safely in and out of the car
How will the educator supervise other children while washing a sick or soiled child
How will the range of indoor and outdoor equipment and material be stored
How will the service better engage with their
How will visitors to the service be informed about identified hazards
How will we identify curriculum priorities What will this journey look like for our service and how will we document this
How will you ensure your procedurefacility maximises adult health and safety
How will you monitor noise in the environment once you are operating to know if you need to initiate further noise effects mitigation
How would adults respond when children bring inappropriate material from home
How would staff respond when children bring inappropriate material from home
Howto information is identified by a checklist symbol.
However, anything about this, about the change itself, um,
However, services are also able to use other resources that they may have developed inhouse for this purpose.
However, services can use other resources that may have been developed inhouse for this purpose.
However, services must at least specify:
However, these services can submit their RS Return through ELI, if they wish to.
However, um, it would be for the board to decide as well.
Huia Playcentre arranges for Sione to visit James Cook Primary School from to every Wednesday for one month before he begins attending James Cook Primary School.
Huia Playcentre is a sessional service.
Huia Playcentre is a sessional service. They claim days advance funding in the Sessional column.
Huia Playcentre operates sessions per day, each for . hours.
Huia Playcentre operates sessions per day, each for . hours:
Huia Playcentre operates two sessions per day, each for . hours.
Huia Playcentre operates two sessions per day, each for . hours:
Hutt City Kindergartens Association
I am the manager of TE supporting the attendance codes, uh,
I at least have not been privy to anything
I believe implemented last year,
I believe it was previously called justified other.
I certify that, to the best of my knowledge, the information contained on this form is true and correct.
I graduated transition plan.
I have confidence that they will be made.
I have have this on the West coast
I know Im fielding uh, a couple
I know that general practitioners in Nelson have been
I may be prosecuted and fined or imprisoned.
I mean, everything is nuanced
I really just want to close up now, thank you all for your time for listening. Appreciate it. Please contact us at any opportunity you may have or any questions you may have, we are here to help. Kia ora. Thank you.
I think I missed a few points out, um, from the recording.
I think it is a school level decision. I
I think its daily, it needs to be completed, so its,
I think that kind of, thats a good question in terms
I think thats, um, thats an unjustified absence.
I think this is a conversation that we have to have Mark
I think we, we get into that, that queue
I under, uh, weve had that before.
I understand that, um, that wouldve been marked present,
I want to do my best to outline, um, uh,
I will guide you through some tips to make it easier for you when you are ready to print the financial statements either for your own visual checking or providing it to the board for signing.
I will have to pay back the total amount of any overpayment andor
I would encourage you to follow the link.
I would really love it if Marika, Tina,
Ill also show you how to hide a row that has no number or has a zero value in all three columns to improve the presentation of the financial statements and Ill show you how to format the worksheet to show a white background.
Ill just quickly find this for you.
Ill kick us off. Um, Im Mark Keith.
Ill show you how to arrange the worksheet vertically and in synchronous sidebyside viewing in Microsoft Windows, compare your current mapping of the trial balance to the latest template, add and delete rows to the existing mapping to align to the latest template.
Ill show you how to blank each row and column in preparation for manual data entry in the input worksheet, check the blanked input worksheet balances and all the financial statements and notes are blank and balanced and how to key data into each section and to check them against your system financial statements.
Ill speak more to what I heard
Ill, um, Debbie, can I please ask you
Im Catherines asked if its the same for primary,
Im a project manager here at the Ministry of Education,
Im assuming from the corridor that Ive just heard,
Im going to show you how to gather all parts of the Annual Report, upload into the Education Portal and put a copy onto the schools website.
Im going to show you how to hide rows and notes that are not required for your school.
Im going to show you how to quality assure each worksheet with a red coloured tab. These worksheets will form the printed pages of the financial statements.
Im going to show you some key steps for populating the inputs worksheet manually.
Im having issues with the chat, sorry,
Im sorry, just to finish that one off.
Im very excited, uh, to outline to you some, um,
I, um, I will just get the,
IE notifying FA au If two
IEM devices help to assess:
IT leads should be told in a timely manner about new or departing users and role changes for least privilege to work in practice.
ITE lift and shift presentation
Ia ra; he toromitanga i roto i te reo.
Ideally any equipment needed should be stored near the exits from the building to avoid the need to retrieve it from more distant storage areas when evacuating the building in an emergency.
Ideally, least privilege should be implemented for all systems used by your school or kura.
Ideally, toilet and handwashing facilities should be close to play areas (that is, not down long corridors) to make access for children as easy as possible.
Identify hazards and risks.
Identify the roles they and others will play during an emergency drill.
Identify your procurement needs and prepare a detailed statement of requirements.
Identifying a need for support
Identifying achievement challenges
If children are attending, the service would require:
If MaeLing only attends from to one Monday, another child (Tom) may attend from to .
If a board wants to close its school for instruction during term time, it must:
If a centre is looking at transporting children to and from the centre, the accountability for regular transport (outside enrolled and licensed hours) is to be agreed between parents and the ECE centres concerned.
If a certificated teacher is on extended leave without pay for their usual days worked, they cannot claim the allowance during this time.
If a certificated teacher works across two services that apply for the allowance the allowance will be calculated at a prorata amount across both services.
If a change to onduty adults occurs and eligibility for quality funding is maintained, the service must keep a record of the change.
If a child attending a service is from a family with separated parents, the Education and Training Act sets out the right of entry to early childhood education (ECE) services for parents and guardians.
If a child attending the service is from a family with separated parents, the Education and Training Act sets out the right of entry to early childhood education (ECE) services for parents and guardians.
If a child attending your service is from a family with separated parents, the Education and Training Act sets out the right of entry to early childhood education (ECE) services for parents and guardians.
If a child cannot go home immediately, keep them away from others, perhaps by making a bed up on a couch for them and get the other children involved in an activity as far away as practical while still being able to monitor the child
If a child cannot go home immediately, keep them away from others, stay with them at all times, and give them plenty of clear fluids to drink (water). Keep them cool if there is a fever and warm if they are cold.
If a child has an unusual or complex need, services need to ensure educators trained to administer that medication, and to ensure that their training needs are met.
If a child has an unusual or complex need, services need to identify how many staff need to be trained to administer that medication, and to ensure that their training needs are met.
If a child is aged , or , they are eligible for the hours ECE funding scheme. The subsidy covers up to hours of early childhood education each week. It can only be used for up to hours a day.
If a child is eligible, they are not guaranteed a place in a vehicle as we will not always have a suitable service available. In this circumstance, the family can get the SESTA Conveyance Allowance.
If a child is injured, any required first aid is administered or supervised by an adult meeting these requirements.
If a child needs to go to hospital or the doctor, who will go with them and how will care be ensured for the other children at the centre Ratios must still be met at the centre, and there must be a first aider remaining at the centre.
If a child needs to go to hospital or the doctor, who will go with them and how will care be ensured for the other children at the home
If a childrens worker cannot provide you with a Police certificate, they need to prove that they tried to get one. They must also make a statutory declaration under the Oaths and Declarations Act about whether they have any overseas criminal convictions.
If a complaint is made directly to your early learning service, you should follow your complaints policy and procedure.
If a complaint is made to us
If a completed RS return is not received for the ECE Subsidy funding cycle, the
If a completed RS return is not received for the ECE Subsidy funding cycle, the PITA allowance will not be paid.
If a concern involves a teacher or school staff member, the school board must suspend the person immediately while the concerns are investigated.
If a dedicated art sink is not possible at your centre, you will need to have an acceptable alternative system. Alternative systems should (as much as possible) eliminate the risk of art materials either causing contamination, or becoming contaminated by pathogens or toxic substances.
If a dedicated art sink is not possible at your centre, you will need to have an acceptable alternative system. Talk to your local health protection officer (HPO) from public health for advice about the best way to ensure hygienic practices.
If a driver decides it is unsafe to continue with their route, they can pull over. They are not permitted to remove students from the bus. They must call their employer and follow their procedures. This may include calling the police or school to remove the students concerned.
If a hazard is identified, how it will be eliminated, isolated or minimised When will it be done Who is responsible for this
If a member of staff is under the influence of alcohol or any other substance, consider what action you will take. This is an employment issue and appropriate procedures would need to be followed.
If a parent chooses not to pay an optional charge, the only action a service or educator can take is to withhold the additional feature(s) covered by the optional charge. By choosing not to pay an optional charge, parents are agreeing to not have access to that additional activity or item.
If a parent has a health condition which might compromise their ability to supervise throughout the excursion, ask them to let you know.
If a playgroup closes, they will need to identify equipment purchased with Ministry of Education funds. The inventory can be used to maintain a record of these purchases.
If a plumbing fixture is not available, service providers will need to consider how they will ensure sick or soiled children are washed easily and hygienically.
If a practising certificate lapses
If a public transport option becomes available, we may stop running school buses in that area. We will give affected schools at least a full terms notice of the change.
If a scheduled sleep or rest time is part of the services daily routine, then the service will need enough beds, mattresses, stretchers or mats for every child attending.
If a service has had to notify a specified agency of an incident, you must also notify us.
If a service is closed because of emergency, staff should ensure they are available wherever they can be of help to children, families and colleagues.
If a service is found to have not met the necessary funding conditions of the
If a service is found to have not met the necessary funding conditions of the PITA:
If a service is located within a larger premises (such as a school, church or recreation centre), then the phone services within that organisation may be used to comply with this requirement. However, there needs to be adequate systems in place to allow phone messages to be relayed back to the service, and the service to be able to use the phone to make calls when necessary and not impact on adult to child ratios.
If a service provider operates a number of services, the total funding for all those services is paid to the service provider.
If a service provider operates more than one service, funding for all services will be paid to the bank account of the service provider.
If a service was given Ministry regional office written approval for an emergency closure confirmed by letter or email and you are submitting a paperbased RS Return:
If a student behaves inappropriately or unsafely, you must take steps to manage this behaviour as in any other area of school life.
If a student can no longer use the school bus because a route is changed, they may be able to get other transport assistance.
If a student loses their place on the school bus, their caregiver is still responsible for getting them to school. Caregivers arent entitled to a conveyance allowance in this situation and the student is still legally required to go to school.
If a teachers overseas qualifications are not comparable to a New Zealand qualification, they may be able to apply for registration through a discretionary pathway.
If a teachers practising certificate lapses, the teacher cannot continue working as a childrens worker until:
If a visit has not been achieved, then this should be documented with an explanation and a description of their other attempts to see the child.
If adults suspect that during the process of exiting or reentry to a building to secure items poses further risk to their own lives or the lives of others, then they should not do so.
If after working with us you are still not happy with how we have handled your complaint, there are a range of options for you to consider seeking a resolution.
If an ECE centre has pets they need to be appropriately housed and restrained at all times and children supervised when interacting with them. Make sure their habitats are cleaned and maintained as required depending on the needs of the animal(s).
If an activity poses a risk, parents, caregivers and educators will use their judgement to ensure that the right kind of supervision can be provided. If close supervision cannot be provided for an activity which requires it, then parents, caregivers and educators should encourage children to modify their activity or defer it until the appropriate level of supervision can be provided.
If an activity poses a risk, teachers, educators and
If an educator is an employee of a homebased service provider, homebased educator top up payments must not be charged.
If an enrolled child is absent from a homebased service and the educator, by contractual agreement, is not paid for absent children, the service provider cannot claim funding for that child for that day.
If an infant is sleeping in a cot or portable cot, the infant must not be in the same room as a bunk bed.
If an informal decision does not sort out your concern, you can make a formal complaint in writing to a support manager at your local Ministry office.
If any children eligible for Hours ECE attended the service on a casual basis and received Hours ECE, list the number of hours each of these children attended.
If any children under years of age attended the service on a casual or conditional basis, list the number of hours each of these children attended.
If any outdoor space is used by the playgroup, it is either:
If approval is not given for the individual homebased educator absence, child absence funding cannot be claimed during this closure.
If attending a school is not the best option (you might live a long way from the nearest school, travel overseas or have other reasons) your child can learn with
If centres are unsure about the suitability of a building with other tenants for an ECE service, they should contact the local fire service office as they will provide individualised advice on the suitability of any premises and the development of an evacuation scheme.
If certification has been granted for less than years, the Ministry of Education will view the Corrective Action Plan that forms part of the Hospitals Audit Report, in order to be satisfied that the relevant aspects of operation remain compliant.
If changes are proposed to a stateintegrated school, the proprietor must be involved in the consultation.
If children are being taken out of the hospital grounds, then they need written parental consent.
If children are capable of standing up in their cot or bed, ensure that there are no choking hazards within reach for example curtain cords.
If children are eating outside, the educator should encourage children to:
If children are left at the centre during an excursion, the teaching staff to children ratios must be met and there must be a first aid qualified staff member at the centre.
If children need to use the facility (such as in the case of an isolation area or bodywash facility), their safety, supervision and dignity can be assured.
If children travel in a motor vehicle while in the care of the service:
If early childhood education and care centres have any concerns about interior lighting levels, they are able to contact the local regional public health officer for advice.
If early childhood education and care centres have any concerns about noise levels inside a centre, they are able to contact the local regional public health officer for advice.
If early childhood education and care centres have any concerns about noise levels, they are able to contact the local regional public health officer for advice.
If ever a dispute were to arise between a parent and service regarding the care of their child around sleep, it would be useful for the service to be able to refer the parent to the documented procedure to demonstrate that good practice occurred.
If food is provided by parents for a shared lunch a list of all food provided is required to meet this requirement
If food is provided selecting appropriate food for individual children is very important to minimise choking risk. It is important to discuss with a parent or caregiver the foods children can manage safely rather than relying on age alone as the indicator.
If furniture and items do not meet these requirements they cannot be used.
If furniture and items do not meet these requirements, then they cannot be used.
If infants, toddlers or children not walking attend, there are safe and comfortable (indoor and outdoor) spaces for them to lie, roll, creep, crawl, pull themselves up, learn to walk, and to be protected from more mobile children.
If many children become sick with the same illness at the same time, services sometimes need to close to manage these outbreaks.
If multilevel cots are used:
If multiple schools use one bus route, one school takes responsibility. This is known as the head school. They will appoint the routes head bus controller, who has some extra responsibilities.
If no antibiotic treatment, then days from onset of illness or until no more coughing, whichever comes first
If no discretionary hours have been used, then no submission is required.
If no one remains at the centre during the excursion, consider leaving a written notice at the centre that is visible to visitors providing information on:
If no place in a vehicle is available, you may be able to get a payment called the SESTA Conveyance Allowance. We pay this directly to you to contribute to the costs of getting your child to school.
If not permanently set up, furniture or items intended for children to sleep on (such as cots, beds, stretchers or mattresses) and bedding is hygienically stored when not in use.
If older children are present (either after school or during holidays), the educator needs to consider internet management and monitoring.
If only attesting to paying all employed certificated teachers at least the amount described at Step of the salary scale, a service may count employer KiwiSaver contributions towards the minimum salary requirement, provided it has been agreed to by the teacher and their employer.
If other agencies are also investigating, we may need to wait for their results before the incident can be closed. We will contact you with information about this.
If other children develop the illness, take a careful look at the hygiene and cleaning routines used at the home:
If other children develop the illness, take a careful look at the hygiene and cleaning routines used at your service:
If outdoor space is not available, alternative arrangements are made to provide children attending with opportunities for gross motor (physically active) play.
If possible, aim for at least member of the teaching staff to be excluded from the ratio calculation. This leaves them free to manage and coordinate during any unforeseen event, or to deal with routine items such as collecting tickets, managing storage of back packs and so on.
If possible, aim for at least one of your teaching staff to be excluded from the ratio calculation. This will leave them free to manage and coordinate during any unforeseen event, or to deal with routine items such as collecting tickets, managing storage of back packs and so on.
If possible, staff should attempt to ascertain the length of time the noise might occur and if appropriate make contingency plans as to:
If providing outofschool care, the educator needs to be aware of the space that older school children will be using, as well as any spaces that may be shared with ECE children.
If providing outofschool care, the educator should ensure they can see and hear the children at all times. Small spaces should be kept clear of clutter and larger spaces are set up so children have clear play spaces that educators can observe.
If relevant, how are potties stored, used and cleaned
If schools do not use the curriculum halfdays granted by the Minister of Education, the minimum halfday requirement reverts to:
If setting up a separate area:
If someone else has to pick up your child, you have to let staff know in writing or, in an emergency, by text message.
If someone is under the influence of alcohol or drugs
If space allows, hospital management may be in a position to provide a separate room for the exclusive use of early childhood education staff. Where separate space is not available, staff may share space with other hospital staff.
If staff are needed to move between rooms, the service should ensure ratios are maintained in both rooms.
If staff suspect that during the process of exiting or reentry to a building to secure items poses further risk to their own lives or the lives of others, then they should not do so.
If storage of madeup formula brought by parents is necessary, it should only be kept in the refrigerator for a maximum of hours past the time it is made up.
If storage of madeup formula brought by parents is necessary, that it should only be kept in the refrigerator for a maximum of hours past the time it is made up.
If the th of the month is a weekend or public holiday, you will be paid the next business day.
If the ECE centre is being established in an existing building, children can be protected by:
If the ECE centre is in a building with other tenants, centres need to be aware that the fire evacuation scheme approved by Fire and Emergency New Zealand applies to the whole building and all tenants, and is the responsibility of the building owner. It does not just apply to the ECE centre.
If the Teaching Council has issued or renewed a practising certificate, they will have considered them to have a satisfactory vet. Centresservices can choose to rely on this or carry out their own police vet.
If the Teaching Council has issued or renewed a practising certificate, they will have considered them to have a satisfactory vet. Playgroups can choose to rely on this or carry out their own police vet.
If the abuse or neglect is happening at a school, you should contact us so we can make sure the school is following the right processes to address the situation.
If the adult lives in a home that becomes licensed for homebased education and care, you must get their Police vet before the service begins to operate. This applies even if the person is unlikely to be present when the service is operating.
If the adult moves to a home that is already being used for homebased education and care, you must obtain their Police vet before they move in.
If the audit determines the service has been incorrectly funded the service may have their funding adjusted in the next funding cycle.
If the centre chooses to have a scheduled rest or sleep time during the day for all children, then they may choose to turn some of the activity space into a sleeprest area during that time. However, children who do not wish to sleep or rest must have somewhere to play.
If the centre decides to allow children to rest or sleep as and when they need to throughout the day (either in a separate room or in a quiet area of the service) then the stated ratio of to needs to be met. It is important that children have something to lie down on when they want to sleep or rest, and do not have to wait.
If the centre does not have a separate dining room, making use of existing tables and chairs within the general activity space is a practical way of providing places for children to sit and eat.
If the centre prefers to allow children to selfregulate when they need a sleep or rest, they may decide a separate sleep room is a better option for them. Or (if only one or children choose to sleep at a time, and not very frequently) they may provide a quiet area within the activity space that children can go when they want to rest or sleep.
If the centreservice chooses to rely on a safety check completed on their behalf, we recommend that they:
If the child is absent or access to the home is prevented (for example, by severe weather conditions), then the visit should be rescheduled for another day in that week or the following week. It is good practice to keep records of visits and any reason for rescheduling.
If the child is present, the scheduled visit goes ahead.
If the child is sleeping in a room positioned reasonably close to where other children are playing, it is easier for the educator to regularly check children.
If the child is unexpectedly asleep when the Persons responsible (Coordinator visiting teacher) arrives, they can use the time while at the house to ensure other regulatory requirements, such as health and safety practices, are being met. Another visit to the child must be rescheduled for the following month.
If the child was born outside of New Zealand, a copy of their passport and visa with of expiry (where applicable).
If the childs needs mean they could be a risk to themselves or others while in a vehicle, you will need to help the family to complete a Safe Travel Plan form. This plan outlines any measures to keep everyone safe while travelling.
If the concern involves a teacher
If the contract value is , and above (excluding GST and disbursements)
If the contract value is below , (excluding GST and disbursements), use the consultant engagement short form agreement and conditions of engagement agreement together.
If the educator provides the food:
If the effective for the change occurs during any month in the advance period, services must count the number of advance days they will claim funding for before and after that . This allows the Ministry to calculate the correct advance from the effective .
If the excursion involves activities in or near water, additional supervisory precautions will be required. This means educators should have constant visual contact and be in close proximity to children at all times. If educators need to move away from the area they should take all children away from the water.
If the final value of a procurement is , or more including GST, all staff involved must sign a conflictofinterest declaration. This must be done before they get involved in the purchasing process.
If the final value of a purchase is , or more including GST, we recommend all staff involved sign a declaration.
If the hand basins are too far away from your main meeting room and you want the children to wash their hands (after painting, or before eating, for example), you might consider using a soapy flannel (that you rinse after each child has used it) or wet wipes. Do not provide a single container (like a bucket or basin) filled with water for all the children to use as this is not hygienic.
If the height of hand basins is between and mm from the floor for older children, and to mm from the floor for young children, they are likely to be easily reached. Consider the age range of children who will attend.
If the home does not have a landline, the educator will need to ensure they have a means of accessing appropriate help and support.
If the home is in a building that has an approved fire evacuation scheme, the evacuation procedures must be consistent with that scheme.
If the home is in a building with other tenants there will be a fire evacuation scheme approved by the Fire and Emergency New Zealand that applies to the whole building and all tenants, and this is the responsibility of the building owner.
If the home is located in an apartment block, the building will require a code of compliance certificate and building warrant of fitness. Again, the service provider should ask for copies.
If the home is providing outofschool care, drills need to include both the enrolled children and older outofschool care children to ensure everyone in the home knows what to do in an emergency drill and all children can be safely evacuated.
If the home only has a cordless phone, be aware the educator will be unable to use it when the power goes off for any reason.
If the illness is infectious, contact the parents or caregivers of children with low immunity. They may want to keep their children at home until the risk of illness is over.
If the inspection is carried out by a person other than a qualified inspector a Playground Inspection Attestation Form stating that the structureequipment is safe for use will need to be signed by the person completing the inspection.
If the number of funded child hours provided on the EC is higher than the actual entitlement claimed on the RS Return, the service will receive a reduced washup in the next funding payment.
If the number of funded child hours provided on the EC is lower than the actual entitlement claimed on the RS Return the service will receive the remainder of its full entitlement in the washup payment.
If the person is a registered teacher, the board must report this to the Teaching Council of Aotearoa. This is required under the Teaching Council Rules .
If the playgroup chooses to rely on a safety check completed on their behalf, we recommend that they:
If the premises fall under Section of the Building Act , or Section of the Building Act applies:
If the premises fall under section of the Building Act , or section of the Building Act applies:
If the qualification is an early childhood teaching qualification at Level or above, it should be completed within years of enrolment.
If the rescheduled visit does not occur due to another absence by the child or access issues, a visit should be arranged for the following week. Occasionally a visit cannot take place.
If the results of a funding claim audit andor reporting on an RS Return andor RS Initial Application for Funding for an Early Childhood Service forms indicate that the amount of funding provided is greater than it should have been, the amount of the over funding will be:
If the school visit is not recorded, then the absence rules will be applied.
If the service decides to allow children to rest or sleep as and when they need to throughout the day (either in a separate room or in a quiet area of the service) then the stated ratio of to needs to be met. It is important that children have something to lie down on when they want to sleep or rest, and do not have to wait.
If the service decides to allow children to rest or sleep as and when they need to throughout the day, possibilities include:
If the service does not meet the conditions by the due we give them, their licence may become provisional or be suspended.
If the service does not meet the conditions of the suspension notice, we may cancel its licence to operate.
If the service has not responded, by the due , to requests made by the Ministry for services to provide complete and accurate information as required by conditions of funding andor section of the Education and Training Act through the Early Learning Information System (ELI) or any alternative authorised method, to enable the Secretary for Education or the Minister of Education to exercise their powers or carry out their responsibilities under the Education and Training Act , and as permitted under Privacy Principles and .
If the service is open, funding may be claimed for children who attend the service on that day or who are enrolled to attend on that specific public holiday.
If the service provides regular transport (outside of enrolled and licensed hours), accountability is agreed in writing between parents and the service.
If the service will have a different bank account under the service provider, an RS form must be completed by the new service provider of the service and returned to ECE Operational Funding.
If the students enrolled school changes, the family need to reapply for SESTA.
If the washing is done at the home of the educator, that it is done as a separate load to the household wash.
If the washing is taken home by parents, that it is done as a separate load to the household wash.
If their application is successful, the teacher must have a letter to give to the service. This must confirm registration via the discretionary pathway from the Teaching Council.
If there are bunk beds present in the home, they must not be used. The room with the bunk bed must be made inaccessible to children. It must be included on the hazard management checklist (HS) for that home and the bedroom door must be closed each day.
If there are differences you will need to investigate, locate and fix these errors.
If there are not sufficient child restraints or carsvans available for any excursion, then other transport options need to be considered.
If there are not sufficient child restraints or carsvans available for any excursion, then other transport options will need to be considered.
If there are outofschool care children in the home, a similar process is required so they can be isolated from other children and collected as soon as possible.
If there are pets in the home, the outdoor area of the homebased setting will need to be regularly checked for animal droppings and these removed.
If there are serious injuries or death, the Police are responsible for contacting
If there are significant hazards such as roads, rivers, or animals in close proximity to the home, consideration needs to be given to how the risk can be mitigated or managed by the educator. More guidance for rural properties is given in Things to consider.
If there has been a conviction, you must take into account:
If there is a door to the area where the toilets and handwashing facilities are, this must be able to be independently opened by children.
If there is a real risk that a child will be harmed, contact the Police or
If there is a smoker or vaper in the household, they must not smoke or vape while children are attending the service. This includes the outside area.
If there is a washing machine on site, it is a good idea to have a door leading directly from the laundry to the outside area, so staff can access the washing line without walking through the centre.
If there is access to the internet (either for use with the children or in an office) consider password protection and the use of parental locks.
If there is an outdoor play area provided for children in a hospitalbased setting, the service will need to consider the type of outdoor equipment to provide.
If there is an urgent risk that a child will be harmed, contact the Police or
If there is concern table surfaces are not able to be made completely hygienic through wiping, washable covers can be used as a barrier between the table and food. Covers are also a good way of showing children that the table is now an eating place rather than an activity place.
If there is immediate risk of harm
If there is not a washing machine and drying facilities on site, you may want to consider:
If there is only one signatory, please indicate that on the form.
If there was wrongdoing, we will make an offer to resolve your claim. This may include a written apology from a senior Ministry official andor a payment to acknowledge your experiences. You are welcome to seek legal advice about our response to your claim.
If theres a problem with our website or you need help, contact us.
If this approach doesnt ensure the child restraints are used correctly, contact the Police.
If this happens, we will let you and the complainant know.
If this is difficult for you, ask a support person to do this for you or with you.
If trained relievers are available but your option cannot be maintained e.g. when the trained reliever holds a different qualification to the usual parent
If trained relievers are not available and this is the first, second, third, fourth or fifth daysession in the current funding period where trained relievers have not been available, then service management must:
If travelling by bus where children are not restrained ensure there is adequate supervision.
If using electronic means to verify attendance records you must meet the criteria below. How the criteria are met is up to each individual service.
If we are concerned, we may ask the Education Review Office (ERO) to review your home education programme and show them your Certificate of Exemption application. If this happens, we will let you know why.
If we are considering changes to an enrolment scheme or creating a new one, we work with the school to consult with their community. This is a legal requirement.
If we are notified of a reported incident or receive a complaint, we usually contact the service provider first.
If we are the right place for your claim and you are comfortable continuing through the process, your claim will be added to the queue for an assessment.
If we decline your application, you may want to request a review of this decision. A review might be needed if:
If we do not have a mobile phone number and have an email address, we will send them an email.
If we find a health and safety issue at an early learning service that needs to be addressed immediately, we may issue written directions.
If we find areas of noncompliance, we may:
If we find no evidence of regulatory noncompliance, the complaint or incident will be closed.
If we have neither a mobile phone number nor an email address, we will send them a letter in the post.
If we have received your March roll by the specified on the roll count form, we use this. If we have not, we use the provisional roll.
If we have received your March roll by the specified on the roll count form, we use this. If we have not, we use the provisional roll. We add a new entrant adjustment in both cases.
If we have sent you a text, email or letter with a unique reference number, you are entitled to a remediation payment.
If we have their mobile phone number, they will receive a text. (To avoid the text looking like SPAM, we will not include a link. We will write the website address to go as education.govt.nz which people can search themselves.)
If we identify any attendance data quality errors or issues at the end of the term, we will email you an end of term data quality report to assist you in rectifying these. Once you have rectified these errorsissues, we will be able to send you your Every Day Matters report.
If we released the information that would be contrary to other legislation or constitute contempt of court or the House of Representatives: section
If we scroll over to Column A I and to rows Ai to Ai we will see the school received , for the disposal of assets. This is the figure shown in the statement of cash flow and should agree with your banking records.
If we verify your details business days or more before the th of the month, you will receive your payment on the th of that month.
If we verify your details less than business days before the th of the month, you will receive your payment on or before the th of the next month.
If we visit unannounced, one of our officials will:
If you apply after October, your application will be considered for Term . There is no back payment to Term .
If you apply by October for the following year, we will let you know in December if your application is approved.
If you are a former employee and think we may have old contact details for you, email us.
If you are a parent or caregiver and want to apply for a conveyance allowance for your child, please visit the Parents and caregivers webpage for more information.
If you are a registered teacher, your code of conduct requires you to report child abuse or neglect.
If you are an IT lead or provider, see our guidance on how to technically implement least privilege at your school.
If you are an individual or community group who would like hard copies, email your request to
If you are applying for a multiple barrier boarding allowance, you must attach the completed and signed Section from your referrer before you submit the application to us.
If you are applying for an
If you are applying to homeschool a child who is older than , they must be enrolled at a school while you do this.
If you are completing a paperbased RS return, this declaration will be signed. Paperbased RS returns must be completed in pen and signed in order to be processed for funding. Do not use pencil anywhere on your RS return.
If you are completing an electronic RS return, this declaration will be submitted.
If you are involved in buying for your school, you must declare any conflicts of interest so they can be properly and transparently managed.
If you are not happy with how an investigation has been managed, you can contact the Manager Integrated Services at your regional office.
If you are not happy with how the school has dealt with the issue, you can raise your concerns with the Teaching Council of
If you are not happy with our decision, you can contact your Regional Director of Education.
If you are not happy with the response from the school, contact your local Ministry office for support.
If you are not satisfied with our response, you can make a formal complaint with the Office of the Ombudsman.
If you are not sure about the reason why we cannot provide the information requested, or you would like more explanation, contact us.
If you are not sure, but think the illness may be infectious, contact the public health unit for information and advice.
If you are operating a centre under National Programme , staff must have a good level of food safety knowledge relevant to the food provided at the centre and the ability to put it into practice.
If you are purchasing an existing early learning service, and retaining existing staff from that service, you may not need to complete all seven components of the safety check for all those staff.
If you are still unhappy, you can make a formal complaint through the Office of the Ombudsman.
If you are terminally ill andor attended Waimokoia, you may be able to choose between the prioritised payment or rapid payment options, and we will write to you with a settlement offer.
If you are unhappy with our response, you can discuss this with us. If appropriate, we can review our response. This might happen in circumstances where, for example, more information becomes available.
If you are unsure about whether a qualification meets the requirements, contact us.
If you are unsure if your service can suspend the Three Week Rule during a period in which your service will not be operating, please contact your Ministry regional office for guidance.
If you believe unjustified restraint has occurred with your
If you can organise a good system for each child to have their own towel, then individual towels can be good. The trouble is, towels usually get mixed up, and they also take up a lot of space.
If you change the number of hours your child is at their early learning service,
If you decide to change or clarify your request, that will be considered to be a new request. The working days will start from the day after this new request is received.
If you do not currently have a website, we can host your annual report on our Education Counts website. Send us your request to host your annual report along with the school boards approval.
If you do not get an answer, you cannot leave it
If you do not receive a response to your request for official information within the statutory time limit or you are unhappy with the response you receive, you can complain to the Ombudsman.
If you do not think your complaint has been addressed, you can contact your regional office.
If you do not use an MDM system, you should enforce your password policy and screen lock for users.
If you feel you need more advice after talking to your school, you can contact our learning support team to talk about your concerns. They can help you to understand whether your child may need additional support, and if so, what options may be available.
If you find that safety checks have not been done, or you have any concerns about how it was done, you will need to do it yourself. If any information is incomplete or missing for any staff, you will need to do those components yourself.
If you have a complaint or concern about health and safety at your childs early learning service, you should talk to them first.
If you have a complaint or concern about your childs early learning service, you should talk to them first. There should be a complaints policy in place that is accessible to everyone.
If you have a concern or complaint about the use of seclusion in a school, contact your local Ministry office straight away.
If you have a website and are interested in protecting it in a similar way, you can
If you have an educator looking after your child at home (theirs or yours), you can still apply for hours ECE. To do this, the educator must be part of a licensed homebased early learning service. The Ministry of Education pays the early learning service, not the individual educator.
If you have any enquiries or complaints about our information gathering activities or believe we have not acted in accordance with this statement, you can find out about making a complaint on our website.
If you have any feedback, contact us at
If you have any feedback, get in contact with us at
If you have any further questions about remediation for former employees of the Ministry, email the team.
If you have any questions about property procurement, email us or contact your property advisor.
If you have any questions about the RS Return or need help filling it in, please contact the Resourcing Contact Centre:
If you have any questions about the limitation policy, we recommend that you seek legal advice.
If you have any questions or need help with the pay parity optin scheme, contact us:
If you have any questions or need more information, contact our schooling data team.
If you have any questions or would like to talk to us about either of these payments, contact us.
If you have any questions, email
If you have any questions, email us at
If you have complaints related to the following organisations, raise the issues directly with the relevant organisation:
If you have concerns about a learning support service, you can make a complaint. Well work with you to resolve it.
If you have questions about the requirements for risk assessments, contact us.
If you have trouble filling in the form, you can ask your regional office for help. While they cant fill out the application for you, they can help clarify information and answer questions about the application process.
If you have used half hour blocks, convert these blocks into whole hours.
If you highlight cells S to S you will be able to check the net book value of the assets disposed of.
If you include a child aged or older in your unders ratio count, they are funded at the years and older funding rate.
If you know of schools that have done similar projects, ask them about their experiences.
If you know what is causing the illness, make sure the child or staff member stays away for the recommended (or required) time.
If you live in an area close to a school (the schools zone), your child is guaranteed to get a place at that school. If you want your child to go to a school outside the area where you live, you may have to apply, and a place is not guaranteed.
If you manage school devices with a mobile device management system (MDM), such as Microsoft MDM, Microsoft Intune, Google Endpoint Management, or Jamf, you should set your password policy for all those devices. You can also require users to set a screen lock.
If you move out of a zone after your child is enrolled at a school, they are entitled to remain at the school. You can also choose to enrol your child at the new local school they are in zone for.
If you need a sign language interpreter when you meet with us, we can organise for you to have the support of your preferred interpreter.
If you need access to GETS, contact us.
If you need advice about changing NSI records, you can contact our service desk for support.
If you need assistance confirming this functionality, check with your system provider or ask the system user to do this for you.
If you need assistance creating an ESL account, please ring the Education Service Desk on
If you need assistance creating an ESL account, ring the Education Service Desk on
If you need further help deciding, more detailed information and examples of the process are available.
If you need help after talking to your school, contact us.
If you need help to enrol, you can contact your regional office.
If you need help to phone us, contact the New Zealand Relay help desk.
If you need more information about your schools obligations under the Childrens Act and Education and Training Act , contact us.
If you need support with information sharing, contact us.
If you need to, write your password down in a diary or a notebook that nobody else has access to.
If you purchased an existing service
If you raise an issue with us, we will work with you and do our best to resolve it.
If you suspect abuse or neglect of a child or young person by an adult, you should report it. Find out who you can contact.
If you suspect abuse or neglect, you should tell someone.
If you suspect abuse or neglect, you should tell someone. You must follow your schools child protection policy, which should be on the school website, or available on request.
If you suspect someone is physically or mentally unwell in a way that could pose a risk to children, you must prevent them from coming into contact with children at your service.
If you think your password has been stolen, or your account has been accessed by someone without permission, you can:
If you use a third party to safety check your childrens workers, you are responsible for confirming these are completed and that a person does not pose a risk to children.
If you want to educate your child at home instead of enrolling them at school, they need to be officially exempted from the New Zealand education system.
If you want to see policies relating to health and safety at your childs early learning service, ask the service. Most policies should be available for you to see.
If you want to stop homeschooling your child, you can enrol them at school at any time. You cannot do both at the same time, so this will cancel your childs exemption.
If you wish to reproduce images, contact
If you wish to reproduce images, email
If you work at a school or
If you would like information about your schools staffing or provisional roll, email
If you would like information or instructions on a topic not covered here, try the handbook Table of Contents or Glossary. Examples of funding forms can be found in Appendix .
If you would like more information about record keeping and financial reporting requirements check the following sections:
If you would like more information about record keeping and financial reporting requirements, check:
If you would like to know more about having an Education Sector Login (ESL) to access the Education Learning Management System, refer to:
If you would like to know more about having an Education Sector Login (ESL) to access the Education Learning Management System.
If you would like to know more about joining the ICT contractors panel, contact us.
If you would like to know more about joining the construction directory, contact us.
If you would like to know more about joining the offsite manufacturing supplier panel, contact us.
If you would like to know more about joining the professional services directory, contact us.
If you would like to lodge a claim about your time at a state school and you are unsure about where to go, we are happy to discuss this with you. We can also support you to talk to a school board about your concerns if you wish.
If you would like to print a copy of this handbook, refer to the list of downloads below where you will find downloadable PDF versions of each chapter.
If you would like to set up a meeting with one of our staff, please call .
If youre a student or parent of student interested in a schooltoschool exchange, talk to your school.
If youre having trouble reaching us on social media, you can email us or get in touch with one of our local offices.
If youre not getting the help that you need from your school, you can contact us. Our regional offices will be able to support you to get the help you need.
If youre not happy with your schools term dates
If youre parked in our accessible car park on level , use the lift from level to make your way to the reception.
If youre still not happy with how were handling your complaint
If your application for the allowance is approved, you will receive the payment as long as your child is eligible. You do not need to reapply for it each year.
If your application is turned down, we will send you a letter explaining our reasons. You can appeal the decision in writing to your regional office. If your appeal is unsuccessful, you can submit a new application to your regional office.
If your average roll is higher than your March funding roll, you can apply for extraordinary roll growth funding.
If your average roll is higher than your quarterly funding roll, you can apply for extraordinary roll growth funding.
If your baby is bottlefed, they should be held or properly supervised by staff.
If your child becomes unwell, centre staff or your childs home educator will call you and ask you to come and take your child home.
If your child doesnt qualify for SESTA, there may be other support available.
If your child gets sick or injured at their early learning service or
If your child goes to more than one early learning service or
If your child has a notifiable disease, your service will need to report it.
If your child has an issue, finding it early is good for their learning and development.
If your child has extra needs
If your child has food allergies, intolerances, or follows religious food guidelines, you should make a plan with your early learning service when you enrol.
If your child has naps during the day, talk to your early learning service about their routine and how long your child should sleep for. You can do this when you enrol, and as your child gets older and their nap times change.
If your child has safety or mobility needs that mean they cannot travel independently, you may be able to get help from the Specialised School Transport Assistance (SESTA) service instead.
If your child is aged to , they can also enrol with
If your child is eligible for transport assistance, we may provide:
If your child is ineligible for school transport assistance
If your child is not enrolled at school or kura
If your child is private boarding with a caregiver, their contact and bank account details need to be given to your childs school. The school will then pay the caregiver.
If your child leaves school before the end of a term, we will recover the remaining allowance.
If your child lives far away from the closest school they can enrol at, they may qualify for a free school bus or financ
If your child lives far away from the closest school they can enrol at, they may qualify for a free school bus or financial support.
If your child lives far away from the nearest school, or faces significant difficulties, we may be able to assist with the cost of boarding.
If your child lives too far from their school to travel there each day, they might qualify for an allowance to assist with the cost of boarding away from home.
If your child lives very far from school
If your child needs specialist equipment to travel, ask your school to apply for this.
If your child needs to take medicine at their early learning services, you will need to provide written authority for the administration of that medicine to your child. This applies to prescription and nonprescription medications.
If your child uses dummies (pacifiers) to sleep, talk to your centre about whether they allow this.
If your child wants to transition to school, you should contact your regional office. They will assist you with the process.
If your child went to school, we will contact them for information about your childs education so far.
If your child will be transitioning out of nappies while enrolled at an early learning service, you can talk to staff about supporting your child.
If your child would be eligible to use the school bus if they attended their closest school, but is enrolled at a school further away, they may be able to use the school bus at their enrolled school. Your school can give you information about the school bus and tell you if your child qualifies.
If your childs behaviour while travelling is disruptive or is a safety risk, they may lose their place on the school bus. If this happens you cannot get the conveyance allowance.
If your childs boarding situation changes, you need to let us know as soon as possible so we can review their new circumstances.
If your childs legal guardian has been assigned by a Court, provide us with a copy of the Court Order.
If your childs need is due to an injury and covered by the Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC), they are not eligible for help from SESTA. Contact ACC for more information about what support might be available.
If your childs needs mean they could be a risk to themselves or others while in a vehicle, youll need to complete a Safe Travel Plan form. This plan outlines any measures needed to keep everyone safe while travelling. Complete this form with support from your school and include it with your application.
If your childs school changes, youll need to reapply for SESTA.
If your childs teacher thinks they may need to work with our learning support team to plan how to meet your childs needs, they can contact us after discussing this with you.
If your circumstances change
If your complaint is about criminal conduct, you may like to consider making a complaint to the NZ Police.
If your financial year was
If your group no longer meets Ministry of Education funding criteria but wishes to continue meeting it may be possible to retain the use of equipment and existing funds. Please discuss this with your Ministry education advisor.
If your highest roll number exceeds your funding roll plus your new entrant adjustment, you can apply for extraordinary roll growth funding.
If your homebased service or individual homebased educator is forced to close in an emergency, other than an infectious disease:
If your homebased service was given Ministry regional office written approval for an emergency closure confirmed by letter or email and you are submitting a paperbased RS Return:
If your homebased service was given Ministry regional office written approval for an emergency closure confirmed by letter or email and you are submitting an electronic RS Return:
If your initial funding rate is higher due to your attestation response, you may receive a significantly reduced washup payment.
If your initial funding rate is lower due to your attestation response, your advance funding may not adequately subsidise the cost of employing your certificated teachers.
If your licence is for children aged and over only, you may fill empty places with children aged or over. You must not fill empty places with children aged under .
If your licence is for mixed ages, you may fill empty under places with children of any age. You must not fill empty and over places with children aged under .
If your playcentre is funded at the quality rate, you must:
If your playcentre is funded at the standard rate, you must:
If your playgroup has any paid workers, then you will have obligations under the Health Safety at Work Act (HSWA). Additional guidance about the HSWA is available for early learning services.
If your school does not use an SMS there are Excel templates to use. You must submit these through our Secure Data Portal.
If your school has been closed by the Minister, you must complete a liquidation statement. We recommend using our model liquidation statement as a template.
If your school has its own servers, you can secure your accounts with these steps:
If your school or kura did not have a person who is paid using the S designation code, a generic password will be applied to your reports.
If your school uses The New Zealand Curriculum
If your service does not have a dishwasher and you wash dishes by hand, the Ministry of Health recommends you:
If your service generates ,,. in ECE Funding Subsidy, Hours ECE funding and Equity Funding payments between June and May, you will be topped up to ,.
If your service generates ,,. in ECE Funding Subsidy, Hours ECE funding and Equity Funding payments between June and May, you will be topped up to ,.
If your service has had a change of service provider, then you should
If your service has joined a larger group of services under a service provider, you may be contacted by the Ministry to confirm the exact service provider name (if this is not obvious from the new bank account).
If your service has previously chosen not to have an EQI calculated, but would now like to, then you should contact the Resourcing Contact Centre on
If your service is a communitybased service, for example an incorporated society, a charitable trust, a registered charity, owned by a community organisation, or considered a Public Benefit Entity under XRB requirements, you must provide general purpose financial statements.
If your service is a playcentre
If your service is a private service, for example a partnership, sole trader, or limited liability company, you can choose to provide either general purpose financial statements or a special purpose financial report.
If your service is for unders only
If your service is forced to close in an emergency:
If your service is not able to connect to ELI, you must complete the RS form.
If your service is to offer Hours ECE, only count your yearolds as and Over hours. Count your yearolds, yearolds and yearolds separately in the Hours ECE hours row. This is necessary so that your yearolds, yearolds and yearolds are not doublecounted.
If your service owes money to the Ministry of Education, an invoice will be issued.
If your service was given Ministry regional office written approval for an emergency closure confirmed by letter or email and you are submitting an electronic RS Return:
If, however, the caregivereducator, by contractual agreement, is paid for absent children, the service provider can claim funding for an absent child and the absence rules will apply.
Impairments to Property, Plant and Equipment and Accounts Receivable set off against Assets and Receivables.
Implementation of improved practices as required.
Implementing Government priorities
Implementing the Fakailoga Tino programme to support teachers to name, negotiate and navigate racism so they can better support Pacific learners, parents, families and communities.
Important news for the Ministry of Education
Improved teacher training: Developing the workforce of the future, including leadership development pathways
Improving accountability and transparency for standard setting and approval functions for initial teacher education
Improving education for children and young people with LS needs
In , Targeted Funding is provided for the period January to February .
In , we had a conversation with
In , we began work to review and identify pay errors for all Ministryemployed and paid staff, including former staff. We worked closely with a specialist payroll consultant and went back as far as March . We agreed these dates with our union partners as we started this work.
In , the Schooling Network Team in National Office worked with a range of regional and national office staff to develop the first
In , there were ,
In April , the Minister of Education, Hon Erica Stanford announced priorities for education. One of these priorities is targeting effective learning support interventions for students with additional needs.
In Playcentres, the person responsible must have a recognised qualification as set out in the New Zealand Gazette.
In September , we finished calculating historic holiday pay errors dating back to March for Ministry employees and completed an independent quality assurance (IQA) process to ensure our calculations and data corrections are correct.
In a dual enrolment situation, funding may be claimed only by the service at which the child was present.
In a few weeks, you will be able to make a submission on the proposals on this Bill through Parliaments website.
In a homebased setting, it is likely that there would be more than one different place that could meet this requirement (bedroom, study, family room, and so on). Deciding on the best place to use in each situation will depend on:
In a homebased setting, this could happen in the home with the children who are there, or at a playgroup that homebased educators may attend.
In a hospital, inappropriate material may also include exposure to frightening or inappropriate sights and sounds connected with medical treatment, equipment and procedures. Without skilled staff and sensitive opportunities to ask questions, express fears, and receive explanations, children can misunderstand what is happening andor become very anxious.
In a hospital, services use the ECE activity room, which is covered by this criterion, as well as the licensed premises which includes wards and other areas of the hospital. These areas are not the responsibility of the service.
In a particular approach to working with infants, called heuristic play, infants who are old enough to sit up comfortably on their own and reach for objects are given free access to everyday items stored in a container or basket. Adults stay with and watch the infant while they explore, without taking over. Infants can focus for long periods of time, sitting alongside a basket and choosing from a range of materials, exploring their space and texture by mouthing, banging, handling and waving.
In accessing any changing areatable.
In accordance with Schedule of the Education and Training Act , we use National Student Numbers for:
In accordance with Section of the Education and Training Act , eligible services that fail to meet the conditions of funding may no longer be eligible for funding and either all or part of this funding may be recovered by the Ministry of Education as outlined in Chapter Recovery of early childhood education funding.
In addition to compliance with HS Fire evacuation scheme (above) the centre must have a documented evacuation procedure specifically for the ECE premises. The evacuation procedure required is the responsibility of the service provider.
In addition to that, one thing I wanted to state as well is
In addition to the ECE Funding Subsidy and Hours ECE, services may receive an Annual TopUp for Isolated Services.
In addition to the required annual plan, services may also have a strategic plan.
In addition to the rules in this handbook, ECE services must also comply with relevant legislation, such as:
In addition to the single PDF file, your school can also upload an Excel spreadsheet version of annual financial statements. This is optional.
In addition to the starter packs sent out earlier this year, kura that submit their data will receive additional printed sets of the resources available online here:
In addition, HomeBased enrolment records for children receiving Hours ECE must also include the Homebased Educator Top Up Payments Agreement section of the Enrolment Agreement Form, completed by the parentguardian.
In addition, each Playcentre Association is required to send a copy of their audited general purpose financial statements to the Ministry.
In all areas of the ECE activity room, large and heavy items of furniture, equipment and appliances must be secured to the structure of the building. Smaller appliances such as stereos or microwave ovens can be secured with industrial Velcro.
In all areas of the centre, large and heavy items of furniture and equipment and appliances must be secured to the structure of the building, studs are fine, but wallboards may be too weak. Smaller appliances such as stereos or microwave ovens can be secured with industrial Velcro, seismic wax and nonslip mats. More information is available on the Natural Hazards Commission website.
In all areas of the playgroup premises, large and heavy items of furniture and equipment and appliances must be secured to the structure of the building. Smaller appliances such as stereos or microwave ovens can be secured with industrial Velcro.
In all cases, funding can be claimed for all sessions the child was absent from within a week period. The week period begins on the first day of absence.
In an emergency situation, the educator (as the only adult nearby) often needs to deal directly with emergency service personnel when they arrive at the scene. This makes it even more important that there is a safe place for children to wait while the emergency is dealt with. Young children often behave erratically when scared or distressed, and educators need to reduce stress (for themselves, as well as for the children) in these situations as much as possible.
In an emergency situation, the educator (as the only adult nearby) often needs to deal directly with emergency service personnel when they arrive at the scene. This makes it very important to have an evacuation procedure and to have a safe place for children to wait while the emergency is dealt with. For more information see HS Safe assembly areas (below).
In an emergency, staff will let you know when you can pick up your child. They will also tell you if they have had to evacuate to a different place. This could be by phone, a sign on the door, text message or on their social media page.
In an evacuation of a hospitalbased service all children will be under the management of the medical staff not the play specialist.
In carrying out our statutory functions, we may receive information relevant to our statutory functions from other people or agencies. Any such information is collected in accordance with any relevant statutory powers and in compliance with relevant legislation, information sharing agreements, memoranda of understanding and our internal policies.
In cases where water is stored, a tempering valve can be installed. Refer to criterion PF Tempering valve. The water temperature of child accessible taps needs to be checked on every day of operation before children use the tap(s).
In column G, we have preset the more common adjustments which you dont need to change.
In decisions around when nappies are changed.
In developing the annual plan services can ask:
In early childhood services in Aotearoa New Zealand, it is important that educators understand the significance of
In essence, you are free to copy, distribute and adapt the material, as long as you attribute it and abide by the other licence terms.
In exceptional circumstances, you may be able to request an exemption to use a different market approach.
In extreme circumstances, drivers can stop the bus to call their employer. They must then follow their service providers procedures. This may include calling the Police.
In future years, you only have to review and modify the mapping for new codes or delete old codes.
In general children should stay away from an early childhood service when they are ill and causing concern or:
In many cases, childrens needs can be met by their school or
In most cases, this requirement will be met by the excursion records required for criterion HS (above).
In order to carry out our regulatory compliance function, we may use the information we hold as evidence, as well as for analysis, risk assessment, audit, monitoring, andor prosecution purposes. In doing so we will comply with our obligations under the Privacy Act .
In order to check that all data for the statement of comprehensive revenue and expense has flowed through correctly from the inputs worksheet, have a look at line under column H to J.
In order to check the statement of changes in net assets and equity, refer to check calculations on line under columns H to J.
In order to meet this criterion services can use a daily check sheet. Any hazards found should be documented and eliminated, isolated or minimised.
In order to receive funding at the standard rate, playcentres must have:
In our example, cell D , four thousand five hundred fortyone dollars cash is held on behalf of the Ministry of Education and required to be spent in .
In particular, this statement relates to our regulatory compliance activity that ensures compliance with the Education legislation.
In preparing this information release, the Ministry of Education has considered the public interest considerations in section () of the Official Information Act.
In sessional services such as Playcentres, adults can use the furniture and fittings within the activity area when the children are not present.
In teacherled education and care centres and kindergartens, the person responsible may be primary or ECE qualified. In hospitalbased and homebased services, only ECE qualified teachers can be a person responsible.
In the education sector, this screening service has been approved for early learning service owneroperators.
In the event of a funding claim audit, funding claimed for absent children who do not have an enrolment agreement will be recovered by the Ministry.
In the event of a funding claim audit, funding claimed for casual or conditional children who did not attend will be recovered by the Ministry.
In the event of a funding claim audit, funding claimed incorrectly will be recovered by the Ministry.
In the event of a major disaster, they should make themselves available to assist, with particular reference to providing support for the emotional wellbeing of children and suitable coping strategies.
In the event of an emergency, hospital play specialists may have a useful role in supporting children who are distressed, and should be prepared with strategies for such situations.
In the event that your SMS provider does not have said
In the home setting where it is likely that children of varying levels of ability and mobility will be together in the same activity space, it is important that infants and toddlers can safely play and explore, both indoors and outdoors.
In the majority of schools, your child can start school on the day they turn years old. That means they dont have to wait until the start of a new school year.
In their communication, the former employees will receive a unique code to use in the claimant management portal where they must complete some verification questions.
In these cases, the Ministry requires additional information to ensure that funding is delivered accurately.
In these cases, the debt or liability will have been outstanding to the Ministry for a period of days or more.
In these cases, the service provider must make sure new educators have some first aid knowledge. They must gain an NZQAaccredited first aid qualification within months of registering with the service. This is a licensing requirement as set out in clause HS.
In this criterion, supervised means an adult is assigned to oversee children while they are eating to ensure attention is on the children and not on completing other tasks. The adult assigned must be in close proximity to the children who are eating and know how to respond if a child is choking or has an adverse reaction.
In this principle, children are empowered to learn and grow by encouraging and allowing them to make choices and take responsibility for their own learning.
In this section respondents will be
In this session, Im going to show you how to manually adjust the cash flow for noncash items, manually add back information on any assets disposed of at a loss, add back information on any assets disposed at a surplus, review the acquisition of assets under a lease or hire purchase security document.
In this situation, services may claim up to hours Hours ECE Funding per eligible child plus up to hours ECE Subsidy Funding per childplace.
In this video Ill be showing you how to import your trial balance, map the trial balance codes to the Ministry of Education codes and then complete the quality assurance necessary to ensure validity of the information.
In this video you will learn how to remap the schools existing links for the latest version of Kiwi Park.
In what ways can educators and coordinators increase the range of experiences to challenge children or extend their learning
In what ways can parents and
In what ways do our notions of power impact on parents and
In what ways do our notions of power impact on parents sharing their aspirations
Include a statement about when and where the group meets.
Including emergency plans and procedures as a regular agenda item for meetings between educators and coordinators.
Including emergency plans and procedures as a regular agenda item for meetings.
Including emergency plans and procedures as a regular agenda item for staff meetings.
Increasing school attendance
Independent relief teachers
Indicative operational funding entitlement
Individual Attendance Plans
Individual enrolment agreements
Individuals or community group
Individuals prohibited from being employed or engaged in a core worker role under the workforce restriction can apply for a Core Worker Exemption.
Indoor early childhood education and care centre spaces need to be designed for natural light and consider the visual awareness of the outside environment. Lighting (natural or artificial) should be appropriate to the activities offered or purpose of each room.
Infants are learning to anticipate events, make sense of their worlds and communicate their needs in these early months of life. They learn through touch, sight, sound, smell, and taste in exploration of their everyday environments, and through interactions with adults and other children in environments that are safe yet provide sensory stimulation.
Infants experience onetoone interactions which are intimate and sociable.
Infants learn by having a variety of safe, everyday objects that stimulate their senses. Play in natural environments or with natural materials (nature), provide rich opportunities for exploring. Warm sun on faces, squishy mud between toes, the smell of mint in the garden Our senses gather information about the world around us and how it works
Infants must not be placed in a bed as they may roll off the bed.
Infants or other children with special needs who may not be able to drink independently should not be propped up and left unattended as they can move around or slide over which may lead to choking.
Infants or other children with special needs who may not be able to drink independently should not be propped up and left unattended by adults as they can move around or slide over which may lead to choking. Staff ratios should be sufficient for this and providing a comfortable adult sized chair will assist the required oneonone supervision.
Infants under the age of months and other children unable to drink independently are held semiupright when being fed. Any infant milk food given to a child under the age of months is of a type approved by the childs parent.
Infants: birth to about months
Inform suppliers of the procurement outcome
Inform the selected supplier that they have been awarded the contract, subject to funding being released.
Information Update: ITE current landscape
Information about changing systems during a funding period can be found at education.govt.nz.
Information about eligibility, the conditions that govern the funding and applying for these funding types can be found in this handbook.
Information about how we manage and protect personal information.
Information about safety around plants in ECE services and which plants to avoid.
Information about the current daily bus and technology bus contracts and our tender procurement approach.
Information about the learner populations from these language communities and current levels of Pacific Languages in Education provision is set out in the supporting evidence brief. It will be important for the Ministry to continue to grow its data about learners and the workforce and providers of Pacific Languages in Education.
Information about the legislation governing our education system and legislative changes affecting schools, kura and early learning services.
Information about the programme, including support and resources for schools,
Information about the reports and advice our ministers have considered
Information about the strategies and policies guiding the work we do.
Information and guidance about your childs learning and development from early learning to school and kura and tertiary education.
Information and guidance are sought from appropriate agencies as required to enable
Information and guidance are sought when necessary from agenciesservices to enable adults providing education and care to work effectively with children and their parents.
Information and guidance are sought when necessary, from agenciesservices to enable adults providing education and care to work effectively with children and their parents.
Information and guidance is sought when necessary from agenciesservices to enable educators and coordinators to work effectively with children and their parents.
Information collected directly
Information collected on this website
Information for a deep dive on education for children
Information is provided to parents about:
Information is shared with the parents and caregivers of children attending, including:
Information is stored and retained in accordance with our Privacy Policy, our Records Management Policy, and our Information Privacy and Security Policy. We also comply with legal obligations about retention and protection of information under the Privacy Act and the Public Records Act .
Information on hours ECE:
Information on complaints if you have concerns about learning support services.
Information on completing the EC transitional advance form is in Section of this handbook.
Information on funding claim audits and record keeping audits:
Information on keeping children safe in the sun.
Information on our process to hear and respond to sensitive claims.
Information on successful suppliers is on the New Zealand Government Electronic Tenders Service (GETS):
Information on the required first aid qualifications is available of the first aid page of this website.
Information on the required first aid qualifications is available on the first aid page of this website.
Information or data on a particular subject collected and preserved.
Information or instructions for financial reporting:
Information provided to parents about Ministry funding must be for the individual centre, not consolidated for an association or membership body that has multiple centres.
Information provided to parents about Ministry funding must be for the licensed service, not consolidated for a homebased service provider that has multiple services.
Information received from third parties
Information relevant to all service is identified with A. Service type specific information is identified with the following corresponding letter:
Information sharing about vulnerable children
Information sharing for learning support
Information sheet: Prioritised settlements
Information sheet: Rapid payments
Information that supports you to complete other required and recommended actions.
Information to help you meet this criterion
Information to parents and caregivers can be provided in different ways such as parent information sheets, newsletters or on a notice board.
Information to protect from family violence
Information we release proactively, including ministerial advice and responses to requests under the Official Information Act.
Information will also be included in our annual reports for onwards.
Information withheld or refused
Infrastructure Asset Planner
Infrastructure Manager Asset Planning
Infrastructure Manager Asset Planning (Acting)
Infrastructure Manager Asset Planning
Infrastructure Manager, Auckland
Infrastructure Manager, Napier
Infrastructure Manager, Southern Region
Infrastructure Manager, Southern region
Infrastructure and property
Initial Teacher Education
Injuries, illnesses and incidents can be a part of early childhood experiences. When a child becomes seriously ill or suffers a serious injury while in the care of the service, services must get medical assistance. This would usually be ringing for an ambulance or taking the child to see a doctor. It is always better to seek medical assistance if you are unsure of the extent of the injury or the seriousness of the illness than to risk the consequences of doing nothing.
Injury and incident procedure flowchart
Inland Revenue is a good starting point for finding out about obligations and entitlements concerning tax.
Inland Revenue legislation, rules and regulations
Inquiry time is no longer available for schools and
Instagram community guidelines
Instructions for completing the RS Return can be found in Chapter of this Handbook.
Instructions for the operation of enrolment schemes
Insurance is a specialised topic. Each playgroup will have different insurance requirements and you should seek independent legal advice about yours, particularly for matters relating to public liability. Playgroups can undertake their own risk assessment to guide their insurance decisions. The following questions can be useful starting points for discussion:
Interaction provides a rich social world for children to make sense of and understand.
Interaction provides a rich social world for children to make sense of and understand. Educators provide encouragement, warmth, acceptance, and challenges to help children extend their ideas and understanding of the world.
Interactions with parents give them a sense of belonging and are culturally appropriate.
Internal Environment Monitoring (IEM) devices
Internal Environment Monitoring devices
Internal Environmental Monitors, and
Internal Environmental Quality (IEQ) Design report
Internal Environmental Quality (IEQ) Design report example
Internal evaluation involves asking questions such as:
Internal evaluation is about identifying what is and is not working, and for whom. This is carried out with the aim of improving practice and what is happening for children and then to determine what changes are required.
Internal evaluation is another important way to create opportunities for
Internal evaluation is another important way to create opportunities for educators and coordinators to recognise how well their current practices meet the needs of the learners and highlight areas where educators and coordinators may need to develop their practice.
International student legislation
International students coming to New Zealand
International students on exchanges longer than months require a visa to stay in New Zealand. Contact Immigration New Zealand for more information.
Introduction (including a description of the organisation).
Introduction to Kiwi Park training module video series
Introduction to video series on managing school finances and annual reporting.
Introduction: Kiwi Park training module
Inventory of school systems and recordkeeping
Investigating a complaint or incident
Investigation report template complaint
Investigation report template incident
Investigations by other agencies
Investment in a separate account or entity and to accumulate interest or generate profit.
Irritation and redness of eye. Sometimes there is a discharge
Is any fundraising required
Is any major maintenance work required
Is it practical or productive for administrative staff to share space with other staff using the space to relax during meal breaks
Is it sufficient for the numbers and ages of the children
Is our environment organised for small groups, quiet play or to support the different sensory needs of
Is our environment organised for small groups, quiet play, or to support the different sensory needs of
Is our environment used in purposeful and meaningful ways
Is the absence approved Yes, no.
Is the child able to be seen directly by children using the other toilets
Is the child within view of adjacent areas when the bathroom door is open
Is the environment arranged in a way that allows choice and opportunities for independence and interdependence
Is the evaluation process and rationale for the selection of the preferred offer described clearly and fully
Is the furniture comfortable for adults as well as children
Is there a minimum time per day or per year that my child has to be enrolled for
Is there a plan in place to prevent this from happening again
Is there any, or is that a policy that we have to
Is there anything about the design that offers the child some sense of privacy (for example, a partition or children facing away from the cubicle while handwashing)
Is there regular opportunity for selfreview, internal evaluation, and to set priorities for the year ahead
Is this different to the ATIS
Isola Playgroup Philosophy Statement
Isola preentry playgroup procedures
Issuespecific information releases
Issues that should be considered when using sleep monitoring technology in addition to the physical checks include:
Issues to consider in developing a hazard and risk identification and management system to ensure hazards are assessed and addressed in an ongoing way are:
It also explains how you can make a complaint about our informationgathering activities, and how you can request information from us.
It also provides the framework for any improvements we make in our continued effort to support schools to manage school property effectively.
It can involve extra language tuition where required. Study should not only involve learning a language.
It does not matter who witnesses the incident. If the service is told of an incident by a visiting adult or parent, this must be documented in the same way as if an educator witnessed the incident.
It enables ECE services to provide early childhood education to yearolds, yearolds and yearolds for up to a maximum of hours per day for hours per week per child without charging fees.
It has to be adapted for those reports.
It is a condition of funding that every service provider of a licensed early childhood service must provide the information listed in this chapter to the Ministry of Education, at the frequency specified, through the ELI system or any alternative method the service provider is authorised by the Ministry to use, to enable the Secretary for Education or the Minister of Education to exercise their powers or carry out their responsibilities under the Act, and as
It is a condition of funding that every service provider of a licensed early childhood service must provide the information listed in this chapter to the Ministry of Education, at the frequency specified, through the ELI system or any alternative method the service provider is authorised by the Ministry to use, to enable the Secretary for Education or the Minister of Education to exercise their powers or carry out their responsibilities under the Act, and as permitted by Privacy Principles and .
It is a condition of funding that licensed early childhood services provide information to the Ministry.
It is a good idea to have a policy and process in regard to alcohol and other substances for volunteers, parents and visitors to the playgroup.
It is a good idea to include this requirement in a parent information pack.
It is a good idea to locate the nappy changing area close to a toilet, so that children who are beginning to toilet train can easily use the toilets when they get their nappies changed.
It is a useful record for both parents and medics in the event of a child experiencing an adverse reaction or suddenonset illness.
It is also quite difficult to tell what has caused the illness and whether or not it is infectious. Familiarity with the information in centrebased Appendix of the criteria on infectious illnesses, incubation periods, symptoms, recommended exclusion times from attending the service and so on will be helpful.
It is an audit of the amount of funding claimed and received by a service.
It is calculated using the data you submit in the SDR.
It is critical that your answers to the attestation questions match the salaries actually paid to your certificated teachers.
It is essential plastic mattress covers are securely attached to mattresses. It is recommended that these waterproof covers are held in place with elastic or other such device. Any ripped mattress covers must be replaced immediately.
It is essential that staff, relievers and volunteers are made familiar with these requirements before commencing work, and are confident in knowing what they are expected to do, both for practice drills and should there be an actual emergency.
It is expected that children in the service can interact freely in the main Pacific language of the service, without direction.
It is good for infants to have the opportunity to experience a range of textures. A range of mixed flooring types may be one way to provide this.
It is good practice for the educator is consultation with the family needs to have a procedure for hygienic preparation of bottles including:
It is illegal to operate any premises as an early childhood education service without a licence.
It is important all mobile children are able to get outside without being dependent on adults.
It is important all mobile children are able to get outside without being dependent on adults. In your planning to meet the easy and safe access by children criterion, the service will need to consider factors such as whether any obstructions andor health and safety risks can be removed or minimised, or if the adult to child ratio may need to be higher if there are a number of stairs that children must use.
It is important for service providers and educators to have considered in advance the types of situations that might occur in a homebased service and how these would be best handled. This would be an appropriate discussion during an induction process and could include:
It is important for staff to have considered in advance the types of situations that might occur in a hospitalbased setting and how these would be handled. For example, staff will need to have considered in advance what they would do in situations such as if a parent or caregiver under the influence of alcohol or any other substance arrives in the activity room.
It is important that ALL injuries, illnesses and incidents are recorded, even if only minor injuries are sustained. This is for reasons:
It is important that children playing outside are safe and not able to leave the home setting unassisted or unnoticed by an adult. The most practical way of keeping children safe is to have unclimbable fences or barriers enclosing the play space. It is recognised that fences in homebased settings will vary in design and height. The materials fences or barriers are constructed with, height and space design, and size should also be considered.
It is important that educators and coordinators develop meaningful and reciprocal relationships with parents and
It is important that nappies are not changed in any part of the building that is used for food preparation.
It is important that the Ministry of Education and education agencies give effect to Ka Hikitia and Tau Mai Te Reo.
It is important that the service assesses and understands the hazards and risks that are relevant to its own unique situation. To start this assessment, see below for a sample list of potential hazards.
It is important that the service provider and educator assesses and understands the hazards and risks and hazards that are relevant to the environment of each home. To start this assessment there is a sample list of potential hazards.
It is important that the space is attractive, interesting and fun, as this will help the children:
It is important that your valuable playgroup equipment is stored safely, especially if you are using a community building. A locked cupboard with shelving inside can be useful if no larger space is available but must be attached to the wall for safety in earthquakes.
It is important to ask for identity documentation, and if a parentcaregiver can provide it, please state in the enrolment form which documentation you sighted.
It is important to engage with
It is important to keep your emergency contact details up to with your early learning service. Staff need to be able to contact you in an emergency. They also need to know who has permission to pick up your child.
It is important to note that the approved fire evacuation scheme only covers fire emergencies.
It is likely that a large number of specialists will already be working with a child in a hospitalbased setting. Before educators approach an additional specialist service, it is important to consult with the parents to ensure that the process is appropriate. Confidentiality issues must always be taken into consideration.
It is not always easy to tell when a child is becoming ill. (A change in behaviour can be one indicator.) It is also quite difficult to tell what has caused the illness and whether or not it is infectious. Familiarity with the information in Appendix of the criteria on infectious illnesses, incubation periods, symptoms, recommended exclusion times from attending the service and so on, will be helpful.
It is possible for services to receive both Component D equity funding and the ATIS.
It is preferable that the art preparation and clean up facility is a separate plumbedin sink or tub unit that is used exclusively for this purpose.
It is preferable that the art preparation and cleanup facility is a separate plumbedin sink or tub unit that is used exclusively for this purpose.
It is proposed that Murphys Park Drive will become the new boundary separating the zones of Te Kura Rau Iti and Te Uho o Te Nikau School. Additionally, the East boundary of Te Uho o Te Nikau School is being clarified on the map to accurately reflect the current road layout. This clarification is not intended to change the existing zone but rather to ensure the written description aligns with the actual road network.
It is recommended that ECE services use bleach as a disinfectant when responding to recent outbreaks of diseases caused by microorganisms (germs) such as giardia, cryptosporidium and salmonella. Many of these germs are resistant to most disinfectants. Bleaches contain sodium hypochlorite, the chemical which kills bacteria and viruses. Bleach used must be at least hypochlorite. Supermarket bleach is labelled between and sodium hypochlorite. Bleach solutions must be made fresh daily to remain effective.
It is recommended that family medications and creams are kept separately from first aid supplies used by the educator in their role.
It is suggested service providers make contact with their territorial local authority at the earliest stage when planning a new centre or renovations to clarify any resource consent requirements.
It is the responsibility of a Service Provider to ensure that any delegated representative who may complete the PITA application understands what attestation conditions their service has met prior to submitting the application.
It is the responsibility of a service provider to ensure that any delegated representative who may complete the
It is the responsibility of a teacher to provide evidence, to the satisfaction of their employer, of any factors used to determine the length of service as an uncertificated teacher in a recognised Pacific immersion or bilingual environment that could be counted as previous relevant work experience.
It is the responsibility of a teacher to provide evidence, to the satisfaction of their employer, to determine the length of service as a certificated teacher in a recognised Pacific immersion or bilingual environment. This could include:
It is the responsibility of the service to ensure new playground equipment is compliant. If the furniture or equipment does not come with proof of compliance, ask the supplier to provide the appropriate evidence.
It is thought that this part of the regulation is rarely unpacked by the Ministry of Education or the sector. There is some anecdotal evidence that it has been interpreted to mean that a dedicated dining room must be provided. This criterion expands on and makes more explicit the requirement to make some provision regarding where children eat while attending the service but does not dictate any particular arrangement.
It is up to a teacher to provide evidence, to the satisfaction of their employer, of any factors used to determine their initial salary step.
It is useful to create some smaller group activity spaces using partitions or shelving and visual dividers with floor coverings to create quiet activity zones away from main foot traffic routes and noise generating activities such as music areas.
It is useful to include phone numbers for key people who can be contacted for information about the playgroup. Make sure this is kept uptoand is somewhere easy to find. Make it clear if the phone number is for the playgroup premises or for the key contact people. Think about specifying a time when these people can be contacted.
It is very common for early childhood services to have to deal with children experiencing different forms of illness. Some will be infectious, that is, spread from person to person or from animal to person. Other forms of illness do not spread and will only affect the child or adult who has the illness.
It is very common for early childhood services to have to deal with children experiencing different forms of illness. Some will be infectious, that is, spread from person to person. Other forms of illness do not spread and will only affect the child or adult who has the illness.
It may be more difficult to evacuate children from centres that are not at ground level in the event of a fire. Fire evacuation schemes need to identify ways to mitigate this. We recommend reading High rise evacuation plans for ECE service providers.
It may be more difficult to evacuate children from centres that are not at ground level in the event of a fire. Fire evacuation schemes need to identify ways to mitigate this. We recommend reading the guidance for high rise evacuation plans for ECE service providers
It may be more difficult to evacuate children from centres that are not at ground level in the event of a fire. Fire evacuation schemes need to identify ways to mitigate this. We recommend reading the guidance for high rise evacuation plans for ECE service providers (see HS Emergencies, above).
It may be more difficult to evacuate children from homes that are not at ground level in the event of an emergency. Your evacuation procedure will need to identify ways to mitigate this. Additional guidance is available specifically for services above ground level, we recommend you read High rise evacuation plans for ECE service providers.
It may be useful for a service to include all information about sleep in one place such as the sleep procedure which may include aspects such as:
It might be necessary to wash a child:
It must be available on your school website or on request.
It needs to be consistently applied to all users and across all your systems.
It needs to be easy to understand by everyone including families and members of the community and should be clearly displayed.
It seems to be very popular at the moment
It sets clear expectations that school attendance is a priority, and that:
It should be outside of school time, that training.
It states the conditions a service must meet by a certain . If the conditions are not met, we may cancel its licence to operate.
It summarizes the amount of cash and cash equivalents entering and leaving the school.
It would be beneficial for a service provider to develop clear procedures to make expectations of coordinators and educators clear. The procedure could outline the consequences of inappropriate behaviour. It is good practice to go through this procedure with both coordinators and educators during their induction process and to share this information with parents.
It would be useful to develop a practice of reviewing enrolment and attendance records regularly and filing enrolment records of children who have left or have not attended for a considerable period of time.
Its also important that you check and complete each note if you are required to include information manually.
Its effectively the same as a,
Its great to see a large number
Its only by the end of the term that they need
Its quite a good, it is a good question.
Itchy scalp, especially behind ears
Items (for example cartons, fabric or bottle tops) can be collected at home for use in collage and junk play but be aware of safety. Many natural materials can be collected from beaches and other areas and be used in your group.
Items in first aid kits will need to be replaced as they are used, and regular checks should be made to ensure that any perishable items are not past their useby (once a month or term is a good idea). Having a minimum stock list of frequently used items as well as a staff roster for checking your first aid kit(s) will help to ensure perishable items and frequently used items are renewed as needed.
Items in first aid kits will need to be replaced as they are used, and regular checks should be made to ensure that any perishable items are not past their useby (once a month or term is recommended). Regular checks are particularly important in the home setting where family members may also be accessing first aid kit items.
Items that should be laundered and how often.
Items to be laundered include but are not limited to:
Items to be laundered include:
Items whose primary purpose is transportation such as slings, backpacks, prams, buggies and car capsules cannot be provided by the centre as an item intended for children to sleep on as they are not intended for that purpose or allow children to lie flat.
Items whose primary purpose is transportation, for example slings, backpacks, prams, buggies and car capsules cannot be provided by the homebased provider or educator as an item intended for children to sleep on as they are not intended for that purpose or allow children to lie flat.
Iwi affiliation (if applicable)
James Cook Kindergarten is a sessional service.
James Cook Kindergarten operates two sessions per day. Session is for hours and session is for . hours.
Jane Rogers (OAG) presentation.
Jared, does this, uh, can you see the presentation Okay
Job descriptions are statements written to describe the:
Job descriptions clearly identify the roles and responsibilities of a specific job, helping to promote positive relationships within a team of staff.
Join Hector and friends as they navigate the digital seas and learn valuable lessons about online safety.
Joining the ICT contractors panel
Joining the construction directory
Joining the offsite manufacturing supplier panel
Joining the professional services directory
Journalists wanting information about individuals need to get permission before we can respond to media queries about them. Ask the people in question to complete the privacy consent form, then scan and send it to the media inbox, along with your query.
July funding round: February to May.
June (payment on the first working day in July).
Just a couple of key dates. The draft financial statements have to be given to your auditor in auditable form by the st of March and then you must submit your Annual Report to the Ministry by the st of May.
K employed to be in charge of a service, and who is not a K or K employee
K employed to carry out professional support, guidance, and administrative roles, and responsible for the management of K employees, under delegation from their employer
K employed to be responsible for the management of K employees
Ka Hikitia Measurable Gains Framework
Ka Hikitia is a crossagency strategy for the education sector.
Ka Hikitia measurable gains framework
Ka Hikitia: Supporting resources for early learning
Ka Hikitia: Supporting resources for schools
Ka Hikitia: Supporting resources for tertiary
Ka Ora, Ka Ako aims to reduce food insecurity by providing a daily nutritious lunch to students in need of the greatest support to help them learn and thrive at school or kura.
Ka Ora, Ka Ako is targeted at the top of students in schools and kura facing the greatest socioeconomic barriers. The lunch programme is being extended to up to , toyearolds in early learning services beginning February .
Katy Flintoff (Lower Hutt)
Kaupapa here tiaki tamariki
Keeler, R., (). Natural Playscapes: Creating outdoor play environments for the soul. Redmond, WA: Exchange Press.
Keep a record of safety checks
Keep information confidential
Keep records of the process
Keep the approval letter or email for your records.
Keep the dishes separate from each other while they are rinsed, for example on a dish rack.
Keep the emergency drill records for years.
Keep the hazard and risk checklists for the current year and the preceding year.
Keep the immunisation register up to .
Keep the number of accounts with administrator privileges to a minimum.
Keep the records of food served for months.
Keep the sleep records for the current year plus additional year.
Keep your child home if they are sick
Keep your password secure by:
Keeping Police vet information
Keeping a record of medicine administration demonstrates that the service has fulfilled its duty of care. That the child needing medicine has been given the right dose of the right medicine at the right time.
Keeping a record of sleeping times and checks by adults will ensure that parents have access to important information about their childs sleeping patterns while at the service.
Keeping a record of sleeping times and checks by educators will ensure that parents have access to information about their childs sleeping patterns each day while they are in the care of the educator.
Keeping safe while using school buses
Keeping safe while using the bus
Keeping track of teacher hours
Keeping your personal information secure
Kei te kaiako te kawenga ki te whakarato taunakitanga o ana tohu me ana wheako mahi o mua.
Key Objective : Raise the value of Pacific languages.
Key Objective : Strengthen pathways and resources to learn Pacific languages and learn through Pacific languages.
Key Objective : Create opportunities to use Pacific languages more in more spaces.
Key dates for school staffing and funding
Key investments made in the Budget include an additional:
Key objectives for Targeted Funding.
Key tasks the service intends to undertake
Key to this are strong foundational skills in reading, writing, and maths. These skills allow them to be successful in the broader curriculum learning at school and gain qualifications into further study and employment. This will open doors to fulfilling careers and empower our children to navigate the world confidently.
Keychain (only for iPhones or Google)
Ki runga ki te mata o te whenua
Kindergarten funding is calculated using the same variables as education and care services, with the exception of the Attestation of Certificated Teachers Salaries. Kindergartens must keep the same records as education and care services. There is a separate funding rate for kindergartens.
Kindergarten teachers, head teachers and senior teachers collective agreement (KTCA)
Kindergartens are entitled to discretionary hours per funding period, when a certificated reliever is not available. The recordkeeping requirements outlined in Section B also apply to kindergartens. This includes the obligation to submit a report to the Ministry on the discretionary hours used each funding period.
Kindergartens that operate a mixture of allday and sessional must complete the Staff Hour Count for the days that they operate as allday.
Kindergartens, which are teacherled centrebased services controlled by a kindergarten association (see Glossary), are treated differently for funding purposes.
Kindergartens, which are teacherled centrebased services controlled by a kindergarten association see Glossary, are treated differently for funding purposes.
Kitchen and cooking facilities or appliances are designed, located or fitted with safety devices to ensure that children cannot access them without adult assistance or supervision.
Kitchens and cooking facilities are potentially dangerous places for children so access for children must be supervised.
Kitchens and cooking facilities are potentially dangerous places for children so access for children must be supervised. For this reason, centres need to have the ability to make their kitchen and cooking facilities inaccessible to children.
Kiwi Park group model financial statements
Kiwi Park model financial statements and supporting documents
Kiwi Park model liquidation statement
Kiwi Park training module for schools on how to collate and upload your annual report.
Kiwi Park training module for schools on how to hide Rows and Notes that are not required for your school.
Kiwi Park training module for schools on how to import and map a trial balance.
Kiwi Park training module for schools on how to populate the trial balance converter.
Kiwi Park training module for schools on how to prepare a trial balance for export.
Kiwi Park training module for schools on how to quality check the financial statements.
Kiwi Park training module for schools on how to quality review the Statement of Cash Flows.
Kiwi Park training modules
Kowhai St. Childcare Centre records the daily number of Certificated Teacher Hours and Other Teacher Hours on their Staff Record.
Kowhai St. provides its RS Return to the Ministry of Education.
Kowhai St. transfers the daily Certificated Teacher Hours and Other Teacher Hours for the funding period from their Staff Record to the Staff Hour Count section of their RS Return.
Kowhai Street Childcare Centre completes their July RS Return with their Certificated Teacher Hours and regulated (ratio) staff hours for February, March, April, and May.
Kowhai Street Childcare Centre completes their March RS Return with their Certificated Teacher Hours and regulated (ratio) staff hours for October, November, December and January.
Kowhai Street Childcare Centre completes their November RS Return with their Certificated Teacher Hours and regulated (ratio) staff hours for June, July, August and September.
Kowhai Street Childcare Centre is an allday service.
Kowhai Street Childcare Centre operates allday on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, and Tuesday and Thursday as sessional. They claim days in the allday column, and days in the sessional column.
Kowhai Street attests that all of their employed certificated teachers are being paid at least the amount specified at Step to Management
Kowhai Street attests that all of their employed certificated teachers are being paid at least the amount specified at Step to .
Kowhai Street attests that all of their employed certificated teachers are being paid at least the amount specified at Step .
Kowhai Street attests that all of their employed certificated teachers are being paid at least the amount specified in Full Parity Salary Scale (Full Step to Full Management Steps).
Kowhai Street is placed on the base funding rate.
Kristen is enrolled to attend an early childhood service days a week.
Kristen was absent for more than half of the Fridays in August.
Kura must use this funding to provide school transport assistance to all eligible
Kura receive a daily amount for each eligible
LM Consulting ( hours, days a week)
Laminated safety glass or toughened safety glass is much stronger than ordinary glass and breaks less easily. When it does break, it does not splinter into sharp jagged pieces. This greatly reduces the risk of injury.
Land Use Grants revenues is set off against property expenses.
Language consists of words, sentences and stories, languages of sign, mathematics, visual imagery, art, dance and drama, rhythm, music, and movement. For children who are nonverbal, alternative and augmentative communication (ACC) technology and devices can be used to replace or augment verbal communication.
Language consists of words, sentences and stories, languages of sign, mathematics, visual imagery, art, dance and drama, rhythm, music, and movement. For children who are nonverbal, alternative and augmentative communication (ACC) technology and devices can be used to replace or augment verbal communication. Mokopuna are encouraged to engage with different forms of expression in ways that they find meaningful and enjoyable.
Language is a vital part of communication and cultural transmission. If children are competent communicators, they are wellplaced to enjoy their relationships with others and to be successful learners.
Language is a vital part of communication and cultural transmission. If children are competent communicators, they are wellplaced to enjoy their relationships with others and to be successful learners. Language does not consist only of words, sentences, and stories though: it includes the language of images, art, dance, drama, mathematics, technology, movement, rhythm, print and music.
Language planning support
Language planning supports stronger and consistent language development across an entire education service.
Languages spoken at home.
Large easytoclean mats spread on the floor or on the grass, benches and the edges of low decks are also practical ways of providing places for children to sit and eat.
Large print summary (long version)
Large print summary (short version)
Last year, the Ministry for Regulation (MfR) led an ECE Regulatory Review.
Lastly, the initial step should be further advanced if the teacher also has other relevant work experience, such as unqualified or overseas teaching. Other relevant experience must be within the last years and is up to a maximum of steps.
Late submissions may result in late or no payment.
Later commencement for
Laws and regulations for early learning services
Laws and regulations for early learning services.
Laws governing early learning
Learn about how to support children at playgroup.
Learn about official information and making requests under the Official Information Act .
Learn about our OIA responsibilities when responding to requests from the media.
Learn about our established property supplier panels and how you can join one.
Learn about our role and who we are, New Zealands education system, and how to contact us.
Learn about the Required, Recommended, and Inform compliance levels used on our site.
Learn about the characteristics of infants, toddlers and young children.
Learn about the compliance levels used on our site.
Learn about the education and care available for your tamariki before they go to school or kura.
Learn about the education, training and career options to support your young person when they leave school.
Learn about your childs education at primary and secondary school.
Learn how to create a bus procedure for your school in our training module for bus controllers.
Learn how to enrol your child in an early learning service, how their settling in process might work, and what to bring on the first day.
Learn more about how we investigate complaints and incidents.
Learn what roles there are in our procurement process and who they are usually assigned to.
Learn what steps we can take if a licenced early learning service does not comply with licencing criteria or other legal requirements.
Learn where to install Internal Environment Monitoring devices (IEMs) at school, how to read the data and what to do if you have a problem.
Learner Identity Broker privacy impact assessment Full report
Learner Identity Broker privacy statement
Learner Identity Broker privacy statement for students
Learning Support Action Plan
Learning and using your language creates a greater sense of belonging, a strong sense of identity and makes you feel safe and valued in your place of learning
Learning experiences and play opportunities
Learning opportunities and experiences
Learning support Action Plan
Learning support exemptions
Learning support for literacy and communication
Learning support information about children and young people may need to be shared in groups.
Learning support request form
Learning support request form DOCX, KB
Learning support request form for Canterbury, Chatham Islands
Learning support request form for South Canterbury
Learning support resources for parents
Learning support service complaints
Learning support services
Learning support services in the regions
Least privilege for IT leads and administrators
Least privilege reduces the risk of accidental or intentional misuse of information. It can:
Leave and holidays Employment New Zealand
Leave the totals line so that you have a mechanism to check if you agree with your schools totals.
Leaving Teacher Destination (permanent staff only).
Legal requirements for school attendance
Legal requirements for schools that run their own services
Legislative requirements for consultation are located in Section of the Education and Training Act :
Length of service progression
Leo o Fanau Moana bilingual
Leo o Fanau Moana bilingual ( to bilingual):
Leo o Fanau Moana immersion
Leo o Fanau Moana immersion ( to immersion):
Leo o fanau moana bilingual
Leo o fanau moana immersion
Lessening the likelihood of a prone or crawling infant, or a toddler just beginning to find their feet, being accidentally injured by an older child who is fully engaged in their own play and is not aware of their presence.
Level are immersion education settings where
Licence changes are permitted under the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations .
Licenceexempt and certificated playgroups now need to meet the same funding rules and requirements to be eligible for funding. Differences in the amount of funding available to Licenceexempt and certificated playgroups remain in recognition of the quality assurance provided by the certification process.
Licences are issued to early childhood education services under the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations .
Licences set the standards for curriculum, premises and facilities, health and safety, and governance and management of early childhood services.
Licensed ECE services are eligible for funding under this component if they provide early childhood education in a language and culture other than English (including sign language) during more than half of the formal education and care programme.
Licensed ECE services receiving the ECE Funding Subsidy must meet certain eligibility and funding conditions.
Licensed ECE services that meet the criteria outlined in this chapter are eligible.
Licensed ECE services with an EQI of , , or are eligible to receive Component A Equity Funding.
Licensed ECE services with an EQI of , , or are eligible to receive funding under Component B: Special needs and nonEnglish speaking backgrounds.
Licensed ECE services with an Isolation Index of . or greater qualify to receive funding.
Licensed and certificated services
Licensed early childhood education services and certified playgroups must follow the national gazetted curriculum framework for early childhood education,
Licensed early childhood services must confirm the accuracy and completeness of their ELI records by the end of the following month.
Licensed early childhood services must send information to the ELI system through ELI Web, or a Ministryapproved commercial student management system (SMS).
Licensed early childhood services must submit ECE Census information once per year. The collection is notified by the Ministry.
Licensed early childhood services, unless specifically exempt, must send complete and accurate information to the ELI system. This includes:
Licensed early learning services (except
Licensed early learning services are required to have regard to the NELP as part of the Governance, Management and Administration (GMA) requirements.
Licensed early learning services have to meet health and safety criteria set by us and other agencies.
Licensed early learning services must meet specified ratio requirements. The ratio depends on the age of the children and type of service.
Licensed early learning services receive government funding, but usually there is an additional cost for
Licensed early learning services that meet the criteria outlined in this chapter are eligible to receive Targeted Funding.
Licensed early learning services which serve
Licensed homebased services must meet the requirements specified in the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations and the Licensing Criteria for homebased ECE services.
Licensed private and communitybased services with an Isolation Index of . or greater which receive less than , per annum in ECE Funding Subsidy, Hours ECE and Equity Funding are eligible to receive the ATIS (see Section for more details).
Licensed services receiving the ECE Funding Subsidy must meet these conditions at all times.
Licensing Criteria for Centrebased ECE Services
Licensing Criteria for Homebased ECE Services
Licensing Criteria for Hospitalbased ECE Services
Licensing and certification
Licensing criteria are used to assess how centres meet the minimum standards set out in the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations .
Licensing criteria assess if centrebased ECE services meet minimum standards set by the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations to retain their licence.
Licensing criteria assess if homebased ECE services meet minimum standards set by the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations to retain their licence.
Licensing criteria assess if hospitalbased ECE services meet minimum standards set by the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations to retain their licence.
Licensing criteria for centrebased ECE services
Licensing criteria for centrebased early learning services
Licensing criteria for centrebased education and care services
Licensing criteria for homebased ECE services
Licensing criteria for homebased education and care services
Licensing criteria for hospitalbased ECE services
Licensing criteria for hospitalbased education and care services
Lifting the quality of New Zealands physical learning environments.
Lighter things such as books and blocks can also cause injury if they fall on children.
Lighter things such as books and blocks can also cause injury if they fall on children. These can be held on shelves by a wire or short chain connected to the shelf with a metal eye or hook.
Lighter things such as books and blocks can also cause injury if they fall on children. These can be held on shelves by wire or a short chain connected to the shelf with a metal eye or hook.
Lighter things such as books and blocks can also cause injury if they fall on children. These can be held on shelves by wire, or a short chain connected to the shelf with a metal eye or hook.
Like I said, that gives greater effect to, to greater effect
Limit the number of administrators
Limitation policy for claims of abuse in state care
Limitation policy for historic claims of abuse in statecare
Limits of exemption general
Limits of exemption threeweek rule
Line of sight from the door
Line of sight from those using bathroom facilities
Linen must be removed from the mattresses and not stacked in between mattresses.
Linen used by children or adults is hygienically laundered.
Link between staff hour count and funding rate
LinkedIn (Ministry of Education of New Zealand)
Links from other sites to this one
Links to other websites from this one should not be taken as endorsement of those sites or of products offered on those sites. When visiting other websites, refer to the conditions of use and copyright policies of those sites.
Links to thirdparty websites
Liquid soap (rather than a communal bar of soap) can be less messy and is more hygienic when there are several children attending.
Liquid soap (rather than a communal bar of soap) can be less messy and is more hygienic.
List of all school board members OPTIONAL.
List of daily and technology school bus providers
List of potential hazards
List of services in the scheme
List the daily number of hours of enrolment for each enrolled child eligible for Hours ECE.
List the daily number of hours of enrolment for each permanently enrolled child under years of age.
List the number of discretionary hours (or parts thereof) that have been used to cover the absence of each certificated teacher for the day.
List the number of hours that can be claimed for each child.
Listen to Minister Kelvin Davis talk about Ka Hikitia and Tau Mai
Live animals (insects, frogs, spiders, and so on) should be observed with care and returned to their natural environment as soon as possible.
Lockable castors should be used to prevent trolleys or shelving on wheels from moving around. Think about weight distribution on free standing shelves, that is, store heavy items at the bottom of shelving with lighter items higher up.
Lockable castors should be used to prevent trolleys or shelving on wheels from moving around. Think about weight distribution on free standing shelves.
Lockdown drills should be practiced by educators without children. Drills on what to do in potentially violent situations can be practiced, but at a time that children are not on site as the drills may cause undue fear and anxiety. However, educators should be aware of procedures and able to carry the procedures out if the service has been alerted to an immediate threat. Practices for lockdown drills should be recorded and kept as per other drills.
Lockdown drills should be practiced by staff without children. Drills on what to do in potentially violent situations can be practiced, but at a time that children are not on site as the drills may cause undue fear and anxiety. Especially if the drill involves everyone sheltering in a darkened space such as a sleep room. However, staff should be aware of procedures and able to carry the procedures out if the service has been alerted to an immediate threat. Practices for lockdown drills should be recorded and kept as per other drills.
Log in to Netsafes Kete for further guidance that may be useful.
Log the time and of when the record was verified.
Login and support queries for schools and tertiary applications:
Longterm insights briefings
Longterm insights briefings are a statutory requirement under the Public Service Act .
Longer term planning signals our direction to the wider community, including:
Look at Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations regulation and licensing criterion GMA for what is required.
Look at how many children are already permanently enrolled to attend your service when it opens.
Looking at what teachers need to teach in Pacific bilingual education.
Looking forward to rolling these out
Low achievement at school in literacy, numeracy, oral language and other subjects.
MA Statement of operation
MPI website is useful for anyone handling food.
Main office number ( hours, days a week)
Main office number (Office hours: ampm, MondayFriday)
Maintaining a list of allergies for children at the home, and ready access to the list and relevant medications in the event of an allergic reaction.
Maintaining a list of allergies for children attending the centre, and ready access to the list and relevant medications in the event of an allergic reaction.
Major investment in teacher supply
Major works contract template
Make a notification of a childs serious injury or illness if it:
Make sure each parent knows which children they are responsible for. Give them a list of names.
Make sure that any sores and weeping cuts, spots and scratches are covered at all times in all environments, and encourage children not to scratch or pick at them. If these wounds cannot be covered, the child or staff member should stay at home until they have healed.
Make sure that staff wear gloves and use disinfectant to clean up spills, or blood or other body fluids.
Make sure that the fastenings used are strong enough to hold the weight of the heavy object. What will happen if it gets bounced updown
Make sure that the fastenings you use are strong enough to hold the weight of the heavy object. What will happen if it gets bounced up and down
Make sure that the fastenings you use are strong enough to hold the weight of the heavy object. What will happen if it gets bounced updown
Make sure that you can check off each of the items below before you submit the annual report to us. Details of what your report should cover for each of these items are in the annual report template.
Make sure the NAS is up to with any software updates.
Make sure they are aware of the itinerary, timetable and general logistics of the excursion.
Making a complaint about an investigation
Making an official information request
Making sense of what is happening
Making sure your claim is in the right place
Management and administration
Management and administration criteria for playgroups.
Management and administration information about closing a playgroup.
Management positions may be held by:
Management staffing has a roll component and either:
Managing behaviour on school bus services
Managing noise levels will benefit everyone at the service. Establish expectations with children about what is an acceptable level of noise inside.
Managing noise levels will benefit everyone in the home. Establish expectations with children about what is an acceptable level of noise inside.
Managing staffing usage (banking staffing)
Managing student behaviour on school transport
Many children go to a school close to where they live. Many schools have an enrolment scheme called zoning.
Many items in ECE centres need prompt, regular washing. This should include bedding as well as towels, cloths, bibs and dress ups.
Many items in a homebased setting need prompt, regular washing. This should include bedding as well as towels, cloths, bibs and dress ups.
Many services develop regular reporting processes including providing an annual report. Often monthly financial reports are made available. This is a good way to provide information to parents on a regular basis.
Map of attendance services
March funding round: October to January.
March to May: The auditor provides the audited financial statements to the board.
Marketing and promotional activitiesresources.
Marlborough Kindergarten Association
Material on this website is licensed for reuse under the Creative Commons Attribution
Materials to help implement
Maths Professional Learning and Development
Maths resources clarification
Mats are useful because they can be removed for cleaning and can be moved within the centre to reorganise the learning environment from time to time. There are some very effective semipermanent tapes that attach a mat to the floor. This helps to ensure mats do not become a hazard.
Matters regarding remuneration over and above base salary are to be discussed between the teacher and their employer.
Mattresses must have a surface that is smooth, easily cleaned and impervious to moisture and does not present a suffocation hazard to children. The waterproof layer must cover at least the whole of the upper surface and all sides of the mattress.
Mattresses need to fit firmly inside the cot to avoid gaps that an infant could get wedged in. Mattresses should not be too soft, as this is a risk factor for infant suffocation.
Mattresses need to fit firmly inside the multilevel cot to avoid gaps that an infant could get wedged in. Mattresses should not be too soft, as this is a risk factor for infant suffocation.
Maungawhau (Mt Eden) office
Maximum (M) salary step for that qualification group.
Maximum FCHs for the ECE Funding Subsidy
Maximum child age taught (months).
May be consolidated (i.e. one report covering all services)
May be consolidated (i.e. one statement of accounting policies covering all services)
McKenzie Residential School and Campbell Park School
Measured by Equity Index (EQI).
Measured by Isolation Index.
Measured by attestation (EC form).
Measurement of eligibility
Mechanisms for notification
Media privacy consent form
Medical certificate to support application for exemption from absence rule for special andor health needs.
Medicine (prescription and nonprescription) is not given to a child unless it is given by authorised personnel, in an emergency or as part of the childs treatment as a patient of the hospital.
Medicine (prescription and nonprescription) is not given to a child unless it is given:
Medicines are stored safely and appropriately, and are disposed of, or sent home with a parent (if supplied in relation to a specific child) after the specified time.
Medicines must be stored out of the reach of children, but still be easily accessed by an adult if needed in an emergency. Some medicines may require refrigerated storage.
Medicines must be stored out of the reach of children, but still be easily accessed by the educator if needed in an emergency. Some medicines may require refrigerated storage. Services must ensure that children do not have unsupervised access to the kitchen or the fridge.
Medium works contract template
Melanie attends hours per day, Monday to Friday.
Melanie is receiving Hours ECE and is enrolled for five hours on Monday to Friday, from am to pm.
Micronesian not further defined
Microsoft Windows or later, which may have Windows Hello to scan your face or fingerprint.
Microsoft has default security settings that includes multifactor authentication and guidance on how to use FA for email.
Middle management allowances for secondary and composite schools
Middle management allowances may be allocated:
Minimising physical restraint in schools
Minimising student distress in schools
Minimum adult to child ratios and first aid
Minimum child age taught (months).
Minimum number of teachers responsible for supervision of sleeping children.
Minimum salary scale for certificated teachers
Minimum salary scale for management positions
Minimum salary scales and salary progression
Minimum salary scales before November
Minimum salary scales from November
Minimum salary steps and employer Kiwisaver contributions
Minimum submission frequency
Minister Retis media releases
Minister Seymour announced today that the Government accepted all recommendations from the review report.
Minister Seymours media releases
Minister Simmonds media releases
Minister Stanfords media releases
Ministers release on the attendance action plan Beehive website
Ministers media releases on the Beehive website
Ministry auditors must be provided access to hospital records for verification purposes.
Ministry of Education Customer Services
Ministry of Education child protection policy
Ministry of Education policies including Child Protection Policy and protected disclosures.
Ministry of Education staff are free to use social media in their personal lives. The opinions or views they expressed are their own, not ours.
Ministry of Education staff.
Ministry of Educations Bullying Free NZ website
Ministry of Education. Quality in Action
Ministry staff will engage in conversations with services about how they may show they have regard for the NELP. For example, some services may be due to update their annual plan so it could be as simple as including the NELP in this. Services could look at how the NELP can be woven into their selfreview and internal evaluation processes and systems as well as professional growth cycles.
Ministryfunded resources (Years to )
Minor works contract guidance
Minor works contract template
Missing a week of school each term means missing a whole year of learning by the time your child is . Regularly attending school helps students to get the most out of their education.
Mixed and allday kindergartens
MoE Design features report template
Moana Valley Preschool had Certificated Teacher Hours for September.
Mod Com Portable Buildings Limited
Monday October to no later than Friday December (up to half days).
Monday July to Friday September ( half days).
Monday October to no later than Friday December (up to half days).
Monday September : Provisional roll review applications open.
Monday April to Friday July ( half days).
Monday July to Friday September ( half days).
Monday July to Friday September ( half days)
Monday April to Friday June ( half days).
Monday April to Friday July ( half days).
Monday November : Extraordinary roll growth applications open.
Monday January : Quarter operational funding instalment paid.
Monday October to no later than Friday December (up to half days).
Monday April : EOY Banking staffing letters on secure data portal.
Monday September : September roll return due.
Monitor and review hazard and risk management system and practices.
Monitoring and maintaining the right levels of access
Monitoring progress: children receiving Hours ECE
Monitoring progress: children receiving Hours ECE (removed April ):
Monitoring progress: teacher registration targets
Monitoring progress: teacher registration targets (removed April ):
Monitoring will include checking for warmth, breathing, general wellbeing every to minutes or more frequently according to the needs of the child. This will be recorded along with the time of the check and the name of the adult checking.
Monthly data is required to be inputted and confirmed as correct by the end of the following month.
More about enrolment schemes
More detailed information is available on Ventilation in early learning services.
More guidance on developing a complaints policy and process is available, which includes a suggested template for developing a complaints policy and procedure.
More homebased regulatory guidance
More information about ELI can be found on this website.
More information about copyright:
More information about noise is available in the licensing criteria guidance: PF Lighting, ventilation, heating and acoustic materials.
More information about noise is in the licensing criteria guidance for HS Noise levels.
More information can be found in the resource
More information can be found in the resource:
More information can be found on the equity funding page.
More information for all services on the rates and applying for funding is available in the following sections:
More information for schools
More information is available from the NZ Transport Agency website.
More information is available in the guidance for HS Securing furniture.
More information is available in the publication Caring for animals: a guide for teachers, early childhood educators and students.
More information is available on the NZ Transport Agency website.
More information is available on the Police vetting page.
More information on childcare assistance can be found on the Work and Income website or call
More information on each of these funding types can be found in the following chapters:
More information on equipment in ECE centres.
More information on philosophy statements can be found in the Ministry of Educations guide for starting a centrebased ECE service.
More information on risk management
More information on the requirements of the Food Act and Food Regulations is available on the Food Act section of this website.
More options for complaints
More record keeping information
More regulatory guidance for homebased ECE services.
More teacher guidance for accelerating literacy learning in Years to and to will be available later this year.
More than , learners,
Most children stay at school until they are around years old.
Most of the information we collect is provided directly by people or organisations, or their authorised representative, in order to meet their statutory obligations and according to our powers as a regulator.
Most scholarships will have an application deadlines and documents you need to submit. You may need to supply personal documents such as:
Most school buses are managed by the Ministry of Education, but some schools are funded to organise their own transport services.
Most schools in New Zealand are owned and funded by the state (state schools). They teach the national curriculum and are secular (nonreligious).
Most schools, and teachers, do not use physical restraint on students. For the schools that use physical restraint, this should be used only as a very last resort needed to prevent students from imminent harm. The compulsory online module helps clarify the difference between appropriate physical contact and restraint.
Most staff do not need to do physical holds and releases training.
Moving over the face of the land
Multilevel cots (also known as bunk cots or stacker cots) are those where (usually) cots are fixed on top of each other.
Multilevel cots are only acceptable if the following can be assured:
Multilevel cots must have no gaps or protrusions that could trap an infant or catch their clothing and have no sharp edges. The sides must be high enough to stop an infant climbing out and there should be no footholds.
Multilevel cots must only be able to be opened from the outside by an adult to place a child in or remove a child.
Multilevel cots, bunk cots and stacker cots
Multiple Barrier Allowance
Museum, Art Gallery, Zoo education officers.
Must be itemised by service
My understanding is that you are to use the question mark
NSNs are allocated and stored in the National Student Index (NSI).
NZ Government Business.govt.nz website carries a range of resources and tools for employers covering recruiting, appointing and managing staff.
NZ Transport Agency index data and processes to calculate any adjustments.
NZ Transport Agency requirements
NZ has car restraint guidance you can share with
NZQA has guidance on AI and when its use is acceptable in assessment.
NZTA determines the loading limit for every passenger service vehicle, including the number of standing passengers.
Napier Free Kindergarten Association Incorporated
Nappy change facilities should be located in an area of the home that is separate from food preparation or eating areas.
Nappy changing areas should be cleaned and disinfected after every nappy change.
Nappy changing procedures at early learning services
Nappy changing surfaces should be cleaned and disinfected after every nappy change.
Nappy changingdisposal procedure
National Certificate of Educational Achievement
National Education Growth Plan
National Education Growth Plan
National Education Schooling Network Methodology
National Education and Learning Priorities
National Emergency Management Agency
National Monitoring Study for Student Achievement (NMSSA) Year
National Student Number (NSN).
National Student Numbers for tertiary providers
National Trust Board and the Ministry of Education signed
National Trust Board and the Ministry of Education.
National Trust Board. The trust and the
National Trust and licensed by the Ministry of Education under the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations .
National Trust who will advise the Ministry of Education at the same time.
National Trust, the service provider will seek information and guidance from
Nau mai, haere atu taku karere
Nausea, diarrhoea andor vomiting
Nausea, stomach pains, general sickness with jaundice (yellow skin) appearing a few days later
Nelson District Free Kindergarten Association
Nelson, Marlborough, West Coast
Nelson, Marlborough, West Coast, Canterbury, Chatham Islands, Otago, Southland:
Netsafe has a range of resources for educators and parents
Netsafe has developed acceptable use policy templates for ECE Services, and parents or caregivers. The templates may be downloaded from Netsafe.
Netsafe has developed acceptable use policy templates for schools and
Netsafes website offers help to prevent cyberbullying. Netsafe can also help with reporting abuse online and bullying on mobile phones.
Network for Learning (NL)
Network for Learning (NL) if the password is to NL services
Network for Learning (NL) is a Crown company that helps connect, protect and support schools and kura across Aotearoa New Zealand through a wide range of managed internet, WiFi and cyber security products and services. NL is committed to improving digital learning experiences and outcomes for all.
Never enter your actual password when testing the strength of it. Only use it to understand how to improve your passwords or passphrases.
New Ready to Read Phonics Plus cards available
New Zealand (Teaching Council) is responsible for Police vetting registered teachers, principals and relief teachers. This is part of the process to hold a practicing certificate or Limited Authority to Teach (LAT).
New Zealand Educational Institute (NZEI)
New Zealand Legislation website
New Zealand Qualifications Authority
New Zealand Qualifications Authority (NZQA)
New Zealand Qualifications Authority (NZQA) must assess overseas qualifications.
New Zealand Relay is a free service that helps people who are:
New Zealand School Trustees Association.
New Zealand Sign Language (NZSL) Tutors
New Zealand Sign Language video for the summary of the Action Plan for Pacific Education ( refresh)
New Zealand Transport Agency requirements.
New Zealand Transport Authority has guidance for schools and families about bus safety.
New Zealand and the children in the group.
New Zealand citizens overseas and corporate bodies with a place of business in New Zealand can also request information.
New Zealand culture. Early childhood services are a vital link to ensuring all New Zealand children, regardless of ethnicity, are given the opportunity to learn about and experience, in a very real way, both
New Zealand in certain circumstances. The Teaching Council has information and guidance on how to embed the Code and Standards further into your teaching practice, and how to identify breaches of the code using a number of scenarios in their Resource Centre.
New Zealand is the professional body for New Zealand teachers.
New Zealand students on an exchange
New Zealand that provide a holistic description of what high quality teaching practice looks like and what it means to be a teacher in
New Zealands Network of Schools
New Zealand, Tertiary Education Commission, and New Zealand School Trustees Association (NZSTA). The education sector includes all early learning, schooling, and tertiary education provision.
New Zealand, it is important that
New ZealandGerman Student Exchange
New ZealandGermany Exchange
New and existing employees
New closing for instruction settings
New daily bus and technology bus contracts began in Term .
New early learning service types introduced
New services are eligible for funding from the day that they are licensed and operating.
New services must complete the RS Form to receive their first ECE Funding Subsidy entitlement.
New services must complete this form to receive their first funding payment.
New services or services considering renovations should be aware of the requirements of the New Zealand Building Code.
New services that are affiliated to, or located on the grounds of, a state or integrated school must ensure they are a separate legal entity, and have a separate management structure and bank account to that of the school.
New servicesowners that have not completed a full financial year of operation do not have to provide audited financial reports.
Newly installed playground equipment or safety surfacing must have a certificate of compliance to show it is installed according to the manufacturers instructions. These may be asked for during the licence assessment process.
News and information for Pacific families and caregivers with kids in education.
News, guidance and resources for education professionals working in schools and kura.
News, guidance and resources for service providers, contractors and suppliers working with schools, kura, and early learning services.
Next select View, Arrange All, Vertical.
Next, copy the exported file to the folder where you have saved the Kiwi Park model. Rename the file to something more appropriate for future reference and audit purposes.
Niche Modular Construction Limited
No Salary Scale (No Step).
No Salary Scale (No step)
No Salary Scale (No step).
No alcohol is to be consumed on the premises when children are present.
No funding may be claimed for any continuous absences from the
No money was paid to the school. This resulted in a loss on disposal of ,.
No person on the premises smokes or vapes in any area which is available for use by children or for food preparation while children are attending the service.
No person on the premises smokes or vapes in any area which is available for use by children or for food preparation while children are present.
No person on the premises uses, or is under the influence of, alcohol or any other substance that has a detrimental effect on their functioning or behaviour during the services hours of operation.
No step: base funding band.
No, I think thats exactly right, Jared.
No, it doesnt have to be changed
Noise levels can be reduced indoors by good acoustic design and materials.
Nonteaching staff who are bus controllers must fill in the NOVOnt timesheet.
None, but ECCschool should be informed. Treatment recommended to kill eggs and lice.
None, but skin contact should be avoided
Northern Auckland Free Kindergarten Association Incorporated
Northland Kindergarten Association
Not all children in the service are expected to interact in the main Pacific language of the service, however, will do so when directed.
Not all early learning services will have spaces available so you might need to go on a waiting list.
Not all school buses have to have seatbelts. But if there are seatbelts, they should be used.
Not all schools have zones. Anyone can enrol at schools that dont have an enrolment scheme. If your child is enrolled at a school without an enrolment scheme, they are entitled to remain at the school if an enrolment scheme is brought in.
Not all schools use cohort entry, so youll need to check with the school when you enrol your child about when they can start.
Not all syllabuses are available to homeeducated students. You will need to contact the school of your choice and organise the exams through them and pay a fee if your child is accepted.
Not only to have proactive informed conversations
Not usually, but there is a provision for a charge to be made.
Note that some of the findings we have made might be upsetting to read about.
Note that the due for the Targeted Funding report is different to the due for general and special purpose financial reports.
Note that this licence does not apply to:
Note: A session of . hours will receive funding for hours.
Note: Emergency closure approval request older than one calendar month will not be approved.
Note: Exclude yearolds, yearolds and yearolds that will be receiving Hours ECE at your service.
Note: For the November funding round the attestation period for funding conditions related to Full Parity Salary Scale Steps to Full Management steps start from November .
Note: Funding conditions for licensed homebased services previous to January are available for reference in Appendix .
Note: Funding conditions for licensed homebased services previous to January are available for reference on the ECE Funding Handbook updates page.
Note: Funding conditions related to the Full Parity Salary Scale are effective from November .
Note: Homebased service providers must try to place the enrolled children with another educator before applying for emergency closure approval.
Note: In exceptional circumstances, in isolated communities, () may be waived by the Ministry regional office.
Note: It is important to use real, well maintained, adult tools that work properly when children use them.
Note: Regulation ()(c) must be read alongside other regulations and licensing criteria that further describe a services or person responsibles responsibilities. Regulations to note:
Note: Services completing a paperbased RS Return must complete and sign the forms in pen. Pencil must not be used. Completed RS Returns should be sent:
Note: The Base Salary Scale is only effective from November .
Note: The Extended Parity Salary Scale is only effective from November .
Note: The Full Parity Salary Scale is only effective from November . Full Parity Funding Rates are a higher set of funding rates available to education and care and hospitalbased services who pay all employed certificated teachers according to the Full Parity Salary Scale.
Note: The Parity Salary Scale is only effective from November .
Note: The above January standard funding rates were used to pay the November advance funding for January and February . From January the homebased services standard funding rates will no longer be an option. The quality funding rates will remain. In the March washup funding payment, all homebased payments from January will be at the quality funding rates.
Note: Where a service meets both definitions, general purpose financial reports are required.
Note: Where an educator is not able to provide education and care due to a noncontrollable health and safety issue stemming from an infectious illness, homebased services can apply to their local Ministry office for emergency closure approval to use absence funding. This only applies to the educator, not other residents in their household. If approved, then normal absence funding rules apply.
Note: a maximum of hours can be claimed each day for each licensed childplace.
Notes to the financial statements.
Notifiable disease (Doctors notify the Public Health Service)
Notifiable disease (Doctors notify the public health service)
Notifying a specified agency
Notional Rolls are reviewed once each funding period for the first months, and then at least once every months after that.
Notional rolls will be reviewed regularly against average actual attendance to ensure funding can be delivered fairly and accurately.
November funding round: June to September.
Now lets go to the Statement of Cash Flows worksheet. Check that line and columns I through K have returned and nil balance for each column. If not, then you will have to investigate the reason for any imbalance and fix accordingly at its source.
Now select SDP School Data Portal from the list of options.
Now the worksheets are grouped, please note any changes you make will be applied to all six worksheets. So please be careful not to type anything or make any other changes.
Now, as we were going through this, during these sessions,
Number and ages of children and whether any are receiving outofschool care.
Number of certificated teachers your ECE service needs
Numbers ending in . or above may be rounded up to the next number. Numbers ending in . or below should be rounded down to the previous number.
Numbers ending in . or above should be rounded up to the next whole number. Numbers ending in . or below should be rounded down to the previous number.
Numbers of each item will depend on the size of your group. The list below gives suggested items but not recommended numbers, as this will be different for each group. Consider the age and the developmental stage of the children as well as the size of your group when buying equipment.
Nurses may need to be included.
Nurturing young minds together. Explore resources and guidance to support early learning adventures.
Nutrition standards for Ka Ora, Ka Ako menus
Oamaru Free Kindergarten Association
Observations during holiday periods
Obtain in writing from the person or organisation completing the safety check that they have done this to the standard set out in the Childrens Act .
Occasionally, scalp infections that require treatment may develop
Occasionally, we may contact you about your home education exemption.
October (payment on the first working day in November).
Office of the Privacy Commissioner
Office of the Privacy Commissioner.
Official Information Act and media responses
Official Information Act requests
Official information is any information held by the government. This includes Ministers of the Crown in their official capacity and government departments and ministries, including the Ministry of Education.
Official information requests
Official surname and given names (including middle names).
Offsetting funding recoveries
Offsite manufactured building panel
Oh, and excuse me. Uh, thank you Tiffany.
Oh, well, I think thats probably all the time
Okay. So, um, Catherines asked, uh, regarding, uh,
Okay. There will be plenty of time for questions at the end,
Okay So I knew this wouldnt take as long
Older children in nappies need to be encouraged to be as independent as possible:
Older outofschool care children must not be expected to help carry nonwalking children during an emergency drill, nor should they be responsible for the evacuation of ECE children.
On May NZEI applied to MBIE to initiate a Fair Pay Agreement for the early childhood sector.
On October , this section was removed.
On September, Kowhai Street Childcare Centre had children under the age of enrolled in their service. One child under the age of attended casually.
On September, Kowhai Street Childcare Centre had children enrolled and receiving Hours ECE.
On September, Kowhai Street Childcare Centre had children aged or over enrolled in their service. Four children aged or over attended casually.
On September, Kowhai Street Childcare Centre had five children enrolled and receiving Hours ECE.
On September, Kowhai Street Childcare Centre had six children aged two or over enrolled in their service. Four children aged two or over attended casually.
On September, Kowhai Street Childcare Centre had three children under the age of two enrolled in their service. One child under the age of two attended casually.
On September, Moana Valley Preschool held sessions. At the morning session, certificated teachers (Chris and Leilani) were working. Each counted towards regulated (ratio) staff for hours.
On September, Moana Valley Preschool held two sessions. At the morning session, two certificated teachers (Chris and Leilani) were working. Each counted towards regulated (ratio) staff for hours.
On duty does not mean just being on the premises or solely involved in administration.
On duty means working and involved with the children for all the hours that the service is open for children.
On duty: homebased education and care coordinators
On schoolled projects, the project manager does the performance review. The property advisor supports you to do this.
On the RS Return they are to be noted as TOD. Funded child hours and staff hour count are not to be entered for teacher only days.
On the morning of the scheduled visit, the Persons responsible (Coordinator visiting teacher) phones the educator to check the child is attending.
On this worksheet, you need to make some manual selections in column B to choose the rows to print.
Onboarding and offboarding checklists templates
Onboarding and offboarding procedures
Once a child is enrolled at a school, they are entitled to stay at the school, even if the enrolment scheme changes.
Once a child is enrolled at school, no funding can be claimed by an ECE service.
Once a month for sessional teacher led and parent
Once a month, we release the full text of advice received.
Once a parent has agreed to pay an optional charge, the service or educator may enforce the payment as they would enforce a fee.
Once a parent has agreed to pay homebased educator top up payments, the homebased educator may enforce payments as they would enforce a fee.
Once a week for allday teacher led services.
Once again, she experimented with a straight push with all wheels on the ground and with a half lift with the back wheels raised. When these techniques failed again, she tried bending her knees and making herself lower then pushed from this squatting position. Then in frustration she performed the full lift leaning way back and carrying the buggy through the door again.
Once all the data has been entered check at the top of the page on line to see if the worksheet is balanced.
Once an agreement to pay has been reached then services may enforce payment.
Once completed, forms should be returned to the Resourcing Division Contact Centre.
Once endorsed, your achievement challenges plan will be on Education Counts.
Once feedback has been considered, content will be released in Term this year and becomes required teaching from the start of .
Once in the car park, take the first left and head towards the end where the Ministry of Education Visitor Car Parks are located. Each Visitor Car Park is numbered.
Once information is no longer required to be retained, it must be securely destroyed.
Once notified, we will follow up with the service to ensure any recommended actions are put in place.
Once the contract is awarded and work is underway, the contract needs to be managed closely.
Once the information is no longer required to be retained, it must be securely destroyed.
Once the initial step is agreed, a teacher will continue to progress up the salary scale, provided their teacher registration practicing certificate remains valid.
Once the thermostat has been adjusted to the required temperature, it can be locked to prevent accidental or unauthorised readjustment. Refer to PF Tempering valve.
Once we have finished researching McKenzie Residential School and Campbell Park School, rapid payments will be available for those schools.
Once you are happy with the preparation, run the trial balance report, confirming one more time that it has been saved in either CSV or XLS format and is located in the required folder.
Once you have all the information together, scan it into one PDF document ready for uploading via the school portal.
Once you have an ESL account, the delegated authoriser needs to add a
Once you have logged in select the dropdown option Annual Report May in the School Data Portal to ensure your annual report is submitted correctly.
Once you have submitted, we will verify your details.
Once your child has been exempted from school, it is your responsibility to teach your child.
Once your claim is received, we will provide you with information about the claims process.
One Pacific language is the main way to talk to and teach children. It is used or more of the time at the service. It is expected that children in the service can interact freely in this Pacific language, without being instructed.
One Pacific language is the principal language of communication and instruction with children. It is used or more of the time, including during the implementation of the curriculum. It is expected that children in the service can interact freely in Pacific language, without instruction.
One Pacific language is used at least of the time as the language of communication and instruction with children, including in the implementation of the curriculum. English is accepted as a temporary language of instruction and communication. Not all children in the service are expected to interact freely in Pacific language, however, will do so when instructed.
One Pacific language is used at least of the time to talk to and teach children. English is accepted as a temporary language. Not all children in the service are expected to interact freely in the Pacific language. They will be able to do so when asked.
One of the important things that we started out is we,
One of these elements is that mokopuna attend
One thing I did want to touch on though,
One thing I wanted to state as well is that the,
Online training for bus controllers
Online with a suite of resources to assist you.
Only count Other Teacher Hours required to meet the regulated (ratio) staff requirements.
Only provide guest users with the minimum level of access and permissions they require. Make sure to revoke their access when no longer needed.
Only services who wish to receive the extended parity funding rates are required to pay a minimum salary to certificated teachers employed in a management position.
Only teacher experience within New Zealand can be counted towards the PITA.
Open shelves should only be used to store sealed packets or food in containers. Cupboards or storage units used for storing food need to be fit for purpose and designed to reduce the chances of food becoming contaminated by vermin and insects.
Open the GL file that contains the schools trial balance, budget and last year and copy the three columns and rows.
Open the school data portal and log in.
Operational changes to make the system easier to navigate and to improve data collection.
Operational funding information
Operational funding is the money your board receives for the daytoday running of the school or
Operational guidelines: Regulation ()(c)
Operational guidelines: Regulation ()(d)(ii)
Optimising the learning support workforce.
Optional charges are a request for a payment that parents may choose whether or not to make for a specific purpose, which can be oneoff or ongoing, that:
Optional charges can be requested at any time after enrolment. Therefore, if requested at the time of planning the excursion, the charge can reflect real and actual costs.
Optional charges can not be a condition of initial or continued enrolment, or requested for:
Optional charges can only be requested for:
Optional charges cannot be requested for the administration of Hours ECE, wage administration for Homebased educators or home management. More information on this can be found on this website.
Optional charges must apply for a specific purpose, which could be oneoff or ongoing.
Optional charges must be for the actual costs of providing extra items or services. They could be:
Optional charges should reflect the real and actual costs of the additional item or activity.
Options for quality rates
Or the child has a shortterm illness or condition that is supported by an EC Form, and this specifies the period of the exemption.
Or you can contact the Office of the Ombudsman.
Or, if your school doesnt have a website request the Ministry to host your annual report by sending an email to
Oral Item: Removal of Education and Learning Objectives
Oral health care is free for children until they turn .
Order a New Zealand birth certificate online.
Other adults or children present.
Other agencies, such as the New Zealand Police or the Teaching Council, may also investigate a reported incident.
Other annual reporting support material
Other home appliances such as televisions, stereos or microwave ovens should be secured with industrial Velcro or nonslip mats.
Other licensing criteria that interact with HS:
Other licensing criteria that interact with HS
Other licensing criteria that interact with HS
Other parts of the periodic safety recheck should be completed to make sure risk has been assessed.
Other reports on special and contestable funding MAY BE NECESSARY.
Other sanitary facilities
Other sources of ECE funding (removed April ):
Other things to consider when arranging travel in motor vehicles include:
Other things you might like to consider when arranging travel in motor vehicles include:
Other transport options that schools and caregivers may wish to explore if their students are ineligible for school transport assistance include:
Other useful sites for help with employment issues
Otherwise, you can contact our regional offices.
Our Data Quality report help guide explains how to report attendance correctly.
Our Education Counts website has guidance on how to prepare and submit your roll return.
Our Inclusive Education website has guides to supporting diverse learners that are helpful to both teachers and parents.
Our Specialised School Transport Assistance (SESTA) page has information about school transport assistance for students with safety andor mobility needs.
Our applications and online systems site has more information about how to access and use
Our boarding allowance team assess the applications, considering the following criteria.
Our child protection policy
Our child protection policy applies to all employees, contractors and volunteers working for us.
Our commitment is built off the place and benefit of Pacific languages and Pacific bilingualism in Aotearoa.
Our design reviews are a collaborative process that gives expert advice to the project. We work with an independent and impartial panel of experts who support our team with reviews, including:
Our eLearning digital resource for early learning services helps build awareness and confidence in recognising, responding to and reporting on suspected child abuse and neglect.
Our education system reflects our unique and diverse society.
Our fact sheet explains how school bus routes are designed and extended. It also has information about timetables and bus stops.
Our factsheet has more information to help you plan for design reviews.
Our guide explains the requirements your early learning service must meet under the Childrens Act .
Our guide to sharing learning support information includes practical information, a consent checklist and protocol templates.
Our guidelines and instructions outline how boards must operate an enrolment scheme. These documents include templates of public notices and letters for boards to use.
Our home education guide has information about this.
Our legislation gives us powers to collect, use and share information we need to perform our statutory function to:
Our local offices are the first point of contact for early learning services, schools, parents, learning support and the wider community.
Our pay parity guide has more information about the scheme.
Our privacy policy is governed by the New Zealand Privacy Act .
Our OIA responses
Our regional office staff can support your school with any issues around reporting of child abuse or neglect, safety checking and child protection policies.
Our responsibilities around enrolment schemes are:
Our responsibilities under the Official Information Act (the Act) include responding to requests for official information from the media.
Our social media accounts are monitored between am and pm Monday to Friday and periodically in the evenings and on weekends and public holidays.
Our social media accounts may provide links to other websites or embed material which may contain information that is the copyright of third parties and subject to restrictions on use or reproduction.
Our specialists work in collaborative teams. Any specialists who work with your child and their teachers will be able to use a wide range of resources and expertise. Our team includes:
Our toolkit supports your board and principal to implement
Our transparency statement explains how we collect, use and share information gathered about individuals and organisations for the purposes of carrying out our statutory functions under the Education and Training Act .
Our transport contract manager will liaise between the TSP and schools as needed.
Our weathertightness design standards have details of the standards you must follow.
Our website also has information about how you can request information under the Official Information Act and the Privacy Act on our contact page.
Our work in education aligns to the objectives for Pacific Languages Strategy:
Our work in education aligns to the objectives for Pacific Wellbeing Strategy:
Our work in education aligns to the overarching objectives for the Education System:
Our written direction to the service will include:
Out of those hours weekly maximum per child, hours per week may be claimed as Hours ECE. The remaining hours up to may be claimed as Plus ECE funding.
Outofzone preenrolment process
Outbound exchange students are not considered as enrolled in their New Zealand school while they are on exchange. You do not receive funding for them.
Outdoor activity space is:
Outdoor space should enable children to experience natural settings (for example, wind, sky, sun, rain) and enable children to undertake activities that would generally not be allowed inside a building (for example, running, kicking a ball). The suitability of the outdoor space to provide learning outcomes for children will be assessed on a casebycase basis, taking into account the practicalities and risks of each case under the provisions of Regulation () of the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations .
Over September and October , we consulted on the topic of our next longterm insights briefing, realising the potential for technology to support personalised and tailored learning in the future.
Overseas qualifications must be assessed by the New Zealand Qualifications Authority (NZQA) as comparable to the nearest New Zealand equivalent qualifications.
Overseas qualifications must be comparable to a New Zealand early learning or primary teaching qualification. Teachers with an overseas qualification must apply to the New Zealand Qualifications Authority (NZQA) for an International Qualifications Assessment.
Overseas teaching experience can sometimes be recognised as a qualification. The Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand has more information.
Overview: Mixed Model Approach for Supporting Learners
P, P and P for teachers who hold a current practising certificate issued by the Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand but no subject or specialist qualification at level or above on the NZQF, or equivalent overseas teaching qualifications recognised by the NZQA.
P for teachers who hold a current practising certificate issued by the Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand and:
P for teachers who hold a current practising certificate issued by the Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand and:
P for teachers who hold a current practising certificate issued by the Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand and:
PF Design and layout of premises
PF Hospital legislation compliance
PF Heating, lighting and ventilation
PF Outdoor activity space
PF Handwashing facilities
PF Heating, lighting, noise and ventilation
PF Lighting, ventilation, heating and acoustic materials
PF Outdoor activity space
PF Infant toddler safe space
PF Toilet and handwashing facilities
PF Kitchens inaccessible
PF Nappy change facilities
PF Body wash facilities
PF Handwashing facilities
PF Handwashing facilities ratio
PF Infant toddler safe space
PF Premises support effective supervision
PF Design of sleep provisions
PF Toilet and handwashing facilities
PF Hand drying facilities
PF Water temperature control
PF Nappy change facilities
PF Body wash facilities
PF Design of sleep provisions
PF Building Act compliance
PF Safe furniture and equipment
PF Sessional over sleep space
PF Sessional services only: over sleep space
PF Allday over sleep space
PF Allday services only: over sleep space
PF Allday over sleep provisions
PF Allday services only: over sleep provisions
PF Sessional services only: under sleep space
PF Sessional under sleep space
PF Sessional services only: under cot:child ratio
PF Sessional under cot:child ratio
PF Allday services: under sleep space
PF Allday under sleep space
PF Allday services: under child:cot ratio
PF Allday under child:cot ratio
PF Toilet and handwashing facilities
PF Infant toddler safe space
PF Nappy change facilities
PF Safe furniture and equipment
PF Outdoor activity space
PF Opportunities for active play
PF Premises support effective supervision
PF Infant toddler safe space
PG: Playgroup funding claim
PG: Playgroup special grant
PPPM panel suppliers can contact the procurement team in their region for questions or clarifications.
PVC pipes and guttering, planks of untreated wood
Pacific Education Foundation
Pacific Education Foundation scholarships
Pacific Education Foundation scholarships aim to encourage Pacific students into tertiary education. The scholarships can be used for any area of study at either graduate or postgraduate level.
Pacific Languages Strategy
Pacific Languages Strategy in
Pacific bilingual and immersion education means at least Pacific language is the medium of education instruction for or more of the time (or more than . hours per week).
Pacific languages have a special place within Aotearoa and within our education system.
Pacific languages in education
Pacific languages recognised for PITA
PacificLanguagesStrategy.pdf (mpp.govt.nz)
Paid supervisorscoordinators working in playgroups need to be safety checked if any children attend without a parent or guardian present. Volunteers, for example parents attending with their children, do not need to be safety checked.
Pain in jaw, then swelling in front of ear and fever
Paper towels or individual hand towels are more hygienic than a single communal towel.
Paperbased attendance schedules must be maintained and verified in pen. Electronic attendance schedules must adhere to the Electronic Attendance Records Criteria outlined in chapter of the Funding Handbook.
Paperbased enrolment and staffing schedules must be maintained in pen. If these documents are electronically , alterations and verification must be in pen.
Parent helpers need to actively supervise the children in their care. This means being close enough to keep them safe at all times. They should not let any child leave their group.
Parent involvement and information
Parental acknowledgement could be:
Parental acknowledgement of the medicine having been given to their child must also be recorded. Category (i) and (ii) medicines require daily parental acknowledgement, whereas parental acknowledgement may be obtained and recorded weekly or every months for category (iii) medicines whose dosage does not change.
Parental permission upon enrolment.
Parenting courses and information
Parents and caregivers can request a review of an eligibility decision by emailing the School Transport team.
Parents and educators need to decide who provides any infant formula and bottles. If the educator provides the formula, parental approval of the brandtype is required before it is used. If the usual brandtype is unavailable, parental approval of any substitute is also required prior to its use.
Parents and legal guardians
Parents and legal guardians are required to:
Parents are advised how to access:
Parents are collecting the child
Parents can attest as part of the enrolment form that their child does not receive more than hours per day and hours per week of Hours ECE as a total across all services the child attends.
Parents can be charged fees for hours outside hours ECE
Parents can only be charged fees for hours outside of the Hours ECE maximum of hours per day and hours per week per child.
Parents feel that they are wellinformed and that their views are respected and taken note of.
Parents may choose to allocate their Hours ECE hours across more than service.
Parents must attest on the enrolment agreement form that their child does not receive more than hours per day and hours per week of Hours ECE as a total across all services the child attends.
Parents must confirm the total hours per day of Hours ECE the child will receive at the service and any other service the child is enrolled to attend.
Parents must have a choice about whether they want to pay for the additional item or activity covered by the optional charge. They must be informed in writing that agreeing to an optional charge is not compulsory, and they must not be penalised for choosing not to pay an optional charge.
Parents must not be charged fees for hours claimed as Hours ECE.
Parents must not pay fees for hours ECE
Parents need to accept that there is no place for smoking, alcohol or other illegal drugs on any excursion.
Parents need to agree to follow all the requests and expectations of the teaching team.
Parents need to be informed where the evacuation point will be so they will know where their children will be.
Parents of children attending the service and adults providing education and care are provided with opportunities to contribute to the development and review of the services operational documents (such as philosophy, policies and procedures and any other documents that set out how day to day operations will be conducted).
Parents of children attending the service and adults providing education and care are provided with opportunities to contribute to the development and review of the services operational documents (such as philosophy, policies and procedures and any other documents that set out how daytoday operations will be conducted).
Parents of children attending the service and adults providing education and care are provided with opportunities to contribute to the development and review of the services operational documents (such as philosophy, policies, and procedures and any other documents that set out how daytoday operations will be conducted).
Parents of children participating in the service and adults providing education and care are provided with opportunities to contribute to the development and review of the services operational documents (such as philosophy, policies and procedures and any other documents that set out how daytoday operations will be conducted).
Parents should be aware of safe searching techniques and provide information to children on how to react and deal with unsolicited, inappropriate material.
Parents should never smoke or vape at the playgroup while children are attending the service.
Parents who choose not to pay an optional charge must receive at least the standard of service required by the regulations. It is the responsibility of the service providing Hours ECE to ensure parents do not pay a fee for hours covered by Hours ECE, either to the service provider or the educator (in the case of a Homebased service).
Parents who choose not to pay optional charges
Parents will choose which days the Hours ECE hours will be allocated to, but no individual day may exceed six Hours ECE hours.
Parents views are sought and recorded.
Parents, caregivers and educators should guide children on how to use equipment appropriately and safely.
Parents, caregivers and educators should have regular conversations about how play is supervised in their own setting.
Parentscaregivers need to be made aware that reports from ERO are free and available from the local ERO office on request.
Parentscaregivers need to be made aware that reports from ERO are free and available from the local ERO office on request. They can also be downloaded from the Education Review Office.
Parentscaregivers need to be made aware that reports from the Education Review Office (ERO) are free and available from the local ERO office on request.
Parity Funding Rates are available to services who pay at least Parity Salary Scale (Step to ).
Parity Funding Rates are available to services who pay at least Steps to .
Parity Salary Scale (Step to ).
Parity Salary Scale (Step )
Parity Salary Scale (Step ).
Parity funding rates are available to education and care services who agree to pay all employed certificated teachers according to Step to of the Parity Salary Scale.
Parity salary scale (Step )
Parity salary scale example: March funding period
Parking is available on Bellingham Street and surrounding streets, or at the Ormiston Shopping Centre. Avoid parking in the Pakn Save carpark to prevent fines or towing.
Part of the check involves asking your childs early learning service about their learning and development.
Partial Step Partial management step: Extended parity funding rates. Band determined by the services certificated ratio.
Participate in public consultations with the Ministry of Education.
Participate in the opportunities provided by the ECE service to engage with parents.
Partner with families to design education opportunities together with teachers, leaders and educational professionals so aspirations for learning and employment can be met.
Partnerships are developed with
Partnerships involving regular consultation with parents, guardians, and
Parts of the home used by children have:
Passwordless authentication
Pay equity and pay parity
Pay parity guide for ECE teachers and service providers
Pay parity in Early Childhood Education
Pay parity optin scheme for education and care services
Pay particular attention to frequently used areas.
Paying the EEL is a requirement under the Education (Export Education Levy) Regulations .
Payment records for Hours ECE
Payment to individual services is the responsibility of the service provider.
Payments are made on the th of each month.
Payments for former Ministry employees
Payments through the Unfunded International Providers (UIP) portal
Payroll error (February).
Payroll exception reports (March).
People and employment in early learning
People who have regular or overnight contact with children at school or kura without parents or guardians must undergo a full safety check.
Percentage of students at or above the expected curriculum level, by subject
Performance security by
Performance management starter pack
Periodic rechecking must be done every years.
Periodic safety checking of existing childrens worker
Permanently enrolled children with special needs or health problems may be exempt from the Frequent Absence Rule or funded for continuous absences beyond the week period.
Permission for special excursions needs to be sought for each excursion.
Person responsible observation of each educator and child
Person responsible requirements
Personal information is any information about an identifiable individual. The type of information we collect will depend on the service we are providing or the function we are carrying out. It can include:
Personal information is any information that relates to, and could identify, an individual.
Personal information is being collected by the Ministry for the purpose of assessing your claim. We are committed to keeping your information safe. Any information you provide, including your name, contact details, and information about your claim, will be securely filed. Information you provide will only be used for the purpose it was collected for and will not be disclosed by the Ministry except in accordance with the Privacy Act and any relevant Court orders.
Persons or organisations wishing to send email material to individuals or organisations whose email addresses appear on this website must comply with the requirements of the Unsolicited Electronic Messages Act .
Persons responsible (Coordinator visiting teacher) cannot observe children outside their normal enrolment hours. Therefore, their hours of work must align with the enrolment hours of the children under their supervision.
Persons responsible (Coordinator visiting teacher) must not conduct more than observations outside the home per month period, and these should not occur months in a row. They must visit the child in the enrolled home setting in between. Observations outside the home can occur in addition to the home visit for any given month.
Persons responsible (Coordinator visiting teacher) visits must take place primarily in the home in which the child is enrolled for education and care. This applies to all homes, including those in rural and remote locations.
Persons responsible have primary responsibility for overseeing the education and care, comfort, health and safety of children attending the service. They also provide professional leadership and support to educators within the service.
Persons responsible hold a number of important roles. They supervise children and staff, and they are directly involved in and primarily responsible for the daytoday education and care, comfort, and health and safety of children attending the service.
Persons responsible in teacherled centrebased services must:
Persons responsible must have a recognised early childhood teaching qualification and a current practising certificate from the Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand.
Persons responsible must have an ECE or primary teaching qualification and a current practising certificate.
Persons responsible must work with children and staff and should not be engaged in activities that take them away from their supervision responsibilities. For example, they should not be located in an office with no children physically present undertaking administration duties.
Pets kept in homebased settings need their habitats to be cleaned and maintained as required depending on the needs of the animal, and children supervised when interacting with them.
Philosophy means a statement that:
Philosophy, goals and professional development are clearly linked.
Phone: () ( ECE ECE)
Photographs and other observations are analysed to identify the learning that has occurred and how to build on it.
Physical Restraint Guidelines
Physical holds and releases training
Physical or mental unwellness includes:
Physical restraint incident reporting
Physical restraints resource overview and modules
Pipsqueak job descriptions
Pipsqueak playgroup roster, Term ,
Places for children to sit and eat could include:
Places for children to sit and eat include:
Placing an insert into a sink facility used for another purpose to prevent art materials from coming into contact with any cleaning waste or chemical residues, andor to prevent paint or wastewater from coming into contact with the sink.
Planning and documentation
Planning and preparing for emergencies
Planning and providing for a range of learning experiences and opportunities
Planning, evaluation, and assessment documentation clearly identify the learning that has occurred for the child.
Plans will use the STAR and be tailored to meet the needs of each school community. Regulations relating to these plans will be progressed this year to come into effect for the start of Term .
Plastic equipment, while cheap, easily accessible and attractive to children, is often poor imitations of real objects. For example, a plastic hammer, plastic spanner and plastic carpentry bench have little educational value for carpentry play. By using a real hammer or spanner successfully, a child can learn a lot of carpentry skills as well as gain useful knowledge about these objects and their uses. With adult support, children will also learn about important issues relating to the safe use of real equipment.
Play specialists should be aware of safe searching techniques and provide information to children on how to react and deal with unsolicited, inappropriate material.
Playcentre Educator Award or Playcentre Introductory Awards.
Playcentre Practice (course of The Playcentre Diploma in Early Childhood and Adult Education).
Playcentre Practice (course of the Playcentre Diploma in Early Childhood and Adult Education).
Playcentre Sessions (course of The Playcentre Diploma in Early Childhood and Adult Education).
Playcentre and playgroups are parentled and can choose to employ qualified teachers but are not required to.
Playcentre in Context (course of the Playcentre Diploma in Early Childhood and Adult Education), and
Playcentre in Context (course of the Playcentre Diploma in Early Childhood and Adult Education).
Playcentres and playgroups rely on your involvement and support to operate. Other early learning services are less reliant on
Playcentres are licensed and must meet the same standards for education and care as teacherled services, but have different qualification requirements.
Playcentres cater for children from birth to school age. They are run cooperatively by parents and
Playcentres choosing to take up Hours ECE cannot claim initial advance funding for Hours ECE.
Playcentres choosing to take up Hours ECE in their centres cannot claim initial advance funding for Hours ECE.
Playcentres meeting the group supervision requirements for standard funding (as specified in section C) can access quality funding if one more adult with the Playcentre Introductory Award is on duty on the session. This adult would be in addition to those required by the group supervision requirements for standard funding. So, the number of required adults on session effectively increases by one.
Playcentres should contact their relevant Ministry regional office as early as possible to discuss their situation. It is important to note that if a playcentre does not meet the conditions on any provisional licence then the licence must be cancelled.
Playcentres that cannot meet the person responsible or minimum qualifications for group supervision may be eligible for discretionary funding for up to sessions per funding period. All other supervision and licensing requirements must be met including adult:child ratios and first aid qualification requirements.
Playcentres with no person responsible
Playground inspection attestation form
Playgroup Funding Handbook
Playgroup aim and information example
Playgroup aim and information example
Playgroup aim and information example
Playgroup asset inventory
Playgroup funding handbook
Playgroup operational funding: a general grant available to all eligible playgroups to assist with ongoing operational costs.
Playgroup special grant factsheet
Playgroup special grant: a discretionary grant available to assist playgroups to meet large costs that cannot be met from other funding.
Playgroups are certificated in accordance with the Education and Training Act under the Education (Playgroups) Regulations , which prescribe minimum standards that each certificated playgroup must meet. Certification criteria are used to assess how playgroups meet the minimum standards required by the regulations.
Playgroups are communitybased groups run by parent and
Playgroups are expected to have emergency drills at least every months. Evacuation drills should be organised to test a variety of emergency situations and scenarios. For example, practising both earthquake drills and fire evacuation drills, and practising evacuation via alternative exits if these are available. You should aim to hold your trial evacuations at times when you have typical numbers of children, of varying ages, and adults at the playgroup. Consider also the timing of evacuations and whether or not attending parents will be notified in advance. Holding unannounced evacuations at challenging times (for example during morning teatime) may be inconvenient but will give you greater assurance that your procedures are effective.
Playgroups are not licensed. To receive government funding and support, they need to be certified. Parents and
Playgroups are required to document a plan outlining the learning experiences and play opportunities they will provide. A plan provides a starting point for playgroups. It provides a summary of the experiences and opportunities available to children during sessions.
Playgroups are required to review the experiences and opportunities planned for and provided at playgroup at least every months. Reviewing these will help you to make sure they are consistent with the curriculum framework.
Playgroups do not receive the same level of funding as licensed ECE services.
Playgroups give children of all ages the chance to work and play together.
Playgroups have access to a range of organisations that support families, like Plunket, Barnardos, Ministry of Social Development (MSD), Rural Education Activities Programmes (REAP), local schools, councils and community networks such as churches. Information from these organisations could be made available to parents and caregivers.
Playgroups meet in a variety of different premises, for example church halls,
Playgroups must have a child protection policy that meets the Childrens Act requirements.
Playgroups must meet the Education (Playgroups) Regulations to be certified and receive government funding.
Playgroups must provide the Ministry of Education with name and address for a funding contact person and keep them informed when changes occur. This is the person that funding claim forms and other information are sent to.
Playgroups recognised as Licenceexempt prior to December must continue to meet the definition of a playgroup in the Education Gazette on February to remain eligible for funding. Playgroups established after December must hold a current interim or full certificate to be eligible for funding.
Playgroups should work with their education advisor to find satisfactory solutions.
Playgroups that are meeting the curriculum requirement will plan for and provide:
Playgroupsemployers cannot rely on a safety check done by a different employer (either current or previous) as the check was not done on their behalf. They must carry out all of the components themselves.
Please contact your Ministry regional office or the Resourcing Contact Centre if you are unsure whether you are applying the Frequent Absence Rule correctly.
Please contact your regional finance advisor to provide your suggestions on other videos that may be helpful.
Please direct any questions about Playcentre qualifications to Playcentre Aotearoa.
Please direct any questions about the qualifications for Playcentres to your playcentre regional support team or Ministry regional office.
Please note however, that under HS Emergency drills, the Ministry requires services to carry out trial evacuations (covering a variety of emergency situations), on an at least monthly basis. See the guidance for HS Emergency drills for more details.
Please refer to Chapter of this handbook for further information on Equity Funding.
Please refer to Chapter of this handbook for further information on Hours ECE.
Please refer to the Glossary for more information about permanent enrolments.
Please refer to this section for an illustration of how to apply the Frequent Absence Rule.
Please send your feedback to:
Please update these errors as soon as you receive the report.
Plunket or another Well Child
Plus ECE describes the remaining hours of funding a service can claim for each child in addition to the Hours ECE hours. It is the difference between hours ECE Subsidy funding and the Hours ECE hours.
Plus ECE hours are the ECE Funding Subsidy funded hours available per child once that child has used all of their Hours ECE hours.
Pokapu Waka Kura user guide for directly resourced schools
Pokapu waka kura user guide SESTA applications
Police vets at a governance level are also part of the process of applying for a probationary licence. Information about this is available in the EC probationary licence application form.
Police vets by other organisations
Police vets by the Teaching Council
Police vets for childrens workers are part of the safety checking process all early learning services must complete.
Police vets for homebased care
Police vets for overseas childrens workers
Police vets for schools and kura
Police vets must also be completed for anyone who, in the course of their work for the service provider, is not defined as a childrens worker. This is set out in Schedule of the Education and Training Act .
Police vetting applications may take up to business days to process.
Police vetting for early learning services
Police vetting is mandatory for anyone who is likely to have unsupervised access to students at a school during normal school hours.
Police vetting is part of the safety check process.
Policies should also contain provision for ensuring children are protected from harm by any person present at the home.
Policies, planning and investment optimise longterm social, environmental and economic benefits.
Policy approvals for amendments to school board priorities
Policy proposals progressed by ETAB
Pooling of Targeted Funding
Poor participation at school. For example, difficulty taking part in everyday classroom learning, completing schoolwork, poor attendance and not taking part in extracurricular activities.
Poor relationships. For example, being socially isolated, having difficulty forming relationships and friendships, andor lacking respect for others.
Portable cots can only be used in a homebased setting if they are used by a single child. As portable cots are made with a textile or mesh that allows for breathable air zones, they cannot be easily cleaned when used for multiple children (PF, below).
Portable cots cannot be used in a centrebased setting. As portable cots are made with a textile or mesh that allows for breathable air zones, they cannot be easily cleaned when used for multiple children (PF, below).
Portacom New Zealand Limited
Portfolios can be paper based or electronic and stored online and accessed securely by parents.
Portfolios can be paper based or electronic that can be stored online and accessed securely by parents.
Positive feedback from maths PLD
Positive mental health and wellbeing is feeling good, functioning well and feeling connected. Its important for all of us. For your child, good mental health helps them to be resilient, confident and secure so they get the most out of their education.
Positive steps are taken to prevent injury to people and damage to property resulting from unsecured heavy furniture, fixtures and equipment falling.
Positive steps are taken to respect and acknowledge the aspirations held by
Positive steps are taken to respect and acknowledge the aspirations held by parents and
Post Primary Teachers Association
Post: PO Box , Wellington .
Practical skills, advice, and resources for finding your way after leaving school.
Preenrolment ballot deadlines
Preschool bedrooms, indoor
Preferred or shortlisted respondent letter template
Pregnant women should seek advice from their maternity provider or GP.
Premises and facilities criteria for centrebased ECE services.
Premises and facilities criteria for homebased ECE services.
Premises and facilities criteria for hospitalbased ECE services.
Premises and facilities criteria for playgroups.
Premises, furniture, furnishings, fittings, equipment, and materials are kept safe, hygienic, and maintained in good condition.
Premises, furniture, furnishings, fittings, equipment, and materials for the use of children attending are kept safe, hygienic, and maintained in good condition.
Premises, furniture, furnishings, fittings, equipment, and materials used by children as part of the ECE programme are kept safe, hygienic and maintained in good condition.
Prepare a procurement plan
Prepare for an emergency or traumatic incident in early learning
Preparing all young people for satisfying and rewarding working
Preparing for staff employment
Preparing or reviewing the statement of philosophy
Preparing the annual financial statements
Preparing young people for work is an important issue to explore. Although many young people navigate transitions from school to work, education or training, a significant proportion face barriers which prevent them from reaching their work goals and aspirations.
Preparing your roll return
Presentation by Chad Britton on preparing your annual report.
Presentation by Chad Britton, Ministry of Education.
Prevent someone from accidentally deleting or making changes to the system.
Prevent unauthorised access by not exposing it to the internet. If it does need to be internetfacing, restrict access by IPCIDR or geolocation.
Preventing spread of illness to others
Previous experience relates to any experience that will be relevant to the certificated teachers role.
Previous relevant work experience
Previously Worked As Teacher flag (permanent staff only).
Primary and Intermediate school terms and holidays calendar
Primary and intermediate school terms and holidays calendar
Primary and secondary education
Primary responsibilities of the position.
Primary, intermediate and specialist schools must be open for instruction for a minimum of half days in .
Primary, intermediate and specialist schools must be open for instruction for a minimum of half days in .
Primary, intermediate and specialist schools must be open for instruction for a minimum of half days in .
Principles of attendance in
Print edition ISBN
Print edition ISBN
Prior to the safety check, obtain confirmation from the person or organisation that they are undertaking the safety check on your behalf.
Prioritised payments for claimants who are terminally ill
Prioritised settlement payments are an option for any claimant who is terminally ill and not expected to survive longer than months, regardless of any available medical treatment.
Prioritised settlement payments for claimants who are terminally ill.
Prioritising stronger learning support
Prioritising systems for least privilege
Privacy impact assessment
Privacy information related to this website and social media.
Private schools can have different terms and holidays. They can also open on Easter Tuesday. Check with the school.
Private schools get some government funding but are mostly funded through charging parents school fees. They develop their own learning programmes and do not have to follow the national curriculum.
Private schools have greater legislative freedom than state and stateintegrated schools and can vary their opening hours and school year.
Private services are able to make financial gains and distribute these to their members.
Privately owned ECE services only
Probationary licence and application form for centrebased early learning
Probationary licence and application form for homebased early learning
Procedures can be developed in a way to facilitate discussion between coordinators, educators, and
Procedures should address:
Process for change of funding rate
Process for the new rapid payment options
Processes and procedures to help manage behaviour
Processes for human resource management, including:
Procurement COI declaration and confidentiality agreement
Procurement of goods and services
Procurement recommendation report template
Procurements between , and ,
Procurements less than ,
Procurements less than ,
Procurements more than ,
Procurements more than ,
Procurements more than ,
Professional development and appraisals (or professional growth cycle)
Professional development for certificated teachers (in all practising certificate categories
Professional development for coursesseminars that are not aimed at improving the outcomes for priority learners.
Professional development for staff employed or engaged in the service is a priority, proactively supported and appropriately resourced.
Professional development is closely aligned to individual appraisal goals or the professional growth cycle for certificated teachers.
Professional learning and development
Professional officer of NZEI Te Riu RoaPPTATTANZ.
Professional practice regarding separated parentsguardians
Professional services directory
Professional services registration of interest
Professional services request for proposal
ProfessionalServicesRequestforQuote
Profile (of the successful applicant).
Programmes are between weeks and months in length.
Programmes should support
Progress Update on the Highest Needs Change Programme
Progress report
Progression of certificated
Progression of certificated staff through the salary steps described in this section is only a required funding condition while a service attests to meeting the requirements of the full salary scale. If a service chooses not to attest, at any point, the condition does not apply. However, legal agreements that specify salary progression may still apply (eg employment contracts).
Progression of certificated teachers through the allowance steps described in this section is only a required funding condition while a service attests to meeting the requirements of the allowance level that the service has attested to. If a service chooses not to attest, at any point, the condition does not apply. However, legal agreements that specify allowance entitlements may still apply (e.g., employment contracts).
Project and site constraints table
Prolonged or repeated exposure to limited employment has negative impacts on youth wellbeing and can have significant longterm consequences. This is a complex policy challenge with multigenerational consequences.
Property and infrastructure
Property contractor health and safety prequalification
Property procurement process for project managers
Property procurement step : plan the procurement
Property procurement step : specify requirements
Property procurement step : approach the market
Property procurement step : evaluate supplier offers
Property procurement step : award the contract
Property procurement step : manage the contract
Property programme and project management panel
Property project and programme management panel list
Proportion of students present more than of the term
Proposed amendment to Te Uho o Te Nikau
Proposed changes to the Education and Training Amendment Bill (No )
Proposed enrolment scheme for Te Kura Rau Iti
Proposed enrolment scheme written descriptions and maps
Prosecution and Warnings Policy
Prosecutions for nonattendance or nonenrolment are a last resort when all other attempts to return a student to enrolment and regular attendance have failed.
Protect children from adults who are unwell
Protect children from inappropriate material
Protect your information using passwords
Protect your information using strong passwords
Protecting children at early learning services
Provide a range of books for parents on such topics as:
Provide the PDF to your website provider for publishing, if your school has a website.
Providers must submit information and make a payment every months:
Providers of educational or vocational training courses may have completed some of the components of the safety check as part of their enrolment process. For example, an interview, reference check and police vet.
Providers will benefit from a more modernised and effective regulatory system that allows for innovation, with less compliance costs.
Providing clear direction to the Teaching Council through a Statement of Government Policy and policy decisions on initial teacher education
Providing data through the ELI system does not replace the enrolment, attendance and absence records required for funding which are defined in Chapter .
Providing documents for parents to read:
Providing for the wellbeing of tertiary and international learners
Providing funding for innovative programmes through the Pacific Education Innovation Fund.
Providing information to parents could take a variety of forms. This information could be:
Providing liquid soap is recommended because it reduces the spread of infection. It should be easily accessible for each child using handwashing facilities.
Providing long stainlesssteel troughs that have or warm water taps can be easier for or children to use, and easier to clean and manage soap spills than or individual sinks.
Providing written information to parents can take a variety of forms including:
Providing written information to parents could take a variety of forms including:
Providing written information to parents could take a variety of forms, including:
Providing written information to parents could take a variety of forms. This information can be provided in a variety of ways including:
Providing your RS Return to the Ministry
Provision for infants and toddlers
Provision of fee information
Public Service Commission
Public consultation on the notification period for school strikes
Public consultation on the use of unique identifiers for the Performance Based Research Fund
Public holidays must not be included in advance funding claims and will be paid by wash up.
Public holidays: Good Friday April, Easter Monday April, Easter Tuesday April (a school holiday).
Public sector employment with education focus, e.g., Ministry of Education, Early Childhood Development or other Crown Education Agencies.
Publication of email addresses on the education.govt.nz website should not be taken as deemed consent to receiving unsolicited email.
Publications and documents by the Ministry of Education.
Publishing your annual report online
Publishing your documents online
Purchase clay from Playcentre shops, quality toy shops or local potters association. Detail the sort you want for example white, red, brown, smooth or gritty.
Purpose of a design review
Purpose of enrolment schemes
Purpose of the RS Return
Purpose of the funding claim audit
Purpose of this statement
Qualification Group Notations
Qualification and person responsible requirements for different service types
Qualification and persons responsible requirements vary according to the type of early learning service you run.
Qualification information
Qualification requirements
Qualification requirements and the person responsible role
Qualification requirements and the persons responsible role
Qualification requirements for educators
Qualification requirements for homebased early learning services
Qualification requirements for homebased services
Qualifications and university entry
Qualifications requirements
Qualified staff employed by your early learning service must have an early childhood education (ECE) teaching qualification recognised by the Teaching Council.
Quality Teaching and Leadership: Quality teaching and leadership make the difference for learners and their whanau.
Quality funding rates are available to homebased ECE services that meet the regulated qualification requirements. For more information please refer to B.
Quality funding rates are available to playcentres and
Quality funding ratesoptions
Quality learning environments
Quarter operational funding instalment paid.
Quarterly progress report
Questions about qualifications
Questions to consider when writing assessment policy that includes GenAI:
Questions to help playgroups plan what happens and how they happen
Quite a lot of them, uh, now,
RFx Process Terms and Conditions
RFx process and conditions of tendering
RS Change of Bank Account
RS Initial Application for Funding for an Early Childhood Service
RS: Initial application for funding for a EC service
RS Early Childhood Funding Returns
RS returns must have a completed declaration
RS: Early childhood funding return
RSE is essential for equipping young people with the knowledge and confidence to navigate important topics such as consent, healthy relationships, pubertal changes, and online safety. The draft framework aims to provide consistent, ageappropriate, and evidenceinformed content from Years to .
Rachel Vickers (New Plymouth)
Raise your complaint directly with the statutory appointee first. If youre not happy with the response from the appointee, contact your local office for support.
Rapid payment offers for claimants who attended
Rapid payment options are available to people who attended Mt WellingtonWaimokoia school and some people who have a terminal illness.
Rapid payment policy for sensitive claims
Rapid payments are an optional way some sensitive claims can be settled quickly without the need for a full assessment.
Rapid payments are an optional way to settle your claim with the Ministry quickly and without the need for a full assessment.
Rapid payments are now available for students who attended
Rapid payments for claimants who attended
Rashes and skin infections
Rates (and changes to rates) must be documented and provided to parentscaregivers.
Rates from December
Rates from December
Rates from January
Rates from January
Rates from January
Rates from November
Ratio flexibility in mixedage early learning services
Ratio flexibility in mixedage services under Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulation A.
Ratio requirements are part of the licensing criteria and are regulated by the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations , issued under section of the Education and Training Act .
Read about different types of schools in the network.
Read case studies of the use of GenAI at New Zealand schools.
Read more about discretionary pathway registration on our website.
Read more about how the equity index works.
Read more about the Education and Training Amendment Bill (No ).
Read more about the whakapapa of Tau Mai Te Reo, its past iteration, and more research that sits behind it.
Read more about this change:
Read our child protection policy
Read terms and conditions
Read the New Zealand gazette notices:
Read the application form before applying. It has information about:
Read the attendance code decision tree, attendance code guidance and frequently asked questions document for more information.
Read the final reports prepared by the probity auditor.
Read the following page for more information on safety checking for school staff.
Read the guide below for information about how to keep your child safe and what is expected of them while they travel on our buses.
Read the limitation policy and an easyread guide to the policy.
Read the requirements and how to meet them for your service type:
Read this guide for information about when a student can transfer their eligibility for transport assistance to a different school.
Read this guide for more information.
Really important one here, student is present
Really the last one there is just a catch all around any other balances that you have in your financial statements and making sure that you have reconciliations and supporting information that sits in behind each of those.
Reasons for declining a media request
Recent initiatives include:
Reception, deliveries and couriers
Recognised ECE teaching qualification (or overseas qualification assessed as comparable by NZQA)
Recognised homebased qualifications
Recognised primary teaching qualification (or overseas qualification assessed as comparable by NZQA)
Recognised service is based on time spent working as a certificated teacher in New Zealand.
Recognition of previous relevant work experience as an uncertificated kaiako
Recognition of previous relevant work experience as an uncertificated teacher
Recommended options include the following.
Reconfirming an enrolment agreement
Record all children as absent for the day of the emergency closure. Funding may be claimed for the hours that children have a permanent enrolment subject to the funding maximums of the ECE Subsidy and Hours ECE.
Record keeping also ensures the Ministry of Education can verify funding claims.
Record keeping for licensed homebased services
Record keeping requirements
Record keeping requirements for hours ECE:
Record the Emergency Closure in your system (ELI or SMS).
Record the emergency closure in your system.
Recordkeeping requirements:
Recorded outcomes from the review and evaluation process. Outcomes show how the service has regard for the Statement of National Education and Learning Priorities (NELP) in its operation.
Recording breaksabsences
Recording school visits on attendance records
Recording school visits on the enrolment agreement
Recording special arrangements
Records can be kept in a form to suit your service as long as the requirements set out in this Handbook are met.
Records can be stored in a form to suit your service but must be available on request to Ministry of Education staff, reviewers from the Education Review Office (ERO), and other authorised personnel.
Records for all childrens workers
Records for children receiving hours ECE
Records for childrens workers employed after July
Records for childrens workers employed before July
Records meet the requirements of the ECE funding handbook and include at least:
Records must be available for inspection by authorised Education Review Office and Ministry of Education auditing staff.
Records must be kept for years.
Records must show that every years you:
Records must show the list above, and also:
Records of staff qualifications
Records that demonstrate the employment relationship and the pay rate of the employed certificated teacher (education and care services and hospitalbased services only).
Recovery of early childhood education funding:
Red cheeks and a lacelike rash on body
Reducing foodrelated choking for babies and young children
Refer to HS Medical assistance and incident management (below) for the requirement to keep records of serious illnesses.
Refer to Learning Environments for Playgroups for recipes.
Refer to PF Nappy change facilities for more information.
Refer to advertisements in the Education Gazette to help you.
Refer to criterion PF Bedding for more information.
Refer to criterion PF Safe furniture and equipment (above) for more information on relevant standards.
Refer to the Glossary in this Handbook for definition of discretionary hours.
Refer to the guidance for PF Hand drying facilities (below).
Reference information is identified by a book symbol.
Referrals go straight to a service provider who will allocate the referral to a
Refers to statutory or legal requirements, such as Acts, regulations, and the ECE Handbook.
Refresh of the Action Plan for Pacific Education for
Refreshing achievement challenges
Regional Asset Manager, Auckland
Regional Infrastructure Manager
Regional Infrastructure Manager Southern
Regional Infrastructure Manager, Central North
Regional Infrastructure Manager, Te Tai Tokerau
Regional Ministry staff will continue to work with boards to develop and amend enrolment schemes and will engage with them about any consultation processes planned for after January .
Regional Property Advisor
Regional Property Advisor (Tauranga Office)
Regional Public Health have no concerns about the air flow through and around the cots (HS)
Regional Public Health produce a number of fact sheets on a variety of diseases.
Regional Public Health provides guidelines for washing soiled children including suggested spill kit contents.
Regional Public Health recommends that all washing is done in hot water with an adequate amount of laundry detergent.
Regional public health units recommend that all washing is done in hot water with an adequate amount of laundry detergent.
Registered private schools must have regard to the NELP when operating the school. They must also ensure that their staff consider the NELP when developing and delivering the curriculum.
Registered teachers are expected to disclose any new convictions and serious matters to the Teaching Council. The Teaching Council will not share the content of Police vets with schools.
Registered teachers are expected to disclose any new convictions and serious matters to the Teaching Council. The Teaching Council will not share the content of Police vets with you.
Regular opportunities (formal and informal) are provided for
Regular opportunities (formal and informal) are provided for parents to:
Regular practice also ensures that any equipment relied on in an emergency drill will be subject to regular checks, for example, any special equipment that might be used to assist in the evacuation of the nonwalking children. It is also recommended that educators have a range of strategies available to manage any children whose behaviour has become disturbed during the emergency drill.
Regular practice will also ensure that any equipment that will be relied on in an emergency drill will be subject to regular checks, for example, any special equipment that might be used to assist in the evacuation of the nonwalking children. It is also recommended that staff have a range of strategies available to manage any children whose behaviour has become disturbed during an emergency drill.
Regular practice will also ensure that any equipment that will be relied on in an evacuation will be subject to regular checks, for example, any special equipment that might be used to assist in the evacuation of the nonwalking children. It is also recommended that the adults have a range of strategies available to manage any children whose behaviour has become disturbed during the evacuation.
Regular refresher training for all staff and volunteers.
Regular refresher training for all staff.
Regularity of Person responsible observations
Regulated (ratio) staff are staff required to meet the minimum regulatory requirements for staff:child ratios.
Regulated (ratio) staff hours
Regulated (ratio) staff hours are the total number of hours worked by all regulated (ratio) staff in a service each day.
Regulated (ratio) staff hours: B
Regulation Curriculum standard
Regulation Premises and facilities standard
Regulation Health and safety practices standard
Regulation Management and administration standard
Regulation ()(c) requires the person responsible (Coordinator visiting teacher) to take all reasonable steps each month to observe each child participating in the service while that child is receiving education and care.
Regulation Curriculum standard: general
Regulation ()(d)(ii) requires that, at all times while children attend the service, there is person responsible for every children.
Regulation A allows you to use spare capacity in your unders group by treating older children as unders for ratio purposes. You have spare capacity if you have fewer unders attending your service than you could have under the adulttochild ratio. This could help you stay within the minimum ratio for your andover group and avoid the need for more staff.
Regulation Premises and facilities standard: general
Regulation Health and safety practices standard: general
Regulation Governance, management, and administration standard: general
Regulations and licensing criteria set out what you must do to protect the safety and wellbeing of children at your early learning service.
Regulations made under the Education and Training Act specify when all state and stateintegrated schools and
Regulations, criteria, and rules we draft, publish and administer under the delegated authority of the Minister of Education.
Regulatory Impact Statements
Related to clause ()(a) of standard.
Related to clause ()(d) of standard.
Relating to actions you are taking to implementprepare to implement curricula, assessment and
Relating to actions you are taking to lift attendance and reduce absence.
Relationships and interactions in the service engender respect between children, and between children and educators.
Relationships are a source of learning, empowerment, and identity for all of us. As educators if we believe everything we do has an impact on learning and teaching, we have a responsibility to engage in responsive and respectful relationships with children,
Relevant drills to be carried out with children are likely to at least include fire evacuation, earthquake, shelter in place and tsunami, depending on the services location. Lockdown is a drill that should be practiced by staff without children.
Relevant health and safety forms and checklists for playgroups are available to download from this page.
Relieving teaching hours of work at a Pacific immersion or bilingual service can count towards their length of service. Completion of , hours of work is equal to one year of service.
Relying on safety checking completed by another organisation on your behalf
Remember that the same ratios on the excursion must be met for all ages of children as you are required to do at the centre. However, given the inherent risks involved in taking children out of the centre, consideration should be given to increasing ratios.
Remember the same ratios on the excursion for all ages of children as you are required to do in the hospitalbased service must be met.
Remember: You must take into account the Three Week Rule and Frequent Absence Rule when completing your RS Return. You can find more information on the absence rules in the sections listed below:
Remember: you may claim up to hours per day and hours per week for each licensed childplace.
Remove them immediately and let the air dry them. Never use a tea towel or cloth to dry or polish the dishes after they have been cleaned.
Removing barriers to learning To remove barriers to participation in early learning and meet the basic needs of
Reo Rua Education and Care
Reo Rua Education and Care:
Reo rua education and care
Repeat Step (above) for children aged or over less any hours for children claimed as Hours ECE.
Repeat Steps for each day in the month.
Repeat for each day in the first month of the funding period.
Repeat steps to for each month in the funding period.
Repeat steps for each day in the first month of the funding period.
Repeat the formula from Step for the hours worked by Other Teachers who were being counted towards regulated (ratio) staff.
Report Minister Stanford
Report Minister Stanford
Report Minister Stanford
Report Minister Stanford
Report Minister Stanford
Report back to Cabinet and overview of the mixed model approach
Report bullying to the police
Report on how the school has given effect to
Report suspected abuse or neglect of children and young people by adults
Report suspected outbreaks of communicable illnesses to your local Public Health service.
Report suspected outbreaks of communicable illnesses to your local public health service.
Reporting Requirements for Targeted Funding
Reporting accident and incidents on school transport
Reporting accidents and incidents on school transport
Reporting of your daily attendance data
Reporting on Targeted Funding
Reporting requirement for service providers and licensees of more than one service
Reporting template for Targeted Funding for Disadvantage
Reporting to the Ministry
Reports about an incident at an early learning service can come from:
Reports may be subject to external review by the Ministry andor the Education Review Office (ERO).
Request access to information we hold about you and to contact our Privacy Officer.
Request for a review of a decision
Requesting a review of an audit
Requesting a review of eligibility
Requesting optional charges for excursions and transport
Requests can be refused, or information withheld, but only if a good reason exists under the OIA for not providing the information.
Requests for commentary, opinion or interview are not defined as official information so they are not covered by the Act.
Required adult:child ratio
Required documentation is made available as appropriate to parents and Government officials having right of entry to the service under Section of the Education and Training Act .
Requirements for homebased services
Requirements include child protection policies, safety checks for childrens workers and Police vetting for other staff and contractors.
Requirements when driving
Research and data requests
Research has shown that the factor that most contributes to reducing injuries and fatalities during any emergency evacuation is regular practice. This ensures that any coordinators and parents are familiar with procedures and that children also become familiar and comfortable with what is expected of them.
Research has shown that the factor that most contributes to reducing injuries and fatalities during any emergency situation is regular practice. This ensures that educators are familiar with procedures and that children also become familiar and comfortable with what is expected of them.
Research has shown that the factor that most contributes to reducing injuries and fatalities during any emergency situation is regular practice. This ensures that staff and adults at the centre are familiar with procedures and that children also become familiar and comfortable with what is expected of them.
Research has shown that the factor that most contributes to reducing injuries and fatalities during any emergency situation is regular practice. This ensures that staff and volunteers are familiar with procedures.
Research report about Mt WellingtonWaimokoia school
Research shows that teacher training and qualifications have a positive impact on learning outcomes for children.
Research the local market to understand how many qualified suppliers are available and may be interested in quoting for the work. Send a request for a quote to as many of them as possible.
Research to understand the features of quality Pacific Bilingual Education: Review of Best Practices
Reset a users password Google
Reset a users password Microsoft
Residential School because rapid payments will be based on standard findings for each school.
Resource Teachers of the Deaf
Resource Teachers: Learning and Behaviour (RTLB)
Resource consent conditions
Resources and tools to get career ideas, explore study options and create your CV.
Resources for all services
Resources for implementing the framework
Resources for preparing your annual accounts
Resources for schools, parents and
Resources for teacherled services
Resources reflect ethnic diversity and the cultures of the families using the service.
Resources to go with Ka Hikitia
Resources to go with Tau Mai Te Reo
Resources, guidance, achievement standards, tools and corequisites for both
Resourcing information for your school or
Responding to Official Information Act requests from the media
Responses to Official Information Act (OIA) requests that have substantive information and are of public interest.
Responses to Official Information Act requests
Responsibilities and safety
Responsibilities when using the transportation service
Responsibility for safety checking always rests with the employing or contracting organisation. This means centresservices should exercise due diligence when relying on checks undertaken by others. Things to consider include:
Responsibility for safety checking always rests with the employing or contracting organisation. This means playgroup should exercise due diligence when relying on checks undertaken by others. Things to consider include:
Restricted or no access to a child
Restrictions on spending Targeted Funding
Retain all procurement documentation in the project file for years.
Return the RS form to ECE operational funding.
Returning to Teaching in Aotearoa New Zealand Practising Certificate.
Review your other systems and applications to make sure least privilege is applied. The vendors of your systems may provide guidance on how to edit and review access and permissions.
Reviewing the educational programme can be done in different ways and each playgroup will determine how best to do this for themselves. Many groups will find it useful to review what is being provided on a more regular basis than once a year. Talking at monthly meetings about what is or has been working well, and what you might want to do differently is a good starting point for regularly reflecting on how well your playgroup is working for its members.
Reviewing work with AI tools
Reviewing your homeschool programme
Revised Guidelines and Instructions for Enrolment Schemes were produced before December . Until January , enrolment schemes were developed and operated under the existing guidance and legislation.
Revised attendance codes FAQs
Risk assessments after a Police vet
Risk assessments after a Police vet for early learning services
Risk is the likelihood that death, injury or illness might occur when a person is exposed to a hazard. Risks must be managed by taking action to eliminate them, and if that is not reasonably practicable, minimising or isolating them. Eliminating a hazard will also eliminate any risks associated with that hazard.
Risk is the likelihood that death, injury or illness might occur when a person is exposed to a hazard. Risks must be managed by taking action to eliminate them, and if that is not reasonably practicable, minimizing or isolating them. Eliminating a hazard will also eliminate any risks associated with that hazard.
Risk management checklist
Risk mitigations such as increasing supervision or the use of safety matting do not meet the requirements of this criterion.
Robust cleaning procedures are needed to ensure all facilities are thoroughly cleaned before and after being used for art preparation and clean up.
Robust processes need to be in place to support the IT lead to implement least privilege. The following processes should be documented and carried out in practice.
Rolebased access control (RBAC) is a method for managing user access to systems by assigning permissions to roles rather than individuals. It is considered good practice to ensure the right level of access is applied.
Roles and responsibilities guides
Roles and responsibilities in the procurement process
Roll returns give us data about the students enrolled at each school in New Zealand.
Rooms used by children at a comfortable temperature
Rotary Youth Exchange New Zealand
Round the total to the nearest hour.
Round the total to the nearest whole number.
Round the total to the nearest whole number. Numbers ending in . or above should be rounded up to the next whole number. Numbers ending in . or below should be rounded down to the previous whole number.
Round the totals to the nearest whole number.
Royal Commission into Abuse in State Care and in Care of FaithBased Institutions
Royal Commission of Inquiry
Ruahine Kindergarten Association
Rule for extended nonoperation
Rules about counting time for claims about abuse in State care
Rules about standing and using seatbelts on school buses
Rules for allocating middle management allowances
Rules for allocating salary units
Rules for allocating senior management allowances
Rules for early childhood education
Rules set by the Ministry to limit funding that may be claimed for children permanently enrolled at a service who are either continuously or frequently absent. Absence funding cannot be claimed for children who are casually or conditionally enrolled.
Runny nose and eyes, cough and fever, followed a few days later by a rash
Runny nose, persistent cough followed by whoop, vomiting or breathlessness
SESTA (Specialised School Transport Assistance)
SESTA Conveyance Allowance
SESTA drivers are expressly forbidden to touch any student or leave the vehicle unattended. This means school staff must:
SESTA may be available for students at your school who cant travel to and from school independently due to safety andor mobility need
SESTA request for a review of a decision form
SESTA request for review decision
SESTA: roles and responsibilities guide
SMS vendors at present, um,
SMS vendors providing a service to tertiary organisations can find out how to integrate with NSI on the application website.
Safe and hygienic handling practices are implemented with regard to any animals at the service. All animals are able to be restrained.
Safe and hygienic handling practices are implemented with regard to any animals. All animals on the premises are able to be restrained.
Safeguarding Children has information about what to do if you are worried about a child, and what to report to Oranga Tamariki.
Safer organisations Safer children
Safer organisations, Safer children
Safer recruitment Safer children
Safety and behaviour on school transport
Safety and hygiene when eating outside
Safety and suitability of surfaces, furniture, equipment and materials are also covered under Criterion PF Safe furniture and equipment which covers purchasing and installing playground equipment and surfacing.
Safety and suitability of surfaces, furniture, equipment and materials both indoors and outdoors are also covered under criterion PF Safe furniture and equipment which covers purchasing and installing playground equipment and surfacing.
Safety check assessment tool
Safety checking common questions
Safety checking cover sheet
Safety checking for child protection in early learning
Safety checking general guidance
Safety checking includes the collection and consideration of a range of information about the person.
Safety checking of trainees and students on practicum
Safety checking record keeping requirements are outlined in the criteria for each service type:
Safety checking relief teachers
Safety checking tools and resources
Safety checks and Police vetting is required by the Childrens Act .
Safety checks by a third party
Safety checks for adults in schools poster
Safety drills to teach your students
Safety on the bus is a shared responsibility
Salaries is used to determine
Salaries reflect base pay
Salary from December
Salary from January
Salary from November
Salary progression is linked to qualifications. Section of the pay parity guide explains salary progression, including salary progression with improved qualifications.
Salary progression: Improved qualifications
Salary protection only applies to permanent units.
Salmonella: to hours
Sand and water play can be brought inside (with some careful planning and supervision).
Saturday April to Sunday April .
Saturday April to Sunday April .
Saturday September to Sunday October .
Saturday September to Sunday October .
Saturday June to Sunday July .
Saturday September to Sunday October .
Saturday July to Sunday July .
Saturday July to Sunday July .
Save iterations as you go.
Scanning or regularly looking around to observe all children and to be aware when one moves out of view.
Schedule identifies which adults can be counted when determining the adulttochild ratios.
Schedule of the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations sets out the adulttochild ratios required for each age group and service type.
Schedule of the Act makes the Ministry of Education responsible for developing and consulting on enrolment schemes.
Scholarships and study awards
Scholarships for study and training
School Annual Accrual Report Certification
School Bus Procurement Request for Proposal Tender
School Bus Procurement Request for Proposals Tender
School Data Quality report help guide
School Error Report Summary Calculator
School Evaluation of Physical Environment.
School Lunch Collective model
School Property Officer Christchurch
School Property Officer Invercargill
School Property Officer Nelson
School Support Limited ( hours, days a week)
School Transport Assistance
School and kura boards must prepare and submit accurate roll data to us on certain dates each year. This is known as the roll return.
School and kura resourcing roll audits
School and kura roll returns
School annual accrual report (SAAR) and leave liability reports.
School annual financial statements
School attendance quick reference guide
School board objectives and NELP
School boards are legally required to provide a safe environment for students. They will discuss your complaint at a board meeting. You may ask to attend, and you can also ask to speak at the meeting.
School boards must consider that information to assess whether the person would pose a risk to the safety of children if they were to work at the school.
School boards must follow the key dates for application and ballot deadlines. These are set out in the instructions. They must coordinate and share ballot deadlines with other schools in their region or city.
School bus code of conduct
School bus conveyance allowance
School bus route design and route changes
School bus route design information
School bus routes fall within the Transport Eligibility Zone of the schools they service.
School child protection policy
School employers must now make sure all new, beginning, and overseas teachers complete the compulsory module Physical Restraint Understanding the Rules and Guidelines within weeks of starting at the school. Support staff in a team supporting a student with restraint as part of their support plan must also complete the compulsory online module.
School enrolment schemes in New Zealand
School enrolment zones, on the other hand, are geographically defined areas around schools to prevent them from becoming overcrowded.
School exchange programmes
School exchanges are programmes where students can live and study in another country. Students get the chance to experience a new school, a different education system, a new culture, and sometimes a new language. Most exchange students live with host families.
School exchanges may be run directly by schools or by private exchange programme organisations (EPOs).
School leavers embark on a new journey. Support them with guidance, and resources for a successful transition to the next chapter
School leavers toolkit for teachers
School opening and closing for instruction
School planning and reporting
School playground outdoor
School principals are usually assigned this role.
School principals salary grades
School property contractors
School property meets agreed standards to support teachers to succeed.
School property procurement ROI evaluation workbook
School property procurement evaluators guide
School property procurement open tender evaluation workbook
School resourcing key dates
School responsibilities for bus safety and behaviour management
School strike notification
School term dates and holidays
School terms and holidays dates
School transport advisors contacts
School transport assistance
School transport assistance (for education professionals)
School transport assistance parents and caregivers
School transport assistance eligibility and applications
School transport contacts
School transport drivers must:
School transport for directly resourced schools
School transport regional contacts
School transport roles and responsibilities guide
School transport specialist equipment
School visits counted towards the attendance will be recorded on the attendance record.
School year and terms length
School zones and enrolment schemes
School zones and enrolment schemes information for parents
Schools more than just class
Schoolrelated complaints
Schooltoschool exchanges
Schooltoschool exchanges are direct partnerships between a New Zealand school and a school overseas.
Schooltoschool student exchanges additional application form
Schooltoschool student exchanges: Application for approval
Schooltoschool student exchanges: MoU template
Schools also have access to the RTLB service. RTLB are specialist
Schools and EPOs are required to provide pastoral care for both all exchange students in line with the Education (Pastoral Care of Tertiary and International Learners) Code of Practice (the Code).
Schools and kura have many resources and tools they can access to support learners, including our learning support team.
Schools and kura must be open for instruction for a specified number of half days each year. If a oneoff issue means you cannot meet this minimum requirement, contact your regional office.
Schools and kura must be open for:
Schools and kura must meet the requirements of Privacy Principle of the Privacy Act by keeping student and staff personal information secure.
Schools and kura will be provided with yearend payroll information in early February each year. This will assist with the preparation of the annual financial statements.
Schools and parents are legally responsible for making sure students attend school every day.
Schools and teacher statistics
Schools and the Code of Health and Disability Services Consumers Rights
Schools annual reporting webinar
Schools are expected to apply government procurement rules when using public money. The New Zealand Government Procurement website has more detail about what a conflict of interest is and how to manage it.
Schools are responsible for confirming that a student meets the rules for an eligibility transfer.
Schools are responsible for providing us with uptodata about students who use our bus services to get to school.
Schools are responsible for telling students, parents and caregivers if any changes are made to their school bus service.
Schools can also rely on confirmation from tertiary education organisations when hosting their students.
Schools can refer to the list of panel members to find project managers or project administrators available in their region.
Schools can report incidents through either:
Schools continue to comply with the Open and Closing regulations. guidance outlining what we consider open for instruction to mean, the closing for instruction settings, and regulatory requirements will be available on this website from May .
Schools continue to make sure teachers are recording the correct new attendance codes and that daily attendance data is checked to remove all unknown codes or errors.
Schools covering all years can determine how best to meet the requirements above.
Schools covering years can use halfdays for general curriculum and assessment PLD and halfdays to prepare for the new curricula being implemented in .
Schools do not need permission to close for emergencies. If your school needs to close due to an emergency, please contact your local Te Mahau office as soon as it is safe to do so.
Schools have flexibility to choose the start and end dates of their school year, so long as they start between Monday January and Monday February, and end no later than December .
Schools have flexibility to choose the start and end dates of their school year, so long as they start between Monday January and Friday February, and end no later than December .
Schools have flexibility to choose the start and end dates of their school year, so long as they start between Monday January and Wednesday February and end no later than Friday December .
Schools in the Ka Ora, Ka Ako Healthy School Lunches Programme
Schools may refer students to an attendance service provider if they think it may help. Attendance service staff might visit you at home to help get your child back to school.
Schools might also choose to close for local events like gala and show days, or for religious holidays in some communities.
Schools must accept outofzone enrolments in an order defined by the Education and Training Act , using a ballot, if necessary.
Schools must have a staff member available while buses are in service
Schools must make sure students are safe on work placements.
Schools must record and report on attendance
Schools must work with transport providers and caregivers to make sure services are run safely and to manage inappropriate behaviour.
Schools needing to close for emergencies do not need to meet these criteria.
Schools or transport providers can withdraw a students place on the school bus if the problem is serious or ongoing. They can do this temporarily or permanently.
Schools payroll remediation
Schools resourcing and ECE funding
Schools sharing common community interests should work together to set a common start for their community.
Schools should develop and document their bus procedures to make behaviour expectations clear.
Schools should provide a safe and inclusive environment for students. Talk to your childs teacher if you are concerned about their wellbeing at school. Ask to meet with the teacher at a time convenient for them. Think about what concerns you want to discuss first.
Schools start or continue using the Stepped Attendance Response (STAR) and adapt it to their needs. Schools align policies and procedures to the new attendance rules and codes.
Schools will record absences and report them to us. This helps us to understand where more help may be needed.
Schools with Years to
Schools with Years and only
Schools with Years to
Schools with consent to assess listed standards are required to have an authenticity policy to support assessment practice. This policy must include the acceptable use of GenAI.
Schools, caregivers and transport providers must work together to make sure students can travel safely to and from school.
Schools: SESTA application
Scissors should be childsized and have rounded ends.
Scroll down to the link for this years annual reporting circular.
Search for Child Protection.
Search the database for your local TDA.
Secondary Teachers Collective Agreement
Secondary and composite school terms and holidays calendar
Secondary and composite school terms and holidays calendar
Secondary and composite schools must be open for instruction for a minimum of half days in .
Secondary and composite schools must be open for instruction for a minimum of half days in .
Secondary and composite schools must be open for instruction for a minimum of half days in .
Secondary and intermediate schools:
Secondary schools are continuing to use the Achievement Standards and support materials for NCEA assessments.
Secondary schools need to open for slightly fewer days per year than primary and intermediate schools. They may close earlier at the end of the year.
Secretary can authorise the inclusion of a grandparenting scheme
Section of the Education and Training Act defines a playgroup as a group that meets on a regular basis to facilitate childrens play and in respect of which:
Section of the Education and Training Act defines an early childhood education and care centre as a premises that is used regularly for the education or care of or more children (not being children of the persons providing the education or care or children enrolled at a school who are being provided with education or care before or after school) under the age of years by day (or part of a day) but not for any continuous period of more than days.
Section of the Education and Training Act defines homebased ECE services as the provision of education or care, for gain or reward, to children who are under the age of years, or who are aged years but not enrolled at school, in:
Section of the Education and Training Act defines hospitalbased education and care service as the provision of education or care to or more children under the age of who are receiving hospital care.
Section is included in the application document below.
Section of the application for this allowance must be completed and signed by a referrer. They should be someone who can explain the barriers your child is facing. There could be more than one referrer if that helps to describe your childs situation.
Section of the Education and Training Act
Section of the Education and Training Act provides for the payment of funding to eligible early childhood services subject to conditions so that they may provide early childhood education. Services which fail to meet these conditions may no longer be eligible for funding and either all or part of this funding may be recovered by the Ministry of Education.
Section (a) to avoid prejudice to the security, defence, or international relations of New Zealand.
Section works through several examples of the Frequent Absence Rule.
Section of the Act currently requires the Minister of Education to issue eligibility criteria that must be met by applicants for appointment as principal.
Section of the ECE funding handbook gives more information about notional rolls.
Section ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons.
Section ()(b)(ii) to protect the commercial position of the supplier of the information.
Section ()(ba)(i) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence where making the information available would likely prejudice the supply of similar information.
Section ()(ba)(ii) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence where making the information available would likely damage the public interest.
Section ()(f)(iv) to protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials.
Section ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinion.
Section ()(h) to maintain legal professional privilege.
Section ()(j) to avoid prejudice to negotiations.
Sections under this audience
See Chapter for all funding claim audits and record keeping information relating to early childhood education services that are eligible for Ministry of Education funding.
See Chapter for information on financial reporting requirements.
See Chapter of this Handbook and the relevant section for your service type (in Chapter ) for further information on record keeping requirements.
See Page of the Pacific Languages Strategy
See Section B for further information on record keeping for teacherled services.
See Section B: Education and Care services for information on the staff record requirements.
See Section Ba for funding conditions related to kindergartens.
See Section for information on sharing child places and calculating Hours ECE.
See Section for the maximum FCHs for Hours ECE Funding.
See Section for more information on the absence rules.
See Section for details on applying for an exemption.
See Section for details on how to apply for an exemption.
See Section for information on the EC transitional advance form.
See Section for instructions on completing the RS Form.
See Things to consider for securing furniture that may need to be moved frequently.
See Things to consider for suggestions of other points to consider for sleep procedures.
See also funding claim audit and record audit in the Glossary.
See also the Guidance for HS Hazard and risk management.
See important resourcing dates for your school.
See information about digital and data programmes, strategies and policies in education.
See more information on equipment in early childhood education (ECE) services.
See new settings for how schools can close for instruction during term time.
See section for information on funding rates.
See section B of the ECE funding handbook.
See section B for further details on the required records.
See the ACC website for more information on preventing injuries at work.
See the Glossary for definitions of casual, conditional and permanent enrolment.
See the Professional practice regarding separated parentsguardians above.
See the Professional practice regarding separated parentsguardians guide above.
See the Professional practice regarding separated parentsguardians guide under GMA Parent access to information, above.
See the criteria and allowance types, including how much they are.
See the full Bill on the New Zealand Legislation website.
See the licensing criteria for each type of service below:
See the documents and advice for the Freedom of Expression Proposal.
See the documents and advice for the Initial Teacher Education Proposal.
See the regulation for written directions.
See under bookslanguagemusic for ideas for music and dance.
Seek further advice from a healthcare professional or public health service.
Seek permission from the person who is being safety checked for the information to be shared. Permission could be sought by the person or organisation completing the safety check before it is undertaken, or by the centreservice prior to requesting the information.
Seek permission from the person who is being safety checked for the information to be shared. Permission could be sought by the person or organisation completing the safety check before it is undertaken, or by the playgroup prior to requesting the information.
Seeking approval to consult on S amendments and removing the NELP in ETAB No
Select Catalogue from the top menu
Select the Physical Restraint programme tile
Select the inputs worksheet in your model and start deleting all formulas section by section.
Select view sidebyside and synchronous scrolling. Scroll down the two worksheets sidebyside to make sure each row number and description are the same is the new model.
Selecting an appropriate assembly area should also take into account where Fire and Emergency New Zealand vehicles and personnel might be when they are responding to a fire.
Selecting appropriate food for individual children is very important in minimising choking risk. It is important to discuss with a parent or caregiver the foods children can manage safely rather than relying on age alone as the indicator.
Selection and appointment processes
Selfreview guidelines for early childhood education
Selfreview is about looking back on the implementation of policies, procedures and practices to ensure licensing requirements are met. Selfreview involves asking questions such as:
Send them home as soon as possible. Recommend that they stay at home until well again.
Send your electronic roll return file directly from your student management system (SMS).
Sending information to the ELI system
Senior management allowances are in:
Senior management allowances for secondary schools
Sensitive Claims lodgement form
Sensitive claim lodgement form
Sensitive claims contact details
Sensitive claims of abuse in state schools
Sensitive claims of abuse in state schools before
Sensitive claims of abuse in state schools process
Separate accounts for everyday usage and administrator tasks
Separate accounts for everyday use and administrator tasks
Service closes over the Christmas period.
Service closure temporary reason.
Service continues to operate as normally organised over the Christmas period.
Service information collected
Service must keep evidence that a parent or guardian of each child has regularly examined and confirmed the attendance record. This needs to be completed once a week.
Service must keep evidence that a parent or guardian of each child has regularly examined and confirmed the attendance record. This needs to be completed:
Service profile information (removed April ):
Service provider documentation for Regulation ()(c)
Service providers could hold meetings to convey information about the service, for example:
Service providers could hold meetings to convey information about the service.
Service providers may want to consider having a process in place for when educators leave the service to ensure that information relating to enrolment records is no longer held by the educator but is kept by the service provider.
Service providers, umbrella organisations and
Service staff require guidelines and opportunities for training to further develop their knowledge and understanding of:
Service type specific funding
Service type specific information
Service type specific information is identified at the top of the page. Service types are:
Services affiliated to a school
Services are eligible to claim the ECE Funding Subsidy for up to FCHs per childplace per day, to a maximum of FCHs per childplace per week (that is days).
Services are eligible to claim up to hours per child per day, to a maximum of hours per child per week.
Services are expected to maintain a list of trained relievers who are available when trained parents
Services are not required to offer the terms of the Kindergarten Teachers, Head Teachers and Senior Teachers Collective Agreement.
Services are required to contact the Ministry if there is any subsequent drop in the use of the main language or if there are changes to the cultural nature of the education programme provided.
Services are required to keep other information on enrolment records for health and safety purposes. Please see the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations or contact your Ministry local office for further details.
Services are required to provide children under years with the opportunity to have restful sleep at any time they are attending the centre.
Services are required to provide evidence to support the numbers claimed on the EC form. This could be in the form of actual enrolment and attendance numbers.
Services are required to report on how government funds have been spent as a condition of their licence.
Services are required to report to parents and the local community about how they have spent their Equity Funding.
Services are required to submit a record of the number of discretionary hours they have used in a funding period to the Ministry.
Services can be licensed to provide both teacherled and parentled education and care during any week, but only one kind of provision on each day.
Services can opt out of the scheme. To opt out, contact us.
Services can record sleep in a variety of ways. These include:
Services cannot be funded on a notional roll and claim funding for normal funded child hours (FCHs) .
Services connected to ELI submit their RS Return electronically via ELI Web or their Student Management System (SMS).
Services could have more than one designated sleeping space. All criteria must be met for any and all designated sleep spaces. In mixed age settings, many services choose to use their designated space(s) for children of all ages (not just under s), because they find supervision easier when all children sleep in the same place.
Services do not need to apply for a change of funding rate. This will be automatically calculated by the Ministry when they submit their RS return each funding round.
Services do not need to provide additional information.
Services funded on a notional roll claim their full notional roll figure for each day of operation, instead of entering their actual funded child hours on their RS Return. This means that services on a notional roll do not apply the Frequent Absence Rule when claiming funding.
Services funded on a notional roll must keep the same records (e.g. enrolment records, attendance records and staff records) as other services (see Chapter Record keeping).
Services funded on notional rolls receive the same funding rates as other services. They do not receive additional funding (except where eligible for equity funding).
Services have regard for the National Education and Learning Priorities
Services have until June each year to send the Ministry their audited financial reports for the previous financial year.
Services may be funded hours ECE ( hours ECE hours and plus ECE hours) for up to FCHs per child per day, to a maximum of FCHs per child per week.
Services may be funded the ECE funding subsidy (Under and and over) for up to FCHs per childplace per day, to a maximum of FCHs per childplace per week.
Services may begin claiming Hours ECE funding for a child on their third birthday.
Services may choose how they report to their community on the spending of this funding. This can be done by detailing the information in a newsletter, a notice displayed at the service or by publishing their annual financial reports.
Services may choose to develop a healthy food and drink policy with
Services may choose to keep a higher indoor temperature but should ensure that is comfortable for children. Having a service temperature that is too warm could lead to lethargy.
Services may claim a maximum of:
Services may claim funding for all sessionsdays a child was enrolled to attend, but was absent from, within a three week period. The three week period begins on the first day of absence.
Services may claim funding for all the sessionsdays a child was enrolled to attend, but was absent from, within a week period. The week period begins on the first day of absence.
Services may display posters which encourage healthy foods and demonstrate how to prepare foods to meet the developmental needs of
Services may have funding withheld if they do not complete the financial reporting requirements.
Services may have their funding withheld if they fail to meet the audit requirements.
Services may provide the healthy food and drink guidance to
Services may request donations
Services may want to consider how information is shared so it is culturally appropriate for the audience. Things to consider include:
Services must allow reasonable opportunities for parents to review their decisions regarding optional charges. Either party may initiate a change to the agreement and any changes must be documented in accordance with record keeping requirements. Oneoff optional charges are agreed at the time parents are asked by the service.
Services must also keep evidence (e.g. a signed attendance register) that a parentguardian of each child has regularly examined and confirmed the attendance record.
Services must comply with the standards set in the licensing criteria as well as the requirements of the Health Safety at Work Act (HSWA) and its regulations. Additional guidance about the HSWA is available for early learning services.
Services must comply with the standards set in the licensing criteria as well as the requirements of the Health and Safety at Work Act (HSWA) and its regulations. Additional guidance about the HSWA is available for early learning services.
Services must ensure that licence maximums are not exceeded when children are attending a makeup day.
Services must ensure that the activity or item offered exceedsis over and above what is required by regulation.
Services must have a child protection policy that meets the Childrens Act requirements.
Services must have a procedure so people know how to make a complaint about any instance of noncompliance, and this must include the option for people to contact their regional Ministry of Education office, with the appropriate contact details.
Services must keep a paper copy of any changes to enrolment records which are held electronically. This will enable changes to be signed by parentsguardians.
Services must keep a record of how they have used Targeted Funding. Details on how Targeted Funding was used must be provided at the individual service level.
Services must keep a separate enrolment agreement for each child.
Services must keep records of fees, donations, optional charges and homebased educator top up payments received from parents.
Services must keep records to demonstrate persons responsible hold a current practising certificate.
Services must keep records to demonstrate persons responsible hold both an early childhood qualification recognised by the Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand for registration purposes and a current practising certificate.
Services must keep the following documentation:
Services must make the policy and information about its practices available to parents (GMA Information provided to parents).
Services must make the policy and information about its practices available to parents as required by criterion GMA Parent access to information.
Services must not charge fees for hours that they claim as Hours ECE. If a service claims Hours ECE funding under an absence rule, the service must not charge fees for any conditional or casual child who directly fills that place. If the service charges a fee, it must claim the ECE Funding Subsidy.
Services must not claim funding for absences that continue into the fourth week and beyond.
Services must not offer Hours ECE only:
Services must not state that a child has attended an early childhood service when they did not attend for any reason.
Services must not state that a child:
Services must promote the Ministry of Health Guidance and may demonstrate compliance by developing formal policies and procedure in partnership with
Services must provide a copy of the Ministry of Health Guidance at the time of enrolment and should record on the enrolment form that this information has been provided and understood by parents.
Services must provide a copy of the Ministry of Health guidance at the time of enrolment and should record on the enrolment form that this information has been provided and understood by parents.
Services must provide evidence to support their claim. This could be in the form of actual enrolment and attendance numbers.
Services must provide these documents to the Ministry or its Resourcing Auditors on request.
Services must record the hours covered by Other Teachers as Other Teacher Hours on the Staff Record and Staff Hour Count for breaksabsences over minutes.
Services must report directly to parents and the local community on how they spend their equity funding.
Services must report on the ATIS as part of their financial reporting on the ECE Funding Subsidy.
Services must send their audit reports to the Ministry along with their audited general purpose financial statements or audited special purpose financial report.
Services must spend Targeted Funding in the funding period it was allocated.
Services must use Targeted Funding in line with the requirements specified in the Targeted Funding guidelines.
Services must use the Staff Record to manage the Staff Hour Count.
Services need a process to ensure that enrolment forms are checked by parents at least annually to ensure all enrolment details are up to . It is good practice to have enrolment forms checked more often if possible
Services need to ensure the required documentation as outlined in the governance, management and administration criteria is made available when required.
Services not connected to ELI, send their RS Return by post, using the paperbased RS Return sent to them by the Ministry.
Services not eligible for ATIS include:
Services of all types will be audited to verify the accuracy of their funded child hour entitlement claims including record keeping requirements for Hours ECE.
Services offering Hours ECE must offer Hours ECE to all eligible children.
Services offering hours ECE
Services on a notional roll are funded on average actual attendance for a specified period. The Ministrys initial calculation of average actual attendance is based on past RS Returns.
Services participating in the KidsCan ECE Food for Kids Programme are not required to register food control plans with MPI. This is because registration is required when food is purchased and sold. KidsCan donate the food to early learning services and there is no charge to families.
Services provide their RS Return to Ministry as follows:
Services receiving quality level funding must keep:
Services receiving quality level funding must maintain a record of trained parents
Services receiving the Annual TopUp for Isolated Services (ATIS) must report this as part of their income. They do not need to report how it was spent.
Services receiving the PITA must keep the following documentation:
Services recognised by the Ministry of Education have to be licensed or certified. They are not Governmentowned in the way that state schools are.
Services risk losing funding if their records cannot be audited because they are unclear or ambiguous, or are not available for audit.
Services seeking Equity Funding under Component C: Language and culture other than English (including sign language) must complete this form.
Services seeking an exemption from the absence rules for a child with special andor health needs must complete this form.
Services seeking an exemption from the absence rules must complete an EC form (and EC form where applicable).
Services set their own fee structures, so youll need to check with the services you are interested in.
Services should be familiar with the obligations of the Privacy Act and understand the information privacy principles dealing with collecting, holding, use and disclosure of personal information.
Services should be familiar with the obligations of the Privacy Act and understand the information privacy principles dealing with collecting, holding, use and disclosure of personal information. Information on this can be found at the Privacy Commissioner website.
Services should budget to ensure funds are available to cover the period between starting to operate and receiving their first payment.
Services should check with any potential manufacturersupplier that a certificate of compliance is available before purchase (for example, a certificated manufacturer may have added a new piece of equipment to its range since certification and the new product may not comply with NZS :).
Services should consider children with additional needs.
Services should consider having a process whereby the enrolment records are collected or delivered to the service provider every months (or after each funding period). This minimises the likelihood of loss or damage.
Services should demonstrate the visibility of the principles, strands, goals, and learning outcomes of their chosen pathway within their documentation i.e., policies, curriculum documentation, engagements with parents and
Services should develop a procedure with parents
Services should ensure that:
Services should maintain a list of certificated relievers who are available when certificated teachers are absent.
Services should not be penalised if they are unaware that an absent child will not be returning to the service. However, the Ministry cannot fund absences indefinitely.
Services should report on each category of funding received from the Ministry.
Services that are required to keep a Staff Hour Count (education and care services, hospitalbased services and allday kindergartens), will also be audited on:
Services that believe they have received less than their full ATIS entitlement should contact their service provider.
Services that decide to stop offering Hours ECE funding should contact the ECE Operational Funding team on
Services that do not operate for a continuous period of weeks or more may claim funding for enrolled children who are absent before and after the break.
Services that do not operate for a period of two weeks or more may extend the Frequent Absence rule where a child has already been frequently absent in the previous month.
Services that fail to provide the above records on request may be returned to standard funding rates.
Services that keep only electronic records for recording attendance must use a software package or other electronic means of recording attendance that has provision for noting and referencing any changes in a manner that is transparent for staff, parents and the Ministry.
Services that must complete the Staff Hour Count may record the hours worked by relievers who are Other Teachers as Certificated Teacher Hours for the purposes of the Staff Hour Count for up to hours during the funding cycle.
Services that offer Hours ECE to all eligible children must ensure all hours for children covered by Hours ECE have no charge.
Services that opt in can access higher funding rates for paying their certificated teachers at or above certain minimum salary steps. There are minimum salary scales. We fund services the funding rates that are in line with their chosen salary scale.
Services that submit paperbased RS or use ELI Web and have used discretionary hours during a funding period, must submit the report found at the following link along with their RS.
Services that use an approved student management system (SMS) please contact your SMS provider if you require assistance in providing this information.
Services that wish to apply for a recalculation of their advance funding should contact the ECE Operational Funding team on
Services where cooked meals for children are prepared are likely to need more fully equipped kitchen facilities than services where children provide their own food. However, all services must meet the requirements set out in this criterion.
Services who do not plan to use vehicles for evacuating children in the case of a tsunami should still practice the tsunami drill as per their procedure and in line with their services emergency plan (HS).
Services who do not plan to use vehicles for evacuating children in the case of a tsunami should still practice the tsunami drill as per their procedure and in line with their services emergency plan (HS).
Services who do not provide this information to the Ministry through the ELI system or an approved alternative method may have their funding withheld in part or in full.
Services will be audited on
Services will need to develop a process which supports staff to ascertain how a relationship between separated parents and the service may be established so that communication channels can be opened. This could include ensuring educators have a copy of the enrolment form, so they are clear what any court orders are.
Services will need to ensure those involved in the creation of the annual plan are familiar with priorities to of the NELP.
Services will need to indicate whether a child is receiving Hours ECE, any agreements by parentscaregivers to pay optional charges, and that the attestation section and homebased educator top up payment section (where relevant) of the enrolment form has been completed by the parentscaregivers.
Services will still need to comply with early learning regulatory requirements and funding conditions.
Services with an EQI of , , or are eligible for a review of their EQI, provided certain conditions are met.
Services with an EQI of , , or are eligible to apply for a review of their EQI if they are able to provide evidence that:
Services with an income of less than , will not have to provide audited financial reports. Services with an income of more than , will still have to provide audited financial reports.
Session : Preparing your school trial balance for export
Session : Import and map your school trial balance for the first
Session : Populating the trial balance converter in kiwi park
Session : Populating the inputs worksheet manually
Session : Quality checking the financial statements
Session : Reviewing the statement of cash flow
Session : How to hide rows and notes not required by your school
Session : Collating and uploading your annual report subtitles
Sessional education and care services and hospitalbased services Base funding rates
Sessional education and care services and hospitalbased services Extended parity funding rates
Sessional education and care services and hospitalbased services Full parity funding rates
Sessional education and care services and hospitalbased services Parity funding rates
Sessional services operating a session of . to hours will receive funding for hours.
Sessional services that offer . hour sessions may claim funding for hours for those sessions.
Sessional teacherled centrebased services.
Sessional certificated teachers
Set a password policy for Google or Microsoft accounts
Set a password policy on your devices
Set up least privilege with Google Workspace
Set up least privilege with Microsoft
Set up least privilege with other systems
Set up of the environment
Sets of highquality plastic creatures for example, domestic animals, dinosaurs, sea creatures
Setting up a schooltoschool exchange programme
Setting up a separate area
Setting up new NCEA Pacific subjects, including Gagana Tokelau and Vagahau Niue
Several recent reviews and inquiries have found that, despite significant investment in learning support, many disabled learners and children and young people with learning support needs are not having their needs adequately met by the education system. So many of these children and young people are not achieving equitable educational outcomes.
Shade the boxes to show when each adult will actually be working with the children.
Shane is absent on Monday. This means Aroha can attend for the day from to .
Shane is permanently enrolled to attend from to Monday through Friday.
Sharing of personal information in early learning services
Sharing personal information to protect children
Sharing personal information to protect children in early learning
Sharing personal information with the Teaching Council
Sharing the information we collect
Sharing your phonics data
Short form agreement for consultant engagement template
Short form agreement guidance
Short form model conditions of engagement agreement
Should all seniors be marked X from the first day
Sign inSign out template
Sign insign out template
Simple, short passwords are easy to guess.
Since November , we have been contacting all former employees entitled to a payment via the following methods.
Single Data Returns (SDRs) for providers that receive Government funding
Singlesex schools or schools that offer specific sports or other programmes are not considered special character schools.
Sink with hot water connection
Sione currently attends Huia Playcentre from to on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays.
Sione has attended for fewer than hours a day on more than half of his enrolled days in November.
Sione is enrolled to attend an early childhood centre for hours a day on Monday, Wednesday and Friday.
Six priorities to improve achievement
Skipping class. So truet really is, um, it really is
Sleep furniture spacing at early learning services
Slings, backpacks, prams, buggies and car capsules
Small hard foods that are difficult for children to bite or chew (for example, nuts, large seeds, popcorn husks, raw carrot, apple, celery)
So I just wanted to outline that for those that may be, um,
So I spoke, you know, myself
So I think its kind of a case by case basis for that,
So I think that will come up at board level around
So I would assume that if you are, uh, tagging along
So Im not sure what GTP is.
So before we start, I would, um,
So daily reporting of attendance data becomes next year.
So first off, if you have, uh,
So for example, if you were traveling from the west coast
So for example, if youre sitting there thinking, okay,
So have there been any changes
So if the board decided that that was actually a, um,
So if you could delineate those in the decision trade,
So if you look at present that out of class,
So it could be an N which is a present code.
So it is purely about, um, mark, uh, Tina and Jared
So its just about the school, um, process, um,
So lets kick into it. Okay.
So lets look at these in some detail.
So lets well progress through them,
So myself and, um, some very talented others, um, we
So practice for NZQA, uh, exams would be
So question mark truant, um, explained but not approved
So rural schools, when students go with whanau
So that would be a, a decode for the student who,
So that would be, um, around how the school manages,
So thats an e its an e its a explained, not approved.
So the V code is for, um, and its for study leave
So the X code isnt reported to the ministry
So the absence, um, an attempt has been made
So the last day of school.
So the question from Catherine,
So there definitely is provision for, um, you know,
So there, the codes that are in school policy are
So therefore, we have labeled this explained and approved.
So they could be on a transition plan, um,
So this is, um, yeah, as you can see here, this is, uh,
So we had enough to create a start for .
So we listened. So we, we kept that in.
So weve done exactly that.
So weve got a, um, follow up comment from Tanya,
So we, we went from , weve now got ,
So what we do with the daily reporting,
So what we have here is a table that demonstrates
So what weve got here is a very easy
So when you are having follow up with the whanau
So with that said, I will stop sharing.
So with that said, everything else was up for grabs.
So yeah, a decode is, is a half day, um, code
So youd have that in your policy or your processes.
So, so everything is, were dealing in the gray
So, uh, not using anything outside of that.
So, um, and thats, uh, been launched this year, um,
So, um, definitely want the this to be present,
So, um, it wouldve to become either a T
So, um, you kind of mark them present for that class.
Social media and online wellbeing
Social media plays a big part in the lives of many young people. Its a useful tool for learning and staying in touch with other people but can sometimes present risks to your childs wellbeing and selfesteem. Before letting your child get started with using social media, make sure you communicate with your child about on the online safety basics.
Social media sites may occasionally become unavailable. The Ministry of Education cant accept responsibility for lack of service due to downtime.
Social media terms of use
Social worker employed by DSW or the board.
Soft furnishings. The softer furnishings you have, the more sound is absorbed. Some practical options are:
Some ECE services have significantly different operating models and erratic patterns of enrolment andor attendance due to their special function in the community.
Some are communitybased and some are privately owned. This means there is a lot of variation in how these services are provided.
Some centres (especially those without administration staff) choose to divert incoming calls to an answer phone during particular times of the day, to minimise the interruptions to staff while they are working with children. This is a matter of choice, but checking messages at regular points through the day to ensure that urgent or important information from parents is received is recommended.
Some centres accept babies from birth until they start primary school. Others only take older children. This information will be available on a centres website or by contacting them.
Some centres will supply formula for your baby. If they do, you have to agree on the brand and type of formula.
Some change facilities require educators to engage in excessive heavy lifting, hunching over or kneeling. This may result in sprains or strains, so educators need to be mindful of how to manage this.
Some district health boards (DHBs) have their own specific requirements. You will need to contact your local DHB for clarification.
Some early childhood services choose to follow the school terms and holidays. Fulltime daycare services are usually open through the school holidays but close over Christmas. Check with your service.
Some early learning services are open during the school holidays. Other types, like Playcentres and some kindergartens, are closed during the school holidays.
Some early learning services offer parenting information and courses for families and the wider community. These courses can be about a wide range of parent and child topics such as developing social competence and language development.
Some early learning services provide food for your child and formula for your baby. Others will ask you to pack meals and snacks for your child each day. You will find this information when you visit or enrol at your centre, or on their website.
Some equipment, such as puzzles, will have specific uses, while some will be chosen for their flexibility of use, for example, blocks that can be used to build roads, houses or form patterns. Children will also need equipment available to help them develop new skills or practice newly established ones, for example, scissors or balls.
Some examples of cyberbullying include creating false online profiles, posting abusive comments or embarrassing pictures or videos, and sending harmful text messages. Its likely this behaviour is happening both at school and outside of school grounds.
Some examples of extended nonoperation where the Frequent Absence Rule can be suspended are:
Some examples of extended nonoperation where the Three Week Rule can be suspended are:
Some examples of planning documentation are available to download in the Criteria section.
Some examples or nuance scenarios.
Some facilities that can be located outside the premises, if services can demonstrate they have adequate access to them. For example, separate ECE services located in the same building can share the same centrally located adult toilet, workspace, art sink and bodywash facilities.
Some groups use the following types of play as a starting point to make sure they provide a variety of equipment, experiences and opportunities:
Some homebased service providers have a range of equipment and resources available for educators to loan and educators may belong to toy libraries.
Some homes may have a dishwasher that can be used. If the home does not have a dishwasher and the educator washes dishes by hand the Ministry of Health recommends a hygienic method of hand washing dishes is followed:
Some homes may have open plan kitchens and there are likely to be times when children will need to access kitchen and cooking facilities to take part in supervised activities, such as cooking and food preparation.
Some injuries, illnesses and accidents must be notified to specified agencies under separate legislation. Services should familiarise themselves with their wider obligations to notify these agencies.
Some issues to consider are:
Some local councils also run school buses in urban areas.
Some of the key actions we are continuing are
Some of the key actions we have started are
Some of the key actions we will start are:
Some of the proposed changes in ETAB include:
Some of these decisionmaking processes will take longer than others. This means that some materials delivered to the ministers may be about items that stay under active consideration and take longer for us to share.
Some of these will be more formal as in the case of regular monthly meetings and others will be less formal as in meeting over a shared meal or coffee. As well, you may want to display information on notice boards or use surveys and questionnaires to gain information.
Some older children may be nonverbal, what appropriate strategies and teaching practices do we have to support them to make choices within our curriculum
Some other organisations may supply a Police vet as part of safety checking a childrens worker. This may be tertiary training providers and relief teacher agencies.
Some overseas teachers may be able to have teaching experience recognised as a qualification. The Teaching Council has more information.
Some playgroups may choose to provide an infant specific area. Talk to your regional education advisor about different ways to do this.
Some playgroups may have more specific purposes like promoting language and cultural values.
Some playgroups use a newsletter or wall chart to encourage parents to follow these guidelines and take responsibility.
Some practical examples are:
Some practical options are:
Some reporting areas of general purpose financial statements and special purpose audit reports can be consolidated for services that are grouped into a service provider for funding purposes.
Some schools and kura have enrolment schemes. This means only students who live in a specific area around the school are guaranteed a place.
Some schools have enrolment schemes. Only students who live in a specific area around the school are guaranteed a place.
Some schools organise their own school buses. They may have their own rules for how their service work.
Some service operators find bleach unpleasant to work with and seek out alternative products. If you or your cleaning provider wish to use an alternative disinfectant, you must have scientific evidence (from the manufacturer) that it is effective for its intended purpose.
Some services are in lowlying coastal areas and therefore would be required to evacuate if there was a tsunami warning. Some of these services may have an evacuation procedure that requires the use of vehicles to get as many children as possible to high ground quickly. It is not expected that these services practice the tsunami drill to the full extent by overloading vehicles with children and travelling to the designated safe space as this is illegal in normal circumstances and poses unnecessary risk to children. These services should still practice their tsunami drill and include children as far as practicably possible, for example, drill may include a process that facilitates the movement of children to the proposed exit point as quickly as possible in preparation for getting children into planned evacuation vehicles.
Some services are in lowlying coastal areas and therefore would be required to evacuate if there was a tsunami warning. Some of these services may have an evacuation procedure that requires the use of vehicles to get children to high ground as quickly as possible. It is not expected that these services practice the tsunami drill to the full extent by loading vehicles with children and travelling to the designated safe space as this may pose unnecessary risk to children. These services should still practice their tsunami drill and include children as far as practicably possible, for example, drill may include a process that facilitates the movement of children to the proposed exit point as quickly as possible in preparation for getting children into planned evacuation vehicles.
Some services have a particular language and cultural focus. For example,
Some services use a device such as a traffic light that indicates when noise volumes are too high, and children can be reminded to lower the noise levels.
Some support is available for children with
Some systems have RBAC groups or templates that can be created to make assigning permissions easier.
Some things that your group will need to consider:
Some universities have entry pathways specifically for homeschooled students.
Sometimes applications are unsuccessful. If that happens, you will receive a letter from us. You can then contact us to discuss your application further.
Sometimes centresservices use relief teachers to cover shortterm staff absences. These people must be safety checked.
Sometimes changes are made by the Minister of Education or us to manage growth or decline in state schools or
Sometimes children at the centre will need to have all or part of their bodies washed. This might be necessary, for example:
Sometimes children at the home will need to have all or part of their bodies washed. This might be necessary, for example:
Sometimes it might be the staff that notice something first. If they notice any hearing, vision or other health issues, they may suggest that you take your child for a Well Child check.
Sometimes students who arent eligible can use the school bus if the transport provider allows it. Criteria need to be met for this to happen. These students may have to pay a fare.
Sometimes there can be value in observing a child and educator away from the home setting, for example at playgroups. However, services must note the following conditions:
Sometimes we need to keep the identity of a complainant confidential. We will contact the complainant to let them know if we are investigating.
Sometimes, first aid training is difficult to access for new educators working for a licensed homebased service provider. This could be because they are geographically isolated or an unexpected event means they cannot get to planned training. This does not apply to existing educators who are renewing their first aid qualification.
Sometimes, some or all of the B School Check may take place at the early learning service.
Sometimes, your child may be in a group of children of a similar age. In others, they will be with a mix of ages.
Sorry, my color on my screens just got funny.
Sorry. Yeah, so the, um, for the student attending,
Sound of Ministry of Education jingle in the background.
South Canterbury Free Kindergarten Association
South Otago Free Kindergarten Association Incorporated
Southbase Construction Limited.
Southern Cross Cultural Exchange
Southern Cross Educational Enterprises
Southland Free Kindergarten Association
Space is available for children aged and older to sleep or rest for a reasonable period of time each day. If the space used for sleeping or resting is part of the activity space, there are alternative activity spaces for children not sleeping or resting as necessary.
Space is available for children aged and older to sleep or rest for a reasonable period of time each day. If the space used for sleeping or resting is part of the activity space, there are alternative activity spaces for other children not sleeping or resting as necessary.
Speak first to the schools principal, then to the school board.
Special activities for infants might include:
Special activities for toddlers
Special character school does not mean singlesex schools or schools that offer specific sports or other programmes that your child may want to attend.
Special character schools
Special edition School and Early Learning Bulletins were sent on Friday May .
Special purpose financial report
Special purpose financial statements
Special requests or needs
Specialised School Transport Assistance (SESTA)
Specialist equipment funding
Specific considerations should include the following:
Specific sounds or the absence of them may signify reason for concern and alert an educator to signs of potential danger.
Specifically, any child who becomes unwell while attending the service or receiving outofschool care is kept at a safe distance from other children (to minimise the spread of infection) and returned to the care of a parent or other person authorised to collect the child without delay.
Speech intelligibility, disturbance of information extraction, message communication
Sponsors have greater flexibility in teaching, curriculum, governance, hours and days of operation, and funding, with the aim of achieving greater innovation in learning.
Spraying and wiping cots, beds and mattresses with a suitable cleaning agent is needed before storage.
Spread through different routes including coughing, sneezing, faecaloral route
Staff (either paid or unpaid) who are only on the premises or involved in administration do not count towards eligibility.
Staff and volunteers should be able to confidently and knowledgeably:
Staff employed or engaged in the service, in conjunction with the appraiser, identify specific and measurable goals, and progress towards achieving these is monitored through documented observations, conversations and ongoing feedback.
Staff enrolled in a course of study that will result in a recognised ECE teaching qualification within months
Staff must get their first aid qualification from a training provider accredited by the New Zealand Qualifications Authority (NZQA).
Staff protection and child protection policies need to be kept in mind.
Staff record requirements
Staff record verification sheet template
Staff required for your service to meet the minimum regulatory requirements for staff:child ratios.
Staff should know who the person responsible is at any one time and be able to provide this information to parents on request
Staff space does not have to be located within the licensed premises, but it does need to be situated nearby.
Staff start and end dates in role at service.
Staff start and end dates working at service.
Staff will call an ambulance if an injury is serious.
Staff will want to know all about your child. This will be both practical information like sleep routines, food preferences, allergies and whether they are toilet trained, but also more personal things like their interests and how they like being comforted.
Staffeducators should be able to confidently:
Staffing schedules support the smooth operation of an ECE service.
Staffing transfer agreements
Stakeholder research informing the Cabinet Paper and Work Programme (October )
Standdowns, suspensions, exclusions and expulsions from school
Start and end of enrolment.
Start and end of service temporary closure.
Start by reminding yourself about what it is you are trying to achieve (go back to
Start no later than Saturday December and run for or weeks (from schools closing until opening of school the following year).
Start no later than Saturday December and run for or weeks (from schools closing until opening of school the following year).
Start with an informal discussion
Starting an early learning service
Starting in early learning
Starting school as part of a group has lots of benefits for children. They often feel less anxious and settle more quickly when they start together with other new children.
Starts between Monday January and Monday February and ends Thursday April ( half days).
Starts between Monday January and Friday February and ends Friday April ( half days).
Starts between Monday January and Wednesday February and ends Friday April ( half days).
State and stateintegrated schools and kura can choose to start and end their school year between these dates:
State and stateintegrated schools and kura must close on:
State and stateintegrated schools began using a different set of attendance codes from Term .
State schools are governmentowned and funded.
State schools that have an enrolment scheme must follow an outofzone preenrolment process.
State, stateintegrated and private schools
State, stateintegrated, schools and
Stateintegrated schools annual financial statements guidance
Stateintegrated schools are schools that have a special character. They generally have a philosophical or religious belief as part of their school programme. If your child attends one of these, it must be the closest school of its type for them to qualify for transport assistance. For example, the closest Catholic school if Catholic education is chosen.
Stateintegrated schools are schools with a special character. They are funded by the government and teach the national curriculum. They have their own sets of aims and objectives to reflect their own particular values and are set within a specific philosophy or religion. You will pay compulsory attendance dues.
Stateintegrated schools have to make specific disclosures in their financial statements. Read our guidance for the details.
Statement of KiwiSport funding.
Statement of National Education and Learning Priorities (NELP)
Statement of National Education and Learning Priorities
Statement of accounting policies
Statement of changes in net assetsequity.
Statement of compliance with employment policy.
Statement of comprehensive revenue and expense.
Statement of financial performance (profit and loss account)
Statement of financial position (balance sheet)
Statement of financial position.
Statement of movement in equity
Statement of responsibility signed and dated.
Statistics New Zealands Data Explorer includes census information, ethnicity and age.
Step : Parity funding rates. Band determined by the services certificated ratio.
Step : Base funding rates. Band determined by the services certificated ratio.
Step : Daily certificated teacher hours
Step : Sessional example
Step : Daily other teacher hours
Step : Sessional example
Step : Monthly certificated teacher hours
Step : Monthly other teacher hours
Step : Complete the rest of the RS return
Stepped Attendance Response STAR
Stepped attendance response (STAR)
Stepped attendance response STAR
Steps for setting up services, useful website links, and other handy resources are available to all groups on the Ministry website. For information about the Early Learning Information System (ELI) or the electronic submission of RS returns, please visit Early Learning Information or contact your Ministry regional office for further details.
Stomach pain, fever, nausea, diarrhoea andor vomiting
Storage space is needed for the variety of indoor and outdoor equipment and resources that are required.
Strategic plans are best developed in consultation with all stakeholders, for example
Strategic plans are best developed in consultation with all stakeholders, for example parents
Strategic plans should be regularly reviewed and modified. Progress could be recorded, perhaps on the bottom or back of the annual plan
Strategic plans should be regularly reviewed and modified. Progress could be recorded, perhaps on the bottom or back of the annual plan.
Strategies, policies and programmes
Strengthening Freedom of Speech in New Zealands Universities
Strengthening Transmission and Maintenance
Strengthening expectations for school attendance
Strengthening initiatives to make learning environments in schools safe and inclusive.
Stretcher fabric must be taut and its wear monitored to ensure the stretcher does not sag with use over time.
Stretchers and mattresses
Strike notification period in the Education and Training Act
Strong passwords are often your first line of defence against an unauthorised person gaining access to your system.
Strong relationships are formed between children and educators due to low turnover of staff.
Structure of equity funding
Structures and fences should:
Student Exchange Australia New Zealand
Student attendance: Guide for schools and kura
Students are expected to comply with the code of conduct of the transport service provider.
Students are not eligible for SESTA if they are:
Students can only receive allowance at a time. They must meet specific criteria to qualify.
Students must live at least .km (Years ) or .km (Years ) from their school or kura. For accuracy and consistency, we use the mapping software ArcGIS to measure the distance over the shortest public road or pedestrian route from the home roadside gate to the school or kura front gate.
Students must meet all of the following criteria to be considered for the Access Barrier Allowance:
Students must meet all three eligibility criteria to get school transport assistance.
Students should be at school all the time unless they are sick
Students studying in New Zealand in an approved exchange programme are considered domestic students for funding purposes. You cannot charge them fees.
Students who are unsuccessful are put on a waiting list in the order they were drawn in the ballot. They may be offered a place if it becomes available later in the year. The waiting list remains until the school holds its next ballot.
Study International Service New Zealand
Submit a completed application form to us.
Submit completed achievement challenges to your Director of Education for endorsement. Endorsement enables a Community of Learning to access the full range of resources available to them to support the important job of tackling the challenges.
Submit the EC HB to the Ministry regional office at the end of the calendar month.
Submit your annual report to us using the School Planning and Reporting Application. Guidance is available within the application.
Submit your planning and reporting documents to us using the School Planning and Reporting Application. Guidance is available within the application.
Submitting an annual report
Submitting your documents to us
Substantial collation or research is required to make the information available: section
Substitute days and hours
Substitute days and hours:
Successful teaching incentives have encouraged more people into teaching. These incentives prioritise training in specific shortage areas. In addition, overseas recruitment campaigns have been successful in attracting teachers, particularly secondary teachers in subject shortage areas.
Such conditions may include, but are not limited to:
Sudden onset of fever with cough, sore throat, muscular aches and a headache
Suggested headings for job description
Suitable human resource management practices are implemented.
Sun protection. Rain wear if needed.
Supervising adults hold one of the following combinations of training:
Supervising children using computers at the service is essential. If a centre has access to the internet (either for use with the children or in the office) consider password protection and the use of parental locks.
Supervising children using computers or iPads at your playgroup is essential. If your playgroup has access to the internet (either for use with the children or in an office) you should consider password protection and the use of parental locks.
Supervising children using computers or other electronic devices (tablets, iPads and so on) in the home is essential. If the home has access to the internet (either for use with the children or in another room) password protection and the use of parental locks should be considered.
Supervision arrangements.
Supervision is an essential component of hazard and risk management in a playgroup. Supervision must be active and focussed.
Supervision is an essential component of hazard and risk management in a service. Supervision must be active and focused.
Supervision is an essential component of hazard and risk management in a service. Supervision must be active and focussed.
Supervision is an important element in ensuring children are safe while attending the centre. The physical environment in centres needs to be designed and laid out so effective supervision is easy.
Supervision is not just watching the children. It requires focused and intentional observation of children.
Supervision is paramount in ensuring children are safe while attending the service.
Supervision of children in kitchens
Supervision on excursions
Supervision plan should include:
Supervision requirements: ECE funding handbook
Supplier performance review
Suppliers and consultants engaged on school property projects may need performance reviews.
Support CommunityLed Action for Language Revitalisation and Maintenance
Support Grant for Provisionally Registered Teachers
Support for disabled children
Support for families who homeschool
Support for individual children
Support for kids who are Deaf or hard of hearing
Support for the Education Sector
Support grant for provisionally registered teachers (removed April ):
Support staff in a team supporting a student with restraint as part of their support plan must also complete the online module.
Support with education for children who are Deaf or hard of hearing
Support works across the system to tailor an approach depending on the needs of the child.
Support your childs wellbeing and mental health
Supporting Pacific Languages in Education will also make a significant contribution to the overall health of these languages, the vision of the
Supporting Pacific families through the Talanoa Ako programme.
Supporting resources have been developed to help schools to embed the STAR in their practice.
Supporting teachers to assess and share childrens early learning progress
Supporting volunteersparent helpers
Supporting your child if they need extra help with their learning
Supporting your child through big milestones
Sure, mark. I was just saying weve got the first question
Surfaces need to be constructed from or sealed with moistureimpervious materials and designed in a way that minimises a buildup of dirt, food particles and bacteria, for example in corners and joins. Check surfaces regularly for signs of wear and tear, chips, scratches, loose tiles, cracked grout or worn sealant. Any of these can allow moisture to penetrate the surface and make the surface difficult to keep hygienic.
Surfaces need to be constructed from or sealed with moistureimpervious materials and designed in a way that minimises a buildup of dirt, food particles and bacteria, for example, in corners and joins. Check surfaces regularly for signs of wear and tear, chips, scratches, loose tiles, cracked grout or worn sealant. Any of these can allow moisture to penetrate the surface and make the surface difficult to keep hygienic.
Table : Rates for all day teacherled homebased ECE services from January .
Table : Rates for playcentres from January .
Table : Rates for certificated playgroups and licence exempt services from July .
Table : Equity Funding rates for eligible services from January .
Table : Targeted funding for disadvantage rate for eligible services from March .
Table : Parity funding rates for allday education and care services and hospitalbased services from January .
Table : Extended parity funding rates for allday education and care services and hospitalbased services from January .
Table : Full parity funding rates for allday education and care services and hospitalbased services from November .
Table : Base funding rates for sessional education and care services and hospitalbased services from January .
Table : Parity funding rates for sessional education and care services and hospitalbased services from January .
Table : Extended parity funding rates for sessional education and care services and hospitalbased services from January .
Table : Full parity funding rates for sessional education and care services and hospitalbased services from November .
Table : Funding rates for all day and sessional Kindergartens from January .
Table surfaces can generally be made hygienic by spraying with a diluted bleach solution (see the guidance for HS Premises and contents are safe and hygienic) and then being wiped dry before use. If there is concern table surfaces are not able to be made completely hygienic through wiping, washable covers can be used as a barrier between the table and food. Covers are also a good way of showing children that the table is now an eating place rather than an activity place.
Table surfaces can generally be made hygienic by spraying with a diluted bleach solution and then being wiped dry before use. See the guidance for HS Premises and contents are safe and hygienic.
Tailored teaching approaches To support teachers,
Take part in the consultation for the draft English Years to curriculum content.
Take the time to review the written description and maps of the proposed zones. You can share your feedback by answering the questions in this online survey.
Take things further if you want
Talk about it and make a policy
Talk about the procedures without needing to refer to any documentation.
Talk to the learning support person who works with you or ask to speak to their manager.
Talk to the school if you have concerns about bullying. This could be your childs classroom teacher or someone like a dean or the school principal. Tell them what you have heard from your child. You could also ask:
Talk to your childs early learning service for information about how they organise their days and what activities they have.
Talk to your childs teachers or healthcare provider
Talk to your early learning centre about any courses they offer, or that they know are available in the community.
Talk to your education advisor about the best way to do this in your playgroup.
Talk to your school about start dates
Talk to your school to find out what is available and if your child is eligible.
Talk to your school to see if there is a local school bus service they can use. You can also ask if they are eligible for the nonSESTA Conveyance Allowance. This is financial support for children who live far from their closest school and transport options.
Talk with regional Ministry of Education playgroup certification staff and Fire and Emergency New Zealand personnel about the best options for your particular situation.
Talk with your regional education advisor about the best way to manage nappy changing at your playgroup.
Talking points for Cabinet for Social Wellbeing Committee (EN)
Talking together Learning in the home
Taranaki Free Kindergarten Association Incorporated
Targeted Funding cannot be used for general operating expenses or profit.
Targeted Funding for Disadvantage
Targeted Funding for Disadvantage (Targeted Funding) is a specific funding mechanism for ECE services and
Targeted Funding is a targeted funding mechanism for all licensed early learning services. Targeted Funding is paid to eligible early learning services in addition to the ECE Funding Subsidy, Hours ECE and Equity Funding.
Targeted Funding is paid to eligible early learning services in addition to the ECE Funding Subsidy, Hours ECE and Equity Funding.
Targeted Funding is paid to eligible early learning services in addition to the ECE Funding subsidy, Hours ECE and Equity Funding.
Targeted Funding must be spent on those early learning services that the Targeted Funding entitlement.
Targeted Hours are the estimated number of Funded Child Hours attended by children considered to be from disadvantaged backgrounds.
Targeted funding for disadvantage
Targeted funding includes:
Targeting learning support for better achievement
Targeting learning support for better student achievement
Tari o te Kaitiaki Mana Tangata
Tauranga Regional Free Kindergarten Association Incorporated
Taxis and shuttles have different legislated requirements for child restraints. Children travelling in taxis should be restrained as if they were in a private car or van.
Taxis and shuttles have different legislative requirements for child restraints. Ensure children travelling in taxis are restrained as if they were in a private car or van.
Te Aho o Te Kura Pounamu (Te Kura
Te Aho o Te Kura Pounamu (Te Kura)
Te Aroha Free Kindergarten Association
Te Hurihanganui (m announced in Budget ). This kaupapa reboots and expands Te Kotahitanga and is being rolled out over six communities.
Te Koranikaeti ni Mwakuri ibukin Reireia Kaain te Betebeke
Te Kura Rau Iti and Te Uho o Te Nikau
Te Rautaki Rawa Kura
Te Rautaki Rawa Kura: The School Property Strategy
Te taetae ki te kura me te whakaurunga
Te whakahaere i te Hauora me te Haumaru
Te whakapiki i te taetaenga ki te kura
Teacher Salaries Grants Revenue is set off against Learning Resources.
Teacher education lecturers and community education tutors providing service in a teaching position while the teacher held a teaching certificate.
Teacher only days are not funded.
Teacher registration and certification ensures the quality of teachers. Newly graduated provisionally certificated teachers must be supervised and supported through an advice and guidance programme once they begin teaching in an ECE service.
Teacher training scholarship
Teacherled centres need a certain number of qualified teachers for the number of children enrolled. Some centres choose to have more adults and more teachers per child. This may impact your choice of early learning centre.
Teacherled education and care service
Teacherled education and care services: B
Teacherled homebased ECE services
Teacherled services (including homebased, education and care, and hospitalbased services).
Teacherled services must also keep other records listed in the table below. Homebased services have other additional requirements, depending on whether they are funded at the standard rate or the quality rate.
Teacherled services operating on a notional roll must keep staff records, and enter the staff hour count in the usual way, calculating regulated (ratio) staff hours based on the children who actually attend.
Teacherled services: Chapter
Teacherspecific staffing allowances
Teachers and any authorised supporting staff members working with a student who has restraint in their support plan must do both the online module and physical holds and releases training. This training accessed through your
Teachers and principals who are bus controllers must complete the NOVOt form. Send this to Education Payroll at the end of each term.
Teachers are to be assessed on the highest qualification held.
Teachers can work with you to get more help for your child if it is needed. They can explain aspects of the school processes and expectations. Some schools have special learning or support coordinators that your childs teacher can refer them to. Most secondary schools have onsite counsellors.
Teachers need to be able to access the SMS, their own folders, and perhaps other folders to support their colleagues, but they dont need access to the financial system.
Teachers often have strategies or approaches they will try within the classroom that you can also support at home. Making a plan together is a good place to start.
Teachers who improve their relevant qualification(s), where their current salary rate is lower than the entry step for the new (improved) relevant qualification group, should be placed on the higher applicable entry step from the effective of improving their relevant qualification(s).
Teaching Council Disciplinary and Competence Processes Proposal
Teaching Council certification details.
Teaching language percentages at service.
Teaching languages at service.
Technical Support for ESL and the School Planning and Reporting Application is available from the Education Service Desk.
Technical guidance for information technology (IT leads) on how to implement the right levels of access for users, also known as the principle of least privilege.
Technology class staffing and transport for Years and
Telling you about these reasons ensures we are fulfilling our obligation under the Act to provide a reason for the refusal. This is specified under section of the Act.
Temperature in ECE activity rooms used by children
Temperature in rooms used by children
Tempering Valve A tempering valve is a safety device fitted by a plumber designed to provide water to taps at a consistently controlled temperature. It works by mixing hot and cold water between the hot water source and the outlet.
Template for assessing pay parity steps
Templates of review plans and frameworks that can be used as guides for review are also included in the appendices. A glossary and references follow at the back.
Temporary fencing forms may be appropriate if erection is stable and secure so that a child is unable to climb over or through the barrier or push the barrier over.
Tender made approximately of individual routes available to allow smaller regional suppliers to compete for routes.
Tender was for larger transport providers and offered all remaining routes in groups.
Term can start between Auckland Anniversary Day (the Monday closest to January) and the day after Waitangi Day ( February).
Term must end no later than December in any year.
Terms and holiday dates for state schools and kura and stateintegrated schools to support school boards, administrators, principals and parentscaregivers to plan their calendars.
Terms, holidays and cohort entry dates
Tertiary Education Commission
Tertiary Education Commission (TEC)
Tertiary Education Strategy
Tertiary and further education
Tertiary education providers
Tertiary education providers can access the NSI system if they:
Tessa continued to push the buggy outside and back in over and over and over again. She invested a huge amount of effort and energy in the straight push, the half lift and the squatting push over and over again. Eventually she rocked the buggy in frustration and as she pushed down on the handle the front wheels lifted and it slid inside. Success at last
Text on screen: Kiwi Park Training Module
Text on screen: Lifting aspiration and educational achievement for every New Zealander.
Th procurement officer has the primary responsibility for managing and administering the procurement. They draft all procurement documents.
Thank you for your participation in shaping the future of education in your community.
Thank you very much. Um, okay, lets crack into it.
Thank you. And Donnas also asked, how long do you keep it
Thank you. And weve got a question in
Thank you. Weve got a question from Anna in the chat.
That has been a workaround that the sector have
That is a great question.
Thats definitely what I learned when I spoke
Thats great. Thanks, mark.
Thats the mailbox at the bottom of that slide.
Thats, uh, uh, not a ministry, um, decision,
The Teaching the Basics Brilliantly work programme will lift student outcomes with a coherent, wholeofpathway approach to assessment and aromatawai. This includes work underway on a new assessment and aromatawai tool for Years to , expected to be ready for use in Term , , and the introduction of Phonics Checks and Hihira Weteoro for children in Years to .
The main absence rules are:
The regulations require you to develop and display a statement of philosophy. It needs to be easy to understand by everyone involved in your service and clearly displayed.
The refresh of the plan includes:
The year vision and the education objectives form the core of our overall approach to education:
The ATIS is calculated annually in arrears. Payment is made each year with the July ECE Funding Subsidy payment.
The ATIS is intended as a topup for the specified service only. Isolated services that are grouped under one service provider may choose to combine several ATIS payments if this better ensures their sustainability.
The ATIS is paid annually in arrears with the July funding payment.
The ATIS is separate from the Isolation component of Equity Funding.
The Access Barrier Allowance is , per year.
The Access Barrier Allowance is for students who live too far from their nearest state or stateintegrated school or
The Action Plan was launched in July and set out the Government actions we had committed to in . We committed to regularly monitor and report on the progress of the Action Plan and to regularly update the Government actions in the Action Plan to make sure that we capture all the work Government is doing.
The Annual TopUp for Isolated Services (ATIS) assists small licensed services in isolated areas to maintain access to ECE.
The Annual topup for Isolated Services (ATIS) is an income topup for small licensed ECE services in isolated areas.
The Associate Minister of Education has announced an action plan for attendance. The plan is an evolving set of initiatives that work together and support existing efforts to lift school attendance.
The B School Check is the last Well Child
The Bill also creates a new power for regulations to be made about Attendance Management Plans. This allows regulations to make detailed requirements for Attendance Management Plans. The regulations will be able to:
The Bill amends section of the Act on school board objectives with a new section that makes educational achievement the paramount (highest priority) objective.
The Bill changes the wording of section of the Act from:
The Bill changes the wording of section of the Act from:
The Bill removes section from the Act, which:
The Bill strengthens Initial Teacher Education (ITE) through greater government oversight of the Teaching Council. The Teaching Council is the regulatory body who sets standards for ITE and approves ITE programmes.
The Childrens Act specifies who needs to be safety checked. You can read this in Section of the Childrens Act .
The Childrens Act specifies who needs to be safety checked. You can read this in section of the Childrens Act .
The Code Compliance Certificate may include an occupancy load. This is the number of people who can be in the building at any one time and includes adults and children.
The Code of Health and Disability Services Consumers Rights
The Daily Bus Conveyance allowance is a contribution to help with the cost of getting your eligible child to school or the nearest bus route. We pay it to you quarterly after your school sends us the enrolment report at the end of term. The conveyance allowance is not paid on fixed dates so the you receive your payment will vary.
The EC Form is available from your Ministry regional office, or from the Resourcing Division Contact Centre on
The EC Form (Section removed and replaced with in April ):
The EC Transitional advance form:
The ECE Census (also known as the ECE Return).
The ECE Census collects information about the operations of an early childhood service during a particular week. This information contributes to a comprehensive information base on early childhood education (ECE) in New Zealand and is used by the Ministry to monitor and forecast ECE expenditure and design new policies.
The ECE Funding Handbook explains how to keep proper records of staff qualifications.
The ECE Funding Handbook has more information about record keeping requirements.
The ECE Funding Handbook has the funding rates for each of these salary scales.
The ECE Funding Handbook sets out how we fund licensed early learning services.
The ECE Funding Subsidy (and the Plus ECE) rates are the same. These rates are intended to subsidise the cost of providing ECE and to share the costs between government and parents.
The ECE Funding Subsidy is GST inclusive.
The ECE Funding Subsidy is the primary form of government funding for licensed ECE services.
The ECE Funding Subsidy is the primary form of government funding for licensed early childhood education (ECE) services.
The ECE Funding Subsidy must only be claimed for children less than years of age who are not enrolled in school.
The ECE Funding Subsidy rates are determined by service type because the costs and requirements faced by different service types vary.
The ECE activity room needs to be designed and laid out so the physical environment supports the way the curriculum can be provided. Activity spaces need to be configured to allow for a range of learning experiences, as well as meeting the minimum space per child requirement.
The EEL is collected using:
The EEL is used to fund the administration of the international aspects of the:
The EEL rate for UIPs is . of the tuition received from international students, per trimester.
The ENROL guide has information for schools about managing the enrolments of both inbound and outbound students.
The ERC will inspect the damage and arrange any urgent work to be done in order to make the site safe and get the school functioning as quickly as possible. The following information lists the contacts for the ERC in your area.
The Early Childhood Education (ECE) Food Programme provides daily food for children aged to at eligible early learning services.
The Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations (regulation () (d)) require a person responsible to supervise children, or the staff by whom the children are supervised, at all times.
The Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations (schedule ) set out how many children can attend with certain numbers of adults (adult to child ratio).
The Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations also require there to be at least staff member for every children at the centre (at all times children are attending) who either holds a current first aid certificate, is a registered medical practitioner, is a nurse with a current practising certificate, or is a qualified ambulance officer or paramedic.
The Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations set out the conditions and duration of provisional licences:
The Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations set out the reasons we can suspend a licence.
The Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations set out when we can cancel a licence.
The Education (Physical Restraint) rules set out the specific actions schools need to take to reduce student distress and minimise physical restraint. These include developing policies and procedures, staff training, and compulsory reporting.
The Education (Registration of Early Childhood Services Teachers) Regulations require, in teacherled services, the person acting as person responsible to be a registered teacher.
The Education (School Staffing) Order in Council sets entitlements for staffing state schools and kura each year.
The Education Counts website provides useful research, data and statistics, including:
The Education Review Office (ERO) regularly reports on the quality of licensed early learning services. You can read the reports to help you choose.
The Education Review Office (ERO) reviews and reports publicly on the quality of education in all New Zealand schools and early childhood education services.
The Education Review Office is developing a Pacific Bilingual and Immersion Education Quality Framework to provide clear and consistent guidance on best practice pedagogy to early learning services and schools. This will become the basis for its review of relevant services and schools.
The Education Review Office produced a report on service philosophy statements that may be of use when developing a philosophy statement.
The Education and Training Act
The Education and Training Act and the Teaching Council Rules outline the criteria for reporting serious misconduct and may assist in defining serious misconduct in your service.
The Education and Training Act applies to all early learning services in New Zealand.
The Education and Training Act enables the Minister of Education to issue a Statement of National Education and Learning Priorities (NELP).
The Education and Training Act outlines our responsibilities for home educated children and young people.
The Education and Training Act states that an employer must provide a mandatory report to the Teaching Council of
The Employment New Zealand website carries a range of resources and tools for employers covering disciplinary processes and dismissal.
The Equity Index is reviewed each year. Sometimes this means schools and
The Example annual plan is a starting point for how services can arrange key tasks in an annual plan.
The Export Education Levy
The Export Education Levy for schools
The Export Education Levy for tertiary providers
The External Reporting Board (XRB) has responsibility for setting these standards. Information on the audit and assurance standards can be found here.
The Fair Pay Agreement legislation means minimum pay standards can be negotiated and agreed for a whole sector or industry. NZEI Te Rui Roa will be using it to legally embed pay parity and better working conditions for ECE
The Family Violence Act covers us and:
The Family services directory has information on family support organisations in New Zealand.
The Frequent Absence Rule (examples):
The Frequent Absence Rule
The Frequent Absence Rule examples
The Frequent Absence Rule ensures that enrolment agreements match attendance patterns as closely as possible, so that funding can be delivered fairly and accurately.
The Frequent Absence Rule helps services identify absence patterns that suggest a change in enrolment may be needed. By keeping enrolment agreements upto, services can ensure that their funding is calculated accurately.
The Frequent Absence Rule must be applied in these situations:
The Frequent Absence Rule must be continued from the next full month of operation after the period of nonoperation.
The Frequent Absence Rule:
The Funding Rate Table shows the funding rates for each type of service. A copy of the table is included with this Handbook (Appendix ).
The Funding Rate Table will be with any change in funding rates.
The Government has introduced a Bill to amend the Education and Training Act (the Act) and related secondary legislation to make several changes in schools and tertiary education.
The Government is also backing New Zealands teaching workforce by funding teacher registrations and practising certificates, acknowledging the vital role educators play in driving positive change in classrooms.
The Government is developing a work programme to strengthen learning support so that the education system meets the needs of all learners and their families.
The Government subsidises all
The Health and Safety at Work Act (HSWA) requires you to notify WorkSafe of fatalities, serious injuries and illnesses that happen to workers and others as a result of work. WorkSafe has detailed information about making a notification. For early learning services, others includes children, parents and visitors.
The Holidays Act was set up to promote worklife balance for employees. It sets out how employers should pay staff for annual holidays, public holidays, sick leave and bereavement leave.
The Human Rights Commission website provides information about equal opportunities, Including a discrimination and complaints guide.
The ICT contractors panel is a list of ICT contractors approved by us to work on the following school projects:
The Incredible Years Autism
The Incredible Years Autism programmes are part of a range of supports that the Ministry provides for children and young people on the autism spectrum.
The International Student Fee (also known as the International Student Levy) is charged to state and stateintegrated schools with enrolled international feepaying students. The fee is intended to reimburse the Crown for costs associated to feepaying international students in schools. It is deducted from the schools quarterly operational grants on a perstudent basis.
The Kindergarten Teachers, Head Teachers and Senior Teachers Collective Agreement (KTCA) is an agreement negotiated by members of the New Zealand Education Institute (NZEI)
The Kiwi Park cash flow model has a number of preset formulas to adjust for financial transactions that have not passed through the schools bank accounts.
The Learning Support system is being redesigned so it is needs based, equitable, efficient and consistent in its provision.
The Maths PLD supports your use of the maths resources by focusing on implementing the learning area and developing programmes in your schools.
The Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) complies with the Education and Training Act, Privacy Act and Official Information Act.
The Mental Health Foundation has a list of helplines if you need to talk to someone now.
The Minister of Education has granted schools permission to close for additional halfdays in for curriculum focused professional learning and development (PLD). These days do not need to be made up.
The Minister of Education has outlined priorities to improve the education system.
The Minister of Education has specified the circumstances boards can close their schools during Term time.
The Ministers of Education receive a wide range of advice from us when they make decisions across the education sector.
The Ministry also has planning guidance and a quick checklist for your overall emergency management plan.
The Ministry and WorkSafe have produced a flowchart to show what you need to do when there is a notifiable event at your service.
The Ministry and schools must engage property project or programme managers from the property project and management (PPPM) panel.
The Ministry calculates that the percentage of Certificated Teacher Hours for June September for Kowhai Street Childcare Centre was .
The Ministry can approve funding on a notional roll in recognition of the special function of the service.
The Ministry can provide information to help groups set up early childhood education (ECE) services.
The Ministry does not accept any liability for the accuracy or content of information on this website belonging to third parties, nor for the accuracy or content of any thirdparty website that you may access via a hyperlink from this site.
The Ministry does not fund public holidays in advance.
The Ministry does not provide guidance for the
The Ministry for Primary Industries
The Ministry for Regulation its final report.
The Ministry has identified four areas for spending:
The Ministry has prepared flow charts which explain the checks that must be completed on adults in specific roles.
The Ministry is seeking to learn from schools about what works best so the STAR and supporting resources continue to be improved.
The Ministry is wanting to work over the next year with education services to develop a tool and associated supports. Currently, there is extensive information broadly on language planning on
The Ministry makes an advance payment to the new service on the next available payment .
The Ministry makes an advance payment to the service on the next available major payment .
The Ministry may choose to follow, like or otherwise establish connections with others on social media.
The Ministry may offset against all or any funding or other sums of money payable by the Ministry to the service provider, any debt or other sum payable to the Ministry by that Service Provider.
The Ministry may, subject to any conditions and for any period, determine that no funding is payable either in full or in part for any service(s) where:
The Ministry multiplies the average number of each FCHs per day by the number of days the service expects to be open over the coming months.
The Ministry must be informed of changes to a service (or service provider) bank account using this form.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment provides comprehensive advice for employers through its Employment New Zealand website. This gives you access to such tools such as an employment agreement builder and a holiday and leave calculator, and resources including:
The Ministry of Education also has a range of pamphlets available for parents.
The Ministry of Education and partner agencies will use a range of levers across early learning, schooling and tertiary education to support the growth of Pacific Languages in Education. Some of these levers have already been established, while some are still under development. We will work with Pacific communities to support their leadership of Pacific Languages in Education.
The Ministry of Education cant give you this permission.
The Ministry of Education collects and stores a range of information through the ELI system and via paperbased forms. This includes information on enrolled children, teaching and nonteaching staff, as well as some general information on licensed early childhood services.
The Ministry of Education collects information annually from all playgroups about hours of operation, and age, ethnicity and gender of children attending. This annual statistics form (RSPG) is sent out to playgroups in June each year. Accurate enrolment and attendance records will make it easier to complete this form.
The Ministry of Education has developed an enrolment scheme for Te Kura Rau Iti to define its school zone. We encourage you to review the details of this proposed zone and provide your feedback.
The Ministry of Education is developing a work programme to deliver on this priority. Key features of this work programme include:
The Ministry of Education logo may not be used on your site without the Ministrys permission.
The Ministry of Education must also be notified of such incidents.
The Ministry of Education must also be notified of such incidents. See HS Incident notification to the Ministry of Education.
The Ministry of Education office nearest to your service.
The Ministry of Education recognises the Trust Board as the guardians of
The Ministry of Education resource Learning Environments for Playgroups has information on planning appropriate play activities to support the learning of the children in your group.
The Ministry of Education values your input and encourages you to review the proposed enrolment scheme for Te Kura Rau Iti and the proposed amendments to the neighbouring school zones. Your feedback will be carefully considered before a final decision is made on the enrolment schemes.
The Ministry of Education will measure progress and reporting to Pacific communities on a twoyearly basis through the Action Plan Progress Reports and the reporting on the Pacific Languages Strategy.
The Ministry of Education will regularly review the main costs of ECE provision to advise the Government about the changes in costs faced by ECE services.
The Ministry of Education would consider services to be in breach of this criteria if for example:
The Ministry of Education, alongside
The Ministry of Health does not recommend any particular cleaning product, as this depends on the purpose and use. However, hydrogen peroxide and bleach are both effective sanitisers and may be used for some purposes. Some cleaning and sanitising products are more or less effective on some bacteriavirusessoils and so on. The product being used must be effective and used in line with manufacturer guidance. Contact your local office of the public health service for sitespecific advice.
The Ministry of Health does not recommend any particular cleaning product, as this depends on the purpose and use. However, hydrogen peroxide and bleach are both effective sanitisers and may be used for some purposes. Some cleaning and sanitising products are more or less effective on some bacteriavirusessoils and so on. The product being used must be effective and used in line with manufacturer guidance. Contact your regional office of the public health service for sitespecific advice.
The Ministry of Health has produced a publication on infant formula.
The Ministry of Health have a number of publications on drinking water.
The Ministry of Health provide guidance which classifies foods based on their nutritional value with colour codes in the healthy food and drink guidance. The Ministry of Health have determined that healthy options (Green) should make up at least of foods and drinks served at early learning services. For children under years of age, all food and drink provided should be green.
The Ministry of Social Development, Work and Income provides a range of support for childcare costs, which include the Childcare Subsidy and Guaranteed Childcare Assistance Payment.
The Ministry places the service on a rate depending on its operating structure and percentage of Certificated Teacher Hours and its salary attestation for certificated teachers.
The Ministry regional office will approvenot approve funded emergency closure and confirm this to the service by letter.
The Ministry regional office will approvenot approve funded emergency closure and confirm to the service by letter.
The Ministry retains the right to reduce any advance funding calculated from an EC where it deems the claimed numbers on the EC to be overclaimed.
The Ministry retains the right to reduce any advance funding due to be paid to you where it deems the claimed numbers on the RS to be overestimated.
The Ministry retains the right to request proof and evidence to support the numbers claimed on the RS form.
The Ministry will accept up to discretionary hours per funding period (to maintain current rates of funding) when certificated relievers are not available, provided that the record keeping requirements described in this section are met.
The Ministry will calculate the proportion of Certificated Teacher Hours and determine the funding rate for your service.
The Ministry will fund the enrolled hours of permanently enrolled children who are absent up to certain limits. The limits are defined by absence rules the ThreeWeek Rule for Continuous Absence (Section ) and the Frequent Absence Rule (Sections and ) to be read along with Chapter .
The Ministry will not fund closures caused by these circumstances.
The Ministry will not prosecute parents of students who are absent because of chronic illness or health conditions associated with a disability, or who are genuinely engaging with a school and the supports offered.
The Ministry will not split payments between parties.
The Ministry will notify eligible early learning services of their Targeted Funding entitlement in February each year.
The Ministry will recover funding claimed for absences where there is no signed enrolment agreement for the child (see Section for further details on enrolment records).
The Ministry wishes to maintain a reasonable level of funding for children who will return to the service. A level of security in funding allows services to budget more effectively.
The Multiple Barriers Allowances are:
The Multiple Barriers Boarding Allowance is for students who are experiencing significant difficulties in their education, across multiple areas.
The NELP licensing criteria came into effect on January .
The NELP remains in effect for a period of five years unless it is earlier withdrawn or replaced by notice in the New Zealand Gazette.
The NELP sets out priorities for the early learning and schooling sectors. These priorities are joint with the TES. It also shows what Government is doing and sets out actions early learning services and schools and
The NELP shares priorities with the Tertiary Education Strategy (TES), which set the strategic direction and current and medium priorities for tertiary education in . It recognises that learners change and grow as they move through the education system and the education system needed to listen to them, adapt to their needs, and empower them to achieve their aspirations, whatever their age or stage of learning.
The NZ Heart Foundation has information on their free Healthy Heart Award programme which provides structure and guidance around all aspects of food and nutrition. This includes multilingual lunchbox resources, policies, sample menus and resources to engage
The NZQA website lists training providers who can assess the first aid unit standards we require you to have.
The National Certificate of Educational Achievement (NCEA) is the national senior secondary school qualification.
The National Emergency Management Agency and the Ministry of Education have produced a template that can be used for planning for a variety of emergencies (see HS Safe assembly areas, above).
The National Emergency Management Agency and the Ministry of Education have produced a template that can be used for planning for a variety of emergencies.
The New Zealand Government has some specific responsibilities and commitments to Pacific languages. The first
The New Zealand Police vetting service can check staff or volunteers who have lived in Australia.
The New Zealand Police website describes what a Police vet is and sets out the process.
The New Zealand Police website sets out the process for applying for a Police vet.
The New Zealand Qualifications Authority (NZQA) ensures that New Zealand qualifications are regarded as credible and robust, nationally and internationally.
The New Zealand Qualifications Authority (NZQA) has information about statutory actions for unsubmitted data and payments.
The New Zealand Qualifications Authority (NZQA) website has more information about sitting NCEA at a link school.
The New Zealand Qualifications Authority must assess any overseas qualifications as comparable to a NZ ECE or primary teaching qualification, before it can be recognised for funding purposes. The teacher must also be registered and certificated with the Teaching Council.
The New Zealand Standard for playground equipment and surfacing is NZS : Playground equipment and surfacing.
The Office of the AuditorGeneral has detailed examples of how conflicts of interest happen and provides tips on how to manage them.
The Office of the Privacy Commissioner has guidance about sharing information about vulnerable children.
The Office of the Privacy Commissioner outlines your responsibilities under the Act.
The Office of the Privacy Commissioner website
The Official Information Act (OIA) lets eligible people request information from Ministers or departments, including the Ministry of Education.
The Official Information Act (or OIA) enables any eligible person to request official information. We are committed to complying with the purposes, principle and requirements of the OIA.
The Official Information Act and media responses
The Ombudsman can be contacted through their website.
The PITA is available to Pacific immersion and bilingual services who have identified as one of the Pacific immersion and bilingual education and care service types. These service types are:
The Persons responsible (Coordinator visiting teacher) and educator must agree in advance there is a sound pedagogical reason for observing a child outside the home.
The Persons responsible (Coordinator visiting teacher) must be able to provide evidence of both having visited children at the homebased services under their supervision, and that the visits were planned.
The Persons responsible (Coordinator visiting teacher) must take all reasonable steps to observe each child once every month.
The Persons responsible (Coordinator visiting teacher) should keep detailed notes of their observations of the child. Any regulatory issues they note during the visit must also be recorded.
The Playcentre Diploma in Early Childhood and Adult Education, and
The Playcentre Diploma in Early Childhood and Adult Education.
The Playcentre person responsible is not required to hold a current teacher practising certificate.
The Playgroup Funding Handbook explains how playgroup funding is calculated and what conditions need to be met to receive funding.
The Playgroup funding handbook applies to all playgroups funded by the Ministry of Education. In particular, it is intended for the management committees of these playgroups.
The Playgroup funding handbook provides further clarification of the changes associated with the introduction of the Education (Playgroups) Regulations which came into force on December .
The Playgroup funding handbook provides information about how playgroup funding is calculated and the conditions which need to be met to receive funding in accordance with section of the Education and Training Act .
The Playgroup funding handbook sets out the conditions on which funding payments are made to playgroups.
The Police and WorkSafe will investigate notifiable events.
The Police vet will include any information that the Police think is relevant to the role the person will hold at school.
The Police vet will include any information that the Police think is relevant to the role the person will hold at your service.
The Privacy Act governs how organisations and businesses can collect, store, use and share personal information. This includes early learning services.
The Public Service Commissioner outlines expectations for reporting and managing conflicts of interest.
The Qualification Group notation used in the minimum salary scales denotes the:
The RS change of bank account form.
The RS Initial Application for Funding for an Early Childhood Service (RS Form) is the key funding form for new services.
The RS initial application for funding for an early childhood service.
The RS Early Childhood Funding Return (the RS return) is the main funding return for early childhood education (ECE) services.
The RS Return consists of several different sections.
The RS Return is completed three times a year:
The RS Return tells the Ministry the number of funded child hours (FCHs) that are funded for each service, and the rate at which each FCH will be funded.
The RS early childhood funding return.
The RS return will contain only those sections relevant to you.
The Regulations including:
The Resource Management Act is concerned with keeping the environment a pleasant place to live, work, and play. When considering resource consent applications, territorial local authorities (councils) are required to consider any adverse impact the activity may have on the surrounding environment.
The Resourcing Auditor will contact your service before the visit takes place, advising the time of the visit and the documentation you will need to have available.
The Review was designed to make a tangible difference for parents by ensuring that the regulatory framework enables ECE to be supportive, nurturing, and a beneficial experience for both children and their parents.
The Royal Commission into Historical Abuse in State Care and in the Care of Faithbased Institutions has released its final landmark report
The SAAR will be provided in both PDF and Excel formats. Provide both to your auditor and service provider.
The STAR has been developed in line with the good practice identified in Education Review Office (ERO) evaluations and school indicators.
The STAR helps us all to understand what should happen when students do not attend school.
The STAR will continue to be improved as we learn from schools about what works best.
The Safer organisations, Safer children publication provides advice on good practice to help organisations draft high quality child protection policies and review their procedures.
The School Onsite Training Programme has been expanded to places for (up from for ) with further increases for .
The School Property Strategy
The School Property Strategy overview
The Sir Apirana Ngata Memorial Scholarship
The Specialised School Transport Assistance (SESTA) service helps children and young people with safety or mobility needs get to and from school. If your child qualifies for SESTA, we provide a place in a vehicle or a payment to contribute to their travel costs.
The Staff Hour Count must be completed by all kindergartens that operate allday.
The Staff Hour Count must be completed for all days the service operates as teacherled.
The Staff Record must be signed (in full) at the end of each week by each regulated (ratio) staff member as a true and correct record of their actual hours worked for that week.
The Standards for the Teaching Profession determined by the Teaching Council of
The Statement of Cash Flow is important because it informs the reader of the schools cash position.
The Statement of Cash Flows worksheet is linked to the Actual C F Model C Y and the Budget C F Model C Y worksheets please ensure that you have checked both of the cash flow worksheet totals on line which should be showing a nil balance from Column D to column T. If some columns are not, you will need to investigate and fix errors.
The Statement of National Education and Learning Priorities (NELP) was in November .
The Stepped Attendance Response (STAR) sets expectations for school, student, parentguardian, Ministry of Education and broader system responses to student absence.
The TSP must create an incident report in
The TSP must follow their own emergency procedures. They must also immediately contact:
The Tagaloa scholarships are for Pacific students in their final year of postgraduate tertiary study.
The Targeted Funding guidelines provide exemplars for how early learning services can use Targeted Funding.
The Teaching Council champions best practise and leadership, and:
The Teaching Council has guidance about police clearances for workers who come from other countries.
The Teaching Council has information about what information can be shared when reporting a concern.
The Teaching Council has more information about what to do if you are worried about a teachers conduct.
The Teaching Council has more information about who can apply for an endorsement and how.
The Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand
The Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand (Teaching Council) is responsible for Police vetting registered teachers and relief teachers. This is part of the process to hold a practicing certificate or Limited Authority to Teach (LAT).
The Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand provides information about the process of teacher registration.
The Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand sets out the process for Police vetting teachers from other countries.
The Tertiary Education Commission (TEC) is responsible for governmentfunded postcompulsory education and training offered in New Zealand.
The Tertiary Education Commission is responsible for the SDR process. Their website has information about how to complete and submit SDRs.
The Three Week Rule for Continuous Absence (Three Week Rule) limits the period of time that the Ministry will fund continuous absences, to weeks.
The Three Week Rule will restart from the first the child is enrolled to attend after the centre reopens.
The Three Week Rule: extension for extended nonoperation allows services to suspend the Three Week Rule for Continuous Absence (Three Week Rule) during an extended period of nonoperation.
The Transitional Advance form (EC) is used to calculate, or recalculate, advance funding for services in a number of situations such as:
The University of Canterbury and Massey University have information on their website about entry requirements for homeschool students.
The Vision for Pacific Education is that diverse Pacific learners and their families are safe, valued, and equipped to achieve their education aspirations.
The Work and Income childcare subsidy can be used instead of hours ECE. If your childcare subsidy is for more than hours a week, you can receive a mix of both the childcare subsidy and hours ECE.
The World Health Organization () has recommended maximum noise exposures in early childhood education and care centre environments.
The World Health Organization () has recommended maximum noise exposures in early childhood education and care centre environments:
The X code is actually not, um, marked as a type of absence.
The ability for fingers or limbs to become trapped
The ability for fingers or limbs to become trapped.
The absence rules in Chapter apply to Hours ECE funding.
The action plan has resources and guidance for early learning services, schools, tertiary providers and families and communities, including planning templates.
The activity room is set up so that children can independently access equipment and resources.
The additional funding increases the total investment in schools and early childhood education by . in the coming year to . billion. The total includes million of savings found within Vote Education that have been redirected to higher priority frontline areas within education.
The adulttochild ratio must be kept at all times. This includes when you take children on an excursion or when adults stop working for lunch or other entitled breaks. To cover breaks, you may wish to employ additional staff, or bring in staff from noncontact time.
The adult:child ratio with which the service provider is required to comply under regulation ()(b) or any direction by the Secretary under regulation ().
The adults might then balance this information from the child with what they see on session. It is very important that adults are interacting with children, noticing what activities the children are interested in and participating in their learning. The adults on session can then discuss how to extend play at the next session.
The advance payment is washedup against actual funded child hours on the next RS Return and Hours ECE funding becomes part of the normal funding cycle
The age of each child enrolled in a service is important in determining at which funding rate each funded child hour (FCH) will be paid. The number of hours for which each child is enrolled is important in determining the number of hours for which funding can be claimed.
The agencies include the Ministry of Education,
The allowance is irrespective of the language competency of individual certificated
The allowance is irrespective of the language competency of individual certificated teacher or the children attending the service.
The allowance is only for
The allowance is paid in instalments a year, usually around June and November. When your application for home education is approved, you get the first payment in whatever of these months comes first.
The allowance is paid quarterly to your childs school. It cannot be paid in advance.
The allowance will be paid at higher rates as the certificated
The allowance will be paid at higher rates as the certificated teacher increases their years of service as outlined in the table above.
The allowance will be paid for your child until the end of the year in which they turn .
The amended section also:
The amount of advance funding paid is based on the average funded childhours (FCHs) for the previous fourth months, the number of days the service will be operating in the forthcoming months, and the funding rate at which each FCH will be paid.
The annual budget should be developed at the same time as the annual plan.
The annual charge for Cyclical Maintenance Provision is accumulated in the provision for Cyclical Maintenance.
The annual plan describes and guides what the service will do in its operation in the next months. It is detailed enough to cover daytoday events, for example, excursions, staff appraisals or professional development, but is also a schedule of planned strategic opportunities, including for selfreview and internal evaluation (GMA). An annual plan aligns with other aspects of governance, management and administration (GMA) and therefore should be developed at the same time as the annual budget.
The annual plan describes and guides what the service will do in its operation in the next months. It is detailed enough to cover daytoday events, for example, excursions, staff appraisals or professional development, but is also a schedule of planned strategic opportunities, including for selfreview and internal evaluation (GMA). An annual plan aligns with other aspects of governance, management and administration (GMA) and therefore should be developed at the same time as the annual budget.
The annual plan should be created in consultation with the person responsible so that the teaching and learning needs of children can be met. The aspirations of
The appliances needed for cooking andor heating food will depend upon the number of children you are cooking for, and the type of meals being prepared. Options include microwaves, stove tops and ovens.
The application form has more information about these requirements.
The area situated around each cot is well ventilated to allow sufficient fresh air to circulate and there is no buildup of carbon dioxide, moisture and heat (HS)
The arrangement of furniture and equipment in the activity room needs to be designed and laid out so effective supervision is easy.
The assessor will consider the information you share with them, as well as any other relevant material we have find, such as documentation from the school. The assessor will review all of this information to consider the merits of your claim.
The attendance code comparison tree shows which codes changed.
The attendance code guidelines, their purpose is
The attendance codes have been to,
The attendance of a permanently enrolled child does not depend on the absence of any other enrolled child.
The attendance service works with students who are enrolled in school but have not been attending. Schools can contact the service for help with managing attendance and reducing unjustified absence.
The audit report must be signed and dated by the auditor.
The audit visit and report
The authority that originally issued the document.
The availability of a makeup day is at the discretion of the service.
The balance in the checks should be . Again, if there are balances then you will need to start checking each line item and locate the error at its source. Please do not force a balance by changing the formula.
The balance in the checks should be . If there are balances, then you will need to start checking each line item and locate the error at its source. Please do not force a balance by changing the formula.
The balance in the checks should be zero. If there are balances then you will need to start checking each line item and locate the error at its source. Please do not force a balance by changing the formula.
The bank account number must be verified by:
The basic component reflects standard operating costs for all ECE services, for example:
The below documents provide guidance for
The benefits of using a stage process are that:
The best job descriptions do not limit employees but enable them to use their experience, grow their skills and develop their ability to contribute within their organisation.
The blank worksheet can now be completed by entering in the balances for each code. Complete the data input section by section so that you can check totals as you enter data for each category.
The board approved offsite learning,
The board approves the final financial statements.
The board is responsible for completing a school access plan with contractors. This will help clarify who needs a Police vet.
The board must follow our guidelines when doing a risk assessment and show this in your decisionmaking. This is required under Schedule of the Education and Training Act .
The board of each school or
The board returns all documents to the auditor.
The body, agency or person who or that operates the early childhood education and care centre.
The body, agency, or person who or that operates the homebased education and care service.
The body, agency, or person who or that operates the hospitalbased education and care service.
The boundaries of these zones are set at the halfway point between neighbouring schools of the same type, for example, between two secondary schools.
The building consent process is administered by the local councils, as are council bylaws that might impact on the centre. The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment has information regarding Early childhood education centres and Building Code compliance.
The building where your playgroup meets may already have an evacuation procedure. Buildings like churches or community halls, and libraries are generally required to have an approved evacuation scheme under fire legislation. Talk to the building owners about this so that your playgroup can be part of any evacuation drills or planning. You will need to regularly practice emergency evacuationsdrills so that every adult and child knows what they can expect and need to do in an emergency.
The bus controller will contact principals at any affected schools.
The bus will take your child to school but does not provide a doortodoor service. You will need to get your child to and from their closest bus stop.
The car park entrance is at Normanby Road. Push the entry button for the reception to open the gates. The accessible car park is located on level .
The cash flow model needs some more refinement to improve the presentation of information around the buying, selling and disposal of assets.
The cash flow statement measures how well the school manages its cash position, meaning how well the school generates cash to pay its debt obligations and fund its operating expenses.
The certification criteria were last in September .
The closest school transport service to get to their nearest state, stateintegrated school or
The closures for half days must be for the purpose of staff participating in curriculum and assessmentrelated activities, and these closures may occur anytime during .
The completed plan must be endorsed by the procurement leader. The evaluation team should be told of any declared conflict.
The compulsory online module is available for anyone to access. It covers legislative questions and the difference between appropriate physical contact and restraint.
The consultation feedback shaped the content of this resource.
The consultation presents an important opportunity for a range of voices to be heard on this critical learning for our young people. We strongly encourage you to have your say.
The contents of our social media accounts are intended for informational purposes only. The Ministry of Education shall in no event accept any liability for loss or damage suffered by any person or body due to information provided on these sites or linked sites.
The contracts are for an initial term of years with year rights of renewal.
The cost of early learning services depends on what type you choose and how many hours your child will attend.
The cots must be secured to the wall so that the cots cannot fall in any event (HS)
The course is for new and existing bus controllers who have not already done the training. It takes about minutes.
The criteria ensures that children receive consistent, sound and positive guidance about ways of behaving at playgroup.
The criteria in this section are grouped together by topic. Each criterion has also been given a short, descriptive title.
The criteria in this section have been grouped together by topic. Each criterion has also been given a short, descriptive title.
The criterion aims to address a current gap in the Regulations which requires services to have heaters, but not that they are used when children are attending. The criterion aims to uphold the wellbeing of children. Note that the wellbeing of adults at the service is covered by the Health and Safety at Work Act.
The criterion aims to ensure hygienic food practices are maintained for the safety of children.
The criterion aims to ensure that adequate toilet provision is made for adults attending the service, thus upholding the wellbeing of children by reducing the possibility of inappropriate adult use of the childrens facilities.
The criterion aims to ensure that animals kept by the service do not pose a health risk to children. Wording of current regulation appears to be focused on maintaining animal health. This issue is:
The criterion aims to ensure that inadequate laundering practices do not pose a health risk to children.
The criterion aims to ensure that parents are aware of key regulatory information relating to the services operation (thus providing an additional level of accountability for the service), and are given the information they need if they wish to raise concerns and be involved in the service.
The criterion aims to ensure that services have the means to contact parents as necessary, and vice versa, as well as easily deal with any emergency situations that may arise.
The criterion aims to ensure that sleeping provisions are arranged so that they do not present a hazard to childrens safety and wellbeing.
The criterion aims to ensure that the service has information available for parents and staff about the philosophy that underpins their provision of early childhood education and care. This information supports the collaboration between parents and the service to achieve positive outcomes for children.
The criterion aims to minimise the risk of choking on food and to ensure in an event of an adverse reaction appropriate action is taken.
The criterion aims to prevent crossinfection by ensuring that mattresses that may be used by many children over time can be kept hygienically clean.
The criterion aims to prevent crossinfection by ensuring that sleep provisions used periodically (that is, not permanently set up) are hygienically stored when not in use.
The criterion aims to uphold a minimum level of quality education as well as safety for children.
The criterion aims to uphold a minimum level of quality education by ensuring that children have access to a range of suitable and safe equipment and materials.
The criterion aims to uphold childrens safety and wellbeing by giving Ministry of Education the ability to suspend or cancel a licence if the premises are not compliant with the Building Act or maintained in good condition (as opposed to a fine being imposed by the local authority under the Building Act which may not address the immediate risk to children attending).
The criterion aims to uphold childrens safety by ensuring that there are facilities to support the hygienic preparation and storage of food.
The criterion aims to uphold childrens wellbeing by ensuring that some consideration is given to the need for privacy by some children, due to cultural or individual differences. The criterion also aims to prevent service providers from designing toilet areas purely from a costdriven perspective.
The criterion aims to uphold hygienic practices by ensuring that handwashing facilities are adequate.
The criterion aims to uphold hygienic practices by ensuring that the designlocation of toilethandwashing facilities encourages their use by children. The criterion is underpinned by the belief that independence in children is valued.
The criterion aims to uphold the health and safety of children by ensuring hygienic practices occur in regard to food.
The criterion aims to uphold the health and safety of children by ensuring that children are given proper care, and that medication is not administered inappropriately by services.
The criterion aims to uphold the health and safety of children by ensuring that children are not unduly exposed to specified infectious diseases while at the service. Diseases included in Appendix are those listed in the current Health (Infectious and Notifiable Diseases) Regulations that commonly occur.
The criterion aims to uphold the health and safety of children by ensuring that children who fall ill or are injured are given proper care.
The criterion aims to uphold the health and safety of children by ensuring that medication is given to children only by people with the necessary knowledge and skills.
The criterion aims to uphold the health and safety of children by ensuring they have access to a clean drinking water supply. Requirement for independent access is based on evidence that selfaccess to water enables children to maintain an adequate level of hydration.
The criterion aims to uphold the health and safety of children.
The criterion aims to uphold the health and wellbeing of children by ensuring that there are suitable facilities and practices for washing children who vomit or soil themselves while attending the service so that the risk of crossinfection is reduced.
The criterion aims to uphold the health, safety and wellbeing of children by ensuring the service meets their nutritional needs or alternatively encourages parents to do so. Requirement to keep records for months has been reduced to , as this is considered to be a more useful minimum period of time. Recordkeeping requirements serve purposes:
The criterion aims to uphold the health, safety, and wellbeing of children by ensuring that appropriate facilities are available for children wearing nappies. Nappy changing in an early childhood centre is a highrisk activity from a number of perspectives, for example hygiene (as there can be large numbers of children using the facilities) and safety (risk of falls for the child, risk of back injury for adults). Nappy changing is also a personal care routine that by definition makes the young child vulnerable.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety and wellbeing of children by ensuring that pornographic or violent material (electronic games, DVDs, websites, magazines and so on) is not available to children.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety and wellbeing of children by ensuring that pornographic or violent material (written, visual or electronic) is not available to children.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety and wellbeing of children by ensuring that sleeping provisions are safe and appropriate for children using them.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety and wellbeing of children by ensuring that there are comfortable and safe facilities for the isolation of a sick child.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety and wellbeing of children while they are sleeping and minimise risk of harm. Requiring a documented procedure allows for parental input. Display ensures that all adults at the service are made aware of the procedure. Recordkeeping requirements serve purposes:
The criterion aims to uphold the safety and wellbeing of children.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of children by ensuring adults with the necessary skills and knowledge to deal with injuries and illness are present at all times and readily available.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of children by ensuring that adults at the service have the necessary knowledge and supplies to deal with emergency situations.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of children by ensuring that all equipment is of a standard that is considered safe.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of children by ensuring that equipment is safely stored. The criterion also aims to ensure that the design of the storage area does not unduly limit the range of experiences on offer to children on a daily basis (particularly in relation to packaway services).
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of children by ensuring that services have a mechanism to assess and address environmental hazards in an ongoing way.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of children by ensuring that the premises have an adequate plan for evacuating children in the event of a fire.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of children by ensuring that:
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of children by reducing the risk of them coming into direct contact with broken glass.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of children by removing the risk of hot water scalding. The criterion also aims to ensure that water is kept at a comfortable temperature to encourage hygienic handwashing practices.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of children while travelling in motor vehicles. Linking the restraint of children to licensing requirements allows Ministry of Education to put a regulatory intervention in place for noncompliance, as opposed to fines given by Police.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of children.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of infants and toddlers as well as a minimum level of quality education by ensuring that mixedage environments are designed to consider their unique needs.
The criterion aims to uphold the wellbeing of children by ensuring that they have clean and warm bedding when sleeping.
The criterion aims to uphold the wellbeing of children by ensuring there are adequate provisions for sleep to take account of the needs and sleep patterns of individual children.
The criterion aims to uphold the wellbeing of children by ensuring there are adequate provisions for sleep.
The criterion aims to uphold the wellbeing of children by ensuring there are adequate provisions for sleep. The criterion also aims to ensure that children who are not sleeping do not have their activities unduly limited.
The criterion clarifies current expectations of public health units in some areas, and is included in requirements to facilitate clarity and transparency for services with regards to what they have to provide. The criterion aims to ensure that facilities uphold hygienic practices.
The criterion could be met ensuring that after enrolment, copies of the statement of philosophy and important service policies are made available to parents. Each educator could have a folder with all relevant documents in it so that these can be easily accessed by parents.
The criterion ensures at least toilet is provided for those present at the service. The reference to children aged :
The criterion is intended to ensure that children attending playgroups have access to a wide range of suitable and safe equipment and materials.
The criterion is underpinned by the belief that a level of collaboration between parents and adults providing education and care will result in positive outcomes for children. The criterion aims to ensure that parents are well informed about the services operation and their childs education, and are made aware of the input they are able to have.
The criterion is underpinned by the belief that positive outcomes are achieved for children when adults working at the service have the space and opportunity to plan and reflect, and in the case of allday services, have their breaks away from children if they wish. The criterion also aims to ensure that a level of privacy, confidentiality, dignity and respect is available when required for discussions with parents.
The criterion is underpinned by the belief that the opportunity for outdoor play is an important feature of the education and care of young children in New Zealand.
The criterion makes the development and maintenance of all the required documentation related to the criteria a licensing requirement.
The criterion requires your service to make the NELP more visible in your practice and planning. The Ministry will assess how the NELP has been woven into your selfreview and internal evaluation processes, systems, professional development and annual plans
The criterion requires your service to make the NELP more visible in your practice and planning. The Ministry will assess how the NELP has been woven into your selfreview and internal evaluation processes, systems, professional development, and annual plans.
The criterion will provide the Ministry of Education with evidence of the services ability to continue to meet regulatory standards and criteria and afford the financial costs of providing a quality licensed service.
The curriculum framework is based on
The curriculum should enable children with diverse strengths and needs to be actively engaged in learning with, and alongside, their peers in the service. Offering an inclusive environment involves adapting environments and removing any barriers to participation and learning. Teaching inclusively means that
The curriculum should recognise that all
The curriculum should support the cultural identity of all children, affirm and celebrate cultural differences, and aim to help children gain a positive awareness of their own and other cultures.
The curriculum should support the cultural identity of all children, affirm, and celebrate cultural differences, and aim to help children gain a positive awareness of their own and other cultures.
The curriculum standard requires the service provider for every certificated playgroup to:
The curriculum standard: general is the standard that requires every licensed service provider to whom this regulation applies to
The curriculum standard: general is the standard that requires every licensed service provider to whom this regulation applies to:
The curriculum will enable children with special health andor educational needs to be actively engaged in learning with and alongside the other children in the service.
The data is collected and aggregated for the Ministry by Google Analytics, a measurement and research service. You can find out about Google Analytics privacy policy in their Privacy Centre.
The data will also inform future policy development and decisions aimed at improving student attendance.
The data you record in your SMS can help you in your efforts to improve attendance. At the end of each term, you will receive from us a provisional Every Day Matters report. Your report will include:
The depreciation that was accumulated by the assets disposed of are added back as negative numbers in column S Rows to .
The design and layout of any ECE activity room supports effective adult supervision.
The design and layout of any ECE activity room supports the provision of a range of different types of learning experiences that are appropriate to the number, ages, abilities, and specific mobility or treatment needs of the children likely to use it.
The design and layout of the nappy changing facilities need to be appropriate to the ages and number of children attending. The nappy changing area in a sessional service with only older children attending does not need to be the same as those in an allday service with high numbers of infantstoddlers.
The design and layout of the premises support effective adult supervision so that childrens access to indoor and outdoor spaces is not unnecessarily limited.
The design and layout of the premises support effective adult supervision so that childrens access to the licensed space (indoor and outdoor) is not unnecessarily limited.
The design and layout of the premises supports the provision of a variety of activities and experiences with regard to the age and number of children attending.
The design and layout of the premises:
The design of the bus route takes into consideration:
The design, construction, and location of the facilities ensure that:
The designated space for sleeping children under years, and any storage space for furniture and items not permanently set up, will be excluded from the measurement of the indoor activity area (as per Schedule in the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations ).
The development of the child (mobile or nonmobile)
The development of the child (mobile or nonmobile).
The different categories of medicines have different parent authorisation requirements, as set out in Appendix . For categories (i) and (iii), parent authorisation must be given at enrolment of the child at the service. Category (ii) medicines require daily parental authorisation. For category (i) medicines, services must be specific about what products they will use (including brand names).
The different categories of medicines have different parent authorisation requirements, as set out in Appendix . For categories (i) and (iii), parent authorisation must be given at enrolment of the child at the service. Category (ii) medicines require daily parental authorisation. For category (i) medicines, services must be specific about what products they will use (including brand names).
The different education agencies
The dispersal of groupowned assets (money and equipment) should be decided by remaining members of the group, in consultation with your Ministry of Education early childhood advisor.
The document does not exist or is unable to be found: section
The documentation required for this criterion is an inventory. An inventory is a list of items owned by the group. For easy use the inventory can be divided into areas: for example, furniture, books, indoor equipment, creative play, music, outdoor equipment and kitchen equipment.
The documented selfreview and internal evaluation process should identify:
The dollar amount of funding that a service is paid for each funded child hour (FCH).
The door to the toilet or bathroom must be able to be independently opened by children and be kept unlocked at all times.
The draft framework for relationships and sexuality education (RSE) for Years to will be available for public feedback from this Friday April to May. The framework sets out the proposed RSE teaching to be covered in the NZC each year, with a focus on ensuring content is ageappropriate, evidenceinformed, internationally comparable, and clear about what to teach and when.
The draft framework for the teaching of relationships and sexuality education (RSE) is available for public feedback until May.
The driver must ensure that any child in their vehicle is safely secured in the right car seat.
The driver must report any inappropriate behaviour to the transport service provider, who will contact the bus controller or school.
The driver or transport service provider (TSP) is responsible for contacting emergency services immediately.
The duties for all bus controllers are set out in the school transport roles and responsibilities guide.
The early childhood curriculum,
The early childhood education knowledge base is constantly being revised and developed. Professional learning helps us to keep up to with these changes. Participating in professional development opportunities (formal and informal) and reading helps us to continuously build on our understanding. Educators should take opportunities to discuss and debate ideas and theories and identify meaningful ways to put their new knowledge into practice.
The early childhood service must
The early childhood staff form is required to manage the Staff Hour Count.
The education network plans were released in and cover the rest of the country outside of the highest growth areas. These areas are a mixture of steady growth, stable or declining population areas. The NEGP has now been folded into the NENP. The updates show what we have been doing, what has changed, and which projects have been announced.
The education sector includes all early learning, schooling, and tertiary education provision.
The education system for schools is made up of year levels.
The educator will continue to actively supervise all children present during the visit.
The effective of a movement to a higher group following an improvement of qualification(s) is:
The electronic RS Return.
The employing organisation must carry out all of the other components of the safety checking process for certificated teachers.
The enrolment details will indicate if, and for how many hours, a child is receiving Hours ECE at another service. This will tell each service how many Hours ECE hours can be claimed for each child.
The enrolment records must distinguish and identify children who are permanently enrolled and those who may attend on a casual or conditional basis.
The enrolment zone for Alfriston School is proposed to remain unchanged. However, there will be an overlap between the proposed zone of Te Kura Rau Iti and the existing zone of Alfriston School. This means that some addresses may fall within the zones of both schools.
The environment, our expectations, and our teaching practices will be strong indicators of what we consider to be socially appropriate and competent behaviours.
The environment, our own, and parents and
The evacuation procedure must cover all emergency situations. The service provider is responsible for ensuring there is a procedure for each home.
The evaluation criteria and process are described in detail in the RFP for each tender.
The evaluation team evaluate offers made by suppliers and make a recommendation for a preferred supplier.
The evaluation team should have or more people and may include:
The example annual plan is a starting point for how services can arrange key tasks in an annual plan.
The example below illustrates how the Three Week Rule Extension for Extended NonOperation can be applied to a child enrolled for
The example below illustrates how the Three Week Rule Extension for extended nonoperation can be applied to a child enrolled for sessions or days per week:
The example below illustrates how the Three Week Rule Extension for extended nonoperation can be applied to a child enrolled for sessions or days per week:
The example below illustrates how the Three Week Rule can be applied to a child enrolled for
The example below illustrates how the Three Week Rule extension for extended nonoperation can be applied to a child enrolled for session or day per week:
The examples on the next pages illustrate how the Three Week Rule can be applied to children enrolled for , or sessions per week.
The examples on the next page illustrate how the Three Week Rule Extension for Extended NonOperation can be applied to children who have been absent for different periods prior to the period of nonoperation.
The executive summary of this cabinet paper was translated into several languages, available on request.
The expectation is that each early childhood service will use
The experiences and opportunities available should:
The facility can be used by the service whenever it is required.
The facility is located close enough to the service to ensure that people who need to use it can do so without difficulty. This includes considerations of distance as well as comfort, such as not getting wet in bad weather.
The financial statements component of the annual report has a template with a format that you must use. The school annual financial statements page explains how to prepare these.
The fire evacuation scheme needs to include regular trial evacuations for fire emergencies. Fire Regulations require this to be done at least every months, and that it is reported to Fire and Emergency New Zealand within days of taking place. There is information about maintaining an approved evacuation scheme on the Fire and Emergency New Zealand website.
The first aid kit may also contain any category (i) medicines the service chooses to use, providing the appropriate written authority has been gained from parents (see criterion HS).
The first aid kit may also contain any category (i) medicines the service chooses to use, providing the appropriate written authority has been gained from parents (see criterion HS).
The first aid qualification must be refreshed every years.
The following salary scales should be used by services with regard to the minimum salary amounts from November :
The following ECE Census Service Information must be submitted to the Ministry:
The following ECE Census staff information must be submitted to the Ministry:
The following activities will help to ensure all adults are familiar with the emergency drill procedures:
The following activities will support all adults being with the emergency drill procedures:
The following activities will support you in ensuring that all adults are familiar with the emergency drill procedures:
The following activities will support you in ensuring that all adults are familiar with the evacuation procedures:
The following are examples of emergencies where funding will continue for a homebased service:
The following are examples of emergencies where funding will continue:
The following are prominently displayed at the service for parents and visitors:
The following are some measures centres might want to consider implementing to meet this ratio:
The following are useful things to take on an excursion:
The following are useful things to take with you on an excursion:
The following areas can be included in a supervision plan.
The following attendance information must be sent to the Ministry:
The following child information must be collected and sent to the Ministry:
The following diagram represents what funding rates will be paid for each response to the attestation question.
The following diagram represents what funding rates will be paid given the combination of answers to the attestation questions.
The following early learning service types are not eligible to receive Targeted Funding:
The following enrolment information must be collected and sent to the Ministry:
The following example shows how a service could claim funding where a child receiving Hours ECE shares a childplace with an Under Two child.
The following examples are not emergencies:
The following examples are provided as a starting point to show how services can meet (or exceed) the requirement. Services may choose to use other approaches better suited to their needs as long as they comply with the criteria.
The following four salary scales should be used by services with regard to the minimum salary amounts from November :
The following information release contains:
The following is a list of things you may like to consider when estimating how many funded hours you will claim for under , and and over:
The following languages are recognised for the PITA:
The following links provide guidance on how to best implement least privilege for Microsoft .
The following links provide guidance on how to set up admin roles and security best practices on Google Workspace.
The following list of policy documents will be as we continue to publish more material related to ETAB .
The following lists give suggestions for basic equipment in each area of play. Playgroups should refer to education advisors at their regional Ministry of Education office for more information.
The following may make it easier for children to use these facilities:
The following resources have been developed to help schools to embed the STAR in their practice.
The following salary scales should be used by services with regard to the minimum salary amounts from January but prior to November . By paying at least these salary amounts to all employed certificated teachers, Education and Care and Hospitalbased services are eligible for higher funding rates.
The following service information must be submitted to the Ministry:
The following service types are exempt from providing regular information on enrolments and attendance to the Ministry through ELI:
The following suggestions for equipment will help your group establish a broadbased play programme in your playgroup.
The following table details how the funding rate will be determined based on the salary requirements met by the service:
The following table shows an example of financial years and when the information should be sent in.
The following table shows how funding can be claimed for children who attend a service on a casual basis:
The following table shows the number of Hours ECE hours and Plus ECE hours per week that may be claimed for children with different enrolment agreements:
The following table shows the number of FCHs that may be claimed for children with different enrolment agreements:
The foreign country decides any visa or permit requirements.
The formal name and status (such as charitable trust or incorporated society) of the reporting entity.
The formal written agreement between a parent or guardian and a service that a specific child will attend that service at specified times. An enrolment can be permanent, casual or conditional.
The foundation for learning programmes for mokopuna in
The framework has outcome domains. These outcome domains reflect key messages that we have heard from
The frequent absence problem is
The frequently asked questions document below has more information about the use of GenAI in NCEA assessment.
The full responsibilities for you, the driver and the school are explained in the guide below.
The funding goes to your early learning service or
The funding paid to licensed services is paid subject to the terms and conditions set out under this handbook and must be complied with. The terms used in this handbook are based in the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations .
The funding rate table shows the funding rates for each type of service. A copy of the table is included with this Handbook.
The funding rate table will be with any change in funding rates.
The funding rates are made up of basic and variable components.
The funding rates for all ECE services vary according to a range of costs usually faced by that service type.
The funding rules for parentled days are explained in this chapter. The funding rules for teacherled days are explained in Section B.
The glossary defines shared facilities and adequate access.
The golden rule of access, also known as least privilege, means allowing users access only to what they need.
The governance, management, and administration standard: general is the standard that requires every licensed service provider to whom this regulation applies to ensure that:
The guidance and resources provided in the full Action Plan for Pacific Education can also be used by families and communities to further support their children to achieve their aspirations.
The guidance is a starting point to show how services can meet (or exceed) the requirement. Services may choose to use other approaches better suited to their needs as long as they comply with the criteria.
The guidance is provided as a starting point to show how services can meet the requirement. Services may choose to use other approaches better suited to their needs as long as they comply with the criteria.
The guidelines for Targeted Funding
The guidelines include a review tool to help services identify gaps in current policies, information about what to include in a new policy, as well as example policies including a policy used in an early childhood education setting.
The hand washing practices to be used. If relevant, the practices to be used when wearing disposable gloves.
The health and safety practices standard requires the service provider for every certified playgroup to take reasonable steps to:
The health and safety practices standard: general is the standard that requires every licensed service provider to whom this regulation applies to:
The health and safety standards of licensed early learning services are overseen by us. The Education Review Office (ERO) also looks at areas of health and safety.
The home of curriculum content, teaching materials, and news.
The homebased ECE service provider is responsible for ensuring their Persons responsible (Coordinator visiting teacher) meet the requirements of Regulation ()(c). They should have a documented policy or procedure that sets out their expectations of the Persons responsible (Coordinator visiting teacher) in meeting the regulations and how they will be monitored.
The homebased educator top up payment must be no more than the difference between the passthrough and the hourly fee for each child for the hours outside of Hours ECE.
The homebased educator top up payments can only be charged for the hours of Hours ECE.
The homebased educator top up payments can only be charged for the hours of hours ECE.
The hospital from which the service operates has been granted certification under the Health and Disability Services (Safety) Act either:
The hot water temperature from household taps can present a scalding hazard to children. Careful supervision is necessary for young children, and older children can be taught about hot water safety.
The hours Sione was absent in January if he continued to attend for less than hours per enrolled day on more than half of his enrolled days in December and his enrolment agreement is not reconfirmed or changed.
The indicative maps of daily school bus routes are at the start of each school term.
The information below shows the record keeping requirements for Playcentres:
The information is legally privileged: sections
The information is or will soon be publicly available: section
The information kit is different from the Englishmedium toolkit. It includes:
The information on our social media sites and all government web sites is provided on the basis that persons accessing the website undertake responsibility for assessing the relevance and accuracy of its content.
The information provided through the secure data portal will be password protected.
The information they collect includes the and time you visited the site, your IP address, the pages you accessed on our site, the search terms you used, details about your operating system (for example, Windows , Mac OSX) and your web browser (for example, Chrome, Mozilla Firefox, or Internet Explorer).
The information was provided in confidence: sections
The information we gathered has been used to inform our refresh of
The information we gathered has been used to inform our refresh of Ka Hikitia and Tau Mai Te Reo and the overall Education Work Programme.
The information would harm negotiations: sections
The information would harm the maintenance of the law because the matter is, or will be, before the courts (including the Coroner): sections
The information you are requesting must be specified with due particularity meaning that the Ministry must be able to identify the information you have asked for.
The initial salary step for a certificated teacher appointed to a Management Position will be the K, K, K step on the Minimum Salary Scale for Management Positions.
The initial salary step should be agreed between the employer and teacher. The process for deciding it should be transparent and fair.
The intent of the attendance code decision tree is not
The intent of the criteria is to involve parents and caregivers in the operation of the playgroup.
The intent of this criteria is to ensure the health, safety and wellbeing of children is maintained.
The intent of this criteria is to keep children safe.
The intent of this criteria is to make sure there are adequate provisions for the treatment of minor injuries and that the first aid kit is accessible to adults but inaccessible to children.
The intention of this criteria is to ensure that adults and children have the knowledge to respond safely in an emergency.
The land and buildings (or parts of buildings) intended for the exclusive use as a licensed early childhood education and care centre during hours of operation.
The land and buildings (or parts of buildings) used by the playgroup.
The language level that a service attests to meeting is assessed across the entire service licence. The average amount of time spent teaching in a single Pacific language across the entire service will be used to determine the immersion or bilingual level.
The latest curriculum, assessment, and aromatawai news for schools and kura.
The learning and development of
The learning and development of mokopuna is enhanced when culturally appropriate ways of communicating are used and when parents and
The learning needs of children in hospitalbased settings are likely to change rapidly and the educator needs to be particularly sensitive and responsive to this change.
The learning support team will work with other agencies to develop support plans alongside other services such as child development teams.
The level of funding paid to each eligible service is determined by:
The licensing criteria has guidance on what to do when another organisation does safety checking on your behalf.
The licensing criteria were last in September .
The link below gives educators, coordinators, and service providers more information, advice, and guidance to support implementation of the licensing criteria.
The link between costs and funding rates:
The link between licensing and funding:
The links below give educators, coordinators, and service providers more information, advice, and guidance to support implementation of the licensing criteria.
The list below explains the records required by hospitalbased services:
The location and type of artificial light should be carefully considered in the planning and design of an early childhood education and care centre and should consider the activities and purpose of each room.
The location of eligible students, and
The longer a password is, the stronger it is. You can also use special characters to make it even stronger, such as:
The main body of this document is divided into sections. The first section explores the concept of review. The second section outlines the review process, and the third section invites us to reflect on our selfreview process by considering the elements of effective review. Each section concludes with a series of questions to provoke our thinking.
The main objective of the Office of the AuditorGeneral is to improve the trust and confidence in the public sector, so we also do a raft of good practice guides as well to help the public sector improve. In terms of our annual audits, we have what we call a devolved model, so that means we appoint auditors from outside from across New Zealand, so that includes our own business unit Audit New Zealand and also external audit service providers. We currently have got about appointed auditors who audit schools for us across the country.
The main purpose of a school exchange is educational. Programmes where travel is primarily for sporting, cultural or tourism activities are not exchanges.
The main, uh, the true intent of the truancy code is
The management and administration standard requires the service provider for every certified playgroup to ensure that:
The management group or governing board is responsible for writing a draft statement of philosophy. This should be circulated to as many stakeholders as possible to get their opinion. This can be done through a meeting or by doing a survey. Whatever method is best for your stakeholders.
The management plan is part of the procurement COI declaration form.
The maximum number of children on the licence certificate minus the maximum number of children under (if any), plus the maximum number of adults required to meet adult to child ratios, divided by .
The measured route can be a combination of a public road or pedestrian route and may not be walkable or drivable in its entirety. ArcGIS can differ from other mapping software, such as Google Maps, which may map routes from different start and end points and may rely on different bases for waypoint location. They may be inaccurate for determining eligibility.
The method of tracking Certificated and Other Teacher Hours required by the Ministry for funding purposes.
The microorganisms least likely to be killed by bleach or any other disinfectant are giardia and cryptosporidium. These organisms produce microscopic cysts that can stick onto surfaces. The best way to deal with these organisms is to use a good detergent. This means that frequent cleaning with detergent is best for toys, tables and other nontoilet surfaces rather than bleach.
The minimum salaries in this appendix represent a yearly salary calculated on the basis of a hour employed week.
The most important part will be, how schools use this direction to develop their own school specific response to attendance.
The most popular password manager applications are:
The national curriculum covers subjects that are taught at primary and secondary schools and the standards students should reach in each subject.
The nature of hospitalbased services means that many of the other record keeping requirements may not work for them.
The net book value of the assets disposed of at a loss needs to be separately set off on row S . We have entered minus , here. These adjustments help the cash flow model to calculate the cash receipts, if any, given to the school when they disposed of this surplus or obsolete assets.
The net book value of the assets disposed of at a surplus needs to be separately set off and cell S.
The network of schools is all schools in New Zealand that we fund. It is made up of smaller regional networks of schools.
The new entrants adjustment
The new service completes the RS form.
The new service is licensed.
The new service provider must contact their Ministry regional office so that the change of service provider can be verified.
The new service returns the RS form to their Ministry regional office.
The new service types were agreed on by Ministers in mid. It will allow us to better identify and group these services, for more visible and meaningful reporting.
The next funding payment will include accurate washup funding based on actual funded child hour data submitted on the RS Return.
The next step is to ensure that you have all the components that make up the Annual Report.
The normal absence rules apply to these absences.
The number of codes were reduced from to . No new codes were created.
The number of design reviews needed will depend on the size and risk profile for the project.
The number of school aged
The number of toilets needed for centres is calculated as follows:
The numbers of inbound and outbound students should equal by the end of the programmes approval period.
The objective of Component A: Low socioeconomic communities is to target funding to ECE services that provide education and care programmes to children from low socioeconomic communities.
The objective of Component B is to target funding to services that may have significant numbers of children with learning support needs or who are from nonEnglish speaking backgrounds.
The objectives of Equity Funding are to:
The offsite setting must be appropriate for children. The educator must be able to deliver education and care to both the child being observed and the other children in their care, while at the same time engaging with the Person responsible for professional development support purposes. A cafe, for example, would not be suitable. If the observation is to take place at a playgroup, neither the educator nor the Persons responsible (Coordinator visiting teacher) can run the playgroup. It must be run by someone else
The offsite manufacturing supplier panel is a list of suppliers that we have preapproved to help us build and deliver quality learning spaces.
The onboarding and offboarding procedures including notifying the IT lead of:
The operation and administration of individual
The operation and decision making of each
The opportunity for restful sleep is provided by the centre having a designated space where fluctuations in temperature, noise and lighting levels can be minimised. Adequate supervision of sleeping children is required.
The options are identified below.
The original cost of the assets disposed of are added back at cost in column S Rows to .
The outdoor environment is accessible for all children and offers varying degrees of physical challenge and managed risk including opportunities for children to exercise their gross and fine motor skills in this environment.
The overview document describes how to use the modules with students. It explains why it is important to notice student distress at the earliest stage and respond to this distress in manaenhancing ways, rather than resort to using physical restraint which is a last resort.
The parent or caregiver of the ineligible student must:
The parts of the hospital where children participating in the service receive early childhood education and care.
The password will be the MoE number of the person who is paid using the designation code S as at pay period . This is the principal designation code.
The pay parity guide explains how to work out the right salary steps.
The pay parity optin scheme is a funding scheme for education and care services including hospitalbased services.
The pay parity optin scheme is a funding scheme for education and care services, including hospitalbased services.
The pay parity optin scheme seeks to address the disparity in pay between certificated
The payroll information will be provided in ways.
The percentage of students attending regularly is very low in New Zealand compared to many other countries. Lifting school attendance is crucial for future success.
The permission to reproduce material protected by Crown copyright on this site, does not extend to any material that is identified as being copyright to a third party.
The person (or people) responsible for having the role of providing daytoday care for the child.
The person certifying your document(s) must:
The person or entity preparing or compiling the general purpose financial statements or special purpose financial report cannot also audit the statements or report.
The person or persons who operate the playgroup.
The person responsible must be able to guide and support staff to deliver the curriculum.
The person responsible must have:
The person responsible must:
The person responsible provides educators with professional leadership and support. This gives educators access to a qualified and certificated teacher who can respond to any questions or concerns they have while they provide education and care for children enrolled in the service.
The person responsible requirements must be met at all times children are attending, much like adulttochild ratios.
The person responsible role
The person who has primary responsibility for overseeing the education and care, comfort, and health and safety of the children in a homebased service, and for providing professional leadership and support to educators within the service.
The person who has primary responsibility for overseeing the education and care, comfort, and health and safety of the children, and providing professional leadership and support to educators within the service.
The person with the designated role of providing education and care directly to children in his or her care, and attends to the health and safety of those children.
The plan identifies key shifts and a set of actions that are needed to achieve this vision:
The plan must be specific to the premises and the number, age, abilities and enrolled hours of the children attending and must show how the educator will actively supervise children attending the service. It must include, but is not limited to:
The plan should also include any additional supervision that may be required to address risks identified in the risk assessment process.
The play materials and experiences that are available in the playgroup provide ways in which the ideas in the principles and strands of
The policy covers the identification and reporting of child abuse and neglect. There must be information about how the service will keep children safe from abuse and neglect. It must also outline how the service will respond to suspected child abuse and neglect.
The policy is required under the Childrens Act .
The policy must be reviewed every years.
The policy must outline processes for the identification and reporting of child abuse and neglect under the Children and Young persons and their Families Act .
The policy needs to be consistent with advice provided by
The possible uses of GenAI in assessment contexts are therefore more limited than in teaching and learning contexts.
The practice framework for Ministry and RTLB learning support practitioners.
The premises and facilities standard requires the service provider for every certified playgroup to operate from premises that are:
The premises and facilities standard: general is the standard that requires every licensed service provider to whom this regulation applies
The premises and facilities standard: general is the standard that requires every licensed service provider to whom this regulation applies:
The premises are kept at a comfortable temperature while children are attending.
The premises are located in a building that has a current fire evacuation scheme approved by Fire and Emergency New Zealand.
The premises conform to any relevant bylaws of the local authority and the Building Act .
The premises conform to any relevant bylaws of the local authority. Any premises undergoing alterations conform to the Building Act .
The prescribed curriculum framework for the Early Learning Sector is in parts:
The presence of any child during licensed hours who is aged years or younger, who is enrolled at school, and who is counted towards the total number of children that can be present in the home, in line with the requirements set out in section of the Education and Training Act .
The presence of any small parts that could be a choking hazard
The presence of any small parts that could be a choking hazard.
The primary form of government funding for early childhood education services.
The primary purpose of an activity room is to facilitate group activity and the provision of play experiences that cannot be easily taken to the child at their bedside.
The primary responsibility for transporting children to and from school or their school bus stop rests with their caregivers. They are best placed to decide the safest way to do this.
The primary responsibility for transporting children to and from school or their school bus stop rests with their parents and caregivers. You are best placed to decide the safest way to do this.
The principal and board chair sign the statement of responsibility and letter of representation.
The principle of authenticity means that students are required to demonstrate their own knowledge, understanding, and skills in NCEA assessment events. Any evidence submitted for assessment must be their own work.
The procedure aims to ensure:
The procedure could be displayed at the playgroup and pointed out to new parents andor included in information packs. It is also a good idea to provide relevant reading material in the playgroups adult library. Procedures should be reviewed on a regular basis so new families have the opportunity to contribute to their development.
The procedure ensures that children:
The procedure for people with complaints about any instance of noncompliance must include the option for people to contact the regional Ministry of Education office, with appropriate contact details.
The procedure should cover what action will be taken if an educatorcoordinator is under the influence of alcohol or any other substance. This is a staff management issue, and appropriate procedures need to be followed such as processes for managing serious misconduct. See the guidance for GMA Human resource management.
The procedure should state:
The process examined annual, bereavement, family violence, alternative or sick leave and public holidays.
The process for uploading the Excel version of the annual financial statements is the same as for uploading the PDF annual report.
The process is consistent with criterion GMAGMA and includes a schedule showing timelines for planned review of different areas of operation.
The procurement leader endorses the plan.
The procurement leader reviews and endorses all procurement documents and decisions.
The procurement of bus services provided by us was a tender approach. This allowed fair access to government contracts for suppliers of all sizes.
The procurement officer drafts up the plan using the appropriate template.
The procurement officer prepares the procurement plan using one of our templates. It outlines:
The procurement officer writes a report to summarise the evaluation process and recommend a supplier. You can use our template to write this report.
The procurement owner endorses the contract.
The procurement owner endorses the plan.
The procurement owner endorses the recommendation report, and the procurement sponsor approves it. The procurement leader does not need to endorse the report for stage .
The procurement owner represents the buyer in the procurement. They review and endorse all procurement documents prepared by the procurement officer (project manager).
The procurement sponsor approves the plan.
The procurement sponsor must provide written approval for the purchase.
The procurement sponsor reviews and approves:
The procurement sponsor reviews and signs the contract.
The progress report for the quarter ending June shows:
The project manager remains actively involved in the project.
The proposed changes are that the Teaching Council must:
The proposed change is to amend Schedule of the Act to more clearly allocate NSNs for researchers, and for research and funding purposes. This allows the current use of NSNs for the Performance Based Research Fund (PBRF). It also allows retrospective validation to make sure the previously collected dataset could be used consistently.
The proposed change to the Act would mean that universities:
The provision of water should be included on the daily checks carried out be staffadults at the centre.
The provisional licence must be displayed clearly for
The provisions of the Building Act do not apply to homes built prior to that have not since been renovated. The Ministry of Education will not require code of compliance certificates for every home. If recent building work has been undertaken, then the service provider should ask for a copy of the code of compliance certificate.
The publication of the criteria on its own can be downloaded and printed.
The publication of the criteria on its own can be downloaded as a PDF and printed.
The information includes key documents and decisions that relate to this work.
The purpose of a funding claim audit is to:
The purpose of the safety check that was done (for example what role).
The purpose of this allowance is to:
The purpose of this criteria is to ensure that environmental hazards are regularly checked and addressed.
The purpose of this priority is to strengthen the learning support system so we can respond better to the needs of learners and their families through evidencebased approaches and targeted investment for equitable educational outcomes.
The purpose of todays session really is to outline, uh,
The qualification requirements for different types of centres are set out by us.
The quantity of first aid items you will need to store in your kit will depend upon:
The rates, per annum per certificated
The rates, per annum per certificated teacher, are:
The rationale for observing a child outside the home must be recorded.
The recognised qualifications are:
The recommendation report goes to the procurement owner and procurement leader for endorsement.
The recommendation report is then passed on to the procurement sponsor for approval. The sponsor must consider:
The record must include trained parents
The record of medicine administered to children should be kept for years.
The record should include:
The recording of category (i) medicines administered in relation to injuries as required by criterion HS will meet this requirement for those medicines.
The recording of category (i) medicines administered in relation to injuries as required by criterion HS will meet this requirement for those medicines.
The refreshed Ka Hikitia strategy visual (A) June
The regulations require all services to have a person responsible available to support educators for all hours children are attending. Teachers accessing this provision cannot be used to avoid this obligation, therefore they cannot fulfil the role of person responsible while waiting for recertification.
The regulations require that all (i.e. of) educators either hold a homebased service qualification, or within months of starting with a homebased service are working towards the qualification.
The relevant records must be provided at the site of the audit when an audit is taking place.
The remainder (up to hours) may be claimed as Plus ECE hours.
The remediation process has comprised highly detailed data corrections and recalculations to check that Ministry employees have received at least their minimum entitlements under the Holidays Act .
The report is organised around the Ka Hikitia outcome domains and the measures that underpin each of the domains.
The report shows how school boards have applied their financial resources to achieve the goals set out in their strategic plan in the previous year.
The reporting mechanism may be decided at the discretion of individual services (or the service provider). Each service must include the following information in their annual audited general purpose financial statements or special purpose financial report:
The request for a review should be sent to
The required adult: child ratios are based on the number of children participating at any time at the service.
The required qualifications for auditors are defined in s of the Financial Reporting Act .
The requirement to ensure that human resource management practices are implemented is underpinned by Regulations ()(a) and ()(e). These require service providers to ensure that the service is effectively governed, is managed in accordance with good management practices and all reasonable steps are taken to provide staff employed or engaged in the service with adequate professional support, professional development opportunities and resources.
The requirement to provide attendance data daily will not apply to specified
The requirements are set out in Regulation and the Second Schedule of the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations .
The requirements in this chapter do not apply to hospitalbased services. Requirements for hospitalbased services can be found in Chapter .
The resourcing roll for primary, full primary, and composite schools includes a new entrant adjustment.
The responsibility for the assessment of risk for any excursion lies with the service, and parents should give written approval to the excursion and the proposed ratios.
The responsibility for the assessment of risk lies with the service, and parents should also take responsibility by giving their written approval to the excursion and the proposed ratios.
The result of the safety check is confidential and the service provider and only those staff delegated with responsibilities that would require them to access the information should be able to do so.
The review of EQI process is available once a year. For more information, contact the Resourcing Contact Centre on
The role and responsibilities of the
The role of the person responsible is set out in Regulation .
The role of workers and others in your school will determine the types of child safety checks you need to complete. This document sets out these roles.
The route map information was accurate at the time of publication and is subject to change.
The safety check must be completed by the employing organisation (which may be the playgroup itself). The playgroup needs to confirm that the safety check has been completed if the safety check has been done by the employing organisation.
The salary scale defines the minimum salary levels for a certificated teacher employed at an education and care service or hospitalbased service.
The salary scales for certificated teachers are:
The salary scales shown reflect the base salary for an employed certificated teacher. Bonuses, noncash, or inkind benefits cannot be counted towards the minimum salary requirements.
The salary steps required to be attested to in order for a service to receive extended parity funding rates.
The salary steps required to be attested to in order for a service to receive full parity funding rates.
The salary steps required to be attested to in order for a service to receive the parity funding rates.
The scheme has educational and intercultural value.
The scheme is designed in a way that supports sustainability and longterm viability of the scheme.
The scheme provides higher funding rates to education and care and hospitalbased services who pay all employed certificated
The school and supplier each keep a signed copy of the contract.
The school has to confirm to us that your child is boarding. They then pay it to the hostel or caregiver your child is boarding with.
The school is the closest state or stateintegrated school the student can enrol at.
The school planning and reporting framework
The school staffing cycle
The schools responsibilities are to:
The section in the ECE funding handbook details what is required in keeping attendance records. Attendance records may be kept in a form to suit the service.
The service becomes part of the normal funding cycle. Funding continues as for all services (see section for more details).
The service can still operate on a provisional licence.
The service completes and returns the EC to the ECE Operational Funding team by email to
The service curriculum is consistent with any prescribed curriculum framework that applies to the service.
The service curriculum is printfocused:
The service curriculum provides opportunities for children to play together for sustained periods in groups of their own choosing.
The service curriculum provides opportunities to discuss and negotiate rights, fairness and justice with adults.
The service curriculum reflects the holistic way that children learn.
The service curriculum respects and supports the right of each child to be confident in their own culture and encourages children to understand and respect other cultures.
The service curriculum treats all children, regardless of their age, gender, ethnicity and abilities, as competent and confident learners who are active participants in their own learning. Supportive, responsive educators guide children to make choices in, and contribute to the planning of, the programme in an early childhood service.
The service has at least toilet for every to persons. Persons are defined as children aged and older and teaching staff that count towards the required adult:child ratio.
The service is for getting to and from school only. We will consider transport between multiple addresses and your childs school if:
The service needs to have a procedure for hygienic preparation of bottles including:
The service philosophy and practices reflect commitment to a bicultural partnership.
The service provider contact person can request a review of any audit findings in the report. The request must be filed within working days of the receipt of the audit letter advising of the audit findings.
The service provider holds overarching responsibility for compliance with all regulatory requirements, including the requirements associated with the person responsible role. They are expected to provide the person responsible with enough information and support to make sure they understand their role and can carry out their duties effectively.
The service provider holds overarching responsibility for compliance with regulatory requirements, including the person responsible requirements. They are expected to provide the person responsible with sufficient information and support to ensure they understand their role and can carry out their duties effectively.
The service provider is the body, or agency that, or person who operates the early childhood education service. Where a service is part of an association or larger group of services, funding is paid to the service provider.
The service provider must ensure parents do not pay a fee for hours covered by Hours ECE, either to the service provider or to the educator.
The service provider must record:
The service provider must tell parents and caregivers:
The service provider or centre will need to carry out all of the other components of the safety checking process for certificated teachers.
The service requests an EC transitional advance form from the Ministry of Education team at
The service should identify the best method of communicating with for each
The service will be required to update their attestation and allowance application if their staffing changes at any time.
The services ECE professional leader (i.e. the coordinator).
The services ECE professional leader, (ie, the person responsible).
The set of funding rates available to education and care services and hospitalbased services that do not pay all employed certificated teachers according to the full salary scale criteria described in section B.
The size and contents of your kit will depend on how big your group is, where you meet, and how far away you are from professional medical assistance in an emergency. In most cases, a basic preprepared kit will be sufficient (you can get them from chemists or supermarkets), or you can have a look at the first aid kit contents required for licensed services.
The size and layout of your infanttoddler spaces will depend on the number of children under in the centre, and how it will be used.
The sleep procedure must be displayed so all adults at the service understand what is expected and parents know what will occur.
The softer furnishings you have, the more sound is absorbed.
The space between sleep furnitureitems needs to allow adults to:
The space between sleep furnitureitems needs to allow the educator to easily check on children, ensure they are not too hot or cold, and check their breathing and enables the educator or other adults to move between them quickly in an emergency.
The specific reporting mechanism is at the discretion of the individual service (or service provider). However, the following minimum standards are required:
The staffing record is used by the Ministry to verify that the correct number of Certificated Teacher Hours has been claimed.
The start dates are set by the Minister of Education. Schools using cohort entry must use these dates and cannot change them.
The starting point for the guidelines,
The statement of philosophy tells everyone who works or comes into your premises what is special about your service and what you want to achieve.
The steps below show one way you could complete your Staff Record and Staff Hour Count.
The steps on the KidsHealth page What to do if your baby chokes outlines the appropriate response if a child is choking.
The strategy is supported by objectives.
The student is experiencing significant hardship in their local school environment (Multiple Barrier Allowance).
The student lives more than a certain distance from the school.
The style of financial statements that must be completed by community based services. They should include statements of:
The suitability of the outdoor space to provide the outcomes for children will be assessed on a casebycase basis, taking into account the practicalities and risks of each case under the provisions of Regulation () of the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations .
The supplier signs copies of the contract.
The survey will be open until May .
The suspension notice will state:
The table below outlines the reporting areas that can be consolidated and those that must be itemised (i.e. reported individually for each service).
The table below shows how parents could choose to allocate the Hours ECE hours daily across a week:
The table below shows the sections of the RS return your service will receive and the pages in this Chapter where instructions can be found:
The tables below contain a list of all the resources and examples in this appendix.
The term all employed, in relation to the Minimum Salary Scale for Certificated Teachers, means all certificated teachers who are permanently employed either on a parttime or fulltime basis to work in a teaching or management role in the service (i.e., they are working for hire or reward under a contract of service).
The term excludes teachers who are fixed term or casual employees or teachers employed by a third party and used by services through a contract with the third party.
The terms of use apply to all of our social media accounts.
The terms of use for ChatGPT and any services using it are clear: you must not send it any personal information of anyone under the age of .
The third thing is annually we do a report to the Ministry of Education on the results of the school audits, and we also publish that on our website, and that comes out usually around November in the year of audit.
The time and space involved in hygienically washing dishes by this method means centres using large quantities of dishes should consider installing a dishwasher instead (especially if they do not have designated kitchen staff).
The times of rest periods (for example structured or according to the needs of the individual child).
The tips for food safety on the
The tool is expected to be ready for use by Term next year, with training and support to help you use it being held during Term this year. Schools and kura can continue to use easTTle while the new tool is in development.
The toolkit sets out the requirements of your planning and reporting documents.
The total amount of Targeted Funding received.
The total amount of funding paid to each licensed service in March, July or November.
The total number of hours worked by all regulated (ratio) staff in a service on each day.
The total number of hours worked by certificated teachers in a service when they are counted towards regulated (ratio) staff.
The training is an unjustified absence.
The training takes up to hours.
The transitional advance form (EC) is used to calculate advance funding for services in a number of situations such as:
The transparency statement explains how we collect, use and share information gathered about individuals and organisations for the purposes of carrying out our statutory functions under the Education and Training Act .
The transport provider may charge ineligible students a fare. The provider determines the amount and method of payment.
The trigger point is different depending on year level.
The type and quantity of furniture, equipment, and materials will differ from one playgroup to another. Children should be able to access equipment and materials that support their interests, skills and abilities.
The type of equipment or appliances needed for cooking andor heating food will depend upon the number of children you are cooking for, and the type of meals being prepared. Options include microwaves, stove tops and ovens.
The type of financial report that must be supplied to the Ministry depends on the ownership structure of the service.
The type of supervision required depends on the layout of the premises, activities being undertaken, equipment being used, the ratio of adults to children, and the number, ages and needs of children.
The understandings, patterns of behaviour, practices and values shared by a group of people.
The understandings, patterns of behaviour, practices, and values shared by a group of people.
The unique reference number from the communication we sent you.
The use of we in this document signifies an inclusive approach to selfreview as all members of the early childhood education learning community have opportunities to participate.
The use of GenAI is not permitted in NCEA external assessment.
The use of portable orange netting, cones and walking ropes can be useful for keeping children together while moving and once they have reached the final place of safety.
The use of specific tools for reporting on learner progress is not required in . Schools and kura are encouraged to continue using available standardised assessment tools.
The use of technology does not reduce the requirement to physically enter the room and check on the sleeping child at least every to minutes and record these checks.
The value of the procurement determines the approach and documents you need to use.
The vast majority of children and students attend their local school or early learning centre and learn and achieve alongside their peers.
The way the experiences and opportunities associated with these types of play are made available to children, and they ways that adults interact and respond to children as they play should reflect the principles and strands of
The way we use roll counts to determine your operational funding entitlement varies by school or kura type, and which instalment it is.
The ways in which each early childhood education service works with the curriculum framework will vary. Each service will continue to develop its own curriculum and programmes that reflect the things that are important to the children, their families, the staff, the community and the philosophy of the specific setting. It is important for services to be able to identify how everything we do in an early childhood setting works towards meeting the curriculum framework for the children and families that attend.
The weathertightness design requirements apply to all new state school buildings, including:
The website from which you got to this page is protected by Cloudflare. Email addresses on that page have been hidden in order to keep them from being accessed by malicious bots.
The whole of the environment, indoors and outdoors, is used as a learning resource.
The whole of the environment, indoors and outdoors, is used as a learning resource. Educators provide opportunities for exploration, curiosity, and for mokopuna to test working theories.
The written authority for categories (i) and (iii) medicines is on the enrolment form so must be kept for years. For category (ii) medicines, the written authority should be kept for as long as the child is receiving that medicine.
The written emergency plan must cover all emergency situations relevant to the location of the playgroup such as fire, earthquake, tsunami, flood, storm, volcano, landslide and so on. The plan has a broader scope than just fire evacuation.
The written emergency plan should include at least:
The years of experience of a certificated
The years of experience of a certificated teacher includes all previous experience as a certificated teacher in a teaching role and management position in a Pacific immersion or bilingual environment within New Zealand.
The, these will be running for the next, um,
The, uh, guidelines themselves, um, wont be static.
The, uh, second to that, this meeting will be recorded,
The, um, what I wanted to touch on here as well is for the
The, what we will see, what we are going to do,
Their actual pay will depend on whether the service has opted into the extended or full parity salary scale.
Their ideas and comments should be included in the final statement before it is circulated again. It may be necessary to go back to each of the groups to make sure that everyone is happy with the final statement of philosophy. Statements of philosophy do not have to be long, but they do need to be clear about why the service exists and what it stands for.
Their key objectives for Targeted Funding.
Then with an air of determination she lifted the handle as high as she could leaning way back and when all wheels were off the ground, she carried the whole buggy inside. Puffing from the exertion Tessa dropped the buggy as soon as she was inside. Then she quickly pushed it around in a circle and straight back outside onto the deck where she circled round for another run at the entrance.
Then you can fill in the application.
Then, carry out each of these drills at least every months. Most drills will be practiced by staff with children, the exceptions are lockdown and in some instances tsunami.
There are funding rates for parent
There are types of dishwashers available: domestic and commercial. Each has its own advantages and disadvantages, and services need to consider which is right for them.
There are types of funding for playgroups:
There are established
There are service delivery options for homebased ECE services during the Christmas period.
There are qualification groups, with set criteria for each.
There are types of payments. They are fees, donations, optional charges and homebased educator top up payments.
There are a number of legal child protection requirements your school must follow.
There are a number of resources available on the safety of household water from water tanks and bores.
There are a number of ways children can dry their hands, but some are more hygienic and easier to use than others. Viruses and bacteria spread easily from one child to another when they share the same towel. Getting hands dry is important. Damp hands create damp surfaces, which encourages survival of bacteria, viruses and organisms like Giardia.
There are a range of options to control room temperature, but safety of children is paramount.
There are a variety of reasons why we collect personal information, including:
There are a written emergency plan and supplies to ensure the care and safety of children and adults at the service. The plan must include evacuation procedures for the services premises, which apply in a variety of emergency situations, and which are consistent with the fire evacuation scheme for the building.
There are a written emergency plan and supplies to ensure the care and safety of the children and educator at the home and when away from the home. The plan must include evacuation procedures that apply in a variety of emergency situations and that are relevant to the home.
There are additional duties for
There are additional record keeping requirements for services offering Hours ECE. These can be found in Chapter .
There are additional recordkeeping requirements for services offering Hours ECE. These can be found in Chapter .
There are additional requirements services must meet in order to receive this funding.
There are also group supervision qualification requirements as set out in the ECE Funding Handbook.
There are also guidelines for the requirements to have a person who is responsible at an early learning service.
There are also guidelines to follow about changing nappies.
There are different ways this could be achieved, depending on the age of the children attending the home. These include:
There are different ways to provide drinking water to ensure children maintain an adequate hydration level. These include:
There are facilities (or appropriate arrangements in place) for hygienic handwashing and drying in any ECE activity room.
There are facilities for the hygienic preparation, storage andor serving of food and drink that contain:
There are four types of funding covered in this Handbook including ECE Funding Subsidy, Hours ECE, Equity Funding and Annual TopUp for Isolated Services (ATIS).
There are guidelines for creating safe sleeping areas and washing linen.
There are hygienic facilities (other than those required by PF) or alternative arrangements available for the preparation and cleaning up of paint and other art materials.
There are hygienic facilities (other than those used for body wash) or alternative arrangements available for the preparation and cleaning up of paint and other art materials.
There are items that first aid kits should include to meet the requirements of centrebased ECE licensing criterion PF.
There are items that first aid kits should include to meet the requirements of homebased ECE licensing criterion PF.
There are legal requirements that must be met to operate any premises as an early childhood service.
There are many different options for early learning in New Zealand for children from birth up to years old.
There are many possible approaches to Pacific Languages in Education, including bilingual and immersion education, teaching Pacific languages within the New Zealand Curriculum and supporting community education
There are new modules to support school boards to meet their legal requirement for supporting teachers on recognising and responding to student distress.
There are no public transport options available.
There are no requirements for how you engage a supplier. We do recommend you get a written quote.
There are numerous situations in a hospitalbased setting where information and guidance from outside agencies and specialist services can enhance the ability of a child to fully access the curriculum and therefore improve their educational outcomes. Support and assistance may be focused on an individual child and
There are regular opportunities provided for parents to share their goals for their child with educators.
There are regulations about food safety that early learning services have to follow. These include food allergies, types of foods and how they can be served.
There are resources available that are designed specifically for young people to use themselves.
There are rules around how toilet and washing areas are designed and used.
There are safe and comfortable (indoor and outdoor) spaces for infants, toddlers or children not walking to lie, roll, creep, crawl, pull themselves up, learn to walk and to be protected from more mobile children.
There are safe and comfortable spaces for infants, toddlers or children not walking to lie, roll, creep, crawl, pull themselves up, learn to walk, and be protected from more mobile children.
There are safe and comfortable spaces in any ECE activity room for infants, toddlers, or children not walking to lie, roll, creep, crawl, pull themselves up, learn to walk, and to be protected from more mobile children.
There are several reasons why the media team may refuse to provide all or some of the information requested by the media. These are set out below.
There are several work programmes underway to deliver the priorities and reach our achievement target:
There are some occasions in which it is acceptable to observe a child in an alternative location.
There are spaces for the safe storage of childrens play equipment, personal belongings, cleaning materials, and confidential administrative records.
There are spaces for the safe storage of equipment and materials.
There are start dates at the beginning and middle of each school term.
There are sufficient spaces for equipment and material to be stored safely. Stored equipment and materials can be easily and safely accessed by adults, and where practicable, by children.
There are teacher certification requirements for education and care services, hospitalbased services and kindergartens.
There are times when the media team cannot provide the information requested. This is either because there is a good reason under the Act for refusing the request or because of the time it will take to provide the information.
There is a cost involved, but they have several advantages:
There is a cost to applicants for this service. To find out more, go to CV Check.
There is a dedicated NELP page on
There is a first aid kit containing basic first aid supplies for minor injuries that may occur at the group. The kit is:
There is a first aid kit that:
There is a lot to get to cover today.
There is a maximum of operational days in September.
There is a plumbing fixture (such as a shower, shub or bath) for washing sick or soiled children.
There is a range of options, but safety of children is paramount. See HS Hazard management.
There is a safe and hygienic place for children attending to sit when eating.
There is a set amount of teaching time that schools must be open for each year. Having flexible dates allows each school to meet this requirement and accommodate local events and teacheronly days.
There is a specific evacuation plan for the sleep room where there are multilevel cots (HS)
There is a specific process and timeframe schools must follow to allocate outofzone places. Schools and
There is a supervision criterion which all homebased services must meet. Refer to HS for requirements and guidance.
There is a template that services can use to record the required information.
There is a toilet and hygienic handwashing and drying facilities suitable for the use of children attending.
There is a toilet and hygienic handwashing and drying facilities suitable for the use of the children attending.
There is a written child protection policy that meets the requirements of the Childrens Act . The policy contains provisions for the identification and reporting of child abuse and neglect, and information about how the service will keep children safe from abuse and neglect, and how it will respond to suspected child abuse and neglect.
There is additional information on the parents section of our website, including:
There is also a part of the application that must come from the school.
There is an adult present at all times for every children attending (or part thereof) that:
There is an adult present at all times for every children attending (or part thereof) who:
There is an adult present, at all times while children are attending, who:
There is an outdoor activity space that is:
There is at least tap delivering warm water (over an individual or shared handbasin) for every persons (or part thereof) at the service (that is to say, children attending and adults counting towards the required adult:child ratio).
There is more information on the playground safety standard and a handbook for ECE services to download.
There is more work to do to support Pacific Languages in Education in Aotearoa. In this Action Plan, we have identified the first wave of actions to provide a platform for growth. It will be necessary to update these actions on an ongoing basis.
There is no minimum space requirement for this area to meet the criterion to allow flexibility for services.
There is no requirement that the continuous service in a teaching role is at service.
There is no suitable school within reasonable travel distance of where the student lives (Access Barrier Allowance).
There is now a dedicated NELP page on
There is significant domestic and international evidence that learners who are supported in their community languages achieve improved education and wellbeing outcomes.
There is some new terminology that you, um,
There is space (away from where food is stored, prepared, or eaten) where a sick child can:
There is space available for the restful sleep of children who need it at any time they are attending.
There is space for adults working at the service to:
There may be a fee for joining the waiting list.
There may be costs associated with calling an ambulance. Centres should plan in advance for this contingency.
There may be costs associated with calling an ambulance. Services should plan in advance for this contingency.
There may be exceptions to this. Contact your Ministry regional office for more details.
There must also be a suitably qualified person responsible at each service. They are responsible for the daytoday education and care, comfort and health and safety of the children at your service.
There must always be first aid kit at the centre, and having a second kit to take on excursions will be necessary if some children remain at the centre during excursions.
There must be person responsible for every children.
There must be adequate ventilation in every room in the home that is used by children. Good ventilation is particularly important for rooms children sleep in, where nappies are changed, and bathrooms.
There needs to be adequate space and facilities to prepare and clean up paint and other art materials. A laundry tub would be appropriate for art preparation and clean up. Bathroom facilities are not appropriate.
There needs to be adequate space and facilities to prepare and clean up paint and other art materials. Body wash facilities must not be used for art preparation and clean up.
There service has at least toilet for every to persons. Persons are defined as children aged and older and teaching staff that count towards the required adult:child ratio.
There should also be opportunities for
There should also be opportunities for educators and coordinators to engage in professional reading and to discuss and debate ideas and theories, identifying meaningful ways to put their new knowledge into practice.
There should be no parts smaller than a pingpong ball, no sharp or rough edges and no parts that are easily broken off.
There was the, um, there was the website
There will be hospital policy covering adults who may not have access to a child. Unless a court order rules otherwise, all parents and guardians are entitled to:
There will be limits on some schools ability to accommodate these final two points, particularly depending on its size and location. It is up to the board to decide on their relevance and applicability.
There will need to be adequate hygienic storage for this purpose. You will also need to ensure that the storage does not create hazards to children but is easily accessible to the educator. For bedding, this could be in the linen cupboard.
Therefore, it is a form of unjustified absence truant.
These service types were introduced in May .
These Ministry of Education documents were produced during the development of policy to strengthen academic freedom and freedom of expression in universities.
These accounts need to have different, unique, and strong passwords.
These activities can be done on easels, table tops or the floor.
These all support better indoor environments.
These are all forms of alternative provision.
These are iterative, dynamic documents, which are regularly refreshed and refined as forecasts and situations change.
These are just some examples of ways that Component A Equity Funding can be used.
These are just some of the ways Component D Equity Funding can be used.
These are just some of the ways that Component B equity funding can be used.
These are just some of the ways that Component C Equity Funding can be used.
These are minimum salary scales, and services can choose to pay their teachers above these rates.
These are not the only situations where the Frequent Absence Rule should be applied.
These are set out as part of the services licensing requirements.
These are the criteria about administering medicine to children at early learning services.
These are the main report templates you will need for your submissions.
These are the resourcing rolls we use to calculate your operational funding instalments.
These are the standard terms and conditions for schoolled procurement.
These are the unit standards that provide a first aid qualification that meet the requirements of the licensing criteria.
These centres are licensed in accordance with the Education and Training Act under the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations , which prescribe minimum standards that each licensed service must meet. Licensing criteria are used to assess how the centres meet the minimum standards required by the regulations.
These could be completed at a tertiary education provider, or a vocational pathway such as workplace training.
These could be displayed on a notice board so they are clearly visible and can be read by parents
These forms, along with supporting documentation, must be retained by the service.
These guidelines will help homebased ECE services understand how to meet the requirements of regulation ()(c). They were developed in consultation with representatives of the homebased ECE sector and replace previously information on this topic.
These guidelines will help homebased ECE services understand how to meet the requirements of regulation ()(d)(ii).
These higher salary scales can be paid to qualified, certificated teachers and also to teachers in management roles.
These indicative route maps do not cover all school bus services. These maps exclude:
These key documents offer background information on the Highest Needs Review.
These might look different to what is offered for
These options can also be viewed in infographics on the Playcentre Aotearoa website.
These pages contain instructions about how to complete a task, for example filling out your RS Return.
These pages help you find your way around the handbook.
These pathways will include bilingual early learning services, bilingual and immersion provision in primary schools, opportunities for teaching these languages as subjects in primary and secondary education, including NCEA, and pathways into tertiary education.
These priorities set the direction for our work programmes and how we will assist schools and
These programmes are governmentfunded and free.
These records must be kept by, or available to, the service provider as long as the person is employed or engaged.
These requirements are part of your licence and come under the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations .
These resources are templates and starters for schools to use and adjust for communicating with parents. They include topics like:
These resources from trusted sources can help you learn more about GenAI.
These scholarships provide financial assistance to Pacific students who are enrolled at tertiary education institutions in New Zealand.
These schools can have an enrolment scheme to manage their rolls. Enrolment schemes for these schools may not include a home zone or ballot. They will need to decide how they determine which students are considered local.
These services are licensed in accordance with the Education and Training Act under the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations , which prescribe minimum standards that each licensed service must meet. Licensing criteria are used to assess how the services meet the minimum standards required by the regulations.
These services can be privately owned, or owned and operated by a community group. Some are based within a workplace or university for staff and students to use for their children. There are also teen parent units where parents can attend school while their children go to an associated early learning service.
These services may require a different approach to funding so that continued viability of the service is ensured.
These services must develop a way to retain this information, how they do this is up to them as long as these records can be accessed.
These services should contact a health protection officer at their local public health unit or an environmental health officer at their local council for advice.
These services should contact their Ministry regional office for more information.
These sessions are separated into short and concise user activities.
These specific items may not be reused without express permission.
These supports are planned to be available by May in time for midyear reporting.
These terms of use apply to all of the Ministry of Educations social media accounts.
These terms of use will be reviewed every months to ensure they are fit for purpose. They may be at any time without notice.
These totals are your Staff Hour Count.
These videos give an overview of preparing the annual financial statements and the audit process.
These will be, um, I will put these in the chat shortly, um,
They also provide a quality improvement cycle, selfreview template and planning questions. These are intended to help early learning services plan for and review their use of Targeted Funding.
They are also an indicator of good management and administration practices necessary to ensure the safety of the children attending.
They are easy to replace.
They are futurefocused, providing information about medium and longterm trends, risks and opportunities, including analysis and policy options. Theyre also an opportunity to enhance public debate on longterm issues and contribute to future decision making.
They are identified by the compass symbol.
They are often referred to as coordinators or visiting teachers.
They are often set up in community halls. To be a playgroup, more than half the children attending must have a parent there with them. There is often a small charge to attend.
They are the difference between hours of funding less the Hours ECE Hours, and can be claimed up to six hours per day per child.
They can also be downloaded from the Education Review Office.
They can be used for other cleaning purposes.
They can count towards the requirement in HS, where adult must hold a current first aid qualification for every children attending.
They can have a variety of different operating structures, philosophies and affiliations such as Montessori or Rudolf Steiner.
They can use this information to steal, sell, or destroy identities and important data.
They do not spread infections.
They ensure that it is clear when staff are responsible for children and when they can take lunch breaks or noncontact planning time, etc. Draft schedules should be developed by newly established services to work out:
They include directions to other relevant parts of the handbook. Directions are usually found at the start of each chapter or section.
They must meet all applicable licensing criteria:
They must provide pastoral care and support to their exchange students. While EPOs cannot be signatories of the Education (Pastoral Care of International Students) Code of Practice , they must meet the standards set out in the Code.
They need this information in case there is an outbreak of a vaccinepreventable disease at the early learning service. Children who are not immunised may be asked to stay at home if there is an outbreak.
They say that in bargaining, they will raise issues important to the ECE sector, taking a lead from the though it is likely to mean taking a stand on pay parity, noncontact time, ratios, professional development, and health and safety.
They should be able to confidently and knowledgeably describe how children (walking and nonwalking) will be managed during an emergency drill.
They should be able to confidently identify the roles that they and others will play during an emergency drill.
They should be done at least every months for all systems and applications. Your IT lead can decide the frequency of these reviews, depending on your schools needs.
They sign the contract with the supplier on behalf of the school.
They will be, um, they will be uploaded,
Things to consider include:
Think about how children can move freely without hurting each other. If children are climbing or sliding or jumping, make sure that there is enough cushioning on the floor for safe landing.
Think about how the furniture, equipment, and resources provided at your playgroup:
Think about information you already have on hand that you can use such as documented plans, photos, daily diaries, meeting minutes.
Think about the costs to run the playgroup. Some playgroups are run by
Think about the size, sturdiness and durability of items available to children, especially infants and toddlers.
Think about the space available in your building for nappy changing.
Think it definitely could fit in that, um, that Q code,
This Action Plan maps how we will achieve system change to better support Pacific learners and families in five key areas. This is critical to give life to the year vision for all learners and families in Aotearoa, New Zealand and to the objectives of the Pacific Wellbeing Strategy and Pacific Languages Strategy.
This activity is more suitable for older children and should always be closely supervised.
This adjustment helps the cash flow model to calculate the cash paid by the school to the leasing company as a borrowing cost.
This allowance will be calculated at a prorata rate for part time certificated
This allowance will be calculated at a prorata rate for part time certificated teacher, based on the total number of hours they are employed for.
This allowance will be paid to services monthly in arrears following the receipt of a services application.
This also applies if we find issues of noncompliance that are not related to the reported incident or complaint we were investigating.
This appendix contains resources and examples referred to in this handbook.
This appendix contains the funding rate tables for different service types.
This appendix contains the salary scales for education and care services, including minimum salary scales from January and updates that will be available from November .
This appendix lists the legal names of existing kindergarten associations that currently meet the definition of a kindergarten association in the Glossary.
This applies to adults living in a home where homebased education and care takes place.
This cabinet paper was translated into several languages, available on request.
This can include experience as a certificated teacher working for other immersion or bilingual services that does not use the same Pacific language.
This chapter contains the following topics:
This chapter explains how to ensure that funding continues when the need for flexibility arises.
This criterion aims to ensure adults and children are kept safe from harm.
This criterion aims to ensure children attending without a parent or caregiver are supervised and supported.
This criterion aims to ensure the safety of children in an emergency and also that adults have the necessary knowledge and supplies to deal with any emergency situation.
This criterion aims to keep children safe by ensuring that measures are in place to secure the outdoor environment.
This criterion aims to uphold the safety and wellbeing of children.
This criterion aims to uphold the wellbeing of children.
This criterion does not apply to
This criterion does not require that infants and toddlers are kept separated from older children.
This criterion does not require that infants and toddlers are kept separated from older children. Mixedage settings and
This criterion is intended to ensure that there are hygienic handwashing, drying and toileting facilities for children.
This criterion is intended to ensure the safety of infants and toddlers and to support their exploration, development and learning.
This criterion is intended to make sure children can benefit from engaging in physically active play when no outdoor area is provided.
This criterion is intended to provide parents and caregivers with information about the operation of the playgroup.
This criterion makes more explicit the requirement to make some provision for children who need to sleep while attending the service but recognises that it is a rare occurrence.
This criterion makes sure the design and layout of the premises enables children to have access to a wide range of experiences.
This criterion makes sure what happens at playgroup is in line with the early childhood curriculum
This criterion recognises that:
This data informs robust, consistent decisionmaking so school property is always (at a minimum) warm, safe and dry for all schools across the motu.
This declaration is part of the enrolment agreement example and can be found in Appendix .
This describes the funding process for newly licensed services:
This directory currently covers quantity surveying services, master planning and lead design services. Over time, we will add further consultancy services.
This directory is for Ministry of Educationled projects, tendered by:
This document explains how to find your TDA.
This document explains how to get a UIP portal login and use the portal. It also covers how the EEL is calculated and what data you need to report to us.
This document outlines safety drills to teach to
This document sets out who you should contact.
This does not mean children must never be able to go into the centre kitchen. There are likely to be times when children will need to access kitchen and cooking facilities to take part in supervised activities such as cooking and food preparation.
This email and phone number are for news media enquiries only.
This evacuation procedure must cover all emergency situations including, but not limited to fire, earthquake, tsunami, flood, storm, volcano, landslide and so on. The procedure has a broader scope than just fire evacuation and must be consistent with the overarching Fire and Emergency NZ approved fire evacuation scheme.
This form does not notify Education Payroll. You will also need to also fill in the EdPay and NOVO forms to claim the bus controller allowance.
This form should be used to document the medical reasons behind an exemption from the absence rules. It must be completed by a registered medical practitioner.
This group is characterised by high levels of language endangerment, low numbers of speakers, low intergenerational transmission and strong constitutional ties to Aotearoa with specific constitutional obligations to revitalise these languages. The largest populations of these groups in the world are found in Aotearoa, often in concentrated communities.
This group is characterised by smaller, emerging populations of language speakers with some degree of formal relationship with New Zealand. There are smaller numbers of people from these communities who are New Zealandborn and varying levels of language endangerment.
This guidance should be read in conjunction with the guidance for the other criteria relating to sleep (Premises and facilities to (on this page) and Health and safety to ).
This guidance should be read in conjunction with the guidance for the other criteria relating to sleep in Premises and facilities to (on this page) and Health and safety to .
This guide provides schools with information and resources to assess attendance patterns within their school and put in place appropriate policies and practices to improve student attendance.
This guide sets out the requirements your school needs to meet under the Vulnerable Childrens Act.
This handbook contains types of information.
This handbook contains a lot of information that is relevant for all service types. There are also some sections that are of interest to some services only.
This handbook has everything you need to know about early childhood funding including the ECE Funding Subsidy, Hours.
This handbook has everything you need to know about early childhood funding, including the ECE Funding Subsidy, Hours ECE funding, equity funding and the annual topup for isolated services.
This handbook is designed to be a onestopshop of everything you need to know about early childhood funding, including:
This handbook sets out the conditions for funding payments to playgroups.
This includes guidance for safety checking requirements at playgroups and Playcentres.
This includes hygienic food preparation, and making sure food is able to be eaten safely. An example is grating hard foods like apples and carrots. If you provide your childs lunch and snacks, you may be asked to follow these food safety rules.
This includes information on who to contact to have an international first aid qualification assessed to see if it meets requirements.
This includes looking at:
This includes meeting requirements for record keeping and reporting on the use of funding.
This includes who to contact to have an international first aid qualification assessed to see if it meets requirements.
This information allows the Ministry to ensure that the correct number of funded child hours have been claimed by the service.
This information does not apply to certificated playgroups. Instead, refer to the Playgroup funding handbook.
This information must be available at the service within days of the end of the financial year.
This information will include:
This is a bar chart showing of Year students at or above the expected curriculum level for their age in reading, writing and maths by December .
This is a criterion where health expertise can provide guidance on hygienic practices and the control of infection. Service providers are also reminded that under Regulation , the Ministry of Education may require a service provider to obtain a report from a public health unit in order to assess whether the facilities and procedures used at the centre are adequate to prevent the spread of infection.
This is a line chart showing the proportion of students present for more than of the term. The target is . It decreased to a percentage in the low s in and , then increased to over in . In , the percentage fell to below and saw sharp increases and decreases around until late . In , the percentage fell to , and increased to in . It decreased again to under in , but had a
This is a national panel of suppliers for the delivery of capital works projects over ,.
This is a programme for parents of kids aged , which provides you with skills to better support your child.
This is a requirement for teacherled centrebased services and allday kindergartens only.
This is a requirement of the Childrens Act .
This is a requirement under the Education and Training Act.
This is a specialised subpanel of the AllofGovernment (AoG) construction consultancy services (CCS) panel. It is only available for Ministryled projects.
This is an appropriate way to simplify your document as it is important you do not delete any rows. Before we start the session, it is important that you keep a copy of the model.
This is an estimate of new entrants likely to enrol before October. The adjustment is added to the Year roll to give an adjusted total.
This is our series of short instructional videos for using the Kiwi Park model.
This is outlined in section of the Education and Training Act .
This is public transport that:
This is required by the Education and Training Act .
This is the Under s FCHs for the day.
This is the from which the change of circumstances takes effect. For example, the on which the service begins offering Hours ECE, or the on which the licensed maximum number of children increased.
This is the information you will provide to potential suppliers in your tender documents.
This is the largest review
This is the most common FA method. Using an app on your phone, you receive a time code which you must enter within a set timeframe.
This is the section of your operation statement where you explain the purpose of your group and what you want it to achieve for children and their parents and caregivers. This will include the shared beliefs and values that are important to parents and caregivers in the playgroup. Every statement of philosophy will be different, but you might want to include:
This is the total number of yearolds, yearolds and yearolds you estimate will receive Hours ECE.
This is where a home educator looks after children in a private home. This could be their home, your home or another home. Homebased educators can have up to children from birth to until they start school.
This keeps the financial records of the community group and the ECE service separate.
This limit is specified in the vehicles Certificate of Loading. Transport service providers are responsible for ensuring that they dont exceed loading limits.
This list of providers does not include:
This makes it faster and easier for staff to log in securely.
This may include but is not limited to:
This may include when we are considering and investigating compliance breaches, complaints, and initiating our own investigations or inquiries. We take all steps that are reasonable to ensure that the information we provide to third parties is accurate.
This means that every licensed homebased service must have person responsible, often called the coordinator or visiting teacher, for every children attending at any one time. For services with to children attending there must be persons responsible.
This measure is used for teacherled centrebased services only.
This media release was translated into several languages, available on request.
This method of populating the financial statements is time consuming and can cause errors if you are not sure how the schools GL codes are mapped to the Ministry codes.
This might, for example, include an item on the record which states:
This must be submitted in February each year for the funding received for the previous calendar year. Details on how Targeted Funding was used must be provided at the individual service level and specify:
This needs to be completed:
This new section will mean different things for the different groups of people in our education system.
This pack provides information about the planning and reporting process for your community. It explains the role the community has in the process.
This page contains change of service provider (ownership) information for funding purposes.
This page outlines the eligibility conditions for the ECE Funding Subsidy.
This page will be regularly .
This payment is made up of the advance for July, August, September, October, and washup for February, March, April and May.
This payment is made up of the advance for March, April, May, June, and washup for October, November, December and January.
This payment is made up of the advance for November, December, January, February, and washup for June, July, August and September.
This policy should cover:
This poster sets out who needs to be checked before working at your school, and what steps that involves.
This presentation has guidance about engaging with schools and communities about proposed changes at school.
This principle recognises that children learn through interacting with the people, places and things in their environments. Playgroups can help with this by providing a wide and interesting array of people, places and things for children to interact with.
This principle recognises that children live and grow as members of families and communities and these groups influence their early learning experiences. Family and local community values and aspirations are incorporated into playgroup sessions by respecting differing viewpoints and fostering family and community involvement.
This privacy statement applies to your personal and other information collected through the Learner Identity Broker service.
This process is mandatory for procurements of , or more.
This proposed change to the Act would require school boards to have an Attendance Management Plan by Term . The plan must set out a strategy and process for the school to identify and respond to student absences, with the purpose of returning students to school.
This requires the following steps.
This research was translated into several languages, available on request.
This right includes attending school all hours that the school is open for instruction. Students with special education needs have the same rights to education as other students.
This role is usually filled by a professional project manager.
This section contains ECE Funding Subsidy information for all services.
This section explains how services can calculate Hours ECE Funding.
This section explains how services can calculate the ECE Funding Subsidy.
This section explains how you can transfer the Certificated and Other Teacher hour information from your Early Childhood Staff Record to your RS Return.
This section explains how you can use the Funding Rate Table to find the funding rate for each service and that services can access higher funding rates by meeting quality requirements.
This section explains the Three Week Rule, and how to apply it.
This section explains the criteria for exemption from the absence rules, and how services can apply for an exemption.
This section explains the financial payments services may and may not request from parents for the period children are enrolled for Hours ECE.
This section explains what records ECE services must keep to support their funding claims.
This section illustrates how the Frequent Absence Rule can be applied in the three different situations outlined in the previous section.
This section is for new ECE services.
This section is for services beginning, or ceasing to offer Hours ECE.
This section outlines the eligibility conditions for services eligible to provide Hours ECE and children eligible to receive Hours ECE.
This section outlines what kind of financial information a service should send to the Ministry and when to send it.
This section provides a brief overview of the link between licensing and funding.
This section provides information about the previous iteration of Tau Mai Te Reo (). Tau Mai Te Reo has now been refreshed as part of the Education Work Programme.
This section sets out the circumstances where the Ministry may recover funding from services or service providers.
This section was removed April
This section was removed in April .
This section was removed in June .
This service is for students who have been approved by us. It is free.
This service is provided for state schools only because the Ministry of Education is the owner of these sites. Private and stateintegrated schools are free to directly engage the services of the ERCs themselves but the contracting arrangement would be between these parties.
This should also immediately be reported to your regional office.
This should at least include:
This should be developed in conjunction with parents so there is a shared understanding of what actions staff may take.
This should be set out in your schools cyber security policy.
This site is owned and maintained by the Ministry of Education.
This space is located and designed to:
This statement applies to information gathered by us, our contractors, or any third parties engaged by us.
This table can be found in the Appendix . This will be each time there is a change to the ECE Funding Subsidy rates.
This team should have at least people and may include:
This template also should be to provide a current profile of the list of systems and permissions that are allocated to a staff member. This will make the offboarding process easier for the IT administrator.
This tile is on your homepage.
This toolkit includes worksheets that schools may use during the planning process.
This transparency statement explains how we collect, use, and share information gathered about individuals and organisations for the purposes of carrying out our statutory functions under the Education Act .
This video will help employers and teachers decide which initial step on the salary scale the teacher should be on.
This was the present code, the late code,
This website and its contents are subject to copyright laws of New Zealand and, through international treaties, other countries.
This will be communicated, um, via the school bulletin, um,
This will ensure that funding claims are accepted by the Ministry in the event of a funding claim audit.
This will occur only when the service is filled to its maximum capacity and the casual child is directly replacing an absent child who is claiming Hours ECE.
This will often involve you and your child making several visits before their official start . The first visit will likely be short, with each subsequent visit being a bit longer. When the child is ready, you might be encouraged to leave them at the service for a time.
This year the Ministry of Education will work closely with schools to develop and implement attendance management plans.
Three Week Rule for Continuous Absence
Three Week Rule for Continuous Absence:
Three Week Rule: extension for extended nonoperation
Three Week Rule: extension for extended nonoperation:
Three eligibility criteria make sure school transport assistance is provided to the students who need it most.
Three of these scholarships are for school leavers to train as teachers.
Throughout this section there are examples of services calculating their Hours ECE funding.
Throughout this section there are examples of two services calculating their ECE Funding Subsidy.
Thursday September : Quarter operational funding instalment .
Thursday June : Quarter operational funding instalment in
Thursday March : Quarter operational funding instalment and confirmed entitlement staffing in
Thursday July : July roll return due.
Tick one of the boxes with the reason for the bank account change.
TikTok community guidelines
Time between exposure and sickness
Time taken to complete the emergency drill (for each separate group if appropriate).
Tip: Services can find an auditor or check whether their auditor is a CA ANZ member by visiting the Chartered Accountants of Australia and New Zealand website.
Tips and starters: working together
Tips are identified by the light bulb symbol.
Tips are identified by this block.
Tips for parents and caregivers on child safety (including hot water safety).
To access the School Data Portal, go to services.education.govt.nz, click on the Education Sector Logon,
To add an additional partner school to your approved exchange programme, use this form.
To answer this question respondents will choose one of options:
To answer this question your service must choose one of options:
To apply for a licence, choose the type of early learning service you are opening.
To apply the Frequent Absence Rule, you must check child attendance patterns at the end of each month.
To apply, fill out the application form that applies to your school. Your application must include a copy of your highest roll sorted by funding year level. Contact your student management system (SMS) provider if you need help to create this.
To apply, you must be the childs parent or legal guardian. All of your childs legal guardians need to be in agreement about home education.
To avoid any conflicts of interests, owners or operators of early learning services must use a third party to complete their own safety checks and checks of any person who is related or closely connected.
To be approved, you must meet requirement related to:
To be considered for transport assistance, your child must meet all of the following criteria.
To be counted as participating in a hospitalbased service a child must be admitted to the hospital, or be attending the hospital as an outpatient for visits following an admission and
To be eligible for SESTA, a child or young person must:
To be eligible for SESTA, your child must:
To be eligible for quality funding rates, licensed playcentres must meet or more of the options below. Where or more different types of training are required, these must be held by separate people.
To be entitled to the full amount of Targeted Funding, early learning services must not close or be suspended during the period that Targeted Funding is provided for.
To be helpful, the policy should contain definitions of neglect and abuse so that adults can apply these consistently when needed.
To be helpful, the policy should contain definitions of neglect and abuse so that staff can apply these consistently when needed.
To be licensed by us, all services must meet our standards for education and care, including health and safety, curriculum, premises and facilities, governance and management, and child protection.
To complete the eligibility assessment, the Ministry will extract childlevel attendance data from ELI. Early learning services should ensure their ELI data is kept upto. Failure to do so may affect their funding entitlement.
To comply with these standards, schools and
To confirm what minimum salary levels your service intends to meet, the Attestation for Certificated Teachers section asks:
To count as an adult for each service, a person must be at least years old and have responsibilities other than food preparation, serving, administration, or maintenance.
To demonstrate compliance, your EC application (Application for a Centrebased Early Learning Service) must be accompanied by evidence of staff being employed or engaged and ready to commence work when the licence is issued.
To do this, we collect, use, and share personal information in line with the Privacy Act to carry out our role under the Education and Training Act.
To download the completion certificate, follow the steps below.
To employ teachers for your ECE service
To enable children to access the outdoors easily and safely, the outdoor activity space needs to be connected to the indoor activity space. Where the outdoor space is lower or higher than the indoor space, a ramp or steps can be used to provide access between the two.
To ensure that local students have access to our new school and to manage the roll effectively, we have developed a proposed enrolment scheme in consultation with the local network of schools. We are now seeking your feedback on this proposed scheme.
To fill in the application form, you will need lots of information about your child and their needs. You can find the details of what information you need by opening the online application form. You dont need to start an application to view this information.
To find out more about the options available in your area you will need to check with individual services. This is because not all services even within the same group operate in exactly the same way.
To find out the regulated (ratio) staff requirements for your service, please refer to the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations .
To find out when you will receive your first payment, please contact your Ministry regional office.
To find the course, log in with your Education Sector Logon (ESL) details, and search catalogue for bus.
To find this and future years term dates and halfday requirements, visit the following page.
To get a procurement plan approved:
To get in touch with your regional advisor, email us.
To get the contract signed:
To help services correctly apply this condition clause, operational guidelines are available.
To help us make sure that you receive the correct information, be as specific as you can in identifying the information you want.
To implement the least privilege, IT leads should check:
To increase regular attendance rates, the Government has set a target: by , of students are present for more than of the term.
To join, a supplier needs to be a member of the AoG CCS panel.
To let us know about a change in your childs circumstances, contact us.
To make nappy changing space as safe, comfortable and hygienic for everyone as possible, consider the following:
To make paper towels more economical, halfsized paper towels are available that can be used with standard dispensers. You can reduce mess by teaching children to scrunch the paper towel into the smallest ball they can, before dropping it in the bin.
To meet this criterion in a way that is consistent with
To meet this criterion in a way that is consistent with the prescribed curriculum framework each early learning service should design its own culturally responsive, bicultural curriculum priorities using
To meet this criterion in a way that is consistent with the prescribed curriculum framework each licensed early learning service should design its own culturally responsive, bicultural curriculum priorities using
To meet this objective, a school board must meet a list of supporting objectives. These are generally the same as current objectives, apart from the changes below.
To notify us of a change of bus controller at your school, fill in the change of bus controller form.
To order, go to Down the Back of the Chair or email
To receive the Daily Bus Conveyance allowance your child must meet the criteria for being eligible for transport assistance and have limited access to a school bus. This means either:
To reduce the risk of choking on these foods the educator can:
To reduce the risk of choking on these foods:
To request for learning support, you can:
To request support for your child, phone or email your regional office.
To start a certified playgroup or
To start an early learning service, you need to know what type of service you want to open and if you need to apply for a licence.
To support the refresh of
To track our progress towards improving achievement, the Government has set a target: by December , of Year students are at or above the expected curriculum level for their age in reading, writing and maths.
To ungroup the sheets, right mouse click on the bottom of the worksheet and select Ungroup Sheets.
Toddlers explore in different ways they are energetic and on the move. Often their desires are ahead of their language and their physical abilities.
Toddlers: about to years old
Toilet and handwashing facilities
Toilet and handwashing facilities at early learning services
Toilets and handwashing areas have spaces to give children some privacy when they need it, while also making sure they are safe.
Toilets for adults need to be fullsized, and able to be made private when being used.
Toilets, washing and nappy changing
Total Certificated Teacher Hours Other Teacher Hours for the month period (rounded)
Total Certificated Teacher Hours for the month period (rounded)
Total Hours worked during the ECE Census week.
Total amount of Targeted Funding received.
Total hours claimed per day
Total hours enrolled per week
Total the daily Hours ECE hours for all children.
Total these by day for all children. This is the total hours that can be claimed.
Toys and equipment selected for use in playgroups should be:
Tracey Mouat (Palmerston North)
Traditionally in New Zealand, children have started school on or shortly after their fifth birthday. Many still do, but now some schools are using cohort entry with students starting in groups.
Traffic management and car parks
Training as part of new staff and volunteer induction.
Training as part of new staff induction.
Training could be provided by any of:
Training could be provided via a conversationdemonstrationwritten information by any of:
Training for school leaders and administration staff
Transferring eligibility to another school
Transforming how our children learn to read
Transition attendance plan template
Transitional school visits
Transitional school visits funding rule
Transitional school visits:
Transparency statement about information gathering for regulatory compliance purposes
Transparency statement: Information gathering for regulatory compliance
Transport Delivery Advisor contact details by location
Transport Delivery Advisor contact information
Transport assistance for children with safety or mobility needs
Transport assistance is not available if you have public transport in your area. This is public transport that:
Transport between home and an alternate address is your responsibility.
Transport for early learning services
Transport providers can only take ineligible students if it does not disadvantage an eligible student and they have a seat on the bus for everyone. It also must not require the contracted route to change.
Transport providers must make sure their staff and vehicles meet legal requirements.
Transport service providers decide where the bus will stop along the way.
Tuesday April : Quarter operational funding instalment paid.
Tuesday July : Quarter operational funding instalment paid.
Tuesday March : Banking staffing balancing period ends.
Tuesday January : End of banking staffing Year PP funding code change requests to Education Payroll.
Two new rapid payment options
Twofactor authentication (FA) adds an extra level of security to your school accounts. It should be required for specific roles and accounts at schools or kura.
Twofactor authentication (FA) adds an extra verification step to access an account or network.
Type of service that must provide this information
Types of assistance available
Types of early learning services
Types of information in the ECE funding handbook JPG
Types of primary and secondary education
Types of school exchanges
Typically, a SMS provides more functionality than ELI Web. ELI Web is a freeofcharge Ministry application designed to collect the required data from licensed early childhood services that do not use a SMS.
Uh, I remember my school policy was five days,
Uh, is it a, is it a form of illness and medical absence
Uh, rural schools, when students go with whanau
Uh, should we move to mark the role at the end
Uh, what we have done here is weve made a deliberate, uh,
Uh, you should be able to record time left.
Um, I am going to stop sharing the presentation so I can,
Um, I can, I can fully answer that.
Um, I do see that everyones mic is turned off.
Um, I dont expect people to enjoy a welldeserved holiday,
Um, I suspect a number of,
Um, I think its school policy,
Um, I think thats changing
Um, I think this is where we, um, take us as sort
Um, I think you answered that,
Um, I will have that written down for the next time.
Um, Im Tina Lech, uh, based here in ua,
Um, Im senior advisor here at the Ministry,
Um, Rebecca, just while weve got you, um,
Um, after the presentation, when we get
Um, all ch all required changes will be made in time
Um, and a, uh, into the guidelines where possible,
Um, and also, um, will likely be useful
Um, and as I said, we also left the holiday
Um, and as far as Im aware, um,
Um, and before we kick off, just a few housekeeping things
Um, and further supporting the guidelines, there will be
Um, and if there have, there have only the thereve, uh,
Um, and so if youve got any questions concerning that, um,
Um, and so there could be some guidance coming, uh, midway
Um, and so we did have, um, a number of school, uh,
Um, and so, but there will be further guidance
Um, and then I will put up a, actually
Um, and then just to follow up with
Um, and then we will launch a presentation and kick into it.
Um, and they do have the opportunity
Um, and when we are having conversations with our whanau
Um, and you could have that conversation then,
Um, and youre also more than welcome to interact, um,
Um, and youre welcome to get through to me.
Um, as I said previously,
Um, but I see what Tanyas put in the, the chat.
Um, but for the most part, the, um, what I can share is
Um, but most importantly provide you with an opportunity
Um, but one thing we also have is,
Um, but that was never their intended purpose.
Um, but the X code is for your NCANCQA exams.
Um, but the, the question marks the unknown temporary code,
Um, but through strong sector feedback, they told us
Um, but we are marking half day attendance, so I would say
Um, but we will be providing some guidance in the,
Um, but we, uh, one thing, uh, we had a variety of
Um, but what this is, is its outlining
Um, but when theyre representing their region,
Um, but with that said, in terms of whats changing, um,
Um, but yeah, individual school is,
Um, but yeah, it, the second half
Um, but yeah, like we said, well put, we, uh,
Um, but yeah, you will do expect to see a change, um,
Um, but, so itll kind of be by the end of the day.
Um, but, um, Im not sure if anyone else wanted
Um, but, you know, as, um, unique examples
Um, couple, couple of different
Um, down here in Bluff, um, majority of our Tam Titi,
Um, has that been rolled into a code mark
Um, have called for the need for a simplified set
Um, however, my understanding is that the majority do.
Um, if theres anything, um, that relates
Um, if you cant get a hold of them, I, um,
Um, if you do have any further questions, um,
Um, if you, and you can start to jot this down at any time.
Um, in national office, this was something
Um, it could be that they are going
Um, it does report that now.
Um, it would be the practice of the school.
Um, its an e Um, I would be having conversations
Um, mark and Jared, will there be guidance come
Um, not just culturally, but historically.
Um, otherwise, yeah, definitely Im very keen
Um, so as we work through the guidance, uh,
Um, so do please periodically check back, um,
Um, so if theyre representing the school, um,
Um, so if youve got any questions that relate
Um, so its a, its a really good question.
Um, so our birthday is not an acceptable reason to be,
Um, so thats at the moment, not not a ministry area,
Um, so we are working with SMS, um, all
Um, so you could keep that as present
Um, so you should be able to write a note, um, in that
Um, so, so I think this is where
Um, that has always been a legislative provision.
Um, that was previously approved off site learning.
Um, the other thing is that there are, um, transition plans.
Um, then the school policies are J and e, um,
Um, there are some flowing effects of doing that,
Um, there has been some work going on
Um, there have been previous attempts at this,
Um, there is a section on the attendance codes.
Um, there is a website thats being created, um,
Um, they, the way that its reported is different.
Um, we did discuss it, um,
Um, we havent touched the holiday during term time,
Um, we were considering, um, collapsing that.
Um, we will have the opportunities
Um, weve also got explained and approved,
Um, we, we definitely have listened.
Um, what were some of the things we heard when engaging
Um, with that said, the, another thing
Um, yeah, so that was, uh,
Um, yeah, so they would be, depending on
Um, yeah. So well have to have this conversation
Um, you please enter in, um,
Um, youve got the, essentially the absence codes,
Umbrella organisation carrying out safety checks
Umbrella organisations carrying out safety checks
Unacceptable homebased educator top up payments
Unacceptable optional charges
Under s will remain unchanged.
Under New Zealand law, children under years old must use an approved child restraint suitable for their age and size. If a child is years old, they must be secured in a restraint if available in the vehicle.
Under Section () of the Childrens Act , service providers are required to be able to provide details on any safety check done on a person and their work history including:
Under The Food Act (), education and care services including playgroups that undertake minimal food handling (for example where very limited food is provided (cut fruit, biscuits and so on) and where children bring their own lunchboxes) are only subject to the basic requirement to ensure food is safe and suitable.
Under section of the Education and Training Act , all school and kura boards must prepare financial statements as part of their annual report.
Under section A (Attendance records) of the Education and Training Act , the Secretary for Education has rules setting out administrative and procedural requirements relating to attendance records. These rules are in the New Zealand Gazette.
Under section of the Act, unions are currently required to provide days notice before starting a proposed school strike.
Under the Childrens Act and the Education and Training Act , Police vets must be done for:
Under the Childrens Act , the requirements apply to unpaid work that is undertaken as part of an educational or vocational training course (for example a student teacher undertaking and practicum placement).
Under the Education and Training Act and the Education (School Planning and Reporting) Regulations a new planning and reporting framework is in place.
Under the Family Violence Act, you are required to consider sharing information if it may help protect a victim from family violence, or if we receive a request for information.
Under the Food Act (), homebased educators who prepare and serve food for the children in their care must ensure the food they provide is safe and suitable.
Under the Food Act and Food Regulations , if you provide food as part of your ECE service it must be safe and suitable. Depending on what kind of food you provide, you may need to register and operate under a National Programme Level .
Under the Food Act there are no specific food safety training requirements for early childhood education staff.
Under the Health and Safety at Work Act , ECE services must notify WorkSafe New Zealand if there is a notifiable event. Services should ensure that their health and safety practices are aligned to their obligations under other legislation.
Under the Health and Safety at Work Act , service providers must notify WorkSafe New Zealand if there is a notifiable event. Services should ensure that their health and safety practices are aligned to their obligations under other legislation.
Under the STAR framework, any student who reaches a clearly defined threshold of days absent will trigger an appropriate and proportionate response from their school and the Ministry.
Under the agreement, information can be shared when:
Under the previous legislative framework, Boards were responsible for the development and consultation on the creation or modification of enrolment schemes. This was a significant and timeconsuming obligation on Board members, many of whom are effectively volunteers.
Undercooked food, contaminated water. Direct spread from an infected person or animal
Understand the components that make up your entitlement staffing and how they are calculated.
Understand what transport assistance might be available and who is eligible for it.
Understand what your child is learning at school or kura, how they are progressing against the curriculum, and what you can do to support them at home.
Understand your childs learning
Understanding access based on role
Understanding and minimising the use of physical restraint
Understanding compliance levels
Union members are entitled to attend at least paid union meetings per year.
Unique Identifier use in the PBRF or other research initiatives
Unit I, Bishop Dunn Place
Unit standards for first aid qualifications
Units are for teachers and may not be paid to principals.
Units are not part of the banking staffing arrangements.
Units are paid fortnightly as part of the teachers salary.
Units cannot be divided except for official job share positions as described in the teachers collective agreement.
Units may be available to a teacher who is an assistant or deputy principal and does principal duties at times.
Universities New Zealand has information on scholarships for study in New Zealands universities or overseas.
Unless a court order rules otherwise, all parents and guardians are entitled to:
Unless otherwise indicated, the material on our social media accounts is protected by Crown copyright. You can reproduce this Crown copyright material free of charge without further permission, as long as you:
Unnecessary unless unwell
Unsuccessful respondent letter template
Until sores have dried up or hours after antibiotic treatment has started
Until well and for hours after the last episode of diarrhoea or vomiting
Until well and for days from appearance of rash
Until well enough to return
Unused curriculum halfdays
Up to hours per week may be claimed as Hours ECE for eligible children for whom a parentcaregiver has provided a signed attestation. Remaining hours up to the
Up to of units may be allocated as fixed term.
Uptochild enrolment and attendance information.
Updates to year implementation timeline
Updates to social media terms of use
Updating previously submitted data
Upload the Kiwi Park model (optional)
Upload the annual report as PDF
Upon arrival, take the lift to Level . A member of our team will be downstairs to welcome and guide you in.
Use a calendar to count up the number of days the service will be open and operating as allday during each of the next months.
Use a calendar to count up the number of days the service will be open and operating as sessional during each of the next months.
Use a calendar to count up the number of days your service will be open and operating during the next five months.
Use a modern hash function and salt to prevent rainbow table attacks.
Use a singlestage or stage open tender
Use adequate soap or detergent.
Use hand basins or a trough. If the height of hand basins or a trough is between and mm from the floor for older children, and to mm from the floor for young children, they are likely to be easily reached. (If children need to use steps, the bathroom area will have unnecessary clutter and hazards.) Consider the age range of children who will attend.
Use of National Student Numbers
Use of computers, iPads etc
Use of information collected
Use of social media by Ministry staff
Use our attendance service application to make a referral.
Use our websites without using data
Use strong, unique passwords for every account at your school or kura.
Use taps that turn themselves off, with a very easy lever for children to operate. Taps of this type prevent water from being left on and are available from most plumbing outlets.
Use taps that turn themselves off, with a very easy lever for children to operate. Taps of this type prevent water from being left on.
Use the checklists to help you prepare for the review. The checklists cover what documents you need to submit, depending on which design stage the review is for.
Use the correct quote request template for your project.
Use the evaluation process in the procurement plan to score each compliant offer.
Use the example schedule below as a guide and carry out the following steps.
Use the information below to find out if you can fill extra childplaces with conditionally enrolled children:
Use the information below to see where you can find copies of the documents referred to in this section.
Use the key below to understand the shading and letters used in the example:
Use the key below to understand the shading and letters used in the examples:
Use the steps below to calculate your Hours ECE funding.
Use the table above to find out when the washup payment for February, June or October will be paid.
Use the table to find out the funding rate per funded child hour (FCH) for your service.
Use the unique reference number that you received in your text, email or posted letter from us, to access the portal. You will be asked a set of questions to prove your identity. You will then be able to see the remediation payment amount. If you do not wish to claim your payment, there is a box to tick to confirm you are choosing not to proceed with the claim.
Use these templates to plan debriefing sessions and to notify unsuccessful suppliers.
Use this information to start documenting the procurement requirements.
Use this method by giving permission with organisational units (OU) and groups in Google Workspace and groups in Microsoft.
Use this process for schoolled property projects that need construction or consultancy services.
Use this template to record the information and keep it on file.
Use this to find out if your service should provide general purpose financial statements or a special purpose financial report:
Using factor authentication
Using factor authentication at school
Using hours ECE at more than service
Using a password manager application
Using childsized toilets prevents the need for a step. This may make them safer to use (minimises hazards) and encourages children to toilet because it is much easier for them.
Using one or more buckets to wash materials and disposing of the wastewater in the laundry sink or down an outside gully trap.
Using these tips in optional.
Using these tips is optional.
Using weak passwords across different accounts can make it easy for a cyber criminal to access personal information about your staff or students, like:
Usually, you will stay with your child and take part in the session, but sometimes you can drop older children off for some sessions.
Usually, your midwife will help you sign up with
Vaccinepreventable andor on the National Immunisation Schedule
Vehicles used for school transport must comply with
Ventilation in early learning
Ventilation in early learning services
Verified by: Wanda Maximoff
Verify your bank account details.
Very low fences may need to be replaced to ensure children cannot leave unnoticed.
Very young children need a safe, warm place (rug, carpet square or cushions) to play away from the main play area but where they can still see and be seen.
Video Introduction Ministry of Education
Video Office of The Auditor General (OAG)
Video School Audit Process Deloitte
Video Guidance on Key Areas Ministry of Education
Video summarising pay parity in education and care service (including hospitalbased).
View all news and updates
View all public consultations
View school transport assistance information
View the Ministrys list of basic equipment.
Viewing and correcting of personal information
Vijay has attended for fewer than five days a week in more than half of the weeks in February.
Vijay is enrolled to attend an early childhood centre for days a week.
Vinyl that is coved and extends a little way up the wall is easier to clean and is more hygienic over long periods of time because it eliminates joins at the edge of the floor. Different territorial authorities may have requirements to have vinyl in the toilet and kitchen areas (wet areas) extending mm up the wall. Check the requirements of your local authority.
Visit Down the Back of the Chair to order more copies:
Visit Education Workforce
Visit Health and safety in early learning
Visit the Sport New Zealand website for more ideas.
Vocational Education and Training (VET) redesign
Voluntary Service Abroad providing service was in a teaching position while the teacher held a teaching certificate.
Volunteers do not need to be Police vetted by law, but child safety should always be paramount. If you are not sure whether vetting is needed, it is better to be safe and do a Police vet.
Volunteers do not need to be Police vetted under the Childrens Act or the Education and Training Act .
Volunteers who will have contact with children may include:
Vulnerable Children Act
WSP ( hours, days a week)
Waikato Kindergarten Association
Waimate Free Kindergarten Association Incorporated
WaimokoiaMt Wellington Residential School
Waiting time for yearolds.
Waiting time for yearolds.
Waiting time for yearolds.
Waiting time for yearolds.
Waiting time for under yearolds
Warning: to avoid overpayment of funding
Wash children and wipe noses with disposable wipes or cloths that are used only once.
Washup funding may be a positive (e.g. ,.) or negative (e.g. ,.) amount. If it is negative, the Ministry deducts the amount from future payments.
Washing practices should be consistent with the requirements of PF Body wash facilities.
Washing practices should be consistent with the requirements of PF Body wash facilities.
Water temperature is one of the most common hazards educators will need to manage in the home setting. An educator should never let a child come in contact with water until it has been checked by hand.
We acknowledged that, uh, you know, with the requirement
We aim to acknowledge your complaint within working days.
We also recognise that there are other Pacific languages and communities in Aotearoa. We will work with the Ministry for Pacific Peoples to identify opportunities to support these communities in education settings.
We also recommend that staff complete unit , which will teach staff how to manage first aid in emergency situations.
We also spoke to, um, Kura affiliated
We also want to acknowledge the significant role that families and communities play in supporting their children and young people. We value and thank them for the contributions they make every day.
We are also researching McKenzie Residential School and Campbell Park School. Once our research about these schools is finished, people who attended one of these schools will also be able to choose a rapid payment.
We are also updating our legislative and regulatory frameworks to give effect to the key ideas of Ka Hikitia and Tau Mai Te Reo.
We are continuing some actions from the Action Plan for Pacific Education. We are starting some new actions and have committed to some more new actions too.
We are currently refining the way we collect condition data.
We are descendants of explorers, discoverers and innovators who used their knowledge to traverse distant horizons. Our learning will be inclusive, equitable and connected so we progress and achieve advances for our people and their future journeys and encounters.
We are happy to answer any questions you have about your records.
We are now refining the scope of the topic based on consultation feedback and developing the content for the briefing.
We are pleased to share information regarding a proposed enrolment scheme for Te Kura Rau Iti, a new contributing primary school planned to open in Term , at Murphys Road, Flat Bush, Auckland.
We are pleased to share the refresh of the Action Plan for Pacific Education for .
We are realistic that services providers are unlikely able to provide a lot of documentation to demonstrate full compliance with these criteria right now. Over time we will be expecting more, which will be indicated in discussions between advisors and service providers.
We are required to have a child protection policy under The Childrens Act .
We are responsible for licensing services and making sure services comply with regulated standards. We have the statutory powers, or legal authority, to intervene when services breach regulated standards. This legal authority allows us to:
We are seeking feedback from the community to help shape the final RSE content, which will be included in the refreshed health and physical education learning area, planned to be gazetted and available for use in and required for use from .
We are working through that guidance at the moment.
We assess your application based on the needs of your child. If your child is eligible, they are not guaranteed a place in a vehicle as we will not always have a suitable service available. In this circumstance, you can get the SESTA Conveyance Allowance.
We audit roll returns to make sure schools receive the correct funding and staffing.
We bought the furniture and equipment for , and over the years we depreciated the furniture and equipment by ,. The net book value of the furniture and equipment at the time of disposal was ,.
We bought the vehicle for , and over the years we depreciated the vehicle by ,. The net book value of the vehicle at the time of disposal was , and we sold it for , cash, GST exclusive. This resulted in a gain of , to the school.
We can assist you if your child cant travel to school independently. Find out what we can do and how to apply for support.
We can direct a school with an enrolment scheme to enrol a student if:
We can provide practical support and help with things while you are waiting for your claim to be processed.
We cannot consider claims about private schools. You will need to discuss this with the governing body of the school in the first instance.
We collect information in a number of different ways. Examples include:
We collect, use, and share personal information in different ways depending on what we are doing or the service we are providing.
We commenced targeted stakeholder consultation on Friday August on a government proposal to make changes to the way standard setting and approvals of Initial Teacher Education are undertaken.
We completed payments to current Ministry employees in October and started payments to former employees. Around , former employees are entitled to a payment, with about a third being under .
We consulted on a draft NELP in the Shaping a Stronger Education System with New Zealanders discussion document in late , which was shaped by what New Zealanders had told us so far about what was important to them for education.
We contract providers across the country to deliver this service.
We currently have a number of claims waiting to be assessed. We generally try to assess older claims first, so there is some wait for an assessment.
We design our bus network to collect as many eligible children as possible. Each route needs to serve a minimum number of eligible children before it will be considered. We may alter services and routes as locations of students change.
We did. Um, you definitely, uh,
We didnt feel that that descriptor, um, was as clear
We do have, um, a question from Donna in the chat.
We do not accept claims on behalf of individuals who are deceased.
We do regular audits of our transport service providers. Bus drivers are trained and undergo background checks. They must follow a code of conduct and have guidelines for what to do if there is an incident.
We do this for a number of reasons including maintaining contact with what social media users are saying, sharing content or sending direct messages.
We dont take sides. We stay connected with people and groups who might not agree with us. However, we arent responsible for the content they post.
We encourage school leaders to share their views to help shape expectations and refine the tools needed to lift attendance.
We encourage schools to align term dates with other local schools where possible. If your family is impacted by variation in term dates between local schools, you can talk to your principal.
We felt that that wasnt a, um, upon revision.
We fund local transport providers in most parts of the country to drive eligible children between home and their school.
We fund school bus services for getting students to school or
We had a number of people saying to us, look,
We had a number of primary scores that said, mark, we, we,
We have a Memorandum of Understanding with the Teaching Council, which sets out how we share information with each other.
We have a child protection policy that encourages a culture of child protection.
We have a target of all schools providing quality learning environments by to enable
We have a, a question from Tanya in the chat.
We have also completed some of the actions in the Action Plan for Pacific Education.
We have an information sheet you can share with families.
We have approved CV Check NZ to do safety checks on childrens workers.
We have completed a privacy impact assessment in consultation with the Office of the Privacy Commissioner. There are versions of the assessment.
We have contracted attendance service providers in all parts of the country. Attendance services work with schools and families to help get students back to school.
We have designed an information kit for boards,
We have developed guidance to help you. You may also consider using the development maps to help assess the progress you have made as a
We have divided the network of schools into catchments across the country, each with its own growth profile. We use the latest schoolaged population projections from Statistics New Zealand to forecast demand in each catchment.
We have done this to make the job of producing the financial statements easier.
We have guidance for developing a complaints policy and process, and how to handle complaints.
We have guidance on setting up FA across your school.
We have processes in place to give our students consistent, highquality education at all levels.
We have put together a list of supporting resources. These will be as new resources become available.
We have received some great early feedback from schools participating in the maths PLD, which is designed to deepen your understanding of the maths learning area and support effective classroom practice.
We have students who, um, have to go home due
We highly recommend you use our contracts when agreeing to a purchase.
We hope you find these videos helpful. We are always happy to hear from you and welcome you feedback in these videos. Please contact your regional finance advisor to provide your feedback or suggestions on other videos that may be helpful.
We hope you find these videos helpful. We are always happy to hear from you and welcome you feedback. Please contact your regional finance advisor to provide your feedback or suggestions on other videos that may be helpful.
We hope you find these videos helpful. We are always happy to hear from you and welcome your feedback.
We include your schools data on Education Counts as part of the national daily attendance figure. The data does not identify individual schools. You can request your schools data from your regional office or direct from your SMS.
We investigate any reported complaints or incidents to make sure early learning services are meeting regulatory requirements.
We invite suppliers in the directory to tender for these projects in the first instance.
We invite you to connect with us on:
We know that school leadership, board stewardship, quality teaching, and educationally powerful connections will influence positive school attendance.
We know there are other schools and
We love hearing your thoughts and ideas. But we might not be able to respond to every comment, post or direct message.
We manage and plan the network and make schooling changes to make sure that students have access to appropriate education pathways. Changes could include:
We manage and plan the schooling network across the country.
We manage school networks nationwide using a range of data including:
We may also ask your service to investigate an incident or complaint and report your findings to us.
We may also assist schools to conduct a performance review of their project manager. When we do this, we involve the project manager in the process and ask for their feedback.
We may also contribute to the cost of specialist equipment. This is equipment your child needs to stay safe and comfortable while they travel in a SESTA vehicle.
We may ask you for more details.
We may collect your information from other sources, instead of directly from you. This could include collecting
We may consider applications made at different times of the year under extreme circumstances. Applications close weeks before every school holidays.
We may extend a bus route if it will serve more eligible students. This is subject to certain criteria, so schools should first contact their local Transport Delivery Advisor (TDA) to discuss a request to change bus routes.
We may extend the maximum number of days for transferring a request or making a decision and communicating it to you for the following reasons:
We may issue a written direction. Your licence may be reclassified to provisional or suspended during an investigation. This depends on the health and safety risk to children.
We may need to recover funding if your service moves to a lower funded salary scale.
We may operate other social media channels for a specific purpose or audience at different times.
We may report, block, or ban anyone who posts the above content or comments, or who breaches the terms of use of the relevant social media platform:
We may review your policies, procedures and records to make sure your service has complied with regulatory requirements.
We may share information where necessary to carry out our statutory functions. Information is shared in accordance with relevant statutory powers and in compliance with relevant legal obligations and any information sharing agreements, memoranda of understanding, and our own internal policies.
We may stop running school buses in an area if a public transport option becomes available. We will give affected schools or
We may visit your early learning service to inspect the premises, observe teaching and ask staff for information. This is permitted under section of the Education and Training Act .
We may, for example, share information with:
We meet regularly with ERO to discuss any issues as they arise and to review our agreed ways of working.
We might want to refer the issues you have raised with us to the Police ourselves, particularly if we are concerned that there could be a current risk to the safety of children. We will discuss this with you if we would like to do this.
We monitor contractual and legislative safety requirements of transport service providers (TSPs). This means we regularly contact TSPs and schools to discuss operational or safety concerns.
We monitor residential developments to understand location, scale and phasing so we can project how many students might move into an area. We also consider house sales data, property prices, transport links and a range of other factors in our planning.
We need to provide opportunities for those children and those families that would thrive under a bilingual and immersion system
We need to work with column Q R and S. In our example, a motor vehicle has been sold for and some furniture and equipment has been disposed for nothing. That is, no cash was paid to the school.
We neither confirm nor deny that the information exists: sections
We offer a range of support to
We often get requests about important public issues. To promote openness and accountability, we publish selected responses to these requests.
We only share personal information where the Privacy Act allows us to. Who we share information with includes:
We pay an annual allowance to
We pay the conveyance allowance to parents once per term. How much we pay depends on how many children they are taking to school and how far they have to travel. The allowance is paid at a daily rate so the payment will vary depending on how many school days are in the term.
We provide a school bus conveyance allowance when there is no school bus available, or an eligible student lives more than .km from the nearest bus route. It is paid to parents or
We provide a transport service to help children and young people with safety andor mobility needs get to school. When a child or young person qualifies for SESTA, we either provide a place in a vehicle or a payment to contribute to their travel costs.
We provide assistance when distance or a lack of public transport is a barrier to students attending their closest school.
We provide detailed guides to roles and responsibilities for each of our different service types:
We provide funding for every
We provide funding for specialised equipment if a student needs it to travel safely to and from school. Schools can help caregivers to apply. This is separate to the SESTA application.
We provide nutritious lunches, every school day, to the of students who are in need of the greatest support.
We publish information online on a regular basis. Check whether the information you are looking for has already been released on our website.
We publish the full list of services who have opted in to the pay parity scheme on Education Counts. We update the list each funding period with the minimum salary scale each service has attested to paying their certificated teachers on.
We recommend having at least super administrator or global administrator accounts but less than . This ensures support if an administrator is sick or on leave.
We recommend putting staff into different groups (organisational units) based on what permissions and access they need. For example:
We recommend putting staff into different groups or OU based on what permissions and access they need. If someone needs a slightly different permission set, put them in a new group or give the individual the extra access they need rather than giving the whole group the additional access. Regularly check to see if they still need the additional access.
We recommend teaching your child the skills that they would normally learn at school. If they were to go to school at any stage, this would make the transition easier.
We recommend that boards use our contracted emergency response coordinators when needed and that these contacts be readily available for use in the case of an emergency.
We recommend using a password manager. A password manager is like a digital notebook inside a vault for all your passwords. Password managers can:
We regularly review our systems to make sure that they have appropriate security safety safeguards in place to protect personal information.
We regularly update the directory to encourage new suppliers to join and existing suppliers to amend their appointment. We aim to release an open notice of intent on the Government Electronic Tenders Service (GETS) before any update.
We reserve the right to remove any comments that may compromise our political neutrality.
We reserve the right to remove content posted to our social media accounts that:
We review designs for new schools and significant redevelopments as part of our quality assurance process.
We review the rates each year to account for changes in transport costs. We use
We run an online training session in managing attendance. Email our training services team for an invite to the training:
We run regular consultations about network changes.
We set a range of funding rates depending on:
We share responses that provide significant information and are of public interest. Personal details of requesters are removed.
We take all steps that are reasonable to ensure that the information we collect or receive from third parties is accurate.
We take care to exercise our information gathering powers lawfully and appropriately, and to meet our legal obligations including those in the Privacy Act . We also take care to fulfil our obligations under the State Sector Code of Conduct and Information Gathering Model Standards, and to follow the Ministry of Education Code of Conduct at all times.
We take our obligations under the Official Information Act seriously. That includes responding to requests for official information via media queries.
We took that start of the ,
We try to resolve any formal complaint within working days. If your complaint is complex, this may take longer. If so, we will tell you and regularly update you on progress.
We understand lodging a claim can be distressing. We can pay for up to counselling sessions while your claim is being processed.
We use cookies for the purpose of monitoring website use. A cookie is a piece of code that creates a file on your computer to track the pages that you view on our websites. Cookies from the Ministry website do not collect any personally identifiable information.
We use roll return data for:
We use social media to provide our followers with regular updates, including:
We use social media to share information about education in New Zealand, enable conversations and feedback and to be responsive to the views and needs of New Zealanders.
We use the July roll and add a new entrant adjustment.
We use the March roll and add a new entrant adjustment.
We use the September roll.
We use the Equity Index to work out which schools and kura can join the Healthy School Lunches programme.
We use the Equity Index to work out which schools we need to include to reach these students. The Equity Index is a tool we use to work out which schools may need extra funding and resources.
We use the provisional roll including a new entrant adjustment.
We use the provisional roll.
We use your school roll for each year level to work out the components of your entitlement staffing. Read how we calculate:
We usually contact a service before a visit.
We want all children to achieve their potential no matter where they are.
We welcome different abilities, religious beliefs, ethnic groups, income levels and ideas about teaching and learning.
We will accommodate any special requests or needs you have, where appropriate.
We will appoint an assessor to assess your claim. The assessor is external to the Ministry.
We will ask the service and teacher to share information about themselves to the council by a certain . If they do not do this, we will share the required information with the council.
We will audit your service to check that you are meeting these requirements.
We will be respectful of your culture and values.
We will consider prioritising the assessment of a claim in special circumstances.
We will consult on the draft briefing in early and the details will be added to this page.
We will contact you to let you know of the investigation outcome.
We will contact you with our response to your claim. This might include a telephone discussion and a letter to you. If you have a lawyer, we will write to them.
We will contact you within working days of receiving your complaint to talk about how we will manage it.
We will demonstrate processes around trial balances, financial statements, submitting your annual report, and some tips on how to work efficiently with the model.
We will email you confirmation of the payment.
We will help you find a suitable school or
We will hold your allowance details for months. If your child returns to boarding within that time, we will start your allowance again. If they return after the months, you have to reapply.
We will include the reasons for the decision and the actions we propose to take.
We will inform you of the reason for the refusal and of your right to ask the Ombudsman to investigate the refusal if you are not satisfied with the response.
We will invite you to meet with the assessor to talk about your experiences and discuss what you would like from the process. We can arrange for this meeting to take place at a location, and time that is convenient to you. You are welcome to bring
We will make and communicate a decision on your request as soon as we can. This will be no later than working days after it was received, unless an extension is made.
We will measure and report on progress on a regular basis
We will only approve a schooltoschool student exchange scheme if it meets these requirements.
We will only collect personal information indirectly where the Privacy Act allows us to.
We will provide a separate video session on how to quality check the statement of cash flow and the notes and disclosures.
We will provide more detailed guidance in March that will cover off the new settings in more detail and how to meet the requirements under the regulations.
We will provide updates on further actions as decisions are made.
We will provide updates when available.
We will publish a webpage with more details as the work programme is developed.
We will search for any records we hold about you and we can provide you with a copy of this material. We will do this under the Privacy Act .
We will search for records we hold about you.
We will support the growth of Pacific Languages in Education across early learning, schooling and tertiary education. This includes supporting the growth of bilingual and immersion education settings
We will tailor provision to reflect communities
We will talk through shortly the main differences
We will use a range of levers to support Pacific Languages in Education
We will use the levers by progressing the key actions identified in this Action Plan. You can find out about the actions we are continuing and starting and the actions we will take to grow Pacific languages in education in the full Action Plan for Pacific Education.
We will use the three categories set out in the
We will work with Pacific language communities to develop a pathway forward which best responds to their aspirations for Pacific Languages in Education, together with their community and sociolinguistic circumstances and relationships with the New Zealand Government. This work will be located within the context of our overall education system and will respond to the direction of the
We will work with you towards resolution. Your feedback helps us to improve what we do with you and others in the future.
We will write to you with our decision
We work with the Education Review Office (ERO) to make sure children receive quality education and care.
Were not really sure what to do.
Weve got a question in the chat for TA from Tanya.
Weve got a question in the chat for, from Alison
Weve got another question from Donna coming in.
Weve removed of them.
We, if the parents had approved it, we gave them a,
We, there are no ministry guidelines around that.
Weathertightness design standards
Weathertightness design standards for school buildings
Web version ISBN
Wednesday October : Quarter operational funding instalment paid.
Welcome also my message and depart
Welcome to the ECE Funding Handbook. This handbook is issued under section () of the Education and Training Act .
Well Child Tamariki Ora checks
Well Child Tamariki Ora checks are free for all children from weeks up to years of age.
Well maintained enrolment and attendance records provide evidence for community and Crown funding.
Well, what weve done is we have reduced the codes.
Wellbeing and safety support for tertiary students
Wellbeing support service
Were any conflicts of interest managed appropriately
Westport Kindergarten Association
What Te Tira Hou is telling us
What a bus controller does
What a conflict of interest is
What a password policy is
What a school exchange is
What a strong password is
What about handwashing afterwards for parents and caregivers Would hand sanitisers be useful
What about high school students
What actions did we take
What are children able to see or hear when they are in the home setting
What are our expectations of the range of behaviours children will demonstrate in the early years and in stressful situations
What are our own assumptions of how specialist support operates
What are possiblepotential occurrences at playgroup that could result in lossdamageinjury Can we mitigate against these through Health and Safety policies and practices
What are the limits and boundaries in our service How are these negotiated and shared with children and their families
What are they learning now
What can adults do when they are at playgroup
What can children see or hear when they are at the playgroup
What can children see or hear when they are at the service Consider areas designated for adults as well (for example offices and staff rooms), as children may have access to them at times.
What can we do to help this child progress
What checks you need for adults who come into your school
What child protection requirements your school must meet
What code do you put then
What did you enjoy doing today
What did you like about learning this
What do we know about the supports and services available to us in our local area
What do we say by our actions What goes unnoticed or unsaid Do our actions match our words
What do we say by our actions What goes unnoticed, or unsaid Do our actions match our words
What do we understand about
What do we understand about the notion of
What do we understand about whanaungatanga How is it reflected in our service
What do we want to carry forward Try more of Try in different ways Build on
What do we want to introduce, continue with, adapt or abandon
What do we want to know (For example: Do the environment and our interactions encourage children to actively explore Are we protecting the health and wellbeing of the youngest children in our playgroup).
What do you do if the illness is contagious
What enrolment schemes and school zones are
What handwashing practices are used If relevant, what practices are used when wearing disposable gloves
What happens after you apply
What happens at our place that reflects the importance of languagelearning
What happens during a Person responsibles visit to observe a child
What happens if a sight impaired family member of a child has a guide dog.
What happens if the educator becomes ill
What happens in early learning
What happens to your licence during an investigation
What happens when early learning services do not meet compliance
What happens when early learning services do not meet compliance.
What happens when parents and
What happens when we receive a complaint or report of an incident
What happens with visiting animals (such as pet days or farm animals).
What has changed in the refresh
What has happened that has made me thinkwonder aboutwant to know more about
What in Im having Yeah, more morina.
What information can be shared
What information is available from your local council about emergency procedures
What information is covered by this statement, and why we collect it
What intentional strategies do we use in our teaching practice that provide meaningful and purposeful interactions for children
What intentional teaching strategies and practices do we provide to support
What intentional teaching strategies and practices do we provide to support mokopuna learning and the learning outcomes of
What is Targeted Funding for Disadvantage
What is academic integrity
What is bullying and what you can do to support your child and your school to prevent bullying.
What is equity funding:
What is important in this place and why What do we know about our
What is important in this place and why What do we know about our whenua How will we explore the histories of this place
What is the Government doing
What is the child good at
What is the child interested in now
What is the potential for significant damage or loss
What is the proximity of the hand basin to the toilet
What is the value of the playgroup equipment How much would it cost to replace
What is viewed as social competence and appropriate behaviour may vary from setting to setting. In a hospital it will depend on the values that families, educators, and the hospital hold. It is therefore vital that educators, parents, the medical staff and children share with each other their understandings of social competence.
What is viewed as social competence, emotional competence and appropriate behaviour may vary from setting to setting and will depend on the values that parents and
What is viewed as social competence, emotional competence, and appropriate behaviour may vary from setting to setting, and will depend on the values that parents and
What items should be laundered and how often.
What kinds of images are children able to see in magazines and other print materials What about posters, DVDs, electronic games, and television
What kinds of review practices happen within the language used in engagement with children
What learning have I noticed (What have particular children been practising, trying hard to master, trying for the first time, doing in different ways or with different materials)
What makes a good achievement challenge
What may be regarded as not objectionable under the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act may, nevertheless, be inappropriate and harmful to children given the impact of the medium in which the publication is presented and the age of the children to whom the publication is available.
What may be regarded as not objectionable under the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act may, nevertheless, be inappropriate and harmful to young children given the impact of the medium in which the publication is presented and the age of the children to whom the publication is available.
What opportunities are there for children and parents and
What opportunities are there for the children in our service take part in events and customs of cultural significance
What opportunities might exist for
What opportunity is there for educators, teachers and
What opportunity is there for parents, caregivers and educators to contribute to hazard and risk management systems, processes and practice
What other learning is happening while eating For example, using utensils, textures, colours, appropriate social interactions.
What period does it cover
What procedures are there for preventing and responding to bullying behaviour
What processes does the building owner have for maintaining the Civil Defence kit and emergency drills
What public transport means
What purchases need to be made this year
What purposeful and intentional teaching opportunities do we provide for children to practice and enhance their developing social and emotional competency
What role does a languagerich environment play in the transmission of culture
What salary scale described in the ECE Funding Handbook is your service using to determine the minimum salaries paid to all employed ECE and primary qualified certificated teachers
What salary scale described in the ECE funding handbook is your service using to determine the minimum salaries paid to all employed ECE and primary qualified certificated teachers
What schools must report on
What sort of assessments are we using to assess the support we need
What sort of codes would we use for those situations
What storage facilities are available
What support is available
What support is available for students who are involved in bullying
What teaching qualifications are recognised
What the Action Plan for Pacific Education is
What the Export Education Levy is for, the rate tertiary providers must pay, and how to submit data and payments.
What the Memorandum of Understanding says
What the appropriate ratios are (for example is the excursion going to be near water)
What the network of schools is
What the pay parity optin scheme is
What the person responsible role involves
What this data will be used for
What to bring on the first day
What to do after an accident or incident
What to do at the time of an accident or incident
What to do if children become ill while at the service
What to do if the educator is working in the home of the child and an adult present at the premises consumes alcohol in the presence of the educator andor child.
What to do if you need more support
What to do if your password is compromised
What to include in the documented process
What to think about when using AI tools
What type of emergencies might occur in your area and what will you need to do if they occur
What type of incidentcomplaint would initiate a spontaneous review
What we do with the information we collect
What we learned during the response to the COVID pandemic, and what we heard from
What we share on social media
What weve also got was through our, uh,
What were the outcomes of those actions
What will my RS look like
What would staff do if a parent or caregiver arrived to drop off or collect a child and they were under the influence of alcohol or any other substance
What would the educator do if a parent or caregiver arrived to drop off or collect a child and they were under the influence of alcohol or any other substance
What would you do if a visitor arrived, and they were under the influence of alcohol or any other substance
What would your playgroup community do if a parent or caregiver arrived to drop off or collect a child or they intend to stay and they were under the influence of alcohol or any other substance
What you need to bring will depend on what your service provides for your child. They will tell you what you should bring along. This might include:
What you provide, what you do and how you do it
What youd put in a statement of philosophy
What your child learns at early learning
Whats new for Term
When a July roll is used, the adjustment is worked at as fiveeighteenths of the Year roll, rounded up to the nearest whole number.
When a March roll is used, the adjustment is worked out as eleventwelfths of the Year roll, rounded up to the nearest whole number.
When a centre takes some children on an excursion and some children remain at the centre, the first aid qualification ratio must be met both on the excursion and at the centre.
When a child becomes ill at a centre, the sooner they can be taken home, the better. The centre is not usually set up to deal with sick children for long periods of time, although an area away from other children at the centre where sick children can rest comfortably under supervision, while waiting to be taken home is required. For more information see PF Isolation area.
When a child becomes ill at a home that is not their own, the sooner they can be taken home, the better. In order for them to be kept at a safe distance from other children at the home the educator will need a separate area for them that can be easily supervised whilst looking after other children attending. For more information see the guidance for PF Isolation area.
When a child becomes unexpectedly ill at a centre, there needs to be somewhere for their care to make the sick child feel comfortable, as well as to keep other children from becoming ill until the sick child can be collected and taken home. The child must be able to be supervised. If the child is isolated in a separate room with an adult, the service must maintain adult to child ratios.
When a child becomes unexpectedly ill attending the homebased service, there needs to be somewhere for their care to make the sick child feel comfortable, as well as to keep other children from becoming ill until the sick child or other children at the home can be collected and taken home. The child must be able to be supervised. If the child is isolated in a separate room the educator should carry out regular checks every to minutes, as they would do with a sleeping child.
When a child does not attend on their planned start, one week of absences will be funded if:
When a closed service is part of a group of services operated by one service provider, any overpayment will be deducted from the next payment to the service provider.
When a conflict is declared, a conflict management plan must be agreed by:
When a parent agrees to pay an optional charge, the specific items covered by the charge, and the agreement to pay the charge must be part of the enrolment process and recorded on the enrolment agreement.
When a person responsible is supervising across multiple rooms, they should be moving between these areas to effectively supervise and fulfil their responsibilities. There is no requirement to assign children or staff to each person responsible or for there to be a person responsible in every room.
When a service has received less funding than it is eligible for, the amount of any underpayments will be credited to the bank account nominated by the service provider as soon as is reasonably possible. However, the Ministry may choose to verify whether services are eligible for any underpayments of funding before these are made, for example by way of a funding claim audit.
When a service is closed for renovations.
When achievement challenges are refreshed, you must send a copy to your regional office for review and approval by the Director of Education. Once approved, we will replace the original achievement challenge with the refreshed version on Education Counts.
When administering medicine check that the:
When an educator is not available (for example, due to illness), funding cannot be claimed if no care is provided. If there is a replacement educator, funding can be claimed only for the educator who provided alternative care. Funding cannot be claimed:
When an illness appears to be affecting many children or adults, the service should contact their local public health unit for information and advice.
When and how funding is paid:
When assessing the safety of sleep furniture and items, the following need to be considered:
When carrying out these functions, we may require or collect a range of personal and other information about services.
When changes are made to the assessment, planning, and evaluation process how do we ensure they are effective
When changing SMS or to ELI Web, services must begin sending information to the Ministry within weeks from the cutover . The cutover is your first day using the new SMS or ELI Web.
When children leave the premises on a regular or special excursion, the excursion must be approved by the person responsible.
When children leave the premises on a regular or special outing or excursion the outing or excursion must be approved by the person responsible.
When children leave the premises on an excursion:
When children of different ages are together in the same space, it is very important that the environment is set up to allow infants and toddlers to explore and play safely. This can be done in ways that let them be part of the playgroup community and learn alongside other children while making sure they are safe and able to move without restrictions or limitations.
When children of varying levels of ability and mobility are together in the same activity space, it is very important the environment is designed with infants and toddlers in mind so they can safely play and explore, both indoors and outdoors. This does not mean that infants and toddlers cannot move throughout the centre, learning alongside older children.
When children of varying levels of ability and mobility are together in the same activity space, it is very important the environment is designed with infants and toddlers in mind so they can safely play and explore. This does not mean that infants and toddlers cannot move throughout the ECE activity room, learning alongside older children.
When children should stay away from the service
When choosing a disinfectantsanitiser, it is important to be aware that not all disinfectants are effective against the broad spectrum of germs which can cause illness.
When considering how to provide children with safe and hygienic places to sit while eating you might like to think about:
When consultation is needed
When deciding if a closing for instruction day is appropriate, we recommend boards consider the following.
When deciding whether to approve a place in a vehicle, we will consider:
When deciding which objects to secure, consider the height of the shelf or table it is on. A television falling off a low stand could still injure an infant lying on the floor nearby.
When doing access reviews, you should check:
When entering data please ensure that all balances are in whole dollars as it will save with balancing at completion.
When food is provided by parents
When implementing least privileges, your school should prioritise systems that are:
When informing parents by phone, ascertain where possible whether they have other adult support to deal with the event, for example support to look after other children, transport and so on.
When is it more appropriate to inform the police rather than trying to prevent an adult from removing a child from the premises
When it might be appropriate to temporarily relocate the centre.
When looking for an exchange partner, consider if your school:
When meals or snacks are eaten outside there are some safety and hygiene issues to consider.
When meals or snacks are eaten outside, there are some safety and hygiene issues to consider:
When mokopuna experience stable and consistent relationships with educators it enhances their learning, diverse strengths, and wellbeing. The service provider should consider how the organisation of staffing fosters opportunities for meaningful, positive, and consistent relationships between children and educators.
When notifying parents of an accident or incident in person, think about the sensitivity of the situation and the need for privacy away from the presence of children and other parents.
When people need to be safety checked
When playgroups meet in buildings that are also used for other purposes or by other groups, it is possible for children to be exposed to inappropriate or disturbing material. Posters, magazines, pamphlets, and so on, that are intended for adults might be disturbing or inappropriate for young children.
When requesting donations, services must ensure that donations are not described as fees, or by any other term that implies that they are compulsory.
When securing these items, the following guidelines will be useful.
When securing these items, the following guidelines will be useful:
When selecting an option, the respondent must ensure that their service has paid all employed certificated teachers at least the minimum salary for the period of the RS return.
When selecting an option, your service is identifying what steps of the Minimum Salary Scale for Certificated Teachers and the Minimum Salary Scale for Management Positions your service will use to pay the minimum salary for all employed certificated teachers. This selection is used to determine your initial funding rate.
When setting and reviewing the budget, the service can:
When setting and reviewing the budget, the service provider can:
When standing in the doorway, do you have direct sight of the child on the toilet
When the design requirements apply
When thinking about how to enclose your centre, consider:
When to apply the frequent absence rule
When to complete attestations
When to keep your child at home if they are ill, and what happens if they become sick or are injured while at an early learning service.
When to send your financial report
When unexpected emergency circumstances force a service to close temporarily.
When using private vehicles consider how the following will be checked:
When we are able to, we release these documents with some lines removed according to the Official Information Act. See the list of withholding grounds below.
When we have made a decision, we will tell you in writing.
When you are thinking about the type of outdoor equipment to provide for children, keep in mind that the outdoor area at your playgroup does not serve the same function as a public playground. Equipment will need to engage and challenge children for greater periods of time and be flexible enough for children to construct their own learning. Flexible, moveable equipment allows children choice and control over how their learning environment is set up. Moveable equipment also encourages cooperation between children and provides opportunities for problem solving.
When you can, try to fasten objects near the top rather than at the bottom. If you cannot, then the fastenings at the bottom will need to be very strong. This is because of the leverage effect when something topples (a fridge for example).
When you contact us, include your:
When you drive down into the car park, you will see a keypad on your righthand side just before the gates. Press the number then the symbol showing the bell. This will ring through to reception who will take your call and open the gates for you (instructions are also noted near the keypad).
When you homeschool, you are fully responsible for your childs learning and can set your own curriculum. Your
When you lodge a claim with us, there is some information we need from you to get the process started.
When you prepare your RS return, services need to:
When you receive your Certificate of Exemption, you can start home educating your child from the on your certificate. If the exemption is issued before your child turns years, your starting will be their sixth birthday.
When your child enrols with an early learning service they will be allocated a NSN number from us. This is connected to their birth registration number and becomes their number for their entire education journey.
Whenever children leave the premises on an excursion:
Where a certificated teacher is employed parttime in a teaching or management role and parttime in another role, the certificated teacher is eligible to receive the prorata allowance for all hours connected to their employment in a teaching role or management position.
Where a certificated teacher is employed parttime in a teaching role and parttime in a nonteaching role, the service provider must pay the certificated teacher at least the relevant salary amount on the applicable Minimum Salary Scale for Certificated Teachers when they are employed in a teaching role.
Where a certificated teacher, employed in a nonteaching role, engages in a teaching role regularly (for example to cover breaks), they should be paid at least the relevant salary amount on the Minimum Salary Scales for Certificated Teachers for all hours they are engaged in a teaching role.
Where a certificated teacher, employed in a nonteaching role, engages in a teaching role regularly, for example to regularly cover breaks, they are eligible to receive the allowance for all hours they are engaged in a teaching role.
Where a parent is the employer of an educator, the homebased educator top up payment still applies as a cost to the parent, but is not directly charged by the educator.
Where a service provides food, a record of the daily menu outlining the ingredients will meet this requirement. Menus are required to be specific in case of an unexpected allergic reaction. For example, what type of fruit or the contents of a sandwich must be recorded to satisfy this requirement.
Where a teacher generally works more or less than hours per week, the salary should be calculated to ensure the required hourly rate is maintained.
Where a teacher has been assessed as not meeting the appropriate Standards for their category of practising certificate, salary progression may be deferred. For each teacher to progress to their next step they will need to demonstrate that they meet the appropriate professional Standards.
Where access to first aid training for an educator is limited, a record of the actions taken by the service provider to ensure the educator has knowledge of first aid and achieves a first aid qualification within months of starting work at the service.
Where access to first aid training is limited, the service provider must record their decision to apply the condition, including:
Where an individual homebased educator is not able to provide education and care due to a noncontrollable health and safety issue stemming from an infectious disease:
Where applicable, enrolment records must include details of any transitional school visits (see Section for details) and details of
Where children are involved in food preparation on a regular basis for consumption by others, food hygiene practices must be maintained and children supervised and provided with guidance around not eating the food and discarding dropped items. There should be utensils provided for children and appropriate surfaces should be used.
Where children are involved in food preparation on a regular basis for consumption by others, food hygiene practices must be maintained and children supervised and provided with guidance around not eating the food and discarding dropped items. There should be utensils provided for children to use and appropriate surfaces should be used.
Where children wearing nappies attend, there are safe and hygienic nappy changing facilities.
Where children wearing nappies attend, there is a space (away from the play space and any food preparation areas) available for changing nappies.
Where cots are used, these should be sturdy, easily washable (PF, below) and allow good airflow (HS).
Where cots are used, these should be sturdy, easily washable (PF, below) and allow good airflow (HS).
Where do the notions of childcentred, childinitiated, and childdirected learning fit into all of this
Where does selfreview fit into the curriculum framework
Where dogs brought at pickup and dropoff should be tied (not immediately at the gate where children are passing).
Where food is provided by parents the service promotes and encourages healthy eating guidelines
Where food is provided by parents, the service promotes best practices as set out in the Ministry of Healths guide and must provide to all parents at the time of enrolment a copy of the pamphlet: Reducing foodrelated choking for babies and young children at early learning services.
Where food is provided by the service
Where food is provided by the service, foods that pose a high choking risk are not to be served unless prepared in accordance with best practice as set out in Ministry of Healths guide: Reducing foodrelated choking for babies and young children at early learning services.
Where food is provided by the service, it is of sufficient variety, quantity and quality to meet the nutritional and developmental needs of each child
Where information in these documents has not been released, the relevant Official Information Act grounds for withholding have been noted.
Where is the most hygienic place to change nappies
Where is your list of emergency contact phone numbers
Where is your local civil defence meeting place
Where possible place toy boxes and popular play equipment and resources away from the free fall zones of larger appliances and shelves as well as large glass areas.
Where possible, we align the end of the first term with the Easter holidays. This can make Term shorter or longer depending on when Easter falls.
Where practical it is preferable that children are seated in a chair with their food directly in front of them to prevent the child needing to twist to the left or right, which can cause them to lose control of the food in their mouth.
Where signinsignout sheets are not used by a service, a snapshot of actual attendance in the playroom and ward (where appropriate) is recorded for an average week in March and July. Attendance time is marked in half hour slots noting the names of children participating in the playroom and the ward. A sample form can be found in Appendix .
Where some components of the safety check have been completed by another organisation on their behalf, the centreservice is responsible for confirming that these components have been completed, and that a full safety check has been done.
Where structures or equipment have not been designed, built and installed by a commercial manufacturer, as a minimum, centres need to demonstrate:
Where the home is located at a rural property with farm animals, the educator will need to be aware of any animals in the vicinity of the home and ensure children are supervised when interacting with them.
Where the minimum entitlements were not met, some current and former employees are eligible to receive a remediation payment.
Where there are electronic devices, they should be used under the direct supervision of the educator.
Where there is a serious injury or illness or incident involving a child while at the playgroup, the service provider must notify us as soon as practicable after the event.
Where there is a serious injury or illness or incident involving a child while at the service that is required to be notified to a specified agency, the service provider must also notify the Ministry of Education at the same time.
Where there is evidence of greater than anticipated enrolments, andor that there will be at least children attending at any one time, the service provider must show evidence of meeting the requirement for persons responsible.
Where there is evidence of less than anticipated enrolments, the licence maximum will be set at child places (or less, as required in the circumstances). The service provider will be required to name person responsible for this licence.
Where there is serious injury or illness or incident involving a child while at the services that is required to be notified to a specified agency, the service provider must also notify
Where timeframes are an issue, the media team checks with the reporter to make sure they want to proceed with their request before referring the request to the Official Information team to provide a response.
Where we obtain information using statutory powers, we are clear about the powers we have and the reasons for collecting the information.
Where will staff go if they need to meet privately with a parent Is there a place where parents can feel comfortable at the centre
Where will staff go to have their breaks when children are attending all day
Whether closing for instruction may be aligned with other schools in their local area.
Whether records are stored in paperbased or electronic format they must meet the following conditions:
Whether the educator will need to get parent help or the help of another adult
Which hours can be claimed as hours ECE
Which schools and kura have Healthy School Lunches
Which schools and kura have Ka Ora, Ka Ako Healthy School Lunches
Which way do children face when using the hand basin Are they in front of the child or to the side of the child
While primary responsibility for transporting children to and from school rests with their caregivers, we can help in certain circumstances.
While the activities, resources, experiences, events and routines that occur, or are available during playgroup are important, the principles and strands of
While the number of operating days in the first months is collected on the RS form, new services do not necessarily receive advance funding for five months in their first payment.
While the six worksheets are selected, highlight Column C to J. Right click on your mouse or other pointing device and select Format Cells click on Fill and then select the white as the background colour. Click on Font and then Colour and choose the black theme colour. Click on OK.
While there is discharge from the eyes
White a on a black background
Who can be a person responsible
Who can certify a qualification
Who can get extraordinary roll growth funding
Who can get the allowance
Who can get transport assistance
Who can request information
Who cannot get support from SESTA
Who counts as adult when applying ratios
Who is responsible for enrolment schemes
Who needs to be Police vetted at school
Who needs to be safety checked
Who needs to be safety checked at school
Who needs to be safety checked
Who pays the Export Education Levy
Who should have and manage FA
Who we share your information with
Who will be involved in review and evaluation
Who will be involved when extra support is needed
Who will our service need to work with in a reciprocal and responsive way as part of making the decision to implement
Whos responsible for the statement of philosophy
Whose knowledge is of value
Whose knowledge is viewed as the most valuable
Why least privilege is important
Why practice emergency drills
Why schools have different term dates
Why strong passwords are important
Why the STAR and what it means
Why we collect personal information
Will our staffing needs change
Will the playgroup provide a changing table or mat for everyone at the playgroup to use, or will the group agree that each person brings their own portable mat if needed
Wire stranded farm fencing restricts movements of animals but not children, and additional covering will be required particularly when water troughs, roads, animals or farm machinery are nearby.
With only these two Excel workbooks open, the new model and the old model, were going to try synchronizing the scrolling of the worksheets vertically and sidebyside. This allows us to make sure the schematics of the old model can be copied onto the new model and save us a lot of time.
With your consent, we can also help you get your records from a school.
Withdrawing a students place on the bus
Withholding grounds under the Official Information Act
Within each group there are separate rates for children aged under , and children aged and over.
Within these regulations, services can set their own rules about things like:
Wording cannot be changed, (e.g privacy statement) except to add relevant details for your service. The Enrolment Agreement Form with the required wording can be found in Appendix of this Handbook.
Work continues next year to house the Phonics Checks materials (including all marking and reporting systems) in a single online space.
Work out how many adults you will be required to employ for the number of children (every half hour) and write this number in the planned staff column.
Work out the minimum salary step for certificated teachers covered by the pay parity scheme.
Work out the right salary step for your certificated teachers
Work out your regulated (ratio) staff requirement for each block of time. This should be based on the maximum number of children who attended during each block of time.
Work reciprocally with diverse Pacific communities to respond to unmet needs, including growing and supporting Pacific bilingual and immersion education pathways.
Work underway on a new assessment and aromatawai tool
Work with your childs teacher
WorkSafe bulletin on managing strangulation hazards on play equipment.
WorkSafe information on managing strangulation hazards on play equipment
WorkSafe information on risks in ECE services.
WorkSafe information on risks in education
Workforce restriction and core worker exemption
Worksheet: Community network map
Worksheet: Describing your community and engagement consideration
Worksheet: How do you want to be involved in school planning
Worksheet: Selfreflection tool
World class Inclusive Public Education: New Zealand education is trusted and sustainable.
Write a procurement recommendation report
Write down the requirements
Write down your regulated (ratio) staff requirement for each block of time.
Write the number of days the service will be open and operating as allday for each month in the boxes provided.
Write the number of days the service will be open and operating as sessional for each month in the boxes provided.
Written agreement with partner school
Written approval for regular excursions may be obtained via a signature on the enrolment form, provided the information also informs parents of the planned adult:child ratio.
Written information letting parents know how to access:
Written information letting parents know:
Written procedure for safety checks
Yeah, I think, so. This was around, um, guidelines given
Yeah, and its an interesting one
Yeah, interesting. cause we had the same thing
Yeah, it is, its a question mark until its, uh,
Yeah, its a, thats a difficult one.
Yeah, its, its the same for primary. Yep.
Yeah, no, that, thats exactly right.
Yeah, so in the moment in the guidance, its uh,
Yeah, tha thank you Jared.
Yeah, thats a really good question.
Yeah, thats a, thats a good question
Yeah, that, uh, Tanya, how about students
Yeah, we have this, uh, so I said
Yeah. And, and one thing I wanted to say is the, um, yeah,
Yeah. But I guess this is where we need to, again,
Years of experience of certificated
Years of experience of certificated kaiako service at an immersion and bilingual level
Years of experience of certificated teacher service at an immersion and bilingual level
Yes, no. Are they in class Yes, no.
Yes. The ATIS is available to licensed ECE services, with an Isolation Index of . or greater, which also meet certain income requirements.
Yes. Um, just speaking about SMS programs,
You also have the right to ask the Ombudsman to investigate and review any decision to refuse a request for official information.
You are also responsible for letting the school know if your child is moving schools.
You are always able to see legal advice on your options, and we will reimburse any actual and reasonable legal costs.
You are eligible for quality funding rates if you have adults present with certain qualifications. For specific details see C.
You are eligible for quality funding rates if you have:
You are more likely to receive a payment if you have:
You are not required to have a lawyer to make a claim with us, but you are free to seek legal advice at any stage of the process. If you have a lawyer, correspondence about your claim will be through them.
You are now ready to print the financial statements.
You are required to keep a record showing you have provided opportunities for parents and caregivers to contribute to decisionmaking processes. If meetings are held, recording attendance and decisions and then providing minutes of the meeting could be considered a record. If surveys or questionnaires are used, keep a copy of the collated responses and how you have provided feedback to group members about any actions taken.
You are responsible for getting your child to the bus stop, and for teaching them how to stay safe on and around the bus.
You are responsible for making sure your child is ready to be collected at the agreed time each day. You must meet the driver and provide any help your child needs to get in and out of the vehicle. School staff are responsible for the loading and unloading of students at the school.
You are still required to safety check all childrens workers under the Childrens Act .
You are unable to access this email address
You are welcome to create a hyperlink to this site from another website. But this link must not be presented on your site in any context that implies that this website has an association with your site or endorses your site or product.
You can access the NSI through the web application or your NSIintegrated student management system (SMS). There are user guides available on the application website.
You can also bring along any documentation you have if you think this information will help the assessor.
You can also choose to have a full assessment and accept the settlement offer.
You can also contact us if you have a concern about a homeschooled child.
You can also contact your local Ministry office or visit the Teaching Council of
You can also go to other agencies at any stage of the complaints process.
You can also report the incident to:
You can also send us a general enquiry before making an OIA request.
You can also talk to your doctor or another healthcare provider.
You can also watch our video on revised attendance codes.
You can apply for a boarding allowance for a secondary school or kura student if you are their legal parent or guardian.
You can apply for a licence for your centrebased or homebased early learning service.
You can apply for the daily bus conveyance allowance using our online form, or your school can apply on your behalf. Once you complete the application, it is sent to your school to sign off.
You can apply online for a place onboard a vehicle, the SESTA Conveyance Allowance, or both. Talk to your school before applying as they need to support your application.
You can apply to home educate your child at any age between and .
You can assign NSNs for your students and update existing NSI records that your students may already have. Students who have been enrolled in the New Zealand education system before will have an NSN. Check to see if a student has a current NSN before creating a new one.
You can calculate your average monthly roll using the roll data on the application form.
You can change attendance data after is has been submitted by updating the code in your SMS. You should make these changes as soon as possible after the day of absence.
You can choose to use this service, or another service that meets the appropriate standards.
You can complete your Staff Record either:
You can contact TeachNZ on
You can contact us in a number of ways:
You can create quieter spaces for children simply by using low partitions that children can snuggle up against, especially with a few cushions around, and carpet or rugs to sit on.
You can create quieter spaces for children simply by using low partitions.
You can differentiate the accounts by name. For example:
You can discuss your babys feeding schedule and amounts with staff when you enrol.
You can expect to see a specific privacy statement at the time of collection.
You can find details of the Budget Vote Education package, including fact sheets, in the links below.
You can find homebased education providers by searching online or in your community.
You can find information about performance reviews in the performance management starter pack.
You can find more information here:
You can find more information on all of the actions in the full Action Plan for Pacific Education.
You can find out how to access the PLD here:
You can find out if a school uses cohort entry by looking at their listing on Education Counts.
You can find out what hours an early learning service offers by going to their website or contacting them. Some services also have information on social media.
You can find review reports on EROs website.
You can find the Strategy online here
You can find the full Action Plan for Pacific Education online, here:
You can find them on the New Zealand Legislation website or any bookstore that sells government publications.
You can follow your own processes for this, or use our complaint or incident investigation templates.
You can have as many persons responsible above requirements as you want. For example, you may choose to have a person responsible in every room.
You can invite external users to access your systems to collaborate with your school. This is common for Google Workspace and Microsoft .
You can make a complaint in writing or in an email, by ringing us or at a facetoface meeting.
You can never have more children than the maximum stated on your Certificate of Licence.
You can put your claim on hold at any time.
You can read more about these benefits here
You can read the MOU on the Teaching Councils website.
You can request a copy of information we hold about you by emailing
You can request a review of an eligibility decision by emailing the School Transport team.
You can request the SESTA Conveyance Allowance as an alternative to a place in a vehicle.
You can see the list of recognised qualifications here.
You can set access rules for your logins, such as only ask for FA every weeks, or only when not on school grounds. This is called contextaware access.
You can stop the counting of time for limitation purposes by filing your claim in court. But the limitation policy means that time you spend engaging with a sensitive claims process is not counted for the purposes of calculating timeframes under limitation law. This means that you will not be disadvantaged if you try and resolve your claim directly with the Ministry before filing your claim in court.
You can submit your RS with a different salary scale if you are already paying your teachers at that scale.
You can use our annual report template to help you complete the components of your annual report. Annual reports have no set template, and the use of this template is optional. You can amend this template to meet the needs of your school or
You can use our supplier performance review tools to manage their performance.
You can use these optional templates to create your strategic plan, annual implementation plan and annual report. You can adapt them to suit your school,
You can use your report to inform conversations with staff and your school board about student attendance patterns and unjustified absences in your school.
You can view your entitlement staffing in Pourato.
You can visit your child at their early learning service to breastfeed them. Talk to your service about this when you enrol.
You can write to the school board if you are unhappy with how the school is managing the bullying problem. You should explain the problem and what you want the board to do.
You cant be charged fees for any of the hours that your child has signed up to receive hours ECE for.
You cannot share a Police vet with other agencies or accept a Police vet from them.
You cannot temporarily move into a zone in order to get your child into a school.
You could also get this allowance if your child travels in one of our vehicles but we cant take them all the way between home and school.
You do not need to develop a new strategic plan for , but your board can amend your current strategic plan if you wish.
You do not need to use one of the procurement plan templates, but your property advisor might ask for some of the details of the project. We recommend you talk to your property advisor as they may know of similar projects or available funding.
You have a big part to play in your childs wellbeing. Everyday things, like spending time with them, make a big difference. You can support your childs wellbeing at home by:
You have the right to access your personal information which we hold. You also have the right to request the correction of personal information held about you if you think it is wrong.
You have to apply for a boarding allowance by October to receive the full amount of funding the following year.
You have to complete a home education application form and submit it to your regional office. If you have more than one child, you must apply for each child individually.
You have to pay optional charges if you agreed to pay them when you enrolled. Your early learning service should tell you that you wont be penalised if you dont agree to pay. But they can take away the extra items or services that the charge covers.
You may be able to apply for assistance from Work and Income New Zealand for those hours.
You may be able to lodge a sensitive claim with the Ministry of Education if you believe you were abused (physical, sexual, psychological), mistreated or neglected, and you believe that the experience has harmed you in some way when you attended:
You may be aware that, along with many other government agencies and New Zealand businesses, we were not compliant with the Holidays Act . This was due to former system configuration issues and how the allocation of entitlements was calculated at that time.
You may choose to use this approved screening service, but you are not obliged to do so. You can conduct your checks through another service.
You may decide that the amount you are owed is not worth continuing with the process of uploading your documents and details. See the process below.
You may find it useful to bookmark this page so that it is easily accessible.
You may find that some first aid training providers are starting to phase out the availability of this course.
You may have a child who turns but stays on temporarily at your service. In these cases, you should meet ratios for mixed age services and can apply Regulation A.
You may have to pay a fee for any hours outside hours ECE that your child attends an early childhood service or
You may like to calculate the proportion of Certificated Teacher Hours in advance of receiving your funding advice notice. The calculation is:
You may need to keep track of equipment for insurance purposes. It is useful to check with the owner of the playgroup venue to see if playgroup equipment is covered by their insurance policy.
You may still be able to apply to enrol your child at a school if you live outside its enrolment zone. Your child is not guaranteed a place at the school. This depends on how many outofzone applications the school gets, and how many extra places are available after all the inzone students have enrolled.
You may use our template when contacting successful suppliers.
You may want to consider the needs of children when they are toilet training. Often young children cannot wait to go to the toilet.
You may want to consider under floor heating, particularly in centres catering for infants and toddlers.
You may want to consider wheelchair access and a suitable space for older children who require nappies.
You might also need to provide:
You must also show any safety check records to other agencies if requested. This is permitted under the Childrens Act.
You must comply with these requirements.
You must declare any conflict interest you have to the school board before the buying process begins. Use our conflict of interest declaration and management plan template to do this.
You must declare any conflict of interest you have if the property procurement you are involved with costs , or more.
You must enable Javascript in your browser in order to decode the email address
You must follow our guidelines when doing a risk assessment and show this in your decisionmaking. This is required under Schedule of the Education and Training Act .
You must follow your early learning services child protection policy.
You must get permission from the copyright owner to use:
You must get permission to reproduce such material from the copyright holders. This includes material on websites you access via links from this site.
You must have a list of all the qualified and certificated teachers displayed in the entrance of your service. There is no explicit requirement for services to show who acts in the person responsible role under GMA. But it may be helpful to both staff and parents to clearly state who can act in the role in the same document that is used to display the full names and qualifications of each person who counts towards regulated qualification requirements.
You must have a record of all safety checks on adults and the results.
You must have a written agreement with the overseas partner school covering:
You must have a written procedure for safety checking childrens workers.
You must include a completed deliverables checklist with your review submission.
You must keep a Police vet for at least as long as the person vetted is employed or engaged. That person must be told how long the information is kept, and why. If the information is used for an audit, you must have the persons permission for this before they are Police vetted.
You must let the school know if your child is going to be absent.
You must make sure no adults at your service are under the influence of alcohol or any other substance. This includes during dropoffs and pickups of children.
You must not engage or employ a person with a specified offence in a core childrens worker role unless they have a core worker exemption. This is outlined in the licensing criteria.
You must not use a safety check completed by a childrens workers previous employer.
You must pay all certificated teachers at least the applicable salary step on the minimum salary scale you have attested to. There are factors involved in working out the salary step.
You must provide a Police vet to us if we request it.
You must provide pastoral care for both inbound and outbound students in line with the Code.
You must record inbound students in ENROL and select the appropriate eligibility criteria.
You must report all incidents of physical restraint to us using the online portal. We use this to plan which schools need our support.
You must run an open tender via the Government Electronic Tender Service (GETS).
You must show us your procedures and any safety check records, if we ask for these.
You must submit data to us using our data collection portal.
You must tell us how many students take part in the scheme each year.
You must tell us if your child:
You must understand the geographic area you want to start your service in and decide the type of service you want to establish.
You must use one of our procurement plan templates. Procurements of , or more must use one of the full plan templates.
You must use our attendance codes when recording attendance in your SMS. Each student must be marked with one of these codes for each period or half day that the school is open for instruction.
You must work out the right initial salary step for your certificated teachers. This is a requirement of the pay parity scheme.
You need an Education Sector Logon (ESL) account to use
You need to keep accurate roll returns for auditing. This includes keeping documents to support the information you provide in your returns.
You need to keep records of the emergency drills.
You need to understand the different roles in the procurement process before you begin.
You should aim to hold your emergency drills at times when you have typical numbers of children, of varying ages, and adults at the centre. Consider also the timing of emergency drills and whether or not staff will be notified in advance. Holding unannounced emergency drills at challenging times (for example, during lunch time or sleep time) may be inconvenient but will give greater assurance that procedures are effective. Roles for adults could be varied during emergency drills so that any key responsibilities are covered even in the absence of a particular staff member.
You should aim to hold your trial emergency drills at times when you have typical numbers of children, of varying ages, and adults at the centre. Consider also the timing of the emergency drills and whether or not staff will be notified in advance. Holding unannounced emergency drills at challenging times (for example during lunch time or sleep time) may be inconvenient but will give greater assurance that procedures are effective. Roles for adults could be varied during emergency drills so that any key responsibilities are covered even in the absence of a particular staff member.
You should also note that the Ministry of Educations ECE funding handbook requires records to be kept showing actual staffing levels and child attendance (as opposed to planned staffing levels). Your staffing schedule could be designed so that it can also be used as a staffing record for the purposes of funding. You can find an example in Appendix of the funding handbook. Some software providers have packages available to assist services.
You should also tell us if you move house or go overseas.
You should discuss any concerns with the person who was vetted as part of your assessment.
You should keep a certified copy of educator qualifications, or a record of learning from NZQA. A letter stating an educator has completed their training is not evidence of a qualification.
You should keep the injuryillnessincident record for years from the of the incident.
You should make a referral to our attendance service application if:
You should obtain multiple competitive quotes where possible.
You should review your emergency plans and evacuation procedures at least once a year. Records of each trial evacuation should be used to inform that review. If any changes are required to your evacuation procedures, these should be noted promptly in your evacuation plans and any other documentation and notices . Remember also to communicate to all staff, family and others if you have made any changes.
You should still use a strong password and have good security practices when using your devices.
You should use FA on as many accounts as possible. We recommend having set up FA as follows:
You will also have policies and procedures for using information in the Police vet to support employment decisions. These should be reviewed regularly so they align with the Act and our guidelines.
You will also need to safety check anyone new you recruit.
You will be sent a reminder of how and when to access this end of year payroll information in January.
You will find the checklist showing the five components required included in the link above under the heading Annual Report Checklist.
You will need some low tables and chairs for children to sit at while working at collage, etc. A carpet square is a versatile work area for reading, blocks, puzzles, and so on.
You will need the following information:
You will need to ensure that children and adults who handle animals practice thorough handwashing procedures afterwards.
You will need to fill out an enrolment form, which your early learning service will give to you.
You will need to pay to use a screening service.
You will need to provide a plan outlining the variety of learning experiences and play opportunities the playgroup will provide. Examples of planning documentation can be found in Appendix .
You will need to provide the Ministry with your final funded child hours (FCH) and Certificated Teacher Hours (if applicable).
You will need to send your financial information to the Ministry by
You will need to think about a process for parents to manage situations where an adult present at the premises wishes to smoke or vape. This will include the outside area when children are present.
You will need to think about how you make your statement of operation available for people to read. Some playgroups put their statement of operation up on the wall while others provide parents and caregivers with written information (on a pamphlet or newsletter) when they first come to playgroup, so they know what to expect.
You will only need a tempering valve if the centre has a hot water cylinder.
You will see lower down on this page, information related to the annual reporting process.
You will see we have entered minus , here.
YouTube community guidelines
Young children are learning at a very fast rate. They are learning language skills, developing opinions and interests and coping with change as well as learning about themselves and their abilities. Children at playgroup need space that:
Young children: about . to years old
Young parents aged to can get help with childcare costs.
Younger children will be unable to wait for turns or to share equipment, so it is realistic to provide several of each item, (for example spades in sandpit), if you have several toddlers in your group.
Your Certificate of Exemption is valid until your child turns or enrols in a registered school (whichever occurs first). You can continue to home educate your child after they turn . An exemption is not required to do this.
Your IT provider or IT lead can help you with this. Google and Microsoft have more information about enforcing password requirements on mobile devices. If someone finds the device, the data on it is protected with a password.
Your SMS will submit this information to the Ministry on your behalf (from pm).
Your bank account details (this must be a New Zealand bank account).
Your board needs to complete the following in :
Your child can enter university if they have Christian Education New Zealand (CENZ) Level certificate or CENZ Level certificate with Honours.
Your child can enter university if they have an Accelerated Christian Education Certificate of Achievement and High School Advanced Certificate Level or Certificate Level with Honours.
Your child can sit Cambridge International exams at approved schools in October to November as a private candidate.
Your child does not need to be immunised to attend an early learning service. If they are immunised, the service will ask you to provide your childs immunisation record.
Your child is legally required to be at school every day, unless they are sick.
Your child is not eligible if they are enrolled at a private school or board at a residential specialist school.
Your child may also be able to sit NCEA assessments at a secondary school. You will need to contact the school directly and ask if they will be a link school. There is no obligation for a school to be a link school.
Your child may be able to sit some National Certificate of Educational Achievement (NCEA) assessments.
Your child will learn through play and active exploration. This is supported by the early learning curriculum,
Your childs birth certificate. If a parent has changed their name from the one listed on the child births certificate, provide a copy of the marriage certificate or name change certificate.
Your childs education is free between the ages of and at state schools if they are a New Zealand citizen or a permanent resident.
Your early learning service can never require you to pay a donation.
Your early learning service may need to share personal information with other agencies, such as the Police, to protect children.
Your education advisor can provide you with advice about how to undertake a review. However you decide to undertake a review, the following big picture questions are important:
Your education and care service will receive funding if you meet all of the requirements in the ECE Funding Handbook.
Your hazard and risk management system are likely to be made up of main processes:
Your hazard and risk management system are likely to be made up of main processes:
Your hazard and risk management system is likely to be made up of main processes:
Your hazard and risk management system is likely to be made up of main processes:
Your home education application will be considered by the regional office.
Your homebased ECE service is funded at the homebased quality funding rate, you must:
Your most recent funding roll can be found on
Your onboarding or role change process should consider what access and permissions are required when a new staff member starts. A template is provided below.
Your options will depend on your eligibility. Most people will only be eligible for our full claims assessment process.
Your personal information will not be disclosed to any third party except as authorised under the Privacy Act or other Act of Parliament.
Your playgroup curriculum will be based on the principles of
Your playgroup will need to develop a system to make sure enrolment and attendance records are maintained and reviewed.
Your policy must be reviewed at least every years.
Your policy should be developed in conjunction with your community so there is a shared understanding of what actions a service may take. Your agreed process should be included in a parent information pack.
Your policy should cover:
Your property advisor has this role.
Your referrer must be one of the following:
Your regional office can help with developing your planning and reporting documents.
Your request is for a large quantity of information.
Your rights and responsibilities
Your school board must publish the annual report on your website. We recommend that you publish the annual report at the same time as you submit it to us.
Your school is responsible for doing a safety check on childrens workers. This includes a risk assessment for registered teachers who have been Police vetted as part of their Teaching Council certification.
Your school is responsible for making sure the teaching staff you employ are Police vetted by the Teaching Council.
Your school may have a code of conduct that you and your child must sign up to before using the school bus.
Your school might also connect you with other agencies or alternative education pathways.
Your school must apply for approval before you start an exchange programme with an overseas partner school.
Your school must be a signatory to the Education (Pastoral Care of Tertiary and International Learners) Code of Practice (the Code).
Your school must have a child protection policy. The school board is responsible for creating and maintaining the policy.
Your school policies and procedures should clearly indicate requirements about Police vetting volunteers while acknowledging that volunteers do not need to be Police vetted by law.
Your school will also have policies and procedures for using information in the Police vet to support employment decisions. These should be reviewed regularly so they align with the Act and our guidelines.
Your school will contact you if your child is absent from school.
Your school will work with you to remove barriers to attending. There are many kinds of support available that might help make it easier for your child to come to school.
Your schools roll may grow beyond what you are funded for. If this is the case, you can apply to us for funding in November, when your school roll is unlikely to grow much further.
Your service can attest to or confirm what you are paying your certificated teachers when you submit your RS return. Completing the attestation means identifying that your service has met all the funding conditions for that salary scale.
Your service is responsible for confirming that a full safety check has been done. This is set out in our criteria:
Your service may claim up to hours per day and hours per week of funding per child.
Your service may have their advance funding withheld if:
Your service must have a written child protection policy.
Your service should now be collating more indepth documentation on how you have regard for the NELP relevant to your early learning service in consultation with your parents
Your service will complete an attestation times a year for the March, July and November funding rounds to confirm what you are paying certificated teachers. Attestation periods are:
Your service will need to keep records showing how you have worked out the pay of teachers and evidence of salary progression.
Your service will receive a washup payment if it is due.
Your services isolation index
Your tertiary education organisation may also have scholarships. This information may be on their website, or through a scholarships office on campus.
Zero Data is available to anyone using a mobile device connected to the Spark, Skinny, One NZ, degrees, Warehouse Mobile, Slingshot or Orcon mobile networks.
PDF, KB if you are currently a KiwiSaver member.
for thriving Pacific Languages to build a prosperous Aotearoa and the key objectives to strengthen pathways and resources for learning Pacific languages and learning in Pacific languages.
a Level ECE qualification completed before June
a Level or higher ECE qualification listed on the New Zealand Qualifications Framework or
a NZ ECE or primary teaching qualification and a current practising certificate, or
a Staff Record (that has recorded the actual hours worked by all regulated (ratio) staff) for every day the service is operating
a bank verification stamp on the RS form or
a bed permanently set up in a convenient place, such as the office (this option can double as an area for isolating sick children as well)
a board member (this cannot be the same person as the procurement sponsor).
a brief description of what the funding was spent on
a brief outline of the reasons for spending the equity funding in that way.
a change in a teachers employed hours of work that affects the overall Pacific language immersion and bilingual level of the service
a charitable, statutory, or community trust
a child attends for fewer days per week than they are enrolled to attend, for more than half of the weeks in the month.
a child has attended fewer hours than they were enrolled to attend, for more than half of their enrolled days in the month or
a collection of different textured items for children to touch, taste and feel. Ensure items are nonpoisonous and larger than a pingpong ball to avoid choking.
a comfortable couch that is used for other purposes at other times
a completed EC (Medical Reasons for Exemption to Use Early Childhood Absence Rule for Children with Special Health Needs) or
a contact name and phone number.
a copy of the attendance records for every child who attended your service in the previous months
a copy of the attendance records for every child who received Hours ECE at your service in the previous months
a copy of the compliance schedule if months have not elapsed since the compliance schedule was first issued.
a copy of the current Annual Building Warrant of Fitness; or
a copy of the current practising certificate of each certificated
a copy of the current practising certificate of each certificated teacher
a copy of the current practising certificate of each certificated teacher (either the digital certificate, Teaching Council approval email, or a copy of the online register showing name and expiry )
a copy of the enrolment records for every child who attended your service in the previous months
a copy of the enrolment records including Hours ECE attestation for every child who received Hours ECE at your service in the previous months
a copy of the notification that has been signed by the parent, or
a cosy quiet area, use pillows, curtains and soft toys
a current practising certificate.
a dated signature of at least one parentguardian to attest to the accuracy of the enrolment record.
a definition of a specified
a definition of serious misconduct and
a definition of serious misconduct; and
a financial payment (amounts vary depending on the decade you attended
a financial payment of , to settle your claim
a foundation or society for example Asthma and Respiratory Foundation NZ.
a foundation or society, for example Asthma and Respiratory Foundation NZ.
a handout for parents containing relevant information, or
a head or senior teacher in a kindergarten
a justified absence because we saw the value in
a justified, a JA justified absence.
a learning support needdisability
a level , or above, qualification developed by
a look at potentially for, I think thats due
a masters degree of teaching or
a means of cooking andor heating food
a means of hygienically washing dishes
a member of the community or
a member of the family or the community
a member of the management team or board or
a modern look and feel with a, with simplistic easy
a notice on the wall of the service.
a number of schools, and I suspect probably most
a particular staff member
a payment to help you with the costs of getting your child to and from school.
a presence, then they could do that.
a primary school prior to
a primary teaching qualification
a procedure people should follow if they wish to complain about noncompliance with the Regulations or criteria.
a process for providing formal and informal opportunities for parents to:
a process for providing positive guidance to encourage social competence in children (C)
a process for reviewing the positive guidance provided by the group.
a public awareness campaign on the importance of school attendance
a qualified certificated teacher employed in a management position in a licensed early childhood centre.
a qualified certificated teacher employed in a teaching role of the time or of the time Pacific immersion or bilingual environment within a New Zealand state or state integrated school, or
a qualified certificated teacher in a teaching role or management position in a licensed Pacific immersion or bilingual early childhood services within New Zealand.
a range of equipment and resources that invite exploration, stimulate thinking, include the familiar and the unfamiliar, and reflect the dual cultural heritage of
a range of picture puzzles to suit different ages, from simple piece puzzles with knobs to the more complex
a range of utensils, for example, rolling pins, shape cutters, garlic press, pots and pans, durable plastic cutlery and scales.
a record of enrolment that shows their course start and the they complete their qualification.
a record of information and guidance sought from agencies andor services (C).
a riskmanagement appraisal of any issues identified.
a school board member (this cannot be the same person as the procurement sponsor).
a school decision and school level.
a selection of buckets, spades, shovels, rakes
a selection of dancing accessories, for example scarves, bell wrist bands, streamers,
a selection of musical instruments, for example drums, bells, tambourines, shakers, maracas, clappers, cymbals, wood blocks
a selection of natural materials.
a selection of paper, cardboard and natural materials for painting on
a sink connected to a hot water supply
a specialist school before
a specific teaching practice
a stateintegrated school with a special character that is
a statement of accounting policies
a statement of financial position (balance sheet)
a statement of movements in equity
a statutory agency such as the Police.
a strengthened focus on Pacific bilingual and immersion education and Pacific languages in education through a change to key shift
a stretcher or mattress that can be pulled out and set up as required in a quiet area of the service.
a student has been absent without an explanation and
a subject or specialist level qualification on the NZQF (i.e. not an initial teacher education qualification) which can be a Diploma (excluding a National Diploma), Graduate Diploma or Degree or
a subject or specialist level qualification on the NZQF which can be an honours degree or a Post Graduate Diploma or
a subject or specialist level qualification on the NZQF masters or doctorate or
a supervision plan approved by Playcentre Aotearoa and
a supervision plan specific to the excursion is developed and implemented
a system of regular appraisal
a technical expert (such as an architect)
a technical expert such as an architect
a trained early childhood teacher in a teaching capacity in a licensed early childhood centre or the Early Childhood Service of Te Aho o Te Kura Pounamu (Te Kura)
a variety of play opportunities to encourage learning
a warm, safe, secure, predictable, interesting and stimulating environment
a whiteboard blackboard recording information for that session or day of operation.
aa. the service has regard to any statement of National Education and Learning Priorities; and
ability of staff to assess, plan and evaluate if space is shared with others
about any planned reviews and consultation.
about the accident or incident as soon as possible. This must be no longer than hours after the accident or incident.
about the service in general.
about what transport options are available. They can tell you about any help your child may be able to get, or if there is public transport they can use.
access to a free school bus service
accessing resources and guidance to start using Phonics Checks and Hihira Weteoro.
accessories for shop, office, medical play and so on.
accessories such as hats, scarves, belts, bags, shoes
accessories, for example, bottle tops, pieces of leather, fabric, card, vinyl, PVA glue, paint, rubber bands, cotton reels, natural materials.
accommodate at least the requirements of criterion PF, when arranged in accordance with criterion HS.
accommodate at least the requirements of criterion PF, when arranged in accordance with criterion HS.
achievement and attendance data
acknowledge in writing that they have received the conditions of transportation.
acknowledge the complaint or incident report within working days
acknowledge the source and copyright status of the material.
acoustic absorption materials, if necessary, to reduce noise levels that may negatively affect childrens learning or wellbeing.
acoustic fencing and plantings.
across the country. Of these, , () were learning in Level education. In , ,
actionable insights to improve student attendance.
actions taken and by whom and
actions taken and by whom; and
acts as the understanding between
add in notes to support this.
adding classrooms for roll growth
additional drained and ventilated wall cavity requirements
additional staff beyond the minimum regulated adultchild ratios
address and contact number
adequate information is made available to parents of enrolled children and, where appropriate, to the families or
adequately separated from areas of the service used for play or food preparation to prevent the spread of infection.
administering legislative and regulatory controls
administers the process for managing complaints about teachers.
administration of Hours ECE
administrative and office staff
administrative information technology (IT) work, such as managing other users, changing configurations, or creating or deleting resources.
adult cups, teaspoons and so on
adults at the service have the necessary skills, knowledge and experience to deal with emergency situations
adults can easily find the necessary provisions for administering first aid; and
adults have clear access to at least one side (meaning the length, not the width)
adults providing education and care
advisers on Deaf children
after weeks of continuous absence (see Section for further details on the Week Rule).
aged between and years who cant attend an early learning service or
align cancellation powers of competencedisciplinary bodies
align the powers of competencedisciplinary bodies in regard to conditions that are imposed on practising certificates and LATs for specified periods
all coordinators and educators in homebased services
all educators qualifications, or
all information provided during the safety check and
all information provided during the safety check, and
all kitchen laundry (dish cloths, tea towels, hand towels, oven mitts and so on)
all licensed ECEs receive an ECE funding subsidy for up to hours a week (the hours includes any hours of ECE funding being used)
all other staff who have regular contact with children
all parents and educators that will be associated with the reconstituted service are provided with accurate contact information for the rostered persons responsible at least weeks before the service starts operating
all parents, educators, and persons responsible associated with the affected services are given week notice of the change taking place
all private vehicles must have the appropriate safety restraints for adults and children in accordance with the NZ Transport Agency regulations.
all reasonable steps are taken to provide staff employed or engaged in the service with adequate professional support, professional development opportunities, and resources.
all service providers, service owners, managers, head teachers and persons responsible
all students will be learning literacy and mathematics in a way that evidence tells us best supports students to learn
all students working in your service as part of their educational or vocational training, including school students
all teachers, including relief teachers (independent or from an agency)
all the experiences, activities, events and routines that happen
allday services face higher costs than sessional services because they must meet different ratio requirements
allow adequate supervision; and
allow adults to easily get children out in the case of an emergency evacuation (HS).
allow adults to easily get children out in the case of an emergency evacuation (HS).
allow children, who are able to, sit or stand safely when they wake (HS)
allow children, who are able to, sit or stand safely when they wake (HS)
allow disciplinary bodies to impose conditions on subsequent practicing certificates or LATs
allow enough time to produce high quality draft financial statements
allow for additional staff time with children and their
allow the Complaints Assessment Committee to refer a matter back to the Teaching Council.
allow the Teaching Council to annotate the public register of teachers or list of LATs for additional reasons
allowance application understands what attestation conditions their service has met prior to submitting the application.
allowance must keep the following documentation:
allowance serves to support
allowance will not be paid.
allowance, an employed certificated
allows children to make choices and be involved in planning and problem solving
allows children to play individually, in groups and with others
allows for easy cleaning (or is disposable) and
allows for easy cleaning (or is disposable); and
allows the Minister to issue a statement of National Education and Learning Priorities (NELP)
allows young children the freedom to explore and play in an environment designed especially for them
along with the PDF and approval from the Board.
also have the opportunity to learn more about parenting, develop social and community networks and build greater confidence.
also refers the action, strategies, and practical application of uplifting te reo and maintaining a
alterations to the outside of an existing building, like a roof or wall cladding.
amending it if necessary.
amending school board objectives to better align with Government priorities, including making educational achievement the paramount objective for school boards, while retaining the other objectives as essential supporting objectives
amount allocated over the forecast period
an Individual Development Plan (IDP) issued within the previous six months by the Ministry of Education Learning Support team or an alternative accredited early childhood special education provider or
an acceptable reason for being absent.
an allowance to contribute towards the cost of travel to school or the nearest bus pickup or dropoff, or
an apology from the Secretary for Education
an early childhood qualification recognised by the Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand for registration purposes
an early learning qualification
an early learning teacher has been convicted of an offence punishable by imprisonment for months or more
an email from the parent confirming that they have been notified.
an extension to teach has been received
an honours degree of teaching or
an online training session
an outline of the amount received under each component of equity funding
an overseas qualification assessed by NZQA as comparable to a NZ ECE or primary teaching qualification and a current practising certificate, or
an overview of the reasons given for absence
and AllDay Kindergartens
and C, there seems to still be a little bit
and E code will be up to, um, school boards
and I appreciate that a lot
and I guess it really will go back to that,
and I have been leading the redesign
and I know Minister Seymours
and I suspect there will be a variety of questions
and Im attending a, um, a doctors
and Jared in that order could please introduce themselves.
and The New Zealand Curriculum, to support
and Training Act , which, um, enables
and a t are all unjustified absences anyway.
and absence, then we can get into
and administration staff that we spoke to felt that, uh,
and advice, uh, for Nelson Mob West Coast,
and also a, um, also the Ang Iwi leaders group.
and any court orders affecting daytoday care of, or contact with, the child.
and are they likely to have it all ready and up
and as the stewards of the
and best practice would be, uh, to be following up with the,
and board approved offsite learning, including courses,
and communities to achieve those goals across the learner pathway.
and community are encouraged to participate in and contribute to the curriculum.
and community is supported; when their parents and
and community, and reflect these in practice.
and concise feel for, for what these codes actually are.
and conducted in ways that uphold the principles of
and educators and coordinators
and exercising around what schools deemed
and feedback from the sector have consistently
and feel free to step in here, Jared.
and for future generations.
and for the best of this individual student.
and for, um, so special character schools in terms
and forget, dont want you to spend any more time
and full participation of
and g the holiday during term time, all of those are unex,
and get a copy of the score bulletin.
and had an opportunity to, to simply say to them,
and how the service has regard for the statement of National Education and Learning Priorities (NELP) in its operation.
and how to get in contact with the ministry, um,
and include knowledge and perspectives of
and international competitions surely justified
and is on a, uh, interim attendance code website.
and it enables proactive conversations with parents.
and its a part of, its a, you know, it is a, its a form
and its individual practice in case by case with students,
and its not included in regular attendance data.
and just supporting Mark today.
and learner, or education workforce information from schools and
and make sure that the guidance that we provide is clear.
and may be about a range of topics including:
and my role today is to support Mark with this.
and noting that its hit .
and now that that functionality no longer exists
and now you can see what the codes are.
and other support people with you to this meeting.
and out this, uh, around schools needing
and parents to understand and respond to the learning and development needs of
and please do not be a stranger.
and policies and procedures.
and professional development for staff.
and report attendance every day, we thought, you know what,
and report daily attendance
and scenarios arise, uh, there is always the opportunity
and service leaders have a responsibility to engage in responsive and respectful relationships with children, parents and
and service providers more information, advice, and guidance to support implementation of the licensing criteria.
and sets out the ways in which the principles and strands of the curriculum can be put into practice in each
and some other work streams, uh, around star,
and something that came up a lot with, um,
and state integrated schools will be required to record
and students taking part in it, um, alongside whanau
and teachers to thrive in environments that support their success.
and that is where all information about the revised
and that it is heard, seen and used throughout the day, integrated throughout the service curriculum.
and that will be reflected in the attendance code decision
and that will be some new terminology.
and the Ministry of Education have produced an Emergency management plan template that can be used for planning for a variety of emergencies.
and the Secretary for Education.
and the aconga, then you would be having a conversation
and the board, if theyre an isolated community,
and the changes to the revised attendance codes, um,
and the codes, um, up to speed for something
and the example L equals late or left early
and the importance of these concepts in the development of relationships
and the learning that goes, that goes alongside it.
and the overall Education Work Programme.
and the wider community. An environment that is safe, respectful, and welcoming will encourage
and their curriculum guidance is provided by
and their suitability to work with
and then absent in the afternoon.
and then record that theyve left early.
and then the absence codes broken down into justified
and then the, uh, so the presence codes,
and then you can see what theyve been merged to.
and this is just regarding the question mark,
and this will come clearer on in a couple of slides,
and to ensure the survival of
and to work with parents and
and unjustified absence categories.
and want it to be as simplistic as possible.
and want to consider a rapid payment, download the information sheet from the key documents and find out more about the
and we are looking forward to having, um,
and we have merged them into existing present justified
and we spoke to a number of schools.
and well click into the next slide, is a series of
and weve just slightly relabeled the question mark.
and what the follow up is.
and your playgroup philosophy statement) and decide on an aspect that you want to review.
and, uh, their presentation and their responses.
and, um, despite, uh, reasons A, B,
answering the following question:
any aggravating or mitigating factors.
any agreed actions decided between all agencies involved.
any court orders affecting daytoday care of, or contact with, the child.
any cultural or family considerations
any emergency that requires the school to close.
any fees charged by the service
any infectious or contagious disease or condition.
any logos, emblems and trademarks on the website
any medical information about your child such as allergies, medication and medical conditions.
any medicines your child requires.
any other home nominated by a parent of the children.
any physical or mental condition that could be dangerous (for example, strange or disturbing behaviour, or aggression)
any planned reviews and consultation and
any planned reviews and consultation.
any previous relevant work experience
any service recognised for salary purposes, and
any state school that is now closed (including specialist schools and health camp schools), and
appropriate and secure storage for early childhood education curriculum support materials and records.
appropriate curriculum implementation by the service provider and
appropriate curriculum implementation by the service provider; and
appropriate documentation and records are:
appropriate positive guidance strategies which use praise and encouragement and give the child respect and dignity
appropriate written procedures and records are developed, maintained, and made available when appropriate.
are a central part of everyday learning and sharing as a group is an important way of teaching.
are a crucial part of quality early childhood education. Parental presence and engagement have been found to support improved outcomes for children and develop a greater sense of belonging for
are also eligible to receive Equity Funding and the Annual Topup for Isolated Services (ATIS) from the Ministry of Education.
are also supported to undertake training in
are checked for warmth, breathing, and general wellbeing at least every to minutes (during daytime sleep), or more frequently according to individual needs.
are checked for warmth, breathing, and general wellbeing at least every to minutes, or more frequently according to individual needs.
are companion strategies and should be read in conjunction with each other.
are competent and confident learners who are active participants in their own learning, regardless of their age, gender, ethnicity, and abilities.
are consistent with any prescribed curriculum framework that applies, and
are currently chartered to
are early learning services which promote
are eligible to receive the ECE Funding Subsidy (
are eligible to receive their allowance while on paid leave for their usual days worked.
are encouraged to engage with different forms of expression in ways that they find meaningful and enjoyable.
are heard, listened to, and enacted in our setting
are mindful of all learners when planning social, sensory, and physical environments. They are intentional and deliberate when selecting resources, teaching strategies, and learning experiences based on knowledge of the child and the local context.
are more expensive to purchase
are open continuously for at least one session of . hours per week and
are playgroups that provide learning in and through
are relatively cheap (compared to commercial)
are required to develop and adopt a freedom of expression statement that sets out their approach to freedom of expression and is consistent with clear statutory expectations
are required to prepare a
are required to publicly report on academic freedom and freedom of expression in their annual reports and to maintain complaints mechanisms.
are responsible for providing a safe and bullyingfree learning environment for all students. This includes preventing and responding to bullying.
are reviewed by the group and amended as necessary at least every months.
are sayings that have many meanings rather than direct translations. They should be read in this light.
are the experts on their children. In what ways do you partner with parents and
are the responsibility of the whole
are the teaching qualification recognised by the Trust Board for
around a school staff from schools all across the
around getting the bus and things like that.
around requesting medical certificates
around those unjustified absences.
around, um, around presence
around, um, what that guidance is gonna be.
around, you know, whats sort of in scope and outer scope.
arrival and departure times and
as X up until the day that school has finished.
as a D but the ones that arent would be a form
as a basis for weaving with children, and parents and
as a moment in time, so if present in class
as a removing them from the role.
as a separate written notice given to parents, or
as a student can still make up to four hours of,
as an email to the parents
as on a case by case basis.
as part of a parent induction pack
as part of their normal programmes.
as question mark for the everyday matter reports.
as they build authentic and reciprocal relationships that support positive transitions for children in, through and from the service.
as to their competency in
as well as we go through this.
asking openended questions of the children when guiding their learning
asking other local schools if they have worked with the supplier and for their opinions.
aspects of provision that are not required by regulation
aspects of provision that are required by legislation
aspirations, and how are these shared so that all
aspirations, and how are these shared so that educators and coordinators understand and use them
assess risk on childrens education, health, safety and wellbeing
assess the likelihood and impact of identified risks
assess, plan and evaluate.
assess, plan, and evaluate.
assessment and management of risk
assessment and management of risk is undertaken
assessment and management of risk is undertaken, and adult:child ratios are determined accordingly. Ratios are not less than the required adult:child ratio
assessment and management of risk; and
assist in meeting the additional costs of service delivery.
assist students, where required, in and out of the vehicle and fasten their seat belt and any other personal positioning devices
assistance for students with complex safety or mobility needs.
at a childsized table inside or outside
at a dining room or kitchen table
at a school level, um, around
at a secondary school, um, for the climate strikes.
at any reasonable time on request by a parent of a child enrolled in the service; and
at any reasonable time on request by a parent or member of the family or caregiver of a child attending the playgroup:
at any time on request by any person exercising powers or carrying out functions under Part of the Act.
at any time on request by any person exercising powers or carrying out functions under Part of the Act; and
at least person on each session who holds a qualification gazetted as meeting the Person Responsible requirements for Playcentres.
at least a full terms notice of the change.
at services receiving quality funding rates
at tables in the main activity area
at the end of the day, recording actual hours worked by regulated (ratio) staff (make sure you keep a copy of the roster or schedule to support this) or
at the right time (follow any instructions provided by parents or medical staff about this).
at the time of enrolment. The guidance may be provided in hard copy, electronically or via an electronic link for
at the time of enrolment. The guidance may be provided in hard copy, electronically, or via an electronic link for
attaching a document printed on bank letterhead, with the bank account number visible, to the RS form.
attaching a preprinted bank deposit slip to the RS form or
attendance codes will be housed.
attendance information that has been entered into the SMS incorrectly
attendance patterns in your school
attendance registers that have been marked by staff on a twice daily basis (or once a day for services that operate only one session).
attendance registers to help work out where the absence rules need to be applied.
attended when they did not attend.
attending the school day.
autofill your passwords into websites for you
automated transfer from student management systems
available for the exclusive use of the service during hours of operation.
available for use by other groups in the community; but
avoid reversing as much as possible
avoids limiting children based on their gender or ability
bacteria, such as salmonella and campylobacter
balls in a range of sizes, ropes, hula hoops
base management staffing for secondary, area and composite schools
based on that special character or,
baskets for carrying things.
battinggraspingkicking, use scarves, toys that roll and mobiles
be aged between and years
be big enough for largemuscle activities such as running and jumping.
be designed to eliminate head or limb entrapments
be enrolled at their nearest state or stateintegrated school that meets their special education needs
be enrolled at their nearest state or stateintegrated school that meets their special education needs.
be interacting with an adult providing education and care or
be involved in decision making concerning
be involved in decisionmaking concerning their childs learning (C); and
be large enough to allow all children to lie flat on their backs
be licensed to carry passengers (they have a passenger endorsement)
be more interested and so they are more likely to be involved in their own learning
be nonsexist and inclusive
be of a height and design that prevents children climbing over. Young children can commonly scale a fence that is less than .m high, so this would be a minimum
be of a height and design to prevent children from climbing over or through
be organised, equipped and managed on a cooperative basis, and
be present to assist in the loading and unloading of students into or out of a SESTA vehicle
be relevant and challenging for the range of ages and abilities of children attending.
be reviewed every years.
be run according to the operating requirements set out in the Playcentre
be taking part in an activity initiated by an adult providing education and care or
be temporarily kept at a safe distance from other children (to prevent crossinfection)
be written down and in use
because Ive had examples in the past where Ive had
because its an isolated community, so they, they have
because its been putting pressure on the practitioners just
because of the importance of
because the queue for the board approved.
because the redesign of the codes is, uh, you know,
because there has been a change that was,
because theres no explanation.
because these services are very different from
been assessed as meeting the Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand standards for certification.
been privy to all of this
before I manager for Nelson Mobile West Coast Week,
before we do that, I will put up the slide for
being employed for a hour week, , hours a year. The allowance does not increase if certificated
better use of data, assessment, and evidence to identify and invest in supports and services that work.
between truant and explained, but not approved.
between truant and unex, um, and explained but not approved.
between truant and, um, and explained,
board and the different requirements for their plans
board approved offsite learning.
board, cloth and plastic books
boarding at residential schools, and need transport to and from home for the weekend or holidays
boards until July . This applies to:
boards. It has information about the new requirements, a suggested process and example templates.
bodies of water (such as pools or water troughs).
body, spirit, energy, minds, hearts, compassion, tears,
books which show males and females in nontraditional roles
bookshelves or display case
brief description of the purpose to which the funding was applied (e.g. purchase of goods or services)
brief outline of the reasons for spending the funding in that way
brushes of different sizes, rollers, and other items for printing and painting
bubblemaking shapes and mix
bucket with lid for storage
bug catchers or insect viewers
bus controllers at the schools serviced by the route
but I guess this is, this is, uh,
but I just wanna say thank you very much, um,
but I wouldnt want them to be disadvantaged.
but I, if its a, if its a parking issue, I, I believe,
but a list of examples that give greater effect to
but due to family organization have
but due to the family organization,
but happy, um, uh, to provide some guidance to your school,
but its, its not reported.
but my substantial role sits in Wellington.
but not approved, its the same thing.
but not approved, or in other words, a unjustified absence.
but on balance, we, um, we didnt progress with that.
but only the presentation itself.
but out of class due to onsite school activity,
but recapping on this, weve got the present codes,
but the reason given, um,
but then also offsite school organized activity.
but then its got an example of three days.
but there will be, um, if possible to do so.
but they are still there for the half day for two hours.
but this is where its really important for schools to have,
but to also physically track where students are.
but we would only enforce that if we, um,
but when going to a daily reporting, does it have
but will reduce the fees you pay. When you fill out your enrolment form, youll need to say which hours will be covered by hours ECE. Talk to your early learning service about whether they offer hours ECE, as some may not.
but yeah, Id be, Id be marking it as a T.
by a doctor or ambulance personnel in an emergency or
by a doctor or ambulance personnel in an emergency; or
by definition they can be in conflict with each other and having both is an indicator of an environment fit for purpose, and
by doctor or ambulance personnel in an emergency or
by supporting us to examine the
by the end of the day, no.
by the parent of the child or
by the parent of the child; or
by what the educator will have the qualification.
call your service manager or local office
called for the need to have a simplified set
can also be used to hygienically clean toys and playdough equipment
can apply for the school bus conveyance allowance on behalf of students using
can apply to us to use different term dates and opening times. Contact your regional office for support.
can be seen in what is provided, how it is provided, the way adults and children engage with each other and with the experiences, activities, events and routines that happen at playgroup.
can be separated out and measured.
can be supported by specialist services to develop an inclusive approach to the curriculum.
can be used by the service whenever they require it
can be used to allow children to explore attitudes and feelings
can handle a high volume of dishes
can meet the requirements of one of the quality options
can meet the requirements of the quality funding rate.
can no longer meet the requirements of any of the quality options
can occur. For instance, childrens health and wellbeing can be promoted through the rituals and routines associated with food. Children can learn about their own and other cultures through interacting with a range of culturally diverse dolls, musical instruments, books and pictures; they can develop understandings about concepts such as size, shape and volume by experimenting with water and different sized containers.
can only pool Targeted Funding if each individual service agrees and provides written consent that details how much of their Targeted Funding entitlement they wish to pool.
can perform its function to the same level as if it were located on the premises
can provide a way of understanding review. The process of
can take to respond to the priorities.
cannot receive more than one full allowance entitlement.
care arrangement, where the Chief Executive Officer of
care provided by the service or due to the service being well regarded
carpet attached to the underside of tables.
carpet square or floor cushions
carpet square or table and chairs
carry out investigations where we believe there may be breaches.
casual bookings made for children who do not attend the service.
casual education and care services
casually enrolled children who do not attend.
centrebased services face higher facility costs than services that do not have to maintain a centre.
certified evidence of residency status
chair or sofa where adults can sit with young children
challenge our interpretations of anything Is the process around this one of empowerment
challenge our interpretations Is this process one of empowerment
change or revert permissions if access is needed for a fixed amount of time.
change the licence status to provisional
changes of role and responsibilities
changes. Where relevant, this could include establishing baseline information for where your students are at in relation to new curricula being implemented in .
changing the year levels at a school
check a primary identification document
check a specified form of photographic identification
check all passengers are seated before departing (if seats are available)
check if a persons name has changed and, if so, get the required documentation
check its strength to ensure it is sturdy enough to cope with the weight of the children using it
check membership of any relevant professional organisation or licensingregistration authority
check mirrors before closing doors to make sure nobody is in the way
check that all safety checking has been appropriately completed for all existing staff
check that records are in place, collated and stored securely on file, and made available to us on request.
check the each of these safety check components were completed.
check the nappy changing procedure and make sure that all staff are following it carefully
check. It is a free health and development check for your yearold and helps give them a good start at school. At this check, the B School Check team will look at your childs growth and development and check your child can see and hear well.
checking that all appropriate notices were displayed
child has been absent on the same enrolled day or days of the week for more than half of these days in the month or
children able to sit or stand can do so safely as they wake.
children are familiar with, and confident in, responding to emergency procedures.
children are supervised and seated while eating (HS Supervision while eating, below) and
children are supervised and seated while eating (HS, below), and
children cannot access any hazardous materials themselves.
children enrolled at school.
children enrolled in school
children who are present in the home but not enrolled in the homebased service or
children who become unwell while attending the service are kept at a safe distance from other children (to minimise the spread of infection) and returned to the care of a parent or other person authorised to collect the child without delay.
childrens dignity and right to privacy is respected; and
childrens independence can be fostered as appropriate
choice of where the animal(s) will be, for example visiting wards, individual rooms, or in public areas
choose Education Sector Logon, and finally select School Sector logon links.
choose their own learning activities at every opportunity by providing opportunities for positive social interactions and learning through relationships.
circuit board or collection of electrical components
circumstances where the technology will not be appropriate for example power cuts, child is unwell; and
civil defence emergencies.
clarify the role and expectations of employees
clarify the scope of the prosecution function of the Teaching Council relating to failures to make a mandatory report
cleaning agents, medicines, poisons and other hazardous materials
cleaning agents, medicines, poisons, and other hazardous materials
clear away pollutants and odours to improve air quality
clear records are kept that include:
clearly identify and include on the document their:
clicking on a link sent to your email address.
clothing items such as sun hats
cloths used for art and messy play
cloths used for art and messy play.
collaborate, relationships can strengthen. This will influence
collaborative process within the, uh, uh, timeframes allowed
collection of items for sorting by type, colour, size (natural materials such as stones, leaves, shells are good)
collection of natural materials to classify and investigate for example, shells, leaves, stones, feathers, bark
collects the student within an hour of school or
collects your child within an hour of school finishing
coloursnumbersshapessize
combine random words together to make a passphrase
come to life through the interactions, responses and relationships that occur between children and children, children and adults, and adults and adults during playgroup.
communal decisionmaking practices
communicate in our setting
communicate this out, but we are working at pace, uh,
communicate with adults providing education and care about their child, and share specific evidence of the childs learning and
communicate with adults providing education and care about their child, and share specific evidence of the childs learning; and
communicate with educators and coordinators, about their child, and share specific evidence of the childs learning and
communicate with parents and caregivers about safety and behaviour expectations.
communicate with the auditor at each step of the process
communication and social skills
communications in languages other than English.
complete enrolments and attendance records are submitted to the
complete the RS return in order to receive funding.
completed , hours work, and
complex learning support needs
complies with the requirements of Appendix
conditionally enrolled children who do not attend
conditionally enrolled children who do not attend the service
conflict of interest management plans
connected to the indoor activity space and can be easily and safely accessed by children
consider undertaking your own risk assessment for each staff member
considered a Public Benefit Entity under XRB requirements.
consolidated reporting, if your service is one which is grouped into a service provider (for funding purposes), or you are a licensee of more than one service.
constitutes unlawful use of imagery that violates copyright or breach of a licence agreement
consult the Minister before changing teaching standards or the requirements for practicing certificates
consult the Secretary of Education and consider their advice when it is performing its functions relating to standards for qualifications that lead to teacher registration and approval of teacher education programmes.
consult your community and develop a year strategic plan outlining how the board will meet its primary objectives, as outlined in Section of the Education and Training Act
contact address (email or post)
contact each educator engaged in the service at least once per fortnight
contact numbers for people seeking information about the group.
contact your bank if you think your payment information might have been accessed.
contain provisions on the identification and reporting of neglect and abuse and
contain provisions on the identification and reporting of neglect and abuse, and
container to store this equipment (named and mouse proof).
containers for tea, coffee, milo, sugar
continues to provide the basis for consistent high quality curriculum delivery in the diverse range of early childhood services in
contracting a commercial laundry.
contractors and their employees before the person has, or is likely to have, unsupervised access to children.
contractors and their employees who may have unsupervised access to children during normal operating hours.
conveyance allowances to contribute to the cost of getting to school or
copies of ECE, Primary or overseas qualifications along with NZQA assessments of the overseas qualification for all certificated teachers
copies of qualifications and current practising certificates for certificated teachers
copies of the letter of registration with an ECE or primary endorsement from the New Zealand Teaching Council
copies of training records for parents
copyrighted materials from other websites, or
costs such as fees or donations, and
could report to their board.
counseling appointments will be coded as D.
covered by an adhesive film designed to hold the glass in place in the event of it being broken; or
covered mattress for rolling and tumbling
cradle gym or hanging frame with interchangeable objects
create an annual implementation plan that sets annual targets and actions for working towards strategic goals
create ourselves or is there a
create strong random passwords or passphrases
creating and deleting resources.
cry easily, are irritable or in pain
currently lists some education and learning objectives for early learning, primary and secondary education.
curriculum ensures an environment rich in
curriculum is consistent with the prescribed curriculum framework that applies to
curriculum is inclusive and responsive to the
curriculum is informed by planning, implementation, and evaluation that demonstrates an understanding of
curriculum provides a range of indoor and outdoor experiences and opportunities in
curriculum respects and supports the right of
cutlery, vegetable knifepeeler
cutters (wire or fishing line)
daily staff activities, such as emails or browsing the internet
data errors such as missing student or attendance information
and time medicine was administered and by whom and
and time medicine was administered and by whom; and
and time medicine was given and who administered it
the transition arrangement began
days and times of actual attendance for each child
days and times of operation
deadlines and procedures for applications
decide how work is allocated or delegated
decide whether further action is required from us.
deciding if one is required
decisionmaking, management and responsibilities
decorations on walls, especially thick wall hangings and dimensional decorations rather than flat pictures
define how suspected neglect and abuse will be identified and reported
defines learning outcomes for
delaying their morning routine
deliver the curriculum for children using the main language of communication.
deliverables and planned timeline
delivery against the achievement target is atrisk
departing staff and students.
describe how children (walking and nonwalking) will be managed during an emergency drill
describe how children (walking and nonwalking) will be managed during an emergency drill.
describes when and how to apply the Frequent Absence Rule.
designated character school with a character that is
designed and located to allow children capable of independent toileting to access them safely without adult help and
detail on each of the yearly recheck components and how these are completed
detail on each of the safety check components for existing childrens workers and how these are completed
detail on each of the safety check components for new childrens workers and how these are completed
detail on how the risk assessment is undertaken, and what action is taken when risk is identified
detail the areas Targeted Funding must be spent within.
details of any chronic illnesscondition that the child has, and of any implications or actions to be followed in relation to that illnesscondition
details of how at least parent (or someone nominated by them) can be contacted while the child attends the service
details of how at least parent (or someone nominated by them) can be contacted while the child is participating in the service
details of the amount of funding received from the Ministry of Education
details of when first aid training is booked for.
determining standards for teacher registration and the issuing of practising certificates
develop appraisal processes and procedures
develop criteria for allocating resources
develop meaningful and reciprocal relationships with parents and
developed, maintained, and regularly reviewed; and
developing and consulting on it
developing social competence and understanding of appropriate behaviour.
direct feedback from the education sector and disability community
direct resourced bus services provided by schools
directresourced bus services provided by schools
discard any dropped food and
disciplinedismissal procedures.
discuss any significant issues with your property advisor.
display board for instruments
display school bus signs when students are on the bus
do not have access to food or liquids while in bed and
do not have access to food or liquids while in bed; and
document. In , we have
documentation of discussions with families.
does not create hazards to children but is easily accessible to adults
does not have its own website, we can host your documents on our Education Counts website. Send a boardapproved request to us.
does not have to meet the teacher certification criteria
does not need the student to be picked up before am and gets them to school or
does not need the student to change buses more than once on a journey.
does not need your child to be picked up before am and gets them to school on time
does not need your child to change buses more than once on a journey.
does not present a suffocation hazard to children.
dolls, dolls bed, bedding
dont sell or distribute any material on a commercial basis
dont use the material in a derogatory manner or a misleading context
donations, which you can choose to pay.
draw on their wide knowledge of each child to make meaning of their observations and plan for next steps.
dress up clothes, for example, doctor, police, firefighter, animal suits and other unisex costumes, ballet costumes, overalls, hard hats, cultural costumes and fabrics
drives the calculation of salary units, and middle management and senior management allowances.
drying rack or line and pegs
dune sand (this can be purchased by the sack from hardware shops and stored in a bucket).
during term time and truant.
each child is restrained as required by Land Transport legislation
each child is restrained as required by Land Transport legislation and
each child is restrained as required by the Land Transport legislation
each child is restrained as required by the Land Transport legislation;
each university will be required to develop and adopt a freedom of speech statement, setting out their approach to freedom of speech, consistent with clear expectations
early learning educators work with parents,
easily accessible and available to children
easily recognisable and readily accessible to adults and
eat from a lunchbox or plate
education and care services
education, across the country.
education.surveymonkey.com
effectively guarded by barriers which prevent a child striking or falling against the glass.
electrical sockets and appliances (particularly heaters)
email us using the email address for your area office below
emergency contact phone number
emergency information, such as school closures during bad weather
employed by and teaching in a licensed Puna Reo or Reo Rua Education and Care that receives
employed in split roles, only the hours they are employed engaging in duties and responsibilities in a teaching role should be counted as hours of work. Information on split roles can be found in section B Education and care services.
employment agreement guides and
enable children to experience natural settings (for example, wind, sky, sun, rain)
enable children to make choices about their learning
enable children to undertake activities that would generally not be allowed inside a home (for example, running, kicking a ball)
enabling informationsharing to support multiagency attendance support
encapsulate those four codes.
enclosed by structures andor fences and gates designed to ensure that children are not able to leave the premises without the knowledge of adults providing education and care
enclosed by structures andor fences and gates that are maintained so that children cannot leave without an adults help; and
encourage and support a variety of learning possibilities.
encourage play with others as toddlers become more social and
encourage written and spoken language
encouraged for all users of your schools Google or Microsoft accounts, except students.
encouraged for any accounts or systems that have personal information or access to financial information, or any critical school systems
encouraged to continue with their current assessment, aromatawai and reporting practices in
encouraged to implement and week phonics checks or Hihira Weteoro for Year students and share phonics data with us.
encourages children to be confident in their own culture and develop an understanding, and respect for, other cultures and
encourages children to be confident in their own culture and develop an understanding, and respect for, other cultures; and
encouraging attendance at early childhood services
engage specialist professionals
enhancing process for children and parents and
enrol their child at a registered school when they turn years old
enrolled at a private school.
enrolled at or licensed places at
enrolled in Level education across the country.
enrolment (see Section A for details).
ensure that all children under and a half years of age are accompanied by a parent or caregiver.
ensure that appropriate procedures are in place to deal with fires, earthquakes, and other emergencies.
ensure that daytoday health and safety risks and hazards are identified, and that appropriate steps are taken to address those risks or hazards when children attend
ensure that early childhood education and care service providers comply with licencing requirements and
ensure that staff are implementing any prescribed curriculum framework and know how to use it in providing education and care
ensure there is enough space for adults working in the area as well as the children
ensure they are not too hot or cold
ensure you have a written procedure in place that reflects your new services governance and management
ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, the health and safety of children attending the playgroup; and
ensures services licensed exclusively for under yearolds are not disadvantaged by having to provide more toilets than would be of use for under yearolds.
ensuring education providers and students receive appropriate resourcing
equipment and material costs for the ongoing purchase of new equipment and consumable materials and
equipment and material costs for the ongoing purchase of new equipment and consumable materials; and
equipment to fill, pour and sieve, for example bottle funnels, cups, watersand wheels, spoons and small spades
equivalent overseas qualifications assessed by the NZQA or an overseas qualification where NZQA has assessed that the qualification has level (graduate) study in a subject or specialist area(s) i.e. any area of study that is not initial teacher education.
equivalent overseas qualifications assessed by the NZQA.
essentially brought the guidelines
establish clear procedures for monitoring income and expenditure.
establishing and maintaining the qualifications that lead to teacher registration.
establishing routines and expectations
ethnicity (including iwi affiliations as appropriate).
even though student does not have the appointment,
even though the student does not have the appointment,
everyday matters as you normally would.
evidence of a bank account in your name
evidence of ongoing routine maintenance inspection of structures and equipment for compliance with the following provisions of NZS ::
evidence of parental acknowledgement.
evidence of parental acknowledgement. Related to clause ()(b) of standard.
evidence of parental knowledge of the incident.
evidence of parental permission and approval of adult:child ratios for regular excursions
evidence of parental permission and approval of adult:child ratios for special excursions; and
evidence of parental permission for regular excursions at the time of enrolment and
evidence of parental permission for special outings or excursions.
evidence of parental permission.
evidence of reasons for trained parents
evidence that parents have been informed.
evidence that the procedure is regularly reviewed.
example templates for how a
examples is it could be a a n
exchange programme and policy
excludes teacherled services.
excursions and entrance fees
excursions that do not meet the criteria for excursions and transport.
expectations, and our teaching practices will be strong indicators of what we consider as socially appropriate and competent behaviours.
experience stable and consistent relationships with
experiences a significant change in the number of eligible
experiencing hearing loss
experiencing tummy aches, headaches or feeling sick
explains the Frequent Absence Rule and
extensions and additions to an existing building
extreme weather conditions
fabric draped from the ceiling
fall zones (including free height fall provisions), and
falling from a height during a nappy change
feel more confident being involved in activities
fees for the hours your child attends
fibrous or stringy foods that are difficult for children to chew (for example, celery, rhubarb, raw pineapple)
fibrous or stringy foods that are difficult for children to chew (for example, celery, rhubarb, raw pineapple).
financial management processes
financial performance (profit and loss account) that includes specific reference to the funding received from the Ministry of Education
financial position (i.e. a balance sheet)
financial reports are not audited or do not meet the audit requirements. Refer to Section
finding it hard to talk about school in a positive way
firefighting equipment serviced and so on.
fitting safety glass in windows or doors that children can reach
five sessions or days per week
five sessions or days per week.
fixedterm contractors (i.e., if a contract of service is in place).
following guidelines set down by the Trust Board. The
following instructions for mixing formula (as different brands use different size scoops and volumes of water).
following instructions for the formula (as different brands use different size scoops and volumes of water).
following the completion of , hours of work, and
food preparation surfaces that are impervious to moisture and can be easily maintained in a hygienic condition.
foods with skins or leaves that are difficult to chew (for example, sausages, chicken, lettuce, nectarines)
for a period of at least years; or
for a period of less than years, but the lesser period of certification does not reflect problems identified with requirements relating to the hospitals premises and facilities that would affect children participating in the ECE service.
for a que as a question mark
for absence for training for the sport also,
for absence has been ascertained.
for all periods the service is open.
for day one, term one next year.
for educators, learners and employers
for half an hour, then go home, what do we do
for medical if theyre absent for the day.
for meetings, attendance records and minutes could be considered as evidence
for particular hours of operation.
for pulling up, use towel rails attached to wall, steps and couches
for questions at the end of this session.
for regular excursions at the time of enrolment and
for some of these codes anyway.
for special excursions prior to the excursion taking place and
for staff who need admin access, create a separate account to their everyday account, and make sure it has a secure password and is factor authentication (FA) enabled
for the SMS providers that enable you to do so.
for the competition is the justified absence.
for the decode for those, uh, for those appointments.
for the doctor dentist appointment.
for the educator who was not available
for the latest updates and resources to support implementation in your schools and
for the next week and a half.
for the purposes of certification.
for the remainder of this year, please contact
for the ride, um, due to whatever reason, then um, the child
for the, uh, exam leave and the unsupervised exam study.
for their category of practising certificate, years of experience allowance progression may be deferred. For each
for two weeks prior to the competition
for when a child is wagging or skipping class.
for when a medical certificate is required does need
for when a school requires a certificate,
for which order to address you.
for your attendance this morning.
for your child. All children have the right to attend their local school. We know that being around other
foreign materials (for example glass, animal droppings), equipment faults, vandalism, and dangerous objects
form, fraction and shape boards
forms of work experience, alternative education team,
forms submitted manually by education providers
freephone (NZ only): EDASSIST
from birth to school age.
from the early stages of establishment, through to being fully functioning. Contact your regional education advisor to talk about support options.
from the start of next year, we will be, uh,
functionality, um, I would encourage you
funding and staffing schools
funding conditions related to educator and persons responsible
funding conditions related to the attestation of certificated teacher salaries for education and care services
funding rate an education and care
funding rates for homebased ECE services
funding rates for parent
funding (ECE funding subsidy) quality funding rate requirement
funerals in the community
furniture or other items nearby that children are likely to climb onto that would bring them within reach of the glass.
games such as dominoes, picture lotto, patterning
gazette.education.govt.nz
general contributions towards the cost of high quality education and
generally take longer to run through a cycle of dishes
geometric and serrated puzzles
get a New Zealand Police vet
get familiar with the safety check requirements and our guidance
get the bank associated with the service to write in the new bank account details and sign and stamp the RS form or
get written consent from all schools nearer to the students home than their chosen school allowing the transport provider to carry the student
give practical recognition of
gives the school board a base to make longterm decisions.
giving children positive feedback and showing real interest in their play
giving help to use resources correctly
glue (polycell and PVA), containers and brushes
good quality hand drill and bit, screws, screwdriver
governance, size, structure and staffing
great minds thinker like Tanya and youre not alone.
grouping are central to the philosophy of some centres.
guidelines for external and internal
had a pretty good starting point in terms of
had you in mind when we developed this, we wanted this to be
hand beaters, bowls, scrapers
hand towels (wash regularly).
happen in different environments and
has outcomes and audacious goals. These have been mapped onto the
has a current relationship with an overseas school
has a mattress covered in nonporous material, and
has a quiet area for stories, puzzles or similar and
has adequate breaks (for example, lunch)
has advice on looking after yourself and connecting with your child in ways that support their wellbeing.
has any staff or community connections with schools in other countries
has been assessed as not meeting the appropriate Teaching Council of
has been woven, and to evaluate our practice.
has important elements to ensure total immersion in
has information about how to apply for an exemption.
has information about making food safe for
has information about what children learn through the New Zealand Curriculum and
has more information about community engagement and consultation.
has plenty of safe and appropriate equipment
has time to plan for childrens learning and curriculum delivery.
have a clear and justifiable purpose to close for instruction
have a duty to protect and promote academic freedom and freedom of expression
have a good choice of suitable activities
have a latching mechanism that is unreachable by children.
have a maximum adult:child ratio of :, and
have a means of washing or wiping their hands.
have about their children
have all SMS contributors, uh,
have an absence notification process
have an important role and responsibility in fostering, role modelling and supporting the peertopeer interactions of
have any horizontal railings or low posts located on the exterior of the fence
have diarrhoea or vomiting.
have different sets of requirements to meet. These options are unique to either playcentres or
have educator timesheets that show the hours worked and
have enrolment records for each child and
have mobility or safety needs that prevent them from travelling independently to school
have mobility or safety needs that prevent them from travelling independently to school.
have no interest in activities or play
have no more than children attending, and
have passed a fit and proper person check.
have some flexibility to decide when Term starts, and when Term finishes. Terms and are fixed.
have speech communication difficulty.
have to advertise if they have any places left for outofzone
havent been too many changes.
having a family member or friend that works at a business your school might buy from
having a financial interest in a business your school might buy from.
having a separate fenced off exercise area where dogs can be removed to if necessary.
having a sheet parents can tick and sign when they have reviewed documents.
having barriers that prevent children from falling against glass surfaces
having previously worked for or with a business that your school might buy from
hazards present in kitchen or laundry facilities
health and safety legislation.
healthy options make up less than of foods and drinks served.
help calculating parental leave for your staff.
help keep track of absences so that the absence rules can be applied and
help keep track of hours of attendance that can be claimed for children attending casually.
help remove excessive moisture in the air
help staff to train or upgrade their qualifications
helping children develop their interests through play
helping children make friends and socialise with other children and adults
helping their child put their ideas into practice without taking over
her attendance pattern returns to normal in October or
hessian (to work clay on)
hessian or old sheets for tunnels, houses
highest roll that you supply to us in your application form.
his attendance pattern returned to normal in March or
his attendance pattern returns to normal in December or
his enrolment agreement is reconfirmed or changed.
hold sensitive information and may raise privacy concerns.
holds a current First Aid qualification gained from a New Zealand Qualification Authority accredited first aid training provider or
holds a current first aid qualification gained from a New Zealand Qualification Authority accredited first aid training provider or
holds a current first aid qualification gained from a New Zealand Qualifications Authority accredited first aid training provider; or
honours the relationship with
hour may be claimed as Plus ECE.
hours of employment for each certificated
hours of employment for each certificated teacher, and
how (method and dose) and
how (method and dose), and
how are maintenance issues communicated to the person responsible or governance committee for any repairs or replacement
how comfortablefamiliar they are with the procedure
how do we capture the last time, uh, in your EMS
how do we, how are we supposed to deal
how food can be kept safe and hygienic while being consumed
how hazards and risks will be identified
how information about costs will remain current.
how information will be shared between agencies and how the complainants privacy will be protected
how is the maintenance of premises and equipment documented, managed and budgeted for
how it fits with your internationalisation policy, if you have one
how many staff will be needed overall to ensure compliance with the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations (schedule )
how often children eat at your centre each day
how outbound exchanges fit with your education outside of the classroom policy
how processes for updating the identification of hazards and risks on a regular basis will be
how the ECE Funding Subsidy for education and care services is calculated
how the child is feeling and responding to becoming ill.
how the costs involved in providing early childhood education (ECE) are turned into funding rates
how the environment is set up
how the funding rates can be changed to reflect changes in costs, and
how the proportion of Certificated Teacher Hours is turned into a funding rate
how the supplier should break down their prices when they provide pricing information
how their identity was confirmed and
how their identity was confirmed, and
how their identity was first confirmed
how these were redesigned.
how they can be involved in the service
how to code absence due to students joining heco
how to decide if your service should provide general purpose financial statements or a special purpose financial report
how to keep track of Certificated Teacher Hours
how we came about this, uh, how we, you know, essentially
how we decide if a place in a vehicle is provided
how will the service better engage with their
how will visitors to the service be informed about identified hazards
how you can interpret these codes.
how you will approach the market
how you will evaluate the proposals you receive from suppliers.
how you will fund the exchange programme.
however they were comfortable on balance, um,
https:conversation.education.govt.nzconversationsactionplanforpacificeducation
https:tinyurl.comseasc
https:tinyurl.comkhzvd
https:tinyurl.comxzysnv
https:tinyurl.commtsvfuin
https:tinyurl.commyrh
https:tinyurl.comyvfbrxn
https:www.education.govt.nzourworkoverallstrategiesandpoliciesactionplanforpacificeducation
https:www.education.govt.nzourworkoverallstrategiesandpoliciesthestatementofnationaleducationandlearningprioritiesnelpandthetertiaryeducationstrategytes
https:www.mpp.govt.nzprogrammesallofgovernmentpacificwellbeingstrategy
https:www.mpp.govt.nzprogrammespacificlanguagessurvey
https:www.mpp.govt.nzprogrammesthepacificlanguagesstrategy
i. There is a direct cost associated with the excursion (e.g. an entry fee) andor
identifies what is special about the service and
identifies what is special about the service, and
identifies what is special about the service; and
identify hazards and risks
identify issues that make attendance challenging for a student
identify priorities for expenditure
identify professional development needs and guide career developments.
identify the roles that they and others will play during an emergency drill.
identify the roles they and others will play during an emergency drill
identify, report, and respond to suspected or real cases of child abuse and neglect.
identifying students who may need additional support to participate in learning
identity, language and culture matter
if I do not make documents available for inspection or
if I do not provide documentation supporting the funding claim or
if I do not tell the Ministry of Education of changes that may affect funding claims or rates
if I have failed to answer all the questions in full or
if I have made a false statement or
if Im the, lemme just read this correctly.
if a child has a toileting accident
if a child has had a toileting accident
if a child has vomited over themselves
if a child has vomited over themselves or another person
if a child has vomited over themselves or over another
if a hazard is identified, how it will be eliminated, isolated or minimised When will it be done Who is responsible for this
if children become dirty during play.
if children become very dirty during play.
if children become wet or dirty during play.
if clearing tables for meals will impact upon the programme
if food is provided that is not prepared in accordance with the Ministry of Health guidance and the service does not consider it to be developmentally appropriate for that child.
if it is to be used by children, may be used by them in a manner that ensures their safety, supervision, and dignity can be assured.
if meals are scheduled or rolling
if one has an appointment, um, so for a,
if the area for infants is a separate room, think about how you will deploy staff across rooms to ensure adult:child ratios are maintained across the service.
if the parentguardian chooses not to place their child in the care of the alternative caregivereducator.
if there is demand from your current students
if you are here, but Im very excited to outline to you
if you are sending documents out to parents, having a sheet parents can tick and sign when they have reviewed documents would also be a way of recording evidence
if you can connect to a school in a country where a language you teach is spoken
if you have any questions or comments about our social media accounts or these terms of use.
if you have the resources to maintain partner school relationships and support participating students
if you havent had the opportunity, please do go back, um,
if you havent seen that around following up on, um,
if you need further support.
if you require any support
if you were previously using an S for, you are now using,
ii. Travel is required to get to the destination, specifically any distance greater than what could be considered reasonable to reach by walking.
imagery to guide us through the process of review. Review is an important part of what we do together to generate growth through improvement. By pausing in our work and evaluating the effectiveness of our curriculum, we have opportunities to transform practice. Such is the nature of review.
immersion and bilingual education and care services to recognise, retain and attract certificated
immersion and bilingual education and care services.
immersion or bilingual early childhood service (including
immersion or bilingual environment within a New Zealand state or state integrated school (including
immersion or bilingual environment.
immersion or bilingual environment. This can include experience as a:
immersion or bilingual environments should be credited as halfservice up to a maximum of years experience. This experience could have been paid or unpaid.
implementing structured teaching approaches
impose conditions for improvement.
improve staff:child ratios
improve staff:child ratios.
improve thermal comfort in warm weather by increasing air movement and removing heat.
in Englishmedium Schooling by ERO gives a snapshot of the current provision of
in Level education has increased since . In , there were , school aged
in a teaching role and management position in a
in accessing any changing areatable
in decisions around when nappies are changed.
in managing attendance. Email our training services team for an invite to the training:
in our decision making about what support may be needed and how to access this support
in our service to lead and participate in events and customs of cultural significance
in some Pacific communities.
in terms of whats changing,
in the Working together guide.
in the attendance code guidance in general.
in the enrolment form, or
in the free text field when you select a code,
in the ministry stance on this one.
in the revised code guidance around that.
in the time that they left.
in this document provide a way of considering review concepts from a
inaccessible to children.
inappropriate practices, such as inflicting physical or verbal punishment, isolating children, labelling children with derogatory words or shaming them
include early learning services, schools,
include information in their annual reports on how it considered any relevant statements of government policy.
include items typical and distinctive to outdoor settings (such as dirt, grass, sandpits, paddling pools and outdoor play equipment).
include quiet spaces, areas for physically active play, and space for a range of individual and group learning experiences appropriate to the number, ages, and abilities of children attending.
included as part of a parent induction pack
includes all previous experience as a certificated
includes licensed playcentres and licensed
including alternative provision.
increase language resources
increase professional development of staff
increase the range of experiences to challenge children or extend their learning
increased cladding durability.
increased roof pitch (slope)
increases their years of service as outlined in the table above.
increasing the notification period unions must provide before undertaking strike action from days to days
indicators of performance and value for money
indooroutdoor baby swing
induction procedures into the service
induction procedures into the services
inform our approach to new knowledge
inform the driver, caregiver, transport service provider and us if there have been any changes or events that may impact on student behaviour.
information about any planned reviews and consultation.
information about how the service will respond to suspected child abuse and neglect.
information about our services and activities
information about the practices the service employs to keep children safe from abuse and neglect and
information about the practices the service employs to keep children safe from abuse and neglect; and
information about the workforce restriction and how this iswould be met
information about work history
information concerning their child
information from any relevant professional organisation or registration body
information on how the funding has been spent.
information on where to seek advice, if needed
information receivedsought from relevant agencies or services.
informing policy, legislation change, and decisionmaking
infrastructure and service providers.
ingesting a cleaning product that wasnt stored securely
ingredients to make play materials for example cornflour, Lux flakes. Polycell paste
initiate your incident response plan
insightful trends and next steps
installing structured cabling
integrating wireless services.
interacting with other people in the home, including visitors and
interactions should provide encouragement, warmth, acceptance, and challenges to help children extend their ideas and understanding of the world.
interactions that occur between all the people in the group.
interlocking block sets for example, Duplo, Lego, Mega blocks.
internal appointment, temporary removal from class
interprets the curriculum broadly, taking it to include all the experiences, activities, and events, both direct and indirect, that occur within the early childhood setting.
interruptions to essential services
into all aspects of the service curriculum including routines, rituals and regular events.
into something else, the descriptions reflect that, right
into the chat for those that arent familiar with it.
introduce staff recruitment and retention initiatives
introduce themselves and explain why they are there
introducing a Stepped Attendance Response to guide school actions for each level of absence
introducing chants, rhymes, songs or music if appropriate, and helping the children to develop the language of social interaction, negotiation and inquiry.
investigating whether a local bus operator would consider running a commercial school bus service.
invitations to provide feedback on specific issues
involved in activities or routines (such as sleeping, eating and toileting) in separate parts of the home
involvement in providing education and care for children
ironing board, iron, brooms
is New Zealands distance learning school that provides teaching and resources for your child.
is a basis for weaving with children and parents and
is a bicultural document and
is a crossagency strategy for the education sector. The agencies include:
is a qualified ambulance officer or paramedic.
is a registered medical practitioner or nurse with a current practising certificate or
is a registered medical practitioner or nurse with a current practising certificate; or
is a serious injury or illness which occurred as a result of work activity and
is a strategy for all learners, while
is a strategy for all learners.
is a website that supports those teaching and learning
is above what is required to meet the regulated standards and
is accountability. This includes accountability to the Government.
is all weve done is weve really aligned it
is an online community for parents of disabled and medically fragile children. Parents can join
is any fundraising required
is any major maintenance work required
is as simple as if you were,
is assessed as meeting the applicable Teaching Council of
is available on our curriculum website
is both a noun and a verb, and in the context of the allowance, is interpreted as below:
is chosen will be considered the closest. This is to allow
is deemed offensive, abusive or obscene
is designed as a living document so we can progressively update it based on our ongoing conversations with
is easily recognisable and readily accessible to adults, and
is easily recognisable and readily accessible to adults; and
is education under the organisations included in
is eligible for this allowance.
is eligible to receive the prorata allowance for all hours connected to their employment in a teaching role or management position.
is employed parttime in a teaching or management role and parttime in another role, the certificated
is enhanced when culturally appropriate ways of communicating are used and when parents and
is enrolled when they are not enrolled or
is evident in everything that happens in our service. Consider the physical, temporal, and social environment (e.g., regular routines throughout the day, the way people interact with each other), and caregiving routines (e.g., for infants and toddlers). How do we articulate this
is evident in everything that happens in our service. Consider the physical, temporal, and social environment (eg, regular routines throughout the day, the way people interact with each other) caregiving routines (eg, for infants and toddlers) how do we articulate this
is for the education and care of the child and
is funded at the quality rate
is funded at the standard rate
is funded until the end of .
is given to the right child (doublecheck the details on the label each time)
is in a town that has an active sister city relationship.
is inaccessible to children.
is intended to be the basis for decisions about the way the service is managed and about its direction in the future.
is involved in international learning opportunities which you can expand
is it is approved within the school policy.
is located close enough to the premises to ensure that people who need to use it can do so without difficulty, taking into account distance and comfort (such as not getting wet in bad weather), and
is maintaining alignment with government objectives
is making progress in relation to improving asset management.
is not in the toilet or nappy changing area.
is not working for too long each day and
is on extended leave without pay for their usual days worked, they cannot claim the allowance during this time.
is organised but challenging
is part of an international network of schools with similar values or philosophies
is produced and administered by the Trust.
is responsible for providing evidence, to the satisfaction of their employer, of any factors used to determine the length of service as a certificated
is responsible for providing evidence, to the satisfaction of their employer, of any factors used to determine the length of service as an uncertificated
is responsible for the registration and ongoing certification of teachers in New Zealand
is spoken, heard, and visible across the environment and used for a range of purposes.
is the cloak that warms the
is the pathway specifically for
is the responsibility of all
is the responsibility of all educators and coordinators in the education system.
is the same as in the previous month.
is the technique used across cultures to weave a
is their legal guardian, and where
is there regular opportunity for selfreview, internal evaluation, and to set priorities for the year ahead
is unreasonable (approximately kms).
is used for only child.
is well set up so adults can interact with children and respond quickly to their needs.
issue a written direction
it does not comply with the regulations or licensing criteria
it enhances their learning, diverse strengths, and wellbeing. The service provider should consider how the organisation of staffing fosters opportunities for meaningful, positive, and consistent relationships between children and
it is compliant with the RFx process terms and conditions.
it is recommended by the chief executive of Oranga Tamariki.
it misses the reporting deadline
it no longer automatically switches, um, to a truant code,
it says example three days.
it would be an m uh, yes.
it would be queue as board approved,
it wouldnt, it would be a t marking as t it wouldnt matter
itd be present in the morning
its a school, um, process and practice area.
its little Johnnys birthday today, we struggle with this.
its not school organized, um,
items for floating and sinking (wood, stone, cork, shells, and so on)
items for matching for example, socks, shells, stones, leaves
items that parents may either provide for their own children, or pay for the service to provide.
its height from the floor (generally, anything below cm can be reached by young children)
its location in relation to the activity room
its own curriculum priorities of valued learning, taking into consideration the aspirations and learning priorities of
joining them and sharing in their play
joining your child in play.
journey times (one way) should preferably be no longer than minutes and must not exceed an hour
just inquiring about whether there is a stated time that,
justified and unjustified absences
keep an attendance record for each enrolled student
keep attendance records to show the hours each child attended and
keep attendance records to show the hours each child attended plus
keep attendance records to show the hours each child attended.
keep evidence of attempts to contact trained relievers, for example email records and
keep evidence of the reason for the qualified staff members absence and
keep evidence to show that quality level adult:child ratios were met.
keep records for Christmas coverage when services have been reconstituted over the holiday period.
keep the dishes separate from each other while they are rinsed
keeping track of attendances by children who attend on a casual basis
keeping track of variations in attendance that might indicate a Frequent Absence (see section ).
know they have a sense of belonging in this place
lack of staff (except when this is due to a noncontrollable health and safety issue)
lack of staff, including homebased educator absence (except when this is due to a noncontrollable health and safety issue stemming from an infectious disease)
large bowl for mixing dough, finger paint
large cardboard or wooden boxes
launching an attendance dashboard and regular reporting of daily attendance figures so we all know the number of students attending each day and keep focused on increasing regular attendance
learn about the languages and cultures of all parents and
learning and development, and knowledge of
learning and the learning outcomes of
learning from home, then it would be an n If it is
learning support advisors
learning support request form
learning, their interests,
learning, understanding, love and soul.
leo o fanau moana bilingual.
leo o fanau moana immersion
lessens the likelihood of a prone or crawling infant, or a toddler just beginning to find their feet, being accidentally injured by an older child who is fully engaged in their own play and is not aware of their presence
let you know when they leave.
lets give them something thats, uh, hopefully said,
licence mergers or increases
licensed early childhood services
licensing criteria. Guidance is available upon request directly from
lie down comfortably; and
lighting (natural or artificial) that is appropriate to the activities offered or purpose of each room
like practice exams or mock exams.
like we dont really require a, you know,
limitations of their role.
limiting the number of children allowed outside at any one time
links to sites that may be obscene, abusive, offensive or indecent
local council information
location and design of playgrounds on site
location of eating areas in relation to hand washing facilities
look at the cleaning programme, including the cleaning of toys, bedding, equipment and frequently handled fixtures and fittings such as door handles, toilet flush buttons and taps and improve the programme if necessary.
look like can be found on the Teaching Council of
made available where appropriate:
magnets and a collection of items to test for magnetism
mailbox, and we can certainly help you through that process, but we will be letting you know that information as it comes out.
mainly focused on and involved in supervising quality environments for educators and children and
maintain good health and safety practices at the playgroup; and
maintained regularly; and
maintenance of technology and associated batteries
make all reasonable efforts to ensure that the service provider collaborates with the parents and, where appropriate, the family or
make and take calls while moving around the centre
make emergency calls from anywhere inside or outside the building.
make sure everyone is washing their hands thoroughly before eating and after using the toilet
make sure everyone is washing their hands thoroughly before eating and after using the toilet and the educator after changing nappies.
make sure that students have been toileted and is ready to be collected from the agreed pickup point at the agreed time
make sure their child (including enrolled yearolds) attends school every day the school is open until they are at least years old.
makes all cultures feel welcome
making a water jug and individual cups available for children to pour their own water.
making sure all vehicles comply with
making sure education providers and students receive the right funding, resources, and support
making water jugs and individual cups available for children to pour their own water. These need to be cleaned daily.
manage inappropriate behaviour on the bus (in conjunction with the provider)
manage poor performance promptly
manages the systems for ensuring teachers are competent
managing any supervision issues for example is an extra adult in the car a good idea, so the driver can concentrate on driving, and children can make the most of the experience
mandatory for all administrator and financial accounts
material on our social media pages that is protected by the copyright of a third party.
materials for mixing (for example oil and water)
maunga, awa, moana, whenua
may also have a teacher responsible for learning support who you can talk to.
may be a bit confused about or havent seen before.
may be funded at another ECE service for up to hours per week.
may choose to open or close.
may need to develop their practice.
may not be able to be used to clean toys and other equipment, because the water temperature is generally too hot.
means older children can enter the space freely to play and interact with their younger friends or siblings but do so consciously.
means older children can enter the space freely to play and interact with their younger friends or siblings, but do so consciously.
medical certificates or other Yeah.
meet all Hours ECE funding rules.
meet privately with parents and colleagues
meet privately with parents and colleagues;
meet the minimum number of half days required under the regulations for the school year
meet the record keeping requirements for quality funding rates (see Section C for more details).
meet the teacher in person
meets the AustralianNew Zealand Standard ASNZS : (Folding cots)
member who is absent or a situation in a homebased education and care service funded at the quality rate when a coordinator is not available to replace the specified coordinator of the service.
member, then your service may meet the requirements for an alternative option for that day. Service management must document the reason why the option could not be met and keep evidence to show that the alternative option was met.)
middle management allowances for secondary and composite schools
might decide, um, that its a j
minimise fluctuations in temperature, noise and lighting levels
ministry could retain that.
mirror (safety glass or filmed, fixed to wall)
modify circumstances where teachers can seek voluntary deregistration
monitor and document supplier performance and quality of delivery
monitor and review hazard and risk management system and practices.
monitoring and ensuring student enrolment and attendance
monitoring and ensuring student rights around enrolment and attendance
monitoring results across the New Zealand education system
more than half the children attending on any occasion have a parent or caregiver present in the same play area at the same time and
movable equipment (for example, planks, reels, boxes, ladders, tyres, tunnels)
move between them quickly in an emergency.
moves to a different boarding hostel or private board home
multiple unit blocks (plain wooden blocks cut to specific sizes)
must be closed, including public holidays, anniversary days and weekends
must be open, including the terms and school year length
must have a designated character under Section of the Education and Training Act and provide a
must have particular regard to the NELP, including when developing or renewing their charters. The NELP can be used alongside their own local priorities, and in conjunction with delivering a rich local curriculum, to help every
must prepare an annual report under section of the Education and Training Act .
must prepare annual financial statements in the same format as the Kiwi Park model financial statements.
must retain appropriate documentation as evidence of educator qualifications: Refer to Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations , regulation ()(e).
must submit a roll return to us in March and July each year. Schools with students in funding year levels to must also submit returns in June and September each year.
must use public sector public benefit entity (PBE) financial reporting standards.
name and amount of medicine given
names and signatures of the key people involved in its preparation and a review .
names of educators and the children for whom they provided education and care
national and international reporting.
natural materials, for example, rocks, tree trunks, leaves, shells, flax
navigating this document than you need to, um,
needs immediate admission to hospital or
needs more tailored support, our team might provide specialist help to support your childs teacher. They may also work directly with your child.
needs treatment by a doctor within hours of exposure to a substance.
new staff and what type of access they require for their role
new teacher starting employment in your service
news and information about the New Zealand education system
no child attends for more than hours on any day and
no information has been provided
noncontrollable health and safety issues
noncontrollable health and safety issues stemming from an infectious disease (This only applies to the educator, not other residents in their household)
nonteaching and unregistered employees before the person begins work at the service and
not be made of materials that allow children to gain a foot or toe hold, for example mesh or netting with holes over mm in diameter.
not sharing your passwords with others
not the Ministry of Educations core business; and
not to say that it wont be explored at a later point in
not unduly restricted by Resource Consent conditions with regards to its use by the service to provide for outdoor experiences and
not unduly restricted by Resource Consent conditions with regards to its use by the service to provide for outdoor experiences; and
not used as a private dwelling.
not, I understand that question.
notes about equity funding and how this has been spent (when applicable).
notes and explanations about attendance, such as when a child is away sick or has attended for moreless hours than they were enrolled AND
notes made by medical staff
notices on the wall of the activity room
notices on the wall of the service
notional rolls for hospitalbased services
now covered by the Animal Welfare Act .
numbers and ages of children they will cater to
nursery rhymesfairy stories
observations and learning stories
obtain information and guidance from agencies with expertise in early childhood learning and development, to the extent necessary, to:
of Education to be absent from school.
of NC QA exams or the last day of the school term
of a longer conversation than that,
of all when seeking support and guidance How do we include and respond to the diverse strengths and needs of children, parents,
of attendance codes to make it easier for schools
of boards, uh, having the ability to make decisions, um,
of children enrolled in the service; and
of concerns from those that we spoke to, um,
of contacting parents, uh,
of data recording and reporting.
of information that we are going to outline today.
of interest to the children in the group.
of mental illness, and it is a part of the, um,
of our earlier considerations is we were considering, um,
of people joined, um, or joining.
of proactive communication in the early new year as well.
of questions on this myself.
of sporadically over time.
of studentcentered approach and,
of study leave until the last day of NCEA exams
of the Early Childhood Education Funding Handbook, or
of the child and the importance of respectful, reciprocal, and responsive relationships.
of the codes was never intended as a pseudo mechanism
of the day is an m if there is travel involved,
of the day periods not at the start
of the enrolled children in relation to the learning and development of, and decision making about, those children and
of the enrolled children in relation to the learning and development of, and decision making about, those children; and
of this information youve likely already seen, um,
of those areas that you saw, including a, um,
of those children about the operation of the service; and
of trustees will be given some guidelines.
of tuition in any given day, then you know, we,
of unjustified absence. Yes.
of why were the attendance codes changed, this was something
of you on this call, um, have historically used the codes
offer challenge and familiarity.
offer children a range of readily accessible books.
offer qualifications approved for student loans andor allowances.
offer to provide a debrief to unsuccessful suppliers.
office. Restraint is only used as a shortterm measure while other supports are put in place.
on GTP if only there for half days, et cetera.
on duty requirements for parents
on mats spread on the floor or ground
on particular days of the week
on top of their base salary.
one session or day per week.
one, you know, one or more codes have been merged
only assign access to files and systems that staff need for their job, for example, not having access to staff payroll information if you do not need it
only provide admin access to people who need it for their job, for example, your information technology (IT) lead
only) learning environment.
open for at least continuous period (session) of . hours per week.
opening and closing schools.
operating, supervision and qualification requirements for playcentres
opportunities for children to make decisions.
optional charges for special activities, extra staff or supplies for your child such as food or nappies
options for quality funding rates that are available for all parent
or a dentist appointment, Im coding
or a letter from the Ministry confirming the funding rate change (where necessary) as evidence that the service has not claimed quality level funding for more than five dayssessions of trained parents
or a notice on the wall of the service.
or an E, Im guessing its a T
or as accurate, um, as what the true intent
or caregivers are involved in educating and caring for the children, and managing the service. They include Playcentres, playgroups and
or cultural events kind of at that, at
or donations, some have a regular fee, and others are free. It must be clear to parents and caregivers how much it will cost them to attend playgroup.
or have to look at timings, um, that, um,
or health problems are not eligible for an exemption from the absence rules.
or homebased service is by visiting. You can do this with your child or without.
or is sometimes returned home.
or it has been historically.
or its purpose, is to act as a quick reference guide.
or not acceptable in terms of that site stuff.
or other culturally recognised family group.
or other related marches.
or other, um, that is to be determined by school policy.
or permission from a parent slash caregiver, eg.
or refer to the NZQA website for more details.
or teachers who each work across several schools and
or the COPA of their school.
or the Police. You can also speak to them without making a notification. You can remain anonymous if needed.
or the information that has been
or the unknown temporary code until a reason
or theyre representing, um, the country, then it can be a,
or theyre sending in a message to say
or this upcoming change, um, please do email this mailbox.
or time in the sick bay, those are simply the four codes
or twice a day, then its a bit different.
or will we find that in a different area
or you get a Police vet yourself in the meantime.
or, um, internal exams during the year,
other frequent users of the property.
other government agencies where we are required or permitted to do so by law (such as under the Privacy Act , the
other offences committed or a pattern of recurring offending
other regulatory agencies, where we consider sharing it may assist that regulatory agency to carry out its statutory functions
other services funded on notional rolls.
other subject matter experts where necessary.
our regional transport contract manager.
outline of the amount received under each Equity Funding component
outlines the fundamental beliefs, values and ideals that are important to the people involved in the service:
outlines the fundamental beliefs, values, and ideals that are important to the people involved in the service:
overseas students with domestic student status (for example, New Zealand residence visa holders or exchange students)
owned by a community organisation (e.g. a city council, church, or university)
paints (powder or liquid tempera and pallet)
paper of different size, texture, colour
parents and the wider community of the school
parents have given prior written approval of their childs participation
parents have given prior written approval of their childs participation and of the proposed ratios; and
parents have given prior written approval to their childs participation and of the proposed ratio for:
parents will participate in the supports offered, and work with the school, the Ministry and other agencies where required, to return children to regular attendance
parents, caregivers, families.
parentscaregivers have given prior written approval to their childs participation and of the proposed ratios for:
participate in the opportunities provided by the ECE service to engage with parents
participation in hospitalbased services
partners through reflective practices
perhaps the wider community
permanent full or parttime managers
permitted by Privacy Principles and .
person responsible is absent
personal professional qualities and skills
persons responsible are on duty for all hours children are receiving education and care
persons responsible in licensed homebased services
phone your service manager or local office
phone your service manager or local office or
physical or sexual assaults or threats
pick up and set down students on the lefthand side of the road
picture books with simple text
pieces of wood, card, fabric
place your service on a provisional licence while you meet areas of noncompliance within a specified timeframe, or
placing an insert into a sink facility used for another purpose to prevent art materials from coming into contact with any cleaning waste or chemical residues, andor to prevent paint or wastewater from coming into contact with the sink.
plain and coloured pencils
plan and evaluate the curriculum for children using the
plan for, provide, and review an education programme that is consistent with any curriculum framework prescribed by the Minister that applies to certificated playgroups and
planned housing developments
planning your roster or schedule before the start of the week, and making changes each day only if there was a change to the regulated (ratio) staff requirements for any of the hours in that day. By the end of the week, the planned staff record will have become a record of actual hours worked.
plantings (trees) and placement of movable equipment that negate the height of the fence
plastic animals and people
plastic tubing, bottles, sponges
please contact attendance codes review.
please email the attendance codes review mailbox
please email the everyday matters mailbox.
please, Ill put my email in the chat.
pliers (to hold nails with)
plus in families undertaking training in
plus other person with attestation
poetryrhyme and finger plays
position relationships, such as to whom the person is responsible, and to whom they relate
post an award notice on Government Electronic Tenders Service (GETS)
posters and wall displays
posting and nesting boxes
potential risks bordering the centre, for example, highways, rivers, other hazards
potentially the school Gazette as well, uh,
practice rather than process and,
preferably have a selfclosing mechanism installed
prescribe content for Attendance Management Plans, including information about how the school will:
previous reviews, cause this hasnt there.
primary curriculum staffing
primary responsibilities, including intended outcomes of key tasks
principal and deputy principal(s)
priorities and aspirations and reflect these in our service
privacy and the collection of images and recordings
private arrangementscommercial arrangements with operators.
private boarding for students from
professional development costs
professional development for teachers
professional leadership staffing for primary, intermediate, restricted composite and special schools.
professional services (e.g. CAANZ accountants)
programme for mokopuna funded as ECE until age .
programme is a series of health visits and support. It is free to all
promote and protect written and spoken language
promote and protect written and spoken language of children attending
promote the availability of the service within the community.
promptly notify all suppliers of the outcome in writing, ideally within weeks of making the decision
protect the account from unauthorised access
protects them from becoming soiled
protozoa, such as giardia and cryptosporidium
provide a SHALLOW bowl of water and items for babies to splash and play with.
provide a safe environment at school for unloading and loading buses, including having the school bus stop in a safe location
provide advice and assistance to services about record keeping requirements.
provide all relevant supporting documentation (your auditor should provide you with a list).
provide assistance to attend the service (e.g. transport assistance)
provide assistance to attend the service (e.g. transport assistance).
provide assistance to attend the service (for example, transport assistance)
provide courses for parents and
provide education and care to children in attendance and guidance to staff providing education and care
provide extra professional development for staff and extra education for
provide for group and individual play
provide further guidance to help
provide good administration and financial accountability in expenditure of public funds, such as funding from the Ministry of Education.
provide incentives to retain
provide more information on that a little bit later.
provide more professional development opportunities for staff
provide opportunities for choice, planning and problem solving
provide opportunities for choice, planning, and problem solving
provide opportunities for exploration, curiosity, and for
provide positive guidance to children attending the playgroup in order to support childrens learning.
provide professional development for staff
provide professional development to educators on a regular basis and keep records of any such activity.
provide programmes for children that are at least partly managed by the parents of the children attending the session.
provided at regular meetings
provided by a parent for the use of that child only or, in relation to
provided by a parent for the use of that child only.
provided by the service and kept in the first aid cabinet.
provided does not fit within school policy.
provided is considered trivial.
provides a positive learning environment for those children and
provides a positive learning environment for those children; and
provides advice for organisations interpreting and applying the safety checking regulations.
provides distance education from early childhood level to Year .
provides for the payment of various subsidies to licensed Early Childhood services.
provides learning advisors, teachers and inregion staff to work with students, their families and communities to help students achieve their potential.
provides more than a million free healthy lunches every week to
provides older children with the opportunity to concentrate and work on a project for a sustained period of time without fear of it being demolished by a young helper
provides the basis and context for the curriculum regulatory requirements in the Regulations for all early learning services. The curriculum framework is set by the Minister of Education. The current framework was in the New Zealand Gazette on April .
providing a range and variety of opportunities allows children to revisit familiar experiences and learning and engage with new or unfamiliar ones
providing a wide range of equipment and resources to use in many different ways
providing drinking fountains outdoors, or water coolers inside (these need to be secured to meet the standards of HS Securing furniture)
provision for growing indoor plants, seeds, bulbs, etc
provision for operational costs (such as electricity, telephone, food purchases and other daytoday items) and maintenance of the premises as appropriate.
provision for operational costs (such as electricity, telephone, food purchases, and other daytoday items) and maintenance of the premises as appropriate.
provision for operational costs and maintenance of the premises as appropriate.
provision for professional development
public holidays and local anniversary days
public holidays and observed provincial anniversary days
purchase additional curriculum resources and an increased range of supplies
purchase specific learning or teaching resources
putting in an enrolment scheme
qualifications and experience required for the position
qualifications andor final year status
qualifications of certificated teachers
quarterly funding roll for March, June and September
question marks occur in the morning,
quick contact with emergency services when necessary
range of picture books to suit different ages, including:
reaching the attendance target is feasible
receive funding for equivalent fulltime students
receive ongoing operational funding and staffing support. Private schools and early learning services can be unfunded members.
receives , when it joins a Community of Learning.
receiving ACC for a short period of time
reciprocal permissions in partner countries.
recognise the additional cultural and language competencies that certificated teachers in Pacific immersion and bilingual education and care services have to teach the curriculum in Pacific languages
recognise the additional skills certificated
recognises that around this age children are starting to interact with toilets. Sole use of potties does not provide opportunities for this learning experience.
recognising that sometimes children will play and learn successfully by themselves and at other times adult contribution will be needed to extend the play
record keeping requirements for hospitalbased services.
record keeping requirements for parent
record keeping requirements for playcentres.
record keeping requirements for teacherled education and care services.
record keeping requirements.
recording days and times of actual attendance for each child (as described above)
records of allowance payments to certificated
records of allowance payments to certificated teachers.
records that verify each certificated
records that verify each certificated teacher hours of employment
records that verify how the initial and current salary of a certificated teacher employed in a management position was determined
records that verify how the initial and current salary of a certificated teacher employed in a management position was determined.
records that verify the pay rate at which each permanently employed certificated teacher is paid. This must include copies of signed employment contracts, letter of appointment and letter(s) confirming changes in salaries paid to certificated teachers
records to confirm salary or wage amounts.
recruit people with relevant language proficiency
reduce barriers to participation faced by those groups that are underrepresented in ECE services
reduce educational disparities between different groups in New Zealand communities
refers to any commercial activity, including advertising.
reflect different attitudes and feelings
reflect the cultural differences in the centre
reflect the special nature or philosophy of the centre
reflects an understanding of learning and development that is consistent with current research, theory, and practices in early childhood education and
reflects an understanding of learning and development that is consistent with current research, theory, and practices in early childhood education; and
regarding the attendance codes.
regarding the pre existing codes, which are still to be used
regular excursions at the time of enrolment and
regular outings or excursions at the time of enrolment, and
regularly review the access staff have and remove access they no longer need
reimburse expenses of voluntary helpers
reimbursement of actual and reasonable legal fees if you have talked to a lawyer about your claim.
reimbursement of actual and reasonable legal fees, if applicable.
relief managers (i.e., short term, long term or employed by an agency), or
reminds us to pause in our work, to look closely at the way our curriculum
reo rua education and care
repayable by the service to the Ministry of Education on request and
replaces the term local curriculum with teaching and learning programmes.
report it to your IT lead or the principal and seek further help
reproduce the material accurately
required adult:child ratios are maintained; and
required contextual background information if required.
requirements for quality funding rates
requires of parent andor
requiring exterior doors andor windows to be closed at all times.
requiring universities to have a statement on freedom of expression.
researching the supplier online
respects and acknowledges the aspirations of parents, family, and
respond to student absences at the specified thresholds and causes of student absence
responds to the learning interests, strengths, and capabilities of enrolled children and
responds to the learning interests, strengths, and capabilities of enrolled children; and
responsibilities to children
responsible for providing learning opportunities and care demonstrate an understanding of
responsible for providing learning opportunities and care to work effectively with
responsible for providing learning opportunities and care, sharing information of
responsible for providing positive learning opportunities and care engage in meaningful, positive interactions to enhance mokopuna learning and nurture reciprocal relationships.
revised or revamped descriptors.
revoke access if the user is leaving the school, or
right dose (use a standard measuring syringe or spoon)
risk analysis of education outside the classroom.
risk management processes
road signs (could be homemade)
role at a level or equivalent,
role or management position in a licensed
roles and responsibilities around record keeping and reporting
rolls of stretchable bandage
safe and durable (check for sharp edges, small parts that may break off and nontoxic durable paint)
safe and healthy practices by the service provider and
safe and healthy practices by the service provider; and
safe and hygienic practices and
safe and hygienic practices; and
safe and that provide sufficient space, facilities, and equipment to support the learning of children attending the playgroup and maintain their health and wellbeing; and
safe, welldrained and suitably surfaced for a variety of activities
safe, welldrained, and suitably surfaced for a variety of activities
safe, welldrained, and suitably surfaced for a variety of activities.
safety checking all transport staff in accordance with the Childrens Act .
safety pins, bandage clips or tape (or some other means of holding dressings in place)
saucepan or electric fry pan for cooked dough
school aged children must not be expected to help carry nonwalking children or be responsible for evacuating ECE children
school organized activities, and work experience.
school utilisation and capacity
schools and the Ministry of Education will take action when student absence is a concern
schools have fewer full offers to evaluate
scissors and snips that cut properly, Sellotape, string, stapler
screwing activities for example, nuts and bolts, plastic jars and lids
secondary curriculum staffing.
see secondary schools, its kind of every hour
select a minimum salary scale
select the link below to search via school name.
selection and appointment procedures
send us a learning support request form.
send us an expression of interest form. A person from your regional office will be in touch.
senior management allowances for secondary schools only.
sensory objects to touch, taste, shake, smell, bang, push, prod, and look at.
separate sections or columns for children aged under two and for children aged and over
service at an immersion and bilingual level
service or organisational policies.
service soon after your baby is born.
services beginning or ceasing to offer Hours ECE
services beginning, or ceasing, to offer Hours ECE
services disregard the individual needs of
services in your area are listed on Health New Zealands website.
services prepared foods for to yearolds in accordance with the Ministry of Health guidance for to yearolds for the sake of efficiency or
services that are recognised by the Ministry as meeting the requirements for teacherled funding rates.
services that are required to meet teacher certification requirements will have higher labour costs, and
sets out food safety rules for early learning services.
sets shared goals, or achievement challenges, based on the needs of its children and young people. The
sets the direction so that no student will be left to accumulate absences without an appropriate response to return them to regular attendance
setting up the environment to reduce the potential of conflict
several changes of clothes plus a bag for dirty clothes to be sent home in (expect your child to get messy while playing)
sharing their aspirations Whose aspirations are missing and why How can we gain these
sharing with schools and parents refreshed health guidance to support good decisions about school attendance.
should be included and encouraged to contribute to discussions about their childs progress and achievements. The assessment process should recognise people, places, and things that support a childs learning, and the ways in which children assess their own learning.
should be included and encouraged to contribute to discussions about their childrens progress and achievements. The assessment process should recognise people, places, and things that support a childs learning, and the ways in which children assess their own learning.
should be organised with groups of children in ways that support secure and consistent care, language learning pathways, and positive transitions for children and
should be sought and embedded in the plan, and the plan should at least demonstrate when the service plans to involve these groups in planning.
should be woven and considered through all curriculum criteria.
should draw on knowledge gained from the child and their parents and
should enable mokopuna to engage in meaningful interactions with people, places, and things.
should encourage children to modify their activity or defer it until the appropriate level of supervision can be provided.
should encourage children to modify their activity, or defer it until the appropriate level of supervision can be provided.
should guide children on how to use equipment appropriately and safely.
should have regular conversations about how play is supervised in their own setting.
should purposely and intentionally respond to the strengths, interests, abilities and needs of each child, and at times seek additional support from outside agencies in relation to learning, behaviour, development, or communication.
should seek to develop mutually positive relationships with
should set to achievement challenges based on the key priorities in their community.
should share with, and support, parents and
sieves, funnels, boats, measuring beakers, jugs
sign an attestation to confirm that you have paid all certificated teachers at least the minimum salary amounts for the period of the RS return.
signature of a parentcaregiver (dated).
signature sheets where regulated (ratio) staff have signed (in full) at the end of each week that the Staff Record is a true and correct record of their actual hours worked for that week
significant increases in enrolments.
significant increases or decreases in enrolments.
signing out of your device when you are not using it
simple inset puzzles with knobs
sit on a mat or at an outside table
sitting on grass or other outdoor surfaces.
sitting on grass, bark or other surfaces.
sitting on the edge of low decks
slight increase in attendance from Term to .
small and large cars, trucks and trailers
small hard foods that are difficult for children to bite or chew (for example, nuts, large seeds, popcorn husks, raw carrot, apple, celery)
small prams and pushchairs (wellbalanced so do not tip easily)
smaller blocks (could have smaller coloured blocks or Duplo)
so I can see which order, uh, in order, uh,
so ag missing an hour every day
so it would actually be a presence.
so secondary schools who have have counseling in schools
so the recording will be using the presentation, uh,
so we have the, um, alternative provision.
so, um, please jot them down in the chat.
so, um, when they head off to those, um,
soft untreated wood in a variety of shapes and sizes
some visibility from another area of the service is possible.
some work thats provided for them.
something you are, such as a fingerprint
something you have, such as an identification (ID) card.
something you know, such as a pin for your phone
sometimes can make it to school, child might be brought
special excursions prior to the excursion taking place; and
special outings or excursions prior to the outing or excursion taking place; and
special topics, for example visit to hospital, new baby
specific spouting requirements
specific teaching practice
specific teaching resources such as a dance or music teacher
specify the period in which a board must review its Attendance Management Plan and readopt the plan or adopt a new or amended plan.
speechlanguage therapists
sponges (to keep clay moist)
spoons, spatula, eggbeater or whisk
staff employed by other organisations who work at your service such as early intervention teachers.
staff to carry out any business requiring phone contact.
staffing costs, including leave entitlements
staffing records as described in this section and
starting employment in your service
statement of National Education and Learning Priorities
sterile saline solution (or some other means of cleansing wounds)
sterile wound dressings, including sticking plasters
storage containers for flour, cornflour and so on.
store curriculum support materials and
store curriculum support materials; and
stories from other cultures
strengthening accountability of school boards
strengthening the focus on attendance, including a new requirement for boards to have attendance management plans
student is absent without explanation
students have higher achievement when in Level
students sponsored by the New Zealand Agency for International Development (NZAID).
students studying offshore
students who are representing their region.
students will understand why attendance is important, and that their parents, teachers and leaders will support them to be at school and learning.
students progress every year and
subsidise learning experiences outside the service
suitability of fences, gates, or structures to mitigate the risks identified
supervise and be actively involved with children in attendance and staff providing education and care (even when children and staff are located in separate spaces)
supervise loading and unloading of the bus at school
suppliers do not need to prepare a full offer unless they have been shortlisted and have a reasonable chance of getting the contract.
supply fresh air for breathing
supplying structured cabling product
support ECE services in raising their level of educational achievement.
support Pacific immersion and bilingual education and care services to recognise, retain and attract certificated teacher with the additional language skills they require.
support all children to develop prosocial strategies for learning with and alongside others
support children if challenges or difficulties arise and intervene if there is potential danger. To ensure risk is minimised or eliminated, teachers, educators and
support children if challenges or difficulties arise, and intervene if there is potential danger. To ensure risk is minimised or eliminated, teachers, educators and
support claims for funded child hours (FCHs)
support the learning and development of enrolled children and
support the learning and development of enrolled children; and
support the provision of different types of indoor and outdoor experiences and
support the provision of different types of indoor and outdoor experiences; and
support transition from home to the early childhood service and from the early childhood service to school
supported to be active participants in the development of our curriculum priorities
supported to evaluate their role as
supporting policy analysis
supporting students that have not achieved the NCEA corequisites.
supports the processes to make sure teachers meet and maintain the necessary standards needed to teach
suspend or cancel your licence in serious cases of noncompliance.
sustaining a serious injury from play equipment.
take all reasonable precautions to prevent accidents and the spread of infection among children enrolled in the service and
take all reasonable precautions to prevent accidents and the spread of infection among children enrolled in the service; and
take all reasonable steps each month to observe each child participating in the service while that child is receiving education and care
take all reasonable steps to ensure that appropriate procedures are in place to deal with fires, earthquakes, and other emergencies.
take all reasonable steps to ensure that the premises, facilities, and other equipment on those premises are:
take all reasonable steps to make sure students attend when the school is open
take all reasonable steps to make sure students enrolled in their school attend, as required under section () of the Act
take all reasonable steps to observe, support, and provide guidance on the implementation of the prescribed curriculum framework by the service and keep records of these activities
take all reasonable steps to promote the good health and safety of children enrolled in the service and
take all reasonable steps to promote the good health and safety of children enrolled in the service; and
take the form of individual or group learning
take the time to share their aspirations and expertise about their
taking more days off school.
talk about the procedures without needing to refer to any documentation
talk about the procedures without needing to refer to any documentation.
talk to staff at your regional office about early learning services and needs in your area.
targeted effective learning support
tea towels (wash regularly)
teachers and schools are supported by a detailed, knowledgerich curriculum and will know what needs to be taught and when
teachers with current practising certificates
teachers with limited authority to teach.
teaches early childhood, primary, secondary and special needs students using multimedia and online learning. Your child can also study or courses if a subject they want to study is not available at their school.
teaching and learning in a representative sample of Englishmedium primary and secondary schools.
technology education staffing
telephones, cash register.
tells us what should happen when students do not attend school.
testing accuracy and responsiveness of the technology
textured rugs and cushions for infants to crawl over.
than they do in English medium education. With this in mind, we have much work to do to support our education partners and grow
that I believe has ever been conducted.
that I would like to run over.
that Marika, um, put through.
that a New Zealand Police vet was obtained
that a risk assessment was undertaken
that actually, no, we would really appreciate if you the
that an interview was conducted
that are identifying achievement challenges.
that are in effect for the remainder of term ,
that are in most need of support.
that are not affiliated to TRN or NKAI, and
that at least referee was contacted and relevant information obtained.
that can also meet the quality funding requirement below are eligible for quality funding rates.
that carries or maintains the
that children are treated with dignity and respect.
that come into effect from term one next year,
that could be used as well.
that each early childhood education service weaves for its children.
that gives effect to that.
that have a statutory agreement with the Secretary for Education will be required to have particular regard to the NELP in developing a plan.
that if theyve turned up for a little bit,
that in terms of connecting to their culture.
that in theory should have been present this entire time.
that is DI would think Jared, that if the sub, um,
that is of sufficient variety, quantity and quality to meet the nutritional and developmental needs of each child.
that may have that looming question.
that meet certain additional requirements.
that membership of any relevant professional organisation or licensingregistration authority was checked
that might not be taking these down.
that national level has historically been a form
that providers can adapt for early learning services.
that question from Donna, so
that relates to the existing codes
that said, yeah, well, what about the
that selfgoverning schools and,
that suits your family, check out the options near you on Education Counts. Their website includes the school zone information for schools that have one.
that the main ones are wanted to point your attention to.
that the more fulsome attendance code guidelines,
that the reason for absence has been explained.
that the service is paying
that the service is paying PITA to their certificated teachers on top of their base salary.
that the service teaches in Pacific languages of the time or of the time, and
that there is some other work stream going on,
that these arent acceptable reasons from the Ministry
that they still had the ability within their SMS, um,
that theyre taking the afternoon off, then it would be a J.
that was actually done quite collaboratively.
that was done in isolation.
that we can produce those reports.
that we have the day off for our birthday.
that were always dealing in the grave
that weve made a very clear call on is the M code.
that were getting lunches that drop out of the threshold will still be part of
that were not in the school lunches programme before will be invited to join.
that werent necessarily able to attend.
that when they go on exam leave, I would be marking them
that would be greatly appreciated.
that would be under the bot related codes, is that correct
that would benefit from free lunches. Funding is limited, so we aim to reach the top of students in schools and
that would counter that, uh, in terms of their inability
that you can see on your screen.
that you do the role or every time they move classes.
thats a school policy decision.
thats attending or the, the, they would be classified
thats probably down to a practice decision at a,
that, that proceed, you know, that came together
that, what I can say is this was something that
the Hours ECE Attestation section of the Enrolment Agreement Form completed by the parentguardian if the child is to receive Hours ECE at this service, and
the Concluding Observations of the United Nations Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities ().
the EC Playcentre form.
the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations
the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations , and the Licensing Criteria for Early Childhood Education and Care Centres
the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations , and the Licensing Criteria for Homebased Education and Care Services
the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations .
the Education and Training Act
the Frequent Absence Rule.
the Ministry of Education
the Ministry of Social Development has a childcare subsidy to help some families with childcare costs.
the Optional Charges Agreement section of the Enrolment Agreement Form to be completed by the parentguardian.
the Persons responsible (Coordinator visiting teacher) notes taken during the visit
the Persons responsible (Coordinator visiting teacher) schedule of planned visits (spreadsheet, diary and so on)
the Police, if our staff are threatened or abused.
the RS Initial Application for Funding for an Early Childhood Service
the SESTA Conveyance Allowance
the ThreeWeek Rule for Continuous Absence and
the Tuesday following Easter Monday
the Tuesday following Easter.
the Unfunded International Providers (UIP) Portal for Private Training Establishments (PTEs) that do not receive Government funding.
the V code is, is marked as a, as a type of presence.
the absence pattern of the frequently absent child again (as part of checking the absence patterns for all children in your service).
the action specified in Appendix is taken for any person (adult or child) suffering from particular infectious diseases and
the action specified in Appendix is taken for any person (adult or child) suffering from particular infectious diseases; and
the actual dates and times that each child was cared for over the period that the service was reconstituted.
the actual hours worked each day by each regulated (ratio) staff member
the actual number of regulated (ratio) staff that were required during each hour of the day to meet regulated (ratio) staff requirements
the actual times and dates each person responsible worked
the adults responsible for providing education and care as part of the service; and
the age and understanding of the child
the ages and abilities of the children attending
the agreement of the parents andor guardians involved.
the amount and details of the expenditure of any Ministry of Education funding received by the service
the amount and details of the expenditure of any Ministry of Education funding received by the service and
the amount and details of the expenditure of any Ministry of Education funding received by the service, and
the amount and details of the expenditure of any Ministry of Education funding received by the service; and
the amount of time that has passed since the offending, whether any more offending has happened and whether behavioural change has happened since
the annual topup for isolated services.
the area surrounding each child allows sufficient air movement (to minimise the risk of spreading illness) and
the area surrounding each child allows sufficient air movement to minimise the risk of spreading illness; and
the attendance code decision tree really had the end user,
the attendance code decision tree, um, and, uh, how
the average number of children in each age group and the hours they are expected to attend the service during the advance period and
the calculated funded child hours for each day during a selected week for
the childs full name, of birth, and address
the completion of , hours of work at a Pacific immersion or bilingual service, and
the condition and placement of equipment
the condition and placement of equipment; and
the condition and placement of learning, play and other equipment
the conditions a service must meet
the cost and availability of the service.
the council is aware there has been, or is potential for, a risk to a childs wellbeing or safety while at an early learning service and needs to notify us.
the criteria we use to assess your application
the each of these safety check components were completed.
the of booked first aid training.
the or dates on which the person was engaged or employed by the organisation and
the or dates on which the person was engaged or employed by the organisation, and
the that the child will no longer be enrolled and attending the service (the termination of the enrolment agreement) as advised by the parentguardian or
the the child commenced attendance at the service and their finish
the the service will begin offering Hours ECE.
the they must be met by.
the they started in that role
the , time and description of the injury, illness or incident
the dates their ballots will be held.
the days and times each child is expected to attend, and details of any later changes to the agreement signed and dated by at least one parentguardian
the definition of childrens worker and how this is applied to determine who to safety check
the definitions of Certificated Teacher Hours and regulated (ratio) staff
the difference between general purpose financial statements and a special purpose financial report
the difference between standard and quality funding rates
the educator does not yet have a first aid qualification
the educator is part of a licensed homebased service, and
the emergency plan needs to include how all children in the home will be safely evacuated at the same time
the emergency supplies in the home should be sufficient to also provide for the older children who are also present in the home.
the estimated of regulated (ratio) staff hours that will be covered by certificated teachers and whether a service attests to paying at or above certain minimum salary levels (education and care services, hospitalbased services only).
the excursion supervision plan
the expected number of days of operation for the coming months
the first aid requirements in criterion HS are met in relation to those children and any children remaining at the premises
the first and last name of each child, clearly identified
the full names and qualifications of each person counting towards regulated qualification requirements
the funded child hours claimed by the service in the RS Return process.
the funded hours that the service will be open and
the funding claim may be reviewed and funding withheld andor
the funding claim may be reviewed, and funding withheld, andor
the funding process for new services
the goods, services or contract works that need to be delivered or undertaken
the ground rules for attending playgroup sessions
the groupings themselves made logical sense.
the health and wellbeing of the
the holiday for turn time, the G code.
the home of the person providing the education or care or
the hours a casually or conditionally enrolled child attends the service.
the hours a permanently enrolled child is enrolled to attend the service or
the kind of food provided, for example, food cooked at the centre or packed lunches brought by the children
the learning outcomes expected for children
the length of time children attend
the length of time in a SESTA vehicle
the length of time the service operates
the link, please scroll up to the top of this chat.
the location and method of travel
the location of the excursion
the manner in which information is released
the minimum amount of access they require for each of these systems.
the minimum salary scale for certificated teachers employed in a management position in education and care services
the minimum salary scale for certificated teachers employed in education and care services
the monthly confirmation of records is completed on time.
the most recent Education Review Office report regarding the service
the most recent Education Review Office report regarding the service.
the name and address of at least parent
the name of the medical practitioner (or medical centre) who should, if practicable, be consulted if the child is ill or injured
the name of the medical practitioner with overall responsibility for the childs care
the name of the school(s) you are complaining about
the namesignature of those checking them while in bed (every minutes), and
the names of adults and children involved
the names of rostered persons responsible
the names of staff used for regulated (ratio) staff requirements at any time during the day
the names of the people authorised by the parent to collect the child and
the names of the people authorised by the parent to collect the child; and
the nature and severity of the offending
the nature of the work the person iswas engaged in.
the nature of the work the person wasis engaged in.
the next set of Government actions that will further contribute to achieving the vision and key shifts for Pacific education success.
the notes to the financial statement should state how each type of funding has been spent (if a service has received more than one type of funding).
the number and ages of other children attending
the number of children attending your centre
the number of convictions that are relevant to the role
the number of days the service will be open and
the number of funded child hours per day for the previous actual months
the number of kits you choose to have.
the number of outofzone places
the overall outcome the procurement needs to achieve
the period you were at the school (this can be an estimate)
the person (or people) responsible for having the role of providing daytoday care for the child and
the person (or people) responsible for having the role of providing daytoday care for the child, and
the person with the conflict
the philosophy that underpins the service
the physical layout of the home (and related supervision issues)
the playgroup is effectively managed in accordance with good management practices; and
the playgroup is managed in a collaborative way with the parents and caregivers involved; and
the positions of responsibility playgroup need to be managed effectively
the practising certificate has been renewed
the predicted return time, and
the procurement requirements
the prohibition of particular activities (such as music)
the purpose for setting up the playgroup
the purpose of a safety check
the purpose of each application, who should use them, and
the purpose of their investigation and area of responsibility
the reason why access to first aid training is limited
the receipt of urgent medical attention.
the recommendation report.
the regional property team
the relevance of the information in the Police vet to the role being vetted for
the relevance of the information in the Police vet to the role being vetted for (for example, whether there are any matters relating to children or other vulnerable people)
the requirements of the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations are still met by the service
the resources and availability the supplier will need to meet your expected timeframes
the safety of the student, other students, and driver on the service
the school bulletin a couple of times, um,
the school thought the student was out of zone, but the student actually lives in the zone, or
the schools were very much in favor of merging all
the service has not met the financial reporting requirements for early childhood education (ECE) services that are outlined in
the service has temporarily closed and for the period of that closure, or
the service is effectively governed and is managed in accordance with good management practices; and
the service itself, or another service
the service or the service provider is in receivership or liquidation.
the service provider has not met any of the conditions set out in the Early Childhood Education Funding Handbook or in any other documentation which was the basis for receiving funding. This includes the failure by the service(s) to maintain accurate records to the standard required by the Ministry,
the service provider is in debt to the Ministry and is unable or unwilling to repay the Ministry either immediately or within the timeframe prescribed by the Ministry, or
the service provider regularly collaborates with:
the service will have to pay back the total amount of any overpayment.
the services current licence certificate and
the services current licence certificate; and
the services operational documents (such as its philosophy, policies and procedures and any other documents that set out how daytoday operations will be conducted); and
the services operational documents (such as its philosophy, policies, and procedures and any other documents that set out how day to day operations will be conducted) and
the services operational documents (such as its philosophy, policies, and procedures and any other documents that set out how daytoday operations will be conducted)
the services operational documents (such as its philosophy, policies, and procedures and any other documents that set out how daytoday operations will be conducted); and
the services operational documents and
the services operational documents; and
the signature of the person responsible giving approval for the excursion to take place.
the signs and symptoms of child abuse and neglect
the skills and expertise the supplier requires
the student has started their final year at school and is assessed as ineligible from a new residential address
the student would be significantly disadvantaged by not being enrolled at that school (only in exceptional circumstances), or
the supplier has completed all declarations
the symptoms of the illness
the time and of the excursion
the time and of the outing
the total actual hours worked each day by Other Teachers who were counted towards regulated (ratio) staff requirements.
the total actual hours worked each day by certificated teachers who were counted towards regulated (ratio) staff requirements (including hours worked by Other Teachers acting as relievers for up to discretionary hours) for education and care and hospitalbased services, and kindergartens.
the total number of children attending on any occasion is not greater than times the number of parents and caregivers present in the same play area at the same time.
the total number of children in the reconstituted service does not exceed the maximum service size of
the two exam related codes, the index,
the type of contract you will use and key contract terms and conditions.
the type of staff who are employed, that is, if there are any administrative staff.
the user management admin role is assigned to a staff member helping managing users instead of the super admin role
the v in the X code are important.
the websites design elements or any photography and imagery.
the wellbeing of their family and community is supported
the written permission of a parent of the child is obtained before the travel begins (unless the child is travelling with their parent).
the written permission of a parent of the child is obtained before the travel begins (when children are not travelling with their parent).
the written permission of the parent of the child is obtained before the travel begins.
the, um, Q code now will be a board decision.
their applicable qualification group, and
their family, culture, knowledge, and community are respected and
their initial safety check
their learning at level sets the foundation for the next steps along a chosen pathway.
their own valued learning, taking into consideration the aspirations and learning priorities of
their previous years of work history
their role at the service
there are adequate provisions available for the treatment of minor injuries
there are communication systems in place so that people know where the children are, and adults can communicate with others as necessary.
there are communication systems in place so that people know where the children are, and the educator can communicate with others as necessary.
there are exceptional circumstances that were not considered during the initial application (eg your child is living in emergency housing or has been affected by displacement or natural disaster)
there are exceptional circumstances that were not considered during the initial application (for example, a student is living in emergency housing or has been affected by displacement or natural disaster)
there are, uh, transition plans that, um,
there has been a complaint or incident involving a child that needs further investigation.
there is a place set aside for the children to sit and eat (PF Dining facilities).
there is a place set aside for the children to sit and eat (PF).
there is a school bus or public transport in your area, but you live more than .km from the nearest bus route.
there is also the health school code
there is new information available that may alter the original assessment.
there is no school bus available, or
there is no school bus or public transport available in your area, or
there was a slight termonterm increase in attendance from Term to .
there were a few codes that we sought to, uh,
thereve been, um, thatve happened kind
these changes should be made in time for next year.
they are safe and appropriate for the ageweight and number of children needing to use them
they have to take other kids with them.
they live more than . km from the nearest school bus route.
theyre representing their region
think about how the space can support infants and toddlers to explore movement such as rolling, crawling, pulling themselves up, climbing and walking
thinking aloud, when working on problems together adults can share their thoughts and show how they go about solving problems
this definitely was not something
this shared as soon as we can.
those will be uploaded, uh, before years end.
three sessions or days per week
three sessions or days per week.
through meaningful experiences.
through next year, uh, around that with a a,
through the Education Gazette.
through the allowance steps described in this section is only a required funding condition while a service attests to meeting the requirements of this allowance. If a service chooses not to attest, at any point, the condition does not apply. However, legal agreements that specify allowance entitlements may still apply (for example, employment contracts).
through the bulletin about if there is an update
time was one of the things that schools were telling us.
time, um, but we werent looking to create any new codes.
to Christchurch for an appointment, stayed over for a day,
to a number of school leaders.
to access and engage with services available for children who need additional support for their learning.
to access this application.
to achieve excellent and equitable outcomes and provides an organising framework for the actions we will take.
to actively participate in decisions that affect the education of their children How do we ensure these processes are effective
to actively participate in decisions that affect the education of their children How do we ensure they are effective
to administer to improve the consistency
to also incorporate travel time as well.
to anxiety related reasons.
to apply for the following types of school transport assistance on behalf of their
to appointments out of town,
to appointments outta town,
to ask questions, connect with other parents and find resources and information.
to assist children considered to be from disadvantaged backgrounds. Targeted Funding is available to licensed, early learning services that meet specific eligibility criteria.
to avoid parking issues at school, eg, like a lake road.
to be able to share this with people
to be changed before the EOD
to be changed for the everyday matters reports so
to be confident in their own culture and respect other cultures.
to be defined by school policy.
to be involved in the development of policies and procedures
to be learning from home, um, if theyve got some, um,
to be offsite learning opportunities, um, and some schools
to be recording attendance, um, every day to record
to be seen, read, heard and spoken.
to be not too often.
to be, um, a one stop shop.
to bear when reviewing our service philosophy
to board of trustees around the decisions.
to capture time loss, eg, like late code
to come in in , uh, pending some decisions.
to comply with the requirements of Schedule (which relates to activity spaces)
to comply with the requirements of Schedule (which relates to activity spaces).
to contact your SMS providers.
to continue the Healthy School Lunches Programme for more years, including million to introduce a targeted early childhood food programme
to contribute to hazard and risk management systems, processes and practice
to create this new code board approved offsite learning.
to decide in terms of their policies.
to demonstrate compliance with the criterion; and
to develop their knowledge and practices.
to discuss how to adjust their future funding.
to discuss their situation and to obtain an EC form if appropriate.
to engage in meaningful interactions with people, places, and things.
to engage in professional reading and to discuss and debate ideas and theories, identifying meaningful ways to put their new knowledge into practice.
to enhance and extend the whole development of
to ensure that parents have access to important information about their childs sleeping patterns while at the service.
to ensure the safety and wellbeing of the
to explain the absence, but the absence
to find out why their child is absent
to follow attendance code decision tree,
to formally review and refresh their achievement challenges every to years, with the appointment of a new lead principal, or if goals are reached.
to get those, those certificates.
to give you three minutes back,
to guide our teaching decisions and curriculum design and planning
to have an attendance management plan.
to have some very clear examples in the courage guidelines
to incorporate a lot of these questions.
to learn about review and to improve the effectiveness of selfreview processes.
to my knowledge in existence from around .
to physically track students.
to physically track where a student was, um, and now,
to progress to their next step they will need to demonstrate that they meet the appropriate professional Standards.
to properly fulfil the duties and responsibilities connected with their employment. This will include, rostered hours, noncontact hours, staff meetings, paid professional learning and development and any paid leave.
to provide an opportunity to understand
to provide more detail about ways to do this.
to provide that guidance.
to provide useful information in the event of any allergic reactions that may develop in children attending.
to providing much needed clarity.
to realise high expectations.
to realise their aspirations and thrive with their
to reasonably be able to travel there daily.
to recognise how well their current practices meet the needs of the learners and highlight areas where
to record added granularity.
to record if a student leaves early
to remain current in their understanding of learning and development, theories, and practices. Regular professional learning and development (formal and informal) should support
to review the nappy change procedure, for example:
to school but doesnt get out of car
to search for and access relevant content, tools and resources:
to section of the Education
to section of the act.
to show that the care arrangement has been approved and that funding can be claimed.
to some eligible children and not to other eligible children
to support learning and development in the home
to support the acquisition and use of
to take other kids with them.
to take, uh, you know, other kids with them if theres, if,
to teachers who hold salary units.
to test working theories.
to the caregiver notification slash text guidelines
to the inaugural, um, sector information session.
to the preexisting codes for the remainder of this year,
to the question section, I will put a link, um,
to the revised codes or the,
to them In the first instance, if you have a question
to track patterns of attendance,
to use premises and facilities that, having regard to the number and age range of the children attending the premises, provide sufficient and suitable space for a range of activities, facilities for food preparation, eating, sleeping, storage, toileting, and washing, and sufficient and suitable heating, lighting, noise control, ventilation, and equipment to support:
to value their knowledge and expertise and ensuring continuity between home and the early learning settings (
to value their knowledge and expertise, and ensure continuity between home and the early learning settings (
to view the following information:
to, to have a stab at that one.
to, uh, as weve got it there,
tools and online services, through the Education Sector Logon.
towels use for children if they become messy or wet whilst at the service
trace actions to specific users when there is an issue
training in operation of technology
training.education.govt.nz
transporting students to multiple addresses.
travels to within . km of both your home and school
travels to within .km of the roadside gate of the students home
travels to within .km of their school or
treated as a debt which the Ministry can offset against all or any funding sums payable by the Ministry to the service provider.
treating nonsafetyglazed windows, doors and lowlevel mirrors with safety film
treating wired glass panels with safety film.
tree We will look at next.
triangular bandage (or some other means of immobilising an upper limb injury)
trolley or shelves for storage of wood, tools and accessories
trolleys, push and pull along toys, wheelbarrows.
trough for sand andor water
truant code, um, there was a lot of confusion when,
trucks, diggers, graders, and so on
try to make your password characters or more
uh, around the medical leave that schools can request, um,
uh, so I can see whats coming through.
uh, unjustified absences.
um, Alison as well in that area.
um, an n present, but out of class.
um, and for the attendance codes to be front of mind.
um, is a, uh, really does hit the mark in terms of
um, particularly in, um, kapa, like, uh,
um, provide a consistent, um, a a consistent
um, was throughout this process, one of our earlier, um, one
understand the practices and procedures of our service
understanding of aspirations and expectations for
understandings of aspirations and expectations for
undertake a risk assessment.
undo any problematic changes.
units in English medium schools, where some students at the school learn in
universities will be required to publicly report on academic freedom and freedom of speech in their annual reports and to maintain complaints processes.
university councils will have a duty to protect and promote academic freedom and freedom of speech and
unless deemed medically necessary.
up to hours ECE Funding Subsidy (Under s and and Overs) per licensed childplace per day.
up to hours per day, and hours per week for each child eligible for Hours ECE (made up of Hours ECE hours and Plus ECE hours)
updates to the implementation supports hub and our year implementation timeline.
uphold a minimum level of quality education by ensuring that children have easy access to the outdoor environment
uphold childrens safety and a minimum level of quality education by ensuring the area is welldrained and has suitable surfacing.
uphold childrens safety by ensuring that the outdoor environment is securely fenced so that escape is less likely and
urban public transport services provided by regional authorities
urban public transport services provided by regional authorities.
us, so we can reset your accounts such as Education Sector Logon (ESL) and we can inform Education Payroll (EPL)
use a supervision plan approved by Playcentre Aotearoa, and
use a trough, trays on a table or, if on the floor, use a tarpaulin.
use adequate soap or detergent
use an approved electronic attendance register and Ministryapproved attendance codes to record attendance.
use an empty paddling pool to create a play pit, use balls, washable scarves and ribbons and
use fabrics of different textures (lace, hessian, fur, linen) to make balls, rugs etc for babies to play with
used for a specific period of time to treat a specific condition or symptom and
used for a specific period of time to treat a specific condition or symptom; and
used for the first aid treatment of minor injuries and
used for the first aid treatment of minor injuries; and
used for the ongoing treatment of a prediagnosed condition (such as asthma, epilepsy, allergic reaction, diabetes, eczema and so on) and
used for the ongoing treatment of a prediagnosed condition (such as asthma, epilepsy, allergic reaction, diabetes, eczema and so on); and
used safely and kept free from hazards and
used safely and kept free from hazards; and
using a password manager.
using a revised set of attendance codes.
using a roster system of parents to pick up and return linen for laundering so that you can ensure a good supply of clean linen. If parents are to be used, ensure you have clear procedures, which ensure hygienic laundering.
using an email address you no longer have access to, contact us to change the address and password.
using and reviewing the NCEA support materials
using individually marked water bottles or sipper cups. Water bottles or sipper cups will need to be emptied and washed daily
using language that encourages discussion, thinking, negotiation and humour
using openended questions for example, how, why, what do you think
using play equipment and resources, both indoors and outdoors
using public transport (where available)
using technology or while they are in the presence of technology while it is being used by others in the home.
utilities (electricity and telephone).
value as learning for their children
values and principles consistent with
vandalism, dangerous objects, and foreign materials
vandalism, dangerous objects, and foreign materials (for example broken glass, animal droppings)
vandalism, dangerous objects, and foreign materials (for example, broken glass, animal droppings)
variety of boxes, cartons and tubes
variety of cardboard and paper
variety of materials for example wool, fabric, natural materials, old cards, egg cartons, crepe paper, cellophane, magazines, glitter, corks etc.
variety of nails, magnet to pick up nails
vehicles having current registration and warrants of fitness
ventilation (natural or mechanical) that allows fresh air to circulate (particularly in sanitary and sleep areas)
ventilation (natural or mechanical) that allows fresh air to circulate (particularly in sanitary and sleep areas) and
verification of identity (including previous identities)
verify that a service is meeting the record keeping requirements
verify that the service is claiming and receiving the correct amount of funding
verify the certification status of teachers employed by the service
verify the certification status of teachers employed by the service.
vices attached to ends of bench (left hand and right hand) or G clamps
view the regions below or
viruses, such as rotavirus, norovirusNorwalklike viruses
visit each educator engaged in the service at least once per month
visit other services in your area to find out what types of services are already in your community
visits outside the home setting
volunteers. Sessions are held regularly. Some offer session a week and some more. Children can go as many times a week as you like, but not for more than hours per day.
wait for the allclear from the duty teacher at school before departing on the home run.
wall textiles especially thick wall hangings and dimensional decorations rather than flat pictures
wanted to get the bus earlier
was based off of a identified need, um,
was given to the Ministry by
was open between and . We have researched the school and made standard findings about what was happening there each decade that it was open.
was in September . It identified nine target languages and described the status, current health and aspirations for these languages in Aotearoa. It also described a tailored approach to different languages to recognise these circumstances.
was refreshed in and is the overview of the network of
water trough or plastic bowls
we acknowledge that not all appointments can be made
we are looking forward to having
we did have a, a number, Im gonna say maybe a couple
we dont really require a medical certificate
we dont really use those codes.
we had offsite class course and distance learning,
we have conductcompetence concerns about an early learning teacher, or
we have included that within the m code for illness
we have incorporated these key messages into the vision and principles of Ka Hikitia and Tau Mai Te Reo.
we havent created any new codes at this point.
we used the s code in order to, uh, in order
we werent looking to change at all.
we will be reporting question marks.
we would really appreciate if you could delineate the,
weve, weve put a stake in the ground,
website has more information.
well, um, we used to be able,
were learning in Level (which was . of the total
what I believe are some very positive changes
what I would call design constraints, um,
what about a code for counseling appointments
what equipment is provided
what happens if a sight impaired family member of a child attending the service has a guide dog
what happens if you have tried every way
what hours each shift will need to cover and
what is involved in these positions and how they are filled.
what it is because our question mark, e
what opportunity is there for educators, teachers and
what purchases need to be made this year
what steps are in place to get the qualification
what support is available.
what systems or applications each person needs to access to do their job
what the arrangement is, so if it is, um,
what the revised codes, um, have come to look like.
what they need to be acceptable
what to do when trained parents
what values are really important for your playgroup.
what values are really important for your service and community.
what values underpin the service.
what we had heard from the sector.
what we had learned through this was that, um, inadvertently
what you need to know about the revised attendance codes.
what you want to achieve day by day
what you want to achieve daybyday
what you were saying a moment ago, please
whats changing when it will land, um,
whats likely youve, uh, you may have already seen them if,
when (time or specific symptomscircumstances) medicine is to be given.
when (time or specific symptomscircumstances) the medicine should be given.
when I spoke to the sector about the difference
when a child attends fewer hours than they are enrolled to attend, on a daily basis, on more than half of their enrolled days in a calendar month. Note: this does not apply to sessional services.
when a child attends for fewer days per week than they are enrolled to attend, in more than half of the weeks in a calendar month or
when a child is absent on the same enrolled day or days of the week for more than half of these days in a calendar month or
when a childs attendance is casual or conditional
when a service is closed for renovations.
when and how to apply for a change in funding rate.
when determining the food to serve to
when new services can expect their first funding payment.
when we said about creating these codes.
when you would be marking your, um, your attendance.
where dogs brought at pickup and dropoff should be tied, for example, not immediately at the gate where children are passing
where possible, allow children to see what is happening outside the centre boundary
where the child is entitled to attend for the enrolled hours on a regular, ongoing basis.
where the safest stops are on the route.
where you can find the reporting and how frequently it will be .
where you can go to for further support.
whether or not it is (or will be) a regular, routine part of their daily life for some time to come
whether other children are present who may be distressed by observing the treatment.
whether the existing furniture is suitable
whether they hold a current practising certificate, and its expiry
whether they will provide meals or ask you to pack lunch for your child.
which Ill have to find the link to that, um,
which both onsite and offsite,
which have all been completely reworked from the ground up,
which is the step attendance response.
which it historically does.
which outlines is the student present
which part of the enrolment is conditional. It can be the entire enrolment or specific days andor hours and
which shifts will need to be filled by registered teachers to ensure compliance with the Education (Registration of Early Childhood Services Teachers) Regulations .
which supplement the attendance code decision tree, um,
which will be available soon,
who are representing their region or New Zealand
who have counseling provision within the school.
who have passed on and connections through
who leave eg early EG Some parents want
who lives at least .km (Years ) or .km (Years ) from their
who run the sessions receive information, support and training from us. Playgroups that are not certificated can open if parents stay with their
who were for example native speakers: this was in order to give the Trust time to establish its own qualification (i.e.
who were not developing in accordance with expected range of development in small children or
who work across more than one eligible service will receive the allowance at a prorata rate.
why attendance is important,
why the service was established
why you set up the service
will be down to practice, I guess.
will be required if an activity includes an element of risk. For example, climbing, cooking, using ropes, cords or tools of any kind or activities near water.
will be required if an activity includes an element of risk. For example, climbing, cooking, using ropes, cords or tools of any kind, or activities near water.
will go a great step in the right direction
will investigate your report and let you know if they need more information.
will our staffing needs change
will use their professional judgement to ensure that the right kind of supervision can be provided. If close supervision cannot be provided for an activity which requires it, then teachers, educators and
windows and other areas of glass
with all evidence required to assess the request, is received by the Ministry.
with attestation have been attested by
with certain qualifications.
with controlled entities must prepare consolidated annual financial statements. They should use the Kiwi Park Group model financial statements.
with expenses greater than million are categorised as tier entities and must provide extra disclosures. Refer to the disclosure checklist for tier school guide.
with mental health related absences
with principals, um, who you can go to, um, to contact
with regular opportunities to connect with the wider natural environment and materials drawn from nature.
with the additional language skills they require.
with the climate strikes.
with the parents there about the importance of, uh,
with the regulation changes next year, mark.
with the required training on duty at all times (see Section C for licensed playcentre requirements or Section C for
with the written authority (appropriate to the category of medicine) of a parent.
with the, uh, with us via, via chat.
with your student management system, please do reach out
withdraw from children for planned breaks as appropriate
within the guidelines set down by
wooden or plastic hammer board.
work continues to deliver on the priorities, which include the new maths action plan and developing a consistent system of assessment and
work effectively with parents and, where appropriate, family or
work in collaboration with the parents and
work more than , hours per year.
work to keep children safe from abuse and neglect
work with agencies or charities to support their students. These include:
worked roster or shift arrangements
working together to revitalise and strengthen
works across two services that apply for the allowance, the allowance will be calculated at a prorata amount across both services.
works with students, their parents,
written notice advising parents if the home their child is attending will have children receiving outofschool care and
written parental acknowledgement of the written notice.
years of service in a bilingual and immersion service
you believe that this experience has harmed you in some way.
you can answer, but if you do
you have not been successful getting them back to school.
you have quite a lot of questions.
you know, I think thats an unjustified absence.
you know, so like, um, if Im student A
you may apply to be funded at the quality rate
you must apply to return to the standard funding rate
you will need to update your enrolment agreement with them.
your child has more than home address because of shared custody.
your child has respite or after school care arrangements
your child has started their final year at school and is assessed as ineligible from a new residential address
your childs immunisation record
your childs school principal
your full name and of birth
your legal status registration in New Zealand
to Australia and AsiaPacific countries
to the United States (not Canada)
. for children aged and under.
to European countries (including the UK)
to search a year period, and
for the rest of the world
for a standard birth certificate
for an official death certificate.
for an official marriage certificate.
if you also want a new copy of your marriage certificate.
or to order a birth certificate with your new sex marker or name, or both, depending on the certificate design you select.
. for a standard certificate
for a decorative birth certificate
. for a decorative certificate
. for adults aged and over
for a pack with a standard and a decorative birth certificate.
to update the sex marker on your birth certificate
to update your name on your marriage or civil union record, and
. for a pack including standard and decorative certificate.
(New Zealand Electronic Travel Authority)
(treasure) that our government works to protect. Learn about the history of
) . at Level AA, as per the
) and an enduring power of attorney (
) and enduring power of attorney (
) archive at Trentham military camp has about . million personnel files for , people who have served in the armed forces, post World War I. A request for a record must be authorised if the person is still alive.
) are available when you take time off from work to care for a baby or child under or recover from pregnancy. This is separate from parental leave.
) are often mistaken for being the same but they have some important differences.
) became the The Natural Hazards Commission (
) became the The Social Investment Agency (
) client, you can apply online through MyMSD. Otherwise, you can call Work and Income to discuss your situation and apply.
) for personal care and welfare or property in place.
) has accepted your claim, you may be able to get help with transport costs.
) if you have questions about tax, such as:
) is a statutory body established under the Game Animal Council Act to represent the interests of the hunting sector and improve the management of game animals (deer, tahr, chamois and wild pigs) while contributing to positive conservation outcomes.
) lists the amounts for the:
) owns and manages the content on this website.
) versions are provided alongside some, but not all
) was integrated into the
), contact the Congratulatory Messages team and they will make sure the person receives the King
(outside NZ)
(outside NZ)
(calling from overseas)
(outside NZ)
, Wellington or Christchurch. Youll need photo ID.
, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
, ask your lawyer to provide instructions that:
, caregivers and community
, the Firearms Safety Authority as soon as possible.
, the Police, and those in health and education
, the family court can get involved.
, the fire and other emergency functions of organisations were combined into Fire and Emergency New Zealand.
, there are types of records in the HART register, mandatory and voluntary:
, what it covers and who you want to make decisions for you.
, with an independent board.
, you give them the power to do anything with your money, property and other assets that you could do if you were personally present.
, you select a celebrant and pay for the licence.
, your family can apply to the family court to have someone appointed as your property manager.
Archives New Zealand website
New Zealand History website
. Be as specific as possible.
. Govt.nz is your guide to finding and using government services.
. Include an international bank draft in NZ dollars to pay the fee. Make it payable to the Department of Internal Affairs.
. Only the unique aspects of an
. Passports are valid for years.
. The Act replaced the
. This depends on how aware the donor is of those connections.
. You will be charged a fee for this.
( CONSUMER)
Paradise Valley Road
Featherston Street (entry on Johnston St.)
b Victoria Street West
Ellesmere Junction Road
identical passportstyle photos, verified by a witness.
passport photos that meet the photo requirements.
. Collect your documents
. Complete the application form
. Sign the form in front of a Registrar of Marriages
or older, and a relative of the child, or
or older, and at least years older than the child, or
. Go into an NZ Transport Agency licensing agent
. Submit your application form
steps to get your money Sorted
Fergusson Drive
A Community Services Card can reduce healthcare costs. Anyone on a low income who is aged or over, a NZ citizen or permanent resident and normally lives here, can apply.
A background for text to set it apart from the main content, for example breadcrumbs, and notes such as alerts or warnings.
A birth certificate costs:
A caveat (for marriages) or a notice of objection (for civil unions) is a written document that explains the legal reasons why you think someone should not be allowed a marriage licence.
A certified copy is a photocopy that has been stamped or endorsed by a witness (for example, a Justice of the Peace) who confirms that the copy is a true copy of the original document.
A civil union certificate is an official record of a civil union.
A civil union is the formalisation of a relationship between two people, regardless of gender, in accordance with the Civil Union Act . Some overseas countries may not recognise New Zealand civil unions so you may want to seek independent legal advice before deciding to enter into a civil union. A celebrant must conduct your civil union.
A congratulatory message will be sent from:
A lawyer may represent you at any time during the process.
A little preparation here, possibly in your statement of wishes, helps your loved ones a lot.
A name change certificate is an official record of a name change if they were born outside NZ.
A notary public, sometimes called a public notary, is a lawyer authorised by the Archbishop of Canterbury in England to officially witness signatures on legal documents, collect sworn statements, administer oaths and certify the authenticity of legal documents for use overseas.
A nurse or other health professional may visit you at home to help with your medications and medical needs. Learn more about these services and if you qualify.
A person appointed by the family court to make decisions about property and financial affairs for someone who lacks the capacity to make these decisions for themselves.
A person appointed by the family court to make personal care and welfare decisions for someone who lacks the capacity to make these decisions for themselves.
A person can appeal decisions about:
A personal care and welfare
A personal order is for decisions which would usually be part of an
A printout can be emailed to you. A certificate must be posted, or given to you in person if you order it at a Births, Deaths and Marriages office.
A range of features about the Treaty and Waitangi Day
A recent survey found more than government websites with a government domain name (.govt.nz). We know there are many more registered with .org or .co.nz. The government spends million maintaining these every year.
A satellite office is located at the Hawkes Bay Business Hub, providing business development assistance.
A screaming highlight used for search buttons, warning style box and error messages.
A separation agreement is the best option for most people who have children or property together. You can make the agreement yourselves, in writing or verbally (it has to be written if it includes information about property you share). It should include the you agreed to separate.
A specialist is a medical practitioner who is trained in a specific field of medicine. You usually need to visit your general practitioner (doctor) first for a referral to a specialist.
A statement of wishes is also a quick way to communicate your burial or cremation wishes.
A step by step guide to separating and getting divorced in NZ.
A trial period is a timeframe that employers can use to find out if you are suitable for a job. An employer can dismiss you and you cannot raise a personal grievance for unjustified dismissal if the trial period was valid.
A warrant of fitness (WoF) or certificate of fitness inspection is a regular check to make sure your vehicle is safe.
A welfare guardian is appointed if the family court believes this is the only way to make sure the right personal care and welfare decisions are made for you.
A wellplanned retirement helps you enjoy life with those you love.
A will is a set of instructions for after someone dies. The person lists what they want to happen with their:
AZ list of government organisations
AGMARDT invests in the following areas:
ARLA is supported by the Ministry of Justice.
About the accessibility of this website
Abuse, harassment and domestic violence
Acceptable evidence of identity for a driver licence application
Accepted documents include:
Access and correct your personal information
Access to information about your previous registered sex and name can only be provided under specific circumstances under section of the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Act (BDMRRA), and approved by the RegistrarGeneral of Births, Deaths and Marriages.
Access to your birth, marriage and name change records
Accessibility tips for using this website
Accessible option for
Accident Compensation Corporation
Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC)
Act, and manage the Natural Hazard Fund, including by investing in the Fund in accordance with the
Acting Chief Executive Officer
Acting Chief Executive and Comptroller
Acting Chief Executive and Government Statistician
Acting Public Service Commissioner
Acting Secretary for Education
Activate your EPA for personal care and welfare
Activate your property EPA
Add burial or cremation instructions
Adding link sharing of our pages to social media platforms does not imply we endorse these sites or that there is any obligation for you to share to platforms you belong to or have not already joined.
Administrative and legal tasks can feel extra stressful without the certainties from a will.
Adobe Acrobat Reader Get Adobe
Adopted between and , inclusive
Adopted in or before
Adopted in or before
Adopting a child born via surrogacy
Adopting a child from overseas
Advertising Standards Authority
Advertising Standards Authority (ASA)
Advising and making recommendations to the Minister of Conservation on hunting issues.
After a successful application: deal with the estate
After someone dies, an executor or administrator needs to be appointed by the High Court to deal with the estate.
After the dissolution order takes effect
After you apply for NZ citizenship
After your child turns and years of age
Agree how to share care of any children
Agricultural and Marketing Research and Development Trust
Agricultural and Marketing Research and Development Trust (AGMARDT)
Air Force Museum of New Zealand
Air NZ Customer Relations
Air New Zealand operates scheduled passenger services:
Alcohol Regulatory and Licensing Authority
Alcohol and Drug Helpline
Alexander Turnbull Library
All New Zealand citizens and permanent residents can get a congratulatory message for:
All New Zealanders are entitled to basic human rights and freedoms to protect them from unlawful discrimination. Find out about your rights, and how to get help or make a complaint.
All data usage will be charged back to the government agencies that sponsor the websites you visit.
All documents must be original or certified copies. If you provide a certified copy of a document, it must be certified by a New Zealand embassy or consulate, or authorised Department of Internal Affairs (DIA) counter staff.
All forms of postsecondary school education and training come under their umbrella. This includes:
All information is anonymised to protect your identity and personal information. That means that you cannot be identified by any comments, quotes, images or location.
All other claims, including claims for earthquake damage which occured after April , are still dealt with by AMI.
All parents and guardians must provide copies of different documents that show their current name. These do not need to be certified.
All parents or guardians must provide a certified copy of of the following:
Allied Nationwide Finance
Also, some applications may require additional checks with external agencies to verify the descent claim.
An alleged offence has occurred and legal action will be taken.
An apostille is an official government certificate that proves the signature, stamp or seal on a document is genuine for use in countries that are members of the Hague Convention Treaty.
An apostille or authentication is an official government certificate that proves the signature, stamp or seal on a document is genuine.
An authentication is an official government certificate that proves the signature, stamp or seal on a document is genuine. Authentication is sometimes called legalisation.
An enduring power of attorney (
An enduring power of attorney for personal care and welfare is one of the types of
An enduring power of attorney for property is one of the types of
An objection lasts for one year unless you withdraw it.
An ordinary or general power of attorney (
An ordinary power of attorney (
An overseas marriage is usually valid unless it would be illegal in NZ, for example bigamy. If you want to check your marriage is legal here, you can apply to the Family Court for a declaration. Talk to a lawyer to find out if you need to do this.
And is still responsible for their previous functions to deliver:
Animal Control Products Ltd
Animal Control Products, trading as Orillion, supplies pest control tools to:
Any additional apostilles and eapostilles will cost
Any additional category A authentications will cost
Any additional category B authentications will cost
Any personal identifying information gathered for user research is stored securely then deleted when the project is completed.
Anyone can ask their employer to transfer a public holiday to another day.
Anyone can be a victim of financial abuse. Find out about financial abuse and scams and how to protect yourself or someone you care for.
Anyone convicted of a crime in a New Zealand court, and who believes they have suffered a miscarriage of justice over their conviction or sentence, or both, can apply to the CCRC for an independent review of their case.
Apostille and authentication categories
Apostille or authentication
Apostilles and authentications are certificates that prove the signature, stamp or seal on a document is genuine.
Apostilles do not need to go to MFAT for checking.
Application for a replacement driver licence (PDF KB)
Application for certificate of no impediment to marriage or civil union BDM (PDF KB)
Application for certificate of no impediment to marriage or civil union BDM accessible alternative (TXT KB)
Application processing times vary. Check this page for regularly timeframes:
Application to register a change of name and update sex marker on birth certificate (PDF KB)
Application to register a change of name and update sex marker on birth certificate and under (PDF KB)
Application to register a change of name and update sex marker on birth certificate and under accessible alternative (TXT KB)
Application to register a change of name and update sex marker on birth certificate accessible alternative (TXT KB)
Application to register a change of name and update sex marker on birth certificate aged and (PDF KB)
Application to register a change of name and update sex marker on birth certificate aged and accessible alternative (TXT KB)
Application to register a name change BDM (PDF KB)
Application to register a name change BDM (PDF KB)
Application to register a name change BDM accessible alternative (TXT KB)
Application to register a name change accessible alternative (TXT KB)
Application to register a name change aged and under BDM (PDF KB)
Application to register a name change aged and under accessible alternative (TXT KB)
Application to register a name change aged years and under BDM (PDF KB)
Application to register a name change aged and BDM (PDF KB)
Application to register a name change aged and accessible alternative (TXT KB)
Application to register a name change aged and years BDM (PDF KB)
Application to register a name change within years of birth BDM (PDF KB)
Application to register a name change within years of birth BDM (PDF KB)
Application to register a name change within years of birth BDM accessible alternative (TXT KB)
Application to register a name change within years of birth accessible alternative (TXT KB)
Application to update sex marker on birth certificate (PDF KB)
Application to update sex marker on birth certificate and under (PDF KB)
Application to update sex marker on birth certificate and under accessible alternative (TXT KB)
Application to update sex marker on birth certificate accessible alternative (TXT KB)
Application to update sex marker on birth certificate aged and (PDF KB)
Application to update sex marker on birth certificate aged and accessible alternative (TXT KB)
Applications currently take around working days, plus delivery.
Applications may require checks with external agencies to verify the descent claim. In some cases external checks can take months to complete. We will contact you directly if this applies to your application.
Apply by post or in person
Apply for Best Start payments
Apply for NZ citizenship if born in Samoa before
Apply for a New Zealand passport
Apply for a birthday message
Apply for a child passport
Apply for a childs first passport
Apply for a congratulatory message
Apply for a dissolution order (divorce)
Apply for a divorce on your own
Apply for a personal order
Apply for a wedding anniversary message
Apply for a welfare guardian
Apply for a working holiday visa
Apply for an adult passport
Apply for citizenship by grant
Apply for daytoday care and solve disagreements
Apply for help to pay the court fees for a civil or family case
Apply for help with the costs of heating your home, or check advice for keeping those expenses down.
Apply for information on the register
Apply for or renew a child passport
Apply for your first adult passport
Apply online for a marriage licence
Apply to be the administrator
Apply to handle the estate
Apply to register your citizenship by descent
Apply to the Family Court
Applying for NZ Superannuation
Applying for a divorce on your own
Applying for a divorce together
Applying for citizenship by grant costs:
Applying to administer an estate is a legal process with a fee.
Applying under eligibility criteria
Applying under eligibility criteria
Applying under eligibility criteria
Approved applications are sent for processing and then the congratulatory messages are posted.
Approved overseas auditors and associations of accountants
Ara Institute of Canterbury
Archives New Zealand holds records about New Zealands military history.
Archives New Zealand is in the process of putting the military records of everyone who served in World War I online.
Are you single or in a relationship
As a business unit within Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission, LDC is the primary delivery vehicle for sectorwide leadership development.
As a citizen by descent, you may also be eligible to apply for citizenship by grant. If you are successful, any future children you have who are born outside New Zealand can
As a contrast to the blue subtle highlight, for example visited links.
As a regulator of the takeovers market, the Panel:
As a stateowned enterprise, AsureQuality helps farmers, growers and food producers in meeting their compliance requirements and upholding these high standards of food quality and safety.
As an NZ citizen, you can enrol your children in Australian schools. You and your family can study at Australian universities or polytechnics. If you already have a qualification it may be recognised, or you may have to apply for assessment.
As part of the egg donation process, youll have:
As part of the link to Govt.nz, government websites should use a visible NZ government logo.
As soon as your pregnancy is confirmed you need to choose a lead maternity carer (
As the executor (probate) or administrator (letter), you make sure that the wishes of the person who died happen.
As well as maternity and paternity leave, there are other leave options for eligible parents and carers. You may be able to get parental leave payments from the government.
Ashburton District Council
Asia New Zealand Foundation
Ask a question about the Govt.nz website, suggest an improvement to the website, or report a problem about the website to the Govt.nz team.
Ask for a referral to a fertility clinic
Ask the overseas organisation which type of apostille they want.
Associate Minister for ACC
Associate Minister for Energy
Associate Minister for Social Development and Employment
Associate Minister for Sport and Recreation
Associate Minister for the Environment
Associate Minister of Agriculture
Associate Minister of Agriculture (Animal Welfare, Skills)
Associate Minister of Agriculture (Horticulture)
Associate Minister of Defence
Associate Minister of Education (Partnership Schools)
Associate Minister of Finance
Associate Minister of Foreign Affairs
Associate Minister of Health
Associate Minister of Health (Pharmac)
Associate Minister of Housing (Social Housing)
Associate Minister of Immigration
Associate Minister of Justice (Firearms)
Associate Minister of Police
Associate Minister of Transport
At a minimum, this website aims to:
At least of your adoptive parents was a New Zealand citizen (by birth or by grant) at the time of your adoption.
At least one of the people applying must be:
At the time of your adoption, at least of your
At the time of your birth, at least of your
At their offices you can:
Auckland (English, business, construction and postgraduate design programmes for international students).
Auckland Waikato Fish and Game Council
Auckland Bioengineering Institute
Auckland District Health Board
Auckland Policy Office (APO)
Auckland Regional Council
Auckland University of Technology
Australia, Asia, Pacific
Australian passport (or other evidence of Australian citizenship) and a birth certificate
Authentication Unit contact details
Authentication Unit document requirements
Authentication Unit requirements
Authentication category A
Authentication category B
Autonomous crown entities
Aviation Security Service
Aviation Security Service (Avsec)
Avsec is the official provider of aviation security in New Zealand.
BDM General identity declaration (PDF . MB)
BDM Application to record (or update) donor details on the Human Assisted Reproductive Technology Register (PDF KB)
BDM Application to record (or update) donorconceived person details on the Human Assisted Reproductive Technology Register (PDF KB)
BDM Application by donor to access information held on the Human Assisted Reproductive Technology Register (PDF KB)
BDM Application by donorconceived person (or guardian) to access information held on the Human Assisted Reproductive Technology Register (PDF KB)
BDM Authorisation for disclosure of information to agent (PDF KB)
BDM Access to and disclosure of identifying information (PDF KB)
BDM Request a document authentication or apostille (PDF KB)
BDM Request a document authentication or apostille accessible version (TXT .KB)
Bay of Plenty District Health Board
Bay of Plenty Regional Council
Bay of Plenty Regional Council (BOPRC)
Bay of Plenty family services
Be polite when sending feedback to the Govt.nz team
Become a certified translator
Become an independent celebrant
Become an organisational celebrant
Before any information can be released, additional medical practitioners must sign the application.
Before content is , your information must meet at least of the following criteria.
Before dealing with an estate, you need to apply for either:
Before making a claim to the tribunal you must first make a complaint either to the Human Rights Commission, the Privacy Commissioner or the Health and Disability Commissioner.
Before you accept a job, you need to agree on your pay, hours and working conditions. You can apply for money to help pay the costs of starting a new job.
Before you apply for a divorce, known as a dissolution order, through the Family Court, you need to:
Before you apply for a student visa
Before you apply, check you meet the requirements to become a New Zealand citizen.
Before you get married overseas
Before you leave New Zealand, make sure your NZ passport is valid.
Before you make a complaint about a marriage or civil union celebrant, you should think about how you want your complaint resolved.
Before you make a complaint to the RegistrarGeneral:
Before you send any documents, check the Department of Internal Affairs Authentication Units requirements. You may need to provide either an original or a copy that has been notorised.
Before you send your documents to the Authentication Unit, check if they need to be:
Being deprived of NZ citizenship
Benefits Review Committee
Bernard Spragg NZ, Flickr, January
Best Start is of types of Working for Families payments. You might qualify for some or all of the other types of payments.
Between and some records exist, but they are not complete.
Between Monday January and Friday February
Birth certificate application form
Birth certificates and source documents FAQ (PDF KB)
Birth certificates and source documents FAQ accessible (TXT KB)
Birth certificates, citizenship, passports, changing name or gender
Birth, Death and Marriage Historical Records
Births Deaths Marriages Online
Births, Deaths and Marriages
Births, Deaths and Marriages (BDM) registers and maintains New Zealand birth, death, marriage, civil union and name change information, and issues certificates and printouts.
Births, Deaths and Marriages can only make changes to New Zealand birth certificates.
Births, Deaths and Marriages office
Births, Deaths and Marriages offices
Births, Deaths and Marriages online
Births, deaths and marriages
Births, deaths and marriages in NZ
Births, deaths, marriages
Blue and orange are the primary colours, so theyre used first. Other colours are only introduced if needed. Infographics or illustrations use these colours as a starting point.
Born and adopted in New Zealand (NZ), the Cook Islands, Niue or Tokelau
Born and adopted on or after January
Born and adopted outside NZ
Born before and adopted after January
Born between and
Born outside NZ and adopted in NZ
Borrowing against the value of your home
Both parents need to complete the birth registration, unless parent is:
Both your mother and your father must sign the form.
Bringing pets into New Zealand
Bringing things into New Zealand
British Antarctic Territory
Broadcasting Standards Authority
Building , Central Park Corporate Centre
Building , Central Park Corporate Centre
Building Practitioners Board
Building System Performance
Building System Performance (BSP) is responsible for managing NZ building laws and regulations that protect public safety and property.
Business, work, employment rights, paid parental leave
But you cannot pass on New Zealand citizenship to children you have outside New Zealand.
Buying a house, apartment or a rental property
Buying or building one home to live in
Buying, renting, selling, building, rates, renovating, insulation
By making investments that allow the New Zealand Superannuation Fund to grow, they are helping lessen the tax burden of future taxpayers in NZ.
By packaging content from both government and private sectors, these websites offer clear and practical information on topics such as:
By viewing and using this site, you agree to these Terms of use.
CCBY . international licence terms
CDs and sound recordings
CIIL currently has four investments which it manages:
Call COURTS ( ) for enquires or for an update on your case.
Call Births, Deaths and Marriages
Canterbury District Health Board
Canterbury family services
Capital and Coast District Health Board
Careers NZ are responsible for supporting New Zealanders to have the skills, knowledge and training opportunities for lifelong success.
Careers NZ is a resource for:
Careers New Zealand is now owned and maintained by the
Caregiving and foster care enquiry form
Caregiving support and learning
Caring for someone with a health condition, injury or illness
Cars, vans, motorcycles, mopeds and trucks need to be registered and issued number plates to be legally driven on our roads.
Carterton District Council
Catch History Review Committee
Category A authentications
Category B authentications
Celebrants can get support and information, and opportunities for professional development.
Celebrants can legally perform marriages andor civil unions in New Zealand. If you want to become a celebrant, you can choose to be independent or connected with an approved church or organisation. Once youre registered you need to renew your registration each year and keep your contact details upto.
Celebrants set their own fees on top of the cost of the licence.
Celebrants they have separate fees.
Central Otago District Council
Central Plains Water Limited Stage
Central South Island Fish and Game Council
Certificate of no impediment
Certificate, printout or source document
Certified fertility providers
ChairpersonSurveyorGeneral
Change a civil union to a marriage
Change the gender on your birth certificate
Change the registered sex on a birth certificate
Change the registered sex on your birth certificate
Change your childs name application form
Change your driver licence record
Change your gender in your passport
Change your gender on your official ID
Change your name in your passport
Change your name on your driver licence
Change your name on your official IDs
Change your own name application form
Change, replace or cancel your
Change, replace or cancel your EPA
Changes to your birth certificate
Changing from citizenship by descent to citizenship by grant
Changing or cancelling your application
Changing to hospitallevel care
Changing your childs name
Changing your citizenship status
Changing your name on your driver licence
Changing your name when you get married
Changing your study plans
Charles Fergusson Building
Chatham Islands family services
Check document requirements with the overseas organisation
Check if you are a citizen
Check if you need an NZeTA or a visitor visa
Check if you need to apply to the High Court
Check if you need to include other documents
Check that you understand the decisionmaking process for burials and cremations.
Check the Authentication Units document requirements:
Check the Ministry of Health website for clinics in your area:
Check the country you are using your document in
Check the dates of the national public holidays and regional anniversary days.
Check the progress of your application
Check the progress of your application:
Check this information from the Citizens Advice Bureau (
Check this page for regularly BDM service timeframes:
Check this page for regularly service timeframes:
Check this page for regularly timeframes:
Check this page regularly for uptoBDM processing times.
Check what to think about and organise before you die. You can also create your own plan on the End of Life Service website.
Check which visas youll need and organise to get them well ahead of your travel dates.
Check you meet the criteria and have the required documents before you apply, then download and complete an application form.
Check you meet the requirements
Check you meet the requirements for NZ citizenship
Check your complaint meets the criteria
Check your mobilenetwork provider
Check your own credit record
Checking the surname on your birth certificate
Chief Archivist and General Manager
Chief Executive Secretary of Defence
Chief Executive Chief Review Officer
Chief Executive and Commissioner
Chief Executive and Director
Chief Executive and Secretary
Chief Executive and Secretary for the Environment
Chief Executive and Secretary of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Chief Executive, and Secretary for Culture and Heritage
Chief Human Rights Commissioner
Chief Parliamentary Counsel
Child and Youth Mortality Review Committee
Child care and support, paternity, adoption, surrogacy, marriage consent, donor issues.
Child passports are for children aged and under. They cost and are valid for years. When a child turns , their passport is still valid until it expires or is cancelled.
Child support is paid by parents who do not live with their children, or who share care of their children with someone else.
Childcare and supervision
Children aged or under
Children do not have to meet all the same requirements as adults to get New Zealand citizenship.
Children you can apply for
Chinese notarial certificate and a letter or valid resident permit visa from Immigration New Zealand confirming resident status
Choose the gender on your citizenship record
Choose the kind of ceremony you want then follow the stepbystep guide.
Choose the kind of ceremony you want then follow the stepbystep guide. You must get married by a celebrant.
Choose the right tax code for your NZ Superannuation
Choose to be the executor
Choose your lead maternity carer
Choose your residential care
Choosing the gender on your citizenship record
Christchurch City Council
Christchurch City Libraries has an extensive list of Australian family history resources.
Citizens by descent cannot pass on New Zealand citizenship to any children they have outside New Zealand.
Citizenship Offices contact information
Citizenship and passport application
Citizenship by grant for your child
Citizenship by grant for yourself
City Rail Link (CRL) is NZs largest transport infrastructure project.
Civic Administration Building
Civil Aviation Authority of New Zealand
Clarity and peace of mind for your loved ones
Climate Change Commission
Cnr Anglesea and Nisbet Street
Cnr Anglesea and Nisbet Streets
Cnr Hanover and Harrow Streets
Code companies are New Zealandregistered companies that are listed on the
Colour accessibility is important for people who may:
Colours, images and logos
Community organisations and local services
Community services card, food safety, dental care, help at home
Complain about a TV or radio programme or an ad
Complain about a celebrant to the RegistrarGeneral
Complain about a government department
Complain about a marriage or civil union celebrant
Complain about a privacy breach
Complain about discrimination
Complain about home help and support services
Complain about something you bought
Complain about your financial services provider
Complain about your utility provider
Complain to the Ombudsman
Complaints about an approved organisation celebrant
Complete a form for each enduring power of attorney (EPA or EPOA) you want to create. Save on legal fees by planning ahead.
Complete a parenting through separation course
Complete the application and sign the form
Complex estates often take longer.
Conducting game animal research.
Congratulatory Message Service team
Congratulatory messages are sent by post days before the birthday or wedding anniversary but you can ask for them to be sent earlier.
Congratulatory messages for significant birthdays and wedding anniversaries is a free service for all New Zealand citizens and permanent residents who live in New Zealand.
Conservation House Whare Kaupapa Atawhai
Consider these options before you create your
Consider your options before creating this EPA
Consider your options before setting up a property EPA
Consultations across government
Consumer rights and complaints
Contact Banking Ombudsman
Contact Births, Deaths and Marriages
Contact Celebrants Aotearoa
Contact Commerce Commission
Contact Identity and passports
Contact NZ Customs Service
Contact Office of the Privacy Commissioner
Contact a NZ embassy overseas
Contact an MP or the NZ Parliament
Contact and agency details
Contact details and information for all government departments and organisations.
Contact details for qualified midwives who are members of the
Contact details for the Office of the Privacy Commissioner
Contact one of our offices in New Zealand
Contact one of the following organisations:
Contact the Citizenship Office
Contact the Citizenship Office below to check your citizenship status.
Contact the Citizenship Office to check your citizenship status.
Contact the Citizenship Office to request an evidentiary certificate:
Contact the NZ Parliament
Contact the authorities in the country where you plan to get married and check their rules and requirements.
Contact the embassy of the country where the person was born or died.
Contact us through NZ Relay
Contact your local service centre
Contact: Congratulatory Message Service team
Contacts for legal and financial advice
Content is in plain English, so the website is easy to read and easy to understand. The content on the site is organised in the way you search for information.
Content is obscured at high zoom levels
Content is often duplicated across a number of government websites. For example, there are over government websites that provide information about work and jobs.
Continue to broaden your skills while working. You can become better at your job, increase your chance for a promotion or change your career entirely.
Controller and AuditorGeneral
Convert your overseas driver licence
Cook Islands, Niue or Tokelau birth certificate
Cooperation and health services
Copyright and attribution
Copyright in photographs on Govt.nz is not owned or licensed to you by the Crown. Unless otherwise stated in relation to specific photographs, you cannot copy, distribute or adapt any photograph without the agreement of the copyright owner.
Corner East Tamaki Road and Newbury Street
Corner Molesworth and Aitken Streets
Corner of King and Princess Streets
Corner of Molesworth and Aitken Streets
Corner of North Road and Price Street
Countries that have signed up to the Hague Convention on Intercountry Adoption
Course delivery is a blend of face to face and online activity which suits a range of learners including those still in fulltime employment.
Courses are offered at the main Otaki campus and at a number of sites around Aotearoa, NZ.
Courses are offered through the:
Court fees for civil family court cases
Create an enduring power of attorney
Create your EPA for personal care and welfare
Create your EPA for property
Credit records, consumer rights, complaints, debt, privacy
Credit, debit or prepaid gift card (for example Prezzy card) by adding your payment details to the form.
Criminal Cases Review Commission
Criminal Cases Review Commission (CCRC)
Criteria for putting information on Govt.nz
Cromwell, Central Otago (courses such as snowsports, horticulture, sports turf management and sustainability)
Crown Asset Management Limited
Crown Infrastructure Partners Limited
Crown Irrigation Investments Limited
Crown Irrigation Investments Limited (CIIL)
Crown Irrigation Investments Limited (CIIL) is an investment management focused business.
Crown Research Institutes
Crown entity subsidiaries
DIA disclaims and excludes all liability for any claim, loss, demand or damages of any kind whatsoever (including for negligence) arising out of or in connection with the use of either this website or the information, content or materials included on this site or on any website we link to.
DIA is part of a wholeofgovernment approach to surrogacy matters. This fact sheet was produced jointly by DIA, Immigration New Zealand,
DIA may require proof of your identity before being able to provide you with any personal information.
DIA may revise these Terms of use at any time. Any such revisions take effect when this page is .
Dates for public holidays and anniversary days
Dates when employees get national public holidays and regional anniversary days.
David Pimborough, Shutterstock
Daytoday care and other responsibilities for guardians
Daytoday care is not automatic
Daylight saving, freedom camping, natural resources, fishing, hunting
Days in lieu (alternative holidays)
Death of a firearms licence holder
Debt Repayment Orders, and
Debt collection and repossession
Decide not to participate
Decisionmaking for burial or cremation
Decisions your attorneys cannot make
Default text colour for body text and page headers.
Defence Employer Support Council
Defence Force issues medals to former and serving New Zealand military personnel.
Definitions of enduring power of attorney roles
Deliver to an overseas address
Democratic Republic of Congo
Denise Church QSO CFInstD
Department of Conservation
Department of Corrections
Department of Internal Affairs
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
Depending on how much you earn and how old your children are, your family may be able to get help with the cost of childcare.
Depending on the emergency, NEMA lead or support the response and recovery. NEMA work to build the capability and capacity of the emergency management system to reduce risk, to be ready for emergencies, and to respond and recover from them.
Depending on your situation, you may have to pay this money back.
Depending on your situation, you may need to provide additional documents.
Depending on your skills, where you come from, your age and other factors you may be able to work in New Zealand temporarily for more than months.
Deposit an overseas divorce or dissolution certificate
Depression and Anxiety Helpline
Deputy Privacy Commissioner
Descent registration and passport timeframes
Develop positive relationships between the Game Animal Council and stakeholders through effective liaison, advice and communication.
Develops new materials, products and approaches to assist other agencies with sustainable management of risk, environment and natural Earth and groundwater resources
Device set up and assistive technology support
Dial in a medical emergency
Difference between an apostille and an authentication
Different organisations can help you with your retirement and other related topics.
Digital Identity Services Trust Framework regulator
Digital Public Services branch
Digital accounts and assets can be frustrating in the best of times. Being organised with these is definitely an act of love for those close to you.
DirectorGeneral of Health and Chief Executive
DirectorGeneral of Security
Disagree with child support amount
Discover jobs that would suit you, find and apply for vacancies, and prepare for interviews.
Disposal of firearms and ammunition
Disputes when buying a car
District inquiries relate to a paricular place or piece of land, and generic inquiries deal with everything else.
Division of Arts, Law, Psychology and Social Sciences
Division of Health, Engineering, Computing and Science
Do not get it certified by a justice of the peace or a solicitor. If you do, your document will not be able to be apostilled or authenticated.
Do not send us sensitive personal information or include it in feedback forms or surveys.
Do not staple, glue or paperclip photos to the application form as this may damage the photos.
Do you want to have a successor (backup) attorney You can only have .
Do you want to have the same attorney as your partner
Do you want to have the same attorneys as your partner
Doctors and practice nurses work in a general practice (medical centre). Find a medical centre to enrol with.
Doctors, dentists and prescriptions
Documents are sent to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade and to international embassies for authentication (sometimes also called legalisation).
Documents are sent to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade to do a check.
Documents you must include
Dog owner fines and offences
Dog problems and complaints
Domestic and family violence
Donors and donorconceived people or their parents or guardians must complete both a:
Donors can ask to find out the name of any children born from their donation, but the child has to be or older and give permission.
Donors will not be automatically identifiable for donations made before August .
Donors, donorconceived people or their parents or guardians can:
Download and complete the application form:
Download the application form
Drives innovation and sustainable economic growth in our energy sector
Driving fines and penalties
Driving in NZ if you are visiting
Drug Free Sport New Zealand
Drug Free Sport New Zealand is now part of the Sport Integrity Commission.
Due to your lack of mobility, you now need hospitallevel care. Unfortunately your current facility does not provide this. Your anxiety and worry about moving to another care home is also affecting your health.
Dunedin (main campus offering most courses)
ED: Mutual transactions of associations (including clubs and societies)
EFTPOS (only available when you visit an office in person)
EPA for property: Disposal of firearms, arms items and ammunition
EPL has built an online payroll service for schools called EdPay.
ERO reviews schools and early childhood education services, and publishes national reports on current education practice. Their reports are used by parents, teachers, school principals, early childhood education managers, boards of trustees and policy makers.
Early learning services generally follow the same terms and holiday dates as state schools.
Eastern Fish and Game Council
Eastern Institute of Technology
Education New Zealand (ENZ)
Education Review Office (ERO)
Education for children with a physical disability or illness
Education scholarships, grants and awards
Educational certificate or school report
Electrical Workers Registration Board
Electricity Corporation of New Zealand Limited
Eligibility for public funding
Ellesmere Junction RoadSprings Road
Email addresses are not made available to the public. Unless required by law, we will not disclose the names or email addresses of individuals who provide feedback to us or who provide us with submission forms without their consent.
Email us for further information.
Emergencies can have consequences for people, communities, property, infrastructure, the economy and the environment. NEMA support communities to reduce the impact of emergencies across all hazards and risks.
Emergencies in New Zealand
Emergencies, health advice, and workplace safety
Employees must be paid at least the minimum hourly wage rate for every hour worked.
Employment Relations Authority
Employment Relations Authority (ERA)
Employment rights and complaints
Enduring Power of Attorney (EPA) for personal care and welfare
Enduring Power of Attorney (EPA) for property
Enduring power of attorney
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority
English as a second language
English for speakers of other languages
Enhance the quality of game animal herds while maintaining or enhancing conservation outcomes.
Enhances our understanding of geological and Earthsystem processes
Enrol and vote in an election
Enter or exit full screen
Environmental Protection Authority
Eruera PrendergastTarena
Every years is the general rule to review your will and
Every baby born in New Zealand must be registered, usually within months of being born. You can order your babys birth certificate and apply for their IRD number at the same time.
Examples and timelines for dealing with estates
Examples of a valid complaint include:
Examples of different levels of help for executors
Examples of support available:
Examples of topics covered by MBIE smallbusiness websites
Examples of when an EPA for property might be helpful
Examples of when this EPA is helpful
Explore the Treaty of Waitangi
Export goods, animals or personal belongings
Faculty of Business and Economics
Faculty of Creative Arts and Industries.
Faculty of Education and Social Work
Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences
Fair trading, consumer rights and privacy
FairWay Resolution is a professional services firm that works with clients to prevent, manage, resolve and learn from conflict.
FairWay employs around staff and contracts with over specialist reviewers and dispute resolution practitioners (adjudicators, reviewers, mediators and conciliators) throughout New Zealand.
Fake celebrants and weddings
False claims about birth certificates:
Family Violence Death Review Committee
Family history, Te Reo, Treaty of Waitangi, military history
Family records in Australia
Family violence, mental health, addiction, separation, divorce, property, wills, sex changes.
Far North District Council
Fast seek to x of the video
Feedback about the Govt.nz website
Feedback is important and is used to evaluate and improve the site.
Fences, driveways and drains
Fertility clinics hold additional information to what is in the
Fertility issues and assisted reproduction
File and serve your Family Court documents
File documents to a District Court
Filing documents with a Youth Court is the same as with a District Court.
Fill in all parts of the form, except the statutory declaration
Fill in all parts of the form, except the statutory declaration.
Fill out a Notice of Intended Marriage outside New Zealand form and return it to Births, Deaths and Marriages.
Fill out and submit the online form.
Film and Literature Board of Review
Financial Markets Authority
Financial help and benefits if youre over
Financial help and services
Financial help for caregivers
Financial help for firsthome buyers
Financial help for people with a disability or illness
Financial help for your family
Financial help if someone dies
Financial service providers
Find a counsellor in your local area.
Find a job or list a vacancy
Find a notary public in New Zealand New Zealand Society of Notaries
Find fertility clinics in your area
Find information about the visitor centre, education services, Parliamentary Information Service, Office of the Speaker, and media enquiries.
Find out about central and local government consultations happening across the country.
Find out about maternity care, getting a midwife, parental leave, antenatal classes, health tests and parenting support.
Find out about your choices for tests, care and treatment.
Find out how Apple supports inclusive use of Mac computers and portable devices like iPhone, iPad, Watch, TV and HomePod
Find out how to become a marriage and civil union celebrant in New Zealand, stay up to with your registration, and access support and training.
Find out how to request an NZeTA (New Zealand electronic Travel Authority) and how much it costs. Allow hours for your request to be processed.
Find out if you can get a visa to work in New Zealand. Your partner needs to have a work, student or Military visa or be a New Zealand citizen or resident.
Find out if you can get help to pay for home insulation and efficient, fixed heating options through the Warmer Kiwi Homes programme.
Find out if you can get money to help pay for your education.
Find out what a rates rebate is, if you qualify and how much you might get off your rates. See how and when to apply and download the application form.
Find out what is on a credit record, who can access your credit record, and your rights to change information on it.
Find out what to do and who to contact if you have a concern or complaint about your home support services.
Find out what to do when someone dies, and record, share and discuss your own end of life wishes.
Find out when your child can start school, how to choose a school, enrol and prepare your child for school.
Find out when your family came to NZ
Find out where your nearest Heartland Service Centre is:
Find out whether you can get governmentfunded pregnancy care and what services are included.
Find out who to contact to get free health advice for you and your family.
Find resources and courses for learning
Find your Member of Parliament (MP)
Find your local council by region
Finding and starting a job
Finding information about your adoption
Finding relatives in Australia
Finding your birth parents
Fines, penalties and losing your licence
Fire and Emergency New Zealand
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Act
First apply for parental leave from your employer, then apply for parental leave payments from Inland Revenue.
First certificate (paper or electronic apostille)
First, contact a fertility clinic
Follow these steps when you apply for New Zealand citizenship.
Font size is set in pixels
Food South Otago located at Otago University in Dunedin.
Food Standards Australia New Zealand
Food Waikato located near Hamilton
Food labels help you make informed choices about the products you buy.
FoodSouth located at Lincoln in Canterbury
For New Zealand passport applications and renewals, contact
For a paper apostille, the Department of Internal Affairs Authentication Unit will put a covering page, called an apostille certificate, on top of your documents. They will be tied together with a ribbon and get an official embossed seal.
For adults aged or over it costs:
For an overseas civil union to be valid in NZ, the original civil union must have happened in:
For any donations made at a New Zealand fertility clinic on or after August that resulted in a birth, changes must be made through the fertility clinic.
For any general or media enquires about:
For appeals from NZ, the Supreme Court of New Zealand replaces the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council located in London.
For applications relating to birth and adoption in Samoa, please be aware that these external checks are currently taking to months (in addition to the timeframe mentioned above).
For birth and marriage certificates, to register a death or related matters, contact the Department of Internal Affairs (
For births that happened at least years ago, use:
For borders and lines, for example table grid lines, above accordions and promo tiles.
For business information on fair trading, regulated industries, competition, mergers and authorisations, contact the Commerce Commission.
For children aged or under it costs:
For civil cases, they decide on claims of up to ,.
For complaints about privacy, contact the Office of the Privacy Commissioner.
For complaints about your bank, contact the Banking Ombudsman.
For current passport processing timeframes, visit the passports website.
For customs clearance to bring items into NZ, contact the NZ Customs Service and the Ministry for Primary Industries (
For customs clearance when you take items out of NZ, you may need to contact both the NZ Customs Service and the Ministry for Primary Industries (
For donations made before August that resulted in a birth, complete the appropriate form below:
For donations made on or after August , the fertility clinic will have more details about the donor than the
For donorconceived persons
For enquiries about a current application, email
For enquiries about applying for citizenship, email
For financial assistance if youve lost your job or are not working at the moment, contact Work and Income New Zealand.
For free health advice, treatment and information, call Healthline on
For general enquiries, email
For help starting a business in New Zealand, contact business.govt.nz.
For help to start and maintain your KiwiSaver savings scheme, contact Inland Revenue.
For help with a rates postponement or rebate, contact your local council.
For help with living expenses or to find emergency housing, contact Work and Income New Zealand (
For information about COVID and the workplace for employees, employers and businesses, contact Employment NZ.
For information about employment rights and guidance on how to resolve your concerns, contact Employment New Zealand.
For information about the public housing landlord and urban development partner, contact
For information about your student loan, contact Inland Revenue (
For information and guides on tenancy rights and responsibilities, contact Tenancy Services.
For information on housing and urban development policy and support, contact the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development (
For more details, such as their main and additional roles, check the website for Fire and Emergency
For more information call the family justice help line on
For more information, see
For most people, your driver licence is valid for years. The NZTA will send you a renewal reminder letter about weeks before your photo driver licence is due to expire (if they have your current address).
For nonurgent applications, follow the standard process below.
For parents, the Ministry of Justice also has advice and resources for getting help for your children. These include:
For people using a keyboard rather than a mouse to navigate, Govt.nz:
For price concerns on essential products and services, contact the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (
For questions about citizenship by descent or getting proof of citizenship status, email
For questions about injuries, claims and payments, contact Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC).
For questions about workplace safety and regulations, contact WorkSafe.
For support when making employees redundant, contact Work and Income New Zealand (
For the first year of Best Start, it does not matter how much your family earns.
For the safe and legal disposal of your firearms, other arms items and ammunition, End of Life Service offers advice on leaving instructions:
For these donations, donors and donorconceived people can choose to give their details to the voluntary register. The HART Register includes only the details they choose to provide. For this reason, requests for information from the voluntary register wont always result in the information desired.
For up to , official advice for New Zealanders living and travelling overseas, see the Safe Travel website.
For visas in another country or territory, contact the local immigration authority.
Forest Stewardship Council
Forms and supporting documents
Foster parents (caregivers) look after children in many ways, from shortterm or emergency care, to longterm or permanent arrangements.
Fostering a child (caregiving)
Franklin District Council.
Free access to governmentsponsored websites
Free health checks for children under
Free health services for children
Free independent advocates are available to assist with the complaint process.
Free or subsidised maternity care
Freephone: (New Zealand only)
From April we dont offer the All Blacks decorative birth certificate.
Funded by the Ministry of Health and provided by
Funding, services and support available to help children with disabilities and learning support needs to go to mainstream schools.
GNS Science exists to create a cleaner, safer, more prosperous future for
GNS undertakes research that:
Gender on the Driver Licence Register
Genders you can choose to show on your certificate
General Practice afterhours service
General identity declaration form
Gerardine CliffordLidstone
Get a New Zealand student visa
Get a civil union licence
Get a copy of a WW service record
Get a document translated into English so you can use it in NZ.
Get a marriage certificate
Get a marriage licence online
Get a nondisclosure direction
Get a record of a name change
Get a record of your name change
Get a translation to use in another country
Get a visa to visit another country
Get a warrant of fitness or certificate of fitness
Get an IRD number for a business, charity or trust
Get an IRD number for your child
Get an order to administer property
Get celebrant training, support and information
Get financial help with housing
Get help to find birth, death and marriage records
Get help with the costs of raising children with Working for Families tax credit payments. Your payments are worked out based on the information you give Inland Revenue about your income for the year.
Get information from them about local fishing and hunting:
Get information from them about local freshwater fishing and game bird hunting:
Get information in an emergency or disaster
Get or renew a New Zealand passport
Get proof you are a citizen
Get proof you are not a citizen
Get publicly funded health services
Get someone elses birth certificate
Get the documents translated by a government agency or court in the country that issued the documents.
Get the documents translated by a translation agency in New Zealand or send the Citizenship Office your original documents. If you do not have professional translations of your documents, the Citizenship Office will get in touch with you to arrange these, if required.
Get the documents translated by a translation agency in New Zealand, send the Citizenship Office your original documents. If you do not have professional translations of your documents, the Citizenship Office will get in touch with you to arrange these, if required.
Get your certificate and original documents
Get your child a New Zealand passport when born overseas
Get your child an NZ passport when born overseas
Get your information ready
Get yourself a New Zealand passport when born overseas
Getting NZ Superannuation or the Veterans Pension
Getting New Zealand citizenship for a child born through an international surrogacy agreement involves multiple government agencies and processes. Your options are outlined in a fact sheet produced by DIA and the other agencies involved in international surrogacy matters.
Getting a New Zealand passport
Getting help with budgeting and finances
Getting help with your budget
Getting your car driver licence in New Zealand is a step process. As you progress through the stages you gain a new licence with fewer requirements and more responsibilities.
Getting your documents back
Getting your documents translated
Gisborne District Council
Give all of these documents to your celebrant before your wedding.
Giving up your NZ citizenship
Going back to work after your parental leave ends
Going to court as a witness
Government Chief Digital Officer
Government Chief Information Security Officer
Government Communications Security Bureau
Government Superannuation Appeals Board
Government Superannuation Fund Authority
Government Superannuation Fund Authority (GSFNZ)
Government Web Accessibility Standard
Government contact details
Government help is available to educate children with a physical disability or illness.
Government help with dental costs
Government services and tools
Government websites are also required to follow the Web Accessibility Standard, which includes making images accessible.
Governmentgrade login and verified identity services.
Govt.nz aims for good contrast between text and the background it appears on.
Govt.nz also defines how to select, name and style links.
Govt.nz current accessibility issues
Govt.nz displays up to promo tiles in this area at any one time.
Govt.nz displays up to promo tiles at any one time.
Govt.nz does not provide:
Govt.nz follows bestpractice advice for online Government content.
Govt.nz follows bestpractice advice on how to write for government digital channels.
Govt.nz follows the NZ Government Accessibility Guidelines for images.
Govt.nz has promo tiles on sections of the home page to link to timely or new information.
Govt.nz is for people who need to interact with the NZ government in the course of their daytoday lives including NZ citizens and residents, or people who want to move to or visit NZ.
Govt.nz is guided by the Strategy for a Digital Public Service, which provides new opportunities to support better public services by putting you at the centre of the design.
Govt.nz is here to make it easier for you to find and use government information and services online.
Govt.nz principles, vision and goals
Govt.nz puts you, the user, at the centre of everything.
Govt.nz uses a line height of . times the font size. Generous line height increases white space, making the page easier to read.
Govt.nz uses limited colours to add emphasis to the text or content elements theyre applied to.
Govt.nz uses multiples of pixels (px) to create consistent spacing. Usually a gap between a heading and paragraph is px.
Govt.nz uses the New Zealand government allofgovernment brand in combination with the Coat of Arms. The Public Service Commission looks after the allofgovernment brand.
Govt.nz uses the following styles, sizes and spacing for headings and paragraphs.
Govt.nz uses the font Fira Sans because it:
Grants funded by Lotto help to pay for equipment for disabled people who want to be more closely involved in their communities.
Greater Wellington Regional Council
Guardians of New Zealand Superannuation
Guide to finding shipping lists that are available online
Guide to researching NZ soldiers in the First World War
HK TST Chung King Woodhouse clothing shop JF Shibuya display on sale.JPG
Hague Convention adoptions and NZ citizenship
Hanmer Springs Thermal Pools and Spa
Hastings District Council
Have a plan ready in case you become unable to make decisions for yourself. Some health events can cause you to lose mental capacity.
Have your say on proposed amendments to waste legislation
Having a baby, marriage, divorce, bereavement, financial help
Health Quality and Safety Commission
Health Research Council of New Zealand
Health advice and services
Health and Disability Commissioner
Health services in your area
Health tests and screening
Healthcare and medical costs
Heartland Services (Heartlands) ensure rural and isolated communities receive access to the services and support they need from government and community services.
Heartland service centres provide advice and support free of charge, including access to:
Help children grieve and mourn their loss
Help for children with behaviour problems
Help for children with learning support needs
Help for partners staying at home
Help for victims of crime
Help from a carer and assistive equipment could make tasks such as showering, dressing and using a toilet much safer for you. Find out what government help you may qualify for.
Help paying for childcare
Help paying for early childhood education
Help with daytoday personal care
Help with housing and paying rent
Help with mental health and addiction
Help with searching historical records
Her Excellency the GovernorGeneral
Heritage New Zealand Pouhere Taonga
High Performance Sport NZ
High Performance Sport NZ (HPSNZ)
High Performance Sport NZ leads the high performance sports system in New Zealand.
Historical births, deaths and marriages
History, culture and heritage
Home repairs and maintenance
Horizons Regional Council
Horowhenua District Council
Hospital and specialist services
Housing and household costs
Housing, rates and renting
How Govt.nz uses colours, images and logos.
How a personal order works
How do I find out about correct etiquette at a
How long applications take, and help with the cost
How many annual holidays you get
How many people do you want to share in the responsibility of looking after your money, property and other assets. You can have or more attorneys and the same applies for successor attorneys.
How much NZ Superannuation you get paid depends on whether you have a partner and your living arrangements.
How much a celebrant charges is up to them. You pay them directly.
How much debt do you have
How telehealth services are supported
How to apply for Best Start
How to apply for NZ citizenship
How to apply for NZ citizenship by grant
How to apply for a visitor visa
How to apply if your child is to or was born outside NZ
How to apply if your child is under and was born in NZ
How to change your details on the register
How to consent or cancel consent
How to enrol your child at school in NZ
How to file your documents
How to find out what parliamentary bills are open for public feedback and options for how to make a submission.
How to get divorced in NZ
How to get fertility treatment
How to have a civil union in NZ
How to make a submission on a bill
How to order a civil union certificate
How to order a name change certificate
How to pay the International Visitor Levy
How to register your baby
How to select, prepare and cook food safely.
How to send your feedback about the Govt.nz website
How to withdraw your application
How wills help you and your loved ones
Human Assisted Reproductive Technology Act
Human Rights Review Tribunal
Human rights and freedoms
Hutt Valley District Health Board
IRD numbers, benefits, superannuation, SuperGold, KiwiSaver
IVF treatment to stimulate egg production
Identity Referee Declaration (PDF KB)
Identity referee or witness
If a loved one has died, you might be able to get help with the cost of the funeral, burial or cremation. You may also get help with living expenses or childcare.
If a parent or legal guardian is not able to sign the statutory declaration section of the form, you need to explain why. You also need to provide evidence if they are:
If all parents or guardians cannot sign
If any of your documents are not in English
If both parents can complete the form, or if one of the parents is unknown, you can register the birth online.
If both parents cannot complete the form
If colour has a meaning assigned to it, Govt.nz uses other methods to supplement this information. For example, a graph using colours also has text labels. For colour that has no meaning, like decorative text, or logos and brand names, accessibility guidelines are not necessarily followed.
If information about your donor or donorconceived child is not available on the
If it deals with shared property:
If naming the other parent would put you or your baby in danger
If the Hague Convention applies, the adoption cannot be assessed under scenario .
If the RegistrarGeneral decides it is not a valid complaint, they will let you know about other avenues of dispute resolution.
If the RegistrarGeneral does not investigate the complaint
If the RegistrarGeneral investigates the complaint
If the RegistrarGeneral investigates the complaint, they will get information from the marriage or civil union celebrant and any available witnesses. A decision will be made based on the legislation and information gathered.
If the application is received less than weeks before the anniversary, the congratulatory message may not be able to be sent in time for the event.
If the baby is going to be adopted
If the carer is not a parent of the child (nonparent carer), their income is not included in
If the claim to citizenship is through the father, you have to prove he is the father. So, both parents need to give consent for their information to be collected and used to verify the claim.
If the claim to citizenship is through the mother, the father does not have to sign the form. This is because you do not need to provide information about the father to verify who the mother is.
If the couple apply for a marriage licence, the Registrar of Marriages sends the objection to the Family Court. The court decides whether the objection is valid or not.
If the estate is worth less than ,, you may not need to apply to the High Court.
If the event is in January, you should apply no later than December.
If the other parent cannot fill in the form
If the other parent has died, provide their death certificate.
If the other parent is known but cannot complete the form for any of the above reasons, you need to complete a PDF form and post it to Births, Deaths and Marriages (BDM).
If the person is still alive, you cannot get their records without their written approval.
If the underlying page remains accessible to screen readers, visually impaired users can accidentally navigate away from the Shielded Site widget while it remains visible on the screen. This can cause privacy issues, confusion and difficulty in navigating back to the widget.
If the witness does not have a New Zealand passport, they must be a:
If there are any issues with or disputes about an
If they are on the HART Register
If they do nothing within that time, the court will check your application, making sure it meets all the requirements, and make the dissolution order. The divorce will take effect month after the dissolution order is made.
If they were born outside NZ
If you adopted your child outside New Zealand, talk to the Citizenship Office about what you need to do.
If you already have a name change application in progress, do not apply to update your sex marker until this has been registered by Births, Deaths and Marriages.
If you already have official English translations, provide these with your original documents.
If you also want to change your name
If you also want to update the sex marker on your New Zealand birth certificate, this is a different process to just changing your name. You can apply to change both using the same form.
If you also want to update the sex marker on your childs New Zealand birth certificate, this is a different process to just changing their name. You can apply to change both using the same form.
If you applied at the New Zealand High Commission
If you applied by post or at a DIA counter
If you apply on behalf of a child aged or under, your application falls under
If you apply when your child is under months old, you do not need to complete the family income section.
If you are or and are married, in a civil union or de facto relationship, you must complete an adult form.
If you are or older, you need an adult passport. Adult passports cost and are valid for years.
If you are Deaf, hard of hearing, deafblind or speechimpaired, you can use the New Zealand Relay Service (NZ Relay) to contact us.
If you are a or yearold donorconceived child
If you are a New Zealand citizen by birth or grant and have a child overseas, you can register them as a citizen by descent and get them a New Zealand passport.
If you are a New Zealand citizen by birth or grant, any children you have outside New Zealand are citizens by descent.
If you are a citizen by descent
If you are a citizen by descent and have a child outside New Zealand
If you are a citizen by descent you can travel on a New Zealand passport and are entitled to live and work in New Zealand. You mostly have the same rights as any New Zealand citizen.
If you are a citizen by descent, you may also be eligible to apply for citizenship by grant.
If you are a citizen by descent, you must register your citizenship before you can get a New Zealand passport.
If you are a citizen by descent, you need to register your citizenship to make it official and to get a passport.
If you are a citizen by descent, you:
If you are a medical practitioner
If you are aged or under, you also must include statutory declarations from:
If you are already a New Zealand citizen
If you are applying due to marriage under eligibility criteria , you also need to provide your:
If you are applying for or registering your New Zealand citizenship, you can ask for your citizenship certificate to show your preferred gender.
If you are applying under eligibility criteria , you also need to provide the birth certificate of your parent who was born in Samoa on or after May and before January .
If you are applying under eligibility criteria , you also need to provide:
If you are becoming a citizen of a country that does not allow dual citizenship, you might have to give up your New Zealand citizenship.
If you are not eligible for funding
If you are not happy with the resolution offered by your celebrant, church or approved organisation, you can make a complaint to the RegistrarGeneral. Only refer the complaint to the RegistrarGeneral if it meets the above criteria.
If you are not in contact with the other parent or they cannot fill in the form, talk to the Citizenship Office.
If you are not in contact with your parent or they cannot fill in the form, talk to the Citizenship Office.
If you are not satisfied with our response to any privacyrelated concern you may have, you can contact the Privacy Commissioner and make a privacy complaint.
If you are not yet a New Zealand citizen
If you are the personal representative of someone who has died, you can apply to block public access to their records.
If you are the personal representative of someone who has died, you can find out who has requested their records. You will need to provide evidence that you are their personal representative (the executor, administrator or trustee of their estate).
If you are under , you apply for citizenship as a child.
If you are under , and intending to get married in the United Kingdom, you must also obtain consent from each of your parents.
If you arrive in NZ less than days before your wedding
If you become a donor, you have to provide identity information to the fertility clinic, and this information will be included on the Human Assisted Reproductive Technology (HART) register if a child is born from your donation.
If you bring your application into a Department of Internal Affairs public counter, your original documents are copied, certified and given back to you straight away.
If you cannot afford to pay for a lawyer, you can apply for legal aid.
If you cannot get NZ Superannuation or other benefits
If you cannot get any other financial support from the government, you can apply for help with daytoday living costs and health.
If you cannot manage your property yourself anymore and you do not have an
If you cannot solve a problem with a government agency, you can complain to the Ombudsman.
If you celebrate separately after your wedding, you cannot misrepresent that event as your legal wedding.
If you change your name again in the future, your new name and the name you provided in the process of changing registered sex will both be displayed on the birth certificate.
If you changed your name or were adopted
If you choose a formula assessment, the amount of child support depends on:
If you come to New Zealand on a holiday, you may need to get an NZeTA or a visitor visa.
If you come to New Zealand on a holiday, you might need to apply for a visitor visa before you arrive. Work out what you need to do to apply.
If you decide to move overseas you may be able to keep getting some or all of your NZ Super or Veterans Pension.
If you decide to unregister and not participate in user research, contact the project team by emailing
If you did not get a letter to confirm your details or you have questions, contact
If you did not order a certificate, you will get a confirmation email.
If you disagree with the amount of child support, you may be able to ask for a review.
If you do need to apply by post or in person, go to
If you do not have a current passport, you can send another photo ID or a certified copy of your current driver licence. If you do not have a current photo ID, include a note with your application explaining why.
If you do not have a passport
If you do not have a photo ID, you must complete an identity referee declaration form:
If you do not have an acceptable photo ID, you must also complete a identity referee declaration. You must choose a referee we can contact to confirm your identity.
If you do not have an acceptable photo ID, you must complete an identity referee declaration form.
If you do not have official English translations, the DIA Translation Service can do this for you.
If you do not have official English translations, the DIA Translation Service can do this for you:
If you do not have your full birth certificate, you need to get it from the country where you were born.
If you do not know the year of a record youre looking for, you can ask Births, Deaths and Marriages to search for it.
If you do not know the year of the birth, death or marriage, you can ask Births, Deaths and Marriages to search their records. There may be an extra cost for this.
If you do not know the year of the birth, death, civil union, marriage or name change, you can pay for help.
If you do not know the year of the event
If you do not meet a requirement
If you do not meet the requirements for citizenship, you can withdraw the application and get a partial refund of NZD..
If you do not receive salary, wages or a benefit, you need to organise payments yourself.
If you find some parts you need or want to change, update your will and
If you get ACC payments and NZ Super
If you get NZ Superannuation or a Veterans Pension, youll get a SuperGold Card. Use it to get business discounts, free or discounted council services, and free offpeak travel on public transport.
If you got married or had a civil union in New Zealand and legally ended the relationship overseas through a divorce or dissolution, you can get this information added to your marriage or civil union certificate.
If you got married or had a civil union in New Zealand and you want to update your name on your marriage or civil union certificate, you can do this on your name change form.
If you had your baby with the help of a sperm or egg donor
If you have a deceased family member you think qualified for a medal they never claimed, their closest living relative can apply for it on their behalf.
If you have a disability or illness you might be able to get an allowance, subsidy or loan to help with your expenses. Financial assistance is available for all citizens.
If you have a low income, you may be able to get other payments and support in addition to your
If you have a partner (or had a partner in the last year), you need to give their:
If you have a privacy complaint about DIA
If you have a problem at work talk to your boss directly. If you cannot solve it you can get help from government and other organisations. Some of this help is free.
If you have a problem with a celebrant who is a minister of a church or approved organisation, you should contact the church or organisation directly about your complaint.
If you have a problem with your bank, insurance company or financial adviser, you can make a complaint.
If you have a problem with your celebrant, its a good idea to talk to them first. Your celebrant will likely want to resolve any issues with you directly and use your feedback to improve their performance in future.
If you have a serious problem with a marriage or civil union celebrant not performing their legal duties before, during or after your ceremony, you can make a formal complaint about them.
If you have also requested a certificate with your new information, this will be sent to you by post or courier after the application is processed.
If you have an accident, serious illness or mental incapacity and become unable to make or communicate personal care or welfare decisions, this
If you have an outstanding bill, contact the company and try to arrange to pay it off. If this is not possible, you may be able to get some help.
If you have any concerns about how DIA manages your personal information, you may contact the DIA Privacy Officer with the details above.
If you have any questions about child support, contact
If you have any, do you want your children involved in your care
If you have changed your gender identity
If you have changed your legal name
If you have changed your legal name, you must provide evidence of the name change, such as a marriage certificate or deed poll.
If you have ever changed your name outside New Zealand, include name change documents like a marriage or civil union certificate.
If you have lost or damaged your New Zealand birth certificate or your citizenship certificate, you can apply for a replacement or call to check your certificate number.
If you have lost your certificate
If you have lost your marriage or civil union certificate and you want to replace it, you must order a new certificate.
If you have questions about updating the sex marker on your birth certificate, contact the Births, Deaths and Marriages team:
If you have spoken with your celebrant and you are still unhappy, you can make a claim with the Disputes Tribunal for up to , for disputes about goods and services.
If you know someone in prison, you can support them by visiting, calling or writing to them.
If you live in Auckland, Wellington or Christchurch, you can make the booking online.
If you live in NZ or will arrive here more than days before your wedding
If you live in New Zealand for at least years, you can change your citizenship to become a citizen by grant.
If you lived or worked in another country you may be able to get their social security pension. When you apply for NZ Superannuation or the Veterans Pension, apply for these pensions at the same time.
If you lived or worked overseas
If you lose your mental capacity your
If you need a New Zealand passport to travel immediately for an emergency, call the Passport Office to discuss your situation:
If you need a birth certificate to apply for a government benefit and you cannot afford the cost, Work and Income may be able to help.
If you need a civil union certificate
If you need a document translated into English or another language, you can organise the translation yourself or use the Department of Internal Affairs Translation Service.
If you need an accessible version of a
If you need health advice, call
If you need help from the police, the fire service, or you need an ambulance, dial and the emergency operator will connect you to the right place.
If you need help paying your formulaassessed child support, you may be able to get assistance from Work and Income.
If you need more help or have questions about the information or services on this page, contact one of the following agencies.
If you need more help or have questions about the information or services on this page, contact the following agencies.
If you need more help or have questions about the information or services on this page, contact the following agency.
If you need more information, contact the Citizenship Office.
If you need to change or cancel the application, contact the Congratulatory Message Service as soon as possible.
If you need to get your document notarised, you must use a New Zealand notary public.
If you need to get your documents translated, the Department of Internal Affairs can do the translation as part of your application. Alternatively, you can organise your own translation.
If you need to travel in a hurry you can apply for an urgent passport. It costs and is processed within working days.
If you need to travel in a hurry you can apply to have your passport renewed urgently. It costs and is processed within working days.
If you need to travel in a hurry, you can apply for an urgent passport for . We aim to process applications for urgent processing within working days, but this can depend on demand and factors such as complete information and a photo that meets the standards.
If you need to travel urgently
If you need your document notarised
If you need your document translated
If you or someone you care about is the victim of a crime, theres support and help available.
If you ordered a new birth certificate or name change certificate for your child, this will be posted to you.
If you ordered a new birth certificate or name change certificate, this will be posted to you.
If you organise your own translation, you need to get it notarised by a New Zealand notary public.
If you own a house, you can get people to occupy the spare bedrooms and help with the bills.
If you own your own home, many councils let you postpone or defer paying your rates. Check with your council to find out if they offer this service and whether you are eligible.
If you plan to leave within months, apply for a Marriage Visitor Visa.
If you post or courier your application, the Citizenship Office couriers your original documents to you with your citizenship certificate and passport, if you applied for one.
If you prefer to apply by post, contact the Congratulatory Message Service team who can email or post you a PDF of the printed form.
If you provide feedback by email, that feedback is sent to appropriate Department of Internal Affairs (DIA) staff. We may pass on relevant comments to other people within DIA who administer or contribute content to the site. This could include your email address and other identifying information that you have provided.
If you provide personal information, it is held securely by DIA and will not be retained once the insights have been documented and is no longer needed.
If you refuse to be the executor
If you start or stop work, remember that you may need to change the tax code you use for any other sources of income, such as NZ Superannuation, investments or another job.
If you still cannot agree after completing the course and mediation, you can apply to the Family Court to make a custody order.
If you submit a survey or feedback form to us, it will be sent to appropriate public sector staff.
If you think a TV or radio programme hasnt followed the broadcasting standards, or an ad (on TV, radio, the internet or in print) hasnt followed the advertising standards, you can complain to the relevant authorities.
If you think that public access to your birth, marriage, civil union or name change records would put you or your family in danger, you can apply for a nondisclosure direction, which would block public access to your records.
If you visa has expired, is about to expire or you have questions about the conditions about your visa, contact Immigration NZ (
If you visit your doctor more than times in a year, talk to your doctor about the High Use Health Card to lower the cost of the visits.
If you want a birth certificate for your new baby
If you want to get a driver licence in your new name, you have to apply in person.
If you want to update a sex marker and also change a name, you must provide proof of your identity in the community.
If you want to use the paper form instead
If you want to use your birth certificate outside New Zealand
If you want your child to be a New Zealand citizen, you have options:
If you were adopted outside New Zealand, talk to the Citizenship Office about what you need to do.
If you were born before
If you were born before
If you were born in New Zealand and youre adopted, once you turn you can request your preadoptive birth certificate and information about your adoption records held by Oranga Tamariki.
If you were born in New Zealand before January
If you were born in New Zealand on or after January
If you were born in New Zealand or have been granted citizenship, you can register your child as a New Zealand citizen by descent and get them a New Zealand passport.
If you were born in Samoa before January , apply here:
If you were born on or after January , apply here:
If you were born or married overseas, we will ask you to submit supporting documents, if you have them.
If you were born outside NZ
If you were born outside New Zealand
If you were born outside New Zealand and adopted in the Cook Islands, Niue or Tokelau, you may not be a New Zealand citizen. For advice on this, contact the Citizenship Office below.
If you were born overseas
If you were born overseas and at least of your parents was a New Zealand citizen by birth or grant when you were born, you are a New Zealand citizen by descent.
If you were born overseas and at least of your parents was a New Zealand citizen by birth or grant when you were born, you can register as a citizen by descent and get a New Zealand passport.
If you work in government and want to add information about your services to Govt.nz, contact the Govt.nz team.
If you work in government, this guide helps you work out if your information and services should be on this site.
If you would like to deliver your application in person, you must make an appointment at one of our offices in New Zealand:
If youre or and only want to update your sex marker:
If youre or , want to change your name, and have your legal guardians consent to change your name:
If youre a guardian applying on behalf of a child
If youre a parent or guardian of a child aged or under who wants to update the sex marker on their birth certificate, you can apply on their behalf.
If youre aged or over
If youre aged or over and also want to change your name:
If youre aged or over and only want to update your sex marker:
If youre an adult, your application falls under
If youre applying alone or an additional guardian appointed by the Family Court, you may also need to provide evidence of your guardianship status. Theres more information about this on the application form.
If youre applying alone or youre an additional guardian appointed by the Family Court, you may also need to provide evidence of your guardianship status. Theres more information about this on the application form.
If youre away from NZ for weeks or less, you may still receive your NZ Superannuation or Veterans Pension.
If youre being harassed by someone youre not in a relationship with, you can apply for a restraining order.
If youre calling from overseas:
If youre enrolled to vote, you can be asked to serve on a jury once every years.
If youre having problems with a dog, you can speak to the dogs owner. Otherwise you can speak to your local council.
If youre intersex and want to change the sex recorded on your birth certificate to indeterminate, use the process for correcting errors in birth registration.
If youre travelling outside New Zealand and someone who is travelling with you dies, contact the nearest NZ embassy or Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade office.
If youre worried a child is being abused, please report your suspicions so authorities can investigate.
If youve bought a vehicle and something goes wrong, your rights depend on if you bought it from a motor vehicle trader or privately.
If youve retired on a limited income, you may be able to get government help to pay for regular costs or unexpected expenses. You can use your SuperGold Card for transport and other discounts.
If your adoptive parents were not NZ citizens
If your application is declined because you do not have a claim to New Zealand citizenship by descent, the Citizenship Office emails you or sends you a letter. You may not get a refund.
If your application is declined because your child does not have a claim to New Zealand citizenship by descent, the Citizenship Office emails you or sends you a letter. You may not get a refund.
If your application is declined, the Citizenship Office sends you a letter and includes your original documents.
If your application is successful, you are couriered your citizenship certificate and passport, if you applied for one.
If your application is successful, you will receive a full refund.
If your baby was born outside New Zealand
If your baby was stillborn or has died
If your birth was registered in New Zealand and you currently live overseas, you can still apply using this process. You must complete a statutory declaration with an authorised person in your country, and send the completed application to your nearest Department of Internal Affairs office.
If your birth was registered outside New Zealand and you want to make changes to your overseas birth certificate, you need to seek advice from your country of birth.
If your celebrant is a member of Celebrants Aotearoa
If your celebrant is a member of Celebrants Aotearoa, you can also contact them about your complaint.
If your celebrant is a minister or leader of an approved organisation
If your child has changed their gender identity
If your child is or under and wants to update the sex marker on their birth certificate:
If your child is or under, wants to update the sex marker on their birth certificate, and wants to change their name:
If your child is to or was born outside NZ
If your child is aged or over:
If your child is under and was born in NZ
If your child was adopted outside New Zealand
If your child was born as a result of a sperm or egg donation, you can update their name on the Human Assisted Reproductive Technology (HART) register at the same time as the name change, see:
If your child was born outside New Zealand
If your child was born outside New Zealand, you must also provide documents that show when and where they were born, and that they are a New Zealand citizen or entitled to live here indefinitely.
If your claim to New Zealand citizenship is through your father
If your claim to New Zealand citizenship is through your mother
If your complaint is about a celebrant who is a minister of a church or other approved organisation, the RegistrarGeneral will contact the church or organisation about the complaint as well as the celebrant.
If your contributions to the site include material in which copyright or other intellectual property is owned by a third party, you warrant that you have the right to use that material and to grant the licence referred to in, and on the terms of, the clause above.
If your documents are being apostilled
If your documents are being authenticated
If your documents are not in English
If your expense is not listed, talk to Work and Income to discuss your situation and find out how they can help you.
If your feedback is not about the Govt.nz website
If your gender is different to the one on your birth certificate, you can ask for your citizenship certificate to show your new gender (if you have not yet applied for citizenship), or request an evidentiary certificate (if you have been granted citizenship).
If your income or the property value is higher, you need to apply for a property manager
If your mental capacity improves, your need for this
If your money is likely to be tied up until after probate and other estate tasks, setting up a prepaid funeral trust might be an option.
If your parent cannot fill in the form
If your parent cannot sign the form because they have died, you need to provide a death certificate.
If your parent has died, provide their death certificate.
If your partner moves into a rest home or hospital, you can get financial help to stay in your home, look after your own health and visit your partner.
If your relationship ends, you need to try to resolve child custody arrangements yourselves before you can go to court.
If your situation changes
If your translations are not acceptable, the Births, Deaths and Marriages Office will contact you.
If your wedding may have been performed by someone pretending to be a registered marriage or civil union celebrant, you should make a complaint to the RegistrarGeneral.
Images and text: Zero Data (
Images on the website include feature images, graphs, infographics and icons.
Immigration Advisers Authority
Immigration New Zealand confirmation of visa permit status.
Immigration New Zealand confirmation of visapermit status.
Immigration and Protection Tribunal
Immunisation Advisory Centre
Immunisation protects people from many serious diseases. It can also stop some diseases from spreading within your family and the community.
Immunise your child for free
Import goods, animals or personal belongings
Improve the acceptance of hunting as a safe and legitimate activity, and game animals as valued introduced species.
In addition to a small head office,
In addition to the registration and passport application fees, you must also pay for the cost of courier delivery. The amount you need to pay will depend on your current location.
In criminal cases they cover minor offences, but can also conduct trials for some serious offences, such as rape and aggravated robbery.
In front of an authorised witness (for example, a Justice of the Peace), you must:
In general, you can take annual holidays at any time that is agreed between you and your employer.
In rare cases, the Minister of Internal Affairs might grant New Zealand citizenship to someone who does not meet all the requirements.
In rare circumstances, the Minister of Internal Affairs can take away your New Zealand citizenship. You will no longer be able to use a New Zealand passport and you might not be allowed to live here.
In the worst cases, uncertainties about your endoflife wishes and estate can harm relationships within your family.
In your application you can select either:
Indepth resources for making a will
Include related documents or items to be sent overseas
Include these documents with your New Zealand citizenship application:
Increase or decrease volume by
Independent Crown entities
Independent Police Conduct Authority
Industrial and provident societies
Information about Dependent Child Resident Visa
Information and links for parents and caregivers.
Information and services are included on Govt.nz if there is evidence that users need help to:
Information for before and after birth:
Information for marriage celebrants
Information gathered in user research can be from:
Information held only by fertility clinics
Information to help beneficiaries: timeline and roles
Information you need to provide
Infracom was formed by legislation on
Infrastructure Commission
Infrastructure Commission (InC)
Inland Revenue Department
Inland Revenue has more information about eligibility for Best Start, which is of types of Working for Families payments.
Inland Revenue tax number
Insolvency and Trustee Service
Instead, you can order a printout. A printout is a copy of the information on the death record. It is not an official document.
Instructions are available to help you make the content larger:
Insulation and energy efficiency
Integrity Sport and Recreation Commission
Intellectual Property Office of New Zealand
Interim New Zealand Health Plan
International Accreditation New Zealand
International Antarctic Centre
International students in New Zealand may be able to work while on a student visa. Your eVisa or visa sticker in your passport shows whether you can work.
International surrogacy and citizenship
Intersex conditions are sometimes known as differences in sex development (DSD).
Invercargill City Council
Investigate a potential error on a record
Investment decisions will be made by the fund itself, according to its kaupapa and investment strategy, which will be developed by the independent board.
Is all your property relationship property, or is some just in your name
Issues with your attorneys
It also performs independent audits for the Accident Compensation Corporation.
It can take up to months to handle simple estates.
It costs to change your name.
It costs . for a replacement photo driver licence.
It costs to lodge a caveat or objection.
It expires after months.
It helps people find new government information, services and tools. Govt.nz provides a shortterm link to new services from a tile on its home page so people can help with trials and give feedback.
It helps users to contact government. Govt.nz provides a directory listing of government organisations so that users can find:
It is an offence under the Marriage Act and Civil Union Act to willingly and knowingly pretend to be a registered marriage or civil union celebrant and perform a wedding.
It makes it easier for users to:
It may be shared with thirdparty contractors to the extent necessary for them to administer or work on the site, or to work on special projects with us.
It pays to plan for your retirement as early as possible.
It should reduce your legal costs, if you make some decisions before you get legal advice.
It takes to months to find out if your application to become a New Zealand citizen has been approved.
It takes between and weeks for the certificate to be sent to you.
It was set up on October to address homelessness, make housing affordable and cities more liveable.
Its the little things.
Its learning advisors, teachers and inregion staff work with students, their whanau and communities to help students achieve their educational and personal goals.
Jobseeker Support Student Hardship.
Joining KiwiSaver when you start work
Jurisdiction of District Courts
Just make sure data is turned on and visit
Kapiti Coast District Council
Kaunihera Taiao ki Waitaha
Keeping a vehicle on the road
Keeping baby safe during pregnancy:
Keyboard shortcuts for YouTube videos
Keyboard shortcuts when watching or listening to media
Kiwi Access Card or overseas proof of age card.
KiwiRail Holdings Limited
KiwiSaver withdrawals after you turn
Know your rights when a debt collector demands payment or takes your stuff because you cannot pay your bills.
Kupu Taurangi Hauora o Aotearoa
Kurow Duntroon Irrigation Company Limited
LDAC Secretary (Legal and Policy Adviser)
Lakes District Health Board
Land Information New Zealand
Landcare Research New Zealand Limited
Language Act created a partnership between
Language Strategy. One of the goals of the strategy is to have million speakers of basic
Language petition, with over , signatures was delivered to Parliament. The petition led to many changes for the revitalisation of
Latin America and the Caribbean
Leadership Development Centre
Leadership Development Centre (LDC)
Leadership and focus on improving the lives of disabled people
Learn about builtin accessibility tools and features in Microsoft Technologies like Windows
Learn about moving into a rest home or hospital. Find out what to do when you need to move in urgently or need to transfer to another care facility.
Learn about the house buying process. Work out what you can afford before you start looking at properties.
Learn about where, what and how you can safely hunt on public conservation land in NZ.
Learn more about creating an
Learn more about selfidentification
Learn whats on a name change certificate and what you can use one for. Order a name change certificate online, by phone, post, or in person.
Learning support (special education)
Lease or tenancy agreements
Leaving children by themselves
Legal Services Commissioner
Legal help when being harassed
Legends relating to different areas of NZ
Legislation Design and Advisory Committee
Level , Harbour City Centre
Level , Brandon Street,
Level , Featherston Street
Level , Fanshawe Street
Liabilities of the estate
Licences, registration, fines, tickets, buying, selling, WOF, car seat
Limited Partnerships (New Zealand and overseas)
Links are designed to be accessible and helpful to users. This includes:
List of apostille and authentication countries
List of embassies (Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade website)
List of embassies Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Living overseas for a few months
Local Government Commission
Lottery grants for disabled people
MIT Kolmar, Papatoetoe, School of Sport
MIT Mangere home to their School of Plumbing, Gasfitting and Drainlaying
MIT Otara the main campus
MPI is focused on the success of the primary industries for the benefit of all New Zealanders. Through their work they aim to:
Mackenzie District Council
Main points to know about Best Start
Maintaining your house and garden
Make a claim with the Disputes Tribunal
Make a complaint about a celebrant (PDF KB)
Make a complaint about a celebrant accessible alternative (TXT .KB)
Make a complaint about food poisoning
Make a complaint about residential care
Make a complaint if you have a problem with your electricity, gas, water, phone, internet or an issue with access to shared property for broadband installations.
Make content on a web page larger
Make sure the family and guardians have information about the:
Make sure you do this before you leave New Zealand, or you may need to return to NZ if the overseas authorities require that a notice of intended marriage is lodged here.
Make sure you safely and legally dispose of any firearms, other arms items and ammunition.
Make sure your mobile data is turned on before you visit Zero Data.
Make sure your personal care and welfare
Make sure your rental agreement lets you have another person living there. If it does not, you can talk to your landlord about changing the agreement to include another person.
Make the NZ government logo accessible
Making a statutory declaration
Making the site easy to use
Manage your money in retirement
Manager, Education Workforce
Managing your money in retirement
Manawatu District Council
ManawatuWhanganui family services
Mandatory registrations are for any donations made at a New Zealand fertility clinic on or after August that result in a birth. The mandatory register includes:
Manukau Institute of Technology
Many NZ families originated in Europe, but they might have emigrated to Australia first.
Many places across New Zealand offer courses, some are free and some have fees. Courses are available for beginner, intermediate and advanced learners.
Marlborough District Council
Marlborough family services
Marriage licence application form
Marriages and civil unions in the UK
Masterton District Council
MatamataPiako District Council
Mediation run by a family dispute resolution service provider
Medical practitioners who can prove they need information from the HART register to provide medical treatment or advice can get full access to someones registered records.
Meet with a staff member who:
Mental Health and Wellbeing Commission
Mental capacity or incapacity
Mental health and addictions
Mercury NZ Ltd is an electricity generator and energy retailer.
Messages are posted to the person or couple days before their birthday or wedding anniversary.
MidCentral District Health Board
Mike Brebner, Flickr, December
Milford Sound, New Zealand
Military history, records and medals
Minister Responsible for Ministerial Services
Minister Responsible for RMA Reform
Minister Responsible for the GCSB
Minister Responsible for the NCSC
Minister Responsible for the NZSIS
Minister for Arts, Culture and Heritage
Minister for Building and Construction
Minister for Child Poverty Reduction
Minister for Digitising Government
Minister for Disability Issues
Minister for Economic Development
Minister for Emergency Management and Recovery
Minister for Ethnic Communities
Minister for Hunting and Fishing
Minister for Infrastructure
Minister for Land Information
Minister for Media and Communications
Minister for Mental Health
Minister for National Security and Intelligence
Minister for Oceans and Fisheries
Minister for Pacific Peoples
Minister for Regional Development
Minister for Rural Communities
Minister for Small Business and Manufacturing
Minister for Social Development and Employment
Minister for Social Investment
Minister for Sport and Recreation
Minister for State Owned Enterprises
Minister for Tourism and Hospitality
Minister for Trade and Investment
Minister for Treaty of Waitangi Negotiations
Minister for Universities
Minister for Vocational Education
Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety
Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector
Minister for the Environment
Minister for the Public Service
Minister of Climate Change
Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs
Minister of Foreign Affairs
Minister of Internal Affairs
Minister of Local Government
Minister of Science, Innovation and Technology
Minister of State for Trade
Ministry for Culture and Heritage
Ministry for Ethnic Communities
Ministry for Pacific Peoples
Ministry for Primary Industries
Ministry for the Environment
Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment
Ministry of Disabled People
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Ministry of Housing and Urban Development
Ministry of Social Development
Ministry of Youth Development
Mixed ownership model companies
Monday to Friday, am to .pm
More about Have your say on proposed amendments to waste legislation
More about Mutual transactions of associations (including clubs and societies)
More about the proposed product stewardship regulations for agrichemicals, their containers, and farm plastics
More help with WW research
More information about eligibility
More information about inheritance
More information about the Youth Court
More information and contact details
More information and support
More information: wills and preparing financially
More specific authority for property includes when you, for example:
More support and information about health
Most NZ citizens can visit, live and work in Australia without applying for a tourist or work visa. NZ permanent residents need to apply for visas to Australia.
Most New Zealanders over can get
Most New Zealanders over can get NZ Super. For lower incomes, you may also be able to get government help to pay for regular costs or unexpected expenses.
Most New Zealanders will be able to get
Most of the governments billion Provincial Growth Fund (PGF) has been fully allocated, as a result of the government reset of PGF funding to help the country recover from the economic impact of COVID.
Most of the museum is free, only some short term exhibitions have entry fees.
Most overseas marriages are valid in New Zealand. Your marriage will be registered in the country where it takes place.
Most overseas people who are not residents cannot buy homes here. Certain overseas people can apply for OIO consent to buy one home and live in it.
Most people can get a marriage licence. Samesex marriages are legal in New Zealand.
Most people can order a death certificate by phone. You can pay by credit or debit card.
Most people can order a marriage certificate by phone. You can pay by credit or debit card.
Most people get NZ Superannuation when they turn , but there are other sources of income you might use to support yourself.
Most people get NZ Superannuation when they turn , but there are other sources of income you might use to support yourself. These can affect the tax you pay or benefits you can apply for.
Most people get their certificates in to weeks.
Most people get their certificates in weeks.
Most people get their certificates within weeks.
Most people visiting New Zealand for a short period of time must pay the NZD International Visitor Conservation and Tourism Levy (IVL).
Most people will not be affected, but some people may find their record is not in their preferred surname and needs to be amended.
Most students must renew their student visa every year. You can do this online or complete a paper form.
Motivation to plan for retirement
Motor Vehicle Traders Register
Motor vehicle registration
Moving into residential care
Moving or travelling overseas
Moving overseas if you get NZ Superannuation or the Veterans Pension
Moving to Australia, working overseas, emergency help
Multigeneration family walking on winter beach with dog
Mum and daughter planting
Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa
Mute or unmute video volume
NEMA is an autonomous departmental agency, hosted by the
NEMA was established on December , replacing the Ministry of Civil Defence Emergency Management.
NEMA works with central and local government, communities, iwi, and business to make sure responses to and recoveries from emergencies are effective and integrated.
NZ Government Web Accessibility Standard .
NZ Government, consultations, voting, Parliament, complaints
NZ Growth Capital Partners
NZ Growth Capital Partners (NZGCP)
NZ On Air is an independent government funding agency delivering quality and diverse New Zealand public media.
NZ Passport application and renewal
NZ Superannuation is a universal payment for New Zealand citizens and residents who are or older.
NZ certificate of identity (issued under the Passports Act or the Immigration Act )
NZ citizenship if you are adopted
NZ emergency travel document
NZ government logo markup
NZ refugee travel document
NZ screen talent is identified, developed and connected
NZ stories are seen and valued here and overseas.
NZs leading certifier of quality, environmental and occupational health and safety management systems.
NZCER is a notforprofit organisation with strategic priorities:
NZCER is an independent research and development organisation which carries out and disseminate education research, and provide independent information, advice, and assistance.
NZD. to register your citizenship
NZD. to register your citizenship and get a passport.
NZD. to register your citizenship and get a passport.
NZGIF is not a funding agency and does not accept applications for funding or grants.
NZTE helps New Zealand businesses grow internationally.
National Advisory Council on the Employment of Women
National Care Standards Regulations
National Cyber Security Centre
National Emergency Management Agency
National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research Limited
National Library of New Zealand
National Museum of the Royal New Zealand Navy
National Organised Crime Group
National Pacific Radio Trust
Natural Hazards Commission
Natural Hazards Commission (NHC)
Navigate our website with browser functions, assistive technology, keyboard shortcuts and more.
Nearly all Govt.nz content is licensed under Creative Commons. This means you must make it clear that any content you use comes from the Govt.nz website and is owned by the Crown.
Neighbours should share the costs for fences and shared driveways. You may share the costs for some drains.
Nelson Marlborough Fish and Game Council
Nelson Marlborough District Health Board
NelsonMarlborough Institute of Technology
Network for Learning Limited
Network for Learning Limited (NL)
New Plymouth District Council
New Zealand (visits by appointment only)
New Zealand Aid Programme
New Zealand Blood Service
New Zealand Broadcasting School
New Zealand Council for Educational Research
New Zealand Customs Service
New Zealand Debt Management Office
New Zealand Defence Force
New Zealand Export Credit Office
New Zealand Film Commission
New Zealand Fish and Game Council
New Zealand Food Innovation Network
New Zealand Food Innovation Network (NZFIN)
New Zealand Food Innovation Network is a national network of facilities and indepth knoweldge around supporting the growth and development of New Zealand food beverage business of all sizes.
New Zealand Game Bird Habitat Trust Board
New Zealand Geographic Board
New Zealand Government Property Corporation
New Zealand Green Investment Finance Limited
New Zealand Green Investment Finance Limited (NZGIF)
New Zealand Green Investment Finance Ltd (NZGIF) is a green investment bank established with the purpose of accelerating investment to lower greenhouse gas emissions activities in New Zealand.
New Zealand High Commission
New Zealand Infrastructure Commission
New Zealand Lotteries Commission
New Zealand Lottery Grants Board
New Zealand Parole Board (NZPB)
New Zealand Petroleum Minerals
New Zealand Productivity Commission
New Zealand Qualifications Authority
New Zealand Railways Corporation
New Zealand Railways Corporation (NZRC)
New Zealand Security Intelligence Service
New Zealand Superannuation and the Veterans Pension
New Zealand Symphony Orchestra
New Zealand Tax concept annual tax return IR form with coins and flag
New Zealand Telehealth Services
New Zealand Tourism Board
New Zealand Trade and Enterprise
New Zealand Trade and Enterprise (NZTE)
New Zealand Transport Agency
New Zealand achieve the social, cultural and economic benefits of international education.
New Zealand apprenticeships
New Zealand birth certificates are a record of birth. You can order a birth certificate online. It costs for a standard certificate.
New Zealand birth certificates:
New Zealand birth, death, marriage, civil union and name change certificates are public records. In most cases, they can be ordered by anyone.
New Zealand certificate of identity or refugee travel document issued under the Passports Act , with a letter or valid resident permit visa from Immigration New Zealand confirming resident status
New Zealand citizen by birth or grant
New Zealand citizenship certificate
New Zealand citizenship certificate and a birth certificate
New Zealand has special arrangements with some countries to let their citizens work here. Some visas recognise your skills and experience, while others let you learn out about our lifestyle and culture.
New Zealand passport and a birth certificate
New Zealands resilience to natural hazards
New Zealand. They do this by providing trusted cybersecurity services.
New organisations and previous DHBs
New selfidentification process
Nga Pirihimana O Aotearoa
No Asset Procedures (NAP)
No action required or, on further investigation, this is not a complaint the RegistrarGeneral has jurisdiction over. They will let you know about other avenues of dispute resolution.
No action required: the celebrant is not at fault.
No later than Friday December
NonPublic Service departments
Nondisclosure directions
North Canterbury Fish and Game Council
Northland District Health Board
Northland Fish and Game Council
Northland Regional Council
Northland family services
Not returning to your job from parental leave
Not safe to talk Stay on the line.
Notice of Objection (PDF KB)
Notice of intended marriage form BDM (PDF KB)
Notice of intended marriage form BDM (PDF KB)
Notice of intended marriage outside NZ BDM (PDF KB)
Notice of intended marriage where parties are ordinarily resident outside NZ form BDM (PDF KB)
Notice of intended marriage where parties are ordinarily resident outside form BDM (PDF KB)
Notification of birth for registration of child born in New Zealand form BDM (PDF KB)
Notification of birth for registration of child born in New Zealand form BDM accessible alternative (TXT KB)
Nursing and medical help at home
Observations, quotes, and insights may be used by DIA and shared with other government agencies for research purposes.
Offpeak travel is normally:
Office of Film and Literature Classification
Office of Human Rights Proceedings
Office of the AuditorGeneral
Office of the Clerk of the House of Representatives
On June , a new selfidentification process replaced the Family Court process. Under the new process, applications are received directly by Births, Deaths, and Marriages.
On the back of of your photos, they must:
Once given probate or the letter of administration for the estate, you can start to administer it.
Once people conceived from donated embryos or cells are aged years they may consent to contact by their donor.
Once successful, dealing with the estate depends on how simple or complex it is.
Once the order takes effect:
Once you are a citizen, you can apply for your New Zealand passport. This is a separate process.
Once you have received your citizenship certificate, you can apply for a New Zealand passport. This is a separate process.
Once you know the child is eligible, check the other criteria to see if you can get child support for the child.
Once you turn , you apply for citizenship as an adult.
Once youre registered as a celebrant, you need to keep your details up to .
Once youre registered as a celebrant, you need to renew your registration each year.
Once your New Zealand citizenship is approved, you need to attend a citizenship ceremony.
Only Good Friday and Easter Monday are public holidays. Easter Sunday is not a public holiday, and shops can choose to open if their local council lets them.
Only one of you needs to complete the application, but you need information about both of you.
Only registered celebrants can perform weddings or civil unions in New Zealand.
Only the DIA project team administering the research has access to your registration details.
Only the project team involved in the research has access to the results of the user research data.
Only the unique aspects of an
Open Polytechnic of New Zealand
Options for burial or cremation
Options that might be available to you
Oranga TamarikiMinistry for Children
Order a birth certificate
Order a birth certificate online
Order a marriage certificate
Order a marriage certificate online
Order a new birth certificate to prove their name has changed. This will show their new name and all their previously registered names.
Order a new birth certificate to prove you have changed your name. This will show your new name and all your previously registered names.
Order by post using the paper application form
Order by post using the paper form
Ordinary power of attorney (
Ordinary power of attorney (POA) and enduring power of attorney (EPA or EPOA) are often mistaken for being the same but they have some important differences.
Ordinary power of attorney versus enduring power of attorney
Organisational celebrants can legally perform marriages in New Zealand for an approved church or organisation.
Organise your digital accounts
Otago Fish and Game Council
Other help and payments you may be able to get
Other options for finding a will
Other options for free access to internet
Other responsibilities for the executor or administrator
Other than personal information, which is covered under the Privacy Policy, any material you transmit or post to the site is considered nonconfidential. This includes feedback or submissions you provide.
Other urgent or unexpected costs
Other ways to contact Work and Income
Other ways to work or volunteer at Fire and Emergency
Otherwise, you can check most government websites and contact information using Zero Data.
Otherwise, your parent or guardian can apply for you.
Otorohanga District Council
Outdoor Access Commission
Outside of the estate, the executor or administrator needs to:
Overseas Investment Office
Overseas marriages are valid in NZ
Ownership of the images is listed with the copyright information.
Pacific Cooperation Foundation
Pacific Radiology Building
Paid parental leave: Contact
Palmerston North City Council
Papakura District Council
Parental leave is the leave you apply to your employer for so that you do not have to work once you have your baby.
Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment
Parliamentary Counsel Office
Parliamentary UnderSecretary to the Minister Responsible for RMA Reform
Parliamentary UnderSecretary to the Minister for Infrastructure
Parliamentary UnderSecretary to the Minister for Media and Communications
Partnerships have created a growing network of over , protected areas, ranging from small backyard patches to huge swathes of high country.
Passport expiry and transit requirements
Passports and visas when you go to Australia
Passports, citizenship and identity
Paul Sutherland Photography,
Pay a speeding ticket or traffic infringement
Pay fines from speeding, parking, safety cameras or other tickets
Pay for your apostille or authentication
Pay the organisation that sent you the fine or ticket. Check how to pay online, what happens if you do not pay on time, and how to dispute them.
Paying back your student loan
Paying for home insulation
Paying for residential care
Paying for visits to doctors
Paying tax if you come to work in NZ
Payments for child support
Payments for young people aged or who cannot live with their parents, and for young parents aged to .
Payments start when your parental leave payments end.
People conceived from donated embryos or cells andor their parentsguardians may agree to identifying information being released to people conceived from the same donor.
People conceived from donations made on or after August can find out the identity of their donor.
People do not have to make a will.
People seeking work and employers looking for staff can connect on the following websites:
Performing a marriage or civil union ceremony
Perinatal and Maternal Mortality Review Committee
Perioperative Mortality Review Committee
Permanent residency and citizenship for NZers in Australia
Personal Property Securities Register
Personal care and welfare
Personal care and welfare enduring power of attorney
Personal orders are made by the family court on behalf of people who are either completely or partly unable to:
Personal orders are used when specific actions must be taken on your behalf.
Personal orders by the family court
Personal orders can be applied for by:
Personal property securities
Pharmaceutical Management Agency, PHARMAC
Phone to get advice about child health and parenting.
Phone numbers, emails and addresses for New Zealand citizenship offices in New Zealand, Australia and the United Kingdom.
Phone: (outside New Zealand)
Photo identification (ID)
Places to start researching NZ history
Placing a child for adoption
Please note that there is no urgent service available for Samoanborn applicants who have not yet been registered as New Zealand citizens by descent, or when your case involves an overseas adoption.
Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Board
Police National Headquarters
Policy advice and administration of, a wide range of issues relating to veterans entitlements, care and recognition.
Polynesian explorers and exploration of New Zealand
PolytechnicsInstitutes of technology
Post the completed form to:
Postal address and email details
Postpone or defer paying your rates
Preadoptive birth certificate (someone elses)
Preadoptive birth certificate (your own)
Prescription glasses are permitted as long as your eyes are still visible.
Prescription subsidy scheme
Presence in NZ requirements
Previous name: Homecare Medical
Primary and community care
Print a web page in large text
Prison life and going to prison
Privacy Officer contact details
Privacy notice for Govt.nz
Privileges and responsibilities of a citizen
Problems accessing this website
Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification Chain of Custody.
Programmes for schools, teachers and parents to help children with behaviour and learning problems.
Promo tiles are owned and managed by the Govt.nz team. Tile placement is decided according to business needs, the timeliness of the content, and user priorities.
Promo tiles can be a variety of widths. They can display across the space available in groups of , or . On extra small screens they snap to full width.
Promo tiles give a preview of priority content. They consist of a title, description and image.
Promote hunter safety and education.
Promote standards for hunting and management of game animals.
Promoting safety initiatives.
Proof of your identity in the community
Property can include anything of value that you own, lease, hire, or hold on hire purchase.
Property enduring power of attorney
Proposed product stewardship regulations for agrichemicals, their containers, and farm plastics
Provide wellconsidered advice and recommendations to the Minister of Conservation on matters relating to game animals and hunting.
Providing information and education to the sector.
Providing information when making financial transactions
Provincial Growth Fund (PGF)
Proving and protecting your identity
Public Finance Act Schedule organisations
Public Finance Act Schedule a companies
Public Service Commission
Public Trust lists examples and timelines for estates that are:
Public holidays and regional anniversary days
Public holidays over Christmas and New Year
Public holidays, minimum wage, annual, sick, domestic violence and other leave, changing jobs
Public records, official information and parliamentary processes
Publish your content on Govt.nz
Queen Elizabeth II National Trust
Queen Elizabeth II National Trust (QEII)
QueenstownLakes District Council
Quotable Value New Zealand Ltd
REANNZ offers a range of services and products specifically designed to meet the needs of end users operating in these specialist environments.
Radio New Zealand Limited
Radio Spectrum Management
Raise awareness of the views of the hunting sector.
Raise the issue with your celebrant
Raising awareness of the views of the sector.
Rangitikei District Council
Read about other events of importance to the history of the
Read more information about:
Recent births, deaths and marriages, and civil union and name change records
Records and disclosure statement
Recreation and the environment
Refugees coming to New Zealand
Register and fertility clinics both hold the following information about donorconceived people and their donors:
Register as a citizen by descent
Register as a citizen by descent and get a passport
Register does not record:
Register for information, which will include details about the clinic.
Register your babys birth online
Register your citizenship
Register, contact the clinic that provided the original fertility treatment.
Register, you must complete this form:
Register. Clinics must give this information to the
Registered citizens by descent may also meet the requirements for citizenship by grant. Citizenship by grant allows you to pass down citizenship to children born outside New Zealand.
Registering a new baby and getting a birth certificate
Registering your citizenship by descent and ordering a passport costs NZD., AUD or GBP.
Registering your new car or truck
Relationship property generally covers things that have financial value (such as insurance payouts, superannuation) and debts.
Renew or replace a child passport
Renew or replace your adult passport
Renew your adult passport
Renew your celebrant registration
Renew your driver licence
Renewing a childs passport costs . Child passports are valid for years. Once a child turns their passport is valid until it expires or is cancelled. After that, they must renew their passport as an adult.
Renewing an adult New Zealand passport costs . Adult passports are valid for years.
Report a crime thats not an emergency
Report a serious work health and safety issue, injury or death to WorkSafe.
Request a tile by emailing
Request for NZ birth certificate or printout form BDMB (PDF KB)
Request for NZ birth certificate or printout form BDMB accessible alternative (TXT .KB)
Request for NZ birth certificate or printout form BDMB accessible alternative (TXT .KB)
Request for New Zealand marriage certificate or printout form BDMM (PDF KB)
Request for New Zealand marriage certificate or printout form BDMM accessible alternative (TXT .KB)
Request for death certificate or printout BDMD (PDF KB)
Request for death certificate or printout BDMD accessible alternative (TXT KB)
Request information from the government
Request to search access register BDM (PDF KB)
Requirements for NZ citizenship
Requirements for Samoan citizens
Requirements for children
Research analysis and reports
Research and Education Advanced Network New Zealand (REANNZ) provides a specialist network, tools and services that facilitate the transfer of data intensive research, both nationally and internationally.
Research family histories
Research your family history
Researching life events has never been faster. You can search and view records and order historical certificates online.
Reserve Bank of New Zealand
Respond to fires and other emergencies.
Responsibilities of Fire and Emergency
Rest homes and residential care
Revisions to these Terms of use
Royal New Zealand Airforce
Saint Georgia and South Sandwich Islands
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
School fees and donations
School holidays, school zones, student loans, scholarships
School term start and end dates
School terms for future years
School zones, reviews and equity funding
Screensaver size: Zero Data (
Screening services: cervical and bowel screening coordination centres
Search costs are on top of the cost of getting a certificate or printout.
Search for family history records in NZ
Search for family history records in New Zealand
Search for jobs in government, sign up for job alerts and find out how to apply for government vacancies.
Search for power of attorney templates and forms online or contact a lawyer.
Search historical birth, death and marriage records
Search historical births, deaths and marriages
Search historical records
Search old newspapers and archives
Search old newspapers, find archives and websites on local and national history.
Search online shipping lists
Search the Human Assisted Reproductive Technology Register
Search the records and medals of New Zealanders at war and get sources for doing your own military research.
Secretary and Chief Executive
Secretary for Justice and Chief Executive
Secretary for Local Government
See the application form for a list of people who can authorise your statutory declaration.
See the full list on the Whakarongorau Aotearoa website.
Seek forward or backward by seconds
Select your preferred gender when you:
Selfemployed or running a business
Send the original name change certificate with your application. This could be a deed poll certificate, adoption order or other document.
Send your completed form with your supporting documents and payment to the Department of Internal Affairs in New Zealand, Sydney or London.
Send your form, photos, documents and payment in a tracked courier bag to:
Separating from your spouse or partner
Separating or getting divorced
Services BDM helps provide
Services and support for anyone experiencing abuse from a partner, expartner, family member, flatmate, friend, or carer.
Services offered in residential care
Services provided for Auckland, include:
Services provided for the Ashburton district include:
Set up a prepaid funeral trust
Set up enduring powers of attorney (EPAs)
Sexual Harm Healthline: Safe to talk
Sharing your personal information
Shielded Site external widget accessibility issues
Shift workers and public holidays
Shipping lists might be able to tell you:
Should you and your partner activate your
Signing the declaration is not your wedding ceremony.
Sir Apirana Ngata Memorial scholarships.
Situation : When you were born
Situation : When you were adopted
Social Investment Agency (SIA)
Social Workers Registration Board
Some PDF documents do not have an accessible version
Some councils provide other transport options such as taxis or vans. Check with your local council about public transport options.
Some documents also require checking by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT).
Some fertility treatments are funded for eligible people in NZ.
Some of the text has low contrast, reducing its readability and making it difficult to read for users with visual impairments.
Some organisations need only a RealMe login, and for others you need to set up a RealMe verified identity.
Some organisations that are in a category B country will let you change to get a category A authentication. It is worth asking the organisation if they will accept a category A authentication as they are quicker and cost less.
Some records cannot be accessed. These include:
Some scrollable content sections have no visible keyboard focus indicator
Some types of income have the tax taken out (deducted) before you receive it. For all other income you need to declare it to Inland Revenue and pay the tax.
Some types of visitor visas allow you to work in New Zealand for up to months.
Sorted has advice to help you:
South Canterbury District Health Board
South Taranaki District Council
South Waikato District Council
South Wairarapa District Council
Southern Institute of Technology
Southern Response Earthquake Services Limited
Southland District Council
Southland District Health Board
Southland Fish and Game Council
Southland family services
Splitting shared property
Standard certificates are folded.
Standard certificates are folded. Decorative certificates are sent in a flat pack.
State Housing Appeals Authority
State what you want to happen with what you own. There are some legal limits, but a lawyer or trustee company can help with how those apply to your situation.
Statistical information and cookies
Statistical information collected
Status of children search
Statutory declarations, pay a fine, human rights, criminal records
Step Check what you need to apply for
Step Preparing your documents
Step Complete the application form and pay
Step Submit the application
Step by step information to help you get the right support and services for you and your baby.
Steps to Freedom grant confirmation letter
Steps to Freedom grant confirmation letter.
Steps to help you through the death of a loved one.
Storage and deletion of information
Store your will and EPAs in safe places
Store your will and enduring powers of attorney in safe places
Strategy for a Digital Public Service
Stratford District Council
Studying and qualifications in Australia
Submit a notice of objection to someones wedding
Submit the completed application form and the documents to the Authentication Unit at the Department of Internal Affairs.
Submit your application form
Submit your completed form with your supporting documents and payment to the Department of Internal Affairs in New Zealand, Sydney or London.
Submit your form and payment
Submit your form, documents and payment
Subtle highlight for links, buttons, alert style box and success messages.
Success Criteria failures
Suicide Mortality Review Committee
Suitably qualified medical practitioner
Super. For lower incomes, you may also be able to get government help to pay for regular costs or unexpected expenses.
Support and information about genderaffirming healthcare
Support someone in prison
Support the New Zealand Geographic Board in the naming of our geographic features and places, including those on the continental shelf and in the Ross Sea region of Antarctica.
Supreme Court of New Zealand
Survey and feedback forms
Tai Poutini Polytechnic (TPP) is based on the West Coast and has campuses in Greymouth, Westport, Wanaka, Christchurch and Auckland.
Take your form and documents to any NZTA licensing agent.
Talk to your lawyer or legal advisor to make sure your property
Talk to your lead maternity carer about what screening you should have.
Taranaki Fish and Game Council
Taranaki Regional Council
Tari o te Kaitiaki Mana Tangata
Tax on investments and savings
Tax, benefits and finance
Te Aho o Te Kahu, Cancer Control Agency is a departmental agency reporting to the Minister of Health.
Te Kaunihera Rangahau Hauora o Aotearoa
Te Kaunihera aRohe o Te Tai Tokerau
Te Kaunihera o Tai Tokerau Ki Te Raki
Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission
Te Kura Matatini ki Otago
Te Kura Matatini o Taranaki
Te Kura Matatini o Whitireia
Te Kura Toi Tangata Division of Education
Te Kura provides distance education to around , students each year from early childhood level to Year .
Te Mana Kounga Kai Ahitereiria me Aotearoa
Te Mata Kairangi School of Graduate Research
Te Papa Tipu Innovation Park
Te Ratonga Todo O Aotearoa
Te Ratonga Whare Paremata
Te Reo Irirangi o Aotearoa
Te Reo Whakapuaki Irirangi
Te Taiurungi Chief Executive
Te Tari Ture o te Karauna
Te Whare Takiura O Tamaki Makau Rau
Te Whare Takiura o Manukau
Te Whare Wananga O Murihiku
Te Whare Wananga o Waikato
Te Whare Wananga o te Awakairangi
Te kaunihera o Kirikiriroa
Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand
Telecommunication Dispute Resolution
Telehealth services offered
Television New Zealand Limited
Telford Rural Polytechnic
Tell people about your name change
Tell someone you trust which lawyer or trustee company you worked with. This is most likely either:
Tell the right people where to find your will and
Tell them that your document is being notarised for an apostille or authentication.
Telling someone about your criminal record
Tenants, landlords and flatmates have different rights and responsibilities when renting a home or boarding house room.
Tertiary Education Commission
Testamentary guardians are not automatically responsible for the daytoday care of children, though.
Text that looks like headings is not marked up as headings in HTML
ThamesCoromandel District Council
The ASA provides a free complaints process for consumers about the content and placement of advertisements.
The Accreditation Council (previously known as Telarc) works with businesses of all sizes, from oneperson operations to major corporations and government departments. The certification programmes used have been developed internationally, nationally or within industry.
The Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) is the selfregulatory organisation of the advertising industry in New Zealand.
The Alcohol Regulatory and Licensing Authority (ARLA) helps New Zealanders by looking into decisions made by district licensing committees and local authorities.
The Authentication Unit can only process documents that meet their requirements.
The Authentication Unit can send any additional documents or items to an overseas organisation along with your apostilled or authenticated documents. Include them with your application.
The Authentication Unit does not provide an urgent service.
The Authentication Unit will send your documents to the address on your application form.
The Benefits Review Committee can review decisions about:
The Benefits Review Committee can review decisions made by the Ministry of Social Development, including Work and Income. A Review of Decision goes through an internal review before being seen by the Benefits Review Committee.
The Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Act (BDMRRA) is the legislation that lets the RegistrarGeneral of Births, Deaths and Marriages oversee changes to birth registrations and certificates.
The Board engages with ministers to establish a good partnership model to collectively return
The British Empire included United Kingdom dominions and colonies, but excluded protectorates and protected states. If you are unsure if you were born in the British Empire, contact us:
The Business.govt.nz, GoManufacturing and GoBusiness websites help small businesses in
The CRL is a .km twintunnel underground rail link up to metres below the Auckland city centre. It will transform the downtown Britomart Transport Centre into a twoway throughstation that better connects the Auckland rail network.
The Catch History Review Committee can review decisions made by the Chief Executive of the Ministry for Primary Industries.
The Charter School Agency is a departmental agency established on July to implement and operate the new charter school model, including negotiating and managing contracts and delivering funding.
The Charter School Agency is responsible for engaging with stakeholders, including those who may be interested in applying to be charter schools. It supports the Charter Schools Authorisation Board which approve sponsors for new and converting charter schools. The Agency is hosted by the Ministry of Education.
The Citizenship Office contacts you if they need more information.
The Citizenship Office will courier your citizenship certificate to you. We will return any original documents along with your certificate.
The Citizenship Office will send you a letter to let you know if your application has been approved.
The Citizenship Office will send your citizenship certificate to the New Zealand High Commission.
The Climate Change Commission is an independent Crown Entity. The purpose of the Commission is to provide independent, evidencebased advice to Government to help Aotearoa New Zealand transition to a lowemissions and climateresilient economy.
The Commission has offices in Auckland and Wellington.
The Commission will help improve how New Zealand coordinates and plans these significant projects, make the most of the infrastructure the country already has, and plan longterm to ensure investment delivers what we need, where and when it is needed.
The Commissions key areas of work are:
The Commissioner is separate from the Ministry for the Environment.
The Companies Office also looks after other business registers.
The Congratulatory Message Service team checks that your application is complete.
The Council audits against management system standards for:
The Customs Appeal Authority is an independent body that can review decisions made by the New Zealand Customs Service, including decisions about importing and exporting goods.
The Digital Identity Services Trust Framework regulator is called the Trust Framework Authority. The role of the authority is to accredit digital identity service providers.
The Disability Allowance is a weekly payment from Work and Income for people who have regular, ongoing costs because of a disability.
The District Court can hear claims up to a value of ,. Examples of common civil claims include:
The District Court is divided into main specialties:
The District Court of New Zealand is the first place where most criminal and civil cases are officially presented and decided.
The District Courts have a broad criminal jurisdiction. Examples of common criminal claims include:
The Earthquake Commission (
The Electricity Corporation of New Zealand (ECNZ) has no staff or premises.
The External Reporting Boards work focuses on:
The Family Court hears cases on a broad range of topics. Examples of common Family Court claims include:
The Family Court process has been discontinued. If your application was already under consideration when the change happened, you can finish the process through the Family Court.
The Flesch reading ease score
The Government is consulting on proposals to amend the Waste Minimisation Act (WMA) and the Litter Act .
The Government is seeking feedback on proposed regulations to enable a national takeback and recycling scheme for agrichemicals, their containers, and farm plastics.
The Governor of the Reserve Bank is accountable to the government for the banks performance, but in most other areas has statutory independence about how outcomes are achieved.
The Govt.nz font stack lists all the fonts that are used, including those for people who cannot use Fira Sans. They all have universal browser support and are listed in the order they will appear. These alternative fonts provide a similar experience to Fira Sans.
The Govt.nz team will review your request in the context of the broader scope of Govt.nz.
The Govt.nz vision is to make it easy for you to find and use government services.
The HART register lets people conceived from donated embryos, eggs or sperm find out about their genetic origins and ask to find out about any others conceived from the same donor.
The Human Rights Review Tribunal is an independent body that can review decisions about human rights, privacy, and health and disability issues.
The Leadership Development Centre works in partnership with agencies across the system to deliver a range of products, programmes and services including:
The Mental Health and Wellbeing Commission has taken on the monitoring and advocacy function for mental health and addiction services from the outgoing Mental Health Commissioner at the Office of the Health and Disability Commissioner.
The Ministry for Ethnic Communities has offices in Wellington, Auckland and Christchurch.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) plays a central role in shaping and delivering a strong economy by delivering policy, services, advice and regulation to support business growth.
The Ministry of Education lists the school terms and holidays for future years.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT) represents New Zealand in formal communications with other countries and their governments. By building connections and influence in other countries, MFAT works to secure outcomes that matter to New Zealand.
The Ministry of Health website has advice on choosing an
The Ministry of Justice has information about personal orders:
The Ministry provides ethnic communities in New Zealand with information, advice and services and administers funds to support community development and social cohesion.
The National Cyber Security Centre (
The National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) provides strong, national leadership to create an emergency management system that reduces the impact of emergencies.
The National Pacific Radio Trust owns and operates the Pacific Media Network, a New Zealand radio network and panPasifika national broadcasting network. It runs NiuFM and pi based in Auckland as well as Wellingtonbased Samoa Capital Radio.
The Natural Hazards Commission
The Network for Learning Limited (NL) was founded in the belief that equitable access to digital technology, will empower young New Zealanders to succeed in education and beyond.
The New Zealand Game Animal Council (
The New Zealand Government has allocated three billion dollars over a threeyear term to invest in regional economic development through the Provincial Growth Fund (PGF).
The New Zealand Government logo, Coat of Arms and other logos, emblems and trade marks on Govt.nz are protected by law. You must not copy or use any logo, emblem or trade mark without express permission and compliance with applicable laws.
The New Zealand Railways Corporation (NZRC) is a statutory corporation that owns around , hectares of railway land. It was established to support
The New Zealand citizen parent needs to include their most recent New Zealand passport number.
The New Zealand telehealth services include:
The Office of Treaty Settlements and Takutai Moana
The PGF is administered by the Provincial Development Unit, part of the Ministry of Business, Innovation, and Employment.
The Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment investigates environmental concerns independently of the government of the day. The Commissioner reports to Parliament through:
The Passport Office lets you
The Public Service Commissioner:
The Queen Elizabeth II National Trust is a statutory organisation independent from the government
The RegistrarGeneral can investigate complaints that a marriage or civil union celebrant has not fulfilled their obligations under the Marriage Act , the Civil Union Act , or the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Act .
The RegistrarGeneral will keep any personal information in the complaint private and confidential. Only authorised people will be able to view your information. They will not share your personal information with the celebrant, church or approved organisation unless they have your consent. However, due to the nature of the complaint, the celebrant may work out who made it.
The RegistrarGeneral will let you know the next steps in the process. They may also ask you for additional information.
The RegistrarGeneral will make a preliminary assessment to see if it is a valid complaint and within their jurisdiction to investigate.
The RegistrarGeneral will make one of the following decisions:
The Right Honourable Dame Cindy Kiro is the current GovernorGeneral.
The Social Investment Agency seek to improve outcomes for people through the systematic, consistent, and rigorous use of data and evidence to invest earlier and more effectively.
The Social Wellbeing Agency (
The Southern Institute of Technology (SIT) is renown as the home of the Zero Fees Scheme (ZFS).
The Taiaroa Head Site No. claim is the only one left to settle.
The Translation Service will tell you if the fee is different for your translation
The Transport Accident Investigation Commission do not investigate road accidents unless another mode of transport, like rail, was also involved.
The Trust Framework Authority regulator:
The Trust receives an annual grant from the Government, managed by NZ On Air and overseen by the Ministry for Culture and Heritage.
The University of Auckland
The Youth Court deals with criminal offending by young people that is too serious to be dealt with by the police in the community.
The Youth Court is a division of the District Court but is independent of government.
The ZFS is applicable to all New Zealand citizens, residents and permanent resident visa holders.
The accidents investigated are either:
The adoption is an intercountry adoption between countries that are signed up to the Hague Convention on Intercountry Adoption, and the adoption complies with those requirements.
The adoption laws in the country where the adoption took place are compatible with New Zealand law.
The allofgovernment brand
The amendment is free of charge.
The apostille and authentication process is done by the Department of Internal Affairs Authentication Unit.
The application fee is NZD..
The application process can take some time, and being approved does not necessarily mean youll be chosen by birth parents who place their child for adoption.
The assessment considers things like:
The assessment criteria change from time to time. If you do not meet the criteria, making lifestyle changes like quitting smoking or losing weight could help you to become eligible. Your specialist will discuss this with you at your appointment.
The board, lottery distribution committees and the Ministers Discretionary Fund are serviced by the Department of Internal Affairs.
The celebrant is directed to improve their performance and the complaint is recorded.
The celebrant is removed from the New Zealand Gazettes list of marriage celebrants.
The ceremony has a set fee of , which you pay to the celebrant in advance
The committee has two representatives from the Ministry of Social Development and a community representative, and acts independently from the Ministry of Social Development.
The congratulatory message will be posted to the person or couple days before their birthday or wedding anniversary, unless you asked for an earlier .
The consequences for pretending to be a registered marriage or civil union celebrant are serious. If convicted, the punishment may be a prison sentence of up to years.
The cookies do not collect personal information. You can disable them or clear them out of your web browser without affecting your ability to use the site.
The coordination of commemorative activities.
The council was established on November replacing:
The couple celebrating their anniversary can also choose to get a message from the Mayor if they live in:
The court can only make personal orders for people who:
The current state of accessibility on Govt.nz and how improvements are being made.
The employer helpline for redundancy support is
The external icon could be rendered using CSS.
The family court decides:
The fee to confirm your gender on an evidentiary certificate is ..
The fees you pay depend on the court you are going through. You may be able to get help to pay some court fees depending on your situation. Visit the Ministry of Justice website for more information.
The government digital presence is often messy, confusing and not well coordinated across agencies.
The information you enter in the form will only be shared with the people who are part of providing this service. This includes:
The law allows the sex on a birth certificate to be recorded as indeterminate.
The letter and evidence could cover:
The main difference is when they start and end.
The management of the governments relationship with veterans and their representative organisations.
The marriage licence costs .
The meaning of the Treaty
The office of the Government Chief Digital Officer in the Digital Services branch, Department of Internal Affairs (
The office provides the Minister with information on issues relating to older people. Their team works with local, regional and central government, and community organisations to:
The only way to activate this
The organisation consists of:
The period you can apply for a congratulatory message is from months before the event to months after the event.
The person celebrating their birthday can also choose to get a message from the Mayor if they live in:
The person who died may have already told some people where their will is.
The process is different if you were born before . Talk to the Citizenship Office about what you need to do.
The process is more complicated for category B countries, so authentication costs more and takes longer.
The process is more complicated for category B countries. Documents will need to be sent to an embassy. This type of authentication costs more and takes longer.
The promo tiles on Govt.nz link to timely or new information. See how to request a tile for your new service or tool.
The provision of exservice memorials and maintenance of Services Cemeteries throughout NZ.
The purpose of a personal care and welfare EPA
The purpose of an EPA for property
The register acts as an electronic noticeboard for information about money owed on cars and other expensive items.
The register is a record of people conceived from sperm or egg donations made at a New Zealand fertility clinic, and their donors. Donors can ask for the names of any children born from their donation, but the child must be or over and give permission.
The requirements you need to meet to get New Zealand citizenship depend on when you arrived here or when you were born.
The review checks that the decision was fair and made within relevant law and policy. You can apply for a Review of Decision within months of a decision being made.
The role of Te Aho o Te Kahu is to provide the New Zealand Government with cancerrelated policy advice, as well as to provide national leadership to ensure our cancer services provide high quality and consistent cancer diagnosis and treatment to those affected by cancer, as well as strengthening our approach to cancer prevention and early detection.
The role of the Sport Integrity Commission
The services are supported by clinical teams of registered nurses, mental health nurses, psychologists, psychotherapists, psychiatrists, counsellors, doctors, paramedics, poisons officers, health advisors, family and sexual harm professionals, and emergency triage nurses.
The services offered by residential care providers can vary. They must tell you about the services they offer and be clear about which ones you must pay extra for.
The site is a way for people to find out what they need to do, as well as how government can support them. They do not need to know which agency to go to as information is presented by topic.
The span is used for screenreaders and hidden by default.
The statistical information referred to above can be viewed by site administrators and certain other DIA staff. It may also be shared with other government agencies.
The time it takes to process a passport application and descent registration is variable. Current demand for the services can impact timeframes. Allow at least weeks ( working days) plus time for delivery.
The timeframes below are estimates only. If we need any additional information during processing, we will contact you.
The tribunal hears claims about issues including:
The type of citizenship you can get depends on your situation.
The type of visa depends on whether you and your partner plan to:
The usual abbreviation for an ordinary power of attorney. It may also be called a general power of attorney.
The usual abbreviation for enduring power of attorney.
The verified identity service allows customers to easily and securely prove their identity online.
The voluntary register information is available to donors and people conceived from donor embryos or cells donated before August with consent of the donor or donor conceived person.
The website for End of Life Service guides you through how to:
The widget allows screen reader access to the underlying page
The witness fills in the witness section of the application form. They also write your name and the on the back of of the photos, and then sign it.
Their agency covers both New Zealand and Australia.
Their campuses are located in:
Their collections build on Turnbulls personal collection and have grown through donation, bequest, legal deposit, and targeted purchasing to contain millions of items
Their collections span five areas:
Their core functions are to:
Their courses cover careers in:
Their focus is on areas and activities where we can have the most positive impact. The areas they work in are:
Their hearings are private. There are no lawyers or judges and members of the public and the media are not allowed into the hearing room.
Their inquiries are divided into two groups:
Their main purpose is to distribute funding to develop and enhance the wetland habitats of game birds and other wetland inhabitants.
Their new name has to consist of surname and or more other names. If you have religious, philosophical or cultural reasons to have only one name, you need to include a letter of explanation with your application.
Their office has a wide range of functions, including:
Their programme includes:
Their purpose is to help New Zealanders make better decisions about property.
Their research focuses on:
Their responsibilities are:
Their role is to help improve the quality of law making. They:
Their role is to manage the Crowns financial assets and debt to get the best value for the Government.
Their role is to manage the assets of:
Their role is to support:
Their service is available to residential and small business customers of telecommunications companies who are part of their scheme.
Their strategic priorities are defined as:
Their undergraduate and post graduate programmes include courses in:
Their work covers main areas:
Their work involves matters that impact the longterm benefits that the electricity market provides to consumers, including:
Their work spans everything from influencing development of the national transport system to promoting road safety, managing the state highway, and licensing drivers and vehicles.
Then contact the Authentication Unit so they can check what you will be sending them. This could include:
There a various requirements you need to follow when filing your documents to a District Court. Learn more on the Ministry of Justice website.
There are categories of authentication, depending on the country the documents are being used in.
There are ways to apply for a grant of citizenship, depending on when and where you were born.
There are ways you can get your documents translated:
There are agencies represented in the
There are different child support arrangements. You can choose a:
There are main types of New Zealand citizenship. The type you can get depends on your situation.
There are main types of New Zealand citizenship: by birth, by descent and by grant.
There are public holidays over Christmas and New Year.
There are types of fulltime residential care. Providers sometimes offer more than one type of care within the same property.
There are facilities, all of which are exportaccredited and open access:
There are also websites to help you do your own family history research.
There are biosecurity and customs rules about what you can and cannot bring into New Zealand.
There are community services that can help you manage your finances.
There are different reasons for child support to end. Check the list of reasons on
There are implications for the disposal of your firearms, other arms items and ammunition if this
There are keyboard shortcuts you can use when watching YouTube. For these shortcuts to work, the YouTube video must have keyboard focus.
There are only online shipping lists of people who came to NZ:
There are restrictions on what you can buy, for example you cannot use the card to buy:
There are separate processes to change the gender on your New Zealand citizenship record and other identity documents.
There are some decisions you need to make that are unique to a property
There are various organisations throughout NZ that can help support you and your family.
There have been false online claims about birth certificates.
There is no official retirement age in New Zealand. The common age to retire is when NZ Super and some other pension payments start.
There is no set timeframe for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade checks or authentication by overseas embassies.
These are authenticated by the Authentication Unit, and then sent to the MFAT for verification.
These are the legal terms and definitions of the various roles for an enduring power of attorney (EPA or EPOA).
These links are not permanent navigation points, and are only provided for a fixed term (usually month).
These terms apply to the entire contents of the site, to any web feeds produced by the site and to any feedback or submissions provided through the site. By viewing and using the site, you will be deemed to agree to these Terms of use.
These tiles link to distinct topic areas, or timely information that is usually delivered on Govt.nz.
These tiles link to new services or tools to help with initial promotion, and to help gather feedback from users.
They administer New Zealands business registers, including the Companies Register.
They administer the Governments incentive schemes and coproductions and certify NZ films for tax purposes. They invest in:
They also administer the NZSO National Youth Orchestra.
They also deal with complaints about social workers.
They also enforce regulations that provide the benefits of competition in markets where effective competition does not exist.
They also have commercial enterprises, including a publishing division, conference and function operations, cafes, a car park and retail stores.
They also have mortality review committees that review deaths to learn how best to prevent them.
They also hear appeals from tribunals and lower courts, including the District Court.
They also offer several courses through online learning.
They also operate the New Zealand Special Air Service (NZSAS) who work on difficult overseas missions and in terrorist situations.
They also provide information on how the classification system works in New Zealand.
They also provide local river flow and lake information.
They also provide regional council activities including:
They also sell international standards.
They also support employers to find staff by providing:
They are a researchbased organisation. They:
They are an independent body set up under the Employment Relations Act . They have offices in:
They are formerly known as the State Services Commission.
They are part of the international community made up of over National Research and Education Networks (NRENs).
They are responsible for classifying films, games, computer files and other publications under the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act .
They are responsible for:
They are the legal owner of New Zealand House in London.
They can help you understand your rights and responsibilities as an employee or employer. Employment New Zealand aims to support positive relationships between employers and employees, and to promote safe, fair and harmonious workplaces.
They can review decisions made by the Government Superannuation Fund Authority including decisions about entitlements to money from the fund.
They can review decisions made by the Office of Film and Literature Classification about the classification of publications including:
They carry out research to:
They collect most of the governments revenue and administer a number of social support programmes.
They consider and determine the annual remuneration and allowances of:
They consider complaints about:
They consider offenders who are eligible:
They cover Kaikoura, Hurunui, Waimakariri, Christchurch, Selwyn, Ashburton, Timaru, Mackenzie, and the Waitaki and Waimate districts.
They deal with civil and criminal appeals from cases heard in the High Court, the Employment Court and criminal proceedings in District Courts.
They develop standards in areas like:
They do not have a handsonrole in daily traffic, aviation, rail or maritime matters.
They enforce laws that promote competition and protect consumers in New Zealand. This includes laws that prohibit misleading and deceptive conduct by traders, and protect consumers when they borrow money or buy goods on credit.
They focus on removing barriers and bringing about societal changes that improve the lives of disabled people.
They focus on serious fraud which may include:
They grant and register intellectual property (IP) rights in NZ. This includes:
They have close links with community organisations representing the interests of older people, like:
They have identified priority areas:
They have interactive exhibitions, dynamic events and education programmes. Their collections are short term, long term or permanent.
They have researchers available who can help you use the Turnbulls collection.
They hear appeals from reviews of decisions made by Housing New Zealand about incomerelated rents and applicants eligibility and need for Housing New Zealand housing.
They hear decisions that have been to the Employment Relations Authority and are still not resolved.
They hear major crimes and civil claims involving more than ,. They deal with judicial reviews of administrative action and admiralty proceedings.
They help people get jobs by providing:
They help the Clerk of the House (their chief executive) provide the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives with:
They help you (the donor), by giving the people you choose (your attorneys), the power to do some things for you. Your attorneys do not need to be lawyers or have any legal training.
They help you make informed choices about your student finance, how to apply for it and manage it online. This includes:
They help young people, aged between and years old, to use their knowledge, skills and experience to participate confidently in their communities.
They manage investment funds:
They must apply for their passport as an adult.
They must renew their passport as an adult.
They need to be paid before assets can be handled as set out in the will.
They negotiate the settlement of historical Treaty of
They offer a free telephone service, hours a day days a week, that:
They offer a range of applied vocational programmes including:
They offer a range of qualifications and courses that you can study by distance and online learning.
They offer certificates, diplomas, degrees and postgraduate qualifications through the following faculties:
They offer courses including:
They offer courses through their:
They offer courses to New Zealand and international students in:
They offer first and postgraduate degrees in:
They offer information on:
They offer internet and voice services to small and mediumsized businesses.
They offer over qualifications from certificates through to master degrees covering subjects including:
They offer services across the residential, rural, government and commercial sectors, including:
They offer technical and professional qualifications, from universitystandard degrees to diplomas, certificates and foundation courses. They also deliver short awards and adult community education courses across the region.
They provide an independent onestop shop for all parliamentary electoral matters including services to:
They provide both independent oversight of the industry and increased consumer protection.
They provide building practitioners, officials, consumers and other regulators training, guidelines and information about their roles and responsibilities.
They provide certificate, diploma, degree and postgraduate programmes in:
They provide income support to those in need through:
They provide information and resolve disputes about unlawful discrimination.
They provide legal representation for people who claim to have been unlawfully discriminated against, and help them take their case to the Human Rights Review Tribunal.
They provide research and consulting in:
They provide services for Central Otago, including:
They provide services for Christchurch, Lyttelton and the Banks Peninsula, including:
They provide services for Hamilton city, including:
They provide services for Hutt City, including:
They provide services for Napier, including:
They provide services for older people, including:
They provide services for the Buller district, including:
They provide services for the Carterton District, including:
They provide services for the Chatham Islands, including:
They provide services for the Clutha District, including:
They provide services for the Invercargill district, including:
They provide services for the Otago region, including:
They provide services which include:
They receive administrative support from the
They replaced the Residence Review Board, the Refugee Status Appeals Authority, the Removal Review Authority, and the Deportation Review Tribunal.
They research and consult on:
They resolve complaints about infringements of health and disability rights by service providers. More serious complaints may be formally investigated by HDC.
They support organisations who employ territorial and cadet force personnel.
They were established in .
They work in partnership with national sport organisations (NSOs), allocating resources to sports organisations and athletes and delivering worldleading support to impact performance.
They work in the following areas:
They work with clinicians, providers and consumers to improve health and disability support services.
They work with members to support their use of the network.
Theyre not involved in daytoday environmental management.
Things that come under this
Think about what your needs will be if your
This QWBA explains how the income tax rules apply when a close company provides shortstay accommodation (eg, through Airbnb, Bookabach, Booking.com or Holiday Houses). It explains when and how the mixeduse asset rules and the standard tax rules apply, and when shareholders or employees will receive income from their use of the property.
This allows your loved ones to see your wishes, which might be hidden in your will until finishing the probate application.
This also applies to children born by IVF to a surrogate.
This authority is limited to areas.
This can confuse screen reader users, as the structure and hierarchy of the content are not properly conveyed.
This certificate will state:
This does not include regular cleaning and check ups.
This draft operational statement explains the income tax treatment of amounts societies, clubs and other associations receive from members, other than amounts subject to a specific tax exemption such as for charities or sports clubs. It explains that the mutual association provisions override the mutuality principle for trading stock and services supplied to members. It also explains that subscriptions and levies will not be covered by the mutuality principle if the association is not able to distribute to members. Such amounts may be business income or income under ordinary concepts, depending on the circumstances. The statement will be prospective in application when finalised.
This enduring power of attorney (
This free course helps parents focus on the needs of children. You have to do this first.
This group was previously called the Organised and Financial Crime Agency New Zealand.
This includes information about:
This interpretation statement considers the application of s CD () and () of the Income Tax Act in relation to the factors to be taken into account in determining whether an offmarket cancellation of shares is made in lieu of the payment of a dividend.
This is a link which leads to an external website
This is a link which leads to an external website.
This is a link which leads to another page on the website
This is a link which leads to another page on the website.
This is a link with focus
This is a way of making sure your loved ones can pay for your funeral with less stress.
This is another option provided by the Family Court. The court appoints a person to look after your property and financial affairs.
This issue makes it difficult for keyboardonly users to navigate backward through the interface, potentially causing frustration and hindering efficient navigation.
This list only includes the most popular topics for people using our website. If you cannot find what youre looking for, use our website search or visit our
This listing is for consultations that government departments are asking for feedback on.
This means people who rely on screen readers or who need to modify the way the text looks could have difficulty reading or understanding some content.
This means you should be able to:
This notice explains how and when Govt.nz collects personal information, what we do with it and your right to see or change it.
This order applies when your annual income or government benefit is below a certain amount, or if any of the property to be managed is worth less than ,.
This organisation is legally known as New Zealand ViceChancellors Committee.
This redevelopment programme will see the majority of the existing state houses replaced with warm, dry state, affordable, KiwiBuild, and private market houses over the next years.
This requirement comes under the Arms Registry amendments to the Arms Act
This site generates persistent session cookies (that is, they have an expiry and are removed on that ) for the purpose of monitoring site usage.
This site is owned and maintained by the AllofGovernment Service Delivery team, part of the Department of Internal Affairs.
This website is designed to be used by everyone.
Timeline and information for dealing with the estate
Timeline for dealing with estates
To apply for and receive Working for Families or Best Start, contact Inland Revenue (
To apply for and receive paid parental leave, contact Inland Revenue (
To apply for citizenship in New Zealand, contact the Department of Internal Affairs (
To apply for citizenship under section A of the Citizenship (Western Samoa) Act , you must meet of the eligibility criteria.
To apply you need to call Work and Income to discuss your situation and find out how they can help.
To be effective, the contrast ratio between text colour and the background needs to be at least .:.
To be eligible for any funded treatment, you and your partner (if you have one) both have to be New Zealand citizens or eligible to live in NZ for at least years.
To become a citizen by grant, you need to apply.
To become a sperm donor, you generally have to:
To become an egg donor, you generally have to:
To change or cancel your application, contact the Congratulatory Message Service team.
To change the gender on your passport, you need to complete a passport application form and pay for a new passport.
To change the sex marker on your birth certificate, you must complete a statutory declaration and apply to Births, Deaths and Marriages.
To change your name on other forms of ID, like your driver licence, you may need evidence to show you have officially changed your name.
To check the progress of your application, click on the link below. Select Continue saved application, then log in using RealMe.
To check the surname used on your birth certificate, you have to apply and pay for the birth certificate.
To check whether you can live or work in NZ, contact
To check you meet travel and transit requirements, check with your airline.
To check your application status log in to
To ensure support is targeted, effective and designed with small businesses in mind,
To find NZ embassies in certain countries and territories, visit the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (
To find out if you are a New Zealand citizen, use the online tool or ask the Citizenship Office.
To find out if your celebrant is registered visit our celebrants page.
To find out information relating to:
To find your whakapapa (genealogy), you can search old birth, death and marriage records.
To get a New Zealand passport, you need to be a citizen.
To get a certified copy, you must have your original document copied, stamped and initialled by:
To get a divorce, you apply to the Family Court for a dissolution order.
To get a residency visa, your adoptive parents need to apply for you as a dependent child.
To get your child a New Zealand passport, you need to register their citizenship. You can order them a passport at the same time when you fill out the form.
To get yourself a New Zealand passport, you need to register your citizenship. You can order a passport at the same time by ticking a box on the form.
To make a celebrant complaint you must provide the following information:
To receive a congratulatory message for an event being celebrated in January, apply by December at the latest.
To renew a child passport online, you must have a:
To renew your passport online you must be aged or older and have a:
To save time, book an appointment online before you visit a BDM office.
To set up and maintain your child support payments, contact Inland Revenue (
To update a sex marker and change a name
To use a document overseas it may need to be apostilled or authenticated. Apostilles and authentications are certificates that prove the signature, stamp or seal on a document is genuine.
To withdraw your objection, email
Together, they work to provide consistent, highquality health services for all people.
Toggle captions off, on, or cycle through the available tracks
Toi Ohomai Institute of Technology
Tourism New Zealand is the organisation responsible for marketing New Zealand to the world as a tourist destination.
Trace your family history
Trading Standards do not investigate products that have safety requirements set by other government agencies:
Trading in annual holidays for cash
Training and apprenticeships
Transferring a public holiday
Transgender surgery and therapy
Translating documents into English
Translating official documents
Translations included as part of your application
Transport Accident Investigation Commission
Transport after an injury
Transport and vehicle costs
Travel or move to Australia
Travelling or living overseas
Travelling to or currently in NZ, customs, border security, refugees
Travelling to or living in NZ
Trustee company or trustee corporation
Try asking your neighbours to be quiet if theyre making too much noise. You can also complain to their landlord or the council.
Tumuaki o te Mana Arotake
Types of citizenship: birth, descent and grant
Types of citizenship: grant, birth and descent
Types of evidence you can use:
Types of residential care
UNITEC Institute of Technology
Under certain circumstances the Family Court may confer certain rights on people born from donated embryos or cells who are aged or years to enable them to be treated as being aged years or more.
Under the Privacy Act , you have the right to access and ask us to correct any personal information you have provided to us.
Under the terms of the licence, you must attribute the content to the Crown and the Govt.nz website.
Understand the types of citizenship
Undertaking management functions for designated herds of special interest.
Unexpected accidents or illnesses can occur at any age, and an
United Kingdom national or,
Universal College of Learning
Universities NZ lists their points of focus and details around their legal functions.
Universities NZs key functions are to:
Universities New Zealand (UNZ)
Unless noted as an exception, or on specific items or collections of content:
Update on New Zealand House
Update sex marker on birth certificate
Update the sex on your birth certificate
Update the sex on your childs birth certificate
Update your celebrant registration details
Update your will and EPAs
Upgrade to citizenship by grant
Urgent applications cost more and take up to working days. You cannot make an urgent application if your case involves an overseas adoption.
Urgent citizenship passport
Urgent citizenship and passport application
Use to report crimes to Police that are not urgent and do not need Emergency Services.
Use RealMe to prove who you are online and securely access many government and private sector services online.
Use RealMe to prove your identity online
Use Zero Data to get free access to governmentsponsored websites. This way, money is not a barrier to getting important services and information.
Use of personal information
Use of statistical information
Use the Te Aka online dictionary to understand
Use the calculator to get an estimate on what you might be eligible for.
Use the form below to find out whether:
Use the form below to find out:
Use the portrait or landscape posters to:
Use the selfcheck tool to find out if you are eligible for New Zealand citizenship.
Use this online service to order a certificate for a marriage that happened in the last years.
Use this selfcheck tool to find out if you meet the requirements for New Zealand citizenship.
Use your NZ documents overseas
User research information
User research participation
Using an agent to access information
Utility links and page information
Valuers Registration Board
Vehicle licensing and road user charges
Verified identity service
Victoria University of Wellington
Victoria University of Wellington.
Virgin Islands of the United States
Visa expiry and reentry conditions
Visas for workers from specific countries
Visit He Tohu at the National Library
Visit the New Zealand Transport Agency website for information about updating your driver licence.
Visit the Waitangi treaty grounds and treaty house
Visiting Heritage New Zealand Pouhere Taonga heritage sites
Visitor visas and the NZeTA
Voluntary registrations are for donations made before August that result in a birth.
Waikaremoana Hydro Scheme
Waikato Institute of Technology
Waikato Management School
Waikato Pathways College.
Waimakariri District Council
Wait to find out if your application is approved
We are a free and independent dispute resolution service. We look into complaints by customers about their banks.
We carry out annual audits of hundreds of public entities on behalf of the AuditorGeneral.
We do not claim to own your copyright material. You do, however, grant DIA a nonexclusive, royaltyfree and irrevocable licence to:
We do not own these social media channels and encourage you to read their privacy policy and conditions of use. Please protect your personal information and others by not publishing any personal information such as names and addresses.
We do not use, share or transfer personal information in connection with the site except as set out in this notice, or as otherwise set out somewhere on the site (including in terms linking to the site).
We last audited this website with an automated scan in
We may pass on relevant content from that form to other people within DIA, other government agencies or third parties who administer or are participating in the particular project or consultation that the form relates to. This could include your email address and other identifying information.
We use Google Universal Analytics to collect statistical information about your visit to help us improve the site. This information is aggregated and does not identify you personally. It includes:
We will only use personal information provided to us for the purpose of:
We will process your application as soon as possible.
We will process your application within working days.
Web Accessibility Standard .
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (
Web accessibility is essential for disabled people and useful for everyone in a variety of situations.
WebAim colour contrast checker
Websites to support small businesses in NZ
Wellington Fish and Game Council
Wellington Railway Station
Wellington family services
West Coast District Health Board
West Coast Fish and Game Council
West Coast Regional Council
West Coast family services
Western Bay of Plenty District Council
Western Institute of Technology (Taranaki)
Westland District Council
Whaia te pono kia puawai ko te tika
Whanganui District Council
Whangarei District Council
What are your financial goals
What counts as income for benefits
What do you want to have happen with your business
What does not go on Govt.nz
What happens after you apply for a licence
What happens after you make a complaint
What happens next and timeframes
What instructions and restrictions will you include in your
What is a civil union certificate
What is a name change certificate
What it means to be a citizen by descent
What it means when your parent signs the form
What someone owes to others is also part of the estate. These are, for example:
What the notary public will do
What to do if you have lost your New Zealand citizenship certificate, or if you need to prove whether or not you are a New Zealand citizen.
What to do when someone dies
What to get ready before you apply for NZ citizenship
What to include when you email us:
What to organise before you die
What you can and cannot bring with you into New Zealand
What you can change your name to
What you can do with RealMe
What you can get a congratulatory message for
What you can search online
What you need to do when someone dies
When do you want to activate your
When someone dies overseas
When someone dies without a will
When the child turns , you stop getting Best Start payments.
When the message will be posted
When there are enduring powers of attorney
When to update your will and
When you apply for New Zealand citizenship by grant, you need to provide documents to prove your identity, such as:
When you apply for an apostille you can request either a paper or an electronic apostille (eapostille).
When you apply to register as a union, they will:
When you arrive in Australia
When you become a New Zealand citizen, you will have the same privileges as a person who was born here. You will also have the same responsibilities.
When you both agree to get a divorce
When you can no longer manage in your own home, you can move into a rest home or hospital. Talk to your doctor or other health professionals about the level of care you need.
When you find out about your application
When you get a flatmate in your own house
When you give general authority to your attorney under a property
When you have a problem at work
When you have an activated
When you have mental capacity or capability, you understand the information given to you and the decisions you need to make. You can think through the consequences of your decisions and communicate your decisions.
When you need an NZ student visa
When you need to use a New Zealand birth certificate in another country, you might be asked to get the document apostilled or authenticated. Some countries call this legalisation.
When you need to use a New Zealand document in another country, you may be asked to get the document apostilled or authenticated.
When you pay tax or do a tax return you need to know what to include as income. Check to see what counts as a source of income.
When you register to participate in user research you provide us with your email and contact details.
When you register your baby, you must give them a name. You can also:
When you separate from your partner, you can make a separation agreement, or apply to the Family Court for a Separation Order if you want to.
When you start a new job, youll automatically be enrolled in KiwiSaver if youre eligible and not a member already. You can also join through your current employer or directly with a provider.
When you use a NZ document in another country, you might need to get it translated. You will probably need to get it apostilled or authenticated too.
When your parent signs the form, it means they are giving consent for their information to be collected and used to:
Where to file your documents
Where to find the will of someone who died
Where to start when thinking about residential care
Whether you can get help depends on how much you and your partner earn and what money and assets you each have. You may need to pay some of this back, depending on your situation.
Whether you need an apostille or authentication depends on the country your documents will be used in.
While there are no absolute barriers to access for disabled people using our website, we know a little more work is required to fully conform to
Whitireia Community Polytechnic
Who MBIE works with to provide the website content
Who can access information on the register
Who can access your personal information
Who can move into residential care
Who do you want to be your attorney You can only have .
Who has to sign the form and why
Who sees the information in the form
Who the messages are from
Who to contact for more help
Who will your attorney need to consult with (other than you), when they make decisions about your personal care and welfare
Why these goals were chosen
Will you still manage some aspects of your personal care and welfare yourself or will you give your attorney responsibility for all your personal care and welfare needs Keep in mind the circumstances under which this
Wills only take effect after death.
Wills, probate and estates
With a RealMe verified identity to prove who you are online, you can:
With an apprenticeship, you can earn money while getting skills and qualifications.
Withdrawing your application
Without a visible focus indicator, sighted keyboardonly users may struggle to navigate and interact with the content.
Without an accessible name, screen readers cannot identify the purpose of the iframe, making it difficult for visually impaired users to understand what it is without having to interact with it.
Work and Income New Zealand
Work and Income can help with:
Work and Income have an online tool you can use to check what other payments and assistance you can get.
Work and Income supply the Community Services Card (CSC) on behalf of the Ministry of Health to help lower healthcare costs.
Work and Income will load money onto a payment card you can use at stores that accept them. The amount you can get will depend on your situation. You do not have to pay this money back.
Work out how to save money on your energy bills, make your home more energy efficient and protect the environment.
Work that leads to residence
Working after : ACC levies and entitlements
Working days do not include weekends or public holidays. The timeframes above do not include delivery times for certificates.
Working for Families and Best Start
Working for Families and Best Start: Contact
Working for Families payments
Working here if your partner is in NZ
Working in NZ after you study
Working in NZ for more than months
Working in NZ for up to months
Working on public holidays
Working while on a student visa
Working with a trustee company or lawyer helps you and your loved ones. Sorted also lists online options that might work for your situation.
Workplace safety and injuries
World War One service records
Writing a will can even motivate you to start or improve your retirement planning.
Writing a will helps you plan for both:
You also need to get an identity referee or witness to support your application.
You also need to provide evidence of:
You and your household must be assessed and approved as suitable to adopt a child.
You are a New Zealand citizen by birth if one of the following situations is true for you:
You are a New Zealand citizen by birth.
You are automatically a New Zealand citizen by birth if, at the time of your adoption, at least of your adoptive parents was a New Zealand citizen.
You are automatically a New Zealand citizen by birth if, at the time of your adoption, at least of your adoptive parents was:
You are automatically a New Zealand citizen by birth.
You are eligible for New Zealand citizenship if you were born in Western Samoa on or after May and before January .
You are eligible for New Zealand citizenship if:
You are likely to be a New Zealand citizen by birth.
You are not a New Zealand citizen if your adoptive parents were diplomats from another country and serving in New Zealand at the time of your birth.
You are not officially a citizen until you have registered.
You are only a citizen if, when you were born, at least of your parents was:
You can access and reuse data from across government on data.govt.nz.
You can access information on the HART register if:
You can add more personal touches, too. A will has very specific wording for it to be valid and work when you need it to.
You can also apply to verify your address to prove where you live to any organisation that uses RealMe.
You can also check information about yourself held by the
You can also keep a copy of your will or
You can also log in to create your own plan online.
You can also see information about:
You can apply at our public counters in Auckland, Wellington, Christchurch, Sydney and London. Contact us to make an appointment:
You can apply for Best Start online when you register your baby.
You can apply for NZ citizenship if you were born in Samoa on or after May and before January , or if you meet of the other eligibility criteria.
You can apply for a divorce together when you both agree to divorce, or you can apply for a divorce on your own. Read more information on the Ministry of Justices website:
You can apply for a new birth certificate on the name change form, or request one later.
You can apply for a printout of all recorded, unrestricted information using the forms below.
You can apply for congratulatory messages:
You can apply for your child to be granted New Zealand citizenship. Include a letter with the application form that explains why your child should be granted citizenship even though they do not meet the requirements. You should include any evidence you have.
You can apply for your childs first passport online.
You can apply for your first passport online.
You can apply in person at the New Zealand High Commission in Apia. You dont need to make an appointment.
You can apply online if you live in
You can apply online if you live in NZ, or you will arrive in NZ more than working days before you get married.
You can apply online if you want to:
You can apply online or use a printed form. Make sure you apply at least weeks before you plan to come to New Zealand.
You can apply online, in person, or by post.
You can apply to adopt a child in New Zealand as a couple or as an individual.
You can apply to change your name if:
You can apply to the Family Court to be treated as though you are .
You can appoint a trustee corporation to be your attorney. A trustee corporation acts for you in a neutral and independent way but you need to pay for this.
You can ask for an ambulance, police, fire service or search and resuce.
You can ask them to review a decision about:
You can ask to swap up to week of your annual holidays for cash each year.
You can become a citizen by grant before your child is born outside New Zealand. You must meet the requirements.
You can book an appointment in Auckland, Manukau, Wellington or Christchurch.
You can book an appointment in Auckland, Wellington or Christchurch.
You can bring your pet here, but they must meet specific health standards. These change, depending on the country your pet is coming from.
You can change all or part of your name.
You can change the name in your new passport if your name was changed by:
You can change the sex recorded on your birth certificate to indeterminate if your sex was incorrectly registered as male or female when you were born.
You can change your civil union to a marriage (or your marriage to a civil union) without dissolving your current relationship. You need to complete a form and hold another marriage or civil union ceremony.
You can check the contrast ratio of Govt.nz colours using an online tool.
You can choose a standard or a decorative certificate which has an image on it.
You can choose to appoint someone else to access this information for you, see
You can choose to give your attorneys specific powers for certain situations or general responsibility for everything.
You can choose to have a different gender on your citizenship certificate than what is shown on your birth certificate.
You can choose to put restrictions on who can use your eggs.
You can choose to put restrictions on who can use your sperm.
You can complain if youve been discriminated against in many areas of public life, including:
You can complain if your personal information is being revealed without your agreement or if an organisation refuses to let you see information about you.
You can complete the PDF form in Adobe Acrobat Reader for Windows or Mac, or print it off and complete it by hand.
You can courier, post or deliver the application in person.
You can donate money to charities and approved organisations directly from your pay.
You can download contact details for government organisations, their chief executives and chairpeople.
You can find out all about Births, Deaths and Marriages on Govt.nz.
You can find the advice on Digital.govt.nz:
You can get ACC payments and NZ Super payments at the same time, but only for years.
You can get a New Zealand residency visa if, at the time of your adoption:
You can get a certificate that proves you are not a New Zealand citizen.
You can get a free congratulatory message for significant birthdays and wedding anniversaries from the King and New Zealand dignitaries.
You can get help paying for:
You can get the payments if:
You can get your credit report for free. If your information is wrong, you can get your record corrected.
You can give local and central government feedback on their plans before they make decisions.
You can lodge a notice of your intended marriage if you have been resident in New Zealand for at least days and are:
You can make a claim if the celebrant:
You can make a request to get your birth certificate apostilled or authenticated by phone or post.
You can make a will by using a:
You can only be the executor if you were named in the will to act as one.
You can order a New Zealand passport at the same time as you register your citizenship by descent.
You can order a birth certificate by phone. You can pay by credit or debit card.
You can order a birth certificate for anyone born in New Zealand.
You can order a civil union certificate online, by phone, post, or in person.
You can order a name change certificate:
You can order by phone or in person from a Births, Deaths and Marriages office:
You can order certificates in person in Auckland,
You can order certificates in person in Auckland, Manukau, Wellington or Christchurch. You must book an appointment online.
You can order certificates in person in Auckland, Manukau, Wellington or Christchurch. Youll need photo ID.
You can order death printouts from Birth, Deaths and Marriages online.
You can order marriage printouts from:
You can order more recent records from Births, Deaths and Marriages.
You can order online for a person born within the last years.
You can order your child a New Zealand passport at the same time as you register their citizenship by descent.
You can post or courier your application to Wellington, Sydney or London.
You can register your child and order a certificate at the same time.
You can register your child as a New Zealand citizen by descent and get them a New Zealand passport.
You can request an evidentiary certificate to confirm your gender and any other changes in details since you gained citizenship.
You can search NZ birth, death, marriage, civil union and name change records.
You can search and order online:
You can search for registered NZ companies.
You can search for the records and medals of New Zealanders who were in the armed forces.
You can search online for:
You can send feedback about this website by emailing us or by post.
You can set up your device to suit your needs.
You can still apply for government help if you cannot get
You can submit a complaint to them by:
You can take unpaid leave if your employer agrees to it. The agreement should be recorded in writing.
You can then register your baby as a New Zealand citizen by descent and apply for their New Zealand passport.
You can trim most branches or roots that cross into your property up to the property boundary.
You can update the sex marker on your birth certificate if your birth was registered in New Zealand.
You can update your sex marker and change your name on the same form.
You can use Zero Data if your mobile phone uses:
You can use shipping lists to find out how and when people arrived in New Zealand.
You can use the Human Assisted Reproductive Technology (HART) Register to learn about your genetic origins and, if all parties agree, contact donors.
You can use the Tribunal to settle small claims up to ,.
You can use the Working for Families calculator to check if you can get the other types of payments.
You can use your SuperGold Card to travel free on scheduled offpeak public transport.
You can use your marriage certificate as official evidence of your marriage.
You can usually file your documents in person, by post or electronically.
You can withdraw all your savings when you turn , as long as youve been a KiwiSaver member for at least years.
You can withdraw your application at any time. You may not get a refund.
You can work out how much you might get or how much you may have to pay under a child support formula assessment with
You cannot enter the United Kingdom to get married or enter into a civil union on the month tourist visa that most NZers can get at the UK border.
You cannot find out information about any genetic siblings who were not donorconceived.
You cannot pass citizenship to any children who are born outside New Zealand. They will need to
You choose the rest home or hospital that you want to move to and can afford.
You could get free access to internet if these options are available to you:
You decide if your attorney can make decisions about everything to do with your personal care and welfare or only decide on some things. There are some decisions that your attorney cannot make.
You do not have to do anything official when you separate from your partner, but a separation agreement or separation order can help to keep things clear.
You do not need to be a New Zealand citizen. Visitors to New Zealand can marry or have a civil union here.
You do not need to do anything else until the ceremony.
You get the endoflife wishes and legacy you want
You get your printout by email after about working days.
You have to pay for the search even if the record is not found.
You may also be eligible for a funded consultation with the fertility specialist.
You may also get your documents translated by:
You may also meet the requirements to apply for for citizenship by grant. If you are successful, any future children you have who are born outside New Zealand can
You may be a New Zealand citizen by descent if your situation fits one of the following scenarios:
You may be able to get child support even if you and the child, or the other parent, lives outside of
You may be able to get help paying for an eye test and glasses. Whether you can get help depends on how much you and your partner earn and what money and assets you each have.
You may be able to get help paying for immediate and essential dental treatment such as fillings and extractions.
You may be able to get help to cover your expenses or subsidise the cost of your care.
You may be able to get help to pay for car repairs if you:
You may be contacted to confirm that all details are correct.
You may choose to share personal information with us when you:
You may need to get an apostille or authentication certificate for the death certificate, or have it translated into another language.
You may need to pay for a replacement certificate. You can pay over the phone by credit or debit card.
You may qualify for help with cleaning your home, doing the laundry, buying essential appliances, mowing the lawn, weeding the garden and getting essential home maintenance tasks done. Find out how to get these home support services and if you qualify.
You might be asked to get your birth certificate translated into another language.
You might be eligible for citizenship by descent if you:
You might be eligible for citizenship by grant if you were born:
You might be eligible to have the fee either:
You might find some limits to using sponsored websites if they have or link to content outside of Zero Data.
You might need a death certificate if youre administering someones estate or applying for a funeral grant from Work and Income or ACC.
You might not need an official death certificate.
You might not need an official marriage certificate.
You move permanently into residential care after having a bad fall. Before your fall, you had been living independently and taking care of all the decisions about your money, property and other assets.
You must apply for a review within working days after the day a decision is entered into the Register of Classification Decisions by the Classification Office.
You must file your documents to the correct court. This may be the court nearest to you, but sometimes it can be a court in another suburb or town, depending on the type of case.
You must follow the road rules for your safety and the safety of others when you drive. If you do not, you can be fined or have your driver licence or car taken off you.
You must get legal advice from a lawyer, qualified legal executive or a trustee corporation when creating your personal care and welfare
You must have a needs assessment if you want to get governmentfunded home help. Find out if you qualify and the support services you might get.
You must include copies of different documents that show your current name. These do not need to be certified or authorised.
You must make an appeal within days of the authoritys decision.
You must meet of the following eligibility criteria:
You must provide identical passportstyle photos. The photos need to be signed by your chosen witness.
You must provide a certified copy of of the following:
You must provide a certified copy of any of the following, as long as it states your name, and place of birth:
You must provide a certified copy of your own photo ID or an identity referee declaration form to confirm your identity.
You must provide a certified copy of your photo ID or a identity referee declaration form to confirm your identity.
You must provide certified copies of documents that prove the identity of all the childs parents or legal guardians.
You must provide copies of different documents that show either your birth name, married name or new name. These do not need to be certified. Accepted documents include:
You must show your photo ID or completed identity referee declaration to the same person who is authorising your statutory declaration. Sign the identity referee declaration in front of them. They can certify this document at the same time.
You must sign a statutory declaration before a person authorised under the Oaths and Declarations Act. You need to do this in person and show them either your photo ID or an identity referee declaration. Theyll also sign your application form.
You need New Zealand citizenship to apply for a passport.
You need a student visa if you want to study full time in New Zealand for more than months.
You need consent from a Family Court Judge before you can marry.
You need the following information:
You need to apply for most benefits online, then meet with a case manager before your application is accepted and you start being paid.
You need to apply to get a congratulatory message. The person or couple celebrating the event can apply, or someone can apply for them.
You need to arrange your licence at least working days before you get married.
You need to be able to hold a basic conversation in English to get New Zealand citizenship.
You need to fill in the application form with both of your parents. Your New Zealand citizen parent needs to include their most recent New Zealand passport number.
You need to get a name change certificate to prove you have changed their name.
You need to get a name change certificate to prove you have changed your name.
You need to get any documents that are not in English translated.
You need to get someone to witness of your passport photos.
You need to include these documents with your application:
You need to make an appeal within working days of receiving the Customs decision. A lawyer or advocate can present your case for you if you want, either in a formal hearing or based on written submissions.
You need to show you are of good character to get New Zealand citizenship.
You need to show you have been physically present in New Zealand for a certain amount of time and that you intend to continue living here.
You need to sign the declaration in front of an authorised person. Check the form for a list of people who can witness your declaration.
You need to tell Births, Deaths and Marriages:
You need to write and ask for your surname to be amended and provide two types of evidence:
You need to write and ask for your surname to be amended.
You only need a separation order if one of you does not want to separate, though you can choose to apply for one together if you both agree.
You only need to provide original name change documents if your name was changed outside of NZ or in some special circumstances.
You or your partner needs to take the notice to your local Registrar of Marriages in person, so they can witness you signing the declaration. The address is on the form.
You pay a goods and services tax (GST) on most of your purchases in New Zealand.
You pay speeding tickets and Police infringement notices, for example for not wearing a seatbelt, directly to the Police.
You pay tax on income from all your savings and investments, whether theyre in NZ or overseas. Your tax rate is based on your income.
You should also check if the organisation asking for the document has specific requirements. For example, they may:
You should check to see if you need to do this with the local register office in the country where you intend to get married.
You then pay a set fee of to the celebrant on the day of your ceremony.
You were adopted before November , or you were under years old at the time your adoption was finalised.
You will need to provide the following documentation:
You will not get a charge or use up mobile data if:
Youll need to confirm your details with
Young people aged between and who are charged with a serious offence will go to Youth Court rather than the District Court or High Court. The Youth Court does not deal with murder, manslaughter and traffic offences.
Young people aged between and who are charged with an offence will be directed to a Youth Court rather than the District Court or High Court.
Your New Zealand citizenship status depends on:
Your New Zealand marriage certificate is an official record of your marriage. It costs to have it posted to you. You can order your certificate online.
Your New Zealand marriage or civil union certificate is an official record of your marriage. It costs to get one sent to you.
Your annual holidays are paid at the rate of the greater of your ordinary weekly pay and average weekly earnings.
Your attorney found a few possible options. Two of which she carefully researched, before recommending of them. For each of these, she:
Your authenticated documents will have a covering page on top with a stamp from MFAT. The documents will be tied together with a ribbon and get an official embossed seal. They are then sent to the address you included on your application form.
Your babys name must not be:
Your birth certificate is the official confirmation that you are New Zealand citizen. To get your certificate, contact
Your care plan after a needs assessment
Your child is a citizen by descent when they are born or adopted, but to get your child a New Zealand passport you must register them.
Your children born outside New Zealand can
Your children who are born outside New Zealand can
Your complaint will be investigated as promptly as possible. Allow several weeks for a decision.
Your documents will be authenticated by the Department of Internal Affairs Authentication Unit, and then sent to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT) for verification.
Your emails and contributions to the site may constitute public records and be retained to the extent required by the Public Records Act . DIA may also need to disclose those materials under the Official Information Act or to a Parliamentary Select Committee or in response to a parliamentary question.
Your health during pregnancy
Your last pay when you leave a job
Your last pay when you retire
Your lawyer or trustee company stores a copy of your will or
Your lawyer will help you to decide if a
Your licence to us for contributions to www.govt.nz
Your mother must sign the form.
Your new birth certificate details
Your new name has to consist of surname and or more other names. If you have religious, philosophical or cultural reasons to have only one name, you need to include a letter of explanation with your application.
Your partner and NZ Superannuation
Your payments start as soon as your application is processed. It usually takes about weeks.
Your personal care and welfare and property
Your personal information
Your previous name and registered sex will not be displayed on the new birth certificate. Your certificate will have a new registration number, but this number will still contain your original year of registration as the first digits.
Your property manager can do the same kinds of things for you as an attorney would under an
Your request should include:
Your rights after being arrested
Your welfare guardian can do the same kinds of things for you as your attorney would under an
Your will gives those you love clarity while they grieve losing you. Your endoflife wishes in a will can help a lot during an intense time of mourning.
Your will sets out what you want to happen with your estate and other endoflife wishes.
Your witness must sign the statutory declaration section of the form to confirm they have sighted each original photo ID. They must also certify each photo ID.
Your witness must sign the statutory declaration section of the form to confirm they have sighted your original photo ID. They must also certify your photo ID and documents.
Zero Data gives you free access to governmentsponsored websites. This way, money is not a barrier to getting important services and information.
Zero.govt.nz has you covered.
a New Zealand citizen, or
a United Kingdom national, or
a charge or security placed on property owned by someone granted legal aid
a child aged up to years
a citizen of another Commonwealth country, or
a citizen of the Republic of Ireland
a copy of your separation agreement or separation order
a copy will be posted to you and your expartner
a court in the country that issued the document.
a danger to you or your child.
a device with internet access and a camera
a doctor or registered counsellor.
a family of settled person visa, or
a list of organisations with contact details
a plain and neutral background.
a proposed image and text using these specifications:
a public register of licensed and qualifying tradespeople
a separate statutory function
a staff member at a Department of Internal Affairs public counter in Auckland, Manukau, Christchurch or Wellington
a statutory declaration that states:
a wide range of education programmes
a work broker to help find the right people
about the disposal of your firearms, other arms items and ammunition.
accept electronic eapostilles or paper apostilles.
accept multiple original documents, and not notarised copies
accepts your application fee
access to business tools and resources
accessible alternative (TXT KB)
acquire military equipment
act in accordance with their role and responsibilities as set out in the Education Act .
add your baby to your Working for Families Tax Credits
administer NCEA for secondary schools
administer New Zealands science and research activities in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean
administer a fund for land transport research
administer a national strategy on outdoor public access, including walkways
administer and monitor legislation.
administer applications for major infrastructure projects
administer exams for people wanting formal certification as translators and interpreters
administer funding for preschool services, schools and tertiary providers
administer student allowances and loans
administer the Emissions Trading Scheme and New Zealand Emission Trading Register
administer the contract with the Meteorological Service so they can provide weather forecasts and warnings
administer the rules for overseas investment in sensitive New Zealand assets, ensuring a balance between protecting those assets and facilitating investments that benefit New Zealand.
administering the NZ Oil Pollution Fund.
administering, evaluating and improving the site
advice on what to expect from tradespeople who are doing plumbing, gasfitting and drainlaying work.
advise departments early on in creating policy and laws
advise on and facilitate the creation of the data and evidence infrastructure for social investment
advise on policy and operational regulation
advise on the impact of government policies on ethnic communities and identify opportunities to affect change
advise the Government about the law
advise the Government on the defence of NZ and its interests
advise the Minister of Internal Affairs on matters relating to lotteries.
advise, lead, support and coordinate activities across the public sector
advises the Government on funding and system settings
advising for Government on policy that might affect NZ retirement income
advising the Government on setting the problem gambling levy.
advocate for the collective interests of people who experience mental distress or addiction (or both), and the people who support them.
advocates for systemlevel changes
after you have changed their name.
after you have changed your name.
aged under and for careexperienced
aged up to in Aotearoa New Zealand.
agree to release identifying information about yourself to any children conceived from your eggs (this is a legal requirement).
agree to release identifying information about yourself to any children conceived from your sperm (this is a legal requirement).
aim to reduce the harm that serious and organised crime, including financial crime, causes in communities
aims to reduce the impact on people and property when natural disasters occur, by protecting homeowners and helping them recover from natural hazard events.
air quality and pollution monitoring
alleged fraud of generally more than million
allocate funds from the National Land Transport Fund to activities on local roads and state highways including passenger transport services
allocation of provisional catch history or quota based on catch history
allowances for people on lowtomiddle incomes.
alphabet and its sounds. This can help you when saying everyday words and place names.
also has regional spread through
an European Economic Area (EEA) family permit.
an additional fee of if you also want to change your name
an approved translator, or
an authorised staff member at a New Zealand embassy or consulate
an electronic apostille, called an eapostille.
an official title or rank, or resemble one (for example, Justice, King, Prince, Princess, Royal)
an official title or rank, or resembles one (for example, Justice, King, Prince, Princess, Royal)
an original or certified copy of your marriage or civil union certificate
analyse what they hear from the communities they visit, alongside nationwide data and other information they collect.
and associated standards and regulations, including the
and confirmation that the
and either you intend to marry a:
and families, are meeting their needs, delivering services effectively, and improving outcomes
and gave it equal legal status to English. The Act has been replaced by
and include your daytime contact number.
and introduce yourself and where you are from.
and is an autonomous Crown entity, listed under the Crown Entities Act
and look for the PDF form under Other ways to apply at the bottom of the page.
and others who advocate for system change.
and the plan for revitalising the language.
animal and laboratory science
animal care and veterinary nursing
animal control and bylaws
animal control and health regulation
antenatal screening for Down syndrome and other conditions
any actions that you have already taken to resolve the complaint
any copyright in content on Govt.nz is owned by the New Zealand Crown
any other changes to your details.
any time constraints or required dates
any time on weekends and public holidays.
anything else you think is important.
appear in court together, the judge makes the dissolution order and your divorce will be official immediately.
applications and help from the Ministry of Justice.
applications for legal aid, including if an application has been declined
applications for resource consents.
applications or visas, contact Immigration NZ (
applied for an IRD number for your baby, you will receive this after about working days
apply for Best Start payments
apply for New Zealand citizenship
apply for New Zealand citizenship by grant
apply for a New Zealand passport online
apply for a RealMe verified identity and address
apply for a marriage licence
apply for a replacement driver licence
apply for an IRD number for your baby
apply for your child to be granted New Zealand citizenship.
apply to access information about your donor, or people who share your donor.
apply to be granted New Zealand citizenship, or
appoint someone to manage your bank account
appoints and employs public service chief executives
approve place names that already exist unofficially
approving any changes to casino licences
approving clinical trials of new medicines
are or but only if they are, or have been, married or in a civil union or de facto relationship.
are an Australian citizen, or
are entitled to live here indefinitely.
are made when you have mental capacity and are used for longterm purposes, such as appointing an attorney to make decisions for you if you lose your mental capacity.
are not linked to bonds or financial institutions
are responsible for the yearround management of Scott Base
are used for shortterm, temporary or specific purposes.
are working hard to process applications as quickly as possible.
around new residential dwellings, to encourage people to live in the central city
around the world, specialising in the Asia Pacific region.
arrange reinsurance or other risk transfer products in respect of all or part of
arranged for you to also have a tour.
art galleries and museums
art gallery and heritage centre.
as an official language of
as partners with the Crown to protect, promote and support the revitalisation of
assess and audit the New Zealand Defence Force functions, duties and projects.
assess and report publicly on:
assess visa applications from people who wish to visit, work, study, or live permanently here
assesses and investigates complaints made about accredited providers or services
assessing people who wish to adopt children and reports to the Family Court on adoption applications
assist an executor of a will
assist government departments in reviews of the law and are regularly called upon to assist Parliamentary select committees
assist other NZ government agencies.
at any level. Learn how to get translations and how to become a translator.
at home with your other important documents.
at least of your biological parents had a New Zealand resident visa or permit, and
attracting international keynote speakers and experts to speak at New Zealand conferences and forums.
audio recording of comments.
audit regimes for accreditation of building consent authorities
auditing and licensing medicine manufacturers.
automotive, transport, warehousing and logistics
available hours a day, days a week.
be a source of information about Auckland.
be the same, similar or different
be viewing the site in bright sunlight
be with you when you give birth
became fully operational when the Water Services Act was passed.
before January you legally married someone who meets eligibility criteria .
before January you legally married someone who meets eligibility criteria .
behave as a responsible New Zealander.
being able to use them without relying solely on their colour
benefits for people unable to support themselves
biosecurity and biodiversity management
biosecurity and public health surveillance
biosecurity, including animal and plant pest control
birth certificates from before someone changed their registered sex.
birth certificates from before someone was adopted
birth of a deceased person who died at least years ago, or who was born at least years ago
birth of a living person who was born at least years ago
birth records that are at least years old
birthday, contact the Congratulatory Messages team and they will make sure the person receives the King
birthdays of years and over
books, magazines and newspapers, and
both stop when you cancel them. They are automatically invalid when you die
boughtinstore will kits.
build trusted, competitive and effectively regulated markets
building and environmental health regulation
building and resource consents
building consents information
built environment including quantity surveying, architectural technology, construction management and supervision
business administration and computing
business and administration
business and community support
business assets worth over million
business that offers free WiFi to its customers.
by giving written notice to your attorney and successor attorney.
by giving written notice to your attorneys and successor attorneys.
by their name or what they do in government.
by their name, political party or electorate.
can travel on a New Zealand passport
cannot register details from a family member or friend of a donor or donorconceived person. The information must be registered by the person themselves.
cannot use public transport.
cannot usually be used on their own as proof of identity.
care for nationally significant heritage properties
care for New Zealand memorials, monuments, war graves and symbols of national identity.
career practitioners, such as teachers and career advisers.
carrying out audits, studies and inquiries
catchment management, including flood protection and control works
celebrate Pacific business success through various events, celebrations and initiatives
central campuses NZ Maritime School, MIT Queen Street (both in Auckland city)
certificate of approval or licence issued by the Private Security Personnel Licensing Authority
certifies your documents.
certifying seafarers and registering ships
change colours, contrast levels, fonts and text size
change place names (eg correct spelling)
change your name or gender on your passport
change, replace or cancel your
changing the colour of visited links
charged too much for their service.
check and make submissions on Bills presented to Parliament.
check for help with funeral or
check if you are eligible for citizenship.
check these rules are being complied with and take action if they find that they are not
check with the overseas organisation for any specific requirements, such as any extra forms, payments or courier bags.
check your application is in order and complies with the Employment Relations Act
check your complaint meets the criteria, and
checked and carryon baggage.
checking that the organisations which support and work with
checking the accuracy of weight andor measure in prepackaged or catchweight goods (eg checking that prepackaged meat is the advertised weight)
checks your application form
children of a donor who were not donorconceived.
choose a final resting place
choosing your attorney and their responsibilities
citizen of another Commonwealth country, or
citizen of the Republic of Ireland
citizen or ordinarily resident here
citizen or permanent resident, you may be able to get free or subsidised pregnancy care.
citizen or resident, or you care for a child who is a resident and present in
citizens and permanent residents get free pregnancy care unless you choose a private obstetrician or private sonographer.
citizenship or resident status
civil defence emergency
civil defence and rural fire
civil defence emergency management
clear, sharp and in focus.
clearly write which documents need to be apostilled or authenticated.
closely related by birth, marriage or adoption
cluster reviews of education institutions and services
coastal and harbour management
coastal navigation and safety
collect blood from volunteers
collect excise duty from tobacco, alcohol and fuel manufacturers in NZ.
collect fines and reparation
collect foreign intelligence that has a bearing on NZ
collect intelligence relevant to security
collect money from customs duties and GST on items coming in and out of NZ
collect road user charges and other revenue
collect the levy for the insurance provided under the
commission or carry out research to support quality teaching.
communicate decisions about their personal care and welfare.
communication and marketing
communications and writing
communities in emergencies and disasters.
communities the power to decide how they invest in
community and economic development
community and health services
community and student radio stations
community development and neighbourhood support.
community halls, libraries and pools
complaint forms if you have a complaint about a plumber, gasfitter, or drainlayer
complete an application form
complete survey or feedback forms
computing information technology
conduct inquiries and make recommendations in relation to security clearances.
conducting safety inspections of all NZ and foreignflagged ships calling at NZ ports
conducting user research if you registered to participate.
connect businesses with national and international experts
connect international businesses and investors with highvalue growth opportunities in New Zealand.
connecting with smaller companies who deliver power to homes and businesses
consent from a parent or guardian
considering suggestions for changes to districts or regions
considers applications for exemptions from the Code
construction including carpentry, plumbing, electrical, painting and decorating
consult on key policy developments
consult with the community about food safety issues
consult with you, your carers, family members, your other attorneys, successor attorneys and your welfare guardian.
consumer engagement: Partners in care
contact the fertility clinic directly for information, if it is known, or
contribute to or lead peace and security operations in the South Pacific
contribute to peacekeeping missions.
contribute to wholeofgovernment efforts at home and abroad in resource protection, disaster relief, and humanitarian assistance.
contributing to a socially just and equitable education system
controlling pest animals and plants
controlling pest plants and pest animals
controlling pests and disease
coordinate and train conservation volunteers
coordinate international education policy
coordinating responses to major marine pollution spills
create awareness of the opportunities and challenges of New Zealands ageing population.
creative arts and industries
creative industries and technologies
crosssocial system advice and support for the social sector with cross system work
culture, learn some words and their meanings.
of the birth or wedding
deal with competence and discipline issues in teachers
death records that are at least years old, or
debts, loans or liabilities
decide complaints about broadcasters
decides you do not have the mental capacity to make decisions about your personal care and welfare or to communicate your decisions.
deductions from your income
deed poll certificate, change of name certificate, or birth certificate showing both names, or
deed poll or statutory declaration.
defence force or police service photo identity card
defend NZ on the sea (for example, supporting fishery patrols)
deliver campaigns that challenge antisocial attitudes and behaviour.
deliver innovation programmes, training and workshops
delivering property datainsights
delivering services and consultancy in over countries.
delivers cybersecurity uplift to Pacific Islands nations
description: words maximum.
details about your enquiry.
detect and apprehend offenders
develop and administer food standards
develop and share solutions that can be used again
develop and support highperforming science and innovation
develop initiatives to raise public awareness and support for parttime military service and NZDF youth programmes.
develop land transport rules and the official New Zealand road code
develop the best systems for dairy, sheep, beef and deer farming
develop, implement and promote strategies for tourism
developing a financial reporting strategy for New Zealand
developing and monitoring maritime safety rules and marine protection rules
developing business ventures based on the land
developing consumer policy including consumer protection
developing management capability and governance skills within the sector
did not meet your expectations
did not properly carry out their duties as requested by you
digital platforms such as QV costbuilder and SalesDirect.
discharge their obligations as an ally of Australia
disciplining or prosecuting when required.
discretionary investment managed scheme (DIMS) providers
dispose of your firearms and ammunition as required by law
dispute resolution schemes
disputes over business contracts or debts
disrupts cybersecurity attacks
distribution of income, grants and scholarships
does regular user research to ensure that integrating information into Govt.nz actually makes things easier for people.
dog control and registration
dog registration animal control
doing quality assurance reviews of work done on behalf of the AuditorGeneral.
donations made outside New Zealand
donations which did not result in a birth
draft Government bills and Legislative Instruments
early childhood education
economic and community development
economic development and tourism
educate and engage workplaces about health and safety, hazardous substances and energy safety
educating the maritime community about best practice in safety and environmental standards
education and social sciences
educational certificate or school report
electricity transmission and distribution
electrotechnology, engineering and welding
eligibility to receive provisional catch history or fishing quota
email and phone facilities
emergencies in other developing countries.
emergency management, and
empower ethnic communities to achieve their aspirations.
enables participants to comply with their Code obligations
encourage New Zealanders to get involved in conservation and to get out and enjoy activities on conservation land
encourage good administration in government by giving feedback and training to agencies.
encourage the uptake of renewable energy
encourage young Pacific entrepreneurs through joint initiatives with secondary and tertiary education providers.
endoflife wishes, such as funeral,
enforce breaches of immigration law and ensure that people who are not allowed to remain in New Zealand leave when they are supposed to
enforce the law on antispam, censorship, gambling, antimoney laundering and countering financing of terrorism
enforcement of conditions placed on a grant
enforces the Takeovers Code to ensure that Coderegulated transactions are transparent and equitable
enforcing the Weights and Measures Act .
engineering, construction and infrastructure
enhance cooperation between and collaborate with law enforcement and other relevant government organisations to plan and conduct national and international operations.
enhance the value of NZs natural resources
ensure academic quality assurance
ensure safe and fair workplaces
ensure that businesses have access to the skills they need and that current and future demand for skills is met
ensure the food produced is safe
ensure the integrity and confidentiality of government information
ensures State services are delivered in the most efficient and effective way.
ensuring that every learner receives what they need to be successful, and to improve outcomes in the tertiary education system as a whole.
ensuring that relevant port facilities and New Zealand ships meet the requirements of the Maritime Security Act and various international rules
ensuring the safety of general consumer products being offered for sale or supply in NZ are safe
entitled to live in New Zealand indefinitely.
entitlements to benefits, New Zealand Superannuation, supplementary assistance and social housing
environmental health and building control
environmental information and monitoring
environmental management systems, including laws, regulations and national environmental standards
environmental monitoring and restoration
eople with visual impairments may have difficulty reading the content.
establish and maintain the rules that all pilots, engineers, aircraft operators, airlines and aerodromes follow to keep flying safe
ethnicity and any relevant cultural affiliation
events centre, libraries and pools
evidence that supports your complaint, if available
examine and monitor the treatment of people in places of detention eg in prisons, immigration detention facilities, and secure care in hospitals
examining how proposed legislation could affect individual privacy.
expert leadership advice.
explain food issues eg labelling, additives, chemicals
facetoface or virtual appointments with government and community services
facilitate digital transformation.
facilitate research and education, and contribute to the sharing of information, knowledge and expertise on natural hazard risks, impacts and resilience
family doctors who provide maternity care
family income level that determine if you can or cannot get Best Start after your child turns and years of age.
file size: aim for KB and no more than KB
file your tax returns, work with your accountant and Inland Revenue
filling out a complaint form online or sending them the complaint form by fax, email or post
films and video recordings
financial help if youre on a lower income
financial product markets (such as NZX)
finding and applying for teaching jobs
fisheries and aquaculture.
fitforpurpose plants and animals
flood and land management
focus on the stories and lived experiences of
food safety investigation
for personal care and welfare and you cannot make or communicate decisions for yourself, your family can apply to the family court:
for personal care and welfare are described here.
for personal care and welfare do not apply to a property
for personal care and welfare only starts if you lose your mental capacity.
for personal care and welfare.
for property are described here. For everything else see:
for property does not include these instructions and your attorney does not have a firearms licence, your attorney must dispose of your firearms, other arms items and ammunition in an appropriate manner, as follows:
for property has some important differences from an
for property. Consider having a different attorney for each type of
for the activation of the
for your personal care and welfare.
forecasts for NZ towns and cities, rural areas and national parks
foreign draft (only available if you apply at the Sydney office).
forensic science (eg crime scene investigation)
forestry and forestry rights
form from the Ministry of Justice website or ask for a copy from wherever you get your
form is all correctly filled out and signed, it becomes your enduring power of attorney legal document.
form online from the Ministry of Justice or ask for a copy wherever you get your
forms part of the heritage of our country.
foster collaborative projects and share knowledge about technology and innovation
foundation and youth guarantee
fraud so complicated that it needs special skills and resources to investigate it
free access to workshops and selected NZQA recognised courses.
from Polynesia in the th century and created a new language and culture.
full names of the person or couple, as they appear on their birth or marriage certificate
function and provides system stewardship of publicservice information security
fund community service providers
fund the delivery of emergency housing
funding organisations to support communities to protect and help children
gather and analyse data to inform decisionmaking in the education sector.
gave BDM permission to tell the MSD about the birth of your child, MSD may contact you to talk about any changes to your benefit.
general identity declaration form, and
genetically improve livestock
geographical indications.
get an apostille or authentication certificate for your marriage certificate, or
give accreditation to laboratories.
give advice to the Government and the tourism industry.
give awards and fellowships.
give grants funding to health researchers
give out profits from the New Zealand Lotteries Commission
give places official names
give the serial numbers of the firearms
gives confidential and reliable advice about medical problems, and where you can get help
gives general health information.
giving stakeholders insights from research.
goods and services tax (GST)
government agencies (eg the Department of Conservation)
government services, for example, paying your car registration.
grants and subsidies to encourage employers to provide work
grapegrowing and wine science
grapegrowing and winemaking
guarantee the risk of nonpayment on any of their credits, loans or bonds.
guardian responsibilities
guidance and training on best practice
had a visa that allowed them to reside in New Zealand indefinitely.
hairdressing, beauty and makeup artistry
halls, airfields and libraries
handle complaints and investigates the administrative conduct of state sector agencies, including in relation to official information requests (OIAs)
handling complaints, investigations, and recalls of medicines and medical devices, and
has new functions that:
has local websites to help you with health services in your area.
has more information about surrogacy on their website:
has no effect and your attorney has no power to make decisions until your
has no further authority and your will takes effect instead.
have a Body Mass Index in the healthy range
have a New Zealand passport or have a job that is listed below.
have a presence on a number of international forums and specialist networks relating to Antarctica.
have a purpose to mobilise New Zealanders to be world leaders in clean and clever energy use
have a say in how your child is raised
have agreed on the care of your children.
have an illness or disability
have at least parent who was a New Zealand citizen by birth or grant when you were born.
have contact with your child (unless a court rules otherwise)
have full access to education
have full economic and social rights
have health advice for pregnancy, such as:
have known you for more than year, and
have printed a page in black and white.
have your marriage certificate translated into another language.
hazardous substances, chemicals or cosmetics
health and social practice
health and social services including alcohol and drug counselling, health and wellbeing
health quality intelligence
hear appeals against licensing decisions made by the Registrar
hear appeals against provisional local alcohol policies
hearing appeals against decisions
hearing appeals to do with ward or constituency boundaries.
hearing complaints about how
help NZ businesses grow without damaging the environment.
help New Zealand businesses succeed through technology
help Pacific communities and government agencies communicate.
help a child cope with the death of a parent
help exporters of all sizes make better decisions and connect to the right partners
help food businesses understand the Food Standards Code.
help industries work safely with hazardous substances
help make our locationbased information easy to find, share and use
help migrants to settle into New Zealand
help people to access and use the collective knowledge of the nation and make information readily available
help people to reach an agreement that works for both parties.
help resolve employment issues related to territorial and cadet force personnel
help schools function by providing property, transport and information technology services
help to find a way through a problem that may not seem immediately apparent
help with creating a will
help with estate management
help with search and rescue operations
helping businesses to understand their markets and to identify opportunities for growth and collaboration
helping people access information about past adoptions.
helping to keep the banking, finance company and insurance sectors running smoothly
helping young people accept responsibility for their offending and supporting them so they do not reoffend
helplines, counselling and support services
helps businesses manage employee injuries, while encouraging safer workplaces
helps health providers to register with us, lodge and manage claims and invoice us.
helps you take the first steps
hold a New Zealand resident visa or permit, or
hold a current Australian Resident Return Visa.
hold collections of research material
hold tenancy bonds in trust until the end of a tenancy.
horticulture and animal care
household census register from an Asian country and a letter or resident permit visa from Immigration New Zealand confirming resident status.
household census register from an Asian country and a letter or valid resident permitvisa from Immigration New Zealand confirming resident status.
how long a property manager is appointed for
how long you have been living with that gender identity.
how many property managers you need
humanities and social sciences
identify and develop Aucklandspecific policies that will promote Auckland and national economic growth
identifying links to external websites.
if any donorconceived persons have been born, and their gender for .; or
if you are not part of the couple, your full name and your relationship to the couple
if your child can show a link to New Zealand
if your child has family living in New Zealand who are citizens
if your child has longstanding family or whakapapa ties to New Zealand
image size: px x px
impose special conditions for an extended supervision order
improve or simplify their experience when dealing with government
improve primary sector productivity
improve the online experience of government
improve the overall performance of the transport system
improve the responsiveness of the public sector to the needs of ethnic communities
improvements to the traffic network, to make it easier to move around the city by car, bike, or on foot.
improving leadership and capability
improving the consistency of vocational education and training
in New Zealand on or after January to parents who were not New Zealand citizens or permanent residents.
in email notifications or alerts
in hard copy publications
in pregnancy can stop it transferring to your baby.
in the United Kingdom, or
include the details of a suitable person, persons, or organisation to be contacted to take possession of your firearms, other arms items and ammunition
include their name and signature
includes powers such as buying and selling real estate, managing rental properties, buying insurance, making financial transactions in your name and collecting any debts due.
includes your health and wellbeing, where and how you live, if you need to be in fulltime care, your general welfare and enjoyment of life.
income support to help people get into, and stay in work
increase sustainable resource use
increasing the employment participation of key groups of women
indicate if you want to gift, donate or sell the items, or surrender them to New Zealand Police for destruction
infection prevention and control
inform and influence decisionmaking
information about all donorconceived persons (if they have consented) related to the donor for ..
information about exactly what happened before, during and after the marriage or civil union
information about how and where they died.
information about the health of the environment.
information for overseas trained teachers wanting to work in New Zealand.
information is kept about the donor
insights, tools, and practices that improve cross social system decision making for improving wellbeing.
international agreements (eg United Nations missions, regional security operations)
international institutions.
invest in the next generation of Pacific leaders who will make a longlasting difference in the private and public sectors across the region
investigate and analyse cyber incidents against NZ critical infrastructure
investigate and hear complaints about the conduct of Licensed Building Practitioners (LBPs)
investigate people giving immigration advice without a licence or exemption
investigate serious wrongdoing and other serious breaches.
investigate topics given to us by the Government (eg housing affordability, local government regulation)
investigates and reports on matters relating to departmental performance.
investigating and analysing maritime accidents and accident trends
investigating and responding to weights and measures complaints from consumers and business
investigating complaints about breaches of privacy
involved in the other responsibilities of raising children.
is of official languages in
is a blessing or prayer often said at the beginning of a gathering or sharing of food.
is a free training course for highlyproficient speakers to become qualified translators and interpreters.
is a government authentication and identity verification service.
is a type of greeting and introduction. You can learn your
is about your health, wellbeing and enjoyment of life. It may include, for example:
is activated because you do not have the mental capacity to take care of your property yourself, your attorney must contact
is activated due to your mental incapacity.
is appropriate for your situation.
is clear about what you want done and who will do it.
is dedicated to fostering strong, ongoing and effective relationships with
is for. You decide if you want an
is if a suitably qualified medical practitioner:
is no longer valid and your attorneys lose the authority they had under your
is not just for elderly people. Anyone over the age of should consider creating an
is separate from your will. When you die, the
is staffed by registered nurses
is the best option for your situation.
is the national antidoping agency and is responsible for enforcing the Sports Antidoping Rules through testing and investigation
is to ensure sport and recreation in New Zealand is safer and fairer.
issue driver licences and transport service licences
issue licences to people who are fit and competent to give immigration advice
issuing competence certificates.
issuing practice certificates
issuing practicing certificates.
it must be in writing and signed by both of you
keep forests safe from pests, weeds and disease
kits can be an option for some people. These are, for example:
know if any of your details have changed, so they can make sure your child support is still correct.
know the common reactions to grief, and ways to support kids, by age group
know what they need to do and how to do it.
language from to present day.
lead an ongoing review of social sector spending to measure outcomes.
lead governments ICT strategy.
lead national security planning, which includes civil defence.
lead the National Road Safety Committee, working towards safer roads, vehicles, drivers and speeds
lead work to improve housing affordability, and provide employment, residential tenancy, and unit titles dispute resolution services.
leading the Strategy for Financial Capability
leading thinking and shaping the future of education.
lease or tenancy agreement
leave instructions for funeral and memorial services.
leave the UK within months, or
legal studies and law enforcement
let organisations know about the death
let traders register with them and manage their registration online
lets people tab between links
letter from Immigration New Zealand confirming resident status
liaising with national and international organisations that have similar standard setting functions
libraries, pools and indoor facilities
license early childhood education providers
licensing casino operators and venues
licensing of people and companies working in the real estate industry
link ethnic communities with government
literacy and numeracy education
live in New Zealand indefinitely
living together in a de facto relationship when your baby was born.
local music and music promotion
local platforms and services like HEIHEI, NZ On Screen and ABLE captioning.
local roads and footpaths
local roads, footpaths and street lighting
longer than characters, including spaces
longer than characters, including spaces
look after regional parks, including pest management.
look after tracks, tramping huts and campgrounds on conservation land
looking after regional parks, including pest management.
looking after the land, air, freshwater, and coast, and
looking at the quality of practice and identifying areas for improvement across the wider
lowcost housing through central government or your local council.
mail and courier services
maintain competency standards and a code of conduct for immigration advisers
maintain the New Zealand Heritage list
maintain the Register of Radio Frequencies designed to facilitate spectrum engineering and trading
maintain the list of both registered traders and banned traders.
maintaining aviation infrastructure around the country
maintaining the NZ Marine Oil Spill Response Strategy and National Contingency Plan
major new public facilities like the Convention Centre and the Metro Sports Facility, that will encourage locals and visitors into the central city
make a credible contribution in support of peace and security in the AsiaPacific region
make a postponement order
make it clear they have seen all the pages in a document (e.g. by marking every page).
make recommendations to improve the approaches to mental health and wellbeing
make rules regulating the conduct of these lotteries, and
make sure government policy is done legally
make sure land is sustainably managed
make sure people in prison and offenders in the community serve their sentences
make sure that public sector organisations are spending public resources well and making good decisions.
make sure the death is registered within
make sure the operations of the executive government are done according to the law.
make what government does easier to understand
makes sure accredited providers consistently meet the laws, rules and regulations of the trust framework
makes use of its domestic and international networks to facilitate information exchanges within sectors, share information with trusted partners, and support our cybersecurity work in New Zealand.
making recommendations to the Minister of Local Government
making sure medicines meet safety, quality and performance standards
making sure the workers meet a specific standard
manage and account for the funds invested in transport
manage and develop property holdings for rail operations and appropriate thirdparty land use.
manage and improve forests
manage driver testing services
manage national advertising and education programmes
manage our Crown land, river and lake beds, administering high country pastoral leases, and Crown forestry licenses on land held for Treaty settlements
manage our survey and title transactions to provide confidence in our property rights system
manage passports, citizenship, name changes, and birth, death, marriage and civil union registration and certificates
manage permits and licences for hunters and fishers, and for companies that want to carry out business on conservation land, eg kayaking tour groups
manage the Crowns buildings within the parliamentary area
manage the National Heritage Preservation Incentive Fund.
manage the New Zealand Qualifications Framework, from certificates to PhDs
manage the New Zealand refugee programme.
manage the environmental impact of activities in the EEZ, including prospecting for petroleum and minerals, seismic surveying and scientific research.
manage vehicle certification, registration and licensing
manage your business, employees, suppliers, customers, business assets and property
manage your money and bank accounts
manages the accreditation mark for the digital identity services trust framework.
managing NZs power system so that electricity is delivered whenever and wherever needed.
managing and protecting the environment from the adverse effects of resource use
managing daytoday and routine tasks in your home
managing over million traffic movements per year
managing the Rescue Coordination Centre New Zealand search and rescue response service
managing the list of vaccines, medicines and devices that get subsidised in the community (part of the cost is paid by government so it is cheaper for the user)
managing the use of the natural environment (air, land, fresh water, coastal waters)
managing which hospital medicines are funded, and national contracts for some devices used in public hospitals.
marine and environmental studies
marine forecasts, warnings and tide information
marketing and promoting NZ films and filmmakers both here and overseas.
marriage records that are at least years old
marriage that occurred at least years ago
married or in a civil union at any time from when your baby was conceived until their birth, or
matches the tone of the content
material with high production values gets funded
maximise export opportunities
may provide free antenatal classes. Talk to your
medical history, if considered significant by the clinic.
meet the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (
meeting the needs of the regions of New Zealand and their learners, industries, employers and communities
members of local authorities and community boards.
mental health and addiction quality improvement
minimising the effects of pollution from ships offshore oil and gas platforms
minor offences such as disorderly behaviour.
missing and you have tried to find them, or
monitor and enforce compliance with the Residential Tenancies Act
monitor and enforce compliance with the law, and
monitor how NZ is promoting and protecting all persons with disabilities under the UN Disabilities Convention
monitor mental health and addiction services and advocate improvements to those services
monitor the aviation safety performance of each size of aircraft
monitor the performance of transport Crown entities
monitor travellers arriving in New Zealand without the required documents
monitoring and managing water quality and quantity issues
monitoring compliance with the
monitoring reactions to medicines and medical devices
monitoring system performance and using an outcomesbased approach for
monitoring the marketplace for emerging product safety risks and issues and responding to consumer complaints relating to unsafe goods.
monitoring the quality of retail fuel in NZ (diesel, petrol and biofuels)
monitoring their training
monitors and manages the financial affairs of the Government, including the Budget and the Financial Statements of the Government
monitors health outcomes.
monitors places where young people are detained.
monitors the performance of commercial entities owned by the Crown
more than working days before you get married.
motor vehicle registration
museum, libraries, pools, community halls and iSite Customer Service Centre
museums, libraries and pools
must be created with help from either a lawyer, a qualified legal executive, or an authorised officer or employee of a trustee corporation.
national cervical screening
national direction through national policy statements and strategies
national evaluations on education topics
natural event risk management eg floods.
navigate the website using just a keyboard, switch, or speech recognition software
need the car to get to work
negotiate new outdoor public access.
new public spaces gardens, parks, and gathering spaces that make the central city greener, and easier and more enjoyable to move around
newborn metabolic screening
no earlier than months before the event
no later than months after the event.
nonrelatives, such as doctors and social workers.
not act in a way that is against the interests of New Zealand
not appear in court, the court will check your forms and make the dissolution order. Your divorce will take effect month after the the order is made
not be your relative or partner
not live at the same address as you
not married or in a civil union or de facto relationship
notforprofit organisations.
notify the Ministry of Social Development (MSD) of the birth of your baby, if you get a benefit.
now, with the integration of
number. If youre not sure, contact
nursing, midwifery and medical imaging
nutrients and supplements
obey and promote the laws of New Zealand
obligations to pay maintenance or superannuation, and
obstetricians (doctors who specialise in pregnancy and childbirth).
occupational health and safety
occupational regulation of registered valuers, and
of the burial or cremation
of unsound mind or unable to act because of a medical condition.
offer a farm management service.
offer a range of loans which are not available in the private sector
offer a range of research and development grants.
offer educational support, advice and materials
offer livestreaming of these networks as well as ondemand programmes from their website
office administration and computing
official information requests (OIA)
official practice and policy
on the name change form, or
on this or any other website
only accept documents that were recently issued
only if a suitably qualified medical practitioner decides you do not have the mental capacity to manage your money, property and other assets.
only if a suitably qualified medical practitioner decides you do not have the mental capacity to manage your property.
opera and ballet productions
operate and improve the state highway network
operating radar centres in Auckland and Christchurch
operating monetary policy, eg by setting the Official Cash Rate (OCR) to keep prices stable
options for getting citizenship.
options to help with your legal costs
or have or more shareholders and or more share parcels and is at least mediumsized.
ordered a birth certificate, this will be sent to you by your choice of standard post or courier
originals, or if copies are accepted
other Working for Families tax credits, including Best Start.
other birth certificate and a letter or valid resident permit visa from Immigration New Zealand confirming resident status
other birth certificate with a letter or valid resident permit visa from Immigration New Zealand confirming resident status
other dependent children in care
other donorconceived persons related to the same donor.
other passport with a valid Australian permanent resident permit visa
other passport with a valid residence permit visa issued by Immigration New Zealand
other passport with a valid residence permit visa issued by Immigration New Zealand and a birth certificate
other things like your screen resolution and the language setting of your browser.
overseas electoral agencies
overseas with no delivery address or contact details
oversee a code of responsible conduct
overseeing the construction regulatory system, including the Building Act and the Building Code
own and operate a national network which meets the needs of its customers
parks, playgrounds and camping grounds
parks, reserves and sportsfields
parks, swimming pools and sports grounds
parks, walkways and sports fields
parks, walkways and sportsfields
participate in user research.
pay for some legal help to cover specific areas of wills and estates
pay your bills, your mortgage and other debts
paying for doctor visits and prescriptions
paying for longterm care in a rest home or hospital
payment of costs awarded to an opponent in a civil case.
people who are in positions of high public interest
permits, food licensing
personal care and welfare
personal or health information requests
plan future use of the radio spectrum
planning resource consents
planning the work for the organisation
plant variety rights, and
police practices, policies and procedures.
pool and sports stadium and gym
postgraduate qualifications.
practical support for people with the right experience to start a business.
preferred names of the person or couple celebrating the event
preparing and issuing accounting standards
preparing and issuing climate standards and nonbinding guidance on nonfinancial reporting.
preparing and issuing standards for assurance practitioners
pressure injury prevention
prevent user preferences from changing the default text size. P
primary, secondary and tertiary learners
produce several safety publications and run safety training courses and seminars.
professional and administrative services.
professional cookery and hospitality
project and career development
promote alignment, collaboration, and communication between entities involved in mental health and wellbeing
promote digital capability in government.
promote investment in the mineral estate.
promote the benefits of conservation.
promote the involvement of central government in major regional development projects
promote the wellbeing of older people, and
promote, organise and conduct lotteries
promotes public understanding of takeovers law.
promoting responsible use of medicines
property management services
property, money and other possessions
prosecute people for serious workplace health and safety failures.
protect and manage native plants, insects and animals
protect from biological risk.
proverbs and are an important part of
provide a certified copy of an acceptable photo identification (ID).
provide a direction on how funding decisions should be made.
provide a locationbased reference system to enable accurate positioning of land and sea features
provide administrative and support services to the House of Representatives and to members of Parliament
provide advice on arts, culture, heritage, sport and recreation, and broadcasting
provide advice on radio spectrum matters, including legislation, licensing and licence compliance
provide advice to government on matters relating to national security
provide advice to people who want to report serious wrongdoing in their workplace eg unlawful, or corrupt behaviour (whistleblowers)
provide an Auckland perspective in the development of central government policy
provide and support rail passenger services in metropolitan areas, and long distance services for both domestic and tourist markets
provide broadcast content to partner organisations.
provide care throughout your pregnancy
provide care to you and your baby for to weeks after the birth.
provide data about the charities sector for the public, researchers and policy makers
provide disability support services, and equipment and modification services
provide employment support, income support, entitlements and superannuation services
provide ferry services (forming the bridge between the North and South Islands) for rail and road freight, and for passengers and their vehicles
provide for the transport of bulk and consolidated freight
provide further details about the firearms, other arms items and ammunition, as requested by
provide information about travel times and traffic conditions.
provide information and advice on how people can use energy more wisely.
provide information for visitors to conservation land and manage visitor bookings
provide information on your rights and responsibilities as a landlord or tenant
provide information to add to the register
provide information to the public
provide information, codes, and guidance tools for workers and employers
provide leadership on outdoor public access issues
provide mediation services to help landlords and tenants talk about problems with tenancies
provide online resources like
provide policy advice on key issues for Pacific peoples.
provide professional leadership
provide protective security advice to government agencies
provide scientists and engineers, advice and facilities to help with technology and product development
provide sector coordination
provide social housing assessments and services
provide special education services
provide technical input into government standards policies to help with export trade
provide tours, education and information services for the public.
provide treatment programmes, education, job training and support to rehabilitate people and reduce the likelihood of them reoffending.
provides a complaints service available to everybody, from high performance to grassroots. The service is free, confidential and independent.
provides advice and guidance to government and other agencies
provides cybersecurity information and educational resources
provides disability system leadership across the government.
provides information about local health services, including general practitioners (GPs or family doctors) and hospitals
provides information, resources, tools and education
provides reports to Ministers, which are:
providing a Marine Pollution Response Service, with a dedicated team of trained oil spill response experts
providing a coastal maritime safety and distress radio service
providing air traffic control and engineering training
providing air traffic control at main city and regional airports, and NZ military bases
providing and operating lighthouses and other aids to navigation for ships on the NZ coast
providing drinking water to the region
providing education and guidance for consumers and businesses on consumer laws and issues
providing independent, expert advice to the Government on mitigating climate change and adapting to the effects of climate change
providing information to consumers.
providing residential and care services for children who need care and protection and for young people who offend
public transport and transport planning
public transport planning and funding.
public works eg energy projects, hospitals, schools
publish a list of all active licences and managers certificates in New Zealand.
publish and research broadcasting standards.
publish legislation online and in printed form
publish regularly information about the activities, finances and people involved in registered charities
publish such material in any media and in any format, including:
puts together information about the threat landscape to share with partners
qualifying financial entities
quantum of reported eligible catch.
radiation safety and emergency response
rain radar, satellite imagery and weather maps
rating, market and asset valuations and advice
reCAPTCHA security and privacy
read the most recent audit reports
read the standard explanation for personal care and welfare document.
recall an offender to prison
receive complaints from people who have received poor immigration advice.
receives reports of, and responds to, cybersecurity incidents
recognise overseas qualifications for those who plan to work or study in New Zealand.
recommendations for commendations
recommends reform to takeovers law
record the physical features of our natural and built environments to provide uptomaps and information
recovery of social welfare debts.
recreation areas, libraries and pools
recreation centre, library and pool
recreation centres and libraries
recreation centres, libraries and pools
recreation facilities, libraries and pools
reduce the number of government websites
refer disputes that cannot be resolved at mediation to the Tenancy Tribunal
refuse to be the executor.
regional and district statements and plans
regional gardens, Yarrow Stadium and Port Taranaki ownership.
regional land transport planning.
regional transport matters
register and fertility clinics
register and monitor charities
register as a citizen by descent
register as citizens by descent
register details about money owed in the PPSR (including details of who the money is owed to)
registered medical professional.
registering electrical workers
registering new social workers
registry office in Auckland, Wellington or Christchurch
regulate new organisms (plants, animals, GM organisms) and hazardous substances and chemicals
regulate the modification of archaeological sites
regulates the health system
regulating the regions natural resources
release an offender on compassionate grounds.
release nonidentifying information to potential recipients to help them choose who to use as a sperm donor
remove details from the PPSR when the debt has been repaid.
renew or replace a current or expired passport
renewing practice certificates for social workers already registered
rent, board or a home loan with an accommodation allowance
replace a lost, stolen or damaged passport.
reporting and giving advice to Parliament
reporting concerns you have about health and disability services
reporting on sector trends and innovations.
represent New Zealand in sports.
represent New Zealand internationally in aviation and maritime issues.
represent New Zealands position in the international coordination of radio spectrum use
represent the Government in court
represent you if you get a benefit or pension from Work and Income
research issues that help improve productivity.
reserves, parks and sportsfields
reset your RealMe password
resident or you have not lived here for long enough.
residential care services
resilience of food production under a changing climate
resolve issues of interference
resolves issues and complaints about poor behaviour in sport and recreation like bullying, racism and abuse
resolving disputes about the use of the Building Code
resource and building consents
resource consentingcompliance
resource consents for air, land and water use
resource consents for building and water use
resource consents for using natural resources
responding to and investigating complaints about the quality of retail fuel in NZ
responding to distress calls and beacon activations
responding to the majority of the findings of the Canterbury Earthquake Royal Commission that are related to the construction regulatory system
responding to your feedback and information provided in forms and surveys
responsibilities of raising children
responsible for the daytoday care of children
restraining or noncontact orders.
retailers in NZ and overseas.
review decisions about licences to sell alcohol and to issue managers certificates
review names for Crown protected areas (eg national parks).
review the law and processes in specific areas selected by it or referred to it by our Minister
reviews market practice and undertakes policy development
reviews the performance of public service chief executives
revitalisation initiatives in their respective
roads, footpaths, cycleways
romoting the importance of long term thinking by:
rubbish and recycling management
rubbish, recycling and landfill
rubbish, recycling and landfills
run Radio New Zealand International (RNZI), an overseas shortwave service, broadcasting to the South Pacific and beyond
run a comprehensive programme of public awareness and education activities
run health ethics committees
run radio spectrum auctions.
run training programmes for Pacific farmers and small and mediumsized businesses, and
running education programmes
rural veterinary technicians
s are registered midwives, but they can also be:
s can help in this situation. You can set up either or both a:
s give you and your loved ones another layer of clarity.
s message on their next anniversary.
safeguarding people and property from the dangers of gas and electricity
school or educational institution
school term dates for New Zealand primary, intermediate and secondary schools.
screen and test blood donations, and
screen interactions (for example, clicking on web links)
screening with your first antenatal blood tests. Picking up
scripted and factual content for a variety of freetoair television, digital and online platforms
search and rescue operations
search for organisations that can help your family.
search the PPSR to find out about any money owed on personal property
seasons of major symphonic repertoire
send you a certificate of registration.
serious offences such as rape and aggravated robbery
services, for example, selling coins and stamps, paying your bills
set policies for grants, and
set rating valuation standards and work with local government to ensure confidence in our rating valuation system
set the requirements for and approve initial teacher education programmes
set the standards for social investment practice to ensure consistency across government agencies and contracted providers
set up a trust andor act as trustee
set, publish and update guidelines on law design and content
sets the direction and policy for the health system
setting exams for electrical workers
setting industry standards
setting standards for the AuditorGeneral
severe weather information, including official warnings
sewerage and drainage systems
sewerage treatment and disposal
show them each original photo ID.
show them your original photo ID.
showing an underline when you hover over navigation links
shown in Parliament and on their website
sign language and English. The language is central to
sign the statutory declaration section of the application form to declare what you have said is true, and
small business and computing
social and community work
social work and human services
some Courtappointed liquidations.
some combination of these people.
some way for them to return your documents to you, like a selfaddressed envelope.
something from as early in life as possible.
specialist healthcare provider that manufactures high technology medical devices, mainly artificial limbs, for individual patients with an integrated rehabilitation and coordination of care service.
specialist parliamentary procedure and legal advice
specified statutory officers and appointees to Independent Crown Entity boards
spelled with numbers or symbols (for example, V).
sport science and human performance
spouses birth certificate.
staff at the Department of Internal Affairs who administer the congratulatory message service
stand for parliament or local government
statutory declaration confirming your name change has been registered with Births, Deaths and Marriages.
stillbirth records that are at least years old
stillbirth that occurred at least years ago
stop illegal imports and exports through controls at borders
stopping or changing a grant
store and manage the nations archives and library collections
stormwater and wastewater
student or tertiary identity card
supervise corporate managed funds.
supply a copy of the property
supplying NZs money, eg notes and coins
supplying trusted and independent information through
support teachers, students and their families to raise educational achievement in schools
support tertiary education organisations to be accountable, selfimproving and selfmanaging
support the development of efficient infrastructure
supporting innovation by funding research and technology development
supports government agencies and nationally significant organisations with tailored services and advice.
surgery to harvest your eggs.
survey our sea, providing official nautical charts and publications for safety at sea
sustainability and outdoor education
sustainable farming systems
sustainable regional development.
sustainable rural development
take over as main caregiver if something happens to you.
taking a pension overseas or getting an overseas pension
taking care of the regions harbours.
taking disciplinary action
technology (printing, photocopying and scanning services)
television, radio and film.
templates, either online or paperbased
that partners with private landowners to protect natural and cultural heritage sites on their land with covenants. A covenant is an agreement with a landowner to protect land forever. These covenants protect more than , ha of private land.
the Canterbury Earthquake National Memorial
the Crown to promote the knowledge and use of
the Department of Internal Affairs (on behalf of the Crown) licenses you to copy, distribute and adapt that content in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution (CCBY) . International Licence.
the External Reporting Board (
the FoodBowl located in Auckland
the FoodPilot located at Massey University near Palmerston North
the National Librarian is responsible for leading all National Library services in NZ.
the New Zealand Accounting Standards Board (
the New Zealand Auditing and Assurance Standards Board (
the Officers of Parliament Committee.
the Resource Management Act
the Sustainability Reporting Board (
the adoption is recognised under the Hague Convention, or by the Adoption Act .
the amount to be repaid by somone granted legal aid
the birth certificate of your spouses parent who was born in Samoa on or after May and before January .
the building product certification scheme
the celebrant intentionally failed to send the paperwork to Births, Deaths and Marriages after the ceremony to register your marriage or civil union.
the celebrant made a serious legal error during your marriage or civil union ceremony
the celebrants contact details, if you have them
the child was born outside New Zealand, and
the circumstances of you being a citizen by descent
the citizenship status of your adoptive parents at the time of your adoption.
the citizenship status of your biological parents at the time of your birth
the clinic where the donation happened.
the conditions placed on a grant
the cost of raising a child
the and place of the marriage, or when and where it was intended to happen
the and place you were married
the and time you visited the site
the of divorce if your marriage has been dissolved in NZ.
the , year, or range of years to search
the delivery address and daytime contact number
the donor has asked for information about the donorconceived person.
the donorconceived person
the donorconceived person shares a donor with another
the effectiveness, efficiency, and adequacy of approaches to mental health and wellbeing
the full names of the couple involved in the marriage or civil union
the gender you want on your citizenship certificate, and
the government agency that issued the original document
the governments health and disability policies
the maximum level of legal aid granted
the mayors of some cities.
the mental health and wellbeing of people in NZ
the name of the marriage or civil union celebrant
the name of the person who applied for your information
the name of the ship they arrived on
the outcome you are seeking.
the pages you visited on our site and the links you clicked on
the place where the event happened, and
the planning and commissioning of health services in NZ
the process of changing or cancelling an
the provision of goods and services.
the purpose of the initiative or trial, including the target audience
the quality and measurement of gas and electricity.
the referring site (if any) from which you clicked through to this site
the relevant application form.
the safety of electricity supply, and transmission generating systems
the safety of gas and electrical appliances and installations
the search terms you used
the signature and witness requirements
the specific goal being sought by linking from Govt.nz (such as seeking feedback on a trial, raising awareness as part of initial launch)
the tenants living in your house
the type of record (birth, death, marriage, civil union or name change)
the type of web browser you use, such as Chrome, Internet Explorer or Mozilla Firefox
the year of their birth, death, or marriage.
they are or under, and
they were born here, they are a New Zealand citizen, or they are entitled to live here indefinitely.
think about what outcome or resolution you would like.
tips on how to talk with children
tips on what you need to check when youre hiring a tradesperson
to act on behalf of plus
to be released on conditions.
to have someone appointed as your welfare guardian
to help reduce your legal costs.
to log securely into online services such as your Inland Revenue account, and to renew or replace your passport.
to manage your child support if your child is:
to protect their interests in case of incapacity.
to the end of the service
tobacco, such as cigarettes
tools for your money confidence and financial wellbeing
tourism, travel and hospitality.
tourism, travel and retail
trades and professional skills
training and seminars to help clients get up to speed quickly
training, seminars or work experience to build up confidence and skills
transitioning to more efficient, productive, safer agrifood systems.
transport for medical reasons.
transporting bulk electricity from where its to cities and towns
travel overseas on a New Zealand passport
ultrasound scans to check your reproductive system
unable to complete the form because of a medical condition
under , or and attending a registered school in
undergo several rounds of blood tests
underlining link text that appears in body copy so that people can scan and see them
understand from ethnic communities what they need to thrive and communicate this to government
understand the structure of government
understand what a decision is about
understand what could happen because of a decision made about their personal care and welfare
understanding of standards and commitments of the teaching profession
undertake mapping of outdoor public access
undertake workplace assessments and investigations to improve health and safety at work
universal newborn hearing screening.
used to be called Homecare Medical.
uses plain English for all Govt.nz content, with a Flesch reading ease score of at least
using overseas parental orders to get citizenship
usually live in New Zealand
utility bill (for example, gas, electricity, mobile phone)
vary or cancel any release conditions imposed
vehicles and child seat restraints
verify they are your parent, and
video filming of screen activity
wage subsidies to help with the costs of employing staff.
walkways, footpaths and streetlights
want the documents translated
was established as an independent statutory entity as required by
wastewater, stormwater and drinking water
water quality and water quantity management
water treatment and supply
water, wastewater and stormwater
website for support and information:
website to find out how to:
websites of government and nongovernment services
wedding anniversary (or any anniversary after a
weekly Best Start payments that you receive
went through the admission agreement with the manager
what to do with your cat if you cannot have it with you.
what your property managers need to report on to the Family Court
when and where the child was born, and
when and where you were born, and
where and when you were adopted
where and when you were born
where to locate a business, and
where we need roads, schools and hospitals
where you do and do not want to live
whether or not the application was granted.
who are in care or at risk of coming into care
who your welfare guardian is
why you want your child to be a New Zealand citizen
will let your employer or Work and Income know when and how much to take from your pay.
with government assistance before
with your enduring power of attorney (
within the Department of Internal Affairs and came into effect on
words are used frequently in New Zealand. Learn some basic words, their meanings and hear how they are pronounced.
words you find. You can translate
work on the most common browsers, platforms and devices, and with assistive technologies.
work to improve the energy efficiency of New Zealands homes and businesses
work to prevent crime before it happens
work with businesses, community groups, iwi and others to help them get involved in conservation
work with government agencies to support the delivery of quality services
work with other agencies and parties to improve workplace health and safety systems
work with other agencies to apply the social investment approach
work with other agencies to develop reform proposals.
work with people to find answers that reflect good faith and common sense
work with the Civil Aviation Authority and Aviation Security Service on air safety
work with the Pacific public and private sectors to strengthen commercial and trade relationships
workrelated training, and
working with children, young people and their families
works across the government to improve outcomes for more than million disabled people in New Zealand.
works out the amount and manages the payments.
works to help with the protection, wellbeing and prosperity of
works to prevent injuries from happening
workshops and masterclasses
workshops and practical advice for getting work
write the and place they signed the documents, and
write the they signed the photo.
write your full name, and
writing a complaint letter and sending this by fax, email or post.
you are a parent or guardian of a donorconceived person who is aged or under.
you are named on the register, and you are aged or over
you both have to get independent legal advice
you can remarry or enter into a new civil union.
you have any concerns regarding your privacy.
you intend to marry outside New Zealand in accordance with the Foreign Marriage Acts to of the Parliament of the United Kingdom.
you need any content sent to you in a different format
you were born before January , and
you were born in the British Empire.
you were born outside New Zealand, and
you would like to access or change your personal information DIA has stored
youre or and have consent from all your guardians, and
your birth certificate or birth record
your child was born on or after
your citizenship or resident status (you must be a New Zealand citizen or entitled to live here indefinitely).
your current NZ driver licence
your current NZ passport, or
your current passport or photo ID
your dates and places of birth
your email address and phone number
your email or postal address
your expired NZ driver licence, as long as it did not expire more than years ago
your face in a neutral expression, not smiling or frowning and with your mouth closed
your face looking directly at the camera
your full birth certificate with your parents names
your full names before your marriage
your home address when you got married
your local Member of Parliament.
your marriage certificate
your mobile device is connected to a participating network (step ),
your name and gender as recorded when you became a citizen
your operating system, for example Windows, MacOS
your original birth certificate
your parent or legal guardian, and
your parent was born in Western Samoa on or after May and before January , and
your passport or travel document.
your passport, travel document, or stateissued ID
your preference to go into a care facility that allows residents to bring their pets
your signatures must be witnessed by a lawyer
your spouses birth certificate, and
your will takes effect instead.
zoom in up to without text spilling off the screen or having to scroll horizontally at small resolutions
kjtrvweh : Confidential advice to Government
Building Innovation Partnership delivers a ministerial briefing on a Quake Centre initiative to develop a National Digital Infrastructure Model (NDIM).
Circular economy attributes:
On three and a half days each year, almost all shops must close under the Shop Trading Hours Act . These are Christmas Day, Good Friday, Easter Sunday, and until pm on ANZAC Day.
holidaysactreviewpapers
holidaysactreviewpapersb
(excluding GST) Register and Service Type Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee levy) Change in charge Companies register Name approval . . . . . Company incorporation . . . . . (.) Annual return . . . . . . Annual return API . . . . . . Amalgamation . . . . . Restoration . . . . . Personal Property Securities register Registrationrenewal financing statement . . . . (.) Registrationrenewal financing statement API . . . . (.) Basic search Internet . . . . Basic search API . . . . Financial statement s (Disclose and Companies registers) Financial statement filing . . . . (.) Disclose register Disclose: Managed fund offers Lodgement of product disclosure statement (per fund) . . . . . Add new fund to existing managed fund (limited disclosure) . . . . . Annual confirmation to managed fund (per fund) . . . . . Disclose: Other financial products Lodgement of product disclosure statement (per PDS) ,. ,. ,. ,. ,. Add limited disclosure to other financial product ,. ,. ,. ,. ,. Annual confirmation other financial products (per PDS) ,. ,. ,. ,. ,. Disclose: Managed investment schemes Register managed investment scheme or governing document ,. ,. ,. . . File scheme annual report . . . . . CO levy ., NZBN levy ., IP levy . .
(excluding GST) Register and Service Type Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee levy) Change in charge Friendly Societies register For filing, under section () of the Act, a copy of a special resolution passed for the purpose of amalgamation or transfer of engagements or conversion into a company. . . . . . For filing a resolution for conversion of a society into a branch under section of the Act . . . . . (.) For any cancellation or suspension of the registration of a society or branch under any of paragraphs (d) to (g) of section () of the Act . . . . . . For filing an instrument of dissolution under section of the Act . . . . . (. ) Retirement Villages register Registration application . . . . (.) Annual return ( units) . . . . Annual return ( units) . . . . . Annual return ( units) ,. ,. ,. . Insolvency Practitioners register Licence registration . . . . . Annual confirmation . . . . (.) Auditors register Registrationrenewal of a licence . . . . . Annual confirmation . . . . . includes the financial statement filing cost of . Retirement Villages Land transfer fees It is proposed that sections (b)(c), (a) (c) and of the Retirement Villages (Fees) Regulations are amended to refer to fees charged by the Registrar General of Land, as set out in the Land Transfer Act , and the regulations thereunder .
. per of liable earnings
. billion was from the professional services sector
. billion was from manufacturing
. billion was from the hire and property rental sector
. per of liable earnings
. billion (just over ) was from the primary sector
million (, per business)
million to fund foodbanks and community food organisations.
million (over years)
. billion direct, . billion indirect contribution to GDP
. billion or of exports
. million for the second round of the Regional Events Promotion Fund
million for a Regional Tourism Boost
million to secure more business events for New Zealand
million was from the construction sectors
million was from the health care and social assistance sector.
. billion was held in Te Waipounamu (South Island)
million was from the education sector
million for New Zealand Cycle Trail Fund to enhance the Great Rides
of invoices paid within business days
Keys for Gender Sensitive OSH Practice Guidelines for Gender Mainstreaming in Occupational Safety and Health
Grow relates to economic performance. To achieve the standard of living and quality of life for today and for future generations we need a wellperforming economy through productive and sustainable use of resources across New Zealand.
No information given represents individuals who did not give information on this aspect, or who indicated they preferred not to say.
Refugees are participating fully and integrated socially and economically as soon as possible so that they are living independently, undertaking the same responsibilities, and exercising the same rights as other New Zealanders and have a strong sense of belonging to their own community and to New Zealand.
(Delayed from July ).
(Delayed from Quarter )
(Delayed from Quarter )
(Do not use this email address for queries about your visa application.)
(Including the Geneva Convention, Convention on Cluster Munitions etc.)
(New slide the that were identified and emerged as the high scoring products from Stage I into Stage II are spread across a wide range of systems, products, processes, and categories. The table lists the opportunities and Tim Morris and Virginia Wilkinson are in the bottom righthand corner)
(New slide stating that the project woks to a clear client brief and lists client brief and select key concepts, which are the challenges, purpose of the work and the requirements)
(OIA request) from us, we encourage you to check out our sources of information below as you may find the information you need is already publicly available:
(OSHAA provides that regulations may be made for registration of space objects)
(Overseas): .
(The Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety made a minor amendment to paragraph of the terms of reference.)
(a leap year). An accrual ra t e of . would mean that in a day year an employee would accrue . weeks (which is just less than four
(a) immediately on publication; or
(a) publication in a fully Open Access journal (i.e., Gold OA); or,
(b) deposit of an acceptable version in a suitable online repository (i.e., Green OA)
(b) where a publisher policy requires an embargo period, immediately at the end of the embargo period or months after the of such publication, whichever is earlier.
(e) regulations and ;
(formerly known as Hale Twomey).
(formerly the Governmentfunded Centre for Space Science Technology (CSST)), based in Alexandra, which has plans to develop satellite data products to drive regional economic growth.
(hurt and humiliation) of the employee, or the loss of any expected benefit.
(in consultation with your offic e)
(many can be studiedearned under apprenticeships):
(refer paragraphs above) . We have proposed the same with regards the rules for reducing the divisor for the AWE calculation to account for periods when an employee off work and receivi ng no or reduced pay (refer paragraph above) . .There are a reas where opportunity for simplification may exist and areas where stakeholders are likely to raise a variety of perspectives on the underlying policy. Our proposed approach will provide the opportunity to consider the overall operation of the rules in t his area further . Potential o pportunities for simplification include : Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government . I n Cabinet agreed that AL payments would be based on the greater of three rates: Ordinary Leave Pay (OLP) (a new calculation to replace the current Ordinary Weekly Pay (OWP) which has been problematic ), Average Weekly Earnings ( AWE ) of the last weeks or AWE over the last weeks. The short run A WE adds a third calculation to the methodology in the Act . Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government T he complexity of the rules for determining the use of AL entitlement . One of the most problematic areas of the Act is determining the amount of the fourweek AL entitlement an employee uses when they take time away from work. Employers and employees must agree on this based on what genuinely constitutes a working week for the employee. The lack of prescription and extent of flexibility means that, in the case of employees with work cycles different to seven days (for example shift cycles or nine day fortnights) or variable hours of work, discretion and judgement must be app lied.
(the ERA)), employment with the outgoing employer ceases at the point of restructuring. It is common for the incoming employer to reach a contractual agreement with the outgoing employer to offer positions to current employees. To the employee, it appears as though their employment has
(with targeted communications) :
) to their analysis of different occupational diseases against the technical criteria.
). You will be asked to provide your name and email address so we can send you future electronic newsletters. When you unsubscribe to our alert or newsletter, your details will be deleted from the database.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, l NOVATION EMPLOYMENT HIKINA WHAKATUTUKI BRIEFING Interim Report from the Holidays Act Taskforce December Priority: Medium I Security classificat ion: In Confidence Tracking number: Action sought Action sought Deadline Hon lain LeesGalloway Agree to the proposed twomonth January Minister for Workplace extension to the timeframe with the Relations and Safety Taskforce reporting to you in July Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone st contact Gerard Clark Employment Standards Policy Manager Principal Analyst, Jon Saunders Employment Standards The following departme ntsagencies have been consulted Ministers office to complete: Comments D Approved D Noted Seen D See Ministers Notes D Declined D Needs change D Overtaken by Events D Withdrawn BRIEFING MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT HIKINA WHAKATUTUKI Interim Report from the Holidays Act Taskforce December Priority: Medium Security In Confidence Tracking classification: number: I Purpose . This is the Interim Report from the Holidays Act Review Taskforce (the Taskforce) which you established in May to review the Holidays Act (the Act) and make recommendations for change. Executive summary . The Taskforce is making good progress and is currently identifying and developing possible solutions to address the issues with the current Act. The Taskforce expects to be in a position to report back to you with recommendations for change that have been robustly tested in July . This is a slight extension to the anticipated report back of May to allow the Taskforce to conduct some additional targeted consultation on its recommendations prior to reporting to you. . To , the Taskforce has an Issues Paper and received almost submissions on issues with the Act and ideas for change. The Taskforce has considered a number of options for change and has identified two main alternative options for determining and paying leave entitlements. It now intends to test these options with an independent payroll advisor. . In addition to its detailed testing with a specialist payroll advisor, the Taskforce also intends to conduct targeted confidential consultation with key stakeholders including a broader group of payroll providers in the first half of . This will ensure that the Taskforce can be confident that its final recommendations are credible, implementable and will meet the objectives of the review ( outlined in Annex One). MBIE view on the proposed extended timeframe . MBIE supports the Taskforces request for a twomonth extension to the timeframe and recommends that you agree to it. The additional consultation that the extension would allow for will mean that the Taskforces recommendations are better informed, better understood by key stakeholders and more likely to resolve current issues without creating any unintended consequences. . If the Taskforce did not undertake this additional consultation it is likely that MBIE would seek to do so after the Taskforce reported. The impact on the overall timeframe for making policy decisions on changes to the Act is therefore likely to be minimal. MBIE considers that the twomonth extension to the timeframe is justified. Recommended action The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment recommends that you: a Note the attached interim report from the Holidays Act Taskforce Noted In Confidence b Agree to a twomonth extension to the review timeframe to allow for additional targeted consultation with the Holidays Act Taskforce reporting to you with its final recommendations in July . Gerard Clark Ho lain eesGall ay Manager, Employment Standards Policy Minister foiWar,k lace Relations and Labour and Immigration Policy, MBIE Safety It I.R . I . I . . fI .. fl.tlg In Confidence Background . On May , following Cabinet agreement earlier in May, you announced the establishment of a Taskforce to review the Act. . The Taskforce comprises BusinessNZ, the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions (NZCTU) and government (MBIE, the State Services Commission and Inland Revenue are all represented) and is chaired by Professor Gordon Anderson, an employment law specialist from Victoria University. MBIE provides the Secretariat to the Taskforce. . The Taskforce had its first meeting in July and has met monthly since then. The Taskforces Terms of Reference are included as Annex One. As part of Stage One of the review the Taskforce an Issues Paper in August . At its first meeting the Taskforce agreed to the following threestage process for the review: Stage One Understanding the full range of issues with the current Act (including the publication of an Issues Paper to seek feedback from key stakeholders) Stage Two Identifying and testing possible solutions (including robust testing of the impact of alternative options on different forms of working arrangements, employers and sectors) Stage Three Confirming the preferred option and drafting the Taskforces recommendations and final report. The Issues Paper set out a number of key issues that employers, employees and payroll providers experience with the Holidays Act . . In late August the Taskforce an Issues Paper on MBIEs website which set out its understanding of the key issues employers, employees and payroll providers face in trying to implement the Act. The Issues Paper sought feedback from key stakeholders on whether: the issues set out in the Issues Paper were described accurately stakeholders had experienced any other issues working with the Act that were not captured in the paper stakeholders had any suggestions or proposals for change . In recent years a number of issues have been identified with the Act that have made it difficult to implement in practice. In addition to a range of specific issues relating to specific parts of the Act (for example, determining entitlements and payments for annual holidays), there are also some more fundamental, crosscutting issues. These crosscutting issues relate to the design of the Act itself and are the cause of many of the perceived problems employers, employees and professional service providers (including payroll providers) face in working with the Act. The main issues in this category are: the lack of specific prescription in the Act. For example, the Act does not define a week for the purpose of the annual holidays entitlement, which causes difficulties when it is not obvious (for example, if employees work on a roster pattern that does not fit a weekly cycle, or they work variable hours and days from week to week). the complexity of the Act. There are a number of different calculations for different parts of the Act. Often employers are unclear which calculations should be used and many In Confidence employers are not using the correct calculations at the correct times (or are carrying out the calculations incorrectly). the lack of clarity. For example, there is insufficient guidance provided to ensure a common understanding of terms such as regular between all parties. It is also unclear how to translate the hours generally used as the base unit of time by payroll systems into the days and weeks as required by the Act, especially when an individuals working arrangements change. . In addition to these crosscutting issues there are a range of specific issues related to those sections of the Act that deal with: the entitlements to, and payments for, annual holidays. For example, determining what a week is when it is not clear from the working pattern, knowing which method to use to determine payments for annual holidays and how to use it correctly, and using the Pay As You Go provisions inappropriately. the entitlements to, and payments for, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays and sick leave (BAPS leave).For example, determining an otherwise working day and determining what payments are included in an employees relevant daily pay and when average daily pay can be used instead. . The Issues Paper set out the issues noted above in some detail and asked for feedback from stakeholders on a number of specific questions . . and stakeholders generally felt the Issues Paper captured the main issues they experience in working with the Act. . The Taskforce received a good response to the Issues Paper with substantive submissions received. The submissions covered a wide range of issues, ranging from a focus on a single specific issue, to comments relating to many aspects of the Act and suggestions for new systems to replace the existing Act. . The substantive submissions comprised: submissions from employers from payroll practitioners or providers from individuals from other groups or organisations (such as law and accounting firms submitting based on their clients experiences). . NZCTU is seeking the input and views of individual trade unions through its own internal consultation process throughout the review. NZCTU then represents the views of these unions in discussions at Taskforce meetings. This process explains the lack of responses from individual trade unions to the consultation on the Issues Paper. . The vast majority of submissions () felt that the Issues Paper accurately captured the main issues with the current Act. Many suggestions for change were received with some consistent key themes . Many of the responses to the Issues Paper made suggestions about how the system could be improved. While there were many detailed submissions with specific proposals, there were a number of key themes that emerged from the submissions. The headline messages that came through from the submissions in relation to any potential changes were: strong support for a more prescriptive approach (whatever shape this took) strong support for a simplified system with fewer calculations In Confidence strong support for an accrualbased system (similar to the Australian system) strong support for a system based on hours. . A more detailed summary of the submissions received is attached as Annex Two. The Taskforce is now considering options to address the issues with the current Act Two main options are currently being considered . . While the Taskforce has considered a wide range of options for change it is currently considering two main options. Both involve a simplified system for how the payment for all forms of leave should be calculated with alternative systems for calculating an individuals leave entitlement. . The first option that is being considered would retain the existing entitlementbased system whereby an employee becomes eligible for weeks of annual leave after months of work but would provide greater clarity about how to calculate leave entitlement for those with unpredictable work patterns. . The second option would be based on an accrual system whereby an employee accrues leave from their first day of employment up to the existing entitlement of weeks. . Both options would also include a much greater level of prescription about how leave entitlements and payments should be calculated, in particular for those with working arrangements with variable hours andor pay. . The Taskforce has not settled on final versions of these options, and the testing phase will involve assessing a number of suboptions which may produce slightly different results for different types of working arrangements . . . . and these options will be rigorously tested with payroll systems and key stakeholders. . The Taskforce is conscious that any new system it recommends must protect employees entitlements while being capable of being implemented in the New Zealand payroll environment (as set out in the Terms of Reference). The Taskforce is planning a robust testing phase to ensure that it fully understands the implications that different options would have on the entitlements received by employees across different working arrangements, employers and sectors. . The Taskforce has contracted a specialist provider to conduct detailed payroll testing and provide independent advice to the Taskforce on the implications these options for change would have for employees, employers and payroll systems. . This independent advice to the Taskforce will be supplemented by additional targeted consultation with key stakeholders with a significant interest in the outcome of the review. For example, the Taskforce intends to consult, on a confidential basis, with a broader range of payroll providers in . The groups represented on the Taskforce (NZCTU, Business NZ and the government) will also undertake their own consultation with their own networks. . Only once this full series of testing has been carried out and the implications of the different options are well understood will the Taskforce consider its final recommendations. In Confidence The Taskforce will also make recommendations in relation to a range of other issues with the Act. .. . There are also a range of other more specific issues relating to the Act which the Taskforce will consider and may make recommendations about. Some of the more substantive issues that the Taskforce will consider include: Employees who miss out on public holidays because their work pattern does not include a Monday It has been suggested that employees wh,o do not work a regular day week miss out on the full entitlement to public holidays because when a public holiday falls on a weekday that they do not usually work they do not receive a paid day off. They may also not benefit from any public holiday that falls on a Saturday or Sunday being transferred to a Monday. The Holidays Act override in the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act (PLEPA) The PLEPA overrides the Holidays Act so that a person who returns to work after a period of parental leave is entitled to only average weekly earnings for months. This effectively means that annual holidays taken the moment they return are paid , which gradually increases over the next months. It has been argued that this approach is discriminatory against parents who have taken parental leave (overwhelmingly women), and contrary to the objectives of the PLEPA (to protect the rights of employees during pregnancy and parental leave). Taking sick leave for part days Some employees may only need to be off work for part of a day (e.g. they go home early). The Act is silent on the possibility for part days to be paid as sick leave, but some employers already do this anyway. Whether a new or revised Act should include requirements in relation to the software to be used for Holidays Act purposes Adopting this type of approach would be similar to approaches used by Inland Revenue in relation to tax compliance and could provide greater assurance that employers were complying with the Act. Consideration will need to be given to the compliance costs (for both government and employers) of the accreditation or other regulation of software. The treatment of existing leave entitlements upon the sale and transfer of a business The Act requires employers to pay out any outstanding entitlements to their employees when employment ends (including when a business is sold or transferred). Despite this, industry practice is often for holidays entitlements (e.g. accrued sick leave, or annual holidays) to be retained by an employee when they are transferred from one employer to another. The Act does not currently provide for this practice . . before the Taskforce reports to you with its final recommendations in July . . When it was established the Taskforce was expected to report to you with its final recommendations within months. While the Taskforce initially planned to report to you in May , it now proposes to report to you in July to allow time for the targeted consultation with key stakeholders outlined above to take place. . The Taskforce considers that the benefits of this additional targeted consultation (which would support the credibility and validity of the final recommendations) justify a minor In Confidence extension to the timeframe of the review. The extension would mean that while the review of the Holidays Act would take longer than the original timeframe, the Taskforce itself (which held its first meeting in July ) would report back within months. In Confidence Annex One: Holidays Act Review Taskforce Terms of Reference Purpose . The purpose of the Holidays Act Working Group (the Group) is to make recommendations to Government for a clear and transparent set of rules for providing entitlements to, and payment for, holidays and leave that can be readily implemented in a payroll system and is applicable to an increasingly diverse range of working and pay arrangements. . It is important that a customerfocused approach is taken to this review to ensure that recommendations are readily implementable by employers and their payroll providers. Background . There is widespread noncompliance with the Holidays Act (the Act) and it is generally accepted that this is due both to issues with the implementation of the legislation in payroll systems and the business processes that support these, and issues with the legislation itself. . The Act works well for a standard, five day, hour week, but can be difficult to apply to more diverse working arrangements and complex remuneration packages . This is primarily because the Act is based on two key principles relating to entitlements and pay: a) that entitlements are determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken b) that employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave, that is, they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked. . In these situations , the Act relies heavily on employers making judgements as to how the provisions of the Act apply to the specific circumstances of the individual employees, and in some cases agreement with the employee is required. In some cases, these may need to happen each time leave is requested. . The result is an Act that does not provide certainty to employers and employees, is difficult for employees and employers to understand and interpret, is hard to systematise in a payroll system, and can incur relatively high compliance costs for employers. Objectives . The Group is required to develop, test and make recommendations to the Government on policy options for the provision of, and payment for, holiday and leave entitlements that: a) continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act b) provide clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements c) are simpler than the current Act in relation to provisions of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave d) are readily implementable in a payroll system e) minimise compliance costs for employers f) minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees g) ensure the balance of decisionmaking between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated In Confidence h) are readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future i) aim to protect overall entitlements for employees. Scope and parameters . The Review will retain the purpose of the current Act (in section ) and (at least) the current levels of entitlements ( such as four weeks annual holidays, five days sick leave). . The Group will consider: a) options to improve both the provision of, and payment for, entitlements that meet the objectives set out in paragraph , and: i. where tradeoffs between competing objectives are required, will be explicit about how these are made ii. may include consideration of the place of the standard five day, hour, working week in the Act b) any other matters relating to the Act that it sees fit. This may include holidays and leave entitlements modified by other Acts (such as the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act ). . The principles set out in paragraph may also be reconsidered, but options must aim to preserve the intent of these as far as possible. . The Group will not, however, consider the complex issue of remediation of historical underpayments of holiday and leave pay. Membership and Process . The Group will consist representatives from MBIE, the State Services Commission and Inland Revenue, along with three to four members each representing workers, employers, led by an independent Chair with the power to commission work. . The Group will be chaired by Gordon Anderson, a law professor at Victoria University. The Chair is an independentneutral party in the Group discussions, whose purpose is to facilitate the parties to reach jointly agreed recommendations to Government. . The Group is expected to consult widely to get a comprehensive understanding of the issues with the Act, and draw on international examples of holidays and leave legislation where appropriate. . The Group is also expected to work closely with technical experts such as payroll providers, business rules specialists, and service design and delivery specialists to assist with the design and testing of policy options. . The Group is required to support their recommendations with quantitative analysis of different options, tested with bona fide payroll data, to ensure that those options are readily implementable and adverse consequences have been identified. . The parties agree that consistency of attendees will be important for the Group to achieve its objectives, and will ensure that representatives will not be changed unless this is unavoidable. If any change in representatives is required, the party concerned will ensure the new attendees have been well briefed on previous discussions and progress. . The parties will each ensure that their constituentsstakeholders have appropriate opportunity to have input into development of options, through the parties internal governance In Confidence arrangements. MBIE will ensure that appropriate crossagency structures in place for senior government officials to be kept informed of, and have input into, the work of the Group. . MBIE will provide secretariat support to the Group and information and research that the Group identifies is required to facilitate its discussions. Rules of engagement . The parties agree that they will: a) work together in good faith, balancing the interests of all parties b) hold discussions in confidence and on a without prejudice basis c) agree any external communications at each meeting. . If the parties are unable to reach agreement on recommendations, the Groups final report will outline: a) the areas where the parties have reached agreed recommendations b) the areas of difference . Timing and reporting . The Group will report back to the Minister of Workplace Relations and Safety with their recommendations within months. This timeframe will give the Group sufficient time to commission work and undertake robust testing of options. . The Group will also provide an interim report after six months, so that Cabinet and the New Zealand public can be informed about the Groups progress. . Each party will be responsible for reporting to their constituentsstakeholders, in accordance with any messaging agreed during the Groups discussions and as required by their internal governance mechanisms. In doing so, the parties agree to honour the confidentiality of the Groups discussions. In Confidence Annex Two: Summary of submissions on Issues Paper . The Taskforce received a good response to the Issues Paper with substantive submissions received. The submissions covered a wide range of issues, ranging from a focus on a single specific issue, to comments relating to many aspects of the Act and suggestions for new systems to replace the existing Act. . The headline messages that came through from the submissions were: Strong support for a more prescriptive approach (whatever shape this took) Strong support for a simplified system with fewer calculations Strong support for an accrual based system Strong support for a system based on hours. Details of submissions . substantive submissions on the Taskforces Issues Paper were received. Of these, were submitted directly to the Secretariat as standalone submissions while were submitted via MBIEs online response form. . Along with the substantive online submissions, a further respondents also completed part of the on line response form. As these respondents were either duplicates of other submissions or did not provide any comments (apart from their name and contact details) they were excluded from the analysis. Key themes in submissions . The following key themes were raised by submissions on the Issues Paper, with some examples of the specific comments made on each theme. There are a number of reasons why employers have difficulty complying with the Act, including: o the Act being overly complex with too many calculations o the lack of support or expertise that payroll professionals have o the Act is not systematisable as it requires too many judgement calls. The problems with the Act affect many different types of employers and employees, such as: o employees who are paid piece rates or commissions, or who work overtime or unpredictable hours o employees who change their pay, role or working patterns o nonstandard workers (e.g. gig workers, shift cycles that are not days). The two broad principles that the Taskforce identified as underpinning the Act (that entitlements should be determined in relation to the work pattern at the time leave is taken, and that employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave) are generally appropriate, although: o the principles may no longer be relevant for all workers o the principles may not be compatible with simplicity o the principles allow employees to game the system and favour the employee over the employer. There are specific issues relating to the provision of annual holidays and BAPS leave, and there are crosscutting issues that apply to the Act in general, such as: In Confidence o terms like working week and otherwise working day being unclear o closedowns and the saletransfer of business can cause problems o the Mondayisation of public holidays can be an issue as employees who do not generally work on Mondays can be seen as missing out on some public holidays o subjective andor unclear decisions about when to use various calculations o the application of leave entitlements to casual employees. A number of submissions made comments about the role and function of the Labour Inspectorate, such as: o the Inspectorate should provide more guidance and be more accessible to employers who need support with holidays entitlements o the Inspectorate should have more responsibility for making consistent binding determinations, but these decisions should be able to be appealed. Along with comments about the problems with the current Act, many submitters provided proposals for changes and suggestions for improvements, including: o using an accrual system where employees accumulate actual time off, rather than a hypothetical week entitlement o providing more guidance on the various terms used in the Act o reducing (or eliminating) the subjective decision points in the Act o reducing the number of different types of payments and calculations o clarifying or simplifying the processes for closedowns, the treatment of casual employees, the transfer of public holidays, alternative holidays and interactions with parental leave o requiring (or allowing) payroll providers to have their payroll software accredited as compliant and approved. In Confidence
Note that the Liability Convention and Outer Space Treaty do not assign liability to states regarding the operation of launch facilities and operation of high altitude vehicles.
: Renewal of overseas launch licence
Over time the NZSA may undertake further conformity assessments of other overseas licences, permits or authorisations with a view to adding to the list detailed in section . of this policy.
Regulation : R equirements for orbital debris mitigation plan
Regulation : R equirements for orbital debris mitigation plan . Policy intent New Zealand has establish ed a policy position and process on how to assess applications for payload permits for operations involving ADR and OOS . This policy considers mitigations for the following risk areas: Orbital debris mitigation Security and stability Liability and insurance .
This will also ensure the payloads have a very limited life ( years) which further reduces the probability of collision, and that any risk to, or interference with, the operations of crewed spacecraft is eliminated. . Conditions If a payload permit is granted section of the Act provides that t he Minister may impose conditions on the payload permit or overseas payload permit as necessary . There may be cases where imposing specific permit conditions can mitigate the concerns around payloads that are unable to be tracked an dor that propose to operate at altitudes above crewed spacecraft. Such conditions may include (but not limited to): requirements to install a device or beacon that transmits location data ; requirements to collaborate with other spacecraft operators f or the purposes of collision avoidance; and requirements to notify the NZSA of any incident or accident involving the permitted spacecraft .
, a reference for managers of mines, quarries and tunnelling operations, to help establish, maintain and promote a strong health and safety culture.
, a staged transition of LAS from MBIE to MEC will begin with the transfer of some key contractual relationships with telephone and video interpreting service providers. By the end of June, it is expected that all remaining contracts will be transferred, guidelines and documentation will be , and LAS information will be available on the MEC website.
, and will come into force on
, as well as directing visitors during crisis events or natural disasters.
, employers, workers and unions negotiate in good faith, with access to mediation and dispute resolution services available if they are unable to agree.
, sign it, and return it to
, which allows skilled migrants with qualifications and work experience to apply for residence. Migrants approved under this visa stream can bring their partner and dependent children (if any) with them. In :
As above, a people trafficking awarenessraising resource for government and the community, including what trafficking is, where you might see it, indicators and who to call for help, is under development by the InterAgency Trafficking Operations Group. Expected to be end of and disseminated early .
for application and assessment information
for application information.
for more information about the Catalyst fund
for more information about the Horizon Europe.
for more information about the scheme.
focused PRO will deliver research while building capabilities and commercial outreach in areas such as artificial intelligence, synthetic biology, aerospace, medical technology and quantum technology.
. Action has been incorporated into Action .(Continue to support and contribute to international efforts to address forced labour, people trafficking and slavery through ongoing engagement in multilateral forums.)
. At this time the role of administering LAS will transition from MBIE to the Ministry for Ethnic Communities (MEC).
. Build greater consumer awareness of forced labour, people trafficking and slavery, and identify actions that enable individual consumers to support the human rights of workers.
. Consider amending the Crimes Act to strengthen provisions for the criminalisation of trafficking in children (under years of age).
. Consider and progress opportunities to prevent and disrupt lowerlevel offending, such as breaches of employment standards, which can escalate into more extreme forms of exploitation.
. Consider introducing legislation requiring businesses to report publicly on transparency in supply chains, to help eliminate practices of modern slavery.
. Consider opportunities to improve business oversight and practices by parties other than the direct employer, to ensure wider compliance with employment standards.
. Continue capacitybuilding activities to support the disruption and prosecution of forced labour, people trafficking and slavery.
. Continue engagement with agencies, organisations and forums working to address forced labour and people trafficking in the Pacific.
. Continue to develop information sources for migrants on their work rights and entitlements, including during the recruitment and placement process, and on where to seek support to protect themselves in exploitative situations.
. Continue to support victims to participate in the criminal justice process, including through the provision of appropriate support.
. Develop and deliver bespoke training and capability building programmes with AsiaPacific border and law enforcement agencies.
. Develop risk indicators and associated information sharing agreements for forced labour, people trafficking and slavery in New Zealand and the AsiaPacific Region, to support onshore and offshore risk identification, disruption and investigation activities, and victim identification and rescue.
. Facilitate processes for the efficient delivery of support services to victims of people trafficking.
. Identify mechanisms to assist in building greater child safeguarding measures in the Pacific.
. Identify ways to strengthen capacity and capability of social servicesagencies in the Pacific to respond to child protection issues such as child trafficking and exploitation.
. If relevant, please include the page URL.
. Implement changes to make it easier for migrant workers to leave exploitative employment, through the development of a new dedicated reporting and triaging function and new temporary visa, which will help to prevent exploitation from further escalating.
. Improve accessibility of information so that anyone who experiences, sees or suspects exploitation knows where and how to report it.
. Improve government procurement practices so that government purchasing more effectively supports good employment and supply chain practices, including combating forced labour and people trafficking from supply chains.
. Leverage and build on bilateral and multilateral agreements and forums to enhance crossborder information sharing and work to prevent forced labour and people trafficking.
. New Zealand citizens can also operate or invest in a commercial sex business.
. Only one PAA is required, which gives access to all the providers on the panel.
. People who perform commercial sexual services are breaching the conditions of their temporary visa and may be liable for deportation.
. Prior to the development of ACC, Aotearoa New Zealand and international workers compensation schemes supported workers who had injuries that developed gradually (including occupational diseases).
. Provide advice, information and training so people working in frontline roles better recognise people trafficking, forced labour and slavery, and take timely and appropriate action to identify and minimise harm.
. Provide information resources and advice to employers to ensure they are aware of their employment and immigration obligations.
. Provide information resources and advice to vulnerable groups so that people in New Zealand know their rights.
. Review and amend, as appropriate, policy and legislative settings to ensure they are fitforpurpose in enabling the disruption, prosecution, and recovery and confiscation of income derived through exploitation in its wider context.
. Strengthen cooperation between enforcement agencies to support efficient and effective responses to enquiries relating to forced labour, people trafficking and slavery.
. The Ombudsman will decide whether to investigate and review our decision and they may make a recommendation to us.
. This includes partners of a New Zealander or resident, partners of work visa holders and student visa holders. In :
. Undertake research and monitoring activity to better understand the nature and extent of forced labour, people trafficking and slavery in New Zealand.
. Work towards implementing the United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights.
. Work with social sector agencies and nongovernmental organisations to help inform exploitation victims of their rights, and opportunities to seek help and assistance.
. Work with system and sector leaders, including business and union representatives, to develop and share tools, resources and information to support assurance of organisational and supply chain work practices, including recruitment processes.
. in Electrical and Computer Engineering and a Bachelor of Commerce in Economics from the University of Canterbury.
shrvakdix iii. Addressed the Terms of Reference set for the review, focusing particularly on enhancing the certainty, transparency, and practicality of the legislative provisions on leave and leave pay.
According to analysis from Sapere Research Group conducted in .
End oflife processes include passivation and any disposal manoeuvres
End oflife processes include passivation and any disposal manoeuvres .
Family violence leave, Bereavement leave, Alternative holidays, Public holidays and Sick leave. The Taskforce did not decide between the two possible reference periods for the short run average weekly earnings calculation (i.e. four or weeks). I have decided to recommend a week reference period, for reasons set out in paragraph . The Taskforce continued to use the term Average Daily Pay for this approach to FBAPS leave, despite adopting an hours based formulation (Average Daily Pay is defined differently in the current Act). shrvakdix take a given period of time away from work. For example, if an employee wants to take a paid day off on a Wednesday, what proportion of an employees annual leave balance (which is held in weeks) does this day off amount to The prescriptive process agre ed by the Taskforce involves using documentation (e.g. an employment agreement) or a prescribed averaging method to determine leave entitlements and deductions. The latter approach would be used only in cases where an employees working week is highly vari able and unpredictable.
From June , after which dedicated funding was no longer available, the Labour Inspectorate withdrew from ongoing involvement in a number of payroll cases before the employer ha d completed its remediation process (for example where an employer had calculated but not yet paid arrears and the Inspectorate had confidence that the employer was committed to, and capable of, completing its remediation). As a result, from July the Inspectorate does not have a complete record of all of the arrears that have been paid by some of the larger employers.
Holidays Act Review Terms of Reference Purpose . The purpose of the Holidays Act Working Group (the Group) is to make recommendations to Government for a clear and transparent set of rules for providing entitlements to, and payment for, holidays and leave that can be readily implemented in a payroll system and is applicable to an increasingly diverse range of working and pay arrangements . . It is important that a customer focus ed app roach is taken to this review to ensure that recommendations are readily implementable by employers and their payroll providers. Background . There is widespread non compliance with the Holidays Act (the Act) and it is generally accepted that this is du e both to issues with the implementation of the legislation in payroll systems and the busines s processes that support these, and issues with the legislation itself. . The Act works well for a standard, five day, hour week, but can be difficult to apply t o more diverse working arrangements and complex remuneration packages. This is primarily because the Act is based on two key principles relating to entitlements and pay: a. that entitlements are determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken b. that employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave, that is , they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked. . In these situations, the Act relies heavily on employers making judgements as to how the provisions of the Act apply to the specific circumstances of the individual employees, and in some cases agreement with the employee is required. In some cases, these may need to happen each time leave is requested. . The result is an Act that does not prov ide certainty to employers and employees, is difficult for employees and employers to understand and interpret, is hard to systematise in a payroll system, and can incur relatively high compliance costs for employers. Objectives . The Group is required to develop, test and make recommendations to the Government on policy options for the provision of, and payment for, holiday and leave entitlements that: a. continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act b. provide clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements c. are simpler than the current Act in relation to provisions of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave d. are readily implementable in a payroll system e. minimise compliance costs for employers f. minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees g. ensure the balance of decision making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated
Holidays Act Review Terms of Reference Purpose . The purpose of the Holidays Act Working Group (the Group) is to make recommendations to Government for a clear and transparent set of rules for providing entitlements to, and payment for, holidays and leave that can be readily implemented in a payroll system and is applicable to an increasingly diverse range of working and pay arrangements . . It is important that a customer focus ed app roach is taken to this review to ensure that recommendations are readily implementable by employers and their payroll providers. Background . There is widespread non compliance with the Holidays Act (the Act) and it is generally accepted that this is due both to issues with the implementation of the legislation in payroll systems and the busines s processes that support these, and issues with the legislation itself. . The Act works well for a standard, five day, hour week, but can be difficult to apply t o more diverse working arrangements and complex remuneration packages. This is primarily because the Act is based on two key principles relating to entitlements and pay: a. that entitlements are determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken b. that employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave, that is , they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked. . In these situations, the Act relies heavily on employers making judgements as to how the provisions of the Act apply to the specific circumstances of the individual employees, and in some cases agreement with the employee is required. In some cases, these may need to happen each time leave is requested. . The result is an Act that does not prov ide certainty to employers and employees, is difficult for employees and employers to understand and interpret, is hard to systematise in a payroll system, and can incur relatively high compliance costs for employers. Objectives . The Group is required to develop, test and make recommendations to the Government on policy options for the provision of, and payment for, holiday and leave entitlements that: a. continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act b. provide clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements c. are simpler than the current Act in relation to provisions of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave d. are readily implementable in a payroll system e. minimise compliance costs for employers f. minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees g. ensure the balance of decision making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated h. are readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future i. aim to prote ct overall entitlements for employees . Scope and parameters . The Review will retain the purpose of the current Act (in s ection ) and (at least) the current levels of entitlements ( such as four weeks annual holidays, five days sick leave ). . The Group will consider: a. options to improve both the provi sion of, and payment for, entitlements that meet the objectives set out in paragraph , and: i. where trade offs between competing objectives are required, will be explicit about how these are made ii. when considering (g), may include consideration of the place of the standard five day, hour, working week in the Act b. any other matters relating to the Act that it sees fit. This may include holidays and leave entitlements modified by other Acts (such as the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act ). . The principles set out in paragraph m ay also be reconsidered, but options must aim to preserve the intent of these as far as possible. . The Group will not, however, consider the complex issue of remediation of historical underpayments of holiday and leave pay. Membership and Process . The Group will consist representatives from MBIE, the State Services Commission and Inland Revenue, along with three to four members each representing workers, employers, led by an independent C hair with the power to commission work . . The Group will be c haired by Gordon Anderson, a law professor at Victoria University. The Chair is an independentneutral party in the Group discussions, whose purpose is to facilitate the parties to reach jointly agreed recommendations to Government. . The Group is expected to consult widely to get a comprehensive understanding of the issues with the Act , and draw on international examples of holidays and leave legislation where appropriate. . The Group is also expected to work closely with technical experts such as payroll providers, business rules specialists, and service design and delivery specialists to assist with the design and testing of policy options. . The Group is required to support their recommendations with quantitative analysis of different options, tested with bona fide pay roll data, to ensure that those options are readily implementable and adverse consequences have been identified. . The parties agree that consistency of attendees will be important for the Group to achieve its objectives, and will ensure that representatives will not be changed unless this is unavoidable. If any change in representatives is required, the party concerned will ensure the new attendees have been well briefed on previous discussions and progress. . The parties will each ensure that their constituentsstakeholders have appropriate opportunity to have input into development of options , through the parties internal governance arrangements. MBIE will ensure that appropriate cross agency structures in place for senior government official s to be kept informed of, and have input into, the work of the Group. . MBIE will provide secretariat support to the Group and information and research that the Group identifies is required to facilitate its discussions. Rules of engagement . The parties agree that they will: a. work together in good faith, balancing the interests of all parties b. hold discussions in confidence and on a without prejudice basis c. agree any external communications at each meeting. . If the parties are unable to reach agreement on recomm endations, the Groups final report will outline: a. the areas where the parties have reached agreed recommendations b. the areas of difference. Timing and reporting . The Group will report back to the Minister of Workplace Relations and Safety with their recommendations within months. This timeframe will give the Group sufficient time to commission work and undertake robust testing of options. . The Group will also provide an interim report after six months, so that Cabinet and the New Zealand public can be informed about the Groups progress. . Each party will be responsible for reporting to their constituentsstakeholders, in accordance with any messaging agreed during the Groups discussions and as required by their i nternal governance mechanisms. In doing so, the parties agree to honour the confi dentiality of the Groups discussions.
I N C O N F I D E N C E rarm Confidential advice to Government I N C O N F I D E N C E ECOMIN agreed: .to the content of the consultation document, attached to the paper under ECOSUB for release alongside the exposure draft of the Bill in September ; .that officials may make minor and editorial changes to the consultation document before it is released for targeted consultation; noted that the Minister intends to report back to ECO in December on feedback themes and the proposed policy direction. Rachel Clarke Committee Secretary Present: Officials present from: Hon David Seymour Hon Nicola Willis (Chair) Hon Brooke van Velden Hon Louise Upston Hon Paul Goldsmith Hon Tama Potaka Hon Matt Doocey Hon Simon Watts Hon Melissa Lee Hon Penny Simmonds Hon Chris Penk Hon Nicola Grigg Hon Andrew Bayly Hon Andrew Hoggard Hon Mark Patterson Simon Court MP Jenny Marcroft MPOffice of the Prime Minister Office of Hon Brooke van Velden Officials Committee for ECO I N C O N F I D E N C E rarm
Operational Policy: Liability, Insurance and Indemnities . Purpose of this document This is the New Zealand Space Agency ( NZSA ) policy concerning liability insurance and indemnities relating to permitting and licencing assessments and decisions made under the Outer Space and High altitude Activities Act ( the Act ) and in accordance with the Outer Space and High altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations ( the Regul ations ). It explains the provisions in the Act relating to liability, insurance and indemnities and provides guidance on how these provisions will be implemented when assessing applications under the Act and the Regulations . When to apply this policy This policy will be applied as one of a number of considerations when assessing applications for : Launch licence s Payload permit s Overseas launch licence s Overseas payload permit s Facility licence s High altitude licence s
RDP is defined as what an employee would have received had the worked on the day concerned and includes productivity or incentive based payments (including commission) and overtime payments the employee would have otherwise received had they worked on the day concerned and the cash value of any board or lodgings provided by the employer to the employee. ADP is a daily average of the employees gross earnings (as per the definition in the Act) over the past weeks. This is worked out by: adding up the employees gross earnings for the period, and dividing this by the number of whole or part days the employee either worked or was on paid leave or holidays during that period.
Regulatory Impact Statement Improving the Holidays Act (mbie.govt.nz) kjtrvweh
See Section C for a breakdown of the estimated number of employees affected. shrvakdix
Status quo and problem definition
The Bill amends the term Annual Holidays in the Act to Annual Leave to better reflect the range of purposes for which the entitlement is used (for example to care for dependants, attend to personal matters or if sick, bereavement or family violence leave entitlements are exhausted). Agree to the following formula to provide clarity about the A verage Weekly Earnings divisor reduction for a part week of unpaid leave: Number of hours of unpaid leave taken in the week (up to the value of the denominator), divided by the employees average number of guaranteed hours per seven day period. Agree Discuss Adjustments to the rules for taking, allowing and requiring AL to reconcile them with an accrual system Note that the provisions in the Act for taking, allowing and requiring AL are based on entitlement arising after a fixed period, that we consider the current balance of interests is appropriate, and that the proposed adjustments below to reconcile them with an accrual system seek to maintain their underlying intent. Noted Agree that an employer must not unreasonably withhold consent to an employees request to take accrued AL entitlement and may also agree to leave in advance of accrued entitlement but does not have to approve a request (this reflects the Cabinet policy decision on pro rata leave in advance). Agree Discuss Agree to adjust the provisions for AL an employer must allow an employee to take so that, following the employees first month employment anniversary Within each month period an employer must not withhold consent to an employee taking four weeks of accrued AL entitlement (if an employee has it avai lable), and cannot withhold consent to an employee taking at least weeks of their accrued AL entitlement in a continuous period. Agree Discuss Agree to adjust the provisions for AL an employer can require employees to take so that an employer can require employees to take accrued AL entitlement that is in excess of four weeks but only if: they have sought to confer with the employee and genuinely tried to reach agreement about when the leave is to be taken and been unable to; or they have an establ ished annual closedown period and they give the employee at least days notice of the requirement to take AL entitlement. Agree Discuss Adjustments to the rules for cashing up AL entitlement to reconcile them with an accrual system Note that an accrual system will require a consequential amendment to the period of months of continuous employment specified in the Act as the timeframe within which an employee can cash up one week of AL and that the proposal below is designed to maintain the policy intent that only one week of AL can be cashed up per year regardless of whether AL has been cashed up in previous years. Noted Agree that, after the completion of the first months of employment , an employee may request to exchange for payment (cash up) up to one week of AL entitlement in each subsequent month period and that all other supporting provisions related to cashing up AL remain unchanged. Agree Discuss AL in advance during a closedown period Note that, in Cabinet agreed that, during a closedown period, an employer would not be able to refuse an employees request to take AL in advance above the pro rata amount of leave in advance (or accrued AL under an accrual system) an employee has earned and that stakeholders have raised concern about the liability risk this creates for employers . Noted Agree to rescind the Cabinet decision above and maintain the status quo so that, during a closedown period an employer may agree to an Agree Discuss employee taking AL in advance, but an employer does not have to allow this. PAYG Note that in , Cabinet agreed to a new four part test for paying AL as a regular part of an employees pay (pay asyou go (PAYG)) and a new requirement to review its use every weeks , that the previous Minister refined
The Bill was intended to replace the Act, its name more accurately reflects the purpose s of all leave types it (like the Act) provides minimum entitlements to : annual leave (which employees use for a variety of purposes broader than ho lidays) , public and alternative holidays , and sick, bereavement and family violence leave. kjtrvweh I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E administration. Making significant changes at this time would extend the timeframe for policy development and legislative drafting before an exposure draft could be released. I also intend to use the exposure draft consultation document to seek feedback on alternative policy options in some areas . The exposure draft consultation would be a good opportunity to gain feedback on whether more substantial shifts from the previous Governments decisions are needed and merit extending the timeframes for delivering completed legislation. I believe that seeking feedback from the various stakeholders who are impacted by the legislati on, including those who work with it on the ground, will be the most effective way of ensuring the Bill we introduce is robust and will resolve the longstanding issues . I will bring a separate Cabinet paper seeking agreement to release the consultation document . After consultation, I intend to report back to Cabinet in December following analysis of stakeholder feedback on the exposure draft and may seek further poli cy decisions at this time. Depending on the nature of feedback and the extent of changes proposed , I intend that a Bill will then be introduced in May . Background The Act sets out an employees minimum entitlements to annual holidays , public holidays and sick, bereavement and family violence leave and the rate of payments for them . There are longstanding and well known compliance issues with the Act (summarised in Appendix One) , to which p roblems with the Act itself are a core contributor . The issues have resulted in significant costs for employers as a result of remediat ing historical underpayments and implement ing system change s to support future compliance. This has impacted both the private and public sectors. While the Act largely works for those employees who have traditional working hours, it is not fit for purpose and is complex to apply in the context of modern and constantly evolving working and remuneration arrangements. In May , Cabinet agreed to establish a tripartite Holidays Act Taskforce , comprised of government, business, and union representatives , to recommend improvements to the Act CAB MIN. Of the members , six were unions, two were Business New Zealand representative s, MYOB was the only payroll provider representative , and Bell Gully the only legal expert . In contrast with this approach, I believe it is important to seek input and feedback from a wider range of payroll providers, legal experts and small businesses to reinforce th is Governments commitment to the workability of legislation . In March , Cabinet agreed to endorse the Taskforces recommendations in full as the basis for a substantially amended Act CAB MIN refers . The approach to reforming the Act agreed by Cabinet in retained its underlying framework but included new detailed processes and prescriptive methodologies. While these were intended to provide more certainty about how to calculate entitlements, they do not simplify the Act.
Where a service or activity is provided and charged to a group of individuals that all benefit from it as a club good. A memorandum account is used by government to monitor expenditure and revenue from third party fees and levies, usually over a five year period, to ensure that large fluctuations in fee amounts are avoided over time and that the overall balance trends tow ards zero. This memorandum accounts purpose is limited to the administration of legislation providing for the registration and provision of documents and information services for businesses and other registry services. Section of this document outlines the function and status of the Companies Office memorandum account. and other significant IT system upgrades can no longer also be absorbed within the current Companies Office budget . The cost model has incorporated savings in MBIE support cost as part of the government wide savings initiative included in Budget . Increasing compliance and enforcement work The Companies Office has m onitored an increase in non compliance relating to the Companies register. As a result, it should u ndertake more compliance and enforcement work in response to the growing complexity of non compliance, including increasing director prohibitions and related Court proceedings . The Companies Office must also begin a programme of information and education to inform stakeholders ( eg registry users entities that are registered on one of the Companies Office registers) about recent legislative changes and their impacts ( eg the introduction of the Incorporated Societies Act ) as well as undertake related compliance and enforcement wor k in those areas . Without further expenditure in these areas there is a risk that the Companies Office may not be able to take appropriate action, which could lead to a loss of integrity to the system and potential harm to the community. Likely future infrastructure cost pressures The Companies Office anticipates that o ver the next three tofive years, aging systems require maintenance and improvement to ensure it continues to offer quality service delivery ( eg improvements are planned to the Disclose register). MBIE also has a medium term technology strategy to move from capital based information technology (IT) systems to Software as a Service (SaaS) subscription based services. Improvements to Companies Office register IT systems will focus on maintaining economies of scale within the base IT infrastructure to ensure that benefits are realised within any future significant changes to the registry system. However, any significant future transformation of the Companies Office registry system would include public consultation as part of the business case development and consider any impacts on cost recovery settings. What is within the scope of the review All fees and levies collected from third parties by the Companies Office across the registers set out in Figure are within the scope of this review, with some exceptions. These registers are grouped according to two purposes. Figure : Registers in scope of the review Entity registers that record entities formed Companies Incorporated Societies Limited Partnerships Friendly Societies Credit Unions Building Societies
day per week deliveries to the remainder of delivery points.
eg. the licensed builders regime, which contains complementary roles for the Registrar of Licensed Building Practitioners, th e Building Practitioners Board, and the chief executive of MBIE, in whose name prosecutions of non licensed builders are taken. Cabinet manual para . (a) states In their relationship with Ministers, officials should be guided by a no surprises pri nciple. They should inform Ministers promptly of matters of significance within their portfolio responsibilities, particularly wher e these matters may be controversial or may become the subject of public debate. Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines of Issue: July Security Classification Unclassified Version: . Review ed June Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page of c. decide whether it creates a new or substantial risk that needs to be reported to the Solicitor General under the Solicitor Generals Prosecution Guidelines . . Where a person has disclosed a conflict of interest, that person must usually cease further involvement in the prosecution process. . The independence of a prosecutor is not compromised merely by the fact that they have provided advice at the investigative stage, unless they are likely to be a witness. Prosecution decision making . Threshold for prosecution No prosecution may be commenced unless it meets the two part test set out in the Solicitor Generals Prosecution Guidelines : a. Evidential sufficiency: there is available and admissible evidence sufficient to provide a reasonable prospect of conviction; and b. Public interest: Prosecution is required in the public interest. A prosecution decision in accordance with the Prosecution Policy and these procedures and guidelines must be made in every case where a breach of any Act, regulation, or other legislative instrument (which is enforceable by an offence provision) has been investigated , there is evidenc e to suggest a prima facie case, and there may be public interest in proceeding to a prosecution. For some relatively minor or technical breaches of the law it is acknowledged that there may be no obvious public interest in a prosecution and that individua l business units enforcement strategies may provide for the use of other enforcement tools to achieve compliance . A formal prosecution decision in accordance with the Prosecution Policy is not required in this case, however the decision (and the relevant enforcement tool used) shou ld still be recorded by the business unit. . Investigators role When MBIE investigators investigate a suspected breach of any Act, Regulation or other instrument that may meet the requirements for prosecution, it is the responsibility of the investigator to prepare the file for referral to a prosecutor for review before the formal prosecution decision is made or confirmed by the relevant prosecution decision maker. The file should include copies of the evidence available (including evidence that may support an available defence), and clearly identify any issues that may go toward weight (including credibility) or admissibility. The file should also include all relevant information as to matters going to the public interest assessment . . Legal review Legal revi ew must be carried out by a prosecutor. This review is an integral independent check within the process. It is significant, not only in respect of reviewing the technical aspects of individual cases, but also in ensuring the efficient, effective and timel y management of cases generally. Review is a continuing process, and all prosecutors are required to take account of any change in circumstances in any prosecution. Accordingly, there needs to be a close and effective liaison
https:www.employment.govt.nza ssetsUploadsdcholidays act guidance holidays leave .pdf
https:www.employment.govt.nza ssetsUploadsdcholidays act guidance holidays leave .pdf shrvakdix
. Complete the REPF Application Form
. Develop our sovereign space capabilities with a national space mission
. Earning, taking and paying annual leave Description Analysis of Option Two (compared to Option One) Earning annual leave (AL) Current Act: Employees are entitled to four weeks AL , arising after months continuous employment. An employee is not entitled to access any AL until the their AL entitlement arises. Option One: Four weeks AL entitlement would continue to arise after months continuous employment, but an employer would not be able to unreasonably withhold consent to an employees request to take AL in advance on a pro rata basis. Option Two: Employees would accrue four weeks AL from the start of employment at a rate of not less than . weeks per week of em ployment. There would be a clear set of parameters to support the operation of the system and adjustments to other parts of the AL provisions to reconcile them with an accrual based system. Taking AL Current Act: Employers are required to agree what portion of AL entitlement is used for a period of AL based on what genuinely constitutes a week for the employee each time leave is taken. Option One: When determining the use of AL entitlement for an employee who h as guaranteed hours of work, an employer would be required to carry out an audit to assess whether the employees actual hours were percent or more than their guaranteed hours. If they were, the employer must use actual hours to determine use of AL enti tlement for a period of AL. To determine the number of hours an employee who does not have clear daily hours would have worked on a day of leave , an employe r would have to calculate the average number of hours an employee had worked on the same calendar d ay in the previous weeks (the calendar methodology). Option Two: There would be no audit requirement and where an employee has guaranteed hours of work AL calculations w ould always be based on those. The calendar day methodology would be replaced with a calculation based on an average of an employees hours of work across all days of work in the previous weeks . Paying AL Current Act: The rules for paying AL as a regular part of an employees pay (Pay asYouGo or PAYG) lack clarity and require the application of discretion and judgement. Option One: There would be a fourpart test to define an intermittent or irregular working pattern for the purpose of assessing an employees eligibility to be paid for AL using PAYG. Employers would have to review eligibility every weeks. Option Two: The four part test would be replaced with objective criteria for using PAYG and the week review period would be extended. Clear and simple Earning leave Option Two would simplify the end toend system for providing a nd paying AL entitlement, and better support common practice with a clear set of parameters to provide clarity around the operation of a week based accrual system for employers, payroll and employees. Taking leave A single methodology for employees with guaranteed hours will simplify the Bil l and provide clarity and certainty for both employers and employees. Replacing the calendar day methodology with an average across all days is simpler and easier to understand as it does not require a separate calculation for each individual day of leav e in a pay period. Paying leave Objective criteria will remove the need for employers to apply judgement (which Option One would still require) , thereby creating greater certainty and clarity. Readily implementable Earning leave An accrual based AL system would align with the way many payroll and accounting systems already account for AL entitlements. Employers a nd payroll would not be required to differentiate between different pots of AL an employee has earned. Taking leave Removing the audit requirement for employees with guaranteed hours reduces administrative burden and compliance costs associa ted with completing an audit. Removing the calendar day methodology removes the requirement for businesses to have integrated ti me and attendance and payroll systems to support the new rules. Payroll providers indicated that most payroll systems, particularly those used by small businesses, ar e currently only configured to store total hours for a pay period rather than a breakdown of daily hours of work and leave. Paying leave Removing the requirement to apply employer judgement to determine if criteria are met for PAYG means that the criteria could be systematised. Under Option One, the week review period would impose high comp liance costs on employers. A longer review period will reduce administrative burden and compliance costs. Flexible and future proof Earning leave The adjustments to the rules for rules for taking, allowing and requiring AL to be used to reconcile them with a weeks based accrual system are deigned to maintain the current degree of flexibility around employer and employee rights and obligations. Paying leave Greater certainty around eligibility for PAYG will make the criteria easier to apply to a range of employment situations. A l onger review period would provide greater flexibility around using PAYG as it will avoid short seasonal fluctuations in wo rk triggering a requirement to stop using PAYG. Fair for employers and employees Earning leave Adjustments to reconcile other AL provisions with weeks based accrual are designed to maintain the underlying intent of the current provisions and maintain the current balance of interests. The parameters are designed to ensure an employee will have accrue d four weeks AL after the same period as they would be entitled to it under Option One. Taking leave The benefit of removing the audit function and using actual rather than guaranteed hours (Option Two) is a subjective assessm ent. If an employees hours of work vary significantly from their guaranteed hours, using guaranteed hours would mean an employee u ses more entitlement for a part week of AL compared to if actual hours were used, but that would translate to higher pay for the part week of AL. The exposur e draft will provide the opportunity to test the fairness, practicality and outcomes of this approa ch. MBIE does not consider that removing the calendar day methodology will have a significant impact on leave entitlement and payment calculations. An employees average hours worked on a calendar day would only vary significantly from their average acr oss all days when, despite not having agreed daily hours, the employee does have a discernible pattern of work whereby they work more hours on average on some cale ndar days than others. The exposure draft will provide opportunity to test for any unintended consequences. Paying leave PAYG criteria will be designed to reflect the underlying intent of the Option One criteria to ensure that an employee who receives PAYG does genuinely work on an intermittent basis and have periods away from work. The review period will be longer than weeks but will still ensure that there is a framework to support the review of its use during employment , which is missing from the current Act. kjtrvweh
. In May , the Minister of Workplace Relations and Safety established a tripartite Taskforce comprising government, New Zealand Council of Trade Unions and BusinessNZ to review the Holidays Act . The purpose of the review is to make recommendations t o Government for a clear and transparent set of rules for providing entitlements to, and payment for, holidays and leave . Any new system needs to be able to be implemented in a payroll system , and apply to an increasingly diverse range of working and pay arrangements while aiming to protect overall entitlements for employees . . In order to provide recommendations to Government, the Taskforce must have a comprehensive understanding of the issues with the current legislation. To assist with this task, the Task force has developed this paper which summarises the key issues with the Act as understood by the group. While this paper focuse s on issues that arise from the legislation itself, it also includes discussion of the problems these i ssues create for employers , employees and payroll providers in trying to implement the Act. . The Issues Paper seeks the following feedback from key stakeholders : o from your perspective, are the issues outlined in this paper described accurately o are there any other issues you have experienced in working with the Act If so, what are these issues o do you have any suggestions or proposals for change . The paper begins with a brief overview of the history of holidays legislation and some background info rmation relating to the current review. This is followed by a brief overview of the Act itself (Section ), a discussion on who is affected by issues with the Act (Section ) and a summary of the key issues identified by the Taskforce (Section ). The paper conclude s with some ideas for change (Section ) and intended next steps (Section ). . The key questions we would like your feedback on will be posed throughout the Issues Paper. They are also collated following Section on page . History of the Holidays Act . . The Bank Holidays Act was New Zealand s first holidays legislation, which stated that banks should shut on Christmas Day, Boxing Day, New Years Day, Good Friday, Easter Monday and the sovereigns birthday. This was shortly followed by legislation extending paid statutory holidays to all employees. . For many years, p rovision of paid annual holidays in addition to statutory holidays to groups of workers was piecemeal, and depended largely on the collective bargaining power of individual unions. The first comprehensive piece of legislation regarding paid annual holidays was the Annual Holidays Act , which granted the right to two weeks paid holiday for all employees . This was increased to three weeks in and four weeks in . . In more recent times, significant reviews of holidays legislation were undertaken in and . The review resulted in the Act, replacing the Holidays Act , and the review resulted in a series of amendments in . . These reviews had similar objectives, namely to make the legislation easier to understand and apply and to make it more applicable to a wider range of working
. The Government has put legislation in place to regulate space and high altitude activities conducted in New Zealand and by New Zealanders overseas. The Outer Space and High altitude Activities Act (the OSHAA Act) was passed into law o n July and will com e into force on December . . The objectives of the OSHAA Act are to: facilitate the development of a s pace industry and provide for its safe and secure operation , implement certain international obligations of New Zealand relating to space activities and space technology, including those found in the Outer Space Treaty , manage any potential or actual liability that may arise from the space industry , establish a system for the regulation of space activities and certain high altitude activities , and to preserve New Zealands national security and national interests .
. The Parties . . Background . . Shared objectives . . Commitments . . Legislation to establish permanent Mori spectrum entity . . The new Mori Spectrum Entity . . Legal Effect . . Shared principles . . Spectrum Allocation . . Funding . . Tahua Tautoko (accelerated industry investment initiative) . . Ka Hao Mori Digital Technology Fund (Ka Hao Fund) . . Working together on spectrum policy . . Statutory and contractual obligations . . Nonexclusive relationship . . Representations . . Condentia lity . . Review and variation of MOU . . Dispute resolution . . Term of Memorandum of Understanding . . Definitions in this Memorandum of Understanding . . Signatories . Appendix A: Historical background of radio spectrum . Appendix B: Process for future spectrum transfers and renewals . Appendix C: Initial spectrum allocations to the Mori spectrum entity . Appendix D: Operational processes for working together on spectrum policy .
. This paper seeks agreement to the recommendations of the Holidays Act Taskforce as the basis for an amended Holidays Act.
. Purpose of this document This is the New Zealand Space Agency ( NZSA ) policy relating to applications for Active Debris Removal or OnOrbit Servicing missions made under the Outer Space and High altitude Activities Act ( the Act) and in accordance with the Outer Space and High altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations (the Regulations ). It sets out the approach that will be taken by the NZSA when assessing applications under the Act . . This operational policy should be read alongside the operational policy on orbital debris mitigation plans. When to apply this policy This policy will be applied when assessing applications for active debris removal (ADR) andor on orbit servicing (OOS) m issions (including demonstrations) : Payload permit Overseas payload permit . . Relevant sections in the Act The Act allows the Minister to impose conditions on payload operators in relation to (among other things) : managing New Zealands liability under international law protecting New Zealands national security and other national interests avoiding potentially harmful interference with the activities of others in the peaceful exploration and use of outer space .
. Purpose of this document This is the New Zealand Space Agency (NZSA ) policy relating to the recognition and assessment of the orbital debris mitigation plans ( ODMP ) required for launch licence and payload permit applications made under the Outer Space and High altitude Activities Act ( the Act) and in accordance with the Outer Space and High altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations ( the Regulations ). It sets out the approach that will be tak en by the NZSA when assessing applications under the Act. . When to apply this policy This policy will be applied when assessing applications for: Launch licence Overseas launch licence Payload permit Overseas payload permit . . Relevant sections in the Act and Regulations The Act requires the Minister to be satisfied that the applicant has an orbital debris mitigation plan ( ODMP ) that meets the prescribed requirements. The relevant sections in the Act are: Launch Payload Overseas Authorisation (): Appl ication for launch licence ( )(c) : W hen launch licence may be granted : R enewal of launch licence () : Appl ication for overseas launch licence ()(c) : Wh en overseas launch licence may be granted () : Application for payload permit ()(b) : W hen payload permit may be granted ()(b) : W hen overseas payload permit may be granted : Minister may take into account authori sation granted in country other than New Zealand
. Key Limitations or Constraints on Analysis There are a number of limitations and constraints relating to this Regulatory Impact Analysis. These include: Only the main annual holidays options developed and tested by the Holidays Act Taskforce are included in the options analysis. Variations from these, or other proposals not considered by the Taskforce (for example, the portability of leave between different employ ers), have not been considered. The issue of remediation of historical underpayments of annual holiday and leave pay was not included in the analysis, but formed part of the problem definition. This is in line with the scope of the Holidays Act Taskforces work. There has not been wide consultation on the Holidays Act Taskfor ces recommendations. The lack of comprehensive consultation with stakeholders constrains MBIEs ability to fully understand the impacts and costs of various proposals. Estimates of impacts and costs have been derived from the payroll testing conducted on the options and relevant survey data. The payroll testing dataset included , by design , a large overrepresentation of employees with varied and unpredictable working arr angements as these employees are most likely to be impacted by changes to the Act. However, as the data used was disproportionately skewed towards less common working arrangements , it cannot be directly extrapolated to the wider New Zealand workforce . The data was also based on employers from one geographi c area (the lower North Island) and, while covering most sectors, did not include all occupations. The Taskforce eliminated an accrual based approach to annual holidays (Option Two) as an option part way t hrough payroll testing because it could leave a small number of employees worse off when compared to the status quo . As a result, it was only tested using an early payment methodology that predates the Taskforces final recommended payment calculations or the payment calculations outlined in this analysis. MBIE has not had the time to conduct this additional payroll testing. There is a lack of New Zealand data on annual holidays and leave entitlements and their use more generally . In combination wit h how pa yments can be impacted by when the leave is taken and the uncertain nature of how a new Act could influence behaviour , it is difficult to quantify the status quo and estimate the fiscal impacts of the options . shrvakdix
. Policy background The Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, Including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (the Outer Space Treaty ) and the Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects (the Liability Convention) assign liability to a State party for damage s caused by space objects that ar e launched from its territory or by its nationals overseas. A space object may include launch vehicles (such as rockets), payloads (such as satellites) and component parts thereof. When more than one launching state is involved, states are jointly and se verally liable. As a launching state, New Zealand has: absolute liability for damage caused by its space objects on the surface of the Earth or to aircraft in flight (i.e. during launch or re entry into the atmosphere); and fault based liability for damag e caused in orbit.
. Policy intent New Zealand has establish ed a permit ting process for payloads . From time to time we receive payload permit applications for payloads smaller than U . The small size of these payload s means that they are more difficult to track using current space situational awareness ( SSA) systems. Tracking of objects smaller than U is possible but is dependent on a number of factors such as altitude, design features or radar cross section. The ability to detect and track objects in orbit is increasingly necessary for effective SSA and Space Traffic Management (STM ) as the number of payloads (and population of orbital debris) continues to grow.
. Verifying compliance NZSA will consider: the alignment of the ODMP with the CONFERS Guiding Principles for Commercial Rendezvous and Proximity Operations (RPO) and On Orbit Servicing (OOS ) whether the risk and hazard analysis has considered all likely risks, and sensible mitigations are in place the planned communication methods and frequency how information will be communicated to potentially affected parties in the event of an anomaly including provisions for consultation with other states in the event of potential accidental harmful interference. Further information Where an application is incomplete, contains deficiencies or inconsistencies, or in any other way fails to satisfy the requirements of the Act and Regulations, further information will be requested from the applicant. Th is may occur at any point during the application and assessment process. . Conditions The Minister may impose conditions on the licence or permit in relation to ADROOS missions. Such conditions may include, but not be limited to: Requirement that payloads launched from New Zealand comply with relevant regulations of the state that has jurisdiction over the object being serviced or removed Prohibition of any remote sensing capabilities of these payloads from being used to collect data on third party satellites Notification of any change, expiry or revocation to a licence, permit or authorisation treated by the Minister as satisfying New Zealands orbital debris mitigation requirements Notification of deviations from the planned orbi tal trajectory Notification of any incident or accident ( eg a conjunction, near miss or collision), or notification of debris associated with the object, including details of that incident or accident Notification of initiation of re entry or other end oflife processes .
.. Payloads that cannot demonstrate trackability equivalent to a U object may be permitted in some circumstances if they operate below th e orbits of crewed spacecraft (typically km)
.. Where an application is made and an overseas authorisation has not been assessed as meeting New Zealands requirements for an orbital debris mitigation plan, applicants will need to demonstrate that the ODMP provided with the application is compliant with regulation . In this case the NZSA will assess the applicant s ODMP by reviewing the technical information required, including e nsuring the relevant analyses are carried out with a suitable tool and approp riate inputs .
.. Where an application is made for an overseas hosted payload, the applicant is required to submit the ODMP for the carrier payload and the hosted payload . NZSA will assess these in accordance with either .. or .., whichever is applicable. Further information Where an ODMP is incomplete, contains deficiencies or inconsistencies, or in any other way fails to satisfy the requirements of the Act and Regulations, further information will be requested from the applicant. This may occur at any po int during the application and assessment process. Where our verification process revels a potential non compliance with the standards using DAS or DRAMA, we may request the applicant to undertake a high fidelity assessment as per section . of this policy. Where an applicant is unable to show compliance with New Zealands regulation , no launch licence, overseas launch licence, payload permit , or overseas payload permit may be granted. . Waivers The regulations do not permit a waiver to be issued if th e ODMP does not meet New Zealands regulatory requirements. . Conditions The Minister may impose conditions on the licence or permit in relation to orbital debris. Such conditions may include, but not be limited to, requirements to notify the NZSA of: Any change, expiry or revocation to a licence, permit or authorisation treated by the Minister as satisfying New Zealands orbital debris mitigation requirements payload deviations from the planned orbital trajectory any incident or accident (e.g. a conjun ction, near miss or collision), or notification of debris associated with the object, including details of that incident or accident initiation of re entry or other end oflife processes .
shrvakdix iii. The Taskforces recommendation to change how annual holidays payments are calculated for employees returning from parental leave is explained in paragraphs of this paper. A mid range estimate of the cost of implementing this approach would be approximately million per year for employers across New Zealand.
AL wou ld accrue during any period an employee was on paid leave, unpaid sick, bereavement or family violence leave, parental leave, voluntary military service leave or was not working while receiving weekly accident compensation. AL entitlement would also accrue on the first week of any other period of unpaid leave but, unless the employer and employee agree otherwise, not on weeks beyond that. The Bill also provides clarity around the definition of unpaid leave to mean a period during which an employee would b e required to work under their employment agreement but are absent without pay with the agreement of both the employer and employee. When it is agreed that AL will accrue during weeks in a period of unpaid leave beyond the first week, the AWE divisor would b e reduced by that number of weeks. The formula would be: Number of hours that the employee did work in the week unpaid leave was taken (up to the value of the denominator), divided by the employees average number of guaranteed hours per seven day period, multiplied by .. The formula would be: Number of hours of unpaid leave taken in the week (up to the value of the denomina tor), divided by the employees average number of guaranteed hours per seven day period . kjtrvweh I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Adjust ments to reconcile other AL provisions with an accrual based system Provisions in the Act that set out employees rights to take AL and when an employer may require an employee to tak e AL The provisions a re based on AL entitlement arising after a fixed period and require adjustments to reflect an accrual based framework. In summary the current provisions are:
Do you agree with the description of the issu es relating to annual holidays set out on pages and in Annex Two If not, why not
For a total budget of . million , which includes . million of Crown funding . Companies, incorporated societies, limited partnerships , friendly societies, credit unions and building societies registers. This levy allows for a more transparent distinction between the cost of providing specific services and the costs that are shared by all registers, so that users and consumers have an accurate understanding of what they are paying for. What costs would the levy be applied to Of the approximately million expenditure to be recovered from third parties , approximately million ( percent of the budget) has been identified as shared costs that could be recovered by the levy. A proposed CO levy amount has been developed by dividing this cost by an estimated annual volume of , (representing registrations and annual return filing on the entity registers). To determine what costs would be recovered from the CO levy, we considered the shared costs that make up the foundation of a registry system. The types of shared costs are: personnel costs for the Companies Office senior management team and education and information team; property leases and maintenance; depreciation; capital charge; and MBIE functional support. How the levy revenue would be allocated to registers and impact fees The revenue collected from entity register users will be applied to shared (system support) costs across the Companies Office registers, except for services which are recovered from other specific levies . The remaining direct costs to provide specific services within each register will be recovered by register fees proposed in Section . Analysis of options considered for applying a levy We considered other options for applying a registry system levy under the Companies Ac t: Charging the levy each time any user (of any of the registers) is required to pay a fee: this option is not proposed because it is not as equitable as charging alongside an annual return or filing fee . Requiring payment of the levy with all fees would see some users paying the levy more than once a year because they access more services requiring a fee. For example, a company may have to pay a levy when it first register s on the Companies register as well as paying the levy for being registered on the FSP register , and then for each time it subsequently registers a security interest on the PPSR . Not introducing a levy: this option is not proposed as it will not allow the Companies Office to separate the costs of providing specific services clearly and efficiently from shared costs, making it inequitable for smaller registers by continuing the current fee based approach f or each register. Smaller registers (like the Friendly Societies register and the Incorporated Societies register) and any new , smaller registers would not benefit from the advantage of economies of scale due to their low volumes, a nd as a result are likely to pay significantly higher fees. This option is unsustainable and does not meet the intent of amendments to the
Relevant legislation , regulations and standards d. Crimes Act e. Criminal Disclosure Act f. Criminal Procedure Act and Criminal Procedure Rules g. Evidence Act h. Search and Surveillance Act i. Sentencing Act j. Summary Proceedings Act k. Employment Relations Act l. Employment Court Regulations m. Solicitor Generals Prosecution Guidelines n. Crown Law Media Protocols for Prosecutors Measures of success and compliance management . The Manager Legal Services (Litigation) will assess the effectiveness of this policy based on the following measures of success: a. All prosecution decisions comply with the Solicitor General s Prosecution Guidelines , this policy, and the Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines b. the outcomes of prosecution decisions (as reported annually by the Public Prosecutions Unit of the Crown Law Office) reflect MBIE prosecutions are well managed c. continuous improvement to Prosecution Procedure and G uidelines to incorporate the comments and expectations of the court . The Manager Legal Services (Litigation) will monitor compliance with this policy as follows: a. Embedding procedures requiring two or more people input before pro secution decisions are made Title: Prosecution Policy of Issue: July Dep Sec Sponsor: Insert Deputy Secretary Title Version: . Last Review: February Policy Owner: Chief Legal Officer Policy Classification : Operation al Next Review : February Security Classification: Unclassified Page of b. Deploying tools such as checklists or other education to help inform staff and managers of their relevant obligations . Compliance information regarding the performance of this policy will be provided to the relevant business gro up and the Compliance Centre of Excellence on a quarterly basis . Non compliance . Failure to comply with this policy may be considered a breach of the Code of Conduct . . Any action taken as a result of a breach of any of the obligations set out i n this policy will be conducted in good faith, a fair process will be followed, and the person involved will have a full opportunity to respond to the concerns or allegations and have access to appropriate support, advice or representation.
Section : Companies Office funding The objectives of the Companies Office The Government has set a priority to grow economic prosperity and foster a dynamic, productive and competitive economy . MBIE promotes this vision through its strategic intention of working towards the outcome of a dynamic business environment that foster s innovation and international connections. In delivering registry services, the Companies Office has two main objectives: to facilitate the ease of doing business in New Zealand by providing easy touse registers and easily accessible information; and to maintain confidence in the registers it administers through a focus on integrity and taking enforcement action where this is necessary. The Companies Office contributes to protecting New Zealand businesses and consumers by building confidence and helping to keep the market free from entities and individuals who do not comply with the law. Well functioning and trusted markets are essential to ensure an efficient and transparent New Zealand business environment that in turn helps grow New Zealand for all. In managing all its registers, the Companies Office aims to provide customer focused, fair, regulatory driven registers that are supported by quality management systems and focused on excellence. Its approach to compliance is risk and evidence based, with a preference to educate first wherever possible. Current revenue and expenditure The total current budget of the Companies Office is approximately million per year of which approximately . million is funded by the Crown. This leaves approximately million per year to be recovered from fees and levies. Table on the next page shows the types of costs incurred and the revenue collected by each register since the last review in .
Theme Recommendations . Employers and employees should have the ability to agree to arrangements that are different to those in the Act , providing that it can be demonstrated that these arrangements provide the employee with leave entitlements that, at a minimum, mee t the standards set out in the Act .
. Funding ) The Crown will contribute funding (exclusive of GST) as follows: a) M already provided by TPK , b) .M appropriated as part of Budget , c) M to be appropriated through Budget (timing to be confirmed), d) M funding for Tahua Tautoko (accelerated industry investment initiative) , subject to further agreement as described in clause of this M OU. ) Funds are subject to Cabinet decisions , Parliamentary appropriation approvals, and funding agreemen ts signed by the parties to this M OU andor any entity receiving any funding . ) If funds are disbursed prior to the establishment of the MSE, it is anticipated that these will be paid to the IMSC under agreed funding arrangements with the IMSC . ) There will be no further expectation on the Crown to provide any further funding other than as set out above.
. Note that the Holidays Act binds the Crown as will any amendme nts to that Act
. The costs to the G overnment of implementing the changes in payroll systems are also expected to be substantial. As noted in the September final report back to Cabinet on the All of Government Payroll Programme to improve government payroll systems, many government agencies payroll systems are bespoke and aging, and already struggling to adapt to ongoing changes GOV MIN.
. The issues that the Act poses for employers, employees and others are well documented. While it provides some prescription around determining pay for holidays and leave, there remains a high degree of ambiguity in situations when remuneration arrangements are complex. Many employers also have difficulty calculating entitlements as the legislation does not always prescribe how these are to be provided. The result is that current provisions generally work for a standard five day, hour week, but pose a number of issues when applied to more diverse working arrangements and variable pay structures.
XXXX; ; ; XX to XX; XX to XX
shrvakdix Implications for Government as an employer and funder of contracted services
Are you aware of other issues relating to annual holidays If so, what are they
Current leave payment process
From the of the prosecution decision to disposal of the prosecution. Cost billed or to be billed for external prosecutions. Leave blank for in house prosecutions.
The agreed test was that: employer must stop using PAYG if, at the threemonth review, the employee has worked hours or more on average per week over all the weeks in the review period, or the employee has performed work during six or more of the weeks in the review period (unless they have also had a continuous period of more than four weeks without work). general eligibility threshold for PAYG and promote the actual taking of AL whenever possible . .While they would provide greater certainty, th e objective test and week review requirements are complex, and drafting was challenging . A week review period would also impose high compliance costs and onus on employers . In addition, it would mean that if an employees hours of work passed the threshold in one month period PAYG would have to stop indefinitely even if that was not a recurring work pattern . We recommend a less restrictive and simplified framework for using PAYG .In cases where working arrangements are variable, and an employee genuinely has periods when they do not work, PAYG is a simple and fair way for employers to provide an employee with their AL entitlement. It avoids the need to determine what constitutes a w eek in these situations and
. New Zealand could choose to meet its proposed TSA obligations through a contract with Rocket Lab. However, legal advice supports the view that the TSA obligations will require domestic legislation within a reasonable time of concluding the TSA so that New Zealand can Restricted yrupqmdi s (a) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted ensure full compliance with our TSA obligations. Legislation is also required to give effect to other international Space Treaty obligations that New Zealand is party to but has not previously had to ensure compliance with because we have not had a space launch industry. . For the purposes of the RIA we have defined the status quo as: Rocket Lab wishes to launch space objects in New Zealand; the New Zealand Government is negotiating a TSA with the US Government to enable Rocket Lab to access the necessary US technology. Once the TSA is concluded, signed and brought into force it will create obligations on the New Zealand Government to protect and ensure the secure use and management of sensitive US technology; once rocket launches commence from New Zealand (either by Rocket Lab or any other launch operation that might establish in New Zealand) we will need to discharge our other existing international obligations that we have previously signed up to and manage the liabilities that arise from those agreements; and without a regulatory regime for space launches there is no way we can ensure full compliance with those obligations or manage the liabilities. Problem definition . The problem with the status quo is that New Zealand cannot: ensure full compliance with the proposed TSA and other international obligations; adequately manage the liability to the Crown that arises from our international obligations; manage national security risks related to space objects (launch vehicles and satellites); and be assured that safety and environmental risks arising out of space launches can be managed. Compliance with the TSA and other international obligations . Legislation is required to fully meet obligations proposed in the TSA, as well as obligations arising from a number of international outer space treaties. There are five international treaties on outer space law, three of which New Zealand is already party to, and two to which we will need to accede. Technology Safeguards Agreement (TSA) . The draft TSA imposes a number of obligations on New Zealand relating to the use and secure management of sensitive US technologies. For example Article VI () requires that the New Zealand Government must ensure that only people authorised by the US Government access launch sites, equipment, and data in segregated areas. Outer Space Treaty . The Outer Space Treaty on principles governing the activities of states in the exploration and use of outer space including the moon and other celestial bodies. New Zealand is party to this Treaty). The Outer Space Treaty creates a number of obligations. For example, each country that is party to the agreement bears international responsibility for its national activities in outer space. Countries must ensure that the activities of private entities in outer yrupqmdi s ()(h) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted space require authorisation by the State and are subject to ongoing supervision. We cant meet this obligation under the status quo. Rescue Agreement . The Rescue Agreement relates to the rescue of astronauts, the return of astronauts and the return of objects launched into outer space. New Zealand is a party to this Treaty and is able to meet its international obligations under the status quo through existing law and protocols put in place by the New Zealand Police to guide their operational response to an incident. Registration Convention . The Registration Convention requires registration of objects launched into outer space. New Zealand is not currently a party but should accede as registration of space objects is integral to a New Zealandbased space launch programme. Cabinet approval will be sought separately. Moon Agreement . The Moon Agreement governs the activities of states on the moon and other celestial bodies. New Zealand is not currently party. So far only a small number of countries () have signed and ratified the Moon Treaty since it came into force in . We consider that more analysis is required to understand the obligations that arise from the Moon Treaty and to determine if New Zealand should accede to the Treaty. This is not a priority relative to putting in place a regulatory framework for space launch activities. New Zealands liability . The Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects is the main international Treaty relating to liability associated with space objects. New Zealand is a party to this Treaty. In general the States participating in a launch (which includes a State from whose territory a space object is launched) are jointly and severally liable to pay compensation for any damage their space objects cause to other parties, or to third States, on the surface of the Earth, to aircraft in flight, in the air, or in outer space. . In some circumstances liability is absolute, unless it can be shown that a claimant State was grossly negligent or intended damage to be caused. In other circumstances, liability is apportioned on the basis of fault. A State that has paid compensation following an incident causing damage may seek indemnification from other parties involved in the launching. National security risks Re stricted yrupqmdi s ()(h), s ()(f)(iv) s (a) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted Safety Risks . Rocket launches and satellites create safety risks. For the most part safety will be dealt with under existing domestic law (e.g. the Health and Safety at Work Act from April ) which creates general obligations on space launch operators. In additional, there are specific obligations, such as the requirement for secure and segregrated areas and accident areas, that arise out of the TSA relating to safety and therefall fall within the scope of New Zealands international obligations. Legal advice is that regulation is needed so that New Zealand can ensure full compliance with these TSA obligations. . There may also be particular safety concerns that arise from highfrequency launches or particular payloads which over time may require a more proactive approach to safety. Given the relative novelty of rocket launches in New Zealand knowledge of where these risks might arise cannot be anticipated and hence we cannot be assured that the status quo, which in this case is reliance on existing law, will be sufficient. Environmental Risks . Local authorities have responsibility and powers under the Resource Management Act to authorise and manage the land use activities associated with, and effects on the environment arising from, rocket launches. While for the most part it can be expected that the RMA is adequate to address environmental risks, some risks might arise that are beyond the jurisdiction of the RMA. These could include risks to the environment in space. As with safety risks, the relative novelty of rocket launches in New Zealand and indeed the development of knowledge internationally of environmental risks in space, means that we cannot be assured that reliance on existing law will be sufficient. Policy Objectives . Based on the problem definition, the following policy objectives describe the outcomes that we are seeking to achieve with respect to a legal framework for space launches. These have been agreed with the Minister of Economic Development: The development of safe, secure and responsible space activities (this includes addressing national security, safety and environmental risks but in a way that allows the development of a space industry in New Zealand). Meet our obligations arising from the TSA related to the use and secure management of sensitive US technologies. Meet our obligations arising from international outer space treaties that New Zealand is party to or will need to accede to once space launches commence. Manage New Zealands liability that arises out of our existing international obligations. . It is essential the legal framework does not inhibit the development of a space launch industry. As part of the policy development process, an assessment of the economic benefits of the development of a space launch industry in New Zealand was undertaken by Sapere Research Group. This estimates the benefits to New Zealand from the development of a space launch industry to be in the order of m to .bn over years. The potential for further upside benefits is great. The benefits identified by Sapere include: yrupqmdi s (a) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted significant economic development opportunities from the growth in scale and critical mass of Rocket Labs supply industries, including D printing, carbon composites and engineering; increased employment and salaries in Rocket Labs supply industries and Rocket Lab as it scales up its launch activities; increased numbers of international visitors to watch rocket launches leading to increased demand for accommodation and other services particularly in the Mahia region; construction activity and infrastructure improvements in the Mahia Peninsula related to the development of the space launch facility; and significant but unquantified benefits from the reputational effects of being a first mover in the development of lowcost highfrequency space launches . Options and impact analysis .The following options have been assessed in terms of whether they wholly or partly meet the policy objectives: Option : Do nothing (status quo); Option : Nonregulatory option, specifically a contract with Rocket Lab or any other space launch or satellite operator; Option : Develop a regulatory regime for space launches (Option A is to develop a standalone regime; Option B is to modify existing law). . Doing nothing is not an option as it would mean that New Zealand is in breach of its international obligations, cannot shift liability to those who create the risks and are best placed to manage them, does not alow New Zealand to protect national security, and may not be adequate to address safety and environmental risk. We have not undertaken further analysis of this option as it does not achieve any of the policy objectives. Restricted yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted Assessment of how each feasible option meets the policy objectives . The analysis of how each option meets the policy objectives is set out below. Does it meet our international obligationsDoes it enable safe and secure launches from New ZealandDoes it manage liability risks Non legislative option (contract)
. These challenges with the Act, combined with poor implementation i n payroll systems and the business processes that support them, have led to widespread non compliance with the legislation. As at June , arrears had been calculated in respect of of the completed investigations undertaken by the Labour Inspecto rate into non compliance with the Act. Arrears (which can include underpayments going back several years) have ranged from an average per affected worker in one organisation, to around , per affected worker in another organisation. In total, aroun d . million has been paid to , employees shrvakdix across numerous organisations. This total remediation figure is expected to grow substantially over time, particularly when payments made by District Health Boards are incorporated.
. Agency appearances Inhouse prosecutors may instruct a suitably qualified Departmental or Crown entity prosecutor from another agency to appear on a prosecution in certain circumstances, or use local Crown solicitors to act as a gents for list appearances or sentencing etc. The prosecutor will consult with the investigator and relevant manager before instructing out. Factors to be considered include the nature, complexity and importance of the appearance, its location, and cost. In any such case the in house prosecutor will brief counsel acting about the file. . Reporting following disposal of prosecutions The prosecutor must, within five days of the completion of the prosecution, provide a prosecution report to the investigator or other person in charge of the file on the result. This report must be in Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines of Issue: July Security Classification Unclassified Version: . Review ed June Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page of the form of the Return on Prosecution form annexed t o these Guidelines and Procedures and must be copied to the Manager Legal Services Litigation. For in house prosecutions, the individual prosecutors are responsible for reporting the disposed prosecution (and related hours, disbursements and costs), to the designated administrator in legal branch, to allow monthly reporting to the Public Prosecutions Unit at the Crown Law Office. Where business units have briefed out prosecutions to Crown Solicitors, the business unit is responsible for providing the r eport to the legal branch administrator. Where any oral decision has precedent value or contains a contentious ruling relating to the determination of a point of law that may be subject to appeal, the prosecutor should request the Court to have the decisi on typed up. Appeals . The defendant or MBIE may appeal the following decisions of a Court: a. a pre trial ruling (with leave of the Court) b. a sentence imposed c. a ruling by the trial Court (on a question of law, with leave of the Court) d. bail e. orders relating to na me suppression and f. a costs order. However, under the Cabinet Directions on the Conduct of Crown Legal Business and the Solicitor Generals P rosecution Guidelines , MBIE (or a Crown Solicitor) must obtain the Solicitor Generals consent to appeal any decision of a court (except bail decisions which are within the authority of Crown solicitors). . Defendant Appea ls Any external prosecutor who receives notice of an appeal filed by a defendant, in a case originally prosecuted for MBIE by that prosecutor must immediately inform the instructing MBIE employee. This includes conviction appeals. Any in house prosecutor who receives notice of an appeal filed by a defendant must immediately inform the Manager Legal Services Litigation. The business manager or Litigation Manger will discuss the appeal with the pro secutor who appeared on the prosecution and the prosecution decision maker before deciding whether to oppose the appeal. For prosecutions taken by in house prosecutors the prosecutor or Litigation Manager will instruct a Crown Solicitor to represent MBIE on appeals in accordance with the Cabinet Directions on the Conduct of Crown Legal Business and the Crown Solicitors Terms of Office. . MBIE Appeals No appeal (other than a bail appeal) may be filed on behalf of MBIE, whether by a MBIE prosecutor or by exte rnal counsel unless the prior written consent of the Solicitor General has been obtained. The usual time frame for filing an appeal in the appropriate Court is within working days of the decision being made. The relevant business unit manager or prose cutor may initiate a request for approval to appeal. The initiator of the request is responsible for forwarding urgently to the Litigation Manager the following material: Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines of Issue: July Security Classification Unclassified Version: . Review ed June Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page of a. the decision to be appealed (or, in the case of an oral decision that has not been transcribed: the prosecutors notes of the decision, to be followed by a typed transcript of the notes as soon as possible) b. a statement of the proposed ground(s) of appeal and details of the alleged errors in the judgment c. any written submissions for the Ministry or the defendant and d. an outline of the importance to the Ministry of conducting an appeal and any risks in doing so. This information should be provided to the Litigation Manager as soon as possible but at the latest within five working da ys of the decision to be appealed. The decision on requests for the Solicitor Generals consent to appeal will be made by the Litigation Manager in consultation with the business unit manager and the prosecution decision maker and prosecutor who appeared on the prosecution. This decision should be made by the Litigation Manager no later than five working days after receipt of the file. Where the Litigation Manager agrees an appeal is appropriate, he or she will facilitate the request for approval to Crown Law (on behalf of the Solicitor General), with the assistance of the Prosecutor who appeared on the prosecution. If the Solicitor General consents to the appeal being filed, the appeal will be dealt with by either Crown Law or by a Crown Solicitor (depen ding on the circumstances). . Outcome of appeals On receipt of the appeal judgment, counsel appearing on an appeal must forward a copy immediately to the relevant investigator or business unit manager, the in house prosecutor (if relevant) and the Litigation Manager. For a sentence appeal, the counsel must complete a report on the case in the standard Return on Prosecution format and provide it within five days to the relevant business unit and Litigation Manager.
TXT service (for people with hearing or speech difficulties)
shrvakdix Disability Perspective
Proposed l eave payment process
The costs that are related to the IP oversight scheme and the NZBN register will not be recovered from the CO levy as they are recovered from levies in their own right . Unlike the NZBN levy and IP levy which recover the costs of discrete functions, these shared costs do not have fixed unit costs. Instead, the CO levy is set, and the levy revenue is then applied to these shared costs. Companies Act in to provide for the benefits of a system approach to running registers by introducing a levy . Table below shows how these two options do not meet all the principles of cost recovery when compared to the proposed approach of an annual levy on entity registers. Table : Analysis of proposals for applying a CO levy against principles of cost recovery
e. New Zealand is at an early stage of the shift to more circular economy ; there is emergent activity in sustainable businesses and communities New Zealands economy, like most other countries, is not very circular. We are one of the highest generators of waste in the OECD, with an average of kg per person sent to municipal landfills in . Our research estimated that less than of materials that flow into the New Zealand economy are recovered through recycling. There is a growing nich e of businesses adopting circular practices . Organisations such as the Sustainable Business Network have been supporting circular business practices for many years. Their Circular Economy Directory lists organisations and has had , users since . Many circular businesses remain small and have difficulty scaling in an economic system and business environment that is stil l fundamentally linear. Product end oflife considerations tend to be the focus for many businesses wanting to be more circula r. Reinventing products and designing out waste in the first place has been less prominent but is growing. Regional initiatives using circular practices are emerging in New Zealand, particularly in the bioeconomy. For example, North lands Ngawha Innovation and Enterprise Park is a collaborative hub for business and process innovation, focussed on kaitiaki, circ ular economies, employment opportunities and regional capability development. Communities are involved in networks supporting avoidance of w aste and circular approaches; these include Para Kore, Zero Waste Network, New Zealand Food Waste Champions and Rep air Caf Aotearoa. Modest government investments have supported these initiatives while the circular concept is beginning to be embedded in some areas of government policy. Source: Impacts of circular approaches on emissions, jobs, and other factors
months after the commencement .
growth in Family work visa holders
. Ka Hao Mori Digital Technology Fund (Ka Hao Fund) ) The Parties to this MOU agree that the transfer by TPK of the remaining balance of the Ka Hao Fund (. million) will commence either upon the introduction of the legislation to the House or before the end of t he calendar year, whichever comes first. The details of the transfer and future administration of the fund are to be agreed between MSWG and TPK. ) The fund ing in clause above is exclusive of any funds transferred from the Ka Hao Fund.
. To help address these issues, Cabinet agreed in May to establish a Taskforce to review the Act and suggest recommendations for change CAB MIN refers. The tripartite group was comprised of government, union and business representatives, and was chaired by Professor Gordon Anderson, an employment law specialist from Victoria University. The Taskforce was provided with approximately a year to provide its final report.
payload permits have been issued to different organisations, including:
shrvakdix Endorse the unanimous recommendations of the Holidays Act Taskforce . Note that in May , Cabinet agreed to establish a Taskforce to review the Holidays Act and suggest recommendations for change CAB MIN refers
Are you aware of other issues relating to BAPS leave If so, what are they
Improving enforcement programme ( . million) . million will be applied to enforcement activities and programmes across the suite of registers that help to encourage market compliance and combat harmful phoenixing and other poor business practices : Further funding will allow an increase in enforcement against companies and directors who are not complying with the law, which will have a positive impact on the marketplace . New and amended legislation will result in a widening of enforcement activities that will need to be undertaken by the Companies Office Integrity and Enforcement Team. For example, the new Incorporated Societies Act includes an expanded suite of enforcement tools which will require additional full time positions to be effectively administered. New provisions within th is Act are more aligned with those set out in the Companies Act (the Companies Act), spanning infringement notices and prohibition of office holders through to prosecution . There has been an increase in the complexity of matters referred to the Registrar of Companies relating to director prohibitions, which provide protection for the public from company directors who have been dishonest , incompetent or irresponsible. More high profile directors of multiple companies are being prohibited where mismanagement has resulted in company failures. There has also been a significant increase in the number of prohibited directors seeking to overturn decisions via a ppeal proceedings in th e civil registry of the High Court. This has led to increased legal expenditure as Crown Law must be engaged to act on behalf of the Registrar of Companies . Criminal prosecutions carried out for the Registrar of Companies have also increased in complexity, impacting legal expenditure. More time is spent on preparing matters for Court, as well as extended hearing and trial durations. Table on the next page details how the additional expenditure would be allocated across the registers as well as how much of it would be recovered through fees and levies . It compares this to the current budget and the scenario where the current budget would be split across the proposed new levies and existing fees with no increase .
Media comment . Publishing the nature and outc ome of enforcement actions draws attention to the consequences of violating the law. It is a valuable tool for both educating duty holders and deterring noncompliance . . However, public statements concerning prosecutions and investigations must be treated with particular care. . The general expectation is that relevant business unit will provide a spokesperson and prosecutors will not make any public comment. . In communicating with the public through the media in relation to a prosecution, MBIE staff will act in accordance with the Crown Law Media Protocol for Prosecutors, News Media Policy and will act in a way that: a. does not prejudice the right to a fair trial b. supports the administration of justice and the integrity of the criminal justice system c. respects the principle of open justice and d. treats the victims of crime with courtesy and compassion , and respects their privacy. . MBIE will publicise the outcome of a prosecution where it considers it appropriate. This will be managed by the releva nt business unit manager together with the communications and legal teams. Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines of Issue: July Security Classification Unclassified Version: . Review ed June Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page of Civil Proceedings relating to prosecution action . Civil proceedings arising out of a prosecution, will be managed as follows: a. any application or other civil action against MBIE in th e District Court that arises in the course of a prosecution must be managed by the relevant prosecutor or Crown Solicitor instructed on the prosecution and b. any application or other civil action against MBIE in the High Court that arises in the course of a prosecution or enforcement action (including judicial review) must be managed by the MBIE Prosecutor, Crown Solicitor andor the Crown Law Office. Diversion . Where MBIE business units operate a diversion scheme it is important that a. there are clear guidel ines on when the scheme should be used and the criteria for making any decision as to whether to offer diversion b. the diversion scheme is publicly available (eg. in the compliance and enforcement part of MBIEs website) c. the scheme is not mentioned to potent ial defendants during the course of an ongoing investigation (which could impact on the admissibility of evidence) d. the existence of the scheme is not taken into consideration until a decision to prosecute has been made and charges laid e. the diversion decisi on maker is independent of the investigator who prepared the prosecution f. the decision to offer diversion is consistent with the Solicitor General s Prosecution Guidelines , and in particular the public interest test, and takes into account the views of any victims. Related documents . Prosecution policy . Declaration of Interest policy . Delegations policy Help . If you have questions about t hese procedures, talk to your manager in the first instance. . Managers should seek advice from the Auckland Legal Manager, or Manager Legal Services Litigation. Appendices . Appendix Roles under Procedure and Guidelines Role Responsibilities Investigator Investigates suspected breaches of relevant Act, Regulation or other instrument Responsible for preparing file for referral to a prosecutor for review Ensures the file contains all relevant evidence, identifies issues going towards weight, credibility and Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines of Issue: July Security Classification Unclassified Version: . Review ed June Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page of admissibility, and includes all relevant information in relation to the public interest assessment Prepares disclosure for prosecutor review and assists prosecutor with disclosure obligations. Prosecution Decision Maker (within business unit) Reviews file and assesses in accordance with the Prosecution Policy , these Procedure s and Guidelines and the Solicitor Generals Prosecution Guidelines Advises investigator (or investigators manager) if further inquiries or information are necessary or if the file is to a satisfactory standard Makes prosecution decision Records and places on the case file the reasons for the decision to prosecute or not Where a decision is made to issue a written warning or to offer diversion, reasons for that decision must also be placed on the case file. Prosecutor Reviews file and evidence to ensure that the Tests for Prosecution ( evidential sufficiency and public interest) set out in the Solicitor Generals Prosecution Guidelines are met If not satisfied that the test for prosecution has been met, the prosecutor provides a written recommendation to the prosecution decision maker that a decision of no prosecution should be made If satisfied that the test for prosecution has been met, the prosecutor documents and confirms this to the prosecution decision maker who will make the ultimate decision whether to initiate prosecution. Manager Legal Services Litigation This role is referred to in various places in procedures eg: clause provid ing legal advice around conflicts of interest . Chief Legal Officer andor Business Unit Manager This role is referred to in various places in procedures eg: Responsibilities around conflict of interest clause .
Section : Introduction . In May , the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety established a tripartite Taskforce comprising government (the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) , State Services Commission and Inland Revenue) , the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions , and Bu siness New Zealand , to review the Holidays Act (the Act) . Professor Gordon Anderson, an employment law specialist from Victoria University, chaired the Taskforce and MBIE provided Secretariat support . . The purpose of the review was to make recommendat ions to Government for a clear and transparent set of rules for providing entitlements to, and payment for, holidays and leave . . This report begins with relevant background information and a summary of the process the Taskforce followed (Section ) . This i s followed by a brief overview of the issues with the current Act (Section ), a summary of the feedback received from stakeholders on the Issues Paper by the Taskforce in August (Section ) , and an overview of the options that the Taskforce developed and tested in the review (Section ) . Section sets out how the Taskforce assessed these options and made its decisions , while Section sets out the Taskforces final recommendations. Summary of the review . It has become apparent in recent y ears that there is a high level of non compliance with the Act. While it generally works for a standard, five day, hour week, the Act can be difficult to apply to more diverse working arrangements and complex remuneration packages. Noncompliance has re sulted in many employees not receiving the correct remuneration for their entitlements and employers spending significant resources on both remediating historical underpayments and complying with the Act. . The Taskforce that was established for the review was required to develop, test and make recommendations to the Government on policy options for the provision of, and payment for, holiday and leave entitlements that: continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act , which is to promote bal ance between work and other aspects of employees lives by providing minimum entitlements to annual holida ys, public holidays, sick leave, bereavement leave and family violence leave provide clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employe es receive their correct entitlements are simpler than the current Act in relation to provisions of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave are readily implementable in a payroll system minimise compliance costs for employers minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees ensure the balance of decision making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated are readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future aim to protect overall entitlements for employees. . The Taskforces Terms of Reference can be found in Annex One and the Cabinet paper establishing the Taskforce can be found at: http:www.mbie.govt.nzinfo servicesemployment skillslegislation reviewsholidays actreview .
Section : Introduction . In May , the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety established a tripartite Taskforce comprising government (the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) , State Services Commission and Inland Revenue) , the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions , and Bu siness New Zealand , to review the Holidays Act (the Act) . Professor Gordon Anderson, an employment law specialist from Victoria University, chaired the Taskforce and MBIE provided Secretariat support . . The purpose of the review was to make recommendat ions to Government for a clear and transparent set of rules for providing entitlements to, and payment for, holidays and leave . . This report begins with relevant background information and a summary of the process the Taskforce followed (Section ) . This i s followed by a brief overview of the issues with the current Act (Section ), a summary of the feedback received from stakeholders on the Issues Paper by the Taskforce in August (Section ) , and an overview of the options that the Taskforce developed and tested in the review (Section ) . Section sets out how the Taskforce assessed these options and made its decisions , while Section sets out the Taskforces final recommendations. Summary of the review . It has become apparent in recent y ears that there is a high level of non compliance with the Act. While it generally works for a standard, five day, hour week, the Act can be difficult to apply to more diverse working arrangements and complex remuneration packages. Noncompliance has re sulted in many employees not receiving the correct remuneration for their entitlements and employers spending significant resources on both remediating historical underpayments and complying with the Act. . The Taskforce that was established for the review was required to develop, test and make recommendations to the Government on policy options for the provision of, and payment for, holiday and leave entitlements that: continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act , which is to promote bal ance between work and other aspects of employees lives by providing minimum entitlements to annual holida ys, public holidays, sick leave, bereavement leave and family violence leave provide clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employe es receive their correct entitlements are simpler than the current Act in relation to provisions of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave are readily implementable in a payroll system minimise compliance costs for employers minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees ensure the balance of decision making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated are readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future aim to protect overall entitlements for employees. . The Taskforces Terms of Reference can be found in Annex One and the Cabinet paper establishing the Taskforce can be found at: http:www.mbie.govt.nzinfo servicesemployment skillslegislation reviewsholidays actreview . shrvakdix
f. Material shifts to circular economy and a higher value bioeconomy would need to be supported by sustained Government support Shifting toward s a more circular economy could support market competitiveness , supply chain resilience for critical materials, reduce emissions and environmental degradation, and generate local jobs . The scale of change will require action from across the business sector, consumers and communities , as well as a substantive role for government . Experience from other countries shows the shift can be slow and requires multiple levers . Governments are turning to stronger market shaping interventions to accelerate the shift to reduced and more efficient use of resources. Moving to higher value , lowe remission products in the bioeconomy will be needed for New Zealands transition to a low emissions economy and to achieve the governments goal to doubl e the value of exports. Moving from volume to value has been a long term and challenging goal for New Zealand. Collectively , the research programme finds that New Zealands shift to a circular economy and to a high value bioeconomy could be a means to achiev e a range of government goals: emissions reduction, as well as economic productivity and growth, gr owing export value, and supply chain resilience. A material shift will require sustained investment and multiple initiatives across different policy areas supporting coordination, information availability, and innovative activity. Sources: Emerging and future platforms in New Zealands bioeconomy Barriers, enablers and approaches for a more circular economy
. Working tog ether on spectrum policy ) There will be a programme of regular engagement and information sharing (subject to any legal constraints) on radio spectrum management work programmes including the allocation of spectrum to the MSE . ) Engagement will consist of annual meetings between the MSE or MSWG and the Minister responsible for radio spectrum, and quarterly meetings between ofcials acting on behalf of the Parties. Further details are set out in Appendix D: operational processes for working together on spec trum policy . ) Nothing in this M OU restricts the MSEs ability to make direct representations to the decision maker about spectrum policy .
XXXX; XX; XX; XX;
shrvakdix Publicity . Note the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety intends to publicly release the Holidays Act Taskforce Report (Annex ) alongside a statement signalling the Governments decision to adopt the recommendations in full
Do you agree with the des cription of the other issues in Annex Two If not, why not
Do you agree with the description of the other issues in Annex Two If not, why not
Scope of the review . The scope of the review was sufficiently broa d so as to generate fundamentally new ways of providing for entitlements and pay, while retaining the purpose of the current Act and (at least) the current levels of entitlement. . The Taskforce also ha d scope to consider any other matters relat ing to the A ct that it saw fit. This include d holidays and leave entitlements modified by other Acts (such as the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act ) and the interplay between the Act and other amendments to legislation (such as the recent amendments to the Employment Relations Act ). The Taskforce w as expected to consult to get a comprehensive understanding of the issues with the current legislation, and to draw on examples from overseas jurisdictions where appropriate . . The review did not include th e issue of remediation of historical underpay ments of holiday and leave pay. Employers still have an obligation to remediate employees for current and historic underpayments , and must be compliant with the current Act until any new legislation comes into e ffect. . The Taskforce notes that a transitional period would be required to ensure a smooth transition for employers, employees and payroll providers to the provisions of any amended Act. The Taskforce did not, however, consider the requirements of such a transitional period as part of the review. The review process . The review comprised three phases: Phase one Understanding the full range of issues with the current Act Phase two Developing and testing options Phase three Confirming preferred option( s) and finalising recommendations Phase One Understanding issues with the current Act . It was important for the Taskforce to ensure that it had a full understanding of the issues associated with the current Act. To this end , the Taskforce developed an Iss ues Paper which was released in August for a period of public consultation. The Issues Paper set out the Taskforces understanding of the key issues employers, employees and payroll providers face in trying to implement the Act. Feedback was sought fr om interested stakeholders about: whether the issues outlined in the Issues Paper were described accurately whether stakeholders had experienced any other issues working with the Act that were not captured in the Issues Paper (and if so, what those other i ssues were) whether stakeholders had any suggestions or proposals for change. . A total of submissions were received in response to the Issues Paper. They are summarised in Section of this report. CTU affiliate unions did not make submissions in respons e to the Issues Paper. Instead, the affiliate unions provid ed their feedback directly to the Taskforce via the CTU representatives . Business NZ felt that the Issues Paper captured their concerns with the current Act. Phase Two Developing and testing opti ons . The second phase of the review involved developing a number of options for change. The options were informed by feedback received during Phase One , as well as by views and proposals put forward by members of the Taskforce.
Scope of the review . The scope of the review was sufficiently broa d so as to generate fundamentally new ways of providing for entitlements and pay, while retaining the purpose of the current Act and (at least) the current levels of entitlement. . The Taskforce also ha d scope to consider any other matters relat ing to the A ct that it saw fit. This include d holidays and leave entitlements modified by other Acts (such as the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act ) and the interplay between the Act and other amendments to legislation (such as the recent amendments to the Employment Relations Act ). The Taskforce w as expected to consult to get a comprehensive understanding of the issues with the current legislation, and to draw on examples from overseas jurisdictions where appropriate . . The review did not include th e issue of remediation of historical underpay ments of holiday and leave pay. Employers still have an obligation to remediate employees for current and historic underpayments , and must be compliant with the current Act until any new legislation comes into e ffect. . The Taskforce notes that a transitional period would be required to ensure a smooth transition for employers, employees and payroll providers to the provisions of any amended Act. The Taskforce did not, however, consider the requirements of such a transitional period as part of the review. The review process . The review comprised three phases: Phase one Understanding the full range of issues with the current Act Phase two Developing and testing options Phase three Confirming preferred option( s) and finalising recommendations Phase One Understanding issues with the current Act . It was important for the Taskforce to ensure that it had a full understanding of the issues associated with the current Act. To this end , the Taskforce developed an Iss ues Paper which was released in August for a period of public consultation. The Issues Paper set out the Taskforces understanding of the key issues employers, employees and payroll providers face in trying to implement the Act. Feedback was sought fr om interested stakeholders about: whether the issues outlined in the Issues Paper were described accurately whether stakeholders had experienced any other issues working with the Act that were not captured in the Issues Paper (and if so, what those other i ssues were) whether stakeholders had any suggestions or proposals for change. . A total of submissions were received in response to the Issues Paper. They are summarised in Section of this report. CTU affiliate unions did not make submissions in respons e to the Issues Paper. Instead, the affiliate unions provid ed their feedback directly to the Taskforce via the CTU representatives . Business NZ felt that the Issues Paper captured their concerns with the current Act. Phase Two Developing and testing opti ons . The second phase of the review involved developing a number of options for change. The options were informed by feedback received during Phase One , as well as by views and proposals put forward by members of the Taskforce. shrvakdix
Section of the NZBN Act prescribes entities eligible for an NZBN as corporate, public, or unincorporated entities, who do not already have an NZBN, are not ineligible for an NZBN ( eg individuals not registered on the NZBN register as a sole trader or in their personal capacity as a consumer or employee). Annual levy on entities Levy on all fees No levy Justified Efficient Equitable Questions for submitters on proposals for the CO levy: What is your view on who should be charged the CO levy and the typed of shared costs the levy will recover What impact will paying an annual levy of . have on your business or organisation
Section : Delivering an option What are the next steps To pro gress
Table : Impact of new levies and additional million budget on registers Current budget Current budget with proposed levies Proposed additional budget Proposed total budget Expenditure by register Companies , , , , PPSR , , , NZBN , , , Disclose managed funds , , , Disclose financial statement filing , Financial service provider register , , , Limited partnerships Retirement villages Incorporated societies , , , Friendly societies, building societies, and credit unions Insolvency practitioners (IP) IP oversight scheme Auditors Total expenditure budget , , , , Recovered through CO levy , , , NZBN levy , , IP levy Fees , , , , Total revenue , , , , Forecast position of the memorandum account Figure on the next page shows the trend of the annual surpluses or deficits resulting from forecasts of existing and proposed fees and levies over financial years. Surpluses and deficits should trend towards zero overtime. There are two trends: if there is no change in fees, the deficit is forecast to continue (downward trend); and if fees and levies are changed as proposed in this document , the memorandum account is forecast to return to a zero balance within five years (upward trend).
. The Taskforce considered the options for change it developed against a range of criteria set out in its Terms of Reference. These criteria set out that the Taskforces recommendations were expected to:
. No permit is required for a high altitude payload and the term has very limited application throughout the Act (it is used in section in connection with enforcement powers and in section which extends the regulation making powers to high altitude payloads, but otherwise does not have any operative effect). ISSUE . A key issue is whether a permit should be required for high altitude payloads. A related question is whether the current definition of high altitude payload is appropriate. . The SPRS team noted that recent developments with high altitude technologies make it desirable that equipment taken into high altitude, such as sensors used for remote sensing or other equipment used in scientific research , is permitted separately from the high altitude vehicle itself. . Submissions have also highlighted that the current definition of high altitude payload may need refinement.
. A key part of this phase was the need to ensure that options for change were robustly tested , to ensure that they would work in practice. To achieve this, the Taskforce contracted Hudson Taylor, a professional services firm with expertise in payroll matters, to assess and test the op tions that the Taskforce had developed , with anonymised real payroll data. . Hudson Taylor undertook three stages of testing as follows: Stage One testing a conceptual peer review to test whether the options developed by the Taskforce were capable of being implemented in payroll systems. Stage Two testing detailed testing of each option with anonymised payroll data covering a wide range of working arrangements, employers and employee types, and different sectors of the New Zealand economy. Stage Three tes ting further testing of the preferred options to assist with the final decision making. . The testing process and the results of the testing are discussed in more detail in Section . Phase Thre e Confirming preferred option (s) and finalising recommendati ons . Phase Three of the review involved assessing the options developed by the Taskforce against a range of criteria. The results of the testing carried out at Phase Two of the review formed part of this assessment , but a number of other criteria we re als o used as set out in the Taskforces Terms of R eference. The results of this analysis then formed the basis of the final recommendations of the Taskforce , which are set out in Section of this report. . Phase Three also included targeted consultation with payroll providers to seek feedback on specific aspects of the proposed recommendations. Overview of the Holidays Act . The Act sets out the minimum entitlements to holidays and leave, and payment for them, that employers are obliged to provide to their employees. Its purpose is to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees lives by providing minimum entitlements to annual holidays, public holidays, sick leave , bereavement leave and family violence leave . The Ministry of Business, Innova tion and Employment (MBIE) is responsible for administering and enforcing the Act. . Two key aims of the Act can be summarised in the following principles : Entitlements are to be determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken . This principle is intended to ensure that the entitlements (both in terms of the leave period to be taken, and the level of payment for the leave period) reflect the employee s work pattern at the precise time they take their leave rather than being based on w hat they have hypothetically accrued or earnt over time. Employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave. That is, they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked for the period they are taking leave for . . The key provisions of the Act include: at least four weeks of annual holidays each year for employees a paid day off when a public holiday falls on a day that an employee would usually work
. A key part of this phase was the need to ensure that options for change were robustly tested , to ensure that they would work in practice. To achieve this, the Taskforce contracted Hudson Taylor, a professional services firm with expertise in payroll matters, to assess and test the op tions that the Taskforce had developed , with anonymised real payroll data. . Hudson Taylor undertook three stages of testing as follows: Stage One testing a conceptual peer review to test whether the options developed by the Taskforce were capable of being implemented in payroll systems. Stage Two testing detailed testing of each option with anonymised payroll data covering a wide range of working arrangements, employers and employee types, and different sectors of the New Zealand economy. Stage Three tes ting further testing of the preferred options to assist with the final decision making. . The testing process and the results of the testing are discussed in more detail in Section . Phase Thre e Confirming preferred option (s) and finalising recommendati ons . Phase Three of the review involved assessing the options developed by the Taskforce against a range of criteria. The results of the testing carried out at Phase Two of the review formed part of this assessment , but a number of other criteria we re als o used as set out in the Taskforces Terms of R eference. The results of this analysis then formed the basis of the final recommendations of the Taskforce , which are set out in Section of this report. . Phase Three also included targeted consultation with payroll providers to seek feedback on specific aspects of the proposed recommendations. Overview of the Holidays Act . The Act sets out the minimum entitlements to holidays and leave, and payment for them, that employers are obliged to provide to their employees. Its purpose is to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees lives by providing minimum entitlements to annual holidays, public holidays, sick leave , bereavement leave and family violence leave . The Ministry of Business, Innova tion and Employment (MBIE) is responsible for administering and enforcing the Act. . Two key aims of the Act can be summarised in the following principles : Entitlements are to be determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken . This principle is intended to ensure that the entitlements (both in terms of the leave period to be taken, and the level of payment for the leave period) reflect the employee s work pattern at the precise time they take their leave rather than being based on w hat they have hypothetically accrued or earnt over time. Employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave. That is, they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked for the period they are taking leave for . . The key provisions of the Act include: at least four weeks of annual holidays each year for employees a paid day off when a public holiday falls on a day that an employee would usually work shrvakdix
Annex O ne: Summary of Government response to Holidays Act Taskforce recommendations The table below sets out the Holidays Act Taskforces proposals across a number of key themes and compares them with the provisions in the cu rrent Act. Themeprovision Current Act Taskforce prop osals Rec Government response Calculation of leave payments Annual holidays payments Paid at the greater of: Ordinary Weekly Pay (OWP) (or average weekly earnings over last weeks if OWP cannot be calculated) Average weekly earnings over last months For employees that have been on parental leave, only the average weekly earnings over last months is used. Paid at the greater of: Ordinary Leave Pay Average weekly earnings over last or weeks (if Ordinary Leave Pay is unclear) Average weekly earnings over last weeks The above calculation is also used for those who have been on parental leave (i.e. the parental leave override is removed). , Accept recommendations , adopting weeks as the reference period for the short run average weekly earning s calculation . The Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety also recommends that commission or incentive payments, where it is unclear what period of time the payments were earned over, should only be included in the week average payment calculation. FBAPS leave payments Relevant Daily Pay (RDP) or Average Daily Pay over last weeks (if not possible to calculate RDP or if pay varies within pay period) Paid at the greater of: Ordinary Leave Pay Average Daily Pay over last weeks Accept recommendation Gross earnings definition Lack of clarity as to what payments are included in gross earnings (e.g. what a discretionary payment is). Clarifies that gross earnings means all cash payments received, except direct reimbursements for costs incurred. Accept recommendation How deduction of entitlement is calculated Period of annual holidays Annual holidays entitlement of four weeks , but lack of detail about how to determine entitlements and payments where it is not obvious (e.g. for employee with variable hours andor pay). Employee and employer agreement about what genuinely constitutes a working week for the employee. Annual holida ys entitlements are calculated, taken, paid and held in weeks or portions of weeks. Use hours from employment agreement or roster. If no hours set out in employment agreement or roster, then use average hours worked over corresponding days in previous w eeks. , Accept recommendations shrvakdix Day of FBAPS leave Deductions in days (but lack of certainty about how to determine if a day is an Otherwise Working Day). Deductions in days or part days (sick and family violence leave can be taken in units of less than a day, at a minimum of a of a day). Prescribed formula for determining an Otherwise Working Day. , , Accept recommendations Taking annual holidays in advance Employees become entitled to four weeks leave after months continuous employment. The Act does not specifically provide for leave in advance (i.e. it is at the discretion of the employer). Employees become entitled to four weeks leave after months continuous employment, but have the ability to take leave in advance on a prorata basis (e.g. could take weeks leave after working for months). Accept recommendation Payasyougo (PAYG) There is confusion as to what intermittent or irregular means in relation to employees being eligible to re ceive annual holiday pay with their pay (instead of being entitled to take paid time off) . Clearer definition of what intermittent or irregular means, and employers required to review PAYG employees every weeks to check eligibility for PAYG. Also removes the ability to pay PA YG for employees on fixed term contracts of less than months. Accept recommendation Availability provisions Silent on how availability provisions interact with leave. Clarifies how availability provisions and leave interact. Accept recommendation FBAPS eligibility Employees are eligible for sick, bereavement and family violence leave after six months continuous employment or if they meet an hours test after six months. A new eligibility test for sick, bereavement and family violence leave. Bereavem ent leave and family violence leave are available from day one, and sick leave accrues over four months. Bereavement leave is expanded to cover more family members. , , Accept recommendations Transferring public holidays Employees can transfer a public holiday to another day, but can be left worse off in some circumstances. Provisions are amended to reduce the chance of employees being disadvantaged by a transfer. Accept recommendation Closedowns Closedown provisions are confusing and can disadvantage employees. Closedown provisions are amended to provide greater transparency and certainty, and reduce negative outcomes for employees. Accept recommendation Sale and transfer of a business Employees must have all of their leave entitlement s paid out and reset on the sale Employees have a choice about whether to transfer all of their leave entitlements or have them paid out. Accept recommendation shrvakdix and transfer of a business. Many employers are unclear on these provisions. Record keeping and payslips Employers must keep relevant records. No requirement to provide a payslip to employees. Record keeping requirements are in line with the general statutory obligation to keep records relat ing to minimum employment standards , and employe rs must provide detailed payslips every pay period. , Accept recommendations Compliance and enforcement A range of information and education tools are available to support employers to comply with the current legislation ( including detailed guidance first in ) . Labour Inspectors also have a range of compliance tools t o address non compliance, ranging from enforceable undertakings and infringement notices , to seeking penalties through the employment institutions for more serious breaches. The Taskforce recommended further work be undertaken to develop appropriate compliance and enforcement mechanisms to support implementation of a revised Holidays Act. Accept recommendation , noting an initial view that any changes required to these mech anisms are likely to be minor and consistent with the general framework of current employment legislation Going above the minimum standards Although employers and employees can agree to different arrangements as long as they meet the minimum, this could be made clearer. The Act explicitly states that different arrangements can be agreed as long as entitlements can be demonstrated to at least meet the minimum standards. Accept recommendation
Are you aware of any further issues you believe should be considered If so, what are they
Figure : Memorandum account balance FY
For applicants who do not have variable components of pay and work consistent hours each week, the outcome of the proposed fo urweek average formula will be very close to the legal status quo for OWP. In oth er cases, because the proposed formula is based on gross taxable earnings which includes more payment types than OWP ( e.g. oneoff bonuses and commission payments that are not a regular part of pay), it might produce a slightly higher payment rate compared to the legal status quo. In a small number of cases, it might produce a lower payment rate than OWP if the applicants four week average of gross taxable weekly earnings was lower than both their OWP in the week before P PL payments commence and their AWI. kjtrvweh I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E be manageable within the existing appr opriation. IR implementation costs are also expected to be min or because the proposed formula is aligned with the one already being applied . Treatment of leave entitlements in a restructuring situation In , Cabinet agreed that on the sale and tran sfer of a business, employees should have a choice about whether to transfer all of their leave entitlements or have them paid out and reset . The Taskforces recommendation aimed to address the lack of legislative clarity regarding the treatment of leave entitlements for some employees in these situations which results in (well intentioned) common practice in breach of the Act.
Stout Street, PO Box ,
Stout Street, Wellington
Stout Street, Wellington, New Zealand
The New Zealand Business Number Funding (Validation and Authorisation) Act . This includes companies, overseas companies, incorporated societies, limited partnerships , friendly societies, credit unions and building societies . Questions for submitters on proposals for the NZBN levy: What is your view on who should be charged the NZBN levy and the costs the levy will recover What impact will paying an annual levy of . have on your business or organisation
. Non exclusive relationship ) MSWG acknowledges the agreements under this MOU do not create an exclusive relationship and the Minister (s) and the Crown may develop other relationships with third parties (including external stakeholders, other Mori entities, or international instruments) provided however that where the Crown intends to enter into or enters into relationships with other parties which relate to the relationship between M SWG and the Crown as detailed in this MOU, then the Crown will ensure: a) That it discloses to MSWG in a prior and transparent manner the Crowns intentions and provides MSWG with sufficient information to make an informed response to the Crown as to the impl ications (if any) of the Crowns proposed relationship with the third party; and b) That any relationship with a third party will not, to the extent possible, undermine this MOU.
. The Taskforce was particularly guided by three key principles: certainty, transparency and practicality. It wanted the recommendations to provide the certainty that employers and employees require, to ensure that employees are fully informed about their le ave entitlements, and to work in the real world. It also wanted to ensure that no employee would be worse off under its proposals.
Are the broad principles that underpin the Holidays Act (that entitlements are to be determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken and that employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave) still appropriate
Section : The basis for setting fees and levies Proposed fees and levies are set to recover approximately million annually, considering the proposed increase in budget and any forecast deficit. A cost allocation model identifies the costs to be recovered The Companies Office uses a cost allocation model , developed in , to identify the type and amount of costs that need to be recovered from users. The model was derived from an analysis of the type of expenditure , the type of services the Companies Office provides, the time spent by staff on specific services within a specific register (like incorporating a company or filing an annual return) , and the volumes they deliver. The cost allocation model assumes that: users benefit from the registry services of the Companies Office and should contribute to their funding through fees; any forecast deficit or surplus is accounted for in final fees and levies; and fees and levies are set to ensure that , overall, the memorandum account balance trends towards a nil balance within the next five years. The cost allocation process has three components, outlined in Figure below. Figure : Components of cost allocation
This is a high level assessment based on officials preferred option. The Holidays Act require s that the outgoing employer must pay out untaken annual leave and alternative holiday entitlements when the employment with them ends . Restructuring situations include when a business is sold or transferred or work is contracted in or out . kjtrvweh I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Operationalising the change agreed by Cabinet would mean that employers would be required to offer employees a choice about whether to have their leave entitlements transferred or paid out by the outgoing employer, as a downstream decision of something they are voluntarily agreeing to. Imposing this statutory constraint on employers contractual arrangements and could discourage the in coming employer from offering employees the opportunity to transfer their employment if large leave liabilities were involved . o how liability will be apportioned betwee n the employers must also be negotiated and agreed by the outgoing and incoming employers ; o how and what employee information required by the incoming employer in relation to leave entitlements will be provided so that they can correctly determine the employee s entitlements and payments ; o when an employee takes transferred leave entitlements , the payment rate must not be less than what it would have been had it been paid out at the time of transfer .
at least five days each year of paid sick leave three days paid leave if an employees immediate family member dies, or one days paid leave for the death of a person outside their immediate family from April , the Act now provide s up to ten days of leave for people affected by family violence (on a similar basis to the provisions for sick leave and bereavement leave ). . The Act provides a number of calculations for determining pay when employees take holidays or leave. For annual holidays , employees must be paid whichever is the greater of their Ordinary W eekly Pay or th eir average weekl y earnings over the previous months. For all other types of leave , employees must be paid their R elevant Daily Pay, or if impractical or the employee s daily pay within the relevant pay period is variable , their Average Daily P ay. . The Act also covers a number of issues such as annual closedowns for businesses, transferring public holidays , the ability to cash up one weeks annual holiday entitlement and the employers obligation to keep records . The enforcement provisions follow those in the Employment Relations Act and, as with other minimum entitlements, permit both employees and Labour I nspectors to take cases.
. For the exposure draft w e propose the inclusion of the following formula to clarify the amount of AL that would accrue during a part week of unpaid leave (the treatment of part weeks was identified as lacking clarity and causing confusion in the current rules by our stakeholder working group) : Number of hours that the employee did work in the week unpaid leave was taken (up to the value of the denominator), divided by the employees average number o f guaranteed hours per seven day period, multiplied by . . . Under the Act, if it is agreed that unpaid leave beyond the first week will be included in continuous employment, when the employee takes AL and the employer makes the payment calculation, the y must also reduce the week divisor for the Average Weekly Earnings (AWE) calculation by the number of whole or part weeks of unpaid leave greater than one that fall in the week reference period . This means that, weeks of unpaid leave beyond the fi rst week also do not deflate the payment rate. This rule does not apply when
. Representations ) The parties agree they will not make any statement on the others behalf to any third party without the express authorisation of the other party.
. Significant thought has gone into ensuring that the OSHAA Act is flexible enough to deal with rapidly evolving technology and market demand. Equal importance has been placed on keeping compliance costs as low as possible. The lesson from overseas experience is that this is necessary to avoid stifling economic and innovation opportunities and to underpin New Zealands advantage as a location for space activities. . The OSHAA Act achieves these objectives by establishing a decision making framework that is risk based and proportionate. It avoids unnecessary prescription , for example, by allowing the decision maker to tailor the conditions of licences and permits to provide a graduated approach to riskmanagement (rather than a one size fits all approach). . The OSHAA Act s regulation making powers also provide the necessary scope to deal with future technologies and applications. A number of regulation making powers are included in the OSHAA Act . Not all of them must be used initially or will be relevant for every activity they are built into the legislation to future proof it and to enable a flexible approach to managing risk . The regulator can take existing foreign licenses i nto account when considering an application . The OSHAA Act enables the Minister to take into account foreign licenc es for the activity when de ciding whether to grant a licence for launches, payloads or launch facilities. This approach has been taken to red uce duplication of costs for applicants and is consistent with a number of other New Zealand regulatory regimes like product safety. . International cooperation arrangements with certain foreign regulators will facilitate this aspect of the regime. The ab ility for foreign licenc es to be taken into account has influenced the nature of the regulations proposed in this document , particularly the information requirements . . We note that there are some issues which New Zealand must consider from its own perspecti ve (like fitness to hold a license, national interest, and national security). We have asses sed the marginal impacts of the proposed requirements in New Zealand on top of what applicants will face overseas (e.g. to what extent do the proposals add cost for these applicants by requiring differing or more comprehensive information to be provided with applications ). On balance , we consider that the impacts are justified in relation to the benefits of ensuring a safe and secure environment for space activities . . The ability to recognise authorisations granted in a foreign jurisdiction reduces the compliance burden on applicants and enables the New Zealand S pace Agency to operate effectively from day one of the regime coming into force. As noted above, space activities are a new industry for New Zealand and it will take time to develop the necessary technical capability and expertise required to operate a comprehensive licensing regime. Key information gaps and assumptions . Disruptive technologies are making it e asier and more affordable to access space and this is creating opportunities for new participants and new products and services. New Zealand is seeking to facilitate a dynamic and competitive space industry by putting in place a regulatory regime that prov ides flexibility to accommodate future industry developments and the evolution of international space law, whilst managing risk . . Key assumptions in re lation to the design of the regime are: Overly onerous licensing requirements would impose high compliance costs and would deter foreign payload providers from launching in New Zealand s tifling the development of a New Zealand based space industry . This means any regulatory
. The Taskforce was not able to consult widely on its proposed recommendations due to timeframe pressure. Although it consulte d on a subset of its recommendations with a small group of payroll providers in September , there are likely to be other interested stakeholders, such as other payroll providers and practitioners, businesses and employment lawyers.
b Victoria Street West
XXXX; XX; XX; XX
How could holiday entitlements be provided for in a way th at reflects the flexible working arrangements we have in New Zealand, including any arrangements we expect to see in the future
How could holiday entitlements be provided for in a way that reflects the flexible working arrangements we have in New Zealand, including any arrangements we expect to see in the future
Section : Issues with the current Act . In August , the Taskforce produced an Issues Paper which summarised t he main issues with the current Act and sought views from stakeholders about whether they had been correctly captured . The key issues with the current Act are outlined below. For a fuller discussion please see the Issues Paper : https:www.mbie.govt.nzassetsUploadsbbbcbafholidays actreview issues paper.pdf . Who is affected by the issues with the current Act Many employers and employees are affec ted by non compliance with the Act . It is clear to the Taskforce that issues with the Act are widespread across the New Zealand economy. Many employers and employees are affected by non compliance with the Act and e ven employers with a workforce working st andard hours may face challenges , such as not including all relevant payments in gross earnings. Finding solutions to the challenges posed by the Act will therefore support all employers and employees to better understand their obligations and entitlemen ts. . Employees and employers are not assisted in endeavouring to comply with the Holidays Act where payslips do not contain the necessary i nformation to assess compliance, or similarly, where leave transaction records are not easily accessible. Arguably ma ny non compliance issues could have been addressed earlier through a greater level of transparen cy. but its harder for some employers for different reasons . Some employers find it more difficult to comply with the Act, or are more likely to face implemen tation issues than others, particularly where there are flexible or variable work practices in place. Small employers may have difficulty interpreting the Act , while large employers attempting to systematise their payroll can run into issues with the parts of the Act that require manual decision making and intervention (such as the determination of what a week is for an employee). . Some employers are unable to comply with the Act because their payroll system is not compliant, or because they misunderstand the capabilities and limitations of their system. Furthermore, the set andforget mentality that some employers have regarding systemisation often mean s that payroll systems may not be when circumstances change. . Some sectors and industries are particularly prone to complex working arrangements that do not fit the standard working week that the Act was originally based on. For example, sectors that have a high proportion of employees working irregular hours, such as hospitality, retail , or healt h services , may be more likely to have problems with interpreting and implementing the Act. and the effects can be worse for some employees . A common problem for many employees is the uncertainty about entitlements and payments that is associated with wor king irregular hours, shift work, or changing hours. . Issues also arise in relation to payments as well as the actual entitlements, especially when employees pay is variable or the payroll system is not when changes occur. This can occur when emplo yees payments include commission, incentive based payments, overtime, or board and lodgings. Complications can arise in determining whether these additional payments are regular or not, and whether they should or should not be included in the calculatio n of payments for leave.
Section : Issues with the current Act . In August , the Taskforce produced an Issues Paper which summarised t he main issues with the current Act and sought views from stakeholders about whether they had been correctly captured . The key issues with the current Act are outlined below. For a fuller discussion please see the Issues Paper : https:www.mbie.govt.nzassetsUploadsbbbcbafholidays actreview issues paper.pdf . Who is affected by the issues with the current Act Many employers and employees are affec ted by non compliance with the Act . It is clear to the Taskforce that issues with the Act are widespread across the New Zealand economy. Many employers and employees are affected by non compliance with the Act and e ven employers with a workforce working st andard hours may face challenges , such as not including all relevant payments in gross earnings. Finding solutions to the challenges posed by the Act will therefore support all employers and employees to better understand their obligations and entitlemen ts. . Employees and employers are not assisted in endeavouring to comply with the Holidays Act where payslips do not contain the necessary i nformation to assess compliance, or similarly, where leave transaction records are not easily accessible. Arguably ma ny non compliance issues could have been addressed earlier through a greater level of transparen cy. but its harder for some employers for different reasons . Some employers find it more difficult to comply with the Act, or are more likely to face implemen tation issues than others, particularly where there are flexible or variable work practices in place. Small employers may have difficulty interpreting the Act , while large employers attempting to systematise their payroll can run into issues with the parts of the Act that require manual decision making and intervention (such as the determination of what a week is for an employee). . Some employers are unable to comply with the Act because their payroll system is not compliant, or because they misunderstand the capabilities and limitations of their system. Furthermore, the set andforget mentality that some employers have regarding systemisation often mean s that payroll systems may not be when circumstances change. . Some sectors and industries are particularly prone to complex working arrangements that do not fit the standard working week that the Act was originally based on. For example, sectors that have a high proportion of employees working irregular hours, such as hospitality, retail , or healt h services , may be more likely to have problems with interpreting and implementing the Act. and the effects can be worse for some employees . A common problem for many employees is the uncertainty about entitlements and payments that is associated with wor king irregular hours, shift work, or changing hours. . Issues also arise in relation to payments as well as the actual entitlements, especially when employees pay is variable or the payroll system is not when changes occur. This can occur when emplo yees payments include commission, incentive based payments, overtime, or board and lodgings. Complications can arise in determining whether these additional payments are regular or not, and whether they should or should not be included in the calculatio n of payments for leave. shrvakdix
The insolvency practitioners regime is co regulated between MBIE and accredited industry bodies. This means that all insolvency practitioners are required to hold a licence from an accredited front line regulator currently the New Zealand Institute of Chartered Accountants (NZICA). Companies who register under sections and () of the Companies Act and file an annual return under sections () and (). Table : Proposed IP levy IP oversight scheme Unit Cost () Proposed levy () Current levy () Change in charge () change IP levy . . .
government organisations
growth in Essential Skills visa holders
. Condentiality ) The parties agree that unless otherwise required by law or by mutual agreement that they will keep condential all information acquired as a result of t his MOU. ) The parties acknowledge that any information held by the Crown may be required to be released under the Ofcial Information Act or the Privacy Act . ) The parties agree to consult with each other on any proposed release of information where practicable. ) For the avoidance of doubt, the MSWG is entitled to disclose to its members appropriate information , provided that those to whom this information is disclosed are made aware of the
XXXX; to ; ; XXXX
How could the different calculations for holidays and leave payments be simplified
There are a number of cross cutting issues with the current Act . There are a number of cross cutting issues that apply across the whole Act rather than to one specific section. These relate to the design of the Act itself and are th e cause of many of the problems employers, employees and professional service providers (including payroll providers) face in working with the Act. These issues include : the lack of prescription in the Act which can make it hard to implement, particularly if agreement between employer and employee is not reached (for example, the re is no explicit guidance about how to determine a week for the purpose of the annual holidays entitlement if it is not clear (e.g. if an employee work s variable hours and days from week to week) ) the complexity of the Act , which can cause confusion for those using it (for example, the Act includes several different pay calculations , and employers often struggle to use the correct calculations at the correct times (such as when to use Relevant Daily Pay compared to Average Daily Pay)) the lack of clarity in relation to spe cific terms included in the Act (for example, the lack of a clear definition of regular in relation to determining what income should be included in calculati ons for the payment of leave ). Annual holidays determining entitlements and payments . There are a range of specific issues related to those sections of the Act that deal with the entitlements to, and payments for, annual holidays. These include: Determin ing what a week is . A fundamental issue in terms of compliance with the Act is to determine what a week is in relation to an employees working arrangements. This can be very simple for some , but difficult for other forms of working arrangements , such as th ose on shift patterns that are not based on calendar weeks , or those with variable days and hours of work. . If agreement is not reached early on between an employer and an employee about what constitutes a working week for that employee, then this can have significant consequences when the employee takes leave. The basis of this agreement may also change over time, meaning that the agreement may need to be revisited. In practice this does not always occur when working arrangements change. Incorrect accrual over time . Problems can arise when payroll systems are used that have not been adapted to the requirements of New Zealand law. For example, many payroll systems use accrual methods based on accumulating an entitlement over time. This approach may not be com patible with the requirements of the Act, in particular the need for entitlements to be determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken. Particular problems arise when an employees hours increase , as an employee will not accrue sufficient time for four weeks leave if their hours increase during the year. Knowing which method to use to determine payments for annual holidays, and how to use it correctly . Section of the Act requires employees to be paid for their annual holidays at a rate that is the greater of either their Ordinary Weekly Pay (OWP) at the point the leave is taken, or their average weekly earnings (AWE) for the months previous. Correctly applying section requires employers to calculate both OWP and AWE and to use the larger number . There are many stages in this process , which introduce s the risk of non compliance, if reliable quality assurance is not used.
There are a number of cross cutting issues with the current Act . There are a number of cross cutting issues that apply across the whole Act rather than to one specific section. These relate to the design of the Act itself and are th e cause of many of the problems employers, employees and professional service providers (including payroll providers) face in working with the Act. These issues include : the lack of prescription in the Act which can make it hard to implement, particularly if agreement between employer and employee is not reached (for example, the re is no explicit guidance about how to determine a week for the purpose of the annual holidays entitlement if it is not clear (e.g. if an employee work s variable hours and days from week to week) ) the complexity of the Act , which can cause confusion for those using it (for example, the Act includes several different pay calculations , and employers often struggle to use the correct calculations at the correct times (such as when to use Relevant Daily Pay compared to Average Daily Pay)) the lack of clarity in relation to spe cific terms included in the Act (for example, the lack of a clear definition of regular in relation to determining what income should be included in calculati ons for the payment of leave ). Annual holidays determining entitlements and payments . There are a range of specific issues related to those sections of the Act that deal with the entitlements to, and payments for, annual holidays. These include: Determin ing what a week is . A fundamental issue in terms of compliance with the Act is to determine what a week is in relation to an employees working arrangements. This can be very simple for some , but difficult for other forms of working arrangements , such as th ose on shift patterns that are not based on calendar weeks , or those with variable days and hours of work. . If agreement is not reached early on between an employer and an employee about what constitutes a working week for that employee, then this can have significant consequences when the employee takes leave. The basis of this agreement may also change over time, meaning that the agreement may need to be revisited. In practice this does not always occur when working arrangements change. Incorrect accrual over time . Problems can arise when payroll systems are used that have not been adapted to the requirements of New Zealand law. For example, many payroll systems use accrual methods based on accumulating an entitlement over time. This approach may not be com patible with the requirements of the Act, in particular the need for entitlements to be determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken. Particular problems arise when an employees hours increase , as an employee will not accrue sufficient time for four weeks leave if their hours increase during the year. Knowing which method to use to determine payments for annual holidays, and how to use it correctly . Section of the Act requires employees to be paid for their annual holidays at a rate that is the greater of either their Ordinary Weekly Pay (OWP) at the point the leave is taken, or their average weekly earnings (AWE) for the months previous. Correctly applying section requires employers to calculate both OWP and AWE and to use the larger number . There are many stages in this process , which introduce s the risk of non compliance, if reliable quality assurance is not used. shrvakdix
months after the the Bill receives Royal assent ;
of Pacific residence approvals were through the Residence from Work visa category, which has been set up as a step towards gaining residence and settling in New Zealand permanently. Although the numbers are small, the number of approvals under this visa category has more than doubled in the last years.
. I have included a brief summary of the groups main recommendations below.
. Review and v ariation of MOU ) The parties acknowledge that over time th is MOU may need to evolve to reect changing circumstances. Therefore, the parties will meet solely for the purpose of reviewing the progress in achieving the objectives of this MOU every three years, or otherwise more frequently as mutually agreed. ) The parties may at any time and by mutual , written agreement amend this MOU to reect: a) Changing circumstances; or b) A termination for this MOU where a legislative andor contractual relationship between the parties addresses the matters which are the subject of this MOU , including this principle of review .
. Appendix MBIE Return on Prosecution (Required for all disposed MBIE prosecutions) CRI No: Insert CRI No. (eg: CRI ) FILE No : Insert client refActionStep reference if relevant
XX; to ; to ; ; ; XX; ; ;
to ; to ; to ;
; ; to ;
to ; ; to ;
There are no proposed fees for the NZBN register all costs of the register will be recovered from entities through the proposed NZBN levy. Table : Proposed fees and charges for Companies register services (excluding GST) Companies register Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee levy) Change in charge change Name approval . . . . . Company (New Zealand and overseas) incorporation . . . . . (.) () Annual return (New Zealand and overseas) . . . . . . Annual return API (New Zealand and overseas) . . . . . . Amalgamation . . . . . Restoration . . . . . CO levy ., NZBN levy ., IP levy . Name approval This fee was changed from . to . in . The proposed fee reflects the general increase in the cost of the service since th at time . Company incorporation Since , a portion of the cost of the NZBN register has been included in the company incorporation fee. These costs will now be recovered within the proposed NZBN levy (see Section : Who would pay the levy and when ), removing them from the company incorporation unit cost , resulting in a lower fee. Annual return In , the annual return fee was set below cost to significantly reduce the surplus balance in the memorandum account. This fee was reduced at that time because, for the most part, companies had contributed towards this surplus over time due to increasing volumes and a stable cost structure . The NZBN costs previously recovered from the fee have been reapportioned to the NZBN levy, resulting in the proposed fee portion reducing from . to . (and from . to . for Annual return API transactions). The proposed total charge for annual returns now reflects full cost recovery with the fee and inclusion of the NZBN and CO levies resulting in a net increase . Amalgamation An increase in the proposed amalgamation fee reflects full cost recovery for this service. The nature of the work required to support this service is labour intensive. While there are only about amalgamation applications per year, it is important that these applications are reviewed thoroughly,
Using the pay asyougo provision inappropriately . Section allows an employer to regularly pay annua l holiday pay of per cent of the employees gross earnings , in lieu of providing four weeks of annual holidays (commonly referred to as pay asyougo(PAYG)) . . However, an employer is only able to do so if the employee is on a fixed term agreement for le ss than months, or works on a basis that is so intermittent or irregular that it is impracticable for the employer to provide the employee with four weeks annual holidays. . It is not always clear to employers when this clause applies, and what imprac ticable means especially if an employee requests or agrees to have holiday pay included in their regular pay. There is no statutory definition of a casual working arrangement, even though this term is sometimes used in employment agreements. Taking an nual holidays in advance . Employees are entitled to four weeks paid annual holidays after months of continuous employment. Employees can request annual holidays in advance but employers have no obligation to approve this request. This means an employee may not be able to take any time off work during their first months of employment. There are legitimate personal and community responsibilities that can mean that workers require time away from work before they have completed months of continuous emp loyment. FBAPS leave (family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays and sick leave ) determining entitlements and payments . There are also a range of specific issues related to those sections of the Act that deal with the entitlement to, and payments for, FBAPS leave. These include: Determinin g an Otherwise W orking Day (OWD) . Although Section () provides a list of factors t o be taken into account by the employer and employee when determining whether a day is an OWD , the se factors are not ranked and t here is no guidance about the weighting that should be attached to each factor . Determining what payments are included in an employees Relevant D aily Pay (RDP) and when Average D aily Pay (ADP) can be used instead . The pa yment for a public holiday, alternative holiday, sick leave , bereavement leave and family violence leave is determined using RDP. This is defined by section of the Act as the amount of pay that the employee would have received had they worked on the day concerned. . RDP is a subjective and hypothetical decision, based on the historic earnings of the employee as well as the employers estimation of what the employee would have received had the employee worked on the day concerned (for instance, by looking at what ot her employees who did work earned ). This is more difficult to calculate if employees earnings vary considerably (especially if commissions or other additional payments are part of their earnings), if the business is not open on the OWD that is being considered (e.g. it is shut for a public holiday) or where sufficient records are not kept. . There is also an issue relating to the calculation of ADP, as the formula in section A () requires the employees gross earnings to be divided by the number of whole or part days they worked. This could potentially disadvantage employees who work varied
Using the pay asyougo provision inappropriately . Section allows an employer to regularly pay annua l holiday pay of per cent of the employees gross earnings , in lieu of providing four weeks of annual holidays (commonly referred to as pay asyougo(PAYG)) . . However, an employer is only able to do so if the employee is on a fixed term agreement for le ss than months, or works on a basis that is so intermittent or irregular that it is impracticable for the employer to provide the employee with four weeks annual holidays. . It is not always clear to employers when this clause applies, and what imprac ticable means especially if an employee requests or agrees to have holiday pay included in their regular pay. There is no statutory definition of a casual working arrangement, even though this term is sometimes used in employment agreements. Taking an nual holidays in advance . Employees are entitled to four weeks paid annual holidays after months of continuous employment. Employees can request annual holidays in advance but employers have no obligation to approve this request. This means an employee may not be able to take any time off work during their first months of employment. There are legitimate personal and community responsibilities that can mean that workers require time away from work before they have completed months of continuous emp loyment. FBAPS leave (family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays and sick leave ) determining entitlements and payments . There are also a range of specific issues related to those sections of the Act that deal with the entitlement to, and payments for, FBAPS leave. These include: Determinin g an Otherwise W orking Day (OWD) . Although Section () provides a list of factors t o be taken into account by the employer and employee when determining whether a day is an OWD , the se factors are not ranked and t here is no guidance about the weighting that should be attached to each factor . Determining what payments are included in an employees Relevant D aily Pay (RDP) and when Average D aily Pay (ADP) can be used instead . The pa yment for a public holiday, alternative holiday, sick leave , bereavement leave and family violence leave is determined using RDP. This is defined by section of the Act as the amount of pay that the employee would have received had they worked on the day concerned. . RDP is a subjective and hypothetical decision, based on the historic earnings of the employee as well as the employers estimation of what the employee would have received had the employee worked on the day concerned (for instance, by looking at what ot her employees who did work earned ). This is more difficult to calculate if employees earnings vary considerably (especially if commissions or other additional payments are part of their earnings), if the business is not open on the OWD that is being considered (e.g. it is shut for a public holiday) or where sufficient records are not kept. . There is also an issue relating to the calculation of ADP, as the formula in section A () requires the employees gross earnings to be divided by the number of whole or part days they worked. This could potentially disadvantage employees who work varied shrvakdix
What changes would make the Act easier to apply to workers with variable hoursdays of work
. Dispute resolution ) The parties will act at all times in good faith. However, in the event of a d ispute the parties agree to the following process: a) If one party considers there has been a breach of this MOU, then that party may give written notice to the other that they are in dispute. b) Before written notice is given under this clause ..a, the parti es may agree to participate in a dispute resolution method that reflects the values and principles of tikanga Mori. c) As soon as practicable upon receipt of the notice given under clause .. a, the parties representatives will meet to work in good faith to resolve the issue. d) If the dispute has not been resolved within working days of receipt of the notice given under ..a, the Chief Executive of MBIE , or their delegate, and a nominated representative of the MSWG andor MSE will meet in good faith to resolve the issue. e) if the dispute has not been resolved within working days of the meeting set out in clause ..d, the nominated representative of the MSWG andor MSE will meet in good faith with the Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications to resolve the issue.
. The Holidays Act sets out the minimum entitlements to holidays and leave, and payment for them, that employers are obliged to provide to their employees. Its purpose is to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees lives by providing minimum entitlements to annual holidays, public holidays, sick leave and bereavement leave. MBIE is responsible for administering and enforcing the Act. . Two key aims of the Act can be summarised in the following principles : Entitlements are to be determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken . This principle is intended to ensure that the entitlements (both in terms of the leave period to be tak en, and the level of payment for the leave period) reflect the employees work pattern at the precise time they take their leave rather than being based on what they have hypothetically accrued or earnt over time. Employees should not be financially disad vantaged by taking leave. That is, they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked for the period they are taking leave for . . The key provisions of the Act include: o at least four weeks of annual holidays each year for employees o a paid day off when a public holiday falls on a day that an employee would usually work o at least five days each year of paid sick leave o three days paid leave if an employees immediate family member dies, or one days paid leave for the death of a person outside their immediate family o from April , the Act will also provide for up to ten days of leave for people affected by domestic violence (on a similar basis to the provisions for sick leave and bereavement leave ) . The Act provides a number of calcul ations for determining pay when holidays or leave are taken. For annual holidays , employees must be paid whichever is the greater of their ordinary weekly pay or their average weekly earnings over the previous months. For all other types of leave, emplo yees must be paid their relevant daily pay, or if impractical or the employee s daily pay within the relevant pay period is variable , their average daily pay. . The Act also covers a number of issues such as annual closedowns for businesses, transferring of public holidays , the ability to cash up one weeks annual holiday entitlement and the employers obligation to keep records . The enforcement provisions follow those in the Employment Relations Act and, as with other minimum entitlements, permit bot h employees and labour inspectors to take cases. . While the Act provides for certain levels of minimum entitlements, it does not pr ovide full guidance on how these are to be provided in different working situations . For a standard five day, hour working week, this is generally straightforward, but in other situations it is not obvious, such as when employees work unpredictable hours or receive variable pay (such as commissions) . In these situations the Act relies on employers and employees reaching agreement as to how entitlements will be met or taken.
; to ; ; ; ; to ;
; XX to XX; XX to XX; XX;
additional provincial schools
. Policy Intent The Act puts into place a flexible approach to managing the risks associated with space activities. This approach incorporates the provisions in the Act relating to the management of New Zealands liability under the Outer Space Treaties. New Zealands regulatory regime takes the view that liability is best managed by those whose activities create the risk. The Act preserves flexibility for risk sharing between the government and the licensee across the activities governed by the Act. This is reflected in the ability of the Responsible Minister to apply conditions to a licence or a permit requiring insurance and indemnities. It is the preference of the New Zealand regulatory regime that the risks associated with activities permitted under the Act are managed first through technical controls , such as compliance with international orbital debris mitigation standards . Please refer to NZSAs Orbital Debris Mitigation Operational Policy for further detail. The Minister may impose indemnity and insurance requirements if the risk cannot be managed with technical controls alone. In the case of launch licences there will always be a requ irement for indemnity and insurance.
. Policy intent To obtain a licence under the Act, applicants must satisfy the Minister that they are technically capable of conducting the activit ies authorised by the licence safely. NZSA will not take a one size fits all approach when conducting this assessment and preparing its advice to the Minister. NZSA will give regard to the complexity of the activity proposed when considering the technical capability requirements. This policy is not intended to be prescriptive in its application. The application of this policy is intended to evolve to reflect the development of new technologies and to align with industry best practice. . Determining technical capability Under the Act, t he Minister may treat licences, permits or other authorisations from other jurisdictions as satisfying some or all of New Zealands requireme nts for an applicant to demonstrate technical capability. This does not apply to th e requirements for the grant of a high altitude licence. For example U.S Federal Aviation Administration launch licences , held by the applicant, may be treated as meeting N ew Zealands launch licence requirements relating to technical capability . If an applicant is seeking to rely on a foreign licence , permit or other authorisation to satisfy the technical capability requirement , they should contact NZSA at nzspaceagencymb ie.govt.nz .. The Applicant may demonstrate technical capability through employment or contractual arrangements Applicants must demonstrate t hey have the technical capability necessary to manage the risks associated with the proposed activity. The applicant may demonstrate this through the employment of specialist staff or contractual arrangements, that the technical capability to carry out the activities safely has been met. This may be demonstrated through one or more employed or contracted pe rsons. .. How an applicants technical capability may be demonstrated: The regulations require every applicant provide certain information about each person whose technical capability they are relying on for the purposes of the application. These include; The persons name; The persons relationship to the applicant; Evidence of the persons relevant qualifications and experience; and
Active Debris Removal and On Orbit Servicing : Operational Policy
All AL entitlement weeks not taken would be paid at a rate that is the greater of Ordinary Weekly Leave Pay, Quarterly Average Weekly Earnings and Annual Average Weekly Earnings as if the AL was being taken at the end of employment. employment . We propose that AL entitlement accrues at a rate of not less than . weeks per week of employment . This accrual rate means that employees AL entitlement per year of employment would continue to be approximately four weeks . We recommend the periods of employment AL accrues
All figures taken from the Survey of Working Life . Based on the total number of employees (,,) minus the number which usually work standard hours (,,). shrvakdix
Are there other specific types of business arrangements for which compliance with the Act is more difficult
Contents Glossary of terms . . . . Foreword . . . . . Executive Summary and recommen dations . . . Section : Introduction . . . . Summary of the review . . . . Scope of the review . . . . The review process . . . . Overview of the Holidays Act . . . Section : Issues with the current Act . . . Who is affected by the issues with the current Act . . There are a number of cross cutting issues with the current Act . . Annual holidays determining entitlements and payments . . FBAPS leave (family violence leave, b ereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays and sick leave) determining entitlements and payments . . Other issues . . . . Section : Feedback from stakeholders on the Issues Paper . . Key themes from the submissions . . . Submissions analysis . . . . Suggestions for change . . . . Section : Options developed and tested . . . Section : How the Taskforce made its decisions . . . Section : Final recommendations . . . Process for leave calculations and payments . . . Annual holidays entitlements . . . . Annual holidays payments . . . . FBAPS leave entitlemen ts . . . . Other proposed changes . . . . Annex : Holidays Act Review Terms of Reference . . Annex : Entitlements under the Holidays Act and proposed system . Annex : Current record keeping requirements and proposed additional requirements to reflect the Task forces recommendations . . .
Family violence leave, Bereavement leave, Alternative holidays, Public holidays and Sick leave.
Family violence leave, Bereavement leave, Alternative holidays, Public holidays and Sick leave. shrvakdix
For example, the Taskforce recommended a reference period of the previous weeks for severa l calculations. A literal interpretation would mean that employees would need to split pay period data to calculate back weeks from when the period of leave began. The Bill, like the Act, provides for the basis of all reference periods to be complete pay periods. kjtrvweh
Note that Table only includes licensing and permitting activity conducted under the Act (and its regulations). In addition to the above, a further approvals for payload launches were approved by the Minister under the contract which Rocket Lab and the New Zealand Government entered into as an interim measure before the legislative regime had been established and brought into effect. The table does not include applications under assessment , which may or may not be granted , nor discussions with potential applicants pre application, which may or may not result in the submission of an application.
Orbital Debris Mitigation: Operational Policy
Payloads of a size les s than U : Operational Policy
SPBs are covered under the highaltitude licence.
Under the Act , entitlements to annual leave are held and paid in units of weeks and entitlements to other leave types are held and paid in units of days. Entitlements (apart from public and alternative holidays) arise as a single amount after specified periods of employment. kjtrvweh I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Work on the Bill progressed but was paused before the General Election The previous Government directed officials to draft legislation that reflected the Taskforces recommendations. Between and MBIE completed a policy design process to develop the tec hnical details required for drafting a Bill. MBIE brought together a small working group of payroll providers and practitioners to support this process . From to , the then Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety (WRS) used the authority dele gated by Cabinet to make decisions on technical changes to supplement the Taskforces recommendations . These were intended to address areas in the recommendations where the working group had identified ambiguities, gaps, opportunities for simplification and workability issues . Drafting of the Bill, which would repeal and replace the Act began in late but was paused in June due to reprioritisation of projects before the General Election . There are opportunities to achieve a better balance between objectives The previous Government had a bottom line of maintaining tripartite consensus. To achieve that, it traded off simplicity for ensuring that no employee would be worse off than under the current Act, in any circumstances. This commitment constrained the options available for simplification, which, in the New Zealand context, would likely have required a direct trade off with employee entitlements. The simpler the rules for providing and paying leave entitlements, the more extensive this trade off with existin g entitlements becomes, particularly for employees with non standard work and pay arrangements. The Australian National Employment Standards are often referenced as an example of a simpler model that could be adopted in New Zealand, however, this would li kely result in a significant reduction in entitlements for many New Zealand employees . In New Zealand, leave payments reflect variable hours of work and extra payments (such as overtime rates, commission, and allowances) . This results in higher leave payme nts than under the Australian legislation , where annual leave (AL) entitlements and leave payments are based only on an employees ordinary hours of work and pay, which are easier to calculate. Despite refinements agreed by the then Minister for WRS before the General Election, the detailed methodologies and processes agreed by Cabinet in result in an inevitable amount of complexity. In some cases, they would also still not be readily implementable in payroll systems (particularly those used by sm all businesses) and would increase the cost of compliance and of providing leave entitlements. Further simplification is possible. It is my view that there are opportunities to simplify the provisions while still maintaining employees overall level of ent itlement and the underlying entitlements model, which is what I am proposing in this paper. To make the provisions substantially simpler would require redefining the trade offs between the objectives and would result in some groups of employees facing redu ctions in entitlements. It would also take substantially longer before stakeholders see any progress because officials would need to revise key aspects of the design work.
h. are readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future i. aim to prote ct overall entitlements for employees . Scope and parameters . The Review will retain the purpose of the current Act (in section ) and (at least) the current levels of entitlements ( such as four weeks annual holidays, five days sick leave ). . The Group will consider: a. options to improve both the provi sion of, and payment for, entitlements that meet the objectives set out in paragraph , and : i. where trade offs between competing objectives are required, will be explicit about how these are made ii. may include consideration of the place of the standard five day, hour, working week in the Act b. any other matters relating to the Act that it sees fit. This may include holidays and leave entitlements modified by other Acts (such as the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act ). . The principles set out in paragraph may also be reconsidered , but options must aim to preserve the intent of these as far as possible. . The Group will not, however, consider the complex issue of remediation of historical underpayments of holiday and leave pay. Membership and Process . The Group will consist represent atives from MBIE, the State Services Commission and Inland Revenue, along with three to four members each representing workers, employers, led by an independent Chair with the power to commission work . . The Group will be c haired by Gordon Anderson, a law professor at Victoria University. The Chair is an independentneutral party in the Group discussions, whose purpose is to facilitate the parties to reach jointly agreed recommendations to Government. . The Group is expected to consult widely to get a compre hensive understanding of the issues with the Act, and draw on international examples of holidays and leave legislation where appropriate. . The Group is also expected to work closely with technical experts such as payroll providers, business rules specialist s, and service design and delivery specialists to assist with the design and testing of policy options. . The Group is required to support their recommendations with quantitative analysis of different options, tested with bona fide payroll data, to ensure th at those options are readily implementable and adverse consequences have been identified. . The parties agree that consistency of attendees will be important for the Group to achieve its objectives, and will ensure that representatives will not be chan ged unless this is unavoidable. If any change in representatives is required, the party
nonprofit organisations
or day per week deliveries to each delivery point that received or day per week deliveries as at June
. Background ) Radio spectrum contributes to wellbeing and a productive, sustainable and inclusive New Zealand. It can provide economic, cultural, social and environmental benefits. ) Appendix A: Summary of historical background of radio spectrum provides the historical interaction between Mori and the Crown in relation to radio spectrum. ) The MSWG considers that:
. Co nfirm which days are Otherwise Working Days . Determine amount of leave being taken (L) in hours Use EA or roster (if known). If not available, average hours worked on the corresponding day in the last weeks . Employee applies for leave and confirms range . Determine amount of time in a week (W) in hours . Calculate leave as a portion (P) of a week (PLW) . Calculate and pay the greater of AWE or P, AWEP and OLP . Deduct portion of a week (P) from balance Use EA or roster (if known). If not avail able, average weekly hours over the last weeks Use EA or roster (if known). If not available, use the relevant AH test or FBAPS leave test . Calculate an hourly rate (divide total earnings in last weeks by the total hours worked in the last weeks) Abbreviations ADP Average Daily Pay AH Annual holidays AWE or Average weekly earnings in last or weeks AWE Average weekly earnings in last weeks EA Employment agreement FBAPS Family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays, sick leave L Leave in hours OLP Ordinary Leave Pay P Portion of a week W Working week in hours . Calculate and pay the greater of ADP (hourly rateL) and OLP . Deduct relevant days (or part days) from balances FBAPS leave Annual Holidays
. Co nfirm which days are Otherwise Working Days . Determine amount of leave being taken (L) in hours Use EA or roster (if known). If not available, average hours worked on the corresponding day in the last weeks . Employee applies for leave and confirms range . Determine amount of time in a week (W) in hours . Calculate leave as a portion (P) of a week (PLW) . Calculate and pay the greater of AWE or P, AWEP and OLP . Deduct portion of a week (P) from balance Use EA or roster (if known). If not avail able, average weekly hours over the last weeks Use EA or roster (if known). If not available, use the relevant AH test or FBAPS leave test . Calculate an hourly rate (divide total earnings in last weeks by the total hours worked in the last weeks) Abbreviations ADP Average Daily Pay AH Annual holidays AWE or Average weekly earnings in last or weeks AWE Average weekly earnings in last weeks EA Employment agreement FBAPS Family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays, sick leave L Leave in hours OLP Ordinary Leave Pay P Portion of a week W Working week in hours . Calculate and pay the greater of ADP (hourly rateL) and OLP . Deduct relevant days (or part days) from balances FBAPS leave Annual Holidays shrvakdix
. Competitive business settings
. Confirm which days are Otherwise Working Days . Determine amount of leave being t aken (L) in hours Use EA or roster (if known). If not available, average hours worked on the corresponding day in the last weeks . Employee applies for leave and confirms range . Determine amount of time in a week (W) in hours . Calculate leave as a portion (P) of a week (PLW) . Calculate and pay the greater of AWE or P, AWEP and OLP . Deduct portion of a week (P) from balance Use EA or roster (if known). If not available, average weekly hours over the last weeks Use EA or roster (if known). If not ava ilable, use the relevant AH test or FBAPS leave test . Calculate an hourly rate (divide total earnings in last weeks by the total hours worked in the last weeks) Abbreviations ADP Average Daily Pay AH Annual holidays AWE or Average weekly earnings in last or weeks AWE Average weekly earnings in last weeks EA Employment agreement FBAPS Family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays, sick leave L Leave in hours OLP Ordinary Leave Pay P Portion of a week W Working week in hours . Calculate and pay the greater of ADP (hourly rateL) and OLP . Deduct relev ant days (or part days) from balances FBAPS leave Annual Holidays
. Confirm which days are Otherwise Working Days . Determine amount of leave being t aken (L) in hours Use EA or roster (if known). If not available, average hours worked on the corresponding day in the last weeks . Employee applies for leave and confirms range . Determine amount of time in a week (W) in hours . Calculate leave as a portion (P) of a week (PLW) . Calculate and pay the greater of AWE or P, AWEP and OLP . Deduct portion of a week (P) from balance Use EA or roster (if known). If not available, average weekly hours over the last weeks Use EA or roster (if known). If not ava ilable, use the relevant AH test or FBAPS leave test . Calculate an hourly rate (divide total earnings in last weeks by the total hours worked in the last weeks) Abbreviations ADP Average Daily Pay AH Annual holidays AWE or Average weekly earnings in last or weeks AWE Average weekly earnings in last weeks EA Employment agreement FBAPS Family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays, sick leave L Leave in hours OLP Ordinary Leave Pay P Portion of a week W Working week in hours . Calculate and pay the greater of ADP (hourly rateL) and OLP . Deduct relev ant days (or part days) from balances FBAPS leave Annual Holidays shrvakdix
. Establish a worldleading regulatory environment for space and advanced aviation
. Evaluation background and purpose
. Note that the Holidays Act T askforce submitted its report to me in October and has proposed an improved status quo which retains the existing units of entitlement (weeks for annual holidays, days for other types of leave) and focuses on addressing known issues with the Act by pr oviding greater certainty
. Submit your completed application form to
. The issues with the current Holidays Act are well documented. The lack of clarity and certainty associated wi th the current Act make it difficult to implement for employers and hard for employees to be sure they are receiving their correct statutory entitlements (such as the correct amount of annual holidays, and the pay associated with this).
. What is the policy problem or opportunity A number of issues have been identified with the Act that ma ke it difficult to implement in practice. Chief among these is that there is often a lack of prescription, particularly in how entitlements should be provided and how they are to be paid. For example, the Act does not prescribe how to determine what a week is for the purposes of annual holidays or an otherwise working day for other forms of leave, and is silent on how to include some types of payments, such as bonuses, in payment calculations. The result is that current provisions generally work for a standard five day, hour week, but pose a number of issues when applied to more diverse working arrangements and variable pay structures. Another key issue with the legislation is that it can be complex for employers understand and apply . Many employers struggle with the many payment calculations (there are at least ) and knowing when to use them. A common example is not knowing when to use relevant daily pay and average daily pay when calculating payments for public holidays and sick, bereavement and family violence leave. There is also a lack of clarity over certain terms used in the Act. For example, it is not entirely clear what intermittent or irregular means in relation to work patterns or what is mean by regular in relation to determining what income should be in cluded in payment calculations. The e ffect of the Acts lack of prescription, simplicity and clar ity is that: shrvakdix
Application to register a company under s() and register an overseas company under s() of the Companies Act. Registration of an annual return under s() and overseas company under s() of the Companies Act. Application Processing Interface (API). requiring significant resource. This service will not attract any levies as the y will be charged when the new ly formed company pays its annual return fee. Restoration The proposed fee is comparatively high because this service requires the Companies Office to consider applications, advertise proposed restorations, and consider any objections that may be received before determining whether a company should be restored. T he process across the Companies and Incorporated Societies registers is the same and therefore it is proposed to provide the same fee of . for both registers. Fees to be revoked Over time Companies Office services have moved from paper based to online. The Companies Act Regulations currently prescribe fees for services that are no longer delivered by the Companies Office or are delivered differently compared to when they were introduced. Table below summarises the fees proposed to be revoked from those regulations. Table : Proposed Companies register fees to be revoked Personal Property Securities The Personal Property Securities register (PPSR) was established under the Personal Property Securities Act to provide an efficient system to register security interests in personal property and for this information to be easily searchable. Table below shows the proposed adjustments to current fees paid for services on the PPSR register. Table : Proposed fees for Personal Property Securities register services (excluding GST) Personal Property Securities register Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee) Change in charge change Registrationrenewal financing statement . . . . (.) () Registrationrenewal financing statement API . . . . (.) () Basic search internet . . . . Basic search API . . . . Description of service Current fee (GST exclusive ) Reason for revoking Photocopy made by the public . Service no longer provided. Photocopy made by the Registrar . Service no longer provided. For any other electronic search . This fee was established for web based searching for finance statements under the Personal Property Securities Act . The service is no longer provided. Manual search of the Companies register . Service no longer provided because Companies register is an online register only. Registration and renewal fees (including API) We propose a decrease in the PPSR registration and renewal fees for single and API transactions. The current fees set in included a level of IT development cost to replace the register and that work has now been completed. In addition, forecast higher registration and renewal volumes have resulted in a lower unit cost . Search fee (including API) Basic internet searches of the PPSR and API searches are charged at different amounts. The unit cost has remained stable with cost increases offset by the increase in volumes. The difference in fees reflects the cost of the search functionality using the A PI being spread over . million searches, versus the lower volume of , public basic searches. Fees to be revoked The Personal Property Securities Regulations currently prescribe fees for services that are no longer delivered by the Companies Office or are delivered differently compared to when they were introduced. Table below summarises the fees proposed to be revoked. Table : Proposed PPSR register fees to be revoked
Proposed options for Companies Office levies and fees Section : Current and proposed levies Three levies (two new levies and one current levy) with distinct purposes are proposed to recover costs from a group of users across various registers. Table below summarises the proposed levy amounts and level of revenue forecast to be collected from each type. Table : Summary of proposed levies Levy type Type of Costs Current levy () Proposed levy () Approximate forecast revenue (m) of total budget Companies Office levy Companies Office shared registry systems . . NZBN levy NZBN register . . Insolvency Practitioners (IP) levy IP oversight scheme . . . Total costs recovered from levies .
What changes would make the Act easier to apply to workers who receive variable pay (e.g. workers paid by commission )
What changes would make the Act easier to apply to workers who receive variable pay (e.g. workers paid by commission)
hours, as using ADP to calculate their pay treats all days equally , regardless of how much is earned on each specific day. Partial sick leave days . Currently, t he Act describes sick leave and family violence leave entitlements in terms of days, and does not divide those entitlements into smaller units, such as part days or hours. In practice, the Taskforce understands that some employees and employers may agree t o account for the sick or family violence leave entitlement in hours or part days. However, the Act does not explicitly allow for these forms of leave to be taken in units of less than a day. . For example, if an employee works for part of the day and then goes home sick, this may be counted as using a whole day of sick leave, no matter how much of the day the employee has worked before going home. This can lead to an employee using their full sick leave entitlement of five days when in fact they have only b een off sick for parts of these five days. Other issues . The Taskforce is aware of a number of other issues that are not specifically related to entitlements and payments for annual holidays and FBAPS leave . . For ex ample, people who work a Monday to Friday f iveday week observe all public holidays regardless of the day that they fall on. This does not apply to other working arrangements (i.e. if somebody regularly works weekends but not Mondays).
hours, as using ADP to calculate their pay treats all days equally , regardless of how much is earned on each specific day. Partial sick leave days . Currently, t he Act describes sick leave and family violence leave entitlements in terms of days, and does not divide those entitlements into smaller units, such as part days or hours. In practice, the Taskforce understands that some employees and employers may agree t o account for the sick or family violence leave entitlement in hours or part days. However, the Act does not explicitly allow for these forms of leave to be taken in units of less than a day. . For example, if an employee works for part of the day and then goes home sick, this may be counted as using a whole day of sick leave, no matter how much of the day the employee has worked before going home. This can lead to an employee using their full sick leave entitlement of five days when in fact they have only b een off sick for parts of these five days. Other issues . The Taskforce is aware of a number of other issues that are not specifically related to entitlements and payments for annual holidays and FBAPS leave . . For ex ample, people who work a Monday to Friday f iveday week observe all public holidays regardless of the day that they fall on. This does not apply to other working arrangements (i.e. if somebody regularly works weekends but not Mondays). shrvakdix
for international productions ( in certain circumstances)
year old weekly earnings were in (up from in ).
. It is also suggested that the definition of gross earnings be amended to mean all cash payments received, except direct reimbursements for costs incurred.
. Term of M emorandum of Understanding ) This MOU: a) commences upon signing by both parties; and b) may be terminated by the mutual written agreement of the parties or by either party, for a ny reason whatsoever, giving days written notice of termination to the other.
. Reducing the extent to which variable aspects of work and pay are reflected in leave entitlement and pay calculations:
Telecommunications Service Obligation (TSO) Deed for TSO Network Services
Tourism Data Domain Plan
standards policy and infrastructure review
changes to the Companies Act and Limited Partnerships Act
Briefings to Incoming Ministers
Regional Migration Trends
Research, Science and Innovation Domain Plan PDF .MB
energy consultations and reviews
review of Section (A) of the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance Act
Briefings to Incoming Ministers
energy consultations and reviews
Tourism Data Domain Plan
conformance policy and infrastructure review
Electricity Price Review
Digital twin workshop hosted by Wellington City Council where the concept of a national digital twin of infrastructure is tabled and discussed.
conformance system strategy
international tourism forecasts
Digital twin hub Australia New Zealand launched by Smart Cities Council ANZ to provide information, resources, access to networks, and host events and forums in support of progressing the adoption of digital twin.
Infrastructure NZ webinar on the value of a digital twin.
Briefings to Incoming Ministers
Fellowships Impact evaluation
Implementation review
support Tourism Recovery Package
Review of the Crown Minerals Act
Aotearoa Digital Twin Summit hosted by Smart Cities Council ANZ and Aurecon.
Launch of the Digital Twin challenge across ANZ by Smart Cities Council ANZ as an month immersive programme for leading councils and government agencies to develop and deliver digital twin innovation for all.
Release of ANZ digital twin stratergy blueprint, Smart Cities Council ANZ.
and NASA JPL interns
support Tourism Communities: Support, Recovery and Reset Plan
Aotearoa NZ Digital Twin Summit hosted by Smart Cities Council ANZ and Aurecon.
Briefings to Incoming Ministers
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Intern
Nondepartmental appropriations reports
Contruction Sector Accord releases Digital Mapping for the Contruction Sector report, cross government review of the current state of development of a pansector digital North Star including with respect to digital twin.
Digital Twin Partnership New Zealand is launched as a volunteer led industry group with a vision to accelerate the adoption of digital twin as a tool for growth and prosperity by creating deep and diverse connections between people and across organisations.
NZ Data and Digital Twin Summit hosted by Smart Cities Council ANZ and BECA.
Briefings to Incoming Ministers
JPL interns with NASA Administrator Senator Bill Nelson, NASA Deputy Administrator Pamela Melroy, and Head of New Zealand Space Agency Iain Cossar.
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Interns
Public Perceptions of Immigration Survey: Summary Report
nondepartmental appropriations reports
Briefings to Incoming Ministers
Financial Services Reforms
Proposed amendments to the Crown Minerals Act
Capital Markets Reforms
financial services reforms
Briefings to Incoming Ministers
XXXX; XX; XX; XX;
Section : Feedback from stakeholders on the Issues Paper . The Taskforce received a good response to the Issues Paper , with substantive submissions received. The submissions covered a variety of issues, ranging from a focus on a single specific issue, to comments relating to many aspects of the Act and suggestions for new systems to replace the existing Act. Key themes from the submissions . The headline messages that came through from the submissions were: strong support for a more prescriptive approach (whatever shape this took) strong support for a simplified s ystem with fewer calculations strong support for an accrual based system (similar to the Australian system) strong support for a system based on hours . . The CTU consulted with its individual affiliates and submitted their feedback directly through its rep resentation on the Taskforce. The CTU unions: strongly supported greater guidance and prescription in those areas where there is current employer non compliance strong ly support ed maintaining a universal leave entitlement based on service strong ly support ed maintain ing leave balances in weeks (annual leave) and days (FBAPS) strong ly support ed greater transparency through the provision of enhanced payslips and better access to leave transaction histories. Submissions analysis . A total of submissions on th e Taskforces Issues Paper were received , including five late submissions received after the closing . Of the submissions , were submitted directly to the Secretariat as standalone submissions , while were submitted via MBIEs online response form. . The submissions comprised: submissions from employers from payroll practitioners or providers from individuals from other groups or organisations (such as law and accounting firms submitting based on their clients experiences). . The va st majority of submissions () expressed support for the broad content of the Issues Paper. Three did not agree with the Issues Paper, and four did not give a position either way. . The Secretariat analysed the submissions accord ing to a number of themes, broadly correspond ing to the differe nt sections of the Issues Paper . Some key points from the submissions are set out below: Cross cutting issues with the Act there was general agreement that elements of the current Act are confusing and that the lack of prescription in certain areas makes it hard to comply with the Act.
The consultation document seeks feedback on whether the changes proposed in the Bill or alternative options strike the most appropriate balance between the following policy objectives: . Simple but clear: new frameworks, processes, rules, and criteria should be as simple as possible, while providing clarity and certainty for employers about their obligations and rights. . Workable: changes should be readily implementable in existing payroll systems where possible (including those used by large and small businesses), with minimal additional ongoing administrative burden, implementation requirements and compliance costs. . Flexible and future proof: provisions should be applicable to the full range of complex working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future, and support flexibility where it is appropriate for employers and employees to adopt an approach that suits their circumstances. . Proportionality of entitlements and obligations: changes should appropriately balance interests between parties, specifically between the provision of entitlements and transparency for workers and compliance costs for employers. Making more significant changes such as those in paragraph above would require additional time for further policy design, testing, and legislative drafting. Significant changes would delay the introduction of the Bill. We would need to be confident that delaying the Bill would enable us to deliver the best outcomes for those who are impacted by, and work with, the legislation. To help inform these decisions at the end of the consultation, participants will be asked to list the top issues they would prioritise and why. I seek Cabinet agreement for officials to make minor and editorial changes to the consultation document before it is released for targeted consultation. I N C O N F I D E N C E uohzj Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government I N C O N F I D E N C E MBIE officials have selected a representative sample of stakeholders Public interest in having a say during consultation has been overwhelmingly positive. During the registration window from June to July , individuals completed a registration of interest in participating in the consultation. Interest was spread across a good range of employers, employees, and technical experts, across various industries, sectors, and population groups. I have recommended, and Cabinet has previously noted, that MBIE will undertake a targeted consultation in order to ensure officials are able to deliver advice following submissions in a timely manner, and to help us stay on track to deliver legislative change by the end of this term. MBIE officials have selected individuals from this group to provide a balance of diverse perspectives and technical expertise. A sample size of provides an appropriate balance between quality of feedback and a manageable workload in terms of analysing submissions within the timeframe. Of the participants, have been selected for their technical expertise (such as pay system providers, payroll professionals, legal practitioners, human resource providers and accountants), reflect an employer perspective, with a strong focus on small and medium businesses, and reflect an employee perspective. Representative bodies have been included in each group. There is a good spread across industries and representation of population groups within the . Given the significant interest from the public, there may be some stakeholders who will be disappointed that they were not chosen to participate in the targeted consultation. However, I want to make clear that the public will be able to have their say on final Cabinet policy decisions when the Bill goes through Select Committee. Undertaking full public consultation before the Select Committee stage risks delaying progress on legislative change. I will report back to Cabinet in December on feedback themes and proposed policy direction After the consultation closes, officials will analyse the consultation feedback, and provide me with a summary report and advice on options. In December , I will report back to Cabinet on the feedback themes and proposed policy direction. This report back will also provide information on the timing for finalising the Bill. Costofliving Implications The purpose of the consultation is to seek feedback on potential costs and impacts of proposed changes in the Bill and alternative options. If required, I will provide further details on costofliving implications when I seek final policy decisions from Cabinet in February . Financial Implications The proposals in the Bill will require many changes to different aspects of pay and leave systems for employers, including the government as an employer. The cost of As noted in the September final report back to Cabinet on the All of Government Payroll Programme to improve government payroll systems, many government agencies payroll systems are bespoke and aging, and already struggling to adapt to ongoing changes GOVMIN. I N C O N F I D E N C E uohzj I N C O N F I D E N C E implementation will vary for employers depending on a range of factors, including the type of payroll system they currently use to manage pay and leave. To help build an understanding of the likely scale of costs, the consultation document asks targeted questions to elicit more details from employers and payroll providers about the anticipated significance of the changes required to business processes andor systems to implement the proposed changes. MBIE also intends to work with the Public Service Commission and Treasury to develop a tailored questionnaire for public service agencies, seeking information about the costs and implementation considerations for government employers, to inform future advice. Legislative Implications The Bill, when finalised, is proposed to repeal and replace the Act because the proposed changes represent a fundamental change to the legislation and this approach provides scope to modernise the legislation. The Bill retains provisions in the Act unaffected by Cabinet decisions. The Bill will ultimately be binding on the Crown but, like the Act, will not apply to the Armed Forces as defined in section () of the Defence Act .
MHz and MHz As soon as practical MHz MHz As soon as practical . GHz MHz in the range . . GHz, with specific frequency be agreed November
XX; XX; XX; XXXX
Two high profile examples in the public sectors are NZ Police and MBIE. NZ Police have paid out approximately million to its staff (and there are more payments to come). The breaches related to issues such as payment for public holidays and alternative holidays and the inclusion of allowances in relevant daily pay. MBIEs payroll review project is still underway and so the extent of the remediation is not yet know n, but the breaches relate to issues such as calculation of relevant daily pay, failure to compare ordinary weekly pay and average weekly earnings, and record keeping obligations . The outstanding liability across the state sector is not known. The NZ Police payment is by far the largest to . Three other agencies have made pay outs, but these were very small in comparison (the largest was around ,). However, there are many remediation projects underway (such as MBIEs) and the extent of underpayments of these will not be known until they are completed. s ()(g)(i) s ()(g)(i) There are issues with both the implementation of the legislation . MBIEs engagement work with payroll providers and employers concluded that there are three broad reasons underlying the poor implementation of the legislation: . There is limited capability, effort and resources applied to comply with the Act ; for example: .. payroll systems not correctly configured to support compliance .. employers taking a set and forget approach to their payroll systems, not recognising that systems will often require manual intervention .. an underskilled and undervalued pa yroll profession . Employer practices, employment arrangements and the Act are not well aligned; for example: .. poor record keeping practices .. poor business processes meaning that payroll does not necessarily have all of the relevant information from across the business needed to comply .. there is increasing flexibility in work and pay arrangements in the labour market and the Act is more complex to apply when these are complex andor variable . Adequate information and guidance is not readily available to assist employers, employees and payroll providers. Poor record keeping and inaccessible records also mean that employees struggle to understand their entitlem ents or detect noncompliance. A result of this is that there is relatively little case law on Holidays A ct interpretation issues. and the legislation itself The Act itself is generally straightforward to apply when work and pay arrangements are consistent and predictable; for example, same hours and days each week for the same pay. This is because, despite amendments designed to cater for nonstandard working arrangements, the fundamental design of the legislation is predicated on a standard five day, hour working week. The Act is mor e difficult to apply when hours are variable or unpredictable from week to week, and when remuneration arrangements are complex ( for example, when they include bonuses, commissions, or other incentive payments). This is primarily because the Act is based on two key principles relating to entitlements and pay: . that entitlements are determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken (so that entitlements are not affected by changes in work pattern) . that employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave, that is , they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked. This requires a number of judgements to be made based on the specific facts of an employees working and remuneration arrangements, and often the agreem ent of the employee is required. In situations in which it is not clear how the entitlement is to be provided, the Act does not provide any prescription. It is simply left to the employer and employee to reach agreement and this is rarely done. Instead, either the employer makes a determination, or the payroll system relies on available information which may no longer be accurate. The requirements for employers to use judgement or reach agreements with their employee are difficult to systematise and payroll systems are often configured around assumpt ions or agreements which later shift. An example of this difficulty is defining a week for the purpose of the annual holidays entitlement when it is not obvious (for example, if employees work on a roster pattern that does not fit a weekly cycle, or they work variable hours from week to week). The Act provides no guidance on how to achieve this, relying instead on employers and employees reaching agreement on what genuinely constitutes a working week for the employee at the time the leave is taken. Further complexity arises from the units for holidays and leave entitlements in the Act and the number of different calculations for holidays and leave pay. The Act uses weeks and days as units for the entitlements it provides, but most payroll systems use hours as the fundamental unit . It is therefore common practice to calculate leave in hours and convert to the other units. There are significant issues with the conversion taking place accurately when circumstances change. And there are seven different pay calculations in the Act. In some cases it is unclear which calculation should be used, and many employers are not using the correct calculations at the correct times. The combined effect of these issues is that: . many employees are not receiving their correct entitlements (in many cases they are receiving less than the statutory minima) . employers and employees do not have certainty regarding the provision of, and payment for, entitlements . employers, particularly those with large numbers of employees on variable work and pay arrangements , can incur relatively high compliance costs to comply with the Act . the Act cannot be readily systematised in a payroll system . many employers are carrying a liability on their books that cannot be readily quanti fied (and may change significantly when employees change their work patterns). Previous attempts to resolve the problem have not resulted in an enduring solution The most significant recent reviews of the Holidays legislation have been the review that r esulted in the Act, and the review that resulted in a series of amendments in . The Act replaced the Hol idays Act which had also been subject to a number of reviews. These reviews had similar objectives, namely to make the legislation easier to understand and apply and to make it more applicable to a wider range of working patterns beyond the standard five day, hour working week. It is fair to say that both of these reviews failed to meet these objectives. There appear to be three key reasons why these reviews failed: . employer and employee representatives held fundamentally different views on the possible outcomes of a review and could not reach agreement . policy options were never tested in payroll systems with real payroll data to determine how easy it would be to implement them in those systems and to identify adverse consequences ( that is , service design and delivery people were not adequately involved in the pol icy design process) . the compliance costs of requiring employers and employees to agree matters often each time an employee requests leave were not adequately considered. In addition, the second review was constrained by its terms of reference (it could only look at payment for holidays and leave, not how the entitlements were provided). Aside from these reviews, the main intervention to has been the Labour Inspectorates Payroll Strategy referred to above. This was designed to address the issues relating to implementation of the current Act. In addition to the programme of audits and investigations, the Strategy involved: . an extensive stakeholder engagementcodesign programme to better equip businesses to comply . a proactive information and educati on programme. This Payroll Strategy work is now complete, though a small team focusing on audits and investigations remains within the Inspectorate. An example of this work is the publication of revised guidance on compliance with the Act produced in colla boration with employer and employee representatives, payroll and other business service providers and employment law experts. Stakeholders have reported that this guidance is proving useful but that it also highlights ongoing difficulties with the Act. Any improvements resulting from the Payroll Strategy will remain constrained by the problems with the legislation and the difficulty of systematising entitlements and payments in a payroll system . Many stakeholders, while acknowledging the work undertaken t o , remain unhappy with the current situation as uncertainty about exactly what is required to be compliant persists. I consider that a proper resolution of these issues will only be achie ved through legislative change. The time is right for a review of the Act There are several reasons why the time is right for a review: . both employers and employees are feeling the pain of current widespread noncompliance and the difficultly of actually complying with the Act and are calling for change . we have a deeper understanding of the issues with the legislation and a good understanding of why past reviews have failed as a result of the work undertaken over the last few years . we have developed good relationships with a wide range of stakeholders as a result of the Payroll Strategy and can draw on these to develop a piece of legislation that will endure. In December , I received a joint letter from Business New Zealand (Business NZ) and the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions (NZCTU) acknowledging that both employers and employees were affected by the problems with the Act and seeking a meeting to discuss how to establish a process to review the Act. This meeting took place in February and it was agreed that a workshop would be held, along with offi cials from MBIE, to discuss the outline of a terms of reference for a review. The workshop took place in March and the positions agreed form the basis of the terms of reference discussed in this paper and attached as Annex One. These terms of reference outline the objectives, scope, and timing for the review. However, if we approach this review as simply fixing the current framework of the Act, I am concerned that we increase the risk of failure to make things better. We need to be aiming for a new, or significantly amended, piece of legislation that is easier to use and designed with the current and future labour market in mind. The Working Group will be tripartite with an independent C hair I propose that the R eview be carried out by a tripartite Working Group led by an independent Chair with the power to commission work, and intend to invite Business NZ and NZCTU to each nominate three to four people to sit on the group in addition to the Government representat ives. I will also make it clear that it will be important that the interests of small businesses are represented on the group. I recommend Gordon Anderson, a professor of law at Victoria University as the Chair of the Group. Professor Anderson has extensi ve experience in employment law , both as an academic and a barrister. He has served as the Asian VicePresident of the International Society for Labour and Social Security Law and is a member of the Advisory Committee of the Labour Law Research network and President of the New Zealand Labour Law Society. Professor Anderson has the support of both the Council of Trade Unions and Business New Zealand. As the C hair of the Working Group, he will be paid in accordance with the Cabinet fees framework for members appointed to bodies in which the Crown has an interest. The Government representatives on the Group will be senior officials from MBIE, the State Services Commission and Inland Revenue. MBIE will provide secretariat support to the Group and will also ensure appropriate structures are in place for agencies to be kept informed o f, and input into, the work of the Group. The Review must demonstrate that the objectives can be met I propose that the objectives of the review be options for change that: . continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act . provide clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements . are simpler than the current Act in relation to provisions of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave . are readily implementable in a payroll system . minimise compliance costs for employers . minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees . ensure the balance of decisionmaking between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated . are readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future . aim to protect overall entitlements for employees . While some of the objectives are broadly the same as previous reviews, I consider it critical to the success of a review that options are designed and tested by end users ( for example, employers, empl oyees, payroll providers and professionals). It is important that the ease of implementation of options in a payroll system is given high priority. I therefore anticipate that some form of technical reference group will be established as part of the review, consisting of people such as payroll providers (and their software developers), business rules experts (such as those employed at Inland Revenue for the development of tax legislation) and service design and deli very experts to support them with both the design and testing of options. I will expect to see quantitative analysis of different options tested with real payroll data to support the working groups recommendations. I cannot rule out the possibility that s ome options might leave some employers and employees worse off than now. However, a blanket criterion that no employer or employee be worse off will overly constrain the Review and, given the inherent uncertainty of the current Act in some situations, be hard to determine in all cases. It is important however that the review aims to protect overall entitlements for employees and minimises complia nce costs for employers. The Review must be broad enough to allow for new solutions The scope of the R eview m ust be sufficiently broad to generate fundamentally new ways of providing for entitlements and pay, while retaining the purpose of the current Act and (at least) the current levels of entitlement. Full consideration must also be given to the issue of desi gning an Act that works equally well for the ever increasing range of different working and pay arrangements that we see in the labour market. This may include consideration of the place of the standard working week in the holidays legislation. The review will also have the scope to consider any other matters relating to the Act that it sees fit, other than those relating to the provision of entitlements and pay. This may include holidays and leave entitlements modified by other Acts (such as the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act ). I expect the group to consult widely to get a comprehensive understanding of the issu es with the current legislation, and to draw on examples from overseas jurisdictions. but will not include the issue of remediation of historical underpayments The scope of the R eview will no t include the issue of remediation of historical underpayments of holiday and leave pay. However, it will be important to provide clear communications around this issue when a review is announced. This issue is addressed further in the Risks section below. Indicative t iming and reporting The Group will report back to me with their recommendations within months. This timeframe will give the Group sufficient time to commission work and undertake robust testing of options. The Group will also provide an interim report after six months, so that I can update Cabinet and the New Zealand public on the Groups progress. There are a number of risks associated with a review The Group may be unable to reach consensus on its recommendations Past reviews have shown that it can be difficult to achieve consensus on recommendations to change or amend the holidays legislation. While employers and employees appear close together on the need for, and scope of, a review it is quite possible that when it comes to making detailed recommendations, their representatives may be unable to reach consensus (or may leave the hard decisions to Ministers). Past reviews, h owever, have been conducted by independent Ministerial Advisory Groups involving just employers and employees . I intend that for this review Government will be an equal partner on this tripartite working group putting it in a stronger position to influence the development of options. Furthermore, given all that is now known about the compliance issues with the current Act, there is a high level of commitment from all parties to fi nd an enduring solution. Involving payroll providers and other private sector organisations in policy design Concern may be raised that the involvement of payroll providers and other private sector organisations in the design and testing of options may giv e those entities an unfair market advantage when changes to the legislation are implemented. I do not consider this too significant a concern as these organisations will not know what the shape of any final legislative change will be until Parliament passes these changes. In addition, there will be a suitable implementation period following passage of any legislative change for service providers to develop new products to reflect these changes. Conflict of interest management, confidentiality and r egular communication from the Group about its activities and progress could assist in allaying any concerns that do remain. Employers may be reluctant to address current payroll issues Regardless of any changes to the Act, employers retain an obligation to remedi ate employees for historical underpayments of holiday and leave pay and to pay employees correctly until a new piece of legislation is in place. However, employers may be reluctant to put too much further resource into correcting current issues with their payroll systems if they know they are likely to have to change them in the future. It will be important to clearly communicate to employers that this obligation remains. It is likely to be a minimum of two years before new legislation is passed, and this w ill be followed by a suitable implementation period for employers to updatereplace their payroll systems. Employers, particularly those that are currently considering purchasing new payroll systems (or making substantive changes to their current ones) will need to consider how best to meet their obligations given the likelihood of legislative change in two to three years time . Some employers may find that managing the issues with their payroll systems with manual fixes may be the most effective approach , but, for others , implementing a new system now may be an integral part of correctly remediating employees. In the meantime, the Labour Inspectorate will continue to support employers to remediate employees for historical underpayments (such as through their recently practice note on estimating arrears), and will continue with their programme of audits and investigations. Consultation The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet (Policy Advisory Group); State Services Commission; Treasury; Minist ries of Education, Justice, Health, and Social Development; Ministries for Primary Industries, Women, and Pacific Peoples; Inland Revenue; Department of Internal Affairs; T e Puni Kokiri; and N ew Zealand Police have been consulted on this Cabinet paper. The New Zealand Council of Trade Unions and Business New Zealand participated in a workshop (along with MBIE) to outline the key elements of the Terms of Reference in Annex One and have also been consulted on this paper. Financial Implications I propose that MBIE will meet any costs associated with the review (anticipated to be up to . million) by transferring an anticipated underspend of . million in the Labour Market Policy Advice and Related Outputs Multi Category Appropriation in the current financi al year to the financial year. I am seeking delegated authority for the Minister of Finance and I to jointly agree the final amount to be transferred. The likely costs are expected to relate to fees for the Chair, and any costs associated with work that the Chair might commission (including research or legal advice that MBIE agrees to undertake). MBIE will also consider requests to contribute to reasonable travel and accommodation costs f or out of town members where these are consistent with the Cabinet Fees Framework. Costs may also arise from any processes established as part of the review to robustly test options to ensure that they are practical and any adverse consequences are identified (for example, this could include developing a web tool that payroll experts can use to test proposed options with payroll data). Any public consultation undertaken as part of the review will also have cost implications. I do not anticipate that the costs associated with the review will be greater than . million but if they are, then I may need to seek additional funding to complete the work. Human Rights This proposal has no human rights implications. Legislative Implications This proposal has no legislative implications. However, a review is expected to lead to recommendations for legislative change. Regulatory Impact Analysis Regulatory Impact Analysis requirements do not apply to this proposal, but will be carried out when options for change are brought back to Cabinet. Gender Implications This proposal has no gender implications. Disability Perspective This proposal has no disability implications. Publicity If approved by Cabinet, I intend to announce the establishment of the Holidays Act Working Group shortly after . I will publish this paper and the Terms of Reference on the MBIE website , subject to consideration of any deletions that would be justified if the information had been requested under the Official Information Act . Recommendations The Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety recommends that the Committee: Note that there is compelling evidence of widespread noncompliance with the Holidays Act Note that this noncompliance is due both to poor implementation of the Act and to issues with the Act itself Note that MBIEs three year payroll strategy was focused on addressing the first reason, but that only a review of the legislation can provide an enduring solution to the non compliance issues Agree to establish a tripartite Holidays Act Working Group to make recommendations to the Government on options for the provision of, and payment for, holiday and leave entitlements , and on any other matters relating to the Act that the Group sees fit to address, that meet the objectives in the Terms of Reference Agree to the Terms of Reference for the Holidays Act Working Group attached as Annex One Note that membership of the Group will consist of three to four Government representatives from the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment , State Services Commission and Inland Revenue, along with three to four people nominated by each of Business New Zealand and the Council of Trade Unions Agree to the appointment of Professor Gordon Anderson as Chair of the Group Authorise the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety to make minor amendments to the Terms of Reference Agree that the estimated cost of the review, .m, be met by an in principle expense transfer to of an anticipated underspend in the Vote Labour Market Multi Category Appropriation: Labour Market Policy Advice and Related Outputs, subject to confirmation of the amount of the expense transfer by joint Ministers (Minister of Finance and Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety) in the October baseline update Invite the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety to report back to Cabinet on the Government response to the Groups recommendations within months.
agencies are paying more than of their invoices within working days.
Annual holidays issues comments from submissions included that : o the various calculations for annual holidays cause confusion about how to use them and when (for instance OWP vs AWE), a nd payroll systems are not a lways able to do this correctly o transfe rring an employee from PAYG to ann ual holidays can be problematic o it is unfair for the entitlement to annual holidays to only arise af ter months o there may be incentives for employees to take leave at particular times. FBAPS leave issues comments from submissions included that: o the Mondayisation of public holidays is unfair f or those who dont work Mondays o RDP and ADP ar e confusing and hard to define and can lead to gaming o the l ack of prescription about what an O therwise Working Day is leads to non compliance o it is hard to know when to use ADP what does possible or practicable mean o it is impractical and unfair not to prorata sick leave when in reality people do take part days o the six month stand down period for sick and bereavement leave is unfair. Role of the Labour Inspectorate comments from submissions included that: o the Labour Inspectorate should provide more education and guidance for employer s on how to comply with the Act o future roles for the Labour Inspectorate could include certifying payroll systems, and having the power to issue a binding ruling if an employer and employee agreed on an issue. . Key problems with the Act identified by the CTU included: lack of trans parency and insufficient information on payslips to ascertain if leave has been correctly paid poor access to leave transaction records in a form that can be easily checked. employers excluding some components of pay from AWE, OWP or RDP (switching allowa nces off) employer discretion as to when to use RDP or ADP resulting in the lower amount being paid employers not using averaging to assess OWP when hours worked are variable employers not following the prescribed method for calculating ADP inconsistent a pproaches by employers to different types of termination payments: redundancy, gratuities, golden handshakes all of which are forms of delayed remuneration sick and bereavement leave being denied for casual employees the pay as you go provisions be ing used inappropriately public holiday leave and alternative holidays not being granted when they should
Annual holidays issues comments from submissions included that : o the various calculations for annual holidays cause confusion about how to use them and when (for instance OWP vs AWE), a nd payroll systems are not a lways able to do this correctly o transfe rring an employee from PAYG to ann ual holidays can be problematic o it is unfair for the entitlement to annual holidays to only arise af ter months o there may be incentives for employees to take leave at particular times. FBAPS leave issues comments from submissions included that: o the Mondayisation of public holidays is unfair f or those who dont work Mondays o RDP and ADP ar e confusing and hard to define and can lead to gaming o the l ack of prescription about what an O therwise Working Day is leads to non compliance o it is hard to know when to use ADP what does possible or practicable mean o it is impractical and unfair not to prorata sick leave when in reality people do take part days o the six month stand down period for sick and bereavement leave is unfair. Role of the Labour Inspectorate comments from submissions included that: o the Labour Inspectorate should provide more education and guidance for employer s on how to comply with the Act o future roles for the Labour Inspectorate could include certifying payroll systems, and having the power to issue a binding ruling if an employer and employee agreed on an issue. . Key problems with the Act identified by the CTU included: lack of trans parency and insufficient information on payslips to ascertain if leave has been correctly paid poor access to leave transaction records in a form that can be easily checked. employers excluding some components of pay from AWE, OWP or RDP (switching allowa nces off) employer discretion as to when to use RDP or ADP resulting in the lower amount being paid employers not using averaging to assess OWP when hours worked are variable employers not following the prescribed method for calculating ADP inconsistent a pproaches by employers to different types of termination payments: redundancy, gratuities, golden handshakes all of which are forms of delayed remuneration sick and bereavement leave being denied for casual employees the pay as you go provisions be ing used inappropriately public holiday leave and alternative holidays not being granted when they should shrvakdix
. A prescriptive Otherwise Working Day test is also proposed for determining when a particular day is an Otherwise Working Day for FBAPS purposes. More specifically, employees should be eligible for this type of leave if they wer e expected to have worked on that day or have worked of the corresponding calendar days in either the last four or weeks.
For example, the Ministry of Justice stopped processing incoming and outgoing cheques after May : https:www.justice.govt.nzaboutnews andmedianewsthe ministry isphasing outpayment by cheque Limited Partnerships register Current fee (GST exclusive ) Reason for revoking Certified copy of finance statement . Service no longer provided Building Societies, Friendly Societies and Credit Unions The Companies Office maintains a series of small registers for building societies, friendly societies and credit unions to meet the requirements of the Building Societies Act and the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions Act (the Act). Table : Proposed fees for Building Societies, Friendly Societies, and Credit Unions register services (excluding GST) Building Societies register, Friendly Societies register, and Credit Unions register Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee) Change in charge change Registration . . . . . (.) () Annual return . . . . . . Annual return friendly society branch . . . . . . Registration of an Association of credit unions under section () of the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions Act . . . . . (. ) () CO levy ., NZBN levy . Registration and annual return fee The changing business landscape has resulted in less of these types of entities, mean ing fewer registrations and annual returns. This review has highlighted that, as the registered number of these types of entities decline, the entities that remain have to cover costs. The annual return fee portion of the total charge is proposed at ., making this equitable with other entity register annual return fees . It is proposed to align the registration of an association of a credit union with the registration fee for the other registers under the two Acts. Proposed changes specific to Credit Unions and Friendly Societies process fees Tables and on the next page outline amendments to fees specific to processes for credit unions and friendly societies under the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions Act . These changes are outlined as follows: For Credit Unions, there are two new fees that were enabled under changes to the Act in (Table ) : A new fee f or filing a request to remove a credit union under section ()(b) reflects the change to the Act for a dissolution action for credit unions. The existing fee under () (as applied by section ()) is being revoked. The new fee is based on the cost of dissolution for a friendly society. A new fee for filing under section C() for amalgamations o r transfers of the Act . For Friendly Societies (Table ) rounding has been applied to a variety of fees other than those in Table to reflect the GST exclusive amount, and then converted back to be GST inclusive for the purpose of inclusion in the new regulations. No levies are proposed to be added to these services . Table : New Proposed fees for specific Credit Unio ns register services (excluding GST) Credit Unions register Unit Cost Proposed fee Current fee Change in fee change For filing, under section ()(b) the Act, where a request to the Registrar is made to remove the credit union from the register. . . . For filing, under section C () of the Act, a copy of a special resolution passed for the purpose of amalgamation or transfer of engagements. . . .
was decided that costs would be recovered from third parties. Therefore, since NZBN register costs have been included within the Companies register fees set in regulations under the Companies Act. In Parliament decided that the costs of administering the NZBN register should be met from a levy. This proposal implements that decision. Who would pay the levy and when The NZBN levy would be prescribed for entities who are eligible and have been assigned an NZBN. It is proposed that the NZBN levy is paid annually by all corporate entities that are registered on a Companies Office entity register and have been allocated an NZBN. Like the proposed CO levy the NZBN levy will be charged alongside the relevant register fee for incorporation or registration, and then for each annual return. Unincorporated or unregistered entities such as sole traders, partnerships or trusts will not pay the NZBN levy, on the basis that when the NZBN Act was introduced it was decided that costs for maintaining an NZBN register should not be recovered from this group of users. Their proportion of costs will continue to be funded by the Crown. Cost of the NZBN register to be recovered Table below shows the type and approximate amount of costs of the NZBN register to be recovered from an NZBN levy. Table : NZBN Register costs Cost m Personnel . IT maintenance and support . New IT investment . Education and support . Depreciation and capital charge . Other operating costs . MBIE technical support . Total cost levy recovers . The NZBN levy amount has been derived by dividing the costs by an estimated annual volume of , , representing registrations and annual return s filed on the entity registers who have an NZBN. Table below shows the proposed levy against the unit cost. Table : Proposed NZBN levy NZBN register Unit Cost () Proposed levy () Current levy NZBN levy . . The NZBN levy has been set at . rather than the unit cost of . .
leave balances being maintained in incorrect units of time, including employers using hours instead of weeks or days, and crediting and debiting balan ces inconsistently to the disadvantage of employees. Suggestions for change . The majority of submitters () provided specific suggestions or recommendations about changes that could be made to the Act in relation to annual holidays, FBAPS or other provisio ns. Some of the specific suggestions included are outlined b elow by topic area . Suggestions relating to a nnual holidays entitlement s . There was some support for an accrual system based on hours because of the simplicity of such a system (i.e. entitlements b uild up from day one). Others proposed using days or even minutes as the units of entitlement. . Other suggestions included: using guaranteed or agreed hours in employment agreement s as the basis for determining entitlement (i.e. do not include overtime) using a statutory minimum number of hours p er months (i.e. rather than four weeks) differentiat ing between workers with regular hours and workers with variable hours , and using an accrual system for those with variable hours that the e mployer should no t have to agree to leave being taken providing more guidance and be tter definitions in relation to issues such as casual employment , what a week is for a particular employee, w hich payments should be included in the calculation of the payment rate , and w hat is meant by terms such as regu lar and ordinary working day. Suggestions relating to the c alculation of leave payments . There was support for s implify ing the payment calculations for leave. Options proposed included using one rate for all leave or th e greater of a comparison between two rates (for example, of the rate set out in an employment agreement or an average over months). . Other suggestions included: only use Average Weekly Earnings, rather than Ordinary Weekly Pay, because using Ordinary We ekly Pay incentivises taking leave after a spike in payments using a daily rate (common in the meat industry) basing l eave payments on gross earnings divided by contracted hours; hours worked over the contracted rate would not accrue more leave, but woul d increase the payment rate allow ing a cashing up of more than one week of leave using a four week average for calculating payments as weeks was too long. Suggestions relating to FBAPS leave . A variety of suggestions were received in relation to the tr eatment of FBAPS leave. These ranged from a suggestion to r eplace all forms of FBAPS leave (apart from public holidays) with a single entitleme nt of days of personal leave , to a suggestion to change the qualification period for bereavement leave from si x months to , hours.
leave balances being maintained in incorrect units of time, including employers using hours instead of weeks or days, and crediting and debiting balan ces inconsistently to the disadvantage of employees. Suggestions for change . The majority of submitters () provided specific suggestions or recommendations about changes that could be made to the Act in relation to annual holidays, FBAPS or other provisio ns. Some of the specific suggestions included are outlined b elow by topic area . Suggestions relating to a nnual holidays entitlement s . There was some support for an accrual system based on hours because of the simplicity of such a system (i.e. entitlements b uild up from day one). Others proposed using days or even minutes as the units of entitlement. . Other suggestions included: using guaranteed or agreed hours in employment agreement s as the basis for determining entitlement (i.e. do not include overtime) using a statutory minimum number of hours p er months (i.e. rather than four weeks) differentiat ing between workers with regular hours and workers with variable hours , and using an accrual system for those with variable hours that the e mployer should no t have to agree to leave being taken providing more guidance and be tter definitions in relation to issues such as casual employment , what a week is for a particular employee, w hich payments should be included in the calculation of the payment rate , and w hat is meant by terms such as regu lar and ordinary working day. Suggestions relating to the c alculation of leave payments . There was support for s implify ing the payment calculations for leave. Options proposed included using one rate for all leave or th e greater of a comparison between two rates (for example, of the rate set out in an employment agreement or an average over months). . Other suggestions included: only use Average Weekly Earnings, rather than Ordinary Weekly Pay, because using Ordinary We ekly Pay incentivises taking leave after a spike in payments using a daily rate (common in the meat industry) basing l eave payments on gross earnings divided by contracted hours; hours worked over the contracted rate would not accrue more leave, but woul d increase the payment rate allow ing a cashing up of more than one week of leave using a four week average for calculating payments as weeks was too long. Suggestions relating to FBAPS leave . A variety of suggestions were received in relation to the tr eatment of FBAPS leave. These ranged from a suggestion to r eplace all forms of FBAPS leave (apart from public holidays) with a single entitleme nt of days of personal leave , to a suggestion to change the qualification period for bereavement leave from si x months to , hours. shrvakdix
In Confidence BRIEFING Holidays Act Review: Policy decisions for an exposure draft of the Bill March Priority: High Security classification: In Confidence Tracking number: Purpose This paper seek s your decisions on policy changes relating to the Holidays Act Review . Subject to your agreement, these changes will be included in a paper for Cabinets consideration in May , alongside the proposal to release an exposure draft of the Employment (Leav e Entitlements) Bill, which is intended to replace the Holidays Act (the Holidays Act) . Executive s ummary We briefed you in December and February on our work to review the Holidays Act, noting areas where improvements could be made that go beyond the previous decisions made by Ministers and Cabinet. Since then, we have focused on developing alternatives that would simplify obligations, reduce compliance costs for employers and address areas previously incomplete while broadly aligning with t he Taskforce recommendations and existing entitlements model . You requested that we seek decisions at one time , so this paper brings together our advice on new policy decisions to include in a paper for Cabinets consideration in May . The p roposal s, grouped into three areas, are outlined in this cover note, with detailed advice and recommendations set out in the annexed papers. In summary, the proposed changes will: simplify the framewor k for providing annual leave (AL) entitlement and for paying AL as a regular part of an employees pay, and address liability risk s arising from current decisions if employers have a closedown (Annex Two) consolidate the payment methodology for other leave types so that only one calculation is required, reduce the implementation requirements for determining the use of leave and refine the leave eligibility criteria and accumulation timeframe for sick leave (Annex Three) update the methodology for determining parental leave payments to reflect existing practice and enable parties to make choices regarding leave entitlements for employees in a restructuring situation (Annex Four). In addition to your decisions on policy chan ges, we are seeking an early indication of your desired approach to consultation on an exposure draft of the Bill that would replace the existing Holidays Act. There are two broad options: public or targeted consultation. Under either option, we can reach out to various stakeholders to ensure a range of voices are heard. On balance, we favour a targeted approach as it will help ensure we are better positioned to deliver a Bill for introduction in early . Once we receive your decisions on this paper, we will incorporate them into a draft Cabinet paper and undertake consultation with other Government agencies. We will also finalise our regulatory impact analysis. We expect to provide a draft Cabinet paper for your consideration , and for Ministerial consult ation , in mid April.
In Confidence Annex One: Summary of decisions to
In Confidence Annex Two: Providing, taking and paying annual leave
In Confidence Annex Three: Providing, taking and paying other leave types
In Confidence Annex Four: Amendments to parental leave and employment relations legislation
In Confidence Recommended action The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment recommends that you: a Note that since we met with you in late February, our focus has been on progressing alternatives to some of the previous policy decisions on changes to the Holidays Act , in order to simplify obligations, reduce compliance costs for employers , and address areas that were previously incomplete Noted b Note that detailed recommendations on alternative options are provided for y our consideration in each of the three annexed papers , relating to annual leave (Annex Two), other leave types (Annex Three), and amendments to other legislation (Annex Four) Noted c Note that, if you agree, we will include the proposals in a paper for Cabinet consideration in May, alongside proposals for consultation on an exposure draft of the Employment (Leave Entitlements) Bill Noted d Note that, while both public and targeted consultation on the exposure draft would elicit the desired feed back, a more targeted approach consulting a variety of stakeholders identified in consultation with your office will help to ensure we are well placed to deliver a Bill for introduction in early Noted e Agree to either: i. public consultation (with targeted communication s to identified stakeholders) Agree Disagree OR ii. targeted consultation only (based on a stakeholder list compiled in consultation with your office) Agree Disagree f Note that we are continu ing our engagement with a small worki ng group of representatives from B usiness New Zealand and the Council of Trade Unions who both support further simplification Noted g Note that we expect to provide a draft Cabinet paper (reflecting your decisions above and in the annexed papers) for your comment and Ministerial consultation in midApril. Noted
In Confidence circumstances . We are proposing a new consolidated single calculation for FBAPS leave payments . Methodology for determining the hours an employee would have worked on a day of leave: Cabinet also accepted the recommendation to introduce a new calendar day methodology for determining the hours that an employee would have worked on a day of leave. Stakeholders raised concerns that implemen ting this methodology would require significant changes to payroll systems with high associated costs. We propose removing the calendar day methodology for both annual leave and FBAPS leave. Eligibility criteria for family violence, bereavement and sick le ave: Cabinet also accepted the recommendation for new eligibility criteria to determine employees eligibility for FBS leave from their first day of employment. The previous Minister made adjustments to these criteria to improve clarity, but the inclusion of an expectation s based assessment which requires employer judgement , means the eligibility criteria remains complex . We propose removing the expectations based assessment that occurs on the first day of employment. Timeframe for accumulation of sick leave: Cabinet also accepted the Holidays Act Taskforces recommendation tha t eligible employees become entitled to the full minimum family violence leave and bereavement leave entitlements from their first day of employment, with an accumulat ion period of four months for s ick leave . As s ick leave entitlement has since increased f rom five to ten days per year , you may choose to reconsider the sick leave accumulation period .. . The proposed changes are summarised in the table below. Payment methodology consolidation A revised relevant daily pay calculation made up of base pay and fixed allowances (that will not otherwise be paid during the period of leave) and an average of productivity and incentive payments received. Determining the hours that would have been worked on a day of leave Removing th e calendar day methodology for both annual leave and FBAPS leave (and instead us ing an average of hours worked across all days of the week ). Eligibility criteria FBS leave Remov ing the expectations based assessment in the eligibility criteria for family violence, bereavement and sick leave (meaning that only employees with agreed hours will be eligible for FBS leave from day one and others will be subject to eligibility tests after three months) . Timeframe for sick leave accumulation Two options for accumulating sick leave either proceeding with previous decisions or accumulating the full entitlement over six months (a longer period) . . More detail on these proposals and detailed recommendations for your consideration are provided in Annex T hree. Amendments to parental leave and employment relations legislation (Annex Four ) . The paper contained in Annex Four (Amendments to parental leave and employment relations legislatio n) covers two areas: The methodology for determining parental leave payments: The Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act relies on the existing Holidays Act definition of ordinary weekly pay to calculate parental leave payments. We are proposing to add a standalone formula to parental leave legislation, in order to disconnect it from the Holidays Act .
In Confidence The tr eatment of leave entitlements in a restructuring situation: There is currently a lack of legislative clarity regarding the treatment of leave entitlements for some employees in a restructuring situation. We are proposing a flexible approach for those employees, enabl ing treatment of entitlements to be negotiated by the incoming and outgoing employers rather than requiring them to be paid out. . The proposed changes are summarised in the table below. Methodology for determining parental leave payments (amending the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act ) Replace the current reference to ordinary weekly pay with a standalone formula that is aligned with the methodology Inland Revenue currently uses Specify that the formula should reflect a four week average of gross weekly taxable earnings before the start of parental leave (we are continuing to work with IR on the reference period details). Treatment of leave entitlements in a restructuring situation (amending the Employment Relations Act ) For employees specified in Schedule A of the Employment Relations Act : Approach unchanged , employees are given the choice to transfer employment to the new employer, and if they choose to transfer employment, entit lements are transferred . For other employees: require the treatment of leave entitlements in restructuring situations to be covered in employment agreements as a matter that will be negotiated between the outgoing and incoming employers , require the apportionment of liability and the transfer of relevant employee information to be covered in employment agreements as matters that will be negotiated between outgoing and incoming employers, and specify that the payment rate for transferred leave en titlements must not be less than what it would be if it were paid out in accordance with the Holidays Act at the time of transfer . More detail on these proposals and detailed recommendations for your consideration are provided in Annex Four. There are opt ions regarding consultation on the exposure draft . In addition to the changes proposed above, w e propose to see k Cabinet approval for an approach to the exposure draft (in the May Cabinet paper) . We discussed this with you briefly at our policy session in late February, and noted your preference to ensure that voices from small business owners are heard . . Releasing an exposure draft of the Bill provides an opportunity to test the Bills clarity and workability with various interest groups, includi ng those who will need to work with it on a daytoday basis. It will provide an opportunity to surface issues early, so we can address as much as possible prior to introduction and anticipate feedback that might be raised in Select Committee submissions . . Aside from the decisions you make on the attached papers, the exposure draft will largely reflect decisions made by the previous Government, in line with the tripartite consensus based approach. As discussed with you, w e can use the consultation document to ask targeted questions around alternative options in some areas, such as different accrual models and pro rata sick leave for part time employees.
In Confidence We worked with Inland Revenue on the parental leave amendments , with wider consultation to c ome . We worked with Inland Revenue (IR) to develop our advice on consequential amendments to the parental leave legislation. IR supports the recommendations contained in the Annex Four paper relating to parental leave . Consultation with wider Government age ncies will be undertaken on the draft Cabinet paper and we will brief you on any concerns raised through that process. We are working towards a Cabinet paper for consideration in May . Once we receive your decisions on this paper, we will incorporate them i nto a draft Cabinet paper and undertake consultation with other Government agencies. We will also finalise our regulatory impact analysis and submit a Regulatory Impact Statement to the assessment panel . . We expect to provide a draft Cabinet paper for your consideration and for Ministerial consultation in mid April. An indicative timeline for the May Cabinet paper is as follows: Milestone Week of April Draft Cabinet paper provided to Ministers office April May Ministerial consultation Tuesday May Final Cabinet paper provided for lodging Thursday May Cabinet paper lodged Wednesday May Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Monday May Cabinet . After Cabinet decisions, officials will issue drafting instructions to P arliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) as soon as possible and work with PCO to review drafting and provide feedback. We will also prepare a consultation document to accompany the exposure draft . These stages are set out in the timeline below:
In Confidence Annexes Annex One: Summary of decisions to Annex Two: Providing, taking and paying annual leave Annex Three : Providing, taking and paying other leave types Annex Four: Amendments to parental leave and employment relations legislation
, people employed, approx. of total workforce
In Confidence Annex T hree : Financial implications and compliance costs . The recommendations have financial implications for employers. Improved clarity and certainty through greater prescription should reduce the risk of future non compliance issues and help to reduce future remediation processes and compliance costs, offsetting some of the cost increases . This is dependent however on the extent to which the legislation is implementation ready and that it does achieve the intended clarity and certainty.
In Confidence
In Confidence providers an d payroll practitioners working for public and private sector employers. The group contributed their insights into the practicalities of implementing the recommendations in payroll systems, and across a variety of complex employment environments.
because ADP is calculated as an average across all days of work, its value is the same for any day of FBAPS leave regardless of how much an employee would have earned on a specific day. If an
with this decision , the hours will instead be based on an employees average hours across all days worked in the pay periods that started in the weeks before the one in which the l eave is taken. This means that employers will only be required to make one calculation for all days of annual leave in a pay period. Each day of annual leave will have the same number of hours assigned to it. . The s ame simplification was not made to the methodology for calculating the hours that would have been worked on
In Confidence
In Confidence . The recommendations also involve compliance costs for employers (refer to Annex Three for more detail on the financial implications). Despite refinements to simplify some key areas of concern, the changes required to payroll systems are still likely to be significant. The recommendations also include some increases in access to entitlements and leave payments. Compliance requirements and costs will vary depending on situation specific factors such as employer size, the types and complexity of working arrangements and pay structures , the nature of the payroll system used and whether dedicated payroll profe ssionals are part of staff . . There is potential for further modifications or alternatives to some of the Taskforces recommendations to simplify the changes to the Act and better address the associated risks. Options b or c would both provide opportunity to consider other options for change that would achieve more balance between the Taskforces objectives than the currently agreed package of changes. Maintaining consensus between business and union representatives . Cabinet asked the Taskforce to aim to provide jointly agreed recommendations. In , the Taskforce would not have reached consensus on any recommendations that moved away from the underlying framework of the Act ( based on leave entitlements provided after set periods , and measured in weeks and days) . . Employee representatives are likely to continue to oppose a fundamentally different basis for providing leave entitlements, such as an hours based accrual model that many employers and payroll providers have suggested could provide a simpler model (option c). Their opposition is driven by the potential impacts on the principles of the current Act (set out in paragraph ) and therefore the current level of worker entitlements the Act provides. . During the election period we have continued our engagement with BusinessNZ and NZCTUs nominated representatives on the Bill. BusinessNZ is supportive of an exercise to review whether the recommendations represent the best solution to the issues. Given the challenges highlighted during the policy design and drafting processes, both they and NZCTU representatives have given an initial indication that they are willing to consider alternative options that broadly align with the recommendations (option b ). These options would retain the current units of entitlement and the underlying framework of the Act but better balance the changes across the objectives Cabinet set for the Taskforce (particularly by reducing the overall level of complexity ). Considering other options for change will take time to progress . Options b or c would require more time to progress than option a. They would involve policy development and Cabinet processes, issuing of new drafting instructions, and potentially significant redrafting work by PCO (noting however that work to complete the Bill within the current policy decisions is also significant). Option c is likely to require the most time as it requires development of a fundamentally new model for providing and paying leave entitlement s and could also be complex . A robust design and testing process would be required to mitigate the risk of new, unforeseen ambiguities and challenges . . Taking more time on the policy process now does mean the challenges of the current Act will remain for longer. Until new legislation comes into force employers need to comply with the current Act and, like historical underpayments, will become liable to remediate employees for any underpayments during that time . However, taking longer on the development of solutions
In Confidence now is more likely to achieve the desired outcomes and reduce compliance costs in the longer term. . As a balance between taking time to get it right and immediately progressing changes to improve the legislative framework, we recommend option b as a practical next step. Work carried out since the release of the Taskforce report, including refinements to address gaps in the Taskforces recommendations and simplify matters where possible is not yet public. Along with any further work you would like us to progress, the resulting Bill may be more positively received than what is presented in the Taskforce report. As discussed below, there are also options for the legislative process that would allow us to continue exploring alternatives with stakeholders before a final decision is made. Steps in the legislative process . Once the policy is settled and a Bill is complete, you have some choices about the steps in the legislative process. Broadly your choices are to: Progress a Bill towards introduction and select committee : this option would provide the fastest progress . Any issues that are identified by stakeholders would need to be addressed during the select committee stages, which is likely to be more difficult than addressing them earlier . Changes made at that stage also carry a higher risk of implementation issues. Or Issue an exposure draft before introduction and the commencement of the parliamentary stages : this option would provide an opportunity to test the policy direction and the Bills technical details, clarit y and usability with stakeholders before final decisions are made and a parliamentary process commences . . We recommend issuing an exposure draft as part of the legislative process. This would be consistent with the commitment in the National and ACT Parties Coalition Agreement to ensur e regulatory decisions are based on principles of good lawmaking. Along with questions on the technical details of the exposure draft, the accompanying consultation document could include specific questions on alternative policy options for providing and paying leave entitlements to elicit stakeholder feedback before final decisions are made. Issuing an exposure draft would also provide the opportunity to test the implementation period required to enable robust implementation of changes to payroll and business systems. . While it may provide greater assurance that the Bill i s free of technical issues, this option would require more time. Once a draft Bill was complete to a standard that would support consultation, MBIE would need to develop and publish a consultation document. Before introduction , submissions would need to be analysed, advice provided to you on the feedback and any issues identified, solutions developed and incorporated in an introduction version o f the Bill. Next steps . We look forward to discussing the next steps for this work with you in more detail. We will then be in a position to provide more detailed advice on your chosen policy direction. Annexes Annex One: Summary of the Holidays Act Taskforce s recommendations Annex Two: The Taskforces objectives and parameters Annex Three: Financial implications and compliance costs
In Confidence
In Confidence Annex O ne: Summary of the Holidays Act Taskforce recommendations The Holidays Act Taskforce recommendations include: New methodologies, calculations and definitions , intended to provide prescription and clarity around how to accurately calculate entitlements and payments. These include: New methods that employers must use to calculate the amount of the four week entitlement to annual holidays an employee uses when t hey take leave. This includes prescription around how to determine a week for the purpose o f annual leave entitlement. New leave payment formulas and definitions to provide greater clarity about what payments must be included in the calculations. This includes clarifications to the definition of gross earnings. New eligibility tests for f amily violence, bereavement and sick leave and a new otherwise working day test for determining days on which these entitlements apply. A new test for when an employee may receive their annual holiday entitlement on a payasyou go basis and clear rules for reviewing whether it can continue to be used throughout the course of employment. Improvements in access to some leave entitlements, intended to ensure the balance of decision making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated. These include: Ability for e mployees to take annual leave in advance of when the four week entitlement arises after each months of employment on a pro rata basis. Access to sick, bereavement and family violence leave from the first day of employment for eligible employees and ability to take part days of sick and family violence leave. Access to three days bereavement leave expanded to a wider number of family members, including cultural family groups . Some increases to minimum leave payments to address disadvantages currently experienced by some employees. These include: The addition of a week average pay calculation for comparison to the ordinary pay and week average calculations for annual leave payments so that employees (such as seasonal workers) are not disadvantaged by taking leave adjacent to a busy period. Introduction of a requirement to pay the greater of ordinary and average pay for family violence, bereavement and sick leave and alternative and public holidays for all employees to resolve issues with the appl ication of the current methodology and potential for employer gaming. Removal of the override to the normal rules for annual holiday payments in the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act which disadvantages employees returning from parental leave who take annual holidays. Improved transparency and clarity around some processes including: Clearer requirements related to the process for having a closedown period.
In Confidence What is permitted and required with regards treating employment as continuous for the purpose of leave entitlements when a business is sold or transferred. A requirement to provide pay statements in every pay period to provide greater transparency about leave and pay for employees. Additionalclarified record keeping requirements to ensure employers have the data required to accurately complete the calculations and tests.
In Confidence Annex Two: The Holidays Act Taskforce s objectives and parameters Objectives
In Confidence You have options in the following areas about how to proceed with the Holidays Act Review: The priority for this work : Progressing this work in your future work programme will require dedicated MBIE policy and legal resources and PCO drafting resource. The policy direction in which to proceed : Options include proceeding with the Taskforces recommendations in full or considering alternative options that might go further to reduce complexity or minimise complianc e costs for example (and which may or may not align with the Taskforces recommendations ). The steps in the legislative process: You could progress a Bill straight to introduction or issue an exposure draft first to test the policy direction and technical details. We recommend: giving a high level of priority to completing work to reform the Holidays Act to resolve the longstanding issues and their ongoing impact s (consistent with the Coalition Governments commitment to improve the quality of regulation); exploring alternative options that maintain broad alignment with the Taskforces recommendations , but go further than what has been within scope for the policy design work to ( nominated representatives of both BusinessNZ and the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions (NZCTU) have indicated a willingness to do this ); and issuing an exposure draft of the Bill to gain wider stakeholder feedback on the policy direction and technical details before final policy decisions are made and the p arliamentary part of the process commences (consistent with National and ACTs coalition agreement commitment to ensure regulatory decisions are based on the principles of g ood law making) . We look forward to discussing the next steps for this work with you in more detail. We will then be able to provide more detailed advice on your chosen option. Recommended action The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment recommends that you: a Note that, as Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety , you are responsible for administering the Holidays Act (the Act) . Noted
In Confidence
In Confidence Background to the Holidays Act and the impact of noncompliance . As Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety you are responsible for the Holidays Act (the Act). The purpose of the Act is to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees lives . It sets out an employees minimum entitlement s to annual holidays (in weeks) and public holidays , sick, bereavement and family violence leave (in days) , and the payments for them that employers are obliged to make. The Act also covers issues such as annual closedowns for businesses, transferring public holidays and cashing up one weeks annual holiday. . The Act is one of the core foundations of the employment relations and employment standards (ERES) regulatory system, placing rights and obligations on every employer and employee. There is significant opportunity for improvements to the Act to ensure it is , and remains , fitforpurpose in the context of modern and constantly evolving working arrangements and is responsive to business needs. This includes resolving tensions in the current balance between the core regulatory objectives for the ERES system of flexible regulatory design, worker protection and certainty for regulated parties . . In our Briefing to the Incoming Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety , we recommended that work to reform the Holidays Act be accorded a high level of priority in your future policy work programme refers. The Act was intended to accommodate increasingly diverse work patterns through flexible regulatory design . The Act sought to address criticisms that the Holidays Act was complicated, difficult to understand and apply and, being predicated on a hour Monday toFriday working week, did not reflect changes in working and pay patterns that had occurred in the interv ening years. . The Act retained the underlying leave entitlement system in the previous Act (based on weeks for annual holidays and days for other types of leave which are provided after specified periods of employment ) but was designed to accommodate diverse working and pay arrangements through flexible regulatory design. There are several areas in the Act where employers can adopt a range of approaches to meet their legal obligations , andor where employers and employees must agree how entitlement s will be provided (such as determining what a week means for each individual employee) . . T he Act is based on two key principles relating to entitlements and pay . i. T hat entitlements are determined in relation to the work pattern at the time leave is taken. ii. T hat employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave, that is, they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked. but does not provide the certainty and clarity that employers and employees need . The Acts largely principles based approach to expressing the rules contrasts with a prescriptive, rules based approach, which is strongly supported by many stakeholders (particularly employers and payroll providers). Rather than providing choices for calculating entitlemen ts, a rules based approach would provide precise calculations and formulas that would give a single correct answer as to what the minimum entitlement and pay is in all situations. . The principles based approach is generally straightforward to apply when work and pay arrangements are consistent and predictable. T he flexible design of the Act s provisions is more difficult to apply when hours of work vary between weeks and days and when pay
In Confidence structures include variable components such as commission and allowances. In these cases, employers have to use their best judgement on how to apply the principles based on the specific facts of an employees working and remuneration arrangements , and a number of provisions require the agreement of employees each time leave is taken. . A number of the specific terms, calculations and processes included in the Act also lack clarity and have been a feature of a significant body of litigation related to the Act. . The result in practice is that: employers lack certainty that the way they have calculated leave entitlements and pay meets their minimum obligations and employees have difficulty understanding whether they have received their statutory entitlements ; the Act is difficult to implement in payr oll systems due to the number of circumstantial judgments and agreements required; there are high compliance costs for employers, particularly those with large numbers of employees who have variable work and pay arrangement s; issues related to the implementation of the Act are a significant driver of demand for employment support services. Systemic compliance issues with the Act have been well known since . The challenges with applying the legislation, combined with payroll systems that are incapable of supporting compliance or not correctly configured by employers , and poor business processes (for e xample inaccurate record keeping) , have contributed to widespread (often unintentional) non compliance with the Act. . Systemic compliance issues with the Act first came to light in in a case involving BP Oil . MBIEs engagement with key payroll providers and employers in indicated that problems with implementing the Act were likely to be widespread. A targeted review of the Act was proposed in based on attempting to resolve differences between employer and employee representatives but Cabinet decided not to proceed. The differences in opinion centred around the fact that some employees and employers were likely to be worse off if changes to the Act were implemented. . MBIE was asked to look for solutions within the current legislative framework and between and the Labour Inspectorate delivered a payroll strategy to address implementation issues. The programme of work focussed on remediation of historical underpayments, industry and sector engagement and better provision of information and education to employers and employees. While this has helped with implementation of the current Act and created greater awareness of what is required to comply, the extent of improvements has been constrained by the problems with the legislation and the difficulty of systematising entitlements and payments. . Many stakeholders remain unhappy with the current situation as the uncertainty about exactl y what is required to be compliant persists. In Simpson Griersons pre election survey percent of employers selected Holidays Act simplification as their top priority for an incoming government to address, as was the result of the previous four pre election surveys. The economic impact of Holidays Act issues is significant . The significant and widespread underpayment of employee leave entitlements has result ed in large scale remediation payments across both the public and private sectors, running i nto billions of dollars. As of June (when funding for the dedicated Labour Inspectorate
In Confidence payroll audit and investigations team ceased), New Zealand employers (who had at least employees and an electronic pay system) had made remediation payments to a total of , employees, amounting to a sum of . million. Over percent of employers assessed by the Labour Inspectorate were found to be non compliant , and in different organisations arrears have ranged from an average of to , per affected employee. . This figure does not include remediation payments due to health and school sector employees , New Zealands two largest payrolls. In April Te Whatu Ora Health New Zealand estimated , current and former employees were owed a combined total in the vicinity of . billion. Te Whatu Oras remediation project is expected to be completed in . The Ministry of Education (MoE) is undertaking Holidays Act remediation on behalf of , schools and for around , current and former employees across , roles. MoE made its first remediation payment of . m illion to , school employees in June , focused on payments for sick leave, public holidays, bereavement leave and family violence l eave. Further remediation payments are in progress and total l iability is estimated at around m illion. This figure excludes payments for annual holidays for teachers , for which the remediation amount is yet to be determined. . Enquiries related to the Holidays Act drive demand for employment support and dispute resolution services in the ERES system: Between July and February , the proportion of monthly calls related to leave and holidays received by the MBIE Service Centre employment line each month ranged from approximately percent to percent. Enquir ies tend to spike during public holiday periods such as ChristmasNew Year and Easter. Since July , the proportion of complaints received each year by the Labour Inspectorate involving holidays and leave issues has ranged from to percent. A greater proportion of investigations have involved Holidays Act issues ( percent in ). A study of Citizens Advice Bureau enquiries found employment was the second largest area for which people sought help. About percent of employment enquiries related to employment conditions, of which half were about pay and leave issues. Community Law Centres reported holiday pay enquiries compris e around four percent of their work in the year. Work commenced in to address the issues with the Act A tripartite taskforce was established to suggest improvements to the Act . In May , following a joint request from BusinessNZ and the NZCTU, Cabinet agreed to establish a tripartite Holidays Act Taskforce (the Taskforce) comprised of government, business, and union representatives to suggest improvements to the Act CAB M IN . The Taskforces objectives and parameters are included in Annex Two.
In Confidence . The Taskforce was provided scope to design a system for providing and paying leave entitlements that could be fundamentally different from the current system ( where weeks and days of leave entitlement arise after specified periods of employment ). It was also required to preserve current levels of entitlement and the intent of the principles set out in paragraph as far as possible. In addition to considering options to improve the provision of, and payment for , entitlements , the Taskforces parameters extended to considering any other matters related to the Act that it saw fit. . The Taskforce undertook its review in three distinct phases: i. Understanding the issues wi th the Act. This included publishing an issues paper to seek input from businesses, payroll practitioners and providers, employee representatives and individuals. ii. Developing and testing options to address the issues identified . The testing was conducted by an external provider with expertise in payroll matters and using bona fide payroll data across a wide range of working arrangements. iii. Confirming preferred options and finalising recommendations. This involved assessing the options developed by the Taskforce against a range of criteria, consulting with a select group of payroll providers, and confirming the final recommendations in a report p rovided to the Government in October . Cabinet agreed to endorse the Taskforce s recommendations in full . The Taskforce reached agreement on an improved status quo model for calculating leave entitlements and pay, where entitlements continue to be provided after specified periods of employment and the existing units of entitlement are retained (in weeks for annual leave and days for other types of leave) . The recommendations address a wide range of issues that were identified through the first phase of the review and can be grouped in four areas as follows : i. Prescriptive methodologies , calculations and definitions to address the current lack of certainty about how to calculate and pay leave entitlements . ii. Improved access to some leave entitlements, to address issues identified by some stakeholders related to the month (annual leave) and month (other forms of leave) waiting periods for employees to be able to take leave . iii. Some increases to minimum leave payments for some employees, to address financial disadvantages some employees may experience when they take leave. iv. Improved transparency and clarity around some processes to ensure employees are able understand their leave entitlements and pay. The recommendations are summarised in more detai l in Annex One. . In March , Cabinet endorsed the Taskforces recommendations in full, as the basis for a substantially amended Holidays Act CAB MIN. The Government announced this decision in February (following a delay due to Covid ). MBIE has completed a detailed policy design process with a range of stakeholders . When Cabinet endorsed the Taskforces recommendations, it noted that the complexity of the existing legislation and the proposed amendments to it meant further detailed policy design work would be required to implement them in legislation. . MBIE completed the detailed policy design work during . To support this process MBIE brought together a working group of stakeholders that included payroll system
In Confidence Policy direction . You have options in terms of how to proceed in relation to the policy settings . There are several considerations for you in deciding on the direction in which you wish to proceed which are discussed in more detail below. In summary , the options include: a. Proceed with existing Taskforces recommendations: This would involve completing the Bill based on the existing recommendations . While still requiring significant work before introduction , this option would deliver the fastest progress . It would not, however, provide opportunity to consider improvements that might lead to better long term outcome s. b. Explore alternatives that align with the Taskforces recommendations: Under this option, we would c onsider alternative options for reduc ing complexity or minimis ing compliance costs (for example) , while broadly aligning with the recommendations and retaining the underlying entitlements model . Examples include considering a weeks based accrual system for annual leave; consolidating some of the payment methodologies and simplifying t he new framework for using payasyougo for annual leave . c. Explore alternatives outside the Taskforces recommendations: This option would consider alternative s to the recommendations that represent a fundamentally different model for providing and paying leave entitlements (such as an hours based entitlement accrual system for annual leave). This option would allow for new solutions to address issues. However, i t is likely to be comple x, would take the most time to progress , and tripartite consensus may be challenging. . We recommend exploring option b as a first step, while ensuring there are opportunities to test other options with stakeholders (including option c), for example through an exposure draft consultation on the Bill (discussed further below). There are opportunities to simplify the recommendations and reduce compliance costs for employers . Cabinet set eight objectives for the Taskforce in its Terms of Reference (Annex Two). The Taskforce focussed particularly on providing greater clarity and certainty through the provision of detailed processes and prescriptive methodologies and on protecting employee entitlements . It focussed less on others , such as simplifying the Act and minimising compliance costs for employers . . The prescriptive methodologies and detailed processes the Taskforce recommended will add more certainty to the regulatory environment but also result in an inevitable amount of complexity . The policy design and drafting process has further highlighted the extent of the complexity and the challenges of implementing the recommendations in a way that provides clarity and is easy to understand and use for all sta keholders. While providing more certainty, there is a risk that the level of complexity in the draft Bill will present future implementation and compliance challenges for employers. . The balance struck between objectives is likely to be a contentious aspect of the Bill. During the Taskforces consultation processes, many stakeholders (particularly employers and payroll providers) raised concerns about the level of complexity and therefore the extent to which the proposals would address the underlying issues the Act poses . This has continued to be a theme through the design process .
ANNEX FOUR: AMENDMENTS TO PARENTAL LEAVE AND EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS LEGISLATION Overview of the paper . This paper seeks your agreement to include amendments to parental leave and employment relations legislation in your May Cabinet paper. The proposals are intended to reflect current practice to reduc e rates of non compliance. . The Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act (PLEPA) relies on the existing Holidays Act (Holidays Act) definition of ordinary weekly pay (OWP) to calculate parental leave payments. We recommend disconnecting the PLEPA from the Holidays Act instead of using the replacement for OWP in the Employment (Leave Entitlements) Bill (the Bill). We propose a standalone methodology which reflects the intent of current methodology but is more compatible with Inland Revenue (IR) systems . . Ther e is a lack of legislative clarity regarding the treatment of leave entitlements for some employees in restructuring situations. As a result, common practice among employers does not align with requirements in the Holidays Act. We are proposing a flexible approach for those employees, enabling treatment of entitlements to be negotiated by the incoming and outgoing employ ers rather than requiring them to paid out in accordance with the Holidays Act. Recommendations Area Recommendation Decision Methodology for determining parental leave payments Note that a consequential amendment to the methodology for calculating parental leave payment rates in the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act (PLEPA) is required because it uses the Holidays Act ordinary weekly pay (OWP) calculation which is replaced in the Employment (Leave Entitlements) Bill and that this also presents an opportunity to better support the objectives of IRs online application system to make applications faster and easier for applicants and employers. Noted Agree that your May Cabinet paper seeks agreement to replace the reference to OWP in the PLEPA with a standalone formula that is aligned with the methodology IR uses for the calculated income estimate of OWP and the average weekly income calculation set out in SCAA of the PLEPA. Agree Discuss Note that the proposed formula would use a four week average of an applicants gross weekly taxable earnings before parental leave payments start, and that we are continuing to work with IR on the details for the timing of the calculation which we will include in your May Cabinet paper. Noted Treatment of leave entitlements in a restructuring situation Note that, in March , Cabinet agreed to the Holidays Act Taskforces recommendation that on the sale and transfer of a business, employees should have a choice about whether to transfer all of their leave entitlements or have them paid out and reset. Noted Note policy work on this recommendation has revealed that giving effect to the recommendation would impose a statutory constraint on the contractual arrangements businesses make during the sale and transfer of a business, which could discourage incoming Noted employ ers from offering employees the option to transfer their employment. Agree that your May Cabinet paper seek agreement to provide that: for employees not specified in Schedule A of the Employment Relations Act (E RA): o specified matters relating to the treatment of leave entitlements in restructuring situations must be included in employees Employee Protection Provisions as matters employers will negotiate if they have negotiated for the employee to transfer their employment and the empl oyee has chosen to do so, including: whether the incoming employer will recognise all or part of the employees annual leave and alternative holiday entitlements not taken at the of transfer or the outgoing employer will pay them out, and whether the employee will be given a choice about this (full details set out in option five of Appendi x One) , how liability will be apportioned between the employers in relation to what has been negotiated regarding the matter above, and how employee information needed in relation to what has been negoti ated regarding the matter above will be provided to the incoming employer o the payment rate for transferred leave entitlements must not be less than what it would have been had it been paid out at the time of transfer for employees specified in Schedule A of the ERA, the status quo related to the treatment of leave entitlements in restructuring situations remains unchanged. Agree Discuss We recommend a consequential change to the Parental Leave payment methodology The replacement of Ordinary Weekly Pay in the Holidays Act means a consequential amendment to the methodology for determining Parental Leave payments is required . The E mployment (Leave Entitlements) Bill ( the Bill) replaces the ordinary weekly pay (OWP) c alculation that is part of the Holidays Act (Holidays Act) methodology for calculating annual holiday payments, with a new ordinary weekly leave pay (OWLP) calculation. This change is intended to provide better certainty for employers. . D uring drafting, it was identified that replacing OWP with OWLP meant a consequential amendment would be required to the methodology in the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act (PLEPA) for determining the rate of parental leave (PL) payment payable to an eligible employee. . Currently, the PL payment rate method set out in the PLEPA is the greater of the employee s OWP just before the commencement of parental leave payments or their average weekly income (AWI), up to a maximum weekly amount of .. The policy intent of including OWP is to reflect what an employee would have earned at the time payments start. The intent of AWI is to reflect earnings over a longer period (the AWI calculation is set out in the PLEPA and is the weekly average of the employees gross taxable earnings in of the last weeks in which those earnings were highest). Weve developed options for the amendment and recommend disconnecting the PL payment methodology from the Bill . During the election period, we worked with Inland Revenue (IR), the agency responsiblefor processing parental leave applications and making PL payments, to develop options for the consequential amendment to OWP. We aimed to retain the policy intent of the OWP and AWI comparison. . The two main options considered were to replace OWP with: a. Option : A reference to the new OWLP calculation in the Bill. b. Option : A standalone formula in the PLEPA which would disconnect the PL payment method from the Bill. Option two provides an opportunity to remove a remaining pain point in IRs online PPL application system . MBIE and IR recommend option as it supports the objectives of IRs online paid parental leave (PPL) application system which was rolled out in . The objectives were to make PPL applications faster and easier for applicants, reduce compliance costsfor employers, and simplify processing for IR. . The online PPL application system includes a calculated income estimate (based on the employees income information held by IR), inten ded to remov e the responsibility for making the complex payment calculations from applicant s and employers (which had been identified as one of the most significant pain points in the PPL application process). . The calculated income estimate is limited however, as it has not removed this burden from all applicants and employers because IR does not have access to the level of detailabout an employees pay that is required to calculate OWP in accordance with theHolidays Act . Instead, it estimates OWP using a formula based on a four week average of total gross taxable earnings. This impacts applicants who receive less than the maximum PL payment rate (. per cent in the financial year). . To avoid delays in the deployment of the online system when it was rolled out, resolving the issue was not prioritised. Currently IR has a notification to inform applicants that itmay not have all the necessary information to calculate payment rates correctly. These applicants are given instructions about how they andor their employers can manually check the calculations. They can update IRs figure if they determine that the payment rate that they are legally entitled to is different than the IR estimate. Just before PL payments are due to start, IR also sends a reminder to applicants who apply early to Prior to , regulations required PPL applicants to fill in a form and verify supporting information through statutory declarations. In IRs research, parents identified this administrative process as a major pain point. IR holds most of the information applicants were asked to provide and verify, meaning much of the administrative burden was unnecessary. In IR integrated the PPL application process into its new tax system. After determining eligibility for PPL through SmartStart (a single joint agency online platform for services associated with the birth of a child) applicants are directed to their secur e myIR account to complete and lodge the application (which includes the PL payment rate calculation). IR receives information about employees gross taxable earnings and deductions each payday, but it does not have visibility o f the payment types that make up the gross taxable amount. It cannot distinguish the components of OWP an employer is able to such as salarywages, allowances and regular productivity and overtime payments. confirm all the application details are still correct and up to , including the income estimate. . Like OWP, the new OWLP calculation in the Bill requires information about the components of an employees pay that IR does not have access to. Option One would therefore still require manual checking of estimated calculations for all applicants and employers. We propose a standalone formula in the PLEPA that is aligned with the methodology IR currently uses to estimate income . MBIE and IR propose replacin g the reference to OWP in the PLEPA with a standalone formula that is aligned with the methodology IR use for the calculated income estimate of OWP in the online application system and with the methodology for the AWI calculation specified in the PLEPA. The proposed formula would use a four week average of an applicants gross weekly taxable earnings before parental leave payments start. We are continuing to work with IR on the precise details for the timing of the calculation to ensure workability and will finalise this for inclusion in your May Cabinet paper. . We have assessed the proposal against the criteria of practicality, payment outcomes for PPL applicants and costs to government. Practicality . The proposed formula uses information IR holds and woul d therefore mean that, for most applicants , the income estimate calculated through the online application system would be accurate. . Aligned with the objective of the including the calculated income estimate in the PPL application system, most applicants or their employers would therefore no longer need to run manual calculations to check the pre populated figure , further reducing the compliance costs and administrative burden of PPL applications . Payment outcomes for applicants . The majority of applicants will be unaffected as their OWP andor AWI are above the maximum payment rate ( per cent in the financial year, , of , applicants). For applicants whose OWP andor AWI are less than or close to the maximum rate (. per cent in the financial year or , of , applicants) the impact on their payment rate will be situation dependent. For applicants who do not have variable components of pay and work consistent hours each week, the outcome of the proposed four week average formula will be very close to the legal status quo for OWP. . In other cases, because the proposed formula is based on gross taxable earnings which includes more payment types than OWP (eg. oneo ff bonuses and commission payments that are not a regular part of pay), it might produce a slightly higher payment rate compared to the legal status quo .
ANNEX THREE: PROVIDING, TAKING AND PAYING OTHER LEAVE TYPES Overview of the paper . This paper seeks your decisions on adjustments to some of the Cabinet policy decisions for changes to family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative and public holidays, and sick (FBAPS) leave. The proposals are intended to reduce complexity and compliance costs associated with these leave entitlements and payment calculations. They all remain aligned with the underlying intent of the Taskforce recommendations. . There are three FBAPS proposals covered in this paper: Part : Consolidation of FBAPS payment methodologies Part : Calculation of hours to be assigned on day of FBAPS leave Part : Refinement of sick leave criteria and set period for accumulation of entitlement s. Recommendations Area Recommendation Decision Consolidation of FBAPS payment methodology Note that, under the Act , FBAPS leave payments are based on an employees relevant daily pay (RDP) or, if it is not possible to determine RDP or an employees daily pay varies in the pay period, an employer may use average daily pay (AD P) which , in some circumstances, requires the employer to make a judgement about which to use. Noted Note the Taskforce recommendation requires the comparison of two calculations for all employees (ordinary daily leave pay and a new hours based average daily pay) to remove the need for judgement , reduce risks of gaming and ensure FBAPS payments reflect what an employee would have earned on a specific day . Noted Note that initial feedback suggests the new calculations are still complex and burdensome and that the new formulas could inflate FBAPS payments above what an employee would normally earn on a day in some circumstances . Noted Agree to a revised relevant daily pay calculation which is a single calculation for FBAPS leave payments involving: base pay and fixed allowances (that will not oth erwise be paid during the period of leave) and an average of productivity and incentive payments received. Agre e Discuss Note that we will continue to work on the exact detail of the revised RDP methodology to ensure that the calculation is clear and functional and will include this in your May Cabinet paper . Noted Note the exposure draft can to test the views of stakeholders , including those of payroll providers , on the ease of application . Noted Calculation of hours to be assigned on day of FBAPS leave Note that the Taskforce recommended, and Cabinet agreed to a new calendar day methodology for situations when employees do not have clear daily hours of work to determine the number of hours an employee would have worked on a day of annual or FBAPS leave. Noted
ANNEX TWO: PROVIDING, TAKING AND PAYING ANNUAL LEAVE Overview of the paper . This paper seeks your decisions on adjust ments to some of the Cabinet decisions on changes to the annual leave (AL) provisions in the Holidays Act (the Act) . The proposals are intended to reduce complexity and compliance costs and to more closely reflect common practice and understanding of AL entitlements while maintaining alignment with the underlying weeks based entitlement system . . The paper also provides an initial overview of some other areas where opportunity remain s within a week sbased entitlement system to make further technical improvements or policy adjustments. Finally, the paper provides an initial overview of considerations around an alternative hours based accrual entitlement system . As discussed with you, we can include targeted questions on these areas in the exposure draft consultation document . Recommendations Area Recommendation Decision AL entitlement framework Note that in , Cabinet agreed that employees should continue to become entitled to four weeks AL after months continuous employment but that an employer must not unreasonably withhold consent to an employees request to take AL in advance of entitlement arising on a pro rata basis and that this would add complexity and not support common practice. Noted Agree that, rather than retain the rule that four weeks AL entitlement arises as a single amount after months continuous employment, a weeks based accrual system be adopted with AL entitlement continuously accruing. Agree Discuss Parameters to support a weeks based accrual system Agree that AL entitlement accrues at a rate of not less than . weeks per week of employment. Agree Discuss Agree that the weeks of employment that AL accrues during aligns with the weeks that are included and excluded from months of continuous employment under the Act. Agree Discuss Agree to the following formula to provide clarity about the amount of AL that would accrue during a part week of unpaid leave (when AL does not accrue): Number of hours that the employee did work in the week unpaid leave was taken (up to the value of the denominator), divided by the employees average number of guaranteed hours per seven day period, multiplied by .. Agree Discuss Agree that, aligned with the status quo, when it is agreed that AL entitlement will accrue during unpaid leave beyond the first week, the Average Weekly Earnings divisor must be reduced by that number of weeks. Agree Discuss
The previous Minister agreed to change the accumulation process for sick leave to reflect the increase in sick leave entitlement from five to ten days . In July , the previous Government increased the minimum sick leave entitlement from five to ten days per year. In November , the previous Minister considered how to adjust the accumulation process to reflect the increased entitlement. He agreed that employees who were eligible from their first day of employment would be entitled to two days of sick leave on their first day of employment, an additional two days after one and two months of employment, and an additional four days after three months of employment, so the ten days of minimum sick leave entitlement was reached after three months (,,,).
We recommend simplifying the framework for paying AL as a regular part of an employees pay ( payas you go) . The Act provides that some employees may be paid for their AL as part of their regular pay (payasyougo (PAYG) ) instead of being provided with four weeks AL entitlement each year if: the employee is on a genuine fixed term agreement of less than months, or the employee works so intermittently or irregularly that it is impractical for the employer to provide them with four weeks AL. . In both of these situations: the employee must agree to it in their employment agreement and the AL pay must be no less than eight percent of their gross earnings in the pay period. . There are several areas of the current framework that are problematic in practice . Employers must exercise a high degree of discretion to make the assessment of whether an employee works on a basis that is so intermittent or irregular that it is impractical to provide four weeks AL as time off work . If PAYG is agreed, the framework for review ing its use during employment and stopping it if the criteria no longer apply is also not clear . The lack of clarity has contributed to non compliance. . To address these issues, in Cabinet accepted the Taskforces recommendations for improving clarity and certainty around when PAYG can be used and a clear set of parameters to support its use. These included a new four part test of an interment and irregular working pattern and a recurring week review period to determine if the definition continues to be met. The recommended approach lacks clarity and adds administrative burden . The recommended test lacked clarity in several areas and still required a high degree of judgement. Amongst other things, i t required an employer to make expectation based assessments a bout work patterns before the start of employment and to make a subjective assessment at each review about whether an employee had an underlying pattern of work in the previous weeks (defined as an assessment that time at work had not repeated in a manner possible to anticipate) . . The previous Minister agreed to a refined version of the criteria for using PAYG that made clear PAYG may be used from the start of employment if the employee does not have agreed hours of work in their employment agreement and there is no expect ation that it would need to stop after the first week review. An objective test for the week review was also agreed . The previous Minister also agreed to clarifications and additions to the recommended framework for the week review process to address ambiguities, gaps and improve workability. . The refined test and framework reflected tripartite agreement that the proposals aligned with the underlying intent of the recommendation, including the intent to increase the
fairness of the requirement to provide the full ten day minimum sick leave entitlement to employees who work less than five days a week. A number proposed a pro rata approach to sick leave for part time employees . You have received correspondence from a number of stakeholders who have raised similar concerns and suggestions . . To provide an opportunity to seek stakeholder feedback, we can include some options for addressing the issues raised in the exposure draft consultation on this mat ter if you wish.
Appendix Hypothetical examples of FPABS calculations (for illustrative purposes only and with judgement exercised as to how methodologies would apply) . Marcus has guaranteed hours per week but no agreed days or times of work. A normal shift is hours and might be during the day or at night. His agreed pay is for ordinary hours, but for overtime and weekend work. Currently, he receives an enduring higher duties allowance of per week as acting supervisor. He is also paid a night shift allowance of and receives an incentive payment of if he meets his targets for a shift. He receives a quarterly retention bonus of . Scenario . A public holiday falls on an otherwise working day (OWD) for Marcus. He is not rostered to work and so is entitled to a paid . hour day without work (calculated based on week average). a. Holidays Act RDP Judgement required, but arguably c annot be calculated as Marcus had no rostered hours. b. Holidays Act ADP . Calcu lated as daily rate based on average gross earnings (including enduring allowances). c. Taskforce ODLP . Calculated as hours at a rate of plus . hours overtime at a rate of . d. Taskforce hourly ADP . Calculated as average of gross earnings, excluding higher duties allowance which is enduring. e. Revised RDP . Calculated as hours at a rate of per hour plus . hours overtime at a rate of per hour (the same as ODLP) plus . hours at a rate of . per hour to refl ect average incentive payments based on a week average. Scenario . Marcus notifies his employer he is sick before he starts a rostered hour night shift. a. Holidays Act RDP . Calculated as hours at a rate of plus hours overtime at a rate of plus fixed night shift allowance of and likely incentive allowance of . b. Holidays Act ADP . Calculated as daily rate based on average gross earnings (including enduring allowances). c. Taskforce ODLP . Calculated as hours at a rate of plus hours overtime at a rate of plus a full night rate allowance of . d. Taskforce hourly ADP . Calculated as hours at a rate of the hourly average of gross earnings (.), excluding higher duties allowance which is enduring. e. Revised RDP . Calculated as hours at a rate of per hour plus hours overtime at a rate of per hour plus a full night rate allowance of (the same as ODLP). RDP also includes hours at a rate of . per hour to reflect average incentive payments based on a week average.
Note concerns were raised by stakeholders, particularly payroll practitioners, about the complexity of the calendar day methodology and the extent and cost of system changes it would require. Noted Note that, in response, the previous Minister agreed to remove the calendar day aspect of the methodology for annual leave and allowed parties to reach a formal agreement not to use the default calendar day methodology for FBAPS leave. Noted Note the removal of the calendar day methodology for FBAPS leave means that assigned hours would instead be based on an employees average hours across all days worked in the pay periods that started in the weeks before the one in which the leave is taken. Noted Note there will be some scenarios where employees are paid for fewer hours than they regularly work on a particular day as a result of this change in calculation but we believe these situations are limited and outweighed by the significant information collection, storage and processing costs of the calendar day methodology . Noted Agree to include in your Cabinet paper a proposal to remove the calendar day methodology for both annual leave and FBAPS leave . Agree Discuss Refinement of FBS (family violence, bereavement and sick) leave criteria Note Cabinet agreed that for eligible employees become entitled to FBS leave from their first day of employment (removing the current sixmonth waiting period) and that other employees would become eligible if they met prescribed tests after three or six months of employment. Noted Note that the current FBS eligibility criteria (worked an average of hours per week, and at least one hour in every week or hours in every month) does not align with entitlement from day one. Noted Note that, to support access to FBS entitlements from the first day of employment Cabinet also agreed to new eligibility tests and that the previous Minister agreed to clarifications to these, including a criteria for eligibility from the first day of employment that requires a judgement about whether the employer expects the employee to meet the hours test which will create uncertainty and potential for disagreement . Noted Note the removal of the expectations based assessment that occurs on the first day of employment will mean that only employees with agreed hours in their employment agreement are eligible to FBS leave from their first day of employment, and all other employees are subject to the eligibility tests after three months of employment. Noted Agree to include in your Cabinet paper a proposal to remove the expectations based assessment in the eligibility criteria for FBS leave. Agree Discuss Refinement of sick leave accumulation profile Note that Cabinet agreed that employees should be able to access their full entitlement of family violence and bereavement leave from day one but that sick leave entitlement should build up from day one so that an eligible employee can access the full allocation (five days at the time of decision) after four mont hs. Noted Note the previous Minister agreed to change the accumulation profile for sick leave to reflect the increase in sick leave entitlement from five to ten days so that, for employees eligible from day one, days would accumulate over the first three months of Noted
employment and other employees would get their full day entitlement when they become eligible after three months. Note you have the option of proceeding with the previous Ministers decision on the accumulation profile or considering one with a longer timeframe. Noted Agree to an accumulation profile for days sick leave: EITHER Option : Proceed with the previous Ministers decision; OR Option : Use a longer timeframe of six months: two days on day one, a further four days after three months and a further four days (i.e. the full entitlement) after six months. Agree
. The methodology would include the components of the current Holidays Act RDP but would provide a formula that makes it clear and possible to calculate the variable components (eg. commission and overtime) in every case. In situations where RDP is currently straightforward to calculate, the aim is that there would be little change from how FBAPS payments are currently calculated. The consolidated calculation is designed to be applicable to both waged and salaried workers. . The consolidated calculation would be comprised of four parts : A base rate for wages or salary plus fixed allowances plus an average of productivity or incentive payments received plus the cash value of board and lodgings. Base rate . Waged employees: Wages payable under the employees employment agreement at the time leave is taken for each of the hours it has been determined the employee would have worked on the relevant day if they had not been on FBAPS leave. If overtime or penal rates would have applied to any of those hours, then those rates must be used for the relevant hours. . Salaried employees: Employee must continue to be paid the salary payable under their employment agreement for the day as if they had not been on FBAPS leave. Employees must also receive any additional wages payable under their employment agreement for any additional hours the employee would have worked on the day in question that are not compensated by salary. Fixed allowances . Fixed allowances are an allowance of a non variable amount that an employer would always be required by the employees employment agreement to pay if t he employee had worked the hours it has been determined they will be on FBAPS leave. This includes allowances such as fortnightly and daily allowances, a shift allowance or events based allowance (such as a forklift driving allowance) that would always be payable under the employment agreement for those hours. . Fixed allowances would not have to be included if they are enduring (will continue to be paid in full despite the employee being on leave, for example a fortnightly higher duties allowance) Produc tivity or incentive based payments (including commission) . The value to be included would be calculated as follows: productivity and incentive based payments (including commission) received in pay periods that started in the weeks before the one in which the day of FBAPS leave is taken, divided by the number of hours the employee has worked or been on paid leave in those pay periods, multiplied by the hours it has been determined would have been worked on the relevant day. . Cabinet has agreed that, if the payments were earned over a period longer than weeks , or do not relate to a specific period of time , they do not have to be included (eg. an annual bonus or incentive payment or long service or sign on bonus). This would apply to the calculation. Cash value of Board and Lodgings . For the exposure draft , this would be determined according to the current definition in the Act. Stakeholders have noted that the current definition lacks clarity about how it applies in various circumstances and can lead to double dipping in cases where an employee continues to use board and lodgings during a period of leave. W e will include targeted questions about how it could be clarified and modernised in the exposure draft consultation document.
We think the revised RDP would result in fair outcomes for employees and employers . We think that the consolidated calculation will, overall, provide a fair outcome for both employers and employees. Appendix includes some initial, hypothetical scenarios we have developed to illustrate how the calculation will apply and how the payment outcomes might compare to the status quo and to the greater of methodology agreed by Cabinet in . . There is no solution that will produce a payment outcome that reflects precisely what an employee would have earned on a specific day in all situations. We have therefore aimed for a methodology to test in the exposure draft that we think will produce an outcome that reflects , to the greatest extent possible, what an employee would have expected to receive on any given day. In some cases, this might mean that payments are lower than they would currently be under the status quo (due to the possible inflation of payments above what would have been earned using the current ADP calculation in some cases), but not lower than what the employee would have reasonably expected to receive on the day had they worked. Part : Determining hours an employee would have worked on a day of leave Cabinet agreed to a new calendar day methodology to assign hours to a day of leave . In , Cabinet agreed to the new methodologies recommended by the Holidays Act Taskforce for FBAPS and annual leave (AL) to provide clarity about how to determin e the portion of their entitlement an employee is using for a period of time off work. A key part of these methodologies is determining the number of hours an employee would have worked on a day of leave. . For employees who do not have specified daily hours of work , Cabinet agreed that for both AL and FBAPS leave, the calculation of the number of hours an employee would have worked would be based on the average number of hours that an employee has actually worked on the same day of the week over a week period (the calendar day methodology ). Using this methodology, if an employee took leave on a Monday, their employer would calculate the total hours they worked on each Monday over the previous weeks, and divide the total hours by the number of Mondays they had worked in the previous weeks. Implementing the calendar day methodology would require extensive and costly system changes . The calendar day methodology has been one of the key areas of concern raised by stakeholders (particularly payroll providers) throughout the policy design process. These concerns c entre on the extent and cost of the payroll system changes that would be needed to implement the methodology, as payroll systems would be required to access and store data about daily hours of work and leave. Payroll providers have indicated that most payroll systems, particularly those used by small businesses, are currently only configured to store total hours for a pay period rather than a breakdown of daily hours of work and leave. . The methodology would also require employers to make numerous calculations when a period of leave is more than one calendar day, as a different calculation would need to be made for each calendar day of leave in a pay period. The previous Minister agreed to remove the calendar day aspect of the methodology for annual leave and provide greater flexibility for FBAPS leave . Before the General Election, the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety agreed to simplify the methodology for determining the hours an employee would have worked on the day of annual leave by removing the calendar day aspect of the methodology. In accordance
day methodology would therefore only be used if the employee notified their employer of their intent to take leave before the roster was created (for example, if the employee has a scheduled medical procedure). . We consider the benefits to employers of removing the calendar day aspect of the methodology for calculating the hours to assign to a day of FBAPS leave outweigh the disadvantages doing so may have for some employees in some scenarios. Part : FBS leave eligibility criteria and accumulation of sick leave entitlement Eligible employees currently become entitled to FBS leave after six months of employment . Currently under the Act, employees become entitled to family violence leave, bereavement leave and sick leave (FBS leave) if they meet the following eligibility criteria: a. they have completed six months of current continuous employment with the same employer, or b. they have worked for the employer for six months for an average of hours per week, and at least one hour in every week or hours in every month. . An employer may choose to allow an eligible employee to take FBS leave in advance before they have reached six months of employment, but there is no obligation for them to do so. Cabinet agreed for eligible employees to become entitled to FBS leave from their first day of employment . In , Cabinet accepted the Holidays Act Taskforces (the Taskforces ) recommendation that eligible employees begin to accumulate the minimum sick leave entitlement, and become entitled to the full minimum family violence leave and bereavement leave entitlements, from their first day of employment. At that time, the minimum sick leave entitlement was five days per year. The recommended accumulation process was for eligible employees to become entitled to one day of sick leave on their first day of employment, and an additional day aft er every month of employment until the five days of minimum sick leave entitlement was reached after four months (,,,,). . The intention behind the recommendation was to recognise that employees have little control over when they may need to take FBS leave and may therefore need to take it during their first six months of employment. It was also to recognise that not having access to FBS leave from the first day of employment may encourage employees to go to work sick, which raises health and safety concerns and is not in line with the key principle of the legislation to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees lives. Cabinet agreed to a new eligibility criteria for FBS leave . The current criteria in the Act to determine employees eligibility for FBS leave (worked for the employer for six months for an average of hours per week, and at least one hour in every week or hours in every month), is based on eligible employees becoming entitled to FBS leave after six months of employment. Such eligibility criteria do not align with the recommendation that eligible employees begin to accumulate FBS leave from their first day of employment.
. The Taskforce recommended a new criteria to determine employees eligibility for FBS leave from their first day of employment, which Cabinet accepted in . The new eligibility criteria included the following tests at various points of employment: a. First day of employment: Does the employee have agreed hours and an expectation of continuous employment (an expectation that the employee will not have any periods of unpaid leave that are longer than one week) b. After weeks of employment: Does the employee meet the hours test (has the employee worked on average or more hours per week during the last weeks) This test is to be repeated after each week period. c. After six months of continuous employment: all employees are eligible. The previous Minister also agreed to adjustments to make the new eligibility criteria for FBS leave clearer . The new criteria accepted by Cabinet to determine employees eligibility for FBS leave did not include sufficient details explaining how it should be applied by employers (continuous employment is only defined in the Act for the purpose of annual leave and applying that definition would have introduced significant complex to FBAPS) . In , the previous Minister agreed to a number of clarifications to the new eligibility criteria, to ensure the steps involved in the tests that are included in the new eligibility criteria are clear. The clarifications resulted in the following tests: a. First day of employment : Does the employee have agreed hours specified in employment agreement or an expectation of meeting the three or six month criteria (an assessment by the employer, based on any available employment information and conducted in good faith, of whether there is an expectation that the employee will meet the criteria) b. After three months of employment : Does the employee meet the hours test (has the employee worked on average ten or more hours per week during the last three months, including hours paid as any form of paid leave) c. After six months of employment : Does the employee meet the hours test or the ongoing work test (has the employee had no more than two continuous periods without work that are longer than four weeks over the last six months) If the employee does not meet the eligibility criteria after six months of employment, these two tests must be repeated after each subsequent three month period (or more frequently if the employer chooses to do so). The inclusion of an expectation judgement means the eligibility criteria remains complex . The test applied on the first day of employment involves a judgement about whether the employer expects the employee to meet the hours test. Such a judgement adds complexity and an opportunity for a difference of view between the employer and employee. . We recommend removing the expectations based assessment that occurs on the first day of employment. This will mean that only employees with agreed hours in their employment agreement are eligible to FBS leave from their first day of employment, and all other employees are subject to the eligibility tests after three months of employment. . This would reduce the number of employees who employers would need to provide FBS leave to from their first day of employment and simplify the new eligibility criteria.
. Other suggestions included: using an accrual system for sick leave remov ing time and a half for alternative ho lidays address ing the Mondayisation issue related to public holidays (i.e. those not scheduled to work on Mondays are di sadvantaged in relation to public holidays) increas ing the sick leave entitlement to day s per year but with a cap of days accumulated sick leave allow ing sick leave to be taken in part days . Other suggestions . In addition to proposals in the areas o utlined above, a range of other suggestions were provided . These include removing the parental leave override , providing approved software that employers could use or requiring payroll companies to gain some form of accreditation.
. Other suggestions included: using an accrual system for sick leave remov ing time and a half for alternative ho lidays address ing the Mondayisation issue related to public holidays (i.e. those not scheduled to work on Mondays are di sadvantaged in relation to public holidays) increas ing the sick leave entitlement to day s per year but with a cap of days accumulated sick leave allow ing sick leave to be taken in part days . Other suggestions . In addition to proposals in the areas o utlined above, a range of other suggestions were provided . These include removing the parental leave override , providing approved software that employers could use or requiring payroll companies to gain some form of accreditation. shrvakdix
https:www.legislation.govt.nzactpubliclatestwhole.html The Ministry of Justice stopped processing incoming and outgoing cheques after May : https:www.justice.govt.nzaboutnews andmedianewsthe ministry isphasing outpayment bycheque (excluding GST) Auditors register Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee) Change in charge change Registrationrenewal of a licence . . . . . Annual confirmation . . . . .
. The Taskforce also recommended a significant change to ho w annual holidays payments are calculated for employees returning from parental leave.
. The proposals mean that, from the second year of employment onwards , an employee must be provided the ability to take four weeks off work at an agreed time during each year (unless they took AL in advance the year before or had unpaid leave and did not accrue four weeks). They maintain the flexibility for an employer to refuse a n employees request to take AL on spec ific dates if they have sound business reasons. This maintains an employers ability to negotiate with an employee about when during a year requested leave will be taken so that they can also manage their business operations. . The proposed adjust ment to the rule that an employer can require an employee to take accrued AL in excess of four weeks is more restrictive than the status quo (which applies to all AL entitlement that has arisen after months of continuous employment ). It is the simplest option however and we think it likely reflects common practice and understanding for accrual based systems in use. The rules for cashing up AL entitlement would require adjustments to reconcile them with weeks based accrual . Under the Act an employee may reques t (unless the employer has a policy stating otherwise) to cash up (exchange for payment) up to one week of their AL entitlement in each entitlement year (the months of continuous employment beginning on the on which the employee most recently became entitled to A L). . An adjustment is required to reconcile the rules for the period within which AL entitlement can be cashed up with a weeks based accrual framework. We recommend that your May Cabinet paper seek s agreement to the following: After the completion of the first months of employment an employee may request to cash up (exchange for payment) up to one week of accrued AL entitlement in each subsequent month period. All other supporting provisions related to c ashing up AL would remain unchanged. . This proposal maintains a waiting period to cash up a week of AL entitlement and a limit to the time period for doing so but changes the period from months continuous employment to months . It also retains the existing policy intent that only one week of
nature of work in health, and to the large number of complex allowances payable under health collective agreements.
XX; XX; XX to XX; XX; XX
Section : Options de veloped and tested . The Taskforce developed and tested a number of options for changes to the way l eave entitlements are treated under the current Act . An initial set of options for change was developed . The Taskforce developed the following five high level options for change: Option One used an entitlement based system with a proposed working arrangements test to define working patterns Option Two used an entitlement based system with additional prescription to determine leave entitlements for non standa rd working patterns Options Three, Four and Five were all based on an accrual system with variations in the units that accrued: o In Option Three leave accrued on paid hours worked o In Option Four leave accrued on agreed hours o In Op tion Five leave accrued in weeks towards a four week fixed entitlement . which were then tested with a specialist payroll advisor . Hudson Taylor, a professional services company with payroll expertise, was contracted by the Taskforce to provide independent advice to the Taskforce on the implications that the options would have if they were implemented across New Zealand. A key part of this testing was to ensure that options were tested against the wide range of working arrangements and employer types that can be found across the New Z ealand economy. . Hudson Taylor was initially contracted to undertake two stages of testing: Stage One a conceptual peer review to assess whether the options developed by the Taskforce were sound from a payroll systems perspective (i.e. capable of being i mplemented in payroll systems in New Zealand) . Stage Two detailed testing of the options developed by the Taskforce against anonymised payroll data to understand the impact these would have on different kinds of working arrangements present in the New Ze aland economy. . Following the Stage Two testing the options were refined and a pre ferred option emerged. . A final round of testing (Stage Three) was then undertaken by Hudson Taylor on the preferred option and other proposals developed by the Taskforce. Thes e other proposals included a prescriptive m ethodology for determining an O therwise Working Day and a revised definition of gross earnings to be used for leave payment calculations.
. Currently, the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act overrides the payment for annual holidays provisions in the Holidays Act, and states that for any annual holidays an employee becomes entitled to within months of beginning a period of parental leave, they will only be paid at the rate of their average weekly earnings over the last months.
. During the issue identification phase of the Holidays Act Review
. The working group identified some areas of the Taskforces recommendations that would benefit from greater clarity, some areas where there were gaps, and some where there were opportunities for simplification and to enhance their workability and implementation readiness for payroll systems. . MBIE also continued to engage with nominated representatives of the NZCTU and BusinessNZ during the policy design process on the development of solutions to the issues identified, and the tripartite consensus has been mainta ined . . The previous Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety agreed to a number of refinements, adjustments and additions to the recommendations. In accordance with the
New Zealand and overseas companies (excluding GST) Register and Service Type Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee levy) Change in charge Disclose register Disclose: overseas offers Offer under Asia region funds passport (per fund) . . . . . Financial Service Providers register Registration . . . . (. ) Annual renewal . . . . Incorporated Societies register Registration . . . . . (.) Annual return . . . . . Restoration . . . . . Amalgamation . . . . Conversion to be an incorporated society . . . . . Limited Partnerships register Registration (New Zealand a nd overseas) . . . . . . Annual return (New Zealand and overseas) . . . Building Societies, Friendly Societies and Credit Unions registers Registration . . . . . (.) Annual return . . . . . . Annual return Friendly society branch . . . . . . Registration of an Association of credit unions under section () of the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions Act . . . . . (.) Credit Unions register For filing, under section ()(b) the Act, where a request to the Registrar is made to remove the credit union from the register. . . . For filing, under section C () of the Act, a copy of a special resolution passed for the purpose of amalgamation or transfer of engagements. . . . CO levy ., NZBN levy .
Section : How the Taskforce made its decisions . The Taskforce cons idered the options it developed and tested against a range of criteria set out in the Terms of Reference. These criteria set out that t he Taskforces recommendations were expected to: continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act provid e clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements be simpler than the current Act in relation to the provision of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave be readily implementable in a payr oll system minimise compliance costs for employers minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees ensure the balance of decision making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated be readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future aim to protect overall entitlements for employees. . While the Taskforce considered all of these factors in its decision making , it paid particular attention to the aims of providing clarity and certainty for employers and employees while aiming to protect overall entitlements for employees and ensuring that the recommendations could be implemented in the wide range of working arrange ments in place across the New Zealand economy. . Individual Taskforce members had a range of views about particular issues considered by the Taskforce. On some issues the Taskforces final recommendations may not reflect the personal views of individual mem bers but the Taskforce worked hard to ensure it could deliver a set of consensus recommendations without any minority views. The Taskforce considered a range of options before selecting its preferred system . As noted earlier in the report, the Taskforce considered a range of options in the course of the review. One of the options supported in a number of submissions received by the Taskforce was an accrual model based on hours worked. Under this type of model , all employees would earn annual holidays in hours at a set percentage rate (. of every hour worked would give employees the equivalent of four weeks leave per year). The employees leave balance would accrue in hours as they worked and any annual holidays taken would be calculated in hours. Emplo yees would receive leave based on their arrangements at the time they earnt the hours (rather than at the time of taking leave). . This type of accrual system was supported by some stakeholders and opposed by others. The testing of the accrual options iden tified that such a system would leave some people worse off. As a result, the Taskforce did not proceed with further development of an hours based accrual system. . All members agree that the recommendations in this report provide a solution that meets the objectives of the review. Consensus would not have been achievable on any other approach . . A weekly entitlement system was selected by the Taskforce as its preferred option. The Taskforce considered that this option struck a good balance between retaining certain aspects of the current Act such as the existing units of entitlement while adding the
Section : How the Taskforce made its decisions . The Taskforce cons idered the options it developed and tested against a range of criteria set out in the Terms of Reference. These criteria set out that t he Taskforces recommendations were expected to: continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act provid e clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements be simpler than the current Act in relation to the provision of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave be readily implementable in a payr oll system minimise compliance costs for employers minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees ensure the balance of decision making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated be readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future aim to protect overall entitlements for employees. . While the Taskforce considered all of these factors in its decision making , it paid particular attention to the aims of providing clarity and certainty for employers and employees while aiming to protect overall entitlements for employees and ensuring that the recommendations could be implemented in the wide range of working arrange ments in place across the New Zealand economy. . Individual Taskforce members had a range of views about particular issues considered by the Taskforce. On some issues the Taskforces final recommendations may not reflect the personal views of individual mem bers but the Taskforce worked hard to ensure it could deliver a set of consensus recommendations without any minority views. The Taskforce considered a range of options before selecting its preferred system . As noted earlier in the report, the Taskforce considered a range of options in the course of the review. One of the options supported in a number of submissions received by the Taskforce was an accrual model based on hours worked. Under this type of model , all employees would earn annual holidays in hours at a set percentage rate (. of every hour worked would give employees the equivalent of four weeks leave per year). The employees leave balance would accrue in hours as they worked and any annual holidays taken would be calculated in hours. Emplo yees would receive leave based on their arrangements at the time they earnt the hours (rather than at the time of taking leave). . This type of accrual system was supported by some stakeholders and opposed by others. The testing of the accrual options iden tified that such a system would leave some people worse off. As a result, the Taskforce did not proceed with further development of an hours based accrual system. . All members agree that the recommendations in this report provide a solution that meets the objectives of the review. Consensus would not have been achievable on any other approach . . A weekly entitlement system was selected by the Taskforce as its preferred option. The Taskforce considered that this option struck a good balance between retaining certain aspects of the current Act such as the existing units of entitlement while adding the shrvakdix
Section : Proposed fees and total charges for all registers This section sets out the proposed fees given the level of cost to be recovered after levy revenue has been applied to each register. The tables within each subsection show what the total charge for specific register services would be, made up of proposed fees and applicable proposed levies . Questions have been included, and y our feedback is sought for any or all registers.
. Because the employees average weekly earnings (from their employer) during parental leave will usually be , and parental leave periods can be up to weeks long, this means that some employees can take their leave but are entitled to be paid
. In a standard restructuring situation (involving types of employees not specified in Schedule A of the Employment Relations Act
. Instead, to provide some flexibility to employers, the Minister agreed to retain the calendar day methodology as the default methodology for calculating the hours that would have been worked on a day of FBAPS leave, but provided the option for an employment agreement to specify that the employer will use the employees average hours across all days worked. . This means that, while the methodology for calculating the hours that would have been worked on
. Table below provides an overview of each key part of the Act. Table : Key parts of the Holidays Act Part Key sections Part Preliminary provisions The commencement, purpose and overview of the Act, as well as how it is to be interpreted and applied Key definitions, including ordinary weekly pay, relevant daily pay and average daily pay Guidance about how to determine what would otherwise be a working day Part Holid ay and leave entitlements Entitlement to, and payment for, annual holidays Calculations and obligations regarding holiday pay Provisions relating to c losedown periods Relationship between annual holidays and other entitlements (e.g. sick leave, bereavement leave) Entitlement to , and payment for , public ho lidays Transferring public holidays and alternative holidays Relationship between public holidays and other entitlements (e.g. sick leave, bereavement leave) Entitlement to , and payment for , sick leave and bereavement leave Part Enforcement and other matters Employer and employee obligations under the Act Who can enforce the Act and penalties for non
February shrvakdix
necessary level of prescription to give employers and employees the certainty that they need. . Retaining the annual holidays entitlement in weeks ha s the benefit of automatically adjusting to an employees changed circumstances . If an employee increases or decreases their hours then as long as their annual leave entitlement is held in weeks, this entitlement will automatically adjust to the changed hours (e.g. if an employee increases their hours from to hours per week, then one weeks annual holiday entitlement automatically becomes worth hours rather than hours). . This option was selected by the Taskforce as its preferred option and refined through further testing . Further details about the component parts of the recommended option are included in the next section. and carried out some targeted consultation with the payroll industry . In September the Taskforce consulted with representatives fro m the payroll industry on its draft recommendations that were expected to have the most significant impact on payroll systems . The feedback contained a range of views with some respondents expressing support for some proposals but noting concerns with othe r proposals. . The Taskforce made changes to its proposals in light of the responses r eceived. For example, following feedback about the complexity that would be involved in the proposal to apportion commission or incentive payments across pay periods, the Taskforce decided not to progress with this proposal. . A number of specific technical points were also raised in the feedback which the Taskforce acknowledges will need to be addressed in the detailed design phase that will be required before the pr oposed ch anges are implemented .
of the New Zealand adult population has participated in a cycle tourism activity in the past year.
. Further information relating to the Act can be found at the following : The Act itself can be found at: http:www.legislation.govt.nzactpubliclatestDLM.html The Employment New Zealand website: https:www.employment.govt.nzleave andholidays Holidays Act guidance: https:www.employment.govt.nzassetsUploadsHolidays ActGuidance onannualholidaysSepv.pdf The Employment Law Database, which contains Holidays Actrelated determinations from the Employment Relations Authority: http:apps.employment.govt.nzdeterminations Holidays Actrelated judgments made by the Employment Court of New Zealand: https:www.employmentcourt.govt.nzjudgments
. The parental leave override has been criticised as discriminating against parents who take time off to care for their young children, and the issue has a disproportionate impact on women.
Section : Final recommendations . This section outlines the final recommendations of the Taskforce across the following sections: process for leave calculations and payments annual holidays entitlements annual holidays payments FBAPS leave entitlements other proposed changes . . A comparison of the main holiday and leave entitlements under the Holidays Act and the Taskforces prop osals can be found in Annex . Process for leave calculations and payments Issue Calculating l eave payments . One of the main issue s with the current Act is the number of calculations and lack of clarity about how to calculate leave payments for the various forms of leave. . The Taskforce has discussed a range of options for addressing this by provi ding greater clarity and prescription about the process for determining the amount of leave to be used and the payments for any period of leave. . The Taskforce considered a single process for calculating leave payments for all forms of paid leave. However, it ultimately concluded that separate methodologies should be retained for calculating annual leave and FBAPS leave. . Annual leave entitlements are based on average weekly earnings and annual leave payments take account of work carried out over the previou s months. There is an expectation that the whole of the annual leave entitlement will be used to ensure that employees have a minimum of four weeks paid leave from work each year. . In contrast there is no expectation that an employee should use all of th eir FBAPS entitlement (with the exception of the public and alternative holidays leave). FBAPS leave exists to provide employees with paid leave for particular events (e.g. a public holiday, an episode of sickness or the death of a close relative). Payment s for FBAPS leave should, to the greatest extent possible, reflect what the employee would have earnt if they had worked on the specific day in question. . The Taskforce considered, therefore, that the different policy rationales for the different forms of leave was best accommodated in a system where each form of leave continued to be treated separately, albeit with greater prescription about the specific methodologies to be followed . . The methodologies provide clear rules to be followed at each step of the process to provide the certainty that is missing from the current Act (for example, how to determine a week for an employee if this is not set out in an employment agreement or work roster). The process es to be followed for FBAPS and annual leave are set o ut in the diagram on page . . This approach is intended to provide a clear set of rules that employers can use when processing requests for each form of leave. The specific rules that would apply to each step are covered in the following sections. Annual leave payments . The approach proposed by the Taskforce includes a new concept of Ordin ary Leave Pay (OLP). OLP is a new calculation intended to replace the existing Relevant Daily Pay and
Section : Final recommendations . This section outlines the final recommendations of the Taskforce across the following sections: process for leave calculations and payments annual holidays entitlements annual holidays payments FBAPS leave entitlements other proposed changes . . A comparison of the main holiday and leave entitlements under the Holidays Act and the Taskforces prop osals can be found in Annex . Process for leave calculations and payments Issue Calculating l eave payments . One of the main issue s with the current Act is the number of calculations and lack of clarity about how to calculate leave payments for the various forms of leave. . The Taskforce has discussed a range of options for addressing this by provi ding greater clarity and prescription about the process for determining the amount of leave to be used and the payments for any period of leave. . The Taskforce considered a single process for calculating leave payments for all forms of paid leave. However, it ultimately concluded that separate methodologies should be retained for calculating annual leave and FBAPS leave. . Annual leave entitlements are based on average weekly earnings and annual leave payments take account of work carried out over the previou s months. There is an expectation that the whole of the annual leave entitlement will be used to ensure that employees have a minimum of four weeks paid leave from work each year. . In contrast there is no expectation that an employee should use all of th eir FBAPS entitlement (with the exception of the public and alternative holidays leave). FBAPS leave exists to provide employees with paid leave for particular events (e.g. a public holiday, an episode of sickness or the death of a close relative). Payment s for FBAPS leave should, to the greatest extent possible, reflect what the employee would have earnt if they had worked on the specific day in question. . The Taskforce considered, therefore, that the different policy rationales for the different forms of leave was best accommodated in a system where each form of leave continued to be treated separately, albeit with greater prescription about the specific methodologies to be followed . . The methodologies provide clear rules to be followed at each step of the process to provide the certainty that is missing from the current Act (for example, how to determine a week for an employee if this is not set out in an employment agreement or work roster). The process es to be followed for FBAPS and annual leave are set o ut in the diagram on page . . This approach is intended to provide a clear set of rules that employers can use when processing requests for each form of leave. The specific rules that would apply to each step are covered in the following sections. Annual leave payments . The approach proposed by the Taskforce includes a new concept of Ordin ary Leave Pay (OLP). OLP is a new calculation intended to replace the existing Relevant Daily Pay and shrvakdix
former quota refugees who arrived in New Zealand in were interviewed for the research. Around half of those interviewed were men () and half were women () and the top countries of origin were Bhutan (), Syria () and Colombia (). Six participants were aged to , were aged to , and five were aged and over.
, potential fires still in New Zealanders homes
. The Taskforce recommended removing the parental leave override, which would mean that, for parents returning from parental leave, any annual holidays they became entitled to while on parental leave (or soon after returning to work) would be paid at the sam e rate as other annual holidays.
. the high altitude provisions will be drafted as a separate part of the Bill so that they operate as a set of standalone requirements and definitions. This also means that, if necessary, they can be decoupled from the main outer space provisions without impacting on the integrity of those parts of the Bill. I also propose that the title of the new Act be amended from the Space Activities Act to the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act. yrupqmdi s ()(f)(iv) s ()(h), s ()(j) s ()(h), s ()(j) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED Defining the lower limit at which the high altitude regime will apply .There are three main options for defining the limit at which the high altitude regime will apply. The following table lists the options and the advantages and disadvantages associated with them: Option Comment . Reference to flight level (about km above ground)This is the limit of New Zealands flight information region. The advantage of using this limit is that it effectively represents the upper limit of airspace likely to be subject to air traffic control and used by ordinary civil aircraft providing air services. . Reference to an altitude of km above groundThis is a height at which some scientists believe near space begins. Its disadvantage is that it may appear arbitrary. . Reference to flight level (about km above ground)This is the current altitude that is the limit of controlled airspace in New Zealand. As the limits of controlled airspace are made by a designation under the CA Act, this option also has a practical connection with the civil aviation regime which is helpful given the need to harmonise certain criteria for authorising activities under the two regimes. .The group of officials referred to in paragraph recommend that the appropriate limit at which the high altitude regime will apply should be set with reference to flight level (option above). This option strikes a balance between: the risks of setting the limit too high and thereby failing to regulate activities occurring between this limit and the lower options; the risks of setting the limit too low and thereby inadvertently bringing within the scope of the regulatory regime a whole lot of activity that we do not want to capture. It is possible that flight level will capture aircraft such as weather balloons which are not intended to be in scope. However, this can be dealt with by including a power for the responsible Minister to make regulations that exempt or exclude, as may be appropriate, specified vehicles or aircraft or classes of vehicles or aircraft which undertake certain activities that are not intended to be subject to the high altitude regulatory regime, and are otherwise regulated as appropriate under civil aviation law; and the need to ensure an efficient alignment between the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act and the CA Act, and to reduce any uncertainty and complexity in relation to the interface between the two regimes. . yrupqmdi s (a) s (a) s (a) s ()(h), s ()(j) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED .The current review of the CA Act will provide a further opportunity to ensure consistency and alignment of the regulatory regimes in the (new) Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act and the (revised) CA Act in relation to high altitude activities. There will also be a review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act three years after its enactment, which will provide a further opportunity to ensure harmonisation between the two regulatory regimes. National security assessment process .The domestic regulation of space and high altitude activities is new for New Zealand, and requires consideration of how best to manage national security risks that may arise from these activities. .In December , Cabinet agreed that the responsible Minister must not grant a licence if: the grant of a licence would be inconsistent with New Zealands international obligations; or the Minister in Charge of the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service (NZSIS) certifies that the grant of a licence would pose an undue risk to national security; or the responsible Minister is not satisfied the applicant is a fit and proper person; or the grant of a licence would be contrary to New Zealands national interests (EGI Min refers). .Under New Zealand law, national security issues are managed in different ways ranging from The Telecommunications Interception Capability and Security Act where a national security Minister has powers of direction to address national security issues to the regimes in Passports and Immigration law where the decision on national security risk is left to the responsible Minister. .The Minister in Charge of the NZSIS and Responsible for the GCSB and I would like to consider a new model for the proposed Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act. This is described below. Proposed national security regime as it would apply to the space regime The consultation process .When considering an application for, renewal of, or change to a space licence or permit (or a high altitude licence), the Minister responsible for the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act (the responsible Minister) will receive information and advice from the Minister in Charge of the NZSIS andor the Minister Responsible for the GCSB about any actual and A space licence is required for the launch into space of one or more launch vehicles of a specified type. A space permit is required for the launch into space or one or more payloads of a specified type. A high altitude licence is required for the launch of one or more vehicles of a specified type capable of reaching high altitude , whether or not carrying a payload. yrupqmdi s ()(h), s ()(j) s ()(f)(iv) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED potential national security risks, whether those risks can be mitigated, and (if so) the mitigation measures recommended. .The consultation process may conclude that there are no significant national security risks from the proposed application, or that any risks identified can be adequately mitigated through changes to the proposed activity or through imposing conditions on it. The responsible Minister may impose conditions on a space licence, space permit, or high altitude licence that he or she considers necessary and desirable to protect national security. When considering whether to impose a discretionary condition, the responsible Minister must consult with the Minister in Charge of the NZSIS and the Minister Responsible for the GCSB. .It is also proposed that the consultation process apply when: the responsible Minister considers whether an authorisation granted in a country other than New Zealand be treated as a space licence or permit; for the renewal of a space licence or permit; or for changes to a licensee or permit holder. The consultation process will also apply to the granting, renewal, variation, revocation or suspension of a high altitude licence. The certification process .The consultation process will be sufficient to manage most national security risks. However, in the event that either the Minister in Charge of the NZSIS and Responsible for the GCSB and the Minister responsible for the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act consider that there is a significant security risk and that the risks are not sufficiently mitigated, either Minister can refer the application to a specified group of Ministers (including the Prime Minister, the Minister in Charge of the NZSIS, the Minister Responsible for the GCSB, the Minister responsible for the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act, the Minister of Defence, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, and any other Minister specified by the Prime Minister). .The Minister in Charge of the NZSIS and Responsible for the GCSB can issue a certificate vetoing the activity, with the agreement of the specified group of Ministers. .Where a certificate is issued, the responsible Minister will decline the licence or permit accordingly. .In all cases, a national security risk assessment will be undertaken. However, the administrative arrangements that sit behind the decision on the national security certificate will not be included in the legislation as the level of detail would unnecessarily complicate the legislation. .The certification process will not limit the responsible Ministers authority to consider an application for, a renewal of, or a change to a licence for a space or high altitude activity. yrupqmdi s (a) s (a) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED Dealing with national security issues in court proceedings Offences and penalties under the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act .In December, Cabinet agreed that there should be offences necessary to support the Space Activities Bill with penalties that apply to comparable conduct under existing criminal law. This paper seeks Cabinet approval to detailed offence and penalty provisions to include in the Bill. The Ministry of Justice has been consulted and their advice has been incorporated into these proposals. yrupqmdi s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv), s ()(g)(i) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED Licensing offences .The nearest domestic analogue for the licencing aspects of the regime is the penalty regime in the CA Act, although it is arguable that there is the potential for greater harm arising from licensing offences against the space regime (including public safety, national security, international relations, and international liability for damage). .A matter of importance in relation to very serious licencing offences in the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill is that there is power to arrest offenders and, if necessary, to extradite them back to New Zealand from another country. This requires these types of offences to be imprisonable. .The CA Act provides for an additional financial penalty of three times the value of any commercial gain resulting from a licencing offence where the offence is committed for commercial gain. I propose adopting the same approach under this regime. .I propose that the following licensing offences and penalties be adopted: a. Launching or procuring the launch of a space object without a permit. This offence will be punishable by: in the case of an individual, a term of imprisonment not exceeding one year, or a fine not exceeding ,, or both; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding ,; b. Intentionally failing to comply with conditions of a permit. This offence will be punishable by: in the case of an individual, a term of imprisonment not exceeding one year, or a fine not exceeding ,, or both; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding ,; c. Failing to comply with a licence or permit condition. This offence will be punishable by: in the case of an individual, a fine not exceeding ,; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding ,. d. Penalty for commercial gain or Crown international law liability. I propose an additional penalty of three times the amount of any commercial gain where the offence is committed for commercial gain. This additional penalty is modelled on s of the CA Act and seems appropriate given the wellfinanced nature of the space industry. e. There will also be offences for operating a high altitude vehicle without a permit, failing to comply with high altitude permit conditions, and making false and misleading statements in a permit application. These will attract the same penalties as the licencing offences under the space regime. Interference (with a space object) offences .The offences relating to interference with space objects are necessary to implement our international obligations under the TSA with the US and are akin to the trade secrets offence in the Crimes Act . This offence is punishable by a term of imprisonment not exceeding five years. The TSA is cast in absolute terms, which means that there will need to be a strict liability offence punishable by a fine. However it is proposed that there also be more serious offences punishable by five years imprisonment for interference with space objects with intent to obtain a trade secret. .The TSA also requires us to have offences relating to security and enhanced security areas, including offences relating to failing to display identity badges. Of these, the most serious relates to being found in a security area and requested by an enforcement officer to leave yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED but refusing to do so. This is akin to a trespass offence and we propose that it be penalised accordingly. .I propose the following interference offences and penalties: a. Interfering with a launch vehicle or payload with intent to obtain a trade secret . This offence will be punishable in the case of an individual with a term of imprisonment not exceeding five years, or a fine not exceeding ,, or both; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding ,; b. Interfering with a space object or payload without a lawful excuse . This offence will be punishable by a fine not exceeding , in the case of an individual; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding ,. These lower penalties reflect the less culpable nature of this offence compared to the offence in e) above; c. Refusing to state name, address, authority to be in security area, or refusal to leave a security area after an enforcement officer asks . This offence will be punishable by: in the case of an individual, a term of imprisonment not exceeding three months andor a fine not exceeding ,, or both; or for minor offending, an infringement offence with a fine not exceeding ,. d. Failure to maintain a system for ensuring persons in a secure area wear identity cards. This offence will be punishable by a fine not exceeding , in the case of an individual; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding ,. False or misleading information .I propose the following offences and penalties in relation to supplying false and misleading information: a. False and misleading information in a licence application . This offence will be punishable by a fine not exceeding , in the case of an individual; and in the case of a body corporate a fine not exceeding ,; or for minor offending where someone unintentionally provides false or misleading information in a final license application, there could be an infringement offence not exceeding ,. b. Providing false or misleading information to an enforcement officer. This offence will be punishable by: in the case of an individual a fine not exceeding ,; and in the case of a body corporate a fine not exceeding ,; or for minor offending where someone unintentionally provides false or misleading information there could be an infringement offence of ,. Proposal that the review of the Act be a legislative requirement .Cabinet has agreed that there will be a review of the Act three years after its enactment. I propose that the review should be a legislative requirement as this will create certainty to all interested parties that the review will be undertaken and also provide assurance that, while the legislation has some novel elements, there is a clear process to review and adjust these requirements as needed. Authorisation for a group of Ministers to take technical decisions during the final drafting stages yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED .There may be a number of additional second order policy decisions that are required in order to finalise the legislation so that it can be introduced into the House in August. .For this reason, I wish to retain the Cabinet authority given to the following group of Ministers (the Minister for Economic Development, the Minister of Defence, the Minister in Charge of the NZSIS and Responsible for the GCSB, and the Minister of Transport) to take any second order policy decisions required to finalise the legislation before it is introduced into the House. I propose to amend this list to also include the Minister of Foreign Affairs. Consultation .The following government agencies have been consulted: the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Ministry of Transport, the New Zealand Defence Force, the Ministry of Defence, the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service, the Government Communications Security Bureau, the Ministry of Justice, The Treasury, and the New Zealand Police. The Department of Land Information New Zealand has been consulted on the high altitude proposals in the paper. Financial Implications .The setup costs associated with developing the space and high altitude activities regime are being absorbed by agencies until the new legislation is enacted. The law will establish regulations to enable the costs of regulatory work (e.g. the granting of licences and permits, monitoring and enforcement) to be met by the parties that benefit from the regulatory activity. An implementation work stream has been established by MBIE that will identify the resourcing implications associated with the new space policy and regulatory functions, and any ongoing budget implications will be addressed in the Budget. Human Rights .MBIE will work with the Ministry of Justice during the drafting process to address any Bill of Rights issues that arise. Legislative Implications .The Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill has a category on the legislative programme. The Bill will be presented to the Cabinet Legislation Committee in August following the completion of the parliamentary treaty examination process of the Technology Safeguards Agreement Treaty. .I propose to release a disclosure draft of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill for targeted consultation. In the first instance I propose to make it available to the Foreign Affairs, Trade and Defence Select Committee for its information to assist with their consideration of the Technology Safeguards Agreement (TSA) Treaty. I consider that the Bill will provide important context for how the New Zealand proposes to facilitate the development of a safe, secure and responsible space industry of which the TSA is but one part. yrupqmdi s ( )(f) (iv) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED Regulatory Impact Analysis .When the original Cabinet decisions on the development of a regulatory regime for commercial space launches from New Zealand were sought, a Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS) was prepared. This Cabinet paper extends the space regime to include certain high altitude activities and the RIS has been amended accordingly to reflect this, and is attached to the Cabinet paper. The inclusion of certain high altitude activities within the space regime does not significantly change the costs and benefits associated with the development of a domestic regulatory regime for space activities. Publicity .I intend to issue a public announcement that the Government is developing a comprehensive and robust regulatory regime to enable commercial space launches and the operation of payloads to take place from New Zealand and to regulate certain high altitude activities. I am considering making the announcement after Cabinet has considered the proposed TSA text, which is planned to take place on May. Recommendations The Minister for Economic Development recommends that the Committee: .Note that a small number of policy issues have arisen during the development of a domestic regulatory regime for commercial space launches and the operation of payloads from New Zealand, including: a. a proposal to include certain high altitude (near space) activities within the scope of the space regulatory regime; b. the decisionmaking process for the issue of a national security certificate (which has the effect of a veto on the proposed activity); c. the offences and penalties regime under the new Act; and d. confirmation that the review of the new Act after three years will be a legislative requirement. High altitude (near space) regime .Note that developments in technology mean that high altitude vehicles operating in near space are being designed to provide a range of functions similar to satellites including earth observation, surveillance, communications, maritime control and internet connectivity; .Agree that New Zealand needs to be well positioned to control future activities carried out at high altitudes that originate from New Zealands territory; .Agree that a high altitude activities regime be included as a separate part in the proposed Outer Space Activities Bill to control activities carried out at high altitudes that originate from New Zealand, and specifically that: yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED a. Payloads that New Zealand authorities deem to be capable of being operated at very high altitudes are within the scope of the proposed space regime; and b. High altitude vehicles (i.e. the carrier systems that New Zealand authorities deem to be capable of taking payloads up into the high altitude region) are also within the scope of the proposed legislation, but (if they are aircraft) the safety aspects of their operation will still be addressed through established Civil Aviation Authority procedures; . Agree that the lower limit at which the high altitude regime will apply to certain vehicles that originate from New Zealand will be set with reference to flight level (this is currently the altitude that is the limit of controlled airspace in New Zealand and is about kms above ground); . Agree that the responsible Minister will have the ability to make regulations that exempt or exclude (as may be appropriate) specified vehicles or aircraft or classes of vehicles or aircraft which undertake certain activities that are not intended to be subject to the high altitude regulatory regime and are otherwise regulated as appropriate under aviation legislation and regulations; . Agree that the title of the proposed legislation be the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act; National security considerations . Note that a strong and credible national security regime is a precondition for space launches to take place from New Zealand; . Note that, in December , Cabinet agreed that the responsible Minister must not grant a licence if: a. the grant of a licence would be inconsistent with New Zealands international obligations; or b. the Minister in Charge of the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service (NZSIS) certifies that the grant of a licence would pose an undue risk to national security; or c. the responsible Minister is not satisfied that the applicant is a fit and proper person; or d. the grant of a licence would be contrary to New Zealands national interests; . Agree (subject to legislative drafting) to a model for managing national security considerations comprising the following elements to be applied in the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act: yrupqmdi s (a), s ()(h), s ()(j) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED a. The national security Minister(s) would be consulted as part of the decision making process on the proposed activity. b. The nature and significance of the risk and extent to which it can be mitigated would be taken into account in the decisionmaking process (both Ministers can agree on the mitigations that should be imposed). c. In the event that either Minister believes a launch should not proceed, the matter is referred to the specified group of Ministers designated by the Prime Minister. d. The Minister in Charge of the NZSIS and Responsible for the GCSB can issue a certificate vetoing the activity, with the agreement of the specified group of Ministers. Offences and penalties . Agree that the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act will provide for the following offences and penalties based on similar domestic analogues: a. Launching or procuring the launch of a space object without a permit. This offence will be punishable by: in the case of an individual, a term of imprisonment not exceeding one year, or a fine not exceeding ,, or both; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding ,; b. Intentionally failing to comply with conditions of a permit. This offence will be punishable by: in the case of an individual, a term of imprisonment not exceeding one year, or a fine not exceeding ,, or both; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding ,; c. Failing to comply with a licence or permit condition. This offence will be punishable by: in the case of an individual, a fine not exceeding ,; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding ,; d. Penalty for commercial gain or Crown international law liability of three times the amount of any commercial gain where the offence is committed for commercial gain; e. There will also be offences for operating a high altitude vehicle without a permit, failing to comply with high altitude permit conditions, and providing false and misleading statements in a permit application. These will attract the same penalties as the licencing offences under the space regime; yrupqmdi s ()(f)(iv) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED f. Interfering with a launch vehicle or payload with intent to obtain a trade secret. This offence will be punishable in the case of an individual with a term of imprisonment not exceeding five years, or a fine not exceeding ,, or both; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding ,; g. Interfering with a space object or payload without a lawful excuse. This offence will be punishable by a fine not exceeding , in the case of an individual; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding ,; h. Refusing to state name, address, authority to be in security area, or refusal to leave a security area after an enforcement officer asks. This offence will be punishable by: in the case of an individual, a term of imprisonment not exceeding three months andor a fine not exceeding ,, or both; or for minor offending, an infringement offence with a fine not exceeding ,; i. Failure to maintain a system for ensuring persons in a secure area wear identity cards. This offence will be punishable by a fine not exceeding , in the case of an individual; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding ,; j. Providing false and misleading information in a licence application. This offence will be punishable by a fine not exceeding , in the case of an individual; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding ,; or for minor offending where someone unintentionally provides false or misleading information in a final license application, there could be an infringement offence not exceeding ,; k. Providing false or misleading information to an enforcement officer. This offence will be punishable by: in the case of an individual, a fine not exceeding ,; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding ,; or for minor offending where someone unintentionally provides false or misleading information there could be an infringement offence of ,; Requirement to review the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act .Note that Cabinet has agreed that the Act be reviewed three years after its enactment; .Agree that the review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act three years after its enactment be a legislative requirement; .Agree that the following group of Ministers (the Minister for Economic Development, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Minister of Transport, the Minister of Defence, the Minister in Charge of the NZSIS, the Minister Responsible for the GCSB) be authorised to take any technical decisions required to finalise the legislation before it is introduced into the House; yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED Release of disclosure draft of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill .Agree that the Minister of Economic Development releases a disclosure draft of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill for targeted consultation; .Agree that the disclosure draft Bill be provided to the Foreign Affairs, Trade and Defence Select Committee for its information; Authorised for lodgement Hon Steven Joyce, Minister for Economic Development, and Science and Innovation yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act
submissions on the discussion document
Ordinary Weekly Pay calculations. OLP would include the base rate for any hours worked in the relevant period, plus pay for any scheduled overtime, allowances, incentive or commission payments that the employee would have received if they had worked for the relevant period. . The underlying principle for OLP is that it shoul d capture all payments that the employee would have received if the employee had been at work for the period in question. This is to ensure that, while on paid leave, the employee is paid a minimum of what they would have been paid if they were at work for the relevant period. . Section of the Act states that annual holiday pay should be paid based on average earnings over the last four weeks if OWP cannot be calculated. The Taskforce considered whether the four week average earnings calculation should be replaced by a week average earnings calculation. However, testing undertaken by the Taskforce noted that removing the four week average earnings calculation could disadvantage some employees in particular situations (e.g. employees who take leave just a fter a busy period of work for whom the four week average earnings calculation is used because it is not possible to calculate OWP). The Taskforce therefore considers that further work would be required to determine whether a four or week averaging peri od would be the most appropriate period to consider alongside OLP and the week average when calculating annual holiday pay . . Currently Section of the Act states that annual holi day pay must be the greater of OWP or the employees average weekly earni ngs over the last weeks. In some circumstances this can result in an employees income reducing when they are on leave when compared to their income from directly before the leave. For example, if an employee had worked at an increased level of income d ue to, for example, a seasonal variation . The Taskforce is proposing to address this issue by introducing a new average weekly pay calculation over the last four or w eeks . FBAPS leave payments . The process for calculating FBAPS leave payments is set out in the diagram on page and includes the following key steps: a) Determine that the day in question is an Otherwise Working Day (see separate section on this issue) b) Determine the number of hours that would have been worked on the day in question this sho uld be determined by the hours set out in an employment agreement or roster. If no hours of work are set out in an employment agreement or roster then the expected hours of work should be calculated by the average hours worked across all corresponding days worked in the previous weeks (e.g. if the day in question is a Mon day, then an average of the hours worked on all of the Mondays worked in the previous weeks ) c) Calculate Average Daily Pay for the day in question this should be done by calculating t he hourly pay rate (based on the total earnings in the last weeks divided by the total weekly hours worked in the last weeks) and then multiplying the hourly rate by the number of hours that would have been worked on the day in question d) Pay the great er of the Average Daily Pay and Ordinary Leave Pay for the day in question e) If an employer uses an employment agreement or roster to calculate the hours worked on the day in question in (b) above, then weekly hours from an employment agreement or roster mus t be used in the weekly calculation to determine the hourly pay rate in (c) above. If an employer uses actual hours worked to calculate the hours
Ordinary Weekly Pay calculations. OLP would include the base rate for any hours worked in the relevant period, plus pay for any scheduled overtime, allowances, incentive or commission payments that the employee would have received if they had worked for the relevant period. . The underlying principle for OLP is that it shoul d capture all payments that the employee would have received if the employee had been at work for the period in question. This is to ensure that, while on paid leave, the employee is paid a minimum of what they would have been paid if they were at work for the relevant period. . Section of the Act states that annual holiday pay should be paid based on average earnings over the last four weeks if OWP cannot be calculated. The Taskforce considered whether the four week average earnings calculation should be replaced by a week average earnings calculation. However, testing undertaken by the Taskforce noted that removing the four week average earnings calculation could disadvantage some employees in particular situations (e.g. employees who take leave just a fter a busy period of work for whom the four week average earnings calculation is used because it is not possible to calculate OWP). The Taskforce therefore considers that further work would be required to determine whether a four or week averaging peri od would be the most appropriate period to consider alongside OLP and the week average when calculating annual holiday pay . . Currently Section of the Act states that annual holi day pay must be the greater of OWP or the employees average weekly earni ngs over the last weeks. In some circumstances this can result in an employees income reducing when they are on leave when compared to their income from directly before the leave. For example, if an employee had worked at an increased level of income d ue to, for example, a seasonal variation . The Taskforce is proposing to address this issue by introducing a new average weekly pay calculation over the last four or w eeks . FBAPS leave payments . The process for calculating FBAPS leave payments is set out in the diagram on page and includes the following key steps: a) Determine that the day in question is an Otherwise Working Day (see separate section on this issue) b) Determine the number of hours that would have been worked on the day in question this sho uld be determined by the hours set out in an employment agreement or roster. If no hours of work are set out in an employment agreement or roster then the expected hours of work should be calculated by the average hours worked across all corresponding days worked in the previous weeks (e.g. if the day in question is a Mon day, then an average of the hours worked on all of the Mondays worked in the previous weeks ) c) Calculate Average Daily Pay for the day in question this should be done by calculating t he hourly pay rate (based on the total earnings in the last weeks divided by the total weekly hours worked in the last weeks) and then multiplying the hourly rate by the number of hours that would have been worked on the day in question d) Pay the great er of the Average Daily Pay and Ordinary Leave Pay for the day in question e) If an employer uses an employment agreement or roster to calculate the hours worked on the day in question in (b) above, then weekly hours from an employment agreement or roster mus t be used in the weekly calculation to determine the hourly pay rate in (c) above. If an employer uses actual hours worked to calculate the hours shrvakdix
. For the reasons set out below, I consider that the Taskforces recommendations, set out in pages to of the Taskforces report (Annex Two), should be adopted in full as the basis for a substantially amended Holidays Act.
. In addition, the regulator must be able to assess whether an applicant meets the threshold tests for granting a license in the OSHAA Act . Without setting some requirements in regulations, the regulator m ay find it difficult to get information necessary to assess whether the applicant can meet these tests . . An additional consideration is whether the scope, detail and substance of the application requirements meet the objectives of the regime, particularly to grow an internationally competitive space industry. If requirements are too burdensome, this may act as a disincentive to the industry developing by imposing undue compliance costs on applicants. . We note that there will be no application fees for licenses initially. This will reduce the overall costs for applicants of applying under the regime. Size and magnitude of the problem . At this stage, the size of these problems ar e difficult to assess because of the small scale of activity affected by the requirements and the uncertain nature of application volumes. However, as activity ramps up , onerous application requirements have the potential to stifle the development of the s pace industry and or add substantively to the costs of operating from New Zealand. For example, anecdotal evidence from discussions with overseas payload operators indicates that the costs associated with seeking professional legal advice to enable them to be satisfied that they are comply ing with the requirements of a licensing regime can add a significant compliance cost over and above time spent on the application process. Problem definition for HAV exemptions . Developments in technology mean that vehi cles that operate at high altitudes can carry out similar functions as satellites. The high altitude part of the OSHAA Act enables the government to ensure that high altitude activities taking place from New Zealand are consistent with our national interes ts, including national security. It also ensures that technologies that perform similar functions are regulated in a consistent way. New Zealand is one of the first countries to regulate high altitude activities. This means we have not been able to base our regime on international comparators . . An HAV is defined broadly in the OSHAA Act as any vehicle capable of operating above the upper limit of controlled airspace . This broad definition of high altitude will mean that some current HAV users who effectively can operate without restriction now provided they meet the requirements of the Civil Aviation Rules (Part ) will now require a high altitude licenc e. Some existing activity in this area is positive for New Zealand (such as weather and atmospheric monitoring). . In order to ensure that the regime is taking a proportionate response to licensing this activity, two aspects were included in the legislation: As noted above the approach to licen ce conditions can be tailored to the level of risk , and A power to exempt certain classes of vehicle from the HAV aspects of the regime is included in the OSHAA Act . . The problem this Regulatory Impact Statement considers is whether to exempt certain classes of vehicle. Size and magnitude of the problem . The size of the problem is relatively low at the current time in that there are only a handful of HAV operators that we are aware of that would be affected by the regulations. However, the
Are there other specific types of business arrangements for which compliance with the Act is more difficult
M Language Services specialises in enabling seamless, realtime telephone and video communication across languages.
M is an Australasian Language Service and Language Technology Provider with a proven track record of providing prebooked and ondemand interpreting services across Australia and New Zealand to organisations to assist them to engage with Culturally and Linguistically Diverse communities.
. Summary of sections in the Act relating to indemnit ies and insurance
shrvakdix vii. ensure the balance of decision making between employers and employees when it comes to reque st for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated
Active Debris Removal and On Orbit Servicing : Operational Policy
Although some specific payments may not be included in particular calculations, su ch as the calculation of Ordinary Leave Pay.
Although some specific payments may not be included in particular calculations, su ch as the calculation of Ordinary Leave Pay. shrvakdix
For example, provision of flexibility around the week reference period recommended for a number of calculations and providing ability to calculate hours to be assigned to a day of leave using an average over all days of work rather than specific calendar days. Stakeholders suggested that implementing these requirements may involve significant and costly payroll system changes, especially for small businesses.
For example, the Taskforce recommended a reference period of the previous weeks for several calculations. A literal interpretation would mean that employees would need to split pay period data to calculate back weeks from when the period of leave began. The Bill, like the Act, provides for the basis of all reference periods to be complete pay periods. kjtrvweh I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E I propose changes to simplify, reduce costs and address gaps As discussed below (para ), I propose to release an exposure draft of the Bill for consultation in September this year. Before I release an exposure draft , I am seeking Cabinet s agreement to make additional policy decisions . The proposals in this paper are intended to address some of the known issues with the previous Governments decisions , by simplify ing obligations , improv ing workability , better supporting common practice and reduc ing implementation requirements and compliance costs for employer s. They also address some areas where decisions were previously incomplete. My proposals are all broad ly align ed with the current drafting and underlying framework of the Act to enable faster progress towards the release of an exposure draft (which will enable this Government to demonstrate its commitment to resolving the issues with the Act ). Developing and testing options for changes beyond this scope would require significant additional time as end toend system changes would be required . I am confident my proposed changes provide greater simplicity, but I am also aware that there are further opportunities for simplification within the current framework and that businesses may also call for more foundational changes to the legislation (which would require more time for policy development and drafting) . I intend to use the expos ure draft consultation document to ask targeted questions a bout alternative options in some areas, such as a simpler payment methodology for annual leave, different entitlement accrual models (such as hours based) and pro rata sick l eave for part time employees , which ha ve been raised by a number of stakeholders . I intend to report back to Cabinet in December following analysis of stakeholder feedback on the exposure draft and may seek further policy decisions at th at time. The proposals are grouped into three areas and summarised below , with full details and analysis provided in Appendices Two, Three and Four . Appendix One provides an overview of the full package of changes that will be included in the exposure draft. Area One : Earning , taking and paying annual leave (full details in Appendix T wo) The proposals focus on simplifying the way that employees earn and take AL . A key change is moving to a weeks based accr ual system to simplify the end toend system for providing and paying AL entitlement and better support common practice. Other changes focus on reducing the extent of payroll system changes required by the new methodology for determining the use of AL entitlement and on ensuring the framework for paying A L with regular pay provide s the certainty that is currently missing from the Act. Moving from a weeks based entitlement system to a weeks based accrual system for providing AL entitlement : employees would accrue their four week AL entitlement continuously during employment rather than becom ing entitled to four weeks AL after months continuous employment . This is similar to the approach in comparable countries . It would align with the way many payroll and accounting systems already account for AL entitlements and resolve issues in other areas of the AL provisions which are a key source of compliance issues.
Glossary of terms Annual holiday s entitlement: Also known as annual leave, this is an employees legal right to not less than four weeks of paid annual holidays each year after working for an e mployer for months (Section s to of the Holidays Act (the Act )).
Have we accurately captured the broad range of working arrangements that can contribute to difficulties with the Act
OSHAA Section : Minister may take into account authorisation granted in country other than New Zealand.
One alternative is to specify that an employee must be provided four weeks AL each months and provide flexibility for employers to work out how to provide that. This would not provide certainty and carry high compliance risks. Another option w ould be to provide a formula to help employers calculate how much AL should accrue each year. This would avoid the minor discrepancy between four weeks and the actual amount a rate of . results in (refer footnote ) but adds complexity , administrative burden
Orbital Debris Mitigation: Operational Policy
Payloads of a size les s than U : Operational Policy
Principal Liaison Advisors established at MBIE to support survivors of migrant exploitation during the investigation of their exploitation allegation. This support includes facilitating contact with accommodation and welfare support providers, and supporting them through the visa process and any resulting court case.
SG Guidelines para .. Assessment of the public interest is an on going obligation. It should be reassessed whenever there is any material change in the circumstances of the case (including a ny relevant developments in the law) or the defendant (such as ill health). Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines of Issue: July Security Classification Unclassified Version: . Review ed June Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page of between prosecutors and the re levant investigator(s) to reach the right decisions in managing prosecutions, particularly when deciding to change or withdraw charges . . Evidential Test It is the responsibility of the prosecutor reviewing the file to determine whether there is evidential sufficiency for the proposed charges selected or alternatives having regard to the evidence available. To meet the evidential test, a prosecutor must be satisfied that the proposed evidence is sufficient to provide a reasonable prospect of conviction. A reasonable prospect of conviction will exist if, in relation to an identifiable person, there is credible evidence which could be given before a Court and upon which an impartial Judge or jury could reasonably be expected to be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the person has committed a criminal offence. If this first limb of the test is not met, then no charge may be laid, no matter how important o r serious the matter may be. . The Public Interest Test If the evidential test is met, the next consideration is whether the public interest requires the prosecution to proceed. It is not the case that all offences for which there is sufficient evidence mus t be prosecuted. The prosecution decision maker must exercise the discretion as to whether a prosecution is required in the public interest. There are a multitude of factors that may be considered in determining whether prosecution is in the public interes t. A non exhaustive list of such factors is contained in the Solicitor Generals Prosecution Guidelines . In each case where the evidential test has been met, the prosecutor will weigh the relevant public interest factors that are applicable. The prosecutor will then determine whether or not in his or her view the public interest requires prosecution. . Written adv ice following review of file by prosecutor The prosecutor may give advice on any legal issue raised by the file and will provide written advice on the outcome of the file review. If the prosecutor is not satisfied that the test for prosecution has been m et, they will provide written advice to the prosecution decision maker that a decision of no prosecution should be made. This advice should at a minimum include: a. an outline of the facts of the case b. the elements of the offence and any relevant statutory defences c. the evidence considered by the prosecutor d. any possible issues of admissibility that have been identified , and e. the advice that there is either insufficient evidence to establish that there is a reasonable prospect of success in a prosecution andor concern that the public interest test has not been met (with accompanying reasons). If the prosecutor is satisfied that the test for prosecution has been met, they will document and confirm this for the prosecution decision maker . . Prosecution decision makers Prosecution decisions must be made by prosecution decision makers in accordance with MBI Es delegations framework and these procedures and guidelines. In the case of all prosecution delegations: a. the authorisation must be recorded in writing b. the delegate must comply with the Prosecution Policy and these procedures and guidelines. Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines of Issue: July Security Classification Unclassified Version: . Review ed June Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page of It is expected that delegations for prosecution decisions will sit at tier or level unless one or more of the following escalation criteria apply: a. the legislation, or the particular provision breached, is new or untested b. there are potential issues with the exercise of search and seizure powers (whether under a search warrant or exercisin g a statutory power) c. there are human rights issues d. there are (or may be) allegations made that MBIE has acted negligently or unlawfully , or e. any other reason exists that may indicate special sensitivity. A prosecution decision maker must: a. not have had any s ignificant involvement in the preparation of the case file b. be satisfied that all relevant information has been obtained and that the file is prepared to a satisfactory standard c. have considered, and applied, the current version of the Prosecution Guidelines . . The Decision If a prosecutor determines that the evidential test has not been met then, subject to review or escalation, a decision of no prosecution must be made. A decision of no prosecution does not preclude any further consideration of a case by the prosecutor, if new or additional information becomes available. If the prosecutor advises that the evidential test and the public interest test appear to be met the prosecution may proceed if the prosecution decision maker is comfortable in relation to evidential sufficiency and considers it is in the public interest to do so. In determining whether to proceed with the prosecution, the prosecution decision maker must, in conjunction with the public interest assessment under the Prosecution Guidelines take into account as appropriate: a. MBIEs and the business units statutory objectives and enforcement priorities including sector strategies, if any b. alternatives to prosecution which may achieve compliance c. any existing or likely prosecution or other proceedings involving the defendant(s) by another business group, or government agency, and the likely outcome d. the relevant statutory timeframes and the pe riod since the matter first came to MBIEs attention e. the obsolescence or obscurity of the law. Factors that must not be taken into account include: a. colour, race, ethnicity, sex or marital status, religious, ethical or political beliefs b. political advantage or disadvantage to the prosecuting agency or people linked to it , and c. the possible effect on the personal or professional reputation or prospects of MBIE or its staff d. any proposal for payment of money, including compensation
SaaS is a software licensing and delivery model that allows users to connect and use centrally hosted cloud based applications over the internet on an on demand, subscription basis. The Companies Office also supports Crown funded registers (meaning the Government provides revenue directly to meet costs). Fees and levies are not charged to users of these registers, and therefore are not within the scope of this review. Other registers that support the New Zealand economy more broadly Financial Service Providers (FSP) Personal Property Securities (PPSR) New Zealand Business Number (NZBN) Disclose Auditors Insolvency Practitioners (IP) Retirement Villages
The Act is based on two key principles relating to entitlements and pay. i. That entitlements are determined in relation to the work pattern at the time leave is taken. ii. That employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave, that is, they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked. kjtrvweh
There are a small number of situations, such as where IRs employment information is not up to , an employees work patternearnings change between the time of application and when parental leave payments start, or an applicant has multiple employments the calculated income estimate will still only produce an estimate and applicants andor their employers will need to check the calculations. . In a small number of cases, it might produce a lower payment rate than OWP if the applicants four week average of gross taxable weekly earnings was lower than both their OWP in the week before PL payments commence and their AWI. . We consider that, overal l, the use of a four week reference period aligns with the intent of including OWP in the PL payment rate methodology for applicants, providing a significantly different reference period to the week period used for the AWI calculation, and will provide a fair outcome for applicants.
This is the refined definition of OLP that the previous Minister agreed to , to address ambiguities around how components such as scheduled overtime and incentive or commission payments that the employee would have received if they had worked for the relevant period were to be included in the calculation. Hourly average rate of pay is based on gross earnings in the last weeks divided by total weekly hours worked , or on paid or unpaid leave in the last weeks
broad categories of investment are highlighted for all of the platforms but in the essential oils for example, the question is where is the investment required We first paint a brief vision; New Zealand growers and producers will wake up to the incredible opportunity presented by essential oils made from unique New Zealand flora. What investment is needed We need to invest in scaling up farming systems. We need to invest in increasing processing capability. We need to invest in developing specialised products.
concerned will ensure the new attendees have been well briefed on previous discussions and progress. . The parties will each ensure that their constituentsstakeholders have appropriate opportunity to have input into development of options , through the parties internal governance arrangements. MBIE will ensure that appropriate cross agency structures in place for senior government officials to be kept informed of, and have input into, the wo rk of the Group. . MBIE will provide secretariat support to the Group and information and research that the Group identifies is required to facilitate its discussions. Rules of engagement . The parties agree that they will: a. work together in g ood faith, balancing the interests of all parties b. hold discussions in confidence and on a without prejudice basis c. agree any external communications at each meeting . . If the parties are unable to reach agreement on recommendations, the Group s final report will outline : a. the areas where the parties have rea ched agreed recommendations b. the areas of difference. Timing and reporting . The Group will report back to the Minister of Workplace Relations and Safety with their recommendations within months. This timeframe will give the Group sufficient time to commission work and undertake robust testing of options. . The Group will also provide an interim report after six months, so that Cabinet and the New Zealand public can be informed about the Groups progr ess. . Each party will be responsible for reporting to their constituentsstakeholders, in accordance with any messaging agreed during the Group s discussions and as required by their i nternal governance mechanisms. In doing so, the parties agree to honour t he confi dentiality of the Group s discussions.
payload permits were issued between October and December bringing the total to payload permits approved to .
Any other information relevant to the assessment of the persons technical capability. This may include; o References from members of the industry; o Professional organisation memberships; and o A history of successfully completing similar activities in other jurisdictions. If there is a question regarding any specific evidence you may consider relevant please contact NZSA at: nzspaceagencymbie.govt.nz .. Elements where technical capability must be demonstrated. The applicant must demonstrate that they have the technical capability to conduct a ll aspects of the launch or operation of the launch facility safely. This may require that technical capability be demonstrated in areas such as ; Design, implementation and reliability analysis of flight safety systems; Design, implementation and reliability analysis of active orbital debris mitigation processes; Design, construction and operation of a launch facility or launch vehicle; Hazardous substance management; Range safety analysis; The production and implementation of emergency management plans; and .. Technical capability throughout the life of the licence The technical capability demonstrated at the time of granting a licence should be retained by the licence holder throughout the life time of the licence granted under the Act. If there is a change in employment or contractual arrangements which affects this then the licence holder should notify NZSA as soon as possible. The licence holders technical capability should continue to reflect industry best practice over the life of the licence, such as by ensuring staff and contractors undertake continuous professional development.
were still on a work visa
. Agree to endorse in full the Taskforces recommendations, as set out in pages to of the Taskforces report (Annex Two), as the basis for a substantially amended Holidays Act (noting also the summary of recommendations and t he proposed Government response at Annex One)
. Alongside this leg islative ambiguity, implementation of the Holidays Act in payroll systems and associated business processes has been poor. In recent years numerous organisations around the country have had to overhaul their payroll systems to achieve compliance with the c urrent legislation. As at June , around . million in remediation payments had been paid to , employees across numerous organisations and this figure is expected to grow substantially.
. MBIE considers that the . million per year estimate is an overestimation. There were limitations to the estimate because it was based on a testing sample that included a large overrepresentation of employees with varied and unpredictable working arrangements, and a range of other assumptions were therefore made to s caleup the costs to the entire workforce.
. Promoting global trade and investment
. Shared objectives ) The parties shared objectives for this enduring agreement are to a) contribute to an increase in Mori participation and opportunity in spec trum related industries and the digital economy ; and b) enable M ori to contribute their talent and skills to spectrum related industries.
. To this end, the OSHAA Act provides for six types of licences permits being (i) launch licences, (ii) payload permits, (iii) overseas launch licences, (iv) overseas payload permits, (v) facility licences and (vi) high altitude licences . The licensing process will be administered by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment ( MBIE ). . This regulatory impact statement deals with two issues : The application requirements for licenses and permits , and Whether any class of vehicle should be exempted from the high altitude vehicle (HAV) require ments of the regime. . The preferred options for these issues are: A minimum list of application requirements seeking information from applicants on how they meet the threshold tests in the OSHAA Act . This is supported by a power to accept incomplete applic ations, and the existing power in the OSHAA Act to require additional information to be given post application. A small set of exemptions from the high altitude aspects of the regime: o balloons launched with only the following sondes : radiosondes, ozone so ndes, frost point sondes, and or backscatter sondes , and o the payload is used for the sole purpose of measuring any combination of the following atmospheric profiles : pressure, temperature, humidity, wind speed and direction, ozone concentration, water vapo ur and aerosols (including dust, smoke and volcanic ash)
. Under the Act , an employees entitlement to four weeks of annual leave (AL) arises after each completed months of continuous employment. An employee may also reques t to take AL in advance of it arising, but employers have no obligation to approve the request. . During the issue identification phase of the Holidays Act Review , some stakeholders raised concern about the waiting period for employees to access AL entitlements . Many employers do allow employees to take AL in advance of their entitlement arising but not all employees have access to annual leave during their first months of work . . To address this, in Cabinet accepted the Holidays Act Taskforce (the Taskforce) recommendation that employees should continue to
. Understanding how well the building consent system is aligned with its intent
. Unlock trade and investment
. What criteria, in addition to monetary costs and benefits have been used to assess the likely impacts of the options under consideration The two options have been assessed against the following criteria: a. It continues to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act Section of the Act sets out the purpose of the Act which is to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees lives and to provide: a. annual holidays to provide the opportunity for rest and relaxation b. public holidays for the observance of days of national, religious, or cultural significance shrvakdix
. What other options have been ruled out of scope, or not considered, and why Only the two main annual holidays options developed and tested by the Holidays Act Taskforce are included in the options analysis. Variations from these, or other proposals not considered by the Taskforce (for example, the portability of leave between different employers), have not been co nsidered. In addition, while the estimated impacts of the Taskforces full recommendations are included in this analysis (section .), the various options for the remaining recommendations have not been examined. This is because: the Taskforce s options for annual holidays cover the main, feasible alternatives how annual holidays are treated is of significant interest to stakeholders, with most supporting one or the other of the two main opt ions presented in this analysis all recommendations were consid ered in depth by the Taskforce (e.g. for the issue of what happens to annual holiday and leave entitlements when a business is sold, the Taskforce received two supporting papers from the Secretariat, considered five main options , and discussed the relative advantages and disadvantages of each option over a number of meetings before making a decision ) the recommendations were developed and negotiated between employer, employee and government representatives, and are assumed to balance the varying perspectiv es of the different groups .
. million annual international visitors
worked on the day in question in (b) above, then actual hours worked must also be used in the weekly calculati on to determine the hourly pay rate in (c) above. . The Taskforce considers that the proposed FBAPS payment methodology delivers appropriate leave entitlements and payments for all employees, and can be implemented in payroll systems. It will give employers the certainty they seek that they are meeting legislative requirements. Testing undertaken on behalf of taskforce members was able to confirm that, in a range of scenarios, the proposed methodology minimises overpayments or underpayments that were present with other methodologies considered. Testing on this aspect was conducted using a different methodology than for other aspects of the report. For this reason the Taskforce notes that additional testing and analysis (particularly using real representative payroll data) may provide additional assurance that there are no unintended consequences of the proposal. Recommendation The Taskforce recommends that leave payments should be calculated as follows: The relevant period of annual holidays leave should be paid based on the greater of: o Ordinary Leave Pay o Average Weekly Pay for the last four or weeks o Average Weekly Pay for the last weeks. Each day (or part day) of FBAPS leave should be paid based on the greater of: o Ordinary Leave Pay o Average Daily Pay
. Drafting was put on hold in June to allow PCO to focus on Bills that were progressing prior to the G eneral Election. The Bill remains in complete and there are several drafting and technical issues yet to be resolved. Progressing a Bill to a complete and settled state will require dedicated policy, legal and PCO resource s .
. In cases where the calendar day methodology is used, the employees average hours worked on a calendar day would only vary significantly from their average hours across all days worked when, despite not having agreed daily hours, the employee does have a discernible pattern of work whereby they work more hours on average on some calendar days than others . . For FBS leave, t he averaging methodology would only be used to calculate the hours an employee would have worked on a day of leave when those hours cannot be ascertained from an employees employment agreement, roster, or other document or record used in the normal course of employment. . Due to the events based nature of FBS leave, an employee would typically notify their employer of their intent to take it shortly before or on the day it occurs. This means that in many cases for em ployees with variable daily hours of work, their roster would have been set before they notify their employer. In these cases, their rostered hours would be used . The calendar
. We are available to discuss any of the proposals contained in this paper at your convenience.
Proposed leave payment process
Table : Proposed fee for financial statement filing (excluding GST) All applicable register s Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee) Change in charge change Financial statement filing . . . . (.) ()
. The Taskforces recommendations meet the objectives of the review that were set out in the Terms of Reference. Importantly, the recommendations will provide the certainty and clarity that both employers and employees require f rom the Holidays Act while preserving employees entitlements.
Annual holidays entitlements Issue Annual h oliday s unit of entitlements . One of the most significant issues with the Act is the difficulty that it poses in calculating annual holiday entitlements and payments for employees who have variations in the hours they work andor the amount they are paid. For these employees, it can be very hard to establish what a working week is. This can make it difficu lt to determine how much of an employees entitlement needs to be used for a particular period of annual holidays. . As noted earlier, the Taskforce considered and tested a range of options in relation to how annual holiday entitlements should be calculated and paid. The Taskforce was keen to ensure that it recommended a system that was straightforward for the majority of employees while also containing enough prescription to provide certainty for those situations where it is not clear what proportion of an annual holidays entitlement should be used for a period away from work nor how much the employee should be paid. Recommendation The Taskforce recommends that annual holidays entitlements should be calculated, taken , paid and held in weeks or portions o f weeks.
. The Taskforces proposals are likely to result in a small increase in the amount paid out by employers in relation to annual holidays and other forms of paid leave (more detail is provided in the Financial Implications section of this paper). However, this additional cost must be considered in the context of the current uncertainty and amount of resources expended by employers on attempting to comply with the current Act. Employers across the New Zealand economy have faced or are still facing expensive remediation bills resulting from their inability to comply with the Act.
advance) . . Balances of leave in advance and leave entitlement should be treated the same. For example, when leave in advance is taken, it will result in a negative leave balance as the entitlement does no t arise until after months . . The Taskforce believes that this approach better balances the different needs of employers and employees and provides employees the flexibility to take time off before they receive their entitlements. Issue Calculating annual leave entitlements and payments for employees . One of the problems with the current Act is how to determine how much of an annual leave entitlement an employee needs to use for a period of time away from work, if the employee works variable hours. . The Taskforce has considered this issue in detail and proposes that the following stepped methodology should be used to determine how much of an employees leave entitlement should be used for a period of annual leave . Step Identifying days the employee wishes to take annual holidays on (step from diagram on page ) An employee may take annual holidays on any days that meet one of the following criteria: o the employee has worked on the corresponding calendar day within the last week s, or o the day in q uestion is a day on which the employee could b e contractually obliged to work, or o the day in question is a day on which the employee could offer to work in accordance with the terms of their contract. Step Determining hours that would have been worked on each d ay of leave (step from diagram on page to determine value of L) If the number of hours an employee would have worked on a specific day is set out in an employment agreement or work roster then this figure should be used. If the number of hour s an employee would have worked is not set out in an employment agreement or work roster , then an average working day for all leave purposes shou ld be determined by calculating the average daily hours the employee worked on all corresponding calendar days in the previous weeks (e.g. if the employee wishes to take leave on a Monday then the average hours worked on all Mondays in the week period should be used) . This calculation will need to be carried out for each day of leave the employee wishes to ta ke. Step Determining what a week is for an employee (step from diagram on page to determine value of W) If an employees hours of work are set out in a n employment agreement or work roster then these hours would be used to determine what a week is for the employer. If the hours of work are not set out in a n employment agreement or work roster then a week would be determined by the average number of hours worked per calendar week within the previous weeks (or across the length of the shift cycle if there is a repeating shift pattern). Step Converting leave to be taken into a portion of a week (step from diagram on page to determine value of P) The period of annual holiday to be taken needs to be converted into a portion of a week so it ca n be deducted from t he annual holidays entitlement:
advance) . . Balances of leave in advance and leave entitlement should be treated the same. For example, when leave in advance is taken, it will result in a negative leave balance as the entitlement does no t arise until after months . . The Taskforce believes that this approach better balances the different needs of employers and employees and provides employees the flexibility to take time off before they receive their entitlements. Issue Calculating annual leave entitlements and payments for employees . One of the problems with the current Act is how to determine how much of an annual leave entitlement an employee needs to use for a period of time away from work, if the employee works variable hours. . The Taskforce has considered this issue in detail and proposes that the following stepped methodology should be used to determine how much of an employees leave entitlement should be used for a period of annual leave . Step Identifying days the employee wishes to take annual holidays on (step from diagram on page ) An employee may take annual holidays on any days that meet one of the following criteria: o the employee has worked on the corresponding calendar day within the last week s, or o the day in q uestion is a day on which the employee could b e contractually obliged to work, or o the day in question is a day on which the employee could offer to work in accordance with the terms of their contract. Step Determining hours that would have been worked on each d ay of leave (step from diagram on page to determine value of L) If the number of hours an employee would have worked on a specific day is set out in an employment agreement or work roster then this figure should be used. If the number of hour s an employee would have worked is not set out in an employment agreement or work roster , then an average working day for all leave purposes shou ld be determined by calculating the average daily hours the employee worked on all corresponding calendar days in the previous weeks (e.g. if the employee wishes to take leave on a Monday then the average hours worked on all Mondays in the week period should be used) . This calculation will need to be carried out for each day of leave the employee wishes to ta ke. Step Determining what a week is for an employee (step from diagram on page to determine value of W) If an employees hours of work are set out in a n employment agreement or work roster then these hours would be used to determine what a week is for the employer. If the hours of work are not set out in a n employment agreement or work roster then a week would be determined by the average number of hours worked per calendar week within the previous weeks (or across the length of the shift cycle if there is a repeating shift pattern). Step Converting leave to be taken into a portion of a week (step from diagram on page to determine value of P) The period of annual holiday to be taken needs to be converted into a portion of a week so it ca n be deducted from t he annual holidays entitlement: shrvakdix
were approved through the Pacific Access Category.
. The Taskforces proposals have been tested to ensure they can be implemented with a payroll system. There will be some transitional costs and investments associated with establishing a new or amended payroll system. However, once such a system is in place the ongoing costs faced by employers in relation to complying with the Holida ys Act should reduce. For organisations that have recently reconfigured their payroll systems to achieve compliance with the current Act, adapting to the Taskforces improved status quo approach should involve less re work than would a more radical overh aul of the Act. shrvakdix There are other options which would be simpler in some respects but these have drawbacks and do not have consensus support . The Taskforce considered a number of options in the course of its review. One of these options wa s for an hours based accrual system for annual holidays. In this type of system an employees leave balance would automatically accumulate in hours at a set rate (e.g. of each hour) for every hour worked.
o For a single day of leave this should be determined by dividing the average working day in hours by the average working week in hours. This will give the portion of a week to be deducted from the leave balance. o For multiple days of leave the entire amount of leave to be taken should be calculated in hours (repeat Step for each day of leave requeste d) before it is divided by the employees working week (the answer from Step (W)) . . The process above sho uld be followed for all periods of annual leave requested by an employee. In many cases the answer will be straightforward but this prescriptive methodology will provide a definitive answer even in those cases where it is not obvious. This does not prevent employers and employees from agreeing and paying weeks of leave where an employee has an entitlement to leave but is in a non work period (e.g. for employees who have periods of work followed by periods where they do not work). . The Taskforce also proposes that there be an audit requirement that if an employees actual hours were found to be percent or more above their contracted hours over a week period then the employees actual hours should be used instead. This audit requirement would be intended to act as an incentive to ensure that the employee s contracted hours are an accurate reflection of their actual hours of work. . The Taskforce also proposes a provision t o prevent an employee from being required to use more than one weeks annual holidays entitlement for a calendar week of leave. This is to avoid an unusual situation that could arise under an averaging approach where an employee with a parti cular work pattern could theoretically be expected to use more than one weeks leave in a single calen dar week. For example, if an employee wished to take leave in a week where they were scheduled to work more hours than their average weekly hours over the preceding weeks then it is possible that the actual hours of leave they wish to take would be more than their average weekly hours of work. In this case , the amount of leave to be taken should be capped at one week for each calendar week. The averaging worked hours methodology set out in this section should only be used for part weeks of leave since an y full weeks of leave will be deducted in units of entire weeks. Recommendation The Taskforce recommends that: . The stepped process outlined above should be followed to determine how much of an employees annual leave entitlement should be used for a peri od of time away from work where an employees days and hours of work are not set out in an employment agreement, shift roster or other document. . Where an employees days and hours of work are set out in an employment agreement, shift roster or other docume nt and these are an accurate reflection of the employees actual working pattern, these hours should be used as the basis for determining annual holiday entitlements. . An audit requirement be introduced such that if an employees actual hours were found to be or more above their contracted hours over a week period then the employees actual hours should be used instead. . A provision be introduced so that an employee cannot be required to use more than one weeks annual holidays entitlement for a calend ar week of leave (the averaging worked hours methodology set out in this section should only be used for part weeks of leave) .
o For a single day of leave this should be determined by dividing the average working day in hours by the average working week in hours. This will give the portion of a week to be deducted from the leave balance. o For multiple days of leave the entire amount of leave to be taken should be calculated in hours (repeat Step for each day of leave requeste d) before it is divided by the employees working week (the answer from Step (W)) . . The process above sho uld be followed for all periods of annual leave requested by an employee. In many cases the answer will be straightforward but this prescriptive methodology will provide a definitive answer even in those cases where it is not obvious. This does not prevent employers and employees from agreeing and paying weeks of leave where an employee has an entitlement to leave but is in a non work period (e.g. for employees who have periods of work followed by periods where they do not work). . The Taskforce also proposes that there be an audit requirement that if an employees actual hours were found to be percent or more above their contracted hours over a week period then the employees actual hours should be used instead. This audit requirement would be intended to act as an incentive to ensure that the employee s contracted hours are an accurate reflection of their actual hours of work. . The Taskforce also proposes a provision t o prevent an employee from being required to use more than one weeks annual holidays entitlement for a calendar week of leave. This is to avoid an unusual situation that could arise under an averaging approach where an employee with a parti cular work pattern could theoretically be expected to use more than one weeks leave in a single calen dar week. For example, if an employee wished to take leave in a week where they were scheduled to work more hours than their average weekly hours over the preceding weeks then it is possible that the actual hours of leave they wish to take would be more than their average weekly hours of work. In this case , the amount of leave to be taken should be capped at one week for each calendar week. The averaging worked hours methodology set out in this section should only be used for part weeks of leave since an y full weeks of leave will be deducted in units of entire weeks. Recommendation The Taskforce recommends that: . The stepped process outlined above should be followed to determine how much of an employees annual leave entitlement should be used for a peri od of time away from work where an employees days and hours of work are not set out in an employment agreement, shift roster or other document. . Where an employees days and hours of work are set out in an employment agreement, shift roster or other docume nt and these are an accurate reflection of the employees actual working pattern, these hours should be used as the basis for determining annual holiday entitlements. . An audit requirement be introduced such that if an employees actual hours were found to be or more above their contracted hours over a week period then the employees actual hours should be used instead. . A provision be introduced so that an employee cannot be required to use more than one weeks annual holidays entitlement for a calend ar week of leave (the averaging worked hours methodology set out in this section should only be used for part weeks of leave) . shrvakdix
growth in the number of Study to Work visa holders
Issue Parental leave override . The Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act includes an override to the Holidays Act , which states that for any annual holidays an employee becomes entitled to within months of beginning a period of parental leave, they will only be paid at the rate of their average weekly earnings over the last months. . Because the employe es average weekly earnings during parental leave will be , and parental leave periods can be up to weeks long, this means that some employees are entitled to be paid per week for annual holidays when they return from parental leave. The employees average weekly earnings will only gradually increase over the following year, leaving employees disadvantaged at a time when they may most need to use their holiday entitlement. Because the vast majority of people who take parental leave in New Zealand ar e women, this can also be seen as an issue of gender equity. . The Taskforce noted the added cost for employers of removing the parental leave override, but felt this was outweighed by the benefits for parents and primary carers of being able to take time away from work to spend time with their new child, without being financially disadvantaged. The Taskforce also noted feedback that the provision was often misunderstood, and was difficult to input in some payroll systems, which leads to some employees havi ng the override applied to more of their leave balance than it should have been. Recommendation The Taskforce recommends that the parental leave override in the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act should be removed to address discrimin ation against parents who take time off to care for their young children.
. The employees leave balance would be held in h ours and whenever the employee wished to take annual holidays, they would simply use the appropriate number of hours from their accumulated leave balance.
there is no underlying pattern of work within each Review Per iod, and there is evidence of periods without work within each Review Period. The following enabling parameters that sup port the new definition are: a. An underlying pattern of work can be defined as: an assessment , within a specified timeframe, that time at work does not repeat in a manner possible to anticipate . b. Periods without work can be defined as: a continuous period away from work of more than one week . c. A recurring week Review Period , beginning on the first day of employment . d. If the employer and employee agree to the definition at the start of employment, the Act assumes the definition is met until the of the first Review Period . e. On the of the first Review Period , the employer analyses relevant data such as payroll records and work schedules and determines whether the definition has or has not been met . f. If the employer determines the definition has been m et, PAYG can continue until the next determination at the subsequent Review Period . g. If the employer determines the definition has not been met , PAYG is stopped and leave entitlements begin . In such an instance the employer is not liable for leave entitleme nts for the work done within the Review Period in question . h. From the second Review Period onwards, the employer becomes retroactively liable for leave entitlements if an objective review of relevant data indicates that the definition was no longer met but PAYG was not stopped, i.e. wilful blindness . i. If the employer and employee disagree whether the definition has or has not been met at a review , then the employee can opt out of PAYG even if the employer considers that they still meet the definition (the emp loyee cannot opt in to PAYG if the employer does not agree they meet the definition) . j. The employer or the employee can agree at any time that the definition is no longer met. In such instances, PAYG is stopped and leave entitlements begin . k. The employers review of the definition must be conducted in good faith . l. PAYG loading should be clearly identified as a distinct component of every pay record. The Taskforce also recommends that: . Annual holiday entitlements for those meeting the intermittent and i rregular definition should be paid every pay period as per cent of gross earnings and itemised separately on employees payslips. . PAYG should be optional for those employees that meet the definition. . PAYG should no longer be an option for fixe dterm employees on contracts of less than months.
were the principal applicants and were the secondary applicants.
. This system would be simple to operate for employers and may be easier for some employees to underst and. It was favoured by many respondents to the Taskforces issues paper. However, it requires a fundamental change to the calculation of payment for leave. Entitlements are currently determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is take n, whereas under this approach they would be based on an employees arrangements at the time they earned the leave.
Table : Proposed Friendly Societies and Credit Union register fees to be revoked
potential for proble ms to arise in situations where an employee with an availability provision in their contract is on annual holidays during (or adjacent to ) a period when they are expected to be available to work , or where an employee with an availability provision in their contract is told a shift ha s become available, but is unable to work due to sickness, bereavement, or family violence . Recommendation The Taskforce re commends that: . Employers ability to re quire employees to attend work under an availability provision should be suspended from the end of the last shift the employee works before their leave period until the start of the first shift they work on their retu rn from leave. The employee could still agree to work during this period if they wished. . It should be made explicit that as soon as an employee agrees or is required to work a day under an availability provision, the day in question should become an agree d working day and the entitlement to sickness, bereavement and family violence leave would now apply to this shift. Annual holidays payments Issue Definition of gross earnings . Although gross earnings is defined in section of the Holidays Act, there is a lack of clarity about whether certain forms of payments should be included in the calculation of annual holidays and FBAPS payments. For example, employers are not always clear whether payments such as discretionary payments, cashed up holidays and redundancy payments should be included in gross earnings, and this issue is one of the most common issues that feature in litigation related to the Act. . There is also no definitive position on whether the following payments should be considered as pa rt of the gross earnings definition: employee share benefits insurance benefits contractual redundancy compensation payments that are compensatory and would not ordinarily be considered earnings . . The Taskforce wanted to provide clarity in this area to ensure that employers know what is expected of them to meet their obligations in respect of payments made in relation to Holidays Act entitlements. . A number of options were considered in relation to this, including considering whether definitions used in t he Income Tax Act could be used for Holidays Act purposes. Although this option appeared initially appealing, upon further investigation a number of downsides were identified such as the fact that the purposes of tax legislation and employment regulat ion are not necessarily always aligned. . The Taskforce considered that a simpler definition could be provided that captured the intent of the provisions and would be easier for employers to understand and comply with. . The Taskforce noted the impact that th is proposal could have on employers as it would mean that all commission payment and bonuses would always be included (as there would no longer be any exclusion of discretionary payments) . However, it noted that many of these payments are already include d. In addition, employers would be able to
potential for proble ms to arise in situations where an employee with an availability provision in their contract is on annual holidays during (or adjacent to ) a period when they are expected to be available to work , or where an employee with an availability provision in their contract is told a shift ha s become available, but is unable to work due to sickness, bereavement, or family violence . Recommendation The Taskforce re commends that: . Employers ability to re quire employees to attend work under an availability provision should be suspended from the end of the last shift the employee works before their leave period until the start of the first shift they work on their retu rn from leave. The employee could still agree to work during this period if they wished. . It should be made explicit that as soon as an employee agrees or is required to work a day under an availability provision, the day in question should become an agree d working day and the entitlement to sickness, bereavement and family violence leave would now apply to this shift. Annual holidays payments Issue Definition of gross earnings . Although gross earnings is defined in section of the Holidays Act, there is a lack of clarity about whether certain forms of payments should be included in the calculation of annual holidays and FBAPS payments. For example, employers are not always clear whether payments such as discretionary payments, cashed up holidays and redundancy payments should be included in gross earnings, and this issue is one of the most common issues that feature in litigation related to the Act. . There is also no definitive position on whether the following payments should be considered as pa rt of the gross earnings definition: employee share benefits insurance benefits contractual redundancy compensation payments that are compensatory and would not ordinarily be considered earnings . . The Taskforce wanted to provide clarity in this area to ensure that employers know what is expected of them to meet their obligations in respect of payments made in relation to Holidays Act entitlements. . A number of options were considered in relation to this, including considering whether definitions used in t he Income Tax Act could be used for Holidays Act purposes. Although this option appeared initially appealing, upon further investigation a number of downsides were identified such as the fact that the purposes of tax legislation and employment regulat ion are not necessarily always aligned. . The Taskforce considered that a simpler definition could be provided that captured the intent of the provisions and would be easier for employers to understand and comply with. . The Taskforce noted the impact that th is proposal could have on employers as it would mean that all commission payment and bonuses would always be included (as there would no longer be any exclusion of discretionary payments) . However, it noted that many of these payments are already include d. In addition, employers would be able to shrvakdix
. Under an hours based accrual system, employees whose hours of work increased over the course of a year would be disadvantaged in comparis on to the status quo. A system where the leave balance is held in weeks automatically adjusts when an employees hours of work increase or decrease (i.e. an employee with two weeks of leave will still have two weeks of leave, it is just that each week wi ll now represent a higher or lower number of hours than before their hours of work changed). An hours based accrual system does not include this automatic adjustment and so an employee whose hours of work increase may find themselves without enough hour s of leave in their accumulated balance to take four weeks of paid leave.
adjust the quantum of any such discretionary payments in light of the fact that such payments would now form part of an employees gross earnings. . The Taskforce considered smooth ing commissionincentive payments across the period that they relate to (for example, a sixmonthly commission payment could be smoothed across the weeks that it relates to rather than be counted as a lump sum in a week average ). However, feedback from payroll industry representativ es raised concerns about the complexity that this proposal would create. In light of this feedback the Taskforce decided not to progress with this proposal. . Instead t he Taskforce proposes that any payments that relate to a period that falls entirely withi n a reference period (whether the reference period is four or weeks), for example, monthly or quarterly commission payments , should be included in the four or week average while payments that relate to longer periods (such as annual bonuses) should b e excluded from the four or week average but included in the week average. . Where there is uncertainty over the period which the paymentcommission a possible rule could be that the payment is excluded from the week reference period if it has a value greater than of all such payments received in the last weeks. The Taskforce noted that further work may be required in relation to the treatment of these type of payments (especially if a four week average earnings calculation was chosen instead of a week average earnings calculation) . . The Taskforce agreed to recommend that cashed up statutory annual holidays should be included in gross earnings but should be excluded from the four or week leave payment calculation. . The Taskfor ce considered the issue of redundancy compensation payments but could not come to an agreed position about whether these payments should be included in the definition of gross earnings. One alternative that was discussed was that per cent of the value of any redundancy compensation payments could be included in the calculation of leave payments to be paid upon termination rather than the entire value of the redundancy compensation payments being included. The Taskforce noted the case currently before th e courts on this issue and con sidered that the outcome of this case could infor m a future decisi on about whe ther these payments should be included or excluded. Recommendation . The Taskforce recommends that the following definition of gross earnings should be used as the basis for leave payment calculations: an employees leave payment should reflect all cash payments received, except direct reimbursements for costs incurred . The Taskforce proposes that any payments that relate to a period tha t falls entirely within a reference period ( whether the reference period is four or weeks), for example, monthly or quarterly commission payments should be included in the four or week average while payments that relate to longer periods (such as ann ual bonuses) should be excluded from the four or week average but included in the week average FBAPS leave entitlements Issue FBAPS unit of entitlements . FBAPS entitlements are held in days. While the Taskforce consider ed the issue of the units o f entitlement to be used throughout the Act, it did not consider that there was a strong case to move away from defining FBAPS entitlements in days.
adjust the quantum of any such discretionary payments in light of the fact that such payments would now form part of an employees gross earnings. . The Taskforce considered smooth ing commissionincentive payments across the period that they relate to (for example, a sixmonthly commission payment could be smoothed across the weeks that it relates to rather than be counted as a lump sum in a week average ). However, feedback from payroll industry representativ es raised concerns about the complexity that this proposal would create. In light of this feedback the Taskforce decided not to progress with this proposal. . Instead t he Taskforce proposes that any payments that relate to a period that falls entirely withi n a reference period (whether the reference period is four or weeks), for example, monthly or quarterly commission payments , should be included in the four or week average while payments that relate to longer periods (such as annual bonuses) should b e excluded from the four or week average but included in the week average. . Where there is uncertainty over the period which the paymentcommission a possible rule could be that the payment is excluded from the week reference period if it has a value greater than of all such payments received in the last weeks. The Taskforce noted that further work may be required in relation to the treatment of these type of payments (especially if a four week average earnings calculation was chosen instead of a week average earnings calculation) . . The Taskforce agreed to recommend that cashed up statutory annual holidays should be included in gross earnings but should be excluded from the four or week leave payment calculation. . The Taskfor ce considered the issue of redundancy compensation payments but could not come to an agreed position about whether these payments should be included in the definition of gross earnings. One alternative that was discussed was that per cent of the value of any redundancy compensation payments could be included in the calculation of leave payments to be paid upon termination rather than the entire value of the redundancy compensation payments being included. The Taskforce noted the case currently before th e courts on this issue and con sidered that the outcome of this case could infor m a future decisi on about whe ther these payments should be included or excluded. Recommendation . The Taskforce recommends that the following definition of gross earnings should be used as the basis for leave payment calculations: an employees leave payment should reflect all cash payments received, except direct reimbursements for costs incurred . The Taskforce proposes that any payments that relate to a period tha t falls entirely within a reference period ( whether the reference period is four or weeks), for example, monthly or quarterly commission payments should be included in the four or week average while payments that relate to longer periods (such as ann ual bonuses) should be excluded from the four or week average but included in the week average FBAPS leave entitlements Issue FBAPS unit of entitlements . FBAPS entitlements are held in days. While the Taskforce consider ed the issue of the units o f entitlement to be used throughout the Act, it did not consider that there was a strong case to move away from defining FBAPS entitlements in days. shrvakdix
. The Taskforce did not recommend such a system because of concerns about the disadvantages it could have for some employees and the departure from the principle that annual holidays entitlements are based on the work pattern at the time the leave is taken.
Recommendation The Taskforce recommends that FBAPS entitlements should continue to be held in days.
of the people were women, which is a great number to see. I loved being there and meeting everyone and I wish I had more time to spend with these people.
D printing a new way of life for amputees
D printing and additive manufacture
Have we accurately captured the broad range of working arrangements that can contribute to difficulties with the Act
. Approach to exercising the discretion to require insurance and or indemnity The Act provides the responsible Minister with flexibility to require insurance or an indemnity . NZSA will apply the following policy: Payloads: Generally small payloads that meet internationally accepted standards for orbital debris mitigation (supported by an ODMP that meets New Zealands requirements) will not require indemnity and insurance requi rements. Indemnity and in surance requirements for a payload permit is assessed on a case by case basis. The Minister may impose further condi tions on any licence or permit as they see fit.
Active Debris Removal and On Orbit Servicing : Operational Policy
Are there other specific types of working arrangement s which raise particular difficulties in terms of complianc e with the Act
As note d in the September final report back to Cabinet on the All of Government Payroll Programme to improve government payroll systems, many government agencies payroll systems are bespoke and aging, and already struggling to adapt to ongoing changes GOV MIN . kjtrvweh
Employees that have variable working arran gements and complex remuneration structures are most likely to receive an increase in leave payments. They are most likely to work in the health care and social assistance, accommodation and food services and public administration and safety sectors. Approximately percent of the health care and social assistance workforce and per cent of the public administration and safety workforce are employed in the public service, compared to the public services proportion of the total New Zealand workforce of per cent. It is therefore likely that a greater proportion of the marginal fiscal impacts of the Taskforces proposals will be apportioned to the Government than the sectors per cent of the workforce would suggest. Confidential advice to Government
For example, in the UK a workers .week annual leave entitlement begins to build up as soon as they start their job. A regular worker receives one twelfth of their leave in each month. In Australia an employee (who is not a casual employee) accumulates four weeks of paid annual leave for each year of service with th e employer. An employees entitlement to annual leave accumulates continuously based on the number of ordinary hours they work. kjtrvweh I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Removing the requirement to allow employees to take AL in advance during a closedown period : This reduces a liability risk for employers should the employee s employment end as leave in advance is above AL an employee has earned . Simplifying and reducing the implementation requirements of the new methodology for d etermining the use of AL entitlement: I propose removing the audit requirement for employees with actual hours that differ from guaranteed hours which would have a high compliance burde n and result in uncertainty for employers and employees. I also propose replacing the requirement to calculate average daily hours of work based on specific calendar days to reduce the extent of payroll system changes required. Simplifying the framework for paying AL as a regular part of an employees pay (pay asyougo (PAYG)): I seek Cabinets agreement to design objective criteria for using PAYG that do not require the use of judgement and will provide the certainty that is currently lacking . I also propose lengthening the period for reviewing the use of PAYG in order to reduce administrative burden and compliance costs.
Independence . The Solicitor Generals Prosecution Guidelines state at . that: The universally central tenet of a prosecution s ystem under the rule of law in a democratic society is the independence of the prosecutor from persons or agencies that are not properly part of the prosecution decision making process. Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines of Issue: July Security Classification Unclassified Version: . Review ed June Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page of . The Prosecution Policy provides that MBIE will ensure that prosec ution decisions are taken independently. The processes and guidelines in this document are intended to protect the independence of the MBIE prosecution decision maker. . Any matters that arise outside of the Prosecution Policy and these procedure and guidelines that may compromise or be seen as compromising independence m ust be raised with the Chief Legal Officer . . MBIE business units may develop enforcement strategies setting out business unit priorities and guiding deployment of investigations resources. Prosecution d ecision makers should be aware of these strategies and take them into consideration , but prosecution decisions must be made independently by the responsible decision maker with the benefit of expert legal advice. . Where a regulatory framework splits regulatory role s between MBIE and an external body, it is appropriate to consult the external body on an enforcement strategy, but not on individual prosecution decisions. . Internal and external comment and discussion on prosecution matters (including reporting to SLT, Ministers or comment to the media) should recognise this independence both before and during prosecutions. Formal reports to Ministers andor SLT should generally occur only once charges have been laid or withdrawn, in accordance with the no surprises obligations of officials in respect of matters that are likely to be controversial or the subject of public debate. . Public comment on investigations and prosecutions must follow section of this document (media comment). Conflict of Interest . All staf f involved in prosecutions or potential prosecutions must act lawfully, fairly, promptly, and free of any actual, potential or perceived conflict of interest. This applies when making decisions or contributing in any way to any MBIE prosecution or other litigation arising out of or related to prosecution action that may reasonably be contemplated. . Any conflict of interest by an MBIE staff member (whether actual , potential or perceived) must be disclosed immediately to the relevant manager in accordance with the Declarations of Interest Policy , Prosecution Policy and appropriate legal advice sought from the prosecutor or the Manager Legal Services Litigati on. In the case of disagreement as to the existence of a conflict of interest or the way in which it should be managed, the Chief Legal Officer s decision will be final. . It is the responsibility of the business unit manager to: a. record, in accordance with the Declarations of Interest Procedure , the nature of the conflict, the d ate of disclosure, its impact on the prosecution if any and any advice given as to its management; b. assess whether it creates a risk (other than ordinary litigation risk) that needs to be included in a risk register; and
Orbital Debris Mitigation: Operational Policy
Survey of Working Life, Blumenfeld, Ryall Kiely (). Employment Ag reements: Bargaining Trends and Employment Law Update . shrvakdix
Testing undertaken by Dragonfly on behalf of CTU.
Testing undertaken by Dragonfly on behalf of CTU. shrvakdix
The Review team commissioned Professor Steven Freeland to provide expert advice for our review in relation to high altitude activities.
The research finds that our strength in post farmgate bioprocessing systems (manufacturing) is highly flexible and not directly tied to the land and so it is easily adaptable to the manufacture of high value products (as distinct from commodities) , drivi ng diversification and growth in our export economy. Thus, utilising our existing bioresources including waste streams into their highest value applications is found to be easier than developing all new crops and sources of biomaterials. In the longer term , New Zealand might look to develop new production systems, examples being seaweed, microalgae, industrial hemp, canola, and eucalyptus, most of which are currently being trialled by market players. The key issue with new production syste ms is whether they can scale quickly and become competitive. Some, like seaweed, will require significant RD around growing and harvesting systems, to develop efficiency and scale economies. The success of others, like canola, is dependent on whether New Zealand can be internationally competitive with major offshore producers. Ideally , in the future , New Zealand can utilise its significant forestry resources and potentially new high rotation crops such as eucalyptus to manufacture biochemicals, bioplastics and bioenergy at a scale to substantially replace similar fossil fuel derive d products. Currently the economics of doing this is challenging. In addition, New Zealand would have to develop a whole value chain around these bio industries to make them work. This includes funding of innovation infrastructures, such as an open access pilot scale biorefinery to enable proof of concept, technical information acquisition and pilot scale production. Work to on costs of establishing such a facility, includin g potential reve nue streams, indicates that reasonably substantial Government capital investment and ongoing part funding of operations would be required. This is consistent with the experience of similar facilities in other countries. Mori business are well placed to pi oneer and benefit from emerging new bioeconomy products and industries, given existing investment, knowledge, and skills in land based industries , particularly forestry. For Mori, innovation will be key for: minimising the use of fossil fuels through th e development of alternative products; increasing value added by exporting finished and consumer ready goods rather than raw inputs; and increasing the production of biomass by shifting land use to higher yielding crops. More generally, our research found that the Mori economy can act as a catalyst for shift to more sustainable and circular use of resources, particularly through land utilisation opportunities and the role of local place anchored enterprises. New Zealand needs new skill sets and capabiliti es in firms and institutions to transition to more value added and branded export business. New Zealand has highly developed capabilities along the whole value chain as a low cost commodity food exporter, based on years of public and private investment. Over the last twenty years there has been growing industry investment in developing more c omplex added value products, often consumer products, with exports now valued at . billion as indicated above. This growth has often been led by start ups and new entrants (eg Chinese investment in infant formula and petfood) rather than by the large incumbents. A key reason for this is that the commodity business requires skills and capabilities based around scale, efficiency, and quality, while the added value business requires a whole additional set of skills and capabilities that the commodity playe rs (and New Zealand generally) lack. The additional capabilities include the ability to manage complex value chains, constant product and packaging innovation, access to pilot facilities , new technologies and machinery, market insights , access to capital, and skills in sales and brand development . Some of the capabilities required have been put in place, such as the New Zealand Food Innovation Network (NZFIN), the Biores ource Processing Alliance (focusing on waste streams), and the Food and Beverage Inform ation Project that ran from to . Achieving the Governments export target through value rather than volume will likely require scaling and expanding these programmes, in li ne with the significant investment in food being made by competitor countri es Australia, Singapore, Denmark, Ireland. Upgrading of capital equipment to enable the production of added value products is also an important opportunity to embed practices of reducing waste and circularity . Source s: Emerging and future platforms in New Zealands bioeconomy Barriers, enablers and approaches for a more circular economy
This is a high level assessment based on officials preferred option. Confidential advice to Government transferred from one employer to the other but in reality they have entered a new employment relationship with the incoming employer. . Our view is that in these situations, the outgoing employer is legally required to pay out untaken annual leave and alternative holiday entitlements under the Holidays Act when the employees employment with them comes to an end, and the employees leave entitlements res et with the incoming employer. The outgoing employer is not required to pay out untaken family violence leave, bereavement leave or sick leave (FBS leave) entitlements when employment ends, but may choose to do so. . However, in practice the outgoing and incoming employers often allow employees to transfer all or part of their leave entitlements (including annual leave and alternative holidays) and come to an agreement about who takes on the liability for that leave. This outcome is beneficial for both employers and employees. It provides employers flexibility in relation to business arrangements and liabilities, and means employees do not always have to wait to become entitled to paid time away from work because their leave entitlements have been reset by the incoming employer. However, it is technically a breach of the Holidays Act. . Because of this , there is currently no legal framework to support common practice when it comes to apportioning liability between them and transferring the employee information needed to calculate employees leave entitlements and pay to the incoming employer . This causes confusion and issues with the calculation and payment of leave following restruct uring . . Our view is that the new legislation should legitimise the common practice. However, the Taskforces recommendation (which Cabinet accepted in ) seeks to go further than this and require employers to offer employees the choice as to whether they have their annual leave and alternative holidays paid out or transferred if they are transferring to the incoming employer. Giving effect to the Taskforces recommendation would be complex . It is unclear whether the Taskforces recommendation was intended to apply to the types of employees specified in Schedule A of the ERA. Part A of the ERA already sets out that these types of employees must be offered choice to transfer employment to the incoming employer, and if they do choose to transfer, their leave entitlements must be automatically transferred . This explicitly overrides the Holidays Act requirement that the outgoing employer must pay out untaken annual leave and alternative holiday entitlements. . The Part A provisions are intended to account for these employees lack of bargaining power and greater risk of losing their job or having their terms and conditions undermined. We consider it strikes an appropriate balance between the Emplo yment Relations and Standards regulatory system s objectives of flexibility, certainty and worker protection, and recommend the situation for specified employees remains unchanged. . It is also unclear how the Taskforces recommendation was intended to be im plemented in standard restructuring situations. For types of employees not specified in Schedule A, the decision by employers to offer employees the opportunity to transfer their employment in a restructuring situation is a contractual choice. Part A of the ERA requires employment agreements to contain an Employ ee Protection Provision (EPP) that sets out the process employers will follow in restructuring situations , however this process can be decided by parties to the employment agreement. The EPP must a lso include the matters employers will negotiate regarding the affected employees employment, including whether they will have the choice to transfer employment on the same terms and conditions. . A literal approach to operationalising the Taskforces recommendation would mean that employers would be required to offer employees a choice about whether to have their leave entitlements transferred or paid out by the outgoing employer, as a downstream decision of something they are voluntarily agreeing to. Imposing this statutory constraint on employers contractual arrangements could discourage the incoming employer from offering employees the opportunity to transfer their employment. . Due to the additional policy work required, work to implement this recommendation was put on hold and it is not currently included in the Bill. During the election period we have progressed work to develop options for addressing the underlying issues the recommendation was intended to address. . We are seeking your agreement to include an adjustment to the current Cabinet decision accepting the Taskforces recommendation in your May Cabinet paper. This will enable your preferred option to be included in the exposure draft of the Bill, providing the opportunity to test it with stakeholders for practicality and any unintended consequences or further complexities we may not have considered. Options to address the issues identified in restructuring situations defined in Part A of the ERA . We have identified f ive options to clarify how leave entitlements should be treated in restructuring situations (as defined in Part A of the ERA) where employees who are not specified in Schedule A of the ERA transfer employment to the incoming employer. These are summarised in Table below and more detail is included in Annex One. Table options for addressing issues related to the treatment of leave entitlements in restructuring situations defined in Part A of the ERA Option Description No legislative change but improved MBI E guidance (there currently is none) to improve understanding of the current legal status quo to pay out and res et annual leave and alternative holiday entitlements. This would require rescinding the Cabinet decision to accept the Taskforces recommendation. Improved MBIE guidance (same as option one) and legislative amendments to clarify the legal status quo. This would also require rescinding the current Cabinet decision. Legislative change that requires employers to automatically transfer employees annual leave and alternative holiday and FBS leave entitlements if they negotiate for the employee to be offered the choice to transfer employment and the employee chooses to do so. This would require a minor adjustmentclarification to the current Cabinet decision, but it would be difficult to draft a legislative ame ndment to achieve this. Legislative change that requires employers to offer employees the choice to transfer all or part of their annual leave and alternative holiday and FBS leave entitlements if they negotiate for the employee to be offered the choice to transfer employment and the employee chooses to do so. This would require a minor adjustmentclarification to the current Cabinet decision, but it would be difficult to draft a legislative amendment to achieve this. Recommended option Legislative change that requires the treatment of leave entitlements to be included in Employee Protection Provisions as a matter that the outgoing employer will negotiate with the incoming employer. The specific matters are set out in detail in A ppendix One and include whether the incoming employer will recognise all or part of the employees annual leave and alternative holiday entitlements not taken at the of transfer (instead of the outgoing employer paying them out in accordance with the Holidays Act provisions). They also include whether an employee will be provided a choice in the matter, or it will be automatic. This option would require a more significant adjustment to the current Cabinet decision as, unlike options three and four, it departs from the Taskforces recommendation to require employers to provide a choice to employees. . We have assessed the options against the core objectives of the Employment Relations and Standards regulatory system: Regulatory flexibility : provides scope for parties to adopt a range of approaches to meet legal obligations relating to the treatment of leave entitlements in the event of restructuring. Worker protection: enables employers to give employees whose employment is being transferred the option to retain all or part of their leave entitlements to take paid time away from work. Certainty: provides clarity about the treatment of leave entitlements in restructuring situations. We recommend option five because we consider it strikes the most appropriate balance between the objectives . Option five provides the flexibility for employers to adopt a range of approaches that best suit their specific business circumstances, which the other options do not provide. It also provides employers the ability to negotiate for all or part of employees leave entitlements to be transferred and, where this is negotiated, whether employees are offered a choice in the matter. It would override the Holidays Act requirement that annual leave and alternative holiday entitlements must always be paid out at the end of employment, and provide a legal framework for employers to follow. . Option five reflects common practice (unlike the other options) and would provide certainty regarding the legal obligations in restructuring situations. It would also require Employee Protection Provision s in employees employment agreements to include the apportionment of liability and the transfer of relevant employee inform ation as matters employers will negotiate. . In terms of worker protection, option five does not ensure that employees will always have their leave entitlements transferred or that they will have a choice in the matter, but it does provide the ability for this to happen. It includes a safeguard for situations where an employee transfers employment on a lower rate of pay, ensuring that the payment they receive for transferred leave entitlement is not less than what it would have been if it were paid out and res et at the time of the restructuring. . Option five also minimises the risk of distorting the negotiation process between employers. The mandatory nature of the requirement to provide employees the choice to transfer their leave entitlements in options three and four may discourage the incoming employer from offering employees the opportunity to transfer their employment if large leave liabilities were involved. Appendix One: Options for addressing issues related to the treatment of leave entitlements in standard restructuring situations Implementation option Certainty Regulatory flexibility Worker protection . No legislative change but improved MBIE guidance (there currently is none) to improve understanding of the current legal status quo to pay out and reset annual leave and alternative holiday entitlements. Requires rescinding the Cabinet decision to accept the Taskforces recommendation. Legisla tion does not provide clarity but guidance will provide greater certainty about legal requirements. The common practice of including transfer of leave entitlements as part of negotiations between employers remains non compliant and this would be clarified in guidance.
allowances, incentive or commission payments that the employee would have received if they had worked for the relevant period.
areas of specialisation:
government agencies have released a Longterm Insights Briefing about preparing all young people for satisfying and rewarding working lives. A summary of the briefing is also available.
years after certification
. Agree to refine the Taskforces recommendations on two issues where the recommendations were incomplete, by specifying that:
. Build an aerospacecapable workforce
. Innovation, technology and science
. Problems in the building consent system
. The estimate also assumes that all employers currently provide minimum leave entitlements to their employees. In practice however, many employers already provide entitlements at least equal to the increases the
. To help address the root causes of these issues, Cabinet agreed in May to establish a Taskforce to review the Act and suggest recommendations for change CAB MIN refers. The tripartite group was comprised of government, union and business rep resentatives, and was chaired by Professor Gordon Anderson, an employment law specialist from Victoria University. The Taskforce was provided with approximately a year to provide its final report.
.. the reference period for the short run average weekly earnings calculation used f or calculating annual holiday payments should be weeks
.. any commission or incentive payments where it is unclear what period of time the payments were earned over should only be included in the week average payment calculation
.. Using the pay asyou go provision inappropriately . Section allows an employer to regularly pay annual holiday pay of per cent of the employees gross earnings in lieu of providing weeks of annual holidays (commonly referred to as pay asyougo(PAYG)) . . However, an employer is only able to do so if the employee is on a fixed term agreement for less than months, or works on a basis that is so inter mittent or irregular that it is impracticable for the employer to provide the employee with weeks annual holidays. . It is not always clear to employers when this clause applies, and what impracticable means especially if an employee requests or agre es to have holiday pay included in their regular pay. There is no statutory definition of a casual working arrangement, even though this term might be used in employment agreements. . Some employees may start off as a casual worker and be eligible for PAYG but over time a pattern of work might emerge. If this happens then the employer should switch to providing annual holidays. Correctly using the PAYG provision requires the employers to be in regular contact with their payroll, and to make adjustments shou ld circumstances change. . An additional liability can arise in situations where an employee may incorrectly be paid PAYG for months or more as, after months the employee becomes entitled to annual holidays in line with Section . In this instance, a n employer has not met their obligation by providing four weeks of annual holidays. Providing an additional per cent (eve n if identified and agreed as holiday pay), does not absolve the employer from the requirement to provid e the four weeks entitlement if the employee has worked for the employer for longer than months . Do you agree with the description of the issues relating to annual holidays here and in Annex Two If not, why not
a minimum amount of a quarter of a day.
for domestic productions.
. For reasons of clarity a nd simplicity, as well as providing an appropriate balance between minimising cost to employers while protecting entitlements for employees, I propose that the short run reference period should be weeks and that any commission or incentive payments wh ere it is unclear what period of time the payments were earned over should only be included in the week average payment calculation.
. The objectives of the OSHAA Act are to: facilitate the development of a space industry and provide for its safe and sec ure operation implement certain international obligations of New Zealand relating to space activities and space technology, including those found in the Outer Space Treaty , manage any potential or actual liability that may arise from the space industry establish a system for the regulation of space activities and certain high altitude activities , and preserve New Zealands national security and national interests . . The design of the regulations should not hinder these objectives. . In addition, the specif ic objectives we are assessing the options in this Regulatory Impact Statement against are: For the application requirements Enabling the regulator and applicants to efficiently work through the application process and meet the requirements of the regime Ensuring the compliance costs of applying for licenses are appropriate , and maintain the international competitiveness of the regime, and Enable the license application process to evolve over time as volumes increase and the regulator develops expertise and best practice . For the issue of higha ltitude exemptions Managing national interest and national security risks associated with certain h igh altitude activities
. The Taskforce also discussed the Mondayisation issue whereby those employees who regularly work Mondays receive more paid public holidays as a result of their wor king patterns than other employees who do not regularly work on Mondays. . The Taskforce considered establishing a pro rata public holidays entitlement based on the average number of days per week worked. This would ensure that all employees who worked th e same number of days per week received the same entitlement to paid public holidays regardless of which particular days of the week they worked. Under this approach , every employee s public holidays entitlement would be based on the number of days worked per week as set out below: No. days worked per week Public holidays employee is eligible for , or . The prorata entitlement would be calculated at the end of the year and the employee would then receive any additional enti tlement in the form of alternative holidays (for example, if an employee worked four days a week and throughout the year only received seven paid public holidays then at the end of the year they would receive an entitlement of two alternative holidays). No employee would be disadvantaged under the proposal so if, as a result of their working pattern, an employee had received more paid public holidays than their prorata entitlement suggests they should have received no action would be taken. . While estab lishing a pro rata public holidays entitlement would address the Mondayisation issue, it would add complexity and cost for employers. The Taskforce was unable to reach agreement about recommending the establishment of such an entitlement. Recommendati on The Taskforce recommends that a day should be considered an Otherwise Working Day for an employee for FBAPS purposes if: the employee was expected to work on the day in question according to a work pattern that has previously been agreed between the employee and employer (for example, a regular shift pattern that is set out in an employment agreement) , or the employee has worked on or more of the corresponding days in either the previous weeks or the previous weeks.
Appendix One: Summary of questions
growth in visitor arrivals in the last years
Appendix Two: Summary of proposed fees and levies Proposed Companies Office fees and levies set to recover million expenditure
Recommendation The Taskforce recommends that section ()(a) of the Act , regarding peo ple on whose death the employee may take days of bereavement leave, should be extended to include: stepfamily family bymarriage not already included (siblings inlaw and children inlaw) cultural family groups (e.g. whngai relationships) aunts, uncles, nieces and nephews miscarriage (this proposal is currently being progressed via a private members bill). The Taskforce notes that the definition included in the Family Violence Act app ears to cover all of these groups and individuals, but may need to be to specifically include miscarriage: family member, in relation to a person, means (a) any other person who is or has been related to the person (i) by blood; or (ii) by or through marriage, a civil union, or a de facto relationship; or (iii) by adoption: (b) any other person who is a member of the persons whnau or other culturally recognised family group
. I propose to mitigate this risk by emphasising the support that the Taskforce recommendations received from both business and union representatives on the Taskforce, and h ighlighting the improvements that the proposed system will provide. I will particularly emphasise that these proposals will allow employers to shift from a highly uncertain and risky regulatory environment where large remediation payments are the norm, to one where they will be able to have confidence they are meeting the regulatory requirements.
Other proposed changes Issue Establishing a th public holiday . The Taskforce also discussed the case for establishing a public holiday for Ma tariki. The Mori calendar (the Maramataka) begins in June when the Matariki star cluster reappears in the sky. Recently, some politicians, members of the public, and media commentators have argued that a new public holiday should be created to recognise Matariki, which would celebrate the Mori New Year and honour Moritanga (traditions and cultu re). New Zealand currently has public holidays, and Waitangi Day is the only one of these that honours Mori as tangata whenua. Recommendation The Taskforc e was unable to reach a consensus view in relation to establishing an additional public holiday. The Taskforce noted that Matariki could be marked either by establishing an additional public holiday or by transferring an existing public holiday to recognis e Matariki. The Taskforce noted the case for Matariki to be recognised with a public holiday but did not feel it was within its remit to make recommendations about whether Matariki should be marked with a public holiday, and if so how this should be achiev ed (i.e. by establishing an additional public holiday or transferring an existing public holiday to Matariki).
. The complexity of the existing and proposed legislation means that further policy decisions will likely be required during the drafting process (for example, to connect the various elements of the Taskforces proposals, and reconcile them with provisions o n which the Taskforce did not make recommendations). I therefore request authorisation to make any changes and decisions during drafting in line with the Taskforces recommendations.
be reset by agreement) . This would no longer be necessary, due to the Taskforces previous recommendation that employees should be able to take holidays in advance of entitlem ent, on a prorata basis. . Employees should be able to take holidays in advance beyond their prorata entitlement in the event of a customary closedown, but employers may not compel employees to do this. . A minimum notice period of days should be in troduced for agreed additional closedowns (the Act is currently silent on notice periods for these). . The agreement between employer and employee that additional closedowns will occur must be in writing.
. I note that the Better Rules approach will be used to develop the detail ed policy and implementation specifications that will be necessary for this next phase of work. Better Rules is a collaboration between multiple government agencies, including the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), Inland Revenue and t he Parliamentary Counsel Office. The Better Rules approach involves creating a clear concept model, decision trees and rules statements that can then be translated into both written legislation and computer code. This should result in legislation that is clear and, importantly, workable for computerised payroll systems. I note that this approach has been used successfully by Inland Revenue, which also needs to develop rules with payroll systems in mind.
. In recent years a number of issues have been identified with the Holidays Act that have made it difficult to implement in practice. In addition to a range of specific issues relating to specific parts of the Act (for example, determining entitlemen ts and payments for annual holidays), there are also some more fundamental, cross cutting issues related to the design of the Act. . This section outlines these fundamental, cross cutting issues as well as highlighting some of the more significant issues th at relate to specific parts of the Act. A more detailed list of the specific issues the Taskforce is aware of in relation to particular parts of the Act is included in Annex . . The Taskforce would appreciate feedback on: whether the issues outlined in thi s section and in Annex are captured correctly from your perspective whether you have encountered any other issues related to implementing the Act that are not included in this paper and if so, what these are. Some issues relate to all aspects of the Act . . There are a number of issues that apply across the whole Act rather than to one specific section or other. These relate to the design of the Act itself and are the cause of many of the problems employers, employees and professional service providers (inclu ding payroll providers) face in working with the Act. These issues, which are discussed below, are: the lack of specific prescription in the Act the complexity of the Act the lack of clarity in relation to specific terms included in the Act. .. The lack of prescription in the Act can make it hard to implement, particularly if agreement between employer and employee is not reached . The Act is intentionally not prescriptive in its design , to allow different ways for employers and employees to comply based on the particular circumstances of their workforce and individual situations. . In situations in which it is not clear how the entitlement is to be provided, the Act does not provide any prescriptio n. Instead a number of judgements are required based on the specific facts of an employees working and remuneration arrangements. Often the agreement of the employee about how leave entitlements should be provided for their particular circumstance is requ ired. In practice, this agreement of the employee may not always be sought. . Instead, either the employer makes a determination, or the payroll system relies on available information which may never have been , or is no longer, accurate . The requirements f or employers to use judgement or reach agreements with their employees are difficult to systematise and can involve significant resources, especially for large employers with many staff. Payroll systems are often configured around assumptions or agreements which later shift.
Appendix Three: Forecast annual volumes by register to determine unit costs Register Service Annual volumes Companies register Company incorporation , Annual return , Annual return API , Name approval , Amalgamation Restoration , Personal Property Securities register Registrationrenewal financing statement , Registrationrenewal financing statement API , Basic search internet , Basic search API ,, Financial statement s Financial statement filing , Disclose register Disclose: Managed fund offers Lodgement of product disclosure statement (per fund) Annual confirmation to managed fund (per fund) , Disclose: Other financial products Lodgement of product disclosure statement (per PDS) Annual confirmation other financial products (per PDS) Disclose: Managed investment schemes Register managed investment scheme or governing document File scheme annual report Disclose: overseas offers Offer under Asia region funds passport (per fund) Financial Service Providers register Registration , Annual renewal , Retirement Villages register Registration application Annual return ( units) Annual return ( units) Annual return ( units) Incorporated Societies register Registration Annual return , Restoration
records for longer than six years in cases where an issue has been raised in good faith. Issue Payslips . There is currently no legal requiremen t for employers to provide payslips to employees in New Zealand. Although employees have a legal right to ask their employer for their wages, time and leave records, this information could be made more transparent and accessible for employees. . The Taskfor ce believes it is important that employees have regular access to information regarding their leave entitlements, and that payslips create the opportunity for this to be issued to employees on a consistent basis. Payslips increase transparency over pay and allow employees to better understand and track their leave entitlements. Recommendation The Taskforce recommends that employers should be required to provide payslips to employees i n every pay period. Payslips could be in a digital or physical format, but employees should be able to request that their payslip be provided in a specific format. While noting that the precise design and format of payslips will require further work, the Taskforce recommends that payslips should include the type of informatio n outlined in the table below. Proposed information to be included in payslips Format Payslips should be in electronic form or hard copy General data Employer name Employee name which payslip was made of start of employment Number of hours wor ked each day and pay for those hours Days or portion of days worked over a calendar week Gross amount Net amount Specifics of all deductions from gross amount Types of pay (e.g. regular, overtime, or a combination, PAYG) Inputs and methodologies, as appli cable, used to calculate general data Leave entitlements on which entitlement to annual holidays begin on which entitlement to FBAPS leave begin Current entitlement to annual holidays expressed in weeks or portion of weeks Current entitlement to family violence, sick leave and alternative holidays (if applicable) expressed in days or portions of days Balance of annual holidays leave expressed in weeks or portion of weeks Balance of family violence, sick leave and alternative holidays (if applicab le) entitlements expressed in days or portions of days Inputs and methodologies, as applicable, used to calculate leave entitlements Leave transactions Payment for annual leave or FBAPS leave, if applicable Payment for cashed out annual holidays, if appli cable
records for longer than six years in cases where an issue has been raised in good faith. Issue Payslips . There is currently no legal requiremen t for employers to provide payslips to employees in New Zealand. Although employees have a legal right to ask their employer for their wages, time and leave records, this information could be made more transparent and accessible for employees. . The Taskfor ce believes it is important that employees have regular access to information regarding their leave entitlements, and that payslips create the opportunity for this to be issued to employees on a consistent basis. Payslips increase transparency over pay and allow employees to better understand and track their leave entitlements. Recommendation The Taskforce recommends that employers should be required to provide payslips to employees i n every pay period. Payslips could be in a digital or physical format, but employees should be able to request that their payslip be provided in a specific format. While noting that the precise design and format of payslips will require further work, the Taskforce recommends that payslips should include the type of informatio n outlined in the table below. Proposed information to be included in payslips Format Payslips should be in electronic form or hard copy General data Employer name Employee name which payslip was made of start of employment Number of hours wor ked each day and pay for those hours Days or portion of days worked over a calendar week Gross amount Net amount Specifics of all deductions from gross amount Types of pay (e.g. regular, overtime, or a combination, PAYG) Inputs and methodologies, as appli cable, used to calculate general data Leave entitlements on which entitlement to annual holidays begin on which entitlement to FBAPS leave begin Current entitlement to annual holidays expressed in weeks or portion of weeks Current entitlement to family violence, sick leave and alternative holidays (if applicable) expressed in days or portions of days Balance of annual holidays leave expressed in weeks or portion of weeks Balance of family violence, sick leave and alternative holidays (if applicab le) entitlements expressed in days or portions of days Inputs and methodologies, as applicable, used to calculate leave entitlements Leave transactions Payment for annual leave or FBAPS leave, if applicable Payment for cashed out annual holidays, if appli cable shrvakdix
. The previous Minister also agreed that employees who would become eligible after three months would receive their full ten days of minimum sick leave entitlement upon becoming eligible. This solution took into account feedback from our working group that aligning the accumulation points for these two groups of employees would help simplify the accumulation process and making it easier to understand and implement in payroll systems. They had raised concerns that the gradual accumulation process Cabinet agreed to would add complexity because it involved multiple points at which different groups employees would become entitled to different portions of the minimum sick leave entitlement. You may wish to reconsider the accumulation profile . We recommend seeking Cabinet approval for the accumulation profile. However , you may wish to reconsider the accumulation profile and propose a different approach . . You may wish to lengthen the timeframe over which sick leave accumulates, considering the impact on employers of providing the minimum sick leave entitlement earlier than the current requirement of after six months of employment. For example, rather than accumulating over the first three months of employment, sick leave could accumulate over the first six months of employment. . There are a range of accumulation profiles you can choose depending on whether you placed greater importance on lengthening the timeframe over which this group of employees sick leave accumulates, or on reducing the complexity and related costs to employers. . We recommend a profile for the exposure draft that lengthens the accumulation over six months. To respond to the stakeholder feedback about complexity, we propose that there are fewer accumulation points. Our proposal is two days entitlement on day one, four more days after three months and the remaining four days at the six month point (,,). This is a minimum and an employer (as many do now) could choose a simpler profile that is above it, for example by providing the full day entitlement from day one. . Accumulating sick leave over six months has the downside that to retain parity, employees who meet the eligibility criteria (the hours test) after three months, would also need to have an accumulation profile. These workers would receive six days when they become eligible and then the additional four days when they reach six months. Stakeholders are likely to raise further concerns about the provision of sick leave . A longer timeframe over which sick leave accumulates in the first year of employment would go some way to address employer concerns about the costs of providing sick leave to employees from the first day of employment for eligible employees . . Despite this, a new requirement to give eligible employees the ability to take some sick leave from d ay one is likely to reinforce stakeholder concerns about the overall fairness of sick leave entitlements and the costs and risks to businesses. Several employers raised concerns in their submissions on the Holidays (Increasing Sick Leave) Amendment Bill in regarding the
Register Service Annual volumes Limited Partnerships register Registration Annual return , Friendly Societies registerCredit Unions registerBuilding Societies register Registration Annual return Insolvency Practitioners register Licence registration Annual confirmation Auditors register Registrationrenewal of a licence Annual confirmation Levies CO levy , NZBN levy , IP levy ,
Payment for PAYG, itemised separately, if applicable Inputs and methodologies, as applicable, used to calculate leave transactions Quarterly review of employees working arrangement (for PAYG, sick, bereavement and family violence leave eligibility purposes) on which quarterly review carried out Result of quarterly review for PAYG eligibility (if applicable) and any changes to entitlements resulting from the review Result of quarterly review for sick, bereavement and family violence leave eligib ility and any changes to entitlements resulting from the review Termination Reference to termination pay, if applicable Reference to leave pay, if applicable Inputs and methodologies, as applicable, used to calculate termination Corrections Notation of any corrections to previous payslips, including references to payslip number, methodologies an d data that have been corrected
. One recommendation made by the Taskforce was for further work to be undertaken on the design of compliance and enforcement mechanisms to suppor t any revised Act. While this work is yet to be completed, my initial view is that any changes to the existing mechanisms (such as the functions and powers of labour inspectors) are likely to be minor. I will seek Cabinet policy approvals if further work l eads me to conclude that a significant departure from existing employment legislation is necessary.
Appendix Four : Summary of fees to be revoked and other minor changes Description of service Current fee (GST exclusive ) Reason for revoking Companies register Photocopy made by the public . Service no longer provided. Photocopy made by the Registrar . Service no longer provided. For any other electronic search . This fee was established for web based searching for finance statements under the Personal Property Securities Act . The service is no longer provided. Manual search of the Companies register . Service no longer provided because Companies register is an online register only. Personal Property Securities register Verification statement by post . Service no longer provided. Certified copy of finance statement . Service no longer provided. This fee was similarly revoked in for the Companies register. Limited Partnerships register Certified copy of finance statement . Service no longer provided Friendly Societies and Credit Unions register Copy per page under section () of the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions (Fees) Regulations . . Service no longer provided . Annul return filed more than three months after close of the financial year (Part and Part of the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions (Fees) Regulations ). . An overdue fee is not applied to other annual return filings for other registers . On application for confirmation of an amalgamation, transfer of engagements, or conversion into a company under section () of the Act . This service has not been provided in years, as the Registrar has not received an application under this section and it is anticipated that this service can be managed with no additional fee. For filing an instrument of dissolution under section (as applied by section ()) of the Act. . Following an amendment to the Act in , credit unions cannot be removed from the register by filing an instrument of dissolution. For filing, under section () (as applied by section () of the Act, a copy of a special resolution passed for the purpose of amalgamation or transfer of engagements. . The description of the fee in regulations no longer matches the changes made to the Act in .
Recommendation The Taskfo rce recommends that employers and employees have the ability to agree to arrangements that are different to those in the Act providing that it can be demonstrated that these arrangements provide the employee with leave entitlements that, at a minimum, meet the standards set out in the Act .
were approved through the Partner resident visa category.
. The Treasury, State Services Commission, Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (Policy Advisory Group), Ministry of Education, Ministr y of Health, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Social Development, Office for Disability Issues, Ministry for Women, Ministry for Pacific Peoples, Inland Revenue, Oranga Tamariki Ministry for Children, Department of Internal Affairs and Te Puni Kokiri wer e consulted on this paper.
Annex : Holidays Act Review Terms of Reference Purpose . The purpose of the Holidays Act Working Group (the Group) is to make recommendations to Government for a clear and transparent set of rules for providing entitlements to, and payment for, holidays and leave that can be readily implemented in a payroll system and is applicable to an increasingly diverse range of working and pay arrangements. . It is important that a customer focused approach is taken to this r eview to ensure that recommendations are readily implementable by employers and their payroll providers. Background . There is widespread non compliance with the Holidays Act (the Act) and it is generally accepted that this is due both to issues with th e implementation of the legislation in payroll systems and the business processes that support these, and issues with the legislation itself. . The Act works well for a standard, five day, hour week, but can be difficult to apply to more diverse working a rrangements and complex remuneration packages. This is primarily because the Act is based on two key principles relating to entitlements and pay: a. that entitlements are determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken b. that employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave, that is, they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked. . In these situations, the Act relies heavily on employers making judgements as to how the provisions of the Act a pply to the specific circumstances of the individual employees, and in some cases agreement with the employee is required. In some cases, these may need to happen each time leave is requested. . The result is an Act that does not provide certainty to employe rs and employees, is difficult for employees and employers to understand and interpret, is hard to systematise in a payroll system, and can incur relatively high compliance costs for employers. Objectives . The Group is required to develop, test and make rec ommendations to the Government on policy options for the provision of, and payment for, holiday and leave entitlements that: a. continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act b. provide clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements c. are simpler than the current Act in relation to provisions of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave d. are readily implementable in a payroll system e. minimise compliance costs for employers f. minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees g. ensure the balance of decision making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated h. are readily applicable to the full range of working and remune ration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future i. aim to protect overall entitlements for employees.
On application for confirmation of an amalgamation or transfer under section () of the Act . The service has not been provided in years. There are only three remaining credit unions, therefore it is anticipated that this service can be managed with no additional fee.
of these were approved through the Dependent Child resident visa category.
Scope and parameters . The Review will retain the purpose of the current Act (in section ) and (at least) the current levels of entitleme nts (such as four weeks annual holidays, five days sick leave). . The Group will consider: a. options to improve both the provision of, and payment for, entitlements that meet the objectives set out in paragraph , and: i. where trade offs between competing obj ectives are required, will be explicit about how these are made ii. may include consideration of the place of the standard five day, hour, working week in the Act b. any other matters relating to the Act that it sees fit. This may include holidays and leave entitlements modified by other Acts (such as the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act ). . The principles set out in paragraph may also be reconsidered, but options must aim to preserve the intent of these as far as possible. . The Group will no t, however, consider the complex issue of remediation of historical underpayments of holiday and leave pay. Membership and Process . The Group will consist representatives from MBIE, the State Services Commission and Inland Revenue, along with three to four members each representing workers, employers, led by an independent Chair with the power to commission work. . The Group will be chaired by Gordon Anderson, a law professor at Victoria University. The Chair is an independentneutral party in the Group discus sions, whose purpose is to facilitate the parties to reach jointly agreed recommendations to Government. . The Group is expected to consult widely to get a comprehensive understanding of the issues with the Act, and draw on international examples of holiday s and leave legislation where appropriate. . The Group is also expected to work closely with technical experts such as payroll providers, business rules specialists, and service design and delivery specialists to assist with the design and testing of policy options. . The Group is required to support their recommendations with quantitative analysis of different options, tested with bona fide payroll data, to ensure that those options are readily implementable and adverse consequences have been identified. . The p arties agree that consistency of attendees will be important for the Group to achieve its objectives, and will ensure that representatives will not be changed unless this is unavoidable. If any change in representatives is required, the party concerned wil l ensure the new attendees have been well briefed on previous discussions and progress. . The parties will each ensure that their constituentsstakeholders have appropriate opportunity to have input into development of options, through the parties internal governance arrangements. MBIE will ensure that appropriate cross agency structures in place for senior government officials to be kept informed of, and have input into, the work of the Group. . MBIE will provide secretariat support to the Group and informat ion and research that the Group identifies is required to facilitate its discussions.
. The Department of Internal Affairs, on behalf of the All ofgovernment Payroll Programme working group, relayed concerns that the Taskforces recomm endations do not provide enough certainty, transparency and practicality, and will impose significant costs on employers when updating their payroll systems and complying with new requirements. The working group recommends that further detailed design work , including more comprehensive payroll testing, is conducted before decisions are made by Cabinet regarding legislative change.
Are there other specific types of working arrangements which raise particular difficulties in terms of compliance with the Act
(MBIE, ) MBIE Strategic Intentions https:www.mbie.govt.nzassetsstrategic intentions .pdf MBIEs purpose is to grow New Zealand for all https:www.mbie.govt.nzaboutwho weare Table : Companies Office actual or forecast expenditure and revenue FY () Financial year Actual Actual Actual Actual Actual Actual Forecast Total revenue by register , , , , , , , Companies, limited partnerships, NZBN , , , , , , , Incorporated societies Friendly societies, credit unions, building societies Retirement villages Disclose , , Financial service providers , , , , , , , PPSR , , , , , , , Auditors and insolvency practitioners Financial reporting filing Other Total feeslevies funded expenditure , , , , , , , Personnel , , , , , , , Other operating , , , , , , , Depreciation , , , , , , , Capital charge , , MBIE functional support , , , , , , , Surplus(Deficit) (,) (,) (,) (,) (, ) (, ) (,) Memorandum account balance as of June , , , , , (,) (,) Monitoring revenue and expenditure: tracking the memorandum account The Companies Office uses the memorandum account to track the annual revenue and expenditure associated with providing services to users of each of its registers that are not funded by the Crown. The memorandum account records the annual surplus or deficit to provide a cumulative balance over time. It is monitor ed for when changes will be required to the cost recovery settings (the structure and amount of fees and levies) and to ensure that recurring surpluses or deficits are kept to a minimum. This practic e is in line with Treasury and OAG cost recovery guidance. The three to fiveyear frequency of reviews of cost recovery and resulting adjustments to fees and levies provides entities with a level of certainty that fee and levy amounts will not fluctuate annually and allows them to plan accordingly for any changes. Fluctuations between surplus and deficit are expected over time (shown year toyear in Table ). Many of the Companies Office services are demand driven , and economic shocks such as the recent COVID pandemic, can impact the demand for service across the Companies Office registers. In , the memorandum account showed an accumulated surplus of . million. Therefore , the fees and levy review resulted in some fees being set below cost recovery to reduce this surplus over time. A s at June , the memorandum account balance reached a deficit of . million and forecast to continue to decline by approximately . million per year unless charges are . Why the current level of fees cannot be maintained Without any change to fees, MBIE would need to either seek a capital injection or fund the deficit from its cash reserves. Funding from cash reserves is not sustainable overtime, as it would compromise MBIEs capital investment plan. A capital injection wo uld need to be considered by Cabinet in the wider context of investment across New Zealand. Proposed additional expenditure The review of the cost model has identified a level of savings to cover increase d costs in other areas (eg savings in personnel reprioritised to offset other types of expenditure). The proposed fees and levies in this document incorporate a proposed increase of . million to the Companies Office budget above this reprioritisation exercise. This increase would meet new cost pressures, improve the types of operational services provided and maintain the integrity of the Companies Office registry regime within the next three tofive years. The increased budget would be applied to the four categories of cost pressures below. IT Infrastructure upgrades to ensure continued functionality and security (. million) . million will be applied to required IT spending to cover the cost of essential security and maintenance upgrades to the existing IT systems (primarily supporting the Disclose register) . Costs include appropriate resourcing to meet current IT standards, improving the efficiency of registration and renewal processes for customers and enhancing cyber security measures to minimise the risk of cyber attacks. Improvements to IT systems will s implify registration and payment, as well as the statutory declarat ion and disclosure processes, which will improve the overall processing of online applications and renewals. MBIE IT functional support ( . million) . million will be applied to additional MBIE IT functional support costs for IT platforms shared across MBIE. MBIE has recently integrated several IT platforms shared by the Companies Office registry systems to the cloud (including migration of register websites). The integrations and migrations aim to eliminate security and continuity risks and improve technical resilience but have resulted in an additional operating expenditure to the registers managed by the C ompanies Office. Expanding education and awareness activities (. million) . million will be applied to working with existing incorporated societies to help them understand their new obligations under the Incorporated Societies Act (which came into effect on October ) over the next three years. Work will also focus on improving how incorporated societies interact with the registry system.
shrvakdix per week for annual holidays if used immediat ely following their return to work, and any such leave used in that first year after return will be paid at a lower rate than their ordinary weekly pay. The value of the leave increases during the year, and is at the normal rate months after they have r eturned from parental leave.
As the question of whether to pursue cost recovery is a policy matter, and not within the scope of the statutory revi ew, further discussions with Rocket Lab on this subject were not progressed as part of this work .
Conclusions and recommendations
Do you have anything further to add about the role of the Labour Inspectorate as a regulator of the Holidays Act
For example, an employee might work six to eight hours most Saturdays they work, but four hours most Sundays they work. In this case, the average hours the employee has worked across all days could be lower than their usual Saturday hours, but higher than their usual Sunday hours. If an employee has very variable daily hours of work or works a similar number of hours on any calendar day of work then there will be little difference.
Foreword October
Or tier operational managers in large branches. Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines of Issue: July Security Classification Unclassified Version: . Review ed June Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page of e. the existence of a diversion po licy. If the prosecution decision maker and the prosecutor do not agree on evidential sufficiency, the prosecution decision maker may seek a review through contacting the Legal Manager, Litigation or relevant Crown Solicitors office. If the prosecution decision maker and the prosecutor do not agree whether or not it is in the public interest to take or continue a prosecution, the decision maker must consult the Manager Legal Services Litigation and if disagreement remains, the matter should be referred to the General Manager of the branch in which the business unit sits (if the General Manager is not the prosecution decision maker) and the Chief Legal Officer in accordance with the Legal Services Policy . If the Chief Legal Officer and the General Manager cannot agree on the public interest, a decision to commence or continue the prosecution may only be made by the General Manager or relevant Deputy Secretary after obtaining legal advice from the Crown Law Office or the relevant Crown Solicitor. The decision must be based only on information contained in the case file. . Coordinated Enforcement and Prosecution Decision Making It is not uncommon that more than one MBIE business unit, or more than one government agency may investigate a particular matter, in circumstances where prosecution or other enforcement activity by any of those business units or agencies could result. Wherever possible, MBIE business units must work collaboratively with each other or other agencies to ensure that investigations are carried out in the most expedient and robust manner. For example, in some cases it may be possible for business units or agencies to share information, such as witness statements, to ensure that witnesses are not subjected to multiple interviews by different people. Care will al ways be required however to ensure that the sharing of information does not compromise the investigation(s). When determining whether to prosecute, the prosecution decision maker should consider any existing or likely prosecution or other proceedings invol ving the defendant by another MBIE business unit, or other government agency, and the likely outcome. In the case of a decision not to prosecute on public interest grounds, where there is non compliance with legislation administered by another agency, the decision maker should consider referring that matter to that other agency for decision to ensure a coordinated government response, prior to any formal response being issued. It is the responsibility of the investigator and the relevant business unit manag er to consult with the Police or other agency responsible for enforcing the legislation concerned before a decision to prosecute is made, and to provide reasonable notification as to progress and outcome of any prosecution commenced. Those consultations wi ll ensure that good information is available in relation to the public interest in prosecuting the person and may, at MBIEs discretion, impact on its decision to bring a charge(s), or the timing of any charges being brought (e.g. to await a prosecution decision in respect of more serious offending).
Purpose of this document To develop this document MBIE reviewed the current cost of services delivered by the Companies Office, including forecast cost pressures and the fees and levies it currently charges to recover those costs. The objectives of the review are to ensure that: the Companies Office is funded sustainably while ensuring users meet an appropriate portion of the cost given the benefit they receive the Companies Office can resource all the functions it is expected to deliver. This document outlines the proposed changes to fees and levies and key questions to help MBIE understand the impact on your business or organisation. Proposed timeline for review Due Action May Release of discussion document June Deadline for public submissions to MBIE August Report to relevant Ministers on submissions and final proposals for changes to fees and levies September Seek approval from Cabinet for proposed changes December Fees and levies implemented Guidance considered in this review This review takes into account existing guidance on setting charges, including the Treasurys Guidelines for Setting Charges in the Public Sector and the Office of the Auditor Generals (OAG) Good practice guide: Setting and administering fees and levies for cost recovery . The principles of cost recovery set out in the guidance are reflected in the options for adjusting fees and levies, where relevant. How to use this document The remainder of this document is structured in five sections with three appendices. Section Content Page Overview Section Summary of the review and proposals Section Companies Office funding Section The basis for setting fees and levies Proposed options for Companies Office fees and levies Section Current and proposed levies Section Proposed fees and total charges for all registers Appendix One Summary of questions Appendix Two Summary of proposed fees and levies Appendix Three Forecast annual volumes by register to determine unit costs Appendix Four Summary of fees to be revoked and other minor changes Overview Section : Summary of the review and proposals The Companies Office performs an important role The Companies Office administers a portfolio of economy supporting registers established by various Acts of Parliament. The Acts and associated regulations set out the obligations of businesses or entities who are registered and the functions of each Reg istrar. Regulations prescribe the fees and levies to be paid by users to recover the costs of operating the registers. The Companies Office helps ensure that those doing business in New Zealand are registered and accountable to the law, and that information about them is publicly available. It oversees New Zealands core business information through the New Zealand Busin ess Number (NZBN) register. Its functions are critical in building trust and confidence in our economy, helping to make New Zealand a place where doing business is easy, transparent , and fair. Why do fees and levies need to be reviewed Most services (like filing an annual return or registering an entity) provided by the Companies Office are funded on a user pays basis through two types of third party charges: Fees that are collected to fund specific services ( eg filing an annual return on a particular register); and Levies that are collected and allocated to broader functions where they provide benefits to a club of users ( eg for regulatory oversight by the Companies Office). Treasury and OAG guidance recommends that when the g overnment sets fees and levies, it should do so at a rate that is no more than the amount necessary to recover costs incurred in providing the services to which they relate . However, because costs can change, it is important that fees and levies are regularly reviewed to check that they are covering costs and not resulting in over recovery or under recovery of costs and any fee adjustments made. The Companies Office reviews fees and levies every three to five years to ensure an appropriate amount of cost recovery. In the last review in , fees were set to recover less than the cost required to operate, to account for a level of over recovery in previous years. This fluctuation in cost recovery is monito red through the Commerce and Consumer Affairs: Registration and Provision of Statutory Information memorandum account (the memorandum account). Costs pressures considered in this review The modelling of costs and the proposed fees and levies in this review have considered the current budget for the Companies Office registry services in the context of the shift of costs between registers from the overall position in . The review f ound that the general inflationary pressures
areas of specialisation:
day per week deliveries to PO Box and Private Bags, except where they received less than day per week deliveries as at June .
day per week delivery to all delivery points which received the rural delivery service as at June , except for those points which had a lower delivery frequency
segments of this industry have distinct customers with distinct needs and, as a result, different firms targeting them. These are the classic weightlifting muscle building when they think of sports nutrition. Then you get into the products targeting professional sports people who are often worried about banned substances and being substance free. Then there are gym members and what we call weekend warriors, then there are the people who are more the aspirational or healthy life stylers and then there are people who are looking for meal replacement and weight management type products. Each of the segments have distinct customers with distinct needs.
of the value of credits successfully secured or rebooked on behalf of consumers (excluding GST).
. Accelerate aerospace innovation
. Discussion of underlying causes
. I received the Taskforces final report in October (a ttached as Annex Two). Unlike past reviews of the Act, the Taskforce was able to make unanimous recommendations on a comprehensive package of changes to improve the current legislation. The Taskforce:
. Infrastructure for growth
. Legislation to establish permanent Mori spectrum entity ) Both parties agree that legislation will likely be required to establish and give effect to a permanent Mori Spectrum Entity. ) The Crown intends to propose draft legislation to establish a permanent Mori S pectrum Entity for introduction to the House of Representat ives. ) The draft legislation that will be proposed for introduction to the House of Representatives: a. Must comply with the drafting standards and conventions of the Parliamentary Counsel Office for Government Bills, as well as the requirements of the Leg islature under Standing orders, Speakers Rulings, and conventions; and b. Must be in a form that is satisfactory to the MSWG and MBIE; and c. Must be consistent with this MOU. ) MBIE and the MSWG will work together from the of this MOU to support the passage of any draft bill through Parliament. ) Until the permanent entity is established, the Interim Mori Spectrum Commission will undertake the responsibilities of the intended M ori Spectrum Entity.
. Note that some of the Holidays Act Taskforce recommendations are likely to receive negative feedback but this risk can be partly mitigated by a communications strategy that focuses on the improvements that the Taskforces recommendations will provide
. million annual visitors by
. Pathways to Open Access
.. Acceptable loci for Green OA deposit
.. Acceptable versions for Green OA deposit
.. Timing of Open Access
.. Metadata requirements
. Open Access to Research Data
. What other impacts is this approach likely to have Option One Impacts of the Taskforces recommendations for the entitlement and payment for annual holidays The Taskforce proposals reflect an improvement on the current annual holidays provisions. They provide clear rules for how to calculate a week, clarify what payments are to be included in payment calculations, and give employees the ability to take leave in advance on a pro rata basis (at present, employees can only take annual h olidays in advance at an employers discretion ). The entitlements and payment calculations also minimise incentives for employees to take holidays on particular days (i.e. payments and deductions are well calibrated) or for employers to arrange rosters in certain ways. However, the annual holidays recommendations increase the number of payment calculations from two (greater of Ordinary Weekly Pay and average weekly earnings over the last months) to three, and do not fully address concerns regarding compl exity and being easily understood by regulated parties . Payroll testing and our analysis indicates that : The annual holidays proposals under Option One result in higher annual holiday payments (on average) than the status quo . Results show that around p er cent of employees were better off and annual holidays payments Total Monetised Cost Approx. . million per year for Option One Nonmonetised costs Expected benefits of proposed approach compared to taking no action Regulated parties (employers and employees) Employer s will have g reater clarity and certainty, be better able to systematise rules, and reduce the likelihood and impact of remediation projects. E mployees more likely to receive their correct entitlements and payments and have earlier and greater access to some forms of leave. Medium Regulators (Labour Inspectorate) Greater clarity and prescription should make it easier to identify noncompliance . Low Wider government Some benefits as regulated parties. Medium Total Monetised Benefit Nonmonetised benefits Medium shrvakdix
. Reporting requirements
Rules of engagement . The parties agree that they will: a. work together in good faith, balancing the interests of all parties b. hold discussions in confidence and on a with out prejudice basis c. agree any external communications at each meeting. . If the parties are unable to reach agreement on recommendations, the Groups final report will outline: a. the areas where the parties have reached agreed recommendations b. the areas of diff erence. Timing and reporting . The Group will report back to the Minister of Workplace Relations and Safety with their recommendations within months. This timeframe will give the Group sufficient time to commission work and undertake robust testing of op tions. . The Group will also provide an interim report after six months, so that Cabinet and the New Zealand public can be informed about the Groups progress. . Each party will be responsible for reporting to their constituentsstakeholders, in accordance with any messaging agreed during the Groups discussions and as required by their internal governance mechanisms. In doing so, the parties agree to honour the confidentiality of the Groups discussions.
. I disagree with the Payroll Programme working groups recommendation that further testing should occur. The model proposed by t he Taskforce was subject to robust testing by an external provider with expertise in payroll matters and using bona fide payroll data across a wide range of working arrangements. The Taskforces model represents a unanimous recommendation by employer, work er and government representatives. I am confident that the Taskforce considered the need for certainty, transparency and practicality and that their recommendations are a significant improvement on and more readily implementable than the status quo. Any ch ange will have implementation costs. I plan to minimise these through the Better Rules approach discussed in paragraphs above.
Annex : Entitlements under the Holidays Act and proposed system Entitlement Holidays Act Proposed system Annual holidays Employees are entitled to four weeks annual holidays each year when they have worked for their employer for months. Employees are entitled to four weeks annual holidays each year when they have worked for their employer for months. Employees have the ability to take annual holidays in their first months up to the amount they would be eligible for on a pro rata basis. Sick leave Employees are entitled to five days paid sick leave a year. Employees are entitled to sick leave after six months continuous employment, or if they have worked for the employer for six months for an average of hours per week and at least one hour in every week or hours in every mon th. Sick leave is explicitly considered in units of days. Employees are entitled to five days paid sick leave a year. Eligible employees are entitled to one day of sick leave from their first day of employment, with an additional day per month of employme nt until the full entitlement of five days is reached after four months. Employees are eligible for sick leave if they have agreed hours and an expectation of continuous employment. If not, they are eligible after weeks if they have worked on average at least hours a week, or after six months continuous employment. Employees have the ability to take sick leave in units of less than a day on a proportionate basis for time and pay with a minimum amount of a quarter of a day. Family violence leave Emplo yees are entitled to days paid family violence leave a year. Employees are entitled to family violence leave after six months continuous employment, or if they have worked for the employer for six months for an average of hours per week and at least one hour in every week or hours in every month. Family violence leave is explicitly Employees are entitled to days paid family violence leave a year. Eligible employees are entitled to family violence leave from the first day of employment. Employees are eligible for family violence leave if they have agreed hours and an expectation of continuous employment. If not, they are eligible after weeks if they have worked on average at
Annex : Entitlements under the Holidays Act and proposed system Entitlement Holidays Act Proposed system Annual holidays Employees are entitled to four weeks annual holidays each year when they have worked for their employer for months. Employees are entitled to four weeks annual holidays each year when they have worked for their employer for months. Employees have the ability to take annual holidays in their first months up to the amount they would be eligible for on a pro rata basis. Sick leave Employees are entitled to five days paid sick leave a year. Employees are entitled to sick leave after six months continuous employment, or if they have worked for the employer for six months for an average of hours per week and at least one hour in every week or hours in every mon th. Sick leave is explicitly considered in units of days. Employees are entitled to five days paid sick leave a year. Eligible employees are entitled to one day of sick leave from their first day of employment, with an additional day per month of employme nt until the full entitlement of five days is reached after four months. Employees are eligible for sick leave if they have agreed hours and an expectation of continuous employment. If not, they are eligible after weeks if they have worked on average at least hours a week, or after six months continuous employment. Employees have the ability to take sick leave in units of less than a day on a proportionate basis for time and pay with a minimum amount of a quarter of a day. Family violence leave Emplo yees are entitled to days paid family violence leave a year. Employees are entitled to family violence leave after six months continuous employment, or if they have worked for the employer for six months for an average of hours per week and at least one hour in every week or hours in every month. Family violence leave is explicitly Employees are entitled to days paid family violence leave a year. Eligible employees are entitled to family violence leave from the first day of employment. Employees are eligible for family violence leave if they have agreed hours and an expectation of continuous employment. If not, they are eligible after weeks if they have worked on average at shrvakdix
commercial organisations
. The proposals in this paper have financial implications for employers and employees, and for the Employment Relations Employment Standards (ERES) regulatory system.
Entitlement Holidays Act Proposed system considered in units of days. least hours a week, or after six mon ths continuous employment. Employees have the ability to take family violence leave in units of less than a day on a proportionate basis for time and pay with a minimum amount of a quarter of a day. Bereavement leave Employees are entitled to bereavement leave of either three days or one day per bereavement. Employees are entitled to bereavement leave after six months continuous employment, or if they have worked for the employer for six months for an average of hours per week and at least one hour in every week or hours in every month. Bereavement leave does not extend to: stepfamily; siblings in law and children inlaw; cultural family groups; aunts, uncles, nieces and nephews; and miscarriage. Employees are entitled to bereavement leave of either three days or one day per bereavement. Eligible employees are entitled to bereavement leave from the first day of employment. Employees are eligible for bereavement leave if they have agreed hours and an expectation of continuous employment. If not, they are eligible after weeks if they have worked on average at least hours a week, or after six months continuous employment. Bereavement leave extends to: stepfamily; siblings inlaw and children inlaw; cultural family groups; aunts, uncles, nieces an d nephews; and miscarriage. Public holidays Employees are entitled to a public holiday if it falls on a day that the employee would otherwise have worked. Employees are entitled to a public holiday if the employee was expected to work on the day in questi on or they have worked on or more of the corresponding days in either the previous or weeks. Alternative holidays Employees are entitled to an alternative holiday if they: o work on a public holiday that is an Otherwise Working Day for them , or o are on call on a public holiday that is an Otherwise Working Day for them and they have to limit their activities on the day. Employees are entitled to an alternative holiday if they: o work on a public holiday that is an Otherwise Working Day for them , or o are on call on a public holiday that is an Otherwise Working Day for them and they have to limit their activities on the day.
Entitlement Holidays Act Proposed system considered in units of days. least hours a week, or after six mon ths continuous employment. Employees have the ability to take family violence leave in units of less than a day on a proportionate basis for time and pay with a minimum amount of a quarter of a day. Bereavement leave Employees are entitled to bereavement leave of either three days or one day per bereavement. Employees are entitled to bereavement leave after six months continuous employment, or if they have worked for the employer for six months for an average of hours per week and at least one hour in every week or hours in every month. Bereavement leave does not extend to: stepfamily; siblings in law and children inlaw; cultural family groups; aunts, uncles, nieces and nephews; and miscarriage. Employees are entitled to bereavement leave of either three days or one day per bereavement. Eligible employees are entitled to bereavement leave from the first day of employment. Employees are eligible for bereavement leave if they have agreed hours and an expectation of continuous employment. If not, they are eligible after weeks if they have worked on average at least hours a week, or after six months continuous employment. Bereavement leave extends to: stepfamily; siblings inlaw and children inlaw; cultural family groups; aunts, uncles, nieces an d nephews; and miscarriage. Public holidays Employees are entitled to a public holiday if it falls on a day that the employee would otherwise have worked. Employees are entitled to a public holiday if the employee was expected to work on the day in questi on or they have worked on or more of the corresponding days in either the previous or weeks. Alternative holidays Employees are entitled to an alternative holiday if they: o work on a public holiday that is an Otherwise Working Day for them , or o are on call on a public holiday that is an Otherwise Working Day for them and they have to limit their activities on the day. Employees are entitled to an alternative holiday if they: o work on a public holiday that is an Otherwise Working Day for them , or o are on call on a public holiday that is an Otherwise Working Day for them and they have to limit their activities on the day. shrvakdix
Entitlement Holidays Act Proposed system Payasyougo (PAYG) If an employee works so intermittently or irregularly that it is impracticable for the employer to provide them with four weeks annual holidays, they may agree to be paid annual holiday pay with their pay. PAYG is also available for employees on fixed term arrangements of less than months. Only employees that meet the following test may agree to be paid annual holiday pay with their pay: o no minimum number of hours and no expectation of ongoing work , and o employer has no obligation to provide work or the employee to accept work , and o there is no underlying pattern of work , and o there are periods without work. Employ ers are required to review working arrangements every weeks to ensure that employees on PAYG still meet this test. PAYG is not available to employees on fixed term arrangements of less than months (unless they meet the four part test).
. The majority of employees, particularly t hose with standard hours and stable earnings, should not see increased payments when compared to the current Act. However, improved clarity and certainty should help address non compliance issues and many employees may see changes in their holiday and leav e pay as a result.
Annex : Current record keeping requirements and proposed additional requirements to reflect the Taskforces recommendations Section of the Holidays Act (current) Proposed new requirements (bold bullets represent new data points ) General data Employee name of start of employment Number of hours worked each day in a pay period and pay for those hours Current entitlement to annual holidays on which employee last became entitled to annual holidays Current entitlement to sick days General data Employee name of start of employment The of any day worked, and the n umber of hours worked on that day The start and end of any shift cycle during the pay period For each hour paid, the c ategory of payments made (e.g. weekly pay, overtime, commiss ions, etc.) Gross earnings over the pay period Annual holidays and FBAPS leave Dates on which annual holidays or FBAPS have been taken Amount of payment for annual holidays or FBAPS taken Portion of annual holidays that have been paid out in each entitlem ent year and amount of payment for cashed out annual holidays Annual holidays The entitlement to annual holidays at the beginning of each pay period, expressed in weeks or portion of weeks . The on which the employee last received an entitle ment to annual holidays , and what the entitlement was, expressed in weeks or portions of weeks The dates on which the employee used any of their annual leave entitlement, and: o whether the annual leave was during a close down period, under section of th e Act o how much leave was used for each day of leave, expressed in portions of a week . The b alance of annual leave at the end of the pay period expressed in weeks or portion of weeks Public holidays Dates and payments for public holidays worked Number of hours wo rked on public holidays Day or part of a day of any transferred public holidays of entitlement to an alternative holiday Dates and payments for any public or alternative holiday not worked but entitled to holiday pay Cash value of any board or lodging s Payments for cashed out alternative holidays FBAPS leave The entitlement to each category of FBAPS leave, at the beginning of the pay period, expressed in days or portions of days The on which the employee last received any entitlement to FBAPS lea ve (for each type of leave, and what the entitlement was, expressed in days) The dates on which the employee used any of their FBAPS leave entitlements, and how much leave was used each day (expressed in portions of a day) The balance of FBAPS leave at the end of the pay period, expressed in days or portions of days If applicable, a record of the hours test that was applied to determine eligibility for family violence, bereavement and sick leave If applicable, a record of the or more corresponding days in previous or weeks test to determine an Otherwise Working Day for FBAPS leave Termination records of termination of employment Holiday pay upon termination of employment Public holidays Dates and payments for public holidays worked Number of h ours worked on public holidays Day or part of a day of any transferred public holidays of entitlement to an alternative holiday Dates and payments for any public or alternative holiday not worked but entitled to holiday pay
Annex : Current record keeping requirements and proposed additional requirements to reflect the Taskforces recommendations Section of the Holidays Act (current) Proposed new requirements (bold bullets represent new data points ) General data Employee name of start of employment Number of hours worked each day in a pay period and pay for those hours Current entitlement to annual holidays on which employee last became entitled to annual holidays Current entitlement to sick days General data Employee name of start of employment The of any day worked, and the n umber of hours worked on that day The start and end of any shift cycle during the pay period For each hour paid, the c ategory of payments made (e.g. weekly pay, overtime, commiss ions, etc.) Gross earnings over the pay period Annual holidays and FBAPS leave Dates on which annual holidays or FBAPS have been taken Amount of payment for annual holidays or FBAPS taken Portion of annual holidays that have been paid out in each entitlem ent year and amount of payment for cashed out annual holidays Annual holidays The entitlement to annual holidays at the beginning of each pay period, expressed in weeks or portion of weeks . The on which the employee last received an entitle ment to annual holidays , and what the entitlement was, expressed in weeks or portions of weeks The dates on which the employee used any of their annual leave entitlement, and: o whether the annual leave was during a close down period, under section of th e Act o how much leave was used for each day of leave, expressed in portions of a week . The b alance of annual leave at the end of the pay period expressed in weeks or portion of weeks Public holidays Dates and payments for public holidays worked Number of hours wo rked on public holidays Day or part of a day of any transferred public holidays of entitlement to an alternative holiday Dates and payments for any public or alternative holiday not worked but entitled to holiday pay Cash value of any board or lodging s Payments for cashed out alternative holidays FBAPS leave The entitlement to each category of FBAPS leave, at the beginning of the pay period, expressed in days or portions of days The on which the employee last received any entitlement to FBAPS lea ve (for each type of leave, and what the entitlement was, expressed in days) The dates on which the employee used any of their FBAPS leave entitlements, and how much leave was used each day (expressed in portions of a day) The balance of FBAPS leave at the end of the pay period, expressed in days or portions of days If applicable, a record of the hours test that was applied to determine eligibility for family violence, bereavement and sick leave If applicable, a record of the or more corresponding days in previous or weeks test to determine an Otherwise Working Day for FBAPS leave Termination records of termination of employment Holiday pay upon termination of employment Public holidays Dates and payments for public holidays worked Number of h ours worked on public holidays Day or part of a day of any transferred public holidays of entitlement to an alternative holiday Dates and payments for any public or alternative holiday not worked but entitled to holiday pay shrvakdix
among licensed immigration advisers
. Estimates of the direct costs for employers (and corresponding direct benefits for employees) are based on payroll testing undertaken on behalf of the Taskforce by an independent professional services company using real payroll data. By design, the testing sample included a large overrepresentation of employees with varied and unpredictable working arrangements (as these workers are most likely to be affected by changes to the Holidays Act). This meant that a range of assumptions had to be used in order to scale up the impacts to the entire workforce.
Cash value of any board or lodgings Payments for cashed out alternative holidays
. The total additional direct cost to employers of adopting the Taskforces recommendations is estimated to be up to . million per year (with a corresponding benefit for employees). This represents less than . per cent of New Zealands total wage and salary bill. The impact is broken down as follows:
. MBIE issued a public consultation document on May with a four week consultation period. The consultation involved an iterative process involving agencies that need the information (including the intelligence community, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Transport, the New Zealand Defence Force, and the Civil Aviation A uthority ) and the entities that must provide the information to ensure that we calibrate in such a way that we are only asking for what we need to apply the tests in the OSHAA Act , having regard to the costs of providing the information, and we are asking for the information in a way that is most helpful to the applicants. In addition to seeking submissions MBIE officials also travelled to the United States to meet with prospective applicants and relevant United Stages regulatory agencies. . Key themes from the feedback from industry (including nine written submissions) : Ensuring that the information requirements are the minimum necessary and consistent with international requirements
. Many of the Taskforces recommendations will necessitate changes to payroll systems and employers will incur compliance costs in transitioning to the amended Holidays Act. While the projected compliance costs have not been quantified, I note that, for employers that are already compliant with the current Holidays Act, the upfront changes to payroll systems required to implement the Taskforces recommendations should be relatively minor (as the recommendations amount to an improved status quo). In the longer term, the greater certainty provided by the Taskforce recommendations should see compliance costs reduce for employers.
were approved through the Samoan Quota.
tourism spending is by domestic visitors
. I intend to submit a Budget bid to support the implementation of the Holidays Act amendments.
. The State sector disproportionately employs workers in two of the sectors anticipated to be most impacted by the Taskforces proposals. Approximately per cent of the health care and social assistance workforce and per cent of the public administr ation and safety workforce are employed in the State sector, compared to the State sectors proportion of the total New Zealand workforce of per cent. It is likely that a greater proportion of the marginal fiscal impacts of the Taskforces proposals wi ll be apportioned to the Government than the State sectors per cent of the workforce would suggest. There are also likely to be cost pressures for Government funded services provided through private sector employers.
G information pack PDF KB
NZEmpC E TuIncandorsvCHH.pdf (employmentcourt.govt.nz) If an employee elects to do so, the employer must allow the employee to take at least weeks of their AL entitlement in a continuous period. available), and cannot withhold consent to an employee taking at least weeks of their accrued AL entitlement in a continuous period. Employers can require employees to tak e AL they have become entitled to if: they cannot reach agreement with their employee about when AL will be taken or they have a closedown period and they give the employee at least days notice If an employees AL entitlement balance is greater than weeks an employer can require employees to take AL entitlement in excess of weeks but only if: they have sought to confer with the employee and genuinely tried to reach agreement about when the leave is to be taken and been unable to or they have an established closedown period and they give the employee at least days notice of the requirement to take AL entitlement.
Executive Summary and recommendations Summary . The issues that the Holidays Act (the Act) pose s for employers, employees and others are well documented. Many employers struggle to comply with the Act, especially where there is unpredictable variation in employees working arrangements or payment rates , and there have been , and continue to be , many costly remediation cases. The lack of clarity and certainty associated with the current Act make it difficult to implement for employers and hard for employees to be sure that they are receiving their statutory entitlements. . To address the issues with the current Act , the Taskforce proposes a range of recommendations to revise the system for determining, calculating and paying the statutory leave enti tlements set out in the Act. . Although it consi dered a wide range of employee working arrangements , at a high level the Taskforce focused on achieving the following goals for two broad groups: For those employees with clear, predictable work patterns , the Taskforce wanted to ensure that taking leave and calculating leave payments should be an easy and simple process . For those employees with uncertainty about some or many aspects of their working arrangements (for example, unpredictable working hours and or payment rates), the Taskforce wanted to ensur e that the re are c lear prescriptive rules that employees and employers can use to accurately determine , calculate and pay leave entitlements . . The Taskforce recommend s a system that retains the existing units of entitlement set out in the Act. This means that annual holidays entitlements w ould continue to be calculated, taken and paid in weeks with FBAPS entitlements continu ing to be calculated, taken and paid in days. Although the Taskforce is proposing that the units of entitlement be retained , it propos es significant changes in a number of areas to provide the certainty and clarity that employers and employees require. These range from clear prescriptive methodolog ies for determin ing deductions and payments for all paid leave , to a new and objective Otherwise Working Day test , for categorically determin ing whether an employee is eligible for a day of FBAPS leave. . The Taskforce s recommendations address the T erms of Reference and will greatly improve the wo rkability of the Act. The Taskforce is well aware that uncertainty costs businesses as well as being unsettling and potentially costly for employees. This is why these recommendations include clear methodologies to provide definitive answers in those cases where it is not obvious how to determine leave entitlements and payments. . Employees with fixed, predictable hours and regular pay will see little change as a result of the bulk of the Taskforces proposals. Calculating leave deductions and payments will remain simple for these straightforward cases. It is those e mployees with varied or unpredictable working hours andor payments who will most benefit from the Taskforces proposals . These employees will now have the certainty that has been lacking to a bout how any periods of paid leave should be calculated and taken. . The diagrams on pages indicate the key points of uncertainty in the current approaches to determining annual holidays and FBAPS leave payments that would be addressed under t he Task force s proposed methodolog ies for determining payments for all leave types.
In December , the Minister agreed to an extension of the timeframe for the statutory review of the OSHAA. Since the original commissioning, the feasib ility of delivering the final report within the original timeframe had been impacted by two key factors (alignment with other related work and the size and complexity of the work required to analyse and reach conclusions on certain matters raised via submi ssions). The report back was extended to March .
It is acknowledged that in some cases a prosecution decision maker may make a prosecution decision, conditional on review by a prosecutor. This is acceptable under these procedures and guidelines provi ded the decision maker carries out the substance of their role under this document. Para ., Legal Services Policy. Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines of Issue: July Security Classification Unclassified Version: . Review ed June Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page of Finalisation of charges . Once the decision to prosecute is finalised, the accountability for legal issues in connection with the prosecution file passes to the prosecutor. In particular, the prosecutor: a. determin es the wording of the charge(s) and b. ensures the prosecution file is prepared to an appropriate standard. . MBIE may bring charges under the legislation that it administers or other legislation, including (most commonly) the Crimes Act . When deciding whi ch legislation to lay a charge under, the prosecutor will have particular regard to the nature of the alleged conduct and the charge that would most appropriately mark that conduct. . It is the responsibility of the prosecutor, in consultation with the inves tigator or prosecution decision maker to determine what charges are appropriate. When making decisions on charges, the following matters must be taken into account: a. the selection of charges must take into account the totality of the offending. Representati ve charges should be considered for repeated or ongoing conduct where the criteria under s of the Criminal Procedure Act are made out and b. if the offending relates to acts or omissions attributed to a company or other corporate entity, the charges sh ould reflect: i. the purpose of the relevant legislation and any express provision as to party liability; and ii. the relative culpability of that corporate entity andor its officers and employees. . If the most obvious charge on the facts of the case is a specifi c charge that is not available because a limitation period has expired, it is only in exceptional cases that it will be appropriate to select a more general charge with a higher penalty. . The relevant Crown Solicitor should be consulted in particularly complex or serious cases likely to result in Crown Prosecutions, or where certification by a Crown Solicitor is required under an Act. Some offences, due to their seriousness, require the con sent of the Attorney General before a charge can be laid. Where these charges are contemplated early advice should be sought from the prosecutor who will arrange to seek the required consent from Crown Law. . The Prosecution Guidelines provide broad guidance about choosing charges. Considerations include: a. the number of charges must reflect the alleged conduct and the public interest in having appropriate convictions entered against the defendant b. neither the number nor seriousness of charges should be decided by having regard to the impact of that decision on the likelihood of an offer by the defendant to plead guilty to lesser charges. Infringeme nts . Infringement offences are generally able to be proceeded with by infringement notices or through the filing of a charging document. Each infringement must therefore be able to be proven to the criminal standard. . Even where an infringement offence cannot be proceeded with by way of a charging document, if a person issued with an infringement notice disputes the offence andor forma lly requests a hearing,
MBIE (). Calculating Payment for Leave: Summary of the compliance issues with the Holidays Act . shrvakdix
What role do you think the Labour Inspectorate , or any other agency or institution , should have in relation to any future holidays legislation
. I consider that the Taskforces recommendations should be adopted in full as the basis for an amended Holidays Act. The proposed amendments (summarised in Annex One, and set out in full on pages to of the Taskforces report) will provide all regulated parties with much needed certainty, while protecting overall entitlements for employees.
. Note that the Minister for ACC will report back to Cabinet by March with advice on the progress of all the proposals listed in Appendix including:
. The cost of implementation will vary for employers depending on a range of factors, including the type of payroll systems they currently use to manage pay and leave. Officials estimated that approximately to percent of employers do not currently use payroll software, to percent use non cloud based payroll software and to per cent use either off theshelf (often smaller employers) or bespoke (often larger employers including government agencies) cloud based payroll software.
. the proposal to increase funding for existing free advocacy services for accident compensation claimants,
. What are the implementation risks As part of the Taskforces consultation process, payroll providers indicated that they would require at least months to update their systems in order to comply with a new Act. There were also some concerns that the Taskforces recommendations remain complex in some ar eas and employers who do not use payroll systems or have dedicated payroll functions , particularly SMEs, may have difficulty complying with a new Act. These issues could be mitigated by including payroll providers and employers in the Better Rules process focusing on implementation and delaying the at which new requirements come into effect by to months. Plenty of support, guidance and tools would also be developed to help comply with a new Act, with a particular focus on SMEs. shrvakdix
. the proposal to fund a free nationwide advocacy service modelled broadly on the Health and Disability Commission Advocacy Service, and
. any implications for ACC levies and appropriations arising from the implementation of the review recommendations as listed in Appendix .
. Cabinet agreed to a new prescriptive four step methodology with detailed formulas and rules to provide certainty in these cases.
. The prop osals in this paper will form the basis of an amended Holidays Act. I have submitted a legislative programme bid for amendments to the Holidays Act with a Category status (instructions to be provided to Parliamentary Counsel Office in ).
. The Regulatory Impact Analysis requirements apply to the proposals in this paper and a Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS) has been prepared and is attached.
. MBIEs Regulatory Impact Analysis Review Panel has reviewed the Improving the Holidays Act RIS and considers that the information and analysis summarised partially meets the Quality Assurance criteria.
. The reviewers commented: the RIS is a partial meets because the second option (accrual based system for annual holidays) has not been analysed to the same extent as the first option as it was dismissed relatively early by the Taskforce, despite their early consultation indicating wide support for the second option, particularly by employers. There has been limited time for analy sis or consultation post Taskforce to better understand the impacts of the second option and so it is difficult to compare the options on a like forlike basis.
. This Regulatory Impact Statement concludes that regulations are necessary to set out requirements for licences and permits, particularly for the information to be provided. The preferred approach for information requirements is to seek the minimum amount of information necessary to enable the regulator to undertake the statutory tests in the OSHAA Act . The information requirements are informed by overseas regulatory models and have been produced in close consultation with oth er New Zealand agencies and with prospective applicants. . The Regulatory Impact Statement also propose s an exemption for certain classes of lowrisk HAV s. This is consistent with the policy objectives of not imposing a disproportionate cost on low risk HAV operators , and manages risk appropriately in by ensuring high risk activities are not exempt Implementation plan
. The amendments to the Holidays Act proposed by the Taskforce appear to be consi stent with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act and the Human Rights Act .
. Adopting the Taskforces recommendation to remove the parental leave override in the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act will have a pos itive impact on employment rights for parents of young children in general and women in particular (because the override has a disproportionate impact on women). This issue is explained in more detail in paragraphs of this paper.
. The OSHAA Act will come into force on December . . Once Cabinet has agreed to the proposals, drafting instructions will be issued. It is expected that regu lations will be promulgated by early September. . In addition, officials are working with affected parties to prepare them for the regime coming into force . Schedule of the OSHAA Act (clause A) enables the Minister in issuing a highaltitude licence on or after the commencement to take into account any action or process undertaken before the commencement if they substantially complied with the provisions of this OSHAA Act . This will enable officials to work with affected parties to ensure that they have a licence for high altitude activities on the day that the OSHAA Act comes into force. . The OSHAA Act contains transitional provisions for Rocket Lab and for payloads carried by Rocket Lab to ensure a smooth transition from the existing contractual arrangements in place to manage their New Zealand activities to the new OSHAA Act .
. Amending the Act to make it easier for employers to implement, and easier for employees to be sure they are receiving their correct statutory entitlements, is likely to benefit disabled people. Disabled people are likely to be overrepresented in the group of employees with varied or unpredictable working hours andor payments that stand to benefit most from the Taskforces proposals. Once the proposals are implemented, this group of employees should have more certa inty about how any periods of paid leave should be calculated and taken.
. With the Enabling Good Lives demonstrations in Christchurch and Waikato, and the MidCentral System Transformation prototype, more disabled people are employing their own support sta ff. The proposed changes to the legislation to provide greater clarification of obligations as employers should therefore reduce the risk of non compliance with the Act by all employers, including disabled employers.
were not in New Zealand years later.
. The proposed recommendations, includi ng increased flexibility and clarity, are also likely to benefit support workers across the disability sector. This group of employees may often have irregular or unpredictable work hours andor payments.
. The proposals in this paper support the outcomes o f the New Zealand Disability Strategy , in particular Outcomes : Employment and economic security, : Accessibility (of information), and : Choice and control.
. Through the licence application process, MBIE will collect a range of data points (such as number of application s, types of vehicle, payloads, types of applicants) which will give us the ability to monitor the volumes and types of New Zealand space activities. The information gathered will also be used to measure the time and cost involved in administering the licensing process (this information is essential to enable us to cost the New Zealand Space Agency operations). We will also seek feedback from applicants about their experience of the licence application process. . New Zealand has certain international obligatio ns relating to space activities and space technologies. The OSHAA Act provides mechanisms to meet those obligations through, for example, conditions imposed on licences and permits. The regulator will monitor compliance with licences and permits to ensure that the activities are conducted in accordance with the terms and conditions of the licence or permit. . In addition, a three year review is built into the OSHAA Act . At this time we expect to revisit whether the regulations proposed in this document remain fit for purpose . However, the regulations can be revisited at any time if needed so that they remain current particularly in light of evolving international space law and changing technologies.
kt of all waste () was recycled
What role do you think the Labour Inspectorate , or any other agency or institution , should have in relation to any future holidays legislation
kjtrvweh
kjtrvweh Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team has been consulted and confirms that the CIPA requirements do not apply. Financial Imp lications The methodologies for determining leave entitlements agreed by Cabinet in would necessitate significant changes to every payroll system used by New Zealand employers, including Government payroll systems . The proposals in this paper are intended to reduce the changes that would be required , thereby reducing the financial implications of the reforms for employers . This includes the costs that would be incurred by government as an employer. The cost of implementation will vary for employers depending on a range of factors, including the type of payroll systems they currently use to manage pay and leave. I intend to ask targeted questions to elicit more details about the implementation costs as part of the exposure draft consultation process and will provide further information in my December report back to Cabinet . While there may be benefits in terms of implementation costs, t he proposals in this paper will not significantly alter the co sts employers will incur in terms of providing entitlements (refer to Appendix One for more information) . The RIS estimated that the total additional cost to employers of those proposals could be up to . million per year . Cost ofliving Implications Employers may pass on the implementation costs and increase s to the costs of leave entitlements to consumers. That is why my proposals are intended to reduce the total costs of reforms to the Act incurred by employers. Simpler and clearer obligations will also help to ensure employees receive their statutory entitlements. Human R ights The Cabinet policy decisions on amendments to the Act were assessed to appear to be consistent with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act and the Human Rights Act . The changes to those decisions proposed in this paper maintain broad align ment with those decisions and do not alter that assessment. The exposure draft consultation process will provide opportunity to gain further insights into the distributional impacts of the changes and any issues for specific population groups. Communications Following Cabinet decisions on the proposals in this paper I propose to announce th e Governments intent to release an exposure draft for targeted consultation . To ensure a variety of stakehol ders are included and represented in targeted consultation, I will encourage anyone who is interested in having input to contact MBIE within a defined time period. Depending on how much interest there is, MBIE will select a
kjtrvweh Confidential advice to Government I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Appendix One: Summary of issues with the Holidays Act and proposed response (green text represents changes proposed in the paper , black text in right column represents areas where the previous Governments decisions are being progressed for the exposure d raft) Key issues with the Holidays Act Response in the Employment (Leave Entitlement) Bill Entitlement to Annual Leave (AL) Earning annual leave weeks entitlement arises after months continuous employment meaning employees may have to wait to take leave and the framework does not support accrual based systems which many employers use. A weeks based accrual system with entitlement accruing continuously during employment, with clear supporting parameters. Using annual leave The meaning of a week of AL entitlement requires judgement and agreement each time an employee takes leave when work does not fit a traditiona l seven day cycle. A new methodology for determining use of AL entitlement that provides certainty for all working arrangements. Payasyougo Judgement and discretion are required to determine eligibility for employers to receive holiday entitlement in their regular pay. New objective criteria for determining eligibility for using pay asyougo along with a clear framework for reviewing its use during employment. Closedown periods Provisions for having a closedown period lack clarity, certainty, and transparency. Provisions provide greater clarity and transparency around how employees are notified about closedown periods. Entitlements to Family Violence, Bereavement and Sick (FBS) Leave , Public and Alternative Holidays (FBAPS leave) Earning FBS leave FBS leave entitlements arise after six months continuous empl oyment meaning employees may not be able to access leave for FBS purposes if they need it in their first six months. Eligible employees have access to FBS leave entitlement s from the first day of employment and eligibility criteria are clearer. days s ick leave accumulates over the first six months. Using FBS leave No explicit provision for taking part days of FBS leave. Ability to take part days of FBS leave proportionate to time that would have been worked on the day. Bereavement leave entitlement Eligibility to take three days bereavement leave not inclusive of varied family arrangements or cultural practices. Eligibility to take three days bereavement leave expanded so that employees can access it for more family members. Otherwise Working Day (OWD) Determining whether a day is an OWD for the purpose of entitlement to paid FBAPS leave requires the use of judgement. A new prescriptive OWD test with a clear application for all leave types and working arrangements. Payments for all types of leave Payment methodologies Inclusion of variable components of pay in calculations: lack of clarity around what constitutes a regular overtime and incentive payment and the value of such payments, discretion is also required to decide when criteria are met for using alternative averaging formulas. A new greater of three methodology for calculating annual leave payments: Ordinary Weekly Leave Pay (which does not include variable components of pay) and quarterly and annual average weekly earnings. A new calculation for FBAPS leave payments: a base rate for wagessalary and fixed allow ances, plus an average of productivity or incentive payments. Gross earnings Definition is not clear about payment types that must be included and has been one of the most common litigation issues. New definition of gross earnings provides clarity around which payment types to include. End of employment The different calculations for paying employees for AL they have and have not become entitled to when employment ends cause confusion and is difficult to apply. One payment calculation for AL when employment ends (an accrual based system makes the calculation for AL an employee has not yet become entitled to redundant). Overrides to the Act AL payment method overrides for employers who take parental and volunteers leave result in employees receiving reduced pay for annual leave. AL payment method overrides removed so employees returning from parental and volunteers leave will be paid according to the normal rules for annual leave, rather than their pay only being based on their average weekly earnings over the last weeks. Other provisions Leave in restructuring situations Lack of legislative clarity about treatment of leave entitlements in restructuring situations which results in common practice in breach of the Act (which requires AL to be paid out). A flexible approach (for employees not specified in Part A of the Employment Relations Act ) enabling the treatment of leave entitlements to be negotiated by the incoming and outgoing employers rather than requiring AL to be paid out. Information about pay and leave Employees have the right to ask for information kept in records but there is no requirement for employers to directly inform them about how pay and leave have been calculated. A legal requirement to provide a pay statemen t in each pay period to provide greater transparency about leave and pay for employees. Leave records There are some gaps in requirements and changes to the Act will require some additional information to be held in records to support calculations. record keeping requirements including some new information and some clarifications to existing provisions. kjtrvweh I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Appendix two : Proposed adjustments to the Cabinet decisions related to the provisions for providing, taking and paying annual leave Area Context Proposal Framework for providing AL entitlement In , Cabinet agreed that : i. employees should continue to become entitled to four weeks AL after months continuous employment but, ii. rather than have to wait until AL entitlement arises to use it, an employer must not unreasonably withhold consent to an employee taking AL in advance on a pro rata basis.
kjtrvweh Confidential advice to Government, Free and frank opinions I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E
kjtrvweh I N C O N F I D E N C E
kjtrvweh I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E representative sample for the ma in stakeholder groups. This strategy is particularly intended to target small businesses, who will adopt a range of working arrangements and who often do not have the same payroll infrastructure as larger organisations. Proactive Release I intend to proactively release this Cabinet paper (subject to redactions in line with the Official Information Act ) . I will consider the timing of the proactive release of this paper alongside my announcement about the release of an exposure draft. Recommendati ons The Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety recommends that the Committee: note that, in March , Cabinet agreed to endorse in full the recommendations of the Holidays Act Taskforce CAB MIN (which it had established in CAB MIN ) as the basis for a substantially amended Holidays Act ; note that, from to , the then Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety made some decisions under the authority delegated by Cabinet to address technical issues and the Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) commenced work on drafting the Employment (Leave Entitlements) Bill, but work has been on hold since June ; note that, despite refinements made, the detailed methodologies and processes Cabinet agreed to result in inevitable complexity , would require significant changes to payro ll systems , and represent a significant and costly compliance burden ; Changes to existing Cabinet policy decisions note that the following policy changes and additions to the Cabinet decisions (set out in detail in Appendic es Two, Three and Four) would simplify obligations and reduce compliance costs while broadly aligning with the existing policy decisions and underlying entitlements model ; Annual leave (AL) (Appendix Two) . agree to rescind the decision that employees continue to become entitled to four weeks annual leave (AL) after months continuous employment and replace it with a weeks based accrual system with a clear set of parameters to support its operation ; . agree to adjustments to the provisions in the Act that relate to employees rights to take AL , employer s rights to require an employee to take AL and to the rules for exchanging AL for payment to reconcile them with a weeks based accrual system ; . agree to rescind the decision that employers must allow employees to take AL in advance beyond their pro rata entitlement during a n annual closedown period ; . agree to rescind the decision that the m ethodology for determining the hours an employee would have worked on a day of leave (AL and other leave types) be based on a calendar day average and replace it with a formula that uses an average across all days of work in pay periods that started in the previous weeks ; kjtrvweh I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E . agree to rescind the decision to in troduce an audit requirement for employees who have guaranteed hours of work and work additional hours so that, in these situations, guaranteed hours are used as the basis of leave calculations ; . agree to amend the decision to introduce a fourpart test for paying AL as a regular part of an employees pay (payasyougo) and to require employers to review its use every week s; . authorise the Minister f or Workplace Relations and Safety to make decisions on the detail of provisions for using pay asyougo in order to align with the following approach: .. provide objective criteria for using pay asyougo that do not require the application of judgement; .. reduce the administrative burden and compliance costs of the review process during employment. Other leave types (Appendix Three) . agree to rescind the decision to require the comparison of two leave calculations for other leave types and repla ce it with a consolidated single calculation ; . agree to a revi sed accumulation profile for sick leave to take into account the increase in sick leave from five to days since the Cabinet decisions ; Amendments to other Acts (Appendix Four) . agree to replace the reference to O rdinary Weekly Pay (OWP) in the Parental Leave Employment Protection Act (PLEPA) with a standalone formula that is aligned with the methodology I nland Revenue currently uses for the calculated income estimate of OWP ; . agree to rescind the decision that on the sale and transfer of a business, employees should have a choice about whether to transfer all of their leave entitlements or have them paid out and reset ; and .. for employees specified in Schedule A of the Employment Relations Act (the ERA) , retain the status quo which requires the automatic transfer of entitlements if employment is transferred ; .. for all other employees , replace the decision with a flexible approach that ensures incoming and outgoing employers have to consider the treatment of entitlements when employees transfer rather than always being paid out under the Act ; Implementation period note that, in , Cabinet directed MBIE to develop a transition plan and report back to Cabinet CAB MIN and that MBIE completed this work during its policy design process in consultation with its stakeholder working group ; kjtrvweh I N C O N F I D E N C E
kjtrvweh I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Determining use of AL for employees who have guaranteed hours of work and work additional hours Cabinet agreed that, where employees have guaranteed hours included in their employment agreement , those hours would be used for the purposes of determining the use of AL entitlement. It also agreed that there be an audit requirement such that , if an employees actual hours of work were found to be percent or more above their guaranteed hours over a week period, then the employer must determine their use of AL based on their actual, rather than guaranteed, hours of work using averaging calculations.
kjtrvweh I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Appendix Four : Proposed amendments to parental leave and employment relations legislation Area Context Proposal Methodology for determining parental leave payments (amending the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act ) The Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act (PLEPA) relies on the definition of ordinary weekly pay (OWP) in the Act to calcula te parental leave payments. Cabinet agreed that OWP be replaced and so a consequential amendment is needed in the PLEPA.
kjtrvweh I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Appendix Five: Supplementary Impact Analysis (to the Regulatory Impact Statement)
kjtrvweh
kjtrvweh Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government
. A number of options were developed and tested in the course of the re view . These includ ed two versions of an hours based accrual system (where employees earn annual holidays in ho urs at a set percentage rate for every hour worked). This type of accrual system was supported by some stakeholders and opposed by others . The testing of the accrual options identified that such a system would leave some people worse off. As a result , the Taskforce did not proceed with further development of an hours based accrual system . . All members agree that the recommendations in this report provide a solution that meets the objectives of the review. Consensus would not have been achievable on any other approach . . The key elements of the Taskforces proposals are set out below: Annual holidays entitlements should be calculated, taken , paid and held in weeks or portions of weeks , while FBAPS leave should continue to be held in days A prescriptive appro ach to calculating payment s for leave . This would pay the greater of the following payments for the relevant period of annual leave : o Ordinary Leave Pay (base rate plus any scheduled overtime , allowance, commission and incentive payments) o Average weekly pay for the last four or weeks o Average weekly pay for the last weeks . Each day (or part day) of FBAPS leave should be paid based on the greater of: o Ordinary Leave Pay o Average Daily Pay A prescriptive process to determine how much leave needs to be take n for an employee to have a period of time away from work (this will be particularly useful if it is not clear what a week is for an employee ) An employee would still become entitled to four weeks annual holidays after months but would have the abili ty to take leave in advance on a pro rata basis A prescriptive O therwise Working Day test for determinin g when a particular day is an O therwise Working Day for FBAPS purposes (e.g. if an employee has worked per cent or more of the corresponding days in the previous four or weeks) A clearer definition of gross earnings would be used as the default for all leave payment calculations as follows: o employees leave payment s should reflect all cash payments received, except direct reimbursements for costs incurred . . One of the key problems with the current Act is the lack of clarity that it provides about how to determine leave entitlements and payments when there is variability or uncertainty about an employees working pattern (for example, when an employees pay varies or when an employee s hours of work have no set pattern). . The Taskforces recommendations directly address this lack of clarity and provide the certainty needed , through a series of prescriptive methodologies and tests that will prov ide definitive answers even in cases where certain aspects of the working arrangement are unpredictable or variable. These include:
shrvakdix spread over a number of pay periods (with potentially significant impacts on the value of leave used in the affected pay periods and the amount of tax paid).
Do you agree with the description of the cross cutting issues set out on pages If not, why not
Monitoring, evaluation and review
Volumes are the total instances of a specific activity in a year eg the total number of annual returns filed each year with the Companies Office on the Companies register. Volumes are included in this document where relevant and summarised in Appendix Three: Forecast annual volumes by register to determine unit costs . Costs to be allocated The current budget and the additional expenditure required for improvements and the registry activities to be recovered.Cost allocators Each cost item (eg salaries, IT support, travel) from the Companies Office financial report is assigned an appropriate cost allocator based on specific assumptions by register. Personnel costs are split by team and then allocated across the registries and services those teams are responsible for.Registry services Each cost item is allocated across the registry services based on its assigned cost allocator. Direct and indirect costs are allocated across services that are to incur a fee. These costs were divided by volumes to get a unit cost. Volumes used in the cost allocation model are based on an analysis of past data and a forecast of future growth based on economic trends. Cost recovery principles guide the setting of fees and levies The way costs are allocated has been informed by general cost recovery guidelines. Three principles set by the Treasury and the OAG have been used to develop and analyse the impact of options for setting fees and levies. The principles recommend that fees and levies to be set in a way that is: justified : costs recovered through fees and levies should reasonably relate to the services they are charged for, with any indirect costs appropriately included ( eg MBIEs technical support costs); efficient : fees and levies should closely reflect the actual costs needed to provide registry services, so that users experience value formoney; and equitable : the Companies Office should ensure that fees and levies are applied and managed so that they are fair for all users of its registry services. Third party fees and levies should also be transparent (a fourth principle in the OAG guidelines). Revenue from fees and levies should be correctly accounted for and used appropriately, and the process for developing fees and levies should be clear and easily understood. Where relevant, these principles have been applied to options for how specific fees and levies could be set to derive the cost recovery impacts ( eg which users pay and how often, how much cost is allocated to a fee or a levy , and how it impacts the total amount to be paid to the Companies Office). All proposed fees or levies in this document represent the preferred option , including the proposed additional expenditure of . million. Proposed cost recovery structure: splitting existing costs between fees and levies A revised cost recovery structure for all registers is proposed, splitting existing and new charges into fees and levies, to better reflect that the Companies Office operates its registers as a system with shared services. Historically, the Companies Office has recovered the costs of operating all its registers from users through fees. Over time it has introduced shared services ( eg personnel and systems that work across registers) to better manage increasing operating costs without significant fee increases. It achieves this by ensuring smaller registers with low volumes of users ( eg the Friendly Societies register) do not pay a disproportionate amount to recover the costs of similar services, such as filing an annual return , than larger registers with higher volumes ( eg the Companies register). This ensures that users experience the same level of service at a fair and reasonable cost. Figure on the next page shows how shared services benefit all users of the Companies Office according to cost recovery principles.
With the exception of one addition agreed by the previous Minister to provide clarity that, like if AL is cashed up when an employee has not requested it, if more than one week of entitlement is cashed up in an entitlement year the leave remains in force as if the payment had not been made. This is consistent with Cabinet s authority to make decisions on compliance and enforcement mechanisms to support the new Act. AL entitlement can be cashed up per year, regardless of whether any has been cashed up in previous years . . The implication of a change from months continuous employment to months is that, if an employee has accrued less than four weeks AL entitlement in a month period (because they have had unpaid leave, they could cash up a higher proportion of their entitlement (eg six months unpaid leave would mean they can cash up one of two weeks entitlement ). If, however, an employee has taken unpaid leave, we think it is unlikely they will have accrued AL entitlement left to cash up and, regardless, have had time away from work. We considered options that would address this but concluded that the small risk of misuse of the provision did not justify the legislative and administrative complexity they would add. We recommend maintaining the status quo for AL an employee can take during a closedown period . In Cabinet agreed to a set of adjustments related to the framework for having closedown periods that primarily focused on improving clarity and transparency . Our stakeholder working groups feedback on the detailed design of the framework was generally positive. The main concern they raised was the aspect of the Tas kforce recommendation providing that, during a closedown period, an employer would not be able to refuse an employees request to take AL in advance above the pro rata amount of leave in advance (or accrued AL under an accrual system) an employee has earned. . The concern centres around the liability for an employer if an employee takes this AL in advance and their employment ends soon after. The liability arises because leave in advance is unearned and payment made for it is above what the employee would be entitled to be paid out for AL if employment ended. The group raised c oncern about the difficulties for employers to recover overpayments . . The working groups concerns are likely to be raised by other stakeholders during consultation on the exposure draft. To address the liability risk and maintain the balance of interests between employers and employees, w e recommend seeking agreement in your May Cabinet paper to rescind the decision to require an employer to agree to an employees request to take AL in advance during a closedown period. We recommend the status quo is maintained so that, during a closedown period an employer may agree to an employee taking AL in advance if they do not have sufficient accrued AL entitlement to cover the closedown period, but an employer does not have to allow this .
https:www.mbie.govt.nzassetsUploadsbbbcbafholidays actreview issues paper.pdf shrvakdix
. I acknowledge that a number of stakeh olders (particularly businesses and payroll providers) called for a more radical overhaul of the Act, centring on a simplified accrual methodology for annual holidays. However, no consensus could be achieved among Taskforce members on whether the merits of such a system (simplicity and transparency) outweighed the disadvantages. Adopting the Taskforces recommendations in full is therefore the only option available to substantially improve the Holidays Act while preserving tripartite consensus.
. Invite the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety to issue drafting instructions to Parliamentary Counsel Office giving effect to the policy decisions in this paper
. Legal Effect ) This MOU: a) is a statement of good intention based on respective roles and responsibilities of each party; b) is entered into on a without prejudice basis; c) is not legally binding; d) does not create a legal relationship ; e) does not diminish or extinguish any rights Mori have arising from Te Tiriti o Waitangi Treaty of Waitangi or any aboriginal or customary rights . The parties acknowledge, however, that the MOU may be relevant to the relationship between the Crown and Mori in the future , including any disputes ; and f) does not alter any existing, or create any new legal or equitable rights or obligations. . Shared principles ) The following represents what the Parties believe are the shared principles , consistent with Te Tiriti o Waitangi The Treaty of Waitangi and its principles , that underpin the way we work together and how we will achieve our shared objectives: a) We accept that utmost good faith, honour, integrity, honesty, transparency and account ability are the standards necessary to build a future trusting relationship. b) We acknowledge and celebrate the distinct but shared objectives of each other and understand we have different roads to take for the wellbeing of Aotearoa. c) We will work together c onstructively on our differences and jointly identify and resolve problems as they arise. d) We acknowledge that working together provides more effective use of our resources to achieve our shared objectives.
. When and how will the new arrangements be reviewed The new arrangements would be reviewed by MBIE as part of ongoing monitoring and compliance activities. A comprehensive review of the legislation would be initiated if serious issues were identified as part of this work.
. of the value of cash refunds (excluding GST), and
. I intend to issue a press release announcing the Governments decision to adopt the recommendations of the Holidays Act Taskforce, and publish the Taskforces report on MBIEs website.
among offshore student advisers.
. As stated above in paragraph , some of the recommendations in the Ho lidays Act Taskforce Report may receive negative feedback, particularly from some employers or payroll providers. The media could focus on the complexity of the recommendations and question why the Government has chosen to endorse all of the Taskforces proposals.
growth in spend in the last years
. I propose to mitigate this risk by emphasising the support that the Taskforce recommendations received from both business and union representatives on the Taskforce, and highlighting the improvements that the proposed system would provide when co mpared to the status quo . It will also be made clear that businesses and employers will be given plenty of time and guidance to prepare for any changes.
. I intend to proactively release this Cabinet paper on MBIEs website, subject to any appropriate withholding of information that would be justified under the Official Information Act .
Are you aware of other cross cutting issues with the design of the current Act If so, what are they
As noted in the September final report back to Cabinet on the All of Government Payroll Programme to improve government payroll systems, many government agencies payroll systems are bespoke and aging, and already struggling to adapt to ongoing changes GOV MIN. MBIE considers that the . million estimate is an overestimation as employees w ith variable work patterns were overrepresented in the sample. The estimate assumes that all employers currently provide minimum leave entitlements to their employees , however many already provide entitlements in line with the proposed changes.
Base rate plus any scheduled overtime, allowance, commission and incentive payments. shrvakdix
Filing a charging document would ordinarily require leave of a District Court Judge or a Registrar (Summary Proceedings Act , s ()(a)). However, the specific legislation may have a provision which provides for filing without leave. Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines of Issue: July Security Classification Unclassified Version: . Review ed June Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page of then the test for prosecution must be satisfied and the relevant procedures in this document must be complied with before MBIE files a notice of hearing in Court. . An infringement notice may be revoked by a person authorised by the G eneral Manager of the branch in which the business unit sits. Records, Disclosure and Reporting . All significant prosecution advice and all prosecution decisions (including no prosecution decisions) must be recorded in writing. . It is the responsibility of the prosecution decision maker to record their decision and the reasons for it. Those reasons must be accurate and timely. . It is the responsibility of the prosecutor to maintain a record of any prosecution commenced and to report to the client investigat or and the relevant prosecution decision maker. . Disclosure Disclosure in prosecutions is governed by the Criminal Disclosure Act ( CDA ). Under the CDA, a prosecutor is the person for the time being in charge of the file or files relating to a crimina l prosecution. It therefore includes both the relevant investigator (or person in charge of the file) and the lawyer acting. Under the CDA, the prosecutor must disclose certain information to the defendant (initial disclosure) within working days of th e commencement of proceedings. If requested by the defendant in writing, the prosecutor must provide additional information from the investigation file, as soon as is reasonably practicable. A list of the information that a defendant can request at this ti me is set out in section () of the CDA. The remaining information (full disclosure) must be disclosed as soon as is reasonably practicable after a defendant has pleaded not guilty. In MBIE responsibility for preparing disclosure falls on the investigato r or person in charge of the file. The prosecutor for the file is responsible for checking full disclosure and advising as required. Disclosure ensures that a defendant is able to review all relevant information relating to the prosecution, with the excep tion of information that is able to be withheld. The grounds for withholding information are contained in s CDA. It is the responsibility of the prosecutor to ensure that MBIE complies with all disclosure obligations, including those set out in the CDA , and to ensure that there is a record of what has been disclosed, to whom and when and, in the case of non disclosure, the reasons for that decision. The relevant investigator or person in charge of the file is expected to provide all necessary assistance to ensure that the prosecutor is able to discharge his or her responsibility. Final decisions on withholding or disclosing information in non straightforward cases should be made jointly between the prosecutor, and the person in charge of the file (if nec essary with the input of the relevant managers). It is the responsibility of the person in charge of the file to ensure those within business units who need to be kept informed are notified of progress. . Victims In cases involving a victim or victims for the purposes of the Victim Rights Act : a. it is the responsibility of the inv estigator or other person in charge of the file to keep victims informed of progress of the investigations and prosecutions in accordance with s of that Act, and b. it is the responsibility of the prosecutor, in conjunction with the person in charge of th e file to prepare victim impact statements. Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines of Issue: July Security Classification Unclassified Version: . Review ed June Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page of Prosecutors should also act consistently with the Victims of Crime Guidance for Prosecutors , and the Victims Code , both of which explain prosecution responsibilities in further detail. . Witnesses Any MBIE employee who is requested by a prosecutor or investigator to give evidence in support of a MBIE prosecution must attend Court and assist upon request. If the employee has any concerns regarding their safety, they should notify their manager and the prosecutor immediately. That way all parties can consider whether any steps may need to be taken to protect the witness (for example, giving their evidence in an alternative way e.g. by CCTV). An MBIE employee must give evidence in a prosecution that is not brought by MBIE if summonsed. It is the responsibility of that employee to inform their manager that they have been summonsed and to inform them of any potential risks arising out of the nature of the evidence that they may be required to give. Employees and managers are encouraged to seek advice from a prosecutor if they are concerned about the evidence required or the potential risks. MBIE employees called to give expert evidence in a prosecution must comply with the Code of Conduct for Expert Witnesses . For MBIE prosecutions, it is the responsibility of the prosecutor to ensure that the witness understands their obligations as an expert witness. New information in the prosecution context . Investigators and other staff must provide any relevant new or previously undisclosed information to the prosecutor as soon as practicable. . MBIE has a continuing obligation to inv estigate potentially exonerating material if it comes to hand (and to disclose new information to the defence). . New information may also be relevant to the ongoing obligation to consider the propriety of a prosecution (see public interest test above). Conduct of prosecutions . Choice of prosecutor All MBIE prosecutions must be conducted by properly qualified legal counsel. Prosecutions may be carried out by in house prosecutors or by Crown Solicitors or employees of Crown Solicitor firms under instruction fr om the relevant business unit. Crown solicitors may only undertake prosecutions for MBIE in the area for which they hold the Crown warrant . Some prosecutions cannot be undertaken by in house prosecutors and so must be taken by Crown Solicitors, or in so me cases taken over by Crown Solicitors following a plea or case review hearing. These are Crown prosecutions and are set out in the Crown Prosecution Regulations . Where a matter is transferred to a Crown Solicitor as a Crown prosecution, the in house prosecutor and investigator must ensure that the Crown Solicitor receives the full file and accompanying prosecution report. For all other prosecutions, the decision as to which prosecutor to use is made in accordance with the Legal Services Policy , but the table below sets out some situations when a Crown Solicitor may be instructed to lead or support a pros ecution.
Free and frank opinions shrvakdix
Section of the Companies Act specifically requires any levies that are recovering costs across the Companies Office registry system to be set in regulations according to these three principles. It requires that they must be applied having regard to the cost of administering the whole system of registers, not on the basis of the costs of administering individual registers . Figure : Principles and benefits of shared services A shared approach enables: An organisational structure and operating model, supported by legislative changes to introduce new levies, that produce economies of scale (meaning it is more cost effective to operate a group of registers as one office rather than individually) in the delivery of registry services. Justified Any registers and functions to leverage off the existing business processes, technology, and infrastructure, minimising the overall cost. Efficient Users of smaller registers (registers with a comparatively low number of users) to benefit from a registry system that includes larger registers, so that fixed costs of providing registers are spread across more users. Equitable The Companies (Levies) Amendment Act amended the Companies Act to enable the Companies Office to collect levies from its users to recover shared services costs. A levy under the Companies Act allows for money to be collected from specified users of one register and be legitimately used to mee t the costs of operating any or all registers under one Companies Office registry system. Without introducing a specific levy to recover the costs of providing shared services, smaller registers would experience a significant, exponential increase in their fees. MBIE proposes that cost recovery is split between fees and lev ies under a mixed structure to give effect to these legislative changes , where : a new levy would recover the shared costs of the registry system to more clearly identify the existing costs of providing shared services, charging them to the appropriate group of users at a fair amount ; and fees would offset the remaining direct costs of providing specific registry services , offsetting the shared costs recovered through levies paid by specific users. This mixed cost recovery structure would sit alongside other levies that recover the cost of specific club goods, such as the existing Insolvency Practitioner levy and a proposed NZBN levy. Section sets out the proposals for applying and setting the amount of each of the three levies . Figure on the next page shows how the current fee based cost recovery structure will be split across new and existing fees and levies. The overall type of costs, the type of charges that will recover those costs, and the approximate portion of revenue an d expenditure for each type of charge are easily identified.
The policy intent is to ensure that employees still have at least three weeks paid time of f work for each entitlement year (regardless of when they actually take it). A closedown period is one period per year when an employee customarily closes their business operations or discontinues the work of one or more employees and requires the employee to take all or some of their annual leave entitlement. Under the Wages Protection Act employers can include a general deductions clause in employment agreements enabling them to recover overpayments from an employees final pay in some circumstances. In addition to this, before an employer make s any specific deduction from an employees pay the employer must consult them before making a specific deduction and an employee must agree in writing.
c. Internationally, many policies and regulations are aimed at circular practices and have implications for New Zealand exporters There are approximately national or trans national level circular economy str ategies worldwide and more than international legislative instruments. Governments have adopted circular approaches to address limited raw material availability and supply chain shock s, increase productivity and jobs, and address climate change and degenerating natural cap ital. A wide range of measures are used including bans, levies, taxes, minimum prices, standards, requirements for information on products, extended producer responsibility , procurement, grants and other regulatory and fiscal incentives . Policies focussed on upstream waste prevention and resource recovery are of growing interest and include incentives for circular design, repairability, and use of digital product passports and other measures to provide consumers with information about the origin , footprint , recyclability and life cycle of products. New Zealand is also among countries that have agreed to develop a legally binding Global Plastics Treaty , including circular economy approaches to address plastic pollution. Most attention on emissions and climate change mitigation to focus on the role of energy (largely scope and emission s). However, increasing attention globally is being paid to material and wider supply chain related emissions (scope ). A shift to a circular economy is a key part of reducing scope emissions in material production and supply chains . Our trading partners circular economy transitions will likely have implications for some New Zealand exporters and our place in wider global trade fl ows. Circular economy objectives are reflected in the trade and economic policies of New Zealands top four trade partners: China, Australia, US and Japan, as well as in the UK, EU, and indications toward s this in India. There are explicit circular economy provisions in New Zealands recent Free Trade Agreements with the EU, UK, and the Closer Economic Relations ( CER) Sustainable and Inclusive Trade Declaration with Australia. Shared interest in working together on circular economy is part of the joint statement on California New Zealand Climate Cooperation signed in July . New Zealand will require ongoing awareness of international circular economy developments to make timely responses to opportu nities and risks , including wher e regulatory interventions may be needed . Failure to comply with international standards and practices may mean reductions in market access, additional trade costs, or loss of competitive advantage. Examples of international developments with implications for New Zealand include: changes to Australian sustainability and recyclability requirements which will need to be met by New Zealand exporters for Australias Packaging Targets . EU reporting and disclosure measures that will have implications for som e products placed on the market in the EU, including recyclability or recycled content requirements, labelling , ecodesign, traceability, and product data . New Zealand has limited ability to influence design and manufacturing abroad. This makes strategic c ollaboration with trade partners on circular economy approaches important to mitigate risks of supply chain disruptions and market volatility. Government has roles through our information networks and trade relationships to monitor developments and support our exporter community to adapt to these global transitions. Source: International developments toward more circular economies and the implications for New Zealand
a clear process to follow to determine how much of an annual holidays entitlement needs to be used for a period of time away from work a prescriptive test for determining an Otherwise Working D ay for FBAPS purposes a clear definition of w hen a working arrangement is so irregular and intermittent that an employee may receive their annual holidays entitlement as payment rather than as paid time off. . In addition to proposals for the calculation and delivery of annual holidays and FBAPS entitlements, the Taskforce has also made a number of other recommendations to address other issues with the Act. . While f urther detailed policy and design work will be required to finalise the precise detail s that will be required to implement these proposals , the recommendations in this report provide the structure and format of a revised system for determining, calculating and paying the statuto ry entitlements set out in the Act. Updating the Act to be i n line with modern legislative drafting principles w ill also help improve the Act (for example, through adding examples to illustrate particular points). . The Taskforces recommendations are summa rised in the table below and discussed in more detail in Section . Recommendations Theme Recommendations Payment for annual holidays and FBAPS leave . The greater of the following should be paid for the relevant period of annual leave: a. Ordinary Leave Pay ( base rate plus any scheduled overtime, allowance, commission and incentive payments) b. Average weekly pay for the last four or weeks c. Average weekly pay for the last weeks . Each day (or part day) of FBAPS leave should be paid based on the greater of: a. Ordinary Leave Pay b. Average Daily Pay
growth in Working Holiday Scheme visa holders.
. Authorise the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety to make decisions, consistent with the Taskforces recommendations, on any issues that arise during the detailed policy design and drafting process
. If Cabinet agrees to my recommendation to adopt the Taskforces recommendations, work will begin immediately on detailed policy design and the legislative drafting process. I have submitted a legislative programme bid for amendments to the Holidays Act with a Categor y status (instructions to be provided to Parliamentary Counsel Office in ).
. The Taskforce would like to hear from anyone who has proposals for changes to the Holidays Act. Please bear in mind that any proposals for change will need to reflect the criteria set out in the Terms of Reference for the review. The Terms of Reference states that: . The Group is requ ired to develop, test and make recommendations to the Government on policy options for the provision of, and payment for, holiday and leave entitlements that: o continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act o provide clarity and certainty f or employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements o are simpler than the current Act in relation to provisions of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave o are readily implementable in a payroll system o minimise compliance costs for employers o minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees o ensure the balance of decision making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated o are readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future o aim to protect overall entitlements for employees . . Please consider these requirements when developing your suggestions for change . . You may wish to consider the following questions in developing your proposal. Are the broad principles that underpin the Holidays Act (that entitlements are to be determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken and that employ ees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave) still appropriate
of rural houses and businesses having access to broadband peak speeds of at least Mbps (compared with currently the RBI objective was )
Are you aware of other cross cutting issues with the design of the current Act If so, what are they
shrvakdix
shrvakdix
shrvakdix HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Final Report OCTOBER shrvakdix
E.g. t otal earnings in the last weeks divided by the total number of hours worked in the last weeks. shrvakdix
Free and frank opinions Free and frank opinions shrvakdix Financial Implications
In your opinion, what are the main reasons that make the Holidays Act difficult to comply with for employers
Information about making a complaint about MBIEs compliance with the Victims Rights Act is available on the MBIE website at http:www.mbie.govt.nzaboutour peoplecontact usvictim support mailboxsearchtermvictim . See letter from Deputy Solicitor General to Crown Solicitors dated August . Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines of Issue: July Security Classification Unclassified Version: . Review ed June Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page of Reason Example To support MBIEs capacity to provide services Insufficient staff within a particular district or area of regulation to meet needs Complex legal issues Likely to require complex advocacy with national implications High Profile Case is high profile with considerable media interest. This may be because of the defendants identity, international aspects, circumstances surrounding the case or the victims identity Independence from Ministry required When the case calls for independent advice or advocacy for example; when there is a perceived or actual conflict of interest . Running of the case Once the decision to prosecute is made, accountability for legal issues in connection with the file passes to the prosecutor. The pr osecutor will consult the investigator or other person in charge of the file as to the conduct of the prosecution and keep them informed as to progress. In the case of Crown Prosecutions, once the Crown has assumed responsibility for an MBIE prosecution, all decisions are matters for the Crown Prosecutor to decide, in consultation with MBIE. All prosecutors acting on behalf of MBIE are required to comply with all relevant professional obligations, including the requirement to present the prosecution case f airly and fully, but not to strive for a conviction. The prosecutor must also keep the relevant manager and, for in house prosecutions, the Manager Legal Services Litigation, appraised of any significant developments in the file. Significant developmen ts include: a. developments that may affect the conduct of other prosecutions b. indications of media interest, or developments of which the Ministry may wish to alert the media and c. matters affecting resourcing for the prosecution. Except as otherwise instructed, the authority to accept, on behalf of MBIE any proposal for resolution of a prosecution remains with the prosecution decision maker, who must seek advice from the prosecutor. If the prosecutor thinks that a proposal may be m ade during a court hearing, he or she should discuss with the prosecution decision maker what resolution would be acceptable before the hearing. In some cases, resolution proposals may also be made proactively by prosecutors, with the authority of the pr osecution decision maker.
Section of the Companies Act , as amended by the Companies (Levies) Amendment Act . Questions for submitters on proposals for a mixed cost recovery structure: What is your view on a mixed cost recovery structure of fees (for specific services) and levies (for fixed shared costs), and the types of costs allocated to fees and levies Are there any other options you would like to see considered to recover shared costs from users Figure : Current and proposed mixed cost recovery structure
Theme Recommendations and a more detailed definition should be provided for when PAYG can be used because a work pattern is intermittent or irregular. . An employer s ability to require employees to attend work under an availability provision should be suspended from the end of the last shift the employee works before their leave period until the start of the first shift they work on their return from leave. . The following definition of gross earni ngs should be used for leave payment calculations: an employees leave payment should reflect all cash payments received, except direct reimbursements for costs incurred. FBAPS leave entitlement . FBAPS leave should continue to be held in days . . Eligible e mployees should be entitled to bereavement leave and family violence leave from the first day of employment. Eligible employees should be entitled to one day of sick leave from their first day of employment, with an additional day per month of employment u ntil the full entitlement of five days is reached after four months. . Employees should have the ability to take sick leave and family violence leave in units of less than a day on a proportionate basis for time and pay with a minimum amount of a quarter of a day. . There should be a new test for which employees are eligible for sick, bereavement and family violence leave. . A new prescriptive methodology should be used to determine whether a day is an O therw ise Working Day for an employee for FBAPS purposes. . The list of people for whom bereavement leave applies should be extended to include a more modern understanding of family members. . Provisions relating to transferring public holidays should be amended to reduce the chance of employees being disadvantaged by t he transfer. Other proposed changes . The Taskforce was unable to reach a consensus view in relation to establishing an additional public holiday (e.g. for Matariki). . Closedown provisions should be amended to provide greater transparency and certainty for employees. In addition, the requirement that holidays are paid out at per cent and an employees anniversary is reset should be removed (although it should still be possible for anniversary dates to be reset by agreement). . On the sale and transfer of a business, employees should have a choice about whether to transfer all of their leave entitlements to the new employer or have them paid out and reset. . Record keeping requirements should be to reflect changes to how leave entitlements are held, calculated and paid. . Employers should be required to provide payslips to employees in every pay period. . Issues that cause non compliance with the current Act should be considered in the design of the compliance and enforcement mechanisms to support any revised Act .
Theme Recommendations and a more detailed definition should be provided for when PAYG can be used because a work pattern is intermittent or irregular. . An employer s ability to require employees to attend work under an availability provision should be suspended from the end of the last shift the employee works before their leave period until the start of the first shift they work on their return from leave. . The following definition of gross earni ngs should be used for leave payment calculations: an employees leave payment should reflect all cash payments received, except direct reimbursements for costs incurred. FBAPS leave entitlement . FBAPS leave should continue to be held in days . . Eligible e mployees should be entitled to bereavement leave and family violence leave from the first day of employment. Eligible employees should be entitled to one day of sick leave from their first day of employment, with an additional day per month of employment u ntil the full entitlement of five days is reached after four months. . Employees should have the ability to take sick leave and family violence leave in units of less than a day on a proportionate basis for time and pay with a minimum amount of a quarter of a day. . There should be a new test for which employees are eligible for sick, bereavement and family violence leave. . A new prescriptive methodology should be used to determine whether a day is an O therw ise Working Day for an employee for FBAPS purposes. . The list of people for whom bereavement leave applies should be extended to include a more modern understanding of family members. . Provisions relating to transferring public holidays should be amended to reduce the chance of employees being disadvantaged by t he transfer. Other proposed changes . The Taskforce was unable to reach a consensus view in relation to establishing an additional public holiday (e.g. for Matariki). . Closedown provisions should be amended to provide greater transparency and certainty for employees. In addition, the requirement that holidays are paid out at per cent and an employees anniversary is reset should be removed (although it should still be possible for anniversary dates to be reset by agreement). . On the sale and transfer of a business, employees should have a choice about whether to transfer all of their leave entitlements to the new employer or have them paid out and reset. . Record keeping requirements should be to reflect changes to how leave entitlements are held, calculated and paid. . Employers should be required to provide payslips to employees in every pay period. . Issues that cause non compliance with the current Act should be considered in the design of the compliance and enforcement mechanisms to support any revised Act . shrvakdix
. A disproportionate number of public service employees work in two of the sectors m ost likely to receive an increase in leave payments due to the variable working arrangements and complex remuneration structures of employees. There are also likely to be cost pressures for Government funded services provided through private sector empl oyers.
. Note the authorisation sought under recommendation includes authority to make decisions on compliance and enforcement mechanisms to support the new Holidays Act regime (such as the functions and powers of labour inspectors), provided these do not deviate significantly from mechanisms in current employment legislation
. Spectrum Allocation ) The Crown will allocate to the MSE to be held for the benefit of all Mori at no cost of all future Commercial Spectrum allocations that are allocated using the Management Rights regime , or any regime that might in the future replace the Management Rights regime . ) To avoid doubt , future commercial allocation refers to allocation of any new spectrum and renewal of existing spectrum. ) The MSWG note and accept that not all spectrum is managed via Management Rights and not all Management Rights are created for commercial purposes. ) The following are excluded from the arrangement set out in this MOU: a) Grants of radio licences for general use and for individual use on a first come, first served basis. b) Management Rights that are sub licenced by the Crown for local or sub national services. c) Broadcasting licences for sound and television which have been granted to Mori organisations including iwi and Te Mtwai at the time of this MOU and which are subject to separate agreements , but only to the extent that those separate agreements remain valid and in force. ) Appendix B: Process for f uture spectrum transfers and renewals sets out the process agreed by the parties for determining the specific details of spectrum transfers and renewals . ) Within twelve months of signing this MOU, the Crown will agree to allocate to the MSE to be held for the benefit of all Mori, at no cost, spectrum as set out in Appendix C: Initial spectrum allocations to the Mori Spectrum Entity .
. of invoices were paid within working days, up . in the previous quarter. This is the best result ever reported to for this initiative.
. were domestic users.
: (within NZ):
: Building foundations for the future.
: First Thursday of each month, alternating each month between .pm and pm
: PROs will always aim to maximise the longterm benefit to New Zealand. While the emphasis will shift to commercialisation and delivering economic outcomes, PROs will still need to deliver critical public good knowledge and services.
: PROs will deliver to government priorities for science, innovation and technology.
: PROs will look for opportunities to coinvest in research capability, facilities and knowledge production.
: The work programme and interpreting calls
: The National Interest Risk Review draws from the information in the TCIEU and allows relevant agencies to review potential risks associated with a permit (e.g. risks related to international relations or national security ). The impact and likelihood of the risk occuring is considered, as well as any appropriate mitigating factors (e.g. whether risk could be reduced by attaching conditions to the payload permit).
: Thursday, May, .pm
: Transparency between public funding and activity in PROs, with appropriate cost recovery models.
: formed by bringing together the National Institute for Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA) and the Institute of Geological and Nuclear Sciences Limited (GNS Science), and noting that Cabinet agreedinprinciple for NIWA to acquire MetService as a wholly owned subsidiary. This PRO will foster economic and environmental resilience in New Zealand through sustainable resource use, energy innovation, climate science and effective hazard mitigation. The process for the NIWA acquisition of MetService will continue as planned.
: general updates from MBIE in policy areas.
: opportunities for funding through SSIF programmes and infrastructure.
: opportunities for funding through the Commercialisation Partner Network and the PreSeed Accelerator Fund.
: opportunities for science funding for international partnerships and the Catalyst Fund.
: updates and information from MBIE on the reforms to the science innovation and technology sector.
: with mechanisms to prioritise, avoid unnecessary duplication, resolve tradeoffs and support consistency and coordination within and between PROs.
A million Local Activation Programme for programmes that were free to the public in town centres, venues and locations across Auckland, such as events organised by business associations, community groups, and cultural organisations.
A G INFORMATION PACK FOR MEDIA What is G, and how does it use radio waves What is the difference between ionising and nonionising radiation Radiation is split into two broad categories: ionising and nonionising. Nonionising radiation doesnt carry enough energy to ionise, or strip electrons from atoms and molecules, and therefore it does not have enough energy to damage our DNA. The radiation emitted from radios, mobile phones, phone towers and WiFi routers (RF radiation) is nonionising. The nature of this kind of radiation, and the way it interacts with the body, is quite different to ionising radiation like xrays. The New Zealand Radiofrequency Exposure Standard sets maximum exposure limits for the public to protect Kiwis of all ages. For more information on the New Zealand Standard, see page of this pack.G G G G G The electromagnetic spectrum has a variety of uses in New Zealand and internationally, including for radio and cellular mobile technology. Devices and equipment like computers, radios, mobile phones, phone towers and WiFi routers emit electromagnetic radiation. Cellular networks use dedicated radio spectrum frequencies for the connection between the cell site and the handset (cell phone). G is simply a new application of radio technology Releases of new cellular mobile technology have occurred approximately every decade since the s. The next (fifth) generation (G) is expected to be a significant step up from G networks in terms of speed, capacity and operational flexibility. The initial plan for the G rollout is that it will use frequencies similar to those used by current mobile phones. In the future, higher frequencies around GHz will become available, enabling even faster data transfer. These frequency bands have been used for household appliances, communications and radar for over years. More information about the frequencies for G is available on page of this pack. Very low frequencyM illimetre wavesInfraredG G, G GHzVisible UltraViolet XRays Gamma Cosmic RaysRadio frequency spectrum VLF SHF EHF LFMFHFVHFUHF KHz KHz PHz GHz EHz EHz THz NONIONISING IONISING How does G work and why is access to radio spectrum frequencies so important C ellular networks use dedicated radio spectrum frequencies for the connection between the cell site and the handset (cell phone). The government allocates these frequencies when new technology or demand arises. Each radio service is allocated a frequency to prevent it interfering with other services. T he government has announced that the . GHz band will be the first spectrum allocated for G. M obile network operators will use a combination of frequency bands to provide G services including the . GHz band and other bands they already have access to. H igher frequencies around GHz (sometimes referred to as millimetre waves or mmWaves) will be introduced later for G services, especially where high data rates or capacity are needed. Millimetre waves have been widely used for many years for pointtopoint communication links. T here is a common misconception that higher frequency signals are more harmful. In fact, the most important parameter when it comes to exposure to radio waves is the intensity of the radio wave. Exposures from G cell sites will be similar to those from the current technologies. However, if there is high demand in a particular area then more sites will be installed. Because each site will be serving a smaller area, they will operate at lower power which will have the effect of lowering exposures compared to G and G technology. T he frequencies to be used by G cell sites and devices are similar to those that have been used by existing technologies for many years, and are covered by the limits in New Zealand Radiofrequency Exposure Standard. (more information on the New Zealand Standard is provided on page of this pack). Standards New Zealand coordinates the process to develop and review a New Zealand Standard such as this, which includes convening expert committees and undertaking public consultation on draft standards. You can find out more about Standards New Zealand here: www.standards.govt.nz What does the government do to protect Kiwis from harmful radiofrequency exposure There are a number of government agencies and local bodies involved in the roll out of G in New Zealand. The responsibilities of these agencies and local bodies include setting regulations for the NZ telecommunications industry to operate within, allocating radio spectrum for network operators to use for G, monitoring research into health effects, and setting radiofrequency exposure limits for the public. C onsenting and monitoring the development of infrastructure (land use and environmental emissions controls) MfE, LG N ational direction and environmental standards for telecommunications facilities MfE E nvironmental health monitoring and compliance MoH, LG R ecommending health standards MoH Mon itoring research into non ionising radiation MoH O ccupational health MoH, MBIE S etting rules for telecommunications operators MBIE S upporting telecommunications infrastructure development and operations MBIE I ndustry standards and codes of practice MBIE C onsumer protections MBIE P roduct compliance framework MBIE RNZ Standard radio products RNZ electrical and electronic products C onsumer advice MoH, MBIE A llocating rights to spectrum MBIE M anaging spectrum use, licensing and compliance monitoring for interference management MBIE R epresenting NZ and providing inputs to international radiocommunications, regulations and standards MBIE Radio SpectrumOperators Consumers Management SpectrumEnvironment Health MfE Ministry for the Environment MoH Ministry of Health LG Local councils (territorial authorities) MBIE Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment More information about the agencies and bodies involved in G T he Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) is responsible for establishing the telecommunications regulatory environment, including setting the rules within which the telecommunications companies operate and the product compliance framework. MBIE is also responsible for making frequency bands available for new uses, including bands for the G network. You can read more about MBIEs roles here: www.mbie.govt.nzscienceandtechnologyitcommunicationsandbroadband and here: www.rsm.govt.nzbusinessindividualsbuyingelectricalandelectronicproductsinnew zealandwhattolookforwhenyourebuyingaproduct M BIE has laid the groundwork preparing for G through industry workshops and has run a public consultation process to discuss G spectrum bands and their future allocation. MBIE is also working with interested parties on technical and regulatory issues relating to G. A ll radio transmitters in New Zealand must either be licensed by a radio licence, spectrum licence or general user licence, or have an exemption from licensing. MBIE oversees this licensing process. Details of individual spectrum licences issued for each radio transmitter are searchable in a public register, the Register of Radio Frequencies: www.rrf.rsm.govt.nzsmartwebsmartpagesmartWelcomePage.wdk T he Ministry of Health is responsible for expert advice on health effects from electromagnetic fields and closely monitors international research, including the frequencies expected to be used for G technologies. This includes recommending exposure limits for the New Zealand Radiofrequency Exposure Standard (NZS.). You can read more about their role here: www.health.govt.nzourworkenvironmentalhealthnonionisingradiation T he Ministry for the Environment is responsible for regulatory controls under the Resource Management Act (RMA) , including the National Environmental Standards for Telecommunications Facilities (NESTF). You can read more about their role here: www.mfe.govt.nzrmanationaldirectionnationalenvironmentalstandardsnationalenvironmentalstandards L ocal governments role is to implement and enforce the national direction for telecommunications facilities through policies and plans under the Resource Management Act . The Resource Management (National Environmental Standards for Telecommunication Facilities) Regulations (NESTF) require that all cell sites, including those that use G technologies, comply with the standards. This includes the New Zealand Radiofrequency Field Exposure Standard, which set maximum exposure limits for the public. Ensuring products and equipment are safe T heres a range of international and AustraliaNew Zealand standards that the telecommunications industry adheres to, to ensure the products and equipment they are using are safe. I n New Zealand, all network providers rolling out a G network must comply with the Resource Management Act (RMA) , including the National Environmental Standards for Telecommunications Facilities (NESTF). These regulations include compliance to the New Zealand Radiofrequency Field Exposure Standard which sets maximum exposure limits for the public. The current NZ exposure standard already covers G. T he limits in the exposure standard are more than times lower than the levels at which adverse effects might occur. These limits protect people of all ages, including children. T he exposure standards limits are recommended by the International Commission on NonIonizing Radiation Protection, which the World Health Organization recognises for its independence and expertise in this area. The Commission has reviewed and reaffirmed these limits periodically (most recently in ). It bases any changes to them on the findings of health research, and not the requirements of telecommunications or other industries. Many countries (including Australia, Canada, France and Germany) use exposure limits similar to those in NZ. E xposures from G transmitters will be similar to those from the current technologies. However, if there is high demand in a particular area, more sites will be installed. Because each site will be serving a smaller area, they will operate at lower power which will have the effect of lowering exposures. W hen a mobile network operator proposes a new cell site, they must submit precommencement reports to the local council to show that the requirements in the NESTF and the exposure standard will be met for each cell site covered by the NESTF. This includes taking into account exposure from other telecommunications facilities in the vicinity as well. If the report shows that the cell site will generate exposures at or above of the public exposure limit, further reporting to the local council is required. If a facility or network operator cannot comply with requirements in the NESTF, the proposed facility will be noncomplying. C hecks that telecommunications equipment comply with the exposure limits are carried out by mobile network operators (in line with joint standards referenced in the NESTF). I nformation on the cell sites in your area can be obtained from your local council. How different is G infrastructure from G and G The key difference with G compared to previous generations of mobile technology is that G will normally use beamforming antennas. However, beamforming is already used to a limited extent by some G sites. See below for more detail on how a beamforming antenna operates: Conventional antenna Conventional cell site antennas (for example those currently used for G and G) produce a single fan shaped beam covering a sector about degrees wide. Regardless of where the receiving device is (for example, a person using their cell phone in their home), the radio beam is sent to the entire area served by the antenna. Beamforming antenna The difference with a beamforming antenna is that it produces a larger number (say, ) of narrow beams that are directed to a small area. This means that instead of covering the entire area with the beam, it is targeted to the receiving device in use. BRM Monitoring health research to keep everyone safe G is simply a new application of radio technology. Existing research on the possible health effects of radiofrequency fields applies as much to G as to any other radio system in use. T o keep up to with research, the Ministry of Health convenes an expert advisory committee, known as the Interagency Committee on the Health Effects of Non Ionising Fields. The Committee meets every six months and provides the Director General of Health with high quality, independent scientific and technical advice. The Committee has considered the issue of G deployment and has concluded there is nothing in the latest research that would indicate the need to change current policy settings relating to the health effects of radio waves. I n addition, the Ministry participates in a World Health Organization project to assess the health effects of electromagnetic fields. A t this point there is no indication that exposure to radiofrequency from cellular mobile technology exceeds guidelines or will do so once G is implemented. F or more information please see the latest Ministry of Health G factsheet here: www.health.govt.nzsystem filesdocumentstopicsheetsgandhealthaug.pdf T he Ministry of Health has also produced an expert Q A on G available here: www.health.govt.nzyour healthhealthylivingenvironmentalhealthradiationenvironmentcellsitesandggquestionsandanswers T he Ministry of Health has also produced an addendum to the Interagency Committee on the Health Effects of NonIonising Fields: Report to Ministers , providing advice on G radiofrequency fields. This is on the MoH website alongside the report to Ministers here: www.health.govt.nzpublicationinteragencycommitteehealtheffectsnonionisingfieldsreportministers F or further information about G, including G and health, the Office of the Prime Ministers Chief Science Advisor has created an information sheet G in Aotearoa New Zealand that you can download here: https:www.pmcsa.ac.nzourprojectshottopicsginaotearoanewzealand
A Bachelor of Astronomy may help you understand how radio telescopes work
A Bill to amend the Building Act has been introduced to Parliament. This captures the first phase of proposed changes in the building law reforms that were publicly consulted on in , and announced by the Minister for Building and Construction in October.
A Child Protection Policy is required for organisations providing governmentfunded services to children and families.
A Critical Minerals List for New Zealand
A Digital Technologies ITP Partnership Board was established to support the ongoing implementation of the ITP, made up of a diverse group of representatives from industry bodies, sector leaders and government.
A Fair Pay Agreement Working Group was set up in June to make recommendations on the design of a sectorlevel bargaining system. It was chaired by Rt Hon Jim Bolger ONZ.
A Mineral and Petroleum Resource Strategy
A Minerals Strategy for New Zealand to
A Minerals and Petroleum Resource Strategy ()
A National State of Emergency was declared on Tuesday February , local territorial authority and Civil Defence and Emergency Management (CDEM) groups managed the response to the weather event in their respective areas.
A New Zealand Income Insurance Scheme PDF KB
A New Zealand Income Insurance Scheme could play a significant role in better protecting workers and incomes, matching skills with where they are needed, and helping communities and industries during economic shocks and transitions.
A Repairability Index was introduced in France in . This was able to be quickly introduced to market in part because its methodology requires manufacturers of products to provide their own repair rating. The rating currently covers a range of five electrical and electronic products, which will be expanded over time.
A Spotlight Series where small business owners who have recently transformed their business by becoming digital can share their experiences with other small business owners.
A Steering Group with an independent chair will provide oversight of the Review.
A Tax Incentive is now available to businesses conducting eligible research and development in New Zealand.
A Technical Capability and Intended End Use (TCIEU) document is produced by MBIE officials based on relevant information from the application materials. It is presented in an accessible format for interagency consultation. This information includes: mission and purpose; country of jurisdiction; altitude and inclination; technical capability of the payload (i.e. physical dimensions, primary system, power subsystem, communications, attitude control, propulsion, remote sensing); and intended end use of the payload.
A caller sends a text message to a relay assistant through the NZ Relay application on their mobile phone or tablet. The relay assistant then relays the message verbally to a standard phone user and texts the spoken reply to the caller to read.
A caller signs with an NZSL interpreter on Skype, the interpreter relays the message verbally to a nonNZSL user over the phone, and then signs the reply to the caller.
A caller speaks directly to another phone user using TTY equipment. A relay assistant then types the spoken reply to the caller to read.
A caller speaks with a specialist relay assistant using both Skype, to provide visual cues, and a regular phone. The relay assistant then relays their message to a standard phone user.
A caller types a message to a relay assistant through the NZ Relay website. The relay assistant then relays the message verbally to a standard phone user and types the spoken reply to the caller to read.
A caller types their message to a relay assistant using TTY equipment. The relay assistant then relays their message verbally to a standard phone user and then types the spoken reply to the caller to read.
A caller with a speech impairment can speak with a specialist relay assistant using their own voice or a synthesizer. The relay assistant then relays their message to a standard phone user.
A caller with a speech impairment can type a message to a relay assistant using TTY equipment. The relay assistant then relays their message verbally to a standard phone user, who then speaks directly to the caller.
A charter doesnt impose an extra obligation on core agencies to carry out system assessments. Core agencies expect existing accountability processes and proactive selfassessments are sufficient.
A charter summarises how the system is intended to perform so that risks and gaps in the system can be identified quickly in system assessments and other types of regulatory system monitoring.
A circular diagram shows the five integrated themes and outcomes of the New ZealandAotearoa Government Tourism Strategy, centred around enriching New ZealandAotearoa through sustainable tourism growth. These are:
A circular economy and bioeconomy can tackle climate change and lift economic value
A circular economy is based on principles, driven by design:
A clearly defined longterm vision, to which the community and stakeholders are committed, with an agreed understanding of what success looks like, is critical to ensure all parties are heading in the same direction.
A cogovernance approach is the best format for New Zealand tourism operators to contribute to, shape, and benefit from a stronger data and information system. The aim is for the tourism sector to be better placed to:
A coregulation licensing regime for insolvency practitioners
A consultation document is on our website outlining the proposed changes to the regulations and inviting written submissions. The submission period runs for around four weeks. If you have any queries about the consultation process, please contact MBIE.
A crossgovernment interagency working group provides advice on the implementation of the work programme.
A culture of thinking outside the box, and a science system that supports knowledge intensive firms.
A daily allowance for living expenses
A demonstrated strong commitment to their principal field of studies and to interdisciplinary work, and
A diversion agreement over an illegal gold mining operation at Millers Flat, Otago has delivered a resolution that benefits all parties, including reparation to the local community.
A djust the rules for taking, allowing and requiring AL and for cashing up
A djusting the policy decision regarding the treatment of leave entitlements in restructuring situations : G iving effect to the existing policy decision , that all employees should have a choice about whether to transfer all of their leave entitlements to the new employer,
A draft critical minerals list for New Zealand
A draft minerals strategy for New Zealand to
A duty has been introduced in the Adventure Activities Regulations requiring operators to have processes in place to communicate the risks associated with an activity to prospective participants (lifting risk communication duties to the level of regulation and providing for a fine if operators do not meet this requirement).
A duty of good faith requires parties to a contract not to mislead or deceive one another.
A dynamic business environment fostering innovation and international connections.
A filtered search to all the documents stored on the MBIE website.
A fourweek notice period and fourweek payment, at of salary, from employers
A free NZ Relay app for mobile phones and tablets is available to download from the App Store and Google Play Store. This app can be used to make and receive text relay and captioned relay calls, using mobile data or a WiFi connection.
A full list of our investment funds
A further students from the same round were chosen for the Autumn NASA Internship period from September to December , and given prestigious New Zealand Space Scholarships to attend. Follow the video journeys of their unique projects and experiences there.
A further six months of financial support from the scheme, at of wages or a salary
A general synthesis of all the evidence (eg, human epidemiology and animal studies) leads to the conclusion that there is a causeeffect relationship in a broad sense and in terms of general common sense.
A geographical indication (GI) identifies a product as originating in a region, area or locality where its quality, reputation or other characteristic is attributable to its geographical origin. The characteristics of the product must depend on the geographical place of production.
A globallyconnected economy, with agreements in place for technology transfer and research collaboration.
A guide to just transitions
A highperforming health and safety regulatory system contributes to our goal of healthy, safe and fulfilling work for all New Zealand workers, and to grow New Zealand for all.
A joint statement on the U.S. New Zealand Space Dialogue
A key focus for our interest in APEC is the Human Resources Development Working Group (HRDWG).
A key focus of the Just Transition programme was to ensure that regions were activated and supported to plan and manage the social, economic, and environmental impacts of a transition. A successful transition was where regions could identify and then act upon new opportunities and manage the impacts in a way that was fair and just.
A key focus of the Strategy is more inclusive employment outcomes. This is supported by a series of action plans that focus on improving outcomes for groups that consistently experience poor employment outcomes. There are employment action plans, which seek to improve labour market outcomes for:
A launch facility is a fixed or mobile facility or place from which launch vehicles are intended to launch and which includes all other facilities necessary to launch a launch vehicle. Licences are only required for facilities in New Zealand; they are not required for New Zealand launch facilities abroad.
A launch vehicle is any vehicle which reaches or is intended to reach outer space, or which carries, supports, or is intended to carry or support the launch of a payload. Licences are required for launches that occur in New Zealand and for New Zealand launches that occur overseas.
A letter includes envelopes, packets, packages or wrappers for which a charge is made to carry it, take charge of it, or send it.
A letter is defined in the Postal Services Act as any form of written communication or document or article addressed to a specific person or address. It must not be conveyed by electronic means or by a courier service.
A list of datasets we have created
A list of organisations involved in New ZealandAotearoas tourism industry.
A literature review that examines key definitions, concepts and measurement approaches about resilience as a backgrounder for policymakers and others interested in the topic.
A major policy programme in implemented the recommendations of the Royal Commission, through the:
A member of our commercial team may also reach out to you via a phone call to verify this information if required.
A minor adjustment was made to the main port price from July to ensure that prices changes adequately reflected retail price change in Auckland following the introduction of the Auckland regional fuel tax. From October onwards, main port prices have been adjusted for the increased prevalence of discounting activity (through loyalty schemes, shopper coupons and regional discounting) to produce the discounted price.
A modern regulatory regime for a safe, sustainable and thriving space industry.
A national register of selfcontained vehicles is hosted by the Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Board. The register enables local authorities and the public to verify whether a vehicle is certified as selfcontained.
A new applied doctorates scheme to be introduced in aims to create more impactful science and better prepare more researchers for the wide range of careers outside of academia, such as in industry, Crown Research Institutes, iwi organisations and local councils.
A new dedicated number and web form to make it easier to report migrant worker exploitation.
A new gateway test that businesses can use when responding to a claim that a person is an employee and not a contractor.
A new model for clinical trials in New Zealand
A new visa to support migrants to leave exploitative situations quickly and remain lawfully in New Zealand. This visa will be valid for up to six months.
A nonrefundable application fee of (including GST) is payable at the time of your application.
A number that is a multiple of is unchanged
A number that is not in a or b is rounded to the nearest multiple of twothirds of the time, and to the next nearest multiple of onethird of the times. For example, will become twothirds of times, and will become onethird of times.
A package of energy sector discussion documents
A patent is an exclusive right granted for new inventions for a period of up to years. To get a patent, technical information about the invention must be disclosed to the public in a patent application. IPONZ is the government agency responsible for granting patents.
A people trafficking awarenessraising resource for government and the community, including what trafficking is, where you might see it, indicators and who to call for help, is under development by the InterAgency Trafficking Operations Group. Expected to be end of and disseminated early .
A postal identifier may be a name, logo, stamp, postmark or other label or mark that can be as simple as a rubber stamp bearing the postal operators name.
A practical guide to getting into circular economy
A printable PDF version is below.
A printable card that people who may need language assistance services can show to help them use government services. The card has fields where you can write your name and the language you speak, and the MBIE website address for language assistance services.
A printable poster and brochure for people to indicate which language they use.
A promising new cancer treatment is entering a phase trial coordinated by the Malaghan Institute of Medical Research, proving New Zealand is an ideal testing ground for clinical research in CAR Tcells and other immunotherapies.
A proposed building consent exemption for small standalone dwellings, commonly known as granny flats, of up to square metres in size will now cover small standalone dwellings of up to square metres.
A purchase order number (PNXXXXXX) if you have received a purchase order from us
A purchase order will be required prior to supply of some goods and services. Your MBIE contact will send you a Purchase Order using the email address you have provided us. If you are provided with a purchase order number, you must reference this on your invoice.
A pyramid diagram shows some key factors of the visitor experience. At the top of the pyramid is hero experiences, followed by supporting themes and experiences, then accommodation, attractions, hospitality, retail, events and conferences, and at the base of the pyramid are supporting infrastructure, amenitiesservices, policiesregulation. Sitting along the sides of the pyramid are capability, innovation, investment and organisational structuresinstitutions.
A quarterly update of labour market statistics, providing an overview of the current state of the labour market.
A range of government agencies have an interest in space and advanced aviation.
A range of legislative, operational, and regulatory changes will be made to transform performance across the system.
A range of levyrated technical policy proposals to improve fairness were also confirmed by Cabinet, these are detailed below and in Regulatory Impact Statements included at the bottom of this page.
A recent year review of ANZSRC was led by a project comprising the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), Stats NZ, the
A redirector page has been set up without anywhere to redirect to.
A refreshed industry strategy in response to COVID
A regulatory charter is a management tool designed to support a living regulatory system and reinforce its shared ownership for those with regulatory functions.
A report and summary slides are available here for download:
A report on the critical barriers, enablers and approaches needed for a more circular economy in Aotearoa New Zealand by
A report on the impacts of circular approaches on emissions, jobs, and other factors
A requirement to provide a pay statement in each pay period to provide greater transparency about leave and pay for employees.
A review of the financial reporting framework led to the Financial Reporting Act which sets reporting requirements for businesses and registered charities.
A review of the trafficking victim certification process to ensure it is still fitforpurpose, whilst started, was not completed in .
A roadmap for hydrogen in New Zealand
A satellite office is located at the Hawkes Bay Business Hub, providing business development assistance.
A screen sharing session can only be undertaken with your express verbal agreement. By continuing you acknowledge that:
A significant function of the centre will be to join up existing food safety science and research to make the best use of New Zealand and international resources. The centre will also link to and collaborate with the international science community and related international research platforms.
A single methodology based on guaranteed hours would simplify the Bill, reduce compliance costs and obligations, and provide certainty and clarity to both employers and employees. The benefit of using actual rather than guaranteed hours is a subjective assessment . If an employees hours of work vary significantly from their guaranteed hours , using guaranteed hours would mean an employee uses more entitlement for a part week of AL compared to if actual hours were used, but that would translate to higher pay for the pa rt week of AL . The employee would be under no legal obligation to work on days that are not agreed days of work .
A six month timeframe is aligned wit h the current entitlement timeframe but is longer than the fourmonth period recommended, reducing the impact on employers. The proposal also responds to feedback from MBIEs working group that the multiple accumulation points for different employee groups would be complex to administer in practice by including fewer accumulation points.
A small proportion of Pacific migrants come to New Zealand as international students, making up three percent of all student visas approved in . The number of Pacific student visa approvals has been consistent over the last five years, decreasing by five percent.
A strategy to support the growth of our space and advanced aviation sectors
A summary of indicators that describe how Aotearoa New Zealand is performing in terms of Good Work PDF KB
A summary of insights arising from the research programme is available:
A summary of select data and featured actions as at June .
A summary of submissions and feedback received during the consultation on the proposed subject of MBIE and MFAT Joint LongTerm Insights Briefing.
A summary of submissions is available on the consultation page:
A summary of submissions to the Proposed changes to the International Visitor Conservation and Tourism Levy discussion document.
A summary of the proposals in the New Zealand income insurance scheme.
A summary of these suite of reports is available:
A system that encourages increased investment in low emissions technologies, and
A table overview of the New Zealand Screen Production Rebate policy criteria for the Uplift.
A telecommunications service obligation (TSO) is established through an agreement under the Telecommunications Act between the Crown and a TSO provider.
A tiered dispute resolution system supports parties to resolve issues that may arise, including access to mediation and facilitation.
A total of completed responses were received in , equating to an overall response rate (excluding ineligible responses) of .
A total of , student visa holders were present in New Zealand on June . This was less than the year before. The main contributor to this decline was a decrease of in the number of new student visas approved in .
A trade mark enables businesses to distinguish their products or services from similar products or services offered by competitors. The main purpose is to create a distinctive and preferably memorable brand that customers associate with quality products or services.
A tripartite Taskforce was established to suggest improvements to the Holidays Act . The Holidays Act (the Act) sets out the minimum entitlements to holidays and leave, and payment for them, that employers are obliged to provide to their employees. Its purpose is to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees lives by providing minimum ent itlements to annual holidays, public holidays, and sick, bereavement and family violence leave.
A vision for hydrogen in New Zealand
A wide range of digital twins in development or earlystage use in New Zealand were identified in the research. Most twins are of cities, buildings, or infrastructure, often developed by councils, to enable efficient design, planning and management of resources and assets. Sectororiented RD programmes include forest, vineyard and orchard twins to support sustainable and productive growing systems. These current uses are consistent with circular objectives for resource efficiency.
A wide range of opportunities were identified for circular economy approaches to contribute to emissions reduction and wider impact in New Zealand. The report presents these in detail, assessing their likely benefits and limitations.
A work programme that will achieve our vision.
A Summary The future of business for Aotearoa New Zealand
ACC Claimants who disagree with a decision made by ACC are able to have the decision reviewed by an independent reviewer.
ACC and MBIE Briefing Paper: Appendices A, B and C
ACC and MBIE Briefing Paper: Improving ACCs dispute resolution processes, including ACCs response to the Independent Review of Acclaim Otagos report
ACC and MBIE Briefing Paper: update on the response to the Miriam Dean Review and next phase of work to improve disputes performance
ACC considered it was acting lawfully in charging the interest. Potential legal issues were identified when ACC proposed to consult on setting a method in regulations for calculating a debit interest charge to be included in instalment plan fees.
ACC is required under section of the Accident Compensation Act to award to claimants some of the cost of taking the review, where the independent reviewer makes a decision fully or partly in favour of the claimant, or considers the claimant has acted reasonably.
ACC is required under section A of the Accident Compensation Act to conduct a biennial review of the Cost of Treatment Regulations.
ACC levies are set every years. In any given year, levies are intended to be equivalent to the lifetime cost of rehabilitating those who are injured in that year. This excludes the cost of claims made by nonearners (which are government funded) and investment returns.
ACC mainly pays for the Accident Compensation Scheme (AC Scheme) from accounts funded by levies, which ACC collects from New Zealanders including businesses (employers, selfemployed, contractors, and shareholderemployees).
ACC uses a retrospective approach to assess how market activity has affected the cost of treatment and rehabilitation. ACC also works with the sector to identify areas for improvement as part of the decisionmaking process. If you would like to share your suggestions on what could be improved, please contact ACC.
AEWV Dashboard PDF KB
AI, machine learning, and advanced computing
APEC Energy Working Group
APEC Fossil Fuel Subsidy Reform Peer Review
APEC Policy Partnership on Science, Technology and Innovation.
APP : Additional Key Persons for Technical Capability Details
APP : Additional Overseas Authorisation Details
ASPIRE Nomination Form
ASPIRE prize: Inclusive science, technology and innovation for a resilient and sustainable environment
ASTRO G Astrobiology The University of Auckland
Abbreviations and glossary
Ability to take AL in advance during a closedown period
Ability to take AL in advance during a closedown period:
About Better for Business
About Longterm insights briefings
About copyright and trademark issues
About international regulatory cooperation
About our research and data
About the Accident Compensation Review Costs Regulations
About the ILO and its role
About the MethaneSAT space mission
About the Taskforce and Advisory Group
About the earthquakeprone building system review
About the tourism forecasts
About the work health and safety regulatory system
About thirdparty fundraisers
Above the left end of the arrow, there is the heading:
Accelerate recovery by targeting investment in priority portfolio markets and segments.
Accelerating Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency consultation
Accelerating building projects with selfcertification and inspection targets
Access a range of consumer research and reports commissioned or undertaken in recent years.
Access a range of tourism research and reports commissioned or undertaken in recent years.
Access previous national and regional international tourism forecasts dating back to .
Access the HAV licence application form here:
Access the payload permit application form here:
Access to and around a regiondestination is a key enabler. It can either accelerate or hinder visitor growth.
Access to the data used in this study was provided by Stats NZ under conditions designed to give effect to the security and confidentiality provisions of the Data and Statistics Act . The results presented in this study are the work of the author, not Stats NZ or individual data suppliers.
Accession to the United Nations Convention on Registration of Objects launched into Outer Space PDF KB
Accident Compensation (Interest on Instalments and Unpaid Levies) Amendment Bill
Accident Compensation (Interest on Instalments) Amendment Act
Accident Compensation Corporation
Accident compensation dispute resolution review
Accident compensation regulatory system
Accommodation Association
Accommodation Data Programme
Accommodation Data Programme (ADP)
Accommodation Survey (July September )
Accountability of a dispute resolution scheme
Accountable for MBIE meeting its obligation under this policy.
Accounting reforms in and
Accreditation Employer Interim Reporting July PDF KB
Accredited Employer Programme Changes
Achieving and measuring success
Achieving financial capability is a powerful tool in enhancing overall economic prosperity and wellbeing. One way to achieve financial capability is through the uptake of financial capability programmes. However, even though highly successful, Pacificcentred financial capability programmes have been available, uptake of these programmes by the community has been low.
Achieving the vision for tourism
Acknowledging our mistakes and listening to feedback.
Act . Our proposals are intended to
Act . If so, state when .
Act unaffected by Cabinet decisions.
Action Plan for Pacific Education to
Action toward this end may take various forms:
Actions to support the Strategy
Active Debris Removal and On Orbit Servicing Missions: Operational Policy IssueVersion Control Version Amendments V th May Initial Issue
Active Debris Removal and OnOrbit Servicing Missions: Operational Policy PDF KB
Actively championed by leaders
Activities Bill PDF KB
Activities eligible for a preassessed activity licence.
Activities funded by the RTBF will be delivered between April and July and will target AutumnWinter visitation. It is expected this will mean a strong focus on the Australian market. Successful proposals can build on existing activities or deliver new activities.
Adaptable and responsive to government
Adaptation and global markets
Addendum to the Regulatory Impact Statement on proposed changes to the Holidays Act .
Additional Employment Protections for Security Officers Under Part A: Approval to Draft PDF KB
Additional costs of proposed approach compared to taking no action Regulated parties (employers and employees ) Increased ongoing costs for some employers due to : gross earnings definition new payment methodologies removal of the paid parental leave override earlier availability for some types of leave new bereavement leave definition record keeping and payslips requirements Oneoff costs for many employers to upgrade to a new payroll system. . per year for Option One Low Regulators (Labour Inspectorate) Oneoff costs to operationalise the new requirements and upskill staff, provide initial education services, update guidance and tools and respond to questions after implementation. Possible on going costs related to increased enforcement and compliance activity. Approx. . million ( to ) for Option One. Medium Wider governm ent Estimated costs to government as an employer included in the Regulated parties estimates Low Other parties Oneoff costs to payroll providers to upgrade their systems. This is expected to be greater for Option Two, but cannot be estimated at this time. Low shrvakdix
Additional information for applicants, suppliers and vendors
Additional options for complainants
Additional recordkeeping requirements to ensure employers have the data required to accurately complete the calculations and tests.
Additional resource to establish a comprehensive identification and support system for victims of trafficking is still required. INZ will continue to research and scope this work, which will include exploring options for funding.
Additional resources may be required to support the development and implementation of the plan; therefore, the process needs to be cognisant of central and local government planning and funding cycles. DM should aim to provide continuity of activity across both political and planning cycles, to provide confidence for stakeholder commitment and investment.
Additionally , NZSA may : assess the ODMP using the latest DRAMA or DAS software to verify compliance with regulation ; or arrange an independent assessment of the ODMP by a suitably qualified entity , such as ESA .
Additionally, employers retain an obligation to remediate employees for historical underpayments that have occurred due to noncompliance with the current Holidays Act.
Addressing temporary migrant worker exploitation
Addressing temporary migrant worker exploitation PDF .MB
Addressing the exploitation of migrants is a priority for the New Zealand Government.
Addressing zero hours contracts and other practices
Addressing zero hours contracts and other practices regulatory impact statement
Addressing zerohour contracts
Adjustments to fees (where required)
Adjustments to the Climaterelated Disclosures Regime summary of discussion document
Administrators of financial benchmarks
Adopting a DM approach enables communities and destinations to respond to changing conditions and determine the type of tourism they would like to have and the benefits they would like to receive, taking an active role in managing these.
Adoption of circular practices in buildings, agriculturefood, and manufacturing would provide emission savings over time and have impacts for productivity, jobs and supply chain resilience.
Advanced Energy Technology platform
Advanced International Law (LAWPUBL )
Advanced aviation (including aerosciences, autonomous flight systems, and air traffic management)
Advancing our understanding of flooding in New Zealand
Adventure Activities keeping it safe: Consultation brochure PDF KB
Adventure Activities keeping it safe: Consultation document PDF .MB
Adventure Activities keeping it safe: Summary of proposals PDF .MB
Adventure activity operators must obtain a safety audit by an accredited safety auditor and be registered by WorkSafe as an adventure activities operator in order to offer their activities.
Advice on options for prorating sick leave for inclusion in the exposure draft Bill.
Advice on proposed reductions to the New Zealand Trade and Enterprise Budget PDF KB
Advice on the transitional provision for the personal grievance income threshold PDF KB
Advice provided to the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety on the possible policy direction of legislation to address modern slavery and worker exploitation across domestic and international operations and supply chains. Modern Slavery Leadership Advisory Group established, meeting four times in . Includes representatives from business, unions, and civil society.
Advice to the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety on the possible policy direction of legislation to address modern slavery and worker exploitation across domestic and international operations and supply chains. This includes potential obligations to prevent breaches of employment standards in domestic operations and supply chains.
Advising agencies Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment Decision sought Improving the Holidays Act Proposing Ministers Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety
Advising on economic development and tourism policy, and managing major events and tourism funds
Advising on labour market policy, immigration policy, management of international components, workplace relations and safety policy and accident compensation policy.
Advising on science, innovation, investment and biotechnology policy
Aerospace technologies are essential to the day to day functioning of our country, enabling navigation and communication, security and defence, environmental monitoring, disaster response and recovery, weather forecasting, and natural resource management.
Affected parties (identify) Comment : nature of cost or benefit (eg, ongoing, one off), evidence and assumption (eg , compliance rates), risks Impact m present value where appropriate , for monetised impacts; high, medium or low for nonmonetised impacts Evidence certainty (High, medium or low)
Affordability and opportunity:
After , the Commerce Commission may recommend to the Minister for Digital Economy and Communications that:
After adjusting for changes in prices, real growth from was estimated at ..
After considerable research, it was decided to adopt the National Accreditation Authority for Translator and Interpreters (NAATI) system of interpreter standards and associated accreditation for those doing interpreting work in the New Zealand Public Sector.
After consultation, the Minister will bring the proposals to Cabinet and any approved changes to Schedule will be taken to the Executive Council through an OrderinCouncil process.
After the consultation, we will provide advice to the Government which will be considered at Parliament, along with text of the Forced Labour Protocol, .
After the submission period closes, MBIE reviews and summarises the submissions before providing final recommendations to the Minister along with a regulatory impact analysis. The Minister then provides recommendations to Cabinet for its approval.
Agencies who commit to the charter are obliged to selfassess algorithms they use to deliver their services to identify the level of risk associated with the algorithm. This will help us to prevent the perpetuation of bias, protect privacy, and ensure alignment with the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi.
Agencies, policies and budget initiatives
Agency disclosure statement
Agency disclosure statement . List of Acronyms . Error Bookmark not defined. Executive summary . Status quo and problem definition . Objectives . Options and impact analysis . Consultation . Conclusions and recommendations . Implementation plan . Monitoring, evaluation and review .
Agenda for the Future of Work Tripartite Forum March PDF KB
Agenda for the Future of Work Tripartite Forum on Climate Change June PDF KB
Agenda for the Future of Work Tripartite Forum on Good Work and Workplaces June PDF KB
Agenda for the Future of Work Tripartite Forum on Just Transitions September PDF KB
Agenda for the Future of Work Tripartite Forum on just transitions March PDF KB
Agenda for the Future of Work Tripartite Forum, July PDF KB
Agree Discuss Note that we are continuing to work on the details of the criteria and mechanism
Agreement between the European Union, of the one part, and New Zealand, of the other part, on the participations of New Zealand in Union programmes PDF KB
Agreement between the Government of New Zealand and the Government of the United States of America on science and technology cooperation contributing to domestic and external security capabilities PDF KB
Agreement between the Government of New Zealand and the State of Colorado on cooperation on science, innovation, technology and space.
Agreement between the New Zealand Government and Rocket Lab Ltd New Zealand and Rocket Lab USA Inc (Sept )
Agreement for scientific and technological cooperation between New Zealand and United States PDF .MB
Agreement on scientific and technological cooperation between the European Community and New Zealand PDF .MB
Agreement relating to science, research and innovation cooperation between the Government of Australia and the Government of New Zealand PDF KB
Agreements have were signed with Inspire.net, Gisborne.net, Chorus and Araneo to connect remote schools and their surrounding communities with fast wireless broadband.
Agreements were signed with Chorus and Vodafone and include:
Agritech, Construction Digital Technologies
Air NZ on board with new climate change research
Aircraft Maintenance Engineering (Certificate or Diploma)
Airspace Integration Trials
Alexandra is completing a PhD in Mechanical Engineering at the University of Canterbury, with a research interest in neuromorphic engineering.
Algorithm charter for Aotearoa New Zealand
Algorithms are used at MBIE for one or more of the following reasons:
Algorithms at MBIE: Transparency and accountability for our algorithm use
Alison Marris Manager, Employment Standards Policy Labour, Science and Enterprise , MBIE
Alison Marris Manager, Employment Standards Policy Labour, Science and Enterprise, MBIE
Alison McDonald, Deputy Secretary Immigration New Zealand
Alison McDonald, Deputy Secretary, Immigration
Alison Stewart, Foundation for Arable Research (FAR)
Alison brings a wealth of operational leadership experience from public service in New Zealand and the United Kingdom. She arrived in New Zealand in and spent years at Te Kawa Mataaho (formerly the State Services Commission) where she was the Deputy Commissioner for Performance Improvement. She went on to become Director of the Customs transformation programme, before taking up the role of Deputy Chief Executive Services for Children and Families (South) at Oranga Tamariki in .
Alison leads Immigration New Zealand, which provides stewardship of the immigration system to facilitate and protect New Zealands interests. It aims to deliver outstanding immigration services, bringing the best people to New Zealand to make it prosper.
Alison was made an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in for her work with Her Majestys Revenue and Customs.
All Graduates Interpreting and Translating
All Graduates apply best practice and use the latest technology to deliver services. Their inhouse development team offers extensive IT integration capabilities tailored to client needs.
All Graduates are committed to making communication with Culturally and Linguistically Diverse (CALD) communities easy and accessible. All Graduates develop trusting and mutually rewarding relationships with their interpreters and translators, and the public service, and together deliver a gold standard to CALD communities.
All MBIE employees, contractors and consultants must meet the standards of behaviour set out in the:
All New Zealanders can participate in employment with opportunities to fulfil their needs and aspirations
All agencies generally entitled to purchase services under collaborative contracts (e.g. central government departments, crown entities and local government authorities) are eligible to join this contract.
All building work in New Zealand must meet certain requirements to achieve safe, healthy, durable homes and buildings. These requirements support our goal to grow New Zealand for all.
All components of the package concluded on July and successfully supported the wellbeing of Aucklanders while stimulating economic activity.
All data sharing is assessed to be compliant with the Privacy Act and specific legislative information sharing provisions. This ensures the data shared is accurate, reliable and securely stored to facilitate providing powerful trusted data, improving customer service offerings and ensuring MBIE is empowered by data.
All employees are required to have a formal agreement in place if they are to work remotely, including working from home for more than two days per week on a recurring basis. This includes completing available wellbeing, health and safety assessments with employees who are working remotely in New Zealand.
All employees in New Zealand have minimum employment rights that their employer must meet.
All formal Flexible Working arrangement requests, acceptance and decline rates and reason will be recorded by People and Culture.
All funding applications are assessed by a panel that makes recommendations to the Tourism Minister or MBIE Chief Executive (or their delegate) as appropriate.
All nominees should meet the following criteria:
All occupation groups experienced falls in online job advertisements, with the Labourers occupation group seeing the largest annual and year decline.
All of Government procurement Part of PDF .MB
All of Government procurement Part of PDF .MB
All of Government procurement Part of PDF .MB
All of Government procurement Part of PDF .MB
All of government approach to online financial scams
All organisations would be required to take action if they become aware of modern slavery or worker exploitation
All payloads considered on a casebycase basis
All postal identifiers must be registered with us, and available for public inspection as part of the register of postal operators.
All prosecution decisions must be recorded as set out in the
All research outputs in scope of the policy must be listed in annual and final reports, as required by the applicable funding agreement for the project. The list of research outputs must include a permanent DOI or URL link for the research output.
All roles are treated as flexible unless there is a genuine business reason for a role not to be. Flexibility is equally available to women, men, and gender diverse employees, irrespective of the reason for wanting it. Working flexibly does not undermine career progression or pay.
All telecommunications providers must help fulfil interception warrants (or use ongoing statutory authority). In addition, a smaller group of network operators must preinvest in the necessary equipment and technical resources to carry out interceptions over their networks.
All the latest Science and Innovation news stories as well success stories from previous funding rounds.
All the products in the top blue section moved into the Stage II where they were further assessed.
All the quarterly data series are no longer being seasonally adjusted. Users are recommended to do annual comparisons to avoid seasonal effects.
All unadjusted data in the above Excel files is available in this consolidated file:
AllofGovernment Approach to Online Financial Scams PDF KB
AllofGovernment Employment Strategy and Youth Employment Action Plan
AllofGovernment Employment Strategy and Youth Employment Action Plan: Minute of Decision
Alliance turning waste into m boost to the New Zealand economy
Allow Labour Inspectors to issue an infringement notice where employers fail to provide requested documents in a reasonable timeframe.
Almost . billion has been invested in UFB infrastructure to ensure as many New Zealanders as possible can experience the social and economic benefits of faster broadband.
Almost all advisers had worked with at least one INZ office in the last three months. They had mixed views of the experience of dealing with INZ offices, with offshore advisers more positive than onshore advisers. Generally, advisers were most positive about how they were treated by staff (over ), and least positive with regard to accessing and getting help when needed (). Improved communication was the most frequently citied suggestion to enhance the experience of dealing with INZ offices.
Almost half () of Pacific student visa holders were approved for study at primary and secondary schools, followed by at universities and polytechnics.
Almost half of Pacific approvals for residence were under the
Almost half of the workers approved come from Vanuatu.
Alongside WorkSafe New Zealand, we work to achieve this through these main pieces of work.
Alongside this programme, other rural broadband options are available from private network operators.
Also called Tourism Satellite Account (TSA), this data shows the impact of tourism on the economy in terms of expenditure and employment
Also consulted on was a preliminary proposal to require full and final claims liability settlement for all AEs in the Full Self Cover (FSC) plan. However, given the lack of support this will not proceed. Instead, ACC will shortly consult AEs on a revised proposal for full and final settlement only when an Accredited Employer chooses not to renew their AEP accreditation or has their accreditation terminated.
Alternative dispute resolution services play an important role in Aotearoa New Zealand. One major aim is to achieve better coordination and greater consistency in dispute resolution approaches.
Alternative energy research projects awarded funding
Alternatively you have the right to seek a review of the response by the
Although New Zealand remains a nonassociated third country participant in Pillar and Pillar of Horizon Europe, there are still many possibilities for New Zealand researchers to be involved. These will mostly fund New Zealand researchers to work internationally, although there are some cases where researchers can be supported to work in New Zealand.
Although most reported good health and generally positive noneconomic outcomes in New Zealand, a number of their outcomes on these dimensions grew worse over their first years after residence approval. The reasons for these declines are not wholly clear and could be investigated in future research.
Although the government does not own or operate any telecommunications networks, it is committed to improving connectivity for the benefit of all New Zealanders. Becoming a leading digital nation will only be possible through the combined efforts of the government and telecommunications industry.
Although these factors are listed as possible considerations, the national interest, and what would be contrary to it, is not defined in the Act. Instead, the Act grants the Minister broad discretion to decide on a casebycase basis whether granting a payload permit would be contrary to the national interest. This approach has advantages over a more rigid test, that, for example focussed on certain payloads or payload classes. This ensures that the Act is an enduring piece of legislation that can easily respond to changes in the global risk environment, both on Earth and in space, and government priorities.
Amazon Series Memorandum of Understanding for the Uplift
Amend the local fibre companies constitutions to align with Chorus
Amending the Gas Act
Amendment Regulations
Amendments to the Electricity Safety Regulations to expand the permitted voltage range for electricity supply
Amendments to the Gas Act in ensure the Act is fitforpurpose for regulating the disclosure of security of supply risks, and that penalties are robust.
Amendments to the Immigration Act are to ensure that immigration is managed in a way that balances the national interest, as determined by the Crown, and the rights of individuals (as per Section of the Act).
Amendments to the regulations will lower the risk to power lines from trees that are outside the GLZ. The changes will also:
Amenities, services and infrastructure
Among those migrants whose last student visa ended between July and June :
Among those migrants whose last work visa ended between July and June , remained in New Zealand on a resident visa while were not in New Zealand years later.
An HAV is any vehicle that travels, intends to travel, or can travel to higher than flight level or the highest upper limit of controlled airspace under the Civil Aviation Act (linked below). This may include aircraft, balloons, and sounding rockets. Licences are required for HAVs in New Zealand; they are not required for New Zealand HAVs abroad.
An IRC if Withholding tax needs to be deducted (schedular payment) or an Exemption Certificate if exempt from withholding tax deductions. This includes offshore entities who provide services in NZ.
An RSAB is an omnibus bill (a bill that amends more than one piece of legislation) introduced with the approval of the parliamentary Business Committee under Standing Order ()(c).
An alphabetical list of all community languages.
An analysis of the spending patterns of international visitors to New Zealand from to mid.
An earlier report, which MBIE commissioned from Sapere Research Group in , estimated the economic impact of the development of a rocket launch industry in New Zealand:
An effective safety case will give operators the ability to manage the public safety risks they create without the constant need to seek authorisation from the Minister to make changes. It is for this reason that the safety case should be presented as a robust argument rather than a summary of the safety system (any changes to the safety system should not automatically result in a requirement to amend the safety case). Satisfying the Minister of Changes There may on occasion be a need to amend the safety case. Operators should consult MBIE to determine whether or not a variation may be required. Operators may do so at any stage, however must not implement any proposed variations to the safety case until the Minister is satisfied that they have considered the risk to public safety resulting from those changes and that sufficient assurance has been provided that public safety risks can be managed. Any variation to the safety case must be applied for in writing, with the amendments clearly identified, the rationale for the changes explained and a suitable risk assessment completed. Examples of when operators might need to apply for a variation to the safety case include: the nature of activities have changed in such a way systems required are not adequately reflected that the risk to public safety has increased and the in the safety case; andor resources or systems for managing the risk are no a variation is required to ensure compliance with longer appropriate; your public safety duties and the requirements the methodology and systems for managing risk are of the Act and its regulations. no longer appropriate and the new methodology and Operators do not need to apply for a variation where minor administrative corrections (such as grammar, spelling or punctuation) are made, however they should ensure that MBIE is provided with the current version of the safety case. Applicants should have a suitable document control system in place to ensure that obsolete material is appropriately removed from service, and that only current material is being operationally implemented. Formatting and Structure Applicants should ensure that the safety case is legible, set out in a clear and logical manner and is easily understood (written in plain English). It should be submitted to MBIE in an electronic format (either MS Word or searchable .pdf document). The commitment to public safety must be evident. The size and complexity of the document will be dependent on the type of operations are undertaken and the public safety risks that operations present. The Minister may seek to verify the commitments made in the safety case by evidencing components of the safety management system. Contact Details Any questions please contact the New Zealand Space Agency directly. Freephone (within New Zealand) (THENZSPACEAGENCY) (THENZSPACEAGENCY) For overseas callers Email nzspaceagencymbie.govt.nz Website www.mbie.govt.nzspace
An effective standards and conformance system makes it easier for consumers and businesses to make informed decisions. The Government, consumers and the community rely on standards and conformance to protect public health, safety and the environment.
An employee is no longer on an existing employment agreement if they move to a new employer, or they shift to a new role within the same employer. However, if the employee shifts to a new role with the same employer as a result of a restructure, the transitional period will still apply.
An employer and employee agreeing to new terms and conditions within an employment agreement (unrelated to the threshold) will remain covered by the transitional period. For example, if an employer and employee agree to vary the employment agreement to change hours of work or work location, the transitional period will continue to apply.
An employer may also agree to leave in advance of accrued entitlement but does not have to approve a request . An employer must allow an employee to take AL within months after the on which the employees entitlement arises . Following the employees first month employment anniversary Within each month period an employer must not withhold consent to an employee taking four weeks of accrued AL entitlement (if an employee has it
An employer may also agree to leave in advance of entitlement arising, but does not have to approve a request . An emp loyer must not unreasonably withhold consent to an employees request to take any AL entitlement that they have accrued during employment (this reflects the C abinet policy decision on pro rata leave in advance).
An employer will be able to choose whether to make a deduction in response to a partial strike. If they decide to do so, the Bill requires the employer to provide written notification about the deduction to employees.
An estimated . of the material flowing into the economy ends up as waste in landfill, with less than of materials recovered, indicating a low level of recovery through recycling or composting.
An evaluation of the framework will be completed to inform consideration of future legislative changes to the AC Act.
An exposure draft of the Regulations was released for public feedback in December . We received submissions in total and a number of minor changes have been made in response to the feedback.
An image of a horizontal double ended arrow going left and right.
An implementation period between the da te the Bill receives Royal assent and the on which it comes into force will be required to support a smooth transition to the new rules.
An important aspect of the Kitmap project was not only to understand what infrastructure we have, but also how it is accessed and used. This includes who uses the infrastructure, how they get access to it, and how it is maintained. Information about access to infrastructures is also a key input for the future Kitmap online tool.
An inclusive and consumerfocused energy system
An independent insightdriven analysis of trends and opportunities to further develop cycle tourism and to increase its value to communities across New Zealand has been completed.
An independent review into the AEWV was announced by the Minister of Immigration in August .
An innovative and modern energy system that creates new opportunities for business and consumers.
An insight into budget initiatives, research organisations, the Vision Matauranga Capability Fund Policy and the Science Board.
An installation is specified as of categories depending on the impact the installation method has on the property that neighbours share. Each category has a different consent requirement:
An integrated Destination Management approach
An interim replacement to Monthly Regional tourism Estimates (MRTEs) that provide insights into monthly tourism spend
An introduction to copyright protection and laws in New Zealand.
An introduction: which provides the rationale for regulating space activities from New Zealand, key features of the existing regulatory regime, and the approach to the statutory review.
An overview of our tools for drilling into uptolabour market data is available on our
Analysis of proposals for determining the levy portion that should come from plugin hybrids and battery electric vehicles.
Analysis of proposals on motorcycle groupings and crosssubsidisation.
Analysis of proposals on removing the No Claims Discount product and amending the Experience Rating product.
Analysis of proposals regarding new Classification Units for home improvement stores and sports and physical recreation.
Analysis of proposals to integrate a financial incentive for motorcycle rider training into the vehicle licensing system.
Analysis of the adventure activities regime
Analysis on decisions to support the package of reforms to modernise the Companies Act.
Analysis on proposals to set debit interest rates for Work levy payers who opt to use a payment plan, and to amend the interest on late levy payments to ensure compatibility between the two rates.
Analysis supporting the inprinciple agreement for NIWA to acquire MetService.
Anastasia is a machinist at a forestry mill that has gone into liquidation, and one of workers laid off.
And actually, as weve done the engagement here, we realised that one of the things which really accelerates digital twins is the incorporation of AI and predictive analytics into it. And the potential there is to get round some of the problems of different datasets and different standards. But actually New Zealand is in a really good place to lead that and weve thought that as weve gone through the work that weve done so far. So really it is over to you to see if you think that we can make New Zealand at the forefront of this. It is already perhaps at the forefront in many ways, but how do we drive that forward and be the best.
And before we go to questions, weve got some examples here. Just to tell you this, this is real. Its not just hypothetical, its happening. Im going to go through these quickly for the sake of time. So some of these are kind of imagined digital twins or real digital twins.
And then of course if there are any changes in there we have to agree with any stakeholders we can virtually show them and that should be able to help make the change easier.
And then one last thing. This is really a push for New Zealand. So on the next slides there, I dont expect you to pick it up. But its basically just showing the timeline of digital twins. And the amount of interest is building over time. Its almost like a momentum this building. I havent put in figures here, the attendance figures for each of these events as they get bigger and bigger as more and more people are interested in the potential for a digital twin. But you can see theres been annual summits being held and partnerships created and challenges developing. And on the next slide it really shows in its picking up even more. We have Digital Twin Partnership New Zealand launching as an industry group. And Infrastructure Commission recommending an investigation and the Construction Sector Accord.
And then right at the start I mentioned, you could have a digital twin of a living thing. Well, this is this is quite close to that in terms of, were looking at a digital twin of the hydrology in a forest, and obviously thats more and more important now with flooding and managing floods.
And then weve got the Wellington digital twin, here, where Im not going to go into detail on that one. But obviously, Wellington City already has a digital twin for some areas of use for utilities, etc.
And then, its a very rapidly moving simulation, as we get to the end of the useful life of the building. Im hoping this is the end of the century, but we dont know for sure how things will develop. But what weve got is basically a material bank from the digital twin, we know all the materials in the building, we know all the equipment in the building. We can probably use online platforms to find really good sales for any materials that are there for any product, some of them might want to go back to the original manufacturer, weve got all that information. So we can maximise whether its wood, or its concrete or steel or any other material or some of the digital equipment, we can actually get the best value for it. Not only that, while were in this process, we can actually see for insurance purposes and for depreciation, for any kind of accounting thing. We can see what the buildings actually worth at any point in time and our views.
And what weve assumed is that the people that are in the design phase or developing this are going beyond using Building Management information systems and digital engineering. And theyre thinking actually, because weve got a complex here, thats got multi users and a lot of different moving parts, a digital twin would be a really good way to manage this and ensure we get cost efficiencies. We can try out things before we actually do them in the virtual environment. We can test out things and so theyre seeing the benefit, developers are seeing the benefit of the potential for digital twin and this complex that theyre trying to create. And again, were seeing efficiency savings.
And you can imagine for facilities management were going to have lots of opportunity to manage things with sensors, etc. We mentioned mobile apps software as a service, we can connect into that general trend and we can interact with it. Online training platforms when it comes to the end of the life, I think those are going to be very useful because as we get through the use phase, were going to be selling off materials that were not using anymore. And those platforms provide a market for that. Digital passports. These are coming from materials and products, the European Unions pushing them theyre becoming a thing. When weve got more information like that we can slot that into digital twin and we could build it. I mentioned D printing, and of course digital engineering .
Anna Pollock, Founder of Conscious Travel
Anna is the Recipient of The Visionary of the Year Award from the Canadian tourism industry. She has also undertaken seminal work in many aspects of tourism, notably in education, sustainability and technology. She created the first internetbased tourism strategy for Scotland and codeveloped one of the first multipurpose destination management systems.
Annas current work focuses on the application of systems thinking and regenerative principles to the tourism sector.
Annex : Information requirements for licence and permit applications Proposed information requirements
Annex : Measures and indicators
Annex : Mitigating overvoltage from generation at the inverter
Annex One: Summary of decisions to Summary of Cabinet decision Intent behind decision Key refinements agreed by previous administration Annual leave see Annex Two for further proposals Retain weeks as the unit of entitlement. Avoid potential disadvantages to employees that moving to a different unit of entitlement may cause but provide prescription and clarity about calculations and processes. NA Introduce a prescriptive method for determining the use of annual leave entitlement. Provide clarity about what constitutes a week for each employee, so employers no longer have to rely on their judgement to determine what constitutes a week for employees with variable hours or work cycles that are different to days. Simplify the method for determining the use of annual leave entitlement based on average hours to reduce costs and complexity for employers , so it is based on average hours worked on all days of work over the previous weeks (instead of on that specific calendar day) . Adjust recommended audit requirement as this would be costly and time consuming for employers. Clarify that in certain circumstances an employer and employee may agree to the employee using a whole week of annual leave for a seven day period without work. Introduce a new payment method for annua l leave so it is paid at the greater of three calculations: Ordinary Leave Pay, Short Run Average Weekly Earnings and Long Run Average Weekly Earnings. Provide a clear method for employers to accurately calculate annual leave payments. Specify how new payment methods should apply in other areas that specify rules for paying for annual leave (annual leave in advance, when employment ends, when annual leave is cashed up, closedowns). Align when payment for annual leave must be made with common practice, so the default is to pay annual leave in the pay that relates to the period during which it is taken (and the alternative is to pay annual leave before it is taken). Introduce week reference periods as the basis for Short Run Average Weekly Earnings calculations and calculations to determine the use of leave entitlements (also relevant for FBAPS leave below). Provide a reference period shorter than months that can be used across multiple calculations. Provide some flexibility around the exact number of weeks included in week reference period calculations, to prevent payroll systems from having to split pay period data. Replace current Relevant Daily Pay and Ordinary Weekly Pay calculations with Ordinary Leave Pay (also relevant for FBAPS leave below). Provide a clear calculation that does not require employers to use judgement and discretion like Relevant Daily Pay and Ordinary Weekly Pay do currently. Clarify the payment types that must be included in the Ordinary Leave Pay base rate. Reframe Ordinary Leave Pay as a weekly and daily rate, to enable it to be applied to annual leave and FBAPS leave in a way that is clear and logical within the framework of the new legislation. Clarif y the pay ment types that should be included in gross earnings all cash payments an employee received, except direct reimbursements for costs incurred. Make the definition of gross earnings easier for employers to understand and comply with. Clarify that the status quo exceptions to the payment types included in gross earnings continue to apply. Exclude redundancy compensation payments because they have not been earned. Clarify that only payments that were earned over weeks or less need to be included in the Short Run Average Weekly Earnings calculation , to prevent overinflation . Prorate annual leave in advance. Prevent employers from being able to unreasonably withhold consent to an employees request to take annual leave in advance on a pro rata basis, and also prohibit employers from requiring employees to take leave of this nature. Clarify that employers may choose to record the amount of pro rata leave in advance available to an employee, but that they are not required to do so. Introduce a clear set of parameters around the ability for employees to use PayAsYouGo (PAYG) . Provide clarity about when an employee is eligible to receive PAYG, and increase the threshold for this, to ensure it is not used inappropriately. Refine criteria to determine whether an employee is eligible to use PAYG , to clarify parts of the original proposal that were unclear. Require employers to give employees written notice regarding closedown periods and other periods in which work is dis continued , and allow employees to take annual leave in advance during a closedown period. Provide certainty and transparency for employees about their rights and employers obligations when establishi ng a new closedown period or having a n existing closedown period, and r emove complexity of the current requirement s for employees who are not entitled to annual leave at the time of a closedown . Clarif y that employers must also continue to give employees days notice of specific closedown dates and the annual leave arrangements that will apply, as per the status quo. Specify the process for establishing a new closedown, as this was not clear in the original proposal. Family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays, and sick leave (FBAPS leave) see Annex Three for further proposals Retain days as the unit of entitlement. Avoid potential disadvantages to employees that moving to a different unit of entitlement may cause but provide prescription and clarity about calculations and processes. NA Provide employees the ability to take sick leave and family violence leave in part days (with a minimum amount of a quarter of a day) . Align legislative requirements with common practice among employers , increase flexibility for employees, and prevent employees sick leave and family violence leave entitlements from being deducted at a rate that does not reflect their use ( currently an Provide employees the ability to take bereavement leave and alternative holidays in part days , as this is also common practice among employers and will increase flexibility for employees. Remove the minimum amount of a quarter of a day, so actual hours of work and time off work are always recorded and paid as such. employer could deduct a full day of sick leave or family violence leave even if an employee worked for half a da y). Make sick leave entitlement accumulate from the first day of employment , and family violence leave and bereavement leave entitlements available in full from the first day of employment, for eligible employees . Ensure employees do not need to have w orked for six months to have access to FBS leave, as these leave types are needs based and when employees use them is typically outside of their control. Adjus t the accumulation process for sick leave to align with the new minimum sick leave entitlement of days per year. Align the accumulation process for employees who become eligible after three months of employment with the process for employees who are eligible from their first day. Introduce a new criteria to determine whether an employee is eligible for FBAPS leave (based on whether they have agreed hours, are expected to be continuously employed, or the average hours they work per week ). Update the FBAPS leave eligibility criteria so it aligns with the change to make FBS leave available to eligible employees from day one. Adjust the eligibility criteria and tests to remove complexity and provide clarity for employers and employees where there were gaps in the original proposal . Remove proposed ability for employers to retest employees eligibility to receive their second and subsequent entitlements. Introduce a new prescriptive test to determine whether a day is an Otherwise Working Day for an employee. Provide employers with a prescriptive test to use to determine whether a day is an Otherwise Working D ay for an employee, so this is no longer based on employers judgement. Specify how the prescriptive test should be applied in various circumstances, to ensure it is workable in practice and provides a definitive answer. Clarify that the reference period for the prescriptive test should only be weeks (rather than and weeks as originally proposed), to align with Cabinets decision about Short Run Average Weekly Earnings. Introduce a new payment method for FBAPS leave so it is paid at the greater of two calculations: Ordinary Leave Pay and Average Daily Pay. Provide a clear method for employers to use so employees are paid at least what they would have been paid had they worked on the day of FBAPS leave (the current payment method may result in some employees with variable hours or commission payments not receiving what they would have been paid if they had worked). Adjust the payment method when it is based on average hours to provide some flexibility for employers, by allowing employers and employees to agree that FBAPS leave hours be based on average hours worked on all days of work over the previous weeks (instead of on that specific calendar day). Clarify which hours must be included as FBAPS leave hours when an employment agreement or roster is used to determine the hours of FBAPS leave taken , as this was not clear in the original proposal . Extend bereavement leave so employees are entitled to three days for a wider scope of family members, including stepfamily, family bymarriage, aunts, uncles, nieces and nephews, and cultural family groups . Recognise that employees may have varied family arrangements or cultural practices, and could be equally bereaved by the loss of extended family and culturally recognised family members. Clarify that the extension is to a spouse or partners family members and not only family by marriage , and limit scope of spouse or partners family members the extension covers, to remove uncertainty for employers and employees . Clarify cultural family groups is limited to culturally recognised family members the employee has a relationship with that is similar to those listed in legislation, to remove uncertainty for employers and employees . Specify that employees can use bereavement leave at any time and on non consecutive days, to recognise that employees may need to use bereavement leave in different ways. Leave in restructuring situations see Annex Four for further proposals Enable employees to choose whether to transfer their leave entitlements or have them paid out when a business is sold or transferred and they transfer their employment to the new employer . Align legislative requirements with common practice. Employers are currently required to pay out employees annual leave and alternative holidays when their employment ends (if they are not a specified category of employee with additional protections set out in the Employment Relations Act ), but in practice these leave entitlements are often transferred with t heir employment. NA Parental leave see Annex four for further proposals Remove the parental leave override , which results in employees who take annual leave being paid less for annual leave they take in the months following their return to work . Ensure employees who take parental leave are not paid less for annual leave they take in the months following their return to work. Also remove the override in relation to volunteers leave, which follows the same framework as parental leave. Other matters Update record keeping requirements . Align record keeping requirements with the other changes being made. Refine list of record keeping requirements to reflect final design details and ensure the requirements are clear. Require employers to provide employees with a pay statement in each pay period, and allow employees to request their pay statement be provided in a specific format. Increase transparency for employees regarding their pay and leave entitlements so they can better understand whether they have been calculated correctly. Specify how pay statement requirements would be set out in legislation. Clarify that pay statements must be provided in either a physical or digital format that an employee has access to without needing to raise a request, to provide more flexibility to employers . Consid er issues that cause non compliance in the design of compliance and enforcement mechanisms . Support the implementation of the changes being made by ensuring they can be appropriately enforced. Specify a criteria to determine which provisions in the new legislation will have penalties for failure to comply.
Announcement by the Minister for Building and Construction
Annual Performance Report
Annual Performance Report
Annual Performance Report
Annual Performance Report
Annual Reportback and Refresh of the Employment Strategy
Annual disability snapshot
Annual emissions for the manufacturing sector ( baseline)
Annual holiday entitlement : Also known as annual leave, this is an employees legal right to not less than four weeks of paid annual holidays each year after working for an employer for months (Section s to of the Holidays Act (the Act )). Average daily pay ( ADP) : The daily average of an employees gross earnings over the past weeks. This is worked out by adding up the employees gross earnings for the period, and dividing this by the number of whole or part days the employee either worked or was on paid leave or holidays for, during that period. An employer may use an employees ADP for the purposes of calculating payment for a public holiday, an alternative holiday, sick leave, or bereavement leave if it is not possible or practicable to determine releva nt daily pay or daily pay varies within the pay period when the leave falls (Sections A, , , , , and of the Act ). Average weekly earnings (AWE) : AWE is one method for calculating annual holiday payment rates (the other being Ordinary Weekl y Pay). It is of the employees gross earnings for the months immediately before the end of the last pay period before the annual holiday (Sections , , , and of the Act ). BAPS leave : A collective term for Bereavement leave, Alternative holidays, Public holidays and Sick leave. Casual employee : Employment legislation does not define what casual employee means (it is set out in case law). It is generally taken to mean an employee who works only as and when required, can turn down work and has no expectation of ongoing employment (Section of the Act ). Closedown period : Employers can have a customary closedown of all or part of their operations once a year and require employees to take annual holidays during the closedown, even if an employee has to take unpaid leave. Christmas is the most common time for a closedown, although it can occur at any time of year (Section s to of the Act ). Fixed term agreement : Employment relationships with a set start and end day or event, along with a genuine reason based on reasonable grounds for such an arrangement. This arrangement , including the way in which the employment will end and the reasons for it ending that way, must be clearly specified in writing in the employment agreement (Section of the Act ). Gross earnings (GE) : For the purposes of calculating payments for holidays and leave, gross earnings means all payments that the employer is required to pay to the employee under the employees employment agreement for the period during which the earnings are being assessed (Sections , A, A, , , , , and of the Act ). Leave without pay : When an employer allows an employee time off work when they would otherwise be working, but does not pay them for this time (Section of the Act ). Ordinary Weekly Pay (OWP) : The amount an employee receives under their employment agreement for an ordinary working week, including regular allowances, regular productivity or incentive based payments (including commission and bonu ses), the cash value of board or lodgings, and regular overtime. Intermittent or one off payments as well as discretionary payments and employer contributions to superannuation schemes are not included in ordinary weekly pay (Sections , , A, , , , and of the Act ). Otherwise Working Day (OWD) : An otherwise working day is a day that an employee would have worked, if it was not for them being sick, being on bereavement leave, being on annual holidays or it being a public holiday (Section s , , and of the Act ).
Annual holidays entitlement . Annual holidays entitlements should be calculated, taken, paid and held in weeks or portions of weeks. . Employees should become en titled to four weeks leave after months continuous employ ment, but have the ability to take leave in advance on a pro rata basis . . A clear process should be followed to determine how much of an employees leave entitlement should be used for a period of time away from work. Where an employees days and hours of w ork are set out in an employment agreement, shift roster or other document and these are an accurate reflection of the employees actual working pattern, these agreed days and hours should be used as t he basis for determining leave entitlements and deducti ons. . The parental leave override in the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act should be removed , to address discrimination against parents who take time off to care for their young children. . The ability for employers to use pay asyougo (PAY G) for employees on fixed term contracts of less than months should be removed
Annual holidays entitlement . Annual holidays entitlements should be calculated, taken, paid and held in weeks or portions of weeks. . Employees should become en titled to four weeks leave after months continuous employ ment, but have the ability to take leave in advance on a pro rata basis . . A clear process should be followed to determine how much of an employees leave entitlement should be used for a period of time away from work. Where an employees days and hours of w ork are set out in an employment agreement, shift roster or other document and these are an accurate reflection of the employees actual working pattern, these agreed days and hours should be used as t he basis for determining leave entitlements and deducti ons. . The parental leave override in the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act should be removed , to address discrimination against parents who take time off to care for their young children. . The ability for employers to use pay asyougo (PAY G) for employees on fixed term contracts of less than months should be removed shrvakdix
Annual holidays determining entitlements and payments . . There are a range of specific issues related to those sections of the Act that deal with the entitlements to, and payments for, annual holidays. A more detailed list of these issues is set out in Annex but some of the more significant issues are outlined below. .. Determining what a week is . Section of the Act states that after the end of each completed months of continuous employmen t, an employee is entitled to not less than weeks paid annual holidays . A fundamental issue in terms of compliance with the Act is therefore determining what a week is in relation to an employees working arrangements. . This can be very simple for some but difficult for other forms of working arrangements as illustrated in the scenarios below . Tina works . . from Monday to Friday. It is not difficult to determine a working week for Tina. Simon works a regular four day onfour day off, hour s hift pattern. This means
Annual implementation Report
Annual implementation Report
Annual implementation report
Annual implementation report
Annual implementation reports
Annual letter of expectations for
Annual reporting enables us to evaluate contract performance and remain informed about research progress. We also use data obtained via annual reporting for policy and strategy development, marketing and our corporate accountability documents.
Annual waste produced in New Zealand ( baseline)
Another example of adding value to some of our existing bioresources and biomass.
Another example showing that we need to add more new value to this resource.
Answer questions in a short survey (now closed)
Antidumping and countervailing duty refunds
Antony Royal Mori telecommunications and technology industry representative
Any achievements and specific accomplishments in their scientific work or in raising public awareness in science.
Any action taken as a result of a breach of any of the obligations set out in this policy will be conducted in good faith, a fair process will be followed, and the person involved will have a full opportunity to respond to the concerns or allegations and have access to appropriate support, advice or representation.
Any citizen of an APEC member economy is eligible to be nominated for the ASPIRE Prize. All nominees must be under the age of as of December .
Any complaints or disputes concerning damage to other property can be referred in the first instance to the respective network operator.
Any external security consultant engaged by MBIE to gather information to support our regulatory compliance activities will be licensed under the Private Security Personnel and Private Investigators Act and required to comply with all relevant legislation and Codes of Conduct, and MBIE policies and procedures.
Any information redacted in this document is redacted in accordance with MBIEs policy on Proactive Release and is labelled with the reason for redaction. This may include information th at would be redacted if this information was requested under Official Information Act . Where this is the case, the reasons for withholding information are listed below. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that w ould outweigh the reasons for withholding it.
Any information redacted in this document is redacted in accordance with MBIEs policy on Proactive Release and is labelled with the reason for redaction. This may include information that would be redacted if this information was requested under Official Information Act . Where this is the case, the reasons for withholding information are listed below. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it.
Any information you provide through screen sharing is voluntary and you are not required by law to provide any information.
Any network infrastructure that is funded through the first phase of the Rural Broadband Initiative (RBI) must be open access, and provide for a range of services being provided from a range of retail providers.
Any organisation wanting to find out more about NZRIS can get in touch by emailing
Any person who believes that a child or young person has been, or is likely to be,
Any reforms will aim to promote the longterm interests of consumers by ensuring:
Any scheme with defined rules will have disputes, but we expect these to occur in only a small number of cases. The scheme will have an independent dispute resolution process.
Any such information gathering must be approved according to our internal authorisation process. That process, and any related activities, are required to be regularly reviewed to ensure compliance with the law, our internal policies, and our risk management requirements.
Anyone can apply for a board role, unless they:
Anyone can carry out business as a postal operator by collecting, carrying or delivering letters, provided they are registered as a postal operator with us.
Anyone who carries on business as a postal operator without being registered could be convicted and fined up to , and another , for every day that the offence continues.
Aotearoa New Zealand Peace Foundation
Aotearoa New Zealand delivers exceptioanl visitor experiences
Aotearoa New Zealand embarks on ambitious new space research
Aotearoa New Zealand is joining forces with US space company Axiom to collaborate on ambitious new space research that could have far reaching benefits for humankind.
Aotearoa New Zealand will require new generation to meet future electricity demand, according to the latest Electricity Demand and Generation Scenarios (EDGS) report released by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) today.
Aotearoa best practice dispute resolution framework (the Framework)
Appendix : Changes in Pilot Scope
Appendix A: References and additional resources
Appendix B: Detailed evaluation approach
Appendix C: Key events in the building consent system
Appendix Three: Proposed adjustments to the Cabinet decisions related to the provisions for providing, taking and
Appendix: useful links and information sources
Applicants are encouraged to apply international technical standards when developing the mitigation measures for the ODMP. Compliance with the following guidelines and standards will generally meet the requirements of regulation and the Inter Agency Spa ce Debris Coordination Committee ( IADC ) Space Debris Guidelines ; NASA STD. NASA Technical Standard ISO Space Debris Mitigation Standards (and any other space debris related ISO standards ), are available through Standards New Zealand Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines o f the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNCOPUOS) JMR D JAXA Space Debris Mitigation Standards ESSB HBU ESA Space Debris Mitigation Compliance Verification Guidelines .
Applicants are expected to be familiar with the Trusted Research Guidance for Institutions and Researchers and (for universities) the Universities New Zealand Trusted Research Protective Security Requirements (TRPSR) guidance. If there are any questions arising from this, consult your Research Office.
Applicants are required to provide prescribed information on the capability and intended enduse of the payload. If insufficient information is provided, MBIE engages with applicants to request additional information, to ensure the nature of the payload and its planned activities are understood. All payload permit applications are assessed by technical experts.
Applicants can apply for or more events. The minimum amount of funding available for each event is , and the total funding for additional event promotion costs across all approved events for that RTOCouncil, is a maximum of , per round.
Applicants can apply for up to of their existing promotional budget to undertake additional promotion of an event, with some flexibility for financially constrained RTOscouncils
Applicants must cofund at least of each ebike charging station
Application and assessment information
Application and assessment process
Application for HighAltitude Licence APP DOCX KB
Application for Payload Permit APP
Application for payload permit APP
Application form for gas distributors seeking gas operator status
Application form for gas distributors seeking gas operator status.
Applications are open now for funding from the following science and innovation funds and grants.
Applications close on November .
Applications for Round will be open from April to April .
Applications for support through the programme closed on June .
Applications for the New Zealand Space Scholarship close on November .
Applications for the Tourism Data Partnership Fund will open on
Applications must be a collaborative effort led by a Regional Tourism Organisation (RTO).
Applications now open for Tourism Infrastructure Fund
Applications open on February and will close at on March .
Applications open on Friday August and close on Friday October .
Applications should be focused on:
Applications that make use of satellite signals and data
Applications will be assessed using the following criteria:
Applications will be considered by an independent panel with expertise in tourism promotion.
Applicaton form to apply for funding from the Regional Events Promotion Fund round .
Applied Geophysics (ESCI)
Apply by pm, June
Apply for a permit to send a payload into space.
Applying to be a postal operator
Appointment and reappointment
Appointment of steering group members and chair
Appropriate training is completed by all employees providing childrens services, both before they start the role and during their tenure.
Approval for signature of the Horizon Europe Association Agreement between the European Union and New Zealand PDF .MB
Approve d rafting of legislation . Note the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety has submitted a legislative programme bid for amendments to the Holidays Act with a Category status (instructions to be provided to Parliamentary Counsel Office in )
Approved codes of practice
Approves minor changes to the policy and associated procedures
Approves new and major amendments to this policy
Approves new and major amendments to this policy and associated procedures
Arbitration Adjudication
Are you interested in exploring Horizon Europe funding opportunities
Are you wondering how to build visibility and profile for your team amongst European and International collaborators
Area Three: Amendments to other legislation (Full details in Appendix Four) I am proposing a consequential amendment to the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act (PLEPA) that disconnects parental leave payment calculations from the Holidays Act . I am also proposing to adjust the policy regarding the treatment of leave entitlements in r estructuring situations to provide flexibility and support common practice. A consequential amendment to the parental leave payment methodology in the PLEPA : this is required because the PLEPA relies on the existing Holidays Act definition of ordinary weekly pay (OWP) to calculate parental leave payments. Cabinet agreed that OWP be replaced. I propose a standalone formula in the PLEPA which is more aligned with the methodology Inland Rev enue (IR) currently uses for the calculated income estimate of OWP . kjtrvweh I N C O N F I D E N C E
Area Two : Paying and accumulating other leave types (family violence , bereavement and sick leave and alternative and public h olidays ) (Full details in Appendix Three) The proposals focus on reducing the complexity of the payment methodologies by removing the requirement to make two calculations and avoiding the overinflation of payments that they could have caused in some situations. They also update the profile for accumulating sick leave from the first day of employment. Simplifying the payment methodologies so that only one calculation is required : This proposal will replace the decision to introduc e a requirement to make two calculations and pay the greater of them. The proposed calculation will achieve the intended objective of removing the ne ed for employers to apply judgment and will reduce the complexity of the methodology. It should avoid the overinflati on of payments the current proposal may lead to and provide overall payment outcomes that can be considered a fair reflection of what an employee would have earned on a day had they been at work. A longer and simpler t imeframe for accumulation of sick leav e: In Cabinet agreed that eligible employees annual entitlement to five days sick leave should begin accumulating from the first day of employment with full entitlement reached after four months ( one day each month) . Sick lea ve entitlement has since increased to days per year . I propose an accumulation profile over six months with fewer accumulation points .
Areas for work health and safety reform: approval to consult
Argo Navis Limited (Argo Navis) was a New Zealand aerospace company, specialising in the development of innovative rocket propulsion systems for the space industry.
Around million of cofunding from local stakeholders was contributed towards construction of the Great Rides.
Around of temporary work migrants from the Pacific came to New Zealand under the Recognised Seasonal Employer Scheme.
Around half of these workers found employment in the Auckland region, followed by in Canterbury.
Around half the advisers perceived the website experience positively. They called for enhanced ease of website navigation including a better search engine, and more detailed information.
Around onefifth of Pacific residence approvals were through the
Around threequarters of advisers had used Immigration Online (on behalf of), with use significantly higher among onshore advisers. There was little dissatisfaction with this channel. Offshore advisers said they were more likely to use it if technology problems were resolved, as the benefits were a reduced need to use Visa Application Centres (VACs) and the ability to lodge applications at any time.
Arrangement on scientific and technological cooperation between New Zealand and the Republic of Korea PDF KB
Arrangement relating to research, science and innovation cooperation between the government of New Zealand and the government of Great Britain and Northern Ireland PDF KB
Arrangement relating to science, technology and innovation cooperation between New Zealand and Singapore PDF KB
Arranging for IT, furniture, access, and other equipment to be provided to enable safe and secure remote working where necessary.
Artificial Intelligence (AI)
As Easter approaches, the Labour Inspectorate is reminding employers and employees to understand their rights and obligations concerning Easter trading laws.
As NZRIS matures, it is expected to contain main types of data: data about funding and other resources that enable research to happen; and data about the research activity itself. Data about funding and other resources will generally include the name of the research fund or other resource, its purpose, how it is being distributed, and who it is distributed to. Data about research activity will generally include the name of the project and outputs. Both types of data will include the names of organisations and individuals involved in the research.
As New Zealand looks to move beyond the economic and social impacts of COVID, there are important lessons to be learned from the way in which we were able to support one another through an unprecedented series of challenges.
As Yvonne, said, nothing is impossible it just depends on how you are looking at it. This was a life changing experience for me and I would do it again in a heartbeat.
As a licenced space participant you must take, and continue to take, all reasonable steps to manage risks to public safety. In determining what is reasonable, the applicant will first need to consider what is possible. Applicants are expected to identify the risks that the operation will (or could) expose the public to, and to find out what control measures are available to eliminate or minimise those risks to public safety. Applicants will then need to determine what is reasonable to do in their circumstances. Applicants must provide the highest level of protection to the public that they reasonably can. Generally, applicants may consider cost as a reason not to implement an effective safety control where that cost is grossly disproportionate to the public safety risk, but only after fully assessing the options that are reasonably available to eliminate or minimise the harm that could occur should that risk be realised Applicants may be asked to demonstrate why identified controls that are not implemented, are not reasonable in their circumstances. There should be appropriate evidence to justify decisions. The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) expects that to ensure public safety as a responsible space participant applicants will: engage and consult with workers, stakeholders and the safety equipment, standards and controls that others impacted by their operations; are selected will be fit for purpose and the most suitable for the operations; identify and understand the hazards and public safety risks that the operations will or could expose others to; verify that controls are functioning as intended, and where issues arise that these will be dealt with and identify and develop the people, systems and the controls continuously improved; standards that will be needed given the scope and complexity of the operations to ensure public safety; take opportunities to make safety improvements where they are identified, unless it is not reasonable to do so; put in place clear rules, procedures and standards that are expected to be followed by the people have suitable plans in place to cope with an unforeseen involved with the operations; emergency, and that these will continue to be tested. What is a Safety Case A safety case is a written document that describes through a compelling argument the applicants commitment to, and plan for, an operation that ensures the safety of the public. The safety case must be supported by a body of evidence. It is important to understand how the safety case will work in the context of your operations, to benefit public safety. The safety case will be a high level document signed off by the applicants governing Board and Executive leadership team. It will: integrate with the operations management systems provide assurance that the systems and controls in and support the applicant to manage the risks to place will manage, and continue to manage, these risks; public safety; demonstrate how the applicant will gain assurance provide assurance that the applicant understands that the controls are being implemented and that what risks have been created, or could be created; they are effective. As a minimum applicants will need to ensure that the safety case addresses the requirements of the Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations (the regulations). Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities Act sections ()(b), ()(b), ()(b) ()(a)(ii)
As a member of the ILO, New Zealand is required to report annually on the position of its law and practice in relation to unratified instruments including conventions and recommendations. The set of instruments for each General Survey are focused on a particular subject matter.
As a result, members of the New Zealand interpreter workforce will need to be credentialed or Working Towards NAATI (WTN) as meeting the appropriate NAATI standards, if they wish to continue providing interpreting services to New Zealand public sector agencies from July .
As a result, minor changes were made to the national interest risk review process in light of the values and objectives from the Policy and feedback from the Space Policy Review consultation, as well as specific feedback from agencies and within MBIE regarding the process,
As a series of Zipped CSV files
As a society we want our bioeonomy to deliver on these objectives in order to maintain and grow this incredible employment that it creates for us, and we want to ensure a stable domestic supply of food, fibre, and wood. We want to grow export revenues and maintain or grow our contribution to GDP, while at the same time the bioeconomy is going to face higher wages, higher labour, we want to be richer country, we want to pay people more. We are going to have more rules and high compliance costs, that is just a fact of life. We are going to have higher energy costs and there is going to be less land and less useable water space. At the same time to achieve our national and global targets we must emit less carbon dioxide, create less methane, create less nitrous oxide, and send less waste to landfills. This is the problem we are trying to solve, we are trying to find products, platforms within the bioeconomy that can help us get to this.
As a state servant you are also expected to read, understand and adhere to:
As above, Cabinet decisions are expected on proposals on proposed legislation to address modern slavery and worker exploitation in operations and supply chains. Legislation is intended to be introduced in .
As above, in May OT and MoJ met with the Chief Justice of Kiribati to discuss how to work collaboratively with the judiciary to implement child safeguarding measures in the adoption process, to prevent child trafficking and exploitation. OT has been working closely with the Pacific Justice Sector Programme, and Tonga specifically, to identify models of practice within the Pacific judiciary which prevent trafficked children being trafficked and exploited.
As above, public consultation on proposed legislation to address modern slavery and worker exploitation in operations and supply chains undertaken from April to June . A submissions report was on the MBIE website in September.
As above, the Education and Workforce Committee will report on the Worker Protection (Migrant and Other Employee) Bill. It is expected that the Bill will be passed by Parliament in Quarter .
As agreed with you, w eve continued discussions with
As an employee you have the right to:
As an example, this is a page out of the seafood sector where we look at the number of registered fishing boats so that has surged and then it has been declining, so we see that there is an increasing productivity in average tonnes landed per vessel.
As humans, we bring our own subconscious biases into all decision we make. Through automation we can limit and reduce the impact of these biases and provide more consistent decisions and responses. For example, algorithms that assist with recruitment, finance and procurement allocation.
As of April , Dr Longdell reports that the photon pair sources have been completed. They were built at the DLR in Berlin and are now working in the Otago lab. The focus has now switched to the quantum memories.
As part of Electrify NZ, the Government has committed to delivering a regulatory regime for offshore renewable energy, to enable investment and deliver clean energy at scale.
As part of our commitment to providing the best possible service to our customers, we record all inbound and outbound communication with the MBIE Customer Service Centre i.e., telephone calls and email queries. This helps us to identify ways that we can provide you with a better service.
As part of our commitment to providing the best possible service to our customers, we record all inbound and outbound communication with the MBIE Customer Service Centre i.e., telephone calls and email queries. This helps us to identify ways that we can provide you with a better service. For more information, read our Privacy statement:
As part of our commitment to the charter, we are implementing an MBIE Algorithm Use Policy. The purpose of this policy is to enable accountability for decisions at MBIE, increase transparency about our algorithm use, and strengthen support systems for our staff working with algorithms.
As part of our ongoing commitment to supporting tourism research, this section provides the tourism forecasts microdata.
As part of our work managing radio spectrum, MBIE has laid the groundwork preparing for G through industry workshops and has run a public consultation process to discuss G spectrum bands and their future allocation. MBIE is also working with interested parties on technical and regulatory issues relating to G.
As part of the Language Assistance Services Programme a new standards and certification framework for language practitioners working across the public sector, the NAATI framework, will come into effect from .
As part of the Language Assistance Services Programme, a new standards and accreditation framework for interpreters working across the public sector, the NAATI framework, came into effect from July .
As part of the Review, we also commissioned wideranging research on the nature of temporary migrant worker exploitation, and the gaps and opportunities to address this. This research was conducted through a third party, to provide an independent and confidential space to hear the experiences of migrant and international student groups, and to hear from unions and businesses.
As part of the global effort to combat climate change, New Zealand is participating in the MethaneSAT space mission.
As part of the new fibre regime, regulations are now in place which require Chorus to provide specified anchor broadband and voice services and a direct fibre access service (DFAS) on the terms and the maximum prices set in the regulations. The regulations come into effect on January .
As part of the recovery from the COVID pandemic, Tourism New Zealand continues to encourage domestic travel. Recently they launched new domestic winter activity showcasing a range of Aotearoa winter experiences. Despite borders opening for overseas travel, new research shows that around two thirds of New Zealanders intend to take a domestic holiday in the next months. The research also shows that winter is our second favourite season for holidaying.
As part of the tender process, suppliers have been evaluated based on factors including their experience and ability to provide a high volume of language interpreting services.
As part of the use of our statutory powers and to gather and preserve information and evidence, we may:
As part of their Consumers Price Index (CPI) calculations, Statistics New Zealand surveys a selection of service stations in regions of New Zealand, as well as collecting information about discounting from the major fuel retailers, to produce quarterly average prices.
As part of their internships, students are partnered with NASA scientists, who serve as the students mentors. Students complete designated projects outlined by their mentors, gaining educational experience in their fields of study while also contributing to NASA missions and science.
As part of this commitment we are releasing, on a quarterly basis, a summary of all payloads approved for launch by the Minister for Space.
As the building regulator, we monitor current and emerging trends in the building sector, including the lessons to be learnt following the Canterbury earthquakes.
As the government agency responsible for telecommunications policy, we have a focus on developing efficient, reliable and responsive infrastructure, productive and competitive businesses, and a worldclass business environment.
As the national mail carrier, New Zealand Post must meet certain minimum obligations relating to the sale and delivery of postal products. These obligations are set out in an agreement between New Zealand Post and the government in the Deed.
As well as being able to opt back into unjustified dismissal coverage, employers and employees can continue to negotiate their own employment dispute resolution processes into their employment agreement.
As well as climate change, global megatrends like ageing populations and technology change will result in major changes to the structure of the economy. New Zealand needs to better understand, and prepare for, these and other structural changes.
As well as offering worldclass visitor experiences that showcase some of the best landscapes and scenery that New Zealand has to offer, the trails create ongoing job opportunities and economic, recreational and health benefits for New Zealanders.
As well as offering worldclass visitor experiences that showcase some of the best landscapes and scenery that New ZealandAotearoa has to offer, the trails create ongoing job opportunities and economic, recreational and health benefits for New Zealanders.
As well as the centres host Massey University, research partners are:
As you can see at the top of the slides, weve got various phases through the life of this complex with the design phase, procurement, construction, the usage phase, and then end of life phase. When we are going through all that, then things might be building up over time, as each business case is presented then they may be thinking that will be really useful to have inside the digital twin.
Ashburton District Council
Asia region funds passport
AsiaPacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
AsiaPacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) is a regional economic forum established in .
Aside from financial support, can you think of any other support that would help workers return to work
Asking for an interpreter when calling government services
Assess number of roles requested(WA.(l)) PDF KB
Assessing competition impacts
Assessing the proposed regulatory changes
Assessing, approving, or declining flexible working arrangement proposals in line with the accompanying procedures, guidelines, and this policy.
Assessment of application to add security officers to Schedule A of the Employment Relations Act PDF KB
Assessment of the New Zealand Ecosystem
Assessment panel pick the New Zealand candidate
Assists business groups with any breach managementmitigation activities as required
Associate Deputy Secretary Immigration. Supports the Deputy Secretary Immigration to lead Immigration New Zealand into the future. They manage key strategic partnerships related to the global immigration system, our authorising environment and our commitments under te Tiriti o Waitangi.
Associate Minister for Energy
Associate Minister for Regional Development
Associate Minister for Social Development and Employment
Associate Minister of Housing
Associate Minister of Immigration
Associate Professor at Otago University Jevon Longdell is leading this project from the New Zealand side, and says it is these qubits that his team is working to harness and store.
Association of Salaried Medical Specialists
Assurance Risk and Accountability Committee (ARA)
Assurance over climaterelated disclosures: occupational regulation and expanding the scope of assurance
Astrobiology and biology (including human performance in extreme environments)
Astrophysics, space sciences, and exploration
At ,, the number of temporary workers present in New Zealand on June was higher than the year before. This growth was driven by:
At a high level, the Review will include:
At a minimum, an annual Flexible Working at MBIE pulse check will be implemented to measure the status of the flexible working culture across MBIE, including the application of informal and ad hoc arrangements.
At any time, you may choose to end the screen share session if you wish.
At least manned points of presence where customers:
At least points of presence, comprised of physical outlets and selfservice kiosks.
At the New Zealand Space Agency we want all New Zealanders to take advantage of the infinite possibilities the global space economy has to offer.
At the bottom of the arrow are further arrow scales that span the length of the arrow, they show:
At times people employed by us may engage in forums on LinkedIn and other online channels. Any opinions or views expressed on these forums belong to the individual staff member. Our staff acting in an official capacity will identify themselves along with their position within the organisation, and state that they are representing the Ministry.
Atmospheric science programme
Atmospheric science programme questions
Attach your submission as a Microsoft Word or PDF file and email to:
Attracting international screen productions to New Zealand produces a range of direct and indirect economic benefits. These include ontheground production expenditure and spillover benefits to other areas of economic activity.
Auckland Uniservices Limited
Auckland University of Technology
Australia is a close SIT partner, and currently our most frequent collaborator in terms of copublications between our researchers. This relationship is supported by an overarching SIT Cooperation agreement and a work programme of collaborative activities. Current bilateral programmes are focused on cyber security and space technologies.
Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS).
Australian New Zealand Scientific Research Classifications
Australian Research Council (ARC)
Authorised by: Katherine MacNeill Manager, International Strategy Labour, Science and Enterprise August
Authorised for lodgement Hon Iain Lees Galloway Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety
Authors must publish their outputs in a way that allows them to retain sufficient rights to comply with the policy, either by retaining copyright over their works (as opposed to transferring copyright to the publisher), or by publishing their work in a journal that permits them to deposit their manuscript in an Open Access repository.
Avalon Kent (July to December )
Average D aily Pay (ADP): The daily average of an employees gross earnings over the previous weeks. This is worked out by adding up the employees gross earnings for the period, and dividing this by the number of whole or part days the employee either worked , or was on paid leave or holidays for, during that period. An employer may use an employees ADP for the purposes of calculating payment for a public holiday, an alterna tive holiday, sick leave, family violence or bereavement leave if it is not possib le or practicable to determine Relevant Daily Pay or daily pay varies within the pay period when the leave falls (Sections A, , , , , and of the Act ).
Average Motor Vehicle levy
Average weekly earnings (AWE): AWE is one method for calculating annual holiday payment rates (the other being Ordinary Weekly Pay). It is of the employees gross earnings for the months immediately before the end of the last pay period before the annua l holiday (Sections , , , and of the Act ).
Awarded to Robin McNeill MNZM
BAPS leave (bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public . holidays and sick leave) determining entitlements and payments . There are also a range of specific issues related to those sections of the Holidays Act that deal with the entitlement to, and payments for, BAPS leave. A full list of these issues is set out in Annex but some of the more significant issues are outlined below. .. Determining an otherwise working day . The concept of an otherwise working day (OWD) is a fundamental test for all leave (an employee can only take leave on a day that they would have otherwise been working), but it is particularly relevant for determining an employees entitlement to BAPS leave. . Section () provides a list of factors that ca n be taken into account by the employer and employee when they agree on whether a day is an OWD. The factors to be considered are not ranked and taking these into account is, by definition, a subjective and hypothetical decision requiring communication and agreement between the
BE READY PLUS: pandemic preparedness
BNPL lenders will be required to provide information to borrowers who miss payments about financial mentoring services.
BNPL lenders will have to disclose key information about credit contracts and any variations.
BNPL lenders will need to be part of an external dispute resolution scheme and provide details of the scheme if borrowers make a complaint or hardship application. Consumers will be able to receive compensation and statutory damages from lenders who breach relevant CCCFA rules.
BNPL loans will be exempt from the requirement to carry out affordability assessments if they comply with a range of credit reporting and other requirements intended to reduce the risk of consumers getting into problem debt.
BNPL providers were not automatically required to comply with the rules under the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance Act (CCCFA). This is because they do not charge interest, credit fees or take a security interest over goods. BNPL products are subject to the Fair Trading Act , and some BNPL lenders offer other products which are CCCFA regulated, such as credit cards.
BRIEFING Holidays Act Review: background, progress and next steps December Priority: Medium Security classification: In Confidence Tracking number: Purpose To provide you with background to the Holidays Act , the work underway to improve the legislation and the basis for a discussion on how to proceed with that work. Executive s ummary The Holidays Act (the Act) is a core part of the employment relations and standards regulatory system. It sets out minimum leave entitlements and payments that employers are obliged to provide to their employees. The Act is difficult for employers and payroll providers to apply in practice. This, combined with poor payroll and business system practices, have contributed to systemic compliance issues with the Act that have been well known since . Large scale remediation payments, running into billions of dollars, have been made across both the public and private sectors. The Act was designed to accommodate diverse working and pay arrangements through flexible regulatory design, enabling employers to adopt a range of approaches to meeting their obligations. In practice however, this flexibilit y means that employers lack certainty about how to correctly calculate leave entitlements and pay. Employers must often apply their best judgment or reach agreement with employees based on the specific facts of the situation each time leave is taken, espec ially in situations where working arrangements and pay structures are not the same every week. The Acts predominantly principles based approach contrasts with a rules based approach that would provide precise calculations and formulas , definite answers about leave entitlements and pay and be easier to implement in digital payroll systems. In March , Cabinet endorsed in full the recommendations for improvements to the Act made by a tripartite Holidays Act Taskforce. The recommendations retain the underlying framework of the Act (which provides entitlement after specified periods of employment to weeks of annual leave and days of other types of leave) and include: i. p rescriptive meth odologies, calculations and definitions ii. i mproved access to some leave entitlements iii. some increases to minimum leave payments iv. i mproved transparency and clarity around some processes . MBIE has completed a detailed policy design process with a stakeholder working group to design the technical details required to implement the recommendations in legislation. The previous Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety agreed to a number of adjustments to address areas where the working group identified ambiguities, gaps and opportunities for simplification. The Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) bega n drafting a Bill to implement the recommendations , but drafting work has been on hold since June to allow PCO to focus on Bills that were progressi ng pr ior to the General Election.
Bachelor of Advanced Science (Hons)
Bachelor of Applied Science (Biodiversity Management)
Bachelor of Applied Technology (Electrotechnology) Level
Bachelor of Applied Technology: Electrotechnology
Bachelor of Arts Mathematics
Bachelor of Arts Statistics
Bachelor of Computing Systems
Bachelor of Engineering Technology
Bachelor of Engineering Technology (Electrical) Level
Bachelor of Engineering with Honours
Bachelor of Engineering with Honours Mechatronics
Bachelor of Engineering with Honours in:
Bachelor of Engineering with HonoursMaster of Engineering in:
Bachelor of Engineering with HonoursMasters of Engineering in:
Bachelor of Health Science
Bachelor of Information Sciences
Bachelor of Information Sciences Computer Science
Bachelor of Information Sciences Data Science
Bachelor of Science (BSc)
Bachelor of Science Mathematics
Bachelor of Science Statistics
Bachelor of Science in Astronomy, Astrophysics
Bachelor of Science in Software Engineering
Bachelor of Science or Engineering
Bachelor of ScienceBachelor of Applied ScienceBachelor of Data ScienceMaster of ScienceMaster of Data Science (names may vary) specialisingmajoring in (many variations also exist):
Background and revisions to the IVS
Background information and associated documents related to workplace relations in the screen industry.
Background on mail in New Zealand
Background to the Acts development
Background to the RSE Review
Background to the consultation
Backing emerging technologies
Backpacker Youth Adventure Tourism Association
Bali Process Disruption of People Smuggling and Trafficking Working Group compendium of successful operations
Bali Process Disruption of People Smuggling and Trafficking initiatives, including simulation based exercise and Joint Period of Action, on hold pending COVID restrictions.
Bank account documentation from your bank such as a precoded deposit slip, bank letter or statement. The bank logo, account name and number must be clear
Baringa EV international case studies report
Baringa is an international consultancy with expertise in the energy sector, network regulation, and policy measures in place to support transport and low emissions transition objectives. The report presents international case studies describing how the United Kingdom and Australia are managing the transition towards EVs and supporting public EV charging infrastructure, with a focus on regulatory policy solutions. The report was commissioned to generate ideas and options that could be considered in New Zealand based on best practice and lessons learned from overseas jurisdictions.
Barriers, enablers and approaches for a more circular economy
Basic application details required for all types of licences and permits If a natural person, then: Name Address Contact details Current nationality
Bay of Islands, Northland Photo: Alistair Guthrie
Bay of Plenty Regional Workforce Plan
Be a New Zealand citizen (NASA requirement).
Be able to obtain appropriate insurance cover for travel and stay in the United States.
Be accessible to prospective workers and employers
Be available to participate in person from June to August (dates subject to change).
Be eligible for a J visa to the United States and have read and understood the J visa terms and conditions.
Be fluent in English to actively participate in discussions
Be part of small group informal sessions with their preselected speaker(s)
Be proficient in written and spoken English (NASA requirement).
Be transparent and consistent
Be willing to undergo any required health and security checks for travel to the US and entry into US federal facilities.
Because of this, all shop employees can refuse to work on Easter Sunday without any repercussions for their employment relationship.
Becoming a translator or interpreter for government agencies
Becoming one of the most aspirational travel destinations and transitioning to a regenerative model requires fundamental change to the foundations of our tourism system.
Becoming party to it would send a clear message of the importance New Zealand places on tackling forced labour and other forms of modern slavery.
Bed and Breakfast Association
Before applying for a board role check that you:
Before his current role, Paul was Deputy Secretary for our Labour, Science and Enterprise group, and as Deputy Director General at the Ministry for Primary Industries, responsible for Policy and Deputy Director General Strategy and Performance.
Before joining MBIE, Richard spent years at BNZ in a variety of roles and was a member of the Executive team. He has held senior HR roles at ASB, Fonterra and had over years with Air New Zealand in a number of operations roles including Manager NZ Airports.
Before making an OIA request, check out our other sources of information as you may find the information you need is already publicly available:
Before the end of your term, you should let the board Chair and the Board Appointments and Governance team know if you are open to being reappointed for another term.
Before the expiry of their credential, practitioners are required to apply for recertification and provide evidence of continuing work practice and professional development to maintain the certification for a further years.
Before to the introduction of the Auckland regional fuel tax on July , our method for monitoring weekly fuel prices and importer margins assumed that retail prices were the same across the country.
Before you apply to the Tourism Data Partnership Fund, read this website material to make sure your organisation and project meet the eligibility criteria.
Before you make a request
Being a good steward of our regulatory systems is a priority for MBIE. As regulatory stewardship is central to our organisational strategy
Below are the full dashboards as downloadable PDFs.
Below are the open and scheduled science and innovation funding and investment opportunities.
Below is a summary of the consultation feedback.
Benefits Review Committee
Benefits from international productions
Bereavement leave will be expanded so that employees can access days of leave for more types of family members.
Berl: Business and Economic Research Limited
Besides complying with the Regulations, applicants may need to comply with other relevant requirements. For reference, resources about other potentially relevant requirements include:
Bespoke modern slavery capacity building with Pacific partners currently on hold due to closed borders.
Best practice guidance on dispute resolution
Better Protection for Contract Workers
Better Work Action Plan for tourism launched
Better for Business is a crossagency programme developed to champion New Zealand businesses. We do this by identifying and developing easier and smarter ways for business and government to interact.
Better protections for vulnerable contractors
Between and New Zealands consumer laws were comprehensively reviewed.
Between and the Labour Inspectorate delivered a pr ogramme of work focussed on remediation of historical underpayments, industry engagement and better provision of information and education.
Beyond the top products there is a wide range of smaller or emerging marine bioactives. Krill oil we are now producing our own here and shark liver oil are now being produced in New Zealand, Abalone, Oyster, Sea Cucumber and Chitosan.
Bilateral and technology safeguards agreements
Bill makes to the minimum requirements and those employers will not incur additional costs related to them (for example many employers already provide sick leave from day one and do not apply the parental leave annual leave payment override) .
Bioeconomy Opportunities Research Executive Summary PDF KB
Biofuels and the sustainable biofuel obligation
Biographies for the Science System Advisory Group members.
Biological Weapons Convention
Biological weapon prohibition
Biomedical Science and Medical Laboratory Science
Blumhardt, H. (). Victoria University of Wellington.
Board appointment complaints policy
Board of Airline Representatives
Boards purpose and criteria
Bobbi Brown, GM Tourism Events, Great South
Boosting rural connectivity and economic growth
Borrowers facing unforeseen hardship can apply to the lender to have their repayment contract varied.
Borrowers will be protected from unreasonable default fees.
Both Invest NZ and NZTE will be performance based and have a culture underpinned by clear economic incentives, with a laser focus on commercial outcomes. The agencies will also have clearly defined roles that allow them to function as easy conduits for inward investment and outward growth.
Both MBIE and territorial authorities have roles and responsibilities under the National Civil Defence Emergency Management (CDEM) Plan Order and the Building Act . MBIE is one of several agencies with legal obligations, roles, and responsibilities for building management in emergencies. MBIE works with other agencies to plan for and provide coordinated, integrated and effective responses to emergencies. Territorial authorities must develop and maintain arrangements to ensure they are ready to respond to an emergency and lead recovery work.
Both NASA and ESA provide guidance on suggested OD MP format which includes all the relevant sections. Applicants are requested to provide an ODMP using the latest DRAMA or DAS software to show compliance with regul ation . If DAS or DRAMA return a non compliant result, we may require the applicant undertake a high fidelity assessment and provide this to MBIE.
Both of these classifications follow a hierarchical structure.
Bragato Research Institute
Breaches of the Code may, following investigation, result in disciplinary action, up to and including a first formal warning; a final warning or dismissal either with or without notice.
Brendan Gould, Forest Owners Association
Briefing Approach to the Research Development Tax Incentive Bill PDF KB
Briefing RD Tax Incentive Summary of Submissions PDF .MB
Briefing RD Tax Incentive: Extensions to Growth Grant contracts PDF KB
Briefing for the Incoming Minister COVID Response: Managed Isolation and Quarantine (MIQ) PDF .MB
Briefing for the Incoming Minister for Economic Development PDF .MB
Briefing for the Incoming Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications PDF .MB
Briefing for the Incoming Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs PDF .MB
Briefing for the Incoming Minister of Immigration PDF .MB
Briefing for the incoming Minister Responsible for the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment PDF .MB
Briefing for the incoming Minister Responsible for the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment PDF .MB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for ACC PDF .MB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Auckland PDF KB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Building and Construction PDF .MB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Commerce and Consumer Affairs PDF KB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Economic Development PDF MB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Economic Development PDF KB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Economic Growth PDF KB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Energy PDF .MB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Energy PDF KB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Media and Communications PDF .MB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Regional Development PDF .MB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Regional Economic Development PDF KB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Resources PDF .MB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Science, Innovation and Technology PDF .MB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Small Business and Manufacturing PDF KB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Small Business and Manufacturing PDF KB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Social Development and Employment PDF KB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Space PDF .MB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Tourism and Hospitality PDF .MB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Tourism and Hospitality PDF KB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Trade and Investment PDF KB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety PDF .MB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for the Public Service: Government Property Group PDF KB
Briefing for the incoming Minister for the South Island PDF KB
Briefing for the incoming Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs PDF .MB
Briefing for the incoming Minister of Employment PDF .MB
Briefing for the incoming Minister of Immigration June , October PDF .MB
Briefing for the incoming Minister of Immigration PDF .MB
Briefing for the incoming Minister of Science, Innovation and Technology PDF .MB
Briefing for the incoming minister Accident compensation portfolio December PDF KB
Briefing to the incoming Minister for Media and Communications PDF MB
Briefing: Draft Employment Relations Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction
Briefing: Implementing the recommendations of the Murdoch Report PDF KB
Briefing: Proposed Changes to Employment Legislation
Briefing: Research Development Tax Incentive Early implementation review PDF KB
Briefing: Temporary migrant worker exploitation review Business models and practices PDF .MB
Briefing: Temporary migrant worker exploitation review Improving the pathway for reporting and referring PDF .MB
Briefing: Temporary migrant worker exploitation review Overview PDF .MB
Briefing: Temporary migrant worker exploitation review Penalising and deterring employer noncompliance PDF MB
Briefings to Incoming Ministers
Briefings: Advice on providing greater certainty for contracting parties PDF .MB
Brings together tourism data, research and reports from a wide range of sources into one easytouse tool
Broad coverage for different working arrangements
Broad discretion when considering national interest
Broadband and Internet New Zealand Limited
Broadband and mobile programmes
Broadband deployment update: December PDF KB
Broadband deployment update: December PDF .MB
Broadband deployment update: June PDF KB
Broadband deployment update: June PDF KB
Broadband deployment update: March PDF .MB
Broadband deployment update: March PDF KB
Broadband deployment update: September PDF KB
Broadband deployment update: September PDF KB
Broadly speaking this document is somewhat of an appendix with a fancy cover in some ways. We look at first the available bioresources and insector capabilities. What do we have to work with We look at aquaculture, forestry, arable crops, winegrapes, etc and look at what is going on in each of those. We then look at the supporting capabilities around that which we defined as smart people, good ideas and useful capital and then finally we talk about why it is so hard to develop new platforms.
Browsing the work programme of the relevant Cluster for open and forthcoming calls by following the links above
Budget Bilateral: Further Information and Savings Options PDF .MB
Budget proactive release documents
Budget : Energy Portfolio Information for your discussion with Hon David Seymour PDF .MB
Budget : Hon Louise Upston summary portfolio information for your discussion with Hon David Seymour PDF KB
Budget : Options for Geohazards Budget Bid PDF .MB
Budget : Regional Development summary portfolio information for your discussion with Hon David Seymour PDF KB
Budget : Resources summary portfolio information for bilateral discussion with Hon David Seymour PDF KB
Budget initiatives, research agencies, the Vision Matauranga Policy and Science Board information.
Budget overview of the million Tourism Recovery Package
Budget significant initiatives
Build a skilled workforce so workers have the skills they need to achieve their career aspirations
Build a skilled workforce so workers have the skills they need to achieve their career aspirations.
Build brand for a New ZealandAotearoa holiday, making New ZealandAotearoa a preferred and aspirational destination among the most discerning travellers.
Building (Earthquakeprone Building Deadlines and Other Matters) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introd.
Building (Pool Manufacturers and Retailers) notice
Building (Pools) Amendment Act
Building (Pools) Regulations
Building Code fire safety review discussion document
Building Consent System Performance Monitoring Quarterly update
Building Controls Updates newsletter
Building Performance Website
Building Performance website
Building Practitioners Board
Building System Insights Programme
Building System Performance
Building System Regulatory Strategy
Building a regenerative model for tourism is important for ensuring the longterm sustainability and resilience of tourism. As tourism is a significant sector of our economy, building a regenerative tourism sector will also contribute to wider efforts to decarbonise our economy.
Building a stronger weather forecasting system
Building and Construction
Building and Construction Sector Trends Reporting Package
Building and Construction Sector Trends: Annual report
Building and construction
Building and construction closed consultations
Building and construction consultations
Building and construction regulation
Building consent system review: Options paper summary of submissions
Building failure investigations
Building regulatory system
Building regulatory system charter
Building research and data
Building resilience must carefully balance the risks with the cost of mitigation to the sector and ultimately consumers. A reserve of days will enable New Zealand to better ride out smaller disruptions and, in the event of a major supply event, allow time for other solutions to be put in place.
Building the cycle trails
Building, Resources and Markets
Building, Resources and Markets is headed by Deputy Secretary Paul Stocks.
Built environment use case for Digital Twin
Bus and Coach Association
Business Events Activity Survey ()
Business Events Delegate Survey ()
Business Events Industry Association
Business Events Research Programme ()
Business Groups management: Identify and manage risks in daytoday operations (st line)
Business Mentors New Zealand
Business New Zealand paper on Economic Resilience and Just Transitions PDF KB
Business New Zealand paper on Workforce Development Priorities PDF KB
Business advisory support
Business and consumer research
Business and consumer research into awareness, attitudes, and understanding of their rights, obligations and responsibilities.
Business expenditure on research and development (BERD)
Business group management: Identify and manage risks in daytoday operations (First Line)
Business growth and innovation data
Business operations survey information releases
Business specific networks
BusinessSkilled visa stream
BusinessNZ and the NZCTU for targeted consultation on t he technical aspects of the Bill
BusinessNZ response on the Future of Work for Women PDF KB
Businesses can find out about what support may be available to them, or register their interest for support, by visiting the Qualmark website.
Businesses that intend to claim the tax incentive can enrol via myIR before they officially apply by submitting a General Approval or a Criteria and Methodologies Application. Enrolment will provide businesses with an initial assessment of their eligibility and key information about how to apply.
Businesses use standards and conformance to support innovation and development, and compete locally and internationally.
Businesses with a tourism focus looking for support from the RBPN business advisory service should visit the Regional Business Partner Network website for more information including eligibility criteria.
Businesses with uncertain or changing demand for their products or services can benefit from offering flexible, shortterm contracts. People may choose to accept work as a contractor to suit their individual lifestyle and preferences. Contracts for services are an important way for businesses to access specialist skills which they would not be able to retain inhouse.
But on the other side supporting technology, whats really changing is all that supporting technology thats making digital twins more powerful, shall we say. And so we have artificial intelligence, which can connect up all these different data streams into that twin structure. We have automated robotics and automation. And the more that comes in, the more thats information to feed into digital twin. The Internet of Things, more and more sensors, in objects and machinery. Ive got an oven at home thats connected to the internet, which freaks me out I have to say. But my wife loves it. So those things are happening all the time.
But please let us know what is your role in these sectors.
But the impact of COVID on the tourism sector has been severe. International visitor arrivals to New Zealand decreased . and the number of people directly employed in tourism decreased by a third.
But worldwide we are also seeing tourism return at pace and there is pentup demand from our key markets to travel internationally again.
Buy Now Pay Later (BNPL) is a relatively new credit alternative in New Zealand. By using BNPL, consumers can access goods or services now but pay for them later in a series of interestfree instalments.
By contrast, pirated and counterfeit goods are infringing goods that have been produced or sold overseas without the consent of the relevant copyright or trade mark owner. The Copyright Act and Trade Marks Act provide criminal offences for importing pirated and counterfeit goods for resale.
By default, all ANZSRC code information will be released. However, some ANZSRC codes could be considered sensitive and could lead to the prejudice andor safety of the person(s) andor organisation(s) that submitted the data. If you require MBIE to mask or remove these sensitive codes, please contact your MBIE Investment Manager.
By following the Tiaki Promise, visitors are making a commitment to act as a guardian, protecting and preserving Aotearoa during their visit.
By framing economic wellbeing and financial literacy as a key component of overall wellbeing, we are more likely to attract Pacific communities to financial capability programmes, as it aligns with Pacific worldviews.
By putting a focus on diversity we can make sure that we capture the very best ideas and talent to support the highest quality research. We believe that everyone should have a fair and equal opportunity to participate in the science system to their fullest potential.
By submitting, posting or displaying your content on any of our social media accounts, you grant us a nonexclusive, transferable, sublicensable, royaltyfree, worldwide licence to use that content.
By supporting and investing in tech, we can promote economic growth and employment in New Zealand. We can boost the tech sector by attracting and retaining the skills and expertise needed to help tech firms grow.
By using or accessing our social media pages, you are considered to have consented to the conditions of use of the particular social media channel and our individual page or account. These terms of use apply to all of our social media channels and tools, unless otherwise specified.
By working together we will flourish and achieve greatness
C OVERSHEET Minister Hon Brooke van Velden Portfolio Workplace Relations and Safety Title of Cabinet paper Holidays Act Reform: Consultation document for targeted consultation to be October Li st of documents that have been proactively released Title Author August Holidays Act Reform: Consultation document for targeted consultation Office of Workplace Relations and Safety Minister August Appendix Two: Summary of key proposals and alternative options included in the consultation document Office of Workplace Relations and Safety Minister August Holidays Act Reform: Approval to Consult ECO MIN Minute Cabinet Office June Holidays Act Reform: Decisions on sick leave for the exposure draft MBIE I nformation redacted YES A ny information redacted in this document is redacted in accordance with MBIEs policy on Proactive Release and is labelled with the reason for redaction. This may include information that would be redacted if this information was requested under Official Information Act . Where this is the case, the reasons for withholding information are listed below. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. S ome information has been withheld for the reasons of privacy of natural persons, confidential advice to Government, free and frank opinions, and legal professional privilege. Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT HTKINA WHAKATUTUKI BRIEFING Holidays Act Reform: Decisions on sick leave for the exposure draft June Priority: High Security In Confidence Tracking classification: number: Action sought Minister Action souaht Deadline Hon Brooke van Velden Indicate your preferred approach for June Minister for Workplace prorating sick leave in the upcoming Relations and Safety exposure draft Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone Alison Marris Manager, Employment () Standards Policy Principal Advisor, Simon Cooke Employment Standards () Policy The following department sagencies have been consulted D Treasury MoJ MFATMPI Ministers office to complete: Comments: NZTE MfE D Other: D Approved D Noted SeenMSD DIA D See Ministers Notes st contact lrivacyJ NA TECMoE TPKMoH D Declined D Needs change D Overtaken by Events D Withdrawn Note: MBIEs recommendations in this briefing were for t he limited purpose of determining a prorata sick leave option for consultation. They do not have the status of final policy recommendations or decisions. Further advice will be provided in due course taking into account consultation feedback and a wider range of options. In Confidence BRIEFING Holidays Act Reform: Decisions on sick leave for the exposure draft June Priority: High Security classification: In Confidence Tracking number: Purpose To seek decisions on your preferred approach for including a pro rata approach to sick leave in the upcoming exposure draft Bill (the ED). Executive summary On May Cabinet endorsed your next steps for Holidays Act reform : issuing an exposure draft Bill (ED) and consultation document for targeted consultation in September ECO MIN . The ED will largely be based on decisions made by the previous Government , with some policy changes to improve workability and reduce compliance costs . The consultation document will seek feedback on options that depart more significantly from th e existing framework. Cabinet decided that the provision of sick leave entitlement in the ED should include a pro rata approach. This decision reflects employer feedback about the cost of the decision to increase sick leave from to days a year for all eligible employees, regardless of working pattern. You have delegated authority to decide the detail of a pro rata sick leave approach for the ED. While there is a large range of potential options for this (including hours or weeks based accrual as suggested by business stakeholders ), the need to work within the EDs underlying framework to be ready for consultation in September limits the options significantly. There are three main design choices: () whether to keep a base of days for all employees, or scale the entire day entitlement, () the basis for the scaling method (hours worked or days worked), and () the entitlement scale itself (ie how particular work patterns correspond to different numbers of days of sick leave). MBIE recommends the following choices (noting that more significant changes could be considered via the consultation document): Retain ing a day floor for all eligible employees , and scaling the remaining days of entitlement based on work patterns . Basing the scalin g method on the number of days per week on which work is performed . An entitlement scale that provides four tiers of entitlement : The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE )s complete recommended approach is summarised in Annex Two . Your decisions on this briefing can provide enough detail for MBIE to issue drafting instructions. This could be achieved either by agreeing to (or providing feedback on) Annex Two, or by indicating which of the discrete design choices you would decide differently. In the latter case, MBIE would report back to y ou to flesh out your preferred approach for the ED. Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government In Confidence Recommended action MBIE recommends that you: a Note Cabinet decided that the sick leave entitlement should be pro rated so that there is some proportionality between an employees sick leave entitlement and the quantum of work they perform each week ECO MIN refers Noted b Note that you have delegated authority to make decisions on the detail of the prorata approach, so that this can be included in the upcoming exposure draft Bill (the ED) which you intend to release for targeted consultation in September Noted c Note that the timeframe for policy development and drafting require the EDs prorata approach to remain consistent with the existing framework (see Annex One ), but a lternative options involving fundamental changes to the end toend system (such as an hours or weeks based accrual model) can be explored through the consultat ion document that will accompany the ED Noted d Note the three main design choices for the ED are: i. whether the entire entitlement ( day s) should be subject to scaling ii. the general basis for scaling different employees sick leave entitlements ( based on either the number of hours or the number of days an employee works per week ) iii. the entitlement scale itself (with a key choice being h ow closely the total entitlement should reflect work patterns) Noted e Note that Cabinet agree d to a revised accumulation profile for eligible employees to become entitled to the full sick leave entitlement over their first six months of employment ( days at the start of employment, a further days after months, and the remaining days after months ) Noted f Note that a day floor for all eligible employees would allow th e agreed accumulation profile (described in recommendation e) to be retained with minimal adjustment and drafting complexity , but scaling the entire day entitlement would require more fundamenta l rework ing Noted g Note the complete straw person option for the ED (Annex Two ), which adopts MBIEs recommendations for each of the design choices described in recommendation d , with minimal change to the accumulation profile described in recommendation e , and includes the following scaled approach to the annual sick leave entitlement: Work pattern Annual entitlement days per week days days per week days days per week days or more days per week days Noted h For the purpose of the ED , either: i. Agree to the complete straw person option set out in Annex Two Agree I Agree subject to minor feedback I Disagree OR ii.Indicate (by circling your preferred options below) the areas where your design choices differ from those recommended by MBIE: Issue : Whether the entire entitlement should be scaled Option A Option B Provide an entitlement of at least five days of Scale the entire day FTE entitlement to reflect sick leave for all eligible employees (only the work patterns (acknowledging that some remaining days would be scaled to reflect employees would be entitled to less sick leave work patterns) than the minimum standard that applied from MBIE preferred option to ) Issue : The basis for scaling employees entitlements Option A Option B Number of calendar days per week on which Number of hours worked per week (an average work is performed (an average would be used would be used in some circumstances) in some circumstances) MBIE preferred option Issue : The scaling approach Option A: Low precision Option B: Medium precision Option C: Maximum For example, a binary model ( Three or four entitlement tiers precision days for parttime; days for depending on individual work Multiple tiers () to maximise fulltime) to maximise simplicity patterns proportionality between MBIE preferred option entitlement and work pattern (balancing simplicity and fairness) Note that in drafting the ED, an issue may arise about consequential changes to the maximum current entitlement and maximum carryover provisions (relating to employees ability to retain unused sick leave at the end of an entitlement year) Agree that the maximum current entitlement should remain unchanged at days, as per the status quo, and that consequential amendments may be required to related provisions. Alison Marris Manager, Employment Standards Policy Labour, Science and Enterprise MBIE Hon Brooke van Velden Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety .I.I. . In Confidence In Confidence Your decisions are needed to give effect to Cabinets direction on pro rated sick leave . On May, Cabinet agreed to your proposed policy changes related to the Holidays Act reform that will be included in the ED for consultation in September ECO MIN refers . As part of these decisions, Cabinet agreed that the statutory sick leave entitlement currently days per year for all eligible employees should be pro rated so that there is some proportionality between an employees sick leave entitlement and the quantum of work they perform each week . You have delegated authority to make decisions on the detail of a pro rata approach for inclusion in the ED. . The ED will be accompanied by a consultation document designed to elicit feedback on the EDs underlying policy choices , as well as to seek feedback on whether more significant policy changes are needed. Alternative prorata options to the one you select for the ED can be included in that document. Cabinet noted that you will report back on the content of the consultation document in August . . Design decisions for a pro rata approach are needed soon so that drafting of this aspect can get underway for the ED. We would also value an early steer on any alternative s you wish to seek feedback on through the consultation document (this will need to be ready for agency and Ministerial consultation by midJuly). Cabinet s decisions limit the range of practical options for the ED . The ED will retain the underlying sick leave entitlement framework of the existing Holidays Act (the Act) , based around the entitlement being expressed as a whole number of days . Based on the decisions made to , i t will include changes to the eligibility criteria , the timing of sick leave entitlement s, and to the method for paying sick leave ( the status quo and agreed changes are summarised in Annex One ). . We have assumed that , for the ED, Cabinets intent is to design a prorata approach for consultation purposes that is consistent with this underlying framework. This reflects the need to finalise the ED before September , and that more fundamental changes would need longer to design. . For the ED, these considerations rule out some pro rata options that might be favoured by business stakeholders . Alternative options for achieving proportionality can, however, be described and assessed in the consultati on document for stakeholder comment. You have several design choices . Noting the need to work within the existing framework, the key policy and design choices are: a) Whether the entire sick leave entitlement ( days) should be scaled to reflect working patterns , b) The general basis for scaling different employees total entitlements. c) The entitlement scale itself In the previous Government agreed to increase the minimum sick leave entitlement from five days to ten days per year CAB MIN and this was implemented through the Holidays (Increasing Sick Leave) Amendment Act in . Free and frank opinions Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to G Confidential advice to Government In Confidence . The briefing also seeks direction on two more minor design issues: a) Adjusting the sick leave accumulation profile recently agreed by Cabinet (how new employees progressively accumulate sick leave when starting a job) . Discussion of this matter is included in relation to the first design choice (paragraphs ). b) A consequential issue relating to the maximum current entitlement (a provision in the current Act). Analysis: Design choices for the ED . Each of the main design choices is considered separately below . We have set out the viable options and stated MBIEs preferred option for each. . The design choices build on each other. The first two design choice s have flowon consequences for the range of options available for the third (the scaling approach). We have only described detailed options for the scaling approach that are consistent with MBIEs recommendations for the first two design choices . If you disagree with those initial recommendations , we will need to report back to you with more detai l to flesh out the alternatives for the ED . . In making our recommendations we have applied criteria based on those that have guided Cabinets recent decisions on the Holidays Act review . The key criteria we have applied are clarity and simplicity , ease of implementation, reducing the potential costs of sick leave for employer s, and employee access to sick leave . . We have referred to potential costs because sick leave is a needs based entitlement, so employers only incur costs when sick leave is actually used. A higher total annual entitlement does not necessarily translate to greater use by employees. . Ease of implementation refers both to implementation by end users (including in payroll systems) and ease of implementation within the ED (drafting ease and minimal disturbance of other policy decisions). . Annex Two sets out a complete straw person option, based on adopting all of MBIEs design recommendations. Issue : Whether the entire sick leave entitlement ( days) should be scaled to reflect work patterns Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government In Confidence Issue : The basis for scaling different employees sick leave entitlements Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government In Confidence Issue : How closely an individuals entitlement should reflect their work pattern Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government In Confidence We also seek your confirmation of MBIEs intended approach to one minor issue Treatment of the maximum current entitlement (ie how unused sick leave from previous years is treated) . The current Act contains a provision (s ection ) on carrying over unused sick leave to any subsequent month period of employment . An employee may carry over up to days of unused sick leave , to a maximum of days current entitlement in any year . This does not prevent parties from agreeing to carry over higher levels of unused sick leave. If this happens, any accumulated days of sick leave greater than will be a contractual entitlement, rather than a statutory one. . In drafting the ED, the issue of whether consequential changes to this provision are needed is likely to arise. In MBIEs view, it is the maximum current entitlement of sick leave, rather than the maximum amount that can be carried over between years, that is the substantive policy Confidential advice to Government In Confidence setting in the current Act (the maximum carryover is a mathematical consequence of the maximum current entitlement) . This was confirmed by the previous Government in its decision to adjust the maximum carryover amount downwards (from days to days) when doubling the sick leave entitlement from to days. The maximum current entitlement remained unchanged ( days). . We therefore recommend maintaining the maximum current entitlement at days and noting that a consequential amendment may be needed in light of pro rating (as different employees will become entitled to different new amounts of sick leave on their respective month leave anniversaries) . Next steps . We have structured this briefing with the aim of ensuring that your decisions provide sufficient detail to be used as the basis for drafting instructions. This is possible either by: a) indicating your agreement to the straw person complete option contained in Annex Two, or b) providing feedback on anyall of the discrete design choices in this briefing (where your preference differs from MBIEs recommendation). . If you adopt the latter approach, we will provide you with an alternative complete option for your consideration as soon as possible, based on your design choice s, with the aim of allowing drafting to begin as soon as possible. . Work is also underway on the consultat ion document, which will provide scope for consider ing options that would go further towards achieving the simplicity you have indicated you wish to prioritise. In the context of pro rating sick leave, we think these options could include: a) Weeks based accrual b) Hours based accrual (used in Australian employment standards). Annexes Annex One: Summary of the current framework for the statutory sick leave entitlement Annex Two: Complete straw person option (adopting all MBIEs recommended design choices) Free and frank opinions In Confidence Annex One: Summary of the current underlying framework for sick leave Current settings in the Holidays Act The basic framework . The Act provides a minimum entitlement of days paid sick leave per year for employees, which can be used when an employee (or their partner or dependant) is sick or injured. The entitlement for sick leave is not pro rated, meaning a ten day entitlement per year applies regardless of whether the employee works full time or part time. . The entitlement to sick leave arises after an employee has worked for six months with the same employer, either continuously or, over a month period, for an average of at least hours a week, including at least one hour a week and hours a month. The Act also states that employees can carry over up to days of unused sick leave, to a maximum of days current entitlement in any year. . As with other minimum employment standards legislation, the sick leave provisions provide a bottom line entitlement. Employers and employees are free to agree on more favourable sick leave arrangements and many workplaces do go above the minimum standard . Any changes to the minimum standard would not necessarily mean that more favourable terms (in employment agreements) would be unwound. Taking sick leave . It is only possible to take sick leave on a day that would otherwise have been a working day. Sparse working patterns should in themselves reduce the likelihood of sick leave being taken . Relatively generous entitlements for part time employees do not necessarily result in disproportionate sick leave costs for those employees. Payment for sick leave . Sick leave is paid by the employer at the rate of relevant daily pay (the amount of pay that the employee would have received had the employee worked on the day concerned), or in some circumstances may be paid at the rate of average daily pay (the employees gross earnings for a defined period divided by the number of whole or p art days the employee worked or was on paid leave during that period). . The payment methodology means that payment for sick leave is responsive to work pattern (even though the total entitlement, ie the number of yearly opportunities to be on paid sick leave, is not). Relevant Da ily Pay adjusts to the hours the employee would have worked on the specific day they are sick. For example, if an employee is sick on a day they would usually work four hours, they would be paid for four hours. If they are sick on a day they would usually work hours, they would be paid for hours. However, if Relevant Daily Pay cannot be calculated (eg because an employees daily pay varies) sick leave pay will based on a daily average. Modifications to the sick leave framework already agreed to be included in the ED . In accordance with Cabinet policy decisions made to , the ED will retain the underlying sick leave entitlement framework of the existing Act, based around the entitlement being expressed as a whole number of days . Key changes currently agreed to the settings are sick leave availability from day one of employment, new eligibility criteria for F amily Violence, Beareavement, and Sick (FBS) leave and a new single payment calculation. Sick leave availability from day one of employment . Rather than the current six month waiting period, under the ED eligible employees will begin to accumulate their sick leave entitlement from the first day of employment , reaching days after six months of employment (not e that the accumulation profile below will need to be adjusted to account for the agreed pro rata approach) . a) For employees eligible for sick leave from the first day of employment, days sick leave will accumulate over a timeframe of six months. They will be entitled to two days In Confidence on day one, a further four days after three months and a further four days (ie the full entitlement) after six months. b) For employees eligible for sick leave after three months of employment, sick leave will accumulate over a timeframe of three months. They will be entitled to six days when they become eligible and then a further four days (ie the full entitlement) after si x months. c) For employees eligible for sick leave after six months of employment, the full entitlement of days will be provided upon becoming eligible (aligned with the current six month timeframe). . From the second year of employment onwards , full sick leave entitlement is provided on eligible employees month employment anniversary New eligibility criteria for FBS leave . To support the provision of sick leave from day one of employment, the ED includes new criteria to determine whether an employee is eligible for FBS leave. All employees with agreed hours of work specified in their employment agreement will be eligible fro m the first day of employment, other employees will become eligible after three months if they have worked an average of hours or more per week. New consolidated p ayment methodology . The ED will include a new single payment calculation. It does not require employers to apply judgement, meaning that it can be used in all employment situations. It is based on the hours an employee would have worked on a day of sick leave, meaning that, like the current R elevant Daily Pay calculation it will be responsive to work that would have been formed on a specific day of leave. . The consolidated calculation comprises four parts: a base rate for wages or salary an employee would have earned on the day plus fixed allowances plus an hourly average of productivity or incentive payments received plus the cash value of board and lodgings. In Confidence Annex Two: Complete straw person prorata option for the ED (adopting all recommended design choices) Basis for th e straw person option . The following option sets out, in full, how MBIE would propose to reflect Cabinets decision in the ED (to ensure there is some proportionality between an employees sick leave entitlement and the quantum of work they perform each week ECO MIN r efers). . The option adopts all of MBIEs recommended design choices for the ED described in this briefing. It also: a) assumes the underlying framework for the ED is retained (see Annex One) , and b) demonstrates a minimum viable change to the sick leave accumulation profile recently agreed by Cabinet (in the context of this set of design choices) . MBIEs complete straw person option for building proportional sick leave into the ED The basic framework . Rather than all eligible employees being entitled to days of sick leave per year (as per the status quo), all eligible employees are entitled to n days of sick leave per year, where n is a variable amount of days determined by reference to an individual employees work pattern. . The scaling calculation (to determine n) is based on: a) The agreed number of calendar days per week on which work is performed (per the employment agreement), or b) If there is no agreed number of days per week on which work is performed, or if the agreed number of days varies from week to week (which can occur under roster arrangements), an average number of days per week over the reference period. . The number of extra days (n) will vary according to employees work patterns as set out in the table below. Work pattern Entitlement o utcome days a week extra days (total entitlement is days) days per week extra days (total entitlement is days) days per week extra days (total entitlement is days) or more days per week extra days (total entitlement is days) . For consistency with the underlying framework of the ED, an averaging method will sometimes be used . The following specifications will apply: a) If an employee has an agreed number of days per week on which work is performed included in their employment agreement that are the same in each seven day period, their entitlement would be based on that number of days. b) If an employee has an agreed number of days of work that vary between seven day periods (for example they work a nine day fortnight or a rotating shift cycle) their entitlement would be based on the average number of agreed days per week. c) If an eligible employee does not have an agreed number of days in their employment agreement, their entitlement would be based on an average of the number of days per week on which work was performed over the last weeks (or weeks in the first year of employment). In Confidence d) If entitlement is based on averages, the number of days would be rounded up. For example if an employee works a nine day fortnight and works an average of . days per week, this would be rounded up to five days. The accumulation profile of sick leave entitlement for year one of employment . The accumulation profile is summarised in the table below (and compared to the May Cabinet decision). The recommended approach allows for minimal adjustment to the accumulation profile that Cabinet already agreed to. Proposed approach for ED (reflecting partial scaling of entitlement) Approach agreed by Cabinet in May Day one of employment Eligible employees receive days Eligible employees receive days After three months of employment Already eligible employees receive an extra days (to total days) Newly eligible employees receive days Already eligible employees receive an extra days (to total days) Newly eligible employees receive days After six months of employment Already eligible employees receive the extra number of days (n) that corresponds to their work pattern (to total n) Newly eligible employees receive the total number of days ( n) that corresponds to their work pattern Already eligible employees receive an extra days (to total days) Newly eligible employees receive full entitlement ( days) On each month anniversary of receiving the full entitlement All eligible employees receive their next full entitlement ( n days ) All eligible employees receive their next full entitlement ( days) . The main adjustment needed is that employees who become eligible for sick leave on day one of employment, or during their first three months of employment, would become entitled to days of sick leave at the month point ( rather than days , as Cabinet had previously agreed ). . Only the extra days of entitlement that arises at the month point would be subject to scaling (using the methodology described above ). For employees who become eligible to sick leave for the first time at the month mark, their entire yearly entitlement would be calculated at that point.
CATEGORY B: IMPROVEME NTS TO THE OPERATION AND EFFECTIVENESS
CATEGORY C: ENABLING FUTURE RESPONSIVENESS CATEGORY D: OTHER
CCBY . International license terms
COMMENT : Insert comments
COVERSHEET Minister Hon Brooke van Velden Portfolio Workplace Relations and Safety Title of Cabinet paper Holidays Act Reform: Consultation document for targeted consultation to be October
COVERSHEET Minister Hon Brooke van Velden Portfolio Workplace Relations and Safety Title of Cabinet paper Holidays Act Reform: Further Policy Decisions to be June
COVERSHEET Minister Hon Michael Wood Portfolio Workplace Relations and Safety Title of Cabinet paper Government Response to the Report of the Holidays Act Taskforce to be February
COVID Consumer Travel Reimbursement Scheme (the Scheme)
COVID Innovation Acceleration Fund
COVID Response and Recovery Funding
COVID Response: Tourism sector recovery plan
COVID consumer impacts study reports
COVID economic data preAugust
COVID pandemic and its impact on building system actors
COVID research database
COVID response recognition award
CTU and Business NZ view on support for displaced workers PDF KB
CTU comments for July Future of Work Tripartite Forum PDF KB
CTU definition of good work PDF KB
Cabinet Circular CO () Cabinet Fees Framework PDF KB
Cabinet Office circular CO()
Cabinet accepted the Holidays Act Taskforce recommendation that employees should continue to become entitled to four weeks AL after months continuous employment but
Cabinet ag reed that, for all leave types, the calculation would be based on the average number of hours that an employee has worked on the same calendar day in the previous weeks (the calendar day methodology). This calculation would need to be carried out for each day of leave an employee takes.
Cabinet agreed on a number of proposals relating to consumer credit regulation.
Cabinet agreed seeking inprinciple for NIWA to acquire MetService.
Cabinet agreed that during a closedown period, an employer must allow an
Cabinet agreed to apply the CCCFA to BuyNow, PayLater.
Cabinet agreed to further decisions to support the package of reforms to modernise the Companies Act.
Cabinet agreed to introduce the Accident Compensation (Interest on Instalment Plans) Amendment Bill.
Cabinet agreed to make regulations that enable a consumer data right in the banking sector.
Cabinet agreed to policy decisions for an amendment to the Regulations.
Cabinet agreed to proposals for inclusion in the Accident Compensation (Interest on Instalment Plans) Amendment Bill.
Cabinet agreed to publish an Employment Action Plan for New Zealand.
Cabinet agreed to some changes and additions to existing Cabinet policy decisions related to reform of the Holidays Act and noted the intention to release an exposure draft Bill.
Cabinet agreed to submit the Accident Compensation Levy Regulations to the Executive Council.
Cabinet agreed to the content of the consultation document for release alongside an exposure draft Bill for targeted consultation.
Cabinet approval to consult on areas for work health and safety reform.
Cabinet approved the Building (Earthquakeprone Building Deadlines and Other Matters) Amendment Bill for introduction.
Cabinet decisions expected on proposals on proposed legislation to address modern slavery and worker exploitation in operations and supply chains. Legislation is intended to be introduced in .
Cabinet documents that set out policy decisions in relation to the draft Bill
Cabinet has agreed to changes to allow leave entitlements to be transferred in restructuring situations
Cabinet made policy decisions about the original Bills in July . The COVID pandemic delayed the progress of these Bills, and Cabinet decided in May to combine the original Bills with the amendments that had been identified for a fourth set of Bills.
Cabinet noted the proposals, but no decisions have been made.
Cabinet noted the update on the Employment Strategy and refresh of the Strategy.
Cabinet paper RD tax incentive for implementation PDF KB
Cabinet paper on improvements to the TDL liability allocation process
Cabinet paper outlining the establishment of the New Zealand Screen Production Grant
Cabinet paper providing a progress update on the Employment Strategy and setting out the refresh of the Strategy.
Cabinet paper providing advice on a number of proposals relating to consumer credit regulation, resulting in the decisions in the minute.
Cabinet paper seeking agreement to draft regulations that enable a consumer data right in the banking sector
Cabinet paper seeking agreement to introduce the Accident Compensation (Interest on Instalment Plans) Amendment Bill.
Cabinet paper seeking agreement to proposals for inclusion in the Accident Compensation (Interest on Instalment Plans) Amendment Bill.
Cabinet paper seeking agreement to publicly consult on proposed levy rates for , , and .
Cabinet paper seeking agreement to publish an Employment Action Plan for New Zealand.
Cabinet paper seeking agreement to some changes and additions to existing Cabinet policy decisions related to reform of the Holidays Act and noting the intention to release an exposure draft Bill.
Cabinet paper seeking agreement to submit the Accident Compensation Levy Regulations to the Executive Council.
Cabinet paper seeking approval for introduction of the Building (Earthquakeprone Building Deadlines and Other Matters) Amendment Bill.
Cabinet paper seeking approval to apply the CCCFA to BuyNow, PayLater.
Cabinet paper seeking approval to consult on areas for work health and safety reform.
Cabinet paper seeking approval to the content of the consultation document for release alongside an exposure draft Bill for targeted consultation.
Cabinet paper seeking further decisions to support the package of reforms to modernise the Companies Act.
Cabinet paper seeking inprinciple agreement for NIWA to acquire MetService.
Cabinet paper seeking policy decisions for an amendment to the Regulations.
Cabinet paper: days commitments: A fairer workplace relations system
Cabinet paper: Easter Sunday shop trading amendment
Cabinet paper: Employment Relations Amendment Bill: Outstanding Issues and Approval for Introduction
Cabinet papers and decisions relating to the review framework.
Cabinet papers and minutes
Cabinet papers reporting on the Employment Strategy
Cabinet response to the review
Cairo has developed a commercially viable product and a startup business called Cattle Credit to scale up his idea for use on farms. His next steps include developing industry partnerships, engaging potential customers, and securing preseed funding.
Call recording and email retention
Call the MBIE Service Centre on
Call us if you believe you are being exploited, you are concerned another person is being exploited or if you want to report an unscrupulous employer.
Call us on or email
Callaghan Innovation (on Behalf of Toro Studios)
Callaghan Innovation is a Crown agent that provides products and services to enable businesses to invest more in research, science, engineering, technology and design, so that they can be more successful in the global market.
Callaghan Innovation website
Camilla Rutherford, Te Puia, Rotorua
Camping in vehicles at commercial campsites
Camping in vehicles on private land
Candidates on the final shortlist were submitted to NASA for final selection.
Candidates who are successfully selected for internship placement by NASA will be eligible to have the costs of their internship supported through the New Zealand Space Scholarship.
Canterbury Earthquakes Royal Commission website
Canterbury Regional Workforce Plan
Canterbury labour market and skills shortage data
Capability and development
Capability of the applicant and supplier combined to deliver:
Capacity building modules on trafficking in persons, forced labour and slavery developed as part of the Hakili Matagi Immigration Core Elements Curriculum.
Capacity of the supplier to deliver:
Captioned relay services are available using the NZ Relay application for mobile phones and tablets.
Carbon capture, utilisation and storage
Carbon capture, utilisation, and storage (CCUS) is the process of capturing carbon dioxide (CO) and either using it or storing it to prevent it from entering the atmosphere.
Careers Expo for rangatahi to explore potential pathways towards in the Agritech, Construction and Digital Technologies ITP sectors across Aoteaora New Zealand.
Careful consideration has been given to the privacy, security and confidentiality issues associated with using administrative and survey data in the IDI. Further detail can be found in the Privacy impact assessment for the IDI available from the Stats NZ website.
Carl Ramage, Rautaki Solutions
Carl is the Managing Partner of WNT Ventures, a preseed and seedstage venture capital fund actively establishing and building deep tech companies. He has been actively involved in companies as diverse as AIML, Urban Mining, Advanced Manufacturing, Robotics, and Aerospace.
Carole Inkster, Infant Nutrition Council
Carolyn Tremain, Chief Executive
Carolyn has over years experience leading large, complex service delivery organisations, and substantial change management programmes.
Carolyn holds a Bachelor of Arts from Victoria University, Wellington.
Carrying and delivering letters for profit
Cartels and collaborative activities
Case for adding home and community support workers to Employment Relations Act Schedule A PDF KB
Case study: Controlling access to Piopiotahi
Case study: Domestic tourism
Case study: How to exercise Tiaki in practice
Case study: Hundertwasser Art Centre
Case study: Manapouri infrastructure
Case study: Responsible Camping Ambassador Programmes
Case study: The Lake Dunstan Trail
Cash ing up leave: See paying out some of the annual holiday entitlement below.
Castalia report Impact of reducing Rural Delivery frequency PDF .MB
Catalyst Fund Investment Plan
Catalyst Fund Investment Plan
Category doesnt apply to shared property overseen by a governing body (eg, a body corporate). In this case, Category installation methods will be subject to Category consent requirements.
Category methods have lasting impacts, eg, digging into and resealing a small part of a concrete drive to conceal a cable. For these installations, neighbours will be provided a highlevel design of what is proposed and will have working days to object, based on a limited number of grounds. If they dont object within that timeframe, their consent is deemed.
Cathy Webb, Seafood New Zealand
Causation is likely if there is a very specific population at a specific site and disease with no other likely explanation. The more specific an association between a factor and an effect is, the bigger the probability of a causal relationship.
Cebu Declaration on East Asian Energy Security
Celestial bodies, planets and stars
Central Government agencies are committed to paying of domestic invoices within working days.
Central Otago District Council
Central Radio Services Ltd
Central and local government strategies and policies, as well as regulatory and planning frameworks, determine the environment within which the tourism sector operates. This includes the location, type and scale of tourism activity permitted within an area.
Central government agencies payment times summary
Centre of Digital Excellence
Certifying selfcontained vehicles as a Certification Authority
Chair and board member vacancies are generally advertised on MBIEs website.
Change since last quarter
Changes include MBIE updating its risk assessment template and providing more information to agencies on issues identified in previous applications and or on similar issues.
Changes to ACC regulations for Chinese medicine, paramedics and audiometrists
Changes to Pool Safety Rules Questions and Answers
Changes to a range of costs associated with the running of the Accredited Employers Programme, including administration fees, discounts, bulkfunded public health care costs, stop loss (where there is a high number of workrelated accidents within a very short timeframe), and highcost claims cover (limiting exposure to costs from a single event).
Changes to consumer credit law
Changes to entitlements . The Taskforce proposes the following amendments to entitlement eligibility and availability:
Changes to hours of work law
Changes to personal grievances
Changes to register details
Changes to support the effective management of freedom camping in New Zealand.
Changes to telecommunications regulation and funding frameworks
Changes to temporary work visas
Changes to the Act introduced:
Changes to the Employment Relations Act which provide security officers with additional employment protections came into effect on July .
Changes to the Takeovers Code
Changes to the process for setting pay for Members of Parliament
Changes were made to section (A) of the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance Act (CCCFA) in , following a review of this provision.
Charges by family travel group
Charges paid to TSO providers
Charter review and management
Chartered Professional Engineers Council
Chartered professional engineers
Charters and system assessments complement each other as shown in this diagram:
Charts of the daily variability of the importer margin on regular petrol and diesel are also available, based on data provided by
Chatham Island Postal Service Ltd
Check if your agency is already participating
Check out the National Broadband Map to see if you can access UFB. The map also provides details of who to contact if you are interested in upgrading your internet services.
Chemical Weapons (Prohibition) Act
Chemical Weapons Convention
Chemical weapon prohibition
Chief Executive expenses disclosure
Chief Executive: David Walsh
Chief Legal Officer (Policy Owner)
Chief Operating Officer Immigration. The operational arm of INZ with a focus on Visa Operations and ensuring quality in decisionmaking.
Childcare Assistance presentation by Dr Suzy Morrissey PDF KB
China is an important SIT partner for New Zealand and is currently our th highest partner in terms of copublications. We have several collaborative mechanisms in place to support cooperation with China in the bilaterally agreed priority areas of food science, environmental science, and health and biomedical science. There are active joint research programmes covering each of these areas.
Chorus TSO Deed variation
Chorus extending its existing fibre network by approximately , kilometres, with some homes on route being provided with the opportunity of fibretothepremise at urban prices
Chorus extending urbanlike broadband speeds to of rural customers
Chorus is the TSO provider of Network Service supporting delivery of Local Residential Telephone Service
Chorus upgraded over cabinets, which allowed over , households and businesses to access improved fixed line broadband.
Chris Houston Dr Suzi Keeling, Beef Lamb New Zealand
Chris Roberts, CE, Tourism Industry Aotearoa
Christchurch City Council
Christchurch International Airport Ltd
Christchurch meetups foster growth in aerospace industry
Christchurch, New Zealand
Christin Watson (July to March )
Circular Economy Action Plan ()
Circular Economy and Bioeconomy
Circular Economy: From Commitments to Action
Circular economy for emissions reduction
Circular economy policy and regulatory areas
Circular economy practices exist in New Zealand within and across manufacturing subsectors. Subsectors differ greatly. However, they are connected through resource flows and face similar challenges, particularly around waste.
Circular economy standards
Circular economy strategies, policies and regulatory measures are increasing worldwide, including with our key trading partners
Circular economydriven design
Circular measures are wideranging in nature and purpose
Circulate products and materials at the highest value
Circulation of a paper from MBIE on best practice considerations for survivor inclusion will be circulated between the InterAgency TIP Operations Group, Plan of Action Reference Group and civil society Advisory Group.
Citizens and permanent residents charges
Civil Aviation Authority (CAA)
Claimants are expected to look for work or participate in training or rehabilitation
Claimants will be offered support to get back to work
Claimants will need to remain in New Zealand while receiving payments, except when going overseas for things like funerals, weddings or health treatments.
Clarification is sought regarding the mechanisms for verifying compliance once conditions have been imposed. Ministry of Defence (seconded by the New Zealand Defence Force) Defences submission asked whether, when a condition is set in place, there is a mechanism that ensure a subsequent verification of compliance.
Clarity: The review is easy to understand
Classification of a letter
Clear methods, formulas and tests
Clearly communicate to clients that they must comply with their obligations or risk being sanctioned, by implementing the Traffic Light System and considering options for nonfinancial sanctions, including community work experience and money management.
Climaterelated disclosures consultation paper
Climate: reduce carbon emissions in the tourism sector or have a positive impact on the climate.
Clinical and epidemiological knowledge: How well Schedule reflects this current knowledge
Close Fleet Saver for entry and renewal from July , then completely close the programme from June .
Closed: April , pm
Closed: April , pm
Closed: February , pm
Closed: April , pm
Closed: February , pm
Closed: February , pm
Closed: March , pm
Closed: February , pm
Closedown period: Employers can have a customary closedown of all or part of thei r operations once a year and can require employees to take annual holidays during the closedown, even if an employee has to take unpaid leave. Christmas is the most common time for a closedown, although it can occur at any time of year (Section s to o f the Act ).
Closer Economic Relations with Australia and the TransTasman Mutual Recognition Arrangement
Closure of MBIE Pacific Economic Development Programmes PDF KB
Cloud computing, machine learning and the Hubble Space Telescope
Cluster : Culture, Creativity and Inclusive Society
Cluster : Culture, heritage and inclusive society
Cluster : Civil Security for Society
Cluster : Civil security and society
Cluster : Digital, Industry and Space
Cluster : Digital, technology and space
Cluster : Climate, Energy and Mobility
Cluster : Climate, energy and mobility
Cluster : Food, bioeconomy, natural resources, agriculture and environment
Cluster Munitions Prohibition Act
Cofunding is not required. Participating organisations are free to contribute cofunding if they wish. The use or level of cofunding does not influence the outcome of applications.
Cofunding of will be required
Coastal, Estuarine and Marine environments
Code of Conduct for Crown entity board members
Code of Conduct for employees, contractors and consultants
Code of Conduct for the Directors of Public Finance Act Schedule A Companies
Collaborating with other agencies to develop wholeofgovernment approaches.
Collaborative and ongoing process
Collate a national New Zealand data set on the health and wellbeing impacts of working through the COVID lockdowns.
Collecting statistical information using cookies via Google Analytics
Collection by third parties
Collection in these circumstances is subject to enhanced levels of oversight and increased internal controls to ensure it is conducted appropriately.
Collection of personal information
Collection, storage and use
Combatting climate change with hybridelectric jet planes
Combatting modern forms of slavery: Plan of action against forced labour, people trafficking and slavery PDF KB
Combatting online financial scams
Combines our labour market monitoring programme with the latest developments in the labour market to paint a summary of labour market trends up to the latest quarter.
Combining a proven reputation as a trusted and responsible global citizen with a nimble and responsive government system that gets things done.
Come to our monthly dropin sessions online where you can ask your National Contact Points, MBIE, EURAXESS, University and CRI Research support staff and more all of your questions. The questions are designed to be informal and supportive. We will cover set topics each month which will be advertised in advance on the MBIE website during the first part of each session. The remaining time is available for Q A.
Commentary on the Taxation (RD Tax Credits) Bill PDF KB
Commerce Amendment Act
Commerce and Consumer Affairs
Commerce and Consumer Affairs portfolio: briefing for the incoming minister PDF KB
Commerce, Consumer and Business
Commercial organisations put up a variety of payloads for different purposes including science, remote sensing and technology demonstration and educational. Other commercial purposes which do not fit into these categories include:
Commercialisation Partner Network
Commission Contact Code
Commission a paper on best practice for including trafficking victims in NRMs.
Commissioned case studies
Commitment to add new delivery points
Commitments relating to other frequency bands Spectrum in the frequency ranges and MHz is currently committed for possible use by a new Emergency Services network and is also being considered for use by KiwiRail for train signaling and control. If further work shows it is not req uired for emergency services andor rail the government will transfer this spectrum to the MSE . MBIE and MSE to review the status of this further work, with initial review to be undertaken within months of the of the MOU, and make a recommendation to the Minister if any further action is required. If this spectrum is required for Emergency Services andor rail then MBIE will work with the MSE to determine whether sharing is possible between those functions and other use s. Spectrum in the MHz b and is currently being considered for future use by cellular mobileG services. MBIE will work with the MSE to develop a model for spectrum allocation or licensing in the band , noting that the future use of this band has yet to be confirmed.
Common themes from these conversations include the challenges startups face with getting money, finding talented people, connecting with others, and being fair and inclusive.
Communications Following Cabinet approval of the consultation document and finalisation of the Bill by PCO, officials will send the Bill, consultation document, and response form to all consultation participants. I will also make a public announcement to confirm that this action in the Q Action Plan has been met. Proactive Release I intend to proactively release this Cabinet paper (subject to redactions in line with the Official Information Act ). Recommendations The Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety recommends that the Committee: .note that in May CABMIN Cabinet noted the intent to release an exposure draft of the Bill for targeted consultation to test a range of policy options with those who will be affected by the reform, and to report back to Cabinet in August seeking agreement to the content of the consultation document; .note that, in addition to amending existing Cabinet decisions, Cabinet agreed that the Bill should include a prorata approach for providing the minimum day sick leave entitlement and that, as authorised by Cabinet, the Minister for I N C O N F I D E N C E uohzj Free and frank opinions I N C O N F I D E N C E Workplace Relations and Safety has made decisions on the detail of the approach that will be included in the consultation document; .note that the purpose of the consultation document is to seek feedback on the technical and policy details of the proposals in the Bill and on alternative policy options; .note that if, following consultation, Cabinet agrees to further work on key areas of the Bill, then additional time for further policy development and legislative drafting will be required, and that the timing of introduction would depend on the number and significance of the changes and whether further testing is required; . .agree to the content of the attached consultation document for release alongside the exposure draft of the Bill in September , and that officials may make minor and editorial changes before it is released for targeted consultation; .note that the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety will report back to Cabinet in December on feedback themes and the proposed policy direction. Authorised for lodgement Hon Brooke van Velden Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety I N C O N F I D E N C E uohzj Confidential advice to Government Appendix Two: Summary of key proposals and alternative options included in the consult ation document (Blue represents areas where this Government took decisions in May on changes to previous Cabinet policy decisions) Annual Leave (AL) Sick, Bereavement and Family Violence leave Key areas of change Key proposals in the Bill Provision of entitlement A weeksbased accrual system whereby entitlement accrues continuously during employment. Taking AL rights and Adjustments to align rights and obligations related to taking AL with weeksbased obligations accrual. Determining use of AL A new methodology for determining use of AL entitlement that removes the requirement for agreement between parties about what a working week means for an employee. It provides a formula that is applicable to all working arrangements and does not require the application of judgement. Payments Payasyougo (PAYG) (AL paid with regular pay) Annual Cosedowns Provision of sick leave entitlement AL payment method: A new greater of three calculation methodology: Ordinary Weekly Leave Pay, Quarterly Average Leave Pay (QALP), Annual Average Leave Pay (AALP). Gross earnings: New expanded definition to clarify which payment types are included. One payment calculation for AL when employment ends (because of shift to accrual). AL payment rules for employees who have had a period of parental or volunteers leave: rather than AL pay being based only on AALP, payments based on the normal method. New objective criteria for determining eligibility for using PAYG along with a clear framework for reviewing its use during employment. New provision s related to establishing and having annual closedow ns to provide greater clarity and transparency. A prorata approach for providing the minimum day sick leave entitlement which retains a fiveday floor for all eligible employees with a fourtier entitlement scale based on days of work per week. In the first year of employment entitlement accumulates over the first six months. uohzj Summa ry of alternative options include d in the consultation document Design an hoursbased accrual model for all or some employees (and shifts in the endtoend system to support this). Provide the ability to cash up more than one week of AL in each year. Extend the minimum notice period before an employee can be required to take AL. Alternative options for specific groups of employees including those who: work guaranteed and additional hours (option: instead of guaranteed hours use an average). have agreed hours of work that differ between weeks (option: use specific instead of average weeks). have no agreed hours (options: use an average of hours worked over weeks rather than a quarter and provide ability to calculate averages at fixed points in time rather than each time leave is taken). Provide the ability for employers and employees to agree to a different method than the one prescribed for determining how an employees AL entitlement will be provided and its use. Payment method: the current greater of two calculatio n or a shift to a single calculation (similar to FBAPS). Timing of calculations: calculate QALP and AALP at fixed points in time (once a quarter, or every six months) rather than every time leave is taken. Gross earnings: clarify the status quo or narrow the definition. Cash value of board and lodgings: a modernised rule for including this in leave payments. AL payment rules for employees who have had a period of parental or volunteers leave: retain current payment rule or adjust rules so that AL does not accrue during these periods, but AL payment at the full rate. Increase flexibility around using PAYG so it can be used for more employees or remove ability to use PAYG but ensure rules for calculating pay are simple and practical. Remove requirement to review use of PAYG during employment, so it could be used indefinitely once agreed. Do not introduce a requirement to establish a closedown window before an annual closedown takes place. Provide the ability for employers to have more than one annual closedown period per year. Prorate the full tenday sick leave entitlement. Adjust the scaling approach so there are more or fewer tiers. Provide a mechanism to account for days an employee works in addition to guaranteed hours of work. Design a weeks or hoursbased sick leave accrual model for all or some employees (and shifts in the endtoend system to support this). Sick, Bereave ment and Family Violence leave Public and Alternative holidays Changes to leavere lated provisions in other legislation Key areas of change Key proposals in the Bill Summary of alternative options included in the consultation document Bereavement leave entitlement Eligibility framework Criteria for using entitlements Payments Entitlement criteria Transferring whole public holidays Payments Expanded list of family members on whose death an employee may take three, days bereavement leave. Clarificat ion that an employee may take bereavement leave at any time following the bereavement. Employees with agreed hours have access to entitlements from the first day of employment (rather than waiting six months) and other employees after three months if a test is met. New criteria for days on which leave entitlement may be used: Otherwise Working Day (OWD) concept replaced with criteria similar but distinct from OWD test for public holiday entitlements. Reframed method for using and paying sick and family violence leave while receiving accident compensation. Ability to take part days of leave proportionate to the number of hours that wou Id have been worked on the day. A new definition of Relevant Daily Pay (RDP) for leave payments and removal of Average Daily Pay (ADP): RDP base rate for wagessalary, fixed allowances, an average hourly rate of productivity or incentive based payments. New criteria for identifying Otherwise Working Days (OWD) for determining whether public holiday entitlements apply, including an objective test test for employees who do not have agreed days of work. Clarifications to the conditions and processes for agreeing to transfer a public holiday to another OWD (must be by employee request and OWDs identified when transfer is agreed). A new definition of Relevant Daily Pay (RDP) for leave payments (refer to sick, bereavement and family violence leave payments above). A new payment calculation for working on a public holiday: . times pay for hours actually worked plus RDP for any agreed hours not worked. Provision of a pay A new legal requirement to provide a pay statement in each pay period to provide greater statement transpa rency about leave and pay for employees. Leave entitlements after A flexible approach enabling the treatment of leave entitlements to be negotiated by the a sale or transfer incoming and outgoing employers rather than requiring AL to be paid out. Parental leave payment Replacement of the Holidays Act Ordinary Weekly Pay part of the calculation with a method fourweek average of gross weekly earnings. Do not expand access to three days bereavement leave or reduce extent of expansion. Create a specific list of people on whose death an employee may take one day bereavement leave. Introduce a time limit for when bereavement leave entitlement expires. Retain sixmonth waiting period for all employees who meet eligibility criteria. Adjust eligibility criteria to be more or less restrictive. Simplify by removing any eligibility criteria all employees eligible from day one or after six months. Accumulation profile shorter than six months or remove staggering to simplify. Refer to OWD below. Use a single calculation but use base only or base pay plus a loading. A greater of two calculations methodology (RDP or ADP). A higher (or lower) threshold than of corresponding calendar days worked for a day to be an OWD. A longer or shorter reference period for the test (e.g., one, six or months). Do not introduce a requirement for employers to provide a pay statement. Remove uncertainty by clarifying the status quo. Creating legislative structures to require employers to give transferring employees a choice about what happens to their leave balances. uohzj MBIE
Communications Portfolio: briefing for the incoming minister PDF MB
Communications and Broadband
Communications markets regulatory system
Communications, Design and Ministerial Services
Communications, Infrastructure and Trade
Communities Strategy
Communities should have an active role in the management of tourism in their region and mana whenua have an essential role in Destination Management as Treaty partners. Common challenges communities want solved are noise, overcrowding, damage to the natural environment and a lack of cultural context for visitors.
Communities should have an active role in the management of tourism in their region.
Community Organisation Refugee Sponsorship Category Evaluation
Community Organisation Refugee Sponsorship Category Pilot: Process evaluation
Community Renewable Energy Fund
Community languages providers by location
Community leaders (church, sports groups and extended families) in these different groups can be strong advocates in promoting services through word of mouth and encouraging participation by those in their wider network. This endorsement increases trust in services and programmes and increases the likelihood of participation.
Community perceptions of migrants and immigration PDF .MB
Community perceptions of migrants and immigration PDF .MB
Companies Act modernisation: further policy decisions
Companies Act modernisation: further policy decisions PDF KB
Companies Office (CO) levy A CO levy of . is proposed, to be paid once annually by users of entity registers with their incorporation (registration) or annual return fee. A proposed new CO levy would recover the shared costs (costs of operating the registry system that are not specific to any one register) that are currently allocated across existing Companies Office fees. It is proposed that the CO levy will be paid annually by users of the entity registers. For users who incorporate a new entity on one of these registers, the levy will be charged alongside the incorporation or registration fee. The levy will be charged in following years alongside the fee for filing an annual return. By charging users of the entity registers alongside these fees, most Companies Office users will contribute . once a year to funding shared services.
Companies Office Fees and Levies Review
Companies The Companies register is the most comprehensive and searched register administered by the Companies Office. It provides the infrastructure for registered companies and the Registrar of Companies to meet the requirements of the Companies Act. Table on the next page shows the proposed adjustments to current fees paid by companies on the register.
Compass Communications Ltd
Compelling visitor experiences
Competition market study into supermarkets
Competition regulation and policy
Competition regulatory system
Competition study into personal banking services
Competition system charter
Competitive and dynamic markets are critical to economic productivity and the welfare of New Zealanders.
Competitive business settings
Complaint selfassessment
Complaints about breaches of the Human Rights Act, including discrimination, racial and sexual harassment and conversion practices
Complaints about telecommunication service providers
Complaints and disputes about retirement villages
Complaints should be emailed to the Board Appointments and Governance team:
Complaints will be managed in accordance with the following principles:
Complete our feedback form
Complete research programme into how best to deliver information to migrant workers and their employers.
Complete the Confidentiality Deed
Complete the TDPF application form:
Completed in December , this report covers screen sector firms and employment trends from to .
Completing and submitting all necessary documentation to support a flexible working arrangement.
Compliance information regarding the performance of this policy will be provided to the relevant business group and the Compliance Centre of Excellence on a quarterly basis.
Compliance reporting and information regarding the performance of this policy will be provided to the relevant business group and the Enterprise Risk and Compliance branch on a quarterly basis.
Comply with this policy and associated procedures applicable to their role
Complying with this and all other relevant MBIE policies.
Components of a Destination Management plan
Comprehensive and Progressive TransPacific Partnership ()
Comprehensive and accurate data and insights are an essential component of all industry decisionmaking processes, whether by central and local government, businesses, entrepreneurs and investors, tangata whenua, communities and interest groups, the media, researchers and academics, and others.
Comprehensive economic data on the screen sector builds and strengthens our understanding of the economic contribution of the sector to New Zealand, and plays a valuable role informing policymakers and the sector.
Computer Engineering or Computer Systems Engineering; or
Computer networks and cloud computing
Computers can process large quantities of data quickly, much faster than our staff can manually. We may use algorithms to keep up with large application numbers so our staff can deal with more complex work and respond to the public quicker. For example, the Immigration New Zealand Advance Passenger Processing (APP) which performs validation matching and screens for risks at the border.
Conceptually this operation extracts the oils from leaves and flowers to make essential oils for food, household, cosmetics, and health sectors.
Concerns of financial hardship
Conditions to apply to licence or permit
Conduct of financial institutions regime
Conferences, school events, university events
Confidential advice to Government
Confidential advice to Government I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E receives Royal assent. Payroll providers MBIE consulted confirmed that these changes can be implemented independently from the other changes in the Bill and would not require a major system change . I propose that the consequential amendment to the PLEPA to replace the Holidays Act OWP calculation comes into force from the start of the financial year ( July) following the on which the Bill receives Royal assent and that it applies to parental leave applications re ceived on or after that . I plan to release an exposure draft for targeted consultation I plan to release an exposure draft of the Bill with an accompanying consultation document in September . The exposure draft would largely reflect the prev ious Governments decisions, with the amendments proposed above (refer paragraphs above ) to improve workability in areas where officials can progress policy and drafting work quickly. I expect to bring a separate Cabinet paper seeking agreement to release the consultation document in August . Releasing an exposure draft of the Bill would enable technical and workability issues to be surfaced , stakeholder concerns with policy decisions to be identified and for changes to be made before the Bill is introduced . Waiting for Select Committee to gain feedback increases the risk of further delay s to delivery if significant drafting changes are needed. I propose that the exposure draft is a nearcomplete version of the Bil l although t here may be some areas (such as transitional provisions which are dependent on other areas of the Bill) where drafting is not able to be completed by September . Officials will work with Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) to prioritise drafting resource on the core provisions of the Bill to ensure that feedback can be sought on those areas. Consultation Feedback provided by payroll providers and practitioners during MBIEs policy design process has helped to inform the proposals included in this paper. MBIE has also continued to engage with nominated representatives of Business New Zealand and the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions to seek their perspectives. They have indicated that they are supportive of the work undertaken to simplify the Taskforces recommendati ons. The following Public and nonPublic Service departments and agencies were consulted on this paper: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (Policy Advisory Group), the Treasury, Public Service Commission, IR, Office of the Privacy Commissioner, MoE, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Social Development, Ministry for Culture and Heritage, D epartment of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Defence, Ministry for Women, Ministry of Disabled People, Te Puni Kkiri , Te Arawhiti, Ministry fo r Pacific Peoples, Oranga Tamariki, Ministry for Ethnic Communities, PCO , New Zealand Police and the New Zealand Defence Force. Health New Zealand Te Whatu Ora (Health NZ) has been consulted on the paper due to the size and complexity of the workforce it employs and funds , and the potentially significant costs to government of implementing the changes in the kjtrvweh I N C O N F I D E N C E
Confidential advice to Government, Free and frank opinions
Confidentiality and information sharing
Confirmation of decisions regarding Callaghan Innovation
Conformance assessments check that goods, services, personnel and systems meet standards or comply with regulatory requirements.
Conformity Assessment Mutual Recognition Arrangements
Conformity assessment mutual recognition arrangements
Connecting Now (the current provider)
Connecting Now is a language service provider committed to enabling seamless communication across cultures.
Consider amending the Crimes Act to strengthen provisions for the criminalisation of trafficking in children.
Consider commissioning an assessment of the prevalence of forced marriage in New Zealand.
Considering the impact of their application on their team and on MBIE throughout the application process.
Consistency or reproducibility
Consistent findings observed by different persons in different places with different samples strengthen the likelihood of an effect.
Construction Urban Planning
Construction Sector Accord
Construction Skills Action Plan
Construction and demolition waste (which accounts for up to half of all wastes going to landfill) could be reduced at the initial design stages of building or used as input for new products. Modular construction, offsite prefabrication and adaptive reuse are emerging as approaches for resourceefficient buildings. Development of data and digital tools, such as material passports and material tracking systems, would enable more reuse and remanufacture of materials.
Consulation on the revised Terms of References
Consultation and summary of submissions
Consultation document: Insulation requirements in housing and other buildings
Consultation document: Options to address the safety risks of corded window coverings
Consultation is coordinated by MBIE, and supported, as appropriate, by the wider APO membership.
Consultation is led by MBIE and supported by ACC
Consultation is scheduled to close on March , pm.
Consultation methodology and feedback
Consultation on changes to the regime
Consultation on modern slavery and worker exploitation
Consultation on the Policy Statement on the Venture Capital Fund Act
Consultation on the Review
Consultation on the Review occurred from midAugust to the end of September . The MBIE Review team identified and targeted the following entities that were directly affected by the Act, but an open invitation was also placed on the MBIE website for any others to provide their direct interest:
Consultation opens on draft Tourism Environment Action Plan
Consultation paper: Draft Incorporated Societies Regulations
Consultation paper: Proposed updates to ACC regulated payments for treatment
Consultation paper: Seeking proposals for additions to the list of occupational diseases under the Accident Compensation Act
Consultation requests can be sent to
Consultation section on the MBIE website
Consultation with RSE workers
Consultation with the Minister for Auckland
Consultation, engagement and hui
Consultations between Police and Oranga Tamariki Specialist Child Interviewers Unit (SCIU) to strengthen techniques and skills when interviewing child victims, has not yet progressed.
Consultations, analysis and resources
Consultative planning informed by data and insights
Consumer Advocacy Council
Consumer Advocacy Council ( to )
Consumer Information Standards (Origin of Food) Regulations
Consumer Information Standards (Origin of Food) Regulations Minute of Decision PDF KB
Consumer Information Standards (Origin of Food) Regulations PDF KB
Consumer Protection Website
Consumer Protection quarterly reports
Consumer Protection website
Consumer and Commercial Regulatory System Assessment
Consumer and Commercial charter
Consumer and commercial regulatory system
Consumer research and reports
Consumer summary discussion document: Ticket reselling in New Zealand
Consumers seeking refunds or credits should contact the travel agent or wholesaler they booked through. MBIE does not collect identifiable consumer information about individual bookings.
Contact CrimeStoppers on or complete an online Crimestoppers form to report a case anonymously.
Contact Immigration New Zealand on if you have questions about your immigration status and whether you can work in the sex industry on your visa.
Contact details and postal identifiers
Contact for telephone discussion (if required)
Contact persons designation: Managing Director
Contact person: Ben Fitzpatrick
Contact person: Dennis Welby
Contact person: Harry Clark
Contact person: Howard Ede
Contact person: Malcolm Shaw
Contact person: Nelson Siva
Contact person: Rob Alker
Contact person: Sharon Souproanuck
Contact the New Zealand Space Agency
Contact us for more information
Contact us if you have questions about applying for a permit or licence. Talking about your application with us means that we can make sure you are providing us with all necessary information. A discussion can also help us process your application more efficiently. We can help you transfer any sensitive information and ensure it is protected, subject to relevant legislative requirements.
Contact us to receive a copy of the launch facility licence application form.
Contact us to receive a copy of the launch licence application form.
Contact your territorial authority directly for more information about proposed local policies for Easter Sunday shop trading.
Contacts designation: Company Secretary and General Counsel
Contents . How to have your say . Glossary of terms . Forward . . Introduction . History of the Holidays Act . . Overview of the current review . . Scope of the review . . . Overview of the Holidays Act . . Who is affected by the issues with the current Act . All employers and employees are affected by noncompliance with the Act . . But its harder for some employers for different reasons . . And the effects can be worse for some employ ees . . The Labour Inspectorate has a significant role to play as the regulator, and is also an . important user of the Act . . What are the key issues with the Holidays Act . Some issues relate to all aspects of the Act . . Annual holidays determining entitlements and payments . . BAPS leave determining entitlements and payments . . Other issues . . . Ideas for change . . Next steps . Recap of questions . Annex : Terms of Reference. Annex : More detailed list of issues
Contents Safety Case Guidance Public Safety The importance of a Safety Case Your safety duty What is a Safety Case
Context of the consultation
Continue the New Zealand Space Scholarship which supports internships for graduate students at prestigious international space research institutes.
Continuing to carry out their work in accordance with wellbeing, health and safety policies and guidelines.
Continuing to meet performance expectations and maintaining open communication with their people leader and team (unless privacy is a concern) for the duration of the arrangement.
Continuing to set clear expectations and maintain open communication throughout the duration of flexible working arrangements. Regularly reviewing flexible working arrangements to ensure they are still working effectively for the individual, the team, and MBIE.
Contract and Commercial Law Act
Contract between the New Zealand Government and Rocket Lab Cabinet paper (Sept )
Contract between the New Zealand Government and Rocket Lab EGI Minute (Sept )
Contracting arrangements, or contracts for services, are a fundamental part of our labour market, and are used across nearly all sectors of the economy.
Contractor work in Aotearoa New Zealand
Contractors and service providers funded by, or working on behalf of MBIE to provide childrens services, either have adopted a suitable child protection policy and regularly review their own child protection policy, or have adapted and applied the MBIE policy as appropriate.
Contractors doing screen production work can bargain collectively in their occupational groups and at the productioncompany level.
Contractors doing screen production work must have written contracts with mandatory terms about contract termination and protection from bullying, discrimination and harassment.
Contracts and policies relating to social media training PDF MB
Contracts of Insurance Act
Contractual and financial disputes between domestic tertiary learners and education providers. Helping international students resolve complaints with their education provider.
Contribute to our short, medium and longterm development outcomes we seek in the Pacific region
Convention on the prohibition of military or any other hostile use of environmental modification techniques
Conventional promotional and awareness strategies such as utilizing church groups, Pacificlanguage radio shows, and Facebook are considered effective methods to reach the Pacific community.
Conversion of Inbound Tour Operator (ITO) loans to grants (up to . million per ITO)
Conversion of up to . million per ITO of the STAPP loans to grants. This is for ITOs that accepted and received STAPP loans in . ITOs promote and sell New Zealand travel packages to offshore buyers, such as wholesalers, travel agents, meeting planners, and event managers.
Coordination across the tourism system
Copyright material on this website is protected by copyright owned by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment on behalf of the Crown.
Copyright of third parties
Copyright or trademark issues should be resolved between the parties concerned.
Copyright protection in New Zealand
Copyright protection overseas
Corin Walker Bain, Waitomo Caves, Waikato
Corporate and Digital Shared Services
Corporate and Digital Shared Services is headed by Deputy Secretary Richard Griffiths.
Corporate governance regulatory system
Correspondence between MBIE and State Services Commission about the inquiry
Cost Recovery Impact Statement to assess the proposed changes for the levy round.
Cost centre and natural account (in number format, xxxx.xxxx) or a project code (in the number format xxxx.xx.xx.xxxx)
Cost reductions really are the key driver. But managing a complex environment with multiple users is also. Its also worth pointing out here as well that digital twins dont suddenly just appear. What happens is that theres a use case or a business case. And so, I want to make the point clear that what normally happens is that somebody looks at a range of data they have and they go wow, wait, if we can pull them together into something thats practical, and we can use in a better way, theres going to be a lot of potential. So it usually starts with that and it builds up over time. So it doesnt suddenly just magically appear.
Costs for subsiding telecommunications services supplied under TSOs are funded through the Telecommunications Development Levy. This levy is collected from the telecommunications industry.
Costs to government . Costs of PL payments : It is not possible to calculate an exact fiscal cost due to the number of variables (such as the pay and work arrangements of specific applicants) and unknowns (such as number of applicants in a given year). IR expects any changes in costs because of the proposal to be minimal however, and manageable within the existing appropriation. As discussed in paragraph
Councils can put in place local policies that allow shops within their area, or parts of it, to trade on Easter Sunday. Councils create local policies, and then notify MBIE.
Councils representing regions in New Zealand that do not have an RTO
Counsellor, Science and Innovation, China
Counsellor, Science and Innovation, Europe
Counsellor, Science and Innovation, USA and Canada
Countries have implemented a range of measures including bans, levies, taxes, minimum prices, requirements for information on products, procurement, grants and other fiscal incentives. There has also been growing attention and support for circular policy objectives, such as extended producer responsibility, repairability and reuse and recycling of materials.
Country of origin of food
Courses available within the Bachelor of Science at Auckland University of Technology:
Cover briefing asking Ministers to take the attached Cabinet paper to the Cabinet Economic Development Committee.
Cover letter to Doug Martin PDF KB
Coverage for contractors and the selfemployed who lose work
Coverage for employees made redundant or laid off
Coverage for job losses due to redundancy, layoffs and health conditions and disabilities
Coverage for loss of work due to a health condition or disability
Coversheet to Fair Pay Agreements Regulatory Impact Statement PDF KB
Craft markets, farmers markets
Create a new Classification Unit and Levy Risk Group for home improvement stores; modernise the Classification Unit for professional sports and ballet; and create a new Classification Unit for those who do not employ participants.
Created by Ariki Creative, Te Ara Waihiko began in with Rangatahi focused workshops, resource development
Creating beauty from New Zealand: Supporting investment in the emerging natural or biobased cosmetics platform
Creating more adaptive and resilient institutions
Creating safer places: addressing workplace violence in communitybased care and support settings.
Creating strength from New Zealand: Supporting investment in the sports nutrition and weight management platform
Creative Commons Attribution . New Zealand License
Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance (Buy Now, Pay Later) Amendment Regulations
Criminal Cases Review Commission
Criminal Disclosure Act
Criminal Procedure Act
Criminal Procedure Act and Criminal Procedure Rules
Criminalisation of cartels
Criteria to establish a causal relationship
Criteria to establish if the causal connection between the disorder and employment is sufficiently strong to enable automatic acceptance of a claim
Critical Issues in Space Law (LEGAL )
Critical materials, for example through improving product durability and domestic recycling of critical materials, such as plasterboard and those found in electronic devices.
Critical worker occupancy
Crossgovernment functions
Crosssubsidisation to cover motorcycle claims
Crown Entities we monitor
Crown Fibre Holdings (CFH) was formed as a Crownowned company to manage the Governments investment in UFB infrastructure. It completed its initial task of selecting partners to participate in the UFB initiative in . The telecommunications industry has recently sought clarification of CFHs role during the building of the UFB network and setting of network prices.
Crown Infrastructure Partners Limited
Crown Infrastructure Partners is managing the contractual arrangements for RBI. For more information, please visit:
Crown Infrastructure Partners is managing the contractual arrangements for the MBSF.
Crown Infrastructure Partners website
Crown Law Media Protocols for Prosecutors
Crown Minerals Act Amendment Bill introduced
Crown Minerals Act regime
Crown Research Institute Toolkit
Crown Research Institutes
Crown Research Institutes (CRIs) are Crownowned companies that carry out scientific research for the benefit of New Zealand.
Crown Research institutes
Crown entities and statutory boards
Crown entities we monitor
Crown entity partners include:
Crown entity partners play an integral delivery role across these roles. The Labour Science and Enterprise Group facilitates and advises on the settings they need to succeed.
Currency of your invoices
Current and historical minimum wage rates
Current and upcoming funding and investments:
Current building rules, ways to comply and guidance
Current contract expiring
Current endorsed qualifications
Current functions include free mobile and international calling, twoway calling between SpeechtoSpeech service users, and the ability to use both Zoom and Microsoft Teams when booking remote sessions on the Video Interpreting Service.
Current funding and investment opportunities
Current initiatives and resources
Current postal operators in New Zealand, their postal identifiers and contact details.
Current work underway to deliver a regenerative tourism model is aimed at:
Currently funded Research Programmes
Currently funded Smart Ideas
Currently there are TSO providers:
Customers of insolvent businesses
Customs plans to refresh people trafficking training to particularly target border operations and intelligence staff.
Cutting red tape at the start of employment
Cycle Tourism Insights Report
Cycle tourism is a low carbon activity that can help connect visitors to local communities, experience local food, beverage and artisanal products, and create a direct link with the local culture and heritage.
Cycle trail users brought an estimated direct economic contribution to regions of more than million.
Cycle trails good for health, economy
Cyclone Gabrielle and Cyclone Tam highlighted the vulnerability of electricity infrastructure to severe weather events like storms and floods. During Cyclone Gabrielle alone, trees outside the Growth Limit Zone (GLZ a designated area around power lines which trees are not allowed to grow into) caused power outages that left , households without heating, lighting, internet and access to essential appliances.
DECISION: of decision and sentence outcome
DIA to continue rollout of trafficking training for staff processing CBD applications.
DISTRICT COURT AT insert court ) ON: (insert of sentencing) JUDGE: Insert name of sentencing Judge COUNSEL: PROSECUTION : Insert name DEFENDANT: Insert name PLEA: GuiltyNot guilty
DM brings together different stakeholders to achieve the common goal of developing a wellmanaged, sustainable visitor destination. It is an ongoing process that requires destinations to plan for the future and considers the social, economic, cultural and environmental risks and opportunities.
DM involves collaboration across the multiple stakeholders that make up the ecosystem of a destination.
DM plans should focus on activation and critically determine key areas that are realistic and achievable.
DOIAREQ OIA relating to the Tenancy services helplines PDF KB
Daily fuel importer margin series PDF KB
Daily importer margin charts
Daily updates of statistics covering managed isolation and quarantine occupancy, projected occupancy over the next days, total returnees to New Zealand, incident reports and Ministry of Health testing data.
Daily updates up to November
Daiyu is a manager for a local florist. An economic downturn, combined with changing demographics in the area, have led her boss to call time on the business.
Daphne Luke Te Huarahi Tika Trust
Data Insights Intelligence
Data Science Review Board
Data Strategy Knowledge
Data and related resources on the economic impact of COVID
Data collected may include:
Data from funding rounds that used the ANZSRC codes has been mapped to the latest ANZSRC codes using the translations supplied by the ANZSRC working group.
Data from the Business Events Research Programme, gathered via the Business Events Activity Survey and Business Event Delegate Survey.
Data from weekly monitoring of importer margins for regular petrol and automotive diesel
Data is a key priority in the New ZealandAotearoa Government Tourism Strategy.
Data is provided for provided for the period July to April . The report is quarterly.
Data on the number of requests we have received in previous years and the timeliness of our responses are annually by the
Data project requirements
Data science and analytics research
Data tables for coal production in New Zealand
Data tables for electricity production in New Zealand
Data tables for gas production in New Zealand
Data tables for oil production in New Zealand
Data tables for renewable energy resources in New Zealand
Data tables showing greenhouse gas emissions from New Zealands energy sector
Data, information, and digital tools can help track and manage resources more efficiently, supporting the functioning of markets and transparency for consumers.
Data, research and analysis
Datadriven innovation, artificial intelligence, and government procurement were identified as future focus areas.
Dates are subject to change. We will notify all changes by email. Join our mailing list to receive email updates.
Dates for the next funding round have not been finalised.
David Hudson, SGA Solutions
David Perks, GM Regional Development Destination and Attraction, WellingtonNZ
Dawn Aerospace increasing NZ space flight
Dawn Aerospace New Zealand Limited
Dawn Aerospace has a vision of sustainable and scalable space transportation at every step, from getting things to space, moving them around and bringing them back to Earth.
Dawn Aerospace is a NZ registered company pushing the boundaries of space technology and engineering in green satellite propulsion, suborbital launch vehicles and novel orbital launch systems. Read more about their innovation successes in our guest article written by Kiwi Cofounder, James Powell.
Dawn Aerospace is a New Zealand aerospace company with subsidiaries in the United States and the Netherlands.
Dawn Aerospace take on summer interns and work in collaboration with a range of universities to support final year (Honours) and masters students. To find out more email
Deesclation training for MBIE staff PDF .MB
Dear Minister, It is with pleasure that I submit these recommendations for changes to the Holidays Act to you on behalf of the Holidays Act Taskforce. You asked us to have regard to a range of criteria in our review and in particular to attempt to reach c onsensus in our recommendations. I am pleased to say that thanks to the hard work of the Taskforce members and their genuine desire to arrive at solutions that meet the needs of all parties, we have managed to do so. The recommendations in this report are endorsed by all Taskforce members. Throughout the review the Taskforce has been guided by some key principles which have informed our discussions and the decision making process we have followed. These principles are: Certainty the recommendations con tained in this report will provide the certainty that employers and employees require. Employers will know what they need to do to meet their obligations under the Act and employees will know what their entitlements are and when they have or have not recei ved them. Transparency the Taskforces proposals will ensure that employees are fully informed about their leave entitlements so they can see how their entitlements have been delivered and how any leave payments have been calculated . Practicality the Taskforce has been focu sed on ensuring that the proposals it develops can work in the real world. Th roughout the review the Taskforce has tested proposals with anonymised payroll data and with multiple employer and employee scenarios to check that they wi ll be implementable in the many and varied businesses across New Zealand. The proposals in this report will ensure tha t Government, unions, employers and, most importantly , employees, can have confidence that in the millions of instances each year when an employee requests and is granted leave by their employer, their leave bala nce and payment for that leave can and will be correctly calculated. The proposals meet the objectives from the terms of reference, and deliver the much needed clarity around holiday s, and other leave entitlements and pay , that employers and employees have sought for many years. I would like to take this opportunity to thank all those who have participated in the review and who have shared their views throughout the process. I would also like to express my appreciation to the Taskforces Secretariat for the work they did to support the Taskforce. I commend these proposals to you and look forward to the Governments response.
Decarbonising process heat
December Pike River Implementation Final Update
December Update on Horizon Europe Partnerships
Deciding what form of dispute resolution process is needed
Decisions by Ministers are documented in Cabinet papers. We release these papers and their minutes.
Decisions on eligibility for remedies for personal grievances PDF KB
Deed of Amendment to the Deed of Understanding between The Sovereign in right of New Zealand acting by and through the Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications and New Zealand Post Limited () PDF KB
Deed of Amendment to the Deed of Understanding between The Sovereign in right of New Zealand acting by and through the Minister of Broadcasting, Communications and Digital Media and New Zealand Post Limited () PDF KB
Deed of variation: Chorus Limited and Chorus New Zealand PDF KB
Deep space communications
Define terms of reference for leadership group and plan development
Defining standards and conformance
Defining the destination is important when multiple stakeholders with various perspectives are involved. In addition, it fosters a pragmatic approach that can ensure progress and success.
Definition of a just transition for the Future of Work Tripartite Forum PDF KB
Definitions and classifications
Delivering a modern immigration system through the Our Future Services programme PDF .MB
Delivering improvements to the Holidays Act is a priority for the Government.
Delivering services to people and business
Delivery of digital skills training and support focused on enabling smallmedium tourism businesses to benefit from digitising their business.
Dennis Robert Welby ta Jocks post
Department of Conservation
Department of Conservation (DOC)
Department of Conservation concessions waiver
Department of Conservation waiver
Department of Conservation: developing a framework for managing visitor risk from natural hazards in the conservation estate and online guidance around volcanic risk in Tongariro National Park.
Department of Corrections
Department of Internal Affairs
Department of Internal Affairs: will be in future working collaboratively with other agencies regarding future access to WhakaariWhite Island
Department of Internal Affairs;
Department of Mechanical Engineering.
Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
Depending on the design of the system, MBIE may perform all of these functions in a given system, but usually there are a number of agencies involved which deliver different aspects.
Deploying tools such as checklists or other education to help inform staff and managers of their relevant obligations
Deployment under MBSF is expected to increase geographic mobile coverage by , up from .
Deputy Secretaries (Dep Secs)
Description of Activities
Description of goodsservices
Design a satellite mission competition
Design andor manufacture of space equipment and subsystems
Designating banking under the Customer and Product Data Bill
Designating banking under the Customer and Product Data Bill PDF KB
Despite this decline, at ,, new approvals remained just over higher than they were in .
Destination Management (DM) is a key focus of the strategy and will contribute to the following strategy goals:
Destination Management (DM) requires a holistic and integrated approach with three interdependent components:
Destination Management Guidelines
Destination Management Guidelines
Destination Management Plans
Destination Management and planning is the mechanism by which New Zealanders can ensure that tourism in their region reflects their wishes and they have an agreed way to maximise the benefits that tourism brings whilst managing any negative impacts. It helps give greater certainty to the private sector that enables long term investment as well as confidence to the public sector about the facilities and services they need to provide.
Destination Management and why its important
Destination Management brings together different stakeholders to achieve the common goal of developing a wellmanaged, sustainable visitor destination. It is an ongoing process that requires destinations to plan for the future and considers the social, economic, cultural and environmental risks and opportunities.
Destination Management brings together different stakeholders to achieve the common goal of developing a wellmanaged, sustainable visitor destination. It is an ongoing process that requires destinations to plan for their future and considers the social, economic, cultural and environmental risks and opportunities.
Destination Management planning can apply to a macroarea, region, district or specific location. All of these layers are relevant in the context of the destination and stakeholder needs.
Destination Management planning needs to be cognisant of national and regional planning frameworks to reduce the potential for conflicting objectives and unfulfilled goals. Destinations also have a role in influencing the focus of these frameworks.
Destination Management requires a holistic and integrated approach.
Destination Management requires data, research and insights to inform decision making and measure success. This includes understanding your visitors well, how your destination delivers on visitor needs and expectations, as well as measuring how your community feels about visitors and the tourism sector.
Destination Queenstown Events
Destination brand building and improving the visitor experience
Destination management and planning
Destinations focus on attracting both domestic and international visitors, including general holiday visitors, and visitors who may visit family and friends, or be attracted for an event, conference or study opportunity. They target different markets and segments through a range of promotional activities to realise the value for their destination from tourism, given their goals aspirations and the types of experiences that appeal to their selected markets.
Detail on making a submission, how we use the information you share with us, and how we may release information
Detailed development and assessment of options to deliver on the recommendations accepted by the Government at Stage
Detailed policy design work was completed
Detailed secondtier design parameters for an income threshold.
Details around establishing PROs
Details of the bi yearly ANZSRC review
Details the final changes to the MBIE Intelligence Realignment.
Details the final decision to the changes and implementation approach required as a result of the Governments decision to cease funding to, and disestablish, the Consumer Advocacy Council.
Details the final decisions across the Business and Consumer realignment.
Develop a lifecoursederived approach to help reduce persistent disadvantage in the labour market.
Develop a new Civil Aviation Rule for experimental or developmental aircraft and systems operations to allow rapid iteration and testing of advanced aviation vehicles and technologies.
Develop a sustainable funding model for Regional Development investments including the operation of Crown Regional Holdings Limited.
Develop education and public engagement initiatives to maximise the inspiration value of a national space mission.
Develop tools to support the provision of inworktraining, and improve investment in trainingrelated active labour market programmes. (MBIEMSD)
Developing a Destination Management plan
Developing a Safety Case
Developing a Safety Case Planning for the safety case Applicants should ensure that the safety case is presented as a robust argument (not as a summary of the safety management system). The safety case must: be owned by the leadership;
Developing a new dispute resolution scheme
Developing algorithms which predict human behaviour or automate decisionmaking impacting humans e.g. Artificial intelligence
Developing the Fair Pay Agreements policy and background information
Development and piloting of new training on child victim interviewing.
Development of Financial Market Conduct Act regulations
Development of a National Referral Mechanism (NRM) is being considered by Ministers. This will be a significant project with benefits for victim identification, support and the connection between government and nongovernment organisations.
Development of initial regulations
Development of the Financial Markets Conduct Act
Development of the Gene Technology Bill
Diagram of Proposed RSE system PDF KB
Diagram: The Work Health and Safety Regulatory System
Differences between the previous and new versions (also on Aria):
Different parts of our Ministry also have social media accounts that provide information about specific subject areas. Follow us for information and updates.
Different types of flexible working
Digital Boost training videos support small businesses to learn and adopt digital ways of working. There are a range of videos, from industry specific to real world stories from small businesses across Aotearoa, sharing their digital experience.
Digital Compliance for LowRisk Plumbing and Drainlaying Work Pilot Evaluation Findings
Digital Economy and Communications
Digital Solutions Delivery
Digital Strategy for Aotearoa
Digital Technologies Industry Transformation Plan
Digital Technologies Industry Transformation Plan (web version)
Digital Twins: Demonstration workshop report DOCX MB
Digital Twins: Demonstration workshop report PDF .MB
Digital connectivity programmes
Digital technologies, digital twins
Digital technologies, digital twins and the circular and bioeconomy
Digital technologies: Digital twins and the circular and bioeconomy DOCX .MB
Digital technologies: Digital twins and the circular and bioeconomy PDF .MB
Digital twins are not yet being developed in a way to realise their full potential in New Zealand. A lack of data literacy is reducing the effective exchange and use of data. Limits in collaboration across industry and data standardisation mean digital twins are being developed without optimal interoperability.
Digital twins have important potential to support circular or sustainability objectives. They can help track materials in the value chain, facilitate predictive maintenance of machines, and fill gaps in information about product composition and availability to enable markets to function well for product reuse or recycling.
Digital twins in healthcare: a collaboration between New Zealand and Europe
Director, Edgar Diabetes and Obesity Research Centre and Head of Department (Medicine), University of Otago
Directors and senior management of BNPL lenders will be required to be certified by the Commerce Commission to be fit and proper persons for their respective positions.
Directors and senior management will be subject to due diligence duties.
Directors: Jignasha Patel, Nagaja Tharanginee Sanatkumar, John Gilbert Sproat, Rodger John Finlay (Chair), Carol Anne Campbell, Richie James Smith
Directors: Nelson Siva, Peter Beavis, Michael Smith, John McMahon
Directory of Official Information
Disagreement with an assessment or decision about your tax or child support
Disclaimer This document is not intended to be read as prescriptive requirements for the production of a safety case. This document is a guideline only and should not be used as a substitute for legislation or independent expert advice. Where this document is inconsistent with the Act andor relevant Outer Space or High altitude regulations, the Act and those regulations prevail. There may be factors taken into account in any application process, transaction or decision that are not covered by these guidelines. Adherence to these guidelines does not guarantee a particular outcome. The New Zealand Space Agency is not responsible for the results of any action taken on the basis of the information in this document, or for any errors or omissions. The New Zealand Space Agency may vary this document at any time without notice. Photo on inside front cover: River Crossing by Mark Gee Photo on inside back cover: St Clairs Milky Way by David Willing MBIE
Disclose The Disclose register was established by the Financial Markets Conduct Act (FMC Act) and provides for the registration and ongoing reporting obligations relating to offers of financial products and managed investment schemes. Its functions relate to managed investment schemes, other investment offers and financial statement filing. All fees are proposed to increase, reflecting planned investment in the Disclose register over the next two years to upgrade this register and reduced forecast volumes. The current fees were set in and were based on the estimated cost and volumes over a seven year period, which included one off volumes of schemes being re registered. Though the cost of the register has remained relatively stable, current annual volum es have declined which has resulted in an increased unit cost. The proposed fees are based on the unit cost for each service which has been calculated from the average time it takes staff to complete the various services within the register. The unit costs in Table on the next page are then derived from the cost of service divided by the forecast volumes. The most significant proposed increase is for the lodgment of Product Disclosure Statements (PDS). This increase is due to the additional time now taken to process the requested updates to existing products on the register and various compliance obligations throughout the year. Description of service Current fee (GST exclusive ) Reason for revoking Verification statement by post . Service no longer provided. Certified copy of finance statement . Service no longer provided. This fee was similarly revoked in for the Companies register. Table : Proposed fees for Disclose register services (excluding GST) Disclose register Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee) Change in charge change Disclose: Managed fund offers Lodgement of product disclosure statementlimited disclosure statement (per fund) . . . . . Add new fund to existing managed fund offer . . . . . Annual confirmation to managed fund (per fund) . . . . . Disclose: Other financial products Lodgement of product disclosure statementlimited disclosure statement (per PDS) ,. , . , . ,. ,. Add new PDS to existing offer for other financial product ,. , . , . ,. ,. Annual confirmation other financial products (per PDS) ,. , . , . ,. ,. Disclose: Managed investment schemes Register managed investment scheme ,. , . , . . . File scheme annual report . . . . . Disclose: overseas offers Offer under Asia region funds passport (per fund) . . . . .
Disclosure of Chief Executive expenses Carolyn Tremain: July to June
Disclosure of Chief Executive expenses: January to June
Disclosure of Chief Executive expenses: July to December
Disclosure of Chief Executive expenses: July to June
Disclosure of information
Disclosure of origin requirements in the patents regime
Disclosure regulations and thirdparty fundraisers consultation
Disclosure regulations would require thirdparty fundraisers to disclose prescribed information about their fundraising activities when asking for donations.
Discount forecast tracking
Discourage frivolous and excessive litigation, and
Discuss If you agree to option above: Agree that those eligible for sick leave after three months are entitled to six days at that time and then a further four days (i.e. the full entitlement) after six months and that those eligible after six months would receive their full entitlement of days at that time (aligned with the current six month timeframe). Agree Discuss Note that the accumulation profile may need to change if further amendments are made to sick leave entitlements e.g. pro rata for parttime workers. Noted Part : Payment methodology consolidation There are several issues with the current payment methodology for FBAPS leave . Under the Holidays Act (the Act), payment for FBAPS leave is an employees relevant daily pay (RDP) but, if it is not possible or practicable to work out RDP or an employees daily pay varies in the pay period in question average daily pay (ADP) may be used instead. . During the issue identification phase of the Holidays Act Review , several issues and concerns with the RDP and ADP definitions were raised. These included that: determining RDP relies on an employers judgement about whether an employee would have received commission or incentive and overtime payments on a specific day had they not been on leave and what the value of those would have been . there are situations were either RDP or ADP could be used (for example where it is possible and practicable to determine RDP, but an employees daily pay varies within the pay period in which the holiday or leave falls) and in these cases employers are required to a make a judgement about which calculation to use each time leave is taken, creating high compliance costs. employers can game the rules by paying the lower of the ADPRDP when either could be used (employer gaming) .
Discussion Document Review of New Zealand Companies Office Fees and Levies ( )
Discussion Document: Review of the Engine Fuel Specifications Regulations
Discussion document for public consultation on proposed fees and levies, and their amounts, administered by the New Zealand Companies Office.
Discussion document released for public consultation
Discussion document: Commerce Commission levy for the economic regulation of water services
Discussion document: Enhancing telecommunications regulatory and funding frameworks
Discussion document: Moving towards a financially sustainable mail service
Discussion document: NZ Income Insurance Scheme summary
Discussion document: Regulations for soliciting on behalf of charities
Discussion document: Review of New Zealand Companies Office Fees and Levies ()
Discussion document: Seeking feedback on the proposed additions to Schedule of the Accident Compensation Act
Discussion document: Ticket reselling in New Zealand
Discussion paper: Growth and Dynamics of the New Zealand Screen Industry
Diseases will be excluded if evidence of the causal connection between the disorder and employment is not sufficiently strong to allow a connection to work to be automatically accepted.
Displaying all upcoming events
Dispute resolution following natural disasters ()
Dispute resolution following natural disasters PDF .MB
Dispute resolution in New Zealand
Dispute resolution practitioners
Dispute resolution processes
Dispute resolution refers to all processes that are used to address disputes. It includes all dispute resolution methods and approaches from early resolution through to formal tribunal or court processes.
Dispute resolution research and insights
Dispute resolution resources
Dispute resolution scheme
Disputes about decisions made by ACC
Disputes about energy, water and broadband shared property access
Disputes about vehicles purchased from registered traders
Disputes are damaging, expensive, and time consuming. They affect individuals, communities, organisations, government, and the economy. Preventing disputes, and resolving disputes earlier and more effectively, benefits Aotearoa New Zealand and the economy.
Disputes between consumers and banking service providers
Disputes between consumers and financial service providers
Disqualify people convicted of migrant exploitation and people trafficking from managing or directing a company.
Distance is sparking innovation at Otago University and the German Aerospace Centre (DLR), where researchers are collaborating across oceans to advance communications in space.
Distinguished Professor Margaret Brimble, University of Auckland
Diversity Data Dashboard Science System Investment and Performance
Diversity In MBIE Science Investments
Diversity in Science Statement
Diversity in Science statement
Diversity in public service employment
Diversity is vital for our science system to realise its full potential.
Diversity is vital for our science system to realise its full potential. A focus on diversity ensures we capture the very best ideas and talent to support the highest quality research.
Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Plan
Do Something New, New Zealand ft. Madeline Sami and Jackie van Beek
Do you dream of going to space
Do you dream of going to space In Haritina Mogosanu applied to be an astronaut at the European Space Agency (ESA).
Do you have access to people with the skills and capability you need
Do you want to build and assemble rockets or satellites
Do you want to build rocket engine components, or work with machines like D printers or computercontrolled mills or lathes to make parts of rocket engines, or test rocket engines on the ground
Do you want to design or build the avionics systems that guide, navigate and control rockets and spaceplanes and satellites
Do you want to design or build the electrical systems that power rockets, spaceplanes and satellites
Do you want to design rocket bodies or spaceplane structures, and analyse and design the way they will fly into space
Do you want to design rocket engines or satellite thrusters, or analyse and improve enginesthrusters using computer systems or test facilities
Do you want to study data from rocket or spaceplane launchesflights and analyse or design systems and software that make better, faster, or safer space rockets or spaceplanes
Documentation issued for the funding opportunity will contain
Documentation relating to the freedom camping law reforms
Documents on the House of Representatives website
Documents relating to MBIEs use of security guards part of PDF .MB
Documents relating to MBIEs use of security guards part of PDF .MB
Documents relating to MBIEs use of security guards part of PDF .MB
Documents relating to changes to eligibility to remedies for personal grievances
Documents relating to introducing an income threshold for unjustified dismissal personal grievances
Documents relating to pay deductions for partial strikes
Documents relating to providing greater certainty for contracting parties
Documents relating to the Acts development
Documents relating to the Tourism Recovery Package
Documents relating to the development of the Equal Pay Amendment Act
Documents released to SCC inquiry
Does not provide flexibility for employers to continue the common practice. Employees who are offered and choose to transfer employment do not lose leave entitlements and do not have to wait to become entitled to time off work.
Does not provide the choice between payment and time that option four does as transfer of entitlement is part of the choice to transfer employment. . Legislative change that ov errides the Holidays Act provisions and requires employers to offer employees the choice to transfer all or part of thei r leave entitlements if they negotiate for the employee to be offered the choice to transfer employment and the employee chooses to do so. Requires a minor adjustmentclarification to the current Cabinet decision, but it would be difficult to draft a legislative amendment to achieve this (most aligned with taskforce recommendations) . Legislation provides clarity, but would introduce greater complexity framework than option three. As above.
Doing what we say we will do, when we say we will do it.
Domestic Tourism International Benchmarking Study PDF MB
Domestic Violence Victims Protection Act
Domestic demand and investment alone will not be sufficient to support our space and advanced aviation sectors to double in size. Increasing international trade and investment in New Zealand companies will be critical for sector growth.
Domestic tourism was able to keep many businesses alive during the closure of the international borders and reminded New Zealanders about the importance of tourism to the economy, encouraging kiwis to explore and try new experiences. This reminder will continue to be valuable as we welcome international visitors back to New Zealand.
Donnell Alexander, New Zealand Food and Grocery Council
Download a copy of our standard terms of purchase:
Download full monitoring and reporting dashboards
Download guidance for local authorities:
Download the PDF version here:
Download the PDF version:
Download the Pacific Migrant Trends and Settlement Outcomes full report .
Download the Sectors data base
Download the data used to produce the charts on this page.
Download the factsheet about the Screen Industry Workers Act below.
Download the full reports
Download the latest quarterly report
Download the latest spreadsheet showing our forecast discounts and actual discounts for petrol and diesel.
Download the maturity assessment tool
Download the most recent datasets and associated data dictionaries here:
Download the screen sector data
Dr Bruce Thorrold Laura Kearney, DairyNZ
Dr Domigan is a Senior Lecturer at the Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering at the University of Auckland. She received both her BSc (Hons) (), and PhD in Biochemistry () from the University of Canterbury and was a Postdoctoral Fellow in the Department of Biomedical Engineering at Tufts University (Massachusetts, USA).
Dr Maia Brewerton, Health New Zealand and Malaghan Institute of Medical Research
Dr Nikki Freed, Daisy Lab
Dr Paul Gardner, University of Otago
Dr Rachel Perret, Malaghan Institute of Medical Research
Dr Regina Eisert is our Germany Science and Innovation Coordinator. She is responsible for establishing and strengthening bilateral collaboration in a wide range of mutually beneficial research fields.
Dr Rod Badcock, Robinson Research Institute, Victoria University of Wellington
Dr Wedderburn is the Emeritus International Ambassador at AgResearch. Before this she was the Assistant Research Director responsible for international collaborations, adoption and practice change.
Draft Digital Technologies Industry Transformation Plan
Draft Longterm Insights Briefing on the future of business for Aotearoa New Zealand
Draft critical minerals list released for consultation
Drafting of legislation to implement the Taskforce recommendations and refinements began before the General Election but a Bill was not introduced.
Drafting, introduction and passage of Bill (if any)
Draws on local as well as international talent, and has strong connections with the global space economy.
Du Val statutory management
Due to Covid travel restrictions this partnership was established solely online without meeting in facetoface situations, what were some of the challenges and opportunities you came across
Due to the experimental nature of this product, it should be used with caution. While care and diligence have been used in developing the data for this product, we cannot warranty it is errorfree and will not be liable for any loss or damage suffered by the use, directly or indirectly, of it.
Duplication of other data initiatives, most notably TDLG recommended initiatives identified in the roadmap in the strategic business plan
During rounds of funding, applications were awarded a total of ,, by the Regional Midsized Tourism Facilities Grant Fund.
During Round and of the fund projects received funding.
During a screen share session, we are viewing your computer screen, so you should ensure that anything private or confidential is not visible on your screen
During his internship Axl will work with the Jet Propulsion Laboratory team that is using Delta Differential Oneway Ranging technique to determine spacecraft position. This is directly applicable to the work he will be doing at the Warkworth Space Centre when it begins supporting deep space missions later this year.
During the policy design process MBIEs stakeholder working group raised concerns about the extent and cost of the payroll system changes that would be needed to implement the calendar methodology, as payrol l systems would be required to access and store data about daily hours of work and leave. Payroll providers indicated that most payroll systems, particularly those used by small businesses, are currently only configured to store total hours for a pay perio d rather than a breakdown of daily hours of work and leave . For many businesses implementation would require integration of time and attendance and payroll systems. Remove the calendar day aspect of the methodologies for determining the hours an employe e would have worked on a day of AL and other leave types , and replace them with formulas that use an average of an employees hours of work (including paid and unpaid leave) across all days worked in the pay periods that started in the weeks before the one in which the leave is taken.
During the policy review process, input on the RSE scheme was sought from RSE workers via a survey and inperson group consultation sessions. Input from a series of prior consultation sessions on the development of the Ola Manuia Pacific RSE Health and Wellbeing Framework was also used to support the recommendations of the policy review.
During the transition period, Crown Research Institutes will continue to deliver the science that is needed by their customers and New Zealand.
Duties, taxes and direct levies on motor fuels in New Zealand
Ecommerce means online trading, that is, buying and selling goods and services over electronic networks. Although ecommerce refers to all electronic transactions over any electronic network, today we tend to think of it as transactions carried out on the internet.
ENSURING A SAFE, RESPONSIBLE AND SECURE SPACE INDUSTRY
ENZ ethical and sustainable work practices resources have been completed for directors and investors.
ENZ provides a suite of learning modules for employees and employers, which are publicly available, and regularly . The modules cover issues such as employment rights, pay and wages, hours of work and resolving problems (directed at either the employee or the employer).
ENZcommissioned migrant exploitation research (led by Kantar Public) on migrant workers and employers of migrant workers was released in September . The research results will inform how to best deliver information to migrant workers and their employers.
ERA , come into force two months after the the Bill receives
ETSP scheme terms and conditions.
EU Funding Tenders Portal
EU reporting and disclosure measures that will have implications for some products placed on the market in the EU, including for product compliance, recyclability, or recycled content requirements, labelling and ecodesign requirements, and traceability and product data.
EURAXESS Australia and New Zealand
Each General Manager is required to develop a Compliance, Monitoring and Assurance Plan for their functional area to ensure robust consideration of information gathering requirements. They are also required to make regular reports to the MBIE Information Gathering Policy Owner.
Each PDF only contains one invoice.
Each department will explore a different topic, but all are futurefocused think pieces that enhance awareness and spark public debate on longterm issues.
Each email only contains one PDF, and
Each highaltitude licence has been approved by the Minister for Space, on advice from officials.
Each member economy, through its MBIE representative on the APEC Policy Partnership for Science, Technology and Innovation (PPSTI), is invited to nominate young scientist under the age of to be considered for the ASPIRE Prize.
Each of the RSLGs produced RWPs in , refreshed them in , and established LIRs.
Each quarter, a Quarterly Connectivity Update is reporting on the progress of the governments broadband and mobile programmes.
Each report is available for download below.
Each year we will track progress of some key labour market indicators. These indicators will provide a temperature check on how the labour market is performing and may identify where further work is required. The indicators have been identified because they measure longterm trends and support ongoing monitoring. They are based on data sources currently available. New indicators may be added as robust data sources become available. These indicators should be considered alongside the monitoring dashboards for the employment action plans. These dashboards include more detailed breakdowns of key labour market statistics for the groups of people they are focused on.
Each year, the Minister for Social Development and Employment reports to Cabinet on the progress being made under the Employment Strategy. These reports are at the end of this page.
Earlier in her career, Carolyn worked for Air New Zealand where she was head of the Human Resources and Organisational Change for the Air New Zealand Group.
Early access to KiwiSaver
Earth Materials (GEOL)
Earth observation and Earth science (including airborne science)
Earth sciences, including climate and hazards resilience
Earthquake repairs to Canterbury homes
Earthquakeprone building and seismic risk management review
Earthquakeprone building systems feedback
Earthquakes and natural disasters
East Asia Science and Innovation Area Joint Research Program
East Asia Summit Energy Cooperation Taskforce
Easter Sunday continues to be a day of significance across New Zealand and some people would rather not work on this day.
Easter Trading Laws: Your rights and responsibilities
Economic Benefits of Code Compliant NonStructural Elements in New Buildings.
Economic Context Briefing November PDF KB
Economic Context PDF KB
Economic Development and Tourism
Economic Development: briefing for the incoming minister PDF KB
Economic Impact Analysis of the Development of a Rocket Launch Industry (June )
Economic benefits of the screen industry
Economic growth is key to raising living standards, creating higherpaying jobs, and delivering the vital infrastructure and public services that New Zealanders want and deserve.
Economic impacts of colonisation
Economic regulation of goods or services
Economic regulation policy for water services
Economic trends in the screen sector
Economic trends in the screen sector: Firms employment
Economic trends in the screen sector: Firms and employment
Economic trends in the screen sector: Firms and employment PDF .MB
Education New Zealand is a Crown agent that focuses on growing the economic, social and cultural value New Zealand gains from international education. It works with the international education industry and across other governments to promote the quality of the New Zealand education system and the countrys expertise in providing education and training products offshore.
Education, Development Training
Effective Marketing and Promotion
Effective financial dispute resolution: Summary of discussion paper
Effective marketing can be used to manage the effects of visitors in the area by advocating for responsible visitor behaviour e.g.
Effectiveness of information disclosure regulation for airports
Efficient and easy to navigate regulatory regimes for advanced aviation and space will position New Zealand as a worldleading location for development, testing, launch and flight operations.
Electrical Workers Registration Board
Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Electricial Workers Registration Board
Electricity (Safety) Regulations
Electricity Demand and Generation Scenarios
Electricity cost and price monitoring
Electricity industry regulatory framework
Electricity operators in New Zealand
Electrifying Great Rides: application form DOCX KB
Electrifying the Great Rides
Electronic Travel Authority information PDF KB
Electronic Travel Authority: further policy decisions PDF KB
Electronic Travel Authority: next steps for policy decisions and regulations PDF MB
Electronic alerts and newsletters
Elements of effective governance
Eligibility and cofunding criteria
Eligibility for the research and development tax incentive
Eligibility selfassessment tool
Eliminate forced labour and people trafficking from supply chains
Eliminate waste and pollution
Elizabeth Heeg, Forest Owners Association
Ellen MacArthur Foundation
Email MBIE about board appointments
Email the Accident Compensation Policy team at MBIE
Email the Food Innovation Network
Embarking on a new DM planning process can be a lengthy exercise requiring a reasonable degree of commitment and resourcing. Stakeholders need to be clear about what they want to achieve and be mindful of the resources, capability and capacity available to develop and implement the plan. Small steps can be taken and built on over time as capacity and resources become available.
Embedding procedures requiring two or more people input before prosecution decisions are made
Embedding this policy in their business groups.
Embedding this policy in their group.
Emeline PaatDahlstrom and Eric Dahlstrom have been working in the space industry for over three decades. As part of a team of passionate space technologists and educators, they have helped create a social enterprise called SpaceBase, focused on space education, entrepreneurship and collaboration.
Emergency Caller Location Information
Emergency Caller Location Information Service
Emergency Management Planning
Emergency Voice Calling Services Code
Emergency calls in New Zealand
Emergency calls in New Zealand are made by calling . A main component of the emergency calling system is the Initial Call Answering Platform (ICAP) for the first answering of calls.
Emerging Technologies Programme
Emerging market and indepth reports
Emerging technologies programme
Emissions savings potential
Employee applies for annual holidays Abbreviations P Portion of a week RDP Relevan t Daily Pay ADP Average Daily Pay OWP Ordinary Weekly Pay AWEm Average weekly earnings over the last months FBAPS Family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays, sick leave Employee applies or is eligible for FBAPS leave Confirm range Agree what constitutes a working week Agree amount of leave being taken as a portion of a week (P) Calculate POWP and PAWEm
Employee groups listed in Schedule A receive additional employment protections in certain restructuring situations, set out in subpart of Part A of the ERA.
Employees cooperate with other agencies including Oranga Tamariki and the New Zealand Police in a way that is in the best interest of the child and aligns with the purposes of the Act and associated legislation and regulation.
Employees earning over the threshold can continue to raise personal grievances on other grounds, for example discrimination, sexual or racial harassment, or union duress.
Employees have days from the end of their employment to raise an unjustified dismissal claim, unless the employer agrees to the personal grievance being raised, or the delay was due to exceptional circumstances.
Employees returning from parental leave will be paid according to the normal rules for annual holidays, rather than their pay only being based on their average weekly earnings over the last weeks.
Employees will be able to take annual holidays on a prorata basis in advance of their entitlement.
Employers and employees can opt back into unjustified dismissal protection, as well as continue to negotiate their own dispute resolution processes
Employers and employees will be able to negotiate the terms and conditions of individual employee agreements at the start of employment which can differ from the collective employment agreement.
Employers can adopt a range of approaches to meet their legal obligations that best suit their circumstances. Employees may or may or not have entitlement transferred. And may or may not have the option whether to have entitlements recognised or paid out.
Employers must notify employees of this right in writing between and weeks before Easter Sunday. Failure to provide proper notice means employees cannot be compelled to work on that day.
Employers will also incur implementation costs . The implementation of the Taskforce recommendations will necessitate significant changes to every payroll system used by New Zealand employers, and there will be multiple steps in the end toend implementation process. These system changes will incur costs to employers and there may also be additional costs associated with accessing the specialist payroll skills and expertise that may be required.
Employers will be required to respond to written requests from unions for information on how specified pay deductions are calculated.
Employers will incur costs due to increased access to leave entitlements and new payment methodologies . The R egulatory Impact Statement estimated that the total additional cost to employers of adopting the Taskforces recommendations, due to the increa sed access to leave entitlements and the use of new leave payment methodologies (refer to Annex One), could be up to . million per year (with a corresponding benefit for employees).
Employers will provide a fourweek payment for redundancies and layoffs, to discourage unnecessary redundancies and provide extra assurance that the scheme is only used by those who should be eligible, lowering costs to other employers. What do you think about this payment Are there other ways to promote integrity
Employers will still need to inform an employee:
Employment Agreement Builder
Employment Court Regulations
Employment NZ (ENZ) completed initial interviews with employers of migrant workers as part of research to improve communication channels.
Employment NZ completed initial interviews with employers of migrant workers as part of research to improve communication channels.
Employment New Zealand website
Employment Relations (Extending Part A Protections to Security Officers) Order PDF KB
Employment Relations (Flexible Working Arrangements) Amendment Act
Employment Relations Act
Employment Relations Act amendments
Employment Relations Amendment Act
Employment Relations Authority
Employment Relations and Employment Standards charter
Employment Standards Legislation Act
Employment Strategy: October Report Back
Employment Strategy: SixMonthly Report Back
Employment legislation reviews
Employment makes an important contribution to wellbeing.
Employment relations and standards
Employment relations and standards regulatory system
Employment standards are requirements such as the minimum wage, annual holidays and written employment agreements. They protect vulnerable workers and help to ensure workplaces are fair and competitive.
Employment, Skills and Immigration Policy
Enable Networks Limited Fibre Deed
Enable equitable sharing of benefits across employers, workers and communities
Enable lines owners to assess the likelihood and potential impact of a fall for trees they consider could be a risk to lines, then issue a Treefall Hazard Notice for moderate and highrisk trees.
Enabling KiwiSaver investment in private assets summary of discussion document
Enabling a futurefocused regulatory regime
Enabling investment in offshore renewable energy discussion document
Enabling space business environment
Encourage other government agencies to deliver people trafficking training to relevant staff.
Encouraging changes in industrial energy use.
Endorses new and major changes to this policy
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority
Energy Minister Simon Watts has announced a second round of changes to the Electricity (Hazards from Trees) Regulations to better protect power lines from falling trees.
Energy and Resource Markets news
Energy and Resource Markets work programmes
Energy and natural resources
Energy and natural resources statistics and modelling
Energy consultations and reviews
Energy efficiency in New Zealand
Energy generation and markets
Energy hardship expert panel and reference group
Energy hardship research reports
Energy markets regulatory system
Energy portfolio weekly reports
Energy strategies for New Zealand
Enforce immigration and employment law to deter employer noncompliance through a fitforpurpose offence and penalty regime.
Engage with us on social media
Engagement and Experience
Engineering Associates Registration Board
English: Ask for an interpreter JPG, KB
English: Government interpreting services
Enhance international prevention responses through regional cooperation
Enhancing support for displaced workers over the medium term PDF KB
Enhancing telecommunications regulatory and funding frameworks
Enrich Aotearoa New Zealand through sustainable tourism growth
Ensure compliance frameworks are robust, fitforpurpose and adequately resourced.
Ensure government is well positioned to use aerospaceenabled data through capability building and improve access to datasets to support the delivery of public services like disaster response and recovery.
Ensure immigration settings, including for the Green List and Skilled Migrant Category are appropriately targeted to address skill gaps and prioritise skilled migrants.
Ensure new and existing staff in their teams are made aware of and comply with the policy
Ensure students and workers have access to career resources, information and support to make informed decisions.
Ensure the welfare system is focussed on effectively supporting people who can work into jobs. (MSD)
Ensure your agency has signed the new Panel contract by March .
Ensures awareness of this policy across MBIE
Ensures the policy is reviewed and by the agreed review
Ensuring MBIE complies with the Employment Relations Act Parts AA and AB and the Health and Safety at Work Act in relation to flexible working
Ensuring employees are given appropriate information and training to assist them to comply with their obligations under this policy
Ensuring that people crossing the border and staying in New Zealand are entitled to do so.
Ensuring the electricity market is delivering fair and affordable prices.
Ensuring their business group complies with the Employment Relations Act Parts AA and AB and the Health and Safety at Work Act in relation to flexible working.
Ensuring their business groups are compliant with this policy and associated procedures
Ensuring their group is compliant with this policy.
Ensuring their team complies with the Employment Relations Act Parts AA and AB and the Health and Safety at Work Act in relation to flexible working.
Ensuring they carry out work in accordance with the agreed arrangements made with their people leader.
Entanglement swapping is the process by which one particle in the photon pair becomes entangled with a third particle. This new photon particle subsequently becomes entangled with the first particle without any direct interaction.
Enterprise Risk, Strategy and Transformation
Entity Performance and Investment
Environmental Chemistry (ENVS)
Environmental impacts of space vehicle launches
Environmental management work
Environmental stewardship
Envisory (formerly known as Hale Twomey).
Equal Pay Act: Improvements to pay equity legislation
Equal Pay Amendment Bill: Outstanding Issues and Approval for Introduction
Equitable Transitions Strategy
Equity, Diversity and Inclusion Capability Fund
Essential Skills visa approvals from the Pacific made up of Pacific temporary workers.
Essential oil production can be part of a wider circular system. In this example, this is an example of how the essential oil goes into the circular economy. Obviously we can get high yields, we can use regenerative practices, and then through sustainable design with low packaging per kilo, we can use modern plant and equipment, especially easier at the beginning of a process, we can have potential for alternative energy sources, we can have reverse supply chain and we can convert used waste into alternative sources of energy ie the idea being that everything goes back in and stays within the system to and can be used again.
Essential oils are a critical core middle step to a wide range of platforms in the bioeconomy. What we did here for each of the platforms we looked at what are the main production system that can feed into it, what is the biomass handling, say the primary and sometimes the secondary processing system ie in this case the essential oil extraction and then what does that then enable and what does it feed into, like a wide range of other sectors, like Tim said before, no product is an island on its own, it feeds into multiple other products.
Essential oils are in line with the desired direction for the bioeconomy. We are looking at these are the same indicators we looked at earlier, for each of them we reviewed, for example, the increasing valueadd. They are obviously a highvalue output. They are an ingredient with highvalue products that are being given to other highvalue products. It is a winwin here.
Essentially this platform scales up potential oil production from a local biomass to a supplierwide range of further processes. This is just an example of what we did for all of the platforms. We did the situation, the complication, and the resolution.
Essentially with this one each of them has a slightly different format because they are a different industrydifferent product. With this one it was essentially what are they, a definition around what it is, what do we have as a resource to contribute to marine bioactives Then we looked at specifically at our largest resources which is mussels, then fish oil, marine collagen, which is a growing area for New Zealand. Then we looked at the smaller and more emerging marine bioactives. We then looked at strategic themes across these bioactives. We then applied circular framework to it in terms of the circular economy and then at the end we looked at what is the situation in New Zealand. What is happening with growth etc Then who are firms, who is investing, who is doing what and then just itemising at the back and profiling each of the selected firms that are in the industry.
Establish a Regional Infrastructure Fund with . billion in capital funding over the Parliamentary term.
Establish a national mission through the development, manufacture, launch and operation of one or more sovereign satellites and application of the data collected to meet a government need, such as supporting our maritime domain awareness and broader space domain awareness.
Establish and support a University Advisory Group to provide advice on the challenges and opportunities in the university system. (MOETEC)
Establish leadership group
Establish three new immigration infringement offences targeting noncompliant employer behaviour.
Established in , HRDWG focuses on
Established in , the New Zealand Screen Production Rebate (NZSPR) supports the screen sector by encouraging international and domestic production activity.
Establishes and maintains the Litigation Register
Establishing the Taskforce
Estimated discounts since
Estimated health benefits of million resulting from trail use for cycling, such as improved sense of wellbeing and mental health; an increased appreciation of the natural environment; and physical fitness improvements.
Estimated revenue
Estimated space revenue across subsectors from .
Estimating Labour Market Activity post COVID
Estimating the Risk to Life Safety during Earthquakes from NonStructural Elements in Commercial Buildings in New Zealand
Ethical and sustainable work practice due diligence
Ethical and sustainable work practices
Ethnicity data was collected based on the Statistics New Zealand Level Classifications for ethnicity.
European Commission guidance
Evaluating the New Zealand Screen Production Grant
Evaluation of changes to the Residential Tenancies Act
Evaluation of the consumer law reforms
Evaluation of the Building Consent System
Evaluation of the New Zealand Cycle Trails
Evaluation of the Temporary Migration Worker Exploitation Review will commence.
Evaluation of the Welcoming Communities Pilot Programme Final report PDF, . MB
Evaluation of the Welcoming Communities Pilot Programme Summary report PDF, KB
Eve Pleydell, Horticulture New Zealand
Even though this Temporary Migrant Worker Exploitation Review focuses on temporary migrant workers, including international students, many of the proposals to reduce their exploitation could benefit everyone in work, including New Zealand permanent residents and citizens.
Event organisers are not eligible to apply directly to the fund and should engage with their local RTO or council. The decision to apply for REPF funding will be made by the RTO or Council.
Events Transition Support Payment scheme (ETSP)
Events are an important part of the New Zealand domestic tourism landscape. Tourism New Zealand research indicates that up to of domestic travel is primarily driven by people looking to participate in events.
Events can be either new or established, recurring events (the event must be able to measure return on investment where possible)
Events must be ticketedpaid or registration events
Events must not occur in the period December to January.
Events should, where possible, align with the Destination Management plan for the region.
Events that take place in the New Year summer period ( December to January).
Events the fund will not support
Events which are also receiving (within this Round funding period) other central government funding including:
Events which occur in gateway regions administered by the following RTOs:
Every individual operator, director and chief executive of a postal operator must complete a Declaration by Individuals, Directors and Chief Executives form (PO):
Every person wishing to gain a NAATI credential will need to have completed prerequisite training or a qualification. These are detailed on the NAATI website.
Every role should be suitable for some form of flexibility but not every type of flexibility will work for every role. Genuine business reasons may mean that some types of flexibility cannot be implemented for some roles.
Every year, more than , New Zealanders are made redundant, laid off, or have to stop working because of a health condition or disability.
Everyone should be able to participate in meaningful and fulfilling work irrespective of their ethnicity, gender, age, sexual orientation, health conditions, disabilities or any other personal characteristics. We acknowledge that some groups need additional support to achieve better employment outcomes. This requires systemwide change as well as within individual workplaces to be inclusive, embrace diversity and be free from discrimination and bias. We need to work together to address longstanding disadvantage, stereotypes and prejudices.
Everyone, irrespective of their needs, should have the opportunity to resolve disputes. This means dispute resolution schemes should be accessible, visible, and affordable for all people who may need to use them.
Everything we do at MBIE is about growing Aotearoa New Zealand for all. We recognise that a strong economy is one in which we use the skills, knowledge and time of our people in conjunction with our natural resources, and financial and physical capital to improve the wellbeing of current and future generations.
Evolution Networks Limited
Examination of current state of earthquakeprone building system, including costbenefit analysis
Examines evidence about the effectiveness of policies aimed at enhancing the resilience of economic systems.
Examines trends in temporary and permanent migration to and from New Zealand
Examines which analytical tools are suited to transformative change (forwardlooking and transformative policies aimed at addressing challenges like climate change and involving changes to the structure of the economy).
Examining layers of history to protect lakes in Aotearoa New Zealand
Example International obligations and payload permitting processes
Examples include Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) in the EU, Deposit Return Schemes (DRS) in Norway, South Australia and South Africa, and collection standards enacted in Belgium and Spain.
Examples include an inconsistent use of qualified practitioners, gaps in language assistance services availability outside business hours, and funding issues in relation to government contracted services.
Examples of TDPF grant cofunding
Examples of relevant international obligations commonly considered for payload permitting decisions
Excellent Science: Supports frontier research projects, fellowships, and exchanges for researchers.
Exceptions copyright of third parties
Exchange of letters between Telecom and the Crown
Exclusive Economic Zone and Continental Shelf (Environmental Effects) Act
Executive report of the Independent Taskforce on Workplace Health Safety He Korowai Whakaruruhau PDF .MB
Existing blue warrants will expire for private vehicles on June .
Expand the applicability of the telecommunications regulatory regime to offshore providers
Expanding the circumstances under which WorkSafe can refuse, suspend, cancel or add conditions to operator registrations, where serious safety concerns arise.
Expenses, gifts and hospitality expended by the Chief Executive.
Experience Rating Framework
Experience Rating threshold for Medical Fees and Treatment Costs
Experience and product development (Attractions)
Explaining the differences between the costs in the Cabinet paper and the final figures
Explaining where people are in the process.
Explanation of puzzle graphic
Explore innovative ways for the government to apply aerospace technologies to address scientific, societal and national security challenges.
Explore the data and compare the GDPs of different territorial authorities and industries in New Zealand
Explore the provision of external regulatory advice to support efficient regulatory decision making by the New Zealand Space Agency and the Civil Aviation Authority for space and advanced aviation activities respectively.
Exposure draft of Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance (Buy Now Pay Later) Amendment Regulations
Exposure draft of Health and Safety at Work (Adventure Activities) Amendment Regulations
Expression of Interest Form for NZCT Fund.
Extending Paid Parental Leave to weeks Cabinet Paper
Extending paid parental leave
Extension of earthquakeprone building remediation deadlines
External review into how the noninterference provisions of the Crown Minerals Act are effected
External security consultants
Extract from MBIE Workplace Relations and Safety Policy weekly report for the period from to September PDF KB
Extract from BRIEFINGREQ: MBIE Workplace Relations and Safety Policy weekly report for the period from January to January PDF KB
Extreme Event application form
Extreme Weather Recovery Advice Fund
Extreme Weather Research Database
Extreme event recovery works on Great Rides to reopen and repair sections of trail that have been damaged by extreme events such as storm damage, fire, flooding or single event vandalism.
Extreme weather recovery efforts to benefit from Tourism Infrastructure Fund
Extreme weather science response
FBAPS leave: A collective term for Family violence leave, Bereavement leave, Alternative holidays, Public holidays and Sick leave.
Face to Face Interpreting
Face to Face Interpreting Service
Face to face interpreting service
Face to face interpreting service providers for NZSL listed by location.
Face to face interpreting service providers for community languages listed by location.
Face to face interpreting services listed by language group.
Facebook Community Standards
Facebook Statement of Rights and Responsibilities
Facilitate connections between schools, employers, and tertiary education organisations to ensure students are better prepared for employment andor further education and training.
Fact sheets to help you learn what these changes mean for you, as well as more information about the building law reforms are available on
Failure to comply with this policy may be considered a breach of the Code of Conduct.
Fair Pay Agreement Working Group
Fair Pay Agreement Working Group Report PDF MB
Fair Pay Agreement discussion paper
Fair Pay Agreements Regulatory Impact Statement PDF .MB
Fair Pay Agreements Act
Fair Pay Agreements Act Repeal Bill
Fair Pay Agreements Bill: Approval for public interest test criteria details and delegated authority for key FPA regulations PDF KB
Fair Pay Agreements Regulations
Fair Pay Agreements legislation
Fair Pay Agreements: Approval to draft PDF KB
Fair and accessible public services: Summary report on the use of interpreter services and other language assistance in New Zealand PDF KB
Familial relationships involved, including through adoption
Family dispute resolution
Family violence guidelines
Farsi: Ask for an interpreter JPG, KB
Fast broadband policy and regulation
Faun Watson is completing a PhD in Physics at Victoria University of Wellington, with a research interest in sustainable satellite deorbiting devices.
Features of the incentive
February InterAgency Operations Group completed training with US Department of Justice on trafficking investigations.
Feedback is open from May to June .
Feedback on changes to the Act will be considered alongside other proposed regulatory or legislative amendments. Further amendments may arise from workstreams relating to the statutory review of the Act and policy workstreams from the Space Policy Review.
Feedback report: proposed interpreter transition support package
Feedback, enquiry and complaints form
Feeling safe in a new environment may affect how quickly migrants settle and whether they decide to stay. Overall, most Pacific migrants () reported feeling safe or very safe in New Zealand, similar to the proportion for recent migrants overall (). They were also less likely to report that they were treated unfairly because they were from overseas () compared with recent migrants overall ().
Fewer parent category and skilled migrant category approvals were the main drivers behind a decline in residence approvals
Fibre on electricity lines
Fibre pricequality path and information disclosure
Fibre regulatory framework
Fighting climate change from space: MethaneSAT
Figure : Thirty high potential emerging bioeconomy opportunities for New Zealand . (Index page from Coriolis, ).
Figure : Safety Risk Management
Figure : Screenshot from the digital twin technology workshop demonstrating opportunities for digital twins in the built environment . Source : Digital technologies, digital twins and the circular and bioeconomy
Fiji was the largest source country of Essential Skills migrants from the Pacific.
Final Decision Business and Consumer
Final Decision Business and Consumer PDF KB
Final Decision Consumer Advocacy Council Secretariat
Final Decision Consumer Advocacy Council Secretariat PDF KB
Final Decision Enhancing MBIE Property Services
Final Decision Enhancing MBIE Property Services PDF KB
Final Decision MBIE Foundations for the Future
Final Decision MBIE Foundations for the Future PDF .MB
Final Decision MBIE Intelligence Realignment
Final Decision MBIE Intelligence Realignment PDF KB
Final Government decisions for changes to be made via legislative amendment andor nonregulatory measures.
Final Welcoming Communities Pilot Programme Report
Final fees and levies are set to apply from December unless otherwise stated in the discussion document. You can expect to hear about the final changes to fees and levies before they take effect.
Final report summarising findings and highlevel recommendations drafted and provided to Government
Finance and Expenditure Committee inquiry
Finance, Performance and Assurance
Financial Dispute Resolution Service
Financial Markets Authority
Financial Markets Authority Act
Financial Markets Conduct Act
Financial Markets Conduct Act
Financial Markets Conduct Amendment Bill and Financial Service Providers (Registration and Dispute Resolution) Amendment Bill: Policy Approvals and Approval for introduction PDF KB
Financial Markets Supervisors Act
Financial Records relating to security services PDF .MB
Financial Reporting Act
Financial Service Providers (Registration and Dispute Resolution) Act
Financial Service Providers The Financial Service Providers (FSP) register was established under the Financial Service Providers (Registration and Dispute Resolution) Act . Several legislative changes have been introduced to the FSP register since its introduction in . In March significant changes included the implementation of a new financial advice regime and, before that, introduction of new licen sed services, such as non bank deposit takers and insurers and extending the register to include new financial markets, including registered and licenced services such as peer topeer lending and crowd funding. Table below shows the proposed adjustments to current services paid for services on the FSP register. Table : Proposed fees for Financial Service Providers register services (excluding GST) Financial Service Providers register Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee) Change in charge change Registration . . . . (.) () Annual renewal . . . . Registration and annual renewal fees The additional investment in the register over the past four years has resulted in an increase in the overall cost of the register. This recent work to enhance the register has had a positive flow on effect by creating new system approaches to software dev elopment that could be utilised by other registers administered by the Companies Office. For this reason, that benefit for all Companies Office registers has meant that t he annual return fee for the FSP register can be maintained at the current level of . and the registration fee can be reduced . Incorporated Societies The Incorporated Societies register provides the infrastructure for incorporated societies and the Registrar of Incorporated Societies to meet legislative requirements. The Incorporated Societies Act ( Act) came fully into force on October and will co exist with the Incorporated Societies Act ( Act) until April when the latter is revoked. Societies registered under the Act will not be subject to the new legislation until they reregister under the Act. If an existing society does not reregister during the transition period from October to April , it will cease to be incorporated. In August , Cabinet agreed to set registration and restoration fees under the Act at the same level as those under the Act: Registration fee : .; and Restoration fee : . These fees have now been set in the Incorporated Societies Regulations , which came into force on October , and are intended to cover the period until the new fees and levies are in place . Fees under the Act were last in . Since th en, the overall cost of running the register has increased. This is because electronic functionality of the register has improved, as well as increasing costs related to contact centre support services and services that ensure compliance. The proposals incorporate education and awareness costs forecasted over the next four years related to the introduction of new legislation to ensure existing entities understand their filing obligations under the new Act (see Section : Proposed additional expenditure ). Table below outlines the proposed new fees and levies. Table : Proposed fees for Incorporated Societies register services (excluding GST) Incorporated Societies register Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee) Change in charge change Registration . . . . . (.) () Annual return . . . . . Restoration . . . . . Amalgamation . . . . Conversions to be an incorporated society . . . . . CO., NZBN levy .
Financial Services Complaints Limited
Financial Services Reforms policy approvals Minute of Decision PDF KB
Financial Services Reforms: policy approvals and approval of the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance Amendment Bill for introduction PDF KB
Financial Services Reforms: policy decisions PDF KB
Financial Statement filing Entities that meet certain criteria under the Companies Act , and under the FMC Act are required to file financial statements with the Companies Office. Table on the next page shows the proposed decrease in the financial statement filing fee .
Financial hardship can take a range of forms. Consumers may be unable to make payments on BNPL, with any missed payments adding to the debt they face through late payment fees. It could also mean that consumers who do meet their BNPL payment obligations are not able to afford other expenses (such as a power bill or groceries) because the payment instalment is collected automatically via a debit card or credit card.
Financial markets and advisers
Financial markets charter
Financial markets conduct
Financial markets conduct regulation
Financial markets conduct regulatory system
Financial mentoring organisations, who work to help New Zealanders in financial difficulty, have made MBIE aware that BNPL could be creating financial hardship for some consumers.
Financial support for attendance
Financial support is provided for most jobs losses
Find a provider by language group
Find information about building management in emergencies
Find out about New Zealand trade mark registration and protection on the IPONZ website
Find out about key projects designed to strengthen and build long term sustainability in the tourism sector in Aotearoa New Zealand.
Find out how this will impact you
Find out how todays experts got into their current roles
Find out how you can provide translation or interpreting support to the New Zealand Public Service.
Find out how your space career could take off
Find out if your agency is eligible
Find out more about MethaneSAT:
Find out more about Regulations
Find out more about how we prepare the international tourism forecasts and what they cover.
Find out more about infringement fees and penalties levels:
Find out more about science and innovation research data.
Find out more about the application process, unrecoverable costs, triggers for payment as well as information for suppliers and vendors.
Find out more about the atmospheric science project
Find out more about the services available on the NZ Relay website
Find out more on our Spacerelated Opportunities page
Find out who can assist with document translation.
Find your local Police station
Find your local authority
Finding the right formula for success
Findings from the evaluation of the pilot of strengthened settlement information for the Pacific Access Category (PAC) and Samoan Quota (SQ) ballot winners. The purpose of the evaluation is to understand whether the pilot was successful in helping PAC and SQ migrants prepare for a new life in New Zealand. This will provide a view on how the resources and processes could be improved in the future to better help Pacific migrants plan for life in New Zealand.
Findings from the evaluation of the Welcoming Communities pilot programme. The interim and final evaluation reports cover the development, implementation, early outcomes and lessons learned during the year pilot programme from July to June .
Findings from the evaluation of the Welcoming Communities pilot programme. The interim and final evaluation reports cover the development, implementation, early outcomes and lessons learned during the year pilot programme.
Findings from the evaluation of the pilot are provided in annual evaluation reports. The third report presents the findings from the final year of the evaluation and builds on the findings from the previous two yearly reports.
Findings from the targeted review
Findings from the targeted review were presented to the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety in November . Based on the findings, the Government announced that it planned to make improvements to the regime. MBIE undertook the second phase of work to develop proposals for change in more detail, targeted to areas identified in the review. A public consultation on possible changes to the regime was conducted in .
Findings from this research will contribute to building a picture of Pacific migrant settlement outcomes in New Zealand and challenges faced by these migrants.
Findings of an independent review into the AEWV was released in February .
First, Marine Bioactives from New Zealand.
First, we would like to thank the lead organisation, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment. This project was also supported by Ministry for Primary Industries, Ministry for the Environment and New Zealand Trade and Enterprise. Also, thanks to the businesses, academics, researchers etc that helped us out with this project. We really appreciated it, thank you.
Fiscal measures can be used as a policy tool to encourage behaviour change and reduced resource use. In addition to tax, fiscal measures include levies, minimum prices for materialsproducts, grants or guaranteed returnspayments. Grants are often used to stimulate a desired change in society or the economy, such as the take up of an early stage, beneficial new technology.
Fit for purpose consumer credit legislation highcost credit contracts provisions
Fit for purpose consumer credit legislation: Summary of discussion document
Fit for purpose financial services conduct regulation: Summary of discussion document
Fit for purpose regulation of consumer credit
Fixed term agreement: Employment relationships with a set start and end day or event, along with a genuine reas on, based on reasonable grounds , for such an arrangement. This arrangement , including the way in which the employment will end and the reasons for it ending that way, must be clearly specified in writing in the employment agreement (Section of the Act ).
Fixedterm and casual workers who can show a regular pattern of work with an employer, and a reasonable expectation of future income, will be treated like permanent workers and eligible for the full support offered if their regular pattern of work is disrupted.
Flexibility requires give and take between the employee, people leader and team. It also places collective obligations on employees, people leaders and teams to be open and adaptable so that it works for everyone.
Flexible (discretionary) leave
Flexible working at MBIE policy
Flexible working needs to work for the agency, teams, and employees. Consideration should be given to how flexible work arrangements can maintain or enhance service delivery and the performance of agencies, teams, and employees. It should not result in increased workloads for employees working flexibly, or for other team members who are not.
Flexible working proposals can be made at any time in an employment life cycle including during recruitment, and there are no limits to how many times a proposal can be made.
Flexible working should not be viewed as something which is just agreed between an employee and people leader. This means that the impact of arrangements should be considered on teams and the agency as a whole.
Flip the Fleet is a nationwide project aimed at getting more Kiwis behind the wheel of an electric vehicle.
Flow on benefits to local industry
Following a number of recent complaints from consumers about ticket reselling practices, the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs has announced a review into ticket reselling in New Zealand.
Following consultation, the Government approved various changes to the Accredited Employers Programme.
Following consultation, the Minister for Media and Communications has announced a suite of regulatory changes to improve telecommunications services for New Zealanders and promote innovation
Following discussion between the telecommunications sector and the Ministry of Economic Development and CFH, the Minister of Communications and Information Technology and the Minister of Finance have written to the New Zealand Telecommunications Forum (TCF) clarifying CFHs role.
Following the North Island severe weather events MBIE commissioned a review of how the rapid building assessment system worked during the response to assess how well it functioned and identify any areas for improvement.
Following the WhakaariWhite Island eruption on December , the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety directed MBIE to undertake a targeted review of the adventure activities regulatory regime.
Following the review of the Telecommunications Act , the legislation:
Following this, at the request of the ACC Minister, we commissioned Miriam R Dean CNZM QC to undertake an Independent Review. Her report found that some (though not all) of the concerns raised by Acclaim were valid and recommended a number of possible improvements to existing practice.
Food Secure Communities Programme
Food South Otago located at Otago University in Dunedin.
Food Waikato located near Hamilton
Food and Beverage Directory
Food and Beverage Information Project
FoodBowl, Mangere, Auckland
FoodSouth located at Lincoln in Canterbury
For New Zealand Sign language Face to Face Interpreting Services please visit:
For New Zealand to prosper we need to increase the economic, social, environmental, and cultural outcomes from our limited biological resources and manage the tradeoffs arising from increased demand.
For a directory of publiclyavailable, nonpersonal New Zealand government held datasets go to
For any questions, please get in touch with us at
For any trade labour submissions, questions or other matters please contact us through:
For avoidance of doubt, the Prosecution policy does not apply to staff involved in civil enforcement (i.e. noncriminal or offence proceedings) of MBIE legislation (e.g. before occupational licensing boards or the Employment Relations Authority).
For businesses, RD is recognised as a key indicator of innovation, which enhances their ability to be successful in the evolving global marketplace.
For clarity, neither GYSS nor MBIE will cover:
For delivery function, a prompt could be to assess whether the regulator is clear about its responsibilities and what the regulated parties are required to do.
For each person who has a or more ownership or control interest in the organisation : Nam e Principal business address Current nationality (relevant only to natural persons) Information for Launch licences Launch details A description of the launch vehicle (including name, payload capacity, and capabilities of the launch vehicle) Name and lo cation of the proposed launch facility or facilities from which launches will occur Expectations as to the duration of the licence andor number of launches covered and launch windows (if known at the time of application) Details of the intended basic orb ital parameters (including the nodal period, inclination, apogee, and perigee) of any part of a launch vehicle that is intended to reach outer space
For each successful Endeavour Fund application from , this spreadsheet details:
For eligibility assessment contact New Zealand Government Procurement
For enquiries about positions, please contact
For example, these infringements apply to:
For example, when assessing the policy function, a prompt could be to assess whether policy teams are able to clearly articulate what the regime is trying to achieve.
For food, a focus on innovation upstream in the food value chain, would reduce environmental impacts and help to maintain competitiveness of trade which is increasingly focused on environmental sustainability. Approaches that could be considered include scaling regenerative agriculture and aquaculture, innovation in alternative protein foods, increasing consumerfacing information, supporting innovation networks, and placebased initiatives to test and demonstrate food system solutions.
For further information (except legal advice) email
For further information about specific award notices please contact the relevant government agency.
For further information or enquiries about Language Assistance Services please write to us on
For further information regarding information or data sharing:
For guidance on how to make a complaint please refer to:
For guidance on making submissions in relation to the CPTPP and UKFTA Labour Chapters, please see the following links:
For importdependent subsectors, circular economy models that reduce consumption by extending service lives, sharing access to products or creating jobs through reuse, remanufacturing or repair, may reduce supply risks and global emissions.
For instance, MBIE recently announced the successful proposals for our second dedicated investment in space research through the million Catalyst: Strategic Space call, which will accelerate the development of space sector capability in New Zealand by building partnerships with leading international space organisations.
For international investors and people interested in doing space and advanced aviation business in New Zealand
For more detailed information on how the changes could affect you, visit the
For more information about Briefings being developed by other departments, see:
For more information about eligibility visit the NZGP website
For more information about our Association and Treaty documents:
For more information about the RSE scheme, please see the following links:
For more information about the Screen Industry Workers Act , please visit:
For more information about the changes, you can contact us at
For more information about the charter, supporting documentation and algorithm use across government, click the link below:
For more information about why New Zealand is an attractive place to do space business, see
For more information and current funding opportunities:
For more information including the benefits of participating and key definitions, read the key information document:
For more information on Regulatory System Amendments Bills, contact us at
For more information on the privacy laws in New Zealand and contact details for the Office of the Privacy Commissioner, visit the
For more information on this report, please email
For more information or advice, contact our Horizon Europe secretariat by emailing:
For more information, contact:
For more information, please contact
For more information, please contact us:
For more information, see our Diversity Statement
For more information, visit the Grow Regions website
For more see the following link.
For people looking to start, manage or grow their space or advanced aviation business
For phone numbers and postal addresses, see the main
For queries about New Zealand involvement in Horizon Europe email
For questions or concerns, please contact us at
For security reasons, we suggest you send the link and password by separate methods. For example, send the link by email and the password by text message.
For specific details on what is available, contact your local DHB.
For successful candidates, this will be followed by the next phase, which is a set of psychological interviews and group tests before medical testing.
For the release, we present results of a simplified model with estimates for the year ended March and updates for the previous years.
For the board member recruitment process, MBIE:
For the monitor and evaluate function a prompt could be to assess whether the responsible agency encourages feedback and the compliance and enforcement function a prompt could be to assess whether the agencies with an enforcement role comply with the enforcement strategy.
For the purpose of this policy, the following publication pathways are considered acceptable:
For the purposes of issues relating to disclosure, prosecutor has an alternative meaning. With disclosure, the functions of the prosecutor are shared between the investigator and the lawyer responsible for the file.
For the purposes of this fund the following RTOs are not eligible:
For the purposes of this fund, an RTO is one of the member organisations of Regional Tourism New Zealand. A list of these organisations is available on the Regional Tourism New Zealand website.
For the purposes of this policy, it is acceptable for either of the following versions of a manuscript to be deposited in an Open Access repository:
For the uptoinformation about MBSF coverage, please visit:
For this project to add value, we are heavily dependent on survey responses across the space and advanced aviation supply chains and the quality of information provided.
For this reason, it may be helpful to ensure there are adequate information and advisory services for businesses to help them understand and meet any requirements, where possible. The government has an important role to utilise existing information channels, such as through trade relationships and knowledge networks, to maintain awareness of international developments and implications for New Zealand. Our existing and future trade agreements and broader international relationships can act as policy dialogue channels with other countries. These settings can enable New Zealand exporting firms to meet the environmental expectations of our trade partners and consumers.
For us, success looks like:
Forced labour, people trafficking and slavery are serious forms of exploitation seen internationally and within New Zealand. Addressing these practices requires a wholeofsociety response, undertaken through strong partnerships across government agencies and with civil society, businesses, unions, academia and international partners.
Foreign government applicants, aligned with strategic interests
Foreign licences, permits or authorisations For any foreign licences, permits or authorisations applied for, granted or declined, provide: Details of the foreign regulator (name, location) Authorisation or registration numbersidentifiers and copies of the relevant authorisation of issue and length of time in which the authorisation is in effect Entityentities in respect of which auth orisation has been issued Information regarding any conditions imposed and the nature of those conditions
Foreign licences, permits or authorisations For any foreign licences, permits or authorisations applied for, granted or declined: Details of the foreign regulator (name, location) Authorisation or registration numbersidentifiers and copies of the relevant authorisation of issue and length of time in which the authorisation is in effect Entityentities in respect of which authorisation has been issued Information regarding any conditions imposed and the nature of those conditions Permit for launch of payload overseas If the applicant is applying for an overseas payload permit, in addition to the information required above : the name and location of the overseas launch facility from which the payload is intended to be launched; and
Foreign margin requirements for OTC derivatives
Forestry and wood processing spotlight report series
Forestry and wood processing spotlight reports
Foreword from the Minister for Space
Foreword from the Minister of Tourism
Formal flexible working arrangement proposals will be responded to in writing within working days of the proposal being made. A final decision in writing must be given within a month of the proposal being made. Proposals made under the Domestic Violence Act must have a final decision within working days of the proposal.
Formality empowerment spectrum
Formatting and Structure
Former Employment (Pay Equity and Equal Pay) Bill
Former Refugees, Recent Migrants and Ethnic Communities Employment Action Plan released in March
Former Refugees, Recent Migrants, and Ethnic Communities
Forming a clearer and fairer cost recovery structure
Forum documents released prior to February
Framework for paying AL as a regular part of an employees pay (pay as you go (PAYG))
Framework for providing AL entitlement
Fraudulent work experience for fijian forestry workers PDF KB
Free advice and information on your rights
Free, phonebased service that helps resolve a workplace issue early, quickly and informally
Freedom camping has a long history in New ZealandAotearoa. Many New Zealanders and international visitors enjoy travelling and experiencing a range of camping experiences around the country, including camping for free.
Freedom camping infringements cannot be applied to people experiencing homelessness. Council enforcement staff should refer these people to social support agencies when appropriate.
From July the national earthquakeprone building system took effect under the Building Act .
From July , national quarantine and isolation (referred to as MIQ) will transfer to the New Zealand health system.
From July , introduce a discount on levies to riders that have completed an advanced rider safety course (e.g. RideForever).
From September pool manufacturers and retailers must supply notices with pools. The Building (Pool Manufacturers and Retailers) notice sets out the requirements for the notices.
From to , we held a review into New Zealands insurance contract law to ensure it facilitates wellfunctioning insurance markets.
From we will start to add to the ORCID records of successful applicants public facing summary details of their awarded funding.
From , Chorus and the local fibre companies are already required under their open access deeds to offer an unbundled massmarket fibre service on commercial terms.
From , the digital technologies sector focused on government and industry working together to start implementing a series of activities to see the sector reach its full potential. Additionally, by accelerating growth of the digital sector, this ITP aimed to work towards a diversified, loweremission, higherwage and resilient economy in New Zealand.
From , students can study Space Science at Victoria University of Wellington. Topics covered include:
From April to June , we called for expression of interests for COVID Innovation Acceleration Fund funding. The initial size of the Fund was million (excluding GST) with an anticipated minimum proposal size of , (excluding GST) and a criteria that projects needed to achieve impact within months.
From classical to quantum
From the Far North to Southland, more than , has been confirmed for maintenance projects on the Great Rides of the New Zealand Cycle Trails, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment announced today.
From the initial engagement that weve done we have seen that the circular economy is not the prime reason why people use digital twins. It is more about efficiency and cost saving. Thats the key driver for digital twins and also better management of resources. So being unashamedly admitting here, that circular economy is almost like a byproduct of the ability to do more circular things, a byproduct of that drive for efficiency and cost savings and better management that the digital twins created. We are going to use some slides from the digital team at Aurecon just to show the hypothetical example for you. And were looking at optimising building asset management.
From their first day of employment, eligible employees will be entitled to bereavement leave and family violence leave, and to begin accruing sick leave. Other employees will be eligible after months if they meet the new tests.
From time to time we seek public comment on a specific issue relating to the building industry through a formal consultation process.
From time to time we seek public comment on a specific issue through a formal consultation process.
From time to time, we review employment and accident compensation legislation. Our current and past reviews are listed on this page.
From time to time, we review immigration legislation. Our current and past reviews are listed on this page.
From what is known of toxicology, chemistry, physical properties, or other attributes of the studied risk or hazard, it makes biological sense to suggest that exposure leads to the disease or injury.
Fuel Market Financial Performance Study
Fuel security in New Zealand
Full Impact Statement Template Coversheet : Improving the Holidays Act
Full Impact Statement Template continue to struggle to comply with their obligations and issues with entitlements and payments will persist . . What do stakeholders think about the problem The primary stakeholders are employers and employees. Many employers are struggling to comply with their obligations under the current Act and a large number of employees are not receiving their correct entitlements. Both groups stand to benefit from an improvement to the legislation . Payroll providers are another interested stakeholder group. They attempt to implement the obligations outlined in the Act in their systems and seek to provide employers with products that are compliant, efficient and effective. The Holidays Act Taskforce released an issues paper in August which set out its understanding of the key issues with the Act. It saw these as being that the Act is not prescriptive enough, it is too complex, and there is not enough clarity over certain terms used. The Taskforce received substantive submissions on the issues paper from employers, payroll providers and individuals . The vast majority of submissions () felt that the issues paper accurately captured the main issues with the Act. There is general a greement from stakeholders as to what the main issues with the Act are, as well as that legislative change is the best way to address them. This aligns with MBIEs conceptualisatio n of the problems with the Act. . What are the objectives sought in re lation to the identified problem The key objectives of improving the Act are to: make the provision of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave simpler and more readily applicable to the range of working arrangements in the labour market provide clarity and certainty to employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements, and remuneration for them, and employers indirect compliance costs are minimised aim to pro tect the overall entitlements for employees make obligations easier to systematise and implement in payroll systems.
Full Impact Statement Template options as the groups purpose was to suggest improvements to the legislation , and because a number of non regulatory initiatives had already been implemented as part of the Labour Inspectorates payroll strategy. The Taskforces options were shaped by research, i nternational comparisons and consultation. For the majority of issues considered, MBIE (as the Taskforce Secretariat) provided detailed policy papers outlining the various options and their relative advantages and disadvantages. In addition, the Taskforce consulted with a small group of payroll providers on some of its recommendations and made some changes in light of the responses received, such as not progressing with a proposal to apportion commission or incentive payments across pay periods. Option One The Taskforces proposals The Taskforces proposed approach is an improved status quo, where the existing units of entitlement are retained (weeks for annual holidays, days for other forms of leave) and the focus is on addressing known i ssues with the e xisting Act. The group was guided by three key principles when making recommendations : certainty, transparency and practicality. It wanted the recommendations to provide the certainty that employers and employees require, to ensure that employees are fully informed about their leave entitlements, and to work in the real world. It also wanted to ensure that no employee would be worse off under any of its proposals. With regards to annual holidays, t he Taskforce recommended that: annual holidays entitlements should be calculated, taken, paid and held in weeks or portions of weeks a clear process should be followed to determine how much of an employees leave entitlement should be used for a period of time away from work (this involves using the days and hours of work that are set out in an employment agreement or roster, or if not available, an averaging approach) employees should become entitled to four weeks leave after months continuous employment, but have the ability to take leave in advance on a pro rata basis annual holidays should be paid at the greater of Ordinary Leave Pay, average weekly pay for the last four or weeks, and average weekly pay for the last weeks the following definition of gross earnings should be used for leave payment calculations: an employees leave payment should reflect all cash payments received, except direct reimbursements for costs incurred . The Taskforce could not agree whether the short run average weekly pay in the payment calculations should be based on the previous four or weeks, and referred this decision to the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety. The Minister proposed that the second reference period in the annual holida ys payment methodology should be weeks. The Taskforces proposals provide greater prescription to areas of ambiguity in the Act. They provide rules for how to calculate a week or otherwise working day for leave purposes, particularly for workers wit h variable working patterns for whom it is currently difficult to calculate , and clarify which payments must be included in calculations . They
Full Impact Statement Template also reduce the number of payment calculations , remove the need for an employer to decide on a specific payment c alculation due to the greater of approach for annual holidays and leave , and better define key terms. This option provides the clarity and certainty that employers and employees are seeking and will help to ensure that employees receive their correct ent itlements and remuneration for them. This will reduce future remediation issues, particularly the costly payroll investigations and the need for arrears payments. This option also seeks to protect employees entitlements and can be implemented in payroll s ystems. Option Two An hours based accrual system for annual holidays, with other aspects following the Taskforces proposals Option Two proposes a fundamentally different approach for how annual holidays entitlements are calculated, taken, paid and held. It departs from the principle that annual holidays entitlements are based on the work pattern at the time the holiday s are taken, and introduces a system where entitlements are based on an employees arrangements at the time they earned the m. This option adopts the remaining Taskforce proposals , including holding other forms of leave in days . Under Option Two , all employees would earn annual holidays in hours at a set percentage rate (. of every hour worked would give employees the equivalent of four weeks annual holidays per year). The employees annual holidays balance would accrue in hours as they worked and any holidays taken would be calculated and deducted in hours. An accrual system, by definit ion, means that e mployees would receive holidays and payments based on their arrangements at the time they earned them (rather than at the time of taking the holidays ). Hours that would accrue annual holidays would be determined as follows: For salaried workers, hours that accrue annual holidays are those set out in the employment agreement (i.e. what is usually expected to be worked) plus any additional hours that are agreed and paid separately to the core hours in the employment agreement. For workers paid on a daily or hourly rate, hours that accrue annual holidays are any hours that they are paid for (including overtime). The following process would be used to determine how much annual holidays would need to be taken for a period of time away from work: If the number of hours an employee would have worked on a specific day is set in an employment agreement or work roster, then this figure should be used. If the number of hours an employee would have worked is not set out in an employment agreement or work roster, then an average working day should be determined by calculating the average daily hours the employee worked on all corresponding calendar days in the previous week s. For example, if the employee wishes to take holidays on a Mon day, then the average hours worked on all Mondays in the week period should be used. This process would need to be carried out for each day of holidays the employee wishes to take. shrvakdix
Full Impact Statement Template The greater of the following should be paid for the relevant period of a nnual holidays : . Ordinary Leave Pay (base rate plus any scheduled overtime, allowance, commission and incentive payments) . Average Leave Pay (average hourly rate in the last weeks multiplied by the amount of leave being taken in hours) . Average Leave P ay (average hourly rate in the last weeks multiplied by the amount of leave being taken in hours) The proposed new definition of gross earnings would be used for payment calculations. This includes all cash payments received , except direct reimbursements for costs incurred. The employee would be entitled to take any annual holidays that had accrued to , but could take leave in advance if agreed to by the employer. There would also be no need for pay asyougo provisions , in contrast to Option One . This option responds to feedback received from many stakeholders for an hours based accrual system . Many of the submissions received on the Taskforces issues paper indicated a strong support for an accrual system based on hours a nd for a simplified system with few er calculations. Some of the payroll providers the Taskforce engaged with on the draft recommendations also raised concerns with how annual holidays were conceptualised and suggested different accrual approaches. As with Option One, this approach provides greater prescription for how to calculate entitlements and payments and better defines key terms. It is also simpler than the current Act in respect to the hours based accrual system for annual holidays and the removal of additional payment calculation s. These changes can be implemented in payroll systems, provide the clarity and certainty that employers and employees are seeking , and are simpler in many respects when compared to the current Act. This will help to ensure t hat employees receive their correct entitlements and remuneration for them , helping to eliminate remediation issues such as costly payroll investigations and the need for arrears payments. However, a small number of employees could be worse off under an accrual approach when compared with the status quo or Option One , and some employees would likely find the shift from having their entitlement s held in weeks to accrued hours confusing . The specific proposals for options one and two are provided in Table .
Full Impact Statement Template Table : Option One and Option Two proposals Theme Option One Taskforce proposals Option Two Hoursbased accrual (differences highlighted) Payment for annual holidays and FBAPS leave The greater of the following should be paid for the relevant period of annual leave: o Ordinary Leave Pay (base rate plus any scheduled overtime, allowance, commission and incentive payments) o Average weekly pay for the last four or weeks (the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety subsequently chose a week reference period) o Average weekly pay for the last weeks. Each day (or part day) of FBAPS leave should be paid based on the greater of: o Ordinary Leave Pay o Average Daily Pay The gre ater of the following should be paid for the relevant period of annual leave: o Ordinary Leave Pay (base rate plus any scheduled overtime, allowance, commission and incentive payments) o Average Leave Pay (average hourly rate in the last weeks multiplied by the amount of leave being taken in hours) o Average Leave Pay (average hourly rate in the last weeks multiplied by the amount of leave being taken in hours) Each day (or part day) of FBAPS leave should be paid based on the greater of: o Ordinary Leave Pay o Average Daily Pay Annual holidays entitlement Annual holidays entitlements should be calculated, taken, paid and held in weeks or portions of weeks. Employees should become entitled to four weeks leave after months continuous employment, but have the ability to take leave in advance on a pro rata basis . A clear process should be followed to determine how much of an employees leave entitlement should be used for a period of time away from work. Where an employees days and hours of work ar e set out in an employment agreement, shift roster or other document and these are an accurate reflection of the employees actual working pattern, these agreed days and hours should be used as the basis for determining leave entitlements and deductions . The parental leave override in the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act should be removed, to address discrimination against parents who take time off to care for their young children. The ability for employers to use pay asyougo (PAYG) for employees on fixed term contracts of less than months should be removed and a Annual holidays entitlements should be calculated, taken, paid and held in hours. Employees earn annual holidays at a set percentag e rate (.) . For salaried workers, hours that accrue leave are those set out in the employment agreement (plus paid overtime); for workers paid a daily or hourly rate, hours that accrue leave are any hour s that they are paid for. A clear process should be followed to determine how much of an employees leave entitlement should be used for a period of time away from work. Where an employees days and hours of work are set out in an employment agreement, shi ft roster or other document and these are an accurate reflection of the employees actual working pattern, these agreed days and hours should be used as the basis for determining how much leave to deduct . The parental leave override in the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act should be removed, to address discrimination against parents who take time off to care for their young children. shrvakdix
Full Impact Statement Template more detailed definition should be provided for when PAYG can be used because a work pattern is intermittent or irregular. An employers ability to require employees to att end work under an availability provision should be suspended from the end of the last shift the employee works before their leave period until the start of the first shift they work on their return from leave. The following definition of gross earnings s hould be used for leave payment calculations: an employees leave payment should reflect all cash payments received, except direct reimbursements for costs incurred. The ability for employers to use payasyougo (PAYG) for employees should be removed. An emp loyers ability to require employees to attend work under an availability provision should be suspended from the end of the last shift the employee works before their leave period until the start of the first shift they work on their return from leave. The following definition of gross earnings should be used for leave payment calculations: an employees leave payment should reflect all cash payments received, except direct reimbursements for costs incurred. FBAPS leave entitlement FBAPS leave should co ntinue to be held in days. Eligible employees should be entitled to bereavement leave and family violence leave from the first day of employment. Eligible employees should be entitled to one day of sick leave from their first day of employment, with an add itional day per month of employment until the full entitlement of five days is reached after four months. Employees should have the ability to take sick leave and family violence leave in units of less than a day on a proportionate basis for time and pay with a minimum amount of a quarter of a day. There should be a new test for which employees are eligible for sick, bereavement and family violence leave. A new prescriptive methodology should be used to determine whether a day is an Otherwise Working Day for an employee for FBAPS purposes. The list of people for whom bereavement leave applies should be extended to include a more modern understanding of family members. Provisions relating to transferring public holidays should be amended to reduce the chance of employees being disadvantaged by the transfer. FBAPS leave should continue to be held in days. Eligible employees should be entitled to bereavement leave and fa mily violence leave from the first day of employment. Eligible employees should be entitled to one day of sick leave from their first day of employment, with an additional day per month of employment until the full entitlement of five days is reached after four months. Employees should have the ability to take sick leave and family violence leave in units of less than a day on a proportionate basis for time and pay with a minimum amount of a quarter of a day. There should be a new test for which employees a re eligible for sick, bereavement and family violence leave. A new prescriptive methodology should be used to determine whether a day is an Otherwise Working Day for an employee for FBAPS purposes. The list of people for whom bereavement leave applies shou ld be extended to include a more modern understanding of family members. Provisions relating to transferring public holidays should be amended to reduce the chance of employees being disadvantaged by the transfer. shrvakdix
Full Impact Statement Template Other proposed changes The Taskforce wa s unable to reach a consensus view in relation to establishing an additional public holiday (e.g. for Matariki). Closedown provisions should be amended to provide greater transparency and certainty for employees. In addition, the requirement that holidays are paid out at per cent and an employees anniversary is reset should be removed (although it should still be possible for anniversary dates to be reset by agreement). On the sale and transfer of a business, employees should have a choice about wh ether to transfer all of their leave entitlements to the new employer or have them paid out and reset. Record keeping requirements should be to reflect changes to how leave entitlements are held, calculated and paid. Employers should be required to provide payslips to employees in every pay period. Issues that cause non compliance with the current Act should be considered in the design of the compliance and enforcement mechanisms to support any revised Act. Employers and employees should have the ab ility to agree to arrangements that are different to those in the Act, providing that it can be demonstrated that these arrangements provide the employee with leave entitlements that, at a minimum, meet the standards set out in the Act. The Taskforce was u nable to reach a consensus view in relation to establishing an additional public holiday (e.g. for Matariki). Closedown provisions should be amended to provide greater transparency and certainty for employees. In addition, the requirement that holidays are paid out at per cent and an employees anniversary is reset should be removed (although it should still be possible for anniversary dates to be reset by agreement). On the sale and transfer of a business, employees should have a choice about wheth er to transfer all of their leave entitlements to the new employer or have them paid out and reset. Record keeping requirements should be to reflect changes to how leave entitlements are held, calculated and paid. Employers should be required to provide payslips to employees in every pay period. Issues that cause non compliance with the current Act should be considered in the design of the compliance and enforcement mechanisms to support any revised Act. Employers and employees should have the abili ty to agree to arrangements that are different to those in the Act, providing that it can be demonstrated that these arrangements provide the employee with leave entitlements that, at a minimum, meet the standards set out in the Act.
Full Impact Statement Template c. sick leave to assist employees who are unable to attend work because they are sick or injured, or because someone who depends on the employe e for care is sick or injured d. bereavement leave to assist employees who are unable to attend work because they have suffered a bereavement e. domestic violence leave to assist employees to deal with the effects on the employees of being people affected by domestic violence b. It provides clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements A major problem identified with the current Act is the difficulty in clearly understanding and expressing entitlements, s o an improved Act should be easier to understand and align more with how employers and employees expect the Act to operate. c. It is simpler than the current Act in relation to provisions of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave The complexity of the current Act creates issues for employers and employees, so a more simple Act should make it easier to implement. d. It is readily implementable in a payroll system Many employers use automated payroll software for the majority of their payroll needs, so the Act should be easily able to be translated into a software system. This would likely involve reducing the number of manual decisions that employers currently need to make about their employees entitlements. e. It minimises perverse incentives on emplo yers and employees An improved Act should not incentivise employees to take leave on particular days and not others or incentivise employers to arrange rosters in a particular way to minimise entitlements for their employees. f. It ensures the balance of deci sionmaking between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated An improved Act would ideally not give one party greater bargaining power in relation to the taking of leave, wherever possible. g. It is readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future An improved Act should be future proofed and should apply equally to more traditional working arrangements, as well as being fle xible enough to apply to the types of working arrangements that could exist in the future. h. It aims to protect overall entitlements for employees An improved Act should, as much as possible, ensure that employees receive at least their current minimum entitlements (four weeks of annual holidays per year, up to public holidays, five days of sick leave, up to three days of bereavem ent leave per bereavement, and ten days of domestic violence leave). The majority of the criteria do not conflict with one another. However, there appears to be some trade off between simplicity and protecting overall entitlements for employees (criteria c and h). Under the current Act, annual holidays entitlements are in weeks and a week needs to reflect the work pattern a t the time the leave is taken. For example, if an employee was shrvakdix
Full Impact Statement Template previously working hours a week but recently increased their hours to a week, a week for them would be hours. Under an hours based accrual system, however, an employee would build up a bank of leave in hour s and this does not need to be converted into a week as part of annual holidays calculations (i.e. they determine how many hours they want off and deduct that from their balance) . The tension between simplicity and protecting overa ll entitlements for employees arises when comparing an accrual based system with the current Act or with Option One . Some e mployees could be worse off under an accrual approach if they increase their hours , as they would have accrued leave based on what they have worked and it would not be converted to match their current working pattern . These employees would miss out on annual holidays (i.e. time off) and payments compared to the status quo they would never be able to claw b ack. However, it should be noted that employee s would be better off compared to the current Act if they have recently reduced their hours as they would have more in the bank . In essence, some options may be significantly simpler and meet all other criter ia, but may have impacts on some employees annual holidays entitlements under certain circumstances .
Full Impact Statement Template Section : Impact Analysis Table Marginal impact: How does each of the options identified in section . compare with taking no action under each of the criteria set out in section .
Full Impact Statement Template making changes to the Act that provide greater prescription as recommended by the Holidays Act Taskforce, if retaining the current units of entitlement and protecting employees entitlements are prioritised (Option One) adopting the majority of the Holidays Act Taskforce proposals but introducing a new system where annual holidays are accrued over time, if simplicity for employe rs and employees is prioritised (O ption Two). Both options provide greater clarity and certainty and will help to ensure that employees receive their correct entitlements and payments for them . They are also implementable in a payroll system , promote the current objectives of the Act, and are applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour ma rket. The related Cabinet paper is likely to seek agreement to Option One. Section B : Summary Impacts: Benefits and costs Who are the main expected beneficiaries and what is the nature of the expected benefit The main beneficiaries of changing the Act would be employees and employers. For employees, they would be more likely to receive their correct entitlements and payments, have earlier and greater access to some forms of leave, and may benefit financially from the introduction of new payment methodol ogy. For employers, they would have greater clarity and certainty regarding their obligations and an ability to better systematise rules relating to annual holidays and leave. This should help to reduce costly remediation issues that have occurred as a res ult of ambiguities with the current Act. All employers and employees would benefit from legislation that provi des greater certainty. However, e mployees with variable working and pay arrangements would benefit the most as they are the ones most likely to c urrently receive incorrect entitlements and payments. Similarly, organisations that employ these types of workers would also significantly benefit from greater prescription in how to calculate entitlements and payments for employees with more complex worki ng and payment arrangements .
Full Impact Statement Template specific days); minimises incentives for employers to arrange rosters in certain ways (except permanent arrangements to minimise public holidays costs) specific days); minimises incentives f or employers to arrange rosters in certain ways (except permanent arrangements to minimise public holidays costs) Balance of decision making between employers and employees Retains existing approach where annual holidays is by agreement, but formalises the widespread practise of employers agreeing to the use of annual holidays during the first year of employment by explicitly allowing leave to be taken in advance on a pro rata basis; making sick, bereavement and family violence leave availabl e from day one removes the need for employers to agree for employees to take leave in the first six months Retains existing approach where annual holidays is by agreement, but employees have the right to take the annual holidays that they have accrued ; making sick, bereavement and family violence leave available from day one removes the need for employers to agree for employees to take leave in the first six months Applicable to diverse working arrangements Prescribed rules apply to diverse working arrangements , but annual holidays provisions may not be as future proofed as Option Two due to a rigid and complex approach Prescribed rules apply to diverse working arrangements ; annual holidays provisions more easily applied to all types of working arrangements when compared to Option One Aims to protect employee entitlements Vast majority of employees better off Most employees better off, except those who increase their hours and want to take annual holidays soon after Overall assessment Preferred option if protecting employees entitlements is prioritised Preferred option simplicity is prioritised
Full Impact Statement Template Section : Conclusions . What option, or combination of options is likely to best address the problem, meet the policy objectives and deliver the highest net benefits MBIE recommends making changes to the Act that provide greater prescription as recommended by the Holidays Act T askforce, if retaining the current units of entitlement and protecting employees entitlements are prioritised (O ption One). This approach keeps annual holidays entitlements in weeks and retains the requirement that a week must reflect the current workin g pattern, thereby largely protecting employees annual holidays entitlements when compared to the status quo . It should also have less of an impact on payroll systems as it seeks to improve, rather than fundamentally change, holidays and leave entitlements. Alternatively , MBIE recommends adopting the majority of the Holidays Act Taskforce proposals but introducing a new system where annual holidays are accrued over time, if simplicity for employers and employees is prioritised (O ption Two). An hours based accrual system for annual holidays makes it significantly easier to calculate entitlements and removes the need for complicated pay asyougo provisions . This should make it easier for employees to understand their entitlements and reduce compliance costs for employers . More generally, b oth options provide greater clarity and certainty and will ensure that employees receive their correct entitlements and payments for them. This should help to eliminate remediation issues and the need for cos tly payroll investigations and arrears payments. Both options are also implementable in a payroll system, promote the current objectives of the Act, and are applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour mar ket. These r ecommendations need to be viewed in light of data and consultation limitations. As previously outlined, while MBIE has confidence in the assumptions and evidence on the type of employees that are likely to be impacted and how, a lack of data on the annual holidays and leave system and the purpose of the payroll testing make it difficult to estimate fiscal impacts at the New Zealand level. With regards to consultation, the Taskforce only publicly consulted on an issues paper and with a small group of payroll providers on a subset of draft recommendations. MBIE intends to conduct further consultation on detailed policy and implementation issues with relevant stakeholders after Cabinet agreement. The consultation that has taken place to indicates t hat there will be a mixed response to the Taskforces recommendations ( Option One). While it has the support of key stakeholders, such as Business New Zealand and the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions, it is expected that others (particularly some payrol l providers and employers) would see th em as overly complex and would prefer an accrual based opt ion more in line with Option Two . On the other hand, it is expected that most unions will oppose Option Two as some employees could be worse off when compared to the status quo .
Full Impact Statement Template . Table : Summary of costs and benefits of Option One
Full Impact Statement Template
Full Impact Statement Template increase on average by . for the sample tested . This i s largely due to entitlements being held and paid in weeks, the greater of three approach to payment calculations and the new g ross earnings definition . Employees with variable hours andor pay are most likely to be impacted . It is estimated that approximately , and , employees , or between three and per cent of all New Zealand employees , work variable hours or receive variable pay. These employees are primarily from the health care and social assistance, accommodation and food services and public administration and safety sectors . Most employees annual holidays pay is unchanged . The majority of employees should not see increased payments when compared to the current Act. Around per cent of the employees included in the payroll testing did not receive an increase in pay. However, there could be a marginal change for those employee s that are not currently receiving their correct entitlements or payments. A small number of employees could be disadvantaged . Workers who take annual holidays immediately after a period in which their average hours over the last four weeks are higher than their average hours over the last weeks could be worse off, relative to the status quo. Table provides an overview of the results of the payroll testing.
Full Impact Statement Template The percentages set out in the table above need to be treated with caution as they are not directly applicable to the wider New Zealand working population. The percentages represent the portion of employees from the testing dataset who would be impacted by the Taskforces proposals. By design , however, the testing dataset includes a large overrepresentation of employees with varied and unpredictable working arrangements as these employees are most likely to not be receiving the correct entitlements now and because it is important to capture as many varied working arrangements and leave scenarios as possible. Therefore, the per ce nt figure of employees from the testing dataset who would be negative impacted is almost certainly a significant overstatement of the percentage of New Zealand employees who would actually be negatively impacted. Similarly, the dollar figures in the table should be treated with caution as they are based on salaries of employees in the testing dataset rather than average salaries from across the New Zealand economy. Using the payroll testing data, it is estimated that annual holidays payments could increase across the New Zealand economy by up to . million per year. However, in light of the caveats mentioned above, MBIE considers that this is a n overestimation . Option Two Impacts of an accrual based annual holidays system As detailed in section ., th e alternative option for annual holidays is an accrual based system where entitlements are calculated, taken , paid and held in hours. Payment would be based on the greater of: Ordinary Leave Pay (base rate plus any scheduled overtime, allowance, commission and incentive payments) Average Leave Pay (average hourly rate in the last weeks multiplied by the amount of leave being taken in hours) Average Leave Pay (average hourly rate in the last weeks multiplied by the amount of leave being taken in hours) As with Option One, these proposals reflect an improvement on the current annual holidays provisions. They provide clear rules for how to calculate entitlements and payments , give employees the ability to take leave as they earn it , and minimise incentives for employees to take holidays on particular days (i.e. payments and deductions are well calibrated) or for employers to arrange rosters in particular ways . It is also simpler than the current Act in respect to the hours based accr ual system for annual holidays and the removal of complex pay asyougo provisions. Payroll testing indicates that many employees would not be negatively impacted or would better off under Option Two when compared to the status quo . Employees with stable hours and pay, have recently decreased their hours, or work variable hours and take leave during quieter periods would be better off than under the current Act. However, those who have recently increased their hours or work variable hours and take leave du ring busy periods would be worse off than under the current Act. For example, if an employee has recently increased their hours permanently and wishes to take annual holidays , they would not have accrued as much leave as they would currently be entitled to . These employees would miss out on annual holidays (i.e. time off) and payments compared to the status quo they would never be able to claw back . Conversely, if they took annual holidays shortly after permanently decreasing their shrvakdix
Full Impact Statement Template hours , they would likely have accrued more leave than they would have been entitled to under the current Act. Employees could also be slightly disadvantaged if they were to leave within the first months of employment. Under the current Act, employees receive their annual holid ays entitlement after months and if they leave before this time they get paid of their gross earnings in lieu of annual holidays (unless they have taken them in advance) . Under Option Two, they would be paid what they had accrued at ., so c ould be slightly financially worse off. It is estimated that Option Two could impact between , and , employees , or three to per cent of all New Zealand employees . These would typically be those working highly variable hours in the health care and social assistance, accommodation and food services and public administration and safety sectors . The Taskforce eliminated an accrual based approach to annual holidays as an option part way through payroll testing because it could leave a small number of employees worse off when compared to the status quo . As a result, it was only tested against an early payment methodology that predates the payment calculations provided in this analysis or the Taskforces final recommended payment c alculations. MBIE h as not had the time to conduct this additional payroll testing. However, as t he majority of payroll systems already calculate a nnual holidays based on an accrual system, it is expected that there not be a large cost to the payroll sector to implement this option . Impacts of other recommendations The Taskforce made a number of additional main recommendations that are common to both options one and two . The estimated impacts of these recommendations are provided below. Payment calculations for other forms of leave Under the curr ent Act, payment for family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays and sick leave (FBAPS leave) is calculated using relevant daily pay or average daily pay. Relevant daily pay is what an employee would have received if they were at work on that day, and includes payments such as regular (taxable) allowances, productivity or incentive based payments and overtime payments if the employee would have received them on the relevant day. If it is not possible t o calculate relevant daily pay or the employees daily pay varies within the pay period, an employer can use average daily pay. This is the daily average of an employees gross earnings over the previous weeks. The Taskforce recommended that each day (o r part day) of FBAPS leave should be paid based on the greater of: Ordinary Leave Pay (base rate plus any scheduled overtime, allowance, commission and incentive payments) Average Daily Pay (average hourly rate multiplied by the amount of leave being taken in hours). This m ethodology is more prescriptive and can be implemented in payroll systems . It also removes the need for some employers to decide which payment calculation to shrvakdix
Full Impact Statement Template adopt, which can be a source of confusion or could be done in a way to financial ly advantage the employer . The p ayroll testing suggest s that: No employees would be worse off . When compared to the current Act, no employee would be worse off under the FBAPS payment methodology. Most employee s would be better off . While some employees would not see a change in their FBAPS leave pay (), results show that the majority () would receive more under the Taskforces proposals than when compared to the status quo. The average daily FBAPS leave payment increased by . per cent. As with the testing for annual holidays payments, the results need to be treated with caution as they are not directly applicable to the wider New Zealand working population. Therefore, it is expected that the proportion of employees that are p aid more than the status quo and the average size of the increase is an overestimation. Using the payroll testing data, it is estimated that FBAPS payments could increase across the New Zealand economy by up to . million per year. However, in light o f the caveats mentioned above, MBIE considers that this is an overestimation and provides a maximum estimate for a range . A more reasonable estimate is . million per year. This assumes that the increase in FBAPS leave payments is largely confined to w orkers with variable hours andor pay. Removing the parental leave override Section of the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act overrides section of the Holidays Act , so that employees who became entitled to annual holidays while they were on parental leave or in the months after returning to work are paid differently. These employees are only entitled to be paid at a rate based on the average weekly earnings over the last months, rather than the gr eater of this amount and th eir Ordinary Weekly Pay. Because the employees average weekly earnings during parental leave will be , and parental leave periods can be up to weeks long, this means that some employees are entitled to be paid per week for annual holidays when the y return from parental leave. Removing section () of the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act would mean that em ployees who take leave after returning from parental leave are paid at their full rate (greater of Ordinary Weekly Pay and their average weekly earnings over the last months), removing discrimination issues. It also simplifies payroll complexity and aligns with broader Government goals of supporting families and working parents. However, it could lead to behavioural change, such as employers becoming more reluctant to employ parents (despite being in breach of legislation ), and may disadvantage employers if employees resign immediately after months of parental leave and are paid at their full rate for the annual holidays entit lement. It would also likely increase costs for employers. It is d ifficult to estimate the marginal cost of removing the override due to lack of data on the status quo . For example, there is limited information on the duration of parental leave (paid and u npaid), how many employees return to work following parental leave , and whether they return full or part time. We also do not know how much these types of shrvakdix
Full Impact Statement Template employees earn and how they use annual holidays once they return to work (e.g. do they wait until th eir annual holidays are worth more before using them or take them earlier when they are needed ). In light of these caveats, a range of estimates have been calculated: A low estimate would be a negligible marginal increase for employers across New Zealand . This assumes that employees currently returning to work wait until their annual holidays are worth their full rate or close to their full rate . A mid range estimate would be approximately million per year for employers across New Zealand . This estimat e tries to account for some employees not returning to work, and for those that do, returning at reduced hours . It also assumes that returning employees are earning the average wage and only take half of their annual holidays entitlement at a reduced rate. A highrange estimate would be approximately . million per year for employers across New Zealand . This assumes that all employees return to work but at reduced hours, are earning the average wage, and wish to take all of their entitled leave immediat ely upon return . MBIE considers that the midrange estimate is likely to be the most accurate, although these calculations are based on limited data and a number of assumptions and are only provided to give a sense of possible marginal costs . Availability of bereavement, sick and family violence leave Under the Act, all employees are entitled to five days paid sick leave a year, days family violence leave a year and bereavement leave of either three days or one day per bereavement depending on the nat ure of the relationship with the deceased. Although an employer and employee can agree to take sick leave, family violence leave or bereavement leave in advance, there is no obligation on the employer to provide them before six months employment. The Taskforce recommended that eligible employees should be entitled to bereavement leave and family violence leave from the first day of employment. It recommended that eligible employees should be entitled to one day of sick leave from their first day of employment, with an additional day per month of employment until the full entitlement of five days is reached after four months (the entitlement of five days for the second and subsequent years of employment should apply from the anniversary of their employme nt). This recommendation provides a number of benefits. Employees have little control over when they may need these forms of leave, and would benefit by having protections in place in the first six months. Other workers, such as those who frequently change jobs or work for a business which has been sold, are also disadvantaged by not having immediate access to leave. It also aligns with the purpose of the Act and encourages employees to stay home when sick. The gradual increase of sick leave over the first four months may be more difficult for employees to understand and for employers to implement than the status quo. However, this approach tries to balance the needs of employees to take sick leave within the first six months and increased costs to employers . shrvakdix
Full Impact Statement Template It is estimated that m aking bereavement, sick and family violence leave available from day one will increase costs across the New Zealand economy by . million per year. This figure accounts for tenure and turnover rates in New Zealand and is based on assumptions on the amount of leave likely to be taken within the first six months of employment . Eligibility fo r bereavement, sick and family violence leave An employee is currently eligible for bereavement, sick and family violence leave if: they have six months current continuous employment with the same employer, or they have worked for the employer for six months for an average of hours per week, and at least one hour in every week, or hours in every month. In light of the Taskforces recomme ndation that these forms of leave are available from the first day of employment, it proposed a new eligibility test: All employees with agreed hours and an expectation of continuous employment should be eligible for family violence leave and bereavement l eave from the first day of employment. All employees with agreed hours and an expectation of continuous employment should be eligible for sick leave from the first day of employment. Sick leave days should build up from one day on the first day of employme nt to a full entitlement of days after months. Agreed hours refers to the hours that the employer and employee have agreed that the employee will work, as outlined in the employment agreement. Expectations of continuous employment refers to the exp ectation that the employee will not have any periods of unpaid leave that are longer than one week. Employees with no agreed hours or who are not expected to work continuously should be subject to an hours test applied after weeks. This test requires that the employee works on average at least hours a week over the preceding weeks. If the employee meets this threshold, they become eligible for sick leave, family violence leave and bereavement leave. If they d o not meet this test, it is repeated a fter weeks to see if they meet the hours requirement or have been working continuously. All employees should be eligible for sick leave, family violence leave and bereavement leave after six months of continuous employment. This proposal provides clarity for employers and employees and should be relatively straightforward for the majority of employees. While it will remain somewhat complex for variable workers, it should not be any more so than the status quo. As it is analog ous to the current eligibility requirements and likely to apply to a similar number of employees, it is anticipated that it would not increase costs . Payasyougo annual holidays Under the current Act, employers can regularly pay annual holiday pay with a n employees pay if the employee works on a basis that is so intermittent or irregular that it is impracticable for the employer to provide the employee with four weeks annual shrvakdix
Full Impact Statement Template Due to data limitations, it is not possible to provide an estimate of the total marginal cost of Option Two. However, it is estimated that the total ma rginal cost of Option One could be up to . million per year. This is comprised of increased costs for the following proposed changes: A new annual holidays payment methodology (. million per year ). A new payment methodology for other types of leave (. million per year). Changing how annual holidays payments are calculated for employees returning from parental leave ( million per year ). Bereavement, sick and family violence leave being available to employees from day one (. million per year ). There are also likely to be some costs for employers to transition to a new or payroll system. Amendments to the Act would require a number of changes to payroll systems and i t is unclear how much this could cost individual employers or New Zealand more generally . MBIE intends to work with payroll providers and employers during implementation to assist with the transition .
Full Impact Statement Template holidays. Also known as pay asyougo (PAYG) , this type of arrangement must be specified in an employment agreement at a rate of not less than eight per cent. The Taskforce recommended that PAYG should not be available to employees on fixed term contracts of less than months and a more detailed definition should be provided for wh en PAYG can be used because a work pattern is intermittent or irregular. It also developed a range of enabling parameters to support the new intermittent or irregular definition, such as a recurring week review period. The Taskforces proposals prov ide clarity as to what intermittent or irregular and should reduce the incidence of some employees incorrectly receiving PAYG as opposed to annual holidays. However, it could incentivise employers to offer more or less casual work or to structure work to fit the defined thresholds. The Taskforce intentionally sought to increase the general threshold of eligibility for PAYG, and it is likely that the proposed provisions would reduce the number receiving PAYG. The introduction of a review period may increas e compliance costs for employers, but it is estimated that the overall costs of the Taskforces PAYG recommendations would be negligible. Even if the percentage of employees receiving PAYG alters , the costs should be the same as an loading on top of emp loyees earnings and four weeks paid annual holidays are equivalent. Taking sick leave and family violence leave in smaller units The Act considers sick leave and family violence leave in days and does not explicitly allow for these types of leave to be t aken in units of less than a day. Although many employers allow their employees to take sick and family violence leave in part days, it is possible than an employee could be deducted a full days leave when they were only away for a few hours. The Taskfor ce recommended that employees should have the ability to take sick leave and family violence leave in units of less than a day on a proportionate basis for time and pay with a minimum amount of a quarter of a day. This would provide greater clarity on the matter of partial sick and family violence leave, protect employees entitlements, and ensure that the usage and deduction of sick and family violence leave entitlements would more closely align. However, it may increase payroll complexity and lead to inc reased costs for employers that: currently treat part sick leave and family violence leave days as whole days ; and have employee s that use their full entitlement and need more time off ; and require employees who have used their full entitlement to take annual or unpaid leave . MBIE considers that very few employees would use their full family violence leave entitlements as a result of not being granted part days and needing to take unpaid leave each year. While this number would be higher for sick leave, it is not possible to provide an estimate of increased costs. It is expected that the fiscal impacts would likely be negligible at the New Zealand economy level.
Full Impact Statement Template Otherwise working day test Section () of the Act provides a list of factors to be taken into account by the employer and employee when determining whether a day is an Otherwise Working Day for FBAPS purposes. However, as these factors are not ranked and there is no guidance about the weighting that should be attached to each factor, there are often difficulties determining whether an employee is eligible or not for a day of FBAPS leave. The Taskforce recommended that a day should be considered an Otherwise Working Day for an employee for FBAPS purposes if: the employee was expected to work on the day in question according to a work pattern that has previously been agreed between the employee and employer, or the employee has worked on or more of the corresponding days in either the previous weeks or the previous weeks. This approach pr ovides prescription and certainty as to whether a particular calendar day is an Otherwise Working Day for an employee , ensuring that employees receive their correct entitlements. However, although it minimises incentives for employers to make short term ch anges to rosters in order to avoid obligations, it does not remove the incentive to set permanent working arrangements in a way that reduces costs relating to public holidays. For example, MBIE has received feedback from a number of workers that their empl oyers have placed them on a Tuesday to Saturday roster in order to avoid having to pay them for the public holidays that fall on a Monday. It is possible that more employees will receive FBAPS leave than under the current Act, although it could be argued that these employees should already be receiving them. It is expected that the new Otherwise Working Day test will result in a negligible marginal cost. New bereavement leave definition Employees can take three days bereavement leave on the death of their partner, parent, child, sibling, grandparent, grandchild or partners parent. Bereavement leave can be taken at any time and for any purpose relating to the death, and does not have to be taken strai ght away or on consecutive days. A separate provision en ables an employee to take one days bereavement leave on the death of any other person. However, this is only on recognition by the employer that the employee has suffered bereavement by taking into account : closeness of relationship; any responsibility for ceremonies around death; andor cultural responsibilities . The Taskforce recommended that section ()(a) of the Act, regarding people on whose death the employee may take three days of bereavement leave, should be extended to include: stepfamily familybymarriage not already included (siblings inlaw and children inlaw) cultural family groups (e.g. wh ngai relationships) aunts, uncles, nieces and nephews miscarriage. shrvakdix
Full Impact Statement Template This would recognise the importance of a greater set of relationships and circumsta nces, provide greater certainty to employees about when they can take bereavement leave and better supports the purposes of the Act. It also better support s cultural practices and varied family arrangements. This proposal is likely to have cost implicatio ns for employers. However, it is not possible to estimate the marginal fiscal impact of the extended bereavement leave definition as bereavement leave is not finite , there are no reliable statistics on the number of days currently taken each year, and no r eliable way to estimate how much employees would use after a change in legislation . For comparison purposes, if the number of bereavement leave days taken each year by employees increased on average from half a day to one, costs would increase from . million a year to . million a year. Closedown provisions The Act allows employers to have one period per year where they customarily close operations and require employees to use some or all of their annual holiday entitlements. Businesses can have additional closedowns throughout the year if employees agree, but employers cannot require the use of holiday entitlements for these additional closedowns. The Taskforce proposed a number of changes to the Act to provider greater transparency and certainty for employees . It also recommended that the requirements that holidays are paid out at and an employees anniversary must be reset during a closedown should be removed. These recommendations better protect employees entitlements, align with the p urpose of the Act and provide greater certainty for employees. As they do not alter the level of entitlement (just whether it is taken as leave or as a lump sum payment), it would not increase costs for employers. Sale and transfer of a business Under the current Act, employees outstanding holidays and leave entitlements cannot be transferred from an outgoing employer to a new employer in the event that a business is sold. This is because, in these situations, existing employment agreements come to an end and the Act requires that outstanding annual holidays entitlements are to be paid out. The exception to this requirement is when vulnerable workers are involved and section J of Part A of the Employment Relations Act applies. Anecdotally, MBIE is a ware that in many instances these entitlements are in fact transferred from one employer to a new employer. In some cases, this may occur with the agreement of employees while in other cases it may occur without employees being given a choice. The Taskforc e recommended that on the sale and transfer of a business, employees should have a choice about whether to transfer all of their leave entitlements or have them paid out and reset. This benefits employees who have accumulated entitlements and wish to retai n them. For example, if they have carried over days paid sick leave in recent years and have accumulated annual holidays in prep aration for an upcoming shrvakdix
Full Impact Statement Template trip. However, it also p rovides the option to have their annual holidays paid out for those employees that would prefer a lump sum payment. The Taskforce pro posals imply that the employer that is selling would be responsible for paying out entitlements for the employees that wished to reset them , but this is not made explicit . This issue, as wel l as concerns around inheriting incorrect holidays and leave records and liabilities, will be examined as part of the next phase of the Holidays Act Review. This proposal has some potential disadvantages : The ability for employees to be paid out for accum ulated annual and alternative holidays is contrary to the policy objective of giving employees time away from work. It is unclear whether it has the potential to lead to behavioural change, such as incoming employers deciding to start fresh with new staff rather than retaining existing employees, offering incentives one way or another, or only offering employment to employees who take a pay out . It could also have implications for a businesss ability to sell, particularly if a new employer would be inheri ting large leave liabilities and incomplete wage, time and leave records. In light of the Taskforces recommendations that annual holidays can be taken in advance on a pro rata basis and that sick leave, bereavement leave and family violence leave are avai lable from day one, it is expected that this recommendation would not have a significant marginal cost for employers . Record keeping and payslips requirements Under the current Act, employers must keep the information necessary to demonstrate that they hav e complied with minimum entitlement provisions. The Taskforce agreed with this general approach and recommended that record keeping requirements should be to reflect changes to how leave and entitlements are held, calculated and paid. It also recom mended that employers should be required to retain all holiday and leave records for six years and to make these available to employees on request. As there is currently no legal requirement for employers to provide payslips to employees, the Taskforce recommended that employers should be required to provide payslips to employees in every pay period. It was proposed that p ayslips could be in a digital or physical format, but employees should be able to request that their payslip be provided in a specific format. These recommendations help to ensure that employers hold the information needed to calculate pay and leave entitlements, address any queries from employees and support any investigation into correct payment or miscalculation. They also provide a c lear way for employees to have regular access to information regarding their leave entitlements, increase transparency, and allow employees to better understand and track their holidays and leave entitlements. The proposed requirements may necessitate changes to payroll systems and result in direct costs to payroll providers and indirect costs to employers. The payslips requirement may also increase compliance costs for employers. It is unclear how much these recommendations may cost individual employer s or New Zealand more generally, shrvakdix
Full Impact Statement Template but MBIE intends to work with payroll providers and employers during implementation to assist with the transition. shrvakdix
Full Impact Statement Template Section : Implementation and operation . How will the new arrangements work in practice The implementation of options one or two would require le gislative change via a Holidays Amendment Bill. It is anticipated that a n amended Act would come into effect to months after royal assent in order to provide payroll providers the time to develop n ew systems and for employers to adopt them. Transitional provisions would likely be needed, and although the details of these still need to be worked through , it is expected that they would be relatively complex and detailed in order to minimise costs and unintentional non compliance for employers . The Better Rules approach would be used in the drafting process in order to help develop the detailed policy and implementation specifications. It involves creating a clear concept model, decision trees and rules statements that can then be translated into both written legislation and computer code. This should result in legislation that is clear and workable for computerised payroll systems. The Better Rules approach seeks to involve important stakeholders into t he process in this case, it could include employer and employee representatives, payroll providers and Parliamentary Counsel Office. Once implemented, MBIE would be the agency responsible for the legislation. The Labour Inspectorate, as the regulator fo r the employment relations and standards regulatory system, would be responsible for enforcing and monitoring the new arrangements. It is especially important that sufficient s upport is provided to employers, employees and payroll providers during the implementation period . For the Labour Inspectorate, this could include: increasing its resourcing in order to determine how to operationalise the new requirements , develop new training resources, and enforce the new requirements engaging with relevant stakeholders (e.g. roadshows with payroll providers and payroll professionals) updating approximately per cent of the existing guidance and products relating to holidays legislation .
Full Impact Statement Template Section : Monitoring, evaluation and review . How will the impact of the new arrangements be monitored MBIE will track the number and types of queries to the MBIE contact centre, the Labour Inspectorate and our websites (business.govt.nz and employment.govt.n z) in relation to the Holidays Act. The number and types of breaches resulting from Labour Inspectorate activities, as well as Employment Relations Authority and Employment Court cases, will also be monitored. The details of the monitoring and evaluation f ramework will be developed by MBIE as part of the next phase of work.
Full Impact Statement Template As part of the regulatory analysis, MBIE developed estimates of the number of emp loyees impacted by the proposed changes to the Act and which sectors could be most impacted. The estimate for the number of employees with variable working pat terns andor pay, and considered a proxy for those most likely impacted by options one and two, was based on: the number of employees with no usual working p attern (,) the number of employees that work shifts that vary (,) the number of employees that worked paid overtime at a higher rate in the last four weeks (,) the number of employees who do not usually work standard hours (,). These figures only provide an indication of how many employees may see a change in their holidays and leave payments as a result o f options one and two. As proxies have been used, the actual number that may be impacted could differ. Estimated fiscal impacts have also been developed for a number of Taskforce proposals. Calculations have used a number of estimates and assumptions, such as estimated number of employees and average weekly earnings, so are intended to provide a broad indication of possible costs.
Full Impact Statement Template Impact Statement : Improving the Holidays Act
Full Impact Statement Template Estimated fiscal impacts have also been develo ped for a number of Taskforce proposals. Calculations have used a number of estimates and assumptions, such as estimated number of employees and average weekly earnings, so are intended to provide a broad indication of possible costs. . Responsible Ma nager (signature and ): Gerard Clark Employment Standards Policy team Labour and Immigration Policy branch Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment
Full Impact Statement Template Section : Problem definition and objectives . What is the current state within which action is proposed The Act sets out the minimum entitlements to holidays and leave, and payment for them, that employers are obliged to provide to their employees. Its purpose is to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees lives by providing minimum entitlements to annual holidays and other types of leave. It is estimated that there are , employers and , , employees in New Zealand. Under the Act, all employees are entitled to: A minimum of four weeks paid annual holidays after each months of continuous employment for their employer. Employees can be paid annual holidays on a pay asyougo basis if they are on a fixed term agreement of less than months or work so intermittently or i rregularly that it is impractical for the employer to provide them with four weeks annual holidays . Up to public holidays each year, if they are days they would otherwise work. An alternative holiday, if they are required to work (or are on call and th is impacts on their day ) on a public holiday that is an otherwise working day . Access to five days paid sick leave a year , days paid domestic violence leave a year , and up to days of paid bereavement leave per bereavement: after six months of current contin uous employment with the same employer, or after working for the employer for six months for an average of hours per week, and at least one hour in every week, or hours in every month. Annual holidays are paid at whichever rate is the higher of the employees ordinary weekly pay (or if this is not possible to calculate, the average weekly ea rnings in the last four weeks) and the employees average weekly earnings in the last months. Sick leave, bereavement leave , family violence leav e and public holidays are paid at the rate of relevant daily pay, or average daily pay if it is not possible to calculate relevant daily pay or the employees daily pay varies within the pay period . The Act also covers a number of other issues . These include annual closedowns for businesses, transferring of public holidays and cashing up one weeks holiday. While an employment agreement cannot provide less leave than is required under the Act, it can provide more, and many employers do in fact set their employee entitlements at levels above the minimum standards set out in the Act. Analysis of collective agreements, for example, indicates that per cent of employees have more annual holidays than the statutory minimum and per cent are entitled to days sick leave in their first year of employment.
Full Impact Statement Template . What regulatory system (s) are already in place Annual holidays and leave is part of the wider employment relations and employment standards regulatory system. The purpose of this system is to promote employment relationships that are productive, flexible and to the benefit of employers and employees. The core statutory requirements relating to holidays and leave are provided in the Holidays Act . The Act is based on prevailing societ al views about just treatment and acknowledge s that conditions can arise in labour markets where asymmetries of power and information can exist between employers and employees. The Act is supported by online tools and guides, a contact centre and problem resolution services established under employment relations statute . These include: Mediation Services , where an independent mediator seeks to help an employee and an employer resolve an employment relationship problem in a semi formal and con fidential environment. The Employment Relations Authority , an independent body established to consider the facts of an employment relationship problem and make a decision based on the merits of the case. The Employment Court , which hears and determines ca ses relating to employment disputes, including challenges to determinations of the Employment Relations Authority, questions of interpretation of law, and disputes over strikes and lockouts. Labour Inspectors , who monitor and enforce compliance with employ ment standards .
Full Impact Statement Template Many employees are not receiving their correct entitlements, or payment for their entitlements Employers and employees do not have certainty regarding the provision of and payment for entitlements Employers, particularly those with large numbe rs of employees on variable work and pay arrangements, can incur relatively high compliance costs to comply with the Act The Act cannot be readily systematised in a payroll system Many employers are carrying a liability that cannot be readily quantified (a nd may change significantly when employees change their work patterns). These challenges with the Act itself, combined with poor implementation in payroll systems and the business processes that support them, have led to widespread non compliance with the legislation. Since , every employer engaged by the Labour Inspectorate Payroll team has had a form of non compliance with the Act, ranging from relatively minor record keeping breaches to fullscale noncompliance with the provision and payment of holi days and leave. It has been estimated that between , and , employees could be affected by non compliance in New Zealand. Noncompliance issues have often led to underpayments to employees. As at June , arrears had been calculated in respec t of of the completed investigations undertaken by the Labour Inspectorate into non compliance with the Act. In total, around . million has been paid to , employee s across numerous organisations. This figure will grow over time District Health Boards have estimated remediation payments with a cost of million, while the Ministry of Education had million allocated in Budget for remediation payments. In December , the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety receive d a joint proposal from Business New Zealand and the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions to review the legislation. A Taskforce was established by Cabinet soon after to review the Act and suggest recommendations for change. The tripartite group was compris ed of BusinessNZ, the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions and government representatives (MBIE, the State Services Commission and Inland Revenue) , and was chaired by Professor Gordon Anderson, an employment law specialist from Victoria University. It provi ded the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety with its final report in October , and proposed an improved status quo where the existing units of entitlement are retained (weeks for annual holidays, days for other forms of leave) and the focus is on addressing known issues with the existing Act. A number of non legislative initiatives have been implemented in recent years to try and address issues with the Act. In addition to proactive audits and investigations, the Labour Inspectorate has conducte d extensive industry engagement and developed a suite of tools and guides . However, while these efforts have provided greater clarity and support to employers and employees, it is clear that th ey are not sufficient to fully mitigate the problems with the A ct itself . Without legislative intervention, employers will
Full details of NAATI recertification criteria can be found on the NAATI website.
Full details of the scheme are available on the domestic topup scheme page.
Full members of New Zealand Cycle Trails Incorporated (NZCT Inc)
Full text versions of Conventions
Functional Leader for government procurement and property.
Funded by levies on wages and salaries, with both workers and employers paying an estimated . each
Funded researchers should follow funder principles and policies with respect to research data management and should be prepared to share data with other researchers through online institutional or subject data repositories whenever they are not restricted by other considerations as described above. Researchers are encouraged to produce a data management plan outlining what data sets their project will generate or process, whether and how these data will be made accessible, how they will be curated, stored, and preserved, and measures taken to safeguard and protect indigenous or other sensitive data.
Funding a dispute resolution scheme
Funding can be used by the RTO to assist with administration costs incurred managing the funding process. It is considered up to is reasonable should RTOs choose to claim these costs. This must be deducted by the RTO from the funding allocated to the event. It is not additional to the allocated funding.
Funding can be used for RTOs to undertake additional promotion of their event or for the RTO to provide to an event organiser (via a thirdparty contract) to undertake additional promotion of an event.
Funding cannot be used to substitute existing funding for promotional activities.
Funding commercialisation projects from publicly funded research.
Funding for Great Ride trail managers and annual maintenance.
Funding for quality assurance, data and insights, and promotion of the NZCT brand.
Funding for reasonable travelrelated expenses, such as insurance cover.
Funding for the summer will be available to local authorities to help manage responsible camping. It will be for operating costs, including education and enforcement projects, ambassador programmes, as well as temporary facilities like showers and toilets
Funding information and opportunities
Funding is for additional event promotion costs only i.e. not to substitute the existing budget (see example in cofunding section)
Funding is for ebike charging equipment and installation costs only (Note: The fund should not be used for additional facilities associated with the charging station)
Funding is in addition to the . million in grants that was allocated to RTOs through the Strategic Tourism Assets Protection Programme (STAPP) in .
Funding of a further round of the Tourism Infrastructure Fund. This is to support communities by cofunding infrastructure that is significantly used by visitors to prepare for the return of international tourists.
Funding recipients for the Strategic Tourism Assets Protection Programme
Funding second NAATI tests (if you have failed your first NAATI language test)
Funding to attract more international visitors to regional New Zealand
Funding will be available for one year of data collection with a further six months for both implementation and design, and finalisation (including delivery of data and project report to the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE)). It is anticipated that applicants will commission professional data providers to deliver services, enabling quality data.
Funding will be available for one year of data collection with a further six months for either designimplementation andor finalisation
Further advice on eligibility for remedies for personal grievances
Further advice on eligibility for remedies for personal grievances PDF KB
Further consultation in SeptemberOctober involved online survey, email submissions and more hui. We heard from:
Further decisions on proposed national IP policy for research and wider incentives for commercialisation.
Further decisions regarding Callaghan Innovation
Further detail about industry policy and the ITP Programme
Further detailed design work will be required to implement the Taskforces recommendations in legislation
Further information about GYSS, including eligibility criteria and confirmed speakers, is included below and on their website:
Further information about the Food Secure Communities Programme is available on the Ministry of Social Development website.
Further information about the NESTF and National Environmental Standards more generally can be found on the Ministry for the Environment website.
Further information about the Tourism Futures Taskforce
Further information on Horizon Europe for New Zealand entities
Further information on each area
Further information on the Recognised Seasonal Employer Scheme
Further partnerships will be added to this list over time, including those that are currently under development alongside new opportunities.
Further work is needed to fully develop these proposals and it is expected that further advice on the review proposals will be provided to the new Minister of Immigration in the first half of next year.
Further work responding to the Royal Commission on the Pike River Coal Mine Tragedy included:
Future Services. Leads the Our Future Services programme to deliver a costeffective immigration system that is productive, effective at managing risk and provides a more seamless experience for our customers and staff. Future Services also leads Continuous Improvement work to improve efficiency, standardise processes and remove waste in our ways of working and support leadership capability and culture.
Future iterations of Going For Growth will be released as your ideas are adopted and as the Government makes progress through its agenda.
Future of Work Tripartite Forum
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting November
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting September
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting March
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting March (cancelled due to COVID)
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting September
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting June
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting July
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting June
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting June
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting March
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting April
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting November
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting agenda March PDF KB
Future of the Skilled Migrant Category
Future of work: Status update PDF KB
Future plans (inclusive of possible funding streams independent of the TDPF) for replicating the proposed initiative are identified. Final reporting requirements will include a report back on efforts identified in proposals.
Future plans are identified for how the proposed data will addvalue to the tourism data system and be used to enable better productivity or improved environmental outcomes. Examples might include upcoming strategy or business case development or monitoring for continuous improvement. Examples do not need to be limited to a subsector. The extent of impact will be demonstrated by the number of uses identified, as well as the reach of each use.
Future procurement opportunities
Future procurement opportunities (FPO) are posted on the Government Electronic Tender Service (GETS). This gives suppliers early notice of a planned procurement. You can follow an FPO and receive notifications when a related tender is released on GETS.
Future review for the copper pricing framework
GBSI presents important commercial and defence opportunities for New Zealand. However, it could also be used to facilitate activities that may harm our national security or are contrary to our national interests.
GETS award notices historic
GETS product categories historic
GETS region by tender historic
GETS schema and documentation
GETS supplier data historic
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO THE REPORT OF THE HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Proposal
GPS trackers and personal locator beacons.
GST registration certificate or a copy of the online IR GST registration
GYSS will cover the following during the Summit:
GYSS is a gathering of young scientists and research ( years old or younger) from all over the world, with a chance to interact with eminent scientists and technology leaders in the multidisciplinary fields of chemistry, physics, medicine, mathematics, computer science and engineering. GYSS provides a platform for conversations on science and research, technology, innovation and solutions to global challenges.
Game Development Sector Rebate scheme
Game development sector rebate
Gap analysis of policies and programmes for a just transition PDF KB
Gas (Safety and Measurement) Regulations
Gas production forecast to fall below demand
Gathering further information from applicants as necessary:
Gene technology (also known as genetic engineering or genetic modification) has been used in New Zealand for a long time. The rules intend to support our scientists in using gene technologies to make advancements in healthcare and climate change, protect our unique environment, lift our agricultural productivity, and boost exports.
Gene technology has the potential to deliver enormous benefits for New Zealand, but we havent been able to capture these benefits. Like Australia, a regulator will be established to allow New Zealand to access the benefits and manage the risks of these technologies. The regulator will make sure the use of gene technology is safe.
Gene technology is a powerful tool that has the potential to deliver enormous benefits for New Zealand.
Gene technology media pack DOCX KB
Gene technology regulation
Gene technology regulator
General Funding Agreement contract template New Zealand Singapore Leveraging AI for Healthy Agei.
General Manager People and Culture (Policy Owner)
General background to the OSHAA Act . With the advent of Rocket Lab (a United States company with a New Zealand subsidiary) conducting space launches from New Zealand, there is a need to mana ge various associated risks to New Zealand , including: meeting international obligations as set out in international treaties relating to space activities to which New Zealand is party, including liability and insurance , meeting obligations under the Tec hnology Safeguards Agreement, a treaty level agreement with the United States for managing the transfer of sensitive technology from the U nited States to New Zealand , manag ing safety risks that arise from space activities , and ensuring that space activit ies conducted in New Zealand (and by New Zealanders offshore) are consistent with New Zealands national interests, including national security. . Although rockets , their launches and high altitude vehicles (HAV s) are to some extent regulated by Civil Aviati on Act Part , New Zealand has no comprehensive regulatory regime designed for space launches . Therefore, there is limited scope to prevent anyone from launching space or high altitude objects or to manage the operation . . The OSHAA Act establishes a regulatory regime to ensure that New Zealand can meet its international obligations and m anage the risks associated with space and high altitude activities. . When the OSHAA Act comes into force, licenses andor permits will be required for the following act ivities: Launching a launch vehicle(e.g. a rocket) into outer space from New Zealand , Launching and operating a payload (e.g. a satellite) from New Zealand , Launching a HAV from New Zealand (such vehicles operate above controlled air space but do not reac h outer space) , Operating a launch facility in New Zealand , and Launching a launch vehicle or payload by a New Zealand national overseas (a requirement of New Zealands international obligations). . MBIE will administer the licensing regime and undertake s pace policy functions. The Minister for Economic Development will a ct on advice from MBIE and relevant agencies to determine whether to grant licenses and permits . . A number of threshold tests ap ply to the grant ing of a license or permit (depending on the provisions of the OSHAA Act ), such as : Applicants must be technically capable of undertaking the proposed mission Applicants must demonstrate how they will manage public safety Applicants must demonstrate how they will mitigate orbital debris
General enquiries, feedback and complaints
Geneva Conventions Act
Geographical Indications (Wine and Spirits) Registration Act review
Geology, biology, chemistry, physics for bachelor and then on to a Masters degree
Geothermal energy generation
Get in touch with us if you would like more information or have a question.
Getting people into employment and lifting economic outcomes.
Give wildlife space, for example if encountering seals or sea lions, keep a distance of at least metres.
Given the magnitude of the emergency response and the widespread damage to buildings, MBIE wanted to understand how well the rapid building assessment system functioned during the response and to identify any areas for improvement.
Given this existing work, the Tourism ITP took the taken the opportunity to take a phased approach and focus energy on targeted actions required to deliver systemic change, rather than producing another stocktake of issues and challenges for the industry.
Global Challenges and Industrial Competitiveness: Addresses societal challenges and promotes industrial competitiveness.
Global Impact Visa evaluation: Implementation and early outcomes year one report PDF MB
Global Impact Visa evaluation: Integration and early outcomes year two report PDF .MB
Global Impact Visa evaluation: year three final report PDF .MB
Global Young Scientists Summit
Global Youth Scientists Summit
Global circularity hubs, networks and alliances are on the rise
Global impact visa evaluation reports
Glossary and common abbreviations
Glossary of commonly used trade terms
Glossary of dispute resolution terms
GoBusiness and GoManufacturing make it easier for small businesses and the manufacturing sector in New Zealand to access the tools, advice, and resources they need to grow, export, and reach their full potential. By packaging content from across government and the private sector, these websites provide simple, clear, and practical information designed with small businesses and manufacturers in mind.
Going For Growth sets out pillars driving the push for economic growth:
Going For Growth sets out steps to ensure regulatory settings:
Going For Growth sets out steps to:
Going For Growth: supermarkets on notice
Golden Bay Emergency Communications Services Charitable Trust
Good governance practice in the public sector
Good ways to get started are:
Gordon Anderson Holidays Act Taskforce Chair
Gordon Anderson Holidays Act Taskforce Chair shrvakdix
Governance is a key lever to ensure regulatory systems are clear about what they set out to achieve, how they go about achieving it, and monitoring results. The right people at the governance table can bring all the parts of a system together to ensure that the system is learning and adapting, rather than taking a set and forget approach. Good governance can help with response to critical issues (such as Covid lockdowns), adaptation to changes in our uncertain environment, and ensuring delivery minimises compliance costs while maximising societal benefits.
Government Centre for Dispute Resolution
Government Electronic Tenders Service
Government Investment in Decarbonising Industry
Government Procurement Rules
Government Procurement Rules consultation
Government Property Group
Government Property Group (GPG).
Government Property Group website
Government agencies are working with the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) and the Department of Internal Affairs (DIA) on the comprehensive LAS work programme to transform the way in which New Zealand public sector agencies provide language assistance services to nonEnglish speaking clients.
Government agencies need to identify opportunities to improve information for victims of exploitation and other vulnerable groups.
Government agencies that need a large volume of translation services may find our draft Transition Plan useful as a basis for preparing their own plan.
Government and local communities cofund the Great Rides, which provide a healthy and enjoyable way for New Zealanders and international visitors to see the country.
Government briefings and papers
Government confirms next steps for tourism data initiatives
Government entities have stewardship obligations under the State Sector Act to monitor the performance of the regulatory systems they oversee.
Government has a significant programme of work to ensure the building regulatory system is efficient, and to support the building and construction sector to lift performance.
Government has a significant programme of work to support the building and construction sector to lift performance.
Government launches the Former Refugees, Recent Migrants and Ethnic Communities Employment Action Plan
Government performs a number of functions in the resolution of disputes. It:
Government policy statements
Government prescribes daylight disinfectant to modern slavery
Government presentation on next steps for responding to emissions budgets PDF KB
Government presentations on the current state of the economy and labour market and skills and training PDF .MB
Government provides confidence to those seeking an adventure
Government response to the report of the Holidays Act Taskforce PDF MB
Governments Tourism Snapshot
Governmentled connectivity programmes such as the UltraFast Broadband Programme, Rural Broadband Initiative Mobile Black Spot Fund, Rural Capacity Upgrades Programme and Remote Users Scheme are delivering improved broadband and mobile services to New Zealanders.
Graduate students (Masters and Doctoral)
Granny flats building consent exemption on track
Grant Webster, Tourism Holdings Limited (coChair)
Grant has been the Chief Executive Officer of Tourism Holdings Limited since . Grant is Chairman of the joint venture businesses Action Manufacturing, Just go Motorhomes and Togo. He is also currently on the Board of Tourism Industry Aotearoa (TIA).
Granting visas to people who New Zealand needs to work, visit, study, or settle here.
Grants for scientific research and associated activities since .
Grants to Regional Tourism Organisations (RTOs)
Grants will be from a minimum of , to a maximum of ,
Great Rides get ebike upgrade
Greater exposure should generally lead to greater incidence of the effect. However, in some cases, the mere presence of the factor can trigger the effect. In other cases, an inverse proportion is observed: greater exposure leads to lower incidence.
Greater transparency for employees
Green Paper and consultation
Gross earnings (GE): For the purposes of calculating payments for holidays and leave, gross earnings means all payments that the employer is required to pay to the employee under the employees employment agreement for the period during which the earni ngs are being assessed (subject to certain exclusions under the Act) (Sections , A, A, , , , , and of the Act ).
Groundbased space infrastructure
Groundbased space infrastructure (GBSI) refers to the systems on Earth that interact with spacecraft.
Grounds for objecting to a Category installation are that the person:
Grow regional economies by improving resilience and increasing productivity. (MBIE)
Growing RD expenditure has benefits for us all, and will enable our innovators, our entrepreneurs and our visionaries to build a better New Zealand.
Growing RD will fuel innovation, drive economic diversification, and increase productivity.
Growing global food security with digital tools
Growing innovative industries in New Zealand: From the knowledge wave to the digital age
Growing the food and beverage sector
Growing the number of skilled people
Growth in global travel means that some destinations around the world are under pressure from tourism, resulting in overcrowding and negative effects on the quality of the visitor experience, the environment and communities.
Growth in labour productivity
Guidance for Public Service Agencies: Developing DEI Plans
Guidance for the distribution of Cabinetrelated material PDF KB
Guidance is available on these topics:
Guidance on developing and reviewing a dispute resolution scheme
Guidance on dispute resolution
Guidance on dispute resolution clauses in contracts
Guidance on how to make a complaint
Guidance, standards, and information
Guidance: Flexibleworkbydefault
Guides and resources available for government agencies and communities regarding the Language Assistance Services programme.
Guiding principles on business and human rights PDF . MB
HAB is a series of stratospheric balloons. The primary objective of the balloons is to test components and systems intended to be used by the Kea Atmos highaltitude platform solarpowered aircraft, currently in development.
HOLIDAYS ACT REFORM: FURTHER POLICY DECISIONS Proposal The lack of clarity and certainty provided by the Holidays Act (the Act) has been a longstanding issue . This paper seeks agreement to change s and additions to some of the previous Governments policy decisions on the reforms CAB MIN before release of an exposure draft for targeted consultation later this year . Relation to Government priorities The Coalition Governments Action Plan for the period April June includes taking Cabinet decisions on the reform of the Act. The proposals in th is paper also relate to the Governments priority to im prove the quality of regulation. Executive Summary Issues with the Act have been a longstanding concern for employers and payroll providers. The lack of clarity around the processes and calculations required to determine leave entitlements and payments make s the Act difficult to apply in practice . Even with the best intentions, most employers w ill have found themselves noncompliant at some point in time. In t he previous Government set up a Holidays Act Taskforce (the Taskforce) to make suggestions for improvements to the Act and i n endorsed all of the Taskforces recommendations . Before the General Election drafting of the Employment (Leave Entitlements) Bill (the Bill) began , but was not completed. I am concerned the previous Governments decisions were not on t rack to improve the simpli city and workability of the legislation . In fact, in some areas I believe the previous Governments decisions would add complexity and compliance costs. I am seeking Cabinet s agreement to make further policy decisions in order to address some of the opportunities the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment ( MBIE ) has identified to increase simpli city, reduce costs and improve workability. My proposals at this time focus on areas where policy and drafting work can be undertaken quickly so that this Government can demonstrate timely progress . I plan to release an exposure draft of the Bill for targeted consultation in September , along with a consultation document . Releasing an exposure draft for consultation this year will demonstrate this Governments commitment to resolving this longstanding issue. The exposure draft Bill would incorporate the c hanges proposed in this paper but would largely reflect decisions made by the previous
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper . Overview of the Holidays Act
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper . Employers have a range of obligations that are set out in the Act. These are outlined below:
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper compliance Powers of , and determinations by , a Labour Inspector Obligations relating to holiday and leave records
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper . Who is affected by the issues with the current Act All employers and employees are affected by noncompliance . with the Act . We understand that the issues with the Act traverse the range of employment arrangements in New Zealand, and it is unlikely that any employer or employee experiences none of the problems identified in this paper . Even employers with a workforce working standard hours may face challenges such as not including all payments in gross earnings. . This means that finding solutions to the challenges posed by the Act will support all employers and employees to better understand their obligations and enti tlements. . It is clear to the Taskforce that issues with the Holidays Act are widespread across the New Zealand economy. Therefore, any potential solutions need to be applicable to the full range of current and expected future working arrangements. We will need to guard against the risk of solving problems for one group only to create problems for a different group. but its harder for some employers for different reasons . . Some employers find it more difficult to comply with the Act, or are more likely to face implementation issues than others , particularly where there are flexible or variable work practices in place . The review of the Holidays Act will consider the circumstances and arrangements that make compliance more difficult , in order to ensure that solutions are effective and make a difference where it matters most. . For instance, some small and medium sized employers have difficulty interpreting the Act (particularly if they do not have a dedicated payroll professional as part of their staff). This c an lead to poor understanding of the Act, especially its more complex provisions, and may see employers taking shortcuts or incorrectly applying parts of the Act. . At the other end of the labour market, large employers look to systematise as much of their payroll as possible, particularly when dealing with a workforce that does not have regular and identical work patterns. This drive to systematise the Act can lead large employers to miss parts of the Act that require manual decision making and interventi on (such as the determination of what a week is for an employee). . Some employers are unable to comply with the Act because their payroll system is not compliant, or because they misunderstand the capabilities and limitations of their system. Not all payroll systems have been adapted to the requirements of New Zealand law. For example, many payroll systems use accrual methods for calculating leave entitlements. This can cause issue s as accrual system s are based on accumulating an entitlement over time. This approach may not be compatible with the requirements of the Act, in particular the need for entitlements to be determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken. Furthermore, the set andforget mentality that some employers have regarding systemisation often means that payroll systems may not be when circumstances change. . Some sectors and industries are particularly prone to complex working arra ngements that do not fit the standard working week that the Act was originally based on. For example, sectors that have a high proportion of employees working irregular hours, such
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper as hospitality, retail or health may be more likely to have problems with i nterpreting and implementing the Act. . Any solution recommended by the Taskforce must be simple enough to be understood easily by all employers and employees, able to be systematised in a way that is implementable for most employers who use payroll systems , and cover the wide vari ety of working arrangements while ensuring employees receive their minimum entitlements. Have we accurately captured the broad range of business arrangements that can contribute to difficulties with the Act
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper . Issues also arise in relation to payments as well as the actual entitlements, especially when employees pay is variable or the payroll system is not when changes occur. This can occur when employees payments include commission, incentive based payments, overtime, or board and lodgings. Complications can arise in determining whether these additional payments are regular or not, and therefore should be included in the calculation of payments for leave. . It would seem that the more a working arrange ment differs from a standard day working week paid as a regular salary, the more likely employers and employees are to be caught out by the various issues that arise in implementing the Holidays Act. This highlights to the Taskforce that any solution n eeds to be flexible enough to cover all possible arrangements, especially given the expected shifts towards more flexible work patterns in the future.
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper recommendations about, the role the Inspectorate should play in relation to any new legislation arising from this review. The review can also consider alternative institutional arrangements in relation to the regulation and administration of any new holidays legislation (for example, whether other agencies or institutions should have any particular roles in relation to any new legislation). Do you have anything further to add about the role of the Lab our Inspectorate as a regulator of the Holidays Act
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper . What are the k ey issues with the Holidays Act
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper . An example of this difficulty is in defining a week for the purpose of the annual holidays entitlement when it is not obvious (for example, if employees work on a roster pattern that does not fit a weekly cycle, or they work variable hours and days from week to week). The Act is not explicit about how to achieve this, relying instead on employers and employees reaching agreement about what genuinely constitutes a working week (Section ()) for the employee at the time the leave is taken. . The experience of recent years has shown that this approach is not working in practice. The lack of prescription and clear guidance has led to problems, especially in situations where the constructive engagement between employers and employees in relation to leave provisions may not be taking place or where employment agreements (whether individual or collective ) are not kept or agree to things that are not in line with the Act. .. The Holidays Act is a complex piece of legislation which can prove confusing to those using it . Attempting to provide a range of ways for employers and employees to meet their obligations under the Act means that the Act is complex. There are s everal different pay calculations in the Act including: Two calculations for Ordinary Weekly Pay ((Section () and Section () if Section () cannot be used) Calculation of Average Weekly Earnings (Section ()) Calculation of Relevant Daily Pay (Section () ) Calculation of Average Daily Pay (Section A ()) Calculation of annual holiday pay after an entitlement to a holiday has arisen (i.e. where an employee has worked for more than months) (Section ) Calculation of annual holiday pay if holiday taken in advance (i.e. before an employee has worked for more than months) (Section ) Calculation of annual holiday pay if employment ends within months (Section ) Calculation of payment for public holidays (Section ) Calculation of payment for alternative h olidays (Section ) . Often employers are unclear which calculations should be used and many employers are not using the correct calculations at the correct times . . For example, in relation to payment for BAPS leave it can be difficult to determine when to use Relevant Daily Pay (RDP) as opposed to Average Daily Pay (ADP). Section A() sets out the circumstances in which an employer may use ADP, but there may be circumstances in which an employer may be able to determine both RDP and ADP. In these circumstances the Act is not explicit about what is required (i.e. in situations where the employees daily pay varies within the pay period when the holiday or leave falls then the employer may use RDP or ADP). . One of the key principles underpinning the Act is that entitlements are determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken (so an employee taking leave for a day is paid what they would expec t to have earnt if they had been at work). In practice, however, determining entitlements in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken can pose implementation difficulties (for example, the work pattern can be open to interpretation or ha rd to prove if good records are not kept). . Achieving compliance with this requirement imposes a significant operational and administrative burden, particularly in large seasonal workforces andor where work patterns vary across different groups of employe es. It requires ongoing interaction
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper between payroll teams, employees, and managers, in relation to all employees. Furthermore, in the modern economy, flexible working is increasingly common. The Act provide s limited guidance as to how an employees entitlements should be determined where the employees hours of work are flexible (for example, an arrangement whereby the employee is paid for hours per week, which can be performed on any day and at any time of the employees choosi ng). .. especially given the l ack of clarity over certain terms used in the Act . There are two aspects to this issue: firstly, some terms or phrases are used in the Act with insufficient guidance provided to ensure a common understanding of the term between a ll parties (e.g. regular in relation to determining what income should be included in calculations for the payment of leave). This can lead to issues and misunderstandings if different parties have differing interpretations of particular terms or phrases . secondly, the Act sets out holidays and leave entitlements in weeks and days while payroll systems more commonly use hours. Issues can arise with the translation between the hours generally used by payroll systems into the days and weeks set out in the Act, especially when an individuals working arrangements change. Although this is not a problem with the Act itself , it causes practical issues for employers and employees when trying to implement the Act. Do you agree with the description of the cross cutting issues set out above If not, why not
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper Contents
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper that he works four days a (calendar) week for a block of four weeks and then three days a week for a block of four weeks before the eight week pattern repeats . It is harder to determine what a working week is for Simon. Marama works hours a week but has flexibility about when these hours are worked so the number of days worked each week varies between and days. A working week for Marama may best be accounted for in hours rather than days. This approach can however cause other issues (e.g. in terms of determining whether a day that has been requested as holiday falls on an otherwise working day) . . If agreement is not reached early on betw een an employer and an employee about what constitutes a working week for that employee, then this can have significant consequences when the employee takes leave. The basis of this agreement may also change over time , meaning that the agreement may need to be revisited. In practice this does not always occur when working arrangements change . .. Incorrect accrual over time . Problems can arise when payroll systems are used that have not been adapted to the requirements of New Zealand law. For example, many payr oll systems use accrual methods based on accumulating an entitlement over time. This approach may not be compatible with the requirements of the Act, in particular the need for entitlements to be determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the l eave is taken. Particular problems arise when employees hours change as, under a straightforward accrual system where the accrual pattern is set at the start of the year , an employee will not accrue sufficient time for four weeks leave if their hours inc rease during the year . This problem occurs even if the accrual pattern is when the employees hours increase. The result of this is that employees can be left without their correct entitlements while employers may be liable for remediation. . This issue can be exacerbated by the setandforget mentality that some employers have regarding systemisation , as this often means that payroll systems may not be when employees circumstances change. .. Knowing which method to use to determine payments for annual holidays, and how to use it correctly . Section requires employees to be paid for their annual holidays at a rate that is the greater of either their ordinary weekly pay (OWP) at the point the leave is taken, or average weekly earnings (A WE) for the months previous. Correctly applying section requires employers to calculate both OWP and AWE and use the larger number. . OWP can be determined in two ways. Section () defines it as the amount that the employee receives under their empl oyment agreement for an ordinary working week (including regular additional payments such as overtime and commission). However, section () allows OWP to be calculated using an averaging formula over the previous weeks if it is not possible to dete rmine OWP using section (). . Ensuring compliance with section , therefore, requires employers to have detailed wage and time records for employees that include details about earnings for the purposes of OWP and gross earnings over a longer time perio d for the purposes of AWE. The employer is also required to calculate the payment for both OWP and AWE (which can involve a subjective decision about what payments are deemed to be regular) and then use the larger number. . There are many stages in this pr ocess that introduce the risk of non compliance, if reliable quality assurance is not used .
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper employer and employee. This make s it difficult to systematise the OWD concept, and for parties to have confidence that the Act is being complied with. Employers sometimes attempt to systematise this by using a particular formula whic h may focus on one particular factor over others but such an approach may not be compliant with the Act. . The implications of this decision can be significant. For example, if an employee works on a public holiday that is an OWD for them, then they become entitled to an alternative holiday. If the day is not an OWD, then they do not become entitled to the alternative holiday . .. Determining what payments are included in an employees relevant daily pay and when average daily pay can be used instead. . The payment for a public holiday, alternative holiday, sick leave and bereavement leave is determined using RDP. This is defined by section as the amount of pay that the employee would have received had they worked on the day concerned. . RDP is a subjective and hypothetical decision, based on the historic earnings of the employee as well as the employers estimation of what the employee would have received had the employee worked on the day concerned (for instance , by looking at what other employees who did work earnt ). This is more difficult to calculate if employees earnings vary considerably (especially if commissions or other additional payments are part of their earnings), if the business is not open on the OWD that is being considered (e.g. it is shut for a public holiday) or where there arent sufficient records being kept . . Employers and employees can agree on a rate that is to be used as RDP in an employment agreement, but this must be equal to or greater than the rate that would be calculated using the above definition. Employers therefore need to carry out the calculation to be confident that they are compliant. . Section A allows an employer to use ADP if it is not possible or practicable to determine RDP, or if the employees daily pay varies wit hin the pay period when the holiday or leave falls. This allows employers to use a simpler week calculation. It is not clear that this trigger is appropriate, and the choice between RDP and ADP may benefit from being made simpler. . There is also an is sue relating to the calculation of ADP, as the formula in section A () requires the employees gross earnings to be divided by the number of whole or part days they worked. This could potentially disadvantage employees who work varied hours, as using ADP to calculate their pay treats all days equally regardless of how much is earned on each specific day. Do you agree with the description of the issues relating to BAPS leave here and in Annex Two If not, why not
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper . For example, people who work a Monday Friday five day week observe all public holidays regardless of the day that they fall on. This does not apply to other working arrangements (i.e. if somebody regularly works weekends but not Mondays).
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper . Ideas for change
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper . Next steps . Submissions received during this consultation period will be used to inform the work of the Taskforce as it develops its recommendations. . Once it has a full understanding of the issues posed by the Act, the Taskforce will develop options for change which will then be robustly tested using anonymised payroll data to assess how well these options could work in practice. . Following a robust tes ting phase the Taskforce expects to report back to the Minister of Workplace Relations and Safety with its recommendations by mid . The final report of the Taskforce will be publicly released.
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper Recap of questions
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper Do you agree with the description of the issues relating to BAPS leave set out on pages and in Annex Two If not, why not
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper Annex : Terms of Reference
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper f. minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees g. ensure the balance of decisionmaking between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated h. are readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future i. aim to protect overall entitlements for employees. Scope and parameters . The Review will retain the purpose of the current Act (in section ) and (at least) the current levels of entitlements (such as four weeks annual holidays, five days sick leave). . The Group will consider: a. options to improve both the provision of, and payment for, entitlements that meet the objectives set out in paragraph , and: i. where tradeoffs between competing objectives are required, will be explicit about how these are made ii. may include consideration of the place of the standard five day, hour, working week in the Act b. any other matters relating to the Act that it sees fit. This may include holidays and leave entitlements modified by other Acts (such as the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act ). . The principles set out in paragraph may also be reconsidered, but options must aim to preserve the intent of these as far as possible. . The Group will not, however, consider the complex issue of remediation of historical underpayments of holiday and leave pay. Membership and Process . The Group will consist representatives from MBIE, the State Services Commission and Inland Revenue, along with three to four members each representing workers, employers, led by an independent Chair with the power to commission work. . The Group will be chaired by Gordon Anderson, a law professor at Victoria University. The Chair is an independentneutral party in the Group discussions, whose purpose is to facilitate the parties to reach jointly agreed recommendations to Government. . The Group is expected to consult widely to get a comprehensive understanding of the issues with the Act, and draw on international examples of holidays and leave legislation where appropriate. . The Group is also expected to work closely with technical experts such as payroll providers, business rules specialists, and service design and delivery specialists to assist with the design and testing of policy options.
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper How to have your say
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper . The Group is required to support their recommendations with quantitative analysis of different options, tested with bona fide payroll data, to ensure that those options are readily implementable and adverse consequences have been identified. . The parties agree that consistency of attendees will be important for the Group to achieve its objectives, and will ensure that representatives will not be changed unless this is unavoidable. If any change in representatives is required, the party concerned will ensure the new attendees have been well briefed on previous discussions and progress. . The parties will each ensure that their constituentsstakeholders have appropriate opportunity to have input into development of options, through the parties internal governance arrangements. MBIE will ensure that appropriate crossagency structures in place for senior government officials to be kept informed of, and have input into, the work of the Group. . MBIE will provide secretariat support to the Group and information and research that the Group identifies is required to facilitate its discussions. Rules of engagement . The parties agree that they will: a. work together in good faith, balancing the interests of all parties b. hold discussions in confidence and on a without prejudice basis c. agree any external communications at each meeting. . If the pa rties are unable to reach agreement on recommendations, the Groups final report will outline: a. the areas where the parties have reached agreed recommendations b. the areas of difference. Timing and reporting . The Group will report back to the Minister of Workplace Relations and Safety with their recommendations within months. This timeframe will give the Group sufficient time to commission work and undertake robust testing of options. . The Group will also provide an interim report after six months, so that Cabinet and the New Zealand public can be informed about the Groups progress. . Each party will be responsible for reporting to their constituentsstakeholders, in accordance with any messaging agreed during the Groups discussions and as required by their internal governance mechanisms. In doing so, the parties agree to honour the confidentiality of the Groups discussions.
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper Annex : More detailed list of issues The table below provides a more detailed list of the issues that the Taskforce is aware of that employers, employees and payroll providers face in implementing the Holidays Act. Some of these issues relate to the systems that employers tend to use in their attempts to comply with the Act rather than being issues with the legislation itself. These issues are included here because they still represent a practical barrier that can prevent employees from getting the entitlements that they are due, and will be relevant to any ideas for change to the current framework . The Labour Inspectorates guidance document on the Holidays Act is a useful resource for employers, and provides useful additional material in relation to compliance with the Act. This Guidance is available here: https:www.employment.govt.nzassetsUploadsHolidaysAct Guidance onannualholidaysSepv.pdf . Description of issue Section of Act Cross cutting issues Meaning of regular in relation to payments The Act refers to payments that are a regul ar part of the employees pay but no definition of how regular is to be interpreted is provided. What payments are included in gross earnings Employers not always clear what payments should be included as gross earnings, such as discretiona ry payments, cashed up holidays and redundancy payments. Transferring an employee from intermittent or irregular to permanent work pattern Complexity associated with providing correct entitlements when a n employees work pattern changes. Definition of otherwise working day The Act provides a range of criteria to assist in the determination of what is an otherwise working day , but t hese criteria are not always usedwell understood, and sometimes noncompliant rules can be agreed to. Definition of ordinary working week Although the term ordinary working week is used in the Act (Section () (a)) , this term is not defined. While it may be easy to determine a working week for some employe es this is not true for all. Determining which averaging formula should be used, and when The Act provides a number of different formulae for use in different situations (e .g. for Relevant Daily Pay, Average Daily Pay, Average Weekly Earnings or Ordina ry Weekly Pay ). Knowing exactly what formula should be used requires correctly configured software, or a high level of knowledge and confidence with the Act. Employees are often not aware of possible issues with their entitlements being met. Sicknessbereavement leave arising while employee is taking annual holidayspublic holiday and A
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper If an employee suffers a bereavement while taking annual holidays, the Act requires the employer to allow them to take the day as bereavement leave instead. If an em ployee is sick while taking annual holidays, an employer may allow the employee to take the day as sick leave rather than annual holidays. Some employers do not understand their obligations in relation to this , and find exchanging holidays and leave confus ing (particularly given that employers are required to apply different approaches to the pay for these different types of leave) . Employment ending with entitlement to annual holidays overlapping a public holiday Employees are entitled to pa yment for a public holiday if it falls within the period that would have been covered by an existing entitlement to annual holidays. This is not always well understood, and employer s may be using an accrual system that doesnt differentiate between entitle ment and accrued leave. Employers having insufficient record keeping and operating a set and forget mentality There may be an assumption (by employers and employees) that an electronic system is correct and reliable. Issues can arise if systems are not when working arrangements andor pay change. Employerspayroll systems calculating entitlements in hours rather than weeks or days This can cause complexity and difficulty in understanding entitlements, and can present challenges with translat ing different units of entitlement. Sale and transfer of business Although the issue of the transfer of holidays and leave entitlements following the sale , contracting out or transfer of a business is dealt with for some employees by Part A of the Empl oyment Relations Act (which provides protection to the terms and conditions of specified categories of employees on the sale or transfer of a business), the Holidays Act is silent on this issue. We understand that in reality the practice varies across the economy and additional clarity would be provided if this issue was explicitly addressed in the Holidays Act. Annual Holidays Determining entitlements and payments Determining what payments are included in the OWP calculation Can be difficu lt for employers to determine what payments are included, and employees may not be aware. Also requires contact with payroll to ensure it is always correct for the employees working arrangements. Defining what a week is Employer and employee can agree what a week looks like, but this requires good communication and agreement about working arrangements. Issues also arise when working out what portion of a week has been used when an employee takes leave, and this might be Part
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper calculated differently (and incorrectly). Inconsistency in the calculation of AWE Section refers to of gross earnings; section refers to average weekly earnings for months previous. and ()(b)(ii) Not clear what not possible means for using the OWP formula rather than Section () Section () allows for a simple formula to be used if it is not possible to determine OWP. This is not very clear for employers, and hard to systematise. OWP calculation divisor The calculati on for OWP can be confusing for employers and payroll providers because it can sometimes refer to more than weeks, but needs to be divided by . () Payasyougo provision for workers being paid holiday pay Can be difficult for employers to know wh en it is appropriate to use the PAYG provision. When working arrangements change, it can be difficult for employers to know when to start providing weeks, rather than pay. Annual holiday pay across multiple pay periods (difference between OWP and AWE) Section () has two different calculations, which may provide different results. The Act requires the greater figure to be used, but some employers find it difficult to understand and use this section. ()(b) Incorrect accrual over time The use of accrual systems can cause problems as the amount of leave accrued may not provide a full entitlement, particularly if the employees working arrangements change during the year . This can also cause issues when an employee leaves employment as the outsta nding leave balance may be incorrect if calculated using an accrual approach. , Cashing up annual holidays entitlements Issues associated with the process for employees to request a portion of their entitlement to be converted into money. This i s related to employers and employees referring to annual holidays entitlements as money owed, rather than time owed. A B.A.P.S Determining entitlements and payments Determining an otherwise working day Defining an otherwise working day is fundament al for all parts of the Act, but it can be difficult for employers and employees to understand exactly what it means where flexible or variable work patterns are in use. and Calculating hypothetical wages for RDP RDP is based on what the employee would have otherwise earned, had they worked. This is a subjective decision that the Act provides guidance on, but not firm answers. This is hard to systematise for employers, and
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper hard for employees to determine whether they have been paid correctly. Determining what additional payments need to be included in RDP calculations Similar to above, the payments are not always easy to determine, and the required information may not be captured in payroll data (e .g. payroll system captures base wage but not additional payments). Payments for working on a public holiday If an emplo yee works on a public holiday, Section requires them to be paid according to RDPADP half. ADP is only used if the RDP cant be determined . In som e cases although the employee actually worked it may not be possible to determine their RDP (e.g. if their shift only included part of a public holiday) in which case ADP needs to be used. Greater clarity could be provided for employers about how to deal w ith these situations. Transferring public holidays Transferring holidays can be a confusing process, especially given that an employee can work on a public holiday and receive an alternative holiday instead. Requires ongoing agreement between employer and employee. A and B ADP calculation counting part days as whole days Some employees find themselves disadvantaged when picking up small shifts if their employer is using ADP, because this lowers the average they would be paid. A() Trigger to use ADP instead of RDP One trigger to use ADP instead of RDP is if the employees daily pay varies within the relevant pay period, which some argue is too broad. A()(b) Applying sickbereavement leave entitlements to those who work part timecasual Some employers suggest that these entitlements should be provided pro rata. Should the Act explicitly provide for this Subpart Taking sick leave for part days Some employees are only off work for part of a day (e .g. they go home early). The Act does n ot provide guidance for part days to be paid as sick leave, but some employers do this anyway. Greater clarity around this would be helpful. Other issues Coverage of bereavement leave list Are there other categories of person that should be included in this list ()(a) Mondayisation of public holidays Some employees claim that this gives preference to employees who work a standard day week including Monday. These employees get the benefit of a paid day off where public holidays either fall on a Monday or fall on a Saturday or Sunday and are then taken on the following Monday. Employees who do not work a standard day week may be considered to be missing out on public holidays because when a public and A
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper holiday falls on a weekday that they do not usu ally work they do not receive a paid day off. Holidays Act override in Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act This section overrides the Holidays Act so that a person who returns to work after a period of parental leave is entitled to only average weekly earnings for months on the leave that they be came entitled to during their absence . This effectively means that annual holidays taken the moment they return are paid , which gradually increases over the next months. It could be argued that this approach is discriminatory, and contrary to the objectives of the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act (to protect the rights of employees during pregnancy and parental leave). There is a further problem that most payroll systems cannot distinguish between different values of leave. PLEPA s Closedowns There are a number of areas where the Act could provide greater clarity in relation to closedown periods. These include: The relationship between the must in Section () and t he may in Section () ( i.e. whether Section () takes precedence because it says the employer must pay the employee or whether this is an eitheror situation where the employee is either paid the (as per Section ()) or agrees to use a nnual holidays in advance (as per Section ())) The definition of reasonably proximate in Section () in relation to the nominated as the anniversary for an employee not entitled to annual holidays there have been cases of employers nom inating dates several weeks away from the actual closedown period. Entitlement to an alternative holiday The entitlement arises regardless of how much of a public holiday is worked, but some employers credit hours worked. Payment of alternative holidays Alternative holidays can only be paid out after months, but this sometimes happens incorrectly.
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper Glossary of terms
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper Payasyougo (PAYG) annual holiday pay : Employees who meet either of two specific sets of criteria (i.e. are on a fixed term arrangement for less than months or work on an intermittent or irregular basis ) can agree with t heir employer to be paid annual holiday pay on top of their gross earnings for each pay period, instead of receiving paid annual holidays (Section of the Act ). Paying out some of the annual holiday entitlement : This is commonly referred to as cashing up some annual holidays. Employees can ask their employer to pay out up to a maximum of one week of their minimum four week annual holiday entitlement each entitlement year (instead of taking the time off as paid annual holidays). The employee must make th e request for this pay out and the request must be in writing. Employers may have a policy against paying out (including in an applicable collective agreement), but even if they do not have such a policy they do not have to agree to a pay out (Sections A to F of the Act ). Permanent employee : A person employed on an ongoing indefinite basis. Relevant daily pay (RDP) : What an employee would have received if they were at work on that day. Relevant daily pay includes: payments such as regular (taxable) allowances, productivity or incentive based payments (including commission and bonuses) if the employee would have received them on the relevant day; overtime payments, if the employee would have received them on the relevant day; and the cash value of boa rd or lodgings if this has been provided by the employer. It does not include employer contribution payments into an employee superannuation fund or reimbursements payable to the worker for the day (Sections , A, , A, , , , , , and of the Act ). Regular payments : Regular payments , such as payments for overtime and productivity or incentive based payments, are included in calculations of ordinary weekly pay. Although t he Act does not define what constitutes a regular payment, payments made in respect of work regularly undertaken should be included even if these payment s are not made every pay period (Section of the Act ).
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper Forewo rd
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper . Introduction
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper patterns beyond the standard five day, hour working week. It has become evident that neither of the se reviews was able t o fully meet these objectives. Overview of the current review . . In recent years it has become apparent that there is a high level of non compliance with the Act. While it often works for a standard, five day, hour week, the Act can be difficult to apply to more diverse working arrangements and complex remuneration packages. N oncompliance has resulted in many employees not receiving the correct payments for their leave and emp loyers spending significant resources on remediating historical underpayments and complying with the Act. . The Taskforce that has been established for the current review is required to develop, test and make recommendations to the Government on policy optio ns for the provision of, and payment for, holiday and leave entitlements that: o continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act , which is to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees lives by providing minimum entitlemen ts to annual holidays, public holidays, sick leave and bereavement leave o provide clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements o are simpler than the current Act in relation to provisions of, and payme nt for, entitlements to holidays and leave o are readily implementable in a payroll system o minimise compliance costs for employers o minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees o ensure the balance of decision making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated o are readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future o aim to protect overall entitlements for employees . . The review is being carried out by a tripartite Taskforce , comprising representatives from government, the Council of Trade Unions and Business New Zealand. Professor Gordon Anderson, an employment law specialist from Victoria University , is chairing the Taskforce and MBIE is providing Secretariat support . The Taskforces Terms of Reference can be found in Annex One and the Cabinet paper establishing the Taskforce can be found at: http:www.mbie.govt.nzinfoservicesemploymentskillslegislation reviewsholidaysactreview . The Taskforce will report back to the Minister of Workplace Relations and Safety with its recommendations by mid . This timeframe will give the group sufficient time to commission work and undertake robust testing of options. . Any changes the Government decides to make as a result of the review will need to go through the legislative process, so it will likely be some time before a new Act is implemented. Scope of the review . . The scope of the review is sufficiently broad so as to generate fundamentally new ways of providing for entitlements and pay, while retaining the purpose of the current Act and (at least) the c urrent levels of entitlement. . Full consideration will be given to designing an Act that works equally well for the ever increasing range of different working and pay arrangements that can be seen in the labour market. This may include consideration of whe ther the reference to the working
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Holidays Act Review : Issues Paper week should be retained in the holidays legislation and if so, what form this should take. . The review also ha s scope to consider any other matters relat ing to the Act that it sees fit. This may include holidays and leave entitlements modified by other Acts (such as the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act ). The Taskforce will consult to get a comprehensive understanding of the issues with the current legislation, and draw on examples from overseas jurisdictio ns. . The review will not include the issue of remediation of historical underpay ments of holiday and leave pay. Employers still have an obligation to remediate employees for current and historic underpayments and must be compliant with the current Act until new legislation comes into effect. MBIE will continue to provide support and engagement on these issues to as sist employers in the meantime.
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Final Report OCTOBER
Haami Piripi National Iwi Chairs Forum
Haka Ka Mate Attribution Act guidelines
Hamilton Waikato Tourism
Hamilton Waikato tourism ambassadors
Handle your complaint in a manner that is:
Hari at the Mars Desert Research Station in Utah in .
Has overall responsibility for ensuring MBIE meets its obligations under the Prosecution policy
Has strong space manufacturing and space applications subsectors, and cuttingedge research and development capability within several universities across the country; and
Hastings District Council
Hatchery Technology Development for the Aquaculture of Freshwater Crayfish and Mussels
HauoraHealth: Improving health and social wellbeing.
Have a high academic standing and have obtained a minimum grade point average (GPA) of . or higher on a scale of ., or an equivalent standard. You will need to convert your New Zealand grades to the US GPA . scale.
Have previously completed an undergraduate or graduate program in STEM.
Have settings that are flexible, enabling the system to respond to labour market changes over time
Have your say at the consultation section on the MBIE website
Have your say on changing the Building Code requirements for insulation in homes and other buildings.
Have your say on work health and safety
Have your say: Options to address safety risks of corded window coverings
Have your say: Seeking feedback on moving towards a financially sustainable mail service
Having a wellsupported, equitable, and diverse startup ecosystem in New Zealand will create highpaying jobs, improve income equality, support our transition to a carbon free economy, and make Aotearoa a place where highlyskilled people want to live.
Having been in tourism for almost years, Tak has spent his working life in the industry undertaking a wide range of roles from front line hosting and tour guiding to business development and marketing management.
Having more businesses investing in technology and innovation will create higherpaying jobs for New Zealanders and diversify the economy into new industries and markets.
Having strong social dialogue on these issues has strengthened employee and employer voice on important crosscutting issues. The Forum meets three times a year and is supported by officials from MBIE and the Treasury. All documents for the Forum that were released earlier than February can be found on the Treasury website.
Having systems in place to enable timely and effective monitoring and auditing of prosecution decisionmaking (including relating to infringements)
Hawkes Bay Regional Workforce Plan
He Kai Kei Aku Ringa Action Plan
He Kai Kei Aku Ringa Action Plan PDF KB
He Kai Kei Aku Ringa will be delivered through an action plan that draws together new and emerging projects from across government agencies.
He Kai Kei Aku Ringa: Strategy and action plan
He Tapuae Service Management Plan PDF KB
He Toronga Pakihi ki Taranaki
He aka ka toro navigation fund successful projects
He has an extensive career in international marketing and leadership roles spanning more than years. Prior to the airport, Justin held the roles of Director of Trade, PR Major Events and GM Marketing at Tourism New Zealand and before that he was Director of Marketing at McDonalds New Zealand Pacific Islands and Marketing Manager at CocaCola Oceania.
He has more recently served in senior roles in the public sector, including as Deputy Secretary, Higher Courts at the Ministry of Justice and as General Manager, NZ Petroleum and Minerals at Ministry of Economic Development.
He tipu ka hua investment programme
Health and Disability Commissioner
Health and Safety at Work (Adventure Activities) Amendment Regulations (SL )
Health and Safety at Work (Adventure Activities) Amendment Regulations Briefings and reports PDF .MB
Health and Safety at Work Act
Health and Safety at Work Act
Health and Safety at Work Act : Plant, structures, and hazardous work
Health and Safety in Employment (Mining Operations and Quarrying Operations) Regulations
Health and Safety in Employment Amendment Act
Health and forensic science services
Health and safety at work
Health and safety at work regulatory system
Health and safety at work strategy
Health and safety consultations
Help for victims of people trafficking
Help people get into work quickly and stay in work, reducing negative impact of jobloss and time on benefit for people and the economy, and changing longerterm trajectories for people with a view to improving employment outcomes, limiting increases in benefit numbers and reducing them over time.
Helping migrants and refugees to make New Zealand their home.
Helping workers find and keep decent jobs
Hemi is a mobile crane operator who has three different jobs working for oil and gas companies.
Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II passed away on September , in the st year of her reign as Queen of New Zealand.
Her career outlook looks promising, until a pandemic strikes: borders are closed, travel bookings plummet, and Natalie is made redundant. Flying a plane involves more than handling the wheel, it requires an eye for detail, critical thinking, communication, data literacy and leadership. Natalie uses her insurance payments to take stock of her career and look for a new path. After four months, she finds a job that matches her skills: operations manager at a recycling plant.
Here is some more information about how Immigration manages data which includes aspects of data sharing
Hi I am Bill Nelson, and I am priviledged to be the Administrator of NASA.
Hierarchy of New Zealand building control system
High (left) to low (right)
High Tech Manufacturing report
High Technology Manufacturing report
High share of quarterly renewable electricity generation as industrial demand for electricity fell
Highaltitude vehicle (HAV) licence
Highaltitude vehicles are licenced under the Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities Act and the Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations .
His primary research is in high temperature superconductivity (HTS). He was the founder of the programme that developed HTS Roebel cables including the development of the manufacturing and characterisation processes. His current interests include the application of HTS to space technology.
Historic day in the campaign to beat plastic pollution
Historic reform of corporate law
Hold approved Great Ride status, as provided by the Minister of Tourism and Hospitality.
Holiday Parks Association
Holidays Act R eview Terms of Reference Proposal This paper seeks Cabinets approval to a review of the Holidays Act (the Act) on the basis of the Terms of Reference attached in Annex One. Executive Summary The Holidays Act (the Act) provides minimum entitlements to annual holidays, public holidays and sick and bereavement leave to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees lives. Systemic compliance issues with the Act first came to light in and since then it has become apparent that noncompliance is widespread, with a large number of employers struggling to meet their obligations under the Act and a large number of employees not receiving their correct entitlements. This situation has arisen because there are problems both with the implementation of the Act in payroll systems, and with the Act itself. Over the last three years, the Ministry of Business, I nnovation and Employment ( MBIE ) has delivered a payroll strategy led by the Labour Inspectorate to address the implement ation issues, but this alone has not been sufficient. I consider that only a broad review of the Act will provide an enduring solution. I propose that a tripartite working group be convened to review the Act and make recommendations for change to Government within months. I seek the Commit tees agreement to appoint Gordon Anderson, a law professor at Victoria University, as an independent Chair of the Group. Key objectives of the review will be to develop options that: . make the provision of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and lea ve simpler and more readily applicable to the range of working arrangements in the labour market . provide clarity and certainty to employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements and employers indirect compliance costs are reduced . aim to protect the overall entitlements to employees . are easy to systematise and implement in payroll systems . T he Group will be expected to convene appropriate technical experts to robustly test options to ensure that this objective is met and any adverse consequences are identified. The lack of such rigorous testing was a significant failing of previous reviews. The review must be forward looking, and consideration of the issue of remediation of underpayments under the current Act is out of scope of the review. However, I acknowledge that this issue is of significant concern to a number of private and public sector entities, particularly those that may currently be considering investment in new payroll systems. The obligation of employers to remediate employees for historical underpayments remains, as does their obligation to ensure compliance with the current Act until new legislation is passed. It is likely to be a minimum of two years until new legislation is passed and I anticipate that there will be a significant implementation period following that to allow service providers to develop new products to deliver on the changes . In the meantime, the Labour Inspectorate will continue to work to support employers to remediate employees and amend systems to be compliant with the current Act. The Holidays Act provides minimum entitlements to holidays and leave The purpose of the Act is to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees lives by providing minimum entitlements to annual holidays, public holidays, sick leave and bereavement leave. The Act provides a number of calculations for determining pay when holidays or leave are taken. T he Act also covers a number of issues such as annual closedowns for businesses, transferring of public holidays and cashing up one weeks holiday. The enforcement provisions follow those in the Employment Relations Act and, as with other minimum entitlements, permits both employees and labour inspectors to take cases. While the Act provides for certain levels of minimum entitlements, it does not prescribe how these are to be provided. For a standard five day, hour working week, this is straightforward, but in other situations it is not obvious, such as when employees work unpredictable hours. In these situations the Act relies on employers and employees reaching agreement as to how entitlements will be met or taken. There is some prescription around determining pay for holidays and leave for example, pay can be based on an averaging formula if it is not possible to work out what the employee would have been paid if they had worked but there remains a high degree of ambiguity in situations when remuneration arrangements are complex (for example, including commission or incentive payments). but there is compelling evidence of widespread non compliance with the Act These challenges with the Act itself, combined with poor implementation in payroll systems and the business processes that support them, have led to widespread noncompliance with the legislation.
Holidays Act Review Issues Paper August
Holidays Act Review Issues Paper PDF KB
Holidays Act Review Terms of Reference Purpose . The purpose of the Holidays Act Working Group (the Group) is to make recommendations to Government for a clear and transparent set of rules for providing entitlements to, and payment for, holidays and leave that can be readily implemented in a payroll system and is applicable to an increasingly diverse range of working and pay arrangements. . It is important that a customerfocused approach is taken to this review to ensure that recommendations are readily implementable by employers and their payroll providers. Background . There is widespread noncompliance with the Holidays Act (the Act) and it is generally accepted that this is due both to issues with the implementation of the legislation in payroll systems and the business processes that support these, and issues with the legislation itself. . The Act works well for a standard, five day, hour week, but can be difficult to apply to more diverse working arrangements and complex remuneration packages. This is primarily because the Act i s based on two key principles relating to entitlements and pay: a. that entitlements are determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken b. that employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave, that is, they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked. . In these situations, the Act relies heavily on employers making judgements as to how the provisions of the Act apply to the specific circumstances of the individual employees, and in some cases agreement with the employee is required. In some cases, these may need to happen each time leave is requested. . The result is an Act that does not provide certainty to employers and employees, is difficult for employees and employers to understand and interpret, is hard to systematise in a payroll system, and can incur relatively high compliance costs for employers. Objectives . The Group is required to develop, test and make recommendations to the Government on policy options for the provision of, and payment for, holiday and leave entitlements that: a. continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act b. provide clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements c. are simpler than the current Act in relation to provisions of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave d. are readily implementable in a payroll system e. minimise compliance costs for employers
Holidays Act Review: Terms of Reference PDF KB
Holidays Act Review: Terms of Reference: Cabinet paper PDF KB
Holidays Act Review: Policy decisions
Holidays Act Review: Policy decisions for an exposure draft of the Bill
Holidays Act Review: Policy decisions for an exposure draft of the Bill PDF KB
Holidays Act Review: background, progress and next steps PDF KB
Holidays Act Taskforce members
Holidays Act reform: further policy decisions
Holidays Act reform: further policy decisions PDF KB
Holidays Act: Issues paper
Home Inspection Survey Report and the full list of recommendations
Hon Brooke van Velden Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety
Hon Brooke van Velden Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety . . .
Hon Dr David Clark Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications ) ) ) )
Hon Grant Robertson Minister of Finance
Hon Iain Lees Galloway Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety
Hon Willie Jackson Minister for Mori Development
Horizon Europe Pillar actions are structured in thematic Clusters, with each having a Work Programme outlining topics to be addressed in the current period. The Work Programmes include details of the scope of the topics, the expected impacts and outcomes, the available budget, and any conditions relating to the call.
Horizon Europe Research Fund
Horizon Europe TopUp Fund reporting template
Horizon Europe and New Zealand
Horizon Europe guidance and reference documents are available through the EU Funding and Tenders Portal.
Horizon Europe reference documents and guidance
Horizon Europe unlocked: Monthly dropin QA
Horowhenua District Council
Horticulture Technology Catalyst
Hospitality workforce survey report
Hosts for new applied doctorates scheme announced
Hotel accommodation for locallybased participants.
Hours or days worked and the work pattern. This can be, but is not limited to, a nineday fortnight, compressed hours, part time hours, job share.
Household salesbased electricity cost data and publicly advertised retail electricity tariff data
Housing Affordability Measure
Housing New Zealand Corporation
Housing New Zealand Corporation is a Crown agent that provides housing services for people in need. Housing New Zealand manages state houses and tenancies.
Housing and tenancy regulatory system
How affordable do you think the levy will be for you
How can I tell Recognising child abuse PDF MB
How can we ensure the proposed income insurance scheme honours the Treaty partnership
How can we set up governance in our regulatory system
How do we collect information
How does it relate to other guidance
How does the adventure activities regulatory regime operate to manage risks where activities intersect with natural hazards What are the roles and responsibilities of the organisations involved in the regime (WorkSafe, auditors and operators) to identify and manage these hazards
How effective are resiliencefocused policies
How effective are resiliencefocused policies A literature review PDF KB
How effective are resiliencefocused policies Summary of literature review PDF KB
How our funding process works
How our investment is helping to produce science and innovation success in New Zealand
How our investment is helping to produce science and innovation success in New Zealand.
How space contributes to the New Zealand economy
How the government will contribute to this objective
How to apply for Horizon Europe funding
How to comply with consumer laws and deal with complains in the best way.
How to follow up or make a complaint
How to get in touch with the New Zealand Space Agency if you would like more information or have a question.
How to make an OIA request
How to navigate GCDR tools and resources.
How to register as a network operator under the Telecommunications Act .
How to register as a postal operator
How to register for a board role
How to report migrant exploitation
How to use the Migrant Employment Data
How we collect and use information about people flying in and out of New Zealand
How we forecast the estimated discount
How we process complaints
How we use ORCID identifiers
How we will monitor the Strategy
How well is WorkSafe performing (efficiency of resource use, and value add quality of outputs delivered)
How will the new arrangements be implemented During the policy design proce ss following the Cabinet decisions, stakeholders unanimously agreed that, given the scale and complexity of the changes, an month implementation period between the the Bill receives Royal assent and the on which it comes into force would be required to support a smooth transition to the new rules.
How will the new arrangements be monitored, evaluated, and reviewed Monitoring, evaluation and review pro cesses set out in the RIS remain relevant,
How will this collaboration change how you operate in the future
How will this partnership help you expand the breadth of your research
How willWhat doWhat is the What harm applicants What is it What areapplicantscommitment could operations monitor safety that the the resourcesneed to dooperation to ensuring cause to performance and that you needto keep the public safety the public the effectiveness to be safe does pubilc safe of controls Figure : Safety Case Considerations Description of Activities A summary of who (and where) you are, the type of activity you undertake and what is important to your operation is useful context. This information should be focused at a high level. Consider: Who are we and what do we do Where do we operate What type of activity do we undertake How are we governed When do we operate Organisational structure Applicants could look to include within the body of the safety case highlevel maps and diagrams of facilities and vehicles as well as organisation charts. Licenses from other regulatory regimes (where relevant) and operational frameworks such as the organisations safety framework are useful supporting evidence. Safety Commitment and Goals Safety is a fundamental part of any organisation and must be integrated throughout the management systems. How the leadership will achieve and ensure public safety must be evident. The regulations require applicants to describe the systems that have been (or will be) implemented to protect public safety. It could be useful to include a set of public safety principles that your organisation can use to strongly influence safety culture. Organisational principles should not be a statement of compliance with legislation and regulations. They should be: meaningful; appropriate; and clear enough to prevent ambiguity.
However, Section also outlines that the Minister may decline to grant a payload permit if
However, any postal operator can issue other unofficial stamps for the mail they carry. They can use the words New Zealand only if:
However, no one may carry letters for profit unless they are registered as a postal operator with us.
However, the very characteristics that enable this speed, accuracy and security also pose unique challenges for longdistance transmission.
However, where we require information that is relevant to us considering and investigating compliance breaches, concerns, and initiating our own investigations or inquiries, we may gather information from people or entities using our statutory powers.
Human Resources Development
Human activity is leading to increased greenhouse gas emissions. This is the global picture we have got, surging carbon dioxide, surging methane, and surging nitrous oxide.
Human rightsdiscrimination
Hunt for the Wilderpeople
Hybrid Technologies Limited
I am Tim Morris. I am the Director of Coriolis. With me is Virginia Wilkinson, she is our Research Director. We were the lead researchers on this project, and we are looking forward to taking you through that research today. This is going to be a brief summary of our work and there is over pages of material developed in this project, so there is a lot here. We are just going to go through it at a high level and present from the different documents that we have done and talk to some of highlevel work we did in the themes really as a teaser for you to go and get into the material more than anything else.
I am aware that there are other government agencies with operational arms that have complex working arrangements that have not yet been consulted. I will ensure they ,
I am delighted to have this opportunity to acknowledge the historic signature of the Artemis Accords by our partners in the New Zealand Space Agency, led by Dr. Crabtree. I would also like to acknowledge the support of Foreign Affairs Minister Mahuta and Economic Development Minister Nash, and thank you for all the work you did to get us here today.
I am pleased to launch the refreshed New Zealand Space and Advanced Aviation Strategy to drive the growth of our space and advanced aviation sectors into the future.
I am seeking a new selfcontainment certification for my vehicle
I consider that the significant benefits of removing the calendar day aspect of the methodology outweigh the disadvantages of doing so may have for some employees in some scenarios.
I do not consider that the impact of this change on leave entitlement and payment calculations would be significant. An employees average hours worked on a calendar day would only vary significantly from their average across all days when, despite not having agreed daily hours, the employee does have a discernible pattern of work whereby they work more hours on average on some calendar days than others. For events based leave (for example sick leave) the averagi ng method would only apply where an employee notified their employee of the intent to take the leave in advance and no hours had been agreed for the day. In typical situations the notification would occur on or shortly before the day of leave however and r ostered hours would be used.
I propos e a flexible approach, enabling treatment of entitlements to be negotiated by outgoing and incoming employers
I propose an implementation period of months is included in the exposure draft Bill
I propose short er implementation periods for s ome changes that can stand alone
I propose that , following Cabinet decisions
I propose that changes the Bill makes to
I propose to adopt the Taskforces recommendations in full
I seek confirmation of my decisions on two issues where the Taskforce did not make final decisions . There were two outstanding issues from the Taskforces report where my decisions were required to fill in the gaps. These were: Whether the second or sho rt run reference period for calculating annual holiday payments should be four or weeks. The Taskforce agreed to a greater of three approach to annual holidays payments that included what the employee would have received if they were at work (Ordina ry Leave Pay), a short run average weekly pay (calculated using either the previous four or the previous weeks), and a long run average weekly pay over the last weeks. The Taskforce could not agree whether the short run average should be based on the previous four or weeks, and their report refers this decision to me. What rules should apply for commissions or incentive payments when it is unclear what period of time they were earned over. For instance, should the entire amount be treated as tho ugh it was earned within the current pay period, or
ILO Conventions ratified by New Zealand
ILO membership involves partnership between the Government and the most representative organisations of employers and workers in New Zealand:
IMPOSING FEES AND CHARGES Cost recovery Rocket Lab ROCKET LAB Given the unusual and novel nature of this industry in New Zealand and the potential for rapid changes in the nature of launch activities (such as a rapid growth in the number of payloads per launch, or a decrease in the mass of individual payloads, or cha nges in launch The legislation provides all the tools necessary to impose fees, levies and charge s. If a decision was taken to pursue cost recovery, the Act provides the ability to impose fees if required and is flexible enough to accommodate different fee structures serving a range of policy goals.
INZ Senior Irregular Migration Liaison Officer deployed to Southeast Asia July .
INZ and NZ Police (NZP) Investigations Protocol signed October . The protocol provides a tangible guide on how INZ and NZP work in a collaborative, coordinated and cooperative way.
INZ continues to identify opportunities for proactive communications about serious exploitation and trafficking. In the first half of INZ provided extensive support and was interviewed for media coverage about a recent prosecution.
INZ continues to work through supporting crossborder trafficking victims on a casebycase basis, with a heavy reliance on investigative staff who are fulfilling the role of victim supporters. This has been identified as an issue that needs addressing and additional resourcing.
INZ has been engaging with key agencies involved in supporting victims of trafficking to ensure processes are streamlined (Ministry of Health and Ministry of Social Development). A review of the victim certification process is underway, with a joint INZNZP workshop held in Quarter .
INZ has now completed work to advise migrants when the employer they are working for, on an employerspecific visa, is placed on the Labour Inspectorate stand down list.
INZ has sent fewer letters with information on work rights this year than in previous years.
INZ have arranged for Fijian investigative staff to visit New Zealand, where they will shadow INZ Investigators, meet with Border officials, and share information and training materials.
INZ is continuing regular engagement with key migrant communities (Chinese, Filipino, South Asian and Latin American). Migrant exploitation (including the visa and reporting mechanism) is regularly discussed at migrant network meetings.
INZ now engages with Fiji immigration on a monthly basis to share information and build capacity, including on local cases with no connection to New Zealand.
INZ to work with Fiji, Kiribati, Samoa Immigration (and other partners if requested) to deliver bespoke capacity building support to address forced labour, people trafficking and slavery, once work plans are confirmed in .
INZ will operationalise changes arising from the introduction of the Migrant Worker Protection Bill, specifically the new infringement regime and the establishment of a broader stand down list of employers.
IRD disputes review process
ISBN (Online): May
ISBN (online)
ISBN (online)
ISSB issues inaugural global sustainability disclosure standards
ITPs are focused on longterm transformation, and identify actions and initiatives for nearterm implementation over to year periods.
ITPs were developed for sectors: Advanced Manufacturing, Agritech, Construction, Digital Technologies, Fisheries, Food and Beverage, Forestry and Wood Processing and Tourism.
IVL annual performance reports
IVS analysis and research
IVS classifications and definitions
IVS data available from Stats NZ
IVS questionnaire and brochures
Identification and Management of Risks
Identification of barriers and enablers provided insights about the activities and approaches that would be needed for a shift to more circularity in the New Zealand economy to realise emission reduction potential and economic benefits.
Identifying priorities to support workers who are displaced or at risk of displacement PDF KB
If a complainant does not accept that their complaint has been responded to, or resolved to their satisfaction, the complainant may consider contacting the:
If a review is needed, MBIE will prepare and release a consultation document for interested parties to suggest occupational diseases and providing supporting research.
If an applicant has committed a criminal offence, their application will be individually assessed.
If an employee identifies an incident of child abuse or neglect and determines that the child is in immediate danger, the employee will notify the New Zealand Police on .
If an employee is dismissed before the threshold applies, the employee will be able to raise an unjustified dismissal grievance within the day period. For example, if an employee on an existing employment agreement is dismissed days before the end of the transitional period, they will be able to raise an unjustified dismissal claim after the end of the transitional period, so long as it is within the day period.
If applicable, Reporting Guidelines for our funds can be found in the Essential documents list on the relevant Funds webpages.
If appointed, you will not be in an employment relationship with either MBIE or the entity whose board you have been appointed to.
If approached directly by an MP, you will ensure that any such dealings are addressed and seen to be addressed impartially.
If information appears to us to have been gathered unlawfully, we may refer this to the Police.
If interpreters have not booked their tests by pm (New Zealand time) on June , interpreters will need to pay for any second NAATI tests themselves. MBIE will not honour any outstanding entitlement notes after that time.
If people are not able to return to work, the welfare system remains available to support them. The Government is committed to ongoing reforms to improve the welfare system.
If the applicant is a body corporate or other entity , then: Legal form and name Registered office or principle place of business Unique identifier (if applicable) Contact details for dealing with the applicant
If the applicant wishes to use a tool different from DAS and DRAMA, the applicant must justify its use from a technical standpoint and MBIE must approve its use . . Verifying an ODMPs compliance Regulation prescribes requirements for an ODMP for the purposes of the Act. A summary of regulation is set in . of this policy. The approach to verifying compliance with regulation may vary. Currently, an application may take one of two paths: .. The applicant may rely on an authorisation that has been treated by the Minister as satisfying New Zealands orbital debris mitigation requirements in accordance with section of the Act, or an assessment by ESA has been completed. The authorisations that the Minister currently treats as satisfying the requirements are listed in section . of this policy. Where an applicant has an authorisation from one of the listed agencies, or has had its orbital debris mitigation plan independently assessed by ESA as meeting its standards, no further assessment of the orbital debris mitigation plan is required. For our own purposes of ensuring compliance with the terms of any granted licence or permit and as an evidence base should an on orbit collision occu r, the NZSA may still require a copy of the ODMP that was submitted in support of the overseas authorisation.
If the travel agent or wholesaler that you booked with is insolvent, in liquidation, in receivership, or in administration, you should contact the administrator of the company. Administrators of insolvent businesses may participate in the Scheme if they can meet all the eligibility criteria, and provide MBIE with a warranty that they are legally entitled and able to return refunds to New Zealand consumers.
If the travel agent successfully recovers a refund or credit, consumers should receive the full value of what is recovered.
If the working arrangement meets all criteria, the worker is a
If this occurs, we will explain the reasons why. For more information please refer to sections
If we have a good reason for refusing a request for correction, you are entitled to request that a statement be attached to the information of the correction that was sought but not made.
If you an interpreter that has already booked a second test and are waiting to sit a second NAATI test, please contact the Language Assistance Services inbox at
If you are a new supplier to MBIE, we will need to set up an account for you in our finance system so that your invoices can be paid.
If you are a postal operator in New Zealand you can make changes to your details using this form:
If you are eligible contact
If you are in a position where you are required to give advice to the Government you have a responsibility to provide such advice honestly, impartially and in a full and frank manner, drawing attention to the possible consequences of policies or proposals.
If you are intending to become a postal operator, you should read the
If you are posting your request please ensure you have included name, your postal address or preferred email address, and specific details of the information you want.
If you are unhappy with our response, contact us in the first instance. You have the right to seek a review of the response by the
If you are unsatisfied with a response from MBIE to your complaint you can contact:
If you are unsure about your eligibility to join this contract, you should visit the Government procurement website, and apply for eligibility if necessary.
If you cannot find the information you need, you can email your query to Employment New Zealand.
If you do not have an active application, please login to your myNAATI portal and submit your application. Make sure to indicate that your application will be sponsored by MBIE and upload your entitlement note.
If you feel physically threatened or your personal safety is at risk, you should call your
If you feel that a personal relationship means that you cannot be objective in the performance of your duties, you will raise the matter with your manager immediately.
If you feel that we have not met our commitment, please let us know. We would also like to hear if you have had a good experience with us. You can do this through our online
If you find that your personal views or beliefs on an issue are in conflict with the Government to an extent that you cannot perform your duties in a politically neutral way, you will immediately raise this with your manager.
If you found the directory useful and would like it to be reinstated, please email us at
If you have a dispute and are unable to resolve it yourself, or are unhappy with the outcome, there are dispute resolution schemes who can help. Listed below are some of the schemes you can go to depending on the type of issue you have and the stage your dispute is at.
If you have a general question about rights and obligations related to leave and holiday entitlements you can find information for employers and employees on the Employment New Zealand website.
If you have a oneoff or ad hoc requirement for face to face interpreting services, then you can choose any provider from the panel and contact them directly to request a booking. Using the information on this website and the Price Book. Choose from the panel a provider that can support the language groups and locations you need, and give you the best value for money.
If you have any concerns about wrongdoing (e.g. fraud, corruption, dishonesty, conflicts of interest etc) at our Ministry:
If you have any enquiries about our information gathering activities, or believe we have not acted in accordance with this statement, complete our concerns and feedback form.
If you have any feedback or an enquiry about the open data report, contact us at
If you have any queries about New Zealands postal market contact us via email at
If you have any questions about the Electrifying Great Rides Fund,
If you have any questions about the Regional Events Promotion Fund, please contact
If you have any questions about the Regional Tourism Boost Fund please contact us on
If you have any questions about the Tourism Communities: Support, Recovery and Reset Plan, please contact:
If you have any questions about the Tourism Data Partnerships Fund, email
If you have any questions about the consultation process contact us at
If you have any questions about the dropin session, feel free to reach out to Professor Rachael Taylor Cluster (Health) NCP at
If you have any questions about this Code or what might be considered unacceptable behaviour under the Code or before you take a course of action that you are not entirely sure complies with the Code, please discuss these with your manager. If you are aware of behaviour occurring within MBIE that could contravene the Code, you must also raise this with your manager or another appropriate person.
If you have any questions email
If you have any questions email us at
If you have any questions for DOC on this component of the Tourism Communities: Support, Recovery and Reset Plan, please contact:
If you have any questions, please email:
If you have questions about the review, you can get in touch with the team at
If you have questions about whether your current or former employer has calculated your leave payments correctly, or if you believe you may be eligible for a remediation payment, contact your employer in the first instance. Many employers have webpages about their Holidays Act remediation programmes which include contact details for employees.
If you have seen or suspect a breach of employment standards you can report it to the Labour Inspectorate.
If you have specific questions about the Holidays Act Review, email
If you havent filled out the survey yet, you can do so by going to the MBIE website or the Space Trailblazer website, which is also got our phone number. If youd like to give us a call.
If you know that the information was previously and publicly available but you cannot find it on any of our websites or in the National Library collection, you can request a copy under Part of the Public Records Act (Public access to information and records).
If you live in a shared property (eg, a multiunit building) or a house accessed via shared property (eg, a shared driveway) and you have had problems connecting to UFB due to consent issues, we encourage you to contact your retail service provider to place a new connection order.
If you need to request for your personal information, you can directly contact the appropriate service provider at MBIE.
If you own intellectual property, you are responsible for monitoring the way it is used and protecting it against infringement.
If you provide dispute resolution services, GCDR resources are available to help you assess how well you are meeting best practice.
If you suspect a business is breaching the Easter trading laws, notify MBIE via our online reporting form.
If you want to check personal information that we hold, please write to:
If you want to learn more about good governance practice in the public sector, or conflicts of interest, guidance is available from the Office of the AuditorGeneral:
If you want to submit a complaint, use the guidance in our board appointment complaints policy.
If you wish to apply for a job with us, you will be required to register your details with us to
If you wish to become a postal operator in New Zealand you must complete an Application for Registration form (PO):
If you wish to communicate directly with Ministers and MPs in your personal capacity about matters concerning MBIE you will first raise the matter with the Chief Executive.
If you wish to follow up your request, or are unhappy with our response,
If you wish to reproduce images, please contact us to discuss:
If you would like to contact our screen sector policy team please email us at:
If you would like to discuss MBIEs regulatory systems performance work programme, please contact us at
If you would like to discuss our regulatory systems performance work programme, contact us at
If your complaint to MBIE was in relation to your personal information, and you are unsatisfied with our response, you can contact:
If your questions are urgent, call .
Image courtesy Harris Butt Architecture
Image courtesy of Paramount Pictures.
Image courtesy of Warner Bros Picture
Image courtesy of Warner Bros Pictures.
Imagine if scientists could accurately predict the severity of storms and other climate phenomena, giving those in their path potentially lifesaving information.
Imche is the cofounder and Chief Executive of Aucklandbased Outset Ventures, which works with deeptech startups, especially those using intensive RD or commercialization of university research. She has experience of engaging with young people to build investment and governance capabilities through mentorship. She will bring consideration of diversity and inclusion through her work with women founders, as well as understanding wider international trends and connections.
Immigration (Fiscal Sustainability and System Integrity) Amendment Bill
Immigration (Fiscal Sustainability and System Integrity) Amendment Bill: Approval for introduction PDF KB
Immigration (Fiscal Sustainability and System Integrity) Amendment Bill: Policy Proposals PDF KB
Immigration Act amendments
Immigration Advisers Authority
Immigration Compliance and Investigations
Immigration Design and Assurance. Leads the design of agreed policy, process, and platform change. Defining and delivering to requirements, as well as implementing and embedding change into the business. Ensures that INZ is being an effective regulator, meeting our legal and regulatory obligations.
Immigration NZ (INZ) Investigations presentations at Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation (JCLEC) and Bali Process Disruption Working Group.
Immigration NZ (INZ) completed initial research on international definitions and methodological measurements of people trafficking.
Immigration NZ (INZ) has held regular zoom meetings with community stakeholders, including leaders of the Muslim, South Asian, Filipino and Chinese communities throughout the year, regarding the protection of migrants and their rights in NZ.
Immigration NZ (INZ) has held virtual capacitybuilding sessions with Fiji immigration officials on topics including compliance and investigations.
Immigration NZ (INZ) review of employment rights information sent to migrants in visa approval letters.
Immigration New Zealand advisers survey
Immigration New Zealand form requiring the approval of the General Manager, Enablement May PDF .MB
Immigration New Zealand is headed by Deputy Secretary Alison McDonald.
Immigration New Zealand undertakes an annual survey of immigration advisers and lawyers to help evaluate and improve its customer service.
Immigration Risk and Border. Supports preand postdecision making for visa applications and manages preentry at the border, with accountability for all risk functions which crosscut the visa decision process.
Immigration Weekly Report for the period from February to February PDF KB
Immigration consultations
Immigration legislation reviews
Immigration regulatory system
Immigration research and data
Impact Analysis MBIE prepared a regulatory impact statement which accompanied the May Cabinet paper. This paper does not seek any additional policy decisions so no further analysis is required. Officials will prepare further impact analysis to accompany the February Cabinet paper if further policy decisions are sought. The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team was consulted in May and confirmed that the CIPA requirements do not apply to the policy decisions which the consultation document is based on. Population Implications The content of the consultation document does not have any direct population implications, but the consultation is an opportunity to consult with relevant population groups and ask targeted questions to understand their views on the proposals and how their interests and rights could be affected. MBIE officials consulted with five other agencies during the selection process to ensure relevant population groups are represented in the consultation. The Ministry of Health, Te Puni Kkiri, Ministry for Disabled People, Ministry for Pacific Peoples and Ministry for Ethnic Communities provided recommendations which MBIE considered alongside other factors when selecting the participants for targeted consultation. The RIS is an addendum to the full RIS to reflect policy changes. I N C O N F I D E N C E uohzj Confidential advice to Government I N C O N F I D E N C E Human Rights The proposals in the Bill have all been assessed as appearing consistent with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act (NZBORA) and the Human Rights Act . The exception is the decision to include a prorata approach to providing sick leave entitlement which has not yet been assessed. A full assessment of that proposal, along with other options for further policy changes, will be completed by the Ministry of Justice for consistency with the NZBORA before I seek final policy decisions. Consultation The following Public and nonPublic Service departments and agencies were consulted on this paper: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (Policy Advisory Group), PCO, the Treasury, the Public Service Commission, Inland Revenue, Office of the Privacy Commissioner, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Social Development, Ministry for Culture and Heritage, Department of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Defence, Ministry for Women, Ministry of Disabled People, Te Puni Kkiri, Te Arawhiti, Ministry for Pacific Peoples, Oranga Tamariki, Ministry for Ethnic Communities, New Zealand Police and the New Zealand Defence Force. Treasury provided feedback on the need for sufficient engagement with the health and education sectors to ensure that the proposed changes are workable for them, given the historical difficulties and potential fiscal costs that could arise from implementing changes. Potential impacts for the government as an employer will be assessed through a separate questionnaire (refer to paragraph ) and, in addition, MBIE intends to continue direct engagement with Health New Zealand (Health NZ) and the Ministry of Education.
Impact Summary: Security officers and Part A of the Employment Relations Act PDF KB
Impact Summary: Wheel clamping PDF KB
Impact statement informing final Cabinet decisions on amendments to the Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities () orbital debris mitigation requirements.
Impacts Assessment against objectives Manag es risks of high altitude activity efficiently and effectively The requirement for a license is not disproportiona te to the level of risk Reduce compliance costs for licensed activity that is low risk Option one: No exemptions No exemptions would mean a large volume of low risk activity would be caught by this approach which is of no interest to regulators, and was is not intended under the Act as a means of managing risk. In addition, no exemptions policy would create a burden on the regulator which may detract from their ability to focus resources on the high risk activity.
Impacts of Economic Transitions on Firms, Workers, Regions and Households PDF KB
Impacts of circular approaches on emissions, jobs, and other factors
Impacts on employees and employers . The Taskforces recommendations will result in employees receiving slightly more leave pay, on average, than they would under the current Act. Employees that have variable working arrangements and complex remuneration structures are most likely to receive an increase in annual holidays and leave payments. It is estimated that between , and , employees, or to per cent of all New Zealand employees, fall within these categories and are most likely to work in the health care and social assistance, accommodation and food services and public administration and safety sectors.
Impacts on people experiencing homelessness
Implement communitybased job coaches for young jobseekers.
Implement education initiatives that will lift achievement and prepare students to pursue aerospace careers.
Implement evidencebased instruction in literacy and mathematics. (MOE)
Implementation and evaluation
Implementation of any regulatory and nonregulatory measures.
Implementation of joint INZENZ migrant exploitation allegation triage and reporting model
Implementation of the New Zealand Screen Production Grant: Cabinet paper
Implementation of the package
Implementing a ban on new fossilfuel baseload electricity generation
Implementing the Fuel Quality Monitoring Programme
Implementing the Tourism Strategy
Implementing the recommendations
Implications for businesses
Implications for the G overnment as an employer . As an employer, the Government will incur costs due to the increased leave entitlements and the use of new leave payment methodologies provided for by the Bill. Free and frank opinions Confidential advice to Government
Implications for the regulator . For the Labour Inspectorate and associated functions within MBIE, implementing the legislative changes effectively would have resourcing implications that could not be met within current baselines (without compromising other regulatory functions) . In particular:
Import and export restriction agreements
Imported goods subject to antidumping and countervailing duties
Improve access to justice for claimants
Improve cooperation in investigations across government agencies
Improve information for victims of exploitation and vulnerable groups
Improve international cooperation and partnership
Improve our understanding of exploitation to enable better targeting of actions and measures
Improve the management of highrisk projects and increase the transparency of reporting in the Regional Development portfolio.
Improved customer and user experience
Improvements are required, it is not perfect. The essential oils is a great sector and there is interest in companies doing things, but for all of these identified, is this platform growth ready, where are the execution gaps What do we need to do to get this thing really humming We looked across a range of common metrics across all of the sectors and essentials oils is doing well in some areas and not so well in others as a guideline.
Improving efficiency in the inspection process: Discussion document
Improving health and safety assessments
Improving our diesel resilience
Improving resource efficiency and the circularity of economies for a greener world
Improving the employment relations and standards system: Fair Pay Agreements PDF MB
Improving the sustainability of freedom camping in New Zealand.
In Professor Long and his team was awarded the Cooper medal by the Royal Society of New Zealand for research to develop a commercial process for the manufacture of superconductor Roebel cable.
In , the Government amended the Fair Trading Act (by inserting section A) to allow for disclosure regulations to be made in relation to thirdparty fundraisers.
In we commissioned an independent survey of the repairs to randomly selected earthquakedamaged Canterbury homes.
In we consulted on disclosure regulations for thirdparty fundraisers.
In , Cabinet decided all recommendations contained in the Independent Review report on ACC dispute resolution processes would be addressed.
In , the Joint Working Group on Pay Equity Principles (JWG) provided recommendations to guide the implementation of pay equity. It noted that the current framework in the Equal Pay Act relied on the courts to determine principles for assessing pay equity issues and setting pay rates.
In , the former Minister of Science and Innovation, the former Minister of Finance and the former Minister for Stateowned Enterprises commissioned our Ministry and Treasury to review policy settings for open access to weather data.
In , we arranged for a report to be produced determining if there was a level of governmentheld weather data which should be opened up for public access (over and above data already available) to better stimulate innovation and promote economic growth.
In , we commissioned research on the earthquake performance of nonstructural elements: detailed reports, and a small survey of buildings in Wellington and Auckland.
In , external consultants PwC and Experian produced the report Weather Permitting: Review of open access to weather data in New Zealand (Weather Permitting).
In the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade and our Ministry commissioned the New Zealand Institute of Economic Research (NZIER) to prepare brief international regulatory cooperation case studies focused on drawing out the lessons learnt.
In , New Zealand acceded to the Convention on the Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space (the Registration Convention), in time for the first launch of spacecraft from New Zealand.
In , the Government brought together industry, business and worker representatives to design a model that allows collective bargaining in the screen industry. The Screen Industry Workers Act implements their recommendations.
In MBIE signed an agreement to collaborate with the Environmental Defense Fund and its subsidiary MethaneSAT LLC, who are leading the mission.
In she was a recipient of the Alan Blizzard Award for teaching in Canada and in was awarded a Rutherford Discovery Fellowship to explore higher education, neoliberalism and equity in Aotearoa New Zealand.
In , Cabinet set out principles which guide decisions on space activities authorised by New Zealand.
In , Regional Skills Leadership Groups (RSLG) were established to support the development of workforce plans for regions. These Regional Workforce Plans (RWPs) were to be informed by regional economic development priorities to ensure businesses attract people with the right skills to the right place.
In , we started asking applicants applying for science and innovation funding to provide us with the ORCID iDs of team members in key roles.
In the minimum sick leave entitlement was five days per year. The agreed accumulation process was for eligible employees to become entitled to one day of sick leave on their first day of employment, and an additional day after every mont h of employment until the minimum fiveday sick leave entitlement was reached after four months.
In , . of school leavers enrolled in level and above tertiary education, a . increase from the previous year.
In , Cabinet accepted the Holidays Act Taskforce s
In , MBIE commissioned an independent review of the early implementation of the scheme to identify how it was working so far and whether any parts of the process could be improved. The review comprised interviews with a range of stakeholders and focused on the experience of businesses and their advisors through the application process for the RDTI.
In , Tourism New Zealand pivoted to domestic marketing as a response to the international border closures from COVID. The Government made this decision to support the industry in continuing to operate.
In , when it endorsed the Taskforces recommendations, Cabinet directed MBIE to develop a transition plan and report back to Cabinet CAB MIN . MBIE undertook this work as part of the policy design process.
In Haritina Mogosanu applied to be an astronaut at the European Space Agency (ESA). Read her story below.
In , . of all school leavers achieved level or UE standard, a . decrease from .
In , the Government asked a Tripartite Working Group, made up of union, employer and public sector representatives, to examine the issue and report back with recommendations.
In , Business and Economic Research Limited (BERL) completed a truncated programme of work for a report for evaluating the economic effects of the MOUs for the uplift of the New Zealand Screen Production Grant.
In , the Future of Work Tripartite Forum commissioned research projects, both designed to support a better understanding of how the transition to a highwage, lowemissions economy is likely to impact businesses and workers.
In , the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs commissioned an investigation into changes to credit laws introduced on December . This has led to further amendments to the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance Regulations and the Responsible Lending Code. The first tranche of changes came into force on July , and the second tranche are in force on May .
In MBIE commissioned research on the potential for greenhouse gas emissions savings and other impacts from circular approaches in the New Zealand context.
In , Kiwi interns completed internships at NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, USA.
In , INZ plans to provide assistance with ongoing training activities with Pacific agencies to support investigation and prosecution efforts.
In , the previous Government announced its intention to address modern slavery by introducing new legislation that would require organisations and businesses to be transparent about their operations and supply chains through a new public register.
In we took part in a bilateral Space Dialogue with the United States Government. Representatives from both governments discussed how we can strengthen our existing bilateral space cooperation.
In , Connecting Now helped facilitate conversations in over languages, with an average connection time of less than minute.
In April and May consultation was carried out on proposed legislation to address modern slavery and worker exploitation in supply chains both in New Zealand and internationally.
In August Government approved the piloting of the Community Organisation Refugee Sponsorship Category (CORS) Category as an alternative form of admission for up to refugees in .
In August , the Taskforce an issues paper that set out its understanding of the key issues that employers, employees, and payroll providers face in trying to implement the Holidays Act . The Taskforce considered feedback from stakeholders on the issues paper as it developed its final recommendations.
In August, Cabinet agreed to exempt BNPL providers from unreasonable fee provisions in the CCCFA. This was given effect by the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance (Buy Now, Pay Later Exemptions) Amendment Regulations which commenced on November . This decision was made in response to concerns about the unintended impacts the CCCFA fee provisions would have on the ability of BNPL providers to calculate and charge default fees, for the overall viability of BNPL products.
In Canada, sales revenues from remanufacturing and comprehensive refurbishment generate an estimated CAD billion annually. The International Resource Panel has found that when compared to manufacturing a new product, remanufacturing can reduce the need for new materials from to and reduce to of the energy needs and associated greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions related to their manufacturing.
In Confidence Office of the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety Chair, Cabinet Economic Development Committee
In December we consulted on the proposed Accident Compensation Appeal Tribunal. Submissions did not support establishing a Tribunal and it was decided not to progress establishing a specialist appeal tribunal.
In December , we released a discussion document seeking feedback on main areas:
In December the Taskforce provided an interim report to the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety on progress with the review of the Holidays Act.
In December we applied adjustments to the data to ensure the Auckland regional fuel tax is reflected in the data:
In December , we made adjustments to account for the introduction of the Auckland regional fuel tax on July .
In December , we provided a progress update to the ACC Minister on our progress implementing the recommendations. This report provides transparency about the work agencies have done in response to the review. It does not signal an end to work being done to improve the dispute resolution process. This is an ongoing commitment for ACC.
In December , the Cabinet agreed to include security officers in Schedule A.
In December , the Energy and Resources Minister decided a new year energy efficiency and conservation strategy is to be developed. This will replace the existing strategy, rather than rolling it over for another years.
In December , officials were directed by the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety to take a new approach to reforming the Holidays Act, with a focus on simplicity, improving workability and reducing compliance costs. The approach involves designing an hoursbased accrual model for annual leave and considering whether other models may be bestsuited for more complex work arrangements.
In Europe, one of the actions of the Circular Economy Action Plan is a proposal for companies to substantiate their environmental claims using evidence.
In February , the Government announced the formal commencement of a million package of investments to bolster the capacity in wireless networks in rural areas which is expected to benefit up to , rural households and businesses as a Rural Capacity Upgrade (RCU). Work is in progress on new towers and upgrades to existing towers (and some fibre backhaul) to improve network performance in rural areas.
In Hamburg, my test group was about people split into classrooms, and we had a few days to meet each other as we stayed at the same hotel, and also meet the people who came there before and after us. What I found absolutely amazing was that we all got along very well. We were supposed to compete against each other, yet it was an extraordinary sense of camaraderie between us. We stay in touch on Whatsapp and still talk to each other. There were test pilots, doctors, aerospace engineers, biologists, one astronomer, and a few software engineers in my group. There was someone who works at SpaceX in the US and I was the only science communicator astrobiologist in our group.
In January , the JWG was reconvened to provide further recommendations that address
In July we released a request for proposals (RFP) for the hosting of the centre to the research organisations who participated in the workshop.
In July , we signed a joint statement of principle supporting the adoption and use of ORCID iDs in New Zealand with other New Zealand organisations representing the scientific and research community.
In July , the Minister for Communications appointed Utilities Disputes Limited as the approved scheme provider.
In July we asked for feedback on a proposed subject and focus areas for the Briefing. The feedback we received helped us narrow our focus to purposeled business and use of blockchain technology. The full summary of feedback is available here.
In July , the previous Government increased the minimum sick leave entitlement from five to days per year. The accumulation needs to be adjusted to reflect this. Adjust the accumulation profile for sick leave t o reflect the increase in sick leave entitlement from five to days: For employees eligible for sick leave from the first day of employment : days sick leave accumulates over a timeframe of six months , two days on day one, a further four days after three months and a further four days (i. e. the full entitlement) after six months. For employees eligible for sick leave after three months of employment : sick leave accumulates over a timeframe of three months, six days when they become eligible and then a further four days (i.e. the full entit lement) after six months . For employees eligible for sick leave after six months of employment: full entitlement of days is provided upon becoming eligible (aligned with the current six month timeframe).
In July a webinar for government procurement officials was held on Modern Slavery and the direction of travel regarding the developing legislation, to raise awareness and address questions and concerns from procurement practitioners across the public sector. The event had attendees representing over agencies and entities.
In July regulations setting out infringement fees and fines came into law.
In June , Cabinet approved the piloting of the Community Organisation Refugee Sponsorship Category (CORS) as an alternative form of admission for up to refugees in .
In June , the Minister of Tourism set up the independent New Zealand Tourism Futures Taskforce (the Taskforce) following the significant change to global travel and tourism in New Zealand as a result of COVID.
In March the State Services Commissioner appointed Doug Martin to conduct an inquiry into the use of external security consultants by Southern Response Earthquake Services Limited and MBIE.
In May , the Government announced the design of the Fair Pay Agreements system. The design was informed by the Fair Pay Agreements Working Group and public consultation, as well as involvement from the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions and BusinessNZ.
In May we asked for feedback on a draft of the Briefing. We shaped the content of the final Briefing through the contributions of those who wrote submissions, and met with us in person and virtually in this second phase. The full consultation summary is available here as an accessible web version and PDF.
In May , new trails were granted Great Ride status and joined the New Zealand Cycle Trails network, increasing the number of Great Rides to .
In May , INZ travelled to Fiji to assist and coordinate the delivery of ongoing training packages for Fijian authorities. INZ assisted the Fijian immigration service with a local investigation, as well as operational prevention activities.
In May , Cabinet approved the introduction of the Bills, agreed to rescind or amend some previous Cabinet decisions, and agreed to include some additional matters in the Bills.
In New Zealand M has been providing interpreting services under the Open Syndicated Panel Agreement for facetoface interpreting services with the population target of people with limited or no English language proficiency who require access to public services and information as well as visitors to New Zealand needing access to essential services and information.
In New Zealand, the layout design of semiconductors and integrated circuits is protected by the Layout Designs Act .
In October the Science Board selected Massey University as the centre host, following the RFP process.
In October , MBIE and the German Aerospace Centre (DLR) signed a Letter of Intent at the International Astronautical Congress (IAC) to enable joint research collaboration, focused on space systems, earth observation technologies and applications, transport technologies and energy technologies.
In October , the Government released a discussion paper that sought feedback on a range of options for the design of a Fair Pay Agreements system. The consultation closed November .
In October , we consulted on a set of proposed changes that will prevent migrant exploitation, protect exploited migrants, and better enforce appropriate working conditions and immigration obligations. Consultation closed on November.
In October , MBIE launched a new service for government agencies to access face to face interpreting services.
In October , the Government agreed to apply the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance Act (CCCFA) to BNPL. MBIE opened consultation on December to seek feedback on the proposed regulations, including a proposed threshold of and what will apply above the threshold. Stakeholders were invited to provide feedback from December to March .
In October , the Government agreed to an allofgovernment approach to online financial scams. This has informed the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs to lead engagement measures across government, with industry, and internationally.
In September , Cabinet agreed to progress an action item in the coalition agreement between Labour and New Zealand First to take serious action on migrant exploitation, particularly of international students.
In a circular economy, products and materials are kept in circulation through processes like maintenance, reuse, refurbishment, remanufacture, recycling, and composting. Downstream efforts such as waste and resource management are usually the first areas to be addressed in domestic circular economy policy, though more significant shifts occur with policies focussed on upstream waste prevention and resource recovery. Some examples of key policy and regulatory areas include:
In accordance with the Privacy Act , please be aware that your personal information is being collected through the screen share function and the recording of the screen share session. This is to ensure that Client Services Advisors can assist you with your query and to ensure that we can resolve any disputes that may arise following a screen share session. It may also be used for quality and training purposes.
In addition to her MBIE responsibilities, Carolyn is Chair of the Public Sector Auckland Career Board, and is a member of the Victoria University of Wellington Business School Advisory Board.
In addition to launch and facility licences, we also conduct assessments for payloads and highaltitude vehicles.
In addition to providing information specified in the application forms, you may be required to fill out the APP or APP forms.
In addition to the challenges that may be experienced by all New Zealand youth in their transition to adulthood, migrant youth may face additional challenges related to settling in a new country and adapting to a new culture.
In addition to the cochairs and independent members, the Taskforce includes:
In addition to this exceptional work experience opportunity, interns will be asked to give back to the wider New Zealand aerospace sector and NASA through outreach and social media activities.
In addition, international screen productions can:
In addition, the wider public will also get an opportunity to make submissions at Select Committee stage.
In addition, this report includes monitoring data on employment outcomes for quota refugee arrivals from to .
In addition, we reserve the right to remove content posted on our pages that:
In all these situations, the parties involved generally have a range of options for managing or resolving the dispute. They may try to:
In broad terms, entanglement is the mindbending quantum mechanics phenomenon where two photons behave as one unit even when physically separated. You cannot measure something about one photon without affecting the other photon in the pair, which is what makes it secure.
In carrying out the review, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), as the administering agen cy of the Act, will assess the Acts operation and effectiveness through, inter alia, considering the following: Alignment of provisions with intent ( eg do the provisions in the Act allow the purposes to be met); Efficient ( eg do they impose minimum com pliance costs on the regulated entities and agencies involved in administering the Act, and do they result in the provision of timely and comprehensive information to inform decision making); Certain and predictable ( eg does the regime provide a sufficie nt level of certainty and predictability to regulated entities); Flexible ( eg given that this is an area of rapid technology change, is the Act sufficiently technology neutral); Transparent (for the regulated entities and the general public).
In considering how to collect information we take into account a range of factors, including:
In considering how to structure the safety argument, Figure provides a highlevel overview of some of the questions that applicants should ask when considering and planning the development of the safety case .
In considering the national interest, the Act notes that the Minister may have regard to:
In early , severe weather events affected large parts of the North Island, causing widespread and devastating damage to buildings and communities.
In early March , MBIE released a discussion document on the issues related to ticket reselling. It was based on initial research and some stakeholder interviews, as well as potential options to address the consumer concerns around ticket reselling. You can access this document in the table further down this page.
In essence, you are free to copy, distribute and adapt the material, as long as you attribute it to the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment and abide by other licence terms.
In general terms, a just transition in New Zealand is a strategy to move a region toward a low carbon future. It is about a region leading their own transition to ensure that the impacts and opportunities that may arise from the transition are more evenly distributed.
In general, if an agency has previously signedup to an All of Government or Syndicated contract (including Telephone and Video Interpreting) then it is eligible to join the OSA as a Participating Agency.
In general, you can only freedom camp on local authority land if your vehicle is certified selfcontained. Check in with your local authority to find out more:
In healthcare, new rules mean our doctors and scientists could more easily research, develop and manufacture innovative therapies in New Zealand, like using the patients own cells to help fight against cancer. Or, scientists could develop a type of pine tree that meets our forestry needs but doesnt spread. This would help to protect and preserve our native environments.
In late , open letters were issued to the telecommunications, and digital platforms sectors. These letters urged industryled initiatives and developments, including improving consumer protection and redress measures.
In late December , we briefed you on the
In mid, we sought feedback on a discussion paper examining the concept of impact as it relates to the science system.
In order to be added to Schedule A certain criteria must be met
In order to be added to Schedule A, certain criteria must be met
In order to benefit from this funding, interpreters must have a MBIE issued entitlement note and
In order to carry out our law enforcement, regulatory compliance and protective security functions, we may use the information we hold as evidence, and for analysis, risk assessment, audit andor monitoring purposes.
In order to ensure there are interpreters with NAATI credentials in New Zealand, MBIE managed the Interpreter Standards Transition Support (ISTS) package for a threeyear period from July . Registration closed January . The timeframe for interpreters who registered with ISTS towards the end of the registration period to complete their accreditation has been extended through to June .
In order to manage these risks, MBIE undertakes a sensitive technologies risk assessment on those projects that are recommended for MBIE Science and Innovation funding. Higher levels of assessed risk require specific risk mitigation strategies to be put in place. These will normally form part of the funding contract conditions of a project.
In order to reach the minimum , grant threshold, the minimum total cost of the project must be ,
In our Endeavour Fund funding applications, applicants are required to specify the Australian and New Zealand Standard Research Classification (ANZSRC) Fields of Research (FoR) and SocioEconomic Objectives (SEO) research codes that classify their proposed research.
In parallel to the MBIEled national interest risk review process, the Government Communications Security Bureau (GCSB) and New Zealand Secret Intelligence Service (NZSIS) undertake a National Security Assessment on each payload and provide a briefing to the Minister(s) responsible for the GCSB and NZSIS.
In response to the COVID pandemic, New Zealand set up a Managed Isolation and Quarantine (MIQ) system out of necessity to protect our people.
In selecting what control is reasonable, applicants should give consideration to: the likelihood of a public safety risk being what is known, or what ought reasonably be known, realised; and about the risk; and the consequence of the public safety risk being what is known, or what ought reasonably be known, realised; and about how the risk can be controlled. Applicants must be able to demonstrate an identification of any public safety risks outlining: the likelihood and consequence of the public the monitoring activities that will be undertaken safety risk; to ensure your controls remain effective; and the control measures considered and used who is responsible for ensuring that controls to eliminate or minimise the risks; are implemented. MBIE encourages applicants to check, consider and use where appropriate to the operation any commonly accepted control measures (such as industry standards) to control the risks. Applicants should still ensure that any residual risk is managed appropriately. Where a decision is made not to implement a control that could improve public safety, (if required) applicants must be able to demonstrate the rationale for not implementing it. Some risks that the public could be exposed to may require them to be managed in accordance with more prescriptive regulations (hazardous substances might be an example). Applicants must be aware of, and apply these as required. Figure represents an accepted framework for safety risk management. The complexity of the risk assessment methodology that is used to assess a public safety risk will depend on the nature of the task being performed or the public safety needs to be managed. To give the regulator confidence that applicants understand the public safety risks they create, a copy of your public safety risk assessment should be provided when the safety case is submitted. ASSESS Engage with workers and stakeholders, identify your hazards and risks, determine your critical or priority risks, identify possible controls CONTROL IMPROVE Implement controls, educate identify control and systemic SAFETY RISK on correct use of controls, weakness, feedback to MANAGEMENT Review data and reports, give priority to controls the business, effect that protect multiple meaningful change persons simultaneously MONITOR Encourage reporting, engage with workers and stakeholders, undertake effective assurance activities including audit and investigation
In situations where RDP is currently straightforward to calculate, the aim is that there would be little change fr om how payments are currently calculated. The consolidated calculation is designed to be applicable to both waged and salaried workers.
In some circumstances, the formal court system may be an appropriate channel or a last recourse when other approaches have been unsuccessful.
In some circumstances, you may also need to provide additional information by completing the APP and APP forms, which are provided below.
In some subsectors, opportunities exist to use more of what we produce locally. In some cases, this could make businesses more resilient and create skilled jobs. Clear policies on managing domestic versus global emissions need to guide these transitions.
In the year, , migrants from the Pacific were approved for residence. The number of Pacific migrants approved for residence has remained stable over the last years, increasing by between and . This growth was driven by the increase in the InternationalHumanitarian visa stream approvals.
In the first half of OT has been working closely with the Pacific Justice Sector Programme to identify models of practice within the Pacific judiciary which prevents children being trafficked and exploited. The programme went live in May, introduced by the Lord Chief Justice of the Tonga Supreme Court, and it is hoped that this model will encourage other Pacific nations to follow suit.
In the next sections, in all of the reports, we looked at some of the activities, as in this particular chart where some of the international acquirers are buying into the New Zealand market.
In the years prior to COVID, the number of freedom campers steadily increased. Communities raised concerns about the environmental impact of freedom campers and the cost of hosting them, particularly those visitors staying in cars or vans that did not have a toilet. Poor visitor behaviour was starting to impact Brand New Zealand.
In this section are indepth analytical pieces of research into projecting how markets operate.
In this section you will find all our consultations, both current and closed. Your views are important to us and we encourage you to have your say.
In this section you will find data and statistics about rental bonds.
In this section you will find data and statistics about rental bonds. Information about housing and urban development is available from the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development website. Tenancy information for landlords and tenants is available from the Tenancy website.
Inkind contributions are not permitted.
Inkind contributions may be allowed, but will be considered on a case by case bases. Contact MBIE for any questions regarding inkind contributions.
Include the symbol when dialling.
Including an month implementation period in the exposure draft will provide an opportunity to test whether this timeframe is sufficient as a general commencemen t for
Incorporate the views of Pacific Island countries and workers, and the impacts on Pacific labour markets
Incorporated Societies Act
Increase the level of crosssubsidisation of owners of motorcycles to the cost of injuries to motorcyclists from to with a staged increase of from July and from July .
Increase the threshold for medical and treatment costs used in Experience Rating calculations from to .
Increased access to some leave entitlements
Increased certainty for contractors coming
Increased diesel reserves to improve resilience
Increased onshore diesel reserves to improve resilience
Increasing the minimum sick leave entitlement
Increasing the minimum sick leave entitlement PDF KB
Independent Police Conduct Authority
Independent Research Organisations
Independent Review of the Acclaim Otago (Inc) July Report into Accident Compensation Dispute Resolution Processes
Independent Taskforce on Workplace Health and Safety
Independent and privately owned
Independent dispute resolution providers in New Zealand: a snapshot
Independent dispute resolution providers in New Zealand: a snapshot PDF KB
Independent research organisations have internal capability for carrying out research, science, technology or related activities with ownerships and governance independent of Government.
Independent review into the Accredited Employer Work Visa (AEWV)
Independent review of WorkSafe in relation to WhakaariWhite Island
Independent reviews of WorkSafe
Independent reviews of WorkSafe in relation to WhakaariWhite Island and a Strategic Baseline review, assessing whether WorkSafe is managing its resources efficiently and effectively are available here.
Independently qualified pool inspectors website
Index of registers Entity registers: Companies Incorporated Societies Limited Partnerships Friendly Societies Credit Unions Building Societies Other registers: Auditors Insolvency Practitioners Retirement Villages Disclose Personal Property Securities Financial Service Providers Other services: Financial Statements filing
Indicative timeline for change
Indigenous Innovation: Contributing to economic growth through distinctive research and development.
Individuals were able to identify up to three ethnicities and as many project team roles as they identified with meaning that some individuals may have been counted more than once.
IndoPacific Economic Framework for Prosperity ()
IndoPacific Economic Framework for Prosperity (IPEF) Supply Chain Agreement
Industries identified for the development of an Industry Transformation Plan are those with significant potential to contribute to a high productivity, high wage, lower emissions economy.
Industry Focus Group members
Industry Transformation Plans
Industry Transformation Plans (ITPs) took a highintensity, highengagement approach to industry policy, with the purpose of setting a transformative vision and action plan for key sectors in the New Zealand economy.
Industry funders the Dairy Companies Association of New Zealand, the Meat Industry Association and Zespri have committed . million so far.
Industry transformation plans
Ineligible Research Objectives
Influencing the design of products and assets for durability and reuse can result in significant waste elimination and efficient material circulation. Initiatives such as digital product passports can support supplychain transparency and life cycle information sharing, which complement broader circular economy initiatives.
Informal flexible working is where flexible working does not affect remuneration or leave. It does not require a change to your employment agreement. InformalAd hoc flexible working is agreed with your people leader on a casebycase basis and does not follow a regular pattern of working hours or days or location.
Informalad hoc flexible working
Information about migrant exploitation to MBIE website in languages.
Information about our new data processing pipeline
Information about payload capabilities Overview of the payload and its subsystems, and the payload capabilities and intended uses Summary of manoeuvring capability, if any If the management, oversight or control of the payload or its operation (including the ground segment) is being sub contracted , the : o Name
Information about payloads with remote sensing capability A description of payloa d sensors and summary of their capability including : o Resolution, field of view, and field of regard o Onboard storage and processing capabilities o Geolocation accuracy o Persistence
Information about shortterm accommodation activity in New Zealand at national, regional, and lower levels
Information about space events for students across Aotearoa, competitions, and educational resources.
Information about the New Zealand Screen Sector
Information about the Screen Industry Workers Act
Information about the high altitude vehicle and purpose of launch or launches A summary of the mission and purposes of each HAV launch, including: o a description of the HAV (including name and type of vehicle, payload capacity and capabilities of the HAV) o proposed flight path or flight plan (if applicable) o If known at the time of application, anticipated launch windows o proposed launch site (including for multiple launch sites if applicable) o anticipated duration of the mission o intended fl ight level band or range
Information about the new Matariki public holiday, its principles and values.
Information about the type of funding available and eligibility criteria.
Information and Communication Technology report
Information and Communications Technology
Information and advice on consumer issues
Information and communications technologies enhance innovation and productivity across the economy. To realise this potential, we work to ensure that telecommunications markets operate efficiently and communications infrastructure is well developed.
Information and data about research, science and innovation.
Information and tools to help you design policy, legislation and services for dispute resolution using a best practice lens are linked below. This can also help guide you in establishing a new scheme or reviewing an existing scheme.
Information collected directly
Information collected from another person or agency
Information collection to prevent significant harm
Information for consumers about your rights if your car has been clamped is available on our
Information for consumers seeking refunds or credits for cancelled overseas travel
Information for employers
Information for employers and employees on shop trading days
Information for employers in the sex industry about who can be a sex worker in New Zealand and the responsibilities of employers. Translated into simplified Chinese, Thai, Korean and Portugese.
Information for local authorities
Information for prospective Certification Authorities and vehicle inspectors
Information for prospective certification authorities and vehicle inspectors
Information for vehicle owners
Information for workers in the sex industry about who can be a sex worker in New Zealand, where to get help and more information. Translated into simplified Chinese, Thai, Korean and Portugese.
Information from submissions was analysed and included in the report.
Information gathering concerns and feedback
Information gathering for regulatory compliance, law enforcement and protective security purposes
Information gathering for regulatory compliance, law enforcement and protective security purposes.
Information gathering must be authorised according to our internal authorisation processes. These processes may vary within various teams in MBIE according to their regulatory function and the severity of the potential harm caused by the noncompliance, offending or threat. Each of our internal authorisation processes, and the related activities, are regularly reviewed.
Information is available on the Ministry for Ethnic Communities website.
Information is stored, accessed and retained in accordance with our Privacy Policy, Information and Records Management Policy, ICT Acceptable Use Policy, and the MBIE Code of Conduct. It also needs to be in compliance with the Public Service Commission code of conduct, and applicable laws including the Privacy Act , and the Public Records Act .
Information on Budget announcements for science and innovationrelated funding.
Information on how GST (if any) has been included
Information on how we process complaints and what we need from you.
Information on previous Budget announcements for science and innovationrelated funding.
Information on the council
Information on the current Commissioner
Information on this page was in March following an internal audit of payload permits issued.
Information on what is needed to certify your vehicle (including answers to technical questions), and where to go to get certified, is available on the Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Board website:
Information on your rights when buying a product and service
Information related to an applicants fitness to hold a licence Whether the applicant or a person who is to have or is likely to have cont rol over the exercise of the rights under the licence: has been charged with or convicted of any offence in New Zealand or in any other jurisdiction, has had an aviation document under the Civil Aviation Act or regulations made under the Civil Aviation Ac t suspended or revoked (other than a revocation at the request of the applicant), or had conditions imposed on an aviation document, or has received notice from the C ivil Aviation Authority of a proposed adverse decision, has ever had a licence, permit or authorisation for the same or substantially similar activity by a foreign regulatory body suspended, denied or revoked and the reason s given and if so details of what and when
Information related to an applicants fitness to hold a licence Whether the applicant or a person who is to have or is likely to have control over the exercise of the rights under the licence: has been charged with or convicted of any offence in New Zealand or any other jurisdiction, or has had an aviation document under the C ivil Aviation Act or regulations made under the C ivil Aviation Act suspended or revoked (other than a revocation at the requ est of the applicant), or had conditions imposed on an aviation document, or has received notice from the Civil Aviation Authority of a proposed adverse decision, or has ever had a licence, permit or authorisation for the same or substantially similar act ivity by a foreign regulatory body suspended, denied or revoked and the reason s given
Information required to register
Information that prospective Certification Authorities must provide to the Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Board have been made in regulations. As has the criteria the Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Board will use to assess applications from Certification Authorities. These regulations also set a fee of plus GST that applicants from prospective Certification Authorities must pay the Board to cover their assessment costs.
Information, examples and answers to your questions about the topics covered here can be found on our website, www.mbie.govt.nz
Informed consumers and businesses interacting with confidence
Infrastructure for growth.
Infringement fees and fines
Infringement fees and penalties table
Ingenuity and effective science infrastructure
Initial advice on eligibility to remedies for personal grievances PDF KB
Initial advice on setting a highincome threshold for personal grievances
Initial advice on setting a highincome threshold for personal grievances PDF KB
Initial considerations for developing or reviewing a dispute resolution scheme
Initial feedback suggests the new calculations
Initial global drivers for circular approaches were limited raw material availability, climate change and degenerating natural capital. Subsequent drivers have included increasing resilience (including to geopolitical risks and volatile trade), productivity gains, economic competitiveness, and higher value jobs.
Initial paper on income threshold, seeking agreement to targeting consultation.
Initial review is conducted by ACC
Initiative Summary for initiative Funding further decarbonisation of industry and heat and implementing supporting policies () PDF KB
Initiative Summary for initiative Supporting the energy transition to a low emissions economy () PDF KB
Initiative summary documents
Inland Revenue (on amendments to parental leave legislation
Inland Revenue Department
Innovation Programme for Tourism Recovery
Innovation, technology and science
Innovations in sustainable agriculture, such as the use of more local and organic alternatives to imported fertiliser.
Innovative Europe: Focuses on innovation and technology development.
Inquiries into the suitability of the loan for the consumer will not be required because they are unlikely to be useful given the nature and structure of BNPL loans.
Insight into the effects of the COVID pandemic on safety and health cooperation within an interconnected, multipleemployer, work environment.
Insights approaches to dispute resolution in New Zealand
Insights from approaches to dispute resolution in New Zealand
Insights into emissionsintensive, tradeexposed businesses
Insights into emissionsintensive, tradeexposed businesses (stage )
Insolvency Practitioners (IP) levy No change to the current IP levy of ., with no change to who pays. The Insolvency Practitioners Regulation Act introduced a co regulatory licensing regime to promote quality, expertise and integrity in the profession of insolvency practitioners (IP). The co regulatory licensing regime means that frontline regulation of insolvency practitioners is carried out by accredited bodies, and that the Registrar of Companies has a role to monitor and report on the adequacy and effectiveness of the systems and p rocesses of regulators. An IP levy was introduced in September under the Insolvency Practitioners Regulations as an annual payment for users on the Companies register only, with a commitment to review the charges in the next full review of the Companies Office fees and levies. Who will pay the levy and when The IP levy will continue to be paid annually by companies (New Zealand and overseas) on the Companies register only. All companies receive the same benefit of operating in a business environment with an active oversight scheme that ensures compliance with the statutory duties of insolvency practitioners. Costs recovered by the levy Table below shows the type and amount of costs of the IP oversight scheme to be recovered from the existing levy. Table : Costs of the IP oversight scheme Cost m Oversight functions . Enforcement and education . Other operating costs . MBIE functional support . Total cost levy recovered . No change proposed to the levy amount The proposed IP levy has been derived by dividing the cost by the annual volume of , (representing the number of companies who incorporate or would file an annual return). Table on the next page shows the unit cost of the IP oversight regime.
Insolvency Review Working Group
Insolvency and Trustee Service
Inspection targets will come into force later in and legislation to enable the selfcertification scheme will be introduced by the end of the year.
Installations with an impact beyond these categories are outside the scope of this regime and will continue to require the written consent of all affected owners eg, if the length of a driveway needs to be dug up it will still need all parties to actively consent.
Institute of Environmental Science and Research Limited
Institute of Geological and Nuclear Science Limited (GNS Science)
Instrument and sensor design and development
Insufficient causal evidence
Insulation requirements in housing and other buildings
Insurance and Financial Services Ombudsman
Insurance contract law review
Integrated circuit design protection
Integrating our funding system with ORCID will be an iterative process that we expect to grow and develop over time.
Intellectual Property Office of NZ
Intellectual property and copyright
Intellectual property enforcement
Intellectual property refers to new or original innovations and creations of the mind such as:
Intellectual property refers to new or original innovations and creations of the mind.
Intellectual property refers to new or original innovations and creations of the mind. This section also covers copyright, trade marks, patents and other forms of intellectual property protection.
Intellectual property regulatory system
Intellectual property rights
Intellectual property rights (also known as IPRs) give creators and innovators the exclusive right, for a limited time, to control what others may do with their creations and innovations.
Intelligence assessment, to establish baseline understanding of the people trafficking landscape in NZ, scheduled for completion. This assessment will be reproduced on an annual basis.
Intelligence assessment, to improve understanding of the people trafficking landscape in New Zealand, scheduled to be undertaken for a second year (delayed from )
InterCultural Capability eLearning
Intercultural capability eLearning
Interactive Levelised Cost of Electricity Comparison Tool
Interim Action Plan: July to December
Interim Report from the Holidays Act Taskforce PDF .MB
Interim Welcoming Communities Pilot Programme Report
Interim arr angements for spectrum ownership pending creation to the Mori spectrum Entity. The parties to this M OU will agree legal arrangements that allow the IMSC unimpeded use of the Management Rights as described above while enabling the Crown to ensure that the Management Rights will be transferred to the Mori Spectrum Entity , and are not transferred to another party or mortgaged in the interim.
Interim hydrogen roadmap: Public consultation submissions summary
Interim report from Holidays Act Taskforce
Internal Policy Advisory Group (IPAG)
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
International Crimes and International Criminal Court Act
International Energy Agency
International Energy Business Forum
International Energy Forum
International Humanitarian Law (IHL)
International Labour Conventions ratified by New Zealand
International Labour Organization
International Labour Policy Team
International Law (LAWPUBL )
International Relations and Security Studies
International Science Partnerships
International Science Partnerships programme
International Security and International Relations at Massey
International Visitor Conservation and Tourism Levy
International Visitor Survey
International Visitor Survey (IVS)
International Visitor Survey data release materials
International Visitor Survey methodology
International case studies: regulatory policy solutions to support public electric vehicle (EV) charging infrastructure
International collaborative research projects often provide findings beyond what one team could achieve alone. In what areas do you hope to gain more skills and a better perspective of the topic you are researching
International developments and implications for Aotearoa New Zealand
International developments toward more circular economies and the implications for New Zealand
International engagement on energy
International experience indicates that adoption of circularity is challenging as it involves significant change in production and consumption systems; governments are using marketshaping interventions to accelerate the shift to reduced and more efficient use of resources.
International financial reforms
International forecast microdata
International obligations and space
International opportunities
International organisations we participate in
International regulatory cooperation
International regulatory cooperation (IRC) toolkit
International regulatory cooperation is the different things a country can do to:
International regulatory cooperation toolkit
International relationships
International research projects
International research shows that successful destinations fulfil each aspect of the visitor journey and experience. They have a strong brand and a diverse offering. This includes a good supply of natural, historic and cultural attractions, varied accommodation types and a range of hospitality offerings. They also have quality infrastructure, services and amenities, which collectively help the destination to be attractive, competitive and sustainable.
International science partnerships
International standards and conformance organisations
International student visa holders
International student visa holders from the Pacific remain small and are mostly dependents of temporary visa holders
International tourism forecasts
International travel arrangementscosts to and from Singapore
International visitor experience report
International visitors bring money into the economy and showcase the New ZealandAotearoa brand to an international audience. However, COVID encouraged a renewed focus on the domestic visitor market.
International visitors, domestic visitors and COVID
InternationalHumanitarian visa stream,
Internationally, many policies and regulations are aimed at circular practices and have implications for New Zealand exporters.
InternetNZ is the trustee of the .nz domain name for New Zealand. It is an open membership organisation dedicated to protecting and promoting the Internet for New Zealand.
InternetNZ signed a Memorandum of Understanding with us in May for the management of the name. Under this MOU, InternetNZ has a duty to manage the domain name in service to the local internet community.
Interpreters can find the tests MBIE has agreed to fund in their entitlement note issued from MBIE. The next available NAATI test will likely be after June , but you must have made the booking by then.
Interpreting and applying the law and regulations in good faith.
Into the Black II and III
Into the Black II and III aimed to break the world amateur stage altitude record by reaching an altitude in excess of km.
Into the Black II and III are both stage highpowered sounding rockets, built and designed by the students in the Aerospace Club. Each rocket has a Global Positioning System device in the nose cone to aid postlaunch recovery.
Into the Black II was successfully launched on July , although it did not break the amateur stage world record.
Into the Black III was successfully launched on January . Communication with the rocket was lost so the maximum altitude was unable to be confirmed.
Into the Black aimed to break the world amateur stage altitude record and the world altitude record by reaching an altitude of km.
Into the Black is a .m, stage highpowered sounding rocket. It was built and designed by students in the Aerospace Club. It has a GPS device in the nose cone to aid postlaunch
Introduce cc, cc and cc motorcycle risk groups from July to better reflect the cost of injuries increases as the engine capacity of a motorcycle increases.
Introduce a duty on third parties with significant control or influence over an employer to take reasonable steps to prevent a breach of employment standards occurring.
Introduce legislation to give effect to reforms.
Introduce new approaches to supporting jobseekers, including seminars supporting job profilesCVstraining and new work checkins for jobseekers in their first weeks on benefit and after months.
Introducing a Performance Monitoring model to better measure the performance of Accredited Employers (AEs)
Introducing a risk classification system.
Introducing an Income Threshold for Unjustified Dismissal PDF KB
Introducing an income threshold for unjustified dismissal personal grievances
Introducing sector specific notifiable incidents, requiring operators to report incidents associated with hazards in the sector to WorkSafe.
Introducing specific regulatory requirements for landownersmanagers
Introducing specific requirements for how adventure activity operators must assess and manage natural hazard risks
Introduction from Hon Grant Robertson (Minister of Finance), Richard Wagstaff (President) and Kirk Hope (Chief Executive).
Introduction from the Minister for Social Development and Employment
Introduction to this discussion document
Introductory Astronomy (PHYS)
Invest NZ will work with multinational corporations and foreign investors to attract people, businesses and capital into New Zealand across industries and technologies, with a particular interest in investing in the science, innovation and technology that will drive our economy.
Invest New Zealand and New Zealand Trade and Enterprise
Investigates complaints about NZ Police
Investigates complaints about government agencies
Investigates complaints about the quality of health and disability services
Investigation into electricity supply interruptions of August
Investigations and reviews for safer buildings
Investing in governance can save time in the longer term as it can help ensure that underperformance is addressed early, rather than having to find resources to respond should something go wrong.
Investment Plan
Investment by the Government in infrastructure and tourism assets:
Investment in people and capability building is critical to lifting the productivity of the tourism sector and delivering quality visitor experiences.
Investment in quality infrastructure and tourism assets helps creates positive economic, social and environmental benefits for New Zealanders, and our visitors.
Investor Guide to the NZ Tech Sector
Invoices can be sent to us as a PDF attachment to
Involving the wider team in discussions about flexible working arrangements, what could work and the potential impacts on the team and MBIE.
Is anything missing from the adventure activities regulatory regime that increases the chance of catastrophic events occurring when adventure activities operate onnear natural hazards Are more specific roles or specific controls for the management of natural hazard risks needed
Issue Availability of sick leave, family violence leave and bereavement leave . All employees under the Act are entitled to five days paid sick leave a year, days family violence leave a year and bereavement leave of either three days or one day pe r bereavement depending on the nature of the relationship with the deceased. These forms of leave are made available to employees after six months continuous employment. Although an employer and employee can agree to take sick leave, family violence leave or bereavement leave in advance, there is no obligation on the employer to provide them before six months employment. . The Taskforce recognises that employees have little control over when they may need sick leave, family violence leave and bereavement le ave, and would benefit from having protections in place in the first six months. The current waiting period may also encourage some employees to go to work sick, which raises health and safety concerns and is not in line with the intention of the Act to pr omote balance between work and other aspects of employees lives. Recommendation The Taskforce recommends that: . Eligible employees should be entitled to bereavement leave and family violence leave from the first day of employment. . Eligible employees sho uld be entitled to one day of sick leave from their first day of employment, with an additional day per month of employment until the full entitlement of five da ys is reached after four months (the entitlement of five days for the second and subsequent yea rs of employment should apply from the anniversary of their employment) .
Issue Partial sick and family violence leave . The Act considers sick leave and family violence leave in days and does not explicitly allow for these types of leave to be taken i n units of less than a day. For example, if an employee works for part of the day and then goes home sick, this may be counted as using a whole day of sick leave. This is potentially unfair for employees and can reduce their sick and family violence leave entitlements at a faster rate than actually used. . In practice, many employers allow their employees to take sick leave in part days. However, the Taskforce sees a clear benefit in this applying to all employees as it would protect employees entitlements t o these types of leave and provide clarity to employers and employees. . The Taskforce also considered whether employees should have the ability to take bereavement leave, alternative holidays and public holidays in units of less than a day. However, it conc luded that allowing for partial bereavement leave could create a situation where employees feel compelled to shorten their bereavement leave, while allowing for partial alternative holidays and public holidays would not align with the purpose of these prov isions. Recommendation The Taskforce recommends that employees should have the ability to take sick leave and family violence leave in units of less than a day on a proportionate basis for time and pay with
Issue Partial sick and family violence leave . The Act considers sick leave and family violence leave in days and does not explicitly allow for these types of leave to be taken i n units of less than a day. For example, if an employee works for part of the day and then goes home sick, this may be counted as using a whole day of sick leave. This is potentially unfair for employees and can reduce their sick and family violence leave entitlements at a faster rate than actually used. . In practice, many employers allow their employees to take sick leave in part days. However, the Taskforce sees a clear benefit in this applying to all employees as it would protect employees entitlements t o these types of leave and provide clarity to employers and employees. . The Taskforce also considered whether employees should have the ability to take bereavement leave, alternative holidays and public holidays in units of less than a day. However, it conc luded that allowing for partial bereavement leave could create a situation where employees feel compelled to shorten their bereavement leave, while allowing for partial alternative holidays and public holidays would not align with the purpose of these prov isions. Recommendation The Taskforce recommends that employees should have the ability to take sick leave and family violence leave in units of less than a day on a proportionate basis for time and pay with shrvakdix
Issue Eligibility for sick leave, family violence leave and bereavement leave . Under the current Act, employees are eligible for sick leave, family violence leave and bereavement leave if: they have six months current continuous employment with the same employer , or they have worked for the employer for six months for: o an average of hours per week, and o at least one hour in every week or hours in every month. . As outlined above , the Taskforce recommends that these forms of leave are available to eligible employees from their first day of employment. If this recommendation was implemented, the current eligibility criteria would no longer be appropriate and would need to be amended to better align with this approach. Recommendation The Taskforce reco mmends that a new test be established for eligibility for family violence, sick and bereavement leave, as follows: . All employees with agreed hours and an expectation of continuous employment should be eligible for family violence leave and bereavement leav e from the first day of employment. . All employees with agreed hours and an expectation of continuous employment should be eligible for sick leave from the first day of employment. Sick leave days should build up from one day on the first day of employment to a full entitlement of days after months. . Agreed hours refers to the hours that the employer and employee have agreed that the employee will work, as outlined in the employment agreement. Expectations of continuous employment refers to the expect ation that the employee will not have any periods of unpaid leave that are longer than one week. . Employees with no agreed hours or who are not expected to work continuously should be subject to an hours test applied after weeks. This test requires tha t the employee works on average at least hours a week over the preceding weeks. If the employee meets this threshold, they become eligible for sick leave, family violence leave and bereavement leave. If they do not meet this test, it is repeated afte r weeks to see if they meet the hours requirement or have been working continuously. . All employees should be eligible for sick leave, family violence leave and bereavement leave after six months of continuous employment .
Issue Prescriptive O therw ise Working Day test . Although section () provides a list of factors to be taken into account by the employer and employee when determining whether a day is an Otherwise Working Day, these factors are not ranked and there is no guidance about the weighti ng that should be attached to each factor. This can cause problems when determining whether an employee is eligible or not for a day of FBAPS leave. . To address this the Taskforce is proposing a prescriptive test that can be used to definitively answer the question of whether a particular calend ar day is an Otherwise Working D ay for an employee.
Issue Prescriptive O therw ise Working Day test . Although section () provides a list of factors to be taken into account by the employer and employee when determining whether a day is an Otherwise Working Day, these factors are not ranked and there is no guidance about the weighti ng that should be attached to each factor. This can cause problems when determining whether an employee is eligible or not for a day of FBAPS leave. . To address this the Taskforce is proposing a prescriptive test that can be used to definitively answer the question of whether a particular calend ar day is an Otherwise Working D ay for an employee. shrvakdix
Issue Extension of bereavement leave . The Act provides three days bereavement leave on the death of immediate family member. A separate provision enables an employee to take one days bereavement leave on the death of any other person at the discretion of the employer. . Berea vement leave is intended to help employees emotionally recover from their loss before returning to work, and to allow them to take care of matters to do with the bereavement. The Taskforce believes that eligibility for three days bereavement leave should be extended, to recognise that employees could be equally bereaved by the loss of extended family, and to support cultural practises and varied family arrangements.
Issue Transferring public holidays . An employer and employee can currently agree to transfer a public holiday that is an Otherwise Working Day fo r the employee to be observed on a different Otherwise Working Day. This provision is intende d to recognise cultural diversity in workplaces, but it can disadvantage employees . . An employee who works a public holiday is paid time and a half and also given an alternative paid day off. The transfer of a public holiday is equivalent to this alternative paid day off, but the employee is no longer paid time and a half for working on the public holiday. The transfer can also be complicated for employees with variable rosters, who may not know in advance whether the day they would like to transfer thei r public holiday to will be an O therwise Working Day for them. Recommendation The Taskforce recommends two changes to this section of the Act: . The Act currentl y states that the purpose of the transfer is not to avoid the employees entitlements under sections and for working on a public holiday, although the transfer may have that effect. The employees entitlements under sections and are to be pai d time and a half for working on the public holiday, and to be provided with an alternative holiday if they work on a public holiday. The Taskforce recommends that the phrase although the transfer may have that effect is removed from the Act. . The Taskfor ce recommends that a day that a public holiday is transferred to should automatically be treated as an O therwise Working Day for an employee, regardless of their working pattern. This enables employees to transfer paid public holidays to days that are of s ignificance to them, without being limited by their work pattern or lack of clarity about future rostering.
Issue Transferring public holidays . An employer and employee can currently agree to transfer a public holiday that is an Otherwise Working Day fo r the employee to be observed on a different Otherwise Working Day. This provision is intende d to recognise cultural diversity in workplaces, but it can disadvantage employees . . An employee who works a public holiday is paid time and a half and also given an alternative paid day off. The transfer of a public holiday is equivalent to this alternative paid day off, but the employee is no longer paid time and a half for working on the public holiday. The transfer can also be complicated for employees with variable rosters, who may not know in advance whether the day they would like to transfer thei r public holiday to will be an O therwise Working Day for them. Recommendation The Taskforce recommends two changes to this section of the Act: . The Act currentl y states that the purpose of the transfer is not to avoid the employees entitlements under sections and for working on a public holiday, although the transfer may have that effect. The employees entitlements under sections and are to be pai d time and a half for working on the public holiday, and to be provided with an alternative holiday if they work on a public holiday. The Taskforce recommends that the phrase although the transfer may have that effect is removed from the Act. . The Taskfor ce recommends that a day that a public holiday is transferred to should automatically be treated as an O therwise Working Day for an employee, regardless of their working pattern. This enables employees to transfer paid public holidays to days that are of s ignificance to them, without being limited by their work pattern or lack of clarity about future rostering. shrvakdix
Issue Closedowns . The Act allows employers to have one period per year where they customarily close operations and require employees to use some or all of their annual holiday entitlements. Businesses can have additional closedowns throughout the year if employees agree, but employers cannot require the use of holiday entitlements for these additional closedowns. . A number of issues were id entified with the closedowns section of the Act. Many aspects of the provision lacked clarity; the minimum notice period appeared to be disproportionate to the impact closedowns can have on employees; and there were particularly negative consequences for employees not entitled to holidays at the time of a closedown. The current Act prescribes a mandatory per cent payout for employees not entitled to holidays at the time of a closedown, which leads to a reset of those employees anniversary dates, so they are ineligible for paid holidays for another months. Recommendation The Taskforce recommends that closedown provisions should be amended to provide greater transparency and certainty for employees. In addition, the requirements that holidays are paid out at and an employees anniversary is reset should be removed . The Taskforce recommends six changes to the closedowns sections of the Act: . Employees should have an obligation to inform incoming employees, in writing, if their business has a customary closedown, with an indication of the general time of year and length of this closedown. This should happen before the prospective employee signs the employment agreement. . The Act should note that a new business can establish the custom of a closedown, but they must provide a reasonable notice period to all existing employees. . The requirement that employees who are not entitled to holidays at the time of a closedown be paid out of their gross earnings and have their anniversary reset should be removed (although it should still be possible for anniversary dates to
Issue Closedowns . The Act allows employers to have one period per year where they customarily close operations and require employees to use some or all of their annual holiday entitlements. Businesses can have additional closedowns throughout the year if employees agree, but employers cannot require the use of holiday entitlements for these additional closedowns. . A number of issues were id entified with the closedowns section of the Act. Many aspects of the provision lacked clarity; the minimum notice period appeared to be disproportionate to the impact closedowns can have on employees; and there were particularly negative consequences for employees not entitled to holidays at the time of a closedown. The current Act prescribes a mandatory per cent payout for employees not entitled to holidays at the time of a closedown, which leads to a reset of those employees anniversary dates, so they are ineligible for paid holidays for another months. Recommendation The Taskforce recommends that closedown provisions should be amended to provide greater transparency and certainty for employees. In addition, the requirements that holidays are paid out at and an employees anniversary is reset should be removed . The Taskforce recommends six changes to the closedowns sections of the Act: . Employees should have an obligation to inform incoming employees, in writing, if their business has a customary closedown, with an indication of the general time of year and length of this closedown. This should happen before the prospective employee signs the employment agreement. . The Act should note that a new business can establish the custom of a closedown, but they must provide a reasonable notice period to all existing employees. . The requirement that employees who are not entitled to holidays at the time of a closedown be paid out of their gross earnings and have their anniversary reset should be removed (although it should still be possible for anniversary dates to shrvakdix
Issue Sale and transfer of a business . Under the current Act, employees outstanding leave entitlements cannot be transferred from an outgoing employer to a new employer in the event that a business is sold. This is because, in these situations, existing employment agreements come to an end and the Act requires that outstanding entitlements to leave are to be paid out at the end of employment. The exception to this requirement is when vulnerable workers are involved and section J of Part A of the Employment Relations Act applies . . The Taskforce is aware that it is not always well understood by employers what is permitted with regards to leave entitlements when the sale and transfer of a business occurs. In addition, employees can be disadvantaged by having their leave entitlements paid out as th ey need to then wait or months until they are once again entitled to annual holidays , sick leave, family violence leave and bereavement leave. Recommendation The Taskforce recommends that on the sale and transfer of a business, employees should ha ve a choice about whether to transfer all of their leave entitlements or have them paid out and reset. Issue Record keeping requirements . Under the current Act, employers must keep the information necessary to demonstrate that they have complied with minimum entitlement provisions. This helps ensure that employers hold the information needed to calculate pay and leave entitlements, address any queries from employees and support any investigation into incorrect payment or miscalculation. . The Taskforce agrees with this general approach and recognises that the record keeping provisions will need to be if changes are made to how leave entitlements and payments are calculated. . The Taskforce also noted that employees should have access to information about their holiday and leave records on request and that the employer would be expected to provide this information in a format that can be understood by the employee. Recommendation The Taskforce recommends that: . Record keeping requi rements should be to reflect changes to how leave entitlements are held, calculated and paid, as outlined in Annex . . Employers should be required to retain all holiday and leave records for six years and to make these available to employees on request in a format that can be understood and supports verification by the employee . However, employers should retain relevant
Issue Sale and transfer of a business . Under the current Act, employees outstanding leave entitlements cannot be transferred from an outgoing employer to a new employer in the event that a business is sold. This is because, in these situations, existing employment agreements come to an end and the Act requires that outstanding entitlements to leave are to be paid out at the end of employment. The exception to this requirement is when vulnerable workers are involved and section J of Part A of the Employment Relations Act applies . . The Taskforce is aware that it is not always well understood by employers what is permitted with regards to leave entitlements when the sale and transfer of a business occurs. In addition, employees can be disadvantaged by having their leave entitlements paid out as th ey need to then wait or months until they are once again entitled to annual holidays , sick leave, family violence leave and bereavement leave. Recommendation The Taskforce recommends that on the sale and transfer of a business, employees should ha ve a choice about whether to transfer all of their leave entitlements or have them paid out and reset. Issue Record keeping requirements . Under the current Act, employers must keep the information necessary to demonstrate that they have complied with minimum entitlement provisions. This helps ensure that employers hold the information needed to calculate pay and leave entitlements, address any queries from employees and support any investigation into incorrect payment or miscalculation. . The Taskforce agrees with this general approach and recognises that the record keeping provisions will need to be if changes are made to how leave entitlements and payments are calculated. . The Taskforce also noted that employees should have access to information about their holiday and leave records on request and that the employer would be expected to provide this information in a format that can be understood by the employee. Recommendation The Taskforce recommends that: . Record keeping requi rements should be to reflect changes to how leave entitlements are held, calculated and paid, as outlined in Annex . . Employers should be required to retain all holiday and leave records for six years and to make these available to employees on request in a format that can be understood and supports verification by the employee . However, employers should retain relevant shrvakdix
Issue Compliance and enforcement . The Taskforce noted that the issues that cause n oncompliance with the current Act should be considered in the design of the compliance and enforcement mechanisms to support any revised Act. This work should also consider the ability of different parties to raise concerns in relation to the Act , the appropriate enforcement mechanisms available to the different stakeholders (for example, which options are available to which parties) and the appropriate avenues fo r these concerns to be pursued . . The Taskforce noted that the development of the appropriate compliance and enforcement mechanisms for an y revised system would require further design and policy work. Recommendation The Taskforce noted that the issues that cause non compliance with the current Act should be considered in the design of the compliance and enforcement mechanisms to support any revised Act . Issue Ability to a gree above minimum standards . The Taskforce was keen to ensure that employers and employees have the ability to agree to leave arrangements that vary from the entitlements set out in the Act providing it can be demon strated that these arrangements provide the employee with leave entitlements that, at a minimum, meet the standards set out in the Act. . In its deliberations the Taskforce chose to focus on developing recommendations for the economy as a whole. While it did conside r the impact that particular options could have on particular employee types and working arrangements, it chose not to directly enter into discussions with any specific sectors throughout the review to avoid being seen to have favoured any speci fic sector in the development of its recommendations. . The Taskforce does, however , acknowledge th at its proposals will have implications for specific sectors (such as the education sector) which will need to be worked through .
Issue Taking annual holidays in advance . Employees are currently entitled to four weeks paid annual holidays after months of continuous employment . Although employees can request annual holidays in advance, employers have no obligation to approve this request. This means an employee may not be able to take any time off work during their first months of employment. . The Taskforce acknowledges that many good employers already allow their employees to take leave in advance. However, it woul d like to see all employees have the ability to take annual holidays within the first months of employment if the need arises. Recommendation The Taskforce recommends that employees should have the ability to take annual holidays in their first mon ths up to the amount they would be eligible for on a pro rata basis (i.e. no right to take more leave than entitled to). For example, an employee who had worked in a role for three months could not be unreasonably prevented from taking a week of annual hol idays. Any leave that was requested above the pro rata entitlement would be at the discretion of the employer. In addition, the Taskforce also recommends that: . Annual holidays in advance on a pro rata basis should be subject to the same considerations as a ny annual holidays request. For instance, the provisions that apply to the taking of annual holidays entitlements should be replicated to maintain the balance of interest between the employee and employer (i.e. an agreement between parties as to when annua l holidays in advance will be taken, and the obligation on employers to not unreasonably withhold consent). . Annual holidays in advance needs to reflect the pattern of work at the time it is taken. For example, if an employee increases their hours later in the year, they cannot go back and receive a top up on the holidays they have previously taken . . It should be made explicit that employers are expressly prohibited from requiring employees to take annual holidays in advance . . Alternative holidays cannot be un reasonably withheld (in line with annual holidays in
Issue Taking annual holidays in advance . Employees are currently entitled to four weeks paid annual holidays after months of continuous employment . Although employees can request annual holidays in advance, employers have no obligation to approve this request. This means an employee may not be able to take any time off work during their first months of employment. . The Taskforce acknowledges that many good employers already allow their employees to take leave in advance. However, it woul d like to see all employees have the ability to take annual holidays within the first months of employment if the need arises. Recommendation The Taskforce recommends that employees should have the ability to take annual holidays in their first mon ths up to the amount they would be eligible for on a pro rata basis (i.e. no right to take more leave than entitled to). For example, an employee who had worked in a role for three months could not be unreasonably prevented from taking a week of annual hol idays. Any leave that was requested above the pro rata entitlement would be at the discretion of the employer. In addition, the Taskforce also recommends that: . Annual holidays in advance on a pro rata basis should be subject to the same considerations as a ny annual holidays request. For instance, the provisions that apply to the taking of annual holidays entitlements should be replicated to maintain the balance of interest between the employee and employer (i.e. an agreement between parties as to when annua l holidays in advance will be taken, and the obligation on employers to not unreasonably withhold consent). . Annual holidays in advance needs to reflect the pattern of work at the time it is taken. For example, if an employee increases their hours later in the year, they cannot go back and receive a top up on the holidays they have previously taken . . It should be made explicit that employers are expressly prohibited from requiring employees to take annual holidays in advance . . Alternative holidays cannot be un reasonably withheld (in line with annual holidays in shrvakdix
Issue Clarifying the eligibility of Pay AsYouGo (PAYG) provisions . The Act allows for an employer to regularly pay annual holiday pay with the employees pay, also known as PA YG, if the employee works for the employer on a basis that is so intermittent or irregular that it is impracticable for the employer to provide the employee with four weeks annual holidays. In addition, the Act states that PAYG must be specified in an emp loyment agreement at a rate of not less than eight per cent and that the holiday pay is identifiable as a separate component of the employees pay. . The Taskforce wishes to improve the definition of intermittent or irregular in relation to PAYG to provide clarity for employers and employees, reduce inappropriate use of PAYG, and increase the general threshold of eligibility for PAYG. The rationale behind these changes is to promote the actual taking of holidays, whenever possible, in line with the purpose of the Act. Recommendation . The Taskforce recommends that the ability for employers to use pay asyougo (PAYG) for employees on fixed term contracts of less than months should be removed and a more detailed definition should be provided for when PAYG can be used because a work pattern is intermittent or irregular. . The proposed four part test of an intermittent or irregular working pattern is: the employee has no minimum number of hours and no ex pectation of ongoing employment, and the empl oyer has no obligation to provide work or the employee to accept work , and
Issue Clarifying the eligibility of Pay AsYouGo (PAYG) provisions . The Act allows for an employer to regularly pay annual holiday pay with the employees pay, also known as PA YG, if the employee works for the employer on a basis that is so intermittent or irregular that it is impracticable for the employer to provide the employee with four weeks annual holidays. In addition, the Act states that PAYG must be specified in an emp loyment agreement at a rate of not less than eight per cent and that the holiday pay is identifiable as a separate component of the employees pay. . The Taskforce wishes to improve the definition of intermittent or irregular in relation to PAYG to provide clarity for employers and employees, reduce inappropriate use of PAYG, and increase the general threshold of eligibility for PAYG. The rationale behind these changes is to promote the actual taking of holidays, whenever possible, in line with the purpose of the Act. Recommendation . The Taskforce recommends that the ability for employers to use pay asyougo (PAYG) for employees on fixed term contracts of less than months should be removed and a more detailed definition should be provided for when PAYG can be used because a work pattern is intermittent or irregular. . The proposed four part test of an intermittent or irregular working pattern is: the employee has no minimum number of hours and no ex pectation of ongoing employment, and the empl oyer has no obligation to provide work or the employee to accept work , and shrvakdix
Issue Interaction between availability provisions and Holidays Act entitlements . Availability provisions (under section D of the Employment Relations Act ) are clauses in employment contracts that require the employee to be available to accept any work the employer offers within specified periods . Employees are paid compensation for making themselves available. . The Employment Relations Act and Holidays Act are both silent on the relationship between availability clauses and Holidays Act entitlements. This gap means there is
Issue Interaction between availability provisions and Holidays Act entitlements . Availability provisions (under section D of the Employment Relations Act ) are clauses in employment contracts that require the employee to be available to accept any work the employer offers within specified periods . Employees are paid compensation for making themselves available. . The Employment Relations Act and Holidays Act are both silent on the relationship between availability clauses and Holidays Act entitlements. This gap means there is shrvakdix
Issued licences and permits
It allows workers to make a pay equity claim using a process
It also applies to every contract or funding arrangement entered into by MBIE with other persons or organisations for the provision of services for children.
It also lays out a work programme to achieve that vision.
It brings together a range of economic datasets we produce jointly with Statistics New Zealand into one easytouse tool. Information is presented using dynamic graphs and summary tables.
It focuses on a number of topics including contribution to GDP, employment, labour market and skills, as well as performance in productivity, innovation and exports.
It focuses on people aged and over and is made up of action items with a focus on training and upskilling, finding and staying in work, supporting employers to be more inclusive, and planning for the effects and opportunities of an aging workforce.
It fosters human capacity building, social integration, and strong and flexible labour markets by developing useful labour market information and policy, improved workplace conditions and practices, and strong social safety nets. New Zealand held the role of coordinator for this network over the period of .
It has goals to support this vision and key actions for Ministers to drive progress. The actions are led via the Social Development and Employment, Education, Immigration, Tertiary Education and Skills, and Regional Development portfolios, and agency leads from the Ministry of Social Development (MSD), Ministry of Education (MoE), Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), and the Tertiary Education Commission (TEC).
It highlighted some of the most popular experiences sought out by Australian visitors, such as fine dining, jet boating, cycling through vineyards and even star gazing in a hot tub in internationally renowned dark sky reserves.
It includes the following workstreams:
It is a requirement under the ILO Convention , to which Aotearoa New Zealand is a party, for members to provide compensation to workers incapacitated by occupational diseases.
It is an offence punishable by a fine of up to , for anyone other than a Universal Postal Uniondesignated operator to issue stamps with the words New Zealand in any other form.
It is an offence to aid or abet migrants to remain in New Zealand or to breach the conditions of their visas.
It is an offence to post dangerous or objectionable material. The law allows postal operators to hold suspicious or dangerous postal articles.
It is an offence to unlawfully open a postal article that is not addressed to you, or to divulge its contents.
It is an update to an earlier convention, which New Zealand is party to.
It is highly recommended that interpreters book their second test as soon as possible to allow NAATI time to confirm the test booking by the closing .
It is not acceptable for participating government agencies to seek to form a commercial relationship with an individual interpreter outside of their relationship with their chosen provider. Interpreters may choose to change from one provider to another, or work concurrently for more than one provider; that is a matter for the interpreter and the providers, and government agencies should not be involved in this.
It is not costeffective to provide UFB in every rural community. Instead, the Rural Broadband Initiative (RBI) is providing faster internet to hundreds of thousands of rural homes and businesses outside UFB areas.
It is not intended to give all the answers or provide a template for the design and structure of a new scheme. Disputes are unique to their context and require bespoke solutions for effective resolution.
It is reasonable and prudent for ACC to charge debit interest when businesses pay their levies by instalments because ACC is forgoing any interest it would have earnt from investing the levies earlier. This is fairer for those businesses paying their levies in a single payment on the due .
It is your responsibility to ensure any worker engaged in your operation is able to undertake the work, and is not doing so unlawfully or breaching their visa conditions.
It may also be of interest to practitioners and members of the public.
It passed its third reading late July , and will come into force on November.
It provides advice on the policy and operational issues related specifically to dispute resolution.
It provides the following rebates on specified goods and services purchased in New Zealand:
It was important that the Government considered recommendations in this report before the group started work on a second phase. Further advice is due to MBIE in due course and will largely focus on funding mechanisms.
It was set up as a partnership between government, industry organisations and research institutions.
It will help address the current disparity where a person who experiences an accident can receive much more support than a person with a nonaccidentrelated health condition or disability, such as being diagnosed with cancer, despite a similar loss of ability to work.
It will take approximately minutes for you to complete on behalf of your organisation or as an individual.
Its been a long time coming since the last one was in . And so much has happened since then.
Its calculated as the difference between the:
Its goal is for New Zealand to have an energyproductive and lowemissions economy.
James Hartley, Consumer and Commercial System
James told me that you all know what circular economy is. So, we dont really need to go into that in detail. But just to recap quickly, there are three principles of circular economy. Trying to eliminate waste and pollution through better design. We really want to circulate products and materials in the economy at the highest value for as long as possible. So, were looking at whether its the material, like as simple as a piece of wood, can we reuse that wood Can we retain that wood for longer and look after it If its a product like a computer, how can we keep that going for as long as possible And then at the end of the life, how can we take the materials that are left behind and put them back into the next production line And by doing so we protect nature because were not continually extracting material from nature. Were using the material that we have in our economy already as much as possible. So, we help to regenerate nature. And of course, if theres anything thats biological in that process, whether it be food or anything else, we return that to nature to help grow the next crop, whether thats a forest and apples or vegetables, etc. So thats the circular principles, just a recap and a reminder.
Jan Marsh A small number of submissions were received as part of the Review regarding the potential for weaponisation of space and the need for space to be used exclusively for peaceful purposes. These submissions included the following suggested amendments to the Act: Add a new purpose of promoting the peaceful uses of outer space and ensure that no weapons or potential weapons are launched from New Zealand or by New Zealanders. Include new threshold requirements in the payload permitting provision in the Act designed to ensure that the payload is not a test for, or potential part of, a weapon or of a device that can ass ist the operation of a weapon. References to international obligations and national interest in the Act should be supplemented with the words including disarmament and arms control treaties and agreements to which New Zealand is a party. Require complian ce with the New Zealand Nuclear Free Zone, Disarmament, and Arms Control Act . Require consultation with the Minister of Disarmament and Arms Control on licence and permit applications under the Act as it does with the Security Ministers. The Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade should be added into section () of the Act which provides for information sharing between the Minister and the various agencies that perform regulatory function affecting space activities. This matter will be considered as part of the space policy review which ministers have recently agreed to.
Jason Dawson, CE, Hamilton Waikato Tourism
Job Check Models PDF .MB
Job growth for different industries
Jobs Online monitors changes in an index of online job advertisements, not the number of actual online job advertisements. It uses information from online job advertisements from internet job boards: SEEK, Trade Me Jobs, the Education Gazette and Kiwi Health Jobs.
Jobs Online monthly data release
Jobs Online quarterly release
John Caradus, CE, Grasslanz Technology Limited
John Crocker (January to October )
Join one of our social media channels and take part in the conversation. We have a presence on:
Join our mailing list to receive information and news on government funding initiatives and other support for tourism.
Join our mailing list to receive our latest Energy data.
Join our mailing list to receive our latest tourism data.
Join our mailing list to receive the latest Tourism information and news on government funding initiatives and other support for tourism.
Join our mailing list to receive the latest tourism data released by MBIE, for example the Tourism Electronic Card Transactions.
Joint BusinessNZ and CTU memo on support for displaced workers PDF KB
Joint BusinessNZ and CTU memo on support for displaced workers and skills and training PDF KB
Joint Immigration NZ (INZ)Employment NZ (ENZ) Compliance and Enforcement Strategy completed.
Joint Immigration NZ (INZ)Employment NZ (ENZ) Compliance and Enforcement Strategy, designed to improve collaboration to combat migrant exploitation, completed and being applied.
Joint Oil Organisations Data Initiative
Joint Presentation on Social Unemployment Insurance PDF KB
Joint Social Partner Memo on Partnership for a Just Transition PDF .MB
Joint Statement of Principle: Adoption and use of ORCID identifiers in New Zealand
Joint Working Group on Pay Equity Principles
Joint memo from BusinessNZ and the NZCTU on the Just Transition gap analysis and Future of Work Tripartite Forum priorities PDF KB
Joint winner: Cairo Akehurst
Joint winner: Tianyi Mathur
Jointly with the Treasury, we concluded a review into open access weather data in October .
Josephs employment agreement guarantee s him a minimum hours a week, but he is regularly offered additional work when it is available. The work c an take place on any days of the week. He is paid an hour. The data below provides weeks of his work pattern. Week Days and hours worked No of days worked Total hours Gross pay Variation Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri Sat Sun
Judicial Decisions Online
Just a bit of context around this workshop. This is part of a wider piece of work and research that a consortium of organisations including SBN, Aurecon, ThinkStep as well as The Connective, Arup and Project Moonshot are working on to provide insights to the Ministry of Business Innovation and Employment to feed into a national circular economy and bioeconomy strategy as part of the emissions reduction plan. And so it is quite important work, and a big opportunity for everyone to input into that work. There are lots of streams happening and we are really keen to get your input.
Just as in other professions and sectors, ongoing professional development, such as attending conferences, webinars, and trainings will need to be completed to ensure that the credential is maintained.
Just over a third of approvals were under the
Just over half of those approved () were partners of New Zealanders (with a likelihood of transitioning into residence).
Just transitions Gap analysis PDF KB
Just transitions are a powerful invitation for communities to develop positive visions for change, transform unfair systems, draw on diverse strengths and worldviews, and come together to solve problems in ways that work better for everyone.
Justin Watson, Christchurch International Airport
Justin has a broad experience base, including significant international marketing and partnership experience, having worked intimately with all of New Zealands key international trading partners, along with industry experience across FMCG, retail, tourism and government.
Justin is on the New Zealand China Council and was previously a Tourism Industry Aotearoa board member.
Justin is the Chief Aeronautical and Commercial Officer at Christchurch International Airport, responsible for leading the airports aeronautical development, customer, HR and commercial teams.
K is a singlestage sounding rocket. Its primary objective is to test propulsion systems developed by Argo Navis, as well as to prove critical flight infrastructure and systems for future highaltitude launches.
Ka whakapau kaha kia whakawhanake tonu.
Kaitautoko partners and supporters
Kaupapahere Rangahau Tuwhera Open Research policy
Kaylene Larkin Ashlin Chand, Meat Industry Association of New Zealand Incorporated
Kea Aerospace Limited (Kea) is a New Zealand aerospace company, focused on stratospheric flight operation and aerial imaging.
Keep reading to find out how your space career could take off.
Keep up to on changes by subscribing to the
Keep up to with news and events from across the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE).
Keep up to with news, and access resources related to Managed Isolation and Quarantine.
Keep up your Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) subjects
Keeping in Touch days allow parents to do limited work while on parental leave, if they choose to, for example to attend a team day or an organisational announcement.
Keeping in Touch extended
Key accountabilities and responsibilities
Key briefings provided by MBIE to the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety
Key documents for changes to employment legislation
Key employer obligations Employers are required to fully comply with the provisions set out in the Act. Some of the key obligations include: Providing eligible employees with at least four weeks of annual leave a year, a paid day off when a public holiday falls on a day that an employee would usually work, at least five days sick leave each year, and three da ys paid bereavement leave if an immediate family members dies (or one day s paid leave for the death of a person outside their immediate family ) Using the calculation method for annual holidays (either OWP or AWE) that results in the greater rate Using the employees RDP for calculating payment for public holidays, sick leave and bereavement leave, unless it is not possible or practical or the employees daily pay varies within the relevant pay period , in which case ADP may be used Keeping accurate and u p to holiday and leave records
Key findings: Overall, the report concludes that the regulatory regime has a good track record to and is well regarded by those entities that engage with it. There have been no material safety or security incidents and the licencing and permitting processes under the Act have operated efficiently.
Key protections from the CCCFA are outlined below:
Key: much better than doing nothingthe status quo better than doing nothingthe status quo about the same as doing nothingthe status quo worse than doing nothingthe status quo much worse than doing nothingthe status quo shrvakdix
Kiwi Innovation Network Limited
Kiwi researchers looking at how we weather solar storms
Kiwi scientists revolutionising xray scanning technology
Kiwi wine tech shakes up industry
KiwiSaver Act (Part and Schedule )
Know your consumer rights
Knowledge Intensive Services report
Knowledge intensive services report
KoreaNew Zealand Free Trade Agreement ()
Kumeu Film Studios outdoor water tank.
LEADRVictoria University Commercial Mediation in New Zealand Project Report (June ) PDF KB
LEGISLATIVE ISSUE SUBMITTER ANALYSIS RECOMMENDATIONS Should payload permits and overseas payload permits be wrapped into a single permit that applies to payloads launched from New Zealand and payloads launched overseas. Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) An issue that has arisen in relation to constellations where a New Zea land operator intends to launch some satellites that are part of a constellation in New Zealand and some overseas, where the timing of the launch is uncertain. While the assessment of satellites launched from New Zealand is necessarily different from satel lites launched overseas, it may be administratively easier if no distinction was made between a payload permit and an overseas payload permit. We note however, that the same or similar benefits do not hold in the context of combining domestic and overseas launch licences, due to the fact that these often have location specific safety requirements and do not have a set number of launches attached to the licence. A change to the payload permitting provisions would mean significant reformatting of the payload permit sections of the Act, but arguably this disadvantage would be outweighed by the benefits, such as greater efficiency, that are likely to be gained from a more streamlined approach. Contrarily, there are also advantages in treating the launch licen sing and payload permitting sections in the same way since they arise from the same treaty obligation. The Review recommends keeping this issue under active review and discussing with PCO when the legislation is amended if the possibility of combining payl oad permitting and overseas payload permitting provisions into a single payload permitting requirement is valid. The Act is missing enforcement options for low level issues without resorting to licence suspension or fines. Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) MBIE, in its capacity as the regulator, has not taken any enforcement action under the regime to and do not envisage needing to if the sector continues to be highly compliant. While the sector has been highly compliant to , the potential for non compliant behaviour in future remains a possibility. The Review provides an opportunity to be proactive about ensuring the regulatory levers available enable a proportionate response in the event where non compliant behaviour warrant s some form of enforcement action, but where suspension or revocation of a licence or permit is not justified. Furthermore, the existence of enforcement levers, even if not used, can have a deterrent effect against non compliant behaviour arising in the f irst place. The existence of lower level enforcement options may also help to prevent a regulated party from having their licence revoked or suspended, which may impact on future The Review concludes that a prima facie case exists to support the introduction of lower level enforcement options, and recommends that MBIE undertakes further policy work to: Assess options for lower level enforcement provisions (including, but not necessarily limited to, abatement notices, improvement notices, and enforceable undertakings). If supported by the findings of the policy work, and subject to Ministerial agreement, the lower level enforcement options would then be included in the Act. Add the ability to veto individual activities or launches, not just through launch licence conditions. This could be a useful option for when the payload is already in orbit (as revoking a permit at that point is not desirable). Operation and effectiveness may benefit from consideration of legislative change in the compliance strategy.
LEGISLATIVE ISSUE SUBMITTER ANALYSIS RECOMMENDATIONS The Act does not provide for a situation where a New Zealand entity begins operating a payload launched from overseas that is already in space (eg when a person buys an existing satellite). Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) The Review team notes that, there is no provision under the Registration Convention for a state that is not a launching state to register a payload even if its national subsequently acquires an interest in the payload. In these circumstances in international law, the launching state continues to have jurisdiction and control over the payload even if it changes hands in orbit. As a result, space laws in other jurisdictions d o not generally require a licence in these circumstances. However, there may be merit in New Zealand regulating these activities even when is not strictly required under the international law to demonstrate that it is a responsible space actor. We do not a nticipate that the situation will arise very often. The Review recommend s that SPRS monitor developments in other jurisdictions relating to the transfer of satellites in orbit and consider further whether any change is required at the time amending legisla tion is developed.
LEGISLATIVE ISSUE SUBMITTER ANALYSIS RECOMMENDATIONS The Acts statutory licence conditions are in legislation rather than regulations. This limits the flexibility to update these. Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) Since the inception of the Act, a number of standard Ministerial conditions have been deemed necessary. These Ministerial conditions can be included as statutory conditions when the legislation is revised. Under the existing settings, licence conditions are prescribed via the Act which limits the flexibility to update them as new information comes to light, or in response to The Review recommends that Ministerial conditions that are routinely imposed be prescribed as statutory conditions. The Review also recomm ends discussion with PCO about whether the statutory conditions are best placed in primary or secondary legislation. LEGISLATIVE ISSUE SUBMITTER ANALYSIS RECOMMENDATIONS The Act is currently lacking key mechanisms to effectively regulate human spaceflight or human high altitude flight. Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) In the US, the advent of commercial sub orbital flights with passengers has already begun and it is likely that other jurisdictions will follow in the future . The extensive international agreements that regulate aviation and determine key aspects ( such as liability and governance) when dealing with foreign nationals as passengers do not govern this activity, however, they do raise significant questions and decisions for launch ing states seeking to enable this type of activity within their regime. Significant policy work would be required to determine whether, and if so how, to enable this type of activity within New Zealands regime. The Review makes no recommendations, on the basis that it would be premature to do so ahead of the policy work bein g undertaken. It seems that changes to primary legislation will be necessary to deal with human spaceflight.
LIABILITY An issue has been raised about whether the current approach to liability and insurance is appropriate, considering the increasing risks of collision in the space environment. LeoLabs
LINZ engages on the use of aerospace technologies to inform land information and management.
LSE MBIE Board Applicant Customer Journey Start of Recruitment Process Appointment Process Completed Induction Provided to AppointeeApplicants Submit their Application via the MBIE Recruitment Portal MBIE sends confirmation to applicants that their application has been received MBIE Provides Shortlisting Advice to the Responsible Minister MBIE informs applicants that shortlisting advice has been provided to the Minister Minister Agrees to Preferred Applicant Cabinet Confirms Preferred Applicant Minister sends letter of appointment to the successful applicantShortlisted Applicants are Interviewed MBIE completes panel interviewsApplications Open MBIE posts role on the vacancies page and advertises on employment websites MBIE notifies people who have registered their interest in board vacancies Applications Close MBIE advises applicants that applications have closed and outlines the next steps Minister Selects Applicants to Shortlist MBIE advises applicants whether the Minister has shortlisted them for an interview MBIE Provides Appointment Advice to the Responsible Minister MBIE advises shortlisted applicants that appointment advice has been given to the Minister Cabinet Consults Appointments and Honours CommitteeThis graphic sets out a typical board appointment process some recruitments may not follow all of these steps.
Labour Immigration Policy Branch
Labour Inspectorate complaints
Labour Market Statistics Snapshot
Labour force participation
Labour market forecasting
Labour market reports that are no longer being
Labour market reports, data and analysis
Labour provisions in trade agreements help ensure that labour is not exploited for economic benefit. The intent is that this will help enhance the conditions in which people work now and into the future. They also set out areas for cooperation with our trading partners, including sharing information about our experience and best practice, to help improve working conditions.
Labour, Science and Enterprise
Lake Dunstan, Central Otago
Land Information New Zealand
Landcare Research New Zealand Limited (Manaaki Whenua)
Landcare Research New Zealand Limited is a Crown research institute. Its purpose is to drive innovation in New Zealands management of terrestrial biodiversity and land resources to both protect and enhance the terrestrial environment and grow New Zealands prosperity.
Language Assistance Services
Language Assistance Services Handbook for users
Language Assistance Services Operational policy for New Zealand public sector agencies and those they fund
Language Assistance Services. Handbook for users . PDF .MB
Language Assistance Services. Operational policy for New Zealand public sector agencies and those they fund . PDF .MB
Language assistance available
Language assistance services handbook
Language assistance services operational policy
Language assistance services wallet card
Language support is available when accessing many government services. The Ministry for Ethnic Communities has online resources to show people how to ask for an interpreter. This is available in languages.
Large film and television productions:
Large organisations and those with control over New Zealand employers would be required to undertake due diligence.
Last amended: November
Last amended: October
Last amended: May
Last amended: January
Last amended: February
Last amended: August
Last amended: February
Last amended: November
Last amended: September
Last amended: September
Last amended: September
Last reviewed: May
Last reviewed: November
Last reviewed: September
Last reviewed: August
Last reviewed: September
Last April
Last August
Last February
Last February
Last July
Last May
Last May
Last November
Last October
Last August
Last August
Last December
Last December
Last February
Last July
Last May
Last October
Last October
Last September
Last April
Last February
Last March
Last May
Last April
Last August
Last June
Last June
Last March
Last May
Last October
Last September
Last August
Last January
Last March
Last March
Last November
Last August
Last December
Last July
Last June
Last May
Last October
Last April
Last February
Last March
Last April
Last August
Last August
Last December
Last March
Last October
Last October
Last April
Last August
Last March
Last October
Last April
Last March
Last March
Last September
Last December
Last October
Last September
Last April
Last August
Last December
Last December
Last February
Last July
Last June
Last March
Last May
Last November
Last December
Last February
Last January
Last March
Last September
Last September
Last April
Last February
Last February
Last January
Last June
Last March
Last May
Last April
Last February
Last May
Last November
Last April
Last August
Last August
Last August
Last February
Last July
Last May
Last September
Last December
Last December
Last December
Last June
Last March
Last March
Last September
Last August
Last December
Last March
Last March
Last May
Last October
Last October
Last September
Last December
Last July
Last March
Last April
Last December
Last December
Last February
Last August
Last December
Last January
Last May
Last October
Last December
Last March
Last May
Last October
Last December
Last December
Last February
Last January
Last July
Last November
Last April
Last April
Last December
Last January
Last July
Last July
Last June
Last March
Last May
Last October
Last February
Last January
Last July
Last March
Last October
Last September
Last August
Last February
Last July
Last June
Last May
Last May
Last October
Last February
Last February
Last July
Last June
Last November
Last October
Last April
Last August
Last August
Last February
Last June
Last May
Last May
Last November
Last November
Last April
Last January
Last July
Last March
Last November
Last November
Last April
Last August
Last June
Last June
Last November
Last October
Last September
Last August
Last January
Last July
Last March
Last May
Last October
Last year I got to use both these things.
Late in , MBIE commissioned Gravitas OPG to undertake a review of how the rapid building assessment system worked during the response. The aim of the review was to confirm that the agencies and organisations involved met their responsibilities under the legislation.
Later in , all nominated participants and their institutions will receive an update on their final decision on participant selection, which is made at the discretion of the GYSS Organising Committee. Please note that an MBIE nomination does not guarantee an invitation to participate in GYSS . Nominees who do not complete the registration will also be disqualified.
Latest COVID economic data
Latest Official Information Act releases
Latest energy balance tables for New Zealand, showing how energy supply and demand by sector varies by energy fuel type
Latest proactive releases
Launch andor operation of satellites andor spacecraft
Launch the New Zealand Sectors Dashboard
Law change brings new decommissioning obligations and added enforcement
Law change for Easter Sunday shop trading
Law, Politics Social Services
Lawyers as gatekeepers to commercial mediation in New Zealand ()
Leaders and champions are required across all aspects of destinations, and partnerships and collaboration are important for success. A focus and commitment to building DM knowledge and capability across all entities involved in supporting the destination is important.
Leaders of the group agreed to set up the taskforce at the second summit in when they adopted the
Leadership Development Centre
Leadership and structures
Leadership demands nothing less.
Learn about the establishment of Managed Isolation and Quarantine (MIQ), and the important role it played in protecting our people from a largely unknown, rapidly evolving virus. MIQ was one of the hardest parts of the pandemic, but it saved lives.
Learn more about past NASA intern experiences
Learn more about the Matariki holiday and celebration
Learning from similar systems overseas
Learning modules for public servants about interpreting services
Learning modules for public servants who work with communities
Leave entitlements under the current Holidays Act
Leave history per entitlement year and amount of payment representing PAYG under section of the Act Portion of annual holidays that have been paid as PAYG expressed in weeks or portions of w eeks For PAYG employees, a record of the quarterly review of working pattern to determine if the employee was still eligible for PAYG and amount of payment for cashed out annual holidays Portion of annual holidays that have been cashed out in each ent itlement year, expressed in weeks or portions of weeks
Leave methodologies (directly in the section or referenced to another part of the Act) Which leave methodologies (under which section of the Act) that have been applied to any portion of leave take n, e.g. the methodology applied to determine average working week, including reference periods, equations, shift cycles, etc. Quarterly review of employees working arrangement (for PAYG, sick, bereavement and family violence leave eligibility purpose s) on which quarterly review carried out Calculation used and r esult of quarterly review for PAYG eligibility (if applicable) and any changes to entitlements resulting from the review Calculation used and r esult of quarterly review for sick, bereaveme nt and family violence leave eligibility and any changes to entitlements resulting from the review Termination records of termination of employment Holiday pay paid upon termination of employment Corrections Notation of any corrections to previo us payslips, including references to payslip number, methodologies an d data that have been corrected
Leave without pay: When an employer allows an employee time off work when they would otherwise be working, but does not pay t hem for this time (Section of the Act ).
Led by Associate Professor at Otago University Jevon Longdell
Led by Dr Delwyn Moller, CEO ReSTORe Lab Ltd, Wanaka, New Zealand
Led by Dr Nicholas Rattenbury, from the Department of Physics in the Faculty of Science.
Led by Stefan Powell, CEO and CTO of Dawn Aerospace.
Legal and Trading names (this needs to match invoices you send us)
Legal requirements Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities Act Applicants must produce a safety case as required by the regulations if applying for any of the following licence types: Launch licence or overseas launch licence Facility licence; and Highaltitude licence. If applicants have a launch licence issued by an international regulator, and they are seeking to have that recognised by MBIE, and that licence is subject to specific public safety duties that are consistent with New Zealands own regulations, the Minister may take this into account. The applicant should contact MBIE to discuss this, if that is the case. If the applicant is a person conducting a business or undertaking in New Zealand, they will have additional workplace safety duties. Applicants should refer to WorkSafe and the Health Safety at Work Act to ensure full awareness of workplace health and safety duties. Additionally, a number of the Health Safety at Work regulations may be relevant and again the applicant should ensure full awareness of their duties, and compliance with these regulations. WorkSafe New Zealand is New Zealands primary workplace health and safety regulator. Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations The regulations require that the following must be included in the applicants safety case: a description of the activities proposed under the details of all relevant New Zealand and international licence to which the safety case relates; standards that have been applied or will be applied in relation to the safety of the activity; a description of any systems that have the purpose of preventing, or limiting the effect of, risks to a description of the systems that the applicant public safety and the failure of which could cause or has implemented, or intends to implement, for contribute substantially to a serious risk to public the purpose of ensuring that the activities under safety; the licence are conducted in a manner that does not create a significant risk of serious harm to any a description of the arrangements in place to verify member of the public or significant damage tothat the systems described are or will be suitable property owned by a person other than the licensee;and will remain in good condition for the duration of the licence; provides details of the key personnel responsible for the safety of the proposed activities under the a safety assessment that provides for the licence;identification of any serious risks to public safety associated with the activity, the nature of each includes an emergency plan that effectively risk, including the likelihood and consequences addresses all serious risks to public safety of an (including the potential magnitude and severity of accident, is specific to the proposed activities under the potential consequences), the geographical areas the licence and the serious risks to public safety likely to be affected by the activity and, if relevant, (if any) identified in the safety assessment, is demographic information about the local community integrated into the applicants safety management that may be affected by them and the measures that systems, is understandable by workers, visitors, the applicant has implemented, or will implement, to and other people who are likely to be affected and minimise the risks to public safety; provides for the testing, review, and updating of emergency procedures (including the frequency of any testing, review, and updating).
Legal, Ethics and Privacy.
Legislation Design and Advisory Committee Guidelines
Legislation reinstating petroleum exploration has been introduced by the Coalition Government.
Legislation takes effect.
Legislation we administer
Lesly Van Nijilen, Organic Exporters NZ
Lessons learnt from the earthquakes
Letter from Carolyn Tremain of MBIE to Peter Hughes following the completion of the external review into how the noninterference provisions of the Crown Minerals Act are effected
Letter from Chief Executive, MBIE to State Services Commissioner setting out MBIE response to issues raised by the Commissioner relating to the All of Government Protective Security Panel.
Letter from State Services Commissioner to Carolyn Tremain as Chief Executive of MBIE
Letter from State Services Commissioner to Carolyn Tremain as Functional Leader of Government Procur.
Letter to Callaghan Innovation Board Chair
Letter to Callaghan Innovation Chair further expectations regarding the disestablishment of Callaghan Innovation
Letter to Enable Networks approving deed
Letter to State Services Commissioner from Carolyn Tremain as Chief Executive of MBIE
Letter to State Services Commissioner from Carolyn Tremain as Functional Leader of Government Procur.
Letter to Telecom approving the Copper and Fibre Deeds
Letter to Telecom approving the Rural Broadband Initiative Deed
Letter to Ultrafast Broadband Limited approving deed
Letter to Vodafone approving deed
Letter to Whangarei Local Fibre Company approving deed
Letter to WorkSafe New Zealand Chair re Strategic Baseline Review PDF KB
Letter to the New Zealand Telecommunications Forum on Crown Fibre Holdings role clarity outcomes and price setting on the ultrafast broadband network
Letter: Update on external review into how the noninterference provisions of the Crown Minerals Act.
Letters from the Minister of Communications and Information Technology approving the deeds:
Letters must not exceed mm in height, mm in length, mm in thickness, or kg in weight. (Note: this is the definition of a letter, amended in .)
Levy portion for plugin hybrids and battery electric vehicles
Liability Indemnity and Insurance Operational Policy PDF KB
Licence for an overseas launch If the applicant is applying for an overseas launch licence, in addition to the information required above, the applic ant must provide: the name and location of the overseas launch facility from which the launch vehicle will be launched; and the name, principal business address, and place of organisation or incorporation of the owner of the overseas launch facility. Information for payload permits Information about the payload A summary of the payload mission and purpose, including a description of the system the payload is part of, for example a constellation of satellites or other similar system. Expected operational l ife of the payload. If known at the time of application, for each proposed launch(es) of a payload(s) under the permit, state the anticipated start (s) and duration of the launch window(s) and location of the launch(es), Details of the intended orbital parameters (including the nodal period, inclination, apogee and perigee) of the payload. In relation to the payload and, if applicable, spacecraft bus : o The primary place of manufactureassembly o The name of the organisation In relation to the payload integrator (if different from payload owner) : o Name o Place of organisation or incorporation o Place of integration A description of the protective security (including cyber security) measures or policies (if any) in place to protect the: o payload command and c ontrol systems, o unenhancedraw remote sensing data, and o systems commanding remote sensing systems and sensor tasking.
Licence type Granted Variations granted Payload Permits Overseas Payload Permits Launch Licences Overseas Launch Licences Facility Licences High altitude Licences DECLINING AN APPLICATION OR IMPOSING CONDITIONS . For each licence and permit type, provisions within the Act set the parameters for entry into and ongoing lawful operation in respect to activities carried out under New Zealands jurisdiction for outer space and the high altitude environment. I n particular, this includes provisions for: Criteria which must be satisfied in order for the Minister to grant a licence or permit such as consistency with international obligations. Grounds on which an application may be declined such as national interest considerations. Conditions which may be imposed such as incident reporting requirements. . As of April , no applications for licences or permits have been declined, and every payload permit and licence has had ministerial conditions impos ed. There are now a number of conditions which have become standard for all payload permits. VARYING, SUSPENDING OR REVOKING PERMITS AND LICENCES . The Act prescribes the grounds on which the Minister may vary, suspend, or revoke a licence or permit that ha s been granted. This may be initiated by the licensee or the Minister may invoke these powers of their own accord in certain circumstances. For example, if the Minister believes on reasonable grounds that the revocation, variation or suspension of a launch licence is necessary in the interests of national security, public safety, compliance with any of New Zealands international obligations or other national interests . . Since the inception of the Act, the revocation power ha s only been invoked on one occasi on. In this case, the Minister revoked the licence (a high altitude licence) at the request of the licensee. That licence holder has since applied for (and received) a subsequent high altitude licence for the next generation of their vehicle. . The Minister has regularly varied permits and licences. For payload permits this has generally occurred at the permit holders request to allow the launch of additional identical payloads. Rocket Lab s Launch licence s have been varied several times to allow for new capabilities, most notabl y, Rocket Labs plans to recover the first stage of the launch vehicle.
Licensed Building Practitioners
Licensed building practitioners
Licensing system for refrigeration, heating and air conditioning technicians
Like Australia, a regulator will be established to allow New Zealand to manage the risks of these technologies.
Limitations of scenario modelling
Limiting human bias from a process
Linked changes will be made to the Audit Standard and guidance materials to provide information on good practice for communicating risks and what information should be provided to participants.
Links from other sites to this one
Links to other websites should not be taken as endorsement or recommendation of those sites or products offered on those sites. This includes websites that may host our content (eg, video files on YouTube). We dont endorse advertising, related material, or other content you may view on such sites while accessing our content.
Links to the schedules are provided below:
Links to third party websites
Liquid fuels use in New Zealand
List of all approved payloads to December
List of community languages
List of documents that have been proactively released Title Author August Holidays Act Reform: Consultation document for targeted consultation Office of Workplace Relations and Safety Minister August Appendix Two: Summary of key proposals and alternative options included in the consultation document Office of Workplace Relations and Safety Minister August Holidays Act Reform: Approval to Consult ECO MIN Minute Cabinet Office June Holidays Act Reform: Decisions on sick leave for the exposure draft MBIE
List of documents that have been proactively released Title Author March Cabinet Paper: Government Response to the Report of the Holidays Act Taskforce Office of the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety March Cabinet paper Annex One: Summary of Government response to Holidays Act Taskforce recommendations MBIE October Cabinet paper Annex : Holidays Act Taskforce final report (note this documents will also be separately on the MBIE website when your announcement is made Holidays Act Taskforce March Regulatory Impact Statement Improving the Holidays Act MBIE March DEVMIN: Government Response to the Report of the Holidays Act Taskforce Cabinet Office
List of documents that have been proactively released Title Author May Holidays Act Reform: Further Policy Decisions Office of Workplace Relations and Safety Minister May Regulatory Impact Statement: Holidays Act reform Further Policy Decisions MBIE May Holidays Act Reform: Further Policy Decisions Minute of Decision ECO MIN Minute Cabinet Office Dec Holidays Act Review: background, progress and next steps MBIE Mar Holidays Act Review: Policy decisions for an exposure draft of the Bill MBIE
List of participating agencies
Listed industry bodies only. Partnering with other industry bodies, RTOs and others (for example, nongovernmental organisations (NGOs), academia) is encouraged.
Listen to New Zealand researchers share their personal career journey and thoughts on what progress has been made to promote diversity and what more can be done.
Lists of Ministerial documents by portfolio
Live and work New Zealand
Loan administration costs
Local authorities have the ability to set, add to, or change the provincial anniversary day holidays. It is up to the relevant local authorities to decide whether or not to move South Canterbury Day.
Local government guidance PDF, KB
Local hotel accommodation for overseasbased participants (twin sharing from January )
Local insights report: December
Local insights report: June
Local insights report: November
Local insights report: October and November
Local insights report: OctoberNovember
Local insights report: September
Local policies cannot control or override shop trading provisions in other legislation, such as defining specific opening hours, liquor licensing provisions or determining what types of shops may open.
Local policies of individual councils
Locally engaged employees offshore are covered by local legislation and their employment agreements.
Longterm Insights Briefings
Longterm Insights Briefings public consultations
Longterm insights briefings
Longterm insights briefings are a new statutory process under the Public Service Act . They are futurefocused, providing information about medium and longterm trends, risks and opportunities, including analysis and policy options for responding.
Longterm sustainable funding mechanisms
Looking to connect your research group or business with local partners
Loose cords on window coverings, such as roller blinds, concertina blinds, Roman blinds and slatted blinds like Venetian blinds, are dangerous for young children, because they can get entangled and strangled by the operating cords or inner cords.
Low (left) to high (right)
Low hydro lake levels require continued reliance on coal and gas for electricity
Low inflation, low interest rates and good fiscal management create the conditions for growth. Stability in these settings provides certainty for businesses and households, supporting their investment and longterm decisionmaking.
Low pay in New Zealand report
MBIE Vodafone Rural Broadband Agreement
MBIE Chorus Agreement
MBIE Code of Conduct
MBIE Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Plan
MBIE Evidence and Insights
MBIE Flexible Working Policy for staff
MBIE Flexible Working Policy for staff.
MBIE Horizon Europe topup funding scheme
MBIE Science Whitinga Fellowship
MBIE Science and Innovation Funding Agencies: The Royal Society of New Zealand
MBIE Suppliers information
MBIE accepts eInvoices. We prefer you to send us eInvoices instead of sending PDFs via email. Sending eInvoices helps us process and pay your invoices more efficiently.
MBIE advises applicants of the outcome, and releases summaries of payloads permitted in the previous quarter.
MBIE also aims to apply a continuous improvement mindset by analysing feedback and complaints data to identify:
MBIE also provided the Select Committee with additional information after the hearing to respond to their questions. The full evidence text is available at:
MBIE also publishes Contract award notices on GETS for contracts in accordance with the Government Procurement Rules.
MBIE and DIA worked with interpreters, other government agencies using interpreting services, Universities and Technical Institutes who deliver interpreter training, the New Zealand Society of Translators and Interpreters (NZSTI) and NAATI to develop the package to support New Zealand interpreters to transition to the NAATI accreditation system.
MBIE and DLR have now agreed to jointly support a set of research projects, with the New Zealand research teams receiving a total of NZ million (GST excluded) over years.
MBIE and Data Ventures have worked together to produce estimates for monthly unique local and visitor populations in each RTO in New Zealand.
MBIE and MFAT will seek further feedback on a draft of the Briefing later in before finalising the Briefing and presenting it to Parliament before the end of the year.
MBIE appoints the panel, which includes:
MBIE board applicant customer journey
MBIE can nominate up to people. Spots will be allocated on a firstcomefirstserved basis. MBIE will upload these details to the GYSS portal and nominees will be contacted by the GYSS Organising Committee (via the submitted email address) in September to provide further registration details. This may include uploading an endorsement letter from their supervisor or academic mentor, describing:
MBIE cannot grant permission to reproduce such material: you must obtain permission from the copyright holders themselves.
MBIE carried out a targeted consultation with stakeholders over midMarch to midApril .
MBIE commenced the review of the RSE policy in late .
MBIE commissioned an independent review to assess whether WorkSafe is managing its resources efficiently and effectively, and provide advice on the rationale, quantum and targeting of any additional funding which may be required.
MBIE commissioned research company ColmarBrunton to ask three key questions relating to ticket reselling as part of one of their fortnightly omnibustype surveys.
MBIE commissioned research report on the critical success factors that promote financial capability amongst Pacific communities in Aotearoa New Zealand.
MBIE commissions and writes reports about the science system.
MBIE communicates with you at each stage of the recruitment process, and lets you know if you have been shortlisted by the responsible Minister.
MBIE conducted surveys to collect information about our RSI workforce. The surveys were designed to better understand the demographic characteristics, skills and workplace practices of people who contribute to our RSI system as well as the challenges they face.
MBIE considers the independent report, as well as cost estimates and other policy considerations, to inform recommendations to the Minister for ACC on proposed changes to Schedule .
MBIE creates a list of stakeholders
MBIE departmental change processes
MBIE develops and delivers policy, services, advice and regulation to support economic growth and the prosperity and wellbeing of New Zealanders.
MBIE develops and delivers policy, services, advice, and regulation to support economic growth and the prosperity and wellbeing of New Zealanders. MBIE combines the former Ministries of Economic Development, Science and Innovation, and the Departments of Labour and Building and Housing. MORE INFORMATION Information, examples, and answers to your questions about the topics covered here can be found on our website: www.mbie.govt.nz or by calling us free on: . DISCLAIMER This document is a guide only. It should not be used as a substitute for legislation or legal advice. The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment is not responsible for the results of any actions taken on the basis of information in this document, or for any errors or omissions.
MBIE encourages territorial authorities to consider the conclusions of the report and the best practice service provision suggestions as part of their readiness planning for future events.
MBIE guiding principles relevant to this policy
MBIE has a responsibility to keep people in New Zealand safe and to prevent harm, such as in the employment, immigration, and consumer protection contexts. In situations where MBIE is seeking to prevent, or address, significant harm we may consider it appropriate to undertake information gathering activity that has an increased impact on an individual or organisation.
MBIE has been sourcing, analysing and interpreting a wide range of data related to the impact of COVID and on recovery options. This includes real time and historic data about the economy across a range of areas.
MBIE has been utilising Connecting Now as a single provider while the panel procurement has been underway. Connecting Now also went through the procurement process to continue providing services as a panel member.
MBIE has begun reporting on energy hardship levels in Aotearoa. The first report is available on the Report on Energy Hardship Measures webpage.
MBIE has commissioned research on how Aotearoa New Zealand can reduce emissions, and lift the value derived from our biological resources.
MBIE has completed the Domestic Demand Review into whether funding domestic tourism marketing is an appropriate ongoing function for Government in the medium to long term.
MBIE has done extensive testing and is fully confident in the robustness of all Jobs Online data. However, because of the minor changes noted above, users are advised to redownload the full data series rather than just appending the latest data point.
MBIE has established a new national model for agencies to access face to face interpreting services more effectively and efficiently across New Zealand.
MBIE has incorporated the areas identified for improvement in the review into the continuous improvement programme. The actions identified include:
MBIE has policy responsibility for the GDSR while NZ On Air administers this rebate.
MBIE has redeveloped the Jobs Online data processing pipeline. The switch to the new process has not resulted in any major changes to the Jobs Online data series.
MBIE has started identifying amendments for a fourth set of Bills. At this stage, the timeline for progressing a fourth set of bills has yet to be confirmed.
MBIE has started work to analyse the request and prepare a report for consideration by the Minister of Workplace Relations and Safety, as set out in section A of the ERA.
MBIE has taken a number of steps to address safety issues with these products, including engaging with retailers, manufacturers, suppliers and community organisations, as well as consumer promotions.
MBIE has undertaken a review to assess if any adjustments to the maximum amounts payable are required to take into account increases in the costs of undertaking a review.
MBIE intends to ensure that information about any changes to the Holidays Act is available to employers, employees and payroll providers as soon as practical after a Bill is passed, and before it comes into force.
MBIE intends to use this consultation process, along with further research, to develop a better understanding of the nature and scale of the problem, the options, benefits, costs and other impacts of the options, and implementation.
MBIE introduced narrative CVs as an option for funding applications, which are common in the UK, the Netherlands, Ireland, Switzerland and Luxemburg. Other jurisdictions have been introducing narrative CVs as funding processes evolve.
MBIE is of newly designated agencies. The others are Department of Internal Affairs, New Zealand Customs Service, and Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Other CWPAs include government agencies, for example Oranga Tamariki and NZ Police and nongovernment organisations such as recognised Iwi authorities and health practitioners.
MBIE is also consulting on proposed changes to the adventure activities regulatory regime.
MBIE is committed to achieving broader cultural, economic, environmental, and social outcomes when purchasing goods, services or works. Government Procurement Rules and policy requires us to consider how we can create opportunities for New Zealand businesses.
MBIE is committed to being the place where people want to work, by attracting and retaining skilled people who are engaged in safe and fulfilling work.
MBIE is consulting on options for updating the Review Costs Regulations, which outline the costs payable to ACC claimants who seek a review of an ACC decision.
MBIE is grateful to everyone who supported the RSLG function with their time and expertise.
MBIE is hosting an information webinar for RTOs on Monday February . Invitations have been sent directly to these organisations.
MBIE is leading a policy and operational review of Temporary Migrant Worker Exploitation in New Zealand.
MBIE is leading an independent review of whether WorkSafe has carried out its obligations appropriately in relation to WhakaariWhite Island.
MBIE is one of the biggest regulatory departments in New Zealand. About threequarters of what we do relates to designing and delivering regulatory systems. We are responsible for stewardship of statutes.
MBIE is providing a topup funding scheme for overhead costs to support New Zealand researchers and organisations participating in Horizon Europe projects.
MBIE is responsible for administering certain aspects of the KiwiSaver Act .
MBIE is seeking feedback on proposed design features of the Game Development Sector Rebate.
MBIE is seeking feedback to inform further advice to the Government on proposed changes to the Skilled Migrant Category residence visa.
MBIE is sourcing, analysing and interpreting a wide range of data for sectors and regions as part of the response to COVID.
MBIE is sourcing, analysing and interpreting a wide range of data for sectors and regions as part of the response to COVID. These make use of historical data to understand context as well as incorporating novel data sources available in real time. A range of resources are compiled to support policy advice and monitoring and provide the evidence base for the recovery phase.
MBIE is supporting New Zealand to take a strategic approach to Artificial Intelligence (AI).
MBIE is working closely with the Crown Research Institutes on proposals for merging into their new configurations as early as October, ahead of legislation to formally establish the PROs. Two independent convenors have been appointed to lead the mergers for the bioeconomy and earth science PROs. These convenors will ensure the needs of the new entities are at the forefront throughout the merger process. Two governance groups, comprising the relevant Chairs and convenor for each PRO, have also been established. Part of this process will include work to ensure aligned science capability is brought together for maximum impact.
MBIE issued a discussion document in which set out a wide range of potential options for change.
MBIE manages board appointment processes for a large number of Crown entities, Crown entity companies, statutory bodies and advisory boards on behalf of responsible Ministers.
MBIE may request, from the person or organisation that made the submission, additional information that is necessary to consider the substance of the submission.
MBIE now has the ability to voluntarily request and disclose personal information with other CWPAs for specified purposes relating to the safety and wellbeing of any child or young person.
MBIE operational description
MBIE plays a central role in shaping and delivering a strong New Zealand economy.
MBIE prepared a full Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS) which accompanied the Cabinet paper that sought agreement to endorse the
MBIE previously consulted on BNPL in late . This consultation focussed on understanding how BNPL could trigger financial hardship for consumers, to inform how to achieve an effective BNPL sector one where the risks of financial hardship are balanced against the benefits of BNPL.
MBIE procures a literature review of the relevant clinical and epidemiological evidence for occupational diseases, and the independent selection and management of medical experts to assess the evidence of listed diseases against the technical criteria.
MBIE produces these snapshots after each new release of the Labour Market Statistics, by Stats NZ every November, February, May and August.
MBIE provides Secretariat services to the Taskforce.
MBIE provides Secretariat support to the Council.
MBIE provides a weekly report to the Minister for Energy, here you can find our weekly reports from April onwards. We release these reports on a monthly basis
MBIE provides a weekly report to the Minister for Energy, here you can find our weekly reports from April onwards. We release these reports on a monthly basis.
MBIE released an exposure draft of the proposed Health and Safety at Work (Adventure Activities) Amendment Regulations . This feedback was sought to ensure the changes would work as intended.
MBIE reports annually on the implementation and interactions resulting from this Policy in our Annual Plan through MBIEs designated Policy Owner for this Child Protection Policy, the General Manager, Refugee and Migrant Services, Immigration New Zealand.
MBIE reserve the right to audit its service providers to check if they have an appropriate child protection policy in place or have adapted and applied the MBIE policy as appropriate.
MBIE science grants diversity data
MBIE shares data with domestic and international agencies to support and sustain good public services for New Zealanders.
MBIE staff, contractors and consultants are bound by the standards outlined in the MBIE Code of Conduct (the Code).
MBIE stands up Gas Security Response Group
MBIE supported the Modern Slavery and Worker Exploitation Advisory Group to produce its third annual awarenessraising newsletter. It was disseminated electronically this year, and promoted during a Social Justice event at the Wellington Anglican Diocese in August.
MBIE topup funding scheme
MBIE uses data to help inform, improve, and deliver the important services we provide to people in Aotearoa New Zealand and internationally. While MBIE decisions are largely made and reviewed by people, algorithms play a role in distilling information from large or complex data sets to support human decisionmaking and reveal insights that could not easily be revealed by human analysis alone. Human oversight is maintained at an appropriate level in our use of algorithms to ensure the data we use is being used safely and effectively.
MBIE usually lets nominating agencies know when it has a board vacancy. This is another way you may find out there is a suitable board vacancy.
MBIE will likely be invited to nominate people to attend GYSS around July . If you are interested, please keep an eye on this webpage.
MBIE will play a key role in carrying out the Review, but a number of key components will be delivered externally, including to ensure the right level of technical input and other expertise informs the Review.
MBIE will record all formal flexible working arrangement proposals and the outcome of those proposals.
MBIE will then send information (including a Price Book) to help you decide whether you should join the agreement, and a Participating Agency Agreement (PAA) to populate and send back to
MBIE will track the num ber and types of queries to the MBIE contact centre, the Labour Inspectorate and our websites (business.govt.nz and employment.govt.nz) in relation to the Holidays Act. The number and types of breaches resulting from Labour Inspectorate activities, as well
MBIEs Energy Use Newsletter provides updates from the Energy Markets branch on issues relating to:
MBIEs Longterm Insights Briefing was submitted for Select Committee consideration in November .
MBIEs Prosecution policy sets out MBIEs expectations and rules governing prosecutions decision making and prosecution proceedings.
MBIEs gender pay and ethnic action plan PDF KB
MBIEs public consultations
MBIEs transparency statement describes the kind of information MBIE gathers to ensure it can effectively:
MBIEs use of security guards PDF .MB
MBIE, in conjunction with ACC, conducts a biennial review of the Cost of Treatment Regulations.
MBIEs Regulatory Impact Analysis Review Panel has reviewed the Impact Statement. The panel considers that the information and analysis summarised in the Impact Statement meets the criteria necessary for Ministers to make informed decisions on the proposals in this paper. The panel notes the technical nature of the proposed changes and the intention to con sult. It will be important for the consultation document to set out the issues in a clear and accessible way.
MFAT contributes to the development of international space policy, including engagement on space security, from space debris to the weaponisation of space, through United Nations space fora and engagement with international partners.
MFAT has established a NZD . million programme with Tearfund for to connect communitybased livelihoods work with an antitrafficking programme. Implementation in Solomon Islands, Fiji, Vanuatu and Sri Lanka has begun.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act . The Minister has not revoked any payload permits (New Zealand based), overseas payload permits, launch licences, o r facility licences.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act MBIE s responsibilities as steward of the regulatory system, including monitoring safety culture . MBIEs risk averse a pproach to compliance . Assurance measures for each licen ce or permit type under the Act. Preventative action and managing relationships . While statutory levers to enforce compliance, and address non compliance, are available in the regime if needed, the day today work of MBIE focuses on preventative steps which mitigate the likelihood that enforcement action will be required and help regulated parties to comply. These include: Regular engagement with the only launch licence hol der (Rocket Lab) to ensure they are aware of their obligations, and to provide clarity on which agency holds which regulatory responsibilities under the Act . Publication of educational and guidance material, such as operational policies, to provide guidanc e to regulated parties and applicants . Engagement with payload permit applicants prior to their applications being accepted to help ensure the applicants are aware of the requirements under the Act . Regular communication with regulated parties and applicants. . Within the regime, and at its boundary with other systems, there are multiple regulators with overlapping mandates . As steward of this regulatory system, MBIE has taken steps to mitigate risks of either duplication of effort or gaps, such as: Undertaking a regulatory mapping exercise to determine who is responsible for which regulatory functions under OSHAA . Entering into a Memorandum of Cooperation (MoC) with the New Zealand Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) and a separate MoC with the United States Federa l Aviation Administration (FAA) ; Developing MoCs (or equivalent) with WorkSafe New Zealand, the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service, and the New Zealand Police. . APPROACH TO THE REVIEW .. SCOPE . The Terms of Reference (see Annex Three ) set out the agreed scope of the statutory review. . Section of the OSHAA prescribes that the Minister for Economic and Regional Development, as Minister responsible for the Acts administration, is required to: as soon as practicable after three years from the Acts commencement, commence a review of the operation and effectiveness of the Act and prepare a report on that review; and present the report to the House of Representatives as soon as practicable after its completion. . Consistent with the Terms of Refere nce, the scope of the statutory review includes an assessment of whether the licensing and permitting processes (within the Act and its regulations) are effectively and efficiently delivering on the purposes of the Act, and how they might be improved opera tionally. The statutory review of the Act is not intended to revisit first principles .
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act .. PROCESS . The consultation process ran from mid August to the end of September and targeted those stakeholders directly affected by the OSHAA . Most submissions were received in written form, although verbal discussions with some stakeholders also took place. . Those targeted in the consultation process fell into four broad categories: Agencies involved in administering the licensing and permitting processes Over a dozen government agencies were included as part of this group, including relevant parts of MBIE, such as the Space Policy and Regulatory Systems (SPRS) and the Radio Spectrum Management team. International regulatory agencies MBIE emailed a targeted group of regulatory bodies in other jurisdictions to obtain their views on best practice in the regulation of the space and high altitude sector and engage on matters relating to international obl igations. Agencies from Australia, Japan, Europe and the United States were included in this group. Industry stakeholders who have applied, or will apply, for licences and permits Regulated parties (past, present and prospective) were the largest sub set of the targeted consultation group, with several dozen falling into this category. Many were existing permit holders, but some were prospective applicants . Other stakeholders (eg universities and sector providers ). .. RESPONSE . The Review Team receive d written submissions and engaged in two stakeholder meetings which were treated as verbal submissions, with their agreement. Relevant extracts from Ministerial correspondence received during this period have also been treated as a submission s, as denot ed by an M in the list below. . Written submissions were received from the following parties: AotearoaNew Zealand Peace Foundation (International Affairs and Disarmament Committee) M Care Weather Civil Aviation Authority Government Communications and Se curity Bureau and New Zealand Security Intelligence Service joint submission Jan Marsh M Land Information New Zealand Ministry of Defence Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade New Zealand Defence Force New Zealand Nuclear Free Peacemakers and Space f or Peace Aotearoa M New Zealand Police New Zealand Security Intelligence Service Orbital Astronautics Robert Howell M Rocket Lab Space Operations New Zealand Space Policy and Regulatory Systems team ( within MBIE) Note: Submitters marked with an asterisk () are those who were given, and provided substantive input into, the information framework which the Review Team engaged the cross agency group
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act on. The framework outlined questions and prompts for input to draw ou t insights and evidence from these agencies which they may hold from their experience as an agency with a role in the system. . During the consultation period, the Review Team met separately with Kea Aerospace , LeoLabs , and with the F AA as a co regulator. As relevant to the subjects covered in the report, the insights and perspectives from these discussions are reflected in the body of this report, in a similar manner to feedback received via the submissions process. . The Review Team als o commissioned Professor Steven Freeland, an international law expert , to provide insights on the regulation of high altitude activities internationally.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act PART TWO: KEY FINDINGS . OVERALL VIEW OF THE REGIME . New Zealands regime for the regulation of space and high altitude activities has performed well. There have been no material safety or security issues, and decisions have been compliant with New Zealands international obligations, and national security and national interests. . The submissions indicate that the regime is well regarded by those entities that engaged with it, and this is illustrated by some quotes:
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act PART THREE: SUBSTANTIVE MATTERS ) DEFINITION OF LAUNCH FACILITY STATUS QUO . Section of the Act provides a person must not operate a laun ch facility in New Zealand unless the person has a facility licence for the launch facility . The term launch facility is defined to mean, subject to any regulations made under section ()(), a) means a facility (whether fixed or mobile) or place from which it is intended to launch a launch vehicle; and b) includes all other facilities that are necessary to launch a launch vehicle from the facility or place. . This is potentially a very broad definition which extends not just to the launch range and mis sion control but also testing facilities and ground stations. ISSUE . Space Op erations New Zealand (Space Ops) has expressed concern about the definition on the basis that it could be interpreted as meaning that they are required to hold a licence in relation to their operation of ground stations. ANALYSIS . We agree with Space Ops that the definition is too broad and should be amended to specifically exclud e ground stations which were not intended to be caught by the definition. If ground stations are to be regulated, they need to be regulated separately from launch facilities since the operator of a ground station is generally a different person than the op erator of a launch facility. . The issue is broader than just the inclusion of ground stations within the definition. The second limb of the definition that includes all other facilities that are necessary to launch a launch vehicle from the facility or pla ce extends the definition beyond what is necessary to ensure launch facilities are properly regulated. Accordingly, we propose that the definition be amended so that it applies only to what is often described as the launch range . A possible approach tha t has been suggested is t o repeal the second limb of the definition and add this into the first limb which captures the facility from which it is intended to launch a launch vehicle and includes any other relevant installation or equipment necessary for the operation of the facility. RECOMMENDATION . The Review recommends t hat the definition of launch facility should be amended to remove the reference to ground stations. ) ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES FOR REGULATING LAUNCH FACILITIES STATUS QUO . The Act requir es that the Minister may grant a facility licence only if the Minister is satisfied that a) the applicant is technically capable of operating a launch facility safely; and b) the applicant has taken, and will continue to take, all reasonable steps to manage ris ks to public safety ; and
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act c) the proposed operation of the launch facility is consistent with New Zealands international obligations; and d) the applicant and the proposed operation of the launch facility meet any other prescribed requirements relating to the launch facility. ISSUE . The SPRS team has suggested it might be desirable to clarify the respective roles and responsibilities of MBIE and Work Safe on the face of the legislation. ANALYSIS . On the issue of the roles and responsibilities of MBIE and WorkSafe , we consider there is no need for the OSHAA to specifically regulate any of the facilities referred to in the definition for safety because they are already regulated under the Health and Safety at Work Act . . There are two options for clarifying the ro les and responsibilities of the respective agencies. The first option is to repeal the technical capability and safety requirements in clause of the Act, leaving the regulation of launch facilities to be dealt with entirely under the Health and Safety at Work Act . . The alternative option would be to repeal the technical capability and safety requirements in clause and include a provision , such as that provided in section A of the Crown Minerals Act , that requires the Minister to seek the views of the health and safety regulator (WorkSafe) on whether the prospective licensee has the capability and systems required to meet the requirements under the Health and Safety at Work Act before granting a facility licence. . On balance, we prefer the la tter approach because a simple repeal of the provision might be seen as a dilution of the emphasis on public safety. A requirement for the Minister to seek the views of WorkSafe on facility safety would also provide an additional check in the system which is appropriate for what is still a novel activity. This would have some resource implications for WorkSafe. However, the number of licence applications is likely to be very small and the SPRS team already asks WorkSafe to review the launch facility aspects of Rocket Labs safety case , so we would not expect this to be significant. RECOMMENDATION . The Review recommends that consideration be given to : repealing the requiremen t in clause () of the Act that, before granting a facil ity licence , the Minister must (a) be satisfied that the applicant is technically capable of operating a launch facility safely , and (b) that the applicant has taken, and will continue to take, all reasonable steps to manage risks to public safety . creatin g a new provision such as that provided in section A of the Crown Minerals Act , and that should be introduced, requiring the Minister to seek the views of the health and safety regulator (WorkSafe) on whether the prospective licensee has the capability a nd systems required to meet the requirements under the Health and Safety at Work Act before granting a facility licence. ) LAUNCH LICENCES MANAGING LAUNCH SAFETY STATUS QUO . Currently , launch safety is managed through a threshold test in section of t he Act that requires the Minister to be satisfied that the applicant has taken, and will continue to take, all reasonable
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act steps to manage risks to public safety supported by requirements in the regulations for a safety case. ISSUE . A key issue is whether this is the optimal approach to managing launch safety or whether it would be better managed through performance based safety regulations such as the FAA Commercial Space Transportation Regulations. A related issue is whether the current requiremen ts for a safety case are sufficiently specific about the types of safety systems that are required and , more generally , whether there needs to be more clarity about the safety standards against which a licence application will be assessed. ANALYSIS . Perform ance based regulation started to be adopted as more common regulatory approach in the s. It was a reaction to the cost and innovation inhibiting effect of the extant prescriptive approaches. The objective of performance based systems is to provide cert ainty through prescribed safety standards , but also flexibility by allowing alternative means of compliance. The Building Act is an example of this form of regulation. . The requirement for safety cases as a means of regulation was also a reaction to ex tant prescriptive regulation, but in this case the defined problem was that operators focused on compliance rather than safety. The primary objective of the safety case approach was to shift responsibility for safety from the government (as the rule maker) to the operator. Flexibility was a secondary objective. . In practice, our current safety case approach has not been tested because the Minister is able to treat Rocket Labs FAA launch licence as satisfying the safety and technical capability requirements , rather than relying on its safety case. However, we need to ensure that the legislative framework is sufficiently robust to manage safety appropriately if an application by a nonUS applicant was made. . An advantage of the safety case approach is that it provides maximum flexibility and as a result readily accommodates changes in technology , therefore support ing innovation. However, it does not provide certainty to operators as to the safety standards that need to be applied or how licence applications will be assessed. . The FAA has had a great deal of experience in regulating the safety of commercial space activities and it has recently amended its regulations to move it to a more performance based model , which mitigates earlier concerns that the regula tions were too rigid to allow for innovation. . There would be several advantages in moving to a performance based model based on the US regulations. As both the US and New Zealand regulate Rocket Labs activities, there are significant advantages in the two systems being interoperable. . The US has a proven track record in regulating space launches and the requirements in the regulations are set to achieve a high standard of safety. However, the regulations also allow for alternative approaches to those provid ed for in the regulations, provided they achieve an equivalent level of safety. . As a result, the regulations provide certainty to both regulators and regulated parties about the safety standards that are required whilst provi ding flexibility to allow for i nnovation. . There is also an increasing interest in space launch activities internationally and there is an advantage in having safety regulations that are interoperable. There is a limited pool of people internationally who have the expertise to assess lau nch licence applications, a problem which would be compounded if there are a multiplicity of different approaches to safety regulation.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act . It seems likely that other jurisdictions that are establishing space regulatory systems will look to the US system as an exemplar of safety regulation given its experience in regulating launch safety. . Even if other jurisdictions do not look to the US safety standards and the full advantages of interoperability are not realised, a performance based approach seems more approp riate than our current open ended safety case approach because of the clarity and certainty it provides about the safety standards that are required. This seems important in a field of endeavour that is characterised by rapid technological change, and whic h is therefore inherently risky. . However, if the current safety case approach is to be retained, consideration needs to be given to whether the existing requirements are sufficiently specific to appropriately manage safety or whether a greater level of prescription is required, particularly as to the general nature of the safety analysis that is required. . The regulations require identification of safety critical systems, the safety standards applied, safety management systems and an emergency management pla n but do not prescribe the type of safety analysis that is required. This contrasts with the new UK Space Industry Regulations which contain much more detai led requirements for a safety case, including detailed requirements for flight safety analysis and ground safety analysis. . The Australian regulations do not specifically require a safety case but are also much more specific than the New Zealand regulations about the information required for a launch licence and the type of safety analysis that is re quired. RECOMMENDATION . The Review recommends that MBIE carry out a review of the safety requirements for launch licen sing to assess whether more detailed safety regulation is required, whether through performance based safety regulation or more detailed re quirements about the contents of a safety case. At the same time, the Review Team is aware that MBIE is consider ing what is necessary to build its own capability so that it is in a position to appropriately regulate domestic launches in circumstances where recognition of an overseas licence is not possible. ) LAUNCH LICENCES THE MANAGEMENT OF ORBITAL DEBRIS STATUS QUO . Section ()(c) of the Act establishes , as a threshold test for a launch licence , that the applicant has an orbital debris mitigation plan th at meets any prescribed requirements. Section (c) of the Act establishes a similar requirement for payload permits. Regulation of the Outer Space and High altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations specifies the requirements for an orbital debris mitigation plan (ODMP) . ISSUE . MBIEs consideration of Rocket Labs imminent C APSTONE mission to lunar orbit has identified that, in addition to the management of debris in Earth orbit , there is also a need to manage non Earth space debris and to provide for planetary protection. There is currently discussion about whether and what changes need to be made to the regulations to take account of the fact that New Zealands space activities now extend beyond activities in Earth orbit and now into lunar orbit. . Leaving aside the need to regulate space debris, Rocket Lab has submitted that the current orbital debris mitigation requirements in the regulations do not provide operators with sufficient certainty because they do not specify the standard or standards that need to be adhered to. The issue here is whether there needs to be an amendment to the regulations .
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act ANALYSIS . If space exploration takes place beyond Earth orbit, there is a potential for space debris that is nonEarth orbit ing. This is particularly likely to arise in the context of the post mission disposal of the launch vehicle , where this takes place beyond Earth orbit. . Planetary protection is the practice of protecting solar system bodies from contamination by Earth life and pr otecting Earth from possible life forms that may be returned from other solar system bodies. N ASAs planetary protection polic ies and requirements provide a useful model for ensuring the protection of the Earth, the Moon and other celestial bodies. The Com mittee on Space Research (COSPAR) guideline s, which are similar , also provide a useful model. . Article of the Outer Space Treaty requires states parties to conduct exploration of outer space, the Moon, and other celestial bodies so as to avoid their harmf ul contamination and adverse changes in the environment of the Earth resulting from the introduction of extra terrestrial matter and, where necessary, shall adopt appropriate measures for this purpose. . In the short term it has been possible to manage the permitting of Rocket Labs proposed CAPSTONE mission by developing a policy on post mission disposal in the lunar orbit. In the longer term , it is desirable to develop regulations to manage space debris beyond Earth orbit and implement requirements for pla netary protection. . On the existing regulations, we note that the regulations are based on the requirements for orbital debris mitigation developed by the Inter Agency Space Debris Co ordination Committee (IADC). The regulations specify the outcomes that ar e required for an ODMP, rather than specifying a particular means of achieving those outcomes. This gives operators flexibility about the standards they apply for managing orbital debris, providing they achieve the necessary outcomes. We would be reluctant to prescribe standards that the operator must adhere to since this would reduce flexibility and potentially inhibit innovation. MBIE provides information on its website about the standards that will meet the orbital debris requirements which helps provide certainty for operators. RECOMMENDATION . The Review recommends: That the Act be amended to include a new threshold requirement that would apply if an applicant for a licence intends to conduct space exploration beyond Earth orbit. The new provision would require the Minister to be satisfied that non Earth orbit ing space debris and planetary protection are appropriately managed, in accordance with prescribed requirements (if any). In addition, there should be a new power to make regulations prescribing requirements relating to the management of non Earth orbit ing space debris and planetary protection. That MBIEs SPRS team considers publishing on its website a list of the international standards that provide an acceptable means of compliance with the regulations relating to the management of orbital debris. ) RELATIONS HIP BETWEEN LAUNCH LICENCES AND HIGH ALTITUDE LICENCES STATUS QUO . There is currently no definition of outer space in the Act . There is a definition of high altitude. . High altitude means an altitude above the higher of: (a) flight level ; and
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act TABLE OF CONTENTS PART ONE: INTRODUCTION . . . . . Rationale for regulating space activities . . . .. Establishing the case for intervention . . . .. Extending the scope to high altitude vehicles . . . . Key features of regulatory regime . . . .. System objectives . . . . .. Key elements of the regime . . . . Licensing and permitting . . . . Reco gnition of international authorisations . . . Regulation making powers . . . . Operational policies and guidance material . . . .. Key facts and figures on implementation . . . Applications for licences and permits . . . Declining an application or imposing conditions . . . Varying, suspending or revoking permits and licences . . Statutory powers . . . . Non statutor y practices to support compliance . . . . Approach to the review . . . . .. Scope . . . . . .. Process . . . . . .. Response . . . . .. PART TWO: KEY FINDINGS . . . . . Overall view of the regime . . . .. PART THREE: SUBSTANTIVE MATTERS . . . ) Definition of launch facility . . . . Status Quo . . . . . Issue . . . . . Analysis . . . . . Recommendation . . . . . ) Roles and responsibilities for regulating launch facilities . . Status Quo . . . . . Issue . . . . . Analysis . . . . . Recommendation . . . . . ) Launch licences managing launch safety . . . Status Quo . . . . . Issue . . . . . Analysis . . . . . Recommendation . . . . . ) Launch licences the management of orbital debris . . Status Quo . . . . . Issue . . . . . Analysis . . . . .
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act (b) the highest upper limit of controlled airspace under the Civil Aviation Act . . Accordingly, the Act provides for the lower limit of high altitude but does not provide an upper limit. ISSUE . Professor Steven Freeland , an international space law expert, has raised an issue about whether the relationship between launch licences and high altitude licences is sufficiently clear. The submissions from Kea Aerospace and the SPRS team also raise issues about the lack of clarity about the boundary between launch licences and high altitude licences. . The key concern is that there should be clarity and certainty about when launch licences, high altitude licences and payload permits are required. ANALYSIS . At the time the legislation was developed there was a delibera te decision not to define the term outer space or to set the upper limit of high altitude because there is no international consensus about where airspace ends and space begins. . The issue is significant because the legal regimes that govern space and outer space are very different states have jurisdiction over their airspace, no state has jurisdiction over space and different liability rules apply. . Over the last three years the absence of a definition of outer space or of a defined upper limit of highaltitude has not caused any difficulties in practice. Rocket Lab has been the only applicant for a launch licence and there have been two applications for high altitude licences , one relating to an experimental rocket, the other to a high altitude balloo n. In each case , the applicant knew without being told what type of licence was required. . However, as new technologies develop and high altitude vehicles reach higher and higher altitudes , the issue of whether the operator should apply for a launch licence , or a high altitude licence may become more acute . This is because in the absence of any definition of where airspace ends and outer space begins, at very hig h altitude it may not be clear if a particular activity is a space activity or a high altitude ac tivity. . There are two options for introducing greater certainty about whether a particular activity requires a launch licence or a high altitude licence.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act return of a space object require s a licence. There is a separ ate requirement for the launch of high powered rockets below this level. . When the spatial limit was introduced in (as an amendment to the current Acts predecessor , the Space Activities Act ), the Australian government emphasised that the purpose of the amendment was to provide certainty to industry about when the provisions of the legislation applied, given there is no definitive explanation of the term in either Australian or international law. In other words, the legislation did not purport to d ecide where airspace begins and outer space ends , and the spatial limit is simply a mechanism to provide certainty to industry . Denmark . The Outer Space Act defines the term outer space as meaning: space above the altitude of km above sea level. . Like Australia, the Danish Government has acknowledged that there is no internationally agreed definition of outer space and that the purpose of the definition is to clarify the scope of the Act to launches or attempted launches up to a clearly d efined point a nd, thus, to provide certainty to industry . The definition does not in any way prejudge a Danish position about the definition of the term outer space according to international law. United Arab Emirates (UAE) . Federal Law no . () of on The Regulation of the Space Sector introduced a high altitude regime. It defines the upper limit of high altitude as any area above an altitude of kilometres or more. . Very few other jurisdictions include a spatial limit in their space laws to delimit where airspace ends and space begins , although we are advised by Professor Steven Freeland that several other jurisdictions are currently considering it. OPTION . The alternative option is to define the activities that constitute launch activ ities and to exclude launch activities from the high altitude definition. This is similar to the approach taken in the UK legislation the Space Industry Act . The Act distinguishes between space activities and suborbital launches . Space acti vities are activities that involve going into Earth orbit and beyond. Suborbital activities involve the operation and return of craft capable of operating above the stratosphere , or balloons that can reach the stratosphere carrying crew or passengers. . Whil e the definition of suborbital flights under the UK legislation is quite different from New Zealands hig haltitude definition (and relates only to activities above the stratosphere), we are attracted to defining the licen sing requirements by reference to the distinction between activities that go into orbit and beyond , and suborbital activities (which would , under New Zealand law , be defined as to include vehicles capable of or intended to go above controlled airspace). . This is because a test based on the distinction between launches where the launch vehicle or part of it goes into Earth orbit and beyond sits much more neatly than a spatial limit with the threshold tests under our legislation. . The threshold tests that apply to launch licences and high altitude vehicles are largely the same they are concerned with safety, consistency with international obligations and managing national interests. . The key difference between launch licences and high altitude licences is that a launch licence application is re quired to meet an additional threshold test relating to the management of orbital debris.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act . That being the case , it makes sense to have a definition of launch activities that encompasses those activities that could create orbital debris (or more broadly space debris) as we discuss later in the report. . If a spatial limit was adopted, an applicant might be required to meet orbital debris requirements in circumstances where no orbital debris could, or would, be created. . We acknowledge that some sounding rock ets, such as the German Aerospace Centers ( DLR) MORABA rocket and NASAs Oriole IV do go to extremely high altitude and that certain vehicle s with ballistic profiles reach such heights that they could pose a safety risk to space object s. However, we consi der this is best managed through the safety risk assessment for high altitude vehicles , rather than being managed by an arbitrary spatial limit. . Finally, we note the possibility of hybrid vehicles that are intended to go into both space and high altitude . In these circumstances it would be appropriate for a launch licence rather than a high altitude licence to be obtained. As the only difference in licen sing requirements would be that a launch licence requires orbital (and other space) debris to be managed while a high altitude licence does not, it would be unnecessary to require an operator to obtain two licences. RECOMMENDATION . The Review recommends that consideration be given to including in the legislation a new definition of launch activity. A launch licence would be required if a person was seeking to carry out a launch activity. The definition of launch activity would relate to an activity wher e a launch vehicle, or any part of the launch vehicle, is intended to go into Earth orbit or beyond Earth orbit. If that approach was taken, a consequential change could be made to the payload definition to replace the reference to an object intended to go into space with a reference to an object intended to go into Earth orbit and beyond. ) HIGH ALTITUDE REGIME MANAGING THE SAFETY OF HIGH ALTITUDE ACTIVITIES STATUS QUO . The high altitude regime distinguishes between high altitude vehicles that are aircraft and those that are not when it comes to managing the technical competence of operators and the safety of the high altitude vehicles. . In relation to high altitude licences that are not aircraft , the Minister needs to be satisfied that the applicant h as the technical capability to conduct a safe launch and the applicant has taken, and will continue to take, all reasonable steps to manage risks to public safety. . To satisfy these requirements, The Regulations require the applicant to submit a safety case . This aligns with the approach to launch licences. . In the case of high altitude vehicles that are aircraft, the Minister requires confirmation from the Director of Civil Aviation that the aircraft or (where relevant) the operator of the aircraft has the appropriate permits, certificates , or other documents required under the Civil Aviation Act (if any) or in the case of a foreign aircraft, that the aircraft is recognised under New Zealand law . The Minister must also take into account any advice or inf ormation provided by the Director of Civil Aviation in relation to the safety of the operation of the aircraft at high altitude. ISSUE . A key issue is whether the current approach to safety regulation of HAVs is appropriate. Does it make sense for the Minister to rely on the Civil Aviation Act to manage the safety of HAVs
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act that are aircraft Is the safety case approach appropriate for managing the safety issues associated with HAVs that are not aircraft or would performance based safety regulation be more appropriate Related questions include whether the requirements applicable to rockets in part of the Civil Aviation Rules are suf ficient for dealing with high powered rockets and how to deal with hybrid vehicles. For example, Dawn Aerospaces space plane is currently regulated as an aircraft but in many respects operates more like a rocket. . MBIEs SPR S team has also raised a separ ate but related issue about whether there should be a separate licence class for high powered rockets even if they do not reach high altitude, noting that the Act does not currently regulate Missile Technology Control Regime ( MTCR ) category one rockets tha t are not launched to an altitude at or above flight level . The SPR S team considers there is a question of whether the applicable CAA Rule () is appropriate for managing public safety in this area because its concern is with the safety of aircraft a nd high powered rockets are not aircraft. ANALYSIS . The distinction between high altitude vehicles that are aircraft and those that are not is sens ible because aircraft are subject to a comprehensive safety regime under the Civil Aviation Act . The te rm aircraft means any machine that can derive support in the atmosphere from the reactions of the air otherwise than by the reactions of the air against the surface of the Earth. The civil aviation regime is designed to manage the technical competence of operators (w here appropriate) and the safety of aircraft. . The C AA has the expertise in regulating aircraft safety and it would add an unnecessary cost and compliance burden if there was an additional layer of safety regulation for aircraft merely because they are int ended to, or are capable of, going into high altitude. . A potential complication is that at very high altitude an aircraft may cease to be an aircraft. An example would be a spaceplane that is deriving atmospheric lift during ascent, then continuing a ballistic trajectory to an apogee followed by a descent that is initially ballistic but derives atmospheric lift for flight at lower altitude. However, we anticipate that in these circumstances the CAA would continue to be the safety regulator since it would m ake no sense for a different regulator to regulate safety for a small part of a vehicle s journey. . The Act contemplates that the CAA will provide the Minister with advice on whether there are additional safety risks from operating at high altitude. In our view this is sufficient to appropriately manage the safety risks associated with unmanned high altitude vehicles because the safety risks at high altitude are not so different from the safety risks at lower levels as to require a separate and additional la yer of regulation. . However, while the distinction between HAVs that are aircraft and those that are not remains appropriate to avoid the situation of having two different regulators regulating the same thing, there is a question about whether Parts and of the Civil Aviation Rules apply to, or are appropriate for, regulating all forms of high altitude activity . The issue is particularly acute in the case of vehicles, such as Dawn Aerospaces spaceplane, which is regulated as an aircraft , though in ma ny respects operates more like a rocket. While the timing of any review of Parts and of the Civil Aviation Rules is a matter for the CAA, we would support an early review being undertaken in conjunction with further work by MBIE on the regulation o f high altitude vehicles. . A related question is whether the OSH AA deals appropriately with the safety of HAVs that are not aircraft. Part of the Civil Aviation Rules does provide some limited regulation of rockets , but this is largely for the purpose o f ensuring the safety of aircraft. The CAA has acknowledged these rules are not appropriate for, and do not apply to , launch vehicles that are regulated by the OSH AA. A similar issue arises about whether they are appropriate for, or should apply to, high powered high altitude rockets which are also regulated by the OSHAA. We recommend that
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act MBIEs SPRS team engage s with the CAA to discuss the appropriateness and applicability of Part of the Civil Aviation Rules for managing high powered high altitude roc kets. We also recommend engagement with the CAA on how to regulate HAVs . . Currently the OSHAA requires a safety case for HAVs that are not aircraft. The question is whether performance based safety regulation would provide better safety outcomes than the current safety case approach. This is the same question we have asked in relation to launch vehicles. Our tentative view is that it would because it provides clarit y about the safety standards that are required. Accordingly, we recommend that further work on this issue be undertaken in conjunction with a review of the safety requirements for launch licen sing. . Whatever form of regulation is required, it will be import ant to consider the scope of the safety analysis that is required. Generally, the safety analysis will need to cover public safety on the ground and in the air. In the case of vehicles that go into very high altitude, particularly those with a ballistic pr ofile, the safety of space objects will also need to be considered. In each case, the safety analysis will need to be proportionate to the risks associated with the activity. . On the issue raised by the SPRS team about the need for a new licence type to reg ulate high powered rockets that are not capable of or intended to reach high altitude , we have several reservations. We are not aware of any issues that have arisen with rockets that operate in altitudes of lower than flight level and the regulation of rockets at these much lower altitudes seem a long way removed from a space law. . We note that Australia (which does not have a high altitude regime) has recently adopted a licen sing requirement for high powered rockets. The definition of a high powered ro cket is contained in rules and does not depend upon the altitude the rocket is capable of achieving. . The definition in rule of the Australian rules specifies two elements for an object to be a high power rocket. An object is a high power rocket if it m eets either paragraph (a) or (b). Paragraph (a) provides that rockets which have a large combined total impulse (greater than , Newton seconds) are captured as high power rockets. Paragraph (b) ensures that rockets which have a lower combined tot al impulse (but still greater than , Newton seconds) than in paragraph (a) but include systems that allow active control of the rockets trajectory, are captured as a high power rocket. . We are confident, however, that a high powered rocket that met t he Australian definition would be capable of going into high altitude. On that basis we do not consider adopting the Australian approach would result in a different outcome than the New Zealand approach. Accordingly, the Review does not recommend any new l icence type for rockets that are not capable of or intended to go into high altitude. . Finally, an issue has been raised whether the current rules are adequate if an operator was proposing to undertake manned high altitude space flight. In our view , they ar e not. However, as there is currently no prospect of manned spaceflight on the horizon, we have not explored that matter any further. RECOMMENDATION . The Review recommends: That MBIE engage s with the CAA to discuss the applicability, and appropriateness of Part of the Civil Aviation Rules, for high powered rockets and more generally for HAVs; and That further consideration of whether performance based regulation of the safety of non aircraft HAVs be undertaken in conjunction with a review of the safety requirements for launch licen sing.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act . The Review does not recommend the creation of a new licence for high powered rockets that are incapable of going beyond flight level . ) PAYLOAD PERMITS AND HIGH ALTITUDE PAYLOADS STATUS QUO . Section of the Act requires a person who launches or procures the launch of a payload to have a payload permit if that payload is launched: a) from a launch facility in New Zealand ; or b) from a launch vehicle that was launched from a launch facility in New Zealand or a vehicle i n the air that was launched from New Zealand. . The term payload, subject to any regulations made under section () (): a) means an object that is carried or placed, or is intended to be carried or placed, in outer space; and b) includes components of a launch vehicle that are specifically designed or adapted for the object (but does not otherwise include a launch vehicle or any of its component parts) ; and c) includes a load to be caried for testing purposes or otherwise on a non profit basis. . Accordingly, persons who procure the launch of payloads (eg satellites or other space objects) are required to have a payload permit, whether that payload is launched from a launch services provider such as Rocket Lab or from a high altitude vehicle. . The Act also conta ins a definition of high altitude payload. . A high altitude payload, subject to any regulations made under section () (): a) means an object that is carried or placed, or is intended to be carried or placed, at high altitude; and b) includes components o f a high altitude vehicle that are specifically designed or adapted for the object (but does not otherwise include a high altitude vehicle or any of its component parts) ; and c) includes a load to be caried for testing purposes or otherwise on a non profit ba sis.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act . Dawn Aerospace, for example, noted that the current definition of high altitude payload is problematic and confusi ng in their operational context and Kea Aerospace drew attention to the fact that the term payload is used differently in the civil aviation and space contexts. In our discussions with the CAA, they also drew attention to the differences in terminology i n the civil aviation and space contexts. ANALYSIS . At the time the legislation was developed, the high altitude vehicles that were in contemplation were high altitude balloons, such as those operated by NASA for research purposes. It seemed unnecessary at the time to consider the payload of a vehicle separately from the high altitude vehicle itself , because it was assumed that the owner and operator of the payload would be one and the same. . New technologies, such as the spaceplanes being developed by Dawn Aerospace and Kea, change that position because they open up the very real prospect of scientific and other activities being commissioned by someone other than the person who operates the vehicle. In such a case, the payload or equipment used to carry out the activity might be owned by either the operator of the high altitude vehicle or by the person who is conducting the scientific research. . There is a clear rationale for requiring separate licences and permits for launch vehicles and payload s in the space context because a launch vehicle and its payload are separate and distinct space objects that need to be separately managed from the perspective of safety, management of orbital debris and protecting the national interest. . This distinction holds good whe never a payload is placed into orbit, whether by a launch vehicle or by a high altitude vehicle, and in each case the legislation requires a payload permit under section because the same interests are at play . These interests are the management of the collision risk in space, the management of orbital debris, and ensuring the activity is consistent with international obligations and not contrary to the national interest . . The position is much less clear cut in the case of high altitude vehicles and the ac tivities they perform at high altitude. Safety issues relating to high altitude vehicles are likely to be managed through licen sing of the vehicle and the issue of orbital debris does not arise. There may not need to be a separate permit to manage the saf ety of its payload in the case of a high altitude vehicle because the payload is unlikely to operate independently of the high altitude vehicle. For example, a sensor for remote sensing is likely to be attached to the vehicle and the safety of the activity is likely to be assessed as part of the vehicle licen sing requirement. However, further work is required to assess whether that will always be the case and to fully understand the impact of carrying various types of scientific equipment on vehicle safety . . It will always be necessary for activities carried out by a high altitude vehicle to be consistent with our international obligations and not contrary to the national interest. These interests are as relevant to high altitude activities as they are to lau nch activities. . Accordingly, we agree that in circumstances where the operator of the vehicle may not necessarily be the person that carries out the activity, there will almost certainly be a need for a permit that is separate from the vehicle licence to p roperly regulate the activity performed by the vehicle and ensure it is not contrary to the national interest. . However, in our view, a question that needs to be asked is exactly what it is that needs to be permitted. Is it the activity that the vehicle i s carrying out or is it the payload it is carrying Do the differences in context necessitate a difference in approach from the way in which launches and payload s are regulated . Arguably, in the high altitude context, it is more appropriate to regulate the activity carried out by a high altitude vehicle rather than its payload because the payload (or equipment used to
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act carry out the activity) could be owned and operated by either t he operator of the high altitude vehicle who hires it out for commercial gain or by the person who has commissioned the high altitude activity. If the concern is about the nature of the activity and who is carrying it out, then regulating the activity rath er than the payload seems more appropriate. Against that, th e capability of the payload may in and of itself give rise to national interest concerns. . In our view the question of how to regulate the new and emerging high altitude technologies raises some s ignificant issues that we are only able to touch on very briefly in the context of this review. Further work is necessary to get a better understanding of how the business models of the proposed operators will work, the nature of the payload s they are like ly to carry and how the payload might impact on questions of vehicle safety. We recommend that further work on these issue s be undertaken as soon as is practicable given that development of the technology is reasonably well advanced. . The issue of the exist ing definition of high altitude payload is of limited importance when looked at in the context of the much bigger issues surrounding the regulation of high altitude activities. As the term is used in the legislation, it has very little operative effect. The term is used in the definition of technical data, in the enforcement provisions (which have never been used) and in the regulation making powers (with no regulations having been made). While the definition will need to be looked at in the context of the further work on high altitude vehicles, we do not see any need for urgent amendment. RECOMMENDATION . The Review recommend s that further work be undertaken on how best to regu late new and emerging high altitude activities. ) HIGH ALTITUDE REGIME THE SCOPE OF THE EXEMPTION REGIME STATUS QUO . The Outer Space and High altitude Activities (Definition of High altitude Vehicle) Regulations regime excludes certain types of balloons from the high altitude regime. These include certain types of weathe r balloon, balloons launched for educational purposes under the supervision of schools and universities , and balloons of a type readily available in retail stores in New Zealand if they are used solely for the purpose of describing or illustrating the prog ress of the balloon. ISSUE . Dawn Aerospace submits that a broader category of balloons should be exempt from the regime. It notes that the Civil Aviation Rules distinguish between medium free balloons and heavy free balloons . It considers medium weight balloons should be exempt from the high altitude regime. In the Civil Aviation Rules t he term med ium free balloon means a free balloon, that : () carries a payload of or more payload packages with a combined mass of i. more than kg; and ii. less than kg; and () does not meet any of the criteria specified in the definition of the term heavy free balloon.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act ANALYSIS . The current exemptions in the Outer Space and High altitude Activities (Definition of High altitude Vehicle) Regulations exclude from the regime balloons of a type that are unlike to pose risks to national security or other national interests. . We have consulted relevant agencies who agree that medium weight balloons as defined in the Civil Aviation Rules are unlikely to give rise to any significant national interest concerns . This weight class has a limited utility for operations that could raise any issues that are sufficiently serio us to warrant regulation. T he limits imposed by weight affects complexity of activities, and the types of activity it can undertake , and duration of the operations of balloons of this type. On that basis, we agree that medium weight balloons can be exclude d from the highaltitude regime. . On that basis, we consider that medium free balloons should be excluded from the highaltitude regime. RECOMMENDATION . The Review recommend s considering the case for amending the Outer Space and High altitude Activities (De finition of High altitude Vehicle) Regulations to exclude certain high altitude vehicles, including medium free balloons and small rockets . ) HIGH ALTITUDE REGIME ESTABLISHMENT OF A REGISTRATION SYSTEM STATUS QUO . The Registration Convention requires t hat when a space object is launched into Earth orbit and beyond the launching state is required to enter the object on a domestic register and to provide certain information about the object to the Secretary General of the United Nations as soon as reasonably practicable. . MBIE has established a domestic space register and regularly provides information from the register to the Secretary of the United Nations as required by the Registration Convention. ISSUE . There is no comparable registration requir ement for high altitude vehicles. . Professor Steven Freeland has suggested that there may nonetheless be utility in establishing a register of high altitude launches for domestic use. ANALYSIS . We agree. While there is no obligation to create a register or to furnish information to the UN, a register is likely to provide a quick and easy way to respond to requests for information about high altitude launches. The establishment of a register is not onerous and does not require legislation. RECOMMENDATION . The Review recommend s the SPRS team establish a register of high altitude vehicles.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act ) THE NEED TO REGULATE THE RETURN OF SPACE OBJECTS AND HIGH ALTITUDE VEHICLES STATUS QUO . The OSHAA doesnt currently distinguish between the launch and return of launch vehicles and high altitude vehicles. If the launch vehicles and high altitude vehicles, or any part of them, return to Earth this is simply treated as an aspect of the launch l icensing or high altitude licen sing process. . Under Australian law , a separate authorisation is required for the return of a space object . ISSUE . Professor Steven Freeland suggests that consideration should be given to the need for a separate authorisation f or the return of both space objects and high altitude vehicles. ANALYSIS . We do not consider there is a need for a separate authorisation for the return of a space object or a high altitude vehicle where the person who launches the space object or high altitude vehicle also returns the object or vehicle , since the issues relating to both launch and return can be appropriately dealt with in the same licen sing process. . However, there may be a case for requiring a separate authorisation for a return of a space object or high altitude vehicle if the launcher of the vehicle does not need a launch or high altitude licence. This will generally be the case if the launch vehicle or high altitude vehicle is launched from a country other than New Zealand. . For example, in Australia, launch vehicles launched in another jurisdiction have been returned to the Australia n Outback . Theoretically , this could also occur with certain types of high altitude vehicle s, such as a high altitude balloon . . If a high altitude vehicle launched overseas returned to New Zealand, a diplomatic clearance would be required which would give New Zealand a measure of control. However, in the case of the return of a launch vehicle, no diplomatic clearance is required, a nd the return would be entirely unregulated. . In both cases, the return could give rise to both safety and environmental issues , and so a requirement for prior authorisation may be appropriate. RECOMMENDATION . The review recommend s that consideration be give n to requiring a separate authorisation for the return of space objects and high altitude vehicles. The requirement for a return authorisation would apply only if launch of the space object or high altitude vehicle has not been licen sed in New Zealand. ) SECTION OF THE ACT THE PURPOSE PROVISION STATUS QUO . Section of the OSHAA sets out the purpose of the Act and provides: The purpose of this Act is to: a) facilitate the development of a space industry and provide for its safe and secure operation;
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act Recommendation . . . . . ) Relationshi p between Launch licences and High Altitude Licences . . Status Quo . . . . . Issue . . . . . Analysis . . . . . Recommendation . . . . . ) High Altitude regime managing the safety of high altitude activities . . Status Quo . . . . . Issue . . . . . Analysis . . . . . Recommendation . . . . . ) Payload permits and High Altitude payloads . . . Status Quo . . . . . Issue . . . . . Analysis . . . . . Recommendation . . . . . ) High Altitude regime the scope of the exemption regime . . Status Quo . . . . . Issue . . . . . Analysis . . . . . Recommendation . . . . . ) High Altitude regime Establishment of a Registration system . . Status Quo . . . . . Issue . . . . . Analysis . . . . . Recommendation . . . . . ) The need t o regulate the return of space objects and High Altitude vehicles . Status Quo . . . . . Issue . . . . . Analysis . . . . . Recommendation . . . . . ) Section of the Act the purpose provision . . . Status Quo . . . . . Issue . . . . . Analysis . . . . . Recommendation . . . . . ) Emerging technologies future proofing the regime . . Status Quo . . . . . Issues . . . . . Analysis . . . . . Recommendation . . . . . ) Remote sensing . . . . Status Quo . . . . . Issues . . . . . Analysis . . . . . Recommendations . . . . .
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act b) implement certain international obligations of New Zealand relating to space activities and space technology; c) without limiting paragraph (b), implement the obliga tions in the Outer Space Treaty not to: i. place in orbit around the Earth any objects carrying nuclear weapons or weapons of mass destruction, install such weapons on celestial bodies, or station such weapons in outer space in any other manner ; ii. establish mil itary bases, installations, or fortifications on celestial bodies ; iii. test any type of weapons or conduct manoeuvres on celestial bodies; d) manage any potential or actual liability that may arise from the space industry; e) establish a system for the regulation of space activities and certain high altitude activities; f) preserve New Zealands national security and national interests. ISSUE . Kea Aerospace submits that the legislation currently treats high altitude activities as secondary to space activities and that there should be a reference to high altitude activities in section (a) of the purpose provision in recognition of their equal importance. ANALYSIS . The Review team agrees that it would be appropriate to include a specific reference to high altitude a ctivities in section (a) of the Act. Whilst Rocket Labs launch activities were the original catalyst for the legislation, the past three years has seen the emergence of new technologies such as Dawn Aerospaces suborbital and orbital rocket powered space plane which is under development , and Kea Aerospaces solar powered, remotely piloted aircraft which is also being developed. . While there is a reference to high altitude in clause (e), which relates to the objective of establishing a system for appropri ately regulating these activities, there is no equivalent reference in section (a) , which prescribes as an objective facilitating the development of a space industry and providing for its safe and secure operation. The objective of facilitating the develo pment of a high altitude industry and providing for its safe and secure operation is equally important as the development of a space industry and should be included in the purpose provision. RECOMMENDATION . The Review recommends that section (a) of the Act be amended to include the purpose of facilitating the development of a high altitude industry and providing for its safe and secure operation. ) EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES FUTURE PROOFING THE REGIME STATUS QUO . The Act contains several regulations making powers that were designed to future proof the regime. Regulation making powers are a useful and flexible mechanism for managing an emerging technology because they provide an option for regulating new technologie s when they are sufficiently developed, without necessarily requiring it unless and until there is a case for regulation.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act ISSUE S . Since the OSH AA was developed there have been several developments that pose challenges for regulating the space environment. To future proof the regime, we consider it would be useful to include new regulation making powers to allow for the regulation of new issues and technologies in the future. For example, submissions identified technologies such as beacons , propulsion , and active debris removal as potential subjects for regulation. . The SPRS team can, and does develop , operational policies to deal with new and emerging issues. For example, it is currently developing a policy on constellations. New and emerging issues can also be regulated through the imposition of conditions on licences and permits if there is a need for binding obligations to be imposed. However, if these activities become widespread, regulations are a much more certain and transparent means of regulating them . . Arguably , the existing regulation making powers could permit the making of regulations to regulate these emerging technologies , since they allow for regulations to do anything that is necessary or desirable to protect public safety, protect the environment, preserve national security and avoid interference with space or terrestrial telecommunicati ons. . However, best practice may require specific regulation making powers rather than general regulation making power s that could be vulnerable to legal challenge. . The issues discussed below are not an exclusive list of the emerging technologies and issues that may warrant regulation in the future. They are intended only to illustrate the pace of change in the space sector and the need for the regime to include flexible mechanisms , such as regulation making powers , so that the law can keep pace with technol ogy. ANALYSIS CONSTELLATIONS . The emergence of satellite constellations has posed new challenges because most international rules, norms and standards are premised on the operation of a single satellite and are not intended to, and may not be capable of, de aling with the issues raised by large constellations. . A specific concern has recently been raised by the International Astronomical Union (IAU) that the number of new low Earth orbit satellite constellations interferes with optical and radio astronomy and the need to keep dark and quiet skies for science and society. . These concerns have arisen in the context of large constellations, such as the SpaceX Starlink , rather than in the context of small constellations of the kind that have thus far been launch ed from New Zealand . However, we cannot rule out the possibility in the future of applications for payload permits being made for payloads that will contribute to very large constellations. . MBIE is currently developing a constellations policy , but policies cannot create binding obligations and there may well be a need for regulations in the future , including regulations designed to protect the dark and quiet skies. THE EMERGENCE OF VERY SMALL SATELLITES . The miniaturisation of satellite technology h as revolutionised space making it more affordable and opening space to new space actors, such as Rocket Lab. Some of the satellites launched by Rocket Lab have been very small satellites of less than U (a U or unit is equivalent to a cm cube) . . There a re several new technologies emerging that are aimed at improving the ability to track very small satellites. Submissions to the review, for example , mentioned beacon technology and
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act propulsion as potentially useful technologies. Other passive means of de orbiting are also being considered . . MBIE has adopted a policy for managing very small satellites, but it is foreseeable in the future that regulations relating to the tracking of satellites and management of collision risks will be required as international standards and norms develop about how to regulate satellites using these new technologies . ACTIVE DEBRIS REMOVAL . The growing quantity of debris in space poses a danger to users of the orbital environment, such as spacecraft. It also increases the risk that humans or manmade structures could be impacted when objects re enter Earths atmosphere. There is increasing international interest in technologies that could assist in managing the problem of debris , such as active debris removal and on orbit servicing o f satellites. . These give rise to complex legal issues, including whether consent of the owner of the debris is required, what happens whe n there is no identifiable owner, how the liability rules operate in the context of space debris removal and on orbit servicing , and the respective roles and responsibilities of the servicing and client states. . However, these technologies are potentially very beneficial and again it is foreseeable that regulations will be required to provide for their use in the future. THE UTILISATION OF SPACE RESOURCES . The US is embarking on the largest space exploration programme since the Apollo Moon landings in the s and s. The Artemis Program prioritises the development of space resource utilisation technologies to enable dee pspace exploration missions beyond the Moon and to Mars. The term space resource utilisation refers to the extraction and use of resources available on the Moon and other celestial bodies. While the immediate interest in space resource utilisation relat es to using those resources, such as water, that would facilitate exploration beyond the Moon, there is also the potential for mining for commercial purposes. . While NASA is leading the Artemis missions, it regards international partnerships with both gover nments and private sector actors as playing a key role in achieving a sustainable return to the Moon and the first human mission to Mars. . Accordingly, it invited several countries, including New Zealand , to join the Artemis Accords. This required New Zeala nd to agree to a non binding set of principles designed to guide the safe and sustainable exploration of outer space, including principles relating to the utilisation of space resources. The issue of space resource utilisation is also being discussed in the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space with a view to developing norms and standards . Rocket Lab is an early participant in the Artemis Program. It intends to launch the CAPSTONE payload as part of the program. This w ould involve Roc ket Lab launching a satellite to test the lunar orbit for the proposed Lunar Gateway a small space station that will act as an orbiting outpost to facilitate later parts of the programme. . Accordingly, we recommend a new regulation making power to prescribe requirements on New Zealand nationals relating to the utilisation of space resources on the Moon and other celestial bodies. RECOMMENDATION . The Review recommend s that the MBIE consider th e inclusion of new regulation making powers to regulate new and emerging technologies when the OSHAA is next amended. The new
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act regulation making powers could include powers to make regulations regulating the activities that we have described above. ) REMOTE SENSING STATUS QUO . Remote sensing is the science of acquiring information about an object or phenomenon from a distance. Remote sensing involves the collection of data about a sensed object, area, or activity by making use of the electromagnetic wave s emitted, reflected, or diffracted by the sensed object, area, or activity. Remote sensing can involve Earth observation or the observation of other objects in space. Remote sensing activities offer enormous benefits for science and a range of other disci plines but can give rise to national security risks and may give rise to national interest concerns. . The Act does not currently contain specific provisions relating to remote sensing activities but does have general provisions for managing national securi ty risks and protecting the national interest. These apply to remote sensing as well as to other space activities. They include the power of the Minister to decline a permit if the Minister is not satisfied that the grant of a permit is in the national int erest and the power to impose conditions on a permit. . The Act also contains a power to make regulations prescribing conditions or licences and permits which may include providing for the imposition of requirements relating to the collection and disseminati on of data obtained by remote sensing. However, at this stage no regulations have been made relating to the collection and dissemination of remote sensing data. . There are also regulations prescribing the information a licensee must submit with a licence application, including some that are specific to remote sensing. Clause s and of schedule of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations require applicants to provide the following information in relation to p ayloads with remote sensing capability: . A description of any payload sensors and a summary of their capability, including information about the payloads : a) resolution, field of view, and field of regard; and b) onboard storage and processing capabilities; an d c) geolocation accuracy; and d) persistence. . A summary of the proposed recipients of any enhanced and raw remote sensing data, including details of : a) any customers or classes of customers who will receive enhanced remote sensing data; and b) whether the applicant will provide any raw data to any customers or classes of customers; and c) any plans to provide the raw data by the payload i. to governments whose territories have been sensed; or ii. for non commercial, scientific, educational, or other public benefit p urposes. . MBIE has not a formal remote sensing policy. However, the Minister has agreed an approach to regulating remote sensing payload permits to protect national security and other national interest concerns. The approach involves relying on the technic al controls imposed by
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act an overseas licence and otherwise imposing conditions on all remote sensing payloads that require the permit holder not to supply data to designated terrorist entities or to entities that are subject to our UN Sanctions Regulations. ISSUES . The GCSB and NZSIS jointly submitted that it may be appropriate to enact regulations relating to the collection and dissemination of remote sensing data. . Two issues arise in considering the content of any remote sensing regulations . First whether th e current requirement that payload applicants who carry out remote sensing activities provide information about their customers or classes of customers is necessary or appropriate. Second whether steps should be taken to implement the UNs Principles re lating to Remote Sensing of the Earth from Outer Space. ANALYSIS . We agree there is a case for dealing with remote sensing in a single set of regulations given recent technological advances, particularly Keas development of high altitude pseudo satellite that has remote sensing capabilities. Currently the specific information requirements for remote sensing in the Outer Space and High altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations apply only to payload permit applications. Rather than replicat ing the requirements for highaltitude applications, it would make sense to consolidate the requirements in a single set of regulations dealing with remote sensing. . An issue that arises with the current regulations is whether the existing requirement that the applicant provide information about customers and classes of customers is necessary or appropriate. The requirement is intended to identify end use customers t o assist in managing national security and complicity risks. However, it is potentially problematic because commercial remote sensing products are widely available on the open market and many remote sensing companies will not necessarily know who their end use customers are. Even if they do know their customers, the products can be resold on the open market so there is simply no guarantee about where they will end up. The question i s, does i t make sense to try to impose restrictions on products that are rea dily available However , there is also a view that more detailed information about an operator s customer base should be required if the operator has military or intelligence agencies as customers. . The enactment of new regulations would provide an opportu nity to revisit this issue to assess whether our current approach is sound. One option is to consider the use of end user licence agreements which is the approach taken in Canada. It would also be useful to consult with the US. The US has recently adopted much less restrictive remote sensing regulations because of concerns that its earlier approach disadvantaged US companies without protecting national security , due to the availability of remote sensing data from companies operating outside the US. It would be interesting to know how the new regulations operate in practice and whether any issues have resulted from taking a less restrictive approach. . The other matter worth considering is whether to implement the UNs Principles relating to Remote Sensing of the Earth from Outer Space and including a principle that the sensed state shall have access to remote sensing data on a non discriminatory basis and on reasonable cost terms. The legislation in both the US and Canada require s the operators of remote sens ing systems to make available to the government of any country unenhanced data collected by the system concerning the territory under the jurisdiction of such government on reasonable terms and conditions. . Apart from these matters , we anticipate the regul ations would include our current standard condition forbidding applicants for licences or permits from supplying data to designated terrorist
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act entities or to entities that are subject to our UN Sanctions Regulations and would otherwise empower the Minister to impose any other condition necessary to manage New Zealands national interests. RECOMMENDATIONS . The Review recommend s the enactment of regulations relating to the collection and dissemination of data obtained by remote sensing. These would apply to bot h applicants for payload permits and applicants for high altitude licences if the payload or vehicle carries out remote sensing. ) NATIONAL INTEREST ASSESSMENT STATUS QUO LAW . In each of the licen sing and permitting provisions of the Act, the Minister may, despite being satisfied of all other prescribed matters (eg in relation to safety, compliance with international obligations etc.), decline to grant a licence or permit on national interest grounds. . In considering the national interest the Minister ma y have regard to economic or other benefits to New Zealand of the proposed operation; any risks to national security, public safety, international relations, or other national interests; the extent to which the risks can be mitigated by licence or permit conditions; any other matters that the Minister considers relevant. PRACTICE . To no national interest analysis has been undertaken, but all applications are assessed to determine whether such an analysis should be undertaken. . A number of operational , policy and decision making frameworks have been developed to inform decisions on whether to undertake national interest analysis and the processes to be followed if is undertaken. These include MBIE, ministerial and Cabinet approved activities, as set o ut below. MBIE APPROVED Operational decisions on the level of detail that payload applicants must provide on their customers. The documentation of a National Interest Process to determine whether to undertake a national interest analysis. This states tha t Officials will undertake a National Interest Assessment (NIA) only when high risks are present, as determined by a risk review. MINISTER APPROVED Ministerial agreement to a policy on commercial remote sensing payloads (Commercial remote sensing paylo ads: national interest considerations and proposed approach to permitting ( March )). The current development of policies on mega constellations and potentially other topics. CABINET APPROVED
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act Cabinet agreement to an approach to payload permitting under the Act with the objective of enabling a consistent payload permitting decisions, particularly with regard to government applicants. The approach included: o PRINCIPLES : The following principles will guide decision making: Responsibility space ac tivities from New Zealand should promote an orbital environment where users avoid causing harm or interference with the activities of others. Sustainability space activities from New Zealand should preserve the benefits of space for future generations th rough adherence to sustainable practices. Safety space activities from New Zealand should not jeopardise the safety of people on the ground or in space. Space activities authorised by the Government should reflect New Zealands values and interests and align with broader policy settings. o ACTIVITIES NOT IN THE NATIONAL INTEREST: The following activities will not be approved: payloads that contribute to nuclear weapons programmes or capabilities. payloads with the intended end use of harming, interfering with, or destroying other spacecraft, or space systems on Earth. payloads with the intended end use of supporting or enabling specific defence, security or intelligence operations that are contrary to government policy. payloads where the inten ded end use is likely to cause serious or irreversible harm to the environment. ISSUE . The Minister is able to decline an application for a licence or permit on national interest grounds even when other tests in the Act are met. Effective use of this provis ion requires complete and accurate information on the capability and intended use of payloads in particular (in future high altitude vehicles or HAVs), clear and agreed criteria in relation to what may be contrary to the national interest, and the involve ment of relevant agencies and Ministers in the advice and decision making process. However, what may be contrary to the national interest can both evolve over time and be application specific, and hence there are inevitable uncertainties and resolving thes e through licensing and permitting can be time consuming. . Operating a responsive regulatory system that supports space industry development requires licence and permit applicants to have maximum regulatory certainty, minimum compliance costs and timely d ecisions. The issue highlighted in submissions is the need for operational, policy and decision making frameworks for ensuring that activities that are contrary to the national interest are not licensed or permitted, while continuing to deliver a r esponsive regulatory system that supports space industry development. ANALYSIS . The national interest provisions in the Act were intended to be a final safeguard, to allow the government to prevent or impose conditions on space related activities that woul d otherwise be approved. National interest is not defined in the Act and ill defined generally, but in this context
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act would include New Zealands values as well as interests ranging from our international reputation to defence and security. . Notably in th is Act , economic benefits (as well as other benefits) can explicitly be taken into account in assessing the national interest. This is consistent with the first purpose in the Act, to facilitate the development of a space industry as well as provide for it s safe and secure operation. . Outer space and increasingly high altitude, has significant strategic value for state and non state actors, and can be used for both offensive and defensive purposes. Some of these purposes are consistent with New Zealands val ues and interests and others are contrary to them. . As one of the few launching states, New Zealand also has the opportunity to promote and protect our interests through permitting activities that, for example, contribute to our defence and security, as w ell as influencing global norms and rules. . Acting in accordance with New Zealands values and interests requires a good understanding of what these are in a space context, and with sufficient specificity that they are able to be operationalised within the framework of the Act. No submitter is suggesting changes are required to the Act or regulations, and the Review Team agrees with this. Hence, the articulation of New Zealands values and interests, and the right level of specificity, will need to be provid ed in policies and decision making frameworks. RECOMMENDATION S MORE SPECIFIC NATIONAL INTEREST CRITERIA SHOULD BE DEVELOPED . The Review Team is required to consider the operation and effectiveness of the Act, and how it might be improved operationally. T he Team is of the view that the effectiveness of the national interest provisions of the Act require clear criteria against which to assess whether a national interest assessment should be undertaken, and what should be taken into account in the assessment . . The Review Team recommends that consideration be given to developing more specific national interest criteria. These may need to be reflected in a revision of, and agreement by Cabinet to, the Approach to payload assessments under the Outer Space and H ighaltitude Activities Act, which was agreed by Cabinet in , in relation to both the Principles that guide decision making and Activities that are not in the national interest. REFLECT SPACE INDUSTRY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES THROUGH ESTABLISHING POLICY SETTINGS IN ADVANCE OF APPLICATIONS AND CONSIDER ESTABLISH ING TIME LIMITS . Space industry development (in the Purpose to the Act) and economic benefits (in the factors that the Minister may take into account in assessing the national i nterest) are key features of the regulatory regime. The effectiveness of the Act depends on these outcomes being achieved. . Licence and permit applicants value maximum regulatory certainty, minimum compliance costs and timely decisions. Not addressing the se will inevitably make New Zealand a less attractive place to undertake space activities. . Clearer criteria against which to assess whether a national interest assessment should be undertaken, and what should be taken into account in the assessment, s hould provide greater certainty, speed up the analysis, and allow decisions to be taken more quickly. Asking applicants to provide more information will increase compliance costs but should also reduce the time required to undertake due diligence of an app lication. . However, while the Review Team accepts some applications have a level of novelty that New Zealands national interest stance will be determined through the assessment process, generally
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act policy should be established in advance as this contributes to certainty and timely decision making. . Hence, the Review Team is of the view that continuing an upfront investment in establishing and keeping up topolicy on matters of national interest significance is important, noting that the policy will in most cases cover space industry and economic benefits as well as risks. There is a policy on remote sensing, but there are plans to update this, and work is underway on policies for mega constellations and space resources. . The Review Team also consider s that establishing time limits for decision making on payload applications could be considered. UPDATE THE NATIONAL INTEREST PROCESS . Changes to criteria will inevitably require MBIEs National Interest Process to be . Matters that should be take n into account include the level of detail provided in the advice to the Minister on complex or sensitive payload applications, sharing of information between agencies in the course of assessing whether a national interest assessment should be undertaken a nd when it is being undertaken, and refresh ing the types of information applicants are being asked to provide.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act PART FOUR: INTRODUCTION TO OTHER ISSUES . The SPRS team, having had substantive experience in working with the Act and the associated regulations since their enactment, are well placed to understand how the regulatory regime operates in practice. With the benefit of this experience, they have identif ied a range of smaller technical matters where opportunities may exist to improve the Act or regulations. While many of the matters considered in this section were raised by MBIE, relevant feedback from other submitters was also received and has been integ rated into the appropriate sections accordingly. . These issues, as set out in Annex One, fall into four broad categories: Improving clarity and addressing gaps: The Review has identified opportunities to refine the Act to provide clarity and address gaps or ambiguities within the regime. Improvements to the operation and effectiveness of the Act The Review has identifie d opportunities to improve the efficiency of the Act so it can better support its purpose. Enabling future responsiveness The Review has identified opportunities to further future proof the Act, for example to accommodate technological developments. Other This section covers the remaining lower level considerations which do not fit within the categor ies above, but that are within the remit of the Review.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act ) National Interest assessment . . . Status Quo . . . . . Issue . . . . . Analysis . . . . . Recommendations . . . . . PART FOUR: I NTRODUCTION TO OTHER ISSUES . . . ANNEX ONE: TABLE OF OTHER ISSUES . . . ANNEX TWO: RECORD OF OUT OFSCOPE SUBMISSIONS . . ANNEX THREE: TERMS OF REFERENCE . . .
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act ANNEX ONE: TABLE OF OTHER ISSUES CATEGORY A: IMPROVING CLARITY AND ADDRESSING GAPS
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act Creating a statutory power (in the Act) to re ject an application under circumstances when MBIE cannot accept an application.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act business opportunities , but while still providing a formal mechanism to disc ourage, and make explicit the unacceptability of, non compliant behaviour. The Act does not explicitly allow the Chief Executive to appoint enforcement officers with a subset of the powers the Act provides. Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) Other New Zealand acts ( eg Hazardous Substances and New Organisms Act ) that allow for enforcement officers expressly state that enforcement officers can be granted one or any of the powers in the Act and that the powers must be outlined in their warrant. It is desirable to take the opportunity to make it clearer on the face of the legislation that the Chief Executive can extend a limited subset of the powers to enforcement officers. The Review concludes it would be useful to refine the Act to provide greater clarity, so that it clearly and unambiguously empowers the Chief Executive to limit the powers granted to enforcement officers to only those that are commensurate wi th, and appropriate to, the particular circumstances. For instance, where an enforcement officer is primarily engaged to promote compliance with the Act, it is generally preferable that they do not have the power to use force to enforce debris protection a reas, so it is desirable that the Act clearly provides for the limitation or restriction of powers, at the Chief Executives discretion only be extended to suitably trained and qualified Government officials. To this end, the Review recommends that: The re quirement that the Chief Executive must issue a written warrant to appointed enforcement officers (under section () of the Act) is retained; and that: This clause of the Act is extended to expressly provide that, when issuing the warrant, the Chief Exec utive may choose to limit the functions andor powers afforded to the enforcement officer, by specifying these on the warrant. The Act does not provide for the creation of single purpose enforcement officer with powers in relation to debris protection areas. Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE)
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act enforcement officer in debris protection areas. powers of an enforcement officer under this Act section ((a) to (f), and sections () and apply. The Crown Minerals Act provides the ability for MBIE to grant non interference zone permits, which provides for specific offences against the Act. No such provision currently exists in the Act, but it may be beneficial to include.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act timely information in the context of rapidly evolving and fast moving space launch schedules.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act changes in the sector. Setting the conditions via regulations instead would enable greater responsiveness and help to ensure the system is better positioned to adapt as the sector continues to evolve. The term enforcement officer can have negative connotations which InspectorCompliance Officer can mitigate. Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) The case for proposing the change in terminology in the regime from enforcement officers to either inspectors or compliance officers is based on the following key factors: It would align the terminology used in this regime with that used with the FAA and other New Zealand regulators. It may also reduce any perceived issues with the term enforcement officer. The Review recommends that the terminology be discussed with PCO. Where the term payload is used in section ()(b) of the Definition Regulations, it is not currently preceded by high altitude. Dawn Aerospace Section of the Definitions Regulations prescribes the parameters or conditions for when a balloon is not classified as a high altitude vehicle for the purpose of the Act. Section ()(b) reads the purpose of the payload is solely to measure all or any of Dawn Aerospace, however, has expressed the view that this should be high altitude payload rather than just payload. The reasoning behind this suggest ion was not offered in the submission. This is a minor drafting issue that should be discussed with PCO when the regulations are revised. The Act defines the term high altitude vehicle as follows: high altitude vehicle, subject to any regulations made under section () (), means an aircraft or any other vehicle that travels, is intended to travel, or is capable of travelling to high altitude Dawn Aerospace Dawn Aerospace submits the definition should be refined so that it only req uires a high altitude licence only if a vehicle is intended to go into high altitude. The Space Policy and Regulatory team question whether the capability aspect of the definition is workable in the context of vehicles which are being progressively devel oped to reach high altitude. For example, at what point i n Dawn Aerospaces testing and upgrade process are its vehicles capable of reaching high altitude At the time the legislation was developed, it was a deliberate decision to include vehicles that are capable of going into high altitude in the regime. The concerns about safety and consistency with the national interest arise are the same whether a vehicl e is intended to go into high altitude or is merely capable of it. We do not consider there are workability issues where vehicles are being progressively developed and tested. It will be a question of fact at any given point in time whether or not the vehi cle is capable of going into high altitude. However, the issue should be monitored and if we are wrong and there are difficulties applying it, officials should work with PCO to refine it when the legislation is amended. The question of whether the current physical inspection systems in place are sufficient to pre detect risks that may lead to an incident was raised via the submissions process. NZSIS and GCSB The NZSIS and GCSB suggested that it may be worth asking whether the physical inspection systems in place are sufficient to pre detect risks that may lead to an incident. For example, no enforcement officers have been appointed yet under section , and they are not aware of anyone else performing that in spection function (though the Protective Security Requirements ( PSR) team do some in relation to security), so it remains unclear how much would be caught under current processes unless an incident were to actually occur. In other words, absence of an inc ident is not necessarily evidence of absence of risk. The Review team notes that Space Policy and Regulatory systems team has a compliance strategy that employs several tools to manage compliance and that is specifically tailored to the nature of the indus try and risks it poses. Mechanisms for ensuring compliance include regular reviews of Rocket Labs protective security plans and regular engagement with Rocket Lab. In a regulatory system where there is only one regulated party there is less of a role for inspection than in systems where the regulator has to regulate a very large number of regulated parties. Use of advisory circulars to support compliance Dawn Aerospace Dawn Aerospace invites consideration of the potential to use advisory circulars (ACs) (and potentially other instruments) as part of the regime. In response to this suggestion, the Review team discussed this with the CAA, as they use ACs in their regime. CAA indicated that they find ACs to be very helpful, noting that they offer excellent f lexibility (a lot more so than regulations) and are effective in supporting compliance with rules. They also allow people to have other solutions that are not in the AC, but that meet the rules. In the context of aviation, those in the industry tend to be familiar with this type of instrument too. The Review can see the merit in using advisory circulars because they are familiar to participants in the civil aviation system. Advisory circulars are used to provide guidance on means of compliance with the performance based requirements of the regulations. While Advisory Circulars are intended to su pport compliance with statutory provisions, they do not have statutory status themselves, and no changes to the Act or regulations are required to enable or support the use of ACs.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act DEFINITION OF TECHNICAL DATA Technical data, as currently defined by the Act, means information in any form (including oral information, blueprints etc) that is required for the design, engineering, development, production, processing, manufacturing, use, operation, overhaul, repair, etc. of launch vehicles, payloads, high altitude vehicles, high altitude payloads or related equipment, but does not include publicly available information. NB: This is a summarised version of the definition Rocket Lab Rocket Lab is of the view that the t erm technical data as currently defined is too broad, and that it extends to the inclusion of information which they consider to be benign and which should not be restricted, nor require the controls to applied by the Act. In response to this submission , the Review considered whether there is a case for refinements to be made in light of this comment, starting with an assessment of all sections of the Act where it features and the impact that it has in practice.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act Under the space treaties, launching states are liable for loss and damage caused by space activities. The Act gives the Minister power to impose indemnity and insurance conditions on licensees and permit holders. However, to , in the case of payload permits, insurance requirements have not been imposed. Liability has been managed by avoiding collision risks through appropriate orbital debris mitigation plans .
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act ANNEX TWO: RECORD OF OUT OFSCOPE SUBMISSIONS
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act frequencies), Rocket Lab indicated that they were receptive to commenting on appropriate metrics by which the direct and indirect costs of administration which may be recovered so as not to conflict with the goal of further developing the in dustry. By way of comparison, the FAA Office of Commercial Space Transportation (FAA AST) does not accept payment or fees for licensing or permitting activities. Licensing and permitting fees in New Zealand would discourage payload operators from using providers operating in New Zealand, or industry or academia developing payloads and the associated economic activity, in an already highly mobile and international market. The question of whether to impose fees, levies and or charges is a policy question, for the Minister to consider. As no statutory amendments are required, and this issue is a policy matter, the Review makes no recommendations in respect to this theme.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act PART ONE: INTRODUCTION . RATIONALE FOR REGULATING SPACE ACTIVITIES .. ESTABLISHING THE CASE FOR INTERVENTION . In December , Cabinet approved the high level design of a regulatory regime to enable commercial space launches and the operation of payloads (eg satellites) from New Zealand (CAB Min refers). . At that time, New Zealand did not have a regulatory regime for space launches, and there was limited scope to prevent anyone from launching space objects. The need to develop legislation , what would ultimately become the Outer Space and High altitude Activities Act (OSHAA) , was precipitated by Rocket Labs intention to launch from New Zealand from . . Becoming a launch state triggered new obligations under international treaties which New Zealand was already party to and legislative changes w ere required to give practical effect to treaty provisions that had not previously applied (ie when not a launch state). Legislative change was also needed to implement the Technology Safeguard Agreement (TSA) with the US Government, which was being negotiated at the time. . The design of the regulatory regime considered the need to manage risk and meet New Zealands international obligations , but also the potential economic benefits of having a space industry. New Zealand adopted a permissive regime that provides what is necessary to meet international obligations and manage risks, while not imposing unnecessary regul atory costs which could deter the growth and development of the space industry. . The establishment of a commercial space industry in New Zealand presented significant economic and strategic opportunities, including: Estimated economic benefits to New Zealan d of m to .bn over a year period, including employment opportunities both directly within the space industry as well as in associated supporting industries . Building capability and expertise in space activities and applying associated advance d technologies (eg space propulsion and carbon composites) to a range of downstream applications . Potential intangible or unquantifiable benefits from the reputational impacts of being a first mover in the development of low cost, high frequency space laun ches. .. EXTENDING THE SCOPE TO HIGH ALTITUDE VEHICLES . Rocket Labs proposal to launch rockets to space from New Zealand was the catalyst for developing the regime and the original scope of the work reflected this, in that it was limited to outer space activities. In the course of developing the regime a case was identified to include high altitude activities within its scope, and Cabinet agreed to its inclusion . . The concept of regulating high altitude vehicles (HAVs) was relatively novel at the time. W hile other countries are now regulating HAVs, New Zealand was at the forefront.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act ANNEX THREE: TERMS OF REFERENCE Review of the Outer Space and High altitude Activities Act Terms of Reference
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act . The rationale for including HAVs within the scope of the regulatory regime was based on the following key factors: To future proof the legislation in anticipation of technol ogical advances . To promote or enable consistent regulatory treatment across different technologies that perform similar functions . To provide certainty for commercial operators about the rules that apply to their activities in New Zealand, recognising th at a lack of certainty around this may have an inhibitory effect on investment in research and development activities, and new business ventures. To ensure New Zealand is well placed to have appropriate oversight and control of high altitude activities th at originate from within its territory. . KEY FEATURES OF REGULATORY REGIME .. SYSTEM OBJECTIVES . New Zealands regulatory regime for outer space and high altitude activities is designed to fulfil the core system objectives. The objectives, which form the basis of the Acts purpose, are to: Facilitate the development of a space industry and provide for its safe and secure operation . Implement certain international obligations relating to space activities and space technology . Manage any potential or actual liability that may arise from the space industry . Preserve New Zealands national security and national interests. .. KEY ELEMENTS OF THE REGIME . The OSHAA provides a flexible regulatory regime for space and high altitude activities, with licensing and permitting functions primarily being achieved throu gh its associated regulations, policies and operational procedures (including for launch vehicles, facilities, payloads, and high altitude vehicles). . An overview of the core elements of the regime is set out below. LICEN SING AND PERMITTING . Internationally , standard practice for regulating commercial space activities is a licensing regime that provides the necessary controls over participation in space launches, including powers to veto launches andor payloads. Commonly, this takes the form of an overarchi ng licence for a certain type of activity or context (eg space launches) with the option to impose specific requirements via licence conditions. . New Zealand adopted a permissive licensing and permitting regime that affords the decision maker with discreti on around imposing licence conditions (as opposed to providing detailed conditions in primary legislation). . New Zealands regime provides for six categories of permits and licences, as follows: Launch licence (New Zealand based ) Overseas l aunch licence ( for New Zealand nationals overseas ) Payload permit (New Zealand based) Overseas p ayload permit ( for New Zealand nationals overseas ) Facility licence
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act High altitude licence . . The Outer Space Treaty requires states parties to regulate national activities in ou ter space. This has generally been interpreted as a requirement to licen se activities that take place within a states territory and activities that are carried out by its nationals overseas. Accordingly, the launch licen sing and payload permitting provisi ons in the Act have extraterritorial application. RECOGNITION OF INTERNATIONAL AUTHORISATIONS . Section of the Act prescribes that the Minister may take into account authorisations granted in countries other than New Zealand. Specifically, section () prescribes the Minister may treat a licence, permit, or other authorisation that concerns a matter relevant to the Ministers decision and that was granted, or is lik ely to be granted, to an applicant or other person in a country other than New Zealand as satisfying some or all of the criteria for granting a launch licence under section , a payload permit under section , an overseas launch licence under section , an overseas payload permit under section , or a facility licence under section . . The recognition of international authorisations, where appropriate, creates significant benefits for the regulator and regulated parties alike, by limiting duplication of effort and unnecessary costs and allowing New Zealand to leverage the experience of regulatory agencies in other jurisdictions. . This feature of the Act is particularly important in the context of launch licen sing because of the comprehensive requirements that apply to launch licen sing, at least in the US. As Rocket Lab noted in its submission, the ability for the Minister to recognise its US Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA) licence has supported rapid development of New Zea land based endeavours, which in turn has encouraged and supported the local space and associated technology industry and economy. The Minister has also recognised certain overseas licences and permits as meeting New Zealands orbital debris mitigation requirements. However, as the assessment of orbital debris mitigation plans is a much more straightforward process than the assessment of launch licence applications , this is of less significance. REGULATION MAKING POWERS . The regime provides a broad range of regulation making powers . These were intended as a means of future proofing the regime because technologies relating to space and high altitude activities are rapidly evolving. The range of regulation making powers in the Act supports flexibility by providing options for classifying, and therefore managing, new technologies. That is not to say regulations must be made but they are available if necessary. . The regulation making powers do not, in and of themselves, create any new costs or compliance burden s for the regulated parties, but having them available where required, supports the responsiveness and flexibility of the system s permissive approach. . Using regulation making powers as a tool to future pr oof the regime was , and still is, considered to be the optimal approach to managing the challenges of regulating an industry undergoing fast paced technological change and provides flexibility for the regulatory settings to evolve as new information becomes available and industry practice changes. . Two o f the regulation making powers were invoked alongside the introduction of the Act in late , namely: Outer Space and High altitude Activities (Definition of High altitude Vehicle) Regulations (the Definition Regulations): To provide clarification regarding vehicles that are not classified as high altitude vehicles (HAV s) for the purpose of the Act and therefore will not require a licence.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act Outer Space and High altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations (the Licences and Permits R egulations): To provide the requirements for licences and permit s, particularly in relation to the information which applicants must provide . . In addition to the two which have already been invoked, the regime provides a broad range of other regulation making powers, designed to empower the regulator with the flexibility needed to keep pace as the risk profile of the sector evolves and technology changes. The regulation making provisions include, for example, powers to define (in regulation) c ertain terms (eg launch vehicle, payload, space objects); and to impose levies, fees and charges. . While several regulation making powers are currently unused, retaining them in the Act provides flexibility to regulate future issues. The Ministry of Busine ss, Innovation and Employments (MBIE) Space Policy and Regulatory Systems ( SPRS ) team are of the view , and we agree, that broad regulation making powers are necessary, and none of the powers are being used in ways that are not justified. OPERATIONAL POLI CIES AND GUIDANCE MATERIAL . To support the industry to meet the statutory criteria, MBIEs SPRS team publishes guidance material for a range of topics. . In most cases, the guidance takes the form of outlining the operational policy that is applie d by MBIE in the course of considering applications. Guidance of this nature is provided on the following topics : Orbital debris mitigation Liability, insurance and indemnities Payloads of a size less than U Technical capability . . The safety case guidance is the exception. Instead of setting out the operational policy for how the application is assessed by MBIE, the safety case guidance is focused on assisting applicants in meeting the current safety case requirements. .. KEY FACTS AND FIGURES ON IMPLEMENTATI ON APPLICATIONS FOR LICENCES AND PERMITS . MBIE has administered the licensing and permitting regime established by the Act since its inception. . The table below (Table ) provides data on licensing and permitting activity under the Act from the time it came into force (on December ) until April .
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION EMPLOYMENT Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act Table : Licen sing and permitting activity under the Act ( December April )
MIQ capacity and allocations
MITIGATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT Robert Howell This submitter expressed concern that the Act does not feature any provisions about caring for, or avoiding any damage to the environment, and made reference to climate change matters.
MPs pay was frozen in , after the Government determined that the proposed salary increase to be unjustifiably high. The freeze allowed time for us to do work to ensure the settings for determining MPs pay are appropriate.
Mahi Tahi Better Together
Maintaining the pace for the great rides
Maintains overall oversight of the status of the Prosecution policy
Maintains overall oversight of this policy
Major Events Fund or Creative and Cultural Events Incubator
Major commercial sporting events such as cricket and rugby fixtures
Major in sport and exercise
Make a complaint about the appointment process
Make a request for official information
Make an online request to the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment under the Official Information Act (OIA).
Make changes to work visas to ensure settings are better focussed on facilitating the right mix of skilled migrants and that New Zealanders are first in line for jobs. (MBIE)
Make sure you save your password and form link exactly as displayed.
Making a complaint to the Privacy Commissioner
Making a request for personal information
Making employees aware of this policy and the procedure and guidelines that support compliance with it
Making it easier to build granny flats ()
Making it easier to do business with Government, Business Connect is a new digital service platform that will allow businesses to apply for things like licences and permits from different government agencies in one place.
Making sure people know their rights and responsibilities.
Making the most of the benefits of tourism
Making visa processing more efficient
Mana Whanonga Pirihimana Motuhake
Managed Isolation and Quarantine
Managed isolation and quarantine (MIQ) charges allow the Government to recover some of the costs for MIQ. The aim of the charges is to share the costs in a way that fairly reflects the benefits to both the New Zealand public of having a robust system, and those who leave and enter the country.
Managed isolation and quarantine data
Managed isolation was an essential part of our border measures to protect New Zealand from COVID. All MIQ facilities are now closed.
Manager Legal Services (Litigation)
Manager, Employment Standards Policy
Managers and People Leaders
Managers are required to report any breaches of the policy, any adverse comments by courts, and any costs awarded against MBIE in MBIE prosecutions to the Chief Legal Officer.
Managing Director, iNZight Analytics; Deputy Director, Healthier Lives National Science Challenge; Associate Professor (Honorary) of Statistics, University of Auckland
Managing conflicts of interest: A guide for the public sector
Managing earthquakeprone buildings
Managing environmental and social issues
Managing health and safety
Manaia has worked for years as a primary school teacher. She loved the job, but chronic back pain due to osteoarthritis means she can no longer bend down to help her young students with their studies.
Manapouri is a small town in Fiordland that is the gateway for journeys to Doubtful Sound, along with a variety of renowned walking tracks. Prior to COVID, peak visitor demand to the area caused traffic hazards and shoreline deterioration, including significant wear and tear on the local boat ramp, car park and toilet facilities. This detracted from the visitor experience and undermined local support for tourism in the area. The Tourism Infrastructure Fund contributed . million to upgrade this infrastructure
ManawatuWhanganui Overview
Mandate membership in an industry dispute resolution scheme for retail telecommunications providers with annual telecommunications revenue over million
Mandatory climaterelated disclosures
Mandatory requirements in the Act
Manufacturing sector report
Manufacturing sector report key facts and findings
Many aspects of DM could already be captured in existing plans. Some destinations may want to take a light touch approach, coordinating components of existing plans and identifying gaps and new areas to focus on. Other destinations may choose to embark on a full DM planning process.
Many businesses are already working to identify and address risks of modern slavery in their domestic and international supply chains. Government guidance is available to support businesses to embed ethical and sustainable work practices, and help develop social practice due diligence systems. Links to government resources and a selection of international guidance is available below.
Many can be studiedearned under apprenticeships:
Many countries have developed policy and regulatory measures to support the shift towards a more circular economy. These aim to encourage circular practices, resource efficiency and avoid the creation of waste. Recent measures, mostly over the past years, include:
Many employers already use accrual based systems to provide earlier access to AL . The agreed approach reinforces the need for the complex and confusing workarounds the se employers have need ed to build into their systems to ensure compliance. Replace the first part of the decision with a weeks based AL accrual system that would treat all weeks of AL an employee has earned as a single, continuous ly accruing, pot of entitlement. This pr oposal would simplify the provision of AL entitlement and better support common practice . It would also resolve issues with the rules for paying employees for outstanding AL when employment ends and simplify the provisions related to annual closedown perio ds and record keeping. Provide a clear set of parameters to support the operation of a weeks based accrual system that: o specify AL entitlement accrues at a rate of not less than . weeks per week of employment (regardless of the number of hours actually worked in a week) ; o provide clarity about the weeks of employment that AL accrues during . These would align with the weeks that are included in months continuous employment under the Act; o specify a rule f or reducing the divisor for the average weekly earnings (AWE) calculation to account for periods of unpaid leave which align s with the status quo ; o provide clear formula s for determining the amount of AL that would accrue during a part week of unpaid leav e and the AWE divisor reduction for a part week of unpaid leave .
Many factors affect the lives of New Zealanders, including global forces such as climate change, COVID, and economic changes as well as national factors such as policy and regulatory change.
Many of the deliverables for this subpillar relate to ongoing activities by agencies to support victims to participate in the criminal justice process, including through the provision of appropriate support.
Many of the following can be studiedearned under apprenticeships:
Many participants indicated that the general framework of the draft Bill is not a significant improvement on the current Holidays Act and that more fundamental changes to the leave system would better address the longstanding issues with the Holidays Act. Key reasons given included complexity, compliance costs and workability for those with variable work arrangements.
Many professions generally require additional learning, testing and certification to be completed after achieving academic qualifications. This is to ensure consistent standards are being met across the sector. Transitioning the New Zealand interpreter workforce into the NAATI Certification System will support the professionalisation of the interpreting sector in New Zealand.
Many space careers require a degree or some sort of apprenticeship to get you started. Below are some degreeapprenticeship options, but check out the universities for their full range of offerings.
Many types of working arrangements exist, including permanent, fixedterm and casual employees, as well as contractors and selfemployed people. What do you think about our proposals to cover a broad range of working arrangements
Map of the Great Rides with Estimated Revenue for PDF MB
Mapping emissions and waste data in the manufacturing sector
Marae Digital Connectivity Programme
March update to telephone and video interpreting services
Marine bioactives from New Zealand: Supporting investment in the emerging marine bioactives platform
Marine collagen we have had a lot of new firms come into this space and we are now producing a lot of our own marine collagen.
Maritime people smuggling and trafficking research product scheduled for release.
Market forecast summaries
Market study into residential building supplies
Market study into retail fuel
Marketing and promotion (Awareness)
Massey University submitted its proposal to host the centre with support from research providers AgResearch, Cawthron Institute, ESR, Plant and Food Research, the University of Auckland and the University of Otago.
Master of Aerospace Engineering
Master of Engineering Studies
Master of Laws (International Law and Politics)
Master of Space Studies (this is a new programme at University of Canterbury, starting in )
Matariki projects star in latest round of Tourism Infrastructure Fund
Material flow and Sankey diagram findings
Matt Glenn, CEO, Kiwifruit Breeding Centre
Maximise contribution from both domestic and international visitors while they are here, ensuring that they spend more, and on higherquality experiences.
Maximum , cofunding
Mayor Hon Stephanie (Steve) Chadwick, Rotorua District (coChair)
Measures for transition to an expanded and highly renewable electricity system
Measures of changes in job vacancies advertised by businesses on internet job boards
Measures of success and compliance management
Measures of the expenditure, characteristics and behaviours of international visitors to New Zealand
Mediation Restorative Justice
Mediation to help resolve employment issues
Mediation to help resolve issues with rented housing
Mediation to support agreements between parents for the care of their children
Mediation within the Canterbury Earthquakes Insurance Tribunal
Medical Council of New Zealand
Medical and Health Sciences has been divided into two more focused Divisions in the new FoR classification, and the Technology Division has been removed, in line with advice from researchers and users of the classification.
Medium and large organisations would be required to disclose the steps they are taking
Medium to longterm employment forecasts
Medium to longterm employment outlook: Looking ahead to
Medium to longterm employment outlook: Looking ahead to
Meeting Minutes of the Startup Advisors Council on December
Meeting Minutes of the Startup Advisors Council on
Meeting Minutes of the Startup Advisors Council on
Meeting Minutes of the Startup Advisors Council on
Meeting Minutes of the Startup Advisors Council on
Meeting in conjunction with the IEF, the International Energy Business Forum was set up:
Melanie Porter is the Deputy Secretary for Strategy and Assurance.
Melanie Porter, Deputy Secretary, Strategy and Assurance
Melanie Porter, Deputy Secretary, Strategy and Peformance
Members of the Advisory Group
Members of the Institutes Board of Governors are appointed by the GovernorGeneral of New Zealand. The Minister of Tourism recommends Board members to the GovernorGeneral.
Membership of the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space COPUOS PDF .MB
Memorandum of Agreement on Labour Cooperation between the Government of New Zealand and the Government of the Republic of the Philippines ()
Memorandum of Cooperation between Immigration New Zealand, Ministry of Business Innovation and Employment of New Zealand and The Immigration Services Agency of Japan Regarding Information Sharing on Immigration Matters
Memorandum of Cooperation between the Government of New Zealand and the State of Colorado concerning cooperation on Science, Innovation and Technology PDF KB
Memorandum of Cooperation between the Government of New Zealand and the State of Colorado concerning.
Memorandum of Cooperation with the Japan Immigration Services
Memorandum of Understanding Maori Spectrum Agreement PDF KB
Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of New Zealand and the Government of the Republic of Indonesia on Labour Cooperation ()
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page requirements of this confidentiality clause.
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page . Definitions in this Memorandum of Understanding ) In this MOU, the following terms are defined as follows: Term Definition Radio spectrum , or spectrum The range of electromagnetic frequencies lower than gigahertz. Telecommunication See section of the Telecommunication Act Broadcasting See section of the Broadcasting Act Ka Hao Fund the Mori Digital Technology Development Fund created after the government allocated million in to support initiatives that will create high value jobs and opportunities to advance Mori in digital technologies . Te Puni Kkiri and the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment have joint responsibility f or the Ka Hao Fund, and Te Puni Kkiri is the lead agency. Tahua Tautoko The accelerated industry investment initiative referred to in clause of this MOU. Management Rights Spectrum property rights described in Parts and of the Radio communications Act Mori Spectrum Entity (MSE) means the entity that will be created to hold the assets and fulfil the functions as described in this MOU Interim Mori Spectrum Commission (IMSC) means the existing entity created by the MSWG in to fulfil certain functions as directed by MSWG , prior to the establishment of the MSE . Allocation of any new spectrum Refers to allocation of frequency ranges under a management right regime for the first time Renewal of existing spectrum Refers to reallocation of frequency ranges that have previously been allocated under a management right regime. Radio licence A license granted or deemed to have been granted under Part of the Radiocommunications Act Spectrum licence means a licence created under Part o f the Radiocommunications Act Commercial Spectrum Spectrum that has been identified for allocation to anyone other than the Crown, in the form of Management Rights. New Zealand Radio Sector Group An industry group, convened by MBIE, that is consulted before MBIE determines New Zealands position in international negotiations on spectrum matters.
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page . Signatories
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page Appendix A: Historical background of r adio s pectrum In , the first claims by Mori to radio spectrum arose when Mori sought to secure the third national television channel warrant. This bid, without financial backing, failed , and New Zealands last VHF television network passed into private hands. In , the Waitangi Tribunal in the Te Reo Mori claim (W ai ) found that broadcasting was one way for the Crown to fulfill its obligations under the Treaty to protect and promote te reo Mori as a taong a. Those findings were accepted by the Crown. In , Mori language radio stations began broadcasting. In , a Radiocommunications Bill was introduced that had no specific spectrum provisions to address Mori broadcasting. Te Reo Mori claimants remai ned concerned about the Crowns ability to promote Mori language through broadcasting and about limited Mori access to broadcasting. However, the first spectrum auction saw a block of frequencies retained to meet future requirements for non commercial br oadcasting and the promotion of Mori language and culture. In a second spectrum auction was called for AM and FM radio broadcasting licences. This led to a request for an urgent hearing by the Waitangi Tribunal of two claims before it. The claimants maintained that the number of frequencies the Government proposed to reserve for promotion of Mori language and culture through broadcasting were inadequate. The Tribunal recommended postponement of the auction, but this was refused by the Government. This eventually went to the Court of Appeal where most of the Court found that the Minister could not reasonably have decided to proceed with the auction without first awaiting the report of the Waitangi Tribunal. When the auction eventually proceeded, further FM frequencies were reserved nationwide for promotion of Mori language and culture. In the s, the Government proceeded with plans to sell state owned broadcasting assets. Mori took the Crown to court to halt these sales. Although their attempts fa iled, they continued to appeal through the courts and eventually went to the Privy Council in England. The Privy Council recognised that the language was in a vulnerable state and that the Crown would need to take especially vigorous action for its protection. Because of this the Crown amended the Broadcasting Act in and established Te Mngai Pho, the Mori language and culture broadcasting funding agency. From , blocks of G spectrum in the GHz band were proposed for auction. Three years o f unsuccessful negotiations led the late Rangiaho Everton, on behalf of all Mori, to make a claim (Wai ) to the Waitangi Tribunal which sought allocations in line with previous Government decisions. The Waitangi Tribunal found in favour of the G spect rum claim, but the Government declined to accept its recommendations, and proceeded with auctions. Following the G auction, the Government established Te Huarahi Tika Trust in , and allocated it million to promote Mori participation in ICT. Te Hu arahi Tika Trust had by succeeded in securing a shareholding in what is now degrees. This supported the arrival of a third telco in Aotearoa and increased competition in the market. In , Mori again contested the sale of G spectrum, and again their claims were rejected by the Government. Following the G auction in , another fund of million was allocated to support initiatives that create high value jobs and opportunities to advance Mori in digital technologies . This fund, calle d the Ka Hao Fund, is administered by Te Puni Kkiri. In Mori agreed to early allocation of G spectrum in good faith and to maintain positive Mori Crown relationships through to an enduring agreement on spectrum issues and beyond. As the planned long term auction of G spectrum looms, Mori claims to spectrum remain unresolved. Mori maintain their views: that a taonga is anything highly valued by iwi; taonga , the word used in Article Two of the Treaty of Waitangi, applies to tangible or intangibl e things; and the spectrum is a
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page taonga of high value, and is of high value to iwi. Mori and the Crown have never reached agreement on this point. Appendix B: Process for f uture spectrum transfers and renewals Spectrum identified in the MOU will be transferred to the MSE through a Management Right Agreement, at no cost. Ownership of a Management Right gives the ability to grant spectrum licences within a particular frequency range . The Crown sometimes sells Management Rights to third parties. Those r ights are particularly useful to companies that wish to operate national networks but may also be used to create a set of regional operations . In the future, if the Management Rights regime is replaced by an alternative, then the principles in this MOU wi ll apply. Overs and unders mechanism As per clause above , the Crown will allocate to the MSE, to be held for the benefit of all Mori, at no cost, of all future C ommercial Spectrum allocations. Spectrum availability and technical constraints mean that it will not always be practical to allocate exactly of any particular spectrum allocation. For example, some technologies operate in MHz increments. If, say, MHz is available then allo cating would result in wasted spectrum. That is x MHz but only MHz would be usable. In situations where the spectrum technical limitations make it impractical to split the spectrum into the agreed percentage, a percentage above or belo w the agreed percentage may be necessary. If this happens, the Crown and the Mori Spectrum Entity will discuss the situation before making allocation decisions. The Crown will decide an allocation amount under or over the agreed percentage of, considering the MSEs preference and the most efficient use of the band. Over time, the parties intend for all allocations under this M OU to average out at the agreed percentage . This long term average will be weighted to reflect the relative valuati ons of di fferent frequencies. That is, MHz in the UHF band is much more valuable than M Hz of millimetre wave spectrum. The Crown and MSE will engage in good faith to agree how to reflect different valuation and tracking of overs and unders. For avoidance of doubt, neither party will attempt to use the overs and unders mechanism to reduce or increase the total value of the spectrum being allocated to the Mori Spectrum Entity. Application to renewals and other Management Rights Returned or expired spec trum rights that are allocated through the management right regime will be treated as a new allocation and will be in scope of the agreed formula. Other spectrum related matters The position of the Management Right within the band will be determined by the Crown following discussion with the MSE. If the Crown is planning a sale of rights, the MSE may choose to have the allocated spectrum asset realised in the form of revenue, in which case, MBIE would sell any spectrum on behalf of the MSE as part of the wi der allocation process. MSE spectrum will not be subject to implementation requirements or spectrum caps that may be imposed in other spectrum within the same band. MSE spectrum will be subject to the same technical requirements as other occupants of the band. The MSE will have membership in the New Zealand Radio Sector Group . The MSE will be invited to participate in technical working groups and on matters of detail, noting conflicts of interest between
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page the governance and operational parts of the entity and subject to any confidentiality deeds to be signed. The MSE will be invited to participate in working groups that determine New Zealands position to international spectrum meetings and will have the option to have MSE representation in the New Zealand delegation.
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page Appendix C: Initial s pectrum allocation s to the Mori Spectrum Entity Management Rights to be transferred The following Management Rights will be made available for the use of the IMSC and ownership transferred to the Mori Spectrum Entity on its establishment. Band name Frequency range Commencement
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page Appendix D: Operational processes for working together on spectrum policy
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page Subject to clause above, t he parties agree the following information will not be shared by the Crown to the MSWGMSE , unless to the extent it is otherwise publicly available : Advice on issues that the Mori spectrum entity has not flagged interest in Advice that the Minister has requested in confidence Aide memoires (no new decisions) Speech notes Event briefings Spectrum valuations , prior to a commercial allocation process Commercial documents from other MNOsspectrum operators
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page CONTENTS
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page Signed in the presence of:
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page . The Parties The Parties to this Memorandum of Understanding are: Party A: The Mori Spectrum Working Group (MSWG) compris ing: Nga Kaiwhakapmau i Te Reo (WAI claimant) , represented by Piripi Walker and Andrew Robb New Zealand Mori Council (WAI claimant) represented by Peter Fraser Te Huarahi Tika Trust represented by Daphne Luke National Iwi Chairs Forum represented by Haami Piripi Mori telecommunications and technology industry representatives Antony Royal and Robyn Kamira Through Waitangi Tribunal claims hui and subsequent hui, the MSWG is mandate d to work with the Crown towards an enduring agreement for the allocation and managem ent of spectrum and resources for Mori . This MOU is signed by Piripi Walker, Haami Piripi, Peter Fraser, Daphne Luke, Robyn Kamira, and Antony Royal on behalf of the MSWG. Party B: The Crown The Crown is represented by Ministers acting under authority de legated by Cabinet. The Crown agencies operate within the mandate provided by legislation, Government policy as set by Cabinet, and the direction of their respective Ministers: Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment Minister for Mori Development Te Puni Kkiri Minister of Finance The Treasury The Crown manages spectrum on behalf of all New Zealanders. This role is enabled by the Radiocommunications Act and includes consideration of fairness, certainty, dispute resolution, future and current needs. The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) is responsible for the regulation, administration, and investigation of radio spectrum in Aotearoa New Zealand. This MOU is signed by Hon Dr David Clark; Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications, Hon Grant Robertson; Minister of Finance ; Hon Wil lie Jackson; Minister for Mori Development on behalf of the Crown.
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page a) spectrum is a taonga as per Ko te tuarua ( Article ) in Te Tiriti o Waitangi and as affirmed by the Waitangi Tribunal in on the W ai claim. b) spectrum is a means to achieve rangatiratanga and broad regional, economic, cultural , environmental and so cial outcomes that are enabled by greater Mori participation in, a nd benefit from digital technologies. c) Mori have already added significant and tangible value to the New Zealand economy as a result of participation in the telecommunications sector. ) The Crown does not accept the conclusions and recommendations of the W ai report, and in particular does not accept that radio spectrum is a taonga. ) Mori and the Crown have engaged in good faith to attempt to address Mori interests in spectrum. More recently: a) The Governments recent preparations for the . GHz band spectrum allocations sparked renewed Crown focus on Mori interests in spectrum, and i n May , Mori and Crown formed a joint working group to develop options for an enduring agreement to address Mori interests in spectrum. b) In December , an agreement was reached for an allocation of . GHz spectrum to Mori as part of a short term allocation of spectrum for G. Crown funding was also pledged for a Mori led programme of work to build capability and technical expertise in spectrum related activities, and to support broad engagement with Mori as a step towards an enduring agreement between Mori and the Crown. c) A total of . million funding was provided from Te Puni Kkiri (TPK) and MBIE baselines and the Ka Hao fund in , and a subsequent million from TPK was provided in . . million was committed for this work in Budget . ) The Crown and MSWG are now pursuing an outcomes based engagement. ) The MSWG and the Cr own are committed to reaching an enduring agreement on Mori interests in radio spectrum. ) Both parties are committed to growth and shared prosperity by supporting Mori to improve regional, economic, cultural , environmental and so cial outcomes . ) Mori and the Crown agree that the growth and extension of Mori led initiatives hold the key to a long lasting step change in Mori participation in the digital economy. ) The Parties believe that what is set out in this MOU will achieve the shared Mori Crown objecti ves set out below; while acknowledging there remain some areas where Mori Crown views differ.
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page The Mori Spectrum Working Group commit s to: ) working alongside IwiMori to create a permanent entity that leverages the radio spectrum to support Mori regional, economic, cultural , environmental and so cial wellbeing. ) fulfilling its role of managing the radio spectrum allocated to it on behalf of M ori. This role involves ensuring that: a) spectrum is used efficiently and fairly for a range of commercial, non commercial and public good purposes b) users of spectrum have certainty about their rights and obligations c) spectrum use is monitored so that legitima te usage rights and obligations are maintained and enforced d) disputes between different spectrum users are resolved fairly, and e) future spectrum needs are accommodated The Crown commits to: ) fulfilling its stewardship role of managing the radio spectrum on be half of all New Zealanders. This role involves ensuring that: a) spectrum is used efficiently and fairly for a range of commercial, non commercial and public good purposes b) users of spectrum have certainty about their rights and obligations c) spectrum use is mon itored so that legitimate usage rights and obligations are maintained and enforced d) disputes between different spectrum users are resolved fairly, and e) future spectrum needs are accommodated
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page . The new Mori Spectrum Entity ) The new Mori Spectrum Entity to be established, will seek to build its internal capability to ensure it effectively performs its roles with the view to serving Mori interests and opportunities in spectrum, is sustainable, and is immediately active in the telecommunication sector and industry. ) This will be done through connecti ng Government initiatives and programmes to the MSE and or by jointly developing initiatives. ) Joint a spirations for the MSE will include the following : a) be an influential and a significant participant in the teleco mmunications sector ; and b) enable Mori participation and development in the telecommunications sector by: i) helping to create a pipeline of skills and capability for Mori , ii) helping to provide opportunit ies for jobs, businesses, innovation and partnering in spectrum related activities.
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page ) We will operate a no surprises approach to the sha ring of information under this M OU, subject to any legal constraints.
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page . Tahua Tautoko (accelerated industry investment initiative) ) The p urpose of Tahua Tautoko is to a ccelerate Mori participation into the telecommunications and technology sector via the MS E to create a direct and dedicated gateway for Mori training, jobs, business and leadership pipelines . ) The criteria that the parties to this M OU will use to evaluate the business case for Tahua Tautoko are: a) Generates steady significant revenue; b) Gives access to assets, expertise, infrastructure and capital; c) Enables significant influence in the industry (credibility, commercially strong) enabling leverage to enter quality partnerships; d) Strategically aligned with government strategies e.g. economic, digital, telecommunications strategies ; e) Seeks to achieve the shared objectives of this M OU (refer clause ). ) The Crown has agreed to set aside funds (refer clause ) for this initiative, subject to the development of one or more proposals that (a) seek to achieve the purpose and any agreed criteria , and (b) are agreed by Ministers and MSWGMSE . ) The parties acknowledge there will be further discussions on the criteria and how this initiative will work in practice. MBIE commits to working with MSWGMSE on the development of the Tahua Tautoko criteria and proposal(s) . ) Reviews of progress under clause of this MOU will include a review of progress on the purpose and criteria for Tahua Tautoko as set out in this clause.
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page . Statutory and c ontractual obligations ) The parties acknowledge that MBIE is a Government department and that this MOU will not require MBIE to act in any way contrary to its obligations pursuant to Ministerial or Cabinet direction, or under its statutory responsibilities, or pursuant to any contractual obligations it has established with othe r parties. ) The MSWG acknowledge the Crowns obligation to act in the best interests of the public including Iwi, and Mori and other citizens by maximising the amount of spectrum available for the social and economic benefit of all. ) This means that MSWG wi ll not seek to limit Crown spectrum allocations or influence the price that the Crown puts on its spectrum allocations. ) Both parties acknowledge the requirements of the Commerce Act , and will not act in an anticompetitive manner.
Memorandum of arrangement relating to science and research cooperation between MBIE and the Chinese Academy of Sciences PDF KB
Memorandum of cooperation between MBIE and the National Natural Science Foundation of China PDF .MB
Memorandum of understanding
Metadata in Green OA repositories must include the project ID, list MBIE as a funding source, and contain a permanent DOI (or URL if no DOI is available) for the version. Metadata should also contain other relevant information as applicable and appropriate including, but not limited to: author(s)creator(s); title; publisher; of publication; volume, issue, and page numbers; ISBNISSNother standard number; licence associated with an item; and the ORCID identifier for the author.
Methane is a potent greenhouse gas that contributes significantly to the amount of warming that we are experiencing. New Zealand is participating in the MethaneSAT space mission as part of the global effort to combat climate change.
MethaneSAT is a stateoftheart satellite designed to detect global methane emissions with unprecedented accuracy. The MethaneSAT satellite is unique because it can measure over a large area and focus on specific targets.
Michael has built up his mechanic business over years. His employees are like family.
Microbes and their environments (BIOL)
Midpoint review of the phaseout of the Low Fixed Charge (LFC) Regulations
Migrant Employment Data is released quarterly. The data has a lag of approximately months (so for example the data released in September would be current to June ). We currently distribute this data through different channels:
Migrant Exploitation Protection Visa (MEPV) established on July , with applications accepted, approved and declined (withdrawn) as at Dec .
Migrant Survey report
Migrant Survey report PDF KB
Migrant Trends is the th in an annual report series examining trends in temporary and permanent migration to and from New Zealand.
Migrant Worker Protection bill introduced, to give effect to legislative changes proposed under the Temporary Migrant Worker Exploitation Review
Migrant Youth a statistical profile of recently arrived young migrants
Migrant Youth Information Project
Migrant Youth: A statistical profile of recently arrived young migrants
Migrant Youth: a statisical profile of recently arrived young migrants
Migrant and community experience of migration
Migrant exploitation protection visa
Migrant worker protection bill introduced, to give effect to legislative changes proposed under the Temporary Migrant Worker Exploitation Review
Migrants from Fiji () and Samoa () make up the majority of those approved.
Migrants from Fiji () made up the majority, followed by Tonga ().
Migrants from Fiji made up the majority of those approved ().
Migrants from Fiji made up the majority of those approved ().
Migrants were more likely to be working as Technicians and Trades Workers ().
Migrants who dont hold any visa to be in New Zealand are even more vulnerable. These migrants are less likely to be aware of their rights and entitlements than their New Zealand colleagues.
Migrants settlement experiences and community attitudes
Migrants settlement experiences and community attitudes toward migrants and immigration
Migration Trends and Outlook
Migration data explorer (MDE)
Migration research and evaluation
Migration trends data explorer
Migration trends of migrants from the Pacific over the last years using Immigration New Zealand data
Mike is the founder of a number of startups, including Sonar and Joyous. He is a author in marketing, employee experience, and the software industry, and a past winner of the Bayer Innovators Award. He is regarded as an expert in Softwareas a Service business models and technology marketing. He holds board and advisory board roles in various technology companies ranging from investorled early stage through to established public companies.
Mikhael Sayat on helping to create the next generation of spacebased computers
Miles Holden, Moeraki, Otago
Milestone reached for fixing the Holidays Act
Milford Opportunities Project
Milford Opportunities project
Minerals Strategy for New Zealand and Critical Minerals List launched
Minerals and petroleum consultations and reviews
Minerals and petroleum strategies for New Zealand
Minimum Wage Order PDF KB
Minimum Wage Order PDF KB
Minimum Wage Review PDF .MB
Minimum Wage Review PDF .MB
Minimum Wage Review PDF .MB
Minimum Wage Review : Setting the rates PDF KB
Minimum and maximum liable earnings
Minimum delivery frequency
Minimum number of delivery points in total
Minimum wage Cabinet paper
Minimum wage regulatory impact statement
Minimum wage Cabinet paper
Minimum wage regulatory impact statement
Minimum wage Cabinet paper
Minimum wage regulatory impact statement
Minimum wage Cabinet paper
Minimum wage regulatory impact statement
Minimum wage Cabinet paper
Minimum wage regulatory impact statement
Minimum wage Cabinet paper
Minimum wage review PDF .MB
Minimum wage review, December
Minimum wage review, December
Minimum wage review, November
Minister Responsible for the GCSB and NZSIS advised of national security risks:
Minister approval sought:
Minister for Building and Construction
Minister for Economic Growth
Minister for Infrastructure
Minister for Media and Communications
Minister for Regional Development
Minister for Small Business and Manufacturing
Minister for Social Development and Employment
Minister for Tourism and Hospitality
Minister for Trade and Investment
Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety
Minister for the Public Service
Minister for the South Island
Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs
Minister of Science, Innovation and Technology
Minister response to consultation on Holidays Act replacement
Ministerial Direction to Callaghan Innovation on the administration of a RDTI transitional support mechanism PDF KB
Ministerial decisions informing national interest considerations
Ministers representing various other portfolios, senior officials and members of various APEC forums meet throughout the year to launch new initiatives, track the progress of existing programmes and implement directives from the leaders. New Zealand has hosted APEC twice, in and (the first ever fullyvirtual APEC).
Ministers office to complete:
Ministry for Culture Heritage
Ministry for Culture and Heritage
Ministry for Ethnic Communities
Ministry for Pacific Peoples
Ministry for Pacific Peoples; and
Ministry for Primary Industries
Ministry for Primary Industries (MPI)
Ministry for the Environment
Ministry for the Environment (MfE)
Ministry of Business, Innovation Employment
Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment
Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE)
Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) Hkina Whakatutuki Lifting to make successful
Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), Department of Internal Affairs (DIA), New Zealand Police (NZP), Oranga Tamariki (OT)
Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), Department of Internal Affairs (DIA), New Zealand Police (NZP), Oranga Tamariki (OT), New Zealand Customs Service (NZCS)
Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, Longterm Insights Briefing
Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment;
Ministry of Business, Innovation, and Employment
Ministry of Culture and Heritage
Ministry of Defence (MoD)
Ministry of Disabled People
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT)
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade;
Ministry of Housing and Urban Development
Ministry of Justice to further develop the training framework for Communication Assistants and raise awareness to lawyers and police prosecutors of the Communication Assistance service.
Ministry of Pacific Peoples
Ministry of Primary Industries
Ministry of Primary Industries (MPI)
Ministry of Social Development
Ministry of Social Development;
Ministry of Transport (MoT)
Minute of Decision for the Cabinet Business Committee on setting average levy rates for , , and .
Minute of Decision for the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee on publicly consulting on proposed levy rates for , , and .
Minutes of the Expert Reference Group PDF .MB
Mission Operations Control Centre (MOCC)
Mission operations, machine learning and donut catchups
Mitigating risk of technology and service failure
Mitigation Adaptation to Climate Change
MoE intends to consult Education Payroll Limited (EPL) on the proposed changes .
MoJ to consider amending the Crimes Act to strengthen provisions for the criminalisation of trafficking in children. If the opportunity arises the Ministry will endeavour to progress this work.
MoT develops policy and regulations for transport, including emerging aviation technologies.
Mobile coverage currently covers areas where over of New Zealanders live and work. However, our geographic coverage was sitting at around .
Modelled Territorial Authority GDP
Modelled Territorial Authority Gross Domestic Product
Modelling and forecasting
Modern slavery and worker exploitation
Modernising parental leave
Modernising parental leave regulatory impact statement
Module : Understanding interpreting
Module : How public servants can access interpreting services
Module : How to communicate effectively using an interpreter
Monday to Friday, am to pm
Monitoring arrangements for MBIEmonitored Crown entities
Monitoring energy use to create a sustainable ecocommunity
Monitoring of changes to the Residential Tenancies Act
Monitoring the Commerce Commission
Monitoring the petrol excise duty reduction
Monitors compliance with the policy on a regular basis
Monopsony in the New Zealand labour market PDF .MB
Monthly Regional Tourism Estimates (MRTEs)
Monthly Regional Tourism Estimates (MRTEs, )
Monthly labour market fact sheet
Monthly unique regional population estimates (MURPEs)
Mood of the Nation survey on the Tourism Industry website
More and better research fellowships
More broadly, companies can take steps now to mitigate security risks. Recently released guidance on how to protect critical assets is available to support the industry to keep themselves safe.
More detail on these proposals and detailed recommendations for your consideration are provided in Annex Two .
More details on the Great Rides and Heartland Rides, including location, grading, and service providers can be found on the New Zealand Cycle Trail website.
More flexible dismissal process for highincome employees
More granular tools would be required to fully assess the implications associated with each of the scenarios, from the capital investment required to grow dairy production, through to the research and marketing development required to build export premiums, and the detailed energy analysis needed to assess the biomass requirements to meet the expected primary and final energy supply requirements.
More information about eligibility, approved research providers, record keeping obligations and inyear payments can be found
More information about the Amendment Act on the Parliament website
More information about the IDI
More information about the Regional events fund
More information about the minimum wage
More information can be found here:
More information can be found on scams including the types of scams, and how to report and avoid them here:
More information can be found on the Employment New Zealand website.
More information can be found on the Immigration New Zealand website.
More information is available on our ANZSRC page on this website
More information on New Zealand standards is available on the Standards New Zealand website.
More information on child labour exploitation among migrants, international students, refugees
More information on foundational projects
More information on our privacy statement
More information on the rebate, including the criteria and application process, is available at:
More information on the review process
More information on these arrangements is available on the
More information on wage rates
More information on what is needed to certify your vehicle, and where to go to get certified, is available on the Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Board website:
More sick leave to support employees on the way
More wind and solar generation needed to meet future demand
Most Pacific Essential Skills workers were in their s and s and more likely to be male.
Most attention on emissions and climate change mitigation to has focused on the role of energy (largely scope and emissions). However, increasing attention is being paid to material and wider supply chain related emissions (scope ). A shift to a circular economy is a key part of reducing scope emissions in material production and supply chains.
Most businesses pay their ACC levy invoice annually in a single payment. However, ACC also offers a range of instalment plan options to pay, including a , , or month instalment plan. Historically, ACC has required some businesses that use an instalment plan to pay debit interest on levies remaining outstanding. It continues to do so for those using a month instalment plan currently.
Most changes take effect on Monday May .
Most gained residence through the Talent (Accredited Employer) visa category.
Most general lender responsibilities will apply without modification, including assisting borrowers to make informed decisions, and treating them reasonably and ethically.
Most migrants () under this visa stream were approved through the Skilled Migrant Category.
Most of our NCPs are parttime in the NCP role, so be aware that you may not always get an immediate response.
Most of the information we collect is provided directly by people or entities, or an authorised representative, as a requirement to fulfil statutory obligations and according to our powers as a regulator.
Most other forms of government support are not affected
Most substantive feedback related to education and employment inclusion, to improve pathways to sustained employment for disabled young people.
Most temporary work visa migrants from the Pacific transition to residence through the Family visa stream
Most were in the to age group and the majority () were males.
Most workers will be covered by income insurance
Motivation to contribute to NASA and the New Zealand space sector.
Motor Vehicles Disputes Tribunal
Motu Economic and Public Policy Research was commissioned to deliver research on the longterm settlement outcomes for Pacific migrants in New Zealand.
Mount Campbell Connect Limited
Mr Hiroshi Kikuchi, Commissioner, The Immigration Services Agency of Japan
Mutual recognition arrangements
My research portfolio is expanding into a thoroughly new area. My expertise in telescope operation, control and use for astronomical research, coupled with broader research into small satellite mission design for science projects, has widened my field of operations into space science and engineering; a significant rescoping of my career path.
My vision for tourism is for New ZealandAotearoa to be rated one of the top three aspirational tourism destinations in the world by the most discerning travellers.
NAATI and recertification
NAATI will process your application. This may take a few days, so it is recommended you get your application submitted by June at the latest.
NASA Balloon Team Sets Up For AroundTheWorld Test Flight From New Zealand
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Intern
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Intern
NASA internships and New Zealand Space Agency scholarships
NASAs superpressure balloon programme launching from Wanaka in the South Island.
NESTF information on the Minitry for the Environment website
NOTE: If a final report has not been received for an event which received funding in Round , that event will not be considered for Round funding.
NZ Bioforestry sought to understand and contextualise the role and shift of the Forestry and Wood processing sectors towards low emissions: generating economic growth through sustainable forestry methods and diversifying and elevating the forestry workforce.
NZ Certificate in Composites
NZ Certificate in Engineering (Electrical)
NZ Certificate in Engineering Fabrication (Electrical)
NZ Certificate in Engineering Fabrication (Mechanical or Electrical)
NZ Certificate in Engineering Fabrication (Mechanical)
NZ Diploma in Engineering (Electrical)
NZ Diploma in Engineering (Mechanical or Electrical)
NZ Diploma in Engineering (Mechanical)
NZ DiplomaCertificate in Engineering (Electrical)
NZ Government Procurement
NZ Government Procurement and Property
NZ Industrial Relations Foundation
NZ Nuclear Free Zone, Disarmament and Arms Control Act
NZ Petroleum and Minerals Website
NZ Police (NZP) and OT Specialist Child Interviewers continued to hold consultations to strengthen techniques and skills when interviewing child victims.
NZ Post Deed of Understanding variation PDF KB
NZ Post Deed of Understanding variation PDF KB
NZ Post Deed of Understanding PDF KB
NZ Post discussion document PDF KB
NZ Post shall not reintroduce the rural delivery fee.
NZ Space Policy Review Consultation (closed)
NZ and Colorado to cooperate on aerospace, tech sectors
NZ is cochairing the CounterTerrorism and Transnational Crime workstream under the ASEAN Regional Forum until .
NZ population . million half a million increase in the last six years
NZBN (Department invoices)
NZCT Fund Expression of Interest Form
NZCT funding and how to apply
NZCTU paper on Workforce Development and Future Resilience PDF KB
NZDF LEOLABS LeoLabs made several observations about liability and insurance including: It has conducted a study on the likelihood and impact of collisions in space, and highlighted these risks were increasing, as more and more satellites are launched into space. At the mome nt, there is no accepted liability chain for a collision in space, but it is clear that the Space Agency would be part of that chain if an incident were to occur. Whether or not the Space A gency is found to be liable would depend on the circumstances. The Review Team considers the provisions in the Act relating to indemnity and insurance give the necessary tools to appropriately manage liability. We do note that some jurisdictions provide an indemnity for operators for loss or damage above a specified amount. These indemnity provisions are intended to ensure that operators are not discouraged from conducting space activities by the potential for ve ry high losses if something goes wrong. We do not consider such a
NZEECS Unlocking our energy productivity and renewable potential
NZIER Report, November
NZIIS Claimants will be offered support to get back to work
NZIIS Financial support is provided for most jobs losses
NZIIS Most workers will be covered by income insurance
NZIIS Our proposals at a glance
NZIIS The scheme will be managed by ACC, which will also collect the levy
NZRIS Indigenous Data Sovereignty Working Group
NZRIS Stewardship and Oversight Group
NZRIS Stewardship and Oversight Group (NSOG) terms of reference
NZRIS codesets Github page
NZRIS is a technology solution that will allow data to be held in one place and be presented in a way that is userfriendly and manageable.
NZRIS will help to create common data standards, reduce the reporting burden, simplify administration, and enable the reuse of data.
NZS : Rainbowinclusive workplaces: A standard for gender and sexual diversity in employment
NZSA Safety Case Guidance PDF KB
NZSA develops space policies that both supports the effective implementation of the Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities Act and development of the sector.
NZSA leads on policies to develop the New Zealand space and highaltitude sector, attracting international companies to invest in New Zealand, and engaging on international science investment programmes.
NZSpaceTalk keeps you on developments in the sector including new technologies, what NZ researchers and students are up to, and guest pieces from thought leaders and industry.
Narottam is completing a PhD in Electrical and Electronic Engineering at the University of Canterbury. His research looks at techniques for remotely tracking the orientation of spacecraft.
Natalie is an experienced airline pilot, flying Kiwis around the country and the world for years.
National Action Plan
National Construction Pipeline Report
National Construction Pipeline Report : Infographic
National Cyber Security Centre
National Emergency Management Agency
National Emergency and Management Agency
National Environmental Standards
National Environmental Standards for Telecommunications Facilities
National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research Limited (NIWA)
National Policy Statements
National Science Challenges
National Security Assessments
National Statement of Science Investment
National Survey of Employers
National Survey of Employment Intentions
National direction on greenhouse gas
National interest analysis: proposed accession to the Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Works for Persons Who Are Blind, Visually Impaired, or Otherwise Print Disabled PDF KB
National interest considerations
National interest workstream
National interest, a final safeguard in the Act
National quarantine and isolation in the future
Natural gas production in New Zealand is expected to drop below demand, according to the latest oil and gas reserves data released by the Ministry of Business, Innovation Employment (MBIE).
Negotiating alternative options with staff regarding flexible working arrangements where necessary.
Nelson Tasman Regional Workforce Plan
Nelson, Marlborough and Tasman Overview
Net increase over years
Net inward migration continued to grow
Network of four INZ Irregular Migration Liaison Officers deployed full time to South and SouthEast Asia
Network operators in accordance with the Telecommunications Act and the Telecommunications Act are listed below in alphabetical order with their month of registration.
New Divisions have been created for Indigenous research in both the SocioEconomic Objectives (SEO) and Fields of Research (FoR) classifications. Indigenous research has been a focus of this review, involving significant engagement with Indigenous research communities in New Zealand and Australia. Indigenous research being classified appropriately will ensure that this important area of research is better recognised.
New Zealand China Strategic Research Alliance Investment Round Contract Template
New Zealand China Strategic Research Alliance Investment Round Proposal Template
New Zealand Germany science and technology cooperation agreement PDF KB
New Zealand Japan science and technology cooperation agreement PDF KB
New Zealand Singapore Biotech in Future Food Research Programme Call for Proposals
New Zealand Agreements with trade and labour components
New Zealand Airports Association
New Zealand Amazon Memorandum of Understanding
New Zealand Association to Horizon Europe: Negotiating mandate PDF KB
New Zealand Bill of Rights Act
New Zealand Business Number (NZBN)
New Zealand Business Number (NZBN) levy A new NZBN levy of . is proposed, to be paid annually by entities with their registration or annual return fee. This levy will recover the cost of operating and administering the NZBN register. The NZBN register was introduced by the New Zealand Business Number Act (NZBN Act) as a government initiative aimed at reducing costs for businesses that interact with government. An NZBN is a unique identifier with key information attached to it about a business that is searchable by the government, businesses, and the public . The NZBN enables government agencies to readily identify an organisation and coordinate their services to reduce the time businesses spend interacting with government. It also enables the creation of innovative private sector Government toBusiness (GB) and Business toBusiness (BB) services including supplying, tendering or contracting to government. Why entities are only now being charged a separate NZBN levy When the NZBN Act was implemented, the Companies Office automatically allocated an NZBN to all corporate bodies in New Zealand, including state sector entities, and those registered on a Companies Office entity register ( eg companies, incorporated societies and building societies). Government provided a level of funding to the Companies Office for several years to cover the costs of the NZBN and encourage these bodies and entities to register an NZBN. The funding recognised that entities and bodies may have been discouraged from firs t using an NZBN if they had to pay a fee for its introduction, limiting the uptake of obtaining an NZBN. Once the register was established it
New Zealand Certificate in Mechanical Engineering (Level , preapprenticeship)
New Zealand Certificate in Mechanical Engineering Level
New Zealand Claims Resolution Service
New Zealand Claims Resolution Service (NZCRS)
New Zealand Companies Office Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment PO Box , Wellington , New Zealand www.mbie.govt.nz www.companiesoffice.govt.nz Contents How to have your say Contents . . . . . . Purpose of this document . . . . . Overview . . . . . . Section : Summary of the review and proposals . . . . Section : Companies Office funding . . . . . Section : The basis for setting fees and levies . . . . Section : Current and proposed levies . . . . Companies Office (CO) levy . . . . New Zealand Business Number (NZBN) levy . . . Insolvency Practitioners (IP) levy . . . . Section : Proposed fees and total charges for all registers . . . Index of registers . . . . Companies . . . . . Personal Property Securities . . . . Disclose . . . . . Financial Statements . . . . Financial Service Providers . . . . Incorporated Societies . . . . Limited Partnerships . . . . Building Societies, Friendly Societies and Credit Unions . . .. Retirement Villages . . . . Insolvency Practitioners . . . . Auditors . . . . . Appendix One: Summary of questions . . . . Appendix Two: Summary of proposed fees and levies . . . .. Appendix Three: Forecast annual volumes by register to determine unit costs . . Appendix Four: Summary of fees to be revoked and other minor changes . .
New Zealand Council of Trade Unions
New Zealand Customs Service
New Zealand Customs Service;
New Zealand Cycle Trail funding
New Zealand Cycle Trail website
New Zealand Cycle Trails Incorporated
New Zealand Defence Force (NZDF)
New Zealand Disability Strategy
New Zealand Document Exchange Ltd ta DX Mail
New Zealand Embassy, Beijing, China
New Zealand Embassy, Washington D.C. USA
New Zealand Emissions Trading Scheme
New Zealand Energy Efficiency and Conservation Strategy
New Zealand Energy Quarterly
New Zealand Energy Strategy
New Zealand Events Association
New Zealand Film Commission
New Zealand Food Composition Database:
New Zealand Food Innovation Network website
New Zealand Food Safety Science and Research Centre
New Zealand Food Safety Science and Research Centre contract template
New Zealand Food Safety Science and Research Centre contract template explanatory note
New Zealand Forest Institute Limited
New Zealand Forest Research Institute Limited (trading as Scion)
New Zealand Forest Research Institute Ltd (Scion)
New Zealand Free Trade Agreements
New Zealand Government Procurement
New Zealand Government Procurement (NZGP)
New Zealand Government Procurement and Property
New Zealand Government Procurement and Property (NZGPP) is responsible for supporting the Chief Executive Carolyn Tremain in her role as
New Zealand Government Procurement and Property helps government agencies deliver better public services for better value.
New Zealand Government Procurement website.
New Zealand Growth Capital Partners (formerly NZVIF)
New Zealand Growth Capital Partners.
New Zealand Institute for Minerals to Materials Research
New Zealand Intelligence Community (NZIC)
New Zealand Legislation website
New Zealand Maori Tourism
New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs Trade
New Zealand Mission to the European Union
New Zealand Mission to the European Union, Brussels, Belgium
New Zealand Mussel export prices if we look at it by form, the live mussel, the price goes up frozen meat at per kilo, powder has been declining over time but sitting around just over per kilo and if we look at oil, it is sitting at around per kilo. We can see that we are certainly adding value with the oil.
New Zealand National Contact Point for responsible business conduct OECD guidelines for multinational enterprises
New Zealand Nuclear Free Peacemakers and Space for Peace Aotearoa
New Zealand Nurses Organisation
New Zealand Petroleum Minerals
New Zealand Petroleum and Minerals has granted an offshore petroleum exploration permit after a courtordered reconsideration and released the Block Offer Invitation for Bids for onshore petroleum exploration in Taranaki.
New Zealand Petroleum and Minerals website
New Zealand Police NEW ZEALAND POLICE This submission noted that MBIE, under the Crown Minerals Act, has the ability to grant non interference zone (NIZ) permits for mining and oil exploration activities within the maritime spectrum. This provides for specific offences against the Act where vesselspersons enter a NIZ. The Police have suggested that a similar piece of legislation for the Act would be beneficial to ensure any vessels entering any exclusion zone are subject to specific legislation that can be use d for prosecution where breaches occur. REVIEW TEAMS ANALYSIS AND RESPONSE In considering what has been proposed in this submission, there was a question of whether it would be consistent with New Zealands international obligations, recognising that the law of the sea provides only very limited exceptions to what we can do in waters that are not under our jurisdiction. The Review Team considers that such an amendment would be inconsistent with New Zealands international obligations under UNCLOS and rec ommends no change.
New Zealand Post is now a stateowned enterprise and is subject to a deed of understanding with the Government to cover its social, price and service commitments.
New Zealand Posts information disclosure requirements
New Zealand Posts main obligations under the current Deed are set out below.
New Zealand Prostitutes Collective
New Zealand Refugee Resettlement Strategy: Success indicators and measures outcomes update for PDF KB
New Zealand Regional Fibre Group
New Zealand Registered Architects Board
New Zealand Relay Service website
New Zealand Relay website
New Zealand Research Information System
New Zealand Screen Production Grant: oneyear review report
New Zealand Screen Production Rebate
New Zealand Sectors Dashboard
New Zealand Sectors Report
New Zealand Sectors Report full report
New Zealand Sign Language by location
New Zealand Smart Grid Forum
New Zealand Space Policy Review consultation (closed)
New Zealand Space Scholarship
New Zealand Space Sector: Its value, scope and structure
New Zealand Space and Advanced Aviation Economic Survey
New Zealand Space and Advanced Aviation Strategy
New Zealand Space and Advanced Aviation Strategy to
New Zealand Space and Advanced Aviation Strategy
New Zealand Superannuation and Retirement Income Act (Part and Schedule )
New Zealand Tourism Board
New Zealand Tourism Futures Taskforce
New Zealand Trade and Enterprise
New Zealand Trade and Enterprise (NZTE)
New Zealand Trade and Enterprise (NZTE) is New Zealands international business development agency. Its role is to help New Zealand businesses grow bigger, better and faster in international markets.
New Zealand Trade and Enterprise (NZTE) will focus on driving export growth by facilitating trade and access to international markets and ensuring New Zealand businesses have the necessary support to expand their international reach.
New Zealand Traveller Declaration
New Zealand Treaties Online
New Zealand Visitor Activity Forecast
New Zealand adheres to the main international agreements that promote a peaceful, sustainable, safe and secure space environment.
New Zealand along with seven other nations helped craft the principles espoused in the Artemis Accords. These simple, universal principles will enable the next generation of international partnerships for the exploration of the Moon and beyond.
New Zealand and Germany enjoy a strong and longstanding research relationship, underpinned by the New ZealandGermany Science and Technology Agreement. The agreement is administered by MBIE and the German Federal Ministry for Education and Research (BMBF). There are a range of current joint investments with Germany in the areas of green hydrogen, biomedical engineering, and space technologies.
New Zealand and the State of Colorado have signed a Memorandum of Cooperation, further strengthening relationships between the two regions.
New Zealand award notice data by government agencies on the Government Electronic Tender Service (GETS).
New Zealand biomaterials are a key ingredient in a range of essential oils (often blended or added to a carrier oil). What can you do with essential oils What are the things they flow into They flow into a huge amount of thing in your house today. Things like aromatherapy, air freshener, cosmetics, candles, medicinal oil, skin health, perfume, food ingredient etc.
New Zealand company designs worldleading space radar structure
New Zealand consumer surveys
New Zealand cruise impact research
New Zealand data providers must be legal entities.
New Zealand energy sector greenhouse gas emissions
New Zealand experienced a net gain of , permanent and longterm migrants in , which was . more than in . This was the fifth consecutive year in which migration increased and the highest net gain ever recorded.
New Zealand experiences transformational change in national economic prosperity.
New Zealand firms: Reaching for the frontier PDF .MB
New Zealand generally launches small satellites, and CubeSats in particular.
New Zealand generation stack updates
New Zealand government agencies signed up to telephone and video interpreting
New Zealand government agencies signed up to telephone and video interpreting, and the face to face interpreting panel.
New Zealand government procurement open data
New Zealand has types of trade remedy action to deal with dumped or subsidised imported goods that could injure New Zealand manufacturers.
New Zealand has a strong interest in managing the SSA risks associated with payloads less than U. Encouraging trackability through our permitting regime demo nstrates New Zealands commitment to the responsible use of space and reflects the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Spaces ( COPUOS ) Guidelines on the Long Term Sustainability of Space ( LTS Guidelines ). These encourage regulators to promote the t rackability of space objects, regardless of their size or mission type. The application of this policy is intended to evolve to reflect the development of new technologies, changes in the satellite and broader space industry , and the orbital debris environ ment. . Information to be taken into account when applying this policy Relevant sections of the Act must be complied with. Other information that is to be taken into account in the application of this policy includes : the applicants submitted orbital debris mitigation plan ; any applicable technical advice, reports or assessments provided by other space agencies , regulators or experts ; any overseas licence, permit or other authorisation relevant to the proposed activities .
New Zealand has a strong startup community that has shown impressive resilience in recent years and some early success. However, there is a greater opportunity to leverage our excellence in technology and innovation to create a world class innovation and knowledge intensive economy.
New Zealand has already launched payloads with national security applications, none of which have been assessed to be inconsistent with our national interests. Any application to launch a payload which is inconsistent with our domestic laws and policies andor our international obligations, will not be progressed.
New Zealand has joined an international arrangement to cooperate with NASA on peaceful exploration and activity in outer space.
New Zealand has launched commercial payloads, such as those that have remote sensing capabilities, which are owned by the United States, France, Japan, and Singapore. Remote sensing includes observing the Earth from their respective satellites and providing these images to their customers. Payload missions that New Zealand has launched include satellites gaining realtime images and maritime traffic tracking.
New Zealand has legislation and policies in place to address domestic instances of slavey or forced labour. Our legislation includes the Immigration Act and Crimes Act, which have provisions to prevent domestic and transnational people trafficking and slavery. The Government Procurement Supplier Code of Conduct sets an expectation that suppliers monitor and address international human rights standards in their supply chains.
New Zealand has limited ability to influence design and manufacturing abroad. This makes strategic collaboration with trade partners on circular economy approaches important to mitigate risks of supply chain disruptions and market volatility. Aligning sustainability and circular economy strategies with each trading partners specific policies and market conditions will be pivotal.
New Zealand has long been recognised as a great place to do business, regularly appearing as one of the top countries to do business in reports from organisations like the World Bank and the Economist Intelligence Unit. New Zealand has a businessfriendly taxation system that supports capital investment. The Research and Development (RD) Tax Incentive supports RD expenditure in New Zealand by providing a tax credit on eligible RD costs. We have close ties with global markets and free trade agreements with major trading partners.
New Zealand has multiple natural advantages which make it an ideal place to develop, test and operate space and advanced aviation technologies. Our uncrowded skies, coupled with our relatively low population density, means there is plenty of space for testing out innovative concepts in the air and on the ground. New Zealand is also a great location for Earth observation satellite calibration and validation and has a range of suitable sites for space and advanced aviation ground infrastructure.
New Zealand has mutual recognition arrangements with other economies. This allows exporters to have their conformity assessments in New Zealand recognised in overseas economies.
New Zealand has opened nominations for its candidate.
New Zealand has ratified, and is bound by many ILO Conventions.
New Zealand has shared in this growth and many of these challenges and opportunities are having an influence on our situation.
New Zealand has significant opportunities to produce addedvalue, biobased products that utilise biowaste streams, and reduce emissions and dependency on fossil fuels.
New Zealand has some of the largest selection of launch angles (azimuths) for rocket launches in the world. Our remote location is also an advantage, giving us clear skies and seas, and relatively low levels of air traffic.
New Zealand has strategic choices about what our biological resources are used for in the future. In making these choices, it will be important that New Zealand leverages the greatest value from our limited bioresources while ensuring their sustainability, maintaining the ecosystems that underpin them and reducing emissions.
New Zealand has the opportunity and the capability to become the most innovative and future focused tourism destination in the world. The Government will continue working with partners to lay the groundwork to affect real, systemic change as the tourism sector rebuilds.
New Zealand implements measures to meet its international commitments and prevent the conditions that enable forced labour, people trafficking and slavery. This includes meeting our commitments under the Forced Labour Protocol, which came into force for New Zealand in December .
New Zealand in international communications forums and trade negotiations.
New Zealand is a founding member of APEC which promotes trade and economic growth in the AsiaPacific region. APEC is of considerable economic and political significance to New Zealand.
New Zealand is a founding member of the ILO and has had a strong association with it throughout its history.
New Zealand is a founding member of the International Labour Organization (ILO) which is the key global labour body and source of international labour law.
New Zealand is a major food and beverage exporter, with the industry accounting for of all goods and services exports.
New Zealand is a member of the International Energy Forum (IEF) and participates in several of its initiatives, including the Joint Oil Organisations Data Initiative and the International Energy Business Forum.
New Zealand is a regular participant in the IEFs biannual dialogue with energy ministers, and is a financial contributor to the IEF. We are also an active participant in the Joint Organisations Data Initiative.
New Zealand is almost alone in the developed world in not having some kind of mandatory, nationwide income insurance scheme or other protection, such as mandatory redundancy payments, for people who lose their jobs.
New Zealand is already a party to United Nations space treaties:
New Zealand is also party to other international treaties that are relevant to space payloads, including treaties on disarmament, the environment and human rights. We reflect these international laws and governance arrangements in our domestic legislation and policies.
New Zealand is an associated country in Pillar of Horizon Europe, the worlds largest multilateral research and innovation programme. New Zealandbased researchers and organisations can join or lead Horizon Europe projects and receive funding on equal terms with their European counterparts.
New Zealand is an attractive place for spacerelated commerce.
New Zealand is at an early stage of the shift to a more circular economy; there is emergent activity in sustainable businesses and communities.
New Zealand is business friendly
New Zealand is committed to the safe, secure and responsible use of space. The Government is managing the risks posed by GBSI by introducing a bill in for a new regulatory regime covering new and existing infrastructure.
New Zealand is highly dependent on its biological resources to thrive and is not selfsufficient in these resources.
New Zealand is home to a thriving innovation ecosystem that encourages worldleading research and development (RD) activity and resourceful ways of getting things done.
New Zealand is in the midst of a major upgrade of its telecommunication infrastructure:
New Zealand is on the path to a low emissions, climate resilient future. Government has set into law a target for net zero greenhouse gas emissions by (other than for biogenic methane). The Emissions Reduction Plan is one mechanism we are using to focus our collective efforts toward transitioning to a more resilient, low emissions economy.
New Zealand is open for business
New Zealand is the ideal location for New Space
New Zealand is the ideal location for new space
New Zealand is wellknown for developing creative solutions to problems. We are home to a thriving innovation ecosystem that encourages worldleading research and development activity. Our futurefocused policy and regulatory settings make New Zealand an attractive location to develop new space and aviation products and ideas. New Zealand companies are transforming our access to space, developing new transportation solutions and applying aerospaceenabled data in new ways to solve problems and improve our daily lives.
New Zealand is widely regarded as one of the worlds premier locations for screen production and postproduction work.
New Zealand is widely regarded as one of the worlds premier locations for screen production.
New Zealand lags behind the world on RD spending. This Government has an ambitious target of increasing research and development expenditure to percent of GDP by .
New Zealand leads: Alex Semprini and Marina Dzhelali, Medical Research Institute of New Zealand (MIRNZ)
New Zealand leads: Professor Louise ParrBrownlie, Departmental Science Advisor, MBIE and Dr Justin Dean, University of Auckland
New Zealand led a project through the HRDWG over examining how social dialogue can support resilience and responsiveness in times of crisis as well as for more longterm issues such as challenges posed by the future of work.
New Zealand offers many advantages to industry leaders, research institutions and innovative startups.
New Zealand payload permits by country
New Zealand produces broad types of cosmetic products. To summarise at a highlevel, these are face creams, face serums, scrubsmasks, body lotions, sunblock, and makeup.
New Zealand relay service
New Zealand research and development
New Zealand researchers create worldfirst stroke detection technology
New Zealand residents can be sex workers in New Zealand but can become liable for deportation if they invest in, are a director of, own or manage a commercial sex business.
New Zealand screen businesses are highly competitive internationally and globally recognised for their innovation and skill.
New Zealand seafood, so just touching on seafood to get a feel for what is in this document. New Zealand seafood has capabilities across the supply chain. We have got a strong and welldeveloped seafood, so wild catch and aquaculture industry with a large number of players.
New Zealand tertiary GIS papers, programmes and contacts
New Zealand uses around million litres of diesel every day and while the chances of a severe and sustained fuel disruption are low, the consequences for Kiwis and the economy would be catastrophic.
New Zealand voluntarily took part in an APEC Fossil Fuel Subsidy Reform (FFSR) peer review in to identify inefficient fossil fuel subsidies leading to wasteful consumption.
New Zealand was invited by the European Union to consider joining the new partnerships being established under the nd Strategic Plan of Horizon Europe. The Government has elected to join two new cofund partnerships
New Zealand will continue to advocate for effective international rules, norms and standards in space. New Zealand is party to the main international space treaties which are reflected in our domestic laws and policies. Although these international agreements provide the legal framework for space activity, the global space context has evolved in the decades since the agreements were reached, including through the growing number of countries and commercial operators active in space, the development of new space technologies and the rapid increase in the amount of space activity. New Zealand supports ongoing efforts to advance international agreement on norms, rules and principles of responsible behaviour in space.
New Zealand will have two targeted agencies to support economic growth through strong international connections in trade and investment.
New Zealand will need significantly more biomass for bioenergy production. Meeting that demand will require changes in land use, with associated impacts on other primary production.
New Zealand will require ongoing awareness of international circular economy developments to make timely responses to opportunities and risks. This includes keeping up with regulations, policies and strategies proposed by our major trading partners to ensure that our exporters can meet changing standards. Failure to comply with international standards and practices may mean reductions in market access, additional trade costs, or loss of competitive advantage.
New Zealand works to proactively identify victims and supports them to safety and recovery by putting their protection and needs at the heart of our responses.
New Zealands universities play a prominent role in the New Zealand research environment.
New Zealands Energy Outlook
New Zealands Horizon Europe National Contact Points
New Zealands abundant and diverse energy resources have long underpinned our economy. The challenge is to meet New Zealands energy needs in a way that supports our way of life, the economy and the environment.
New Zealands contribution
New Zealands economic context
New Zealands future productivity to : Consultation document PDF KB
New Zealands gene technology rules are changing. Gene Technology is a powerful tool available to scientists, and recent improvements mean we can use it more precisely and safely than ever before. While gene technologies have been used in New Zealand for a long time, the current rules have not been to match the scientific advancements.
New Zealands participation in ILO
New Zealands participation in the International Energy Programme
New Zealands postal market was opened to full competition in . We are responsible for laws and regulations relating to postal services.
New ZealandAotearoa Government Tourism Strategy
New ZealandAotearoa Government Tourism Strategy Summary of consultation submissions PDF .MB
New ZealandAotearoa Government Tourism Strategy PDF .MB
New ZealandAotearoa Tourism Strategy
New ZealandAotearoa delivers exceptional visitor experiences
New ZealandAotearoa is a special place and visitors contribute significantly to our country.
New ZealandChina Strategic Research Alliance Call for Proposals
New ZealandMalaysia Agreement on Labour Cooperation
New ZealandSingapore Leveraging AI for Healthy Ageing Call for Proposals
New Zealanders lives are improved by tourism
New accreditation and single work visa
New applied doctorates scheme
New blue warrants have not been available for freedom camping since June
New connectivity funding for more rural homes and businesses
New eligibility tests for Family Violence, Bereavement and Sick leave.
New employer accreditation and work visa
New gateway test for contracting arrangements
New government employment rule targeting quality employment outcomes for NZ workers came into force October , supported by public guidance.
New leave payment formulas and definitions to provide greater clarity about what payments must be included in the calculations. This will include a new definition of gross earnings and a new Ordinary Leave Pay calculation to replace Ordinary Weekly Pay and Relevant Daily Pay.
New legislation to protect the public from wheel clampers charging excessive fees and preying on motorists is in effect from January .
New measures have come into force on July to better protect migrants from exploitation.
New methods that employers must use to calculate the amount of leave entitlement an employee uses when they take leave. This will include a formula for calculating leave for employees with variable working arrangements.
New migrant exploitation phone line and online reporting established on July, with complaints of migrant exploitation received by October, of which found to potentially be exploitation and referred for investigation.
New migrant exploitation phone line and online reporting established on July.
New pool safety legislation came into effect on January .
New social enterprise helping to democratise space
New social media platforms such as Instagram and TikTok appeal to most participants. Using short stories and reels to promote both the positive and negative impacts of financial capability was seen as an effective strategy for timepoor consumers.
New space payload principles protect the national interest
New standards and accreditation requirements from July
New standards and certification requirements
New student visa approval numbers fell slightly but remained high
New training modules on people trafficking completed by MBIE, and shared with NZP, OT, Customs and DIA. Specialised training for Airline Liaison Officers developed and rolled out. Police Specialist Child Protection Teams, all new detectives, and all District CIB Managers have received people trafficking training in .
New work visa approvals grew in , which was the seventh consecutive yearonyear increase.
New, clearer requirements related to the process for having a closedown period.
Next steps for enabling more offshore renewable energy generation
Next steps for the RSE Review
Next steps on Industry Strategy
Next steps on Industry Strategy: Minute of Decision
Next, the Tourism Industry Transformation Plan will focus on addressing challenges and harnessing opportunities related to how the tourism industry interfaces with our natural environment.
Nga Haeranga NZ Cycle Trail Evaluation Report PDF .MB
Nic Blakeley, Deputy Secretary, Labour, Science and Enterprise
Nic has also worked at Treasury in a range of policy areas, including a period as economic advisor to the Minister of Finance.
Nic joined MBIE in July from the Ministry of Social Development (MSD) where he held Deputy Chief Executive roles since in Social Policy, Strategy and Insights and most recently Transformation
Nimble, stable, and reputable government
No action Option One Taskforce proposals Option Two Accrual system Promotes purpose Better promotes worklife balance due to earlier and better access to leave Better promotes worklife balance due to earlier and better access to leave Clarity and certainty Provides better prescription (e.g. how to determine a week and otherwise working day) and clarifies certain terms (e.g. gross earnings, intermittent or irregular) , but may remain hard for some employers and employees to understand entitlements Provides better prescription (e.g. how to determine a week and otherwise working day) and clarifies certain terms (e.g. gross earnings, i ntermittent or irregular) Simpler Provisions remain complex for employees with variable hours andor remuneration Annual holidays entitlements much simpler to calculate Implementable Greater prescription and rules improve implementability ; requires less upfront changes to payroll systems as it is an improved status quo, but annual holidays may be more difficult to calculate and compliance costs may be higher over time when compared to Option Two Greater prescription and rules improve implementability ; requires more upfront changes to payroll systems, but annual holidays easier to calculate and compliance costs may be lower over time when compared to Option One Perverse incentives Removes perverse incentives around forms of payment (e.g. discretionary bonuses) and payment calculations (e.g. RDP vs. ADP) ; minimises incentives for employees to take holidays and leave on particular days (i.e. payments and deductions are well calibrated so employees are not incentivised to take time off on Removes perverse incentives around forms of payment (e.g. discretionary bonuses) and payment calculations (e.g. RDP vs. ADP) ; minimises incentives for employees to take holidays and leave on particular days (i.e. payments and deductions are well calibrated so employees are not incentivised to take time off on shrvakdix
No more than of total delivery points, subject to the condition that conversion of existing individual delivery points to communal delivery points may only occur with the written consent of the user.
No nominations are being sought in .
No regulations were made as a result of this review. However on May the Minister for the Community and Volunteer Sector announced a review of the Charities Act . The Department of Internal Affairs is the lead agency. The scope of the review includes the regulation of thirdparty fundraisers.
No risk of introducing distortions to wider negotiations. Employees are financially compensated for leave not taken but, as entitlement to time away from work must be reset, employees must wait to become entitled to time away from work again. . Improved MBIE guidance (same as option one) and legislative amendmen ts to clarify the legal status quo. Requires rescinding the Cabinet decision to accept the Taskforces recommendation. Legislation provides clarity about legal requirements. As above. As above. . Legislative change that overrides the Holidays Act provisions and requires employers to automatically transfer employees leave entitlements if they negotiate for the employee to be offered the choice to transfer employment and the employee chooses to do so. Requires a minor adjustmentclarification to the current Cabinet decision, but it would be difficult to draft a legislative amendment to achieve this. Legislation provides clarity about legal requirements.
No shop trading restrictions or restrictions on the sale of liquor will apply to this public holiday.
No. National security issues cannot be adequately addressed without an ability to prevent those who present a security risk from participating in a rocket launch industry. At the moment in the absence of a licencing regime there is limited ability to stop the launch of a space object. Safety risks can largely be managed under the Workplace Health and Safety Act, but frequent launches may also present features (likelihood of risk and consequences), which require additional obligations on the operator. Environmental risks can largely be managed under the RMA but novel environmental risk may arise (such as pollution in space) that are outside the jurisdiction of the RMA)No. There needs to be a legislative basis to transfer liability arising out of New Zealands international obligations to those who ownoperate space objects. Legislative option (A)Yes. A new law will enable us to develop a regulatory regime that addresses our international obligationsYes. A new law will enable us to meet national security objectives. A new law will enable any emerging safety and environmental risks to be addressed through imposing licence conditions on the operator.Yes. A new law will contain provisions to transfer liability to those conducting rocket launches. yrupqmdi s (a), s ()(h) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted Legislative option (B)While it is feasible to modify existing law, there are no advantages over standalone legislation and significant disadvantages. Significant amendments would be required to the scope, purpose and powers of these Acts before they could apply to rocket launches. For example, the Civil Aviation Act deals with a different context (although there are some minimum requirements for rocket launches in Part ) and it is largely focused on safety not national security. The Defence Act also has a different purpose and would require significant amendments before it could apply to a commercial rocket launching area. Given the specific strategic role of the Defence Force, it is unlikely that the Defence Act is a suitable vehicle to regulate a commercial industry. . Our conclusion is that neither the status quo nor the nonregulatory option addresses all the problems that we need to address in order to enable space launches from New Zealand. Therefore legislation is required to meet our obligations and manage risks. Detailed content and design choices .The design of the legislation needs to address the problems that have been identified and the policy objectives set out in paragraph . . A set of principles to guide these decisions has been developed and agreed with the Minister for Economic Development. The principles are as follows: Minimum necessary, i.e. the legislation will contain the core elements required to achieve New Zealands policy objectives, and the rules and their enforcement will be proportionate to the benefits and risks expected to arise from the development of a New Zealand rocket industry. Certain and predictable , i.e. regulated entities have certainty as to their legal obligations and the regulatory regime provides, as far as possible, predictability over time. This is particularly relevant in a situation where Rocket Lab will transition from a contract with the Government to a regulatory regime for rocket launches. Flexible , i.e. a regime that is flexible enough to accommodate changes to the number of industry participants, launch locations and international obligations. Consistent with existing domestic law , i.e. there is a presumption that wherever possible the regulatory regime developed for rocket launch activities in New Zealand will maintain domestic law, including safety and environmental legislation, rather than seek to modify it. . Weve also had regard to international practice. Specifically, the UN General Assembly Resolution on recommendations relevant to the peaceful exploration and use of outer space. While we can deviate from that we could not then be sure that we were effectively meeting our international obligations. . Internationally, space launch legislation is based on a licensing or permitting regime that provides the necessary controls over participation in space launches including powers to prevent or stop launches. Licensing or permitting also enables liability to be transferred to where it can best be managed. . Weve considered two approaches: A prescriptive approach with detailed provisions relating to the matters that we have identified above contained in the primary legislation, or a more permissive approach where the legislation sets up a decision making framework that enables the decisionmaker to address these decisions on a casebycase basis. Weve assessed these options against the principles as follows: Restricted yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted Description of prescriptive approach .An example of a more prescriptive approach to space law is provided by Australias Space Activities Act . While it provides for a decisionmaker to issue a licence based on certain legislative criteria, it also contains in the primary legislation detailed provisions relating to liability, safety and accidents. . However, it is relevant to the consideration of the definition and consideration of this option that the Australian Government has just announced that the Act will be reviewed. The rationale for the review included the fact that space technologies have advanced significantly since the Act was introduced, and the need to ensure Australias civil space regulation effectively stimulates innovation and investment in this growing industry sector while effectively meet Australias international obligations in managing the space environment. . In commenting on the review, the chief executive of the Space Industries Association of Australia noted that the Space Activities Act was based on the outdated assumption that the Australian space sector would involve launch vehicles sending large satellites into space but satellites are becoming increasingly miniature, and that The risk and liability assumptions that underpin the Act in its current form are acting as a brake on the development of a viable Australian space industry, Description of permissive approach .The permissive approach is based on giving a decisionmaker (the responsible Minister) discretion to make the decision on whether or not to issue a licence and the conditions of such a licence, but balanced against and informed by specific objectives which are aligned with problems and objectives identified in this regulatory impact analysis. . There will need to be some prescription, as certain requirements in the TSA around safe and secure areas and accident zones are quite specific. There will also be regulationmaking powers, as some matters may be more appropriate for Cabinet to decide, or there may be conditions that are common to all licencees or classes of licencee, and these could usefull be set out in regulation to provide certainty to licence applicants. . The key features of the permissive approach are as follows: Requirement for licence . All persons who launch or operate space objects will be required to have a licence which the responsible Minister may grant if the activities proposed to be undertaken are consistent with the purpose of the regime. A licence will authorise the launching of one or more space objects. . The Minister must not grant such a licence if: The grant of a licence would be inconsistent with New Zealands international obligations, or The Minister responsible for the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service certifies the grant of a licence would pose an undue risk to national security, or The Minister is not satisfied that the applicant is a fit and proper person; or The grant of a licence would be contrary to New Zealands national interests. . Before granting a licence, the responsible Minister will be required to consult with other interested Ministers to take into account other national interests. . To avoid duplication and unnecessary cost, it is proposed that the responsible Minister would have power to recognise nonNew Zealand licences or parts thereof and, if the Minister is yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted satisfied, to exempt an applicant from any requirement that has been fulfilled by obtaining that nonNew Zealand licence or part of that licence. Licence conditions . The licence may specify certain conditions which may include conditions designed to prevent the contamination of outer space or adverse effects on the environment of the Earth, avoid interference with the activities of others in outer space, avoid any breach of New Zealands international obligations, preserve national security, ensure the safety and security of launch sites and related areas, and govern the disposal of payloads in outer space on the termination of operations under the licence and related licence requirements. . Regulations may prescribe minimum standard conditions which are to be included in every licence. Revocations . There will be a power to revoke licences if concerns, particularly national security concerns, arise in relation to the licence. Other grounds for revoking licences will include matters such as making false statements, or providing false information in relation to licences, breach of licence conditions, committing serious offences, or concerns about health and safety. . The responsible Minister will have the power to revoke the licence if the Minister responsible for the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service issues a certificate that continuation of the licence poses a risk to national security, or for breach of licence conditions, or for other grounds including matters such as making false statements, providing false information in relation to licenses, committing serious offences, or concerns about health and safety. Liability Risk sharing versus risk transfer .The international liability to pay compensation reflects that at the time the international treaties were negotiated, in the late s and early s, space launches were still largely government activities. Technology advances in the development of small satellites has changed this and a greater number of public and private entities are now participating in space activities. . States dont tend to take responsibility for risks caused by private entities as the State does not create the risks, nor is best placed to manage them. These are matters for the ownersoperators of space objects. In light of this many states pass off liability to the ownersoperators of space objects, both through stating in legislation that they have liability, and through the requirement for insurance. However some states, such as the US, take a risksharing approach with the objective of encouraging the development of the space industry. . The US (and the Netherlands), have developed regulatory regimes based on risksharing i.e. the US government will require the licensee to carry insurance for part of the risk and will itself carry the rest of the risk. The assessment in these countries is that risk sharing is necessary to foster the development of the space industry. . In response to the international liability to pay compensation, other jurisdictions such as Australia take the approach of requiring the licensee to have insurance to reimburse the government for the cost of international claims for damage up to a certain amount. It has been claimed that the financial burden resulting from the liability rules is one of the factors that has made the Australian regime too costly and inhibited the development of a space launch industry. The conversation.comspace treaties are a challenge to launching small satellites in orbit. Shooting for the stars: Turnball government aims to stimulate space industry Restricted yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted . Our advice on this is to include a provision in the primary legislation to authorise the responsible Minister to require an indemnity against the Crowns liability in whole or in part and to set licence conditions requiring insurance for a specified amount. Regulationmaking powers . There will need to be broad regulationmaking powers including: powers to make regulations prescribing fees, information and standard terms and conditions to be included in licence applications, any procedural requirements including time limits and extensions relating to applications, security requirements (e.g. adherence to the Protective Security Requirements) and security enhanced areas, procedures and processes for launch safety investigations and launch recovery operations, and other matters as necessary for the proper administration of the Act. Assessment of prescriptive vs permissive approach . Weve assessed these two approaches against the regulatory design principles in the following table Design principlesPrescriptive regime Permissive regime Minimum necessary yrupqmdi s ()(j), s ()(f)(iv) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted What constitutes the minimum will change over time, as international space law evolves to deal with new technologies and new markets. It is not possible to precisely predict the direction of these developments and attempts to do are likely to be based on incorrect assumptions which could undermine the efficacy of the law over time. In addition, what is the minimum in relation objectives such as national security is highly dependent on a casebycase risk assessment. A permissive approach allows judgements on what is the minimum necessary to be reflected in the decision to licence and in the licence conditions. A permissive approach provides flexibility for the conditions to evolve as information becomes available on what the minimum necessary. Certain and predictable Prescriptive approaches can provide more certainty, but in relation to space law this should not be overstated as there is always going to be a discretional element (to licence or not having regard to a range of objectives). Prescriptive approaches may inadvertently result in scenarios where there is greater uncertainty over the longterm than a permissive regime because the particular circumstances around a new market or technology were not contemplated which may result in a need to review and amend the law more frequently. The margin of discretion is higher for the discretionary approach which on the face of it would tend to reduce certainty, particularly over the shortterm until practice leads to the development of case law. However, this should also not be overstated relative to the prescriptive approach as the objectives that the decisionmaker needs to balance will be clearly set out in the primary legislation. Flexible A prescriptive approach in the primary legislation will limit the scope for the law to adapt to deal with new technologies or new markets. The permissive approach is more amenable to tailoring decisions to the particular case. Consistent with domestic lawBoth options are intended to be consistent with domestic law. Restricted yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted . We conclude that a permissive approach is the best way to achieve the policy objectives and to address the problems that have been identified. While a permissive regime provides for less certainty and predictability than a prescriptive regime in the shortterm until practice and caselaw has been established, a prescriptive regime carries a greater risk that the law will become outdated more quickly as the assumptions on which it is based no longer hold in the face of changes to technology and the market. As the permissive regime meets the other design criteria better than the prescriptive regime, our advice is that this approach is more suitable to the challenges of designing a legal framework for an industry undergoing fast paced technological change. High altitude activities regime B ackground . A key objective of the proposed space activities regime is to facilitate the development of a safe, secure and responsible New Zealand space industry. To future proof the legislation for ongoing developments in technology and to ensure that different technologies providing similar services are treated consistently, it is proposed that certain high altitude activities are brought within scope of the legislation. . In many cases, these technologies are dual purpose (military and civil). By including certain high altitude activities within the scope of the legislation, the New Zealand government will have the ability to control near space activities that originate from New Zealand territory and ensure that they are consistent with our national interests. This approach is consistent with the proposition that New Zealands space policy and space law should encompass all of New Zealands interests in space. The problem . The Civil Aviation Act governs the civil aviation system in New Zealand (international and domestic). It provides for the economic regulation of licensing and international air services competition for foreign and New Zealand international airlines. It also establishes the safety and security framework for civil aviation. Security in this context is read as aviation security. This is relatively narrow in scope only covering risks to safety from the carriage of dangerous goods and the risk to aviation security by unlawful interference with an aircraft. The CA Act has no powers to control activities or operations that may pose a threat to national security or are not in the national interest. . The current review of the CA Act may address this gap. Aircraft as defined in the CA Act includes balloons and remotely piloted aerial systems (RSPAs, sometimes known as drones). Rockets are not captured by this definition, and are therefore not covered by the regime, except for air traffic control purposes to ensure any rocket launch does not interfere with aircraft operations. The regulation of aircraft operations (including balloons and RSPAs) operating in near space is therefore unsatisfactory from a national security national interest perspective. . The lack of a regulatory framework for high altitude activities creates the following problems: yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted Lack of certainty for commercial operators about what rules apply to their activities in New Zealand. This may inhibit investment in research and development activities and new business ventures.
Nominations are now closed, the nominees can be found below.
Nominees should be from the following categories:
Nominees should demonstrate a commitment to excellence in scientific research and cooperation with scientists from other APEC member economies, including inclusive and interdisciplinary collaborations in subjects such as:
Non legislative actions aimed at resolving Holidays Act compliance issues have been progressed
Nonstandard employment arrangements will have additional criteria for access to the scheme:
None identified at this stage
None identified at this stage.
North Island Weather Events Primary Producer Finance Scheme
Not have a permanent position (in general, scientists with permanent positions, in particular the professortenure level, will not be admitted to the Summit).
Not have participated onsite in previous GYSS, with the exceptions of GYSS and (online editions), and
Not less than day per week deliveries to . of delivery points.
Note that Section o f the Act allows the Minister to treat an overseas licence, permit or other authorisation as satisfying some or all of the criteria for the granting of a launch licence, overseas launch
Note that Section of the Act allows the Minister to treat an overseas licence, permit or other authorisation as satisfying some or all of the criteria for the granting of a payload permit or overseas payload permit. . Payload permits may not be granted for objects smaller than U unless they can demonstrate trackability or have a limited orbital lifetime .. Payloads that can suitably demonstrate trackability equivalent to a U object may be permitted if they mitigate trackability concerns related to their small size : These concerns are mitigated, for example, through the deployment of antenna, solar panels, o r other components that increase the radar cross section of the object to the equivalent of a U object , or the use of reflectors or beacons that transmit location data . Applicants should demonstrate the reliability and performance of the mechanism used t hrough testing, analysis or by other means. Assurance will be verified through the NZSAs own assessment process.
Note that some payload permits are for more than satellite.
Note that submissions may be requested under the Official Information Act (the OIA). If you have any objection to the release of any information in your submission, please clearly indicate this in your submission form, or cover email accompanying your submission. Clearly indicate which parts of your submission you consider should be withheld under the OIA and the reason why.
Note that the Contract and Commercial Law Act repealed and replaced the Electronic Transactions Act (in addition to other legislation), but only made nonconsequential amendments.
Note that the MBIE topup scheme does not apply to actions outside of Pillar .
Note that the data in the charts are calculated using undiscounted retail prices, and will therefore generally be at a higher level than our weekly importer margins. Take care when comparing these series.
Note: Events taking place between December and January are excluded in both years.
Note: Only applicants from ESA member or associate member countries are eligible to apply.
Note: The file Jobs Online Detailed occupational data is now a csv file and the formats of the variable names have changed.
Note: You can end the session at any time by closing the app or clicking the red X icon.
Note: version February
Noted We recommend simplifications to the framework for providing AL entitlement Cabinet agreed to changes to provide employees access to AL before entitlement arises
Noted and no action required This submission has been noted, but t he direct relevance of this submission to the Review is not clear. Note: While it is not within the remit of the OSHAA to prescribe the statutory requirements for environmental matters of the nature that the submitter has raised, adherence to New Zealands environmental legislation is incorporated into the OSHAA. There are several references in the Act which explicitly cites compliance with New Zealands environmental legislation as a requirement. For example, section ()(g)(iv) provides that, to obtain a launch licence, the licensee must conduct the launch and operations in a manner that complies with New Zealand law, including, without limitation, the Civil Aviation Act , any regulations and rules made under that Act, and all health and safety and environmental legislation. This is one of many similar provisions in the Act. ETHICAL INVESTMENT Robert Howell This submitter provided commentary on the theme of unethical investment funds and cited the OSHAA within their submission. The submission provides a suggestion regarding the definition of an ethical company and proposes that if this definition (or similar) were to be included in the Governme nts procurement policy, then the OSHAA could include a requirement to conform to this policy. As the Act does not relate to investment, it is difficult to see the analogy that is being drawn with New Zealand Government procurement. Notwithstanding that the OSHAA is cited, the Review considers this part of the submission to be outside the scope of t his review.
Nothing can be achieved without a plan, a workforce and a way of doing things
Notice process to cover file sharing infringements
Notice setting the criteria for selecting the New Zealand Food Safety Science and Research Centre host
Notwithstanding the above, New Zealand Post shall continue to provide:
Now that our border is open and we are welcoming back international visitors, the tourism sector is beginning to rebuild. Global and domestic challenges will continue to impact the recovery. There is uncertainty in the global economy, including inflationary pressures, high fuel and other travel costs, reduced air connectivity, labour shortages and constrained supply chains.
Now that you have read about different aspects of our proposed New Zealand Income Insurance Scheme, what do you think overall Do you think New Zealand needs the scheme, taking into account what employers and employees will need to pay What do you see as the strengths and weaknesses of the scheme
Now the advantage of having all that is probably an easier consenting process. Its also easier to talk to the various users and users of the building. But also with the complexity of the range of users here, it also means that a lot of things can be simulated and tried out. When you look at things like energy efficiency, the carbon impact sustainability of the materials, longevity of the materials, going a bit beyond digital engineering and looking at a number of different things.
Now we have entered the design phase. So, we have a lot of options. As you can see some fancy little cartoon type of buildings appearing and disappearing and moving. So this is really just to emphasise that what wed be looking at with the use of the data that were going to be putting into this digital twin is to look at what options might work.
Now, were going to go and talk through a use case. So what weve looked at is a scenario where a digital twin could be used as a case in New Zealand. And weve chosen the built environment. And the reason for that is in the digital twin space, what were seeing is, thats probably the area where digital twins are becoming adopted, probably most quickly. Not exclusively, but the advantages of the digital twin are being seen in built environment spaces more quickly than other areas.
Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty
Nuclear disarmamentnonproliferation
Number of invoices for quarter
Number of payload permits approved
Numerous brands now sell green shell mussel oil, that product comes in a range of concentrations (of the lipid fraction).
O)based satellite propulsion technology for sustainable space transportation
OECD AI Principles overview
OECD Committee for Scientific and Technological Policy (CSTP)
OECD Global Science Forum
OIA statistics Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission
OIIR Export Control and Interagency Liaison Division (ECILD)
OPTION . The first option is to introduce an upper limit into the high altitude definition. There ar e a small number of jurisdictions that have adopted an upper spatial limit for the purposes of either defining when a launch licence is required or for the purposes of defining an upper limit of a high altitude regime. These are described below. Australia . The Space (Launches and Returns) Act incorporate s into the definitions of launch , return and space object, a reference to the distance of km above mean sea level . The launch and
ORCID identifiers (iDs) are a nonproprietary digit alphanumeric code that distinguishes you from other researchers. They are used to link all of your research outputs and activities together in a record that is integrated with other publishers, institutes, funders and researchrelated services.
OT and MoJ met with the Chief Justice of Kiribati in May to discuss working collaboratively with the Kiribati judiciary to implement child safeguarding measures in the adoption process, to prevent trafficking and exploitation of children. Due to the current political situation in Kiribati, which is impacting on the judiciary, this engagement has been on hold.
OT has begun collecting data on reports of concern (ROCs) which allege forced labour, child trafficking or slavery.
OT has completed a pilot test of the people trafficking training, and work to adapt the modules for an OT context will be prioritised in the first quarter of .
OT is continuing to collect data on reports of concern (ROCs) which allege forced labour, child trafficking or slavery. This includes data on demographics, key sectors involved, and source countries.
OT to identify training needs of evidential interviewers and develop training material access to existing training courses. OT also plans to conduct a gap analysis to identify current practices in interviewing victims, and what is needed to strengthen these practices, but it has not progressed in .
OT to identify training needs of evidential interviewers and develop training materialaccess to existing training courses.
Obligation to provide competitors with access to the NZ Post postal network.
Obligations of postal operators
Obtaining the scholarship is conditional upon the successful candidate signing a contractual agreement with MBIE and includes a number of obligations.
Occupations listed in Schedule A receive additional employment protections in certain restructuring situations set out in Subpart of Part A of the Employment Relations Act.
Ocean observation project takes New Zealand from world trailing to world leading
October Monthly Regional Tourism Estimates (MRTEs)
Of , kt of waste , ended up in landfill:
Of all the channels used, the Adviser Line at the Immigration Contact Centre was viewed most positively (). It was perceived as friendly, willing to help and having a positive attitude to problem solving. However, there were concerns about accuracy, consistency, and lack of specificity, leading to suggestions for improved staff training and more experienced staff on the line.
Of all the channels, advisers were least positive about their experience of dealing with VACs, with a quarter expressing dissatisfaction. They were unhappy with the time taken by VACs to submit completed applications, and their treatment of advisers as professionals. Suggested enhancements related to the need for improved communication between VACs and advisers, and keeping advisers on applications submitted through them.
Of those people granted residence in , . were still in New Zealand after years compared with . of those granted residence in .
Office Of The Privacy Commissioner
Office of the Deputy Secretaries
Office of the Deputy Secretary (BRM)
Office of the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety Cabinet Economic Policy Committee
Office of the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety Chair, Cabinet Economic Development Committee
Office of the Ombudsman Response Calculator
Office of the Privacy Commissioner
Office of the Privacy Commissioner, if relevant.
Officers (eg director or chief executive)
Official Information Act
Official Information Act release
Official Information Act requests
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace February (part of ) PDF .MB
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace February (part of ) PDF MB
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace February (part of ) PDF MB
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace February (part of ) PDF MB
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace February (part of ) PDF MB
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace February (part of ) PDF .MB
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace February (part of ) PDF .MB
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace February (part of ) PDF MB
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace February (part of ) PDF MB
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace February (part of ) PDF MB
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace February (part of ) PDF .MB
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace February (part of ) PDF KB
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace February (part of ) PDF .MB
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace February (part of ) PDF .MB
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace February (part of ) PDF .MB
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace February (part of ) PDF MB
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace February (part of ) PDF MB
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace February (part of ) PDF MB
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace February (part of ) PDF .MB
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace February (part of ) PDF MB
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace February (part of ) PDF .MB
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace February (part of ) PDF MB
Official Information Request form
Officials from the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) are currently working to design the details of the new approach.
Offshore petroleum permit granted and Block Offer tender opens
Offshore renewable energy
Older Workers ( and over)
Older Workers Employment Action Plan released in April
Older Workers Employment Action Plan launched
Older energy consultations and reviews
Oliver Valins, Chief Advisor to the Secretary
Oliver holds a PhD in Geography from the University of Glasgow.
On May the Consumer Information Standards (Origin of Food) Regulations (the Regulations) were made under the Fair Trading Act . These Regulations give effect to the requirements in the Act by setting the detailed country of origin labelling requirements.
On December , the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs released a discussion document seeking comment on potential disclosure regulations for thirdparty fundraisers who are making requests for funds for charitable purposes.
On June the Scheme was extended months from the original end of June , to December .
On July the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) was officially designated as a Child Welfare and Protection Agency (CWPA) under the Oranga Tamariki Act .
On April , MBIE on behalf of the Minister for ACC released a consultation document on proposed changes to regulations made under the Accident Compensation Act , essentially addressing the following three topics: Chinese medicine, paramedics, and audiometrists.
On December the Minister for Media and Communications agreed to amend the Chorus TSO Deed to enable Chorus to retire Customer Multi Access Radio (CMAR) and Country Set (CS) legacy technology used to provide TSO telephone service.
On December , Cabinet confirmed the proposed levy rates outlined in the table below.
On December , the Fair Pay Agreements legislation was repealed.
On August , following a recommendation of the Financial Markets Authority, the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs placed a number of entities and subsidiaries of the Du Val Group into statutory management under the Corporation (Investigations and Management) Act .
On January the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) opened consultation on options to address safety risks presented by corded window coverings. MBIE is seeking feedback on a range of options to further address the safety risks corded window coverings pose to young children.
On February , we met with you to discuss
On December , MBIE released the Te Ara Paerangi Future Pathways White Paper. The white paper included key policy directions and actions for the Te Ara Paerangi programme. These are no longer proceeding.
On application for confirmation of an amalgamation or transfer under section () of the Act . The service has not been provided in years. There are only three remaining credit unions, therefore it is anticipated that this service can be managed with no additional fee. Table : Proposed fees for Retirement Villages register services (excluding GST) Retirement Villages register Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge (recovering m) Current charge (fee) Change in charge change Registration application . . . . (.) () Annual return ( units) . . . . Annual return ( units) . . . . . Annual return ( units) ,. ,. ,. . includes the financial statement filing cost of . Registration and application annual return fees There is currently a single application fee, and fees for the annual return are set using a tiered system based on the number of units available for occupation by residents (i.e. less than units; to units; or more than units). The overall cost to manage the register has risen since . However, the cost of delivering these services has shifted from being incurred mainly by processing registration applications, to the processing of key information and reviewing financial statem ents in the form of an annual return. There are fewer than new registrations per year, but approximately annual returns. When fees were last set in the cost for the Companies Office to review annual financial statements was not included. It was incorrectly assumed that these costs would be able to be recovered through the financial reporting statement filing fee under the Companies Act . Therefore, the proposed annual return fee now includes the cost of filing financial statements (. regardless of the number of units). We propose to increase the annual return fees but reduce the application fee. We propose that retirement villages continue to pay a tiered annual return fee according to the number of units they have, because it remains more equitable for larger retirement villages to pay a higher fee as they have a larger base by which to recover that cost. Land transfer fees It is proposed that sections (b)(c), (a) (c) and of the Retirement Villages (Fees) Regulations are amended to refer to fees charged by the Registrar General of Land, as set out in the Land Transfer Act , and the regulations thereunder . Under the Retirement Villages (Fees) Regulations , registration of Retirement Villages on property titles ( regulation ), notifying the Registrar of any changes to the property, building or premises comprising a retirement village ( regulation ), and any request to cancel the registration of a village ( regulation ) has prescribed fees equivalent to amounts charged by Land Information New Zealand (LINZ) under an outdated version of the Land Transfer Regulations . These fees should align with the fees set routinely by LINZ for comparable transactions, currently set out in Schedule , Part of the Land Transf er Regulations . It is likely that the Land Transfer Regulations will be reviewed and amended again in the future. To reflect the current fee and avoid a future misalignment of fees between the Retirement Villages (Fees) Regulations and Land Transfer Regulations , it is proposed that instead of stating a specific fee, the Retirement Villages regulations refer to fees charged by the Registrar General of Land, as set out in the Land Transfer Act and the regulations made under the Act. Method of payment Currently the Retirement Villages (Fees) Regulations section refers to how fees and penalties may be paid. We propose that fees and penalties can no longer be paid by cheque, in line with financial service providers and government departments phasing out cheque payments in . Insolvency Practitioners Under the Insolvency Practitioners Regulation Act the Companies Office is responsible for maintaining a register that captures key information about licensed insolvency practitioners that is provided to accredited bodies. The current fees and levy came into effect on September . Section propose s no change in the levy amount of . that is collected from users on the Companies register. Table below shows the proposed adjustments to current fees for insolvency practitioners. Table : Proposed fees for Insolvency Practitioners register services (excluding GST) Insolvency Practitioners register Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee) Change in charge change Licence registration . . . . . Annual confirmation . . . . (.) () Registration and annual return fees The registration fee was first established using the higher volume of practitioners becoming licensed under the Insolvency Practitioners Regulation Act . Now that the scheme has been established the register operating cost is less than forecast, but the annual forecast of new practitioners has also decreased resulting in a proposed increased registration fee. On the other hand, overall, there are more practitioners licensed than forecast, with reduced operating costs related to the annual confirmation p rocess resulting in a proposed decrease in the annual confirmation fee. Auditors Under the Auditor Regulation Act the Companies Office is responsible for maintaining a register that captures key information of licensed auditors received from accredited bodies. The fees have not been adjusted since . The proposed fees in Table on the next page reflect the general increase of the cost of the service since that time. Table : Proposed fees for Auditors register services
On this page you will find links to previous Economic Development initiatives and plans.
OnDemand services are readily available for common and widely spoken languages. Some rare languages may require prebooking as they may not always be available ondemand.
Once ACC has concluded its review, it must provide a report to the Minister for ACC giving the results of the review and its recommendations. The report is required to be delivered by December in the year the review is conducted.
Once implemented, MBIE would be the agency responsible for administering the legislation. Following the consultation process, we will develop a plan to support businesses and payroll providers. The plan will include recommendations for new tools, r esources, guidance and engagement activities,
Once in force, the new law will enable collective contracts to be negotiated. Occupational contracts will come into effect months after bargaining concludes. Enterprise contracts will come into effect when they are signed by bargaining parties, or at a later if agreed.
Once nominations are received, PPSTI members across the APEC region rank the nominees through a selection ballot to determine the winner.
Once the assessment is completed, we release a public summary of the assessment.
Once the relevant team in MBIE receives your complaint you can expect that they:
Once we have considered the submissions, we will develop the final proposals. If these proposals are approved by Cabinet, they will form the basis of revised regulations under the various pieces of legislation that regulate the fees and levies considered in this document. See the section Purpose of this document for a proposed timeline of key milestones.
Once you have submitted your feedback to us, all submissions will be analysed to help inform our final recommendations to the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs.
Once you start studying you will be able to decide what to specialise in to get into the type of work you really want to do.
One New Zealand Group Ltd
One issue the Accords deals with is space resource utilisation. The ability to use space resources (the mineral resources in and on the moon and other celestial bodies) is critical to enable the next phase of space exploration, including to the possibility of sending humans to Mars. Recent technological advances have made space resource utilisation feasible which has increased states interest in addressing it in national policy and regulation. Given the increasing importance of this issue, space resource utilisation needed to be considered alongside our membership in the Accords.
One of the learnings of these polls is never play the middle option.
One of the main reasons we looked at marine bioactives is that it is a great example of adding value to an existing biomass. New Zealand wild capture production peaked in and has been trending down since as quotas are reduced to maintain stock. Marine bioactives is using marine resources but one of the challenges here is the amount of marine resources we are taking out of the ocean, for very good and sustainable reasons, it is decreasing.
One of the most comprehensive global databases for standards relevant to circular economy revealed that there were international standards relating to circular economy as of . An example of this is the International Organization for Standardisation (ISO) working toward standard language and approaches for the circular economy (ISOTC ).
One of the other ways we look, we look at the supply chain here is looking at who participates across the supply chain, so, the is obviously a lot of dairy processes moving into specialist ingredients, importers and then a lot of manufacturers and blenders, contract manufacturers and a lot of brand only which have been manufactured by others which are then being exported or just supplied to the local market.
One of the proposals in the Masterplan, released to the public in July , was to place controls on accessing the road from Te Anau to Milford Sound Piopiotahi. The Masterplan proposed to do this in two ways:
One of the recommendations was that the National Plan that outlines how MBIE and the partner agencies manage interference with permitted offshore petroleum and minerals activities under the Crown Minerals Act be refreshed.
One onshore petroleum exploration permit granted
One onshore petroleum exploration permit has today been granted through the Block Offer competitive tender process.
Onefifth of those approved were under the
Oneoff pieces of research.
Oneoff research project resulting in publications in .
Ongoing ownership of this policy and ensuring compliance.
Online Crimestoppers form
Online dispute resolution ()
Online dispute resolution PDF KB
Online financial scams are a growing problem in New Zealand. Losses were just under million dollars in . The issue crosses a number of sectors, including banking, telecommunications, and digital platforms. Work has been underway to establish a coordinated approach to combatting scams.
Online job advertisements are a proxy for all job advertisements as there are other forms of advertising. Online job advertisements are also a proxy for job vacancies, a key indicator of labour demand, as some vacancies are not advertised. Duplicate advertisements within each job board, across job boards and months are removed.
Online job advertisements continued to decline across all skill levels, with advertisements for unskilled jobs seeing the largest annual and year decline.
Online learning modules for public service staff
Only one data project application per applicant
Only postal operators designated as New Zealands Universal Postal Union administration can issue official New Zealand stamps, ie a stamp with the words, or abbreviation for New Zealand. Currently, New Zealand Post Ltd has sole right to this designation.
Open Government Partnership
Open access deeds of undertaking
Open access to weather data consultation
Open access to weather data review
Open and upcoming science and innovation funding opportunities
Open government and official information
Open letter to the banking sector
Opened in May , the Lake Dunstan Trail attracted over , users in its first year of operation, helping support local cafes and restaurants, wineries, accommodation providers and bike hire services in Cromwell, Clyde and the wider region.
Openly shared datasets should be accompanied by appropriate metadata including attribution and provenance information, and any other necessary information for researchers to appropriately understand the datasets and limitations thereof.
Operational Policy : Technical Capability . Purpose of this document This is the New Zealand Space Agency s (NZSA ) policy which sets out the approach that will be taken when assessing , and preparing advice for the Minister of Economic Development, whether an applicant is technically capable of safely conducting a launch, or safely operating a launch facility, under the Outer Space and High altitude Activities Act ( the Act ) and the Oute r Space and High altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations ( the Regulations ). . When to apply this policy This policy will be applied when assessing applications for: Launch licence Overseas launch licence Facility licence High altitude licence (where the vehicle proposed to be launched is not an aircraft) . Relevant sections in the Act and Regulations The Act require s the Minister to be satisfied that an applicant is technically capable of safely conducting the activities authorised by a licence in order to grant that licence . The exception is an application for a high altitude licence where the vehicle propos ed to be launched is an aircraft. The relevant sections in the Act are: ()(a) : When launch licence may be granted ()(a) : When overseas launch licence may be granted ()(a) : When facility licence may be granted ()(a)(i) : When high altitude licence may be granted The Regulations set out the information that needs to be provided with an application to demonstrate this tech nical capability. The relevant sections in the Regulations are:
Operational Policy: Technical Capability New Zealand Space Agency PDF KB
Operational policy and guidelines for public sector agencies
Operational satellite policy
Operational shift proposal by Janice Panoho PDF KB
Operators who wish to protect their name are advised to seek independent legal advice.
Opportunities for New Zealand
Opportunities for collaboration with a diverse range of other interns and staff are provided in both formal and informal settings.
Opportunity to have your say
Option to extend support for up to months for training and rehabilitation
Options for HAV Exemptions Option one no exempti ons . Cabinet agreed to include an exemption making power in the OSHAA Act for vehicles which undertake certain activities that are not intended to be subject to the high altitude regime (EGI MIN ) based on the associated level of risk. . Officials considered the possibility of not developing an exemption for certain classes of HAVs and instead relying on the ability to adopt a light touch licensing approach for low risk activities , and the ability to tailor licence conditions appropriate to the level of risk. We were also concerned to ensure that any exemption did not inadvertently exempt other activities that should be licenced. We were also proposing not to charge fees so that the only costs
Options for application requirements . The most significant aspect of the regulations is the information that is required to be submitted i n or with an application. W e have considered two main approaches to setting these requirements. These have been assessed in terms of how well they achieve the objectives of the OSHAA Act . Option Prescribe d etailed information requirements . Under this option, the regulations would prescribe detailed information requirements that would apply to all applicants for a particular licence or permit, irrespective of their background, technical expertise, the purpose of mission and the type of space technologies used in the operation . Applicants would need to submit all of the information even if it wasnt absolutely necessary to inform an assessment . This is consistent with a prescriptive approach . . There are a number of difficulties with adopting such an approac h. During the initial consultation phase on the regulations, MBIE received advice from industry participants that overly onerous information requirements would increase compliance costs for the industry and potentially deter operators from undertaking activities in New Zealand. In addition, MBIE received advice that the information requirements should, as far as possible, be modelled on comparable international licensing regimes to reduce the compliance costs on operators whose operations may be governed by an overseas licence as well as a New Zealand licence . In order to better understand overseas licensing requirements, MBIE considered a number of models for the application requirements including the United States, United Kingdom and Australia. Preferred o ption Minimum necessary requirements supported by information gathering powers and guidance for applicants . Our preferred option is to require applicants to provide th e annexed list of requirements (see Annex ) . The information requirements for licences and permits cover the following matters (the following list is a summary of the types of information required and not an inclusive list): Applicant details required for all licences and permits: e.g. name, address, contact details, current nationality, legal form of organisation, details of persons with more than ownership or control interest in the organisation. (This information is principally required to assess national security as well as to provide a key contact for licence and permit applications) Information about the proposed mission and purpose, and description of the vehicle(s) and payload(s): This includes as applicable a description of the vehicle and payload capabilities, ground systems used to support the operation, launch facility and over view of protective security (including cyber security) measures or policies in place. (This information is principally to assess national interests and national security)
Options to expedite transition of Growth Grant recipients RD tax incentive briefing PDF KB
Options to manage within different funding paths, and advice on the best path.
Or see the following page for more detailed information from MBIE on participation of New Zealand entities in Horizon Europe.
Orbital Debris Mitigation Operational Policy PDF KB
Orbital Debris Mitigation: Operational Policy IssueVersion Control Version Amendments V May New recognised standardsguidelines added Information for overseas hosted payloads added Clarification on verification process
Orbital debris mitigation An orbital debris mitigation plan that describes how the applicant will meet the following outcomes that reflect international best practice with respect to orbital debris mitigation: o Limitation of debris released during normal operations, o Minimisation of the potential for on orbit break ups; o Minimising the risk of collision; o Minimising the risk on Earth and in Space through post mission disposal.
Orbital debris An orbital debris mitigation plan that describes how the applicant will meet the following outcomes that reflect international best practice with respect to orbital debris mitigation: o Limitation of debris released during normal op erations, o Minimisation of the potential for on orbit break ups; o Minimising the risk of collision; o Minimising the risk on Earth and in Space through post mission disposal.
Ordinary Leave Pay (OLP): OLP is a new calculation proposed by the Taskforce to replace the existing Relevant Daily Pay and Ordinary Weekly Pay calculations. OLP would include the base rate for any hours worked i n the relevant period, plus pay for any scheduled overtime ,
Ordinary Leave Pay (OLP): OLP is a new calculation proposed by the Taskforce to replace the existing Relevant Daily Pay and Ordinary Weekly Pay calculations. OLP would include the base rate for any hours worked i n the relevant period, plus pay for any scheduled overtime , shrvakdix
Ordinary Weekly Pay (OWP): The amount an employee receives under their employment agreement for an ordinary working week, including regular allowances, regular productivity or incentive based payments (including commission and bonuses), the cash value of board or lodgings, and regular overtime . Intermittent or one off p ayments as well as discretionary payments and employer contributions to superannuati on schemes are not included in Ordinary Weekly Pay. If it is not possible to calculate the payment for an ordinary working week based on these factors then the Act includes a formula to be used to calculate O rdinary Weekly Pay (Sections , , A, , , , and of the Act ).
Organisational Capability and Assurance Committee (OrCA)
Organisations involved in the provision of specialised support services
Organisations, industry bodies and companies, not owned by the Government, funding or carrying out research.
Oro Mauri is dedicated to utilising western technology to cultivate and capture the sounds of taonga puoro (sacred instruments) and their healing properties by developing an app where users can customise their own healing tracks.
Otago Regional Workforce Plan
Otago Regional Workforce Plan update
Other agencies have roles and functions in the system but these agencies are not parties to the charter nor are they owners of it.
Other details Details of spectrum authorisations (current and pending) for the high altitude vehicle Details of spectrum authorisations for any earth stations within New Zealand jurisdiction that it is intended th e high altitude vehicle will transmit to or receive from International Telecommunications Union Advanced Publication Information (API) number(s) and associated status where required (when known)
Other details Details of spectrum authorisations (current and pending) for the high altitude vehicle Details of spectrum authorisations for any earth stations within New Zealand jurisdiction that it is intended the high altitude vehicle will transmit to or receive from Details related to an applicants fitness to hold a licence
Other details Details of spectrum authorisations (current and pending) for the high altitude vehicle Details of spectrum authorisations for any earth stations within New Zealand jurisdiction that it is intended the high altitude vehicle will transmit to or receive from International Telecommunications Union Advanced Publication Informatio n (API) number(s) and associated status where required (when known)
Other engaged stakeholders (eg universities and sector providers).
Other governement strategies
Other issues . . We are aware of a number of other issues that are not specifically related to entitlements and payments for annual holidays and BAPS leave, which are detailed in Annex Two.
Other issues: A number of more minor issues have also been identified through the consultation process and included in the Report.
Other key aspects of minimum sick leave entitlements, including the ability to accumulate up to days of unused sick leave, remain the same.
Other labour market reports
Other language service providers can also assist with document translation.
Other laws postal operators need to comply with
Other policy and briefing documents
Other projects taking place across government in response to the WhakaariWhite Island eruption include:
Other research outputs, such as presentations, reports, books and monographs are not covered by the policy. Research data are not covered by the Open Access mandate, although this policy guidance also includes recommendations for researchers around enabling access to research data where possible.
Other space activity in New Zealand includes:
Other useful resources are available from EURAXESS Australia and New Zealand, an initiative of the European Commission providing free information about European research, career opportunities, international collaboration networking possibilities.
Others at a workplace (eg visitors)
Otherwise Working Day (OWD): An O therwise Working Day is a day that an employee would have worked, if it was not for them being sick, being o n bereavement leave, being on family violence leave, being on annual holidays or it being a public holiday (Section s , , and of the Act ).
Our consultations and reviews for energyrelated issues.
Our consultations on energyrelated issues.
Our Annual Report shows our progress against our targets and outcomes for the year ended June .
Our Consumer Protection team report quarterly on New Zealands consumer issues landscape.
Our December advice to you indicated there were opportunities to simplify the Bill
Our Diversity Data Dashboard allows you to view the diversity data we have collected and gain an oversight into the diversity of applicants that have applied for MBIE science funding since . You can use it to see a picture of the diversity of our funding applications, whether successful or not, by fund, year, and information type.
Our Dynamic Earth (ENVS)
Our Energy modelling work programme produces projections of future energy supply, demand, prices and emissions.
Our European and US Counsellors also represent the New Zealand Space Agency overseas.
Our Future Services Programme Gateway Review Report Extract (October ) PDF .MB
Our Future Services is our roadmap to improve key areas:
Our Future Services: Detailed Business Case PDF .MB
Our International tourism forecasts are based on econometric modelling, current trends and forecasts of international factors, and are developed with tourism industry input.
Our Regulatory Systems Stewardship Strategy
Our Science Board is the statutory body responsible for making independent investment decisions for the Endeavour Fund and National Science Challenges.
Our Science Board is the statutory body responsible for making independent investment decisions for the Endeavour Fund, National Science Challenges and Partnerships.
Our Strategic Intentions Statement of Intent describes our role and function in the public sector; the outcomes we aim to achieve in support of the Government and New Zealand; and how success will be measured.
Our Trade and International team is responsible for overseeing standards and conformance infrastructure in New Zealand and advising the Government on related policy.
Our address or the email address for your MBIE contact
Our ambition for regulatory stewardship is to create and maintain regulatory systems that prevent harm and enable Aotearoa New Zealands people, businesses, and future generations to thrive. At the heart of this is the need for stewardship to be in our DNA. We also have an opportunity to leverage our scale, scope and connection.
Our analysis and commentary from our labour market forecasting programme informs New Zealand employers and government policy.
Our annual National Survey of Employers (NSE) collects data on workplace practices in New Zealand businesses within the context of current employmentfocused legislation.
Our arrangement with the UK Space Agency describes how New Zealand and the UK would work together on joint ADR and IOS missions, by establishing principles and guidance to reduce legal, policy, and regulatory barriers associated with multistate ADR and IOS missions.
Our assessment of regulatory systems
Our assessments are conducted by a small team of our staff not directly involved in the system, sometimes supplemented by a member from another agency.
Our business friendly environment and futurefocused policy and regulatory settings make New Zealand an attractive choice to research and develop new ideas and products.
Our capability priorities
Our collective focus areas
Our commitment to using ORCID iDs
Our current work programme includes negotiating and implementing labour commitments in trade agreements, meeting our reporting and relationship obligations to the International Labour Organization, participating in the APEC Human Resources Development Working Group and developing advice on a range of international labourfocussed policy issues including modern slavery and migrant worker exploitation.
Our datasets on data.govt.nz
Our employment strategy: Everyone working to deliver a productive, sustainable and inclusive New Ze.
Our employment website has
Our employment website has more information as follows:
Our employment website has the
Our employment website has the most uptoinformation about parental leave, including eligibility, payments and returning to work.
Our energy modelling work programme produces projections of future energy supply, demand, prices and emissions.
Our experimental Modelled Territorial Authority Gross Domestic Product (MTAGDP) estimates provide annual GDP estimates for territorial authority areas and industry groups.
Our followers can expect to receive regular updates covering some or all of the following:
Our funding and support programmes aim to build a highperforming science and innovation system that will transform New Zealand into a more diverse, technologically advanced, smart nation.
Our funding and support programmes aim to build a highperforming science and innovation system.
Our government is confidently backing entrepreneurs already working in spacerelated activities, and welcomes others to join our emerging space industry. This aligns to our goal to develop New Zealand as a hub for highvalue, knowledgeintensive businesses through innovation and research and development (RD).
Our innovative partnerships programme is dedicated to helping research and development intensive businesses connect, collaborate and invest in New Zealand.
Our international engagement programme includes visits to, and discussions with other national space agencies, potential investors and entrepreneurs and other government regulators.
Our international labour relations
Our involvement in space, RD, and worldleading innovative international science partnerships.
Our latest news and media releases.
Our laws minimise unnecessary prescription, by including detailed requirements in regulation. Compliance costs are also minimised, by enabling overseas licences to satisfy New Zealand requirements.
Our legislation empowers us to request or demand the information we need to give effect to that legislation, including to monitor and ensure compliance, as well as carry out investigations where we believe people or organisations may be in breach.
Our media centre provides contact details and links to common media topics.
Our mission is to regulate space and highaltitude activities, including launch and satellites
Our most recent occasional papers
Our older consultations and reviews on energyrelated issues.
Our onscreen and offscreen talent, our production facilities, and our unique landscapes continue to make an important contribution to the screen sector and the wider New Zealand economy.
Our onscreen and offscreen talent, our production facilities, and our unique landscapes continue to make an important contribution to the sector and the wider New Zealand economy.
Our open and scheduled science and innovation funding and investment opportunities.
Our organisational strategy: Te Ara Amiorangi
Our partnership has continued at pace since the collaboration began.
Our people are the greatest asset in meeting the challenges of the future. MBIE aims to deliver better support and more opportunities for the research, science and innovation workforce.
Our policy advice on maintaining an efficient standards and conformance infrastructure helps remove technical barriers to improve trade.
Our predictions for the future are never guaranteed, but are still useful tools for planning, weighing up different options and taking proactive action if risky situations arise. Our algorithms help us understand what our future may look like so that we can stay prepared. For example, using predictive analytics to estimate business health.
Our previous service provider (former ezispeak) went into liquidation in . MBIE has decided to take a strategic approach of procuring a panel of providers to deliver telephone and video interpreting language assistance services. This ensures there is a range of interpreters and languages available to meet the needs of service users and provide business continuity for New Zealand government.
Our proposals at a glance
Our proposed scheme aims to cover as many workers as possible to reflect the different ways people work, ensure more people can benefit and to keep costs low.
Our regulatory regime provides for the safe, responsible and secure use of space from New Zealand, and includes the following legislation which came into force in December :
Our regulatory regime supports the growth of a safe, responsible, and secure space industry that meets our international obligations and manages any liability arising from our obligations as a launching state.
Our research and evaluation reports are contained in our
Our role in the telecommunications sector
Our role is also to administer, advise, monitor, enforce and represent as follows.
Our role is to create better outcomes for all New Zealanders, particularly by supporting business growth.
Our scheme aims to help people find good new jobs that match their skills and aspirations. It also aims to help people use the time to learn new skills or rehabilitate from a health condition or disability.
Our scheme is designed to provide enough of a financial cushion that workers have the time and financial security to find a good new job, rehabilitate, or retrain for a different career.
Our scheme will be funded through levies on workers and employers
Our senior leadership team
Our senior leadership team works collaboratively to set and guide our strategic direction.
Our social media accounts may provide links to other websites or embed material which may contain information that is the copyright of third parties and subject to restrictions on use or reproduction.
Our strategic intentions statement of intent describes our role and function in the public sector; the outcomes we aim to achieve in support of the Government and New Zealand; and how success will be measured.
Our tools for drilling into uptoimmigration data are available on our
Our unique geography makes New Zealand a great location for space and advanced aviation activities
Our values help guide us to be the best organisation we can be, both as a place to work and for the people we serve.
Our ways of dealing with disputes in Aotearoa New Zealand have changed in recent decades in response to a range of social and other changes. There has been a search for more costeffective and quicker alternatives to traditional courtbased resolution, particularly for civil disputes.
Our websites have security measures in place to prevent the loss, misuse and alteration of information under our control. To maintain the cyber security of our systems and information, our systems are subject to ongoing monitoring (including activity logging), analysis and auditing.
Our youth employment action plan: Setting our young people on a strong pathway to fulfilling working.
Out of Scope, s ()(g)(i) Concerned that this might be indicative of wider compliance issues with the Act, MBIE engaged with a number of key payroll providers and employers in . This engagement indicated that problems with implementing the Act were likely to be widespread. U sing research data available at that time as proxies for variable hours and pay, MBIE estimated that between per cent and per cent of the workforce could be affected, with employees owed, on average, between and per year, and with a total cost to the economy (taking into account the potential for six years back pay) of between m illion and . b illion. The wide range is a result of the choice of proxy data used to quantify the issue. A targeted review of the Act was proposed in April . However, the previous Government did not proceed on the basis that some employees and employers were likely to be worse off. For example, if a yearly averaging approach to pay for annual holidays is taken, then employees whose current pay is greater than their yearly average would lose out. Instead, MBIE was asked to look for solutions within the current legislative framework. The Labour Inspectorate initiated a Payroll Strategy in that included a programme of proactive audits and investigations (and, subsequently, a number of watching briefs in which MBIE supports employers to undertake their own audits) to identify issues with payroll systems and remediate employees . The Inspectorates proactive audit programme initially focused on the largest employers in New Zealand. As of December , auditsinvestigations (including proactive audits) had been completed. All of these involved some degree of noncompli ance. Of these cases, have finished calculating and paying arrears. These payments totalled . million to , employees (not including NZ Police see below). Average pay outs to employees in each case ranged from to ,, and were under in out of the cases.
Out of these, ., that is people including myself, made it to the phase selection that focused on psychological performance and included cognitive, technical, motor coordination and personality tests. We were all invited to Hamburg, and flown there by the ESA. We had days since the lucky email arrived to sort out our travel availability, train every evening, go to work every day and deal with everything else you have to deal with preparing for a trip like that. I had to make sure I was not catching any COVID either as I would not have been able to come back to New Zealand. For me it also meant that I had to be away from my family for months as my quarantine spot was only on the of December but I was happy to do that. I was really lucky that I just had my second vaccine so I was all good to go.
Outbound tourism data (that is, New Zealanders leaving for overseas)
Outcomes Paper: Australian and New Zealand Standard Research Classification Review PDF KB
Outcomes of a dispute resolution scheme
Outcomes of the Recognised Seasonal Employer policy review PDF KB
Outer Space Treaty requires compliance with the UN Charter, which prohibits the threat or use of force except in limited circumstances.
Outer Space and High Activities Bill
Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill: Final Policy Decisions PDF KB
Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities (Definition of Highaltitude Vehicle) Regulations
Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations
Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations
Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations : Proposed Amendment.
Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities Act
Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities Act
Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities Act and associated regulations
Outer space and High Altitude (Licences and Permits) Regulations
Outer space and high altitude activities
Outer space and highaltitude activities regulatory system
Outlines that proposed changes to the MBIE Intelligence in the Data, Insights and Intelligence branch.
Outlines the new operating model for MBIE Property Services.
Outlines the new organisational structure at MBIE.
Over schools, and hospitals and health centres can access fibre broadband.
Over people provided feedback. Several recurring themes centred on delivering the benefits of tourism for New Zealand and New Zealanders and helped in framing the final Strategy.
Over detailed reports are available for use by:
Over million people live with rare diseases across Europe alone. Meet the Kiwi involved in a Horizon Europe project that aims to leave no one behind by prioritising research into new treatments, prevention, and diagnostic pathways for rare health conditions.
Over business and regulatory system and sector stakeholders engaged with by Employment NZ (ENZ) on ethical and sustainable work practice resources.
Over half () found employment in the Auckland region, followed by in Canterbury.
Over the months from July and June , almost . million trips were taken across the New Zealand Cycle Trail Great Rides network.
Over the last year, advertisements fell for all industries. Over the last years, since the March quarter, the only industry to see overall growth in advertisements was Education.
Over time, NZRIS will provide:
Over twothirds of student visa holders and threequarters of work visa holders had left New Zealand years after the end of those visas
Over twothirds were under the age of years and more likely to be male ().
Overall the feedback was strongly supportive of the possible future directions set out in the briefing, which focus on key areas of opportunity:
Overall, the review found that the rapid building assessment system is perceived as a sufficient system for a building emergency response framework in AotearoaNew Zealand.
Overview of AEWV PDF KB
Owners of existing works (including power poles, overhead lines, and other infrastructure connected with the provision of electricity) can now enter the land on which those works are located, and use the works to deploy, maintain, and upgrade fibre optic cable for delivering telecommunications services.
P ayroll providers and payroll practitioners MBIE consulted were of the unanimous view that, given the scale and complexity of the changes
PAGE APP MBSEP APP ADDITIONAL KEY PERSONS FOR TECHNICAL CAPABILITY DETAILSAdditional Key Persons for Technical Capability Details This form is used for applications made under the Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities Act for when there are multiple key persons relied upon for their technical capability in conducting a safe launch. Please provide the reference number for the application this form is associated with (if you have one), otherwise the name of the applicant in the application form: Your reference number Completing this form Where you are providing information on this form; you can do this by responding to the questions either directly on the form, or if needed by attaching a separate document and noting this on the form. Please provide evidence that the applicant is technically capable of conducting a safe launch, including the following information about each person who has technical capability relied on in the evidence. Full name Relationship to the applicantSummary of evidence of qualifications or previous experience to undertake the activity (evidence must be attached) Any other information considered relevant to assist with the assessment of technical capability MBSEP APP ADDITIONAL KEY PERSONS FOR TECHNICAL CAPABILITY DETAILSPAGE Full name Relationship to the applicantSummary of evidence of qualifications or previous experience to undertake the activity (evidence must be attached) Any other information considered relevant to assist with the assessment of technical capability Full name Relationship to the applicantSummary of evidence of qualifications or previous experience to undertake the activity (evidence must be attached) Any other information considered relevant to assist with the assessment of technical capability
PAGE APP MBSEP APP ADDITIONAL OVERSEAS AUTHORISATION DETAILSAdditional Overseas Authorisation Details This form is used for applications made under the Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities Act for which there are multiple Overseas Authorisations being submitted for recognition by the New Zealand Space Agency. Completing this form Where you are providing information on this form; you can do this by responding to the questions either directly on the form, or if needed by attaching a separate document and noting this on the form. Please provide the reference number for the application this form is associated with (if you have one), otherwise the name of the applicant in the application form: Your reference number .. For each overseas authorisation please provide: The jurisdiction in which the overseas authorisation was applied for or granted. The name and contact details of the overseas regulator that is considering or has granted the overseas authorisation. The person who has been granted or is likely to be granted the overseas authorisation. If the person described in item (c) is not the applicant, that persons relationship to the applicant. MBSEP APP ADDITIONAL OVERSEAS AUTHORISATION DETAILSPAGE .. For each overseas authorisation that was granted please provide: of grant it came into force (if different) Duration Number or identifier (if any) Attach a copy of the overseas authorisation (preferred) or a provide a description of its contents (including information about any conditions imposed under it) If it has been suspended or revoked, the of any suspension or revocation .. For each overseas authorisation that has been applied for but not yet granted or declined please provide: The of the application A description of the overseas authorisation applied for
PAYG can be a fair and simple way for e mployers to provide AL entitlement in employment situations where work is genuinely intermittent and employees have no obligation to perform work that is offered. It avoids the need for complex calculations to determine what a week of entitlement means for an eligible employee and what they should be paid for AL they have used. Further, where an employer opts to offer PAYG, employees must always be offered the choice of PAYG or receiving AL entitlement so that they can receive their AL pay during periods th ey do not work.
PCBU (eg business or organisation)
PDF versions of the individual submissions received are available below:
PEACEFUL USES OF OUTER SPACE Aotearoa New Zealand Peace Foundation
PERSON PROSECUTING : Insert name of person who signed charging documents DEFENDANT: Insert name of defendant CHARGES : Insert description of charges ( eg. x Produces a fraudulently obtained passport ) SECTION and ACT: Insert section and Act charges laid under eg. ( s Immigration Act )
PO Box , Wellington
PO Box Wellington
PO Box , Wellington
PO application for registration form
PO Declaration by Individuals, Directors and Chief Executives form
PO Change registration details
PO Change registration form
PPSTI members will judge the nominees based on how well they have demonstrated:
PROs will be grouped by focus area:
Pacific Employment Action Plan
Pacific Employment Action Plan released in May
Pacific Essential Skills workers were more likely to be employed as Technicians and Trades Workers and as Labourers.
Pacific Immigration Development Community (PIDC) Information Sharing Working Group workshop planned for Feb .
Pacific Migrants Trends and Settlement Outcomes report
Pacific Migrants Trends report
Pacific Peoples labour market trends
Pacific Wellbeing Strategy
Pacific international students were more likely to be studying in New Zealand as dependents of temporary work or student visa holders. In :
Pacific migrants interviewed in LISNZ faced a number of challenges to becoming successful and settled in New Zealand, including limited English and low education, which may have caught many in lowpaying or parttime work and made them particularly vulnerable to economic conditions.
Pacific migrants report similar or better settlement outcomes than other migrants on some indicators
Pacific migrants trends report
Pacific migrants with residence are more likely to stay in New Zealand
Pacific residence approvals have remained stable over the last years almost half approved under the Family visa stream.
Paid Parental Leave Questions and answers
Pamfleet Promotions Ltd ta Pamfleet Post
Panel providers have signed an agreement with MBIE to provide face to face interpreting services. Providers have agreed to standardised terms, conditions, service levels and pricing. Terms outside the agreement cannot be negotiated for individual government agencies (except for service levels, where providers and individual government agencies can agree to higher service levels). Any changes to pricing need to be agreed by MBIE and the provider in a contract variation. Any contract variations would apply equally to all participating government agencies.
Parallel importing allows retailers, wholesalers and other parties to get import for resale goods subject to copyright and trade mark rights in New Zealand directly from licensed or authorised overseas sources, instead of dealing with local suppliers, licensees or agents.
Parallel importing in New Zealand
Parallelimported goods are not pirated and counterfeit goods. They are genuine and lawful goods that have been put into circulation in another country either by, or with the consent of, the owner of the relevant copyright or trade mark.
Parental leave for parents of preterm babies
Parliamentary Corporation
Parliamentary Treaty Examination: Report of the EDSI Select Committee PDF, KB
Parliamentary UnderSecretary to the Minister for Infrastructure
Parliamentary UnderSecretary to the Minister for Media and Communications
Part : Context, the case for change, and options
Part : Overview of the Economy by Sector
Part : Questions for you
Part : Crosscutting Sectors
Part : Next steps and implementation
Part of the Contract and Commercial Law Act
Part of the Contract and Commercial Law Act (formerly the Electronic Transactions Act )
Part A (Subpart Three) of the ERA requires employment agreements to contain an Employee Protection Provision (EPP) that sets out the process employers will follow in restructuring situations. The EPP must also include the matters employers will negotiate regarding the affected e mployees employment, including whether they will have the choice to transfer employment on the same terms and conditions. Rescind this decision and: For employees specified in Schedule A of the ERA, retain the status quo provided for in the ERA. For employees not specified in Schedule A of the E RA, expand the matters that EPPs must state employers will negotiate (if transfer of employment is negotiated) to the following : o whether or not employment wi ll be treated as continuous for the purpose of determining the employees service related entitlements (including leave entitlements under the Act and rights and benefits under PLEPA) ; o whether or not the new employer will recognise all or part of the employees annual and alternative holiday entitlements not taken or exchanged for payment before the of transfer (instead of the outgoing employer paying them out in accordance with the Act); o whether or not the new employer will recognise all or part of an employees family violence, bereavement and sick (FBS) leave entitlements not taken or exchanged for payment before the of transfer ; o whether or not, where recognition of annual leave and alternative holiday and FBS leave entitlements is negotiat ed, an employee will be provided a choice in the matter or it will be automatic if they choose to transfer their employment . The ERA would also include the following requirements when any of the above is negotiated:
Part A of the Employment Relations Act (the ERA) already provides tha t, when employees specified in Schedule A of the E RA are affected by restructuring , they must be offered choice to transfer employment to the incoming employer, and if they do, their leave entitlements must be automatically transferred. This explicitly overrides the Holidays Act requirement to pay out entitlements. For types of employees not specified in Schedule A, the decision by employers to offer employees the opportunity to transfer their employment in a restructuring situation is a contractual cho ice.
Partial Test Ban Treaty
Partial economic assessment of MOUs for the Uplift of the New Zealand Screen Production Grant
Participants in the targeted consultation included stakeholders comprising employers, employees, and technical experts, across various industries, sectors, and population groups. MBIE selected the participants from those who registered interest in participating in June .
Participating agencies can use whichever panel provider they choose. You should always treat providers fairly, by giving them as much notice as possible of requests and decisions. Give advice of any change with as much notice as possible.
Participating in other parts of Horizon Europe
Participation in face to face interpreting services panel and telephone and video interpreting services is voluntary, through an Open Syndicated Contract.
Participation in the programme does not count towards academic credit for any New Zealand qualification.
Participatory Science Platform
Partner internationally on advanced research with worldleading research institutes, including our current partnerships with NASA, the German Aerospace Center (DLR) and SmartSat CRC.
Partnership with private investors
Partnership work visa stream
Partnerships Programmes
Past enquiries or reviews of economic regulation
Past reviews of the Commerce Act
Paul Stocks, Deputy Secretary, Building, Resources and Markets
Paul Stocks, Deputy Secretary, Building, Resources and Markets (BRM)
Paul has held a number of management roles at Treasury, with responsibility for areas including education, market interventions and tax policy. He also worked at the Ministry of Health and the New Zealand Planning Council.
Pay Transparency presentation by the National Advisory Council on the Employment of Women PDF KB
Pay deductions for partial strikes
Pay deductions for partial strikes to be reintroduced
Pay the greater of POWP and PAWEm Deduct portion of a week (P) from annual holidays balance Confirm range Confirm day is an Otherwise Working Day Pay RDP or ADP Deduct days from balance (for sick and family violence leave) Lack of clarity about how to determine when a day is an Otherwise Working Day Unclear when RDP and ADP can be used. Unclear how to include commissions and overtime into RDP Lack of clarity about what constitutes a working week Lack of clarity about how to calcula te P Unclear how to incorporate commissions and overtime into OWP, when to use OWP averaging approach Calculate RDP (if possible, pay is constant) Calculate ADP (if RDP not possible, pay varies)
Pay the greater of POWP and PAWEm Deduct portion of a week (P) from annual holidays balance Confirm range Confirm day is an Otherwise Working Day Pay RDP or ADP Deduct days from balance (for sick and family violence leave) Lack of clarity about how to determine when a day is an Otherwise Working Day Unclear when RDP and ADP can be used. Unclear how to include commissions and overtime into RDP Lack of clarity about what constitutes a working week Lack of clarity about how to calcula te P Unclear how to incorporate commissions and overtime into OWP, when to use OWP averaging approach Calculate RDP (if possible, pay is constant) Calculate ADP (if RDP not possible, pay varies) shrvakdix
Payasyougo (PAYG) annual holiday pay: Employees who meet either of two specific sets of criteria (i.e. are on a fixed term arrangement for less than months , or work on an intermittent or irregular basis ) can agree with their employer to be paid annual holiday pay on top of their gross earnings for each pay period, instead of receiving paid annual holida ys (provided that certain requirements are satisfied) (Section of the Act ).
Paying out some of the annual holiday entitlement: This is commonly referred to as cashing up some annual holidays. Employees can ask their employer to pay out up to a maximu m of one week of their minimum four week annual holiday entitlement each entitlement year (instead of taking the time off as paid annual holidays). The employee must make the request for this pay out and the request must be in writing. Employers may have a policy against paying out (including in an applicable collective agreement), but even if they do not have such a policy they do not have to agree to a pay out (Sections A to F of the Act ).
Payload owners by organisation type
Payload permitting summary for PROTOSAT.
Payload permitting summary for StriX.
Payload permitting summary for approved payload QPSSAR.
Payloads approved for launch
Payloads are objects that are carried, placed, or intended to be carried or placed in outer space. Permits are required for payloads launched from New Zealand and for New Zealand payloads that are launched overseas.
Payloads launched from New Zealand must meet tests to ensure public safety, minimise potential to create orbital debris. They must also be consistent with international obligations, national security, and wider national interest.
Payloads of a size less than U Operational Policy PDF KB
Payloads of a size less than U : Operational Policy . Purpose of this document This is the New Zealand Space Agency (NZSA ) policy relating to the consideration of applications for payload permits made under the Outer Space and High altitude Activities Act (the Act) and in accordance with the Outer Space and High altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations ( the Regulations ), where the proposed payload is of a size less than U (a unit of satellite volume equivalent to a cm cube). It sets out the approach that will be taken by the NZSA when assessing applications under the Act. . When to apply this policy This policy will be applied when assessing applications for: Payload permit s Overseas payload permit s . Relevant sections in the Act and Regulations The Act requires the Minister to be satisfied that the applicant has taken and will continue to take all reasonable steps to safely manage the operation of a payload and thro ugh an orbital debris mitigation plan (ODMP ) that the applicant has taken measures to minimise the risk of collision with debris. The relevant sections in the Act and the Regulations are: () : Application for payload permit ()(b) : When payload permit may be granted ()(b) : When overseas payload permit may be granted Regulation : Requirements for orbital debris mitigation plan
Payloads that contribute to nuclear weapons programmes or capabilities.
Payloads to continue to be considered on a casebycase basis.
Payloads where the intended end use is likely to cause serious or irreversible harm to the environment.
Payloads with the intended end use of harming, interfering with, or destroying other spacecraft, or space systems on Earth.
Payloads with the intended end use of supporting or enabling specific defence, security or intelligence operations that are contrary to government policy.
Payment for annual holidays and leave should be based on clear rules . The Taskforce proposed that annual holidays payments should be paid at the greater of a short run average weekly earnings over the last or weeks, a longrun average weekly earnings over the last weeks, and what the employee would have earned if they had been at work on the day(s) in question (referred to as Ordinary Leave Pay). FBAPS leave payments would be paid at the greater of the average hourly pay over the last weeks or Ordinary Leave Pay.
Payment methodology consolidation
Payment methodology: In , Cabinet accepted the Holidays Act Taskforce s
Payment times are measured from when an invoice is entered into agencies financial systems. The majority of invoices received are entered into agency financial systems within working day.
Payments such as penal rates and overtime rates would be included in the average hourly rate and apply to all hours on any da y, regardless of whether those rates wou ld have actually applied.
Pays . per week in levies
Pays . a week in levies
Pays . a week in levies
Peerreview conference proceedings
Peerreviewed journal articles
Penalties for nonregistration
People are at the core of the RSI system. Their skills, ideas and connections are vital to the creation, communication and application of knowledge. We want to ensure that people in the RSI workforce are supported to work to their full potential, in a system that supports their career development and overall wellbeing.
People are skilled and engaged in safe and fulfilling work
People can only receive six months of insurance payments every months. This can be spread over multiple claims (using any unused financial support), and the months begins from the first claim.
People can work parttime while receiving payments
People combining work with formal education
People concerned in business management: Karthik Krishnamurthy (Director), Teo Bee Hoon (Director), Gerard Willsher (Director), Sharon Souproanuck
People concerned in business: Bryan Running, Neil Jamieson, Janette Lye, Jasmine Estelle George, Paul Bailey, Steven McIvor
People concerned in business: Dennis Welby and Sharon Welby
People concerned in business: Robin Alker (Director), Mark Christopher Brightwell (Director)
People leaders approving or declining flexible working proposals or arrangements must follow the appropriate procedures.
People leaders support, champion and role model flexible working for their teams and themselves.
People who hold or have previously held citizenship in a country listed on the NASA Designated Countries List are not eligible to apply for this scholarship. Please refer to the OIIR Export Control web page for the most uptolist.
People who hold resident visas are not able to operate or invest in a commercial sex business in New Zealand. If a resident visa holder operates or invests in such a business they are deemed to have breached the conditions of their visa and may become liable for deportation.
People who keep working while unwell are much less productive, and when it takes longer to recover, important skills can be lost.
People who wish to migrate permanently to New Zealand enter through of the residence streams of the New Zealand Residence Programme. These are the SkilledBusiness Stream, Family stream and InternationalHumanitarian stream.
People will be encouraged and supported in their job search. In rare cases of a pattern of noncompliance, people will be given notice and time to meet their obligations. If they fail to do so, insurance payments may be temporarily stopped.
People will have the opportunity to have their say on the changes during the Select Committee process.
People working in New Zealand will pay insurance levies to support them if they lose their job.
People working multiple jobs are eligible if they lose a job that provides more than of their income. Any payments will top up these workers to of their previous income.
Periodic analysis of trends will identify any parts of the business where additional support may be required to enable flexible working.
Permanent employee: A person employed on an ongoing indefinit e basis.
Permanently reinstate the rights that allow fibre providers to access shared property to install fibre in certain circumstances and make minor adjustments to the rights to improve their effectiveness
Permits and licences for space activities
Permitting decision summary for StardustMe Limiteds SD to SD
Permitting decision summary: Research Trust of Victoria University of Wellington
Permitting decision summary: StardustMe Limited
Person concerned in business and contact person: Ben Norrie
Person concerned in business and contact person: Clinton John McInnes.
Person concerned in business and contact person: Gareth Foster
Person concerned in business and contact person: Joshua McLairn
Person concerned in business and contact person: Sandra Todd
Person concerned in the business management: Frank Martin Janssen (Managing Director), Dagmar Anja Giradet (Director), Klaus Giradet (Director), Sibilla Anja Beate Giradet (Director), Raymond Goubitz (Director), Stephanie Katja Bertha McGill (Director), Antonia Barbara Elisabeth Wright (Director).
Person concerned in the business management: Murray Bell, Elizabeth Bell
Personal characteristics, selfmanagement, and interpersonal skills
Personal grievances: A threshold for unjustified dismissals
Personal grievances: A threshold for unjustified dismissals PDF KB
Personal grievances: Second order policy issues for an income threshold
Personal grievances: Second order policy issues for an income threshold PDF KB
Personal journeys of New Zealand researchers
Personalised interpreter training
Personnel and Resources
Peter Fraser New Zealand Mori Council (WAI claimant)
Petroleum and Minerals Report
Petroleum and Minerals report
Petroleum and minerals regulatory system
Ph: or
Phase Rural Broadband Initiative contracts
Phase Rural Broadband Initiative open access requirements
Phase UltraFast Broadband Initiative
Phase broadband initiative documents
Phase deployment (completed)
Phase was completed in June and provided new or improved broadband to over , rural households and businesses
Phase : February to June
Phase deployment (in progress)
Phase : July to June
Phase : July to December
Phased return to work i.e., employees gradually increasing their hours on returning from longterm leave; phased retirement i.e., employees gradually reducing their hours as they approach retirement; seasonal working i.e., to cover busy periods and job sharing i.e., splitting a role with another employee.
Phil has a long history of supporting startups to grow, including through his role as a founding partner at the venture capital fund Movac, which has invested in a number of successful New Zealand earlystage ventures. As the former Chair of the Angel Association New Zealand, he brings extensive experience in investment into startup firms and helping to guide their growth, as well as an awareness of wider international trends.
Phone interpreting service is available ondemand or prebooked, and video translation service is available prebooked.
Phone: or
Phone: or
Phone: or
Photo credit: Camilla Stoddart
Photo credit: Daniel Wrench
Photo credit: Ola Thorsen, US Embassy
Physical Chemistry (CHEM)
Physical Chemistry (CHEM)
Physical address: Stout Street, Wellington
Physics of the Earth and Planets (PHYS)
Pike River Recovery Agency
Pike River Recovery Agency annual reports
Pilot of modern slavery training modules for Pacific countries delayed due to COVID restrictions.
Piripi Walker Nga Kaiwhakapmau i Te Reo (WAI claimant) ) )
Place of business: Bernard Street, Two Mile Bay, Taupo
Place of business: Strathmore Avenue, Levin
Place of business: Sir Woolf Fisher Drive, East Tamaki, Auckland
Place of business: Rosebank Road, Avondale, Auckland,
Place of business: Botha Road, Penrose, Auckland
Place of business: Havill Street, Palmerston North
Place of business: Frye Crescent, Wanaka,
Place of business: Chatham Islands (Pitt Island Waitangi)
Place of business: Ground Floor, New Zealand Post House, Waterloo Quay, Wellington
Place of business: Level , Johnsonville Road, Johnsonville, Wellington
Place of business: Unit F, Richard Pearce Drive, Auckland Airport, Manukau
Plan implementation: roles, responsibilities, resources
Plan of action against forced labour, people trafficking and slavery
Plan of action against forced labour, people trafficking and slavery PDF KB
Plan of action implementation reports
Plannedexisting event promotion budget
Planning for the safety case
Plant Variety Rights Act review
PlantTech Research Institute
Playing our part in the global immigration system, together with border partners to keep New Zealand safe.
Please contact the New Zealand Space Agency if you need help or have questions.
Please do not leave your computer unattended during the screen share session.
Please email any questions or comments about the briefing to the Employment, Education and Training Secretariat below.
Please email your thoughts and feedback to:
Please forward the survey on our behalf to your suppliers, customers and contacts in the New Zealand space and advanced aviation sectors.
Please note that all reports of migrant exploitation will be treated in the usual manner and participation in the research commissioned by MBIE does not guarantee any outcome in relation to a report of migrant exploitation.
Please note that this email address is not monitored for queries. Please send statements or enquiries to
Please note that you are not required to agree to sharing your screen with the Client Services Advisor and the call can proceed as normal.
Please note these reports are not an official part of the sectors report series, and statements or advice contained within do not necessarily reflect government policy.
Please note, any employment positions for the New Zealand Space Agency will be advertised on the careers website:
Please note: This content will change over time and can go out of .
Please note: the dashboard is no longer being . The Regional Economic Activity web tool is an alternative source of labour market data.
Please reach out if you have any questions.
Please read and accept the terms conditions to start your session
Please refer to the data dictionaries for more information on the Migrant Employment Data.
Please take the time to read this summary of the proposals for the New Zealand Income Insurance Scheme.
Please use this form for general enquiries and any feedback, including compliments, complaints, and suggestions. We are interested to know what MBIE is doing well and what you think MBIE can do to improve its services and delivery.
Please visit the Qualmark website for more information and to register your interest.
Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Board
Plumbers, Gasfitters, and Drainlayers (SelfContained Vehicles) Regulations
Plumbers, gasfitters and drainlayers
Police plan to deliver awarenessraising training to all new Police recruits
Policy Advisor, Employment Standards Policy
Policy and Regulatory Capability
Policy design paper, following consultation.
Policy papers advising or seeking agreement from the Minister of Tourism on freedom camping policy decisions.
Policy work has begun to enable legislative change where needed. This includes to:
Policy, strategy and discussion papers
Positive outcomes from the project
Post Graduate CertificateDiploma in Aerospace Engineering
Postal Address: P.O Box , Taupo
Postal Deed of Understanding
Postal Services Act on the New Zealand legislation website
Postal Services Act and its associated regulations.
Postal address: B Centaurus Road, Christchurch
Postal address: Strathmore Avenue, Levin
Postal address: Frye Crescent, Wanaka,
Postal address: DX CR
Postal address: PO Box , Palmerston North
Postal address: PO Box , Wellington
Postal address: PO Box , Auckland Airport, Manukau
Postal address: PO Box , Albany, Auckland
Postal address: PO Box , Milford, Auckland
Postal address: PO Box , Wellesley Street, Auckland
Postal address: PO Box , Mairangi Bay, Auckland
Postal address: PO Box , Johnsonville, Wellington
Postal address: Private Bag , Wellington
Postal address: Private Bag , Parnell, Auckland
Postal operators in New Zealand
Postal operators must comply with all relevant laws including transport, planning and tax laws. They are responsible for ensuring they comply with laws and regulations. If unsure, they should seek independent legal advice.
Postal operators must fulfil certain criteria and follow the provisions of the Postal Services Act.
Postal operators must mark mail they carry with a postal identifier, which is:
Postal outlets with additional postal services
Postal services in New Zealand
Postgraduate Diploma in Computing
Posting dangerous or objectionable material
Posts made by others to our social media channels are the responsibility of that person or organisation. They dont necessarily reflect the opinions or policy of our Ministry.
Powering Potential programme
Practical applications for the space sector could include biosensors, autonomous systems, or new materials that could organise or repair themselves automatically, which could be vital in spacecraft or in extraterrestrial environments, and would avoid the need for impractical traditional manufacturing infrastructure in space.
Practice Advisory : Improving earthquake performance of nonstructural elements
PreCOVID our tourism forecasts provided expectations on the future tourism demand in New Zealand. Closure of the New Zealand border in early has made forecasting challenging and given the lack of data and uncertainty around international travel, we decided to halt it. When reliable data is readily available, we will look to resume forecasting.
PreCOVID our tourism forecasts provided expectations on the future tourism demand in New Zealand. Please bear this in mind when using this information.
Prerequisite courses that are endorsed by NAATI as teaching and assessing the skills and knowledge required by the translating and interpreting profession are available on the NAATI website. The website is regularly.
Predicting future behaviour
Preferred option : Prescribe the minimum necessary information requirements An iterative application procedure ensures an efficient process whereby we seek the minimum information necessary with the ability to fast track applications that are low risk and have already satisfied the informat ion requirements through the provision of a foreign licence. It also enables us to seek additional information that may be required in a targeted way (although we note that this may increase the turnaround time .) Ensures that compliance costs are in line w ith international benchmarks for the level of risk . With the exception of HAVs, most of the operators seeking a New Zealand licence or permit will already require a US licence or authorisation fro m another foreign jurisdiction thus further reducing compli ance costs. A flexible and nimble approach to regulations permits the regime to adapt as our experience and knowledge of the industry grows and to evolve in line with international best practice .
Preliminary Proposal : Require Full and Final Settlement for Full Self Cover
Preparing all young people for satisfying and rewarding working lives LongTerm Insights Briefing
Preparing for G in New Zealand
Present their research on stage or through poster sessions, and
Prevent exploitation from escalating through policy and operational responses
Prevent the occurrence of workplace (and other) conditions that might enable temporary migrant worker exploitation
Preventing Financial Hardship Caused by the use of BuyNow, PayLater
Previous Economic Development work
Previous Strategic Intentions Statements of Intent
Previous deployment updates
Previous intern experiences
Previous international tourism forecasts
Previous nondepartmental appropriations reports
Previous plans and reports
Previously, Robert was Head of Investment Management at Provincial Development Unit (PDU), the team responsible for detailed assessments, analysis, and critiquing of all funding applications, and making recommendations to decisionmakers.
Pricing information is only available to eligible government agencies. You will need to complete a Confidentiality Deed:
Primary Growth Partnership:
Prime Ministers Science Prizes
Prime Ministers Space Prizes
Principal Advisor, Employment Standards Policy
Principles for managing complaints
Principles that underpin a flexiblebydefault approach
Prior to COVID, MBIE commissioned research pieces on domestic tourism trends to inform future decisionmaking. Read these at the links below:
Prior to the COVID pandemic, tourism was one of our largest and fastest growing sectors.
Prior to the legislation coming into force, the Government had an agreement with Rocket Lab USA Inc. and Rocket Lab NZ authorising their launch activity from New Zealand.
Prior to the screen share session beginning, the Client Services Advisor will make a clear statement asking for your agreement to share your screen. Please do not begin the session until you have provided your express verbal agreement and have been given an opportunity to close any windows on your screen that you do not want to be seen by the Client Services Advisor. The screen recording will begin once your screen has been shared.
Prior to this, Melanie held a number of roles leading policy teams responsible for competition, consumer, economic regulation and corporate governance policy at the Ministry of Economic Development.
Priority will be given to those applications that can demonstrate:
Privacy Commissioners website
Privacy of natural persons
Privacy statement for the TelephoneVideo Interpreting Service
Private Investigators for Regulatory Activities PDF .MB
Proactive and sophisticated risk management
Proactive release of papers
Proactive release of payload permit summaries:
Proactive release of policy advice on Fair Pay Agreements
Proactively released documents
Problems with the website
Procedure for submissions on trade agreements
Process Heat in New Zealand
Process for considering national interests payload permit applications
Process to launch a payload
Producing Technical Capability and Intended End Use document:
Productive, sustainable and inclusive growth
Productivity Commission Inquiry
Professional interpreters allow communication between government agencies and culturally and linguistically diverse people. Professional interpreters abide by high ethical standards and may specialise in certain areas, such as health or legal services.
Professor Aidan Byrne (Chair)
Professor Byrne is Provost at the University of Queensland and was previously the Chief Executive of the Australian Research Council. Professor Byrne completed a BSc and MSc degrees at the University of Auckland. He completed a PhD in Nuclear Physics at the Australian National University, where he later served as Director of College of Physical and Mathematical Sciences and Dean of Science. Professor Byrne spent over years in Bonn, Germany as a von Humboldt fellow and is a fellow of the Australian Institute of Physics.
Professor Eason completed a PhD from the University of Surrey in the UK, after which he specialised in the development of new cardiovascular pharmaceuticals. He was awarded Companion of the Royal Society of New Zealand in , the Thomson Medal for research leadership in , Companion of the New Zealand Order of Merit in for his services to science and wildlife conservation and Fellow of the Royal Society .
Professor Emily Parker (Chair), Ferrier Research Institute, Departmental Science Advisor MBIE
Professor Hugh Blair, Board Member of Focus Genetics (sheep and beef breeding), New Zealand Animal Evaluation Limited (NZAEL), Dairy Genetics, Science Advisor to NBRYO Australia
Professor Long is Director of the Robinson Research Institute at Victoria University of Wellington. He completed his PhD in Physics at the University of Southern California, Los Angeles and joined IRL, the predecessor to the Robinson Research Institute, in .
Professor Margaret Brimble
Professor Richard Blaikie, Deputy Vice Chancellor Research and Enterprise of University of Otago, is chair of NSOG. Members of the group come from a range of organisations from across the research, science, and innovation sector and represent a variety of skills, expertise, and interests. Terms of Reference for NSOG can be found here:
Professor of Aerospace Engineering and Director of the Aerospace Research Institute, University of Canterbury
Professor of Environmental Planning, University of Waikato
Professor of Musicology, University of Auckland
Programme funding recipients
Progress for fixing the Holidays Act
Progress report: December
Progress towards identifying potential earthquakeprone buildings
Progressing our broader space interests
Progression of negotiations between OT and X (Please note that the name of the country is being withheld due to sensitivity of the negotiations) towards a bilateral agreement to safeguard children being moved across borders, included a roundtable discussion in July .
Prohibit certain business with sanctioned countries
Prohibits arbitrary or unlawful interference with privacy
Prohibits military or any other hostile use of environmental modification techniques having widespread, longlasting or severe effects as the means of destruction, damage or injury, including in space
Project Colead, MethaneSAT and Chief Scientist at Environmental Defense Fund
Project Hau Nuku: Weather forecasting system review
Projects are cofunded in partnership with local councils (or community organisations with council support) and each round of the Tourism Infrastructure Fund has a different funding priorities statement. In , for the first time, the Fund considered infrastructure projects to support the delivery and management of Matariki events to mark the first year of the new public holiday.
Projects funded by the IVL
Prolonged or repeated exposure to limited employment has negative impacts on youth wellbeing and can have significant longterm consequences. This is a complex policy challenge with multigenerational consequences.
Promote inclusive work so everyone has opportunities to participate in meaningful and fulfilling work.
Promoted important cases responding to serious noncompliance with employment law, including an Alcohol and Regulatory Licencing Authority decision to refuse a liquor licence due to poor employment practices.
Promoting financial literacy and capability in Pacific communities
Promoting global trade and investment
Promoting sustainable space and Earth environments
Promoting the responsible uses of space internationally
Property access for telecommunications
Proportion of delivery points that can be communal
Proposal : Implement new health and safety assessment requirements
Proposal : Strengthen the assessment of Claims and Injury Management
Proposal : Performance Monitoring
Proposal : New pricing options for the Partnership Discount Plan
Proposal for Change Business and Consumer
Proposal for Change Business and Consumer PDF .MB
Proposal for Change Consumer Advocacy Council Secretariat
Proposal for Change Consumer Advocacy Council Secretariat PDF KB
Proposal for Change Enhancing MBIE Property Services
Proposal for Change Enhancing MBIE Property Services PDF KB
Proposal for Change MBIE Foundations for the Future
Proposal for Change MBIE Foundations for the Future PDF MB
Proposal for Change MBIE Intelligence Realignment
Proposal for Change MBIE Intelligence Realignment PDF KB
Proposal to develop an Electronic Travel Authority PDF .MB
Proposal to develop and Electronic Travel Authority Minute of Decision PDF KB
Proposals can include pilotprototype work.
Proposals for most Pillar actions are made by multinational research consortia with partners from a minimum of EU Member States or Associated Countries (note that these are minimum criteria, and most proposals include additional partners).
Proposals should include commentary on the following criteria:
Proposals to address problems with wheel clamping Cabinet minute PDF KB
Proposals to address problems with wheel clamping Cabinet paper PDF KB
Proposed levy rate
Proposed levy rate
Proposed levy rate
Proposed Accident Compensation Appeal Tribunal
Proposed Intellectual Property Laws Amendment Bill
Proposed amendments to the BuiltReady Scheme Rules public consultation
Proposed changes for Chinese medicine
Proposed changes for audiometrists
Proposed changes for paramedics
Proposed changes to Deed of Understanding
Proposed gap analysis template PDF KB
Proposed minor change to nurse definition
Proposed updates to the nonnotifiable and notifiable risk tiers, and
Proposed weather forecasting system review and options
Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines
Prosecution action is one of a number of possible responses that may be used by MBIE in respect of criminal conduct within the areas that it regulates. It is a significant enforcement tool that must be used in a deliberate and targeted manner.
Prosecution decision maker
Prosecution decision makers must consider each case on its own merits when making the decision to prosecute.
Prosecution procedure and guidelines
Prospective postal operators must provide the following information:
Prosperous and adaptable people, sectors and regions
Protect temporary migrant workers in New Zealand and enable them to leave exploitative employment
Protecting New Zealands energy infrastructure
Protecting the Intellectual Property of Indigenous Media
Protecting vulnerable workers
Protects the financial value of transferred entitlements for employees who may transfer on terms and conditions less than their existing terms and conditions.
Provi di ng an implementation period to support the transition to a new Act
Provide a detailed submission through the Have Your Say section of our website
Provide advice identifying medium to longterm work to reduce persistent disadvantage.
Provide for the effective and efficient delivery of support services to victims
Provide transparent and reliable labour market indicators to show occupational and other skills information. (TECMBIE)
Provide transparent, futurefocussed and accessible careers information and advice aligning work and learning pathways to skills, supporting students and workers to make informed decisions. (TEC)
Provides a clear framework to support transfer of entitlements when it is negotiated. The legal framework would provide for the common practice of including the transfer of leave entitlements as part of negotiations.
Provides advice and support to business groups relating to the provision and procurement of legal services in accordance with the Legal Services policy
Provides for transfer and protection of sensitive US technology
Provides information on national employment by industry, occupation, and regional employment for Pacific Peoples.
Provides information on resolving problems related to building and construction
Provides quarterly reporting on policy compliance to the Compliance Centre of Excellence
Provides requested advice and seek your decision regarding options for the future of Callaghan Innovation
Provides rules applicable to armed conflict
Provides the history of the decisions and future options relating to Callaghan Innovation
Providing accurate, relevant and clear information.
Providing flexible working arrangement documentation.
Providing greater certainty for contracting parties PDF .MB
Providing guidance regarding this policy to people leaders.
Providing more tailored pricing options for AEs.
Providing transitional support to RD performing businesses PDF KB
Providing, taking, and paying
Provincial Growth Fund tourism
Provincial Growth Fund tourism funding
Provision of these services does not imply any guarantee that the support representative will be successful in problem resolution, and MBIE accepts no liability in this connection.
Psychosocial (or mental wellbeing) support
Public Perceptions of Immigration Survey
Public Research Organisations
Public Service Commission guide on integrity and conduct
Public consultation on proposals to address modern slavery and worker exploitation in operations and supply chains.
Public consultation on proposed legislation to address modern slavery and worker exploitation in operations and supply chains undertaken from April to June . A submissions report was on the MBIE website in September.
Public perceptions of immigration survey : Summary report PDF .MB
Public sector boards perform important governance functions, which means the recruitment process usually takes longer than a standard job vacancy.
Public sector financial resource code sets
Publications and technical papers
Publicly provided income insurance is a new concept for New Zealand, but we do have a similar system for accidents: ACC. We propose that the New Zealand Income Insurance Scheme is funded and managed in a similar way.
Publish a refreshed Child and Youth Strategy.
Publish relevant cases of serious noncompliance with immigration law, to build greater consumer awareness of modern slavery.
Official Information Act requests
Publishing an Employment Action Plan
Purchase order terms of purchase
Purpose of standards and accreditation
Purpose of the consultation
Putting out the welcome mat A resource for developing your welcoming plan January PDF .MB
Qualifications held by our workforce
Qualifications that can help
Quality Assurance (completed by QA panel) Reviewing Agency: The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment . Panel Assessment Comment : MBIEs Regulatory Impact Analysis Review Panel has reviewed the attached Impact Statement prepared by MBIE. The panel considers that the information and analysis summarised in the Impact Statement meets the criteria necessary for Ministers to make informed decisions on the proposals in this paper. The panel notes the technical nature of the proposed changes and the intention to consult. It will be important for the consultation document to set out the issues in a clear and accessible way.
Quality Assurance Assessment: MBIEs Regulatory Impact Analysis Review Panel has reviewed the attached Impact Statement prepared by MBIE. The Panel considers that the information and analysis summarised in the Impact Statement partially meets the criteria necessary for Ministers to make informed decisions on the proposals in this paper. This is because the second option (accrual based system for annual holidays) has not been analysed to the same extent as the first option as it was dismissed r elatively early by the Taskforce, despite their early consultation indicating wide support for the second option, particularly by employers. There has been limited time for analysis or consultation postTaskforce to better understand the impacts of the sec ond option and so it is difficult to compare the options on a like forlike basis. Reviewer Comments and Recommendations:
Quality data and information informs strategic direction, sets investment priorities and improves business decisionmaking. On this page you can find information and data on the science and innovation sector.
Qualmark received million to establish a free advisory service to support tourism businesses as they navigate the impacts of COVID. The Tourism Advisory Support Service is available to provide advice to businesses on things like how to transition their business for the domestic market, strategy development, and moving in and out of hibernation.
Quantium Solutions New Zealand Pty Ltd
Quarterly Labour Market Report
Quarterly Labour Market Scorecard
Quarterly connectivity update Q to March PDF .MB
Quarterly connectivity update Q to June PDF .MB
Quarterly connectivity update Q to September
Quarterly connectivity update: Q to March PDF MB
Quarterly connectivity update: Q to March PDF .MB
Quarterly connectivity update: Q to March PDF .MB
Quarterly connectivity update: Q to June PDF .MB
Quarterly connectivity update: Q to June PDF .MB
Quarterly connectivity update: Q to June PDF .MB
Quarterly connectivity update: Q to September PDF .MB
Quarterly connectivity update: Q to September PDF .MB
Quarterly connectivity update: Q to September PDF .MB
Quarterly connectivity update: Q to December PDF .MB
Quarterly connectivity update: Q to December PDF .MB
Quarterly connectivity update: Q to December PDF .MB
Quarterly labour market report
Quarterly release data files
Quarterly updates on broadband deployment
Queen Elizabeth II Memorial Day
Queen Elizabeth II Memorial Day Bill passes into law
Queen Elizabeth II Memorial Day is to be treated as
Queen Elizabeth II Memorial Day will be considered a nonworking day for statutory and contractual provisions, where these express timeframes with reference to working days. September is also South Canterbury Anniversary Day. Under s Holidays Act , when public holidays fall on the same day, employees only get day off.
Queenstown Lakes District
Queenstown Lakes District Council
Queenstown Lakes Economic Transformation and Resilience Fund
Questions about the consultation
Questions for Submitters: Cost recovery structure What is your view on a mixed cost recovery structure of fees (for specific services) and levies (for fixed shared costs), and the types of costs allocated to fees and levies Are there any other options you would like to see considered to recover shared costs from users Levies Companies Office (CO) levy What is your view on who should be charged the CO levy and the type of shared costs the levy will recover What impact will paying an annual levy of . have on your business or organisation New Zealand Business Number (NZBN) levy What is your view on who should be charged the NZBN levy and the costs the levy will recover What impact will paying an annual levy of . have on your business or organisation Fees by register All registers What impact would the proposed total charge have on your business or organisation Are there any adjustments to the proposed fees(s) that you think should be reconsidered If yes, which fee(s) and why Do you think the reasons for proposed adjustments to the fee(s) are clear and understandable If not, why not Incorporated Societies register What effect would the proposed total charge have on your organisation Are there any adjustments to the proposed fees(s) that you think should be reconsidered If yes, which fee(s) and why Do you think the reasons for proposed adjustments to the fee(s) are clear and understandable If not, why not
Questions for consultation
Questions for submitters on proposals to any or all registers: What impact would the proposed total charge have on your business or organisation Are there any adjustments to the proposed fees(s) that you think should be reconsidered If yes, which fee(s) and why Do you think the reasons for proposed adjustments to the fee(s) are clear and understandable If not, why not
Quick guide: how to navigate GCDR tools and resources
R E S T R I C T E D EGIMIN Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Scope of Space Policy and Lead Space Agency Portfolios Economic Development Science and Innovation On April , the Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee: Background noted that Rocket Labs intention to establish a commercial satellite launch business in New Zealand has meant that a space policy and regulatory capability is rapidly developing to meet New Zealands obligations as a launch State, and to manage the safety and security issues arising from frequent launches; noted that a space policy capability will enable New Zealand to capitalise on emerging economic opportunities, advance New Zealands interests in space, manage international obligations, and assist in developing international arrangements to ensure the responsible use of space; noted that on December , the Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee (EGI): . approved the highlevel design of a regulatory regime to enable space launches from New Zealand, with legislation to be enacted during ; . directed officials to report back with further advice on the scope of space policy and on space agencies; EGIMIN Space policy scope and guiding objectives noted that the scope of space policy: . encompasses the totality of New Zealands interests in space, including economic development, national security, foreign policy, safety and the environment; . includes space launch, satellites, satellite applications and technologies operating at very high altitudes; R E S T R I C T E D yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act R E S T R I C T E D EGIMIN noted that the proposed guiding objectives for space policy are to: . facilitate the development of a safe and responsible space industry, including managing effects on Earth, in space and on other users; . promote the use of satellite and very high altitude vehicle applications; . ensure the equitable, efficient and sustainable access to satellite orbits and radio spectrum resources used for space services; . preserve and advance New Zealands position in space and access to space capabilities; . ensure New Zealands international rights and obligations in the use of space are met, and that the governments liabilities as a launching State are managed adequately; . enhance and protect national security; Space agencys functions and form noted that in order to meet the objectives outlined in paragraph above, a lead space policy agency will have the following functions: . policy advice, including: .. research, information gathering, monitoring and evaluation, and strategic planning; .. ongoing risk assessment and advice on how the government can manage its liability associated with being a launching State in the context of a rapidly evolving commercial market, and the development of strategies to manage this liability and pass it on to the space launch and payload operators; . develop and maintain (jointly with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade) New Zealands international relationships and international obligations for space (Defence will continue to manage militarytomilitary relationships); . domestic coordination of information and advice across the various policy dimensions (this is likely to be a significant part, e.g. up to percent, of the policy advice function); noted that the draft legislation establishes the following regulatory functions: . authorisation of space launches, payloads and satellites; . national security considerations; . registration of space objects; . monitoring and enforcement; . accident investigation; . designation of secure areas; R E S T R I C T E D yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act R E S T R I C T E D EGIMIN . issuing of security cards; . education, information and guidance for industry participants; agreed that the nature and scale of the proposed space policy and regulatory functions does not justify the establishment of a standalone agency; agreed that the space policy functions be located within an existing agency based on the best strategic fit and alignment with existing mandate and capability; agreed that the authorisation functions are closely associated with the policy grounds for assessing a license application, and that these functions should be kept with the lead space policy agency; agreed that a domestic crossagency coordination committee be established to integrate space policy advice across the range of agencies with space interests, and that the space policy agency will provide a secretariat for the committee; noted that the two candidates to lead space policy are the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) and the Ministry of Transport; noted that either MBIE or the Ministry of Transport could be the primary agency for the space regulatory functions, but that in practice different regulatory agencies will be involved in different regulatory functions and that this is being worked through as part of the implementation work stream that MBIE has commenced; agreed that: . space launches and space applications have a broad economic development and innovation focus that extends into many areas of the economy and society; . this, along with the need to maintain momentum in the development of the proposed space legislation, means that MBIE is best placed to be the lead space policy agency for an initial period of three years; agreed that: . the location of the lead space policy agency be reconsidered as part of the required review of the proposed Space Activities Act (three years after the legislation is enacted); . the review will take into account developments in international space law and space policy, as well as any changes to the civil aviation regime; directed the lead space policy agency to report back to the responsible Minister: . in June , with advice on a domestic coordination mechanism to provide Ministers with integrated and cohesive advice on space policy; . in October , with advice on a New Zealand space policy, including an assessment of opportunities for New Zealand from satellite applications and a strategy to exploit their utilisation; Financial implications noted that when the proposed legislation is enacted, licensing fees on industry participants will be used to recover the costs associated with the regulatory functions; R E S T R I C T E D yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act R E S T R I C T E D EGIMIN agreed that until the proposed legislation is enacted, the costs associated with developing and implementing the regulatory regime shall be absorbed within agency baselines, as the process involves a degree of capability building by agencies and there are public good reasons for meeting these costs from Crown funding; agreed that the ongoing costs associated with space policy work be met from Crown funding; noted that a dedicated space policy capability (including the licensing function) and that any budgetary pressures associated with MBIE or the Ministry of Transport taking on these functions will be addressed as part of that agencys four year plan in the Budget; Legislative implications noted that the Space Activities Bill has a category priority on the Legislation Programme (to be passed in ); noted that officials will report back to EGI as soon as possible to seek final policy approvals to enable the proposed legislation to be introduced into the House in May . Suzanne Howard Committee Secretary Present: Officials present from: Rt Hon John Key Hon Bill English (Chair) Hon Gerry Brownlee Hon Steven Joyce Hon Paula Bennett Hon Amy Adams Hon Simon Bridges Hon Michael Woodhouse Hon Maggie Barry Hon Craig Foss Hon Jo Goodhew Hon Nicky Wagner Hon Louise Upston Hon Paul Goldsmith Hon Te Ururoa Flavell Hon Peter DunneOffice of the Prime Minister Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet Officials Committee for EGI R E S T R I C T E D yrupqmdi s ()(f)(iv) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act
R escind the decision to introduce a require ment for
RBAs trained prior to the emergency event were wellprepared for their role and felt wellmanaged by their immediate team leader in the field
REANNZ (Research Education Advanced Network NZ Ltd)
REANNZ is the notforprofit Crownowned company that owns and operates a highspeed, unrestricted broadband network for the New Zealand education, research and innovation communities.
REPF funding for additional promotion
REPF funding should not be used to substitute the existing promotional budget. It is to enhance the amount available for promotional purposes.
RESTRICTED Office of the Minister for Economic Development and Science and Innovation Chair, Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill: Final Policy Decisions Proposal .This paper provides further advice on issues that have arisen during the development of a regulatory regime for commercial space launches from New Zealand, including: a proposal to include certain very high altitude (near space) activities within the scope of the regulatory regime; the decisionmaking process for issuing a national security certificate (which has the effect of vetoing the proposed activity); the offences and penalties regime under the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act (the Act); and confirmation that the review of the Act after three years will be a legislative requirement. Executive Summary .In December , Cabinet approved the highlevel design of a regulatory regime to enable commercial space launches and the operation of payloads (e.g. satellites) from New Zealand. During the development of the legislation, a small number of policy issues have arisen that require Cabinet approval in order to finalise the proposed legislation. The inclusion of high altitude activities within the scope of the proposed space regime .New technologies are being developed to operate at very high altitudes (from about km down to the normal operating altitudes of aircraft, an area often referred to as near space). Some of these technologies perform similar functions to satellites. The advice from officials from the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), the Ministry of Transport, Defence and Security agencies, including relevant officials from the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, is that certain high altitude activities should be included within the scope of the proposed space regime. This will future proof the legislation for advances in technology and ensure that different technologies that perform similar functions are treated consistently. It will also ensure that New Zealand is well positioned to control high altitude activities that originate from New Zealand. .The group of officials referred to above have discussed the appropriate lower limit to apply to the high altitude regime and recommend that it be set with reference to flight level (this is currently the altitude that is the upper limit of controlled airspace and is approximately kms above ground level). This reference point emphasises the connection with the civil aviation regime and the intended continuity between the two regimes. .The Minister responsible for the administration of the proposed Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act (the responsible Minister) will have the ability to exempt or exclude (as may be appropriate) specified (classes) of high altitude vehicles which undertake activities yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED that are not intended to be subject to the high altitude regulatory regime, and are otherwise regulated as appropriate under aviation legislation and regulations. The decisionmaking process for issuing a national security certificate .Cabinet has agreed that serious national security concerns associated with the application for a space licence, or with the operation of a space object, will result in the issue of a national security certificate (which will act as a veto on the proposed activity). .The Minister in Charge of the NZSIS and Responsible for the GCSB and I would like to propose a new model for managing national security considerations for the proposed Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act. The core elements of the model are described below: The national security Minister(s) would be consulted as part of the decision making process on the proposed activity. The nature and significance of the risk and extent to which it can be mitigated would be taken into account in the decisionmaking process (both Ministers can agree on the mitigations that should be imposed). In the event that either Minister believes a launch should not proceed, the matter is referred to the specified group of Ministers designated by the Prime Minister. The Minister in Charge of the NZSIS and Responsible for the GCSB can issue a certificate vetoing the activity, with the agreement of the specified group of Ministers. . Offences and penalties regime .I propose an offence and penalty regime to deter conduct that could cause serious harm (such as damage to people, property and the environment) or that could breach New Zealands international obligations, including our obligations under the Technology Safeguards Agreement with the United States. .The proposed offences and penalties are based on the closest domestic analogues including the Civil Aviation Act (e.g. for licensing offences such as launching or procuring the launch of a space object without a licence) and the trade secrets offences under the Crimes Act (e.g. for offences relating to interference with space objects). .For serious licensing offences, I propose that there be a power to arrest offenders and, if necessary, to extradite them back to New Zealand. This requires serious offences to be eligible for a term of imprisonment (not less than one year). The Civil Aviation Act provides for an additional financial penalty of three times the value of any commercial gain resulting from a licensing offence where the offence was committed for financial benefit. The same approach is proposed under this regime. yrupqmdi s ()(f)(iv) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED Review of the Act .Cabinet has agreed that there will be a review of the Act three years after its enactment. I propose that this review be a requirement in the legislation as this will create certainty that the review will be undertaken and provide assurance that, since the legislation has some novel elements, there is a clear process to review and adjust these elements as required. Background .New Zealand has certain natural advantages as a space launch location due to our clear skies and seas, and access to particular launch angles. New Zealands status as a responsible international citizen with trusted security partners is also an important enabler for space launches to take place from New Zealand. We already have one highly innovative company, Rocket Lab, located here and intending to launch from New Zealand. This positions New Zealand at the threshold of exciting new developments associated with low cost rocket launches and the placement of small satellites in space. .The Government is putting in place a modern and internationally credible regulatory framework to enable space activities to be located in New Zealand. The regulatory framework will mean that we can be part of these exciting new developments whilst ensuring that they are in the national interest. .In December , Cabinet approved the highlevel design of a regulatory regime to enable commercial space launches from New Zealand and the operation of payloads (e.g. satellites) in outer space in order to: facilitate the development of safe, secure and responsible space activities; implement New Zealands international obligations for space activities (including United Nations outer space treaties and the proposed Technology Safeguards Agreement); and to manage New Zealands liability that may arise from space launches (EGI Min refers). .The legislation will establish a licensing regime (an overarching licence to launch a space object with a permitting regime for specific payloads such as satellites, with specific requirements implemented through licence conditions) to enable the Government to control the launch and operation of space objects from New Zealand. This is consistent with international practice for commercial space activities legislation. .Cabinet also authorised a group of Ministers to have power to act to make decisions on the detail of the legislation consistent with the policy framework in the Cabinet paper. During the subsequent development of the legislation, a small number of policy issues have arisen that have broader implications for the content of the regulatory regime and therefore require further Cabinet consideration. These are: a proposal to include certain very high altitude (near space) activities within the scope of the space regime; the decisionmaking process for the issue of a national security certificate (which has the effect of a veto on the proposed activity); yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED the offences and penalties regime under the new Act; and a proposal that the review of the new regulatory regime after three years be a legislative requirement. Comment Including high altitude activities within the space activities regulatory regime .Developments in technology are enabling new types of operating systems to be deployed in near space (from about km down to the normal operating altitudes of aircraft). These systems (including high altitude balloons, high altitude drones and pseudosatellites) are being developed by commercial and military interests to carry out similar functions to satellites, including earth observation, border surveillance, maritime control and internet connectivity. A recent example of such an experimental activity is NASAs super pressure balloon, which took flight from New Zealand in recent months to undertake scientific experiments. As these technologies develop, they have the potential to become a popular choice for certain scientific missions that would otherwise require more expensive rocket launches. .While the use of high altitude vehicles operating in near space for these types of applications is still developing, military and civil utilisation of this zone is increasing with the consequent need to address issues such as national security and safety. Operations in near space are a potential hazard for air traffic and for the public in the case of technology failures or malfunctions. .The safety aspects of such systems if they are aircraft (including balloons and drones) are regulated under the Civil Aviation Act (the CA Act). However, the CA Act has a focus on the promotion of aviation safety and does not take account of national security and national interest requirements. .The establishment of a legal regime for high altitude activities will ensure that New Zealand is well positioned to control these activities in future as technological advances and circumstances require. It will also benefit private entities by providing regulatory certainty and a consistent legal framework for investment in experimental technologies. .The key design questions associated with how best to regulate very high altitude activities include: which regulatory regime should apply to high altitude activities the (new) space activities regime, or the (revised) civil aviation regime; and determining the appropriate lower limit to apply to a high altitude regime. Which regulatory regime should apply to high altitude activities .The two candidates for a high altitude regime are the proposed Outer Space Activities Act or the civil aviation regime (the CA Act is currently under review). Officials from MBIE, the Ministry of Transport, the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, and Defence and security agencies have discussed the options and consider that the proposed space regime is the best fit for regulating certain high altitude activities. Although there is no legal definition of Outer Space, this is generally accepted as the area extending beyond km above Earth, beyond which the atmosphere will not support an aircraft operating below orbital speed. yrupqmdi s ()(f)(iv) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED .The objectives of the proposed space regulatory regime (including economic development and innovation, and managing risks to safety, security and the environment) are equally applicable to activities in near space as they are to activities in outer space. Extending the scope of the space regime to include certain high altitude activities does not significantly alter the costs or benefits associated with establishing the new regime. Moreover, the development of a high altitude regime as part of the proposed space regime will ensure that different technologies providing similar functions are regulated consistently regardless of the altitude at which they operate. This will help future proof the space regime for developments in technology. .The civil aviation regime already applies to all aircraft regardless of altitude, but it is predominantly focused on safety of New Zealands air transport services and does not enable regulation on national security or national interest grounds. .The inclusion of certain high altitude activities within the proposed space activities regime will mean that: payloads that New Zealand authorities deem capable of being operated at very high altitudes (i.e. near space) are within the scope of the space regime; and highaltitude vehicles (i.e. the carrier systems that New Zealand authorities deem capable of taking payloads up into the high altitude region) are also within the scope of the proposed space regime, but (if they are aircraft), the safety aspects of their operation will still be addressed through established Civil Aviation Authority procedures. .
RRI Performance Framework
RSABs aim to improve regulatory systems by ensuring that they are effective, efficient and align with best regulatory practice. The amendments in these Bills achieve this by:
RTA Awareness and Compliance Research : (Gravitas) Qualitative report Gravitas
RTA Monitoring Awareness of Changes to Insulation and Smoke Alarm Requirements survey
RTA Monitoring Awareness of Changes to Insultation and Smoke Alarm Requirements monitoring report
RTOs should use this application template. Email your completed application to
RWPs and Local Insight Reports (LIRs) produced by the RSLGs are still available and can be accessed below. Local insights reports provide onthe ground qualitative and quantitative information on regional labour markets and skills.
Radiation Safety Act
Radio Spectrum Management
Radio Spectrum Management website
Radiocommunications Act
Radiocommunications Act and its associated regulations.
Radiocommunications Regulations
Raise a concern or provide feedback
Raising workplace productivity and wages
Range of datasets on the New Zealand economy, by sector, with data from MBIE and Stats New Zealand
Rapid building assessments
Rapid building assessments are completed by teams led by the local territorial authority. Rapid Building Assessors (RBAs) are deployed to assess damaged buildings, including existing or potential hazards. They then record details of the damage and assign appropriate placards to buildings to identify how they can be used.
Rather than supporting workers to remain attached to their current jobs, as the Government did throughout COVID, we need policies that provide economic security to the individual directly and support them to transition into new work, regardless of the source of their displacement.
Rationalisation, alignment and coordination
Rauemi tautoko support resources
Rautaki mo te Taurikura PDF .MB
Re sc ind the decision to introduce a
Retesting is not required and it is strongly recommended that New Zealand Interpreters join the New Zealand Society for Translators and Interpreters to keep abreast of developments in the sector and opportunities to seek professional development.
Reaching out to your networks in Europe as early as possible to find partners and build your consortium
Read Simon Murdochs report:
Read Weather Permitting: Review of open access to weather data in New Zealand
Read a complete list of all CWPAs that can request or share information under the Oranga Tamariki Act :
Read a snapshot of how this support has made a difference to Kiwi businesses:
Read a summary of the New Zealand Income Insurance scheme.
Read about our consultation on Disclosure of origin requirements in the patents regime.
Read about the NASA interns
Read about the Queenstown Lakes Economic Transformation and Resilience Fund
Read about the Strategic Tourism Assets Protection Programme decisions and allocation
Read about the first phase of RBI improved connectivity:
Read about the project in the document below.
Read additional information
Read an overview of pay equity and the framework
Read an overview of the changes:
Read image transcript: New gateway test that businesses can use
Read information on current employer obligations:
Read more about Corporate and Digital Shared Services
Read more about Immigration New Zealand
Read more about Labour, Science and Enterprise
Read more about Regional Development Commercial Services
Read more about Strategy and Assurance
Read more about Te Whakatairanga Service Delivery
Read more about eInvoicing
Read more about how Part A operates
Read more about our Building, Resources and Markets
Read more about patents on the IPONZ website
Read more about the consultation and submissions
Read more about the Building System Regulatory Strategy
Read more about the Forced Labour Protocol.
Read more about the Governments decisions and work to refocus the science, innovation and technology system:
Read more about the Human Resources Development Working Group
Read more about the Milford Opportunities project
Read more about the NZDLR joint research programme
Read more about the Oranga Tamariki Guidelines
Read more about the Science Board
Read more about the Science System Advisory Group on our website:
Read more about the Seismic Review Steering Group
Read more about the Southland Just Transition:
Read more about the amendments to the regulations resulting from the review
Read more about the consultation and submissions
Read more about the consultation on the recommendations of the review
Read more about the consultation on the recommendations of the review
Read more about the evaluation of the New Zealand Cycle Trails
Read more about the independent review
Read more about the new requirements on the
Read more about the proposed changes to the adventure activities regime
Read more about the review on the DIA website.
Read more about this research in the report, downloadable here:
Read more about your rights as a consumer on the Consumer Protection website
Read more in our Outcomes Framework
Read more information on the regulations
Read previous issues of the
Read the Act on the New Zealand Legislation website
Read the Cabinet paper and associated Minute:
Read the Cabinet paper that began the review:
Read the Cabinet papers, Cabinet minutes and BNPL Regulatory Impact Statement:
Read the Chorus TSO Deed variation:
Read the Deed for Services between the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment and Utilities Disputes Limited
Read the Employment Action Plan
Read the Employment Relations (Extending Part A Protections to Security Officers) Order
Read the Fair Pay Agreements Regulations
Read the Fair Pay Agreements Regulations
Read the Forestry and wood processing spotlight report series
Read the HTML version of the RSI Workforce Survey of Organisations Report
Read the Health and Safety at Work (Adventure Activities) Amendment Regulations :
Read the Land Access Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS)
Read the Ministers announcements:
Read the Ministers full media release
Read the NESTF Users Guide
Read the National Statement of Science Investment
Read the Open Weather Data Procurement Terms of Reference
Read the Pay Equity Regulatory Impact Statement
Read the Residential Tenancies Act Amendments : Monitoring Report
Read the Scheme Rules (Source: Utilities Disputes) PDF KB
Read the Summary of Submissions
Read the Supplementary Order Paper
Read the Vodafone nondiscrimination consultation summary of the submissions PDF KB
Read the announcement about the Bill by the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety, August
Read the application documents
Read the first Science System Advisory Group report
Read the full Holidays Act Taskforce final report
Read the full Terms of Reference
Read the hospitality workforce survey report for
Read the independent research and other background documents relating to the review:
Read the industry QA for technical information on the RBI
Read the inquirys full report
Read the latest news and announcements about managed isolation and quarantine.
Read the latest news, media releases and ministerial announcements related to science funding and science and innovation.
Read the survey findings from the RSI Workforce Survey of Organisations and Individuals.
Read the targeted review of the adventure activities regulatory regime report
Read the terms of reference for the Taskforce
Read the terms of reference for the advisory council:
Real Estate Agents Authority
Recategorise plugin hybrid electric vehicles and battery electric vehicles as petrolpowered and nonpetrol powered vehicles respectively.
Received the endorsement of an organisation that was invited to provide nominees (in New Zealand, this is automatically granted to you by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment for the first nominees)
Receives per week in insurance payments.
Receives a week in insurance payments.
Receives per week in insurance payments.
Recent full code set and descriptions
Recent improvements mean we can use it more precisely and safely than ever before and places like Australia, Japan, the EU and England have safely embraced gene technologies.
Recipients of MBIE scienceled funding are required to submit an annual report on the outputs and outcomes of activities undertakenproduced during the preceding months.
Recipients who take up this scholarship but do not complete their applicable tertiary qualification may be required to pay back the full value of the scholarship received.
Recognised Seasonal Employer (RSE) Scheme
Recognised Seasonal Employer (RSE) scheme research
Recognised Seasonal Employer Limited Visa: Visa details
Recognised Seasonal Employer policy review
Recognised Seasonal Employer policy review, Summary of Submissions PDF KB
Recognised Seasonal Employer scheme
Recognising safer riders with lower levies
Recommendation was amended after the Cabinet Paper was submitted. The amended recommendation reads:
Recommendations from the Joint Working Group on Pay Equity Principles
Recommendations of the report
Reconvened Joint Working Group
Record of highaltitude licences issued by the New Zealand Government
Record of the work completed by the previous Government before the General Election
Records and retention of personal information
Recruiting to fill board vacancies
Redeveloped Uplift Policy Criteria July
Redwoods Treewalk Rotorua
Refer to the sections above to see which of the below guidance documents are relevant to your licence or permit of interest:
Reference information, either one of the following:
Reference to a specific commercial product, process or service, whether by trade or company name, trademark or otherwise, does not constitute an endorsement or recommendation by the New Zealand Government or the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment.
Refocusing New Zealand Trade and Enterprise
Refocusing our approach to Industry Policy
Refocusing our approach to Industry Policy: Minute of Decision
Refocusing the science, innovation and technology system
Reform the vocational education and training system to ensure it responds to the needs of learners, industries and communities. (MOETEC)
Reforming the building regulatory system and building and construction sector
Reforms and review process agreed in August
Refresh of people trafficking pages on INZ website, including new information about visas available to trafficking victims, and brochures translated into languages.
Refresh the New Zealand Curriculum and Te Marautanga o Aotearoa so they promote knowledgerich, clearly defined pathways to further education or work, grounded in the science of learning. (MOE)
Refreshed Terms of Reference
Refreshing competition settings
Refusing OIAs and withholding information
Regarding the development of a global space traffic management system, it is understood that significant work on this has, and continues, to t ake place and there are a number of possibilities for where this might lead in future. The Review examines whether, or to what extent, New Zealands legislative settings are well placed to respond to future developments in this area. LeoLabs LeoLabs sp oke to the theme of a global space traffic management system. Its thinking on this is that while a country could develop one, it is not convinced it is likely to get buyin from all major countries with an interest in space. While this is one view, the Review team is aware that there is a lot of work happening in this area, and there are a range of possibilities for how it might evolve in future. As it cannot be discounted entirely in future, the Review considers whether the e xisting statutory settings provide New Zealand with the flexibility to engage with developments in this area in future, should they arise. The Review considers it to be premature to make pre emptive adjustments to the statutory settings in relation to th is matter. While discussions are underway at an international level on this topic, it is too early to determine what will ultimately arise in this space and any changes to New Zealands regulatory settings would need to be coherent with international pract ice and norms that have not yet been established.
Regardless of the approach, ambitious visions and comprehensive programmes of activity are commendable; however, DM plans should be realistic and focus on achievable outcomes, with short, medium and longterm priorities and actions.
Regenerative tourism ensures that tourism gives back more to people and places than it takes.
Regenerative tourism ensures that tourism gives back more to people and places than it takes. Tourism must add more than only economic value, it must actively enrich our communities and help protect and restore our environment.
Regenerative tourism will ensure that visitors to New Zealand Aotearoa have a positive impact on our communities and leave as storytellers who are able to share our unique culture and heritage with the world.
Regional Business Partner Network
Regional Development Commercial Services
Regional Development Commercial Services is headed by Deputy Secretary Robert Pigou.
Regional Economic Activity Tools
Regional Economic Activity Web Tool
Regional Economic Activity mobile app
Regional Economic Activity reports
Regional Economic Activity web tool
Regional Economic Development
Regional Events Promotion Fund
Regional Events Promotion Fund: Round application form April
Regional Events Promotion Fund: Round application form April DOCX KB
Regional Infrastructure Fund.
Regional Midsized Tourism Facilities Grant Fund
Regional Migration Trends report
Regional Research Institutes Initiative
Regional Skills Leadership Groups
Regional Strategic Partnership Fund
Regional Tourism Boost Fund
Regional Tourism Boost Fund Application Form February
Regional Tourism Boost Fund Application Form February DOCX KB
Regional Tourism Boost Fund recipients
Regional Tourism Estimates
Regional Tourism Indicators (RTIs)
Regional Tourism Organisation New Zealand
Regional Tourism Organisations
Regional Tourism Organisations (RTOs)
Regional Tourism Organisations grants
Regional Workforce Plan
Regional Workforce Plan Reflections
Regional Workforce Plan Refresh
Regional Workforce Plans and Local insight reports
Regional and seasonal dispersal of international tourists report
Regional economic activity
Regional economic development
Regional economic resilience in New Zealand Summary PDF KB
Regional economic resilience in New Zealand PDF .MB
Regional fuel tax impact on importer margins
Regional gross domestic product (GDP) per capita
Regional migration trends reports
Regional participation in the labour market
Regional tourism organisations will receive a total of million to attract more international visitors to regional New Zealand this year.
Register as a network operator
Register of highaltitude vehicles
Registered Engineering Associates
Registered office: Eden Street, Oamaru,
Registered office: Botha Road, Penrose, Auckland
Registered office: Havill Street, Palmerston North
Registered office: Building B, Unit , Apollo Drive, North Shore, Auckland
Registered office: Ground Floor, New Zealand Post House, Waterloo Quay, Wellington
Registered office: Level , Harris Road, East Tamaki, Auckland
Registered office: Unit F, Richard Pearce Drive, Auckland Airport, Manukau
Registered offices: B Centaurus Road, Christchurch.
Registered offices: Sir Woolf Fisher Drive, East Tamaki, Auckland
Registered operators have the right to access and amend their information.
Registered postal operators have certain rights that are not available to other organisations and individuals involved in the delivery business. By law, they can:
Registering as a postal operator
Registering with a nominating agency will not necessarily mean that your name is put forward for a board vacancy. Agencies only nominate candidates who they consider meet the specific requirements of the role.
Registration April
Registration October
Registration February
Registration August
Registration August
Registration March
Registration September
Registration June
Registration May
Registration April
Registration July
Registration March
Registration January
Registration August
Registration June
Registration October
Registration fee It is proposed that the fee for registration is .. This is less than the current fee of . and reflect s the direct costs of registration. The CO and NZBN levies (which w ould be applied to and annual return registration fee s across entity registers ) will be applied to this service for a total charge of . . Restoration fee It is proposed that the fee for restoration is .. This reflects the level of work undertaken to restore an incorporated society to the register as if it had never been removed. This fee is the same as for company restorations. This service will not attract any levies . Annual return fee NEW Under the Act, incorporated societies will be required to file an annual return for the first time . An annual return fee of . is proposed to recover the administrative costs of processing returns. Annual returns were not required to be filed under the Act, so there is no current fee for this service. Incorporated societies registered as charities with Charities Services under the Charities Act do not need to file an annual return with the Companies Office and so will not be required to pay this fee. Charities file their annual return with Charities Services and therefore would pay any annual return fees to the Department of Internal Affairs according to the fees that they charge . In the same transaction as the annual return fee (which recovers the direct cost of that service) incorporated societies will be charged the . NZBN levy and the . CO levy , to recover shared system cost s, in line with the proposed annual return charges for other entity registers. The proposed total annual return charge is .. Amalgamation fee NEW Section of the Act provides for two or more societies to amalgamate as one society. There was no equivalent provision under the Act. As this is a new function, we do not know how much time it will take , although we expect it to be simpler than amalgamating two companies for which . is charged. We also do not expect there will be many applications to amalgamate, but if two or more societies do wish to do so, this should not be prohibitively expensive for them. Therefore, we propose to set the fee at the same level as the restoration fee for an incorporated society of .. Conversion fee NEW Section of the Act provides for conversion of a body corporate or other association that is formed or incorporated by or under an Act that is specified by the regulations into an incorporated society. There was no equivalent provision under the Act. It is anticipated that the workflow to convert certain entities into an incorporated societ y is similar to the registration of an incorporated society and therefore the fee is proposed to be set at the same level of .. As this service forms a new incorporated society, a CO levy and NZBN levy is proposed to be charged in addition to the fee. Limited Partnerships The Limited Partnerships Act established a modern regulatory regime for limited partnerships that gives the business community in New Zealand the option of a flexible and internationally recognised business structure, similar to limited partnerships used in overseas jurisdictions. Ta ble on the next page shows the proposed adjustments to the existing limited partnerships registration fee, and the proposed amount for two new levies applied to the annual return service . Questions for submitters on proposals for the Incorporated Societies register: What effect would the proposed total charge have on your organisation Are there any adjustments to the proposed fees(s) that you think should be reconsidered If yes, which fee(s) and why Do you think the reasons for proposed adjustments to the fee(s) are clear and understandable If not, why not Table : Proposed fee for Limited Partnerships register services (excluding GST) Limited Partnerships register Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee) Change in charge change Registration (New Zealand and overseas) . . . . . . Annual return (New Zealand and overseas) . . . CO Levy , NZBN Levy . Registration fee When the current fee was set in the number of limited partnerships that register was expected to be in the low hundreds. Over time the recognised benefits of registering as a limited partnership under th e Limited Partnerships Act have been recognised, with approximately new registrations annually. This in turn has resulted in approximately , annual returns now being filed. It is proposed that the cost of processing the annual returns is recovered through the registration fee as the Limited Partnerships Act does not currently allow a fee to be charged for an annual return service . Accordingly, the charge for regis tration is proposed to increase from . to .. Annual return fee No annual return fee is proposed. However, limited partners hips will be charged the CO and NZBN levies when they file their annual return . The Limited Partnerships Act may be reviewed later to include the ability to charge an annual return fee . Fees to be revoked The Limited Partnerships Regulations currently prescribe s fees for services that are no longer delivered by the Companies Office or are delivered differently compared to when they were introduced. Table below summarises the fee proposed to be revoked in the regulations. Table : Proposed Limited Partnerships register fee to be revoked Currently , regulation of the Limited Partnerships Regulations refers to how fees and penalties may be paid. We propose that fees and penalties can no longer be paid by cheque, in line with financial service providers and government departments phasing out cheque payments in .
Registration is normally automatic unless the applicant, or any person involved in the management of the business, has been convicted of any of the following criminal offences in the last years:
Registration is not always required
Registration of a postal identifier does not create a trademark or other proprietary right.
Registration of objects launched into orbit or outer space
Registrations for the COVID Response Recognition Award have now closed. Thank you to all those who worked at MBIE Managed Isolation and Quarantine (MIQ), Immigration New Zealand (INZ) or with one of our MIQ partners for applying.
Regular payments: Regular payments, such as payments for overtime and productivity or incentive based payments, a re included in calculations of O rdinary Weekly Pay. Although the Act does not define what constitutes a regular payment, payments th at an employee receives on a regular basis should be included (for example, any payments that are paid every (or most) weeks should be included). MBIE Holidays Act Guidance includes advice for employers to help them determine what payments should be consi dered regular (Section of the Act).
Regular survey of migrants and their experiences of life in New Zealand and New Zealanders about their perceptions of migrants.
Regulating building professionals and practitioners
Regulating companies and other entities
Regulating products, production, and consumption for a circular economy in Aotearoa New Zealand
Regulating the price of unbundled fibre products
Regulating to ensure space activities are safe and secure
Regulation prescribes that an ODMP must: a) specify any international standard or guidelines followed (if any); b) specify any independent person or body that has assessed the plan (if any), and the result of that assessment; c) specify the orbital debris mitigation measures taken or intended to be taken, which measures must be sufficient to ensure: i. the release of debris during the normal operations of the vehicle or payload is limited; ii. the potential for break up of the vehicle or payload while in orbit is minimised; iii. the potential for the vehicle or payload to collide with debris other than debris released in the course of the activity to which the licence or permit relates is minimised; and iv. at the end of the activity to which the licence or permit relates, the vehicle or payload is disposed of in a way that minimises risks to, or in, Earths environment and in the space environment (including the risk of collisions). . Policy intent New Zealand has established a licenc e and permit process for launch v ehicles and payloads . The requirement to supply an ODMP as part of that process is consistent with international best practice and is intended to ensure that proliferation of debris by space objects is limited , thus reduc ing the risk of collisions in space and the potential for debris to cause damage in orbit and upon atmospheric re entry . The application of this policy is intended to evolve to reflect the development of new technologies, changes in the satellite and broader space industry and the orbital debris environment. . Information to be taken into account when applying this policy Information to be taken into account in the application of this policy includes : relevant sections of the Act and regulations the applicants submitted orbital debris mitigation plan and, where applicable, the orbital debris mitigation plan for the host satellite (for New Zealand payloads that are hosted by another satellite for a launch taking place overseas, both the host and payload permit applicant must meet the orbital d ebris mitigation requirements in the Act and regulations ) any applicable technical advice, reports or assessments provided by other space agencies , regulators or experts any overseas licence, permit or other authorisation relevant to the proposed activities .
Regulation in the research, science and innovation system
Regulation in the tourism system
Regulation of financial advice
Regulation supporting economic development
Regulations also set out competency requirements for vehicle inspectors. Certification Authorities will need to be satisfied that a person meets competency requirements before they appoint them as vehicle inspector.
Regulations for fibre installation
Regulations under section of the Telecommunications Act
Regulations under the Exclusive Economic Zone and Continental Shelf (Environmental Effects) Act
Regulatory Assurance and Performance
Regulatory Impact Statement
Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS): Outer Space and High Altitude
Regulatory Impact Statement Reform of Gene Technology Regulation PDF .MB
Regulatory Impact Statement : day commitments in Employment Relations
Regulatory Impact Statement : Further day commitments in Employment Relations
Regulatory Impact Statement addendum: Buy Now, Pay Later Regulations PDF KB
Regulatory Impact Statement and Stage Cost Recovery Impact Statement: Designating the banking sect.
Regulatory Impact Statement on the changes proposed by the Accident Compensation (Interest on Instalment Plans) Amendment Bill .
Regulatory Impact Statement Regulatory Impact Statement: Holidays Act reform Further Policy Decisions Purpose of Document Decision sought: Further improvements to the replacement of the Holidays Act Advising agencies : Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment Proposing Minister s: Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety finalised : May Problem Definition Work has been underway to draft new legislation to replace the Holidays Act (the Act). However, detailed policy design work based on the Cabinet decisions to accept the Holidays Act Taskforces recommendations revealed workability issues and t he extent of system changes for businesses and payroll providers that the implementation of those decisions would require. The Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety is planning to release an exposure draft in September to test the policy and tec hnical details before a Bill is introduced. Before an exposure draft is released there is an opportunity to make changes and additions to some existing policy decisions , to address issues identified through stakeholder feedback to and allow for more effective feedback on unknown issues . These changes focus on areas where policy and drafting work can be undertaken quickly and would simplify, address gaps, and reduce implementation requirements for payroll and businesses. Executive Summary Issues with the Holidays Act have been a longstanding concern for employers, employees and payroll providers. The lack of clarity around the processes and calculations required to determine leave entitlements and payments, and reliance on employer judgement , have caused widespread and often unintentional non compliance with the Act, resulting in high remediation costs for both public and private sectors. In the Government established the Holidays Act Taskforce (the Taskforce) to explore issues wit h the Act and in endorsed its recommendations for improving it. The Cabinet decisions were intended to provide certainty and clarity for employers by providing greater prescription. The prescriptive formulas , methodologies and detailed processes agreed by Cabinet in add an inevitable amount of complexity. The Regulatory Impact Statement ( RIS) accompanying the Cabinet paper concluded that the proposals were superior to the Holidays Act on al l criteria except simplicity. Greater simplicity would have required a trade off with other objectives , including ensuring that no employee would be worse off than under the current Act. Subsequent policy design and drafting work revealed the extent of co mplexity , and the implementation and compliance costs some of the processes and calculations agreed in would result in. The feedback from stakeholders involved in MBIEs policy design process was that the size of these potential costs was so high that it cut back the net benefits of the changes. Some technical refinements were made through that policy design process that are consistent with the policy decisions, but th ere was not scope kjtrvweh
Regulatory Impact Statement It is intended that the co nsultation document that accompanies the exposure draft will seek feedback on options that are beyond the current scope for policy changes, and the Government may consider these options following consultation. What options are being considered The follow ing options are being considered regarding the content of the exposure draft that is intended to be released in September : Option One: Exposure draft reflects the Cabinet decision to endorse the Taskforces recommendations, along with the technical refinements agreed by the previous Minister for WRS. Option Two: Exposure draft largely reflects the decisions ( e.g. Option One) but incorporates changes and additions in order to simplify and reduce costs in areas where officials can comple te the necessary policy and drafting work before September. Under Option Two, we propose changes to three areas of the draft Bill, where there are known opportunities to reduce costs, simplify and improve workability within the constraints of the Septembe r exposure draft. . Earning, taking and paying annual leave: The changes focus on simplifying the way that employees earn and take annual leave (AL). A key change is moving to a weeks based accrual system to simplify the end toend system for providing and paying AL entitlement and better support common practice. Other changes focus on reducing the extent of system changes required by the new methodology for determining the use of AL entitlement and ensuring the framework for paying AL with regular pay does provide the certainty that is missing from the Act. . Paying and accumulating other types of leave: The changes focus on reducing the complexity of the payment methodologies by removing the requirement to make two calculations and avoiding the overinfl ation of payments th is could have caused in some situations. They also update the profile for accumulating sick leave from the first day of employment. . Treatment of leave entitlements in a restructuring situation : This includes an adjustment to the policy regarding the treatme nt of leave entitlements in restructuring situations to provide flexibility and support common practice. Description and analysis of Option Two The following tables provide a description of the three areas for proposed change, accompanied by a qualitative analysis against the criteria listed above. For the purpose of this analysis, Option One, which is analysed in detail in the RIS, is considered the status quo or do nothing option. The tables also provide a brief description of the relevant provis ions in the current Act, without the changes. Key: Much better than doing nothingthe status quo Better than doing nothingthe status quo About the same as doing nothingthe status quo Worse than doing nothingthe status quo Much worse than doing nothingthe status quo kjtrvweh
Regulatory Impact Statement
Regulatory Impact Statement . Paying and accumulating other types of leave (family violence, bereavement and sick leave (FBS leave )) Description Analysis of Option Two (compared to Option One) Payments for other leave types Current Act: Payments are based on an employees relevant daily pay (RDP) or, if it is not possible to determine RDP or daily pay varies in the pay period, an employer may use ADP. Option One: All employees would be paid at the greater rate of Ordinary Leave Pay (OLP) and a new hours based Average Daily Pay (ADP) . Option Two: There would be a consolidated single calculation comprising a base rate for wages or salary plus fixed allowances plus an average of productivity or incentive payments received plus the cash value of board and lodgings. Accumulating sick leave Current Act: Eligible employees become entitled to the full sick leave allowance of days after six months of continuous employment. Option One: Proposes that eligible employees receive a portion of their sick leave entitlement on their first day of employment, with the remaining entitlement accumulating over a fourmonth period. In , statutory sick leave entitlement was only five days per year, the fourmonth accumulation period reflects this smaller allowance. Option Two: Proposes a longer accumulation period of sixmonths for sick leave entitlement to reflect the increase from five to days sick leave per year. Clear and simple Paying FBS leave One payment methodology is simpler than two and avoids additional complexity and administrative burden in situations where th e current calculation in the Act is straightforward. The intent is that, in situations where the current methodolo gy is straightforward, there would be little change from how payments are currently calculated. Accumulating sick leave Fewer accumulation points for sick leave will be simpler and offer clarity around entitlement for employees and employers. Readily implementable Paying FBS leave Systems only need to be capable of performing one calculation with no requirement for a comparison. A clear formula will make it possible to calculate variable components of pay in all cases. Accumulating sick leave Fewer accumulation points will be easier to administer in leave management systems. Flexible and future proof Paying FBS leave The payment methodology is intended to be applicable to all work and pay patterns. Accumulating sick leave The revised sick leave accumulation period is fit for purpose with the increase to ten days sick leave entitlement. Fair for employers and employees Paying FBS leave There is no solution that will produce a payment outcome that reflects precisely what an employee would have earned on a spec ific day in all situations, but the consolidated calculation is designed so that it should, overall, provide a fair outcome for both employers and employees (reflecting what they would have expected to be paid had they worked). It avoids the payment overinflation that the new hours based A DP calculation would result in under option one in some ca ses but still incorporates the variable components of leave pay that are part of leave payments under the Act. Accumulating sick leave The longer sick leave accumulation period reduces the impact on employers compared to the four month period recommended but is aligned with the current entitlement timeframe of six months and still provides earlier access to sick leave equivalent to the decisi on (employees would still have access to five days after four months). . Treatment of leave entitlements in a restructuring situation Description Analysis of Option Two (compared to Opti on One) Current Act: There is lack of legislative clarity regarding the treatment of leave entitlements for some employees in restructuring situations which results in common practice in breach of the Act (which requires AL to paid out and reset). Option One: If an employee (not covered by Schedule A of the Employment Relations Act), is offered the choice to transfer employment, they will als o be given the right to choose whether to transfer their leave entitlements or have them paid out in accordance with the Holidays Act when employment with the outgoing employer ends. Option Two: Proposes no change to the treatment of employees specified i n Schedule A of the Employment Relations Act. They must be offered choice to transfer employment and if they choose to do so must be given the choice to transfer leave entitlements. For employees not covered by Schedule A of the Employment Relations Act , the matters that Employment Protection Provisions (EEPs) (a compulsory part of an employment agreement) must state employers will negotiate (if transfer of employment is negotiated) would be expanded to include matters related to the treatment of leave e ntitlements. This would include whether or not the new employer will recognise leave entitlement s and if so whether the employee will be provided a choice to transfer their entitlement s. Clear and simple Option Two avoids the need to mimic the complex legislative provisions that currently apply in transfer situations for specif ied employees (Sub part of Part A of the ERA) and set out a multi step choice set for employees and employers and information di sclosure provisions. Option Two does increase the complexity of the requirements for EEPs in employment agreements but is intended to support common practice around the negotiation of the treatment of leave entitlements. Readily implementable Implementation detail would be negotiated between the two employers so they can negotiate an arrangement that is workable for their systems. Option Two will require a change to the employment agreement of all employees to amend the EPP. Flexible and future proof Option Two provides the flexibility for employers to adopt a range of approaches that best suit their specific business circumstances. I t is intended to support common practice. It would also require but maintain flexibility around the commercial negotiation of appo rtionment of liability and transfer of employee information. In contrast, option one would require an incoming employer to offer transferring employees a choice to have their leave entitlements transferred or paid out by the outgoing employer as a downst ream decision of voluntarily agreeing for employees to be offered the choice to transfer employment on the same terms and conditions. Fair for employers and employees Option Two would not impose a statutory constraint on the contractual arrangements employers negotiate in restructuring situa tions. Such a constraint could discourage the incoming employer from offering employees the opportunity to transfer their employmen t if large leave liabilities were involved. The proposal includes a safeguard for situations where an employee transfers employment on a lower rate of pay so the value o f transferred leave entitlements is not affected . Employees may or may not have entitl ement transferred and may or may not have the option (unlike Option One where they would always have the option if they are offered and choose to transfer employment). kjtrvweh
Regulatory Impact Statement Which option is likely to best address the problem, meet the policy objectives, and deliver the highest net benefits There are multiple, sometimes conflicting, objectives when developing a legislative regime for employee leave and pay entitlements. Policy makers are trying to balance appropriate minimum standards for employees with compliance costs for employers. A balance is needed to develop a framework that can be applied to all types of employment and work situations in a fair and consistent manner, whilst being easy to understand and implement , minimising the need for employer judgement. The current proposal (Option One) , based on the Cabinet decisions, gives effect to the highlevel recommendations from the Holidays Act Taskforce. Detailed design work to take those recommendations and turn them into an implementable framework, made clear the complexity needed to achieve some of the desired outcomes. The methodologies for determining leave entitlements agreed by Cabinet in would necessitate significant changes to every payroll system used by New Zealand employers, including Government payroll systems. The new proposals (Option Two) are the result of policy work inten ded to achieve the same highlevel outcomes specified by the Taskforce, but with simpler payment methodologies and fewer calculation steps for employers and payroll providers to navigate. A simpler Act would be easier for employers and payroll to implement , minimise the need for extensive payroll changes and associated implementation costs and reduce on going calculation costs. Employees would also benefit from a simpler Act with better clarity and transparency around their legal pay and leave entitlements. Although we cannot quantify the implementation costs, we believe they will be lower for Option Two and the consultation will provide an opportunity to test with stakeholders. Option Two proposals are expected to reduce the compliance burden for employers and improve overall understanding and workability of entitlements and obligations relating to leave for employees. The proposals under Option Two address feedback from stakeholders in some areas and are mainly focused on parts of the Bill considered to be critical to the overall operation of the legislation. The Option Two proposals prioritise areas where changes will improve the quality and usefulness of consultation feedback, while balancing progress towards delivery of a Bill for introduction. We antici pate these changes will improve the anticipated quality of submissions on the exposure draft of the Bill and go some way towards addressing the concerns that might have been raised by submitters otherwise.
Regulatory Impact Statement to address any of the issues with the underlying pol icy decisions MBIE and stakeholders identified through the detailed policy design process. Before the General Election, drafting of the Employment (Leave Entitlements) Bill (the Bill) began but was not completed. The Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety (WRS) intends to release an exposure draft of the Bill in September for targeted consultation. The purpose of the exposure draft is to identify remaining technical and workability issues with the proposed policy decisions and to understand stakeholder concerns and views before a Bill is introduced. There are two options related to the content of the exposure draft that is intended to be released in September : Option One: Exposure draft reflects the policy decisions (with technic al refinements) in their entirety. Option Two: Exposure draft incorporates changes and additions (that were previously out of scope) to some of the policy decisions in areas where officials can complete policy and drafting work within the time availa ble before September. The Minister for WRS is proposing Option Two. The p roposed policy changes are intended to simplify the regime while maintaining broad alignment with the underlying framework of the Act and the objective of protecting the overall level of worker entitlements. Addressing some of the known issues will enable stakeholders to focus their feedback in other areas. The changes proposed under Option Two address some, but not all, of the issues with the policy decisions that MBIE and stakeholders have identified. Changes beyond this scope would involve substantial additional policy work and would not be achievable before September. The Minister for WRS intends to use the consultation document that will accompany the exposure draft to ask targeted questions about alternative policy solutions in these areas. This RIS acts as an addendum to the RIS and includes an additional qualitative assessment of the expected costs and benefits of the proposed policy changes in Option Two. The proposed policy changes will n ot significantly impact on the cost estimates in the RIS , which focus on the costs employers will incur because of the new payment methodologies and earlier access to some leave entitlements which are not changing. These proposals aim to reduce the co mpliance costs to employers of implementing the changes, which the RIS did not include analysis of. Following consultation in September , the Minister for WRS may propose further policy changes before the Bill is introduced. Any new or substantial ly changed policy proposals will be subject to further regulatory impact analysis.
Regulatory Impact Statement Limitations and Constraints on Analysis There were a number of limitations and constraints relating to the RIS, although most of these were focussed on the costs and benefits of increases to leave payments and earlier access to leave entitlements. The RIS also identified some limitations and constraints rel evant to calculating implementation costs , which are the focus of the current proposals: There had not been wide consultation on the Taskforces recommendations. The lack of comprehensive consultation constrained MBIEs ability to fully understand the impa cts and costs of the Taskforces recommendations. It was not clear what changes might be needed to implement recommendations in payroll systems and as a result, what potential costs might be for payroll providers and employers. Accurately quantifying the cost of implementing system changes is inherently difficult. Costs will vary depending on a range of factors, including: o the size of the businessorganisation o the nature of the employers workforce o the type and functionality of existing payroll systems us ed to manage pay and leave (including whether it is digital and, if so, whether it is cloud or noncloud based , whether it is an off the shelf or bespoke product that requires a customised implementation process and whether it is integrated with time and attendance systems) o the employers access to payroll expertise. The Taskforce was given scope to change fundamental aspects of the Act so long as tripartite consensus between government, business, and union representatives could be maintained. This requi rement constrained the Taskforces recommendations. Additional limitations and constraints in this RIS include: The refinements proposed in Option Two largely reflect MBIE s engagement with payroll providers during the policy design process and their feedback on areas where significant system changes would be required. A lack of b roader consultation remains a limitation on the analysis. It is, therefore, difficult t o quantify the extent to which Option Two might reduce implementation and compliance costs , which is why we have focused on qualitative analysis. The proposal s in Option Two were constrained by the time available for policy development and drafting ahead of an exposure draft in September . Policy refinement has occurred at pace with a focus on addressing some known gaps with the assumption that further insights and evidence will be provided during the exposure draft process. The scope for making chang es to the existing policy decisions is limited to options that maintain broad alignment with the current drafting of the Bill and the underlying framework, which at the time required tripartite consensus. Significant changes that would extend the timeframe for policy development and legislative drafting before an exposure draft could be released are out of scope and have therefore not been considered or analysed. The consultation document that accompanies the exposure draft will seek feedback on options tha t are beyond the current scope for policy changes, and the Government may consider these options following consultation. The narrative description of proposed changes set out in this addendum is largely based on anecdotal feedback from stakeholders engaged with the detailed design process undertaken to . The consultation process will ask targeted questions to kjtrvweh
Regulatory Impact Statement elicit more details about the implementation requirements, costs and impacts of proposed changes. While the limitations and constraints impact th e ability to quantify the costs and benefits of the options, MBIE consider s that the qualitative assessment based on feedback from stakeholders on the impacts of the policy decisions is sufficient to give Minister s confidence to make an informed decision on options for changes to be included in the proposed exposure draft fo r consultation. Responsible Manager(s) (completed by relevant manager) Alison Marris Manager, Employment Standards Policy Ministry of Business, Innovation, and Employment
Regulatory Impact Statement Section : Diagnos ing the polic y problem What is the context behind the policy prob lem Issues with the Holidays Act have been a longstanding concern for employers, employees and payroll providers. The lack of clarity around the processes and calculations required to determine leave entitlements and payments make the Act difficult to app ly in practice, particularly when it comes to complex and evolving working arrangements that differ from a standard five day, hour salaried week. The effect of the lack of certainty and clarity the Act provides to employers is that: many employees are not receiving their correct entitlements, or payment for their entitlements employers and employees do not have certainty regarding the provision of , and payment for , entitlements employers, particularly those with large numbers of employees on variable wo rk and pay arrangements, can incur relatively high costs to comply with the Act the Act cannot be readily systematised in a payroll system many employers are carrying a liability that cannot be readily quantified (and may change significantly when employees change their work patterns). Reliance on employer judgement and poor implementation in payroll systems has caused widespread and often unintentional non compliance with the Act, resulting in significant remediation costs for public and private se ctor employers. Until a legislative solution is provided, risk of ongoing non compliance will remain. In , Cabinet agreed to establish a tripartite Holidays Act Taskforce (the Taskforce), comprised of government, business and union representatives , to recommend improvements to the Act . In , Cabinet agreed to a legislative solution, endorsing the Taskforce s recommendations for improving the Act . The recommendations retain the underlying framework of the Act , which provides entitlement after specif ied periods of employment to weeks of annual leave and days of other types of leave , and include: prescriptive methodologies, calculations and definitions intended to provide more certainty about how to calculate entitlements and pay improved access to som e leave entitlements some increases to minimum leave payments improved transparency and clarity around some processes. The Taskforce focussed more on some of the objectives Cabinet set for it than others. It focussed particularly on providing greater certainty about how to calculate entitlements and ensuring that no employee would be worse off than under the current Act in an y circumstances. This focus required a significant trade off with the objective of simplifying the Act. Between and , MBIE brought together a small working group of payroll providers and practitioners to complete the detailed policy design proce ss required to implement the policy decisions in legislation. This work and initial d rafting of the Bill revealed ambiguities and gaps in the policy decisions, and the extent of complexity within the prescriptive methodologies and system changes they would require , particularly those used kjtrvweh
Regulatory Impact Statement by small businesses . For example, the recommended methodology for determining the hours an employee would have worked on a day of leave would require employers to have pay systems that are integrated with time and att endance, which many small businesses do not currently have . The then Minister for WRS made decisions on some refinements in response to technical issues identified by MBIEs stakeholder working group, maintaining alignment with the policy decisions a nd tripartite consensus. Drafting of the Bill was not completed before the General Election and further work to draft provisions that accurately reflect policy will be required to complete the Bill, irrespective of whether th ere are any further poli cy changes . What is the policy problem or opportunity The Minister for WRS intends to release an exposure draft of the Bill in September for targeted consultation. The Minister has decided to test the workability of changes in the Bill with stakeholders to ensure any legislative changes are robust and en during. Stakeholders will be asked to comment on the technical details in the Bill and highlight any concerns around workability and implementation. Before an exposure draft is released, there is an opportunity to make some changes and additions to the existing policy decisions. A number of issues identified during the policy design process could not be addressed within the scope MBIE was given prior to the General Election. The scope required continued tripartite consensus and alignment with the unde rlying policy decisions which meant only technical refinements were possible. There is now scope to make some further policy changes to address known issues. These changes would simplify, address gaps and reduce implementation requirements for payroll and businesses and focus on areas where policy and drafting work can be undertaken quickly before September (they do not address all the known issues). Changes p roposed seek to resolve issues in the following areas: The annual leave framework including access to annual leave entitlements, methodologies for determining how leave is taken, and PayasYouGo leave payments. Payment methodologies for family violence, bereavement and sick leave, and the accumulation period for sick leave entitlement. Treatment of leave entitlements in restructuring situations. The proposed changes have been informed by consultation and drafting during the policy design proce ss, which revealed that in some cases, the methodologies and processes would result in an inevitable amount of complexity . The proposed changes are achievable within the time frame and will improve the quality of feedback from stakeholders during consultation and reduce unnecessary feedback on known issues with already identified solutions. Depending on feedback received from stakeholders, more substantial changes may then be considered . Given the work that has happened to and the risk of ongoing non compliance, the most efficient way of seeking that feedback is to complete the legislative drafting , incorporating changes to some known issues with the decisions.
Regulatory Impact Statement Who will be affected by the prop osed changes The primary stakeholders are: employers who struggle to comply with their obligations under the current Act employees who do not always receive their correct entitlements payroll providers who supply payroll systems to employers and payroll p ractitioners who work in employer organisations. All stakeholders stand to benefit from improvements to the Act. Businesses and payroll in particular will benefit from further refinements to the Cabinet decisions which aim to improve implementation a nd workability, whilst also reducing administrati ve burdens and compliance costs. Feedback provided by payroll providers and practitioners during MBIEs policy design process has helped to inform the propos ed policy changes in Option Two . MBIE ha s also continued to engage with nominated representatives of Business New Zealand and the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions to seek their perspectives. They have indicated that they are supportive of work to simplify the changes. Employee representatives are likely to continue to oppose a fundamentally different basis for providing leave entitlements, such as an hours based accrual model that many employers and payroll providers have suggested could provide a simpler model. Their opposition is driven by the p otential impacts on the principles of the current Act and, therefore, the current level of worker entitlements the Act provides. Compared to the Cabinet decisions, changes proposed in Option Two are not expected to have a material impact on specific population groups. The proposals will not substantially impact any of the proposed improvements in access to leave entitlements the policy decisions deliver. Improved access to entitlements will benefit all employees but particularly those employees in jobs with variable working patterns, lower levels of pay and less generous conditions of employment. Women, Mori, Pacific people s, disabled people and young people are more likely than other groups to be employed in these jobs . A key objective of the proposed changes to the policy decisions is to improve the accessibility and understandability of the new legislation which will benefit these population groups by making it easier for them to understand their leave entitlements. What objectives are s ought in relation to the policy problem The RIS outlined the key objectives for improving the Act, which are still relevant : Provide clarity and certainty to employers and employees about the rules for providing minimum leave entitlements and payment s. Make the provision of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave simpler and more readily applicable to the range of complex working arrangements in the labour market . Make obligations easier to systematise and implement in payroll systems. Minimise compliance costs . Protect the overall level of entitlements the Act provides for employees.
Regulatory Impact Statement The previous Government had a bottom line of maintaining tripartite consensus . Achieving this result ed in a focus on ensuring no employee would be any worse off than under the Act. Protecting worker entitlements while providing greater certainty and clarity required a direct trade off with the objective of simplifying the Act. The Minister for WRS has instructed MBIE to seek more balanced policy solution s (Option Two), considering all objectives, particularly simplicity and workability to improve implementation and compliance costs. kjtrvweh
Regulatory Impact Statement Section : Deciding upon an option to address the policy problem What criteria will be used to compare options In order to meet the above objectives, the options have been assessed against the following criteria: Clear and simple Obligations in relation to the provision of, and payment for, leave entitlements are as simple as possible, while providing clarity and certainty fo r employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements and employers can have confidence they have met their obligations. Readily implementable to minimise compliance costs Workable and readily implementable in payroll systems (including those used by large and small businesses). This includes minimising the system changes required and the need for employers to apply judgement and discretion when determining entitlements and payments. Minimises administrative burden, imp lementation requirements and compliance costs. Aligned with common practice (where this is well intentioned and desirable ). Flexible and future proof Applicable to the full range of complex working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both n ow and in the future. Supports flexibility where it is appropriate for employers and employees to adopt an approach that suits their circumstances. Fair for employers and employees Results in a fair outcome for both employers and employees and achieves a n appropriate balance of interests between parties. This includes maintaining overall levels of entitlement for employees but ensuring an appropriate balance between protection of entitlement and compliance costs. Minimises the risk of any perverse incenti ves on employers or employees to arrange work and leave to minimise obligations or maximise entitlements. Appropriately calibrates the balance of decision making between employers and employees. What scope will options be considered within The scope for making changes to the existing policy decisions is limited to options that maintain broad alignment with the current drafting of the Bill and the underlying framework of the Act. Policy development and drafting work for options considered must be able to b e undertaken quickly, within the timeframe for release of an exposure draft in September . What options are out of scope Significant changes that would extend the timeframe for policy development and legislative drafting before an exposure draft could be released are out of scope. These include some further opportunities for simplification within the current framework, such as the payment methodologies for annual leave, and alternative policy options that represent a fundamentally different model for providing and paying leave entitlements, such as an hours based accrual system for annual leave. kjtrvweh
Regulatory Impact Statement: Applying the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance Act in a proportiona.
Regulatory Impact Statement: Easter Sunday Shop Trading
Regulatory Impact Statement: Holidays Act reform further policy decisions
Regulatory Impact Statement: Holidays Act reform further policy decisions PDF KB
Regulatory Impact Statement: Increasing the minimum sick leave entitlement PDF KB
Regulatory Impact Statement: Introducing an income threshold for unjustified dismissal PDF KB
Regulatory Impact Statement: Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulat.
Regulatory Impact Statement: Partial strikes PDF KB
Regulatory Impact Statement: Strengthening consideration and accountability for the employees behaviour in personal grievance process PDF KB
Regulatory Systems (Building and Housing) Amendment Act
Regulatory Systems (Commercial Matters) Amendment Act
Regulatory Systems (Economic Development) Amendment (No ) Bill: Approval to table a Supplementary Order Paper
Regulatory Systems (Economic Development) Amendment (No ) Bill: Supplementary Order Paper: Minute of Decision
Regulatory Systems (Economic Development) Amendment Act
Regulatory Systems (Economic Development) Amendment Bill and Regulatory Systems (Immigration and Workforce) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction
Regulatory Systems (Economic Development) Amendment Bill, the Regulatory Systems (Housing) Amendment Bill, and the Regulatory Systems (Workforce) Amendment Bill: approval for introduction and new amendment to Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act
Regulatory Systems (Housing) Amendment Act
Regulatory Systems (Workforce) Amendment Act
Regulatory Systems (Workplace Relations) Amendment Act
Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill (): new policy proposals
Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill (No )
Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill (No )
Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill (No )
Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill (No ): Policy proposals
Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill (No )
Regulatory Systems Amendment Bills (RSABs) are a legislative vehicle used by MBIE and other large regulatory agencies.
Regulatory Systems Amendment Bills: policy proposals
Regulatory Systems Amendment Bills: policy proposals Minute of Decision
Regulatory Systems Bill: Housing Portfolio Matters: cabinet paper
Regulatory Systems Policy Assurance and Performance
Regulatory cooperation is important because we live in an interconnected world. It can:
Regulatory impact statement
Regulatory impact statement for the accident compensation amendments to be included in the Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill ()
Regulatory impact statement: Research and development Tax Incentive PDF KB
Regulatory impact statement: The Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities Act Regulations PDF KB
Regulatory institutions and practices
Regulatory oversight, space related policymaking and sector development functions
Regulatory system assessment: Consumer and commercial system owner response PDF KB
Regulatory system assessments provide an insight into how well a regulatory system is working at a particular point in time within the existing policy and institutional framework.
Regulatory system governance
Regulatory systems amendment bills
Regulatory systems and stewardship
Reimbursement can be sought for refunds, credits and rebookings processed from August , which are made in respect of bookings confirmed on or before August .
Release of immigration information
Release of ticket reselling discussion paper
Released: Tuesday, May
Relevant D aily Pay (RDP): What an employee would have received if they were at work on that day. Relevant D aily Pay includes: payments such as regular (taxable) allowances, productivity or incentive based payments ( including commission and bonuses) , and overtime payments if the employee would have received them on the relevant day; and the cash value of board or lodgings if this has been provided by the employer. It does not include employer contribution payments int o an employee superannuation fund or reimbursements payable to the worker for the day (Sections , A, , A, , , , , , and of the Act ).
Relevant legislation, regulations and standards
Relevant legislation, regulations, and standards
Relevant sections Launch licence ()() Conditions, indemnity , and insurance relating to launch licence () Renewal of launch licence Continuing obligations of licensee Payload permit ()() Conditions, indemnity and insurance relating to payload permit Continuing obligations of permit holder Overseas launch licence ()() Conditions, indemnity and insurance relating to overseas launch licence () Renewal of overseas launch licence Continuing obligations of licensee Overseas payload permit ()() Conditions, indemnity and insurance relating to overseas payload permit Continuing obligations of permit holder Facility licence () Conditions and indemnity relating to facility licence Renewal of facility licence High altitude licence () Conditions and insurance relating to high altitude licence If there is a proposed transfer or change of control of a licence or permit, the liability, indemni ty and insurance requirements are reviewed and conditions may be imposed as appropriate in accordance with this policy
Remediation deadlines for earthquakeprone buildings that had not lapsed as at April have been extended for years, to allow time for the Review and any subsequent changes to take place.
Remote Users Scheme (RUS)
Remove the No Claims Discount and crosssubsidisation of the Experience Rating framework.
Removing manual handling of your invoices means invoice information gets to the right place, at the right time with less chance of errors happening along the way. This all helps to reduce delays in processing and payment of your invoices.
Removing rewards for poor employee behaviour
Renewable electricity generation
Renewable energy strategy work programme
Rental Vehicle Association
Repairability is a measure of the extent and ease with which a product can be repaired and maintained.
Repealed Waters economic regulation and consumer protection regime
Replace the current reference to OWP in the PLEPA with a standalone formula that is aligned with the methodology IR use s for the calculated income estimate of OWP in the online paid parental leave (PPL) application system. It would : use a four week average of an applicants gross weekly earnings ; and specify the four week reference period is the most recent four weeks up to the point that entitlement to parental leave payments commence s. Analysis Practicality: Reduces compliance costs and administrative burdens for applicants an d their employers as m ost applicants or their employers would no longer need to run manual calculations to check the pre populated figure . Payment outcomes: The majority of applicants will be unaffected as their OWP andor Average Weekly Income ( AWI) are a bove the maximum parental leave payment rate ( percent in the financial year, , of , applicants). For those affected , the impact on payment will depend on their remuneration structure . I consider that, overall, the proposal will provide a fair outcome for applicants and aligns with the original intent of including OWP in the methodology by providing a significantly different reference period to the week period used for the AWI calcul ation . Costs to government: It is not possible to calculate an exact fiscal cost due to the number of variables but as only a small percentage of applicants are affected, costs should be minimal. IR expects costs will
Replace the previously agreed approach with
Report migrant exploitation form
Report of concern (ROC) data will be analysed for relevance and usefulness.
Report on UK and Norway RD Tax Credit Schemes PDF KB
Report on analysis of consultation meetings PDF KB
Report on energy hardship measures
Report on the survey of Registered Engineering Associates: views on raising the annual registra.
Report on the findings of the Tourism New Zealand Domestic Demand Review
Report on the operation and effectiveness of the OSHAA
Reporting Migrant exploitation form
Reporting and disclosures based on the circular economy (and sustainability more broadly) are increasing, as consumers, governments, and businesses set higher expectations around the environmental impacts of production and consumption. In turn, this has also highlighted greenwashing issues.
Reporting any noncompliance with this policy to their people leader.
Reporting migrant exploitation
Reporting on prosecutions outcomes in accordance with the
Reporting on the Older Workers Employment Action Plan
Reporting on the Plan of Action is important to show ongoing commitment to these issues, to maintain focus in this area, to allow greater awareness in agencies of complementary work underway, and to provide stakeholder groups outside government the ability to understand, influence and support government activities. The Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety has agreed that annual implementation reports will be produced and on the MBIE website.
Reporting possible wrongdoing by our staff
Reporting under the ILO constitution
Reporting, disclosures, and greenwashing prevention
Reports from the individual research projects:
Reports on the environmental impacts of tourism
Reports, data and analysis on the New Zealand screen sector:
Request an independent review
Request for OIA responses on the Oranga (Wellbeing) research project
Request for OIA responses on the Oranga (Wellbeing) research project PDF KB
Request for Proposals Food Safety Science and Research Centre
Request for proposals released
Request for the costs associated with the Oranga (Wellbeing) research project
Request for the costs associated with the Oranga (Wellbeing) research project PDF KB
Requests should include your name, your postal address or preferred email address, and specific details of the information you want.
Requiring adventure activity operators to register directly with WorkSafe (rather than indirectly via their auditor) and some adjustments to the information they have to provide.
Research Reports on Domestic Tourism
Research and Development Tax Incentive
Research and Development Tax Incentive for Implementation PDF KB
Research and Development Tax Incentive: Review of implementation PDF KB
Research and development data
Research and development survey:
Research and development tax incentive
Research by the Leather and Shoe Research Association (LASRA) has been awarded a Gold Status by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment for exceeding excellence and impact.
Research commercialisation
Research drew on various data collection sources, including a literature review, an environmental scan, and indepth interviews and focus groups with various stakeholders. These included financial capability providers, the Retirement Commission and participants in financial capability programmes.
Research helping New Zealand prepare for the new reality of extreme wildfires
Research on the impact and effectiveness of international modern slavery legislation completed.
Research summary and insights: circular economy and bioeconomy As part of the first Emissions Reduction Plan, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (M BIE) undertook a programme of research to determine New Zealands potential to reduce emissions through resource efficiency and recovery ( circular economy) and h ow to get greater value from New Zealands biological resources (bioeconomy) . The research was focu sed on developing evidence and insights relevant to New Zealands distinctive economy, and related challenges and opportunities. For the purposes of th e research: a) a circular economy involves designing out waste and pollution, keeping resources in use for as long as possible, then recovering and regenerating products and materials at the end of their lifecycle b) the bioeconomy encompasses the sustainable use of natural biomass resource and a reduction in waste and pollutants coupled wi th transitioning awa y from dependence on fossil fuel resources. Both have objectives to achieve economic, environmental, cultural and social outcomes. Research was commissioned from a range of external providers over the period December to May . Reports from the i ndividual research projects are available on MBIE s Circular Economy and Bioeconomy webpage . A range of quantitative and qualitative research methods were used in the projects including: Material flow analysis: Analysis of mass, energy and carbon emissions data, including presentation in Sankey diagrams, which provide a visual representation of the flows of materials and emissions for New Zealands economy as a whole , and for waste, food, energy and built environment sectors. Market analysis: Analysis of emerging or potential bioeconomy opportunities from a commercial perspective, assessing growth r eadin ess across four dimensions: competitiveness of production for the required biomass; clarity of customers and markets; competitiveness of processing and logistics; and the level of organisation and cooperation in the industry. System approaches: Use of system maps and tools, such as the multi level perspective, to identify patterns of activity and change at sector and whole economy levels and best potential leverage points for actions. Literature scan and stakeholder interviews : All projects undertook scansreviews of relevant international and New Zealand research. Conversations with s takeholder were used to elicit and test insights and findings during the research.
Research summary and insights: circular economy and bioeconomy PDF KB
Research to support and help futureproof the ageing workforce
Research will also meet the needs of industry, helping to grow exports and ensure local food and beverage businesses have access to foreign markets through meeting internationally recognised food safety standards.
Research, Science and Innovation
Research, Science and Innovation (RSI) Workforce Surveys
Research, Science and Innovation Domain Plan
Research, Science and Innovation System Performance Report
Research, Science and Innovation Workforce Survey of Individuals Report
Research, Science and Innovation Workforce Survey of Organisations Report
Research, Science and Innovation sector data
Research, evaluation and monitoring in relation to consumer credit including evaluation of the Credit Contract and Consumer Finance Act (CCCFA).
Research, science and innovation
Research, science and innovation briefings on the RD tax incentive June August PDF KB
Researchers held some ethnic specific focus groups to allow for exploring differences in perspectives and experiences across Pacific ethnic groups. This included talanoa (discussion) with participants who identified with the following ethnicities: Samoan, Tongan, Niuean, Cook Islander, Fijian and nonPacific.
Reserve Bank of New Zealand
Residential Tenancy Agreement Builder
Residential insurance claims resulting from natural disasters
Resolution of illegal mining case sees reparation to local community
Resource Management Act
Resource efficient buildings and infrastructure, for example switching to more renewable, biobased, and recycled materials.
Respecting people for who they are.
Responding to the Royal Commission on the Pike River Coal Mine Tragedy
Response template: Review of New Zealand Companies Office Fees and Levies ()
Response times and charges
Response times will vary between teams across MBIE and the complexity of the complaint. If a response cannot be provided in a short turnaround, and requires further investigation, this could take up to approximately days.
Response to Canterbury earthquakes
Response to inhearing request for further information
Response to the rapid building assessment system review
Responses to Royal Commission recommendations
Responses to selected OIA requests received by us.
Responses to selected Official Information Act (OIA) requests of public interest
Responses to the Canterbury Earthquakes Royal Commission recommendations final report
Responsibility for the Bioresource Processing Alliance, New Zealand Product Accelerator and New Zealand Food Innovation Network will transfer to the most relevant PRO.
Responsible camping reforms
Responsible for embedding the policy into operational activities within their business area
Responsive skills systems enabling learning for life
Restrict the planting of new trees on land that is not already forested outside of urban areas.
Restricted Office of the Minister for Economic Development and Science and Innovation Chair, Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee THE SCOPE OF SPACE POLICY AND A LEAD SPACE AGENCY Proposal This paper proposes a broad scope for space policy including all of New Zealands interests in space: space launches, satellites, satellite applications and payloads performing similar applications carried to very high altitudes by balloons and potentially other aircraft . The paper also proposes that there be a lead agency for space policy and to administer the proposed space legislation. The functions of the lead space policy agency could be located in the Ministry of Transport or the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE). The Minister of Transport and I have agreed that, due to the significant economic development and innovation objectives of the proposed Space Activities Act, and the need to maintain momentum in the policy, legislation and implementation work streams, MBIE should be the lead space policy agency for an initial period of three years. However, this decision will be reconsidered as part of the legislatively required review of the Space Act which will take place three years after enactment. The lead space policy agency will have a significant coordination role and a crossagency coordination mechanism is proposed to formalise this. Executive summary Rapid developments in space technology have enabled smaller, cheaper satellites and lower cost satellite launch services. This has made space accessible to more players a process sometimes referred to as the democratisation of space. Rocket Labs innovative new rocket technology and streamlined business model put it at the forefront of these developments. Rocket Labs proposal to commence commercial space launches from New Zealand has precipitated the need for us to develop legislation to enable space launches from our territory, to meet our obligations under international treaties as a launch state and manage the safety and security risks. The process of developing the legislation has highlighted that space is of immense strategic importance around the world and that international legal and policy frameworks are evolving in response to the fast pace of development in technology and business models. It has become clear that we have to rapidly build our policy capabilities in the space realm to capitalise on the emerging economic opportunities, advance our interests in space, and manage international relationships and obligations. New Zealands interests in space extend beyond space launches to satellites and their uses. Satellites enable the provision of critical services and infrastructure including banking, transportation, electricity, telecommunications, navigation, remote sensing (with applications ranging from agriculture and landuse monitoring to disaster management and climate change) and national security. Hence, this paper proposes that space policy yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act encompasses all of New Zealands interests in space including economic development, national security, foreign policy, safety and the environment. It also proposes that space policy includes the use of technologies operating at very high altitudes that carry out similar functions to satellites, so that New Zealand is well positioned to control these activities in the future as technological advances and circumstances require. The breadth of space policy means that knowledge is located in different agencies. New Zealand has a few pockets of space policy expertise including the Radio Spectrum policy team at MBIE and satellite applications in the New Zealand Defence Force (NZDF), Land Information New Zealand (LINZ) and some Crown Research Institutes. However, no single agency is responsible for advancing New Zealands policy interests in relation to space and space applications. I propose to address this by assigning a lead agency for space policy. The agency will assume the substantive policy lead in areas where there are currently gaps (e.g. in the economic development dimensions of space policy, the regulatory dimensions of space policy and contributing to the development of international norms and rules associated with the use of space). The agency will also have a substantive coordination role and a crossagency coordination mechanism is proposed to formalise this. I do not consider that the scale of the proposed policy and regulatory functions justifies the establishment of a standalone agency. Instead the new functions can be located within an existing agency based on the strategic fit and alignment with the agencys mandate and capabilities. The two most suitable candidates for the space policy functions are either the Ministry of Transport or MBIE. The choice between these agencies comes down to a judgement about the best strategic fit for space policy i.e. whether it is more closely aligned to growth and innovation outcomes or more closely aligned with transport safety including system resilience. In both Australia and the UK, the space policy lead agency is hosted by agencies with substantially similar responsibilities to those of MBIE in the science and innovation and economic development areas. The regulatory functions associated with implementing the proposed regulatory regime for space launch activities could be located with the lead policy agency or with a separate entity. However, as the authorisation functions (including national security considerations, safety assessment and financial assurance) are closely associated with the policy functions, I propose to keep these two functions together. Once the proposed legislation is enacted, licensing fees on industry participants will be used to recover the costs associated with the regulatory functions. An implementation work stream has been established to develop the approach to approving and monitoring Rocket Labs launches and payloads in and to develop detailed procedures for approving and monitoring rocket launches and payloads once the Act comes into force. Until the legislation is enacted, I propose that the costs associated with implementing the regulatory regime be absorbed within agency baselines as the process involves a degree of capability building by agencies and there are public good reasons for meeting these costs from Crown funding. The costs associated with developing space policy will be met from Crown funding as is usual for funding government policy advice. Should MBIE or the Ministry of Transport be the lead agency, they would address any budget pressures associated with taking on these functions as part of their four year plan in the Budget. yrupqmdi s ()(f)(iv) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Background Rocket Labs proposal to commence commercial space launches from New Zealand requires us to rapidly develop our policy and regulatory capability Rocket Lab (a US company founded by New Zealander Peter Beck and with a New Zealand subsidiary) is offering regular commercial space launches from the Mahia Peninsula commencing in late . Rocket Lab has developed innovative rocket technology that enables it to offer dedicated launches for small satellites (at around of the price of other commercial services) and its streamlined launch service aims to reduce the time required to launch small satellites into space, making commercial launches more accessible. New Zealand offers advantages as a space launch location for reasons including our remote geographic position and low levels of air traffic. A regulatory regime will also need to have due regard for payloads which could have dual civilian and militaryintelligence uses, or the launch of which would not be in New Zealands national security or foreign policy interests. Commercial space launches provide economic opportunities for New Zealand, but are set against a background where security issues are highly relevant. For example, before Rocket Lab can commence space launches, New Zealand must conclude a Technology Safeguards Agreement (TSA) with the US. The TSA will enable the transfer of sensitive US technologies for use in the launch vehicles, and imposes obligations on New Zealand regarding the secure use and management of those technologies. The establishment of a space launch industry in New Zealand also has the potential to create national security and foreign relations benefits. More widely, it will enable New Zealand to play a more active role in promoting the responsible use of space alongside likeminded nations at a time when changes in the international regulatory environment are needed in response to the rapidly evolving commercial sector. The need for a domestic regulatory regime for space activities was precipitated by the need to ensure we meet our international obligations as a launch state (including United Nations space treaties as well as the TSA), and to manage safety and national security issues arising from frequent launches. In November , Cabinet agreed to develop a A report by Sapere on the potential economic benefits of the development of a commercial space launch industry in New Zealand estimates that Rocket Lab could contribute between million to , million of value add to New Zealand over years. This includes the downstream effects of New Zealand industries having easier access to satellite technologies . yrupqmdi s (a) s (a) s ()(b)(ii) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act new regulatory regime to enable commercial space launches from New Zealand (Cab Min refers). The development of the legislation has highlighted the need for a more comprehensive and coordinated space policy capability to help government balance commercial, wider economic, national security, foreign policy and other interests. To address this, Cabinet directed that MBIE in consultation with key agencies to report back to Cabinet with further advice on space policy and space agencies by the end of March (Cab Min refers). The scope of space policy Space policy encompasses all of our interests in space, including space launches, satellites and satellite applications and similar applications undertaken at lower altitudes by payloads carried by aircraft such as balloons Space is of great importance to modern life and the costs of accessing space are falling rapidly. Advances in technology have enabled the development of very small satellites and lowercost launches with the ability to carry multiple satellites into space. Larger fleets of smaller satellites are operating with greater capability and these developments are creating opportunities for a greater number of government and private customers to take advantage of satellite applications. As a result, we are seeing a significant increase in the number of commercial satellites being launched and a continued reduction in the average satellite mass. A key driver of this is the growing popularity of nanomicrosatellites (satellites less than kg) for civil and commercial use. In , nanosatellites were launched globally (an increase of around compared to ). One market assessment predicted that the number of small satellites launched each year from to would continue to show steady growth reaching to satellites a year by (a total of , to , satellites over the period).Rocket Lab is at the forefront of this business in providing dedicated launches for small satellites (rather than having them as secondary payloads on the launches of bigger satellites). New Zealand has a wellestablished (but still developing) interest in satellites and their applications. Satellites typically carry out a few basic functions: remote sensing, communications, global navigation, broadcasting, national defence, manned spaceflight support and research. Some of these functions have a very wide and increasing range of applications. For example, remote sensing satellites are used for weather observation, landuse monitoring, resource management, climate change monitoring, military surveillance and mapping, amongst other things. Communications satellites provide internet access, television, telephone and other data relay services; some are configured as intelligence collectors. The uses of navigation satellites for aircraft, shipping and road vehicle navigation and control systems and precise terrestrial location information are well known. Less familiar, but no less essential, is the use of the precision timesynchronisation systems these satellites incorporate to facilitate the accurate clock reference of computer networks used for commercial services such as banking and stockexchange transactions, and Spaceworks Small Satellite Market Observations; Spaceworks NanoMicrosatellite Market Assessment. Projections are based on announced launch intentions, market research and qualitativequantitative assessments. yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act critical national infrastructure services such as electricity networks. Other functions may be developed in future. Other systems, including balloons and certain types of aircraft operating at very high altitudes (from about kilometres down to the normal operating altitudes of aircraft also known as near space) may carry out similar functions to those of satellites in the future. Compared to satellites these have both advantages and disadvantages that make them more or less suitable for the various applications described above. The use of vehicles operating at these altitudes for these applications is still developing, and military and civil utilisation of this zone is increasing with the consequent need to address issues such as overflight of New Zealand territory, national security, and safety. To enable New Zealand to be well positioned to control future activities in this area, this paper proposes that the scope of space policy include certain activities at very high altitudes. When I report back to Cabinet on the proposed space activities Bill, I will recommend that very high altitude activities are included within the scope of the legislation. Space policy principles and guiding objectives New Zealand is seeking to facilitate the development of a safe, secure, responsible and sustainable commercial space launch industry. The establishment of a space launch industry creates a strategic opportunity for New Zealand to build our capabilities and expertise in the space sector and to apply space technologies (e.g. advanced materials, navigation and guidance systems and rocket propulsion) to a range of other domestic industries. It also creates the potential for New Zealand to design, build and have satellites in space. The fast pace of space technological development and the increased number of players is creating a challenging and evolving international environment. Other countries such as Australia and the UK are currently reexamining aspects of their legal and policy frameworks to ensure that their current provisions strike the right balance between encouraging innovation and industry development in the use of space, managing the risks and vulnerabilities created by a more congested and contested space environment and managing the associated government liabilities arising from international treaty obligations. The approach that New Zealand is taking to space policy is informed by developments in likeminded countries which are grappling with similar issues. Officials have begun to establish relationships with international space experts and space policy and regulatory agencies in the UK, US and Australia. However, we cannot simply wait for international consensus to develop on all issues. New Zealands space policy will reflect our unique circumstances as an emerging space faring nation and as a niche player in the rocket launch industry. The principles that are relevant to space policy were set out in the November Cabinet paper, A Regulatory Regime to Enable Space Launches from New Zealand (CabMin refers). These principles are: Supporting New Zealands economic development interests, through providing a comprehensive but flexible policy and regulatory framework to achieve safe and secure launches while supporting industry development and innovation; Supporting New Zealands national security interests and international security partnerships through reducing or removing the current security risks a New yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Zealandbased space launch industry poses, mitigating the risks to New Zealands security that result from other actors behaviour in space, strengthening security cooperation including with other spacecapable states, and providing more opportunities to improve New Zealands and our partners defence force effectiveness; Managing the Crowns interests (including foreign policy and security interests), through support for the exercise of New Zealand sovereignty, managing the Crowns exposure to liability risk, providing a robust complianceoversight regime and fulfilling international treaty obligations; and Consideration of a New Zealand position on broader space security issues, including norms of responsible behaviour in space, the possible weaponisation of space, selfdefence in space, and the risks of debris in Earth orbit. In support of these principles, the following policy objectives set out the key aims that New Zealands space policy shall seek to address: Facilitate the development of a safe and responsible space industry including managing effects on Earth, in space and on other users; Promote the use of satellite and very high altitude vehicle applications; Ensure the equitable, efficient and sustainable access to satellite orbits and radio spectrum resources used for space services; Preserve and advance New Zealands position in space and access to space capabilities; Ensure New Zealands international rights and obligations in the use of space are met and that the Governments liabilities as a launching state are managed adequately; and Enhance and protect national security. These objectives will be used to guide the development of New Zealands space policy. I propose that the lead agency for space policy report back to the responsible Minister with further advice on New Zealands space policy by October . We have limited understanding about the extent to which different New Zealand industries and sectors are using or planning to use satellites and space technologies or what the opportunities are to extend the use of these applications in New Zealand. Improving our knowledge of this will enable us to identify opportunities for economic growth and innovation, and identify where government can facilitate the uptake and use of these new technologies. I propose that information on the potential for satellite and very high altitude applications in New Zealand form part of the October space policy report back. Space agencies: functions and form A space policy agency needs a broad mandate and leadership role supported by an explicit coordination mechanism to integrate the multiple interests in space policy yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act New Zealand has a few pockets of space policy expertise, e.g. the Radio Spectrum policy team at MBIE and satellite applications in the NZDF, LINZ and some Crown Research Institutes but no single agency is currently responsible for advancing New Zealands space objectives or for coordinating advice across all policy agencies with an interest in space. Given the broad scope of space policy, the required knowledge and expertise is unlikely to reside solely in one organisation. However, it is desirable that there be a lead agency to provide a central point of contact within government on space policy, to coordinate advice across multiple policy dimensions, and to assume the substantive policy lead where there are currently gaps (e.g. the economic development dimensions of space policy; the regulatory dimensions of space policy including development and maintenance of domestic space law; and contributing to the development of international norms and rules associated with the use of space). Decisions on the lead agency should take into account the functions that need to be carried out as they relate to both space policy and implementation. Space policy functions In order to lead effectively across the multiple policy dimensions associated with space, a lead policy agency would have the following functions: Policy advice (including research, monitoring and evaluation, and strategic planning). It is proposed that the authorisation of space launches, payloads and satellites be located with the policy function. A key component of the authorisation function will be an ongoing risk assessment and advice on how the government can manage its liability associated with being a launching state in the context of a rapidly evolving commercial market, and the development of strategies to manage this liability and pass it on to the space launch and payload operators; Developing and maintaining (jointly with MFAT) New Zealands international relationships and New Zealands international obligations for space. (Defence will continue to manage militarytomilitary relationships); and Domestic coordination of information and advice across the various policy dimensions. This is likely to be a significant part (e.g. up to ), of the policy advice function. The lead agency would have objectives of building on our existing knowledge, integrating the diverse interests of government agencies, and leveraging international resources to achieve the capabilities we need. Consistent with this, I seek Cabinet approval for: A space policy agency with a broad mandate and clear leadership role . While the lead space policy agency would have overarching responsibility for the totality of New Zealands interests, in practice we could contemplate one or two centres of excellence based around commercial applications of space on the one hand and defencesecurity applications on the other. There would need to be explicit and effective coordination between the two centres of excellence. A domestic coordination committee . An explicit function of the lead agency for space policy will be the coordination of information and advice across domestic A list of UN space treaties and international institutions is attached in Annex . yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act agencies. This could comprise a crossagency senior officials group, e.g. for linkages to the New Zealand Intelligence Community. The host agency for space policy would provide a secretariat for the coordination committee. Further work will be needed to work out practical systems and structures to manage the production of advice, including from intelligence and security agencies. Functions within the scope of implementation The draft legislation establishes the following regulatory functions: Authorisation of space launches, payloads and satellites; National security considerations; Registration of space objects; Monitoring and enforcement; Accident investigation; Designation of secure areas; Issuing of security cards; and Education, information and guidance for industry participants. These functions could be conducted or coordinated through the space policy agency (i.e. MBIE or the Ministry of Transport). As the authorisation functions are closely associated with the policy grounds for assessing a license application, the proposal is to keep these functions with the policy function. The powers associated with these functions will be assigned through the legislation to the appropriate entity. For example, while the lead agency would be responsible for providing advice on the granting of a license to the responsible Minister, the power to issue, revoke or suspend the licence would reside with the Minister. The agency charged with undertaking authorisations needs to gear up quickly and be highly responsive. In particular, the regulator needs quickly to develop the capability to understand the risks associated with licensing space launches and the operation of space objects, but the expertise required, (e.g. to undertake detailed technical and risk assessments), could be contracted in as needed. The remaining functions listed in paragraph above could be located within an existing regulatory entity but, in practice, the implementation of the new regulatory regime will involve a significant coordination element. For example: Accident investigations will be carried out by one or more of the following agencies: New Zealand Police, Work Safe, the Civil Aviation Authority, Maritime New Zealand or the Transport Accident Investigation Commission; The New Zealand Intelligence Community has the requisite expertise and mandate to evaluate matters relevant to national security. The New Zealand Intelligence Community will assist with riskbased security assessments (Protective Security Requirements) for companies participating in the space industry (whether conducting launch activities or developing space applications); and The Aviation Security Service has capabilities in issuing security cards. The New Zealand Intelligence Community includes the NZSIS and GCSB as well as parts of DPMC, NZDF, MoD, MFAT and others as necessary. yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act The question of which agency carries out the enforcement functions will be resolved through the development of an implementation process and will be addressed in subsequent reports to Cabinet. Candidate agencies for lead space agency This paper seeks a decision on which agency should be responsible for administering the proposed space legislation. My assessment is that the nature and likely scale of activities associated with space policy (including administering the new legislation) do not justify the creation of a standalone agency. I propose that these functions be located with an existing agency based on the best fit with mandate and capability. The two most likely lead agencies for space policy are the Ministry of Transport or MBIE. Officials have also considered the NZDF but concluded that the economic development objectives do not fit well with that agencys mandate and focus on national security. However, the NZDF and Ministry of Defence will maintain and develop specialist expertise around space policy for national security and military applications. The New Zealand Intelligence Community will also maintain a role in assessing the implications of space policy and activity from a national security standpoint. The primary regulatory functions associated with the authorisation of space launches, payloads and satellites could be carried out by MBIE or the Ministry of Transport. However, as noted above, in practice, there will be different regulatory agencies involved in different aspects of the regulation of space activities. The State Services Commission has developed guidance on the preferred location for policy functions where the choice is between agencies of the same type. The guidance incorporates a set of criteria which are weighted according to their relative importance. The criteria that are most relevant to the space policy functions include: Strategic fit: compatibility with the existing agencys present role and functions, People capability : whether the agency has, or could acquire, what it would need now and in the future to deliver the interventions and outputs which best contribute to the outcomes government is seeking; and Implementation : this includes consideration of whether the expansion would be cost effective without jeopardising the efficient, effective and economical management of the activities of the host agency. MBIE and Ministry of Transport officials have undertaken a joint assessment of the preferred location using these criteria. Their conclusion is that the assessment criteria are broadly neutral in terms of which agency is the preferred location and that the choice for Ministers comes down to a judgement about the following two matters: Strategic fit: MBIEs Radio Spectrum team has expertise in radio spectrum policy and radio spectrum management, licensing and compliance, which is applicable to satellites and satellite licensing. MBIE is also the governments lead advisor on growth and innovation policies. In both Australia and the United Kingdom (UK) the policy lead agency is hosted by agencies with substantially yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act similar responsibilities to those of MBIE. It is however ultimately a call for Ministers as to whether the host agency should have a greater focus on economic developmentinnovation (MBIE) or transport safety and system resilience (Ministry of Transport). Implementation: MBIE is the larger policy agency and more able to marshal the resources required to develop the required policy capability. MBIE has been coordinating the development of the proposed regulatory regime for space activities and is more likely to be able to gear up and implement quickly. I have discussed the preferred location for the space policy functions with the Minister of Transport, Hon Simon Bridges. The Ministry of Transport fulfils the role of regulation and investing for economic goals in the transport system. However, space launches and space applications have a broader economic development and innovation focus that extends beyond transport and into many areas of the economy and society. Through coordinating the development of the proposed space legislation, MBIE has begun to develop space policy expertise and is well placed to maintain the existing momentum in the development of the regulatory regime. This leads us to conclude that MBIE should be the lead space policy agency for an initial period of three years. The proposed Space Activities Act will be reviewed three years after it is enacted. This review will provide a further opportunity for the government to consider which agency is best placed to host the lead space policy functions over the longer term taking into account developments in international space law and space policy and any changes to the civil aviation regime. Resourcing implications Two general principles apply to how government agencies resource policy and regulatory functions. These are: Crown funding for policy work; and Thirdparty funding for regulatory work (this is consistent with the principle that those who benefit from the regulatory activity should pay for it). The UK Space Agency is an executive agency of the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, and has responsibility for leading UK civil space policy, regulating UK civil space activities, and ensuring the UK meets international treaty obligations. In Australia, the Department of Industry, Innovation and Science is the central point of contact and coordination for the Governments involvement in national and international civil space activities which are administered by a range of agencies. yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act The Treasury guidelines for setting charges in the public sector identify a range of objectives for costrecovery charges including reducing reliance on funding from general taxation; and dealing equitably with the tax payer, those who benefit from the service, andor those whose actions give rise to it. These general principles have been applied to the proposed space policy and space regulatory functions identified above to provide an initial estimate of the resourcing implications of the new functions and how these will be met. The detailed analysis is attached in Annex . In summary, this analysis supports the following proposals: Once the proposed space legislation is enacted, licensing fees on industry participants will be used to recover the costs associated with the regulatory functions (An implementation work stream has been established to develop the approach to approving and monitoring Rocket Labs launches and payloads in and developing detailed procedures for approving and monitoring rocket launches and payloads once the Act comes into force. This work will provide a baseline estimate of the costs which will be recovered through license fees). Until the legislation is enacted, the costs associated with developing and implementing the regulatory regime will be absorbed within agency baselines as the process involves a degree of capability building by agencies and there are public good reasons for meeting these costs from Crown funding. The costs associated with developing space policy will be met from Crown funding as is usual for funding government policy advice. Should MBIE continue to be the lead agency, it will address any budgetary pressures associated with taking on these functions as part of its next four year plan in the Budget. If the Ministry of Transport took on these functions it would also need to address any budgetary pressures in the Budget. Consultation The following agencies have been consulted: The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Ministry of Transport, the New Zealand Defence Force, the Ministry of Defence, the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, the New Zealand Police, the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service, the Government Communications Security Bureau, the State Services Commission, the New Zealand Treasury and Land Information New Zealand. Financial Implications There are financial implications associated with the development of a space policy and space regulatory capabilities. The general resourcing principles adopted in this paper are that the costs of policy work should be met through Crown funding and the costs of regulatory work should be met by the parties who benefit from the regulatory activity. The set up costs associated with developing the new regulatory regime will be absorbed by agencies until the new legislation is passed. An implementation work stream has just been established which will identify the resourcing implications associated with the new space regulatory functions. Further advice on this will be provided to Cabinet as part of a subsequent paper seeking approval for regulations to enable cost recovery of the regulatory functions. With respect to the costs of the new space policy functions, I yrupqmdi s ()(f)(iv) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act propose that the lead agency for space policy address any budget implications in Budget. Human Rights NA Legislative Implications This paper does not have legislative implications. Final policy approvals for the proposed legislation will be sought in a subsequent Cabinet paper expected to be submitted to the Cabinet Committee on Economic Growth and Infrastructure in April . Regulatory Impact Analysis The RIA requirements do not apply to this paper as it relates to the internal governance arrangements for space policy and for the administration of the proposed space activities legislation. Publicity No publicity is planned in relation to the contents of this paper. However, once the TSA negotiations have been concluded, I propose to issue a media statement noting that New Zealand is developing legislation to enable safe, secure, responsible and sustainable space launches to take place and providing information to the public about their opportunity to submit on the content of the Bill. Recommendations The Minister for Economic Development recommends that the Committee: Note that Rocket Labs intention to establish a commercial satellite launch business in New Zealand has meant that New Zealand is rapidly developing a space policy and regulatory capability to meet our obligations as a launch state, and manage the safety and security issues arising from frequent launches; Note that a space policy capability will enable New Zealand to capitalise on emerging economic opportunities, advance our interests in space, manage international obligations, and assist in developing international arrangements to ensure the responsible use of space; Note that in December Cabinet approved the highlevel design of a regulatory regime to enable space launches from New Zealand, with legislation to be enacted during , and directed officials to report back with further advice on the scope of space policy and on space agencies (CAB Min refers); Note the scope of space policy encompasses the totality of New Zealands interests in space including economic development, national security, foreign policy, safety and the environment and that it includes space launch, satellites, satellite applications and technologies operating at very high altitudes; Note the proposed guiding objectives for space policy are to: yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Facilitate the development of a safe and responsible space industry including managing effects on Earth, in space and on other users; Promote the use of satellite and very high altitude vehicle applications; Ensure the equitable, efficient and sustainable access to satellite orbits and radio spectrum resources used for space services; Preserve and advance New Zealands position in space and access to space capabilities; Ensure New Zealands international rights and obligations in the use of space are met and that the Governments liabilities as a launching state are managed adequately ; and Enhance and protect national security; Note that in order to meet the objectives in recommendation above, a lead space policy agency will have the following functions: Policy advice (including research, information gathering, monitoring and evaluation, and strategic planning). The policy function also includes ongoing risk assessment and advice on how the government can manage its liability associated with being a launching state in the context of a rapidly evolving commercial market, and the development of strategies to manage this liability and pass it on to the space launch and payload operators; Develop and maintain (jointly with MFAT) New Zealands international relationships and international obligations for space. (Defence will continue to manage militarytomilitary relationships); and Domestic coordination of information and advice across the various policy dimensions. This is likely to be a significant part (e.g. up to ), of the policy advice function; Note the draft legislation establishes the following regulatory functions: Authorisation of space launches, payloads and satellites; National security considerations; Registration of space objects; Monitoring and enforcement; Accident investigation; Designation of secure areas; Issuing of security cards; and Education, information and guidance for industry participants; yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Agree that the nature and scale of the proposed space policy and regulatory functions does not justify the establishment of a standalone agency; Agree that the space policy functions be located within an existing agency based on the best strategic fit and alignment with existing mandate and capability; Agree that the authorisation functions are closely associated with the policy grounds for assessing a license application and that these functions should be kept with the lead space policy agency; Agree that a domestic crossagency coordination committee is established to integrate space policy advice across the range of agencies with space interests, and that the space policy agency will provide a secretariat for the committee; Note that the two candidates to lead space policy are the Ministry of Transport or the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE); Note that either MBIE or the Ministry of Transport could be the primary agency for the space regulatory functions, but that in practice different regulatory agencies will be involved in different regulatory functions and this is being worked through as part of the implementation work stream that MBIE has commenced; Agree that space launches and space applications have a broad economic development and innovation focus that extends into many areas of the economy and society, and that this, along with the need to maintain momentum in the development of the proposed space legislation, means that MBIE is best placed to be the lead space policy agency for an initial period of three years. Agree that the location of the lead space policy agency will be reconsidered as part of the required review of the proposed Space Activities Act (three years after the legislation is enacted) and that the review will take into account developments in international space law and space policy, as well as any changes to the civil aviation regime Direct the lead space policy agency to report back to the responsible Minister with advice on: A domestic coordination mechanism to provide Ministers with integrated and cohesive advice on space policy (June ); A New Zealand space policy, including an assessment of opportunities for New Zealand from satellite applications and a strategy to exploit their utilisation (October ); Note that when the proposed legislation is enacted, licensing fees on industry participants will be used to recover the costs associated with the regulatory functions; Agree that until the proposed legislation is enacted, the costs associated with developing and implementing the regulatory regime shall be absorbed within agency baselines as the process involves a degree of capability building by agencies and there are public good reasons for meeting these costs from Crown funding; Agree that the ongoing costs associated with space policy work will be met from Crown funding; yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Note that taking on these functions will be addressed as part of that agencys four year plan in the Budget; Note that officials will report to the Cabinet Committee for Economic Growth and Infrastructure in April to seek final policy approvals to enable the proposed legislation to be introduced into the House in May . Authorised for lodgement Hon Steven Joyce Minister for Economic Development yrupqmdi s ()(f)(iv) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Annex International Space Treaties and Institutions UN Space Treaties and Convention sResponsible body Description Radio frequency spectrum Treaties and ConventionsResponsible BodyDescription Outer Space TreatyUnited Nations Committee on the Peaceful Use of Outer Space (COPUOS). New Zealand is not a member of COPUOS. The Secretariat for COPUOS is United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs (Vienna)Principles governing the activities of states in the exploration and use of outer space, including the moon and other celestial bodies. New Zealand has ratified this treaty.International Radio Regulations (Treaty)International Telecommunic ations Union (ITU). The ITU is a UN specialised body. The Secretariat for the ITU is in Geneva.Manages the international radio frequency spectrum and satellite orbits resources. New Zealand is a member and ratified the Treaty in . Liability ConventionCOPUOS Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects. New Zealand has ratified this treaty.ITU Constitution and ConventionITU Coordinates efforts to eliminate harmful interference between radio stations of different countries and to improve the use made of the radio frequency spectrum for radio communications services and of the geostationarysatellite and other satellite orbits. Registration ConventionCOPUOS Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space. New Zealand has not yet ratified this treaty. Rescue ConventionCOPUOS Agreement on the Rescue, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into Outer Space New Zealand has ratified this treaty. Moon Treaty COPUOS Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies. New Zealand has not ratified this treaty. NonUN Agreements: International Telecommunications Satellite Organisation. Promotes public satellite communications. NZ is a member. yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Annex : Proposed space policy and space regulatory functions and resourcing implications Policy functions Activities Agencies New expanded functionsActivities to be carried out before Rocket Labs first test launchResourcing implications (shortterm long term) Policy advice. This includes: environmental scanning; research; stakeholder engagement; development of advice (e.g. in relation to managing the governments liability as a space launching state, and the economic opportunities associated with satellite applications); strategic planning; monitoring and evaluation.Early activities will be the development of a New Zealand space policy, and putting in place the information systems and processes necessary to undertake a review of the regulatory regime in three to five years (as will be required by the legislation).The lead space policy agency will have primary responsibility for these activities.New Policy development activities related to the development of the new regulatory regime are being undertaken by MBIE. Going forward this work will be led by the responsible agency for space policy. The costs of policy activities associated with the design of the regulatory regime are being met from within MBIEs baselines. Once the legislation is passed, it is estimated that a policy capability of three to five FTEs will be required
Restricted Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS): Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill Agency Disclosure Statement Th is RIS has been prepared by the Ministry of Business Innovation and Employment. It summarises the analysis of options to provide a legal regime for space and certain high altitude activities taking place from New Zealand. The need for this legislation has been precipitated by the intention of a company, Rocket Lab, to commence space launches from New Zealand; and the negotiation of a Technology Safeguards Agreement (TSA) with the US Government to enable the transfer of sensitive technologies from the US to New Zealand. legislation should follow on quickly to provide certainty and alleviate risk. Normally this paper would follow the advice to the Government on the TSA (as the legislation is required for New Zealand to ensure full compliance with the TSA) but because of the critical path to facilitate the first rocket launch, legislative drafting needs to commence in advance of the conclusion of the TSA. The broader cost benefit analysis associated with a rocket industry in New Zealand will be contained in the advice to Ministers on the TSA and in the National Interest Analysis. This paper focuses on the cost benefit analysis associated with the enabling legislation (assuming that the TSA will be concluded). Legislation is also required to give effect to other international Space Treaty obligations that New Zealand is party to but has not previously had to ensure compliance with because we have not had a space launch industry. The requirement for domestic law to enable New Zealand to ensure it can fully comply with its TSA and other international obligations means there is limited discretion. Given this, the proposals have been informed by established best practice with respect to national legislation for space activities, in particular the UK Outer Space Act and the United Nations General Assembly resolution on recommendations on national legislation relevant to the peaceful exploration and use of outer space (November ). While it is possible to deviate from international best practice legislation for space activities, conforming means that we can be confident that we can meet our international obligations. During the development of the space regulatory regime, we became aware of a range of technologies being developed to operate at very high altitudes (near space) and performing similar functions to satellites, including Earth observation, internet connectivity and surveillance activities. In order to future proof the space activities regime for developments in technology, and to ensure that different technologies providing similar applications and services are treated consistently, it is proposed that certain high altitude activities be brought within the scope of the space regime. With one exception (relating to the need to meet certain international obligations such as the TSA), the problem definition, policy objectives, key choices and conclusions are the same for the high altitude regime as the space regime. Given this, the inclusion of high altitude activities is an extension of scope at the margin and it does not justify a separate RIS. Instead the RIS has been to include the regulatory impact analysis produced on the high altitude regime. The Minister for Science and Innovation has requested that legislation be introduced into the House prior to Rocket Labs first test launch. This has constrained the time available to undertake the RIA. We have identified the key legal obligations and policy considerations that the regulatory yrupqmdi s ()(h) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted regime needs to provide for. However, within the time available we have not fully worked through all of the matters associated with implementing the regime. A further report back to Cabinet in April provided further advice on the scope of space policy and space agencies. The decisions in this paper did not require a RIS to be produced. We have consulted with relevant government agencies and their comments have been incorporated into the Cabinet papers and RIS. We have also consulted with Rocket Lab who is the only private entity (that we know of) with plans to undertake space launches from New Zealand within the next months. Consultation with the wider public will take place when the Bill is before the Select Committee. Simon Rae Manager, Innovation Policy May Executive summary .The key issue is how best to provide a fitforpurpose legal framework for space and certain high altitude activities from New Zealand that enables New Zealand to fully implement our international obligations, facilitate the development of safe, secure and responsible space activities, and manage liability to the Crown that arises from our international obligations. . The analysis concludes that a new law is required. Internationally, space launch legislation is based on a licensing regime (an overarching licence to launch a space object with specific requirements implemented through licence conditions) that provides the necessary controls over participation in space launches, including powers to veto launches andor payloads (i.e. cargos). Given this, we propose that a licensing regime is put in place. . Choices around the content of the regulatory regime are largely constrained by what is necessary in order to comply with international obligations, including the draft TSA which contains obligations of an absolute nature. However there are choices around: How prescriptive or permissive the regime is; and Whether or not the government transfers all liability associated with space launches, or chooses a risksharing approach. . On the first matter, we propose to adopt a permissive regime that will provide the minimum necessary to meet our international obligations and manage risks and not impose unnecessary compliance on space launch operators. A permissive approach involves giving the decision on the conditions of the licence to a decisionmaker, rather than providing the detailed conditions in the primary legislation. The case for recommending this approach is largely based on the evolving nature of space activities and, in particular, the shift from large and very expensive satellites to micro and relatively low cost satellites, and relatively low cost and frequent launches. A fitforpurpose legal framework needs to meet New Zealands international obligations and provide basic protections, but not stifle the development of a domestic space industry by imposing excessive costs. In an environment of rapidly changing space technologies and related market demand, our judgment is that this is best achieved through tailored licence conditions that take into account the particular circumstances and risks. . Under the Outer Space Treaty and the Liability Convention (two of the main international space treaties) the State assumes liability for space objects. These include launch vehicles yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted and satellites, but the State does not create the risks nor is best placed to manage them. These are matters for the ownersoperators of space objects. In light of this other governments pass off liability to ownersoperators, both through stating in legislation that they have liability, and through the requirement for insurance. However some governments, such as the US, take a risksharing approach with the objective of encouraging the development of the space industry. . For the New Zealand legal framework we have considered two options. The first is to include a provision in primary legislation that the Government will seek an indemnity for liability, with the level of insurance to be set in licence conditions. This makes it cear that licence holders will have liability, but allows the Government to cap that liability through setting insurance requirements that reflect its assessment of risk and consequences. The alternative is for the primary legislation to stay silent on liability and include a provision for the Government to transfer liability through insurance requirements (but stay silent on the policy position thus providing maximum flexibility for future governments). . Space and certain high altitude activities create risks for national security, safety and for the environment. New legislation is required to manage national security risks. For the most part safety will be dealt with under existing domestic law (the Health and Safety in Employment Act , which is to be replaced by the Health and Safety at Work Act from ) which creates general obligations on space launch operators. There may, howver, be particular safety concerns that arise from highfrequency launches or particular payloads which over time may require a more proactive approach to safety. Hence, it is proposed that the primary legislation make provision for safety related licence provisions. Similarly the Resource Management Act will largely address environmental risks. However, there may be environmental impacts in space that we dont yet know about or that fall outside of the scope of the RMA. Hence, it is proposed that the primary legislation make provision for environmental protection related licence provisions. Outer Space regime Status quo . R ocket Lab (a US company with a New Zealand subsidiary) is proposing to commence space launches from New Zealand in early offering a dedicated launch service for small satellites. . The initial testlaunch and any subsequent launches are contingent upon New Zealand concluding and implementing a treatylevel Technology Safeguards Agreement (TSA) with the United States (US) Government. The TSA enables the transfer of sensitive US technologies from the US to New Zealand and imposes obligations on New Zealand in relation to the use and secure management of the technologies. The majority of the obligations are to ensure compliance by Rocket Lab and third parties such as Rocket Labs contractors with the provisions of the TSA. Negotiations between New Zealand and the US on the TSA are underway and a separate Cabinet paper will be prepared seeking approval to sign, implement and bring into force the TSA. . Although rockets are to some extent regulated by Civil Aviation Rule part , New Zealand has no comprehensive regulatory regime designed for space launches and the operation of payloads (e.g. satellites) in space,
Results from ColmarBrunton ticket reselling survey
Retain and hold fast to your mana, be bold, be brave
Retention rate of residents was high and had been slowly increasing
Rethinking the future of New Zealand infrastructure
Retirement Commissioner (Te Ara Ahunga Ora Retirement Commission)
Retirement Commissioners review
Retirement Villages Retirement villages must register with the Companies Office under the Retirement Villages Act . They must also confirm key information and provide financial statements annually. The current fees were last adjusted in . The fees for retirement villages are made up of two components: fees paid by retirement village operators to the Registrar of Retirement Villages (the Registrar) to cover all costs incurred from setting up and maintaining the Retirement Villages register along with all duties and functions required by the Retirement Villages Act ; and land transfer fees which enable the Registrar to notify the Registrar General of Land of a retirement villages registration. The notification is the trigger for the Registrar General to place a memorial on land titles, providing priority for the rights of residents ahead o f the rights of holders of security interests. Table on the next page shows the proposed adjustments to the two components of fee paid by retirement villages. Land transfer fee amounts are not included as they are out of scope of this review , but a change is required to how these are prescribed in regulations . Friendly Societies and Credit Unions registers Current fee (GST exclusive ) Reason for revoking Copy per page under section () of the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions (Fees) Regulations . . Service no longer provided . Annul return filed more than three months after close of the financial year (Part and Part of the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions (Fees) Regulations ). . An overdue fee is not applied to other annual return filings for other registers . On application for confirmation of an amalgamation, transfer of engagements, or conversion into a company under section () of the Act . This service has not been provided in years, as the Registrar has not received an application under this section and it is anticipated that this service can be managed with no additional fee. For filing an instrument of dissolution under section (as applied by section ()) of the Act. . Following an amendment to the Act in , credit unions cannot be removed from the register by filing an instrument of dissolution. For filing, under section () (as applied by section () of the Act, a copy of a special resolution passed for the purpose of amalgamation or transfer of engagements. . The description of the fee in regulations no longer matches the changes made to the Act in .
Return economy airfares to the United States
Review Framework for Schedule , List of Occupational Diseases PDF KB
Review and refine migrant exploitation allegation triage processes.
Review framework for list of occupational diseases
Review into administration of work force visa scheme released
Review of Evaluating the New Zealand Screen Production Grant
Review of December credit law changes
Review of Digital Records
Review of Government investment in the screen sector
Review of New Zealand Companies Office Fees and Levies ( ) How to have your say Submissions process The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) is seeking written submissions on proposals for fees and levies that would recover the costs of operating the New Zealand Companies Office (the Companies Office) and its associated statutory regist ers. The Companies Office is a business unit within MBIE. This discussion document includes some questions you may like to respond to in your submission. The questions are listed in the boxes throughout this document and listed in full in Appendix One: Summary of Questions . Your submission does not need to answer all these questions. Where possible, please include evidence to support your views, for example, references to facts and figures, or relevant examples. All fees and levies proposed in this document are GST exclusive , unless stated otherwise . This discussion document is available on MBIEs website here: https:www.mbie.govt.nzhave your say Please send your written submission on the proposals and questions raised in this document by .pm on Friday June . Please include your name, or the name of your organisation, and contact details. You can make your submission by: attaching your submission as a Microsoft Word or PDF attachment and sending to companiesofficesubmbie.govt.nz ; or mailing your submission to: Companies Office Fees and Levies Review Ministry of Business, Innovation, and Employment PO Box Wellington New Zealand Please direct any questions you may have about the submission process to: companiesofficesubmbie.govt.nz Next steps and implementation Once we have considered the submissions, we will develop the final proposals. If these proposals are approved by Cabinet, they will form the basis of revised regulations under the various pieces of legislation that regulate the fees and levies considered i n this document. Please see the section Purpose of this document for a proposed timeline of key milestones. Final fees and levies are set to apply from December unless otherwise stated in this document. You can expect to hear about the final changes to fees and levies before they take effect . Use of information The information provided in the submissions will be used to inform MBIEs proposed final options in its advice to the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs . We may contact submitters directly if we require clarification of any matters in submissions. Except for material that may be defamatory, MBIE may post PDF copies of submissions received to the MBIE website at www.mbie.govt.nz . By making a submission, we will consider that you have agreed to us posting your submission on the MBIE website, unless you specify otherwise in your submission. Release of information Submissions are subject to requests made under the Official Information Act . If you object to the release of any information in your submission, please clearly indicate which parts you consider should be withheld and include your reasons for withholding the information. MBIE will consider any objections you note and consult with you when responding to requests under the Official Information Act , but MBIE make the final decision on what should be released as required by law. Please indicate on the front of your submission if it contains confidential information and mark the text accordingly. If you wish to make a submission which includes confidential information, please send us a separate version excluding the relevant inform ation for publication on our website and release as required by law. Personal information The Privacy Act establishes certain principles with respect to the collection, use and disclosure of personal information about individuals by various agencies, including MBIE. Any personal information you supply to MBIE as part of your submission will only be used to he lp inform the development of policy advice in relation to this review. Please clearly indicate in your submission if you do not wish your name to be included in any summary of submissions that we may publish. We advise caution on what y ou include in the free text response. Please do not provide more personal information than is necessary for the purposes of this consultation . Providing this information is optional . Your personal information will be securely held by MBIE in limited access folders. You have a right to ask for a copy of any personal information we hold about you because of this consultation, and to ask for it to be corrected if you think it is wrong. If you would like to ask for a copy of your information, or to have it corrected, please contact us at companiesofficesubmbie.govt.nz . Permission to reproduce The copyright owner authorises reproduction of this work, in whole or in part, so long as no charge is being made for the supply of copies, and the integrity and attribution of the work as a publication of MBIE is not interfered with in any way. ISBN: (Online) May first edition In force from May
Review of New Zealand Companies Office Fees and Levies ()
Review of Sapere Report Evaluating the New Zealand Screen Production Grant
Review of consumer credit law
Review of consumer law
Review of electricity market performance
Review of insurance contract law options paper: quick submissions
Review of section of the Commerce Act and other matters
Review of the Copyright Act
Review of the Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities Act terms of reference PDF KB
Review of the Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities Act Terms of Reference Section of the Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities Act (the Act) requires the Minister for Economic and Regional Development (the Minister), as Minister responsible for the Acts administration, to: As soon as practicable after three years from the Acts commencement , commence a review of the operation and effectiveness of the Act and prepare a report on that review; and Present the report to the House of Representatives as soon as practicable after its completion. The Review of the Act will consider: the operation and effectiveness of the Act, since the Act came into force on December ; whether the provisions of the Act should be retained or repealed; and whether any further amendments to the Act are necessary or desirable. In carrying out the review, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), as the administering agency of the Act, will assess the Acts operation and effectiveness through, inter alia, considering the following: Alignment of provisions with intent (e.g. do the provisions in the Act allow the purposes to be met); Efficient (e.g. do they impose minimum compliance costs on the regulated entities and agencies involved in administering the Act, and do they result in the provision of timely and comprehensive information to inform decisionmaking); Certain and predictable (e.g. does the regime provide a sufficient level of certainty and predictability to regulated entities); Flexible (e.g. given that this is an area of rapid technology change, is the Act sufficiently technology neutral); Transparent (for the regulated entities and the general public). There is no legislative requirement to review the Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities (Definition of Highaltitude Vehicle) Regulations and Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations , but these will be considered within the Review to ensure the regime as a whole is operating effectively . The following process will be led by MBIE officials: Collect views (including from government agncies and industry stakeholders) regarding the operation and effectiveness of the provisions of the Act. Identify how the Act and regulations can be improved operationally . Taking into account the consultation, prepare and present a final report to the Minister by December .
Review of the Rapid Building Assessment System
Review of the Telecommunications Relay Service
Review of the building consent system (snapshot)
Review of the rapid building response
Review support available to migrant victims of people trafficking in New Zealand.
Review this funding contract template before applying as this will be the contract you will agree to if you are funded.
Reviewing and updating adventure activity safety guidance
Reviewing and updating adventure activity safety guidance.
Reviewing new and major amendments to this policy and any associated procedures
Reviewing prosecution files and recommendations
Reviewing regulated ACC payments for treatment
Reviews across Government
Reviews decisions by Work and Income
Reviews of the Commerce Act
Revise, renew, reengineer
Revised Domestic Travel Survey data series
Revisions and improvements
Revisions to the Regulations from March
Rich information and analysis of a range of tourism issues
Richard Griffiths, Deputy Secretary, Corporate and Digital Shared Services
Richard has a Bachelor of Commerce from the University of Auckland.
Richard started his career as an Accountant and Financial Analyst before moving into organisational development, leadership and change roles.
Rights of access and correction
Rights of postal operators
Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plans prepared as part of the full assessment pathway
Risk Oversight Functions: Setting MBIEwide expectations, policies and procedures (nd Line)
Risk and Hazard Management Plan To mitigate the unique risks related to the safety and security of these operations a r isk and h azard management plan is required as part of the ODMP, which contains : Detailed analysis of risks and hazards at each stage of mission Steps taken to address hazards and minimise or avoid risks Consideration of the characteristics of, and hazards associated with, the client object part. Communication Plans ADR and OOS payload permit applications should also contain a communications plan. Communication and transparency around planned ADR and OOS operations are important in mitigating the risk of third party operators and states misinterpreting the behaviour of ADR and OOS satellites and intent of their operators . NZSA expects the communication plan theref ore contains details on: How the operator plans to provide information on the planned activity and in the event of an anomaly to: the regulator (MBIE) third party operators the general public . Provision for communication and coordination between entities t hat could be affected by the servi cing operation to avoid misinterpretation of behaviours or harmful interference . Provision for consultation with other states in the event of potential accidental harmful interference . Insurance and Liability Requirements for liability insurance for ADR and OOS payloads are assessed on a case bycase basis , based on the risks associated with each mission . The applicant may be required to hold liability insurance that would indemnify the Crown against claims (up to a set value) made against New Zealand under the Liability Convention. Jurisdiction and O wnership of S pace Objects Active debris removal and on orbit servicing payload permit applicants will require an agreement with the debris object owner establishing consent for the proposed servicing operation. Payload permit applicants may be required to present a n agreement with the state that has registered the client space object and the entity which holds the proprietary right to the object . This agr eement should stipulate that the permit applicant has the necessary consent to execute and deliver the service, the service complies with relevant regulations of the client object registration state and that, where necessary , any changes to the client obje ct appear in an update to the objects registration with the United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs (UNOOSA). Applicants should also provide NZSA with contact information for the client object owner and operator.
Risk and crisis management
Risks associated with nonstructural elements
Robert Pigou Deputy Secretary Regional Development Commercial Services
Robert Pigou, Deputy Secretary, Regional Development Commercial Services
Robert has been a member of the Institute of Directors since .
Robert has extensive experience in the corporate finance and banking sectors both in New Zealand and Asia. He has held senior leadership roles at EY, AsiaPower Developments Limited and Lloyds Bank, The National Bank of New Zealand and Southpac.
Robert is Deputy Secretary, Regional Development Commercial Services which manages a number of Government funding initiatives.
Robin has designed and built ground stations in Antarctica, Tokelau and Southland.
Robin supervises postgraduate students undertaking space research and SpaceOps New Zealand employs undergraduate engineering students in summer jobs.
Robyn Kamira Mori telecommunications and technology industry representative
Rocket Lab MBIE COMMENT The SPRS team has suggested that creating a single purpose enforcement officer in the Act (with powers relating to debris protection areas) would allow Rocket Lab staff (or other launch operators) to have the powers they need to maintain these areas, and the legal distinction would help to clarify their role. ROCKET LAB Rocket Lab acknowledges that New Zealands international obligations to protect sensitive technologies are substantial. They caution, however, that the option to delegate New Zealands ob ligation to operators in New Zealand must be carefully considered, and advise that obligations delegated should be proportional to the risk, consider the equivalent protections required (or not required) of operators of the same technologies overseas, and balance the economic risk to the development of the industry in New Zealand from burdening commercial operators of space systems against the cost of employing New Zealands existing security infrastructure to meet those obligations. Rocket Labs submissi on also stated that that powers and offences in the Act include ambiguities and scope for interpretation that Rocket Lab is not confident could be applied by a commercial enterprise in a way that would be seen to be universally fair and impartial. OSHAA section sets out powers that can be used to protect a debris protection area that may be required for New Zealand to meet its Technology Safeguard Agreement (TSA) obligations. The Review recommends that the relevant legislative provisions are amended to create a debris protection area officer role that is distinct from the role of an enforcement officers who promoteinvestigate compliance with the Act. The role of a debris protection officer would be to protect sensitive technology in the event of an incident that results in debris that are sufficiently intact to require the technology to be protected pending the arrival of an enforcement officer. We disagree with Rocket Lab that requiring an operator to perform this role is inappropriate or disprop ortionate. An operator reaps the benefits from using sensitive technologies and accordingly must bear some of the cost associated with its protection. An operator will generally also be in the best position to manage the risks in the immediate aftermath of an incident. We do not consider a debris protection officer should be able to exercise intrusive powers such as the power of arrest or the ability to use force. However, they should have the power to issue reasonable directions to ensure the protection of sensitive technology, breach of which would be an offence.
Rocket Lab offers apprenticeship positions for high school leavers and technicians in New Zealand wanting to gain onthejob qualifications. These are posted on the Rocket Lab careers website as they become available and have various entry requirements. To find out more email
Rocket and satellite construction
Rocket engines and satellite thrusters
Rockets, spaceplanes and satellites
Role of the New Zealand government
Roles and responsibilities
Round funding recipients
Round of the Regional Events Promotion Fund awarded ,, of funding to events in July .
Round funding recipients
Round funding recipients
Round funding recipients
Round funding recipients
Round funding recipients
Round funding recipients
Royal Commission of Inquiry into the terrorist attack on Christchurch mosques on March
Royal Commission of Inquiry into the terrorist attacks on Christchurch mosques on March
Royal Society of New Zealand
Rule A: Quality employment outcomes
Rules governing the exploration and use of outer space
Rural Broadband Initiative
Rural Broadband Initiative Phase
Rural Broadband Initiative phase two (RBI)
Rural Capacity Upgrade Programme (RCU)
Rural Couriers Society Ltd (Coural)
S ince we met with you in late February, our focus has been on progressing alternatives to some of the Cabinet policy decisions on changes to the Holidays
S ubmissi ons on the exposure draft will likely identify areas where further policy development andor changes to the Bill would be
SEGREGATED AREAS The Technology Safeguards agreement includes a number of requirements aimed at protecting sensitive technologies including requirements to create segregated areas and requirements relating to the use of identity cards. Section s , and of the Act wer e intended to implement these requirements. Section gives the Minister the power to declare segregated areas and areas set aside. These are supported by the offence provisions in sections and of the Act and a related transitional provision. Howeve r, experience with the operation of the Act has demonstrated that the most effective mechanism for ensuring consistency with these obligations is through the imposition of protective security requirements on Rocket Lab rather than through the government de claring segregated areas and areas set aside. SPRS team (MBIE)
SEO is a level hierarchical classification with Sector at the broadest level. While the Sector forms part of the hierarchical structure of the SEO, it is however used only for the grouping of divisions and for publication of RD data, not for data collection. Divisions, Groups and Objectives form the next three hierarchical levels in the SEO in decreasing order. Divisions, Groups, and Objectives are assigned unique digit, digit and digit identification (ID) codes respectively.
SIGNED for and on behalf of The Crown by:
SIGNED for and on behalf of The Mori Spectrum Working Group by:
SPRS TEAM (MBIE) MBIEs SPRS team advised that: MBIE assesses compliance with the Technology Safeguards Agreement (TSA) are as part of its assessment of the consistency of licences and permits with international obligations. The primary components of the TSA that are implemented specifically by the Act are the power to declare Debris Protection Areas and to inform the Mini ster of the intent to develop MTCR category technology so the government may consult the US on the development of MTCR Category technology. Rocket Lab are actively working with other New Zealand agencies, such as WorkSafe and the NZSIS, to develop gui dance materials to ensure other agencies and sector partners are fully aware of their TSA obligations. It is relevant to note that there have been no incidents involving debris and the Minister has not needed to invoke the power to declare a segregated are a. The Review notes that there are several mechanisms in place to ensure compliance with the TSA, including the imposition of protective security requirements on licensees. We agree the following provisions in the Act are unnecessary and should be rep ealed: Section (Segregated areas to be treated as security areas) Section (Segregated areas and areas set aside) Section (Offences relating to segregated areas and areas set aside) Section (Person in control of segregated area or area specially set aside to ensure identity cards displayed) Section (Failing to display identity card).
STATUTORY POWERS . The Act provides the following powers to support compliance with the regime. While not all have been invoked, it remains important that they continue to be available to the regulator. These powers include: Request for Information: Section of the Act empowers the Minister to ask an applicant or holder of any licence or permit under the Act to provide any information that the Minister requires for the purposes of performing functions or exercising powers under the Act in relation to the licence or permit. To , there has been no cause to use this power. MBIE ensures that all requests for information to applicants come from officials with this delegated power. When applicants have been reluctant to provide informatio n (eg due to commercial sensitivity concerns) this has been resolved via negotiation or a revision of the request to encompass only necessary information, negating the need to formally invoke this power. Applicants have been highly compliant and have a str ong incentive to comply with requests for information, so it is not envisaged these powers will be invoked often. Declaration of a debris protection area: Section of the Act prescribes that the Minister may declare a debris protection area, if the Mini ster is satisfied that it is necessary to do so in order to comply with an y international agreement relating to the protection of sensitive space technology. The Minister has delegated this power to the Chief Executive of MBIE. The Chief Executive has not needed to invoke this power to . Sharing information with agencies: Section prescribes statutory provisions which enable information to be shared across specified agencies. Officials routinely share information with other agencies as permitted at Se ction where this is necessary for the performance of their respective regulatory functions . NON STATUTORY PRACTICES TO SUPPORT COMPLIANCE Compliance strategy . MBIE s compliance strategy describes the overall approach to ensuring that people carrying out activities under the Act comply with the statutory requirements and with licence and permit conditions. . Whereas the guidance material is public facing and designed for the regulated parties, the compliance strategy is designed for internal use by MBIE. . The document describes: The key features of the regulatory regime relevant to the compliance strategy , such as: o Recognition of authorisations from some overseas regulators as meeting certain requirements under the Act for some licen ces or permit s; and o that elements of some licensed activities fall under the remit of other New Zealand regulatory regimes. The way MBIE works with its regulatory partners .
STRATUS is a sixyear . million cyber security project led by the University of Waikatos Dr Ryan Ko and funded by us.
STRATUS soaring to the Cloud
Safe Mines: Safe Workers Quick Guide
Safe Operation of the Facility A safety case to show what steps the applicant has taken, and will continue to take, to manage risks to public safety, including: o A description of the approach taken to the safety assessment o A description of the launch fac ility and its proposed operation including a description of all of the safety critical systems o Particulars of all relevant New Zealand and international standards that have been applied or will be applied in relation to the launch facility o A description o f the mechanisms used to make sure the facility is built to a safe standard and its operation is safe o Details of the key personnel responsible for the safety of the facility o A description of the geographical areas likely to be affected by the facility and if relevant demographic information about the local community that may be affected by it o A description of the known significant risks associated with the launch facility o A description of the control measures in place to mitigate those risks o An emergency management plan that describes the systems, process and procedures that will apply in the event of a major incident
Safeguarding Children website
Safer Workplaces consultation: Summary of submissions PDF .MB
Safety Commitment and Goals
Safety Critical Systems and Safety Assessment
Safety A safety case to show what steps the applicant has taken, and will continue to take, to manage risks to public safety , including :
Samoan Quota and Pacific Access Category settlement information pilot evaluation
Sandra Todd ta Quick Post
Sarah Wilson and Philip Gregan, New Zealand Winegrowers
Satellites deliver a wide range of essential services that underpin daily life in New Zealand. Improving our capability to develop, access and use space technologies will deliver benefits for New Zealanders and demonstrate the capability of our space and advanced aviation sectors to the world.
Satisfaction with the overall experience of applying for a visa was:
Satisfying the Minister of Changes
Schedule : information required for any licence or permit application
Schedule : Information required for launch licence or overseas launch licence application
Schedule : Information required for payload permit or overseas payload permit application
Schedule A nonlisted companies
Schedule : Information required for facility licence application
Schedule : Information required for highaltitude licence application
Scheduled application period
Scheduled funding and investment opportunities
Scheme payment recipients
Science System Advisory Group
Science System Advisory Group Report PDF .MB
Science System Investment and Performance
Science Systems Advisory Group
Science Teaching Leadership Programme
Science and Innovation Counsellor, Europe, New Zealand Mission to the European Union
Science and Space Communication
Science and innovation announcements and news.
Science and innovation research and data
Science and innovation success stories
Science, Innovation and Technology
Scion is a Crown research institute that specialises in research, science and technology development for the forestry, wood product and woodderived materials and other biomaterial sectors. Its purpose is to drive innovation and growth from these sectors to build economic value and contribute to beneficial environmental and social outcomes for New Zealand.
Scope of Space Policy and Lead Space Agency PDF KB
Screen sector data to
Screen share allows our Client Services Advisors to view your computer screen and see exactly what you are seeing and doing in real time so that we can provide guidance to you where needed.
Screen share involves the Client Services Advisor viewing what is displayed on your computer screen. The Client Services Advisor cannot access or control your computer through Screen Share.
Screening tool questions to assist OT National Contact Centre and frontline social workers to identify child victims of trafficking were established in June .
Screening tool to assist Oranga Tamariki National Contact Centre (NCC) and frontline social workers to identify child victims of trafficking will be finalised and implemented.
Seahorse Services Limited
Search and Surveillance Act
Season One Memorandum of Understanding for the Uplift
Second phase of Tui Oil Field decommissioning under way
Second phase: Environment
Secretariat for the Foundation is provided by MBIE.
Secretary for Business Innovation and Employment and Chief Executive (The Secretary)
Section () of the Companies Act
Section : Consumer access to dispute resolution
Section : General information . Purpose MBIE is solely responsible for the analysis and advice set out in this Regulatory Impact Statement, except as otherwise explicitly indicated. This analysis and advice has been produced for the purpose of informing key (or in principle) policy dec isions to be taken by Cabinet.
Section of the Telecommunications Act provides for the Commerce Commission to review the regulation of the anchor services ahead of future regulatory periods and make recommendations to the Minister for any regulatory changes it determines necessary. Section similarly provides for the Commerce Commission to review the regulation of DFAS from and at year (minimum) intervals thereafter.
Section : Accessing shared property for fibre installations
Section : Option identification . What options are available to address the problem The Holid ays Act Taskforce considered a range of possible changes to the Act . This included core components of a holidays and leave system such as how entitlements should be calculated and paid, as well as more peripheral issues such as how availability provisions and closedowns should be treated . It focu sed on regulatory
Section of the Crown Entities Act
Section A of the Accident Compensation Act
Section : Telecommunications levy settings
Section : Who is affected by the issues with the current Act Have we accurately captured the broad range of business arrangements that can contribute to difficulties with the Act
Section : Identifying participants in the market
Section : What are the key issues with the Holidays Act
Section : Ideas for change
Section : Enhancing information flow to the Emergency Location Information System
Section of the Act grants constables the powers of a compliance officer under only parts of the Act . Constables do not have the powers of an Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) By amending the Act in the way proposed, this would clarify constables to have all the powers an enforcement officer has und er the Act, including those in debris protection areas. The Review recommends that section is refined along the lines of: For the purpose of investigating compliance or taking reasonable steps to ensure compliance with this Act, regulations made under this Act, or the conditions of licences and permits issued under this Act, a constable may exercise any of the
Section of the Outer Space and High altitude Activities Act (the Act) requires the Minister for Economic and Regional Development (the Minister), as Minister responsible for the Acts administration, to: As soon as practicable after three years from the Acts commencement, commence a review of the operation and effectiveness of the Act and prepare a report on that review; and Present the report to the House of Representatives as soon as practicable after its completion.
Section one of the report is available in the following languages:
Securing unreinforced masonry building parapets and facades
Security of launch and of sensitive space technologies An overview of protective security (including cybersecurity ) measures or policies in place to protect the launch vehicle telemetry a nd control, other launch systems and sensitive technology .
See Payloads approved for launch
See Stats NZs website for information about New Zealands inbound and outbound travel.
See Stats NZs website for information about employment in select tourism industries by Regional Tourism Organisations (RTO). The indicators that have been developed are:
See all related documents
See also our NZRIS newsletters
See below for a link to the PDF version for printing.
See the SSAG website for more information:
See the Strategic fit section
See the full report here:
See what we are currently consulting on
Seeking an appropriation increase of million
Seeking feedback on a proposed levy to recover Commerce Commission costs of regulating water services
Seeking feedback on an exposure draft of the Patents Amendment Bill
Seeking feedback on applying the consumer data right to banking and electricity
Seeking feedback on moving towards a financially sustainable mail service
Seeking feedback on telecommunications regulatory and funding frameworks
Seeking feedback on the purpose and performance of the work health and safety regulatory system.
Seeking feedback on Crown Minerals Act Programmes
Seeking feedback to improve competition in New Zealand
Seeking your feedback on work with engineered stone and materials containing crystalline silica
Seeks ministerial decisions on policy changes relating to the Holidays Act reform to be included in a Cabinet paper in May .
Seismic Review Steering Group
Selfcontainment of motor caravans and caravans
Selfservice tool which displays labour market information from many different sources
Send the completed Confidentiality Deed to
Send us an online enquiry
Senior Advisor, Employment Standards Policy
Series of As outlining design choices for changes to remedy settings.
Services will vary for people who need help for health or disability reasons. Some people will be able to return to work relatively quickly with support. Others may take longer to return to work and need more structured and intensive support. Income insurance provides the time for people to get this.
Servicing all regions all in New Zealand
Servicing over , Government and NonGovernment Organisations across Australia and New Zealand, All Graduates facilitate more than , interpreting sessions each year, including face to face, telephone and video.
Set up in , the New Zealand Space Agency is the lead government agency for space policy, regulation and business development.
Set up in , the New Zealand Space Agency is the lead government agency for space policy, regulation and sector development.
Set up strategic investment in advanced technology research as a first step toward establishing a PRO focused on advanced technologies.
Sets out MBIEs expectations and rules governing prosecutions decision making and prosecution proceedings.
Sets out the procedures and guidelines to be followed by MBIE staff in making a decision to prosecute or to request appeals.
Sets out the scope and process for the review of the most efficient and effective arrangements for New Zealands weather forecasting system.
Setting new fees for incorporated societies
Setting the average ACC levy rates for , , and
Setting the minimum wage for Cabinet Paper PDF KB
Settlement experience of Pacific migrants in New Zealand
Settling in New Zealand: Migrant Survey trends from to
Settling in New Zealand: Migrant survey trends from to PDF KB
Several innovations, including short rotation crops and partial conversions of farms to forestry, could help increase biomass production with less competition for land.
Several projects were initiated in response to the recommendations. These include:
Shane Kinley, Employment Relations Employment Standards System
Shanelle Dyer is an MSc Geography student at the University of Canterbury, using remote sensing and GIS for conservation. Her thesis focuses on counting Weddell seals in the Ross Sea Marine Protected Area (MPA) in Antarctica, in an effort to see how well MPAs protect our vulnerable marine life.
Sharing information about children
Sharing information with Japan for Immigration purposes
She is an early career Pasifika researcher, and the founding associatedirector of All My Relations, an Indigenous research centre at Thompson Rivers University (Canada). She also cofounded the Indigenous research development program called Knowledge Makers in Canada.
She is currently the Secretary and Chief Executive of the Ministry of Business, Innovation Employment (MBIE). The Ministrys purpose is to Grow New Zealand for
Shift the setting of the Telecommunications Development Levy amount from the Telecommunications Act into regulations
Shop employees have the right to refuse to work
Shortterm employment forecasts
Shortterm employment forecasts February
Shortly prior to the General Election, the Government agreed to undertake a review of consumer credit law and make Regulations that apply consumer credit law to Buy Now Pay Later.
Should New Zealand introduce an income insurance scheme for job losses due to redundancy, layoffs or health conditions and disabilities Please state, yes, or, no, and feel free to expand on why or why not.
Should Parliament support New Zealand becoming a party to the Protocol, New Zealand would then deposit the necessary instruments to become a party to the Protocol with the International Labour Organisation.
Should people be able to receive support for up to months if they are in an approved training or rehabilitation programme Extended support will mean higher levies, and may help some people return to work.
Show a genuine interest in science and research
Show a strong commitment to their principal field of study and to interdisciplinary work
Showing results of for
Showing results of for
Siaosi is in his late s and has worked a long career as a public defence lawyer.
Sign up for face to face interpreting services
Sign up for notifications
Sign up for telephone and video interpreting services
Sign up to MBIEs notification service to find out about upcoming board vacancies.
Sign up to news from the Resource Markets branch.
Sign up to receive New Zealand Space Agency updates.
Sign up to receive tourism data updates
Sign up to receive tourism sector alerts
Signup and select your topics of interest for email updates.
Signatures: Alison McDonald, Deputy Secretary Immigration, MBIE of New Zealand
Signed th day of December
Significant governmentled programmes are working to improve broadband and mobile connectivity for New Zealanders.
Similarities and differences with adult labour exploitation
Simon Humphries, Head of the Labour Inspectorate, emphasises the importance of understanding these regulations:
Simplified points system in depth
Simplifying the framework for paying AL as a regular part of an employees pay (pay as you go
Since July , most international visitors to New Zealand have been charged the International Visitor Conservation and Tourism Levy (IVL). The IVL is set at for each eligible visitor to New Zealand.
Since it began in , the Recognised Seasonal Employer (RSE) Scheme has enabled employers in the horticulture and viticulture sector to recruit an annually capped number of seasonal workers from eligible Pacific Island countries to plant, maintain, harvest, or pack crops.
Since the Working Group delivered its report, the Employment Court delivered a judgment on the employment status of Uber drivers. The decision has been appealed and this legal process will take some time to work through.
Since the first Canterbury earthquakes in , we have investigated the impact and developed resources and guidance to help with the rebuild.
Since the late s there have been a number of Treaty settlements to redress the impacts of colonisation. These settlements are generally between and of the total value of loss (as estimated by the Crown).
Singapore Declaration on Climate Change, Energy and the Environment
Site security and risk assessments PDF .MB
Situational analysis of New Zealands bioeconomy
Six tertiary students have been selected to work on NASA projects in the US.
Sky Network Television Ltd
Slide pack for Future of Work Forum on Good Work PDF KB
Small Business Digital Boost
Small Business and Manufacturing
Small business and manufacturing
Small claims up to ,
Smart invoicing capabilities
Smarter use of advanced technologies and more investment in capital will enable New Zealand businesses to be internationally competitive.
So thats going to be an aide memoire, for you in the workshops to see if theres anything that you can come up with that you think are useful things that are going to make a difference.
So the next thing is, how we can connect the twin to a wider city So the potential is that we could connect our complex into the wider digital twin in the city. Maybe that could mean sharing information about transport links, and whats working and whats delayed. It could be about water, or management or even energy, you know, maybe the buildings generating energy and we are swapping it back into the city and managing our energy and our costs in a different way. Theres lots of opportunity there for a wider digital twin for the city. And for the users of the building that can be really helpful because if theyve got an app or something, they can actually see whats happening around them and get local community information.
So theres a whole lot of opportunities there to manage the build and the construction, but also manage any changes that happen. And of course, sometimes with supply chains, particularly now we might get to the stage where we just cant get some material and we have to swap it out and tweak the design. And so were in a good place to do that with all the information weve gathered already.
So this one here is Safe Swim. And this is looking at safe swimming for surfers. And as you can see, one of the aspects for it is the range of collaborations between different bodies to make this digital twin happen. And thats one of the things that with a digital twin, therell be lots of people want to access the data, and for different purposes, so its very much a collaborative.
So to those in the room and we have a number of people online as well. This is the workshop of the potential for digital technology to accelerate the transition to a circular economy. My name is James Griffin and I lead the circular economy work at Sustainable Business Network and together with Callum Blackburn from Aurecon and the host of facilitators and experts from Aurecon and ThinkStep we are going to lead you through the next two hours of insights and discussions.
So weve decided on our design, weve gone for that and looked at a number of cost efficiencies, utilising the data in a digital twin context and weve come up with a design we like. We are able to share that with all the users, and were able to share that with all the stakeholders. And this slide here is a kind of representation of when we are in the procurement phase. So, were looking at a range of different things that we can change in the procurement phase or select.
So, on the bottom of the slide on the right there youve kind of got like a digital passport for a range of materials. So we were looking at the steel construction and were saying well okay, well if we use this material or that material what are the opportunities and the procurement. Some of it might be higher carbon but more long life. We have to make that decision choice and some of it might be better performing and give us other potential. So really in that procurement phase, we can look into these things. We can also have a digital twin linked to the supply chains. So that information could potentially come straight into a form of data storage that we have. And then weve got that for the future as we construct this building.
So, thank you in advance for your contribution.
So, then weve got the ability to take these adaptions and add all that information into the digital twin. But at the same time, when were taking anything out, we can reuse it, we know what the materials are, we know what the equipment are, is, if theres any equipment that needs to be replaced, weve got details of that, you know, a digital representation, which allows things like maybe we could replace a part with something thats d printed, because weve got all the specs, we dont have to go and look for paper manuals to work out who actually supplied this years ago.
So, theres a lot of ability there to make that that building more adaptable and keep the cost down when we do change things. So thats an example of what we might do. And obviously we were trying to make sure that we use things at highest value possible.
So, we have chosen an area in Wellington and what we have envisaged is that theres being a new complex built in a part of Wellington. Its a complex that has residential development, it has business spaces in it, and it has public spaces, perhaps a medical centre or something like that.
So, were going to walk through an example that the Aurecon digital team have created. And its a hypothetical example, but it gives us the opportunity to say to you, heres some of the things that could be in this digital twin. And heres some of the aspects that it could help with and get your brain juices going as to what the opportunity might be for you and your own particular area.
So, what did we do What was the screening process
So, when can we expect this KiwiGerman innovation to be orbiting above us
Social Development and Employment
Social Dialogue as a Tool to Address Labour Market Challenges APEC Human Resource and Development Working Group PDF .mb
Social Good Tapui Limited
Socio Economic Activity V
SocioEconomic Objective V
Software as a Service (SaaS) including mobile apps
Solar photovoltaic energy
Solicitor : Name of counsel who has filled in ROP ROP filled in
Some Government Ministers are proactively releasing the titles of documents they receive from MBIE on a monthly basis. Note that these lists do not include briefings that accompany responses to Official Information Act requests the Minister receives.
Some catered meals (details TBC closer to the )
Some documents may contain redacted information. Any documents with redacted information will include an explanatory note about why that information has been redacted (this may be on the cover sheet included with the document, or an annotation on the redacted information).
Some documents may contain redacted information. Any documents with redacted information will include an explanatory note about why that information has been redacted.
Some employers know that migrant workers can be afraid to report exploitation at work, especially if migrants are:
Some examples of scientific payloads that have been launched from New Zealand include:
Some examples of technology demonstration payloads that have been launched from New Zealand include:
Some financial market participants must disclose their climaterelated risks and opportunities in annual climate statements.
Some information has been withheld due to the f ree and frank expression of opinion.
Some information has been withheld for the reasons of privacy of natural persons, confidential advice to Government, free and frank opinions , and legal professional privilege.
Some information has been withheld for the reasons of privacy of natural persons, confidential advice to Government, free and frank opinions, and legal professional privilege.
Some key findings included:
Some of the findings, distinctive to New Zealand are:
Some of the headline insights from the research are:
Some of the key insights we identified from the research as a whole are summarised in the sections below. Each section has drawn on a range of the commissioned research . Links are provided to the research reports for the main source s at the end of each section . a. Bioeconomy opportuni ties, near term and future, are key for New Zealands shift from volume to value Our research identified emerging or future bioeconomy productsindustries that could support the shift to lower emissions and a more productive economy . These use bioresources to their highest value, utilis e biowaste streams, increase circularity in production, andor reduc e emissions and dependency on fossil fuels. One of our research projects identified commercial opportunities for high value, sustainable and low emission use of bioresources . Thirty bioeconomy opportunities were identified, listed in Figure below . In the short term , the most attractive are complex products aimed at consumer markets in the categories of household and beauty (e g essential oils) , and health and nutrition ( eg nutraceuticals). In aggregate , added value bioeconomy exports spanning processed foods, infant formula, nutraceuticals, alcoholic and non alcoholic beverages, mnuka honey, and petfood were valued at . billion in , up fro m . billion in , a year compound annual growth (CAGR) rate of per cent, above the CAGR required to double in ten years . Opportunities in biocosmetics, sports nutrition, and marine bio actives were explored in depth . These are light weight, high value, knowledge intensive products aimed at high growth international markets, and their development may include applications of biotechnology. Importantly, the more value that is created from existing resources through these kinds of product s, the more scope there is to achieve greater econom ic value while limiting or reducing resource depletion and environmental impacts.
Some of the most successful feature films made in recent years were filmed here, such as The Lord of the Rings trilogy, Avatar and Mission Impossible . Each year we are seeing growth in international production activity in New Zealand.
Some practitioners who work in family law are also members of the New Zealand Law Society (NZLS).
Some proposals consulted on that were not progressed
Some this is where we play circular economy and digital twin bingo. So when weve gone through the use case and some of the examples I wanted to highlight before you go into a workshop scenario, and this is this is designed to get your brain juices going. But on the left there on the slide, are the circular economy attributes, weve got all the things that a digital twin can facilitate. So we talked about the original design phase designing out, but maybe using different materials and being able to visualise what the impact would be if those are renewable or nonrenewable.
Source: Deloitte Access Economics
Source: Digital technologies, digital twins and the circular and bioeconomy
Sources: Impacts of circular approaches on emissions, jobs, and other factors Barriers, enablers and approaches for a more circ ular economy Figure : High level material flows in the New Zealand economy, used to identify impacts of circular approaches (Sankey diagram) Data is mass in kt (thousand tonnes) for . Source : Impacts of circular approaches on emissions, j obs, and other factors , page .
South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty
Southern hemisphere space studies program
Southland District Council
Southland Murihiku Destination Strategy
Southland Murihiku Regional Workforce Plan Update
Southland just transition
Space Institute Director concerned over space debris
Space Policy Review: National Space Policy PDF KB
Space and Advanced Aviation Survey additional information PDF, KB
Space and advanced aviation are regulated under the Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities Act and the Civil Aviation Act respectively. While traditional aviation is not within the scope of the Space and Advanced Aviation Strategy, the development and adoption of advanced aviation technologies supports the traditional aviation system.
Space and highaltitude sector development:
Space careers pathway webinar video
Space debris threatens the longterm usability of Earth orbit, posing risks to the delivery of satellite services that we rely upon in our daily lives. New Zealand aims to lead sustainable space access through our bestpractice regulatory regime and through creating innovative and flexible policies to enable space activity that will improve the safety and sustainability of Earth orbit, such as our active debris removal policy. Enabling this innovative activity from New Zealand also presents an economic opportunity. We also support international efforts to reduce space debris generation, protect the longterm sustainability of space and preserve cultural and scientific uses of the night sky.
Space industry apprenticeships and internships
Space launches involving a US commercial launch vehicle: Require insurance up to the level of the maximum probable loss (MPL) for damage arising from the launch activity . Require New Zealand to be a co beneficiary o n the MPL insurance policy. Require the benefits of the US indemnity for damage above that amount to be passed on to New Zealand If you are seeking a facility or launch licence please get in touch with NZSA at: nzspaceagencymbie.govt.nz
Space law, security and international relations
Space related research development
Space resource utilisation and the Artemis Accords PDF MB
Space sector research, developments and technologies that are transforming the New Zealand and international space sector.
Space technologies can also be used to support sustainability on Earth. Building on our partnership with the Environmental Defence Fund on MethaneSAT, a satellite mission to monitor and study global methane emissions, the government will continue to explore ways in which we can use spaceenabled services and data to understand and mitigate environmental challenges New Zealand is facing.
Spacerelated opportunities in New Zealand
Spark New Zealand Trading Ltd
Spark is the TSO provider of Local Residential Telephone Service to end users.
Spark operates the ICAP so emergency calls are first answered at a Spark call centre. Genuine emergency calls are then forwarded to the appropriate Emergency Service Provider (Police, Fire, Ambulance)..
Speaking to one of the National Contact Points for advice
Special feature: Beveridge curve in New Zealand
Specialising in telephone and video interpreting
Specialist deepsea divers have this week started work off the Taranaki coast to kickstart the second phase of the decommissioning of the Tui Oil Field which is being overseen by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE).
Specialist functions: Set MBIEwide expectations, policies and procedures (Second Line)
Specific Code of Conduct requirements
Specific questions examined by the review include:
Specifically the changes include:
Specified pay deductions will not be able to be made for:
Sport and exercise programmes can include physiology, biomechanics, nutrition and cognitive science. Humans going to the Moon and Mars need these aspects in a very similar way to professional athletes. The AUT Sport Performance Research Institute New Zealand has an active research programme in collaboration with colleagues at NASA led by Dr Brian Russell.
Spotlight on rare disease research to benefit patients worldwide
Stable macroeconomic settings and sound fiscal policy are essential for economic growth.
Staff considerations for a dispute resolution scheme
Stage Initial determination
Stage : Review of seismic risk management in existing buildings
Stage Public consultation
Stage : Options to deliver the recommendations of the Review
Stage : Legislative process (if required) and implementation
Stage MBIE consideration of the report
Stage Cabinet and OrderinCouncil
Stakeholder feedback will inform next steps following the consultati on. If Ministers wish to receive advice on more fundamental changes as a result of feedback, then more policy work will be required, including
Standard Public Holiday requirements under the Holidays Act will apply.
Standard Terms of Purchase (Terms) where another form of contractagreement is not already in place.
Standards New Zealand website
Standards and conformance
Standards and conformance organisations in New Zealand
Standards and conformance regulatory system
Standards are documents that set out agreed specifications for products, processes, performance or services. Standards can cover safety, compatibility, performance, information and quality.
Start your application via the MBIE jobs portal
Starting your screen share session
Startup Advisors Council Meeting Minutes December
Startup Advisors Council Meeting Minutes
Startup Advisors Council Meeting Minutes
Startup Advisors Council Meeting Minutes
Startup Advisors Council Meeting Minutes
Startup Advisors Council appointed
Startups are innovative companies, often in the tech industry, with a scalable business model and strong potential to grow quickly and expand globally. They are important because the products and services they develop can lead to positive economic development outcomes, address pressing issues like climate change and health challenges, and unlock new business models.
State Services Commission Inquiry into the use of external security consultants
State of the Building and Construction Sector
Statement of Economic Policy to the Commerce Commission
Statement of Intent to
Statement of Intent to
Statement of Intent to
Statement of National Education and Learning priorities Tertiary Education Strategy
Statement on te Tiriti o Waitangi
Statements of responsibility
Statistics House investigation
Statistics NZ data on the screen industry show that in :
Statistics New Zealand data on the screen industry
Statistics New Zealand conducts a business survey that includes statistics about business growth and innovation. You can find details about commitment and barriers to innovation, use of information and communications technology, turnover and profitability, management practices and behaviours, and financing arrangements.
Statistics New Zealand conducts a survey of research and development (RD). You can find out about the RD workforce, funding, research activity, and information about how businesses work with universities and Crown research institutes. This survey enables comparisons between countries because it is based on the international Frascati Manual.
Stats NZ review of tourism data
Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High altitude Activities Act A statutory review of the Act, pursuant to section
Statutory Review of the Outer Space and HighAltitude Activities Act
Statutory Review of the Outer Space and HighAltitude Activities Act PDF KB
Step : When the Employment Relations Authority or Employment Court is deciding whether to establish a personal grievance:
Step : Enter the code that was provided by the Client Services Advisor over the phone or sent via email on the next webpage that opens.
Step : When the Employment Relations Authority or Employment Court is deciding whether to award remedies:
Step : Select the button below the field to submit.
Step : When the Employment Relations Authority or Employment Court are deciding whether to reduce remedies:
Step : Follow the prompts and guidance from your Client Service Advisor to download and install the programme.
Steve Hurring (March to October )
Steve has been the Mayor of Rotorua since , and was elected to the Rotorua District Council in .
Steve is the coChair of the Responsible Camping Working Group. She is a trained midwife and has held a number of roles in the Health sector, including as union representative for the New Zealand Nurses Association.
Steven McCabe, one of the four NASA interns on the inaugural New Zealand Space Scholarship talks about his week project designing small sensors to explore hardtoreach areas on Mars and the Moon. He also shows us some of the other amazing research happening at the NASA Ames Research Centre in California.
Strategic Baseline review
Strategic Business Plan
Strategic Intentions Statement of Intent
Strategic Intentions to
Strategic Intentions to
Strategic Science Investment Fund
Strategic Science Investment Fund Programmes Platform Investment Contract Template
Strategic Tourism Assets Protection
Strategic Tourism Assets Protection Programme
Strategic Tourism Assets Protection Programme (STAPP)
Strategic Tourism Assets Protection Programme funding recipients
Strategic intentions
Strategy and Performance is headed by Deputy Secretary Melanie Porter.
Strategy to support the growth of our space and advanced aviation sectors
Strategy, Performance and Design
Strategy, Planning and Performance.
Strengthen operational, policy and legislative settings to enhance enforcement and align with international obligations
Strengthened fuel reserves to help support economic stability
Strengthening consideration and accountability for the employees behaviour in the personal grievance process PDF KB
Strengthening enforcement of Employment Standards
Strengthening enforcement of employment standards
Strengthening enforcement of employment standards regulatory impact statement
Strengthening entry and ongoing participation requirements for AEs by:
Strengthening requirements for operators to communicate risks to activity participants
Strengthening the assessment of claims and injury management processes
Stronger operator registration and notification requirements
Structural Geology and Tectonics (GEOL)
Structural performance of Christchurch CBD building in the February aftershock
Structural performance of commercial buildings
Structure and Spectroscopy (CHEM)
Students must be pursuing a relevant graduate degree at the time of the internship. Students not currently undertaking graduate studies are eligible to apply only if they will be undertaking graduate studies at the time of the internship and must submit proof of enrolment as part of their application.
Study astronomy, physics, chemistry, molecular biology, microbiology, ecology, planetary science, geography and geology and then astrobiology at University of Auckland.
Study environmental sciences, climatology, agriculture, GIS
Study geology and planetary sciences
Study law, international relations, intelligence, security:
Study medicine, biomedical science, health science, molecular biology, cell biology, life sciences, pathology, anatomy and physiology, genetics, radiobiology, medical laboratory science.
Study on remanufacturing and other VRPs in Canada
Subsector (for example, cruise) consumer data (for example, volumes, spend, behaviours, characteristics)
Submissions are due March , pm.
Submissions closed on March . We received submissions in response to the discussion document. The majority of the feedback received was that stakeholders dont want specialist tribunals and would prefer a consistent process of appeal through the courts. As a result, it was decided not to progress work on establishing specialist appeal tribunal.
Submissions closed on the review on December .
Submissions due: June , pm
Submissions may be made to the trade labour email address above or the following postal address:
Submissions on this discussion document closed on December and we are currently working through next steps.
Submissionsnominations have now closed.
Submit a report through our workplace Integrity Line here:
Submit your completed application form to
Submit your feedback on how effective the current system is for managing seismic risk.
Subscribe for updates on the reform process and progress
Subscribe to New Zealand Petroleum and Minerals Updates
Subscribe to data updates
Subscribe to energy data alerts
Subscribe to information release notifications
Subscribe to receive information and updates from New Zealand Petroleum and Minerals (NZPM).
Subscribe to receive updates about Language Assistance Services
Subscribe to sector alerts
Subscribe to the Energy Use Newsletter
Subscribe to tourism data alerts
Subscribe to tourism sector alerts
Subsector (for example, cruise) consumer data (for example, waste, biodiversity, carbon footprints (kilometres travelled).
Success in STEM subjects provides better options for study and employment in most space careers. STEM subjects form the basis for many careers that require innovation and problemsolving skills. Studying STEM encourages you to experiment and learn from real life experiences.
Successful proposals
Successful Horizon Europe Pillar projects with New Zealand partners
Successful applicants will be awarded the New Zealand Space Scholarship to support the costs of their internship. Up to scholarships are available for .
Successful applicants will enter into an investment contract and associated work programme agreement with us (subject to any precontractual conditions being met).
Successful applicants will travel to the USA for a month internship where they will work on innovative and complex projects under the supervision of a NASA mentor. Internships at NASA are an intensive experience and require a high level of professionalism, enthusiasm, and selfmanagement.
Successful candidates will need to comply with certain obligations including, but not limited to, the following:
Successful destinations are characterised by a high degree of alignment between national, regional and local planning frameworks including visions and goals.
Successful destinations have strong leaders and champions, fit for purpose organisational structures, and collaborative partnerships and coordinated delivery across all aspects of the destination. In the New Zealand context, this is particularly important in partnerships between the Crown and iwi.
Successful destinations regularly revise and reengineer their plans and structures according to the changing visitor needs and economic influences.
Successful funding application ANZSRC data
Sue Suckling, Independent Director and Strategy Consultant
Sue holds a Master of Biotechnology from Massey University, and an Honorary Doctorate from Lincoln University, recognising her contribution to business and science.
Summaries of public submissions on NZ Post proposals XLSX KB
Summary Proceedings Act
Summary and assessment of future state options
Summary of Building Regulatory System Assessment
Summary of Competition Regulatory System Assessment
Summary of Corporate Regulatory System Assessment
Summary of Government actions
Summary of Preferred Option or Conclusion (if no preferred option) How will the agencys preferred approach work to bring about the desired change Why is this the preferred option Why is it feasible Is the preferred approach likely to be reflected in the Cabinet paper The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) recommends: shrvakdix
Summary of approved payloads
Summary of changes to the adventure activities regulatory regime
Summary of consultation on the draft Longterm Insights Briefing: The future of Business for Aotearoa New Zealand
Summary of consultation on the draft Longterm Insights Briefing: The future of Business for Aotearoa New Zealand
Summary of discussion document for public consultation on proposed fees and levies, and their amounts, administered by the New Zealand Companies Office.
Summary of feedback from Phase
Summary of feedback from Terms of Reference public consultation
Summary of feedback on the Exposure draft
Summary of findings Whakaari White Island WorkSafe report PDF KB
Summary of goals and actions
Summary of key survey findings
Summary of proposed changes: Review of New Zealand Companies Office Fees and Levies ()
Summary of proposed changes: Review of New Zealand Companies Office fees and levies ()
Summary of questions for the consultation on the future of the skilled migrant category
Summary of submissions for each proposal
Summary of submissions: Developing a regulatory framework for offshore renewable energy
Summary of submissions: Proposed changes to the International Visitor Conservation and Tourism Levy
Summary of the Immigration (Fiscal Sustainability and System Integrity) Amendment Bill changes to the Immigration Act to improve fiscal sustainability and the integrity of the immigration system.
Summary of the feedback provided on the TDLG report
Summary of the memorandum of understanding between New Zealand and Amazon.
Summary of the proposed changes
Summary of the proposed response to the Independent Review, addressing the individual recommendations and setting out next steps
Summary report on analyses of written submissions and consultation meetings PDF KB
Summary results from the and Migrant Surveys
Summary slides Barriers, Enablers, and Approaches for a more Circular Economy
Summary slides to accompany the Barriers, Enablers, and Approaches for a more Circular Economy report.
Summary: Changes to the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance Regulations and Responsible Lending Code following the review
Summary: Findings from the review of the December credit law changes
Summary: Problem and Proposed Approach Problem Definition What problem or opportunity does this proposal seek to address Why is Government intervention required The Holidays Act (the Act) sets out the minimum entitlements to holidays and leave, and payment for them, that employers are obliged to provide to their employees. Its purpose is to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees lives by providing minimum entitlements to annual ho lidays, public holidays, and sick, bereavement and family violence leave. A number of issues have been identified with the Act that make it difficult to implement in practice. Chief among these is that there is often a lack of prescription, particularly in how entitlements should be provided and how they are to be paid. For example, the Act does not prescribe how to determine what a week is for the purposes of annual holidays or an otherwise working day for other forms of leave, and is silent on how to include some types of payments, such as bonuses, in payment calculations. The result is that current provisions generally work for a standard five day, hour week, but pose a number of issues when applied to more diverse working arrangements and variable pay structures. To help address these concerns , Cabinet agreed in May to establish a Taskforce to review the legislation and suggest recommendations for change. The tripartite group, comprised of government, union and business representatives, provided the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety with its final report in October . The proposed approach is an improved status quo, where the existing units of entitlement are retained (weeks for annual holidays, days for other forms of leave) and the focus is on addressing known issues with the existing Act. An alternative approach is to introduce an hours based accrual sy stem for annual holidays, with other aspects following the Taskforces proposals. Without legislative intervention, many of the issues with the Act will persist.
Summary: Use this template to understand the terms and conditions if you are successful with your proposal for the funding round
Supplier has sufficient resources to deliver. Realistic delivery timelines are proposed taking into account other commitments, and data delivery requirements to MBIE.
Supply chain emissions are significant across all subsectors.
Support , additional young jobseekers in phonebased case management including by providing individual job plans.
Support Workers (Pay Equity) Settlements Act
Support an efficient and effective review process.
Support for Energy Education in Communities Programme
Support for innovation and RD
Support for lossmaking firms and transition arrangements for Growth Grant recipients RD Tax Incentive Briefing PDF KB
Support people to have the skills they need to succeed in work, increasing earning potential and reducing benefit inflows and encouraging continued upskilling inwork for improved productivity and resilience.
Support the development of fruit and vegetables that are more resilient to pests and diseases. This would mean more food ends up on the table, and less in the bin.
Support thriving industries and regions so businesses can create more jobs and people can work where they choose
Support thriving industries and regions so businesses can create more jobs and people can work where they choose.
Support through Qualmark:
Support through the Regional Business Partners network:
Support to all employees to carry out their obligations under this policy is made available in a Child Protection Procedure. Each MBIE business function that is or becomes a provider of childrens services has additional supporting standard operating procedures (SOPs) and guidelines as required to meet Child Protection requirements under the relevant legislation.
Support will be available for people to find work and connect them with training or rehabilitation programmes
Support workplaces to respond to the changing world of work and to provide healthy, safe and productive jobs with opportunities for workers to progress
Support workplaces to respond to the changing world of work and to provide healthy, safe and productive jobs with opportunities for workers to progress.
Supporting Government priorities
Supporting a skilled and productive workforce
Supporting communities to manage tourism
Supporting sustainable freedom camping in Aotearoa New Zealand
Supporting the development of iwiled research and development strategies.
Supporting the integrity of the corporate governance system
Survey evaluating the level of customer service provided by Immigration NZ branches worldwide.
Survey of Seismic Restraint of NonStructural Elements in Existing Commercial Buildings
Suse is the current Chair of the Angel Association New Zealand, as well as one of the founders of Angel HQ (Wellingtons angel investor network). Suse has experience in earlystage finance and is knowledgeable about key sectors. She is also skilled in building capability among founders and engaging at the regional level.
Sustainability sits at the heart of DM and enables benefits to be realised while managing the impacts of tourism.
Sustainability: increase the resilience or environmental sustainability of tourism.
Sustainable and resilient economy transformation
Sustainable packaging targets in Australia
Suzanne Stew is Deputy Secretary for Te Whakatairanga Service Delivery Group, which provides critical functions and services that support businesses, employees and consumers to operate successfully in the market place.
Suzanne Stew, Deputy Secretary, Te Whakatairanga Service Delivery
Suzanne is married to Simon and mum to Harry and given any opportunity will join in any singing or dancing.
Suzanne is originally from the UK and worked for British Telecom and Sony before moving to New Zealand in . She began her career as a product engineer and holds a Bachelor of Engineering (Hons) Electronic and Microprocessor Engineering from Strathclyde University in Glasgow, and an MBA from Imperial College in London.
Suzanne joined the public service in as General Manager Internal Partners at New Zealand Trade and Enterprise, where she led the delivery of corporate support services. Prior to that, she held senior management roles spanning diverse functions at TelstraClear and Wrightson.
System governance resources at a glance
T his briefing provides a summary of the changes proposed, with more detailed advice and
THEME SUB THEME SUBMITTER SUBMITTE R COMMENT ANALYSIS LOCATION OF FUNCTIONS Integration of the payload office with the radio frequency licensing office Care Weather Care Weather noted that they went through New Zealands licensing process as part of a Rocket Lab launch in March . Their feedback was that it may be helpful to integrate the payload office with the radio frequency licensing office in New Zealand. Car e Weather considered several jurisdictions for radio frequency licensing and indicated that doing both radio frequency and payload licensing (as well as Earth observation licensing if not already integrated) in the same office may have been appealing to th em as it would have reduced the number of agencies they have to work with. Care Weathers submission suggested that there may be merit in considering New Zealands radio frequency licensing strategy in light of the international radio frequency licensing options to see whether an integrated licensing office may attract more applicants to our regime. This matter is beyond the scope of the Review but is referred to MBIE for its consideration.
TNZ is also doing work to keep the New Zealand brand alive internationally to ensure New Zealand is top of mind for international travellers when borders reopen.
TO: Insert MBIE Business Group Att: Insert name of client contact MBIE LEGAL SERVICES , WELLINGTON Att: Manager Legal Services Litigation Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines of Issue: July Security Classification Unclassified Version: . Review ed June Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page of FROM: Insert name of prosecutor and firm
TSOs that cease to apply under the Telecommunications (New Regulatory Framework) Amendment Act
Table : Proposed fees for specific Friendly Societies register services and rounding (excluding GST) Friendly Societies register Unit Cost Proposed fee Current fee Change in fee change For filing, under section () of the Act, a copy of a special resolution passed for the purpose of amalgamation or transfer of engagements or conversion into a company. . . . . For filing a resolution for conversion of a society into a branch under section of the Act . . . . (. ) () For any cancellation or suspension of the registration of a society or branch under any of paragraphs (d) to (g) of section () of the Act . . . . . For filing an instrument of dissolution under section of the Act. . . . (. ) (.) Fees to be revoked The Friendly Societies and Credit Unions (Fees) Regulations currently prescribe fees for services that are no longer delivered by the Companies Office . Updates are also required to the description of some fees in the Regulations following a change to the Act in . Table on the next page shows the fees proposed to be revoked or to have their description in those regulations.
Table : Impact of the Taskforces proposals on the annual holidays payment model Annual holidays payments Option One Percentage of employees from testing dataset affected Worse off (compared to status quo) . Worse by more than . Worse by . Worse by . No change . Better off (compared to status quo) . Better by . Better by . Better by more than . Average impact on employees from the testing dataset () Average payment for four weeks leave (under proposed option) ,. (compared to ,. under the status quo) Average variance per employee . Average variance per employee .
Tackling sector challenges
Tagalog: Suporta sa wika kapag tumatawag sa mga serbisyo ng pamahalaan
Taiao Ora Consultants Limited
Taiepa Tiketike: Passive Resistance to Climate Change at Parihaka is a project which recently received Gold Status for its partnered approach to research into sustainable energy opportunities for the community of Parihaka.
Tait will carry out experiments using facilities at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory not currently available in New Zealand. Titan is considered ideal for studying the kinds of chemical interactions that occurred before life developed on Earth.
Taitokerau Fibre Networks Ltd
Taking a wholeofsystem view involves thinking about how all the regulatory functions within a system are working together as a whole to deliver the best possible outcomes. Common regulatory functions include:
Taking responsibility to commit to doing things right
Taking the time to put in place and run good governance is an example of putting regulatory stewardship into practice.
Takurua (Tak) Mutu, CoOwner and Director of MDA Group
Talk to us about the match between applied academia and industry and what this means for both.
Tanya Baker, Medicines NZ
Taranaki Regional Workforce Plan
Taranaki Regional Workforce Plan Refresh
Target MSD case management to specific cohorts to support the Jobseeker target.
Targeted consultation on a draft Bill
Targeted review of adventure activities
Targeted review of adventure activity regulations PDF KB
Targeted review of the Commerce Act
Targeted review of the adventure activities regulatory regime PDF .MB
Targeted review of the adventure activities regulatory regime: stakeholder engagement PDF KB
Taskforces recommendations
Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans, and Remedial Matters) Bill
Te Ara Amiorangi: Our path, Our direction
Te Ara Paerangi statement: Embedding Te Tiriti o Waitangi
Te Hiringa MaharaMental Health and Wellbeing Commission
Te Kaunihera Rata o Aotearoa
Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission
Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission
Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission have established six principles for flexible working:
Te Kawa Mataaho The Public Service Commission
Te Kawa Mataaho, Public Service Commission publish data covering the release of official information by different agencies every months.
Te Kupeka Umaka ki Araiteuru (KUMA)
Te Manu Atatu Incorporated
Te Puanga Maara Charitable Trust
Te Purunga ki Te Raki Regional Workforce Plan
Te Tai o Poutini West Coast
Te Tari o Te Pirimia Me Te Komiti Matua
Te WaihangaNZ Infrastructure Commission
Te Whakatairanga Service Delivery
Te Whakatairanga Service Delivery is headed by Deputy Secretary Suzanne Stew.
Te kaupapa outcomes framework
Te whakahaumaru i te matatapu o te tangata.
Te whakaute i te tangata ake.
Technical year review of OSHAA
Technical Advisory Group members
Technical capability For key person s relied upon for their technical capability in operating a safe launch facility: o The persons name o The relationship of the person to the applicant (e.g. emp loyee, contractor, employee of related company etc) o Evidence of the persons qualifications and experience to conduct launch facility operations and activities and any other information the person considers relevant to the assessment of
Technical capability For key persons relied upon for their technical capability in conducting a safe laun ch: o The persons name o The relationship of the person to the applicant (e.g. employee, contractor, employee of related company etc) o Evidence of the persons qualifications and experience to conduct launch activities Any other information the person consid ers relevant to the assessment of technical capability
Technical investigation into the structural performance of buildings in Christchurch
Technologies of special interest profiling
Technologies that could have military or security applications
Technology Architecture.
Technology Safeguards Agreement (TSA) and Side arrangement to the TSA
Technology and Innovation
Technology: lift productivity or capability of the tourism sector through technologybased solutions.
Telecom Deed of Indemnity
Telecom RBI agreement, Schedule , Appendix A: RBI CBDP Fixed Line
Telecom RBI agreement, Schedule , Appendix A: RBI Rural Connections
Telecom RBI agreement, Schedule , Appendix A: RPOPs and LBAPs
Telecom has also submitted a draft deed of undertaking for open access on its legacy fixed copper network, in accordance with section of the Telecommunications Act .
Telecom proposed a variation to the operational separation undertakings to clarify how certain rural telecommunications services would be treated under nondiscrimination rules under the RBI contract with the Government.
TelecomChorus Copper Deed
TelecomChorus Fibre Deed
TelecomChorus Rural Broadband Initiative Deed
Telecommunications (Interception Capability and Security) Act
Telecommunications (Regulated Fibre Services) Regulations
Telecommunications Act
Telecommunications Act and its associated regulations which together comprise the New Zealand telecommunications regulatory regime. The Telecommunications Act regulates the supply of some telecommunication services for promoting competition in telecommunication markets to bring longterm benefits to its users in New Zealand.
Telecommunications Development Levy
Telecommunications Disputes
Telecommunications Relay Service
Telecommunications Service Obligations (TSO) deed for local residential telephone services
Telecommunications and broadcasting network operators
Telecommunications and broadcasting network operators in New Zealand by month of registration.
Telecommunications service obligations
Telephone and Video Interpreting Services Panel providers
Telephone and video interpreting service
Telephone and video interpreting service for government agencies.
TelephoneVideo Interpreting
TelephoneVideo Interpreting Service
Teletypewriter (TTY) to voice
Temporality or time sequence
Temporary Accommodation Service
Temporary Migrant Worker Exploitation review
Temporary entry class visa holder charges
Temporary migrant worker exploitation review: Release of consultation document Minute of Decision PDF KB
Temporary migrants, who breach their visa conditions by working in the New Zealand sex industry, are vulnerable to exploitation.
Temporary worker numbers continued to grow
Temporary workers from the Pacific continue to grow, driven by the continuous increase in workers under the Recognised Seasonal Employer Scheme
Temporary workers help fill seasonal or shortterm skills shortages. In the year, , people from the Pacific were approved for a temporary work visa. The number of Pacific temporary work visa approvals has been growing, increasing by over the last years.
Term Definit ion Prosecution a proceeding in (a) the District or High Court under the Criminal Procedure Act in respect of an offence; (b) the Employment Court under the Employment Relations Act in respect of an offence under that Act. prosecution decision the decision to prosecute, not to prosecute, to withdraw charges or to otherwise continuediscontinue criminal proceedings once commenced . Title: Prosecution Policy of Issue: July Dep Sec Sponsor: Insert Deputy Secretary Title Version: . Last Review: February Policy Owner: Chief Legal Officer Policy Classification : Operation al Next Review : February Security Classification: Unclassified Page of prosecution decision maker manager within an MBIE business unit who has the authority under delegation and the Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines to make a prosecution decision. prosecutor MBIE in house prosecutors, Crown solicitors, or other solicitors or barristers instructed by MBIE as a prosecutor in accordance with the Cabinet Directions on the Conduct of Core Crown Legal Business and Crown Solicitor guidance. For the purposes of issues relating to disclosure, prosecutor has an alternative meaning. With disclosure, the functions of the prosecutor are shared between the investigator and the lawyer responsible for the file. Policy statements . Prosecution action is one of a number of possible responses that may be used by MBIE in respect of criminal conduct within the areas that it regulates . It is a significant enforcement tool that must be used in a deliberate and targeted manner . . MBIEs decisions to prosecute, and whether or not to continue with prosecutions, must be made fairly and consistently. Each prosecution decision must take into account the factors set out in the Solicitor Generals Prosecution Guidelines (including the facts of each case, the relevant legislation, the evidence and the public interest) and any specific internal enforcement strategies. Guidance on decision making is set out in the Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines . Each prosecution decision must be taken independently by a staff member who is free from conflicts of interest. . Prosecution decision makers must consider each case on its own merits when making the decision to prosecute. . Each prosecution recommendation must be reviewed by a prosecutor to ensure that the Tests for Prosecution (evidential sufficiency and public interest) set out in the Solicitor Generals Prosecution Guidelines are met. . When making a prosecution decision , decision makers must follow Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines . . All prosecution decisions must be recorded as set out in the Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines . . Managers are required to report any breaches of the policy, any adverse comments by courts, and any costs awarded against MBIE in MBIE prosecutions to the Chief Legal Officer . Key accountabilities and responsibilities Role Responsibility Governance and oversight Secretary for Business Innovation and Employment Chief Executive (The Secretary) Has overall responsibility for ensuring MBIE meets its obligations under the Prosecution Policy Assurance Risk and Accountability Committee ( ARA ) Maintains overall oversight of the status of the Prosecution Policy Approves new and major amendments to this policy Title: Prosecution Policy of Issue: July Dep Sec Sponsor: Insert Deputy Secretary Title Version: . Last Review: February Policy Owner: Chief Legal Officer Policy Classification : Operation al Next Review : February Security Classification: Unclassified Page of Business group management: Identify and manage risks in day today operations (st Line) Deputy Secretaries (Dep Secs) Embedding this policy in their business groups. Ensuring their business groups are compliant with this policy and associated procedure Managers and People Leaders Making employees aware of this policy and the procedure and guidelines that support compliance with it Ensuring employees are given appropriate information and training to assist them to comply with their obligations under this policy Having systems in place to enable timely and effective monitoring and auditing of prosecution decision making (including relating to infringements) Reporting on prosecutions outcomes in accordance with the Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines Responsible for embedding the policy into operational activities within their business area Ensure new and existing staff in their teams are made aware of and comply with the policy Reviewing prosecution files and making prosecution decisions in accordance with the Solicitor Generals Prosecution Guidelines , this Policy, and the Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines Our People Comply with this policy and associated procedure applicable to their role Prosecutors Reviewing prosecution files and recommendations Advising on whether tests for prosecution in the Solicitor Generals Prosecution Guidelines , are met Conducting prosecutions Specialist functions: Set MBIE wide expectations, policies and procedures (nd Line) Chief Legal Officer (Policy Owner) Has overall responsibility for the system for the management of MBIEs legal risk, and the provision and procurement of legal services Provides advice and support to business groups relating to the provision and procurement of legal services in accordance with the Legal Services Policy Title: Prosecution Policy of Issue: July Dep Sec Sponsor: Insert Deputy Secretary Title Version: . Last Review: February Policy Owner: Chief Legal Officer Policy Classification : Operation al Next Review : February Security Classification: Unclassified Page of Manager Legal Services (Litigation) Assists business groups with any breach management mitigation activities as required Monitors compliance with the policy on a regular basis Ensures the policy is reviewed and by the agreed review Provides quarterly reporting on policy compli ance to the Compliance Centre of Excellence Establishes and maintains the Litigation Register Procedures a. Prosec ution Procedure and Guidelines Related MBIE policies and documents a. Declarations of Interest policy b. Legal services policy c. News M edia policy
Terms of Reference for review of operationalising of noninterference provisions under the Crown Minerals Act PDF KB
Terms of Reference for the review of seismic risk management in existing buildings PDF KB
Terms of reference for New Zealand Tourism Futures Taskforce
Terms of reference for a review of electricity market performance
Terms of reference for the Fair Pay Agreement Working Group PDF KB
Terms of reference for the Science System Advisory Group.
Terms of use for social media accounts
Territorial authorities must consult their communities using the special consultative procedure on any local policy to allow shop trading on Easter Sunday.
Tertiary Education Commission
Text description of image
Text description of infographic
That is a very brief overview of the first document but obviously there is an incredible amount of detail in that document. We will now move on to the Thirty Opportunities document, so in the screening process we had to go from to . What happens in this document is all of the opportunities are developed in more detail. We are going to go through one of those in detail.
That was just a brief run through of the essential oils Stage II level.
That wraps up the presentation and where we are. We have gone through a lot of material, as I said pages of material is there and this is just acting as a teaser, and I hope it encourages you to dive into the documents that interest you. Some audiences may be interested in some documents and audiences may be interested in others. Thank you for taking the time to listen to us and if you have got any questions or observations, complaints or comments please contact us, we always love to talk about our work. Thank you.
The million of funding to foodbanks and community food organisations was allocated through the Ministry of Social Development Food Secure Communities Programme.
The million Tourism Communities: Support, Recovery and Reset Plan includes:
The Other ethnicity category incorporates the following ethnicities and subcategories: Other European, Asian, Southeast Asian, Indian, Other Asian, Middle Eastern, Latin American, African Other Ethnicity and when an individual did not know what their ethnicity was
The Pasifika ethnicity category incorporates the following ethnicities and subcategories: Fijian, Cook Islands Maori, Tongan, Samoan, Niuean, Tokelauan Pacific Peoples and Other Pacific Peoples
The year Strategy highlights the importance of destination management and presents a positive vision for the future where Southland.
The Contact Code allows people to contact the emergency service in the event of a power failure.
The month review is complete and the Government has given its response. It investigated whether the current electricity market delivered a fair and equitable price to consumers. It also considered improvements to futureproof the sector and its governance structures.
The Regulatory Impact Statements that inform the development of amendments to the UltraFast Broadband Initiative model:
The Tourism Flows Model aimed to help stakeholders understand the impact of tourism growth on publicly provided infrastructure.
The Regional Migration Trend reports below provide an overview of the migrant population and migration trends in each region of New Zealand. The reports show trends to and compare recent immigration patterns with previous years.
The Research, Science and Innovation Domain Plan (the Domain Plan) proposed solving this problem by creating a national research information system as a single online hub of consistent, standardised, and accurate information about the sector.
The minimum wage was . per hour.
The minimum wage was . per hour.
The minimum wage was . per hour.
The release of our experimental Modelled Territorial Authority Gross Domestic Product (MTAGDP) estimates is for the year ended March .
The minimum wage was . per hour.
The release of our experimental Modelled Territorial Authority Gross Domestic Product (MTAGDP) estimates is for the year ended March .
The Cabinet decision would add complexity to the framework for providing AL by creating three separate concepts related to AL , (AL entitlement that has arisen, pro rata AL in advance and AL in advance of prorata AL in advance) with different rules that apply to each .
The minimum wage was . per hour.
The release of our experimental Modelled Territorial Authority Gross Domestic Product (MTAGDP) estimates is for the year ended March .
The minimum wage was per hour.
The release of our experimental Modelled Territorial Authority Gross Domestic Product (MTAGDP) estimates is for the year ended March .
The minimum wage was . per hour.
The Auckland Anniversary Weekend floods and Cyclone Gabrielle marked the first instance where the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) deployed RBAs at a national level. Over local and MBIEdeployed RBAs were dispatched across the North Island, completing over , rapid building assessments. Territorial authorities also deployed RBAs to their communities.
The minimum wage was . per hour.
The theme: Inclusive science, technology and innovation for a resilient and sustainable environment
The minimum wage is . per hour.
The minimum wage will be . per hour from April .
The business initiatives
The that were identified and emerged as the high scoring products from Stage I into Stage II, the ones we showed on the page prior but here they are. There is a range of forestrybased products, a range of waterbased products, landbased products, wood, health and beauty, household, beverages, construction etc and in many ways this is a government project and everyone when home with a prize. There is a good range of products here, there is a good range of platforms here, and all of these have opportunities for the future for New Zealand.
The government agencies that developed the briefing, including by holding rounds of consultation, are the:
The AERU modelling had limited ability to incorporate offsetting actions (such as integrating forestry more fully into farming operations), or how improvements in livestock and land use productivity would affect the scenario outcomes.
The ANZSRC Review Outcomes Paper details the review process and outcomes including a summary of changes. Note: Section of the Outcomes Paper has been revised, and additional detail has been added for clarity.
The APEC Science Prize for Innovation, Research and Education (ASPIRE) is an annual award which recognises young scientists who have demonstrated a commitment to both excellence in scientific research, as evidenced by scholarly publication, and cooperation with scientists from other APEC member economies.
The Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC)
The Accident Compensation Corporation manages and delivers a comprehensive, nonfault personal injury cover scheme for all New Zealand residents and visitors to New Zealand. The scheme supports injured people to return to work, independence or everyday life as quickly and safely as possible.
The Accommodation Data Programme (ADP) is a by industry for industry research programme providing information about shortterm accommodation activity at national, regional, and council levels. It estimates the guest nights, occupancy rates and other measures relating to the accommodation industry.
The Accreditation Council is a userfunded, autonomous Crown entity established as the national body for accreditation of testing and inspection bodies. Its activities contribute to the safeguarding of the health and wellbeing of New Zealanders and ensuring our products and services meet domestic and overseas regulatory and customer requirements.
The Act came into force on April . The main changes to employment law it introduced included:
The Act describes when licences and permits are required, how they are issued, and what conditions they may include. It explains the purposes of regulation in this area, including facilitating the development of a space sector, ensuring safe and secure operations, implementing international obligations, managing liability, and preserving national security and national interests.
The Act does not allow a licencepermit holder to surrender a licence. Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) Currently the only way a licencepermit holder can give up their licence is to write to the Minister and request the Minister revoke it. This creates an administrative burden and may potentially change reportable figures ( eg if a licence is revoked, they have to report it on future applications etc.). Providing the legislative mechanism to surrender a permit or licence w ould help to alleviate some of these issues ( eg MBIE would no longer need to consult with the Minister and seek his revocation of a licence or permit, thereby reducing the compliance burden), and provide a quicker (and potentially more certain) route to achieving the same outcome for the applicant ( ie that they no longer hold the permit or licence). The Review recommends that the Act be amended to provide those licences and permits issued under the OSHAA can be surrendered by their holder, subject to the condition that p ayload permit holders may only surrender their licence if the payload has not been launched . The law should be clear that it cannot be used as a mechanism to avoid or in any way alter responsibilities for the payload when in orbit. Review the criteria for the fit and proper person test under OSHAA . The fit and proper person test (OSHAA Section ) at (d) allows the Minister to take into account any history of mental health problems, or serious behavioural problems. Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) The Review team notes that mental health and behavioural issues are commonly regarded as factors in assessing whether a person is a fit and proper person to carry out a potentially dangerous activity. The review team also notes that there is an issue about what needs to be taken into account when assessing regulatory compliance. For instance, there is a question of whether it should only appl y to non compliance with regulatory requirements relating to space and high altitude activities, or whether it should extend to non compliance with any law, such as tax law or employment laws . The Review recommends that fit and proper person test (in sect ion of the Act) be reviewed to consider: Whether it is still fit for purpose, with particular regard for whether the provisions relating to a persons mental health history are appropriate; and Whether compliance with other legislation or regulatory regimes should also be taken into account as part of the fit and proper person assessment. Section (d) (iv) of the Act prescribes a requirement for launch licensees to consult with Land Information New Zealand ( LINZ ) about any notices to mariners that are required. As these notices are fortnightly and annually, LINZ has indicated that they do not provide Land Information New Zealand SUMMARY OF FEEDBACK The submission from LINZ notes that the intention behind this section of the Act is to provide for maritime safety by alerting mariners, through LINZs Notices to Mariners, to the safety considerations arising from rocket launches in New Zealand that the y should be aware of. The fortnightly publishing schedule, long lead times for applications, and the fact that the notices to mariners cannot be easily all limit the ability to communicate usefully using these notices, in this rapidly ev olving context. In essence, it does not provide the timely information to marine rs about rocket launches that other The Review Team recommends that section (d)(iv) be repealed and replaced by a requirement to take reasonable steps to notify mariners of the fact a launch is taking place and the times and areas within which it may pose a danger to mariners .
The Act establishes the Registered Engineering Associates (REA) to oversee the registration and discipline of engineering associates.
The Act provides a framework for ensuring the competence of chartered professional engineers by requiring them to undertake continuing professional development. The Act also puts in places measures to discipline chartered professional engineers.
The Act provides a framework for ensuring the competence of registered architects, which requires them to undertake continuing professional development. The Act also puts in place measures to discipline registered architects.
The Act restored protections for workers, especially vulnerable workers, and strengthened the role of collective bargaining in the workplace. Many of the changes were familiar to businesses, as they rolled the law back to how it was as recently as .
The Act sets out a path to identify, and if necessary, address network security risks which may arise from network operators proposed investments in network equipment. Network operators must engage with the Government Communications Security Bureau (GCSB) about changes to their network equipment where such changes could have an impact on national security.
The Act which introduced the Tax Incentive was passed into law in early May . The following related documents track the progress of the legislation through Parliament and the policy development process:
The Act, which came into force on April , replaced the Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Act . The Act introduced:
The Action Plan is guided by Te Tiriti principles.
The Advanced Energy and Material Lab (AEMSLab), a multidisciplinary research group at University of Canterbury, made leaps and bounds in their research in , receiving our Gold Status rating for the second year in a row.
The Advisory Group will support the Taskforce by testing solutions to inform the final recommendations.
The Agreement between New Zealand and the Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen, and Matsu on Economic Cooperation ()
The Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into Outer Space (also known as the Rescue Agreement), ratified by New Zealand in ;
The Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into Outer Space (the Rescue Agreement), which was ratified by New Zealand in .
The All Vacancies Index is very similar. There are minor differences in the breakdowns of region, industry, occupation and skill level, but these do not change the overall patterns of the time series.
The Ambassador programme is now in six locations around New Zealand, including Auckland, Queenstown, Wanaka and Northland.
The Amendment Act also encourages telecommunications network operators to use lowerimpact methods of installation to reduce disruptions to property. The Amendment Act also enables network operators to use existing infrastructure such as electricity lines for deploying fibre in rural areas.
The Amendment Act created a new dispute resolution scheme to protect property owners. This ensures that any disputes that arise as a result of the new consenting regime are dealt with fairly and efficiently. Network operators must become members of the scheme in order to use the rights of access.
The Amendment Act created new Building Code Clause F Restricting access to residential pools. We have Acceptable Solutions for Clause F.
The Amendment Act enables the use of existing infrastructure (such as electricity lines) for deploying fibre optic cable in rural areas.
The Amendment Act established a new tiered consenting regime that supports different fibre installation methods.
The Annual Report is our main reporting mechanism to Parliament, and is usually tabled in late October. The Annual Report outlines our performance compared to the performance targets set in the previous years Statement of Performance Expectations.
The Artemis Accords belong to our partners as much as they do to the us, and we thank New Zealand for its commitment to establishing peaceful norms of behavior in space.
The Artemis Accords set principles
The Auckland Policy Office (APO) is a collaborative central government office, located in central Auckland.
The Australian and New Zealand Standard Research Classification (ANZSRC) is a set of related classifications Type of Activity (ToA), Fields of Research (FoR) and SocioEconomic Objective (SEO).
The Australian and New Zealand Standard Research Classification (ANZSRC) is a set of three related classifications Type of Activity (ToA), Fields of Research (FoR) and SocioEconomic Objective (SEO).
The Australian government, both at federal and state level, is supporting circular economy developments. Activities include a Circular Economy Ministerial Advisory Group, established in to provide advice to the Australian Government on the transition to a more circular economy, including regulatory and commercial issues, best practice initiatives, circular economy research, development and innovation needs, and measurement of progress.
The Bali Process Disruption of People Smuggling and Trafficking Working Group, cochaired by New Zealand and Vietnam, met in October . It combined days of workshop activities and collaborative learning by more than attendees from countries and international organisations.
The Baringa report was commissioned by MBIE to support advice to government on measures to support public EV charging.
The Better Work Action Plan (Action Plan) for Tourism was launched in Queenstown on March , as part of the wider Tourism Industry Transformation Plan (ITP).
The Bill retains provisions in the
The Bill to give effect to the extension was passed into law in November . The Building (Earthquakeprone Building Deadlines and Other Matters) Amendment Act came into effect on November .
The Bill will be binding on the Crown but, like the Act, will not apply in respect of the Armed Forces as defined in section () of the Defence Act .
The Bills were introduced on May and had a first reading on July . The Bills received Royal assent on March .
The Biotechnologies Group will continue to be funded until the end of June and will transfer to the new bioeconomy PRO once it is established.
The Board is made up of MBIE staff and external members, who provide advice on algorithm use and development, and ensure that algorithms have undergone a robust review by quality experts and adhere to accepted standards.
The Building (Pools) Amendment Act repealed the Fencing of Swimming Pools Act and inserted requirements for residential pool safety in the Building Act .
The Building (Pools) Regulations set out the fees payable by independently qualified pool inspectors and the certificate they will issue if a pool has compliant barriers.
The Building Code is biannually, in June and November.
The Building Practitioners Board is a statutory body constituted under Part of the Building Act . It plays an important role in the Licensed Building Practitioners Scheme, which was launched in November . Its purpose is to encourage competent building practitioners to build homes right the first time.
The Building and Construction Sector Trends Reporting Package provides regular insights on the key and emerging trends in the building and construction sector.
The Building, Resources and Markets group contribute to:
The Business Payment Practices Act has been repealed
The Business Payment Practices Act Repeal Act has come into force.
The CAA is the national aviation regulator, ensuring the safe entry and operation of aircraft within the aviation system.
The COVID disruptions have accelerated the need to change and evolve the tourism data system. The Tourism Data CoGovernance Group was established to create a more collaborative and fitfor purpose tourism data system.
The COVID pandemic severely impacted tourism in New Zealand. The New ZealandAotearoa Government Tourism Strategy sets out a more deliberate and active role for government in tourism. We want to make sure that the many benefits from tourism are realised, while managing the impacts. The Government works as a steward, looking across the system to make sure it is working effectively and as an actor through investments and interventions.
The CPI data for a given quarter is released a couple of weeks after that quarter has ended. This means that for the current quarter we must use a forecast. This forecast is revised with the actual estimated discount when the CPI data for the current quarter is released. We use an Auto Regressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) model for forecasting.
The CabGuide reminds Ministers and agenciesdepartments of requirements to consult with the Minister for Auckland on matters requiring Cabinet approval that will have a significant or disproportionate impact for Auckland.
The Cabinet decision did not include implementation details and there are several practical issues with an audit requirement including imposing a cost and compliance burden on employers . It could be confusing for employees to understand their leave entitlement s and pay if methodologies switched as a result of an audit .
The Cabinet paper in response to the proposals of the original Joint Working Group
The Cabinet paper provides the rationale Cabinet to release the All of Government Employment Strategy and Youth Employment Action Plan
The Cabinet paper that sought approval to introduce the former Bill into Parliament
The Capacity Building Network (CBN)
The Capacity Building Network focuses on skills development, human resource management and vocational training through crosscutting collaboration to facilitate st century talents, enhance employability and provide quality employment.
The Centre of Digital Excellence (CODE) supports the growth of the creative sector through funding of gaming development, creating pathways into the gaming industry and building the capability of those within the gaming sector. CODE was established in Dunedin in as a regional development initiative. Our further funding support has enabled CODE to expand its operations to a national level.
The Chartered Professional Engineers Act protects the title of Chartered Professional Engineer. Only persons registered with Engineering New Zealand (ENZ) may use words, initials, or abbreviations of the title Chartered Professional Engineer.
The Chartered Professional Engineers Council reviews and approve rules containing standards for chartered professional engineering, hears appeals on registrations and disciplinary matters and reports on the performance of the Registration Authority (Engineering New Zealand, formerly known as the Institute of Professional Engineers New Zealand).
The Chorus TSO Deed variation requires Chorus to transition TSO service users to another technology solution if they want to continue to receive TSO telephone service.
The Circular Built Environment Playbook
The Circular Built Environment Playbook report, launched in by The World Green Building Council, calls on the building and construction sector to accelerate the implementation of circular and regenerative principles. of emissions in the sector are related to energy, but the remaining of emissions are associated with the production and consumption of resources and materials a challenge that can be addressed through circular practices at every stage of the building and construction lifecycle, from manufacturing to end of life reuse.
The CoGovernance Group is made up of representatives from across government, academia and the tourism industry.
The Code focuses on acting fairly, impartially, responsibly and in a trustworthy manner, all of which are key to our work as public servants.
The Commerce Amendment Act amended the Commerce Act (the Commerce Act) to give the Commerce Commission the ability to undertake market studies to determine whether there are any factors that may be impeding competition in a market.
The Commerce Commission is required to review the pricing framework for copper services (no later than ) to ensure the new system remains fit for purpose.
The Commerce Commission works out the TSO charge paid to a TSO provider and the proportion of the Telecommunications Development Levy each provider is liable for.
The Commercialisation Partner Network (CPN) builds the capability to turn science findings into commercially viable products.
The Construction Contracts Act provides a process for dealing with payments and disputes under a construction contract, including retention money provisions to protect subcontractors.
The Construction Sector Accord was signed in April by Government and industry leaders. It sets out a shared vision, priorities for change and goals to work together for a high performing building and construction sector.
The Consumer Protection team conducts biennial New Zealand Consumer Surveys (NZCS) to find out what adult New Zealanders know about consumer laws and it explores how they behave when they experience problems with products and services. The surveys provide national level insights on the health of the Consumer Commercial regulatory system, and enable changes to be monitored.
The Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects (also known as the Liability Convention), ratified by New Zealand in ;
The Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects (the Liability Convention), which was ratified by New Zealand in .
The Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space (the Registration Convention), which New Zealand acceded to in .
The Council is open to ongoing engagement and input from anyone who is part of the startup ecosystem, especially founders.
The Council submitted its report and recommendations to the Government in July .
The Council will be chaired by the Science, Innovation and Technology Minister. The appointment process of up to experts with diverse experience in business, science, innovation and technology will begin as soon as possible, allowing the Council to meet and start work.
The Crown Minerals (Decommissioning and Other Matters) Amendment Act received Royal assent on December and a number of new provisions are now in force.
The Crown copyright protected material may be reproduced free of charge in any format or media without requiring specific permission. This is subject to the material being reproduced accurately and not being used in a derogatory manner or in a misleading context. Where the material is being or issued to others, the source and copyright status should be acknowledged. The permission to reproduce Crown copyright protected material does not extend to any material in this report that is identified as being the copyright of a third party. Authorisation to reproduce such material should be obtained from the copyright holders.
The DLR has a long history of scientific research and innovation in space science and engineering, and a proven track record of engaging with their research partners. They have been able to influence and promote the DLRNZ collaboration with their policy makers and gain support within their team to foster this new relationship.
The Deed has been renewed and amended to take into account changes in objectives and market conditions. The present version was agreed in , and then amended in and .
The Digital Futures Policy team is now also scoping an AI strategy for New Zealand and creating Responsible AI guidance for business. Both pieces of work are being developed alongside the Department of Internal Affairs (DIA), other partners, and key AI experts in Aotearoa, including the AI Forum.
The Digital Technologies ITP was developed in partnership with industry over the past few years.
The Digital Technologies Industry Transformation Plan outlines a vision and actions across the focus areas to support the transformation of the digital technologies sector.
The Domain Plan set a broad vision and direction for science and innovation data in New Zealand. It identified a need for better information about research and development funding, expenditure, and outputs, so that as a country we would be able to answer enduring questions about how to best design and implement Research, Science and Innovation activity to achieve social, economic, health and environmental objectives.
The EGR fund is contestable and is available to the Great Rides only. Applicants to this fund must be a Great Ride governance organisation.
The EGR fund is only for ebike charging equipment and installation (for example, connecting directly into the existing power network, but not for extending the network or upgrading transformers). The EGR fund is not intended to be used for additional facilities associated with the charging station (for example, installing a potable water source, toilets, interpretation panels). Great Rides are expected to fund additional facilities by themselves.
The EGR fund is open to Great Ride governance organisations that are:
The ETSP has provided sufficient certainty to incentivise many largescale events to go ahead and continue organising events from late until January . The ETSP is now closed.
The ETSP scheme has now closed, and no further applications and claims will be accepted.
The ETSP scheme is designed to provide the confidence needed for organisers of largescale events to continue organising their events over . The ETSP acts as an insurancetype scheme and covers up to of eligible, unrecoverable costs associated with a cancelled or postponed eligible event. This is designed to act in a similar way to an insurance premium and ensures some risksharing under the scheme, which will encourage appropriate decisionmaking by event organisers and planners.
The Earth System (GEOG)
The East Asia Summit was set up in to address the regions political and economic challenges and strategic opportunities. Membership comprises the ASEAN countries and Australia, China, India, Japan, South Korea, the United States, Russia, and New Zealand.
The Economic Development, Science and Innovation Committee held their hearing on the Briefing on Friday February .
The Education and Workforce Committee will report on the Worker Protection (Migrant and Other Employee) Bill. It is expected that the Bill will be passed by Parliament in Quarter .
The Electrical Safety Regulations, supported with information and guidance from WorkSafe, govern electrical safety. They are intended to help businesses understand how to manage particular electrical hazards.
The Electrical Workers Registration Board promotes safety for all New Zealanders by ensuring the competence of electrical workers. The Board enhances electrical safety through improving competency of electrical workers in New Zealand and delivering occupational regulatory good practice.
The Electrical Workers Registration Board was established in to promote safety for all New Zealanders by ensuring the competence of electrical and electronic workers.
The Electricity Authority is an independent Crown entity responsible for the efficient operation of the New Zealand electricity market. Its objective is to promote competition in, reliable supply by, and the efficient operation of, the electricity industry for the longterm benefit of consumers.
The Electrifying the Great Rides (EGR) Fund provides up to million to improve access to the New Zealand cycle trail network by investing in ebike charging stations on Great Ride cycle trails around the country to rebuild the economy.
The Emergency Caller Location Function has now moved to the Next Generation Critical Communications (NGCC) entity. You can find the information about Emergency Caller Location Information on their website.
The Employment (Leave Entitlements) Bill is intended to repeal and
The Employment Action Plan sets out a programme of actions for government agencies to support more New Zealanders into work and give them greater opportunities to realise their potential.
The Employment Relations (Pay Deductions for Partial Strikes) Amendment Bill, which will reintroduce partial strike provisions, was introduced on December and is now going through the parliamentary process. The Government has announced its intention to pass this Bill in the Q Action Plan that runs from April to June .
The Employment Relations Act will be amended to clarify contracting arrangements, simplify personal grievances, reduce complexity at the start of employment relationships and reintroduce the ability to make pay deductions in response to partial strikes.
The Employment Relations Act will be amended to introduce a highincome threshold for unjustified dismissal personal grievance claims.
The Employment Relations Amendment Act was passed into law on December . It introduced a number of employment law changes that aimed to improve fairness in the workplace and deliver decent work conditions and fair wages.
The Employment Relations AuthorityCourt could otherwise determine that the real nature of the relationship means that the worker is an
The Employment Relations AuthorityCourt may determine that the real nature of the relationship is a contracting arrangement.
The Employment Standards Legislation Act aims to encourage fair and productive workplaces and ensure employment law responds to a dynamic business environment.
The Employment Strategy provides direction to ensure government initiatives and programmes contribute to a wellfunctioning labour market. The purpose of the Strategy is to improve the employment outcomes of all New Zealanders. It is intended to help guide government work programmes across the employment, education and training system. The framework can be used as a tool for analysis to identify gaps and opportunities for new initiatives and the tradeoffs between different policy options.
The Endeavour Fund plays a unique role in the science system through an open, contestable process with a focus on both research excellence and impact.
The Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority (EECA) encourages, supports, and promotes energy efficiency, energy conservation, and the use of renewable sources of energy in New Zealand.
The Energy publications and technical papers page lists energy statistics and modelling publications and technical papers, reports and guides, produced by or for us.
The Engineering Associates Act establishes a voluntary registration framework for engineering associates. The Act provides for the training and experience a person must have before they may be registered as an engineering associate.
The Engineering Associates Registration Board approves registration of engineering associates, exercises disciplinary powers and encourages improved competence and qualification of engineering technologists.
The Entertainment Venues Association of New Zealand
The Envirolink Scheme funds Crown research institutes, universities and private research organisations to provide regional councils with advice and research on environmental projects.
The Envirolink scheme supports regional councils translating science knowledge into practical management advice and adapting management tools for local needs. The scheme is limited to environmental science and cannot fund business as usual activities. Funding is administered by the Ministry of Business, Innovation Employment Science and Innovation.
The Equal Pay Amendment Act introduces a practical and accessible process to raise and consider claims of systemic sexbased pay undervaluation in pay in femaledominated occupations.
The Equity, Diversity and Inclusion (EDI) Capability Fund seeks to support research organisations to identify and break down barriers to attracting, retaining and growing an equitable, diverse and inclusive workforce.
The European Commission adopted their Circular Economy Action Plan (CEAP) in , a key component of the European Green Deal, which contains initiatives along the entire life cycle of products. A digital product passports initiative is one of the key actions under the Circular Economy Action Plan (CEAP) and part of the proposed Ecodesign for Sustainable Products Regulation.
The European Space Agency is recruiting for astronauts and imagine my joy when I got a letter from them inviting me to the second phase of recruiting, the test in Hamburg, in November . I am a New Zealander but also a Romanian so I could apply for the job, which I did. I think this is the most important thing about everything we do in life, if an opportunity shows, have the courage and put yourself out there. Just like me, , applicants put themselves out there.
The European Space AgencyNew Zealand Arrangement
The Events Transition Support Payment (ETSP) scheme was designed to provide assurance to organisers of largescale events, so they could continue organising our much anticipated events over .
The External Reporting Board is an independent Crown entity responsible for developing and issuing accounting, auditing and assurances standards in New Zealand.
The Extreme Wildfire Programme, led by Scion, demonstrates excellence and impact for understanding and preparing New Zealand for the expected increase in wildfires due to climate change.
The FOR classification allows RD activity to be categorised according to the field of research. In this respect, it is the methodology used in the RD that is being considered. The SEO classification allows RD to be categorised according to the purpose or outcome of the RD as perceived by the researcher. It consists of discrete economic, social, technological or scientific domains for identifying the principal purposes of the RD.
The FOR classification has hierarchical levels, namely Divisions (at the broadest level), Groups and Fields (at the finest level). The Division represents a broad subject area or research discipline while groups and fields within represent increasingly detailed dissections of these categories. Divisions, Groups and Fields are assigned unique digit; digit; and digit identification (ID) codes respectively.
The Fair Pay Agreements Act Repeal Act received Royal assent on December and came into force on December . This Act repeals the Fair Pay Agreements legislation.
The Fair Pay Agreements Bill was introduced into Parliament on March and received Royal Assent on November .
The Fair Pay Agreements system aimed to bring together unions and employer associations to bargain for employment terms and conditions for all covered employees in an industry or occupation. The system included support for bargaining parties to help them navigate the bargaining process and reach an outcome, as well as processes to ensure compliance.
The Final Better Work Action Plan is expected to be delivered in late (following consultation on a draft Action Plan), and the scoping for the environment phase is expected to be completed in mid.
The Financial Markets Authority enforces securities, financial reporting and company law as they apply to financial services and securities markets. It also regulates securities exchanges, financial advisers and brokers, trustees and issuers including issuers of KiwiSaver and superannuation schemes. It will shortly also regulate auditors.
The Financial Markets Conduct Act (FMC Act) governs how financial products are offered, promoted, issued and sold, and the ongoing responsibilities of those who offer, issue, manage, supervise, deal in, and trade them. The FMC Act also regulates the provision of certain financial services (including financial advice services) and the conduct of financial institutions.
The Flexible Working at MBIE Policy aligns with the following MBIE guiding principles:
The Food and Beverage Project produces a range of reports about the food and beverage sector in New Zealand including emerging growth reports and indepth reports.
The Food and Beverage Project produces guides to investment opportunities in the New Zealand food and beverage sector.
The Food and Beverage Project publishes comprehensive, datadriven reports on the current and evolving state of New Zealands food and beverage sector.
The Forced Labour Protocol is an international, legallybinding document that provides guidance on how to eliminate all forms of forced labour, punish offenders and protect victims, including ensuring they have access to remedies such as compensation.
The Foundation is administered by Trustees. The Trustees are the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety (Chairperson), the President and the Chief Executive of Business NZ, and the President and the Secretary of the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions (CTU).
The Foundation was established in under the Charitable Trusts Act .
The Future of Work Tripartite Forum (The Forum), which first met in August , is a partnership between the Government, Business New Zealand as representatives of business groups, and the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions as representatives of unions. The Forum aims to support New Zealand businesses and workers to meet the challenges and opportunities presented in a rapidly changing world of work, and provides a place for these social partners to discuss issues and work together to identify and implement solutions.
The Future of Work Tripartite Forum has been disestablished
The GCDR worked to build capability across government to design and deliver appropriate and accessible dispute resolution. This included providing advice and support to dispute resolution schemes and government agencies on best practice.
The Game Development Sector Rebate scheme (GDSR) is a million per year scheme to support the development and growth of New Zealands game development sector.
The Gas Safety and Measurement Regulations prescribe:
The Gene Technology Bill, which allows for the greater use of gene technology while ensuring strong protections for the health and safety of people and the environment, is now going through the parliamentary process.
The General Manager People and Culture will assess the effectiveness of this policy. The following measures of success outline what we expect to see if the policy is working:
The General Manager People and Culture will monitor compliance with this policy as follow:
The Government funded health sector has longstanding challenges complying with the Holidays Act
The Government Centre for Dispute Resolution (GCDR) was established to build capability across government to design and deliver appropriate and accessible dispute resolution.
The Government agreed in June to targeted consultation on the proposed Accident Compensation Appeal Tribunal.
The Government announced the following changes to the adventure activity regulatory regime on October to support improved safety. The full press release is available here:
The Government asked us to evaluate the amendments by . We are regularly monitoring progress to see how the intended outcomes are being achieved.
The Government committed to stopping ITPs as part of the NationalAct Coalition Agreement and its Day Plan.
The Government considered it was important that time was taken to get it right first time in order to minimise the risk of implementation challenges and future compliance issues.
The Government established the Holidays Act Taskforce to suggest improvements to the Holidays Act, following a joint request from unions and employers.
The Government facilitates access to language assistance services, such as interpreting and translation services, to help clients with limited English access public services and information.
The Government has agreed inprinciple for work to commence on bringing together the significant capabilities and resources of the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research Limited (NIWA) and the Meteorological Service of New Zealand Limited (MetService).
The Government has announced an extensive review of the management of seismic risk in existing buildings. The purpose of the Review is to ensure seismic risk in existing buildings is being managed effectively and in a workable, proportionate way.
The Government has announced changes to set an income threshold above which a personal grievance could not be pursued and remove eligibility for remedies where the employee is atfault.
The Government has been considering how to provide better protections for contractors.
The Government has been considering how to provide better protections for contractors. In summary:
The Government has closed the Industry Transformation Plan (ITP) programme. The Digital Technologies ITP was developed between . This page records historical information on previous ITP initiatives for reference only.
The Government has created a new oneoff public holiday on September to mark the passing of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II.
The Government has decided that from July Tourism New Zealand will return to its usual role of promoting New Zealand as a visitor destination to international visitors only, now that the New Zealand borders are open, and we are in post pandemic recovery mode. The Minister will retain the ability to reactivate the domestic marketing activity in the event of an extreme shock that has a significant impact nationally on our tourism sector, should the Government decide it necessary.
The Government has established new awards to recognise the talented people working in New Zealands space and advanced aviation sectors and inspire young people.
The Government has established a consumer data right through the Customer and Product Data Act . The Act establishes an economywide framework to enable greater access to, and sharing of, customer and product data between businesses. This gives individuals and businesses greater choice and control over their data.
The Government has introduced a Bill that will reintroduce partial strike provisions in the Employment Relations Act . This will enable employers to make pay deductions in response to partial strike action.
The Government has made law changes to the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance Act. This follows our review of the consumer credit law.
The Government has reached agreements with a number of infrastructure providers for a million infrastructure roll out to bring more and faster broadband to rural areas over the next years.
The Government has reached detailed decisions about which obligations should apply to BNPL loans, which have been informed by public consultation.
The Government has recently introduced a requirement for country of origin information for certain foods. This page provides information about these new changes.
The Government has responded to the recommendations proposed in the Electricity Price Review (EPR).
The Government has today confirmed that NIWA will be acquiring MetService as a whollyowned subsidiary. The announcement follows the inprinciple decision made last year on the acquisition.
The Government invested heavily in the sector to strengthen tourism for when the border reopened. Our economy also responded well, with people finding new employment outside tourism and some tourism firms pivoting to the domestic market or to alternative offerings.
The Government is aware of issues with the Holidays Act and that these have been a longstanding concern for workers, employers and payroll providers. Resolving these issues is a priority for the Government.
The Government is considering modernising the voltage range allowed in regulations for the supply of electricity to support more rooftop solar panels and reduce electricity costs.
The Government is considering regulating corded window coverings under a product safety standard to address the risk that they pose to young children. Protecting young children is considered a high priority, as they are not able to take independent measures to protect themselves.
The Government is developing a New Zealand Energy Strategy to support the transition to a low carbon economy, address strategic challenges in the energy sector, and signal pathways away from fossil fuels.
The Government is exploring measures to ensure electricity is reliable, affordable and resilient during the transition to an expanded and more renewable electricity system.
The Government is introduced additional protections for businesses and consumers against unfair commercial practices.
The Government is introducing a selfcertification scheme for trusted building professionals and a requirement for Building Consent Authorities (BCA) to help reduce inspection wait times.
The Government is investing million for Stage Three of the project. This phase begins in and will test the feasibility of the recommendations in the masterplan.
The Government is investing an extra . million in international marketing to bring more visitors to New Zealand.
The Government is moving forward with recommendations from the Tourism Data Leadership Group, including establishing a new Tourism Data Partnership Fund.
The Government is progressing legislation to implement a new offshore renewable energy generation regime which will support investment in, and delivery of, clean energy at scale.
The Government is progressing reforms to streamline financial services.
The Government is rebalancing the immigration system to support its plan for a higherproductivity, higherwage economy.
The Government is reviewing consumer credit law as part of a wider reform process for financial services. This section also includes information about previous reviews of consumer credit law.
The Government is taking action to enable private investment in hydrogen. Lowemissions hydrogen is a key tool for reducing emissions in parts of the economy that are less suited to electrification, such as heavy transport and heavy industry.
The Government seeks your feedback on the Engine Fuel Specifications Regulations , that set the parameters for the quality of marine fuel oils, petrol, diesel, ethanol, biodiesel, and blends of these fuels, that are sold or supplied to the public in New Zealand.
The Government undertook targeted consultation in September on a draft Bill with proposed reforms to the Holidays Act. The targeted consultation sought feedback on the technical and policy details of the draft Bill, and on alternative options to improve its simplicity and workability.
The Government wants to harness the great ideas held outside Government to push even harder for growth.
The Government welcomed feedback on changes to these rules and encouraged people to have their say at Select Committee. The Health Select Committee closed submissions at .pm on Monday, February .
The Government will also consider how this policy will apply to the new PROs. The intention is for researchers to receive a share of the financial rewards from commercialising IP.
The Government will be reviewing consumer credit law to ensure settings are targeted appropriately to the risk profile of the lending. MBIE is developing terms of reference for the review. This section also includes information about previous reviews of consumer credit law.
The Government will keep prioritising spending to areas where it matters most and will drive change to ensure that regulatory and tax settings do not hinder productivity. Ensuring that government expenditure represents value for money, and pursuing a credible path to surplus will allow fiscal headroom for the government to pursue ambitious policies for economic growth.
The Government will move to ensure the right settings and incentives are in place for intellectual property (IP) to generate greater commercial and economic benefits from our science, innovation and tertiary education sectors.
The Governments detailed responses to the Productivity Commissions recommendations.
The Government, Business New Zealand and the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions are proposing a new way of better protecting workers and the economy: a New Zealand Income Insurance scheme (NZIIS).
The Government, through our Ministry and the Ministry for Primary Industries, is matching this contribution, bringing total funding to . million per annum. It is expected that funding for the centre will grow over time.
The Great Rides of the New Zealand Cycle Trail network are predominantly offroad trails. They showcase the best of New Zealands landscapes, environment, culture and heritage. The trails are located around the country from Northland to Southland.
The Green Paper was the first step in Te Ara Paerangi Future Pathways programme. It signalled the start of the multiyear reform process to build Aotearoa New Zealand a futurefocused research, science, and innovation system.
The Heartland Rides are mostly onroad routes through scenic landscapes and small towns, and the Connector Rides link the Great Rides and Heartland Rides with urban centres, transport hubs and other key tourist attractions. Heartland and Connector Rides encourage cyclists to use scenic backcountry roads where they can experience heartland New Zealand.
The High Tech Manufacturing Report provides data and analysis on New Zealands high and medium high technology manufacturers.
The Holidays (Increasing Sick Leave) Amendment Act .
The Holidays Act sets out the minimum entitlements to holidays and leave, and payment for them, that employers are obliged to provide to their employees. It is an Act that touches the lives of every employee in New Zealand. Its purpose is to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees lives by providing minimum entitlements to annual holidays, public holidays, sick leave and bereavement leave. However, it has become evident in recent years that widespread non compliance with the current Act is affecting employers and employees right across the New Zealand economy and is costing employers and employees significant sums of money . To address this, i n May , the Minister of Workplace Relations and Safety established a Taskforce to review the Holidays Act (the Act) and recommend changes. The tripartite Taskforce , which includes employer, employee and government representatives , gives us the opportunity to work together to find a better sol ution. I am confident that this review will be more successful tha n previous reviews for two key reasons. First, there is strong agreement across government, employers and unions that a review is needed, and a genuine recognition that a collaborative approach is the best way to identify a preferred solution. Second, we n ow have a much better understanding of the issues the Act causes for employers and employees and so are better placed to ensure that any proposed solution will address these issues. Our recommendations will be thoroughly tested with payroll providers and p rofessionals so we know they will work in practice, not just in theory. To be successful the Taskforce first needs to gain a full understanding of the issues the current Act causes. While the members of the Taskforce bring together significant expertise i n relation to the Holidays Act, we do not claim to have all the answers. This Issues Paper sets out our understanding of the key issues employers, employees and payroll providers face in trying to implement the Act. We want to hear your views on some key questions: o are the issues outlined in this paper described accurately o have you experienced any other issues working with the Act that are not captured in this paper If so, what are these issues o do you have any suggestions or proposals for change Your v iews will be used to inform the work of the Taskforce in developing solutions. We are seeking feedback by Friday October and I encourage you to have your say .
The Holidays Act Taskforce (the Taskforce) seeks written submissions on the issues raised in this document by October . Questions are posed throughout the document to guide your submission. Your submission may respond to any or all of these questions. We also encourage your input on any other relevant issues. Where possible, please include evidence to support your views, for example references to independent research, facts and figures, or relevant examples. You can make your submission: By completing an online sub mission form at MBIEs website www.mbie.govt.nz By sending your submission as a Microsoft Word document to holidays.act.reviewmbie.govt.nz By mailing your submission to: Holidays Act Review Ministry of Business, Innovation Employment PO Box Wellington New Zealand Please direct any questions that you have in relation to the submissions process to holidays.act.reviewmbie.govt.nz . Use of information The information provided in submissions will be used by the Taskforce to inform its recommendations on changes to holidays legislation. It is not being requested for enforcement purposes. We may contact submitters directly if we require clarification of any matters in submissions. Release of information and submissions Submissions will not be proactively although a summary of submissions may be released which may include information you provide . Submissions may be the subject of requests for information under the Official Information Act (OIA). Please set out clearly in your submission if you object to the release of any information in the submission and, in particular, which part (or parts) you consider should be withheld together with your reasons for withholding the information. Examples could include that you have provided commercially sensitive material, or you have privacy concerns. We will take such objections into account when responding to requests under the OIA. Any decision to withhold information requested under the OIA can be reviewed by the Ombudsman. Permission to reproduce The copyright owner authorises reproduction of this work, in whole or in part, as long as no charge is being made for the supply of copies, and the integrity and attribution of the work as a publication of the Holidays Act Taskforce is not interfered with in any way.
The Housing Affordability Measure (HAM) is now produced by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development.
The Human Frontiers Science Programme
The Human Resources Development Working Group
The Hundertwasser Art Centre, Whangarei
The IEF coordinates the Joint Oil Organisations Data Initiative which aims to improve oil data transparency, and in turn improve oil price volatility.
The IEF is a biannual gathering of the worlds energy ministers. It has become the leading platform for producerconsumer dialogue between the International Energy Agency (IEA), member countries of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), and Russia, China and India.
The IEFs Secretariat has headquarters in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, to enhance and provide continuity to the producerconsumer dialogue at ministerial level.
The ILO is based in Geneva, Switzerland. Its staff cover regional offices (Europe, Americas, Middle East, AsiaPacific, and Africa) and some area or branch offices.
The ILO was established in by the then League of Nations. After the formation of the United Nations (UN) in , it became one of the first specialist UN agencies.
The ITP set out immediate focus areas:
The IVL annual performance reports are coowned by MBIE and the Department of Conservation. They record how the revenue by the IVL is allocated, and measure the yearly progress made by the projects the IVL funds. Each reporting year runs from July to June.
The IVL is a levy that is charged to most international visitors to New Zealand. It aims to address current challenges in the tourism and conservation systems.
The Industry Focus Group provides advice to MBIE on gene technology regulation impact focussing on trade, market access (global regulations), consumer perceptions, New Zealand branding, competitiveness in the global market, commercial and economic impact. They also ensure that the regulation will be efficient, effective, consistent and practical to implement and will test policy options.
The Initiative is a partnership between the IEF and other international organisations, including the IEA, AsiaPacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and OPEC.
The Innovation Programme for Tourism Recovery was a contestable fund for projects that will have meaningful impact across the tourism system.
The Insolvency Review Working Group was a panel of experts set up in November to examine aspects of corporate insolvency law.
The Institute of Environmental Science and Research Limited (ESR) is a Crown research institute providing science advice and services to government agencies, local authorities and the private sector. Its purpose is to deliver enhanced scientific and research services to the public health, food safety, security and justice systems and the environmental sector.
The International Labour Policy Team leads New Zealands international engagement and policy advice on labour standards and settings through the International Labour Organization and other multilateral fora such as APEC.
The International Space Institute specialises in providing graduate level training to the future leaders of the emerging global space community at its Central Campus in Strasbourg, France and at locations around the world, including a week Southern Hemisphere Space Studies Program.
The International Sustainability Standards Board (ISSB) issued its inaugural standards for sustainabilityrelated disclosures in global capital markets in June .
The International Visitor Survey (IVS) measures the expenditure, characteristics, and behaviours of international visitors to New Zealand.
The Internet of Things (IoT)
The Interpreter Standards Transition Support (ISTS) package funded course fees for individual interpreters. This reflected the importance placed on equipping interpreters wishing to apply for NAATI accreditation with the knowledge, skills and competencies they need to deliver interpreting services at the required standard.
The Jobs Online quarterly report measures changes in online job advertisements from internet job boards.
The Just Transition programme
The Just Transition programme is now closed.
The Just Transition programme was established to help share and coordinate the work of transitioning New Zealand to a low emissions economy.
The Just Transitions programme was established to help share and coordinate the work of transitioning New Zealand to a low emissions economy.
The LAS programme established a new, comprehensive framework to deliver high quality, consistent and coordinated language assistance services across Government. It comprises of three separate but interconnected projects.
The Labour Inspectorate continues to investigate cases responding to serious noncompliance with employment law. Between July and May , cases were filed with the Employment Relations Authority (ERA) and Employment Court relating to migrant exploitation, seeking arrears andor penalties. Since July a further applications to the ERA have been made. Cases are proactively promoted to achieve systemic behavioural change from employers from individual cases, with articles between July and November .
The Labour Inspectorate has a significant role to play as the . regulator, and is also an important user of the Act . The Labour Inspectorate, as an operational unit within the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, is responsible for ensuring compliance with the Holidays Act. It also plays an important role in assisting employers to understand their obligations, and enabling employees to ensure they receive their correct entitlements by enforcing the Act . . The Inspectorate initiated a Payroll Strategy in that included a programme of proactive audits and investigations (and, subsequently, a number of watching briefs in which employers undertake their own audit, remediation and rectification programmes agreeing to some review by the Inspectorate) to identify issues with payroll systems and remediate employees. In addition to the programme of audits and investigations, the Strategy involved: o an extensive stakeholder engagementco design programme to better equip businesses to comply o a proactive information and education programme. . The Payroll Strategy work is now complete, though a small team focusing on audits and investigations remains within the Inspectorate. One of the outputs of the Payroll Strategy was the publication of revised guidance on compliance with the Act which was produced in collaboration with professional services provide rs including payroll providers , employment law experts , and employer and employee representatives. Stakeholders have reported that this guidance is proving useful but that it also highlights ongoing difficulties with the Act. The Labour Inspectorate has al so issued position statements relating to compliance with the Act, to provide employers with further clarity about the Inspectorates approach. . As noted above, the Labour Inspectorate is responsible for ensuring compliance with the Holidays Act . As pa rt of its review, the Taskforce may consider, and make
The Labour Inspectorate, as the regulator for the employment relations an d standards regulatory system, would be responsible for enforcing and monitoring the new arrangements, and ensuring that sufficient support is provided to employers, employees and payroll providers during the implementation period.
The Labour Market Scorecard was a quarterly update of labour market statistics and indicators. It provided an overview of the state of the labour market.
The Labour Market Statistics Snapshots are a quarterly update of labour market statistics, and provide an overview of the current state of the labour market.
The Labour and Social Protection Network (LSPN)
The Labour and Social Protection Network is a forum for sharing best practice on labour and social protection issues with other APEC economies.
The Labour, Science and Enterprise Group is headed by Deputy Secretary Nic Blakeley.
The Labour, Science and Enterprise group works with people, businesses, regions, and the science, innovation and education systems to help the country and New Zealanders to be successful.
The Land Transport (Wheel Clamping) Amendment Act passed in November , and introduces new requirements to regulate the maximum fee that wheel clamping operators can charge. The Act:
The Language Assistance Services (LAS) Programme has been a multiyear project managed by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE).
The Language Assistance Services (LAS) Programme was created to address language barriers in accessing public services and information. This initiative came about after reviews in and highlighted the need for improved interpreter and translation services in the public sector.
The Language Assistance Services (LAS) Programme was established in to implement the recommendations of a comprehensive review of the provision of interpreting and other language assistance services across the public sector. The goal of the programme, which is coled by MBIE and DIA, is toensure equal access to governmentfunded services for all New Zealanders, regardless of their English proficiency. This will be achieved by addressing the quality, quantity, and accessibility of language assistance services across the public sector.
The Levy recognised that intervention was required to ensure rural and remote areas of New Zealand have access to fast broadband and mobile services. Over million in grant funding from the Telecommunications Development Levy has been allocated to RBI, to ensure that more New Zealanders can experience the benefits of improved connectivity.
The Licensed Building Practitioner (LBP) scheme was introduced in November . From March , building practitioners must be licensed in order to carry out or supervise work on homes and smallmedium sized apartment buildings that is critical to the integrity of the building.
The MBIE Enterprise Compliance function can also provide advice to the ARA Committee on whether the Policy Owner is adequately performing their duties.
The MBIE Science Whitinga Fellowship is aimed at supporting excellent early career researchers impacted by COVID in the New Zealand research science system. This is a oneoff initiative and will provide support of around million over two years for Fellows.
The MBIE business units expected to utilise the voluntary information sharing provisions include Immigration New Zealand, Employment Services and the Labour Inspectorate. These teams require personal information from other agencies to provide services and support to families and young people. They will be able to engage more freely with other CWPAs when appropriate for purposes relating to the safety and wellbeing of those children and young people under the Oranga Tamariki Act, as well as continuing to report if they suspect harm or neglect as they always have.
The MTAGDP estimates data also includes the Regional GDP totals for regional council areas. The nominal MTAGDP estimates align (sum to) the nominal GDP totals for regional council areas from the Regional GDP series, which in turn aligns to the annual nominal national GDP totals. This makes comparison with the official Statistics New Zealand data series possible and valid.
The MTAGDP estimates data are an extension of Statistics New Zealands Regional GDP series (an official Tier statistic), which provides annual nominal GDP for regional council areas (Tasman and Nelson are combined) and industry groups.
The MTAGDP series is annually, as soon as possible after Statistics New Zealand (Stats NZ) releases its annual update to its Regional GDP series (usually at the end of March).
The Manager Legal Services (Litigation) will assess the effectiveness of this policy based on the following measures of success:
The Manager Legal Services (Litigation) will monitor compliance with this policy as follows:
The Measurement Standards Laboratory will also transfer to an appropriate PRO.
The Migrant Youth Information Project comprises:
The Migrant Youth Information Project was a oneoff research project which resulted in publications in .
The Migration Data Explorer enables users to easily access data on the number of visa applications and the number of migrants in New Zealand.
The Minister also sets the criteria against which the Board makes funding decisions. The criteria are in the New Zealand Gazette.
The Minister and Associate Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety are proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister and Associate Minister of Immigration are proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister for ACC is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister for ACC will update the House of Representatives on whether a full review of Schedule will occur and the rationale for that decision, to support transparency throughout the framework.
The Minister for Auckland is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister for Building and Construction is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister for Economic Growth is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister for Energy and the Minister for Resources have initiated a review of the performance of electricity markets. The review began in early and is expected to be completed in June .
The Minister for Energy is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister for Media and Communications is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister for Regional Development is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister for Social Development and Employment is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister for Space announced the release of the New Zealand Space and Advanced Aviation Strategy in September .
The Minister for Space is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister for Space is provided with a briefing from MBIE officials which includes relevant assessment information and advice on each payload application. They are also separately advised of any risks from the Minister responsible for the GCSB and NZSIS. On the basis of this information, the Minister determines whether or not to grant the payload permit
The Minister for Tourism and Hospitality is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety is required by law to review the minimum wages annually, to take effect April each year.
The Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety recommends that the Committee:
The Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety will seek Cabinet decisions on further issues in the coming months.
The Minister for Workplace Relations has identified the following main objectives of the reform:
The Minister intends to seek Cabinet decisions on the new approach in , once the details have been designed. There will be an opportunity for all stakeholders to provide input on the Bill once it is introduced and considered by Select Committee.
The Minister may make a recommendation to amend Schedule A if he is satisfied that the following criteria are met. The criteria are:
The Minister may recommend that the GovernorGeneral adds a category of employees to Schedule A, by Order in Council. The Minister must first be satisfied that all of the following criteria are met:
The Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs is the minister responsible for the Commerce Commission, and appointed us as its monitoring agent.
The Minister of Local Government is leading the group of Ministers responsible for matters relating to the economic and social recovery following the WhakaariWhite Island eruption. The Minister of Local Government is also the territorial authority for WhakaariWhite Island under the Local Government Act.
The Minister of Resources is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister of Science, Innovation and Technology is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister of Small Business and Manufacturing is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Ministers press release and the Reconvened Joint Working Groups Principles on the Beehive website
The Ministry endeavours to the best of our ability and knowledge to ensure that the information on this website is accurate and current. However, we cannot accept any liability for the accuracy or content of material on this website.
The Ministry for Ethnic Communities has also developed other online learning modules to support government agencies, and public servants who provide services or engage with people from Culturally And Linguistically Diverse (CALD) communities. These modules may be of interest to your staff:
The Ministry for the Environment is the governments principal adviser on environmental and climate change issues. However, we also contribute to the development of environmental and climate change policies because of their relevance to energy efficiency and resource development, including:
The Ministry has a compliance strategy in place which is currently under review. One aspect of the strategy is monitoring of satellites launched from New Zealand . MBIE has entered an agreement with Leo Labs, a company that specialises in space situational awareness , that allows it to monitor satellites launched from New Zealand. This is innovative technology allows MBIE to monitor satellites launched from New Zealand in real time. MBIE and LeoLabs have ongoing discussions about how this technology may be built upon to improve compliance monitoring in the future.
The Ministry of Business Innovation and Employment are looking for submissions on the issues raised in the document.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation Employment (MBIE) commissioned this research to explore how Aotearoa New Zealand can increase the value from our biological resources and how these resources can be used more efficiently to reduce emissions.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation Employment (MBIE) is the lead agency for this work alongside the Environmental Protection Authority, Ministry for Primary Industries, Ministry of Health, the Ministry for the Environment and the Department of Conservation.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation Employment (MBIE) released a discussion document and consulted on an exposure draft of the initial Regulations in May .
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT) are working together on a joint Longterm Insights Briefing in .
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) are now in a position to
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) has awarded the Moana Project Gold Status for exceeding excellence and impact in their work. The project supports a sustainable seafood sector by advancing understanding of ocean circulation, connectivity and risks from marine extremes.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) has completed a targeted review of the health and safety regulatory regime for adventure activities, looking at how it operates when activities take place in naturallyhazardous environments.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) has today convened the first meeting of the Gas Security Response Group.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) has undertaken a targeted review of the health and safety regulatory regime for adventure activities, looking at how it operates when activities take place in naturallyhazardous environments.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) is a founding signatory to the Algorithm charter for Aotearoa New Zealand and is committed to applying its principles in our use of algorithms.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) is seeking feedback on a draft of the Digital Technologies Industry Transformation Plan.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) is seeking feedback on a range of options to control the risks from engineered stone and other sources of exposure to respirable crystalline silica.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) is seeking feedback on an exposure draft of the Patents Amendment Bill. This draft Bill amends the Patents Act .
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) is seeking views on proposed new settings for the Skilled Migrant Category residence visa by November .
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) is seeking written submissions on proposals for fees and levies that would recover the costs of operating the New Zealand Companies Office (the Companies Office) and its associated statutory registers. The Companies Office is a business unit within MBIE.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) may share application information with other agencies in order to assist the Minister in the performance or exercise of functions, duties, or powers under the Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities Act .
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) provides advice on relevant international labour issues and assesses the impact of international developments on New Zealands labour interests.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) provides advice to the Government on telecommunications policy and regulation. In , MBIE sought feedback on some regulatory issues and proposed options to improve telecommunications regulatory and funding frameworks.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) seeks written submissions on the issues raised in the discussion document by pm on April .
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) undertook a process evaluation of the Pilot, based on interviews and administrative data, to inform decisions on any future intakes under the CORS Category. The evaluation was undertaken about three months after the sponsored refugees arrived in New Zealand and assesses how well the Pilot has been implemented, what early outputs have been achieved and what improvements could be made if it were rolled out further.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) would like your feedback on proposals on updating the Accident Compensation (Review Costs and Appeals) Regulations .
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), with support from Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC), is responsible for using this review framework to support, if needed, changes to the list of occupational diseases which can be covered by ACC.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment began a year pilot of the Global Impact Visa (GIV) in mid. An evaluation of the pilot was commenced in late. The purpose of the evaluation was to assess the implementation, outputs and early outcomes of the Global Impact Visa pilot.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment does not accept any liability for the accuracy or content of information on this website that belongs to third parties; nor for the accuracy or content of any thirdparty website that you may access via a hyperlink from this site.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment has convened a group of experts to provide advice on strengthening the science, innovation and technology system, including the challenges and aspirations of the sector, and opportunities for growth.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment is seeking feedback on a proposed th edition of the Government Procurement Rules.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment is the steward of New Zealands building and construction regulatory system. We work alongside building practitioners, government agencies, other regulators and the wider construction industry to understand what matters to the sector and to improve the regulatory system.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment led the review, and Minister Nash has agreed to the Reports recommendations.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment logo, and any other MBIE trade mark or logo, may not be used on your site without our prior written permission.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment recently consulted on proposed changes to the postal Deed of Understanding. Submissions on this consultation closed on December , and we are currently working through next steps. You can read about the proposed changes that were consulted on here.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation, and Employment (MBIE) has developed a definition of energy hardship and an initial set of measures that will be used to monitor energy hardship over time.
The Ministry of Education has convened an advisory group to provide independent advice on the university sector. Given the close ties between the university and science systems, both groups are being chaired by Professor Sir Peter Gluckman.
The Ministry of Social Development (MSD) Sector allocation of ANZSIC classes has been . Refer to the Ministry of Social Development Sector output data dictionary for the list.
The Mobile Black Spot Fund (MBSF) is providing greater mobile coverage on approximately , kilometres of state highways and in over tourism locations where no coverage currently exists.
The Monthly Regional Tourism Estimates (MRTEs) provide an estimate of regional monthly expenditure on tourism from both international and domestic consumers.
The NESTF enables quicker and easier installation of lowimpact infrastructure by telecommunications companies, speeding up access to broadband for consumers.
The NESTF provides greater national consistency, and removes the requirement for resource consents for equipment such as cabinets, poles and aerials, provided the main standards are met. This saves time and money for both telecommunications companies and local councils, while ensuring any effects on the environment are minimised and managed appropriately.
The NZ Battery Project was set up in to explore possible renewable energy storage solutions for when our hydro lakes run low for long periods. A pumped hydro scheme at Lake Onslow was one of the options being explored. The Government stopped the Lake Onslow investigations in late .
The NZ Government is managing the decommissioning of the Tui oil field assets in the wake of the financial problems affecting the permit operator Tamarind Taranaki Ltd.
The NZ Industrial Relations Foundation (Inc) (the Foundation) is an educational trust set up to promote, through education, better industrial relations in New Zealand.
The NZ Relay app is free to download from the App Store and Google Play Store and uses mobile data or a WiFi connection.
The NZ Relay range of services is provided by the Crown for people with communications disabilities. MBIE funds NZ Relay to provide equal work and lifestyle opportunities for those with speech, hearing and vision disabilities. These services assist people who are Deaf, hard of hearing, speechimpaired and deafblind to communicate with others over the phone, with the help of a relay assistant.
The NZCT Fund makes funding available to organisations who manage Great Rides for:
The NZDF uses spacebased assets to enable the efficient and effective performance of its core functions. This is done in close cooperation with partner militaries.
The NZIC ensures national security interests are reflected in space policies and supports the safe development of the space sector.
The NZIC includes the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Government Communications Security Bureau (GCSB), and New Zealand Security Intelligence Service (NZSIS). Under the Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities Act , the NZSIS and the GCSB undertake national security risk assessments as part of the regulatory process.
The NZRIS database will provide data about funded research in New Zealand. Access to the database will be open to everyone; students, members of the public, media, government, businesses, and of course, the research community itself.
The NZSPG Review Report (April ) assessed whether the NZSPG operated as expected one year after its introduction, in support of the intended economic, industry development and cultural objectives.
The National Construction Pipeline Report provides year projection of national building and construction work.
The National Construction Pipeline Report provides the sector with a year projection of national building and construction work.
The National Science Challenges were established in and aim to tackle the biggest sciencebased issues and opportunities facing New Zealand.
The National Statement of Science Investment () sets the vision for comprehensive evaluation and monitoring of sector performance.
The New Zealand Business Number
The New Zealand Cycle Trail Fund makes available up to million annually for the maintenance, development and promotion of the New Zealand Cycle Trails (NZCT). The funding comes from the International Conservation and Visitor Levy.
The New Zealand Cycle Trails network is made up of the:
The New Zealand Food Innovation Network provides food development facilities to help businesses develop, test and prove new products, and trial new equipment.
The New Zealand Food Innovation Network website has detailed information on the services provided by the facilities, including case studies of completed projects.
The New Zealand Food Safety Science and Research Centre promotes, coordinates and delivers food safety science and research for New Zealand.
The New Zealand Government invests around .b a year in research activities which are undertaken by many different organisations and institutions.
The New Zealand Government signed a memorandum of understanding with Amazon and its
The New Zealand Growth Capital Partners (NZGCP) is a Crown entity company that invests into seed and venture capital funds. It partners with angel investor groups to drive investment into vibrant early stage New Zealand companies with highgrowth potential and through fund of funds management to invest into venture capital firms.
The New Zealand Institute for Plant Food Research Limited
The New Zealand Labour Market Dashboard displays labour market information from many different sources in one place.
The New Zealand Refugee Resettlement Strategy was developed and implemented in with the aim of improving outcomes for former refugees.
The New Zealand Refugee Resettlement Strategy was developed and implemented in with the aim of improving outcomes for former refugees. The overarching aim of the strategy is to ensure that:
The New Zealand Registered Architects Board regulates the architecture profession. It is responsible for developing and adminstrating rules about competency standards, ethics, complaints and discipline of members of the profession.
The New Zealand Research Information System (NZRIS) will be a freely available national, online database containing information about the research, science and innovation sector.
The New Zealand Screen Production Rebate is a government initiative to grow the sustainability and economic benefits of our screen sector in a dynamic global environment.
The New Zealand Sectors Dashboard is a stop shop for all information about New Zealands economy by sectors. We update it about times a year.
The New Zealand Sectors Report Series is a set of publications that provides a factual source of information on the key sectors that make up the New Zealand economy. This tourism report took an indepth look into how our tourism sector was performing.
The New Zealand Space Agency (NZSA) at the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) is the only New Zealand entity permitted to submit internship candidates for consideration by NASA. Candidates do not apply directly to NASA.
The New Zealand Space Agency (NZSA) sits within MBIE and leads on:
The New Zealand Space Agency is the front door for space activity in New Zealand
The New Zealand Space Agency issues permits and licences for payloads, launch activities, launch facilities, and highaltitude vehicles.
The New Zealand Space Agency offers an internship in partnership with the NASA Jet Propulsion Lab (JPL) via our scholarships programme. The scholarship aims to support New Zealand students in space related activities.
The New Zealand Space Agency provides guidance about the information that is needed for certain licenced or permitted activities.
The New Zealand Space and Advanced Aviation Strategy sets out the steps the government is taking to support the development of our space and advanced aviation sectors and supporting principles for our wider space interests.
The New Zealand Telecommunications Forum sets minimum standards for emergency call services through its industry code of practice, the Emergency Calling Code.
The New Zealand Tourism Futures Taskforce is a public private partnership to lead the thinking on the future of tourism in New Zealand. MBIE provides Secretariat services to the Taskforce.
The New Zealand Tourism Futures Taskforce is an independent public private partnership to lead the thinking on the future of tourism in New Zealand. MBIE provides Secretariat services to the Taskforce.
The New Zealand screen industry brings a range of direct and indirect economic benefits to the sector and New Zealands wider economy.
The New Zealand space industry is taking off in a massive way, but to be the brightest star in the NZ billion global space economy we need skilled workers.
The New ZealandAotearoa Government Tourism Strategy is more important than ever as we welcome visitors back to New Zealand. The Strategy sets out a more deliberate and active role for government in tourism.
The New ZealandEuropean Union Free Trade Agreement ()
The New ZealandHong Kong, China Closer Economic Partnership ()
The Office of the Privacy Commissioner
The Official Information Act (OIA) helps New Zealand Citizens, permanent residents and anyone in New Zealand access information held by government organisations and Ministers. This promotes openness and transparency and enables greater public participation in government.
The Older Workers Employment Action Plan acts as a blueprint on how the Government can help support and encourage older people to stay in the workforce if they want or need to.
The Ombudsman can consider complaints about the administrative acts and decisions of state sector agencies. The Ombudsman will ask you if you have tried to resolve the matter with us directly first and will also consider whether you have any other remedy available. The Ombudsman may look into your complaint and make a recommendation to us regarding the concern you have raised.
The Operating Model to put the principles of the Joint ENZINZ Joint Enforcement Strategy into practice will be delivered.
The Oranga Tamariki Act and the Privacy Act , allows information to be shared, so as to keep children safe when child abuse or neglect is reported or investigated. Given the sensitivity of this information, appropriate precautions shall be taken including when using, disclosing, and storing the information, including taking care not to discuss it openly.
The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) produces voluntary guidelines and recommendations on responsible, sustainable multinational business conduct.
The Our Future Services programme has customers at the heart of its design. Simpler, faster and more userfriendly application processes to reduce waiting times, clear communication on application status, and increased selfservice capabilities will ensure our customers feel informed and supported.
The Our Future Services programme will deliver a more costeffective immigration system that is
The Our Future Services programme will deliver a more costeffective immigration system that is more productive, more effective at managing immigration risk, and provides a better experience for our customers and staff.
The Outer Space and High altitude Activities Act Regulations
The Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations (the Regulations) set out the requirements for various licences and permits.
The Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations Act governs payload permit applications.
The Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities Act
The Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities Act (the Act) regulates launches into outer space, launch facilities, highaltitude vehicles (HAVs), and payloads. It is administered by the New Zealand Space Agency within the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment.
The Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities Act governs the regulation of New Zealand space and highaltitude activities. MBIE (through its Space Regulatory Systems team) is the regulator, including for all payloads launched from New Zealand.
The PDF version of the full report can be found here:
The PDF version of the summary report can be found here:
The Pacific Employment Action Plan starts a conversation for all of us about what new opportunities Government can support for better employment outcomes for Pacific peoples. You can read more about it here.
The Panel Agreement for face to face interpreting is available to agencies within the public sector, including Public Service departments, nonPublic Service departments (such as the New Zealand Police), Crown Entities, Stateowned enterprises and local authorities.
The Parental Leave and Employment Protection Amendment Bill was passed to extend the duration of paid parental leave to weeks.
The Plan of Action provides a highlevel framework for the actions that government agencies will undertake over years to to contribute to eliminating forced labour, people trafficking and slavery.
The Plan of Action structures government actions into broad pillars:
The Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Board (the Board) is established to administer the Act. The Board is a statutory entity and therefore is responsible to Parliament. The Board exists independently of MBIE.
The Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Board has more information for prospective Certification Authorities on its website.
The Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Board is responsible for administering the registration and licensing systems of plumbers, gasfitters and drainlayers.
The Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Board is the regulator of the selfcontained vehicle system. See their website for information on what is needed to certify your vehicle, and where to go to get certified and information for organisations looking to become certification authorities.
The Postal Services Act removed New Zealand Post Ltds monopoly to carry standard letters.
The Postal Services Act imposes a number of obligations on postal operators. By law, they must:
The Privacy Act applies to submissions and survey responses. Any personal information you supply to us in making a submission will only be used for the purpose of assisting in the development of policy advice for this review of Schedule . Clearly indicate if you do not wish for your name, or any other personal information, to be included in the summary of submissions document that we may publish.
The Procurement Project is in the process of establishing new service delivery models for key services to be provided across government, such as the new Telephone and Video Interpreting Service for the government and a panel of organisations who provide face to face interpreting and translation services across the public sector.
The Programme is being designed in consultation with key stakeholders and sector representatives. Design is expected to be completed in late .
The Programme will provide funding for projects that deliver on one or more of the following outcomes:
The Prosecution policy aligns with the following MBIE guiding principles:
The Provincial Growth Fund has invested in projects which:
The Public sector financial resource code sets spreadsheet contains information from Treasury on codesets used for appropriations.
The RD Tax Incentive helps businesses innovate and contribute to a stronger, more productive economy that benefits all New Zealanders.
The RBI build has occurred in phases.
The REPF is available to events which will deliver a high return on investment and increase the likelihood of encouraging visitors to explore New Zealand beyond the key tourism locations. The intention of the funding is to augment the planned promotion of the event i.e. to provide up to of additional funding to enhance the existing promotional budget for the event.
The RSE policy supports New Zealand employers to fill labour shortages in seasonal roles where New Zealanders are not available, while maximising benefits for Pacific workers and countries through the ability to earn money here, learn new skills and increase remittances.
The RTBF is open to groups of collaborating organisations led by an RTO. The lead RTO will submit the application, be the contracted party, and be responsible for delivery of the project.
The Regional Business Partners Network (RBPN) received million for supporting smallmedium tourism businesses impacted by COVID to get expert advice. Eligible businesses will receive vouchers of up to , to access advice and expertise to support business continuity.
The Regional Economic Activity web tool, mobile app and summary reports are regularly with new data as it becomes available from source providers.
The Regional Economic Activity web tool, mobile apps and reports are tools to explore information and data on New Zealands regions.
The Regional Events Promotion Fund (REPF) provides million over years to support the promotion of regional events to the domestic market. The fund is contestable and aims to encourage regional dispersal and increase visitor spend in the regions with an additional focus on encouraging seasonal dispersal by promoting events outside of the peak summer season.
The Regional Midsized Tourism Facilities Grant Fund was set up to fund projects in regions experiencing infrastructure pressure (eg, car parks and toilets) due to an increase in visitors.
The Regional Research Institute (RRI) initiative established new, independently governed, private or private notforprofit regional research institutes.
The Regional Strategic Partnership Fund
The Regional Tourism Boost Fund (RTBF) is a contestable fund which provides million to support regions to attract more international visitors and encourage dispersal of international visitors around the country.
The Registered Architects Act protects the titles of Registered Architect and Architect. Only persons registered with the New Zealand Registered Architects Board (NZRAB) may use words, initials, or abbreviations of the title Registered Architect, or describe themselves as an Architect in the context of offering or providing building design services.
The Regulations also prescribe a levy of dollars that vehicle owners will have to pay each time their vehicle is certified or recertified (every years). The levy covers the cost of regulating the new selfcontainment certification system.
The Regulations in their severed form retain the highlevel service description and maximum prices for the anchor broadband and voice and DFAS services that Chorus is required to offer. The following provisions of the initial Regulations have been removed:
The Regulations prescribe the requirements for an O rbital Debris Mitigation Plan. The relevant regulation is:
The Regulations prescribe the requirements for an ODMP for the purpose of the above sections. The relevant regulation is:
The Regulations were due to commence on November . However, on September the Government agreed to delay the commencement of the Regulations by months. This will give businesses more time to prepare for the Regulations, recognising the significant disruption caused by the reemergence of COVID in the community.
The Regulations were the subject of High Court proceedings under the Judicial Review Procedure Act in . In December , the High Court found certain aspects of the Regulations relating to material incorporated by reference to be unlawful. This has resulted in an order to sever the offending aspects of the Regulations Chorus Ltd v Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications NZHC refers.
The Regulations will now commence on February and do not apply to frozen foods until May .
The Regulatory Systems (Economic Development) Amendment Bill amends Acts and related regulations
The Regulatory Systems (Immigration and Workforce) Amendment Bill amends Acts and related regulations.
The Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill (No ) was introduced on October and passed on March . The RSAB No package comprised:
The Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill (No ) was introduced on December and passed on November . The RSAB No package comprised:
The Remote Users Scheme was launched in November .
The Remuneration Authority is also required to consider the value of the personal benefit arising out of entitlements when setting MPs salaries.
The Report is presented in four parts:
The Research Science and Innovation (RSI) System Performance Report is a snapshot of how the New Zealand science and innovation system is performing in major areas. It covers people, skills, knowledge, infrastructure and funding across government, as well as education and business.
The Research Science and Innovation System Performance Report provides a snapshot of how the New Zealand science and innovation system is performing in major areas. It covers: people; skills; knowledge; infrastructure and funding across government; education and business.
The Research, Science and Innovation Domain Plan puts forward a:
The Research, Science and Innovation Report
The Reserve Bank of New Zealand
The Residential Tenancies Act (RTA) was amended in June to improve tenancy law.
The Resource Management (National Environmental Standards for Telecommunications Facilities) Regulations (NESTF) came into effect on January , replacing the previous regulations.
The Review is the first of three key stages to improve how seismic risk is managed in existing buildings. The three stages and their estimated timeframes are shown below. We are currently at Stage .
The Review of the Act will consider: The operation and effectiveness of the Act, since the Act came into force on December ; Whether the provisions of the Act should be retained or repealed; and Whether any further amendments to the Act are necessary or desirable.
The Review recommends that the SPRS team discusses with PCO how the change in control provision in section ()(b) can be improved . A possible option is that this section of the Act be revised to expressly provide that: If the licensee or permit holder is a body corporate, that they must inform the Minister before they undergo a change of control and apply for a transfer or change of control; If the Minister has not approved a change of control at the time the change of control occurs then any licences or permits the licensee holds will be suspended until the change of control is approved; and If the Minister declines the change of control, then the licence will be revoked. Licence holders are required to take all practi cal steps to ensure the Minister makes a determination on the change of control prior to it occurring. The Review notes that when assessing a change of control application, the Minister will need to assess whether the threshold tests in the Act will cont inue to be satisfied. This is a necessarily implication from the overall scheme of the legislation and the Review Team is not convinced, that the threshold tests need to be replicated in this or other sections, such as the variation provision. However, it is recommend ed that there be a discussion with PCO at the time the legislation is amended about whether there is a need to spell this out more clearly on the face of the application. Currently , when an application is accepted is not defined in the Act or regulations. The Act also currently does not provide the power to reject an application. Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) As there is no statutory power to reject an application, those that do not meet the standard are left in a suspended state, neither unable to proceed nor be finalised by way of a rejection. MBIEs submission to the Review on this issue presented two poten tial avenues for how this matter might be addressed or managed, which were: Establishing a criterion for when an application may be accepted. This may be through operational policy, rather than the Act itself. As a matter of practice, where an application is incomplete, MBIE works with operators to assist them in ensuring complete information is provided. While legislative options were considered, the Review concludes that the current statutory settings should be retained. The incomplete applications matter is best managed administratively by working with applicants to help them complete the application and providing guidance on wha t information is required to enable an application to be assessed .
The Royal Commission made recommendations that were accepted, accepted in principle or noted by the Government.
The Royal Commission of Inquiry into the terrorist attacks on Christchurch mosques its report on December .
The Royal Commission on Pike River
The Royal Commission on the Pike River Coal Mine Tragedy and the Independent Taskforce on Workplace Health and Safety recommended changes to health and safety at work.
The Royal Society of New Zealand
The Rural Broadband Initiative contracts between the Ministry, Chorus (previously part of Telecom) and Vodafone were signed on April . Agreements were signed with Chorus and Network Tasman to deploy fibre to:
The SSAG report informed government decisions on refocusing the science, innovation and technology system.
The Sapere Research Group carried out an independent evaluation of the New Zealand Screen Production Grant in . The evaluation assessed the grants economic and cultural impacts and its role in the development of the industry.
The Scheme has been established to support New Zealand travel agents and wholesalers to obtain refunds and credits for cancelled travel on behalf of their customers. Consumers are not able to apply directly to the Scheme.
The Scheme is also available in rural areas where internet download speeds are very slow and the household is not covered by any other government connectivity programme.
The Scheme is funded up to a maximum of . million, to December . Participating travel agencies and wholesalers will be reimbursed for:
The Scheme supports the recovery of refunds and credits owed to New Zealand consumers by overseas travel suppliers.
The Science Board is responsible for making independent investment decisions on funding proposals for research, science and technology and related activities that are referred to them by our chief executive. This includes funding for the National Science Challenges.
The Science System Advisory Group (SSAG) is chaired by Professor Sir Peter Gluckman and made up of additional members from a range of backgrounds.
The Science System Advisory Group was convened by MBIE to provide advice on strengthening the science, innovation and technology system, including the challenges and aspirations of the sector, and opportunities for growth.
The Scope of Space Policy and a Lead Space Agency PDF KB
The Screen Industry Workers Act comes into force on December . These are the key aspects of the new law:
The Screen Industry Workers Act provides proposes a new model, developed by industry and supported by Government, to allow screen industry contractors to bargain collectively. The Act comes into force on December .
The Sector level of the SEO classification has been removed to streamline the classification. The original Environment division has been divided into two more focussed Divisions (Environmental management and Environmental policy, climate change and natural hazards) in the new SEO classification, also in line with advice from researchers and users of the classification.
The Sectors Reports Series and the New Zealand Sectors Dashboard provides uptoinformation on all the industry sectors that make up the New Zealand economy.
The Select Committee tabled their final report in the week of March :
The Shop Trading Hours Act was amended in to enable territorial authorities to decide whether retailers in their districts can open on Easter Sunday.
The Situation and Outlook for Primary Industries:
The Space Policy Review: National Space Policy Cabinet paper is available here.
The Space and Advanced Aviation Strategy sets five objectives to support doubling of the size of the space and advanced aviation sectors by . These objectives will help us to leverage opportunities and address barriers to growth, building on our existing strengths and supporting the development of new capabilities that will help to grow our economy and address challenges New Zealand is facing.
The Sports nutrition and weight management industry has shown solid, longterm growth, the industry is surprisingly resilient, like cosmetics, to the economic cycle.
The Standards Project identified and implemented a new standards and certification framework for language practitioners working in the public sector. The framework developed by the National Australian Authority for Translators and Interpreters (NAATI) was chosen in for adoption in New Zealand. From July , interpreters wishing to work in the public sector will need to be NAATIcredentialed under the NAATI Certification System or be working towards achieving their credential.
The Standards are performancebased, which provides for flexibility in meeting the requirements, particularly compared with the prescriptive requirements in the voluntary standard.
The Startup Advisors Council is made up of industry leaders who have a deep understanding of startups, capital markets and are aware of international trends. They come from a range of backgrounds and have extensive experience in investment and growth of startup firms.
The Startup Advisors Council was formed in May for a month term. They provide advice to the Ministers of Economic Development and Research, Science and Innovation on how to best support a thriving environment for startups in New Zealand. This includes recommendations for coordinated and targeted actions to enable more startups to be created and scaled up, and to accelerate the growth and maturity of New Zealands startup ecosystem.
The Statement of Economic Policy from the Minister for Communications to the Commerce Commission in relation to incentives for businesses to invest in ultrafast broadband infrastructure:
The Strategic Tourism Assets Protection Programme (STAPP) was intended to protect the assets in the tourism landscape that form the core of our essential tourism offerings to ensure their survival through the disruption caused by COVID. The programme also considered assets that are culturally and historically significant.
The Strategy has a strong commitment to embrace a holistic approach to sustainably growing the visitor economy, looking at all the elements that contribute to the overall visitor experience and having these at the centre of positioning Southland as a soughtafter travel destination.
The Strategy was in . Minor changes were made to ensure a more enduring framework with greater emphasis on implementation and monitoring.
The Summit offers a series of activities, including live plenary lectures, panel discussions, QA sessions, and networking platforms. Participants will also stand a chance to:
The Support for Energy Education in Communities (SEEC) Programme is part of a suite of government initiatives to lift people out of energy hardship.
The TDPF is available to support projects which will deliver core data, that are either national solutions, andor can be nationally replicable or scalable. Proposed projects should fill data gaps, provide greater accessibility and use of data to enable better sector decision making. Projects should be responsive to sector needs, include innovation where possible, and support the goals and objectives set out in the Strategic business plan.
The TECTs are an interim replacement to the Monthly Regional tourism Estimates (MRTEs) to understand tourism spend activity in New Zealand.
The TSA adds another strand to our close and longstanding relationship with the US, and opens the door for US space businesses to consider New Zealand as a business location.
The Takeovers Code aims to ensure transparency and equitable processes for controlchange transactions in the shares of companies it covers.
The Takeovers Panel is an independent Crown agency that regulates changes in the control of widelyheld New Zealand companies. It does this through the enforcement of the Takeovers Code. The Panels aim is to ensure all shareholders can participate in controlchange transactions in a fair and informed manner. It also promotes public understanding of takeovers law and practice and recommends any necessary changes.
The Taskforce intended the audit requirement to be an incentive for employer s to ensure an employees guaranteed hours set out in their employment agreement are an accurate reflection of their actual hours of work. I do not consider the Holidays Act or Bill is the appropriate mechanism through which to create such an incentive. Rescind the decision to introduce an audit requirement so that where an employee has guaranteed hours of work AL calcul ation s will be based on their guaranteed hours of work.
The Taskforce is a independent publicprivate partnership led by two cochairs and supported and informed by an Advisory Group.
The Taskforce recom mends an improved status quo . The Taskforce submitted its final report to me on October (attached as Annex Two). The proposed approach is an improved status quo, where the existing units of entitlement are retained (weeks for annual holidays, days fo r FBAPS leave) and the focus is on addressing known issues with the existing Act. The recommendations were made unanimously.
The Taskforce undertook its review in three distinct phases . Between July and October , the full Taskforce met for meetings and the Taskforce subcommittee met for meetings. The Taskforce undertook its review in three distinct phases:
The Taskforce was asked to make recommendations on options for a clear and transparent set of rules for providing entitlements to, and payment for, holidays and leave.
The Taskforce was to consider: a. options to improve both the provision of, and payment for, entitlements that meet the objectives above and: i. where t rade offs between competing objectives are required, it was to be explicit about how tho se were made ii. was given scope to include consideration of the place of the standard five day, hour, working week in the Act b. any other matters relating to the Act that it s aw fit. Th at could include holidays and leave entitlements modified by other Acts (such as the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act ). The Taskforce was given scope to reconsider the two key principles of the Act but options were to aim to preserve the intent of th ose as far as possible: a. that entitlements are determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken b. that employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave, that i s, they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked. The Taskforce was not to consider the complex issue of remediation of historical underpayments of holiday and leave pay .
The Taskforce will also make recommendations to address the longstanding productivity, inclusivity and sustainability (environmental, social and economic) issues present in some parts of the tourism sector.
The Taskforce will be responsible for decisionmaking and recommendations, and the Advisory Group will be used to test solutions and provide information to support the Taskforce.
The Taskforce will provide an initial report on the future of tourism in New Zealand in December , with final recommendations and steps for implementation in April .
The Taskforces Terms of Reference set out that Cabinet expected it to develop, test and make recommendations to the Government on policy options for the provision of, and payment for, holiday and leave entitlements that: a. continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act b. provide clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements c. be simpler than the current Act in relation to the provision of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave d. be readily implementable in a payroll system e. minimise compliance costs for employers f. minimise perverse incentives on employers and employ ees g. ensure the balance of decision making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated h. be readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future i. aim to protect overall entitlements for employees.
The Taxation (Research and Development Tax Credits) Bill
The Team also has policy responsibilities in relation to a range of international labour issues, including: modern slavery and the Worker Protection (Migrant and other Employees) Act.
The TechHub is a shared multiuse facility for participants of the programme and members of the Tologa Bay community. The programme offers tech literacy, digital marketing and ecommerce training to participants and members of the wider community.
The Technical Advisory Group
The Technical Advisory Group has sectorwide representation. The purpose of the group is to act as a sounding board for NZRISrelated technical matters and inform delivery of the IT system. It also serves as a vehicle for sectorwide issues and concerns to be defined and raised with MBIE.
The Technical Advisory Group provides technical advice to MBIE on uptogene technology regulation, including regulatory procedures and scientific technical matters related to biotechnology, genetic technologies and gene therapies.
The Technology Safeguards Agreement (TSA)
The Technology Safeguards Agreement Side Arrangement
The Telecommunications (Property Access and Other Matters) Amendment Act makes it easier for people to connect to UltraFast Broadband (UFB) in cases involving shared property. It introduced a new, simplified consenting process that telecommunications companies must follow when installing modern networks like UFB, where the consent of more than one party is required.
The Telecommunications (Property Access) Regulations set the fibre installation methods and requirements that fall under each category, as well as other details to give effect to the property access regime.
The Telecommunications (Regulated Fibre Services) Regulations were initially made on September and took effect from January . They were further revised as of March . The Regulations specify anchor broadband and voice services and one direct fibre access service (DFAS) that Chorus must provide to retail service providers (RSPs).
The Telecommunications Act includes a regulatory framework for fibre connection.
The Telecommunications Development Levy (TDL) is collected from telecommunications service providers each year.
The Telecommunications Development Levy subsidises telecommunications capabilities in the public interest which are otherwise not expected to be available commercially, or which are unaffordable.
The Telecommunications Development Levy subsidises telecommunications capabilities in the public interest.
The Telephone and Video Interpreting Services Panel has now been established. The selected providers are:
The Terms of Reference (ToR) sets out the scope and process for the review:
The Tiaki Promise is a commitment to care for Aotearoa, for now and future generations. It has a set of guiding principles for visitors to follow, showing them how to contribute to preserving and protecting our land. These principles include protecting nature, keeping New Zealand clean, being prepared, driving carefully, and showing respect.
The Tiaki website provides practical examples of how visitors can exercise Tiaki. For example, to protect nature, visitors should:
The Tourism Communities: Support, Recovery and Reset Plan also advances a nationwide reset in the tourism sector. Initiatives focus on ensuring tourism will be more sustainable and resilient in the future.
The Tourism Communities: Support, Recovery and Reset Plan targets New Zealand communities and the businesses that are part of those communities.
The Tourism Data Domain Plan sets out the main priorities for tourism statistics, based on agreement by industry and government stakeholders.
The Tourism Data Leadership Group (TDLG) was established to facilitate the provision of consistent, reliable, and trusted tourism data and insights that enables improved understanding to support better decision making, longterm value gains and sustainability for the benefit of all New Zealanders.
The Tourism Data Partnership Fund (TDPF) is a , contestable fund available in only, to identified tourism industry bodies.
The Tourism Data Partnership Fund is open to the following tourism sector industry bodies:
The Tourism Growth Partnership and Regional Midsized Tourism Facilities Grant Fund closed in . Remaining funds were rolled into the Tourism Infrastructure Fund.
The Tourism Growth Partnership was set up to fund industryled commercial projects focused on increasing productivity across the tourism sector.
The Tourism Growth Partnership was set up to fund industryled commercial projects focused on increasing productivity across the tourism sector. Between and , projects received . million in funding.
The Tourism ITP took a phased approach
The Tourism ITP will be a government partnership with tourism businesses and members of the tourism workforce, iwi, researchers and independent advisers. The Tourism ITP will build on recent work by the Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment, Tourism Futures Taskforce and Climate Change Commission, among others, to transform tourism in New Zealand to a more sustainable model.
The Tourism Information and Data Hui
The Tourism Infrastructure Fund (TIF) provided up to million annually to develop tourismrelated infrastructure that supports regions facing pressure from tourism growth.
The Tourism Infrastructure Fund is now open for applications from councils to address infrastructure needs related to tourism.
The Tourism Infrastructure Fund was introduced to develop tourismrelated infrastructure and support local communities facing pressure from tourism growth, for example areas with higher visitor numbers but small ratepayer bases.
The Tourism Satellite Account report presents information on tourisms contribution to the New Zealand economy in terms of expenditure and employment.
The Tourism Transitions Programme was established to provide support and advice to tourism businesses that have been impacted by COVID. It includes three key programmes of work:
The Trafficking in Persons InterAgency Operations Group continues to meet monthly to discuss investigations into cases with elements of people trafficking.
The Trafficking in Persons InterAgency Operations Group has implemented a standardised approach to recording suspected cases of people trafficking.
The TransTasman patent attorney register records the names of persons and companies who may provide patentrelated services in Australia and New Zealand.
The TransTasman patent attorney registration regime
The Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, Including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (the Outer Space Treaty), which was ratified by New Zealand in .
The Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (also known as the Outer Space Treaty), ratified by New Zealand in ;
The Tripartite Working Group provided its report in December . Its recommended priority for reform was establishing a stronger distinction between employment and selfemployment status in law. It recommended that policy work be undertaken to support consultation on a more detailed proposal.
The Tripartite Working Group recommended that a more detailed policy proposal based on its recommendations be developed and consulted on.
The UFB build is occurring in phases, with the nationwide rollout being completed by the end of .
The UltraFast Broadband (UFB) programme is one of the largest and most ambitious infrastructure projects ever undertaken in New Zealand. It will see around of New Zealanders, in over towns and cities, able to access fibre by the end of .
The UltraFast Broadband Programme, Rural Broadband Initiative and Mobile Black Spot Fund are together delivering improved broadband services and mobile coverage throughout New Zealand.
The University of Canterbury Aerospace Club is a studentled club sponsored by the
The University of Canterbury Aerospace Club is a studentled club supported by the University Of Canterbury Department Of Mechanical Engineering.
The Worker Protection (Migrant and Other Employees) Bill was introduced in September and is being considered by Select Committee. Public submissions on the Bill closed on December.
The Working Group provided its recommendations to the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety in December .
The Working Matters Dashboard: March PDF KB
The Working Matters Dashboard: October PDF KB
The Youth Employment Action Plan monitoring and reporting dashboard
The Youth Employment Action Plan sets out a programme of actions for government agencies to improve education, training and employment outcomes for young people.
The Youth Employment Action Plan sets out a programme of actions for government agencies to improve education, training and employment outcomes.
The action plan has been designed to provide space to develop innovative, commercial opportunities both within existing projects and through new partnership opportunities.
The actions in the Action Plan are split into immediate actions, mediumterm actions and longterm actions.
The adoption of over national or transnational level circular economy strategies worldwide, including national circular economy roadmaps in Europe.
The adventure activities regulatory regime
The agreed approach does not fully resolve these issues and will add administrative burden and cost. Proposals agreed by the previous Minister to provide clarity are complex. We propose a
The aim of interpreting services is to ensure that everyone in New Zealand has equal access to government agencies and their services regardless of their level of English proficiency.
The aim of the APO is to:
The aim of the New Zealand Migrant Settlement and Integration Strategy (the Strategy) is to help migrants successfully settle and integrate by participating fully and contributing to all aspects of life in New Zealand. The success of the Strategy is measured across outcome areas through highlevel indicators. This report shares findings on of the indicators where sufficient data is available for Pacific migrants. The primary source of this data was from the Migrant Survey.
The aim of the workshop was to define how best to establish an exceptional food safety science and research centre to ensure New Zealand remains a leader internationally in the food safety field.
The aims of the CORS Pilot were to:
The allofgovernment plan of action against forced labour, people trafficking and slavery sets out a highlevel framework for the actions that agencies will take over the next five years to , to combat these practices.
The amendment also presents an opportunity to better support the objectives of I nland Revenue s (IRs) online application system to make applications faster and easier for applicants and employers. The system includes a calculated income estimate which was intended to remove the responsibility for making the complex payment calculations from applicants and employers.
The annual cap of workers is currently , for the season.
The applicants ability to carry out an activity without compromising the safety of the public is paramount planning for public safety needs to be integrated into business planning. Personnel and Resources Having the right people with the right capabilities and tools is critical to achieving good public safety outcomes. Applicants should clearly demonstrate that they understand the resources required to ensure public safety objectives are not compromised. To demonstrate that public safety outcomes are able to be achieved, applicants must show that they understand: what tasks must be performed throughout the how training and competency is managed effectively operations to ensure public safety; throughout the operation; what resources are required to perform those tasks; how requirements are communicated; and the level of expertise required to perform how you can or will recover, in the event something those tasks; does go wrong, to prevent something from becoming more serious. who is responsible for ensuring that tasks are performed and that they are suitably qualified to do so; If contractors are being used, the applicant must have suitable systems in place to communicate with them and ensure that any public safety risk is well managed. Identification and Management of Risks There should be a strong focus on managing the risks (rather than a focus on what the activities are) and an emphasis on prevention rather than reaction. Applicants must demonstrate that they understand the hazards and risks throughout the operations and how these could threaten public safety. The management systems should be built in such a way that these risks can be controlled. Applicants should focus on managing the risks that have major or significant consequences even if they would be infrequent. The management of the public safety risk will need to be proportionate to the scale of that risk i.e. risks with significant public safety consequences will require more effort and resources to determine the best way to eliminate the risk, or where not practicable to eliminate, to minimise the risk. Applicants should: consider all possible options to control a risk; select the most effective control that is reasonably practicable to implement.
The application form explains the information you need to provide. Anyone applying for this licence must meet requirements in the Regulations, specifically those in Schedule and Schedule (links are below). Some requirements may be at least partially met with foreign authorisations.
The application form explains the information you need to provide. Anyone applying for this licence must meet requirements in the Regulations, specifically those in Schedule and Schedule (links are below). Some requirements may be at least partially met with foreign authorisations.
The application form explains the information you need to provide. Anyone applying for this licence must meet requirements in the Regulations, specifically those in Schedule and Schedule (links are below). Some requirements may be at least partially met with foreign authorisations.
The application form explains the information you need to provide. Anyone applying for this permit must meet requirements in the Regulations, specifically those in Schedule and Schedule (links are below). Some requirements may be at least partially met with foreign authorisations.
The application of this policy is intended to evolve to reflect the development of new technologies, c hanges in the satellite and broader space industry and the orbital debris environment. . Information to be taken into account when applying this policy Information to be taken into account in the application of this policy includes : For payloads that intend to carry out or demonstrate active debris removal or on orbit servicing activities, the ODMP should include specific considerations for the activity being carried out. In addition to the requirements in the Operational Policy on Orbital Debris Mitig ation Plans , these missions will be required to comply with the Consortium for Execution of Rendezvous and Servicing Operations (CONFERS) Guiding Principles for Commercial Rendezvous and Proximity Operations (RPO) and On Orbit Servicing (OOS) . Other sta ndards and relevant documents for ADR and OOS missions recommended by NZSA include: CONFERS Recommended Design and Operational Practices CONFERS On Orbit Servicing (OOS) Mission Phases JERG JAXA Safety standards for OOS.
The aspects of the service descriptions that were contained in the material incorporated by reference into the Regulations have now been removed from the Regulations. However, similar obligations still exist in commercial agreements between Chorus and retail service providers.
The assessment of proposals for Endeavour funding round is performed by a considered selection of independent national and international Assessors from our virtual College of Assessors.
The below design principles will be followed when establishing the PROs:
The below summaries are for all payloads and other licences approved between October and December .
The benefits (to New Zealand) of the proposed data being publicly available are identified.
The benefits of the New Zealand screen industry
The benefits of this additional creativity and innovation are considered to outweigh the costs imposed on society by intellectual property rights.
The best areas of opportunity were identified as:
The briefing is not government policy. However it will inform the future policy development of the agencies who collaborated to develop the briefing, depending on discussion with and the priorities of the Government. It will also inform research and public discussion of the issues and opportunities.
The briefings process means the public can contribute to decision making, helping us collectively as a country to think about, and plan, for the future.
The cabinet papers that set out the policy decisions in relation to these regulations are:
The calculated income estimate is limited however, as IR does not have access to the level of detail about an employees pay that is required to calculate OWP in accordance with the Act and so instead estimates OWP based on a four week average of taxable earnings. This requires affected employees or their employers to manually check the calculations . The OWP replacement agreed by Cabinet requires similar information about the components of an employees pay.
The calculation of importer margins was adjusted in September to include discounting activity. This adjustment has been carried back to October .
The case for adding security guards to Schedule A of the Employment Relations Act PDF KB
The case studies are available online on the NZIER website and are included in the toolkit.
The case studies showcase and raise awareness of the existing regulatory cooperation practice and encourage regulators to think about the opportunities and options for future cooperation.
The centre is a virtual centre that will see the best scientists around the country collaborating on work programmes that cut across different food and beverage sectors.
The centre was launched in May in response to a recommendation from the Government Inquiry into the Whey Protein Concentrate Contamination Incident.
The centres research aims to protect New Zealanders from food safetyrelated health threats, such as Salmonella, Campylobacter and other foodborne diseases.
The change proposal considered the specific functions and accountabilities held by MBIEs Senior Leadership Team and the impact on functional reporting lines for Tier as well as the structure of business groups.
The change proposal focuses specifically on the future capabilities required to support both MBIE property and government property outcomes. Facilities management, as a contained service function for MBIE, is not within the scope of this proposal.
The changes are part of a wider Government initiative to combat all forms exploitation supported by m in funding over four years.
The changes proposed in th is paper do not address all the
The changes to hours of work law aim to retain flexibility where it is desired by both employers and employees. They also aim to increase certainty by ensuring that both the employer and the employee are clear about the mutual commitments they have made.
The changes will be phased in with a transition year in and changes formally starting to apply from April .
The charging station must be located along the Great Ride or an urban centre (within kms of the trail) that provides services for Great Ride users
The charging station must be primarily for cycle tourists using the Great Rides (Note: The fund is not intended to provide the ebike charging facilities for commuters)
The circular economy also presents New Zealand with economic opportunities associated with a more resourceefficient and environmentally sustainable economy. Business opportunities based on our bioeconomy include production of high value wood products, native botanicals, essential oils, biocosmetics, marine bioactives, and farm inputs such as animal feed and fertilisers.
The closing for submissions is
The company manufactures a suborbital spaceplane, Aurora, of which the MkII is an iteration. A spaceplane is an aircraft that takes off and lands conventionally but is capable of entering space.
The complaint will be dealt with in a fair, respectful, and impartial manner.
The complaint will be resolved in a timely manner.
The concept of NObased bipropellant propulsion systems is not new. It has been around for a long time and extensively tested on the ground. The problem is that these engines are hard to get right and the thermal kinetics are a real pain.
The conformance infrastructure includes the regulations, institutions and arrangements for carrying out conformity assessments.
The consolidated calculation
The consultation approach
The contents of our social media accounts are intended for informational purposes only. We shall in no event accept any liability for loss or damage suffered by any person or body due to information provided on these sites or linked sites.
The contents of this website should not be construed as legal advice. Visitors to this website should take specific advice from qualified professionals before undertaking any action as a result of information accessed on this website.
The corporate governance system provides the legal infrastructure for the operation of businesses, notforprofit entities and civil society organisations.
The cosmetic, toiletries and fragrances (CTF) industry has shown solid, strong, longterm growth, the industry is surprisingly resilient to the economic cycle. You would think that cosmetics, toiletries, and fragrances would be the first thing that people cut back on in an economic downturn, but it is really not the case and is surprisingly robust through time. The main outlier here is COVID where people were working from home.
The cost of discounting activity is borne by a range of parties. All other things being equal, this will tend to underestimate the importer margin attributable to oil companies.
The costs associated with the Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) are provided by Envisory (formerly known as Hale Twomey) based on the prevailing carbon price from the New Zealand Carbon Market.
The council will focus on:
The criteria that must all be met are:
The current New Zealand Energy Efficiency and Conservation Strategy (NZEECS) sets the overarching policy direction for government support and intervention for promoting energy efficiency, energy conservation and the use of renewable sources of energy.
The current and previous dashboards are on the page below.
The current contract with Connecting Now ends on March .
The data in this report will provide insights into aspects of the infrastructure portfolio that are serving the system well, and areas where future system design should look to address gaps.
The data used to inform this review was obtained from indepth interviews with RBAs who had been deployed to the weather events. In addition, all MBIE registered RBAs had the opportunity to participate in the review via an online survey, with completed surveys received.
The for a further round will be announced later this year.
The definition reflects the definition of technical data in the Technology Safeguards Agreement and is necessary to ensure New Zealand acts consistently with its international obligations under that agreement. No change is recommended.
The deployment schedule and coverage information for RBI is available on the National Broadband Map:
The details of each Cluster, including links to the current Work Programmes and details of the relevant New Zealand National Contact Point, are linked on the pages below.
The details of these reforms will be carefully worked through as part of the design and implementation of this change programme.
The development of digital connectivity infrastructure is a vital component of New Zealands economic growth, productivity improvements and our wider strategy to increase our global competitiveness, particularly compared to other OECD countries.
The development of guidance documents and risk analysis frameworks
The diagram also shows that the approved codes of practice and guidance, standards, and information can be used in court as evidence of compliance.
The diagram consists of squares. Starting at the top left and going clockwise, the content of the squares is:
The diagram shows that the Health and Safety at Work Act, regulations, and safe work instruments are mandatory.
The disability snapshot was added in the June quarter, and is an annual snapshot.
The discussion document consults on possible approaches to regulation, as well as other nonregulatory options that could support regulation.
The discussion document put forward a number of proposals, including:
The diversity data has been anonymised.
The diversity data we collect is anonymised, and used to inform a pathway to equity in the science system.
The document Monitoring arrangements for MBIEmonitored Crown entities outlines the accountability and performance framework in which Crown entities operate. Particular information relating to CRIs is included in Annex of the document.
The documents below provide more information on these treaties.
The documents taken to Cabinet along with the Cabinet minute can be found below:
The easiest way to find a provider (or a shortlist of providers) is to start by deciding which language group you need and from there you can search by location.
The economic contribution of the screen industry
The effect has to occur after the cause (and if there is an expected delay between the cause and expected effect, then the effect must occur after that delay).
The effective use of knowledge, skills and capital in business is a major driver of innovation and growth. This increases wages, lifts business competitiveness and profitability, and leads to better social and economic outcomes. The interaction of skilled people and innovative businesses provides the greatest scope for economic growth between now and .
The embedding of these insights will ensure that our work remains relevant and evidencebased, and that we continue to be an efficient and effective steward of the building regulatory system.
The employees have little bargaining power.
The employer must also continue to give the employee a copy of the collective employment agreement and if the employee agrees, inform the union as soon as practicable that the employee has entered into the individual employment agreement with the employer.
The enforcement tools available to disrupt exploitation and hold people to account, particularly through prosecution, are effectively used.
The essence of a digital twin lies in its ability to synchronise data between digital and physical realms. The fosters a way data flow. It facilitates feedback mechanisms for effective interventions in the physical system.
The essential oil firms, when we went and had a look, are located across New Zealand.
The estimated discount is calculated as the difference between the:
The estimates are best used as a tool to help understand the industrial makeup of these local economies, rather than as an annual monitoring tool. Given the proportionally large revisions that can occur in GDP estimates at the TA level, in part due to the relatively small numbers involved, they are not expected to serve as key performance indicators (KPIs) or targets for local governments or agencies.
The evaluation report provides a useful insight into the value and positive impacts of the screen sector to New Zealand. However, it also confirms the difficulties in calculating the net economic benefit arising from the grant.
The evaluation report was in June together with peer review reports:
The exposure draft Bill included:
The exposure draft will provide the opportunity to test the fairness, practicality and outcomes of this approach. Framework for paying AL as a regular part of an employees pay (pay as yougo (PAYG)) In Cabinet agreed to a new four part test for determining when PAYG can be used because a work pattern is interment and irregular . It also agreed to a recurring week review period to determine if the definition continues to be met and PAYG can continue . This was intended to address the high degree of discretion employees are required to exercise about whether PAYG can be used and the lack of a framework for reviewing its use during employment . These have both contributed to non compliance. Rescind the decision to introduce a four part test for using PAYG and a mend the decision to require the use of PAYG to be reviewed on a week basis. Authorise the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety to make decisions on the detail of replacement provisions for using PAYG that align with the following approach : o Provide simpler , objective criteria for using PAY G that provide certainty and remove the need for judgement . o Create less administrative burden than a recurring week review but still ensur e that an employee who receives PAYG does genuinely work on an intermittent basis and have periods away from work. kjtrvweh I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E The recommended te st and week review process lacked clarity in several areas and still required a high degree of judgement. Employers would have to make an assessment at the start of employment about what they expected the employees work pattern to be. During employment they would have to determine whether, within each week review period, time at work had repeated in a manner possible to anticipate . A week review period would also impose high compliance costs on employers.
The extension aimed to support working families with newborns and young children and help reduce financial stress.
The fall in advertised job vacancies is easing, with online job advertisements falling by . over the year to the March quarter, following a fall of . over the year to the December quarter. Job advertisements have now been declining since December ( consecutive quarters).
The fibre regulatory framework was introduced following a review conducted between and June . The Telecommunications Act was then amended in November to create a new framework for the regulation of wholesale fibre services, which would replace the existing contracts for government programmes such as the Ultrafast Broadband (UFB) initiative. The framework is a wholesale level arrangement that provides stable and predictable regulation for fibre connectivity and removes regulation of copper lines where fibre is available.
The final New Zealand Consumer Survey closed in November with over , completed responses. Includes questions on whether the fair treatment of workers impacts on consumer purchases. Kantar Public is currently working on the analysis, with a final version to be released in February .
The final report of the investigation into the electricity supply interruptions of August .
The final report on responses to the recommendations of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into Building Failure Caused by the Canterbury Earthquakes (the Royal Commission) was released on February .
The findings have supported work under the First Emissions Reduction Plan to assess how Aotearoa New Zealand could transition to a sustainable and high value bioeconomy.
The findings indicate that circular approaches have the potential to support significant emission savings over time, but that achieving this will take deliberate and sustained action. Other impacts of circular approaches reviewed in the research included greater productivity through more efficient use of physical resource inputs, new and changed jobs, and opportunities to mitigate supply chain risks.
The findings of the evaluation provide compelling evidence that New Zealand Cycle Trail Great Rides are having positive impact to New Zealand. Key findings are as follows:
The findings of the review have now been announced by Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission.
The first balloon launched successfully on . The second balloon launched on , however the flight ended on due to system failure.
The first consultation hui were in JulyAugust and mainly targeted young people and those working closely with them, for example:
The first package of Fair Pay Agreements Regulations was on December and can be found on the New Zealand Legislation website. These regulations were repealed on December .
The first phase of the Tourism Industry Transformation Plan (ITP) focused on enabling Better Work for the tourism industry.
The first phase of this work is to sharpen the purpose of the Health and Safety at Work Act to manage critical risks and clarify the boundaries of the Act.
The focus for assessments is on system performance, not framework performance, and ensuring we treat systems as living.
The focus is on improving the current maintenance and risk settings in the Building Code and educating users. A more consistent programme of updates allows for clear minimum performance requirements. The Building Code is moving to better support sector innovation and best practice.
The focus of our postal policy is to ensure the regulatory environment, including competition in postal services, supports an efficient postal market in New Zealand.
The followup survey to the tourism and hospitality workforce survey.
The followup to the ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work specifies that all member States which have not ratified a core fundamental convention will have to submit an annual report on progress toward implementing the principles set out in said unratified fundamental convention(s).
The following RTOs in the gateway regions are not eligible:
The following are available on the Legislation website:
The following contact information for MBIE media is for journalists and media inquiries only.
The following departmentsagencies have been consulted
The following disclaimer applies to the MED. If you publish data from the MED, we ask that you publish this disclaimer alongside the data, in compliance with Stats NZs policies:
The following graphs show the latest fuel statistics up to the week ending April (weekly).
The following information can be used to set us up in your finance system for invoicing:
The following information is a record of the work done by the previous government on the Fair Pay Agreements legislation:
The following information is a record of the work done up to .
The following information is a record of work done until .
The following is a highlevel description of the regulatory process undertaken by officials for payload permits when considering national interests for payload permit applications:
The following process will be led by MBIE officials: Collect views (including from government agencies and industry stakeholders) regarding the operation and effectiveness of the p rovisions of the Act. Identify how the Act and regulations can be improved operationally. Taking into account the consultation, prepare and present a final report to the Minister by December .
The following provides an overview of national interest considerations and processes, in particular for regulating payloads for launch in New Zealand, or by New Zealand entities overseas.
The following regimes, registers or fees are not within the scope of this review: costs funded by the Crown eg the Charitable Trust Board s register and sole traders applying for an NZBN ; levies set to recover the costs of the Financial Markets Authority (FMA) or External Reporting Board (XRB); the Climate related Disclosures regime and associated filing fee this register c ame into force in January , with fees set by regulations in October ; and late filing fees and infringement fees these are penalty charges and not considered to be cost recovery. What are the proposals In summary, this document proposes: A clearer and fairer cost recovery structure to enable full cost recovery which utilises: o levies (to recover the shared costs of the system); and o fees (to recover the remaining costs of specific registry services). An increase of million in the Companies Office annual expenditure budget to meet identified forecast cost pressures including the need to make incremental upgrades to aging registry systems and undertake compliance, enforcement and education activities including those related to recent legislative changes. Two new levies which meet some costs which have previously been met by fees: o a Companies Office levy (CO levy); and o a New Zealand Business Number levy (NZBN levy). Three n ew fees for incorporated societies for new functions under the Incorporated Societies Act : o annual return fee; o amalgamation fee; and o conversion fee. Adjustments to fees , where required, across all registers and revoking some fees for services that are no longer provided for some registers. How will the proposals affect businesses and entities All proposed charges have been developed to make the best use of the money collected from users and provide a clearer understanding of what users are paying for. For some entities, this means that the total amount they pay annually will stay largely the same. Others may need to pay for services that they hav e not been charged for in the past which may mean a slight increase in existing fees, or new fees. MBIE recognises that entities are facing rising costs of operating and ongoing economic impacts. We have taken these cost pressures into consideration in developing proposals and tried to ensure that fees and levies are fair and reasonable for users within the current economic environment. In some cases there are higher increases, however, it is important to note these increases are still below the rate of general inflation since fees were last adjusted in . Levies are outlined in Section . New and existing fees are outlined register byregister in Section . A summary of all Companies Office unit costs, proposed fees and levies (including the total proposed charge where fees and levies are charged at the same time ), and the current fees and levies are included in Appendix Two . How will the proposals affect consumers Given the scale of any increases to charges payable, the Companies Office does not anticipate the cost of any increase being passed on to consumers in a noticeable way.
The following requirements are not an exhaustive list. Breaches of these requirements may amount to misconduct or serious misconduct depending on the nature and severity of a breach.
The following steps will initiate your session:
The following summarise some of the approved payload purposes for science (), technology demonstration (), remote sensing (), educational () and other commercial (). Note some payloads can have more than one purpose.
The form will automatically save the content as you press Next. Press Save and exit to log out of the form.
The formal process for this Briefing is now complete.
The former Tourism Recovery Ministers Group
The forum aims to build confidence, exchange information, and develop a better understanding of underlying energy issues affecting the world.
The framework for providing AL entitlement : In
The functions of Invest New Zealand
The functions of government
The funding comes from the International Visitor Conservation and Tourism Levy (IVL). Other tourism initiatives in include:
The funding is made available from the International Visitor Conservation and Tourism Levy (IVL) allocation for the development of a tourism data cogovernance model and tourism data programme.
The future of business for Aotearoa New Zealand
The future of work is being shaped by broad global megatrends: technology change, demographic change, globalisation and climate change. These global trends create both risks and opportunities for New Zealand.
The gateway test, once in place, can be used by the Employment Relations Authority when responding to a claim that a person is an employee and not a contractor. If the working arrangement in question meets the factors set out in the test, then the person is considered to be a contractor. If the factors are not met, the claim would then proceed to being considered under the existing full test.
The generation of these insights will inform the direction of the strategy, tell us what activities we need to prioritise and engage in, and whether what we are doing is making a difference.
The goal at the outset of the LAS project was that interpreters working in the New Zealand public sector will be NAATI credentialed or working towards their NAATI credential. From July :
The goal is to identify actions all partners can take to address well known challenges facing the tourism industry and to transform tourism in New ZealandAotearoa to a regenerative model.
The goal of the Review is to reduce the exploitation of temporary migrant workers, including international students. Its objectives are to:
The governing legislation is Part of the Contract and Commercial Law Act . Its purpose is to:
The government provided million ( million each year) through the Freedom Camping Transition Fund to support local authorities to undertake activities relating to the transition to the new freedom camping rules during and . This funding was contestable.
The government reallocated . million for urgent scientific research and data collection to support the response to and recovery from the early extreme weather events in the North Island.
The government uses disclosure regulations to monitor compliance with the Deed of Understanding and also the Postal Service Act.
The government wants tourism growth to be productive, sustainable and inclusive. Our goals are:
The government welcomes feedback on changes to these rules and encourages you to have your say at select committee. Keep an eye on the MBIE website for details.
The graph below shows the estimated discounts since along with the current forecasts.
The graphic below explains how this will work.
The greater the impact of an exposure on the occurrence or development of a disease, the stronger the likelihood of a causal relationship.
The group conducts its projects through networks. We are particularly interested in of these: the Labour and Social Protection Network and the Capability Building Network.
The group contributed their insights into the practicalities of implementing the recommendations in payroll systems, and across a variety of complex employment environments.
The group has branches:
The group has branches:
The group has branches:
The guidance is intended to supplement the procedures and requirements of policy and legislative development already described in major government documents including:
The guide was developed after public consultation to ensure it provides appropriate information and guidance to support effective implementation of the NESTF.
The guiding principles for the review are that the RSE Scheme should:
The health and safety assessment proposal was modified from that consulted on and now requires AEs to be subject to an ACC health and safety audit or become ISO certified.
The health and safety regulatory regime for adventure activities is relatively new, introduced in and came fully into force in November , following concerns over the management of risk in the adventure tourism sector.
The high capacity links enable New Zealand researchers to engage on an equal footing with their peers internationally. REANNZ uses its network and expertise to provide a range of other services to members, such as internet connectivity, video conferencing, pointtopoint links and advisory services.
The highincome threshold will initially be set at , per annum of base pay. Base pay includes regular salary and wages, and excludes other income such as incentive payments, or benefits such as vehicle use.
The highlevel timeline is as follows and as the implementation planning progresses, these timeframes may change:
The image has prompts for conducting a selfassessment of a regulatory system.
The image shows examples of how to conduct a selfassessment of a regulatory system.
The impact of COVID on the tourism sector has been severe.
The impacts of climate change and the need to significantly reduce emissions are likely to affect where New Zealanders live, how we live and work, and how we view and use our land and water.
The importer margin is the gross margin available to fuel retailers to cover domestic transportation, distribution and retailing costs in New Zealand, as well as profit margins.
The income threshold for unjustified dismissal personal grievances will apply to new employment agreements when the legislation comes into force.
The increase in international projects has also supported the production of domestic productions with strong New Zealand stories, such as
The independent experts would produce a report recommending diseases.
The industry is open to collaborating but needs support to overcome transparency and access to better data to support decisionmaking. This is currently considered a market failure.
The infographic shows the key components of the work health and safety regulatory system. In the centre is a diagram showing the duty holders. On the lefthand side is a pyramid diagram showing the different elements of work health and safety law. On the righthand side is a diagram showing parties with regulatory functions. An arrow is pointing from the law diagram to the duty holders diagram, and from the regulatory functions diagram to the duty holders diagram. This shows the centrality of duty holders in the regulatory system.
The information MBIE collects from the screen share session is stored in a secure server for days. In some circumstances we may be legally required to retain the screen recordings, for longer than two years, such as if a call recording becomes a public record.
The information below is intended as a guide to the obligations and rights of postal operators, and does not constitute legal advice.
The information in this form enables the Minister to make a decision on the payload permit application.
The information in your proposal is used for:
The information on our social media sites and all government web sites is provided on the basis that persons accessing the web site undertake responsibility for assessing the relevance and accuracy of its content.
The information provided on this page are forecasts made preCOVID, based on econometric modelling, current trends and bestavailable forecasts of international factors, developed with input from members of the tourism industry. Please bear this in mind when using this information.
The information provided on this website does not replace or alter the laws of New Zealand, or alter any other official guidelines or requirements.
The information provided to the inquiry by MBIE is on this page. Some information has been redacted consistent with the Official Information Act , and where this has occurred the relevant grounds are indicated on each document. MBIE also provided copies of relevant corporate documents.
The information we collect in funding applications and why
The initial focus of the Tourism Industry Transformation Plan is on developing a Better Work Action Plan for the tourism and hospitality industry. Investing more into people, deepening our talent pool and ultimately providing better work for those in the tourism system is a key component of regenerative tourism.
The initiative has now expanded to include (up to) an additional , households and businesses with million from Budget .
The initiatives currently underway to support these goals are:
The international firm Startup Genome has prepared a report for the Council on New Zealands startup ecosystem.
The introduction of more than international legislative instruments with objectives of reduced linear consumption and reuse of materials.
The investment process and funding year they applied for funding from
The issues identified relating to tourism in Aotearoa New Zealand have been the subject of extensive analysis and consultation. This has resulted in a valuable body of existing work, including:
The key components of the law are shown in a pyramid with levels. Starting at the top of the pyramid and going down each level, the components are:
The key difference between the documents is in the definition of the group of employees that the unions request be added to Schedule A of the ERA. This is now support worker as defined in the Support Workers (Pay Equity) Settlements Act , which includes:
The labour market dashboard is no longer being . The Regional Economic Activity web tool is available as an alternative source of labour market data.
The last to apply for the Scheme was December . This is to enable enough time for a submission for payment before the Scheme closes on December .
The latest Energy Quarterly data release from the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) shows electricity generation in the October to December quarter was the lowest December quarter on record since , says MBIE Domains Manager Amapola Generosa.
The latest Energy Quarterly release from the Ministry of Business Innovation Employment (MBIE) shows the difference weather conditions can make to energy generation in New Zealand.
The latest data, and information on how HAM is produced are available on the
The law increased the duration of parental leave payments over years and stages:
The legislation we manage
The likelihood of the event:
The list is Schedule of the Accident Compensation Act (AC Act). Cabinet approved this review framework on September .
The main Cabinet papers relating to the former Bill are accessible below.
The main aims of the New Zealand Cycle Trail project are to:
The main aims of the evaluation are to:
The main changes include:
The main changes included:
The main features of the RD tax incentive include:
The main purpose of the Taskforce is to advise on what changes New Zealand can make to the tourism system, so that tourism enriches both New Zealand and the wellbeing of New Zealanders.
The main purpose of this product is to facilitate understanding of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of Territorial Authorities (TAs) in terms of output over time and by industry group.
The majority of offshore presentations are currently on hold due to closed borders (e.g. Fiji Police and Immigration workshop, Samoan Police awareness programme).
The majority of these students were from Fiji. Fiji was the th largest source country of student visa approvals in New Zealand.
The majority were from Samoa ().
The majority were in the to age group and more likely to be female ().
The majority were in the to age group () and most were males ().
The majority were in their s and s and the gender split is slightly more males than females.
The majority were under the age of years and the gender split is relatively even.
The marketing boost is estimated to result in over , additional international visitors spending an extra million across the country.
The masterplan has required new thinking to safeguard the core character and values, World Heritage status, conservation values and the visitor experience that New Zealanders and our international visitors expect from such an iconic destination. The foundations of the project are based on manaakitanga and kaitiakitanga, and a true mana whenua partnership.
The material contained in this report is subject to Crown copyright protection unless otherwise indicated.
The material contained in this report is subject to Crown copyright protection unless otherwise indicated. The Crown copyright protected material may be reproduced free of charge in any format or media without requiring specific permission. This is subject to the materia l being reproduced accurately and not being used in a derogatory manner or in a misleading context. Where the material is being or iss ued to others, the source and copyright status should be acknowledged. The permission to reproduce Crown copyright protected material does not extend to any material in this report that is identified as being the copyright of a third party. Authorisation to reproduce such material should be obtained from the copyright holders.
The maximum amount of funding available to each ebike charging station is , (excluding GST). Applicants can apply for one or more ebike charging stations, but only one application per Great Ride. Ongoing maintenance of the ebike charging equipment is out of scope of this fund. Any approved funding from the EGR should be used within months of contracting.
The measures came into force on April . They target the worst transgressions of employers without imposing unnecessary compliance costs on employers in general. They include:
The members of the Advisory Group represent a wide range of key sectors and industry organisations in the tourism system. The membership of both the Advisory Group and the Taskforce reflect the crosscutting nature of the tourism system, and its impacts on many sectors and government portfolios.
The migrant exploitation triage and reporting model continues to facilitate the triage of migrant exploitation complaints through to INZ and the Labour Inspectorate, and the liaison capability provides exploited migrants with advice and connections to support. Migrant exploitation phone line and online reporting established on July , with , complaints of migrant exploitation received by December . As of December , individuals have been supported by liaison support.
The migration trends data explorer enables users of migration data to easily access the data they need to address the overarching research themes and enduring questions that relate to migration in New Zealand.
The minimum amount of funding available for each event is ,.
The modelling frame employed by the AERU measures the economic, social, and environmental consequences of land use change but should be seen primarily as a highlevel assessment tool.
The monthly labour market fact sheets have summarised highfrequency and timely data and surveys with a focus around the impact of COVID on the labour market since July .
The more businesses that send and receive eInvoices, the more your business will benefit from saving time on administration and faster payment.
The network established with Fijian authorities will be extended to Tonga and Samoa. The intention is to create a network that can be utilised for future crossborder trafficking or exploitation investigations. Investigative efficiency is being built on both ends.
The new Panel contract starts on April .
The new fellowships are designed to address issues raised by the sector, including career stability, collaboration, mobility, and better representation in the workforce. Key features include:
The new law also proportionately increased the number of Keeping in Touch days:
The new measures include:
The new regime will not capture widespread, consumeroriented products such as:
The new rules and the regulator will ensure that human health and the environment are protected. Places like Australia, Japan, the EU and England have safely embraced gene technologies.
The new rules and the regulator will ensure that the health and safety of people and the environment are protected.
The new schemes replace the Rutherford Discovery, Rutherford Foundation and James Cook Research Fellowships, which will no longer be offered from . Researchers currently undertaking Rutherford Foundation, Rutherford Discovery and James Cook Research Fellowships will continue to be supported at the current funding levels throughout the duration of those awards.
The nomination form for the APEC ASPIRE award.
The number of people approved for residence in fell to , following a increase the year before. The decrease was driven by Parent Category approvals, which fell , and Skilled Migrant Category approvals, which fell .
The objectives for the Recognised Seasonal Employer (RSE) policy review are a set of sustainable longterm administrative settings that work effectively for the government and employers; and a scheme that respects RSE workers and upholds their rights and dignity through an improved set of policies and guidelines, backed by consistent and ethical employment practices.
The objectives of the refinements were to help ensure the new rules and processes for calculating leave entitlements and payments are definitive, clear, and logical, can be systematised, and are workable in all employment situations.
The online form link above takes you to the secure Crimestoppers web form. You and your computer are anonymous. Their call handlers read what you have sent them and will take out any information that might identify you before forwarding it to the relevant authorities in New Zealand.
The online web tool for desktop computers enables comparison of regional data in maps and dynamic charts. This tool will be of special interest for analysts and anyone else wanting a more indepth tool for exploring regional data.
The only current holder of a launch licence or a facility licence is Rocket Lab.
The opinions, findings, recommendations, and conclusions expressed in this report are those of the authors, not Stats NZ.
The other aspect is weve got the potential to link the digital twin, all the users of the building to an app, or some other thing they can access very easily, probably a mobile app is the easiest. But if youve got a complex there, there might be things like the recycling system or notifying the community about some changes, or making people aware of some maintenance or what things are working, what things arent, and users the building can notify of repairs, etc. So there is the potential to link in the users with the digital twin and maximise the kind of information and the flow of information that we have for people. And then that might allow people to manage their energy better, or the water use. Or maybe maximise or use their recycling systems better.
The outcome from this review is the development of an , accurate statistical classification system with sufficient robustness to allow for longterm usage and implementation.
The outcome of using the framework will inform, if needed, a change to Schedule by an Order in Council. Apart from Acts of Parliament, Orders in Council are the main method by which the government implements decisions that need legal force.
The outlook for New ZealandAotearoa tourism
The overarching objective of the Tourism ITP was to contribute to the building of a regenerative tourism system. A regenerative tourism system is one that leaves people, communities, and the environment better than before, and can be understood as an extension of sustainability.
The pace and scale of visitor growth prior to COVID in New ZealandAotearoa surpassed the capacity of the tourism system. While visitor growth increased the opportunities and benefits of tourism, it also highlighted the costs, including infrastructure pressures, overcrowding and environmental impacts. Foundational change is needed to ensure that sustainable tourism growth in New ZealandAotearoa continues to be underpinned by tikanga values. Foundational change is needed to ensure that sustainable tourism growth in New ZealandAotearoa continues to be underpinned by tikanga values.
The paper contained in Annex T hree ( Providing , taking and paying other leave types ) covers four
The paper contained in Annex Two (Provid ing , ta king and p aying a nnual l eave) covers three main areas:
The payment encourages employers to consider if redundancy is necessary, or if alternatives can be found. It will also discourage fraudulent claims. Employers could seek a refund of some or all of the payment if they assist the worker to find work within the initial fourweek period. This payment also reduces costs for all employers and employees, supports good employers, and makes sure that the costs of redundancy are more fairly shared.
The permission to reproduce material on this website does not extend to any material that is identified as being protected by copyright owned by a third party. (This includes material on websites you may access via links from this site).
The pilot was implemented by a partnership between a private partner (the Edmund Hillary Fellowship (EHF)) and Immigration New Zealand (INZ). Partnering with a private provider is an innovative and novel feature of the pilot. The Global Impact Visa was designed to facilitate the attraction, selection and integration of innovative global entrepreneurs, investors, change makers and startup teams. At the end of the threeyear visa, migrants can apply for permanent residency.
The plan of action is comprised of actions organised across three key pillars: Prevention, Protection, and Enforcement. These pillars are underpinned by a partnership approach, with effective partnership being critical to success.
The plan of action will ensure:
The plan of actions highlevel nature reflects that new approaches may need to be undertaken to adjust to the changing nature and means by which forced labour, people trafficking and slavery are carried out. We will continue to review our approach to ensure it is effective and appropriate.
The policy objectives of the Review Costs Regulations were to ensure that the Regulations will:
The policy objectives of the regular review of the Cost of Treatment Regulations are to ensure:
The policy requires that all publications in scope be made Openly Accessible at the earliest opportunity. The policy is permissive of embargo periods of up to months before manuscripts are made available through Green Open Access, if required by the publisher. Embargo periods of more than months are not permitted.
The policy review has a twofold objective: Sustainable longterm administrative settings that work effectively for the government and employers; and a scheme that respects RSE workers, and upholds their rights and dignity through an improved set of policies and guidelines, backed by consistent and ethical employment practices.
The postal Deed of Understanding sets out the minimum obligations of the national mail carrier, New Zealand Post, for the sale and delivery of postal products.
The postal Deed of Understanding was established in and is an agreement between New Zealand Post and the government.
The potential investment is reasonable and proportionate to the benefits that would accrue.
The pressure on infrastructure, environment and quality of life for some New Zealanders meant tourism started to lose its social licence to operate.
The previous Minister agreed to clarifications and adjustments to several aspects of the recommendation to address issues and gaps Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government identified by our stakeholder working group and to simplify where possible. Despite these , it remains the most complex aspect of the end toend rules for AL.
The primary focus of these new initiatives is to make it easier for migrant workers to report exploitation and ensure migrants are able to leave exploitative situations as quickly as possible.
The primary objective of the mission is to demonstrate the operational capability of an extended duration stratospheric balloon.
The principles developed by the JWG aimed to deal with the complexity of the courtbased approach. They did this by creating a new pay equity claims process, which was
The proactive release of official information is another element that helps build trust and confidence in government.
The process to develop the Strategy has been extremely valuable, with significant consultation and stakeholder engagement ensuring the strategy vision had broad representation and was inclusive and reflective of the regional tourism sector.
The program is open to any legal entity, meaning that alongside researchers in traditional research organisations, partners can include businesses, local or regional authorities, nongovernment organisations, community groups and more.
The programme was established to implement the recommendations of two reviews undertaken by MBIE and DIA in and respectively. These reviews found that while Governmentfunded interpreting and translation services are available in New Zealand, a number of barriers and gaps prevent equitable access to public services and information for people with limited English language proficiency.
The programme will be delivered over years, across phases:
The programme will have a direct impact on public safety, by providing greater mobile coverage on stretches of state highway. It will also enhance visitor experiences by providing new coverage in tourism locations.
The programme will move into the businessasusual stage
The project has identified and mapped the emissions and waste patterns of the seven main advanced manufacturing subsectors to identify opportunities to adopt netzero circular manufacturing.
The project must be completed within months after the funding approval
The project resulted in a suite of related reports and as Tim said, this is what we will be going through today at the presentation. Essentially the are:
The project used a multistage screening process to identify the bioeconomy platforms with the needed desirable characteristics. Some of those characteristics we were just talking about. Essentially image a big pool of ideas that goes through a funnel to get the ones that are most attractive falling out the end. We had to start with Stage looking at all the different sort of products and platforms we have in New Zealand, and they were filtered down to the three priority platforms that we then detailed in more.
The proposal aimed to create new responsibilities across the operations and supply chains of all types of organisations in New Zealand, with more responsibilities for larger organisations:
The proposed Fair Pay Agreement system PDF KB
The proposed changes are summarised in the table below.
The proposed changes to AEP include:
The proposed scheme most directly benefits working people, but there are also significant benefits for employers. The proposed income insurance scheme would help shift New Zealand to being a higher productivity economy where businesses generate more value and greater returns. The proposal will also create a clearer process for redundancies, with more predictable costs.
The proposed scheme would also go a long way to addressing the current inequity whereby a person who experiences an accident can receive much more support than a person with a nonaccidentrelated health condition or disability, despite a similar loss of ability to work.
The proposed solution adopts one or more innovative aspects (for example, data collection, analysis, culturally appropriate methodologies) which will create valueadd in the tourism data system.
The proposed solution is feasible (that is, solutions and infrastructure are evidentavailable).
The proposed solution will provide an effective method for the services required (for example, validity, reliability, accepted methodology).
The proposed solution will provide good coverage of the required measures (includes regional data where possible).
The public will have an opportunity to have their say on the development of the new NZEECS. Sign up to the Energy and Resource Markets news to be notified when the consultation opens, or keep an eye on this webpage for more information.
The publication is a guide only and should not be used as a substitute for the Convention texts or for New Zealand legislation.
The purpose of a standards and conformance system
The purpose of assessments
The purpose of the Building System Insights Programme (BSIP) is to conduct strategic research and evaluation, which provides sector intelligence and insights, to inform the implementation and effective delivery of the Building System Regulatory Strategy.
The purpose of the Flexible Working Policy is to:
The purpose of the Health and Safety at Work Act is below the pyramid: To provide for a balanced framework to secure the health and safety of workers and workplaces.
The purpose of the Holidays Act Review
The purpose of the Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Act is to protect the health and safety of the public by ensuring the competency of persons who provide sanitary plumbing, gasfitting and drainlaying services.
The purpose of the Prosecution policy is to:
The purpose of the Review is to ensure seismic risk in existing buildings is managed effectively.
The purpose of the fund is to support the development of data sets targeted towards enabling the tourism sector to achieve either improved productivity outcomes or reducing carbon emissionsimproving environmental outcomes.
The purpose of these laws is to protect the public and workers, as well as to prevent property damage from the supply and use of electricity and gas. Its coverage includes the safety of electrical and gas appliances and fittings at the time of sale or supply.
The purpose of this Policy is to protect the safety and promote the wellbeing of children who come into contact with MBIE employees or services, and assist our people to respond when child abuse or neglect is suspected or identified.
The purpose of this document is to provide applicants with guidance that will help prepare a safety case that adds value to their organisation and provides assurance that critical public safety risks have been identified and are suitably controlled. Applicants will need to demonstrate that they understand and can manage the critical safety risks that they could be exposing members of the public and their property to as a result of their operations. The size and scope of the safety case will be dependent on the nature and complexity of the operation and the safety risks that the public will or could be exposed to as a result. Public Safety Regulated parties must ensure that the safety of the public is not put at risk by their conduct or undertakings. Undertakings include all of the activities conducted by the regulated party that support, or are intended to support, launch activities. The public includes every person whose safety could be put at risk by launch activities. The public needs to be protected from any harm that could be caused by launch activities, including the risk of physical injury or death and of damage to property. All reasonable steps to manage, and continue to manage, the risks to public safety must be taken. The importance of a Safety Case A safety case will help to drive the applicant to meet its public safety objectives and provides for accountability in doing so. All stakeholders (including the regulator) need to have confidence that applicants have carefully thought through and tested how they will keep the public safe. An effective safety case will give confidence to all parties that the applicant is committed to having an operation that carefully considers and manages the risks to public safety, and that they have the capability and capacity to do so. A safety case will help the operation by making it very clear: what the commitments are to public safety; providing assurance that the controls are appropriate, effective and will be adhered to; how public safety is promoted within the operation; making it clear when the public safety commitments that the operation has carefully considered how are not being met; andit could create public safety risks, and what those risks are; that the applicant is always looking to become even safer. As a participant in the space industry in New Zealand there is the potential that the operations may expose members of the public and their property to the risks that it presents. Should a catastrophic event occur the operation could cause death, serious injury or significant damage to property. Harm may occur to people directly affected by the event, but also to others by association. If the operation is not managed safely, it will be exposed to significant scrutiny which could result in loss of confidence that could affect the licence to operate, andor a downturn in business confidence. Applicants must satisfy the Minister that they are technically capable of conducting the proposed activity safely and that all reasonable steps have been taken to manage the risks to public safety (and will continue to be taken) before a licence can be granted.
The purpose of this policy is to enable accountability for decisions at MBIE, increase transparency about our algorithm use, and strengthen support systems for our staff working with algorithms.
The purpose of this policy is to increase equity of access to our research outputs, increase the impact and innovation potential of our research, and ultimately maximise the return on our public investments in research.
The purpose of this privacy statement is to let users of this website and the MBIE Customer Service Centre know when we collect personal information and what we may do with it. We dont use, share or disclose personal information collected or received through this website except as set out in this statement.
The quality of our regulatory systems has a major impact on the lives, work and businesses of New Zealanders. The Government expects regulatory agencies to be stewards of the regulatory systems within which they work. This means adopting a wholeofsystem view, and a proactive, collaborative approach to the care of the regulatory system. The regulatory stewardship role includes responsibilities for:
The questions ask for your insights into the current New Zealand space and advanced aviation sectors and the activities of your organisation.
The rapid growth in tourism preCOVID was creating flowon impacts in our communities.
The raw data used in MTAGDP is based on Stats NZ and custom data, but the methodology was developed by us. Stats NZ will not be held accountable for any error, inaccurate findings or interpretation within the MTAGDP results. Moreover, access to the custom data provided by Stats NZ is under conditions designed to give effect to the security and confidentiality provisions of the Statistics Act .
The recommendations have the Taskforces unanimous support and meet the objectives of the review . One of the key goals I set the Taskforce was for it to produce a set of recommendations that all of its members supported. The failure of past reviews to achieve consensus, and instead deliver opposing options supported by either employers or employees, is seen by many as the key reason the Act is challenging and why there is widespread non compliance. With this in mind I consider that there would need to be a very strong case for us to move away from the Taskforces recommendations and adopt a different ap proach to reform of the Act.
The recommendations included:
The recommendations of the independent review include:
The recording of your screen share session will be deleted after days, after which MBIE will no longer hold this information.
The redesigned action plan for He Kai Kei Aku Ringa .
The regime is futureproofed to be flexible and pragmatic enough to respond to rapid advances in space technologies, space applications and related market demand. Were one of the first countries to develop laws covering nonrocket propelled activity in high altitudes, such as balloons.
The regulation of people in building trades and professions (occupational licensing) aims to ensure workers in the sector are competent and accountable.
The regulation of people in building trades and professions aims to ensure the people responsible for work done are competent and accountable.
The regulation of the price and quality of goods or services in markets with monopoly characteristics is covered by Part of the Commerce Act, and is implemented by the Commerce Commission.
The regulations identify the detailed information required of all applicants, as well as the specific information that is required for each licence or permit type.
The regulations to extend the transitional period for private vehicles will be passed in the first half of before the current deadline of June .
The regulator will be required to consider advice from a Technical Advisory Committee. This committee will advise the regulator on
The regulatory changes are to:
The relationship between online job advertisements and labour demand is complex, particularly when disaggregated at an industry, occupation and regional level. For example, an increase in job advertisements in a particular industry may indicate the industry is expanding, and looking for new workers, or the industry has a high rate of turnover or churn (workers are moving between businesses, but overall employment is not necessarily increasing). Likewise, a decline in online job advertisements can signal reduced employment in an industry, or that the industry is using alternatives to online advertising in their hiring processes (such as wordofmouth or social networks). Alternatively, a decline in online advertisements may signal an industry has less turnover than before.
The relevant sections in the Act are: Payload Overseas Authorisation () : Appl ication for payload permit ()(b) : W hen payload permit may be granted : C onditions, indemnity, and insurance relating to payload permit : Minister may take into account authorisation granted in country other than New Zealand ()(b) : W hen overseas payload permit may be granted : C onditions, indemnity, and insurance relating to overseas payload permit
The remaining columns are not contract specific; they show the overall split of Endeavour funding by reporting year across the FORSEO classifications.
The renewable energy strategy connects renewable electricity generation, the Electricity Price Review, a green hydrogen strategy, Gas Act changes, a resources strategy, process heat, Just Transition work, and backing emerging technologies with the Emissions Reduction Plan and NZ Emissions Trading Scheme.
The renewable energy strategy work programme focuses on main outcomes:
The repeal Act and associated regulatory impact statements are set out below:
The report explores potential pathways and opportunities available to New Zealand, but these do not represent policy advice; and the views, opinions, and conclusions expressed in the report are strictly those of the authors.
The report is intended to be a resource for the RSI sector who contribute to the performance of the science and innovation system.
The report of the Independent Taskforce on Workplace Health Safety He Korowai Whakaruruhau PDF .MB
The report presents selected findings from the Migrant Survey.
The report provides recommendations for areas where MBIE could make improvements.
The report was informed by analysis of existing secondary information about cycle tourism, consultation with industry stakeholders and a consumer survey of the cycle tourism market in New Zealand and Australia. A link to the full report can be found below.
The reports describe key market trends, identify investment opportunities and profile major businesses.
The reports we publish on economic activity in the regions include summary reports of key statistics, indepth Regional Growth Study reports and Regional Economic Activity Reports.
The reports will help you to:
The requirement for new Crown funding to meet these costs will depend on which agency is assigned responsibility for space policy and the extent to which resources can be provided through departmental secondments. Develop and maintain New Zealands international relationships and obligations for space. As a launching state New Zealand will need to strengthen its engagement in international space affairs. This is likely to include more active engagement with the United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs and potentially membership of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS) the administrator of five international space treaties. It is likely to include participating in discussions with other like minded nations on space policy matters. The lead space agency will have the primary lead with support from MFATExpanded None. New Zealand will need to accede to the Registration Convention but this does not need to happen before the first test launch.There are three primary COPUOS meetings in Vienna a year. Travel costs are likely to be in the order of , a year (but there may be scope to combine some of this travel with other scheduled trips). There are also ITU treatymaking meetings in Geneva and meetings for coordination, negotiation and development of international regulations concerning the use of space orbits and satellite spectrum. MBIE is already funding the membership fee for participation of NZ as Member State. There are three meetings per year (costing , a year). yrupqmdi s ()(f)(iv) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Domestic coordination Providing the secretariat to an inter agency senior officials group which will comprise the domestic coordination committee.The lead space policy agency will have this function.New None The resourcing implications are likely to be similar to other policy coordination functions such as coordinating the Business Growth Agenda senior officials groups, and will be managed from within the lead space policy teams budget. Regulatory functions Activities Agencies New or expanded functionsActivities to be carried out before the first test launchResourcing implications (short termlongterm) Authorisation function: space launch, payloads and satellites, and national security risk assessmentThe development and administration of a licensing regimeThe authorisation function will be located with the lead space policy agency. The New Zealand Intelligence Community will provide advice in relation to national securityNew Yes For the initial test launch the costs of these functions are being met from within agency baselines. Once the legislation is passed, the costs associated with the authorisation function will be recovered through a licence fee. However, it is likely to be impractical and inequitable to recover all of the set up costs of establishing the authorisation regime from Rocket Lab and some of these costs need to be met through Crown funding. Registration of space objectsCollecting and keeping a record of information about the time of launch, the general functions of the payloadssatellites and their orbital parameters.Space regulatory agencyNew Yes Same as above Monitoring and enforcementEnsuring compliance with New Zealands domestic space law, our obligations under international treaties and bilateral agreements. Activities will include assessing information provided by Rocket Lab and its clients and physical inspections of Rocket Labs premises. Space regulatory agency with support from New Zealand Intelligence Community New None Same as above yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Accident investigation Activities required for New Zealand to meet its domestic statutory responsibilities and to comply with the TSA obligationsDepends on the nature of the accident, but likely to involve one or more of Police, Work Safe New Zealand, Transport Accident Investigation Commission and Maritime NZNew in relation to space launch accidentsNone Costs of response and accident investigation likely to be met through general taxation Designation of secure areasDesignating certain areas of Rocket Labs facilities as secure areas with restricted access (To comply with the TSA and meet New Zealands security requirements) Space regulatory agencyNew Yes Same as for authorisation function Issuing of security cards Undertaking security checks and issuing security cards to control access to secure areas (To comply with the TSA and meet New Zealands security requirements)Space regulatory agencyNew Yes Same as for authorisation function Education, information and guidanceProvision of guidance about New Zealands regulatory regime for launching space objects. This is likely to include the development of a website as well as seminars and a number for queriesSpace regulatory agencyNew None (although we will be providing advice and information to Rocket Lab)Same as for authorisation function yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act
The requirement to licence all HAV activity would be inconsistent with the principle of ensuring that the costs of licensing are proportionate to the benefits and risks of the activity . A no exemptions approach adopts the presumption that all activity is risky. This would, however, pose a disproportionate compliance cost on low risk HAV operators which would not be consistent with the policy intent. Preferred option : exemptions for low risk HAV activit ies The preferred option will avoid capturing a high volume of low risk activit y, thu s allowing the regulator to focus on activities that pose the greatest risk. The preferred option reflect s the policy intent ion to establish a risk based and proportionate regime. Balloons that carry only radio sondes and any one or more of the following sondes: ozone sondes , frost point sondes, and or backscatter sondes , and the payload is solely used to measure weather , climate, and atmosphere or with devices that only track the progress of the balloon do not pose risks to national security and it is di fficult to If the activity qualifies for an exemption from an HAV licence, there will no additional costs in order to comply with current legislation . HAV activities not exempt will need to seek a licence, but these would be in the elevated risk category, precisely what the Act is regulating.
The requirements for MBIE branches to comply with the Model Standards for Information Gathering and Public Trust are set out in the MBIE Information Gathering Policy. Under the Policy the General Manager of each functional area which undertakes information gathering subject to the Model Standards is responsible for putting documented processes in place that ensure information gathering is compliant with the law, the policy and associated procedure, and agency risk management requirements.
The research also developed a hypothetical digital twin usecase for a built environment. The use case highlighted how digital twin technology could unlock more circular outcomes to achieve cost and resource savings. It also showed how digital twins could allow virtual trials of design changes, material and equipment choices, and infrastructure upgrades.
The research examined New Zealands economic system with a broad perspective. The analysis covered inputs and stocks of raw materials, energy, water, infrastructure and technology, finance, social capital, and human capabilities. It focused on the whole economy, and the sector areas of manufacturing, food, and the built environment which have the greatest potential for emissions reduction through circular approaches.
The research had a focus on the role of digital twins. A digital twin is a dynamic and interconnected digital representation of a physical asset or system, enabling comprehensive insights and informed decision making.
The research programme was undertaken to identify how New Zealand can:
The research ran scenarios to assess at a high level the impacts of converting some sheep and beef land use to forestry to increase bioenergy supply. While gross output rose and emissions fell in these scenarios, localised employment also fell.
The research reports below present findings from the and Community Surveys and include some trend data from the previous surveys.
The research was carried out by thinkstepanz, supported by Aurecon and the Sustainable Business Network.
The research was conducted by the Agribusiness and Economics Research Unit (AERU) at Lincoln University.
The response data is not weighted.
The response included completing rapid building assessments to establish the usability of buildings and the safety of neighbouring properties, local infrastructure and protect the safety of affected communities.
The rest () were partners of work visa and student visa holders.
The resulting report provides an overview of feedback from RBAs on how they were prepared for deployment, including the training, communication, resources and tools they received. It also examines the processes used for deployment, conducting assessments and for ensuring the wellbeing of the RBAs.
The results of a survey conducted in June of Registered Engineering Associates on their views on raising the annual registration fee.
The review also found that most commercial and public appetite was for forecasts rather than observational (raw) weather data.
The review also noted that the benefits and commercial viability of those innovations were unclear, and that there would be costs to making data more available.
The review assesses if any adjustments to treatment payments are required to take account of changes in the costs of rehabilitation. Previously, the review was conducted on a yearly basis. A biennial cycle was put in place to allow ACC to better understand impacts of previous rate increases, in addition to collecting regular information on the cost pressures impacting providers.
The review concluded that making raw observational data more accessible would likely increase gain for mainly commercial users, while legislative reforms would require significant public resources and come at a cost to taxpayers. These costs would likely outweigh any wider benefits for New Zealanders at this time.
The review considered main questions:
The review costs rates are set out in the Accident Compensation (Review Costs and Appeals) Regulations (the Regulations) and are paid for by ACC.
The review covers a year period, from November , when the adventure activity regulations were fully in place, to December , the day of the eruption.
The review examined both regulatory settings and the roles and responsibilities of organisations involved in the implementation of the regime.
The review found areas for improvement in the regime including:
The review found that domestic marketing can have a positive influence on offseason travel, regionally dispersed travel, and other longstanding tourism challenges. However, concerns were raised as to whether central Government can justify investment in domestic marketing now borders have reopened and whether central Government should encourage spend in one domestic sector over another. Regional tourism organisations continue to market domestically as normal and have an important role to play in doing so.
The review found that most data reuse principles are being met by NIWA and MetService. MetService has also informed the Treasury and our Ministry that it is making changes to further increase accessibility and reusability of observational weather data.
The review has resulted in ANZSRC , which includes new Divisions for Indigenous studies (in Fields of Research) and Indigenous (in SocioEconomic Objectives), as well as newly defined FoR Divisions for Biomedical and Clinical Sciences and Health Sciences and newly defined SEO Divisions for Environmental Management and Environmental Policy, Climate Change and Natural Hazards.
The review identified that some barriers existed to data availability in New Zealand and that licence restrictions might be limiting innovation and economic opportunities in valueadded products and services using weather data.
The review into open access to weather data aimed to identify if a level of governmentheld data, above that already available, should be more accessible to the public to encourage innovation in New Zealand and promote economic growth. It also considered how observational weather data made available by MetService and NIWA complied with the New Zealand Data and Information Management Principles.
The review is named Project Hau Nuku, which means shifting winds.
The review of ticket reselling in New Zealand is an opportunity to look at how consumers are being affected by ticket reselling practices, and to consider whether further action is required to ensure consumers are wellprotected and have fair access to tickets.
The review was not assessing the performance of Tourism New Zealand in marketing domestically whilst the international borders were closed, but rather determining the benefits and challenges for central government marketing tourism to New Zealanders.
The review was undertaken by the Sapere Research Group, with oversight from the Treasury, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) and the Ministry of Transport. The reviewer engaged with over stakeholders and received significant input from MetService, NIWA and key stakeholders.
The review was undertaken to update the classification to reflect changes in research and development activity that have occurred since the joint classification was first released in .
The reviews recommended introducing interpreting standards in New Zealand to improve the quality and consistency of the interpreting services provided to people who need to use interpreters so they can interact safely and effectively with New Zealand government agencies.
The risk review process aligns with other regulatory assessments and previous policy decisions, including the payload permitting principles agreed by Cabinet in . Officials are commencing a process to consider amendments to the risk review process in light of the values and objectives from the National Space Policy, approved by Cabinet in April , and feedback from the Space Policy Review public consultation.
The rocket was launched on March ; however, the launch was unsuccessful due to a technical failure. On the request of the licence holder, the licence was revoked on June .
The role and objectives of the Taskforce
The role of a neutral third party
The role of government is to steer the system in the right direction. Government works as a steward, looking across the tourism system to make sure it is working effectively and supporting the industry to thrive..
The role of religious organisations in preventionintervention
The sc hools payroll pays approximately , employees in around , schools across collective agreements. This amounts to approximately million per pay period and . billion per annum.
The scheduled year review of the Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities Act (OSHAA) is now complete. This technical and operational review assessed the performance of the Act against its objectives, and considered how it might be improved operationally.
The scheme is freeofcharge for property owners and consumers to use. It relates only to disputes arising from the use, or intended use, of the statutory rights of access granted by the Amendment Act for shared property.
The scheme is no longer accepting new applicants.
The scheme only handles disputes for shared land or buildings (eg, land and buildings in which multiple parties have an ownership interest) for which a statutory right of access is being exercised by a network operator.
The scheme will be funded by levies on wages and salaries, with both workers and employers paying an estimated . each. These are estimates and will be reviewed after two years. They may need to be adjusted from time to time, depending on the number of claims and how long people receive financial support. This is the same way ACC levies work.
The scheme will have a userfriendly RD definition, a credit rate of per cent, a million cap on eligible expenditure, and a minimum RD expenditure threshold of , per year.
The scheme will pay workers of their salary for up to six months. If they can remain in parttime work with the employer, the scheme will top them up to of their usual salary.
The scheme will require people to look for work or take part in training and rehabilitation. It will be funded by levies on wages and salaries, with both workers and employers paying an estimated . each. ACC will manage the scheme.
The scheme would be funded by levies on wages and salaries, with both workers and employers paying an estimated . each. Do you think the levies are good value for the protection and benefits the scheme would introduce for you and for New Zealand
The scholarship covers specified costs relating to the internships as follows:
The science and innovation systems are critical to boosting the number of knowledgeintensive, internationallyconnected firms. We are working to lift business expenditure on research and development, improve the benefits to the wider economy from business development assistance, and harness the potential of the digital economy.
The science and research relationship between New Zealand and Korea is underpinned by a Science and Technology Cooperation Agreement signed in . We regularly hold joint funding rounds, most recently in focused on artificial intelligence, new materials, and health technologies.
The scope of the RSE policy review includes the following:
The screen industry covers a wide range of businesses, including:
The second package of Fair Pay Agreements Regulations were on May and can be found on the New Zealand Legislation website. These regulations were repealed on December .
The second phase is to make legislative and operational improvements to increase businesses certainty and public confidence in WorkSafe.
The second phase of the Rural Broadband Initiative (RBI) is extending highspeed broadband to more than , households and businesses in rural and remote areas.
The second phase of the Tourism ITP focused on the environment and tourism.
The second work package looks at the combustion side of a rocket engine. As is often the case with complex RD, this work package looks quite different from what we initially planned. We initially looked at complex chemistry schemes to understand the reaction rate of our propellants, but weve switched the focus to injector design. Its a testament to our great partnership that we can adapt plans as necessary.
The selfcertification scheme will be a voluntary initiative through which eligible building companies, plumbers and drainlayers can sign off on their own work on simple homes. The scheme is expected to free up capacity in the building consent system by allowing BCAs to focus on higherrisk, complex work.
The selfemployed are a diverse group. Some depend on a few contracts (such as ridesharing, courier drivers or construction subcontractors), while others (like independent tradespeople) work for many clients. We want to protect people who genuinely lose work for reasons beyond their control, while not covering people who may choose to close their work down in order to access the scheme.
The settlement experience of Pacific migrants to New Zealand: Insights from LISNZ and the IDI PDF .MB
The settlement outcomes of migrant youth
The settlement outcomes of migrant youth a bibliography of New Zealand and international literature
The settlement outcomes of migrant youth: A bibliography of New Zealand and international literature
The settlement outcomes of migrant youth:A bibliography of New Zealand and international litrature.
The seventh round of the Tourism Infrastructure Fund opens on April .
The six successful projects were recommended by a combined international and domestic panel of experts, and will each receive up to , over three years (excluding GST). We received proposals in total from a wide variety of organisations, showing a promising foundation for future initiatives.
The snapshots present key statistics on:
The solution that Dr Longdell and his collaborators are working on aims to combine special crystals that absorb photons and release them again on demand, with a light source that generates these entangled photon pairs.
The space economy and New Zealand
The start and end of the funding contract with us (Contract start and Contract end )
The statutory review of the Act did not suggest any changes to the national interest provisions in the Act or its regulations but did recommend that the Minister considers developing more specific national interest criteria.
The strategy and direction of Tiaki is guided by a collective of seven organisations across public and private sectors and an independent Tikanga Advisor, while organisations right across the tourism industry help to bring the kaupapa to life.
The strategy has fulfilled its vision when:
The structure and processes of the IEF are determined by a statue that took effect in .
The study addressed main topics:
The subsectors mapped were:
The submissions report contains a summary of the consultation feedback.
The survey covered advisers who had application decisions made between July and October . The survey was online between and November .
The survey found that of the homes that met the survey criteria had structural repair work carried out that was noncompliant with the Building Code. An additional homes were assessed as having minor repair defects.
The survey of individuals was conducted with the support of an independent provider whose role included collecting and analysing the information.
The survey of individuals was launched in November and closed in February .
The survey of organisations was launched in November and closed in March .
The survey was conducted by Gravitas Research Strategy for the Migration Evidence and Insights team.
The survey will remain open for your contribution until
The surveys of organisations and individuals were codesigned with the support of a Technical Advisory Group comprised of members of the RSI sector, including human resources experts, researchers and statisticians.
The table below outlines the individual members of the Holidays Act Taskforce and which organisation they were representing.
The targeted review involved analysis of the regulations and their implementation, along with natural hazard analysis. It also involved engagement with key stakeholders involved in implementing the regime.
The targeted review noted there are also a number of systemlevel issues in the design of the adventure activities regulatory system requiring more consideration. These include that:
The targeted review of the adventure activities regulatory regime was conducted between August and December and considered whether weaknesses exist in the regime where adventure activities take place in naturally hazardous environments.
The team works with MFAT to negotiate and implement the labour chapters of a range of trade agreements and closer economic partnerships.
The telecommunications service obligations (TSO) regulatory framework enables specific telecommunications services to be available and affordable.
The telecommunications service obligations (TSO) regulatory framework established under the Telecommunications Act enables specific telecommunications services to be available and affordable.
The telephone and video interpreting service is available to participating government agencies through a government contract.
The telephone and video interpreting services are provided through a panel of providers in over languages:
The temporary migrant worker exploitation review: A summary of changes PDF KB
The terms of reference for the Review can be accessed here:
The theme highlights scientific research dedicated to inclusivity at all stages of career development. This goal additionally incorporates all facets of society in an effort to shape a more balanced world. This may include research that encourages the increased societal connectivity of underserved and marginalized populations, promotes selfsustaining ecosystems, or achieves solutions to mitigate public health risks.
The third package of MBIE RSABs
The third phase is to work on a regulatory relief package to address sector specific pain points.
The three p arts of the transition plan are an implementation period, transition and savings provisions (which are not a priority for the exposure draft) and information and education
The threshold will initially be set at , per annum of base pay, and will be annually
The threshold will not be adjusted for parttime employment (i.e. an employee working hours per week and earning , will not be considered above the threshold).
The time period for both data series extends up to the March year before the release year. The industry breakdown is only available for all the years before the last year of the series.
The timeframe for submissions on this discussion document has now closed. The documents relating to submissions and a PDF version of the discussion document are available on the following page:
The trade labour framework PDF
The transfer of innovation functions and disestablishment of Callaghan Innovation.
The transitional period for employees on existing employment agreements will end:
The two tiered choice for employees may create a further disincentive for employers to negotiate transfer of employment. Provides employees a clear cut choice following a choice to transfer employment, between receiving payment for outstanding leave entitlements or having them recognised by incoming employer and retaining the ability to take the time off work. . Legislative change that requires the treatment of leave entitlements to be included in Employee Protection Provisions as a matter that the outgoing employer will negotiate with the incoming employer . The matters that will be negotiated would be expanded from the transfer of employment on the same terms and conditions to also include: whether or not employment will be treated as continuous for the purpose of determining the employees service related entitlements (including leave entitlements under the Holidays Act and rights and benefits under the PLEPA) , whether or not the new employer will recognise all or part of the employees annual and alternative holiday entitlements not taken or exchanged for payment before the of transfer (instead of the outgoing employer paying them out in accordance with the Holidays Act provisions) , whether or not the new employer will recognise all or part of an employees FBS leave entitlements not taken or exchanged for payment before the of transfer , whether or not, where recognition of annual leave and alternative holiday and FBS leave entitlements is negotiated, an employee will be provided a choice in the matter or it will be automatic if they choose to transfer their employment , how liability will be apportioned between the employers in relation to what employers have negotiated (guidance could also be provided to support this), and how relevant employee information in relation to what employers have negotiated will be provided to the incoming employer (guidance could also be provided to support this) . Provide that the payment rate for transferred leave entitlements must not be les s than what it would be if it were paid out in accordance with the Holidays Act at the time of the transfer. Requires a more significant adjustment to the current Cabinet policy decision as, unlike options three and four, it departs from the Taskforces recommendation to require employers to provide a choice to employees. Legislation provides clarity about legal requirements.
The types of dispute resolution sit along a spectrum of formality and empowerment, as shown in the image below.
The use of analogies or similarities between the observed association and any other associations.
The use of the framework can also address gaps in our understanding of how occupational diseases impact different population groups in Aotearoa New Zealand. As part of using this framework, independent researchers and medical experts will be expected to take a gendersensitive approach (as recommended by the ILO
The views and opinions expressed in these articles are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of the New Zealand Space Agency.
The volume of complaints regarding migrant exploitation has now evened out, and further information and education activity is planned for early to ensure ongoing awareness of options for reporting and notification.
The way in which disputes are resolved and the nature of the outcomes can also affect public confidence in government services and perceptions of quality and fairness.
The way we work expands with increased choices of work settings including collaborative or focused spaces. These spaces positively impact on how we engage and interact with our working environment, colleagues, people leaders, the wider organisation, and our customers. This includes working from home, other MBIE offices, and other locations.
The wider bioeconomy accounts for at least a quarter of all employment in New Zealand depending on how you think about tertiary sectors and service providers. When you look at the New Zealand bioeconomy and the jobs that it creates, the core bioeconomy creates of all jobs in New Zealand. Other related things like supermarkets, food servers, garden supplies, other retailers, pharmacy etc, that sell biomaterials brings you up to of the economy. Research done on the US, which was really good research done on the US, shows that in the US for every job in this core bioeconomy, as we have defined it, another job was created supporting it and that is very clear in the New Zealand context as well. Arguably, and we would stand by it, probably of jobs in New Zealand rely on the bioeconomy one way or another. If you think about things like advertising agencies or banks.
The winning entry will receive a cash prize of USD, from the publishers Wiley and Elsevier. The prize will be awarded at a ceremony hosted by the United States of America in August .
The work considered whether weaknesses exist in the adventure activities regime when adventure activities take place in naturallyhazardous environments.
The work health and safety regulatory system is made up of the:
The work of the ILO is to:
The work of the RSLGs has been valuable for not only regional stakeholders and partners but also government agencies and will be useful for future skills planning.
The workforce surveys were conducted in parts. A survey of organisations collected information about the makeup of the workforce and organisational policies. A survey of individuals collected qualitative information about skills and experience, learning and development opportunities, connections and collaboration, diversity and inclusion, and challenges facing the sector.
Then I was going to mention Next Space here as well, because we have a range of different vendors doing things around digital twins. Next space is one of them, its got a cloudbased platform, where you can actually connect a lot of different data streams, using AI and predictive analytics. One of the challenges with digital twins is that we have data in different formats. And by allowing that to be analysed in a way we can pull them together. So AI is really opening up the opportunity for digital twins to connect different modes of large data.
Then we have this example of the fish oil shows, Antler Farms, is an excellent example of a product making clear, strong product claims. They are making lots of claims around their product on their website.
There are main components in a Destination Management Plan.
There are main components in a Destination Management plan. These components have been developed using international research, government frameworks and industry consultation. Use the descriptions and questions in each component to focus thinking, stimulate discussion and identify gaps, opportunities and areas for further investigation.
There are professional membership associations specifically for dispute resolution practitioners:
There are ways that you can send this information to us.
There are agencies represented in the APO, including:
There are pay systems across Health NZ which, along with the level of payroll competence, vary significantly in quality. The capacity of funded organisations to implement changes also varies.
There are facilities, all of which are exportaccredited and open access:
There are a few large private dispute resolution providers, but most are sole practitioners.
There are a growing number of local, national, and transnational networks, hubs, and institutes designed to support knowledge exchange, innovation, and adoption of circular practices. Examples include the Circularity Accelerator (World Green Building Council), the Ellen MacArthur Foundation, the Circular Economy Initiative (CEI) Action group, Circular Australia, and the Holland Circular Hotspot.
There are a number of initiatives underway across government that are helping address energy hardship. This section includes some initiatives MBIE is progressing based on recommendations in the Electricity Price Review.
There are a number of pathways into the NAATI Certification System:
There are a range of educational missions that we have approved payloads for; this includes for students in Mexico, Australia and several U.S. academic institutions who have developed and built CubeSats that we launched in New Zealand. Some of their missions encapsulate research and development and remote sensing purposes and include:
There are a range of other opportunities to enhance the value and outcomes derived from the bioeconomy including:
There are a wide range of science and innovation funding streams within government.
There are also joint operational situations where public servants operating under different legislative authorities may gather and share information while working together to achieve outcomes. For example, regulators coordinating enforcement action (either across or within agencies) or agencies working together to manage a security threat. Any joint operation requires governance, and determination of the lead agency and reporting requirements in advance of the operation.
There are also public accountability agencies that are partly or wholly focused on complaints to or about government, for example the Ombudsman whose primary role is to investigate complaints against government agencies.
There are at least different dispute resolution schemes or procedures in Aotearoa New Zealand. These cover areas as diverse as consumer protection, employment, property and building and human rights.
There are choices to make around what is shared and how widely it is shared
There are longstanding issues in the building and construction sector. These affect build quality and hold back productivity and innovation. A number of initiatives across government and industry are addressing the complex challenges through a reform of the building regulatory system and building and construction sector.
There are many options for cooperation with different costs and benefits. These can range from sharing information and ideas through to adopting the same laws or policy settings.
There are many underlying, and often complex, causes of energy hardship and any solution will need to address these issues across a number of fronts.
There are more than . million ORCID iDs in use internationally and many New Zealand researchers already have one.
There are no current vacancies.
There are opportunities and implications for future productivity and wellbeing outcomes for New Zealanders. There may be a role for government to help ensure the future outcomes that businesses and New Zealanders more broadly want to achieve, are aligned.
There are opportunities to grow our satellite design and manufacturing capability and our space science, technology and engineering research activity. Some of our universities are actively involved in spacerelated research. Government agencies, such as Callaghan Innovation, are also involved in encouraging research and development.
There are other pathways available too. Space law is set to be a complex and necessary field in coming years, while studying space science more generally can provide in depth and tailored experience in the field.
There are requirements associated with this right to refuse to work on Easter Sunday for both employers and employees. Find out what
There are risks in adopting the Taskforces full set of recommendations, but these can be partly mitigated . It is likely that the Taskforces recommendations will receive negative feedback, particularly from employers. For example, it is anticipated that employers and payroll providers will be disappointed that an hours based accrual system is not proposed and w ill react negatively to the level of complexity in the Taskforces recommendations.
There are two broad option s for consultation:
There have been delays with the procurement process due to the complexity of the cyber security assessment. It is crucial to ensure that our providers can safeguard data, manage potential risks, and maintain compliance with industry regulations.
There is a growing number of domestic and international standards relating to circular economy. Standards are a key enabler of circular economy transition for many reasons, including setting foundational definitions and principles, ensuring minimum quality and safety of new products, embedding circular economy principles in product design, and providing market access to new producers.
There is a penalty of up to , for knowingly providing false or misleading information, and registration can be cancelled. Registration details are made available on this website and at our head office.
There is a range of strong economic arguments for this platform, why this platform, why are we looking at it Obviously, it is an important ingredient. It is a highvalue output, which we mentioned earlier. It has proven capability with people investing in the sector. It is an extensible platform in that it can be made into a range of ingredients, perfumes etc. It has a big opportunity for import substitution.
There is a spike in the MED standard output for unknown industries for the period of October to November . This spike originates from the Inland Revenue Employment Monthly Schedule (IR EMS) data. This does not significantly affect any of the industry outputs.
There is a wide range of digital technologies that can enable a circular economy and bioeconomy in New Zealand. These include artificial intelligence, big data analytics, internet of things, D printing, digital engineering, digital twins and digital product passports for traded goods. You can read an overview of the roles that they can play in the report Digital Technologies, Digital Twins and the circular and bioeconomy available below. The report was developed through research by Aurecon, Sustainable Business Network and Thinkstepanz
There is already a lot of work underway
There is also a wide range of other current and potential stakeholders that would be interested in the opportunity to grow this platform.
There is also another one we dont have, which is a really nice public building, thats a digital twin.
There is also growing global attention to the bioeconomy for the opportunity it presents to support more sustainable economic activity and natural resource use, including the International Advisory Council on Global Bioeconomy (IACGB) and the Global Bioeconomy Alliance (universities).
There is another set of regulations that clarifies which vehicles are considered HAVs. This is called the Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities (Definition of Highaltitude Vehicle) Regulations .
There is no legislative requirement to review the Outer Space and High altitude Activities (Definition of High altitude Vehicle) Regulations and Outer Space and High altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations , but these will be considered wit hin the Review to ensure the regime as a whole is operating effectively.
There is no solution that will produce a payment outcome that reflects precisely what an employee would have earned on a specific day in all situations, but I consider that the consolidated calculation will, overall, provide a fair outcome for both employe rs and employees . The exposure draft will provide an opportunity to test the proposal with stakeholders.
There needs to be more Pacific representation and inclusivity within the banking and finance sector. This is important for fostering trust and relatability between Pacific communities and the financial sector.
There should also be clear rules to calculate the amount of leave being used, and whether leave is available . The Taskforce recommends a prescriptive process to determine how much leave needs to be deducted from an employees entitlement in order for an emp loyee to
There was no limit imposed on the number of roles an individual could perform in an Endeavour application, therefore some applications may have listed more than one person in each role.
There will also be some other obligations that will apply differently to BNPL lenders to ensure they are workable:
There will be funding rounds:
There will be a month transitional period for employees on existing employment agreements
There will be a month transitional period for employees on existing employment agreements. During the transitional period, employees on existing employment agreements will retain the ability to raise an unjustified dismissal personal grievance. This is intended to provide an opportunity for employers and existing employees to negotiate appropriate terms and conditions before the income threshold applies, if they wish.
There will be an implementation period between when a Bill is passed and when it comes into force. The targeted consultation included a question about what a reasonable time would be for the required system changes to be made. The Government will consider this feedback before final policy decisions are made.
There will be no distortions to incoming employers decisions as to whether or not to transfer employment.
There will be no interruption to the Jobs Online processing schedule resulting from this processing change.
There will be opportunities for input during the Review and we would like to hear a range of views. Any public consultation will be notified on the MBIE website.
These Acts made changes in important areas:
These BIMs were prepared for Ministers due to a Cabinet reshuffle following the resignation of Prime Minister John Key in December . These documents were proactively released. Redactions made to the documents were made consistent with provisions of the Official Information Act .
These BIMs were prepared for Ministers due to a Cabinet reshuffle in January . These documents have been proactively released. Redactions made to the documents were made consistent with provisions of the Official Information Act .
These BIMs were prepared for Ministers due to a Cabinet reshuffle in June . These documents were proactively released. Redactions made to the documents were made consistent with provisions of the Official Information Act .
These BIMs were prepared for Ministers following the general election. These documents have been proactively released. Redactions made to the documents have been made consistent with provisions of the Official Information Act .
These BIMs were prepared for Ministers following the general election. These documents have been proactively released. Redactions made to the documents have been made consistent with provisions of the Official Information Act .
These BIMs were prepared for Ministers following the general election. These documents have been proactively released. Redactions made to the documents have been made consistent with provisions of the Official Information Act .
These agreements include the Outer Space Treaty, the Rescue Agreement, the Liability Convention and the Registration Convention:
These alternative approaches have responded to the need for:
These amendments are part of the NationalACT coalition agreement commitment to give greater weight to the intention of contracting parties, where parties enter a contract for services.
These and other global alliances are supporting the development of international agreements that support the transition from the current linearbased economy to a more circular economy. Examples include the UN Global Plastics Treaty, where nations have agreed to develop a legally binding agreement on plastic pollution by , which will reduce greenhouse gas emissions from plastic production, use and disposal.
These approvals have almost doubled in number in the last years.
These are set out here and include a fixed toilet:
These are set out in the Regulations and include a fixed toilet:
These case studies provide best practice examples for agencies to consider in improving their provision of dispute resolution services.
These challenges, the problem we are trying to solve lead to the strategic themes, and this is how we devised that scorecard that would allow us to say which of the products made sense in our future. We are going to need more biomass in the bioeconomy in the future, we are going to need to increase our valueadd, we are going to need to build resilience, resilience we have seen from COVID, we have seen through war in the Ukraine, we are trying to build both regional resilience and resilience in our system to shocks. At the same time, we need to reduce agricultural greenhouse gas emissions, we need to replace fossil fuels and we need to rethink waste. Those there really stood out as we looked at different platforms this was the scorecard that we used against them.
These changes are outlined in the Quick Guide and the Implementation Update:
These changes are reflected in the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance (Buy Now, Pay Later) Amendment Regulations and will come into force on September . The delayed commencement of these regulations is to ensure BNPL lenders are able to comply fully with the CCCFA.
These changes involve amendments to the Health and Safety at Work (Adventure Activities) Regulations , and updates to the Adventure Activities Safety Audit Standard and guidance materials by WorkSafe.
These changes will ensure businesses know what to do to comply with the laws and regulations.
These changes will require new legislation which is expected to be introduced in the year.
These communities were identified because of the high dependence on international tourism in their local economies as a result of COVID.
These documents were proactively released. Redactions made to the documents were made consistent with provisions of the Official Information Act .
These economic challenges are likely to become more frequent. Technology could replace more jobs currently done by people, or replace the products and goods we produce. The move to a lowemissions economy will see significant changes in how we do things, and some industries, like oil and gas, will be replaced by others over time. Changing consumer demands, an ageing population and increasing globalisation will all contribute to big shifts in what work we do, what things we produce and what skills we need.
These guidelines were developed over and through significant engagement with highuse agencies before being taken to the Language Assistance Services Programme InterAgency Working Group for further feedback. The Guidelines were endorsed by the Senior Officials Group responsible for the oversight of the New Zealand Migrant Settlement Integration Strategy and the New Zealand Refugee Resettlement Strategy in mid.
These have emerged from Stage II, partly in conjunction with our client are the ones to take forward, it was not a numeric process it was a joint decision with the advisory group.
These links provide definitions of the entities we monitor.
These modules are also available through the Leadership Development Centre.
These objectives will be achieved through a range of legislative, operational and regulatory changes to transform performance across the system.
These online learning modules are designed for public servants in customer facing roles, or for public servants who are likely to work with people where they do not share a language. They have been developed by the Ministry for Ethnic Communities with support from the MBIE Language Assistance Services team and other organisations.
These organisations will have an increased focus on economic outcomes while delivering the critical stewardship and public good science and science services needed for a wellfunctioning modern economy.
These pages describe what Destination Management (DM) is and how to go about creating a DM plan for your region or community. They provide suggestions on components that could be included in a plan and questions to stimulate discussion and identify gaps, opportunities and areas for further investigation.
These papers have been produced or commissioned by us and contain important insights on issues relevant to our policy portfolios.
These partnerships are being designed through a process of negotiation between the partners (generally research funding agencies and other public authorities of EU member states and Associated Countries) and the European Commission. The outcome of these negotiations will determine the work programme and activities for the partnership, how the funding is allocated, and what opportunities there are for New Zealanders to get involved.
These payment times are every months.
These principles underpin flexible working arrangements at MBIE:
These projects tackle important societal challenges; how will this collaboration give you an advantage in this area
These protections include the ability for an employee to elect to transfer to a new employer on their existing terms and conditions. For example, if the business they work for is sold, or a contract for services is changed to a different service provider.
These regulations do the following:
These regulations prescribe persons who provide fibre fixed line access services as being subject to information disclosure regulation and pricequality regulation. As a result of being prescribed in these regulations, the persons become regulated fibre service providers under the Act.
These reports are designed for use by government, investors, and businesses and have a focus on near term investmentready opportunities and what is required for New Zealand to be internationally competitive.
These rules have not changed under the SelfContained Motor Vehicles Legislation Act:
These services receive funding from the Telecommunications Development Levy and are delivered by a contracted provider, Concentrix Services (New Zealand) Limited.
These social media tiles feature the following message in a range of languages, Do you need language support when calling government services Ask for an interpreter
These systemlevel issues will be considered as part of a first principles review of the regulations beginning in .
These temporary rates will apply until such time as regulations setting out the interest rate and waiver circumstances are made. MBIE and ACC intend to consult on these, subject to Cabinet approval, later this year.
These terms of reference describe the purpose, role, functions, membership, systems and processes of the Startup Advisors Council (Council).
These terms of use may be any time without notice.
These videos are available on the business.govt.nz website and YouTube channel.
These web pages are a guide only. They should not be used as a substitute for legislation or legal advice. The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment is not responsible for the results of any actions taken on the basis of information in these web pages, or for any errors or omissions.
They always had a passion for space, and would love to take on the role, but with a mortgage and two children, Angeli is nervous to trade their secure job and enter a new industry. The introduction of an income insurance scheme provides them with the security they need. Angeli takes the risk, and, two years later, is still working for the same company as one of their lead rocket engineers.
They can often achieve faster outcomes at a lower cost. Parties are also more likely to be satisfied with the result and compliance rates are likely to be higher, so less enforcement should be required.
They could develop fresh fruit and vegetables that are more resilient to pests and diseases. This would mean more food ends up on the table and lessen the bin.
They may also include other bills that address matters that would be considered by a different select committee than the above bills, such as building and housing.
They will maximise the value of public investment and create a more dynamic science, innovation and technology system that can respond to priorities and keep pace with technological advances.
Third parties (eg compliance certifiers, inspection bodies)
Thirdparty fundraisers are commercial businesses used by many charities to raise funds. They are either professional fundraisers who are contracted by charities to raise donations or commercial operators that have an association with a charity and donate a portion of their profits from selling a good or service.
Thirtyeight percent of the Pacific population in was born overseas the largest numbers were born in Fiji and Samoa. Pacific migrants tend to settle in Auckland for employment opportunities and its large Pacific communities. Employed Pacific migrants are overrepresented in lower skilled occupations, such as labourers, and machinery operators and drivers, and are underrepresented in higher skilled occupations, such as managers and professionals.
This million fund is helping tourism businesses to develop digital strategies, access digital tools and benefit from existing government digital enablement initiatives. The fund is split between two separate initiatives.
This million Regional Events Fund is designed to stimulate the domestic tourism market by supporting existing events to continue to operate, or supporting new events to form.
This BIM was prepared following the appointment of a new Minister for Media and Communications.
This Briefing is available as an accessible web version and PDF:
This Government is focussed on helping more Kiwis into work and giving them greater opportunities to realise their potential.
This MBIE scheme will build on our excellent science and research teaching to build key skills in the workforce and create additional opportunities to address sector needs. It will enable more students to use their theoretical knowledge to respond to practical problems in realworld environments.
This Memorandum of Cooperation (MOC) will enable the exchange of information to support the administration and enforcement of the domestic immigration laws of both New Zealand and Japan.
This Policy aligns with the following MBIE guiding principles:
This Policy applies to all employees of MBIE who come into contact with children or young people as part of their role.
This Scheme aims to equip as many rural and remote New Zealanders as possible with the connectivity infrastructure needed to access broadband services where they live.
This Subpart provides specified employees who are affected by certain restructuring situations, such as a company being sold or a contract being transferred, with the option to transfer to the new employer on the same terms and conditions.
This allows for products at the end of their useful lives to be given a completely new life, while also preserving the maximum value. Remanufacturing contributes to conserving the materials within products and helps prevent the generation of waste.
This also benefits employers as it contributes to New Zealand becoming a higher productivity economy where businesses generate more value and greater returns. It helps maintain consumer spending through economic shocks, and keeps people connected to their employers.
This announcement follows government consideration of the first report of the Science System Advisory Group.
This approa ch provides the flexibility for employers to adopt a range of approaches that best suit their specific business circumstances . It is intended to support co mmon practice and would provid e certainty about legal obligations in restructuring situations. It will minimise the risk of distorting the negotiation process between employers. It would also require but maintain flexibility around the commercial negotiation about the apportionment of liability and transfer of employee information . The proposal includes a safeguard for situations where an employee transfers employment on a lower rate of pay so the value of transferred leave entitlements is not affected .
This can be considered if relevant.
This commentary presents the national context for tourism in the year ending March (and for the March quarter where available). The main tourism measures are showing slight growth across the New Zealand tourism industry, strengthened by growth in visitors from outside the top six markets, as well as relatively favourable exchange rates.
This consultation is now closed.
This consultation is now closed. The following information is a record of work done until .
This creates a liability risk for an employer. The liability arises because leave in advance is unearned and payment made for it is above what the employee would be entitled to be paid out for AL if employment ended. MBIEs stakeholder Working Group raised concern about the difficulties for employers to recover overpayments . Rescind the Cabinet decision. I consider that the new requirement to allow an employee to access the accruing amount of AL entitlement during a closedown period is a fair balance of interests. Determining use of AL Methodology for determining hours an employee would have worked on a day of leave A core part of the new methodologies Cabinet agreed to in for determining the use of leave entitlements was a formula for determining the number of hours an employee who does not have clear daily hours would have worked on a day of leave.
This data dictionary details the various outputs produced by the MED process, defines the variables observed in the data, and provides a comprehensive list of all categories encountered in the data.
This data dictionary provides information on the sectoral output for the Migrant Employment Data release.
This data, released on the January , includes final data till May and provisional data to October .
This dataset allows you to download and analyse the diversity data we have collected from applicants and assessors since . It provides a picture of the diversity of our funding applications, whether successful or not, by fund, year, and information type. This information is annually.
This declaration enables us to ensure that appropriate measures can be taken to prevent or limit any direct or indirect harm that may result as a consequence of technologies of special interest being used in our investments.
This decrease was driven by a decline in new approvals from India (our second largest source country), which more than offset a rise in new approvals from China (our largest source country).
This diagram contains the parties with regulatory functions. From top to bottom, they are:
This diagram illustrates key steps in the ongoing DM process. In order, these are listed as:
This diagram shows where New Zealand tourism data is sourced from, what method has been used to compile it, and the relationship the sources have to each other.
This document explains the variables used in our weekly oil price monitoring.
This document is a guide only. It should not be used as a substitute for legislation or legal advice. The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment is not responsible for the results of any actions taken on the basis of information in this document, or for any errors or omissions.
This document is the culmination of a multiyear, multiagency work programme to increase the quality, quantity and accessibility of Language Assistance Services in Aotearoa New Zealand. It provides an overview of the operational policy requirements as well as best practice guidelines for public sector agencies and the services that they fund.
This evaluation is part of the monitoring of the performance of the Great Rides. It details how the New Zealand Cycle Trail Great Rides are impacting trail users, the communities in which the trails are located, and New Zealand as a whole.
This evaluation was designed to better understand how well the current system is aligned with its intended objectives and to explore the underlying causes of issues with its efficiency, predictability and effectiveness.
This exclusive right is based on the idea that intellectual property rights give people an opportunity to make a return on their investment in creativity or innovation. It also provides an incentive for creative or innovative activity that might not take place otherwise.
This exploratory research report provides insights into the supply chain of building products imported into New Zealand.
This file is monthly. It currently contains data from May through to
This former publicprivate taskforce was set up to lead the thinking on the future of tourism in New Zealand. Members consisted of crossgovernment and tourism sector representatives and led recommendations on further policy and regulatory reform in the sector.
This funding will support the development of aerospace technology capability, establishing enduring research partnerships with Germany and jointly contributing to solving global economic, environmental, and social challenges.
This glossary is a collection of terms used by policymakers, practitioners, and users of dispute resolution services in New Zealand.
This group delivers services that support the aspirations of New Zealanders.
This group has branches:
This group has branches:
This group works in partnership with business groups to enable them to deliver their objectives and portfolio obligations. Corporate and Digital Shared Services supports the stewardship obligations of the organisation including its medium and longterm sustainability, finance, health, capability and capacity.
This guidance covers the essential issues you need to consider for dispute resolution clauses when drafting a contract.
This guidance is intended for:
This guide provides practical advice and information to support government agencies and other organisations in Aotearoa New Zealand to better communicate with Culturally and Linguistically Diverse (CALD) communities.
This handbook is a practical guide to working with the Language Assistance Services Operational Policy from July when the NAATI standards were adopted across all public sector agencies and the services they fund. The handbook is organised as a series of information notes for staff, usually on the front line, working with people with limited English proficiency. This handbook explains how the policy from July works in practice.
This includes Cabinet papers and minutes, responses to requests under the Official Information Act , and lists of Ministerial documents.
This includes any workers who advertise services through your website.
This includes ensuring internet resources are managed in a way that supports the interests of New Zealand endusers of telecommunications services.
This includes ensuring that the work environment and location the employee works in is safe.
This includes looking at how the building regulatory system protects lives at an acceptable level of risk and cost.
This information has been developed for businesses and policy makers to support greater awareness about the growing number of policies and regulations being introduced in many countries. The overview draws on research conducted by Thinkstepanz, Aurecon and the Sustainable Business Network.
This information will be shared in accordance with our statutory powers, with appropriate caveats andor controls, and in compliance with the relevant legislation and any information sharing agreements with the other agency. This may include when we are considering and investigating compliance breaches, concerns, and initiating our own investigations or inquiries. We will take all practicable steps to verify information provided to third parties.
This initiative seeks to better prepare students for future careers in the New Zealand aerospace sector. This is a unique opportunity to work on worldleading NASA missions and science, alongside NASA scientists and engineers.
This investment will build important capability in our space sector, enable New Zealand researchers to work with worldleading atmospheric scientists, and make an important contribution to slowing global warming.
This is a million allocation, with an actual spend of . million, to offset the payment of tourism concession fees to the Department of Conservation. Fees have been waived for the period March until the end of June providing cash flow for tourism businesses but also maintaining investment in conservation that these fees normally contribute to. For more information see the announcement on June .
This is a hour service.
This is a hour service. The NZ Relay app is free to download from the App Store and Google Play Store and uses mobile data or a WiFi connection.
This is a complex area and including the option above in the exposure draft will provide the opportunit y to test it with stakeholders for practicality and any unintended consequences or further complexities we may not have considered.
This is a general course which focuses on the key aspects of understanding the role of interpreters and accessing and working through interpreters to ensure effective communication.
This is a new part of the our website and not all portfolios currently have content. We will add more information over time as the site is developed.
This is an example of aspirational and healthy life stylers, and we have a number of growing brands across this space, and this is just an example of some of them.
This is an important issue to explore. Although many young people navigate transitions from school to work, education or training, a significant proportion face barriers which prevent them from reaching their work goals and aspirations.
This is the Application Form for the Regional Tourism Boost Fund. This m contestable fund was set up in to support regions to attract more international visitors and encourage dispersal of international visitors around the country.
This is the overarching BIM, designed to provide ministers with information on our role, purpose and organisational structure.
This is the second cohort of Kiwi students selected to undertake inperson internships at JPL and the third cohort to undertake internships at Ames. The and JPL Internship Programme was offered online under the NASA JPL Covid remote working conditions.
This is the web version of the Destination Management Guidelines.
This is the web version of the Enhancing telecommunications regulatory and funding frameworks discussion document
This is the web version of the Governments Tourism Snapshot.
This is the web version of the Kitmap report.
This is the web version of the New Zealand Space and Advanced Aviation Strategy.
This is the web version of the discussion document Moving towards a financially sustainable mail service.
This is where a flexible working arrangement is part of your employment agreement. It describes a regular pattern of working hours, days, or location.
This list will be added to when new information is available.
This may be in order to carry out legislated functions or to assist another state sector agency fulfil its regulatory compliance, law enforcement, or protective security responsibilities.
This may include us receiving or requesting information from other people or agencies. Any such information will be gathered in accordance with our statutory powers or other lawful authority and in compliance with the relevant legislation and any information sharing agreements.
This means any company or individual can operate a business delivering letters as long as they meet the requirements of the Postal Services Act .
This means that employees earning over the threshold will not be able to raise an unjustified dismissal personal grievance claim. Employers and employees will be able to agree to opt back into unjustified dismissal protection before, or at any point during, the employment relationship.
This means that where the employer and employee agree to a set number of hours they are required to state those hours in the employment agreement.
This means that working arrangements which meet a new smaller set of criteria will be considered to be contracting arrangements (i.e. the workers would not be considered to be employees), and will not need to apply the full test in section of the Employment Relations Act .
This might be through shifting an existing industry to higher value, shifting the performance of large and interconnected industries, or scaling up high potential industries to be a larger part of our future economy.
This might be to help you complete a form or find some information on our website. We use a tool called GoTo Assist and it can be used to support any customers calling MBIE Customer Service Centre lines.
This notice must be given as soon as reasonably practicable. It also needs to be given before the earliest of either:
This opportunity is open to New Zealand research organisations for projects that align with the objective of developing enduring science and innovation collaborative partnerships with worldclass Chinese research organisations in the priority area of Environmental Technologies.
This outlines a number of proposed changes to teams across the Business and Consumer organisational structure.
This outlines the proposed approach to implement the Governments decision to cease funding and close the Consumer Advocacy Council as part of the Budget .
This page allows you to make an online request to us under the Official Information Act (OIA).
This page contains contact details for the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE).
This page contains individual page international tourism forecast summaries for each market.
This page explains the different regulatory system amendment bills that we have used to update legislation we administer.
This page explains the ways that countries can cooperate to improve the quality and effectiveness of domestic law. It includes case studies of cooperation in practice.
This page explains what dispute resolution is, why it is important and how it is practiced in New Zealand.
This page explains where you can go to resolve your dispute.
This page has information about space events for students across Aotearoa, competitions, and educational resources.
This page has information resources about the New Zealand screen sector.
This page has our tourism forecasts for major tourism markets, for the period.
This page is about the protection of new plant varieties and our review of the Plant Variety Rights Act .
This page lists current lay members appointed to the High Court for Commerce Act matters.
This page lists energy statistics and modelling publications, technical papers, reports and guides produced by us or for us.
This page lists only a few of the courses you might like to explore. There are many more on offer at universities throughout New Zealand. We endeavour to keep this content current, but as the information about these courses belong to third parties, we cannot guarantee it will not change. For the most up to information on what is available, check the university websites. These courses are not a guaranteed or endorsed pathway to a space career. The New Zealand Space Agency and MBIE do not endorse any particular course, university or organisation listed on this web page.
This page lists our consultations relating to health and safety.
This page lists the current postal operators in New Zealand and their postal identifiers and contact details.
This page outlines the methodology for the Modelled Territorial Authority Gross Domestic Product estimates of annual GDP estimates for territorial authority areas and industry groups.
This page provides a summary of the submissions MBIE received on the Recognised Seasonal Employer (RSE) policy review options through the consultation process.
This page provides an overview of current and closed consultations and reviews on energy sector issues.
This page provides an overview of current and closed consultations and reviews on minerals and petroleum issues.
This page provides an overview of developments in international policy and regulatory environments that relate to the Circular Economy and their implications for Aotearoa New Zealand.
This page provides an overview of the Recognised Seasonal Employer (RSE) policy review options that MBIE sought your views on through the consultation process. More detail on the relevant policy considerations is contained in the full options document.
This page provides details of current vacancies for boards that we monitor on behalf of responsible ministers.
This page provides important information for suppliers of goods and services to the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE).
This page provides information about the implementation of recommendations from the independent review into accident compensation dispute resolution processes.
This page provides information about trade barriers and how they arise and where to go for help with trade barriers that are making it difficult to export to a particular market.
This page provides information on applying to be a postal operator and your obligations and rights as a postal operator in New Zealand.
This page provides information on tariffs in New Zealand including tariff concessions, tariff reviews and the harmonised system nomenclature.
This page provides links to our consultations relating to health and safety.
This page provides the Cabinet papers and regulatory impact analyses for previous reviews of the minimum wages.
This page sets out background information on a package of reforms of the Companies Act and related corporate governance legislation
This page sets out background information on the review of the Incorporated Societies Act and the enactment of the Incorporated Societies Act .
This page summarises the changes to the consumer credit laws that resulted from the review that took place between and .
This paper seeks Cabinet approval to release the ticket reselling discussion paper for public consultation.
This policy and its supporting documents may provide a guide for best practice unless specifically excluded in the relevant offshore policy manual, or in conflict with local legislation or terms and conditions of employment. In such circumstances local legislation will apply.
This policy applies to all employees, secondees and fixedterm contractors (our people) employed or engaged on any basis by MBIE, whether they are casual, temporary or permanent, whether full time or part time in Aotearoa New Zealand and or assigned offshore.
This policy applies to all peerreviewed research outputs arising from research projects fully or partially funded through research investment processes administered by MBIE, and requires that these outputs be made available through Open Access pathways as outlined below. This includes:
This policy applies to all staff, secondees and contractors employed or engaged on any basis by MBIE (our people), whether they are casual, fixed term or permanent, whether full time or part time and whether they are in New Zealand or in any other country who is involved in prosecutions brought by MBIE, including those authorised to make a decision to prosecute.
This policy builds on the examples of many public research funders around the world, and brings Aotearoa New Zealand in line with international best practices.
This policy does not apply to personal grievances, disputes relating to employment within MBIE or offending by our people outside of their employment with MBIE.
This policy does not cover overseas remote working.
This policy is referrred to in the Request for Proposals for the science investment round and the Request for Proposals for the National Science Challenges.
This policy requires that all peerreviewed publications arising from research funded through research investment processes administered by MBIE be made available with Open Access (free of charge, online access for any person) through one of the approved pathways. These must be made available either:
This policy strongly recommends, rather than mandates, that research data arising from funded projects be made openly available whenever they are not precluded by indigenous data sovereignty considerations, copyright restrictions, confidentiality requirements, or contractual clauses.
This privacy information applies to personal information collected through this website and MBIE Customer Service Centre.
This privacy statement applies to personal information collected through www.mbie.govt.nz. It also includes how personal information is treated by our MBIE Customer Service Centre.
This programme has a practical focus, with tourism operators able to improve their knowledge and practical capability through workshops and onetoone programmes. It also builds on the support that Qualmark has been providing to tourism operators through its Tourism Advisory Support Service.
This project has been an amazing kickstart for our relationship and has led to several other projects with DLR. The data weve collected to has already led to real performance improvements in our hardware, and with so much more to learn, were excited about whats still to come
This public register is a record of highaltitude licences issued by the New Zealand Government.
This publication outlines the conventions New Zealand has ratified and the agencies that administer them. It also provides a brief outline of how they are implemented in New Zealand and includes references to relevant legislation.
This regulatory impact statement has been prepared by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment. It provides an analysis of options for regulations under the Outer Space and High altitude Activities Act on the following issues: o The application requirements for licenses and permits, and o Whether any class of high altitude vehicle (HAV) should be exempted from the requirements of the regime. We note that in respect of application requirements, due to the OSHAA Act requiring applications to be made in the prescribed form, there is no option to have no regulations . We also note that space activities, in particular launche s of vehicles and payloads into outer space, are new to New Zealand and, as a result of the fledgling nature of the industry in N ew Zealand , we only expect a small number of applications in the short tomedium term . This means the implementation of the r egime is likely to evolve over time, which has influenced our approach to the regulations. We have undertaken some analysis of the extent of HAV activity occurring in New Zealand, but it is difficult to assess whether this accurately reflect s the full extent of the activity going on. New Zealand is the only country in the world to introduce a high altitude vehicle regime . Therefore we have no international comparators to use as a bench mark for the proposed regulations. We have tested the proposed requir ements with stakeholders including New Zealand and international space industry participants, HAV operators, and domestic agencies who will be involved in conducting the statutory assessments. We have used their feedback to modify the information requirements and the approach to HAV exemptions.
This rental bond data provides information about the activity level in the housing rental market.
This report assesses how well the rapid building assessment system functioned during the response to the North Island severe weather event and identifies areas for improvement.
This report builds a profile of recent migrant youth in New Zealand by analysing immigration approvals data and Statistics New Zealand
This report combines our labour market monitoring programme with the latest developments in the labour market to paint a summary of labour market trends up to the latest quarter.
This report contains output produced from the Integrated Data Infrastructure (IDI), managed by Stats NZ. The results are not official statistics. They have been created for research purposes from the IDI.
This report describes the size and nature of the New Zealand screen industry and examines the impact of the screen industry on the economy.
This report draws on data from a number of sources, including two surveys we carried out in and to find out how aware landlords and tenants are of the new requirements. We also looked at what action had been taken to comply with them.
This report establishes consistent monitoring on the performance of the building consent system, with a particular focus on building consent and code compliance certificate timeframes. The data shown here is as reported by Building Consent Authorities (BCAs).
This report evaluates the impact of the New Zealand Screen Production Grant for domestic and international productions.
This report examines postnatural disaster dispute resolution in New Zealand. It provides an overview of the types of disputes that arise in the aftermath of a natural disaster, discusses dispute resolution responses in New Zealand and in other jurisdictions and suggests improved options for New Zealand informed by best practice.
This report goes to great examples of a lot of these and how they are procuring their brands.
This report looks at the migration trends of migrants from the Pacific from to using Immigration New Zealand data. It also examines the settlement outcomes for Pacific migrants, primarily using data from the Migrants Survey.
This report looks at the migration trends of migrants from the Pacific over the last years using Immigration New Zealand data.
This report presents selected findings from the and Migrant Surveys, describing working conditions experienced by migrant employees.
This report provides Ministers with the draft Project Hau Nuku: Weather forecasting system review Terms of Reference (ToR).
This report provides a summary of the key findings from the Immigration New Zealand (INZ) Advisers survey conducted among licensed immigration advisers, immigration lawyers and offshore student advisers who apply for a visa on behalf of others. The survey reports on their experience of dealing with INZ.
This report provides an evidence base to inform these choices.
This report provides an independent peer review of the report Evaluating the New Zealand Screen Production Grant
This report provides an introduction to online dispute resolution (ODR). It sets out the concepts which fall within a broad definition of ODR and traces their development. It discusses the benefits and drawbacks of ODR, both generally and in specific contexts, and examines some posssible future developments.
This report shares analysis of our current research infrastructure holdings, the types of research and capabilities they enable, and the ways they are accessed and used. It also aims to increase understanding of our broader research infrastructure portfolio.
This report summarises findings from the to Migrant Surveys.
This report summarises the evaluation of a Pilot project focused on using the BRANZ Artisan tool for the creation of digital records of lowrisk plumbing and drainlaying (plumbing) work.
This report uses the All Vacancies Index (AVI) to measure changes. The AVI is calculated by using raw unweighted data from the internet job boards mentioned above. Comparisons using the AVI can be distorted by small numbers of online job advertisements.
This research collates and analyses emissions and waste stream data for the advanced manufacturing sector. The information is presented by subsector and allows for analysis of where significant and targeted impacts can be made for emissions and waste reduction.
This research consists of a summary report, technical report, and data set.
This research estimates the contribution of insights into Emissionsintensive, Tradeexposed (EITE) businesses to national and regional employment and gross domestic product (GDP) and highlights their role in their respective supply chains. Using InputOutput tables the report estimates the potential economic loss, should EITE businesses be induced to change the level of their production in the future.
This research project examines the nature and use of private commercial mediation in New Zealand by conducting a survey of commercial mediators. The main aim was to move from anecdote to evidence by gathering empirical data from people working in this field.
This research project identified the critical barriers, enablers and approaches that would be needed for a more circular economy in Aotearoa New Zealand by .
This research provides a summary of progress made by territorial authorities towards identifying potential earthquakeprone buildings
This research provides an annual monitor on the state of the building and construction sector.
This research provides insights on the initial impact of the COVID pandemic on businesses, workers, and endusers within the New Zealand building system.
This research was led by The Connective and collaborators.
This research was the first of its type for New Zealand and should be viewed as a starting point for this type of analysis due to current data gaps. Greater availability and quality of data would strengthen future analysis.
This review will look at the most efficient and effective arrangements for the provision of national weather research, observation, modelling, forecasting, warning, severe weather impacts, data access, and communication services in New Zealand.
This section characterises the research infrastructure portfolio across the institutions.
This section contains resources related to dispute resolution in Aotearoa New Zealand.
This section contains the most recent editions of our set of ongoing migration monitoring reports.
This section covers historic reform of legislation supporting the integrity of the corporate system.
This section covers oil security, the oil emergency response strategy, engine fuel quality, biofuels, the Fuel Market Financial Performance Study and duties, taxes and direct levies on motor fuels.
This section covers the Framework which provides an outline for designing a new scheme, or assessing or reviewing whether an existing scheme is fit for purpose and consistent with best practice.
This section covers the electricity industrys regulatory framework, how the industry works in New Zealand, how to apply for electricity operator status and the Smart Grid Forum.
This section covers the way in which decisions about research infrastructure are made and how it is managed across its lifetime, and the sources of funding for investments in infrastructure.
This section explains how we collect, use, and share information when we are carrying out our functions such as considering and investigating compliance breaches, concerns, initiating our own investigations or inquiries, and determining compliance strategies.
This section explains our stewardship role across regulatory systems, including the main elements of our approach and how we assess regulatory systems.
This section has analysis of trends in the data we have been collecting ourselves, or from other organisations.
This section has best practice guidance for developing new dispute resolution schemes and assessing and reviewing existing schemes.
This section has detailed guidance on developing new dispute resolution schemes and assessing and reviewing existing schemes.
This section has research aimed at increasing our understanding of dispute resolution in New Zealand and case studies that provide insights into how dispute resolution is practiced here.
This section includes the Tourism Electronic Card Transactions (TECTs), Accommodation Data Programme (ADP), International Visitor Survey (IVS), Tourism Satellite Account (TSA), and data on international travel and cruise visitor spending in New Zealand.
This section is about our work to improve energy efficiency, including lowering greenhouse gas emissions and fostering growth in renewable energy.
This section outlines our current understanding of how New Zealanders use the mail service and how that has changed over time. The section concludes with questions for you on how you use the mail service now and how you intend to use it in the future.
This section outlines the context for the research and the approach that was undertaken.
This section presents energy statistics including supply and demand by fuel types, energy balance tables, pricing information, international comparisons and greenhouse gas emissions.
This section provides an overview of governmentrelated broadband and mobile programmes.
This section provides information about consumer research and reports commissioned or undertaken in recent years.
This section provides information about reviews of consumer law we have conducted on behalf of the Government.
This section provides information about the allofgovernment approach taken to combat online financial scams.
This section provides information, resources and guidance on our crossgovernment functions of dispute resolution, regulatory stewardship, government procurement and property and language assistance services.
This section provides information, resources and guidance on our functions which support building and construction, tenancy and housing and energy and natural resources.
This section provides information, resources and guidance on our functions which support consumers, employment, business and economic development.
This section provides information, resources and guidance on our functions which support immigration and tourism.
This section provides information, resources and guidance on our functions which support science and technology.
This section relates to the laws on how entities, including companies, incorporated societies, building societies and limited partnerships, are created, administered and wound up.
This section sets out details of the proposed simplified points system and seeks feedback on its workability.
This section sets out information about the investigation of building failures under the Building Act .
This section sets out the events that have received funding from the ETSP to .
This series of reports provides rich information and analysis of a range of tourism issues. Reports currently available are the:
This service is available days a week
This statement applies to information gathered by us, our employees, contractors, or any other third parties engaged by us, including any of these engaged locally andor working offshore. We require any third party that is carrying out information gathering on our behalf to comply with the obligations of MBIE employees.
This strategy is set to expire in mid.
This study followed a group of over , adult New Zealanders from March to March to track changes in consumer concerns, attitudes and experiences.
This summary provides more detailed information on the changes and what the changes mean for adventure activity operators.
This system specifies who can do building work and how to do it. It also provides checks and offers consumer protections.
This theme focuses on advancing environmental resiliency and sustainability through science, technology, and innovation that centres on diverse perspectives, and promotes an inclusive scientific ecosystem. Unlocking the diversity of thought and experience can expand the boundaries of scientific knowledge, which is vital to fundamental research and underpins resilient and sustainable solutions to global environmental and societal challenges.
This transparency statement explains how the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) gathers information for regulatory compliance, law enforcement and protective security purposes. MBIE gathers information for these purposes in order to keep people in New Zealand safe and prevent harm by:
This vision broadens the focus of He Kai Kei Aku Ringa to include prosperity and wellbeing.
This use case, along with selected digital twin examples from New Zealand, was presented to a business and government audience in November . The recording and report from the workshop are available here.
This was a highly competitive process. The evaluation criteria, used to select candidates to be put forward for consideration by NASA, included:
This webpage is currently being
This website contains information obtained from within the New Zealand Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, from third party sources and websites, and from sources commissioned by us, and is subject to change without notice.
This website will be with more information as the Government makes progress through its agenda.
This will not impact existing employment agreements, which will continue to operate as normal.
This work is aimed at helping reposition the industry for the future and ensuring that businesses are safeguarded in the shortterm. In addition, funding has been put aside for anchor projects to boost tourism.
This work is licensed under a
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution . New Zealand Licence
This work makes it easier for New Zealand exporters to trade with other countries, maintains fair market competition, and ensures that products imported into New Zealand are safe.
This work will significantly enhance the spatial resolution of the outputs from MethaneSAT and its usefulness to end users and offshore meat and dairy products.
Three Years On: English and employment outcomes of former refugees
Three interns completed remote internships with NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) as part of the Visiting Student Research Program during and . See what our JPL interns have to say about their experiences here:
Thriving industries and regions
Through Curious Minds, the Government support activities, projects and programmes that work with communities, businesses and educators to boost engagement between science, technology and society. Curious Minds encourages all New Zealanders to ask good questions, solve local problems and uncover innovative science and technology solutions for a brighter future.
Through SpaceOps New Zealand, Robin has been responsible for growing a pipeline of engineers and employees who have the necessary skills and experience to deliver future impact.
Through its Urban Cycleway Programme, Waka Kotahi the New Zealand Transport Agency has cofunded the building of a number of onroad and offroad cycleways. The cycleways make it easier and safer for cyclists to move through our urban centres.
Through the Network Expansion Project, a series of onroad cycle touring routes were added to the New Zealand Cycle Trails network. These are known as the Heartland and Connector Rides.
Through the Provincial Growth Fund, the government seeks to ensure that people living all over New Zealand can reach their full potential by helping build a regional economy that is sustainable, inclusive and productive
Through this research, we found several ways to appeal to Pacific Peoples and promote financial capability programmes in the Pacific community, for example:
Throughout consultation, general comments on the current operation of the RSE scheme and the nature of the policy review process were received.
Thursday May until Wednesday noon, July
Tianyi developed a computer simulation to mimic the process of communication between cells.
Ticket reselling in New Zealand
Timeframe for sick leave accumulation In Cabinet agreed that, rather than the current sixmonth waiting period, eligible employees would begin to accumulate sick leave entitlement from the first day of employment. The intent of this change was to recognise that employees have little control over when they may need to take sick leave and may need to take it during their first six months of employment.
Timeline and key documents for the Customer and Product Data Act
Timely responses will be provided to the complainant.
To access older building and construction consultations, please contact our Building System Performance branch.
To access older health and safety consultations, email us:
To achieve my vision for tourism, the system must be regenerative, giving back more to people and places than it takes. Tourism must actively enrich our communities (contribute to the health and wellbeing of all our diverse communities) and help protect and restore our environment. Our visitors must become Brand New Zealand storytellers and New Zealand must be recognised for our unique experiences and welcoming communities.
To achieve the vision for tourism and transition the sector to a more regenerative model where our unique stories can be brought to life, we need to build more meaningful partnerships.
To achieve this, several changes will be made to the key steps in the personal grievance process:
To apply, candidates must meet the following eligibility criteria:
To assist our collation and analysis of submissions we have provided an optional submission template.
To be completed by quality assurers: Quality Assurance Reviewing Agency: The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment .
To be eligible for the Scheme, travel must have been confirmed on or before August and be for travel overseas.
To be eligible, people will need to have worked or been on statutory parental leave for at least six months in the past months. New Zealand citizens and residents will be eligible for insurance payments.
To be eligible, someone must stop working entirely or experience a reduction in their capacity to work by at least . The health condition or disability must be expected to last for at least four weeks. Any health issues shorter than this should be addressed with sick leave and other leave options.
To better support and incentivise innovation for future economic growth, Callaghan Innovation will be disestablished and its most important functions will be redistributed to other parts of the science, innovation and technology system.
To build the best nitrous engines in the world, there are knowledgeable gaps to fill and a lot of the new research to conduct. Weve made significant strides in our understanding of the thermal properties of nitrous oxide through scientific cooperation with DLR, which is very cool.
To change any of your registration information, complete a change of details on postal register form (PO):
To comply with this policy, an acceptable version (as specified below) must be deposited either:
To contact the dedicated migrant exploitation team, contact MBIE on (Monday to Friday, .am.pm (excluding public holidays))
To , over tourism projects worth over million have been funded through the Provincial Growth Fund
To do this, MBIE has engaged Deloitte Access Economics and Space Trailblazer to perform an economic analysis of the New Zealand space and advanced aviation sectors.
To ensure the sustainability of the tourism sector, we need to develop and promote highquality, authentic visitor experiences that draw on manaakitanga, our unique visitor proposition of our people and our place and tell our stories in way that engages and enlightens.
To facilitate efficient payments to you for the goods andor services you supply, please provide us with the following Taxable Supply Information:
To find out about their projects and experiences watch their Vlogs
To increase the impact and the innovation potential of our public investment in research, our Open Research policy enables free online access for everyone to MBIE funded peerreviewed research publications.
To learn about previously issued HAV licences, see the summary below:
To learn about previously issued payload permits, see the summary below:
To make sure we got the Tourism Strategy right, we ran a public consultation over summer .
To make this data open and more usable we consulted with stakeholders and agreed the format for these reports. A schema is also provided to help you navigate and interpret the data.
To make this happen, over . billion in Crown funding has already been allocated to roll out worldleading communications infrastructure through multiple connectivity programmes including:
To massively oversimplify, the things that matter with rocket engines are how well the propellants burn and how hot the engine gets. Our work has broadly focused on these areas and were already putting the learnings into practice to improve the performance of our thrusters. While there is a lot of data available that describes the heat transfer properties of various liquids, there is nothing specific for NO.
To position New Zealand for future success, MBIE needs to focus on:
To preserve anonymity where there is a small count of people the data has been random rounded to base . This means that:
To provide clarity, MBIE a briefing outlining the process used by officials to assess national interest implications for permits and licences issued under the Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities Act .
To qualify, the job must end. A reduction in hours worked at the job is not an event that is covered by the scheme.
To receive occasional updates and information by email subscribe to the topics of interest.
To reduce wait times for building inspections, BCAs will be required to carry out of inspections within working days. MBIE will produce new guidance for BCAs to help them meet this requirement.
To remain fit for purpose, successful destinations regularly revise, review and reengineer their plans, activities and structures to respond to changing visitor or community needs and the macro and microeconomic influences.
To report a case anonymously: call Crimestoppers on or complete the Online Crimestoppers form.
To report anonymously, call Crime Stoppers on or make an anonymous report on the Crime Stoppers website:
To report migrant exploitation online, fill out the form Reporting migrant exploitation on the Employment New Zealand website:
To report people trafficking, call New Zealand Police or (if it is an emergency).
To report workplace exploitation, contact the MBIE Service Centre on .
To respond to the Taskforces recommendations, we developed
To see all closed consultations relating to building go to:
To see the Act and other documents regarding its origins and its continued evolution, see below:
To see what Buildingrelated consultations are currently open visit:
To support researchers and future funding applicants better understand the New Zealand research landscape we release Australian and New Zealand Standard Research Classification (ANZSRC) data relating to successful funding applications. Currently this information is limited to Endeavour Fund successful applications only.
To support the preselection process, candidates were asked to specify in the application form up to topics from the list below of the subject areas that relate most closely to their current field of study.
To support these principles, the applicant should look to have some public safety goals. There should be clear line of sight through the organisation as to who is responsible for achieving these goals. These goals should: combine lead and lag indicators; be measurable; and be reported on. Together the principles and goals should help drive behaviours that ensure public safety. Safety Critical Systems and Safety Assessment
To support this process, MBIE brought together a working group of stakeholders including payroll system providers, payroll practitioners working in employer organisations, business, and unions.
To what extent do adventure activities in New Zealand experience risks from natural hazards What activities face risks of catastrophic harm if natural hazards are not managed appropriately
Together with Stats NZ and other organisations, we produce a range of data about the tourism industry.
Tohu media looked to protect intellectual property of indigenous media through creation of an AIpowered content system.
Tologa Bay Innovation TecHub
Tom Cruise in action in the South Island of New Zealand for the filming of Mission: Impossible Fallout.
Tool allow to compare a wide range of economic indicators for the various regions of New Zealand
Toolkit for community (former refugees, migrants, NGOs, settlement service providers etc.)
Toolkit for government agencies
Topics of successful grant applications for the IRF funding round were as follows:
Total Tourism Recovery Package Budget
Total available to promote event
Total cost of the project
Total funds committed to the Tourism Recovery Package
Total hours spent on prosecution Cost of Prosecution Expenses (if any)
Total underspend of the Tourism Recovery Package
Touring music and international acts
Tourism Events Queensland
Tourism Advisory Support Service Digital Capability
Tourism Communities: Support, Recovery and Reset Plan
Tourism Data Leadership Group
Tourism Data Leadership Group initial report
Tourism Data Leadership Group sector updates
Tourism Data Partnership Fund
Tourism Data Partnership Fund: Application form
Tourism Electronic Card Transactions
Tourism Electronic Card Transactions (TECTs)
Tourism Evidence and Insights Centre
Tourism Funding Toolkit for Local Government Revenue
Tourism Futures Taskforce
Tourism Growth Partnership
Tourism Industry Aotearoa
Tourism Industry Association
Tourism Industry Transformation Plan
Tourism Industry Transformation Plan (ITP)
Tourism Infrastructure Fund
Tourism Infrastructure Fund opens on April
Tourism Infrastructure Fund panel
Tourism Kickstart Fund opens on April
Tourism New Zealand Domestic Demand Review
Tourism New Zealand also continued to keep the Pure New Zealand brand alive in the hearts and minds of our international visitors and have now resumed international marketing activity to encourage booking and travel to New Zealand. You can explore their work on their website.
Tourism New Zealand initiatives
Tourism New Zealand is currently focused on four priorities to support transition to a regenerative tourism system:
Tourism New Zealand is responsible for marketing New Zealand Aotearoa as a visitor destination for the longterm benefit of New Zealanders.
Tourism New Zealand is the trading name of the New Zealand Tourism Board. It is the Crown entity responsible for marketing New Zealand to the world as a visitor destination.
Tourism New Zealand undertook a range of activity aimed at encouraging domestic visitation during the pandemic, including the Do Something New, New Zealand campaign.
Tourism New Zealand will carry out the marketing activities, which will focus initially on encouraging visitors from Australia, USA, China, India, Germany and Korea. It will start rolling out immediately to increase international arrivals around the regions through winter, spring and into early next year.
Tourism Recovery Package documents
Tourism Sustainability Commitment
Tourism Transitions Programme
Tourism also needs the social licence to operate and be underpinned by a sustainable funding model.
Tourism and hospitality sector focused
Tourism and hospitality workforce report
Tourism businesses in the South Island communities most reliant on international visitors will be able to apply for support from the million Tourism Kickstart Fund initiative on April.
Tourism data cogovernance
Tourism data sources diagram
Tourism employment earnings and filled jobs
Tourism funding toolkit PDF .MB
Tourism infrastructure report
Tourism is integral to economic development and is a key driver and tool to achieve wider economic development goals. DM and visitor attraction strategies can play a role in building the reputation of a regionplace and attracting new residents, businesses and students.
Tourism marketing boost in key countries
Tourism operators do not need to be registered with Qualmark to access this support.
Tourism operators provided extra support
Tourism protects, restores and champions Aotearoa New Zealands natural environment, culture and historic heritage
Tourism research and data
Tourism sector productivity improves
Tourism supports thriving and sustainable regions
Tourism turbocharge takes New Zealand to the world
Tourism was one of our largest and fastest growing sectors in , but was severely impacted by COVID. The Government has invested heavily to support the sector through the pandemic and the border reopening means the sector can begin to recover. We are looking forward to welcoming visitors back to New ZealandAotearoa.
Tourism was selected for an ITP because of its significance to the New Zealand economy, and because the loss of international visitors as the result of COVID gives us an opportunity to rebuild a more regenerative tourism system. Funding for the development of the Tourism ITP was included in the Tourism Communities: Support, Recovery and Reset Plan.
Tourism: briefing for the incoming Minister PDF .MB
Towards a Circular Economy: Implications for Emission Reduction and Environmental Sustainability
Towards an energy strategy for New Zealand
Track record in managing contracts for similar goodsservices. Supplier track record in delivering similar goods or services.
Tracking seals from outer space
Trade agreements and closer economic partnerships are an important part of New Zealands international trade policy.
Trade agreements and partnerships
Trade agreements are an important driver for sustainable growth in Aotearoa New Zealand and in our partner countries.
Trade implications for New Zealand
Trade remedies application and investigation guide
Trade remedies under trade agreements
Trade remedy investigations
Tradeable goods and services are a product of labour. Each free trade negotiation that Aotearoa New Zealand engages on seeks to reinforce International Labour Organization member commitments, and address labour rights and labour issues.
Tradepersons licensing and skills
Training initiatives delivered with domestic and international partners at the ASEAN Transnational Organised Crime course at the Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation (JCLEC) most recently in October .
Trans Power New Zealand Ltd
TransTasman Earth observation research studies confirmed
Transforming the foundations of the tourism system
Transition Fund for Local Authorities
Transitional period for privately owned vehicles will be extended by one year to June
Transitioning to a more circular economy ()
Transitioning to a regenerative tourism model
Transitions and retention
Transitions have traditionally disadvantaged some groups more than others. In a just transition, this is acknowledged and incorporated into planning to make the transition more fair, equitable and inclusive.
Translating and multilingual document formatting
Transmitting data across vast distances inevitably leads to losses and degradation unless you can break up the journey.
Transparency and consistency: Honesty and openness about what is involved in the review, including an evaluation of the framework against these objectives as soon as practicable after implementation of the review
Transport service licence on New Zealand Transport Agencys website
Transportation between hotel to the Summit venue (i.e. no airport transfers)
Travel Agents Association
Treasurys principles for best practice regulations
Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
Trends in the importation of building and construction products
Trusted Research: Guidance for Institutions and Researchers PDF MB
Trustees are advised by a Steering Group consisting of the Chief Executive of the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) or nominee, the Chief Executive of Business NZ or nominee, and the Secretary of the CTU.
Try entering school competitions that will help develop your STEM skills, such as the Design a Satellite Mission essay competition. Participate in initiatives like The Wonder Project or explore resources from the Science Learning Hub. These are designed to inspire young Kiwis like you in STEM.
Tui Project: decommissioning the Tui oil field
Turning now to Biocosmetics, we do a few pages from the Biocosmetics Report.
Turning now to Sports Nutrition, the third of the reports, and again we are just giving you a teaser of all of these.
Turning now to capabilities, this is just a brief teaser on situation looking at the wider capabilities, as I said before the core of this that you have to have a functioning market bioeconomy, then around that we as a wider society, as government, we need smart people, good ideas and useful capital to push on that.
Turning to aquaculture production, New Zealand aquaculture production has grown to around and up to , growth has stalled since and all new species attempted in the last years have failed.
Turning to driving growth or change, what are the drivers of an internationally competitive bioeconomy This comes out of some work we did in Australia a few years ago but you have got to have available resources, you have land, water labour and inputs. You then have to be able to produce biomass, process it, handle it, and have access to markets. The Government often talks about this, but it cannot drive the core of it, that is driven by industry.
Twelve months to renegotiate contracts before income threshold policy takes effect
Two key examples of partnership in the tourism space are:
Two key government initiatives underway that will drive some of those foundational changes are:
Two reviews undertaken by MBIE and DIA in and respectively found that while Governmentfunded interpreting and translation services are available in New Zealand, a number of barriers and gaps prevent equitable access to public services and information for people with limited English language proficiency.
UC Aerospace, one of the largest academic clubs at the University of Canterbury is aiming to make Canterbury a hub for aerospace talent by building career pathways for students. The club runs multiple outreach programmes at both primary and highschool levels to grow student interest in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Maths) and rocketry.
UFB users can access speeds of close to , Megabits per second. This allows them to use business applications to improve productivity, access educational and entertainment content and a whole range of other benefits.
UFB uses fibre optic cables to deliver fibretothepremises. It is most suitable in urban areas with higher population densities. It is superior to the copper technology that was rolled out in New Zealand over the last century.
UN Registration Convention
US Energy Information Administration
UltraFast Broadband (UFB) is being rolled out across New Zealand in partnership with a number of different fibre companies.
Ultrafast broadband initiative Amendment to model
Ultrafast broadband regulatory regime
UltraFast Broadband Limited Fibre Deed
Uncertain about how to identify potential collaborators
Uncluttered launch windows, great location for ground infrastructure and ideal environment for earth observation data calibration and validation.
Under section of the Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities Act , a permit holder must comply with any other conditions that the Minister considers necessary or desirable in order to:
Under the iteration, the terms of the Deed were scheduled to be reviewed by November . The timeframe has been extended and a review is currently underway.
Under the Childrens Act , MBIE will review this Child Protection Policy every years.
Under the Contact Code telecommunications service providers offering home phone services must:
Under the Privacy Act , you can ask any organisation or business for information they hold about you and to correct it if it is wrong. This right extends to small and large businesses, government departments, schools, sports clubs, charities, and community groups. The OPC will ask you if you have tried to resolve the matter with us directly first and will also consider whether you have any other remedy available. The OPC may look into your complaint and make a recommendation to us regarding the concern you have raised.
Under the Prostitution Reform Act , foreign nationals on temporary visas (including visitor, student, or work visas) in New Zealand are unable to work in the sex industry. People may be made liable for deportation if they have been found to have breached this condition. Under the Immigration Act , people unlawfully in New Zealand may not work in New Zealand.
Under the RBI, the Government will subsidise some rural telecommunications services and offer these services to priority users at a lower price than the same, or similar, services are provided over the same network to other customers.
Under the Telecommunications (New Regulatory Framework) Amendment Act , the TSOs which apply to Chorus and Spark will cease to apply in areas which have fibre. Consumers in these areas will have access to affordable fibrebased landline and broadband services.
Under the Telecommunications Act , the Commerce Commission can investigate after whether the unbundled fibre service should be regulated. It can then recommend to the Minister for Communications that price caps should be introduced for the product, together with technical specifications and conditions for the service
Under the agreement, New Zealand agencies preserve their full existing powers and functions, such as border control, health and safety, and accident investigation, by way of a Side Arrangement.
Under the current Act, payments
Under the current law, if a personal grievance is established, the Employment Relations Authority or Employment Court may grant one or more of the following remedies to the employee:
Under the new law, territorial authorities can introduce local polices for shop trading in their entire district or in limited areas on Easter Sunday.
Under this policy, a complaint may be made about the:
Undergraduate study in Data Science
Understanding dispute resolution
Understanding seasonality in domestic leisure tourism demand PDF KB
Understanding the Construction Contracts Act
Understanding variation in tourism spend
Undertake awareness raising and training
Undertaking National Interest Risk Review
Underutilisation in the labour force
Unfair commercial practices
Unite UnionNew Zealand Council of Trade Unions
Unitec Institute of Technology
United KingdomNew Zealand Free Trade Agreement ()
United Nations Act and sanctions regulations
United Nations Convention on Registration of Objects launched into Outer Space: proposed accession PDF KB
Universities New Zealand TRPSR guidance
University club helps launch students into aerospace careers
University of Auckland Research Team
University of Canterbury Aerospace Club
University of Canterbury antimicrobial research receives Gold, again
University partners with industry to grow space workforce
Unlawful postal activities
Unless indicated otherwise for specific items or collections of content (either below or within specific items or collections), this copyright material is licensed for reuse under a Creative Commons Attribution . International Licence.
Unless otherwise indicated, the material we make available on our social media accounts is protected by Crown copyright. You can reproduce this Crown copyright material free of charge without further permission, as long as you:
Unless we have lawful reason for withholding this information, it will be made available if you request access to a transcript or copy of your call by emailing the Privacy Officer at
Unlocking Curious Minds contestable fund
Unlocking New Zealands potential
Unresolved conflict and substandard dispute resolution is socially and financially costly. The direct cost of employment disputes alone has been indicatively estimated at million per annum. The full costs of all types of disputes to government, parties and society are considerable, and are a significant impediment to economic prosperity.
Unsolicited Electronic Messages Act
Until any changes to the Holidays Act go through the Parliamentary process and come into force, all of the existing rules still apply. This means that employers still need to comply with the current Holidays Act, and ensure they are providing the correct entitlements and payments to employees.
Up to million is available annually for the maintenance, development and promotion of the New Zealand Cycle Trails (NZCT).
Up to million is available annually for the maintenance, development and promotion of the New Zealand Cycle Trails to ensure they remain a highquality tourism asset.
Up until the point of transfer of these activities, Callaghan Innovation will as far as possible continue to administer these programmes as it would under normal circumstances, in accordance with the relevant legislation and Ministerial directions.
UpStart Nation is a report for the Government on how to best support a thriving environment for startups in New Zealand.
Upcoming changes to the employerassisted temporary work visa system include:
Upcoming milestones (Quarter )
Update on Budget initiatives for Regional Development portfolio PDF KB
Update on Industry Transformation Plans PDF KB
Update on industry transformation plans
Update on industry transformation plans Minute of Decision
Update on science reforms: CRI mergers and Callaghan Innovation
Update the maximum and minimum liable earnings to reflect movement in the Statistics New Zealand Labour Cost Index.
Ministry of Social Development Sectors
people trafficking training available to all MBIE staff
Updates on our work in the energy and resources sector
Updates on the business initiatives
Updating Accident Compensation Review Costs Regulations
Updating the national interest assessment process PDF KB
Upgrades and renewals on the existing Great Rides.
Upgrading telecommunication infrastructure
Urdu: Ask for an interpreter JPG KB
Urgent scientific research and data collection
Use community providers, clear obligations and targeted incentives to get young people off welfare and into work. (MSD)
Use of personal information
Use of recycled materials
Use the subscription page on the Statistics New Zealand website to receive alerts on International travel (including international visitor arrivals).
Use this template to complete your reporting requirements for the Horizon Europe TopUp Fund.
Use this template to submit your feedback on the Review of New Zealand Companies Office Fees and Levies ().
Use this template to understand all the terms and conditions of the contract if you are successful
Useful supporting evidence that could be provided in support of the safety case submission can include audit and assurance plans, details of incident and accident reporting systems, a Just Culture policy, audit and investigation frameworks etc. Emergency Management Planning The emergency management plan must be specific to the operation and cover the full range of activities that could result in an emergency. It needs to be: carefully considered; implemented; and tested; reviewed and improved. communicated; To demonstrate that the emergency plan is fit for purpose applicants will need to demonstrate that they have: consulted with emergency services, key stakeholders considered how they will maintain effective and neighbouring operations that may be affected, equipment and ensure competency of personnel and the public; required to respond; and appropriate first response capability, equipment and identified potential emergency scenarios and that training for staff who will be immediately exposed; the response will be appropriate, regularly tested through rehearsals and any lessons learned will considered and applied any relevant regulations, feedback and improve the plan .standards or codes; This is not an exhaustive list of assurance activities. Each operation will need to demonstrate a consideration of assurance activity that is suitable to their unique circumstances.
User support within the dispute resolution scheme
Users guide to the NESTF
Using new ideas, knowledge and technology to develop better ways of doing things helps the New Zealand economy grow.
Using the All Vacancies Index (AVI) as main indicator
Using these two building blocks they will store one photon of the entangled pair, allowing the other entangled photon to then be sent somewhere else in an entanglementbased quantum communication network.
Utilities (electricity, gas, or broadband property access)
Value is sustainably derived from the natural environment
Varying the Safety Case
Vector Communications Ltd
Vehicles with a portable toilet are no longer able to be certified selfcontained. From December organisations could apply to become Certification Authorities.
Verification of Safety Systems Assurance
Verification of Safety Systems Assurance To ensure that operators keep the public safe, effective monitoring and assurance activity is essential. While mistakes are inevitable lessons must be learnt to avoid any problems from continuing andor escalating. Operators need to know that the controls they have in place are functioning as intended, and be able to identify emerging risks early. An effective fitforpurpose assurance system may give consideration to: incidentaccident reporting and notification; safety system assessments; internal audits; quality assurance; and investigations; the ability and means to analyse data . An applicants safety case should demonstrate that the regulated party: has the appropriate monitoring systems in place the scope of the assurance activities covers the for the nature of the operation; breadth of the operation and will draw together information from various sources; and has identified who is responsible for monitoring, that they are suitably qualified, empowered and can collate, analyse, report and act upon well resourced; the results to ensure the safety of the public that any problems wont be hidden knows how the monitoring activities will be andor ignored.working and understand the safety critical nature of each component;
Version number . June Title: Prosecution Policy of Issue: July Dep Sec Sponsor: Insert Deputy Secretary Title Version: . Last Review: February Policy Owner: Chief Legal Officer Policy Classification : Operation al Next Review : February Security Classification: Unclassified Page of MBIE guiding principles relevant to this policy . The Prosecution Policy aligns with the following MBIE guiding principles: a. ensuring our core values and diverse and inclusi ve culture, including partnering with Mori, are at the heart of what we do b. ensuring we maintain the trust and confidence of the public c. ensuring the best use of taxpayer funds d. complying with legislation , regulations and standards . Purpose . The purpose of the Prosecution Policy is to: a. establish the principles to which MBIE must adhere in dealing with potential prosecutions, making prosecution decisions and conducting prosecutions andor related proceedings . b. define the expectations and rules governing prosecutions decision making and prosecution proceedings c. ensure effective internal controls are in place over the prosecution decision making process Scop e . This policy applies to all staff, secondees and contractors employed or engaged on any basis by MBIE (our people) , whether they are casual, fixed term or permanent, whether full time or part time and whether they are in New Zealand or in any other count ry who is involved in prosecutions brought by MBIE, including those authorised to make a decision to prosecute . . For avoidance of doubt, the Prosecution Policy do es not apply to staff involved in civil enforcement (i.e. non criminal or offence proceedings ) of MBIE legislation (e.g. before occupational licensing boards or the Employment Relations Authority). . This policy does not apply to personal grievances, disputes relating to employment within MBIE or offending by our people outside of their employment with MBIE. Help . For any queries relating to the policy, please contact the Chief Legal Officer or Manager Legal Services ( Litigation) in the Legal, Ethics, and Privacy branch. Definition of terms
Version number . June Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines of Issue: July Security Classification Unclassified Version: . Review ed June Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page of Purpose . The purpose of this document is to set out the procedures and guidelines to be followed by MBIE staff in making a decision to prosecute or to request appeals. It also establishes standards to be met by prosecutors in any MBIE prosecution . . These Procedures and Guidelines must be read in conjunction with the Prosecution Policy . Scope . These Procedures and Guidelines apply to: a. all MBIE staff authorised (whether as a statutory decision maker or acting under delegation) to make a decision to prosecute, or to take other actions in scope of the Prosecution Policy b. all MBIE staff involved in the preparation for, and conduct of, prosecutions brought by MBIE (whether under legislation administered by MBIE or other laws eg. the Crimes Act ) an d related court proceedings c. all prosecutors acting for MBIE and d. witnesses giving evidence in respect of their role as an MBIE employee or contractor, within any criminal proceedings . . These Procedures and Guidelines do not apply to staff involved in civil e nforcement of MBIE legislation (eg. before occupational licensing boards or the Employment Relations Authority). However, they may still provide useful guidance to such staff, particularly in relation to proceeding s in the Employment Court under Part A of the Employment Relations Act for a pecuniary penalty . Definitions Term Definition Investigation In the context of this document, means investigation of potential criminal conduct. The term d oes not include a routine audit, inspection or complaint review unless after initial assessment (including relevant initial enquires), the investigator determin es to undertake further investigation that could lead to a criminal prosecution . Investigator Any employee (including those warranted under MBIE legislation) whose functions include investigation of suspected criminal offending .
Versions of a manuscript, journal article or conference paper that have not been refereed or peerreviewed (e.g., preprints), are not acceptable for the purposes of this policy. However, MBIE welcomes the availability of preprints to facilitate early access to research outcomes and encourages the posting of preprints on preprint servers with open licensing.
Victoria University of Wellington
Video Interpreting Service
Videoassisted speech to speech
View MBIEs transparency statement
View all Official Information Act releases
View all closed Health and Safety consultations
View all closed consultations relating to energy
View all current Health and Safety consultations
View all data and analysis
View all labour market statistics snapshots
View all occasional papers
View all open consultations relating to energy
View all policy advice documents on Fair Pay Agreements
View all proactively released Cabinet papers and minutes in our Document Library
View all proactively released documents relating to the science sector reforms
View all the Briefings and associated documents from
View all the Briefings and associated documents from
View all the Briefings and associated documents from
View all the documents released in this batch
View current and upcoming funding and investment opportunities.
View latest NZ Space Agency news
View more information on the Better Work phase of the ITP:
View more information on the Environment phase of the ITP:
View of the South Island of New Zealand from the International Space Station
View our closed consultations
View proactive release of documents relating to Immigration
View the High Court judgment and final orders on the Ministry of Justice website.
View the NESTF on the New Zealand Legislation website.
View the Telecommunications (Regulated Fibre Service Providers) Regulations on the New Zealand Legislation website.
View the discussion document:
View the highlights from past Summits
View the report and summary of Government actions
View the strategy and learn more about it.
View the web version of the Employment Action plan
View the web version of the summary of the discussion document:
View upcoming scheduled energy data releases.
View upcoming scheduled tourism data releases.
Visit business.govt.nz for tools and advice from government and industry to support the success of your business.
Visit institutes of higher learning and other prominent landmarks in Singapore.
Visit our Radio Spectrum Management website to find out about licensing, compliance, auctions and consumer information about electronic and radio products from overseas.
Visit the Civil Aviation Authority website for information on regulations for advanced aviation and emerging technologies.
Visit the Construction Sector Accord website
Visit the Digital Boost website for more details and how to register for this support:
Visit the New Zealand Space Agency website for information on space policy, regulation and sector development.
Visit the Tourism Evidence and Insights Centre to access tourism data, research and reports from a wide range of sources.
Visit the Utilities Disputes website for more information on dispute resolution or to raise a complaint with the Scheme.
Visit to find out how to apply for a visa or NZeTA, employ migrant workers, and assist students and refugees. You can also find out what you need to do to give immigration advice, and get information for medical professionals, carriers, and tourism and event organisations.
Visitors are also seeking greater connection and meaning from their travel experiences, wanting to immerse themselves more in communities and to connect with local people and cultures.
Vodafone Limited Rural Broadband Initiative Deed
Voluntary disclosure of personal information
VostroNet (New Zealand) Ltd
W e can ensure this is explained in the consultation document. We anticipate consultation would be open for weeks
Waikato Regional Workforce Plan
Waimakariri District Council
Want to know when new labour market reports are released
Watch a short vlog update from Mikhael Sayat. Mikhael was selected by NASA JPL from a shortlist of highachieving students who applied for the New Zealand Space Scholarship.
Watch short vlogs from the New Zealand Space Scholarship recipients. This programme, administered by MBIEs New Zealand Space Agency, has seen Kiwi interns travel to NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, USA.
Watch their vlogs to find out more about their experiences:
Watch this space as we develop more resources for download.
Watch vlogs from New Zealand students on the internship of a lifetime.
We accept that our official responsibilities may affect the ways we engage in activities outside of work:
We act in the public interest and with a spirit of service to the community:
We act professionally at work and in our dealings with those with whom we work and serve:
We act with fairness, impartiality, courtesy, integrity and honesty in everything we do:
We adjusted the calculation of importer margins in September to include discounting activity. This adjustment has been carried back to October .
We administer the New Zealand Business Number which is a free, globally unique identifier that makes it faster and easier for businesses to connect and interact.
We administer the safetyrelated provisions of the Electricity Act and Gas Act and associated safety regulations.
We advise government on aspects of the emergency call services in New Zealand, working with the New Zealand Police and other agencies.
We advise government on the allocation of New Zealands radio spectrum and administer the Radiocommunications Act and supporting regulations.
We advise government on the allocation of New Zealands radio spectrum and administer the Radiocommunications Act .
We advise the government on resetting and rebuilding tourism on a sustainable and regenerative model of tourism. Regenerative tourism is about giving back more to people and places than it takes. It actively enriches our communities and helps protect and restore our environment. We provide support to the sector as it navigates difficult times, and we provide policy advice to support its recovery.
We also coordinate the development of electronic commerce policy across government to ensure the regulations facilitate use of electronic commerce and dont create barriers and cost to business.
We also established a consultation group representing migrants, businesses, unions and international students. The group has provided perspectives as the review developed ideas.
We also have a SIT Memorandum of Cooperation with the State of Colorado, with a focus on collaboration in aerospace and geothermal technologies.
We also intend to grow our satellite design and manufacturing capability and our space science, technology and engineering research activity.
We also manage the Government Property Portal (GPP). GPP has property and lease, asset, space and facilities management modules as well as reporting capabilities that help agencies manage their property better.
We also proposed that you issue an exposure draft of the Bill, in order to seek feedback and test its
We also strengthen New Zealands science and innovation links at the multilateral level through participation in the following international organisations and groups.
We also used to produce the Food and Beverage Directory which is discontinued for the time being.
We analysed the submissions and provided advice to the Government based on the feedback from this consultation.
We anticipate that this information will also connect to and support the New Zealand Research Information System currently under development.
We are a founding signatory to the Algorithm charter for Aotearoa New Zealand, and are committed to using our algorithms in an ethical and transparent way.
We are also the monitoring agency for the Financial Markets Authority and the Commission for Financial Capability.
We are an attractive location for space activities.
We are an incredibly diverse organisation, employing over , people across a range of roles, and all sharing a commitment to grow New Zealand for all.
We are changing the way employers recruit some migrants for temporary work in New Zealand.
We are clear on how we make decisions.
We are committed to ensuring that our policy and planning processes, as well as our administration of the national Register of Radio Frequencies, licensing, compliance and enforcement, and radio frequency interference (RFI) investigation, are fast, simple and effective, and maximise the use of online services wherever possible.
We are committed to leading the world in space and advanced aviation regulation
We are committed to open government and improving practices around the proactive release and publishing of official information.
We are committed to providing a good experience to our customers. When you interact with us, we promise it will be
We are committed to the safe, responsible, and peaceful use of space. Applicants for permits and licences must meet requirements of the Outer Space and Highaltitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations (the Regulations). They may also need to meet requirements relating to other regulatory regimes, like those for health and safety, hazardous substances, environmental impacts, and radio spectrum use. Information about these other requirements is below.
We are committed to understanding and promoting diversity in science and research.
We are committed to understanding and promoting diversity in science and research. We believe that everyone should have a fair and equal opportunity to participate in the science system to their fullest potential. It is our intent that this data is used to inform a pathway to equity in the science system and enable it to better reflect the diversity of Aotearoa.
We are completing work that may result in changes in New Zealand in response to various international financial market reforms.
We are consulting on Minerals and Petroleum Programmes to reflect recent and proposed amendments to the Crown Minerals Act .
We are continuing to work on the details of these proposals
We are currently reviewing the data sources and methods used to derive national average prices. Care should be taken in using the pricing data, particularly for data since the start of February .
We are going to talk about one of the in detail just give you a feel about how the process works. We are looking at Essential Oils ManufacturingDistilling.
We are inclusive, respectful and responsive in our dealings with all people regardless of their position, personal characteristics or situation:
We are inviting proposals for joint research partnerships between New Zealand and Chinese research organisations for activities that demonstrate benefits for New Zealand by collaborating with worldclass partners in China.
We are looking to improve data, including developing a way to determine a reliable annual figure for business expenditure on research and development (BERD). The Government hopes to increase BERD with the right policy settings.
We are making main contributions to the MethaneSAT mission:
We are open with MBIE and disclose any commercial activities, financial, employment, personal interests or relationships that might cause an actual, perceived or potential conflict of interest:
We are professional and objective in our language, actions and interactions:
We are proposing key changes to how the Companies Office recovers costs:
We are proposing changes to attract and retain migrants with the medium to longterm skills New Zealand needs. The changes are designed to align with the Immigration Rebalance and give more certainty to migrant workers and their families.
We are proposing the following key changes to the Skilled Migrant Category.
We are proposing to introduce a simplified points system that sets a clear, fair, and transparent eligibility threshold for skilled residence.
We are publishing MBIE documents that underpin decisions for Budget .
We are publishing proposal and decision documents for MBIE departmental changes dated from August onwards.
We are releasing documents which relate to the Tourism Recovery Package. The webpage will be periodically.
We are responsible for a range of policy and regulations that control and facilitate broadband and mobile infrastructure, including property access and dispute resolution for UFB installations, and environmental standards.
We are responsible for a range of policy and regulations that control and facilitate broadband and mobile infrastructure.
We are responsible for maintaining a robust regulatory environment for the information and communications technology (ICT) sector.
We are responsible for maintaining a robust regulatory environment for the telecommunications sector.
We are responsible for the delivery of advice, regulation and services that have a real impact on people, businesses and the environment within which they operate.
We are responsible for the maintenance and review of charters for our regulatory systems.
We are seeking expressions of interest for the board positions as set out below.
We are seeking feedback on telecommunications regulatory issues that may impact businesses and consumers.
We are strengthening access to official information by publishing responses to Departmental Official Information Act (OIA) requests of public interest.
We are taking a proactive approach to ensure employers, facilitators of service and workers in the sex industry understand their rights and legal obligations.
We are working to ensure that the retail payment system operates in the interests of New Zealand consumers and businesses.
We are working with other agencies and data providers to further develop this methodology to ensure that it is fit for purpose.
We are working with the Department of Internal Affairs to advance the new direction for water services and policy based on Local Water Done Well.
We are working with the Ministry for the Environment and the Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority to reduce emissions from the industry sector and process heat through energy efficiency and fuel switching.
We are working with the Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) to revise Acts and make them more accessible, readable and easier to understand.
We believe New Zealand can become a significant player in the global commercial space launch industry. However, the opportunities for New Zealand are much broader than launch activities.
We believe a New Zealand Income Insurance Scheme could be an important stepchange that lets us manage the challenges and harness the opportunities that lie ahead for New Zealand.
We cannot enter into any discussion related to politics.
We cannot give you this permission.
We carry out assessments of our regulatory systems to see how well they are performing.
We carry out periodic reviews of the Commerce Act to ensure it reflects modern regulatory practice and continues to deliver benefits to New Zealanders.
We carry out weekly monitoring of importer margins for regular petrol, premium petrol and automotive diesel. This data is weekly, using the previous weeks data.
We collect information from a wide variety of sources in both physical and digital environments. These sources may include: individuals (via inperson interview, telephone call, observation) (voluntary and compulsory); information from online open sources (including websites, social media, apps, and public registers); information from physical sources and locations (e.g. paper records, site visits, inspections); other agencies or entities (e.g. New Zealand government agencies, private sector companies, banks, overseas governments and agencies); information gathered from technical and scientific devices (including biometric information collection, technical measurement devices).
We collect, analyse and publish New Zealand tourism data, along with a range of useful tools and publications.
We conduct interviews and workshops with people involved in all parts of the system at all levels. The feedback from system participants is then mapped against a set of assessment criteria based on lessonsexperience and other good regulatory practice guidance.
We consider the combination of our guidance (Practice advisory ) and industryled initiatives have improved awareness of requirements to restrain nonstructural elements.
We consulted on possible options to introduce a disclosure of origin requirement in the patents regime.
We consulted with the New Zealand Telecommunications Forum (TCF) and other industry stakeholders on the open access obligations that would bind Vodafone under the RBI. We received submissions.
We consulted with the public, and received feedback through written submissions and meetings held around New Zealand:
We continue to update this list as the research landscape evolves.
We contribute to a number of international energy fora that aim to develop a better understanding of underlying energy issues affecting the world.
We contributed to effective regulatory stewardship by supporting schemes to learn from disputes and improve how dispute resolution services are designed and delivered.
We could also use the consultation document to ask targeted questions about alternative entitlement systems . An element of c omplexity within a week sbased entitlement system is inevitable t o provide certainty and clarity about how the rules apply across all working arrangements . . During the Taskforces consultation process, many stakeholders (particularly businesses and payroll providers) called for a more
We currently have a number of roles available. Read more about our people or take a look at our vacancies.
We deliver a range of data, statistics, modelling, research and analytical papers.
We deliver on these objectives through our external facing brands:
We deliver the Ministrys procurement and property functional leadership objectives through a collaborative, centreled approach.
We develop charters and work with the other core agencies to ensure they are comfortable with the charter for their regulatory system. The charter confers no obligation on the core agencies, but records an understanding between them about their respective roles and functions in their regulatory system.
We develop policy and law to support a trading environment that promotes the longterm interests of consumers. This page provides information about recent research and reviews of consumer law.
We develop space policy and strategy
We developed the Briefing through phases of public consultation
We developed the Strategy along with WorkSafe New Zealand with a range of stakeholders. It is informed by research and public consultation on the draft Strategy.
We developed these changes with help from an expert reference group of mining, health and safety and regulatory experts from New Zealand and abroad.
We dont have statutory power to decline to register postal identifiers that include copyrighted words or trademarks. Nor do we check proposed postal identifiers against the trademark database.
We enable spacerelated business, science and innovation
We encourage local authorities to be mindful that it may take time for the public to become familiar with the new rules when considering issuing infringements or fines.
We encourage payload permit applicants to comply with industry best practices for preserving uses of the night sky.
We encourage the use of the Creative Commons Attribution licence (CCBY), permitting free use and reuse subject only to proper attribution.
We encourage you to protect your personal privacy and that of others when using social media, and to take into account the public nature of most social media. Where our social media channels are run by third parties we encourage you to read their privacy policy as well as their terms of use.
We engage independent external boards to help shape and guide our work.
We ensure our actions are not affected by our personal interests or relationships:
We have a central role in governing, monitoring and advising on the gas market to ensure that gas is delivered in a safe, efficient, fair, reliable and environmentally sustainable manner.
We have a central role in monitoring and advising on energy markets to ensure that electricity, gas and liquid fuel are delivered in a safe, efficient, fair, reliable and environmentally sustainable manner.
We have a presence on Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, LinkedIn and Instagram. We encourage you to read the terms of use before engaging with us on these channels.
We have a proven track record of space and aviation innovation
We have a wide range of information, guides, and resources available for government agencies and communities regarding the Language Assistance Services programme.
We have a wide range of operational websites that provide information about specific services and subject areas.
We have a work programme of strategic advice and policy development that includes assessment of, and advice on:
We have approved a range of payloads for launch from New Zealand and this diversity is shown below by country, owner, purpose and size of all payloads up to December .
We have awarded Gold Status for research excellence to a project that is revolutionising the way xray technology will detect, diagnose and monitor many diseases, including cancer.
We have been gathering data and information on the economic impact and recovery options of COVID, and data and statistics about managed isolation and quarantine in New Zealand.
We have bilateral agreements with the United States Government and with the European Space Agency.
We have completed the Monitoring Report which reports on progress with amendments to the Residential Tenancies Act made in June .
We have conducted regulatory system assessments for the following systems:
We have created an online toolkit that provides practical guidance for policymakers and regulators about the opportunities, options and success factors for international regulatory cooperation. The toolkit includes case studies which show the lessons learnt from the different approaches to international regulatory cooperation.
We have customers asking us to support advanced deepspace missions like GTO (Geostationary Transfer Orbit) and GEO (Geostationary Orbit) transfers, Lunar, Mars and asteroid insertions. These highperformance missions benefit substantially from every last percent of performance so, naturally, there is a desire to squeeze more out of them. Collaborating with DLR will help make these missions a reality and allow green propulsion to be more universally applied in space.
We have discontinued the directory as a new service has been developed externally.
We have established a Data Science Review Board to provide MBIE with strategic and practical direction, guidance and leadership for matters relating to data science and algorithm governance.
We have made progress over recent years to move towards a digital and intelligenceled immigration system, but still face enduring challenges that we need to respond to.
We have more than datasets available, ranging across a lot of topics.
We have now completed the Monitoring Report, which reports on progress to . The monitoring report shows that:
We have several guidance documents that you can see towards the end of this page. Guidance documents that may be relevant to HAV licence applicants include those on safety cases; orbital debris mitigation; liability, insurance, and indemnities; and technical capability.
We have several guidance documents that you can see towards the end of this page. Guidance documents that may be relevant to facility licence applicants include those on safety cases; liability, insurance, and indemnities; and technical capability.
We have several guidance documents that you can see towards the end of this page. Guidance documents that may be relevant to launch licence applicants include those on safety cases; orbital debris mitigation; liability, insurance, and indemnities; and technical capability.
We have several guidance documents that you can see towards the end of this page. Guidance documents that may be relevant to payload permit applicants include those on orbital debris mitigation; payloads of a size less than U; liability, insurance, and indemnities; and active debris removal and onorbit servicing missions.
We have released the following ultrafast broadband policy documents in the interests of transparency and open governance.
We have responsibility for maintaining and reviewing charters for our regulatory systems.
We have responsibility for maintaining and reviewing charters. Review of each charter should occur at least every years and include assessments of:
We have worked with a range of groups to develop the Bill.
We help government agencies with:
We help government to deliver better value by lifting procurement capability and performance. We:
We help keep people safe through consistent application of the law.
We help promote international regulatory cooperation to New Zealand regulatory agencies.
We help regions and businesses get the workers they need with a new temporary work visa process.
We help to Grow Aotearoa New Zealand for All to improve the wellbeing of New Zealanders. This page provides information about our business groups.
We help to identify and address the opportunities and challenges facing high growth startup businesses in New Zealand.
We help you know what you need to do, how to do it, and why.
We hold responsibilities relating to trade, including technical barriers to trade, import tariffs, trade remedies, competition, intellectual property and government procurement.
We initiated the survey to assess the Building Code compliance of structural repairs that were exempt from a building consent under Schedule (repairs and maintenance) of the Building Act.
We invest in science through contestable funding rounds. This investment supports programmes which build highperforming science and innovation systems that will transform New Zealand into a more diverse, technologically advanced and smart nation.
We invest in science through contestable funding rounds. This investment supports programmes which build highperforming science and innovation systems.
We know a public consultation is a vital step to make sure we capture all possible options to mitigate the risks.
We lead New Zealands participation in this taskforce at officials level, but dont participate in its subsidiary workstreams. The taskforce undertakes cooperative action on regional energy security issues.
We lead the management of the Crown estate and help other agencies by providing advice and education on:
We listen to you, and we keep it simple.
We look forward to continuing the warm dialogue between our nations as it has been historically, and to identifying and expanding opportunities for cooperation in space in exploration, science, in STEM education, and more.
We looked at the processing as an example and there are post farmgate consumer FCMGCPG, health and home processing platforms emerged from screen .
We looked through each different themes and Antipodes was one of the many cosmetic firms bringing together the key elements of the emerging New Zealand cosmetics story. For each of these points here, the unique environment, the hero ingredients, innovation, circular and sustainable, and ethical. We then built those out into their own sections giving great examples of what the New Zealand firms have done.
We made significant changes to mining regulation in .
We maintain the political neutrality required to enable us to work constructively with current and future governments:
We manage the following legislation:
We may also be required to disclose information under the Official Information Act or to a Parliamentary Select Committee or Parliament in response to a Parliamentary Question.
We may ask or require you to provide some personal information when you complete an online form (eg, the site feedback form or when subscribing to news or updates).
We may collect information by means in which an MBIE staff member is not immediately identifiable. This may be necessary where other means of information collection would prejudice an ongoing investigation, or otherwise prevent MBIE from fulfilling its responsibilities. This includes surveillance activities in accordance with the Search and Surveillance Act .
We may engage external security consultants to gather information to support our regulatory compliance activities. Any engagement of these consultants will be approved by a General Manager, or Deputy Secretary where appropriate, and subject to robust contractual arrangements and regular oversight, with reporting to a governance group that is not directly involved in the decisionmaking or the result of the investigation.
We may followlike organisations and individuals that are relevant to our organisation. This does not imply endorsement or guarantee the accuracy of their information.
We may request the assistance of another agency in relation to the exercising of our statutory powers, for example the New Zealand Police.
We may share information where necessary in order to properly carry out our legislated functions or to assist another public sector agency in fulfilling its regulatory compliance, law enforcement, or protective security responsibilities.
We may use cookies to gather data about trends in website usage using a tool called Google Analytics. This data will be viewable by website administrators and certain other staff. It may also be shared with other government agencies. This information is aggregated and it does not identify you personally.
We may use information about your use of our websites and other IT systems to prevent unauthorised access or attacks on these systems or to resolve such events. We may use this information even if you are not involved in such activity.
We may use information we gather to inform our wider compliance and regulatory strategies. In doing so we will comply with our obligations in the Privacy Act and any other relevant legislation.
We may use services from one or more third party suppliers to monitor or maintain the cyber security of our systems and information. These third party suppliers will have access to monitoring and logging information as well as information processed on our websites and other IT systems.
We may withhold information for specific reasons. If this occurs, we will explain the reasons why. For more information please refer to sections , and of the
We may, at our discretion, report, block or ban anyone who posts the above content, or who breaches these terms of use, or the terms of use of a social media channel.
We may, for example, share information with:
We model future energy supply and demand, and produce a range of useful energy and natural resources data and publications.
We monitor Crown Research Institutes (CRIs), Crown entity companies, statutory entities and Public Finance Act Schedule A nonlisted companies. This page provides information on these entities and the current members of boards.
We monitor Crown Research Institutes, Crown entity companies, statutory entities and Schedule A nonlisted companies.
We monitor the Financial Markets Authority and Te Ara Ahunga Ora Retirement Commission
We need buildings that are fit for purpose and comply with the relevant building standards and requirements. To achieve this, we develop fitforpurpose regulation that ensures public safety and good quality homes and buildings.
We need to be consistent with the usage.
We need to build more meaningful partnerships.
We need to lift skills and productivity to ensure the longterm growth of the building and construction sector.
We now have a quick overview of the format that we had of each of the Stage III deep dives for sports nutrition, biocosmetics and marine bioactives.
We participate in the work of international bodies that support international regulatory cooperation. These include the AsiaPacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
We proactively release Cabinet papers and supporting advice on our policy work.
We produce Briefings to Incoming Ministers (BIMs) following a general election or change in minister. They provide an introduction to each portfolio and summarise key areas of policy and policy issues.
We propose a new single consolidated payment methodology . We recommend including a proposal in your May Cabinet paper to consolidate the greater of ODLP and ADP methodology Cabinet agreed in into a single calculation. W e will continue to work on the exact detail to ensure that the calculation is clear and functional and may include some refinements to the details below in your May Cabinet paper.
We propose that , when it is agreed that AL will accrue during weeks in a period of unpaid leave beyond the f irst week, the AWE divisor must be reduced by that number of weeks.
We provide advice and support to businesses to help them grow, be more innovative, raise their capability and do business more easily.
We provide advice and support to help New Zealand businesses get started, grow, innovate and raise their capability. We also work with other agencies to design and deliver services to businesses in better and smarter ways.
We provide advice to the Minister for Small Business and Manufacturing, and deliver services that support small businesses and manufacturers to grow and prosper.
We provide advice to the Minister of Tourism about the operations of the Institute.
We provide policy advice in the following areas of financial markets conduct regulation:
We provide policy advice on a range of issues relating to the financial markets conduct regulatory system.
We provide policy advice on a range of issues relating to the financial markets regulatory system.
We received submissions on the draft Strategy during public consultation. These showed strong overall support for its direction and vision. People agreed with the Strategy being systemled and futurefocused, placing workers at the centre.
We recognise that months may not be enough time for all employers, with payroll providers and practitioners estimating the implementation process for a medium large employer could take betwee n months. We intend to test the proposed month implementation period during the exposure draft consultation process to better understand the practical implications of this timeframe
We recommend change s to the treatment of leave entitlements in a restructuring situation (amending the Employment R elations Act)
We record calls and retain emails for staff training purposes, helping us to improve the quality of our customer service and to ensure the information we provide is consistent and accurate. We may also share the communication internally with other MBIE business units if required.
We record the screen share sessions for quality assurance purposes. The screen recordings are stored on a secure server for days. If you wish to request information through the Official Information Act , to make a complaint or to discuss your screen share session, please do so promptly to allow us sufficient time to process your request before the screen recording is deleted.
We regulate the use of space from New Zealand
We release a wide range of information to help and inform you.
We require all research fund applicants to declare in their funding proposals any technologies of special interest that may used as part of their research methodology. This covers a range of historic and emerging technologies including:
We reserve the right to report or remove (as appropriate) any posts or comments that do not comply with the:
We respect the authority of current and future governments:
We respect the backgrounds, differences and perspectives of all those with whom we work and serve:
We share our knowledge, experience and information to help others to be successful:
We sought public submissions to help inform the report, particularly on:
We sponsored a number of structural reports on the performance of commercial buildings in the Canterbury earthquakes. These include reports we commissioned to support the work of the Canterbury Earthquakes Royal Commission.
We strive to make a positive difference to the wellbeing of New Zealand and all New Zealanders:
We strongly recommend that you visit the NAATI website and take some time to explore the comprehensive NAATI Credentialing System and all it has to offer to those seeking to become credentialed as professional interpreters.
We support people to lift the level and quality of regulatory system governance in ways:
We support rocket launches, highaltitude vehicle and payload permitting
We support the continuing success of New Zealand as a destination for screen activity, including film, television, digital effects and postproduction work.
We survey recent migrants about their experiences of life in New Zealand and report on their settlement outcomes. We also survey New Zealanders about their perceptions of migrants and immigration to better understand community attitudes.
We surveyed independent providers of dispute resolution services (ie, those not employed by government) to obtain a more comprehensive understanding of the current dispute resolution service provider market.
We talked about the greater opportunity for reuse and repurposing of materials and products because we got so much information about them. That obviously allows us to refurbish and remanufacture as well potentially. Good repair and maintenance, product leasing, we could lease something because weve got all the data around. If we are leasing a flooring or releasing any other aspect of the building and some new model where we lease it and change it after a few years, then weve got all the information the digital twin that can manage that. And it facilitates the recycling of materials and use of recycled material.
We then have a little example here which is when we are at the end of the construction phase. And this is another opportunity where we can use the digital twin to look at timelines, we can try and manage the build in a much better way. This little video is just a representation of how we can transform from the digital plan into the actual construction and see how were matching in terms of performance and timeline. But again, as you know with construction, things dont always go to plan. Maybe we want to change some materials; say weve spotted a really new recycled flooring that we want to use and it ticks a lot of boxes for the stakeholders and so we can swap things in like that and then see whats the difference to the building. How does it affect air quality, how it affects emissions, whats the lifetime of that
We think both of these consultation options will deliver the desired feedback and increase the quality and workability of the Bill for introduction. A targeted approach has the advantage of keeping submissions to a more reasonable number, which will help ensure we are better
We treat information with care, and use and disclose it only for its intended purpose:
We understand your personal information is important to you, and we are committed to protecting your privacy. We will only retain personal information until no longer necessary and according to our legal requirements.
We undertake a programme of assessment of most of our regulatory systems based on regulation best practice principles and past regulatory failures.
We undertake personal and professional development to improve the performance of ourselves and MBIE:
We use ORCID iDs as unique identifiers for research funding to accurately link research publications, data and other research activities to researchers.
We use a range of funding and support programmes to invest the majority of our science and innovation funds. Each programme is supported with comprehensive documentation covering application and assessment details.
We use social media to share the latest information on our programmes and services, and to enable way conversations and feedback.
We used different criteria in home processing than we did in primary production.
We used qualitative interviews with landlords to inform the survey design. This research also provided insight into how they are choosing to act as a result of the new requirements.
We want New Zealand to have safe, healthy, durable homes and buildings. This page provides information about our investigations and reviews for safer buildings.
We want a scheme that honours the Treaty partnership
We want everyone to take advantage of the opportunities that New Zealands participation in the global space economy has to offer.
We want thriving space and advanced aviation sectors in New Zealand to help rebuild our economy. These sectors are already innovative and inspiring, employing a productive and highly skilled workforce to develop capabilities that improve our lives. We have an opportunity to take this even further.
We want to hear from everybody in both of those sectors
We want to hear from individuals, businesses, service providers, and any other interested parties on these proposed changes.
We want to make it easier for culturally and linguistically diverse people to participate in New Zealand society. One way we can do that is to ensure that government agencies can access interpreting services of an appropriate standard, when required.
We welcome any questions, suggestions or comments about international regulatory cooperation.
We welcome feedback and ideas from our followers and will try to join these conversations where possible, however we cant guarantee we will be able to reply individually to every post. If you have an urgent query, please contact us directly.
We welcome input and suggestions on screen sector policy from industry and the wider public, particularly in relation to economic development of the sector and international productions.
We will acknowledge your request as soon as practical and respond no later than working days after we receive it. Sometimes for large requests or those requiring consultation, the Act allows for a time limit extension. If so, we will let you know and give you a specific due .
We will add to this section as we work on improving information and data, particularly with the development of the New Zealand Research Information System (NZRIS).
We will apply the charter where the use of algorithms can significantly impact the wellbeing of people, or there is a high likelihood many people will suffer an unintended adverse impact. We will assess our algorithms for risk and apply the charter accordingly.
We will be gaining new insights into freespace optical communications, laser communication instrumentation, satellite tracking, and ground station operations.
We will continue monitoring progress in .
We will do our best to help you promptly.
We will ensure the education, immigration and welfare systems work together to meet the current and future skills needs of workers and businesses.
We will generally not share personal information that is provided or collected through our social media channels, unless it is necessary to do so for the purpose for which you gave us the information (eg, to investigate a complaint) or where you consent. We will not otherwise disclose personal information provided or collected through our social media channels unless required or otherwise permitted by law.
We will generally not share personal information that is provided or collected through this website, unless it is necessary to do so for the purpose for which you gave us the information (eg, to investigate a complaint) or where you consent. We will not otherwise disclose personal information provided or collected through this website unless required or otherwise permitted by law.
We will generally only use personal information provided to us through our social media channels for the purpose you provided it (eg, to improve our services, or to action or respond to the information provided). We may also use personal information provided to us for other reasons permitted under the Privacy Act (eg, with your consent, for a directly related purpose, or where the law permits or requires it).
We will generally only use personal information provided to us through this website or the MBIE Customer Service Centre for the purpose you provided it (eg, to administer, evaluate and improve the site, to improve our services, or to action or respond to the information provided). We may also use personal information provided to us through this website or the MBIE Customer Service Centre for other reasons permitted under the Privacy Act (eg, with your consent, for a directly related purpose, or where the law permits or requires it).
We will need to manage resources carefully when deciding what changes can be made to the Bill prior to introduction
We will only retain personal information as long as it is required for the purposes for which the information may lawfully be used.
We will provide further updates as more information becomes available. You can sign up for Horizon Europe updates here. If you have any questions or want to get in touch with the New Zealand leads you can email
We will publish a summary of submissions document and may publish individual submissions on the MBIE website. When you make a submission, MBIE will consider that you have consented to it being on the MBIE website, unless you clearly state otherwise (you can easily notify us of this in the submission form provided). If your submission contains any information that is confidential or that you do not want , you can also say this in your submission.
We will seek to consult with you when responding to any such requests for information under the OIA. If you object to the release of information in your submission, we will take that into account when responding to such a request.
We will support workplaces to provide all workers with quality work with opportunities to maximise their potential. We will protect workers from exploitative work and enforce minimum standards.
We will take all practicable steps to verify information received from third parties.
We work closely with a number of agencies to promote science and innovation in New Zealand.
We work closely with a number of agencies to promote science and innovation in New Zealand. There are also other organisations, such as industry bodies and private companies, that are funding or carrying out research in New Zealand.
We work closely with a number of agencies to promote science and innovation in New Zealand. Together, we seek strong links between the science and innovation sector and overseas research interests, as well as with New Zealand businesses and the wider public.
We work in partnership with the Ministry of Primary Industries and New Zealand Trade and Enterprise to manage the Food and Beverage Project and produce various reports about the sector.
We work to ensure that telecommunications markets operate efficiently, and the commerce and ICT infrastructure is well developed.
We work to make our services accessible, efficient and effective for all:
We work to the best of our ability at all times:
We work with a range of stakeholders including businesses, unions and across government.
We work with ministers across a range of portfolios.
Well be publishing the data with our new methodology for national average prices from Wednesday May. The data series using the existing methodology will continue to be in parallel alongside this for weeks from this . Supporting information will be on this page.
Weve come to this example here. Its like oh, its actually time to replace some of the insulation and weve got a better biobased product to put in there that performs better. So we can put in the change. And then we can see what impact that will have. And, you know, it gives us an opportunity to look at different materials and swapping in different equipment as we as we go. And then we can adjust things. But obviously, we know so much about that building, weve captured a lot of the data, we know what the materials are, weve got predictive maintenance. So thats really helpful from a cost management point of view and just managing the building.
Weve got one in Christchurch, which is a flood digital twin, which is looking at managing flooding. And again, were looking at some partnerships and collaboration there to do that.
Weather Forecasting System Preliminary Regulatory Impact Statement
Weather Forecasting System Review Recommendations
Weather Permitting: review of open access to weather data in New Zealand
Web versions of the documents for the consultation Review of New Zealand Companies Office Fees and Levies ().
Webinar about space career pathways
Weekly average importer margins
Weekly average price components for regular petrol
Weekly data and statistics about managed isolation and quarantine in New Zealand.
Weekly fuel price monitoring
Weekly oil price monitoring data dictionary PDF KB
Weekly report to ministers
Welcoming Communities Pilot Programme Evaluation
Welcoming communities New Zealand programme Key messages PDF KB
Welcoming communities pilot programme Final evaluation summary report July June (Martin Jenkins) PDF KB
Welldesigned regulatory settings provide a predictable environment that promotes competition and one where businesses are confident to employ more staff, invest, innovate and enter new markets. This drives growth that benefits all New Zealanders.
Wellfunctioning housing and construction markets support growth in productivity and employment, and affect macroeconomic stability, health, security, and social cohesion.
Wellplanned infrastructure supports the efficient and sustainable movement of people, goods, and information. It facilitates trade and investment while improving living standards and is key to enabling and driving economic growth.
Wellington , New Zealand
Wellington Regional Workforce Plan
Wellington local insights report: November
Western Bay of Plenty District Council
Whakaari White Island WorkSafe report PDF .MB
WhakaariWhite Island reviewing policy settings PDF .MB
WhakaariWhite Island eruption: cross government response PDF KB
Whakapapa of the Action Plan
Whangarei Local Fibre Company Limited Fibre Deed
What are Longterm Insights Briefings
What are Regulatory Systems Amendment Bills
What are online financial scams
What are the likely risks and unintended impacts How significant are they and how will they be minimised or mitigated Although changes to the Act would provide greater prescription and can be systematised , obligations would remain complex in relation to employees with diverse working arrangements and v ariable pay structures. This complexity means that the risk of incorrect payments for some employees is not entirely removed. However, greater regulation and support for compliance from MBIE would reduce this risk. It is also anticipated that small to med ium sized enterprises (SMEs) may be more affected than larger businesses by the proposed changes . This is due to SMEs being less likely to have dedicated payroll professionals as part of their staff and less able to absorb increased costs. These impacts co uld be mitigated by assisting smaller businesses when implementing changes to the Act. Section C : Evidence certainty and quality assurance Agency rating of evidence certainty An external professional services company with payroll expertise was contracted to provide independent advice on the implications that the options for change would have if they were implemented across New Zealand. A key part of this testing was to ensure t hat options were tested against the wide range of working arrangements and employer types that can be found across the New Zealand economy. Using anonymised payroll data from a number of different payroll systems and employers , this testing investigated wh ether the options were implementable in payroll systems, how options compare d to the current Act provisions, and identif ied any issues with the proposals. The model used in the testing was built with the same underlying functionalities for calculating enti tlements and pa yments as payroll systems in order to generate the same results. MBIE has confidence in the testing undertaken with regards to implementability, impacts and estimated increased payments for variable workers . However, as the testing was focus ed on non standard working arrangements, it did not include a representative sample of all working arrangements and c annot be extrapolated directly to the wider labour force. shrvakdix
What are they Bioactive food components are physiologically active constituents in food or dietary supplements derived from both animal or plant sources. Essentially, they have to be added to something else which causes an in effect.
What changes we have made to the methodology used for monitoring importer margins
What child labour exploitation looks like in practice
What cost pressures does WorkSafe face over the next four years and do they align with its role, strategy and government priorities
What do we do with it Do we share it
What do you think about our requirements for workers to be eligible for payments For example, having paid levies, being a New Zealand citizen or resident, and different coverage for health and disabilityrelated job losses.
What does the New Zealand Space Scholarship cover
What does the Strategy mean for you
What does the circular economy mean for my business
What does the future of business for Aotearoa New Zealand look like
What employers can do to prepare for the changes
What happens after you have made your submission
What information is covered by this statement, and why do we collect it
What is Buy Now Pay Later
What is a just transition
What is a regulatory system
What is an Industry Transformation Plan
What is dispute resolution
What is regulatory system governance
What is the discounted price
What mobile coverage is currently available
What outcomes do you hope to achieve through this collaboration
What people had to say about the Strategy
What science and innovation funding and investment opportunities are open and what is scheduled to open in the coming months.
What some leading researchers have to say about the use of ORCID iDs in research funding
What success will look like (outcomes)
What the programme will deliver
What to study after school
What unique benefits do you see as a result of working with DLR researchers and scientists as opposed to those from other countries
What we are proposing and seeking feedback on
What we then found is that we have two different systems and two different ways we had to look at it. One was the biomass production system, so that is the agriculture, silver culture, the aquaculture, what we are producing eg farming and then be biomass systems ie what are we milling or killing or cutting up etc. We looked at it separately and then feed into this into this funnel.
What we want to achieve (objectives)
When US company LeoLabs was looking for an engineering firm to help design a structure to house its Kiwi Space Radar (KSR) it chose Ruamoko Solutions, an innovative New Zealand company recognised for pioneering seismic design for the Christchurch rebuild.
When a partial strike occurs, employers will be able to either:
When considering whether or not to charge, we use these
When language assistance services are not provided, or when these are inconsistent, or of a questionable quality, it can result in less effective public services, prolonged service involvement with increased costs for certain client groups, delays in the successful integration of former refugees and migrants, and compromised confidence in public services altogether.
When making a prosecution decision, decision makers must follow
When making decisions about information gathering, we take into account a range of considerations, including the impact on individuals and their privacy; the harm that MBIE is responsible for preventing or addressing; the public interest in MBIE fulfilling its regulatory, law enforcement and security responsibilities and to assist other public sector agencies to fulfil their responsibilities; and the obligations on MBIE as a public sector agency.
When posting online (for example on Facebook or Twitter) you will not say anything that will bring MBIE into disrepute or compromise your ability to do your job.
When the Fund closed in all remaining funds were rolled into the Tourism Infrastructure Fund.
When the complaint relates to an allegation of discrimination, the complainant may consider contacting the Human Rights Commission.
When the fund closed in all remaining funds were rolled into to the Tourism Infrastructure Fund.
When visiting other websites, please refer to the terms and conditions of use, privacy and copyright policies of those sites.
When we set you up as a supplier in our system, we will ask you to select which of the options below best describes your organisation so that we can have a better understanding of the role your business plays in the New Zealand economy.
When we then when we looked through the process we divided then and looked at them in separate ways. We looked at what was in the production system, we looked at a landbased system and then in a waterbased system, and then in the processing system we looked at these in a slightly different way, as how do they better support the outcomes from existing uses of biomasses which is the wood, the wool, health and home etc. We looked at how to support better farm inputs, so the feed, fertilizers, pesticides etc. Then number three was how do we begin to transition away from the fossil fuels, looking at alternatives such as replacements for coal, petrol, natural gas, plastics etc.
When we work with others and share information
When were looking through this, were actually thinking about now, all the way to , as long as we can really. And were thinking about how over time these things will shape. So, well be starting the use case at the beginning, which is now. And with the technology we have here and now, and the current systems and economy we have, but obviously well be going ahead right up until maybe the end of the century and what could that mean, how can we envisage how things could develop
When you can get rural broadband under RBI
When you can seek new certification
When you imagine your future what do you see yourself doing
When you make a booking request, providers can accept or reject it. There are standard service levels for response times and fulfilment rates. If a provider rejects a booking, you can go to another provider on the panel.
When you provide personal information, unless otherwise indicated, it will be held by us. It may be stored or accessed on behalf of us by authorised third parties (such as thirdparty contractors) to the extent that is necessary, for example for them to administrate or work on the site. We will store and keep your personal information secure in accordance with the Privacy Act and any agents will be subject to our information security and privacy requirements.
When you provide personal information, unless otherwise indicated, it will be held by us. It may be stored or accessed on behalf of us by authorised third parties (such as thirdparty contractors) to the extent that is necessary. We will store and keep your personal information secure in accordance with the Privacy Act and any agents will be subject to our information security and privacy requirements.
When you subscribe to one of our alerts or newsletters, the details you provide may be stored in a secure thirdparty database (eg,
Where any information provided (which may include personal information) to, or through, this site or the MBIE Customer Service Centre constitutes public records, it will be retained to the extent required by the Public Records Act .
Where articles are not yet or submitted at the time of final reporting, the list of publications should include articles in submission or in preparation with a statement of how these will be made available once .
Where do the costs fall Most costs are anticipated to fall to employers . These costs include increased annual holidays and leave payments for some employees due to changes to the gross earnings definition , parental leave provisions, and a new payment methodology . Employees that have variable working arrangements and complex remuneration structures are most likely to receive an increase in annual holidays and leave payments as a result of the proposed changes to the A ct. It is estimated that between , and , employees, or to per cent of all New Zealand employees, fall within these categories and are most likely to work in the health care and social assistance, accommodation and food services and public administration and safety sectors. The majority of employees, particularly those with standard hours and stable earnings, should not see increased payments when compared to the current Act. However, improved clarity and certainty should help address noncompliance issues and many employees may see changes in their holiday and leave pay as a result.
Where information has not been about a payload, there are grounds for withholding that information under the Official Information Act .
Where is Mobile Black Spot Coverage
Where possible resolving disputes regarding declined proposals and informing the employee of the appeals process for declined flexible work proposals.
Where possible, programmes and services should be framed as familycentered, contributing to building intergenerational economic wellbeing and inclusive of cultural practices (e.g. cultural gifting and tithing). The relationship between financial aspirations and cultural values within Pacific communities is important, and these values shape how people think about and handle money, including how wealth is saved or shared within the community.
Where to get help and more information
Where to get your vehicle certified selfcontained
Where to go for more information
Where to go to resolve your dispute
Where we identify the need to use the information further, for example, to consider or investigate compliance breaches, or concerns, or initiate our own investigations or inquiries, we will only do so if required or permitted by law.
Where you can freedom camp
Whether the applicant or a person who is to have or is likely to have contr ol over the exercise of the rights under the licence: has been subject to an order under the Mental Health (Compulsory Assessment and Treatment Act) , and if so, when. Foreign licences, permits or authorisations For any foreign licences, permits or authorisations applied for, granted or declined : Details of the foreign regulator (name, location) Authorisation or registration numbersidentifiers and copies of the relevant authorisation of issue and length of time in which the authorisation is in ef fect Entityentities in respect of which authorisation has been issued Information regarding any conditions imposed and the nature of those conditions .
Whether the applicant or a person who is to have or is likely to have control over the exercise of the rights under the licence: has been subject to an order under the Men tal Health (Compulsory Assessment and Treatment ) Act . If so, state when . Information for launch facility licences Facility details A summary of the facility, including location and an overview of its proposed launch operations (including a general description of launch vehicles to be launched from the facility, frequencies of operation, and proposed launch trajectories ) A site plan showing launch site and command and control centre An overview of any protective security (including cyber security) mea sures or policies in place to protect launch facility systems.
Whether the applicant or a person who is to have or is likely to have control over the exercise of the rights under the licence: has been subject to an order under the Mental Health (Compulsory Assessment and Treatment )
Whether you choose a light touch or detailed approach, be clear about why you are developing a plan, who needs to be involved with clearly defined roles and responsibilities and how the plan will be implemented (and funded).
Which analytical tools are suited to transformative change
Which analytical tools are suited to transformative change PDF KB
Which language do you use Brochure PDF, KB
Which language do you use Poster PDF, KB
While MBIE and DIA are coleading the implementation of the programme, outcomes depend on input from many agencies. The programme shares the governance structure of the New Zealand Refugee Resettlement and Migrant Settlement and Integration Strategies.
While agriculture, forestry, and fishing were the primary contributors to GDP in , professional, scientific and technical services led the way in .
While financial support will be for a maximum of six months, this could be extended for up to months for people undertaking appropriate training or vocational rehabilitation programmes. This is common in international schemes, and ensures those in the scheme have financial security if they are training or rehabilitating.
While launch capabilities are increasingly in the private sector, governments continue to make up a large proportion of the customer base for launch providers, whether directly or indirectly. These payloads can range from research and development, to operational civil services, to military and intelligence payloads. All payloads, including those owned by foreign governments, must meet the tests outlined above required under OSHAA.
While the groups operate separately, sharing a chair will allow for connections to be made between the two systems where appropriate.
While the consultation has now closed, you can find out more about the issues and options we consulted on here:
While there are benefits from BNPL to consumers, businesses and the wider economy as an alternative to other forms of credit, the Government has acted on concerns that for some people, the use of BNPL will be unaffordable and unsuitable, and could result in financial hardship.
While we prepare for these bold and ambitious missions, it is important that the United States and our partners commit to conducting ourselves pacefully responsibly and transparently for the benefit of all, to ensure a safe and sustainable environment for outer space activities.
Who can be a sex worker in New Zealand
Who to contact about exploitation
Who we are and what we do
Why MBIE focuses on regulatory system governance
Why dispute resolution is important
Why international regulatory cooperation is important
Why this objective is important
Why this research was commissioned
Why we monitor importer margins
Why we need organisation size and type of ownership information
Why we need this Action Plan
Wielding the waste of the nation to combat COVID
William Rolleston, Chair, Genomics Aotearoa, South Pacific Sera Limited
With languages spanning established as well as rare and emerging languages and dialects and a focus on punctuality, accuracy, and confidentiality, Ms services are tailored for various industries, including healthcare, legal, and business, ensuring clients receive outstanding support whenever and wherever they need it at the click of a button.
With a targeted approach, t here is a risk of missing some stakeholders who would have liked to make a submission . However,
With adversity comes opportunity, and we now have the chance to reshape our industry and live up to our huge potential and global competitive advantage as Brand New Zealand.
With eInvoicing, businesses no longer need to generate paperbased or PDF invoices that have to be printed, posted or emailed; and buyers no longer need to manually enter these into their financial system.
With highlevel modelling of this nature the results are assessed against the status quo, rather than against a range of feasible land use and production alternatives. This limits the opportunity to assess alternative pathways, which may have lower environmental costs or offer higher economic returns. (Such as the utilisation of new forest production for engineered timber in construction rather than biomass for energy.)
With support from the Ministry for the Environment and the NESTF Technical Advisory Group, we have developed a users guide to help councils and the telecommunications industry understand and implement the NESTF.
With the changes in regulation, gene technologies could:
With the new migrant exploitation research released, the findings should be used to inform how the government can best deliver information to migrant workers and their employers.
With these caveats in mind, data from Jobs Online tracks well in terms of the direction of change of other labour market indicators, such as the unemployment rate.
With unique expertise, talent and technology, coupled with our size and location, New Zealand offers surprising advantages when it comes to making things happen.
With rules, our scientists can make advances in healthcare, climate change, protect the environment, lift our agricultural productivity and boost exports.
Within the environmental services sector, observations make up the most basic data from which valueadd services, such as weather forecasts or climatological products, are derived.
Work closely with our international partners to promote cooperation and reduce barriers to trade including restrictive export controls and domestic sourcing requirements.
Work is underway to explore the changes necessary to ensure a more integrated weather forecasting system including the implementation pathway.
Work is underway to implement the Tourism Communities: Support, Recovery and Reset Plan. Further information on each of the components is set out below, and will be as delivery decisions are finalised.
Work on modern slavery supply chain legislation in New Zealand is on hold while the Government focuses on its current Workplace Relations and Safety priorities. Decisions on whether to progress modern slavery supply chain legislation will be made in due course.
Work on the Adventure Activities Regulations has been completed and these will come into force on April .
Work programme progress update as at June PDF KB
Work programme progress update as of September PDF KB
Work programme status update PDF KB
Work programme status update PDF KB
Work supported by statutes administered by MBIE
Work with engineered stone and materials containing crystalline silica
Workrelated health and safety
WorkSafe NZ: reviewing how it administers the adventure activities regime and making process improvements as required
WorkSafe New Zealand Act
WorkSafe New Zealand Strategic Baseline Review PDF .MB
WorkSafe should implement processes to ensure that when they are informed about an audit being planned for activities on Whakaari White Island, auditors are told to use an appropriate technical expert and are provided the details of the technical experts available.
WorkSafe should recognise activities carried out on Whakaari White Island as its own adventure activity (rather than as part of trekkingmountaineering activities)
WorkSafe will add a section to the Safety Audit Standard on assessing and managing the risks associated with natural hazards. They will also review the Standard more broadly.
WorkSafe will also publish guidance material on good practice management of natural hazard risks.
WorkSafe will over the next years review and add to the package of activity safety guidelines.
WorkSafe, in partnership with the identified technical experts, should consider whether it should develop safety guidelines for activities on Whakaari White Island.
WorkSafe, or an appropriate industry body, should identify individuals or organisations with appropriate experience and qualifications, and ensure they are available to be engaged as a technical expert when required.
Worker eligibility PDF KB
Worker engagement, participation and representation
Workers (employees, volunteers)
Workers eligible after six months of levy contributions in the previous months
Workers made redundant or laid off for economic reasons will receive up to six months of financial support from the scheme
Workers with health conditions or disabilities will receive the same amount of insurance cover
Workforce Survey of Organisations Report
Working Matters Disability Employment Action Plan released in August
Working Matters Disability Employment Action Plan monitoring dashboards
Working Matters ensures disabled people and people with health conditions have an equal opportunity to access employment. You can find the alternative versions of the action plan for various accessibility needs and read more about at the link below.
Working Matters: Report back on the Disability Employment Action Plan
Working Safer: A blueprint for health and safety at work
Working arrangements that do not meet the exclusion criteria will continue to be assessed using the current full test in section of the Employment Relations Act .
Working conditions of migrant employees ( and )
Working in partnership with others
Working in the space sector
Working together to support and facilitate RD in New Zealand.
Working with children or vulnerable adults
Working with communities to transition New Zealand to a lowemissions economy.
Working with the private sector to put together the most relevant digital tools, technologies, products and services to support small businesses with becoming digital.
Workplace Relations and Safety
Workplace Relations and Safety Policy.
Workplace Relations and Safety portfolio funding and savings summary PDF KB
Workplace relations in New Zealands screen industry
Workplace relations in the screen industry
Workplace relationships in the screen industry
Workplace, Safety and Security
Works for agencies and teams
Workshop: Potential of digital twin technology
Written along the full length of the arrow are the following
Written submissions closed at pm
Xerra Earth Observation Institute
You are responsible for ensuring that all parties mentioned in your proposal:
You are solely responsible for the security of the confidential information within your desktop, and MBIE accepts no responsibility for any expenses or losses incurred or any action taken because of receipt of any confidential information.
You are welcome to create a hyperlink from another website to this one. However, the link must not be presented on your website in any context that implies that a Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) website has an association with your site, or that we endorse your site or product.
You can access all of our research and evaluation reports in our document library.
You can access the Radiocommunications Act and Radiocommunications Regulations on the NZ Legislation website:
You can also download the PDF version below.
You can also explore MTAGDP data graphically in our Regional Economic Activity Tools:
You can also provide anonymous information to
You can also reach out to our National Contact Points
You can also read the full discussion document, and provide your feedback through a short survey or full submission in our Have your say section.
You can also register with The Treasury, but they do not offer a nominations service.
You can also report migrant exploitation via Crimestoppers, which provides an anonymous and simple way to pass on information to authorities. There are two ways you can contact Crimestoppers via or through an email form available on their website
You can be a member of a political party however you will not reveal advice given to the Government and you will abide by your duty of confidentiality to MBIE.
You can contact the New Zealand Space Agency at
You can email your request to:
You can fill out and email our submission form, or complete an online survey. Submissions close at pm on November .
You can find more details on the action plan here:
You can find out about Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission guidance and requirements here:
You can find out more about the MEDAB and its members here:
You can find research papers under this theme below.
You can find the consultation document to read on our website, along with a submission template for you to complete if you would like to share your views with us.
You can find the inaugural strategy here:
You can learn more about signing up for GETS access via the New Zealand Government Procurement website.
You can make a request for Official Information via our online form or you can make a request by post.
You can manually disable cookies at any time. Check your browsers Help to find out how (disabling cookies will not affect your ability to use this website).
You can post your request to:
You can read background information about the Cabinet decision in these documents:
You can read key findings from the four reports:
You can read more about how connectivity is improving in your region in the quarterly updates below.
You can read more about these changes at:
You can read more about this at:
You can read more on He Ara Waiora below:
You can read previous work at:
You can read the Acceptable Solutions and more about restricting access to residential pools on the
You can read the Proactively released Cabinet Paper and associated Minute here:
You can read the full letter below:
You can register with any of the following nominating agencies:
You can search by keyword, , document type and topic.
You can search for all our research and evaluation reports in the
You can see when you may expect a response by using the
You can send us your ideas on how to drive New Zealands economic growth through the form below.
You can send your submission to us by email or post.
You can share the form with others
You can use www.mbie.govt.nz without disclosing any personal information.
You can view a copy of the now repealed Fair Pay Agreements Act at:
You dont have to register as a postal operator if you carry letters:
You have a right of access to and correction of any information you provided during the screen share session. If you wish to access or correct any information held by MBIE in relation to your screen share session, please refer to the Make a request for official information page of our website.
You have options about how to proceed with this work . We welcome the opportunity to discuss the Holidays Act Review with you in more detail, so that we can understand how you would like to progress this work. The section below sets out some areas for initial consideration and discussion. The priority to be given to progressing work on reforming the Holidays Act . It would be useful to discuss the priority of this work with you , relative to other aspects of your policy work programme. The Coalition Governments agreements state that a priority for this term is impr oving the quality of regulation . Given the impact of the longstanding issues with the Act (discussed in paragraphs above) on all employers and employees , we recommend that progressing legislative changes to improve the Holidays Act be given
You have rights when you shop for goods and services. Find out more about your consumer rights.
You may also be interested in:
You may be a victim of migrant exploitation if:
You may choose to voluntarily provide personal information through our social media channels. This information may be viewable by account administrators, and our staff (as appropriate).
You may choose to voluntarily provide personal information through this website (eg, in the feedback form or when subscribing to news and updates). This information may be viewable by site administrators, our staff (as appropriate) and thirdparty contractors who may administrate or work on the site.
You may communicate privately with a Minister or MP about matters outside of your role at MBIE, but if you are in a senior position or work closely with Ministers, you should exercise particular care in doing so.
You might be interested in:
You might like to explore these searches
You must get permission from the copyright owner to use:
You must have a transport service licence issued by the New Zealand Transport Agency if you operate a goods service vehicle.
You must log in with your CMS password in order to view the draft or archived content.
You must perform your duties honestly and impartially and avoid any personal, financial or professional situations which may compromise (or be seen to compromise) your integrity. For example, giving preferential treatment to an organisation in which you have an interest.
You should not necessarily expect to be reappointed. In some cases, legislation sets out the maximum amount of time a board member can serve. The Minister has to decide that there are sound reasons for your reappointment.
You should only proceed if youve been instructed to do so by a MBIE Client Services Advisor.
You will act in good faith.
You will advise MBIE if you are made bankrupt or enter into a No Asset Procedure.
You will be active in your own selfdevelopment and take opportunities to enhance your performance.
You will be politically neutral in all of your dealings in the workplace, irrespective of what your personal views may be.
You will carry out all lawful and reasonable instructions.
You will carry out your duties efficiently and use your skills and resources to the best of your ability and be present at and available for work as required.
You will contribute to a healthy and safe workplace.
You will declare any secondary employment or contractingconsulting or business ventures that you are involved with.
You will disclose all conflicts of interest (including potential and perceived conflicts) to your manager. For example, a family involvement in a company tendering for business with MBIE, ownership of a rental property during a dispute with tenants, when a family member appears on your recruitment panel, acting on behalf of others in tribunals or processing the application of a person known or related to you (for example processing an immigration application for a family friend). This can also include conflicts of interest arising from being a member of a club, society
You will disclose all gifts you accept over the value of that are offered in the course of your employment, such as prizes, tickets to sporting events, fees, discounts, upgrades, free travel, products, services, entertainment and hospitality or any other form of benefit, favour, reward or inducement.
You will disclose if you hold another public office.
You will disclose new convictions andor pending criminal charges.
You will disclose past criminal convictions not covered by the Criminal Records (Clean Slate) Act or any other convictions that you are legally required to disclose.
You will ensure any communications you make, whether internally or externally, are professional and respectful.
You will ensure that you remain up to with any continuous professional development that may be required for you to perform your role.
You will ensure that your contribution to any public debate or discussion on policy matters maintains the discretion and neutrality appropriate to your position.
You will ensure that your personal views do not impact on your work at MBIE. This includes ensuring that any personal adherence to or work for a particular political or moral cause or movement does not impact your work performance, discredit MBIE or jeopardise its relationship with clients andor the Minister.
You will familiarise yourself with and adhere to all relevant MBIE policies, procedures and practices.
You will find the report at the link below.
You will follow all lawful and reasonable instructions.
You will get a unique link to the form and a password, which you can share with others. Only person can access the form at a time.
You will maintain confidentiality in relation to work matters at all times, including after your employment has ended.
You will maintain open communication and share information.
You will maintain standards of behaviour, language and dress that are appropriate to the workplace and that uphold a positive image of MBIE.
You will make it clear to others when you are commenting as a private individual.
You will not access or use MBIE information and systems for your personal gain, curiosity, or interest or for the unauthorised gain, curiosity, or interest of another person.
You will not access or work on matters for your family, friends or acquaintances, nor provide them with unauthorised advice or assistance.
You will not approach a Minister or MP about an employment relationship problem. The process for addressing such issues is outlined in your employment agreement.
You will not be present at work in an unfit state, for example being under the influence of alcohol, drugs or other intoxicants.
You will not bring MBIE into disrepute. For example by making statements to the media without authorisation, or making public criticism of or comments on (including on social media) MBIE andor policies with which you have been professionally involved or associated.
You will not make a personal attack on any person.
You will not participate in a political event that advertises your official capacity within MBIE.
You will not pass on or sell MBIE information or information held by MBIE to a third party, for example to a family member or a collection agency, or share information about a tender process with a company participating in that process.
You will not publicaly criticise or comment in a personal capacity on policies with which you have been professionally involved or associated.
You will not store or use MBIE information on unapproved ICT systems or services such as personal email accounts and cloud web services.
You will not unlawfully discriminate against any person.
You will not use your position as an employee of MBIE to obtain information not normally required by you in the course of your employment.
You will obey the law of the country in which you are working.
You will perform your role in line with the performance and behaviour expectations set by your manager
You will provide full, frank and impartial advice to the Government if required in the course of your duties.
You will refrain from physical, verbal, written or psychological violence or bullying of any kind, racial or sexual harassment and unlawful discrimination.
You will treat our customers and other people you have dealings with in your role with courtesy and respect.
You will undertake the duties of your position diligently and to a satisfactory standard to help MBIE meet its purpose.
You will value and support the contribution of all colleagues.
You will work collaboratively with your colleagues and external stakeholders.
You will work constructively and positively with your colleagues.
YouTube Community Guidelines
Your GST number (if applicable)
Your board member fees will be paid in accordance with either:
Your business name or trade name
Your contact at MBIE may give you a form to provide us with the following information:
Your password is randomly , and we do not have access to it.
Your responsibility as an employer
Youth Employment Action Plan released in August
Youth Employment Action Plan Monitoring and reporting Dashboard: August PDF KB
Youth Employment Action Plan monitoring and reporting dashboard
Youth Employment Action Plan monitoring and reporting dashboard: June PDF KB
Zahra Champion, CE, BioTechNZ
Zero emission hopon hopoff buses will be the main transport on the road, with a park and ride system
Zoo and Aquarium Association
CAB MIN .
refers . As you are aware, t he Employment (Leave Entitlements) Bill
A video of a person presenting at a podium in the upper right corner of the screen.
From the bottom center screen, a graphic of a blue hand reaches up, pointed finger extended, and clicks on the Wellington city symbol. The next slide is labelled Design phase and shows a D isometric cityscape appears with the central building highlighted in blue. The city building change in size and shape as Callum talks.
Include a definition of an aircraft in the regulations by reference to the Civil Aviation Act
Isometric building image zooms out to an isometric city with various building highlighted in blue. Blue circles with city symbols appear over each district.
Next slide is labelled End of Life Phase. Drawings of brick, wood and a computer chip are superimposed over the isometric building and all feed into a recycling symbol. Theres a symbol of a crane and wrecking ball in the upper right corner, next to the video of the speaker.
Next slide is labelled Examples
Next slide is labelled Procurement phase and shows a desktop dashboard. The dashboard is divided into sections showing the isographic building from the previous slide, building material options such as modular steel, a comparision between materials and a simulation of the structural impact. The user profile reads Hi Mary Jane, have a great day.
Next slide shows the dashboard on a mobile app instead of a desktop computer. The isometric building is now circled in green.
Slide is titled A summary of the circular economy attributes and supporting technology
Slide is titled Current state of Digital Twins Examples. The text Bioeconomy and regeneration is next to a graphic of a forest water cycle and a mechinal drone.
Slide is titled Current state of Digital Twins Examples. The text Emergency response and safety is next to a map of the Christchurch region with flood risk areas highlighted in red.
Slide is titled Current state of Digital Twins Examples. The text Interaction with city structure is next to a map of the Welington region with a side panel showing live transport data.
Slide is titled Current state of Digital Twins Examples. The text Machine learning and standards interoperability is next to a D image render of pipes.
Slide is titled Current state of Digital Twins Examples. The text User Engagement and behaviour analysis is next to a map of the Auckland region with swimming areas highlighted.
Slide reads: Use case walk through CE focus
Slide reads: What is a Digital Twin A digital twin is typically considered a digital replica mapped onto a living or nonliving entity. It is a dynamic and interconnected digital representation of a physical asset or system, enabling comprehensive insights and informed decision making.
Slide reads: What is a circular economy
Slide reads: Nextspace. Nextspace is a cloud based platform for building mantaining and visualising digital twins. The platoform allows for different data formats and sources can easily transistion between teams as the asset moves across life stages. The whole process is governed by a GUIDbased ontology, in which every component has its own unique ID, allowing proper data storage and connection with other digital twins without the need for data harmonisation.
Slide reads: The Wellington City twin has the purpose of showcasing the multitude of realtime activity and to create a platform where decision making could be enhanced. It uses smart city technologies, with real time data to provide transportation statistics; air traffic visualisations; cycle sensor data; and car park availability.
Slide shows a QR code and reference number underneath a Slido rating scale. Text reads: What level of understanding of digital twin technology do you have is None and is I build them.
Slide shows a decorative graphic of interconnected globes and city buildings in desaturated primary colours. The connections evoke brain synapses. Slide reads: Optimising building asset management: The role of Digital Twin above the aurecon logo Bringing ideas to life.
Slide shows just the isometric building.
Slide shows the bottom of the North Island with a circled blue city symbol over Wellington.
Slide text reads Forest flows. The bold goal of this programme is to create a new biophysical forest hydrology model combining cutting edge remote sensing techniques with terrestrial based measurements, integrating data and enabling scale, as a digital model applicable to planted forests all over New Zealand. These extrapolations will be made possible through detailed analysis and simulation capability, and coupled with powerful tools including visualisation and enabling access to insights, achieving the forest digital twin will be a major breakthrough for hydrology research internationally.
Slide text reads Urban flood Digital twin (Christchurch City Council). The MBIE funded Building Innovation Partnership undertook an exploration of a common referenc eframework to bring together all the disparate information sources needed for flood modelling to test the resilience of infrastructure to flood events. The pilot is being leveraged into a Christchurch digital twin and in work by the NZ Geospatial Research Institute to democratise access to flood assessment modelling.
Slide text reads: Safe Swim is a collaborative programme providing real time advice on the level of risk associated with swimming at specific locations, allowing beach users to make informed decisions about when and where to swim. Safe swim is a partnership between Auckland council and other regional councils, Surf Life Saving New Zealand, Surf Life Saving Northern Region and Auckland Regional public health service.
Slide titled Digital Twin timeline
The cursor selects D from a drop down menu that includes architectural and then structural options. Text on screen reads: Switch between the layers of your BIM model
The next slide is labelled Construction phase and shows a recording of a desktop window. A cursor selects a button labelled BIM compare and a handle slider splits the screen between a photograph of a building under construction and a building model. Text on screen instructs users to click and drag the handle to compare the in progress construction with the model of the same building.
The next slide is labelled Summary and shows a map of New Zealand. circled symbols appear around another circle of arrows feeding into each other. The symbols are a pencil over a drawing of a cog on paper, a cog, location symbol and a person linked in a triangle, a crane and building under construction, completed city buildings above half an underground cog and the crane and wrecking ball.
The next slide is labelled Usage phase and shows Mary Janes dashboard again. The dashboard now shows a larger version of the isometric building image with the roof highlighted in red and the word Usage circled. A stock photo of pink bats is to the left above graphs showing data on the wear and tear of insulation in the building and comparing materials.
The recording continues, showing a calendar and timeline options. Text reads: Calendar: The BIM calendar highlights milestones in the D timeline and selects the closest one. Timeline: Use the timeline on the bottom of the screen to see progress.
The video opens on a slide show. Text on screen reads Workshop: The potential for Digital Twin technology to accelerate the transistion to a circular economy. Welcome.
Timeline over slides reads:
a million cap on eligible expenditure
a day year they would accrue . weeks AL entitlement . Average weekly earnings are worked out by calculating the employees gross earnings over the months prior to the end of the last pay period before the AL is taken and
a base rate for wages or salary plus
a crime involving dishonesty within the meaning of section of the Crimes Act .
a cycle trail technical expert
a day of leave would now be simpler for annual leave, payroll systems would still need to be capable of implementing the calendar day methodology for FBAPS leave for cases where agreement to depart from the default was not reached. MBIE recommends removing the calendar day methodolog y for FBAPS leave . We recommend including a proposal in your May Cabinet paper to remove the calendar day aspect of the methodology for determining the hours an employee would have worked on a day for both annual leave and FBAPS leave. In situations where an employee does not have clear daily hours of work , the hours an employee would have worked on a day of leave would, for all leave types, instead be based on an employees average hours across all days worked in the pay periods that started in the weeks before the one in which the leave is taken. . Thi s change would prevent employers from needing to make the extensive and costly pa yroll system changes that ha ve been a key area of concern for payroll pr oviders.
a day on which schools are closed.
a dual regulatory role, with building consent authorities undertaking daily operations
a further increase to weeks from July .
a gree that the commencement clause of the Bill provides that the rest of the Bill will come into force
a gree that the commencement clause provides that the changes agreed by Cabinet in to the PLEPA
a high level of priority in your future work programme. . Progressing a Bill will require prioritisation of MBIE policy and
a minimum RD expenditure threshold of , per year, unless the expenditure related to RD contracted out to an Approved Research Provider
a more comprehensive picture of what research is being undertaken
a new organisational support component for early and midcareer Fellows
a new way to return abandoned rental properties to the market more quickly.
a participant code of conduct
a proposal template that provides guidance on to prepare your proposal and the information you are required to provide.
a proposed approach to prorating sick leave so that there is some proportionality to how much an employee works
a public holiday for the purpose of the Holidays Act , and that Act will apply, with any necessary modifications, to the observance of the day; and
a requirement to compare two calculations for all employees ( O rdinary L eave P ay
a robust measure of the impact of the effectiveness of the activities, ideally in terms of visitor numbers andor visitor spend.
a senior official from Tourism New Zealand
a senior official from the Department of Conservation.
a senior official from the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE)
a singlesource of data about the system that can inform policy and investment decisions
a small working group of representatives from Business New Zealand and the Council of Trade Unions . We will continue to work through proposals with this group,
a statistical profile of migrant youth based on Immigration New Zealand data and Statistics New Zealand data:
a statutory declaration related to their criminal records, if any
a strategic view across all workstreams to ensure policy proposals will meet the development goals we seek in the Pacific, with a particular focus on the impacts of the scheme on Pacific labour markets
a streamlined application process
a uthorise the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety to make further decisions
a weeks based AL accrual s ystem , along with a clear set o f
a weightedaverage regional fuel tax has been added to the duties, taxes and direct levies data to account for the cents per litre tax applicable only in the Auckland region.
able to subcontract the work, and
about how to contact the union; and
above, the amendment would only impact a small percentage of applicants and any increase in
abused, (whether physically, emotionally, or sexually)
accelerate the growth of talent and skills in our local film industry
accelerate uptake of automation, Artificial Intelligence, data analytics and better technology across both the public sector and the wider economy.
access that information; and, if applicable
accessing advice and support via the Camms reporting tool, andor
accommodation, health, pastoral care, benefits and deductions, and worker rights and addressing exploitation risks
acknowledge the source and copyright status of the material.
across all registers and revoking some fees.
acting in accordance with or complying with the law and legislation
actions of a member of the Board Appointments and Governance team, or
activities . This would have a negative impact on the development of a space industry in New Zealand encouraging an interest in space activities in the wider community in New Zealand.
added value to the tourism and visitor economy
additional million to support conservation visitor related experiences.
addressing regulatory duplication, gaps, errors, and inconsistencies within and between different pieces of legislation
addressing zerohour contracts.
adjusting for changes in prices, real growth from was estimated at ..
adjusts this forecast when Statistics New Zealand releases its latest data.
advice to the Minister for Media and Communications on the recommendations made by the Telecommunications Commissioner
affixed to, impressed or printed on postal articles
agree to use a third party to help them (eg, privately contract with a mediator)
agreement that the exposure draft includes an month implementation period.
all competitors to Chorus and Vodafone being able to access rural broadband infrastructure funded by the government on a nondiscriminatory basis.
all, with its role to create better outcomes for all New Zealanders, particularly by supporting business growth.
allow some paperbased legal requirements to be met with electronic technology that is functionally equivalent to legal requirements.
allowing workers to resign and still receive payments
allows our visitors to have a positive experience of our country, and
an Atmospheric science programme, funded from Catalyst: Strategic over years
an annotated bibliography of research reports and other publications focused on the challenges facing migrant youth settling in New Zealand and in other migrantreceiving countries:
an authority, a tribal group
an average of productivity or incentive payments received plus
an emergency response protocol to ensure a coordinated response to any future major underground mining emergency
an estimated per cent of private rental properties are insulated to the required standard, an increase of per cent since July
an exposure draft in S eptember ;
an increase from to weeks from July
an offence against any of sections , , or of the Misuse of Drugs Act
an offence against sections , or of the Postal Services Act that relate to divulging information from a postal article, unlawfully opening a postal article, or posting a dangerous item
an open access national database of foods and nutrients.
an opportunity to simplify the overall system , but this would require trade offs and there would be a number of design
an optimal outcome from both employer and employee perspective s.
an overall approach to consultation on the exposure draft of the Bill
an upgrade path to G if this is rolled out by Vodafone in the future, which will enable even higher speeds to be offered
analysis on the structure and dynamics of the industry
anchor product prices should become purely costbased
and Mines Rescue (Levy) Regulations , to support the functions of the Mines Rescue Service.
and a new hours based A verage D aily P ay
and above the right end there is the heading:
and if so details of what and when .
and if so details of what and when.
and internships. In Ariki Creative launched a graphic novel and online resource. This project looked to further develop resources and reach from a local initiative to a national collective initiative
and our approach to the next stages. You indicated your preference to receive our advice in one package
and provides a certain regulatory environment while striking an appropriate balance with regulato ry flexibility and worker protection . Legal professional privilege
and replace it with a single, consolidated,
and risk of error . An accrual rate of . would mean that an employee would accrue . weeks AL entitlement in a day year , and . weeks in a day year
and the Volunteers Employment Act
and the extent of any further policy changes
and to ensure the details reflected the policy intent .
and what would be considered fair in some situations . This is especially the case where payments are currently based on RDP with no comparison to an average rate that incorporates all gross earnings. Payments such as penal rates and overtime rates would be included in the average hourly rate and apply to all hours on any day, regardless of whether those rates would have actually applied.
and worker representatives
and would like to join, you need to check the eligibility information first.
and you will be sent a Price Book covering all providers.
annual and public holidays (including payment)
another regulator, oversight agency, or concerns body;
any other matters that the Minister considers relevant.
any period of a partial strike that occurred before the Bill comes into force.
any risks to national security, public safety, international relations, or other national interests;
any similar offence from another country.
anyone we believe could provide information that is relevant to whether to investigate a concern, or to an investigation or inquiry, including witnesses to concern matters;
apply to the district court for an order to dispose of seized postal articles
are a public servant from a core government department applying for a role on a Crown board, although Ministers may exercise discretion to allow appointments (see Cabinet Office circular CO() ), or
are able to access relevant and quality education and training.
are able to combine work, care and social responsibilities without being disadvantaged
are aware of but will help to
are aware of the individual and collective responsibilities expected from board members, for example:
are based on an employees relevant daily pay (RDP) or, if it is not possible to determine RDP or an employees daily pay varies in the pay perio d, an employer may use ADP . I n some circumstances
are confident about employing people from diverse backgrounds and understand the advantages of a diverse workplace
are disqualified under section of the Crown Entities Act for Crown entity boards or section () of the Companies Act for companies, or
are more likely to report that they are in jobs that match their skills and qualification () compared to recent migrants overall (). However, our research on skilled migrants report that skilled migrants from the Pacific had high employment rates, but they have lower levels of income due to the high proportion in lower skilled work.
are on our employment website.
are options about whethe r to release the Bill in whole or in part. We propose to release a Bill that is close to complete
are protected from exploitation
are on MBIEs website, available to anyone who wishes to access it , and
are supported to fulfil their employment aspirations and are able to access rehabilitation andor retraining when disability or health conditions impact on how they participate in the labour market
as Employment Relations Authority and Employment Court cases, will also be monitored.
as an employee or agent of a postal operator
as soon as possible, and make sure to include your customer and indicate that your application is being sponsored by MBIE.
as soon as possible, in order to support the release of
assess agency commercial capability through the Procurement Capability Index
assess it to make sure it is a complaint that MBIE can investigate, or needs to be referred to an appeal, disputes, mediation process or other agency etc
assessment, and forms the basis of the contract for successful projects.
at least the minimum wage
attract more highquality foreign direct investment into New Zealand to grow the economy, and
authority delegated by Cabinet , the
avoid potentially harmful interference with the activities of others in the peaceful exploration and use of outer space; or
b Note that there has been widespread (often unintentional) non compliance with the Act , which has resulted in significant economic impacts and that, along with problems with the implementation of the Act , the design of the legislation makes it difficult to apply in practice. Noted
b. Circular practices in buildings and infrastructure, agriculture and food and manufacturing will provide significant emissions savings, over time, and have impacts for productivity, jobs and supply chain resilience Circular econo my practices can reduce resource extracti on, loss of resources and waste generation, and through this, lower emissions. Opportunities for emission savings were identified for New Zealand through adoption of circular approaches in building, agriculture and food , and in manufacturing. Approaches include, for example using recycled, reused or renewable materials for buildings, the use of more local and organic alternatives to imported fertiliser, and greater product durability of man ufactured goods . In these areas, emission savings were able to be quantified for eight interventions with a total savings of .. Mt COe on the annual emission level . Opportunities related to more resource efficient building accounted for most of thes e quantified savings . This analysis was supported by material flow analysis, displayed in Sankey diagrams, eg as illustrated in Figure . For reference, the savings quantified are equivalent to about three per cent reduction on New Zealands net emiss ions. Further emissions savings are possible over time, f or example, a saving of . Mt CO e per annum was estimated to be achievable in years time if residential buildings are designed to last years, rather than years . Many other opportunities for emissions savings through circularity approaches exist that were not identified or quantified in this research. These include those from emerging or long term change such as designing buildings for reuse, reducing consumption of resources, and agricul tural and manufacturing practices that enable storage or sequestration of carbon. These savings would be in New Zealand domestic emissions production, as well as global emissions in products that we import and consume. Other impacts of circular approaches identified in the research though not quantified were: greater productivity through more efficient use of physical resource inputs for manufacturing maintaining trade and export competitiveness opportunities to mitigate supply chain risk and increase economic resilience , for example through enabling durability, reuse, repair, recovery and local sourcing of critical materials new and changed jobs, for example job gains in repair and remanufacturing and job losses in packaging and waste man agement protection of natural capital . These impacts have particular relevance to manufacturing and point to opportunities for circular approaches to strengthen the performance of New Zealand manufacturing and its contribution to GDP and exports. Our research identified that industry is wanting to shift to more resource efficient circular practices, and are open to collaborating across industry and with government, but need access to better data to support decision making. International e xperience shows that transitioning to a more circular econ omy is both rewarding and challenging, requiring comprehensive approaches and sustained action over decades. Sustained action is particularly important for buildings and infrastructure, wh ere the benefits of greater durability manifest not at the point of construction, but at the time when these assets would otherwise have been replaced.
balance profit with achieving wider social and environmental good
be a source of information about Auckland.
be come entitled to four weeks AL Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government after months continuous employment but, in addition to AL entitlement , an employer must not unreasonably withhold consent to an employees request to take AL in advance on a pro rata basis (the amount of the four week entitlement they have earned eg one week after three months, two weeks after months etc) CAB MIN. The recommended implementation approach adds complexity , when opportunity exists to simplify . The Taskforces recommended approach to providing earlier access to AL adds complexity to the legislative framework . It creates three separate concepts related to AL with different rules that apply to each: AL entitlement that has arisen prorata AL in advance, and AL in advance of pro rata AL in advance. It explicitly requires that when pro rata AL in advance is taken it must be displayed as a negative AL balance in an employees leave record. . The key reason the Taskforce recommended this approach was concern about the compliance issues that have been associated with accrual based AL entitlement systems that do not maintain a clear separation between an employees pot of entitled and accruing AL. Such systems have been used by many employer s who already allow employees to take AL in advance on a pro rata basis . The Taskforce viewed the separation between concepts as important for audit and compliance checking purposes. P roblems that have arisen include: employees being provided less than their fourweek AL entitlement after months continuous employment due to the use of incorrect leave accrual rates underpayments for AL at the end of employment due to oversight andor inability to distinguish and pay entitled and accruing leave out at the different rates units of entitlement other than weeks being used and accrued balances not being adjusted when work patterns change to reflect the employees working week. . The recommended approach reinforces the need for the complex work arounds many employers have needed to build into (well intentioned) accrual systems to ensure compliance. These work arounds , especially the se paration between entitled and accruing AL and the rules that apply to each, are also confusing for both employers and employees . We recommend inclu ding a weeks based AL entitlement accrual system in the exposure draft of the E mployment (Leave Entitlements) Bill (the bill) . The Cabinet decision misses an opportunity to make more substantial changes (within the underlying weeks based entitlement system) to the end toend framework for the provision of AL entitlement that would help to simplify it and improve workability and ease of understanding ( paragraph below discuss complexities that remain in the weeks based entitlement system and alternative accrual systems that could be considered) . Many of the compliance issues with accrual systems have arisen inadvertently because of the challenge of designing an accrual system that is compatible with the current rules. . We recommend including a proposal in your May Cabinet paper that, rather than retain the rule that four weeks AL entitlement arises as a single amount after months continuous employment, we shift to a weeks based accrual system . The system would treat all weeks of AL an employee has earned as a single, continuously accruing, pot of AL entitlement that an employer could not, without sound business reasons, withhold consent to an employee taking. This proposal would support the common practice of AL entitlement accrual by incorporating the concept within the legislative framework. . In addition to removing the concept of continuous employment (discussed further below) from the legislation and clauses of the Bill that specify the rules about the calculation and taking of pro rata leave in advance, other key areas a week sbased accrual system would simplify include: The rules for paying employees for their AL entitlements when employment ends : Under the Act, when an employees employment ends, the employer must pay the employee for AL they have earned but that has not yet arisen as entitlement at eight per cent of their gross earnings since they last became entitled to AL , less payments for any AL taken in advance. The employer must also pay the employee for untaken AL entitlement that has arisen using the normal greater of payment methodologies. This issue was not addressed in the changes agreed by Cabinet in , but the methodologies are a core source of compliance issues . Employers struggle to understand the requirements and employees struggle to understand their final pay . Over and under payments also arise when leave has been taken in advance during employment. A weeks based accrual system would make the eight percent of gross earnings methodology redundant as the AL the payments cover would be AL considered entitlement and the second methodology would apply . Closedown provisions: Accrual would enable consolidation of the provisions as references in the framework to pro rata leave in advance will all be covered by AL entitlement. It would also make t he Cabinet decision to provide ability for employers and employees to nominate a AL entitlement arises when the employer has a closedown custom redundant. The intent was to provide for employees to have AL entitlement to use during a closedown period that occurs in the first year of employment. An accrual system means an employee will already have the equivalent amount of AL entitlement at that . Leave records and pay statements: The requirement to maintain a distinction between entitled and accruing leave in leave records and in the new requirements for inclusions on a pay statement would be removed . We recommend clear parameters to support a weeks based accrual system . We recommend seeking Cabinet agreement to include a clear set of parameters that would support the operation of a weeks based entitlement system and minimise the risk of the compliance issues the Taskforce was concerned about. We recommend specifying a weekly accrual rate . To minimise legislative complexity , provide certainty and support compliance, we propose to specify a minimum number of weeks that accrue for each completed week of
be considered and adopted by policy teams and programme administrators when considering how to design financial capability programmes for Pacific Peoples.
be exempt from liability if letters are lost or delayed.
be led by an RTO which will be the contracted party for this funding and be responsible for delivery of the project
be managed by the applicant but can be delivered by a service provider
be more targeted in your market research
be no more than oneyear of data collection
be of broader public good (that is, the provision of foundationalcore data that is either a national solution, and or is nationally replicablescalable)
behaviour that endangers the health and safety of yourself or others
benchmark performance with your competitors and better understand your own industry sector.
board appointment processes employed by the team.
brief details of the proposed business
brief you on the submissions as soon as possible after the consultation period closes an d work with you to decide which areas to prioritise for further policy andor drafting work prior to introduction .
broadcasting Morse Code messages across the world on amateur radio frequencies. Students around the world will be able to receive these messages
building procurement and property capability within their agency through training and development opportunities, and other tools and resources
building regional human capacity
building resilient connections to the workplace.
burden should be the minimum necessary to meet the objectives of safe, secure and inter nationally credible space industry. Any c osts imposed need to be proportionate to benefits . We can rely on best practice international standards to manage certain risks that arise from space activities, such as orbital debris. These are well understood , acceptable and subject to regular review by technical experts , such as the scientific and technical subcommittee of the United Nations Committee of the Peaceful Uses o n Outer Space ; and The OSHAA Act requires the regulator to be satisfied before granting a launch licence , launch facility licence or (non aircraft) HAV licence that the applicant has , and will continue to take, all reasonable steps to manage risks to public safety. The information regulations will require a safety case (pursuant to the OSHAA regulation making power) and prescribes the key elements of a safety case. These are couched as high level requirements to accommodate a range of practices . Our working assumption is that New Zealands existing domestic law (including the Health and Safet y at Work Act ) is adequate to manage safety on the ground , but the test in the OSHAA is a broader test. In order fo r the Minister to be satisfied that the public safety test has been met, we will work with other domestic regulators (including Worksafe) to ensure a shared understanding of the risks and how these are being managed. This is particularly the case where a foreign licence may deal with some aspects of public safety in relation to the launch vehicle but where this may not be sufficient to address all aspects of safety during the operation . . Key information gaps relate to : The volume of space and high altitude activities that will need to be managed under the regime, particularly the number and frequency of payload launches ; The different types of international collaborations that may arise in relation to space activities, including for example collaborations between domestic and foreign universities. The nature of the collaboration will have implications for whether a licence or permit is required for the activity and the identity of the applicant. This will require us to provide clear information and guidance a bout what activities the regime applies to and to develop strong relationships with industry and universities ; and There are also info rmation gaps with respect to HAV activities where our knowledge of the different participants, types of HAV activit ies and HAV development opportunities is limited. . These information gaps are not unusual for a new regulatory regime and have informed our judgements about t he approach we are taking in respect of the regulations. Problem definition for application requirements . Clauses (), (), (), (), () and () of the OSHAA Act require applications for licenses to be made in accordance with prescribed requirements . . Clause () authorises regulations prescribing information to be given in, or in connection with , applications for licences and permits . This which may include, without limitation, requirements for a safety case, an environmental impact assessment and requirements for an orbital debris mitigation plan. Amendments made to clause of the OSHAA Act during Select Committee require the Minister to be satisfied that there is an orbital debris mitigation plan that meets prescribed standards. Without any regulations to stipulate what must be provided with those applications, applicants could not meet this requirement .
business.govt.nz on YouTube
but have been constrained by the ambiguity within the legislation itself.
but welcome your views on this.
by the end of the first pay period within which an employee will be paid for the period in which the partial strike (or part of a partial strike) occurred.
calculation comes into force from the start of the financial year ( July) following the on which the Bill receives Royal assent and that it applies to parental leave applications received
calculation in the Act but would provide a formula that makes it clear and possible to calculate the variable components ( e.g.
calculation. The proposed methodology would include the current
call us from overseas:
call us within NZ:
can access a wider range of products and services over and above basic postal services.
can identify ways in which the proposed installation will unreasonably impact on their enjoyment of the property, or worsen an existing problem with the property, other than by having a visual impact alone
can receive personal assistance from an NZ Post employee or agent
can show that the installation will have a materially negative impact on the value of their property
can show that the proposed installation will impede their plans for development of the property
capsetting process, allocation methodology, labour market test, compliance, and flexibility
carrying out telemetry, tracking and control of spacecraft
case studies of increasing value while lowering environmental impact, and
central local government.
change s address technical issues identified and simplify them where possible but do not depart from the underlying intent of the Taskforces recommendations. The Parliamentary Counsel Office has begun drafting a Bill . Drafting a Bill that accurately reflects the policy intent of the changes, correctly captures the technical details of the calculations, reconciles the changes with the existing provisions of the Act, and is accessible for users is a highly technical process. . MBIE issued the first set of drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office ( PCO ) in July . Following this, PCO began drafting the Employment (Leave Entitlements ) Bill (the Bill) which would repeal and replace the Act. As part of this process , MBIE shared the Bill with the nominated representatives of
changes to Australian sustainability and recyclability requirements which New Zealand exporters will need to meet as part of Australias National Packaging Targets.
changing the system for managing earthquakeprone buildings
child trafficking and smuggling
children being moved across borders under fraudulent identities
clarify their interaction with leave entitlements), and changes to remove the AL
clarifying and updating statutory provisions in each Act amended, to better give effect to the purpose of that Act and its provisions
classification and reporting on:
clearerrecord keeping requirements
clearly indicates to the public that postal articles have been, or are intended to be, accepted for delivery by that postal operator.
collecting and recording data on the radiation present in low Earth Orbit
collecting data from space to investigate whether there is a link between with atmospheric activity and tectonic activity on Earth
collects information about dispute resolution approaches and outcomes
commercial sexual exploitation of children, including through digital forums
commission and overtime) in every case.
commitment to cooperation with scientists from other APEC member economies
communicates with applicants, and
community and social service providers
community renewable energy.
companies (eg, an employee in dispute with an employer)
comparative emissions profiles
compensation for humiliation, loss of dignity, and injury to the feelings
compete on productivity and innovation rather than low wages.
competencebased licensing for plumbers and drainlayers (this already existed for gasfitters)
compliance and enforcement
complying with legislation, regulations and standards.
conduct extensive research and technical cooperation activities, including vocational training and management development.
conducting digital image processing and software improvement experiments as part of their study
conducting space weather experiments
considerations that would extend the timeframe for introduction of a Bill.
considering how outcomes from seismic risk requirements align with broader Government objectives.
constructing new fibreconnected cell phone towers and upgrading existing cell towers to enable fixed wireless broadband to rural customers, as well as improved mobile coverage
consumer harm is reduce from excessive prices and a lack of fair access to tickets.
consumers have the information they need to transact with confidence
contact the relevant government authority if a postal article or letter is found that breaks the law
contact you if they need more information
continuing to run and provide the RBA training programme throughout the country, including providing facetoface and online learning opportunities
continuous improvement to Prosecution procedure and guidelines to incorporate the comments and expectations of the court.
continuously work to lift their management capability
contribute to New Zealands economy.
contribute towards achieving similar rates of access to fast broadband by rural end users across all regions of New Zealand.
coordinated plan for addressing issues
copyrighted materials from other websites, or
cost will be limited to the maximum payment rate for each applicant. . Although the formula includes more payment types than OWP, it is likely that at present many affected applicants are not changing the automated estimate where it is not correct, meaning that IR may currently be paying some applicants a higher or lower rate than their legal entitlement. In the financial year, of the , PPL applications where OWP was used for the payment rate only were adjusted. It is therefore likely there would be little change in the actual costs of PL payments as a result. . Implementation costs: IR implementation costs are expected to be minimal because the proposed formula is aligned with the one already being applied. The proposed calculation reference periods would require some relatively minor system changes.
costs to ACC are affordable, sustainable and consistent (e.g. through gradual increases)
create jobs leading to sustainable economic growth
create jobs through the design, building and maintenance of the cycle network
create rich cultural visitor experiences
creating artificial meteor showers
creating more information for the public and homeowners on the rapid building assessment system including information to help them understand what a placard on their home means.
crossagency approach to longterm statistical, data and information priorities.
current arrangements for access to weather data
d Note that you have options on how to proceed with the Holidays Act Review including what priority to give the work, the policy direction to take (proceeding wit h the current set of recommendations andor considering alternative ways of address ing all or some of the difficulties with the Act ) and the steps in the legislative process . Noted
d. Data , information, and digital tools can help track and manage resources more efficiently, supporting the functioning of markets and transparency for consumers Sophisticated use of data and information enabled by digital tools will be needed to significantly increase resou rce efficiency and extend the lifespan of products, buildings and infrastructure. Information will need to flow not only along supply chains, but also as feedback loops in systems to signal optimal resource use. Digital tools under development includ e sharing platforms , reverse logistic s support and product passports (which can provide advanced barcode like information about what is in a product , how it is made and how it can be reused or recycled ). These digital tools will involve the use of artificial in telligence, big data analytics, internet of things, D printing, digital engineering, and digital twins. Digital twins are a dynamic and interconnected digital representation of a physical asset or system, enabling comprehensive insights and informed dec ision making. They can help track materials in the value chain, facilitate predictive maintenance of machines, and fill gaps in information about product composition and availability to enable markets to function well for product reuse or recycling. In a manufacturing industry context, digital twins are part of the shift to Industry ., allowing more automated and connected supply chain man agement. For built environment uses, digital twin technology could unlock cost and resource savings by allow ing virtual trials of design changes, material and equipment choices, and infrastructure upgrades . There are a wide range of digital twins in development or early stage use in New Zealand. Most twins are of cities, buildings, or infrastructure, often developed by councils to enable efficient design, planning and management of resources and assets. Sector oriented RD programmes include forest, vineyard and orchard twins to support sustainable and productive growing systems. These current uses are con sistent with circular objectives for resource efficiency. Digital twins are not yet being developed in a way to realise their full potential in New Zealand. A lack of data literacy is reducing the effective exchange and use of data. Limits in collaboration across industry and data standardisation mean digital twins are being developed without optimal interoperability. Adoption of standardised frameworks and technical capabilities, such as artificial intelligence, would enable digital twins to operate in more connected ways. Our research included a workshop designed to demonstrate the potential of digital twin technology in the built environment and for other applications (Figure ).
data and analysis on the current use of biological resources
deal with the design, construction and use of works, installations, fittings and appliances
deal with the importation and sale of fittings and appliances
define requirements for safety management systems
define the expectations and rules governing prosecutions decision making and prosecution proceedings
deliver all funded activities between April and July
deliver significant reforms in key infrastructure sectors, including transport, energy, housing and public services.
demonstrate collaboration between all organisations involved in the application
demonstrate how planned activities will boost international visitor numbers quickly
demonstrate how planned activities will increase regional dispersal of international visitors quickly
demonstrate regions have capacity to host the additional international visitors
demonstrating audio, video and data file transfer capabilities between ground facilities and the payloads
deregulates copper fixed line access services in areas where fibre services are available to consumers, while retaining regulation in areas where fibre is not available
describes a regulatory regime for a public audience.
describes the roles and functions of the various parts of the regulatory regime
destination brand building and improving the visitor experience
detect and prevents criminal offending.
detecting, investigating and prosecuting criminal offending (e.g. fraud, migrant exploitation, breaches of the law such as the Immigration Act , and Crimes Act )
develop a consistent methodology for collecting and analysing trail data.
developing a blueprint for the future build of telecommunications infrastructure
developing additional guidance for territorial authorities and senior decision makers for readiness, response, recovery and riskreduction activities
developing new areas of carbon sequestration, such as the coastal and marine environment.
development of high value biobased products, for example using algae from the marine environment for pharmaceuticals, fertiliser, food, animal feed and other uses
digital and special effects
discounted price less duties, taxes, levies, the New Zealand Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS), and
disputes ownership of property that the proposed installation will make use of or disturb
diversify and shift into higher value, more productive, and more knowledge intensive activities
dividing that figure by . The Act defines gross earnings as including all payments that the employer is bound to make under the employment agreement or legislation (which differs from gross income for tax purposes) . Confidential advice to Government, Free and frank opinions Confidential advice to Government . To align with the proposal in paragraph above, we propose the following formula to provide clarity about the AWE divisor reduction for a part week of unpaid leave: Number of hours of unpaid leave taken in the week (up to the value of the denominator), divided by the employees average number of guaranteed hours per seven day period. The rules for taking, allowing and requiring AL would require adjustments to reconcile with weeks based accrual . The provisions in the Act that set out employees rights to take AL and when an employer may require an employee to take AL are based on entitlement arising after a fixed period. These are set out in column one of Table One below. They would require adjustment s to reflect an accrual based framework . . The intent of the provisions in the Act is to provide a balance between employer and employee interests. The scheme anticipates, in the first instance, an employee applying for AL and the parties attempting to agree. It provides flexibility for employers to be able to withhold consent to an employees request to take AL but that, within a window of months after the on which the entitlement arises , an employer must allow an employee to take the AL. It also allows an employer to require an employee to take AL that has arisen but only in specified circumstances. . We consider the current balance of interests is appropriate, and so we recommend seeking agreement in your May Cabinet paper to adjustments that are aligned with the general intent of the current provisions. Simplicity was also a key criterion, and we considered other options that would maintain precise alignment with the status quo but would have required employers to separate accrued entitlements into annual buckets to distinguish which rules applied to which AL entitlement. This would have added additional record keeping requirements and complexi ty. . Our proposals are included in column two of Table One. The exposure draft will provide opportunity to seek feedback on the proposed adjustments. Table One: proposed adjustments to the rules for taking and requiring employees to take AL Status q uo Proposed rules to reconcile with an accrual system When any AL is to be taken it must be agreed between the employer and employee. When any AL is to be taken it must be agreed between the employer and employee. An employer must not unreasonably withhold consent to an employees request to take AL entitlement that has arisen (after months continuous employment) .
do not experience discrimination in the workplace
do not have the legal right to work in New Zealand.
do not impose unnecessary complexity and compliance costs, and
do not receive confirmation that your application has been received
do not sell or distribute any material on a commercial basis
document, even though we have been running through these very quickly, we had a look at a highlevel at the situation in our major various streams and our capabilities.
domestic satellite broadband terminals
dont use the material in a derogatory manner or a misleading context
drafting instructions to PCO
during reflect s the status quo . For the exposure draft, we propose that AL entitlement would accrue during all weeks of employment that are included in months of continuous employment under the Act. It would accrue during any period an employee was on paid leave, unpaid sick , bereaveme nt or family violence leave, parental leave, voluntary military service leave
e Agree to meet with officials to discuss next steps for the Holidays Act Review . AgreeDisagree
eInvoicing and how it benefits you
eInvoicing status (if your finance system is capable of sending us an eInvoice)
each of these stakeholders and invite
early learning, engagement and attainment in schooling
economic or other benefits to New Zealand of the proposed operation;
education and employment service providers
efficient and lowemissions transport
either Option One or Option Two, the next steps would include additional drafting to develop an improved draft Bill, followed by an exposure draft consultation process to test the workability and cost implications of the draft provisions with employers, e mployees and payroll providers. Option Two would require further drafting instructions to be issued to reflect the policy changes. The consultation will also provide the opportunity to consult with relevant population groups and ask targeted questions to u nderstand their views. MBIE will ensure that representatives of Mori, Pacific peoples, ethnic communities, disabled people, women and rural communities are invited to make a submission.
electronic means do. To address this issue, LINZ has suggested that the wording of this section could be amended to require launch licensees to notify LINZ of rocket launches that have safety implications for mariners, but not go as far as to specify how L INZ provides this information to mariners. ANALYSIS AND RESPONSE At the time the Act was first developed, the FAAs launch licence (which Rocket Lab holds and which New Zealand recognises within the regime) included a requirement to issue a notice for mariners . This requirement has now been removed from the FAA licen sing requirement on the basis that alternative means of publishing the fact the launch is taking place and the areas in in which it may pose a danger to mariners achieve an equivalent level of safety.
email New Zealand Cycle Trails
email address for payment enquiries
emerging market and market opportunity reports
employees earn AL entitlement reflect s the status quo
employees hours and rates of pay vary between days of work, the methodology leads to them receiving more or less than they would have if they worked on a specific day. Cabinet agreed to changes to the methodology for calculating FBAPS pay . To address the issues with FBAPS leave payments , in Cabinet accepted the Holidays Act Taskforces recommended new methodology which includes two new calculations which employers must pay employees the greater of. The intent was to eliminate the requirement to choose which calculation to use, while ensuring that no employees would be financially disadvantaged by being on leave. The new calculations are: a. Ordinary Daily Leave Pay (ODLP): the amount an employer is required to pay an employee under their employment agreement for a relevant day. It inclu des wagessalary, fixed allowances and the cash value of board and lodgings . b. New Average Daily Pay (ADP): ADP is also a new calculation that differs from the one with the same name under the current Act by changing the basis from days to hours. It aims t o make the calculation result more specific to a particular day. It is calculated by multiplying an hourly rate by the number of hours the employee would have worked on a day in question (determined in accordance with a prescribed methodology). Issues w ith the Taskforces proposals were identified during the policy design process . The great er of comparison removes the requirement to apply judgement in deciding whether to use RDP or ADP , making it easier for businesses to comply in some situations . However, in other cases it would add complexity by introducing the requirement to make and compare two calculations. For employees whose hours of work are clear and who do not have variable components of pay , RDP is currently a very si mple and fair calculation. . The new A DP calculation and comparison may inflate payments above what an employee would have
employers to allow employees to take AL in advance during a closedown .
employment service providers and employers.
enable economic activity and growth.
enable more quality infrastructure, by reducing the roadblocks to its delivery, and
enable sponsored refugees, with the support of community organisations, to quickly become independent and selfsufficient
enabling workers to take unpaid parental leave flexibly
encourage employment opportunities
encouraged yearround tourism to a greater number of regions
encourages businesses, individuals, households, community institutions and public sector agencies to take actions to help unlock our renewable energy and energy efficiency potential, to the benefit of all New Zealanders
energy affordability and hardship
engage in lifelong learning with opportunities to train and work at the same time
engage with the tertiary education sector and industry bodies to convey their skills needs
enhance social protection
enhanced the productivity of tourism businesses, drove innovation and supported professional tourism career development
enhancing climate mitigation and resilience
ensure education, training and immigration settings support economic growth, and
ensure effective internal controls are in place over the prosecution decision making process
ensure regulatory compliance, and
ensuring a healthy, safe and secure environment
ensuring housing and construction markets deliver safe and affordable homes and buildings
ensuring the best use of taxpayer funds
ensuring we maintain the trust and confidence of the public
entitlements are sufficient to make treatment affordable for claimants
erect public letterboxes in accordance with relevant planning rules
establish the principles to which MBIE must adhere in dealing with potential prosecutions, making prosecution decisions and conducting prosecutions andor related proceedings.
estimated the implementation process could take up to months. This would depend on a range of factors including the type of payroll system, the size of the business, the employers access to payroll expertise and the nature of the workforce.
excellence in scientific research, as evidenced through scholarly publication
expected to earn on the day in question
explore alternatives outside the Taskf orces recommendations .
explore alternatives that broadly align with the Taskforce recommendations and the underlying entitlements model , or
extending entitlements to a wider group of primary carers than just biological and formal adoptive parents
extending mobile coverage by , square kilometres to , square kilometres of rural New Zealand
extending parental leave payments to nonstandard workers and those who have recently changed jobs
extending unpaid leave to workers who have been with their employer for more than six months but less than
f urther impact analysis to accompany the decisions in this paper, which serves as an addendum to the RIS. This analysis is attached in Appendix Five .
facilitate knowhow and technology transfer to other industries
facilitate the use of electronic technology by reducing uncertainty regarding the legal effect of information in electronic form or communicated electronically
fees set by the Remuneration Authority, or
fees set by the shareholding Minister in accordance with the Crown Company Fees Methodology.
film and video distribution
find out from us whether we hold personal information about you
fixed toilet, which includes chemical and waterless toilets
focus the work health and safety system on critical risks
food safety hazards, for example biological, chemical, physical and radiological
for all entitlement note holders.
for contact information for the general public.
for ensuring employees have time away from work which we will include in your May Cabinet paper and will report back to you if we need any further decisions before then . Agree Discuss Future options for change following exposure draft Note that within a week sbased system , further opportunities , technical improvements and policy adjustments exist and we plan to i nclude targeted questions about these in the exposure draft consultation document , covering : Noted Note that we plan to also use the consultation document to ask targeted questions about an alternative hours based accrual system and that this could provide
for further information and signup documents.
for help and more information.
for more information about the Act and regulations.
for more information about working in the sex industry.
for more information and to access the app.
for more information and to access the tool.
for more information on our other funding opportunities.
for more information on the successful proposals and see
for new functions under the revised regulatory regime introduced with the Incorporated Societies Act .
for stakeholders within MBIE. We notify our stakeholders when the data is , so they can pull the new data as required.
for targeted consultation , and will seek Cabinets agreement to the content of the consultation document
for the RD tax incentive).
forward during the consultation period, we can share the materials with them and invite th em to make a submission.
foundational change to the Act and shift to a system that uses hours as the unit of accrual for AL entitlement rather than retaining weeks as the unit of entitlement. We plan to include targeted questions on this in the exposure draft c onsultation document. . An hours based accrual system could provide the opportunity to significantly simplify the leave entitlement system and provide greater alignment with the basis of other aspects of Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government
four part test for using PAYG and a new requirement for employers to review its use every weeks. This was intended t o address the current lack of clarity and requirement for judgement.
from to hours from July
from the Pacific has also been steadily increasing over the last years. In :
full details on how to apply, how your application will be assessed, what happens if your application is successful.
fund second tests for interpreters
further regulatory impact analysis.
gather together and state the generic rules and requirements for electrical safety and what is deemed to be electrically safe and unsafe
generate international recognition of the New Zealand brand.
give the Pike River families closure
good regulatory practice.
government (across all roles and responsibilities)
government funded health sector, especially considering the
government employees with policy responsibility for an industry or sector
greater accountability and transparency arrangements for the Board including requiring the Board to produce an output agreement and an annual report to be tabled in Parliament; as well as becoming subject to the Official Information Act.
greater enforcement powers to address unsafe or unhealthy rental properties
greater participant involvement and empowerment
gross screen sector revenue increased to . billion
guides the work programme of the Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority (EECA)
has an easement over the affected property and can show that the proposed installation will have an enduring impact on the terms and conditions of that easement.
has information on our previous swimming pool safety proposals.
have a greater understanding of domestic and international visitors.
have a problem submitting your application
have a question about the recruitment process.
have access to good employment in their region and industry
have access to good information about the employment opportunities in their region and industry
have access to quality careers pathway advice
have conducted and a public dialogue on gene editing and how it can be applied in healthcare, in pest control and in the primary industries.
have confirmed their personal details and the nature and level of their involvement in the work described in the proposal is correct, and
have diversity at all levels
have educational pathways that provide the skills needed to participate in a changing world of work, including problemsolving, creativity, agility and adaptability
have employment terms and conditions that reflect their skills, qualifications and experience and the contribution they make
have equal access to employment opportunities
have for the unique s chooling sector work and holiday arrangements .
have opportunities to retrain.
have positive, healthy workplace cultures
have strong foundation skills, including technical literacy
have the appropriate skills and experience
have the skilled workers they need to take advantage of technological advancements
have the workforce and skills planning capability and information they need to invest in the future
have time to carry out the roles duties, such as board meetings and meeting preparation, on top of your other commitments (most board roles are parttime, but some are fulltime)
hazards associated with substances added to food
he telephone and video interpreting service helps government agencies to communicate with clients with limited English proficiency through telephone or video interpreters available hours a day, seven days a week, in over languages.
health and safety management systems
help build procurement capability and develop commercial talent through graduate programme, training and advice
help maintain the Trade in Endangered Species Act and prevent any endangered, threatened or exploited species from being imported or exported.
help prevent future mining tragedies.
help reduce barriers to support trade and investment
help solve big global issues, such as climate change or tax avoidance, where one country cannot deal with the issue on its own.
help you locate New Zealand aerospace companies, products and services.
help you locate aerospace investment opportunities in New Zealand.
helps ensure New Zealanders can continue to enjoy their public spaces at home, or around the country.
helps people understand their rights and obligations, and the opportunities available, but will also hold people to account. This group has an impact on the lives of almost every New Zealander every day be it as employee, employer, business owner, consumer, landlord, renter, new arrival and even those listening to the radio and protecting our airwaves.
high levels of collaboration between stakeholders
hold, open and examine postal articles that break certain laws
horticultural industry stats, including the wine, fruit, vegetable, and ornamental sectors
household and community energy use
household satellite receiver dishes
how space weather affects modernday technologies
how to contact us for assistance with the application process.
http:orcid.org
http:orcid.org
http:orcid.org
https:otago.zoom.usmeetingregistertmnYeJQsWuuhmbbUczg
https:www.crimestoppersnz.orgaboutcontactusemailanonymously
https:www.mbie.govt.nzaboutnewsacceleratingbuildingprojectswithselfcertificationandinspectiontargets
https:www.mbie.govt.nzaboutnewseastertradinglawsyourrightsandresponsibilities
https:www.mbie.govt.nzaboutnewsincreasedonshoredieselreservestoimproveresilience
https:www.mbie.govt.nzaboutnewsprotectingnewzealandsenergyinfrastructure
https:www.mbie.govt.nzaboutnewssuccessfulvisionmataurangaresearchprojectsannounced
https:www.mbie.govt.nzaboutnewstourismmarketingboostinkeycountries
https:www.mbie.govt.nzaboutwhoweareourexternalboardsmaorieconomicdevelopmentadvisoryboard
https:www.mbie.govt.nzscienceandtechnologyspacepermitsandlicencesforspaceactivitiesapplicationforpayloadpermitapp
https:www.unitedrepaircentre.com
i nvite the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety to issue drafting instructions to PCO
i. Employee s should continue to receive their entitlement to four weeks leave when they have completed months continuous employment, but in their first year of employment the Act should provide the ability to take annual holidays in advance on a pro rata basis (e .g. they could take two weeks leave after working for months). However, there should be no ability for the employer to make the employee take any annual holidays prior to formally receiving the entitlement.
i. For annual holidays , it is estimated that payments could increase across the New Zealand economy by up to . million per year. I note that testing of the Taskforces recommendations showed that mo st employees holiday pay remained the same as under the status quo. However, per cent of employees in the sample received more holiday pay than they would under the current Act. Around per cent of employees were worse off (most by less than per cent).
i. Recommended an improved status quo model for leave and leave pay, where the existing units of entitlement are retained (weeks for annual holidays, days for all other types of leave e.g. sick leave)
i. The Labour Inspectorate considers that retaining a complex weeks based entitlement system for annual holidays will require a dedicated team of payroll specialists (labour inspectors) for the long term. A similar team was established in for a fixed term to undertake targeted compliance work when the extent of non compliance with the current Act became evident, but funding for this dedicated team is currently scheduled to cease in .
i. Understanding issues with the current Act . This included consulting on an Issues Paper in August which set out the groups understanding of the key issues with the Act and suggestions for improvement. A total of submissions were received from businesses, payroll practitioners and providers, and individuals.
i. continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holid ays Act
i. in March , Cabinet agreed to endorse in full the recommendations of the Holidays Act Taskforce for improvements to the Act ii. MBIE has completed a policy design process , and iii. the Parliamentary Counsel Office commenced work on drafting a Bill but this w ork is currently on hold. Noted
identifies the common capability gaps and opportunities, through a set of goals and priorities that help us focus our efforts
identify and develop Aucklandspecific policies that will promote Auckland and national economic growth
identify and recommend the optimal arrangements and responsibilities in the weather forecasting system that will best position New Zealand to meet future weatherrelated challenges and impacts within the context of climate change
identify areas of innovation and research and development for the future
identify strategic partners and collaborators
identify whether changes in access to weather data should be considered and if so, what these should be.
identifying and developing a list of emerging technologies that are critical to the future of New Zealand
identifying and recommending ways to address barriers to innovation and commercialisation ensuring a thriving science and innovation ecosystem, and
identifying barriers to meeting regulatory requirements and the types of support or incentives that would help building owners to better manage seismic risk
ie the biopart of the phrase, for sale in markets via economy to consumers and suppliers to them. What we realised as we thought about the problem is New Zealand has biomass production and harvesting systems and we have got to make biomass to feed into the system that biomass flows into various organisations with various names and they handle it, they sort it and they process it. It can be anything from a sawmill, a dairy plant to a fishing boat. Those primary processors produce products that often go to others for processing, a simple example of that would be milk powder then going to another processing facility to be made into infant formula, those products ultimately, and there might be multiple stages of produced products that finally go to markets.
if relevant stakeholders come
if the employer and employee agree to vary their employment agreement to state the threshold applies before the end of the transitional period, or
if you have any questions or comments about our social media engagement.
if you would like more information.
ii. Around per cent of existing Holidays Act related information and education resources will need to be , and additional resources will be required to explain, and assist employers to embed, the Taskforces recommendations (funding for staff time, new products and tools, and promotion).
ii. Devel oping and testing options. This involved developing and testing a number of options for change that were based on the views and proposals put forward by Taskforce members and via the Issues Paper consultation process. The testing was conducted by an extern al provider with expertise in payroll matters and using bona fide payroll data across a wide range of working arrangements.
ii. Employees should become entitled to bereaveme nt leave and family violence leave from their first day of employment. Employees should be entitled to one day of sick leave from their first day of employment, with an additional day per month of employment until the full entitlement of five days is reach ed after four months.
ii. Focused its work on addressing known pain points with the current legislation
ii. For FBAPS payments , payroll testing suggested that no employees would be worse off under the Taskforces proposals, and most would be better off. The average daily FBAPS leave payment increased by around seven per cent. Taking into account the skewe d characteristics of the sample tested, MBIE considers that a reasonable estimate of increased FBAPS payments across the New Zealand workforce is approximately . million per year.
ii. provide clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements
iii. Confirming preferred option and finalising recommendations. This involved assessing the options developed by the Taskforce against a range of criteria, consulting with a select group of payroll providers, and confirming the final recommendations in a report.
iii. Employees should have the ability to take sick leave and family violence leave in units of less than a day.
iii. There may be a case for additional resources to support any new compliance approaches that are developed to support implementation of the Taskforces recommendations. (For example, mechanisms that stipulate expectations around the quality and performance o f payroll products, providers, and associated systems).
iii. be simpler than the current Act in relation to the provision of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave
ill on May , and detailed some technical changes. Second reading of the Bill took place on June . Prior to the Committee of the Whole House, a Supplementary Order Paper was introduced, outlining changes that align
impacts from current and possible future land uses
implementing initiatives on education, labour and capacity building.
importer cost (cost of importing the fuel to New Zealand including the cost of purchasing the fuel in Singapore, shipping it to New Zealand, insurance and losses, and wharfage and handling).
imposing a ban on ticketbuying bots
imposing a price cap on resale tickets
improve education and skills performance.
improve outcomes for businesses, workers and all New Zealanders, and
improve the effectiveness of domestic law
improve the quality of the Bill before an exposure draft is released for consultation later this year . Together with technical refinements made so far, the changes will also demonstrate some progress from the previous Cabinet decisions.
improvements in the collection and reuse of data across the sector
improving sector productivity, that is:
improving the adventure activities audit process.
in New Zealand unlawfully because their visa has expired
in Parliament on September . It passed its first reading on October . Select Committee reported back on the
in Parliament on September . It passed its third reading late July
in a suitable repository that is listed in the Directory of Open Access Repositories (OpenDOAR) maintained by Jisc
in an Institutional Repository that enables Open Access; or
in order to support release of an exposure draft ( refer para
in recognition of the importance of dialogue and partnership between governments and the energy industry.
in some Free and frank opinions Confidential advice to Government
in standard restructuring situations.
in the first instance so that we can try to resolve the issue. We aim to respond to your email within business days.
in this paper and existing Cabinet decisions
inappropriately disposing of waste
include a timeframe and milestones for delivery in the application.
include at least two RTO members in the application group
include delivering an evaluation of the impact of the funded activities by December .
include regional breakdowns (if appropriate)
including eligibility, payments and returning to work.
incomplete, such as the transitional provisions an d record keeping requirements ( which are dependent on other areas of the Bill ).
increase business certainty about what to do to comply.
increase the value derived from our biological resources
increase transparency by publishing regular data on expenditure, outputs, impacts and performance of the science and innovation system
increased capital investment by firms, supported by higher domestic savings and inbound overseas investment
increased duration for earlycareer Fellows
increased tools for labour inspectors
increasing the penalty for fraud
increasing the scale and pace of energy and resource development to ensure secure, resilient and reliable production and supply
independently manage your complaint from the personpeople who are the subject of the complaint
individuals (eg, neighbours in dispute over a shared driveway)
industry participants (businesses and individuals)
inform government policy decisions and longerterm strategy
inform researchers and professionals from all sectors of key findings on how to best promote financial capability in Pacific communities here in Aotearoa New Zealand
inform their customers about emergency call access and how to make emergency calls
information about keeping accurate records
information about opportunities and gaps in the system that can be leveraged to develop new products and services
information about our products, services and activities
information about recruitment.
information and education
information and opportunities for emerging aviation technologies and space.
information on future opportunities and threats
information on primary sector innovation
information) for personal gain or for the personal gain of another person.
innovative and efficient use of electricity
interfering with, or damaging, the environment
introducing a new employerled visa framework that will drive the application process
inventions in all fields of human endeavour
invest in workforce planning, upskilling and developing career pathways for their workers
investigating complaints and making determinations about disputes on certain building matters
investors (domestic or international)
invitations to provide feedback on specific issues
is New Zealands largest employer with around , full time employees
is a new and possibly disruptive technology that not many people understand that could change the way businesses operate.
is a weekly average of retail prices in Auckland, Hamilton, Wellington, and Christchurch.
is being delivered by District Health Boards (DHB) in the communities. Each DHB will tailor delivery to meet local needs, and may include mentalhealth first aid training, community wellbeing events, and other locally identified initiatives.
is on the New Zealand Gazette website.
is partially complete, with drafting based on the policy decisions made by Cabinet and previous Ministers. Those decisio ns are summarised in Annex One.
issues identified by our stakeholder working group during the design process and considered
it results in , I anticipate
iv. Bereavement leave should be expanded to cover more family members (e.g. stepfamily, siblings inlaw and children inlaw, cultural family groups, miscarriage, and aunts, uncles, nieces and nephews).
iv. It is estimated that making bereavement, sick and family violence leave available from day one will increase costs across the New Zealand economy by around . million per year. This figure accounts for tenure and turnover rates in New Zealand and is based on assumptions on the amount of leave likely to be taken.
iv. be readily implementable in a payroll system
ix. aim to protect overall entitlements for employees.
justify why they should seek a HAV licence. They will still be required to comply with the Civil Aviation rules.
kaitiakitanga (guardianship)
kaitiakitanga (guardianshipsustainability)
keep a record of all postal articles held or opened, and allow anyone with the delegated authority of the Chief Executive of the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment access to that record
keep any held items safely before disposal
keep workers safe from harm, including from bullying and harassment
keep you if a response is delayed
keeping the regulatory system up to and relevant
know how and where they can access training
know how to accommodate diverse workplace requirements, including for disabled people and people with caring responsibilities.
know where to go for support from the government (including resources and funding) to create inclusive and accessible workplaces
l ike private sector employers, are included in the exposure draft consultation process.
legal resources and of PCO drafting re s ource . Without this, it will not be possible to produce new legislation that is fit for purpose
less restrictive and simpler framework for using PAYG.
leveraging higher premiums from existing products
licence, payload permit and overseas payload permit. Currently, the Minister treats the following overseas licences, authorisations or ODMP as satisfying some, or all, of the regulation criteria: US Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). The FAA licence does not meet New Zealand requirements for end oflife disposal. Applicants will also need to demonstrate compliance with this requirement US Federal Communications Commission (FCC) for payloads with radio communication capabilities National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) for NASA and NASA sponsored payloads . US Department of Defence (DoD) for US DoD or DoD authorised payloads European Space Agency (ESA) while not a regulator or licensing body, ODMP assessed by ESA as meeting its standards, demonstrate full compliance with New Zealand requirements.
limiting day trial to businesses with fewer than employees.
linkages with relevant science and research providers, and programmes in New Zealand and internationally.
literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works, sound recordings and films, broadcasts
log the complaint in their register and acknowledge it
longterm picture of what is required to improve official statistics, data and information on research, science and innovation
lower their environmental impact and shift to a more sustainable use of energy and resources
maintain a profile so we can match your skills and preferences against upcoming positions
make it easier for employees to understand their entitlements.
make law easier to design, implement and enforce
makes it an offence for an operator to charge more than the maximum fee or to fail to remove a wheel clamp within a reasonable timeframe after a fee is paid
makes these offences enforceable by the New Zealand Police.
making a Report of Concern to Oranga Tamariki,
making procurement and property management easier through systems and frameworks that support quality decision making.
manaakitanga (shared respect, hospitality, generosity and care for others)
manage AllofGovernment contracts for common goods and services.
manage the Government Electronic Tenders Service (GETS)
managing buildings after emergencies.
managing the system that regulates building work and monitoring its effectiveness
mark mail with their unique postal identifier
market trends information
markets are wellfunctioning and competitive
material on our social media pages that is protected by the copyright of a third party.
maximise opportunities for events, and a range of recreational and health benefits for New Zealanders.
measure how you use the website so it can be and improved based on your needs
measure progress towards a more sustainable operating model across environmental, economic, community and regional dimensions
meet the requirements set out in the position description
mental health and addiction support worker
modernising parental leave
monitoring and evaluation.
monitoring and reporting to Government on the execution and delivery of science, innovation and technology strategy, priorities and system reform.
monitoring compliance with legislative requirements and undertaking enforcement action where necessary.
monitoring the performance of councils, in relation to building work
monitoring, review and reporting on regulatory systems
months may not be enough time for all employers. Some stakeholders
more and higher value awards
more effective at managing immigration risk, and
more flexibility and less formality
more specialised and innovative solutions
most landlords and more than half of tenants are aware of changes to insulation requirements
most tenants report their private rental property has at least one working smoke alarm.
most uptoinformation about parental leave
mostly under the Samoan Quota and the Pacific Access Category. In :
moving from a weeksbased entitlement system to a weeksbased accrual system for providing annual leave entitlement
must book a test for NAATI tests funded by MBIE by pm (New Zealand time) on June .
n ote that t he Bill will be binding on the Crown but, like the Holidays Act, will not apply in respect of the Armed Forces as defined in section () of the D efence Act .
n ote that, subject to the report back referred to in recommendation
names and addresses of individual operators or partners, or the chief executive and directors
negotiating and introducing sector agreements ensuring there is more planning for future workforce needs
new content on our other digital channels (news, publications, speeches, media releases, campaigns etc)
next steps for the Holidays Act Review
not align with Cabinet decisions.
not leaving a local authority area when required to do so by an enforcement officer.
not required to be available to work certain times, days or for a minimum period; OR
note that the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety plans to release an exposure draft of the Bill in September
notify us of any changes to their registration information
notifying the Immigration New Zealand (INZ) Duty Officer or the MBIE oncall phone.
o A description of the approach taken to the safety assessment o A description of the launch vehicle and its proposed operation, including a description of all safety critical systems o Particulars of all relevant New Zealand and international standards that have been applied or will be applied in relation to the launch vehicle and its operation o A description of the safety management system the applicant has in place to: a) identify and assess the safety risks associated with the proposed launch activities and b) develop and implement safety control measures o Details of key personnel responsible for the safety of the launch activities o A description of the geographical areas likely to be affected by the launch activities and if relevant demographic information about the local community that may be affected by them o A description of known significant risks associated with the launch activities o A description of control measures in place to mitigate those risks o An emergency management plan that describes the systems, processes and procedures that will apply in the event of a major incident.
o Address o Place of organisation or incorporation o Description of the services being sub contracted.
o balloons launched for the purposes of education by a New Zealand primary or secondary school or a New Zealand tertiary institute for the purposes of education where the payload carried by the balloon can only be used to describe or illustrate the progress of the vehicle and the payload device is an unmodified commercial offtheshelf product, and o model rockets launched and operated by members of the New Zealand Rocketry Association (NZRA) from the NZRA launch site at Taupiri.
o fficials contact a range of stakeholders to ensure they are aware of the consultation, connect them with the materials, and invite
objective criteria for using payasyougo for annual leave and a less burdensome review process, and
of the Bill and consultation document
of the Official Information Act.
of the employee in their former position or in a position no less advantageous to them,
of type Cabinet Minute, Cabinet Paper, Regulatory Impact Statement
on minor and technical matters that are in line with the policy
on our Building Performance website has Canterburyrelated information and guidance for homeowners, building owners and building professionals.
on the proposals in this paper ,
open postal articles to enable them to be delivered
operational policyservice design
opportunities for improvement
or association, having a professional or legal obligation to someone else (such as being a trustee) and owning a beneficial interest in a trustland.
or completing the online form:
or fostering an enabling environment to accomplish these goals.
or other money lost as a result of the grievance (generally up to a maximum of three months of ordinary pay, with discretion for higher reimbursement), andor
or post your request to Ministerial Services, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, PO Box , Wellington .
or was not working while receiving weekly accident compensation. AL entitlement would also accrue on the first week of any other period of unpaid leave but, unless the employer and employee agree otherwise, not on weeks beyond that (which currently extend s the an employee receives their AL entitlement). .
or who has concerns about the wellbeing of a child or young person and the child is not in immediate danger, will first report their concerns to their Manager and together assess the best approach to take. This may involve:
other forms of leave such as sick or bereavement leave
other leave types ( Family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays, and sick leave
other than as a business, such as if you are delivering your own mail
other things like your screen resolution, the release of your installed Flash version and the language setting of your browser.
other tweets, articles or publications of interest which are relevant to our key messages, objectives, promotions or updates
outline how our people can apply for and assess flexible working arrangement proposals in a way that is consistent, transparent, and reflective of the diversity of our people, responsibilities, and functions at MBIE.
outlines government policies, objectives and targets for
overall attitudes towards migrants in New Zealand
p roceed based on the existing recommendations made by the Holidays Act Taskforce and accepted by the previous Government ,
package is the work were doing on health and safety at work legislative reform.
page for more information.
page includes information about the surveys purpose, quality targets, population, sampling, data processing, analysis and outputs.
participation in promotional and alumni activities.
partner with others to develop agreed strategies and interventions to support workforce planning, upskilling and transitions to respond to the changing nature of work.
payment overrides in the PLEPA and Volunteers Employment Protection Act , come into force two months after the the Bill kjtrvweh Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government
payment rules, and the changes to the availability provisions in the
payments above what an employee would have expected to earn on the day in question and what would be considered fair .
payments are not too dissimilar across the health and ACC systems
peer country comparisons.
people and organisations authorised by the regulator or regulations to certify or licence businesses for highrisk work and activities.
performances of performing artists
periods of unpaid leave are not included in continuous employment . .
place workers in jobs that best match their skills and abilities
policy advice on regulation of the telecommunications sector, and the social, cultural, environmental and economic impacts of new technology
policy and technical planning advice on the allocation of the radio and broadcasting spectrums, and issues related to commercial broadcasting.
positioned to deliver a Bill for introduction in early .
potential impact on some of these operators could be high as the licensing regime would impose new information and reporting requirements on them. . The main users affected are likely to be organisations that routinely use high altitude balloons for weather and atmospheric monitoring including the MetService, NIWA, and Rocket Lab (who use s balloons to monitor weather conditions prior to a rocket launch) . Some universities such as Otago University, Canterbury University and Auckland University of Technology inform us that they also use high altitude balloons for education purposes to build capacity and encourage deeper understanding of upper atmospheric processes. In addition, NASA operates an annual high pressure balloon programme from New Zealand as part of their upper atmosphere , climate research and astronomical research programme s. Ther e may be some primary and secondary schools that occasionally launch balloons for teaching purposes. . Weather forecast and storm warning information is provided by the MetService under a contract with the Ministry of Transport and constitutes an important public good service for New Zealand. It is important that this service is maintained and not unduly hindered by regulation.
preparing to find and secure employment
prioritising drafting in areas that are critical for employer s. There may be some areas
privacy and confidentiality
promote accountability for this tragedy
promote competition to boost productivity and living standards
promote diversity through inclusive recruitment and retention strategies
promote employment rights
promote the involvement of central government in major regional development projects
promoting food security, safety, and agriculture biotechnology
property project management
property research and strategy.
propertyrelated procurement
proposed three options for the next stages of the review:
protect national security or other national interests; or
protect people, information, and places
protecting organisational reputation.
provide advice on complex, risky and strategically important projects
provide an Auckland perspective in the development of central government policy
provide an opportunity for community organisations to more actively engage in supporting successful refugee settlement
provide employees the opportunity to have a better balance of personal and professional needs which can be achieved with a range of custom work settings, supporting the mental health and wellbeing of MBIE employees.
provide evidence based independent advice to the public and government.
provide fast broadband to the greatest number of underserved rural homes and businesses within the funding available
provide for installations to be designed and installed under ASNZS (the Wiring Rules)
provide ongoing job and economic development opportunities for regional economies
provide spillover benefits to the wider economy, including digital technology sectors.
provide you with information about doing business in New Zealand.
providers of dispute resolution services.
provides a better experience for our customers and staff.
provides for complaints and dispute resolution services. Many of these services are delivered privately within industries, sectors, and communities.
provides for technical revisions to the Telecommunications Regulatory Levy. These changes provide consistency with the levy arrangements for utility regulation under the Commerce Act
provides for the development of a new utility regulation framework for fibre fixed line access services from
provides more regulatory oversight of retail service quality, associated consumer codes and dispute resolution processes in the telecommunications sector
provides scope to modernise the legislation .
provides ways for people to raise their issues
providing additional parental leave payments for parents of preterm babies.
providing advice and guidance to the Government and the wider sector on issues and topics of interest to building and construction.
providing advice to the Prime Minister on the longterm direction and highlevel priorities for governmentfunded science, innovation and technology, along with areas that could be deprioritised.
providing calibration points for ground based radar to assist with the tracking of orbital debris
providing commercial data connectivity services through providing lowpower and lowdata rate VHF communications between Earth and Space.
providing guidance to support duty holders to control energy safety risks and comply with their legal obligations; and
providing support, advice and expertise
puts in place consumer safeguards when copper services are to be withdrawn
quarterly average main port price, and
quarterly average retail price series produced by Statistics New Zealand.
raised concerns about the risk of future workability issues that reform of the Act may
raising awareness of energy safety risks and legislative requirements;
rangatiratanga (sovereignty)
recommend changes that address the high degree of ambiguity that has made the Holidays Act difficult to understand and implement for employers
recommendation t o replace FBAPS payment methodologies. I nitial feedback suggests the new calculations are still comple x,
recommendation to replace the FBAPS payment methodology with
recommendation was to remove the need for judgement, reduce risks of gaming and ensure FBAPS paym ents reflect what an employee would have earned on a specific day.
recommendations provided in three attached papers.
recommending regulatory responses that balance life safety risks against the costs of regulation and impact on private property owners
reconcile with this proposal.
record an interview conducted inperson or via telephone;
recurring themes that may highlight systemic issues
reduce compliance costs for employers and we
reduce the impact of differences in regulatory settings across borders.
reduce unnecessary costs for businesses, especially small businesses
reduced existing pressure on tourism infrastructure, particularly in communities which lacked local funding capacity
reducing carbon emissionsimproving environmental outcomes, that is:
refers to any commercial activity including advertising.
reform and modernise the innovation, technology and science system
regulating entities section
regulations will be passed to extend the transitional period for private vehicles in the first half of to June .
regulators that implement the law and support people to comply through engagement, enforcement, and standard setting
reinstating set meal and rest breaks
reinstating the ability for lowerpaid workers to bring their families to New Zealand
relating to family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays, and sick leave (known as FBAPS leave) :
release of an exposure draft of the Bill.
remove or disable all public letterboxes and deliver all postal items before they cease business
removes line of business restrictions for Chorus that do not add to prohibition on participation in retail, which remain in place.
removing unnecessary compliance and implementation costs.
renewable and efficient use of process heat
replace the Act because the proposed changes represent a fundamental change to the legislation
replace the Holidays Act . It is an omnibus Bill (a Bill that amends more than one Act).
replacing existing skills bands with a simple remuneration threshold aligned to the median wage
report on progress against government goals
representatives from the Department of Conservation, Waka Kotahi and MBIE.
reproduce the material accurately
request corrections of that information.
requesting official information
require an original copy of a document to be provided to us;
require information to be provided by sworn statement or statutory declaration;
required by the Cabinet policy decisions , months would be the minimum time required for changes to
requirements for safety management systems that operators of gas supply systems must meet. This includes setting the brightline for which gas supply systems are required to have a safety management system
requirements for smoke alarms and insulation in residential rental properties
requires operators to be available (within reason) to respond to requests to remove a wheel clamp
requires operators to remove a wheel clamp as soon as reasonably practicable after a fee is paid
requires the Commerce Commission to undertake retail service quality monitoring
requires the employer to make a judgement about which calculation to use. The intent of the Taskforce s
requiring information disclosure from ticket resellers and primary ticket sellers
research areas using the Australian New Zealand Scientific Research Classifications (ANZSRC)
residential swimming pool barriers must be inspected every three years
resolve it themselves (selfresolution)
responsive and respectful
restoring protections for vulnerable workers, such as those in the cleaning and catering industries, regardless of the size of their employer
revenue received by production and postproduction businesses from international sources increased
review and inform offshore market development (including export and investment) strategies
reviewing and revising current guidance and resources for RBAs
reviewing the Building Code and producing documents that show how to comply with it
reviewing the occupational regulation of engineers
risk assessment, risk management and risk communication of public good food safety issues
robust analysis and implementation support for any changes, and
safely reenter the Pike River mine drift
safety covers can be used as barriers for spa pools and hot tubs
safety critical roles, training and competencies
samples of the proposed postal identifier (see What Is a Postal Identifier below).
scientific researchers (academic, government and corporate).
secure, affordable and abundant electricity supply, and
securing appropriate travel and medical insurance cover for the duration of the internship
see reduced disparities in employment outcomes between different demographic groups and communities.
service, process and information inadequacies
set international labour standards
set out in the standards applicable to the regulations, with a focus on adopting international standards.
set the legislative framework and requirements for electricity and gas safety (energy safety) from supply through to end use.
sets a clear direction for New Zealand, providing a shared vision for where we want to get to, and what we need to do to get there
sets clear expectations for what the regime is intended to achieve
sets out how systems actors will work together to address the gaps, overlaps and uncertainties which inevitably arise in complex systems
sets the maximum fee that operators can charge at (including GST)
sexual, racial or other harassment
shaping competitive, resilient and environmentally sustainable markets for the benefit of all New Zealanders.
sign up for and receive alerts
significantly increase the efficiency and utilisation of resources within the economy to reduce emissions.
simpler methodologies for calculating use of leave that do not require pay systems to access data about daily hours of work
simplify obligations, reduce compliance costs for employers, an d address areas that were previously incomplete . They also address
simplifying the payment method for other types of leave so that only one calculation is required.
someone keeps your passport and money from you
sometimes the government itself (eg, a company challenging a decision by a government agency).
stakeholder concerns relating to the former Bill. The recommendations of the reconvened JWG were provided to ministers in February and were used to develop
streamlines the process for recommending regulation of services in Schedule of the Act
strengthening collective bargaining and union rights
strengthening enforcement of employment standards
strengthening the labour market test for lowerpaid workers and removing it altogether for higherpaid jobs outside the main centres.
strengthening the regulatory leadership role of WorkSafe
strikes that end before the Bill comes into force, or
support exporters to grow their offshore markets, creating more jobs and opportunities.
supporting communities to manage tourism
supporting communities to manage tourism, and
supporting regulations, safe work instruments, standards, approved codes of practice, and guidance that sit under the HSW Act
supports a large, price sensitive, funded sector of up to , employees.
systems to load freshwater and unload wastewater
tackling environmental challenges
take account of crossborder impacts in the design and implementation of domestic law
take photographs during site visits or inspections; or
taking appropriate steps to respond to, and mitigate threats to the physical security of staff, or the security of information or places (e.g. a physical security breach, webhacking).
taking photos of the Earth, Moon and Venus with the integrated camera.
tax and regulatory settings that support greater competition in key sectors (including banking, grocery and energy).
technologies to improve farm productivity, such as precision agriculture
telecommunications service obligations instruments.
telephone and video interpreting service
tell new customers, and remind existing customers at least once a year, that their home phone may not work in a power cut
tell recipients if a postal article will be, or has been opened, and why (unless this interferes with a law enforcement investigation)
tell their customers how they can protect themselves and where to go for further support
territorial authorities will have better tools to enforce pool barrier requirements, including notices to fix and infringement notices.
testing efficient battery charging in an orbital environment.
that a collective employment agreement exists and covers the work to be done by the employee,
that ensures a good mixture of sectors, different size d
that remove the exceptions to the AL
that the commencement clause provides that the consequential amendment to the PLEPA to replace the Holidays Act OWP
that the employee may join a union that is a party to the collective employment agreement,
that, if the employee joins the union, the collective employment agreement will bind the employee.
the Cabinet Fees Framework set out in Cabinet Circular CO (), or
the Chair of NZCT Inc or their representative
the Direct Fibre Access Service should be adjusted
the Equal Pay Amendment Act
the FoodBowl located in Auckland
the FoodPilot located at Massey University near Palmerston North
the Innovation Programme for Tourism Recovery
the Mission Operations Control Centre, funded from the Strategic Science Investment Fund.
the Mobile Black Spot Fund (MBSF)
the Mobile Black Spot Fund (MBSF) is delivering improved mobile coverage on stretches of state highways and in tourism locations.
the Police or another government agency, if required or authorised by law (for example to assist with the investigation of a criminal offence), or to report significant misconduct or breach of duty or where there is a serious threat to health or safety.
the RBA training programme must be able to meet demand
the Radiocommunications Act , including assigning licences, and compliance, enforcement, and registration.
the Regulatory Systems (Building and Housing) Amendment Act , containing amendments to two Acts
the Regulatory Systems (Commercial Matters) Amendment Act , containing amendments to Acts
the Regulatory Systems (Economic Development) Amendment Act , containing amendments to Acts
the Regulatory Systems (Housing) Amendment Act , containing four amendments to two Acts.
the Regulatory Systems (Workforce) Amendment Act , containing amendments to three Acts
the Regulatory Systems (Workplace Relations) Amendment Act , containing amendments to two Acts.
the Resolution Institute (RI, formerly LEADR)
the Rural Broadband Initiative phases and (RBI and RBI)
the Tourism Industry Transformation Plan
the Tourism Infrastructure Fund.
the UltraFast Broadband (UFB) programme
the UltraFast Broadband (UFB) programme and the Rural Broadband Initiative (RBI) are delivering vastly improved broadband services to urban and rural New Zealand
the University of Auckland
the ability to increase international visitor numbers quickly
the ability to increase regional dispersal of international visitors quickly
the availability provisions in the E mployment Relations Act
the background to the review
the bargaining framework in the Employment Relations Act , for employees and employers to assess a pay equity claim and agree on a settlement if a pay equity issue was identified.
the basic physics of the space environment
the business does not terminate the agreement for not accepting an additional task.
the cash value of board and lodgings.
the certification regime for gas appliances.
the company name appears in full on the stamp
the credibility and reliability of the source of the information, where it is not an official source;
the criteria and parameters to improve clarity an d certainty, but that the rules are still complex , with high compliance costs. Noted A gree Discuss
the and time you visited this site
the deduction being made, or
the device you used to access this site
the employees have little bargaining power.
the ethical considerations of human exploration of space and kaitiakitanga of our nearEarth space environment
the extent to which the risks can be mitigated by licence or permit conditions; and
the future state of weather data availability in New Zealand
the general rules and requirements about safety
the impact of the collection on affected individuals;
the inclusion of stateowned enterprises, industry research cooperatives, levy bodies, and minorityowned subsidiaries of select Crown entities
the intended and possible outcome(s) of the information collection (for example, a prosecution or imposition of a fine or other statutory penalty).
the law will allow remedy reductions of up to percent where an employee has contributed to the situation which gave rise to the personal grievance.
the official source of the information;
the opportunities and risks associated with the use of space, and
the other party to a concern, for the purpose of investigating and resolving the concern;
the outcomes of prosecution decisions (as reported annually by the Public Prosecutions Unit of the Crown Law Office) reflect MBIE prosecutions are well managed
the pages you accessed on this site and the links you clicked on
the placarding system was not always fitforpurpose for flooding events
the potential for innovations from access to weather data that is not currently available.
the proposals in this paper which are intended to help reduce implementation requirements)
the proposed operation is in the national interest.
the referring site (if any) from which you clicked to reach this site
the register of telecommunications network operators
the remainder kt was exported to be processed outside of New Zealand.
the remediation process it is currently undertaking .
the retail price series was adjusted, to account for price differences between Auckland and the rest of the country
the rules for how employee s leave entitlements must be treated in restructuring situations (when a business is sold, transferred or work is contracted in or out ) were identified as lacking clarity and as an area where the current legal status quo may not provide
the search terms you used on this site
the sector employs around , people.
the severity of the harm we are seeking to prevent or address; and
the telecommunications functions of the Commerce Commission.
the type of web browser you used to access this site (eg, Internet Explorer, Google Chrome)
the underlying intent of existing provisions an d minimise s
the use of space for Earth observation.
the version of a manuscript that has been accepted for publication in a journal, incorporating all changes required by the peerreview process
the words appear as part of the postal operators name on the stamp
the words are in the same typeface and point size as the company name.
the words form part of the postal operators registered name
the worker is not required to be available to work certain times, days or for a minimum period OR the worker is able to subcontract the work, and
the worker is not restricted from working for others, and
the worker is not restricted from working for others; and
them to make a submission .
there is a written agreement that specifies the worker is an independent contractor, and
there is a written agreement that specifies the worker is an independent contractor; and
they have earned. We propose rescinding this decision to remove the liability risk it would create for employers.
third party certification may not be the most effective way to achieve regime objectives.
this represented . of overall GDP from New Zealand economic production
those interpreters still working towards achieving their NAATI credential will be known as WTN interpreters until they achieve their credential. These interpreters can be used if no credentialed interpreter is available.
through the government contract
to hours from July .
to address . There will be a trade off regarding what we can address and the timing of delivering a Bill for introduction. We will
to apply the more complex payment methodologies that apply when AL is taken . W e recommend simplified criteria for using PAYG .We recommend including a proposal in your May Cabinet paper that is simpler than the fourpart test for using PAYG and less restrictive. The Taskforce also recommended removing the ability to use PAYG for fixed term employees on contracts of less than months . Free and frank opinions Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government We are continuing to work on the details of the proposals .We will continue to work on the detail of the proposals above for inclusion in your Cabinet paper and w e will report back to you if we nee d any further decisions before then. This work will includ e engagement with representatives of Business NZ and the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions to help test for unintended consequences . .W e also intend to engage with the U nited Kingdom to learn from their experience in this area. The United Kingdoms changes to their Working time Regulations (that come into effect on April ) include the introduction of rolled up holiday pay (a similar concept to PAYG) as an option for irregular hour and partyear workers. In its report back on the consultation on the reforms, the Department of Business and Trade states that it understands rolled up holiday pay is already used in a lot of sectors due to the simplicity it offers to calculate holiday pay for irregular hours workers. It also states that, while it recognises that rolled up holiday pay may disincentivise taking time off work it considered that existing safeguards are proportionate in addressing the concerns. Within the weeks based system , further opportunities for simplification and policy adjustments exist . The changes proposed above will simplify, improve workability and reduce compliance costs in some key area s . We are aware that there is still opportunity within a we ek sbased system for further technical improvements. We are also aware of some areas where stakeholders may raise concerns with the underlying policy intent and outcomes . An initial discussion of some of these is included. . W e have proposed that for the exposure draft, the rules for the periods of employment during which
to attract additional multiday visitors
to attract more outofregion visitors
to both internal and external stakeholders. This lets our stakeholders explore the data without setting up a database connection.
to enable full cost recovery.
to enable government ministers to interact with the chief executives of leading energy companies
to finalise the Bill for introduction in May ;
to help individual businesses make decisions about where to next.
to identify additional areas where guidance will be developed to assist applicants understand how they can meet the information requirements . . With respect to the exemptions for HAVs, the consultation document sought feedback on a minor exe mption for primary and secondary schools for educational purposes. Submitters raised the following concerns about the minor HAV exemption including: It is unclear what the rationale is for excluding a particular class of HAV operator (primary and secondary schools) rather than an exemption based on the risk of the operator or particular characteristics of the HAV (such as payload size, weight or purpose)
to implement that business advice.
to meet forecast cost pressures.
to receive Language Assistance Services Newsletter updates or use the button below.
to report migrant exploitation
to simplify, reduce costs, and address gaps
to support businesses to restart or scale up as tourism returns.
to support implementation.
to support its operation .
to take AL in advance above the pro rata amount of leave in advance
to take AL in advance on a pro rata basis . This adds complexity to the framework. We are proposing a weeks based accrual system for AL ,
to the detailed recommendations set out in the attached papers
total expenditure on production was billion, up
tougher sanctions for employers and officers responsible for breaches of employment standards
trade marks, service marks and commercial names and designations.
training opportunities for rangatahi (youth);
transfer data to MBIE for use in the Tourism Evidence and Insights Centre (TEIC) (that is, the data must not be owned by the applicant). This will require consultation with MBIE over the designdevelopment of quality data, and how it can be integrated into the
transforming the foundations of the tourism system
transparent and accountable
types of dispute resolution (sitting along the spectrum of formality and empowerment),
unaccompanied and separated migrant children living in New Zealand.
unbundled fibre services should be pricecapped
under a contract for services with a postal operator.
understand the benefits of investing in training
understand the skills they will need in the future
undertaking joint industrygovernment action to raise awareness of the issues and make commitments to improve the ticketing system.
update regulatory settings to enable more timely decision making, free up innovators to test their technology and ideas, and support businesses to demonstrate the integrity of their products so they can access export markets, and
upload and download of data from spacecraft.
use a process provided by government (eg, a government mediation service, tribunal or ombudsman)
use a process provided by the private sector (eg, an industry body).
use recognised and validated measurement approaches able to be aggregatedcompared with other similar data
use specialist equipment (for example to monitor interference with the radio spectrum).
use the services of New Zealand businesses (that is, industry bodies must commission suitably qualified professionals)
using illegal drugs at work
v. minimise compliance costs for employers
various working arrangements , payroll providers
vi. minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees
viii. be readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future
vocational and disability support worker.
want to withdraw your application after it has been submitted
was launched in May and aims to enrich New Zealand through sustainable tourism growth, underpinned by productive, sustainable and inclusive tourism.
we forecast the discount for the quarter, then
we have developed our Regulatory Systems Stewardship Strategy . This sets a year strategic direction to strengthen regulatory stewardship capability at MBIE.
we share an exposure draft of the Bill and consultation document wit h
website explains how you can meet the current building legislation and regulatory requirements.
wellbeing support and time off for RBAs following an event needs greater consideration.
were later widened and Simon Mount QC was appointed to assist Mr Martin with the inquiry. The inquiry considered (amongst other things) the circumstances of, and reasons for, any engagement by Crown Agencies of external security consultants, including but not limited to Thompson and Clark Investigations Limited.
whanaungatanga (a sense of family and belonging, relationships built on shared experiences and working together).
whanaungatanga (connection)
what personal characteristics and early experiences in New Zealand are associated with successful labour market integration in the long term.
what rules and procedures should apply to accident compensation appeals.
what settlement outcomes have Pacific migrants experienced in New Zealand
what types of Pacific migrants have had more desirable settlement outcomes
when restructuring takes place .
whether system objectives, policy or context have changed over time
whether the charter document should be to reflect these changes
whether, as a result of system assessments, progress has been made in addressing identified risks and closing gaps.
which is about MBIEs work related to the laws on how entities (including companies, incorporated societies, building societies and limited partnerships) are created, administered and wound up.
which is the largest single payroll in the country .
which would simplify the end to end process for providing AL entitlement and better support common practice. We also propose adjustments to other parts of the system to
who should be the decisionmakers for accident compensation appeals District Court Judges or Tribunal Members
wholesale prices for faster broadband comparable to urban pricing
will deliver economic impact for visitors in the host region
will open prior to these dates.
with an accrual based framework
with business and worker representatives
workability. In subsequent discussions on your Workplace Relations and Safety work policy programme, you signalled your comfort wi th option b) above, and the
working in partnership with others.
would be comprised of four parts:
would be those associated with the compliance of seeking a licence. However, the no exemptions option would pose a disproportionate compliance cost on low risk HAV operators which would not be consistent with the policy intent. Preferred o ption exemption s for certain low risk HAV activities . In order to allow for low risk HAV operations to continue without the need for a HAV licence, the preferred option is to prescribe that the following things are not a high altitude vehicle or a high altitude payload for the purposes of the OSHAA Act : balloons launched with only the following sondes : radiosondes, ozone sondes, frost point sondes, and or backscatter sondes , and the payload is used for the sole purpose of measuring any combination of the following atmospheric profiles : pressure, temperature, humidity, wind sp eed and direction, ozone concentration, water vapour and aerosols (including dust, smoke and volcanic ash) balloons launched for the purposes of education by a New Zealand primary or secondary school or a New Zealand tertiary institute for the purposes of education where the payload carried by the balloon can only be used to describe or illustrate the progress of the vehicle and the payload device is an unmodified commercial off theshelf product, and
would impose a statutory constraint on the contractual arrangements businesses negotiate
would increase complexity in some cases (where the current methodology is very simple) and ,
written employment agreements that are followed
www.ombudsman.parliament.nz
www.quantiumsolutions.com
you are paid too little money or none at all
you are subject to fines from your employer for doing something wrong
you have been sexually harassed by your employer
you have no time off for medical appointments, to go shopping or meet friends
you have to pay your wages back to your employer
you must ask permission to eat, sleep, or go to the toilet
your employer bullies or threatens you
your employer forces you to work to pay off a debt
your operating system (eg, Windows , Mac OS X)
Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .
Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY . shrvakdix In Confidence
Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY . I N C O N F I D E N C E DEVMIN Cabinet Economic Development Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Government Response to the Report of the Holidays Act Taskforce Portfolio Workplace Relations and Safety On March , the Cabinet Economic Development Committee (DEV): Holidays Act Taskforce noted that on May , DEV agreed to establish a Taskforce to review the Holidays Act and suggest recommendations for change DEVMIN; noted that the Holidays Act Taskforce submitted its report to the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety in October and has proposed an improved status quo, which retains the existing units of entitlement (weeks for annual holidays, days for other types of leave) and focuses on addressing known issues with the Act by providing greater certainty; agreed to endorse in full the Holidays Act Taskforces recommendations, as set out in pages to of the Taskforces report (attached as Annex Two to the paper under DEVSUB), as the basis for a substantially amended Holidays Act (noting also the summary of recommendations and the proposed government response at Annex One); agreed to refine the Holidays Act Taskforces recommendations on two issues where the recommendations were incomplete, by specifying that: . the reference period for the shortrun average weekly earnings calculation used for calculating annual holiday payments be weeks; . any commission or incentive payments where it is unclear over what period of time the payments were earned only be included in the week average payment calculation; noted that some of the Holidays Act Taskforces recommendations are likely to receive negative feedback, but that this risk can be partly mitigated by a communications strategy that focuses on the improvements that the Taskforces recommendations will provide; Legislative implications noted that a category priority on the Legislation Programme is being sought for a Holidays Amendment Bill (drafting instructions to be issued to the Parliamentary Counsel Office in ); invited the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety to issue drafting instructions to Parliamentary Counsel Office to give effect to the above policy proposals; I N C O N F I D E N C E shrvakdix I N C O N F I D E N C E DEVMIN authorised the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety to make decisions, consistent with the Holidays Act Taskforces recommendations, on any issues that arise during the detailed policy design and drafting process; noted that the authorisation sought under paragraph above includes the authority to make decisions on compliance and enforcement mechanisms to support the new Holidays Act regime (such as the functions and powers of labour inspectors), provided these do not deviate significantly from mechanisms in current employment legislation; noted that the Holidays Act binds the Crown as will any amendments to that Act; Publicity and next steps noted that the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety intends to publicly release the Holidays Act Taskforce Report (Annex ), alongside a statement signalling the governments decision to adopt the Taskforces recommendations in full; directed the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, in consultation with the Government Chief Digital Officer and relevant stakeholders as appropriate, to develop a transition plan and report back to Cabinet by the end of . Janine Harvey Committee Secretary Present: Officials present from: Rt Hon Winston Peters Hon Phil Twyford Hon Dr Megan Woods (Chair) Hon Chris Hipkins Hon David Parker Hon Nanaia Mahuta Hon Iain LeesGalloway Hon Damien OConnor Hon Willie Jackson Hon James Shaw Hon Eugenie Sage Office of the Prime Minister Officials Committee for DEV Hardcopy distribution: Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety I N C O N F I D E N C E shrvakdix
Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .)
Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) ( ) () ,... ,...() ( ) ) : ; ( ( , ( ) . .:. kjtrvweh : ..(( , ) . A . ( B . ) B ( C . ) . . . ( D . . . D A . . . A D ( .(( , kjtrvweh : .(( , ) D ) ( ( ) C . . D . (( : ): : . D( : ); : : : : ( kjtrvweh : ,( : ( , ( C A ( : D : ( ) , ( , : ) : ; : : : :
Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) BRIEFING Holidays Act Review: background, progress and next steps December Priority: Medium Security classification: In Confidence Tracking number: Action sough t Action sought Deadline Hon Brooke van Velden Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety Agree to meet with officials to discuss options for how to proceed with the Holidays Act Review. January Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone st contact Alison Marris Manager, Employment Standards Policy Anna Spencer Principal Advisor , Employment Standards Policy The fo llowing departmentsagencies have been consulted NA Ministers office to complete: Approved Declined Noted Needs change Seen Overtaken by Events See Ministers Notes Withdr awn Comment s Privacy of natural persons
Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E In Confidence
Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) I N C O N F I D E N C E ECOMIN Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Holidays Act Reform: Approval to Consult Portfolio Workplace Relations and Safety On August , the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO): noted that in May , ECO: . agreed amendments to existing Cabinet decisions and made further policy decisions on reforming the Holidays Act ; . noted the intent of the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety (the Minister) to: .. release an exposure draft of the Employment Leave Bill (the Bill) for targeted consultation to test a range of policy options with those who will be affected by the reform; .. report back to Cabinet in August seeking agreement to the content of the consultation document; ECOMIN noted that, in addition to amending existing Cabinet decisions, ECO agreed that the Bill should include a prorata approach for providing the minimum day sick leave entitlement and that, as authorised by Cabinet, the Minister has made decisions on the detail of the approach that will be included in the consultation document; noted that the purpose of the consultation document, attached under ECOSUB, is to seek feedback on the technical and policy details of the proposals in the Bill and on alternative policy options; noted that if, following consultation, Cabinet agrees to further work on key areas of the Bill, then additional time for further policy development and legislative drafting will be required, and that the timing of introduction would depend on the number and significance of the changes and whether further testing is required;
Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution . International (CC BY .) I N C O N F I D E N C E In Confidence Office of the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety Cabinet Economic Policy Committee HOLIDAYS ACT REFORM: CONSULTATION DOCUMENT FOR TARGETED CONSULTATION Proposal This paper seeks agreement to the content of the attached consultation document that will accompany an exposure draft of the Employment Leave Bill (the Bill). These documents will be released for targeted consultation in September . The purpose of the consultation is to seek feedback on opportunities to improve the simplicity and workability of the Bill, and on alternative options that go beyond the Bill. Relation to government priorities The Coalition Governments Action Plan for the period July September includes beginning consultation on the reform of the Holidays Act (the Act). Executive Summary Work has been underway for some time to find enduring, workable solutions to longstanding and widespread issues with the Act. On May , Cabinet noted my intent to release an exposure draft of the Bill for targeted consultation this year, to demonstrate this Governments commitment to reforming the Act. I am seeking agreement to the content of the attached consultation document (Appendix One) for release alongside the Bill in September . The purpose of the targeted consultation is to seek feedback from the various stakeholders who are impacted by the legislation, including those who work with it on the ground, to ensure the final Bill is robust and will resolve the longstanding issues. Consultation will include participants who represent payroll, employer and employee perspectives, to provide technical feedback on the workability of changes to the Act. The Bill largely reflects decisions made by the previous Government, along with improvements agreed by Cabinet in May to increase simplicity, reduce compliance costs and improve workability, and a new proposal to prorate sick leave entitlement. Consulting on the Bill will provide an opportunity to consider whether more substantial shifts from the previous Governments decisions are needed and whether any areas of work merit extending the timeframes for delivering new legislation. The consultation document sets out issues with the Act, explains the changes proposed in the Bill, and explores alternative options. Key issues are highlighted upfront to help direct participants to issues that matter most to them. Targeted and open questions are asked throughout the document to elicit specific technical feedback, views on the Bill, and to invite alternative solutions. At the end of the consultation document, participants will be asked to identify the issues that matter most to them and explain why. This information will inform I N C O N F I D E N C E uohzj I N C O N F I D E N C E decisions on next steps, including consideration of areas that require further policy development and to balance these against the time required to deliver a Bill for introduction. After consultation, I intend to report back to Cabinet in December following analysis of stakeholder feedback on the Bill, and I may seek further policy decisions at this time. Depending on the nature of feedback and the extent of changes proposed, I intend that a Bill will be introduced in May . Background Issues with the Act have been a longstanding concern for employers, employees, and payroll providers. There is widespread agreement that the Act is not fitfor purpose but there is ongoing debate over what a replacement Act should look like, and how interests should be balanced. On May , Cabinet noted my intent to release an exposure draft of a Bill that would replace the Act (named the Employment Leave Bill) for targeted consultation with a representative sample of stakeholders (discussed in paragraphs below) in September . It also noted my intent to seek Cabinet agreement in August to the content of a consultation document that will accompany the Bill CAB MIN. The exposure draft of the Bill released for targeted consultation will largely represent policy decisions made by the previous Government. It will also include improvements agreed by Cabinet in May intended to simplify, improve workability, and reduce costs and complexity, and increase certainty . Some of the key changes Cabinet agreed include: . shifting to a weeksbased accrual system for annual leave, . simplifying the process for calculating annual leave entitlement and the framework for using payasyougo for annual leave, and . consolidating the payment method for other leave types so that only one calculation is required. Cabinet also agreed that the Bill should include a prorata approach for providing the minimum day sick leave entitlement so that there is some proportionality between an employees sick leave entitlement and the quantum of work they perform per week. Based on the Holidays Act Taskforce recommendations CABMIN which it had established in CABMIN . Under the authority delegated to by Cabinet I have made decisions on the detail of the provisions for using payasyougo (PAYG) (paying annual leave as a regular part of an employees pay) that will be included in the Bill. My decisions include the following objective criteria for using PAYG that do not require the application of judgement: i. The employee does not have agreed hours of work in their employment agreement AND ii. The employee works for an average of hours or less per sevenday period AND iii. The employee has at least two, separate, continuous periods of seven days or more during which work is not performed in every six months. In order to reduce the administrative burden and compliance costs of the process for reviewing PAYG during employment, I have also agreed to extend the review period from weeks to six months. I N C O N F I D E N C E uohzj I N C O N F I D E N C E Under the authority delegated to me by Cabinet, I have made decisions on the detail of the prorata approach that will be included in the Bill. The approach retains a five day floor for all employees who are eligible for sick leave and an entitlement scale that provides four tiers of entitlement based on the average number of days employees work per week: five days (for employees who work onetwo days per week), seven days (for employees who work three days per week), eight days (for employees who work four days per week), and days (for employees who work five or more days per week). This decision maintains alignment with design features elsewhere in the Bill, however the consultation document will seek feedback on alternative options. The purpose of consulting on the exposure draft of the Bill is twofold. First, we want to seek technical feedback on how workable the proposed changes are for all stakeholders and understand potential impacts and additional ongoing costs associated with implementation. Second, we want to hear what further changes we could make that would achieve greater simplicity and make it easier for businesses to comply and for workers to be paid their correct entitlements. The targeted consultation will help us understand what really matters to those who work with, or are impacted by, the Act. This Bill is a step on the way to new legislation, but it is by no means a finished product. I know there are further opportunities to improve the simplicity and workability of the legislation, including consideration of alternatives that go beyond what is in the Bill. We need to know if the Bill is on the right track, or if a fundamentally different approach is needed. I seek agreement to the content of the consultation document that will support targeted consultation The consultation document attached (Appendix One) serves as a guide for participants as they navigate the proposed policy changes set out in the Bill and explore alternative options. It explains each policy change and the issues with the Act they are intended to address, and offers alternative policy options for consideration. Questions are included throughout the consultation document seeking feedback from participating stakeholders about both the proposed changes and alternative options. The introduction of the consultation document includes clear messaging that the Bill is not final policy and that more significant changes are possible, both within the current framework and beyond. I want to know which options strike the right balance between the objectives (described in paragraph below) and what benefits, risks and tradeoffs need to be considered. Appendix Two provides a list of the key proposals in the Bill and the alternative options stakeholder views are sought on. Some examples of alternative options that fit within the current framework include: . replacing the three annual leave payment calculations in the Bill with a single calculation, . increasing or reducing flexibility to use payasyougo (PAYG) for annual leave, and . different options for prorating sick leave. The consultation document also includes some alternative options that sit outside the current framework. These include: I N C O N F I D E N C E uohzj I N C O N F I D E N C E . Shifting to an hoursbased accrual system for annual leave (andor sick leave): This could provide a simpler method of providing leave entitlements and more certainty and clarity for employers and employees. There would be tradeoffs between objectives to consider however, and a number of design decisions to be made. It would also require changes to the endtoend annual leave system. . Adjusting rules for when calculations of averages are made so that they can be calculated at a fixed point in time, rather than each time leave is taken:
Despite financial liability being transferred from the outgoing employer, recognising annual and alternative holiday balances is a resourcing liability. This may be a disincentive for an incoming employer to offer existing employees the choice to transfer employment.
be relevant to the organisation; clearly allocate accountability for achieving public safety outcomes; and
Casual employee: Employment legislation does not define what casual employee means (it is set out in case law). It is generally taken to mean an employee who works only as and when required, who can turn down work and who has no expectation of ongoing employment (Section of the Act ).
greater of OLP and ADP payment methodology for other leave
New Zealand is going in a very good direction. These issues with HAVs are not well addressed by other countries and New Zealand is relatively well placed compared to other countries on the HAV side Dawn Aerospace Rocket Lab supports the purpose of the Act and acknowledges to the Act has supported our success and, as a result, the success of our many suppliers and highly skilled employees across New Zealand. It is clear to Rocket Lab that the New Zealand Space Agency and the responsible Minister apply great diligence in reviewing our and our customers launch and payload permit applications, ensuring that the activities continue to meet New Zealands obligations in the Outer Space Treaty, other international obligations, and are in New Zealands nat ional interests Rocket Lab . Submitters made a number of proposals for improving the regime, and these are addressed in the report. The issues have been divided into two broad categories : substantive matters and other issues. . In the substantive iss ues section of the report we discuss the key issues that have been identified in relation to the licen sing and permitting functions under the Act . This has includ ed several issues relating to the regulation of high altitude vehicles , where technological advances since the legislation was developed may require legislative change s. In the Other issues section of the report, we discuss a number of other issues raised in submissions, and identified by MBIE, including some areas where some legislative tidying up may be desirable .
The space sector moves rapidly, and theres a need to keep up and stay relevant. In this regard, the OSHAA as a legislat ive framework is fantastic New Zealands legislative regimethe OSHAA is a major reason why we chose to locate here. The implementation of the regime and the speed at which the NZ Space Agency reactsresponds made New Zealand an attractive location option LeoLabs
A description of the ground stations the payload will be communicating with for commanding the payload or for the transfer of data colle cted by the payload.
An employer must not unreasonably withhold consent to an employees request to take AL entitlement that has arisen. An employer may also agree to leave in advance of entitlement arising. An employer must allow an employee to take AL within months afte r the on which the employees entitlement arises and must allow the employee to take at least two weeks of their AL entitlement in a continuous period. Employers can require employees to take AL they have become entitled to if: o they cannot reach agreement with their employee about when AL will be taken ; or o they have a closedown period ; and they give the employee at least days notice . I consider the current balance of interests between employers and employees is appropriate and I therefore propose adjustments that seek to maintain the underlying intent of the existing provisions while minimising complexity: An employer must not unreasonab ly withhold consent to an employees request to take accrued AL entitlement (this reflects the Cabinet policy decision on pro rata leave in advance) . An employer may also agree to leave in advance of accrued entitlement (status quo) . Following the emp loyees first month employment anniversary o Within each month period an employer must not withhold consent to an employee taking four weeks of accrued AL entitlement (if an employee has it available) ; and o cannot withhold consent to an employee t aking at least two weeks of their accrued AL entitlement in a continuous period. If an employees AL entitlement balance is greater than four weeks an employer can require employees to take AL entitlement in excess of four weeks but only if: o they have sought to confer with the employee and genuinely tried to reach agreement about when the AL is to be taken but have been unable to ; or o they have an established annual closedown period ; and they give the employee at least days notice of the requirement to take AL entitlement. Provisions in the Act for exchanging AL entitlement for payment (cashing up) A weeks based accrual system will require a consequential amendment to the period of months of continuous employment (beginning on the on which the employee most recently became entitled to AL) specified in the Act as the timeframe within which an employee can cash up one week of AL entitlement. To maintain the policy intent that only one week of AL can be cashed up per year (regardless of whether AL has been cashed up in previous years ), I propose an adjustment so that: after the completion of the first months of e mployment an employee may request t o exchange up to one week of accrued AL entitlement for payment in each subsequent month period. kjtrvweh I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Ability to take AL in advance during a closedown period In Cabinet agreed that , during a closedown period, an employer must allow an employee to take AL in advance above the prorata amount of leave in advance they have earned.
An overview of any protective security (including cybersecurity) measur es or policies in place to protect the raw remote sensing data and systems commanding the payload or remote sensing system
Applicants mu st be fit to hold a license . Despite being satisfied that the statutory tests are met, the Minister may decline to grant a licence or permit for the activity if heshe is not satisfied that the activity is in the national interest . The Minister must decline to grant a licence or permit if the Prime Minister issues a certificate that the proposed activity poses a significant risk to national security. . In order to implement the OSHAA Act , regulations are required: to set out the requirements for licences and permits, most significantly the information requirements to prescribe requirements for orbital debris mitigation plans to prescribe requirements for safety cases to prescribe the circumstances in which certain vehicles that go into high altitude are not h ighaltitude vehicles ( and hence will not require a licence ), and to prescribe the form of notices for infringement offences. Current market dynamics and expected activity . The development of a New Zealand based space launch industry creates opportunities for New Zealand to provide launch services to meet a growing demand for launches, particularly for small satellites and constellations of small satellites. It also creates opportunities for New Zealand based organisations to design, build and operate thei r own satellites, and to develop applications for space based information . . At th e current time, Rocket Lab is only launch provider operating in New Zealand that will require a launch and launch facility license under the OSHAA Act. Given the lead time n ecessary to establish a space launch operation, it is unlikely that this position will change in the near future. . For payload permits, we anticipate that Rocket Lab will increase its customer base over the first years, meaning there will be a fairly consistent flow of payload permit applications. If other launch providers enter the New Zealand market, this flow will increase . For HAV licenses, we are aware of three main current users of HAVs (NIWA, the MetService and NASA). We are also aware of some re search and educational launches of high altitude balloons (either by universities, or primary and secondary schools). We expect this sort of activity to increase as technology becomes more accessible and affordable . . We are also aware of groups that are involved in educational and recreational rocketry. These activities would not currently fall within the scope of the OSHAA Act because they do not operate above controlled airspace. However, we understand that the New Zealand Rocketry Association has members that are seeking to operate above controlled airspace in the future (although these launches will not be able to reach orbit). The legislation establishes a proportionate and risk based approach to licenses . The OSHAA Act establishes a licensing and permitting regime to enable New Zealand to authorise and have ongoing supervision of space activities conducted from New Zealand. . The design of the regime has been informed by international space law and practice, and by the experiences of other like minded co untries a number of which are in the process of reviewing their own space laws.
Build ing in flexibility in terms of the information that can be provided e.g. being able to provide a range of dates for launches, flight paths and launch locations (We note that s ome of the information requirements can be set as conditions on a licence to be confirmed closer to the proposed launch )
Ensure that licensing is not required where this would be disproportionate to the level of ris k involved , and Reduce license compliance costs for low risk activity as far as possible . Options and impact analysis
Evidence of safety practices in relation to the (non aircraft) HAV activities, including (if applicable): o A description of the approach t aken to the safety assessment o A description of the HAV and its proposed operation including a description of all of the safety critical systems o Particulars of all relevant New Zealand and international standards that have been applied or will be applied in relation to the HAV o A description of the safety management system the applicant has in place to: a) identify and assess the safety risks associated with the proposed HAV activities and b) develop and implement safety control measures o Details of the key p ersonnel responsible for the safety of the HAV activit ies o A description of the geographical areas likely to be affected by the proposed HAV activities and if relevant demographic information about the local community that may be affected by it o A descripti on of the significant risks associated with the proposed HAV activit ies o A description of the control measures in place to mitigate those risks o An emergency management plan that describes the systems, process and procedures that will apply in the event of a major incident
Evidence of technical capability and safety including name of key persons relied up on for their technical capability and evidence of qualifications, and the steps the applicant has and will take to manage risks to public safety, and plan for managing orbital debris. (This information is principally required to assess safety) Information about previous convictions or offences, and history of mental illness. (This information is principally required to assess fitness to hold a licence) , and Information about any foreign licences, permits or authorisations for the same or substantially similar activity applied for, granted or declined. (This information is to enable an assessment of whether the licence can be treated as meeting some or all of the requirements of the Act including matters such as safety, technical capability and management of orbital debris.) . This list was developed base d on best practice from international regimes as above, including extensive discussions with United States regulators , in consultation with a number of government agencies to ensure the information required meets the New Zealand governments needs for risk assessment . The list of information requirements are supported by: Guidance on the ministrys website that details what specific requirements entail (for example, the elements we would expect to see included in an orbital debris mitigation plan) , and An iterative process for applications where additional information is gathered through s. of the OSHAA Act (which reduce s the amount of information that has to be provided at the outset where the mini mum information requirements are adequate .) . Setting minimum requirements in regulations is appropriate in order to keep compliance costs down for the majority of applicants for whom this information will be sufficient to enable the regulator to undertake t he assessments. This also forms part of the competitive advantage New Zealand has as a launch State for overseas companies wishing to launch payloads from New Zealand. Impacts of the preferred option Assessment against objectives Enable efficient applic ation process Ensuring compliance costs of applying are not overly onerous Enable the application process to evolve over time Option one : Prescribe detailed information requirements A prescriptive regime is likely to be inefficient and time consuming for applicants , as the information requirements would be set at the same level for all applicants, regardless of the level of complexity of their space Relative c ompliance costs from a prescriptive approach may be comparable or higher than competitor regimes instead offering a competitive alternative. In addition, l ow risk andor amateur space activities would be unfairly penalised by a prescriptive regime This would act as a deterrent to companies due to high costs relative to their activities, or Locking in too much detail through regulations during the early stages of establishing a competitive space industry in New Zealand will make it more difficult for New Zealand to apply a flexible and nimble approach to the licencing regime, the cornerstone of New Zealands competitive advantage
If the HAV is not an aircraft , then for key persons relied upon for their technical capability in conducting a safe HAV launch : o The persons name o The relationship of the person to the applicant (e.g. employee, contractor of HAV activities ) o Evidence of qualifications and experience to u ndertake the activity o any other information the person considers relevant to the assessment of technical capability
If the applicant or person who is to have or likely to have control over the exercise of rights under the licence holds an aviation document under the Civil Aviation Act the details in this document may satisfy this information requirement Otherwise , whether the applicant or a person who is to have or is likely to have control over the exercise of the rights under the licence: o has been charged with or convicted of any offence in New Zealand or any other jurisdiction, or o has had an aviation document under the Civil Aviation Act or regulations made under the Civil Aviation Act suspended or revoked (other than a revocation at the request of the applicant), or had condition s imposed on an aviation document, or o has received notice from the C ivil Aviation Authority of a proposed adverse decision, or o has ever had a licence, permit or authorisation for the same or substantially similar activity by a foreign regulatory body susp ended, denied or revoked and the reason s given
If the management, oversight or control of the HAV payload or its operation (including the ground segment) is being sub contracted, provide: o Name o Address o Place of organisation or incorporation o Description of the services being sub contracted.
OSHAA Section ()(b) states that if the licensee or permit holder is a body corporate, they must not undergo a change of control without prior approval of the Minister. The issue is whether this provision is workable in the context of large corporations that have interests in multiple jurisdictions. When considering a change of control application there are not defined criteriaprescribed requirements the Minister mustmay take into account when determining that the licensee or permit holder following the change of control is likely to be able to comply with the conditions, and give proper effect, to the licence or permit Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) The change of control provision was tested when SpaceX purchased an interest in Swarm. The New Zealand transact ion was the last of a long line of transactions involving a number of other jurisdictions involving SpaceX obtaining control of Swarm and which would proceed irrespective of the Ministers consent. While in the event, the Ministers consent was obtained be fore the transaction took place, it is worth exploring with PCO, whether and how the transaction can be made more workable. On the second issue, the review team considers that in assessing whether or not t he change of control should be granted, the Minist er will need to consider whether the threshold tests for a permit would continue to satisfy in the event of a change of control. The issue is whether this needs to be spelt out more clearly on the face of the statute.
Provid ing clarity around de finitions of key terms and which types of licence will be required for which kinds of activity
Provid ing clarity around how an organisation demonstrates it has the technical capability, especially for those organisations building new capability, and how technical capability is assessed The need for good quality guidance to assist applicants to understand the information requirements and how they can meet them. . The feedback on HAV exemptions is incorporated into the HAV exemptions section of this this Re gulatory Impact Statement (paras ). . The analysis of the submissions resulted in a number of modifications to the application information requirements , including to reduce the amount of information obtained up front by asking for a summary of information in the first instance rather than prescribing in detail what information is to be provided (e.g. communications capability) and to provid ing greater flexibility in relation to supplying information that may not be known at the time of application . It also enabled us
Summary of who the enhanced and unenhancedraw remote sensing data is to be provided to, including: o customers or classes of customers who will have access to the data, o whether any unenhanced data will be provided to any customers or classes of customers o plans for making the unenhancedraw data by the payload(s) ava ilable to governments whose territories have been sensed o plans to make the unenhancedraw data available for non commercial scientific, education and other public benefit purposes.
The NZSA may recommend the Minister impose a condition to require insurance to mitigate the risk of the activity. The Minister may impose further conditions on any licence or permit as they see fit.
The costs of acquiring a licence are unlikely to be proportional to the risks (despite the regulators intention for a light touch approach.) . One submitter proposed that an alternative would be to focus the exemption on teaching and educational purposes so that tertiary institutions and community groups could be included in the exemption for their teaching a ctivities. Only one submitter commented that they supported the establishment of a flexible licensing regime for HAVs. . The feedback and follow up discussions with some submitters enabled us to develop a better understanding of the uses of certain HAVs and the risks associated with the technologies. This led us to modify our preferred option as discussed in the Problem Definition (paras ), and Options and Impact Analysis (paras ) sections for HAV exemptions in this Regulatory Impact Statement .
The potential compliance burden associated with licensing, including on educational and recreational organisations and the risk that this would discourage high altitude launch activities and associated opportunities to develop skills and innovation , and
There are various mitigation practices that New Zealand can employ , eg asking questions on matters such as history of previous incidents etc. to assess risk profile, as insurers do. There are countries considering the potential establishment of a global body for space activity, including an international space court. There is an increasing recognitionacceptance of the risks in this space and the need to manage them. The role of re insurers is evolving in this area. While many had left this market after expe riencing losses due to mispriced risk some years ago, re insurers are starting to re emerge as more data becomes available (thereby providing more data to evaluate and price risk). LeoLab s expects that there is likely to be a re emergence of re insurers an d insurance services in this industry and, as this happens, it is likely that clients will increasingly demand this from the satellite operators. Insurance is just one tool for managing risk. Demanding best practice is another lever for managing risk; to prevent harm from occurring in the first place. A suite of steps can be implemented to appropriately manage risk. An MBIE staff member seconded from the Ministry of Defence made a similar point about the exponential growth in the risks of collisions in spa ce. provision is necessary in the NZ context because there is no evidence that operators are deterred by liability risks. On the current practice of not imposing insurance requirements on payloa d operators, that is something that needs to be kept under active review and insurance requirements imposed if it appears warranted at the time of an application considering the assessment of risk . The review team agrees with LeoLabs that insurance is only one tool for managing risk and recommends ongoing consideration of other measures for managing risks such as exploring evolving technologies for actively manging debris.
Where there is a HAV payload : o An overview of the HAV payload and its subsystems, and the payload capabilities and intended uses e.g. imagery, communications, science, remote sensing etc o If applicable, a summary of remote sensing capabilities of the HAV payload o If applicable, a summary of who the remote sensing data is to be provided to o A description of the means of communicating with the HAV for the purposes of commanding the HAV or its payload or for the transfer of data collec ted by the HAV
model rockets launched and operated by members of the N ZRA from the NZRA launch site at Taupiri. . The preferred option is broader than the minor exemption in the discussion document which would only have exempted primary and secondary schools launching balloons for education purposes . The reason for this is that we now have a better understanding of the technologies most frequently used by HAV operators in New Zealand and the risks associated with these technologies. This has enabled us to develop additional exemptions with sufficient specificity to avoid the r isk of inadvertently exempting activities that should be licensed. . Under the OSHAA Act , HAVs that are not capable of reaching high altitude (i.e. the highest upper limit of controlled airspace) are not in scope of the OSHAA Act . This means amateur act ivities such as high power model rockets, which only reach about , feet at the moment, are excluded from the scope of the OSHAA Act . However, we understand that rocketry groups including members of the NZRA are aiming to go higher than this and could potentially be required to be licensed over time. As these activities were not intended to be captured by this regime, we consider it is efficient to exempt them now for the avoidance of doubt. . Model rocketry does not pose a risk to national security as the period these rockets are airborne is merely minutes and model rockets are not guided by computer, nor can they be programmed to fly on a particular trajectory. The current process of flying rockets into controlled airspace is managed under the civil aviation regime, and the NZRA runs a high power rocketry (HPR) certification system that is recognised internationally. In light of this, we also propose an exemption from the HAV licensing requirements for model rockets launched and operated by members of the NZRA Model rockets. . The Minister may make or revoke exemptions any time under the OSHAA Act.
the name, principal business address, and place of organisation or incorporation o f the owner of the overseas launch facility. Information for High altitude vehicle licences Technical capability and safety
and the effects can be worse for some employees. . . As mentioned above, a common problem for many employees is the uncertainty about entitlements a nd payments that is associated with working irregular hours, shift work, or changing hours. The two examples below show some of the difficulties that arise from some employees working patterns: Roberta works hours on Monday, hours on Tuesday and ho urs on Wednesday each week. When agreeing what a week is with h er employer, there are two obvious options, but they have different consequences: week days or week hours. If Roberta takes day of annual holidays on a Monday, she has either t aken a third of a week off ( week days ) or she has taken half a week off ( week hours). This decision has implications for how much of h er entitlement she has used and how much she gets paid for the day she takes off.
Inconsistent treatment of different technologies that perform similar functions (which would create an uneven playing field for commercial operators). New Zealand cannot adequately control certain high altitude activities which originate from New Zealands territory. (The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet is in the process of briefing relevant Ministers on the national security issues for New Zealand arising from very high altitude activities. This information is classified and cannot be included here.) . We wish to make the most of the economic development opportunities associated with near space activities. To do that we need to ensure that New Zealands ability to regulate where necessary to protect and advance interests including national security, safety, and environmental impacts is established. The question is which regime is best placed to regulate near space the Civil Aviation regime or the proposed Space Activities Act Options . The policy objective is to ensure that New Zealand has an enabling regulatory regime that encompasses all of our interests in space, including near space activities. . The options we have considered are: Option : Status quo (and wait for international consensus as to the best approach to regulate certain very high altitude activities). Option : Include very high altitude activities as part of the Civil Aviation Act review. Under this option, very high altitude activities could be regulated through an extension of the Civil Aviation regime to include regulation on national security and national interest grounds. Option : Clarify that the proposed Space Activities Act covers activities carried out in near space. Under this option the responsible Minister would have a power to regulate and permit aircraft activities (in particular those of balloons and drones) in near space on the same basis as similar activities carried out by satellites in outer space. Those regulatory functions relating to safety where the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) has jurisdiction would continue to be conducted by the CAA. Option : Develop a standalone national security bill to address the national security issues. . The advice from the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet is that Option (the status quo) is not a viable option as it exposes New Zealand to immediate national security risks. While other countries are facing similar challenges, there is not yet any international consensus on how they should be addressed, nor any prospect of such consensus in the short term. Based on recent discussions we have had with international space policy experts, Restricted yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted it appears that other countries are at a very early stage in their exploration of potential solutions to this problem. . We have ruled out option on the basis that protecting New Zealands national security is just one of a suite of objectives that are relevant to space activities and it is not efficient from a regulatory perspective to design a standalone regulatory tool to achieve this objective. . This leaves options and . The Ministry of Transport is undertaking a review of the Civil Aviation Act. The Civil Aviation Amendment Bill has a priority to be passed in . Regardless of which of these options is preferred, it is desirable to ensure consistency and harmonisation between the (new) space activities regime and the (soon to be revised) civil aviation regime. . We have assessed options and using the following criteria: Territorial jurisdiction: the option should be neutral as to the extent to which New Zealand asserts territorial jurisdiction within near space; Regulatory efficiency: the option is the minimum necessary to achieve the objectives; International alignment: consistency with evolving international approaches; Regulatory effectiveness: well defined regulatory objectives carried out by a fit for purpose mechanism; Technology neutral: different technologies offering similar services should be regulated consistently. A summary of this assessment is presented in the table below: yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted . Th e above assessment supports the option of extending the proposed Space Activities Act to include certain activities operating at very high altitudes. Specifically, this means that: RestrictedExtend the Civil Aviation regime to include regulation of aircraft on national security and national interest grounds Extend the scope of the proposed space activities regime to include certain high altitude activities. Existing regulatory functions where the CAA has jurisdiction (e.g. safety assessments of balloons and drones and pilot qualifications) will continue to be conducted under the Civil Aviation regime Should be neutral as to the extent to which New Zealand asserts territorial jurisdiction The CAA regime already applies to all aircraft regardless of altitude, but it does not currently enable regulation on national security and national interest grounds. International treaties establish that all nations have free access to outer space. The proposal is to regulate certain high altitude activities because they start from New Zealand (and so we have jurisdiction over the activities). We are not seeking to define where space and airspace begin and end. Regulatory efficiency Both options appear equal in terms of regulatory efficiency. International alignmentThere has been a suggestion that the International Civil Aviation Organisations jurisdiction over international aviation could be extended to include near space activities. However, discussions are at a very early stage and there is no prospect of an international consensus on the best approach emerging in a timeframe useful for our purposes. Regulatory effectivenessX The review of the Civil Aviation Act will propose to regulate aircraft from a national security perspective in lower altitudes (i.e. from the ground up to whatever level we set as the lower limit of the space regime). Cabinet decisions on this proposal will be sought in June. If timing is a critical factor in the decision of where to locate a higher altitude regime then the Space Bill has a slight advantage. The economic and commercial objectives of the proposed Space Activities Act are as relevant to near space as they are to outer space. Cabinet has agreed that space policy should include all of New Zealands interests in space. There is a strong case for keeping the policy and regulatory dimensions of near and outer space activities together. To avoid the perception that New Zealand is seeking to define the limits of outer space to include (part of) what we regard as near space, the high altitude regime will be a separate part of the Space Act. Technology neutralX The CAA regime is predominantly focused on safety of New Zealands air transport services. Including higher altitude activities in the space regime will ensure that different technologies providing similar functions are regulated consistently regardless of which altitude they operate at. This is the most compelling argument. yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted payloads that New Zealand authorities deem capable of being operated at very high altitudes (i.e. near space) are within the scope of the Space Activities Act; and highaltitude vehicles (i.e. the carrier systems that New Zealand authorities deem capable of taking payloads up into the high altitude region) are also within the scope of the proposed legislation, but (if they are aircraft), the safety aspects of their operation will still be addressed through established Civil Aviation Authority procedures. . However, there is as yet no international consensus on the best approach to regulating near space. This means that in this particular area the Space Activities Bill will have to anticipate the evolution of international law in these areas, and we are seeking to do this in a way that is in harmony with international law, not contrary to it. . To help manage these risks, the high altitude provisions will be drafted as a separate part of the Space Activities Bill so that they operate as a set of standalone requirements and definitions. This also means that, if necessary, they can be decoupled from the main outer space provisions without impacting on the integrity of those parts of the Bill. Defining the lower limit at which the high altitude regime will apply .There are three options for defining the limit at which the high altitude regime will apply: Option : Define the limit by reference to flight level (approximately km above ground) This is the limit of New Zealands flight information region. The advantage of using this limit is that it effectively represents the upper limit of airspace likely to be subject to air traffic control used by ordinary civil aircraft providing air services. The disadvantage of this option is that it will not capture many of the activities that New Zealand security agencies are concerned about. Option Define the limit by reference to an altitude of km above ground This is a height at which some scientists believe near space begins. This limit would pick up more of the activity that security agencies are concerned about. Its disadvantage is that it may appear arbitrary. O ption Define the limit by reference to flight level , the current altitude that is the limit of controlled airspace in New Zealand. This is about km above ground This option would pick up more of the activities about which the security agencies are concerned. As the limits of controlled airspace are made by a designation under the Civil Aviation Act, this option also has a practical connection with the civil aviation regime which is helpful given the need to harmonise certain criteria for authorising activities under the two regimes. . A concern with flight level (option ) is that it would capture aircraft such as weather balloons which are not intended to be in scope. However, this could be dealt with by including a power for the responsible Minister to make regulations that exempt or exclude (as may be appropriate) specified vehicles or aircraft or classes of vehicles or aircraft which undertake certain activities that are not intended to be subject to the high altitude regulatory regime and are otherwise regulated as appropriate under aviation legislation and regulations. . On balance we consider that option is the preferred option as it strikes a balance between: yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted The risks of setting the limit of near space too high and thereby failing to regulate activities occurring between this limit and the lower options; The risks of setting the limit too low and thereby inadvertently bringing within the scope of the regulatory regime a whole lot of activity that we do not want to capture. It is possible that flight level will capture some these things but that is why we are proposing that there be the ability to exempt or exclude (as appropriate) specified high altitude vehicles; and The need to ensure an efficient alignment between the Space Activities Act and the Civil Aviation Act, and to reduce any uncertainty and complexity in relation to the interface between the two regimes. . There will also be a review of the Space Activities Act three years after its enactment which will provide an opportunity to ensure harmonisation between the two regulatory regimes. Conclusions and recommendations . A regulatory regime for space activities and certain high altitude activities is necessary for New Zealand to make the most of the economic development and innovation opportunities arising from these technologies while managing security, safety and environmental risks. For space activities, a regulatory regime is also required to ensure that New Zealand can implement the proposed TSA and to meet our other international obligations arising from UN space treaties that we are or intend to become a Party to. The regime needs to be proportionate to the risks and therefore a permissive regime is warranted. Consultation . The following government agencies have been consulted: the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Ministry of Transport, the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry for the Environment, the New Zealand Customs Service, the Ministry of Primary Industries, the New Zealand Police, the Treasury, the State Services Commission, the Civil Aviation Authority, and Worksafe New Zealand. The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC) has been informed. DPMC has led consultation with and coordinated input from the relevant New Zealand security agencies. All agencies are in broad agreement with the need for a licencing regime and the specific design option that is being proposed. . Rocket Lab has been informed about the options and consulted on the design of the regulatory regime and implementation options. Rocket Lab has emphasised that the regime needs to accommodate relatively low cost and frequent launches of very small satellites, and onerous liability provisions will act as significant deterrent to the development of the industry in New Zealand. We consider that the proposed design can address these concerns through the flexibility to tailor licence requirements to specific circumstances, including an assessment of risks and consequences. . We have not publicly consulted on the proposed options while the Government has been in negotiations with the US Government on the proposed TSA Treaty. However, once the TSA negotiations are completed, the Government will make a public announcement that it is developing a regulatory regime for outer space and high altitude activities so that people are aware of the proposals. The public will also have an opportunity to submit on the Bill at Select Committee. Implementation plan . The Government will implement its TSA obligations through a contract with Rocket Lab until legislation is enacted. Draft legislation will be in the public domain before Rocket Labs first test launch. Restricted yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted . Key implementation risks relate to building domestic capability to administer a space activities licencing regime and to monitor and enforce the regulatory requirements. However, for the first two years, at least, Rocket Lab will mainly be launching US rockets with US payloads which will be subject to the US commercial space launch and payload licences. . In April , Cabinet agreed that MBIE will be the lead agency for space policy for an initial period. MBIE is in the process of developing an implementation plan which will cover the initial period until legislation is enacted and implementation once the new Act enters into force. . Compliance costs for the regulated entities will be minimised through flexibility in the legislation to ensure that requirements are proportionate to the perceived level of risk. It is also proposed that the set up costs associated with establishing the new regulatory systems and processes will be met by the Crown. Once the legislation is enacted, a cost recovery fees and levies regime will be established. Monitoring, evaluation and review .Rocket Lab is the only private entity (that we are currently aware of) seeking to develop a space launch industry in New Zealand. Hence, the number of parties directly affected by the space activities regime is small (limited to Rocket Lab and its suppliers). Given this, we propose to keep in regular contact with Rocket Lab to ensure that the legislation is achieving its purpose. We do not expect large numbers of players to be affected by the high altitude activities part of the regime and there will be a power for the responsible Minister to make regulations that exempt or exclude, as may be appropriate, specified vehicles or classes of vehicles or aircraft which undertake activities that are not intended to be subject to the high altitude regulatory regime and that are otherwise regulated as appropriate under civil aviation law. . In light of the speed with which this regulatory regime is being developed (though for good and understandable reasons), combined with the exponential changes in space industry technologies and the space industry overall globally, we propose that there be a review of the regime in two to three years to ensure that the legislation is achieving its purpose. It is also proposed that this review be a legislative requirement in the new Act. yrupqmdi Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act
Schedule : Information required for launch licence or overseas launch licence application: s ee clause Schedule : Information required for facility licence application: see clause Schedule :: Information required for high altitude licence application: see clause
. billion into the New Zealand economy in . Statistics from the NZ Marine Industry
State Highway Maintenance Expnediture (Non Indexed) Vehcile Kilometers Travelled ,
, plus . for each gram above grams (new vehicles).
. billion of imports are carried by sea () maritime fatalities in Around , New Zealanders are employed in transport related industries ( of the workforce) , aeroplanes helicopters amateur built aeroplanes. million passengers screened at aviation security in of passengers processed within minutes aviation fatalities in rail fatalities in . of all journeys made on strategic freight and tourist routes achieved the predictability travel time target ( ),km of rail lineRail,km of state highways ,km of local roads. million registered vehicles in the fleet Auckland . Wellington . Christchurch . of population with access to frequent public transport services () road fatalities in . million licensed drivers at July RoadsGHG emissions by vehicle typeDomestic transport share of emissions Maritime SafetyJobs , new licenses issued annually CO all greenhouse gasesEnvironment (Net t onne km)Light passenger Heavy Light commercial of jobs that are accessible within minutes during weekday morning peak () public transport by car Coastal shipping Rail RoadAviation , commercial passenger flights in Compared with: k in k in (preCOVID) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT SHAPING NEW ZEALANDS TRANSPORT SYSTEM
m m m m m m m m m Major Crown Investment Projects , , Ngauranga to Petone () () Regional resilience Retainingrecruiting bus drivers SuperGold card Supporting Regions Programme () () Crown funded expenditure , , , ,
m m m m m m m m m State highway improvements , , , , Local road improvements () () Walking and cycling improv. () () State highway operations () () , , , , State highway pothole prevention , , Local road operations , , Local road pothole prevention , , Public transport services , , Public transport infrastructure () () , , Safety , , Investment management Rail () () Activity class expenditure , , , , , , Housing Infrastructure Fund () () PPP debt and interest repayment () () Other debt and interest repayment () () , , Total NLTF funded expenditure , , , , , ,
m Delivery Agency Stage Project Previously Approved Funding Waka Kotahi Delivery Scope Canterbury Package Waka Kotahi Delivery Scope Queenstown Package KiwiRail PreDelivery Scope Drury Rail Stations Waka Kotahi PreDelivery Scope Melling Waka Kotahi Delivery SH Waka Kotahi Delivery Takitimu North Link Stage Waka Kotahi Delivery Papakura to Drury South KiwiRail Delivery Wiri to Quay Park s ()(b)(ii), s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
m increase(decrease) Outyears New Zealand Upgrade Transport Projects Tagged Capital Contingency ,. noted that Cabinet has agreed to reprioritise funds allocated to the Northern Pathway within the tagged contingency referred to in paragraph above to suitable projects CAB MIN .; noted that: . Ministers have subsequently approved . million, . million and million of the tagged capital contingency to be drawn for the Community Connect Pilot, the Ashburton Fairfield Freight Hub project, and the Eastern Busway project ENV MIN ; . this leaves a remaining tagged capital contingency of ,. million; noted that the Ministers of Finance and Transport support providing million and New Zealand Upgrade Projects Tagged Capital Contingency to support delivery of the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme ; noted that both of these projects are not part of the New Zealand Upgrade Programme, and that the New Zealand Upgrade Programme is experiencing cost pressures currently estimated at . billion above Cabinet approved funding; noted that due to the reasons referred to in paragraph above, and given the magnitude of the funding allocations for these two projects, Cabinet approval is sought for the decision to provide funding for the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme noted that the funding provided for the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme from the tagged capital contingency referred to in paragraph above will not result in the Crown owning any assets of this project, and will require a capital to operating swap with a corresponding impact on the operating balanc e and net Crown debt; noted that the funding profile of all potential cofunders for the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme has not yet been decided; agreed to provide funding of million from the New Zealand Upgrade Projects Tagged Capital Contingency to support the delivery of the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme; Out of Scope Out of Scope Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E DEVMIN I N C O N F I D E N C E tyqdejwy authorised the Ministers of Finance and Transport to draw down funding of up to million from the New Zealand Upgrade Projects Tagged Capital Contingency , including authority to approve a capital to operating swap and to make consequential changes to appropriations, including establishing new appropriations required, to give effect to the decision in paragraph above, once the funding profile of all potential co funders for this programme is confirmed; noted that providing funding for the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme does not commit the Crown to provide additional funding in the future, and that any further cost increases will need to be met from the National Land Transport Programme or from the local authorities; Financial implications
m increase(decrease) New Zealand Upgrade Transport Projects Tagged Capital Contingency . . . . . Out of Scope Out of Scope Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E DEVMIN I N C O N F I D E N C E tyqdejwy noted that the tagged capital contingency described in paragraph above will expire on February ;
targets, and salesweighted (i.e. vehicle aggregate) exhaust CO
(am to pm) and night (pm to am) for res tricted versus fully licensed riders aged to years old for the combined period from to ( Figure ; see section . of the Technical Report for details).
(Apart from the GPS) what else is going on that matters There was room for the GPS to better recognise and account for wider local strategies, plans, policies, and aspirations. Could better utilise opportunities for implementing mode shift projects from other factors, eg, Waters Other drivers may be more important for achieving mode shift, notably urban form, housing pressures, intensificationsprawl. Recognise that GPS timelines do not necessarily correspond to other strategic planning and funding timelines.
(Continued over page ) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
(Dr) T. Mere. A. Kepa, Chair May .
(GPS). The GPS details how
(Name in Bold and Caps) (Designation)
(Name in Bold and Caps) (Designation) For the Government of Malaysia:
(Name in Bold and Caps) (Designation) For the Government of the Kingdom of Thailand:
(Name in Bold and Caps) (Designation) For the Government of the Lao Peoples Democratic Republic:
(Name in Bold and Caps) (Designation) For the Government of the Republic of Singapore:
(Name in Bold and Caps) (Designation) For the Government of the Republic of the Philippines:
(Name in Bold and Caps) (Designation) For the Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam:
(Name in Bold and Caps) (Designation) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA (Name in Bold and Caps) (Designation)
(Opinion) A holistic way to deliver value for money
(Opinion) Generating value from transport evidence
(Queens Birthday until and Kings Birthday from onwards) and Labour Weekend cover the periods from pm on the Friday to am on the Tuesday.
(Regional Transport Committees) Regulations Revocation Order and the
(Road User) Amendment Rule which I intend to sign subject to Cabinet
(Sections and ) of the Legislat ion Act . However, the Parliamentary
(Table below). Chi square significance testing showed this result to be significant at the p. level of significance. (p value .) The AIO group reoffended less than the expected percentage of predicted reoffending rates The matched group reoffending percentage was above the predicted percentage. The expected percentages were . for the AIO group and . for the matched group, The actual percentages before risk adjustment were . for the AIO group and . for the matched group. Using the actual percentages results in lower relative rate of reoffending, fo r the AIO group, for disqualified driving offences than the matched group within two years. Table : Actual and expected percentage of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for disqualified driving offences, and risk adjusted percentag es, after years, by offender group
(a) (i) substantial ownership and effective control of that airline are vested in the Party designating the airline, nationals of that Party, or both; or
(a) Aeronautical authorities mean s, in the case of each ASEAN Member State, the Minist ry responsible for civil aviation or any other authority or person empowered to perform such functions ; and in the case of New Zealand , the Minister responsible for civil aviation, or any other authority or person empowered to perform such functions; (b) Agreement means the Air Service s Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand , its Annexes , and any amendments thereto;
(a) Project J Scrappage Scheme Reason removed: The Government agreed that this project should be reprioritised.
(a) an aircraft or the operation of an aircraft does not comply with the minimum standards established at PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA that time pursuant to the Convention; or
(a) an airline or airlines of the same or another Party;
(a) in relation to entry, residence , and employment, to bring in and maintain in the territory of the other Party managerial and other specialist staff, office equipment and other related equipment and promotional materials required for the operation of international air services; (b) to establish offices in the territory of the other Part y for the purposes of provision, promotion , and sale of air services; (c) to engage in the sale of air services in the territory of the other Part y directly and, at its discretion, through its licensed agents; to sell such air services, and any person shall be free to purchase such services in local currency of that territory or, subject to the national laws and regulations, in freely convertible currencies of other countries;
(a) introduced into the territory of a Party by or on behalf of the designated airline of another Party; (b) retained on board aircraft of the designated airline of a Party upon arrival in or departure from the territory of another Party; or (c) taken on board aircraft of the designated airline of a Party in the territory of another Party and intended for use in operating the agreed services ,
(a) operate flights in either or both directions;
(a) the airline has failed to prove that it is qualified under Article (Designation and Authorisation) paragraphs (a) (i) or (ii) as applicable; or
(a) the right to fly across the territory of the other Parties without landing; (b) the right to make stops in the territory of the other Parties for non traffic purposes; and (c) the rights otherwise specified in this Agreement, including those rights stated in Annex I (Route Schedule) , Annex II (Exchange of Traffic Rights ) and Annex III ( NonScheduledCharter Air Services) .
(a) this would not result in a lessor airline exercising traffic rights it does not have;
(b) Project K Social Licensing Scheme Reason removed: The Government agreed that this project should be reprioritised.
(b) combine different flight numbers within one aircraft operation ;
(b) there is a lack of effective maintenance and administration of safety standards established at that time pursuant to the Convention,
(c) Project L Sustainable Biofuels Obligations Reason removed: The Government agreed that this project should be stopped.
(c) serve intermediate and beyond point(s) in the territory of the Parties on the routes in any combination and in any order; and
(c) the airline fails to comply with the laws, regulations , and rules referred to in Article (Application of Laws, Regulations and Rules ).
(c) the designated airline is qualified to meet other conditions prescribed under the laws and regulations normally applied to the operation of international air services by the Party receiving the designation.
(d) International air freight services means all cargo air transportation that passes through the airspace over the territory of ASEAN Member States and New Zealand. (e) Air transportation means the public carriage by aircraft of passengers, baggage, cargo, and mail, separately or in combination, for remuneration or hire; (f) Depositary means the Secretary General of ASEAN;
(d) omit stops at any point(s) provided that the agreed services begin or terminate in the territory of the Party designating the airline ,
(d) to convert and remit to the territory of its incorporation, on demand, local revenues in excess of sums locally disbursed. Conversion and PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA remittance shall be permitted promptly without restrictions or taxation in respect thereof at the rate of exchange applicable to current transactions and remittance in accordance with the foreign exchange regulations of the Party concerned; (e) to pay for local expenses, including purchases of fuel, in the territory of the other Part y in local currenc y. At its discretion, th at airline may pay for such expenses in the territory of the other Part y in freely convertible currencies according to local currency regulation; and (f) to perform its own groundhandling in the territory of the other Party ( hereinafter referred to as self handling) or, at its option, select among competing agents for such services in whole or in part. The rights shall be subject to consideration s of safety, security , and physical or operational constraints . Where such considerations preclude selfhandling, groundhandling services shall be available on an equal basis to all airlines .
(e) Project A GPS Replace deliverable: Cabinet approves release of draft GPS for consultation (February ) and engagement roadshow in Q With: Cabinet approves release of draft GPS for consultation (May ) and engagement roadshow occurs in Q. s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Replace and Move deliverable: Cabinet approves publication of final (MayJune ) in Q With: Cabinet approves publication of final (JulyAugust ) in Q .
(f) Project G Auckland Transport Alignment Project (ATAP)
(g) Parties means any of the ASEAN Member State s and New Zealand , for which this Agreement is in force between ;
(g) Project T Clean Car Discount Review
(generally large SUVs, vans, utes)
(generally petrol and diesel cars)
(generally plugin hybrids, and smaller hybrids)
(generally smaller petrol cars, and larger hybrids)
(h) Party means an ASEAN Member State or New Zealand for which this Agreement is in force ; (i) Convention means the Chicago Convention, and
(i) Project O Speed Management Rule
(i) any amendment that has entered into force under Article (a) of the Convention and ratified by all ASEAN Member States and New Zealand; and
(i) the Government of any other country or any agency of such aGovernment; or
(ii) any annex or any amendment thereto adopted under Article of the Convention, insofar as such annex or amendment is at any given time effective for all ASEAN Member States and New Zealand ;
(ii) any international organisation
(ii) the designated airline is incorporated and has its principal place of business in the territory of the Party designating the airline, and that Party has and maintains effective regulatory control of that airline; and
(k) ICAO means the International Civil Aviation Organization ; (l) R oute schedule means the route schedule annexed to this Agreement or as amended in accordance with the provisions of Article (Amendment s);
(k) roadside oral fluid testing
(l) Project R Waitemat Harbour Connections (WHC)
(l) Project R Waitemat Harbour Connections (WHC) Include a new project in the Output Plan with two deliverables: Provide support for Cabinet oral item on ALR WHC in Q Draft Cabinet paper to Minister on emerging preferred option in Q .
(m) Specified route means the route specified in the Route Schedule; (n) Tariff means any fare, rate or charge for the carriage of passengers, baggage, or cargo (excluding mail) in air transportation (including any other mode of transportation in connection therewith) charged by airlines, including their agents, and the conditions governing the availability of such fare, rate , or charge;
(note this has been extended from the original deadline of pm, Monday April).
(o) T erritory in relation to the ASEAN Member States means the land territory, internal waters, archipelagic waters, territorial sea, the seabed and the sub soil thereof , and the airspace over them, and in relation to New Zealand , has the meaning assigned to it in Article of the Convention provided that, in the case of New Zealand, the term territory shall exclude Tokelau ; and (p) U ser charges mean a charge made to airlines by the competent authorities, or permitted by them to be made, for the provision of airport property or facilities or of air navigation facilities, or aviation security facilities or services, including related services and facil ities, for aircraft, their crew, passengers , and cargo. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA ARTICLE SCOPE
(original endorsed by Cabinet in with the refresh approved by the previous Associate
(together referred to as the Orders).
) Fish Spawning Indicator
) provide context to the decision to implement the track user charge, how the charge will apply, and why the charge is required as part of the new planning and funding framework for the rail network.
) to below levels by .
The Ministers of Transport and Finance are jointly responsible for CRLL and ALRL RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT , ccounrnhlc fo erfo r a ce . Tt lnito ::; Stat Ownod nt rp,I jSOE and Fi itnc, aro punsrb,o fo trcnsp.ort :sl.lcrn S:OE kfWII L M CITYRAIL SHAPING OUR TRANSPORT SYSTEM
The Ministers of Transport and Finance are jointly responsible for CRLL and ALRL RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT A ccounrnhlc o erfo rma ce w w w w w w . . Tt lnito so Stat Ownod nt rp,I jSOE cnd Firn:inc aro, punsfblo fo tra sp.ort :sl.lrn S:QE .:fWHI L M SHAPING OUR TRANSPORT SYSTEM
, Acting Secretary for Transport and
, Te Manat Waka is conducting a regulatory review of the Graduated Driver Licensing System (GDLS) to investigate barriers to entry and progression through the system. As part of this review, Te Manat Waka commissioned research into the crash risk of drivers who are slower or do not progress through the driver licensing system to obtain a full driver licence.
, Te Manat Waka is conducting a regulatory review of the Graduated Driver Licensing System (GDLS) to investigate barriers to entry and progression through the system. As part of this review, Te Manat Waka commissioned research into the crash risk of drivers who are slower or do not progress through the driver licensing system to obtain a full driver licence. Research findings were that those who progress from a restricted to a full licence within . years, have better outcomes on the road when compared with those who remain on their restricted licence.
, and services on routes between New
, any rebatefee, and other information be displayed both physically and online on vehicles for sale by motor vehicle traders from April .
, as well as through the submission form accompanying the draft Marine Protection Rules on Maritime NZs website.
, focused on supporting New Zealanders with the rising cost of living, the Government is extending the temporary reductions to petrol excise duty, road user charges and public transport fares for two more months.
, included reducing the frequency of mandatory eyesight checks and streamlining heavy vehicle licence classes.
, such as car odometer readings and public transport boardings, only provide mode specific samples, where the Household Travel Survey combined with the Census provides insights into total travel.
, to give interested stakeholders and members of the public an opportunity to provide feedback
, to give interested stakeholders and members of the public an opportunity to provide feedback. Anyone wishing to make comment can access the draft Marine Protection Rules here:
, which is likely to result in a slight overestimation of fleet numbers. This overestimation is addressed in Te Manat Wakas
of the weekly triplegs were made as the driver, as a car passenger, by walking, by public transport and . by bike.
,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun DecAuckland public transport patronage month rolling total Total Public Transport Boardings Bus Rail Ferry ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, Bus patronage fare revenue Auckland Canterbury Wellington National RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Improving travel choice for Aucklanders . Auckland is experiencing growth of highdensity housing (townhouses , flats, units ). . Dwelling consents within ,m and within ,,m of a rapid transit corridor have been growing.
journeys per week were for social or personal business (like visiting friends or going to the doctor), for shopping, to work, and supporting others (ie taking kids to school or an elderly relative to the doctors). were for journeys in the course of work and to education. journeys were the return home.
For each tripleg, it records the age, sex, ethnicity, and income of the person making the trip.
How people made each leg of the trip within a journey (tripleg), be it as driver, passenger, walking, public transport or bike.
NonDepartmental Capital Expenditure
The Census provides a picture of one type of household trip, the journey to work. The data relates to commuting on a single day, for all households.
The Household Travel Survey provides a picture of all household travel drawing on a small but statistically significant sample. The data is collected over threeyear tranches for journeys of more than metres.
Walking trips have reduced from to a week. Cycling trips have reduced by percent. Public transport has experienced a percent increase in the number of boardings per person, but its share of travel distance has reduced by percent. There has been an increase of driver trip, and car passenger trip a week.
for protected customary rights groups, customary marine title groups, and post settlement governance entities with statutory acknowledgements. It will also be important that the framework the OiCs establish ensures Mori rights and interests are upheld when doing the recovery and repair works and addresses future implementation challenges. This includes giving consideration to absentee owners and ungoverned land affected by proposed works. Engaging with only local iwi on a particular parcel of land does not account for the array of different Mori interests , and therefore clarity on how this can be addressed through implementation will be key. Meeting the purpose of the Recovery Act The proposals outlined above meet the purpose of the Recovery Act as set out in section () as it will assist communities and councils to focus on planning, rebuilding, and recovery by: supporting the rebuilding of state highway and rail infrastructure reconnecting communities to wh nau, employment, education, and other key services minimising disruption to the supply chain and key sectors of the econo my ensuring the safety and resilience of state highway and rail infrastructure facilitating coordinated recovery and rebuild efforts f or short, medium, and long term recovery. How to provide feedback and next steps We invite you to provide feedback on these proposals, which will be provided to the review panel considering these OiCs under the Recovery Act. It will also inform final advic e to Ministers on the temporary law changes in the OiCs. Please email your feedback to transportrecoverytransport.govt.nz by on Monday July . We are keen to know:
stricter targets apply for passenger cars than do for commercial vehicles (utes and vans). The
Percentage share Local Share Private share NLTF and Crown share
High Volume National Regional Arterial Primary Collector Secondary Collect Change in AC Strategy Change in Chipseal Strategy Change in Rehab Strategy Change in Pavement Health Change in Surface Health
Less than strategy More than strategy Worse condition Better Condition For the effectiveness of how well the investment has translated into desired results in terms of performance, the Review Team concluded that for the pavement and surfacing investment, whilst Waka Kotahi has, in general, achieved compliance with expectations, deliv ered a substantial amount of their proposed programme (), some effectiveness issues exist which need to be addressed. The Review Team considers this is likely to be partly driven by the organisations effectiveness to control internal and external inputs to its programme planning and delivery processes (including: budget planning, financial managementcontrol, project management construction oversight, and quality control). Further adherence in needed in the applicatio n of processes and procedures used by the Network Outcome Contract suppliers under the contract and Contract Plans (notably: Maintenance Management Plans and Quality Management plans). Despite delivery of the pavement and surfacing programme, these assets have seen a continued decline in health. Declining health has also occurred where the renewal programme deviated from the targeted strategy (Figure above), even where some lower classification roads received greater levels of rehabilitation. When combined with the large number of newly renewed pavements and surfaces with condition performance issues, if not robustly managed, this may put an additional early burden on the state highway maintenance programme. It was noted that this likely applies to all maintenance contracts, not just the Network Outcome Contracts. A significantly larger pavement and surfacing renewal programme has been proposed over the period with total renewal quantities equating to , lane kilometres ( of network) o f resurfacing and a more comprehensive pavement rehabilitation programme of ( of network) lane kilometres.
. It involved more than people from around local and central government agencies, and expert advisory firms. In addition, we investigated the system and public policy considerations to ensure they were all taken into account.
. It reports on progress made in the first year of implementing the strategy, and actions that have been taken in .
. One of the core outcomes being sought by New Zealands transport system is inclusive access. Inclusive access is achieved when all people are enabled to participate in society through access to social and economic opportunities, such as work, education, and healthcare. In this context, inclusive means that the transport system should be accessible to all, including low income earners, those with disabilities, and people of different ages, genders, sexual orientations and ethnicities. Improving transport equity will help reduce the barriers that prevent some people from fully participating in society.
. The Ministry chairs the Maritime Security Oversight Committee which brings together maritime security agencies to oversee this core issue. It acts as the Strategic Coordination Agency for maritime security, leads maritime security policy and implementation of the Maritime Security Strategy. The Strategy was first in December and refreshed in June .
. The paper reflects thinking and research from domestic and international sources, and puts this in the context of the road freight industry in New Zealand.
. The things we hear and learn from this exercise will feed into our policy work for the Future of the Revenue System project.
. This includes an online form to apply for a clean car rebate.
. This statement is to let you, as a user of this website, know when we collect personal information and what we do with it.
. Under the proposed regime, if a driver fails consecutive oral fluid tests that show the presence of a drug, this leads to an infringement offence. Drivers that fail the oral fluid tests can choose to have an evidential blood test.
.if the goal is to make our road safer and people on our roads safer, and were looking at a dollar spend basis, are we better to be focusing on particularly expensive cycling developments or do NZTA and the agencies guided by GPS need to be just making some hard decisions about spending that money on road maintenance and really achieving some improvements to the state highway network (Sector stakeholder) need to be a greater focus on road and design conditions, engineering, maintenance, driver awareness of fatigue, impact of mental health, anxiety, t raining, and skills there is no consideration to drivers building their own awareness and taking responsibility under Road to Zero (Sector stakeholder) Other comments may be read as supportive of the broader view of transport investment priorities si gnalled by GPS while also advocating for further expansion. For example, one interviewee supported the safety focus but felt a more explicit focus on the safety of all road users would support a wider suite of safety investments. For example, in addit ion to driver focused initiatives such as median barriers and roundabouts, other valid safety investments would include enhancing personal safety in public transport, reducing traffic volumes, and reducing VKT. In another example, which broadly supported the access priority, an interviewee advocated for a more explicit focus on accessibility and the prioritisation of investments that enhanced access and reduced the need for mobility (eg, enhancing online services, car share, neighbourhood workspaces). Several sector interviewees sought a greater level of accountability for multiple GPS priority outcomes within the investment system. One felt that while the direction of GPS was clearly signalled, system responses tended to be filtered through business as us ual mindsets, practice bias, and existing momentum. As illustrated in the quote below, they believed this could lead to investment decisions at odds with GPS intent. They signal a need for balancing a range of outcomes in decision making regarding GPS prio rities and broader government policy directions, such as emissions reductions. A big highway could be objectively safer than the parallel route, but the second order effects are that it incentivises more driving which has knock on effects elsewhere in the network (Sector stakeholder) Further comments from this same interviewee illustrate how different stakeholders may view and understand investment decisions differently. Referring to a cycling and walking project which also required significant investment in seawall infrastructure, this stakeholder saw the seawall investment as diverting cycling and walking funding away from direct cycling and walking outcomes. However, from an investment planning perspective, the investment was likely to have been assesse d as meeting multiple outcomes under safety, mode shift, access, and resilience, respectively. half the budget of cycling and walking infrastructure swallowed by removing demolition materials a huge chunk of the budget to pay for a seawall (Sector stakeholder) Another sector stakeholder believed that the investment system was more aspirational than mandatory, in their view, lacking the ability to force meaningful change: It was explicitly stated that there was going to be a significant increase i n the level of ambition for delivering Land Transport free of death and serious injury we just cant say thats been met (Sector stakeholder) WHAT ARE THE KEY FACTORS THAT AFFECT THE EFFICIENCY AND EFF ECTIVENESS OF CONVERTING INPUTS TO OUTPUTS AND HENCE TO OUTCOMES
.there was some feedback that sometimes the high priorities for regions werent high priorities for government (Government official) . Social licencecommunity support The impact of community opposition on momentum and outcomes in the delivery of cycling infrastructure is well documented. For example, social license for the direction and priorities established under the GPS was identified by o ne interviewee as a factor particularly impacting investment momentum in walking and cycling investments that required the reallocation of existing road space: There was an increased focus on walking and cycling, but we really struggled to invest at the r ates that the Government and we would like to, and the reasons for that are kind of complex the reasons .often come back to community support, social licence (Government official) This interviewee also noted that the national and regional mode shift pl anning triggered by GPS had also revealed the considerable current underfunding of cycling and walking relative to the pace and scale of transformative change that would be needed to meet mode shift targets. Stakeholder support was raised by another g roup of interviewees with respect to their road user constituents. They noted that the high level, strategic nature of the GPS made it difficult to identify and report progress and outcomes that were tangible and meaningful for their constituent members. Y et grassroots stakeholders needed to see how their interests and contributions to change were reflected within and through the GPS system, should their support to the GPS be expected. . External change factors Several interviewees observed that factors e xternal to the land transport investment system could act as either enablers or constraints to desired GPS momentum and outcomes. Factors identified included the impact of rising fuel prices (eg, typically a positive safety impact due to reduced VKT), COVI D (eg, loss of momentum in the uptake of public transport), and recent examples of major transport investments via direct Crown funding, outside the GPS and NLTP (eg, NZUP, Urban Cycleway Programme). Recent Crown investments were considered a clear indicat or that, increasingly, the NLTF alone was insufficient to address critical transport investment needs: but often its been Crown funding thats made the difference through with the urban cycleways and then more recently the Crown stimulus COVID Respons e and Recovery Fund (Government official) One sector interviewee noted that whilst the additional funding sources are encouraging, they also create complexity and make accessing and administering these difficult and time confusing resulting in a slower de livery of infrastructure projects. Blewden, M., Mackie, H., MacArthur Beadle, S. (a). Urban Cycleway Programme : Lessons learnt and future directio n Report prepared by Mackie Research and Consulting for Waka Kotahi. WHAT ARE THE KEY FACTORS THAT AFFECT THE EFFICIENCY AND EFFECTIVENESS OF CONVERTING INPUTS TO OUTPU TS AND HENCE TO OUTCOMES
kkkkkk Jan Feb Ma r Apr Ma y Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Ma r Apr Ma y Jun Jul Aug Class Full Licence Practical Tests Completed by Type Full Domestic Overseas Conversion
A list of all maritime and marine protection rules parts to are available on Maritime NZs website. https:www.maritimenz.govt.nzrulesall rulesmaritimerules RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of . Some requirements in Rules have no corresponding offence, making enforcement difficult. Examples of inequitable penalties being imposed on domestic commercial ships where the HSWA can be used, compared to domestic recreational ships and foreign ships where only the MTA can be used , include : . Section of the MTA makes it an offence to operate a ship (or maritime product) in a manner that causes unnecessary danger or risk to any other person or to any property. The maximum financial penalty under this section for a body corporate is ,. T he equivalent offence in HSWA (s) has a maximum penalty of . million , . In an overseas shipping company was fined , under the MTA for poor maintenance and safety communication leading to the severe injury of a stevedore ; the stevedores domestic employer offered a , enforceable undertaking to avoid prosecution under the HSWA for the same incident., . In , KiwiRail was fined , under the HSW A and ordered to pay , in costs for significant failings, including poorly managed maintenance and processes, which contributed to the Kaitiaki ferry loss of power incident. In their i nvestigation , Maritime NZ also identified possible breach es of the MTA , however, charges cannot be filed under both sections simultaneously and Maritime NZ chose to file a prosecution under the HSWA . Maritime NZ chose the HSWA due to the specific nature of the breach identifiable on the available evidence, being a failing of plant, fixtures and fittings rather than a more general failing that might warrant a broader HSWA or MTA charge. However, it is also relevant to the public interest that the MTA charge would have had a different maximum penalty of only , (plus potentially forfeiture of an amount associated with commercial gain, if any could be proven per s ection of the MTA). Policy proposals were developed to address anomalies in maritime legislation As part of the work for the Regulatory Systems (Transport) Amendment Bill No (the RSTA ) , the Ministry and Maritime NZ identified a range of proposals to improve the current legislation relating to offences and penalties . These proposals were organised under five key objectives and underwent public consultation. One objective was to m odernis e transport legislation to ensure it is fit forpurpose . This objective is particularly relevant to the maritime offences and penalties . The Effective
A sector is a single flight from a departure point to a destination.
Annex VI defines marine diesel engine so broadly that it applies to almost any engine using liquid fuel, regardless of whether it was originally designed for marine use or to run on diesel fuel. The definition is interpreted to cover both compression ignition engines (generally known as diesel engines) and spark ignition engines which will cover a large number of engines on recreational craft. R E L E A S E D U N D E R T H E OF F I C I A L I N F OR MA T I ON A C T
Auckland Transport Monthly Indicators Report December Fullers online monthly dashboard RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of seafarers in this category who are not seeking officer roles to sit an oral exam, which should further speed up this process. However, the type of seafarers that the Auckland ferry operators are seeking often are not certified or their qualifications are not recognised under these international standards. Instead, they tend to be qualified under domestic qualifications issued by their home country. Unless they come from Australia, where New Zealand has a dedicated mutual recognition agr eement, these domestic qualifications have to be assessed case by case to ensure they meet the required competency levels. Specifically, this will require the NZ Maritime schools to assess their competency and recognise prior learning. This can take time. To address this in the case of deck hands, MNZ has applied exemptions to this requirement for two of the three Auckland ferry operators (Fullers and Sea Link) on the basis that appropriate training development of competency will happen on the job. This ha s the added attraction of ensuring that the employee in this case is required to stay with the company they are training with for a length of time. MNZ would be very open to extending these arrangements to the third ferry operator. In the case of skippers, because of the higher level of competency required it is more difficult to put in place such arrangements. However, MNZ are happy to work with both the operators and Maritime schools to work through how the process could be made more efficient for examp le, if operators know in advance that they are going to be seeking a particular number of seafarers from a country with a certain qualification, it may be possible for the schools to assess these qualifications in advance. MNZ suggest a dedicated hui betwe en MNZ, the Maritime schools and the operators would be a good next step to discuss certification timeframes and explore further steps to streamline the process where possible. This can happen relatively quickly MNZ is willing to lead this work and repor t back to you on the results. Transport Sector Agreement In December , Cabinet agreed in principle to a transport sector agreement with a twoyear work to residence pathway for truck drivers and bus drivers DEV MIN . You have decided to include in the transport sector agreement ships masters with a minimum qualification of Skipper Restricted Limits with GT endorsement , and deck hands working in a role covered by ANZSCO code Deck Hand. This decision will extend the two year residence pathway to these critical ferry roles. MBIE will be advising you on implementation timeframes for the transport sector agreement, which will be either April, May or June . The transport sector agreement will be reviewed after months to ensure tha t numbers remain manageable, and that the agreement is meeting its objectives . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of Other background information Fare costs for Auckland ferry services Annex One sets out the fare costs for both Auckland Contracted ferry services and exempt services. Waka Kotahi is reviewing the Fullers Waiheke ferry exempt status At your request, Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency (Waka Kotahi) is currently reviewing the Public Tra nsport Operating Model exemption for the Fullers Waiheke ferry service. Waka Kotahi is seeking legal advice about the information they require before determining whether the criteria under section of the Land Transport Management Act have been met to change the status of the Service. Waka Kotahi will engage stakeholders as soon as practical once they have clarity around what is required for them to determine whether the criteria have been met. This review is important given the impact reliability o f the Waiheke ferry service has on Waiheke residents. Waiheke residents are reliant on the Waiheke ferry service to travel to and from Auckland and have almost no alternatives if a service is cancelled at short notice. Waka Kotahi is expecting to provide you with an update on this review this week. The Waiheke ferry service is currently an exempt service.
Available at www.transport.govt.nzassetsUploadsFinal Regulatory Impact Statement Land Transport RuleSetting ofSpeed Limits .pdf xpmpm PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Climate Implications of Policy Assessment The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team has been consulted and confirms that the CIPA requirements do not apply to this policy proposal, as the threshold for significance is not met. Any changes to speed limits are likely to impact emissi ons. However, it has been determined that the net change would not exceed the CIPA threshold . Population Implications There are no specific population implications identified from the proposal in this paper. Use of external resources No external resources were used in the production of this Cabinet paper. Publicity The Amendment Rule will be notified in the New Zealand Gazette and on NZTAs website. I intend to issue a press release about the effect of the Amendment Rule. NZTA will notify territorial authorities of the Amendment R ule changes. Proactive Release I intend to proactively release this paper within business days of the Cabinet decision. Consultation Public consultation on the Rule was undertaken from June to July . The Ministry of Transport received approximately , submissions. The majority of submitters were in support of the proposals in the Rule, including in support of reversing the previous governments blanket speed limit reductions. NZTA and the Ministries of Regulation (Regulatory Stewardship Team) and Environment ( CIPA Team) were consulted in the development of th is paper. The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet and the Treasury have been informed. Recommendations I recommend that Cabinet Legislation Committee : note that the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits (the Rule) requires speed limits on specified roads that have been reduced since January to be reversed back to the previous higher speed limit by July , unless limited exceptions set out in the Rule apply ; xpmpm PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E note that the public consultation document that led to the Rule included broad references to specified road types that would be subject to the reversal provisions, including arterial roads primarily designed for the efficient movement of people and goods between different parts of urban areas, and rural State highways ; note that the reversal provisions in the Rule include technical road classifications narrower in scope than the broader references used in the consultation document noted in recommendation above; agree that the Rule be amended to include the following roads within the reversal provisions, to better align with the consultation document and policy intent : . transit corridors, where lower speed limits on these roads that were set on or after January will reverse back to the ir higher speed limit s by July ; and . State highway rural connectors, where lower speed limits on these roads set on or after January will reverse back to the ir higher speed limit s by July unless the New Zealand Transport Agency is satisfied there is public acceptance for the lower speed limit ascertained through a fresh consultation exercise ; and note that section A() of the Land Transport Act requires the responsible Minister to have regard to the criteria specified in section () of that Act before recommending the making of a rule, by Order in Council, under section A(); note the advice of the Minister of Transport that the criteria noted in recommendation above has been met; agree that the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits Amendment (the Amendment Rule) will give effect to recommendation above; authorise the submission of the Amendment Rule to the Executive Council; and note that the Amendment Rule will come into force days after it has been notified in the New Zealand Gazette . Authorised for lodgement Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Transport xpmpm PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA I N C O N F I D E N C E LEGMIN Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits Amendment Portfolio Transport On December , the Cabinet Legislation Committee: noted that the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits (the Rule) requires speed limits on specified roads that have been reduced since January to be reversed back to the previous higher speed limit by July , unless limited exceptions set out in the Rule apply; noted that the public consultation document that led to the Rule included broad references to specified road types that would be subject to the reversal provisions, including arterial roads primarily designed for the efficient movement of people and goods between different parts of urban areas, and rural State highways; noted that the reversal provisions in the Rule include technical road classifications narrower in scope than the broader references used in the consultation document noted in paragraph above; agreed that the Rule be amended to include the following roads within the reversal provisions, to better align with the consultation document and policy intent: . transit corridors, where lower speed limits on these roads that were set on or after January will reverse back to their higher speed limits by July ; and . State highway rural connectors, where lower speed limits on these roads set on or after January will reverse back to their higher speed limits by July unless the New Zealand Transport Agency is satisfied there is public acceptance for the lower speed limit ascertained through a fresh consultation exercise; and noted that section A() of the Land Transport Act requires the responsible Minister to have regard to the criteria specified in section () of that Act before recommending the making of a rule, by Order in Council, under section A(); noted the advice of the Minister of Transport that the criteria noted in paragraph above has been met; agreed that the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits Amendment (the Amendment Rule), attached to the paper under LEGSUB, will give effect to the decision in paragraph above; I N C O N F I D E N C E xpmpm PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA I N C O N F I D E N C E LEGMIN authorised the submission of the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits Amendment to the Executive Council; noted that the Amendment Rule will come into force days after it has been notified in the New Zealand Gazette. Tom Kelly Committee Secretary Present: Officials present from: Hon Simeon Brown (Chair) Hon Shane Jones Hon Paul Goldsmith Hon Todd McClay Hon Tama Potaka Hon Casey Costello Hon Nicole McKee Hon Simon Watts Hon Chris Penk Hon Andrew Bayly Hon Scott Simpson, MP Jamie Arbuckle, MP Todd Stephenson, MPOfficials Committee for LEG I N C O N F I D E N C E xpmpm PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA I N C O N F I D E N C E xpmpm Cabinet I N C O N F I D E N C E CAB MIN
Both the Melling interchange and Brougham Street Canterbury are Crown funded outside of the National Land Transport Fund. xxfpyy s ()(g)(i) s ()(i) s ()(j) s ()(g)(i) I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Waikare Gorge realignment Following Cyclone Gabrielle in Feb , there is currently a temporary bailey bridge installed at Waikare Gorge . The additional funding is needed to allow full realignment of the route rather than just replace the existing bridge, and ensure greater resilience to future weather events. Additional funding will also accelerate the detailed design , construction contract award and construction commencement within the NLTP period. Second Ashburton bridge The existing bridge is nearing its end of life, and is often closed during a storm event s, notably in and . The additional funding will cover any funding shortfall and is needed to ensure the replacement bridge can progress quickly through to implementation. The bridge component of the project is million which NZTA will deliver as a State Highway . The local road connections will be funded by Ashburton District Council. This additional funding enables early works construction to commence in subject to resource consents and council decisions and funding. SH Brougham Street Corridor Improvemen ts Brougham St is a key freight route to Lyttleton Port, and has previously been progressed through to pre implementation through the Roads of Regional Significance programme but was removed due to programme affordability. Allocation would cover the current P construction costs and enables construction start mid subject to resource consents. Auckland Level Crossings Removal Programme Auckland Transport is developing a programme to remove a cluster of high priority level crossings in the Auckland rail network. If these level crossings are not removed, road users will face significant delays, with increased safety risks, when CRL opens in . The funding will enable this work to be brought forward, to take advantage of planned network closures in Auckland for the Rail Network Rebuild. Roads of National Significance This funding will allow NZTA to continue to work on the high priority State Highway projects, that will increase economic growth and productivity across New Zealand. The RoNS is a pipeline of major projects that will provide greater certainty to the constr uction sector. Total , NZTA has yet to confirm phasing requirements associated with the funding from the tagged contingency at an individual project level . Initial engagement has suggested a requirement of million in , million in and million in to commence delivery of the above projects. Phasing will vary from that indicated given the complexity of the multi year projects listed. xxfpyy s ()(j) s ()(i) I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Conditions of the GPS tagged contingency The original scope of the GPS tagged contingency was to enable NZTA to bring forward investments in the Governments land transport priorities , as set out in the GPS , that would otherwise be phased to begin from onwards. I am seeking agreement that this tagged contingency be accessed for the projects outlined in paragraph . A number of conditions need to be met before this contingency funding can be drawn down . I note that many, but not all of the conditions agreed by Cabinet have been met. I am seeking Cabinet approval to proceed with draw down of the funds noting that the remaining conditions will be met by the NZTA Board. The following conditions for drawing down the funding have been met: . Demonstrating compliance with Cabinet Office circular CO () : Investment Management and Asset Performance in Departments and Other Entities, including but not limited to submitting Strategic Assessments, Risk Profile Assessments, Business Cases, and Qua rterly Investment Reporting returns to the Treasury; . Confirming the proposed works to be prioritised; and . Providing regular reporting to the Infrastructure and Investment Ministers Group . The NZTA Board will maintain oversight of the remaining conditions : . Project timelines, key milestones, decision points and off ramps; . Independent Quantitative Risk Assessments ; . Benefit cost ratios ; and . Assessment of delivery capacity in affected regions to ensure that projects are deliverable. To ensure these remaining conditions are met I will write to the NZTA Board outlining my expectations for this funding, including the expectation that: . The remaining conditions attached to the establishment of the GPS tagged contingency are to be met as part of their standard business case and approvals processes ; and . Due consideration be given to the Government fiscal strategy including the treatment of capital versus operating expenditure and . Further, I intend to note that these expectations do not impose an obligation on NZTA to approve or decline funding for any particular activity or combination of activities (given the Agencys statutorily independent functions under section () of the LTMA). The long term affordability and ability to finance and fund delivery through to completion will be dependent on future NLTF revenue and the NZTA Boards willingness and capacity to service additional debt; as well as endorsement from the Minister of F inance that the level of debt is consistent with the fiscal strategy for net core Crown debt. xxfpyy I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Reporting requirements Although I am seeking approval from Cabinet to delegat e final decisions on the allocation of funding across the projects to the Board, I expect the Board to provide ongoing reporting on the delivery of these projects. NZTA already provide me with updates through their monthly reporting on GPS delivery and Cabinet will receive updates on these projects through Treasurys Quarterly Investment Reports (in line with CO()). Cost ofliving Implications There are no specific cost ofliving implications arising from this advice. Financial Implications There is a risk that allocating funding to the NLTF which the Board has statutory independence to manage will increase the NLTF operating expenditure profile compared to current forecasts. This would have a corresponding negative impact on OBEGAL. To the extent practicable . I expect the . billion tagged contingencies to be allocated as capital expenditure. I intend to write to the NZTA Board to outline my expectation that the Board give due consideration toward capital expenditure and the Crowns fiscal strategy. Legislative Implications There are no legislative implications arising from this advice. Impact Analysis Regulatory Impact Statement There are no regulatory implications arising from this advice. Climate Implications of Policy Assessment The emissions impact cannot be reliably estimated until final investment decisions on project scope and phasing are made by the NZTA Board. NZTA will consider the emissions impact as part of their standard approval process.
Budget originally set at the start of the NLTP period. Disbursements relate to FEDRUC admin, forecasting and strategy, and regulatory function s (section (a) and ()). RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of NLTF and Crown funded expenditure This table shows the p rogress of expenditure for the NLTP. It includes expenditure funded from: NLTF including Crown topup funding; Crown appropriations for programmes outside the NLTF.
Draft Government Policy Statement on Land Transport (GPS) , slide RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) Release of draft for consultation March Frequently Asked Questions
Executive Summary . Introduction Te Manat Waka (Ministry of Transport) commissioned a multidisciplinary team, led by Dovetail Consulting Ltd, to evaluate the Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS ). The evaluations purpose is to improve understanding of whether and to what extent GPS investments (ie, those fully or partially funded by the National Land Transport Fund NLTF) have achieved their intended results over the three years . Two key evaluation questions (KEQs) guide this work: To what extent has GPS influenced changes in NLTF investments, implementation, and early stage outcomes What key factors affect the efficiency and effectiveness of converting inputs to outputs and outcomes Although initially commissioned as an outc ome evaluation, the long term nature of GPS influence means it is not feasible to seek to attribute outcomes such as road safety, transport mode shift and emissions reductions in the short period. Therefore, this evaluation is more process focuse d, emphasising examining the influence or alignment of GPS on transport investment decision making and planning during . . Methods .. Evaluation criteria To address KEQ , evaluation criteria (Table ) were defined that align with GPS short term results and final reporting measures established by Te Manat Waka for GPS , reflecting the key priorities of safety, access, environment, and value for money. These criteria were systematically addressed using quantitative and qualitati ve evidence (investment data analysis, and key informant interviews, as summarised below). Our analysis focuses on criteria with adequate confidence in the evidence. It excludes criteria where the evidence is inadequate to support a judgement or where no e vidence is available. KEQ was addressed qualitatively. .. Investment data analysis Detailed data from Waka Kotahi on transport activities in National Land Transport Programmes (NLTPs) was matched to data on funding approvals to analyse and compare funding decisions made under GPS with those made under GPS and . This analysis focuses on funding decisions rather than actual expenditure, which may differ, to examine the extent to which the policy directions in GPS were associated with a change in the mix of funding decisions. Actual expenditure while a GPS is in effect will partly reflect commitments from decisions made under prior GPS. Given this, the analysis only considers funding decisions for new https:www.transport.govt.nzassetsUploadsReportFinal GPS measures.pdf ccc EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
For the exact definition of a Class licence, see https:www.nzta.govt.nzdriver licencesgetting alicencelicences byvehicle typewhat youcandrive . For the exact definition of a Class licence, see https:www.nzta.govt.nzdriver licencesgetting alicencelicences byvehicle typewhat youcandrive .
For the purpose of reporting on the Decarbonising Transport Action Plan, some initiatives under Focus Area have been grouped. This equates to initiatives (as per the milestone timelines in the DTAP, rather than ). The combined initiatives are five in relation to congestion charging (under Action .), and the grouping of three initiatives to: deliver major public transport service and infrastructure improvements in Auckland, Wellington and Christchurch under .b. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of The other black initiative is .c. to support initiatives to increase the uptake of e bikes which was not successful in receiving Budget funding. The IEB is examining the impact of these discontinued policies on emissions projections and whether any additional initiatives could be ramped up or new policies could be implemented to increase expected emissions reduction from policy interventions . Ministers recently requested that officials update projections to reflect the most upinformation, and this will be provided at an upcoming CRMG meeting. Transport officials are contributing to this exercise. Although the Social Leasing Scheme and Clean Car Upgrade were not expected to contribute significant emissions reductions, the did have a primary focus on targeting equity. As recently signalled in our weekly report (week ending April refers), we intend to provide you with further advice which outlines what equity focused work is happening across the ERP programme, and how initiatives that are not directly equity focused can be delivered in a way that supports this outcome. initiatives are green and there has been significant progress in a number of areas Good progress has occurred against some of the transport ERP commitments this quarter. Key highlights include: . The EV Charging Strategy was for public consultation on March . . The Land Transport Management (Regulation of Public Transport) Amendment Bill was introduced on March , with the first reading on March . . The Clean Car Standard is operational and v ehicle im porters are on average overachieving the legislated CO target (gkm under the target) set in the Clean Car Standard. . The national VKT reduction plan and engagement on the urban programmes are progressing well, including ongoing work to refine the draft of the national plan. . Action to support a major uplift in bus networks across the country and to stabilise the publi c transport bus driver workforce has continued to progress . There has been a promising decrease in the national bus driver shortfall, which has reduced from about in December to about in March . However, there are outstanding resourcing risks that pose a challenge to delivery All eight initiatives with a red status have not been able to be resourced by the responsible agencyagencies and are therefore behind schedule. We also note that many amber rated initiatives have delivery risks associated with resourcing challenges. Additionally, five initiatives are not yet scheduled to start but will require additional resourcing to be progressed. We are considering mitigation plans for these unresourced initiatives (outlined in the following sections as relevant ), but funding will be required in order to fill this resourcing gap fully. We will keep you on the resourcing challenge in future reports. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of Focus area : Reduce reliance on cars and support people to walk, cycle and use public transport
Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) Frequently asked questions About the GPS What is the GPS The GPS is the Government Policy Statement on land transport. It outlines what the Government wants to achieve in land transport, and how it expects to see funding allocated between types of activities (for example, roading, public transport and road safety) across New Zealands land transport system. Each GPS sets out the priorities for a year period and is every three years. What is the NLTF The National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) is a transport fund made up of fuel excise duty, road user charges, road tolls, vehicle and driver licensing and registration, and income from the sale and lease of state highway property.
I propose that the Cabinet Legislation Committee authorise the submission of the Land Transport Managem ent (Regional Fuel Tax Scheme Auckland) Amendment Order (the A mendment Order) to the Executive Council .
In GPS for the expenditure target was .B and al locations (based on the midpoint for activity classes) was .B. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
In Military theory, t he Operational Art, represents the level of planning that connects the details of tactics with the goals of strategy. In business terms, the operational level evaluates business ends, ways, and means to plan and execute operations and campaigns to support achievement of stra tegic goals. Institution of Mechanical Engineers, , retrieved from https:www.imeche.orgdocsdefault source oscarreports policy statements anddocumentstransport hierarchy.pdfsfvrsn RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
JULY: GPS TAKES EFFECT JULY: NEW GPS DRAFT RELEASED FOR ENGAGEMENT
JULY: NEW GPS TAKES EFFECT
Key commitments in the Initial Strategy include reducing CO emissions by at least percent by , pursing efforts towards percent by , compared to and peaking emissions as soon as possible and reducing the total annual emissions from international shipping by at least percent by compared to . This is calculated using shipping fuel uplifted in New Zealand for international voyages, and does not reflect that many ships carrying New Zealand goods do not re fuel in New Zealand. Therefore, the amount of international shipping emissions attributable to New Zealand is likely higher than this. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE UNCLASSIFIED Page of . Advocate for the interests of Pacific Island countries consistent with New Zealands national interest . If an issue emerges that meet s some but not all of the provisions above, officials will seek further direction from Ministers as necessary on the New Zealand position. IMO negotiations in June July are key to pursuing a decarbonisation target We you on the last round of IMO negotiations via the Weekly Report to the Minister of Transport for the week ending March . Divergence on key issues remain s as we head into the upcoming negotiations , where a revised GHG Strategy must be delivered. We expect the major negotiating challenges for the revised GHG Strategy to centre around reaching agreement on the levels of ambition (including , and targets) . Achieving a common position in the IMO on a zero by goal, and intermediate and targets, will require compromise Officials will continue to work through the Shipping High Ambition Coalition (SHAC) and bilaterally to narrow differences and find common ground that may ach ieve a collective IMO commitment to at least keeping the Paris Agreement commitment to limit temperature rise to .oC alive. It is unlikely that any element of the Strategy will come to an official vote as the IMO strives for consensus on decisions. Reaching consensus may mean that States which disagree with the majority position may make a statement to that effect but do not formally oppose the decision . Agreeing to zero emissions by no later than is still a point of contention A core part of the Strategy is agreeing to shipping decarbonisation goal s. High ambition Member States , including New Zealand and some Pacific countries support a zero GHG emissions by no later than goal, in line with the .oC Paris Agreement temperature limit.
KiwiRail is inherently a capital heavy business. However, the funding it receives from a government budget perspective is treated as a mix of capital and operating. Funding of KiwiRails commercial actives is usually treated as capital, as it repr esents an equity injection into the company, investment in the rail network is seen as an operating grant into public benefit infrastructure. s ()(f) (iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of customers and entering a range of contracts with long lead times, and long life assets such as rolling stock. The previous Government had increased funding up to around m per annum for the national freight network (and .billion for a rolling stock program), however it had not committed all the funding required to implement its plans. In addition, cost pressures have escalated. In , the RNIP programme was initially costed at about . billion , but has since faced around billion of additional cost. We also expect that actual costs will rise further as KiwiRail discover more about the current state of its freight network (as they have recently discovered with the Metro Networks) .
LTMA s()(b), s()(b)(ii),(vii), s(c). LTMA sB and C(c),(d) LTMA s() LTMA s()(e),(f) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Minister Wood agree changes (a) to (j) and (l) to the Output Plan (as set out below) Yes No Minister Allan agree change (k) to the Output Plan (as set out below) Yes No Projects removed from the Output Plan (a) Project J Scrappage Scheme Remove the project from the Output Plan Yes No (b) Project K Social Licensing Scheme Remove the project from the Output Plan Yes No (c) Project L Sustainable Biofuels Obligations Remove the project from the Output Plan Yes No
Ministry of Transport, Richard Paling Consulting, and Murray King Francis Small Consultancy, National Freight Demand Study New Zealand Infrastructure Commission s National Infrastructure Pipeline as at September , which includes . billion of active and planned projects from central government, local government, and private sector infrastructure providers from across the infrastructure system. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
More information on CATR is included in A ppendix . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of considered through this process include Wiri to Quay Park ( million), Papakura to Pukekohe Electrification ( million) and the Drury Rail Stations ( million). Table : Rephasing of Auckland Transport capital programme Rephasing of Auckland Transport s Capital Programme from F inancial Year to ( millions) Programme Original RLTP Rephased RLTP Asset renewals Rapid transit ferry Corridors places Local safety amenity Other , Total , , Tracking ATAP Programme expenditure Capital expenditure Table : ATAP capital expenditure by delivery entity Capital expenditure from July to December Delivery entity Actual expenditure (millions) Planned expenditure (millions) of planned expenditure Change in points compared to the last report Auckland Transport Waka Kotahi NZUP (Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail) KiwiRail City Rail Link Limited (CRLL) Total . Actual expenditure as a percentage of the rephased programmes against planned expenditure was per cent. This is the same as the last report. . Results vary across the delivery agencies. . Auckland Transport state the positive result was aided by the million reallocation to the Eastern Busway. . Waka Kotahi state the variance is due to the impact from C ovid over a sustained period of time and supply chain issues. The Puhoi to Warkworth project in particular has experienced Covidrelated delays which has materially impacted actual expenditure this period. It accounts for approximately per cent of the Waka Kotahi NLTF forecast and actual expenditure is approximately per cent of forecast this period. Other NLTF projects on the programme have, by and large, performed to plan in the first six months. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of . KiwiRail state the result is largely due to limited physical access to the rail network, which needs to be agreed with Auckland Transport. KiwiRails expenditure is not linear, with increased expenditure during rail network closures. Significant works are planned during the rail closures w hich will provide an opportunity to make up any underspend. . Given the rephasing, it is not sensible to look at expenditure variances against budget over the full months of the ATAP programme (July to December ). Across the programme over the July to June reporting period, m of planned funding was not spent. In the reporting period July to December m of planned expenditure was not spent. Operational expenditure Table : ATAP operational expenditure by delivery entity Net o perational expenditure excluding depreciation from July to December Delivery entity Actual expenditure (millions) Planned expenditure (millions) of planned expenditure Change in compared to the last report Auckland Transport Waka Kotahi KiwiRail . . New Total
New Zealand has some experiences of partially financing state highway upgrades through publicprivate partnership arrangements. Repayments are made from the NLTF (for example, Transmission Gully) . s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSI FIED Page of If you wish to intervene earlier, you could write to the LGWM partners now.
Part year S(A) Funding Outyears (millions) . . . . . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of further analysis suggested for specific population groups which the Ministry of Transport has responded to. . The Ministry rec ommends you carry out consultation between March with your Ministerial colleagues and provide feedback to the Ministry of Transport by March . The nature of the land transport system means nearly all New Zealanders and businesses would be impacted by the changes to charges and fees . Submitters and industry participants appreciated the importance of Waka Kotahi as a strong regulator and recognised more funding is needed. However, some remained opposed to increasing charges and fees, noting there was an inability to simply absorb higher costs in the current economic climate. . Recent agency consultation has reiterated st rong support for the proposed removal of driver licensing testing resit fees . This was communicated as a positive step which would lead to better employment options, road safety, and better justice system outcomes . . The Ministry of Transport and Waka Kotahi acknowledge the points raised by the public , industry , and agency consultation. A high level table illustrating the impact to businesses and households is included in Appendix Three and impact analysis is included within the CRIS. The primary risks with regards to the Cabinet paper and proposed changes relate to timing of implementation and subsequent public perception . The fundamental risk is that funding of the regulatory function becomes unsustainable through any combination of delays to approval of the funding review proposals, or only achieving partial approval. This could lead to a reduced regulatory function with resourcing levels below those that led to regulatory failure, or particularly in the case of delays, the need for further Crown fundingfinancing while existing Crown loans need to be repaid. . There is also the risk that ongoing cost of living pressures means an unfavourable reaction from the public and industry to changes to fees and charges . However, commercial parties are not expected to fully pass on increased costs for up to months due to competitive activity and a preference to align with the timing of other cost increases. . Developing proposals has been a large and complex process necessitating a number of assumptions to be made. In addition, uncertainties about inflation and any potential economic recession or behavioural changes mean that it is possible recoveries could be less (or more) than forecas t.
Portfolio work programme update Maritime NZ Project: Critical Changes to M aritime Legislation Maritime NZ and Ministry of Transport officials are currently developing joint advice for you on options for legislative changes . Maritime NZ is also preparing more specific advice for you on challenges arising from the way in which a number of harbourmasters and councils are using their powers under the Maritime Transport Act (MTA). Briefing: Options for Maritime legislation For discussion, this joint MinistryMNZ briefing will set out options for advancing critical changes to maritime legislation. Week ending Friday September Briefing: Changes needed to maritime legislation to address issues arising from the exercise of local navigation safety regulatory powers Dat e: Week ending Friday September
Portfolio work programme update Maritime NZ Project: Critical Changes to M aritime Legislation Maritime NZ and Ministry of Transport officials are finalising joint advice for you on options for legislative changes . Briefing: Options for Maritime legislation For discussion, this joint MinistryMNZ briefing will set out options for advancing critical changes to maritime legislation. Week ending Friday September D ate: Week ending Friday September s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv)
Portfolio work programme update Maritime NZ Project: Critical Changes to M aritime Legislation Maritime NZ and Ministry of Transport officials have provided you with joint advice on the proposed scope for legislative changes . Briefing: Maritime Transport Act Review Joint briefing with the Ministry of Transport on policy options and legislative prioritisation for changes to the Maritime Transport Act. Week ending Friday December Project: Maritime Workforce Maritime NZ, the Port Industry Association, and, jointly, the New Zealand Shipping Federation, Marine Transport Association and the Federation of Commercial Fishermen submitted a response to the consultation on the reform of vocational education that closed on Thursday September . A copy of each submission was provided to your Office. Maritime NZ will meet with sector representatives on Thursday September to discuss workforce and training issues. This is a standing monthly meeting that has recently been focused on the vocational education training reforms. We expect the group will now focus more on the short and long term amendments to the seafarer certification rules. As identified below, we will brief you on the Consultation on Rules Relating to SeaCert and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels on Thursday September .
Portfolio work programme update Maritime NZ Project: Critical Changes to M aritime Legislation Maritime NZ and Ministry of Transport officials have provided you with joint advice on the proposed scope for legislative changes . Project: Maritime Workforce The Port Industry Association has submitted a response to the consultation on the reform of vocational education that was launched on August . This follows the joint proposal for maritime training that was submitted by NZ Shipping Federation, Marine Transport Association and the Federation of Commercial Fishermen. Education officials have encouraged regulators with links to the vocational education sector to submit. Maritime NZ has therefore also provided its own short submission (outlining our role and supporting submissions made by the maritime and ports sectors). A copy will be provided to your Office. The consultation closes on Thursday September .
Portfolio work programme update Maritime NZ Project: Critical Changes to M aritime Legislation Ministry of Transport and Maritime NZ officials are currently developing joint advice for Minister Doocey on options for legislative changes . Maritime NZ is also preparing more specific advice for Minister Doocey on challenges arising from the way in which a number of harbourmasters and councils are using their powers under the Maritime Transport Act (MTA). Briefing: Options for Maritime legislation For discussion, this joint MinistryMNZ briefing will set out options for advancing critical changes to maritime legislation. Week ending Friday September Briefing: Changes needed to maritime legislation to address issues arising from the exercise of local navigation safety regulatory powers Dat e: Week ending Friday September
Portfolio work programme update Maritime NZ Project: Critical Changes to M aritime Legislation Ministry of Transport and Maritime NZ officials are currently developing joint advice for Minister Doocey on options for legislative changes . Maritime NZ is also preparing more specific advice for Minister Doocey on challenges arising from the way in which a number of harbourmasters and councils are using their powers under the Maritime Transport Act (MTA). Briefing: Options for Maritime legislation. For discussion, this joint MinistryMNZ briefing will set out options for advancing critical changes to maritime legislation. Week ending September Briefing: Changes needed to maritime legislation to address issues arising from the exercise of local navigation safety regulatory powers
Portfolio work programme update Maritime NZ Project: Critical Changes to Maritime Legislation Ministry of Transport and Maritime NZ officials have met to discuss options for legislative changes and are currently developing advice for Minister Doocey on these options. Maritime NZ is also preparing more specific advice for Minister Doocey on immediate challenges arising from the way in which a number of harbourmasters and councils are using their powers under the Maritime Transport Act (MTA). Briefing: Changes needed to maritime legislation to address issues arising from the exercise of local navigation safety regulatory powers Week ending Friday August Briefing: Options for maritime legislation For discussion, this joint MinistryMNZ briefing will set out options for advancing critical changes to maritime legislation. Week ending September Project: Maritime Rules Reform Following Cabinet approval, consultation commenced on Wednesday August on the first package of Design, Construction and Equipment rules changes, and will run to October .
Portfolio work programme update Maritime NZ Project: Critical Changes to Maritime Legislation Ministry of Transport and Maritime NZ officials have met to discuss options for legislative changes and are currently developing advice for you on these options. Maritime NZ is also preparing more specific advice for you on immediate challenges arising from the way in which a number of harbourmasters and councils are using their powers under the Maritime Transport Act (MTA). Briefing: Changes needed to maritime legislation to address issues arising from the exercise of local navigation safety regulatory powers Week ending Friday August Briefing: Options for maritime legislation For discussion, this joint MinistryMNZ briefing will set out options for advancing critical changes to maritime legislation. Week ending September Project: Maritime Rules Reform Following Cabinet approval, consultation commenced on Wednesday August on the first package of Design, Construction and Equipment rules changes, and will run to October .
Portfolio work programme update Milford Opportunities Project: Milford Aerodrome Financial Sustainability No update. The new charges for aerodrome users do not come into effect until April . Project: Masterplan Business Case
Portfolio work programme update Milford Opportunities Project: Milford Aerodrome Financial Sustainability No update. The new charges for aerodrome users do not come into effect until April . Project: Masterplan Business Case Thursday September
Portfolio work programme update Milford Opportunities Project: Milford Aerodrome Financial Sustainability No update. The new charges for aerodrome users do not come into effect until April . Project: Masterplan Business Case No update.
Portfolio work programme update Milford Opportunities Project: Milford Aerodrome Financial Sustainability No update. The new charges for aerodrome users do not come into effect until April . Project: Masterplan Business Case No update. Thursday August
Portfolio work programme update Project: Critical Changes to M aritime Legislation Maritime NZ and Ministry of Transport officials are finalising joint advice for you on options for legislative changes . Briefing: Options for Maritime legislation For discussion, this joint MinistryMNZ briefing will set out options for advancing critical changes to maritime legislation. Week ending Friday September D ate: Week ending Friday September Project: RMS Niagara Briefing: RMS Niagara Update This briefing to both you and Minister Doocey will update you about the wreck of the Royal Mail Ship Niagara. Week ending Friday September
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
State Highway Investment Proposal (SHIP): https:nzta.govt.nzassetsplanning andinvestmentdocsDraft Transport Agency Investment Proposal .pdf New Zealand Transport Agency: Maintaining state highways through Network Outcomes Contracts (oag.parliament.nz) AT THE CROSSROADS: THE NEW ZEALAND TRANSPORT AND LOGISTICS SECTOR, ANZ CLIENT INSIGHTS: https:comms.anz.co.nzbusinsightsarticlereport.htmlindustryTransport and https:www.anz.co.nzabout useconomic markets researchtruckometer Road Maintenance Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency. https:www.nzta.govt.nzplanning andinvestmentplanning and investment knowledge base nltpactivity classes andwork categoriesroad maintenance . Vehicle Kilometres Travelled Change from previous year funding block State Highway Maintenance Expenditure ,Millions (non indexed) describes how spending is to be prioritised across all the activity classes with consideration of the long term outcomes for the entire transport system when each NLTP is developed. Each Regional Transport Committee submits proposals for investment in local road and state highway activities in their region and these are supported by evidence and business cases prepared by the relevant agency, Waka Kotahi for state highway activities. In setting investment levels for the GPS activity classes, the Ministry considers, as part of its advice to the Minister, the expenditure required to maintain existing levels of service as well as the expenditure needed to achieve the strategic priorities (i.e., the outputs under how to deliver these outcomes under each strategic priority). Activity class funding ranges provide an ability to flex the level of investment and balance the delivery of GPS priorities against base expenditure requirements such as maintenance and renewals, particularly with regard to not creating large future spending backlogs.
The Alliance comprises: HEB, Fulton Hogan, Aurecon, Tonkin Taylor and NZTA . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Auckland Transport s costs for contract maintenance, public transport contract s, IT, administration, and minor maintenance are all on budget . NZTA NZTA exceeded their operational expenditure forecast by . The overspend was due to cost escalation, as well as additional maintenance needs on the Auckland Harbour Bridge. KiwiRail KiwiRail ATAP operational expenditure was . of planned expenditure during this period. Operational spend has focused on planning work including the Auckland Rail Programme Business Case, an optioneering report for a fourth Southern line, and progression of a route protection strategy . Uneven public transport recovery Public transport remains in recovery mode, with Auckland Transport working towards preC OVID patronage levels of million total boardings per year by mid . At the end of March , total annual boardings were at of the preCOVID target with million boardings . Bus patronage made up ( million) of total boardings , followed by rail patronage at ( million boardings) and ferry at . ( million boardings). While bus patronage is increasing there has been a rise in reported aggressive and threatening behaviour towards bus drivers. There is a proposal in the draft RLTP to fund screens for all buses as a safety measure to mitigate this behaviour . Disruptions are slowing rail patronage recovery. In February , rail already disrupted by the Rail Network Rebuild was disrupted further by the heat affected Southern Line requir ing temporary speed restrictions, signalling faults and Auckland One Rail train crew shortages. KiwiRail undertook urgent remedial work to promptly resolve the issues and lifted speed restrictions on February . Disruptions highlight the need for investment, such as further catch up renewals, which will improve reliability and resilience of the rail network . Ferry services have experienced delays as new staff are trained. In October Auckland Transport and Fullers began the Accelerated Training Programme (ATP) The programme is fast tracking the ferry crew training pathway, aiming to have crew in qualified positions (deckhand and skipper) within and months. A training programme to progress this many qualified positions would typically take several years. The ATP is ahead of schedule and Fullers plan to return two weekday peak services for Half Moon Bay, and the Devonport min peak service schedule, by June . Some Gulf Harbour services will resume in September and be fully reinstated by early . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of ATAP programme outcomes The ATAP outcomes are : encouraging the shift from private vehicles to public transport, walking and cycling addressing Aucklands longer term challenges of climate change efficient and reliable movement of people and goods around the region increasing access to social and economic opportunities through access to transport networks, and significantly improving safety outcomes across the Auckland region, with a reduction in deaths and serious injuries. Between July and March , Auckland Council granted approximately consents within m of a rapid transit network (RTN) station representing a . decline in consents from the same period in the previous year, indicative of a general downturn in building activity. The percentage of the arterial network operating at congested levels of service reached just over in March , for the first time since June and is exceeding preCOVID levels Deaths and serious injuries totalled for the year to March with road deaths and serious injuries. This is a reduction compared to year end March which saw DSI, deaths and serious injuries . Looking ahead As the ATAP investment package comes to an end on June , we will provide you with one final closing report to cover the three years . Although at this stage there is not a new ATAP investment programme, i t will be important to continue some form of implementation reporting against an Auckland programme to enable transparency of delivery and investment . The draft Auckland Regional Land Transport Plan (RLTP) has been released for consultation through to mid June. It will be submitted to NZTA on August for consideration as the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) is developed.
The Joint Board Committee was e stablished in September to govern the programme. It is assumed that the current governance structure for the Eke Panuku and Kinga Ora Joint Board Committee is concluded by providing this programme business case to Sponsors. s ()(b)(ii), s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
The Ministers of Transport, Land Information, Environment . Conserv ation and State Owne d Enterprises RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of PROPOSED ORDERS IN COUNCIL UNDER THE SEVERE WEATHER EMERGENCY RECOVERY LEGISLATION ACT KIWIRAIL AND WAKA KOTAHI REPAIR AND RECOVERY WORKS, AND LAND TRANSPORT MANAGEMENT ACT AMENDMENTS There has been substantial damage to the land transport network across the North Island There has been extensive damage to Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency (Waka Kotahi) and KiwiRails lan d transport networks following the recent severe weather events. While immediate works are underway, there is a clear need for more significant works over the coming months and years to restore, reinstate, and rebuild state highways and rail lines across t he affected regions and ensure their ongoing safety and resilience. The slow recovery of these land transport networks will have ongoing social and economic impacts for affected communities and regions, and New Zealand more broadly. This is because of the critical role transport plays in moving people , goods and services and in enabling other sectors to flourish. This includes forestry, agriculture, and horticulture. The OiC mechanism can help to better coordinate the approval processes needed for repair an d recovery works When undertaking transport infrastructure works, Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail rely on a range of regulatory frameworks to get the necessary planning, funding, and delivery approvals. However, these standard approval processes are not well coor dinated and can take several years to complete . They have different steps, different requirements, and different decision makers. Each approval must be obtained separately before works can start, even if they are for the same project. To reconnect communit ies and restore the supply chain as soon as possible , it is important Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail can carry out the design, consenting and construction of repair and recovery works in a timely, streamlined, and integrated way. This will help to reduce disrupt ion, complexity, duplication of effort, and cost. The SWERL Act enables OiCs to be put in place to temporarily amend certain legislation to exempt, modify or extend existing statutory obligations w here necessary to support recovery in areas affected by the severe weather events . An OiC mechanism was used after the Kaikura earthquake for the successful rebuild of the Coastal Route by Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail. Those involved in this work have highlighted the coordinated approach the OiC enabled on the ground, as well as the benefits of more streamlined approvals. Officials have drawn on lessons from the Coastal Route when considering using the OiC mechanism in response to the severe weather events.
The tag on drawing down funding from the capital contingency appropriation is the completion of Climate Implications of Policy Assessments (CIPAs) for individual projects CAB MIN. refers. ylqdcxs Out of Scope Out of Scope Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I l l C C () I ,,,. .,.,. QJ cii :, :, . . N . ., I.O I I I I . :, :, N ,. N I.O N I n n :; ,.., I ::,::, I ::,::, N N D t N I.O N ; I l l C C ,., ,.., ,,,. ru :, :, c. a. ;;o ;;o N N P N I.O N Weekly Patronage thousands) Jan Jan l Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr Apr May May May May May Jun Jun Jun Jun Jol Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Scp Sep cr ct ct ct ct Nov Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dcc Dec .,.i, r.I) N A Oi C) fV J) OJ . , , , :, ,,,,, I , I ,, . I , I I I I I , , , I I I , , .. , I I , . , I I I , , I , , , I , .. : I I , ,, I I I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E This programme presents an opportunity to improve the level of service for public transport services within the urban area via improved travel time, reliability and frequency of service and become a viable, attractive, and competitive alternative to travel by private motor vehicle, and achieve mode shift in Greater Christchurch. Christchurch City Council has not notifi ed its plan changes to give effect to the National Policy Statement on Urban Development (NPSUD) and the Medium Density Residential Standards (MDRS). The NPSUD and the MDRS are designed to enable greater intensification in the areas where people want to live and work. Implementing these statutory requirements, particularly the NPS UD, will support higher density residential development along frequent or rapid transit corridors . The Associate Minister for the Environment has appointed an investigator under part of the Resource Management Act to work with Christchurch City Council on its housing intensification plan. Even with the delay in notifying the NPSUD and MDRS plan changes, this programme will promote mode shift, emission reduction, rapid transit and higher density living on main corridors. Programme deliverables The entire programme over a five tosixyear period is expected to deliver: . approximately more buses providing a greater number of seats to a greater number of locations at a higher frequency . more bus shelters . more real time display units providing accurate information on bus arrival times . approximately kilometres of bus lanes improving bus reliability . park and ride facilities in Rolleston, Lincoln and Kaiapoi making it easier to access the bus network. The additional million sought from the reallocated Northern Pathway funding will contribute significantly towards the delivery of bus lanes and improvements in real time information display units. In terms of improving bus services nationally, the Minister of Transport announced million to standardise minimum base wage rates for bus drivers in October . The intention of this investment is to improve the conditions of bus drivers, which will make it easier to recruit and retain the workforce while providing more frequent and reliable bus services. This will also help standardise terms and conditions for bus drivers, which currently vary across the country. Similarly, the Minister of Immigrati on is seeking Cabinet agreement in the paper entitled Immigration Rebalance Green List Changes to consult with transport sector representatives for a bus driver sector agreement, which will provide a residence pathway for migrant bus drivers and support the transport industry with improved pay and conditions for bus drivers.
This difference has been calculated at the midpoint of the funding ranges. We also recognise the increase in pressures on the NLTF and the need to increase revenue, with the draft GPS proposing to increase revenue by more than percent over the coming three years . To help Kiwis through the cost ofliving crisis, we have also committed to not increasing Fuel Excise Duty (FED) or Road User Charges (RUC) rates during this term of government, instead supplementing the NLTF with significant Crown funding. Delivering the Roads of National Significance and public transport projects will require the use of alternative delivery models, and a broader range of funding options and financing models. The Government expect s public private partnerships, and other opportunities to use private expertise and finance, will be considere d for all major projects . The Government is a lso signal ling a number of system reforms we will implement in parallel with the delivery of this GPS. Th ese reforms will provide more sustainable revenue, help contain costs and make it easier for delivery agencies to do their jobs. Key among the changes is a move to a year NLTP, which will provide more certainty to local authorities and their commercial partner s, and to the travelling public. I invite you to provide feedback on the priorities and programmes in the draft GPS and help build and maintain a transport system that is productive, resilient, and provides for economic growth.
This difference has been calculated at the midpoint of the funding ranges. period of this GPS. This investment must deliver better outcomes for New Zealanders and for future generations of New Zealanders. We also recognise the increase in pressures on the National Land Transport Fund ( NLTF ) and the need to increase revenue, with the GPS proposing to increase revenue by more than percent over the coming three years. To help Kiwis through the costof living crisis, we have also committed to not increasing Fuel Excise Duty (FED) or Road User Charges (RUC) rates during this term of government, instead supplementing the NLTF with significant Crown funding. Delivering the Roads of National Significance and major public transport projects will require the use of alternative delivery models, and a broader range of funding options and financing models. The Government expects Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) , and other opportunities to use private expertise and finance, will be considered for all major projects. The Government is also signalling a number of system reforms we will implement in parallel with the delivery of this GPS. These reforms will provide more sustainable revenue, help contain costs and make it easier for delivery agencies to do their jobs. Key among the changes is a move to a year National Land Transport P rogramme (NLTP) , which will provide more certainty to local authorities and their commercial partners, and to the travelling public. I expect that GPS will help build and maintain a transport system that is productive, resilient, and provides for economic growth.
This figure is based on a driver travelling an average distance of , kilometres per year with an average fuel efficiency of . litres per km in . Are there any new activity classes in the draft GPS The local road and state highway maintenance activity classes have each been separated into four new classes . The new maintenance activity classes will en sure NZTA, and councils , focus a defined proportion of their maintenance funding on improving our roads and enhancing their resilience. Performance and delivery How will the Government ensure that NZTA is delivering value for money for taxpayers and road users With the draft GPS investing . billion into the transport network there needs to be a focus on value for money and achieving better outcomes for New Zealanders through the use of this funding. The draft GPS sets out value for money as a key strategic priority and includes clear expectations that the NZTA focuses on delivery, value for money, and considers other funding sources and revenue models. The Minister expects NZTA to develop a Performance and Efficiency Plan that will : improve the management of benefits, costs, risk and uncertainty at the programme and activity class level increase the capability and capacity of the transport sector improve asset management practices across the sector provide analysis to inform pricequality trade offs for maintenance and operations expenditure ensure business case and cost estimation reflect best practice manage overheads and back office costs. Does the draft GPS address the need to improve performance across the transport sector Along with providing direction on land transport spending, the draft GPS outlines a range of short and medium term performance indicators and expectations on regular reporting of results. For some of the key outcomes sought by the draft GPS, the Government has identified specific targets for performance: achieving long term maintenance outcomes of renewing two percent of the network and resealing nine percent of the network each year fixing potholes on the State Highway network within hours of be ing reported NZ Police to undertake at least three million roadside alcohol breath tests per year NZ Police to undertake at least , roadside oral fluid drug tests per year (once the new regime is in place) . The long term maintenance outcome reflects what NZTA consider s to be a sustainable level of activity to work towards. Resealing work can extend the life of an asset and postpone the need for renewals and repairs. Renewal work involves removing a roads seal layer to work on the underlaying substrate, which provides structural strength. Determining the right approach depends on the circumstances, especially when a State Highways traffic volumes may have significantly changed since the road was last renewed. The Government intends publishing a new set of objectives and actions on road safety which focus on safer roads, safer drivers, and safer vehicles . The draft GPS supports the Governments road safety objectives by enabling actions such as the Road Policing Investment Programme. How will the draft GPS improve accountability across the sector To increase accountability, the Government will revi ew the role and scope of the road efficiency group (REG) that was started by the previous National led Government in . This will ensure a focus on maximising the efficiency and effectiveness of maintenance work and reducing spend ing in areas like temporary traffic management. The Performance and Efficiency Plan will also ensure activities and functions are aligned to drive better accountability, delivery and value for money from transport investments. In addition, the Government will appoint independent members to the REG and will streamline and refocus this group to deliver better accountability, delivery and value for money from our transport investments. System reforms What do the Governments system reforms involve In parallel with the GPS, t he Government is plann ing a number of reforms to the transport system . These reforms will provide more sustainable revenue, help contain costs and make it easier for delivery agencies to do their jobs . The reforms include: Moving to a year NLTP, which will provide more certainty to local authorities and their commercial partners. Putting in place time of use charging to improve travel times and network performance, reducing overall costs for freight businesses and their customers. There should also be a reduced need for some capital works on these roads . Reforming tolling legislation and allowing for time of use charging on the most congested parts of New Zealands road network to help reduce congestion and maximise use of existing assets . Passing legislation to roll out roadside oral fluid drug testing and set targets for Police to undertake , roadside oral fluid tests per year (once the new regime is in place) . Fast tracking consents for major infrastructure projects which will support the major transport projects within this GPS including the Roads of National Significance and rapid transit projects . What is the Government doing about speed management The Government has indicated it will reset the approach to speed management. It has asked Road Controlling Authorities to await a new rule that will take a more balanced approach to speed limit settings, ensuring economic factors, travel times , and the views of communities and road users are considered , alongside safety . The Government expects speed limits that have been reduced to be reversed where it is safe to do so, enabling people to get to where they need to go quickly and safely. Implementation and next steps Will local government and NZTA have time to incorporate the draft GPS into their plans The Government is releasing the draft GPS now to give NZTA, local government and the sector an indication on what activities to include in their transport planning and funding strategies. The final GPS is required to be released by July , and the current consultation process will allow the Government to meet that timeframe. What are the next steps and when will the final GPS be available Following the close of consultation in April , Ministry of Transport officials will work with the Minister of Transport to finalise the GPS. The Ministry of Transport will summarise the submissions received through the consultation process and will use these to provide advice to the Minister of Transport on what the final GPS should include. A final GPS will be released by Ju ne , following Cabinet approval . How do I provide feedback Public consultation on the draft GPS is now open . To provide feedback, please visit www.consult.transport.govt.nz and complete the short survey.
This figure is based on a driver travelling an average distance of , kilometres per year with an average fuel efficiency of . litres per km in . Excise Duty to Road User Charges as part of the NationalACT coalition agreement. The Government also expects NZTA and the Ministry of Transport will work together to examine how alternative funding and financing arrangements could be used for all new major transport infrastructure projects such as tolling, time of use charging, equity finance and value capture. Are there any new activity classes in the GPS A Pothole Prevention Fund has been established through two new activity classes that are ringfenced to resealing, rehabilitation, and drainage maintenance works on our state highways and local roads. The new activity classes are State Highway Pothole Prevention and Local Road Pothole Prevention Activity Classes. The new maintenance activity classes will ensure NZTA, and councils, focus a defined proportion of their maintenance funding on fixing and preventing potholes, improving our roads and enhancing their resilience. Performance and delivery How will the Government ensure that NZTA is delivering value for money for taxpayers and road users With the GPS investing billion into the transport network over the next three years there needs to be a focus on value for money and achieving better outcomes for New Zealanders. Value for Money is a strategic priority and GPS includes clear expectations that the NZTA focuses on delivery, value for money, and considers other funding sources and revenue models. The Minister expects NZTA to develop a Performance and Efficiency Plan that will: improve the management of benefits, costs, risk and uncertainty at the programme and activity class level increase the capability and capacity of the transport sector improve asset management practices across the sector provide analysis to inform pricequality tradeoffs for maintenance and operations expenditure ensure business case and cost estimation reflect best practice manage overheads and backoffice costs outline how the wider Ministerial expectations and outcomes in GPS will be met. System reforms What transport reforms are being signalled in GPS GPS signals a number of critical reforms to how land transport activities are planned, funded and delivered. These include: Development of a year plan for transport infrastructure in New Zealand Progressing legislation to enable fasttrack consenting approvals Making it easier to sell land no longer required for transport purposes Advancing reforms to the NLTF revenue system Amending the Land Transport Management Act to require future GPSs to adopt a year investment plan
This is because SH is not quite in delivery and so didnt fit well within the cost escalation process, and Papakura to Drury cost estimates increased by million between August and October ; the Treasury recommendation in the cost escalatio n process was based on the earlier figure. s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
This paper proposes that the Cabinet Legislation Committee (the Committee)
This paper seeks authorisation to submit the Civil Aviation (Offences) Regulations
We want to know what you think Te Manat Waka The Ministry of Transport ( the Ministry ) is proposing temporary law changes through three Orders inCouncil under the Severe Weather Emergency Recovery Legislation Act ( the Recovery Act ) to support Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agenc y (Waka Kotahi ) and KiwiRail to do recovery and rebuild works on damaged state highways and rail lines. This public engagement is designed to get your feedback on these proposal s and will run from June to July . We have identified several questions on page which would be useful to get your responses to . This public engagement does not replace any engagement requirements on Waka Kotahi or KiwiRail p rior to undertaking recovery work. State highways and railway lines are substantially damaged In January and February , the North Island experienced a series of severe weather events . This caused large scale and geographically spread damage to the stat e highway and rail network . It also weakened areas that will continue to be damaged in future weather events over the coming months . Sections of the state highway are impassable or have restricted access, with some landowners unable to get on to their property easily or at all. The rail network is just as impacted with some lines no longer usable or viable. This damage has disrupted communities and the supply chain, and impacted on peoples ability to access employment, education, and other key s ervices. Many of the affected areas have high Mori populations, particularly in Northland, Auckland, Tairwhiti and Hawkes Bay. If the damage to state highways and rail lines is not addressed as soon as possible, there will be ongoing social and economic impacts for affected whnau, communities, regions, and New Zealand more broadly . This is because of the critical role transport plays in connecting people and goods and services, and in enabling sectors such as agriculture, horticulture, and forestr y to flourish . Recovery and rebuild works are needed at pace and scale Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail are already doing works to repair damage and restore immediate access to communities . These kinds of works include clearing a slip, opening a single lane, or temporarily installing a bailey bridge. There are processes available to progress these emergency works in a timely way.
What Works (). Logic Models and Theory of Change. Access from: https:whatworks.org.nzlogicmodel Hills, D. (). Logic Mapping: Hints and Tips for Better Transport Evaluations. Access from: https:assets.publishing.service.gov.ukgovernmentuploadssystemuploadsattachmentdatafilelogicmapping.pdf
https:nzta.govt.nzsafetydriving safelyalcohol
https:www.transport.govt.nzassetsUploadsRIARIS RUC increase .pdf RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Given the limited impact the CAM has on light RUC rates, we also do not consider that the transition of petrol vehicles to RUC warrants a major review. However, we are aware of several areas for further investigation that can be progressed internally , that could broadly support a move towards greater application of cost recovery and fairer RUC rates . Opportunit ies for future changes to the model in the context of the fleetwide transition Prior to consideration of any changes to the workings of the CAM we propose to update the expenditure and travel data used this has not been done since and may result in an increase in weight related costs ( such as pavement maintenance spending ) and a decrease in common costs (such as public transport) . This in turn could result in the CAM recommending lower rates for light vehicles and higher rates for heavy vehicles . Opportunities for changing the CAM include: . updates to averag e weight and load factor assumptions such changes could significantly impact the relativities between different heavy vehicle rates, but would have minimal impact on overall revenue collected or the distribution of costs between light and heavy vehicles . revise the treatment of Crown funding and local share external funding sources are removed from the total revenue needed to be collected from common costs only, but there may be a case to consider a different approach that reflects where these funding sources are directed . considering changes to support the transition of petrol vehicles (including motorcycles) into the RUC system. We will report back to you in May with initial findings based on our update to the CAM, and more analysis on the potential inclusion of the above updates.
https:www.transport.govt.nzassetsUploadsReportTheCongestionQuestionsTechnicalReport.pdf RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of . outline processes for local authorities (with the New Zealand Transport Agency ( NZTA )) to propose and implement schemes, ensures public consultation and impact assessments, and establishes roles for governance, monitoring, and reporting ; and . establish mechanisms for adjusting charges, managing scheme operations, safeguarding fairness, and reinvesting revenues into local transport improvements . The Bill also amends the Land Transport Act to make the non payment of time of use charges a moving vehicle offence. The Bill gives effect to Cabinets policy approval for time of use charging legislation in July (CAB MIN ). It enables local authorities to propose time of use charging schemes that work for their local area. It does not automatically introduce a scheme in any city. Cabinet approved the draft Bill for introduction into the House on December and agreed to propose enactment by the end of . You have indicated that you will seek to give the Bill its first reading in the next few weeks. Attached to this briefing are draft first reading speech notes we prepared for Minister Brown, and we are available to adapt these for your preferences . s (c)(ii) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of If you wish to request the Committee focus on a particular topic, we can prepare a letter for you to send to the Chair of the Committee or we can include a section in our initial briefing to the Committee that outlines your expectation s or topic areas that you want to highlight to the Committee. The Committee may also invite you to a hearing on the Bill .
https:www.un orgdevelopmentdesadisabilitiesconvention ontherights ofperson swith disabilitiesconvention ontherights ofpersons with disabilities .html
note that in September , Cabinet considered the outcomes of the public
note that on December , the Cabinet Economic Development Committee agreed that the Auckland regional fuel tax scheme be varied in the manner set out in Auckland Councils proposal to vary the regional fuel tax scheme DEVMIN refers ;
note that on July the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee noted that
noted that in May , as part of Cabinets approval of the revised New Zealand Upgrade
noted that in September , the Cabinet Expenditure and Regulatory Review Committee
noted that the New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) seeks Orders in Council under the
noted that, on July , the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee:
taki to North of Levin Detailed Business Case, https:www.nzta.govt.nzassetsprojectsonl new highwaytechnical reportsONL Final DBC board endorsed August .pdf, page V . Ibid. Ibid, page i. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
) The following sentence is appended to paragraph .
. Centre Port Limited Wellington Te Whnga nui a Tara . Port Nelson limited . Port Marlborough NZ Limited Te Tau Ihu
. Climate Change, Transport, and Clean Car policy The role of clean car policy in New Zealands broader transition to a low emissions transport system Emissions standards and incentives Tax policy Structure and timing of any restriction on the import of ICE vehicles Scrappage or removal of high emitting vehicles in the current fleet
. Each Party grants to the other Parties the rights specified in this Agreement for the purpose of operating international air services on the routes specified in the Route Schedule (hereinafter referred to as the agreed services). . Subject to the provisions of this Agreement, the airlines designated by each Party shall enjoy the following rights:
. Each Party shall have the right to designate , in writing , one or more airlines to operate the agreed services in accordance with this Agreement and to withdraw or alter such designation. Such designation shall be communicated in writing through diplomatic channels to the Depositary, who shall subsequently inform the Parties. . On receipt of such a designation, and of application from the designated airline, in the form and manner prescribed for operating authorisation and technical permission, each Party shall grant the appropriate operating authorisation and technical permission with minimum procedural delay, provided that:
. Each Party shall on the basis of reciprocity exempt a designated airline of another Party to the fullest extent possible under its national law from customs duties, excise taxes, inspection fees and other national duties and charges on aircraft, fuel, ground equipment, lubricating oils, consumable technical supplies, spare parts including engines, regular aircraft equipment, aircraft stores , and other items , such as printed ticket stock, air waybills, any printed material which bears the insignia of the company printed thereon and usual PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA publicity material distributed free of charge by that designated airline, intended for use or used solely in connection with the operation or servicing of aircraft of the designated airline of such other Party operating the agreed services.
. INTRODUCTION .. The Bus and Coach Association NZ (BCA) is a membership organisation representing the interests of the bus and coach industry. We provide industry leadership, advocacy, networking and services for more than members (and their over , buses and coaches). The BCA represents the majority of New Zealands bus and coach operators and domestic and international bus manufacturers. .. The bus and coach industry is a significant contributor to New Zealands economy. The industry contributes over . billion to gross domestic product per year and employs over , people. In tourist expenditure on passenger transport (not including air travel) in New Zealand was . billion and more than . million international visitors used bus and coach services. .. The BCA welcomes the opportunity to provide a submission on the Government Policy Statement on Transport (the GPS). . POLICY INTENT .. The GPS is reviewed every three years and is design ed to guide and prioritise regionalised and national transport spending (with a year outlook ). GPS strategic pr orities are intended to be realised via the NZ Transport Agency (NZTA) working with local government to create Regional Land Transport Plans (RLTP s) which combine to create the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP). Strategic Intent .. The government intends for this GPS to assist in achieving four strategic priorities: ... Safety zero transport harm or transport deaths (as per Road to Zero S trategy ) ... Better Travel Options giving people more choice about how they travel ... Improving Freight Connectivity better goods movement to assist economic development ... Climate Change moving to inclusive and safe low carbon and low emission transport Activity Class Changes .. There have also been changes to traditional National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) activi y classes : ... Road to Zero combining previous safety related activity classes ... Public Transport divided into services and infrastructure ... Coastal Shipping changes to create a level playing field with other freight modes ... Rail Network created to provid e funding to KiwiRail to maintain renew rail network (dependent on legislative change) . . Regional Improvements Removed . Gove rnment Commitments .. This GPS also sets f our NLTP Government Commitments, across total investment in activities: ... Auckland Transport Alignment Project (ATAP) ... Lets Get Wellington Moving (LGWM) ... Road to Zero ( of improvements to be outside Wellington and Auc kland) ... Implementing the Rail Plan . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
. In I led Te Runanga o Turanganui a Kiwa which at that point in time represented Ngai Tamanuhiri, Rongowhakaata and Te Aitanga a Mahaki; . During that time we opposed: a. The dredging and discharge by dredgings of Port Gisborne; b. The pipeline of the Gisborne District Council; and c. The discharge of the Gisborne District Council through their pipeline on the seabed.
. Introduction The Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) outlines the government strategy to guide land transport investment over the next ten years, including guiding how money from the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) will be invested. The release of the GPS signalled a shift in the prioritisation and allocation of transport funding, with a greater portion of the NLTF allocated for act ivities supporting mode shift. Mode shift involves replacing private vehicle travel with more sustainable modes, such as walking, cycling, and public transport (for more details, see here). There are multiple means of achieving mode shift, such as investing in infrastructure and services, managing demand, and integrated transport and land use planning. Complem entary approaches such as triple access planning (physical and spatial proximity and digital connectivity) can also contribute to mode shift. Mode shift has many benefits and contributes to at least three of the five outcomes of the Transport Outcomes Fram ework (Figure ): ) healthy and safe people, ) environmental sustainability and ) inclusive access. This is achieved by having fewer vehicles on the road, lowering emissions, and providing greater transport choices. Improving the viability of alternativ e modes also enhances access by making it easier for people to get where they need to go without a car. Note that mode shift can also refer to moving freight away from a reliance on vehicles but is not considered in this report.
. Ngati Oneone Te Runanganui o Ngati Porou . Rongowhakaata . Ngai Tamanuhiri RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT . Te Aitanga a Mahaki . Te Runanga o Turanganui a Kiwa
. Notes of any meetings during and between the ministertheir office with car companies or car industry groups on the Clean Car Standard and Clean Car Discount . Any correspondence such as emails or letters during or between the ministertheir office and car companies or car industry groups on the Clean Car Standard and Clean Car Discount
. Representation . Road Transport Forum New Zealand (RTF) is made up of several regional trucking associations for which RTF provides unified national representation. RTF members include Road Transport Association NZ, National Road Carriers, and NZ Trucking Association. The affiliated representation of RTF is some , individual road transport companies which in turn operate , trucks involved in road freight transport, as well as companies that provide services allied to road freight transport
. Summary of main findings In , the New Zealand Ministry of Transport commissioned an evaluation to: Examine the safety outcomes of the current Graduated Driver Licensing System (GDLS) for both Class motor vehicle and Class motorcycle licences. Estimate the safety related e ffects of selected changes to the GDLS between and : o Changes to penalties for driver licensing breaches (). o Changes to the minimum ages for obtaining learner and restricted licences (). o Strengthened practical driving tests (). o Introduc tion of the Competency Based Training and Assessment (CBTA) system for obtaining restricted and full motorcycle licences (). This report presents the main findings from the study. Additional findings are reported in the associated Technical Report . The data used for this analysis included records of all Class and Class licences of all stages (learner, restricted, and full) issued in New Zealand between and (inclusive), and subsequent involvements of these drivers and riders in fatal and s erious at fault crashes between and (inclusive), based on data from the Crash Analysis System (CAS) supplied by the New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA). Analysis of safety outcomes in this report is limited to analysis of crash rates and crash involvements of drivers and riders, as other aspects of road safety such as behaviour are more difficult to measure. Crash rates were calculated on a per driver or per rider basis due lack of data on driving or riding activity by individual licence holders . That is, we use the number of people that hold licences when calculating exposure to crash risk and driving or riding experience. Per driver and per rider crash rates are useful for identifying groups of licence holders with higher or lower crash rates, but any such differences may need further investigation to determine if these are due to differences in driving or riding activity, or other factors related to the characteristics of the licence holders.
. The designated airline of each Party shall have the right to operate non scheduledcharter air services between the Parties. The airline must request prior permission from the aeronautical authorities of the other Party. Such requests shall be submitted at least working days prior to the operation of such air services , or at such shorter notice as may be agreed by the aeronautical authority concerned. . Subject to national laws and regulations of each Party , Each Party may extend favourable consideration to applications by airlines of the other Party to carry traffic not covered by this Annex on the basis of comity and reciprocity.
. The points where the navigational aids (buoysbeacons and lights) are that guide ships into and out of the port; and . The area which is designated for safe habouring for ships from unsafe weather which extends to the harbour master then being able to guide them into the port area if able.
. The role of the Minister: Appoint a Chair of the CCSLG Appoint members to the CCSLG Direct the Group to provide advice on specific questions at his discretion Attend the CCSLG meetings
. These permits are necessary to ensure safe entry in and out of the port, and safe habouring during inclement weather; . Tangata Whenua needs to be involved in the shape of how the permits are implemented to ensure the impacts are understood and where possible mitigated including: a. Impacts on the mauri of the moana; b. Impacts on the physicial seabed; c. Impacts on the kaimoana including taunga ika (fishing grounds) of tangata whenua. . Tangata Whenua must be involved in the design and implementation of the navigation aids and harbouring sites and ongoing monitoring. . The best vehicle for Te Aitanga a Mahaki to achieve this is through the Local Leadership Board (details attached) as an impact on the moana affects multiple whanau, hapu and Iwi. a. Te Aitanga a Mahaki would ensure, over and above any separate agreements that they reach, Ngati Oneone is a part of the design and implementation in the Local Leadership Board through Te Aitanga a Mahaki.
. This Agreement or any actions taken thereto shall not affect the rights and obligations of the Parties under any existing agreements or international conventions to which they are p arties, except as provided for in paragraph . . Nothing in this Agreement shall prejudice the rights or the exercise of these rights by any Party under the provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea signed on December at Montego Bay , in particular with regard to freedom of the high seas, rights of innocent passage, archipelagic sea lanes passage or transit passage of ships and aircraft, and consistent with the Charter of the United Nations. . In the event of any inconsistency between a provision of this Agreement and a provision of any existing bilateral or multilateral air services agreements (including any amendments thereto), by which two or more of the Parties are bound or which is not cove red by this Agreement, the provision which is less restrictive or more liberal in terms of air services market liberali sation or which is not covered by this Agreement, shall prevail among two or more of the Parties if they are concurrently bound by the aforesaid bilateral or multilateral air services agreements and this Agreement. If the inconsistency concerns provisions relating to safety or aviation security, the provisions prescribing a higher or more stringent standard of safety or aviation security shall prevail.
. What are your views whether the OiCs will achieve their intended objectives t o support the repair and recovery of the Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail land transport netwo rks
. n ote that this briefing supersedes the previous version submitted to your office in December to account for decisions made by Cabinet DEVMIN refers and jointly by Ministers (OC T refers );
. Any briefings, documents or reports (including drafts) prepared for the incoming and now Minister of Transport, Chris Bishop and also for the Associate Minister of Transport, James Meager. . Any agenda and other documents prepared for any meetings with Minister Bishop and for any meetings with Minister James Meager.
. Federated Farmers of New Zealand welcomes the opportunity to submit to the Ministry of Transport on the Government Policy Statement on Land Transport draft for engagement (GPS ) .
. Land Transport (Register of Land Transport Records Speed Limits)
. noted that secondary legislation in relation to offences under section of the Civil
. parameters for managing and accessing tagged contingency funds (including
.. Main findings for drivers (Class ) The following f indings are based on analysis of crashes involving drivers of light motor vehicles with Class licences, and crashes involving riders of mopeds where the rider did not have a Class licence at the time of the crash. Overall patterns and trends in crash r ates Perdriver crash rates for learners are not significantly different from those for fully licensed drivers Our analysis found no statistically significant difference (p value .) between the overall crash rate for drivers aged to years old with learner licences between and (. crashes per , licensed drivers per year) versus that for drivers of the same age range with full licences (. crashes per , licensed drivers per year). This study found no evidence that supervision re quirements for learner drivers or the learner theory test are inadequate to prepare learner drivers for the risks that they face while driving, relative to fully licensed drivers. However, the dataset used for this analysis does not measure driving activit y directly (e.g. kilometres driven per driver per year). It is possible that more people with learner licences are less active drivers compared to those with full licences (e.g. because they obtained a licence as a form of identification, rather than to dr ive). Further research would be needed to determine whether crash rates for active learner licensed drivers are similar to those for active fully licensed drivers. Crash rates are high for and yearold drivers with restricted licences Current crash rates for and yearold drivers with restricted licences are around . times higher than for drivers aged to with restricted licences, and two to three times higher than for fully licensed drivers aged to . In our analysis, these differe nces are statistically significant (p values .). This raises questions about whether the changes to the Class GDLS could better protect young drivers with restricted licences from crash risks. For example, other studies have found some evidence that longer minimum learner licence durations and stricter requirements for progressing from a learner to a restricted licence are associated with lower crash rates at the restricted stage (Scully et al, ; Senserrick et al, ; VicRoads, ; Williams, ). Perdriver crash rates for drivers aged under have stopped falling Between around and , per driver crash rates for drivers at all licence stages aged under years old were generally declining, but since per driver crash rates have mostly remained the same or increased slightly in some cases (e.g. drivers aged years old on learner and restricted licences; see section .. of the Technical Report for details). These trends likely reflect a number of factors unrelated to driver li censing such as changes in population demographics and participation in driving, investments in road safety improvements, changes to the vehicle fleet, etc. However, this raises a question of whether further adjustments to licensing could help to offset ot her factors that may have contributed to increasing per driver crash rates for those aged under since .
. David Wood (Treasury Officials in attendance) OC
. Land Transport Management (Regional Transport Committees)
. The Federation has extensive experience advocating the interests of farming and other rural businesses , as well as those of rural communities on matters related to transport infrastructure and how it is funded. We have previously submitted on road funding consultations , such as the Government Policy Statement on Land Transport in and (GPS ) , and continue to do so in local council annual and longterm pl anning processes across the country . We have also contributed to the work of Road Controlling Authorities on producing Guidelines for Equitable Funding of Pavement Maintenance of Low Volume Roads in , and submitted on the Road to Zero Road Safety Strategy in .
. a future model for oversight and monitoring;
. authorised the Minister of Transport to determine matters that arise during the course
. freight transport industry which employs , people (. of the workforce), and has a gross annual turnover in the order of billion. . According to MOT s research (National Freight Demands Study ) road freight transport accounts for of the total tonnes of freight moved in New Zealand, based freight measured on a tonnekilometre basis. . RTF members are predominately involved in the operation of commercial freight transport services both urban and interregional. These services are entirely based on the deployment of trucks both as single units for urban delivery and as multiunit combinations that may have one or more trailers supporting rural or inter regional transport. . Introductory comments . The Government Policy Statement (GPS) is something of a disappointment for the road freight sector. This is despite Transport Minister Phil press statement of March suggesting record investment of billion, on top of . billion New Zealand Upgrade programme. Nothing in the Minister s briefing notes (attached to the press release) gives road users confidence the historical hypothecation of the roadrelated revenues will not be drawn in to the transportation expenditure abyss to support all the coalition Government s preferred objectives such as walking, adding to the cycling infrastructure, rail, coastal shipping and public transport. The revised GPS embodies a specific wellbeing focus. The difficulty is determining who truly benefits from the wellbeing objective when the policy actually undermines strategic modal efficiency and displaces it with some sort of theoretical indulgence. In a nut shell, the GPS offers no economic clarity.
.. Main findings for motorcyclists (Class ) The following findings are based on analysis of crashes involving riders of motorcycles with Class licences and crashes involving riders of mopeds who hel d a Class licence at the time of the crash. Overall patterns and trends in crash rates Crash rates for fully licensed riders are relatively high Between and the crash rate for fully licensed riders aged to years old was . times higher t han the crash rate for learner riders of the same age, and this difference is statistically significant (p value .). Controlling for differences in rider age, gender, region of residence, and amount of time since obtaining a Class licence, riders with full licences are around . times more likely to crash than riders with restricted licences, and this difference is statistically significant (p value .). It may be that riders with full licences are more active motorcyclists, that is, they ride more kilometres per year on average than riders with learner or restricted licences, and therefore have greater exposure to crash risk. However, kilometres ridden per year is not measured in the available data, so this hypothesis has not been tested directly in this analysis. These findings raise a question of whether the Class GDLS adequately prepares riders for the increased exposure to crash risk that they are likely to face after obtaining a full licence. Crash rates for young riders with learner licence s are high and have increased substantially Comparing the combined period from to with the combined period from to , the per rider crash rate for all learner riders aged to years old more than doubled from to per , licen sed riders per year and this difference is statistically significant (p value .). Crash rates between and were around three to six times higher for people aged to years old with Class learner licences compared to the overall crash rate for people aged to years old with learner licences and these differences are statistically significant in our analysis (p values .). This suggests that further consideration of the requirements to obtain a motorcycle learner licence and the ef fect on safety for young riders is needed. Estimated safety impacts of the to changes to the Class GDLS Increasing the minimum age in had a minimal impact on crash rates Prior to the increase in the minimum age, only around of motorcyc le learner licences were issued to yearolds (around per year). Therefore, increasing the minimum learner licence age affected only a small proportion of learner riders. It is estimated that yearold riders would have been involved in around . crashes per year on average if the minimum age remained at years. However, most of this reduction in crashes for yearolds was likely offset by an increase in crashes among yearold riders. Overall, increasing the minimum learner age is estimated to have led to a reduction of less than one crash per year for motorcycle riders.
. Transport i nfrastructure is fundamental to the underlying strength of farm businesses, viability of rural communities and prosperity of regional economies. The physical movement of people and goods is especial y important in rural areas where the population is more thinly dispersed and frequently requires that great er distance s need to be travelled than would be common among more densely populated urban areas .
.. Key areas of influence From investment data analysis and qualitative interviews, GPS was seen to have a range of areas of influence, in particular: GPS funding shifted noticeably towards public transport funding and, to some extent, walking and cycling improvements, aligning with the access and safety objectives of the GPS. GPS was a catalyst for a broader understanding of the impacts of land transport and the land transport investments needed to address transport priorities. Consistent with the previous two GPS, benefit cost ratios (BCRs) for funded projects under GPS were typically above one among approved projects, with BCRs recorded in the data available, although not entirely. GPS was also a driver for a significant review of the investment decision making framework and approach, and a new BCR methodology is now in place that should influence transport investments in the future. Results are now seen in shifts in transport planning and programmes. Again, budget allocations to activity classes were a key change mechanism. However, the influence of GPS on transport investment is not linear and instead occurs through interrelationshi ps of priorities between central and local governments. There is often Of the , investment activities that meet the criteria for inclusion in this analysis (see below), have a BCR value recorded in the available data, reflecting around of approved expenditure asso ciated with these activities. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
. Sustainable investment in the roading network is of particular interest for our members at this time given the concerning state of many local roads and bridges and uncertainty around improveme nts to regional highways . Many local roads have been allowed to deteriorate and local bridges to exceed their designed lifetime with inadequate resourcing from both central and local government . Local roads are lifelines for many rural communities allowing access to support the economic, social, cultural wellbeings of those that live, work and play outside of urban areas. Large scale p ublic transport initiatives in urban areas have also assumed a greater priority in recent years in transpo t funding decision making than proceeding with previously announced improvements to many vital regional highway connections.
. The COVID pandemic and resulting public health measures have had a marked effect on the economy, and will continue to do so for some time as the country grapples with the effects of a global recession. The effects on agriculture have been less so than for other sectors of the economy in recognition of its statu s as an essential service that provides food for New Zealanders, supports continuing regional employment, and earns much needed export income. The effects on other sectors of the economy is expected to have a negative impact on the resourcing of local coun cils and their ability to contribute the local share to roading projects in the years to come. Most l ocal councils have recently adjust ed their annual plans and reduced proposed rates increases in recognition of the changed circumstances of their respectiv e ratepayer base s.
. The Ministry will work with the office of the Minister to identify OIA requests involving the Minister and decide the appropriate mechanism for dealing with them, which may include: transfer; consultation; notification of the decision; . The Ministry and the Minister acknowledge that this is a decision to be made on the facts of each request, and in accordance with the law, and not pursuant to any general policy or directive. Notification of requests . The Ministry will notify the office of the Minister of receipt of any OIA request s involving the Minister including, but not limited to where the requested information: relates to the Ministers functions or activities; could impact on the Ministers functions or activities; was by or on behalf of the Minister; is sensitive or controversial; is likely to be in the news media or debated in the House. . Notification of receipt of OIA requests will be carried out through a weekly list supplied to the Ministers office from the Ministrys Official Correspondence Unit. Transfer . The Ministry will transfer all or part of an OIA request to the Minister when that is required under section of the Act that is when the requested information is: not held by the Ministry but is believed by the person dealing with the request to be held by the Minister; believed by the person dealing with the request to be more closely connected with the functions of the M inister. . The need for transfer will be determined on the facts of the particular request , with regard to the specific information at issue and the functions of the Minister, and in consultation with the office of the Minister. . The Minister will likewise tr ansfer all or part of an OIA request to the Ministry when that is required under section of the Act. Following the definition in s () of the Evidence Act , news media is media for the d issemination to the public or a section of the public of news and observations on news. Following the judgment of the High Court in Slater v Blomfield NZHC , this can include a blogger who regularly disseminates news (ie, new information about recent events or events of interest to the public), or observations on news, to a significant body of the public. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
. The government has previously announced significant investments in the roading network through large scale projects under the New Zealand Upgrade Programme . Stimulus initiatives are expected to soon announce further funding for shovel ready roading projects . Indications from some local council s of bids for stimulus funding of roading projects is that there is a n urban focus on projects of limited benefit to rural businesses and communities. The delivery of public benefits and regional RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT employment are emerging as some of the considerations important to the government from its stimulus initiatives. Improved maintenance of local roads and bridges and improvement of regional highways arguably del iver strongly on both those considerations. . Local government has for many years now struggled to sustainably fund the local share of local roading projects. The ministrys write up of the regional workshops held with councils and other regional stakeholde rs helpfully describes these struggles in terms of both the limitations of ratepayer funding and capability issues in councils meeting ministry requirements for project business cases. COVID has had a significant impact on local government revenue and will continue to do so in the years to come. Central government funding of local roading projects and reform of the requirements of councils in accessing that funding must be undertaken in light of these heightened circumstances. . The funding limitat ions on both local government and thei restriction to property value as a method of taxation creates substantial distortion and does not reach all road users. Invariably, in the case of predominantly rural councils his burden falls on farmers and other land users with little maintenance or improvement seen to the roads they rely upon. . As such, t he GPS has an important role to play in supporting wider government initiatives in a way that better addresses the needs of rural people . This can only happen with greater priority being given to funding for the maintenance of local roads and bridges and improvement of regional h ghways. . SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS . Federated Farmers of New Zealand recommends that: .. Road maintenance and improvement is recognised as a specific action for improving the safe use of roads under the Safety strategic priority . .. Introducing a specific focus on the uptake of public transport and other alternative modes of transport unde the Better Travel Options strategic priority is a welcome improvement to GPS . .. The economic importance of supporting regional primary production under the Improving Freight Connections strategic priority is given more weight in the funding levels indicated under relevant activity classes. .. The focus on reducing transport emissions through improved use of public transport and other alternative modes of transport , where relevant , under the Climate Change strategic priority is supported . .. GPS is reviewed and reframed to have regard for its relevance alongside other investment approaches by central government in road transport projects. .. The principles for investing under GPS are reviewed and reframed to provide greater priority to and funding for the maintenance of local roads and bridges to a safe standard and improvement of regional highways. .. The quantum of and rate of increase in funding for Local Road Maintenance is reconsidered and increased. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT .. The quantum of and rate of increase in funding for Local Road Improvements is reconsidered and increased. .. That Crown funding for land transport be reviewed and reframed to have regard for the changed circumstances of local authorities to fund the local share and greater reliance on funding from central government for road transport projects. . ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES . The Federation has no feedback to provide on the role of GPS or descriptions of the responsibilities of the various agencies involved . . STRATEGIC PRIORITIES Safety . The safe use by all of rural roads and bridges is essential for the economic resilience and sustainability of rural communities and regional economies. Rural roads do not solely service rural people. In many parts of the country, much of the traffic along rural roads are access routes also support ing travel to popular destinations from people outside the area. In essence, rural roads a re for all rural users. . The inclusion of Safety as a strategic priority in GPS i a timeless and ongoing objective . From our reading of the section describing Safety , this appear s to be entirely guided by the Road To Zero Road Safety Strategy that was released in . . In its submission on the Road Safety Strategy , the Federation raised several concerns around its fitness forpurpose for rural situations. Proposed actions under the strategy and those outlined in this section disregard the economic vitality of rural communities by ignoring the years of underfunding in rural road maintenance in many districts. . The description of infrastructure safety treatments and desire to tackle unsafe speeds suggest an intention to only engineer and improve roads with highest risk and econom ic importance leaving many roads to degrade by simply reducing the speed limit rather than maintaining or improving these roads to a safe standard. . There is a clear f ailure of GPS to account for ageing parts of the roading network as a safety issue , nor does it appear t hat the maintenance and upgrade of rural roads and bridges to a safe standard relate s to any of the described actions in this section . . This section needs to take a broader approach to road safety tha t has regard for investments that improve safety beyond those described i n the Road To Zero Road Safety Strategy . Doing so is entirely consistent with the interlinkages between strategic priorities. Recommendation: that road maintenance and imp rovement is recognised as a specific action for improving the safe use of roads. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Better Travel Options . This section partially replaces what was the strategic priority Access in GPS with a focus on public transport and realising the social and environmental benefits of public transport and other alternative modes of transport . . The reality for rural road users is that these considerations are largely urban ones given the impracticality and unsustainability of public transport and other alternative modes of transport in rural areas. Rural road users do not, however, restrain themselves to only travelling along rural roads . . More specific focus on r educ ing congest ion in urban centres by moving more people to use public transport and other alternative modes of transport is welcome. Recommendation : that introducing a specific focus on the uptake of public transport and other alternative modes of transport is a welcome improvement to GPS . Improving Freight Connections . This section partially replaces what was the strategic priority Access in GPS with a focus on economic benefits that come with the movement of goods around the country. . It is helpful that t he importance of regional primary production to the national economy is specifically mentioned as a consideration of Improving Freight Connections as a strategic priority. . Prior to the economic impact of COVID , over , New Zealanders (or one in seven people) were directly employed on farms and in downstream processing and support businesses. Rural businesses tend to be thinly dispersed across wide geographic areas often necessitating the movement of their workforce and support services along great er distances than the average urban commute . . For the year ended June , these sectors contribut ed over . billion in export revenue () and collectively account ed for of New Zealands GDP. This is likely to increase with travel restrictions in place for regional travel and continuing for some time for international travel affecting economic contributions from tourism , events and other sector s. . While it is welcome that this section recognises the importance of regional primary production, it does not appear that Improving Freight Connections is given adequate weight as a strategic priority in the funding levels indicated under relevant activity classes . Recommendation: that the economic importance of supporting regional primary production under the Improving Freight Connections strategic priority is given more weight in the funding levels indicated under relevant activity classes. Climate Change . Federated Farmers supports the reduc tion of greenhouse gas emissions , with a particular emphasis on the reduction of carbon dioxide emissions as a priority of central government mitigation efforts. New Zealands Greenhouse Gas Inventory RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT report released in April shows that greenhouse gas emissions from the transport se ctor have increased . between . . The focus in this section on improving uptake of public transport and other alternative modes of transport is welcome. The climate change benefits and public health co benefits are more clearly evident in actions that address the effects of inefficient urban transport than other approaches the government has previously considered. Recommendation : That the focus on redu cing transport emissions through improved use of public transport and other alternative modes of transport under the Climate Change strategic priority is supported . . FUNDING LAND TRANSPORT . This section describes several actions and expectations of central government to support investment in road transport projects that will deliver on strategic priorities and measures for success under GPS . . This section specifically mentions the ministry is considering new and innovative funding approaches to road transport projects given experiences with announced funding for Auckland and Wellington is welcome Likewise, the development of a toolkit to support new funding options for the funding and financing of road transport projects is important in a time of significantly reduced local government revenue and heightened financial challenges faced by ratepayers. Most local authorities have adjusted annual plans currently out for consultation to reduce proposed rates increases and implemen t other measures to support ratepayers . This necessarily affect s the ability of local authorities to contribute the local share on the same basis as was expected prior to the COVID pandemic. . Reliance on investment from central government for road transport projects will be the reality for years to come. As such, it would be wholly appropriate for the funding levels indicat ed in activity classes to be reviewed considering the changed economic circumstances around the country . Ministers have repeatedly mentioned in recent public statements and comments a willingness to invest in known large scale projects . The Infrastructure Reference Group is known to be considering approximately , bids for funding from central government for infrastructure projects, of which a subset is expected to be road transport projects . While understandable, given the econ omic circumstances of the COVID pandemic , that ministers would prefer the direct funding approach , it is difficult to see how this will support delivery on GPS strategic priorities and outcomes .. . The expected investment of billion in funding from central government under GPS pales somewhat against the quant a announced by ministers as part of economic stimulus measures . As such, this section needs to be reviewed and reframed to better describe its place as a funding mechanism fo r road transport projects in what is becoming an increasingly cluttered investment environment. Recommendation : That GPS is reviewed and reframed to have regard for its relevance alongside other investment approaches by central government in road transport projects. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Principles for investing . Alignment , Effectiveness and Efficiency seem reasonable considerations as principles for investments under GPS . That said, additional considerations like public benefit and being shovel ready have emerged in response to the COVID pandemic. . This submission has earlier mentioned the dire need for central government investment to address the legacy of underi nvestment in rural roads and bridges and postponement of previously announced commitments to improve regional highways. . These types of projects arguably meet these emerging considerations and are clearly a factor in wider government expectations of central government investment n infrastructure projects. There are clear public benefits from bringing local roads and bridges to a safe standard and improvements to regional highways. Those local roads and bridges in need of attention are undoubtedly well known to local authorities and would require little more than funding approval for work to proceed in a shovel ready manner . Likewise, many improvements to regional highways had previously been assessed and taken to a point where funding had been approved for work to proceed. . It therefore makes sense for the principles for nvesting under GPS be reviewed and reframed to provide greater priority to and funding for he maintenance of local roads and bridges to a safe standard and improvement of regional highways. Recommendation : That the principles for investing under GPS are reviewed and reframed to provide greater priority to and funding for the maintenance of local roads and bridges to a safe standard and improvement of regional highways. Activity class framework . Local Road Maintenance and Local Road Improvements are activity classes of particular interest to our farmer members for being those activities most closely relevant to addressing the underinvestment in local roads and bridges. . We have looked at the indicated funding for these two activity classes proposed under GPS and compared those funding levels to those earlier indicated in GPS in the graph below . This was done to better assess the extent to which GPS adequately recognised the need for investment in local roading infrastructure over the same general time period. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Crown funding for land transport . This section is larg ely empty in anticipation of an allocation being confirmed under Budget . . This section would benefit from commentary describing how GPS will have regard for significantly reduced local government revenue and heightened financial challenges f aced by ratepayers as a consequence of the COVID pandemic. This situation necessarily affects the ability of local authorities to fund the local share of roading projects on the same basis as would have been expected prior to the COVID pandemic. . As such, it is important that these changed circumstances and greater reliance on funding from central government for road transport projects are reflected in th s section of GPS . Recommendation : That Crown funding for land transport be reviewed and reframed to have regard for the changed circumstances of local authorities to fund the local share and greater reliance on funding from central government for road transport projects. Statement of Ministerial Intentions . The Federation has no particular feedback to provide on the Ministers expectations of behaviours required from Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency to support the implementation of GPS . ENDS RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Crombie Lockwood Tower Level , Queen Street PO Box Victoria Street West Auckland New Zealand Phone: Email: infoinfrastructure.org.nz May Ministry of Transport Attn: GPS team Per email: gpstransport.govt.nz Infrastructure New Zealand is the peak industry body for the infrastructure sector and promotes best practice in national infrastructure development through research, advocacy and public and private sector collaboration. Infrastructure New Zealand members come from diverse sectors across New Zealand and include infrastructure service providers, investors , and o wners . This submission represents the views of Infrastructure New Zealand as a collective whole and may not necessarily represent the views of individual member organisations Infrastructure New Zealand submission on the Draft Government Policy Stat ement on Land Transport ( ) Infrastructure New Zealand has reservations about the Draft Government Policy Statement on Land Transport ( ) particularly around the impact of the COVID lockdown and recession on the transport s ystem. The impacts of COVID are still highly uncertain, particularly for transport, and interim measures to extend the prior GPS or introduce an interim short term GPS may be appropriate. This would provide the funding certainty that the transport syste m needs, while staying relevant to the unknown future for transport . The COVID lockdown and recession does provide a unique opportunity to rethink New Zealands transport and larger land use allocation system. A regional spatial planning approach, in co ncert with ongoing resource management reform, would provide an effective, outcomes based, and equitable transport system . The elephant in the room: COVID The COVID lockdown and recession hit transportation and mobility more than almost any other part of life in New Zealand. The Alert Level lockdown was, fundamentally, a halt to personal mobility in this country. Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT The long term impacts of the lockdown an d recession are of unknown size, scale, duration, and type. Are our empty roads a sign of excess capacity Will we need increased freight capacity as retail moves online Will public transport be hurt by long term social distancing or an increase in workin gfrom home We note that the GPS process and the long term planning process for regional and local councils provides necessary clarity on the next three years of transport investment. Certainty is urgently needed, but the Draft GPS may not be able to totally provide this , given the significant downside risk to National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) revenues due to falling petrol tax and road user charges, lower public transport revenue, and reduced vehicle registrations The Draft GPS fails to address the se risks and in doing so may provide decision makers in local councils and Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency (NZTA) with less confidence in the usefulness of the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) and GPS, not more. While stimulus spending from central government is widely anticipated for transport projects around the country, it is unclear how this should or will integrate with the Draft GPS being consulted on. The GPS on Land Transport would be more relevant and useful if it addressed the NLTF revenue and investment risks resulting from the crisi s. We recommend that the Government consider alternative arrangements to the GPS process such as introducing an interim COVID Response GPS for one or two years or making emergency legislative amendm ents to extend the previous GPS (and concomitant local authority long term planning processes) by one or two years. An interim or extended GPS would need to address the NLTF revenue uncertainty head on and be suitably flexible and adaptable to however the future may unfold. Lets not waste a crisis While the COVID crisis has wreaked havoc on transport revenue and its matching investment, it provides a once inageneration opportunity to rethink and reform the way we plan transport in this country. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT The e conomic impacts of the COVID lockdown are closely linked to the lack of mobility. Even at Alert Level lockdown, with construction, and other safe working returning, the inability for New Zealanders to move has a impact on our GDP. Social and cul tural outcomes may be similarly severe. Transport is the lifeblood of our economy and society. It should therefore be integrated and planned in concert with the rest of our economy and society The Government should use this opportunity to trial a regiona l partnership scheme which would empower regions to plan transport and other land uses collaboratively and at pace to meet Government targets. These partnerships could work in alliances that mirror the fast acting and effective strategies that built back b etter in the wake of the Christchurch and Kaikura earthquakes. These partnerships could last for a two year period. However similar to how accelerated consenting being advanced by the Government will be followed by substantive resource management reform, these partnerships should be followed up with comprehensive reform. If the Government wants to use this crisis to guide transport investment and planning, it can take this chance to fully rethink the process. Building Regions: Regional spatial planning partnerships There are several key issues in the current transport planning system : .Transport planning is disconnected between modes and between other land uses .The system favours arbitrary outputs over substantive outcomes .Cost and benefits are u nequally borne The result of these issues is hat our transport system is highly politicised, unnecessarily expensive, excessively congested, and with insufficient and poorly used capacity across all modes. Addressing these issues will require a reorientat ion of the planning system around integrated spatial planning, clear outcomes, and sustainable funding. New Zealand Treasury ( April ) Treasury Report T: Economic scenarios. Avail able at: https:treasury.govt.nzpublicationstrtreasury report t economic scenarios april htmlsection Sir Peter Gluckman and Dr Anne Bardsley (April ) The Future is Now: Implications of COVID for New Zealand (Koi T: The Centre for Informed Futures). Available at: https: informedfutures.orgsocial cohesion ina post covid world RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT The details of this proposal are outlined in our recent report Building Regions: A vision for local government, planning law and funding reform. Integ rated spatial planning Although transport is intimately tied to other land uses, it remain s largely planned independently. This creates problems when cities choose to increase development in places with insufficient transport capacity , or when transport links are built in places where development restrictions which impede transport utilisation . These problems are not unique to transport. Water, tel ecommunications electricity and social infrastructure is similarly challenged . Disconnected planning is inefficient, costly, and unnecessarily slows progress. It aggravates land price inflation and exacerbates congestion, school shortages, and hospital upkeep Poorly integrated plann ing and infrastructure not only impedes aligned development, it impacts the relationship between the users, beneficiaries and funders of transport. The COVID recovery provides the opportunity to more comprehensively integrate transport with land uses and infrastructure from across the central government, local government, and private spheres. This includes horizontal infrastructure (water, energy, telecommunic ations), social infrastructure (schools, hospitals, parks, libraries, prisons), all transport modes in the public and private sector (including ports and airports) and development It would also include key stakeholders : most notably iwi as well as NGOs or other interest groups. Under our preferred system, t ransport would ultimately become part of an integrated spatial planning effort with other major land uses. It would be performed at a regional level, reflecting the economic and social geography of where most New Zealanders live, work, and play. Spatial planning wou d be undertaken collaboratively with central and local authorities (including regional and territorial authorities) wo rking closely with major infrastructure providers . Regional spatial plans would be guided by a coherent national vision . Spatial plann ng would be guided by national priorities and guidelines. Central government, through its whole ofsystem lens, would se t broad priorities that regions must follow. Regions would be allowed to achieve these priorities in whatever safe and legal way they see fit. Local authorities would feed into regional planning and implement measures that fit the local scale. Available on our website at: https:www.infrastructure.org.nzresourcesDocumentsReportsReport Avisionforlocalgovernment,planninglawandfundingreform.pdf RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Spatial plan ning transport and major network infrastructure at a regional level would allow for economies of scale and efficient planning and coordination with other modes. It would ensure the efforts of a city are connected with the efforts of their neighbouring dist ricts. Clear outcomes The current transport system is focused on overly prescriptive outputs to the detriment of broader outcomes. For example, t he GPS and NZTA regularly set performance targets around travel times, amount of mode shift, audience reach of safety campaigns, etc. While these targets are part of broader overall goals, the net effect is that transport planning is done to achieve some very fine grain targets. An observable tendency has been t o focus on a target achieving subsystem rather than to create a well functioning system. The planning regime should instead work towards clear, overarching outcomes. These outcomes would allow investment to occur in major revolutionary steps where necessary and allow regions and local authorities to find their own optimal way to progress A national plan would, for example, assist regions to deliver affordable housing, safe and efficient transport links, and resilience to natural disasters. In the Wellington Regi on, safe and efficient transport links could be implemented through a n increase in public transport services, whereas the West Coast may instead expand road ing. National direction would guide regional and local policies and investments. F or example, Govern ment objectives to reduce carbon emissions could be provided via funding allocations to regions to create a national electric vehicle charging network Spatial planning around clear outcomes would streamline the guidance and legal burden that governments face when trying to plan land uses based on the long, complicated, and sometimes conflicting Local Government Act, Land Transport Management Act, Resource Management Act, and any National Policy Statements or National Environmental Standards they may be su pported by. To meet these overarching targets, and to find the resources to undertake spatial planning, regions would have to be supported by meaningful funding. Sustainable funding One of the major failings of the current transport system is the poor fina ncial incentives for those who use and manage transport infrastructure. Transport users do not pay their fair share for the impact they have on the transport sector. On a congested motorway, each added driver has a disproportionate impact on congestion, bu t the only material cost they face is the impact on their own time . Wealthier drivers who can afford more efficient RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT vehicles pay less petrol tax despite causing the same costs on the system. Drivers, through the NLTP, are funding other non road modes including rail and coastal shipping. Local authorities, who own and maintain local roads, receive none of the revenue benefits from the increased productivity and wealth that their transport improvements pay for, with most of the added GST, income, or corp orate tax flowing to central government. Land value improvement is captured by landowners . Nor do local authorities feel the downside costs if their inaction slows the economy , worsens inequity, or endangers lives. A regional spatial planning regime would be a partnership. Central government s guidance, through the national vision , would outline the major outcomes that are expected of each region. Regions would then be given grants from the consolidated fund to develop and implement a regional plan. Regions t hat perform well would be eligible to receive a take of the economic taxes (GST, income, corporate tax) that are collected in their region. The fully hypothecated NLTF, which currently is larg ly fund ed by road users , would be replaced by a pricing based system designed to maximise the throughput of road corridors by optimising the relationship between speed and flow. We would like to see much greater acceleration through the GPS to advance road pricing as a mechanism to improve mobility and access by better connecting the costs and benefits of transport decisions. Such a r oad pricing will successfully link beneficia ies of road investment with funders , but additional measures wil l be required to tie other transport beneficiaries to resourcing for public and active transport . Landowners are one principal beneficiary and the GPS should provide clearer guidance on how landowners who benefit from transport investment or planning changes resulting from transport investment will contribute to transport funding. The Government is the other principal beneficiary from transport investment, via its increase in taxation revenue through new economic activity and productivity . We would like to see current Government commitments in response to COVID flow through into longer term commitment s of funding to invest in productive, sustainable and inclusive transport solutions , reflecting the benefit the Government receives The Government may choose to contribute to the transport system, now and into the future, directly through allocations from th e cons olidated account , or by attracting private capital . The GPS should be signalling opportunities for private investment, potent ially linked to toll revenue, land value improvement or simply a long term Government revenue stream . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Summary COVID has greatly increased uncertainty of long term transport planning . The future of transport revenue and demand is unclear . The Draft GPS fails to account for this uncertainty and risks competing with, rather than enabling, a speedy and effective recovery. To provide the necessary certainty of funding and planning for long term planning processes, we propose that the Government eit her extend the previous GPS planning regime for a one o two year interim basis, or institute a temporary GPS that is flexible to suit the unknown future scenarios we may face. The Government can use this opportunity to radically rethink transport planning and investment and reorient the system around an integrated spatial planning regime that is focused on clear outcomes based on sustainable funding. This system would see transport as the enabler of productivity, land use and lower carbon emissions and wou ld depoliticise decisions via collaboration, evidence and shared objectives. We thank the Ministry for the opportunity to comment. Yours sincerely, Paul Blair CEO, Infrastructure New Zealand RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT The Governments National Planning Standards define primary production as: Primary Production Means: a) any aquaculture, agricultural, pastoral, horticultural, mining, quarrying or forestry activities; and b) includes initial processing, as an ancillary activity, of commodities that result from the listed activities in a); c) includes any land and buildings used for the production of the commodities from a) and used for the initial processing of thecommodities in b); but d) excludes further processing of those commodities into a different product. MfE made the decision to include mining and quarrying in the above definition due to the fact that most mineral extraction occurs in rural areas and that the RMA definition of productive land is used for a limited purpose and does not define all primary production activities ( Ministry for the Environment . I Definitions Standard Recommendations on Submissions Report for the first set of National Planning Standards ). In order to retain consistent definitions across planning and policy documents, and avoid confusion and potential conflict, the National Planning Standards definition of primary production should be used in the proposed Government Policy Statement on Land Transport. Strategic Priority: Safety We generally agree that land transport safety needs to be a strategic priority. Higher investment in road design and construction is required to increase infrastructure life, and lower repair requirements. Though the number of accidents related to poor road surface conditions (potholes, bleed areas, uneven surfaces, wheel rutting etc) is not specifically highlighted, these road surface conditions do contribute to accidents. The current NZTA model of constructing cheap roads (low capital cost) and relying on ongoing repair and maintenance means roads are continually under repair or damaged through failure of the pavement. This adds to safety issues due to rutting, potholes, road edge failure (subsidence, erosion) etc. Continual road maintenance has seen a number of tragic incidents involving road workers who are being placed onto the highway network more often to repair and maintain poorly constructed roads. Of particular concern is the state of rural roads. We believe there needs to be an across the board, increase to the Financial Assistance Rate (FAR) thereby increasing the Governments funding proportion of both the maintenance of, and capital expenditure on, local roads. Significant investment has been made to state highways RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT and major arterial routes, but many local roads are in a poor state, unsafe and vulnerable to adverse events. Where a road is a key part of the freight network, ensuring good road infrastructure and maintaining appropriate higher speeds is important. Such infrastructure must include suitable corridor widths and turning bays which allow safe travel for long vehicles. We need to build intersections and entryexits to sites to cater for slower commercial vehicles to enterexit the road network safely and blend in with local traffic. We support encouragement of fleet modernisation through either penalties or positive enforcement. We support lower ACC costs for vehicle operato s with GPS, fatigue management or similar technologies installed. We would also support lower Road User Charges (RUC) for more modern vehicles (ANCAP andor UCSR rated), and conversely higher RUC for older vehicles. We believe mandatory safety features on all vehicles including a mandatory ANCAP or UCSR rating, are critical to improving the safety performance of all road vehicles. There may need to be a transition for older vehicles, but it is important that improving the safety of vehicles is not delayed further. Strategic Priority: Improving Freight Conn ections We agree that improving transport c onnections, alternative routes and investments in multiple travel modes, will boost the ability of the transport system and communities to recover from disruptive events supporting continuity in economic activity and regional development. This will be particularly important as the economy recovers from the COVID pandemic. Jobrich projects like core infrastructure, housing, and environmental restoration are crucial to the Governments plan to stimulate the economy. As stated in the recent NPSUrban Development discussion document transport systems are poorly integrated with land use, and lack highquality options to improve access to jobs, and reduce car dependency. We support review of options for moving aggregate around the country on rail or coastal shipping, particularly where distances from quarry to market increase. Previous attempts by our sector to access such options have been both prohibitively expensive andor difficult logistically to organise within demand timeframes. That said we would be happy to work with Government and transport delivery providers to pursue options for such methods of transporting aggregates around the country. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Strategic Priority: Climate Change Climate change and rising sea levels are going to put added pressure on rock supply for sea walls, riverbank protection and restoration. Demand is almost totally domestic and currently the only alternative to local extraction and supply of aggregates is to import aggregates to meet demand. It is likely that such imports would come from countries who are not operating in sustainable ways nor aiming to achieve carbon neutral targets similar to the ambitions of New Zealand. Importing of aggregates would also put added pressure on our ports, infrastructure and increase carbon emissions through delivering aggregates greater distances. Technically and economically viable opportunities to reduce energyrelated emissions and adopt clean energy technologies exist now. However, the aggregates sector currently face a number of barriers that hinder the uptake of clean energy technologies and other costeffective measures to reduce emissions such as: Road networks are not designed to take the additional weight of electric heavyvehicles. Even if state highways are upgraded, the road networks connectingquarries with their markets include a large number of rural roads. Unnecessary regulatory and cost barriers inhibit our ability to unlock leastcostabatement opportunities and encourage rapid uptake of lowemissions technologies. An example here is Resource Management processes that are complex, litigious and costly and are frequently disproportionate to thedecision being sought, or the risk or impact of the proposal. There is little incentive for recycling and reuse due to the cost of processingthese products relative to natural products and the reluctance of customers to specify andor allow the use of recycled products. These customers include central and local government who are both significant users of aggregates andsand. Principles for investing Making the most of our existing land transport network We agree that existing networks and serv ices could be used more efficiently, however if we continue to embrace technology including heavier electric vehicles and modern heavy vehicle configurations, we need to continually upgrade the road network to compliment this technology. More efficient use of networks in relation to supply of aggregates and sand could mean more flexible operating hours in areas to reduce traffic congestion at peak times and spread the load on roads. An example here is the restocking of resale RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT yards, concrete and asphalt plants in urban areas at night so that trucks are off major arterial roads during the morning peak times. While this may involve hour operations for loading, this can be done while mitigating the operations impacts on the environment and ensuring community wellbeing is maintained. Wayne Scott Chief Executive Officer M P wayneaqa.org.nz Ground Floor, The Terrace, P O Box , Wellington , New Zealand RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Transportation Group NZ SUBMISSION DRAFT GOVERNMENT POLICY STATEMENT ON LAND TRANSPORT May INTRODUCTION This submission is made on behalf of Engineering New Zealand Transportation Group NZ (TG). The National Committee members have compiled this submission with engagement from TG members . TRANSPORTATION GROUP NZ Transportation Group NZ is a Technical Interest Group of Engineering New Zealand, with approximately , members . Membership is made up largely of transportation engineering and planning professionals working in central government, local government, academia and the private sector. OUR SUBMISSION We agree wi th the stated strategic priorities for investment in land transport. The Transportation Gro up supports GPS funding of maintenance and renewal of the rail freight network, including rail connectivity across Cook Strait. The highest level of agreem ent amongst Transportation Group members for an increase in funding are for the Activity Classes Public transport services and Public transport infrastructure , both with more than two thirds support from Members. There was no Activity Class where a majority of Members supported a decrease in funding. The Transportation Group supports an increase fuel excise duty by one cent per litre to provide more funding for healthy and sustainable mobility. Regardless of how road safety activities are funded, the Transportation Group urges that all investment in road safety should all be based on strong and consistent evidence about the potential fo harm reduction. We support raising reve nue from fuel excise duty and equivalent road user charges so that those driving motor vehicles pay more of the true cost of travel, and so that the increases in funding allocations we identified (for public transport, walking and cycling) can be funded. We believe that invest ment direction for road safety is strong in a rural road context. Regarding investment in urban road safety, evidence concerning reduction in fatal and serious crashes should be considered alongside supporting mode shift towards walking, cycling, Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Transportation Group NZ and public transport; and (therefore) supporting health and climate change objectives. The funding allocation process and rules need to be improved in urban settings to account for differences in exposure and therefore risk for people walking, cycling, and using other modes. This includes an urgent need to consider public health as part of urban harm reduction measures. The area of highest group support for decreased funding was investment in new roads, with approximately one third of memberssupporting a decrease in investment, and half supporting maintaining the current investment level. We support raising revenue from fuel excise duty and equivalent road user charges so that those driving motor vehicles pay more of the true cost of vehicle travel, and so that the increases in funding allocations we identified (for public transport, walking and cycling) can be funded. Thank you for the opportunity to submit on the GPS. For more information on this submission please contact: Bridget Burdett CPEng, PhD, MET, BE Civil Deputy Chair of the Engineering New Zealand Transportation Group Phone: Email: s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Submission from the New Zealand Port Company CEO Group on the Draft Government policy Statement on Land Transport (GPS) and Draft New Zealand Rail Plan The New Zeala nd Port Company CEO Group (the Group) comprises the CEOs from Northport, Ports of Auckland, Port of Tauranga, Eastland Port, Napier Port, Port Taranaki, Centreport, Port Marlborough, Port Nelson, Lyttelton Port Company, Prime Port Timaru, Port Otago, and Southport. This submission is made on their behalf. The Group is ge nerally supportive of the draft GPS. In particular the Group welcomes the fact that improving Freight Connections is seen as one of the four strategic priorities in the strategy. The Group has been concerned that in recent years the importance of freight seemed to have been overlooked by transport planners. This was evidenced by the serious reduction in freight planning and modelling capability at the New Zealand Transport Agency and by the delays in implementing an essential project in the freight network the third (and hopefully fourth) rail line into Auckland. If adopted, this strategy will put freight considerations back to where they should be sitting as a strategic priority. Clearly in te rms of priority we encourage a focus on those projects that deliver the highest benefitcost ratios. We are concerned that some public transport proposals around the country appear to be driven without any regard to such ratios. Kiwirail is a vital part o f the freight network that helps ease congestion on the roading network and which delivers important climate change policy benefits for New Zealand. We welcome the integration that is foreshadowed between road and rail planning by giving responsibility to NZTA to advise the Minister on how Kiwirails proposed Rail Network improvement Plan fit with the broader land transport investment programme. Requiring Kiwirail to develop and deliver a year investment programme for the rail n etwork and a year forecast is long overdue. The year by year planning for Kiwirail in recent years has led to some of the problems obvious in the network. We welcome the focus on freight in the Rail Plan also. We suggest before this plan is finalized that the Ministry ensure coherence between this Plan and the GPS, maybe using the same framework and structure as the GPS. We are also please d to see the addition of Coastal Shipping to this GPS. Coastal shipping already performs a critical role in the freight system and has the potential to become even more important. The Group has long advocated mode neutrality and policies that allow the coastal shipping sector to operate on a level playing field with other freight operators including international s hipping operators. These international shipping operators play a crucial role also for domestic freight. The Group would oppose any poli cies that might be introduced to change the current cabotage policy. The importance of the role played by the interna tional operators was highlighted in the response to the Kaikoura earthquake and more recently the response to the Level shutdown in response to covid . We note that funding allocated to coastal shipping in the GPS is limited to that necessary for rese arch. The policy options seem pretty obvious if mode neutrality and a level playing field are the desired outcomes equality of treatment on taxation, enforcement of labour, health and Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT safety laws and equality of treatment in any subsidy policy that might be applied to other transport modes eg rail. Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this draft. The Group looks forward to the strategy being finalized and to working with Ministers and officials to see the strategy implemented. We note that this document was drafted before the Covid crisis and economic downturn hit. We would support a redraft to take account of this new challenge and to front load some of the planned investments deliver more quickly essential freight transport outcomes at the same times as providing a stimulus to employment and economic activity. We note that a numb er of individual ports will be making their own submissions on this GPS RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT May Ministry of Transport PO Box Wellington VIA EMAIL : gpstransport. govt.nz NAPIER PORT SUBMISSION ON THE DRAFT GOVERNMENT POLICY STATEMENT LAND TRANSPORT TO As a key stakeholder, Port of Napier Limited ( Napier Port ) is in re ceipt of the draft Government Policy Statement Land Transport to , (draft GPS ) We appreciate the opportunity to provide a written submission on the draft GPS , which is attached for your consideration. Yours sincerely Michel de Vos General Manager Infrastructure Services W napierport.co.nz Document s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Tabl e P otential funding gap KiwiRail have identified million of s avings that are available from existing rail projects to meet part of the million funding gap. This includes: . Not proceeding with the purchase of coal hopper wagons (saving million).
. Airlines performance, domestic routes, March March Air New Zealand recorded . percent for ontime departures, and Jetstar . percent. For ontime arrivals, Air New Zealand recorded . percent and Jetstar recorded . percent. Air New Zealands cancellation rate was . percent and Jetstars was . percent.
Auckland Council proposes to increase (and in some instances, decrease) the scope of the existing transport capital projects and change the funding accordingly. The increase in some project timeframes is a response to these changes in scope. Public transport and road safety capital projects are proposed to receive the largest funding increases.
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
IPWEA Australian Infrastructure Financial Management Guidelines (AIFMG) Lifecycle gap is calculated each year by subtracting annual depreciation (lifecycle cost) from renewal (asset lifecycle expenditure) for the asset types. The three years for have been added to determine any total potential gap over the funding period. If there is a shortfall between life cycle cost and life cycle expenditure it can give an indication of the life cycle gap possible funding shortfalls to be addressed. financial profile. The ASR for Bridges, Culverts, Tunnel includes only asset component renewal spend (i.e., not the cost to renewreplace a bridge or tunnel) as such the ASR is lower and not reflective of the total investment in this asset type.
Indicative strategic priorities for GPS
On September , the Cabinet Expenditure and Regulatory Review
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Sep Dec Jan Mar Apr Jun Jul Sep Draft GPS submitted to the Minister for consideration (December ) Cabinet approves release of draft GPS for consultation (February ) and engagement roadshow occurs
There are no relevant statutory prerequisites for the Regulations to be made. The civil
This data provides the most up to demographic and offending information and may be a valuable source of information for further study and has therefore been incl uded in this study.
To control for such factors in the analysis in this report, we would need to know how these affected both licence holders who were involved in crashes and those who were not. While there is data on many of these factors for people who were involved in crashes, the corresponding data for people who were not involved in crashes is not available.
Transport Orders in Council to facilitate the repair and rebuild Engagement
Upcoming Cabinet papers Nil this week .
We expect to return the residual Northern Pathway funding back to the tagged capital contingency to address the cost pressures across NZUP. These pressures are currently estimated at . billion across the entire programme, meaning we must either phase some NZUP projects, reduce scope and outcomes, or provide additional funding BRI refers. While some funding might be approved through the Centralised Cost Escalation Claims process, this w ill unlikely be sufficient to address these cost pressures completely. We are seeking Cabinet to approve drawdown and funding of million for the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme. We also seek authorisation as Joint Ministers to draw down on the million once the funding structure of this project has been determined. Background In September , Cabinet agreed to cancel the Northern Pathway project and reallocate the project funding towards an alternative mix of investments CAB MIN. refers. This project was part of NZUP. We support the provision of a further fixed funding of million for the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvement programme to both be allocated from the tagged ylqdcxs Out of Scope Out of Scope Out of Scope Out of Scope Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E capital contingency funding described above. The Crown will not own any assets of the Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvement programme, which means the tagged capital contingency funding will need to be swapped from capital to operating expenditure with a corresponding impact on the operating balance and net Crown debt.
Your guide to the Transport System
agreed that the Orders in Council specify that NZTA provides a report to the Minister at
noted that Waka Kotahi is exploring potential opportunities to reduce embodied emissions
year horizon: the strategic goals to guide what changes have to happen over the next decade
. If approval is not given f or the Eke Panuku Board to be the lead agency for the development programme then CRLL would need to manage the development process. . We recommend the Joint Executive Steering Group continue between Eke Panuku, CRLL, Auckland Council, and Kinga Ora to prov ide urban development programme executive oversight for the implementation phase and to ensure alignment with the foundation outcomes. . We recommend the Eke Panuku Board appoint an independent reviewer to shadow the land sale process to have oversight of t he key process decisions and approvals. This would provide assurance to the CRL Sponsors that an appropriate market approach and decision making process is followed.
. In Auckland Airports view, t he alliance between NZ and SQ as an airline joint venture does appear to have consumer benefit s.
. The alliance will be a tailored alliance. By this we mean that there will be greater client participation by the light rail team in the alliance than has occurred in some more recent New Zealand alliances, which have largely been outsource models. This will allow for the right level of influence in the pre construction detailed planning phase work and allow for continuity from the IBC phase . The model does not derogate from the roles of the ALR Board and the sponsors in decision making.
. agree that if materialising risks bring costs for any projects higher than the Approved Amount , Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail should manage these costs across the programme and within the total approved funding wherever possible;
. Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications Committees Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) Wednesday August Public Consultation On Recovering The Costs Of Goods Management Activities At The Border The Ministers of Customs and Biosecurity are proposing to present a paper and consultation document for consideration at ECO on Wednesday August and Cabinet on Monday August . The documents concern cost recovery proposals for goods management at New Zealands borders. We note that the proposals will lead to some significant cost increases for the maritime sector in particular and that this will result in some significant opposition. We have worked with Customs to ensure that the C abinet paper reflects this reality and in particular that opposition will come from maritime operators likely to be facing cost increases if the proposals are implemented in their current form. Comments were provided to your Office for Ministerial consultation. Cabinet Business Committee (CBC) Monday September
. the service standard obligation to road users;
. the method of publicising the toll in advance of the road opening;
. the signage and other information that will be used to inform drivers approaching the
. a technical description of the proposed components of the toll collection system and
. the structure of the administration fees for all payment methods and all penalty fees;
. the continued existence of a feasible alternative route;
Asset Sustainability and Consumption Ratios
In this analysis, breaches are not counted as reoffending. Breaches are defined as all offences under Australian and New Zealand Standard Offence Classification (ANZSOC) subdivisions and . For AIO and matched offenders, breaches were principally for breaches of community work and other community sentences.
Aside from MARPOL Annex VI, New Zealand has also not acceded to MARPOL Annex IV, which sets out international standards for sewage discharges from certain vessels on international voyages. Although New Zealand has not signed u p to MARPOL Annex lV, components of our domestic legislation meet the same objectives, specifically through the Resource Management (Marine Pollution) Regulations . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED
Holding a CBTA R certificate allows a rider to progress to a Class restricted licence and holding a CBTA F certificate allows a rider to progress to a Class full licence. See section .. NZTA geo coded the address that it had on file for the driver at the time each licence was issued and allocated the addresses to Regional Council areas (using boundaries). Just over of the addresses could be succe ssfully allocated to a Regional Council area. NZTA does not regularly update licence holders addresses outside of these instances. The analysis therefore assumes that the drivers region of residence at the time they received their licence did not change while they held that stage of licence. A moped is permitted to be ridden in New Zealand on either a Class or a Class licence. When a person held both a Class and Class licence and was involved in a moped crash, this was included in the Class a nalysis since the skills required to
Jetstar Jetstar, all reported domestic routes
No grounds have been identified for the Regulations Review Committee to draw the
Table two presents the proposed funding allocation changes between the capital projects within the regional fuel tax programme list.
The paper I am presenting today compl ements that proposal and seeks
We will continue to monitor these aspects of the programme. It is possible that spending may be lower than forecast. This is because allocations from the NLTF are not actually approved until projects have completed the various cost benefit and business case requirements set by Waka Kotahi. The NLTF will not have sufficient revenue to fund the Governments share of LGWM NLTF revenue pressures are forecast to continue for some time.
BUDGET SENSITIVE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE
agreed that the Orders in Council should be drafted to:
noted that Joint Ministers have agreed a riskbased approach for allocating contingency
. Individual domestic routes, March Route Sectors OnTime Departures OnTime Arrivals Cancellations Route total Airline Scheduled Flown No. No. No. Auckland Wellington . . . Air NZ . . . Jetstar . . .
. Separate procurement processes will be run for additional services, including funding and financial advisers, RMA and other lawyers, operations and maintenance advisers . Some of these processes are expected to run in parallel with the UEP procurement.
. These bene fits include a rapid recovery postCovid of the airline capacity deployed by the two airlines between New Zealand and Singapore which has provided access to much needed airline seat and belly hold cargo capacity. The two airlines currently offer travellers access to a comprehensive daily schedule of up to three flights between Auckland and Singapore as well typically daily flights between Christchurch a nd Singapore.
. note that the approach described in recommendations above represents a change in expectations where you would be limiting your levers to agree outcomes and scope, in exchange for enabling the delivery agencies to take a risk based approach to develop options that maximise delivery and outcomes within and across the Approved Amounts ; s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
. empower the toll operator to set toll tariffs within the maximum limit of . at the
. include automatic adjustment of toll rates linked to the Consumers Price Index (CPI)
. include permission for changes to toll rates above the CPI to be made with the
. below the maximum toll, provide that the toll operator may levy different levels of
. in addition to the exemptions set out in section ()(a)(c) of the LTMA, empower
.. declare toll free days i.e., days or periods on which all classes of vehicle
.. grant exemptions to different classes of vehicle or person;
. Industry ontime performance, transTasman routes, March More detail on the number of flights and the routes flown by each airline can be found in section . For March , ontime performance over all transTasman routes covered by this report was . percent for ontime departures and . percent for ontime arrivals. The cancellation rate for the month was . percent. Gold Coast Auckland was the route with the highest ontime performance for departures in March , with . percent. The route with the highest ontime performance for arrivals was Auckland Gold Coast with . percent. Cancellations were highest on the Brisbane Wellington route in March , with . percent of services cancelled. All airlines ontime performance, March Sectors OnTime Departures OnTime Arrivals Cancellations Scheduled Flown No. No. No. , , , . , . .
Further consequential amendment is required through the Land Transport
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
OC City Rail Link Crown Sponsors Approval for the Maungawhau and KarangaaHape Development Precinct Programme Released with some information withheld under Sections ()(a), ()(b)(ii), ()(f)(iv) and ()(j). OC Maritime NZ Authority Recommended Appointments Withheld in full under Section ()(f)(iv). OC Regional Considerations for Implementing Community Connect Extensions Released with some information withheld under Sections ()(a), ()(f)(iv), ()(j) and ()(k). OC The Rapid Review into KiwiRails Handling of Recent Disruptions Progress Update Withheld in full under Section ()(f)(iv). OC Land Transport (Road Safety) Amendment Bill I mplementation Approved Vehicle Surveillance Equipment Notices Released with some information withheld under Sections ()(a). OC Changes to Ministerial Directions for Clean Car Upgrade, Social Leasing, and Clean Car Discount Programmes Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). OC Transport Infrastructure Rebuild Following the Severe Weather Events Withheld in full under Section ()(f)(iv).
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Road Maintenance Task Force Report: https:www.nzta.govt.nzassetsresourcesrmtf reportdocsreport.pdf New Zealand Transport Agency: Maintaining state highways through Network Outcomes Contracts ( ): https:oag.parliament.nznzta contractsdocsnzta contracts.pdf Increasing cost pressures of labour, plant and materials are mainly outside the control of the business, although actions have been taken to mitigate these increases through initiatives such as design standardisation through the use of catalogue design and smarter energy procurement of street lighting. Some of this cost pressure has been borne within the Contractors lump sum activities, which may be impacting the activities delivered. The Review Team estimated a cost increase of approximately between M ( of total expenditure) over the period for additional work andor increased costs by service contractors. Further analysis would be required to understand the composition of additional services and any potential cost trends in the discretionary measures and value items under the maintenance contracts. Over the funding period, Waka Kotahi approved contract variations of M, with approximately half arising from changes in traffic volumes and the other half from enhanced Temporary Traffic Management activities. Over the funding period, Waka Kotahi ma intenance activities accommodated the operating costs for Waterview Tunnel, ongoing network recovery activities associated with the Kaikoura earthquake and the Manawatu Gorge landslide and an increased level of services from retendered contracts.
The A mendment Order reflects the changes identified in the Proposal , including reallocation of funding between projects, and updates to project descriptions and timeframes . Public consultation on the Proposal
The draft Regulations were certified by the Parliamentary Counsel Office as being in
Those not complying with the AIO or the AIL requirements would be disqualified from driving. It is important to note: The information was extracted from the Driver Licence Register (DLR) and is current as at August . The data is limited to applications for an Alcohol Interlock Device (AID) licence granted or partially granted between January July (inclusive). The data is limited to alcohol interlock licences granted or partially granted as part of a reinstatement or reinstatement with requalification application . January July only.
Your guide to the Transport System
agreed that the toll operator be required to establish an electronic system for toll collection
note that the funding provided for the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme from the tagged capital contingency mentioned in recommendation will not result in the Crown owning any assets of this project and require a capital to operating swap with a corresponding impact on the operating balance and net Crown debt note that the funding profile of all potential cofunders for the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme has not yet been decided agree to provide funding of million from the New Zealand Upgrade Projects Tagged Capital Contingency to support delivery of the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme authorise the Ministers of Finance and Transport to draw down funding of up to million from the New Zealand Upgrade Projects Tagged Capital Contingency for the decision in recommendation , including authority to approve a capital to operating swap and to make consequential changes to appropriations, including establishing new appropriations required, to give effect to this decision, once the funding profile of all potential cofunders for this programme is confirmed note that providing funding for the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme does not commit the Crown to provide additional funding in the futu re and any further cost increases will need to be met from the NLTF or from the local authorities Financial recommendations ylqdcxs Out of Scope Out of Scope Out of Scope Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E ylqdcxs Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E agree that the proposed changes to appropriations for above be included in the Supplementary Estimates and that, in the interim, the increases be met from Imprest Supply
noted the following principles for contingency management, and the decision making and
. Individual transTasman routes, March Route Sectors OnTime Departures OnTime Arrivals Cancellations Route total Airline Scheduled Flown No. No. No. Brisbane Wellington . . . Air NZ . . . Qantas . . .
. Mori advisers are also out of scope for the UEP and will be procured separately. This approach has been followed to ensure that Mori businesses are not required to choose a single consortium to partner with during the UEP procurement process (with the att endant risk that Mori business not associated with the successful tender would be excluded from future opportunities to work on the project). This approach allows the ALR Group and the preferred UEP consortium to identify appropriate Mori businesses and work together to engage them to support the project. This will provide PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT
. We understand the two carriers have further plans to add additional peak season seat capacity between Singapore and Auckland as well as Singapore and Christchurch during the upcoming IATA northern winter schedule season . This is a positive development for consumers . We also note that the alliance o ffers customers seamless access to the Singapore Airlines network as well as access to Air New Zealands network at its Auckland hub and onto its domestic and regional network throughout New Zealand .
. be consistent with the expectations under Cabinet Office Circular CO ()
. does not hinder the free flow of traffic;
. enables a user of the toll road to pay a toll automatically (for example, by automatic
. not unnecessarily slow down progress on the Programme;
. enables a user of the toll road to pay within five working days after the toll road;
. take a riskbased approach to the Programme with targeted effort towards, and
. add value, have clear boundaries, reduce any duplication or delays, and not slow
. ensure information is transparent and any issues are reported early, to identify risks
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Sep Dec Jan Mar Apr Jun Jul Sep Advice to Minister on the light EV RUC exemption ending Report back to Minister on the results of the RUC Review consultation and potential next steps (including measures that could support decarbonisation
Auckland Council consulted publicly on the Proposal (as required by section H of the LTMA ) from March to May .
No Regulatory Impact Assessment was prepared as part of ECOSUB. The
The amendments are minor, changing the year from to after
TransTasman ontime performance trends, all airlines, all reported routes
agreed that the toll operator be required to ensure that the details of the tolls that are
of their time walking
. Customers under this joint venture arrangement have access to reciprocal frequent flyer benefits , airline lounge access at key airports and other premium and frequent
. The schedule for the procurement of professional services is figure .
. Airlines performance, transTasman routes, March Air New Zealand Air New Zealand, all reported transTasman routes
A reduction in overall single occupant private vehicle travel in urban areas Improved good quality , fit for purpose walking and cycling infrastructure Improved real and perceived safety for both pedestrians and cyclists Increased proportion of journeys made using public transport and active modes of travel (including children travelling to and from school) Expanded and better connected walking and cycling networks both in urban and rural areas Increased focus of transport investment in ways that aim to promote active trans port and public transport via improved infrastructure, better connections, and improved safety Measure B. Network kilometres of walking and cycling facilities delivered Measure C. investment in walking and cycling Measure A. Perceived safety of walking and cycling Mix of objectives of walking and cycling investments planned and delivered Measure A. Distance per capita travelled in single occupancy vehicles Measure A. Cycling count in urban areas Measure B. Walking count in urban areas Measure A. Mode share for how children travel tofrom school Measure A B. Road deaths and serious injuries and road crash hospitalisations by road type and mode Measure A. Pedestrian and cyclist injuries Measure B. Mode share people Measure F. N umber of passenger boardings using urban public transport services Substantial outcomes data available, but unable to make attribution to outcomes from GPS, APPENDIX CRITERIA SELECTION
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
Public support (as measured via the submission process) was not overwhelming for the Proposal , with percent of respondents supporting the proposal and percent opposed. Auckland Councils local boards were consulted on the Proposal (excluding the Great Barrier Island Local Board, which is excluded from the Scheme). All local boards supported the Proposal. Joint Ministers consideration of the Proposal Section J of the LTMA gives joint Ministers co mplete discretion in whether to make a recommendation after considering a proposal to vary a regional fuel tax scheme.
The Carbon Intensity Indicator (CII) aims to reduce the carbon intensity of a ships operational emissions year onyear. The Energy Efficiency Existing Ship Index (EEXI) aims to reduce emissions by setting a requirement on the technical design of individual ships. Ships must attain approval once in a lifetime. As noted in the main body of this briefing the IMO has also committ ed to develop mid and long term measures to reduce emissions from shipping . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of June OC Hon Kieran McAnulty Action required by: Acting Minister of Transport Monday, June ESTIMATES EXAMINATION SUPPLEMENTARY QUESTIONNAIRE DRAFT RESPONSE Purpose To provide you with draft response s to the supplementary Estimates question naire you received from the Transport and Infrastructure Committee . Key points The Ministry has previously provided you with responses to the standard Estimates questions. Draft response s are now atta ched for supplementary questions you received from the Transport and Infrastructure Committee. Please review the responses and provide feedback to the Ministry if changes are needed. The Ministry will work with your Office to make any amendments in response to your feedback. We will also finalise the formatting of the response once we have your feedback and make any other minor amendments, if required. Once you are satisfied with the responses, please sign the attached letter and send it, along with the responses, to the Transport and Infrastructure Committee . Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of ESTIMATES EXAMINATION SUPPLEMENTARY QUESTIONS DRAFT RESPONSES This briefing provides you with draft responses to select committee questio ns . You answered the standard Estimates questions for Vote Transport on May and y ou have also received supplementary questions. Your response s to the supplementary questions are due to the Transport and Infrastructure Committee by on Monday June . . You are also likely to receive around post hearing questions based on the discussion at the hearing. . Draft responses to questions are attached to this briefing (attachment and Appendices ). We have also prepared a draft cover letter (attachment ) for you to send in electronic form to the Chair of the Transport and Infrastructure Select Committee at Transport.Infrastructureparliament.govt.nz . We have approached the response to the supplementary questions in the same way as previous years . The supplementary questions are substantially the same as previous years and they have generally been answered in the same way. . We have provided information from Crown entities in cases where the question asks for information about entities funded under Vote Transport. This includes City Rail Link Limited (CRLL). If the question does not refer to entities funded by Vote Transport, answers are about the Ministry of Transport. . In the introduction to the responses (page ) we explain that KiwiRail and MetService, although funded under Vote Transport, are the responsibility of the Minister for State Owned Enterprises and we do not in clude them in this response. . Please review the responses and provide feedback to the Ministry if changes are needed. The Ministry will work with your office to make any amendments. . We will finalise the formatting of the response to the supplementary questions once we have addressed any issues that you may raise. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Hearing before the Transport and Infrastructure Committee . The h earing for Vote Transport is scheduled for Thursday June . We are working with your Office to provide you with suppor t material for the hearing. Attachment is refused under Section (d) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Jayden Blake Clerk of Committee Transport and Infrastructure Committee Parliament Buildings WELLINGTON TIparliament.govt.nz Kia ora Jayden Response to the Supplementary Questions to the E stimates for Vote Transport Attached are my r esponse s to the Supplementary Questionnaire in response to the Chairpersons letter of April . The departmental liaison officer for Committee staff to contact is Prashila Dayal, Senior Adviser Corporate Acc ountability , phone or em ail: P.dayaltransport.govt.nz. Ng mihi Hon Kieran McAnulty Acting Minister of Transport Attachment s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of June OC Hon Kiri Allan Associate Minister of Transport Hon Ki eran McAnulty Action required by: Acting Minister of Transport Friday, June MARITIME NEW ZEALAND LIQUIDITY FUNDING IN Purpose To seek your joint approval of the maximum amount of funding for core functions that Maritime New Zealand (MNZ ) is eligible for in , including the amount it can receive from its Protection of Transport Sector Agency Core Functions appropriation (the liquidity facility). Key points The financial recommenda tions for Budget require Transport Ministers to agree a specified amount for MNZ in , prior to the finalisation of its Statement of Performance Expectations (SPE), i.e., the maximum amount of funding for core functions that MNZ should be eligible for in , including the amount it can receive from its liquidity facility appropriation. Officials have worked closely with MNZ to determine a specified amount for and seek your joint agreement to set the amount at . This level of funding is consistent with the total expenditure on core functions set out in MNZs draft SPE and its Budget bid. It includes the New Zealand Oil Pollution Fund which is a separate entity managed by MNZ. Most of this amount would be funded by MNZs revenue from the Maritime Levy and Oil Pollution Levy leaving to be funded by the liquidity facility appropriation . This will fund the difference between MNZs forecast expenditure for core functions and nonCrown revenue forecast to be received in . B ased on current expectations of MNZs revenue, the appropriation has sufficient funds to absorb the difference. Document s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of The proposed specified amount would enable MNZ to deliver its core functions in the coming financial year, and the activities outlined in its draft SPE. However, any unexpected shocks, or unforeseen changes in operational activity would require further funding from the liquidity facility and are subject to approval from the Ministers of Transport and Finance. You received a copy of MNZs draft SPE on May . A new version has been attached as Appendix One with slight changes to the financial statements to reflect the change in Health and Safety at Work Act designation and the amount of liquidity funding required . This has changed the Output statements and financial statements.
The Civil Aviation Authority will publicise the new civil aviation rules (also noting
The revocation of the Land Transport Management (Regional Transport
Your guide to the Transport System
agreed that the toll operator be required to supply the following information to the Minister
note that the indicative spending profile for the additional funding provided in recommendation above is as follows: m increase(decrease) Indicative annual spending profile NonDepartmental Capital Expenditure
s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
unapproved works: The Review Team acknowledges that some unapproved works could have been agreed by Waka Kotahi regionally but not formally reported through the organisations change management processes.
. While Auckland Airport supports this reauthorisation if the airlines demonstrate clear consumer benefits, we reiterate calls from earlier reauthorisation submissions that the cumulative impact on market structure, co mpetition, and consumer outcomes of all existing airline co ordination agreements in force across the market for travel tofrom New Zealand should be regularly reviewed closely.
. With the introduction of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill there will be an inconsistent treatment of different technologies that perform similar functions. . We wish to make the most of the economic development opportunities associated with the use of new technology. However, we want to ensure New Zealands ability to regulate where necessary to protect and advance our interests, including national security. . The Civil Aviation Act has limited powers to control such activities or operations that originate from New Zealand that may pose a threat to national security or are not in the national interest. Objectives . The policy objective is to ensure a safe and secure civil aviation system. In particular, that any risks to New Zealands national security and national interest arising from New Zealand civil aviation operations are effectively and efficiently managed. This should be done in a way that minimises compliance Defined as an aircraft or other vehicle that travels, is intended to travel, or is capable of travelling, above controlled airspace. Withheld for security reasons Withheld for security reasons
. actual traffic volumes compared to forecast traffic volumes for each class of vehicle;
. actual toll revenue compared to forecast toll revenues;
. the ongoing status of the alternative route;
. a network utilisation performance report to include an analysis of the response of
. if there has been a significant change to the method of toll payment since the
Brown OC Emergency Ocean Response Capability Indicative Business Case Brown OC Meeting with Civil Aviation Authority O fficials on November Brown OC Transport Legislative Programme Brown OC Withheld Doocey OC Aide Memoire: Executive Summary of Maritime New Zealands Annual Report Doocey OC Aide Memoire: Executive Summary of the Transport Accident Investigation Commissions Annual Report Brown OC Revision of Limits of Liability under the Montreal Convention Brown OC Toll Road Proposals Doocey Brown OC Withheld Brown OC Meeting with Tatsuya Ishikawa, Acting Chief Executive Officer of Toyota New Zealand Brown OC Withheld Brown OC Transport Governance Reform in Auckland: Summary of Departmental Consultation Brown OC Scope of Independent Review Function a nd Application of Review Fees Brown OC Quarterly Meeting with the Automobile Association Brown OC Visit to Airways Corporation in Christchurch Brown OC Withheld Brown OC Meeting with Interim Aviation Council on the National Aviation Policy Statement Brown OC Roundtable Meeting with Drive Electric Board Members Brown OC Withheld Brown OC Aide Memoire: Procurement M ilestones for the LNIRIM project Brown OC Summary and Analysis of Submissions on Aviation Security Services Discussion Document
China Airlines China Airlines, all reported transTasman routes
Crash rates were calculated for this combined period to increase accuracy of the estimated rates. See section ...
In the meantime, T ransport officials will continue work with MBIE and other agencies to explore the range of options available to the Government reduce EV charging connection costs . As you know , we regularly engage with MBIE and EECA through the cross agency working group o n EV charging infrastructure. Representatives from the Commerce Commission and Electricity Authority have been invited to attend the groups next meeting . We will inform you via the weekly report if any new information or relevant ideas emerge from that di scussion. s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of March OC Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport FERRY STAKEHOLDER MEETING Snapshot
The Cost Drivers Review was conducted by Deloitte and AECOM on behalf of the Ministry and Waka Kotahi and was intended to review the transport investment cost drivers to determine the scope of the pressure impacting on the transport sector. A working group has been tasked with enhancing existing capacity and competencies under the new operating model. A revised governance structure for portfolio delivery is being established across the Transport Services Group to have oversight of the entire delivery portfolio including performance and health of delivery against baseline expect ations commitments (including outcomes, costs, time, risks, resourcing, and Supplier performance). The delivery functions have a new Regional Management structure with clear accountability for the successful performance of the investment delivery. The Activity Class Management structure has been established to be accountable for ensuring the investment best contributes to desired outcomes. The organisation has established a regional quality managementsurveillance team to monitor the quality of contractors works. An internal assurance function has also been established that will report to the Ministry and undertake regular efficiency and effectiveness revie w of the expenditure. An investment planning team has been established to better inform high level investment prioritisation and trade off decisions. This team will provide better strategic investment direction through multi year programmes and packages of activities. o A detailed work programme has been established to action the findings of the OAG report and report internally and externally quarterly on achievement on this programme. o The Network Outcomes Contract Key Results Area (KRA) performance management framework has been modified, with a number of key performance measure assessed as pre requisite requirements that must be satisfied each quarter to achieve performance. o Individual Contract Boards have been established to provide greater accountability for the results arising from the performance framework. This will be achieved through improved ownership of the contracts performance to those best able to influence change, enhance transparency of results and to further stimulate delivery service improvement. o A detailed national annual programme is being compiled for bridge and structures component replacements and its delivery performance will be tracked monthly to ensure transpar ency in the efficient and effective use of this investment. o An approach for collecting condition and performance data for all asset type is underway in collaboration with industry including establishing a consistent defect framework (being developed jointly by Waka Kotahi, the Road Efficiency Group (REG) and industrySuppliers). o Waka Kotahi are investigating options for greater standardisation of pavement design through a catalogue style design selection and the use of shorter life service ability treatments to address customer ride issues. o Work is underway to expand the capability of the asset renewal performance tracker (the tracker) to include more asset types works programmes (such as side water channels, side drains and high lips) an d should be implemented by the start of . The tracker also has an in built function to capture actual as built costs (for pavement and surfacing) but at current this does not appear to be used. Achievement guidelines have recently been , emphasi sing that this should be occurring. o A reconciliation of the proposed pavement and surfacing programme with the intended investment by ONRC has been undertaken and will during the funding period to ensure the investment aligns with the agreed strate gy. o A full review of the Operational Performance Measures is being initiated to inform the procurement of future Network Outcomes Contracts. A programme in response to a perceived deterioration of the network condition was initiated in (named the call toaction) to audit the performance of the network to identify opportunities for improvement.
The Order in Council to amend the Land Transport (Register of Land
The lack of proposed outputs from the investment and documented achievement (outside of pavement and surfacing activities) made it difficult for the Review Team to form a view on the efficiency and effectiveness of all maintenance, operations and renewal activities undertaken. From the information that was available, we determined there are opportunities to improve value for money of the investment in road maintenance by closing identified efficiency and effectiveness gaps and by better targeting investment in maintenance. For example, o The GPS needs to more clearly signal the outco mes sought from maintenance activities o Internal financialbudget management processes need further refinement to ensure the planned level of works is programmed and delivered on time and to budget o Improvements are required to ensure that all work (maintenance and renewal) is completed to the required specification the first time, with reduced performance and quality issues o Statement of Performance Expectations (SPE) measures are not fully representative of the challenges being experienced and appear to mask degradation in condition and service. These findings are explored further in the observation section and recommendations of this report. The Review Team recognises that a range of external cost pressures were experienced in delivering the investment, including cost escalation, traffic and freight growth, health and safety requirements, more significant and frequent natural events requiring more extensive emergency works to retore service, and growing complexity of the network (in terms of length, assets, and technological advancement). Quality issues were also experienced, alongside sector wide skills and resource shortages. Waka Kotahi has also experienced significant organisation transformation over this perio d. The latest restructure is intended to enhance the operating model of the Transport Services group responsible for overseeing design, delivery and management of the land transport system and its infrastructure. The Review Team recognises the current orga nisational changes will likely enable improvements; however, it was noted that Waka Kotahi still does not have an approved asset management policy or strategy for what was stated as New Zealands largest social asset (at B current replacement value).The Review Team considered that an asset management policy and asset management strategy could further assist in the robustness of the organisations business planning in this area and could assist in efforts to reduce variances both in terms of monetary investment, but also in terms of program development and delivery. Based on available information at the time of this review, the Review Team determined with a reasonable (or better) level of confidence that inves tment was delivered with an efficiency and effectiveness of approximately (.b). The Review Team considered that while the investment is being used to do a lot of things well, particularly given the breadth of services and work programmes deliver ed in the face growing external pressures, there are greater opportunities to: o enhance the GPS outcomes and associated investment levels to prioritise improved value for money from investment in this activity class, and o close potential efficiency and effec tiveness gaps that could be holding the delivery of this investment back from realising optimal value for money. The Review Team assessed output and performance of the investment over the period in determining confidence in the proposed investment and determined the proposed investment seeks to address a number of the findings from this Review. Several improvements have already been implemented in the definition of governance roles, operational and financial planning processes and performance monitoring and reporting procedures. Where opportunities persist, recomme ndations have been provided to further build on the lessons learnt from the funding period. KEY REVIEW OBSERVATIONS The delivery of maintenance and operations services are primarily outsourced through a range of contracts, including twenty one Network Outcomes Contracts (NOCs), nine Structures Maintenance Contracts (SMC), two specialist ITS contracts and three Alliances. The organisations three Transport Operations Centres (TOCs) support the day today operation of the system. Over the , Waka Kotahi will operate two Transport Operations Centres. Two Public Private Partnerships (PPP) are in place and will draw funding from this activity class over their operating periods. In the past te n years, the length of road has expanded from , lane kms to , lane kms. This represents a , lane kms (or centreline kms), a . increase which is equivalent to driving almost the entire length of State Highway one way from Northland to Southland. The increased quantity and complexity of assets to manage is beginning to impact the level of maintenance investment required to sustain the level of service for road users. Over the period, more than , maintenance interventions were undertaken with , incidents responded to (including , crashes attended) and , customer enquires managed. Even with a growing usage and number of incidents closing state highways, Waka Kotahi have managed to ensure of the incidents were resolved within targeted timeframe. The vast majority of use on state highways is exposed to good skid resistance and smooth travel: o . of the traffic on state highways exposed to surfaces with good skid resistance (less than of the network length with less than desired skid resistance). o . of the travel on state highways is exposed to smooth roads with low levels of roughness (with approximately of the network length exceeding acceptable roughness threshold levels). Of the , bridges managed by Waka Kotahi only (. of the total bridge assets) had a speed or weight restriction in place in any one year over the funding period. Waka Kotahi entered the funding block with an expectation to maintain service standards set out in the Waka Kotahi Statement of Performance Expectations, the ONRC levels of service, contract performance frameworks and associated technical standards and specifications. Key observations include: o The organisations performance against the investment proposal, as measured by the Statement of Performance Expectations, is generally consistent with targets. The Review Team however, questions whether these measures are truly demonstrative of the challenges the organisation and industry more broadly are facing. It was noted that network availability fell below the desired standard and appears to have been adversely impacted by weather events resulting in longer closures. o Expenditure over the NLTP has been generally consistent with the GPS bands, although when we analyse variance across the activities, material differences occurred across a number of investment areas and all regions. This is consistent with findings of an internal looking back review in and signals a potential ongoing effectiveness issue of existing budgetary development and control processes, as well as the potential impact of controllableuncontrollable cost increases. o Contract framework s such as Key Results Areas (KRA) and Operational Performance Measures (OPM) indicate that, on average, contract teams are meeting acceptable standards of contract performance against expectations. However, due to their self reporting and self auditing structure, the full credibility of these measures is questionable without an appropriate level of independent scrutiny to transparently validate and verify results. The Review Team also questions if this framework is measuring the right parameters given declining condition parameters across the state highways. o Looking at more technical asset condition measures such as the pavement and surfacing health index, less than desirable findings were illustrated with overall results indicating a d eteriorating pavement and declining health of the worst performing sections of the network. These findings are supported by the annual pavement condition reports which also record declining trends overall (with exception to overall network texture).
The total figure for AIO matched and unmatched. Correspondence with Author ( ). Ibid.
This paper will be proactively released within business days after it has been
agreed that the toll operator be required to make a summary of the information listed in
note that, following the decision in recommendation above, the total funding envelope for the Roads of Regional Significance will increase from . billion to . billion. agree that additional funding to support the Waikare Gorge realignment , Second Ashburton Bridge , Auckland Level Crossings Removal programme and Roads of National Significance will be included in the National Land Transport Fund, subject to NZTAs standard decision making processes and with due consideration given to the impact on the Governments Fiscal Strategy . xxfpyy I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E note that NZTA has independent statutory authority over whether activities are approved for National Land Transport Fund funding . approve the following change to appropriations to give effect to the policy decision in recommendation above, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance and net debt: m increase(decrease) Vote Transport Minister for Transport to NonDepartmental Capital Expenditure
. Auckland T ransports operational expenditure has exceeded planned expenditure due to inflation. Cost escalation is being managed by Auckland Transport by delaying the introduction of new services, reducing services , and reviewing contracts with operators. These results exclude deprec iation. A uckland Transport have noted a significant jump in its depreciation costs by m illion for the full financial year. The depreciation figure includes the higher maintenance, repair and financing costs associated with the revaluation exercise. The cost to replace roading over the ten year period increased by .b as at June . . KiwiRails provision of operational funding information is new for this report. KiwiRail are in the process of building network planning capacity to meet budget allocations by end of finan cial year . ATAP delivery highlights . There have been some key milestones achieved over the reporting period, including: the opening of the Manukau Harbour active mode bridge; progress on construction of the interim Northwest Bus Improvements ; Matakana Link Road improvements ; and the completion of the Westhaven to CBD Cycleway .
. Given the large number of air routes and proportion of overall international air capacity to and from New Zealand that is now packaged up within anti trust immune airline joint ventures that allow airlines to co ordinate on capacity and price, we recommend that the Ministry of Transport should give consideration to implement ing a system to regularly monitor the structure and health of the international travel market including :
. Ongoing engagement with key stakeholders and peak bodies is continuing with UN Youth, Kainga Ora, Eke Panuku and Property Council NZ taking place this month. Planning is underway to establish an interactive display and co location at the Kinga Ora Mt Roskill development hub by the end of June.
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSI FIED Page of UPDATE ON LETS GET WELLINGTON MOVING Lets Get Wellington Moving ( LGWM ) is a partnership between central and local government LGWM was originally established in as a three way partnershi p between Wellington City Council (WCC), Greater Wellington Regional Council (GWRC) and Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency . In , Cabinet endorsed an Indicative Package , consisting of three main aspects: . a three year programme of upgrades to walki ng and cycling infrastructure (three year programme) . a people friendly city streets programme of longer term (out to ) walking and cycling improvements and bus priority lanes (people friendly city streets) . upgrades to State Highway One and mass rapid transit (MRT) , subsequently referred to collectively as the Transformational Programme . In , the programme was costed at . billion over years. Cabinet agreed that the Government would fund percent of LGWM (. billion), with the remaining percent provided by WCC and GWRC. Cabinet noted that the Governments share of the funding would be provided through the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) over a year period , except for th e Governments share of MRT which was to be financed and repaid over years. Costs have increased since the Indicative Package was agreed in In , you agreed to an increased funding envelope of . billion for the purposes of public consultation on options . This was to ensure LGWM only engaged on options that fit the funding envelope and did not represent an official increase in the Government contribution. If the funding split agreed in does not change, the Government would need to adjust its contribution to . billion for the LGWM Indicative Programme to be delivered. Cabinet has not had an opportunity to agree to any increases in the Crown contribution or whether the funding split agreed in should change. In June , Cabinet indicated a preferred option of MRT to the south coast of Wellington, a new tunnel through Mt Victoria and improvements around the Basin Reserve . Cabinet also confirmed the decision to finance the Crowns share of MRT , however this was subject to a detailed business case being completed for the entire Transformational Programme . The detailed business case is currently underway and will be finalised in December . In addition to analysing Cabinets preferred o ption, the detailed business case will examine the merits of bus rapid transit along the light rail route. cost estimates will be one of the outputs of this work we expect to receive the first cut of these in JuneJuly .
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
In addition to the RNIP, the Government has committed around billion of funding for major improvements to the rail network including iREX , the Marsden Point Rail Link project in NZUP and others .
It is proposed that the terms of reference clarifies the role of the Board with respect to the ALR Project and ALR Programme in the following ways . a. D escrib ing the scope of the ALR Project and the ALR Programme consistent with the Sponsors Agreement Heads of Terms. b. Setting out the Boards responsibilities according to the ALR Project and the ALR Programme. c. Establishing the primary role for the Board is with respect to the ALR Project, to submit the business case to the Crown within the parameters set by the Crown and Sponsors to inform final investment decisions. d. For the ALR Programme, there are two key roles for the Board. i. Contribute to, and seek information from, from partner agencies, mana whenua, and Auckland Council on wider planning and growth for transport and urban development across the region. Include this in the business case and accompanying advice to properly inform investment decisions. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Item ii. Incorporate decisions made by the Crown with respect to the ALR policy work programme into the business case and accompanying advice.
Ministers have considered the Proposal submitted and, following that consideration, wish to recommend that the Scheme be varied in accordance with the Proposal .
One possible exception is yearold fully licensed females, with a crash rate . times higher than the overall rate for to yearold fully licensed drivers. This difference is not statistically significant at the threshold used in this report ( pvalue .) but if this difference persists in future years it may deserve further investigation.
The Order in Council to revoke the Land Transport Management (Regional
The following agencies were consulted on the contents of this paper: Ministry of
Your guide to the Transport System
authorised the enforcement authority to have access to law enforcement information held
. Eke Panuku will require a delegation from Auckland Council Governing Body to transact the Auckland Council owned land of Ruru Street.
. This is particularly important in the post pandemic context where there is less competition and capacity than pre pandemic and consumers have already seen a significant escalation in airfares for bot h domestic and international travel within and to and from New Zealand.
() What official advice (excluding advice sourced from the Motor Industry Association), if any, has the Minister received on the number and proportion of light vehicles that are forecast in to comply with or have emissions lower than the targets under the Clean Car Standard
() What official advice (excluding advice sourced from the Motor Industry Association), if any, has the Minister received on the number and proportion of light vehicles that are forecast in to comply with or have emissions lower than the targets under the Clean Car Standard
() What official advice (excluding advice sourced from the Motor Industry Association), if any, has the Minister received on the number and proportion of light vehicles that are forecast in to comply with or have emissions lower than the targets under the Clean Car Standard
() Has the Government accounted for any reduction in revenue from charges under the Clean Car Standard as a result of the changes to the targets () What official advice (excluding advice sourced from the Motor Industry Association), if any, did the Minister receive on the fiscal impact of changing the Clean Car Standard targets and, if so, what was that advice () How are Clean Car Standard charges accounted for in the Government fiscal accounts
More generally, a GDLS is a public health intervention that works by starting drivers in less risky situations and exposing them to more risk as they gain expe rience. Williams and Ferguson () provide more information about the rationale for a graduated licensing system. Williams et al () reviewed the evidence for changes to existing GDLS laws in the United States aimed at further reducing crashes amon g young drivers. They conclude that the evidence is mixed about the effectiveness of increasing the learner licence duration.
T he attached Amendment O rder gives effect to this r ecommendation by joint Ministers.
agreed that the toll operator be required to publicly notify the toll level or levels,
. We would add that any assessment of the overall level of competition and consumer choice should also include the domestic market, which is not immune to impact from international alli ance arrangements.
A waiver of the day rule is sought for the Orders and for the Road User
Aspirations to deliver on E missions Reduction Plan (ERP) goals and interregional rail projects may add further funding pressure. Two significant Metro Rail Programme Business Cases covering the next years and with a strong emissions reduction focus ar e currently underway.
Delivery of the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme is expected to be accelerated before substantive increases in service frequency are implemented, which may create affordability challenges.
Expectations should have started to shift with KiwiRail reading the draft GPS, but it would be good to back this up with more explicit guidance around the likely level of funding support.
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
The regulations will come into force on May , a waiver of the day rule is not sought.
These numbe rs vary from the table on page as they refer to offences and not offenders . See Discussion. ibid
Your guide to the Transport System
authorised the Minister to determine any matters of policy or legislative detail that arise in
(d) the information requested is publicly available.
. It is worth noting that t he New Zealand domestic market is high ly concentrated when compared to other jurisdictions. New Zealand ranks th out of the top countries by total domestic airline seat capacity for , however we rank th out of countries in terms one airline having the greatest total market share.
. note that Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail need sufficient authority to manage flexibly within the approved funding envelope in accordance with the expectations and recommendations outlined above, which signifies a shift from existing arrangements;
. NonDepartmental Capital Expenditure
Following practical completion (November ), the CRL project and associated assets, including stations and tunnels, will be vested to Auckland Transport and s ()(b)(ii) s ()(b)(ii) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of KiwiRail, who will then undertake the testing, commissioning, and training work required before CRL can open to the public. Assuming the testing and commissioning process proceeds smoothly, the public operational is likely to be , which aligns with the current timeframe being communicated to the public. The exact opening will ultimately be determined by Auckland Transport and AOR , once Auckland Transport and KiwiRail have completed the activities that need to occur prior to Day operations.
OC Briefing to the Incoming Minister Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). The attachment is refused under Section (d) as it will soon be on the Ministrys website: https:www.transport.govt.nzabout uswhat wedoproactivereleasesSearchForm OC Information on Lets Get Wellington Moving Withheld in full under Section ()(f)(iv). OC Draft GPS : Revised Draft for Review Refused under Section (d). The GPS will be in August . All background material, including this briefing, will be shortly thereafter on the Ministrys website:
See https:www.transport.govt.nzmot resourcestransport dashboard roadtransportrd roadfatalandinjury crashes per populationrd roaddeaths andinjuries permillion licence holders . This also suggests that the proportion of full licences issued to males has reduced to be closer to the overall proportion of males in the New Zealand population, which is currently around ( https:www.stats.govt.nztopicspopulation ).
The Amendment Order complies with each of the following:
The regulations comply with each of the following:
These two projects are not part of NZUP, which is experiencing cost pressures estimated to be . billion BRI refers . Reallocating Northern Pathway funding to these two projects ensures that these high priority projects receive an investment while addressing the affordability challenges and cost pressures within these projects. Due to these reasons and the magnitude of funding allocation for these two non NZUP projects, one of which will require funding to be swapped from capital to operating expenditure, we require Cabinet approval to provide funding for the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme from the tagged capital contingency described above. Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements Bus patronage in Greater Christchurch has declined or flatlined in recent years and remains significantly lower than preearthquake levels (see the solid red and dotted red lines in Figure below). The existing settlement pattern and growth trends in combination with a poor level of service for public transport suggest high dependency on private vehicles for travel would persist into the future. Such dependency will likely have a negative impact on carbon emissions or Vehicle Kilometres Travelled (VKT) reduction and will not contribute towards a wellfunctioning urban environment or provide genuine transport choice.
note that the indicative spending profile for the additional funding provided in recommendation above is as follows: m increase(decrease) Indicative annual spending profile authorise the Minister of Transport and Minister of Finance (acting jointly) to make changes to appropriations as necessary (including capital to operating swaps and establishing new appropriations) to give effect to final investment decisions taken by the NZTA Boa rd under recommendation and above , note that phasing will vary from that indicated given the complexity of the multiyear projects listed . agree that the proposed changes to appropriations above be included in the Supplementary Estimates and that, in the interim, the increase be met from Imprest Supply . agree that up to million of the capital expenditure incurred under recommendations and above be charged against the New Zealand Upgrade Transport Projects Tagged Capital Contingency noted in recommendation and that up to billion of the capital expenditure incurred under recommendations and above be charged against the Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Tagged Contingency noted in recommendation . note that, following the adjustment detailed in recommendations and above, the remaining balances and indicative phasing of the New Zealand Upgrade Transport Projects Tagged Capital Contingency described in recommendation above will be:
. In New Zealand, one carrier represents of the domestic aviation market , which compares to Australia where the largest domestic airline has only market sh are. The recently Australian Federal Government s Aviation Green Paper described the Australian domestic market as highly concentrated , which is notable given New Zealands market is even more dominated by one carrier.
. note the Ministry of Transport and Treasury will work with delivery agencies to update the delegation letters to provide clarity and confidence to deliver in accordance with the above decisions ;
. the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi
.. the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi ;
. the rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act
.. advice from the Treaty Provisions Officials Group on any Treaty of Waitangi provisions (advice was not sought as there are no Treaty of Waitangi provisions in the Amendment Order) ; .. the rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act and the Human Rights Act ; .. the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act ; .. relevant international standards and obligations ; .. the Legislation Guidelines ( edition), which are maintained by the Legislation Design and Advisory Committee. Regulations Review Committee There are no grounds for the Regulations Review Committee to draw the A mendment Order to the attention of the House of Representatives under Standing Order .
. the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act
. relevant international standards and obligations
. the Legislation Guidelines ( editions), which are maintained by the
New Zealand Household Travel Survey and report
. Application of subsection BB () This subsection applies to a carbon intensity ship that is a New Zealand ship that is gross tonnage or more and engaged in an international voyage . () This subsection also applies to a ship in subrule () that has undergone a major conversion on or after the this subsection comes into force. () This subsection also applies to a ship in subrule () with non conventional propulsion that is (a) a cruise passenger ship; or (b) an LNG carrier. () Other than in subrule (), this subsection does not apply to a ship with non conventional propulsion. () This subsection does not apply to any of the following ships: (a) a ship not propelled by mechanical means: (b) a category A ship. . Attained energy efficiency existing ship index () The owner and the master of a ship must ensure an Attained EEXI is calculated at the following times, as applicable: (a) for a ship (i) that is a New Zealand ship on January , upon the scheduled time specified in S chedule ..(); or (ii) that becomes a New Zealand ship after January , before the ship operates as a New Zealand ship: (b) upon a major conversion of the ship. () Subject to subrule (), the owner and the master of a ship must ensure an Attained EEXI (a) is calculated for the ship in accordance with regulations and of Annex VI, taking into account guidelines developed by the IMO titled Guidelines On The Method Of Calculation Of The Attained Energy Efficiency Existing Ship Index (EEXI) ; and (b) meets the standards and requirements in Annex VI; and (c) is accompanied by the EEXI technical file in accordance with regulation . of Annex VI; and (d) is verified by the Director. R E L E A S E D U N D E R T H E OF F I C I A L I N F OR MA T I ON A C T
. Application of subsection BC () This subsection applies to a carbon intensity ship that is a New Zealand ship that is , gross tonnage or more engaged in an international voyage . () This subsection does not apply to any of the following ships: (a) a ship not propelled by mechanical means: (b) a category A ship. . Attained annual ope rational carbon intensity indicator () The owner and the master of a ship must ensure an Attained Annual Operational CII (a) is calculated for the ship in accordance with regulation of Annex VI, taking into account guidelines developed by the IMO titled as follows: (i) Guidelines On Operational Carbon Intensity Indicators And The Calculation Methods : (Ii) Guidelines On The Reference Lines For Use With Operational Carbon Intensity Indicators : (Iii) Guidelines On The Operational Carbon Intensity Reduction Factors Relative To Reference Lines : (Iv) Guidelines On The Operational Carbon Intensity Rating Of Ships ; and (b) meets the standards and requirements in Annex VI; and (c) is verified by the Director. () The Director must verify the Attained Annual Operational CII under subrule ()(c) in accordance with regulation . of Annex VI . R E L E A S E D U N D E R T H E OF F I C I A L I N F OR MA T I ON A C T
. to . Reserved Subsection CB Energy efficiency existing ship index This subsection is currently suspended and will come into force at a later .
. Application of subsection CB () This subsection applies to a carbon intensity ship that is a New Zealand ship that is gross tonnage or more and engaged in a domestic voyage . () This subsection also applies to a ship in subrule () that has undergone a major conversion on or after the this subsection comes into force. () This subsection also applies to a ship in subrule () with non conventional propulsion that is (a) a cruise passenger ship; or (b) an LNG carrier. () Other than in subrule (), this subsection does not apply to a ship with non conventional propulsion. () This subsection does not apply to any of the following ships: (a) a ship not propelled by mechanical means: R E L E A S E D U N D E R T H E OF F I C I A L I N F OR MA T I ON A C T
. Application of subsection CC () This subsection applies to a carbon intensity ship that is a New Zealand ship that is , gross tonnage or more engaged in a domestic voyage . R E L E A S E D U N D E R T H E OF F I C I A L I N F OR MA T I ON A C T
. to . Reserved R E L E A S E D U N D E R T H E OF F I C I A L I N F OR MA T I ON A C T
. Purpose of Subpart F The purpose of this Subpart is to set the conditions upon which an unmanned nonselfpropelled barge may have an IAPP Exemption Certificate issued in relation to it. . Application of S ubpart F This Subpart applies to an unmanned non selfpropelled barge to which this Part applies. . IAPP Exemption Certificate may substitute for IAPP certificate () The owner of an unmanned non selfpropelled barge to which section B or C applies is not required to hold an IAPP certificate for the barge provided (a) there is a valid IAPP Exemption Certificate issued under rule . in relation to the barge; and (b) the requirements in this rule . are met. () The owner and the master must ensure that the IAPP Exemption Certificate is (a) carried on board the ship; and (b) readily available for inspection by the Director and by authorised persons acting on behalf of a Party State at all times. () The owner and the master must comply with the conditions to which the certificate is subject. () It is a condition of each exemption certificate issued in respect of a barge that neither persons nor living animal s are on board the barge during its voyage. . Survey to confirm barge meets certain conditions Before an IAPP Exemption Certificate can be issued, a survey must confirm, taking into account IMO g uidelines titled Guidelines For Exemption Of Unmanned NonSelfPropelled (UNSP) Barges From Certain Survey And Certification Requirements Under The MARPOL Convention , that the barge (a) is not propelled by mechanical means; and R E L E A S E D U N D E R T H E OF F I C I A L I N F OR MA T I ON A C T
or the Human Rights Act
Previous Elected member and appointed Deputy Chair Capital Coast District Health Board Board Member then Deputy Chair Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency
Chair Wellington Culinary Events Trust (Wellington on a Plate)
Track User Charges paid into the National Land Transport Fund by KiwiRails freight business. s ()(g)(i) s ()(g)(i) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of . Reprioritising NIWA funding for minor improvements (saving . million). . Reduc ing the assembly programme at Hillside (saving . million). . Utilising the funding set aside for building the Marsden Point Spur (saving million). We consider the first three savings listed above (totalling million) are legitimate for KiwiRails use as they require KiwiRail making trade offs and stopping investments it was going to make. W e consider the million for the Marsden Point Rail link is a legitimate savings opportunity . However, there is not a strong justification for this to be made available to KiwiRail to internally repriori tise as this project has been driven by Government , not KiwiRail. KiwiRail still has funding to complete detailed design work , which is required under the New Zealand First coalition agreement. Through the other cost savings exercises underway (Table refers), we recommend that . million of the million of savings identified be offered up as KiwiRails contribution to wider transport baseline savings exercises. This would leav e million for KiwiRail to utilise. If you approve million of the reprioritisations identified, then this would mean KiwiRail would have funding for the freight network of around , million for the next three years ( or about million per annum ). We suggest you communicate your funding intentions to KiwiRail In conjunction with KiwiRails S hareholding Ministers,
.. In the development and implementation of legislation and policies to implement the present Convention, and in other decision making processes concerning issues relating to persons with disabilities, States Parties shall closely consult with and actively involve persons with disabilities, including children with disabilities, through their representative organizations. https:www.un.orgdevelopmentdesadisabilitiesconvention ontherights ofperson swith disabilitiesarticle accessibility.html
As you know , work on the Clean Heavy Vehicle Grant Fund has since been led by MBIE through the Budget process (Vote Business, Science, and Innovation Energy portfolio) with support from Te Manat Waka . These arrangements were only established following the January March quarter.
Community Panel on Time of Use Charging in Auckland: Report on the deliberative process and outcomes. May s (c)(ii) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Next steps Auckland Council is scheduled to release a report containing financial estimates of the cost of congestion in Auckland to coincide with the Bills first reading. It is likely this will increase attention on the Governments work to implement time of use ch arging. We can work with your office to prepare for potential media requests. Below is an indicative timeline of the key events and decision points for the legislative programme , based on first reading occurring this month . We are available to discuss time of use charging and the associated work programme. House and legislative stage February First reading and referral to select committee Portal for public submission s open s ( weeks ) March Ministry Officials provide an initial briefing to the Committee Portal for public submission s closes April Oral submissions May Ministry Officials present the departmental report to the Committee June Aug Committee consideration revised tracked versions of the Bill and Committee commentar y prepared Sept Dec Committee report back Second reading, Committee of the Whole House , and third reading Bill enacted RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of ANNEX FIRST READING DRAFT SPEAKING NOTES
EEXI and CII are new Annex VI requirements which take effect on November . Maritime NZ consulted on these new provisions in order to ensure stakeholders were fully informed on upcoming requirements. Annex VI specifies which types of ships the EEDI, EEXI and CII requirements apply to. Some types of ship are not captured, notably fishing vessels and certain types of passenger ship. However, these latter ship types are still required to have a SEEMP.
Funding for new projects from the reallocation of Northern Pathway funding. s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
If agreement is not reached member State Ministers may need to attend a special IMO session . s (a) s ()(j) s ()(j) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT RESTRICTED I propose that Cabinet authorises the Associate Minister of Transport, the Minister for Climate Change, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, and the Minister of Trade to take any final decisions on issues in the negotiations . Should the negotiations move outside the bounds of existing Cabinet decisions, any final decisions with regards to New Zealands position in the IMO negotiations would, where possible, be considered by Cabinet . However, where there are fast moving developments in the negotiations and time constraints, it may not be possible to convene Cabinet to take final decisions. Therefore, I propose that Cabinet authorises, in such situations, the Prime Minister, the Minister of Finance, the Associate Minister of Transport, the Minister for Climate Change, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, and the Minister of Trade to take together any final decisions on other issues in the negotiations. The outcome of the September October negotiations will be a draft legal text for the final measures. This draft legal text will be shared among IMO member states and industry bodies for consideration for months. This will give Cabinet an opportunity to consider the text prior to taking decisions to
Indicative strategic priorities for GPS
Introduction . Purpose and objectives Te Manat Waka (Ministry of Transport) commissioned a multidisciplinary team led by Dovetail Consulting Ltd to evaluate the Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS ). The purpose of the evaluat ion is to improve understanding of whether and to what extent GPS investments (ie, those fully or partially funded by the National Land Transport Fund NLTF) have achieved their intended results over the three years of . Although initi ally commissioned as an outcome evaluation, the long term nature of GPS influence means it is not feasible to seek to attribute outcomes such as road safety, transport mode shift and emissions reductions to the short period of the GPS. Therefore, this evaluation is more process focused, emphasising the influence of GPS on transport investment decision making and planning during . In addition, the influence of external factors on outcomes (such as the COVID pandemic) makes it difficu lt to attribute changes in observed outcomes to the GPS itself. The objectives of the evaluation are to: a Improve our understanding of whether (and to what extent) GPS investments have achieved the intended results. b Reflect on the relationship between Te Manat Waka and Waka Kotahi (New Zealand Transport Agency) to explore how the intentions behind the G PS, and the signals the GPS delivers, are understood and enacted. c Generate insights into the linkages between inputs, outputs and outcomes to identify how GPS influences investments and contributes to observed outcomes. d Provide reflections from GPS to assist in monitoring and implementing GPS and developing GPS . Two key evaluation questions (KEQs) guide this work and provide the core structure for this report: To what extent has GPS influenced changes in NLTF investments, implementa tion, and early stage outcomes What key factors affect the efficiency and effectiveness of converting inputs to outputs and outcomes Appendix of this report details trends observed in key GPS outcomes. Appendices and detail data considered for thi s review for criteria analysis and further detail on investment data analysis. . Background to GPS GPS sets four clear priorities that guide the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) and its investments through the National Land Transport Fu nd (NLTF) and other funding sources: Safety (a safe system free of death and serious injury) INTRODUCTION
Maritime New Zealand (). Stevedoring company spends , in first ever maritime Enforceable Undertaking. Retrieved from: https:www.maritimenz.govt.nzpublicnewsoctoberstevedoring company spends infirstever maritime enforceable undertaking Maritime New Zealand (). KiwiRail sentenced for Interislander ferry Kaitakis loss of propulsion south of Wellington. Retrieved from: https:www.maritimenz.govt.nzpublicnewsseptemberkiwirail sentenced forinterislander ferry kaitaki s lossofpropulsion south ofwellington Ministry of Transport. (). Te Whakahunga o Te Pire Taki Ture (Tnuku) Regulatory Systems (Transport) Amendment Bill . Retrieved from: https:consult.transport.govt.nzpolicyte whakahounga otepiretiaki ture tnuku maritimsupportingdocumentsMOTRSTAMaritimeproposalPV.pdf RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Transport Financial Penalties Framework and Tool (the Framework) was used to develop the proposals under this objective , including: . Proposal ., Modernise the penalties for the safety offences in the MTA : Align the financial penalty levels of the MTA with modern legislation like HSWA to reduce the risk of the inequitable imposition of penalties for the same severity of offending depending on whether the MTA or HSWA is used. This would enable equal treatment of foreign flagged and domestic ships and crew . . Proposal ., Amend the Maritime (Offences) Regulations and Marine Protection (Offences) Regulations : Make five types of changes to the offences and penalties in the regulations. These include creating new offences; merging offences; removing offences; adding infringement penalties; and setting new financial penalties. The proposal included increases to the maximum financial penalties possible for the safety offences in Part of the MTA (refer paragraph ), as set out in the table below (current amounts turquoise strikethrough ). The maximum financial penalties proposed for individuals in sections , A and A above are significantly higher than the remaining offences as these offences apply to people acting in professional capacities involving large vessels. In terms of the Framework , these offences apply to individuals we consider to be special regulated individuals . There may be legislative vehicles to modernise maritime offences and penalties Proposals were agreed by Cabinet in , but implementation stalled In , the Economic Development Committee (DEV) agreed to propos als to modernise maritime offences and penalties and to issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) (refer DEV MIN and CABMIN). Progress on the RSTA maritime proposals stalled because resources were redirected to other priority work .
NZIER . State highway network investments, Assessing the wider economic benefits NZIER report to Northern Infrastructure Forum . August . The Roads o f National Significance include: Whangarei to Auckland, with the following stages prioritised : alternative to Brynderwyns Whang rei to Port Marsden Warkworth to Wellsford. Tauranga to Auckland, with the following stages prioritised : Cambridge to Pia rere Tauriko West State Highway . Auckland roads: Mill Road the East West Link. Roads to unlock housing growth: Hamilton Southern Links Petone to Grenada Link Road and the Cross Valley Link North West Alternative State Highway (SH ). Other major routes: Takitimu Northern Link Stage Takitimu Northern Link Stage Hawke s Bay Expressway Otaki to North of Levin Second Mt Victoria Tunnel and Basin Reserve upgrade the Hope Bypass the Belfast to Pegasus Motorway and Woodend Bypass. These projects are Crown funded and should not be considered for additional funding. More detail on the Roads of National Significance can be found in Appendix B. Further Roads of National Significance may be added over time.
OF There needs to be consideration on how lessons learnt are shared and made publicly available.
On December , the Cabinet Economic Development Committee agreed that the Auckland regional fuel tax scheme (the Scheme) be varied in the manner set out in Auckland Councils proposal to vary the Scheme DEVMIN refers.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Subject to Cabinet agreement for the submission of the Orders to the
The Civil Aviation (Offences) Regulations (the Regulations ), and the
The Lower North Island Rail Integrated Mobility project is forecast to be funded from a combination of Crown Grants, NLTF and Local Share contributions. The Government expect s NZTA to consider : alternative funding sources to deliver major public transport investments, including Build, Own, Operate, Transfer schemes and value capture new ways of thinking and different delivery models to increas e delivery speed . This modern rapid transit system will support urban development and housing growth, which allows for increased public transport choice, building on the investment already made in the City Rail Link in Auckland and the additional trains to be introduced in Wellington later this decade , and the acceleration of Wellingtons North South, East West, and Harbour Quays bus corridors. The Government is funding KiwiRail to deliver network repairs and upgrades to ready the network for these major improvements. Compl eting Aucklands Rail Network Rebuild and upgrading Wellingtons rail network substations are priorities for the Government .
The Ministers of Transport, Land Information, Environment. Conservation and State Owne d Enterprises RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of There has been a focus on balancing speed and ce rtainty with existing rights and protections A key consideration has been striking the appropriate balance between the need for speed , certainty and efficiency of transport infrastructure works, and the rights and protections provided by each piece of legi slation (such as Mori rights and interests, private property rights, conservation, and environmental protection). Upholding Mori rights and interests was an important consideration when developing the proposed modifications : . Waka Kotahi, KiwiRail, the De partment of Conservation and councils will still need to engage with Mori in relation to any potential impacts on public, private and Mori owned land, Treaty settlements and cultural values. . There will be express requirements for engagement in the OiCs to ensure the Crown continues to meet its obligations when implementing the works the OiCs relate to. This includes obligations in section of the Conservation Act relating to the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi. . Treaty settlement commitments an d rights are maintained and there will be no consequential amendments to, or override of, Treaty settlement legislation or Te Ture Whenua Mori Act. The other important consideration was the need to protect private property rights as part of the streamli ned land acquisition processes: . KiwiRail can only use the streamlined land acquisition processes for compulsory acquisition for freehold title in Awatoto and the Esk Valley. It needs to r ealign rail lines in these locations as the current routes are no lon ger viable, as well as when taking climate change considerations for rebuild into account . The intention is for agreement to be reached with owners where possible to avoid the need for compulsory acquisition. . Waka Kotahi can only use the streamlined land a cquisition processes to temporarily access or occu py land while undertaking recovery works. It will need to rely on the standard Public Works Act processes if it wants to compulsor ily acquire freehold title for the works covered by its OiC. This is because of the limited information about where compulsory acquisition of freehold title may be required at this time . Officials are confident the proposed OiCs are necessary and are in line with the purposes of the SWERL Act. There has been no pre engagement with Mori or councils on the proposed OiCs. This is largely due to the challenges in identifying the locations where the OiCs will apply, particularly the streamlined land acquisition process, and the need to protect consti tutional conventions around sharing information before Cabinet consideration. s ()(h) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of The next step is formal engagement and independent review If Cabinet agrees to progress with the initial OiCs, the Ministry will undertake statutory engagement on the proposals from Tuesda y June to Monday July . A longer period of ten working days (noting the SWERL Act only requires a minimum of three working days) is being proposed due to the complex nature of these OiCs and the rights and protections they involve. Draft OiC s will be reviewed by the Severe Weather Events Review Panel and the Regulations Review Committee in mid July . The intention is for the finalised OiCs to be lodged for consideration by the Cabinet Legislation Committee (LEG) on August and Cabinet and Executive Council on August . The OiCs would then be enacted on August . s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE
The Tak aanini Level Crossings cluster includes the closure of Spartan Road and Manuroa Road and the grade separation of Manuia Road, Taka Street and Walters Road (refer to map in Appendix ). The Takaanini programme is now at notice of requirement stage. Notice of Requirement The Takaanini Level Crossings Project has involved Auckland Transport, as the requiring authority preparing two new notices of requirement (NoR) seeking designations for the construction, operation, maintenance and upgrade of grade separated crossings of the North Island Main Trunk (NIMT) railway in Takaanini. Document s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Appendix One: Taka anini Level Crossing Programme Map
The bulk of these offences are for Refus ing Officer s Request For Blood Specimen . Two companies provide interlocks in New Zealand Draeger and Smartstart.
The ter ms of reference describes the role of the Board and how it will operate during the detailed planning phase. The terms of reference are an important document to provide clarity to the Board about their role in this complex programme. They have to explain how the Board fits within and is supported by the bespoke governance arrangements and organising model Cabinet approved in December . The terms of reference will have a wide audience given the number of agencies that will play key roles in advancing the programme and achieving the desired outcomes. This includes members of the Board, Crown and partner agencies, mana whenua and Auckland Council who will work together on the Auckland Light Rail project. The terms of reference have been developed on a principles basis, except where specificity is required. This means that the Board will need to do further work to define its policies and procedures and agree a set of KPIs. The terms of reference are part of a set of arrangements being put in place to enable the Board to operate. This includes a delegations framework between the Ministry of Transport and the ALR Board which will provide financial, human resource and, risk and reputational delegations. Also a services agreement between Waka Kotahi and the Ministry of Transport, to provide the services to the ALR Unit which it will need to function. For example, office space and information technology. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Item . Balancing the need for the Board to have autonomy against the need for the Sponsors to provide direction. . The role of observers on the Board. . Establishing that the Board are ultimately accountable to the three ALR Ministers . Officials have developed proposed responses to each of these issues and are seeking the views of Sponsors on these to finalise the terms of reference. The role of the Board with regard to the ALR Project and the Programme The board is part of a bespoke organising model and set of governance arrangements in which there is both Sponsor (Crown, Auckland Council and mana whenua) and project (ALR Board)level governance. In developing the Sponsors Agreement Heads of Terms, the scope of the ALR Programme and ALR Project were described. The ALR Programme comprises a broad programme of work which includes: the ALR project itself (the light rail transport infrastructure and associated urban development activities) the investments and interventions required to realise the benefits of investment in ALR project the associated interactions between ALRCCM and decisions made elsewhere in respect of Aucklands growth and development, including large scale projects (LSPs) underway with Kinga Ora and other rapid transit projects in Auckland such as the Additional Waitemat Harbour Crossing (AWHC) and the City Rail Link (CRL).
The value of Auckland Transport s roads is based on its replacement cost. Recent pressures on roading input costs (i.e., Inflation, supply chain issues etc.) has increased replacement costs resulting in higher roading asset values and depreciation. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Entity Delivery highlight Waka Kotahi Waka Kotahi trial of safety cameras in Auckland On May, Waka Kotahi started a six month trial using two cameras in Auckland to detect instances of drivers using handheld mobile phones. This was the first of its kind in Aotearoa. Over the first two months of the trial a total of , potential mobile phone use offences have been detected an average of per day, representing . per cent of the total vehicles that travelled through the camera sites during the two months.
Transport Orders in Council to facilitate the repair and rebuild Engagement
Upcoming briefings to Associate Minister of Transport Due Week Ending Title Friday August Changes needed to maritime legislation to address issues arising from the exercise of local navigation safety regulatory powers Friday August Meeting with NZ Shipping Federation, September As per the request from your Office, this briefing will support the Ministers meeting with John Harbord and David Borcoski of the NZ Shipping Federation. Friday September Options for maritime legislation This joint MinistryMNZ briefing will set out options for advancing critical changes to maritime legislation. Friday September Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek your agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rules relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. Friday November
Upcoming briefings to Associate Minister of Transport Due Week Ending Title Friday August Oil Pollution Advisory Committee Terms of Reference This briefing seeks your approval of a Terms of Reference for the Oil Pollution Advisory Committee. Friday August Proactive Release of papers relating to consultation on reform of the maritime design, construction and equipment rule set This briefing seek s your agreement to proactively publish Cabinet material and key papers relating to consultation on proposed reforms to Maritime Rules. Friday August Meeting with MetService Board and CEO, on Wednesday August This briefing provides you with the agenda and talking points for your meeting with the MetService Chair and CEO. Friday August Speech to the New Zealand Heavy Haulage Association year anniversary celebration This briefing provides background information to support your attendance at the New Zealand Heavy Haulage Association year anniversary celebration at Parliament on Wednesday August . A draft speech has been provided to your Office. Friday September Options for Maritime Legislation The Ministry and Maritime NZ have started scoping a review of primary maritime legislation to ensure it is fit for purpose given technological changes and longstanding gaps in the regulatory framework. This briefing sets out options for advancing critical changes to m aritime legislation, for discussion with you . The title and description of this deliverable have been amended to align with the portfolio work programme update.
Your guide to the Transport System
BUDGET SENSITIVE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE
https:www.beehive.govt.nzreleasegovernmentappointsinvestigatorworkchristchurchcitycouncilimprovehousingsupply https:www.beehive.govt.nzreleasebetterconditionswaybusdrivers ylqdcxs RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Additionally, Cabinet already having approved million from Northern Pathway towards Eastern Busway ENVMIN refers is helping induce demand for public transport in one of Au cklands areas with the highest reliance on private vehicle use. These investments are ensuring that public transport uptake is increasing while addressing driver shortages by improving their working conditions. Outcomes expected This programme over a five tosixyear period is expected to deliver a range of benefits including: . increase in annual public transport trips by . million . decrease in total private Vehicle Kilometres Travelled (VKT) on the Greater Christchurch network by . million per year. Funding the project The total cost to deliver this programme is million (P) and is expected to be cofunded by the Christchurch City Council, Environment Canterbury, Selwyn District Council and Waimakariri District Council. There may be some contribution through the NLTF as well. This funding profile has not yet been confirmed. Initially, due to the uncertainty of the COVID pandemic and associated fiscal constraints, an implementation schedule over ten years was agreed. Subsequently, given the urgency to proactively address growing VKT and emissions, elected representatives from Christchurch City Council, Environment Canterbury and Selwyn District Council agreed Notices of Motion to investigate the acceleration of the project to around five tosix years . Waka Kotahi has been very supportive of a more ambitious implementation timeframe, and the contribution it would make to achieving the subregional VKT reduction targets and improved transport choice. While the councils have allowed budget in their Long Term Plans (LTP) for their share of funding according to the previous agreed implementation schedule, Christchurch City Council, and Environment Canterbury in particular, are concerned that the accelerated schedule will provide affordability challenges, resulting in substantial rate increases. Similarly, while the initially agreed implementation schedule is accounted for in the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) over the next ten years, there are uncertainties as to whether the NLTF would be sufficient to provide for the accelerated funding requirements BRI refers. Reallocated Northern Pathway funding of million for this programme would help: . accelerate delivery of the programme, which will speed up mode shift to public transport . provide greater certainty that this project could be undertaken in a timely manner that positively contributes toward meeting the subregional VK T reduction target by . provide assurance that the accelerated implementation of this project is not seen as putting an even higher financial burden on residents already facing cost of living challenges. ylqdcxs RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E The final funding profile of all cofunders of this project is still being determined but works on this programme are expected to begin mid tolate . We, therefore, seek Cabinet approval for funding of million from the reallocated Northern Pathway funding but, to authorise us as Joint Ministers to drawdown on this funding and make any consequential changes to appropriations once the funding profile has been determined. Until the funding profile of this programme has been confirmed, this funding of million will not be drawn down. Approving this funding now but, drawing down later will provide funding certainty now to the parties delivering this programme and will encourage greater momentum in its delivery. ylqdcxs Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E https:www.nzta.govt.nzprojectstearatupuangauranga topitoone ylqdcxs Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements As mentioned previously, since the final funding profile of all cofunders of this project is still being determined, we are seeking Cabinet to approve million from the tagged capital contingency funding for this project but, authorise us to drawdown on this funding and make consequential decisions on the appropriations once the funding profile has been determined. The Crown will not own any assets of this project, which means the tagged capital contingency funding will need to be swapped from capital to operating expenditure with a corresponding impact on the operating balance and net Crown debt. This swap will need to occur because the tagged capital contingency described above is capital funding, and the funding required to support this project would be operating (as it is funding a project not owned by the Crown). ylqdcxs Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Legislative Implications There are no legislative implications arising from this paper. Impact Analysis Impact analysis requirements do not apply to the proposal in this paper. Climate Implications of Policy Assessment Cabinet noted that any new projects programmes being funded from the reallocated Northern Pathway funding must have a full Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) completed, before tagged capital contingency can be drawn down CAB MIN. refers. The CIPA team has been consulted and confirms that the CIPA requirements apply to both projects in this proposal as a key objective is to reduce emissions. Both projects are well aligned with the key action in the transport chapter of New Zealands first Emissions Reduction Plan to reduce reliance on cars and support people to walk, cycle and use public transport. Once implemented, these projects are expected to contribute to a reduction in transport emissions. Modelling of the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme indicates that emissions would be reduced by around , tonnes CO e across the first two emissions budget periods ( cumulative). This is
note that on July the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee authorised the
note that the Land Transport (Register of Land Transport Records Speed
note that the Land Transport Management (Regional Fuel Tax Scheme Auckland Region) Amendment Order will give effect to recommendation above;
noted that Cabinet agreed that drawdown of tagged capital contingency funding was subject
noted that the Civil Aviation (Offences) Regulations (Regulations) will give effect to
noted that the Land Transport (Register of Land Transport Records Speed Limits)
noted that the Minister of Transport (the Minister) has reviewed the Penlink tolling scheme
P a g e We support the defined strategic priorities and are particularly pleased to note that the GPS specifically acknowledges the interconnectedness of these priorities. We consider that previous investment strategies have been too siloed and have failed to adequately consider fully , societal and environmental impacts. We consider the explicit acknowledgement of interconnected priorities addresses this at a strategic level . However, we suggest that greater clarity around the impact of Movement as a Service on these priorities would be beneficial. We are also concerned that the draft GPS lacks a clear policy framework to support the delivery of the defined strategic outcomes. Whilst the principles for investment are necessary, we do not consider them sufficient. We consider them in isolation to be insufficiently transformative and that they could easily be utilised to bolster the status quo. We suggest that the se principles be strengthened by the inclusion of a hierarchy of treatments eg fig . We believe that mandated inclusion of this hierarchy in decision making would alleviate the observed disruption to projects through political pressure. It would also provide a stable basis for operational level planning and resource allocation that avoids fragmentation of effort into a series of piecemeal un coordinated projects . This approach also aligns with the wider framework by considering land use and service delivery as integral parts of the wider transport system.
) Replace the Maximum Expenditure value for years , , in Table on page with the following:
. Are there any change s you would like to see in the OiC proposing streamlined LTMA planning and funding processes
. Commencement This Notice comes into force on April .
. Commercial factors New and used cle an car and light commercial supply Private, commercial and government fleet transition Emerging technologies Mobility as a Service (Maas) TaaS (Transport as a Service) Training and skills required to support the transition Electric vehicle battery recycl ability
. Genuine competition between airlines is vital for consumers and all forms of coordination between airlines , including joint ventures and alliances, must always be thoroughly scrutinised to ensure they result in strong consumer benefits. As we remain in a period wh ere global aviation is rebuilding, capacity is constrained, and airfares are high, it is even more crucial to ensure any airline cooperation results in clear benefits for consumers and the wider economy.
. Introduction This report summarises analysis of driver licensing and road crash data under taken for the New Zealand Ministry of Transport. The objectives of the analysis were to empirically evaluate the road safety related effects of some of the recent changes to New Zealands three stage graduated driver licensing system (GDLS), and to study s ome other aspects of the relationships between driver licensing and road safety. The analysis was limited to drivers with Class (light motor vehicle) licences and riders with Class (motorcycle) licences. .. Scope of the analysis The following is a summary of topics that were determined to be in and out of the scope of this analysis. Section of the Technical Report describes the scope of the analysis requested by the Ministry of Transport. Driver licensing and road safety: Topic s in scope The general aspects of the relationships between driver licensing and road safety included in scope are: Highlevel analysis of patterns and trends in crash rates by licence stage and driver or rider gender, age, and region of residence. More de tailed comparisons of crash rates for restricted versus full licence holders. Evaluation of the effectiveness of the night time restriction for people holding restricted licences at preventing crashes. Analysis of the relationships between progression thro ugh the licence stages and crash rates. In particular, whether there are differences in crash rates for people who progress versus those who do not andor people who progress relatively quickly versus those who progress more slowly. Comparison of crash rat es for fully licensed drivers with advanced driving certificates compared to those without (for Class only). Driver licensing and road safety: Topics out of scope Specific topics that are outside the scope of this analysis include: Heavy vehicle driver l icensing (this was the subject of a separate review in ). How the GDLS is operationalised by NZTA, including the testing processes, location and number of testing stations, the content of licence tests, costs of testing, etc. Implications of driver li censing for access to education and employment, and wider economic and equity implications of the driver licensing system. To manage its scale and complexity, this project focuses on road safety outcomes. Any relationship between driver ethnicity and licen sing or road safety outcomes (age and gender were analysed since they are recorded in the licensing data used for this analysis; ethnicity is not).
. Maximise new opportunities to uplift funding through the National Land Transport Fund by identifying and targeting projects that support tourism and regional development outcomes. . Focus on how we sustainably fund access and mobility initiatives in rural communities. . Advocate for new models of cross agency funding. . Maximise new funding sources as they become available. . Maintain existing assets.
. Study Phases . Orientation and Design Phase The projects first phase involved establishing a clear understanding of the project requirements, engaging with key stakeholders, and an initial scan of the available data and information. An evaluation framework was developed as part of this phase. An inception meeting was held with the Te Manat Waka team, where the details of the project were confirmed as follows: project scope (including what was outside the scope) milestones and programme delivery Technical Advisory Group requirement and composition communications approach and quality control processes dissemination opportunities (to increase uptake) roles and responsibilities output shape and focus. The Orientation and Design steps included the following: An initial scan of the GPS , , and and existing indicators that could be used to track mode shift inputs, outputs, and outcomes, allowing us to identify obvious sources, gaps and limitations of the data. An orientation workshop at tended by key investment and decision making practitioners from Te Manat Waka, Waka Kotahi, and local authorities described the current state of play for implementing the GPS. An evaluation framework designed to form the project evaluation and reporting b asis. This was based on insights from the workshop. A review of Te Manat Wakas Value for Money (VfM) assessment model to de termine how best to embed it in the evaluation framework. The initial scan of the three GPS documents, existing indicators of mode shift, and the orientation workshop led to the development of an initial model to broadly represent a conceptual pathway betw een the GPS and mode shift (refer to Figure ). In the development process, the conceptual pathway was discussed and refined with the workshop attendees. In addition to the GPS annual reporting, identified indicator sources included Census travel statistics, NZ Household Travel Survey, mode share statistics in council reports, Waka Kotahi Storymap outputs, online reports of pedestrian cycling automatic counters and manual cordon count data, operational funding for walking, cycling, and public transport from council reports . . STUDY PHASES
. Subject to paragraph , the designated airline of each Party may use aircraft (or aircraft and crew) leased from any company, including other airlines, provided that:
. Te Runanganui o Ngati Porou . Rongowhakaata
. The exemptions granted by this Article shall apply to the items referred to in paragraph :
. The survey consisted of questions that combined numerical assessments and open text qualitative assessment. Over the preceding months since standing up the unit, the ETU has worked with organisations in the emerging technologies space. These have r anged from traditional organisations such as Air New Zealand, to new entrants such as Dawn Aerospace, through to start ups working on novel technologies such as Aquila. The ETU provided extensive Project Advisor support to of these organisations and thi s was the group that was surveyed.
. This report presents the Eke Panuku and K inga Ora Joint Board Committees recommendations and seeks approval of the attached Programme Busines s Case, and decisions on key issues affecting delivery of the Programme. It records recommended approaches to timing, staging, and quality to deliver on the preferred delivery option for Maungawhau and Karanga a Hape. It includes a precinct development pla n which will be the key document to guide development partners to deliver on CRL Sponsors agreed Vision and Strategic Choices.
. Unless immediate action is essential to prevent noncompliance with paragraphs (b) or (c), the rights established in this Article shall be exercised only after consultations with the Party designating the airline, in conformity with Article (Consultations). . A Party that has exercised its right to withhold, revoke, limit, suspend , or impose conditions on the operating authori sation or technical permissions of an airline in accordance with paragraph shall notify the Depositary of its actions and the Depositary shall thereafter promptly inform the Parties.
. There is no doubt government is proposing to put forward a lot of money for infrastructure development. But given the depth of the Covid impact on the New Zealand economy, we question the approach in the GPS and whether the expenditure proposals remain valid. Recently ( April ) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Ministers Twyford and Peters announced workers road and rail projects. . This is against a backdrop of large existing projects that have been shut down by Covid and are struggling to get back up and running. . Big announcements need to be backed up by the ability to deliver actual outcomes in a global environment that restricts or bans travel by experienced personnel and labour from overseas. . The context of RTF s comments . The RTF comments on GPS are confined to the policy aspects that openly cast aspersions on commercial road freight and seemingly present a thinlyveiled attempt to demonise trucking as unsafe , to help promote rail services in some sort of ascendency in the minds of the public. . We see a policy approach drifting toward some form of political aspiration instead of leading infrastructure expenditure toward an economically viable strategic goal, providing for investment that would , and commonly shared safety outcomes. . RTF has a significant interest in the GPS policy outline specific to road freight, as the new policy framework will almost certainly impact directly and indirectly on the road freight sector. It is within this context we offer our comments. . Applying the strategic direction to land transport investment; page
... Gap Analysis Populating the framework from th e stocktake of indicators highlighted gaps. A greater range of indicators was readily available from the existing reporting process at the mode shift outcome end of the pathway between the GPS and achieving mode shift. While indicators were found for all t he intersections between dimensions, the spatial and temporal maturity of the indicators varied considerably. The indicators included in the stocktake spreadsheet (GPS indicator maturity tab) were assigned one of the following maturity categories based on their availability across different scales and times: Indicator available at all scales and periods. Indicator available at identified scales and periods can be calculated for others. Indicator only available at identified scales and periods. Indicator d ata incomplete in some locations and times. As described above, some of these gaps are due to limitations on the scale of indicators for example, an indicator was only available or appropriate at a local level and, therefore, not included at Regional or national levels. The SUM included a range of novel indicators such as the space dedicated to sustainable urban mobility and time and cost comparisons for public transport and private vehicle journeys. At the time of writing, these were only available for five cities (Auckland, Hamilton, Tauranga, Wellington and Christchurch). Many of the monitoring indicators were restricted to recent periods. The SUM indicators were created using the latest data availabl e in and, therefore, did not provide a look back at the transport situation during past GPS periods. As noted above, there may be other options than retrospectively calculating many of these indicators for past periods. For example, the public transpo rt and private vehicle time and cost comparisons ( SUM , p. ) relied on current data on transport networks, fare prices, and vehicle running costs. An investigation would be needed to determine whether the archive of this information is available in sufficient detail to allow the indicator calculation methods to be replicated for past years. Another issue is that the indicator reporti ng periods do not always align with GPS cycles. For example, Statistics New Zealands five yearly Census provides useful information on travel to work and education. However, the gap between reporting makes it challenging to use the data to see the impact of the three yearly GPS. Many indicators also rely on reporting by multiple organisations, which can result in missing or partial data for some locations. These include many transport network assessment indicators, such as the average punctuality of bus s ervices or the number of pedestrian crossings per square kilometre. The SUM benchmarking exercise illustrated the challenge of devel oping comparable indicators that can be applied across multiple organisations. For example, information on service levels for cycling infrastructure was not readily available in the centralised RAMM (Road Assessment and Maintenance Management) database at the time of data collection (Figure ). . STUDY PHASES
. Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) annual reporting GPS sets out how money from the National Land Transport Fund is allocated towards achieving the Governments transport priorities. Each GPS sets up the priorities for the following year period, and is reviewed and every years. Progress against GPS strategic priorities are reported annually. Ongoing Year annual report against GPS completed. Year annual report against GPS Develop a new GPS reporting dashboard Apply the Transport Sector Monitoring Framework to develop a monitoring framework and reporting indicators for GPS Year annual report against GPS Year annual report against GPS
. Replying to Ministerial correspondence and Parliamentary Questions on issues relating to the above; . Attending transport sector events on my behalf andor at my request;
. Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) evaluations Up to two evaluations are undertaken each year to: ) improve understanding of the impact and effectiveness of GPS, and ) support the continuous improvement of the GPS and the transport investment appraisal system. A review of the approach of value for money Oneoff Supported the implementation of the new assessment model Incorporate the value for money assessment model into GPS development and wider work Continue to build on work from previous year Continue to build on work from previous year A review of state highway maintenance activity class Oneoff Review completed Support lessons learnt GPS evaluation Oneoff Evaluation commenced Complete review and disseminate findings Mode shift in the GPS Oneoff Evaluation commenced Complete review and disseminate findings Explore and develop standardised approach in monitoring and evaluating the GPS Oneoff Scope, procure and complete work An evaluation on the local road maintenance activity class Oneoff Scope, procure and commence evaluation Complete evaluation and disseminate findings An evaluation on the walking and cycling improvement activity class Oneoff Scope, procure and commence evaluation Complete evaluation and disseminate findings GPS evaluationsreviews topic TBC Oneoff Up to evaluations reviews Up to evaluations reviews
.. Workshop An online mapping workshop involving Te Manat Waka and Technical Advisory Group representatives was held, where attendees were provided with the synthesised findings and a discussion about the implications for evaluating the GPS impact on mode shift. The workshop allowed attendees to identify new or different insights from work undertaken and signal focus areas for analysis. Two breakout sessions were used to discuss and debate the synthesised findings from phases , noting surprises, critical gaps and priorities for improving the GPS to achieve mod e shift. Secondly, a set of deliberately positional statements on the implications of the synthesised findings for evaluation (Table ) were used to prompt discussion about evaluating the GPS and invite agreement, disagreement, comments, and explanati ons. Table Summarised statements of the implications of the evaluation of the GPS on mode shift Summary statements for workshop discussion agree, disagree, explain A difference should be observable in what was prioritised for funding at local levels. What was funded may not reflect what is most effective at achieving mode shift. The scope of change will be constrained (by the existing funding mechanism). Specific mode shift promoting classes should see more projects put forward and funded. Moderating processes may not align with priority signals in the GPS. Better open built environment data will enable better evaluation of GPS in the future. GPS needs to interact with other transport funds to have gr eater impact on mode shift. GPS needs to interact with other drivers to have greater impact on mode shift.
. Engaging with officials and me on Budget initiatives that are relevant to your areas of delegation. . Other initiatives as agreed from time to time by us. The above delegations are subject to the conditions set out in this letter. Please also refer to paragraphs . to . of the Cabinet Manual, which deal with the relationship between Ministers and Associate Ministers. Financial and statutory responsibilities As portfolio Minister, I have final responsibility for, and overall control of the Ministry of Transport and over all Crown entities within the portfolio. I am also responsible for Vote Transport and for any relevant statutory functions of the Minister. Where it is required for the purpose of the delegated functions, or whenever I am absent, you may sign documents or authorisations on my behalf. You should show clearly that you are signing on my behalf, by signing for the Minister of Transport. Policy Although you will have responsibility for matters of policy in relation to the above, any significant policy decisions should be discussed with me. Public statements I expect you to take responsibility for all communications regarding your areas of responsibility, including Ministerial correspondence, press statements and public announcements. Ministerial correspondence concerning significant policy issues should be prepared by the Ministry of Transport andor Waka Kotahi for my signature, where appropriate. Any significant public announcements should be discussed with me prior to release and, in some cases, may be made either by me or the Prime Minister. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT My office can provide assistance with media, communication strategies or speech notes, if you require. Relations with the DepartmentMinistry You may contact the Ministry of Transport andor Waka Kotahi on all matters for which you have delegated responsibility. All such inquiries should be made via the relevant Chief Executive or a designated contact person. I expect to be kept fully informed of all significant issues and the relevant Chief Executive is, of course, free to raise any matter concerning your delegated functions with me. You are welcome to attend regular briefing sessions with departmental officials that are held in my office. You may arrange, through my office, to have your own regular briefing sessions or ad hoc meetings with departmental officials to discuss matters relating to your areas of responsibility. A designated member of my office may attend any such meeting. Communications between us You should ensure that I am fully briefed on the actions that you think are necessary to undertake in relation to your delegated responsibilities. All significant papers, letters and directions to the Department should be copied to me for my information. In particular, you need to ensure I receive the earliest warning of any issues that have the potential to become controversial. In turn, I will keep you informed of my actions in relation to your areas of responsibility. I will also consult with you on policy issues, and on matters related to the implementation of policy initiatives within the Transport portfolio where relevant to your delegation. To ensure maximum cooperation and coordination, I propose that we meet regularly to coordinate our actions, and to share views and ideas. Cabinet and Cabinet committee papers The rules on the submission of papers to Cabinet and Cabinet committees are set out in Chapter of the Cabinet Manual. In particular, in terms of paragraph ., you may submit papers to Cabinet and Cabinet committees within your designated areas of responsibility, provided that the submission clearly indicates that I have been consulted and have agreed that the paper may be lodged. You will have access (for example, via CabNet) to all submissions and minutes, of those Cabinet committees of which you are a member. You will also have access to those submissions relating to your delegated responsibilities that are dealt with at any other Cabinet committee. Information held by you as Associate Minister Under the Official Information Act , all papers held by you in relation to your Associate Minister responsibilities within this portfolio are deemed to be held on my RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT behalf. Similarly, you will be treated as my agent, where necessary, for the purposes of the Privacy Act . You will be responsible for all Official Information Act requests in the areas of your delegated responsibility. Parliamentary responsibilities Parliamentary questions relating to your delegated areas of responsibility will be addressed to you. In my absence, you may also be required to answer oral Parliamentary questions on my behalf. Next steps A summary of the above delegations will be on the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinets website, and included in a Schedule of Responsibilities Delegated to Associate Ministers and Parliamentary UnderSecretaries . The Schedule will be presented to the House of Representatives to clarify Ministerial accountability so that, for example, Parliamentary questions can be directed to the appropriate Ministers for answer. I look forward to working with you in the Transport portfolio. Please do not hesitate to discuss these delegations with me at any time.
.. note that the interim arrangements (., . and . ) are within the scope of the existing appropriation agree to fund ECANs interim proposal to provide a percent concession for yearolds using the ondemand service in Timaru recommended Yes No
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
The Transport Records Order is made under sections () and AAA of
WCC and GWRC will soon be commencing the development of Long Term Plans (for adoption in ). These plans will need to explain the respective shares of LGWM costs, and any rates increasesalternative revenue sources needed to provide that share. We consider that more work is required on the governance and delivery arrangements for the Transformational Programme We also consider that there is a need to think carefully about the Crowns role in the governance and delivery of the Transformational Programme. If the Crown is going to be funding its share directly (rather than through the NLTF), then this implies a greater need for Crown involvement in governance and decision making, or some other arrangement that manages the Crowns exposure to risk (for example, ringfenced funding). We are also mindful that while Waka Kotahi has a great deal of experience and expertise to deliver state highway projects, this is not the case for MRT. We also do not have an established approach for delivering these projects in New Zealand. We understand that the partners have agreed that this is an area of conce rn, and such expertise needs to be brought into LGWM. Realising the benefits of LGWM depends on the delivery of urban development and intensification initiatives The governance and delivery arrangements also need to ensure good integration between LGWM tra nsport investments and work to realise urban development and intensification opportunities. These form a large part of the overall benefits associated with LGWM, particularly along the proposed MRT corridor. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Development an d Kinga Ora have been working with LGWM. As the Transformational Programme moves forward, we will need to think about the most effective way to integrate them with governance and decision making to ensure that these opportunities are realised. s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSI FIED Page of We understa nd you are having these discussions with the LGWM partners, and that all partners agree there is a need to streamline decision making processes . We also understand that there was agreement to add a Crown representative to the governance arrangements. We ha ve prepared a progress update letter for you to share with some of your Cabinet colleagues The purpose of the attached letter is to provide a progress update for some of your Cabinet colleagues on LGWM. The letter also summarises some of the key issues with the LGWM programme (covered in this briefing) . We recommend that you share the letter with the following group of Cabinet ministers: . Hon Grant Robertson, Minister of Finance . Hon Megan Woods, Minister of Housing and Minister of Infrastructure . Hon David Parker, Minister for the Environment . Hon Kieran McAnulty, Minister for Local Government. You may also wish to consider sharing the letter with other Wellington based MPs, including: . Rt Hon Chris Hipkins, MP for Remutaka . Hon Ginny Andersen, MP for Hutt South . Hon Barbara Edmonds, MP for Mana . Greg OConnor, MP for Ohariu . Paul Eagle, MP for Rongo tai. Next steps We are keen to meet with you to discuss how you wish to progress LGWM. This discussion should include the role of officials moving forward, and the role of the Crown in governance arrangements for the Transformational Programme. If you wish to intervene now, we will work with you and Treasury on a timeline for seeking Cabinet decisions
Your guide to the Transport System
. Air New Zealand and Jetstar operate domestic air routes to and from Auckland between them, and of those , (or ) are a monopoly routes, with the remaining duopoly routes .
. note that if you agree with the proposed approach, further decisions around drawdown of existing tagged contingency amounts and updates to appropriations will be required upon finalising arrangements and updating delegation letters.
Qualifications Rumaki Reo , Level Te Wnanga Takiura
(Chair from )
, , , , , Page LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Commercials(used) by month A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O , , , , , , , , , Page LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: David Crawford To: M Wood (MIN) Cc: Elena Hood ; Tony Frost (Parliament) Subject: Clean Car Discount Questions Tuesday, May Dear Minister Over the last few working days, members have been seeking my guidance on a range of matters around the operation of the clean car discount for . I am unable to answer some of their questions and therefore need to seek official guidance on anumber of matters. The backdrop to these questions arises from the long lead times we have forthe supply of new vehicles, especially those in strong demand and for EVs. Because the supply of EVs, especially BEVs, is rationed to our market most BEVs coming to New Zealand during have already been presold. Distributors are now taking orders for . If the parameters around the clean car discount for change then this not only creates afinancial risk for Distributors making it also affects their model supply planning. Supplies for are already being ordered so understanding any changes to he CCD now is becomingincreasingly important. I am seeking your guidance on the following: Will the k cap for a rebate remain for or with this change If it changes when canwe expect to be informed of this Will the CO ranges for a discount, the neutral band and for a fee change for Again,when can we expect to be informed of this Kind regardsDavid Crawford, Chief Ex cutive Officer ListingMIA RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: David Crawford To: M Wood (MIN) Cc: Elena Hood ; Ewan Delany ; Mark Stockdale Subject: Letter from the MIA on Clean Car Discount Tuesday, July Attachments: CCD Limit Change Request July .pdf Dear Minister Please see, attached, a letter from the MIA requesting consideration be given to adjusting the Clean Car Discount Cap. Kind regardsDavid Crawford, Chief Executive Officer ListingMIA RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Tuesday July Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport m.woodministers.govt.nz Clean Car Discount Request to Review the Cap Level Dear Minister I have been reviewing the post April operation alisation of the Clean Car Discount with members of the MIA. I am pleased to say that implementation of the full Clean Car Discount from April has been without serious hiccups for the new car sector, although w e have had minor issues with separating model generations (different CO values) in a small number of cases. However, one matter has begun to make itself felt and that is the rising cost of production resulting in ongoi ng model price adjustments Upward price creep is unavoidable. Models that previously were in the k to range are increasingly now falling into the k to k range, resulting in fewer models being eligible for the discount. We request that consi deration is given to amending the cap limits for the calendar year. We ask that you either: Lift the CCD cap from , to ,, or If this is not judged political acceptable, we request consideration be given to a graduated discount between k and k, with vehicles below receiving the full discount based on their CO output, vehicles between k and k receiving of the eligible discount and vehicles from k to k receiving of the eligible discount. Kind regards David Cr awford Chief Executive Officer RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Kit Wilkerson Kitvia.org.nz Dear Kit, Thank you for your email received July , which outlined VIAs concerns regarding the Clean Car Discount (CCD) and called for a delay to the implementation of the Clean Car Standard (CCS). I would like to acknowledge VIA support of the CCD to and your ongoing engagement with Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency to assist in the implementation of the discount. As with any new policy it can be expected that there will be challenges with implementation, which I recognise has often fallen to your members to help in resolving. However it is important that these issues are in seen in the wider context. In its first year, the CCD has proven a huge success with more than , light electric and non plugin hybrid vehicles registered, resulting in significant emissions reductions across cars coming into New Zealand. It has also clearly influenced importers of vehicles, who in many cases have been importing lower emitting vehicles into the New Zealand market to meet demand this is the scheme working as it is meant to, to clean up our fleet. This year we have also witnessed multiple examples of the very real impacts climate change will have on our country. There remains a strong need and public expectation for the Government to continue to deliver on meaningful action on climate change. The CCS is a key component of our response and it will continue to as planned. I have been in contact with Waka Kotahi to suggest they continue to work with VIA over use of the data they have access to. I am informed that Regulatory Services Chief Operating Officer, Brett Aldridge had a constructive conversation with VIA Chief Executive, David Vinsen, yesterday afternoon and undertook to investigate how Waka Kotahi could use the data VIA has access and to hasten the establishment of the new working group to resolve operational issues. I continue to be open to feedback on how the implementation of both policies are going and responding to issues that are raised. I have asked senior officials at Waka Kotahi to commence an assessment of the CCD and the concerns you have raised to determine if we can iron out any remaining obstacles. My hope is that you, and VIAs members, will continue to assist us as we work through this assessment, so the system can continue to deliver for New Zealanders and planet. Yours sincerely, Michael Wood Minister of Transport LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: Kit Wilkerson To: M Wood (MIN) Cc: David Vinsen Subject: VIAs statement regarding withdrawing support for the Clean Car Programme Embargoed Sunday, July Attachments: VIA Clean Car Programme End of Support Press Release.pdf Good evening Minister Wood, Per your discussion with David Vinsen, attached is VIAs statement regarding withdrawing support for the Clean Car Programme. The statement is embargoed until it passes a final vote by the VIA Council. We expect this to occur on Tuesday, July . We have been working hard with your officials to try to solve these issues, and we will continue to do so. We have also been trying to manage the negative impressions of he industry;unfortunately, the frustration within the industry is boiling over. Feel free to contact me with any questions or clarification.Best Regards, Kit Wilkerson Head of Policy and Strategy Imported Motor Vehicle Industry Ass ciation Web: www.via.org.nz Email: kitvia org nz The information transmitted is in ended only for the person or entity to which it is addressed and may contain confidential andor privileged material. Any review, retransmission, dissemination, or other use of, or taking of any other action in relianceupon, this information by persons or entities other than the intended recipient is prohibited. If you received this in error,please contact the sender and delete the material from any computer. LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT s ()(a) News Release Not for Immediate Release Publication VIA Imported Motor Vehicle Industry Association July VIA withdraws support for the Clean Car programme. VIA, the Imported Motor Vehicle Industry Association, has withdrawn its support for the Clean Car Programme due to ongoing failures in implementation in the implementation of the Clean Car Discount, first phase of the programme. While VIA continues to su pport the stated goal of the Clean Car Programme, to reduce carbon emissions and incentivise the transition to a carbon neutral transport system, it was never our preferred option for achieving that goal. The Programme was not appropriate for our unique su pply dynamic, and we would have preferred to work with government to develop a scheme that was suitable to New Zealand. Unfortunately, that option was denied to us, so we did our best to contribute to the Clean Car Programme providing feedback and sugges tions to mould it for the New Zealand context. In the end, we were satisfied that, while not perfect, the Clean Car Programme would positively contribute toward the stated goals at a cost the industry could endure. VIA took the decision to support the Cl ean Car Programme. VIA notes, however, that there have since been a multitude of design changes and failures, both fundamental and superficial, to the Clean Car Programme that were not consulted on and only became apparent as the programme was implemented. These changes are creating conditions that VIA simply cannot support. While some of the issues might seem minor or insignificant , and others are legacy biases , the culmination of these changes in combination with aspects of the Programme we ha ve always opposed, is contributing to unfair market conditions, increased costs to consumers and industry, decreasing public trust in parallel imports, and decreased efficacy of the Programme. We expect these issues be further aggravated by the implementat ion of the Clean Car Standard. Other failures of implementation, such as the ongoing issues with the supply and acceptance of vehicle data, are such a large concern that they alone warrant and justify our cessation of support for the Programme The follo wing highlights some of the reasons VIA can no longer support the Clean Car Programme (not exhaustive and in no particular order): .Application of a flawed safety regime to eligibility to Clean Car Programme subsidies that unfairly disadvantages light effi cient used imports. .Unequal and unfair treatment of PHEVs depending on whether imported by a parallel importer or OEM sponsored importer. .Redesign of the used vehicle penalty scheme that is unfair and counter to previous agreements and first principle desi gn justifications of the Programme. .The use of unladen weight as opposed to tare weight without consultation or justification . LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT .Incomplete vehicle data coupled with an unwillingness to work with parallel importers to accept vehicle data. .The inability t o accurately identify vehic les consistently . .A supplement al data rule, Vehicle Efficiency and Emissions Data (VEED) , that prioritises the deflection of liability over the provision of accurate data . .The willingness to knowingly use flawed data in calculating feebates. .Deflection or denial of responsibility for known errors in vehicle data and in the application of that vehicle data. .Failure to communicate known issues with industry and the public. .Failure to provide appropriate communication channe ls or timeframes for resolving data issues. .Unwillingness to recognise parallel importers as responsible agents for the goods they import. .Unfair treatment of parallel importers versus OEM sponsored importers in the applicat on of the VEED in general. .Uneq ual treatment of functionally new vehicles. .Failure to provide the industry with a letter of indemnity for knowingly allowing the government to steal from car buyers through the application of flawed or unfairly applied data. All the points in the list ab ove have been raised to officials at either NZTA Waka Kotahi andor the Ministry of Transport; a few of the points are still being discussed, most of them have seemingly been ignored. It is VIAs strong recommendation that the implementation of the Clean Car Standard be delayed until the existing flaws in the Clean Car Discount are addressed. Failure to heed VIAs recommendation will further exacerbate the current issues by the extension of the issues into the Clean Car Standard. This does not even consid er the potential of compounding the issues with poor Clean Car Standard design and implementation choices, known and unknown. The government is misleading the public by using incomplete data, resulting in unfair penalties being charged . This has been term ed carbon theft by the industry . The public may not be aware they are being cheated, but VIA has access to accurate and comprehensive vehicle data, and we can correctly identify vehicles; we are well informed on the correct penalties and credits. VIA, and the vehicle import industry, will not accept such unfairness when the second phase of the programme, the Clean Car Standard which will be aimed at importer s, is implemented . If the programme had been implemented as proposed and agreed, VIA would still support it. VIA will reassess its policy position once the issues with the implementation of the Clean Car Programme have been satisfactorily addressed. END For more information contac t Kit Wilkerson, Head of Policy and Strategy, VIA Mob ile: , Email: kitvia.org.nz About VIA: VIA is the business association that represents the interests of all businesses involved in importing, preparing, wholesaling , and retailing parallel imported vehicles that are imported into New Zealand from Japan, UK, and other source markets. LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T LEASED E I L INFORM T LEASED E I L INFORM T From: David Crawford To: Hon Michael Wood Cc: Elena Hood Subject: RE: URGENT CCS and motorcycles Sunday, August Dear Minister This is a follow up correspondence to my earlier email below, and our brief chat at the NZIDEconference on Friday, on the tricky issue of whether or not motorcycle importers will need tohold a carbon dioxide account in order to import and entry comply motorcycles. I have sought legal advice on the scope of sections c and of the Land Transport (CleanVehicles) Amendment Act (hereafter referred to as the Act). The question being does this Actpermit you the option of declaring Class L vehicles exempt from this requirement. I acknowledge that what I set out below is not free from doubt. The two over riding principles of statutory interpretation I have had regard to are: Regulations cannot grant a greater power than the principal Act, and When an Act is created, the presumption is Parliament does not make mistakes. The line of thought I sought clarification on is: S.C of the Act sets out the scope of what Parliament intended regulations pursuant to this section can do. S.C () enables the GovernorGeneral, by order in Council, to make regulations for allor any of the following purposes (this is Parliament, who for the purposes of statutoryinterpretation does not make mistakes, enabling the GG to do this) S.C () (a) enables vehicles to be declared, for the purposes of s., excluded vehiclesfor the purposes of Part . I note that is the entirety of Part of the Act, not just parts of it. S. is a clause that sets out interpretation of Part of the Act. The definition ofexcluded vehicle under this section is a vehicle declared by the regulations to be anexcluded vehicle for the purposes of this part (ie Part of the Act). The above indicates that Parliament in ended regulations could include a list of vehicles to be declared excluded vehicles from this part of the Act. Normally regulations cant diminish the Act,but the above, in my view, indicates that Parliament intended to empower limitation through theregulation making process. Taking this into account, it is my view that when reading s. of the Act, it is arguable thatvehicles declared by regulation to be excluded vehicles are excluded from the purpose of thissection, as s. is within Part of the Act. s. requires every importer who imports light vehicles on or after December must holda carbon dioxide account. But if a vehicle is a declared excluded vehicle under regulation,empowered under this Act to be excluded by regulation, then this section does not apply toexcluded vehicles. Therefore, if this logic holds, you can declare class L vehicles (and you may also need to declareClass AB vehicles, being ebikes) via regulation to be excluded from the purposes of part ofthe Act. I understand officials may not share my view of how the Act may be interpreted. LEASED E I L INFORM T Kind regards David CrawfordMIA. From: Hon Michael Wood Michael.Woodparliament.govt.nz Sent: Monday, August To: David Crawford davidmia.org.nzSubject: RE: URGENT CCS and motorcycles Hi David just picked up your email below. Am having a look into this, thanks for raising. Michael From: David Crawford mailto:davidmia.org.nz Sent: Thursday, August To: M Wood (MIN) M.Woodministers.govt.nz ; Ewan Delany E.Delanytransport.govt.nz ; Sigurd Magnusson S.Magnussontransport.govt.nz ; Jemima de Lacey j.delaceytransport.govt.nz Cc: Elena Scheule Elena.Scheuleparliament.govt.nz ; Tony Frost Tony.Frostparliament.govt.nz Subject: URGENT CCS and motorcycles Dear Minister I need to urgently raise with you whether it was your intention to include in the Land Transport(Clean Vehicles) Amendment Act the requirement for motorcycle importers to hold COaccounts as part of the CCS scheme. We were not expecting this outcome, officials had been very clear with us that motorcycles arenot part of the CCS. However, we recently learnt that officials now believe motorcycle importersmust set up a CO account by December. Motorcycles are not included in a Type A or a Type B vehicle. However, the way the Act is writtenofficials have now confirmed with us that motorcycle importers will need to set up a COaccount and meet the obligations of an account holder by December this year. The problems with this are: They are not ready as the expectation is they are not part of the clean car standard andarguably under the Act they are not. A CO account for motorcycle importers is abureaucratic and meaningless encumbrance given the intent of the Act. Motorcycle importers do not have the tools available to do this as motorcycles are notrequired to meet any vehicle exhaust emissions standard which is where fuelconsumption and CO emission data is derived from. VINDirect is being rewritten to aid light passenger and light commercial vehicle importersto load the necessary information but motorcycle development is not until next year. There has been no expectation they need to do this and they do have any business tools LEASED E I L INFORM T LEASED E I L INFORM T From: David Crawford To: M Wood (MIN) ; Elena Hood ; Ewan Delany Cc: Mark Stockdale Subject: Letter from the MIA on how to exclude Class L Vehicles from the ambit of the CCS. Friday, September Attachments: Ltr to Minister of Transport on how to exclude Class L vehicles from CCS obligations Sept .pdf Dear Minister Our attachment refers. David Crawford, Chief Executive Officer ListingMIA RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Friday September Hon Michael Wood Mini ster of Transp ort m.wood ministers .govt.nz Copy: Ewen Dela ny Manager Environment, Emissions and Adaptation E.Delanytransport.govt.nz Ministry of Transpor t Mechanism to Exclude Class L Vehicles (motorcycles and mopeds) from CCS obligation s using Regulations Dear Minister We have been expl oring how to exclude Class L v ehicles, being motorcycles and mo peds, from the ambit of the C lean Car Standard. Initially we tho ugh all you had to do is make Class L Vehicles an excluded vehicle , as permitted under s. of the Land Transport (Clean Vehicles) Amen dment Act (the Act). We provided our arguments on this point in our submission on the draft reg ulations. However , upon further legal examination we now agree this step alone is not enough . In this regard our vi ews partially line up with that of officials , as far as we understand their views. Prob lem Statement It was never intended to include Class L vehicles within the ambit of the Clean Car standard. Unless they are excluded , either by regulation of by an amendment to the Act, then come December importers of new and u sed Class L vehicles will need to set up a carbon dioxide account pursuant to s. of the Act. They will nee d to then load their account number for each Class L VIN they entry certify to comp ly with the new entry certification requirements. RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Processes to enable attachment of the account numb er to C lass L vehicle VINS i s not yet available in the NZTA system. MIA Legal advice The MIA obtained legal adv ice to ascertain if a vehicle is declared an excluded vehicle in the regu lations, what obligations is it excluded f rom On receiving this advice we asked a further question being is it possible to exclude Class L vehicles via regu lation making powers included in the Act . The answer we received from our first questions is: The definition of excluded vehicle only practically applies to the definition of type A and B vehicles in s . By extension it applies to every section of Part that deals with category A and B vehicles). Excluded vehicles are exempt from the obligations pertaining to catego ry A and B vehicles, but not from those applying to all imported light vehicles. The answer to our second question is (emphasis mine) : I have previously advised you of my view that the ability to have a vehicle declared to be an excluded vehicle only applies to Type A and Type B vehicles and not to light vehicles. As you have pointed out the definition of Type A ehicles in section does contemplate that regulations may be declaring any vehicle or class of vehicle to be a Type A vehicle for the purposes of Part . The significance of this is that if mot orcycles can be declared by regulations to be a Type A vehicle then regulations can be made declaring them to be an excluded vehicle. Section C()(a) and (b) contains the relevant regulation making powers. I appreciate this is a roundabout way of excl uding motor cycles but I dont see any issue with it. Importantly motorcycles would only be declared to be a Type A vehicle for the purpose of Part . Once a vehicle is excluded then the requirements of Part do not apply. This goes beyond the fees a nd charges provisions and there would be no need for motor cycle importers to maintain a CO account . The Solut ion Based on our legal, it is the MIA s considered view that there is a two step process t o excluded Class L Vehicles from having to hold a carbon dioxide account under s. of the Act. This is: By regulation , empowered by s. of the Act with reference to the definition of Type A vehicle (b), declare Class L vehicles to be a Type A Vehicle Also by r egulation, empowered by s. of the Act with reference to the definition of excluded vehicle , declare Class L vehicles to be an excluded vehicle . RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T We apologise f or the lateness of our repl y in terms of feedback on the draft regu lations, but as you can appreciate this is a tricky issue to consider and it has taken some time for us to fully appreciate how the Act is written and how it can reasonably be interpreted . I have asked to meet with you to discuss our view s before you take the final regu lations to Cabinet for approval. Kind regards David Cra wford Chief Executive Officer. RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Out of scope LEASED E I L INFORM T From: David Crawford mailto:davidmia.org.nz Sent: Monday, October To: M Wood (MIN) M.Woodministers.govt.nz ; Elena Scheule Elena.Scheuleparliament.govt.nz ; Ewan Delany E.Delanytransport.govt.nz Cc: Mark Stockdale markmia.org.nz ; Sigurd Magnusson S.Magnussontransport.govt.nz ; Emma Petersen E.Petersentransport.govt.nz Subject: Further MIUA advice on excluding Class L vehicles from the ambit of the CCS Dear Minister Please see the attached letter which follows on from this mornings meeting. Kind regards David Crawford, Chief Executive Officer Out of sco pe LEASED E I L INFORM T ListingMIA LEASED E I L INFORM T From: Sam Jaffe To: Chris Stephenson Cc: Travis Mills Subject: RE: Thanks from the VIA for the Ministers time. Attachments: image.png Hi Chris, Thanks very much for your email and for your time yesterday. I felt that the meeting was indeed constructive. As per email this morning, Ill give you a ring (along with my colleague Travis Mills, our press secretary) to talk through your announcement to VIA members tomorrow. Thanks, Samuel Jaffe Ministerial Advisor to Hon Michael Wood E: samuel.jaffeparliament.govt.nz Parliament Buildings, Wellington, New Zealand Authorised by Michael Wood, Parliament Buildings, Wellington From: Chris Stephenson mailto:chrisenterprisemg.co.nz Sent: Wednesday, October To: Sam Jaffe Samuel.Jaffeparliament.govt.nzSubject: Thanks from the VIA for the Ministers time. Morning Sam,I was hoping you could please pass on to the Minister my thanks for his time yesterday, I know he is very busy at the moment The VIA and our broader industry really do value the relationshipand hope to keep it as c ose and constructive as possible. I gave you my card with contact details, if you ever need anything my cell phone is the best way to reach me Kind Regards, Chris Stephenson I CEO Automotive Retail I Finance I Technology Enterprise Motor Group I Community Financial Services I SatNav NZ Level , Sultan Street, Ellerslie, Auckland, PO Box , Ellerslie, Auckland LEASED E I L INFORM T s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s () (a) IMPORTANT: This email (and any attachment) is confidential and may contain copyright andor legally privileged information. It is intended solely for the use of the individual or entity to whom it is addressed. If you are not the intended recipient please do not copy, use or disclose this email; please notify the sender immediately by return emailand then delete this email. We are committed to the security and protection of the personal information that we holdand use. If you have any questions relating to our compliance with the Privacy Act , please read our Privacy Policyhttps:www.cfsfinance.co.nzprivacypolicy . IMPORTANT: This email (and any attachment) is confidential and may contain copyright andor legally privileged information. It is intended solely for the use of the individual orentity to whom it is addressed. If you are not the intended recipient please do not copy, useor disclose this email; please notify the sender immediately by return email and thendelete this email. We are committed to the security and protection of the personalinformation that we hold and use. If you have any questions relating to our compliancewith the Privacy Act , please read our Privacy Policy . LEASED E I L INFORM T From: Chris Stephenson To: Sam Jaffe Cc: Travis Mills Subject: RE: Thanks from the VIA for the Ministers time. Thursday, October Attachments: image.png Hi Sam, Thanks for the call yesterday about the VIA Alert, this will probably go out later today, although given our expectation of the Ministers decision this afternoon it will quickly become redundant. In keeping with the collaborative spirit we have all benefited from these past few weeks, Iwanted to make sure we didnt catch the Minister by surprise when we start talking to the mediaand our industry post his announcement. Below is a recap of the points I raised over the phonewith you. Obviously not an exhaustive list, but enough to give you context. At a high level our talking points will be; . CCS was complex and a big project to deliver. Start dates were already in legislation, which limited some of Waka Kotahi MoT The Ministers options . VIA had continued to raise a delay as the best solution for mitigating the risks to industry, but acknowledge that changing the legislation would have been difficult . WK engaged with VIA about weeks ago asking for our help and involvement in landing the CCS programme in time for the Jan start . VIA has been working constructively with WK MoT and the Minister Office to try and find a solution . VIA wasnt able to talk about this earlier a we had given WK etc our assurance they could share information freely without it being shared widely and that this was critical for us toachieve the outcomes that we have today. . Wk had raised an initial solution that allowed CCS to start on Jan but it was significantly manual and that was going to add days if not weeks to the onshore importation process . That VIA raised this as catastrophic for our industry making WK reconsider its plan. That WK went back to the drawing board, using our feedback to develop this new staged implementation approach, which while not perfect mitigates that catastrophic risk . That VIA meet with the Minister and raised our two key concerns with the staged approached (Lack of awareness and education delayed billing) . And that the Minister asked we continue to work with WK through the staged delivery to try and reduce the impact on industry of those two items . Thank WK and MoT for their hard work, when faced with a difficult challenge. Thank the Minister for making a pragmatic decision Obviously, everything in here is accurate and truthful, including our thanks and praise for WK,MoT and the Minister. Given there is still lots for us (VIA and WK) to do we dont intent todeliberately pull and punches, but at the end of the day we cant dictate the angle our trademedia may decide to put on things, especially given the current lack of regulations, and late inthe piece announcement. Lastly, we are happy to have this constructive channel open, the Minister now has my contactdetails along with Davids, so if there is anything he needs in the future please feel free to reach LEASED E I L INFORM T out. Kind regards, Chris Stephenson I CEO Automotive Retail I Finance I Technology Enterprise Motor Group I Community Financial Services I SatNav NZ Level , Sultan Street, Ellerslie, Auckland, PO Box , Ellerslie, Auckland IMPORTANT: This email (and any attachment) is confidential and may contain copyright ando legally privileged information. It is intended solely for the use of the individual or entity to whom it is addressed. If you are not theintended recipient please do not copy, use or disclose this email; please notify the sender immediately by return emailand then delete this email. We are committed to the security and protection of the personal information that we holdand use. If you have any questions relating to our compliance with the Privacy Act , please read our Privacy Policyhttps:www.cfsfinance.co.nzprivacypolicy . From: Chris Stephenson Sent: Wednesday, October To: Sam Jaffe Samuel.Jaffeparliament.govt.nzCc: Travis Mills Travis.Millsparliament.govt.nz Subject: RE: Thanks from the VIA for the Ministers time. Thats brilliant thank you.Talk then.Chris From: Sam Jaffe Samuel.Jaffeparliament.govt.nz Sent: Wednesday, October To: Chris Stephenson chrisenterprisemg.co.nz Cc: Travis Mills Travis.Millsparliament.govt.nz Subject: RE: Thanks from the VIA for the Ministers time. Hi Chris,Thanks very much for your email and for your time yesterday. I felt that the meeting was indeed constructive. As per email this morning, Ill give you a ring (along with my colleague Travis Mills, our LEASED E I L INFORM T s ()(a) s () (a) From: Chris Stephenson To: Sam Jaffe Subject: Thanks from the VIA for the Ministers time. Wednesday, October Attachments: image.png Morning Sam, I was hoping you could please pass on to the Minister my thanks for his time yesterday, I know he is very busy at the moment. The VIA and our broader industry really do value the relationshipand hope to keep it as close and constructive as possible. I gave you my card with contact details, if you ever need anything my cell phone is the best way to reach me Kind Regards, Chris Stephenson I CEO Automotive Retail I Finance I Technology Enterprise Motor Group I Community Financial Services I SatNav NZ Level , Sultan Street, Ellerslie, Auckland, PO Box , Ellerslie, Auckland IMPORTANT: This email (an any attachment) is confidential and may contain copyright andor legally privileged information. It is intended solely fo the use of the individual or entity to whom it is addressed. If you are not theintended recipient please do not copy, use or di close this email; please notify the sender immediately by return emailand then delete this email. We are committed to the security and protection of the personal information that we holdand use. If you have any questions relating to our compliance with the Privacy Act , please read our Privacy Policyhttps:www.cfsfinance.co.nzprivacypolicy . IMPORTANT: This email (and any attachment) is confidential and may contain copyright andor legally privileged information. It is intended solely for the use of the individual orentity to whom it is addressed. If you are not the intended recipient please do not copy, useor disclose this email; please notify the sender immediately by return email and thendelete this email. We are committed to the security and protection of the personalinformation that we hold and use. If you have any questions relating to our compliancewith the Privacy Act , please read our Privacy Policy . LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T s ()(a) s ()(a) From: Chris Stephenson To: Sam Jaffe Subject: Industry question on the Clean Car Standard Can the Minister provide comment please Wednesday, November Attachments: image.png Hi Sam, The team and I from the VIA have continued to work with Waka Kotahi on the CCS implementation along the MoT, it was pleasing to see the Regs come out the other day, but westill have the pressing concern of the legislative change. VIA, Industry and WK are all working towards a phased implementation for CCS, but the mechanism to deliver the phased approach is the legislation enabling it. Without it WK andindustry will default to the current legislation which will require WK to deliver a fully manualprocess from Jan this being nothing short of a disaster for the industry I cant emphasise that point enough, it is not hyperbole, the onshore part of our importation process will grind to a halt and within or week be overwhelmed by thousands of cars. I know the Minister has a lot on his plate and with only weeks left in the year to get it all done, I was wondering what assurances he could give VIA and the industry that the changes will bedelivered in time As Im sure he understands and appreciates, as businesspeople we remain nervous until we know for sure that these significant risks have been mitigated. Kind regards, Chris Stephenson I CEO Automotive Retail I Finance I Technology Enterprise Motor Group I Community Financial Services I SatNav NZ Level , Sultan Street, Ellerslie, Auckland, PO Box , Ellerslie Auckland IMPORTANT: This email (and any attachment) is confidential and may contain copyright andor legally privileged information. It is intended solely for the use of the individual or entity to whom it is addressed. If you are not theintended recipient please do not copy, use or disclose this email; please notify the sender immediately by return emailand then delete this email. We are committed to the security and protection of the personal information that we holdand use. If you have any questions relating to our compliance with the Privacy Act , please read our Privacy Policyhttps:www.cfsfinance.co.nzprivacypolicy . IMPORTANT: This email (and any attachment) is confidential and may contain copyright RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T s ()(a) andor legally privileged information. It is intended solely for the use of the individual or entity to whom it is addressed. If you are not the intended recipient please do not copy, use or disclose this email; please notify the sender immediately by return email and thendelete this email. We are committed to the security and protection of the personalinformation that we hold and use. If you have any questions relating to our compliancewith the Privacy Act , please read our Privacy Policy . RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T From: Sam Jaffe To: Chris Stephenson Subject: RE: Industry question on the Clean Car Standard Can the Minister provide comment please Attachments: image.png Hi Chris, Thanks, Samuel Jaffe Ministerial Advisor to Hon Michael Wood E: samuel.jaffeparliament.govt nz Parliament Buildings, Wellington, New Zealand Authorised by Michael Wood, Parl ament Building Wellington From: Chris Stephenson mailto:chrisenterprisemg.co.nz Sent: Wednesday, November To: Sam Jaffe Samuel Jaffeparliament.govt.nzSubject: Industry question on the Clean Car Standard Can the Minister provide comment please Hi Sam,The team and I from the VIA have continued to work with Waka Kotahi on the CCS implementation along the MoT, it was pleasing to see the Regs come out the other day, but westill have the pressing concern of the legislative change. VIA, Industry and WK are all working towards a phased implementation for CCS, but the mechanism to deliver the phased approach is the legislation enabling it. I cant emphasise that point enough, it is not hyperbole, the onshore part of our importation LEASED E I L INFORM T s ()(a) s ()(g)(i) s ()(g)(i) process will grind to a halt and within or week be overwhelmed by thousands of cars. I know the Minister has a lot on his plate and with only weeks left in the year to get it all done, I was wondering what assurances he could give VIA and the industry that the changes will bedelivered in time As Im sure he understands and appreciates, as businesspeople we remain nervous until we know for sure that these significant risks have been mitigated. Kind regards, Chris Stephenson I CEO Automotive Retail I Finance I Technology Enterprise Motor Group I Community Financial Services I SatNav NZ Level , Sultan Street, Ellerslie, Auckland, PO Box , Ellerslie, Auckland IMPORTANT: This email (and any attachment) is confidential and may contain copyright andor legally privileged information. It is intended solely for the use of the ind vidual or entity to whom it is addressed. If you are not theintended recipient please do not copy, use or discl s this email; please notify the sender immediately by return emailand then delete this email. We are committed to the security and protection of the personal information that we holdand use. If you have any questions rela ing to o r compliance with the Privacy Act , please read our Privacy Policyhttps:www.cfsfinance.co.nzprivacypolicy . IMPORTANT: This e mail (and any attachment) is confidential and may contain copyright andor legally privileged information. It is intended solely for the use of the individual orentity to whom it is addressed. If you are not the intended recipient please do not copy, useor disclose this email; please notify the sender immediately by return email and thendelete this email. We are committed to the security and protection of the personalinformation that we hold and use. If you have any questions relating to our compliancewith the Privacy Act , please read our Privacy Policy . LEASED E I L INFORM T s ()(a) From: M Wood (MIN) To: David Crawford Subject: RE: Land Transport (Clean Vehicles) Amendment Bill No Tn koe David, On behalf of Hon Michael Wood, Minister of Transport, thank you for your email of November regarding the Land Transport (Clean Vehicles) Amendment Bill No. Your comments have been provided to the Minister for his information.Ng mihi, Office of Hon Michael WoodMinister for Workplace Relations and Safety Minister of Transport Minister of Immigration Private Bag Parliament Buildings Wellington New ZealandOffice Phone: Email : M.Woodministers.govt.nz From: David Crawford mailto:davidmia.org.nz Sent: Thursday, November To: M Wood (MIN) M.Woodministers.govt.nzCc: Elena Hood Elena.Hoodparliament.govt.nz Subject: Land Transport (Clean Vehicles) Amendment Bill No Dear Minister I have today been listening to the debate in the house as this bill went through its stages. Lots ofmisinformation and I can see why you would hav been hesitant to bring this amendment withthe mud slinging that goes on in the House. Nevertheless, the I am grateful you have included in the amendment clarification to exclude mopeds and motorcycles from the ambit of the clean car standard. My members have todaybreathed a sigh of relief and echo my gratitude. Kind regardsDavid Crawford, Chief Executive Officer ListingMIA LEASED E I L INFORM T From: Chris Stephenson To: Travis Mills Cc: William Blackler ; Sam Jaffe Subject: RE: Clean Car Standard phased implementation Monday, November Attachments: image.png image.png Hi Travis, Thanks for sharing this with me. Please pass on my thanks and congratulations to the Minister for getting this done at such a busy time of the year. Kind regards, Chris Stephenson I CEO Automotive Retail I Finance I Technology Enterprise Motor Group I Community Financial Services I SatNav NZ Level , Sultan Street, Ellerslie, Auckland, PO Box , Ellerslie, Auckland IMPORTANT: This email (and any attachmen ) i confidential and may contain copyright andor legally privileged information. It is intended solely for th u e of the individual or entity to whom it is addressed. If you are not theintended recipient please do not copy use or disclose thi email; please notify the sender immediately by return emailand then delete this email. We are committed to th security and protection of the personal information that we holdand use. If you have any question re ating to our compliance with the Privacy Act , please read our Privacy Policyhttps:www.cfsfinance.co.nz privacypolicy . From: Travis Mills Travis.Millsparliament.govt.nz Sent: Monday, November To: Chris Stephenson chrisenterprisemg.co.nzCc: William Blackler William.Blacklerparliament.govt.nz; Sam Jaffe Samuel.Jaffeparliament.govt.nzSubject: Clean Car Standard phased implementationImportance: High Hi Chris, I hope youre well. Please find below a copy of an embargoed PR the Minister intends to release tomorrow at noon regarding the Clean Car Standard. Ill give you a call in the morning to discuss, LEASED E I L INFORM T s ()(a) Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport EMBARGOED UNTIL PM November PNUI PHO MEDIA STATEMENTThanks Trav Travis Mills (hehim) Press Secretary to Hon Michael Wood E Travis.Millsparliament.govt.nz Parliament Buildings, Wellington, New Zealand Authorised by Michael Wood, Parliament Buildings, Wellington Driving ahead with the Clean Car Standard Following discussions with vehicle importers, the Government has confirmed the Clean Car Standard will be phased in from December , significantly reducing the CO emissions of light vehicles in New Zealand, announced Transport Minister MichaelWood.Emissions from our light vehicle fleet are the single largest source of transportemissions in New Zealand, thanks in part to us having some of the most fuel inefficientand emissions intensive vehicles in the OECD, Michael Wood said.This costs Kiwis at the pump and its damaging our health and the environment. Weneed to increase the supply of fuelefficient vehicles and give New Zealanders morechoice in the variety of low and zero emissions vehicles while also doing our bit forglobal climate change. The Standard will help us do this.From January imported vehicles incur a credit or charge based on CO emissions. The phasein will see charges deferred until June to ensure a smoothimplementation for the industry. The system encourages importers to bring in asufficient number of low and zero emission vehicles that attract credits to offset thecharges applied to higher emitting vehicles.We have worked alongside the industry to confirm an implementation schedule thatbalances a successful implementation with the need for action, Michael Wood said.The Clean Car Standard requires vehicle importers to progressively reduce the CO emissions of the light vehicles, both new and used, they bring into New Zealand. This is LEASED E I L INFORM T s ()(a) achieved by setting CO targets which get more ambitious year by year. The Clean Car Standard will encourage importers to bring in vehicles with lower emissions, that burn less fuel and will stop New Zealand being the dumping ground forthe dirtiest vehicles in the world, Michael Wood saidThis is a scheme aimed at importers, not the general public who will continue to benefitfrom the Clean Car Discount scheme, which is seeing record numbers of electricvehicles and hybrids being imported and bought by New Zealanders. I regularly hearfrom importers about how the upcoming introduction of the Clean Car Standard ishelping them access cleaner vehicles for the New Zealand market.The Standard will complement this work with greater choices for consumers.The Clean Car Standard is one of a number of initiatives in the Emissions ReductionPlan to reduce emissions, improving our health, our environment and our wellbeing,Michael Wood said.Media contact: Travis Mills Editors note: Legislation to enable the phased implementation will be passed under urgency this week. The Clean Car Standard works by providing credits to importers for low or no emission vehicles and imposing charges depending on the CO ratings of the vehicles bought into the country. Highemission vehicles will still be able to be imported but their emissions must be offset by the import of loweremission ones. If vehicle importers do not import sufficientvolumes of low emission vehicles to offset their high emission vehicles charges willapply. The legislation for the Clean Car Standard was passed in February . The regulations that set formulas for the weight adjustment of targets, specify the types ofvehicles excluded and other details related to CO accounts can be found here: https:www.legislation.govt nzregulationpubliclatestLMS.html The Clean Car Standard covers most lightvehicles being imported into New Zealand,except for mopeds or motorcycles which have been excluded. More information on the Clean Car Standard can be found: https:www.nzta.govt.nzvehiclescleancarprogrammecleancarstandard Timeframes December all vehicle importers must hold a CO account, where the CO emission ratings of their vehicles will be recorded. Without this information, vehicles will not be able to complete entry to New Zealand and be registered. January the CO emission ratings of vehicles start to count towards the achievement of the CO targets. For vehicle importers complying on a payas yougo basis, each vehicle will incur a charge, or a credit, based on its CO emissions. Credits can be used to offset charges or be transferred to other importers. June charges to be paid and credits can be transferred from this . LEASED E I L INFORM T s ()(a) IMPORTANT: This email (and any attachment) is confidential and may contain copyright andor legally privileged information. It is intended solely for the use of the individual orentity to whom it is addressed. If you are not the intended recipient please do not copy, useor disclose this email; please notify the sender immediately by return email and thendelete this email. We are committed to the security and protection of the personalinformation that we hold and use. If you have any questions relating to our compliancewith the Privacy Act , please read our Privacy Policy . LEASED E I L INFORM T From: David Crawford To: M Wood (MIN) Cc: Elena Hood Subject: Land Transport (Clean Vehicles) Amendment Bill No Thursday, November Dear Minister I have today been listening to the debate in the house as this bill went through its stages. Lots of misinformation and I can see why you would have been hesitant to bring this amendment withthe mud slinging that goes on in the House. Nevertheless, the I am grateful you have included in the amendment clarification to exclude mopeds and motorcycles from the ambit of the clean car standard. My members have todaybreathed a sigh of relief and echo my gratitude. Kind regardsDavid Crawford, Chief Executive Officer ListingMIA RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T From: David Crawford To: Barbara Kuriger ; Brent Johnston ; David Crawford ; Elena Hood ; Ewan Delany ; Haobo Wang ; Helen White ; J Genter (MIN) ; Jason Familton ; Kerry Lambeth (Parliament) ; M Wood (MIN) ; Sigurd Magnusson ; Simeon Brown ; Simon Court Subject: MIA Press Release new vehicles Sales Nov Friday, December Attachments: Vizulite BEV PHEV HEV Nov .xlsx Registration data onwards YTD November .xlsx November Sales Table.xlsx November New Vehicle Sales Press Release.docx Hi all Please find attached: MIA Press Release on Nov new vehicle sales Sales table Reg table Table on sales of BEVs PHEVs and HEV vehicles. Kind regardsDavid Crawford, Chief Executive Officer ListingMIA RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T BEV Passenger by Model November Marque and Model by Year Breaks filtered by: Motive Power: Electric; Vehicle Type: Passenger Car Van Reference: Total Sales Share Sales Share Sales Share Sales Share Total TESLA MODEL Y BYD ATTO TESLA MODEL MG ZS POLESTAR POLESTAR HYUNDAI IONIQ NISSAN LEAF HYUNDAI KONA KIA NIRO HYUNDAI IONIQ PEUGEOT BMW I VOLVO C VOLVO XC OPEL MOKKA KIA EV MINI HATCH LEXUS UXE MERCEDESBENZ EQA AUDI ETRON MERCEDESBENZ EQC OPEL CORSA BMW SERIES PEUGEOT LDV MIFA JAGUAR IPACE KIA NIRO PLUS MAZDA MX AUDI ETRON GT FIAT E MERCEDESBENZ EQS FIAT SSANGYONG KORANDO VOLKSWAGEN GOLF MERCEDESBENZ VCLASS RENAULT ZOE TESLA MODEL S TESLA MODEL X AUDI Q FORD MUSTANG MACHE GENESIS G GENESIS GV GENESIS GV MERCEDESBENZ EQB PORSCHE TAYCAN VOLKSWAGEN ID. Marque and ModelCurrent Month YTD Current Year Current Month Last Year YTD Last RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Commercial Light by Model November Marque and Model by Year Breaks filtered by: Motive Power: Electric; Vehicle Type: commercial vehicle sales; GVM Split: Up To Kg Reference: Total Sales Share Sales Share Sales Share Shares Sales Total LDV ET LDV EDELIVER LDV EDELIVER MERCEDESBENZ SPRINTER MERCEDESBENZ VITO PEUGEOT PARTNER RENAULT KANGOO LDV V LDV DELIVER Marque and ModelCurrent Month YTD Current Year Current Month Last Year YTD Last RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Commercial Heavy by Model November Marque and Model by Year Breaks filtered by: Motive Power: Electric; Vehicle Type: commercial vehicle sales; GVM Split: Over Kg Reference: Total Sales Share Sales Share Sales Share Shares Sales Total FACTORY BUILT GEELY CRRC ETMAX FORD TRANSIT FACTORY BUILT YANGZHOU YAX ALEXANDER DENNIS ENVIRO SCANIA SCANIA P FACTORY BUILT YUTONG LDV EV FACTORY BUILT CRRC FACTORY BUILT GLOBAL BUS VE FACTORY BUILT YANGZHOU FOTON BJ FUSO ECANTER FUSO ECANTER FUSO ECANTER JAC NEV XCMG E XCMG E YANGTSE MOTOR GROUP UT YANGTSE MOTOR GROUP UT ZEMTEC ECITY Marque and ModelCurrent Month YTD Current Year Current Month Last Year YTD Last RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T PHEV Passenger by Model November Marque and Model by Year Breaks filtered by: Motive Power: Plugin Petrol Hybrid; Vehicle Type: Passenger Car Van Reference: Total Sales Share Sales Share Sales Share Sales Share Total MITSUBISHI ECLIPSE CROSS MITSUBISHI OUTLANDER MG HS FORD ESCAPE HYUNDAI IONIQ MINI COUNTRYMAN KIA NIRO VOLVO XC MERCEDESBENZ GLC VOLKSWAGEN T SKODA OCTAVIA LAND ROVER RANGE ROVER VELAR PEUGEOT PORSCHE CAYENNE MERCEDESBENZ CCLASS LEXUS NX BMW X BMW X PORSCHE PANAMERA SKODA SUPERB LAND ROVER RANGE ROVER EVOQU CITROEN C AIRCROSS BMW SERIES BMW SERIES JAGUAR FPACE FORD TRANSIT KIA SORENTO LAND ROVER DEFENDER LAND ROVER RANGE ROVER TOYOTA PRIUS VOLVO XC BMW SERIES MERCEDESBENZ ACLASS VOLVO XC AUDI Q SPORTBACK FERRARI SF STRADALE MCLAREN ARTURA Marque and ModelCurrent Month YTD Current Year Current Month Last Year YTD Last RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Hybrid Passenger by Model November Marque and Model by Year Breaks filtered by: Motive Power: Petrol Hybrid; Vehicle Type: Passenger Car Van Reference: Total Sales Share Sales Share Sales Share Sales Share Total TOYOTA RAV HONDA JAZZ TOYOTA COROLLA CROSS TOYOTA COROLLA TOYOTA YARIS CROSS TOYOTA HIGHLANDER TOYOTA CHR SUZUKI SWIFT HAVAL H TOYOTA YARIS FORD PUMA KIA NIRO HYUNDAI KONA TOYOTA CAMRY KIA SORENTO HYUNDAI IONIQ VOLVO XC VOLVO XC HYUNDAI SANTA FE MAZDA CX MAZDA MX LEXUS RXH FORD FOCUS SUBARU XV HYUNDAI TUCSON MAZDA MAZDA SUBARU FORESTER LEXUS ISH MASERATI LEVANTE LEXUS UXH VOLVO XC LEXUS NX MERCEDESBENZ CCLASS VOLVO S LEXUS ESH MERCEDESBENZ GLE LEXUS RXHL SEAT LEON BMW X FORD MONDEO LAND ROVER DISCOVERY LEXUS CTH MASERATI GHIBLI SKODA OCTAV A TOYOTA PRIUS FERRARI LAFERRARI LEXUS NXH MERCEDESBENZ ECLASS MERCEDESBENZ S LEXUS LSH KIA NIRO PLUS MCLAREN SPEEDTAIL VOLVO V CROSS COUNTRY Marque and ModelCurrent Month YTD Current Year Current Month Last Year YTD Last RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T LEASED E I L INFORM T A B C D E F G LICENSED VEHICLES BY TYPE AS AT END OF YEAR FROM Vehicle Type CARS , , , , , , RENTAL CARS , , , , , , TAXIS , , , , , TRUCKS , , , , , , BUSESCOACHES , , , , , , TRAILERSCARAVANS , , , , , , MOTORCYCLES , , , , , , MOPEDS , , , , , , TRACTORS EXEMPTVEHICLES , , , , , , MISCELLANEOUS TOTAL ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, NB data source December (year) table RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T H I J K L M N O P , , ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Q R S T U V W X Y ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, , ,, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Z AA AB AC AD AE AF AG AH ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, , ,, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T AI AJ AK AL AM AN AO AP AQ ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T AR AS AT AU AV AW AX AY AZ ,, ,, ,, ,, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,, ,, ,, , ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T BA BB BC BD v v . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,, ,, RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T LEASED E I L INFORM T Passenger Car by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S New ExOverseas Total , Jan , , Feb , , Mar , . Apr , May , , Jun , , Jul , () Aug , . Sep , Oct , Nov , Dec , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan , Jan , Jan , Feb , Feb , Feb , Mar , Mar , Mar , Apr , Apr , Apr , May , May , May , Jun , Jun , Jun , Jul , Jul , Jul , Aug , Aug , Aug , Sep , Sep , Sep , Oct , Oct , Oct , Nov , Nov , Nov , Dec , Dec Dec , , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOvers as Total New ExOver s eas Total Jan , , , Jan , Jan , Feb , , , Feb , Feb , Mar , , , Mar , Mar , Apr , , , Apr , Apr , May , , , May , May , Jun , , , Jun , Jun , Jul , , , Jul , Jul , Aug , , , Aug , Aug , Sep , , , Sep , Sep , Oct , , , Oct , Oct , Nov , , , Nov , Nov , Dec , , , Dec , Dec , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan , , , Jan , , , Jan , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Mar , , Apr , , , Apr , , , Apr , , May , , , May , , , May , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jun , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Jul , , Nov Nov Difference Percentage IncreaseDecreasePassenger Cars by Month By Year Total YTD Total YTD Difference Percentage IncreaseDecrease Page RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Passenger Car by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S Aug , , , Aug , , , Aug , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Sep , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Oct , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Nov , , Dec , , , Dec , , , Dec , , , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan , , , Jan , , , Jan , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Mar , , Apr , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , May , , , May , , , May , , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Aug , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Sep , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Oc , , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Dec , , , Dec Dec , , , , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan , , , Jan , , , Jan , , , Page RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Passenger Car by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S Feb , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , May , , , May , , , May , , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Oct , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Dec Dec , , , Dec , , , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan , , , Jan , , , Jan , Feb , , , Feb , , , Feb , Mar , , , Mar , , , Mar , , Apr , , , Apr , , , Apr , , May , , , May , , , May , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jun , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Jul , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Aug , Sep , , , Sep , , , Sep , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Oct , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Nov , , Dec , , , Dec , , Dec , , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOver as Total New ExOverseas Total Page RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Passenger Car by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S Jan , , , Jan , , , Jan , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , May , , , May , , , May , , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Sep , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Nov , , Dec , , , Dec , , , Dec , , , , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New Ex Overseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan , , , Jan , , , Jan , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , May , , , May , , , Ma , , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Jul , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Nov , , , Nov , , Nov , , , Dec , , , Dec , , , D c , , , , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOvers as Total New ExOverseas Total Page RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Passenger Car by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S Jan , , , Jan , , , Jan , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , May , , , May , , , May , , , June , , , June , , , June , , , July , , , July , , , July , , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Sep , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Nov , , Dec , , , Dec , , , Dec , , , , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New Ex Overseas Total N w ExOv rseas Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May June June J ne July July July Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOverseas Total New ExOvers as Total New ExOverseas Total Page RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Passenger Car by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May June June June July July July Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total N w ExOv rseas Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May June June J ne July July July Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOverseas Total New ExOvers as Total New ExOverseas Total Page RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Passenger Car by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May June June June July July July Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total N w ExOv rseas Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May June June J ne July July July Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOverseas Total New ExOvers as Total New ExOverseas Total Page RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Passenger Car by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May June June June July July July Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan Jan Feb Feb Mar Mar Apr Apr May May June June July July Aug Aug Sep Sep Oct Oct Nov Nov Dec Dec Page RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Passenger Car (new) by months A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O Year Jan Feb Mar April May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec TOTALS , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , Passenger Cars by Months Page RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Passenger Car(used) by months A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Used Passenger Car Registrations by Months Year Jan Feb Mar April May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec TOTALS change , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . Page RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Commercials by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S New ExOversea Total , Jan , , Feb , (,) Mar , . Apr , May , , Jun , , Jul , () Aug , . Sep , Oct , Nov , Dec , New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan , Jan , Jan , Feb , Feb , Feb , Mar , Mar , Mar , Apr , Apr Apr , May , May , May , Jun , Jun , Jun , Jul , Jul , Jul , Aug , Aug , Aug , Sep , Sep , Sep , Oct , Oct , Oct , Nov , Nov , Nov , Dec , Dec , Dec , , , , New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan , , Jan , Jan , Feb , , Feb , Feb , Mar , , Mar , Mar , Apr , , Apr , Apr , May , , May , May , Jun , , Jun , Jun , Jul , , Jul , Jul , Aug , , , Aug , Aug , Sep , , Sep , Sep , Oct , , Oct , Oct , Nov Nov Difference Percentage IncreaseDecreaseCommercial Vehicles by year by Month Total YTD Total YTD Difference Percentage IncreaseDecrease Page RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Commercials by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S Nov , , , Nov , Nov , Dec , , , Dec , Dec , , , , New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan , , Jan , , Jan Feb , , Feb , , Feb Mar , , Mar , , Mar Apr , , Apr , , Apr May , , May , , May Jun , , Jun , , Jun Jul , , Jul , , Jul Aug , , Aug , , Aug Sep , , Sep , , Sep Oct , , Oct , , Oct Nov , , Nov , , Nov Dec , , Dec , , Dec , New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun , Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec , New ExOversea Total New Ex Oversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec Page RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Commercials by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec Commercial Vehicles by years New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec Page RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Commercials by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Page RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Commercials by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOversea Total New ExOvers a Total Jan Jan Feb Feb Mar Mar Apr Apr May May Jun Jun Jul Jul Aug Aug Sep Sep Oct Oct Nov Nov Dec Dec Page RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Commercials(new) by month A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O Year Jan Feb Mar April May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec TOTALS , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , Page RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Commercials(used) by month AB C DEFGH I JKLMN O Year Jan Feb Mar April May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec TOTALS , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , Page RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Top total new vehicle registrations (pass and commercial) Toyota Toyota Toyota Mitsubishi Ford Mitsubishi Ford Mitsubishi Ford Kia Tesla Kia Mazda Suzuki Suzuki Nissan Kia Hyundai Hyundai Hyundai Mazda Suzuki Nissan Tesla Volkswagen BYD MG Honda MG Nissan MG Mazda Honda Tesla Volkswagen Volkswagen Isuzu Honda MercedesBenz MercedesBenz Skoda Subaru Subaru MercedesBenz LDV OTHERS , . OTHERS , . OTHERS , . Total Total Total Top new passenger carSUV registrations Toyota Toyota Mitsubishi Mitsubishi Tesla Toyota Kia Mitsubishi Kia Suzuki Suzuki Suzuki Mazda Kia Hyundai Hyundai Hyundai Tesla Nissan BYD Mazda Volkswagen MG MG Honda Nissan Honda MG Mazda Ford Ford Ford Volkswagen Tesla Honda Subaru Subaru Skoda Nissan Haval Volkswagen Haval MercedesBenz S baru Skoda OTHERS , . OTHERS , . OTHERS , . Total Total Total Top new commercial vehicle registrations Ford , Fo d Toyota Toyota , Toyot Ford Mitsubishi , Mitsubishi Mitsubishi Nissan , LDV LDV LDV , Nissan Nissan Isuzu , Fuso Isuzu Mazda , Isuzu Trucks Fuso Great Wall , MercedesBenz Isuzu Trucks Hyundai , Hino Hino Volkswagen , Volkswagen MercedesBenz Fuso , Isuzu Volkswagen Isuzu Trucks , Fiat Mazda Fiat Scania Fiat Hino Iveco Great Wall MercedesBenz Mazda Hyundai OTHERS . OTHERS . OTHERS , . Total Total Total Note The MIA registrations are counted only once. During the year some vehicles are deregistered, and accordingly the YTD figures in these tables will be less than the YTD figures provided by the NZTA. Full year Full Year Full Year Month of November YTD November YTD November Month of November YTD November Month of November RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Top fifteen new carSUV models MITSUBISHI OUTLANDER TESLA MODEL Y MITSUBISHI OUTLANDER TOYOTA RAV MITSUBISHI OUTLANDER TOYOTA RAV MITSUBISHI ASX TOYOTA RAV SUZUKI SWIFT TOYOTA COROLLA BYD ATTO MITSUBISHI ECLIPSE CROSS TESLA MODEL SUZUKI SWIFT TESLA MODEL Y MAZDA CX MITSUBISHI ASX MITSUBISHI ASX SUZUKI SWIFT MG ZS KIA SPORTAGE MG ZS NISSAN XTRAIL MG ZS KIA STONIC KIA SPORTAGE TOYOTA COROLLA NISSAN XTRAIL TESLA MODEL TESLA MODEL HYUNDAI KONA MITSUBISHI ECLIPSE CROSS HYUNDAI KONA KIA SELTOS FORD EVEREST HONDA JAZZ KIA SPORTAGE HONDA JAZZ MAZDA CX NISSAN QASHQAI TOYOTA COROLLA KIA STONIC MITSUBISHI ECLIPSE CROS TOYOTA YARIS CROSS TOYOTA YARIS CROSS Top fifteen new commercial models FORD RANGER FORD RANGER FORD RANGER TOYOTA HILUX TOYOTA HILUX TOYOTA HILUX MITSUBISHI TRITON MITSUBISHI TRITON MITSUBISHI TRITON NISSAN NAVARA NISSAN NAVARA NISSAN NAVARA ISUZU DMAX TOYOTA HIACE ISUZU DMAX TOYOTA HIACE MERCEDESBENZ SPRINTER TOYOTA HIACE MAZDA BT ISUZU DMAX MAZDA BT GREAT WALL GWM CANNON FIAT DUCATO MERCEDESBENZ SPRINTER FORD TRANSIT ISUZU TRUCKS N SERIES LDV T HYUNDAI ILOAD L V ET FIAT DUCATO FIAT DUCATO MAZDA BT GREAT WALL GWM CANNON LDV G ISUZU TRUCKS F SERIES HYUNDAI STARIA LOAD LDV T FORD TRANSIT LDV DELIVER MITSUBISHI EXPRESS HINO MITSUBISHI EXPRESS MERCEDESBENZ SPRINTER LDV DELIVER LDV G TOYOTA RAV MITSUBISHI OUTLANDER HYUNDAI STARIA TOYOTA RAV SUZUKI SWIFT TOYOTA COROLLA NISSAN XTRAIL KIA STONIC MITSUBISHI ASX SUZUKI SWIFT KIA CARNIVAL MITSUBISHI ASX TOYOTA COROLLA TOYOTA HILUX SUZUKI VITARA TOYOTA YARIS CROSS KIA SPORTAGE HYUNDAI IONIQ MITSUBISHI OUTLANDER KIA CARNIVAL SKODA KODIAQ SUZUKI VITARA TOYOTA YARIS CROSS NISSAN XTRAIL TOYOTA LAND CRUISER PR KIA SPORTAGE TOYOTA HILUX MERCEDESBENZ SPRINTER TOYOTA HIACE MITSUBISHI ECLIPSE CROSS YTD November YTD November Top Rental Vehicles YTD Top Rental Vehicles for the Month of November Full year Full year Month of November Month of November RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Please note there is a difference between the year to total numbers in these tables compared to NZTA data. This is due to the fact the numbers below exclude all deregistrations from the earlier months In these cases the vehicles in question are recorded in the month they are re registered. They are not doubled counted as is the case with the NZTA tables. VFACTS Segments Sales Share VFACTS Segments Sales Share VFACTS Segments Sales Share Total Total Total SUV Compact SUV Medium SUV Medium SUV Medium SUV Compact SUV Compact Pick UpChassis Cab X Pick UpChassis Cab X Pick UpChassis Cab X SUV Large SUV Large SUV Larg Pick UpChassis Cab X Light Light Light Pick UpChassis Cab X Pick UpChassis Cab X Small Heavy Commercial Small Vans Small Heavy Commercial Heavy Commercial Medium Vans Medium People Movers Medium SUV Luxury Vans SUV Luxury Others Others People Movers Large SUV Luxury Large Sports Large Others Micro Micro Sports People Movers Sports Micro Light Buses Light Buses Light Buses Upper Large Upper Large Upper Large Small Segment Profile YTD FORD RANGER FORD RANGER Total TESLA MODEL Y TOYOTA HILUX SUV Compact TOYOTA HILUX MITSUBISHI OUTLANDER SUV Medium MITSUBISHI OUTLANDER MITSUBISHI TRITON Light TOYOTA RAV TOYOTA RAV Small BYD ATTO SUZUKI SWIFT Medium SUZUKI SWIFT MITSUBISHI ECLIPSE CROSS Micro MITSUBISHI ASX TESLA MODEL Y MG ZS MITSUBISHI ASX MITSUBISHI TRITON KIA SPORTAGE NISSAN XTRAIL MG ZS KIA SPORTAGE TOYOTA COROLLA TESLA MODEL TESLA MODEL MITSUBISHI ECLIPSE CROSS HYUNDAI KONA FORD EVEREST HONDA JAZZ YTD November Month of November Full Year Total Vehicle Sales by Model YTD Total Vehicle Sales by Model November RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T December November New Vehicle Regist rations Soften Slightly The Motor Industry Associations Mark Stockdale says that , registrations of new vehicles for the month of November were down . percent compared to November last year. Overall, the market year to is . percent down on the first eleven months of . Registrations of , passenger cars and SUVs were down . ( units) on the same month last year and is ahead of year to by (up , units). Registrations o f , new commercial vehicles were down . ( units) on November last year . Year to sales of commercial vehicles is down . (, units) on the first eleven months of . Along with su pply chain chal enges, the market is being affected by changes to Clean Car Discount introduced on April and the Clean Car Standard about to take effect on the st of January . There has been an increase in low emission vehicle sales and a sustained reduction in the sales of light commercial vehicles, says Mark Stockdale. Key po ints Over all, November registrations of , vehicles were down . ( units) on the same month in , and slightly down . ( units) on year to . There were , BEV passenger vehicles, BEV light commercial vehicles , BEV heavy vehicles, PHEVs and , petrol hybrid vehicles sold for the month . Registrati on of , passe nger and SUVs for November were down . ( units) on November and commercial vehicle registrations of , were down . ( units) compared to November . The top three mod els for the month of November were the Ford Ranger (, units), followed by the Tesla Model Y (, units) and the Toyota Hilux in third place ( units). Year to th e Ford Ranger has re tained top spot (, units), followed by the Toyota Hilux (, units) and the Mitsubishi Outlander (, units). RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T Registrations of heavy vehicles remains s trong with units for the month. Market leader s in November Toyota re taine d the overall market leader with market share ( , units), followed by Ford with (, units) and Mitsubishi in third spot with market share ( , units). Market share ye a r to , Toyota has re tained the lead with ( , units) , followed by Mitsubishi with share (, units) and then Ford with ( , units). BEVs, PHEVs an d Hybrids There were , light vehicle and heavy vehicle full battery electric vehicles registered n November . The top selling models were the Tesla Model Y ( units) followed by the BYD ATTO ( units) and the Tesla Model ( units). Year to there have been , light passenger and SUV BEVs registered compared to , in November Registrations of plugin hybrids were strong with units registered for the month. The top selling models were the Mitsubishi Eclipse Cros s ( units) followed by the Mitsubishi Outlander ( units ) and then the MG HS ( units). There were , hybrids registered in the month of November , with the top selling models being the Toyota RAV ( units) followed by the Honda Jazz ( units) and the Toyota Corolla Cross ( units). SUV and passe nger vehicle sales November Toyota was the mark et lead for passenger and SUV registrations with market share (, units) followed by Tesla with (, units) and then Mitsubishi with also with market share ( , units). Mitsubishi retain the market share l ad for passenger and SUV year to with share (, units), followed by Toyota also with share ( , units) and then Kia with share ( , units) . Tesla has moved i nto sixth place with market share (, units). The top selling p assenger and SUV models for the month were the Tesla Model Y ( , units) followed by the Mitsubishi Outlander ( units ) and then the Toyota RAV ( units). Commercial vehicle sales November The market for light commercial vehicles has settled in at just over seven percent lower than year to . Ford retained the co mmercial vehicle secto r lead with market share ( , units) followed by Toyota with (, units) and Mitsubishi in third with market share ( units). RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T The Ford Ranger took top spot for the month of November as the bestselling commercial model with share ( , units) followed by the Toyota Hilux with share ( units) and the Mitsubishi Triton in third place with market share ( units). Market share year to , the Ford Ranger has re tained the lead ( share and , units ) followed by the Toyota Hilux ( share and , units ) and then the Mitsubishi Triton ( share and , units ). Segmentation The tops spots were the SUV medium segment with sh are followed by SUV compact vehicles with then the Pick UpChassis x segment with market share . Year to small to medium segments comprise of the total market. ENDS: Sheet : Detailed figures for top distributors, full year , month of November and year to , total vehicles, new cars and new commercials. Sheet : Detailed figures for top selling models passenger cars and commercials full year , November and year to Sheet : MIA segmentation full year , November and year to . For Further Information: Mark Stockdale Principal Technical Advisor Motor Industry Association Phone: Email: markmia.org.nz Month on Mont h Comparisons RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED E I L INFORM T s ()(a) LEASED E I L INFORM T press secretary) to talk through your announcement to VIA members tomorrow. Thanks, Samuel Jaffe Ministerial Advisor to Hon Michael Wood E: samuel.jaffeparliament.govt.nz Parliament Buildings, Wellington, New Zealand Authorised by Michael Wood, Parliament Buildings, Wellington From: Chris Stephenson mailto:chrisenterprisemg.co.nz Sent: Wednesday, October To: Sam Jaffe Samuel.Jaffeparliament.govt.nz Subject: Thanks from the VIA for the Ministers time. Morning Sam,I was hoping you could please pass on to the Minister my thanks for his time yesterday, I know he is very busy at the moment. The VIA and our broader industry really do value the relationshipand hope to keep it as close and constructive as possible. I gave you my card with contact details, if you ever need anything my cell phone is the best way to reach me Kind Regards, Chris Stephenson I CEO Automotive Retail I Finance I Technology Enterprise Motor Group I Community Financial Services I SatNav NZ Level , Sultan Street, Ellerslie, Auckland, PO Box , Ellerslie, Auckland IMPORTANT: This email (and any attachment) is confidential and may contain copyright andor legally privileged information. It is intended solely for the use of the individual or entity to whom it is addressed. If you are not theintended recipient please do not copy, use or disclose this email; please notify the sender immediately by return emailand then delete this email. We are committed to the security and protection of the personal information that we holdand use. If you have any questions relating to our compliance with the Privacy Act , please read our Privacy Policyhttps:www.cfsfinance.co.nzprivacypolicy . IMPORTANT: This email (and any attachment) is confidential and may contain copyright andor legally privileged information. It is intended solely for the use of the individual orentity to whom it is addressed. If you are not the intended recipient please do not copy, useor disclose this email; please notify the sender immediately by return email and thendelete this email. We are committed to the security and protection of the personal LEASED E I L INFORM T s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) information that we hold and use. If you have any questions relating to our compliance with the Privacy Act , please read our Privacy Policy . IMPORTANT: This email (and any attachment) is confidential and may contain copyright andor legally privileged information. It is intended solely for the use of the individual orentity to whom it is addressed. If you are not the intended recipient please do not copy, useor disclose this email; please notify the sender immediately by return email and thendelete this email. We are committed to the security and protection of the personalinformation that we hold and use. If you have any questions relating to our compliancewith the Privacy Act , please read our Privacy Policy . LEASED E I L INFORM T UNCLASSIFIED Page of March OC Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport cc Hon Kiritapu Allan Associate Minister of Transport ROAD TO ZERO MINISTERIAL OVERSIGHT GROUP MEETING MARCH Snapshot You are hosting the first Road to Zero Ministerial Oversight Group meeting for . The key items on the agenda are a brief introduction to Road to Zero, the speed and infrastructure programme , road policing programme and the Road to Zero quarterly progress report for the October to December quarter . Time and , March Venue Zoom meeting Attendees Hon Willie Jackson, Associate Minister for ACC, Hon Kiritapu Allan, Minister of Justice and Associate Minister of Transport, Hon Stuart Nash, Minister of Police Officials attending Audrey Sonerson (Te Manat Waka), Nicole Rosie (Waka Kotahi), Andrew Coster (NZ Police), Phil Parkes (WorkSafe), Megan Main (ACC), Kane Patena (Waka Kotahi), Bronwyn Turley (Te Manat Waka), Rajesh Chhana (Ministry of Justice), Bryan Sherritt (Road to Zero), John Baillie (Waka Kotahi), Rebecca Ellery (Minutes) Agenda .Introduction .Speed and Infrastructure Programme .Road Policing Progra mme .Quarterly Progress Report (October to December ) . General business ( time permitting ) Talking points Some suggested talking points are included throughout this document. Contacts Name Telephone First contact Bryan Sherritt Audrey Sonerson Document s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of ROAD TO ZERO MINISTERIAL OVERSIGHT GROUP MEETING MARCH Key points This is the first Road to Zero Ministerial Oversight Group (MOG) meeting of . The MOG last met on October , it was scheduled to meet on December , but the meeting was deferred to Feb ruary due to conflicting priorities and this meetin g was again deferred to March for similar reasons . This is the first opportunity for five months for ministers to be appraised of the progress towards achieving the Road to Zero targets and objectives and to provide guidance and direction as to the most appropriate approach to remedy the shortfall in death and serious injury (DSI) reducti on that is currently being reported. This is the first MOG of This is the first MOG meeting of , and the MOG has one new member Hon Stuart Nash, Minister of Police. Agenda item : Introduction For item ., Bryan will provide a highlevel overview of Road to Zero and its core elements and principles . The purpose of this update will be to ensure Ministers are appraised of what Road to Zero is and what it is trying to ac hieve, and how it aligns with the Vision Zero Safe System approach to road safety that has been successfully implemented internationally . For item ., Bryan will provide a highlevel overview of the Road to Zero Action plan and the importance of having a plan that clearly articulates what needs to be done by the road safety partners over the next three years . Ministerial consultation on the new Road to Zero Action Plan for (the plan) is expected to be underway in March, ahead of Cabinet Committee consideration of the plan. The plan is needed to continue to drive a programme of activity to reduce road trauma. The plan represents a continuation of many measures outlined in the fi rst plan, as modelling indicates that they offer the greatest potential for improving road safety. These measures include infrastructure improvements (such as median barriers and intersection treatments), safer speeds, increased levels of enforcement (both by safety cameras and by Police officers) and lifting the safety performance of the vehicle fleet. Several proposed new actions have been incorporated: RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of . . . . . Feedback from targeted stakeholder consultation was supportive of the proposed plan. There was a strong sense conveyed by stakeholders that the actions need to progress at a quicker pace, particularly given the delays caused by COVID . Agenda item : Speed and Infrastructure Programme (SIP) For this item, Waka Kotahi will provide an update on the median barrier programme and the speed programme. These workstreams are key activities to ensure we achieve the objectives set out in the Road to Zero strategy (the strategy) and together represent half the DSI red uction that the strategy requires. The current forecasting contained in the Road to Zero quarterly progress report indicates that SIP will only achieve of the outputs required by the current targeted programme by . Suggested talking point s You may wish to ask how Waka Kotahi are looking to mitigate the impacts of cyclone Gabrielle on the SIP . Agenda item : Road Policing Programme For this item, the Police Commissioner will have an opportunity to outline the progress that has been made towards achieving the current road policing targets in the December quarter . Some of the road policing metrics such as breath screening tests , and restraint checks showed dramatic improvement in the December quarter, with more than , breath screening tests having been conducted in the quarter. Police will also cover off on road policing over the recent Christmas and New Year holiday pe riod and Operation Open Road. s ()(g)(i) s ()(g)(i) s (d) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of The new Road Safety Partnership Program me (RSPP) governance arrangements have been established, and both the RSPP senior executive group and the management and performance group have been stood up and initial meetings held . Suggested talking point s You may wish to congratulate New Zealand Police for delivering more than , breath screening tests in the December quarter . This number of breath screening tests in a quarter demonstrates that the current RSPP target of three million breath screening tests annually is achievable . Agenda item : Road to Zero Quarterly Update For this item, Bryan will provide an overview of the key elements of the December quarter in the Road to Zero Quarterly Progress Report . Portfolio Overview The Road to Zero portfolio has again been assessed as being at amberred status . This is due to key workstreams in the portfolio not currently progressing a t a sufficient scale or pace to achieve the required outcom es of the strategy and the current Road to Zero A ction Plan ( ). In the December quarter there were impr ovements in the following workstreams, infrastructure , speed management , accessible streets, and vehicle standards. However as indicated in the commentary in the executive summary , the workstreams of infrastructure and speed management (workstreams and ) are likely to regress in the next reporting period . One workstream has had its status reduced to red , being the enhancement of drug driver testing, due to no oral fluid testing device being able to be found that can be legally recommended.
present Chair Auckland Light Rail Establishment Unit Board Director Auton Associates Limited
Tai Timu Tai Pari Marine Spatial Plan: Stakeholder Working Group
Beehive media release Air NZ Singapore Airlines alliance authorised
and progressed to a full licence by the end of without an advanced driving certificate and who progressed to a full licence in at least months, by duration of progression from learner to full licence and licence stage, with confidence intervals. .. Figure Fatal and serious at fault motorcycle crash involvements per , licensed riders aged to per year by riders gender and licence stage with confidence intervals ( to ). . . . . Figure Fatal and serious at fault motorcycle crash involvements per , licensed riders per year by rider age and licence stage with confidence inte rvals ( to ). . . . . . Figure Actual (black dots) and modelled (red line, with confidence bands) monthly crash rates for riders aged under versus riding experience (measured as the amount of time since obtaining a learner licence), from to combined. . Figure Fatal and serious at fault motorcycle crash involvements per , licensed riders aged to per year by licence stage and crash time period with confidence intervals ( to ). . . . . Figure Progression status and CBTA status as at the end of for all riders who received a learner licence between October and the end of . . Figure Distribution of time spent at each licence stage as at the end of of riders who obtained a learner licence between October and the end of and who progressed to a full licence, by CBTA status (months). . . Figure Fatal and serious at fault motorcycle crash involvements per , licensed riders per year by licence stage and CBTA status for riders who received a learner licence from October until the end of , with confidence intervals. . Figure Snapshot of progression by the end of for riders who obtained a learner licence in . . . . . Figure Cumulative proportion of riders who received a learner licence and who had progressed to a full licence in a given amount of time, by year of learner licence start . Figure Four year progression status for riders who obtained a learner licence between and , by gender and year of obtaining a learner licence (percent). . Figure Fatal and serious at fault motorcycle crash involvements per , licensed riders per year to the end of for riders who obtained their learner licence between and , by progression status as at the end of and licence stage. . Figure Distribution of progression durations for riders who obtained a learner licence in to and progressed to subsequent stages by the end of by gender (months). . . . . . Figure Fatal and serious at fault motorcycle crash involvements per , licensed riders per year for riders who obtained a learner licence in and and progress ed to a full licence by the end of , by duration of progression from learner to full licence and licence stage, with confidence intervals. . . . Figure Motor vehicle traffic crash fatality and hospitalisation rates per , people in New Zealand. . . . . Figure Rate of driver fatalities and hospitalisations per , licensed drivers. . Figure Fatal and injury crashes per , licensed drivers per month for drivers who obtained a restricted licence between and in New Zealand. .
Road Policing Programme Incorporating variations for https:www.nzta.govt.nza ssetsresourcesroad policing programmedocs RoadPolicingProgramme incorporating variations.pdf The Road Policing Programme is a programme based on NZ Polices response to the Transport Agency Road Policing Investment Framework. This report provides an outline of the strategic context, and the investment, delivery and monitoring and reporting arrangements. The outcome investment approach has been used by the NZTA and NZ Police to develop the RPP.
Rules came into effect
increases to PED and RUC took effect
Beehive media release Drones will help economy take off
increases to PED and RUC took effect
increases to petrol excise duty and road user charges took effect
, with the addition of one new activity class.
Investment package announced
Act) comes into force on April .
Beehive media release Air New Zealand and Singapore Airlines alliance extended
Speed Rule . It was considered by the Cabinet Expenditure and
Speed Rule and delete reference to the previous rule.
. The signing of the Speed Rule met the Governments commitment
, an increase of percent.
to the Executive Council.
It is possible that some yearolds continue to drive illegally and there may still be some crashes involving this age group. We do not have information that allows us to estimate the number of yearolds who drive illegally. However, there is no evidence that increasing the minimum learner duration in Queensland led to an increase in unsupervised driving by learners (Scott Parker et al, ). As with other analysi s in this report, driving experience is measured by the amount of time since each driver obtained their learner licence.
The Par liamentary Counsel Office has certified the A mendment Order as being in or der for submission to Cabinet.
The Regional Transport Committees Order is made under section of the
The alternativ e approach would be to provide a higher degree of specificity for when the Board needs to seek direction from Sponsors. The challenge with this is pre determining these decisions, inevitably all decisions will not be foreseen.
The data used in this study has no unique identifiers attached to any individual.
agreed that the capital expenditure incurred under paragraph above be charged against the New Zealand Upgrade Projects Tagged Capital Contingency described in paragraph above; noted that, following the adjustment detailed in paragraph above, as well as previous adjustments described in paragraph above, the remaining balances and indicative phasing of the tagged capital contingency described in paragraph above will be as follows:
. Domestic airfares in the six months to June are up compared to the same period pre Covid and are up compared to the same period in .
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
Having observers on or advisors to the Board brings the benefit of their expertise and insights to support the Board. However, the Board has been purposefully established to be skills based with members appointed on the basis of their skills and experience to provide the oversight and direction required to progress the ALR Project through the detailed planning phase. T here is a case for Te Waihanga, with its expertise in aspects of business cases and procurement, and the Sponsors Representative Forum to have representatives as observers to the Board. However, given the skills based purpose of the Board it is proposed that no officials or advisors are prescribed through the terms of reference. Instead, the Board is encouraged and empowered to draw on the expertise of advisors, specifically Te Waihanga and the Sponsors Representative Forum, as well as other appropriate parties . It is important the terms of reference are clear that such an advisor role would have no decisionmaking rights and their attendance is to provide assistance to the Board as and when requi red and, provide clarity on Sponsors expectations . Establishing that the Board are ultimately accountable to the three ALR Ministers
Subsidy is available for NZ community service card holders
There are no grounds for the Regulations Review Committee to draw the
. Auckland Airport supports the reauthorisation of this agreement of the Government can establish clear consumer benefits. However, we seek to engage the Ministry of Transport further on wider issues around consumer choice and competition in the international and domestic aviation markets.
Agencys information sharing with Meta, Facebook and other platforms Information of the development to EV chargers The Ministrys cost allocation model spreadsheet for calculating road user charges.
Over time, drivers get older and have held a licence for longer, both of which affect the probability that a driver is involv ed in a crash. The curve shown in Figure reflects both of these effects.
Parliamentary Counsel Office has certified the Orders as being in order for
The Amendment Order will be in the New Zealand Gaze tte and Auckland Council is required to publish the Proposal in accordance with section of the LTMA .
submissions fall within the scope of your request and are detailed in the document schedule attached as Annex . This schedule outlines how the docu ments you requested have been treated under the Act.
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
The Ministry of Transport undertook a Regulatory Impact Assessment for the
The following Government departments and agencies have been consulted on the Amendment Order: The Treasury, Department of Internal Affairs (Local Government) , and Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency . The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet has been informed.
This specific period was chosen to allow the analysi s to include all drivers aged and under (due to dataset restrictions; see Table ), and to end before the minimum driving age was increased in , to avoid conflating the effects of that change with the changes to penalties. Given the time period f or this analysis ( to ), limitations of the licensing dataset mean that the analysis could only include drivers up to years old. We excluded fully licensed drivers with advanced certificates as having an advanced certificate is likely to have additional effects on safety outcomes that may be difficult to separate from the effects of passing the full licence test and progressin g from a restricted to a full licence. Safety impacts of advanced certificates are analysed in section . below.
MIN, CABMIN refer. I have made the following decisions under
I do not intend to announce these changes as they are administrative in
The terms of reference must provide clarity on where direction comes from to the Board and where accountability sits. R ecognising the important role of Auckland Council and mana whenua in the programme, the intent of the governance arrangements, reflected in the Sponsors Agreement, is that direction to the ALR Board has regard to the views of all Sponsors and is provided as a one sponsor direction. The Sponsors Agreement Heads of Terms sets out the approach for one sponsor direction. Sponsors will seek to reach consensus on decisions while acknowledging that it is likely there will be differences of opinion. Sponsors will communicate with the ALR Board on a one sponsor basis through a Sponsors Representative, with any differences between Sponsors being resolved under the Sponsors Agreement. This will not restrict the Crown instructing the Board to investigate alternative options that may represent differing opinions of Sponsors . While respecting the spirit of the Sponsor partnership, the ALR Board is a Ministerial Advisory Committee. The Board is therefore appointed by and accountable to the Crown. This accountability also reflects the funding arrangements for the ALR Board and Unit for the detailed planning phase, that will be covered by the Crown. This s ()(j) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Item accountability also means it is the responsibility of the Crown to give direction to the ALR Board, in consultation with other Sponsors under the Sponsors Agreement, as discussed a bove. In the terms of reference, i t will be necessary to confirm which Ministers will have responsibility for this accountability role. It is proposed that the three Sponsoring Ministers, the Ministers of Finance, Housing and Transport jointly undertake this role, as this is consistent with the delegations made by Cabinet in December .
Years of New Zealand Travel report
cents per litre reduction to petrol excise duty will be extended until January (instead of ending on August )
note that, following the adjustment detailed in recommendations and above, the GPS tagged contingency described in recommendation above is now exhausted and therefore closed.
. We recommend that Kinga Ora deliver in the order of state units within the Maungawhau and Karanga aHape urban development programme via land purchase at s ()(b)(ii), s ()(j) s ()(j) s ()(b)(ii), s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
I intend to proactively release this paper within days of this Cabinet
agreed that the changes to appropriations for above be included in the Supplementary Estimates and that, in the interim, the increases be met from Imprest Supply.
I recommend that the Cabinet Legislation Committee:
Ministerial consultation has occurred on the proposed amendments , but
The fact that crash rates tend to fall with driver age (particularly among drivers in their teens and s) is reflected in othe r results in this study (e.g. Figure above), and other studies (e.g. Williams, and McCartt et al, ). Boufous et al () examined this issue for drivers aged to years old in New South Wales, Australia. They found that drivers who failed the practical driving test to obtain an intermediate (i.e. restricted) licence at least four times were ar ound . times more lik ely to be involved in a crash compared to drivers who passed the test on their first attempt. Class supervisors must have had a full New Zealand Class driver licence for at least two years and not have a supervisor condition on their own licence.
of their time as a car or van passenger
February and March
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
noted that on May , Cabinet:
. agreed to establish a tagged capital contingency of up to the amount below in Vote
. authorised Joint Ministers to draw down the tagged capital contingency funding
.. establishing parameters for managing access to programme and project
.. CIPA being completed for individual projects and the Programme as a
We note funding for the Taknini cluster is included in the Auckland Council Long Term Plan and the Auckland Regional Land Transport Plan. Document Out of Scope Out of Scope s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of May OC Hon S imeon Brown Minister of Transport AUCKLAND TRANSPORT ALIGNMENT PROJECT (ATAP) IMPLEMENTATION REPORT: JULY MARCH Purpose The report provides a progress update on the Auckland Transport Alignment Project (ATAP) programme for the reporting period, July to March . Key points The transport investment in Auckland from the Government and Auckland Council of . billion between July and March is building resilience and improving accessacross the network. Roads have been repaired since the weather events, more Aucklanders have better access to frequent transport , safety investment has resulted in reduced deaths and serious injuries and rail lines have been rebuilt setting the rail network up for the future . Between July and March , Auckland Transport, KiwiRail and the New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) met important delivery milestones . These include c ompleting the Interim Northwest Bus Improvements , launching the new Western Express (WX) bus service , and re opening the Eastern Line of the Auckland rail network . Capital and operational expenditure across the ATAP agencies is following close to budget and the programme is tracking well . The C C ity Rail Link (CRL) works delivered by the Link Alliance are currently tracking within budget . Public transport patronage has continued to increase over this reporting period, led by bus patronage, and now sits at of pre COVID levels . Congestion has reached pre COVID levels and deaths and serious injuries have reduced over the last year. The ATAP investment package ends on June this year given the new Government Policy Statement, Regional Land Transport Plan and National LandTransport P rogramme . While there will not be an ATAP programme to report against in the immediate future , we will work with the agencies to ensure ongoing r eporting of delivery across the transport prog ramme in Auckland. Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Since the package was agreed, Auckland has received additional Crown funding as follows: million, reallocated from the NZUP funded Northern Pathway project, to support the Eastern Busway project. million from the Climate Emergency Response Fund Transport Choices Package (Appendix details projects). million from the Infrastructure Acceleration Fund, administered by Kinga Ora, for Carrington Road transport improvements and safety improvements for papakinga housing access. million for the NZUP rail programme following a re baselining in to fund scope increases to the Drury Rail stations project, and a further million in late to address cost pressures across several NZUP funded rail projects. million in response to Cyclone Gabrielle and the Auckland Anniversary floods, provided to Auckland Transport. . billion additional CRL funding, co funded () by Auckland Council and Crown. Auckland Council have added million over years from the Climate Action Targeted Rate (Appendix details initiatives). Changes to funding Cancellation of Auckland Light Rail The Coalition Government officially cancelled Auckland Light Rail on January . million was allocated in Budget to Auckland Light Rail Limited (ALRL) for programme delivery until June . A further million was subsequently allocated for strategic land acquisition. ALRL had spent approximately million as of February . An amount of million of unused funding for strategic land acquisition has been returned to the Treasury , and further unspent funding will be returned as the wind up of ALRL progresses . Auckland Regional Fuel Tax (RFT) On March , t he Coalition Government passed legislation to repeal the RFT. Collection of RFT will cease on June . As of March , million had been collected from RFT with million spent. The unspent million will be prioritised to the Eastern Busway stages to , electric trains and stabling, and road corridor improvements . Auckland Transport have presented a revised capital programme to reflect reduced funding as RFT ceases. This has resulted in some non RFT funded projects descoped, deferred or stopped. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Project delivery highlights Between July and March , transport investment in Auckland by Government and Auckland Council has seen a number of key milestones met. Aucklanders have seen progress on large projects such as the Eastern Busway, as well as ongoing investment in maintenance and public transport services. As a result of investment in the ATAP programme, Aucklanders have seen roads repaired since the weather events, new public transport services introduced, for example, the Northwestern bus service (WX) and progress made on rebuilding the Auckland rail network. Project delivery highlights from the three delivery agencies (Auckland Transport , KiwiRail and NZTA) listed below include the completion of projects, significant progress on road maintenance, a move towards emissions reduction by the purchase of electric trains and electric and hybrid ferries and safety improvements across the road and rail network. Auckland Transport Eastern Busway Crown funding of million (reassigned from the cancelled Northern Pathway project in December ) is being used to support the delivery of the Eastern Busway. On November , resource consents were granted on Eastern Busway sections and R (from Pakuranga Town Centre to the east of Ti Rkau Bridge). Site works at these sections have commenced. Eight local businesses, including Pakuranga Plaza Ltd, made appeals to the notice of requirement for Eastern Busway Section based on restricti ons to vehicle and customer access, decreased customer safety, and noise and air pollution. The appeals are now all resolved and consent documents are with the Environment Court for approval. William Rober ts Road opened on March and work has commenced on the Reeves Road (R Hiki) flyover piling . On Ti Rkau Road Auckland Transport have acquired of all properties for the Eastern Busway project. Interim Northwest Bus Improvemen ts The WX service from Auckland city centre to Westgate went live i n November . Buses now travel along State Highway (S H) bus shoulder lanes during peak times, and use interim bus stops at Lincoln Road, Te Atat Road, and Westgate interchanges. Patronage on this service has exceeded the network average, carrying more than , passengers in the four months since opening. At the end of March , boardings were consistently at , passengers per day. A uckland Transport and NZTA are currently developing a detailed business case for a rapid transit busway along SH from the city centre to Westgate . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Road renewals and maintenance In December , AT launched the summer road renovation programme. In March Auckland Transport carried out km of road resurfacing and rehabilitation, which involved replacing both the surface and underlying pavement with new asphalt and concrete. Auckland Transport have completed of the year toroad renewal target (km) and are on track to meet the target of km. Flood recovery The Auckland Transport Flood Recovery Programme identified sites for repair. Of these, were completed in the period July to March ( of total projects). out of the major projects (those costing over ,) have been compl eted, with a further currently in construction. Auckland Transport expect to complete over of all sites by June and to substantially complete flood recovery works in the financial year. Electric train procurement and retrofit Auckland Transport are procuring and delivering new electric trains (or electric multiple units EMUs) to provide additional capacity for growth expected when operating the CRL timetable. The contractor constructing the electric trains (CAF Mexico) are confident they can maintain their programme to deliver new EMUs within approval and shipping deadlines, despite some factory testing and supply chain issues. Auckland Transport are also retrofitting the existing fleet. The retrofit programme updates the technology in the current EMU fleet to match the new trains. Updates include switching out exterior headlights and interior lights to LEDs and fitting a new high voltage transformer. Auckland Transport have completed of Retrofit Stage works, ( out of trains), with all completed trains returned to service. CAF have completed an advance trial installation of the LED interiors with positive feedback from Auckland One Rail. Level Crossing Removal Programme Auckland Transport has identified a programme for the staged removal of all level crossings, either through grade separation or roadfootpath closure, over the next years. The forward programme comprises six groupings of level crossings. Six pedestrian and one road crossing have been marked for removal prior to CRL Day , and funding is confirmed in financial years and . Auckland Transport are required to remove the crossings to reduce risk of serious injury or death and to therefore receive regulatory approval from NZTA for increasing train frequency after CRL opens. Implementation works have been completed at Corban Estate (Henderson) and Tironui Station Road East (Takaanini), which closed in February . Kingdon Street (Newmarket) and Ll oyd Avenue (Mount Albert) crossing closure is planned for May . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Auckland Transport have also completed a programme of l evel crossing safety impact assessments covering locations and individual crossings. Impact assessments will inform a final safety report, due in October this year . The completed report will form the basis of the l evel crossing safety programme, and support safety business case discussions with NZTA, the rail safety regulator . In January , the Auckland Transport Rail Programme Control Group endorsed the recommended option for removing a vehicle level crossing at Church Street (Onehunga) and will begin property acquisition and the road stopping process that involves changing land with the legal status of road to a freehold title. This work will use approved FY funding. Low Emission Ferry Programme Auckland Transport aim to deliver up to nine low emission ferries to improve the reliability, capacity, customer experience and emission profile of Aucklands ferry fleet. Construction of the first four vessels (two EV Maritime vessels and two Devonport hybrid vessels) is underway . However, vessels now need to be to meet new international maritime safety guidelines, released late . Updates have delayed delivery of the first two vessels to Auckland Transport from October December to March May . The following two boats are expected between May April . The cost to procure the first four boats is anticipated to increase by approximately (around . . million) due to the international maritime changes. Designs for wharf upgrades, and charging infrastructure to enable low emission ferries, are in progress and on track for Half Moon Bay, Hobsonville and the Downtown terminal. The New Zealand Transport Agency Northern Corridor Improvements NZTA finished all major construction works on the northern corridor in July , and laid the final asphalt surfacing in November . The project completes the Western Ring Route to provide more resilient and reliable journey times for the movement of people and goods across the Auckland roading network . SH Brigham Creek to Waimauku (Stage ) Construction of the first stage of safety improvements between Huapai and Waimauku started at the end of August . The work includes road and bridge widening, undergrounding of services and installation of mediums and roadside barriers. By the end of March work has begun on new foundation at Berry Bridge, and earthworks continue along the length of road to create a solid sub base for road widening. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Mahurangi Penlink The PenlinkO Mahurangi project is progressing well, with a good earthwork season. Piling work has started on the main Bridge across the Weiti River. As the bridge is the key structure for the project the Alliance has been obtaining insights from other similar bridges that have recently been built to see if there are any lessons that can be applied to the Penlink project. SH Papakura to Drury Stage a , between Papakura and the BP motorway service centre , is progressing well with construction nearing an end. Works include a new southbound on ramp at Beach Road, replacing the Park Estate Road bridge, construction of three bridges over railway lines by the Drury interchange, road widening and new retaining walls on both sides of the motorway, and upgraded noise walls and street lighting. In March the Papakura northbound off ramp opened a week earlier than scheduled. Good progress has been made on the new southbound on ramp due to be opened late Aprilearly May. KiwiRail Wiri to Quay Park Significant physical works were completed over the Labour Weekend and Christmas holidays. KiwiRail have completed signals commissioning at Wiri Junction and begun construction work on Middlemore Station. Papakura to Pukekohe Electrification (PP) Progress has been made on the overhead line equipment (OLE) installation along the route, including wiring and structures. Ahead of the PP line opening, testing is underway and KiwiRail are considering options for the preferred power feed system. Drury Rail Stations Development KiwiRail are making design changes to Drury Central and Paert stations to achieve better value for money. These have progressed well, and all Public Works Act notices have been served. KiwiRail are also preparing a tender for the development of the stations. Design changes for Ngkroa Station have commenced, however resource consent is still outstanding, pending Environmental Court decision. Integrated Rail Management Centre The new Auckland Rail Operations Centre in Ellerslie was delivered under budget and is now in operation. The centre is the co location of staff from KiwiRail, Auckland Transport and Auckland One Rail working to facilitate more efficient service operations.
noted that the parameters for accessing tagged contingency, in addition to
Indicative Asset Consumption ranges ( to ) Pavement (Surface) Pavement (Basecourse Subbase) Drainage Bridges, Culverts Subways, Tunnels Other Structures Traffic facilities Total Asset Base
. a request from the respective delivery agency boards that outlines the need for the
. for higherrisk and rescoped projects, agreement from Joint Ministers to a fitfor
. for all requests, confirmation from the respective delivery agency boards that:
.. the project is likely to fall within the approved funding for the project;
.. there are appropriate processes, capacity and capability in place to
xxfpyy
xxfpyy
xxfpyy
xxfpyy I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E m increase(decrease) Vote Transport Minister for Transport NonDepartmental Capital Expenditure
xxfpyy I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E m increase(decrease) Outyears New Zealand Upgrade Programme Tagged Capital Contingency . . Total Capital . .
xxfpyy I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Annex One: Priority Projects Melling interchange The State Highway Melling Interchange is a Road of Regional Significance. The project will provide better access tofrom State Highway , Lower Hutt and Western Hills by building a grade separated interchange and removing the existing Melling traffic lights. It also provides improved walking and cycling paths, and better access to public transport. The current total approved funding is m with m of contingency expected to be transferred to the project soon. Recent work has revised the forecast cost to The primary drivers of cost increases include an extended pre implementation phase and design development, along with Councils removing scope from the programme (e.g. the Riverlink Bridge). The Council changes have led to increased costs and cost risk for NZTA due to the need to accommodate the scope changes within the programme. Waikare Gorge Realignment The Waikare Gorge Realignment project includes a kilometre realignment and a new metre bridge across the Waikare Gorge on State Highway at Putorino (north of Napier). The NZTA Board approved an interim Single Stage Business Case (SSBC) for the project in and in September endorsed an SSBC with realignment as the preferred option. During Cyclone Garbielle, the existing Waikare bridge was destroyed, closing SH between Napier and Wairoa for three months. A one lane Bailey Bridge with speed restrictions and stopgo controls was installed to reinstate access and remains in place. Budge t provided funding for NZTA to install a like forlike replacement of the Waikare bridge in the same location. The current location remains a significant resilience risk due to damage in future severe weather or seismic events. The NZTA considered alt ernatives, including a raised permanent replacement bridge close to the existing site. This option would require additional funding, the resilience issues would remain and construction would cause significant disruption for the region over months, inc luding periods of road closure which would be incredibly challenging for the local community due to the road having no alternatives. Additional funding would enable NZTA to proceed for the realignment option instead, realigning the SH corridor and rebuilding a new bridge with improved safety, resilience and travel time savings. Auckland Level Crossing Removal Programme Auckland Transport has developed a programme of level crossing removals. This funding will enable delivery of level crossing improvements and removals, with a focus on the Takanini Cluster . The opening of the City Rail Link (CRL) will enable trains per hour per direction to run across the network, compared to six trains per hour per direction currently. With more train movements, the number of trains will result in more frequent and longer operation of level crossing barrier arms. Indicative modelling has demonstrated that barrier arms could be down for up to minutes per peak hour on CRL Day One, increasing as more train services are added. Removing level crossings will reduce the risk of significant delays to motorists when the City Rail Link is operational. xxfpyy s ()(j) I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Crown funding will be additional to funding from Auckland Transport , who will still be expected to contribute their funding share ( percent) towards these works. The Ministry of Transport is exploring the preferred approach to deliver ing these capital works. NZTA is also undertaking further work to interrogat e the indicative costings. Ashburton (Bridge) Tinwald Connectivity The existing two lane State Highway bridge is the only bridge across the river within Ashburton . The detailed business case completed in identified capacity and safety issues with the State Highway Bridge and approaches. The Bridge has also been the subject of closures and the alternative route to cross the river requires at least a kilometre detour. Local traffic is estimated to make up of the current traffic on the State Highway Bridge. Current information is that the total cost of the project (including Council share) will be The bridge component of the project is which NZTA will deliver as a State Highway . The local road connections will be funded by Ashburton District Council. State Highway Brougham St Corridor Improvements State Highway is a high demand corridor and operates as the only access to the Christchurch Port. The project includes upgraded signals at intersections, upgrade d parking locations to a T lane at peak times, upgrade d centre crossings, as well as a metre pedestrian and cyclist overbridge to replace the existing signalised crossing on Brougham Street. Following a scoping exercise to confirm the Roads of Regional Significance programme, Joint Ministers (Transport and Finance) agreed to remove the Canterbury Brougham St Corridor Improvements project from the Crown funding envelope (. billion ).This decision followed design work for the upgrade, confirming that additional funding would be required for the construction. Design and consenting work s have continued. Roads of National Significance (RoNS) The RoNS are strategic corridors that will support economic growth by enabling new housing areas for population growth and key links to export markets. Theyll also improve safety, help to get goods to market more efficiently and effectively, and will build greate r resilience into the roading network. Planning and project development is well underway , with additional funding seeking to accelerate the delivery of the RoNS programme. xxfpyy s ()(j) s ()(j) I N C O N F I D E N C E ECOMIN Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Government Policy Statement and NZ Upgrade Programme Tagged Contingency for Transport Projects Portfolio Transport On December , the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee: Existing funding within Vote Transport noted that Budget established the Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Tagged Capital Contingency (the GPS tagged contingency), to enable the New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) to accelerate delivery of projects in the Governments land transport priorities as set out in the GPS that would otherwise be phased to begin from onwards CABMIN.; noted that: .the New Zealand Upgrade Transport Projects Tagged Capital Contingency (the NZUP tagged contingency) was initially established for the former New Zealand Upgrade Programme CABMIN; .following subsequent decisions taken to appropriate and reallocate funding from the contingency, the remaining balance and indicative funding profile is as follows: m increase(decrease) Outyears New Zealand Upgrade Transport Projects Tagged Capital Contingency... Total Capital ... I N C O N F I D E N C E xxfpyy I N C O N F I D E N C E ECOMIN noted that: .the previous government agreed to provide . million held within the NZUP tagged contingency to the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvement project, contingent on confirmation of the funding profile of potential cofunders DEVMIN; .any drawdown of the contingency for the above would have seen it reclassified as operating expenditure; Reallocation towards projects at risk noted that a range of projects have been identified (Melling Interchange, Waikare Gorge realignment, Second Ashburton Bridge, SH Brougham Street Corridor Improvements, Auckland Level Crossings, and the Roads of National Significance) that are at risk of delayed delivery without early confirmation of funding availability, and that to access this funding requires a change in scope of the GPS tagged contingency ; noted that the conditions attached to the GPS tagged contingency have only been partially met and that the unmet conditions will remain a requirement for the NZTA Board; agreed to expand the scope of the GPS tagged contingency to include the projects in paragraph above; agreed to: .rescind the decision noted in paragraph . above; and instead .reallocate the funding towards the projects identified in paragraph ; Drawdown of the tagged contingencies to provide funding certainty for identified projects noted that in Budget , Cabinet invited the Minister of Transport to report back to Cabinet by June with an update on the implementation of the GPS CABMIN.; agreed to fund the projects at risk in paragraph above by drawing down . billion from the GPS tagged contingency and . million of the NZUP tagged c ontingency; noted that the Melling Interchange and Canterbury Brougham St projects are part of the Roads of Regional Significance programme that NZTA is responsible for delivering on behalf of the Crown; authorised the NZTA Board to take decisions on the allocation of funding for the Melling Interchange, and Canterbury SH Brougham Street projects, subject to NZTAs standard decisionmaking processes, and with due consideration to the impact on the Governments fiscal strategy; I N C O N F I D E N C E xxfpyy I N C O N F I D E N C E ECOMIN agreed to establish the following new multiyear appropriation, to run from July to June : VoteAppropriation MinisterAppropriation AdministratorTitleTypeScope NameMinister of TransportMinistry of TransportNew Zealand Transport Agency: Crown Funding for Transport Projects (Capital)Non Department al Capital ExpenseThis appropriation is limited to Crown funding for transport projects that will result in assets owned by the Crown approved the following change to appropriations to give effect to the decision to provide funding for Melling Interchange and SH Brougham Street Corridor Improvements in paragraph above, with a corresponding impact on net debt: m increase(decrease) Vote Transport Minister for Transport NonDepartmental Capital Expenditure Capital Investment Package Funding for Crown assets. NonDepartmental Capital Expenditure New Zealand Transport Agency: Crown Funding for Transport Projects (Capital) . Total Capital . . noted that the indicative spending profile for the additional funding provided in paragraph above is as follows: m increase(decrease) Indicative annual spending profile NonDepartmental Capital Expenditure New Zealand Transport Agency: Crown Funding for Transport Projects (Capital).... NonDepartmental Capital Expenditure Capital Investment Package Funding for Crown assets. I N C O N F I D E N C E xxfpyy I N C O N F I D E N C E ECOMIN noted that, following the decision in paragraph above, the total funding envelope for the Roads of Regional Significance will increase from . billion to . billion; agreed that additional funding to support the Waikare Gorge realignment, Second Ashburton Bridge, Auckland Level Crossings Removal programme and Roads of National Significance will be included in the National Land Transport Fund, subject to NZTAs standard decisionmaking processes and with due consideration given to the impact on the Governments Fiscal Strategy; noted that NZTA has independent statutory authority over whether activities are approved for National Land Transport Fund funding; approved the following change to appropriations to give effect to the policy decision in paragraph above, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance and net debt: m increase(decrease) Vote Transport Minister for Transport to NonDepartmental Capital Expenditure Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Capital Grant () . noted that the indicative spending profile for the additional funding provided in paragraph above is as follows: m increase(decrease) Indicative annual spending profile ..... authorised the Minister of Transport and Minister of Finance jointly to make changes to appropriations, as necessary (including capital to operating swaps and establishing new appropriations), to give effect to final investment decisions taken by the NZTA Board under paragraphs and above; noted that phasing will vary from that indicated given the complexity of the multiyear projects listed; agreed that the changes to appropriations above be included in the Supplementary Estimates and that, in the interim, the increase be met from Imprest Supply; agreed that: .up to . million of the capital expenditure incurred under paragraphs and above be charged against the NZUP tagged contingency; .up to . billion of the capital expenditure incurred under paragraphs and above be charged against the GPS tagged contingency; I N C O N F I D E N C E xxfpyy I N C O N F I D E N C E ECOMIN noted that, following the adjustment detailed in paragraphs and above, the remaining balances and indicative phasing of the NZUP tagged contingency will be: m increase(decrease) Outyears New Zealand Upgrade Programme Tagged Capital Contingency.. Total Capital .. noted that, following the above adjustments, the GPS tagged contingency is now exhausted and therefore closed. Rachel Clarke Committee Secretary Present: Officials present from: Hon David Seymour Hon Nicola Willis (Chair) Hon Shane Jones Hon Simeon Brown Hon Paul Goldsmith Hon Louise Upston Hon Judith Collins KC Hon Todd McClay Hon Tama Potaka Hon Melissa Lee Hon Penny Simmonds Hon Chris Penk Hon Nicola Grigg Hon Andrew Bayly Hon Andrew Hoggard Hon Mark Patterson Simon Court MPOffice of the Prime Minister Office of Hon Judith Collins KC Officials Committee for ECO I N C O N F I D E N C E xxfpyy I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN Cabinet Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Report of the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee: Period Ended December On December , Cabinet made the following decisions on the work of the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee for the period ended December : ECOMIN Government Policy Statement and NZ Upgrade Programme Tagged Contingency for Transport Projects Portfolio: TransportCONFIRMED I N C O N F I D E N C E xxfpyy Out of Scope Out of Scope I N C O N F I D E N C E CABMIN Rachel Hayward Secretary of the Cabinet I N C O N F I D E N C E xxfpyy Out of Scope
ygffdk
As required by transitional provisions in the Act, The previous Minister of
Auckland Council Research and Evaluation Unit: Auckland Air Quality Annual Report, , and Auckland Air Quality Report March , April RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of May OC Hon Simeon Brown Action required by: Minister of Transport Click to enter a or delete this Action required by: AUCKLAND LEVEL CROSSING PROGRAMME UPDATE Purpose Provide an update on the Auckland level crossing programme including the City Rail Link related crossings and the wider Auckland level crossing removal programme. Key points Seven level crossings will be removed as part of the City Rail Link (CRL) Day one programme. Six of these are pedestrian crossings, one is a roading crossing. Theseven crossings are funded. There is a need to ultimately remove all level crossings on the Auckland rail network,both for safety reasons and to maximise the efficiency of the rail network and the adjacent roading network. While level crossings remain, trains operate at reduced speed in the crossing vicinity and cars are stopped by barrier arms. Auckland Council have indicated partial funding for the Takanini cluster ( million) in the upcoming Long term Plan. This funding has been reduced as Auckland Council have revised the transport capital programme to reflect the cessation of theRegional Fuel Tax. Document s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Western Line Level Crossings There are level crossings on the Western Corridor, of which are expected to still be in place when CRL opens. These are:
Based on findings of Ministry of Transports Future Funding Project: https:www.transport.govt.nzmulti modalkeystrategiesandplansstrategic policy programmefuture funding From the allocation level. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Budget originally set at the start of the NLTP period. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of MONTH YEAR TO FULL YEAR NLTP
Connell J P Kubisch A. C. () Applying a Theory of Change Approach to the Evaluation of Comprehensive Community Initiatives: Progress, Prospects, and Problems, Aspen Institute, Colorado. Note: The term theory of change was popularised by Weiss () and refers to a structured approach used in the design and evaluation of programmes to explore change and how it happens. Construction of the model: Step : Identify the issue Clarity on the problem, opportunity, or challenge you want your intervention to fix is critical. You want to get beyond the symptoms of the problem to the causes. You need to develop a clear problem statement(s). Step : Articulate anticipated impacts Next you want to make assumptions on what you believe your intervention, if successful, is expected to achieve. This is a broad, population level outcome or result the ultimate consequences of effects of the proposed intervention. Step : Identify outcomes This step involves identifying what outcomes will be required for the ultimate impacts identified in step two to be achieved. Outcomes are the direct results or benefits for individuals, whnau, groups, communities, organisations or systems and they can be short term or mediumterm. The further we go on the outcome chain, the less control or influence we have.
KEY PRIORITIES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending September
Key updates Minister engagement on RMS Niagara with the Hauraki Gulf Forum You have received an invitation to meet with Lucy Baragwanath, Executive Officer of the Hauraki Gulf Forum (the Forum). The wreck of RMS Niagara is a frequent agenda item for the Forum as the risk it presents has the potential to impact the Hauraki Gulf. Maritime NZ has previously engaged with the Forum to discuss the wreck, and has a positive and productive relationship with them. Any advice provided to the Forum has been consistent with advice to Ministers. We recommend you visit the Maritime NZ, Maritime Response Team in Te Atatu Auckland prior to meeting with Lucy Baragwanath. The Oil Spill Response capabilities and people that Maritime NZ employs, equips, trains and maintains through the Oil Pollution Fund (financed through the Oil Pollution Levy) would be the responder to a significant oil spillrelease from the RMS Niagara . This will give you a clearer understanding of the condition and risk associated with the RMS Niagara and Maritime NZs capabilities and readiness generally to respond to marine oil spills. The team is also meeting with Iwi and members of the Forum in the week ending Friday August , so will be able to provide more information on what the Forum may be seeking. Maritime Digital Transformation Maritime in the Media KiwiRail is due to be sentenced on September for Kaitakis loss of propulsion incident in January . We are currently working through our external communications approach. Due to the ongoing investigation into KiwiRail following the grounding of the Aratere in June , we will be taking a short media statement only approach. Once the sentence is delivered we will proactively update both your Office and Minister Browns of the sentence. We are developing our approach around recreational craft safety for the springsummerautumn. Already this year we have seen some major events in the recreational craft sector. We will be working to have a people focused approach to our recreational craft free media harm prevention approach.
Key updates Update following Minister Dooceys meeting with YSAR We note that following your meeting with Youth Search and Rescue Trust (YSAR) on Thursday August , you expressed interest in supporting YSAR to find a sustainable source of funding and in supporting the organisation more generally. It would be appropriate for all funding proposals from NGOs in the SAR sector (including YSAR) to be considered as part of the upcoming section () Fuel Excise Duty (FED) funding round. It would be useful to note that YSAR does not undertake search and rescue (SAR) activity themselves. They are focused on enabling youth to develop the necessary skills to potentially participate at some point in SAR activity. Maritime New Zealand Authority Appointments The Ministry aims to commence the advertisement process and to seek nominations for the Maritime New Zealand Authority after receiving Ministerial feedback this week. The deadline for applications is September .
Methods . Establishing evaluation criteria This evaluation uses explicit criteria (aspects of performance) to address KEQ (To what extent has GPS influenced changes in NLTF investments, implementation and early stage outcomes). Criteria summarise the focal points for this evaluation component and provide a transparent, agreed framework for making robust judgements from the evidence, in line with standards for good evaluation practice. Evaluation criteria are aligned with the GPS short term results and final reporting measures established by Te Manat Waka for GPS , reflecting the key priorities of safety, access, environment, and value for money. For this evaluation, the key evaluation criteria focus on the following, drawing on qualitative and quantitative analysis: Increased transport investment mix toward safety oriented investments Increased investment in a better integrated transport network, includin g public transport, walking and cycling and improved land use planning that aims to support improved throughput and access in metropolitan areas Increased focus on transport investment in ways that aim to promote active transport and public transport via i mproved infrastructure, better connections, and improved safety Increased investment in and delivery of transport projects that seek to promote the uptake of active travel modes to support environmental and public health objectives Increased rigour and tra nsparency of transport investment appraisals. Appendix explains how these criteria were selected. In detailed planning for this evaluation with Te Manat Waka and Waka Kotahi, a range of potential criteria were developed to explore the extent to which G PS outcomes are realised. In addition, a wide range of data was reviewed for its potential to inform the evaluation, drawing on GPS short term results and final reporting measures established by Te Manat Waka for GPS . GPS established many quantitative reporting measures. The sources of quantitative evidence focus on measures most relevant to the evaluation criteria, where data is currently available, and where there is confidence that evaluative conclusions can be reached. The proposed qua ntitative evidence sources also consider the smaller set of reporting measures established for GPS . Following feedback from Te Manat Waka and Waka Kotahi, we refined the indicator set to those that are measurable, reportable and relevant to this evaluation, noting where indicators may be useful for future monitoring but are not currently available. Yarbrough, D. B., Shulha, L. M., Hopson, R. K., and Caruthers, F. A. (). The program evaluation standards: A guide for evaluators and evaluation users (rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage https:www.transport.govt.nzassetsUploadsReportFinal GPS measures.pdf https:www.transport.govt.nzassetsUploadsPaperGPS.pdf METHODS
New Zealands Driver Licence Register (DLR) moved to electronic form in May . Based on advice from NZTA, was chosen a s the starting point for analysis due to data consistency and reliability issues in the DLR prior to this , particularly for licence status data. All analysis in this report is based on driver involvements in fatal and serious at fault light motor v ehicle crashes (for Class ) and fatal and rider involvements in serious at fault motorcycle crashes (for Class ). Light motor vehicle (Class ) crashes were defined as those involving cars, vans, utes, SUVs, and mopeds where the rider did not have a Clas s licence at the time of the crash. Motorcycle crashes were defined as those involving motorcycles and mopeds where the rider had a Class licence at the time of the crash. Due to resourcing limitations, it was not possible to analyse moped crashes sepa rately. In this report, at fault crashes are defined as those where the driver or rider was recorded as primarily or partly at fault (for multi vehicle crashes) or at fault (for single vehicle crashes) in the CAS data. CAS defines road deaths as those wher e an injury or multiple injuries resulted in death within days of when the crash happened. Serious injuries include fractures, concussions, intern al injuries, crushings, severe cuts, lacerations, severe general shock necessitating medical treatment, and any other injury requiring admittance or detention in hospital.
Note through the New Zealand Aid Programme, funding has been allocated to support the attendance of Pacific negotiators to the upcoming IMO meetings. This supports continuity in Pacific en gagement in the development of the revised strategy and the measures that will support decarbonisation of the maritime sector. SHAC is led by the Republic of the Marshall Islands and includes members from the Pacific, Europe and other States such as the US and Canada. This includes the Cook Islands, Vanuatu, and the Pacific High Ambition Coalition known as PAC (Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Tonga and Tuvalu). In the UNFCCC, there are no specific target dates by which countries mu st reach zero emissions. The Paris Agreement calls for countries to pursue efforts to limit temperature increase to .C above pre industrial levels. s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE UNCLASSIFIED Page of Certain States (including some major emitters ) continue to favour a less defined aim of net zero GHG emissions preferably around mid century and before the end of this century , despite recent scientific literature show ing that achieving Paris aligned levels of ambition for the shipping sector, including the zero by goal , is feasible if urgent action is commenced no w. including China, Saudi Arabia and Russia have national zeroemission targets. India has committed to a net zero target by . Despite this, we are seeing convergence on a goal with many other countries. Following the March negotiations, we have worked with SHAC members to pool resources to strengthen consensus for an ambitious outcome. For instance, through EU states, the SHAC has strengthened alliances with progressive developing countries including Ghana, Namibia, and Kenya to encourage their voices to be heard. More engagement by these and other dev eloping countries who support a goal would demonstrate that raising ambition in the revised strategy would not necessarily divide member States along developed developing country lines. Realistic, science based and targets are essential for the success of targets New Zealand has also supported proposals put forward by some Pacific countries, as well as Canada, the United Kingdom (UK) and the U nited States (US) , for science based and reduction target check points in the Revised GHG Strategy . Both proposals call for a percent GHG reduction by and a percent reduction by (compared to levels ). These targets are aligned with an overall .C compatible pathway that reduces GHG emissions to zero no later than while also provid ing time for industry to meet t he transition through the adoption of new fuels and technologies. However, these efforts have also encountered resistance from some member States. Several were not in favour of an intermediate reduction target for , arguing that the IMO ha d recently agreed to targets for the Carbon Intensity Indicator mechanism and any additional targets could negatively impact on economic growth. O thers expressed concern that a target was premature due to a lack of sufficient underlying data . They proposed this be reconsider ed in the next revision of the Strategy , taking into account global fuel availability and potential future impacts on Stat es and the industry. An equitable transition will support the Pacific to reach carbon neutrality In the negotiations to , there has been no substantive discussion of a proposal submitted by some Pacific countries calling for equitable transition to be incorporated as a key principle in the revised strategy. Addressing inequity in the maritime sector and sustainable development are a priority for the Pacific. New Zealand has stood in solidarity with the Pacific on this and underlined our readiness for a discussion to define what equitable transition means in an IMO context . This is part of our efforts to ensure equity betwee n States and that no country is left behind in the IMOs collective approach . At the upcoming negotiations , we will continue to reinforce this position , including by supportin g a reference to an equitable transition
On September , I signed the Land Transport Rule Setting of Speed
Safer Journeys interim Evaluation, , Martin Small Consulting RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Section K () of the Land Transport Management Act (LTMA ) allows the Governor General to make an Order in Council to vary a regional fuel tax scheme upon the recommendation of the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Transport (joint Ministers) .
Talking points to the Cabinet paper This document is released in full.
The Lower North Island Rail Integrated Mobility project is forecast to be funded from a combination of Crown grants , NLTF and Local Share contributions. transport choice, building on the investment already made in the City Rail Link in Auckland and the additional trains to be introduced in Wellington later this decade , and the acceleration of Wellingtons North South, East West, and Harbour Quays bus corridors. The Government is funding KiwiRail to deliver network repairs and upgrades to ready the network for these major improvements. Completing Aucklands Rail Network Rebuild and upgrading Wellingtons rail network substations are priorities for the Gover nment .
The Output Plan The Output Plan is an agreement between the Minister of Transport and the Chief Executive of the Ministry of Transport on: specific initiatives that the Ministry will strive to achieve to support the Minister to deliver on the Governments priorities. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Key programmes to develop capability and improve the quality of the Ministrys policy advice Our key programmes include: Hei AratakiThe Ministrys Mori Strategy: This has been developed to improve transport outcomes for Mori. Improving policy quality: This is our broader work programme to strengthen policy capability and quality across the Ministry. Transport Evidence Base Strategy: The Strategy ensures that the transport sector has the necessary data and information to support evidence based policy decisions, and the sector is investing in the right research to support this.
This difference has been calculated at the midpoint of the funding ranges. This is made up of, , million of Crown funding provided to the NLTF and m of direct Crown funding for State Highway and Local Road recovery and response, and m of Crown funding for the Rail response The Road Efficiency Group will have a number of key focus areas: finding efficiency in road maintenance spend to deliver more for road users and taxpayers investment. standardising maintenance protocols and processes to find efficiency where efficiencies can be found. reducing expenditure on temporary traffic management, which is adding significant cost to road maintenance and reducing efficiency of the spend. reviewing Network Outcome Contracts with a focus on achieving long term maintenance outcomes of percent rehabilitation and percent res urfacing per year, ensuring a proactive approach to road maintenance. Contract review will also include increased requirements to fix potholes on our state highway network within hours to increase safety on our roads. The exact scope and role of the refocused Road Efficiency Group will be developed and approved as part of the new Performance and Efficiency Plan. This will ensure activities and functions are aligned to drive better accountability, delivery and value for money from our transport investments. GPS does not include specific additional funding to reseal and rehabilitate roads that have been damaged due to the North Island Weather Events (NIWE) of Since February , Crown funding of . billion has been provided for State Highway, Local Road, and Rail network response and recovery activity. Additional funding for NIWE is intended to be funded through a separate process to this GPS.
With less demand on Monday and Friday, and high demand on Wednesday . Source Auckland Transport patronage data. Start of half price Feb Apr Jun Aug Oct Dec Feb Apr Jun Aug Oct Dec Feb Apr Jun Aug Oct Dec Public Transport Patronage Recovery all modes as a percentage of each month in (pre covid levels) Difference Patronage recovery Target RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Bus driver s hortage . The bus driver shortage is improving but remains a concern, with an estimated shortage of bus drivers in Auckland and in the rest of New Zealand as at December . The Auckland shortage had reduced to as at January . . Driver shortages have caused a significant increase in cancellations . In December , around . per cent of bus trips were cancelled (, out of , trips) .
BUDGET SENSITIVE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE
authorise the submission to the Executive Council of the attached Land Transport Management (Regional Fuel Tax Scheme Auckland Region) Amendment Order ;
authorise the submission to the Executive Council of the:
authorised the submission to the Executive Council of the Civil Aviation (Offences)
authorised the submission to the Executive Council of the following Orders:
ibid New Zealand Infrastructure Commission. (). Buying time: Toll roads, congestion charges, and transport investment. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
note that the Civil Aviation (Offences) Regulations will give effect to the
noted that CIPAs have been completed for the majority of the Programme and shared with
noted the Minister considers Manawat Tararua Highway Te Ahu a Turanga to be outside
transport.govt.nzThese early work products often serve as documentation of progress. Step : Identify outputs (activities and participation) Outputs refers to the direct, tangible results of the interventions needed to achieve longerterm outcomes. Interventions may include things such as new or changed infrastructure or assets, new or changed services, workshops, education, training, etc. Step : Create a list of inputs Inputs are the resources that are utilised in the proposed intervention i.e. what we invest. This may include time, people (staff, volunteers), money, materials, equipment, partnerships, research base and technology, among other things. The inputs allow you to create the outputs. Step : Establishing the underlying causal logic Its important to consider the assumptions underlying why you think this is the best course of action to achieve the outcomes sought. For example: Why do you believe that activity X will lead to output Y andor outcome Z Is there any evidence linking activity X and output Y, or output Y with outcome Z Assumptions are the beliefs we have about the intervention and the people involved and the way we think it will work. This is the theory: the underlying beliefs in how it will work. These are validated with research and experience.
. Are there any specific requirements you think the two OiCs supporting Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail to undertake recovery and rebuild works need to provide for
. Before its proposed introduction, the operating or marketing airline may be required to file for approval with the aeronautical authorit ies of the relevant Parites any cooperative marketing arrangements entered into, in accordance with paragraph . . When holding out air services for sale, the marketing airline will make it clear to the purchaser of tickets for such services, at the point of sale, which airline will be the operating airline on each sector of the services and with which airline or airlines the purchaser is entering into a contractual relationship.
. Data sources, methodology, and limitations .. Data sources Licensing data The licensing data provided by NZTA contained records of ,, Class and , Class licences issued from January to December . For each licence, the dataset included: Unique identifiers for the licence holder. The licence holders of birth. The licence class and stage. The start of the licence (at each licence stage). Whether or not an advanced driving certificate was held by the driver (for Class licences). Additional datasets were provided by NZTA and linked to the licensing dataset using the unique identifiers. These included the holders gender, CBTA R and F certificates issued (i.e. whether or not they had used CBTA to progress to t heir restricted or full Class licence), and the holders region of residence recorded by NZTA at the time the licence was issued. Crash data NZTA provided data on all crashes recorded in CAS between and that involved people in the licensing dataset. For each crash involvement, information was provided about the and time of the crash, an identifier to enable matching with the lice nsing dataset, the drivers or riders age, the class and stage of licence held by the driver or rider at the time of the crash, vehicle characteristics including type, CC rating (i.e. engine size), and year of manufacture, the severity of the crash, and a n indicator of whether the driver or rider was determined to be primarily, partly, or not at fault in the crash. Given the focus on licensing, the analysis was limited to fatal and serious crashes where the driver or rider was recorded as being partly or primarily at fault. After these exclusions, the analysis of Class crash rates was based on , involvements in fatal and serious at fault light motor vehicle crashes (including moped crashes where the rider did not have a Class licence at the time of the crash), and the analysis of Class crash rates was based on , involvements in fatal and serious at fault motorcycle crashes (including moped crashes where the rider did have a Class licence at the time of the crash).
. In the financial year, Auckland Airport had airlines flying to destination s. In June , international seat capacity recovered to compared with preCovid , and domestic recovered to . The return of passenger flights also restores international freight capacity to of pre pandemic level.
. Interpretation In this Notice, unless the context otherwise requires, Act means the Civil Aviation Act Authorised Aviation Security Service Provider has the same meaning as in section of the Act Aviation Security O icer has the same meaning as in section of the Act Inorganic powder means a powder, or a similar granular substance (for example, salt and bath salts), that does not consist of, and is not derived from, living matter International Screening Point means a passenger inspection and screening station that is used for searching people and items that enter a sterile area that services international ights (including transit ights) Sterile area has the same meaning as in section of the Act.
. Nine responses were received (a response rate).
. No Party shall give preference to its own or any other airline over a designated airline of the other Party engaged in similar international air transportation in the application of its immigration, customs, quarantine and similar regulations , and rules .
. On receipt of the operating authori sation and technical permission of paragraph , a designated airline may at any time begin to operate the agreed services for which it is so designated, provided that the airline complies with the applicable provisions of this Agreement. . The Parties granting the operating authorisations and technical permissions in accordance with paragraph shall notify such action to the Depositary, who shall subsequently inform the Parties.
. Recommendations for GPS and reporting Phase The following recommendations are based on lessons from the above evaluation for developing GPS and re porting, using the Ministrys Value for Money assessment model key questions illustrated in Figure below.
. The airlines of each Party, other than those designated under Article (Designation and Authorisation), shall also enjoy the rights specified in paragraphs (a) and (b). These airlines shall be required to meet other conditions prescribed under the laws, regulations , and rules PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA normally applied to the operation of international air services by the Party considering the application. . Nothing in this Agreement shall be deemed to confer on the designated airline of each Party the privilege of taking on board, in the territory of another Party, passengers, cargo , and mail carried for remuneration and destined for another point in the territory of that other Party.
. The regular airborne equipment as well as the materials and supplies normally retained on board the aircraft of a designated airline of a Party may be unloaded in the territory of another Party only with the approval of the customs authorities of that Party. In such case, they may be placed under the supervision of the said authorities up to such time as they are reexported or otherwise disposed of in accordance with customs regulations. . The exemptions provided by this Article shall also be available where the designated airline of a Party has contracted with another designated airline, which similarly enjoys such exemptions from another Party, for the loan or transfer in the territory of that other Party of PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA the items specified in paragraph .
. The role of the CCSLG Provision of independent advice to the Minister Attend meetings and contribute advice
. We note that any d ecisions concerning implementation require agreement from CRL Sponsors.
. note that the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Transport (OC T refers):
. Land Transport (Register of Land Transport Records Speed Limits)
. Land Transport (Register of Land Transport Records Speed Limits) Amendment
. Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) evaluationsreviews Up to two evaluationsreviews are undertaken each year to: ) further improve understanding of the impact and effectiveness of GPS, and ) support the continuous improvement of the GPS and the transport investment appraisal system. A review of the approach of value for money Oneoff Review completed Disseminate findings, and support the development of implementation strategies A review of state highway maintenance investment Oneoff Review commenced Complete review and disseminate findings An outcome evaluation of GPS Oneoff Scope and procure evaluation Complete review and disseminate findings A review on mode shift Oneoff Scope and procure evaluation Complete review and disseminate findings GPS evaluationsreviews topic TBC Oneoff Up to evaluations reviews Up to evaluations reviews
. Investment analysis objectives and scope This analysis explores the extent to which GPS impacted transport investment funding decisions. Due t o prior investment commitments and ongoing baseline activities such as maintenance, only a fraction of transport funding while a GPS is in effect can be directly influenced by the policy directions of that GPS. This analysis compares new funding decision s for transport infrastructure and other improvements made under GPS to those made under GPS and . To simplify the analysis, we focus on initial funding decisions for new investments and do not consider decisions to increase or decrease fund ing for investments already in progress. This is consistent with the decisions taken as part of GPS development that sought to ensure funding levels were sufficient to complete projects already committed. However, this is a limitation of the analysis (due to data limitations and the complexity of the funding process), as subsequent decisions to increase or decrease funding for existing investments may also reflect GPS policy priorities at the time. Our analysis of funding, therefore, reflects expected funding at the time these decisions were made rather than actual funding that has occurred over time which could be a result of changes in delivery cost, scope or other factors. The dollar amounts we report should represent relative funding priorities a nd not actual investment outcomes. Investments entirely funded from external sources outside the NLTF are also excluded, as these are less likely to have been influenced by GPS policy directions. With these exclusions, this analysis is based on , tr ansport investment activities associated with , phases, some extending beyond the GPS period in which the activity was first approved. In addition, given that funding approvals for activities with multiple phases can be a gradual process, the analysis includes funding that had already been approved at the time the data was extracted (up to April ) as well as funding for phases included in the NLTP extract that had not yet been approved but had probable funding status. This is necessary bec ause less time has elapsed for funding to be approved for activities started under GPS compared to activities started under GPS or . Recognising the difficulty of classifying investments and the reality that some investments have multiple ob jectives and involve multiple transport modes, this analysis also includes an application of natural language topic analysis to attempt to identify secondary impacts of investments beyond their broad application. For example, investments classified as road or public transport improvements may also provide some walking or cycling facilities or provide safety improvements. This analysis is a novel application of natural language and funding approvals data that focuses on forward looking decisions rather than backward looking actual expenditure. As such, it has a greater ability to shed light on the impacts of GPS policy directions on transport decision making. Further work to refine and repeat this analysis regularly could be useful to understand better how tr ansport funding is tracking relative to policy objectives. Such changes could also affect ex post realised benefits and costs, and hence the realised BCR may differ from the expected BCR of an investment. We also exclude funding for SuperGold trip payments. This is predominantly Crown funded and supports a specific policy decision that is adjacent to the GPS. METHODS
. Land Transport Management (Regional Transport Committees)
. Land Transport Management (Regional Transport Committees) Regulations
.. Empirical methods used The actual number of crashes observed for any given group of licence holders in any given period of time is subject to random variation as any individual licence holders involvement in a crash is an unpredictable event with relatively low probability. The em pirical methods used in this report are designed to account for this variation when comparing crash involvements or crash rates across groups of licence holders and across time. The following is a brief summary of these methods (see section . of the Tech nical Report for more detail). Analysis of aggregated crash rates We calculated and compared crash rates for various groups of licence holders and time periods by dividing the relevant number of crashes by the relevant number of licensed driver years or r ideryears (i.e. using the number of licensed driver years or rider years as the measure of exposure to crash risk). Since the number of licence holders varies continuously over time, we measured this at a representative point in time, for example on June each year for annual crash rates. In most cases, we report confidence intervals around calculated crash rates as a measure of the uncertainty associated with the crash rate. As discussed in section .. of the Technical Report , in many cases we ag gregate crash rates across three year periods (e.g. to ) to increase the number of licence holders and crashes included in the calculation of crash rates. This allows crash rates to be estimated more accurately (i.e. associated confidence interval s are narrower). However, aggregating across years means that we may miss changes in crash rates over time, and the limitations of the licensing dataset means that the age range of licence holders that can be included in the crash rate calculation reduces as we go further back in time (see section .. below). Balancing these trade offs, we chose three year periods for the calculation of crash rates. Analysis of outcomes for individual licence holders We also used the unit record data for individual lice nce holders to model their involvement in crashes as a function of observed characteristics such as age and gender. The analysis of individual driver or rider crash involvements uses logistic regression models which predict the binary outcome of whether or not a licence holder was involved in crash during a given time period as a function of factors including their age, gender, region of residence, and other licensing related characteristics of interest in our analysis. A logistic regression model predicts the odds that a licence holder was involved in a crash in a given time period. The odds of being involved in a crash is the probability of being involved in a crash divided by the probability of not being involved in a crash. For low probability events, s uch as crashes, the odds of the event are very similar to the probability of the event. Thus, while the discussion of these models refers to the odds of crash involvement to be consistent with how the logistic regression models are formulated, the results can also be interpreted in terms of the probability of crash involvement, and hence in terms of crash rates. This issue is discussed further in section .. of the Technical Report .
.. Limitations of the data Limitations due to construction of the licensin g dataset The licensing dataset did not contain any information about licences issued before but which were still valid after . Thus, while the dataset contains records of all licences issued between and , it does not include information about all licences held during that time. Since experience (measured by the length of time a person has held a licence) is likely to be related to the probability that they are involved in a crash, the construction of the licensing dataset potentially intr oduces bias into the analysis of crash rates, unless this is accounted for in the analysis. For licence holders who first obtained a licence before , we do not know the total amount of time that they have held a licence and thus including such people i n the analysis has the potential to introduce biases. Table shows the combinations of ages of licence holders for which we can assume the licensing dataset contains a complete record of all people who held licenses in that year given that the minimum age for obtaining a learner licence was years old up to August and years old thereafter. The licensing dataset also does not contain any information about expiry and renewal of licences, or disqualification of licence holders. Since licences are t ypically valid for years, some licences issued between and will have expired before the end of and not been renewed. Our analysis effectively assumes that all licences issued from onwards remained valid until the end of . This wi ll over estimate the number of licence holders between and and will cause calculated crash rates for licence holders aged between to years old to be underestimated by an unknown amount in those years.
.. Categorising activities Activities were classified to reflect their main purpose. This was done in two ways: Coding activities to a set of analysis groups based on the activity class, work category, and funding source information recorded in the TIO data. A machine learning natural language processing model was used to evaluate the descriptive text associated with each activity to detect whether certain topics were relevant for that text (see section ... for more details). The topic analysis was used to complement the analysis groups, recognising that it uses text analysis that w ill not be perfectly accurate. However, activity class and work category are relatively restrictive. They may not fully reflect the intent of activities relating to more than one transport mode or offer benefits in addition to the main purpose of the activ ity. For example, safety improvements that occur as part of broader projects or where an activity has the primary purpose of road improvements and provides some walking or cycling facilities. ... Analysis groups Each combination of funding source, act ivity class, and work category was assigned to one of eight analysis groups or was excluded from the analysis (see Appendix for details). Due to changes in definitions over time, it was necessary to aggregate some types of activity. For example, improv ements to state highways and local roads are included in state highway improvements, local road improvements, regional improvements, and road to zero activity classes under different NLTP extracts. For activity classes like regional improvements and road to zero, it is not always possible to determine from the activity class and work category information alone if these were related to state highways or local roads. Hence, improvements to state highways and local roads were combined into a single road improvements group for analysis. The eight analysis groups distinguish broad transport modes and separate improvements from maintenance, operation, and renewals activities: Activity class and work category are general and more detaile d classifications respectively of the objectives and purpose of an investment phase. Definitions of activity classes and work categories have changed over time (see below). METHODS
. Clean Car Policies evaluation A Clean Car Standard and Clean Car Discount were introduced to reduce emissions produced by the light vehicle fleet. The first policy focuses on improving the quality of vehicles being imported into New Zealand, while the latter incentivises the uptake of electronic vehicles. Multiyear evaluation) Baseline data collected Ongoing data collection and analysis Ongoing data collection and analysis Ongoing data collection and analysis . Vehicle Scrappage Scheme evaluation A Clean Car Upgrade trial (equityorientated vehicle scrap and replace) that would provide targeted assistance to lowincome households to purchase a low emission vehicle upon scrapping an ICE vehicle. Oneoff Scope, procure and commence evaluation Complete evaluation . Social Leasing evaluation A vehicle social leasing trial that would lease lowemission vehicles to lowincome participants. Oneoff Scope, procure and commence evaluation Complete evaluation . Reshaping Streets evaluation Changes to regulatory and funding settings to accelerate widespread street changes that support public transport, active travel, and placemakig. Oneoff Project scoping. Collectcollate baseline data (as required) To be defined . Other policy evaluation Manage andor undertake evaluation of other transport policies. Oneoff Topic TBC
Carpenter and Pressley () show that drivers aged to years old in the United States were not compliant with night time driving restrictions in around of fatal crashes between and . The practical ability of supervisors to prevent c rashes could not be analysed using the data available for this study. Carpenter and Pressley () found that drivers aged to years old in the United States who were non compliant with night time driving restrictions and who were involved in cras hes were around five times more likely to be drinking and . times more likely to be not wearing a seatbelt than similar drivers who were involved in crashes but who were compliant with night time driving restrictions.
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
Officials do not think any substantive changes should be made to the Rail Plan at this stage, beyond signalling continued commitment to the funding model, address ing the cost pressures signalled above, and enable network planning to be considered through Waka Kotahi investment processes.
agreed that the conditions specified in paragraph . above have been satisfied, and that
year horizon: a set of enduring principles guiding how the government and sector stakeholders should approach the freight and supply chains system
Last year, the New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) endorsed these investment proposal s signalling the work is urgent and warrants funding. However due to funding constraints they could not fully fund these investment s, hence these budget request s from KiwiRail. We understand these investments are still priorities for funding from the public transport infrastructure activity class under the National Land Transport Programme. This could negate the need for additional Crown funding for these initiatives. You may wish to discuss this with NZTA in the context of developing the GPS. KiwiRail has identified the possibility of widespread service disruptions in Auckland and Wellington in the absence of funding for catch up renewals Given end oflife assets on the Auckland and Wellington metro rail networks, KiwiRail has identified network risks and operating restrictions to ensure safe operation on the metro rail network that would be required in the absence of additional funding for renewals. s ()(b)(ii), s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of In Wellington the risks identified includ e: There is a possibility for some reprioritisation from the wider wellington passenger rail programme We understand that the GPS will indicate ongoing support to the upgrades for the new passenger trains on the lower north island (Wairarapa and Manawatu lines). This project is referred to as the L ower North Island Rail integrated mobility programme (LNIRIM) and received .m of crown funding in B udget . We will shortly brief you on the funding agreement you will need to sign in order for the LNIRIM project to proceed, and we will provide you more detail on the reprioritis ation possibilities in that briefing. The Metro Rail Operating Model (MROM) settings review will develop a sustainable funding model for metro rail You recently endorsed a terms of reference for the MROM settings review, which includes developing a sustainable funding model for metro rail , identifying how costs should be shared between the part ies and how the metro rail system governance can be strengthened so all the parties work better together . We will progress this review over the course of .
noted that Joint Ministers have moved Melling, the Drury Stations projects, and Takitimu
(): (external link)
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
There are als o elevated expectations for rail to play a more prominent role in the context of climate change. New Zealand needs to build a resilient and reliable network to do that, which is the focus of the Rail Plan. Updating the Plan now risks further increases in e xpectations, which may lead to an expansion of government commitments to rail in the financially constrained environment. Officials recommend that the next Rail Plan is developed and released before public consultation of GPS , which would require work to start late in or early (to allow months to update the Rail Plan). s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Next steps Subject to your agreement, we will look to start w ork on a new rail plan in late or early .
noted that the Minister of Housing must be consulted on the South Auckland package
Four years was chosen as it is do uble the standard minimum time for progression from a learner to a full licence for drivers aged under without an advanced certificate.
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
These models predict indicators of whether the driver remained on a learner licence, remained on a restricted licence, or progressed to a full licence after four years. The coefficients of the estimated models correspond to multiplicative differen ces in the odds of the relevant four year progression status occurring for an individual driver. Since the progression outcomes are not lowprobability events, the odds ratios estimated by these models are not equivalent to differences in probabilities of progress ion status.
This age range was chosen to reflect the typical age at which most people start learning to drive.
Brown OC Event with WSP C lients on Portfolio Updates and Priorities Brown OC Meeting with Blind Low Vision NZ and Blind Citizens NZ on Acoustic Vehicle Alerting Systems Brown OC Cost Allocation Model a nd Road User Charges Doocey cc Brown OC Withheld Brown OC Withheld Brown OC Meeting with Jump Charging and Monard Capital to Discuss Heavy Vehicle Charging Infrastructure Doocey OC Withheld Brown OC Meeting with Warren Willmot on BYDs Electric Vehicle Offering and New Zealand Government Policy Brown OC Withheld Brown OC Withheld Brown OC Withheld
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
percent reduction to legislated rates of road user charges will be extended until January (instead of ending on September )
Returned riders are those who have held a motorcycle licence for a long time but have had a substantial break from riding and have subseq uently returned to riding. There is some evidence that the performance of returned riders is lower than both riders that have ridden continuously and riders who have just obtained a motorcycle licence (Symmons Mulvihill, ).
CBTA was introduced at the same time as these tests were strengthened, so the model for restricted riders is based only on those who did not have a CBTA R certificate.
The CIA models impacts of different combinations of measures that all meet the agreed emissions targets. It models how increases in maritime logistics costs flow through to trade and GDP impacts globally and for individual countries. Under all options, there is a small negative impact on global GDP over time relative to a scenario without measures .
Crashes for the most recent three years were combined to improve the statistical reliability of the comparis on. The time of crash was not recorded for around of crashes in the dataset and such crashes were excluded from this analysis. Without imposing any age restrictions, the crash dataset includes night time crashes of riders with restricted licences between and . However, the dataset does not include all riders who held restricted licences during this period (only those who obtained a licence during the period), thus the actual number of crashes is likely to be greater.
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
s (a) s ()(j) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT RESTRICTED Industry supports a global based approach to reduce international shipping emissions but are concerned about disproportionate impacts on New Zealand
noted that in January , Joint Ministers decided to retain million within the Capital
a. Charging infrastructure Charging infrastructure (both public and private) coverage Inhome and in street charging and equipment standards (quality, safety and cyber security) Role of existing electricity lines companies in charging infrastructure roll out, including regulation and investment Role of local government in charging infrastructure roll out, including regulation and investment Role of central government in charging i nfrastructure roll out, including regulation and investment
b. Electricity and network infrastructure Impacts of the acceleration on e mobility on electricity generation and networks Smart grids and smart charging
We acknowledge that KiwiRail only had a few days to consider the draft GPS and the direction it provides in terms of the Governments priorities before submitting their Budget templates. Hence, it was not possible for KiwiRail to reflect the draf t GPS in their templates. The templates show that KiwiRail is still aiming to achieve the full resilient and reliable scenario with the associated funding required to achieve this. s ()(f)(iv) s ()(g)(i) s ()(g)(i) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of
Agree the next Rail Plan will be to inform GPS Yes No Yes No
Consultation . The Ministry will work with the office of the Minister to identify requests requiring consultation. . Consultation may be required with the Minister where, for example: the Minister supplied the information; it is about, or relates to, the functions or activities of the Minister ; release could affect the Ministers functions or activities or legitimate interests. . The Ministry will provide the Minister with all information necessary for informed consultation, including the request, the information at issue, and the decision the Ministry proposes to take. The Ministry will allow a minimum of five working days for consultation to take place, unless the circumstances of the particular request demand a shorter period of time. . The office of the Minister will respond to all consultations as expeditiously as possible. The office of the Minister will let the Ministry know if more time is required so that the Ministry can consider whether it is necessary to extend the maximum working days for making a decision on the request. . The office of the Minister will provide appropriate input in response to the Ministry requests for consultation. Appropriate input means comments and suggestions regarding the: proper application of the withholding grounds and the public interest test; knowledge or release of additional information, including additional explanatory material to place the information that is being released in its proper context; proactive release of the same information to others, provided there is no undue delay in providing that information to the requester. . Inappropriate input includes matters such as raising irrelevant considerations (like political embarrassment), or asking or instructi ng the Ministry to act in a way that would be contrary to the requirements of the Act, including withholding or delaying the release of official information without any proper statutory basis. . The Minister acknowledges that final responsibility for deciding on Ministry request s rests with the Ministry. . The Ministry will consider the input of the Ministers office on an OIA request in good faith and with an open mind, before deciding whether that input provides a reasonable basis for changing its proposed decision on the request. The Ministry may proceed to make a decision on an OIA request if the Ministers office does not respond to the consultation or advise that further time is required. Notification of the decision . The Ministry will work with the offic e of the Minister to identify decisions on OIA requests requiring notification. Notification may be required where the requested information: RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
ECAN will transition to the National Ticketing Solution from July . s ()(j) s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
History RePPPeated: How public private partnerships are failing , , Collective , Eurodad , Latindadd , ODG (Observatorio de la Deuda en la Globalizacin) retrieved from https:www.cadtm.orgHistory RePPPeated How public private partnerships arefailing Anderson, , Another Australian PPP fails will we learn from it Retrieved from https:www.greaterauckland.org .nzanother australian pppfailswillwelearn from it Abdul Rahman, Ismail Memon, Aftab mohd zulkiffli, Nora. (). Failure Reasons of PPP Infrastructure Projects: Case Study of Kuala Lumpur LRT Project. Life Science Journal. . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Indicative strategic priorities for GPS
Joint Ministers recommended the Scheme be varied on December . The attached Amendment Order gives effect to this recommendation.
Land Transport Management Act section ()(a) taki to North of Levin Detailed Business Case, https:www.nzta.govt.nzassetsprojectsonl new highwaytechnical reportsONL Final DBC board endorsed August .pdf, page . s ()(j) s ()(j) s ()(j) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT MINISTER OF TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES This section of the Output Plan sets out what the Ministry expects to deliver to meet the Minister of Transports priorities. This section allows the Minister to track progress during the year and make trade offs if new higher priority initiatives need to be added to the Output Plan during the year. Programme : Decarbonising Transport SRO Bryn Gandy Ph:
TO WHAT EXTENT HAS GPS INFLUENCED CHANGES IN NLTF INVESTMENTS, IMPLEMENTATION AND EARLY STAGE OUTCOMES
TO WHAT EXTENT HAS GPS INFLUENCED CHANGES IN NLTF INVESTMENTS, IMPLEMENTATION AND EARLY S TAGE OUTCOMES
TO WHAT EXTENT HAS GPS INFLUENCED CHANGES IN NLTF INVESTMENTS, IMPLEMENTATION AND EARLY STAGE O UTCOMES
TO WHAT EXTENT HAS GPS INFLUENCED CHANGES IN NLTF INVESTMENTS, IMPLEMENTATION AND EARLY STAGE OUTCOMES
The Civil Aviation (Offences) Regulations (the Regulations ) support
The figures mentioned are current as of December . The recent weather events will increase the asset renewal needs in Auckland. A turnout is a device that acts as an intersection, allowing a train to move from one track to another. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Connected Communities . The Connected Communities project identified a series of upgrades on Auckland arterial roads to deliver multiple benefits at once , including improving safety, increasing mode shift to bus and active modes and reduc ing emissions. . The work was disrupted by Covid and the programme was suspended in and recom menced in . Of the corridors identified for improvements, only two have been substantially progressed, including: Great North Road (is construction ready ) and New North Road (corridor business case is being finalised with approval scheduled for June ).
The most serious sentence AIO and matched offenders is provided in the Appendix. There needs to be some allowance for crimes to be detected and finalised in court (proven) after the follow up duration of interest. In this analysis, a day ( month) period following the end of each reoffending period has been chosen to allow for cases to be finalised. For example; for the month reoffending measure for all AIO and matched offenders, reoffending is only counted if: the new offence occurred within m onths of the charge outcome for the first prosecution AND
This difference has been calculated at the midpoint of the funding ranges. This is made up of, , million of Crown funding provided to the NLTF and million of direct Crown funding for state highway and local road recovery and response, and million of Crown funding for the Rail response. The REG will have a number of key focus areas: finding efficiency in road maintenance spend to deliver more for road users and taxpayers investment. standardising maintenance protocols and processes to find efficiency where efficiencies can be found. supporting the NZTA in reducing expenditure on temporary traffic management, which is adding significant cost to road maintenance and reducing efficiency of the spend. supporting the NZTA in reviewing Network Outcome Contracts in line with the NZTAs focus on achieving longterm maintenance outcomes of percent rehabilitation and percent resurfacing per year, ensuring a proactive approach to road maintenance. Contract review will also include increased requirements to fix potholes on our state highway network within hours to increase safety on our roads. The exact scope and role of the refocused REG will be developed and approved as part of the new Performance and Efficiency Plan. This will ensure activities and functions are aligned to drive better accountability, delivery and value for money from our transport investments. Recovering from the North Island Weather Events of Budget has provided an additional million to fully fund the state highway recovery works in areas affected by the North Island Weather Events (NIWE), and top up funding to continue local road response and recovery works. This is on top of the . billion of Crown funding that has already been provided for state highway, local road, and rail network response and recovery activity.
To assist the effective implementation of the Speed Rule consequential
To what extent has GPS influenced changes in NLTF investments, implementation and early stage outc omes This section summarises our analysis of the data for investment activities that satisfy the conditions outlined in the Criteria list above . This analysis focuses on funding allocations and national benefit cost ratios (BCRs) and the extent to which these differ under GPS compared to GPS and . For context, a brief analysis of actual expenditure is provided first. This detailed analysis is followed by reflections from qualitative interviews on areas of influence in GPS and key areas of impact.
Transport Orders in Council to facilitate the repair and rebuild Engagement
Upcoming briefings copied to Associate Minister of Transport Due Week Ending Title Friday August Friday August Expectations for the Section () Search and Rescue (SAR) triennial funding review This briefing seeks agreement from the Minister of Finance and Minister of Transport to the process for the triennial review of Section () SAR funding and the parallel review of Section funding
Upcoming briefings copied to Associate Minister of Transport Nil this week .
Your guide to the Transport System
BUDGET SENSITIVE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE
agree that the Community Connect appropriation will not fund smartcards for under s and under s at this time Yes No refer this briefing to the Minister of Finance Yes No note that subject to decisions taken above , Te Manat Waka will draft letters for you to se nd to PTAs outlining Crown funding expectations s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE
agree to waive the day rule so the Orders and the Road User Amendment
agreed that an Order in Council be made allowing the taki to North of Levin road be
agreed to waive the day rule so the Orders and the Road User Amendment Rule can
authorise the submission to the Executive Council of the Civil Aviation (Offences)
authorised the Parliamentary Counsel Office to make further changes to the Regulations in
future scenarios that imagine how automation and urbanisation could affect urban transport in the future, and
https:www.un.orgdevelopmentdesadisabilitiesconvention ontherights ofperson swith disabilitiesarticle personal mobility.html RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Public Transport and infrastructure DPA supports the Policy Statements intention to improve and increase use of public transport. However, for disabled people to be able to use public transport on an equal basis with others it is necessary for not only the transport itself to be accessible , but all the associated infrastructure including: footpaths, crossings, ticketing, timetables, route information and maps and stations, bus stops and interchanges. The Accessible Jour ney We draw the Ministrys attention to the concept of the accessible journey: door todoor accessibility and in particular to the report The Accessible Journey by the Human Rights Commission which outlines this concept. Driver Education and Respo nsiveness
note that the Land Transport Management (Regional Fuel Tax Scheme Auckland Region) Amendment Order comes into force on May .
noted that a CIPA has only been partially completed for Takitimu North Link Stage
transport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz Below is an example of what a logic map may look like:
P a g e Safety We fully support the ethical basis underpinning the Road to Zero, and the use of the Safe systems approach to achieving this. We would emphasise the importa nce of the overarching need for land transport systems to be people focussed with safety as the overriding principle . We also support the inclusion within this priority area of inclusive access, noting again the importance of this to older people, and in particular the high degree of co benefits associated with it. We support the aim to reduce D eaths and Serious Injury (D SI) from road crashes by by . We fully support a data driven approach to the targeting of infrastructure projects based on DSI incidents. We also consid er that (relatively) low cost infrastructure improvements with proven high effectiveness, e.g. side rumble strips and median barriers should be given precedence. We support the improvement to active mode infrastructure, particularly where these address ar eas such as junctions and roundabouts that currently prioritise ease of vehicular movement over accessibility for all, noting again the high level of co benefits associated with active mode use. We support the proposed increase in enforcement including dru g testing and alcohol interlocks. We also support the commitment to sustaining road policing numbers. We fully support measures to tackle unsafe speeds and driver distraction particularly cell phone usage . With regard to the safe speeds, w e are concerned that more than hal of vehicles on urban roads routinely break the kmh speed limit, and given the importance of safe pedestrian movement to both our members and to our mokopuna, we suggest far greater enforcement and a major increase in penalty for s peeding should be a priority. We repeat the concern noted in our submission on the GPS that the penalties for speeding are in stark contrast to th ose applying to driving when impaired by alcohol or drugs . We consider that penalties for any behaviour impacting on safety should reflect the ir harm potential independently of the behaviour. For example, the risk factor of a casualty crash from exceeding the speed limit by up to kmh is similar to an excess blood alcohol level of between and mcg, but the penalt ies currently differ by a factor of five. We agree that improvements to rail through the NZ Rail Plan, and the reforming of land use and urban form are essential components and contribute to better travel options as well as improving safety. We support the suggested indicators of DSI and hospitalisation numbers, and DSI by causal factor as appropriate and necessary . Better Travel options The purpose of any transport system is to enable access to services, recreation and work . We applaud the emphasis on transport investments that prioritise people over vehicles through making streets accessible with a n accelerating mode shift. We also applaud the continued support for To tal Mobility, and the Disability Action Plan. We fully support the move to provide greater integration between transport and urban planning, with the goal of liveable cities. We consider the objective of public spaces and street scapes where the primary purpose is the abili ty of people to meet and
. Access and equity Opportunities for innovative solutions to ensure fair access to clean cars and transport to all New Zealanders MaaSTaaS and the role it can play to deliver access and equity, including car share, bike share, walking, public transport etc Affordability of electric vehicles and energy
. Auckland Airports comments in this s ubmission relate only to this specific reauthorisation of this agreement, at this time.
. Conclusions and next steps The GPS signalled a change towards prioritising mode shift that has been widely recognised across the transport sector and can be seen in the and NLTPs. The influence of the GPS was seen in a greater prioritisation for mode shift promoting activities in the composition of activity classes and an increase in the proportion of mode shift promoting activities and costs included in the an d NLTPs compared to the NLTP. The magnitude of the observed post increase in mode shift promoting activities and costs was small relative to the NLTP. However, several likely factors were suggested. Firstly, the ability to achieve substanti al mode shift through the NLTP will likely be constrained by long standing priorities embedded within the network. Secondly, while the GPS and signalled a change in investment priorities, the general GPS investment practices and processes may hav e made it more challenging to enable the range of activities required to achieve a meaningful mode shift in New Zealand. And thirdly, there appear to be barriers to incorporating known non transport drivers of mode shift in the New Zealand context (such as land use) as part of a smarter, more strategic, and more effective investment in mode shift interventions. Evaluating the impact of the GPS on investment for mode shift over time was constrained by the available data. For example, the current transport i nvestment data captured from RLTPs and the NLTP limits the ability to undertake the type of longitudinal analyses required to assess the impact of policy on the investment and management of the NLTP. In addition, it was impossible to extract comparable dat asets for each GPS period at the time of analysis. Because TIO datasets were not structured in a way that allowed longitudinal analysis, the analyses presented here depended on the previously saved manual extracts. Incorporating a longitudinal capacity int o TIO will allow insights to be more easily and efficiently, increasing the transparency of transport investment. Historical ways of measuring modes within the transport system have limited the ability to see all modes equally across the network. The SUM benchmarking prototype demonstrated the challenges to developing the input, output, and outcome indicators that could be u sed to assess progress towards sustainable urban mobility in five high growth cities. And the difficulties of sourcing adequate data at the relevant decision making scales and evaluating the influence of the GPS over time also require that data is relevant to the periods of interest. A greater emphasis in the One Network Framework and Land Transport Benefits Framework on monitoring all modes should result in greater visibility and awareness of active and public transport modes alongside private vehicle trav el. Along with changes in NLTP activities, the evidence from monitoring network outputs and outcomes should help facilitate and better target effective investment in mode shift and optimisation across the network. A clear message from the in dept h enquiry was that assessing the GPS impact on mode shift outcomes (such as changes in public transport and cycling behaviours and private vehicle traffic) will be impossible until the projects invested in since have been built and embedded within communities. However, evaluating the key points on the pathway between the GPS and mode shift identified in this report will provide valuable insights into how the GPS can influence mode shift outcomes as a lead change in the delivery sequence towards that fu ture state. It will also provide information on how long it takes for the GPS to take effect, considering the planning, investment, APPENDIX EVALUATION STOCKTAKE
. Confidentiality Chatham House Rule applies
. Each Party shall observe the security provisions required by another Party for entry into, departure from, or while within, the territory of that other Party. Each Party shall ensure that adequate measures are effectively applied within its territory to pr otect the aircraft and to inspect passengers, crew, carry on items, baggage, cargo , and aircraft stores prior to and during boarding, loading, deplaning , or unloading. Each Party shall also give sympathetic consideration to any request from another Party for reasonable special security measures to meet a particular threat. . When an incident or threat of an incident of unlawful seizure of civil aircraft or other unlawful acts against the safety of such aircraft, their passengers and crew, airports or air navigation facilities occurs, the Parties shall assist one another by fa cilitating communications and other appropriate measures intended to terminate rapidly and safely such incident or threat thereof. . When a Party has reasonable grounds to believe that another Party has departed from the aviation security provisions of this Article, the aeronautical authorities of the first Party may request immediate consultation s with the aeronautical authorities of that other Party. Failure to PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA reach a satisfactory agreement within days from the of receipt of such request shall constitute grounds for application of Article (Withholding, Revocation, Suspension and Limitation of Authorisation). When justified by an emergency, or to prevent further non compliance with the provisions of this Article , the first Party may take interim action prior to the expiry of days. . Each Party shall require the airline of another Party providing service to that Party to submit a written operator security programme , which has been approved by the aeronautical authorit ies of the Party of that airline for acceptance.
. Evaluation results for the driver licensing system (Class ) .. Context: Overall patterns and trends in crash rates As described in more detail in section . of the Technical Report , we undertook detailed analysis of crash rates for drivers by licence stage, driver age, gender, and region of residence, and analysed tre nds in these crash rates over time. These crash rates reflect various factors and trends, many of which are not directly related to driver licensing (e.g. changes in population demographics, investments in road safety improvements, road safety campaigns, c hanges in the vehicle fleet, etc.), but this analysis provides useful context for what follows. Crash rates by licence stage and driver gender Figure shows how crash rates vary by licence stage and gender among drivers aged to years old for the co mbined period from to (the horizontal lines show the overall crash involvement rate across all drivers aged to years old for each licence stage and associated confidence interval). Overall, crash rates among these drivers at the learne r and full licence stages are similar, at just under crashes per , licensed drivers per year. Crash rates at the restricted stage are higher, with an overall rate of just over crashes per , drivers per year. At each licence stage, the crash rate for male drivers is approximately double the rate for female drivers, and in our analysis these gender differences are statistically significant ( pvalues . for all gender comparisons).
. Ngai Tamanuhiri . Te Aitanga a Mahaki
. Please provide us with any other views or feedback on the proposed O iCs.
. The survey was designed to first establish whether the respondents expectations of the gateway process were aligned with the objectives of the Emerging Technologies Programme. This was conducted to ensure that all respondents had started from the same premise. Once this was established, the survey focused on assessing perceived benefits and on gaining insights .
. note that of funding previously allocated to Northern Pathway has now been reprioritised towards other projects DEV MIN refers :
. Background An alcohol interlock is a device similar to a breathalyser that is hard wired into the ignition of a vehicle. The vehicle will not start until a satisfactory breath sample, free of alcohol, has been given. The driver must also perform random breath tests during their journey (Silverans et al., ). Overseas research shows that ignition interlocks are associated with substantial reductions in recidivism ranging from to while the interlock is installed on the vehicle. These results come from several peer reviewed studies and a meta analysis examining the effectiveness of interlocks while installed in a vehicle (e.g., Houwing , ; V oas et al., ; Blais ; Elder et al., ; Silverans et al., ; Voas Marques, ; Willis et al., ; Vezina, ; Coben Larkin, ; Tippetts Voas, ). Drivers convicted of drink driving present a serious risk to other road users. Hedlund and Fell () found that offenders convicted of drink driving are . times more likely to be involved in a fatal crash while intoxicated by alcohol than average licenced drivers. Further, to of all fatally injured drinking drivers are estimated to hav e had at least one prior drink driving offence (Simpson ; Vingilis et al., ). Licence suspension has provided the best evidence of effectiveness in reducing recidivism ( Peck et al., ; Voas , Nichols and Ross ). However, both self reports ( Ross Gonzales ) and covert surveillance of suspended drink drive offenders ( McCart t et al., ) show that many of these drivers continue to drive without licences and often do so even after becoming eligible for licence reinst atement ( Tashima Helander,). Results from New Mexico (Roth et al. , ) show an approximate reduction in alcohol involved injury crashes for the years , a time period where interlock installation rates approached of all arrested offenders. While a direct correlation cannot be established, the evidence is persuasive. Research ( Willis , Lybrand, Bellamy, ) suggests that drink drive offenders who have ignition interlocks installed in their vehicles are at substantially lower risk for recidivism than those who have had their licences suspended either after deciding not to have one installed or being deemed ineligible for an interlock .However, this same research also suggested that the experience of being a participant in an ignition interlock programme by itself does not usually lead to long term changes in drink driving behaviour that last beyond the period o f interlock use. Interlocks require substantial administrative resources to monitor participants. Ignition interlock programmes typically require offenders to bring their ignition interlock equipped vehicle in for regular maintenance and checkup (usually every days). At these checkups, the data stored on the system can be downloaded and examined for signs of failed start attempts, tampering, and circumvention. This type of intensive supervision and monitoring is a key element of ignition interlock progra mmes and may play an important role in reducing recidivism rates among programme participants, both by helping to ensure compliance with programme requirements and by effectively communicating to offenders the need to change their drinking and driving behaviors. As a temporary form of incapacitation imposed for a fixed period of time, interlock programmes are able to reduce recidivism dramatically while the interlock is in place. However there is evidence ( Raub , et al., ) to suggest that it is unrealistic to expect the
. Key themes From investment data analysis and qualitative interviews, GPS was seen to have a range of areas of influence, in particular: GPS funding noticeably shifted towards public transport funding and, to some extent, walking a nd cycling improvements, aligning with the GPS access, safety and environmental objectives. GPS signalled the need for a broader understanding of the impacts of land transport and of the land transport investments needed to address transport priorit ies and new challenges eg, the urgent need to reduce transport related emissions . Not surprisingly, the level of budget allocated to each activity class was described by several interviewees as the key change mechanism. BCRs for funded projects were typic ally well above one among approved projects for which BCRs were recorded in the data available. GPS was also a driver for a significant review of the investment decision making framework (IDMF) and approach, a new BCR methodology is now in place that will influence transport investment decisions in the future. Results from shifts in response to GPS are now seen in many transport planning and programmes. Other areas of impact were seen as: within larger roading projects, greater attention to alter native and multimodal solutions, as required under GPS increased attention to urban form and access to housing as part of a more integrated investment response increased investment in maintenance activity classes a new emphasis on safety investments. However, the influence of GPS on transport investment is not linear and instead occurs through interrelationships of priorities between central and local governments. There is often TO WHAT EXTENT HAS GPS INFLUENCED CHANGES IN NLTF INVESTMENTS, IMPLEMENTATION AND EARLY STAGE OUTCOMES
. RTF can accept some of what is outlined in this section (of the GPS overview) has possible merit, but whether what is proposed is strategic in every case is questionable. Some of the proposed expenditure aspirations suggest an absence of economic rigor and more of an ideological approach to the capability of the land transport freight sector. For example, para makes it clear the Land Transport Fund (LTF) will contribute to the NZ rail plan. We find this aspect troublesome when the NZ Government has pulled back from investing in the roads of national significance programme and then subsequently turned to an expenditure approach that is somewhat biased, choosing to invest in a number of regional initiatives that are beyond the scope of traditional freight routes. . Even though the Government has committed to fund KiwiRail, an entirely governmentowned and managed enterprise, we can only speculate the Crown has no real concerns about throwing good money after bad, ignoring the inconsistent productivity performance and functional limitations of NZ rail services over many previous years. . Para refers to the Crown s December investment (Commitment) to fund the land transport infrastructure to the tune of .B by taking trucks RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT off the road and making, in the GPS writers views, the roads safer by moving more freight to rail. . The statement suggests truck freight traffic makes the roads unsafe and offers the promise of a roading utopia through moving freight to rail. This whole ideological approach is the crux of our opposition to the GPS and totally ignores reality. . The inherent weaknesses of rail as a freight service in an economy the size of was explained to a large degree in our February submission on the Land Transport (RAIL) Legislation Bill. . are not unsafe; this is purely a perception pushed by the sectors of government and society that are opposed to the use of foss lfuelled vehicles. Where there are safety concerns it is due to lack of infrastructure spend making New Zealand roads unsafe for the traffic demands placed on them; nothing to do with the performance of the vehicles themselves which regulations. . Strategic priorities for GPS ; page
. Impact of GPS .. Investment responses Several interviewees were limited in distinguishing between investment planning, decision making, implementation, and outc omes shifts. This reflects the difficulty of attributing specific impacts to a specific GPS when the system is more typically experienced as a continuous complex process comprising successive, overlapping GPS. Nonetheless, several consistent themes emerged from interviewees accounts of investment responses attributable to GPS : An obvious diversion of investment away from state highway improvements, which was done deliberately to redirect funding away from several large urban highway projects that wer e largely developed and close to being implemented, and little notable shift in investment to local road improvement. Common recognition that GPS had signalled a greater focus on cycling, walking, public transport, and rapid transit investment. Within larger roading projects, greater attention to alternative and multi modal solutions is noted, for example, by adding walking, cycling, and public transport facilities to local roads. Increased attention to urban form and access to housing as part of a more integrated investment response. Some described increased investment to maintenance activity classes as an important catchup following previous underinvestment. A new emphasis on safety investments, including Road to Zero and safety improvements on t he State Highway network. Maintenance investments mostly contribute to access and value for money outcomes. Resilience projects (eg, bridge replacements, seawalls) are typically funded under access. However, there was seen to be reduced investment in res ilience overall, which was seen by some as potentially increasing strategic risk across the network . Review and revision of the Investment Decision Making Framework (IDMF, see later detail). .. Environmental responses Several government officials described how GPS had required new thinking about the contribution that land transport investments could make to emission reduction and environmental outcomes. One suggested the GPS had not led to any investments primarily addressing these outcomes, rather, the GPS had, more importantly, provided the strategic mandate and legitimacy for the investment system to have a greater environmental focus overall. Another noted that maintenance investments provided a limited opportu nity to contribute to environmental impacts, although State Highway projects could contribute, for example, through stormwater management and planting enhancements. Beyond obvious investment responses under walking, cycling, and public transport, another official noted that other possibilities were generally of low value (eg, LED street light replacements) or implicated responses not historically anticipated under the NLTF, one APPENDIX TRENDS OBSERVED IN GPS OUTCOMES MONITORING
.. Heavy vehicle users paid m llion into the NLTF in , and roading infrastructure maintenance and renewal has not kept pace with investment or use . Our membership has no appetite for more competition within an already stretched fund with rail and sea mode s that will always lack the ability to fairly account for what will be their disproportionate use and reliance on the NLTF . . FUNDING LEVELS .. The BCA supports the following headline items in the GPS: increase in State Highway (SH) maintenance , up to bil lion increase in l ocal road maintenance, up to . billion billion for new infrastructure and safety investment over billion per year investment in Public Trans port ( PT), to increase by up to over years. No increase in FED or RUC .. The BCA has always supported new technologies where they allow value for money improvements alongside environmental gain. The funding levels and stra tegic outlook of the GPS support our view that buses , and not sole occupancy cars, are the best bet for significant benefits from both low carbon , safety and conge stion perspective s. . CONCLUSION .. The BCA supports the proposed funding levels fo roading and public transport in this GPS. We also support aligning the planning for all transport modes in New Zealand. .. The BCA does not support funding rail or coastal shipping from the NLTF. This proposition is ideologically driven and will not lead to fair and transparent allocation of funds between modes based on contribution and use. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport To Ministry of Transport Disabled Persons Assembly NZ Contact: Prudence Walker Chief Executive policydpa. org.nz Document s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Introducing Disabled Persons Assembly NZ The Disabled Persons Assembly NZ (DPA) is a pan disability disabled persons organisation that works to realise an equitable society, where all disabled people (of all impairment types and including women, Mori, Pasifika, young people) are able to direct their own lives. DPA works to improve social indicators for disabled people and for disabled people to be recognised as valued members of society. DPA and its members work with the wider disability community, other DPOs, government agencies, service providers, international disability organisations, and the public by: telling our stories and identifying systemic barrie rs developing and advocating for solutions celebrating innovation and good practice The submission DPA welcomes the opportunity to input to what is an extremely broad and comprehensive Draft Policy Statement on land transport. We are also pleased that safety is one of the priorities of the Policy Statement. Given the breath and high level nature of the Policy Statement we have only commented on the key issues for disabled people. Right to Accessible Transport The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD) affirms the right of disabled people to access transport services and facilities on an equal basis with others and requires States Parties to engage with disabled people and our organisations on changes which would significantly impact on us. As transport services and facilities have a direct and major impact on the lives of disabled people it is essential that our views are considered in all aspects of transport planning. The UNCRPD Articles most relevant to our submission are: Article . Involving disabled people and our representative organisations in decisions that affect us Article . Accessibility (including transportation) Article Living independently and being Included in the community Article Personal mobility
. Analysis of national BCRs A national benefit cost ratio (BCR) is recorded for () activities included in this analysis. For this subset of activities, the analysis described below compares BCRs for transport activities that were first approved under GPS , , and . The methodology used to estimate tran sport BCRs has changed over time. Therefore, changes in BCRs reported below may be affected by changes in methodology rather than changes in investment value. Hence, our commentary focuses on differences in BCRs across investments at each point rather than comparing changes over time. Figure on the next page shows the distribution and cost weighted average of national BCRs for improvement activities first approved under GPS , , and . Among activities first approved under GPS , the weighted average BCRs for walking and cycling and public transport improvements were less than the weighted average BCRs for road improvements. However, the largest improvement activities tended to have lower BCRs. Again, different patterns are seen across types of improvements first approved in earlier GPS periods, with walking and cycling improvements having the highest weighted average BCR among activities first approved under GPS and public trans port improvements having the highest weighted average under GPS .
. Changing the transport conversation Consistent with Waka Kotahi accounts and the quantitative analysis undertaken for this evaluation, interviewees described GPS as signalling a broader approach to land transport investment than was evident previously. Identified shifts included an increased focus on alternative modes and greater consideration of social, environmental, and economic outcomes. In addition, sector stakeholders and government officials both recognised that greater attention was being given to urban form strategies, as part of a more integrated investment respon se, for example: GPS changed the conversationthe narrative is different around transport investment, it needs to support a better urban form which can support more housingmore density, shorter trips (Sector stakeholder) Sector stakeholders des cribed the introduction of new activity classes. They recognised that GPS had signalled a greater focus on walking, cycling, rail, and rapid transit and a wider range of intended outcomes. Government officials described GPS as a catalyst for reth inking how land transport investments could be used to address transport priorities. For example, GPS : signalled a very different conversation about the land transport system particularly focused around mode shift, what it means to take mode neutr al decisions what is the role government should play in contributing to a low carbon system supporting people to have choices beyond getting in their car (Government official) GPS represented a cultural shift in the way that we view and value transport infrastructure much wider consideration of the benefits that could arise from this particular investment (Government official) https:www.nzta.govt.nzplanning andinvestmentplanning andinvestment knowledge basearchive nltp nltpinvestment assessment framework iafprioritisation ofactivities Present Value End of Life https:www.nzta.govt.nzplanning andinvestmentfunding andinvestinginvestment decision making framework review TO WHAT EXTENT HAS GPS INFLUENC ED CHANGES IN NLTF INVESTMENTS, IMPLEMENTATION AND EARLY STAGE OUTCOMES
. Importance of budget allocation and increase in activity classes Several interviewees identified the investment a llocation to each activity class as a key determinant of the system response to any GPS, not surprisingly, funding requests tended to follow the money. In this regard, allocations were described as forcing change through clearly signalling investment p riorities: GPS has strategic section at the front funding information at the back the only bit that people look at is the bit at the back (Sector stakeholder) Activity classes kind of force change in a way that perhaps the strategic direction and prio rities and objectives dont (Government official) GPS introduced additional funding and two new activity classes in alignment with broader transport outcomes. Some interviewees considered this a positive development. For example, previous underfund ing in some classes had historically necessitated backdoor investment via other classes, reportedly common to walking, cycling, and public transport: work categories were created so bus lane projects could be funded from local road activity class probably the same for cycle lanes cycleways next to motorways were funded that out of the state highway improvement activity class (Government Official) as walking and cycling and public transport got more funding in their activity classes finally we can fund these projects out of a more appropriate activity class (Government Official) However, the same official above suggested that with investment shifts, allocations to walking, cycling, and public transport classes were now being drawn upon for o ther activities: arguably the reverse is now happening funding stuff out of public transport, walking, and cycling activity classes that should be funded from state highways or local roads (Government Official) Some interviewees saw the increasing scope of investment as having the potential to undermine overall system performance, primarily because the investment was now spread over more classes. While agreeing with the need for a diversity of investment, a government official noted this risked exce ssive pressure on local authority capacity and capability as they sought to deliver an increasing range of services: maybe you dont get the highest level of impact that you may want when youre spread thin (Government official) Other concerns express ed about the increasing scope of investment were the potential to reduce the investment focus on existing assets and, through the increased investment to other modes, a reduction in the percentage of road user charges returned to motorised road users. Acco rding to one stakeholder, the investment system had previously been fairly tidy but lost a lot of focus. One interviewee observed that with increased investment in other modes, the GPS influence was being redirected away from the majority of users an d those actually using and paying for the system. APPENDIX TRENDS OBSERVED IN GPS OUTCOMES MONITORING
Around two thirds of the riders who received a learner licence after October had not progressed beyond a learner licence by the end of . Such riders were excluded from this analysis as most had not obtained a CBTA certificate. At that time, not all riders had us ed their CBTA certificate to progress to the next licence stage. Obtaining a CBTA certificate does not lead to automatic progression to the next stage. The rider must apply to progress and hence there is typically a sho rt delay between when a rider receive s a CBTA certificate and when they progress to the next licence stage.
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
, with a corresponding impact on net core Crown debt:
. in May , Cabinet agreed in principle to proceed with three Drury rail stations
. the above conditions have been met and funding can now be appropriated;
. Total Capital . .
approved the following change to appropriations to give effect to the decision in paragraph
st International Civil Aviation Organisation General Assembly
Among the cohort of , riders used for this analysis, only riders progressed to a full licence by the end of wit h a CBTA R certificate but without a F certificate. The se riders were involved in four crashes during that time, which is a disproportionately large number of crashes for such a small group of riders.
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
agreed that the changes to appropriations for in paragraphs and above be
These models predict indicators of whether the rider remained on a learner licence, remained on a restricte d licence, or progressed to a full licence after four years. The coefficients of the estimated models correspond to multiplicative differen ces in the odds of the relevant four year progression status occurring for an individual rider. Since the progression outcomes are not lowprobability events, the odds ratios estimated by these models are not equivalent to differences in probabilities of progression status.
agreed that the capital expenditure in paragraph above be funded from the Capital
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
See Figures , , and in the Technical Report . In most cases, the confidence intervals for the odds of progression for drivers aged in their s and s do not overlap with the confidence intervals for the odds of progression for drivers aged i n their s and s, indicating that these age related differences in progression are statistically si gnificant at the level.
noted that further work will be completed to determine the phasing of the appropriated
Initial feedback from the industry was supportive as reaching an effective global approach to international shipping emissions, through the IMO, would be New Zealands best chance at shaping and influencing a global solution for s ()(j) s ()(j) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT RESTRICTED reducing international shipping emissions that works for New Zealand industry . Realm N iue and Tokelau The Cook Islands is an IMO member and is a party to Annex VI. Officials are maintaining contact with Niue which has joined Annex VI but is not an IMO member and therefore unable to participate in these negotiations as a state party to understand their views. Following consultation, it was decided that New Zealands ratification of Annex VI should not extend to Tokelau. Any updates to Annex VI, including these implementing measures, would therefore also not extend to Tokelau through tacit acceptance. The possibility of Tokelau joining Annex VI in the future remains open.
These findings are consistent with a range of other studies, for example, Bates et al () and Shope ().
noted that Joint Ministers are authorised to make changes to the Programme where no new
At the same time, the start of the night time driving restriction was moved back from midnight to pm, and restr ictions on carrying family members as passengers were tightened. The analysis by Curry et al () therefore reflects the combined effects of these changes, however the authors argue that the decal requirement was the most significant change since it enab led restrictions to be enforced better and increased the incentive for compliance.
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
Only a high level summary of the results is available, and details of the statistical methodology have not been by VicRoads.
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
. Introduction The Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) reports monthly on airlines ontime performance. A key part of the Ministrys stewardship role is to use data and evidence to build greater transparency of aviation system performance. We plan to extend the scope to cover regional routes in the next report. The Ministry thanks the airlines for providing us with the data that made this report possible. The Ministry will continue to evolve this report and welcomes users feedback. . About ontime performance Aviation is a dynamic and complex system. Various factors, many outside airlines control, can affect whether a flight arrives or departs on time. Safety and security are paramount and will always take priority over timeliness. Some airlines have provided commentary on the top factors that affected their ontime performance each month. These are included with each airlines data. Examples of factors that can affect ontime performance for flights include: adverse weather conditions affecting flight, such as high winds, fog, low visibility, snow, heavy rains, volcanic ash technical issues with the aircraft congested air space airport tarmac traffic late arrival of other aircraft, passengers or connecting crew staffing issues across the aviation ecosystem (including airlines, airports, air traffic control) security concerns or processing delays supplier challenges related to fuelling, catering, digital outages, and baggage systems affecting processing and loading of luggage delays in processing international passengers through border checks. . Coverage Domestic Ontime performance is reported for jet services on New Zealand domestic routes between Auckland, Wellington, Christchurch, Dunedin and Queenstown. This report covers the following domestic airlines: Air New Zealand Jetstar. We have only included routes where there is more than one airline operating on that route. There were routes that met this definition during the period reported.
Due to data limitations, we were not able to differentiate between crashes involving drivers with restricted licences who wer e driving with or without a supervisor. For the same reason, we were also not able to analyse the effectiveness of the restrict ion on unsupervised driving while carrying passengers.
I am proposing to make these amendments through two Orders in Council.
Multi year budget appropria tions are well suited; and the impact of planning uncertainties would be mitigated with funding allocated from a much bigger pool. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
On July , Cabinet invited the Minister of Transport to issue drafting
The differences between NLTF revenue and the expenditure targets reflect debt repayments, which are not part of the expenditure target.
The role of regional authorities: https:www.nzta.govt.nzplanning andinvestmentplanningour roleinplanningthe roleoflocal governmentthe roleofregional You can find more information on this here: InvestmentstrategyscenariosforGPSbriefing.pdf (transport.govt.nz) and FurtherinformationonbaseexpenditureinGPSAideMemoire.pdf (transport.govt.nz) Cost in Real terms account for CPI, base Vehicle Kilometres Travelled (VKT, Million) While NLTF revenue has increased over the past years, the GPS has signalled the targeting of investment into the need to transform the transport system for improved safety and capacity, enhancing alternative modes of travel and respond to climate change . This has increased investment challenges for Waka Kotahi in preparing the NLTP alongside those presented by growing cost drivers. Factors driving cost are the growing travel demand for people and goods, increasing cost of transport activities, growing ex pectations for improved services and the growth in the extent and complexity of transport infrastructure and the associated requirements for operation and maintenance.
The state owned enterprise that owns the land beneath KiwiRails network on behalf of the crown. s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
These percentages have been rounded to the nearest number. ylqdcxs Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E due to the provision of improved public transport in Greater Christchurch resulting in a significant decrease in private vehicle trips (Appendix ). There is a high level of uncertainty associated with the estimates and the assumptions used to develop the estimates for both projects. The CIPA team has reviewed the results of the emissions modelling at a highlevel and acknowledges that the approach taken follows the same general approach as estimates provided for NZUP projects. The CIPA team considers the results to be adequate for providing an indicative assessment of the likely emissions impacts given the high level of uncertainty. After accounting for the findings of both project CIPAs, NZUP continues to show a net reduction in emissions, as required by Cabinet CAB MIN. refers. Human Rights The proposal in this paper is not inconsistent with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act and Human Rights Act . Consultation This paper was prepared by the Ministry of Transport. The Treasury, the Ministry for the Environment, Waka Kotahi, and the Ministry of Housing and Urban development were consulted on this Cabinet paper. Communications The Minister of Transport will be announcing a package of communications on the reallocation of funds from the Northern Pathway and these projects will be referred to as part of the package. Proactive Release We intend to release this Cabinet paper proactively in full within the day timeframe in accordance with the Cabinet Office circular Proactive Release of Cabinet Material: Requirements CO () . Recommendations The Ministers of Finance and Transport recommend that the Committee: note that in September , Cabinet agreed to cancel the Northern Pathway project, reallocate the project funding towards an alternative mix of investments and authorised the Ministers of Finance and Transport to take final decisions on the alternative investment mix, and to make consequential changes to appropriations to give effect to those decisions CAB MIN . refers ylqdcxs Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E note that in October , the Ministers of Finance and Transport expressed support for the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme using funding available from the cancelled Northern Pathway project Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) note that Cabinet agreed that new projects programmes that are funded from the reallocated Northern Pathway funding must have a full CIPA completed before tagged contingency can be drawn down note that CIPAs for the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme are complete note that as per Cabinet requirement, NZUP continues to demonstrate a net reduction in emissions after accounting for the findings of the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements CIPAs Policy recommendations note that Cabinet established a tagged capital contingency of up to the amount below in Vote Transport to provide additional funding for the New Zealand Upgrade Programme following baselining and reprioritisation CAB MIN and CAB MIN . refer: m increase(decrease) Outyears New Zealand Upgrade Transport Projects Tagged Capital Contingency ,.
This framework aligns transport penalties with the equivalent penalties in the Health and Safety at Work Act RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of If you wish to progress the RSTA maritime proposals, officials can provide you with advice on potential legislative vehicles to progress the proposed amendments . A review of high priority elements of the MTA and MSA will soon begin In September , the Associate Minister of Transport agreed that officials should progress a review of high priority elements of the MTA and MSA (refer OC) . The Maritime Legislation Bill has a priority rating on the Legislation programme and the indicative timetable has introduction in Q . This review could be an appropriate vehicle to progress the RSTA maritime proposals that are not being progressed elsewhere . Officials will advise on this in the December update to Minister Doocey. There may be opportunities to progress these RSTA maritime proposals at a faster pace In September , Maritime NZ advised you and Minister Doocey of changes needed to maritime legislation to address issues arising from the exercise of local navigation safety regulatory powers ( refer MNZ ). You agreed to support the Ministry and Maritime NZ to identify any suitable legi slative vehicle that may arise across your portfolios, and others connected, to amend the Maritime Transport Act early and urgently. s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of October OC Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Transport MEETING WITH MARTIN KEARNEY CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER , AUCKLAND ONE RAIL Snapshot You are meeting with Martin Kearney, Chief Executive Officer (C EO), Auckland One Rail (AOR) . The meeting is to discuss rail in Auckland, specifically metro rail investment , public transport safety and the Metropolitan Rail Operating Model (MROM) . Time and . . pm, November Venue Britomart Train Station (front entrance) Attendees Martin Kearney, CEO , Auckland One Rail Officials attending NA Agenda Rail in Auckland Talking points talking points are attached Contacts Name Telephone First contact Lou Lennane, Auckland Strategic Programme Lead Karen Lyons, Director Auckland Document s ()(a) s ()(b)(ii) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of MEETING WITH MARTIN KEARNEY CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER , AUCKLAND ONE RAIL Key points Mr Kearney has requested to meet with you to discuss rail in Auckland. Your discussion will take place while you are on a train on the Auckland network. AOR is re sponsible for train operations, rolling stock maintenance, station operations and maintenance, safety, security and customer experience Auckland One Rail (AOR) is playing a significant role in the integration of the City Rail Link (CRL) services into the wider network . AOR is also a key player in mi tigating the effects of disruption to rail passengers , as the rail network rebuild is finalised and work on the wider network continues . Rail passenger and crew safety will be a key area for discussion for this meeting, resulting from recent incidents in Auckland on the public transport network. Mr Kearney has indicated he also wishes to discuss rail funding and the MROM review . Rail Safety As you and the Minister of Police announced on October, there will be an increased police presence on and around public transport services in Auckland in the short term, in response to the fatal attack aboard a bus in Onehunga. This is to increase safety and provide reassurance to public transport workers and users . Warranted Transport Officers (WTOs) are employed by Auckland Transport and have the power to issue fines for non payment of fares, and otherwise act as a visual deterrent and sign of authority. Auckland Transport employs around WTOs, and also contracts private security guards to further increase presence around known hotspot areas. WTOs and security guards must rely on police to enforce the restraint, removal, andor arrest of people engaging in violent or anti social behaviour on and around public transport.
This text will amend the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL). s ()(j) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT RESTRICTED accept the measures, or reserving the New Zealand position . At this decision point Cabinet will be provided with a fuller assessment of the economic impact the measures are likely to have on New Zealand. Impact s for New Zealand The IMO has a Comprehensive Impact Assessment (CIA) detailing the economic impacts on states of different measures to achieve the agreed targets .
Upcoming Cabinet papers Committees Cabinet Appointments and Honours Committee Tuesday October Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Wednesday September New Zealand Air Services Agreement and Protocol This paper seeks approval for New Zealand to sign and ratify the Air Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand and the associated Protocol to the Air Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand on Third, Fourth and Fifth Freedom Traffic Rights between Parties. Wednesday August International Maritime Organisation Climate Change Negotiation Mandate draft Cabinet paper International Maritime Organisation (IMO) member states are negotiating measures to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and ensure international shipping meets its net zero emissions target. This Cabinet paper proposes a revised Cabinet mandate for these negotiations and seeks delegated Cabinet authority for the Associate Minister of Transport, and other relevant Ministers, to provide direction to officials on New Zealands position in these negotiations, as necessary. We will provide an Cabinet paper to your Office on Wednesday August for lodgement on Thursday August . The paper will incorporate feedback from departmental consultation, Ministerial consultation, and any further comments from industry. We are working closely with the M inistry of F oreign Affairs (MFAT) to amend the paper to align with any advice MFAT provides on New Zealands recommended negotiating position to the Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Climate Change. This paper will be considered at Cabinet Economic Policy Committee on Wednesday August and then at Cabinet on September .
Upcoming Cabinet papers Committees Cabinet Economic Policy (ECO) Wednesday September
Upcoming Cabinet papers Committees Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Wednesday September
Upcoming Cabinet papers Committees Cabinet Expenditure and Regulatory Review Tuesday September
Upcoming Cabinet papers Nil this week .
Upcoming Cabinet papers Nil this week.
We do not foresee any risks with the proposed response. Table : Documents in scope of the request and the proposed approach Doc no. Title Proposed approach OC Update on the New Zealand Freight and Supply Chain Strategy December Withhold in full under section ()(f)(iv) Appendix to OC New Zealand Freight and Supply Chain Strategy Executive Summary December Withhold in full under section ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Annex : OC Update on the New Zealand Freight and Supply Chain Strategy and Appendix to OC New Zealand Freight and Supply Chain Strategy Executive Summary RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT .m (.) .B (.)Total Vote Transport CERF funding including out years Spend vs Budget (Billion) CERF Funding Spent to CERF Funding RemainingTransport Chapter ERP Dashboard As at January Key: On Track At Risk DelayedA Portfolio overview of the priority areas within the Transport Chapter of the Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP). Key Messages from this Period Upcoming CabinetMinisterial Decisions (For Priority Areas)Portfolio Risks and Issues CERF Financial UpdateRisks Issues Mitigation PlanPre Mitigation Meeting the first Emissions Budget Implementing the Sustainable Biofuels Obligation was estimated to contribute around half of transports quantified contribution to the first three emissions budgets based on analysis completed as part of the development of the first ERP. The decision therefore has an impact on transports ability to meet its estimated emissions reductions and the ability of all sectors to meet the overall Emission Budgets for New Zealand.The Climate Change Chief Executives group will lead a cross agency response to help New Zealand stay on track to meet the first Emissions Budget. Within the transport sector, we will continue to focus on delivering the full suite of initiatives agreed in the ERP as far as possible. Resourcing The key risk to implementation and meeting the ERP timeframes continues to be resourcing. Limited ability to source qualified staff, and other capacity constraints mean additional funding alone will not resolve this issue.The Ministry has reprioritised some resource to deliver ERP initiatives . Through the upcoming business planning process for the Ministry will revisit which iniatives remain as not fully resourced and consider what further reprioritisation or sequencing changes can be made. The Ministry is also seeking support from other agencies and using contractors where appropriate. Waka Kotahi CERF resourcing pressures are reducing. Sector skill shortages Labour shortages across the transport sector are continuing to create challenges. Recruiting bus drivers remains as a particular concern. We anticipate capacity of the construction sector and local government will be impacted by the recovery from cyclone Gabrielle. Funding agreements are being put in place to enable bus bus driver terms and conditions changes as quickly as possible. Develop and implement a transport sector agreement that will provide migrant bus and truck drivers with a time limited residence pathway. Over the coming months, we expect to see the current rates of cancellation rates to ease as hundreds of recruited international drivers move through immigration, training and regulatory licensing processes. Engagement Engagement with local government is a critical component to the success of most priority ERP initiatives. Time constraints mean that there is less opportunity to engage, and the large amount of engagement across the iniatives which are moving at pace means that alignment is challenging. We are aligning consultation processes with local authorities in the first half of on the draft GPS, sub national VKT targets, and National VKT reduction plan. A partnering model is being developed for the Urban VKT Reduction Programme. Funding Vote Transport is still accumulating a large underspend in relation to CERF funding because of the need for new systems to be set up and processes to be implemented. This reflects the need in some cases for new systems to be set up and processes implemented. In particular, local government has needed to gear up to deliver Transport Choices initiatives. There is an emerging risk that Councils are not able to gear up as quickly as desired or in some cases contribute their local share. There is a risk that this undermines the case for additional funding. However, expenditure has been slowly increasing and we expect it to continue on this trend.The Ministry is actively monitoring CERF expenditure to put in place funding agreements to enable the draw down of funding. Where local share is not available, funding may need to be moved to out years. Timeframes Many of the priority initiatives are working towards tight timeframes and are facing challenges to meet timing expectations, particularly the social leasing scheme.We will continue to keep you regarding progress on key initiatives and escalate any emerging risks regarding delivery timeframes.Overall Risks and Issues Status Minister and Cabinet Decisions relating to priority ERP initiatives Week Ending Vehicle Transition Programme (Clean Car Upgrade Social Leasing) Ministerial delegated decisions for Clean Car Upgrade February Congestion Charging March Freight Decarbonisation Work Programme March Freight Decarbonisation Work Programme March Vehicle Transition Programme (Clean Car Upgrade Social Leasing) Ministerial decisions on design detail for Social Leasing Scheme. March This report covers the period December January and provides a progress summary on your priority initiatives in the transport chapter of the ERP. Subsequent reports will resume the monthly reporting schedule. Overall delivery progress of seven priority areas are on track. This number has been steadily increasing since the first report in October ( on track) which shows the continued efforts of Waka Kotahi and the Ministry through the last few months. A focus for the coming weeks will be understanding what options are available to increase emissions abatement following the decision to discontinue the Sustainable Biofuels Obligation. Overall Financial Status Year tospend has increased to .m compared to .m in the November reporting period. A significant portion of the spend (.m) was made up of establishment payments provided to Waka Kotahi in early December. We anticipate a continued increase in spending across the programme as funding agreements and policy decisions are confirmed. The total value of CERF funding has been to .B from .B. This increased amount tagged contingencies as well as appropriated funding. Further work is being done to identify what additional financial information can be provided in the Dashboard to give you greater clarity on the level of approved and committed funding compared to forecast. ACTUAL SPEND TO m FORECASTED YEAR TOSPEND m APPROVED INITIATIVES CERF Key updates are outlined below. Congestion Charging The Ministry has been working through several versions of the The Ministry is currently working through outstanding policy issues including the potential entities to administer, enforce and collect the charges of a congestion charging scheme. VKT Reduction Plan and Programmes Waka Kotahi and the Ministry are continuing to progress drafting of the National VKT Reduction Plan, with a draft ready for targeted consultation expected in March . In relation to the Urban VKT Programmes, a partnering model has been confirmed internally and informal engagements with local government have gotten underway with a focus on Tier Councils. Biofuels Mandate This specific priority area update covers December February period and will no longer be included in subsequent dashboard reports. In January, public submissions on the Sustainable Biofuel Obligation Bill were received by the Environment Committee. Submissions closed on January and submissions were received. Early February , the Environment Committee began hearing oral submissions. On February , the Government announced that work on the Biofuels mandate would no longer continue. () ()Delivery Schedule Status for the Priority Areas On Track At Risk Delayed Yet to StartOC Document s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Z PAGE PAGE Delivery Progress as at January PAGE DelayedLegends Policy Implementation Ontrack CompleteAt RiskTimeframes outlined below are variable and subject to change. Milestone bars on the timeline represent current forecast of st art and end and may vary from baseline. Priority AreasBaseline Start DateBaseline End DateForecast Start DateForecast End DateQ Q Q Q Q Q Q QCommentary JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC Vehicle Transition Programme (Clean Car Upgrade Social Leasing) Social Leasing: Advice was provided to you on the risks to the delivery of April . A fast tracked trial has been proposed which will involve vehicles to be leased in Invercargill. Waka Kotahi continues to do due diligence on this proposed trial and the risk remains that major issues will be identified closer to the delivery . Clean Car Upgrade: Waka Kotahi is continuing to gather information and provide advice to the Ministry on proposals for the decisions delegated to you in the November Cabinet paper. A decision has been made for Auckland to be the first trial location. This trial is currently on track for April delivery. EV Charging Infrastructure Budget Bid The draft National EV Charging Strategy and accompanying discussion document were finalised for publication in the week of January. Public release was delayed and we understand that the draft strategy and discussion document will be released for public consultation on February . This is likely to delay publication of the final strategy by approximately one month, meaning it will likely by delivered after the June deadline. Freight Decarbonisation Work Programme Public Transport Improvement Initiatives Bus driver terms and conditions: Waka Kotahi has been progressing all party funding agreements with each PTABus Operators to enable funding to be paid. A process has been established to allow PTAs to claim once respective all party and funding agreements are signed. Community Connect: The start has been deferred to July given the Cabinet decision to further extend the half price fares. Bus Decarbonisation Contestable Fund: Waka Kotahi design is complete and will be provided to the relevant sponsor for approval. Reflecting ERP commitments in the next GPS Over the period, the GPS was progressed in preparation for public engagement in April . The timeframe for public engagement has been revised slightly to align with Budget and to allow time for priorities to be amended in light of an increased focus on climate adaptation. Congestion Charging The Ministry has been working through several versions of the The Ministry are currently working through outstanding policy issues including the potential entities to administer, enforce and collect the charges of a congestion charging scheme. Transport Choices Package Detailed analysis, engagement and capability building with Councils is progressing. The funding agreement was finalised in December . Capability webinars with Councils are scheduled to happen Q . VKT Reduction Plan and Programmes (including sub national VKT targets) National VKT Reduction Plan: Drafting underway. You agreed to adjust the publication timing to enable Climate Response Ministers to consider the national plan before it is . Subnational VKT Targets: Minsters opted to defer publication of the sub national targets until mid so that further engagement could be undertaken with affected local authorities. Clean Car Standard Overall progress is going well, which is a reflection of the scheme being rephased to provide more time for implementation. As expected with a programme of this scale, multiple ongoing challenges exist but are being managed. Design Detail for SL considered by Cabinet Social leasing and Clean Car Upgrade commence in at least one location Social leasing and Clean Car Upgrade trials occur in all locations EV Charging Strategy for public consultationCERF bid submitted to Treasury Bill to incorporate the Sustainable Public Transport Framework into the LTMA is introduced Community Connect launched nationwide Collaborate with MOT to provide advice to the Minister on the terms and conditions required to stabilise the public transport bus driver workforce Contestable funding model for Bus Decarbonisation is launched Publish final GPS Undertake public engagement on the draft GPS Subnational VKT targets finalised following further engagement with local governmentEngagement with councils, iwiMori and other partners on the national plan National plan Complete legislated review of the targets Implementation of the full policy by Waka KotahiPreparing advice to Minister on extending the heavy EV RUC exemption and pricing for externalities in RUC rates Advice to joint Ministers on investment package (from the ERP Action Plan) Provide update to joint Ministers on investment package On Track Preparing advice to the Minister on implementing a Clean Truck DiscountAt Risk Milestone status: Overall delivery progress:Milestone type: s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of March OC Hon Michael Wood Action required by: Minister of Transport Wednesday, March Hon Damien OConnor Minister for Land Information cc Hon Kiri Allan Associate Minister of Transport APPROVAL OF TRANSPORT AND PUBLIC WORKS LEGISLATION TO BE INCLUDED IN SEVERE WEATHER EMERGENCY RESPONSE BILL Purpose Seek approval from the Minister of Transport and the Minister for Land Information to list legislation administered by the Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) and Land Information New Zealand (LINZ) in the Severe Weather Emergency Response Bill, which is likely to be introduced on Tuesday March . The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC) has requested confirmation of your approvals by Wednesday March . Key points DPMC is currently preparing a Cabinet paper that will seek Ministers approval to introduce the Severe Weather Emergency Response Bill (the Bill). We understand the Bill is likely to be introduced on Tuesday March. The Bill will enable the creation of Orders in Council (OiCs) to grant exemptions from, modify, or extend legislation listed in a schedule of the Bill. The Ministry of Transport has identified the following three broad areas where it considers it is appropriate for OrdersinCouncil (OiCs) to be made to support recovery from a transport perspective: obroadening Directors powers to enable changes to the powers of the Director of Land Transport and to enable the electronic service of documents (under the Land Transport Act ) ostreamlining planning, funding approvals and procurement procedures of National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) funded road, rail and public transport recoveryrelated activities (under the Land Transport Management Act ) Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of o streamlining and coordinating approval processes for transportrelated infrastructure works so Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail can undertake these works efficiently and effectively (multiple pieces of land use legislation including the Public Works Act , the Government Roading Powers Act and the Railways Act ). As requested by DPMC, we now need to obtain your approval by Wednesday March to include specific legislation for which you are the responsible Minister in the schedule of the Bill. We will then work to develop OiCs to grant exemptions from, modify, or extend the legislation that is listed. The Ministry is seeking agreement from the Minister of Transport to list the following legislation it administers: the Land Transport Act , Land Transport Management Act , Government Roading Powers Act , and Railways Act . The Ministry is also seeking approval from the Minister for Land Information to list the Public Works Act (PWA) in the schedule of the Bill. Land acquisition is one of the most critical processes relating to transport infrastructure works. We are also liaising with the other agencies that administer legislation that covers the approval processes for transport infrastructure works including the Ministry for the Environment, and the Department of Conservation. These agencies are seeking approval from their Ministers for this legislation to be listed in the schedule of the Bill. DPMC have today provided guidance on the process for developing OiCs, including the steps which need to be taken before policy approval is obtained from Ministers. Recommendations We recommend you: Minister of Transport Minister for Land Information agree the following transport legislation will be listed in the Severe Weather Emergency Response Bill, so OrdersinCouncil can be made to grant exemptions from, modify, or extend this legislation: Land Transport Act Land Transport Management Act Government Roading Powers Act Railways Act . Yes No agree for the Public Works Act to be listed in the Severe Weather Emergency Response Bill, so that OrdersinCouncil can be made to assist with recovery from recent severe weather events.
What are the key factors that affect the efficiency and effectiveness of converting inputs to outputs and hence to outcomes
BUDGET SENSITIVE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE
agreed that an Order in Council be made allowing the Takitimu North Link road to be
authorise the Parliamentary Counsel Office to make changes between Cabinet
https:www.hrc.co.nzour workpeople disabilitiespast projectsaccessible journey
note that, subject to the Orders being agreed, the Minister will sign the Land
noted that a full CIPA will be completed and quality assured by the Ministry for the
noted that the Minister will sign the Land Transport (Road User) Amendment Rule
noted that the Regulations come into force on April .
P a g e for children to play and not ease of access for vehicles , particularly important for older people, citing once again the co benefits in health and social integration. Availability and frequency of public transport is a major deter minant of use especially for the disabled and elderly. We consider that improvements to public transport service levels, particularly the integration of multi mode journeys to maximise convenience and ease of use are an essential component of delivery, an d accordingly we consider the delivery of ATAP and LGWM as essential components of accessibility for Auckland and Wellington respectively. We also support the development of high speed inter city commuter rail links, as well as investment to improve the capacity and resilience of metropolitan rail networks. We suggest that to be truly strategic in scope, the Better travel options priority area needs to acknowledge and address the problems of access peculiar to provincial New Zealand. We cons de that this is deficient in two primary areas. Firstly a lack of a viable and affordable public transport system in areas where the population density is insufficient to support traditional solutions. Secondly the degree to which the preferencing of through traffic, especial ly heavy goods vehicles, has disrupted safe access to services within the many provincial and rural towns bisected by state highways. We note especially the cascade effect this has on the ability or willingness to use any form of transport other than priv ate cars, and that restriction of access from fear of crossing busy roads is a major contributor to social isolation. We support the suggested indicators . Improved Freight connections We support the commitment to maintain the road and rail infrastructure that support efficient movement of freight. As such we fully support the intent to improve resilience through improved infrastructure, route duplication and diversification of freight transport to modes that maximise safety and minimise greenhouse gas em issions and air pollution. We consider the suggested indicators to be appropriate. Climate Change A major concern of Grey Power Federation and all older people is the legacy we leave to our grandchildren. In addition to the medium and long term effects on us all from carbon emissions there is also the short term concern of the effect of NO and particulate emissions on health which affect older people and the young more adversely than the general population. Noting the high contribution of both climate aff ecting gases and particulate air pollution from road transport and the exacerbating effect of the preponderance of old and inefficient vehicles in the NZ fleet, we consider that economic intervention is essential if effective change is to be realised. We consider that this can best be addressed through a whole of system approach including encouragement of mode change through public transport infrastructure and service investment. We consider that graduated registration fees based on emissions produced , and banning the importation of any new vehicle not Euro compliant, and any second hand vehicle not Euro compliant are essential first steps . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
. Airline joint venture cooperation agreements allow two or more airlines to co ordinate pricing and seat capacity deployed on one or more air routes and across multipl e origin and destination points . While this can bring about consumer benefits, it also concentrates market power, so all such arrangements must be carefully scrutinised on their merits .
. Consumer education Encouraging the uptake of cleaner cars by consumers Providing accurate information and creating an understanding of future market trends Consumer insights and uptake Consumer confidence and clear information on current i ncentives for clean vehicle uptake
. Evaluation results for the motorcyclist licensing system (Class ) .. Context: Overall patterns and trends in crash rates As described in more detail in section . of the Technical Report , we undertook detailed analysis of crash rates for motorcycle riders by licence s tage, age, gender, and region of residence, and analysed trends in these crash rates over time. As noted in section ., for motorcyclists it is more difficult to compare crash rates for disaggregated groups due to the small numbers involved. Crash rates by licence stage and rider gender Figure shows how crash rates vary by gender among riders aged to years old for the combined period from to , by license stage (the horizontal lines show the crash rate at each licence stage for both gende rs combined and the corresponding confidence intervals). The crash rate for fully licensed riders is around . times higher than that for learner riders and this difference is statistically significant in our analysis ( pvalue .), but other differe nces, including between genders at each licence stage, are not statistically significant (all pvalues .). Crash rates for females have relatively wide confidence intervals (i.e. are estimated relatively inaccurately) due to the small number of female riders relative to males, and for that reason we do not present further breakdowns of motorcycle crash rates by gender.
. Media and comms Enquiries regarding the CCSLG, its activities and work programme are to be referred to either Minister Michael Woods office or the CCSLG Chair, Mark Gilbert.
. Other upcoming Ministry of Transport Cabinet papers
. Revised governance and leadership arrangements for the System through: a. the establishment of a Ministerial Oversight Group b. the establishment of an Advisory Board c. the establishment of a Mori Khui Advisory Board d. the appointment of a System Steward within government. . The appointment of Te Manat Waka as the System Steward.. Stronger alignment to, and the implementation of, the principles of Te Tiriti o Waitangi in the proposed governance and leadership structure. This requires stronger partnership, participation and protection of Mori within the System, and across all levels, including governance and leadership through: a. Mori representation at the Ministerial Oversight Group b. Mori representation at the Advisory Board c. the establishment of a Mori Khui Advisory Board as a dedicated space for Mori in the System d. the appointment of a supported Chief Mori Adviser within the System Steward. . Te Manat Waka confirms an implementation plan to give effect to the new arrangements for the System as soon as practicable, including the approach to implement the System Strategy. . Te Manat Waka works to standup its stewardship capability, including Mori capability and competency, finalises the System Strategy and arrangements to implement the Strategy, and implements the proposed new governance and leadership arrangements by mid . . Oversight and monitoring of Water Safety New Zealand transfers from Sport New Zealand to the System Steward in mid . . Te Manat Waka to work with government, local government, iwi and NGOs to explore roles, responsibilities, regulations, and funding arrangements for recreational safety around coastal and inland waterways, including perspectives on risk and risk management, and the strategies, tools and funding availablerequired.
. The Board approved the procurement strategy at its April meeting. The initial procurement is for engineers, urban planners, designers and industry teams to prepare bids for the detailed planning and design work. We are calling this the UEP (Urban, Engi neering and Planning) procurement tender .
. The highlights of the survey were:
. We now seek your approval of the following seven foundation outcomes: Environmental vitality and climate action: An exemplar net zero carbon urban regeneration development that is resilient to climate change and focuses on the prioritisation of su stainable modes of transport and environmental vitality. Mana whenua partnership: Partner with mana whenua to integrate their mtauranga and reflect their identity in the precinct. Homes: Provide healthy homes with a mix of typologies and accessible homes to cater for a diverse community. Affordable homes: Provide an adequate supply of quality, affordable homes in the precinct to make the most of the location being adjacent to a significant transport connection. Accessibility: Create an accessible precinc t that encourages the use of public transport and provides a safe and connected neighbourhood. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
.pm Wednesday August
. Key themes GPS was relatively disruptive compared to the previous GPS. GPS , therefore, required a range of system changes and shifts in capacity and capability that are st ill in progress and are yet to fully bed in. New priorities developed through GPS objectives, therefore, need to be sustained over time if the shift in investment and outcomes are to be realised. Feedback indicates the new GPS priorities required new mind sets and skillsets to implement the investment shifts signalled. One official believed this had contributed to some turnover in the government sector. Some interviewees described an increasing scope of investment as creating funding pressures with the ava ilable resource now spread thinner, some also described this as potentially undermining the overall impact of the GPS. However, a benefit is that alongside increased investment in walking, cycling and public transport, there are now appropriate activity cl asses that align with a range of transport objectives. Due to the change in government, GPS was finalised later in the planning cycle, meaning that apart from Auckland, there were few meaningful opportunities for RLTPs around New Zealand to respond. I t was reported by some that many existing planned projects were redefined to fit new funding priorities rather than these projects changing substantially. A range of broader factors that highlight the complexity of the transport system was seen to be eith er enabling or acting counter to GPS objectives, which can ultimately affect outcomes: Impact of rising fuel prices on behaviour change Impact of the COVID pandemic on behaviour change (eg, public transport mode shift) Increasingly, transport related fu nding outside of the GPS and NLTP, such as through direct Crown funding. There was a view that such investment reflected the fact that the funding available from the NLTF was insufficient to address transport investment needs and the governments policy pr iorities
. Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications Committees Cabinet Business Committee (CBC) Monday September Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) Wednesday September Biosecurity System Strategy Minister Hoggard has begun Ministerial consultation on the Biosecurity System Strategy package. Consultation will run until Friday August , before proposed ECO lodgement on Thursday September , for consideration on Wednesday September . The strategy aims to address the policy, operational, and participatory challenges in the functioning of the biosecurity system, and is connected to the Biosecurity Act Amendment Bill proposals. While the proposal does not contain any obvious concerns for the maritime transport system, Maritime NZ has asked the Ministry for Primary Industries to involve us in any future work that touches on our functions such as: our current approach to Ballast Water Management the role of Regional CouncilsHarbourmasters; and vessels and those on board (particularly with regard to safety). s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
. Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications Committees Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) Wednesday August Public Consultation On Recovering The Costs Of Goods Management Activities At The Border The Ministers of Customs and Biosecurity are proposing to present a paper and consultation document for consideration at ECO on Wednesday August and Cabinet on Monday August . The documents concern cost recovery proposals for goods management at New Zealands borders. We note that the proposals will lead to some significant cost increases for the maritime sector in particular and that this will result in some significant opposition. We have worked with Customs to ensure that the C abinet paper reflects this reality and in particular that opposition will come from maritime operators likely to be facing cost increases if the proposals are implemented in their current form. Comments were provided to Minister Dooceys Office for Ministerial consultation. Cabinet Business Committee (CBC) Monday September
. Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications Committees Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) Wednesday August Public Consultation On Recovering The Costs Of Goods Management Activities At The Border The Ministers of Customs and Biosecurity are proposing to present a paper and consultation document for consideration at ECO on Wednesday August and Cabinet on Monday August . The documents concern cost recovery proposals for goods managemen t at New Zealands borders. We note that the proposals will lead to some significant cost increases for the maritime sector in particular and that this will result in some significant opposition. We have worked with Customs to ensure that the Cabinet paper reflects this reality and in particular that opposition will come from maritime operators likely to be facing cost increases if the proposals are implemented in their current form. Comments were provided to Minister Dooceys Office for Ministerial consult ation. TBC Mid September Live Animal Exports Review s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
. Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications Committees Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) Wednesday August Public Consultation On Recovering The Costs Of Goods Management Activities At The Border The Ministers of Customs and Biosecurity are proposing to present a paper and consultation document for consideration at ECO on Wednesday August and Cabinet on Monday August . The documents concern cost recovery proposals for goods management at New Zealands borders. We note that the proposals will lead to some significant cost increases for the maritime sector in particular and that this will result in some significant opposition. We have worked with Customs to ensure that the Cabinet paper reflects this reality and in particular that opposition will come from maritime operators likely to be facing cost increases if the proposals are implemented in their current form. Comments were provided to your Office for Ministerial consultation. TBC Mid September Live Animal Exports Review s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
. Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications None this week.
. Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications There are no other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications this week.
. Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications There are no other upcoming portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications .
. Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications There are no other upcoming portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications.
. Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications There are no other upcoming portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications. s ()(f)(iv)
. Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications There are no other upcoming portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications. s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
. Under Safety para the RTF has already argued its views on the coalition government s road safety strategy and our concerns with the antitruck sentiment expressed in that approach. This policy aspect is clearly showing up everywhere in Government policy documents and simply demonstrates certain discriminatory bias to vilify the trucking industry at every opportunity. Given contribution to wealth, this is both mystifying and disappointing. . This section argues the importance of improving transport connections within cities between regions and ports a laudable approach but then patches in the concept of mode neutrality. The whole section is a framework of conflicting ideals. We have the need for improved connectivity, supporting statements around the primary production in the regions being the core of the economy, and then this is followed by a statement, the transport sys em needs to support the most appropriate mode. . The conflict is around what is the concept of most appropriate mode The only option to get primary products off the rural hinterland for processing and export is by truck farms, and any rail freight service would fail to deliver on that service on any number of wellrecognised performance attributes, most notably time and cost. . If we look at the facts today, under the Covid lockdown scenarios (and other recent disaster events in New Zealand), it is the commercial trucking industry that has continued to service food and fuel outlets and provide product to retailers to enable the country to work from home and for there to be some level of economic functionally. It is the inherent resilience and RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT adaptability of trucking that has enabled this to occur. Rail on the other hand, remains in the shade with largely empty rolling stock going backwards and forwards, further reinforcing its vulnerability to changing economic uncertainties. vulnerability to disasters will not change, no matter how much money government throws at it. . Para postulates the strategic priorities overlap and by making places safer, people will adopt walking and cycling, further arguing the flawed case that by making rail investments, freight movements will be safer. This is illogical and simply ignores reality. We would ask for the evidence, and likely numbers, of interregional cycle and walking traffic. . We agree rail has an important role, but to fund it on an ideological aspiration when its service and performance capability is thwarted by design limitations, is a disservice to the tax payers and to those that pay FED and RUCs (vehicle owners and freight service operators) i to the LTF. . Transport outcomes; page . An infographic and accompanying text on this page alludes to the complexity of the programme and highlights the wellbeing and liveability approach of the GPS. But the proposition rests on unsubstantiated assumptions and instead of being a progressive approach, assumes the investment in rail and elusive environmental aspirations will assist in that goal without necessarily having any evidence. This is big call and without some economic analysis, the expenditures on some aspects could outweigh the benefits. . While acknowledgement that the transport actively harm the community, getting to the Road to Zero goals might be elusive. We stress this point in the context that while median barriers and road side treatments are all good, the fact is the roads in New Zealand, particularly in rural areas, are in many cases challenging for many motorists. Poor designs, incorporating poor repair and road surface patching techniques, just add to those challenges. Despite the best efforts of the safety engineers to improve road safety, reducing investment in the fundamental infrastructure is not an entirely viable solution for delivering on the safe outcomes goal, a point RTF emphasised in its submission on the Road to Zero discussion document. . Section . Strategic Priority: Improving Freight Connections; pages . Many, if not most, of the outcomes set out in this section can only result if there is some form of market manipulation to the detriment of road freight. We do not support such market manipulation. . Road freight trumps rail every time simply due to customer demands and choices. The Mini s own research, under the Freight Demands Study, confirms the importance of road freight, a point we highlighted above. The recent Covid experience has confirmed the RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT adaptability of road freight to meet a disruptive market, something rail is unable to do. . shift in language from competition with road, to modal neutrality. But this is still far from actually acknowledging that in a small economy such as New either of those options is limited and the best option is in fact, that road and rail remain complementary. Rail cannot exist without trucks. And if small trucks are required to serve rail heads, as the rail advocates desire, the emissions shed from the additional trucks and transhipping technologies are simply counter intuitive to the goal of reducing greenhouse gases, which is another aspect of the GPS. . The most significant reason the swing towards road freight over the past years has continued to grow, is the improvement in truck payload efficiency. This means, more efficient trucks carry more load reducing the number of truck trips and consequently, reducing emissions per tonne of payload. . Over the past years, efficiency gains through the uptake of HPMVs and MAX have been realised in dairy, logs, livestock, aggregates, and petroleum distribution, as well as general household consumer goods distribution. . RTF finds it difficult to see a future with rail services supplanting trucks, especially when truck transport s environmental performance is continuing to improve with not only improved engine and power train technology, but also improved load management and delivery efficiency. All of this has been achieved without Government intervention by way of subsidies or favourable tax policy. In international transport circles, truck operators are considered one of the most innovative business groups in the world. . Page cites various indicators that are to be measured. We wait with anticipation to see if any of the stated deliverables of more reliable freight routes, more resilient freight routes, reduced greenhouse emissions, and reduced noise and air pollution, will actually come to fruition in a way that is truly measurable. . Section . Strategic Priority: Climate Change; page . . This section continues to feed the desirability of creating an environment where rail and coastal shipping are favoured over road freight. The RTF commented on this in our submission on the Green Freight Project, a background paper on reducing greenhouse gas emissions from road freight in New Zealand through the use of alternative fuel. These comments were Submission on NZ GovernmentMBIE Consultation document: A vision for hydrogen in New Zealand: Green paper. In both these responses to government discussion documents, RTF outlined its views succinctly and benefit in repeating our views here.
. GPS disruption and continuity . . . . Relationship between GPS, NLTP, and RLTP . . . Impact of the continuous programme . . . . Relationship with RLTP . . . .. . Social licencecommunity support . . . . External change factors . . . . . Perceptions and experiences of the investment system . . . Future GPS system stability . . . . Case study: Te Huia train service . . . Overall conclusions and reflections for the future . . . Key findings . . . . . Strengths and limitations . . . . Reflections for Value for Money Framework . . .. . Potential directions forward for future GPS . . . . Reflections on transport investment data analysis . .
. GPS disruption and continuity The degree of stability in investment priorities over successive GPS was described by several interviewees as a factor impacting system efficiency. A sustained period of relative stability enabled system capacity and capability to be developed with confide nce, leading to APPENDIX TRENDS OBSERVED IN GPS OUTCOMES MONITORING
. OiCs and : Supporting works by Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail The Ministry is proposing two OiCs that will streamline and coordinate key approval processes so recovery and rebuild works by Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail can proceed in a seamless and timely manner . These OiCs will be in place until March . The OiCs will make temporary changes to approval processes relating to resource consenting, land acquisition and conservation. These are the key approvals for planning and delivering recovery and rebuild wor ks. Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail will still need to get the approvals required to get started on recovery and rebuild works. The proposed OiCs mean that they will be able to use processes that are simplified or shortened. Table : Prop osed temporary changes Primary legislation Temporary changes Resource Management Act
.pm Speed and Infrastructure P rogramme Nicole Rosie . Standing Item Median barrier update John Baillie
. Relationship between GPS, NLTP, and RLTP Interviewees noted that under standard practice, RLTPs are finalised following the release of the GPS, with timeframes enabling a strategic response at the region al level. However, due to the change of government following the October election, GPS was finalised relatively late in the RLTP and NLTP planning cycle. Because of this, and except for Auckland, there had been limited time for meaningful respo nses within RLTPs. The time officials needed to interpret the GPS may have exacerbated timeframe pressure. For example, one official noted that while GPS had led to a critical discussion by officials, there had been limited time for this to influence RLTPs materially: This essentially just means that there was no significant change in whats being invested in to align with the different focus of the GPS. Youre just rebranding. Whereas given the year that we ideally give Councils to write an RLTP that is aligned with the GPS, they will be much more strategic about what activities theyre bringing forward (Government official) Following the above, several interviews noted that many existing projects were defined or described to fit GPS priori ties rather than projects changing substantially. One official, therefore, described the GPS as having had the most influence within the local planning of existing (rescoped) projects: It is at the planning level where importance is identified then findi ng a way to do it within the activity class structure (Government official) Other comments further illustrate the rescoping process: Councils pick up the strategic priorities in the GPS just relabel activitiesalready in their pipeline eg, rebrand a separated cycle infrastructure project from primarily a safety issue to an access project (Government official) Everyone finds a new box that the same project can now tick what if we do slightly wider shoulders to this motorway and say that we could potentially run buses on them in the future Now its a multimodal projectwe can tick that GPS box even though we havent changed our project at all (Government official) One official observed that the rescoping and selective investment of specifi c local projects to fit national priorities could disrupt the overall coherence of RLTPs: RLTPs provide a cohesive region wide approach the investment system prioritises bits under each activity class on a national basis bits would get included, but then they dont get a cohesive regional whole (Government official). Another official noted that the three year cycle of the GPS was inconsistent with the longer term timeframes under which RLTP were planned and approved: reality is that the GPS and the levers that they want to pull for whatever reason at a political level change every three years whether we like it or not, the strategic direction of a GPS is not much longer than three years .at a regional level if youre saying we want our transpor t network to look like X in years time, you actually start planning those projects years out (Government official) Due to the relatively late development of the RLTP. APPENDIX TRENDS OBSERVED IN GPS OUTCOMES MONITORING
.pm Road Policing Programme Andrew Coster . Standing Item Enforcement update Andr ew Coster
. Expected Percentages and Risk Adjusted Percentages The data tables contain actual and expected (predicted) percentages of both AIO and matched comparison offenders. They also show the risk adjusted percent ages of these two groups reoffending. Expected (predicted) numbers are the numbers of offenders who are predicted to reoffend. They are based on probabilities calculated using a logistic regression analysis using reoffending data on all offenders who would have been eligible for an AIO sentence from to (i.e. the total sample). This analysis involves key predictor variables (age, gender, type of offence, concurrent offences, previous offending history, etc.). Riskadjusted percentages w ere then calculated separately for the AIO group and the matched comparison group. Risk adjusted percentages use ratios of actual numbers of individuals with proved outcomes (i.e. charges proved in court to have been committed) with predicted numbers. These have been calculated to help account for differences in predicted reoffending rates between the two groups which were not accounted for by propensity score matching. This ensures an accurate comparison of reoffending percentages between the AIO and matched comparison groups. For the AIO group, the risk adjusted reoffending percentage is the same as the actual percentage. The reoffending percentages for matched offenders have been risk adjusted to account for differences in the expected reoffending percentages (risk of reoffending) between those receiving AIO sentences and matched offenders. Specifically, the risk adjusted reoffending percentage for this group equals the actual percentage for the matched group multiplied by the predicted percentage for the AIO group divided by the predicted percentage for the matched group. AIO group Risk Adjusted Percentage Actual Matched comparison group Risk Adjusted Percentage (Actual x AIO Predicted ) Matched comp. Predicted
. Full Dataset For AOI eligible offenders from to , Table (Appendix) shows percentages of AIO recipients and non recipients compiled across multiple variables: () Year () Ethnic group () Gender () Age group () Court cluster () Whether first offence or not () Number of previous prosecutions () Number of previous custodial sentences () Number of previous community sentences () Number of charges () Number of previous drink driving charges () Case outcome () Bloodbreath alcohol level
. Perceptions and experiences of the investment system It was beyond the scope of the interview participants in this study to comment on the policy direction signalled by GPS . Nonetheless, in discussing the impact of GPS , participants inevitably commented on policy direction and the investment system overall. These reports are provided and discussed below as they give insight into the experience of stakeholders and may help to inform future action. For example , reports illustrate a range of understanding about the system, clearly reinforcing the importance of open and clear communications about how the system operates. We also note that respondents in this evaluation reflected a range of different perspectives from within central and regional government and between different interests in the transport sectors, each with often diverging priorities with transport funding. This evaluation was able to acknowledge these perspectives and include them for consideration , but we did not seek to resolve nor validate them. One sector stakeholder described the GPS and NLTF as a predict and provide model, which they believed tended to support the status quo or business as usual responses. In a similar vein, a government off icial described the investment model as a bottom up, bid by bid approach. In their experience, this tended to incentivize the investment in things and presented challenges in achieving a more whole of system response that more fully leverages the ran ge of inputs and change levels needed to achieve the intended. For example, while urban development was not a primary lever available within the system, it was highly influential in shaping land transport outcomes. Similarly, the focus on investing in infrastructure and services made it difficult to define and generate investment momentum in demand management strategies. Interviewees made a range of observations about the process of finite investment resources being allocated to discrete activity classes, t his reflects that any GPS is ultimately a decision about where investments are prioritised, and this will often be contested. The prioritisation and allocation process is clearly a factor that can shape stakeholders perceptions of and support for investme nt decisions made. Several stakeholders reflected on the investment decision making process, for example questioning the quality of the analysis and the weighting of evidence used to inform decisions. They raised questions about how BCR analysis was or wa s not being used in decision making. Such comments may be reflective of how the changes to the IDMF are impacting decision making and how different stakeholders are experiencing these shifts. They again reinforce the importance of regularly communicating t he basis of decisions made and the range of factors considered. saying this investment in Kiwi Rail is an investment in road safety, its a highly indirect a small benefit compared to what you could get for that same amount of money put into direct road safety investment (Sector stakeholder) some big road projec ts barely had positive BCR yet cycling and walking projects can have high BCR but dont get political buy in or dont get funded the measure should be used consistently (Sector stakeholder) Some comments illustrated different views and understan ding about policy direction and current strategy. The importance of maintaining an open system, which gives access to the evidence and strategic basis driving investment decisions, is again indicated. APPENDIX TRENDS OBSERVED IN GPS OUTCOMES MONITORING
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
Entity must operate in financially responsible manner The board of a statutory entity must ensure that the entity operates in a financially responsible manner and, for this purpose, that it (a) prudently manages its asse ts and liabilities; and (b) endeavours to ensure (i) its long term financial viability; and (ii) that it acts as a successful going concern.
.. ... . .. . ... ... ... . . . . . . . .. ...... Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar OnTime Departures () OnTime Arrivals () Cancellations () AIRLINES PERFORMANCE, TRANSTASMAN ROUTES, MARCH
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
. The basic principles are Accountability for performance and how funding is used; Fairness entities act fairly and reasonably; Integrity entities operate with the utmost integrity; Lawfulness entities act within the law and meet legal obligations; Openness that the administration of funds is transparent; Value for money resources are used effectively, economically and without waste, with due regard for total costs and benefits.Funding should: . target the achievement of government priorities, the System Strategy Haumaru Tangata Ki Uta Ki Tai, and other strategies within the System . support the aspirations of Mori and uphold Te Tiriti o Waitangi . maintain a sustainable funding model that drives openness and transparency from applicants . encourage collaborative approaches between organisations in the systems including opportunities for shared services between organisations to achieve the greatest impact . provide opportunities for innovation through e.g., seedfunding or trials . provide equity funding i.e., where funding is most needed to cover what is required and what is going to be achieved . promote diversity, reflect and relate to the communities the System serves . support the mitigation of risks within the System.
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
Amounts drawn down will be before final publication
Cabinet also authorised the Minister of Transport to determine matters that arose in
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Te Manat Waka The Ministry of Transport, in collaboration with Waka Kotahi The New Zealand Transport Agency, has reviewed the investment in state highway maintenance to ensure it is giving effect to the Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) in an efficient and effective manner.
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
Indicative strategic priorities for GPS
Measured as travelling less than per cent of the posted speed on local roads. January February March April May June July August September October November DecemberMotorway Network Demand (vehicle kilometres per day) MillionsAverage Monthly Motorway Demand in Auckland Note: Representative of NonPublic Holiday Weekdays RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Auckland fuel use . Fuel use in Auckland declined from , million of litres for the year ending June to , million of litres for the year ending December . . Since December , fuel use has increased slightly to , million litres for the year ending December .
OVERALL CONCLUSIONS AND REFLECTIONS FOR THE FUTURE
Overall conclusions and reflections for the future . Key findings This evaluation finds that attributing influence to any one GPS is complex and challenging, particularly as direction setting, objectives, and outcomes are tempered by the legacy of previous GPS and the interplay of national and regional priorities. Beyond influencing investment decisions, we conclude that GPS influence and outcomes are ongoing and less able to be directly attributed in the short term. This evaluation has highlighted, however, that there is value in exploring the opportunities, challenges, and successes of each GPS, as a long term intervention rather than as a short term initiative and how the transport system and the outcomes it produces are steadily unfolding. This suggests more of a system level monitoring and evaluation approach in the future that tracks and determines the contributory role of each GPS to ou tcomes. Returning to the original objectives of the evaluation, we find that in broad terms: Budget allocations to activity classes are a key change mechanism. To some extent, GPS investments are showing movement towards their intended results, partic ularly in the changes in the mix of investments towards safety, access, mode shift, public transport and active modes. Investment shifts are now flowing through to delivery, but broader outcomes of GPS are yet to be determined. The signals within GPS were picked up in investment decision making by Waka Kotahi and broadly matched the GPS direction across all activity classes except rapid transit, but the timing of the GPS limited its influencealignment in RLTPs outside of Auckland. GPS was a catalyst for a broader understanding of land transport and the land transport investments needed to address transport priorities. The process that unfolds, particularly at a regional level, maybe more of alignment than direct influence. The disruptive na ture of GPS required shifts in demand and supply side system capability and capacity that are still in progress as new skills and mindsets are required to give effect to GPS priorities. The continuity of direction in GPS will continue to build sy stem momentum and should enhance visibility of the contribution of the GPS towards intended outcomes. Within each GPS, relatively small proportions of funds are available for discretionary investment. Increasing costs of maintaining the growing system cou ld place constraints in the future on funding for new initiatives. . Strengths and limitations This evaluation was able to comprehensively review investment decision making and test for their alignment with GPS . In doing so, we were able to explore the significant array of data in a unique way. The quantitative data analysis was complemented by qualitative insights that gave context and a deeper understanding of the opportunities and challenges of GPS influence and contribution. The scope and availa bility of data for this evaluation meant that the quantitative analysis was only able to focus on how funding was spent, not on the efficiency and effectiveness of OVERALL CONCLUSIONS AND REFLECTIONS FOR THE FUTURE
Portfolio work programme update Maritime NZ Project: Critical Changes to M aritime Legislation Ministry of Transport and Maritime NZ officials are currently developing joint advice for you on options for legislative changes . Maritime NZ is also preparing more specific advice for you on challenges arising from the way in which a number of harbourmasters and councils are using their powers under the Maritime Transport Act (MTA). Briefing: Options for Maritime legislation For discussion, this joint MinistryMNZ briefing will set out options for advancing critical changes to maritime legislation. Week ending September Briefing: Changes needed to maritime legislation to address issues arising from the exercise of local navigation safety regulatory powers Dat e: Week ending September
Specifically, we estimate that the odds of crash involvement in the combined period from to of fully licensed drive rs who were aged under years old at the end of were lower for dri vers with advanced certificates and no time discount compared to drivers without advanced certificates, after controlling for differences in driver age, gender, region o f residence, and length of time holding a licence ( pvalue .). Our analysis of in dividual drivers is based on predicting the odds that a driver will be involved in a crash in a given period of time. The odds of being involved in a crash is the probability of crashing divided by the probability of not crashing. For lo w probability event s such as crashes, the odds of crash involvement are similar to the probability of crash involvement, and the results can also be interpreted in terms of crash rates.
TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY A ND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending September
TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDA TES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending September
TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending September
TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending September
TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending September
TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending September
TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending September
TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending September
TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending September
The New Z ealand Road Assessment Programme KiwiRAP is a partnership between the AA, the Agency, NZ Police, Ministry of Trans port and A ccident Compensation Corporation . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
The Transport Records Order will amend the Land Transport (Register of
The differences between NLTF revenue and the expenditure targets reflect debt repayments, which are not part of the expenditure target. Debt repayments are outlined in Appendix A.
TransTasman Ontime performance is reported for services on routes between New Zealand and Australia. This report includes data from the following airlines: Air New Zealand China Airlines China Eastern Airlines Emirates Jetstar LATAM Airlines Qantas Solomon Airlines Virgin Australia. We have only included routes where there is more than one airline operating on that route. There were routes that met this definition during the period reported. . Reports Data was supplied by the airlines and collated by the Ministry. All the airlines that provided data use Aircraft Communication Addressing and Reporting System (ACARS) to electronically measure OTP. After collection of initial data, aggregate reports are subject to internal audit by participating airlines prior to publication. . Definitions Term Definition On time arrival A flight arrival is counted as on time if it arrived at the gate before minutes after the scheduled arrival time shown in the carriers schedule. Neither diverted nor cancelled flights count as on time. On time departure A flight departure is counted as on time if it departs the gate before minutes after the scheduled departure time shown in the carriers schedule.
Transport Orders in Council to facilitate the repair and rebuild Engagement
Upcoming Cabinet papers Committees Cabinet Expenditure and Regulatory Review Tuesday September
Your guide to the Transport System
agreed that the Takitimu Drive toll scheme will exempt drivers from that toll if they are also
https:www.odi.govt.nzdisability action plan the disability action plan RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Recommendation that the Policy Statement ensure national consistency on issues such as the type and length of mobility devices that can be taken on buses. Bus Announcements There is inconsistency throughout the country on bus announcements: some buses provide both visual and spoken stop announcements, while others provide such information only visually or not at all. We believe that the Policy Statement on land transport is the appropriate document for Government to signal a nationwide commitment to the delivery of on bus announcements both visual and spoken. Recommendation that the Policy Statement make a commitment to ensuring that on bus announcements are provided both visually and spoken. Catching the Right Bus Again there is regional inconsistency as to whether people waiting on buses have to signal the b us to stop: this is a particularly risky issue for people who are blind or vision impaired as they cant always tell if the approaching vehicle is a bus or a truck and there are obvious safety issues in expecting blind and vision impaired people to stand at the edge of a footpath with their arm extended into oncoming traffic on the road. The Policy Statement on land transport is an obvious place to inform transport authorities of the Governments expectations on hailing buses. Another area of inconsistency is whether buses have an external speaker system to announce which bus is stopping. This is helpful to many disabled people and again the Policy Statement would be the place to recognise this good practice and signal Governments intention for it to be implemented across the bus network Recommendation that the Policy Statement make it clear that G overnment expects that buses will pull into any bus stop where a person who is using a white cane, guide dog, or other mobility device is waiting. Recommendation that the Policy Statement provide a by which all buses must have external speaker sy stems to announce the number and details of the approaching bus. Total Mobility Scheme We are pleased to see that the Total Mobility (TM) Scheme is mentioned in the Draft Policy Statement. However, supply issues make the TM scheme unusable for many disabl ed people because there are so few wheelchair accessible vans on the road. We need investment that incentivises operators to purchase and operate wheelchair accessible transport.
noted that CIPAs for projects except those noted in paragraphs and above have been
P a g e We consider demand management an essential part of any reduction in environmental harm. In the long term we consider that the introduction of nationwide pay as you drive revenue collection based on time and place of use pricing should be the objective, but in the short term congestion charging is a proven tool for reducing traffic and hence pollution in cities and shoul d be adopted as part of both ATAP and LGWM. We further note that through vehicle registration identification, these systems can also be used to apply emission charging at point of entry to the designated area. In this context we would also support the use of local fuel taxes to provide additional funding for infrastructure to address local problems. Indicators As indicated in the sections above, we agree that the indicators suggested are necessary and appropriate. We reserve judgement as to whether they are sufficient. Investment in land transport Funding We agree with the noted expectations on funding and financing, especially the consideration of captured value offset and targeted funding. We also wholeheartedly support th e principle of optimising whole of life costs and the exploration of alternate financing approaches. We would however note that the there is little evidence to suggest that Private Public Partnerships deliver benefits to the public purse equivalent to the risk borne by the Crown in these contracts and frequently have to be bailed out by the state at a greater cost than had they been fully state funded and financed from inception. We heartily endorse the need for transparency in any alternate financing proposal and explicit disclosure of the trade offs made. Principles for Investing We support the principles of alignment with strategic direction, optimum achievement of GPS priorities (effectiveness) and cost efficiency based on total lifetime costs and the inclusion of all non monetised costs and benefits
taki to North of Levin Detailed Business Case, https:www.nzta.govt.nzassetsprojectsonl new highwaytechnical reportsONL Final DBC board endorsed August .pdf, page . s ()(j) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
(a) as release would be likely to prejudice the security or defence of New
(a) as release would be likely to prejudice the security or defence of New Zealand or the international relations of the New Zealand Government (c) as release would be likely to prejudice the maintenance of the law, including the prevention, investigation, and detection of offences, and the right to a fair trial ()(a) to protec t the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information ()(ba)(i) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely to
(a) as release would be likely to prejudice the security or defence of New Zealand or the international relations of the New Zealand Government ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their duty ()(h) to maintain legal professional privilege ()(j) to enable a Minister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry on, without prejudice or
(a) as release would be likely to prejudice the security or defence of New Zealand or the international relations of the New Zealand Government ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials
(a) as release would be likely to prejudice the security or defence of New Zealand or the international relations of the New Zealand Government ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials ()(h) to maintain legal professional privilege
(b) as release would be likely to prejudice the entrusting of information to the Government of New Zealand on a basis of confidence by
(c) prejudice the maintenance of the law, including the prevention, investigation,
. Appendix: Literature review .. Introduction and scope of this literature review As part of the eval uation of the GDLS, the Ministry of Transport requested a brief review of the empirical literature on the relationship between graduated licensing systems and road safety (i.e. crash rates). The relevant literature is extensive and includes many evaluation s of various aspects of GDLS in various countries. Given the size of this literature, a comprehensive review was not feasible within the scope of this project. Therefore, in this review we focus on summarising the key results of two types of literature: previous empirical studies of the New Zealand GDLS; and international meta studies that summarise evaluations of GDLS in multiple countries. We also briefly review some specific evaluations of GDLS in other countries to give a sense of the different empiric al results obtained in the literature to . This part of the review mainly focuses on literature since . Many existing studies have estimated the effects of introducing a GDLS, that is, the effects of moving from a two stage (learnerfull ) licensing system to a three stage (learnerrestrictedfull) system. In contrast, the objectives of the analysis summarised in this report are to evaluate the effectiveness of the current system and to evaluate effects on road safety of recent changes to that system (e.g. increasing the minimum driving ages). Nevertheless, many of the basic empirical issues relevant for evaluating the introduction of GDLS are also relevant for our analysis, hence the existing literature serves as a useful background and as a complement to the analysis summarised in this report. .. Studies of the New Zealand GDLS Effects of introducing the three stage GDLS Since it was first introduced in , the effects of the New Zealand three stage GDLS on road crashes have been analysed in several studies. The first post implementation evaluation of the effect of introducing the GDLS on crash rates appears to be Frith and Perkins (). They compared trends in crash rates among drivers aged between and with those aged years and older and found that by there was a continuing reduction in the proportion of crashes involving young drivers that could be attributed to introducing the three stage GDLS. Frith and Perkins () also noted that the proportion of crashes involving unlicensed drivers was virtually unchanged after the introduction of the three stage GDLS, suggesting that the new system had not led to higher rates of unlicensed driving. They did however note a significant decline in the number of licenses held by youn g drivers, suggesting that less driving by young people (i.e. reduced exposure to risk) was a key factor behind the reduction in crashes among this group. Another early study was Langley et al (), based on analysis of data on hospital admissions follo wing car crashes. They found that the introduction of a GDLS in New Zealand was closely followed by substantial reductions in car crash injuries for all age groups, especially yearolds, with an estimated reduction in the rate of serious injury crashes for that age group relative to drivers aged and older that could be attributed to introducing a three stage GDLS.
. Auckland Airport strongly supports a process which requires a irline joint venture arrangements to be regularly reapplied for to ensure they are resulting in the benefit to consumers that were promised by the airline operators.
. Key insights from separate contributors were:
. Meeting frequency The group will meet on a bi monthly basis. Meetings will be a mix of online and in person.
. Te Runanga o Turanganui a Kiwa
. We are running a coordinated procurement approach with the Additional Waitemat Harbour Crossing team. The intended outcomes of coordinated procurement are:
. note that the funding agreed on December DEV MIN refers is anticipated to be sufficient to deliver NZUP (with the exception of ONL , MPRL , WPM , and the SAP) , noting that outcome and scope choices will need to be made to ensure that the delivery agencies can remain within approved funding, including on KiwiRails Wellington Rail projects ;
. Drink Driving Reoffending Results There was no significant difference in the risk adjusted reoffending rates for drink driving between AIO (.) and matched group () within one year . (Table below). This could potentially be explained if those not receiving an AIO received a ban from driving for six months or more, but this is unknown, and would take further research to confirm. The AIO group reoffended less than the expected percentage (.) of predicted reoffending rates. The matched group reoffending percentage confirmed the predicted percentage exactly (.). The actual percentages before risk adjustment were . for the AIO group and . for the matched group. Using the actual percentages results in lower relative rate
. Offences that have elements of intention and are inconsistent with the
.pm General Business . Time Permitting All
. Disqualified Driving Reoffending Results Within the first year, after risk adjustment, the AIO offenders had a lower relative rate of reoffending for disqualified driving offences than the matched group (. versus .) (Table below). Chi square significance tes ting showed this result to be significant at the p. level of significance (p value .). The AIO group reoffended less than the expected percentage of predicted reoffending rates. The matched group reoffending percentage was above the predicted percentage. The expected percentages were . for the AIO group and . for the matched group. The actual percentages before risk adjustment were . for the AIO group and . for the matched group. Using the actual percentages results in lower relative rate of reoffending, for the AIO group, for disqualified driving offences than the matched group within the first year. Table : Actual and expected percentage of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for disqualified driving offences, and risk adjusted percentages, after year, by offender group
. Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications Cabinet Deferred TBC
. Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications Committees Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Wednesday October Updating Energy Safety Standards Citations in Regulations The Ministry has been consulted on this Cabinet paper as it will progress a commitment under the Supercharging EV Infrastructure work programme to update the ASNZS Wiring Rules (these set out the requirements for the design, construction and verification for electrical installations). We support the policy direction and have no comments on the content of the paper.
. Redundant offences have been removed, including offences that linked to
. Reoffending for Other (non drinkdisqualified driving) Of fences Results Within the first year, after risk adjustment, the AIO offenders had a lower relative rate of reoffending for other offences than the matched group (. versus .) (Table below). Chi square significance testing showed this result to be significant at the p. level of significance.( p value .) The AIO group reoffended less than the expected percentage of predicted reoffending rates The matched group reoffending percentage was above the predicted percentage. The expected percentages were . for the AIO group and . for the matched group. The percentages before risk adjustment were . for the AIO group and . for the matched group. The actual percentages before risk adjustment were . for the AIO group and . for the matched group. Using the actual percentages results in lower relative rate of reoffending, for the AIO group, for Other (non drinkdisqualified driving) Offences than the matched group within the first year. Table : Actual and expected percentage of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for other (non drinkdisqualified driving )offences, and risk adjusted percentages, after year, by offender group
. Facilitate collaboration Foster crossagency collaboration and relationship with the wider transport sector Ongoing and Ministry of Transports evaluation work programme Update and publish work programme Update and publish work programme Update and publish work programme . Develop capacity and capability Ensure that the sector has access to the right skills and knowledge Ongoing Compiled and developed evaluation templates and tools for internal external use Continue to build on work from previous year Continue to build on work from previous year Continue to build on work from previous year Initiated discussions with Waka Kotahi on a joint evaluation approach Established joint evaluation projects with other agencies Develop processes to ensure relevant agencies are consulted at the early stage of project scoping Continue to build on work from previous year Continue to build on work from previous year Developed and delivered inhouse training exercises to cover the purpose of evaluation and the commissioning process Continue to build on work from previous year Continue to build on work from previous year Continue to build on work from previous year
. Wording has been to match the wording in remade rules and the
. References to the Civil Aviation Act and to civil aviation rules have been
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
.. . . . ... . .. .. ..... . . . . . . . .. ...... Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar OnTime Departures () OnTime Arrivals () Cancellations ()
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
July Tn koe I refer to your email dated June , pursuant to the Official Information Act (the Act) , seeking :
Land Transport Management Act section ()(a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Predicted reoffending percentag es have been calculated using predicted probabilities of reoffending. These were calculated f rom logistic regression models of demographic , current and prior offending factors known to influence the likelihood of reoffending for each AIO and matched offender. Logistic regression models were calculated separately for each of drink driving, disqual ified driving and other reoffending. For example, in Table (reoffending for drink driving), the expected reoffending percentage for the alcohol interlock group is ., lower than the expected percentage for the matched comparison group (.). This m eans the alcohol interlock offenders were predicted to reoffend for a drink driving offence at a slightly lower rate than matched offenders. In other words, using the figures from Table above, the rate for the matched offenders group is being adjust ed to account for the alcohol interlock group having a lower expected reoffending rate.
Term Definition Cancellation A flight removed from service within days of scheduled departure is regarded as a cancellation. The cancellation window starts at midnight days before the flight. For example, if the flight is scheduled to depart at on Monday and is cancelled at or after on the previous Tuesday, it will be counted as a cancellation. If it is cancelled at or before on the Monday prior, it will not be counted as a cancellation. On time departure percentage The percentage of ontime departures is measured against the number of departures operated on any particular sector. On time arrival percentage The percentage of ontime arrivals is measured against the number of arrivals operated on any particular sector. Cancellation percentage The percentage of cancellations is measured against the number of services scheduled on any particular sector. . Caveats and limitations of the data From time to time there could be subtle differences in the way departure time is measured. We are working to harmonise this for future reports. The figures stated in this report refer only to routes within the scope of this report. They do not cover all flights or all routes in New Zealand, or all transTasman routes. Care should be taken interpreting ontime performance for airlines that fly or fewer sectors per month. Due to the small number of flights any delay or cancellation will vary their overall ontime performance considerably.
The Regional Transport Committees Order will revoke the Land Transport
The Regulations will come into force on April . A waiver of the day rule is
These targets are proposed by the Science Based Targets initiative (SBT i) a respected climate science organisation. s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE UNCLASSIFIED Page of in the text of the Strategy . At minimum , we would like to see a commitment to an equitable transition in the revised GHG Strategys Vision . In these discussions, the New Zealand delegation will be guided by the five objectives set out in the equitable transition chapter of New Zealands first Emissions Reduction Plan. This includes seizing transition opportunities; supporting proactive transition planning; enabling an affordable and inclusive transition; building the evidence base and tools to monitor and assess impacts; and encouraging inform ed public participation. The Pacific proposal is for a carbon levy on maritime emissions, revenue from which would be distributed to those States disproportionately negatively impact ed, is framed around the concept of common but differentiated responsibil ities and respective capabilities (CBDRRC) , one of the principles of the Paris Agreement. We are concerned that this principle is open to being interpreted in ways that could see major developing country emitters entitled to revenue streams from this le vy. Our preference is for targeted support for developing countries who need it the most , especially Small Island Developing States (SIDS) and Least Developed Countries (LDCs) , to enable their full participation in the maritime transition . There have also been calls from other member States for a just transition consistent with International Labour Organisation guidelines to suppor t labour force transition (such as capacity building and training for handling new fuels and technologies). Other member States have called for a just and equitable transition which has not yet been defined . Mid and long term measures will also be negotiated in June July Transitioning the maritime sector will require rapid uptake of zerocarbon fuel s and technologies, as well as changes to maritime infrastructure to support a low emissions operating environment. This will require scaling up investment in research and development, production of low carbon fuels and technologies, new infrastructure supp ort, and capacity building. The IMO has committed to develop mid and long term measures to reduce emissions. New Zealand supports the development of a basket of measures to: . make zero carbon fuels price competitive with fossil fuels ; and . reduce the GHG intensity of fuels. These measures also need to provide for an equitable transition for all, particularly for SIDS and LDCs . Presently, the IMO is in the second (of three ) phases of developing mid and long term measures. Phase II invo lves assessment and selection of measures for further
confirmed the previous Cabinet decision to issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary
note that Cabinet agreed to reprioritise funds allocated to the Northern Pathway within the tagged contingency referred to in recommendation to suitable projects CAB MIN. refers note that the Ministers of Finance and Transport support providing million and to support delivery of the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme note that both these projects are not part of the New Zealand Upgrade Programme and that the New Zealand Upgrade Programme is experiencing cost pressures currently estimated at . billion above Cabinet approved funding BRI refers ylqdcxs Out of Scope Out of Scope Out of Scope Out of Scope Out of Scope Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E note that due to the reasons mentioned in recommendation above and given the magnitude of the funding allocations for these two projects, Cabinet approval is sought for the decision to provide funding for the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme
noted that the Ministry for the Environment has been consulted, is confident in the general
s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Programme : Decarbonising Transport SRO Bryn Gandy Ph: Sep Dec Jan Mar Apr Jun Jul Sep
P a g e Making the most of existing transport network We agr ee that optimising the use of existing networks through demand management, behaviour change and land use integration are essential components of any strategy based on the Living Standards Framework. We consider that network charging based on time and place of use is the ideal, but recognise that this will require a substantial investment and so we suggest that it should initially be limited to high demand areas that are easily circumscribed with defined entryexit points. We suggest that congestion chargin g should be a fundamental part of both ATAP and LGWM, integrated with greater availability of public transport, active mode and micro mobility options. We agree that lead investment can be beneficial and should be part of integrated spatial planning in conjunction with local authorities. Dedicated funding for transport priorities We support the hypothecation of the fund to todays transport prio ities Activity class framework We support the inclusion of Rail and Coastal shipping as activity classes to emb ed mode neutrality in the framework. We also support the consolidation of the safety clas es into the Road to Zero class. We consider this latter improves transparency of funding and clarity of purpose. The singular objective of safety prevents gaol transference which we consider occurred where the objective was delivered through road and highway improvement activity classes. We note that travel demand management is to be funded from multiple activity classes. Whilst we understand the logic behind t his, we are concerned that this may lead to uncertainty of funding leading to delay and a loss of clarity in objectives We agree that the separation of public transport into Services and Infrastructure gives greater clarity of investment. We lack the dat a and expertise to comment on the proposed funding ranges. We note the investment expectations to meet Government Commitments to ATAP, LGM, Road to Zero and the New Zealand Rail plan which cross multiple activity classes. We support these commitments as k ey to meeting the strategic outcomes but cannot comment on the relative merit of funding levels. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT May , NZ Automobile Association s ubmission on : Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
. Duration of the Group The CCSLG will exist for the duration of this term of Government.
. Each Party reserves the right to suspend or vary the operating authorisation of an airline or airlines of the other Party immediately in the event the first Party concludes, whether as a result of a ramp inspection, a series of ramp inspections, a denial of access for ramp inspection, consultations , or otherwise, that immediate action is essential to the safety of an airline operation. . Any action by one Party in accordance with paragraph shall be discontinued once the basis for the taking of that action ceases to exist.
. Only the procurement is integrated, there will be separate governance, contracts and teams for each project. A proponent can submit and be shortlisted for both projects but can only ultimately win one. There will be a common evaluation team for both projects.
. The alliance between Air New Zealand and Singapore has been in place since and was reauthorised in .
. The survey asked for feedback for the ETU and ended with a further invitation to provide any feedback the respondents could provide. The feedback was universally helpful, and a number praised the efforts of individual team members.
. You received further advice on these decisions in February (OC T refers) , and: . There is insufficient funding to deliver these four projects to their existing scope and the cost shortfalls are substantive . These projects are earl ier in their project lifecycles, so we consider that there remains a significant risk for further cost increas es as they are further developed. Decisions to begin progressing and investigating the majority of these projects were made in , and the last two years have shown volatility on many fronts, including the fiscal environment. . We note that these projects have some scope for scaling, phasing, and descoping decisions (primarily trading off across the four projects) . However, individual project options may have impacts on outcomes (such as potentially making the programmes overall net emissions positive, rather than negative) . . The remainder of this report refers to NZUP cost estimates that exclude the above four projects. Northern Pathway funding has now been fully reprioritised . The of funding previously allocated to Northern Pathway has now been reprioritised towards other projects: Project Approved Amount (m) Eastern Busway Ashburton Freight Hub . Community Connect . Christchurch Public Transport Futures Northern Pathway Close Down Melling General Cost Escalation Total We consider that funding should be sufficient to deliver most of the remaining NZUP projects to scope, with some exceptions Remaining projects are either in delivery, or have scope choices . Following the December Cabinet decisions DEV MIN refers , the remaining NZUP projects, including the Northern Pathway projects in paragraph above, would be funded to s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv), s ()(j) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(b)(ii) s ()(b)(ii) s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
. note that funding for components of the Wellington Rail projects can be considered in Budget alongside the Lower North Island Rail Integrated Mobility project due to their interdependencies; s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv), s ()(j) s ()(b)(ii) s ()(b)(ii) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
. Departmental Official Information Act requests Due to Requester Requester Summary of request Extended Consultation reports for the draft GPS Extended June Briefings A list of job titles that hold Ministry credit cards and the number of cards shared The Northport dry dock business case Information relating to any planning for minute cities or regional areas in NZ Information on Sustainable Aviation Aotearoa Information surrounding the requesters medical convener tribunal hearing Further information surrounding the requesters medical convener tribunal hearing Internal guidelines on policies, or procedures that relates to neurodiversity, disability, or accessibility s ()(a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
. .... .. .. . . . .. . .. . . . . ... . . . ...... Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar OnTime Departures () OnTime Arrivals () Cancellations () AIRLINES PERFORMANCE, TRANSTASMAN ROUTES, MARCH
.. .. . .. .. ... . . ... . . . . . ..... ...... Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar OnTime Departures () OnTime Arrivals () Cancellations ()
umdw
ghqygg PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Remuneration The ALR Board is classified as a Group , Level Governance Board under the Cabinet Fees Framework. The range for the Chair is between and , per day, and members is between and per day. Given the ALR Projects scale and complexity, the significant skills and experience required to govern and the high profile of the ALR Project, Sponsor Ministers propose a fee exception from the Cabinet Fees Framework. The proposed fee is , per day for the Chair and , per day for Members. While the ALR Board will not be responsible for a compa rably significant budget or organisational environment during the detailed planning phase, its responsibility is to plan a complex project that will provide the parameters for how a significant budget will be spent over the next ten years a decision which carries significant economic, political, social and reputational risks. Progressing the project requires the ALR Board to oversee an integrated transport and urban development work programme, and the alignment of decisionmaking across central government and Auckland Council. Navigating the relationships and decisions required to progress the project across partner agencies and elected members will be a significant challenge. In addition, the ALR Board will need to build and maintain support for the project among communities and businesses in Auckland. As New Zealands most complex transport infrastructure project, the fees paid to the board members will set a precedent. We consider that it would be appropriate to benchmark the fees members of the ALR Board to that of similar bo ards in the sector. The individuals sought to for the ALR Board are of a similar level of skill and experience to the boards we have benchmarked against. The recommended fees are lower than some Government infrastructure boards in the transport and ur ban sector (Kinga Ora, City Rail Link Limited) and equivalent to the daily rates for appointees to the Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency Board. This middle ground balances the complexity, scale and risk associated with the ALR Board in the context of Govern ment pay restraint. Officials are also in the process of preparing advice on the organisational form the ALR entity should take. A change in entity form will require the fees to be reviewed further as they will either sit within a different band of the Cabinet Fees Framework, or outside of the framework if it is under a company structure. For that reason, Sponsoring Ministers intend to review these fees further when advice on organisational form is received. The Minister for the Public Service has been consulted on this proposal, and has confirmed his support for the proposed fee exception.
ghqygg PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT APH Organisation Form Organisation and Responsible Portfolio Brief Outline of the Functions and Responsibilities of the Organisation The Auckland Light Rail (ALR) Board will have overall responsibility and oversight for delivering advice to the Government on how to progress ALR, following Cabinets approval of the Indicative Business Case in December . Key responsibilities include: Overseeing the development, and delivery of, an integrated urban development and transport business case for the ALR project. Ensuring the outcomes sought through the ALR project are achieved through the ALR Units work programme and partnership agreements, including ensuring the project links with other key infrastructure projects in Auckland. Leading the management and oversight of risk and assurance for the project, and providing assurances to Government Sponsors that the project is on track and well managed. Monitoring the ALR Units administration and spending. Appointing the Project Director for the ALR Unit and overseeing their performance. Supporting and enabling the projects wider governance arrangements to ensure collective interests are considered throughout the detailed planning phase. Working with Central Government agencies on the policy work programme that includes development of the entity form for the next stage of the project, funding and financing, and determining the final ownership of the assets created. Leading and facilitating broader stakeholder engagement to build social licence and community engagement for the project. The ALR Board will consist of between five and seven members appointed by Government Sponsors for the ALR Project (the Minister of Transport, Minister of Finance and Minister of Housing).
. Industry ontime performance, domestic routes, March For March , ontime performance for all domestic routes covered by this report was . percent for ontime departures and . percent for ontime arrivals. The cancellation rate for the month was . percent. The route with the highest ontime performance for departures in March was Queenstown Wellington with percent of flights departing on time. Queenstown Wellington had the highest arrivals ontime performance, with . percent of flights arriving on time. Cancellations were highest on the Auckland Wellington route, with . percent of services cancelled.
CBDRRC usually refers to lesser requirements for developing countries on account of their economic status. It is a highly devise concept in the IMO setting and there is no consensus that it should be operationalized through the GHG Strateg y. All of the economic measures currently proposed (flat levy, feebate, fund and reward scheme) will generate revenue which could be used to support the maritime transition. There is significant debate about the use of revenues and how it should be appl ied i.e. in sector vs out ofsector. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE UNCLASSIFIED Page of We are also aware from our interactions with the UK, that they will be intensifying their outreach, including potentia l Ministerial engagement , as part of their broader efforts to preserve the legacy of Glasgow COP outcomes. Officials will be available to help with media queries if your office should receive any. Reducing shipping emissions outside of the IMO In addition to continuing IMO engagement, officials intend to commence work on the domestic actions to reduce maritime emissions committed to in the first Emissions Reduction Plan following the JuneJuly negotiations . This includes developing a maritime national action plan to reduce GHG emissions from ships. The current negotiating mandate also authorises this action with the support of a cross agency team. Responsibility to establish this team rests with Te Manat W aka Ministry of Transport . New Zealand is also pursuing bilateral efforts to reduce emissions from international shipping via green shipping corridors. At COP, New Zealand signed the Clydebank Declaration, which seeks to establish zero emissions shipping on key trade routes by , with more to follow by . We are working with like minded countries like Australia and Singapore with a view to potentially establishing green shipping corridors , with participation from ports, operators, and others along the value chain. While this work aligns with the Governments high ambition agenda on climate change matters and complements work at the IMO to reduce emissions from shipping by creating a platform for demonstration of emissions reduction by early movers , it is challenging to pursue at pace within current resources . We see an opportunity to combine engagement with New Zealand industry on both green shipping corridors and GHG emission reduction measures at the IMO. Next steps, including future updating ou r Cabinet Mandate in future We will update you on the outcomes of the June July negotiations following their conclusion, including where the revised GHG Strategy has landed . Negotiations at the IMO on the development of mid and long term measures to redu ce emissions from shipping will be ongoing . If these negotiations require a revised Cabinet Mandate , we will provide you with further advice , as needed. In late we propose to engage with representatives from the maritime and export industries to discu ss international developments in maritime emissions reduction, including how the possible impacts of potential IMO measures and how green shipping corridors could work in practice. This engagement may inform the New Zealand delegations approach to future IMO negotiations, future advice to you and other Ministers, and the development of maritime initiatives in the second Emissions Reduction Plan .
Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE Recommendations at a glance SECTION FOUR People supporting people . Adopting the Haumata Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Volunteer Strategy and implementing it using the Haumata Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Volunteer Plan to: embed a systematic and sustained approach to support and encourage volunteers and volunteerism provide for a universal and consistent approach to support the NGOs and their volunteers, including: baseline staffing requirements volunteer reimbursements personal protective equipment and gear community engagement and recognition programmes training.
In addition, officials felt some of the material appeared commercial in confidence (see items , , , , and ). Officials propose that such material sent by to you be withheld under the following section of the Act:
Indicative strategic priorities for GPS
Most riders who progressed via CBTA have chosen to use CBTA at the restricted stage an d at the full stage (if they have progressed that far). Very few riders who had progressed to a full licence by the end of used CBTA at only the restricte d stage. See section ..
On May , Auckland Council submitted a proposal to vary the Scheme (the Proposal) . The Proposal is attached for your information. The Proposal arises from Crown investment decisions on transport projects that would have otherwise been partially funded by the Auckland regional fuel tax. In particular, Crown investment decisions relating to the NZ Upgrade Programme and COVID Shovel Ready Programme.
One Network Road Classification: https:www.nzta.govt.nzroads andrailroad efficiency groupprojectsonrc KEY REVIEW FINDINGS The Review Team considered the process underpinni ng the development of the proposed investment levels for each funding period to be consistent with good industry practice. The proposals reflect the influence of external factors, proposed efficiency savings and changes in the balance of maintenance vs. re newal work. Both the and submissions presented a sound analysis of investment required to meet the various pressures on the network, however, greater supporting evidence outside of pavement and surfacing assets is needed going forward. For the period, the Waka Kotahi Board approved an investment level of .B (including emergency works, overheads and administrative expenses) within GPS bands .B and .B. Final expenditure over this period was .b, approximately M mo re than the targeted investment level. This variance is detailed in the observations section below. For the period, the Waka Kotahi Board approved an investment level of .B (including emergency works, overheads, and administrative expenses), within GPS bands funding bands of .B and .B (which will be partly debt funded as part of B borrowings made available by the Crown to support the delivery of the NLTP).
Subject to Cabinet agreement of these Orders in Council I intend to sign the
The Panel recognised that all of the candidates interviewed have impressive skill sets
The Regulations comply with:
These include security decisions made by aviation security officers (rather than the Director); decisions made under the CAAs authority as the designated agency in respect of the aviation sector under the Health and Safety at Work Act (rather than the Act); decisions made to set standards (the IRF only covers decisions made with respect to the application of standards, rather than the setting of standards); and issues relating to nondecisions and the timeliness of decisions, both of which are also not reviewable under the Act. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Option Air New Zealand favoured Option as they viewed this approach would drive more consistency and transparency, and ultimately better regulatory decisions. They submitted that approvals of certain operating specifications (Op Specs) eg changes to operation locations, aircraft maintenance programmes and senior personnel can have a material impact and therefore should be reviewable by the IRF. AIANZ support ed the broadest possible system for the independent review function. They submitted that its members experience most of their problems in areas that involve the application of rule requirements on Op Specs such as approvals of senior person nel changes, new routes or operating locations, technical data, and training courses. The NZ Airports Association submission did not advocate a particular option but raised rule related issues that, as matters stand, only Option could address. In particular, they submitted that the IRF scope should include decisions on location dependent permitted activities such the construction of structures that can impact navigable airspace . NZALPA favoured Option but suggested th ere were grounds for this option to be even broader , by including additional categories of decisions . The bulk of the ir submission focused on its members issues with the medical convener regime (which it acknowledged are outside the IRF scope ) and on the design of the IRF (which is set out in the Act and so is again out of scope). Ardmore Flying Schoo l submitted that Option best aligns with concerns expressed by the sector in submissions on the Civil Aviation Bill. Their s pecific concerns included the impact of decision s on training requirements and syllabus amendments and what they viewed as differing interpretations of the Rules. Follow up discussions with four submitters The Ministry convened meetings with each of NZ Airports Association , Air New Zealand , NZALPA and AIANZ to discuss aspects of their submissions . These discussions clarified that many of the examples of decisions these organisations cited in support of Option (on the need for decisions on Op Specs to be included) had in fact been considered by the Director as applications for exemptions, so would be covered by Option . The discussions also highlighted participants concerns over the timeliness of CAA decision making but, as officials explained, timeliness of decisions is not a reviewable matter under the Act. Some other issues they cited with recent approvals of Op Specs were more about how strictly the Rules are currently drafted, rather than the quality of judgements made by (or on behalf of) the Director in applying them. There are more appropriate avenues for addressing some of the se wider issues . For example, the problems operators cited regarding the lack of flexibility in the Rules would more appropriately be addressed through enhanced stakeholder input into the rule creation and rule amendment processes. We will be exploring this further as part of our regulatory stewardship role. For example, NZALPA noted concerns about the exclusion from Option of a range of security and enforcement decisions, and decisions to delegate functions to personnel and third parties. Inclusion of these w ould not be appropriate as security and enforcement decisions are generally made where there is a need to act promptly to address immediate risks relating to public safety or security ( also, most security decisions are made by aviation security officers rather than by the Director) , while delegation decisions are part of the setting of the operation of the regulatory framework, and so are not made with respect to specific individual regulated parties, aircraft, aeronautical products or services. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Air New Zealand and AIANZ suggested that Option could perhaps be applied with a materiality threshold to reduce the risk of applications for reviews of minor decisions overloading the IRF . Officials noted , however, that designing such a mechanism would introduce subjectivity, complexity and uncertainty to setting the scope of the IRF , with the added risk of judicial challenge s in cases of marginal decisions. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Transport Orders in Council to facilitate the repair and rebuild Engagement
Using NZTAs One Network Road Classification framework (see: https:www.nzta.govt.nzroads andrailroad efficiency groupprojectsonrc ) s ()(g)(i) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Your guide to the Transport System
agreed to deliver the Penlink tolling scheme with two toll points which is estimated to
noted that the Minister of Finance, Minister of Transport and Minister of Climate Change
. Fees and expenses Ministry of Transport
. Providing for a safer, more secure environment for aviation and maritime related industries, commerce, travel and tourism. THE SYSTEMS IN FOCUS AND WHY THEY MATTER Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Social costs averted . We know that millions of New Zealanders and visitors to these shores benefit from recreational safety services each year. While it has not been possible to quantify the social cost averted, they will be significant. . These services include the delivery of frontline safety services on the ground through Coastguard NZ and Surf Life Saving. The number of Coastguard NZ and Surf Life Saving operations are substantial. Over the past four years: Coastguard NZ has undertaken , frontline safety service operations on the water, and Surf Life Saving has undertaken , frontline safety service operations, and , preventative actions . Thousands of people both here in Aotearoa and across the NZSRR have benefited from search and rescue services each year. Over the past four years, the search and rescue system has: saved lives rescued , people assisted , people saved New Zealand over . billion in social costs. Costbenefit in relation to government investment . Funding to support the systems comes from a range of sources, reflecting a line of sight between the funders strategic intent, the services provided, and the beneficiaries of those services. . Government organisations delivering services are funded through their baselines, although in many cases services delivered are secondary to their main purpose. . Nationallybased NGOs delivering dedicated services with broad public benefit operate with multiple sources of funding. Through our work we observe that the level of government funding to NGOs is relatively limited at around percent. This represents significant value for money for the services they deliver and the benefits accruing to New Zealand. Central finding of the Review . The central finding of the Review is that despite the goodwill, effort, and commitment of the organisations in the systems, there are weaknesses preventing them from performing optimally together. There are risks that need to be better managed to avoid a systems failure in the future, including funding needs. . Sections below capture the areas of focus within the Review, the problems and opportunities we explored, and the recommendations to address them. . Sourced from Coastguard NZ. . Sourced from Surf Life Saving. . Direct action taken to reduce or eliminate the probability of a specific rescue, first aid or other reportable incident from occurring. . Sourced from the NZSAR Council Annual Reports to . Social costs calculated using the bases for the Value of Statistical Life. . Appendix provides further information about the importance of the systems and the level of government funding. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Connecting the systems together
. The Minister should only reauthorise this agreement to co ordinate capacity and pricing if analysis shows that there are clear consumer benefits and that it does not risk supressing air capacity to and from New Zealand or drive high er prices for travell ers.
. The survey returns were constructive and provided helpful insights. The ETU has identified several themes, including better engagement, potential workshops and transparency of process. These will benefit from further analysis and engagement with innovators operators. Action has already been taken to initiate this process.
. We are proposing an alliance type model for the UEP. This is appropriate due to:
. We would like to ensure clarity and certainty for market participants to engage and for the delivery process to progress.
. the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi;
. the rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act
. the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act ;
. relevant international standards and obligations;
. the Legislation Guidelines ( edition), which are maintained by the
.... .. . .... .. ... .. ... ... . .. ...... Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar OnTime Departures () OnTime Arrivals () Cancellations () INDIVIDUAL DOMESTIC ROUTES, MARCH
v (a) by an instrument of transfer which complies with this Constitution; or (b) under a system of transfer approved under section of the Securities Transfer Act which is applicable to the Company. . Securities Transfer Act : A Share which is disposed of in a transaction to which the provisions of the Securities Transfer Act apply may be transferred in accordance with the provisions of that Act. Where an instrument of transfer executed by a transferor outside New Zealand would have complied with the provisions of that Act if it had been executed in New Zealand, it may nevertheless be registered by the Company if it is executed in a manner acceptable to the Company. . Other forms of transfer : An instrument of transfer of Shares to which the provisions of clause . are not applicable shall: (a) be in any common form or any other form approved by the Company; (b) be signed or executed by or on behalf of the transferor; and (c) if registration as holder of the Share imposes a liability on the transferee, be signed or executed by or on behalf of the transferee. . Delivery to Company : An instrument transferring Shares must be delivered to the Company or to the agent of the Company who maintains the Share Register, together with such evidence (if any) as the Company reasonably requires to prove the title of the transferor to, or right of the transferor to transfer, the Shares. . Board may refuse to register : Subject to section of the Act (which imposes certain procedural requirements on a board), the Board may refuse to register a transfer of any Share if: (a) the Company has a lien on the Share; (b) the transferor fails to produce such evidence as the Company reasonably requires to prove the title of the transferor to, or right of the transferor to transfer, the Share; (c) the Board has notice of any agreement by the Shareholder to transfer only to some specified person or subject to some specified condition; or (d) the Board, in its absolute discretion, believes that registration of the transfer would not be in the best interests of the Company, but this provision shall not apply in respect of a transfer to an existing Shareholder, provided that the Board resolves to exercise its power under this clause within Working Days after receipt of the relevant transfer and notice of the resolution is sent to the transferor and to the transferee within five Working Days of the resolution being passed by the Board. . When transfer effective : A transferor of a Share is deemed to remain the holder of the Share until the name of the transfer ee is entered in the Share Register in respect of the Share. . Company to retain transfer : If the Company registers an instrument of transfer it shall retain the instrument. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
v (b) any amount which the Company may be called upon to pay under any legislation in respect of the Share, whether or not the due dat e for payment thereof has arrived; and (c) all liabilities and obligations of the Shareholder to the Company, whether solely or jointly with any other person, whether incurred or arising before or after notice to the Company of any equitable interest in any person other than the Shareholder, and whether or not the for payment, fulfilment or discharge thereof has arrived. . Waiver of lien : Unless otherwise agreed between the Company and the relevant Shareholder, the registration of a transfer of a Share shall operate as a waiver of any lien which the Company may have on that Share. . SALE OF SHARES SUBJECT TO FORFEITURE OR LIEN . Company may sell Shares : The Company may sell any forfeited Share, or any Share on which the Company has a lien, in such mann er as the Board thinks fit, provided that: (a) the amount in respect of which a lien exists is due and payable; (b) days have expired since written notice demanding payment of the amount owing has been given to the person entitled to receive notice of meetings of Shareholders in respect of the Share; and (c) before exercising the power of sale, the Board first offers the Share for sale to the holders of the remaining Shares as though it is a new Share to which the provisions of clause . apply. . Proceeds of sale : The net proceeds (after deduction of any expenses) of the sale of a forfeited Share or of any Share sold for the purpose of enforcing a lien shall be applied in or towards satisfaction of any unpaid calls, interest or other amount in respect of which any lien exists (as the case may require). The residue, if any, shall be paid to the holder of the Shar e at the time of its forfeiture or, in the case of a Share sold for the purpose of enforcing a lien, the holder immediately prior to the sale. . Evidence : A certificate by a Director that any power of sale has arisen and is exercisable by the Company under this Constitution, or that a Share has been forfeited on the stated in the certific ate, shall be conclusive evidence of those facts. . Sale procedure : For giving effect to any sale after forfeiture of any Share or for enforcing a lien over any Share, the Board may authorise any person to transfer any Share to the purchaser. The purchase r shall be registered as the holder of the Share and shall not be bound to see to the application of the purchase money, and the title of the purchaser shall not be affected by any irregularity or invalidity in relation to the sale. The remedy of any person having a cause of action in relation to the sale is in damages only and solely against the Company. . TRANSFER OF SHARES . Right to transfer : Subject to any restrictions contained in this Constitution, a Shareholder may transfer any Share: RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
v (b) if determined by the Board, by means of audio, or audio and visual, communication by which all Shareholders participating and constituting a quorum, can reasonably be expected to be able to hear each other simultaneously throughout the meeting. . Exercise of power by meeting or written resolution : A power reserved to the Shareholders by the Act or by this Constitu tion may be exercised either: (a) at a meeting of Shareholders; or (b) by a resolution in writing signed in accordance with section of the Act. . Powers exercisable by Ordinary Resolution : Unless otherwise specified in the Act or this Constitution, a power or right of approval re served to Shareholders may be exercised by an Ordinary Resolution. . MEETINGS OF SHAREHOLDERS . Annual meetings : The Company shal l hold annual meet ings of Sh areholders in accordance with section of the Act. . Special meetings : All meetings of Shareholders, other than annual meetings, shall be called special meetings. . Calling of special meetings : A special meeting of Shareholders entitled to vote on an issue: (a) may be called by the Board at any time; (b) shall be called by the Board on the written request of Shareholders holding Shares carrying together not less than of the voting rights entitled to be exercised on any of the questions to be considered at the meeting. . Time and place of meetings : Each meeting of Shareholders shall be held at such time and place as the Board appoints. . Meetings of Interest Groups: A meeting of the Shareholders constituting an Interest Group may be called by the Board at any time. All the provisions of this Constitution relating to meetings of Shareholders shall apply, with all necessary modifications, to meetings of In terest Groups, except that: (a) the necessary quorum for a meeting is one Shareholder having the right to vote at the meeting, present in pe rson or by Representative; (b) any Shareholder in the relevant Interest Group, present in person or by Representative, may demand a poll; and (c) if the Board so elects, one meeting may be held of Shareholders constituting more than one Interest Group, so long as voting at that meeting is by way of a poll, and proper arrangements are made to distinguish between the votes of the Shareholders in each Interest Group. . Resolution in lieu of annual meeting : It is not necessary for the Company to hold an annual meeting in any calendar year if everything required to be done at the meeting (by resolution or otherwise) is done by resolution in writing signed in accordance with section of the Act. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT v. NOTICE OF MEETINGS OF SHAREHOLDERS . Written notice : Written notice of the time and place of a meeting of Shareholders shall be sent to every Shareholder entitled to receive notice of the meeting, to every Director, and to the auditor of the Company, not less than Working Days before the meeting, but with the consent of all Shareholders entitled to attend and vote at a meeting, it may be convened by such shorter notice, and in such manner, as those Shareholders agree. . Contents of notice : A notice of meeting shall state: (a) the nature of the business to be transacted at the meeting in sufficient detail to enable a Shareholder to form a reasoned judgment in relation to it; (b) the text of any Special Resolution to be submitted to the meeting; and (c) that a Shareholder entitled to attend and vote at the meeting is entitled to appoint a proxy to attend and vote instead of the Shareholder and that a proxy need not be a Shareholder; . Form of resolutions: So far as reasonably practicable, the resolutions to be proposed at a meeting shall be framed in a way which facilitates the giving of two way voting instructions to proxies. . Waiver of notice irregularity : An irregularity in a notice of a meeting is waived if all the Shareholders entitled to attend and vote at the meeting attend the meeting without protest as to the irregularity, or if all such Shareholders agree to the waiver. . Accidental omission of notice : The accidental omission to give notice of a meeting to, or the nonreceipt or late receipt of notice of a meeting by, any person entitled to receive notice, does not invalidate the proceedings at the meeting. . Notice of adjourned meeting : If a meeting of Shareholders is adjourned for less than days it is not necessary to give notice of the time and place of the adjourned meeting other than by announcement at the meeting which is adjourned. In any other case, notice of the adjourned meeting shall be given in accordance with clause .. . PROCEEDINGS AT MEETINGS OF SHAREHOLDERS . Requirement for quorum: Subject to clause ., no business may be transacted at a meeting of Shareholders if a quorum is not present. . Quorum: Subject to clause ., a quorum for a meeting of Shareholders is that number of Shareholders, present in person or by Repr esentative and holding, or representing the holder or holders of, not less than of the Shares. . Lack of quorum : If a quorum is not present within minutes after the time appointed for the meeting: (a) in the case of a meeting called by the Board on the written request of Shareholders entitled to exercise that right, the meeting is dissolved; (b) in the case of any other meeting, the meeting is adjourned to the same day in the following week at the same time and place, or to such other , time and place as the Board may appoint and, if at the adjourned meeting a quorum is not RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT vpresent within mi nutes after the time appointed for the meeting, the Shareholders or their Representatives present are a quorum. . Regulation of procedure : Subject to the provisions of the Act, and except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, the chairperson may regulate the procedure at meetings of Shareholders. . Adjournment of meeting : The chairperson may, with the consent of a meeting at which a quorum is present (and shall, if so directed by the meeting), adjourn the meeting from time to time and from place to place, but no business may be transacted at an adjourned meeting other than the business left unfinished at the relevant meeting. . Adjournment or dissolution of disorderly meeting : If a meeting becomes so unruly, disorderly or inordinately protract ed, that in the opinion of the chairperson the business of the meeting cannot be conducted in a proper and orderly manner, the chairperson, notwithstanding any prov ision to the contrary contained in this Constitution and without the consent of the meeting, may, in his or her sole and absolute discretion and without giving any reason therefor, either adjourn or dissolve the meeting. . Completion of unfinished business if meeting dissolved : If a meeting is dissolved by the chairperson pursuant to clause ., the unfinished business of the meeting shall be dealt with as follows: (a) in respect of a resolution concerni ng the approval or authorisation of a Distribution, the Board may, in the exercise of the powers conferred on it by the Act or this Constitution, authorise such Distribution; (b) in respect of a resolution concerning the remuneration of the auditors, the meeting shall be deemed to have resolved that the Board be authorised to fix the remuneration of the auditors; (c) the chairperson may direct that any other item of uncompleted business, which in his or her opinion requires to be voted upon, prior to the dissolution of the meeting, be put to the vote by a poll without further discussion, in accordance with clause .. . CHAIRPERSON OF MEETINGS OF SHAREHOLDERS . Chairperson : If the Directors have elected a chairperson of the Board and he or she is present at a meeting of Shareholders, he or she shall chair the meeting, unless or except to the extent that the chairperson considers it not pro per or desirable to act as chairperson, either in relation to the entire meeting or in relation to any particular business to be considered at the meeting. . Directors may appoint chairperson : If no chairperson of the Board has been elected or if, at any meeting of Shareholders, the chairper son of the Board is not present within minutes after the time appointed for the commencement of the meeting, or considers it not proper or desirable to act as chairperson, either in relation to the entire meeting or in relation to any particular business to be considered at the meeting, the Directors present may elect one of their number to chair the meeting or that part of the meeting which relates to the particular business, as the case may require. . Shareholders may appoint chairperson : If at any meeting of Shareholders no Director is willing to act as chairperson or no Director is present within minutes after the time RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
v . Multiple registers : The Share Register may, by resolution of the Board, be divided into two or more registers, which may be kept in different places. . Securities other than Shares : The provisions of this section shall apply, with any necessary modifications, to securities of the Company other than Shares except to the extent (if any) provided ot herwise by the terms of issue of such securities or by law. . DISTRIBUTIONS . Power to authorise : The Board, if satisfied on reasonable grounds that the Company will immediately after the Distribution satisfy the so lvency test may, subject to the Act and this Constitution, authorise Distributions by the Company at times, and of amounts, and to any Shareholders, as it thinks fit and may do everything which is necessary or expedient to give effect to any such Distribution. . Form of Distribution : Subject to the rights of holders of any Shares in a Class, the Board may make a Distribution in such form as it thinks fit and shall not differentiate between Shareholders as to the form in which a Distribution is made without the prior approval of the Shareholders. . Entitlement to dividends : The Board shall not authorise a dividend: (a) in respect of some but not all the Shares in a Class; or (b) that is of a greater value per Share in respect of some Shares of a Class than it is in respect of other Shares of that Class, unless the amount of the dividend in respect of a Share of that Class is in proportion to the amount paid to the Company in satisfaction of the liability of the Shareholder under this Constitution or under the terms of issue of the Share, but a Shareholder may waive that Shareholders entitlement to receive a dividend or any part thereof by written notice to the Company signed by or on behalf of that Shareholder. . Deduction of money : The Board may deduct from a Distribution payable to a Shareholder any amount which is due an d payable by the Shareholder to the Company on account of calls or otherwise in relation to any Shares held by that Shareholder. . Method of payment : A Distribution payable in cash may be paid in such manner as the Board thinks fit to the entitled Shareholders or, in the case of joint Shareholders, to the Shareholder named first in the Share Register, or to such other person and in such manner as the Shareholder or joint Shareholders may in writing direct. Any one of two or more joint Shareholders may give a receipt for any payment in respect of the Shares held by them as joint Shareholders. . No interest on Distributions: The Company is not liable to pay interest in respect of any Distribution. . EXERCISE OF POWERS OF SHAREHOLDERS . Alternative forms of meeting : A meeting of Shareholders may be held either: (a) by a number of Shareholders, who constitute a quorum, being assembled together at the place, and time appointed for the meeting; or RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
v . POLLS . Right to demand poll : At a meeting of Shareholders a poll may be demanded by: (a) the chairperson; or (b) not less than five Shareholders having the right to vote at the meeting; or (c) a Shareholder or Shareholders representing not less than of the total voting rights of all Shareholders having the right to vote at the meeting; or (d) a Shareholder or Shareholders holding Shares that confer a right to vote at the meeting and on which the aggregate amount paid up is not less than of the total amount paid up on all Shares that confer that right. . When poll may be demanded : A poll may be demanded either before or after the vote is taken on a resolution. The demand for a poll may be withdrawn. . When poll taken : A poll demanded on the election of a chairperson of a meeting or on a question of adjournment shall be taken immediately. A poll demanded on any other question shall be taken at such time as the chairperson directs and any business, other than that upon which a poll is demanded, may proceed pending the taking of the poll. . Poll procedure : A poll shall be taken in such manner as the chairperson directs and the result of the poll is deemed to be a resolution of the meeting at which the poll is demanded. . Votes : On a poll: (a) votes may be given either pers onally or by Representative; (b) votes shall be counted according to the votes attached to the Shares of each Shareholder present in person or by Representative and voting in respect of those Shares; (c) a Shareholder need not cast all the votes to which the Shareholder is entitled and need not exercise in the same way all of the votes which the Shareholder casts. . Scrutineers : The auditors shall be scrutineers unless they are unable or unwilling to act, or the chairperson of the meeti ng directs otherwise, in which case the scrutineers shall be appointed by the chairperson. . Declaration of result : The chairperson is entitled to declare the result of a poll upon receipt of a certificate from the scrut ineers stating that sufficient votes to determine the result of the resolution have been counted and setting out the basis of that determination. . PROXIES . Right to appoint : A Shareholder may appoint a proxy to vote on behalf of the Shareholder at a meeting of Shareholders. The proxy is enti tled to attend and be heard at the meeting, and to demand or join in demanding a poll, as if the proxy were the Shareholder. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
v . Notice of appointment : A proxy shall be appointed by written notice signed by the appointing Shareholder and the notice shall state whether the appointment is for a particular meeting or for a specified term. The notice shall (so far as the subject matter and form of the resolutions to be proposed at the relevant meeting reasonably permit) provide for two way voting on all resolutions, enabling the appointor to instruct the proxy as to the casting of the vote. . Proxy form to be sent with notice of meeting : The Company shall send a form of notice of appointment of proxy to every Shareholder entitled to attend and vote at a meeting, with the notice convening the meeting. . Proxy form must not name proxy : The Company shall not issue any form of notice of appointment with a proxy named in it, either by name or by reference to an office which that proxy holds, but the Company may indica te in a footnote that certain persons or officers are willing to act as a proxy if a Sh areholder desires to appoint them or any of them. . Production of notice : No appointment of a proxy is effective in relation to a meeting unless a copy of the notice of appointment is received by the Company at its registered office not later than hours before the start of the meeting. . Validity of proxy vote : A vote given in accordance with the terms of a notice of appointment of a proxy is valid notwithstanding the previous death or mental disorder of the principal, or the revocation of the appointment or of the authority under which the notice of appointment was executed, or the transfer of the Share in respect of which the proxy is appointed, if no written notification of such death, mental disorder, revocation, or transfer is received by the Company at its registered office before the commencement of the meeting or adjourned meeting for which the proxy is appointed. . CORPORATE REPRESENTATIVE . Appointment of representative : A corporation which is a Shareholder may appoint a person to attend a meeting of Shareholders on its behal f in the same manner as that in which it could appoint a proxy. . SHAREHOLDER PROPOSALS AND MANAGEMENT REVIEW . Shareholder proposals : A Shareholder may give written notice to the Board of a matter which the Shareholder proposes to raise for discussion or resolution at the next meeting of Shareholders at which the Shareholder is entitled to vote. The provisions of clause of the first schedule to the Act apply to any notice given pursuant to this clause. . Shareholder resolutions : Where the notice to the Board referred to in clause . is given in terms of clause () of the first schedule to the Act or accompanies a request made pursuant clause .(b), and, in either case, states that the Shareholder wishes to propose a resolution at the relevant meeting, then the chairperson of the meeting shall allow Shareholders to consider and vote on the resolution at the meeting. Such resolution shall not be binding on the Board but if the resolution is passed, the Board shall: (a) consider the resolution at the next regular Board meeting following the Shareholders meeting; and (b) no later than one month following that Board meeting circulate a report to Shareholders on the outcome of its deliberations on the resolution. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT v. Manageme nt review by Shareholders: The chairperson of a meeting of Shareholders shall allow a reasonable opportunity for Shareholders at the meeting to question, discuss, or comment on the management of the Company. The Shareholders may pass a resolution relating to the management of the Company at that meeting but no such resolution is binding on the Board. . DIRECTORS . Number of Directors : The number of Directors shall not at any time be more than nine nor less than six. . Shareholding Local Authority : Not more than a total of two members or employees of the Shareholding Local Authority may hold office as Directors of the Company at the same time. . Office to be vacated : The office of Director shall be vacated if the Director becomes a member or employee of the Shareholding Local Authority and there are already two Directors who are members or employees of the Shareholding Local Authority. Where two or more Directors are elected as members of the Shareholding Local Authority at the same election and the effect of that is t here would be more than two Directors who are also members or employees of the Shareholding Local Authority, the Directors so elected to the Shareholding Local Authority shall determine which of them is or are not to hold office as Directors or is or are to vacate membership of the Shareholding Local Authority. In the absence of agreement the matter shall be determined by lot with the losing Director or Directors having the option to relinquish either the directorship of the Company or the membership of the Shareholding Local Authority. . Appointment by Shareholders : Subject to clauses ., . and . a person may be appointed as a Director at any time by an Ordinary Resolu tion or by written notice to the Company signed by the holders of a majority of the Shares which confer the right to vote at meetings of Shareholders. Two or more persons may be appointed as Directors by a single resolution or notice. . Appointment by Board : Subject to clauses ., . and . the Board may at any time appoint a person to be a Director. A Director so appointed holds office only until the next annual meeting of the Company but is eligible for reelection at that meeting. . Existing Directors to continue : The persons holding office as Directors on the of adoption of this Constitution continue in office and are deemed to have been appointed as Directors pursuant to this Constitution. . Rotation of DirectorsTerm of Appointment : No person may be appointed as a Director for a term greater than three years. Any Director may be reappointed at the expiry of his or her term of appointment, provided that no Director may be appointed for more than three consecutive terms.At the annual meeting of th e Company in each year one third of the Directors, or if their number is not a multiple of three then the number nearest to one third, shall retire from office. The Directors to retire shall be those who have been longest in office since their last election. If two or more of those Directors were last elected on the same day, the Directors to retire shall (unless they otherwise agree among themselves) be determined by lot. A retiring Director is eligible for re election. . Appointment of Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson: The Shareholder must appoint the chairperson and deputy ch airperson of the Board. Exceptions to rotation : In determining the Directors who are to retire by rotation at a meeting: RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT va Director who i s retiring pursuant to clause . shall not be liable to retire by rotation at the meeting or be taken into account in calculating the number of Directors to retire; a Managing Director, even though not liable to retire by rotation by virtue of clause ., shall be taken into account in calculating the number of Directors to retire. . Removal : A Director may at any time be removed from office by Ordinary Resolution or by written notice to the Company signed as provided in clause .. . Notice of appointment and removal: Any notice to the Company pursuant to this section appointing or removing a Director must: (a) be signed, or purport to be signed, by the person exercising such right; (b) in the case of joint Shareholders, be signed, or purport to be signed, by all of those Shareholders; (c) if given by a Shareholder which is a corporation, be signed, or purport to be signed, on behalf of the corporation by any director or other person holding equivalent office; and (d) be given to the Company by delivering the notice, or by sending the notice through the post or by facsimile or other electronic means of communication, to its registered office, and may be comprised in one or more separate notices, each signed or purporting to be signed by one or more persons. A notice shall be effective from the time of receipt of the notice by the Company at its registered office. . Vacation of office : A Director ceases to be a Director when his or her term expires pursuant to clause ., or if he or she: (a) is removed from office by an Ordinary Resolution; or (b) dies, or becomes mentally disordered or subject to a property order or personal order made under the Protection of Personal and Property Rights Act ; or (c) resigns by written notice delivered to the Company at its address for service or at its registered office (such notice to be effective at the time when it is so received unless a later time is specified in the notice); or (d) becomes disqualified from being a Director pursuant to the Act; or (e) becomes bankrupt or makes an arrangement or composition with his or her creditors generally; or (f) has for more than six months been ab sent without approval of the Board from meetings of the Board held during that period; or (g) vacates office pursu ant to clause .. . Timing of retirement and appointment : If: (a) a Director retires at a meeting of Shareholders and is not re elected or deemed to be re elected at that meeting, the Director shall remain in office until, and his or her retirement shall take effect at, the conclusion of the meeting; RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT v(b) a Direct or is removed from office at a meeting of Shareholders by Ordinary Resolution, the Director shall remain in office until, and his or her removal shall take effect at, the conclusion of the meeting; (c) a person who is not already a Director is appointed or elected as a Director at a meeting of Shareholders, that person shall take office as a Director immediately after the conclusion of the meeting. . ALTERNATE DIRECTORS . Power to appoint: A Director may from time to time by written notice to the Company appoint any person, who is not already a Director and w ho is approved by a majority of the other Directors, to be that Directors alternate. No Director may appoint a deputy or agent except by way of appointment of an Alte rnate Director under this section . . Rights of Alternate Director : Unless otherwise specified by the terms of his or her appointment, an Alternate Director: (a) is entitled, in the absence or unavailability of the Director who appointed him or her (the Appointor ), to exercise the same rights , powers and privileges (other than the power to appoint an Alternate Director) as the Appointor; (b) when acting as an Alternate Director is subject to the same duties and obligations as the Appointor; (c) is not entitled to be given notice of a meeting of the Directors unless the Appointor has given written notice to th e Company requesting that notice be given to the Alternate Director. . Remuneration and expenses: An Alternate Director is not entitled to any remuneration from the Company in his or her capacity as an Alternate Director but is entitled to be reimbursed by the Company for all expenses incurred in attending meetings of the Directors and in the discharge of his or her duties, to the same extent as if he or she were a Director. . Cessation of appointment : An Alternate Director ceases to be an Alternate Director: (a) if the Appointor ceases to be a Director, or revokes the appointment by written notice to the Company; or (b) on the occurrence of any event which would disqualify the Alternate Director if he or she were a Director; or (c) if a majority of the other Directors re solve to revoke the Alternate Directors appointment. . MANAGING DIRECTORS . Appointment : The Board may from time to time appoint one or more Directors to the office of Managing Director for such period not exceeding five years, and on such terms, as the Board thinks fit and, subject to the terms of any agreement entered into in any particular case, may at any time revoke such appointment. . Resignation : A Managing Director is subject to the same provisions as regards resignation, removal, and disqualification as the other Directors, and if a Managing Director ceases to RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT vhold the office of Director from any cause he or she automatically ceases to be a Managing Director. . Remuneration: A Managing Director is entitled to receive such remuneration for his or her services as an employee (whether by way of salary, commission or participation in profits, or partly in one way and partly in another) as the Board may determine. . REMUNERATION AND OTHER BENEFITS OF DIRECTORS . Power to authorise : The Board may not exercise the power conferred by section of the Act to authorise any payment or other benefit of the kind referred to in that section to or in respect of a Director in his or her capacity as such, without the prior approval of an Ordinary Resolution, except as provided in this section . Each such resolution shall express the Directors remuneration as either: (a) a monetary sum per annum payable to all Directors taken together; or (b) a monetary sum per annum payable to each person from time to time holding office as a Director. . Power to increase : If at any time while the approved remuneration of the Directors is expressed in accordance with clause .(a), the total number of Directors holding office is increased, th e amount of remuneration then payable in accordance with that clause may be increased by the Board by such amount as is necessary to enable the Company to pay the additional Director or Directors by way of remuneration a fee not exceeding the average amount then being paid to each of the other nonexecutive Directors (other than the chairperson). . Notice of proposed increase : No resolution which increases the amount of the Directors remuneration shall be moved at a meeting of Shareholders unless notice of the amount of increase has been given in the notice of meeting. . Payment of expenses: Directors are entitled to be paid for all travelling, accommodation and other expenses properly incurred by them in attending meetings of the Board, or any commi ttee of the Board, or meetings of Shareholders, or in connection with the business of the Company. . Special remuneration : Without limiting clause ., the Board may authorise the Company to pay special remuneration to any nonexecutive Director who is, or has been, engaged by the Company to carry out work in a capacity other than that of Director. . INDEMNITY AND INSURANCE . Indemnity of Directors : Subject to clause ., every Director shall be indemnified by the Company: (a) for any costs incurred by him or her in any proceeding that relates to liability for any act or omission in his or her capacity as a Director or a director of asubsidiary of the Company and in which judgment is given in his or her favour, or in which he or she is acquitted, or which is discontinued; and (b) in respect of liability to any person other than the Company or a related company for any act or omission by him or her in his or her capacity as a Director or a RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT vdirector o f a subsidiary of the Company, and costs incurred by him or her in defending or settling any claim or proceeding relating to any such liability, and this indemnity shall continue in force, despite any subsequent revocation or amendment of this clause, in relation to any liability which ar ises out of any act or omission by a Director prior to the of such revocation or amendment. . Other indemnities : Subject to clause . , the Company may, with the prior approval of the Board, indemnify a director of a related co mpany, or an employee of the Company or a related company: (a) for any costs incurred by him or her in any proceeding that relates to liability for any act or omission by him or her in such capacity and in which judgment is given in his or her favour, or in which he or she is acquitted, or which is discontinued;and (b) in respect of liability to any person other than the Company or a related company for any act or omission by him or her in such capacity, and costs incurred by him or her in defending or settling any claim or proceeding relating to any such liability. . Exceptions: An indemnity conferred by clause .(b), or given pursuant to clause .(b), shall not apply in respect of: (a) any criminal liability; or (b) in the case of an employee of the Company or a related company, any liability in respect of a breach of any fiduciary duty owed to the Company or related company; or (c) in the case of a Director or a director of a related company, any liability in respect of a breach of the duty specified in section of the Act. . Insurance : The Company may, with the prior approval of the Board, effect insurance for a Director or employee of the Company or a director or employee of a related company, in respect of: (a) liability, not being criminal liability, for any act or omission by him or her in such capacity; or (b) costs incurred by him or her in defending or settling any claim or proceeding relating to any such liability; or (c) costs incurred by him or her in defending any criminal proceedings that have been brought against the Director or employee in relation to any act or omission in his or her capacity as a Director or employee and in which he or she is acquitted. . Definitions : In this section : (a) Director includes a fo rmer Director and director includes a former director; and (b) other words given extended meanings in section () of the Act have those extended meanings. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT v. POWERS OF DIRECT ORS . Management of Company : The business and affairs of the Company shall be managed by, or under the direction or supervision of, the Board. . Exercise of powers by Board: The Board may exercise all the powers of the Company which are not required, either by the Act or this Constitution, to be exercised by the Shareholders. . Delegation of powers : The Board may delegate to a committee of Directors, a Director, an employee of the Company, or to any other pe rson, any one or more of its powers, other than a power set out in the second schedule to the Act. . Appointment of attorney : The Company may exercise the power conferred by section of the Act to appoint a person as its attorney, either generally or in relation to a specified matter. Any such power of attorney may cont ain such provisions for the protection of persons dealing with the attorney as the Board thinks fit, and may also authorise any attorney to delegate all or any of the powers, authorities and discretions vested in the attorney. . Ratification by Shareholders : Subject to the provisions of section of the Act (relating to ratification of directors actions) the Shareholders, or any other person in whom a power is vested by this Constitution or the Act, may ratify the purported exercise of that power by a Director or the Board in the same ma nner as the power may be exercised. The purported exercise of a power that is ratified under this clause is deemed to be, and always to have been, a proper and valid exercise of that power. . INTERESTS OF DIRECTORS . Disclosure of Interests: A Director shall comply with the provisions of section of the Act (relating to disclosure of interest of directors) but failure to comply with that section does not affect the operation of clause .. . Personal involvement of Directors : Notwithstanding any rule of law or equity to the contrary, but subject to sections () and of the Act (relating to avoidance of transactions in which a Director is Interested) and section () of the Act (prohibiting a director from acting as auditor of a company), a Director may: (a) contract with the Company in any capacity; (b) be a party to any transaction with the Company; (c) have any direct or indirect personal involvement or Interest in any transaction or arrangement to which the Company is a party or in which it is otherwise directly or indirectly interested or involved; (d) become a director or other officer of, or otherwise Interested in, any corporation promoted by the Company or in which the Company may be directly or indirectlyinterested as a shareholder or otherwise; and (e) retain any remuneration, profit or benefi ts in relation to any of the foregoing, and no contract or arrangement of any kind referred to in this clause may be avoided by reason of a Directors Interest. . Interested Directors may not vote : A Director who is Interested in a transaction entered into, or to be entered into, by the Company may: RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT v(a) attend a meeting of the Board at which any matter relating to the transaction arises but shall not be included among the Directors present at the meeting for the purposes of a quorum and may not vote on any matter relating to the transaction except as provided in clause .; (b) sign a document relating to the transaction on behalf of the Company, and may do any other thing in his or her capacity as a Director in relation to the transaction, as if the Director were not interested in the transaction. . Exception to voting prohibition : A Director may vote in respect of, and be counted in the quorum for the purposes of, a matter in which he or she is Interested if that matter is one in respect of which, pursuant to an express provision of the Act, Directors are required to sign a certificate or one which relates to the grant of an indemnity pursuant to section of the Act. . PROCEEDINGS OF BOARD . Third schedule of Act not to apply : The provisions of the third schedule to the Act (relating to proceedings of a board) do not apply to the Company, except to the extent expressly incorporated in th is Constitution. . Alternative forms of meeting: A meeting of the Board may be held either: (a) by a number of the Directors who constitute a quorum, being assembled together at the place, and time appointed for the meeting; or (b) by means of audio, or audio and visual, communication by which all Directors participating and constituting a quorum can simultaneously hear each other throughout the meeting. . Procedure : Except as provided in this Constitution, the Board may regulate its own procedure. . Notice of meeting : The following provisions apply in relation to meetings of the Board (except where otherwise agreed by a ll Directors in relation to any particular meeting or meetings or as provided in clause .): (a) Not less than two clear days notice of a meeting of the Board shall be sent to each Director, unless: (i) the Director waives that right; or (ii) the issue which is to be the subject of the meeting is, in the reasonable opinion of a majority of the Directors, a matter of urgency, in which event such notice as is practicable in the circumstances shall be given. (b) Notice to a Director of a meeting of the Board may be: (i) given to the Director in person by telephone or other oral communication; (ii) delivered to the Director; (iii) posted to the address given by the Director to the Company for such purpose; RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT v(iv) sen t by facsimile transmission to the facsimile telephone number given by the Director to the Company for such purpose; or (v) sent by electronic means in accordance with any request made by the Director from time to ti me for such purpose. (c) It is not necessary to give notices of meetings to an alternate Director, unless the Director who appointed that person has given written notice to the Company requiring that such notices be given. (d) A notice of meeting shall specify the , time and place of the meeting and, in the case of a meeting by means of audio, or audio and visual, communication,the manner in which each Director may participate in the proceedings of the meeting. (e) A notice of meeting given to a Director pursuant to this clause is deemed to be given: (i) in the case of oral communication, at the time of notification;(ii) in the case of delivery, by handing the notice to the Director or by delivery of the notice to the address of the Director; (iii) in the case of posting, three days after it is posted;(iv) in the case of facsimile transmission, when the Company receives a transmission report by the sending machine which indicates that the facsimile was sent in its entirety to the facsimile telephone number given by the Director; (v) in the case of electronic means, at the time of transmission. . Director may convene meeting : Without limiting the provisions of clauses . or ., a Director has the right at any time to convene a meeting of the Board, or to require an employee of the Company to convene a meeting of the Board, at the registered office of the Company or at the place where the meetings of the Board for the time being are customarily held, by giving not less than seven days written notice signed by or on behalf of the Director to each of the other Directors stating the , time and place of the meeting and the matters to be discussed. . Waiver of notice irregularity : An irregularity in the giving of notice of a meeting is waived if each of the Directors either attends the meeting without protest as to the irregularity or agrees (whether before, during, or after the meeting) to the waiver. . Quorum : A quorum for a meeting of the Board is the greater of four Directors and such number of Directors as represents a majority of the Directors. No business may be transacted at a meeting of Directors if a quorum is not present. . Insufficient number of Directors : The Directors may act notwithstanding any vacancy in their body, but if and so long as the number of Directors holding office is less than the minimum number fixed by clause . only for the purpose of increasing the number of Directors to that number or of summoning a meeting of the Shareholders. . Chairperson: If at any meetings of the Board: RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT va) no ch airperson is appointed, the Directors present may choose one of their number to be chairperson of the meeting; b) a chairpe rson has been appointed, but that chairperson is not present within minutes after the time determined for the commencement of the meeting, the deputy chairperson will be the chairperson of the meeting; or a)c) both the ch airperson and deputy chairperson are not present within minutes after the time determined for the commencement of the meeting, the Directors present may choose one of their number to be chairperson of the meeting. Election of chairperson : The Directors may from time to time elect a chairperson and (if they think fit) a deputy chairperson, of their meetings, and determine the period for which they respectively are to hold office. The chairperson, or failing the chairperson the deputy chairperson (if any), sha ll preside at all meetings of the Directors but if no such chairperson or deputy chairperson is elected, or if at any meeting the chairperson or deputy chairperson is not present within minutes after the time appointed for holding the meeting, the Directors present may choose one of their number to be chairperson of the meeting. .. Voting : Every Director has one vote. Subject to clause ., the chairperson has a casting vote provided t hat a quorum is present and entitled to vote at the meeting. A resolution of the Board is passed if it is agreed to by all Directors present without dissent, or if a majority of the votes cast on it are in favour of the resolution. A Director pres ent at a meeting of the Board is presumed to have agreed to, and to have voted in favour of, a resolution of the Board unless he or she expressly dissents from or votes against, or expressly abstains from voting on, the resolution at the meeting. .. Chairperson to have a casting vote : The Chairperson has a casting vote at a meeting of the Board unless the quorum consists only of: (a) two Directors who are members or employees of a Shareholding Local Authority; and (b) two Directors who are not members or employees of a Shareholding Local Authority; and the Chairperson is a Director who is a me mber or employee of a Shareholding Local Authority. . Written resolution : A resolution in writing, signed or assented to by a majority of two thirds or more of the Directors, or if the number of Directors is not a multiple of three then by the number nearest to two thirds, is as valid and effective as if passed at a meeting of the Board duly convened and held. Any such resolution may consist of several documents (including facsimile or other similar means of communication) in similar form, each signed or assented to by one or more Directors. A copy of any such resolution shall be entered in the Records. The Company shall, within seven days after any resolution is passed in accordance with this clause, send a copy of the resolution to each Director who has not signed or assented to the resolution. . Committees : A committee of Directors shall, in the exercise of the powers delegated to it, comply with any procedural or other requirements imposed on it by the Board. Subject to any such requirements, the provisions of this Constitution RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT vrelating to proc eedings of Directors apply, with appropriate modification, to meetings of a committee of Directors. . Validity of actions : The acts of a person as a Director are valid even though the persons appointment was defective or the person is not qualified for appointment. . Minutes: The Board shall ensure that minu tes are kept of all proceedings at meetings of the Shareholders and of the Board. Minutes which have been signed correct by the chairperson of the meeting are prima facie evidence of the proceedings. . METHOD OF CONTRACTING . Deeds: A deed which is to be entered into by the Company may be signed on behalf of the Company, by: (a) two or more Directors; or (b) any one Director, together with the chief executive or the secretary of the Company whose signature must be witnessed. . Other written contracts : An obligation or contract which is required by law to be in writing, and any other written obligation or contract which is to be entered into by the Company, may be signed on behalf of the Company by a person acting under the express or implied authority of the Company. . Other obligations : Any other obligation or contract may be entered into on behalf of the Company in writing or orally by a person acting under the express or implied authority of the Company. . INSPECTION OF RECORDS . Inspection by Directors : Subject to section () of the Act (which relates to the power of a court to limit inspection), all accounting and other records of the Company shall be open to the inspection of any Director. . Inspection by Shareholders : No Shareholder who is not also a Director is entitled to inspect any accounting or other records of the Company except as expressly authorised by law or permitted by the Board. Subject to the provisions of section of the Act (which permits inspection of certain records by Shareholders) the Board may from time to time determine whether, to what extent, at what times and places, and under what conditions, the accounting or other records of the Company or any of them are open to the inspection of Shareholders (who are not also Directors). . NOTICES . Method of service : All notices, reports, accounts and other documents required to be sent to a Shareholder, shall be sent in the manner provided in section of the Act. . Service of notices overseas : If the holder of a Share has not given to the Company an address within New Zealand for the giving of notices, but has supplied an address outside New Zealand, then notices shall be posted to that holder at such international address and shall be deemed to have been received by that holder hours after the time of posting. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT v. Accide ntal omissions : The failure to send an annual report, notice, or other document to a Shareholder in accordance with the Act or this Constitution does not invalidate the proceedings at a meeting of Shareholders if the failure to do so was accidental. . Joint Shareholders : A notice may be given by the Company to joint Shareholders by giving the notice to the joint Shareholder named first in the Share Register in respect of the Share. . Waiver by Shareholders: Subject to section of the Act (which requires financial statements to be sent to Shareholders who elect not to receive annual reports), a Shareholder may from time to time, by written notice to the Company, waive the right to receive all or any documents from the Company and may at any time thereafter revoke the waiver in the same manner. While any waiver is in effect, the Company need not send to the Shareholder the documents to which the waiver relates. . AUDIT . The auditors of the Company shall be the AuditorGeneral as provided in section of the Port Companies Act . . LIQUIDATION . Distribution of assets : If the Company is liquidated the liquidator may, with the approval of Shareholders and any other sanction required by the Act: (a) divide among the Shareholders in kind the whole or any part of the assets of the Company (whether they consist of property of the same kind or not) and may for that purpose fix such value as the liquidator deems fair in respect of any property to be so divided, and may determine how the division shall be carried out as between Shareholders or between different Classes; and (b) vest the whole or any part of any such a ssets in trustees upon such trusts for the benefit of the persons so entitled as the liquidator thinks fit, but so that noShareholder is compelled to accept any shares or other securities on which thereis any liability. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT APPENDIX RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Private Bag , Parliament Buildings, Wellington , New Zealand k.allanministers.govt.nz beehive.govt.nz To: Ports of Auckland Limited Background:
v . Procedure for issue of new Shares and other securities : The Board may, with the approval of Shareholders by Special Resolution, issue New Equity Securities in accordance with the following provisions: (a) Subject to the provisions of the resolution of Shareholders and to any special rights or restrictions attaching to any existing Shares, all New Equity Securities must be offered to the Shareholders in proportion to the number of existing Shares held by them. (b) The offer must be made by written noti ce to each Shareholder stating: (i) the number of New Equity Securities to which that Shareholder is entitled; (ii) the consideration for which the New Equity Securities will be issued and the terms on which they will be issued; (iii) the time (not being less than days nor more than days) within which the offer, if not accepted, will be deemed to be declined; (iv) that any Shareholder who wishes to acquire New Equity Securities in excess of that Shareholders entitlement must, when accepting the offer, state the number of excess New Equity Securities which that Shareholder wishes to acquire; (v) that any unclaimed New Equity Securities will be used for satisfying the requests for excess Ne w Equity Securities, up on the basis that the unclaimed New Equity Securities will be allocated to the Shareholders requesting excess New Equity Securities in proportion to their existing shareholdings in the Company, but no Shareholder shall be allocated more excess New Equity Securities than the number which that Shareholder has requested; and (vi) that if, thereafter, any New Equi ty Securities rema in unallocated, the Board may offer them to any person whom the Board is prepared to register as a Shareholder provided that the consideration and terms of issue are no more advantageous to that person than those offered to the Shareholders. (c) If any holders of securities other than Shares are entitled by the terms of issue of those securities to participate in any issue of New Equity Securities, the provisions of this clause shall be appropriately modified to take account of such entitlement. . Bonus issues : The Board may resolve to apply any amount which is available for Distribution either: (a) in paying up in full Shares or other securities of the Company to be issued credited as fully paid to: (i) the Shareholders who would be entitled to that amount if it were distributed by way of dividend, and in the same proportions; and (ii) if applicable, the holders of any other securities of the Company who are entitled by the terms of issue of such securities to participate in bonus issues by the Company, whether at the time the bonus issue is RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
v . EQUITABLE INTERESTS IN SHARES . No notice of trusts : No notice of a trust, whether express, implied, or constructive, may be entered on the Share Register. . No recognition of equitable interests : Except as required by law or by this Constitution, no person shall be recognised by the Company as holding any Share upon trust and the Company shall not be bound by, nor be compelled to recognise (even after notice), any equitable, contingent, future or partial interest in any Share, or any interest in any fraction or part of a Share or (except as provided by this Constitution or by law) any other rights in respect of any Share, except an absolute right of the registered holder to the entire Share. . CALLS ON SHARES . Board may make calls : The Board may, from time to time, make such calls as it thinks fit upon the Shareholders in respect of any amounts unpaid on any Shares held by them which are not made payable at fixed times by the terms of issue of those Shares. A call may be made payable by instalments. The Board may revoke or postpone any call. . Time of call : A call is deemed to be made at the time when the resolution of the Board making the call is passed. . Fixed instalments deemed calls: An amount which, by the terms of issue of a Share, is payable on allotment or at a fixed is deemed for the purposes of this Constitution to be a call duly made and payable on the on which the amount is payable. . Notice of call : At least days notice of any call shall be given to the holder of the Share in respect of which the call is made, specifying the time and place of payment. . Differential calls : The Board may, on the issue of Shares, differentiate between the Shareholders as to the amounts to be paid in respect of the Shares and the times of payment of such amounts. . Manner of payment : A Shareholder by whom a call is payable shall pay the amount of the call to the Company at the time and pl ace specified by the Board. . Joint Shareholders : Joint Shareholders are jointly and severally liable to pay all calls in respect of Shares registered in their names. . Default interest : If a call in respect of a Share is not paid on or before the due , the Shareholder by whom the call is payable shall pay interest on the call from the due to the of actual payment at such ra te as the Board determines, unless the Board waives payment of interest wholly or in part. . Proceedings for recovery of call : In any proceedings fo r recovery of a call: (a) it is sufficient to prove that: (i) the name of the relevant Shareholde r is entered in the Share Register as the holder, or one of the holders, of the Shares to which the call relates; and (ii) except in relation to any amount which, by the terms of issue of a Share, is payable on allotment or at a fixed , the resolution making RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT vthe call is ent ered in the Records and notice of the call has been duly given, and proof of the matters mentioned in this clause is conclusive evidence of the debt; and (b) it is not necessary to prove the appointment or qualification of any member of the Board which made the call nor any other matter. . Payment in advance of calls : The Company may receive from any Shareholder in advance any amount uncalled and unpaid upon any Shares held by that Shareholder and may, until the on which the amount becomes payable pursuant to a call, pay interest on the am ount at such rate as the Board and the Shareholder agree. . Cancellation of unpaid amounts : No obligation to pay any amount which is unpaid on any Shares shall be cancelled, reduced or deferred without the authority of an Ordinary Resolution. . FORFEITURE OF SHARES . Notice requiring payment of call : If a Shareholder fails to pay any call or instalment of a call on the due , the Company may at any ti me thereafter by written notice to that Shareholder require payment of the amount unpaid together with any accrued interest and all expenses incurred by the Company by reason of such nonpayment. . Contents of notice : The notice shall specify a further (not earlier than days after the of service of the notice) on or before which the payment is to be made, and shall state that, if payment is not made by the specified , the Share in respect of which the call or instalment of a call is due, is liable to be forfeited. . Forfeiture for nonpayment : If payment is not made by the specified in the notice then, at any time thereafter before the payment required by the notice has been made, any Share in respect of which the notice has been given may be forfeited by a resolution of the Board to that effect. The forfeiture shall include all Distributions declared in respect of the forfeited Share and not paid before the forfeiture. . Notice of forfeiture : When a Share has been forfeited, the Company shall give notice of the resolution to the Shareholder in whose name the Share stood immediately prior to the forfeiture, and shall enter in the Share Register details of the forfeiture. . Cancellation of forfeiture : A forfeiture may be cancelled at any time before the sale of the forfeited Share, on such terms as the Board thinks fit. . Effect of forfeiture : The holder of a Share which has been forfeited ceases to be a Shareholder in respect of the forfeited Share, but remains liable to the Company for all money payable in respect of the forfeited Share. . LIEN ON SHARES . Lien on Shares : The Company has a first and paramount lien upon each Share, the proceeds of sale of the Share, and all Distributions made in respect of the Share, for: (a) all unpaid calls owing in respect of the Share and interest thereon (if any); and RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
v appointed for the commencement of the meeting, the Shareholders present may choose one of their number to chair the meeting. . VOTING AT MEETINGS OF SHAREHOLDERS . Voting at meeting in one place : In the case of a meeting of Shareholders held under clause .(a), unless a poll is demanded in accordance with clause ., the chairperson of the meeting shall determine whether voting will be by voice or by show of hands. . Voting at audiovisual meeting : In the case of a meeting of Shareholders held under clause .(b), unless a poll is demanded in accordance with clause ., voting at the meeting shall be by the Shareh olders signifying individually their assent or dissent by voice. . Postal votes : Unless the Board determines otherwise, Shareholders may not exercise the right to vote at a meeting by casting postal votes. If the Board determines that postal voting will be permitted at a meeting, the provisions of clause of the first schedule to the Act shall apply, with such modifications (if any) as the Board thinks fit. . Entitlement to vote : A Shareholder may exercise the right to vote either in person or by Representative. . Number of votes : Subject to clause . and to any rights or restrictions for the time being attached to any Share: (a) where voting is by show of hands or by voice every Shareholder present in person or by Representative has one vote; (b) on a poll every Shareholder present in person or by Representative has: (i) in respect of each fully paid Share held by that Shareholder, one vote; (ii) in respect of each Share held by that Shareholder which is not fully paid, a fraction of the vote or votes which would be exercisable if that Share were fully paid equivalent to the proportion w hich the amount paid (excluding amounts credited as paid) on that Share bears to the total amount paid and payable thereon (excluding amounts credited as paid and amounts paid in advance of calls). . Declaration by chairperson : A declaration by the chairperson of a meeting that a resolution is carried by the requisite majority is conclusive evidence of that fact unless a poll is demanded in accordance with clause .. . Chairpersons casting vote: The chairperson of a meeting of Shareholders is not entitled to a casting vote. . Joint Shareholders: Where two or more persons are registered as joint Shareholders, the vote of the person named first in the Share Register and voting on a matter must be accepted to the excl usion of the votes of the other joint holders. . RESTRICTIONS ON VOTING . No vote when amount owing on Share : A Shareholder is not entitled to vote at any meeting of Shareholders (including a meeting of an Interest Group) in respect of any Share if any amount is due and payable on that Share by the Shareholder to the Company. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
v made to the Shareholders, or at some later time, in accordance with their respective entitlements; or (b) in paying up any amount which is unpaid on any Shares held by the Shareholders referred to in clause .(a)(i), or partly in one way and partly in the other. . Shares in lieu of dividends: The Board may exercise the right conferred by section of the Act to issue Shares to any Shareholders who have agreed to accept the issue of Shares, wholly or partly, in lieu of proposed dividends or proposed future dividends. . Fractional entitlements : The Board may, in exercising any powers pursuant to this section, deal with fractional entitlements to Shares or other securities in such manner as the Board considers equitable and in the interests of the Company. . ALTERATION OF SHAREHOLDER RIGHTS . Procedure in respect of Shares : The Company shall, before taking action affecting the rights attached to any Shares, comply with the provisions of sections and of the Act. . Issue of further Shares : For the purposes of clause ., the issue of further Shares which rank equally with, or in priority to, any existing Shares, whether as to voting rights, Distributions or otherwise, is deemed not to be action affecting the rights attaching to those existing Shares. . ACQUISITION OF COMPANYS OWN SHARES . Powers to acquire, redeem and hold Securities : The Company may purchase or otherwise acquire Shares from one or more Shareholders in accordance with the provisions of the Act and may, subject to any requirements or restrictions imposed by law, hold any Shares so purchased or acquired. A transfer by the Company of any Shares so held by it is deemed to be an issue of new Shares to which the provisions of clause . apply. . SHARE CERTIFICATES . Issue of Share certificates: The Company may issue Share certificates in respect of all or any Shares and must, within Working Days after receiving an application by a Shareholder, send to that Shareholder a Share certificate, in accordance with section of the Act. . Replacement Share certificates : The Company: (a) may issue a replacement certificate for an y Share certificate that is worn out or defaced; and (b) shall issue a replacement Share certificate for one that has been lost or destroyed, subject to satisfactory proof of that fact, payment of the reasonable expenses of the Company and, if so required by the Board, an appropriate indemnity being given to the Company. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
v Representative means: (a) a person appointed as a proxy under section ; or (b) a representative appointed by a corporation under section .
Advice to Sponsoring Ministers on a Project Planning Agreement, necessary for the establishment of the Schedule Crown Company Process initiated to invite nominations for mana whenua sponsors representation MRT IBC finalised and reported to the Whakawhanake Kinga Committee. Advice provided to Minister on preferred way forward. Public consultation on MRT Stage and of the MRT IBC Cabinet paper provided to Sponsoring Ministers agreeing to establish a Schedule Crown Entity Company s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv)
Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE SECTION SIXSECTION FIVE Funding . Preparation of business cases in the next available government funding rounds to provide: a. baseline funding for NGOs to support the level of services within the System that provide broad public benefits nationally, and b. additional funding required by NGOs to support their volunteers (as identified through the Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Volunteer Plan), and c. additional support to funders within the System supporting recreationbased NGOs and smaller communitybased groups delivering recreational safety services. . Fixed assets for the NGOs to be funded by government on a casebycase basis through the appropriate funding source.. Te Manat Waka to confirm the set of funding principles developed through the Review to guide government funding into the System, to deliver Systemwide outcomes. . The System Steward, once established: a. builds sustained relationships with funders who support the System and the delivery of System outcomes through the funds they provide, and b. maintains longterm insights through an awareness of the sources and levels of funding available to the System. . Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE SECTION SEVEN SECTION HEADING HERE Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Setting the scene
September Rail Regulatory Officials to provide advice on options to: By Wednesday October s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv)
Table one presents the projects assigned regional fuel tax funding before Crown investment and the resulting freed up regional fuel tax revenue.
The Regulations do not include any Treaty of Waitangi provisions and advice was
With respect to the chair candidates strengths were: The Panel suggests that if Ministers do not support their recommendation to proceed with as chair, additional interviews with the other candidates are conducted to probe their abilities and values andor further searching for new candidates is undertaken. s ()(a), s ()(g)(i) s ()(a), s ()(g)(i) s ()(a), s ()(f)(iv) s ()(a) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT UNCLASSIFIED Page of IN CONFIDENCE We consider the confli cts of interest relating to both preferred candidates are manageable Given the type of c andidates sought for the ALR Board, it was inevitable that some individuals would have conflicts of interest. Some conflicts have been assessed as manageable while others are considered as less manageable. An assessment of how this conflict, and others for the preferred candidates, are set out below. The identified conflicts are considered to be manageable. In addition to this assessment, formal disclosures of interests will be sought following ministerial direction on preferred candidates. s ()(a), s ()(g)(i) s ()(f)(iv), s ()(g)(i) s ()(a), s ()(g)(i) Page is withheld in full. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT UNCLASSIFIED Page of IN CONFIDENCE Next Steps Should you agree with our recommendations, we will provide you with the necessary paperwork for Cabinets Appointment and Honours Committee (APH) to consider these appointments at the APH meeting on April . We intend to provide y ou with the paperwork this week so that Ministerial consultation can commence as soon as practicable. Given the time constraints between now and the expected lodgement for the APH p aper ( April ), we recommend you authorise the Minister of Transport to commence Ministerial consultation of the proposed appointments upon his approval of the paperwork. To ensure transparency amongst candidates being put forward, we also recommend you agree to us informing each preferred candidate of the proposed appointments to be taken forward to Cabinet. This ensures the preferred candidates can make an informed decision when consenting to being appointed. Ministerial consultation will also need to take place without clarity of the Minister for the Public Services view on the proposed fee exception, and without complete information from the due diligence of candidates. These pieces of information cannot be obtained before the Cabinet paper is submitted to your office. Completion of these tasks will be undertaken in parallel to Ministerial consultation, with a view that the information will be inputted upon lodgement of the paperwork with Cabinet. Should any significant concerns be raised, we will engage with your offices as soon as possible. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT UNCLASSIFIED Page of IN CONFIDENCE SECTION B: REVISED ALR BOARD FEE EXCEPTION Proposal to ALR Board Fees Sponsor Ministers received advice on a proposed fees exception for ALR Board Members (OC T BRF). The fees proposed were , for the chair and , for members. Sponsor Ministers did not approve this fee proposal and directed officials to rework the proposal. Sponsor Ministers provided the following feedback. . The fee proposed for the members is appropriate, the fee proposed for the chair was too high and should be brought into line with what chairs at City Rail Li nk Limited (CRLL) and Kinga Ora. . Sought clarification as to why the chair is the senior responsible officer (SRO). . The time commitments of the chair and the impact of this on the annual rate paid, were both higher than expected. Officials considered options for where the role of the SRO was best placed in the organising model and advised Ministers in January (OC T). The purpose of the SRO is to be ultimately accountable for the delivery of the project and for ensuring the project meets its objectives, delivers the projected outcomes, and realises the required benefits. In the context of the detailed planning phase this would be the delivery of the business case to inform Crown and council decision making, including final investment decision s. Ministers agreed that the SRO would be the chair of the board for the following reasons, and that this should be reassessed once the new permanent entity has been stood up. . The chair has the most direct line of accountability between the Project Director and Sponsors. A senior official from a sponsor agency does not have this direct line of accountability as the Project Director does not report to them. . The chair would have the greatest capacity to identify and direct resources as required to ensure project milestones and outcomes are achieved and can do so across the breadth of project outcomes (such as urban development and transport). Being both the chair and SRO will place a greater demand on the chairs time. The current chair has indicated a workload of approximately days a month. For the new chairSRO role we have factored in up to days per month across the first months. This is a high estimate and ensures budget is available to meet the demands of the role. It is common for establishment boards to receive a slightly higher overall fee as there is more work involved at the start. The expectation is that the workload of the ALR Board Chair will drop once the new permanent entity is stood up, to be more inline with the typical allocation of working days for a Crown Board under the Cabinet Fees Framework. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT UNCLASSIFIED Page of IN CONFIDENCE The higher workload of the ALR Board C hair is what makes the annual rate considerably greater than CRLL and Kinga Ora counterparts. The annual fee of these chairs has been calculated off an assumed day workload. Acknowledging there remains a strong case for a fee exception for the ALR Board Members, and taking into account the feedback from Sponsors Ministers, we propose a reworked fee of for the ALR chair and for ALR members. This brings the ALR fees in line with the day rates of those for CRLL and Kinga Ora. Should you agree to this fee proposal, you will need to agree to send the letter attached at Appendix Three to the Minister for the Public Service, seeking agreement to this proposal. We expect the proposed fee will be referred to the Appointment and Honours Committee alongside the recommendations on preferred candidates to take on the priority ALR Board roles. Given current timings, it is likely the fee exception will not be included in the APH paper for ministerial consultation, due to begin on April. Section C is withheld in full. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT UNCLASSIFIED Page of IN CONFIDENCE SECTION D: NATIONAL POLICY STATEMENT ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT Update on National Policy Statement on Urban Development The Resource Management (Enabling Housing Supply and Other Matters) Amendment Act (the Amendment Act) was passed into law on December and amended the Resource Management Act (RMA) by bringing forward and strengthening the National Policy Statement on Urban Development (NPS UD). Under the NPS UD as a Tier council Auckland Council must use the intensification specified streamlined process (ISPP) to implement the NPS UD intensification policies and the Medium Density Residential Standards with notification of a plan change to the Auckland Unitary Plan by August . Auckland Council has advised that it is intending to undertake early consultation on aspects of the draft of the plan change in April . The ALR project does not fall within the definition of a planned Rapid Transit Service under the NPS UD as it is still in the early planning stages. The councils plan change can therefore not incorporate the densities needed to meet aspirations for the project s ()(f)(iv) Page is withheld in full. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT UNCLASSIFIED Page of IN CONFIDENCE APPENDIX ONE: INTERVIEW SUMMARIES s ()(a), s ()(g)(i) Pages , and are withheld in full. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT UNCLASSIFIED Page of IN CONFIDENCE Lucy Tukua Ms Tukua is an experienced director and leader, who is currently the Technical Director of Regenerative Outcomes Kaihaut Whakarito at Mott McDonald. She has been heavily involved with driving and advocating for positive change with regards to kaupapa Mori for her whanau, iwi and Tmaki Makaurau. During the interview, Ms Tukua was able to demonstrate significant experience in both serving as mana whenua and working closely with mana whenua, communities and Treaty Partners to improve outcomes across Tmaki Makaurau. Her experiences include working to establish governance and operations for mana whenua partnership at Eke Panuku, and leading a number of regeneration projects, c hairing mana whenua forums, and working with a wide range of iwi to deliver plans and programmes. The Panel was impressed with Ms Tukuas grassroots approach to issues and her engaging personality and, considered she would seek constructive solutions to issues raised. s ()(a), s ()(g)(i) s ()(g)(i) s ()(ba)(i), s ()(g)(i) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Appendix Three: ALR Board fee exception letter to the Minister for the Public Service This letter is r eleased separately. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT
You have indicated in the draft GPS that the Government does not want road users to pay for rail In addition, given the fiscal constraints and the Governments transport priorities,
agreed to depart from the requirement referred to in paragraph above, and instead:
https:www.transport.govt.nzassetsUploadsLandDocumentseaLiterature review ofheavy vehicle driver licensing.pdf
invited the Minister to issue drafting instructions to the PCO for Orders in Council, under
()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons
()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons (c)(ii) the information requested would constitute contempt of court or of the House of Representatives (d) the information requested is or will soon be publicly available
()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information
()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials (d) the information requested is or will soon be publicly available
()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their duty .
()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their duty ()(h) to maintain legal professional privilege (d) information is, or will soon be publicly available
()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their duty ()(i) to enable a Minister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry out, without prejudice or disadvantage, commercial activities . You have the right to seek an investigation and review of this response by the Ombudsman, in accordance with section () of the Act. The relevant details can be found on the Ombudsmans website www.ombudsman.parliament.nz
()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials ()(g)(ii) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the protection of such Ministers, members of organisations, officers, and employees from improper pressure or harassment (d) the information requested is or will soon be publicly available
()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their duty ()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information
()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons, including that of deceased natural persons
()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who
()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information Further context Officials propose some information be withheld as it is intraoffice communication and is therefore out of scope (item ). s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(b)(ii) s ()(b)(ii) s ()(b)(ii) s ()(b)(ii) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Mobile phone numbers are proposed to be withheld under section ()(a) of the Act, relating to the natural privacy of person. In addition, some material is proposed to be withheld as it is free and frank and its released could prevent this expression of opinion (see item ). A matching request has been made to the Ministry seeking correspondence between Ministry officials and industry, and that is being responded to separately. There is a large amount of material that the requestor is potentially looking for which is publicly available in the form of submissions on the Clean Vehicles Bill. We propose that you note in your response that these have not been included within scope, but that they are publicly available on the Parliament website if the requestor wishes to see them.
()(ba)(i) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of
()(ba)(ii) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of
()(f)(ii) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect
()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials
()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank
()(h) to maintain legal professional privilege
()(i) to enable a Minister of the Crown or any public service agency or
()(j) to enable a Mi nister of the Crown or any public service agency or
. . Coordination arrangements . We anticipate the rebuild work will be large, complex and take time. The work , like the response and recovery phases, will need to be coordinated, and delivery and oversight arrangements will be needed, as outlined below. Response phase arrangements . The response phase is almost complete, and many regions have transition ed to recovery . To support the response, the Government has provided a top up of million to the National Land Transport Fund to allow Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail to s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of progress with emergency works. The Waka Kotahi Board approved a special enhanced funding assistance rate for emergency works for local roads. Local authorit ies will receive funding for percent and up to percent of eligible costs during the response phase. . Funding claims from local authorities continue to be received by Waka Kotahi, and significant expenses are being incurred to repair the State highway network. Waka Kotahi only pays claims and invoices once the work has been completed. T he total amount approved to is approximately million, with most of these approvals relating to Hawke s Bay and Tairwhiti regions. Claims and payments will follow. Other funding requests have been received and are being assessed, and if approved , will exhaust the initial million top up. The initial million funding has given the councils and contractors the confidence to get on and do the job, knowing they will be paid . . During the response phase, normal Board accountabilities ensure that decisions are made quickly and funds are appropriately spent. An Officials Coordination Group has been set up to ensure information is shared amongst agencies, and agencies work together to unlock any immediate barriers. This Coordination Group is Chaired by Te Manatu Waka (the Ministry) and includes the Treasury, Department of Internal Affairs , Waka Kotahi and Kiwi Rail. Waka Kotahi engages with the private sector through its freight industry liaison function and can report to the Officials Group on key issues the sector faces. Waka Kotahi can also report on regional engagement to ensure local priorities are shared and known by the Officials Group. Recovery phase arrangements . The recovery phase will focus on improving service levels and completing the high level assessments on rebuild options . During the recover y phase , a better picture of the overall state of the network will become apparent and longer term rebuild options will emerge. . . s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Rebuild phase arrangements . . . . Delivery arrangements for the recovery phase . Waka Kotahis experience with significant large scale recoveries has found that a collaborative recovery model is required to coordinate resources on the ground. The model can be shaped to accommodate the scale of damage and disruption to a wide range of infrastructure assets. It can also allow risk to be ring fenced and recognise the complexity of potentially involving multiple clients and suppliers. . An Alliance model, similar to what has been used before for large scale recover ies, Christchurch and Kaikoura, is well suited to uncertainty, the need for pace and s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of flexibility, with a cost and productivity focus and transparent risk allocation to those best placed to manage it. . The Alliance means rather than Waka Kotahi contracting with a single principal contractor for each work package, Waka Kotahi contracts a group of Tier contractor s to collectively coordinate engineering, design and construction work. Waka Kotahi sees this Alliance model as a collaborative delivery model that prioritises the early involvement of councils, iwi, and regional suppliers. The Alliance will allow Waka Kotahi to readily coordinate resources on the ground and enable delivery at pace across multiple projects . Alliance models are particularly suited for situations requiring rapid mobilisation in response to an event. . A wide r ange of local Tier , and contractors, consultants, national specialists and other Tier contractors will be engaged through the Alliance. A key objective will be to support local economic recovery, drawing on local expertise, and leave a local legacy of skills and experience. Through the procurement strategy , the alliance will set clear healthy market targets including a percentage target for local supplier use. . . Waka Kotahi is engaging with councils and iwi on the Alliance and is holding open house discussions with local suppliers, including how Tier , and suppliers can be involved in the work . Next steps . . . s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of . s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of March Hon Michael Wood Action required by: Minister of Transport Monday, April Hon Kiri Allan Associate Minister of Transport UPDATES TO OUTPUT PLAN Purpose This briefing seeks y our agreement to a number of changes to the Output Plan . Key points The Output Plan is an agreement between you and the Ministry on the key deliverables we expect to deliver for you in and early . For the Output Plan to remain upto, there is a need to amend it during the year. Previous amendments, as advised through Weekly Reports or briefings have been incorporated into the Output Plan set out in Appendix A. This briefing pr oposes a range of changes that: oremove some projects from the Output Plan oamend the deliver ables for some existing projects in the Output Plan oadd some new projec t s to the Output Plan. The Output Plan c hanges are set out in Appendix A. Existing matters to be removed are in red text. Additions and other changes to the Output Plan are in green text. Output Plan projects that are the responsibility of the Associate Minister of Transport are set out on page of Appendix A. The roadside oral flu id testing initiative falls within the Associate Minister of Transports responsibilities. The Associate Ministers officehas been advised that we are adding the initiative to the Output Plan. The AssociateMinister was advised of the timeframes for this work through the Weekly Report forthe week ending March. The Ministr y c onsiders the proposed changes to be low risk. Document OC s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Recommendations
. Auckland Airport is supportive of the Minister reauthorising the alliance if the airlines can demonstrate clear customer and economic benefits . We do however remind the government that they need to monitor airline pricing and competition issues in general more closely than is currently the case .
. The expectations around execution of the UEP contract include:
. We recommend the Eke Panuku Board being the lead agency to take the programme development sites to market. This would include negotiating an agreement on behalf of CRLL, concluding development agreements and receipt of sale proceeds back to CRLL shareholders. This would be subject to the parameters agreed with the shareholders. The Eke Panuku Board requires formal delegations from the CRL Sponsors for this governance structure.
. agreed that drawdown of tagged capital contingency funding be approved for all
. establish road tolling schemes as agreed in paragraphs to above;
. In addition to this, Cabinet agreed that government agencies should increase the breadth and depth of information proactively released by agencies (ref CAB MIN.). . Material covered by this protocol includes Cabinet papers and associated minut es, briefings including the Weekly Report, and titles of briefings. Preparing documents for release . Documents will be prepared for release by the Ministry, withholding information consistent with the grounds in the Official Information Act . . The Office and the Ministry both acknowledge that Section of the Act , which protects Ministers and agencies from civil or criminal liability where information is released under the Act, does not apply to information that is proactively released. Process . All Ca binet papers and minutes marked as suitable for proactive release will be prepared for release by the Ministry. The Ministry will then seek the Ministers approval to publish the documents via a formal briefing. Once the Ministers approval is given, documents will be on the Ministrys website. . Documents, including the Weekly Report, and titles of briefings suitable for proactive release will be prepared for release by the Ministry. Depending on the document, it may or may not require the Ministers approval. The Ministry will liaise with the Office to determine which documents can be approved for release by the Office, and which need the Ministers written approval. Timing . The Office and the Ministry both acknowledge that there are time sensitivi ties around when information needs to be . Cabinet Papers . As stated above, unless otherwise noted, Cabinet material should be released within business days of decisions being made. . To ensure Cabinet material is released within the day timeframe mandated by Cabinet, if it is part of a larger proactive release including additional background documents the Ministry will provide the Cabinet material separately to enable the Office to prioritise it. . The Ministry will provide the Office a minimum of five days for review of material proposed for release. Briefing Papers and Weekly Reports . In many cases there is a time imperative for briefings to be released. . Documents are requested under the OIA and can be refused under Section (d), if they will soon be publicly available. The Office of the Ombudsman states that RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
. agreed that, for the Whangrei to Port Marsden (road), the South Auckland project,
. identify NZTA as the public road controlling authority, the toll operator, and the
. agreed that, in order to draw down the tagged contingency following the assessment
. . . . .. .... . . . ..... . . ... . . .. ...... Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar OnTime Departures () OnTime Arrivals () Cancellations () AIRLINES PERFORMANCE, TRANSTASMAN ROUTES, MARCH
: Up to NZD million was committed to investigate and design large projects in Hawkes Bay, Nelson and the Bay of Plenty. These are:
: Up to NZD million was allocated to finalise investigation and consenting for projects in Northland, Gisborne, Taranaki, Horowhenua, Marlborough and the West Coast. Up to NZD million was committed for construction, depending on whether Waka Kotahis investigations found the projects were needed. These are:
: Up to NZD million was allocated to construct critically important regional projects in Northland, Gisborne, Taranaki, Canterbury and Otago. These are:
A cent per litre regional fuel tax applies to petrol and diesel sold in the Auckland region from July until June .
A cent increase would add cents a week to the average motorists spend, increasing to . per week at cents by July . These increases would generate around . billion in revenue over three years, dedicated to improving our transport network.
A year extension was announced in November and applied to drivers holding a current year learner or restricted car or motorbike licence due to expire between December and December .
A FUNDING FRAMEWORK FOR THE SYSTEM Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Funding insights and relationships . As part of its System stewardship role, Te Manat Waka will be expected to maintain ongoing awareness of the sources and levels of funding available to the System and produce longterm insights. This is necessary to better understand the funding landscape, and potential risks and opportunities. This will also inform ongoing engagement with government and nongovernment funders in the System. . Organisations across government will continue to have important roles to play providing inkind support and funding injects, which will be critical to support the delivery of the System Strategy and its outcomes. . In addition to Crown Appropriation and FED funding discussed earlier, other contributions flow from central government, including funding from Herenga nuku the Walking Access Commission and the Police to support the work of the Mountain Safety Council funding from ACC to Water Safety NZ, and through generic injury prevention campaigns including have a hmm funding from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade to support wider maritime safety and search and rescue initiatives in the Pacific.. We also acknowledge Te Manat Waka, as it transitions into its stewardship role, should continue building an ongoing relationship with Hapai Hapori. Hapai Hapori has been tasked with evolving the Lottery Grants System on behalf of Te Puna Thua the Lottery Grants Board. Funding through the Lottery Grants Board is a key source for many NGOs, community groups, Mori, hap and iwi. Through its work, Hapai Hapori and the Lottery Grants Board are seeking a more strategic, responsive, flexible, and inclusive Lottery Grants System. We understand that some change to what communities, hap and iwi will see will flow from late , with more significant changes expected to be rolled out in . . The System Strategy provides a platform to engage further across government including with Te Whatu Ora Health New Zealand to explore support for Safer Walking and Wander Search. It will also support ongoing engagement with NEMA regarding the provision of services provided by NGOs in response to civil defence emergencies referred to in Section Six. This engagement also needs to consider the training and equipment required by the NGOs to support service delivery during emergencies. . ACC funding also supports Water Skills for Life, the national standard for aquatic education in New Zealand primary schools linked to the national education curriculum. . Hapai Hapori (Community operations) is the business unit within Te Tari Taiwhenua, Department of Internal Affairs which administers the Lottery Grants System. A FUNDING FRAMEWORK FOR THE SYSTEM Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue FED funding constraints and longterm considerations . FED funding through Section () of the LTMA will continue to be a critical source of government funding to the System in the short to medium term. However, as noted previously, the NLTF is under funding pressure and there is a need to ensure that any funding approved under Section of the LTMA does not compromise delivery of the National Land Transport Programme. This will be an important consideration of Ministers when considering any further FED funding of the System. . Te Manat Waka has work underway to develop a set of highlevel principles and process around all eligible activities within Section of the Act to: ensure the consideration of funding requests through this source is robust, transparent, and consistent bring tension into the Section process ensuring funding topsliced from the National Land Transport Fund is for activities that represent value for money and Section spending does not compromise delivery of the National Land Transport Programme ensure the process for considering Section funding requests is straightforward for those applying, and efficient ensure Joint Ministers (the Ministers of Finance and Transport) can have confidence that a robust process has been followed and they have all of the necessary information to make informed decisions.. We expect the highlevel principles and process will be confirmed later this year to feed into the next triennial FED funding round available to the System. . In addition, longterm FED levels are not assured and are predicted to continue to reduce over time. Te Manat Waka is currently considering the future of FED as part of the wider review into the future of the land transport revenue system. This work will explore different approaches to land transport funding, and inform future funding sources for all the systems and organisations funded through FED. . New sources of funding for the System (including recreational boating, search and rescue, and support for the Ministry to administer its role) will be explored. We are aware that the future income tax base may not be considered appropriate to cover the potential gap, given the tradeoffs that could be required to meet public good demands. Other sources that might be considered could include a levy paid on the purchase of a vessel, an additional charge on the Great Walks, or an insurance levy. Developing options and the related policy, including sector consultation, is something that Te Manat Waka in both its government stewardship role and Strategic Transport policy role will lead. . Efforts to decarbonise the transport system: when fewer light vehicle kilometres are travelled and as people choose different modes of transport, revenue will decline from the current main sources such as fuel excise duty and road user charges. SECTION HEADING HERE Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Final take home messages
A Request for Proposals (RfP) was on March and invited applications for the scheme. Applications for the scheme closed on April .
A big programme of public engagement is likely to kick off in , when we have more information about what New Zealanders want from the transport network and options to think about for who should pay for what bit.
A business case approach forms the basis for activity and programme development for investment from the National land Transport Fund (NLTF). Early in the business case approach, the performance measures will need to be developed. When the activity or programme has been implemented, its performance will be tracked against those measures. This will ensure an ongoing evaluation of the success of investments. e NZTA information about the NLTP value for money priority Website Information: https:www.nzta.govt.nzpl anningand investmentnational land transport programme nltpresponding to government prioritiesvalue formoney The content has been covered and summarised in NLTP Page Value for money section . NLTP prioritisation round November Website Information: https:www.nzta.govt.nzpl anningand investmentnational land transport programme nltpnltpprioritisation november The prioritisation funding round was completed using the Investment Assessment Framework . NZTA relocated million of walking and cycling funding to new projects and million for local road improvements to new projects. Direct text Transit New Zealand National State Highway Strategy June Whole document https:www.nzta.govt.nza ssetsresourcesnational statehighway strategydocsnational The strategy sets out how Transit will move towards and manage the state highway network as an integral part of a multimodel transportation network. The strategy identifies the likely longterm direction for New Zealands highway network ( years). Goals for the SH system: Ensure state highway corridors make the optimum contribution to an integrated multimodel land transport system. Provide safe state highway corridors for all users and affected communities. Summary statehighwaystrategy ARCHIVED.pdf Ensure state highways enable improved and more reliable access and mobility for people and freight. Improve the contribution of state highways to economic development. Improve the contribution of state highways to the environmental and social wellbeing of New Zealand, including energy efficiency and public health. Underpinning these goals is needed to make the best possible use of government funding and to ensure value for money for all activities. Pg. Funding and affordability Affordability impacts on a wide range of activities, from ensuring that the existing network provides good value for money to costing maintenance on a wholeof life basis, to the selection of practical and costeffective options for road improvements and mitigation measures. Affordability is about what to do, how to do, how to develop the best solutions for the transport network as a whole and a matter of timing and planning for the longer term, which is why a year view of how the state highway network should develop.
A business case is the vehicle to de monstrate that a proposed investment is strategically aligned, represents value for money, and is achievable. A business case turns an idea (think) into a proposal (plan). It enables decision makers to invest with confidenc e knowing that they have the best information available at a point in time. It is also a reference point during the Do phase to support delivery, and used in the Review phase to determine whether the benefits in the business case were realised. Some direct text, some summary e f Putting it Together An Explanatory Guide to NZs State Sector Financial Management System August https:treasury.govt.nzsitesdef aultfiles pit .pdf The purpose of this document is to introduce New Zealands state sector financial management system. The state sector includes th e offices of Parliament, departments, Crown entities, state owned enterprises (SOE) and their subsidiaries. The Explanatory Guide sets out how different aspects of the financial management and performance reporting systems work together, promote flexibility within constraints, and ensure that public expenditures deliver the expected benefits to New Zealanders.
A bypass would deliver significant travel time benefits for through traffic, and as a result would reduce the level of ratrunning on local streets. The bypass would strongly support the desired safety and liveability objectives for the project, and these outcomes potentially may not be delivered unless the Hope Bypass is introduced.
A combined Ministry of Transport and Waka Kotahi Action Plan outlines how both agencies are putting transportrelated actions in the new Disability Action Plan in place.
A comprehensive Regulatory Impact Assessment which includes the policy analysis for developing the new framework, and options considered, is available here:
A copy of the regulations giving effect to these policy decisions can also be found on the New Zealand Legislation website via the following link:
A coroner will not open a formal inquiry into the death of a Californian tourist in a skydiving accident near Queenstown over six years ago. The Civil Aviation Authority did not find any breaches of health and safety or aviation rules, but it made recommendations that included updating water hazard procedures for skydiving operators. Otago Daily Times, Southland Times Wednesday September Commerce Commission to file charges against Jetstar alleging it misled customers
A crossagency programme to improve access to the licensing system is currently being led by Waka Kotahi and overseen by Employment, Education and Training Ministers. Waka Kotahi is working closely with Te Manat Waka, the Ministry of Social Development, Accident Compensation Corporation, Te Puni Kkiri and New Zealand Police. This programme is designing a future state for the driver licensing system where Waka Kotahi will maintain its role as regulator of the system and optimise how people, processes, policy, technology and information are combined to provide a driver licencing system that is accessible to those who want or need it.
A detailed business case is underway to plan what is needed to accelerate work on this corridor, which could include staging early delivery of rapid transit stations during the next three years ( ). The funding provided through the draft GPS could enable Waka Kotahi to accelerate work to finalise the preferred solution, progress consenting and designation, and start early works.
A fault with a baggage belt at Wellington Airport caused processing delays on July . We received an enquiry, and Wellington Airport had initially identified it as a problem with AvSec equipment, which was incorrect. Comment was provided. NZ Herald July Company enters not guilty pleas in relation to death of skydiver at Muriwai
A final check of all activities was carried out to identify and categorise any remaining activities omitted in steps a nd . At this stage, notes were left throughout the review process, where the coders discussed and agreed upon questions about categorisation to ensure consistency. All activities considered high value (those million or above in cost) were coded by two coding team members and checked as a measure of inter rater reliability. Of the high value activities, there were two instances where the initial categorisation was changed (indicating a very high . inter rater reliability). High value activitie s were selected for these checks because further analysis was planned for the data by cost per category, therefore, ensuring that these high value activities were categorised correctly reduced the risk of overstating or understating their value. Next, each category associated with an activity was assigned a weighting value based on how many categories the activity had received in total: . STUDY PHASES
A further outcome has been the development of the New Zealands first Rail Plan. The Rail Plan sets out Governments vision and priorities for rail over the next decade and beyond. The Rail Plan will play a key role in guiding investment decisions taken via the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) as well as future Crown investment decisions.
A large number of submitters had mixed views on speed. These included, for example, support in principle for reducing the speed limit in some areas, alongside concern that other safety interventions were just as or more important.
A modern and responsive air navigation system is critical to keeping New Zealand safe, connected, growing, resilient, and secure.
A new leadership body that brings government agencies together with the private sector has been set up to tackle domestic aviation emissions.
A new planning and funding framework for rail agreed
A number of models were developed for the report. Most have a documentation file describing the model and a model file for the base case and alternative scenarios.
A number of policy changes were introduced through the Bill process (now reflected in the Act). Key changes include:
A rail connection, as part of general improvements to land transport connections, would help to include Northland more in the upper North Island growth triangle Waikato, Bay of Plenty and Auckland.
A regional fuel tax provides a way for regional councils to raise revenue to fund transport projects in their region that would otherwise be delayed or not funded.
A review of the Total Mobility Scheme is underway. This page details the latest information about the review and upcoming consultation.
A series of upgrades along this corridor could strengthen Northlands links with Auckland, save lives and provide greater network resilience to support a growing population, tourism and economic growth. This will help to prevent costly closures arising from bad weather and crashes. More reliable journeys and greater travel choice with new public transport, walking and cycling facilities will also provide a more sustainable transport system and strengthen key regional freight links.
A simplified list of categories was develo ped to compare mode shift promoting activities with activities that support private vehicle use: roading (activities supporting private vehicle use) active transport (walking, cycling, micromobility) public transport (bus, train, ferry) Activities could b e assigned to more than one category. The TIO analysis was undertaken in three stages: categorising and weighting proportions of activities and the proportion of costs regional comparisons, and funding approvedcommitted compared to probablepossible activities allocated in TIO. approvedcommitted: Activities have funding approved following a council request to initiate the work. possibleprobable: Activities are included in the NLTP, but there is a degree of uncertainty about whe ther they will go ahead. Categorising and weighting proportions Activities were categorised in two ways: TIO Activity Class categorisation: An initial Category was applied using only the TIO Activity Classes from GPS , , and . Table shows how the TIO Activity Classes were categorised. Table Initial categorisation using Activity Classes TIO Activity Classes Years included in GPS Category (new) Local road improvements , Roading Local road maintenance , State highway improvements , , State highway maintenance , , Road safety , Road to Zero Walking and cycling improvements , Active transport Public transport , Public transport Rapid transit Initially, a multimodal category was also used to code activities marked as supporting multiple modes (for example, the Mill Road Corridor activity in Auckland included roading upgrades and a cycle lane and bus priority facilities). Howev er, a separate category was not considered necessary as multimodal activities could instead be identified by being assigned multiple categories . . STUDY PHASES
A small number of vehicles are classified as miscellaneous. These are generally not included in the Ministry of Transports statistics. Many of these vehicles are exempt from licensing.
A small passenger service (SPS) operates for hire or reward, and carries people or fewer, including the driver. Examples include taxis, appbased services, shuttles, private hire, dialadriver and facilitated costsharing.
A snapshot of your portfolio
A snapshot of your portfolio million km extent of NZs search and rescue region one of the largest in the world to reports on domestic inquiries by TAIC each yearShare of domestic freight Freight. billion marine economy contribution to New Zealand s economy (). billion worth of NZ s exports
A snapshot of your portfolio Around , New Zealanders ( of the workforce) are employed in transport related industriesRoad transport CO emissions are from: Light passenger vehicles Heavy vehicles light commercial vehiclesDomestic transport produces of our domestic carbon dioxide emissions and of total greenhouse gas emissions ,km state highways,km local roadsThere are over . million registered vehicles in the fleet . of people in Auckland, . of people in Wellington and . of people in Christchurch have access to frequent public transport services () road fatalities in (as at August ) of jobs are accessible by public transport compared to of jobs accessible by car within minutes during weekday morning peak () . million licensed drivers , new drivers licenses issued annuallyOver ,km of rail line rail fatalities in (as at August ) . of all journeys made on strategic freight and tourist routes achieved the predictability travel time target () of domestic freight was moved by road and by railand by coastal shipping ()NZ marine economy contributed . billion to New Zealands economy () . billion of NZs exports and . billion in imports is carried by maritime () maritime fatalities in (as at August )NZs search an rescue region is one of the largest in the world, spanning over million km , aeroplanes helicopters amateur built aeroplanes. million passengers were screened at aviation security () of passengers were processed through aviation security within minutes in , commercial passenger flights in , compared to , in and , pre pandemic () aviation fatalities in (as at August ) accident inquiries per annum RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT SHAPING OUR TRANSPORT SYSTEM
A snapshot of your portfolio Trucks, trains, ships and airplanes carried about million tonnes of freight around New Zealand ()Around , New Zealanders ( of the workforce) are employed in transport related industriesTransport produces percent of our domestic carbon dioxide emissions and percent of total greenhouse gas emissions ,km state highways,km local roadsThere are over . million vehicles in the fleet, , of these are fully electric light vehicles . of people in Auckland, . of people in Wellington and . of people in Christchurch have access to frequent public transport services. () road fatalities in (as at August ) of jobs are accessible by public transport compared to of jobs accessible by car within minutes during weekday morning peak () Transport CO emissions are from: Light passenger vehicles Heavy vehicles light commercial vehicles,km track in rail network rail fatalities in (as at August ) . of all journeys made on strategic freight and tourist routes achieved the predictability travel time target.() of domestic freight was moved by road and by rail ()NZ marine economy contributed . billion to New Zealands economy (). . billion of NZs exports and . billion in imports is carried by maritime (). maritime fatalities in (as at August )New Zealands search an rescue region is one of the largest in the world, spanning over million km Aircraft , aeroplanes helicopters amateur built aeroplanes. million international passengers were screened at aviation security ().. million domestic passengers were screened through aviation security () . million bags screened at aviation security aviation fatalities in (as at August ) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT SHAPING OUR TRANSPORT SYSTEM
A snapshot of your portfolio MOCK UP Trucks, trains, ships and airplanes carried about million tonnes of freight around New Zealand ()Around , New Zealanders ( of the workforce) are employed in transport related industriesTransport produces percent of our domestic carbon dioxide emissions and percent of total greenhouse gas emissions ,km state highways,km local roadsThere are over . million vehicles in the fleet, , of these are fully electric light vehicles . of people in Auckland, . of people in Wellington and . of people in Christchurch have access to frequent public transport services. () road fatalities in (as at August ) of jobs are accessible by public transport compared to of jobs accessible by car within minutes during weekday morning peak () Transport CO emissions are from: Light passenger vehicles Heavy vehicles light commercial vehicles,km track in rail network rail fatalities in (as at August ) . of all journeys made on strategic freight and tourist routes achieved the predictability travel time target.() of domestic freight was moved by road and by rail ()NZ marine economy contributed . billion to New Zealands economy (). . billion of NZs exports and . billion in imports is carried by maritime (). maritime fatalities in (as at August )New Zealands search an rescue region is one of the largest in the world, spanning over million km Aircraft , aeroplanes helicopters amateur built aeroplanes. million international passengers were screened at aviation security ().. million domestic passengers were screened through aviation security () . million bags screened at aviation security aviation fatalities in (as at August ) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT SHAPING OUR TRANSPORT SYSTEM
A special rebate for low emission disability vehicles will be introduced: , if it is an EV, and , if pluginhybrid or hybrid. Brand new and used imports receive the same dollar amounts.
A summary document and copies of some of the submissions are available below.
A summary of submissions made regarding Euro is available below.
A technical amendment has been made to the Government Policy Statement (GPS) on Land Transport . This is a nonsignificant amendment that enables Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) to utilise all of the loan facilities made available to it.
A technical amendment has been made to the Government Policy Statement on Land Transport to make clear the Crown contribution of .m to the NLTF to fund the rail network.
A total of , households were surveyed, with , giving a full response.
A track user charge for rail freight and tourism is also under development to ensure that KiwiRail contributes to the NLTF in a fair and transparent way.
A transport system for Aotearoa
A typical weeks travel was made up of individual triplegs by different modes between separate destinations. A journey could involve more than one mode, such as walking to the bus stop and then catching a bus.
A walkable city estimated to cost NZD million, will improve accessibility, amenities and walking, and set safer speeds for vehicles. It aims to make the city safe and attractive to walk around.
A work plan under this Terms of Reference will be commissioned after the initial meetin g.
A. F or the designated airline of each ASEAN Member State:
A. Purpose . This is the ALR Group report for the sponsors meeting on May .
ABS is a closedloop part of the braking system that prevents wheel lock during braking resulting in improved vehicle stability, and usually reduced stopping distance. If the wheels are about to lock due to hard braking or slippery road conditions, the ABS hydraulic unit momentarily reduces brake pressure so the wheels continue to rotate. A CBS is a service brake system where brakes on both wheels can be operated by using a single control. During emergency braking, CBS stops the rider from having to balance front and rear brake force manually, eliminating compromised braking due to inappropriate or panicked brake use.
ABS was first introduced on motorcycles in the early s, but has only been offered across all brands since the late s. Although ABS is increasingly available in New Zealand in both new and used motorcycles, not all motorcycles have it.
ACC levy rates for and meant owners of all EVs paid reduced ACC levies as part of their annual vehicle licensing. This reflected a saving of around NZD each year for EV owners. The changes took effect on July .
ACC levy reduction takes effect
ADS B Gra n t Scheme closure The CAA opened a grant scheme for eligible private aircraft owners to claim up to plus GST to install Automatic Dependent Surveillance Broadcast (ADS B) surveillance systems as part of the New Southern Sky programme in March . The scheme was established to help aircraft owners meet the equipage requirements specified for all aircraft flying in a controlled airspace. The ADS B Grant Scheme closure on the June was well signalled, with a record number of claims paid out for the month (). A further claims were received in the last few days of June and these will be paid out during July . There were incomplete applications when the scheme closed. The CAA advised these applicants that the scheme has closed and no further payments can be made. This has resulted in a number of dissatisfied applicants who may seek to raise the issue publicly or through political channels, with the aim of seeking to have grants paid out. Communications and External Engagement July Media plan days from July Nil.
AIO. Alcohol Interlock Order. The group of offenders that received orders from the court to install an alcohol ignition interlock device. Alcohol Ignition Interlock Device. A breathalyser that is wired into your cars ignition, which records every start, stop, test result, violation and distance driven. This information is then available as a report for authorities. Before you start your car, the device requires you to provide a breath sample free of alcohol. During your drive, your interlock device will call for random tests which must be taken. If these are not taken, it is classed as a violation. Charge Outcome . The charge outcome is the on which charges are finalised in court. In this study, it is the on which the drink driving charge r esulted in a conviction. EBA. Excess Breath Alcohol. Future proved outcomes. A reoffence. Interlock. See Alcohol Ignition Interlock Device. MoJ. Ministry of Justice. Proved outcome. A proved outcome is a charge that has been proved in court to have been committed. For adults it includes convictions, discharges without conviction and diversions. Refusal offence. Refusing an officers request for a blood specimen.
AIR SERVICES AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENTS OF THE MEMBER STATES OF THE ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS AND THE GOVERNMENT OF NEW ZEALAND
ALR Ltd is an independent standalone company, with its own board, replacing the Auckland Light Rail Unit.
ALR Sponsors are invited to: Endorse the proposed approaches to finalising the Auckland Light Rail Board Terms of Reference with respect to the following key issues the role of the Board with regard to the ALR Project and the ALR Programme Balancing the need for the Board to have autonomy with the need for the Sponsors to provide direction The role of observers on the Board Establishing that the Board are ultimately accountable to the three ALR Ministers
ANNEX BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON THE INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION FOR THE PREVENTION OF POLLUTION FROM SHIPS (MARPOL) AND THE INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANISATION (IMO) The IMO i s responsible for the safety and security of shipping , and the preventi on of pollution (including GHG emissions) by ships The IMO is a specialised agency of the United Nations and is the global standard setting authority for the safety, security and environmental performance of international shipping. The IMOs main role is to create a regulatory framework for the shipping industry tha t is fair and effective, universally adopted and universally implemented. Key treaties of the IMO (which New Zealand has adopted) include: International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea; International Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollutio n by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter; International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL); and International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers. Through implementing this multilate ral approach, New Zealand gains effective controls over ships to ensure secure supply chains, and minimise risks to the environment, passengers, crew and cargo . Annex VI of MARPOL is the main i nternational convention preventing air pollution and emissions from ships The IMO adopted MARPOL in and modified it by a Protocol in . MARPOL came into force in and applies to ships registered (flagged) to States party to it, wherever they operate. It aims to prevent and minimise operational and accid ental pollution of the marine environment by ships. MARPOL has six annexes categorised by pollution type which are: Annex I Regulations for the Prevention of Pollution by Oil; Annex II Regulations for the Control of Pollution by Noxious Liquid Substances in Bulk; Annex III Prevention of Pollution by Harmful Substances Carried by Sea in Packaged Form ; Annex IV Prevention of Pollution by Sewage from Ships ; RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED
ANNEX ONE GPS IMPLEMENTATION MONTHLY REPORT SEPTEMBER Ministry of Transport led actions . Progress on Actions to the end of August
AO opened by the Commission on Sunday September . The Civil Aviation Authority notified the Commission on Sunday September of a reported issue with the left engine of a passenger ATR aircraft, registration ZK MVL, that occurred on approach to Wellington airport at about . The circumstances reported to are that the aircraft was approaching Wellington airport at approximately feet when there was a low oil pressure caution, followed by an engine fault and engine fire warning. The Pilot declared a mayday then landed safely. The passengers and crew were deplaned on the runway and the airport emergency services attended. The commissioner opened an inquiry on Sunday September , under Section () of the TAIC Act and appointed Ian McClelland as investigator in charge. They will be supported by Jeffrey Shearer and Graham Thomas.
APPENDIX EVALUATI ON STOCKTAKE
APPENDIX EVALUATION STOCKTAKE
APPENDIX TRENDS OBSERVED IN GPS OUTCOMES MON ITORING
APPENDIX TRENDS OBSERVED IN GPS OUTCOMES MONI TORING
APPENDIX TRENDS OBSERVED IN GPS OUTCOMES MONITORING
APPENDIX CRITERIA SELECTION
APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
APPENDIX A NEW ZEALAND DOCUMENT REGISTER DOCUMENT NAME DOCUMENT TYPE OWNER Land Transport Management Act Act NZ Parliamentary Counsel Office Crown Entities Act Act NZ Parliamentary Counsel Office GPS draft for engagement Policy Statement MoT NA GPS Proposal for assessment and prioritisation PowerPoint MoT NA GPS Policy Statement MoT Revised reporting measures for the GPS Policy Statement MoT GPS Policy Statement MoT GPS amended Policy Statement MoT GPS questions and answers MoT Unknown To Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee, From Minister of Transport re: THE GOVERNMENT POLICY STATEMENT ON LAND TRANSPORT : FINAL VERSION Paper MoT Unknown MOT Transport Outcomes Framework and Transport Indicators Framework MoT Statement of intent Statement MoT Statement of intent Statement MoT Statement of intent Statement MoT Statement of intent Statement MoT Statement of intent Statement MoT
APPENDIX C BENCHMARK FRAMEWORKS (AUSTRALIA) DOCUMENT DEFINITION SCOPE OF THE FRAMEWORK HOW IS VFM MEASURED HOW IS IT IMPLEMENTED HOW IS IT REPORTED Transport and Infrastructure Council: Australian Transport Assessment and Planning Guidelines No specific definition prov ided. Transport initiatives in a multi modal context. VFM measured as a product of cost benefit analysis using BCR and NPV. Adjusted cost benefit analysis can be used to incorporate non efficiency objectives. It is a hybrid of multi criteria analysis and cost ben efit anal ysis. The decision to use adjusted cost benefit analysis should be made by the government agency responsible for developing the investment program. Cost benefit analysis aims to identify and express, in monetary terms, all the gains and losses (benefits and costs) created by an initiative to all members of society and to combine the gains and losses into a single measure of net benefit (benefits minus costs). It plays a central role in options generations and assessment and influences decisions, especially measuring VFM in delivering economic efficiency objectives. Cost benefit analysis is applied throughout appraisal process. Where costs or benefits amount to or greater than of overall cost or benefit, they should then be quantifiable. Benefits and costs are brought together in an Appraisal Summary Table (AST) to demonstrate the overall benefits, costs, and net benefits (benefits minus costs) of an initiative. Infrastructure Australia Assessment Framework No specific definition provided. An assessment framework that Infrastructure Australia uses to consider initiatives and projects for inclusion on the Infrastructure Priority List (IPL). Prioritisation of initiatives and projects are undertaken through assessment in terms of strategic fit, economic, social and environmental merit and deliverability. Economic appraisal is undertaken through cost benefit analysis and involves ranking of options by BCR. Deliverability is addressed through the benefits realisation plan to be included in assessment framework template. Identifying the most appropriate solutions starts with fully understanding and quantifying the problem or opportunity and these should align to government priorities and other projectprograms. Infrastructure Australia recom mend reviewing post completion project performance in terms of its strategic fit, economic merit and delivery efficiency (i.e. did the project meet its intended objective, does the output perform well, was the project delivered efficiently against forecast costs). Specific templates are provided for reporting of ranked options by BCR in the Assessment Framework Template.
APPENDIX D DESKTOP REVIEW OF NEW ZEALAND DOCUMENTATION
ARTICLE COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES
ARTICLE COOPERATIVE MARKETING ARRANGEMENTS . In operating or holding out the agreed services on the specified routes, the designated airline of each Party may, subject to national laws and regulations and policies, enter into cooperative marketing arrangements which may include, joint venture, blocked space or code sharing arrangements, whether as the operating or the nonoperating airline (hereinafter referred to as the marketing airline) with:
ARTICLE LEASING . Each Party may prevent the use of leased aircraft for air services under this Agreement which do not comply with Article (Safety) and Article (Aviation Security).
ARTICLE INTERMODAL TRANSPORT
ARTICLE USER CHARGES . Each Party shall not impose or permit to be imposed on the designated airline of another Party user charges higher than those imposed on its own airlines, the airlines of any other Party or non Party operating similar international services. . Each Party shall encourage consultations on user charges between its competent charging authorities and airlines using the services and facilities provided by those charging authorities, where practicable through those airlines representative organisations. Reasonable notice of any proposals for changes in user charges should be given to such users to enable them to express their views before changes are made. Each Party shall further encourage its competent charging authorities and such users to exchange appropriate information concerning user charges.
ARTICLE CUSTOMS DUTIES
ARTICLE APPROVAL OF SCHEDULES . The designated airline of each Party may be required to submit its envisaged flight schedules for approval to the aeronautical authorities of another Party at least days prior to the operation of the agreed services. Any modification thereof shall be submitted for consideration at least days prior to the operation. . For supplementary flights which the designated airline of one Party wishes to operate on the agreed services outside the approved timetable, that airline must request prior permission from the aeronautical authorities of that other Party. Such requests shall usually be submitted at least four working days prior to the operation of such flights , or in such shorter timeframe as the aeronautical authority may permit.
ARTICLE TARIFFS . Each Party shall allow each airline to determine its own tariffs for the transportation of traffic . . Unless required by national laws and regulations, tariffs charged by airlines shall not be required to be filed with the aeronautical authorities of either Party. Each Party may require airlines to file tariffs for information andor approval. . In the event that an aeronautical authority of one Party is dissatisfied with a tariff proposed or in effect for an airline of another Party, the aeronautical authorities concerned will endeavour to settle the matter through consultations in accordance with Article (Consultations) , if so requested by those aeronautical authorit ies.
ARTICLE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
ARTICLE AMENDMENTS . Any Party may propose an amendment to this Agreement by notif ying the Depositary , in writing, who shall transmit the proposal to the Parties. . T he amendment shall be subject to the consent of the Parties and shall enter into force on the as agreed by the Parties.
ARTICLE FINAL PROVISIONS . This Agreement shall be deposited with the Depositary, who shall promptly furnish a certified true copy thereof to each Party. . Each ASEAN Member State and New Zealand shall complete its internal legal procedures necessary for the entry into force of this Agreement and shall, after the completion of its internal legal procedures, deposit its instrument of ratification, acceptance, or approval with the Depositary, who shall promptly notify the other Parties of such deposit. . This Agreement shall enter into force on the of deposit of the instrument of ratification, acceptance, or approval with the Depositary by at least two () ASEAN Member States and New Zealand and shall enter into force only among the Parties that have deposited their instrument of ratification, acceptance, or approval with the Depositary. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA . For an ASEAN Member State depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval after the of entry into force of this Agreement pursuant to paragraph , the Agreement shall enter into force for that ASEAN Member State on the of deposi t of its instrument of ratification, acceptance, or approval. IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this Agreement . DONE at City, Country , this Day of Month in the Year spelt out with Title case , in one original copy in the English Language .
ARTICLE CONSULTATIONS . In the spirit of close cooperation, the aeronautical authorities of the Parties shall consult with one another from time to time with a view to ensuring the implementation of, and satisfactory compliance with, the PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA provisions of this Agreement. Unless otherwise agreed, such consultations shall begin at the earliest possible , but not later than days from the the other Party or Parties receive, through diplomatic or other appropriate channels, a written request, including an explanation of the issues to be raised. When the for consultations has been agreed, the requesting Party shall also notify all the other Parties of the consulta tions and the issues to be raised. Any Party may attend. Once the consu ltations have been concluded, all the Parties as well as the Depositary shall be notified of the results. . Any Party may also request to hold a Working Group Level meeting, up to Ministerial level, if and when deemed necessary, to advance the process of consultations.
ARTICLE GRANT OF RIGHTS
ARTICLE DESIGNATION AND AUTHORISATION
ARTICLE WITHHOLDING, REVOCATION, LIMITATION AND SUSPENSION OF AUTHORISATION . Each Party shall have the right to withhold the operating authorisation and technical permissions referred to in Article (Designation and Authorisation) with respect to an airline designated by another Party, and to revoke, limit, suspend , or impose conditions on such operating authorisations and technical permissions, temporarily or permanently in the event:
ARTICLE APPLICATION OF LAWS, REGULATIONS , AND RULES . While entering, within, or leaving the territory of one Party, its laws, regulations , and rules relating to the operation and navigation of aircraft shall be complied with by the airlines designated by the other Parties. . While entering, within, or leaving the territory of one Party, its laws, regulations , and rules relating to the admission to or departure from its territory of passengers, crew, baggage , or cargo on aircraft (including regulations relating to entry, clearance, aviation security, immigration, passports, customs , and quarantine , or in the case of mail, postal regulations) , shall be complied with by, or on behalf of, such PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA passengers, crew , or cargo of the airlines of the other Parties.
ARTICLE SAFETY . Each Party shall recognise as valid, for the purpose of operating the air services provided for in this Agreement, certificates of airworthiness, certificates of competency, and licences issued, or validated by the Party that designates that said airline and still in force, provided that the requirements for such certificates or licences are at least equal to the minimum standards which may be established pursuant to the Convention. Each Party reserves the right, however, to refuse to recognise as valid for the purpose of flight above its own territory , certificates of competency and licences granted to or validated for its own nationals by another Party.
ARTICLE AVIATION SECURITY . Consistent with their rights and obligations under international law, the Parties reaffirm their obligation to one another to protect the security of civil aviation against acts of unlawful interference forms an integral part of this Agreement. Without limiting the generality of their rights and obligations under international law, the Parties shall, in particular, act in conformity with the provisions of the Convention on Offences and Certain Other Acts Committed on Board Aircraft signed at Tokyo on September , the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft signed at the Hague on December , the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation signed at Montreal on September , the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts of Violence at Airports Serving International Civil Aviation signed at Montreal on February , and the Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives for the Purpose of Detection signed at Montreal on March , insofar as the Parties are parties to these conventions, as well as all other conventions and protocols relating to civil aviation security of which the Parties are parties . . Upon request, the Parties shall provide all practicable assistance to one another to prevent acts of unlawful seizure of civil aircraft and other unlawful acts against the safety of such aircraft, their passengers and crew, PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA airports and air navigation facilities, and to address any other threat to the security of civil aviation. . The Parties shall, in their mutual relations, act in conformity with the aviation security provisions established by the ICAO and designated as Annexes to the Convention to the extent that such security provisions are applicable to the Parties . The Parties shall require that operators of aircraft of their registry or operators of aircraft who have their principal place of business or permanent residence in their territory and the operators of airports in their territory act in conformity with such aviation security provisions.
ATAP evaluation report https:www.transport.govt. nzassetsUploadsLandDo cumentsafceATAP Evaluation Report.pdf The purpose of the Evaluation Report is to present the results obtained from the testing of the transport packages and tools that were prepared to achieve the objectives of the Auckland Transport Alignment Project (the project). pg Value for Money . The APTN is the benchmark against which other packages or strategic approaches are assessed in terms of value for money. The parties to the project are seeking better performance in relation to the project objectives having regard to the cost to users and the amount of investment required for the year programme. . Overall, analysis of the APTN suggested that many of Aucklands most significant transport challenges appear to occur over the next years, with planned investments beyond the next decade appearing to result in improvements. Aucklands significant growth since , the base year for analysis, means that much of this challenge is likely to have already occurred.
ATAP found that, to achieve a significant improvement in Aucklands transport system by , major capital investment in infrastructure is required, alongside demand management interventions like congestion pricing.
ATAP package to reflect shared transport priorities
ATAP package to take in population forecasts and cost estimates
ATTACHMENT A FEEDBACK ON EXTENDING EXISTING PORT COASTAL PERMITS UNDER THE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ACT Te Rnanga o Arowhenua . Ngi Tahu are Tangata Whenua of the Canterbury Region. Ngi Tahu means people of Tahu. Ngi Tahu is the iwi comprised of Ngi Tahu Whnui; that is the collective of the individuals who descend from the five primary hap; Ngti Kur, Ngti Irakehu, Kati Huirapa, Ngi Thuriri and Ngi Te Ruahikihiki. The Charter of Te Rnanga o Ngi Tahu established under the Te Rnanga o Ngi Tahu Act (the Act) constitutes Te Rnanga as kaitiaki of the tribal interests. . Papatipu Rnanga are defined in Section of the Act. This includes Te Rnanga o Arowhenua (hereon referred to as Arowhenua). Aoraki Environmental Consultancy Limited (AEC) is a legal entity that has been given the mandate by Arowhenua Rnanga to represent their interests on all environmental matters. . Ngi Tahu holds and exercises rangatiratanga within the Ngi Tahu Takiw (Takiw) and has done so since before the arrival of the Crown. The Crown and Parliament have recognised the enduring nature of that rangatiratanga through: a. Article II of Te Tiriti o Waitangi (Te Tiriti); b. the Deed of Settlement (Deed of Settlement) between Ngi Tahu and the Crown; and c. the Ngi Tahu Claims Settlement Act (NTCSA) in which Parliament endorsed and implemented the Deed of Settlement. . As recorded in the Crown Apology to Ngi Tahu in the NTCSA, the Ngi Tahu Settlement marked a turning point, and the beginning of a new age of co operation. The Crown apologised for its past failures to acknowledge Ngi Tahu rangatiratanga and mana over the South Island lands within its boundaries and confirmed that it recognises Ngi Tahu as the tngata whenua of, and as holding rangatiratanga within, the Takiw of Ngi Tahu Whnui. The expectation of Ngi Tahu is that, regardless of the content of a ny specific legislation, the Crown acts consistently at all times with that overarching pledge, Te Tiriti and Ngi Tahu rangatiratanga. . This is feedback from Te Rnanga o Arowhenua, the representative body of the Tangata Whenua and who hold manawhenua in the traditional takiw that includes the area between the Rakaia River and the Waitaki River. The takiw includes Prime Port, the port of Timaru , which is one of the port companies that Government is looking at granting an extension under section A of the Resource Management Act for an additional years. . The feedback provided reiterates the desire of Arowhenua to see te ta iao, including the coast and coastal water protected to maintain natural processes; protect and enhance kai moana, and improve coastal water quality. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT J Te lunanga O Arowhenua Society Inc. AORAKI fNY l RNIIEO AL COHSULTANCV LID
ATTENTION: Helen White ADDRESS: NZ Ministry of Transport gpstransport.govt.nz WELLINGTON
AV technology has the potential to trigger significant transformation in the transport system. Trials of AVs are underway around the world (including in New Zealand), and opinions vary on when highly automated vehicles will be widely available. Many modern vehicles have limited automated features that may assist the driver with speed or steering control, such as lanekeep assist or adaptive cruise control.
AVs and the transport system
AVs also known as driverless or selfdriving cars use technology to partially or entirely replace the human driver. The vehicle can navigate to its destination while avoiding road hazards and responding to traffic conditions. Some maritime vessels and aircrafts (including drones) also use autonomous technology.
Abbreviations CAS Crash Analysis System CBTA Competency Based Training and Assessment CC Cubic Centimetres DLR Driver Licence Register GDLS Graduated Driver Licensing System NZTA New Zealand Transport Agency VKT Vehicle Kilometres Travelled
About people attended who had backgrounds in manned and unmanned aviation. They included drone manufacturers, model aircraft associations, commercial operators, training organisations, local authorities and government agencies.
About Us CCS Disability Action is a community organisation that has been advocating for disabled people to be included in the community since . We provide direct support to approximately , children, young people and adults through our branches, which operate from Northland to Invercargill. Our support focuses on breaking down barriers to participation. We receive a mixture of government and private funding.
About gender identity Gender identity refers to a sense of self, regardless of what sex a person was assigned at birth. Not everyone falls neatly into binary male or female categories.
About the GPS What is the GPS The GPS is the Gover nment Policy Statement on Land Transport . It outlines what the Government wants to achieve in land transport, and how it expects to see funding allocated between types of activit ies (for example, roading, public transport and road safety) across New Zealands land transport system. Each GPS sets out the priorities for a year period and is every three years. What is in the GPS The GPS guides the NZ Transport Agency (NZTA) , Kiwi Rail and local authorities on land transport investment. The GPS outlines : the outcomes the Government wants to achieve from its investment in land transport through the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) over the next years how much funding will be provided to the NLTF for NZTA to allocate to transport investments how the NLTF revenue will be funded how the Government wants NLTF funding to be allocated across areas of investment known as activity classes (for example, safety , state highway improvements , and walking and cycling improvements ). GPS also reference s system reforms the Government is looking to undertake in the transport and infrastructure sectors to aid in the delivery of GPS priorities. Hasnt consultation on the draft GPS already taken place In August and September , the previous government consulted on a draft GPS . Following the General E lection, the Coalition Government prioritised developing a new draft GPS that reflects the Coalition Governments transport priorities . Consultation on the Coalition Governments draft GPS is now open . Feedback on the draft GPS closes at pm Tuesday April . You can find more information at: www.transport.govt.nzarea ofintereststrategy and directiongovernment policy statement onlandtransport
About the New Southern Sky programme
About the New Zealand Automobile Association The NZAA is an incorporated society with over . million Member s, representing a large proportion of New Zealand road users. The AA was founded in as an automobile users advocacy group, but today our work reflects the wide range of interests of our large membership, many of whom are cyclists and public transport users as well as private motorists. Across New Zealand, the motoring public regularly come into contact with the AA through our breakdown officers, AA Centres and other AA businesses. Seventeen volunteer AA District Councils around New Zealand meet each month to discuss local transport issues. Based in Wellington and Auckland our professional policy and research team regularly surveys our M embers on transport issues and Members frequently contact us unsolicited to share their views. Via the AA Research Foundation, we commission original research into current issues in transport and mobility. Collectively, these networks, combined with our pr ofessional resource, help to guide our advocacy work and enable the NZAA to develop a comprehensive view on mobility issues. Motorists pay over billion in taxes each year through fuel excise, road user charges, registration fees, ACC levies, and GST. Mu ch of this money is reinvested by the Government in our transport system, funding road building and maintenance, public transport services, road safety work including advertising, and Police enforcement activity. On behalf of AA Members, we advocate for so und and transparent use of this money in ways that improve transport networks, enhance safety and keep cos s fair and reasonable. Our advocacy takes the form of meetings with local and central government politicians and officials, publication of research a nd policy papers, contributing to media on topical issues, and submissions to select committees and local government hearings
Accelerated Regional Roading Package announced
Acceptable best practice Most processes, procedures, system and data are robust and the identified deficiencies do not have a material impact on overall integrity of performance. Documented policies, processes, practices and procedures are embedded, fully understood and implemented well. Adequate controls are in place to ensure consistent levels of performance is achieved.
Access to material incorporated by reference
Access to the material incorporated by reference
Accessibility is a major focus for our organisation. CCS Disability Action runs the Mobility Parking Scheme. This scheme currently supports more than , people to more easily access their communities and facilities. We have a nationwide network of access coordinators who work with local governments as well as the building and transport industries. We are a member of the Access Alliance, which is pushing for a new Access Law. Our fully owned subsidiary, Lifemark Design Ltd, advocates for and provides universal design guidelines to improve the accessibility of New Zealand housing. We have developed ways to collect data on accessibility, including the Measuring Accessible Journeys project and the Street Accessibility Audits. Introduction Transport is the glue that holds our communities together. It is how we get to work, see friends, meet new people, buy groceries, and generally live our lives. Whether we use cars, buses, walking, cycling, ferries, trains andor planes, transport is a vital part of peoples lives.
Accessible Streets Package developed and drafted
Accessible Streets Public Consultation
Accessible Streets consultation
Accessible Streets is one of actions proposed as part of the initial action plan under the new Road to Zero strategy. It is a collection of Land Transport Rule changes designed to improve safety for footpath users, encourage active modes of transport, and support the creation of more liveable and vibrant towns and cities. In particular, Accessible Streets aims to support a shift from private vehicles to more energy efficient, lowcost and healthier modes of transport like walking, cycling and public transport. Everyone who uses the transport network will be affected by these proposed changes.
Accession approved in principle and planned accession announced
Accident Compensation Act
Accident on September with two people onboard. CAA provided the following statement: Bay of Plenty Times
Achieving an efficient, growing aviation sector will require a continued focus on ensuring our
Achieving this will reduce our dependence on fossil fuels and give us a more sustainable, inclusive, safe and accessible transport system that better supports economic activity and community life.
Achieving value for money also requires invest ments to be made at the right time. In some cases this may require investments to be made ahead of demand, to support future developments (lead investments). For example, building a transport corridor ahead of demand while land prices are cheaper summary b Literature Summary
Achilles Bulker update The offshore tug MMA Vision was engaged by the owners of Achilles Bulker to help return the ship from anchorage back into the Port of Tauranga. The tow was executed without any incident on Tuesday and the ship now sits safely alongside in the port. The ship will begin discharge of its cargo once a plan has been formalised and agreed upon between parties, including insurers. The ships owners have engaged a further sea going tug, which is in transit from Singapore, to support the voyage to a foreign port for dry docking. This is not anticipated to occur until sometime in September. Maritime NZ will lift the detention order it imposed preventing the ship sailing when we are satisfied with the towage arrangements. Our investigation into the circumstances and conditions that may have led to the ships rudder detaching is continuing.
Acknowledgements Doveta il would like to thank the following people for their input and assistance in this project and the preparation of this report: Judy Li and Vienna Yang of Te Manat Waka, who provided stewardship and oversight of the evaluation Heather Benwood and Jacob Boy es of Waka Kotahi in facilitating investment data access All interviewees and workshop participants from Waka Kotahi and other interested organisations, who informed all stages of the evaluation process.
Acronyms with plural apostrophes The same rules apply as to normal words.
Across all activity classes, of approved investment expenditure was assessed as having one of the three highest priorities. In general, approvals within the walking and cycling and public transport activity classes tended to have higher prior ities than approvals for local roads and state highway investments.
Across the large number of projects included in our analysis, it is not feasible to examine the evolution of each investment. In addition, the data captured in TIO about investments has changed over time. As a result, there are some differences in the data fields across the three NLTP snapshots, and the way investment activities are classified (activity classes) has changed over time. Data is entered into TIO by numerous people across many organisations, and the quality and quantity of the information provided vary. Given these lim itations, our analysis uses a subset of the NLTP extracts that are generally consistent across the three periods and adjusts for changes in investment classifications (see below). However, our analysis is only accurate to the extent that the data recorded in these extracts is accurate and complete. . Investment data analysis methodology .. Determining the first approval for each activity and assigning activities to a point in time To simplify our analysis, we used the three year GPS period in wh ich funding for the first phase of activity was approved as the GPS period of approval for activities consisting of multiple phases. This reflects that subsequent approvals for phases of an activity are contingent on approval of the first phase and allows us to link the initial funding decision for an activity to a single three year GPS period. Of course, GPS policy directions may also influence approvals for subsequent phases after the first phase. Still, the extent to which this happens is unclear from th e available data, so we focus on the first approval. Funding for phases is often spread across several years and may overlap with more than one GPS period. Therefore, to simplify our analysis, we assign the total cost over all years of all approved investm ent phases of an activity to the GPS period when the first phase of that activity was approved. This allows us to examine the extent to which long term funding commitments have changed under each GPS period. Since later phases of an activity may not be ap proved until years after the first phase approval, for activities first approved under GPS , it is more likely that some phases have not yet been approved compared to activities first approved under GPS and . Recognising this, we also include in our analysis expected funding for future phases that are recorded as having probable funding status of activities that were first approved under GPS , or . However, given that such funding is not yet approved, we distinguish it from fundi ng for approved phases (see below). Figure illustrates the above for a hypothetical investment activity with six phases. The earliest funding approval occurred during GPS , so the total cost of all approved phases (m) is attributed to a funding decision made during that period. In addition, funding for phase six (m) is not yet approved. Still, it has probable funding status in the NLTP extract, so this funding is also attributed to the original funding decision but is distinguished from funding that has been approved. METHODS
Act as a deterrent (penalties are set at a level that will credibly deter offending)
Act passed and rules come into effect
Act) replaces the Civil Aviation Act , and the Airport Authorities Act , and comes into
Acting Minister of Transport
Action : Management of Land Action .: Land disposal Current state assessment underway, with processes mapped. Nil Green Workstreams to improve the disposal timeframes identified and underway March Overarching Land Disposal Strategy complete June Strategy implemented Q . Action .: Land acquisition Current state assessment underway with processes mapped. Nil Green Completed assessment of current state and potential opportunities December Investigation , stakeholder consultation and detailed design March Position statement finalised June Implement new property approach . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE
Action Progress this month Risks, issues or barriers RAG status Upcoming milestones Action : Business case process Progress made on the decision led approach guidance pack with recent feedback being incorporated. Progress made on the programme business case, strategic planning and affordability options. Communicated the new decision led business case process at the Community of Practice on September. Position paper on Treaty partner and councilkey stakeholder engagement is ready for NZTA senior leadership consideration. Progressed cost estimation accuracy guidance. Nil Green Decision led business case process prototyped on RoNS First Wave projects JulyNovember Further development of the new business case process including templates and initial guidance for those projects prototyping the approach November Review prototyping performance and refinement of the decision led approach November Wider guidance development and implementation including Go Live for full extent of application of the new process June . Action : Performance and Efficiency Plan Initiated second iteration of the PEP, kick off discussion held with MoT September and engagement approach agreed, plan will go December Board and to Minister December Nil Green Second iteration of the plan provided to Minister December .
Action Progress this month Risks, issues or barriers RAG status Upcoming milestones Action : Road Efficiency Group (REG) Completed Minister ial briefing role of REG Workshopped new data reporting requirements with local authority and NZTA representatives Agreed maintenance and operations engagement and reporting by REG. Established reporting and guidance for local authority temporary traffic management reporting Commenced local roads data collection Initiated REG Competency Steering Group . Nil Green Complete Q local authority temporary traffic management reporting October Competency delivery group initiation meeting November Contribute to the establishment of the next iteration of the NZTA PEP December Integrate REG business outputs into NZTA business June . Action : Monitoring and reporting Q report under development, including inclusion of temporary traffic management expenditure Nil Green
Action Progress this month Risks, issues or barriers RAG status Upcoming milestones Action .: year transport plan (Lead: Infrastructure Commission) In July, the Infrastructure Commission sought Cabinet approval to the overall approach and timing for developing the National Infrastructure Plan None Green Work on the first National infrastructure Plan to commence. Action .: Fast Track consents legislation (Lead: MfE) The Bill is progressing through the Select Committee stage, ahead of the expected report back on October . None Green Select Committee Report Back on October Action .: Emissions Reduction Plan (Lead: MfE) Public consultation on the ERP concluded on August . None Green Briefing to Minister on outcome of public consultation week by early October . Action .: Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) Reform (Lead: MfE) Final regulations setting NZ ETS unit limits and price control settings for None Green Climate Change Commissions advice on NZ ETS unit limits and price control settings for expected to be March Action .: City and Regional Deals (Lead: DIA) In July, Cabinet agreed a strategic framework for Regional Deals. None Green Cabinet consideration of first regions, funding model and monitoring and evaluation framework will be November. Announcements will be made as quickly as possible after that .
Action Progress this month Risks, issues or barriers RAG status Upcoming milestones Action : Road safety reforms The Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits was signed. The Land Transport (Drug Driving) Amendment Bill continues to be considered by the Transport and Infrastructure Committee. Cabinet considered the Governments Road Safety Objectives document. Green The Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits comes into force on October . The Land Transport (Drug Driving) Amendment Bill will be reported back to the House in December . The Governments Road Safety Objectives document will be released on October . Action : FED and RUC increases The Ministrys work to increase the annual vehicle license fee in is complete. Implementation is led by NZTA and remains on target. Next phase will focus on increases to FED and RUC rates in . None Green Planning for the next phase to commence in . Action : NZTA funding profile None Green Action : Reporting on spend and borrowing Reporting on spend and borrowing by NZTA will be undertaken as part of monthly and quarterly reporting by NZTA. None Green Monthly GPS reporting. Action : Coastal Shipping Resilience Fund Advice provided to the Minister of Transport on the investment objectives and process for allocating the Coastal Shipping Resilience Fund and shared with other relevant ministers. Decisions on objectives and process are yet to be madeGreen Next milestones to be identified following ministerial decisions on the objectives and process for allocating the Fund.
Action Progress this month Risks, issues or barriers RAG status Upcoming milestones Action : Road Policing Investment Programme (RPIP): Action .: Oral fluid testing Bill at Select Committee stage. Police have formed a project team to cover procurement and procedural implementation. Nil Green Action .: Drink driving enforcement NA NA Green Complete Action complete and now part of business asusual reporting where appropriate Action .: Road policing NA NA Green Complete Action complete and now part of business asusual reporting where appropriate Action .: Review road safety investment Work has been scoped and sent for internal review. The scope is expected to be finalised by the end of October and the R AG status for the action will then be on track. Nil
Action Progress this month Risks, issues or barriers RAG status Upcoming milestones Partnership. Action . : Considering tolling for new roads Drafted a report for the Minister on the outcomes from operational efficiency. The Roadside infrastructure panel of suppliers due diligence period is underway. Enhanced tolling assessments are now in place. Nil
Action Progress this month Risks, issues or barriers RAG status Upcoming milestones Priority actions: Action : Reforming the National Land Transport Funds revenue system Agreement by the Minister to engage on market soundings work later this year followed by final policy decisions in early Significant policy work to be undertaken in short timeframe . Shift to new Revenue team structure should help mitigate resource risks . Amber First meeting of the Stakeholder Reference Group in October . A briefing on the approach to transition to RUC is targeted for mid November . Discussions with PCO on resources to support drafting of Time of Use Bill . Action : Ten year investment planning Provided Minister with initial thinking on implementing year investment planning (OC refers). Commenced scoping work on a GPS process that improves alignment between the GPS strategic direction, revenue settings, and underlying costs over a ten year planning horizon. This includes improving the information and advice on investment needs to enable t he Minister to make informed costservice level trade offs when setting the GPS. Green November : seeking agreement from the Minister on a GPS process for GPS , including options to improve information about investment needs (with a focus on informing spend on maintenance and operating activities) . Other actions: Action : Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP is Kiwirail led but advice is Ministry led) You agreed we should decouple the RNIP advice from the We are on track to deliver the RNIP advice on November NA Amber Delivery of our advice on the RNIP is on track for November , however, some engagement with our legal team and interagency is ongoing. We are not expecting any substantive issues arising but will advise your office if there are ay. s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE
Action Progress this month Risks, issues or barriers RAG status Upcoming milestones Priority actions: Action : National Land Transport Plan (NLTP): Action . : Roads of National Significance (RoNS) Action . : Roads of Regional Significance Action . : Projects for further investigation Action . : Waitemat second crossing Action . : Investments in major public transport projects Action .: Investments in walking and cycling na NA Green Complete Action complete and now part of business asusual reporting where appropriate Action : Public Transport Funding Increasing private share project underway with request for information sent to Public Transport Authorities and on track to their agreed private share targets by December . Specification finalised for private share research project that will provide evidence base for longer term targets and toolkit for increasing third party revenue NZTA continuous programme specific requirements for private share targets have not yet been communicated to Public Transport Authorities. Annual planning processes and council meetings may not align with the phase timeframe. Mitigation is to Green Complete Phase complete by December
Action Progress this month Risks, issues or barriers RAG status Upcoming milestones seek agreement from Public Transport Authorities to targets subject to Council endorsement in the new year. Action : Reduce expenditure on temporary traffic management templates for all new capital works contracts with new clauses. Compiled a list of all new capital works projects going to market from November that will use the new contracts. Confirmed maintenance and operations rollout sequence, specifically next contracts to be converted Public Private Partnerships. Prepared the Temporary Traffic Management costs capture system and dashboard. Completed Temporary Traffic Management audits. Started in housing the Traffic Management Centre role to support NZ Guide for Temporary Traffic Management. Nil Green First quarter report on costs against the baseline to be delivered October Implementation of new audit and assurance process October Existing guidance to be retired and replaced with new NZ Guide to Temporary Traffic Management on October NZ Guide to Temporary Traffic Management will be integrated into Network Outcome Contracts from February RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE
Actions from Transport Officials Meeting Meeting with NZ Transport Agency Waka Kotahi (NZTA) Due NZTA to provide advice around options considered for the Waitemat Harbour Connections project. September NZTA to provide an update on the roll out of speed camera signage. September Provide further advice around the work NZTA is doing with the NZ Events Association around developing guidance for local road closures for community events. October NZTA to provide further advice on Improved Cost Recovery, one of the options outlined in BRI . October O ctober Provide advice on disparity in the number of licence tests per driver testing officer ( DTO ) being completed in each region. Included below NZTA to find an opportunity for you to fix a pothole using one of the prefabricated mats . TBD
Actions from Transport Officials Meeting Meeting with NZ Transport Agency Waka Kotahi (NZTA) Monday August Due Provide NLTP datanumbers once this has been endorsed by the NZTA Board. Friday August
Actions led by other agencies Progress on Actions to the end of September
Activity Class Funding Ranges
Activity classes have been set to allow Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency and local government to invest in these priorities.
Acts reviewed and consulted on
Actual Budget Actual Budget Variance Forecast Budget Forecast Budget
Additional Mount Victoria Tunnel and widening of Ruahine Street expected to cost NZD million, this project will improve access for buses, and provide dedicated walking and cycling facilities. These changes will offer more reliability for all types of transport coming from the east of Wellington by redirecting through traffic away from Evans Bay and Constable Street, on to State Highway . It will also keep traffic flowing, while rapid transit is constructed in Newtown.
Additional appropriation changes
Additional design work to decide how a scheme would operate and the infrastructure required to support its operation.
Additional information has been withheld as out of scope.
Additionally, NZTA is currently investigating how to increase the private share (which includes the farebox recovery) across other public transport modes. This work will include setting regionspecific targets that take into account local network design and role. Document s ()(a) Out of Scope Out of Scope s ()(f)(iv) Out of Scope s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Auckland and Wellington are likely to have the most ambitious private share targets, given they are our two largest PTAs, and currently and historically have had among the highest private share levels.
Additionally, short term transport sector delivery plans, many of which are governed by Acts of Parliament and are key components of the transport planning and funding system. For example, the Decarbonising Transport Action Plan ( ) sets out what the Government will do to implement the transport actions in the first Emissions Reduction Plan, and what we need to reduce our transport emissions by percent by and reach net zero by . Transports role within the wider system There are other important levers that transport does not own, but there are actions that can be taken to influence these. For example, land use is an important lever that requires cross system collaboration and agreement. If we want public transport to be more efficient, this can be supported by land use zoning in areas to enable higher density development. Given its role as a key enabler of social and economic connections, the transport system intersects with a wide range of other systems at the local, n ational and global levels. This underlines the need to coordinate and recognise the impacts that decisions in transport may have on other sectors. Figure XX below illustrates some of the key relationships with the transport system, and Appendix XX includes further detail on some key areas where a coordinated response and decisions are required, including maritime security, border security and climate response . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT WIDER COLLABORATION WITHIN THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM
Additionally, there are a range of short term transport sector delivery plans currently in force Additionally, short term transport sector delivery plans, many of which are governed by Acts of Parliament and are key components of the transport planning and funding system. For example, the Decarbonising Transport Action Plan ( ) sets out what the Government will do to implement the transport actions in the first Emissions Reduction Plan, and what we need to reduce our transport emissions by percent by and reach net zero by . Transports role within the wider system There are other important levers that transport does not own, but there are actions that can be taken to influence these. For example, land use is an important lever that requires cross system collaboration and agreement. If we want public transport to be more efficient, this can be supported by land use zoning in areas to enable higher density development. Given its role as a key enabler of social and economic connections, the transport system intersects with a wide range of other systems at the local, n ational and global levels. This underlines the need to coordinate and recognise the impacts that decisions in transport may have on other sectors. Figure XX below illustrates some of the key relationships with the transport system, and Appendix XX includes further detail on some key areas where a coordinated response and decisions are required, including maritime security, border security and climate response . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TRANSPORTS ROLE WITHIN THE WIDER SYSTEM
Additionally, there is scope to explore synthetic fuels for both petrol and diesel engines. There is a need for New Zealand to invest in more research and development to transition to a l owemissions economy, including a broader look at enabling alternative low emission fuels.
Additionally, to implement the GPS direction, NZTA has initiated a programme of work with PTAs focused on increasing private share funding. This includes farebox recovery andthirdparty revenue across all public transport modes. The programme involves settingregionspecific interim targets this year to drive shorterterm improvements, as well asidentifying longerterm initiatives and targets to sustain progress over time.
Address for Service: Ally Crane Aoraki Environmental Consultancy Ltd (on behalf of Arowhenua) Telephone: Email:
Addressing carbon dioxide emissions from the international aviation sector through the Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA).
Addressing offending on public transport buses You have expressed interest in whether changes could be made to the Sentencing Act to make committing an offence on a public transport bus an aggravating factor at sentencing. The Sentencing Act contains a range of aggravating factors, such as the actual or threatened use of violence or a weapon, the victim s vulnerability due to their age or health or any other factor known to the offender, and hostility towards the victims race, nationality, religion, or disability. These factors would seem to apply in many of the recent attacks on buses, subject to the findings of the respective court processes. The Minister of Justice has an upcoming Bill to amend the Sentencing Act due for introduction by September CAB MIN. refers. The Bill includes introducing a new aggravating factor for victims who were working alone at the time of the offending. This aggravating factor will cover victims who work alone such as bus drivers, taxi drivers and, in some circumstances, small business operators like dairies and petrol stations. As with all sentencing decisions, the Courts will consider the particular facts of each case when deciding whether an aggravating factor applies. For example, in the situation where a train conductor is working with a train driver who cannot leave the driver s cab, it would be a matter for the C ourt to consider whether this aggravating factor applies to the particular circumstances of the case.
Adequate some improvement required There is sufficient evidence observed to confirm expectations are generally sufficiently met. Suitable systems and processes are in place and generally applied appropriately with only minor shortcomings which do not compromise the ability to achieve performance. Controls are in place to ensure performance expectationstargets are achieved and minimal risk of impact to customerroad user.
Administering a transport support package to help New Zealands COVID recovery.
Advanced Certificate Advancement of Mori Opportunity Te Wananga o Aotearoa
Advanced aviation is the next aviation revolution and will impact sectors such as agriculture, communications, emergency management, environmental monitoring and advancing science.
Advanced aviation, also re
Advice on impacts on PPP settlement negotiations arising from the upgraded COVID Level Alerts received on August
Advice sent to the Minister
Advice through the Weekly Report on extending the: ZEHV RUC exemption and modelling the impact of the RUC transition on hybrid and EV uptake Wednesday October
Advice to Minister on options and Cabinet report back scheduled for October Project J Scrappage Scheme: Implement an equity oriented vehicle scrap andreplace scheme to make cleaner vehicles and lowemissions alternatives affordable for lowincome households Manager: Ewan Delany Environment, Emissions and Adaptation Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE) Cabinet paper November decisions on April launch of trial the final policy design for trial Project K Social Licensing Scheme: Support social leasing schemes to make cleaner vehicles affordable for lowincome households Manager: Ewan Delany Environment, Emissions and Adaptation Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE) Advice to Cabinet on set up and initial draw down Cabinet paper on final design of the scheme April launch of trial of funding for the social leasing scheme Project L Sustainable Biofuels Obligations: Implement the Sustainable Biofuels Obligation, which requires liable fuel suppliers to reduce the total emissions of the fuels they supply by a set percentage each year through the deployment of biofuels (in blended or neat form) Manager: Ewan Delany Environment, Emissions and Adaptation Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE) Cabinet paper seeking approval of final regulations and Bill (TBC, pending decisions by Ministers) Bill available for introduction
AdvisorFacilitator Auckland Council Governance Framework Review Commissioner Local Government Commission
After years and amendments the VDAM Rules were due for a comprehensive review. Although they generally worked well, changes were needed to:
After a select committee process that included public submissions, Parliament passed the regional fuel tax legislation into law on June .
After considering feedback on the driver licensing system discussion paper, the Government made some changes to the proposals. Cabinet agreed to proceed with the proposed amendments to the Driver Licensing Rule, including a modified proposal for reduced vision testing that responded to the concerns raised during public consultation.
After nearly months of work and interim reports, the group had a number of recommendations:
After risk adjustment, t he AIO offenders had a lower relative rate of reoffending for disqualified driving offences than the matched group within two years (. versus .)
After risk adjustment, the AIO group had a lower relative rate of reoffending for drink driving offences than the matched group within two years (. versus .) ( Table below). Chi square significance testing showed this result to be significant at the p. level of significance (p value .). Both the AIO group (.) and the matched group (.) reoffended less than the expected percentage of the predicted reoffending rates. The expected percentages were for the AIO group and . for the matched group. The actual percentages before risk adjustment were . for the AIO group and . for the matched group. Using the actual percentages results in lower relative rate of reoffending, for the AIO group, for drink driving offences than the matched group within two years. Table : Actual and expected percentage of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for drink driving offences, and riskadjusted percentages, after years, by offender group
After risk adjustment, the AIO offenders had a lower relative rate of reoffending for disqualified driving offences than the matched group within three years ( versus .) (Table below). Chi square significance testing showed this result to be significant at the p. level of significance. (p value .).The AIO group reoffended less than the expected percentage of predicted reoffending rates. The matched group reoffending percentage w as above the predicted percentage. The expected percentages were . for the AIO group and . for the matched group. The actual percentages before risk adjustment were for the AIO group and for the matched group. Using the actual percentages r esults in lower relative rate of reoffending, for the AIO group, for disqualified driving offences than the matched group within three years. Table : Actual and expected percentage of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for disq ualified driving offences, and risk adjusted percentages, after years, by offender group
After risk adjustment, the AIO offenders had a lower relative rate of reoffending for other offences than the matched group within two years (. versus .) (Table below). Chi square significance testing showed this result to be significant at the p. level of significance (p value .). Both the AIO group and the matched group reoffended less than the expected percentage predicted by reoffending rates. The expected percentages were for the AIO group and . for the matched group. The actual percentages before risk adjustment were . for the AIO group and for the matched group for Other (non drinkdisqualified driving). Offences than the matched group within two years. Using the actual percentages results in lower relative rate of reoffending, for the AIO group, for Other (non drinkdisqualified driving) Offences than the matched group within two years.
After risk adjustment, the AIO offenders had a lower relative rate of reoffending for drink drivin g offences than the matched group within three years (. versus .) (Table below). Chi square significance testing showed this result to be significant at the p. level of significance (p value .). Both the AIO group (.) and the matched group (.) reoffended less than the expected percentage of predicted reoffending rates, these were for the AIO group and . for the matched group. The actual percentages before risk adjustment were . for the AIO group and for the matched group. Using the actual percentages results in lower relative rate of reoffending, for the AIO group, for drink driving offences than the matched group within three years. Table : Actual and expected percentage of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for drink driving offences, and riskadjusted percentages, after years, by offender group
After risk adjustment, the AIO offenders had a lower relative rate of reoffending for disqualified driving offences than the matched group within four years ( . versus .) (Table below). Chi square significance testing showed this result to be significant at the p. level of significance.( p value .).The AIO group reoffended less than the expected percentage of predicted reoffending rates. The matched group reoffending percentage was above the predicted percentage. The expected percentages were . for the AIO group and . for the matched group. The actual percentages before risk adjustment were . for the AIO gr oup and . for the matched group. Using the actual percentages results in lower relative rate of reoffending, for the AIO group, for disqualified driving offences than the matched group within four years.
After risk adjustment, the AIO offenders had a lower relative rate of reoffending for drink driving offences than the matched group within four years (. versus .) (Table below). Chi square significance testing showed this result to be significant at the p. level of significance (p value .). The AIO group reof fended less than the expected percentage of predicted reoffending rates. The matched group was above the predicted percentage. The expected percentages were for the AIO group and for the matched group. The actual percentages before risk adjustment were . for the AIO group and . for the matched group. Using the actual percentages results in lower relative rate of reoffending, for the AIO group, for drink driving offences than the matched group within four years. Table : Actual and expected percentage of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for drink driving offences, and riskadjusted percentages, after years, by offender group
After risk adjustment, there was no significant difference in reoffending rates for other offences between AIO and matched offenders within four years. (Table below). Both the risk adjusted AIO group (.) and the similar matched group (.) reoffended (risk adjusted) less than the expected percentage of predicted reoffe nding rates. Predicted percentages were . for the AIO group and . for the matched group. The actual percentages before risk adjustment were . for the AIO group and . for the matched group for Other (non drinkdisqualified driving) Offences than the matched group within four years. Using the actual percentages results in lower relative rate of reoffending for the AIO group, for Other (non drinkdisqualified driving) Offences than the matched group within four years. Table : Actual and of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for other (nondrinkdisqualified driving)offences, and riskadjusted percentages, after years, by offender group
After risk adjustment, there was no significant difference in reoffending rates for other offences between AIO and matched offenders within three years. (Table below). Both the AIO group (.) and the matched group () reoffended less than the expected percentage of predicted reoffending rates. Predicted percentages were . for the AIO group and for the matched group. The actual percentages before risk adjustment were . for the AIO group and . for the matched group for Other (non drinkdisqualified driving) Offences than the matched group within three years. Using the actual per centages results in lower relative rate of reoffending, for the AIO group, for Other (non drinkdisqualified driving) Offences than the matched group within the three years.
After running a tender process on GETS, the Ministry of Transport is pleased to appoint the consultancy firm PwC to undertake the business case work
After running a tender process on GETS, the Ministry of Transport is pleased to appoint the consultancy firm PwC to undertake the business case work (late December ). PwC is leading a consortium also consisting of Beca and Polis who collectively bring relationships and relevant experience within the Northland region. The Ministry intends to hit the ground running in early to enable delivery of the business case to the Minister by mid.
After running a tender process on the Government Electronic Tenders Service (GETS), the Ministry of Transport is pleased to appoint the engineering firm Tonkin Taylor to undertake the technical feasibility study. Tonkin Taylor is leading a wider consortium consisting of Royal HaskoningDHV, MetOcean Solutions, Pacific Marine Management Ltd and the University of Auckland. The study is expected to be complete in months.
After the first months of operation it became clear that the scheme was not financially sustainable with the funding available.
After the paper was released, we gave a keynote presentation
After the projects Terms of Reference were agreed in April , we undertook work that culminated in a report to the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Transport and the Auckland Mayor recommending we progress our investigation into congestion pricing for Auckland.
After the regional fuel tax came into effect in Auckland, we reviewed the range of situations where someone can claim a rebate of regional fuel tax.
Again, this study was not able to ascertain the effectiveness of the AIO after interlock removal due to lack of installation duration data that could be linked to the AIO group. As a temporary form of incapacitation imposed for a fixed period of time, interlock programmes are able to reduce recidivism dramatically while the interlock is in place. However there is evidence to suggest that it is unrealistic to expect the device to have ongoing effects af ter removal in the absence of additional programme features. Unless interlocks are combined with interventions that address the underlying issues that contribute to recidivism such as alcohol abuse and the lack of perceived alternatives to driving after dr inking it is likely that many offenders will continue to drive after drinking once the device is removed. Continued drinking and driving after interlock removal is supported by recent research ( Nieuwkamp et al., ). As repor ted by Waters (), this type of intensive supervision and monitoring is a key element of ignition interlock programmes and may play an important role in reducing recidivism rates among programme participants, both by helping to ensure compliance with programme requirements and by effectively communicating to offenders the need to change their behaviour. A key element involved in extending the effect of interlock programmes is to combine their use with participation in an al cohol rehabilitation program. This would allow treatment providers to take advantage of the recorded interlock data which contains valuable information about alcohol use to inform on treatment planning. One test of this approach found that the interlock pr ovides useful information for treatment providers in promoting the recovery of drink drive offenders ( Voas et al., ). As reported by the interlock providers there are those who are on the programme for up to three years . Given that the interlock data can be used to identify attempted drink driving it may be of merit to offer those whose data indicate repeated attempts to drink and drive further assistance ., There appears to be no data gathered by Waka Kotahi or any Government Agency on interlock installations and it may be of merit to investigate data gathering of installations against alcohol interlock licences issued, as well as interlock installation durat ion data and removal data (whether by exit criteria or other means). An evaluation framework should be constructed to investigate the linking of all data available. This would enable a more exact evaluation to be carried out on those with the interlock fit ted as opposed to those who have received the sentence but did not install the interlock. The data in Table shows that around of the AIO group were driving in contravention of their AIL this could mean that they did not have the interlock installed on their vehicle or were driving a non interlocked installed vehicle the data does not indicate which. However the significant reductions in reoffending of the AIO alone indicate that the use of the sentence is powerful and could be more robustly utilised not only for the eligible cohort currently able to receive the sentence but to further include all drink drive offenders. Another limitation of this study is that it does not include any employment or income data. Research has established that the costs involved can be a factor in whether or not an eligible offender receives, or complies with, such a sentence. It has been reported ( Waters , a) that since August , on average, of the tot al AIL applications were subsidised. There are also other exclusion criteria that may disallow the user of the AIO. As reported by Waters (b) only of those eligible for the, now mandatory, sentence received the AIO. The Court cluster data suggests that the sentence is more widely used in the Auckland and Canterbury districts (see Appendix ). A review of the use of exemptions at
Age Reference people by their age range, not age group.
Agency Project Waka Kotahi SH Waka Kotahi SH Waka Kotahi Takitimu North Link Stage Waka Kotahi Takitimu North Link Stage Waka Kotahi Papakura to Drury Waka Kotahi Penlink Waka Kotahi Melling Waka Kotahi Total KiwiRail Wiri to Quay Park KiwiRail Papakura to Pukekohe Electrification KiwiRail Wellington Railway Station Safety KiwiRail Wairarapa Rail Upgrades KiwiRail Capital Connection Rolling Stock KiwiRail Otiria to Whangarei KiwiRail Total Total
Agency for maritime security within the national security system, lead agency for maritime security
Agency SOE Key Functions Auckland Light Rail Limited (ALRL) ALRL was established in late under Schedule of the Crown Entities Act to deliver a Detailed Business Case by mid for the Crown to make a final investment decision on a light rail route from the Auckland city centre to Auckland Airport. You are jointly responsible for ALRL along with the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Housing with each Minister having a share in the company . In addition, Auckland Council and Manu Whenua representatives are joint sponsors along with the Crown. Development of detailed planning is delivered in accordance with the Project Planning and Funding Agreement . This is a contractual agreement between the Crown, Council and ALRL that sets out the terms for ALRL to manage the delivery of the Auckland Light Rail project. KiwiRail KiwiRail is the SOE responsible for freight and tourism passenger rail services on , kilometres of rail network and operating three inter island ferries. KiwiRail owns, maintains and upgrades the national rail network and associated infrastructure, including the rail networks used by Auckland and Wellington passenger rail services. KiwiRail is also responsible for operating Te Huia rail service , which connects Hamilton to Auckland. Auckland Transport and Greater Wellington Regional Council are responsible for planning, funding and procuring operators for the passenger rail services in their regions. They also own the passenger rolling stock and related infrastructure required to support operations, such as station buildings and maintenance depots. KiwiRails core purpose is to move people and freight, and to cooperate with other players in the sector to create integrated transport solutions for customers. KiwiRail is focused on effici ent freight movements (via rail and ferry) and helping customers to be more competitive. Meteorological Service of New Zealand Ltd (MetService) The core purpose of MetService is to provide weather services that support safety of life and property and, as a SOE , add value to the New Zealand economy. The weather impacts significantly on New Zealands economy, transport safety, primary industries, energy productionconsumption and general public safety. MetService provides a wide range of weather information services and data to government (including other transport sector agencies), business, and directly to the public, to promote public safety and inform weather related risk management and decision maki ng. MetService works closely with other transport sector agencies. It provides specialised road environmental information services to Waka Kotahi and its Network Operations Contractors (contracted to maintain the operations of road networks), and for the management of weather impacts on the state highway network and other major roads. Airways Corporation of New Zealand Ltd (Airways) Airways is a commercial Air Navigation Service Provider (ANSP) that is committed to ensuring safe skies for today and tomorrow. Airways works with partners to provide global aviation customers with safe, integrated airspace management through a proactive safety culture, expert knowledge, and technology enabled soluti ons. Airways provides air traffic control services and infrastructure to enable safe, reliable and efficient air transport within the New Zealand Flight Information Region. Airways is also responsible for maintaining and investing in the aviation infrastructure that supports New Zealands air traffic management system. Airways invest s in new technology that enhances safety and delivers economic and environmental benefits for customers and the public. As an ANSP, Airways is regulated by CAA and provides its service in line with Civil Aviation Rules and international standards .
AgencySOE Key Functions Auckland Light Rail Limited Auckland Light Rail Limited (ALRL) was established in late under Schedule of the Crown Entities Act to deliver a Detailed Business Case (DBC) by mid for the Crown to make a final investment decision on a light rail route from the Auckland city centre to Auckland Airport. The ALR project includes urban development and integration with other transport initiatives and systems, such as the Additional Waitemat Harbour Crossing , You are jointly responsible for ALRL along with the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Housing with each Minister having a share in ALRL. In addition, Auckland Council and Manu Whenau representatives are joint sponsors along with the Crown. The Board operates independently at arms length to shareholding Ministers and Sponsors, in accordance with the Project Planning and Funding Agreement (PPFA). The PPFA is a contractual agreement between the Crown, Council and ALRL that sets out the terms f or ALRL to manage the delivery of the Auckland Light Rail project. KiwiRail KiwiRail is a commercially focused and vertically integrated SOE, responsible for operating freight and tourism passenger services on , kilometres of rail network and three inter island ferries. KiwiRail owns, maintains and upgrades the national rail network and associated infrastructure, including the rail networks used by Auckland and Wellington passenger rail services. KiwiRail will als o be responsible for operating Te Huia (Hamilton to Auckland start up service), once it is operational. Auckland Transport (AT) and Greater Wellington Regional Council (GWRC) are responsible for planning, funding and procuring operators for the passenger rail services in their regions. They also own the passenger rolling stock and related infrastructure required to support operations, such as station buildings and maintenance depots. KiwiRails core purpose is to move people and freight, and to cooperate with other players in the sector to create integrated transport solutions for customers. KiwiRail is focused on efficient freight movements (via rail and ferry) and helping customers to be more competitive. Meteorological Service of New Zealand Ltd (MetService) The core purpose of MetService is to provide weather services that support safety of life and property and, as a SOE, add value to the New Zealand economy. The weather impacts significantly on New Zealands economy, transport safety, primary industries, energy productionconsumption and general public safety. MetService provides a wide range of weather information services and data to government (including other transport sector agencies), business, and directly to the public, to promote public safety and inform weather related risk management and decision maki ng. MetService works closely with other transport sector agencies. It provides specialised road environmental information services to Waka Kotahi and its Network Operations Contractors (contracted to maintain the operations of road networks), and for the management of weather impacts on the State Highway network and other major roads. Airways Corporation of New Zealand Ltd (Airways) Airways is a commercial Air Navigation Service Provider (ANSP) that is committed to ensuring safe skies for today and tomorrow. Airways works with partners to provide global aviation customers with safe, integrated airspace management through a proactive s afety culture, expert knowledge, and technology enabled solutions. Airways provides air traffic control services and infrastructure to enable safe, reliable and efficient air transport within the New Zealand Flight Information Region. Airways is also responsible for maintaining and investing in the aviation infrastructure that supports New Zealands air traffic management system. Airways invest in new technology that enhances safety and delivers real economic and environmental benefits for customers and the public. As an ANSP, Airways is regulated by CAA and provides its service in line with Civil Aviation Rules and international standards .
AgencySOE Key Functions Auckland Light Rail Limited Auckland Light Rail Limited (ALRL) was established in late under Schedule of the Crown Entities Act to deliver a Detailed Business Case (DBC) by mid for the Crown to make a final investment decision on a light rail route from the Auckland city centre to Auckland Airport. The ALR project includes urban development and integration with other transport initiatives and systems, such as the Additional Waitemat Harbour Crossing , You are jointly responsible for ALRL along with the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Housing with each Minister having a share in ALRL. In addition, Auckland Council and Manu Whenau representatives are joint sponsors along with the Crown. The Board operates independently at arms length to shareholding Ministers and Sponsors, in accordance with the Project Planning and Funding Agreement (PPFA). The PPFA is a contractual agreement between the Crown, Council and ALRL that sets out the terms f or ALRL to manage the delivery of the Auckland Light Rail project. KiwiRail KiwiRail is a commercially focused and vertically integrated SOE, responsible for operating freight and tourism passenger services on , kilometres of rail network and three inter island ferries. KiwiRail owns, maintains and upgrades the national rail network and associated infrastructure, including the rail networks used by Auckland and Wellington passenger rail services. KiwiRail will also be responsible for operating Te Huia (Hamilton to Auckland start up service), once it is operational. Auckland Transport (AT) and Greater Wellington Regional Council (GWRC) are responsible for planning, funding and procuring operators for the passenger rail services in their regions. They also own the passenger rolling stock and related infrastructure required to support operations, such as station buildings and maintenance depots. KiwiRails core purpose is to move people and freight, and to cooperate with other players in the sector to create integrated transport solutions for customers. KiwiRail is focused on efficient freight movements (via rail and ferry) and helping customers to be more competitive. Meteorological Service of New Zealand Ltd (MetService) The core purpose of MetService is to provide weather services that support safety of life and property and, as a SOE, add value to the New Zealand economy. The weather impacts significantly on New Zealands economy, transport safety, primary industries, energy productionconsumption and general public safety. MetService provides a wide range of weather information services and data to government (including other transport sector agencies), business, and directly to the public, to promote public safety and inform weather related risk management and decision making. MetService works closely with other transport sector agencies. It provides specialised road environmental information services to Waka Kotahi and its Network Operations Contractors (contracted to maintain the operations of road networks), and for the management of weather impacts on the State Highway network and other major roads. Airways Corporation of New Zealand Ltd (Airways) Airways is a commercial Air Navigation Service Provider (ANSP) that is committed to ensuring safe skies for today and tomorrow. Airways works with partners to provide global aviation customers with safe, integrated airspace management through a proactive s afety culture, expert knowledge, and technology enabled solutions. Airways provides air traffic control services and infrastructure to enable safe, reliable and efficient air transport within the New Zealand Flight Information Region. Airways is also responsible for maintaining and investing in the aviation infrastructure that supports New Zealands air traffic management system. Airways invest in new technology that enhances safety and delivers real economic and environmental benefits for customers and the public. As an ANSP, Airways is regulated by CAA and provides its service in line with Civil Aviation Rules and international standards .
AgencySOE Key Functions Auckland Light Rail Limited Auckland Light Rail Limited (ALRL) was established in late under Schedule of the Crown Entities Act to deliver a Detailed Business Case (DBC) by mid for the Crown to make a final investment decision on a light rail route from the Auckland city centre to Auckland Airport. The ALR project includes urban development and integration with other transport initiatives and systems, such as the Additional Waitemat Harbour Crossing , You are jointly responsible for ALRL along with the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Housing with each Minister having a share in ALRL. In addition, Auckland Council and Manu Whenua representatives are joint sponsors along with the Crown. The Board operates independently at arms length to shareholding Ministers and Sponsors, in accordance with the Project Planning and Funding Agreement . This is a contractual agreement between the Crown, Council and ALRL that sets out the terms for ALRL to manage the delivery of the Auckland Light Rail project. KiwiRail KiwiRail is a SOE responsible for operating freight and tourism passenger services on , kilometres of rail network and three inter island ferries. KiwiRail owns, maintains and upgrades the national rail network and associated infrastructure, including the rail networks used by Auckland and Wellington passenger rail services. KiwiRail will also be responsible for operating Te Huia (Hamilton to Auckland start up service), once it is operational. Auckland Transport and Greater Wellington Regional Council are responsible for planning, funding and procuring operators for the passenger rail services in their regions. They also own the passenger rolling stock and related infrastructure required to support operations, such as station buildings and maintenance depots. KiwiRails core purpose is to move people and freight, and to cooperate with other players in the sector to create integrated transport solutions for customers. KiwiRail is focused on efficient freight movements (via rail and ferry) and helping customers to be more competitive. Meteorological Service of New Zealand Ltd (MetService) The core purpose of MetService is to provide weather services that support safety of life and property and, as a SOE, add value to the New Zealand economy. The weather impacts significantly on New Zealands economy, transport safety, primary industries, energy productionconsumption and general public safety. MetService provides a wide range of weather information services and data to government (including other transport sector agencies), business, and directly to the public, to promote public safety and inform weather related risk management and decision maki ng. MetService works closely with other transport sector agencies. It provides specialised road environmental information services to Waka Kotahi and its Network Operations Contractors (contracted to maintain the operations of road networks), and for the management of weather impacts on the state highway network and other major roads. Airways Corporation of New Zealand Ltd (Airways) Airways is a commercial Air Navigation Service Provider (ANSP) that is committed to ensuring safe skies for today and tomorrow. Airways works with partners to provide global aviation customers with safe, integrated airspace management through a proactive s afety culture, expert knowledge, and technology enabled solutions. Airways provides air traffic control services and infrastructure to enable safe, reliable and efficient air transport within the New Zealand Flight Information Region. Airways is also responsible for maintaining and investing in the aviation infrastructure that supports New Zealands air traffic management system. Airways invest in new technology that enhances safety and delivers real economic and environmental benefits for customers and the public. As an ANSP, Airways is regulated by CAA and provides its service in line with Civil Aviation Rules and international standards .
AgencySOE Key Functions Auckland Light Rail Limited Auckland Light Rail Limited (ALRL) was established in late under Schedule of the Crown Entities Act to deliver a Detailed Business Case (DBC) by mid for the Crown to make a final investment decision on a light rail route from the Auckland city centre to Auckland Airport. The ALR project includes urban development and integration with other transport initiatives and systems, such as the Additional Waitemat Harbour Crossing , You are jointly responsible for ALRL along with the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Housing with each Minister having a share in ALRL. In addition, Auckland Council and Manu Whenua representatives are joint sponsors along with the Crown. The Board operates independently at arms length to shareholding Ministers and Sponsors, in accordance with the Project Planning and Funding Agreement . This is a contractual agreement between the Crown, Council and ALRL that sets out the terms for ALRL to manage the delivery of the Auckland Light Rail project. KiwiRail KiwiRail is a SOE responsible for operating freight and tourism passenger services on , kilometres of rail network and three inter island ferries. KiwiRail owns, maintains and upgrades the national rail network and associated infrastructure, including the rail networks used by Auckland and Wellington passenger rail services. KiwiRail will also be responsible for operating Te Huia (Hamilton to Auckland start up service), once it is operational. Auckland Transport and Greater Wellington Regional Council are responsible for planning, funding and procuring operators for the passenger rail services in their regions. They also own the passenger rolling stock and related infrastructure required to support operations, such as station buildings and maintenance depots. KiwiRails core purpose is to move people and freight, and to cooperate with other players in the sector to create integrated transport solutions for customers. KiwiRail is focused on efficient freight movements (via rail and ferry) and helping customers to be more competitive. Meteorological Service of New Zealand Ltd (MetService) The core purpose of MetService is to provide weather services that support safety of life and property and, as a SOE, add value to the New Zealand economy. The weather impacts significantly on New Zealands economy, transport safety, primary industries, energy productionconsumption and general public safety. MetService provides a wide range of weather information services and data to government (including other transport sector agencies), business, and directly to the public, to promote public safety and inform weather related risk management and decision making. MetService works closely with other transport sector agencies. It provides specialised road environmental information services to Waka Kotahi and its Network Operations Contractors (contracted to maintain the operations of road networks), and for the management of weather impacts on the state highway network and other major roads. Airways Corporation of New Zealand Ltd (Airways) Airways is a commercial Air Navigation Service Provider (ANSP) that is committed to ensuring safe skies for today and tomorrow. Airways works with partners to provide global aviation customers with safe, integrated airspace management through a proactive s afety culture, expert knowledge, and technology enabled solutions. Airways provides air traffic control services and infrastructure to enable safe, reliable and efficient air transport within the New Zealand Flight Information Region. Airways is also responsible for maintaining and investing in the aviation infrastructure that supports New Zealands air traffic management system. Airways invest in new technology that enhances safety and delivers real economic and environmental benefits for customers and the public. As an ANSP, Airways is regulated by CAA and provides its service in line with Civil Aviation Rules and international standards .
AgencySOE Key Functions Auckland Light Rail Limited Auckland Light Rail Limited (ALRL) was established in late under Schedule of the Crown Entities Act to deliver a Detailed Business Case (DBC) by mid for the Crown to make a final investment decision on a light rail route from the Auckland city centre to Auckland Airport. The ALR project includes urban development and integration with other transport initiatives and systems, such as the Additional Waitemat Harbour Crossing , You are jointly responsible for ALRL along with the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Housing with each Minister having a share in ALRL. In addition, Auckland Council and Manu Whenua representatives are joint sponsors along with the Crown. Development of detailed planning is delivered in accordance with the Project Planning and Funding Agreement . This is a contractual agreement between the Crown, Council and ALRL that sets out the terms for ALRL to manage the delivery of the Auckland Light Rail project. KiwiRail KiwiRail is a SOE responsible for operating freight and tourism passenger services on , kilometres of rail network and three inter island ferries. KiwiRail owns, maintains and upgrades the national rail network and associated infrastructure, including the rail networks used by Auckland and Wellington passenger rail services. KiwiRail is also responsible for operating Te Huia, which connects Hamilton to Auckland. Auckland Transport and Greater Wellington Regional Council are responsible for planning, funding and procuring operators for the passenger rail services in their regions. They also own the passenger rolling stock and related infrastructure required to support operations, such as station buildings and maintenance depots. KiwiRails core purpose is to move people and freight, and to cooperate with other players in the sector to create integrated transport solutions for customers. KiwiRail is focused on efficient freight movements (via rail and ferry) and helping customers to be more competitive. Meteorological Service of New Zealand Ltd (MetService) The core purpose of MetService is to provide weather services that support safety of life and property and, as a SOE, add value to the New Zealand economy. The weather impacts significantly on New Zealands economy, transport safety, primary industries, energy productionconsumption and general public safety. MetService provides a wide range of weather information services and data to government (including other transport sector agencies), business, and directly to the public, to promote public safety and inform weather related risk management and decision making. MetService works closely with other transport sector agencies. It provides specialised road environmental information services to Waka Kotahi and its Network Operations Contractors (contracted to maintain the operations of road networks), and for the management of weather impacts on the state highway network and other major roads. Airways Corporation of New Zealand Ltd (Airways) Airways is a commercial Air Navigation Service Provider (ANSP) that is committed to ensuring safe skies for today and tomorrow. Airways works with partners to provide global aviation customers with safe, integrated airspace management through a proactive s afety culture, expert knowledge, and technology enabled solutions. Airways provides air traffic control services and infrastructure to enable safe, reliable and efficient air transport within the New Zealand Flight Information Region. Airways is also responsible for maintaining and investing in the aviation infrastructure that supports New Zealands air traffic management system. Airways invest in new technology that enhances safety and delivers real economic and environmental benefits for customers and the public. As an ANSP, Airways is regulated by CAA and provides its service in line with Civil Aviation Rules and international standards .
Agenda Minister Brown officials meeting PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Agenda Minister Brown officials meeting s ()(f)(iv)
Agenda Minister Brown officials meeting s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Agenda Minister Brown officials meeting s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of . Budget Tim Herbert Verbal update . Aviation Advanced aviation Siobhan Routledge Draft cabinet paper . Paul OConnell OC . Revenue update Brent Johnston Verbal update Part Ministry of Transport and other agencies Lead Paper reference . David Wood (Treasury Officials in attendance) OC
Agenda Minister Brown officials meeting s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Agenda Item : Update on Waka Kotahi Speed and Infrastructure Programme Median Barriers
Agenda Minister Brown o fficials meeting with NZTA
Aggregate gap between vehicles CO
Agree Disagree Agree Disagree Minister of Finance Minister of Transport
Agreement reached between the Government and Auckland Council on how to work together
Agreements. Some parts of the transport sector (e.g. aviation) is subject to regulation by other agencies, e.g. the Commerce Commission regulates the disclosure of pricing by airports given the monopolistic nature of airports. Transport Crown entities, as well as the Ministry, need to deliver services, educate and inform, and make sure that people follow the legal requirements. Through the transport regulatory system, you are able to deliver your priorities through the licensing, certification and regulation of people, organisations, and vehicles. At an individual level, regulatory and enforcement powers are exercised by the transport agencies (through the actions taken by the Director in each of these agencies). You have responsibility for a variety of legal instruments Legislation forms the core of the transport regulatory system comprising primary legislation, secondary legislation, and local government bylaws . You are responsible for transport Acts which set out: the roles and functions of the Ministry, transport agencies, and state owned enterprises (SOEs) (like KiwiRail) the planning and funding arrangements for land transport the roles and powers of local authorities and road controlling authorities licensing and certification arrangements for transport system participants, vehicles and technology the requirements for making transport regulations and rules compliance tools to promote adherence to safety, security and environmental requirements across transport modes. You are responsible for the passage of primary transport legislation through Parliament. The Ministry supports you to do this. Transport rules contain detailed standards, requirements and procedures that govern transport activities Transport rules are the most common form of delegated legislation for transport. Rules contain detailed technical standards, requirements, and procedures governing the construction, maintenance, licensing, certification and operation of transport activities within modes. You are empowered under primary legislation to make these rules through delegated responsibilities. You are expected to advise Cabinet that you intend to make a rule if there would be wide ranging impacts. There is an expedited rule making process where urgent changes can be made by Order in Council. The transport Crown entities develop the majority of transport rules with the Ministrys involvement, but the Ministry leads policy development on significant Rules. Regulations set out associated offences and penalties, fees, and charges Transport regulations mainly set out the associated rule related offences and penalties, and fees and charges that fund the work of the transport agencies. The Ministry leads the development of As Transport Minister you have powers to amend, replace or disallow some local government bylaws. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS
Aide Memoire: Update on Transmission Gully PPP negotiations received on July
Aimee Wiley Chief Executive Motor Vehicle Industry of New Zealand (MIA)
Air Navigation System Review
Air New Zealand Air China Reauthorisation Consultation
Air New Zealand Air New Zealand, all reported domestic routes
Air New Zealand and Air China have lodged an application seeking reauthorisation to continue their Strategic Alliance Agreement (SAA) until March . The Alliance has been in place since September , and is due to expire on March .
Air New Zealand and Cathay Pacific have lodged an application seeking reauthorisation of their North Asia Alliance Agreement.
Air New Zealand and Singapore Airlines have lodged an application seeking reauthorisation of their alliance (the Strategic Alliance Agreement).
Air New Zealand and Virgin Australia have lodged an application seeking authorisation to give effect to a Commercial Framework Agreement, Codeshare Agreement, and various related agreements.
Air New Zealand reports that cancellations were mostly due to weather events, bird strikes, and ongoing Pratt Whitney engine issues affecting some aircraft types, and one aircraft out of service. Cancellation rates improved significantly by the end of the month. The main factors contributing to delays across the domestic jet network during March were: fog in Christchurch bird strikes in Queenstown and Wellington early in the month, one aircraft was out of service for several days due to an engineering issue. Despite these early disruptions, ontime performance steadily improved over the course of the month. ..... .. .... ... .. . . . . . . . . . . . ...... Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar OnTime Departures () OnTime Arrivals () Cancellations ()
Air New Zealand reports that the majority of transTasman delays and cancellations were due to Cyclone Alfred, particularly affecting services to Brisbane and the Gold Coast. Additional cancellations occurred while awaiting transport of parts and maintenance personnel to Brisbane through customs to carry out aircraft repairs. March presented a number of operational challenges, including severe weather, aircraft maintenance requirements, and airport constraints. Air New Zealand says that despite these disruptions, they made solid progress in restoring schedule stability and reducing cancellations by months end. .. ... ...... ... ... . .. .. .. . . . ...... Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar OnTime Departures () OnTime Arrivals () Cancellations ()
Air New Zealand, Cathay Pacific, China Airlines, China Southern, Emirates and Malaysia Airlines will continue to provide airfreight capacity under the IAFC Phase extension. As well as the flights supported by the scheme a number of airlines and carriers continue to operate airfreight services independent of the scheme.
AirNZ Wellington Airport incident On Sunday September during final approach into Wellington, the flight crew of AirNZ flight NZ received a Master Warning Engine Oil Low pressure No engine. At approximately feet the crew received a Master Warning Engine Fire No. The crew continued the approach and landed. The Engine Fire warning remained after the crew had used the two fire extinguishing bottles to put out the fire , so they elected to evacuate the aircraft onto the runway. Airport emergency services arrived very quickly at the aircraft and confirmed the fire had been extinguished. Although very dramatic in appearance the risk to the aircraft and persons onboard was minimal and the AirNZ flight crew are well trained to handle such situations. The Transport Accident Investigation Commission has opened an enquiry into the occurrence with the CAA monitoring the AirNZ investigation and receiving updates as that investigation progresses. s ()(b)(ii)
AirNavigationtransport.govt.nz
Airfreight carries around percent of our exports and percent of our imports by value. Aviation
Airline cooperation agreements
Airline on time performance
Airline ontime performance report
Airlines and aviation businesses from countries with well regarded regulatory systems are more
Airlines and carriers were invited to submit proposals to participate in Phase of the IAFC scheme on September. The RFP closed pm, October. Proposals for Phase of the scheme were assessed against a specific set of criteria by the evaluation panel.
Airlines can apply for the airline cooperation agreements to be reauthorised before the current authorisation expires.
Airport Authorities Act
Airports and airlines must be able to show they support regional connectivity and are key to the recovery of domestic or international aviation.
Airports, airlines, aviation support services and nonaviation transport services (land and maritime) can all apply for the ETC funding by checking their eligibility and requesting an application form from the Essential Transport Connectivity Team.
Airways Corporation of New Zealand Ltd
Akerama Curves Realignment and Passing Lane
Alec Morrison Acting Manager, Strategy b TE MANATU WAKA pi MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT tll.t.L YimiMJrv
Alignment with broader government policy settings will also support consistency in GPS and subsequent transport investment and planning. However, it is acknowledged that the GPS reflects the priorities of the government of the day and that change will likely occur. Investment priorities are clearly an important driver of decision making and implementation. However, an investment model alone will be limited in achieving the transformations needed. It seems apparent that future GPS will increasingly loo k to enhance the integration between the investment levers available through the GPS and other change levels such as regulation, targets, pricing, land reform, and spatial planning. Stakeholder discussions explored the impact that the GPS has had in invest ment planning and implementation, and where these could be identified, some discussion is included. However, these were less evident in the short time period since GPS was . For the future, it would be useful to explore the range of projects that eventuated from GPS investments and any monitoring of benefits realisation that was undertaken to provide a clearer picture of GPS impact and transport system outcomes. Discussions also highlighted the centrality of the continuous programme in transpo rt investment. This included the need for ongoing and additional resources to meet escalating cost increases and the opportunity to strengthen the linkage between policy objectives and baseline expenditure such as routine maintenance. As fiscal resources become more constrained, we can expect to see greater attention being given to innovative uses of core expenditure. . Reflections on transport investment data analysis The NLTP extracts and funding decisions data used for this analysis are a rich sour ce of information about transport investment decisions, as illustrated by the results presented above. It would be possible to use this data to develop regular reporting of new funding decisions and significant changes to existing funding to give better vi sibility of how funding is tracked versus GPS policy priorities. This could enable an ongoing evaluation of funding allocation as a complement to or substitute for standalone evaluations of individual GPS such as the present evaluation. An ongoing evaluat ion at an annual or quarterly frequency can reflect realistic characteristics of the transport investment process, such as: the moving target nature of GPS policy priorities time lags that occur between policy changes and funding decisions due to the ne ed to design and develop investments that are a good fit for policy objectives, and inertia created by past funding decisions for investments that can take many years to progress to completion. The transport investment data focused on the approved decision s (because of their link to delivering desired outcomes) and not those not approved, which were out of scope. There may well be value in future studies exploring to look at the characteristics of those proposed but declined investments against those that w ere funded to check for consistency and rigour in the investment process and to assess if the most beneficial investments and those most likely to achieve GPS outcomes were selected. Further analysis and reporting of transport investment data could also be facilitated by some improvements to the data itself. These changes involve improving the consistency and clarity of the investment data rather than collecting substantial amounts of additional data. Based APPENDIX TRENDS OBSERVED IN GPS OUTCOMES MONITORING
All communication regarding the increase of parking fines
All data comes from the Waka Kotahi NZTA MVR database.
All information provided in this release used best available insights and information at the time. As forecast revenue, spend, and available information changes over time, the information in the briefings, including numbers, may have changed since the time of writing.
All members of the public will be given the opportunity to provide feedback on Government initiatives to reduce transport emissions when the Government releases a draft Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP) for consultation in the nd half of . The ERP will include a transport chapter, based on content from Hkina te Kohupara.
All of our Ministry whnau feel supported and empowered to use te reo in the course of their work and in everyday life. We achieve this by making te reo accessible, normal and a central part of our identity. In doing this, we recognise bi cultural Aotearoa and our role as a Ministry in upholding the principles of Te Tiriti o Waitangi: partnership, participation, and active protection.
All prices above include GST.
All subpages allow the characteristics shown to be modified using the View selection dropdown menu.
All submissions will be public records and will be held for a time period required by the Public Records Act , then destroyed.
All the data provided by the MoJ has been peer reviewed at the Ministry of Justice.
All the revenue from PED and RUC funds the improvement, operation and maintenance of our land transport network. In addition to transport projects funded by PED and RUC, the Government is funding several transport projects through the New Zealand Upgrade Programme.
All these types of impairments can create access needs, from physical access needs to communication and signage access needs. Disabled people are also not a static group. The line between being nondisabled and having an impairment is thin. All people can gain impairments, including temporary ones, which in turn give them access needs. For example, someone over the age of could acquire a disability such as arthritis or hearing loss which would affect their access needs. Access needs are no problem if the built environment and transport is accessible. If not, people can be forced out of the workforce, their community and even their home.
All travel by region (Statistics NZ)
All weighted average BCRs shown in Figure above is greater than (ie, estimated benefits exceed estimated costs) across all three types of activity in all three GPS periods. Still, a small number of activi ties with approved funding had BCRs of less than one. Figure details the distribution of approved and probable future expenditure by type of improvements activity and GPS period of first approval. For example, the large proportion of public transport im provements expenditure with a BCR of less than for activities first approved under GPS relates to the public transport components of the Lets Get Wellington Moving initiative (estimated BCR . in the NLTP). We note that most of this expe nditure is probable future funding that has not yet been approved (as of April ). Similarly, the large proportion of road improvement expenditure for activities first approved under GPS that has no BCR recorded also relates to the road components of Lets Get Wellington Moving, which is the most probable future funding.
Allow for innovation . . . . . Comment on bette r travel options and climate change indicators: . . Part Two: Comments on Road to Zero and Climate change investments . . a. Road to Zero safety investments . . . . What were hearing: . . . . . Infrastructure safety treatments . . . . Road police . . . . . Alcohol interlocks . . . . . . Speed management . . . . . . . .. . . b. Climate change . . . .. . .. . . . . What were hearing: . . . . . . . . Uptake of low emissions vehicles and fuel efficiency information . . . . Alternative fuels . . . . . . . Conclusion . . . . . . . . . About the New Zealand Automobile Association . .. . . .. . . .
Allowing the CAA to respond to different demands to speed up regulatory decision making as emerging technologies evolve.
Almost of submitters supported the proposed vision, with most organisational submitters indicating strong support. There was broad support for including a target in the strategy, with of submitters supporting the proposed target of a reduction in death and serious injuries and wanting something more ambitious.
Almost all attendees agreed the current provisions need to change and several ideas were put forward ranging from better education for drone users to introducing licensing and registration schemes. We will use the feedback to help us develop policy as we review drone regulations.
Along with the above, Te Manat Waka has a strongly engrained flexible working culture this is important to me as a parent of young children. As a result, I feel supported to get my work done as well as to attend my kids sports events
Although domestic aviation emissions are covered by the Paris Agreement, it does not explicitly mention international aviation emissions. The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) is responsible for regulating international aviation activity. In , ICAO agreed on a global goal to achieve carbon neutral growth in the international aviation sector from , and in , it agreed to introduce the CORSIA, a global marketbased measure for reducing and offsetting carbon emissions in the international aviation sector.
Although investment levels into this activity class have increased (see figure ), it appears that successive year investment signals within the GPS have remained lower than necessary when compared to actual expenditure used to maintain the desired service levels and respond to cost drivers. This has potentially contributed to an increased risk of future spending backlog as evidenced by the increase for the period.
Although motorcycles make up just of New Zealands vehicle fleet, they were involved in of fatal road crashes between and motorcyclists were killed during this period.
Although no fundamental flaws were found in either Act, our review identified several issues, including the need to:
Although the likelihood of a major marine oil spill from an offshore installation in New Zealand waters is very low, the environmental, financial and cultural impacts of such an incident would be significant. New Zealands financial security regime for offshore installations aims to ensure operators can meet the costs of their activities, fulfil their legal obligations and cover any liabilities we call this financial security.
Although this working paper focused on ways that new technologies and services could affect transport and our cities, an underlying message was that our future should not simply be technologyled. We would need to be discerning about new technologies, and shape them in ways that improve urban liveability and peoples wellbeing far into the future.
Although views on some aspects differed, most submitters favoured a zerotolerance, presencebased approach to roadside drug testing, although there were concerns about the accuracy of oral fluid testing devices and Mori being disproportionately impacted by drug driving enforcement measures. The majority of submitters supported taking a second oral fluid test if someone failed the first test, followed by taking a blood sample for evidential purposes. However, there was mixed support for random drug testing of drivers.
Always use words in full in sentences, headings, captions, etc.
Amending Part would ensure the risks associated with the oil and gas industry would be addressed. The draft amendments would also provide greater protection to the Crown and the public in the event of a significant oil spill and refining the scope of liabilities would also enable permit holders to use conventional insurance policies to meet their assurance requirements.
Amending the Land Management Transport Act before congestion pricing could be implemented in Auckland or elsewhere.
Amendment Act came into force
Amendment Bill introduced to Parliament and referred to Select Committee
Amendment Regulations (the Transport Records Or der);
Amendment Regulations , the Land Transport Management (Regional Transport
Amendment Regulations ;
Amendment Rule (the Road User Amendment Rule).
Amendment Rule give effect to the decision referred to in paragraph above;
Amendment Rule on the basis that the Orders and the Amendment Rule have
Amendment consultation put on hold
Amendment to the Ministerial Direction
Amendments are also required to regulations made under the Energy (Fuels, Levies and References) Act . These changes will prescribe MARPOL Annex VI specifications for marine fuel oils and for the sampling of those fuel oils.
Amendments to Government Policy Statement on Land Transport
Amendments to Marine Protection Rules Part and were required to support changes to New Zealands offshore financial security regime. These Rules came into force on May .
Amendments to the Act did not change the polluterpays regime. Owners still retain unlimited liability for the cost of pollution damage from an oil spill from their facilities in New Zealand waters. This means that the Crown and any other person affected by pollution damage from an offshore installation is entitled to make a claim against the owner. This unlimited liability includes the:
Amendments to the State Sector Act and Public Finance Act in reinforce taking a longer term perspective and not just managing current financial performance. This is strongly aligned with the concept of benefits management. c Literature Summar y
Among drivers aged and older, the effects of increasing the minimum l earner age depend on how this affected the age and driving experience profile of such drivers, and the relationships between age, experience, and crash rates. We estimated these effects using a model that predicted crash involvements as a function of drive r age, experience, gender, and year (using the amount of time since obtaining a learner licence as a proxy for driving experience). The actual rate of monthly crash involvements for Class licensed drivers (overall, including progression through the licen ce stages) as a function of the amount of time since obtaining a learner licence and the predictions from this model are shown in Figure . In general, the rate of crash involvements starts out relatively low for new learner drivers and reaches a peak whil e most drivers are in the early stages of their restricted licence, before gradually declining as with time. In addition, older drivers tend to crash less often (all else being equal), and the model used for this analysis predicts that each year of age (u p to years old) translates to about a reduction in the odds of crash involvement (see section .. of the Technical Report for details of the estimated relationships between crash involvement and driver age).
Among riders aged and older, due to the relatively small number of riders and crashes, the effects of changes in the age and experience distribution of riders are difficult to estimate accurately. In theory, any additional crashes among riders age d and older should not be greater than the reduction in crashes among yearold riders estimated above, assuming that the effect of the change to the minimum age is to cause riders who would have started learning at years old to start at years o ld instead. In addition, modelling of crash rates indicates that yearold riders are only marginally less likely to be involved in a crash compared to yearolds. Overall, our analysis implies that the main effect of increasing the minimum age for Cla ss was to shift crashes from yearolds to yearolds (and possibly older age groups) with very little change in the overall number of crashes. Accordingly, we estimate that the change to the Class minimum age in prevented less than one crash per year. Estimated effects on crash rates of strengthening the learner and restricted practical tests (October ) The motorcycle learner and restricted practical tests were strengthened in October . We used data on around , riders who received learner licences and , who received restricted licences between and to estimate whether the odds of crash involvement while on a learner or restricted licence were different for riders who obtained their licence after the tests were strengt hened compared to riders who received their licence earlier, controlling for differences in rider age, gender, and region of residence (see section .. of the Technical Report ). The models predict that the strengthened tests did not have a statistically significant effect on crash rates:
Among the key documents that influenced the decision not to proceed with inservice testing were the draft results from a pilot programme of testing of petrol and diesel vehicles. The final versions of the petrol vehicle and diesel vehicle reports were formally in March and December .
An Aide Memoire to the Transport Minister on the timing and key issues that arise for the next phase with the Auckland light rail programme, in the context of the COVID
An action plan accompanied the strategy, setting out actions to be delivered with our road safety partners across five focus areas: infrastructure improvements and speed management, road user choices, vehicle safety, workrelated safety and system management. Annual monitoring reports were prepared to report on progress in implementing the strategy and actions.
An aide memoire to the Minister of transport on the fiscal impacts of COVID on the transport sector.
An assessment of future transport challenges.
An audit team is scheduled to visit Buller District Council in the week of Monday September . This will be followed up by an Investment Assurance (Technical) audit in the week Wednesday September .
An equivalent reduction ( percent) applies across all legislated rates of road user charges. The reduced rate will be in place from April to July , as
An evaluation of modal shift in the Government Policy Statement (GPS) on land transport
An internationally credible regulatory regime aligns with global standards, ensuring that
An outline of future trends and agreed assumptions for the project.
An overview of the strategic context for the project and the current transport situation in Auckland.
An Output Plan is attached (Appendix A refers). The update:
An consolidated version of the
Analysis group Funding source Activity class Work category External funding COVID Recovery and Response Fund (CIP) External funding Property purchase (State highways) External funding COVID Recovery and Response Fund (CIP) External funding Replacement of bridges and other structures External funding COVID Recovery and Response Fund (CIP) External funding Road improvements External funding Crown funding for Napier Gisborne SH External funding Road improvements External funding Cycling Education External funding Promotion, education and advertising External funding Infrastructure Fund ( Capital Investment Package) External funding Cycling facilities External funding Infrastructure Fund (Capital Investment Package) External funding New roads External funding Infrastructure Fund (Capital Investment Package) External funding Property purchase (State highways) External funding Infrastructure Fund (Capital Investment Package) External funding Road improvements External funding Kaikoura Earthquake Fund External funding Emergency works External funding Kaikoura Earthquake Fund External funding Financial grants External funding Provincial Growth Fund External funding Cycling facilities External funding Provincial Growth Fund External funding Emergency works External funding Provincial Growth Fund Exter nal funding Management of the funding allocation system APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
Analysis group Funding source Activity class Work category External funding Community Connect programme External funding (blank) External funding COVID funding External funding Bus services External funding COVID funding External funding Cycling facilities External funding COVID funding External funding Financial grants External funding COVID funding External funding New roads External funding COVID funding External funding Passenger ferry services External funding COVID funding External funding Passenger rail services External funding COVID funding External funding Passenger transport facilities operations and maintenance External funding COVID funding External funding Passenger t ransport infrastructure External funding COVID funding External funding Public transport facilities operations and maintenance External funding COVID funding External funding Public transport improvements, major renewals and minor improvements External funding COVID funding External funding Public transport information operations and maintenance External funding COVID funding External funding Public transport information supply, operations and maintenance External funding COVID funding External funding Public transport infrastructure and major renewals External funding COVID Recovery and Response Fund (CIP) External funding (blank) APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
Analysis group Funding source Activity class Work category External funding Provincial Growth Fund External funding Programme management External funding Provincial Growth Fund External funding Property purchase (State highways) External funding Provincial Growth Fund External funding Road improvements External funding Regional Accelerated Programme External funding New roads External funding Regional Accelerated Programme External funding Property purchase (State highways) External funding Regional Accelerated Programme External funding Replacement of bridges and other structures External funding Regional Accelerated Programme External funding Road improvements External funding Regional Investment Oppor tunities External funding Resilience improvements External funding Regional Investment Opportunities External funding Road improvements External funding Supergold card External funding SuperGold trip payments External funding Urban Cycling Programme External funding Cycling facilities NLTF (blank) (blank) NLTF (blank) Minor improvements NLTF (blank) Sea freight infrastructure NLTF Coastal shipping Sea freight infrastructure APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
Analysis group Funding source Activity class Work category NLTF Local road maintenance Financial grants NLTF Local road maintenance Level crossing warning devices NLTF Local road maintenance Minor events NLTF Local road maintenance Network and asset management NLTF Local road maintenance Operational traffic management NLTF Local road maintenance Preventive maintenance NLTF Local road maintenance Routine drainage maintenance NLTF Local road maintenance Sealed pavement maintenance NLTF Local road maintenance Sealed road pavement rehabilitation NLTF Local road maintenance Sealed road resurfacing NLTF Local road maintenance Structures component replacements NLTF Local road maintenance Structures maintenance NLTF Local road maintenance Traffic services maintenance NLTF Local road maintenance Traffic services renewals NLTF Local road maintenance Unsealed pavement maintenance NLTF Local road maintenance Unsealed road metalling NLTF Maintenance and operation of local roads (blank) APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
Analysis group Funding source Activity class Work category NLTF Maintenance and operation of State highways Environmental renewals NLTF Maintenance and operation of State highways Level crossing warning devices NLTF Maintenance and operation of State highways Minor events NLTF Maintenance and operation of St ate highways Network and asset management NLTF Maintenance and operation of State highways Operational traffic management NLTF Maintenance and operation of State highways Preventive maintenance NLTF Maintenance and operation of State highways Property management (State highways) NLTF Maintenance and operation of State highways Routine drainage maintenance NLTF Maintenance and operation of State highways Sealed pavement maintenance NLTF Maintenance and operation of State highways Sealed road pavement rehabilitation NLTF Maintenance and operation of State highways Sealed road resurfacing NLTF Maintenance and operation of State highways Structures component replacements APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
Analysis group Funding source Activity class Work category NLTF Maintenance and operation of State highways Structures maintenance NLTF Maintenance and operation of State highways Traffic services maintenance NLTF Maintenance and operation of State highways Traffic services renewals NLTF Maintenance and operation of State highways Unsealed pavement mainten ance NLTF Maintenance and operation of State highways Unsealed road metalling NLTF Renewal of local roads Drainage renewals NLTF Renewal of local roads Environmental renewals NLTF Renewal of local roads Preventive maintenance NLTF Renewal of local roads Sealed road pavement rehabilitation NLTF Renewal of local roads Sealed road resurfacing NLTF Renewal of local roads Structures component replacements NLTF Renewal of local roads Traffic services renewals NLTF Renewal of local roads Unsealed road metalling NLTF Renewal of State highways Drainage renewals NLTF Renewal of State highways Environmental renewals APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
Analysis group Funding source Activity class Work category NLTF Maintenance and operation of local roads Drainage renewals NLTF Maintenance and operation of local roads Emergency works NLTF Maintenance and operation of local roads Environmental maintenance NLTF Maintenance and operation of local roads Environment al renewals NLTF Maintenance and operation of local roads Financial grants NLTF Maintenance and operation of local roads Level crossing warning devices NLTF Maintenance and operation of local roads Minor events NLTF Maintenance and operation of local roads Network and asset management NLTF Maintenance and operation of local roads Operational traffic management NLTF Maintenance and operation of local roads Preventive maintenance NLTF Maintenance and operation of local roads Routine drainage maintenance NLTF Maintenance and operation of local roads Sealed pavement maintenance APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
Analysis group Funding source Activity class Work category NLTF Maintenance and operation of local roads Sealed road pavement rehabilitation NLTF Maintenance and operation of local roads Sealed road resurfacing NLTF Maintenance and operation of local roads Structures component replacements NLTF Maintenance and operation of local roads Structures maintenance NLTF Maintenance and operation of local roads Traffic services maintenance NLTF Maintenance and operation of local roads Traffic services renewals NLTF Maintenance and operation of local roads Unsealed pavement maintenance NLTF Maintenance and operation of local roads Unsealed road metalling NLTF Maintenance and operation of State highways (blank) NLTF Maintenance and operation of State highways Drainage renewals NLTF Maintenance and operation of State highways Emergency works NLTF Maintenance and operation of State highways Environmental maintenance APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
Analysis group Funding source Activity class Work category NLTF New improved infrastructure for State highways Resilience improvements NLTF New improved infrastructure for State highways Road improvements NLTF New im proved infrastructure for State highways Seal extension NLTF Regional Improvements Low cost low risk improvements NLTF Regional Improvements Minor improvements NLTF Regional Improvements New roads NLTF Regional Improvements New traffic management facilities NLTF Regional Improvements Property purchase (State highways) NLTF Regional Improvements Replacement of bridges and other structures NLTF Regional Improvements Resilience improvements NLTF Regional Improvements Road improvements NLTF Regional Improvements Seal extension NLTF Renewal of local roads Associated improvements NLTF Renewal of State highways Associated improvements NLTF Road to Zero Low cost low risk improvements NLTF Road to Zero New traffic management facilities APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYS IS
Analysis group Funding source Activity class Work category NLTF New improved infrastructure for local roads New roads NLTF New improved infrastructure for local roads New traffic management facilities NLTF New improved infrastructure for local roads Property purchase (local roads) NLTF New improved infrastructure for local roads Replacement of bridges and other structures NLTF New improved infrastructure for local roads Resilience improvements NLTF New improved infrastructure for local roads Road improvements NLTF New improved infrastructure for local roads Seal extension NLTF New improved infrastructure for State highways Minor improvements NLTF New improved infrastructure for State highways New roads NLTF New improved infrastructure for State highways New traffic management facilities NLTF New improved infrastructure for State highways Property purchase (State highways) NLTF New improved infrastructure for State highways Replacement of bridges and other structures APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
Analysis group Funding source Activity class Work category NLTF Promotion of road safety and demand management Travel demand management NLTF Road policing Road policing NLTF Road safety promotion Demand management NLTF Road safety promotion Promotion, education and advertising NLTF Road safety promotion Travel demand management NLTF Road to Zero Activity management planning improvement NLTF Road to Zero Promotion, education and advertising NLTF Road to Zero Road policing NLTF State highway improvements Travel demand management Walking cycling improvements NLTF Walking and cycling Cycling facilities NLTF Walking and cycling Demand management NLTF Walking and cycling Minor improvements NLTF Walking and cycling Property purchase (State highways) NLTF Walking and cycling Walking facilities NLTF Walking and cycling improvements Cycling facilities NLTF Walking and cycling improvements Low cost low risk improvements APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
Analysis group Funding source Activity class Work category NLTF Public transport SuperGold trip payments NLTF Public transport services SuperGold trip payments Investment management, planning sector research NLTF (blank) Activity management planning NLTF (blank) Activity management planning improvement NLTF Investment management (incl. Transport Planning) Activity management planning improvement NLTF Investment management (incl. Transport Planning) Management of the funding allocation system NLTF Investment management (incl. Transport Planning) Programme Business Ca se Development NLTF Investment management (incl. Transport Planning) Regional land transport planning management NLTF Investment management (incl. Transport Planning) Sector research NLTF Investment management (incl. Transport Planning) Transport model development NLTF Management of the funding allocation system Programme management NLTF Sector training and research Sector research NLTF Sector training and research Sector training APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
Analysis group Funding source Activity class Work category NLTF Public transport Total mobility operations NLTF Public transport Total mobility wheelchair hoist use payments NLTF Public transport Travel demand management NLTF Public transport Wheelchair hoists NLTF Public transport infrastructure Passenger transport facilities operations and maintenance NLTF Public transport infrastructure Public transport facilities operations and maintenance NLTF Public transport services (blank) NLTF Public transport services Bus services NLTF Public transport services Demand management NLTF Public transport services Passenger ferry services NLTF Public transport services Passenger rail services NLTF Public transport services Passenger transport facilities operations and maintenance NLTF Public transport services Public transport information operations and maintenance NLTF Public transport services Total mobility operations NLTF Public transport services Total mobility wheelchair hoist use payments NLTF Public transport services Wheelchair hoists APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
Analysis group Funding source Activity class Work category NLTF Public transport infrastructure Property purchase (State highways) NLTF Public transport infrastructure Public transport infrastructure and major renewals NLTF Public transport infrastructure Rapid Transit Infrastructure NLTF Public transport infrastructure Transitional Rail Infrastructure NLTF Public transport services Low cost low risk public transport improvements NLTF Public transport services Passenger transport infrastructure NLTF Rail network (blank) NLTF Rapid Transit Rapid Transit Infrastructure NLTF Transitional Rail Transitional Rail Infrastructure Public transport services, maintenance, operation renewals NLTF (blank) Public transport facilities operations and maintenance NLTF Public transport (blank) NLTF Public transport Bus services NLTF Public transport Passenger ferry services NLTF Public transport Passenger rail services NLTF Public transport Public transport facilities operations and maintenance NLTF Public transport Public transport information supply, operations and maintenance APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
Analysis group Funding source Activity class Work category NLTF Renewal of State highways Preventive maintenance NLTF Renewal of State highways Sealed road pavement rehabilitation NLTF Renewal of State highways Sealed road resurfacing NLTF Renewal of State highways Structures component replacements NLTF Renewal of State highways Traffic services renewals NLTF Renewal of State highways Unsealed road metalling NLTF State highway maintenance (blank) NLTF State highway maintenance Drainage renewals NLTF State highway maintenance Emergency works NLTF State highway maintenance Environmental maintenance NLTF State highway maintenance Environmental renewals NLTF State highway maintenance Level crossing warning devices NLTF State highway maintenance Minor events NLTF State highway maintenance Network and asset management NLTF State highway maintenance Operational traffic management NLTF State highway maintenance Preventive maintenance NLTF State highway maintenance Property management (State highways) NLTF State highway maintenance Routine drainage maintenance APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
Analysis group Funding source Activity class Work category NLTF Road to Zero Property purchase (local roads) NLTF Road to Zero Property purchase (State highways) NLTF Road to Zero Road improvements NLTF State highway improvements Low cost low risk improvements NLTF State highway improvements Minor improvements NLTF State highway improvements New roads NLTF State highway improvements New traffic management facilities NLTF State highway improvements Property purchase (State highways) NLTF State highway improvements Replacement of bridges and other structures NLTF State highway improvements Resilience improvements NLTF State highway improvements Road improvements NLTF State highway improvements Seal extension Road maintenance, operation renewals NLTF Local road maintenance (blank) NLTF Local road maintenance Drainage renewals NLTF Local road maintenance Emergency works NLTF Local road maintenance Environmental maintenance NLTF Local road maintenance Environmental renewals APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
Analysis group Funding source Activity class Work category NLTF State highway maintenance Sealed pavement maintenance NLTF State highway maintenance Sealed road pavement rehabilitation NLTF State highway maintenance Sealed road resurfacing NLTF State highway maintenance Structures component replacements NLTF State highway maintenance Structures maintenance NLTF State highway maintenance Traffic services maintenance NLTF State highway maintenance Traffic services renewals NLTF State highway maintenance Unsealed pavement maintenance NLTF State highway maintenance Unsealed road metalling Road safety promotion, road policing demand management NLTF (blank) Promotion, education and advertising NLTF (blank) Road policing NLTF Local road improvements Travel demand management NLTF New improved infrastructure for local roads Demand management NLTF New improved infrastructure for State highways Demand management NLTF Promotion of road safety and demand management Promotion, education and advertising APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
Analysis group Funding source Activity class Work category NLTF Transport planning Activity management planning NLTF Transport planning Programme Business Case Development NLTF Transport planning Programme management NLTF Transport planning Regional land transport planning management NLTF Transport planning Sector research NLTF Transport planning Studies and strategies Public transport improvements NLTF (blank) Low cost low risk public transport improvements NLTF (blank) Public transport improvements, major renewals and minor improvements NLTF (blank) Rapid Transit Infrastructure NLTF (blank) Transitional Rail Infrastructure NLTF Public transport Low cost low risk public transport improvements NLTF Public transport Public transport improvements, major renewals and minor improvements NLTF Public transport Public transport infrastructure and major renewals NLTF Public transport infrastructure (blank) NLTF Public transport infrastructure Low cost low risk public transport improvements NLTF Public transport infrastructure Passenger transport infrastructure APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
Analysis group Funding source Activity class Work category NLTF Walking and cycling improvements Minor improvements NLTF Walking and cycling improvements Property purchase (State highway s) NLTF Walking and cycling improvements Travel demand management NLTF Walking and cycling improvements Walking facilities Walking cycling maintenance, operation renewals NLTF Local road maintenance Cycle path maintenance NLTF Local road maintenance Footpath maintenance NLTF Maintenance and operation of local roads Cycle path maintenance NLTF Maintenance and operation of local roads Footpath maintenance NLTF Maintenance and operation of State highways Cycle path maintenance NLTF Maintenance and operation of State highways Footpath maintenance NLTF State highway maintenance Cycle path maintenance NLTF State highway maintenance Footpath maintenance OVERALL CONCLUSIONS AND REFLECTIONS FOR THE FUTURE
Analysis group Funding source Activity class Work category Road improvements NLTF (blank) New traffic management facilities NLTF (blank) Property purchase (local roads) NLTF (blank) Property purchase (State highways) NLTF (blank) Road improvements NLTF Local road improvements Advance property purchase NLTF Local road improvements Low cost low risk improvements NLTF Local road improvements Minor improvements NLTF Local road improvements New roads NLTF Local road improvements New traffic management facilities NLTF Local road improvements Property purchase (local roads) NLTF Local road improvements Replacement of bridges and other structures NLTF Local road improvements Resilience improvements NLTF Local road improvements Road improvements NLTF Local road improvements Seal extension NLTF New improved infrastructure for local roads Advance property purchase NLTF New improved infrastructure for local roads Minor improvements APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
Analysis of the Census Results Travel to Work and Travel to Education in Auckland.
And Upper North Island Freight Story Shared Evidence Base April https:www.unisa.nzwp contentuploadss ummaryofcritical issues.pdf
And underpinning all of this is a commitment to the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi, and ful filling a central and local government partnership with Iwi and commitments made through Treaty settlements. We co nsider this is critically important because it requires bringing together differing world views and values. While much progress has been m ade there are still instances where these values clash rather than working hand in hand.
And: make your average sentence words long RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Andrew Gibson (individual)
Andrew McGlashen (pharmacy)
Andrew Wilson (hehim) Team Leader Public Transport
Anita Baker Mayor, Porirua City Council Anita was first elected to the Porirua Council in and became Mayor in . Wayne Guppy Mayor, Upper Hutt City Council Wayne was first elected to the Upper Hutt Council in and became Mayor in . He is the is the longest serving Mayor in the region.
Annex Type of Title Treatment document PDF document June SOC NZ LimitedSubmission: The Refused in full under section proposed changed to the Land Transport (d) as the information Rule: Vehicle Exhaust Emissions requested in publicly available on the Ministrvs website here PDF document June MIA submission: Vehicle Exhaust Refused in full under section Emissions Amendment (d) as the information requested in publicly available on the Ministrys website here Email September FW Lobbying of MOT to change emissions Some information withheld code acceptance under section ()(a) . Word document Explanation of Test Regimes and values Release in full for MOT.doc. This document is attached to doc Email FW Lobbying of MOT to change emissions code acceotance . PDF document January Explaining road transport emissionsA Refused in full under section nontechnical guide. Pdf (d) as the information requested in publicly available This document is attached to doc Email on the Ministrys website here FW Lobbying of MOT to change emissions code acceptance . Word document March ICCTNZ report and memo on conversion Refused in full under section factor report final.pdf. (d) as the information requested in publicly available This document is attached to doc Email on the Ministrys website here FW Lobbying of MOT to change emissions code acceptance Email July JPEU equivalency work for Dan to review Some information withheld section under ()(a) . Excel spreadsheet JPEU equivalency work.xlxsx Release in full This document is attached to doc Email JP equivalency work for Dan to review Email October RE: Info how EuroJapan equivalencies Some information withheld were determined under section ()(a) Email December RE: OCVehicle emissions codes Some information withheld under section ()(a) . PDF document Delphi emissions booklet Refused in full under section Passenger CarLightDutyVehicle.pdf (d) as the information requested in publicly available This document is attached to doc on the Ministrys website Email: RE: OCVehicle emissions codes transport.go vt.nz I heiarataki.nz Page of From: To: Subject: Attachments: From: TCa Gaveleoe Wright Liz Hoooood FW: Lobbying of MOT to change emission code acceptance Friday, October iroaae joo iroaae joo iroage joo iroage joo iroaaeos joo Exolanatjon of Test Regimes and values for MOT doc Explaining roadtransoort emjssjons A nontecboiral gujde pdf ra;r NZ c;onyersjon factor report final ) pdf ra;r Memo on conversion factor revision vf KG docx Sent: Doc : FW: Lobbying of MOT to change emission code acceptance To: Blake Shepherd Blake.Shepherdnzta .govt.nz; Anna Cleary Anna.Clearynzta .govt.nz Cc: Karl Laulu Karl.Laulunzta.govt.nz; Lily Mcsweeney Lily.McSweeney nzta.govt.nz; Gayelene Wright g. wrighttransport.govt.nz Subject: RE: Lobbying of MOT to change emission code acceptance Hi All Sorry for the lengthy delay in sending you something with my views and a little more content on the acceptance of certain digit emission codes for Japanese used imports. I have written a short summary and attached a couple of useful documents, I hope this helps. Best regards. a) SOC NZ Limited Website : www socnz co oz :::,malllogo This message and any files may contain information that is confidential andor subject of legal privilege intended only for use by the intended recipient. If you have received this message in error please notify the sender immediately and delete the message. From: )Ca Sent: Thursday, August To: Blake Shepherd Blake.Shepherdnzta.govt.nz ; Anna Cleary Anna.Clearynzta.govt.nz RELEASE D UNDER T HE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Cc: Karl Laulu Karl.Laulunzta.govt.nz ; Lily McSweeney Lily.McSweeneynzta.govt.nz Subject: RE: Lobbying of MOT to change emission code acceptance Hi Blake Thanks. SOC NZ Limited Tel : Email Website : www.socnz.co.nz SmallLogo This message and any files may contain information that is confidential andor subject of legal privilege intended only for use by the intended recipient. If you have received this message in error please notify the sender immediately and delete the message. From: Blake Shepherd Blake.Shepherdnzta.govt.nz Sent: To: Anna Cleary Anna.Clearynzta. govt.nz Cc: Karl Laulu Karl.Laulunzta.govt.nz ; Lily McSweeney Lily.McSweeneynzta.govt.nz Subject: RE: Lobbying of MOT to change emission code acceptance H Thanks for the emails on this. Just acknowledging we are receiving and thinking about them at the moment. Ive ccd in Karl Laulu and Lily McSweeny as well who are also working on the Exhaust Emissions Rule. Blake Blake Shepherd Principal Advisor System Policy, System Leadership Group M E blake.shepherdnzta.govt.nz w nzta.govt.nz From: Sent: To: Anna Cleary Anna.Clearynzta.govt.nz Cc: Blake Shepherd Blake.Shepherdnzta.govt.nz s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s () (a) s () g RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Subject: RE: Lobbying of MOT to change emission code acceptance Hi Anna I should probably have explained, the essence of trying to understand emissions testing, is not in the tailpipe values, it is in the way those values are achieved and the specific test methods used. The most noticeable difference between EU NEDC and the Japanese test regimes of JC and J, is that the testing cycle in EU, starts from the moment you start the car, when thevehicles fuel enrichment device is activated , therefore producing a large percentage of thepollutants captured.both Japanese test regimes have a warm up period, allowing the system toclear the pollutants from the start up procedure. However, the Japanese test cycle was designed for giving best results from a car with a small engine (around cc), driving in an urban setting with a top speed of kph, whereas the EUNEDC cycle is designed for vehicles with around a cc engine driving under mixed conditionsand up to kph. Cars designed for the market where the local test regime and process isprevalent will be designed to pass those emission tests, so if they dont then there is s goodreason why. Best regards. SOC NZ Limited Tel : Email Website : www.socnz.co.nz SmallLogo This message and any files may contain information that is confidential andor subject of legal privilege intended only for use by the intended recipient. If you have received this message in error please notify the sender immediately and delete the message. From: Sent: To: Anna Cleary Anna.Clearynzta.govt.nz Cc: Blake Shepherd Blake.Shepherdnzta.govt.nz Subject: Re: Lobbying of MOT to change emission code acceptance Hi Anna Thanks.This was some reasonably in depth work a few years ago and there is much more info than I have s ()(a) s ()(a) s () (a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT already supplied. I have also reached out to our partners in Japan (TUV SUD JP.) and requested them to supply any information they think will help. If Blake or any others in your team would like to discuss, please contact me.Best regards. SOC NZ Limited Tel Email Website : www.socnz.co.nz This message and any files may contain information that is confidential andor subject of legalprivilege intended only for use by the intended recipient. If you have received this message in errorplease notify the sender immediately and delete the message. On Aug , at , Anna Cleary Anna.Clearynzta.govt.nz wrote: Kia ora , Thanks for the email Im doing well and hope you and the Hutt hills are tooIve shared your email and attachments with our team, and Im also CCing our lead on the work into this email, one of our excellent Principal Advisors, Blake Shepherd. As you know, were always keen to ensure all views are captured and taken into account, so this info is much appreciated, I hope its not the last infosharing thattakes place either. Cheers,AC Anna Cleary (SheHer) Manager, Regulatory Policy Policy Te Tpae System Leadership Email: anna.clearynzta.govt.nz Phone: Mobile: NZ Transport Agency Waka Kotahi s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s () (a) s () RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT You dont often get email from Learn why this is important Bowen Street Private Bag , Wellington , New Zealand Connect with us on social media image.png From: Sent: To: Anna Cleary Anna.Clearynzta.govt.nz Subject: Lobbying of MOT to change emission code acceptance Hi Anna Hope you are well.Are you involved with advising MOT on the recent lobbying they have received to accept further emission codes on vehicles from Japan I must admit, it makes me pretty annoyed that certain industry associations think that this should be revisited after extensive consultation which, if anything landedon their side of the fence with the codes that we accept currently. From the research completed prior to and during , the closest to EU is actually Japan , but it was accepted that if that was the minimum acceptedstandard, then there would be a significant negative affect on the volume used carimport industry, to the extent that it may not survive, therefore allowances weremade for D codes. I have significant research on this subject, if you need any, but in reality, you should not need anything more than the ICCT report commissioned by MOT in , whichis fairly clear. I have attached a few documents you may find interesting, they show the differing test cycles and how they work, along with opinions etc. Ultimately, it is fully accepted that equivalence is an unachievable goal, where test procedures are concerned, but in the previous consultation and eventual regulation,the MOT took a pragmatic approach, the Japanese test procedures do not evenmeasure some of the relevant and measured content that the EU system does atsimilar ages. Please contact me if you would like to discuss further or need any more information. Best regards. s ()(a) s ()(a)I RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT SOC NZ Limited Tel :Email Website : www.socnz.co.nz image.jpg This message and any files may contain information that is confidential andor subject of legal privilege intended only for use by the intended recipient. If you have received this message in error please notify the sender immediately and delete the message. This message, together with any attachments, may contain information that is classified andor subject to legal privilege. Any classification markings must beadhered to. If you are not the intended recipient, you must not peruse,disclose, disseminate, copy or use the message in any way. If you havereceived this message in error, please notify us immediately by return emailand then destroy the original message. This communication may be accessedor retained by Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency for information assurancepurposes. This message, together with any attachments, may contain information that is classifiedandor subject to legal privilege. Any classification markings must be adhered to. If you arenot the intended recipient, you must not peruse, disclose, disseminate, copy or use themessage in any way. If you have received this message in error, please notify usimmediately by return email and then destroy the original message. This communicationmay be accessed or retained by Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency for informationassurance purposes. s ()(a) s ()(a) s () (a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT SOC NZ Limited Regist ered office: Level , Pretoria Street Lower Hutt, New Zealand NZ Companies Registration Number : GST Number : Importance of understanding Emissions Test Cyle application. High level overview Over the pas t years, there have been continuous development of measuring and identifying vehicle emissions and until the recent development and acceptance of Real Driving Emissions (RDE) testing, which has broadly aligned different countries methods and procedures for measuring vehicle emissions (while allowing local driving conditions to be accommodated). While the development and adoption of the RDE testing regimes (broadly from on) has gone a long way to align the emissions values being recorded at the tailpipe, previous differing test procedures from multiple countries, use significantly different approaches, therefore meaning the results at tailpipe are largely unreliable if being used in comparison across markets, specifically when being used as a benchmark for developing a universal method to asses a vehicles emissions when being imported into New Zealand as a used vehicle. Doc .: Explanation of Test Regimes and values for MOT.doc SOG NZ: LIMITED WORLDWIDE TESTING PROCEDUR ES AND STANDARDS Japan Europe us mode mode ECE cycle ECEEUDC cycle FTP test cycle Standards on Standards on mode mode cycles mode mode cycles EU ECE EPA CARB Euro ECE R Tier US Tier Euro Euro .. :.: : : . ECE R Tier US Tier . Post new long Tenn Proposal Mode cycles JC Euro ECE R European Union countries: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmar, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg , Malta, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovalia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom Candidate Members: Croatia, Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , Tllley RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT SOC NZ Limited Regist ered office: Level , Pretoria Street Lower Hutt, New Zealand NZ Companies Registration Number : GST Number : By studyi ng the below tables, which are comparisons of the regime process, it can be seen that while the tailpipe emissions remain constant (M class vehiclespassenger cars) throughout the European standards EUa, EUb, EUb, EUc, EUd Temp and EUd, as in the Japanese standards SOG NZ: LIMITED EUROPEAN UNION DRIVING CYCLES: NEDC URBAN (IECE) EXTRAURBAN (EU() CY(LJE Prior to Euro (MVEGA: ECEEUD(). Bag sampfing starts after s idle period. Cycle revision for Euro onwards (MVEG: NED(). Modification of the startup phase: deletion of the s idle period prior to bag s.ampling Speed krrll ,co B) eo es t l) BS: Beginning of sampling at engjnestart. ) ES: End of sampling JAPAN DRIVING CYCLES r Time Js .uo MOOE COLD CYCLE Japan mode MODE COLD CYCLE Japan E)(haust Emission Driving cycle JC Distance: . l:m Max . speed: kmh Duration: Average speed: . bnh Fuel Economy Driving Schedule ,,. ,.. eliuiOfl .,. llliNIIS,:II, . c. . .. Coli:ud .. , l .. T ffl . Distance: . km Oistar,ce: . km Duration: Average speed: . bnh Duration: (Preceded by min warmup at kmh. idle test min warmup at kmh EmlSSIOOS are asurnd dunng the last segments: Distance: . km Max.. speed: kmh Duration: s Average speed: . l;:mh Max. speed: kmh Averagi, speed: . lcmh RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT SOC NZ Limited Regist ered office: Level , Pretoria Street Lower Hutt, New Zealand NZ Companies Registration Number : GST Number : soeNz: LIMITED EUROPEAN UNION EURO ) for compeisiGn ignitionony: exerrptedM vehi,:les tave fo compl; wl Nl Cl tl:st I lmits. ) Applicble to Pl DI engines Dny. N: nnp P:.:Pm,tii;n fnr r.:ic;,;, ,,,.,. fnr Furn n l,.) lntil YlM:ii ilffH th,: rl.ltf:j fnr TAFJ. r.;riCP Pmic;iinr limit nf fiF ; ,iry t,.p rlllflltrl fnr Euro E:b positive ignition vehicles Ui)OI rqJert of manufactuer. ) Test proceduredefined in UI Re: Suppl . JAPAN EMISSIONS STANDARDSGASOLINE AND LPG VEHICLES ige,Ca riClffllllCillYelide Nfw Short llffll t Conrnercial Yelide (GVW s . t) Nfw Leng Tenn Post Nfw Leng gllan Tenn Funn WIJP gllan Alg.atias ) PM limit pplied fof stcichiomnic cirvct injection g.soOne engine.Ii.. wil be ffectiw from Dec. ZO for new vehicles lei Nov. ZOZ for xistrlg whiclei. Number in br.det ti ucp,er rnmdu JAPAN OTHER REQUIREMENT S Exhaust erniion an calculllted as follow,: From Oct mode hot start x . ll mode cold start x .. From Oct : mode hot start x . JCOB mode cold start x .. Since Oct : JC mode hat start X . JCOB mode Cold start X .. From : WTlP. .lapilll has II plan to wrtroduce ROE reguitDn for KIIM cleel vehides. (GVW . t or than people) tram Oct for, Type Appruvae, and tram Oct for Continuou, Production lllhide. ROE test pnClGJ wil clfle from ROE in Europe to cflit driving condticm . ROE method wil be based on phae WlC. ppm . . Ide HC: ppm. eleratian limit , max PM . m . :.gltet . at :t C HSL ts dunill DBL test. Lead: Not detected CJ( ) MTII:: max. wl. SIMur: max. . ma Oxygen: max. l. vol. (JIS :. .) eer: max. l wl. Ditillation at JIM: max. C (JIS K) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT SOC NZ Limited Regist ered office: Level , Pretoria Street Lower Hutt, New Zealand NZ Companies Registration Number : GST Number : What is demonstrated by the above information is that the eventual tailpipe emissions have been set at a constant over the more stringent emissions codes applied to both Japanese standards and European standards, therefore the changes to improve outcomes, must be achieved by the method of measuring those emissions, meaning that the conditions of measurement and timings of measurement (in an attempt to replicate a more realistic drive cycle) will have a significant effect on the outcome. The above information shows that the Japanese JC method uses a variety of Hot Start process to achieve the differing emission codes allocated to specific vehicles , using a percentage of the old method, blended with the newer JC method, meaning that the vehicle has been running for a period of time prior to any sampling of tailpipe gasses being performed, whereas the two other comparison test regimes (EU and USA), both use a cold start method, meaning that tailpipe sampling is conducted throughout the test period. This may not appear to be a large difference, however, it is generally accepted that, if compared under similar general test conditions, during identical periods of test throughout start up and after the vehicle has been running for a short while, readings which may differ by as much as (over the start period timing) The document attached to the email on this general summary, gives a fairly good low level explanation of emissions and on page there is a fairly simple summary of test methods, which state how the Japanese test methods use hot and cold tests to gain their eventual readings and the chart on page of this report gives detail of the specific percentages. The comparison or equivalence between different countries standards is an impossible task, this was identified in the ICCT report commissioned by and delivered to MOT in (attached to the email with this report). The only real way to confirm if Japanese Domestic Market Vehicles meet EU emissions would be to have them fully tested by an approved EU emissions test facility with a certified operator. Whereas European digit VIN identified vehicles can be significantly different technically, while having similar VIN numbers, as the specifics are controlled and identified by the Variant and Version of these vehicles, not specifically the VIN. The Japanese Domestic Market (JDM) vehicles are (I am informed) identical, as identified by the model code, normally found on the Chassis Plate of the vehicle. soeNz: LIMITED RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT SOC NZ Limited Regist ered office: Level , Pretoria Street Lower Hutt, New Zealand NZ Companies Registration Number : GST Number : Conclusion For the majority of European (and some other digit VIN numbered) vehicles showing a digit emission standard on their Japanese Export Certificate and sold new in Japan, then exported to NZ as used imports at a later , we are able, through our partners in Germany, to provide at a small cost, certificates to confirm the EU emissions status of these vehicles (we set this process up in and it has been running since then), where they are specifically identified on the EU database, therefore no problem exists for these vehicles. For JDM vehicles which when tested to EU standards might meet EU emission standards, I would suggest that I engage with our partners in Germany and gain a quote to complete the EU testing on the vehicles in question and as (unlike EU digit VIN numbered vehicles) the model code should reflect identical technical specification then a model code database for JDM vehicles could be compiled to show which are compliant and which are not. I cannot stress how important for equitability it is, that if this testing of JDM vehicles were to be completed, it would need to be done using the correct testing facilities and testing methods. I should also stress, that however clever Artificial Intelligence is and as has been demonstrated recently in many reports of the incorrect results being achieved by employing artificial intelligence, that any solutions based on this technology could be liable to challenge and knowing the depth of the subject matter would most likely be fictisious. Joe Barnett Di rector SOC NZ Ltd. SOG NZ: LIMITED RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: To: Cc: Subject: Attachments: Hi Dan Myers Sinurd Maanusson Gayeleoe Wright RE: JPEU equivalency work for Dan to review. iroaae ong iroaae ong Doc: RE JP equivalency work for Dan to review Monday at am should be ok will be in the Palmerston North office in the morning and in training all afternoon, so if I dont dial in can we have Tuesday as a backup Any time. Re. below: Kits calcs assume that only HC and NOx reduce with the reductions in the standards and info from Fumi supports this, here is the data for Japan : Next Phase Regulation Test Mode Components Enforcement Standard value year co . (.) WLTC NMHC . (.) (gkm) NOx . (.) PM . (.) Attached Table (Related to Alticle ) STANDARD OF APPROVAL OF ARTICLE CONCERNED VITH MOTOR VEHICLES IN ITEM (A) OF TABLE IN ITEM () OF ARTICLES . Contents of standard concemed Respective values posted in the right column of the said Table Standard conceming measurement substances included in emissions ofltem () of Article Carbon Nonmethane Nitrogen Particulate monoxide hydrocarbo n oxide matter . Exhaust emission More than More than Extremely level lower than . or less ., but ..,but small that of I standard . orless or less quantities . Exhaust emission More than More than Extremely level lower than . or less .. but ., but small that of standard . or less . or less quantities . Exhaust emission Extremely level lower than . or less . or less . or less small that of standard quantities Remarks: r . The provisions ofltem of the Remarks of Attached Table shall apply to the definition oftemis appearing in this table. . The provisions of Item of the Remarks of Attached Table shall apply to the method for selecting the standard with which the motor vehicle concerned with the aoolication comolies in this table. Regards Dan Myers Senior Principal Engineer, Vehicle Standards Te Ropa Waeture I Regulatory Services RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Email: Dan.Myersnzta.govt.nz Phone: Mobile: Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency From: Sigurd Magnusson Sent: Wednesday, July To: Dan Myers Cc: Gayelene Wright Subject: JPEU equivalency work for Dan to review. CAUTION: The sender of this email is from outside Waka Kotahi. Do not click links, attachments, or replyunless you recognise the senders email address and know the content is safe. Dan,Thanks for talking for a few hours today. As discussed please review the attached. Im satisfiedwith the quality of the work, subject to your review, however there two items I dont know theanswer to (see coloured text below and in the attached). The latter Ive queried our Japaneseofficial some time ago (I will chase). Are you able to ask Fumi today what she can explain onthese two matters .Note: In , most imported petrol vehicles are manufactured between and but use the D code indicating Japan regulations. It is thereforepossible these are still only meeting Japan limit values, i.e. no PM limit,rather than meet the Japan limit values. .The above assumes that NO, PM, CO reduce with the Dxx, xx, xx, codes. It isnot certain which pollutants must be lower to be awarded those codes. Ideally it would be good if we discuss any feedback you have on the spreadsheet on Monday . Does am Monday suitCheersSigurdSigurd MagnussonSenior Adviser Environment, Emissions and AdaptationMinistry of Transport Te Manat Waka MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Wellington (Head Office) Ground Floor, Queens Wharf PO Box Wellington NEW ZEALAND Tel: Auckland NZ Government Auckland Policy Office Queen Street PO Box Auckland City Auckland NEW ZEALAND Tel: Disclaimer: This email is only intended to be read by the named recipient. It may contain information which is confidential, proprietary or the subject of legal privilege. If you are not the intended recipient you must delete this email and may not use any information contained in it. Legal privilege is notwaived because you have read this email. Please consider the environment before printing this email. s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: Lily McSweeney To: Nick Paterson ; Karl Laulu Cc: Gayelene Wright ; Carol Rios Diaz ; Liz Hopgood ; Blake Shepherd Subject: RE: Info on how EuroJapan equivalencies were determined Tuesday, October Attachments: image.png image.png image.png Hi Nick and Liz Thanks Nick for that clarity, understood. Our previous communication was based on that the prior work on this had been Ministry led, and we (personally, not the organisation) were notdirectly involved however we recognise the change in personnel on your side too and arehappy to have this back on the regulator again. I will provide more fulsome information regarding Lizs request this week but here is a starter Note, I have switched from using equivalency to alignment I think this better recognises that the various standards from different parts of the world will never be exactly equivalent inevery factor. It isnt NZs role to create harmonisation between the international standards,rather it is NZs role to ensure that the standards we list as our minimum requirement arecreating roughly similar outcomes in the vehicles we allow. Firstly, confirming that Karl and I will do lead the work to review the justification of how we determined alignment as per the VIA request, well supported by our SMEs key here on ourside will be Dave Brown, Dan Myers, and Fumi Norman, among others. We have not (as far as I am aware) kicked off the review of justification beyond the initial conversations we had whenthe issue was first raised. This is because we are focusing on the issue (ISC) still outstanding forthe first amendment and do not want to overstretch the time and goodwill of our SMEs whohave other workloads as well as advising on these technical matters.In my opinion, the aims of the work will be to: Identify the justifications that we used to determine alignment between Japanese and European standards (Currently in progress) Ensure that these justifications remain sound and are achieving the desired outcome of (TBC but something to do with NZ accepting standards that are as aligned as possible from avariety of jurisdictions to ensure vehicles being imported from around the globe are meetingsimilar emission targets passing similar emission tests) If determined that the justification is not sound, action how we can resolve identified issues. Regarding the request on info for how we determined the alignments, I am still pulling this together from my end and will give you a debrief soon (I am aiming for an initial set of info toyou tomorrow). It would be useful, if you havent already, to have a look in TARDIS and see ifSigurd had saved any relevant documents in there Cheers Lily McSweeney (SheHer) Policy Advisor, Users and Vehicles System PolicyDocument : RE: info on how EuroJapan equivalencies were determined RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT System Policy Te T pae System Leadership Email: lily.mcsweeneynzta.govt.nz Phone: Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency From: Nick Paterson N.Patersontransport.govt.nz Sent: To: Karl Laulu Karl.Laulunzta.govt.nzCc: Gayelene Wright g.wrighttransport.govt.nz; Carol Rios Diaz C.RiosDiaztransport.govt.nz; Liz Hopgood L.Hopgoodtransport.govt.nz; Blake ShepherdBlake.Shepherdnzta.govt.nz; Lily McSweeney Lily.McSweeneynzta.govt.nzSubject: RE: Info on how EuroJapan equivalencies were determined Hi Karl, Thank you for your email. This is an issue that we would need the NZTA to review as the regulator. I understand that at the the time there was an agreement for the MoT to do this work, although this would normally be a matter that the regulator would lead, as we hadthe capacity and capability to do that. MoT no longer has the capability to undertake this work, and as we are not a regulatory agency we are not actively seeking to replace thiscapability. Kind regardsNick Nick Paterson T: E: n.patersontransport.govt.nz www.transport.govt.nz From: Karl Laulu Karl.Laulunzta.govt.nz Sent: To: Liz Hopgood L.Hopgoodtransport.govt.nz ; Blake Shepherd Blake.Shepherdnzta.govt.nz ; Lily McSweeney Lily.McSweeneynzta.govt.nz Cc: Gayelene Wright g.wrighttransport.govt.nz ; Carol Rios Diaz C.RiosDiaztransport.govt.nz Subject: RE: Info on how EuroJapan equivalencies were determined Hi Liz, We have worked closely with our SMEs, and theyve confirmed equivalency was introduced into the consultation by the Ministry. Below is a snippet of content used during the consultation information session lead by MOT, where the Ministry has determined and labelled equivalents as well as the Japanese standards as being weaker: s ()(a) s ()(a)g RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT J Accepted Emissions Testing Standards from other Jursdlctlons A,pprqwl.at .di.odb,., IObeNKt E.misslon lin.M Ind tNftQ pr lM,Nn lhO tand.vdt do not lltl t,gn t.tlClly Eu,o UIYalnls Alignment .,lh Euro Eu d q,urvalnts ..lignmnl With Eu,o O.Cl us Tilel ianger US er SIIOlgr Japan We,alt r Jpon Wa.aar .II.OR Alig, luWre RQ Exp,ldlld to ngn UNEClRoe .ignt FUWII UNCE IObOWOll FlJOI Dan Myers has provided me with emails confirming MOT were provided data (email attached) from Japan authorities who compared results of vehicles tested to JC and WLTP. The WLTP emissions were up to five times greater than JC. This confirmed that Japan should not be directly compared to Euro or . He also provided the attached spreadshee t (embedded in JPEU email) produced by Sigurd detailing his take on equivalency which I believe was then later used to finalise Amendment Rule definitions for Japan low harm currently inforce. For me, the above information clearly serves things back to the Ministry to determine the best way forward, keeping in mind our SMEs have advised we steer away from the use of equivalence for emissions standards. Cheers Karl Laulu (HeHim) Senior Policy Advisor, Users and Vehicles System Policy I Te Tapae System Leadership I HaJ From: Liz Hopgood l Hopgoodtraosport govt oz Sent: To: Blake Shepherd Blake.Shepherdnzta.govt.nz ; Lily Mcsweeney Lily.McSwee neynzta.govt.nz; Karl Laulu Karl I aulunzta govt oz Cc: Gayelene Wright g.wrighttransport.govt.nz ; Carol Rios Diaz C. RiosDiaztra nsport.govt. nz Subject: Info on how EuroJapan equivalencies were determined Hi Blake, Lily, Karl Hi, hope you are well Im hoping one of you may be able to help me out with any info you have on how the EuroJapan equivalencies were originally determined (and confirming, will you beare you doing the current work on reviewing these If not are RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT you able to connect me with who is. It may be good for us to get an update on whats happening in this space). Thank a lot Liz Hopgood Kaitohutohu Adviser, EnvironmentTe Manat Waka Ministry of Transport M: L.Hopgoodtransport.govt.nz www.transport.govt.nz I work Monday, Tuesday, Friday MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Wellington (Head Office) Ground Floor, Queens Wharf PO Box Wellington NEW ZEALAND Tel: Auckland NZ Government Auckland Policy Office Level , B Victoria Street West PO Box Auckland City Auckland NEW ZEALAND Tel: Disclaimer: This email is only intended to be read by the named recipient. It may contain information which is confidential, proprietary or the subject of legal privilege. If you are not the intended recipient you must delete this email and may not use any information contained in it. Legal privilege is notwaived because you have read this email. Please consider the environment before printing this email. This message, together with any attachments, may contain information that is classified andor subject to legal privilege. Any classification markings must beadhered to. If you are not the intended recipient, you must not peruse, disclose,disseminate, copy or use the message in any way. If you have received this messagein error, please notify us immediately by return email and then destroy the originalmessage. This communication may be accessed or retained by Waka Kotahi NZTransport Agency for information assurance purposes. This message, together with any attachments, may contain information that is classified andor subject to legal privilege. Any classification markings must be adhered to. If youare not the intended recipient, you must not peruse, disclose, disseminate, copy or use themessage in any way. If you have received this message in error, please notify usimmediately by return email and then destroy the original message. This communicationmay be accessed or retained by Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency for informationassurance purposes. s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: To: Carol Rios Diaz ; Lily McSweeney ; Gayelene Wright ; Blake Shepherd ; Nick Paterson ; Liz Hopgood Subject: RE: OC Vehicle emissions codes Wednesday, December Attachments: image.jpg Delphi emissions booklet PassengerCarLightDutyVehicles.pdf Hi Carol et al, Thanks for the response.The essence of understanding emissions is to accept that the way the emissions are measured, and the test regime is designed are the important factors. It appears that MLIT are stating that a vehicle tested to JC, when tested using WLTP would show times greater tailpipe emissions would be recorded. It appears that when the difference between a vehicle being tested using NEDC and WLTP is generally around (as is easily demonstrated using the ICCT conversion factors used by MOT)and it should be accepted that the WLTP test regime is substantially similar to NEDC, with theexception that WLTP requires an RDE test within to give balance between lab testing and realdriving. JC (and all previous Japanese test regimes) have a significantly different test sequencefor all stages of the test and do not include many factors which go to the final result. With the statement from MLIT that JC produces times higher emissions when tested using WLTP, it indicates that no D codes should be accepted. In Europe, my partners tell me that with the exception of Japan not measuring, PM (until ), PN on DI petrol and diesel engines, they would consider Japan to be closer to EUthan any other Japan emissions standard, although Japan does not capture a significant numberof the mandatory requirements for Europe. Please use the attached Delphi emissions booklet to give an idea of how inferior the Japanese test regime is. I hope this helps you and please call if you would like to discuss further.Thanks. SOC NZ Limited Tel :Email Website : www.socnz.co.nzDoc :REOC Vehicle emissions codes s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s () (a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT :::,malllogo This message and any files may contain informatio n that is confident ial andor subject of legal privilege intended only for use by the intended recipient. If you have received this message in error please notify the sender immediately and delete the message. From: Carol Rios Diaz C.RiosDiaztransport.govt.nz Sent: Wednesday, December To: (J(aJ Subject: ( Vehicle emissions codes Hi f)J Please find attached a response to your OIA OC. Regards, MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Wellington (Head Office) I Ground Floor, Queens Wharf I PO Box I Wellington I NEW ZEALAND I Tel: I Auckland I NZ Government Auckland Policy Office Level , Victoria Street West I PO Box Auckland City I Auckland NEW ZEALAND I Tel: I Disclaimer: This email is only intended to be read by the named recipient. It may contain information which is confidential, proprietary or the subject of legal privilege. If you are not the intended recipient you must delete this email and may not use any information contained in it. Legal privilege is not waived because you have read this email. Please consider the environment before printing this email. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Annex Document Schedule Doc Reference Document Decision on release OC Reauthorisation of the QantasEmirates Alliance Initial Advice Refused under Section (d) . The briefing can be found on the Ministrys website here: https:www.transport.govt.nzarea of interestair transportairline code share and allianceagreements OC Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport protocol for Official Information Act Responses and Proactive Releases Involving Ministers Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). OC Air New Zealand Kiwi Shareholder Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). OC Proactive Release of Cabinet Paper on the Funding ReAllocation from the Northern Pathway to the Eastern Busway Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). The attachments are refused under Section (d) as they are available on the Ministry s website. Cabinet paper Funding Re allocation from the Northern Pathway to the Eastern Busway https:www.transport.govt.nzassets UploadsCabinet paperFunding reallocationfrom theNorthern Pathway totheEasternBusway.pdf Minute ENVMIN https:www.transport.govt.nzassets UploadsCabinet Committee MinuteFundingreallocation from theNorthernPathway tothe EasternBusway.pdf OC Update on Fullers Waiheke Ferry Service and SuperGold Card Travel Released with some information withheld under Sections ()(a), ()(b)(ii), ()(f)(iv), ()(g)(i) and ()(j). OC Proactive R elease of Regulatory Systems (Transport) Amendment Bill No Cabinet Paper Policy Approvals Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a) . The attachments are refused under Section (d) . as they are available on the Ministry s website. https:www.transport.govt.nzassetsUploads Proactivereleaseof Regulatory Systems Transport Amendment BillNoPolicy Approvals package.pdf OC Changes to Land Transport Regulatory Charges and Fees Update on Draft Cabinet Paper Consultation Released with some information withheld under Sections ()(a) and ()(f)(iv). The attachment Draft Cabinet paper is refused under Section (d). The Final Cabinet paper and Cost Recovery Statement will be on the Ministry s website soon.
Annex Document Schedule Doc Reference Document Decision on release OC Briefing to the Incoming Minister January Refused under section (d). When , the briefing will be available here: https:www.transport.govt.nzabout uswhat wedoproactivereleasesSearchForm OC Tier Two Briefing to the Incoming Minister of Transport Time of Use Charging Released with some information withheld under section ()(a) and refused under section (c)(ii).
Annex : Documents in scope Doc Reference number Title of Document Proposed decision on request Previously released na Email: Draft GPS implementation work programme briefing Some information is out of scope of this request or withheld under ()(a) No na Excerpt of relevant document: Annex GPS Implementation Work Programme Joint MoT NZTA view.docx Some information is out of scope of this request or withheld under ()(f)(iv) No na Email: FW public transport funding project GPS timelines please extra information by midday please Some information is out of scope of this request or withheld under ()(a) and ()(f)(iv) No na Document: NZT GPS Priority Actions Milestones Public Transport DRAFT ...docx Some information is out of scope of this request or withheld under ()(f)(iv) No na Email: OC GPS Implementation Programme Overview Briefing Some information is withheld under ()( a) No na Excerpt of relevant document: OC GPS Implementation Programme Overview BriefingPolicy.docx Some information is withheld under ()( f)(iv) No na Email: RE GPS Monitoring briefing and work programme Some information is out of scope of this request or withheld under ()(a) and ()(g)(i) No na Email: RE Draft briefing for consultation PEP and GPS Reporting Some information is withheld under ()(a) , ()(f)(iv), and ()(g)(i) No na Excerpt of relevant document: GPS Implementation Work Programme Joint MoT NZTA view v.docx Some information is withheld under ()( f)(iv) No transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of Doc Reference number Title of Document Proposed decision on request Previously released na Email: RE: PMO Monthly Report: Request to update the July report Some information is out of scope of this request or withheld under ()(a) and ()(k) No na Excerpt of relevant document: Final OC GPS Reporting and Performance and Efficiency PlanBriefing Policy .docx Some information is withheld under ()(f)(iv) No na Email: Out of Scope feedback ideally by midday tomorrow Some information is out of scope of this request or withheld under ()(a) and ()(f)(iv) No Document From: Geome Ross To: Rory Leonard; Rebea;a Ellery; Bryan Eield; Joanna Heard; Bey Driscoll; Matthew Skinner; Erin Wynne Rosene Thoreau; Jessica Rangec; Harriet Shelton Cc: Jim Herbert; Mitch Macaulay; Qljyer EindlayBad ham: Quaid Forbes Subject: Draft GPS implementation work programme briefing Monday, June Attachments: wiroaaeQ,.,,.,.O..,.J nn . a. p:ofScope ANNEX GPS Tmolementatjon Work programme Jojnt MoJ NJA yjew docx . Relevant excerpt provided as Document Kia ora koutou, have also attached the GPS work programme that Mitch has been working on and If you have any comments , can you send them across by COP tomorrow. Nga mihi George George Ross (he his) Kaitohutohu Matua I Senior Advisor Investments Te Rautaki Punaha Waka mete Putea Haumi I System Strategy Investment Jfiaahi Waka Ministry of Transport E: g.rosstransport .govt.nz I transport.govt.nz RELE ASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION AC T I Action descnption OufofScope Public transport funding: Increase farebox recovery and thirdparty revenue by Public Transport Authorities . Lead Agency(s) NZTA Public Transport Authorities Ministry of Transport Milestones Phase Establish foundations : By end of (by end of June ) s ()(f)(iv) o Establish nationally consisten t private share definitions, measures , and baselines across all public transport authorities . Private share includes farebox recove.ry and thirdparty funding sources (Lead: NZTA). o Establish interim target for each public transport authority (Lead NZT A) o Monitor and report on progress (Lead: NZTA) Delivery from July RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT You dont often get email from r.ellerytransport.govt.nz . Learn why this is importantFrom: Rebecca Ellery To: Mitch Macaulay Subject: FW: public transport funding project GPS timelines please extra information by midday please Friday, June Attachments: image.png image.png image.png NZT GPS Priority Actions Milestones Public Transport DRAFT ...docx From: Andrew Wilson Andrew.Wilsonnzta.govt.nz Sent: To: Rebecca Ellery R.Ellerytransport.govt.nz; Talia Cohen Wolf Talia.CohenWolfnzta.govt.nzSubject: RE: public transport funding project GPS timelines please extra information by midday please Hi Rebecca,Attached is the latest version of the milestones.Let us know if any questions.Regards,Andrew From: Rebecca Ellery R.Ellerytransport.govt.nz Sent: To: Talia Cohen Wolf Talia.CohenWolfnzta.govt.nz Subject: FW: public transport funding project GPS timelines please extra information by midday please Hi Talia Can you please send me the last version of the milestones for farebox recovery as discussed on the phone just nowI need to use this to inform the PT funding timeline that will be going to the Minister this morning.Where there are key decisions required from the Minister, particularly across would be really helpful.Thanks a lotRebecca Ng mihi Rebecca Ellery Portfolio Manager Programme Management OfficeTe Manat Waka Ministry of Transport E: r.ellery transport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz NZ Government Auckland Policy Office Level , b Victoria Street West, Auckland Availability: I work limited hours on Thursday. From: Rebecca Ellery Sent: To: Talia Cohen Wolf Talia.CohenWolfnzta.govt.nz ; Mitch Macaulay M.Macaulaytransport.govt.nz Subject: RE: public transport funding project GPS timelines please extra information by midday pleaseImportance: High Morning Talia Can you please give us some more detail on this project The timeline below is what I have based on your information you provided but the Minister will want to see more detail than this. We received the below previously: Establish foundations : July to December Establish nationally consistent private share definitions, measures, and baselines across all public transport authorities. Private share includes farebox recovery and thirdparty funding sources (Lead: NZTA). Establish interim target for each public transport authority (Lead NZTA). Monitor and report on progress (Lead: NZTA) Is any of this detail still relevant Are there any decision points with the Minister this year that we could flagApologies for the quick turn around required for this. Could you please send something over by midday so we can get this in the final pack for review and sent to the Minister on timePlease respond to both Mitch and I.Thanks a lotRebecca From: Talia Cohen Wolf Talia.CohenWolfnzta.govt.nz Sent: To: Rebecca Ellery R.Ellerytransport.govt.nz Subject: RE: public transport funding project GPS timelines please Kia ora Rebecca, sorry for the delay. Regarding the dates, there is one mistake in the second milestone, the milestone starts at .. Document Provided as Document s ()(a) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) J I I I J I RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT .SO just to clarify: Milestone .. until .. i(J(ijirv Hope that is dear, If you need anythiog else let m,e know. Talia from: Rebecca Ellery R Flen,rramooa em oz sent: Wednesday. Junes, : AM To: Talia oohen wotf Dia QQheoWQffona ggyr oz subject: public transport funding proj:,ect GPS timelines please I Youdontolticngetemaltofl:r: r:otazxrtgqytnz l:r:,roffitiiimxrt:ol Hi Tatis For the Miniasters top priorities in the OPS, one of which is public tra.nsport funding I am putlingtogether e hightewt dmetine which I wl keep reguis.rty but is also going to be attached to the next OPS paper going to the Minister on Friday. I heve the following stages of work for this that I received from Nick Potter (table betow)who pointed out that you were the lead on this. Can you please confirm ff these high level stages are stll appropriate and whether you have any key milestones that I ooutd also inctude The betow is sts.rt a.nd end . Esbbish kk.ndation s and set nterrn targets ,) s ()(f)(iv) The output for this phase will took similar to the below. Keen to include milestones es welt es phases like you have above. le. las there a key decision or milestone at the end or within any of these phases Dut of Scope MI menonabowhisneeds to goto he Minister on Friday so letme know as soon as )OJ can. icaled llgamii Rebecca Ellery Portfolio Manager Programme Managemen t Office TP M.vi.ffli W.k Min by of Transport ()(a) F rellfryJrnospgn OPYI oz lPPYI oz NZ GCHemm..t Al.di PollC)Offlce LeVel, Vk:l:NSreeWe..AUCS.lano Av : I IKlt llllltld rtotnon y. L MINISlRY OF TRAHSPORT Welingt,on (Head Office) I Gn:l.nd Floor, .Jeens I PO Box Wellington IEWZEAI.Afll) I Tel: I Auckland I NZGowmrrertALdland PdicyOffice lewf . VctcriaStreetWest I PO Box tl: I Auctland City I Auckland NEW ZEAlAJIO I Tel: JO I Oisdaimer. Ths email is ty intended to be read by lhenamed ttqlient ltmayccntan infonnaoon WhCtl is confidential . popnetary a lhe sa.qec:t d legal pri..iege. If you are nd the intended recipiert )OJ RlJSt dMe his email and may not use an, information ccntained n l. Legal pri.tege is not waived becaJse )OJ haw read this emai. Rease consider he en.ironment before pmtirv this emal. This message , together with any attachments, may contain information that is classified andor subject to legal privilege. Arry classification markings must be adhered to. If you are not the intended ,ecipient, you must not peruse, disclose. disseminate. copy or use the message in anyway. ff you have ,eceived this mess.age in error. please notify us immediately by rnturn email and then destroy the original message. This commun ication may be accessed or retained by Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency for information as.suranoe purposes. This message , together with any attachments, may contain information that is classified andor subject to legal privilege. Arry classification markings must be adhered to. If you are not the intended ,ecipient, you must not peruse, disclose. disseminate. copy or use the message in anyway. ff you have ,eceived this mess.age in error. please notify us immediately by rnturn email and then destroy the original message. This commun ication may be accessed or retained by Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency for information as.suranoe purposes. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Document GPS Priority Actions Milestones and timelines for delivery ( to ) Action name: Public transport funding: Increase farebox recovery and thirdparty revenue by Public Transport Authorities. Lead: NZ Transport Agency Waka Kotahi (NZTA) . Timing (next three years Milestone high level is OK) Phase Establish foundations and set interim targets a) Establish nationally consistent private share definitions, measures , and baselines across all public transport authorities, including data collection and analysis. b) Set interim private share expectations for each PTA and NZT A to work with PT As to start increasing private share on annual basis towards levels. c) Identify initiatives to increase private share: Obtaining cost efficienci es and maximising value for money spent on public transport. Maximising patronage and therefore passenger fare revenue. Develop third party revenue streams. Jul to Dec (Q ) . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: George Ross To: Abby McRoberts parliament Cc: Tim Herbert ; Mitch Macaulay ; David Wood ; amy.moorheadnzta.govt.nz ; Anaru Silao ; Chris Bunny Subject: OC GPS Implementation Programme Overview Briefing Friday, June Attachments: image.png OC GPS Implementation Programme Overview Briefing Policy.docx Kia ora Abby, Please find a copy of OC GPS Implementation Programme Overview Briefing attached. This is a joint briefing between the Ministry and NZTA on the actions signalled in GPS , and how we will work together to monitor and deliver these actions. Ill walk over some hard copies shortly. Give me call if you have any questions.Ng mihi George George Ross (he his) Kaitohutohu Matua Senior Advisor Investments Te Rautaki Pnaha Waka me te Ptea Haumi System Strategy Investment Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport E: g.rosstransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz Document Relevant excerpt provided as Document s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT : PUBLIC TRANSPORT FUNDING OUTPUTS tm;re frebox rc;ov.ry and th.,dparty telteJlue L(AOAGlNCV I HAH SUPPOAT MOT OVER.ALL PAOOAAHME r,.; A,.. : NZTA PUBL.ICTRANSPORT by Public Tran,port AutllorltlH . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: To: Cc: Subject: Attachments: Amy Moorhead Mjtch Macaulay Jim Herbert RE: GPS Monitoring briefing and work programme Tuesday, July jmageOOJ PDQ Document Gps Implementation Work programme Jojnt MoJ NZJA CNZJA comments) docx Relevant excerpt provided Implementatjon plan tjmeijnes for brief iodusjon y CJ) pptx as Document for both attachments Kia ora Mitch, Just coming back to you with our comments on this one. I havent tracked changes, but almost all of our items have been checked and confirmed or with current milestones. Exceptions as follows. Out of Scope Should be able to come back on the above items by end of the day. In the meantime, everything else is good to go. Cheers, Amy From: Mitch Macaulay M.Macaulaytransport.govt. nz Sent: To: Amy Moorhead Amy.Moorheadnzta.govt. nz Cc: Tim Herbert t.herberttransp ort.govt.nz Subject: GPS Monitoring briefing and work programme Hey Amy, Understand you spoke with Tim yesterday about the monitoring and reporting briefing were pulling together next week. Well share a draft of this with you tomorrow for feedback, and have set up a time on Monday for us to discuss. The briefing will confirm whats in the Monthly report for the Minister and J Were going to attach the Work Programme again for his info, so Im just making sure this document is still up to . Could you ask your teams to take a look over it again and send RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT me any updates needed by noon on Tuesday Hopefully its a pretty quick exercise given we only it last month. Will send around the briefing tomorrowMitch Mitch Macaulay Principal Advisor Investment E: m.macaulaytransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Wellington (Head Office) Ground Floor, Queens Wharf PO Box Wellington NEW ZEALAND Tel: Auckland NZ Government Auckland Policy Office Level , B Victoria Street West PO Box Auckland City Auckland NEW ZEALAND Tel: Disclaimer: This email is only intended to be read by the named recipient. It may contain information which is confidential, proprietary or the subject of legal privilege. If you are not the intended recipient you must delete this email and may not use any information contained in it. Legal privilege is notwaived because you have read this email. Please consider the environment before printing this email. This message, together with any attachments, may contain information that is classified andor subject to legal privilege. Any classification markings must be adhered to. If youare not the intended recipient, you must not peruse, disclose, disseminate, copy or use themessage in any way. If you have received this message in error, please notify usimmediately by return email and then destroy the original message. This communicationmay be accessed or retained by Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency for informationassurance purposes. s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: Mitch Macaulay To: Kim.Marshallnzta.govt.nz ; amy.moorheadnzta.govt.nz Cc: Tim Herbert ; Rory Leonard Subject: RE: Draft briefing for consultation: PEP and GPS Reporting Tuesday, July Attachments: image.png GPS Implementation Work Programme Joint MoT NZTA view v.docx Thanks Rory. Ive also the Implementation Programme as per the feedback you have both sent through (thank you both) See attached for your info. If you have any further updates needed let me know by noon tomorrow (but it all should be about right, as Ive just drawn on what youve provided me). Amy
Annex : Emails and attachments in scope Agency Email and document Description of information withheld Civil Aviation Authority Email: RE Draft System BIM CAA comments Withheld some information under section ()(a) of the Act privacy of natural persons. Draft System BIM ..CAA comments None. Email: RE Stats for the System BIM CAA Withheld some information under section ()(a) of the Act privacy of natural persons. CAA high level stats for MoT None. Maritime New Zealand Email: Maritime review amended draft BIM text Withheld some information under section ()(a) of the Act privacy of natural persons. Email: RE EXTERNAL Draft System BIM MNZ October Withheld some information under section ()(a) of the Act privacy of natural persons. Draft System BIM ..MNZ None. Email: RE EXTERNAL Maritime Legislative Review Project Steering Group Meeting Withheld some information under section ()(a) of the Act privacy of natural persons. Email: RE MNZ Legislative Review Project Steering Group Meeting Withheld some information under section ()(a) of the Act privacy of natural persons. MarRev scoping steering group Draft BIM narrative None. Email: FW EXTERNAL Draft Strategic BIM MNZ October Withheld some information under section ()(a) of the Act privacy of natural persons. Strategic BIM Fourth Draft SLT October MNZ None.
Annex : Location of d amaged state highway and rail infrastructure This following detail outlines the location of the damaged road and rail infrastructure to be covered by the OiCs. This is not a complete list of all damage sustained following the severe weather events . It is the locations where existing approval processes will not sufficiently enable the repair and rebuild works. Table Damaged state highway network sections Relevant Region Significance and scale of issue Hawkes Bay Region SH Waikare River Bridge to district boundary (about km) earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance, stormwater management SH SH intersection through to Waikare Bridge (km) earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance, stormwater management SH Wairoa to Tuai (km) earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance, stormwater ma nagement SH intersection with SH to Pohokura Road (km) earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance, stormwater management SH Mangamate Stream Tukipo Stream Makaretu River Glencoe Gorge Manga onuku (each abou t m) earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance, stormwater management SH Tutaekuri Bridge (km) earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance, stormwater management Gisborne SH Cemeter y Road to Tokomaru township (.km) earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance, stormwater management, coastal works SH Te Puia to Makarika Road (km) earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance , stormwater management SH Poroporo Road to Whakaangiangi Road (km), earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance, stormwater management SH Turihaua (.km) earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance, stormwater management, coastal works SH Hikuwai Bridge (m) earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance, stormwater management SH Waihuka Road to Te Wera Road (km) earthworks and associated works in watercour ses, vegetation clearance, stormwater management, coastal works Waikato Region SHA Taparahi (m) earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance, stormwater management SHA Troups Falls (m) earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance, stormwater management SH earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance, stormwater management, coastal works at various locations along the route SH Karangahake Gorge (m) earthworks and associated vegetation clearance, stormwater management, erosion protection
Annex One outlines the Ministrys existing work programme on aviation and maritime. Annex Two
Annex One: Breakdown of Funding Decisions and Residual Risk Across NZUP
Annex Two Time critical decisions through to February s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Annex VI requirements will be largely implemented through the Maritime Transport Act (MTA). Before New Zealand can accede to Annex VI, minor amendments to the MTA are needed to ensure that the rulemaking and enforcement provisions in the MTA provide the authority required to fully implement the legal obligations of Annex VI.
Annexes Annex : Loca tion of damaged state highway and rail infrastructure .
Annexes Annex One: Biographies Annex Two: Talking points
Announcement of Supercharging EV Infrastructure work programme
Annual Achievement Reports Each approved organisation and the Transport Agency (state highways) must provide an annual achievement report to the Transport Agency. The information in the reports provides feedback on the delivery of the programmes the Transport Agency has invested in. The reports are used for benchmarking and comparing the performance of the transport network across New Zealand.
Annual Report Report MoT DOCOUMENT NAME DOCUMENT TYPE OWNER Living Standards Framework Framework NZ Treasury Investment Management System and Better Business Cases Website NZ Treasury Putting it Together An Explanatory Guide to NZs State Sector Financial Management System August Guidance document NZ Treasury Managing Benefits from Projects and Programmes: Guide for Practitioners October Guidance document NZ Treasury Guidelines for Setting Charges in the Public Sector Guidance document NZ Treasury CBAx Tool User Guidance Guide for departments and agencies using Treasury Guidance document NZ Treasury The Treasury Gateway Reviews Website NZ Treasury State Services Commission Annual Report Report State Services Commission Principles behind good practice Website Auditor General Procurement Guidance for Public Entities Guidance document Auditor General Auditor General: Spending public money wisely and well: How to put basic principles into practice () Paper and Presentation Auditor General NZTA board meeting minutes Minutes NZTA Development of the Road Policing Programme Website NZTA Road Policing Programme Incorporating variations for Report NZTA Unknown NZTA Investment Decision Making Framework review Website NZTA Office of the Minister of Transport to Chair Cabinet Economic Development Committee Update on the New Zealand Transport Agencys investment decision making framework review Cabinet Paper Office of the Minister of Transport
Annual Report Sets out entities annual non financial and financial performance against the expectations set out in the Statement of Performance Expectations. You can expect to receive annual reports from each entity around October. Quarterly reporting Performance reporting provided by the entity against the priorities and expectations set out in the Statement of Performance Expectations.
Annual road deaths per billion vehicle kilometres travelled
Annual road serious injuries
Anthony Delaney CEO CentrePort
Antilock braking systems for motorcycles
Any agenda and other documents prepared for any meetings with Minister Peters.
Any briefings, documents or reports (including drafts) prepared for the Minister of Rail, Winston Peters.
Any change to the transport revenue system is a major undertaking that will affect all New Zealanders and future generations, so it is important that we take a thoughtful and considered approach to this work, including listening to what transport users think. Te Manat Waka plans to research options and work closely with stakeholders during , and then consult more widely with the public from . Detailed design work and development of the preferred options will come after that.
Any decision to implement congestion pricing would be made as a joint decision between local and central government and would require:
Any queries, please reach out.
Any questions on the proposed OiCs can be directed to Te Manat Waka at
Aotearoa New Zealand condemns, unequivocally, the unprovoked and unjustified attack by Russia on Ukraine. The actions of President Putin are a grave breach of international rules; the use of force to change borders is strictly prohibited under international law, as is targeting of civilians.
Aotearoa New Zealand needs a wellfunctioning, lowemissions transport system that supports everyone to get where they need to go, access the things they need, and spend time with the people they care about.
Aotearoas transport system has undergone changes since the early travellers of the nation.
Appendices Appendix Emergency Management and search and rescue functions . Appendix Cross system collaboration . Appendix Summary of agencies, state owned enterprises, and their functions .
Appendices Appendix Emergency Management and search and rescue functions . Appendix Cross system collaboration . Appendix Summary of transport agencies, Crown entities, SOEs, and their functions . . Appendix Glossary of terms and abbreviations .
Appendices Appendix Emergency Management and search and rescue functions . Appendix Cross system collaboration . Appendix Summary of transport agencies, Crown entities, state owned enterprises, and their functions .
Appendices Appendix Emergency Management and search and rescue functions . Appendix Cross system collaboration . Appendix Summary of agencies, state owned enterprises, and their functions .
Appendices Appendix Emergency Management and search and rescue functions . Appendix Cross system collaboration . Appendix Summary of agencies, state owned enterprises, and their functions .
Appendices Appendix Evaluation Stocktake . . .
Appendices Appendix Trends observed in GPS outcomes monitoring . Appendix Criteria selection . . . Appendix Investment data analysis . .
Appendix Table of documents Document Draft Briefing to the Incoming inister of Transport February Briefing to the incoming February Associate Minister of Transport Key Issues Briefing for the June Acting Minister of Transport Briefing to the Incoming Minister June Reasons for withholdin.. Note, this was a draft document developed in preparation for any Ministerial change post the February Cabinet reshuffle. Some information withheld under sections: ()(f)(iv) ((ba)(i) ()(g)(i) ()U) (a) Can be found here https:www.transport.govt.nzassetsUploadsBlM Assoc.MinisterofTransportMin istryof Transport. pdf Refused under section (d) of the Act on the grounds that the information within the scope of your request will soon be publicly available Refused under section (d) of the Act on the grounds that the information within the scope of your request will soon be publicly available RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Appendix Alignment to GPS Table Changes from GPS GPS Indicati ve signals for GPS Notes Climate Change Transform to a low carbon transport system that supports emissions reductions, aligned with national commitments, while improving safety and inclusive access . Emissions Reduction Transport related greenhouse gas emissions will fall significantly, while providing a more sustainable, inclusive, safe and accessible transport system for all New Zealanders. Elevated to become the overarching focus. This ensures that emissions reduction is a consideration in all investment decisions . Safety Develop a transport system where noone is killed or seriously injured. Safety Develop a transport system where noone is killed or seriously injured. No change is proposed . Maintains directions set through Road to Zero strategy. Better travel options Provide people with better travel options to access places for earning, learning, and participating in society. Sustainable urban development People living in our towns and cities can readily access places to work, study, shop, and a ccess other amenities nearby and through a variety of transport options. The transport system enables more people to live and travel in urban areas by prioritising space efficient modes such as public transport, walking, and cycling. This change confirms t he focus for this priority is on urban centres. Improving freight connections Welldesigned transport corridors with efficient, reliable and resilient connections will support productive economic activity. Integrated freight system Welldesigned transport corridors with efficient, reliable, and resilient connections will support productive economic activity. No change to outcome apart from title. Some change s to ensure that the role of different modes is a key consideration na Maintaining and op erating the system The condition of the existing transport system is efficiently maintained at a level that meets the current and future needs of users. This supports all outcomes. New priority to reflect that maintaining existing infrastructure and servic es will be a major driver of GPS expenditure. na Resilience Minimising and managing the risks from natural and human made hazards, anticipating and adapting to emerging threats, and ensuring the transport system recovers effectively from disruptive events. New priority to reflect the need for investment in resilience, particularly the National Adaptation Plan
Appendix Emergency Management and search and rescue functions Emergency Management and search and rescue functions Emergency Management The transport system is vulnerable to major natural events and human caused shocks that disrupt services. The Ministry exercises its system stewardship role by being the transport sector lead on resilience and security policy matters with other government agencies such as the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC) , the National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA), and the National Security System. The Ministry works closely with the other transport Crown entities to plan for future needs and emergencies so the transport sector can respond efficiently and effectively to system disruptions or damaged infrastructure. System planning and preparedness is reviewed during DPMC led Officials Committee for Domestic and External Security Coordination (ODESC ) forums and exercised as part of the NEMA led all ofgovernment National Exercise Programme. During significant responses , the Ministry will activate and lead the Transport Response Team (TRT) , which acts as the sector coordinating entity for transport under the Civil Defence and Emergency Management Act. As a non operational agency, the Ministry s role is to coordinate the transport sector and ensure a single transport voice is provided to the lead agency for the response and to Ministers. New Zealand Search and Rescue Council New Zealands million km Search and Rescue (SAR) region (the worlds third largest) extends from the South Pole to the southern border of the Honolulu region, halfway to Australia and Chile, and includes American Samoa, Cook Islands, Niue, Norfolk Island, Samoa, Tokelau, and Tonga. Collectively, the SAR sector comprises approximately , people from a wide variety of public, non government and commercial organisations of whom around are volunteers. During the year, the sector saved lives, rescued people, and assisted a further people. These actions averted . billion in social costs to New Zealand. The New Zealand Search and Rescue (NZSAR) Council, established by Cabinet in , provides strategic governance, leadership to the SAR sector, manages the Government s investment into the sector and provides SAR advice to Ministers. The Council consists of the chief executives of departments with SAR responsibilities and includes the Ministry as chair, MNZ , the CAA, the Department of Conservation, the NZ Police, the New Zealand Defence Force, Fire and Emergency NZ, and a nongovernment independent member. The Ministry receives funding for and hosts the NZSAR Secretariat. Either the NZ Police or the Rescue Coordination Centre NZ (an operating group within MNZ ) coordinates SAR operations. The responsible coordinating authority will request the use of SAR assets depending on the requirements of the operation. A wide variety of organisations may participate in SAR operations, including the Department of Conservation, NZ Land Search and Rescue, Coastguard NZ, Surf Life Saving NZ, rescue helicopters, the NZ Police, commercial vessels, Defence and a variety of smaller organisations or assets including members of the public. The SAR sectors revenue comes from a variety of sources, including Crown funding through Vote Transport, Vote Police, Vote Conservation, and Vote Defence, and hypothecated funding collected under the LTMA (which recognises FED paid by recreational boat users). Commercial sponsorship, local fundraising, community grants, class gaming (including gaming machines from pubs and clubs) and the Lotteries Grants Board also provide funding to the wider SAR and recreational safety sectors. The Ministers of Transport and Finance are empowered by the LTMA to allocate FED funding for SAR purposes. The NZSAR Council (on behalf of the Ministry) administers approximately . million per annum of FED investment into SAR sector agencies. The NZSAR Council (on behalf of the Ministry ) also administers the Governments investment of . million per annum into frontline water safety rescue and prevention services (Coastguard NZ and Surf Life Saving NZ).
Appendix Emergency Management and search and rescue functions Emergency Management and search and rescue functions Emergency Management The transport system is vulnerable to major natural events and human caused shocks that disrupt services. The Ministry exercises its system stewardship role by being the transport sector lead on resilience and security policy matters with other government agencies such as the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC), the N ational Emergency Management Agency (NEMA), and the National Security System. The Ministry works closely with the other transport Crown entities to plan for future needs and emergencies so the transport sector can respond efficiently and effectively to system disruptions or damaged infrastructure. System planning and preparedness is reviewed during D PMC led Officials Committee for Domestic and External Security Coordination (ODESC ) forums and exercised as part of the NEMA led all ofgovernment National Exercise Programme. During significant responses the Ministry will activate and lead the Transport Response Team (TRT), which acts as the sector coordinating entity for transport under the Civil Defence and Emergency Management Act. As a non operational agency, the Ministrys role is to coordinate the transport sector and ensure a single transport voice is provided to the lead agency for the response and to Ministers. New Zealand Search and Rescue Council New Zealands million km Search and Rescue (SAR) region (the worlds third largest) extends from the South Pole to the southern border of the Honolulu region, halfway to Australia and Chile, and includes American Samoa, Cook Islands, Niue, Norfolk Island, Samoa, Tokelau, and Tonga. Collectively, the SAR sector comprises approximately , people from a wide variety of public, non government and commercial organisations of whom around are volunteers. During the year, the sector saved lives, rescued people, and assisted a further people. These actions averted . billion in social costs to New Zealand. The New Zealand Search and Rescue (NZSAR) Council, established by Cabinet in provides strategic governance, leadership to the SAR sector, manages the governments investment into the sector and provides SAR advice to Ministers. The Council consists of the chief executives of departments with SAR responsibilities and includes the Ministry (chair), Maritime NZ (MNZ), the Civil Aviation Authority, the Department of Conservation, the NZ Police, the New Zealand Defence Force, Fire and Emergency NZ, and a nongovernment independent member. The Ministry receives funding for and hosts the NZSAR Secretariat. Either the NZ Police or the Rescue Coordination Centre NZ (which is an operating group within MNZ) coordinates SAR operations. The responsible coordinating authority will request the use of SAR assets depending on the requirements of the operation. A wide variety of organisations may participate in SAR operations, including the Department of Conservation, NZ Land Search and Rescue, Coastguard NZ, Surf Life Saving NZ, rescue helicopters, the NZ Police, commercial vessels, Defence and a variety of smaller organisations or assets including members of the public. The SAR sectors revenue comes from a variety of sources, including Crown funding through Vote Transport, Vote Police, Vote Conservation, and Vote Defence, and hypothecated funding collected under the LT MA (which recognises FED paid by recreational boat users). Commercial sponsorship, local fundraising, community grants, class gaming (including gaming machines from pubs and clubs) and the Lotteries Grants Board also provide funding to the wider search and rescue and recreational safety sectors. The Ministers of Transport and Finance are empowered by the LTMA to allocate FED funding for SAR purposes. The NZSAR Council (on behalf of the Ministry) administers approximately . million per annum of FED investment into SAR sector agencies. The NZSAR Council (on behalf of the Ministry) also administers the Governments investment of . million per annum into frontline water safety rescue and prevention services (Coastguard NZ and Surf Life Saving NZ).
Appendix Emergency Management and search and rescue functions Emergency Management and search and rescue functions Emergency Management The transport system is vulnerable to major natural events and manmade shocks that disrupt services. The Ministry exercises its system stewardship role by being the transport sector lead on resilience and security policy matters with other government agencies such as the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC), the National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA), and the National Security System. The Ministry works closely with the other transport Crown entities to plan for future needs and emergencies so the transport sector can respond efficiently and effectively to system disruptions or damaged infrastructure. System planning and preparedness is reviewed during D PMC led Officials Committee for Domestic and External Security Coordination (ODESC ) forums and exercised as part of the NEMA led all ofgovernment National Exercise Programme. During significant responses the Ministry will activate and lead the Transport Response Team (TRT), which acts as the sector coordinating entity for transport under the Civil Defence and Emergency Management Act. As a non operational agency, the Ministrys role is to coordinate the transport sector and ensure a single transport voice is provided to the lead agency for the response and to Ministers. New Zealand Search and Rescue Council New Zealands million km Search and Rescue (SAR) region (the worlds third largest) extends from the South Pole to the southern border of the Honolulu region, halfway to Australia and Chile, and includes American Samoa, Cook Islands, Niue, Norfolk Island, Samoa, Tokelau, and Tonga. Collectively, the SAR sector comprises approximately , people from a wide variety of public, non government and commercial organisations of whom around percent are volunteers. During the year, the sector saved lives, rescued people, and assisted a further people. These actions averted . billion in social costs to New Zealand. The New Zealand Search and Rescue (NZSAR) Council, established by Cabinet in provides strategic governance, leadership to the SAR sector, manages the governments investment into the sector and provides SAR advice to Ministers. The Council consists of the chief executives of departments with SAR responsibilities and includes the Ministry (chair), Maritime NZ (MNZ), the Civil Aviation Authority, the Department of Conservation, the NZ Police, the New Zealand Defence Force, Fire and Emergency NZ, and a nongovernment independent member. The Ministry receives funding for and hosts the NZSAR Secretariat. Either the NZ Police or the Rescue Coordination Centre NZ (which is an operating group within MNZ) coordinates SAR operations. The responsible coordinating authority will request the use of SAR assets depending on the requirements of the operation. A wide variety of organisations may participate in SAR operations, including the Department of Conservation, NZ Land Search and Rescue, Coastguard NZ, Surf Life Saving NZ, rescue helicopters, the NZ Police, commercial vessels, Defence and a variety of smaller organisations or assets including members of the public. The SAR sectors revenue comes from a variety of sources, including Crown funding through Vote Transport, Vote Police, Vote Conservation, and Vote Defence, and hypothecated funding collected under the LMTA (which recognises FED paid by recreational boat users). Commercial sponsorship, local fundraising, community grants, class gaming (including gaming machines from pubs and clubs) and the Lotteries Grants Board also provide funding to the wider search and rescue and recreational safety sectors. Ministers of Transport and Finance are empowered under the LTMA to allocate FED funding for SAR purposes. The NZSAR Council (on behalf of the Ministry) administers approximately . million per annum of FED investment into SAR sector agencies. The NZSAR Council (on behalf of the Ministry) also administers the governments investment of . million per annum into frontline water safety rescue and prevention services (Coastguard NZ and Surf Life Saving NZ).
Appendix Emergency Management and search and rescue functions Emergency Management and search and rescue functions Emergency Management The transport system is vulnerable to major natural events and manmade shocks that disrupt services. The Ministry exercises its system stewardship role by being the transport sector lead on resilience and security policy matters with other government agencies such as the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC), the National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA), and the National Security System. The Ministry works closely with the other transport Crown entities to plan for future needs and emergencies so that the transport sector can respond efficiently and effectively to system disruptions or damaged infrastructure. System planning and preparedness is reviewed during DPMC led ODESC forums and exercised as part of the NEMA led all ofgovernment National Exercise Programme. During significant responses the Ministry will activate and lead the Transport Response Team (TRT), which acts as the sector coordinating entity for transport under the Civil Defence and Emergency Management Act. As a nonoperational agency, the Ministrys role is to coordinate the transport sector and ensure a single transport voice is provided to the lead agency for the response and to Ministers. New Zealand Search and Rescue Council New Zealands million km Search and Rescue (SAR) region (the worlds third largest) extends from the South Pole to the southern border of the Honolulu region, halfway to Australia and Chile, and includes American Samoa, Cook Islands, Niue, Norfolk Isla nd, Samoa, Tokelau, and Tonga. Collectively, the SAR sector comprises approximately , people from a wide variety of public, nongovernment and commercial organisations of whom around percent are volunteers. During the year, the sector saved lives, rescued people, and assisted a further people. These actions averted . billion in social costs to New Zealand. The New Zealand Search and Rescue (NZSAR) Council, established by Cabinet in provides strategic governance, leadership to the SAR sector, manages the governments investment into the sector and provides SAR advice to Ministers. The Council consists of the chief executives of departments with SAR responsibilities and includes the Ministry (chair), Maritime NZ (MNZ), the Civil Aviation Authority, the Department of Conservation, the NZ Police, the New Zealand Defence Force, Fire and Emergency NZ, and a nongovernment independent member. The Ministry receives funding for and hosts the NZSAR Secretariat. Either the NZ Police or the Rescue Coordination Centre NZ (which is an operating group within MNZ) coordinates SAR operations. The responsible coordinating authority will request the use of SAR assets depending on the requirements of the operation. A wide variety of organisations may participate in SAR operations, including the Department of Conservation, NZ Land Search and Rescue, Coastguard NZ, Surf Life Saving NZ, rescue helicopters, the NZ Police, commercial vessels, Defence and a variety of smaller organisations or assets including members of the public. The SAR sectors revenue comes from a variety of sources, including Crown funding through Vote Transport, Vote Police, Vote Conservation, and Vote Defence, and hypothecated funding collected under the LMTA (which recognises FED paid by recreational boat users). Commercial sponsorship, local fundraising, community grants, class gaming (including gaming machines from pubs and clubs) and the Lotteries Grants Board also provide funding to the wider search and rescue and recreational safety sectors. Ministers of Transport and Finance are empowered under the LTMA to allocate FED funding for SAR purposes. The NZSAR Council (on behalf of the Ministry) administers approximately . million per annum of FED investment into SAR sector agencies. The NZSAR Council (on behalf of the Ministry) also administers the governments investment of . million per annum into frontline water safety rescue and prevention services (Coastguard NZ and Surf Life Saving NZ).
Appendix Emergency Management and search and rescue functions Emergency Management and search and rescue functions Emergency Management The transport system is vulnerable to major natural events and manmade shocks that disrupt services. The Ministry exercises its system stewardship role by being the transport sector lead on resilience and security policy matters with other government agencies such as the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC), the National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA), and the National Security System. The Ministry works closely with the other transport Crown entities to plan for future needs and emergencies so that the transport sector can respond efficiently and effectively to system disruptions or damaged infrastructure. System planning and preparedness is reviewed during DPMC led ODESC forums and exercised as part of the NEMA led all ofgovernment National Exercise Programme. During significant responses the Ministry will activate and lead the Transport Response Team (TRT), which acts as the sector coordinating entity for transport under the Civil Defence and Emergency Management Act. As a nonoperational agency, the Ministrys role is to coordinate the transport sector and ensure a single transport voice is provided to the lead agency for the response and to Ministers. New Zealand Search and Rescue Council New Zealands million km Search and Rescue (SAR) region (the worlds third largest) extends from the South Pole to the southern border of the Honolulu region, halfway to Australia and Chile, and includes American Samoa, Cook Islands, Niue, Norfolk Isla nd, Samoa, Tokelau, and Tonga. Collectively, the SAR sector comprises approximately , people from a wide variety of public, nongovernment and commercial organisations of whom around percent are volunteers. During the year, the sector saved lives, rescued people, and assisted a further people. These actions averted . billion in social costs to New Zealand. The New Zealand Search and Rescue (NZSAR) Council, established by Cabinet in provides strategic governance, leadership to the SAR sector, manages the governments investment into the sector and provides SAR advice to Ministers. The Council consists of the chief executives of departments with SAR responsibilities and includes the Ministry (chair), Maritime NZ (MNZ), the Civil Aviation Authority, the Department of Conservation, the NZ Police, the New Zealand Defence Force, Fire and Emergency NZ, and a nongovernment independent member. The Ministry receives funding for and hosts the NZSAR Secretariat. Either the NZ Police or the Rescue Coordination Centre NZ (which is an operating group within MNZ) coordinates SAR operations. The responsible coordinating authority will request the use of SAR assets depending on the requirements of the operation. A wide variety of organisations may participate in SAR operations, including the Department of Conservation, NZ Land Search and Rescue, Coastguard NZ, Surf Life Saving NZ, rescue helicopters, the NZ Police, commercial vessels, Defence and a variety of smaller organisations or assets including members of the public. The SAR sectors revenue comes from a variety of sources, including Crown funding through Vote Transport, Vote Police, Vote Conservation, and Vote Defence, and hypothecated funding collected under the LMTA (which recognises FED paid by recreational boat users). Commercial sponsorship, local fundraising, community grants, class gaming (including gaming machines from pubs and clubs) and the Lotteries Grants Board also provide funding to the wider search and rescue and recreational safety sectors. Ministers of Transport and Finance are empowered under the LTMA to allocate FED funding for SAR purposes. The NZSAR Council (on behalf of the Ministry) administers approximately . million per annum of FED investment into SAR sector agencies. The NZSAR Council (on behalf of the Ministry) also administers the governments investment of . million per annum into frontline water safety rescue and prevention services (Coastguard NZ and Surf Life Saving NZ).
Appendix Evaluation Stocktake . Stocktake
Appendix Trends observed in GPS outcomes monitoring The data in this appendix detail trends over time in a selection of key GPS related outcomes, by way of context and for information purposes. Overall, these figures indicate: A general decline in deaths and serious injuries since compared to the previous three years, but with some variations, noting that transport activity levels in and were impacted by COVID lockdowns. Faster growth in the network of walking and cycling facilities since compared to the previous three years, some of which may be a legacy of earlier funding decisions A general reduction since in the percentage of the population with access to frequent public transport services in Auckland, but growth in Christchurch and general stability in Wellington Overall growth in cycling counts year on year since Continuation of a gradual decline in the proportion of children who travel to and fr om school using active modes since Ongoing increases in road maintenance costs since Increasing distance per capita travelled in single occupancy vehicles since in main urban areas but reducing in Christchurch Increasing land relate d greenhouse gas emissions since , overall and per capita. Annual road deaths
Appendix : Auckland Transport Capital Programme Outlines the projects, timelines and expenses. No mention however of how these are prioritised. Appendix : Significance Policy The Significance Policy determines the significance of variations in relation to the Auckland RLTP ATAP supporting information https:www.transport.govt. nzassetsUploadsLandDo cumentseaecdaATAP Supporting Information.pdf The Auckland Transport Alignment Project (ATAP) is a joint effort by the Government and Auckland Council recognising the need to improve alignment on a longterm strategic approach to transport in Auckland.
Appendix Predicted queues during the coming week During the coming week, queues are predicted at the existing known busy periods (indicated below), using the following colour code: Light blue: No passenger volume forecast Green: Passenger volume forecast to be less than of available capacity Orange: Passenger volume forecast to be between and of available capacity Red: Passenger volume forecast to exceed of available capacity Auckland International
Appendix Criteria selection This evaluation uses a defined set of criteria (aspects of performance) to provide an explicit basis for making robust and transparent judgements from the evidence. The criteria are aligned with the GPS short term results and final reporting measures established by Te Manat Waka for GPS . However, they differ from the GPS short term results in three important ways: ) criteria are distinct from indicators in that they describe relevant impacts without specifying how they should be measured, ) the criteria used in this evaluation relate to expected impacts of GPS at the point in time that the evaluation was conducted, ) the criteria focus on a subset of GPS impacts that were feasible to evaluate from available data. Also note that for most indicators used in this evaluation, targets had not been set to specify the expected extent of changes in investment decisions over . For future GPS, targets would assist with monitoring and evaluating change over time. Table is provide d for transparency to show the relationship between the GPS short term results, the evaluation criteria, the quantitative and qualitative evidence used to address each criterion, and to highlight data gaps that limited the evaluations focus on impact s. The first column of Table shows the GPS short term results, organised under the key priority areas of safety, access, environment, and value for money. The second column translates these short term results into evaluation criteria: positive stat ements describing the expected impacts of GPS in . The third column sets out GPS indicators and the extent to which they were able to inform the evaluation. In detailed planning for the evaluation with Te Manat Waka and Waka Kotahi, a wide range of data was reviewed for its potential to inform the evaluation. GPS established many quantitative reporting measures. However, only some of these measures were relevant to the evaluation criteria, were supported by available data, and were of s ufficient quality to have confidence that sound conclusions could be reached. The proposed sources of quantitative evidence also take into consideration the smaller set of reporting measures established for GPS . Following feedback from Te Manat Wak a and Waka Kotahi, we refined the indicator set to those that are measurable, reportable and relevant to this evaluation, noting where indicators may be useful for future monitoring but are not currently available. Sources of quantitative evidence were di fferentiated into direct measures and supporting measures for the reasons explained above. Measures in italics required analysis of transport investment data to be provided by Waka Kotahi. These are detailed in Table on the pages that follow. Measures highlighted yellow cannot be reported due to a lack of data. Measures that are underlined can only be reported for some or all years between to but not for other periods, so there is no baseline to compare outcomes under GPS against. Measures with a dashed underline are reported for aggregated periods that do not exactly align with GPS periods. The fourth column summarises lines of enquiry that were explored through qualitative interviews. The final column indicates our level of confi dence in the evidence to enable a well informed conclusion to be reached. Our analysis focuses on criteria where there is an adequate level of https:www.transport.govt.nzassets UploadsReportFinal GPS measures.pdf https:www.transport.govt.nzassetsUploadsPaperGPS.pdf APPENDIX CRITERIA SELECTION
Appendix Cross system collaboration Maritime Security You are the lead Minister for Maritime Security and the Ministry is the lead agency for maritime security policy. The Ministry chairs the Maritime Security Oversight Committee (MSOC) , which is responsible for oversight of New Zealands maritime security and comprises maritime security agencies. MSOC developed a Maritime Security Strategy (endorsed by Cabinet in ) in response to multiple increasing security pressures. There are core national security issues within the National Security Strategy , with each issue assigned a Strategic Coordination Agency. The Ministry performs the role for maritime security , and the Ministry sits on the National Security Board, where it is also able to represent other national security issues such as transport security and the supply chain. Border Executive Board The Border Executive Board (BEB) is an interdepartmental executive board with six member agencies New Zealand Customs Service (chair) , Ministry for Primary Industries, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Manat Hauora Ministry of Health, and the Ministry . The BEB provides joint accountability for New Zealands border system and acts as a single point of contact for issues and opportunities that can only be progressed by working across more than one agency. Cabinet has set five accountabilities for the BEB and approved the first BEB Border Sector Strategy in May . The BEB has four priorities for : implement the digital arrival card; progress trans Tasman seamless travel; respond to the resumption of demand for air travel; and coordinate maritime activity. The work programme is reviewed on a six monthly basis and inc ludes a mix of stewardship, coordination, and improvement activities . Climate Change Chief Executives Board New Zealand has international commitments under the Paris Agreement, and a domestic legislative framework (under the Climate Change Response Act ) , that commits the Government to reduce emissions and to improving resilience and the ability to adapt to the effects of climate change. The Climate Change Chief Executives Board was established in July as an Interdepartmental Executive Board (IEB) under the Public Service Act to align and co ordinate cross department climate change action. The Board comprises eight chief executives, is chaired by the Secretary for the Environment, and is responsible to the Prime Minister for its operations. The Ministry of Transports Chief Executive serves on the Board to drive collaboration with other key departments alongside delivering on your transport portfolio commitments. While the Board is responsible for overseeing the delivery of the first emissions reduction plan and national adaptation plan, the Ministry remains accountable for the delivery of actions within your portfolio. For more information on the Board and its work, please refer to the Climate Change Chief Executives Board Briefing to the Incoming Ministers .
Appendix Cross system collaboration Maritime Security You are the lead minister for Maritime Security and the Ministry is the lead agency for maritime security policy. The Ministry chairs the Maritime Security Oversight Committee (MSOC) which is responsible for oversight of New Zealands maritime security and comprises maritime security agencies. MSOC developed a Maritime Security Strategy (endorsed by Cabinet in ) in response to multiple, increasing security pressures. There are core national security issues within the National Security Strategy with each issue assigned a Strategic Coordination Agency. The Ministry performs the role for maritime security , and the Ministry sits on the National Security Board where is it also able to represent other national security issues such as transport security and the supply chain. Border Executive Board The Border Executive Board (BEB) is an interdepartmental executive board with six member agencies New Zealand Customs Service (chair), Ministry for Primary Industries, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Manat Hauora Ministry of Health, and Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport. The BEB provides joint accountability for New Zealands border system and acts as a single point of contact for issues and opportunities that can only be progressed by working across more than one agency. Cabinet has set five accountabilities for the BEB and approved the first BEB Border Sector Strategy in May . The BEB has four priorities for : implement the digital arrival card; progress trans Tasman seamless travel; respond to the resumption o f demand for air travel; and coordinate maritime activity. The work programme is reviewed on a six monthly basis and includes a mix of stewardship, coordination, and improvement activity. Climate Change Chief Executives Board New Zealand has international commitments under the Paris Agreement, and a domestic legislative framework (under the Climate Change Response Act ) that commits the Government to ambitious emissions reduction targets and to improving our resilience and ability to adapt to the effects of climate change. The Climate Change Chief Executives Board was established in July as an Interdepartmental Executive Board (IEB) u nder the Public Service Act to align and co ordinate cross department climate change action. The Board comprises eight chief executives, is chaired by the Secretary for the Environment, and is responsible to the Prime Minister for its operations. The Ministry of Transports Chief Executive serves on the Board to drive collaboration with other key departments alongside delivering on your transport portfolio commitments. While the Board is responsible for overseeing the delivery of the first emissions reduction plan and national adaptation plan as a whole, Te Manat Waka remains accountable for the delivery of actions within your portfolio. For more information on the Board and its work, please refer to the Climate Change Chief Executives Board BIM.
Appendix Cross system collaboration Maritime Security You are the lead minister for Maritime Security and the Ministry is the lead agency for maritime security policy. The Ministry chairs the Maritime Security Oversight Committee (MSOC) which is responsible for oversight of New Zealands maritime security and comprises the lead maritime security agencies. MSOC developed a Maritime Security Strategy (endorsed by Cabinet in ) in response to multiple, increasing security pressures. Maritime security is one of the core issues within the draft National Security Strategy and the Ministry is likely to be made the National Coordinating Agency for Maritime Security within this Strategys Action Plan. Border Executive Board The Border Executive Board (BEB) is an interdepartmental executive board that has six member agencies New Zealand Customs Service (chair), Ministry for Primary Industries, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Manat Hauora Ministry of Health , and Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport. The BEB provides joint accountability for New Zealands border system and acts as a single point of contact for issues and opportunities that can only be progressed by working across more than one agency . Cabinet has set five accountabilities for the BEB and approved the first BEB Border Sector Strategy in May . The BEB has four priorities for : implement the digital arrival card; progress trans Tasman seamless travel; respond to the resumption of demand for air travel; and coordinate maritime activity. The work programme is reviewed on a six monthly basis and includes a mix of stewardship, coordination, and improvement activity. A small secretariat services and advises the board and is funded by contributions from the six border agencies. A separate briefing on the BEB has been prepared for the Minister of Customs, as the Minister responsible for the board. Collective action and collaboration for climate action New Zealand has international commitments under the Paris Agreement, and a domestic legislative framework (under the Climate Change Response Act ) that commits the government to ambitious emissions reduction targets and to improv ing our resilience and ability to adapt to the effects of climate change. The Climate Change Chief Executives Board (the Board) was legally established in July as an Interdepartmental Executive Board (IEB) under the Public Service Act to align and c oordinate cross department climate change action. The RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT WIDER COLLABORATION WITHIN THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
Appendix Cross system collaboration Maritime Security You are the lead minister for Maritime Security and the Ministry is the lead agency for maritime security policy. The Ministry chairs the Maritime Security Oversight Committee (MSOC) which is responsible for oversight of New Zealands maritime security and comprises the lead maritime security agencies. MSOC developed a Maritime Security Strategy (endorsed by Cabinet in ) in response to multiple, increasing security pressures. There are core national security issues within the National Security Strategy with each issue assigned a Strategic Coordination Agency. The Ministry performs that role for maritime security so sits on the National Security Board where is it also able to represent other national security issues such as transport security and the supply chain. Border Executive Board The Border Executive Board (BEB) is an interdepartmental executive board that has six member agencies New Zealand Customs Service (chair), Ministry for Primary Industries, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Manat Hauora Ministry of Health, and Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport. The BEB provides joint accountability for New Zealands border system and acts as a single point of contact for issues and opportunities that can only be progressed by working across more than one agency. Cabinet has set five accountabilities for the BEB and approved the first BEB Border Sector Strategy in May . The BEB has four priorities for : implement the digital arrival card; progress trans Tasman seamless travel; respond to the resumption of demand for air travel; and coordinate maritime activity. The work programme is reviewed on a six monthly basis and includes a mix of stewardship, coordination, and improvement activity. Climate Change Chief Executives Board New Zealand has international commitments under the Paris Agreement, and a domestic legislative framework (under the Climate Change Response Act ) that commits the government to ambitious emissions reduction targets and to improving our resilience and ability to adapt to the effects of climate change. The Climate Change Chief Executives Board (the Board) was legally established in July as an Interdepartmental Executive Board (IEB) under the Public Service Act to align and co ordinate cross department climate change action. The Board comprises of eight Chief Executives, is chaired by the Secretary for the Environment, and it is responsible to the Prime Minister for its operations. The Ministry of Transports Chief Executive serves on the Board to drive collaboration with other key departments alongside delivering on your transport portfolio commitments. While the Board is responsible for overseeing the delivery of the first ERP and NAP as a whole, Te Manat Waka remains accountable for the delivery of actions within your portfolios. For more information on the Board and its work, please refer to the Climate Change Chief Executives Board BIM.
Appendix Cross system collaboration Maritime Security You are the lead minister for Maritime Security and the Ministry is the lead agency for maritime security policy. The Ministry chairs the Maritime Security Oversight Committee (MSOC) which is responsible for oversight of New Zealands maritime security and comprises the lead maritime security agencies. MSOC developed a Maritime Security Strategy (endorsed by Cabinet in ) in response to multiple, increasing security pressures. There are core national security issues within the National Security Strategy with each issue assigned a Strategic Coordination Agency. The Ministry performs that role for maritime security so sits on the National Security Board where is it also able to represent other national security issues such as transport security and the supply chain. Border Executive Board The Border Executive Board (BEB) is an interdepartmental executive board with six member agencies New Zealand Customs Service (chair), Ministry for Primary Industries, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Manat Hauora Ministry of Health, and Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport. The BEB provides joint accountability for New Zealands border system and acts as a single point of contact for issues and opportunities that can only be progressed by working ac ross more than one agency. Cabinet has set five accountabilities for the BEB and approved the first BEB Border Sector Strategy in May . The BEB has four priorities for : implement the digital arrival card; progress trans Tasman seamless travel; respond to the resumption o f demand for air travel; and coordinate maritime activity. The work programme is reviewed on a six monthly basis and includes a mix of stewardship, coordination, and improvement activity. Climate Change Chief Executives Board New Zealand has international commitments under the Paris Agreement, and a domestic legislative framework (under the Climate Change Response Act ) that commits the government to ambitious emissions reduction targets and to improving our resilience and ability to adapt to the effects of climate change. The Climate Change Chief Executives Board (the Board) was established in July as an Interdepartmental Executive Board (IEB) under the Public Service Act to align and co ordinate cross department climate change action. The Board comprises of eight chief executives, is chaired by the Secretary for the Environment, and is responsible to the Prime Minister for its operations. The Ministry of Transports Chief Executive serves on the Board to drive collaboration with other key departments alongside delivering on your transport portfolio commitments. While the Board is responsible for overseeing the delivery of the first emissions reduction plan and national adaptation plan as a whole, Te Manat Waka remains accountable for the delivery of actions within your portfolio. For more information on the Board and its work, please refer to the Climate Change Chief Executives Board BIM.
Appendix Cross system collaboration Maritime Security You are the lead minister for Maritime Security and the Ministry is the lead agency for maritime security policy. The Ministry chairs the Maritime Security Oversight Committee (MSOC) which is responsible for oversight of New Zealands maritime security and comprises the lead maritime security agencies. MSOC developed a Maritime Security Strategy (endorsed by Cabinet in ) in response to multiple, increasing security pressures. There are core national security issues within the National Security Strategy with each issue assigned a Strategic Coordination Agency. The Ministry performs that role for maritime security so sits on the National Security Board where is it also able to represent other national security issues such as transport security and the supply chain. Border Executive Board The Border Executive Board (BEB) is an interdepartmental executive board with six member agencies New Zealand Customs Service (chair), Ministry for Primary Industries, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Manat Hauora Ministry of Health, and Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport. The BEB provides joint accountability for New Zealands border system and acts as a single point of contact for issues and opportunities that can only be progressed by working across more than one agency. Cabinet has set five accountabilities for the BEB and approved the first BEB Border Sector Strategy in May . The BEB has four priorities for : implement the digital arrival card; progress trans Tasman seamless travel; respond to the resumption o f demand for air travel; and coordinate maritime activity. The work programme is reviewed on a six monthly basis and includes a mix of stewardship, coordination, and improvement activity. Climate Change Chief Executives Board New Zealand has international commitments under the Paris Agreement, and a domestic legislative framework (under the Climate Change Response Act ) that commits the government to ambitious emissions reduction targets and to improving our resilience and ability to adapt to the effects of climate change. The Climate Change Chief Executives Board (the Board) was established in July as an Interdepartmental Executive Board (IEB) under the Public Service Act to align and co ordinate cross department climate change action. The Board comprises of eight chief executives, is chaired by the Secretary for the Environment, and is responsible to the Prime Minister for its operations. The Ministry of Transports Chief Executive serves on the Board to drive collaboration with other key departments alongside delivering on your transport portfolio commitments. While the Board is responsible for overseeing the delivery of the first emissions reduction plan and national adaptation plan as a whole, Te Manat Waka remains accountable for the delivery of actions within your portfolio. For more information on the Board and its work, please refer to the Climate Change Chief Executives Board BIM.
Appendix includes further detail on key areas where a coordinated response and decisions are required, including maritime security, border security and climate response.
Appendix . Putting customers voices and needs to the fore Increasingly, the voice of customers is becoming more important: the diversity of their requirements, modality shift and integration with technology to add value for money . Tourists want increased accessibility to information and facilities, e.g. communities need increased support for resiliency and cohesion and freight flows are increasing to meet customer and export growth. The notion of what constitutes value for money needs to take diverse customer needs into account. The shift in emphasis away from asset management to activity management, guided by adoption of the business case approach and the ONRC system, has led to a focus on providing transport systems that meet customer needs. Bay of Plenty RLTP https:cdn.boprc.govt.nzm ediabay ofplenty regionallandtransport planweb.pdf The Plan sets out the priorities and activities the region will work towards in the next six years with a long term view of what might happen in the next years. Page : The Bay of Plenty has followed an Investment Logic Mapping (ILM) process to identify the regions priority land transport problems and benefits. The ILM process involves key stakeholders working together to develop an investment logic map that tracks the relationship between identified problems and the benefits of resolving them. The Bay of Plenty ILM identifies three key benefits of addressing the regions priority land transport problems: Better quality of life for Bay of Plenty residents (). Increased safety for users of the regions transport network (). Improved economic performance ().
Appendix Summary of Emerging Technology Unit survey results CAA EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES UNIT EFFECTIVENESS SURVEY RESULTS Introduction . The CAAs Emerging Technologies Unit (ETU) has been operating for just over one year and its prime purpose is to help operators meet aviation system entry requirements, by providing an enabling gateway process. To ensure that we are meeting our purpose and continue to do so, we have conducted a survey to understand how effective we have been and to get insights on how we can improve. This memo provides an overview of the findings.
Appendix Investment data analysis Baseline activities Table shows how TIO template types were used to classify phases as baseline or non baseline activities based on advice from Waka Kotahi. Table Classification of phases as baseline activities based on TIO template types Baseline activities Template type Template description BCEMERGENCY Emergency BCMAINT Maintenance Operations and Renewals BCPT Public Transport BCRSP Road Safety Promotion BCRTCCOSTS RLTP Management CCMAINT Maintenance programme CCPT Public Transport CCRLTPMGMT RLTP Management CCRSP Road Safety Promotion DCMAINT Maintenance, operations and renewals DCPT Public transport existing services DCRLTPMGMT RLTP Management DCRSP Road Safety Promotion EMERGENCY Emergency Works MAINTNS Maintenance PREVENTIVENS Preventive Maintenance PTNS Public Transport Programme RLTPNS Regional Authority Administration SLEMERGENCY Emergency works SLMAINT Maintenance Operations and Renewals SLPREVENTIVE Preventive maintenance SLPT Public Transport
Appendix Summary of agencies, state owned enterprises, and their functions AgencySOE Key Functions Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport The Ministry advises you, and government more widely, on all policy and regulatory matters within the transport system, and also on funding and governance of the transport Crown entities. The Ministry has key functions under five key levers (previously detailed). Waka Kotahi Waka Kotahi is a Crown entity primarily governed by the Land Transport Management Act (LTMA) and Crown Entities Act . Waka Kotahis functions include investing in, and managing most aspects of the land transport network, including rail. Waka Kotahi has a set of statutorily independent functions, including determining which activities should be included in the NLTP. Waka Kotahi also approves activities as qualifying for payment from the NLTF, approving procurement procedures for land trans port activities, issuing or suspending any land transport document or authorisation, and exercises enforcement powers. Waka Kotahi has regulatory compliance and enforcement responsibilities relating to aspects of rail safety, driver licensing, vehicle testing, and certification and revenue collection. Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) CAA is a Crown entity primarily governed under the Civil Aviation Act and Crown Entities Act . Led by the Director of Civil Aviation, the Authority has two functional divisions: Civil Aviation Authority performs safety and security regulatory functions, and Aviation Security Service (Avsec) delivers aviation security services at New Zealands six security designated airports. Maritime New Zealand (MNZ) MNZ is a Crown entity established under the Maritime Transport Act . It is responsible for promoting a safe, secure, clean and sustainable maritime environment for all commercial and recreational activities on the water and minimising the impact of mar itime incidents and accidents on New Zealand and its people. MNZ has both a domestic and international focus. Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC) TAIC is an independent Crown entity, and acts as a standing commission of inquiry . The Commissions core purpose is to determine the circumstances and causes of certain aviation, rail and maritime occurrences with a view to avoiding similar occurrences in the future, rather than to ascribe blame. TAIC was established to assist New Zealand to comply with its international aviation obligations of ensuring independently conducted, safety focused accident and incident investigations, a role that has since expanded to include investigations of maritime and rail occurrences. The Commission has a range of investigative (not enforcement) powers. City Rail Link Limited City Rail Link Limited is listed as a company under Schedule A of the Public Finance Act . It was established in by the Crown and Auckland Council to deliver Aucklands City Rail Link (CRL) project. The Crown and Auckland Council jointly own City Rail Link Limited (with a percent shareholding respectively). You are jointly responsible, with the Minister of Finance, for the Crowns interest in City Rail Link Limited (as shareholding Ministers). B oard appointments require joint agreement from the Crown and Auckland Council. The Board operates independently to shareholding Ministers and Auckland Council, in accordance with the Project Delivery Agreement. The Project Delivery Agreement is a contractual agreement between the Crown, Council and City Rail Link Limited that sets out the terms for City Rail Link Limited to manage the delivery of the CRL project on behalf of the Crown and Council, as joint sponsors of the project. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TRANSPORTS ROLE WITHIN THE WIDER SYSTEM
Appendix Summary of agencies, state owned enterprises, and their functions AgencySOE Key Functions Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport The Ministry advises you, and government more widely, on all policy and regulatory matters within the transport system, and also on funding and governance of the transport Crown entities. The Ministry plays key functions under five key levers (previously detailed). Waka Kotahi Waka Kotahi is a Crown entity primarily governed by the Land Transport Management Act (LTMA) and Crown Entities Act . Waka Kotahis functions include investing in, and managing most aspects of the land transport network, including rail. Waka Kotahi has a set of statutorily independent functions, including determining which activities should be included in the NLTP. Waka Kotahi also approves activities as qualifying for payment from the NLTF, approving procurement procedures for land trans port activities, issuing or suspending any land transport document or authorisation, and exercises enforcement powers. Waka Kotahi has regulatory compliance and enforcement responsibilities relating to aspects of rail safety, driver licensing, vehicle testing, and certification and revenue collection. Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) CAA is a Crown entity primarily governed under the Civil Aviation Act and Crown Entities Act . Led by the Director of Civil Aviation, the Authority has two functional divisions: Civil Aviation Authority performs safety and security regulatory functions, and Aviation Security Service (Avsec) delivers aviation security services at New Zealands six security designated airports. Maritime New Zealand (MNZ) MNZ is a Crown entity established under the Maritime Transport Act . It is responsible for promoting a safe, secure, clean and sustainable maritime environment for all commercial and recreational activities on the water and minimising the impact of mar itime incidents and accidents on New Zealand and its people. The Agency has both a domestic and international focus. Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC) TAIC is an independent Crown entity, and acts as a standing commission of inquiry . The Commissions core purpose is to determine the circumstances and causes of certain aviation, rail and maritime occurrences with a view to avoiding similar occurrences in the future, rather than to ascribe blame. TAIC was established to assist New Zealand to comply with its international aviation obligations of ensuring independently conducted, safety focused accident and incident investigations, a role that has since expanded to include investigations of maritime and rail occurrences. The Commission has a range of investigative (not enforcement) powers. City Rail Link Limited City Rail Link Limited is listed as a company under Schedule A of the Public Finance Act . It was established in by the Crown and Auckland Council to deliver Aucklands City Rail Link (CRL) project. The Crown and Auckland Council jointly own City Rail Link Limited (with a percent shareholding respectively). You are jointly responsible, with the Minister of Finance, for the Crowns interest in City Rail Link Limited (as shareholding Ministers). B oard appointments require joint agreement from the Crown and Auckland Council. The Board operates independently to shareholding Ministers and Auckland Council, in accordance with the Project Delivery Agreement. The Project Delivery Agreement is a contractual agreement between the Crown, Council and City Rail Link Limited that sets out the terms for City Rail Link Limited to manage the delivery of the CRL project on behalf of the Crown and Council, as joint Sponsors of the project. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT WIDER COLLABORATION WITHIN THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM
Appendix Summary of transport agencies, Crown entities, SOEs , and their functions Agency SOE Key Functions The Ministry The Ministry advises you, and government more widely, on all policy and regulatory matters within the transport system, and funding and governance of the transport Crown entities. Waka Kotahi Waka Kotahi is a Crown agent primarily governed by the Land Transport Management Act (LTMA) and Crown Entities Act . Waka Kotahi s functions include investing in, and managing most aspects of the land transport network, including rail. Waka Kotahi has statutorily independent functions, including determining which activities should be included in the NLTP . Waka Kotahi also approves activities as qualifying for payment from the NLTF , approving procurement procedures for land transport activities, issuing or suspending any land transport document or authorisation, and has enforcement powers. Waka Kotahi has regulatory compliance and enforcement responsibilities relating to aspects of rail safety, driver licensing, vehicle testing, and certification and revenue collection. Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) CAA is a Crown agent primarily governed under the Civil Aviation Act and Crown Entities Act. Led by the Director of Civil Aviation , the Authority has seven business groups performing safety and security regulatory and service delivery functions across the breadth of the aviation system. Maritime New Zealand (MNZ) MNZ is a Crown agent established under the Maritime Transport Act. It is responsible for promoting a safe, secure, clean and sustainable maritime environment for all commercial and recreational activities on the water and minimising the impact of maritime incidents and accidents on New Zealand and its people. MNZ has both a domestic and international focus. Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC) TAIC is an independent Crown entity and acts as a standing commission of inquiry . The Commissions core purpose is to determine the circumstances and causes of certain aviation, rail and maritime occurrences with a view to avoiding similar occurrences in the future, rather than to ascribe blame. TAIC was established to assist New Zealand to comply with its international aviation obligations of ensuring independently conducted, safety focused accident and incident investigations, a role that has since expanded to include investigations of maritime and rail occurrences. The Commission has a range of investigative (not enforcement) powers. City Rail Link Limited (CRLL) CRLL is listed as a company under Schedule A of the Public Finance Act . It was established in by the Crown and Auckland Council to deliver Aucklands City Rail Link (CRL) project. The Crown and Auckland Council jointly own CRLL (with a shareholding respectively). You are jointly responsible, with the Minister of Finance, for the Crowns interest in CRLL (as shareholding Ministers). Board appointments require joint agreement from the Crown and Auckland Council. The CRL project is delivered in accordance with the terms set in the Project Delivery Agreement. The Project Delivery Agreement is a contractual agreement between the Crown, Council and CRLL that sets out the terms for the company to manage the delivery of the CRL project on behalf of the Crown and Council, as joint sponsors of the project. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT APPENDIX SUMMARY OF TRANSPORT AGENCIES, CROWN ENTITIES, SOES, AND THEIR FUNCTIONS
Appendix Summary of transport agencies, Crown entities, state owned enterprises, and their functions AgencySOE Key Functions Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport The Ministry advises you, and government more widely, on all policy and regulatory matters within the transport system, and also on funding and governance of the transport Crown entities. The Ministry has key functions under five key levers (previously detailed). Waka Kotahi Waka Kotahi is a Crown agent primarily governed by the Land Transport Management Act (LTMA) and Crown Entities Act . Waka Kotahis functions include investing in, and managing most aspects of the land transport network, including rail. Waka Kotahi has a set of statutorily independent functions, including determining which activities should be included in the NLTP. Waka Kotahi also approves activities as qualifying for payment from the NLTF, approving procurement procedures for land trans port activities, issuing or suspending any land transport document or authorisation, and exercises enforcement powers. Waka Kotahi has regulatory compliance and enforcement responsibilities relating to aspects of rail safety, driver licensing, vehicle testing, and certification and revenue collection. Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) CAA is a Crown agent primarily governed under the Civil Aviation Act and Crown Entities Act . Led by the Director of Civil Aviation, t he Authority has seven business groups performing safety and security regulatory and service delivery functions across the breadth of the aviation system , so that people feel safe and are safe when they fly. Maritime New Zealand (MNZ) MNZ is a Crown agent established under the Maritime Transport Act . It is responsible for promoting a safe, secure, clean and sustainable maritime environment for all commercial and recreational activities on the water and minimising the impact of maritime incidents and accidents on New Zealand and its people. MNZ has both a domestic and international focus. Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC) TAIC is an independent Crown entity, and acts as a standing commission of inquiry . The Commissions core purpose is to determine the circumstances and causes of certain aviation, rail and maritime occurrences with a view to avoiding similar occurrences in the future, rather than to ascribe blame. TAIC was established to assist New Zealand to comply with its international aviation obligations of ensuring independently conducted, safety focused accident and incident investigations, a role that has since expanded to include investigations of maritime and rail occurrences. The Commission has a range of investigative (not enforcement) powers. City Rail Link Limited City Rail Link Limited is listed as a company under Schedule A of the Public Finance Act . It was established in by the Crown and Auckland Council to deliver Aucklands City Rail Link (CRL) project. The Crown and Auckland Council jointly own City Rail Link Limited (with a shareholding respectively). You are jointly responsible, with the Minister of Finance, for the Crowns interest in City Rail Link Limited (as shareholding Ministers). Board appointments require joint agreement from the Crown and Auckland Council. The City Rail Link project is delivered in accordance with the terms set in the Project Delivery Agreement. The Project Delivery Agreement is a contractual agreement between the Crown, Council and City Rail Link Limited that sets out the terms for City Rail Link Limited to manage the delivery of the CRL project on behalf of the Cr own and Council, as joint sponsors of the project. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TRANSPORTS ROLE WITHIN THE WIDER SYSTEM
Appendix Glossary of terms and abbreviations Airways Airways Corporation of New Zealand Ltd ALR Auckland Light Rail ALRL Auckland Light Rail Ltd ANSP Air Navigation Services Provider APEC AsiaPacific Economic Cooperation BEB Border Executive Board CAA Civil Aviation Authority CERF Climate Emergency Response Fund CRL City Rail Link CRLL City Rail Link Limited DPMC Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet DTRS Decarbonising Transport Research Strategy FED Fuel Excise Duty GPS Government Policy Statement on Land Transport ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization IEB Interagency Executives Board ILO International Labour Organization IMO International Maritime Organization ITF International Transport Forum LTMA Land Transport Management Act
Appendix A: Evaluation framework The purpose of this paper is to record and explain the framework used to evaluate transport packages in the Auckland Transport Alignment project to enable a robust and transparent analysis of different transport investments. This is a useful document understanding how value for money was defined and used to prioritise projectspackages of work. Direct text update to the Waikato RLTP The update to the Waikato RLTP includes three strategic priorities that had been confirmed and weighted through an ILM process of: Road safety () Economic development strategic corridors () Access and mobility () There are also three unweighted underpinning objectives of: Integration and forward planning Affordability Environmental sustainability and resilience.
Appendix One Driver Licensing wait times status Overall wait times compared to the day target:
Appendix Two Officials Meeting Forward Looking Agenda Item for discussion Lead October November December s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv)
Appendix Predicted queues during the coming week During the coming week, queues are predicted at the existing known busy periods (indicated below), using the following colour code: Light blue: No passenger volume forecast Green: Passenger volume forecast to be less than of available capacity Orange: Passenger volume forecast to be between and of available capacity Red: Passenger volume forecast to exceed of available capacity
Applicants must contribute to our primary and secondary objectives.
Applications have now closed.
Applies to Kiwi Rail Temporary changes are proposed that will make it easier for KiwiRail to trim or remove trees and hedges, lower fences andor walls, and implement measures to protect land where rail infrastructure is located. The right of entry for existing rail infra structure will be broadened and will apply to all existing infrastructure and enable its repair, upgrade, and rebuild. New Zealand Railways Corporation Act
Applies to KiwiRail Temporary changes are proposed that will make it easier for KiwiRail to c ease, withdraw or reduce services on a railway line when doing repair and recovery works. Other modifications include making it easier for KiwiRail to get owners to trim or remove trees and hedges, and close branch lines and sidings.
Applies to Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail Temporary changes are proposed to exempt Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail from the setback requirement for taking fish near fish traps. Proposed changes include a processing timeframe and approval process to enable prompt recovery works in relation to structures that may impede fish passage.
Applies to Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail Temporary changes are proposed to simplify and speed up the resource consent and designation processes. Proposed changes include reducing processing times for resource consents, removing notification requirements, clarifying the level of detail required for consent applications and conducting emergency works, and requiring engagement with affected individuals andor groups. Other proposals include clarifying that consented activities are controlled activities, outlining the conditions that can be imposed on consents , allowing the agency to decide conditions imposed, and altering appeal rights for approvals granted under the OiC. An environmental management plan approach will be adopted, along with a liaison group approach. A key check and bal ance will be imposing standardised conditions across all regions to address environmental impacts. The temporary changes will also exempt Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail from Outline Plan of Works requirements. Monitoring and enforcement provisions of the RMA remain unchanged, with these rights remaining with local authorities.
Applies to Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail Temporary changes are proposed to simplify land acquisition processes and make survey plan and proclamation process and administrative changes. This includes reducing or removing requirements to give notice and limit ing rights of objection. KiwiRail will be able to use the simplified land acquisition processes for compulsory acquisition for freehold title only in Awatoto and Esk Valley . This is because of the need to do realignment in these locations as the current route is no longer viable, as well as when taking climate change considerations for rebuild into account. However, any use of these processes will be a last resort.
Applies to Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail Temporary changes are proposed to streamline the process to obtain concessions for use of land, and authorisation to take, kill or interact with protected wildlife. A two tier approach will be taken that distinguishes between incorridor works with values that trigger the approval process, and near corridor works. Wildlife Act approvals for works within some areas will be waived in most circumstances. Where approval is required under all three Acts, an abbreviated process will apply, providing certainty on the information required in an application, the processing timeframes, and condition requirements. There will also be modifications to the Reserves Act to enable councils to allow non compliant temporary uses of council reserves for the purposes of recovery w orks (e.g. equipment and machinery storage), including restrictions on people entering or remaining on a reserve.
Apply existing taxi requirements to all operators (higher regulatory burden in a new single class system).
Appointed CentrePort CEO in May , having previously held the roles of General Manager Regeneration, and General Manager Infrastructure and Environment since joining CentrePort in . Anthony has acted as a Project Director on major infrastructure projects in both Australia and New Zealand. Anthony is experienced in the planning and delivery of projects, and the asset management of large scale infrastructure businesses. He has a civil engineering degree, and a Bachelor of Commerce, from the University of Wollongong.
Appointments made for the Auckland Light Rail Board
Appropriation and Tagged Contingency changes
Approval in principle meant the treaty and the national interest analysis were presented to the House for parliamentary treaty examination and select committee consideration. The Select Committee completed its consideration and reported back to the House in June. The analysis notes becoming party to Annex VI would benefit New Zealands international reputation and climate change engagement. The main benefits include:
Approved organisations and the Transport Agency (state highways) need to provide performance measures for the following activities in order to receive funding approval from the Transport Agency: road improvement activities with a total cost of m or more public transport improvement activities with a total cost of m or more walking and cycling improvement activities with a total cost of m or more all activities with funding contribution from the Urban Cycleways Fund (UCF)
Approximately , households take part in the survey each year.
Approximately half of New Zealands CO
Approximately, , people were interviewed from , randomly selected households over between June and July , and during April and May for some Auckland households only.
Apr May June July ALRL Disestablishment ALRL, MoT, and the ALRL contractors enter into a tripartite agreement for the ongoing management of the GSI Data ALRL reviews all records to ensure consistency with the P ublic Records Act
April , and the Regulations are required to support the implementation of those
April : Submissions open on proposed extension to Qantas and American Airlines authorisation
Ara Thono Pu hoi to Warkworth: The Taki Hono ( or operations building and control centre for staff managing the new road) was officially opened in September . A public open day in October i ncluded over , visitors enjoying a minute guided bus tour of the entire route and meeting the project team. Waka Kotahi will provide an update on the opening once set.
Archives NZ ha s advised that t he records in question are part of series Assented Acts (retained), which are held in the Archives NZ Wellington office https:collections.archives.govt.nzenwebarenasearchentityaims archiveassented acts (retained)qassentedactssourceaims archive. All records in this series are open access and are available to view in the Wellington Reading room. You can book a session here https:www.archives.govt.nzabout uscontact us. You can also reach out for assistance using their Ask an Archivist service at https:www.archives.govt.nzabout usservices weofferask an archivist . You have the right to seek an investigation and review of this response by the Ombudsman, in accordance with section () of the Act. The relevant details can be found on the Ombudsmans website www.ombudsman.parliament.nz .
Are there any new activity classes in the draft GPS The draft GPS proposes a new activity class for interregional public transport, which will play a crucial role in achieving the governments emissions reduction targets. This activity class provides for investment in existing and new interregional services, encouraging regional councils and unitary authorities to work together to expand and improve the interregional public transport service offerings.
Are these priorities likely to change The Indicative Strategic P riorities represent the intended directions for GPS , prior to consultation. Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport welcomes the opportunity to engage with you on the directions outlined in this document. You can contact the GPS team via gpstransport. govt.nz
Area : The purpose of the Total Mobility scheme
Area : How aspects of Total Mobility could be made more accessible for disabled people
Area : How aspects of Total Mobilitys operations could be improved
Area : Funding mechanisms for the Total Mobility scheme
Arotake o te Haumitanga ki te Whakahaere me te Tiaki i ng Huarahi Matua o Aotearoa Whanga Part : Summary Report Prongo Whakarpopoto October
Article reports on CAA appointment of Tracey Taylor for independent culture review. Article includes comment from AIANZ CEO Simon Wallace and NZ ALPA president Andrew McKeen; both indicate support of the review. Comment from the Director of a private aviation company, Hugh Jones of Core Aviation, is also included, expressing concerns about CAA performance and leadership, and questioning whether a survey of indus try was necessary to identify areas for improvement. NZ Herald Thursday September Cavalier pilot convicted over illegal operation of helicopter .
Articles refer to Civil Aviation Act which states that airlines have a responsibility to reimburse customers for loss caused by cancellations or delays on New Zealand domestic flights that are within the airlines control. Stuff, Newstalk ZB, Interest.co.nz Upcoming education publications and products Planned releasepublish What Type Why SepOct Drone safety brochure Safety education product BAU revision Oct In, out, and around Queenstown GAP booklet (update) BAU revision Oct How to be an aerodrome manager GAP booklet (new) As part of the WTSA campaign, new guidance material for aerodrome managers is being produced, in the GAP booklet format.
As Associate Minister of Transport you will help to ensure that New Zealands aviation, maritime,
As Associate Minister of Transport your responsibilities include all matters relating to aviation and
As I noted, in my view, the area where boats shelter in stormy weather is in the area from Te Kowhai beach to Te Kura a Paoa (Young Nicks Head) which is the exclusive area of Ngai Tamanuhiri.
As a result of some of the project costs increasing, the Ministry worked with The Treasury, Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail on a baselining exercise to assess and confirm the costs, scopes and schedules for the original projects. Ministers then requested a reprioritisation of NZUP projects to support emissions reduction goals, urban growth objectives, and to manage costs in a responsible manner.
As a result of the review, the Government announced it would lift the freeze on new services entering the scheme, cap Crown funding for the next years and introduce bulk funding.
As a result of this advice, in June , Cabinet directed us to run a parallel evaluation process with Waka Kotahi and NZ Infra.
As a signatory to Te Tiriti o Waitangi (Te Tiriti), the Crown has an obligation to uphold Te Tiriti in all its interaction with Mori.
As at Wednesday September
As at Wednesday August
As at Wednesday September
As at Wednesday August
As at Wednesday September
As at Wednesday August
As at Wednesday September
As at Wednesday August
As noted above, I am withholding the titles of documents. Both the titles and the contents of these documents remain under active consideration, therefore no further detail s about these papers have been provided to you in this response.
As noted above, I am withholding the titles of documents. Both the titles and the contents of these documents remain under active consideration, therefore no further detail s about these papers have been provided to you in this response. Please note your name has been withheld from the briefings that relate to the requests you have made to the Minister of Transport. Normally this information would not be withheld when providing it to you but this is so our response can be without additional redactions. We also have not provided you with the attachments for these briefings as you already hold the copy of the final response. T his has been explained in the attached document schedule at Annex .
As noted above, I am withholding the titles of five briefings . Both the titles and the contents of these briefing s remain under active consideration, therefore no further detail about them has been provided to you in this response. Certain information is withheld and documents are refused under the following sections of the Act:
As noted above, if the Minister is speaking at the same event, please let the Engagement RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
As of January , the Ministry has not prepared a briefing for the Associate Minister of Transport, Hon James Meager. I am therefore refusing your request for documents prepared for Minister Meager under section (e) of the Act that the documents requested do not exist.
As part of New Zealands effort to reduce international aviation emissions, we will participate in the Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA)
As part of a package of measures being developed to improve air quality, Cabinet agreed to raise the emission standards in order to reduce emissions of vehicles being imported into New Zealand.
As part of his role, Brent is responsible for supporting Ministers offices, overseeing internal governance and reporting, and leading the transport revenue work programme.
As part of the Drone Benefit Study, we also wanted to hear back from various sectors about the barriers and concerns they had about using drones, and eventually integrating drones into the wider transport system.
As part of the Government Policy Statement on Transport , Cabinet agreed to establish a
As part of the Transport Base Evidence Strategys Evaluation Programme, we commissioned Schiff Consulting to evaluate New Zealands GDLS.
As part of the consultation, public workshops were held. We received submissions in response to the consultation document. After considering the submissions, we worked with Waka Kotahi to draft an amendment Rule to put proposed changes into place.
As part of the focus on economic growth and productivity, GPS reintroduces the Roads of National Significance programme and introduces a programme of Roads of Regional Significance across New Zealand. It also sets out a number of major public transport projects.
As part of the wider government
As part of this work, we will be undertaking market sounding discussions with the concessionaire and investor market in May .
As part of your preparation, find out if anyone else from the Ministry is attending andor speaking at the same event, and whether a Minister is attending andor speaking.
As promised, pdf with maps attached for you. The third page is zoomed in version of the Port area its not different to the area on the first map, just hopefully more easily able to be read.
As soon as the new rules come into effect, New Zealand ships will join ships from many other countries in using either low sulphur fuels or an approved way of reducing emissions from using higher sulphur fuels. This will have an immediate positive impact.
As steward of the transport sector we look for opportunities to shape a better future and build our capability by making sure we have the right skills, tools and structures, and provide our people with the right opportunities to succeed.
As system stewards, we work to consider the longterm outcomes for the entire
As the Deputy Chief Executive Corporate Services, Carmen leads the corporate functions that enable the Ministry to operate efficiently. These include finance, communications and engagement, human resources, business enablement and support, legal and procurement, and the New Zealand Search and Rescue Secretariat.
As the Governments system lead on transport, our purpose is to enable a transport system that connects New Zealand.
As the devices would be used as testing devices, the legislation set out criteria and standards that the devices needed to meet. Following a procurement process, no appropriate device was found.
As the largest cofunder of NLTP
As the largest cofunder of NLTP projects, local
As well as by the links above this incorporated material can be inspected by appointment free of charge from Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transports head office at the following address.
As well as by the links above this incorporated material can be inspected by appointment, free of charge, from Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transports head office at the following address:
As well as investigating several alternative schemes, the reports examined road pricing as a means of reducing congestion and raising revenue for investment in land transport. The reports did not make recommendations about whether road pricing should be introduced in Auckland their function was to present information and data for politicians, members of the public and stakeholders to consider. The schemes were developed to provide enough information to help the Government decide if it should do any further work on road pricing.
As well as outlining additional entitlements, the Cabinet paper noted that we would report back on a further review of rebate and refund entitlements by June and prepare a report for stakeholders, which was released in March .
As well as the Land Transport Act , there are other regulations that may be applicable to the operation of AVs. These include:
As well as the evaluation report, we a technical report that provides more information about the methodology, including analysis and findings. Contact us to request a copy. Email
As well as the flights supported by the scheme a number of providers continue to operate outside of the scheme. Exporters and importers should consult with their preferred freight forwarder to identify the most appropriate air service for the requirements.
As you are aware, on January the first part of your request was transferred to the Civil Aviation Authority of New Zealand (CAA) for a response. This was because that information is more closely connected with the functions of the CAA. You can expect a response from them in due course. Regarding the other pa rts of your request, the Government is introducing changes to the regulatory environment to support the growth of advanced aviation in New Zealand. The changes will ensure the system is efficient and easier to navigate for innovators testing their technology and ideas. The work supports the Governments goal to have a world class regulatory environment by the end of that allows rapid iteration and testing of advanced aviation vehicles and technologies. The Ministry of Transport is working in collaboration with the CAA to implement the changes. Industry will be consulted as part of the normal Rule making process. You can access information about this on our website at this link : www.transport.govt.nzarea of interesttechnology andinnovationadvanced aviation
As you heard from Minister McAnulty and Minister Allan earlier today, the transport sector has an incredibly important role in enabling and maintaining the connectivity of communities, places, and the supply chain before , during, and after severe weath er events, like those experienced recently, and also in the event of natural disasters.
As you know, my delegated responsibilities as Associate Minister of Transport include aviation. Accordingly, and i f you agree to me undertaking the role of Kiwi Shareholder , I will write to Air New Zealand informing them of the same . Yours sincerel y
Ashburton Bridge SH Nelson (Rocks Road) shared path SH
Ashburton Bridge State Highway Greater resilience for the South Islands main freight route along State Highway would be boosted and connectivity strengthened with improvements to links across the HakatereAshburton River. Additional benefits would be improved travel choice options.
Aspiration and ambition is exhibited in our mahi. It is a navigational point for how we will lead Aotearoa towards a stronger transport system.
Assessing the infrastructure readiness required for supporting the safe deployment of automated vehicles
Assessment of the LongTerm Requirements for a Resilient Cook Strait Connection
Asset Consumption and Sustainability Ratio
Asset Sustainability Asset Consumption
Assets System capacity . The New Zealand Search and Rescue (NZSAR) Secretariat develops a model to forecast future demand for frontline safety and search and rescue services, to inform the required Systemwide capacity (assets and people) and its configuration as soon as practicable. . Periodic assessment by the System Steward (once established) of Systemwide capacity to meet forecast demand, working with the Coordinating Authorities, NGOs and other operators as appropriate, including the identification of any changes required to Systemwide capacity in response.Aviation operations . Prompt conclusion of work underway through the NZSAR Secretariat to determine operational service standards for helicopter operations to support safe, effective, and efficient search and rescue responses. . Progression of work between the NZSAR Secretariat and the Coordinating Authorities to explore a revised model for the tasking and deployment of aviation assets for search and rescue operations, including the capability and funding uplift required. Telecommunications . The NZSAR Council works with the Next Generation Critical Communications entity to ensure that the NGOs delivering search and rescue services are appropriately accounted for in the new digital communications network for emergency services. Emergency management events . The roles of search and rescue and the NGOs involved in emergency management events, and associated funding arrangements, are included within any future event reviews that occur.
Assigning responsibility to the most appropriate party when a driver is not in control of the vehicle raises concerns under New Zealand legislation, where offence provisions are mainly directed towards drivers. Where the vehicle has taken over the dynamic driving task (DDT), the assignment of responsibility is unclear, as a number of different entities could potentially be responsible depending on the circumstances, including the manufacturer, importer, approval entity, owner, or driver.
Associate Minister of Transport
Associate Minister of Transport Weekly Report week commencing August
Associate Ministers assist portfolio Ministers in carrying out tasks relating to their portfolios. The
Associate Ministers Office to lodge the APH paperwork by September at am . Week September Cabinet to consider the reappointment on September .
Associate Professor Malcolm Tingle (pharmacology)
Association in showed per cent of New Zealands population participating in boating each
At , the total level of asset sustainability (i.e., rate assets are wearing out compared to being renewe d) is considered lower than indicative ranges of to (depending on asset type and organisation). The proposed investment in pavement and surfacing renewals for represents a maintained asset sustainability ratio (ASR) of approximately . This very crudely infers investment is at of the level needed to sustain the asset base condition. In general, spending less on renewals compared to the rate of depreciation can indicate a potential gap in investment that may increase the level of risk to the Agencys long term ability to maintain the condition of the State Highways. Over the funding period this potential gap is estimated to be approximately .b between how much Waka Kotahi expensed on depreciation compared to how much was invested in renewing the asset stock (excluding capital improvements). The Review Team acknowledges, however, that this is a high level indicator, and it is not necessary to fund of the annual deprecia tion if the level of shortfall is less than the actual renewal demand based on condition and service performance capacity of the asset base. We also note that half of this potential gap can be attributed to bridges, culverts, subways, tunnels, and other structures that have experienced significant asset growth and associated depreciation expense. These assets typically have longer life and lower renewal demands than the annual depreciation calculated on a straight line
At a high level, applicants are expected to:
At an individual site level, of full test sites and of restricted test sites met the days or less target last week.
At its July meeting, the Council discussed a communications paper, articulating the need for transparency and agreed to publish key messages from each meeting on the Ministrys website.
At its May meeting, the Council approved the terms of reference and the proposed work schedule.
At its September meeting, the Council discussed the progress being made through the working papers to the develop the National Aviation Policy Statement (NAPS).
At the Councils November meeting, the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) provided an overview of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) audit which will take place in July . The CAA also the Council on other ICAO work underway including an update of the State Safety Programme and the development of a National Aviation Safety Plan, both to be completed before the audit in July.
At the conclus ion of a review the ProgrammeProject SRO will be provided with a Review Report summarising key findings and recommendations. The report will contain: a summary of findings, including an overall delivery confidence RAG rating key recommendations, categoris ed by urgency suggested timing of the next Gateway review.
At the end of LGWM consulted with Wellingtonians on scenarios for improving transport and infrastructure in Wellington. The publics input helped LGWM to develop a Recommended Programme of Investment that was presented to the Minister of Transport in late .
At the first meeting, the members discussed the Terms of Reference for the group and work being done across government on the integration of drones.
At the time of the report most of the refund and rebate entitlements related to productive fuel use, such as fuel used in farm vehicles or commercial ships. We considered whether there was merit in providing a refund or a rebate for fuel used in a broader range of situations for example, fuel used around the home, or in recreational boats or aircraft.
At this stage, there is no confirmed timeframe for completing this work.
Attitudes to transport technologies
Auckland Brisbane . . . China Airlines . . . Air NZ . . . Qantas . . . Jetstar . . . Solomon Airlines . . . Brisbane Queenstown . . . Qantas . . . Virgin Australia . . . INDIVIDUAL TRANSTASMAN ROUTES, MARCH
Auckland Christchurch . . . Air NZ . . . Jetstar . . .
Auckland Dunedin . . . Air NZ . . . INDIVIDUAL DOMESTIC ROUTES, MARCH
Auckland Gold Coast . . . Air NZ . . . Jetstar . . .
Auckland Queenstown . . . Air NZ . . . Jetstar . . .
Auckland Sydney . . . China Eastern Airlines . . . LATAM . . . Air NZ . . . Qantas . . . Jetstar . . . Queenstown Melbourne . . . Air NZ . . . Qantas . . . Jetstar . . . Virgin Australia . . .
Auckland rd and th Main Rail Lines
Auckland Airport Act
Auckland Airport contact:
Auckland Airport views on the Air New Zealand and Singapore Reauthorisation
Auckland C ouncil, as the sole shareholder of Ports of Auckland Ltd, has requested that the Minister of Transport agree to changes to the Port s of Auckland Limited constitution. In accordance w ith section of the Port Companies Act , the Minister of Transport must give prior written approval for any amendments to a port companys constitution. THE MINIS TER: APPROVES, in acc ordance with section of the Port Companies Act , the changes to the constitution of the company as shown in the attached copy of the amended constitution. Dated SIGNED BY the Associate Minister of Transport: Hon Kiri Allan for the Minister of Transport APPENDIX RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of June OC Hon Kieran McAnulty Action required by: Acting Minister of Transport Wednesday, June PROPOSED ORDERS IN COUNCIL UNDER THE SEVERE WEATHER EMERGENCY RECOVERY LEGISLATION ACT KIWIRAIL AND WAKA KOTAHI REPAIR AND RECOVERY WORKS, AND LAND TRANSPORT MANAGEMENT ACT AMENDMENTS Purpose Provide you with background information on th ree proposed Orders inCouncil (OiCs) to support Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency (Waka Kotah i) and KiwiRail to progress their repair and recovery works . These OiCs will be considered by the Cabinet Extreme Weather Recovery Committee (EWR) on June . Key p oints There has been extensive damage to transport infrastructure following the recent severe weather events. Immediate works are already underway by Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail to reconnect communities and restore the supply chain. More significant works will be required by these two agencies over the coming months and years to reinstate and rebuild their land transport networks across the affected regions and ensure ongoing safety and resilience. The OiC mechanism enabled by the Severe Weather Emergency Recovery Legislation Act (SWERL) Act will make it possible for design, consenting and construction of state highway and rail infrastructure to be done in a timely and wellcoordinated way. This will help to reconnect communities and restore the supply chain. It will also reduce disruption, complexity, duplication of effort and cost. Te Mana t Waka Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) has worked closely with Waka Kotahi, KiwiRail, the agencies responsible for the relevant legislation , Te Puni Kkiri and Te Arawhiti to develop three OiCs that will enable Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail to carry out repair and recovery works at pace and scale across the affected regions . While the processes are streamlined, existing rights and protections are not removed . An example of this is shortening rather than removing engagement requirements. Careful consideration has been given to upholding Mori rights and interests and protecting private property rights. Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of The Ministers responsible for the relevant legislation agreed to the proposed modifications. They also agreed the Minister of Transport would take the lead on progressing the OiCs through the Cabinet approval process. The Ministry is working with the relevant agencies on the scope and application of a further OiC for more significant state highway recovery works . This is because the curren t OiC for Waka Kotahi is aimed at enabling it to get started on recovery works and is not designed for major works, such as realigning road corridors. This is due to the limited information available on the location and full extent of the recovery works re quired beyond metres from the legal road boundaries . If Cabinet agrees to progress the OiCs, the Ministry will undertake statutory engagement on the proposals from Tuesday June to Monday July . Draft OiCs will be reviewed by the Severe We ather Events Review Panel and the Regulations Review Committee. The intention is for the finalised OiCs to be submitted for Cabinet approval for enactment on August . The Ministry has provided your Office with speaking points to support you at EWR on June , and officials will be on standby outside EWR to support you if required .
Auckland Council minutes of meeting May
Auckland Council must report on regional fuel tax revenue and expenditure, including delivery of each project the tax funds, and
Auckland International Airport Ltd
Auckland International Airport and airlines have disagreed publicly on the airports proposals to
Auckland International Due to maintenance changes in the operational parameters, including flight loading and passenger presentations, the Auckland International graph is unavailable. It will be once the process is complete. Wellington International
Auckland Light Rail Decision to progress
Auckland Light Rail Board Members
Auckland Light Rail Considerations for the Next Phase (Mar )
Auckland Light Rail Limited (ALR Ltd) has now been established as a Crown Entity Company to deliver the detailed planning and final business case of Auckland Light Rail.
Auckland Light Rail Limited (ALRL) was established in late under Schedule of the Crown Entities Act . Additionally, City Rail Link Limited is the sole company under Schedule A of the Public Finance Act, jointly established by the Crown and Auckland Council to deliver Aucklands City Rail Link (CRL). You have different roles and responsibilities in relation to each of these agencies.
Auckland Light Rail Sponsoring Ministers took a paper through Cabinet to update on progress being made in implementing the governance arragements agreed by Cabinet in December , the work to initiate the next stage of business case assessment, progress in aligning ALR with other investments in Auckland, and other policy and delivery workstreams.
Auckland Light Rail is likely to be New Zealands largest ever infrastructure project. Building the first light rail line in New Zealand involves setting up new systems and regulations, and building local capability to deliver the project. This is a very complex project so it is important that our advice and Treasurys takes account of these complexities and provides practical ways forward.
Auckland Light Rail project
Auckland Light Rail update (Apr )
Auckland Metropolitan Level Crossing
Auckland Northwest Rapid Transit
Auckland Rail Third and Fourth Mains Expansion
Auckland Regional Fuel Tax
Auckland Transport Alignment Project
Auckland Transport Matakana Link Road The road pavement, footpaths, cycleway and landscaping are complete, with the tie into the bridge close to completion. All drainage, rest areas, raingardens and wetlands are also complete, and streetlights are installed. The road will open in tandem with t he new Puhoi to Warkworth motorway. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Ferry Services A partnership agreement was signed with Fullers to enable service improvements and to accelerate decarbonisation of the ferry fleet. Construction contracts were completed for three new electric and electr ic hybrid ferries. Devonport and Waiheke services have been integrated with AT Hop. A new monthly pass to Waiheke is cheaper when compared to the previous Fullers monthly pass. Eastern Busway Panmure Station, the surrounding road upgrade, and the Panmure to Pakuranga section are now complete. Consents for the work in Pakuranga and between Pakuranga to Ti Rkau Drive Bridge have been publicly notified, and vacant properties are being removed along Ti R kau Drive and William Roberts Road. Westhaven to CBD Cycleway All main works are complete. The cycleway is set to open in February after streetlighting works are completed. Minor Cycling (Popup Cycleways) A total of . kilometres of cycleways have been completed on Clark Street (New Lynn), Ian McKinnon Drive (Eden Terrace), Grafton Road (Grafton) and Manukau Station Road (Manukau). Speed Management Programme Phase three speed limit changes started in October . N ew speed limit signs in whitu Peninsula and Waiheke Island were installed and revealed on December . Safety improvements on Marae projects have been completed. Community Safety Programme Seven projects are now complete, three in design, and two in construction.
Auckland Transport also provides information about how the tax works in the Auckland region and the projects it funds.
Auckland Urban Design Governance Board Member Auckland Council
Auckland Urban Design Panel Member Auckland Council Environmental Manager Ngati Paoa Iwi Trust RWC Mori and Iwi Relationships Manager Auckland Tourism Events Economic Development
Auckland household travel over years
Auckland NZ Government Auckland Policy Office Level , B Victoria Street West PO Box Auckland City Auckland NEW ZEALAND Tel:
Auckland, home to . million people, is New Zealands largest and fastest growing urban centre, and over the next years a million more people will call Auckland home. Growth brings opportunities but we need to do things differently to what has been done in the past.
Aucklands cruise ship terminal should be modernised and the Waitemat become a commuter, tourism and recreational harbour.
Aucklands population is projected to increase to at least . million by and visitor numbers are also expected to grow. This growth places pressure on transport networks, reducing performance and increasing congestion.
Audrey Sonerson Secretary for Transport and Chief Executive
Aug : Air New ZealandCathay Pacific North Asia Alliance Agreement
Aug Sep Oct
August Not Government policyTe Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport DRAFT DRAFT New Zealands land transport system is among our greatest physical assets. The roading network underpins our economy and provides lifelines for communities and businesses across the country. The draft GPS sets out the Governments transport priorities and guides investments of over billion from the National Land Transport Fund, and around . billion from local government, each year. This is a record increase in investment in our transport network. It includes a significant boost in road maintenance budgets, supporting recovery and strengthening the resilience of the entire transport system. We recognise cost pressures on the National Land Transport Fund and the need to increase revenue for essential maintenance for our roads. That is why this draft GPS proposes to increase revenue by percent over compared to the previous cycle of . This means expenditure will increase from . billion to . billion, enabling us to better maintain our roads and services. The North Island weather events have added a level of urgency to this task. Budget allocates billion to fund the initial phase of a National Resilience Plan, focused initially on rebuilding from Cyclone Gabrielle and then on closing the infrastructure deficit that has built up in this country over decades. To , we have allocated about . billion towards reinstating transport networks affected by the North Island weather events, with a further million allocated over seven years towards transport resilience. We are also investing heavily in mass rapid transit projects, rail, and walking and cycling pathways to ensure people have options in the way they move around, while also driving down emissions. The draft GPS includes a Strategic Investment Programme, which provides a view of some of the most significant sections of the transport network that require intervention and is expected to guide Waka Kotahis consideration of projects. Signalling the importance of these projects alongside our commitments to road maintenance and public transport services will ensure that we deliver transformative changes to our transport system, without compromising its core functions. He kupu n te Minita Ministerial foreword Te Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport MINISTERIAL FOREWORD DRAFT DRAFT The draft GPS proposes significantly more transport expenditure than ever before. However, the land transport funding system is facing significant pressure due to rising demands and costs. The Government has not increased fuel taxes and road user charges since September . Without more funding, we will not be able to restore cyclonedamaged roads and maintain and improve our roading network to the standards that New Zealanders reasonably expect. We must ensure the network is fit for future generations of New Zealanders and able to withstand the damage from the extreme weather events. Were proposing a two cent per litre increase in petrol taxes and equivalent increases in road user charges for the first six months, another two cent increase the following six months, then four cents a litre more in each of the following two years. This will generate around . billion to be fully dedicated to improving our transport network. This is consistent with the historical norm of semi regular increases, prior to . To keep the increases as small as possible, we are also proposing additional top ups of funding and financing over the next three years. I invite you to provide feedback on the priorities and proposals in the draft GPS and provide your views about the future of our transport system. Hon David Parker Minister of Transport Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua MINISTERIAL FOREWORD DRAFT DRAFT Ng ihirangi Contents .
August Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Review Report Findings and recommendations Haumaru ki te tangata. Haumaru ki te tangata. Mauriora ki te tangata. Waiora ki te tangata. Mai ki uta ki tai. Safer people. Flourishing people. Healthy people. From the mountains to the sea. We draw on the symbolism of Ranginui and Papatnuku in this review to depict the close relationship between recreational safety and search and rescue, and how these systems interact and operate to support safer recreation from the mountains to the sea. RECREATIONAL SAFETY SEARCH AND RESCUE Contents Section Three Connecting the systems together Findings and recommendations Recommendation : Connect the systems together Recommendation : Finalise and implement the draft System Strategy System Strategy at a glance Recommendation : Develop System values Recommendation : Measure System performance Section Four Revised governance and leadership arrangements Findings and recommendations Recommendation : Governance and leadership arrangements Roles, accountabilities, and responsibilities at a glance Recommendation : The System Steward Recommendation : Recognition of Te Tiriti and Te Ao Mori Recommendations : Implementing the new System Change management process Implementation Plan System Recommendation : Recreational safety around coastal and inland waterways Executive Summary Navigating this Report Recommendations at a glance Section One Setting the scene Background to the Review Recreational safety Search and rescue Reflecting a pipeline of safety services How the Review was conducted Section Two The systems in focus and why they matter The journey so far The search and rescue system The recreational safety system Benefits of the systems Social costs averted Costbenefit in relation to government investment Central finding of the Review Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Section Five People supporting people Findings and recommendations Recommendation : Volunteer Plan Enabling Mori capability and capacity in search and rescue Spontaneous volunteers NGO workforce, skills training, and education Section Six Assets supporting service delivery Findings and recommendations Current and future capacity and its sufficiency Recommendation : Specific capacity considerations Working together to prepare for future demand Asset management and planning Aviation operations Telecommunications Emergency management events Section Seven A funding framework for the System Findings and recommendations Existing funding sources Recommendations : Funding needs identified Nationally based NGOs dedicated to the System Funders within the System supporting recreationbased NGOs and smaller communitybased groups Other funding considerations Recommendations : Ongoing strategic considerations Funding principles Funding insights and relationships FED funding constraints and longterm considerations Section Eight Final take home messages Implementation Supporting information Glossary Appendix : Overview recreational safety and search and rescue Appendix : Current governance and leadership arrangements Appendix : Size of the systems and the government contribution Appendix : Customer journey mapping Appendix : Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue System Strategy Appendix : Current and proposed future governance and leadership arrangements Appendix : Roles and membership of the proposed governance and leadership arrangements Appendix : Proposed functions of the System Steward Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Executive Summary Whakataka te hau ki te uru Whakataka te hau ki te tonga Kia mkinakina ki uta Kia mtaratara ki tai E h ake ana te atakura He tio, he huka, he hau h Thei mauri ora Cease the winds from the west Cease the winds from the south Let the breeze blow over the land Let the breeze blow over the ocean Let the redtipped dawn come with a sharpened air. A touch of frost, a promise of a glorious day. Ng mate o ia marae, o ia marae, haere atu rtou ki te Puriuri, ki te Ptangotango. Haere atu ki Hawaiki nui, Hawaiki roa, Hawaiki pmmao. We remember those who have passed and acknowledge their journey beyond. piti hono ttai hono Te hunga mate ki te hunga mate piti hono ttai hono Te hunga ora ki te hunga ora. N reira, tn koutou katoa.
August Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua
August : Air New Zealand and Virgin Australia codeshare agreement authorised
Australia uses oral fluid testing devices as a roadside screening tool. If the presence of drugs is found, the next step is an evidential blood or saliva test. This test is sent for analysis at a laboratory to confirm the presence of drugs, and then the relevant penalty is applied.
Authorised for lodgement .
Authorised for lodgement Hon Matt Doocey Associate Minister of Transport
Authorised for lodgement Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Office of Hon Michael Wood MP for Mt Roskill Minister of Immigration Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety Minister of Transport Associate Minister of Finance Minister for Auckland
Authorised for lodgement Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Transport
Authorising agreements between airlines proposing to operate flights to and from New Zealand under cooperation agreements.
Authority Pricing Review The Authority Pricing Review consultation was launched at on Tuesday August . The launch was supported by an email to over , participants. Were expecting a high level of interest in the consultation. Within one hour, over , people had opened the email, and over , had clicked through to the website link. We will work closely with the Ministry of Transport to review submissions. We will keep you up to on the key themes in the submissions.
Automated Vehicles Work Programme
AvSec is mentioned in coverage of the Ministry of Transports consultation about aviation security service models. Newsroom Friday August Rod Vaughan on life after TV and his plane crash
Aviation Act is required to support enforcement of the remade civil aviation
Aviation Authority. The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet has been
Aviation Officials to send through dates for next meeting of the Interim Aviation Council. Complete Rail Regulatory Officials to provide advice on options to: By Wednesday September Public Transport October Wednesday September s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv)
Aviation OnTime Performance: November and December
Aviation OnTime Performance: October
Aviation Tourism Project: Air Services Agreement ( ASAS) No update. Project: CodeshareAlliance Authorisations No update.
Aviation Tourism Project: Air Services Agreement ( ASAS) You have received a Cabinet Paper and National Interest Analysis for the Air Services Agreement with ASEAN. Cabinet paper: New Zealand ASEAN Air Services Agreement and Protocol This paper is currently undergoing Ministerial consultation. To Committee: Wednesday September (Economic Policy Committee) To Cabinet: Monday September Project: CodeshareAlliance Authorisations Briefing: Air Services Agreement with Hungary Officials have negotiated an air services agreement (ASA) with Hungary. Cabinet has delegated to the Ministers of Transport and Foreign Affairs the authority to approve the outcome of air services negotiations. This briefing seeks your agreement, in consultation with the Minister of Foreign Affairs, to sign the ASA with Hungary. Week ending Friday September Briefing: Air New Zealand Cathay Pacific Alliance Reauthorisation This briefing will provide the Ministrys preliminary view on the application from Air New Zealand and Cathay Pacific for a reauthorisation of their alliance agreement. Week ending Friday September
Aviation Tourism Project: Air Services Agreement ( ASAS) You will shortly be receiving a Cabinet Paper and National Interest Analysis for the Air Services Agreement with ASEAN . Project: CodeshareAlliance Authorisations We have provided your Office with the final report of the Air New ZealandVirgin Australia codeshare authorisation. We have started work on the Air New ZealandCathay Pacific Alliance reauthorisation application. We will provide you with an update in September.
Aviation Tourism Project: Air Services Agreement ( ASAS) You will shortly be receiving a Cabinet Paper and National Interest Analysis for the Air Services Agreement with ASEAN. Project: CodeshareAlliance Authorisations We have provided your Office with the final report of the Air New ZealandVirgin Australia codeshare authorisation. We have started work on the Air New ZealandCathay Pacific Alliance reauthorisation application. We will provide you with an update in September.
Aviation Tourism Project: Air Services Agreement ( ASAS) You will shortly receive a Cabinet Paper and National Interest Analysis for the Air Services Agreement with ASEAN. Project: CodeshareAlliance Authorisations We have started work on the Air New ZealandCathay Pacific Alliance reauthorisation application. We will provide you with an update in September.
Aviation makes it possible for millions of tourists to visit each year, supporting local businesses
Aviation on time performance: July and August
Aviation on time performance: September
Aviation ontime performance February
Aviation ontime performance January
Aviation ontime performance March
Aviation ontime performance: March
Aviation sector ready for takeoff with MIAC extension
Aviation support services must be able to show they are essential to the aviation sector and that without it, the operation and recovery of the aviation system would be significantly impeded.
Avoid using hyphens in compound words The trend is to minimise punctuation that isnt critical. Only use hyphens if the meaning would be unclear without them.
Avoid using jargon, initials and acronyms Dont assume that our audiences understand our jargon and acronyms. Explain it in plain English.
Avondale to Onehunga rail link
B. Contents . This paper covers: Recommendations Update Risks
B. F or the designated airline of New Zealand:
BEB include s airport infrastructure , implementation of the Civil Aviation Act , Av Sec
BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of which would enable this work to progress. Please refer to Appendix One for a summary of analysis from Te Manat Waka and key comments on the documents . In , both entities will continue to be reliant on a liquidity facility, up to a specified amount In Budget , Cabinet agreed to provide Crown funding for the entities in by extending Multi Year Appropriation Protection of Transport Sector Agency Core Functions (known as the liquidity facility). In doing so, Cabinet approved the following financial recommendation:
BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of Next steps Step By May You are required to provide any feedback to have to MNZ and CAA on their draft documents , as per sections (B) and I()(b) of the Crown Entities Act . By May MNZ to provide you with a draft SPE including financial information . By May Te Manat Waka will provide you with advice by this on an appropriate specified amount that both entities can access from their liquidity facilit es along with any other feedback on MNZs financial information. By June Transport Minister s to agree on a specified amount prior to this . By June The entities must consider your comments by this . By July Entities must finalise their documents and publish them on the internet by this . After this Tabling the SPEs. Section L of the Crown Entities Act allows responsible Ministers to table final SPEs upon receipt, or at the same time as the entitys Annual Report for the previous financial year (providing Parliament with a backward and forwar dlooking view of the entity). Attachments Summary comments on draft SPEs (refer to Appendix One ). Draft letters to each Crown Entity providing comment s on draft SPEs (refer to Appendix Two )
BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of Appendix Two: Draft letters to Crown Entities providing comment on SPEs for
BUDGET SENSITIVE Page Metro X Next Steps We have started the MROM Review to resolve the funding issue i n t he long term but suggest at least . million to support metr o r ail through . The . million includes full funding for RNR (.m), WMUP (.m) and one year of funding for backlogs and the local share shortfall of Network ManagementPlans (.m). If you agree to the approach to metro funding, it should be m ade clear to Councils that this is a one off arrangement to find a practical way forward while longer term affordability is worked thr ough and t hat councils will be expected to pay their share in the future.Our view We are sympathetic to KiwiRails requests and expect the Government will ultimately have t o c ontr ibute at least this amount to the metro network to: o address urgent issues maintain current service levels o meet service level expectations around the CRL opening, for example. Delaying this funding increases the chances of there being network disruptions and increases t he ul ti mate cost. The RNR and WMUP Substations are signalled as priorities for the Government and reflected i n th e GPS. NZTA will finalise funding allocations within the Public Transport Infrastructure ( PTI) A ctivity Class as part of the wider National Land Transport Programme ( NLTP ). Finalisation of t he N LTP will occur following approval of the final GPS and receipt of Regional Land Transport Plans. PTI Activity Class funding is very tight, so funding for these projects can t be assumed at this stage. Therefore, we recommend you seek contingency funding to enable these projects t o pr oceed if they ar e not funded by NZTA Board. Seeking .m to fund additional renewals is a pragmatic approach to reduce risks of servic e disr uptions over the next year until the MROM review reports back to you in November with l ong t erm solutions around long term costs and allocation between users and funders.KiwiRail Budget Request KiwiRail have put up bids for the metro networks totalli ng comprising the following:ATTACHMENT : Budget rail portfolio view Metro rail Budget initiatives Initiative sought Description Ministry View Rail Network Rebuild .m Allows KiwiRail to continue delivery of the Auckland Rail Network Rebuild (RNR ) to ready the network for the City Rail Link ( CRL).These initiatives are a priority and we recommend contingency funding is sought to enable these to proceed if not funded by NZTA (tthese initiatives were endorsed by the NZTA Board last year but not funded due to lack of National Land Transport Funds funds at the time).Wellington Metropolitan Upgrade Programme (WMUP) Substations.m Allows KiwiRail to commence the substation renewal component of WMUP . Metropolitan Rail Backlogs and Network Management Plans F unding to address the combination of previous underinvestment and councils unwillingness or inability to fully fund the KiwiRail proposed maintenance programme, resulting in the networks being in a fragile state.We recommend funding one year (.m) to improve metro reliability before the long term funding arrangements can be reset as part of the Metropolitan Rail Operating Model (MROM ) review. Current funding position Government funding of significant metro rail projects completed or approved over the last y ears equates to , million in Wellington, and , million in Auckland. s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE Page Freight Kiw iRail concerns KiwiRail are concerned about having a reduced level of funding certainty. We appreciate that longer term f unding certainty allows KiwiRail to more efficiently plan and run its business. However, more work is required before officials could advise on an appropriate long term funding level that would be consistent with the Governments transport priorities. We are aware that KiwiRail have some long term RNIP com mitments of . KiwiRail have also built up plant and equipment, and a workforce of around , to work on the network infrastructur e ( both metro and freight). Our views on these concerns KiwiRail have had to operate with limited funding certainty in the past, and like any business, needs to be able t o m anage with uncertainty. KiwiRail should not have been planning on the expectation that cost increases would be automatically funded. In addition, around .b worth of new rolling stock is now coming on stream which should improv e frei ght service levels. Next StepsKiwiRail Budget Request KiwiRails Budget bid outlined a r ail freight network investment programme, which would allow it to implement a Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP). KiwiRails Budget bid was based of the previous governments future of rail plans. However, as ill ustrated in the graph below, cost increases have pushed the average per annum cost up from m pa in to m pa in . Current funding position and phasing options KiwiRail has current available funding of around m for future investment in the rail freight networ k. There are options for how this funding can be phased that could be worked through i n y our approval of the next three year RNIP . Savings proposal and our recommendations KiwiRail have offered up of savings proposals to help fund its request. We recom mend that m of savings is allocated to KiwiRail, resulting in circa b funding envelope for the RNIP. The b identified reflects a balanced judgement between giving KiwiRail enough certainty to revise their business plans in a timely manner, while signalling a lower level of funding long term. Ul timately the KiwiRail Board will decide what course of action it will take with respect to its business within any funding envelope and level of certainty provided at this juncture. Regardless of Budget decisions, KiwiRail will need to get your approval for the investment profile overthe next three years (through RNIP ). We understand KiwiRail is preparing a r ange of investment scenarios to discuss with you at the end of the month based on GPS signals and prior discussions with you. If you decide to frontload funding in the first year of the RN IP, we will provide you with a process, timeframes, and engagement programme to support this.ATTACHMENT : Budget rail portfolio view s ()(g)(i) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(g)(i) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Febr uary OC Hon Simeon Brown Action required by: Minister of Transport Tuesday, February RAIL FUNDING INCLUDING THE CAPITAL PIPELINE REVIEW Purpose This b riefing provides an update on the various budget and planning process in relation to rail and discusses the bids KiwiRail have provided for you to submit to the Minister of Finance as part of the budget Capital Pipeline Review process. This briefin g provides further context and detail for the rail related components of the briefing you have received on the overall Transport Capital Pipeline ( OC refers). Key p oints Several budget and funding processes are underway across the transport sector. This briefing provides you with a consolidated view across the rail portfolio. Rail freight KiwiRails current plans for the freight network require an ongoing funding commitment of around per annum. Given your transport priorities and the current fiscal climate, we expect that you consider Following consultation with S hareholding Ministers, we recommend you give KiwiRail a c lear set of funding expectations In the short term, s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f) (iv) s ()(g)(i) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(b)(ii) s ()(f)(iv), s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of M etro funding KiwiRail have put up bids for the metro network s totalling . We are sympathetic to KiwiRails request, and to a large extent
Background and purpose The parties to this protocol are Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) and the Minister of Transport (the Minister). This protocol is effective from the signed. It expires when the present Minister of Transport no longer holds that position. The purpose of this protocol is to set out how the Ministry and the Minister (as well as the Ministers office on the Ministers behalf) will engage on Official Information Act (OIA) requests involving the Minister made to the Ministry , and the proactive release of information. The Ministry intends to publish the operative version of this protocol on its website. Part One: OIA requests OIA requests involving the Minister are ones where there is the potential for the Minister to be affected by the release of the requested information because: it relates to their functions or activities as a Minister; the Minister may be required to prepare for the possibility of public or poli tical commentary. Context and principles . The Ministry and the Minister acknowledge the principle of availability that underpins the Official Information Act (the Act), which means that official information must be made available on request unless there is good reason, in terms of the Act, for withholding it. . The Ministry, the Minister, and the Ministers office, will apply this protocol in a way that does not interfere with statutory obligations to make and communicate decisions on OIA requests as soon as reasonably practicable and within working days (subject to extension only where necessary), and to release official information without undue delay. . The Minister recognises that the Ministry is responsible for making decisions on OIA requests it receives, unless those requests are required to be transferred to the Minister (or other appropriate organisations) in accordance with section of the Act. . The Ministry recognises that the Minister may need to make, be involved in, or know about decisions on OIA requests involving the Minister. See s OIA. See s () OIA. See s A OIA. See s () OIA. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Background paper released and feedback invited
Backlog of tests has reduced by ,, down to ,. NZTA is seeing the positive impact of increased numbers of driver testing officers DTOs, last week having the highest number of tests completed since the wait times intervention work began. The majority of test volume increases are in Auckland (), Canterbury () and Bay of Plenty ().
Balancing the need for the Board to have autonomy against the need for the Sponsors to provide direction It is important for the Board to have clarity of its role and to be empowered to deliver against this. This will support the pace required for the programme to achieve its ambitious timeframes. This has to be balanced with the need for Sponsors to provide direction to be received and considered by the Board, and reflected in the business case. Recognising the complexity of the project and the governance arrangements, instead of attempting to outline all circumstances in which the Board would need to seek direction from Ministers or Sponsors, it is proposed the terms of reference describe the nature of the relationship between the Board and the Crown, other Sponsors and the Sponsors Representatives Forum and, clarify the specific mechanisms that will support this. The terms of reference would describe what these relationships will look like when they are working well. For example, the Board would seek guidance from the Sponsors Representative Forum to determine if a sensitive or significant decision being progressed requires Sponsors direction. s ()(j) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Item
Banking, borrowing, and transferring CO
Based on an analysis of the risk of New Zealand drivers crashing if they have taken drugs, the drugs or drug classes that are proposed for testing are:
Based on the review and public consultation, the Government announced it would simplify the SPS rules, but maintain a focus on safety for passengers, drivers and vehicles. This meant the same rules would apply to all services that connect passengers with customers, including taxi, private hire, ridesharing, and dialadriver services.
Baseline activities Template type Template description BCEMERGENCY Emergency BCMAINT Maintenance Operations and Renewals BCPT Public Transport BCRSP Road Safety Promotion BCRTCCOSTS RLTP Management CCMAINT Maintenance programme CCPT Public Transport CCRLTPMGMT RLTP Management CCRSP Road Safety Promotion DCMAINT Maintenance, operations and renewals DCPT Public transport existing services DCRLTPMGMT RLTP Management DCRSP Road Safety Promotion EMERGENCY Emergency Works MAINTNS Maintenance PREVENTIVENS Preventive Maintenance PTNS Public Transport Programme RLTPNS Regional Authority Administration SLEMERGENCY Emergency works SLMAINT Maintenance Operations and Renewals SLPREVENTIVE Preventive maintenance SLPT Public Transport COMPLEX Complex Project COMPLEXNS Complex Project DCAMP Activity Management Plan DCIMPROVEMENT Improvement activity DCLCLR Low cost low risk improvements DCPROGBCASE Programme Business Case DCTRANSMODEL Transport Model APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
Baseline activities Template type Template description BCEMERGENCY Emergency BCMAINT Maintenance Operations and Renewals BCPT Public Transport BCRSP Road Safety Promotion BCRTCCOSTS RLTP Management CCMAINT Maintenance programme CCPT Public Transport CCRLTPMGMT RLTP Management CCRSP Road Safety Promotion DCMAINT Maintenance, operations and renewals DCPT Public transport existing services DCRLTPMGMT RLTP Management DCRSP Road Safety Promotion EMERGENCY Emergency Works MAINTNS Maintenance PREVENTIVENS Preventive Maintenance PTNS Public Transport Programme RLTPNS Regional Authority Administration SLEMERGENCY Emergency works SLMAINT Maintenance Operations and Renewals SLPREVENTIVE Preventive maintenance SLPT Public Transport FEASIBILITY Feasibility or Strategic study FEASIBILITY Studies and strategyplan development GENERIC Generic Project GENERICNS Generic Project MINORIMPNS Minor improvements SLLARGE Large Projects SLMINORIMP Minor Improvements APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA A NALYSIS
Baseline activities Template type Template description BCEMERGENCY Emergency BCMAINT Maintenance Operations and Renewals BCPT Public Transport BCRSP Road Safety Promotion BCRTCCOSTS RLTP Management CCMAINT Maintenance programme CCPT Public Transport CCRLTPMGMT RLTP Management CCRSP Road Safety Promotion DCMAINT Maintenance, operations and renewals DCPT Public transport existing services DCRLTPMGMT RLTP Management DCRSP Road Safety Promotion EMERGENCY Emergency Works MAINTNS Maintenance PREVENTIVENS Preventive Maintenance PTNS Public Transport Programme RLTPNS Regional Authority Administration SLEMERGENCY Emergency works SLMAINT Maintenance Operations and Renewals SLPREVENTIVE Preventive maintenance SLPT Public Transport Non baseline activities BCMINORIMP Minor Improvements CCLCLR Low cost low risk improvements CCPROGBCASE Programme Business Case CCRESILIENCE Resilience Improvements CCSTRATEGICCASE Strategic Case CFA Community focused activities CFANS Community Programmes APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
Baseline activities Template type Template description BCEMERGENCY Emergency BCMAINT Maintenance Operations and Renewals BCPT Public Transport BCRSP Road Safety Promotion BCRTCCOSTS RLTP Management CCMAINT Maintenance programme CCPT Public Transport CCRLTPMGMT RLTP Management CCRSP Road Safety Promotion DCMAINT Maintenance, operations and renewals DCPT Public transport existing services DCRLTPMGMT RLTP Management DCRSP Road Safety Promotion EMERGENCY Emergency Works MAINTNS Maintenance PREVENTIVENS Preventive Maintenance PTNS Public Transport Programme RLTPNS Regional Authority Administration SLEMERGENCY Emergency works SLMAINT Maintenance Operations and Renewals SLPREVENTIVE Preventive maintenance SLPT Public Transport SLSMALL Small Projects SLSTUDY Studies STANDARD Standard Project
Batteries can overheat and catch fire and are considered dangerous goods when transported by air. Civil Aviation regulations prohibit loose or spare batteries and power banks from checked in luggage, and when carried in carry on luggage must be individually packaged and protected fr om short circuit, for example covering the terminals with electrical insulation tape. Electronic devices in checked baggage must be completely Stuff, NZ Herald PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
Bay of Plenty Annual Report Card https:www.boprc.govt.nz yourcouncilplans and policiesplansregional plansregional land transport plan Bay of Plenty Regional Council has been preparing annual RLTP report cards since , with the most recent .
Bay of Plenty Annual Report Card https:www.boprc.govt.nzyour councilplans and policiesplansre gional plansregional landtransport plan Bay of Plenty Regional Council has been preparing annual RLTP report cards since , with the most recent .
Bay of Plenty Regional Transport Committee
Be proportionate (to harm, and in relation to offences risking similar harm across transport and other legislation)
Because these shortcomings are systemwide, they will not be fully addressed by the NZ Transport Agencys review of its investment decisionmaking framework. A betteraligned system of assessment and evaluation would: P Use values, parameters, methodologies and inputs for assessment and evaluation models that are consistent across transport modes. Have an agreed, clear and broad set of social, economic, and environmental measures to be included in costbenefit analysis. Support the collection of comprehensive data to be used for informing high quality policymaking and investment decisions.
Because we, Treasury and the Provincial Development Unit have been focused on COVID response and recovery work, we have not yet had time to provide advice to the Government on Saperes assessment of the benefits, costs, risks and uncertainties associated with the options.
Beehive Press Release: Govt proposing to make clean cars cheaper to tackle climate change
Beehive Release: Future focus on Upper North Island logistics
Beehive Release: Terms of Reference agreed for Auckland
Beehive announcement Revenue Action Plan to support delivering infrastructure sooner
Beehive press release: Government moves on climate promises
Beehive press release: Govt says put away the phone while on the road
Beehive release: Auckland Light Rail process ended
Beehive release: Expert panel proposes criminal limits for drug driving
Beehive release: Government confirms City Rail Link funding
Beehive release: Govt keeps international flights flying and airfreight flowing
Beehive release: Green light from Govt to get Wellington moving
Beehive release: New Report on Auckland Port Relocation
Beehive release: Next stage of airfreight scheme keeps critical freight flowing
Beehive release: Next steps for Auckland Light Rail
Beehive release: Next steps for Auckland light rail
Beehive release: PM signals next generation of Auckland Transport projects
Beehive release: Qantas Emirates alliance authorised
Beehive release: Record billion investment to help Auckland build back better
Beehive release: Record transport investment in Draft GPS
Beehive release: Record transport investment to help economic recovery and save lives
Before Cabinet approved the introduction of the Bill, the Ministers of Transport and Finance made decisions on issues that arose when the legislation was being drafted and we prepared an RIA. Cabinet agreed to the Bill being introduced to Parliament.
Before Cabinet approved the introduction of the Bill, the Ministers of Transport and Finance made decisions on issues that arose when the legislation was being drafted. Cabinet agreed to the Bill being introduced to Parliament.
Before appointments fall due, we will provide you with advice to support the appointment and re
Before appointments fall due, we will provide you with advice to support the appointment and re appointment of board members. As part of this process, we will provide you with an overall assessment of board capability and recommendations on the skills and capabilities needed to ensure your boards are well governed, effective, and high performing. Table Accountability mechanisms Accountability Mechanism Description Letter of Expectations Primary mechanism used to set the priorities and performance expectations on an annual basis. You can expect to receive draft letters from the Ministry around OctoberNovember. These letters are sent out well in advance of the financial year, so Crown entities can respond effectively.
Before constructing the model: Step Determine the purpose of the logic model, who will use it and for what (i.e. develop a work plan, talk to stakeholders, or develop an evaluation plan) Step Convene stakeholders of relevancy i.e. planners and managers, stakeholders with interests in the outcomes. Step Determine a focus for the logic model and what level of detail is needed to make this a helpful tool i.e. will the logic model depict a single intervention, a multiyear intervention etc. Step Explore and collect the evidence and knowledge base, and what others have doneare doing. Compile findings and lessons learned, applicable theory, and resources. Identify and discuss assumptions you are making and contextual factors.
Before the Bill was introduced, we provided advice about several issues including:
Before the Minister of Transport could ask Cabinet to endorse the LGWM indicative package and the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) contribution, there needed to be further understanding of what was affordable within the broader context of committed and future transport funding.
Before the announcement of the LGWM, we supported the Minister by working with the partners to:
Before the increases were announced, we engaged with the public
Before the legislation was passed, Auckland Council consulted the public between
Before we begin the development of the GPS we are seeking feedback on stakeholders previous experience with the GPS.
Before you start writing, allow yourself time to think and plan. Think about: Who is going to read this What do you want them to do with it What level of knowledge do they have on the subject What are you trying to achieve What must be covered in this document or webpage
Begg and Stephenson () used similar but time series data as Langley et al () and reached similar conclusions about the impact of introducing a three stage GDLS on the rates of crash fatalities and hospitalisations among different age groups ( Figure ). They also found similar but smaller effects on the fatality and hospitalisation rates among drivers aged under re lative to drivers aged to ( Figure ) and concluded that the impacts of the GDLS were not entirely due to a reduction in driving by young people.
Begin work now to decarbonise heavy transport and freight including by:
Behaviour Change Framework
Behavioural insights can improve transport outcomes
Being clear around priorities for the year ahead
Being the Chief Economist at Te Manat Waka, my work involves leading the Domain Strategy, Economics and Evaluation team to support policy teams throughout the policy development lifecycle (from defining policy problems to evaluating achievement of policy outcomes). We foster greater use of evidence and analytics in policy decisions. I am proud of the team as they are smart, committed and passionate about their work.
Below are documents approved for proactive release November .
Below are the documents proactively realeased on the th of January .
Below are the documents proactively realeased on the th of October
Below are the documents proactively released on the th of September
Below expectation improvement required Evidence shows performance below expectationtarget, with minimum targets inconsistently achieved. Process and procedures documentation and systems are not fully fit forpurpose, incomplete or require significant improvement. These are not fully understood or followed by staff and there are inadequate controls are in place and need significant improvements that may have a moderate impact on customersroad users.
Benefit Realisation Reviews Direct text c The Transport Agency conducts benefit realisation reviews every year on a small sample of completed projects or packages that it has invested in. The reviews allow the Transport Agency to compare the planned benefits of a project with the actual outcome achieved. This section outlines the scope, the purpose and selection of activities for reviews.
Benefit cost ratios (BCRs) are considered in transport investment decision making and other factors, such as alignment with GPS priorities. Analysis of BCRs across GPS periods is complicated by changes in t he methodology used to estimate benefits and costs of investments and by the fact that estimated BCRs for investments can change over time, given data or changes in scope. In all three GPS periods and for road, public transport, and walking and cyc ling improvements, it was uncommon for activities with a BCR of less than one to have funding approved (noting that a BCR was not recorded for all approved activities). Across all periods, the funding weighted average of BCRs for approved activities is aro und . to .. There is no clear pattern of differences in BCRs for activities first approved under GPS as distinct from and . .. Further reflections on influence GPS was a driver for a significant review of the investment decision approaching , resulting in a new Investment Decision Making Framework (IDMF) implemented in . It should be noted that value for money was seen by some interviewees as an ongoing processpractice issue (through all GPS) and not necessarily one for which specific outcomes could be attributed to any particular GPS. Qualitative interviews indicated that value for money is an important driver of investment decision making, including but not limited to BCRs. From discussions, it appears that value for mo ney is considered across various dimensions of investment decision making, including alignment with GPS objectives and the prioritisation process intended to select the projects that best deliver outcomes from the investment available. However, interviews also suggested BCRs appear to have a lower influence on, or are only one factor in, investment decision making than previously. Greater attention is now given to strategic alignment and non financial impacts (notably an intention of the new Investment Decision Making Framework). Benefits realisation and lessons learned were not substantial factors in considering value for money. Some interviewees also noted that ideally, the investment levers enacted through the GPS would be more integrated with other leve rs and revenue sources required to achieve desired land transport outcomes including urban form, regulatory, pricing, and other behaviour change strategies. Stakeholders identified broad impacts from GPS when reflecting on the complexities and timef rames of the investment process described above but were often unable to provide more detailed or specific analysis. . What key factors affect the efficiency and effectiveness of converting inputs to outputs and outcomes GPS was relatively disruptive, compared to previous GPS, in that it signalled significant shifts in investment strategy. Responding to these shifts required various system changes, including developing new capacity and capability. These developments, and resultant outcomes, are still in progress. Therefore, new priorities developed through GPS objectives need to be sustained over time (including future GPS) if the shift in investment and outcomes are to be more evident in the data. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Bernadette Arapere (Commissioner) Bernadette is a barriste specialising in public and administrative law litigation and Mori legal issues. She is Deputy Chair of the Teachers Disciplinary Tribunal, a Trustee of the NZ Law Foundation and Raukawa ki te Tonga Trust, and an active member of Te Hunga Ria Mori o Aotearoa (the Mori Law Society). Prior to joining the independent bar, Bernadette was Crown Counsel at the Crown Law Office in Wellington and a Director of Wackrow Williams Davies Ltd in Auckland.
Bernie Wanden Mayor, Horowhenua District Council Bernie has been the mayor of Horowhenua District since . He has demonstrated history of working in the retail industry. Cherie Seamark Deputy Chair, tiawa ki Whakarongotai Charitable Trust Cherrie has extensive experience in providing kaupapa Mori Primary and Community health service leadership.
Better Business Cases The objective of Better Business Cases is to provide objective analysis and consistent information to decision makers, to enable them to make smart investment decisions for public value. The Treasury sets out requirements around the Better Business Case process.
Better Travel Choices report released
Between and , we commissioned Allen Clarke to conduct evaluations of the Act in stages.
Between April and June , the Ministry of Transport and Waka Kotahi publicly consulted on a new draft Setting of Speed Limits Rule . This rule will give effect to the new regulatory framework for speed management and will mandate safer speed limits around schools.
Between January and April Te Manat Waka sought feedback on possible changes to the road user charges system and support the uptake of low carbon vehicles.
Between now and late December , cameras will also be installed on the first state highway corridor on SH Pkeno to Mangatwhiri, and further AT corridors on Whitford Road, Kahikatea Flat Road and Glenbrook Road (East). Also in October , physical site assessments and automated number plate speed surveys will commence on three potential PP corridors in Waikato and Bay of Plenty: SH Matat, SH Lake Rotoma, SH Tumunui.
Bev Driscoll Manager, Rail
Beyond these early priorities it becomes more challenging to assess value for money, as uncertainties relating to project costs, the location and quantum of growth, and the impacts of smarter pricing and new technologies become increasingly significant. The most substantial uncertainty relates to large, longerterm infrastructure investments. The timing and scope of these investments should be monitored over time, particularly with regard to whether they provide value for money as we shift to a greater focus on influencing demand.
Bill introduced to Parliament
Bill introduced, with a CAI Bill referred to CAI Bill progressed Possible RS Bill Police and Waka Kotahi undertake separate Cabinet Select Committee through the House progressed through implementation activities. report back on fleeing Possible RS Bill and gained Royal the House. drivers to be led by drafting and assent. Police and MoT introduction. Project O: Speed Management Rule: Consider possible changes to the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits in light of Prime Ministers announcement to narrow the focus to the most dangerous one percent of state highways, and make targeted changes to speeds around schools, marae and in townships that State Highways transit Manager: Helen White Mobility and Safety Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE)
Bill is introduced to Parliament
Blais, . Sergerie, D., Maurice, P. (). The effect of ignition interlock programmes on drinking and driving: a systematic review.
Board Trustee Auckland Philoharmonia Orchestra
Board member, Civil Aviation Authority Ministry of Transport
Board of Trustee Member Habitat for Humanity Greater Auckland
Board of Trustee Member Sistema Aotearoa
Boards should assess what capability they, and their senior leaders, require to prepare for natural disasters before they occur, and be able to respond rapidly to natural events to enable the re connection of communities at the earliest opportunity.
Border restrictions, implemented in March, significantly reduced passenger services resulting in a collapse of international airfreight movements due to the pandemic. The collapse in international air travel meant New Zealands ability to import essential products, such as medical supplies, and export high value cargo was put at risk. As a small and geographically isolated island nation, international air services are vital to sustain New Zealands connectivity for trade and passengers.
Both airlines ontime performance, March Sectors OnTime Departures OnTime Arrivals Cancellations Scheduled Flown No. No. No. , , , . , . .
Both petrol and diesel vehicles release pollution harmful to our health. However, while diesel vehicles make up a small part ( percent) of our vehicle fleet, they produce most ( percent) of the harm, because their engines produce higher levels of nitrogen oxides and particulate pollution. Exposure to nitrogen oxides causes respiratory and cardiovascular damage and can contribute to smog. Particulates can cause lung cancer, and both forms of pollution contribute to asthma.
Both the listening sessions and the online forum raised consistent issues.
Branding guidelines are currently being developed to provide context and direction on how to use our logo and what colours to use when preparing documents and other material. A copy of the draft branding guidelines can be requested by emailing the Engagement and Communications team.
Brendan Booth Chief Legal Adviser . . . Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport . . . Ministers office to complete : Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Comments
Brendan Thow sentenced to hours of community service and court costs, for flying a helicopter without an appropriate licence or medical approval, operating without an Air Operator Certificate (AOC), and attempting to operate without an AOC. Additional ly, the individual had failed to provide information and obstructed the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) during its investigation, for which he was convicted and discharged. RNZ, The Press, Newstalk ZB, Otago Daily Times s (c)
Brent Johnston Acting Deputy Chief Executive, System Performance and Governance Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport . . . Ministers office to complete : Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events Comments Contacts Name Telephone First contact Brent Johnston, Acting Deputy Chief Executive, System Performance and Governance Yes Sarah Polaschek, Manager, Governance Brett Thomson, Principal Adviser, Governance
Brent Johnston, Chief of Staff, Office of the Chief Executive
Brent brings considerable experience in leadership, strategic planning and regulatory policy through his year tenure at the Ministry. Brent has held a range leadership roles in land transport safety and public transport policy.
Brent was appointed Chief of Staff in June and works closely with our Chief Executive and Senior Leadership Team to guide the strategic priorities of the Ministry.
Brett Gliddon Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Bridge and structures maintenance work is prioritised as high, medium, or low priority on the basis of risk, with all high priority works put forward for funding each year (with some medium priorities). The difference between prioritised and funded works is termed backlog. Maintenance backlog is evaluated and recorded each year on any unfunded high and medium priority works. The backlog trend is monitored at a regional and national level and is a key indicator for funding and also as a pseudo condition indicator because it is directly based on the observe d structure defects. Over the funding period Waka Kotahi has maintained, what the Review Team considered, a relatively acceptable level of backlog of approximately of the annual structures budget. The drainage asset renewal programme delivered less per annum at a higher cost of more than targeted over the three years. It was observed that four contracts did not deliver any of their programme in and only delivered more than half of their target. In , of agreed programme was delivered and of the total delivered length was not identified in the agreed annual plan. The Audio Tactile Profile (ATP) renewal programme delivered less than its scheduled programme. At the time of this Review, data and information were not available to assess the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed and delivered asset renewal investment across all asset types and maintenance contracts. As such, the Review Team was unable to f orm a view on all asset renewalmaintenance programmes. However, given the trends observed with asset renewal programmes that had achievement data, it is the Review Teams opinion that there is likely to be similar issues to address across all physical wor ks programmes. Delivery output measures are required to be clearly documented so that the progress in the delivery of the programmes set out in the Waka Kotahi State Highway Activity Management Plan submission can be monitored and better inform future reviews. Further investigation is needed to understand if an approach has been undertaken which may decrease risk to the contractor whilst increasing cost to Waka Kotahi which may have resulted in discretionary measures and value items under the Network Outcome Contracts being greater than expected. Emerging issues The review team think it worth noting emerging issues that s hould be considered when responding to this review. Changing road classification will affect the maintenance approach by: o Reprioritisation of operational and maintenance activities under the One Road Network Framework, notably in discrete areas of network where potential conflict arises between place and movement, such as urban environments on freight corridors. Emissions reduction and the responses to this will affect the nature and location of demand for road maintenance by: o Targeting reduced private vehicle travel and increased use of active modes and public transport, (particularly in urban areas) will lead to the investment needing to account for changes to road maintenance arising from aspects such as: increasing the public transport fleet (and their increased travel and loading on the infrastructure), adding more cycle lanes and paths, and reducing the wear and tear caused by private vehicle travel o Transferring freight from road to rail and coastal shipping potentially offsetting aggregate growth in road freight. o Changing materials and practices used in road maintenance to reduce the quantity of embedded carbon with a potential change in asset service lives and maintenance costs. o In the face of greater quantities of network posing resilience challenges there will be an increasing reliance on emergency works funding and potentially declining network availability. Consideration should be placed on enhancing network resilience through the State Highway Improvement Activity Class to balance the response through emergency works and optimise network availability. A continued growth in the complexity of infrastructure arising from road safety programmes and from the introduction of autonomous vehicles and electric vehicles characterised by: o Increasing safety barriers and similar infrastructure requiring ongoing maintenance to ensure they are restored after crashes and in a fit forpurpose condition o Electronic devices to better interface with and support vehicle management and control systems, combined with ITS infrastructure to monitor and manage multi model traffic flows maximising throughput of people and goods. OPERATIONAL RESPONSE The GPS sets clear expectations of the results the Minister expects to see f rom NLTF and how Waka Kotahi should go about delivering this. The GPS specifically requires that each applicant into the NLTF (i.e., the funding application for each activity and its business cases) shows how they have considered alternatives, and how they compare against a set of indicators. The purpose for including this in GPS was to ensure that at project level funding applicants had carefully considered the alignment of their project (and alternative options) against GPS objectives. This should support Waka Kotahi in delivering the NLTP by ensuring robust proposals are put forward through Regional Land Transport Plans. The GPS also sets expectations for Waka Kotahi on achieving value for money and better asset management and performance. To support enhanced reporting, monitoring and evaluation of GPS investment, the Ministry have developed an ongoing GPS monitoring and evaluation work programme. This programme comprises of three core components: o developing a set of reporting measures for each GPS o producing and publishing annual monitoring reports against these measure sets o conducting up to two indepth reviews per year to examine specific aspects of the GPS in more detail This Review, along with the parallel Cost Drivers Review represent the first of these and demonstrates the Ministrys commitment to improving the quantity and quality of their GPS monitoring and evaluation. The Ministry are currently scoping their next potential Review which intend s to gather feedback on the way GPS was developed, implemented, and reported on, as a means to apply lessons learnt to the current funding period. However, the GPS is a ten year document so outcomes will take a long time to be achieved and be impacted by external factors beyond National Land Transport Fund investment. The Ministry wants to work more closely with Waka Kotahi during the course of the NLTP to see how it is giving effect to the GPS each year. The Review Team challenged Waka Kotahi on how i t could give the Minister greater confidence that the significant increase in expenditure planned in will deliver on defined and measurable outputs for all work activities and will yield robust governance and accountability, improved budget develop ment and control, enhanced capacity competency, improved asset condition performance and improved construction quality performance. The Waka Kotahi response was: o A significant work programme is being implemented to embed the new business operating model for the Transport Services Group. This operating model is intended to help drive more effective planning and delivery of investment programmes. Key aspects include: A number of teams have been established to enhance different aspects of asset management, with works underway to refine the organisations asset management policy and strategy, lifecycle management plans and delivery programmes.
Briefing Cabinet paper to Minister on the principles that should underpin the air navigation system
Briefing Essential Transport Connectivity Scheme support for Milford Aerodrome
Briefing COVID Response Essential Transport Connectivity
Briefing on the financial impacts on the National Land Transport Fund and Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agencys regulatory memorandum accounts as a result of the Governments immediate response to COVID.
Briefing on the impact of the COVID on the Upper North Island Supply Chain Strategy.
Briefing on the using the ETC to support Milford Aerodromes ongoing operations.
Briefing paper and Cabinet Minute on a proposal to create a financial support scheme to support airlines to ensure critical airfreight capacity is maintained.
Briefing paper and Cabinet Minute to approve new aviation policy initiatives which provide regional aviation connectivity within the aviation relief package.
Briefing paper proposing a framework for assessing requests from transport sector operators for financial support; identifies gaps for which additional assistance would be appropriate; and proposes a process for seeking funding to address those gaps.
Briefing providing further advice on expected revenue and expenditure through the National Land Transport Fund (NTLF) resulting from COVID.
Briefing providing options for the provision of advice in relation to the Upper North Island Supply Chain Strategy.
Briefing summarising key recommended changes to the draft Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS ) following public engagement and consideration of COVID.
Briefing to the Incoming Minister (System)
Briefing to understand the impacts of reduced revenue (from COVID) on the National Land Transport Fund and delivery implications for the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP ) and Government Policy Statement (GPS) .
Briefing to update a Cabinet paper for Auckland Light Rail that was drafted prior to Alert Level .
Briefing: Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek Minister Dooceys agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rules relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. These changes are sought by the sector and reduce costs and complexity. Week ending September Project: Maritime Workforce Maritime NZ officials continue to work with maritime and port sector representatives to assist them in developing their response to the consultation on the reform of vocational education that was launched by Minister Simmonds on Thursday August . Maritime NZ officials met with representatives of Shipping Agents (Shipping NZ) this week. They expressed disappointment at the Ministry of Business Innovation and Employments (MBIE s) announcement that Cabinet had decided not to extend the day deemed visa for international cargo crew, despite the work they had done with coastal shipping representatives (NZ Shipping Federation) to develop a joint proposal for Ministers. They will likely continue to make strong representations to the Minister of Immigrat ion.
Briefing: Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek Minister Dooceys agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rules relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. These changes are sought by the sector and reduce costs and complexity. Week ending September s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Briefing: Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek Minister Dooceys agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rules relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. These changes are sought by the sector and reduce costs and complexity. Week ending Friday September Project: Maritime Workforce Maritime NZ officials continue to work with maritime and port sector representatives to assist them in developing their response to the consultation on the reform of vocational education that was launched by Minister Simmonds on Thursday August .
Briefing: Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek Minister Dooceys agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rules relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. These changes are sought by the sector and reduce costs and complexity. Week ending Friday September s ()(f)(iv)
Briefing: Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek your agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rules relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. These changes are sought by the sector and reduce costs and complexity. Week ending September Project: Maritime Workforce Maritime NZ officials continue to work with maritime and port sector representatives to assist them in developing their response to the consultation on the reform of vocational education that was launched by Minister Simmonds on Thursday August . Maritime NZ officials met with representatives of Shipping Agents (Shipping NZ) this week. They expressed disappointment at the Ministry of Business Innovation and Employments (MBIE s) announcement that Cabinet had decided not to extend the day deemed visa for international cargo crew, despite the work they had done with coastal shipping representatives (NZ Shipping Federation) to develop a joint proposal for Ministers. They will likely continue to make strong representations to the Minister of Immigration.
Briefing: Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek your agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rules relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. These changes are sought by the sector and reduce costs and complexity. Week ending Friday September Project: Maritime Workforce Maritime NZ officials continue to work with maritime and port sector representatives to assist them in developing their response to the consultation on the reform of vocational education that was launched by Minister Simmonds on Thursday August .
Brisbane Christchurch . . . Air NZ . . . Qantas . . .
British Airways and Qatar Airways, along with Iberia Airlines as an added party, have lodged an application seeking reauthorisation of their Joint Business Agreement.
British AirwaysQatar Airways Alliance Consultation
Bruce Peterson, Chair of the NZAAA speaks on RNZ, expressing the view levies and fees are becoming disproportional in how theyre spread across the industry, particularly for the agricultural sector. Its a tax on a tax and were not getting anything for it. And so an example could be before these increases, uh, effectively applying line could be paying up to an hour added onto the hourly rate required. Um, because of this levy, its based on tonnes versus a helicopter on spraying that might only pay . an hour. And then you add the on top of that. And its just outrageous. So were pretty upset about that. He suggests a fuel levy as a fairer approach. RNZ Upcoming education publications and products Planned releasepublish What Type Why JulySeptember Occurrence Investigation Workshop Face toface event To provide training for operators about investigating occurrences, to comply with requirements under CAR Part September Vector magazine (Spring issue) Aviation safety education magazine To educate the aviation community on various aviation safety topics September In, out, and around Queenstown GAP booklet (update) BAU revision September How to be an aerodrome manager GAP booklet (new) As part of the WTSA campaign, new guidance material for aerodrome managers is being produced, in the GAP booklet format September Drone safety brochure Safety education product BAU revision SeptemberOctober Plane talking GAP booklet (update) BAU revision SeptemberOctober Helicopter performance GAP booklet (update) BAU revision
Bryan Field Manager Programme Monitoring Investment Management
Budget Capital Pipeline Review process s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Process Status for rail freight The Budget process for new spending (operating) The Minister of Finance did not invite KiwiRail to submit into this process . Consultation and finalising GPS The r elease of the draft GPS to KiwiRail on Friday February was the first indication provided to KiwiRail that: Road users would no longer be paying for the rail freight network. The government focus for investment in the rail freight network would be on the golden triangle. The preparation of the Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP) KiwiRail need to submit to you a RNIP by June that reflects the GPS and funding allocated to it. The rail freight network in N ew Zealand requires a large ongoing subsidy On December , we briefed you on KiwiRail and the national rail network OC refers. The briefing outlined some of the reasons government supports rail and outlined some significant funding challenges. KiwiRail has been planning based on the previous Government s direction following the Future of Rail work which proposed a resilient and reliable rail network . Achieving this would require ongoing funding of around per annum . Over the last years, in line with the previous Government s plans, KiwiRail has been building up its business including ramping up its workforce, building confidence with
Budget transport initiatives
Building and maintaining a network of key relationships is vital to ensuring the Ministry and the sector are well prepared to respond to issues as they arise. This includes working with other government departments, technology developers, academics, and our counterparts in other jurisdictions.
Building on the success of the IAFC, the Government established a replacement scheme called Maintaining International Air Connectivity (MIAC) to support continued air services. The MIAC scheme began in May and was scheduled to end on March .
Bus drivers employment conditions and wage rates were directly impacted by changes in the contracting and operating environment. Most operators kept their employment conditions the same, with small increases in wage rates, although they varied considerably between current and new operators.
Buses and shuttles that are available on demand could replace scheduled buses in many lowdensity suburban areas.
Business Committee and Cabinet to finalise the signature copy; ygffdk
Business associations networks
Business case commissioned
Business case conclusions
But full recovery took longer. Nearly two years after the earthquake hit, SH and rail freight services opened for the first time. And in October , all major earthquake repairs on the Inland Road were finally complete, providing the community with another means of entering and exiting the town
But the Government has also made clear our ambition for emissions reduction and adaption as a long term solution, and the transport sectors role in making New Zealands goa ls a possibility.
But to ensure that New Zealand is prepared for na ural events, not just a year, but years from now requires a focus on our changing environment and its potential impact on the transport network.
By our methods of collecting and investing revenue had been in place for many years. They had proved to be effective because they balanced a wide range of interests and, during this time, New Zealand saw a significant reduction in road fatalities alongside significant increases in capacity on the roading network and in public transport use.
By creating limits to the permitted dimensions and mass of vehicles, the Rules create a reasonable balance between the efficient operation of the heavy motor vehicle fleet, within the constraints imposed by the road network, while ensuring heavy motor vehicles operate safely.
By examining these aspects, the review aims to identify ways to create a more sustainable and resilient funding model that supports both current operations and future growth of the scheme.
By highlighting these projects, the Government expects that their strategic importance will be given particular consideration during NLTP development, given their alignment and potential impact on the wider government priorities outlined in the GPS.
By the end of , we will establish the scope and terms of reference. We will start work on the review in early .
C omplete Investment Officials to provide email on scope of work underway with NZTA on the Road Efficiency Group. Complete Update on time performance reporting Officials to publish on time performance report for Auckland, Wellington, Christchurch, Queenstown and Dunedin. September Emissions Reduction Plan Transport Chapter Officials to engage with i ndustry on heavy vehicle transition.
C omplete Metropolitan Rail Operating Model Review Officials to consider approach to review Officials to provide advice Office to confirm approach to share briefing with key stakeholders. NA October. It will be delivered concurrently with the next set of MROM Review advice Complete Oral Fluid Testing
C. Recommendations . We recommend that the Sponsors : note the contents of this paper
CAA NZ to bring together the various sector participants in a workshop to debate, inform and develop pathways for the sector.
CAA and Twhaki Airspace Working Group The Authority and Twhaki Joint Ventures have formed an Airspace Working Group, led by the Authoritys Emerging Technologies Unit. The group is working on the development and implementation of a flexible multi use airspace for the Twhaki National Aerospace Centre at Kaitorete. This work is intended to accommodate a wide range of users engaged in the development of advanced aviation concepts while maintaining a safe aviation system with minimal impact on existing airspace users.
CAA is mentioned in an article about someone allegedly using a mirror to distract pilots flying over Te Horo. CAA provided comment as follows:
CAA is mentioned in an opinion piece by Steven Joyce about the increase of international tourism levies. So travel visa costs have gone up, regional airport charges are going up, the CAA and aviation security are lining up to put their charges up as well. The cumulative cross government effect is significant. And some in local government still want bed taxes. NZ Herald Monday September Laser strike Otago rescue chopper.
CAA mentioned in an article on a fatal tandem skydiving accident in Queenstown. The coroner has now released the report with further details of the fatality. Newstalk ZB Tuesday September Frustration at pilots in Kapiti A letter to the editor in response to article about mirrors being used to dazzle pilots. The author writes: Attempts to dazzle Kpiti Coast pilots show the level of frustration residents in Te Horo are experiencing at the hands of local pilots. The CAA is right to be concerned about the threat to aviation safety from reflected sunlight, but it must also take into account the health and wellbeing of the community. The Post Tuesday September Light aircraft accident in Tauranga
CAA mentioned in coverage of laser strikes in Otago. Otago Helicopters chief executive Graeme Gale reports laser strikes up tow twice per week, usually while helicopters are on rescue flights. Information taken from CAA website about risk of laser strikes and potential fines. News Upcoming education publications and products Planned releasepublish What Type Why JulySeptember Occurrence Investigation Workshop Face toface event To provide training for operators about investigating occurrences, to comply with requirements under CAR Part September Vector magazine (Spring issue) Aviation safety education magazine To educate the aviation community on various aviation safety topics September In, out, and around Queenstown GAP booklet (update) BAU revision September October How to be an aerodrome manager GAP booklet (new) As part of the WTSA campaign, new guidance material for aerodrome managers is being produced, in the GAP booklet format September Drone safety brochure Safety education product BAU revision
CAA provided an update on their Emerging Technology Unit (ETU) and its intentions to create a common way forward on technical and operational development. MBIE has had new partners in the Airspace Integration Trials Programme (AITP) since the last meeting, and reflects on successful trials they had in . MoT gave an update on progress with UTM. An engagement paper is being developed to tease out important concepts, including what a UTM system is and what does New Zealand want going forward. All agencies agreed that moving forward the Drone Leadership Group will expand its focus to include all emerging technology, not just drones.
CAA provided data on pilot numbers the p iece was pitched as a discussion about whether there are enough pilots in NZ. The journalist did not advise of an angle focusing on pilot licensing. Key comments: Data from the Civil Aviation Authority shows that commercial pilot licences in New Zealand have fallen over the course of the past three years, though the numbers of pilots in the job seem to be climbing back after being decimated in . There is no doubt the industry and New Zealand needs more qualified pilots quicker than theyre being trained up. The policy settings that we operate under were established in the government controls the number of trainees that go into the system and it controls the pricing that companies can charge, so at a time of high inflation where insurance costs have almost doubled since Covid, maintenance costs are almost there as well and fuel costs have doubled, the industry is very restricted on what it can charge students so in our view the whole policy arrangement needs to be changed.. its just becoming too expensive for ordinary New Zealanders to come into training, they have to come up with around about , cash to train. Aviation NZ CE John Nicholson In general, aviation like us, were suffering to try and find quality and experienced pilots we need to work with our Civil Aviation to drop the minimum requirements right now like we have thousand hour minimums to get pilots in thats going to have to come down to below hours just so we can actually have people to fly our aircraft Air Milford representative Antony Sproull TVNZ July Pilot licensing requirements This topic featured further in news bulletins throughout the day. Key comments: Outdated and no longer fit for purpose. Thats the view of one pilot on civil aviation policy settings. Data from the Civil Aviation Authority shows commercial pilot licences in Aotearoa have fallen from in to in . Aviation New Zealands John Nicholson says these numbers have dropped due to changes to training policies over a decade ago. Irene King says the government is not focused on providing a solution to the Problem. The Civil Aviation Authority said in a statement legislation change is very difficult and confirms nothing is in the works for changing pilot training. No statement to this effect was made. TVNZ PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending July
CAA statement provided relating to an incident near Kaikohe airfield involving a glider that was forced to land outside the airfield. It was reported that the sole occupant was not injured and there was no damage to the aircraft. In the coming days, the pilot will provide more information to allow CAA to understand more about what occurred. News, Otago Daily Times Saturday September Governments visitor levy raises concerns for New Zealands tourism recovery.
CAA statement: We are aware that a laser strike occurred in Auckland on September . Laser strikes are a serious threat to aviation safety. Direct eye exposure to a laser beam impacts a pilots vision; this can completely disorient them or lead to incapacitation. In the worst case scenario it can have disastrous outcomes. Laser strikes will be considered as endangering transport which is a crime under Section of the Crimes Act . The matter is currently being handled by NZ Police. Newshub, Stuff, RNZ, TVNZ, NZ Herald Upcoming communications and engagement Planned releasepublish What Type Why From midSeptember All stories from Vector Winter issue Vector Online article(s) Ongoing education by putting some Vector articles online for anyone to access . JulySeptember (multiple dates) Airworthiness and maintenance Face toface event Education for owners and operators to increase their understanding of the requirements for maintaining their aircraft . September November (multiple dates) Plane Talking Face toface event This series of seminars, as part of the Work Together, Stay Apart campaign, serves the aerodrome communities and will be held in aero clubs and flying schools throughout New Zealand. There are dates in total.
CAAs case against Skydive Auckland and its director had its first hearing in court on July . The defend ants entered not guilty pleas. Stuff July August Why passengers are being warned not to fly with fully charged devices Passengers told not to fly with fully charged devices due to fire risk The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) has released new information that fully charged devices present a greater fire risk, and advises passengers not to charge their devices to full capacity. Our full statement as follows:
CAAs case against the owner of Lister Helicopters, relating to a fatal crash in , was scheduled for its second hearing in Dunedin District Court on July. The hearing was adjourned and has been rescheduled . Stuff, NZ Herald, Newstalk ZB July Wellington Airport queues after baggage belt fault
CAA, Maritime NZ and TAIC. These entities deliver regulatory, security and investigative activities
CABMIN This document is released in full.
CATR projects are f unded by: , million Additional fare revenue CATR Waka Kotahi Total ,
CAUTION: This email and any attachment(s) contains information that is both confidential and possibly legally privileged. No reader may make any use of its content unless that use is approved by Te Rnanga o Ngi Tahu and its subsidiary companies separately in writing. Any opinion, advice or information contained in this email and any attachment(s) is to be treated as interim and provisional only and for the strictly limited purpose of the recipient as communicated to us. Neither the recipient nor any other person should act upon it without our separate written authorization of reliance. If you have received this message in error, please notify us immediately and destroy this message. s ()(a) s ()(a) s s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Te R.Ona,n.gao, NGAI TAHU Oscar CasswellLaird From: Rebecca Beals Sent: Tuesday, June To: Tredegar Hall Cc: Daran Ponter;
CBTA uptake has been relatively higher among older riders. As shown in section .. of the Technical Report , uptake of CBTA generally declines with the riders age at the time of obtaining their learner licence: Among riders aged and under when t hey obtained their learner licence and who remained on a restricted licence at the end of , just over half had a CBTA R certificate. Among similar riders aged and over when they obtained their learner licence, around had a CBTA R certificate a nd around did not. Among riders aged and under when they obtained their learner licence and who progressed to a full licence by the end of , around had no CBTA certificates, compared to around for riders who obtained their learner licen ce at age and over. Across regions, CBTA uptake has been relatively low among riders living in Wellington, Otago, Taranaki, Marlborough, and Southland, and relatively high among riders living in Bay of Plenty, Gisborne, and Tasman regions. CBTA appears to have a relatively large effect on how quickly riders progress through the licence stages. For example, riders in the cohort who progressed to a full licence by the end of spent a median of around to months on their learner licence if they chose CBTA, compared to months for riders who did not choose CBTA ( Figure ; the labelled values are the upper quartile, median, and lower quartile of duration in each case). Similarly, riders who progressed to a full licence spent a median of months on their restricted licence if they chose CBTA, compared to months if they did not. This is partly by design, for example there is no minimum learner licence duration for riders who use CBTA to obtain their restricted licence.
CCDC survey vehicles will be operating in Auckland in the second half of September , presenting an opportunity for the Minister to go for a short drive with the operator to see how data is collected.
CITY RAIL LINK (CRL) MAUNGAWHAU AND KARANGA A HAPE DEVELOPMENT P ROGRAMME ADVICE TO SPONSORS Background . On July Hon Michael Wood, Minister of Transport, representing CRL Sponsors, the Minister of Finance, the Mayor and Deputy Mayor, asked Eke Panuku and Kinga Ora work in consultation with CRLL to deliver advice and be accountable to CRL Sponsors for the development programme delivery for station sites and precincts at Maungawhau (Mt Eden) and Karanga a Hape.
CIVIL AVIATION (OFFENCES) REGULATIONS
CLIMATE CHANGE EMISSIONS WORK
CONTENTS . INTRODUCTION . . . . . POLICY INTENT . . . . . RAIL AND COASTAL SHIPPING . . . . . NLTF PRESSURE . . . . . FUNDING LEVELS . . . . . CONCLUSION . . . . .
COPYRIGHT PERMISSI ON TO REPRODUCE: The content of th s submission i s the property of the NZAA. Information in it is relevant at the time of authorship. The NZAA g ves permission for content in it to be freely copied, cited and distributed , but not altered, subject to due care that content used does not misrepresent the NZAA.
CORSIA complements the other elements of the basket of measures by offsetting the amount of CO emissions that cannot be reduced through the use of technological improvements, operational improvements, and sustainable aviation fuels with emissions units from the carbon market.
COVID Airfreight Response
COVID Alert Level Changes
COVID Aviation Relief Package
COVID Impacts for the National Land Transport Fund and Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency
Cabinet Economic Policy Committee ECO Wednesday May
Cabinet Expenditure Committee Regulatory Reform minute Land Transport Rule Setting of Speed Limits
Cabinet Manual is clear that responsibility for a portfolio always rests with the portfolio or
Cabinet Minute on decision relating to the proposed aviation relief package.
Cabinet Office circular CO() (Investment Management and Asset Performance in the S tate Services) sets out the expectations Cabinet has for agencies in regard to benefits management.
Cabinet Paper Essential Transport Connectivity Scheme Support for Milford Aerodrome
Cabinet Paper on the using the ETC to support Milford Aerodromes ongoing operations.
Cabinet PaperThe Future of Rail: Rail Track User Charges
Cabinet ECOMIN;
Cabinet agreed on July that we initiate a process to develop the next stages of the project.
Cabinet agreed on terms of reference for a review that would guide the development and delivery of a supply chain strategy for the upper North Island, including ports. This work would also offer advice on the priorities for investment in rail, roads and other supporting infrastructure.
Cabinet agreed that a regional fuel tax would:
Cabinet agreed to changes to regional fuel tax rebate entitlements for offroad uses of petrol and diesel.
Cabinet agreed to initiate a business case process on the potential for rapid rail between Hamilton and Auckland, and asked for this process to consider a full range of options for rapid transit.
Cabinet agreed to release a draft of the Bill to the aviation industry for consultation. The draft Bill was released alongside a commentary document highlighting the main changes.
Cabinet agreed to set criminal limits and blood infringement thresholds in legislation based on the advice of the
Cabinet agreed to the proposed Tackling Unsafe Speeds programme, which will include a framework to improve how councils and Waka Kotahi plan for, consult on and implement speed management changes. It will also mean lowering speed limits around schools and a new approach to safety cameras.
Cabinet also agreed that we would undertake consultation on the proposed amendments to the Rules.
Cabinet also included a mandate to initiate an investigation of a separate indicative business case for extending rapid rail to Tauranga, and how that would fit with the proposal.
Cabinet approved in principle New Zealand becoming a party to Annex VI, and the Government agreed to an expected implementation of late . This means Annex VI will come into force in New Zealand months later.
Cabinet approved the introduction of a new framework to allow regional councils and public transport operators to develop a publicprivate partnership to improve delivery of public transport services through collaborative planning and investment.
Cabinet approved the overall policy design of the regional fuel tax and agreed that the legislation could be drafted. The Ministers of Transport and Finance were authorised to make final decisions about any details that arose during the drafting of the Bill.
Cabinet approves publication of final (MayJune ) Cabinet approves release of draft GPS for consultation (May ) and engagement roadshow occurs Cabinet approves publication of final (JulyAugust ) Vote Transport Budget Strategy approved by the Minister (late August) Initiatives seeking Minister of Finance consideration submitted by the Minister (late September) Final Budget initiatives submitted to the Minister of Finance and Treasury (early December) Ongoing budget support and provide final Budget briefings and financial recommendations Update to Minister on stakeholder engagement on issues and challenges Update to Minister on purpose and principles of a future revenue system Advice to Minister on potential options and pathways for a future revenue system Programme : Revenue and Investment SRO Bryn Gandy Ph:
Cabinet confirmation Monday May
Cabinet considered potentially deferring or cancelling the increase to PED and RUC given the impacts of COVID the community. Deferring or cancelling the planned increase would have permanently reduced the amount of money able to be invested in our land transport network. Investing in our transport network helps to stimulate the economy and create jobs which will support New Zealands recovery from COVID. The Government has ruled out any further increases in PED and RUC for the next years.
Cabinet decisions on the changes sought by the vehicle industry to the proposed Clean Car Standard
Cabinet endorsed the indicative package of transport investments
Cabinet has approved the final policy decisions for the Tackling Unsafe Speeds Programme. This includes:
Cabinet made a range of decisions about the policy positions reflected in the new Act. For example, substantive policy changes implemented by the Bill concern the following:
Cabinet material and advice papers for time of use schemes can be found here:
Cabinet noted the indicative cost to the Government and the agreed funding split between central and local government. The Cabinet paper states that individual package components might have varying funding splits between central and local funding but on average, equal to .
Cabinet paper Land Transport Rule Setting of Speed Limits PostConsultation Report Back
Cabinet paper accordingly.
Cabinet paper future border settings and reconnection with international markets
Cabinet paper prepared jointly with MFAT and MBIE, and Cabinet Minute to approve an approach, as part of the wider COVID response, to facilitate increased people movement across New Zealands borders.
Cabinet paper proactively released October
Cabinet paper publication of the NZ Rail Plan
Cabinet paper seeking Summary of Cabinet paper seeking approval to the Street agreement to release submissions and Layouts Rule and approval to draft Government discussion document to briefing seeking final Roading Powers Bill inform public consultation policy decisions from completed Minister
Cabinet paper seeking to publish the final Road to Zero Action Plan to Minister
Cabinet process to select preferred delivery partner for CCM facilitated
Cambridge to Piarere SH
Cambridge to Piarere State Highway
Cancellation of Auckland Light Rail Limited
Candidate for appointment Leigh Auton Mr Auton is a consultant and professional director, with extensive experience in local government. He is the founding Director of Auton Associates Ltd; as well as Chair of the Papakura Kootuitui Trust, and Deputy Chair of Ako Mttupu: Teach First NZ. He has also served on the boards of the Local Government Commission, Auckland Council Property Limited, Emerge Aotearoa, Ng puhi Asset Holding Company and its subsidiaries and Housi ng New Zealand. Mr Auton was also the C hief E xecutive of Manukau City Council and Interim Chief Executive at Tauranga City Council. He has also led or been appointed a member of a number of reviews by central and local government. Mr Autons appointment will provide continuity from the ALR Establishment Unit Board. The ALR Board will benefit from his experience in governance, urban design and infrastructure planning, local government and community engagement. Conflicts of interest I can confirm that appropriate enquiries concerning conflicts of interest have been carried out, in accordance with the Public Service Commission s appointment guidelines, to identify any conflict of interest that could reasonably be identified. Hon Dame Wilde has disclosed that she is a member of Frequency Limited, an infrastructure consultancy firm that has staff seconded into the ALR Establishment Unit following a successful tender to supply. Should Frequency Ltd decide to re tender or submit further tenders for work relating to ALR, Hon Dame Wilde will recuse herself from the procurement process across both boards where this specifically relates to Frequency Limited . PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Ms Tukua has disclosed her role as Technical Director of Regenerative Outcomes Kaihaut Whakarito at the infrastructure consultancy firm Mott MacDonald . It is expected that Mott MacDonald will bid for consultancy work relating to ALR, or infrastructure projects that have close links with ALR. If t his is the case, Ms Tukua will recuse herself from the procurement process across both boards where this specifically relates to Mott MacDonald. Mr Auton has identified no personal conflicts of interest,
Capab ility Capability considerations should include the whole system, including the Ministrys role and involvement and should reflect how much experience an agency, organisation or team has in delivering outputs and outcomes.
Capability should focus on decision make rs in terms of understanding cost and benefits. OF MEETING DETAILS TITLE MoT Value for Money Review Stakeholder Workshop Regional and Local Government Thursday rd July (NZST) AGENCY REPRESENTATIVES Ministry of Transport Waka Kotahi Auckland Transport Waimakariri District Council Christchurch City Council Hamilton City Council Greater Wellington Reg ional Council Palmerston North City Council Environmental Southland Regional Council Upper Hutt City Council WORKSHOP NOTES ITEM NO TES General Queries regarding how the conceptual framework aligns with the GPS text (specifically section . Principles for Investing). The framework should clarify the level of detail that will be required for evaluation. The framework should consider how it responds to the requirements perspectives of the different agencies (i.e. central government vs. regional government vs. local government). There needs to be consideration on how lessons learnt are shared and made publicly available. The framework is a move in the right direction currently there is a good culture of delivery, but less so in checking whether outcomes were delivered. Query regarding whether the framework will create an opportunity to remove duplicate reporting, and other reporting now considered redundant. Outcomes Outcomes are a key element in value for money assessments. The GPS directs short term investment focus year plan but emphasis is on yearly increments. However, the time horizon for the realisation of benefits and outcomes can be much longer. Capability Capability considerations should include the whole system, including the Ministrys role and involvement and should reflect how much experience an agency, organisation or team has in delivering outputs and outcomes. Developing the right tools and resources to assess and report on capability effectively may be difficult. There are currently gaps in behavioural, cultural change, collaboration mechanisms and innovation. Risks arising from capability that could impact value for money should be accounted for in the risk profile of a program or project business case. OF Culture is as important as capability what can be done to stress culture of value for moneybenefit realisation etc.
Capital Investment Package Funding for Crown assets
Capitalise job titles and locations when referring to a named person or place Give the name of the person or place the first time you refer to them.
Carbon offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation
Carmen Mak Policy Director, System Regulatory Design, Ministry of Transport Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport . . .
Carmen Mak, Deputy Chief Executive Corporate Services
Carmen has been at the Ministry of Transport since February in Director roles, and was appointed to the Deputy Chief Executive role in June .
Carmen is an experienced public sector practitioner, having worked in economic, trade and international policy roles in the Treasury, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), and at APEC. She has also had experience in leading the national standards body as an independent business unit within MBIE.
Category (n) () (n) () (n) () Public transport . . . Total Activities with multiple categories . . .
Category Incorporating How It Is Currently Funded Capital Costs Operating Costs Above rail operations
Cc: daran.pontermfe.govt.nz daran.pontermfe.govt.nz ; Rebecca Beals R.Bealstransport.govt.nz Subject: TranganuiaKiwa: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years
Cc: daran.pontermfe.govt.nz daran.pontermfe.govt.nz; Rebecca Beals R.Bealstransport.govt.nz Subject: TranganuiaKiwa: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years
Cc: Daran Ponter Daran.Pontermfe.govt.nz ; Rebecca Beals R.Bealstransport.govt.nz Subject: FW: TranganuiaKiwa: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years
Ccd into this email are our Manat mo te Taiao (MFE) colleagues looking after the RM reforms and iwi partnerships and Rebecca Beals who is our Principal Advisor, Urban Development and Public Transport at Te Manat Waka (MoT).
Centre for Connected and Autonomous Vehicles (UK)
CentrePorts concerns s ()(b)(ii), s ()(g)(ii) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(b)(ii), s ()(g)(ii) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of . On October the Chief Executive Officers of CentrePort and GWRC wrote a letter to you expressing their concerns with the risks they were facing due to the EORC issue. This letter and your response to it are both attached. . . In their letter, CentrePort and GWRC request ed a meeting to clarify the status of the EORC Business Case work and understand mechanisms to mitigate the risks to CentrePorts business from responding to these incidents and were happy to do this in conjunction with Maritime New Zealand. . . Both CentrePort and GWRC have been advocates for government investment in EORC .
Certain information is refused under the following section of the Act
Certain information is withheld in documents , and under section ()(a) of the Act relating to protecting the privacy of natural persons, and certain information in documents and is excluded, as it is out of scope of your request under the Act. If you are interested in more information on how Chapter is applied in New Zealand, you can find the Part Marine Protection Rules on Maritime New Zealands website here: https:www.maritimenz.govt.nzcontentrulespart default.asp .
Certain information is withheld under section ()(a) of the Act, to protect the privacy of natural person s.
Certain information is withheld under the following section of the Act:
Certain information is withheld under the following sections of the Act:
Certain information is withheld under the following sections of the Act: ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials (d) the information requested is or will soon be publicly available
Certification by Parliamentary Counsel
Certification monthly update The update below shows the average working days taken to complete (and the month trend) the following applications as of Monday August : Applications for amendment to existing certificates Applications for new certificates The renewal of existing certificates. The data is provided on a monthly basis and all data is a rolling month data set. Please note that Part (Regulated Air Cargo Agent) and Part (Aerodrome Certification, Operation and Use) have not been included as the data is not yet available.
Chair Housing New Zealand
Chair NZ International Arts Festival
Chair National Military Heritage Trust (Great War Exhibition)
Chair New Zealand Food Safety Advisory Board
Chair Ngpuhi Asset Holding Company Limited
Chair Ngpuhi Deepwater GP Limited Trustee More than a Roof New Zealand
Chair Nikau Foundation Director Frequency Limited
Chair Wellington Lifelines Group
Chair Wellington Regional Stadium Development Trust
Chair Wellington Waterfront Limited Director Natural Gas Corporation (NZ) Ltd
Chair and Board member, City Rail Link Limited
Chair, Cabinet Business Committee
Chair, Cabinet Legislation Committee
Chair, Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency
ChairTrustee Pulman Park Trust
Challenges include high rates of private car ownership and use in New Zealand. Benefits include low costs and minimal space required for parking the devices also complement public transport.
Changes to SPS Rules were introduced to Parliament, as part of the Land Transport Amendment Bill.
Changes to licence time limits announced
Changes to the Clean Car Discount agreed for July
Changes to the Clean Car Standard will be made regarding Disability Vehicles
Changes to the age a nd experience profiles as a result of changing the minimum age therefore have relatively complex effects on crashes among drivers aged and older. We used the model of crash involvements to predict crashes among drivers aged to years old in if the minimum driving age had remained at years old, that is, if the age and experience profile of these drivers was what we estimate it would have been if the minimum age had remained at years old (see section .. of the Technical Report ). The res ults of this analysis are shown in Figure . As well as the reduction in crashes for yearolds, we estimate that increasing the minimum ages reduced crashes among , , and yearolds, due to a greater proportion of drivers in these age groups hol ding learner licences where they are relatively less likely to be involved in a crash. Among to year olds we estimate small increases in crashes, due to reduced driving experience that is not fully offset by drivers being older. Among drivers aged to years old, we estimate negligible impacts on crashes, as once drivers have held a licence for a relatively long time, small changes to the amount of time that they have held a licence are estimated to make little difference to the likelihood that t hey are involved in a crash. Overall, we estimate that increasing the Class minimum ages resulted in around fewer crashes in , all else being equal, and this is a reasonable estimate of the annual long term effects of this policy change given tha t the characteristics of drivers receiving Class licences have been relatively stable in recent years (see section ... of the Technical Report ). This is comprised of a reduction of around crashes among drivers aged to years old, offset by an increase of around crashes among drivers aged to years old. As noted above, around three quarters of this effect corresponds to the reduction in crashes due to yearolds no longer being able to legally drive. A much smaller effect is estimated to be due to changes in the age and experience profile of drivers aged to years old.
Changes to the patterns of demand for personal travel after meant that our traditional forecasting models had consistently overestimated demand and could no longer be relied upon to help us decide how to invest in transport.
Changes to the rules affected taxis, shuttles, private hire vehicles and appbased passenger services. There were also specific changes for dialadriver, carpool operations managed by a third party and for large passenger services that is, vehicles with seats or more, including the driver.
Changing priorities Was there a shift in what was put forward GPS enabled explicitly mode shift promoting projects to be put forward, with mode shift as the primary benefit. GPS and funded classes made it easier to get political buy in for mode shift promoting projects. Walking and cycling work continued to be funded through local road activity classes. Repackaging projects to fit with GPS signals was a pragmatic response.
Changing priorities is hard to evaluate, and a reliance on evidence in the business case process.
Changing trip distribution
Chapter Outlines corridor strategies, network plans and other action areas. Chapter The regional programme sets out all the land transport activities in the Wellington region proposed to be funded over July June . Chapter explains funding resources and estimated costs for year programme and year programme Appendix E The RLTP includes assessment of the RLTP (appendix E). It outlines legislative requirements, what RLTP contributes to the purpose of the Land Transport Management Act and consistency between the draft GPS and draft RLTP . Here is one point that relates to value for money : Draft GPS has the objective of A land transport system that delivers the right infrastructure and services to the right level at the best cost and seeks for the result of improved returns from public transport. Correspondingly, the RLTP seeks to grow public transport mode share which will result in more efficient use of transport infrastructure and better value for money. Wellington RLTP midterm update front section Website Information: http:www.gw.govt.nzrltpl an The RLTP was reviewed in and the programme of land transport activities for the period between and .The purpose of the review is to ensure the overall policy direction is fit for purpose for the second half of its sixyear duration and to update the programme for the next three years (). The reviewed RLTP reflects changes of planned transport activities since and the new national direction in draft GPS .
Chapter : The Purpose and Scope of the RLPT The GPS on Land Transport is referenced including the following four priorities: Safety Summary b Access Environment Value for money The RLTP supports this approach, Safety and access are the two key strategic priorities for the Government and these are supported by the priorities of environment and value for money. Each strategic priority has a number of objectives; Value for money: a land transport system that delivers the right infrastructure to the right level at the best cost. The ATAP (Auckland Transport Alignment Project) is referenced, discussing the funding priorities outlined in ATAP and that it identifies further funding priorities once investment is secured. p. outlines the importance of value for money and the challenges faced such as rising construction costs, changing environments and cross coordination between interested parties.
Chapter Procurement procedure , , Procurement procedures provide guidelines, rules and tools that will enable approved organisations to obtain best value for money from procurement activities they undertake. Each procurement procedure can deal with a broad range of activities and are expected to encompass most activities across the land transport sector. e f Chapter contain the following procurement procedures: . Infrastructure . Planning and advice . Public transport services . Public transport fare subsidy schemes NZ Transport Agency Roads of National Significance Economic Assessments Review July https:www.nzta.govt.nza ssetsresourcesrons economic assessment docsfull report.pdf The purpose of undertaking the assessment is for NZTA to be able to answer two fundamental questions, namely: . Are there quantifiable wider economic benefits associated with the portfolio of RoNS projects . If such benefits exist and are quantifiable, are they of sufficient scale to demonstrate the economic worth of an aspirational RoNS implementation program
Chapter : Measuring Outcomes A table that sets out performance measures and targets to track progress. Value for Money Two areas: Public Transport Subsidies and Achieving Project KPIs. Public transport subsidy Public transport farebox recovery Calculated monthly by AT per cent Achievement of project KPIs Proportion of major project KPIs that have been achieved Utilising results from post implementation reviews completed by AT and the Transport Agency Measure to create baseline and future targets Chapter : Funding and Expenditure Outlines where funds are coming from
Chapter : Monitoring an d Review
Charges on high emission vehicles act as a purchase disincentive and will fund rebates for zero and low emission vehicles. Vehicles with neither very low nor high emissions will not be subject to rebates nor charges (explained in the graphic below).
Chatham Islands Project: Work Towards a S hip Solution No update.
Chatham Islands Project: Work Towards a S hip Solution The Ministry is awaiting your decision on the approach to securing a long term shipping solution. A briefing on the proposed approach and next steps was sent to your O ffice on Friday August .
Chatham Islands Project: Work Towards a S hip Solution The Ministry is expecting to release the RFI for a replacement shipping service to the sector this week . We will provide your Office a copy of the RFI document , as well as some QAs for any potential media interest , hours before the RFI goes live.
Chatham Islands Project: Work Towards a S hip Solution The RFI towards a new shipping solution was released on Thursday September and is expected to run for six weeks. The Ministry will brief you on the results of the RFI process in November .
Checklist Have you found out who else is speaking Have you used the Ministrys PowerPoint template and generic PowerPoint slides Has the speechpresentation been thoroughly checked to ensure that all spelling, grammar and facts are correct Is the language clear and concise, and appropriate for your audience Have you got sign off from the appropriate manager Have you advised the Engagement and Communications team Is your presentation OK to share externally Have you avoided death by PowerPoint Have you received permission for all externally sourced images and graph s Have you liaised with IT Helpdesk to arrange for an IronKey or USB drive to transport your presentation Where can I get more guidance on presenting
Chief Crown Negotiator Treaty of Waitangi Claims for Moriori, Ngati Pahau wera , Raukawa Councillor then Chair Greater Wellington Regional Council
Chief Executive Manukau City Council Qualifications Chartered Member Institute of Directors Master of Town Planning (Honours) University of Auckland
Chief Executive Trade New Zealand (now New Zealand Trade and Enterprise) Mayor of Wellington Wellington City Council Minister of the Crown (Tourism, Disarmament and Arms Control, Assoc Foreign Affairs Trade) New Zealand Government Member of Parliament for Wellington Central New Zealand Parliament
Chief Executives expenses
China Eastern Airlines China Eastern Airlines, all reported transTasman routes
Christchurch Auckland . . . Air NZ . . . Jetstar . . .
Christchurch Brisbane . . . Air NZ . . . Qantas . . .
Christchurch Gold Coast . . . Air NZ . . . Jetstar . . .
Christchurch Melbourne . . . Air NZ . . . Qantas . . . Jetstar . . . Sydney Queenstown . . . Air NZ . . . Qantas . . . Jetstar . . . Virgin Australia . . .
Christchurch Sydney . . . Emirates . . . Air NZ . . . INDIVIDUAL TRANSTASMAN ROUTES, MARCH
Christchurch Wellington . . . Air NZ . . . Jetstar . . .
Christchurch International
Christchurch International Airport Ltd
Christchurch International:
Christchurch Northern Link SH
Christchurch Northern Link State Highway (Woodend Bypass)
Circular economy will remake supply chains
Citation Ministry of Transport. . An evaluation of mode shift in the GPS Transport Evidence Base report. Wellington: Ministry of Transport. in February by the Ministry of Transport, PO Box , Wellington , New Zealand. ISBN
Citation Ministry of Transport. . Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) Evaluation Transport Evidence Base report. Wellington: Ministry of Transport. in February by the Ministry of Transport, PO Box , Wellington , New Zealand. ISBN
City Rail Link Agreement in progress
City Rail Link In September , City Rail Links Tunnel Boring Machine, Dame Whina Cooper, broke through at its final destination at Te Waihorotiu (Aotea). The new stations at M ount Eden and Karangahape Road are beginning to emerge above ground, and final station designs have been completed.
Civil Aviation (Direction to Require Searching for Inorganic Powders, Liquids, Aerosols, and Gels) Notice
Civil Aviation (Direction to Require Searching for Inorganic Powders, Liquids, Aerosols, and Gels) Notice Notice . Title This Notice is the Civil Aviation (Direction to Require Searching for Inorganic Powders, Liquids, Aerosols, and Gels) Notice .
Civil Aviation (Direction to Require Searching for Inorganic Powders, Liquids, Aerosols, and Gels) Notice This Notice is made under section of the Civil Aviation Act (the Act) by the Acting Minister of Transport, after (a) considering the exercise of the power to require searching to be necessary to i. improve or enhance aviation security, and ii. enable New Zealand to be part of a concerted international response to a threat to aviation security. (b) consulting with i. the Director of Civil Aviation, and ii. as the Acting Minister of Transport considered appropriate and practical, representative groups in the aviation industry.
Civil Aviation (Offences) Regulations
Civil Aviation Act came into force on April .
Civil Aviation Authority Pricing Review Proposal This paper reports back on the outcomes of the Civil Aviation Authority of New Zealands (the Authority) public consultation on its proposed levies, fees and charges and seeks agreement to: . new rates for levies, fees and charges with pricing flexibility for the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) and Aviation Security Service (AvSec); and Relation to government priorities The Government has committed to a programme of fiscal sustainability. These proposals align with our focus on responsible spending, restoring fiscal discipline, rightsizing governments footprint, and improving the efficiency and productivity of spending. Executive Summary The Authority is conducting its first pricing review for CAA since , and the first since for AvSec. The review will determine interim funding for the twoyear period between July and June . A first principles review, beginning in early , will ensure the Authority is right sized to deliver its functions effectively and efficiently in the longer term. From August to October , the Authority consulted on three sets of options. The options varied based on whether funding would be raised via increased passenger levies, or a mixture of these levy increases with increases in other levies, fees, and charges. Other levies, fees, and charges in this document refers to levies, other than passenger safety and security levies, as well as regulatory fees and charges. Each option would recover the same total revenue, which would be used to partially rebuild reserves depleted during COVID, and enable the continuation of the Authoritys business without additional Crown funding. Options referenced in this document are in Appendix A. Through the consultation process, submitters concerns generally related to the scale of the increases, and a need to find efficiencies, reduce costs, or find alternative funding sources. Many did not indicate a preference for how funding is raised. The Authority refers to the Civil Aviation Authority of New Zealand as a whole; AvSec refers to the Aviation Security Service, a business group within the Authority; CAA refers to the remainder of the Authority excluding the AvSec business group. s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Generally, airlines and airports supported a balance between passenger levies and other levies, fees, and charges. General aviation submitters primarily supported relying wholly on passenger levies to increase revenue. Decisions to give effect to the Boards revised proposal In considering the submissions, the Authoritys Board has identified cost savings through reductions to proposed increases in staff levels, resulting in reduced levies compared to those consulted on. The Board has proposed two options for achieving the revenue level sought for CAA, and has identified a preferred option for AvSec. I am seeking agreement to the Boards proposal as follows: . For CAA, either: .. Increase passenger safety levies to cover all increased costs, with no increase to other levies, fees, and charges (consistent with the approach in Option in the consultation); or .. Increase passenger safety levies to cover most increased costs, with a percent increase to other levies, fees, and charges. . For AvSec, raise the domestic and international passenger security levies by a similar proportion each (consistent with Option in the consultation). I am also seeking approval to state the new rates as maximums, to allow flexibility for the Authority to reduce them as it identifies efficiencies. Delivering better outcomes for travellers and improved value for money Since taking office, I have been concerned about the focus of the Authority and its overall performance and efficiency. While it will take time to turn around the Authoritys performance, I have already taken several actions to ensure it is focussed on value for money and delivering better outcomes for travellers as a priority. This includes refreshing the Board in August, and through my Letter of Expectations, seeking improved reporting and performance. The Authority has several new measures in its Statement of Performance Expectations, reflecting my expectations of improved performance, including: improved certification timelines for new applications and amendments for all certification types, as well as a specific measure around Part applications where processing times rose to an unacceptable average of months; greater transparency around queue times and overall throughput; and greater transparency around participant satisfaction. s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Funding for additional staff and resources covered by the proposals in this paper will support the Authority to deliver on these performance expectations and ultimately lead to improved experience for the travelling public. Background The Authority is the Crown Entity responsible for regulating the civil aviation system. As a whole, the Authority carries out a wide range of regulatory functions including engagement, education, communication, certification, licensing, monitoring (including audit and inspection), investigation, and enforcement. In this paper, AvSec refers to the business unit in the Authority responsible for delivering aviation security. Its functions include passenger and cargo screening, behavioural detection teams, explosive detector dog teams, and perimeter patrols at six securitydesignated airports and air navigation facilities across the country. This will expand to seven securitydesignated airports from . The remainder of the Authority is referred to as the CAA, which includes both the safety and security regulatory oversight functions. Despite operating under a full cost recovery model, the Authoritys costs have not been met by income from levies, fees, and charges since . This is due to a decrease in passengers resulting from COVID, inflationary pressures, and changing security standards. During this time, the Authority exhausted its reserves and Crown funding has supported the shortfall. I have publicly stated that Crown subsidisation must end on June . There is a range of factors requiring a need for levy, fee, and charge increases, including, but not limited to outofpricing rates; managing more complex applications for emerging technology; implementing new legislative compliance activity requirements and functions such as the behavioural detection function and Explosive Dog Detector unit; and a backlog of policy and Civil Aviation Rules work. On August , I announced a refresh of the Board to ensure that the Authority is focused on delivery and achieving value for money. I directed the Board to identify efficiencies to further reduce the rates originally consulted on. The Authority received submissions on its proposal The Authority undertook public consultation from August to October . Across the submissions, there was broad concern about the scale of the increases and the ability of various segments of the aviation industry to be able to pay. Many submissions received from airlines and airports identified that the scale of the increases on passenger levies could impact demand for flights. General aviation submitters were also concerned about the impact the proposed increases would have on their businesses. The impact of increases on tourism was also raised. Where a preference was given for CAA, airlines, and airports generally supported Option due to what they considered to be a reasonable distribution of increases amongst the sector. General aviation submitters typically supported Option due to it not including any increase in other levies, fees, and charges and, therefore, not impacting on their businesses. Views on AvSecs options were less pronounced. More than half of all submitters stated that they did not have a preference, did not agree with any option, or did not select a preferred option. This is because there were more submissions from the RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E general aviation sector overall, and they do not pay these passenger levies. Airlines, airports, and key industry associations generally signalled either a preference for Option , a single combined levy, or no preference. The Board provided a revised proposal after consultation Following the consultation, the Authority looked for further savings. It identified opportunities to reduce proposed resourcing, specifically, staff numbers. Consequentially, it has amended its proposals to enable a reduction the levy increases. In summary: . For CAA (consistent with Option ): .. Passenger safety levies increase by percent rather than percent (from . to .). .. No increases to other levies, fees and charges. . For AvSec (consistent with Option ): .. Domestic security levies increase by percent rather than percent (from . to .). .. International security levies increase by percent rather than percent (from . to .). . Building in pricing flexibility to allow future efficiencies to be reflected in further reduced rates. The approach for CAA, with no proposed increase in other levies, fees, and charges, reflects significant concerns from the general aviation sector that the proposed percent increase would have a significant negative impact on their economic viability, as well as safety outcomes. My subsequent engagement with the Board Since consultation ended, I have been engaging with the Board. I am particularly interested in the other levies, fees, and charges, as not pursuing any increase in these appears to be out of step with cost recovery principles and policy. Additionally, given there has been no adjustment in safetyrelated fees, charges and levies for since , excluding the general aviation sector from an increase now amplifies the increases that will be faced by that sector in future years. The Board considered my concerns and provided an additional option (referred to in this document as the Hybrid Option). This Hybrid Option would see a smaller increase to passenger safety levies to cover most increased costs, along with a percent increase to other levies, fees, and charges. While it only has a small consequential impact on passenger safety levy rates, it is more aligned with cost recovery principles, in reflecting the costs of the system driven by the general aviation sector. The Authority, working with the Ministry of Transport (the Ministry), will commence work on a first principles funding review in early . This review will examine how s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E costs are recovered and instruct the setting of levies, fees, and charges from July . Without predetermining the outcome of that review, it is likely that the general aviation sector may need to pay a higher proportion of the costs it imposes with respect to system safety risks it generates. A small increase now may help soften likely future increases. Alignment of options with cost recovery policy and principles Option for CAA is least aligned with Treasurys Guidelines for Setting Charges in the Public Sector (the Guidelines). Whether the current mix of levies, fees, and charges used to recover the Authoritys operational costs is optimal is not addressed in the pricing review. The first principles funding review will address this matter. I am satisfied that all of these proposals are consistent with the both the Civil Aviation Act (the Act) and the Civil Aviation Act (the Act), which comes into effect on April . Impact of staffing reductions to realise levy decreases The Authority consulted on increasing its staffing levels by fulltime equivalents (FTE). The final proposal reduces that number by FTE to realise the reduced levy rates. This is still a sizeable increase in available staff and I expect the Authority to continue to identify further efficiency gains, and reduce certification wait times and security screening. Alongside the pricing review, changes to organisational structure, systems, and processes, will ensure the Authority is better placed to meet the expectations of passengers, the aviation sector and Government, as set out in the Authoritys SPE. This will result in a decrease in the backlog of certification applications, due to investment in more efficient processes, and a modest increase in resource to better meet sector demand. Additional resources will be targeted to those areas of expertise required to support economic growth in the sector, and the Governments ambitions in relation to advanced aviation technology. Aligning the AvSec workforce with forecast volume and demand will reduce the amount of time passengers need to wait for aviation security screening, and will increase the number of passengers processed within SPE targets. Pricing flexibility option to enable additional levy decreases The Authority proposes that regulations be amended to set levies at a maximum level, which can be reduced over time as efficiencies are identified. I support this proposal as it would be in line with my preference for lower levies, and my commitment to a more efficient Authority that is wellplaced to enable growth in the sector. Given the limited time available, the Authority has made a reasonable attempt to identify immediate opportunities to reduce costs, and is passing these on through lower levy rates. I have made it clear to the Board that I expect the Authority to identify more opportunities to reduce levies, fees, and charges. The Board is reviewing FTE growth back to . If efficiencies are found in the coming months, they could be reflected in adjusted levies, fees, or charges, should Cabinet agree with the proposed pricing flexibility approach. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Operational implications The majority of resourcing sought through these increases to levies, fees, and charges is to cover previous FTE growth and inflationary pressures. Without these increases, the Authority will need to reduce in size to a level where it will not be able to undertake its core regulatory functions effectively; passengers will need to arrive earlier at airports and wait longer for aviation security screening; and certification wait times will increase for those in the aviation system, and those wishing to enter the aviation system, particularly in the emerging aviation technologies space. Timing implications Should Cabinet not agree with the Authoritys recommendations, further work will be needed to ensure the Authoritys funding is sufficient over the next two years. This will reduce the amount of time the Authority will have to liaise with airlines to allow changes to be reflected in ticket prices, noting airlines typically prefer at least six months of advance notice. I expect the new levies, fees, and charges will be in place by mid. Costofliving implications Increases in passenger safety and security levies will be passed on to passengers through the ticket price. Industry submissions received during the consultation highlighted that the Authority had not sufficiently considered the impacts of Imposition of a capital charge could have a small impact on the amount available for repurposing and associated levy reductions s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E recovering cumulative inflationary impacts since the current rates were last adjusted in and , and rebuilding its financial reserves, on the traveling community. The Board indicated it had concerns about the ongoing viability of general aviation businesses should Option for CAA be selected. The Authority applied a cumulative inflation figure of percent across other levies, fees and charges. They have since revised the figure to percent. While this is an improvement, it would still result in significant increases to other levies, fees, and charges. Applying a percent increase on other levies, fees and charges is well below the cumulative inflation calculated for the period since the previous funding reviews. It also falls under calculations made by some industry associations. Financial implications Aviation security screening arrangements consultations On September , the Ministry released a document for targeted consultation titled Investigating alternative delivery arrangements for aviation security services. Consultation ran for eight weeks and closed on October . The consultations purpose was to gauge industrys appetite to deliver specific aviation security services at airports, before committing to a specific pathway that could deliver more effective and efficient outcomes. Seventeen submissions were received with limited consensus between submitters on a viable alternative delivery model. I am now considering advice from officials before making a decision on next steps. Legislative implications The Act is the current enabling legislation. On April , the Act is being replaced by the Act. This is the legislation that will apply for the implementation of the new regulations. Changes to give effect to the new levies, fees, and charges, and to set a maximum levy rate with scope to make further reductions, can be actioned through regulations. The Ministry will examine whether amendments to the existing regulations will suffice, or whether they should be repealed and replaced. The Ministry will instruct the Parliamentary Counsel Office. Risk of regulations review The Regulations Review Committee is most likely to be interested in the variation between the proposed approach and the consultation proposal. Option for CAA and Option were both consulted on. The Hybrid Option falls within a range of options considered, and would likely be considered a reasonable decision. I am satisfied the s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E proposals have been made in accordance with the objects and intentions set out in the enabling legislation. Risk of judicial review Judicial review will determine whether the decision was made in accordance with the law and within the range of reasonable decisions that could have been made. The preferred options were consulted on, and the Authority considered a range of alternatives. The Hybrid Option falls within a range of options considered and would likely be considered a reasonable decision. Therefore, the Authoritys approach appears defensible. Regulatory Impact Statement The Authority has prepared an Cost Recovery Impact Statement (CRIS) (Appendix B). Due to compressed timelines to ensure the funding review can be implemented by July , there was limited time for the Authority to undertake a full Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA). This Stage Cost Recovery Impact Statement (CRIS) has been reviewed by a panel of representatives appointed by the Ministry of Transport. It has been given a does not meet rating against the quality assurance criteria for the purpose of informing Cabinet decisions. While significant work has gone into this CRIS, it does not present the information in a clear, coherent manner to support good decisionmaking around this pricing review. Options are not assessed against criteria and the advantages and disadvantages of the options are not clearly spelt out. This makes it difficult for the reader to identify the best option or mix of options. Climate Implications of Policy Assessment A Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) is not required for this proposal. Tourism implications Airlines and airports raised the potential impact on demand for flights and tourism as a result of the increased levies. In August , the Ministry conducted an analysis of potential passenger demand responses to the increase in passenger safety and security levies of the preferred options consulted on. The analysis indicated a small potential drop of approximately . percent in international travel and a drop of just over percent in domestic travel. Population Implications General aviation industry submissions generally highlighted that proposed increase in hourly fees will heavily impact the cost viability of small business. The New Zealand Agricultural Aviation Association (NZAAA) highlighted potential implications of the changes on rural general aviation businesses stating the risk to the general public from agricultural aviation activities undertaken in rural areas is considerably less than the risk of air transport operations. NZAAA stated the Authority was levying the agricultural aviation sector disproportionately. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E The Board was swayed by the weight of these submissions but there has not been an analysis of these claims. Treaty of WaitangiTiriti o Waitangi These proposals do not have any Treaty of Waitangi implications. Human Rights These proposals are not inconsistent with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act and the Human Rights Act . Consultation The Ministry has consulted with the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, the Treasury, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, the Ministry for Primary Industries, the Civil Aviation Authority, Te Puni Kkiri, and the New Zealand Customs Service. Communications I will announce the proposal at a stakeholder event in December to allow the Authority to formally notify airlines on new levies. Proactive Release I intend to proactively release Cabinet and Cabinet committee papers and minutes within business days of decisions being confirmed by Cabinet, unless there is a good reason not to publish all or part of the material.
Civil Aviation Authority and Aviation Security Service
Civil Aviation Bill considered by the House of Representatives
Clarifying and strengthening the offshore financial security regime to ensure offshore installation owners have an appropriate amount of insurance, or other financial assurance for their liabilities for pollution damage resulting from an oil spill.
Clarifying where responsibility sits across the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) levels of driving automation
Clean Car Discount Announced
Clean Car Discount FeeRebate Calculator
Clean Car Import Standard Explainer PDF; KB
Clean Car Importer Standard Bill passed
Clean Car Standard and Discount consultation
Clean Car programme will expand to offer
Clean Cars is part of our Climate change emissions work programme.
Clean Vehicle Discount Scheme Charges Regulations
Clean Vehicle Standard Regulations
Clean Vehicles Act Passed
Clearly defines the roles and responsibilities of different parties in the system
Clerk of Committee Finance and Expenditure Committee SEQparliament .govt.nz
Click here to go through to
Climate Emergency Res. Fund Crown Infrastructure Partners () Eastern Busway () ()
Climate Emergency Response Fund (CERF) Table : Indicative CERF Projects for Tmaki Makaurau Indicative CERF projects for Tmaki Makaurau Indicative funding Northwestern Busway Feeder Routes This project will make improvements to the local road bus network to support the Northwestern Busway. It includes km of priority bus and special vehicle lan es, bus stops and pedestrian crossings. East Coast Road and Raleigh Road bus lanes This project will create two sections of bus priority to improve travel time and reliability on East Coast Road and Raleigh Road on the North Shore. This includes pedestrian crossings and other safety improvements . Manurewa Package This project will improve pedestrian and cycling facilities around local schools and the Homai and Manurewa train stations. These stations have been identified as high priority for improved access. Hendry Avenue cycleway This project focuses on cycling improvements to close a one kilometre gap on the existing Southwestern cycleway connecting to the Auckland city centre, Westgate, New Lynn and Onehunga through to the recently opened Ng Hau Mngere bridge. Karanga a hape cycle links This project will improve footpaths and cycleways on Pitt Street and Canada Street in preparation for the new Karangahape CRL station opening. These are important routes in the Auckland cycle network, linking upper Queen StreetIan McKinnon Drive, Karangahape Road, and Nelson StreetTe Ara Whiti cycleways. Mngere cycleway improvements This project will cre ate new cycleway improvements in M ngere, on Bader Drive, and Kiwi EsplanadeShort AvenueWallace Road. During engagement on other cycling improvements for the area, locals identified these as important areas. s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Indicative CERF projects for Tmaki Makaurau Indicative funding Mngere schools This project will make pedestrian improvements and introduce new safety measures to calm traffic around five local schools. This includes pedestrian crossings, raised tables, speed bumps, footpath widening and new kerbs.
Climate Implications of Policy Assessment report back
Climate change emissions work programme
Climate change emissions work programme.
Clodagh OConnor McKenna , Government Relations Manager
Closing July
Codesigning an emerging technology programme.
Coastal Shipping Upper
Coastal shipping accounts for around percent of the goods transported around the country.
Coastal shipping provides important resilience to New Zealands freight system
Coben, J. H., Larkin, G. L. (). Effectiveness of Ignition Interlock Devices in Reducing Drunk Driving Recidivism. American Journal of Preventive Medicine , .
Code of Welfare: Transport within New Zealand
Collaborating with other government agencies on a programme of work to respond to the Kaikura earthquake.
Collecting information about New Zealanders daily travel.
Collecting information and data helps us to understand the costs associated with different transport modes and how those costs compare with the charges paid by transport users.
Collecting personal information
Combining the Census data on Auckland population growth and Household Travel Survey data on Auckland travel per person, reveals total population growth related travel growth a year by all modes between and .
Combining the Household Travel Survey and Census also provides insights into total travel growth per person. Other sources alone
Comments from those in support focused on lower speed limits, particularly in urban areas and around schools. Many also thought that safety infrastructure should support speed limit reductions. Very few submitters commented on safety cameras but those that did tended to support having more cameras.
Comments Overtaken by events
Commissioning and working with other agencies to produce research and reports that may lead to policy changes to reduce harmful vehicle emissions from road transport.
Committee considered the paper title Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed
Committee for the period ended October :
Committee s Order) , (together, the Orders).
Committee). The Committees member agencies have developed a Maritime Security Strategy
Committees Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) Wednesday September Recovering the cost of border processing services for travellers The Ministers of Customs and Biosecurity are proposing to present a Cabinet Paper and Cost Recovery Impact Statement (CRIS) on amendments to the Customs and Excise (Border Processing Levy) for consideration at ECO on Wednesday September and Cabinet on Monday September . The paper contains proposals for amendments to levy rates for recovering the costs of processing international travellers. The proposals include a substantial increase in the levy on arriving cruise ship passengers to recover Customs costs incurred in their processing. We have provided comment to Customs that the paper and CRIS would benefit from more evidence on the harms or risks associated with arriving cruise ship passengers, and the effectiveness of the Customs interventions to address those harms or risks, to make a stronger case for the increase in the levy. The C abinet Paper and CRIS note that the cruise industry is opposed to the increase and has expressed concerns regarding the cumulative impact of recent increases in Government fees and levies on their businesses. We can confirm that this was a strong theme at the recent New Zealand Cruise Association Conference held on Thursday August . Since the initial consultation, Customs have written to submitters on the levy proposals, indicating that because of lowered projections of cruise visits, levies on arriving cruise ship passengers will need to rise further than what was initially proposed in the consultation process. This is likely to increase cruise sector frustration markedly, as the sector is already on record as saying that the lower cruise visit activity is a direct result of high costs. Wednesday September Biosecurity System Strategy Minister Hoggard has begun Ministerial consultation on the Biosecurity System Strategy package. Consultation will run until Friday August , before proposed ECO lodgement on Thursday September , for consideration on Wednesday September . The strategy aims to address the policy, operational, and participatory challenges in the functioning of the biosecurity system, and is connected to the Biosecurity Act Amendment Bill proposals. While the proposal does not contain any obvious concerns for the maritime transport system, Maritime NZ has asked the Ministry for Primary Industries to involve us in any future work that touches on our functions such as: our current approach to Ballast Water Management the role of Regional CouncilsHarbourmasters; and vessels and those on board (particularly with regard to safety).
Committees Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) Wednesday September Live Animal Exports Review This initiative relates to the Governments coalition agreement to reverse the recent ban on live animal exports while ensuring the highest standards of animal welfare.
Committees) Regulations (RTC Regulations) is required as the option
Committees) Regulations Revocation Order and the Land Transport (Road User)
Communications and Engagement . The tender process is being co ordinated with the Additional Waitemat Harbour Connections project, to give industry professionals the ability to better plan their resources for the pipeline of infrastructure work that is coming across the country. The two projects are planning to issue separate media releases and stakeholde r updates to communicate the release of the Registration of Interest tender on May.
Communications and External Engagement July Media plan days from Sunday July (planned) Item Description Targeted media No Statement Reactive statement prepared relating to security screening for FIFA passengers. None Media mentions days to Wednesday July Activity Channel July Getting a scale before the trip A follow piece about Air New Zealands passenger weight survey. Includes an inaccurate statement that the survey was for the purposes of a study by the New Zealand Civil Aviation Authority. The Informant July Laser strikes growing fear for pilots CAA provided data and a statement in response to an enquiry. Article quote as follows:
Communications and External Engagement August Media plan days from Sunday August Nil Media mentions days to Wednesday August Activity Channel August Breakfast at featuring David Harrison
Communications and External Engagement Media plan anticipated media NB: This covers the days from Monday September (planned) Item Description Targeted media Nil Nil Nil Nil Media mentions NB: This covers the days to Tuesday September Activity Channel Thursday September Death of skydiving tourist will not result in coronial inquiry
Communications and External Engagement Tuesday August Media plan anticipated media days from Monday August (planned) Item Description Targeted media Thursday August General release Media release regarding a sentencing for Mr. Throw. CAA records showed he did not hold an AOC or licence for his helicopter. Sentencing scheduled for on Thursday August in Dunedin District Court. All main NZ publications TBC General release Media release for a fatal accident report the microlight accident in Stratford that occurred in February . TBC
Communications and External Engagement Tuesday August Media plan anticipated media days from Monday September (planned) Item Description Targeted media Wednesday September General release Media release regarding a sentencing for a pilot as per court . CAA records showed he held no AOC or license for his helicopter. Sentencing scheduled for on September in Dunedin District Court. All main NZ publications
Communications and External Engagement Tuesday August Media plan anticipated media days from Monday August No anticipated media at this point.
Community Connect Baseline Survey
Community Connect is a targeted package aimed at making public transport more affordable.
Community Perceptions Standard
Community groups and NGOs
Comparison of Electric Vehicle sales market share in various key markets to .
Comparison of Vehicle CO targets compiled January by The ICCT Source Data
Comparison of crash rates for riders choosing CBTA versus those choosing practical tests Figure shows a simple comparison of crash rates by licence stage and CBTA status for the period from October until the end of , among riders who obtained a learner licence after CBTA was introduced. With the exception of fully licensed riders with onl y a CBTA R certificate, in our analysis the differences in crash rates for riders who chose CBTA are not statistically significantly different from those for riders who did not choose CBTA ( pvalues range from . to .). Bearing in mind the lack of st atistical significance, this analysis does however indicate that crash rates for riders choosing CBTA have been around twice as high as those for riders who did not choose CBTA since it was introduced. The only statistically significant difference in our analysis is the crash rate for fully licensed riders who only had a CBTA R certificate. This group of riders had a crash rate . times higher than those without a CBTA certificate ( pvalue .). However, there are very few riders who progressed to a full licence with only a CBTA R certificate after CBTA was
Comparisons of changes over time in crash rates for drivers with and without advanced certificates, and analysis of ti me trends estimated from Poisson regression models of crash rates for drivers of different ages with and without advanced certificates found no statistically significant differences in the estimated crash rate trends (all pvalues .; see section .. of the Technical Report ). Overall, our analysis found no evidence that crash rates for drivers with advanced certificates have differed over time relative to drivers without advanced certificates. We also used logistic regression models that predict cras h involvements for individual fully licensed drivers to test the relationship between having an advanced certificate and the odds of being involved in a crash, while controlling for differences in driver age, gender, and region of residence. We tested thre e different models: . We analysed the current relationship between advanced certificates and crashes by predicting crashes between and for all fully licensed drivers aged to years versus advanced certificate and time discount status. The odds of crash involvement were lower for drivers with an advanced certificate and no time discount compared to drivers without an advanced certificate, and this difference was
Competition in the airline sector
Competition in the airport sector
Complete GPS Officials to draft letter to NZTA Board providing feedback on the draft PEP. Complete Decisions Confirmed Denied Conf irmed Agree to remove the three month transitional period for local authorities for the new parking fee levels . Decision not taken Agree to communicate new parking fee levels with councils in week commencing Monday July . Denied s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Complete Oral Fluid Testing Complete
Complete workshop held on Wednesday August s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Complete. More detail provided in Section July Underway July Aviation Friday August s ()(b)(ii), s ()(j) s ()(f)(iv) s (a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Compliance RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Compliance audits are a regular part of ICAOs role. The purpose of audits is to monitor the
Concerns about range anxiety and the availability of publicly accessible charge points continue to be barriers to electrifying the vehicle fleet. Accelerating the rollout of public charging infrastructure can address these barriers and enable electric vehicle uptake.
Conclusion . We look forward to your views on our recommendation and the attached Programme Business Case.
Conclusion We are very happy to meet with officials to discuss our feedback in mor e detail. Given the uncertainty about what might result from the recently est ablished Infrastructure Industry Reference Group, we have comment ed on the GPS as it is, without guessing what investment might arise from their work. We note there is likely t o be change to GPS , and expect reasonable efforts at further consultation.
Conclusions from our research
Conducting CBA at an individual road level isnt always practical , particularly for urban streets with insufficient data and minimal impact on travel times .
Congestion pricing could improve the environment by reducing the number of vehicle trips. We are investigating how great the reductions in emissions of greenhouse gases and pollutants might be.
Connected Communities Projects July July Jul Dec Total RLTP Budgeted Central Isthmus Cycling Project .m .m .m .m City Centre Fringe Cycling Project .m .m .m .m Great Nth Rd Cycling Bus Priority .m .m .m .m Ellerslie Pakuranga R oad .m .m .m Great North Road .m .m .m Great South Road .m .m .m Manukau Road .m .m .m Mount Eden Road .m .m .m New North Road .m .m .m .m Ponsonby Road .m .m .m .m Total .m .m .m .m . A revised programme for new corridors is being assessed and will be included in the next RLTP and the Tmaki Makaurau Transport Plan. ATAP Programme outcomes . Details on progress against each of the ATAP outcomes for this reporting period and regional fuel tax data are included in Appendix . Looking forward . The recent cyclone and flooding have caused significant damage to the Auckland network. Rebuild will be a key priority for the ATAP agencies at both the Auckland and national levels. The repair work will utilise limited resources and Government and Auckland Council will need to work together to address funding for the recovery and rebuild. Repair work risks delaying the current ATAP programme. . Work on the Joint GovernmentAuckland Council Tmaki Makaurau Transport Plan has commenced focused on an integrated plan across all transport modes and both the longer term and more immediate needs of the Auckland transport system.
Connected corridors Intelligent networks of automated buses, rail services and cars rapidly move people on major transport corridors. Travellers are automatically guided along routes and serviced by their allknowing personalised travel apps.
Connected cycleways expected to cost NZD million, this introduces cycleways on Featherston Street, Thorndon Quay, Courtenay Place, Dixon Street, Taranaki Street, Willis Street, Victoria Street, Kent and Cambridge Terraces and Bowen Street. This will create a connected and safe central city cycleway network that is integrated with the wider cycleway network.
Consequently, many of the transport specific penalties are inconsistent, out of step with comparable modern legislation, and potentially not acting as an effective deterrent. In response to these issues, the Ministry of Transport has developed the Effective Financial Penalties Framework (the Framework) and associated categorisation Tool (the Tool). The Framework provides a set of principles and a systematic approach to support the process for setting more consistent and appropriate financial penalty levels across the three transport modes (land, maritime and aviation). These principles are:
Conservation Act Wildlife Act Reserves Act
Considering the vehicle ecosystem as a whole, rather than just the software and AI within the vehicle
Considering the way we will pay for transport in New Zealand in the future
Considering ways to develop the North Auckland Rail line to improve Northlands transport connections.
Consistent with my Letter of Expectations, I would like you to provide information on the steps you plan on taking to ensure the Agency works toward being a leader in cost and asset management, and what steps it will take to lift regulatory performance after changes to land transport charges and fees are implemented.
Consistent with the Ministrys Te Tiriti obligations, and in our ongoing effort to build our relationships with Te Iwi Mori, we are eager to receive your views to the ports permits extension process. If we have missed any important Iwi, Hap, PSGE or tangata whenua groups in this email please let me know. We are checking in to see if you have any queries about ports permits extension process, or whether you would like to share any views or insights. We note there are potential cultural, and Te Tiriti impacts which need to be considered and that this process is also a part of the wider Resource Management reforms currently taking place through MFE.
Consistent with the Ministrys Te Tiriti obligations, and in our ongoing eort to build our relationships with Te Iwi Mori, we are eager to receive your views to the ports permits extension process. If we have missed any important Iwi, Hap, PSGE or tangata whenua groups in this email please let me know.
Construction h as begun on some of the three year programme and people friendly city streets project s and planning is advancing on many others We consider that the cost and governance risks associated with these aspects of LGWM are generally lower, because the funding required is much smaller than the Transformational Programme and there are well established delivery approaches. There is still a degree of risk, particularly in relation to funding. These projects are also subject to cost pressures , and the NLTF i s facing pressure even to deliver on current commitments.
Construction of a full rapid transit connection from Brigham Creek to the central city along the corridor would take at least years to complete, depending on mode, but the intention from Waka Kotahi is to deliver it in stages starting with a focus on the City Centre to Westgate.
Consultants procured and work commenced Final study findings and recommendations
Consultants procured and work commenced. Interim study findings Final study findings and recommendations
Consultation Maritime New Zealand were consulted on the release of this document.
Consultation Maritime New Zealand were consulted on the release of this document. The New Zealand Federation of Commercial Fishermen (the NZFCF) were also consulted in reference to one line on page , which references a submission made by them to the May RSTA maritime consultation document. The NZFCF were comfortable with the release of this information.
Consultation No consultation on this document took place, however Waka Kotahi and Maritime New Zealand were consulted on the release of the Cabinet paper to which this relates.
Consultation Waka Kotahi and Maritime New Zealand were consulted of this document.
Consultation Waka Kotahi and Maritime New Zealand were consulted on the release of this document
Consultation Waka Kotahi were consulted on the release of this document.
Consultation closed in April .
Consultation closes at pm on Tuesday October .
Consultation feedback shaped our advice to Cabinet to replace the Acts with a single new statute.
Consultation has now closed.
Consultation on amending the road user charges system
Consultation on draft Rule Wednesday May Wednesday June weeks Submissions analysis Wednesday June Monday July weeks Briefing to Minister on outcome of consultation (including any substantive changes to the Rule) Wednesday July
Consultation on driver licence changes open
Consultation on the previous draft GPS has now closed
Consultation on the reform of the design, construction and equipment rules for domestic commercial vessels On Monday July , Cabinet agreed to Maritime NZ initiating public consultation on proposals to reform the design, construction and equipment rules for domestic commercial vessels. Consultation will occur in three tranches over a month period. The first tranche of proposals opened for consultation on Wednesday August and will run until October . To support consultation, Maritime NZ has directly contacted about regulated parties and will be including information in a range of stakeholder publications. Throughout the consultation Maritime NZ will run online information sessions for stakeholders .
Consultation open for the New Zealand Airline Authorisation Agreement Guidelines
Consultation open on airline codeshare and alliance agreement guidelines February
Consultation opens on draft second Emissions Reduction Plan
Consultation will close at pm on April .
Consultation with stakeholders about the safety and regulation of drones
Consultation: Draft Government Policy Statement on Land Transport
Consultation: Qantas Airways American Airlines Reauthorisation
Consultations The NZ Police, Waka Kotahi, the Ministry for Women, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry for Pacific Peoples, Te Puni Kkiri, the Ministry of Justice and Parliamentary Counsel Office were consulted on the release of this paper . None of these agencies raised any concerns.
Contact Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency for more information about driver licences.
Contact Waka Kotahi for more information about the VDAM Rules.
Contact Waka Kotahi with any queries about the consultation.
Contact the Civil Aviation Authoritys New Southern Sky team for more information.
Contact us for tolling policy queries. Email:
Contact us if you are interested in finding out about future forums and how you can participate.
Contact: (Dr) Mere Kepa Takahiwai Maori Committee. Est.. Chair Email: Ph.
Contacts Name Telephone First contact Alex Voutratzis, Principal Adviser, Placemaking and Urban Development
Contacts Name Telephone First contact Brent Johnston , Acting Deputy Chief Executive System Performance and Governance Yes
Contacts Name Telephone First contact Bryan Field, Manager, Programme Monitoring Investment Management Andrew Hicks, Principal Advisor, Programme Monitoring Investment Management
Contacts Name Telephone First contact David Wood, D eputy Chief Executive, Investment Monitoring Tim Herbert, Acting Manager, Crown Entity Monitoring Marcus Schutenko, Senior Advisor, Crown Entity Monitoring
Contacts Name Telephone First contact Emily Irwin, Auckland Principal Adviser Karen Lyons, Director Auckland
Contacts Name Telephone First contact Harriet Shelton, Manager, Supply Chain Seona Ku , Policy Delivery Lead, Supply Chain
Contacts Name Telephone First contact Helen White , Manager, Mobility and Safety Jacob McElwee, Principal Adviser, Mobility and Safety
Contacts Name Telephone First contact Helen White, Manager, Mobility and Safety Holly Jameson, Graduate Adviser, Mobility and Safety
Contacts Name Telephone First contact Helen White, Manager, Mobility and Safety Hugh Mazey, Senior Adviser, Mobility and Safety
Contacts Name Telephone First contact Hilary Penman, Manager Ministerial Services Robert McShane, Principal Adviser Ministerial Services Robyn Smith, Deputy Chief Executive, Corporate Services s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of UPDATES TO OUTPUT PLAN
Contacts Name Telephone First contact Hilary Penman, Manager, Ministerial Services Megan Shields, Team Leader, Official Correspondence
Contacts Name Telephone First contact Holly Walker , Manager, Environment and Emissions Strategy Lucy Patterson, Advisor, Environment and Emissions Strategy
Contacts Name Telephone First contact Holly Walker, Manager, Environment and Emissions Strategy Tracy Yandle, Senior Advisor, Environment and Emissions Strategy
Contacts Name Telephone First contact Matt Skinner, Manager, Environment and Emissions Policy Design Sigurd Magnusson, Senior Policy Advisor, , Environment and Emissions Policy Design
Contacts Name Telephone First contact Siany OBrien, Solicitor Brendan Booth , Chief Legal Adviser
Contacts Name Telephone First contact Tim Herbert, Manager, Investment Ella Steele, Advisor, Investment
Contents Executive Summary . . . . Introduction . . . . . Methods . . . . . To what extent has GPS influenced changes in NLTF investments, implementation and early stage outcomes . . . . What key factors affect the efficiency and effectiveness of converting inputs to outputs and outcomes . . . . . Conclusions . . . . Introduction . . . . . Purpose and objectives . . . . . Backgroun d to GPS . . . Methods . . . . . Establishing evaluation criteria . . . . Investment analysis objectives and scope . . . . Investment analysis data sources . . . . Investment data analysis methodology . . . . Qualitative research objectives and approach . . To what extent has GPS influenced changes in NLTF investments, implementation and early stage outcomes . . . Key themes . . . . . Context: Actual expenditure by GPS period . . . . NLTP activities approvals: Overview of approved funding by GPS period . . Trends in transport investment decision making . . . Detailed breakdown of new funding decisions . . . Analysis of national BCRs . . . Alignment of investments with GPS p riorities . . . . Changing the transport conversation . . . . Importance of budget allocation and increase in activity classes . .. . Impact of GPS . . . . . Case study: Auckland RLTP . . . What are the key factors that affect the efficiency and effectiveness of converting inputs to outputs and hence to outcomes . . . Key themes . . . . CONTENTS
Contents We want to know what you think . . State highways and railway lines are substantially damaged . Recovery and rebuild works are needed at pace and scale . Temporary law changes will enable recovery and rebuild works to get underway more quickly . . . Three Orders inCouncil are proposed . . . OiC : Modifying the LTMA to streamline planning and funding approval processes . . . . . OiCs and : Supporting works by Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail . Key checks and balances have been maintained . . Upholding Mori rights and interests is an important consideration . . . . Meeting the purpose of the Recovery Act . . How to provide feedback and next steps . .
Contents . Introduction . . About ontime performance . . Coverage . . Reports . . Definitions . . Caveats and limitations of the data . . Industry ontime performance, domestic routes, March . . Airlines performance, domestic routes, March . . Industry ontime performance, transTasman routes, March . . Airlines performance, transTasman routes, March . . Individual domestic routes, March . . Individual transTasman routes, March .
Contents A snapshot of your portfolio . Shaping New Zealands transport system . Introduction . The transport portfolio . Your role in the system . The different parts of the transport system . Measuring progress and using evidence . Key transport responsibilities . Investment and revenue . Economic and educational tools . Regulation . Crown monitoring, assurance, and oversight . Influencing the international environment . Delivering your priorities . Transports role within the wider system .
Contents A snapshot of your portfolio . Shaping our transport system . Introduction . The Transport Portfolio . Your role in the system . The different parts of the transport system . Measuring progress and using evidence . Key transport responsibilities . Investment and revenue . Economic and educational tools . Regulation . Crown monitoring, assurance, and oversight . Influencing the international environment . Delivering your priorities . Transports role within the wider system .
Contents A snapshot of your portfolio . Shaping our transport system . Introduction . The transport portfolio . Your role in the system . The different parts of the transport system . Measuring progress and using evidence . Key transport responsibilities . Investment and revenue . Economic and educational tools . Regulation . Crown monitoring, assurance, and oversight . Influencing the international environment . Delivering your priorities . Transports role within the wider system .
Contents A snapshot of your portfolio . Shaping our transport system . The Transport Portfolio . The different parts of the transport system . The Transport Outcomes Framework . Measuring progress and using evidence . The five transport levers . Investment and revenue . Economic and educational tools . Regulation . Crown monitoring, assurance, and oversight . Influencing the international environment . Delivering your priorities . Transports role within the wider system . Wider collaboration within the Transport System .
Contents A snapshot of your portfolio . Shaping our transport system . The Transport Portfolio . The different parts of the transport system . The Transport Outcomes Framework . Measuring progress and using evidence . The five transport levers . Investment and revenue . Economic and educational tools . Regulation . Crown monitoring, assurance, and oversight . Influencing the international environment . Delivering your priorities . Transports role within the wider system . Wider collaboration within the Transport System .
Contents Background and purpose . Part One: OIA requests . Context and principles . Notification of requests . Transfer Consultation . Notification of the decision . Sending a copy of a sent response for information . Record keeping . Assistance . Part Two: Proactive release of information . Background . Preparing documents for release . Process Timing Disputes
Contents Disclaimer . Copyright . Citation . For more information . Research, Economics and Evaluation . The Transport Evidence Base . Acknowledgements . Glossary . List of tables . Introduction . . Background . Methodology . . AIO and Matched Comparison Group Inclusion Criteria . . Defining Reoffending . . Propensity Score Matching . . Expected Percentages and Risk Adjusted Percentages . . Full Dataset . Results . . Drink Driving Reoffending Results . . Disqualified Driving Reoffending Results . . Reoffending for Other (non drinkdisqualified driving) Offences Results . Data Limitations . Discussion . Recommendations and Next Steps . References . Appendix .
Contents Executive Summary . . . Abstract . . . . . About the study . . . . What we found . . . . What we recommend . . . . Next steps . . . . . Introduction . . . . . Study Phases . . . . . Orientation and Design Phase . . . . Data gathering and assess ment Phase . . . .. Populating the evaluation framework . . . . In depth insights Phase . . . The overall impact of the GPS . . . Changing priorities . . . . Observing change . . . . .. Overall insights and implications from interviews . . . Analysis and interpretation Phase . . . .. Findings synthesis . . . . .. Workshop . . . . .. TIO analyses . . . . .. Triangulation of results . . . . . Recommendations for GPS and reporting Phase . . Are we fo cusing on the right thing . . . Can we deliver it in practice . . . . Is it a good use of funds . . . . Can we achieve the outcomes . . . . Do we have the right people . . . . . Conclusions and next steps . . .
Contents Executive Summary . Recommendations . About Us . Introduction . Section .: Indicators for how progress will be measured . Recommendations . Conclusion . . Bibliography . . .
Contents Hei arataki Quick Guide . He kupu rahi i ng kaipnui Writing for our readers . Te momo tuhituhi o Te Manat Waka Te Manat Waka writing style . Ng aratohu Guidelines . Ng ataata Visual design . Ng aratohu waitohu Branding guidelines . Ng tono waitohu Design requests . Ng Ng waitohu me ng ttauira Logos and templates . Te aratohu tuhituhi Writing Style Guide . Ng whi noho Addresses . Te pkeke me te Ira Tangata Age and gender . Ng pakini Apostrophes . Ng taiepa pewa Brackets . Ng tohu matarau Bullet points . Ng p matua Capital letters . Ng piko Commas . Ng tohutoro ahurea Cultural references . Ng phono Dashes . Ng r me ng w Dates and time . Ng ingoa o mtou hoa Kwanatanga me rtou ingoa rpoto Our Government transport partners names and abbreviations . Ng kupu mahue Ellipses . Ng tohutoro References . Ng ira kati Full stops . Ng tohuwehe Hyphens . Ng kupu kaupapa, tkau, rpoto Jargon, initials and acronyms . Ng kupu rpoto o te ture Legal term abbreviations . Ng mhua Measurements . Ng nama Numbers . Ng taitara kawa Official titles . Ng ingoa o ng rp me ng kamupene Organisation and company names . Ng ingoa whi Place names . Ng t ohu whika Page number references . Ng nama waea Phone numbers . Ng tohu krero Quotation marks . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Contents List of tables . . . . List of figures . . . . Glossary of terms . . . . Abbreviations . . . . . Summary of main findings . . . .. Main findings for drivers (Class ) . . . Overall patterns and trends in crash rates . . Estimated safety impacts of the to changes to the Class GDLS Comparison of crash rates for restricted and fully licensed drivers . Effectiveness of the night time driving restriction . . Advanced driving certificates . . . Progression through the licence stages . . .. Main findings for motorcyclists (Class ) . . Overall patterns and trends in crash rates . . Estimated safety impacts of the to changes to the Class GDLS Effectiveness of the night time riding restriction . . CBTA . . . . . Introduction . . . . .. Scope of the analysis . . . Driver licensing and road safety: Topics in scope . . Driver licensing and road safety: Topics out of scope . .. GDLS changes in scope . . . GDLS changes and other changes out of scope . . .. Literature summary . . . .. Structure of this report . . . . Data sources, methodology, and limitations . . . .. Data sources . . . . Licensing data . . . Crash data . . . . .. Empirical methods used . . . Analysis of aggregated crash rates . . Analysis of outcomes for individual licence holders . . .. Limitations of the data . . . Limitations due to construction of the licensing dataset . Limitations for Class due to the small number of licensed riders .
Contents Page . Title . Commencement . Interpretation . Authorised aviation security service providers must use their aviation security o icers to search for substances at international screening points
Contents Page The Output Plan The Ministrys Business as Usual (BAU) programmes Key programmes to develop capability and improve the quality of the Ministrys policy advice How we contribute to major cross government initiatives What we expect to deliver to meet the Minister of Transports priorities
Contents Programme : Decarbonising Transport p. Programme : Revenue and Investment p. Project D: National Freight and Supply Chain Strategy p. Project A: GPS p. Project E: Freight Decarbonisation Programme p. Project B: Budget p. Project S: Congestion Charging p. Project C: Future of the Revenue System p.
Context The Government wants a transport system that boosts productivity and economic growth and enables New Zealanders to get to where they want to go, safely and quickly .
Contr ibuting to the T ransport Evidence B ase
Contraction apostrophes shows letters are missing The apostrophe replaces the missing letters when two words are written as one word, eg, Im, youve, hell, shed, hasnt.
Contracts were awarded under Phase of the scheme in April, restoring capacity to the market. Since it was established, the IAFC scheme has enabled over , flights in and out of New Zealand carrying , tonnes of cargo.
Contributing to the Transport Evidence Base
Contributions to ExternalLed CrossAgency Projects and Initiatives . Provincial Growth Fund (PGF) monitoring and evaluation MBIE has responsibility for administering this fund and lead the monitoring and evaluation work. As part of the Evaluation Advisory Group, we are responsible for providing input on the monitoring and evaluation approach, and contributing knowledge, information, data and technical advice. Ongoing Provided input and technical advice as required . Urban Growth Agenda (UGA) Ministry of Housing and Urban Development plays a lead role in the overall monitoring and reporting for the UGA. We are responsible for providing input to the development of and reporting against the performance framework. Ongoing Provided input and technical advice as required Provide input and technical advice as required Provide input and technical advice as required Provide input and technical advice as required Support the implementation of the Evaluation Strategy . Improve access Use appropriate channels to disseminate evaluation findings to ensure that they are discoverable and accessible Ongoing Proactively disseminated findings to stakeholders Improve the accessibility of evaluation reports and resources from the Ministrys website Continue to build on work from previous year Continue to build on work from previous year . Improve governance Ensure sharing, integration and governance of key data and information products Ongoing Proactively promoted the use of the Ministrys value for money framework Develop the Transport Sector Monitoring Framework (TSMF) and related guiding document to support the sectors monitoring and reporting activities Continue to build on work from previous year to embed the value for money framework and the TSMF Continue to build on work from previous year to embed the value for money framework and the TSMF . Invest in the right projects Ensure we invest in the right activities and projects Ongoing Developed criteria for prioritising GPS evaluations Develop an evaluation approach to support GPS s ongoing monitoring and evaluation work programme Continue to build on work from previous year Continue to build on work from previous year
Contributions to the NLTF through Fuel Excise Duty and Road User Charges do not automatically increase to keep up with cost pressures. This means as costs increase or emergency events occur, we have to either find ways to do more with less or increase Fuel Excise Duty and Road User Charges.
Controlling Authorities (RCAs) considered it more appropriate to have
Conversely, nearly all computer fonts (except Courier) have proportional spacing, whic h means that the width of the characters and the spacing surrounding them are in proportion to each other. Proportional spacing results in a more even, balanced appearance. Because of this, a single space is enough to create the necessary visual separation between sentences.
Cooperative and close While people value facetoface contact, high energy costs have forced them to adapt. New Zealanders have persevered through challenges by simplifying their lifestyles. They value strong communities, resourcefulness and simplicity.
Coordinated a process to choose a preferred delivery partner for CCM
CoordinationNZSAR SecretariatNSS RCCNZ NZ PoliceNZSAR Council: MoT (Chair), CAA, DOC, FENZ, Independent, MNZ, NZDF, NZ Police THE SYSTEMS IN FOCUS AND WHY THEY MATTER Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue The recreational safety system . In many respects, the recreational safety system has its own twopart origin: through the work of national organisations providing recreational safety services to the New Zealand public who head outdoors to connect and recreate. This includes: the Mountain Safety Council Water Safety NZ Maritime NZ DOC nationally based NGOs working across both of the systems: Coastguard NZ Land Search and Rescue Surf Life Saving through the introduction of the NZSAR Councils search and rescue prevention mandate in circa , and subsequent work carried out on its behalf by the NZSAR Secretariat. . In addition, a range of government organisations, local government, and NGOs provide recreational safety services, supporting safer outcomes for people recreating outdoors. A number of these organisations, for example, Drowning Prevention Auckland have been involved in the development of national strategies. . Across the recreational safety system there are five Forums providing governance and leadership functions, illustrated in Diagram below. . Organisations deliver services directly, and in partnership with each other, and with other entities working in the system.Diagram : Collective governance and leadership arrangements across recreational safety Recreational Craft Leaders Forum Wai Ora (Water Safety) Leaders Forum Land Safety Forum Safer Walking Forum NZSAR Consultative Committee NZSAR CouncilWater Safety New ZealandMaritime New ZealandNZSAR Council New Zealand Land Search and RescueNZSAR Council Department of Conservation THE SYSTEMS IN FOCUS AND WHY THEY MATTER Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue . Collective governance and leadership arrangements for landbased recreation is also provided through the Mountain Safety Council. . Appendix provides further information about the collective governance and leadership arrangements within the recreational safety system. Benefits of the systems . The safety services delivered across both of the systems and the organisations involve: supporting the waiora (health and soundness) and mauriora (flourishing wellness) of New Zealanders and visitors to the NZSRR providing the knowledge, skills, training and education to New Zealanders and visitors to Aotearoa to support safer recreation supporting New Zealand business in general, and the prosperity of the recreational tourism sector reducing the cost to New Zealand of preventable injuries and deaths, and of associated rescues and recoveries reducing the catastrophic impact on whnau and friends through the safe return of loved ones ensuring New Zealand effectively contributes to the global search and rescue system, meets international search and rescue obligations, and provides search and rescue across the NZSRR for anyone, anywhere, anytime providing critical support to adjacent systems for example, the emergency management system and the health system.. The ancillary benefits provided by these systems also deserve to be mentioned. We reflect that percent of the workforce delivering frontline safety and search and rescue services are highly skilled volunteers, supported by the following nationally based NGOs: Amateur Radio Emergency Communications Coastguard NZ Land Search and Rescue Surf Life Saving. . The NGOs and many of their volunteers dedicate their time to support: other emergency service organisations (for example, St John and Fire and Emergency) wider civil defence response efforts and provide New Zealand with a rich source of future community and business leaders. . Cyclone Gabrielle has emphasised the criticality of the search and rescue system and organisations involved through: the NGO volunteers, providing lifeline services to local government and those in need, including search and rescue tasked through the Coordinating Authorities, and the Coordinating Authorities working together, playing to their strengths to coordinate effective search and rescue responses through government organisations, the NGOs, and commercial organisations.
CoordinationNZSAR SecretariatNSS RCCNZ NZ PoliceNZSAR Council: MoT (Chair), CAA, DOC, FENZ, Independent, MNZ, NZDF, NZ PoliceNZSAR Council The Councils role is to provide national strategic governance and leadership to New Zealands search and rescue system. In keeping with the Councils highlevel strategic function, its membership is drawn from the chief executives (or delegated to a senior executive) of Te Manat Waka, the Police, the New Zealand Defence Force, DOC, Maritime NZ (including RCCNZ), CAA, Fire and Emergency, and an Independent Member representing the voice of the NGOs. NZSAR Secretariat The Secretariat provides the NZSAR Council with information, support services, and advice. It also provides system leadership and implements measures to effect strong strategic coordination of New Zealands search and rescue system. NZSAR Consultative Committee The Consultative Committee provides a national forum for all New Zealand search and rescue stakeholders, including the NGOs. It provides a link between the Council and the providers of search and rescue services. . https:nzsar.govt.nzassetsDownloadableFilesCOaCBCMinestablishingNZSARCouncilv.pdf . . The search and rescue strategic plan for can be found here: https:nzsar.govt.nzassetsDownloadableFilesNZSARStrategic Plan.pdf .. The NZSAR Councils functions include, but are not limited to: providing strong strategic coordination for all search and rescue in New Zealand strategic policy advice to government responsibility for developing and maintaining New Zealands search and rescue plan establishing a New Zealand search and rescue vision, mission, and goals. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue APPENDIX Appendix : Size of the systems and the government contribution Context . Every year, millions of people across Aotearoa head outdoors to connect, recreate and operate across the wai and the whenua. A range of services target those moments that matter when people head out to recreate and gather kai this includes information, guidance, education, and visitor safety services in situ providing people with the knowledge and skills to stay safe, avoid distressing situations, or survive them should they occur. The latter includes frontline safety services on the ground, to help people when they get into trouble, as well as search and rescue services to return them back to their whnau and friends. Search and rescue is available to anyone and any entity (charitable, commercial or otherwise), anytime and anywhere they need it across the New Zealand Search and Rescue Region.. While it is not possible to prevent and mitigate all accidents, and the need for search and rescue in response, organisations in the systems are committed to do more to support better recreational safety and search and rescue outcomes. We observe a range of work underway across the systems by the organisations involved to better understand, decide on, and do more of what really works, to support people to make the right decisions and return home safely. Death, accident and incident rates Land related recreational death and injury rates . Within the land sector, death rates have remained relatively low over the past five years. For example, people lost their lives involved in tramping, mountaineering, hunting, and trail running activities. The total number of injuries over the same period across these activities was , as illustrated in Graph below. . Over this period, six tramping related deaths involved river crossings (including possible drowning). . Including safety information online about where to head and what to bring; services in situ, including signage, equipment, and other visitor safety services, lifeguard services at beaches (which will vary at each location); and rhui over a particular area where a death has occurred to restore the mauri (lifeforce) of the people and place and support people to learn from the event. . Statistics sourced through the Mountain Safety Council. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Safer Walking incidents . The total number of wander related incidents recorded as search and rescue operations are included in Graph below. (This number is expected to be higher reflecting unreported incidents). Water safety death and hospitalisation . In the Wai Ora (Water Safety) Sector Strategy, reducing death and hospitalisation rates is a critical area of focus with targets included in the Strategy. Water Safety New Zealand (Water Safety NZ) notes that our drowning rate is almost double that of Australia and almost four times that of most Western European countries, although we recognise that there may be different factors which influence this including geography; hospitalisations are also higher. . Graph below shows the fiveyear rolling average of drowning related death and hospitalisation rates against the Strategy targets. . Over the past five years () there have been lives lost at a cost of . billion. . Water Safety NZ statistics show that a large proportion of these drownings involve people engaged in personal recreational activities (e.g., swimming, fishing, surfing, diving, boating, and other recreational craft activity) on, in, and around the water.Graph : Land safety related injuries by activity Graph : Wander related search and rescue operations YTD Hunting Mountaineering Trail Running Tramping, , ,,, , , , , ,,,,, ,APPENDIX . Statistics sourced through Water Safety NZ. . Adapted from the Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transports statistical value of a life model factoring in loss of life or life quality, loss of economic productivity, medical and other material resource costs. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Graph : Drowning and hospitalisation rates Per , preventable drowning deaths using a year rolling averageAPPENDIX Target Year Rolling average Per , people Target: . .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .. . .... .. .. .. ... ... .. . Target: .Per , preventable drowning hospitalisations using a year rolling average. . Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Graph : Coastguard New Zealand frontline safety service support services ( )APPENDIX Safety services supporting wellbeing outcomes . While the value of the breadth of recreational safety services provided across the systems is not currently available, millions of New Zealanders, and visitors to New Zealand benefit from them. We observe an ongoing maturity across the organisations working in the systems to better understand the impact of these services the intention is there, but the capacity and funding to develop a valuation methodology is mixed. . Organisations delivering frontline safety services for example Surf Life Saving New Zealand (Surf Life Saving) and Coastguard New Zealand (Coastguard NZ) measure the number of their prevention activities delivered on the ground to people in need. These are reflected in Graphs and below. . Over these four years Surf Life Saving also undertook , preventative actions. Graph : Surf Life Saving New Zealand frontline safety service support services ( ) Assists First Aid Rescues Searches , , , ,, , , , , Coastguard OperationsSurf Life Saving Operations Coastguard NZ operations include fuel, mechanical, electrical, fire and medical events. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue APPENDIX Search and Rescue . The search and rescue system delivers hundreds of search and rescue operations annually across air, water and land as illustrated in Graph below. This includes search and rescue in neighbouring jurisdictions that New Zealand has supported.. Approximately percent of the search and rescue operations over the time period, as illustrated in Graph below, involved people lost, missing andor in distress, who were: involved in day walking, tramping, recreational boating, and fishing off a vessel, or despondents and wanderers. Graph : Most common types of search and rescue operations Day Walker Despondentpsychotic Tramper Wanderer Fishing (including from a vessel) Recreational Boating Graph : Search and rescue operations Air Land Water SAROP conducted NZ support only . A despondent broadly describes a person who is depressed or suicidal who goes missing. A wanderer generally describes a person with cognitive impairment who goes missing while out walking. . Data sourced from the NZSAR Secretariat. . Ibid . Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue APPENDIX Government funding . Funding comes from multiple sources to support service delivery across the recreational safety and the search and rescue systems including government, local government, New Zealand Lotteries Commission, charities, sponsorship and user pays. The mix reflects the range of organisations operating, the beneficiaries of the services provided, and the multiple funding sources nongovernment organisations (NGOs) combine to support service delivery. . Recreational safety activities of government agencies are grounded in legislative requirements and are part of the agencys primary functions. However, critical search and rescue activities though legislatively mandated, are only one of several services delivered by the agencies. Personnel costs are not captured at levels that allow for direct allocation to activities covered by these systems; assumptions therefore have been made to arrive at estimates of personnel and operating costs. . The key government agencies covered in these figures are the Department of Conservation (DOC), Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire and Emergency), Maritime New Zealand (Maritime NZ) for recreational boating, and search and rescue coordination through the Rescue Coordination Centre New Zealand (RCCNZ), the New Zealand Defence Force, NZ Police (the Police), and Te Manat Waka covering the New Zealand Search and Rescue (NZSAR) Secretariat. . These organisations have spent more than million in on services across the systems made up of: expenditure with a focus on visitor safety matters of million invested by DOC and million by Maritime NZ in recreational boating Coordinating Authorities for search and rescue activity the Police . million and RCCNZ . million support totalling million for search and rescue operations provided by the New Zealand Defence Force and Fire and Emergency governance and leadership undertaken by the NZSAR Secretariat totalling . million including training for the search and rescue sector of . million. . Expenditure by these organisations for the four years from to is summarised in Graph below. . The fluctuations in expenditure are driven by variable operational activity. DOCs million baseline expenditure is consistent over the period. . In addition, Maritime NZ is funded by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade to deliver the Pacific Maritime Safety Programme in partnership with the Cook Islands, Kiribati, Niue, Samoa, Tokelau, Tonga and Tuvalu. The initiatives within the Programme include information and education initiatives to improve maritime safety and the maintenance of search and rescue plans in these countries. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue APPENDIX Graph : Key government agency expenditure Funding of nongovernment agencies . Nationally based NGOs delivering services across the recreational safety and the search and rescue systems covered in this discussion are Amateur Radio Emergency Communications, Coastguard NZ, New Zealand Land Search and Rescue (Land Search and Rescue), Surf Life Saving, Water Safety NZ, and the Mountain Safety Council. Drowning Prevention Auckland is also included as it provides some inkind support services outside the Auckland rohe. The NGOs are businesses with a combined average income of million per annum over the last four years. . There are many recreationfocused organisations that operate in the recreational safety system which have not been captured in this picture. We acknowledge they have a strong interest in supporting their members to have the knowledge and skills to recreate and gather kai safely in the outdoors, however they are not delivering recreational safety services as their core business.. NGO income exceeded million over the last four years of which only million () came from central government. Fundraising in its broadest sense accounted for million () of the income (grants and sponsorship () and donations and fundraising ()). This is depicted in Graph below. . There was a shift in the mix of funding between and when million of government funding over three years for the main NGOs was injected into the systems. Frontline water safety rescue and prevention services received million from Budget with FED funding of million to maintain baseline frontline safety services. . Graph breaks down NGO expenditure across the same period. millions Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue APPENDIX Graph : NGO expenditure Graph : NGO income sources Central GovernmentRegionalLocal GovernmentGrants SponsorshipDonations Fundraising Membership User PaysOther Personal Contractors Administration and other Asset related Club Support operational Club Support capital Volunteer Support Training (internal) Public Safety Initiatives Services
Copy to: Keith Manch, Chief Executive, Civil Aviation Authority Audrey Sonerson, Chief Executive, Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of May OC Hon Michael Wood Action required by: Minister of Transport Monday, May DRAFT R ESPONSE S TO STANDARD ESTIMATES QUESTIONS Purpose To provide you with draft responses to the standard questions you received from the Finance and Expenditure Committee. Key points Draft responses are attached for the questions you received from the Finance and Expenditure Committee. Many of the responses are similar to last year. The Ministry considers the responses to be low risk. Please review the responses and provide feedback to the Ministry if changes are needed. The Ministry will work with your office to make any amendments. Once you are satisfied with the responses, please sign the attached letter and send, along with the responses, to the Finance and Expenditure Committee. Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of DRAFT R ESPONSE S TO STANDARD ESTIMATES QUESTIONS This briefing provides you with draft responses to select committee questions and explains how we will support you through the hearing process . Each year, select committees ask ministers a series of questions on the Estimates of Appropriation for the votes they are responsible for and invite them to attend a hearing. You received the standard questions for Vote Transport on April . . Your res ponse is due to the Finance and Expenditure Committee after Budget is delivered on Thursday May , but before pm on Friday May . . The draft responses to the questions are attached to this briefing (attachment ). We have also prepared a draft cover letter (attachment ) for you to send in electronic form to the Chair of the Finance and Expenditure Select Committee at SEQparliament.govt.nz
Copy to: Kirstie Hewlett, Chief Executive, Maritime New Zealand Audrey Sonerson, Chief Executive, Te Manat Waka
Copy to: Martin Sawyers, Chief Executive, Transport Accident Investigation Commission Audrey Sonerson, Chief Executive, Ministry of Transport
Copyright Under the terms of the New Zealand Creative Commons Attribution . BY licence, this document, and the information contained wit hin it, can be copied, distributed, adapted and otherwise used provided that the Ministry of Transport is attributed as the source of the material the material is not misrepresented or distorted through selective use of the material images contained in the material are not copied. The terms of the Ministrys Copyright and disclaimer apply, available at: www.transport.govt.nz
Copyright Under the terms of the New Zealand Creative Commons Attribution . BY licence, this document, and the information contained within it, can be cop ied, distributed, adapted and otherwise used provided that a the Ministry of Transport is attributed as the source of the material b the material is not misrepresented or distorted through selective use of the material c images contained in the material are n ot copied. The terms of the Ministrys Copyright and disclaimer apply, available at: www.transport.govt.nz
Correct Incorrect pm .pm , :pm, P.M. noon .pm
Correct Incorrect Children aged and younger The under s People aged from to Teenagers People aged and older The over s Older people, people in later life The over s
Correct Incorrect Dont place a full stop after ellipses Dont place a full stop after ellipses.
Correct Incorrect For more information, contact For more info, contact
Correct Incorrect If indicating more information after a sentence, place the ellipses at the end of the sentence with no gap Then have a space before starting the next sentence. If indicating more information after a sentence, place the ellipses at the end of the sentence with no gap Then have a space before starting the next sentence. If indicating more information before a sentence, place the ellipses at the beginning of the sentence with no gap (have a space before the start of the ellipses). If indicating more information before a sentence, place the ellipses at the beginning of the sentence with no gap (have a space before the start of the ellipses).
Correct Incorrect My favourite sandwich is chicken and avocado. My favourite sandwich is chicken, and avocado. Add a comma before the final and for clarity If the list is too complex to make clear with commas, you should rewrite the list or turn it into a bulleted list.
Correct Incorrect My favourite sandwiches are chicken and avocado, bacon, lettuce and tomato, and pastrami, cheese and pickle on rye. My favourite sandwiches are chicken and avocado, bacon, lettuce and tomato and pastrami, cheese and pickle on rye. My favourite sandwiches are:
Correct Incorrect Online, broadband Online, broad band
Correct Incorrect PO Box P.O. Box Private Bag Private Bag DX Box SR DX Box SR Exception: Use R D not RD for Rural Delivery to avoid confusion with the abbreviation for road (Rd)
Correct Incorrect The Government will release its budget today The government will release its budget today
Correct Incorrect The Ministers portfolio The Ministers portfolio The Ministers portfolio RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Correct Incorrect The Ministry believes its purpose is Enabling New Zealanders to flourish I believe our purpose is Enabling New Zealanders to flourish
Correct Incorrect They He or she Artificial Manmade Staff the phones Man the phones Workforce Workmen Spouse Husband Wife
Correct Incorrect Transport Minister Minister of Transport
Correct Incorrect p p p pp
Correct Incorrect www.transport.govt.nz http:www.transport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz
Correct Incorrect Getting an online passport was super easy , says John Smith. Students love becoming data detectives. It helps them engage with statistics, says John Smith.
Corridor Studies (m) In addition to the projects above the GPS also makes m available for Waka Kotahi to look at upgrades to other key corridors for future investments, including:
Cost driver Vehicle weight . tonnes (lightest RUC vehicles) () . tonnes (average light RUC vehicle) () . tonnes (heaviest RUC vehicles) () Heavy vehicle (HV) . . . Passenger car equivalents (PCE) . . . Gross vehicle weight (GVW) . . . Equivalent standard axles (ESA) . . . Powered vehicle (PV) . . . GST . . . Total including GST . . . The CAM has several limitations There are several known limitations of the CAM . Key ones include: . Vehicle weights are based on estimated averages. The CAM assumes, for the purposes of the ESA calculation, that vehicles operate unladen for half their distance travelled , and maximum vehicle laden weights are averaged within each vehicle class, based on operator stated weight from the system prior to . . It accounts for average road use . This means it does not take into consideration the actual road usage by an individual vehicle, the type of pavement it travels on, and geographic boundaries. If the system identified vehicle weight and location, there may be a case to use more precise rate setting for example, a RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of second power rule for ESA might be more appropriate on some State highways, and a seventh power rule on lower quality local roads. The CAM is considered a tool to guide setting RUC rates rather than a rigid rate setting device The CAM is generally a tool to help set rates, but given potentially significant swings up and down in rates, Ministers typically use discretion and limits to the extent to which they adopt the theoretical CAM rates. Exact CAM rates have not been applied in recent decades , and was the last time the CAM was used to influence rate setting, where increases to specific heavy vehicle rates ranged from percent, subject to the extent the CAM estimated the vehicle to be under or over paying. In and , RUC increases were applied as blanket percentage increases to all rates, regardless of the CAMs guidance. The policy process for the RUC increases (as documented in the Regulatory Impact Statement) demonstrates how this has worked in practice. . The government was seeking an overall . percent increase in total RUC revenue. . The Ministry used the CAM to develop five options for setting RUC rates to achieve the increase, including adopting the CAM rates in full (with some big decreases and some big increases), increasing all rates between percent subject to CAM relativitie s, and a blanket . percent increase across all rates. . The decision was taken to apply a . percent increase across all rates, to ensure an equivalent impact on all users, despite it moving RUC rates further from what was specified by the CAM. As a result of successive decisions consistent with the above, current RUC rates differ significantly from the CAM suggested rates. Based on the CAM rates modelled in (based on forecast expenditure for and vehicle kilometres travelled for ) the CAM calculat es heavy vehicles would overpay by about million per year, and that light RUC rates should be approximately percent higher . Some individual heavy vehicle types have RUC rates that over recover by more than percent . This is a consideration for Ministers, and not an inherent issue with the CAM itself. We will continue to support decision making in line with the CAM, and therefore greater cost recovery, while recognising that alternatives may be in the public interest. We consider the current CAM to be largely fit for purpose Based on the scope and how thorough previous reviews were, and that they did not result in substantive changes, we do not consider there to be a strong rationale for a widescale review. Previously reviews have been initiated as a result of sector discomfort with the system, and we are not aware of concerns being raised by the heavy vehicle industry about how rate increases have been attributed recently.
Cost to households and businesses
Cost variances The Review Team analysed variance by work category, both () Operations and Maintenance and () asset renewal, it showed a total increasing trend of investment over the period to with annual budget variances across the regions averaging over targets for the first two years of the period and an improvement to variance in the final year. Waka Kotahi noted that it implemented tighter nationally controlled budget management for regional spending in the final year of the funding period.
Costs are indicative and may change once the detailed design and development of each project component is complete. However, the funding split is not expected to change.
Costs to industry (s hips over gross tons) (GT) The biggest impact of Annex VI is on ships at or over GT, which depending on their age and type will have to comply with all or most Annex VI provisions. About half of the or so ships of this size flagged to New Zealand are already compliant as they are in class, or are surveyed by class societies such as Lloyds Register. Most operators of large ships are aware of the requirements and are already taking action to comply. Depending on the age and type of ship there are a range of actions required to comply, such as: o Switching to diesel fuel (most large ships will already have done this) . Out of Scope R E L E A S E D U N D E R T H E OF F I C I A L I N F OR MA T I ON A C T
Council Member Whitireia Weltec Chair Ministerial Expert Advisory Group on Local Government Infrastructure Board Member Transit New Zealand
Council. These amend the Land Transport (Register of Land Transport
Counsel Office (PCO) for an Order in Council for the Penlink tolling scheme
Counsel Office has advised that the changes are also required to be made by
Court would also be desirable if such data is available. A scoping study to ascertain the availability of records from the Courts should be undertaken.
Courts data is extracted from Tier datasets as at June . . Defining Reoffending For the purposes of this analysis, if a person faced multiple charges in court, all of the charges for that person, on that particular charge outcome , are counted as a single case. The charge outcome is the on which charges are finalised in court. In this study it is the on which the drink driving charge resulted in a conviction. The offence associated with each case is the most serious offence for that case. The offence associated with each individual is the most serious offence for that individual in the year. Future proved outcomes (i.e. reoffences) are based on the time when the next offence occurred, and are only counted if they were finalised up to: year and days after the charge outcome for the first prosecution for month reoffending rates,
Cover briefing Final Land Transport Rule Setting of Speed Limits
Coverage of the Directors Commendation award, presented at AIANZ annual conference. Recipient was Brad MacLachlan, the safety manager for a helicopter operator in the South Island. Otago Daily Times Wednesday August Warning of mass airport security layoffs if funding not hashed out
Crash rates by licence stage and driver age Figure shows how cr ash rates at each licence stage vary with the drivers age, for the combined period from to (horizontal lines show the overall crash rate for each licence stage across all drivers aged to and associated confidence intervals). At the res tricted and full licence stages, crash rates generally decline with age, and drivers aged and under have relatively high crash rates compared to drivers aged to . Drivers aged and years old with restricted licences are particularly high risk, with crash rates more than . times higher than the overall rate for restricted drivers aged to . For fully licensed drivers, crash rates for drivers aged under years old in our analysis are statistically significantly higher than the overall rat e (around . to . times higher, pvalues . in all cases). At the learner stage, yearolds appear to be relatively safe with a crash rate of . crashes per , licensed drivers per year ( pvalue .).
Crash rates by licence stage and driver region of residenc e Across regions of residence (see section .. of the Technical Report ), crash rates for drivers aged to years old for the combined period from to at all licence stages are relatively low in Auckland and Wellington compared to many other regions, suggesting that drivers in predominantly urban areas have fewer crashes andor that crashes in rural areas are more likely to be serious or fatal due to higher speeds and other factors (e.g. remoteness and subsequent delay in medical treatment). C rash rates tend to be higher in southern and western regions of the South Island, that is, the West Coast, Southland, and Otago. Relatively high crash rates are also observed in Northland and Manawatu Wanganui.
Crash rates by licence stage and rider age Figure breaks down the per rider crash rates between and by the riders age. At the learner stage, crash rates are relatively high for riders under years old (horizontal lines show the overall crash rate for each licence stage across all riders aged to ; crash rates have been suppressed for age and licence stage combinations with fewer than licensed riders per year on average). At the restricted and full licence stages stage, relatively wide confidence intervals due to the smaller numbers of riders make it difficult to find reliable patterns, but crash rates appear to be relatively high for riders in their early s.
Crash rates by licence stage and rider region of residence As described in section .. of the Technical Report , across regions of residence there is considerable variatio n in crash rates, but, in our analysis, most are not statistically significantly different from the overall rate for each licence stage across all regions. The only statistically significant case in our analysis is the crash rate for fully licensed riders (aged to years old) in the Bay of Plenty. Such riders were involved in . times as many crashes as fully licensed riders of the same age across all regions between and (pvalue .). Trends in crash rates The small number of riders also makes it difficult to identify trends in crash rates. The statistically significant trends we found are (see sections .., .., and .. of the Technical Report ):
Crash rates by licence stage and two way com binations of driver age, gender, and region We also analysed crash rates by licence stage and two way combinations of driver age by gender and region of residence, for the combined period from to . These crash rates are subject to greater uncertai nty due to the smaller number of drivers in each category. Table shows the ratios of crash rates for licence stage, driver gender, and age combinations versus the overall crash rate for each licence stage and age combination, for the combined period from to . In Table , statistically significant (at the level, twotailed tests) high and low crash rate ratios are highlighted. This shows similar patterns to those described above, that is, in most cases relatively high crash rates for drivers ag ed under years old and relatively low crash rates for drivers aged to years old. In general, female drivers aged to have somewhat lower crash rates and male drivers have somewhat higher crash rates.
Create a new singleclass system where drivers are responsible for safety and compliance (reduced regulatory burden).
Create a new singleclass system where operators have responsibility for safety and compliance (reduced regulatory burden).
Creative Commons Attribution . International
Creative people together transforming our world Creative people together transforming our world Value for Money Review Summary
Criminal limits and blood infringement thresholds agreed by Cabinet
Criteria list for including investment activities in subsequent analysis Transport investment activities are included in the remainder of this analysis if all the following conditions are satisfied: The activity is not a baseline activity (as defined above) The activi ty was not entirely funded by external funding sources (Crown or debt funding), ie, some funding for one or more phases came from the NLTF Funding for the first phase of the activity was first approved in the GPS , , or periods At least one of the activity class or work category are recorded in the TIO data for at least one phase of the activity The activity is not funding for SuperGold trip payments
Crown Entities Act (as of December ) http:www.legislation.govt.nzac tpubliclatestwhole. htmlsearchqsactbill regulationdeemedregcrow nentitiesactreselhp DLM Manner in which functions must be performed The board of a statutory entity must ensure tha t the statutory entity performs its functions (a) efficiently and effectively; and (b) in a manner consistent with the spirit of service to the public; and (c) in collaboration with other public entities (within the meaning of that term in the Public Audit Act ) where practicable.
Crown Infrastructure Partners is reviewing shovelready projects, to help stimulate the economy and support our COVID recovery.
Crown entity monitoring and oversight is a key mechanism to deliver your priorities The Ministry and the transport Crown entities work collaboratively to progress your priorities and the delivery of transport outcomes, and other priority actions to maintain and renew the system. Your role as responsible Minister of these entities is to oversee and manage the Crowns interests in, and relationship with, a statutory entity. While you are ultimately accountable for the ir performance, the boards you appoint to these are primarily responsible. The Crown carries out service delivery and regulation activities in the transport system through Crown transport entities and Crown companies: Waka Kotahi, MNZ, CAA, ALRL and CRL. The Ministry is your monitoring agent for the transport Crown entities. The roles and responsibilities of the Minister, Crown entity and monitoring department are outlined in the It Takes Three Framework. . Figure Roles and responsibilities of the Minister, Crown entity and monitoring department
Crown entity monitoring and oversight is a key mechanism to deliver your priorities The majority of service delivery and regulation in the transport sector is carried out through the transport Crown entities and companies: Waka Kotahi , MNZ , the CAA, Auckland Light Rail (ALR) Limited and CRLL. TAIC delivers independent, no blame safety investigations of accidents and incidents. Crown entities and companies operate with varying levels of statutory independence from their Responsible Minister because of the nature of their roles and functions . Your role as the responsible Minister of these entities is to oversee and manage the Crowns interests in, and relationship with those entities. While you are ultimately accountable, the boards you appoint to these are primarily responsible for their performance. The Ministry is your monitoring agent for the transport Crown entities. The roles and responsibilities of the Minister , Crown entity and monitoring department are summarised in Figure and outlined further within the It Takes Three Framework. Figure Roles and responsibiliti es of the Minister, Cro wn entity and monitoring department You have a role in overseeing the delivery and performance of key transport agencies Your oversight role, supported by the Ministry , helps to ensure the transport Crown entities are effectively performing their functions, many of which deliver critical services to New Zealanders. Below are a range of accountability mechanisms that the Ministry will advise you on to assist you in overseeing the transport Crown entities and meeting your statutory responsibilities. Note that MetService, KiwiRail and Airways fall within the State Owned Enterprises portfolio instead of your Transport portfolio. Monitoring over all three is undertaken by the Treasury. https:www.publicservice.govt.nzguidanceit takes three operating expectations framework forstatutory crown entities RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Parliamem including select committees) Sets direction and funding Appoints the board Monitors performance KEY TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES
Crown funding has been used to meet the shortfall between the minimum investment needed to support the rail network and the profits that KiwiRail can generate from its rail operations. However, the appropriate balance has not been found between:
Crown funds can supplement transport revenue and be used to purchase specific projects or programmes Not all investment in the transport sector has been able to be met from the NLTF. Increasingly, the Crown has made direct investments in specific transport activities through the annual budget process led by the Minister of Finance. Unlike investment from the NLTF where the Waka Kotahi Board has an independent role in overseeing and monitoring expenditure, ministers are accountable for Crown funded activities. Ministers have decision making rights when changes are needed to the budget, scope or timeframes for these projects. While bodies like Waka Kotahi or KiwiRail may deliver Crown funded activities and investment programmes, the Crown usually establishes additional oversight arrangements for any projects or programmes with Crown funding, such as the NZ Upgrade programme. These arrangements give Ministers assurance the intended investment outcomes are being achieved. Economic and educational tools You can use travel demand management tools to drive behaviour change within the transport system Pricing and other economic tools can be used to encourage more efficient use of the network and can be used by local government to influence travel choices and decisions. Such tools include differential charging of public transport (e.g., reduced off peak fares), subsidised public transport fares, tolling, congestion charging, and parking fees. Tolling , for examples, can contribute to the cost of building and maintaining new roads. You are the key decision maker and responsible for recommending to the Governor General that a road is tolled under the LTMA. The Ministry will provide advice on tolling proposals, liaise w ith the Road Controlling Authorities , and advise on the legislative process to establish a tolling order. Information and education are used in road safety and can nudge people to make more informed travel decisions by communicating information about their travel choices. Examples of ways we can influence travel choices and decisions include travel planning apps , social media marketing, information provision, and mass media campaigns. The greatest benefits come from combining economic and educational instruments with compl ementary measures, such as infrastructure provision and legislative changes. In doing so, these measures help to achieve the outcomes you want to see in the transport system . Regulation You have a range of tools in the transport regulatory system to deliver durable transport outcomes Regulation is indispensable to the proper functioning of economies and societies . Regulation underpins markets, creates an enabling environment for firms and individuals, protect s the rights and safety of citizens, and ensures the delivery of public goods and services. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT KEY TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES
Crown monitoring, assurance, and oversight
Cultural Director, Te Tauoma Development Shundi Group NZ
Culture is as important as capability what can be done to stress culture of value for moneybenefit realisation etc.
Current Membership Name Gender Identity Region Ethnicities (and Iwi if applicable) of original appointment Expiry of present term Vacancy (Chair) Vacancy Vacancy Vacancy Vacancy Vacancy Vacancy Auckland Light Rail Board: Finance, Housing, Transport PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT IN CONFIDENCE CO () v IN CONFIDENCE Candidate CV Form
Current regulatory settings
Currently we use Tableau to provide visualisations.
Currently, larger New Zealand vessels need to travel offshore to Australia or Southeast Asia to get serviced, which presents resilience issues, produces additional carbon emissions, and increases the cost of doing coastal business in New Zealand.
Customs Brokers and Freight Forwarders Federation (CBAFF)
D. Update Procurement of professional services . The primary focus of the ALR Group since the last board meeting has been the procurement of professional services consultants to undertake the work necessary to support investment decisions.
DESIRING to establish integrated, efficient , and competitive international air transportation between the ASEAN Member States and New Zealand to enhance trade, the welfare of consumers, and economic growth; DESIRING to contribute to the progress of regional and international civil aviation by gradual liberalisation of air services between the ASEAN Member States and New Zealand ; PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA DESIRING to ensure the highest degree of safety and security in international air transport and reaffirming their grave concern about acts or threats against the security of aircraft, which jeopardise the safety of persons or property, adversely affect the operation of air transport, and undermine public confidence in the safety of civil aviation; REAFFIRMING the principles and provisions of the Convention on International Civil Aviation signed at Chicago on December (hereinafter referred to as the Chicago Convention) ; and DESIRING to conclude an agreement for the purpose of operating air transport between the ASEAN Member States and New Zealand ; HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS:
DEVMIN This document is released in full.
DOCUMENT DEFINITION SCOPE OF THE FRAMEWORK HOW IS VFM MEASURED HOW IS IT IMPLEMENTED HOW IS IT REPORTED TfNSW: Principles and Guidelines for Economic Appraisal of Transport Investment and Initiatives No specific definition provided. Economic appraisal framework to be applied to proposed projects, programs, and initiatives within the NSW transport portfolio. Cost be nefit analysis is the preferred method for appraising costs and benefits, and to comparatively determine options that offer superior value for money. However, cost effectiveness analysis can be used where benefits are similar and financial analysis should also be used if a project is expected to generate revenue or private funding is involved. Decision criteria in project evaluations are: NPV BCR IRR NPVI First Year Rate of Return. The document provides accepted approaches and tools to assess bro ader and wider socio economic and environmental impacts of projects, including: MCA Goal Achievement Matrix Strategic Merit Test Objective Impact Assessment Appraisal Summary Technique Wider Economic Impacts Wider Economic Benefit The investment decision framework shows the causal connections between strategic objectives driven by the goal of providing the greatest social and economic benefit for the whole of NSW and the greatest value for the customers, investments, enablers and transp ort investment outcomes. Preferred options are identified by ranking of options (according to metrics), results of sensitivity analysis, intangibles and unquantified costs and benefits as well as other factors including board social, environmental and poli cy objectives. Post completion evaluation is undertaken to examine, cost, benefits design and significant events that can enhance future project development. A selection of projects are reviewed post completion based on; significance; recurrence; exemplary projects; and those most likely to provide learning. Benefits realisation is a key element in delivering VFM and is undertaken in phases: Understand: articulating the vision, objectives and identified high level benefits and measures. Baseline benefi ts and values are defined in the business case and economic appraisal. Plan: Identify key stakeholders and establish baseline values, KPIs and their measurement methods. Manage: Establish a benefit tracking regime and reporting against benefit measures . Evaluate and report: Evaluating and reporting actual benefits achieved vs. targets. Benefit outcomes are documented, and learnings are identified to inform further strategic decisions and priorities. Value for money is reported through the business cas e and compared to actual performance in the post evaluation report.
DOCUMENT NAME DOCUMENT TYPE OWNER NZTA Arataki version for engagement Plan NZTA NZTA intervention hierarchy Website NZTA Information sheet: Programme Business Case: Intervention Hierarchy Information Sheet NZTA Investment Decision Making Framework Review: Investigation Stage Report Report NZTA National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) Plan NZTA NZTA NLTP Investment Assessment Framework (IAF) Website NZTA Unknown NLTP Investment Assessment Framework Framework NZTA Planning and Investment Knowledge Base Website NZTA Unknown NZTA information about the NLTP value for money priority Website NZTA Unknown NLTP prioritisation round November Website NZTA Unknown Transit New Zealand National State Highway Strategy June Strategy NZTA NZTA Monitoring and reporting on investments Website NZTA Unknown Procurement Manual For activities funded through the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) Framework NZTA NZ Transport Agency Roads of National Significance Economic Assessments Review July Report NZTA NZ Transport Agency assessment of behaviour change advertising programme NZTA Unknown Activity Management Planning: A Guide to integrating the NZTAs Business Case Approach Self assessment Draft Guidance document Road Efficiency Group Upper North Island Freight Story Summary of Critical issues And Upper North Island Freight Story Shared Evidence Base April Report Upper North Island Strategic Alliance DOCUMENT NAME DOCUMENT TYPE OWNER Auckland RLTP Plan Auckland Transport ATAP supporting information Report Auckland Council and Government Unknown ATAP evaluation report Report Auckland Council and Government Unknown update to the Waikato RLTP Plan Waikato Regional Council Waikato Regional Land Transport Annual Monitoring Update Report Waikato Regional Council Wellington RLTP Plan Greater Wellington Regional Council Wellington RLTP mid term update front section Plan Greater Wellington Regional Council Wellington RLTP annual monitoring reports Report Greater Wellington Regional Council Christchurch RLTP Plan Canterbury Regional Council Initial Otago Southland Regional Land Transport Plans Plan Otago Regional Council Otago Southland Regional Land Transport Plans (June ) Plan Otago Regional Council Bay of Plenty RLTP Plan Bay of Plenty Regional Council Bay of Plenty Annual Report Card Report Bay of Plenty Regional Council Various APPENDIX B BENCHMARK FRAMEWORKS (UK) DOCUMENT SCOPE FO THE FRAMEWORK DEFINITION HOW IS VFM MEASURED HOW IS IT IMPLEMENTED HOW IS IT REPORTED HM Treasury Managing Public Money All projects and services that require public resources in the UK. The process under which organisations procurement, projects, and processes are systematically evaluated and assessed to provide confidence about suitability, effectiveness, prudence, quality, value and avoidance of error and other waste, judged for the Exchequer as a whole. No specific advice regarding a unit of measurement. VFM is a core element in managing public money and is used to appraise options, track performance agai nst targets in achieving VFM and review experience to improve future value for money. The document describes the various governmental roles in delivering, assessing, managing reviewing assuring value for money throughout. Departments are required to imple ment control and reporting systems to provide assurance to the Board, Accounting Officers and Ministers. HM Treasury : The Green Book: Central Government Guidance on Appraisal and Evaluation Guidance on appraisal of policies, programmes, and projects to in form decisions that concern public spending, taxation, changes to regulation and changes to the use of existing public assets and resources. Optimising social value (social, economic, and environmental), in terms of the potential costs, benefits and risks. VFM is considered within business cases from different dimensions, including: Strategic What is the case for change, what outcomes are expected and do they fit with government policy and priority economic What is the comparative net value to society commercial Can a realistic commercial deal be struck Financial What is the impact on public resources Management Are there realistic and robust delivery plans Net Present Social Value (NPSV)and BCRs commonly used to summarise social cost benefit analysis within the economic dimension (adjusted to account for inflation and Social Time Preference Rate) based on whole life costs and benefits. Summary measures and their construction depend on context of the decision. Approach is applica ble throughout the development of the business case with greater maturity of information and quantification expected as the list of options reduces. It is advised that expected benefits should be set out in a benefits register and used to support assuranc e of benefits realisation as a project or programme is implemented. Monitoring of costs and benefits during and after implementation is considered necessary, although there are no specific requirements on how this is done. VFM is demonstrated throughout th e business case, and more specific guidance relates to reporting economic appraisal using NPSV and BCR.
DOCUMENT SCOPE OF THE FRAMEWORK DEFINITION HOW IS VFM MEASURED HOW IS IT IMPLEMENTED HOW IS IT REPORTED UK D fT Value for Money Framework: Moving Britain Ahead Transport related business case decision making where public resources are being sought. Using public resources (public capital and resources, stewardship of assets and raising revenue) in a way that creates and maximises pu blic value (total wellbeing of the UK public economic, social, and environmental). VFM is driven by economic purchasing, efficient use of inputs to derive outputs and effectiveness of output to achieve outcomes. Focus on quantitatively measuring economy through Benefit Cost Ratio and Net Present Public Value (NPPV). It is advised that assessments should first use data with most confidence in (i.e. monetised data) to categorise overall VFM score. Scores are then adjusted with evolving monetised impacts, then finally considered against whether indicative or non monetised impacts will influence the overall category of VFM. Where quantification of impacts and expenditure is difficult, VFM can be informed by comparing against similar case studies, national statistics, academic literature, previous monetised appraisals, and evaluation evidence. Implemented during option development as a means to select options that provide the best value for money and achieve wider objectives. VFM is reported through catego risation used to express VFM conclusions depending on the output BCR (from very high to very low). For non monetised assessments categories range from economically positive to negative. VFM statements are then including in any submission requesting an inv estment decision. NAO: Successful Commissioning Toolkit Public sector commissioners working with third party organisations (not forprofits) The optimum combination of wholelife cost and quality (or fitness for purpose) to meet the users requirement. VFM is assessed against criteria: Economy: Minimising the cost of resources used or required (spending less in delivering inputs). Effici ency: the relationship between the output from goods or services and the resources to produce them (spending well, inputs vs outputs) Effectiveness: the relationship between the intended and actual results of public spending (spending wisely, the relatio nship between outputs and outcomes). Equity is also sometimes applied: the extent to which services are available to all people that they are intended to (spending fairly). Poor VFM means more needs to be spent to achieve the expected outcomes or the imp act of the programme or service is less than expected. VFM is an underlying principle in which to deliver services throughout the commissioning process. No specific guidance on how to report VFM.
Daily provisional road deaths
Dame Companion New Zealand Order of Merit
Dana Kirkpatrick Dana.Kirkpatrickparliament.govt.nz ; Simeon Brown simeon.brownparliament.govt.nz Subject: RE: TranganuiaKiwa: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Importance: High
Dana Kirkpatrick Dana.Kirkpatrickparliament.govt.nz; Simeon Brown simeon.brownparliament.govt.nz s ()(a) s ()(a) s () (a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TE MANIATO WAKA IP M HIVOFTl Hapah . na ng, lririi:nti v Aole;roa Iri eke En bling c Zea.landers liourish Subject: RE: TranganuiaKiwa: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Importance: High
Dana Kirkpatrick; Simeon Brown Subject: RE: TranganuiaKiwa: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Attachments:Maps Gisborne.pdf Kia ora
Dangerous goods incident on July A single round of live ammunition was found on an aircraft on July. The ammunition, a shotgun cartridge, was found in the overhead baggage area in Auckland after the flight had arrived. The ammunition was identified by a member of Air New Zealand cabin crew in the process of checking the overhead lockers and was promptly reported to the Aviation Security Service (AvSec). After the report was received, the aircraft was searched by an AvSec explosive detection dog, and nothing further was detected. The ammunition was seized and handed over to NZ Police. As per standard AvSec procedure this incident has been investigated but it has not been determined whether the round was introduced into the aircraft by a passenger, how long it had been on the aircraft, nor whether it passed through an AvSec screening point. Carriage of ammunition is not permitted in carry on luggage. AvSec uses x ray imaging to screen carry on baggage and our people are highly specialised at assessing the images and identifying restricted items. If an item is missed, and if we can identify when and by whom, that officer is given additional training. Every year thousands of prohibited items are seized by AvSec. Ammunition is not uncommon due to hunters travelling by air. If it is believed that ammunition is being deliberately concealed the matter is referred to NZ Police for investigation. In the months to August there have been instances where live rounds of ammunition have been removed from bags at screening points and none of these were determined to be deliberately concealed. Sixth Pacific Meteorological Council meeting and rd Pacific Ministerial Meeting The Authoritys Chief Meteorological Officer will be attending the th Pacific Meteorological Council meeting, followed by the rd Pacific Ministerial Meeting (PMMM ) on Meteorology. Both meetings will be hosted by the Government of Fiji in Nadi from August. Also expected to attend PMMM are the Prime Ministers of Fiji and Tonga, along with the ministers responsible for meteorology in the Pacific region. Delegates from MFAT, MetService and NIWA, will be attending from New Zealand.
Daniel White Manager Policy, Land Information New Zealand Hon Damien OConnor Minister for Land Information . . . Ministers office to complete : Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events Comments Contacts Name Telephone First contact Carmen Mak, Policy Director, System Regulatory Design, Ministry of Transport Brendan Booth, Chief Legal Advisor, Ministry of Transport Craig Harris, Commissioner of Crown Lands (LINZ)
Daran Ponter Chair Greater Wellington CC: Rt Ho n Chris H ipkins, Prime Minister Hon Grant Robertson, Minister of Finance Hon Gi nny Andersen , MP Hutt South RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of June OC Hon David Parker Action required by: Minister of Transport Wednesday, July LAND TRANSPORT (ROAD SAFETY) AMENDMENT BILL IMPLEMENTATION APPROVED VEHICLE SURVEILLANCE EQUIPMENT NOTICES Purpose To seek your agreement to the use of three new camera systems as Approved Vehicle Surveillance Equipment (AVSE) , on the condition that the Land Transport (Road Safety) Amendment Bill (Road Safety Bill) receives Royal Assent and enables the use of average speed cameras. Key p oints The Road to Zero strategy provide s for the expansion of the camera network though the introduction of new safety camera technology, including average speed cameras, and the transfer of the network from N ew Zealand Police (NZ Police) to Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency (Waka Kotahi) . The Road Safety Bill will amend the Land Transport Act (LTA) to allow for the use of average speed cameras. International evidence demonstrates that average speed cameras, which calculate average speed based on two points, rather than speed at a single point, are one of the most effective and cost efficient means of reducing excessive speed s. However, for the new camera systems (including the new average speed came ras) to be used , approval must be gazetted by the Minister of Transport or the Minister of Police in the form of an AVSE notice . There are currently seven of these notices for other types of camera systems in effect. This process does not require Cabinet agreement. Waka Kotahi , with the support of NZ Police , has tested three types of camera systems . Waka Kotahi has determined that they are sufficiently reliable and accurate for your approval. The testing reports are attached at Annex One . In addition, Waka Kotahi seeks amendments to two existing notices to take over the camera network from NZ Police and to enable the use of auxiliary cameras with an existing system . NZ Police have notified us that a further four notices are obsolete Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of and can be revoked. The o ther remaining notice will continue in effect without amendment. If you agree , the Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) will draft notices for your signature . We will provide these notices to you in a subsequent briefing , once the Road Safety Bill has receiv ed Royal Assent . Once signed, the notices will come into force days later. Recommendations We recommend you: approve the following as new vehicle surveillance equipment , on the condition that the Land Transport (Road Safety) Amendment Bill receives Royal Assent and enables the use of average speed cameras : Redflex Halo red light and speed camera system Redflex Halo speed and average speed camera system Redflex Halo Distributed speed and av erage speed camera system Yes No agree to amend the Land Transport (Approved Vehicle Surveillance Equipment) Notice and the Land Transport (Approved Vehicle Surveillance Equipment) Notice to enable the handover of the network to Waka Kotahi Yes No agree to amend the Land Transport (Approved Vehicle Surveillance Equipment) Notice to allow the addition of an auxiliary camera to allow capture of the rear of vehicles, such as trailers and motorcycles Yes No agree to revoke the f ollowing obsolete notices: Transport (Approved Vehicle Surveillance Equipment) Notice Land Transport (Approved Vehicle Surveillance Equipment) Notice (No ) Land Transport (Approved Vehicle Surveillance Equipment) Notice Land Transport (Appr oved Vehicle Surveillance Equipment) Notice Yes No instruct the Parliamentary Counsel Office to draft Approved Vehicle Surveillance Equipment notices to give effect to the above policy. Yes No
Darrin Apanui Rangitne T Mai R Trust Formerly the CEO of Te Matatini Kapa Haka Aotearoa, Darrin has held many senior executive roles. Helmut Modlik Te Rnanga o Toa Rangatira Inc Helmut is an experienced chief executive, director, businessman and consultant with specialist skills in business and economic development.
Dat e: Week ending September
Data analysis and availability
Item for discussion Lead
Friday September Query on Availability of Funding from the Pothole Fund Minister Jones has a query on the availability of funding from the Pothole Prevention activity class not being available till March .
Dated: September ,
Dated: Dated: .. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of OIA BRIEFING March OC H on Michael Wood Action required by: Minister of Transport Wednesday, March OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT REQUEST FROM REGARDING MEETING S AND CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN THE MINISTERS OFFICE AND THE VEHICLE INDUSTRY ON THE CLEAN CAR STANDARD AND CLEAN CAR DISCOUNT Purpose Seek your agreement to the proposed response to an Official Information Act request. Name of Requester Request Im working on a story about climate policy and would like to request under OIA : .Notes of any meetings during and between the ministertheir office with car companies or car industry groups on the Clean Car Standard and Clean Car Discount .Any correspondence such as emails or letters during or between the ministertheir office and car companies or car industry groups on the Clean Car Standard and CleanCar Discount These companiesgroups might be but are not limited to Toyota, Mazda,, Mitsubishi, Motor Industry Association, Motor Trade Association, Ford, Holden, BMW, Global Motors NZ Ltd, Suzuki, Subaru
David Clarke (Commissioner) David has over years experience in governance roles in the commercial, public and charitable sectors, including in Chair, finance and audit and risk roles. He has years of legal professional experience includ ing litigation, and corporate and commercial advic e for private and listed company boards and public entities.
David Crawford Motor Vehicle Industry of New Zealand (MIA)
David Rankin Chief Executive Eke Panuku
David Taylor James ODonnell Manager, National Infrastructure Unit Acting Manager, Programme Assurance and Commercial Te Tai Ohanga, The Treasury Te Manat Waka, Ministry of Transport
David Wood, Deputy Chief Executive, Investment and Monitoring Group
David has a strong background in strategy, policy and commercial operations.
David is an experienced public sector leader and has been at the Ministry of Transport since June .
Day Monday August Time pm .pm Venue Online Microsoft Teams Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) attendees Audrey Sonerson, Chief Executive Brent Johnston, Chief of Staff Paul OConnell, Deputy Chief Executive, Strategy Ruth Fairhall, Deputy Chief Executive, Policy Phoebe Moir, Solicitor Nick Patterson, Manager, Environment Hugh Mazey, Senior Adviser, Safety Jo Gould, Principal Adviser, Safety Anita Waring, Adviser, Safety Jess Ranger, Manager, Urban Development Public Transport Part Ministry of Transport Lead Paper reference . CE Only Time Audrey Sonerson . Weekly Report Audrey Sonerson As at August . Environment Clean Car Standard Ruth Fairhall OC
Day Monday September Time Venue Parliament EW. Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) attendees Audrey Sonerson, Chief Executive Brent Johnston, Chief of Staff David Wood, Deputy Chief Executive, Investment Monitoring Paul OConnell, Deputy Chief Executive, Sector Strategy Ruth Fairhall, Deputy Chief Executive, Policy Tessa Ayson , Acting Manager, Regulatory Reform Jacob Ennis, Principal Adviser, Regulatory Reform Erin Wynne, Manager, ERP Development Danny Eyre, Principal Adviser, ERP Development Siobhan Routledge, Director, Aviation Marian Willberg, Manager, Maritime and Freight Callum Gill, Senior Adviser, Maritime and Freight Part Ministry of Transport only Lead Paper reference . CE Only time Audrey Sonerson Verbal . Weekly Report Audrey Sonerson As at September . Safety Paul OConnell OC
Day Monday September Time .pm .pm Venue Parliament EW. NZ Transport Agency attendees Leisa Coley, Acting Chief of Staff Brett Gliddon, Group General Manager, Transport Services Richard Forgan , Group General Manager, System Leadership Vanessa Browne, National Manager Programme and Standards (.) Andrew Clark, National Manager Maintenance Operations (.) David Shepherd, National Manager Multimodal Integration (.) Talia Cohen Wolf, Manager, Public Transport (.) Apologies Nicole Rosie, Chief Executive Richard May, Chief of Staff Sara Lindsay, Group General Manager, Commercial Corporate Lead Paper reference . Maintenance and Temporary traffic management Vanessa Browne and Andrew Clark MIN . Public Transport Talia Cohen Wolf MIN . NZTA Policy discussion Richard Forgan BRI . Waikare Gorge Brett Gliddon
Day Monday August Time Venue Parliament EW. NZ Transport Agency attendees Richard May, Chief of Staff Sara Lindsay, Group General Manager, Commercial Corporate Brett Gliddon, Group General Manager, Transport Services Chris Bunny, Group General Manager, System Leadership Karen Jones, Group General Manager, Engagement Partnerships Apologies Nicole Rosie, Chief Executive Lead Paper reference . Capital Works discussion Brett GliddonSara LindsayChris Bunny MIN . National Land Transport Programme Sara LindsayKaren Jones . Auckland Level Crossings Sara Lindsay BRI . Signage Sara Lindsay NZT correspondence
Day Monday August Time pm .pm Venue EW. Parliament Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) attendees Audrey Sonerson, Chief Executive Brent Johnston, Chief of Staff Paul OConnell, Deputy Chief Executive, Strategy Ruth Fairhall, Deputy Chief Executive, Policy Matthew Green, Chief Legal Adviser Siobhan Routledge, Director, Aviation Gary Tonkin, Manager, CAA Implementation Joanna Heard, Manager, Safety Jo Gould, Principal Adviser, Safety NZTA Attendees Chris Bunny, Group General Manager System Leadership Amy Moorhead , National Manager, Policy Brett Gliddon, Group General Manager Transport Services Part Ministry of Transport Lead Paper reference . Weekly Report Audrey Sonerson As at August . Paul OConnell Verbal update
Day Monday September Time .pm .pm Venue Parliament EW. NZ Transport Agency attendees Nicole Rosie, Chief Executive Richard May, Chief of Staff Brett Gliddon, Group General Manager, Transport Services Sara Lindsay, Group General Manager, Commercial Corporate Richard Forgan , Group General Manager, System Leadership Alan Kerr, Arc Advisory (item .) Gareth McKay, WSP (item .) Adam Nicholls, Regional System Design Advisor, Transport Services (item .) Lead Paper reference . Capital Works discussion including SH Wellington Brett GliddonSara LindsayRichard Forgan Brett Gliddon Alan Kerr Gareth McKay Adam Nicholls MIN . Dairy Flat designation Brett Gliddon . Westgate discussion Brett Gliddon
Day Monday September Time .pm pm Venue EW. Parliament Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) attendees Audrey Sonerson, Chief Executive Brent Johnston, Chief of Staff Ruth Fairhall, Deputy Chief Executive, Policy Paul OConnell, Deputy Chief Executive, Strategy David Wood, Deputy Chief Executive, Investment and Monitoring Siobhan Routledge, Director, Aviation Jacob Ennis, Acting Manager, Regulatory Stewardship Design Tim Herbert, Manager, Investment Mitch Macaulay, Principal Adviser, Investment Jenny Smith, Principal Adviser, Investment Matthew Skinner, Manager, Revenue Karen Lyons, Director, Auckland Part Ministry of Transport only Lead Paper reference . Weekly Report Audrey Sonerson At August . Auckland David Wood OC
Day Monday September Time .am .am Venue EW. Parliament Attendees Audrey Sonerson, Chief Executive Brent Johnston, Chief of Staff Paul OConnell, Deputy Chief Executive, Strategy Ruth Fairhall, Deputy Chief Executive, Policy Joanna Heard, Manager, Safety Erin Wynne, Manager, ERP Development Natasha Rave, Manager, Resilience Security Danny Eyre, Principal Advisor, Maritime Freight Part . CE Only Time Revenue update Audrey Sonerson Verbal . Weekly Report Audrey Sonerson As at Sept . Safety Oral Fluid Testing Paul OConnell Email . ERP CPM G Meeting Agenda Ruth Fairhall OC . Ruth Fairhall Verbal
Day Monday August Time pm .pm Venue EW. Parliament Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) attendees Audrey Sonerson, Chief Executive Brent Johnston, Chief of Staff Ruth Fairhall, Deputy Chief Executive, Policy Paul OConnell, Deputy Chief Executive, Strategy David Wood, Deputy Chief Executive, Investment and Monitoring Emma Wardle, Senior Adviser, Environment For item . only Tim Herbert, Manager, Investment For item . only Mitch Macaulay, Principal Adviser, Investment For item . only George Ross, Senior Adviser, Investment For item . only Morgan Watkins, Senior Adviser, Safety For item . only Part Ministry of Transport and other agencies Lead Paper reference . EV Charging Ruth Fairhall (MBIE EECA Officials in attendance)
Day Monday September Time .pm .pm Venue Parliament EW. NZ Transport Agency attendees Nicole Rosie, Chief Executive Richard May, Chief of Staff Brent Alderton, Group General Manager Regulatory Director of Land Transport Sarina Pratley, Chief Customer Services Officer Caz Jackson, Group General Manager People Safety Robyn Elston, National Manager System Design (Acting Group General Manager Transport Services) Apologies Brett Gliddon, Group General Manager Transport Services Lead Paper reference . Regulatory update Brent Alderton and Sarina Pratley BRI . People and Capability update Caz Jackson
Day Monday September Time pm .pm Venue EW. Parliament Attendees Audrey Sonerson, Chief Executive Brent Johnston, Chief of Staff David Wood, Deputy Chief Executive, Investment Monitoring Ruth Fairhall, Deputy Chief Executive, Policy Paul OConnell, Deputy Chief Executive, Sector Strategy Nick Paterson, Manager, Environment Jess Ranger, Manager Urban Development Public Transport Nick Potter, Principal Adviser, Urban Development Public Transport Part Ministry of Transport Lead Paper reference . CE Only Time Audrey Sonerson Verbal . Northern Corridor Legislation Business Case David Wood Verbal update . Weekly Report Audrey Sonerson As at Sept . Clean Car Standard Ruth Fairhall Weekly Report . Public Transport Letter of Expectations Ruth Fairhall OC Part . Paul OConnell , MOJ and Police officials NA
Day Monday September Time pm .pm Venue EW. Parliament Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) attendees Audrey Sonerson, Chief Executive Brent Johnston, Chief of Staff Paul OConnell, Deputy Chief Executive, Strategy David Wood, Deputy Chief Executive, Investment and Monitoring Bev Driscoll, Manager, Rail For item . Jacob McElwee, Principal Adviser, Rail For item . Zayaan Ansari, Adviser, Rail For item . Jo Heard, Manager, Safety For item . Jo Gould, Principal Adviser, Safety For item . Jess Maynard, Senior Adviser, Safety For item . Matthew Green, Chief Legal Advisor and M anager , Procurement For item . Siobhan Routledge, Director, Aviation For item . Tom Forster, Manager, Aviation For item . Part Ministry of Transport only Lead Paper reference . Weekly Report Audrey Sonerson At September . David Wood Verbal update
Day Tuesday September Time pm Venue Parliament EW.R
Day Tuesday August Time am .am Venue Parliament EW.R
Dear John Letter of Expectations for City Rail Link Limited I am writing on behalf of the Sponsors to set out our expectations of City Rail Link Limited (CRLL) for the financial year, to inform the entity s planning process and its Statement of Performance Expectations (SPE). We would like to take this opportunity to thank the CRLL Board and all staff members for their hard work in continuing to progress this vital project. During a number of key milestones were achieved by CRLL and the Link Alliance, including the final breakthrough of the Tunnel Boring Machine at the Te Wai Horotiu station, and winning the Decarbonisation Outcome Award in the Building Nations Impact Awards. Please pass on our thanks to the Link Alliance for continuing to deliver significant progress under challenging circumstances. In , Sponsors have some specific expectations for CRLL . These expectations are critical to supporting delivery of Sponsors priorities in the year ahead. Management of risks, costs, and schedule Core expectations of shareholders, as Sponsors of the City Rail Link (CRL) project, are expressed through the Project Delivery Agreement between Sponsors and CRLL. Our overriding expectation is that CRLL will continue to mitigate the risks to the CRL budget and timeframes where possible, to support Sponsors in realising the benefits arising from this significant piece of infrastructure within the Auckland network. As you know, the CRL project is at an inflexion point as it progresses into the fit out and rail systems integration phase. With this transition comes a new type of complexity for the management of the project, and the potential for a corresponding change in risk to schedule. Please ensure that Sponsors are kept up to with the delivery strategy for the next phase, including assurance that the risks during this phase of the project are being managed appropriately. We note the importance of preparing for dayone operational readiness and expect CRLL to continue to work collaboratively with Auckland Transport and KiwiRail so that the intended benefits for Aucklanders are realised at the earliest opportunity . OC Appendix Three s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Health and safety Sponsors have a particularly strong interest in the safety of people who work on the CRL project. The risk profile of the project will change as the nature of construction work changes and as more subcontractors are recruited . We expect that the Board will continue to drive a strong health and safety culture on the project, including working to further reduce the projects injury rate under the target set in your SPE. Strong community engagement and working collaboratively to mitigate impacts on communities It is important that CRLL continues to work constructively with local businesses, residents and stakeholders and seek to proactively ensure that disruption is minimised whenever possible. Sponsors appreciate the hard work that has gone into establishing and administering the Targeted Hardship Fund (THF) to assist small businesses experiencing major and sustained disruption and genuine hardship relating to C construction activity. We expect dialogue to continue with impacted businesses and that applications will continue to be processed in a timely manner and in line with the previously communicated Sponsors highlevel guidelines for the THF. We also expect that CRLL (and therefore the Link Alliance ) will continue to look for opportunities to minimise the impact of construction near worksites. We note how responsive CRLL and the Link Alliance were prior to Christmas in opening up pedestrian walkways, and would like to see more proactive steps like this where possible. Good employer Section of the Crown Entities Act outlines a statutory requirement for all Crown entities to be good employers. Consistent with these statutory provisions, I expect all transport Crown entities to develop effective relationships with workers and unions that contribute to a fair, safe and productive work environment. Next steps A General Election will be held on October . The Public Service Commission is expected to publish guidelines on this years Election for public service entities covering the preelection period. I trust the Board will promptly inform me on a no surprises basis about matters of significance to the transport portfolio, particularly where these matters may become controversial or subject to public debate. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I look forward to receiving your draft SPE by April , and to working with the Board over the coming year to progress this vital Auckland infrastructure project. Yours sincerely Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport on behalf of shareholding Ministers Copy to: Hon Grant Robertson, Minister of Finance Hon Kiri Allan, Associate Minister of Transport Wayne Brown, Mayor of Auckland Desley Simpson, Deputy Mayor of Auckland Dr Sean Sweeney , Chief Executive, City Rail Link Limited Audrey Sonerson , Chief Executive, Ministry of Transport RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of May OC Hon Michael Wood Action required by: Minister of Transport Monday, May INITIAL IMPLEMENTATION ADVICE FOR THE COMMUNITY CONNECT EXTENSIONS Purpose To seek your direction on Community Connect implementation to guide delivery discussions with public transport authorities (PTAs). Key points Through Budget , the Government has agreed to extend the Community Connect scheme, to provide half price fares for year olds (under s), half price Total Mobility fares for Total Mobility card holders and free public transport fares for yearolds (under s). We need to work with PTAs to understand how the subsidies will be delivered across New Zea land. Given Budget Sensitivity, we have limited information on implementation matters but we will engage with PTAs following Budget announcements. To guide these implementation discussions, we seek your direction on the design of the Community Connect exte nsions (focusing on half price fares for under s and free fares for under s). We have identified two options for implementing half price fares for under s: oOption One A passenger pays half the price of any age based fare they are currently eligible for oOption Two A passenger pays half the price of a full adult far e If you want eligible passengers to experience a halving of their current fare, we recommend Option One. Waka Kotahi recommends Option Two , which may be simpler and faster for PT As to implement. However, Option Two would result in some eligible passengers seeing limited or no discount (i.e. child fares are typically of adult fares). Halfprice fares for under s cannot be applied to existing tertiary concessions because only a subset of tertiary students will be eligible and only one concession can be applied to a smartcard. Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of We will work through how to best manage the fiscal risk of PTAs changing fare products that could result in increased costs to the Crown. In the meant ime, we recommend that the Crown subsidy be tied to existing age based fare products (i.e. fares in place before the Budget announcement May ). We also seek confirmation that the subsidy can be applicable to cash fares at the PTAs discretion, to remove barriers in accessing the concession and enable regions that dont have smartcard ticketing to implement the scheme . We recommend that any permanent solution requires the use of a smartcard ticketing system. Utilising smartcards is es sential to measure patronage and will support the Crowns allocation of funding. Officials can work with PTAs to identify any interim implementation options including the feasibility of a system that does not use smartcards initially . We anticipate PTAs will seek clarity on what additional funding is available to implement this initiative. We seek your direction on whether funding is available for enhancing age verification processe s, increasing security measures and supporting induced peak demand. Subject to your preferences, we can provide further information on likely costs following engagement with PTAs. Following Budget announcements we will engage with PTAs to further establ ish implementation timeframes and corresponding feasibility options. We will provide you further advice on implementation matte s and funding mechanisms. Recommendations We recommend you: Confirm the intended scope for the Community Connect funding confirm whether half price fares for yearolds (under year olds) should result in : a) Option a passenger pay ing half the price of any age based fare they are currently eligible for (e.g. a child andor youth fares , and adult fares ) Yes No OR b) Option a passenger pay ing half the price of a full adult far e Yes No note irrespective of the decision taken in recommendation () the subsidy will not apply to existing Tertiary fares agree that the Crown funding be tied to existing fare products and fare levels as at May (i.e. in advance of the Budget announcemen ts) Yes No s ()(g)(i), s ()(k) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of INITIAL IMPLEMENTATION ADVICE FOR THE COMMUNITY CONNECT EXTENSIONS We are providing initial implementation advice for Community Connect Budget initiative in advance of Budget announcements Cabinet agreed to establish Community Connect (a half price subsidy on adult public transport fares) for Community Service C ard (CSC) holders through Budget . Community Connect is on track to start on July . Through Budget , the Government has agreed to extend the Community Connect scheme. The extension will make million available to deliver: . half price fare s for yearolds (under year olds) . half price Total Mobility fares for Total Mobility card holders . free public transport fares for yearolds (under s). We have provided advice on the challenges associated with free fares for children OC refers and provided an update following in confidence discussions with four public transport authorities (PTAs) on the feasibility of implementation Weekly Report WE May refers. This briefing provides initial implementation consideratio ns associated with extending the Community Connect scheme to support delivery discussions with PTAs following Budget announcements. PTAs are responsible for setting public transport fares and adopting fare concessions. Implementation of the extens ons is expected to be more complex than Community Connect for CSC holders and universal half price fares. Given the Budget Sensitivity of the extensions, we have limited information on implementation intricacies across regions. Following conversatio ns with PTAs we will provide more detailed implementation advice and may need to revisit some decisions based on feasibility information. Confirming the parameters for the Community Connect extension Application of subsidy on fare products We seek clarific ation on how you intend the half price subsidy to be applied for under s. There are two available options, set out in the table below : . Option One A passenger pays half the price of any age based fare they are currently eligible for ; and . Option Two A passenger pays half the price of a full adult fare . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of We are yet to test the feasibility of these options in detail with PTAs. Option one would enable eligible passengers to experience a halving of their current fare. B ut it is more challenging to implement given the set up of the ticketing systems. Option t wo is Waka Kotahis preferred option and may be preferred by PTAs due to the simplicity and ease of implementation. Fare concessions ( i.e. child, tertiary) are all based off the adult fare, meaning that when a PTA adjusts the adult fare it automatically ad justs all the concessions. We will explore the feasibility of your preferred option further with PTAs following Budget announcements , including how the option might apply to fare caps . To manage fiscal risk w e recommend Crown funding is tied to fare products and fares prior to Budget announcements We need to work through how to manage the fiscal risk of PTAs making changes to fare products that may result in increased costs to the Crown. In the meantime, we recommend that the Crown subsidy be tied to existing fare products ( i.e. those available in advance of the Budget announcement May ) PTAs should still be given the opportunity to review their fare settings at regular intervals, and subsequently the Crown funding provided would also be reviewed. We will come back to you with further advice on the funding mechanisms to mitigate fiscal risk. Halfprice fares for under s cannot be applied to existing tertiary concessions Only one concession can be registered to a smartcard. The subsid y cannot be applied to existing tertiary fares as it would be too technically challenging. A student would need to choose between the Community Connect concession (half price for under s or CSC holders) or any other PTA initiated concession, depending on their circumstance. The discounts should be implemented through smartcards for both free and half price fares For PTAs that have smartcards, we recommend the subsidies should be implemented through smartcard ticketing systems. Utilising smartcards is crit ical to measure patronage and to determin e how much Crown funding a PTA is entitled to. This will enable PTAs to understand capacity constraints and appropriately plan services. It will also allow the Crown to provide funding tied to foregone fare revenue and government agencies to monitor and evaluate success of the subsidy. We understand you may be open to a transitional approach for free fares if it expedites delivery of the subsidy for users. We understand that PTAs, including Auckland (which requires a smartcard to access some public transport services ), have a strong pref erence to use smartcards. Following Budget announcements, we will explore with PTAs whether an interim approach is feasible without smartcards. Should this eventuate, we will provide further advice on how Crown funding could be allocated (in absence of pat ronage data, and to ensure equitable funding between regions).
Dear Kiri By letter of .. March , you sought my agreement to your assuming the function of Kiwi Shareholder in Air New Zealand Limited. I agree to you assuming the function of Kiwi Shareholder in Air New Zealand Limited and to you advising the airlines Company Secretary accordingly.
Dear name Specific requirements relating to Ministerial expectations
Death on NZ roads since
Dec : QantasJapan Airlines Joint Business Agreement
Decarbonising Transport Action Plan
December December
Decision making Governance . It is assumed that the current governance structure for the partnership of Eke Panuku and Kinga Ora is concluded by providing this programme business case to CRL Sponsor officials.
Decision making scales National Regional Local Statement of Performance Expectations (SPEs) primarysecondary
Decision to join CORSIA confirmed
Decisions Confirmed Denied Comfort taking a tolling and RUC progress update to the Investment Ministers Group on September . Confirmed Auckland Confirmed Update on the Government Quarterly Plan Approved Appr oved s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Decisions on activities included in the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) are informed by the NZ Transport Agencys investment decisionmaking framework. This uses a number of tools and assessment approaches including the IAF and EEM: The IAF is used by NZTA to prioritise projects, based on how they align with the strategic direction we set. The EEM sets out the values and procedures used to value investments in costbenefit analysis. It is used across the transport sector as the industry standard.
Defence Policy and Strategy Statement (Ministry of Defence website)
Defining and developing the future of rail in New Zealand.
Definition of analysis groups Table gives details of how activities in the NLTP extracts were assigned to t he eight analysis groups used in the analysis (or excluded). Activities were assigned to analysis groups based on the combination of funding source, activity class, and work category. Table Analysis groups definitions Analysis group Funding source Activity class Work category ACTIVITIES EXCLUDED FROM ANALYSIS (blank) (blank) (blank) (blank) External funding Road improvements AC Canterbury earthquake fund External funding Emergency works AC Crown funding for Napier Gisborne SH External funding Road improvements Debt Funding Auckland Accelerated Programme Debt Funding Property purchase (State highways) Debt Funding Auckland Accelerated Programme Debt Funding Road improvements Debt Funding Canterbury earthquake fund Debt Funding Emergency works Debt Funding Housing Infrastructure Fund Debt Funding Advance property purchase Debt Funding Housing Infrastructure Fund Debt Funding New roads Debt Funding Housing Infrastructure Fund Debt Funding Property purchase (local roads) Debt Funding Housing Infrastructure Fund Debt Funding Road improvements External funding CAS Operational Support External funding Management of the funding allocation system External funding CAS Operational Support External funding Programme management APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
Deliver a set of Deliver the outcomes and Tmaki associated measures Makaurau endorsed by Cabinet Transport Plan and Auckland Council
Delivering a freight and logistics strategy for the upper North Island that includes whether to move the location of the Port of Auckland.
Delivering the investment
Delivering the key strategic priorities will be influenced by the supporting priorities: environment and value for money. Themes were included to influence how the results are delivered:
Delivery agencies may have to make some scope decisions with impacts on outcome realisation to manage within approved funding . KiwiRail may be required to make scope calls on the Wellington rail projects to manage the project with confidence within the approved funding envelope. We note that the existing delegation letters may not provide delivery agencies with authority to make these decisions . Advice on delegation letters later in this report. . . . While this approach may result in a reduction in outcomes, we consider that this puts the incentives correctly on the delivery agencies to maximise the projects outcomes
Delivery of aviation security services
Delivery on Results Area: The following results areas support the Governments priority for economic growth and value for money : Improved management of the transport asset base Higher returns from new transport investment More open and efficient markets Summary b d Statement of intent https:www.transport.govt.nzab outgovernancestatementsofint entstatementofintent The Statement of Int ent sets out what measures the Ministry of Transport will take to support the government and how it plans to go about it over the next three years ( ).
Deloitte Top Visionary Leader Award
Deputy Chief Executive Aviation Safety David Harrison appeared on TVNZ Breakfast to discuss pilot licensing and training requirements, and to explain that they are determined for safety reasons. This was in response to a piece that aired on July featuring Ant Sproull from Air Milford and Irene King of Ardmore Flying School, lamenting a commercial pilot shortage and claiming that our standards are too high and a barrier for the industry. David made it clear that our role as a regulator is to uphold safety standards, not to bend to commercial or economic pressures. TVNZ August FIFA players skip queues Enquiry received about why FIFA WWC players are permitted to jump security screening queues, in response to a specific case. Statements were provided. The article describes a negative reaction from other passengers and questions why this service is offered. Stuff PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
Despite the clear value that data matching presents in improving estimations on the impact of Alcohol Interlock Orders on reoffending, this type of analysis has limitations. The data from the MoJ had no unique identifier and could therefore not be cross referenced with the information that the interlock providers may hold. There is no set timeframe required within which to install an interlock. The data in this study refers to the Alcohol Interlock Orders rather than devices themselves; there is no information contained regarding whether or not the sentence resulted in the actual installation of the device. It has been reported that within the period of September March , offenders had been issued with an Alcohol Interlock Licence (AIL). (Waters , ). Information provided by Waka Kotahi ( Table below) shows that from to there were AILs granted and while these combined numbers are close to the AIO numbers in Table this indicator does not equate to interlock installation.
Despite the prohibition on night time riding, there was one crash between pm and am involving a rider on a restricted licence aged to years old in the combined period from to , corresponding to a crash rate of . crashes per , licensed riders per year. Similarly, there was one night time crash involving a fully licensed rider of the same age range in the same time period, giving a crash rate of . crashes per , licensed riders per year. This suggests that the night time riding restriction is not fully effective, but since the crash rate for restricted riders aged to at night i s very low and is similar to that for fully licensed riders, this does not appear to be a significant potential safety issue. .. Comparison of characteristics and crash rates for riders choosing CBTA versus those choosing traditional practical tests We analys ed characteristics and crash rates of all riders who received a learner licence between when CBTA was introduced on October and the end of , and who had progressed to at least a restricted licence by the end of . There are , riders in t his
Despite wait times marginally increasing, total tests completed continue to increase. V ehicle Testing New Zealand (VTNZ) have forecast a continued increase in test completion into October as the newly graduated driver testing officers ( DTOs ) build competency and can take on a full schedule of tests. The below chart shows tests completed each week. VTNZ is delivering approximately more tests per week than this time last year. This chart will be included ongoing in the main Driver Licensing wait times reporting in the appendices. (Continued over page)
Detail of changes that will apply from July
Detailed investigation and development stage
Details of fatal crashes are received from NZ Police and summarised here. These figures are provisional and may include deaths or crashes which are subsequently excluded. Reasons for exclusion include the crash being intentional (suicide, homicide), due to a medical event or not occurring on a public road (e.g. a driveway). Figures include crashes up to midnight.
Developing a framework for affordable urban bus and ferry services that people want to use.
Developing a longterm insights briefing on the impact of automated vehicles operating on New Zealand roads
Developing sound legislation to replace the Civil Aviation Act and the Airport Authorities Act .
Developing the Government Policy Statement on Land Tran sport Engagement paper
Developing the Government Policy Statement on Land Transport transport.govt.nz ISSN
Developing the right tools and re sources to assess and report on capability effectively may be difficult. There are currently gaps in behavioural, cultural change, collaboration mechanisms and innovation.
Development of a new coinvestment model to maximise private investment in charging infrastructure. This will include developing a costbenefit framework, consistent with the NationalACT Coalition Agreement.
Devices that have received approval can be found in the Land Transport (Alcohol Interlock Devices) Notice here: https:www.legislation.govt.nzregulationpubliclatestDLM.html
Di Rump CEO, Muapoko Tribal Authority Inc Experienced in governance, leadership, passionate advocate for social justice, participation, and equity.
Digital decadence People enjoy a vast array of experiences and services anywhere, anytime, via their digital interfaces. Many people now feel more comfortable in digital worlds than their own skins. They value openness, collaboration and innovation.
Diploma in Landscape Design Unitec
Director ANZ Banking Group (NZ) Ltd
Disability Action Plan
Disclaimer All reasonable endeavours are made to ensure the accuracy of the information in this document. However, the information is provided without warrantie s of any kind, including accuracy, completeness, timeliness or fitness for any particular purpose. The Ministry of Transport excludes liability for any loss, damage or expense, direct or indirect, and however caused, whether through negligence or otherwise , resulting from any persons or organisations use of, or reliance on, the information provided in this document.
Disclaimer All reasonable endeavours are made to ensure the accuracy of the information in this document. However, the information is provided without warranties of any kind including accuracy, completeness, timeliness or fitness for any particular purpose . The Ministry of Transport excludes liability for any loss, damage or expense, direct or indirect, and however caused, whether through negligence or otherwise, resulting from any persons or organisations use of, or reliance on, the information provided in this document. Copyright Under the terms of the New Zealand Creative Commons Attribution . BY licence, this document, and the information contained within it, can be copied, distributed, adapted and otherwise used provided that the Ministry of Tr ansport is attributed as the source of the material the material is not misrepresented or distorted through selective use of the material images contained in the material are not copied. The terms of the Ministrys Copyright and disclaimer apply, available at: www.transport.govt.nz Citation Schiff Consulting . . Evaluation of the graduated driver licensing system Transport Evidence Base report A. Wellington: Ministry of Transport. in July by the Ministry of Transport, PO Box , Wellington , New Zealand. ISBN For more information For more information about this project and associated report, please contact evaluationtransport.govt.nz
Disclaimer All reasonable endeavours are made to ensure the accuracy of the information in this document. However, the information is provided without warranties of any kind including accuracy, completeness, timeliness or fitness for any particular purpose. The Ministry of Transport excludes liability for any loss, damage or expense, direct or indirect, and however caused, whether through negligence or otherwise, resulting from any persons or or ganisations use of, or reliance on, the information provided in this document. Copyright Under the terms of the New Zealand Creative Commons Attribution . BY licence, this document, and the information contained within it, can be copied, distributed, adapted and otherwise used provided that the author is attributed as the source of the material the material is not misrepresented or distorted through selective use of the material images contained in the material are not copied. The terms of the Ministrys Copyright and disclaimer apply, available at: www.transport.govt.nz Citation Researching Impaired Driving in New Zealand. . A Reoffending Evaluation of Alcohol Ignition Interlock Sentences in New Zealand Transport Evidence Base report. Wellington: Ministry of Transport. in February by Te Manat Waka the Ministry of Transport, PO Box , Wellington , New Zealand. ISBN For more information For more information about this project and associated report, please contact: evaluationtransport.govt.nz
Disclaimer All reasonable endeavours are made to ensure the accuracy of the information in this document. However, the information is provided without warranties of any kind, including accuracy, completeness, timeliness or fitness for any particular purpose. Te Manat Waka, the Ministry of Transport, excludes liability for any loss, damage or expense, direct or indirect, and however caused, whether through negligence or otherwise, resulting from any persons or organisations use of, or reliance on, the information provided in this document.
Disclaimer: This email is only intended to be read by the named recipient. It may contain information which is confidential, proprietary or the subject of legal privilege. If you are not the intended recipient you must delete this email and may not use any information contained in it. Legal privilege is not waived because you have read this email.
Disclaimer: This email is only intended to be read by the named recipient. It may contain information which is confidential, proprietary or the subject of legal privilege. If you are not the intended recipient you must delete this email and may not use any information contained in it. Legal privilege is not waived because you have read this email. s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Hap,.tm nna ng. lnrig.it; o Aoh.;iro. ki. eke En bling cw Zealanders to flourish Oscar CasswellLaird From: Tredegar Hall Sent: Friday, May To: Cc: Rebecca Beals Subject: Ngti Rarua krero on Ports Permits extension proposal Kia Ora George,
Disclaimer: This email is only intended to be read by the named recipient. It may contain information which is confidential, proprietary or the subject of legal privilege. If you are not the intended recipient you must delete this email and may not use any information contained in it. Legal privilege is not waived because you have read this email. s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Q(I,. TE MAHATU WAKA IP M SHIVOFT Hapaitm an. ng;i lrlilJ:r;lh o Aolearoa kiri eke Enabling New Zealanders ourish Oscar CasswellLaird From: Tredegar Hall Sent: Wednesday, June To: Cc: Rebecca Beals; Oscar CasswellLaird Subject: Port Permit engagement Attachments: FW: Te Whanganui a Tara: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years ; Extending the duration of existing port coastal permits.pdf Tn krua,
Disclaimer: all reasonable endeavours are made to ensure the accuracy of the information in this document. However, the information is provided without warranties of any kind including accuracy, completeness, timeliness or fitness for any particular purpose. The Ministry of Transport excludes liability for any loss, damage or expense, direct or indirect, and however caused, whether through negligence or otherwise, resulting from any persons or organisations use of, or reliance on, the information provided i n this document. Under the terms of the New Zealand Creative Commons Attribution . (BY) licence, this document, and the information contained within it, can be copied, distributed, adapted and otherwise used provided that the Ministry of Transport is attributed as the source of the material the material is not misrepresented or distorted through selective use of the material.
Disclaimer: all reasonable endeavours are made to ensure the accuracy of the information in this document. However, the information is provided without warranties of any kind including accuracy, completeness, timeliness or fitness for any particular purpose. The Ministry of Transport excludes liability for any loss, damage or expense, direct or indirect, and however caused, whether through negligence or otherwise, resulting from any persons or organisations use of, or reliance on, the information provided in this document. Under the terms of the New Zealand Creative Commons Attribution . (BY) licence, this document, and the information contained within it, can be copied, distributed, adapted and otherwise used provided that the Ministry of Transport is attributed as the source of the material the material is not misrepresented or distorted through selective use of the material.
Discussion document approved for release
Discussion document consulted on
Distance per capita travelled in single occupancy vehicles
Distracted driving due to mobile phone use is a contributing factor in road crashes. The current fee for using a mobile phone while driving is , which is out of step with other moving vehicle offences (set at ). In March , Cabinet agreed to raise mobile phone penalties to from April .
Do we have the right people The results from this evaluation suggest the GPS and have shifted the conversation about mode shift throughout the transport system in New Zealand. In the end, transport practitioners will follow the money. For some, the GPS and reflected existing ambitions and have allowed greater momentum. For others, the signals and funding allocations have widened the scope of transport activities to include active and public transport. But generally, there is recognition that further change will requi re going beyond the transport system to a more integrated approach, notably with land use. Recommendation : Consider how decision making about transport investment can better reflect the integrated transport and land use approach and technical skills requ ired for change (and those involved in other key drivers of mode shift). APPENDIX EVALUATION STOCKTAKE
Doc Document title Details Cabinet Paper Funding Reallocation from the Northern Pathway to the Eastern Busway Withhold some information under sections ()(f)( iv) and ()(j) Minute ENVMIN Withhold some information under section ()(j)
Doc Document title Details Cabinet paper Amendment to the Land Transport (Infringement and Reminder Notices) Regulations This document is proposed to be released in full.
Doc Document title Details Cover Briefing:
Doc Title of Document Proposed decision on request Rail policy responsibilities and decision making for the rail network investment programme Proposal partially withheld on the grounds of section ()(a) protect the privacy of natural persons
Doc Document Decision on release Briefing to the Minister s of Transport and Finance
Doc Document Decision on release October Email FW: NZTA level crossings briefing Some information withheld under section ()(a) and section ()(f)(iv) October Email Level Crossings Aide Memoire Some information withheld under section ()(a) and section ()(f)(iv) October Email Re: Level Crossings Aide Memoire Some information withheld under section ()(a) and section ()(f)(iv). December Email Attn Abby: OC Email subject OC withheld under section ()(f)(iv) Some information withheld under section ()(a) and section ()(f)(iv) December Email OC Proposal for GPS tagged contingency Cabinet Paper Some information withheld under section ()(g)(i) and section ()(a) August Email Confirming next steps Auckland Level Crossings Some information withheld under section ()(f)(iv) and section ()(a) August OC ATAP Implementation Report July to June Some information withheld under section ()(b)(ii) and section ()(a) May OC Auckland Level Crossing Programme Update Some information withheld under section ()(f)(iv), section ()(g)(i) and section ()(a) May OC Auckland Level Crossing Programme Takaanini Cluster Aide Memoire Some information withheld under section ()(f)(iv), section ()(g)(i) and section ()(a) July OC Auckland Level Crossing Removal Programme Update Aide Memoire Some information withheld under section ()(f)(iv), section ()(g)(i) and section ()(a) November Extract from OC Metropolitan Rail Operating Model Investment and Level of Service Scenarios Some information out of scope and some information withheld under section (f)(iv) transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of Doc Document Decision on release May OC Auckland Transport Alignment Project July to March Some information withheld under section ()(b)(ii) and section ()(a) December OC Title withheld under section ()(f)(iv) Withheld in full under section ()(f)(iv) December OC Title withheld under section ()(f)(iv) Withheld in full under section ()(f)(iv) October OC Aide Memoire Title withheld under section ()(f)(iv) Withheld in full under section ()(f)(iv) December OC Briefing Title withheld under section ()(f)(iv) Withheld in full under section ()(f)(iv) and ()(h) April Cabinet paper Releasing the Government Policy Statement on land transport Withheld in full under section (d) as is available at: https:www.transport.govt.nzassetsUploadsG PS Proactive Release Documents .pdf December OC Cabinet paper Proposal for GPS and NZUP tagged contingency for Transport Projects Withheld in full under section (d) as will soon be publicly available December OC Capital Pipeline Review Withheld in full under section (d) as is available at: https:www.transport.govt.nzassetsUploadsM otBriefings Budget proactive release package Redacted.pdf
Doc Document Decision on release October Email FW: NZTA level crossings briefing Some information withheld under section ()(a) and section ()(f)(iv) October Email Level Crossings Aide Memoire Some information withheld under section ()(a) and section ()(f)(iv) October Email Re: Level Crossings Aide Memoire Some information withheld under section ()(a) and section ()(f)(iv). December Email Attn Abby: OC Email subject OC withheld under section ()(f)(iv) Some information withheld under section ()(a) and section ()(f)(iv) December Email OC Proposal for GPS tagged contingency Cabinet Paper Some information withheld under section ()(g)(i) and section ()(a) August Email Confirming next steps Auckland Level Crossings Some information withheld under section ()(f)(iv) and section ()(a) August OC ATAP Implementation Report July to June Some information withheld under section ()(b)(ii) and section ()(a) May OC Auckland Level Crossing Programme Update Some information withheld under section ()(f)(iv), section ()(g)(i) and section ()(a) May OC Auckland Level Crossing Programme Takaanini Cluster Aide Memoire Some information withheld under section ()(f)(iv), section ()(g)(i) and section ()(a) July OC Auckland Level Crossing Removal Programme Update Aide Memoire Some information withheld under section ()(f)(iv), section ()(g)(i) and section ()(a) November Extract from OC Metropolitan Rail Operating Model Investment and Level of Service Scenarios Some information out of scope and some information withheld under section (f)(iv) transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of Doc Document Decision on release May OC Auckland Transport Alignment Project July to March Some information withheld under section ()(b)(ii) and section ()(a) December OC Title withheld under section ()(f)(iv) Withheld in full under section ()(f)(iv) December OC Title withheld under section ()(f)(iv) Withheld in full under section ()(f)(iv) October OC Aide Memoire Title withheld under section ()(f)(iv) Withheld in full under section ()(f)(iv) December OC Briefing Title withheld under section ()(f)(iv) Withheld in full under section ()(f)(iv) and ()(h) April Cabinet paper Releasing the Government Policy Statement on land transport Withheld in full under section (d) as is available at: https:www.transport.govt.nzassetsUploadsG PS Proactive Release Documents .pdf December OC Cabinet paper Proposal for GPS and NZUP tagged contingency for Transport Projects Withheld in full under section (d) as will soon be publicly available December OC Capital Pipeline Review Withheld in full under section (d) as is available at: https:www.transport.govt.nzassetsUploadsM otBriefings Budget proactive release package Redacted.pdf From: Abby McRoberts parliament To: Richard Cross Cc: Helen FionaWhite Subject: Fw: NZTA level crossings briefing Wednesday, October Attachments: :) Get Outlook for iOS From: Abby McRoberts Sent: To: Tim Herbert t.herberttransport.govt.nz; Jess Edlin J.Edlintransport.govt.nzCc: Helen FionaWhite Helen.FionaWhiteparliament.govt.nz Subject: NZTA level crossings briefing Hi Tim and Jess, As discussed Tim, attached is the most recent NZTA briefing on level crossing removals in Auckland.Cheers, Abby Abby McRoberts Private Secretary (Transport) Office of Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Transport Minister for Auckland Minister for Energy I Minister for Local Government DDI: M: Email: abby.mcrobertsparliament.govt.nz Website: www.Beehive,govt.nz Private Bag , Parliament Buildings, Wellington , New ZealandDocument s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: Richard Cross To: Helen FionaWhite ; Abby McRoberts parliament Cc: David Wood ; Tim Herbert Subject: Level Crossings Aide Memoire Wednesday, October Attachments: image.png Hi HelenAbby Please find attached MOTs advice on the level crossing removals in Auckland. Happy to discuss if you have any questions.Thanks Richard. Richard Cross
Doc Submitter Decision on release Auckland Airport Some material withheld under section ()(a) of the Act Aurecon Released in full Engineering New Zealand Released in full Federated Farmers of NZ Released in full Infrastructure NZ Released in full The Aggregate and Quarry Association Released in full Transportation Group NZ Some material withheld under section ()(a) of the Act NZ Port Company CEO Group Released in full Port of Napier Some material withheld under section ()(a) of the Act Blind Low Vision NZ Released in full Rural Women NZ Released in full Millions of Mothers Some material withheld under section ()(a) of the Act Road Transport Forum Released in full Bus and Coach Association Released in full Disabled Persons Assembly NZ Inc Some material withheld under section ()(a) of the Act Healthy Families Released in full CCS Disability Action Released in full Grey Power Federation Some material withheld under section ()(a) of the Act The Rail and Maritime Transport Union Released in full NZ Automobile Association Some material withheld under section ()(a) of the Act Motor Industry Association Released in full Candor Released in full NZ Heavy Haulage Association Released in full
Document Provided as Document Out of Scope Out of Scope Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Kevin Wright (hehim) BComLLM Senior Manager Investment Assurance Investment Finance,Te Ama Commercial and CorporateEmail: kevin.wrightnzta.govt.nz Phone:Mobile: NZ Transport Agency Waka Kotahi Auckland, Level , Aon Centre, Customs Street West Private Bag , Auckland , New Zealand Connect with us on social media
Document Out of Scope Out of Scope Out of Scope Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Document can be found here: https:www.transport.govt.nzassetsUploadsReportMARPOL Annex VINational Interest Analysis.pdf .
Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Questions: . How have existing activity classes performed against the principles in this NLTP That is, are the current activity classes : a. Clear and understandable b. enabling the delivery of strategic priorities and multiple outcomes c. oversubscribed . How have the new PT and Road to Zero activity classes performed . The annual report on NLTF spend is required to report on how activity classes give affect to outcomes in the GPS. Are the activity classes conducive to supporting useful performance reporting For instance: a. Are the activity class es able to deliver all strategic priorities i. What strategic priorities are easily delivered through the activity class ii. Are there any strategic priorities proposed in GPS that would be difficult to deliver through the existing activity class structure b. Is it easy to unders tand what each activity class is funding and what GPS outcomes it is contributing to i. i.e. does every dollar in the State H ghway Improvement Activity Class deliver improvements on the State Highway network , and can these improvements be easily tracked to outcomes c. Are the activity class es well defined i. Is it clear what activities are funded from each activity class, and are there any overlaps . What improvements can be made to the activity class es a. Are there any major changes needed i. These are major changes that will require a lot of thinking and work to implement changes. i.e. should we create a emissions activity class or remove the Road to Zero Activity Class b. Are there any incremental improvements that could be made i These are chang es that would be relatively simple to implement . i.e. should debt repayments and PPP payments be removed from State Highway Improvements (possibly into their own AC), or should we split Road to Zero into improvements and continuous programmes c. Can the activity class definitions be improved
Document Relevant excerpt provided as Document s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT : PUBLIC TRANSPORT FUNDING OUTPUTS tnc.re ae fa,ebox rec;ov.ry and th.ltcf.party teltellue lf:AOAGNCV I TiAH SUPPOAT MOT OVERALL PAOGAAHME I re,., ,,: NZTA PUL.ICTRANSPOAT by Public T,onport AutllorlliH . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: To: Cc: Subject: Attachments: Amy Moorhead Mjtch Macaulay Jim Herbert RE: GPS Monitoring briefing and work programme Tuesday, July jmageOOJ PDQ Document Gps Implementation Work programme Jojnt MoJ NZJA CNZJA comments) docx Relevant excerpt provided Implementatjon plan tjmeijnes for brief iodusjon y CJ) pptx as Document for both attachments Kia ora Mitch, Just coming back to you with our comments on this one. I havent tracked changes, but almost all of our items have been checked and confirmed or with current milestones. Exceptions as follows. Out of Scope Should be able to come back on the above items by end of the day. In the meantime, everything else is good to go. Cheers, Amy From: Mitch Macaulay M.Macaulaytransport.govt. nz Sent: To: Amy Moorhead Amy.Moorheadnzta.govt. nz Cc: Tim Herbert t.herberttransport .govt.nz Subject: GPS Monitoring briefing and work programme Hey Amy, Understand you spoke with Tim yesterday about the monitoring and reporting briefing were pulling together next week. Well share a draft of this with you tomorrow for feedback, and have set up a time on Monday for us to discuss. The briefing will confirm whats in the Monthly report for the Minister and J Were going to attach the Work Programme again for his info, so Im just making sure this document is still up to . Could you ask your teams to take a look over it again and send me any updates needed by noon on Tuesday Hopefully its a pretty quick exercise given we only it last month.
Document Acceptance Action Name Signed Prepared by Emily Auton April Reviewed by David Silvester Robert Brodnax April Approved by David Silvester April on behalf of Beca Limited
Document Decision on release Cabinet paper Approval to consult on accession to the International Maritime Organization treaty MARPOL Annex VI: Prevention of Air Pollution from Ships Refused in full under section (d) of the Act as the document is publicly available on Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transports (the Ministrys) website. Cabinet Paper MARPOL Annex VI Regulations for the Prevention of Air Pollution from Ships: Approval to Accede Refused in full under section (d) of the Act as the document is publicly available on the Ministrys website. National Interest Analysis Proposes accession to Annex VI regulations for the prevention of air pollution from ships contained in the Protocol of to the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL) Refused in full under section (d) of the Act as the document is publicly available on the Ministrys website. Briefing OC MARPO L Annex VI: Recommended policy approach implementation and funding Some information withheld under section ()(a) , or excluded as out of scope of this request. Briefing OC Supporting material for the Maritime T ransport (MARPOL Annex VI) Amendment Bill for Committee of the Whole house Some information withheld under section ()(a) , or excluded as out of scope of this request. Briefing OC Urgent Proposal to notify commencement of Part Marine Protection Rules Tranche Certain information withheld under section ()(a) .
Document Description of information withheld Previously released Briefing OC BR Advice on Next Steps Following Police Procurement Process for Oral Fluid Testing Devices Withhold in full under section ()(f)(iv) and section ()(h) . Includes advice following the Police device procurement process and Crown Law advice which are currently being considered by Ministers . No Briefing BRCH Oral Fluid Testing Procurement Process Findings: Policy and Implementation Implications Withhold in full under section ()(f)(iv). Concerns the Police device procurement process and information currently being considered by Ministers. No Report Public Attitudes to Road Safety Refuse under section (d) the information requested is publicly available . Yes PowerPoint presentation excerpt Road to Zero Ministerial Oversight Group Quarterly Progress Report for January to March Release an excerpt of in scope material. Contains a progress update for the implementation of oral fluid testing . Yes Excerpts Weekly Report entries Withh old some sections under section ()(f)(iv) under active consideration. Withhold some entries in full under section (d) soon to be publicly available. Weekly report entries for January to March are being proactively released. No Email respo nse to NZ Drug Foundation comment Withhold some material under section ()(g)(i) free and frank expression and section ()(a) personal information . No Email drug driving public relations statement Release in full. No Email letter from Hon Chris Hipkins Release email in full but withhold attached document . No
Document Description of information withheld Risks Mitigations Previously released Briefing Draft paper seeking approval to introduce the Land Transport Management (Regulation of Public Transport) Amendment Bill Phone numbers withheld to protect privacy . Information relating to
Documents proactively released relating to development of the proposed amendments to the harmful emissions standards.
Documents proactively released.
Does anyone externally need to be kept in the loop This depends on the nature of the event and the content of your speechpresentation. You may need to liaise with other agencies or organisations make sure that you build in time in your planning and preparation to receive and incorporate their ideas and feedback.
Does t his mean that if activities do not reduce emissions , then these will not get funded Not necessarily. The GPS will support investment in a range of outcomes alongside emissions reductions (as covered by the five strategic priorities) . For example, we expect many safety improvements , such as median barriers, to be funded that will not reduce emissions on their own. However, investments across RLTPs and NLTPs, over time, will need to reduce emissions as a whole. Priority is likely to be given to investm ents that deliver benefits across multiple outcomes and priorities. Crown funding may also support transport investments that reduce emission, including through the Climate Emergency Response Fund which is dedicated to climate change related initiatives. There is further work underway to clarify the relationship between the overarching focus on emissions reduction and the five other strategic priorities so that these can be appropriately reflected in investment decision making tools and processes (such as the Investment Prioritisation Method used by Waka Kotahi).
Domain Strategy, Economics and Evaluation The Domain Strategy, Economics and Evaluation team operates within the Regulatory and Data Group of the Ministry of Transport. The team supports the Ministrys policy teams by providing the evidence base at each stage of the policy development. The team is responsible for: Developing the Transport Evidence Base (see below) and the Transport Knowledge Hub which connects people from across the wider transport sector and promotes the sharing of transport data, evidence, knowledge, research, information, capabilities, and ideas. Providing economic input on business cases, funding requests, competition issues and specific projects such as valu e capture, natural disasters, and the social impacts on environment and health. Providing the evaluation function for the Ministry, including designing evaluation frameworks, developing performance metrics and indicators, and designing, conducting and pro curing evaluations. The Transport Evidence Base The Transport Evidence Base Strategy creates an environment to ensure data, information, research and evaluation play a key role in shaping the policy landscape. Good, evidence based decisions also enhance the delivery of services provided by both the public and private sectors to support the delivery of transport outcomes and improve wellbeing and liveability in New Zealand. The evaluation of the Graduated Driver Licensing System is listed on the Evaluation Programme, which forms part of the Transport Evidence Base implementation plan. Acknowledgements We would like to thank the following people for their input and as sistance to this project and the preparation of this report: NZ Transport Agency for providing access to the relevant datasets The cross agency Driver Licensing Senior Officials group for providing feedback and comment on the project scope and earlier draf ts of this report Dr Lyndel Bates and Margo van Felius from Griffith University who conducted the peer review
Domestic Transport Costs and Charges Study Report released
Domestic Transport Costs and Charges Study Reports
Domestic Transport Costs and Charges Study commissioned
Domestic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are captured within the Emissions Trading Scheme
Domestic ontime performance trends, both airlines, all reported routes
Dominic CowellSmith Private Secretary (Transport) Office of Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Transport Minister for Auckland Minister for Energy I Minister for Local Government ent.govt.nz Website: www.Beehive,govt.nz Private Bag , Parliament Buildings, Wellington , New Zealand From: Sent: To: Ben Craven Ben.Cravenparliament.govt.nz Subject: question (not for a story just yet) Hi Ben, Hope youre well. Just got this from the proactive release on the GPS. Saw the bit at the bottom Not planning to do a story just yet, but thought Id ask whether the govt had any plans to look into the idea proposed in the box at the bottom increasing farebox revenue by reinstating the farebox recovery ratiopolicy. s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Just curious to know if it was on your agenda or if its been ruled out https :www. trans port.govt. nz a ssetsU ploadsG PSProactiveReleaseDocu ments MarkedUp O EINALPostoffjcecommentsmarkedup Redacted pdt I Question: How much revenue would a percent increase in Farebox rates generate and options to increase Farebox share A percent increase in forebox rates would likely reduce the NL TF shore by between and million per annum I The table below details revenue and funding sources for public transport services over the past years. Officials estimate that a percent increase in farebox revenue would generate approximately to million in annual revenue, reducing the National Land Transport Fund (NL Tf) and local share by between and million each, given the proportiona l split and Funding Assistance Rate (FAR) of approximately percent. This is based on prepandemic revenue fare revenue of million ( financial year). Officials expect that farebox revenue will significant ly increase in the coming financial year (likely gate,. than percent). This is due to the removal of significant subsidies that have been provided since YJl (conclusion of the halfprice fares in June , changes to the Community Connect Scheme, ne di onal topups to replace fare revenue following postCOVID patronage reductions ). This will resufess Crown funding, but NLTF and local share will be similar to previous years. O, V GM tl f.ar,gYptlNUra I Zl zo:r:,m ,tl ),, .. ., , . . ,, . )IJ, SS. ., . u,, .. eU . tU .lll , ,Sl . lc:ric I , Ul lbe, u IIO .. .. , IOO I, l.ll , , . . .A.t ,AI ,, ..,... . ..ao . . . Mf. IJ, ,. , , , . ,j(S .,. , . . ,.. U MUOO , .. t , , .:Z , , tS NZTA I ,.lt . . , ),,a Ci , ., , to.i ., , :o.ree Mt. . ttt,oe . ., ,,. ,.,,,,,. ,ot.oe ,IOA foW pubic tntpOCt UNlcH I PINllle.,..alPT.vlat , .,,. .,,. ,.,. . Option to increase Forebox s:J An option to increase a reue and its proportional share of public transport services, could be to require NZTA to rethe cent farebox recovery ratio policy, which was established in . At the time, this was a target flr FtJISiic Transport Authorities (PTA) to achieve over two National Land Transport Programme j.NfrPcycles (by the mids). While limited policy work has been undertaken and we have not enitith either NZTA or PTAs on reinstating the policy, we consider that regions would again neeeast two NLTP cycles to build towards the target, as most regions are well below percent farebefihue this would not be a quick fix for GPS . Officials expect that a percent farebox tarlbe easier for the larger cities, including Auckland and Wellington. Further policy work could b cq ssioned to provide more robust estimates , more evidence, and an approach which looks at the impfor all regions. s ()(a) ()a) J s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: Andrew Wilson To: Jessica Ranger ; Talia Cohen Wolf ; Adam Lawrence Cc: Liam Fechney ; Chris Young Subject: RE: feedback ideally by midday tomorrow Thursday, October Attachments: image.png Hi Jess,
Dont capitalise local government unless the words form part of the name of a document or piece of legislation.
Dont include minutes when they arent needed.
Dont place a full stop after an ellipses:
Dont use http: if there is a www in the website address.
Dont use quotation marks for the titles of publications Use italics instead. Ng kopipiko Semicolons
Dont use superscript Correct Incorrect st st Writing number ranges Correct Incorrect From to (in sentences) From (in graphs, tables and infographics)
Double spacing was a necessary practice based on the limitations of typewriters, specifically typewriter fonts.
Dr Helen Poulsen (Chair) (toxicology)
Dr Patrick Strange, Outgoing Chair, Auckland Airport Patrick Strange was appointed a director of Auckland Airport in and became C hair in . He has spent years working principally in the New Zealand and international electricity and infrastructure sectors. Patrick retired in as Chief Executive of Transpower, New Zealands transmission owner and operator. During his tenure, Transpower successfully completed a major, multi billiondollar reinvestment in the grid.
Dr Sharon Kletchko (medical specialist)
Dr ug and Alcohol Management Plan (DAMP) Transport Instrument Following your signing of the DAMP Rule (CAR Part ), final preparations are underway for the Director to make the accompanying Transport Instrument. This specifies the details that a DAMP operator must report to the Director. The Transport Instrument was publicly consulted on in AprilMay and will come into effect on April . We are preparing this early to ensure that the sector has the maximum time to prepare before the DAMP regime comes into effect. Transport Instruments are introduced in the Civil Aviation Act and are secondary legislation. This means that the Transport Instrument will need to be tabled in the House, and subsequently gazetted. In the coming week we will provide your Office with the signed transport instrument to be tabled.
Draft Cabinet paper to Minister on review Further work, if any, to be determined after of the scheme Cabinet has taken its decisions
Draft Driver Licensing Amendment Rule consultation
Draft GPS engagement
Draft GPS at a glance
Draft GPS out for consultation
Draft GPS released for consultation
Draft GPS Strategic Investment Programme
Draft Government Policy Statement
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) Release of draft for consultation August
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport Summary at a glance Strategic priorities Crown Investment Programme: Major Transport Projects What is the GPS Transport plan for unlocking New Zealands economic potentialDraft GPS strategic prioritiesMarch Connecting people and freight quickly and safely, supporting economic growth and creating social and economic opportunities. Increased maintenance and resilience Increasing access to markets and resilience on our state highway, local and rural roadsSafety A focus on safer roads, safer drivers and safer vehicles.Value for money Investment in transport must deliver better outcomes for present and future generations of New Zealand Economic growth and productivity A focus on core business NZTA to focus on core roles ie, build and maintain the State Highwaynetwork Stop programmes not aligned with GPS NZTA to ensure that RCAs are following the Ministerial expectations in GPS Ensure GPS expectations are applied to RoadControllingAuthorities(RCAs) to the extent applicable re the NLTF NLTPConsideration of other revenue sources and other funding and delivery models Maximising NLTF revenue Consider tolling for all new roads Future revenue system year investment plan City and regional dealsA focus on value for money Cost control and identify savings Ensure projects maximise benefits and align with Government priorities Focus on services and users New delivery models Efficiencies in managing road tollingA focus on delivery Ensure activities promote GPS delivery Maximise use of new funding and financing and delivery models More efficient business case process Tight control on scope and cost Increased focus on performance and efficiency Performance and efficiency plan Improve management of benefits costs Improve asset management, business case and cost estimation Refocussed Road EfficiencyGroup Drive accountability, delivery and value for moneyOutcomes expected through the draft GPS Increased maintenance and resilienceSafetyValue for moneyEconomic growth and productivity Reduced journey times and increased travel time reliability Less congestion and increased patronage on public transport Improved access to markets, employment and areas that contribute to economic growth More efficient supply chains for freight Unlocked access to greenfield land for housing development and supporting greater intensification More kilometresof the road network resealed and rehabilitated each year Fewer potholes A more resilient network Reduction in deaths and serious injuries Increased enforcement Better use of existing capacity Less expenditure on temporary traffic managementThe GPS sets out the Governments priorities for expenditure from the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) and how Crown funding complements that investment. It also provides direction to local government, KiwiRail and NZTA on the type of activities that should be included in Regional Land Transport Plans (RLTP), the Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP) and the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) respectively. The results the Government wishes to achieve from NLTF investment are expressed via a set of strategic priorities. GPS includes an overarching priority of economic growth and productivity, supported by three equally weighted priorities Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport Summary at a glance Funding ranges March NLTF revenue will rise from . billion in to . billion in the first three years of GPS , an increase of over percent. The GPS proposes funding this increase through: Two increases to Motor Vehicle Registration (MVR) charges in January and . A return to regular increases in Fuel Excise Duty (and equivalent increase in Road User Charges) from January . Additional Crown funding and financing will be considered for all major projects the Government expects public private partnerships, and other opportunities to use private expertise and finance. Forecast funding ranges (m) GPS funding ranges (m) Activity Class State Highway Maintenance , , , , UpperState highway pothole prevention Lower , , , , , , , UpperState highway operations Lower Local Road Maintenance , , , , , , , UpperLocal road pothole prevention Lower Upper Local road operations Lower Other continuing programmes Upper Public transport services Lower UpperInvestment management Lower Upper Safety Lower Upper Rail network Lower Improvements , UpperPublic transport Infrastructure Lower , , , , , , , , , , UpperState highway Improvements , , , , , , , , , , Lower UpperLocal road Improvements Lower UpperWalking and cycling improvements LowerActivity Classes focus on preventative maintenance Funding for pothole management and other preventative maintenance on state highways and local roads will be separated out from other road maintenance funding. This will ensure a greater focus is placed on achieving long term maintenance outcomes.Investment in land transport How does it work The GPS is reviewed every three years and guides investment in transport by providing a year outlook of how spending is prioritised for the transport network. Guided by the GPS strategic priorities, NZTA supports local government to create quality Regional Land Transport Plans (RLTPs). After community engagement, NZTA uses these RLTPs to create the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP). As the largest cofunderof NLTP projects, local government has an essential role in building strong, evidencebased projects and programmes for investment. This work is supported by the role of regional councils, territorial authorities and unitary councils in leading longterm planning for their area.A renewed focus on delivery The Government is looking to NZTA to deliver on its priorities at pace. This will require a tight focus on its core statutory roles. All NLTPrelated activities need to be judged against the benchmark of whether the activity promotes delivery of GPS . The Government is also signalling a number of system reforms that will be implemented in parallel with the delivery of GPS . These reforms will provide more sustainable revenue, help contain costs and make it easier for delivery agencies to do their jobs
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport Section : Strategic Priorities The Government has four Strategic Priorities which this GPS will deliver against : Economic Growth and Productivity Increased maintenance and resilience Safety Value for money. Strategic Priority: Economic Growth and Productivity The Governments top priority for investment through this GPS is to support economic growth and productivity. Efficient investment in our land transport system connects people and freight quickly and safely , supporting economic growt h and creating social and economic opportunities including access to land for housing growth . Core to this priority will be the re introduction of the Roads of National Significance programme , which was started under the previous National Government in . The Government will also invest in major public transport projects alongside local government to deliver more travel choices and reduced congestion in our major cities. Strategic investments in land transport, including the Roads of National Significance, combined with better use of existing infrastructure, will boost New Zealands longterm growth prospects, and improve housing affordability making a material difference to our nations standard of living. New Zealand has among the least affordable houses in the world, the result of a persistent undersupply of houses. New Roads of National Significance and major public transport projects will unlock access to greenfield land for housing development and support greater intensification to ultimately improv e housing supply, choice and affordability. These investments will also bring benefits for national economic growth and productivity, particularly given that state highways carry most of New Zealands interregional freight and link major ports, airports and urban areas. The expectation is that land transport funding will be directed into projects and activities that will support improved productivity and economic growth. The transport sector supports e conomic growth and productivity by providing quality transport connections, which enable goods and people to reach their destinations efficiently. Optimising the use of existing networks and services to deliver an appropriate level of service for users will be critical. In addition, improving the productivity of the transport system, to help manage flows and congestion, will be important to allow use rs to make decisions in real time. It is expected that part of this optimisation will lead to greater use of digital infrastructure and information systems to improve productivity in the transport system , particularly in the management of New Zealands supply chain. Road pricing, such as tolling and time of use charging, will play a key role in the delivery of the Roads of National Significance programme , as part of a wider package of transport revenue and investment tools. Tolling provides an opportunity for an additional source of revenue and will support infrastructure which provide s reduced travel times compared to alternative routes. Time of use charging will improve travel times and
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport network performance, reducing overall costs for freight businesses and their customers. Investments in rail should be focused on the busiest and most productive parts of the existing rail network , to support efficient movement of freight. This will complement investment in our state highway network to deliver a productive and efficient supply chain. Investment in metro rail networks will also support the efficient movement of people in Auckland and Wellington. Roads of National Significance (RoNS) The Government will reintroduce the successful Roads of National Significance programme to achieve its strategic priorities. The Roads of National Significance are some of New Zealands most essential state highway corridors that require significant development and investment that, when complete, will reduce congestion, improve safety, support housing development to address New Zealands ongoing housing crisis, boost economic growth, and provide a more resilient roading network. The New Zealand Institute of Economic Research carried out a report that was focussed on t wo proposed RoNS, Warkworth to Wellsford and Cambridge to Piarere , finding significant economic benefits with these projects . The report found that, o nce operational, each of these RoNS would contribute up to million a year to New Zealands GDP. All Roads of National Significance will be four laned, grade separated highways, and all funding, financing and delivery options should be considered to deliver them in stages and as quickly as possible. The Government further expects that the National Land Transport Fund can be used to fund the development of future Roads o f National Significance. The Government expects that the NZTA will prioritise these strategic corridors in the development of the National Land Transport Programme given their importance, alignment and impact on the Governments wider programme and the Governments focus on returning the NZTA to its core statutory activities and particularly , for this GPS period, maintaining and developing the state highway network. The Roads o f National Significance include: Whangarei to Auckland, with the following stages prioritised : Alternative to Brynderwyns Whangarei to Port Marsden Warkworth to Wellsford. Tauranga to Auckland, with the following stages prioritised : Cambridge to Piaere Tauriko West State Highway . Auckland roads: Mill Road the East West Link. Roads to unlock housing growth: Hamilton Southern Links Petone to Grenada Link Road and the Cross Valley Link North West Alternative State Highway (SH ). Other major routes: Takitimu Northern Link Stage Hawkes Bay Expressway Second Mt Victoria Tunnel and Basin Reserve upgrade the Hope Bypass The Belfast to Pegasus Motorway and Woodend Bypass. More detail on the Roads of National Significance can be found in Appendix B. Further Roads of National Significance may be added over time.
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport Commitments to other projects The Government has identified a number of other projects it wants to progress in this GPS period . These includ e a number of Roads of Regional Significance , such as the Second Ashburton Bridge ; projects that improve resilience and support the cyclone and flood recovery for the East Coast and Central North Island ; and investment in resilience for a number of critically important bridges in the South Island. The Government will continue with identified projects that will be delivered outside of the National Land Transport Programme through direct Crown and other funding approaches . Those priority projects previously funded through the Regional Fuel Tax, will be considered eligible for funding from the NLTF. The remaining RFT revenue will be used to fund the Eastern Busway, Local Road Improvements (e.g. Glenvar Road and Lake Road) and Electric Trains and Stabling. A full list and map of projects that the Government will deliver in this GPS period is contained in Appendix B. Additional Waitemat Harbour Connections The Government is committed to delivering a n additional crossing that, at a minimum, provides for additional road connections between Aucklands North Shore and the CBD. It will seek to reduce the upfront cost of this project to taxpayers by tasking the NZTA with identifying options for private funding, including through equity financing and value capture mechanisms. Projects for further investigation The government expects the NZTA will continue to plan and develop the state highway network to reduce congestion, drive economic growth , and increase safety and resilience. NZTA should work with the wider transport sector to make progress on projects that deliver on these objectives .
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport Public Transport Effective public transport provides commuters with more choice and helps to reduce travel times, congestion, and emissions. A key focus of this strategic priority will be the completion of the City Rail Link and Eastern Busway in the next three years . Alongside this work, planning will also , be undertaken in the next three years for the delivery of the Northwest Rapid Transit Corridor and the Airport to Botany Busway . The major public transport projects include: Completion of the City Rail Link Completion of the Eastern Busway Northwest Rapid Transit corridor Airport to Botany Busway Lower North Island Rail Integrated Mobility
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport There has been a percent increase in Crown NLTF funding for public transport over the past years (Figure ) . However , over the same period patronage has decreased by percent . This has partly been caused by COVID restrictions , but numbers have not increased back to pre COVID levels . Increased public transport fare box recovery and third party revenue will be expected from local government. Figure . Local, private and NLTFCrown share s of public transport services and infrastructure funding
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport Rail Rail plays a role in moving large volumes of goods between major cities , particular ly within the Auckland, Hamilton and Tauranga triangle . This Government will continue to invest in the national rail freight network to support the overall objective of economic growth and productivity while also ensuring that this investment delivers value for money to taxpayers . In recent years, despite a significant increase in investment in the national rail freight network, which included cross subsidisation of the network by road users, the amount of freight being moved via rail has continued to decline (Figure ) . Over the past six years there has been almost . billion invested but rail freight (net tonne kilometres ) is lower now than i t was in . This Governments focus will be to invest in maintaining the network between the busiest and most productive parts of the existing rail network between Auckland, Hamilton, and Tauranga. While rail freight network investments will remain within the GPS, rail infrastructure will no longer be cross subsidised from revenue g enerated from road users. It is unfair to ask people using the roads to fund rail infrastructure. Rail investments will continue to be supported and funded through the Rail Network Investment Programme, as agreed by Cabinet. Track User Charges paid by rail users will be used to support these investmen ts. Figure . Rail i nvestment and freight tonnage
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport Strategic Priority: Increased maintenance and resilience Increasing m aintenance levels and improving resilience on our state highways, local and rural roads is critically important in achieving the Governments overall objective of supporting economic growth and productivity. Access to markets is essential and this means having a resilient network that is well maintained. New Zealand has faced significant challenges in recent years with weather events and the Christchurch and Kaikura Earthquake rebuilds , which have highlighted the need for a focus on resilience of the roading network. Increasing maintenance outcomes is critically important , as well as adopting a more proactive approach to maintenance , to achieve a more reliable network for individuals and businesses to be able to rely upon. Potholes have become increasingly apparent on our roading network in the past five years . While road maintenance funding has increased significantly , the amount of rehabilitation and resealing has not (Figures ). Figure . Maintenance funding trends State Highways
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport This GPS takes a new approach. GPS increases road maintenance funding by million, compared to the draft GPS released by the previous Government in August , and this Government will be requiring road maintenance to be undertaken with a proactive rather than reactive approach. GPS establishes new activity classes to ensure that maintenance funds are prioritised and ringfenced to fix potholes, and to prevent potholes by ensuring that state highways, local and rural roads are maintained to a higher standard. The State Highway Pothole Prevention and Local Road Pothole Prevention activity classes will ensure that maintenance funds are prioritised and ringfenced, with clear outcomes that must be achieved by both central and local government. Funding from these activity classes wi ll only be available for the following activities: road resealing, road rehabilitation and drainage maintenance. GPS introduces a new expectation for NZTA to consider tolling to support the construct ion and maintena nce of all new roads, including the Roads of National Significance. Increased tolling on new roads will protect existing funding in the National Land Transport Fund for maintaining existing roads. Due to the deterioration of the road network, the Government will appoint independent members to the Road Efficiency Group, started by the previous National Government, and refocus it on ensuring that all investment in maintaining and improving resilience on the state highway, local and rural road network is spent in the most efficient manner. It is not acceptable that while funding for road maintenance activities has increased, the real outcomes on our road network continue to worsen.
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport Strategic Priority: Safety Safety on our transport network s is critically important. The steady decline in deaths and serious injuries we observed between the s and early s has slowed over the past decade . Road deaths and serious injuries place a substantial burden on families, society, the economy, and the health sector each year , with significant direct costs incurred by the Accident Compensation C orporation (ACC) and other parties . The Government expects that NZTA will make efforts to facilitate contributions from ACC to investments which improve road safety. There are examples of investments made by ACC , including investment in the Transmission Gully motorway and in motorcycle safety. The Government expects to see this approach extended further in all areas where investment by ACC will result in safety improvements that meet ACCs statutory criteria for investment . GPS directs investment towards road policing and enforcement, which is one of the most important tool s for improving safety on New Zealands roads. Poor road user choices affect everyone on the road. Alcohol and drugs are the leading contributor s to fatal crashes in New Zealand (Figure ) , but only percent of drivers think they are likely to be caught drug driving, and only percent of people think they are likely to be caught drink driving. percent of drink drive offenders are repeat offenders. Similarly, wearing a seatbelt during a crash doubles the chances of surviving a serious crash, yet each year over people die in crashes not wearing a seatbelt. Every year, around , people are disqualified from driving, and about a year are prosecuted for driving while disqualified. Between and , people were killed in crashes involving disqualified drivers. Figure . Deaths in crashes involving alcohol or drugs
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport Police play a significant part in helping to make New Zealand roads safer through rigorous enforcement of the traffic laws including alcoholdrug and speed regulations, promoting good driving practices, and road safety education. The Government expects Police to provide sufficient enforcement levels of traffic laws to achieve specific, as well as general, deterrence aims. The Government also expects Police to identify high risk drivers and proactively intervene to reduce opportunities for offending. Vehicle technology can also play a role, such as mandatory alcohol interlocks for the most severe offenders and improved automated enforcement. Most of the financial penalties and demerit point levels for offences have not been reviewed since the Land Transport (Offences and Penalties) Regulations were set in . As a result, a number of these penalties are poorly targeted, too low to deter unsa fe behaviour, or misaligned with risk (which weakens the signal of risk to the public). The infringement fees, in particular, are significantly lower than the equivalent fees in overseas jurisdictions. For example, almost all jurisdictions in Australia, th e United Kingdom and Canada have higher penalties for not wearing a seatbelt compared to New Zealand. Bringing our penalties in line with Australia would require nearly tripling the infringement fee, while also adding demerit points. Delivering safe roading infrastructure is also critically important for improving road safety. GPS supports investment in safe roading infrastructure by fixing potholes and increasing the level of road maintenance completed on the road network , while also investing in new and safe Roads of National Significance. Delivering improvements to level crossings, like installing safety barriers on rural roads and separating road from rail in busy metropolitan networks, are a key safety priority for road and rail infrastructure to be funded by NZTA, KiwiRails RNIP, and lo cal councils. Upgrading road infrastructure to higher safety standards has a significant impact on improv ing road safety . Independent analysis has found the construction of eight new bypasses, between January and December , resulted in up to a percent reduction in deaths and serious injuries across those roads . Lower cost safety interventions should be retrofitted on high risk parts of the network, where they provide value for money. For example, i t is expected that there will be greater use of rumble strips across the state highway , local and rural road networks. The Government will be introducing a new set of objectives and intended actions for road safety that will focus on safer roads, safer driver s and s afer vehicles . The Government will make a number of reforms to improve road safety during the timeframe of this GPS. These reforms will be targeted towards the highest contributing factors in fatal road crashes . We will: Enact legislation to rollout roadside oral fluid drug testing and set targets for Police to undertake , roadside oral fluid tests per year once the provisions come into force . Increase central governments focus on drink driving and set targets for Police to undertake at least million roadside alcohol breath tests per year. Review fines for traffic offences including consideration of index ing the value of infringements to inflation . Review the vehicle regulatory system to (among other objectives) enable better management of the safety performance of the vehicle fleet, reduce regulatory burden, and ensure our domestic rules are fit for purpose . Invest in road policing and road safety promotion to ensure an appropriate level of enforcement while promoting safer driving. While speed is a contributing factor to safety outcomes on our roads, the Government will
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport not be continuing with a blanket approach to reducing speed limits. I nstead , we will be focused on improving road safety by build ing safer infrastructure, invest ing in safer drivers, and requir ing safer vehicles. We will make changes to the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits to enable Road Controlling Authorities to reverse blanket speed limit reductions where it is safe to do so and to require Road Controlling Authorities to determine speed limits using consistent benefit cost analysis criteria . Speed limit reductions will also be tightened to focus on areas with high safety concerns. Where subsequent safety investments are made, speed limits should be restored to prior speed limits .
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport Strategic Priority: Value for Money There has been a significant increase in investment in transport in recent years, however, this is not translating to better outcomes. GPS will invest over billion into the transport network, which is a significant amount of road user and taxpayer money. This investment must deliver better outcomes for present and future generations of New Zealanders. The Agency, as the Governments delivery agent, will continue to take a leading role in securing improved effectiveness and efficiency within the priorities for investment established by the Government. This means a key focus on value for money in all part s of the transport sector. NZTA will be expected to reduce its head office expenditure by . percent, with those savings reinvested into delivering against the GPS objectives . Increased public transport fare box recovery and third party revenue will be expected from local government. Reduction in expenditure on temporary traffic management, while maintaining the safety of workers and road users. Focus on outcomes in road maintenance investment to deliver smoother and more reliable journeys for New Zealanders. Review of road safety investment to be undertaken to ensure investment is focussed on efficient changes, which make improvements to the roading network at the lowest cost. Making better use of existing assets by allowing time of use charging or the use of dynamic lanes in main cities to manage demand. Focus on whole oflife costs to maximise longrun value. Making better use of existing digital infrastructure and information systems where appropriate to help achieve the strategic priorities in this GPS. All entities involved in providing for the land transport system need to work together to improve the systems performance.
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport Outcomes the Government expects will be achieved by this GPS The NLTP and corresponding RLTPs are expected to prioritise projects and activities that progress the GPS priorities. In doing this, the focus should be on achieving the following impacts in the short to medium term: Economic growth and increased productivity reduc ed journey times and increased travel time reliability less congestion and increased patronage on public transport improved access to markets, employment and areas that contribute to economic growth more efficient supply chains for freight Unlocked access to greenfield land for housing development and supporting greater intensification Increased maintenance and resilience more kilometres of the road network resealed and rehabilitated each year fewer potholes a more resilient network. Improved safety reduction in deaths and serious injuries increased enforcement . Value for money better use of existing capacity less expenditure on temporary traffic management.
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport Section : Investment in land transpor t This section describes how different funding and financing sources will contribute to land transport investments and it sets expenditure limits , including NLTF activity class funding ranges. Revenue Central and local government are partners in planning, building, maintaining, improving , and funding land transport infrastructure and activities. Some activities, like state highway activities, road policing and training and research, are fully funded by central government . However, if the activity aligns with the GPS priorities and is included in the NLTP , it will receive co funding from central government according to the relevant funding assistance rate. Sources of the local government funding share for land transport activities include r ates, development contributions , borrowing and investments. The local funding share is not included in the GPS .
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport The MVR increase and Crown grant reflect our commitment to replace the revenue from fuel tax increases with an equivalent commitment, which provides the revenue stream required for repayment of the loan facilities. On an annual basis the expected revenue from all sources is as shown in Table . The Government plans to return to the previous practice of regular FEDRUC increases from January . The funding profile in Table assumes increases of cents per litre in January , a further cents in January , followed by a cent per litre annual increase starting in January . As is shown in Table , these increases are not in themselves sufficient to fully replace the fixed term funding top ups that will be provided by the Government over the first three years. The Government is very aware of the need to address this potential reduction in funding. We are initiating policy work to determine the tools required to meet our future revenue needs and provide a predictable and sustainable revenue outlook. This is likely to include road pricing alternatives, time of use charging and the transition of all vehicles to road user charges.
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport Funding ranges for activity classes Funding in the National Land Transport Programme is allocated to activity classes. The allocation of funding to these activity classes reflects the strategic direction the government has set. F or each activity class , a funding range determines how much can be spent . The following activity classes will be used for the National Land Transport Programme : State Highway Improvements This activity class is for the purpose of investment in new state highways , improv ing the capacity of existing state highways , and end of life bridge and structures renewals . Investment in this activity class prioritises the strategic priorities of supporting economic growth and productivity, and a safe and resilient transport system . This activity class has a significant increase in funding , which will be used to deliver state highway infrastructure under the Roads of National Significance programme and priority resilience projects . The Government expects that funding in this activity class will not be used to make multi modal improvements , i.e., cycleways and busways, or fund traffic calming measures, such as speed bumps and inlane bus stops . Funding may be used to remove speed bumps that exist on high volume corridors . It is expected that NZTA will prioritise reliable travel times in all investment decisions in this activity class. State Highway Pothole Prevention This activity class is for the purpose of investment in resealing , rehabilitating , and drainage maintenance on the state highway network . The State Highway Pothole Prevention activity class is intended to address the significant rise in the number of potholes and deterioration of the state highway network. Previous Government Policy Statements have funded resealing, rehabilitating, and drainage maintenance activities through the State Highway Maintenance activity class. The State Highway Pothole Prevention activity class differs from this approach as it is ring fenced to fund resealing, rehabilitating, and drainage maintenance activities on state highways and will not fund other maintenance activities . This activity class is paired wit h a focus on achieving long term maintenance outcomes of percent of the state highway network renewed each year and percent of the state highway network resealed each year , and increasing requirements for potholes to be fixed within hours . The Government expects that funding in this activity class will not be used to make multi modal improvements. Funding should only be used to reseal , rehabilitate , and maintain drainage on the state highway network . State Highway Operations This activity class is for the purpose of investment in the o peration of the state highway network. Operation al activities include managing demand and operating services to optimise utilisation across the network. This activity class will fund all operational activities on the state highway network , and includes funding for emergency reinstatement after loss of service. Local Road Improvements This activity class is for the purpose of investment in new local roads and improving the capacity of existing local roads , and end of life bridge and structures renewals.
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport Investment in this activity class prioritises the strategic priorities of supporting economic growth and productivity, and a safe and resilient transport system. Funding in this activity class will not be used to make multi modal improvements , and there will be reduced funding for traffic calming measures, such as speed bumps . It is expected that Road Controlling Authoritie s (RCA) will prioritise reliable travel times in all investment decisions in this activity class. Local Road Pothole Prevention This activity class is for the purpose of investment in resealing, rehabilitating, and drainage maintenance on the local road network . The Local Road Pothole Prevention activity class is intended to address the significant rise in the number of potholes and deterioration in our local road network. Previous Government Policy Statements have funded resealing, rehabilitating, and drainage maintenance activities through the Local Road Maintenance activity class. The Local Road Pothole Prevention activity class differs from this approach as it is ring fenced to fund resealing, rehabilitating, and drainage maintenance activities on local roads and will not fund other maintenance activities . The Government expects that funding in this activity class will not be used to make multi modal improvements. Funding should be used to reseal , rehabilitate , and maintain drainage on the local road network . Local Road Operations This activity class is for the purpose of investment in the o peration of the local road network. Operation activities include managing demand and operating services to optimise utilisation across the network. This activity class will fund all operational activities on the local road network and includes funding for emergency reinstatement to loss of s ervice. Public Transport Services This activity class is for the purpose of investment in the management and operation of contracted public transport services and total mobility transport services. This GPS will expect greater farebox recovery and third party revenue by Public Transport Authorities in order to help support the increased costs that are occurring through the public transport sector. Public Transport Infrastructure This activity class is for the purpose of investment in the management and delivery of renewing and improving infrastructure to support public transport services. It is expected that funding in this activity class will be used to invest in projects that reflect the priorities of this GPS , including a rapid transit network in Auckland and upgrades to rail in the lower North Island. The Government expects to realise the benefits of its investments in major public transport infrastructure, like the City Rail Link and Wellingtons new trains. Completing major network renewals (Rail Network Rebuild, Rail Network Growth Impact Management, Backlog Renewals) and upgrades (Wellingtons rail substations) is a key priority for the Government. Safety This activity class is for the purpose of investment in road policing and nationally consistent and coordinated road safety promotion and will be focused on improving road safety through enforcement and behavioral change , not blanket speed limit reductions. Police must achieve road policing targets set by the Government through funding in this activity class . There will be a strong focus on performance in the next Road Safety Partnership Programme and a small amount of the NLTF that is available to Police will be dependent on performance against enforcement targets relating to speed, alcohol
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport breath testing , and oral fluid testing for drugs once the provisions come into force . Specific details of the Police activities, performance metrics and funding will be developed by NZTA and approved by the Minister in accordance with the Act. The Government expects that i nvestment in road safety will be achieved across activity classes in GPS . This includes the delivery of new Roads of National Significance through the State Highway I mprovement s activity class and investment in a well maintained road network through pothole prevention activity classes . Funding toward road safety will be focused on safer roads, safer drivers, and safer vehicles . The Government expects that investment from this activity class will not be made in traffic calming measures such as raised pedestrian crossings , raised platforms, speed bumps , and inlane bus stops on state highways and local roads. Investment Management This activity class is for the purpos e of investment in the transport planning system, investment in strategic and operational research to support system planning and investment, and investment in the funding allocation system. This activity class will provide i nvestment for funding allocation management , includ ing the development of and administration of the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP), associated funding and procurement procedures, policies and guidelines, funding agreements with approved organisations, assistance and advice to approved organisations , and regional land transport committees.
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport Rail Network This activity class is for the purpose of investment in operation and maintenance, renew als an d improvements to the national rail network. This includes both operational and capital expenditure as outlined in the Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP). NLTF Funding for this activity class will be capped at the level of revenue from Track User Charges (TUCs) and specific Crown funding for rail investments (if any) . The Government expects that activities funded through this activity class will be targeted to parts of the rail network where the most significant economic benefits and opportunities for boost ing the productivity of freight movement exist, i.e., Auckland, Hamilton, and Tauranga . Walking and Cycling This activity class is for the purpose s of maintaining the existing walking and cycling network and investment in walking and cycling where there is either clear benefit for increasing economic growth or clear benefit for improving safety where demonstrated volumes of pedestrians and cyclists already exist . Investment in walking and cycling is expected to make a contribution to economic growth and productivity. To achieve this, funding should be directed to reducing congestion andor improving pedestrian and cyclist safety. A provision has been made in the Walking and Cycling Activity Class to fund the maintenance of walking and cycling infrastructure (including footpaths, shared use paths and cycle paths). Prior to GPS , no funding from the National Land Transport Fund was provided to local government to fund the maintenance of walking and cycling infrastructure (including footpaths, shared use paths and cycle paths). A provision has been made in the Walking and Cycling Activity Class to fund this infrastructure and it is expected that the NZTA Board will consider options to deliver value for money. This could include amending the funding assistance rate (FAR) for these maintenance activities. Any investment in walking and cycling must be funded exclusively through this activity class . The Government expect s that any activities funded under this activity class will undergo robust consultation with community members and business owners that could be affected by the investment, prior to any investment decisions being made . Funding ranges The NZTA is required to allocate funding to activity classes within the funding ranges set out in Table on the following page, and within the overall expenditure targets set out in Table . The expenditure targets do not envisage funding being allocated at the top end of every activity class range. S pecifying the funding allocations as a range provides the NZTA with some flexibility to respond to the actual funding applications received and to manag e issues such as weather delays affecting its own state h ighway investment programme. IN CONFIDENCE Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Table . Activity class funding ranges Activity Class GPS funding ranges (m) Forecast funding ranges (m) State Highway Maintenance State highway pothole prevention Upper , , , , Lower State highway operations Upper , , , , , , , Lower Local Road Maintenance Local road pothole prevention Upper , , , , , , , Lower Local road operations Upper Lower Other continuing programmes Public transport services Upper Lower Investment management Upper Lower Safety Upper Lower Rail network Upper Lower Improvements Public transport Infrastructure Upper , Lower State highway Improvements Upper , , , , , , , , , , Lower , , , , , , , , , , Local road Improvements Upper Lower Walking and cycling improvements Upper Lower
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport Contents Contents . . . . . Ministers Foreword . . . . . Section : Introduction to GPS . . . . Section : System Reform . . . . Section : Strategic Priorities . . . . Strategic Priority: Economic Growth and Productivity . . . Strategic Priority: Increased maintenance and resilience . . . Strategic Priority: Safety . . . . Strategic Priority: Value for Money . . . . Outcomes the Government expects will be achieved by this GPS . . Section : Investment in land transport . . . . Revenue . . . . . National Land Transport Fund . . . . Expenditure . . . . . Funding ranges for activity classes . . . . Linking planned expenditure with revenue . . . Section : Statement of Ministerial expectation . . . Section : Appendices . . . . Appendix A: Debt repayment schedule . . . . Appendix B: Crown Investment Programme . . . Appendix C: GlossaryDefinitions . . . .
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport Linking planned expenditure with revenue A principle underlying land transport expenditure is that the NZTA will manage expenditure so that it links with the amount of revenue that is raised. The authority to approve police funding, a Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP) and NLTF funding for an RNIP sits with the Minister of Transport. For other investment s, decision rights for funding from the NLTF rests solely with the NZTA Board. The NZTA is expected to plan funding allocations for each activity class and approve funding for activities so that total planned expenditure in any year matches the expenditure target set out in Table for that year. It is accepted that the NZTA may not achieve the expenditure target in any one year, if expenditure is within the range specified in Table . The need to manage planned expenditure against revenue arises because expenditure and revenue are subject to uncertainty and fluctuation. Expenditure can vary due to factors such as unforeseen cost increases in key inputs andor unexpected changes in proje ct timing. As revenue is dependent on the level of economic and transport activity it will fluctuate according to economic conditions. As a result, there may be unplanned imbalances between expenditure incurred under the National Land Transport Programme, and the revenue received into the National Land Transport Fund. NZTA has a specific short term loan facility to help it manage this situation. Policy on borrowing for the purposes of managing the delivery of the NLTP At times borrowing will be required to manage the delivery of the NLTP. Borrowing increases available funding in the short term, which can be used to manage cash flow, cope with unexpected shocks, or deliver additional activities. However, in the future th ere will be a corresponding decrease in available funding as the borrowing is repaid. At the time of publishing this GPS, formal arrangements are in place for NZTA to use several borrowing facilities. Table provides details of these arrangements. A forecast of the expected debt repayments over the next six years is presented in Appendix A. If additional borrowing facilities are required, NZTA must seek approval from the Ministers of Finance and Transport. Two of the facilities relate to revolving credit. These provide access to committed funding to manage fluctuations in cash flow either due to seasonal variations or shocks. A change in how borrowing is reported is being implemented in GPS . The activities funded though borrowing (and any new PPPs) will be reported at the time of the investment as expenditure in the appropriate activity class. Repayment of borrowing will b e reported as expenditure from the NLTF, separate from activity class spend. Put simply, the interest and debt repayments will be reflected separately from the activity class ranges in GPS . The Ministry will work with NZTA to develop reporting practices to ensure both the spend on activities funded from borrowing and the repayments of borrowing are clearly reported.
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport Ministers Foreword New Zealands economic prosperity is underpinned by a transport network that enables people and freight to move around efficiently , quickly, and safely. This draft Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS ), which is now out for consultation, sets out the Governments ambitious land transport investment agenda, designed to boost economic growth and productivity, resilience, reliability, and safety. The draft GPS outlines the Governments land transport investment priorities, and guides expenditure of around billion from the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF), and around . billion from local government, each year. This GPS sets the balance between investing in new projects and ensuring we maintain and repair our existing infrastructure. It focusses on achieving four k ey strategic priorities: Economic Growth and Productivity Increased Maintenance and Resilience Safety Value for Money. As part of GPS , we are embarking on a significant programme of new and improved land transport infrastructure. Core to this is the reintroduction of the successful Roads of National Significance programme, which was started under the previous Nationa l Government in . These investments will ensure that key connections are provided so that Kiwis can get to where they need to go, quickly and safely. These investments will also reduce congestion on our roads, provide low emission transport options in our main cities, and c reate a more productive and resilient transport network, driving economic growth, and unlocking land for thousands of new houses. This GPS reintroduces a focus on increasing economic growth and productivity as a priority for land transport expenditure. Including economic growth and productivity as a strategic priority will help to ensure we meet our full potential as a nation. Moving people and freight as efficiently, quickly, and safely as possible is critical to achieving these priorities. GPS brings about a significant change in focus, realigning transport expenditure to better support economic growth, and to ensure all New Zealanders are provided with a well maintained and reliable transport network. We also recognise the importance of local and rural roads in connecting our communities and businesses to key routes, and the importance of ensuring the whole network is maintained to a reliable standard. Maintaining the road network is a priority in GPS . To fix the increasing number of potholes on our roads that has occurred in recent years, and to prevent further deterioration in roading quality, GPS increases road maintenance funding by million, compared to the draft GPS released by the previous Government in
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport August . This additional funding is reflected in the newly established State Highway Pothole Prevention and Local Road Pothole Prevention activity classes , to ensure that funding is focussed on fixing this growing problem. The targeted investments in Auckland and Wellington public transport will reduce congestion and help to unlock the potential of our main cities. This GPS will invest in public transport with , up to . billion available for public transport services , and up to . billion available for public transport infrastructure over the next three years. Road safety is a responsibility we all share, and improving road safety in an efficient manner is a priority for this Government. Road deaths and serious injuries (DSIs) place a substantial burden on families, society, the economy, and the health sector ea ch year. GPS acknowledges these impacts and directs investment toward road policing and enforcement, fixing potholes and increasing the level of road maintenance completed on the road network to make our roads safer, and costeffective infrastructure investments that will help to improve the safety of road users through safe infrastructure. Road safety investment is also directed to educating road users through road safety promotion. GPS will also include investment in infrastructure to reverse recent speed limit reductions where it is safe to do so, enabling people to get to where they need to go quickly and safely. This includes the NZTA increasing speed limits to kmh on ro ads that are engineered to that safety standard. Ensuring that investment in transport is resulting in better outcomes is a key focus of GPS . A significant amount of taxpayers money will be invested in transport over the period of this GPS. This investment must deliver better outcomes for New Zeala nders and for future generations of New Zealanders.
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport Section : Introduction to GPS The Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS ) sets out the governments land transport strategy. This includes, among other things: what the government exp ects to be achieved from its investment in land transport through the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) what the government expects to be achieved from its direct investment in land transport how much funding will be provided and how the funding will be raised how it will achieve its outcomes and priorities through investment in certain areas , known as activity classes (e.g., the maintenance of state highways or road policing) a statement of the Mini sters expectations of how the New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) gives effect to th is GPS. In this way the GPS influences decisions on how funding from the NLTF is invested (see Figure ). It also provides direction to local government , KiwiRail and NZTA on the type of activities that should be included in Regional Land Transport Plans (RLTP) , the Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP) and the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) respectively . Local government , the N ZTA, the New Zealand Police, KiwiRail , and other approved organisations under the Land Transport Management Act (the Act) can receive funding from the NLTF for the land transport activities they deliver, such as the construction and maintenance of state highways , local and rural roads , road policing, and public transport. In turn , Regional Land Transport Plans (RLTP) must be consistent with the GPS. This means the direction and aims of the GPS have a direct influence on the funding that goes to regions and activities. The NZTA determines the specific activities funded from the NLTF based on the direction provided by the GPS. A GPS is issued by the Minister of Transport (the Minister) under terms specified in the Act . This GPS (the Government Policy Statement on land transport ( GPS )), covers the financial period to , and will take effect from July . The Government recognises that one of the action items in the current Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP), prepared under the previous Government, refers to ensuring the next Government Policy Statement on Land Transport guides investment that is consistent with the emissions reduction plan . Following the general election and a change of government in late , the intended emissions reduction policies foreshadowed by the previous Government are being reassessed. For this reason, GPS has not undertaken the alignment exercise as anticipated in ERP . The Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) is the Governments key tool to reduce emissions. In addition to the ETS, matters relating to climate changeemissions reduction issues are being worked through and will be addressed during development of the second Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP) . This will include deciding on the cross sector policy mix , to ensure the second emissions budget is achieved , and we are on track to achieve net zero by . This will be to reflect ERP when the final version of GPS is . Alongside GPS , the Government is committed to doubling renewable energy through its Electrify NZ policy by removing red tape and regulatory constraints. The Government is also committed to delivering , public EV chargers by , subject to cost benefit analysis . Doubling renewable
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport energy and delivering a comprehensive, nationwide network of public EV chargers will reduce New Zealands emissions by enabling the electrification of New Zealands vehicle fleet. GPS covers NLTF spending of over billion across the next three years. Revenue to cover this expenditure comes from user charges such as fuel excise duty, road user charges, vehicle registration and tolls , and income from the sale and lease of state highway property . In addition, the NLTF is topped up by direct funding from the Crown in the form of grants and loans . Over the next decade, a significant portion of the NLTF is committed to maintaining and operating the system. This includes maintain ing state highways , local and rural roads, continuing to deliver better public transport and maintaining public transport infrastructure , maintain ing the rail network, promot ing road safety , and road policing. The NLTF also needs to meet its debt repayment obligations including payments for existing roads built th rough Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) . Figure . The role of the GPS in the land transport planning and funding system
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport Section : System Refor m Transport is a critical economic enabler , ensuring that people and goods can move efficiently and safely, connecting people with both economic and social opportunities. The Governments top priority for transport investment will be to support economic growth and productivity in the New Zealand economy. The Governments overarching goal for transport is an effective, efficient, safe, secure, accessible , and resilient transport system that supports the growth of our countrys economy in order to deliver greater prosperity, security and opportunities for all New Zealanders. This Government Policy Statement will reshape the direction of transport investment in New Zealand, with a significant focus on building and maintaining our state highway network to help achieve these objectives. New Zealand is facing an infrastructure deficit which has grown over time , due, in part, to the following factors : . The transport sector is facing significant cost increases resulting in the affordability of maintenance and new infrastructure projects becoming more challenging through the traditional funding models. . The usefulness of fuel usage as a proxy for road usage is rapidly diminishing , due to growing fuel efficiency of vehicles and the shift to electric vehicles (Figure ) . . The current system is based on a payas yougo model, where revenue is spent as it is raised , with limited access to long term funding and financing tools. Long term funding and financing tools are used overseas to build transport infrastructure. . Consenting and property acquisition for major infrastructure projects has become more challenging, adding significant costs and delays to projects. For example , the Mount Messenger project in Taranaki has been the subject of repeated litigation relating to consenting and property acquisition. The result has been cost increase s, uncertainty for affected residents and a postponing of the benefits that will arise once the much needed project is complete .
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport The Government will be undertaking major reforms to address these challenges with the Ministers of Transport, Infrastructure , and Regional Development working closely together to establish a new framework for investment in New Zealands infrastructure, delivering on the Governments objectives. These reforms include: . Once established, the National Infrastructure Agency (NIA) , and the Infrastructure Commission , will work closely with the N ZTA to develop a year plan for transport infrastructure in New Zealand and connect local and offshore investors with transport projects. These projects will include the Roads of National Significance, major public transport infrastructure, and other transport infrastructur e which are identified as part of the Governments long term infrastructure plan. This GPS will require NZTA to consider alternative funding and financing arrangements for all new infrastructure projects to ensure that New Zealand delivers more infrastructure sooner. . Fast tracking of consents for major infrastructure projects. Legislation is already underway to provide fast track consenting approvals. The changes are expected to support the major transport projects within this GPS , including the Roads of National Significance and rapid transit projects. This is a significant step change which means confidence is provided to the construction sector to invest in the capability and equipment needed to deliver these projects. . Making it easier to sell land that is no longer required for transport purposes. . Rapidly advancing reforms to the National Land Transport Funds revenue system. The first step of this is already underway, with light electric vehicles required to pay Road User Charges from April . The next steps include requiring all road vehicles to move from Fuel Excise Duty to Road User Charges, which is a fairer way of charging for road use based on weight and distance. As part of these reforms, we will reform tolling legislation and allow for timeofuse charging on the most congested parts of N ew Zealands road network, helping to reduce congestion and maximise use of existing assets. Technology will be a critical enabler of these reforms . We expect to advance these reforms over the course of this GPS . Legislative changes will be required to achieve these reforms . It is expected that the Ministry and the NZTA will jointly report to the Minister on the future of land transport revenue within three months of the release of draft GPS . . Amending the Land Transport Management Act to require future Government Policy Statements on land transport to adopt a year investment plan, bringing it into alignment with local government Long Term Plans (LTPs), and providing the NZTA Board with greate r confidence and certainty to invest in long term projects and deliver on a long term transport infrastructure pipeline. . Restoring the credibility of the Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS). The ETS is the Governments key tool to reduce emissions. The Government is committed to reestablishing a strong and stable ETS after the failed auctions in , which were caused by policy uncertainty and changes to the ETS auction settings. Other matters relating to climate changeemissions reduction issues are being worked through and will be addressed during development of the second Emissions Reduction Plan. This will include deciding on the cross sector policy mix to best ensure the second emissions budget is achieved and that the economy is on track to achieve net zero by . This will be to reflect the state of play of ERP when the final version of GPS is .
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport
Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport out for consultation
Draft New Zealand Rail Plan released
Draft Rail Plan consultation
Draft Rail Plan developed
Draft amendments developed
Draft paper released for public feedback
Draft sub national VKT Targets agreed in Engagement with Subnational VKT targets consulted on principle by Cabinet local regional targets inform the with councils and by December councillors development of RLTPs Minister briefed. completed (ongoing)
Driver Licensing Rule amended
Driver Licensing wait times
Driver Licensing wait times Summary for week ending Friday August Wait times for practical testing (restricted and full testing) have improved compared to last week. full tests down by days ( days) restricted tests down by days ( days) . At an individual site level, of full test sites and of restricted test sites met the days or less target last week. The backlog of tests is , ( ).
Driver Licensing wait times Summary for week ending Sunday September Wait times for practical testing (restricted and full testing) have decreased compared to last week. full tests down by days ( days) restricted tests down by days ( days). At an individual site level, of full test sites and of restricted test sites met the days or less target last week. Backlog of tests remains at , ( ).
Driver Licensing wait times Update on interventions of note: There are no significant milestones this week , however work is progressing on other interventions including: The immigration pack information has been finalised and is now with Immigration NZ for inclusion. NZTA will notify you when they have confirmed this has started to be rolled out to new arrivals. Uptake of the VTNZ wrap around support trial for migrants has been slow to . VTNZ expect this to resolve by the end of September. NZTA has increased reporting requirements with VTNZ to more closely monitor this and will work with VTNZ to bolster efforts if engagement remains lower than expected. The first proactive outbound call campaign for people not showing up for multiple booked tests without cancelling (non appearances) will be finished this week. Insights from these customers on why theyre not attending will be collated and shared next week .
Driver Licensing wait times Wait times, staffing and productivity for week August Wait times Staffing Productivity Region Full Change (last week) Restricted Change (last week) VTNZ DTO Headcount Tests Completed Northland Auckland North West , Auckland Central South , Waikato Bay of Plenty Central Wellington , Canterbury Otago Southland National Average Total: , Further graphs relating to wait times, as well as the interventions plan update, can be found in Appendix one.
Driver licensing system discussion paper consultation
Driver licensing system review began
Driving change for vintage vehicles
Drone Benefit Study commissioned
Drone Benefit study commissioned and released
Drone forum November
Drone forums regularly held
Drone regulatory work programme
Drones are rapidly gaining in popularity, for both commercial and recreational uses, and are used in a range of ways including scientific research, military training, search and rescue, inspecting powerlines, and filming for movies and television. They are also used in industries such as agriculture, dairy, forestry and tourism. In future, we are likely to see drones being used for goods delivery and even passenger transport.
Drones have the potential to make fundamental changes to how New Zealanders do business, move goods and even transport people.
Drones represent an enormous opportunity to improve productivity and efficiency across different parts of New Zealands economy. The benefits of drones also come with challenges that require innovative solutions to new and existing regulation.
Drones also known as Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS), unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) or Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) are aircraft of any size that operate without a pilot on board. They can be remotely piloted or fly autonomously.
Drug Driving Amendment legislation comes into force
Drug Driving Amendment legislation passed
Drug Driving Bill introduced
Drug driver testing was developed with feedback from an independent expert panel, a range of road safety partners, stakeholders, and refined through the select committee process.
Due to data availability, not all of the measures proposed for GPS reporting are available. For example, we are unable to report on some of the value for money measures for due to changes to the way data is inputted to and extracted from the Transport Investment Online (TIO) System. Work is underway to address this issue.
Due to the increased popularity of zero and low emission vehicles purchases, Clean Car Discount rebates and charges will change for vehicles registered from July .
Due to the increased popularity of zero and low emission vehicles purchases, Clean Car Discount rebates and charges will change for vehicles registered from July . The changes will ensure that the scheme remains financially sustainable while also moving New Zealands vehicle fleet towards zero emissions. Amounts and eligibility for rebates will reduce, and charges on high emission vehicles will increase. A special provision for disability vehicles will be added. No change has been made to the rebate purchase price cap, meaning that vehicles must still be below , including GST and onroad costs to be eligible for a rebate.
Dunedin Auckland . . . Air NZ . . . Jetstar . . .
During a response the Ministry is an intermediary between the transport sector and key
During our research we created other documents to support our final reports. Many of these are available on request.
During peak times, when the roads are busiest, the charges are higher. During offpeak times, when there are fewer cars on the road, the charges are lower or there are no charges.
During the project we convened and chaired a Northland Rail Stakeholder Reference Group made up of local business interests, local government and central government agencies. The group met every to weeks as we developed the business case.
E ng pou o Hei Arataki.
E kapi ana i tnei te hua o t te pnaha waka mahi ngtahi, m te phekoheko, e puta mai ai he pnaha waka e eke ai a Aotearoa.
E mea ana tnei ko te mahi tahi, ko te ttakitaki, ko te mahi tahi, ko te whai mramatanga, ko te ktui.
E rua ng whanga o te waitohu. Ko te tniko e whakaatu ana i te whai i te mtauranga he arapaki te tukutuku kua whatua mai, ka noho ki ng marae, ka pupuri i ng krero m taua marae me na tngata. Ko te niho taniwha, ko te whiringa hua tapatoru nei te hanga, e whakaatu ana i t mtau kaha, i t mtau mhio ki te tauutuutu, me te mahi tahi.
E whai ana a Hei Arataki kia whakapai ake i ng hua waka m ng Mori. Ko mtau tohu e whitu e whakaatu ana i ng pou rautaki e , me ng mtpono rahi e wh o Hei Arataki.
E whakaaatu ana tnei waitohu i Te Ao Mrama, i te ao hurihuri. E hngai ana ki te hononga o Ranginui me Papatnuku me te hunga ora o waenganui hei tiaki m ttau.
E whakaatu ana tnei waitohu i te r me ng whet. E mea ana a r ngti r, ko te r o te r, ko te korakora ira atua. He kanga whakarangatira te kanga ng whet whai e mea ana me toro ki ng whet.
E whakatinana ana mtau mahi i te wawata me te awhero. He pae whakatere m te hua o t mtau arataki i a Aotearoa ki ttahi pnaha waka pakari.
E wh ng mtpono o te rautaki Hei Arataki.
EV Leadership Group disestablished
EV charging guidance
EV owners have been exempt from paying RUC since . The exemption was put in place until EVs reached around per cent of New Zealands light vehicle fleet. This point has now been reached so the government has decided to end the exemption.
EVs access to special vehicle lanes came into effect
EXCHANGE OF TRAFFIC RIGHTS
Each GPS sets out the priorities for a year period and is every three years.
Each GPS sets out the priorities for the following year period and is reviewed and every years.
Each Party shall allow a fair and equal opportunity for the designated airlines of the Parties to compete in providing the international air services governed by this Agreement.
Each designated airline may, on any or all flights and at its option:
Each month we publish a range of information that shows the progress of these polices. These include:
Each quarter, Te Manat Waka will publish regular updates on progress against the Road to Zero Action Plan. This is used to provide regular reporting and updates through to the various Road to Zero governance groups.
Each quarter, the Ministerial Oversight Group meets to get a progress report on Road to Zero. Quarterly progress reports are prepared for each meeting. These have been released under the Official Information Act, and further reports will be proactively uploaded once available.
Each year over , households are invited to participate in the survey. In approximately ,, households everyone completes it.
Earlier in , Waka Kotahi had begun work on an indicative business case for CCM and had started to engage with the market.
Earlier studies identified that the current Ports of Auckland Ltd (POAL) freight operation in the Waitemat Harbour is likely to run out of capacity to cater for Aucklands longterm freight needs. Some critics of the CBD location suggest that the land could be repurposed for better uses, including for tourism, accommodation and commuter transport, as opposed for storage of containers, cars and other bulk commodities. However, the issue of moving to Manukau is very divisive many believe the Harbour is too shallow and that the tidal Bar makes it inoperable for large container vessels. Weather and sea conditions experienced on the West Coast of New Zealand are also challenging.
Early NZTA AC land swap NZTA to seek NZTA Board funding approval and approval to negotiate. Post approval: NZTA AC sign an inprinciple agreement NZTA and ALRL negotiate terms of sale under PWA (through an accredited supplier) AC Committee considers NZTA ALRL land swap proposal AC local boards consider NZTA ALRL land swap proposal AC Committee to endorse the NZTA ALRL land swap proposal AC Governing Body approve the NZTA ALRL land swap proposal NZTA and Auckland council negotiate the terms of the land swap (including the package of land and to be swapped) through the same accredited supplier
Economic Growth and Productivity: reduced journey times and increased travel time reliability less congestion and increased patronage on public transport improved access to markets, employment and areas that contribute to economic growth more efficient supply chains for freight unlocked access to greenfield land for housing development and supporting greater intensification. Increased Maintenance and Resilience more kilometres of the road network resealed and rehabilitated each year fewer potholes a more resilient road and rail network Safety reduction in deaths and serious injuries increased enforcement Value for Money better use of existing capacity less expenditure on temporary traffic management How will the GPS support economic growth and productivity GPS is a blueprint to build and maintain a transport system that supports New Zealands long term economic growth and productivity A reliable and wellmaintained transport network ensures people and goods can move efficiently, quickly and safely and connects people and businesses with economic opportunities. Investments in Roads of National Significance and Roads of Regional Significance will increase the efficiency of how people and freight move around. Increased spending on pothole prevention is also expected to improve safety and resilience for the movement of freight. What does the GPS mean for investment in rail The GPS focuses rail investment on the highest value parts of the network to support the efficient movement of freight, notably on the connections between Auckland, Hamilton, and Tauranga. This will complement investment in the state highway network to deliver a productive and efficient supply chain. Investment in metro rail networks will support the efficient movement of people in Auckland and Wellington. Budget includes million for development of the Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP). This funding is reflected in GPS . The Crown has made a large contribution to rail over the past six years and will continue to provide direct Crown funding for rail in addition to the RNIP. GPS outlines the range of rail projects the Crown has committed to funding (refer to Table in the GPS ). How does the GPS direct investment in public transport The Government will invest in major public transport projects alongside local government to deliver more travel choices and reduced congestion in our main centers of Auckland and Wellington. The major public transport projects in Auckland include: completion of the City Rail Link completion of the Eastern Busway Northwest Rapid Transit corridor Airport to Botany Busway In Wellington, the major public transport investments include: upgrades to rail network substations through Lower North Island Rail Integrated Mobility (LNIRIM) project replacement rolling stock for the Wairarapa and Manawatu lines. How will the Government ensure our roads are better maintained Maintaining the road network is a priority in GPS . To fix the growing number of potholes on our roads, and to prevent further deterioration in roading quality, the GPS increases road maintenance funding by million compared to the draft GPS released in by the previous Government. GPS establishes a new Pothole Prevention Fund through two new activity classes to ensure that maintenance funds are prioritised and ringfenced towards resealing, rehabilitation, and drainage maintenance works to fix and prevent potholes on state highways and local roads. How does GPS ensure a more resilient transport system GPS includes significant investment in maintenance and resilience to ensure that transport networks are not only maintained to high standards but are also more resilient to the impacts of extreme weather or natural disasters. A new Coastal Shipping Resilience Fund is included in GPS . Through this fund, the Government will invest in measures that support the resilience of coastal shipping for freight. Coastal shipping plays an important role in wider network resilience by providing alternative connections to move goods when road and rail links are damaged or inoperable. Decisions on how this funding is used to improve coastal shipping resilience will be made in due course. How does the GPS improve safety on our roads Road safety is a responsibility we all share, and improving road safety is a priority in GPS . Road safety investment will be directed toward road policing and enforcement, alongside investment in building safer roading infrastructure. The Government will publish a new set of road safety objectives later this year, which will target the highest contributing factors in fatal road crashes, such as alcohol and drugs. Blanket speed limit reductions are being reversed, with speed limit reductions focused on areas with high safety concerns. How will the Government ensure value for money The draft GPS includes value for money as a strategic priority. To ensure value for money, the following changes will be made: reducing NZTA head office overhead expenditure by . percent and reinvesting these savings into delivering against the GPS objectives increasing farebox recovery and thirdparty revenue (e.g. advertising) on public transport services reducing expenditure on temporary traffic management, while maintaining the safety of workers and drivers focussing on outcomes in road maintenance and safety investment reviewing road safety investment to ensure investment is focused on efficient changes, which make improvements to the roading network at the lowest cost making better use of existing assets by allowing time of use charging or the use of dynamic lanes in main cities to manage demand a focus on whole of life costs to maximise longrun value making better use of existing digital infrastructure and information systems investigating opportunities for NZTA to run collaborative andor centralized procurement with local government. A performance and Efficiency Plan, developed by the NZTA, will support lifting value for money from investment in transport. See accountability below for more information. Funding How much funding is forecast under the GPS The GPS signals the Governments transport priorities and guides investment in land transport of billion from the NLTF per year. The GPS will also guide around . billion per year from local government. What is the increase in the licensing fee The Government will be increasing the Motor Vehicle Licencing Fee by on January and a further on January . This fee hasnt been increased since and inflation has reduced the real value of this NLTF contribution by half. The change will return MVR to the level, in real terms. Is the Government raising fuel taxes The Government is aware of the costofliving crisis experienced by New Zealanders and is delivering on its commitment to not increase fuel taxes this term. Instead, it is providing additional Crown funding and financing to the draft GPS. However, the cost pressures in the NLTF mean that we will have to return to the previous practice of regular increases in fuel excise duty (FED) and road user charges (RUC) from January . This means FED and RUC will be increased by: cents per litre in January cents per litre in January and an annual cents per litre starting in .
Economic and educational tools You can use travel demand management tools to drive behaviour change within the transport system Economic instruments can help to better inform people of the impacts of their travel choices by putting a price on those impacts. The price of transport can reflect the direct costs of using the network, the indirect costs and externalities (such as emissions), or it can be set relative to other modes to influence the use of one mode over another.
Economic growth and productivity reduced journey times and increased travel time reliability less congestion and increased patronage on public transport improved access to markets, employment and areas that contribute to economic growth more efficient supply chains for freight unlocked access to greenfield land for housing development and supporting greater intensification . Increased maintenance and resilience more kilometres of the road network resealed and rehabilitated each year fewer potholes a more resilient network . Safety reduction in deaths and serious injuries increased enforcement . Value for money better use of existing capacity less expenditure on temporary traffic management . What are the Roads of National Significance The Government will reintroduce the Roads of National Significance programme to achieve its strategic priorities . By highlighting these projects, the Government expects their strategic importance will be focused on during the development of the NLTP. The Roads of National Significance include the following strategic corridors : Whangarei to Auckland, with the following stages prioritised: Alternative to Brynderwyns Whangarei to Port Marsden Warkworth to Wellsford. Tauranga to Auckland, with the following two stages prioritised: Cambridge to Piaere Tauriko West State Highway . Auckland roads: Mill Road the East West Link. Roads to unlock housing growth: Hamilton Southern Links Petone to Grenada Link Road and the Cross Valley Link the North West Alternative State Highway (SH ). Other major routes: Takitimu Northern Link Stage Hawkes Bay Expressway Second Mt Victoria Tunnel and Basin Reserve upgrade the Hope Bypass The Belfast to Pegasus Motorway and Woodend Bypass .
Economic impact report
Editing Note being when document is finalised
Effective and meaningful engagement with stakeholders from local government, the private sector, researchers and iwi will be critical to achieving government priorities and shaping the transport system. We can provide you with further advice on engagement that you should prioritise, and when. There are other important levers that transport does not own, but there are actions that can be taken to influence these. For example, land use is an important lever that requires cross system collaboration and agreement. Given its role as a key enabler of social and economic connections, the transport system intersects with a wide range of other systems at the local, national and global levels. This underlines the need to coordinate with other sectors and recognise the impacts of transport decisions on them . Figure below illustrates some of the key relationships with the transport system, and Appendix includes further detail on some key areas where a coordinated response and decisions are required, including maritime security, border security and climate response .
Effective financial penalties can support road safety by supporting enforcement officers to enforce the road rules. Most of the financial penalties and demerit point levels for offences have not been reviewed since the Land Transport (Offences and Penalties) Regulations were set in . As a result, a number of these penalties are too low to deter unsafe behaviour. The infringement fees, in particular, are significantly lower than the equivalent fees in overseas jurisdictions. A review of penalties for traffic offences is one of the actions under New Zealands Road Safety Objectives document.
Effective public transport contributes to all our environmental, social, and economic goals. It is a lifeline that connects people to work, school, recreation and to their friends and family.
Effective transport financial penalties
Effectiveness Measures Evaluation Statement of Performance Expectation measures
Eight documents fall within the scope of your request and are detailed in the document schedule attached as Annex . The schedule outlines how the documents you requested have been treated under the Act.
Elder, R. W., Voas, R. B., Beirness, D. J., Shults, R. A., Sleet, D. A., Nichols, J. L., Task Force on Community Preventive Services. (). Effectiveness of ignition interlocks for preventing alcohol impaired driving and alcohol related crashes: a Community Guide systematic review. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, , .
Electric Vehicles Programme
Electric and hybrid light vehicle registrations
Electric vehicle owners to pay road user charges
Electric vehicle road user charges bill passed
Electric vehicles (EVs) are vehicles that run on electricity and which can be plugged in to recharge. They can be powered solely by electric batteries, known as pure electric vehicles, or a combination of batteries and a conventional engine, called plugin hybrid electric vehicles.
Electric vehicles weighing over . tonnes, such as buses and trucks, are exempt from paying RUC until December .
Electronic Stability Control
Electronic Stability Control (ESC) is a crash prevention system that intervenes if it detects that a vehicle is about to skid or lose traction. It independently controls the braking of each wheel to correct the vehicle and pull it back into line if it is skidding out of control. International research indicates that ESC can reduce lossofcontrol crashes by between and , preventing hundreds of deaths and thousands of serious injuries. In , the number of light vehicles with ESC entering the New Zealand fleet was increasing, and was expected to prevent deaths and serious i
Eleven documents are released with some information withheld or refused, and seven documents are withheld in full. An extract has been provided from one document, due to limited content being in scope of your request .
Eliminating emissions across the transport sector supports the response to climate change. The transport sector currently produces per cent of CO emissions, and between and , domestic transport emissions increased by per cent.
Ellipses indicate more information before or after a sentence:
Email us If you are interested in finding out about future forums and how you can participate.
Embedding Value for Money across the Intervention Lifecycle Te ManatWaka has recently developed a Value for Money (VfM) assessment model for assessing and evaluating transport interventions. Embedding this model across the sector would enable demonstration of both efficiency and effectiveness while delivering the outcomes sought consistency in assessment approaches and communications of results an overall improvement in the assessment, delivery, monitoring and evaluation of transport investments and interventions. Full report is available from: https:www.transport.govt.nzassetsUploadsNZMoTValueForMoneyReport.pdf Acknowledgements: We would like to acknowledge BECA and HKA for undertaking a review of Te Manat Wakas approach for value and money and developing this assessment model. We are also grateful for the feedback we received from stakeholders on the draft assessment model, and toolsguides that are currently available. Presenters: Judy Li (Principal Advisor Evaluation) and Joanne Leung (Chief Economist)What are the key characteristics Whiletraditional costbenefitanalysisformsakeyelement,themodel also: considershowvaluescould be generatedthroughoutthe interventionlifecycle, including factorssuchaswholeoflifecostandfeedbackloop accountsforrisksandopportunities, including irreversibleimpacts considerspotential impactsandinterdependenciesofactivities. KnowledgeHubtransport.govt.nz How would it apply Forexample,whenusingthemodelatappraisal stage,itwouldinvolve: identifying assessment criteria for each of thecomponents developing arobustscoringapproach comparing different proposalssolutions basedontheVfMassessment(seebelow). Next steps Test and embed this model in our work Engage with the wider sector to gather feedbacks and ideas to support implementation Develop processes and capability to provide sector lead
Emergency services responded to an engine fire on an Air NZ flight on Sunday. It landed at Wellington Airport, all passengers were safely evacuated. TAIC has since announced an investigation. RNZ, NZ Herald , News, Stuff, RadioNZ
Emirates Emirates, all reported transTasman routes
Emission reduction targets and emissions budgets in the New Zealand Emissions Trading Scheme
Emissions Reduction Plan launched
Emissions reduction As evidenced by the changes to infrastructure in Kaikoura, we are building back better, to ensure the gains from our work to strengthen the transport network now, can be experienced by generations to come.
Empower the Minister of Transport to consider national security within the aviation system and make rules when national security considerations apply.
Enable New Zealand to meet its obligations under the International Civil Aviation Organizations Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation.
Enabling Drone Integration Consultation
Enabling New Zealanders to flourish
Enabling standards to improve consumers capability to shift home EV charging demand away from network peaks.
Enabling the rollout of charging infrastructure to support New Zealanders to shift to electric vehicles.
Encourage low emissions freight and heavy transport options
Encouraging a common language and linking outcomes to benefits realisation is good.
Encouraging people to buy lowemission vehicles is crucial as New Zealanders tend to hold on to their vehicles for longer than people in other countries. An average new vehicle entering the country in will not be scrapped until around , locking in significant emissions over its lifetime. The Clean Car Reforms were developed to address this.
End of reduced rates for fuel excise duty, road user charges, and public transport fares
Ending the reductions to petrol excise duty, road user charges and public transport fares
Energy Efficiency (Vehicle Energy Economy Labelling) Amendment Regulations
Energy Innovation (Electric Vehicles and Other Matters) Amendment Act
Engagement closed on the three proposed transport Orders in Council (OiCs) on July .
Engagement with stakeholders
Engages effectively with domestic and international partners and supports the system of international rules and norms
Engineering and consenting could be difficult for all options.
Enhance drug driver testing
Enhance safety and accessibility of footpaths, bike lanes and cycleways
Ensure the Agencys performance measurement framework continues to be fit forpurpose
Ensure the supply of critical imports, particularly medical supplies, and
Ensuring drivers maintain control of their vehicles to prevent deaths and serious injuries on our roads.
Ensuring the safe deployment of AVs on New Zealands public roads
Ensuring the transport sector has the right data, information, research and evaluation to deliver an evidencebased transport system that improves wellbeing and liveability.
Entity (SCE) under the National Civil Defence Emergency Management Plan Order. A SCE
Environment Aotearoa Our Air report
Environment Aotearoa Our Air report
Environment Aotearoa report and
Environment for the Whangrei to Port Marsden (road), the South Auckland projects, and
Environmental sustainabilityResilience
Enzodiazepines sedatives
Equity in Aucklands transport system
Essential Transport Connectivity (ETC) scheme established
Establishing a Cross Agency Taskforce including, the Ministry of Business Innovation and Employment, the Ministry of Transport and EECA (the Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority), and Crown Infrastructure Partners to drive the work programme and engage with industry.
Establishing investment priority
Establishing the Sustainable Public Transport Framework
Establishment of Auckland Light Rail Limited
Estimated effects on crash rates of increasing the minimum driving ages (August ) As described above, increasing the minimum ages had both temporary and long term effects on the characteristics of drivers obtaining Class licences. The temporary impacts of the changes to the minimum ages on driver characteristics appear to have taken around to months to resolve, that is, for key metrics such as the median ag e of learner drivers to settle at a new long term level. It is possible that these temporary effects on driver characteristics also had temporary effects on crash rates. However, these effects are difficult to measure due to the relatively high uncertainti es associated with crash rates measured over short periods of time. Our analysis of the impacts of increases to the minimum ages on crash rates therefore focuses on the long term effects after the characteristics of licensed drivers stabilised. In terms o f long term safety outcomes, there are two potentially offsetting effects of increasing the minimum age for obtaining a learner licence from to years old: . The total population of licensed drivers is reduced, since yearolds are no longer allowed t o drive. Fewer drivers means fewer crashes, all else being equal, and all or almost all crashes involving yearold drivers were prevented. . The age and driving experience profile of remaining drivers is altered. The typical driver is older, which like ly makes them safer (see Figure above, and similar evidence has been found in a range of international studies such as McCartt et al, ). However, the typical driver also has less driving experience, because increasing the minimum learner age took awa y up to one year of potential driving experience from all drivers who would have obtained their learner licence at years old. Increasing the minimum age for obtaining a restricted licence from to . years is unlikely to have had a significant additional effect on safety outcomes, given that the minimum learner licence duration was unchanged at six months. The remainder of this analysis therefore focuses on the effects of increasing the minimum learner licence age from to years old. Prior to the minimum learner age increasing, just under half of the Class learner licences issued each year were to yearolds. Figure shows how the distribution of ages at which people obtained their learner licence changed between and . In gene ral, the shape of the distribution is similar, and most people who would have obtained a learner licence at years old appear to have obtained their licence around one year later. However, it appears that some people responded by bringing forward the dat e at which they obtained a learner licence. For example, in , of learner licences were issued to people within a month of their th birthday, while in , just under of licences were issued to people within a month of their th birthday.
Estimated effects on crash rates of strengthening the restricted test (February ) We used data on the crash involvements of around , drivers who received restricted licences between and and who were aged under years old at the time to estimate whether the odds of crash involvement while on a restricted licence were di fferent for drivers who obtained their restricted licence after the test was strengthened compared to drivers who received their restricted licence earlier. The model is described in section .. of the Technical Report . We estimate that, after controlli ng for driver age, gender, region of residence, amount of time spent on a learner licence, length of time holding a restricted licence, and year effects, the odds of crash involvement while on a restricted licence were not statistically significantly diffe rent for drivers who obtained their restricted licence after the test was strengthened compared to those who obtained their restricted licence before the test was strengthened ( pvalue .). Estimated effects on crash rates of rebalancing penalties for d river licensing breaches (December ) This change affected all drivers from December onwards with a learner or restricted licence. The changes to the penalties were designed to discourage people with learner and restricted licences from driving in breach of the conditions of their licence, that is, driving without a supervisor while on a learner licence, or carrying passengers or driving at night without a supervisor while on a restricted licence. In theory this change could have led to a reducti on in crashes, assuming that people driving in breach of their licence conditions are at higher risk of crashing than they otherwise would be. In practice, such an effect is likely to be difficult to measure, unless people driving in breach of their licenc e conditions were involved in a relatively large proportion of crashes.
Estimated safety impacts of the to changes to the Class GDLS Increasing the minimum learner age from to years old in led to a reduction in crashes Increasing the minimum age for obtaining a Class learner licence from to years old is estimated to have caused an overall long term reduction of around crashes per year. Around three quarters of the estimated reduction (around crashes per year) was due to yearolds no longer being able to legally drive. The remainder of the reduction (around crashes per year) was the net effects of changes in the distribution of driver ages and the amount of time that drivers had held driver licences among drivers aged under years old. In the overall crash rate for drivers aged under years old was . crashes per , licensed drivers per year. It is estimated that this crash rate would have been . crashes per , licensed drivers per year if the minimum learner age had remained at years old. As above, most of this difference is due to year olds no longer being able to drive. In there would have been around , licensed yearold drivers if the minimum age had not changed, and these people would have obtained some value from being able to drive. While we have not estimated this value in this report, it is a social cost of increasing the minimum driver licensing age. We did not find evidence that strengthening the restricted licence test in had a statistically significant effect on crash rates Drivers under years who obtained their restricted licence after the test was strengthened were estimated to be between less likely to mor e likely (with confidence) to be involved in a crash while on their restricted licence, compared to drivers of the same age who obtained their restricted licence under the previous test. Rebalancing the penalties for licensing breaches in had no measurable effect on crash rates The rebalancing of penalties for driver licensing breaches included changes to the fines and demerit points for breaching licence conditions. Under the changes, the infringement fee was decreased from to and the d emerit points (except for failing to display an L plate) increased from to points. Licences are suspended for three months if drivers receive or more demerit points within any twoyear period. Learner and restricted crash rates for drivers aged and under did change around the time that penalties were rebalanced, but these changes in crash rates are more likely to be explained by general road safety trends and changes in driver demographics. Any impact of the rebalanced penalties on crash rates appear to be too small to distinguish from other factors that affected crash rates at the same time. Comparison of crash rates for restricted and fully licensed drivers Obtaining a full licence is associated with lower crash rates after controlling for di fferences in driver characteristics Fully licensed drivers are around less likely to crash than drivers with restricted licences after controlling for driver age, gender, region of residence, and amount of
Euro and VI implementation dates agreed
Euro d phased in from July to July (or sooner if Australia moves sooner).
Euro VIc phased in from November to November . (This is aligned with Australia).
European Commission Report on Euro .
European Commission report on Euro pollution reductions
Evaluation Programme
Evaluation Programme
Evaluation Programme
Evaluation Team The evaluation team were Adrian Field (proje ct lead), Aaron Schiff (data science), Michael Blewden (qualitative research), Julian King (evaluation design and methods review), Hamish Mackie (peer review), Adela Wypych (data science) and Georgia Parslow (project support).
Evaluation of the Graduated Driver Licensing System
Evaluations of the Road User Charges Act undertaken
Even though the parallel process ended without a preferred delivery partner being appointed,
Every aspect of the parallel process was governed by a probity plan and overseen by an independent probity auditor to ensure that both Waka Kotahi and NZ Infra had equal and fair access to information.
Every two years we commission a stakeholder engagement survey, in order to get an independent view of stakeholders perceptions. The next survey is taking place in .
Every year we report on the work we do and how it supports the outcomes in the framework.
Every year, millions of people across Aotearoa head outdoors to connect, recreate and operate across the wai (water) and the whenua (land). Enabling them are a range of organisations in the recreational safety system who give them the knowledge and skills to do so safely. But sometimes things happen people get lost, injured andor end up distressed in some way. When that happens, organisations in the search and rescue system kick into gear to bring them back to a place of safety. New Zealand has responsibility for one of the worlds largest search and rescue regions, providing search and rescue services for anyone, anywhere in our region. This covers the mid Tasman Sea, halfway to Chile and from the South Pole almost to the equator. This is a total of million km. We also support and are supported by our neighbouring search and rescue regions to undertake search and rescue operations. This is a significant responsibility, bound by international conventions. For a small country we punch well above our weight. The organisations involved in the recreational safety and the search and rescue systems (the systems) include many government and nongovernment organisations (NGOs). Some of these organisations deliver services across both systems.The benefits delivered through the systems are life saving supporting people to head outdoors and return home safely. This includes: the knowledge, skills, training and education provided to New Zealanders and visitors to Aotearoa to support safer recreation reducing the impact of death and injury on whnau, friends and the New Zealand economy supporting New Zealand business in general, and the prosperity of the recreational tourism sector supporting work within other systems for example, the emergency management system and the health system providing search and rescue assistance to anyone, anywhere, and anytime they need it across the New Zealand Search and Rescue Region including commercial operators domestically and internationally supporting the delivery of New Zealands international obligations for search and rescue and wellbeing outcomes globally. Under the radar The organisations and people involved in the systems broadly operate under the radar of both Ministers and the public. They deliver critical safety services with very little fanfare. Many of the people involved are volunteers. They are highly trained and skilled personnel who dedicate their time for free. They are driven by an underlying commitment and passion to help others stay safe. We also know that many of them work for other emergency service providers and respond in civil emergencies their contribution to New Zealands wellbeing is significant. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Executive summary The challenges Across both of the systems, there are challenges, in particular for NGOs, and their volunteers, who face problems relating to: the ability to meet existing and future demands for services because of: New Zealands increasing population growth the growth in the number of people recreating population movement (as a consequence of financial, environmental and other factors) capacity (assets and people), and ensuring the wellbeing of their people through compliance with legislative requirements including health, safety and wellbeing the sustainability of the volunteer model increasing overheads, financial and funding pressures. The organisations and people involved have told us current investment has been enough to keep them operational. But this is insufficient to deliver all of the demands for services in a changing world, provide for necessary strategic planning, innovation and futureproofing, and to implement changes in response. Leadership and a strong willingness by organisations to work together is evident. Collective governance and leadership arrangements have grown and evolved within the systems to address sector specific issues and opportunities; however, in their current form, these collective arrangements are constrained and unable to: address systemswide risks resolve cross cutting issues, or maximise opportunities together.Our recommendations The highlevel recommendations proposed to address these challenges are: the recreational safety and the search and rescue systems connect as one system (the System) to reflect the pipeline of critical safety services delivered between them the finalisation and implementation of a System Strategy to connect the two systems to inspire the organisations involved and harness their power together the implementation of revised and streamlined governance arrangements for the System the appointment of Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport as the System Steward within government, to provide strategic policy advice and coordination across the System and adjacent systems the implementation of the Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Volunteer Plan to provide more Systemwide support to volunteers who form the backbone of the workforce across the System modelling to forecast future demand for frontline safety and search and rescue services, to inform the configuration of assets and people required in response, and investment requirements funding requirements identified to support continued service delivery through the volunteers and the NGOs that support them a set of funding principles to inform government funding into the System. Our overarching driver is: Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai: Supporting peoples wellbeing (waiora and mauriora) and safer recreation from the mountains to the sea. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Wai Puna There is much to be learnt from the approach of Mori to health and wellbeing through the Wai Puna model. The Wai Puna model is a theory of Mori water safety and health developed by Dr Chanel Phillips (Ngti Hine, Ngpuhi), which has underpinned our work to . A Wai Puna approach to support recreational safety and wellbeing, is foremost about strengthening our connection to the land and water. Through a strengthened connection to the environment (by nurturing tikanga behaviour skills, mtauranga knowledge and whakapapa attitudes and beliefs) it encourages safer recreation which has positive health outcomes, allowing people to thrive and flourish in the outdoors. We recognise that more sustained and longterm engagement with Mori is critical to achieve better outcomes for Mori and all New Zealanders. The expected benefits We believe these recommendations will enable: streamlined collaboration and coordination between the organisations involved stronger commitment to joint ways of working to maximise issue resolution and opportunities informed decisionmaking to target resources more effectively across the pipeline of services to better support harm prevention outcomes the means to enable extra funding to create a more sustainable System and the organisations within it better collaboration with adjacent systems across government to pursue resources and funding to deliver System outcomes a sustainable workforce including well supported volunteers.We are in this together Comfort within a changing world is something that organisations in the System need to embrace and adapt to, together. Lifestyle changes, climate change, and technology will continue to evolve at a cracking rate, and how the System is organised, governed, and funded to respond will be essential going forward. Neither the recreational safety system or the search and rescue system can go it alone. Data, insights, research, tools and technology, are some of the key ingredients required between the organisations to support the delivery of harm prevention and response services into the future (and in light of changing circumstances). The ability to better harness these for the benefit of everyone involved in the System and more widely, should be encouraged and supported. Ng mihi nui, Many thanks to everyone who has informed the work of the Review. They have contributed their time and advice, their experiences and stories. This has been incredibly valuable. Special thanks to the Review Advisory Group who have been instrumental in the Review process, and in the work and analysis that has underpinned our findings and recommendations aroha nui ki a koutou. E ng rau rangatira m, ka maumahara koutou ki tnei krero. Ehara taku toa I te toa takitahi, engari he toa takitini. Success is not the work of one but the work of many. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue EXECUTIVE SUMMARY NAVIGATING THIS REPORT This Report is divided into eight sections: Section One contains background information about the Review. It provides an overview about the systems, and the key areas of focus. Section Two sets out the evolution of the systems, their intersections, and describes the benefits and value of them. Sections Three Seven contain the Reviews areas of focus, the main findings and recommendations split over five thematic areas: connecting the systems together and a draft System Strategy developed through the Review (Section Three) revised governance and leadership arrangements for the System (Section Four) systematic support to the volunteers in the System through the Haumata Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Volunteer Plan developed through the Review (Section Five) the capacity (assets and people) available to deliver frontline safety and search and rescue services, current constraints and needs (Section Six) funding needs identified through the Review to support the NGOs and volunteers primarily, and a funding framework to inform government funding into the System (Section Seven). Section Eight sets out a proposed highlevel implementation plan to give effect to the recommendations. The Review recommendations at a glance are set out below. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Navigating this Report System Strategy SECTION THREE . Connect the recreational safety and the search and rescue systems together to better reflect the pipeline of safety services provided across the systems to support wellbeing (waiora and mauriora) and safer recreation. . Finalise and implement a System Strategy Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai supporting peoples wellbeing (waiora and mauriora) and safer recreation from the mountains to the sea to connect the systems together, harness the power of the collective, and to inspire and guide the organisations involved. . Develop a set of values within the System Strategy reflecting the Wai Puna model in alignment with Te Tiriti o Waitangi and the shared responsibility for the System. . Develop measures and confirm the data required for those measures to report progress on the System Strategy and address any gaps.
Evidence from the report shows there is transport inequity in Auckland and this arises as a consequence of two main factors:
Examples of educational instruments to influence travel choices and decisions include travel planning, social media marketing, information provision, and mass media campaigns. The greatest benefits come from combining economic and educational instruments with compl ementary measures, such as infrastructure provision and legislative changes. In doing so, these measures can help to more effectively achieve the outcomes you want to see in the transport system, such as reduced congestion, reduced emissions and better health outcomes. Regulation You have a range of tools in the transport regulatory system to deliver durable transport outcomes Regulation is indispensable to the proper functioning of economies and societies. Regulation underpins markets, create an enabling environment for firms and individuals, protect the rights and safety of citizens, and ensure the delivery of public goods and services. The system is comprised of primary and secondary legislation (which includes regulations, rules, and other instruments). Some transport regulation involves the direct prohibition or authorisation of some commercial activity. Foreign ships are explicitly prohibited from carrying coastal cargo, except in specified circumstances and with specific approval., Airlines operating scheduled international services require an international air services licence, issued within parameters set out in Air Services Agreements. Some parts of the transport sector (e.g. aviation) is subject to regulation by other agencies, e.g. the Commerce Commission regulates the disclosure of pricing by airports given the monopolistic nature of airports. You have responsibility for a variety of legal instruments Legislation forms the core of the transport regulatory system comprising primary legislation, secondary legislation, and local government bylaws . You are responsible for transport Acts which set out: the roles and functions of the Ministry, transport agencies, and state owned enterprises (SOEs) (like KiwiRail) the planning and funding arrangements for land transport the roles and powers of local authorities and road controlling authorities licensing and certification arrangements for transport system participants, vehicles and technology the requirements for making transport regulations and rules compliance tools to promote adherence to safety, security and environmental requirements across transport modes. As Transport Minister you have powers to amend, replace or disallow some local government bylaws. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS
Exceptions include for tables, graphs and charts (eg, Mon, Tue, Nov, Dec).
Exceptions: Use a hyphen to separate a prefix from a name used as an adjective, or from a numeral postFreudian, pre. Use hyphens to avoid confusion with another word Recover, recover .
Excerpt from CVD Committee meeting notes on Cabinet paper Aviation Relief Package
Excerpt from Cabinet Committee meeting notes relating to the proposed aviation relief package.
Excise and Exciseequivalent Duties Table (Budget MeasuresMotor Spirits) Amendment Act
Excise and Exciseequivalent Duties Table (Motor Spirits) Amendment Order
Exclusions already in place will continue to apply. Some new exclusions, such as for motorcycles used in motorsport, will be added.
Executive Council , I also intend to sign the Land Transport (Road User)
Executive Secretary Wharekawa Marae
Executive Summary . . . . . Part : Key Issues . . . . . a. Link between what is announced in the GPS, what is planned, and information about what is delivered. . . . . . Total allocations exceed the expenditure target for . . .. . Signalling differences from one GPS to the next . . . .. . . . New Road to Zero activity class and strategy . . . . . .. . What were hearing . . . . .. . . . . b. State of the land transport funding system . . . . . . Taxing Kiwi motorists . . . . . . . . Road user revenue for major non road capital projects . . . . . .. . . The current situation and an ongoing issue . . . . . . .. . . . There are better ways to do this . . . . . . . . . c. State of the network and its effect on safety . . . . . Road maintenance and road building are road safety i ssues . . . What were hearing . .. . . . . . . . . . Maintenance allocation and the backlog . . . . . . . What were hearing . . . . .. . . . . Reductions to state highway and local oad funding for improvements . . What were hearing . . . . . . Regional and rural New Zealand . . . . What were hearing . . . . . . Comment on Safety indicators: . . . . d. National rail network . . . . Shifting freight to rail . . . . .. Appropriate use o f road user revenue . . . . What were hearing . . . . . Comment on improving freight connections indicators: . . . e. Better travel options and Climate change strategic priorities . . Overlapping priorities . . . . . Mode shift . . . . . What were hearing: . . . . . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Executive Summary Abstract This study evaluate d the interpretation and implementation of mode shift signals in the Government Policy Statement on Land Transport (GPS). Analysis of , , and Transport Investment Online (TIO) data and in depth interviews with transport practitio ners showed that while the trend is towards funding more mode shift activities through the National Land Transport Plan (NLTP) , it is a gradual shift over time. Recommendations address the relatively small margins for change given committed funds, limited capacity within the sector and council budgets, and challenges planning and funding the kinds of complex, network based changes needed to bring about mode shift. About the study The GPS outlines the Governments strategy to guide transport investment through the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) . GPS signalled a shift in funding priorities to emphasise activities supporting mode shift , such as walking, cycling, and public transpor t. This study evaluate d the impact of mode shift changes signalled in GPS . The primary focus was on the GPS and NLTF while recognising that other policies, investments, and factors also influenced mode shift. We evaluated how mode shift signals were interpreted and implemented at national, local, and regional decision making levels . The aim was to improve our understanding of how the GPS supports mode shift and improvements to enhance future iterations of the GPS. Guided by an evaluation framework, o ur methodological approach involved analysing quantitative and qualitative data . The framework was informed by orientation workshop insights where the current context for implementing the GPS was discussed with stakeholders from Te Manat Waka, Waka Kotahi, and local authorities . The evaluation framework included three stages in the process to observe changes supporting mode shift (what is a priority, what gets funded, and what gets monitored) across national, regional, and local decision making scales for the three GPS periods , , and . Existing data and indicators from various sources were gathered and as sessed to populate the framework. Sources included mode shift related transport indicators from Te Manat Waka , NLTF data from Waka Kotahis TIO platform, and strategy and planning documents. Indicators were categorised by maturity based on their availabil ity at the relevant decision making and temporal scales. Additional insights on the interpretation and implementation of GPS mode shift investment signals were gained through semi structured interviews with stakeholders from Waka Kotahi and regional and lo cal councils (urban and rural). Data from the TIO platform was analysed to determine the impact of GPS on transport investment. We observed changes over time in the number of mode shift promoting activities forwarded to the NLTF and their funding in t he National Land Transport Plan (NLTP). Information on activities from three GPS periods (, , and ) was extracted for seven regions and categorised into mode shift promoting, roading or other. A simple weighting process was applied to the categ ories to account for mode shift investment in roading activities (a more nuanced weighting EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Executive Summary The New Zealand Automobile Association ( AA) welcomes the opportunity to pro vide comment on the Government Policy Statement on Land Transport (GPS ) . We have focussed our submission on what we consid er to be critical strategic issues, rather than attempt to comment o n every aspect of GPS , including: Clarity about what the Government is committing to deliver , as allocations exceed revenue by over B in , which has not been the case previousl y. As a consequence, GPS creates some major questions about how trade offs will be made andor what other funding may be required. These are questions we expect a GPS to answer , not pose . In the case of the new Road to Zero activity class the changes from the previous approach to road safety (i.e. mix and level of road safety activities ) are not readily apparent .
Executive Summary Transport is the glue that holds our communities together. In there were an estimated . million disabled New Zealanders All types of impairments can create access needs Access needs are no problem if the built environment and transport is accessible. It is important to assess the safety of the whole transport system for everyone. This means that at risk groups such as disabled people and pedestrians should be visible in the road safety data. The government needs to ensure that disabled people are getting the same opportunities as nondisabled people and are not being isolated, preventing them from accessing work, social, and educational opportunities. The government needs to disaggregate the indicators in Strategic Policy by impairment or access need. Future proofing New Zealand roads and public transport will benefit disabled people as well as the general public Recommendations . Deaths and serious injuries should be disaggregated by impairment or access need and other atrisk groups, such as older people, as well as by whether they are pedestrians. . Disaggregate the indicators in Strategic Policy by impairment or access need. . Desired result needs an additional indicator on the accessibility of public transport for disabled people. This new indicator should say the percentage of public transport vehicles are accessible to disabled people. . Desired result needs an indicator that looks at number of disabled people using public transport. This new indicator should say number of disabled people using and accessing public transport in urban areas (by region). . The government should recognise the work done by the transport and disability sector in New Zealand and consult them on big projects like this. . Measure the participation of disabled people in the transport system RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Existing tools that may contribute to the framework include: ImpactOutcomes Investment Assurance Framework (IAF) IDMF (being revised due August ) Living Standards Framework implementation to be defined Benefits Framework and Benefits Management Approach Non monetised Benefits Manual Quantitative measures Business Requirements Analysis Domestic Transport Cost and Charges (DTCC) (quantitative) REG Excellence Framework Procurement guide ongoing Alternative delivery model work Waka Kotahi manuals and guidance material refreshing business case learning support. Treasury business case guidance Treasury Risk Profile Assessment (RPA) and gateway processes
Expand the aviation security regime to enable shortterm additional security measures in temporary landside security areas at airports when needed to respond to a heightened threat environment.
Expenditure targets were increased by NZD million per year for the years , and .
Expenditure type Work category Analysis category Environment drainage Roads: Maintenance renewals Financial grants stimulus Roads: Maintenance renewals Footpath Walking cycling: Maintenance renewals Network property management Roads: Maintenance renewals Pavement seal Roads: Maintenance renewals Structures Roads: Maintenance renewals Walking cycling Cycling facilities Walking cycling: Infrastructure Walking facilities Walking cycling: Infrastructure Emergency reinstatement Walking cycling: Maintenance renewals Administration General Walking cycling: Other
Experience Technical Director Regenerative Outcomes Mott MacDonald
Exploring options for whether regulatory advice could be provided by an organisation or entity outside of the Civil Aviation Authority
Exploring the case for the development of a dry dock in Northland.
Exposure draft consulted on
Extending existing port coastal permits under RMA
Extending existing port coastal permits under RMA Context The introduction of the Resource Management Act (RMA) required ports to obtain permits to continue some of their operations in the coastal marine area in the interim while they transitioned into the RMA planning framework. These permits were only for coastal occupation activities they were carrying out at the time and are set to expire in September . The permits cover crucial aspects of port activities like navigation aids such as buoys, lights and fog signals, exclusive occupation areas such as safe anchor areas, and some structures such as wharves. Since when the RMA was introduced, ports have expanded and new activities in the coastal marine area have been permitted under the RMA . However, the complexity of the RMA has made gaining consents for pre activities increasingly difficult. Proposal The Government proposes to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years. The proposal: The Government will extend these permits as part of a number of targeted changes to the RMA to be passed in This extension will be automatic and not require an application The expiry of each consent will change, and there will also be a new process to introduce or modify consent conditions on these permits. Impacts of the proposal: Port companies will have an additional years to transition to permanent resource management arrangements The extension will provide ports with the certainty they need to invest and operate in the coastal marine area for the time being A process will be established to introduce or modify consent conditions on these permits where necessary . We welcome your feedback The Ministry of Transport is hosting two online meetings with key stakeholders to gather feedback on the proposal and answer any questions you may have . You will receive invitations to the meetings following this email. You can also provide written feedback by July by email to portsconsulttransport.govt.nz . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TE MANATU WAKA J tP MIIOSTAY OF TltAHSPOAT Hopaiha ana nga tilngata o Aotearoa kla eke Enabling New Zealanders to flourish Oscar CasswellLaird From: Tredegar Hall Sent: Wednesday, May To: C c: shadrach.rollestonmfe.govt.nz; Rebecca Beals Subject: Tauranga Moana: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Attachments:Extending the duration of existing port coastal permits.pdf Tna koutou e ng uri o Tauranga Moana, Ng mihi nui ki koutou me ng ahuatanga o te wa. He uri no Ngti Twharetoa tenei, e whakaarotia mo ng Take Ao Mori o roto i te tari o Te Manat Waka, e tuku mihi ki koutou. On April the Government announced their intention to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years. In your rohe this is for the Port of Tauranga Consistent with the Ministrys Te Tiriti obligations, and in our ongoing eort to build our relationships with Te Iwi Mori, we are eager to receive your views to the ports permits extension process. If we have missed any important Iwi, Hap, PSGE of tangata whenua groups in this email please let me know. We are checking in to see if you have any queries about ports permits extension process, or whether you would like to share any views or insights. We note there are potential cultural, and Te Tiriti impacts which need to be considered and that this process is also a part of the wider Resource Management reforms currently taking place through MFE. You can give feedback in writing by return email directly to me or make a submission to the portsconsulttransport.govt.nz email. We would be happy to arrange a meeting within the consultation period of which is currently open now until July, to explain the key elements of the ports permits extension process, permit duration, impacts, conditions and discuss any of your questions or views. We can hui in person or online based on your preference and availability. In the interests of time, we would advocate for a rohe collective approach for an engagement or hui, based on the responses we receive. Ccd into this email are our Manat mo te Taiao (MFE) colleagues looking after the RM reforms and iwi partnerships and Rebecca Beals who is our Principal Advisor, Urban Development and Public Transport at Te Manat Waka (MoT). If you want any further information about this Kaupapa please feel free to give me a call on the number below. I raro i te manaakitanga nui me ng whakaaro pai ki a koutou i tenei wa puku mahi o mtou o te ao mori. Nku noa, Tredegar Rangitea Hall (he his Mr) Twharetoa, Te Arawa s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Kairahi Mori Director Mori E: t.halltransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TE MANATU WAKA IP M SHIV OF fRM,PORT Hapatm an.i ng.i t:mg;:it:, o Aolearoa k.i Enabling New Zealanders ourish Oscar CasswellLaird From: Tredegar Hall Sent: Wednesday, May To: C c: Ben White; Rebecca Beals Subject: Te Mtau a Maui: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Attachments:Extending the duration of existing port coastal permits.pdf Tna koutou e ng uri o Te Mtau a Maui Ngti Kahungungu, Ng mihi nui ki koutou me ng ahuatanga o te wa. He uri no Ngti Twharetoa tenei, e whakaarotia mo ng Take Ao Mori o roto i te tari o Te Manat Waka, e tuku mihi ki koutou. On April the Government announced their intention to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years. In your rohe this is for the Napier Port Holdings Limited. Consistent with the Ministrys Te Tiriti obligations, and in our ongoing eort to build our relationships with Te Iwi Mori, we are eager to receive your views to the ports permits extension process. If we have missed any important Iwi, Hap, PSGE of tangata whenua groups in this email please let me know. We are checking in to see if you have any queries about ports permits extension process, or whether you would like to share any views or insights. We note there are potential cultural, and Te Tiriti impacts which need to be considered and that this process is also a part of the wider Resource Management reforms currently taking place through MFE. You can give feedback in writing by return email directly to me or make a submission to the portsconsulttransport.govt.nz email. We would be happy to arrange a meeting within the consultation period of which is currently open now until July, to explain the key elements of the ports permits extension process, permit duration, impacts, conditions and discuss any of your questions or views. We can hui in person or online based on your preference and availability. In the interests of time, we would advocate for a rohe collective approach for an engagement or hui, based on the responses we receive. Ccd into this email are our Manat mo te Taiao (MFE) colleagues looking after the RM reforms and iwi partnerships and Rebecca Beals who is our Principal Advisor, Urban Development and Public Transport at Te Manat Waka (MoT). If you want any further information about this Kaupapa please feel free to give me a call on the number below. I raro i te manaakitanga nui me ng whakaaro pai ki a koutou i tenei wa puku mahi o mtou o te ao mori. Nku noa, Tredegar Rangitea Hall (he his Mr) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Twharetoa, Te Arawa Kairahi Mori Director Mori E: t.halltransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TE MANATO WAKA IP M tSJRV OF l H.pah, an, nga .ilg.ita o Aoearoa (ll eke Enabling New Zealmdcrs flourish Oscar CasswellLaird From: Tredegar Hall Sent: Wednesday, May To: C c: Ben White; Rebecca Beals Subject: Te Wai Harakeke: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Attachments:Extending the duration of existing port coastal permits.pdf Tna koutou e ng uri o Te Wai Harakeke Ng mihi nui ki koutou me ng ahuatanga o te wa. He uri no Ngti Twharetoa tenei, e whakaarotia mo ng Take Ao Mori o roto i te tari o Te Manat Waka, e tuku mihi ki koutou. On April the Government announced their intention to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years. In your rohe this is for Port Marlborough NZ Limited. Consistent with the Ministrys Te Tiriti obligations, and in our ongoing eort to build our relationships with Te Iwi Mori, we are eager to receive your views to the ports permits extension process. If we have missed any important Iwi, Hap, PSGE or tangata whenua groups in this email please let me know. We are checking in to see if you have any queries about ports permits extension process, or whether you would like to share any views or insights. We note there are potential cultural, and Te Tiriti impacts which need to be considered and that this process is also a part of the wider Resource Management reforms currently taking place through MFE. You can give feedback in writing by return email directly to me or make a submission to the portsconsulttransport.govt.nz email. We would be happy to arrange a meeting within the consultation period of which is currently open now until July, to explain the key elements of the ports permits extension process, permit duration, impacts, conditions and discuss any of your questions or views. We can hui in person or online based on your preference and availability. In the interests of time, we would advocate for a rohe collective approach for an engagement or hui, based on the responses we receive. Ccd into this email are our Manat mo te Taiao (MFE) colleagues looking after the RM reforms and iwi partnerships and Rebecca Beals who is our Principal Advisor, Urban Development and Public Transport at Te Manat Waka (MoT). If you want any further information about this Kaupapa please feel free to give me a call on the number below. I raro i te manaakitanga nui me ng whakaaro pai ki a koutou i tenei wa puku mahi o mtou o te ao mori. Nku noa, n, Tredegar Rangitea Hall (he his Mr) Twharetoa, Te Arawa Kairahi Mori Director Mori s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT E: t.halltransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TE MANATU WAKA IP Ml SHIV OF TRAINISPORl H;.ip.ll: an.i ni.i t:ugr;it: o Aoe:iroa :i e Enabling New Zea.landers liourish Oscar CasswellLaird From: Tredegar Hall Sent: Wednesday, May To: Cc: daran.pontermfe.govt.nz; Rebecca Beals Subject: Te Wai Pounamu ki Motu Phue: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Tna koutou e ng uri o Te Wai Pounamu ki Motu Phue, Ng mihi nui ki koutou me ng ahuatanga o te wa. He uri no Ngti Twharetoa tenei, e whakaarotia mo ng Take Ao Mori o roto i te tari o Te Manat Waka, e tuku mihi ki koutou. On April the Government announced their intention to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years. In your rohe this is for South Port New Zealand Limited (Blu). Consistent with the Ministrys Te Tiriti obligations, and in our ongoing eort to build our relationships with Te Iwi Mori, we are eager to receive your views to the ports permits extension process. If we have missed any important Iwi, Hap, PSGE or tangata whenua groups in this email please let me know. We are checking in to see if you have any queries about ports permits extension process, or whether you would like to share any views or insights. We note there are potential cultural, and Te Tiriti impacts which need to be considered and that this process is also a part of the wider Resource Management reforms currently taking place through MFE. You can give feedback in writing by return email directly to me or make a submission to the portsconsulttransport.govt.nz email. We would be happy to arrange a meeting within the consultation period of which is currently open now until July, to explain the key elements of the ports permits extension process, permit duration, impacts, conditions and discuss any of your questions or views. We can hui in person or online based on your preference and availability. In the interests of time, we would advocate for a rohe collective approach for an engagement or hui, based on the responses we receive. Ccd into this email are our Manat mo te Taiao (MFE) colleagues looking after the RM reforms and iwi partnerships and Rebecca Beals who is our Principal Advisor, Urban Development and Public Transport at Te Manat Waka (MoT). If you want any further information about this Kaupapa please feel free to give me a call on the number below. I raro i te manaakitanga nui me ng whakaaro pai ki a koutou i tenei wa puku mahi o mtou o te ao mori. Nku noa, n, Tredegar Rangitea Hall (he his Mr) Twharetoa, Te Arawa Kairahi Mori Director Mori E: t.halltransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT lsi TE MANATU WAKA IP M SHIV OF TRAINPORT H;.ipaI, n.i ng. t:ing::it:, o Aole;iroa lw eke En bling New Zea.landers ourish Oscar CasswellLaird From: Tredegar Hall Sent: Wednesday, May To: C c: daran.pontermfe.govt.nz; Rebecca Beals Subject: Te Wai Pounamu ki tepoti: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Tna koutou e ng uri o Te Wai Pounamu ki tepoti, Ng mihi nui ki koutou me ng ahuatanga o te wa. He uri no Ngti Twharetoa tenei, e whakaarotia mo ng Take Ao Mori o roto i te tari o Te Manat Waka, e tuku mihi ki koutou. On April the Government announced their intention to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years. In your rohe this is for Port Otago Limited. Consistent with the Ministrys Te Tiriti obligations, and in our ongoing eort to build our relationships with Te Iwi Mori, we are eager to receive your views to the ports permits extension process. If we have missed any important Iwi, Hap, PSGE or tangata whenua groups in this email please let me know. We are checking in to see if you have any queries about ports permits extension process, or whether you would like to share any views or insights. We note there are potential cultural, and Te Tiriti impacts which need to be considered and that this process is also a part of the wider Resource Management reforms currently taking place through MFE. You can give feedback in writing by return email directly to me or make a submission to the portsconsulttransport.govt.nz email. We would be happy to arrange a meeting within the consultation period of which is currently open now until July, to explain the key elements of the ports permits extension process, permit duration, impacts, conditions and discuss any of your questions or views. We can hui in person or online based on your preference and availability. In the interests of time, we would advocate for a rohe collective approach for an engagement or hui, based on the responses we receive. Ccd into this email are our Manat mo te Taiao (MFE) colleagues looking after the RM reforms and iwi partnerships and Rebecca Beals who is our Principal Advisor, Urban Development and Public Transport at Te Manat Waka (MoT). If you want any further information about this Kaupapa please feel free to give me a call on the number below. I raro i te manaakitanga nui me ng whakaaro pai ki a koutou i tenei wa puku mahi o mtou o te ao mori. Nku noa, n, Tredegar Rangitea Hall (he his Mr) Twharetoa, Te Arawa Kairahi Mori Director Mori E: t.halltransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TE MANATU WAKA J p MIMSTAT TA.AHSP()t:tl H.lpaJha an. np .ingata o Aoler kia eke Enabling New Zealanders flourish Oscar CasswellLaird From: Tredegar Hall Sent: Wednesday, May To: C c: Ben White; Rebecca Beals Subject: Te Wai Pounamu ki Timaru: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Attachments:Extending the duration of existing port coastal permits.pdf Tna koutou e ng uri o Te Wai Pounamu ki Timaru, Ng mihi nui ki koutou me ng ahuatanga o te wa. He uri no Ngti Twharetoa tenei, e whakaarotia mo ng Take Ao Mori o roto i te tari o Te Manat Waka, e tuku mihi ki koutou. On April the Government announced their intention to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years. In your rohe this is for Prime Port Timaru Limited. Consistent with the Ministrys Te Tiriti obligations, and in our ongoing eort to build our relationships with Te Iwi Mori, we are eager to receive your views to the ports permits extension process. If we have missed any important Iwi, Hap, PSGE or tangata whenua groups in this email please let me know. We are checking in to see if you have any queries about ports permits extension process, or whether you would like to share any views or insights. We note there are potential cultural, and Te Tiriti impacts which need to be considered and that this process is also a part of the wider Resource Management reforms currently taking place through MFE. You can give feedback in writing by return email directly to me or make a submission to the portsconsulttransport.govt.nz email. We would be happy to arrange a meeting within the consultation period of which is currently open now until July, to explain the key elements of the ports permits extension process, permit duration, impacts, conditions and discuss any of your questions or views. We can hui in person or online based on your preference and availability. In the interests of time, we would advocate for a rohe collective approach for an engagement or hui, based on the responses we receive. Ccd into this email are our Manat mo te Taiao (MFE) colleagues looking after the RM reforms and iwi partnerships and Rebecca Beals who is our Principal Advisor, Urban Development and Public Transport at Te Manat Waka (MoT). If you want any further information about this Kaupapa please feel free to give me a call on the number below. I raro i te manaakitanga nui me ng whakaaro pai ki a koutou i tenei wa puku mahi o mtou o te ao mori. Nku noa, n, Tredegar Rangitea Hall (he his Mr) Twharetoa, Te Arawa Kairahi Mori Director Mori E: t.halltransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TE MANATU WAKA J p MIMSTAT TA.AHSP()t:tl H.lpaJha an. np .ingata o Aoler kia eke Enabling New Zealanders flourish Oscar CasswellLaird From: Tredegar Hall Sent: Wednesday, May To: C c: Ben White; Rebecca Beals Subject: Te Whanganui a Tara: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Tna koutou e ng uri o Te Whanganui a Tara, Ng mihi nui ki koutou me ng ahuatanga o te wa. He uri no Ngti Twharetoa tenei, e whakaarotia mo ng Take Ao Mori o roto i te tari o Te Manat Waka, e tuku mihi ki koutou. On April the Government announced their intention to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years. In your rohe this is for the Centre Port Limited Wellington. Consistent with the Ministrys Te Tiriti obligations, and in our ongoing eort to build our relationships with Te Iwi Mori, we are eager to receive your views to the ports permits extension process. If we have missed any important Iwi, Hap, PSGE of tangata whenua groups in this email please let me know. We are checking in to see if you have any queries about ports permits extension process, or whether you would like to share any views or insights. We note there are potential cultural, and Te Tiriti impacts which need to be considered and that this process is also a part of the wider Resource Management reforms currently taking place through MFE. You can give feedback in writing by return email directly to me or make a submission to the portsconsulttransport.govt.nz email. We would be happy to arrange a meeting within the consultation period of which is currently open now until July, to explain the key elements of the ports permits extension process, permit duration, impacts, conditions and discuss any of your questions or views. We can hui in person or online based on your preference and availability. In the interests of time, we would advocate for a rohe collective approach for an engagement or hui, based on the responses we receive. Ccd into this email are our Manat mo te Taiao (MFE) colleagues looking after the RM reforms and iwi partnerships and Rebecca Beals who is our Principal Advisor, Urban Development and Public Transport at Te Manat Waka (MoT). If you want any further information about this Kaupapa please feel free to give me a call on the number below. I raro i te manaakitanga nui me ng whakaaro pai ki a koutou i tenei wa puku mahi o mtou o te ao mori. Nku noa, Tredegar Rangitea Hall (he his Mr) Twharetoa, Te Arawa Kairahi Mori Director Mori E: t.halltransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TE MANATU WAKA J p MIMSTAT TA.AHSP()t:tl H.lpaJha an. np .ingata o Aoler kia eke Enabling New Zealanders flourish Oscar CasswellLaird From: Tredegar Hall Sent: Thursday, May To: Cc : Rebecca Beals; Andrew Hampton Subject: FW: Tmakimakaurau: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Attachments:Extending the duration of existing port coastal permits.pdf Tn an koutou o Tmaki, I am resending the email below as MFE has informed me that there were some tangata whenua groups missed from the original email. Aroha mai if this is the second time you are receiving this email. Please pass this krero onto anyone I have missed and reach out if you would like any further information or would like to coordinate a hui. Ng mihi (kind regards), Tredegar Rangitea Hall (he his Mr) Twharetoa, Te Arawa Kairahi Mori Director Mori E: t.halltransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz Fro m: Tredegar Hall Sent: To: Cc: daran.pontermfe.govt.nz; Paul.Beverleymfe.govt.nz; erin.cairnsmfe.govt.nz; david.tapsellmfe.govt.nz; Rebecca Beals R.Bealstransport.govt.nz Subject: Tmakimakaurau: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Tna koutou e ng uri o Tmakimakaurau, Ng mihi nui ki koutou me ng ahuatanga o te wa. He uri no Ngti Twharetoa tenei, e whakaarotia mo ng Take Ao Mori o roto i te tari o Te Manat Waka, e tuku mihi ki koutou. On April the Government announced their intention to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years. s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TE MANATO WAKA IP ,., HRVOFl H,pah, ;n.i n rignta o Aoearo l:l ke Enabling New Zealmdcrs llourish In your rohe this is for the Port of Auckland Limited. Consistent with the Ministrys Te Tiriti obligations, and in our ongoing eort to build our relationships with Te Iwi Mori, we are eager to receive your views to the ports permits extension process. If we have missed any important Iwi, Hap, PSGE or tangata whenua groups in this email please let me know. We are checking in to see if you have any queries about ports permits extension process, or whether you would like to share any views or insights. We note there are potential cultural, Te Tiriti and Taku Tai Moana impacts which need to be considered. This process while separate, is also related to the wider Resource Management reforms currently taking place through Manat mo te Taiao (MFE). You can give feedback in writing by return email directly to me or make a submission to the portsconsulttransport.govt.nz email. We would be happy to arrange a meeting within the consultation period of which is currently open now until July, to explain the key elements of the ports permits extension process, permit duration, impacts, conditions and discuss any of your questions or views. We can hui in person or online based on your preference and availability. In the interests of time, we would advocate for a rohe collective approach for an engagement or hui based on the responses we receive. Ccd into this email are our Manat mo te Taiao colleagues looking after the RM reforms and iwi partnerships and Rebecca Beals who is our Principal Advisor, Urban Development and Public Transport at Te Manat Waka (MoT). If you want any further information about this Kaupapa please feel free to give me a call on the number below. I raro i te manaakitanga nui me ng whakaaro pai ki a koutou i tenei wa puku mahi o mtou o te ao mori. Naku noa, n Ng mihi (kind regards), Tredegar Rangitea Hall (he his Mr) Twharetoa, Te Arawa Kairahi Mori Director Mori E: t.halltransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I. TE MANATCi WAKA IP Ml SHIV OFT Hapati, ;in. ng;i t:mgt: o Aole:iroa km eke Enabling New Zealanders flourish Oscar CasswellLaird From: Tredegar Hall Sent: Thursday, May To: Cc: Ben White; Rebecca Beals Subject: FW: Taranaki: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Attachments: Extending the duration of existing port coastal permits.pdf Tn an koutou o Taranaki Maunga, I am resending the email below as MFE has informed me that there were some tangata whenua groups missed from the original email. Aroha mai if this is the second time you are receiving this email. Please pass this krero onto anyone I have missed and reach out if you would like any further information or would like to coordinate a hui. Ng mihi (kind regards), Tredegar Rangitea Hall (he his Mr) Twharetoa, Te Arawa Kairahi Mori Director Mori E: t.halltransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz Fro m: Tredegar Hall Sent: To: Cc: Ben White Ben.Whitemfe.govt.nz; Rebecca Beals R.Bealstransport.govt.nz Subject: Taranaki: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Tna koutou e ng uri o Taranaki Maunga, Ng mihi nui ki koutou me ng ahuatanga o te wa. He uri no Ngti Twharetoa tenei, e whakaarotia mo ng Take Ao Mori o roto i te tari o Te Manat Waka, e tuku mihi ki koutou. On April the Government announced their intention to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years. In your rohe this is for Port Taranaki Limited. Consistent with the Ministrys Te Tiriti obligations, and in our ongoing eort to build our relationships with Te Iwi Mori, we are eager to receive your views to the ports permits extension process. If we have missed any important Iwi, Hap, PSGE or tangata whenua groups in this email please let me know. We are checking in to see if you have any queries about ports permits extension process, or whether you would like to share any views or insights. We note there are potential cultural, and Te Tiriti impacts which need to be s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT lsi TE MANATU WAKA Ip M TRY OF lRM,lPORl Hapati, ;in ng, t:mg;it:, o Aole:iroa : eke Enabling New Zealanders flourish considered and that this process is also a part of the wider Resource Management reforms currently taking place through MFE. You can give feedback in writing by return email directly to me or make a submission to the portsconsulttransport.govt.nz email. W e would be happy to arrange a meeting within the consultation period of which is currently open now until July, to explain the key elements of the ports permits extension process, permit duration, impacts, conditions and discuss any of your questions or views. We can hui in person or online based on your preference and availability. In the interests of time, we would advocate for a rohe collective approach for an engagement or hui, based on the responses we receive. Ccd into this email are our Manat mo te Taiao (MFE) colleagues looking after the RM reforms and iwi partnerships and Rebecca Beals who is our Principal Advisor, Urban Development and Public Transport at Te Manat Waka (MoT). If you want any further information about this Kaupapa please feel free to give me a call on the number below. I raro i te manaakitanga nui me ng whakaaro pai ki a koutou i tenei wa puku mahi o mtou o te ao mori. Nku noa, Tredegar Rangitea Hall (he his Mr) Twharetoa, Te Arawa Kairahi Mori Director Mori E: t.halltransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT H,patw ;na nga irig.ita o Aoearoa ki;i eke Enabling New Zealmdcrs llourish Oscar CasswellLaird From: Tredegar Hall Sent: Thursday, May To: Cc : Ben White; glenn.webbermfe.govt.nz; Rebecca Beals Subject: FW: Te Tai Tokerau: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Attachments:Extending the duration of existing port coastal permits.pdf Kia Ora an ttou o Te Tai Tokerau, I am resending the email below as MFE has informed me that there were some tangata whenua groups missed from the original email. Aroha mai if this is the second time you are receiving this email. Please pass this krero onto anyone I have missed and reach out if you would like any further information or would like to coordinate a hui. Ng mihi (kind regards), Tredegar Rangitea Hall (he his Mr) Twharetoa, Te Arawa Kairahi Mori Director Mori E: t.halltransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz Fro m: Tredegar Hall Sent: To: Cc: glenn.webbermfe.govt.nz glenn.webbermfe.govt.nz; Ben White Ben.Whitemfe.govt.nz; Rebecca Beals R.Bealstransport.govt.nz Subject: Te Tai Tokerau: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Tna koutou e ng uri o Te Tai Tokerau, Ng mihi nui ki koutou me ng ahuatanga o te wa. He uri no Ngti Twharetoa tenei, e whakaarotia mo ng Take Ao Mori o roto i te tari o Te Manat Waka, e tuku mihi ki koutou. On April the Government announced their intention to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years. In your rohe this is for Northport Limited (Marsden). s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TE MANATO WAKA M Slf:IVOFl H.pah, , n ng, fla o Aoearoa ( ke Enabling New Zealmdcrs flourish Consistent with the Ministrys Te Tiriti obligations, and in our ongoing eort to build our relationships with Te Iwi Mori, we are eager to receive your views to the ports permits extension process. If we have missed any important Iwi, Hap, PSGE or tangata whenua groups in this email please let me know. We are checking in to see if you have any queries about ports permits extension process, or whether you would like to share any views or insights. We note there are potential cultural, and Te Tiriti impacts which need to be considered and that this process is also a part of the wider Resource Management reforms currently taking place through MFE. You can give feedback in writing by return email directly to me or make a submission to the portsconsulttransport.govt.nz email. We would be happy to arrange a meeting within the consultation period of which is currently open now until July, to explain the key elements of the ports permits extension process, permit duration, impacts, conditions and discuss any of your questions or views. We can hui in person or online based on your preference and availability. In the interests of time, we would advocate for a rohe collective approach for an engagement or hui based on the responses we receive. Ccd into this email are our Manat mo te Taiao (MFE) colleagues looking after the RM reforms and iwi partnerships and Rebecca Beals who is our Principal Advisor, Urban Development and Public Transport at Te Manat Waka (MoT). If you want any further information about this Kaupapa please feel free to give me a call on the number below. I raro i te manaakitanga nui me ng whakaaro pai ki a koutou i tenei wa puku mahi o mtou o te ao mori. Nku noa, Tredegar Rangitea Hall (he his Mr) Twharetoa, Te Arawa Kairahi Mori Director Mori E: t.halltransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TE MANATO WAKA IP ,., JRVOFl H,patw ;na nga irig.ita o Aoearoa ki;i eke Enabling New Zealmdcrs llourish Oscar CasswellLaird From: Tredegar Hall Sent: Thursday, May To: Cc : Ben White; Rebecca Beals Subject: FW: Te Tau Ihu: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Attachments:Extending the duration of existing port coastal permits.pdf Tn an koutou o Te Tau Ihu, I am resending the email below as MFE has informed me that there were some tangata whenua groups missed from the original email. Aroha mai if this is the second time you are receiving this email. Please pass this krero onto anyone I have missed and reach out and if you would like any further information or would like to coordinate a hui. Ng mihi (kind regards), Tredegar Rangitea Hall (he his Mr) Twharetoa, Te Arawa Kairahi Mori Director Mori E: t.halltransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz Fro m: Tredegar Hall Sent: To: Cc: Ben White Ben.Whitemfe.govt.nz; Rebecca Beals R.Bealstransport.govt.nz Subject: Te Tau Ihu: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Tna koutou e ng uri o Te Tau Ihu o Te Waka a Maui Ng mihi nui ki koutou me ng ahuatanga o te wa. He uri no Ngti Twharetoa tenei, e whakaarotia mo ng Take Ao Mori o roto i te tari o Te Manat Waka, e tuku mihi ki koutou. On April the Government announced their intention to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years. s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TE MANATO WAKA M SJRVOFl H.ipah, . n ng, trngnta o Aoe;iroa l.ll w En bling New Zealanders llourish In your rohe this is for Port Nelson Limited. Consistent with the Ministrys Te Tiriti obligations, and in our ongoing eort to build our relationships with Te Iwi Mori, we are eager to receive your views to the ports permits extension process. If we have missed any important Iwi, Hap, PSGE or tangata whenua groups in this email please let me know. We are checking in to see if you have any queries about ports permits extension process, or whether you would like to share any views or insights. We note there are potential cultural, and Te Tiriti impacts which need to be considered and that this process is also a part of the wider Resource Management reforms currently taking place through MFE. You can give feedback in writing by return email directly to me or make a submission to the portsconsulttransport.govt.nz email. We would be happy to arrange a meeting within the consultation period of which is currently open now until July, to explain the key elements of the ports permits extension process, permit duration, impacts, conditions and discuss any of your questions or views. We can hui in person or online based on your preference and availability. In the interests of time, we would advocate for a rohe collective approach for an engagement or hui, based on the responses we receive. Ccd into this email are our Manat mo te Taiao (MFE) colleagues looking after the RM reforms and iwi partnerships and Rebecca Beals who is our Principal Advisor, Urban Development and Public Transport at Te Manat Waka (MoT). If you want any further information about this Kaupapa please feel free to give me a call on the number below. I raro i te manaakitanga nui me ng whakaaro pai ki a koutou i tenei wa puku mahi o mtou o te ao mori. Nku noa, Tredegar Rangitea Hall (he his Mr) Twharetoa, Te Arawa Kairahi Mori Director Mori E: t.halltransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TE MANATO WAKA IP ,., JRVOFl H,patw ;na nga irig.ita o Aoearoa ki;i eke Enabling New Zealmdcrs llourish Oscar CasswellLaird From: Tredegar Hall Sent: Thursday, May To: Cc: Daran Ponter; Rebecca Beals Subject: FW: TranganuiaKiwa: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Attachments:Extending the duration of existing port coastal permits.pdf Tn an koutou o Tranga,
Extending fuel excise duty and public transport fares reductions, and reintroducing reduced rates of road user charges
Extension of year limits and a review announced
FAQs Indicative strategic priorities for GPS
FEEDBACK ON EXTENDING EXISTING PORT COASTAL PERMITS UNDER THE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ACT To: Ministry of Transport Te Manat Waka portsconsulttransport.govt.nz Name of person making submission: Te Rnanga o Arowhenua . This is feedback on the proposal by Government on the proposal to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years. The reasons for providing the feedback are: Please refer to Attachment A. Te Rnanga o Arowhenua DO NOT wish to be heard in support of our feedback. Signature of person authorised to sign on behalf of personsorganisation making further submission.
Facebook Community Standards
Facebook Statement of Rights and Responsibilities
Feasibility report and model for incorporating shared Advice to Minister on next steps following transport into new housing developments (Nov ) consideration of the feasibility study
February : Air New Zealand and Singapore Airlines alliance reauthorised
Federal Office of Road Safety (FORS). (). Profile of unlicensed motorists in fatal crashes . Monograph . Canberra, Australia: Federal Office of Road Safety.
Federation of Rail Organisation of NZ (FRONZ)
Feedback Engagement with Ngi Tahu Whnui . The engagement on this proposal has fallen well short of our expectations of engaging with Arowhenua as Papatipu Rnanga and Te Rnanga o Ngi Tahu as a Te Tiriti partner. Arowhenua is deeply disappointed in the processes of engagement with us in respect of these proposals. . As a Te Tiriti partner, and kaitiaki holding Tino Rangatiratanga within the Ngi Tahu takiw, Arowhenua and Ngi Tahu are uniquely placed to engage with the Crown on pragmatic solutions that ensure sustainability of te taiao for future generations. Te Taiao . Arowhenua recognises the importance of PrimePort Timaru to the Timaru community and to the transportation network of New Zealand. However, Arowhenua is concerned this approach appears to o blunt and the extension of occupation by years will: Allow an automatic, year duration which will give rise to intergenerational issues; Potentially further complicate issues relating to the extent to which sA applies in terms of the area occupied and adjacent and managing the effects from t he occupation of the space ; The extent to which it captures and would continue to permit pre structures that should be removed or replaced; or promotes exclusive occupation rights and does not allow for consideration of other compatible uses; Does not account for coastal plans that are overview for review and could remove the ability to develop Timaru Port centric provisions that better account for the aspirations of the port alongside those of the community and the coastal environment. Impact on the ability to create a fit for purpose regulatory environment that addresses Treaty settlements, climate change and the need to manage the Timaru coastline and its resources. Potentially erodes or undermines the relationship that Arowhenua has begun to establish with PrimePort Timaru to work on issues of common concern. Recommendations . Arowhenua recommends the following actions: i. Amend the proposal to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA to no more than years; ii. During the no more than year period undert ake a review of the legislative and regulatory framework for managing the port at Timaru and alongside Arowhenua Rnanga, implement an improved framework for the Port and te Taiao. iii. That any process to introduce or modify consent conditions on permits for PrimePort Timaru includes the requirement to engage with Arowhenua. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT J Te lunanga O Arowhenua Society Inc. AORAKI fNY l RNIIEO AL COHSULTANCV LID TAKAHIWAI MAORI COMMITTEE . Est .. TE TAI TOKERAU EAST, NZMC Nonprofit organisation. Westpac Bank, Ruakaka The New Zealand Maori Council (NZMC) is a statutory organisation, constituted through the Maori Community Development Act . As a national body the Council is mandated to represent Maori throughout Aotearoa New Zealand to work for the wellbeing of Maori through health, education, employment, housing as set out in section of the Maori Community Development Act . COURT HEARING .. the Maori Affairs Act setting apart this land containing . hectares known as Sections and Block Ruakaka Survey District as a Maori Reservation for the purpose of a recreation and sports ground in association with the Takahiwai marae for the common use and benefit of the Maori community of Takahiwai. NZ GAZETTE December Denis Blundell Governor General Declaring land vested in the Auckland Education Bard as a site for a school to be vested in Her Majesty the Queen (Crown land). WHANGAREI COUNTY Sections and Block Ruakaka Survey DistrictGiven under the hand of His Excellency the Governor General and issued under the Seal of NZ this th day of November . Matiu Rata Minister of Lands. ORIGINAL TRUSTEES . . Sections and Block Ruakaka Survey District Committee Toko Pitman, Grant Pirihi, Henare Pirihi, Dick Paki, Percy Johnston Honetana, Barney Scott, Wi Teira Pirihi, Toti Del Epiha, Dawson Rata, Flora Harding and Ngawati Maki. TAKAHIWAI MAORI COMMITTEE Triennial Election Meeting. Sunday October (Dr) Mere Kepa, Chair, Patrick Hilton, Treasurer, Davina Duke, Secretary, Corinthia Kepa, Diane Kepa, Hiria Rata, Shilane Shirkey, Tauwira Hita, Tamihana Paki (absent from consecutive meetings). SENIOR ART ASSOCIATE: Lynda Harris. LAND BLOCK: TAKAHIWAI A Responsible Trustees (.): Ani Pitman, Anthony Lowe, Bert Mackie (deceased), Christine Payne, Donna Flower, Grant Harding (Te Kepa Rata Kukupa have requested Grants replacement by Mark Strang, then Blair Strang, and Craig Harding), Hapeta Rata (deceased), Jacky Whippy, John Paki, Juanita Epiha, Kare Rata, Luana Pirihi, Mervyn Clyde, Michael Abel, Shane Wassell, Russell Pirihi , Sarah Dawson (deceased) Teira Pirihi.
Feedback broadly supporting speed management outweighed feedback opposing it, although there were a number of strong views on both sides.
Feedback on the document closes at pm, Monday March .
Feedback on the draft GPS closes at pm Tuesday April . If you have any questions , please contact gpstransport.govt.nz .
Feedback on the draft GPS closes at pm on September .
Feedback on the draft Marine Protection Rules and any other related questions and comments can be emailed to
Feedback on these indicative priorities has now closed. We are intending to release the formal draft GPS for public consultation in May and you will have an opportunity to provide
Fell, J. C., K. Jones, E. Romano, R. Voas (). An evaluation of graduated driver licensing effects on fatal crash involvements of young drivers in the United States. Traffic Injury Prevention , : . Fell, J. C., M. Todd, R. B. Voas (). A national evaluation of the nighttime and passenger restriction components of graduated driver licensing. Journal of Safety Research , : . Fohr, S. A., P. M. Layde, C. E. Guse (). Graduated driver licensing in Wisconsin: Does it create safer drivers Wisconsin Medical Journal , : . Frith, W. A. W. A. Perkins (). The New Zealand graduated driver licensing system. Conference Proceedings from National Road Safety Seminar, Wellington, New Zealand , vol. , . Gulliver, P., D. B egg, R. Brookland, S. Ameratunga J. Langley (). Learner driver experiences and crash risk as an unsupervised driver. Journal of Safety Research , , . Ivers, R. Q., C. Sakashita, T. Senserrick, J. Elkington, S. Lo, S. Boufous L. de Rome ( ). Does an on road motorcycle coaching program reduce crashes in novice riders A randomised control trial. Accident Analysis and Prevention , : . Karaca Mandic, P. G. Ridgeway (). Behavioral impact of graduated driver licensing on teenage driving risk and exposure. Journal of Health Economics , : . Kardamanidis, K., A. Martiniuk, R. Q. Ivers, M. R. Stevension K. Thistlethwaite (). Motorcycle rider training for the prevention of road traffic crashes (Review). Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews , Issue . Kingham, S., J. Pearce, D. Dorling, M. Faulk (). The impact of the graduated driver licence scheme on road traffic acc ident youth mortality in New Zealand. Journal of Transport Geography , : , . Langley, D., D. Begg, R. Brookland, A. Samaranayaka, H. Jordan G. Davie (). Nonprogression through graduated driver licensing: Characteristics, traffic offending, and reasons for nonprogression. Traffic Injury Prevention , , . Langley, J. D., A. C. Wagenaar, D. J. Begg (). An evaluation of the New Zealand graduated driver licensing system. Accident Analysis Prevention , : , . Lewis Evans, B. ( ). Crash involvement during the different phases of the New Zealand Graduated Driver Licensing System (GDLS). Journal of Safety Research , , . Masten, S. V. R. Foss (). The effects of graduated driver licensing on hospitalization rates a nd charges for and yearolds in North Carolina. Traffic Injury Prevention , : . Masten, S. V., E. A. Chapman, D. B. Atkinson K. K. Browning (). Non compliance with graduated driver licensing (GDL) requirements: Changes in GDL related con viction rates over time among yearold California drivers. Accident Analysis and Prevention , : . Masten, S. V., F. D. Thomas, K. T. Korbelak, R. C. Peck, R. D. Blomberg (). Meta analysis of graduated driver licensing laws. US National Highway Traffic Safety Administration report no. DOT HS .
Fig A Transport system hierarchy
Figur e Cumulative proportion of drivers who received a Class learner licence aged under and who had progressed to a full licence in a given amount of time.
Figure Fatal and serious at fault light motor vehicle crash involvements per , licensed drivers aged to per year for to combined by drivers gender and licence stage with confidence intervals.
Figure Framework for strategic priorities Funding our land transport investment strategy These indicative priorities set the overall direction for land transport investment . This comprises both dedicated funding provided through the National Land Transport Fund , as well as other sources of funding that the Crown may decide to contribute. This includes, for example, Crown contributions to rail, the Climate Emergency Response Fund and the New Zealand Upgrade Programme. Prioritising transport investment s within available fundi ng In recent years, the land transport sector has faced pressures such as COVID lockdowns, supply chain delays, the tight labour market . Projects are being delayed or slowed down due to increased costs, funding pressures and supply chain delays. This has affected the sectors ability to deliver on the ambition in the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) . Waka Kotahi has signalled this is likely to result in a higher than normal carry over of committed activities into the ne xt NLTP. This is likely to place greater pressure on the amount of National Land Transport Funding available for new activities. As in previous years, funding made available for land transport activities, including through the National Land Transport Fund, will need to prioritise investments and make difficult trade offs, including deferring or scaling co funding commitments to prop osals that support the strategic priorities. It is critical that all transport investment decisions continue to be transparent and provide the best impacts and value to New Zealanders. All decision makers should have an ongoing focus on achieving value f or money across the programme. For activities funded through the National Land Transport Fund, we expect Waka Kotahi and partners to deliver benefits that support multiple strategic priorities and outcomes. As signalled on page , this includes seeking opportunities to use maintenance and operations activities to implement new infrastructure and services that support the shifts sought for the system . Transport related greenhouse gas emissions will fall significantly, while providing a more sustainable, inclusive, safe and accessible transport system for all New Zealanders. Supported by five strategic priorities for investment:Overarching focus: Emissions Reduction A land transport system where noone is killed or seriously injured. SafetyMaintaining and operating the system Resilience The existing system is maintained at a level that meets current and future needs. Managing the risks from natural and human made hazardsSustainable urban development Integrated freight system Efficient and effective freight connections People in urban areas have better choices to access economic and social opportunities. OVERARCHING FOCUS EMISSIONS REDUCTION Indicative strategic priorities for GPS Overarching focus Emissions reduction Primary outcome environmental sustainability Transportrelated greenhouse gas emissions will fall significantly , while providing a more sustainable, inclusive, safe and accessible transport system for all New Zealanders . Supporting outcomes Inclusive access New Zealand will transition towards a more equitable and affordable transport system. Healthy and safe people reduced exposure to high concentrations of land transport related air pollution, increased safety for alternative modes such as walking and cycling Resilience and security implementation of the National Adaptation Plan to manage the impacts of climaterelated impacts on critical infrastructure. How we will deliver these outcomes The Government has committed to netzero emissions by . A reduction in transport emissions is needed by to stay on track to reach net zero by . The Government has committed to four transport targets within the transport chapter of the ERP that it will be expected to meet by to contribute to the reduction: reduce total vehicle kilometres travelled (VKT) by the light fleet by below projected growth levels increase zeroemissions vehicles to of the light vehicle fleet reduce emissions from freight transport by reduce the emissions intensity of transport fuel by . The ERP requires an ambitiou s nationwide planning, investment and regulatory programme across a range of infrastructur e and noninfrastructure investments . The ERP makes it clear that achieving challenging emissions reduction and VKT targets requires a focus on better urba n form and more option s for walking, cycling and publi c transport . Urban VKT reduction programmes The ERP call s on Wa ka Kotahi to partner wit h council s and communities to develop lig ht VKT reduction programm es for major urban areas. These programmes aim to provide bett er transport choices through improvements to urban form. This new partnership ap proach to VKT reduction planning will reduce the need to travel by car, and deliver safer, more accessibl e, vibrant urban centr es providing a range of attractive alternatives to travelling by car . Waka Kotahi and it s partner s will need t o prioritise thi s planning work so that the new programm es can inform future investment prioritie s whi ch will be supported in GPS . High thresholds fo r investments that do not support emission s reduction objectives Meeting t he targets set o ut in the ERP will require a significant change in the way that New Zealander s use the transport system. Ov er time, transport investments and intervention s will make it possible for more people to walk, cycle and use publi c and shared transport, especially in our largest urban areas. OVERARCHING FOCUS EMISSIONS REDUCTION
Figure Relationship between you, the Ministry, SOEs and agencies
Figure Relationship between you, the Ministry, SOEs and agencies Appendix XX Transport sector agencies and SOEs page XX provides a detailed explanation on the different types of organisations in the transport system. The Transport Outcomes Framework The Ministry developed the Transport Outcomes Framework (the Framework) in to help the Minister of Transport and Government set priorities for the system and measure progress. The Framework has five inter related outcomes and is closely aligned with the Treasurys Living Standards Framework. The Framework is used by all the transport entities. It is a powerful tool for alignment, role clarity and accountability. The Framework is not a strategy, and it is not intended to set the priorities for the system. Instead, the Framework is intended to help you articulate your priorities so they can be delivered in a joined up way across the system, with a consistent approach to assessing the effectiveness of policy proposals and delivery. The Framework helps to understand transports many areas of influence across society and the economy, and to be more explicit about the trade offs between the outcomes that are sometimes required. Because the outcomes are inter related, they need to be met through a range of interventions. Different Governments can place differing emphasis across the outcomes and there is no single right approach. The Framework also signals the need to balance the present needs and priorities with those of the future. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT MINISTER OF fP.ANSPOAT MINITTRV OF TRANSPORT IITI Accoumab le for performance . . .,. .. .,., . . . . . . . .,. . . .. . . . . . . . . ACClDlla IIVllWTlJj COMtU:IIIIC N TM Mlniste,s of State Owned Enrnrp,so (SEl and Finance aro ;s,;)osrn rot traosporl socur SOE THE TRANSPORT OUTCOMES FRAMEWORK UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
Figure Relationship between you, the Ministry, SOEs and agencies Special purpose vehicle CITY RAIL LINK LTD Special purpose vehicle AUCKLAND LIGHT RAIL The Ministers of Transport and Finance are jointly responsible for CRLL and ALRL RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Accountable for performance . . . . . NZ TRANSPORT AGENCY MARITIME NZ CIVIL AVIATION AUTHORITY TRANSPORT ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION COMMISSION A The Ministers of State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) and Finance are responsible for transport sector SO Es KIWIRAIL METSERVICE AIRWAYS ..I .I SHAPING NEW ZEALANDS TRANSPORT SYSTEM
Figure Relationship between you, the Ministry, SOEs and agencies The Transport Outcomes Framework The Ministry developed the Transport Outcomes Framework (the Framework) with input from sector stakeholders. The Framework sets out a way of assessing the sectors performance and measuring progress against a range of outcomes. There are five inter related outcomes and the Framework is closely aligned with the Treasurys Living Standards Framework. The Framework helps to provide a consistent approach to assessing the effectiveness of policy proposals and delivery. The Framework helps to understand transports many areas of influence across society and the economy, and to be more explicit about the trade offs between the outcomes that are sometimes required. Because the outcomes are inter related, they need to be met through a range of interventions. Different Governments can place their own emphasis across the outcomes and there is no single right approach. The Ministers of Transport and Finance are jointly responsible for CRLL and ALRL RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT . .. . ccounrnh lc fo a:lllllllll .lllllia ;aa. .. .. Ill . . . o n::ilblu lO ta ii:sp:ort. :sBttOr SQE Ml LIGHT RAIL LTD THE TRANSPORT OUTCOMES FRAMEWORK
Figure Relationship between you, the Ministry, SOEs and agencies The Transport Outcomes Framework The Ministry developed the Transport Outcomes Framework (the Framework) with input from sector stakeholders. The Framework sets out a way of assessing the sectors performance and measuring progress against a range of outcomes. There are five inter related outcomes and the Framework is closely aligned with the Treasurys Living Standards Framework. The Framework helps to provide a consistent approach to assessing the effectiveness of policy proposals and delivery. The Framework helps to understand transports many areas of influence across society and the economy, and to be more explicit about the trade offs between the outcomes that are sometimes required. Because the outcomes are inter related, they need to be met through a range of interventions. Different Governments can place their own emphasis across the outcomes and there is no single right approach. To support the Framework, there is a set of quantitative indicators to track transports contribution against the five outcomes over time. CRL and ALRL are jointly operated by the Ministers of Transport and Finance RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT A ccounrnb lc fo erf rman.ce lll .. ..ai I r.:a. a .. .i.iaaa. m a. e; a Tl lni t(I s o S:t rn Chvneci Ent r prI SOE and Firn:m: r o .pu nslblu fo tra ilsp.ort r:to r S:QE l.:fWIA L M LD LIGHT RAIL LTD THE TRANSPORT OUTCOMES FRAMEWORK
Figure Transport Outcomes Framework Currently, the performance of the GPS is largely assessed through the annual reporting of a set of performance measures that align with its strategic priorities, which may change at each iteration of Reprinted from Ministry of Transport Te Manat Waka (). A framework for shaping our transport system: Transport outcomes and mode neutrality. Retrieved September from https:transportnz uat.cwp.govt.nzassetsUploadsPaperTransport outcomes framework.pdf.
Figure Transport investments , relative to the expected range of investment for each activity class Based on more detailed investment data analysis, including committed forward expenditure, alongside qualitative feedback, we have reflected on progress against five key areas of GPS investment that represent the collective judgements of the authors based on the evidence and rating definitions presented in the report. Table below provides our assessment of these areas of GPS delivery, summarised from available potential criter ia and data. However, we acknowledge that for some areas, such as land use planning, there are no explicit measures available, and our evaluative judgements draw on the feedback from interviewees participating in the evaluation.
Figure . State Highway Maintenance Investment (excluding emergency work)
Figure . The GPS provides the strategic direction and sets the government funding contribution for Regional Land Transport Plans and the National Land Transport Programme. The remainder of this document consists of : Section : System Reform Section : Strategic Priorities Section : Investment in land transport Section : Statement of Ministerial expectations Appendix A: Debt Repayment schedule Appendix B: Crown Investment Programme Appendix C: GlossaryDefinitions
Figure Distribution of time discounts obtained by drivers who received full licences with advanced certificates in by the drivers age the time of obtaining their full licence.
Figure Percentage of activities by weighted category When looking at the percentage of NLTP cost allocated across the three TIO Activity Class groups, we observed a change across the three GPS periods (Figure ). Compared with the cost associated with mode shif t promoting classes, the percentage of cost for roadingother classes reduced from . in to . in and . in . Conversely, the public transport and active transport categories increased over the three periods, with more cost associate d with the public transport classes compared with the active transport class (this includes both investment and operating costs).
Figure Total approved and planned expenditure for activities first approved in each GPS period by the analysis group. Costs associated with some activities are included in more than one group. Expenditure on baseline activities is exclude d. As explained above, the dollar amounts shown in Figure do not reflect actual expenditure in each GPS period. Instead, these amounts aim to reflect the intent of funding decisions made in each period , including funds that may be spent in future. Actual funding will likely turn out differently from these plans for various reasons, but this analysis aims to evaluate changes in investment decision making driven by GPS . From Figure , it is apparent that: There is relatively little expenditure shown in the maintenance, operation and renewals groups due to most such activities being defined as baseline activities and excluded from this analysis. New funding for road improvements that have been appr oved was lower under GPS than GPS . Still, if probable future funding associated with activities first approved under GPS is included, total funding for road improvements is expected to continue to increase. New funding for public transpo rt improvements that have been approved was higher under GPS compared to GPS but lower than under GPS . Public transport improvement activities first approved under GPS also include a substantial amount of planned future funding, suggesting that public transpor t
Figure Distribution of total approved and planned expenditure for activities first approved in each GPS period by analysis group . Detailed breakdown of new funding decisions Figure further characterises the expenditure associate d with activities approved in each GPS period by showing the total expenditure for each activity in the four largest groups. Given the substantial amount of funding for activities first approved under GPS that has not yet been approved, Figure also shows probable future funding for such activities. Note, however, that for activities first approved under GPS and , only funding that has been approved is shown. The analysis shows that funding for these activities in each GPS period is usually characterised by a small number of relatively large investments, accompanied by many smaller investments. There were many more road improvements first approved in each GPS period than public transport or walking and cycling improvements. The pattern under GPS does not appear to be substantially different compared to earlier periods.
Figure Fatal and serious at fault light motor vehicle crash involvements per , fully licensed drivers per year for drivers age d to years old in to by gender, advanced certificate status, and time discount status, with confidence intervals.
Figure Percentage of cost for activities by TIO Activity Class The increase in the proportion of cost by weighted category is similar, with showing slightly more cost associated with mode shift promoting activities than in (see Figure ). However, the increase is more apparent when comparing to . Again, the share of cost allocated to public transport is noticeably more than active transport.
Figure Distribution of total approved and planned expenditure over all years for activities first approved in each GPS period by the ana lysis group. Some activities are included in more than one group Figure on the next page illustrates this further by showing the size distribution of funding for improvement activities first approved in each GPS period. As in Figure above, only approved funding (as of April ) is shown for activities first approved under GPS and , while approved and future probable funding is shown for activities first approved under GPS . GPS has shifted towards larger cost activities across a ll three improvement categories.
Figure Percentage of cost for activities by weighted category Overall, there appears to be a gradual rather than a substantial shift in the trend towards mode shift promoting activities. This is seen across the TIO Activity Classes analysis and the weighted categories analysis in the percentage of activities and the percentag e of cost. A stronger trend can be seen in the percentage of cost by Activity Class (Figure ), which shows a continued increase in the cost associated with public transport activities and a decrease in the cost associated with roading activities. However , there are limitations in assessing the percentage of mode shift activities by Activity Class alone. This method does not capture many mode shift promoting activities included under other classes or as components of roading activities. Using the weighted categories provides greater visibility of mode shift promoting activities. The weighted categories indicate that most of the move to mode shift promoting activities occurred in , while between and , the proportion of mode shift promoting activ ities has stayed relatively steady. Regional comparisons The graphs in Figure show how the percentage of weighted activities has changed over the years by region. The most noticeable outlier when comparing across the regions is Auckland, which shows a much lower percentage of roading activities (Fig a) and a much higher percentage of public transport activities (Fig e). When looking across the three GPS periods, Wellington and Otago show a decrease in the percentage of roading activities and an incr ease in the percentage of active and public transport activities. All regions aside from Auckland and Canterbury show a decrease in the percentage of roading activities in compared to . This was consistent with the overall category percentage from (.) to (., see Table ). All regions except Canterbury had an increase in the percentage of active transport between . For public transport, all regions except Auckland had an increase in the percentage between . A sim ilar story can be seen regarding the share of cost across the activity categories by region. Auckland stands out with a lower cost associated with roading and a higher percentage of cost
Figure Snapshot of progression at the learner and restricted stages and achievement of full licences by the end of for drivers who obtained a learne r licence in aged under .
Figure Comparing Regional variation in the percentage of activities and percentage of cost by weighted category In general, the results from the Regional breakdown reinforce the gradual shift towards mode shift promoting activities. Most regions have seen a drop in the percentage of roading activities and an increase in the percentage of active and public transport activities compared to . However, the results also highlight how different regions are at different stages of their mode shift journey. While Percentage of Activities Percentage Cost of Activities RoadingOther Activities (a) (b) Active Transport Activities (c) (d) Public Transport Activities (e) (f) Legend
Figure Distribution of funding for improvements activities first approved in each GPS period
Figure illustrates progression more generally by showing cumulative progression of cohorts of learners aged under to a full licence. Historically, it has taken around months ( years) for half of each cohort of learners to progress to a full licence. Furthermore, the progression curve for the cohort is still increasing after months ( years), thus some drivers in that cohort are expected to continue to progress after . For each cohort, progression i s measured up to the end of , so later cohorts have shorter curves. The figure also shows: There was a disruption to progression caused by the changes to the minimum ages in , for cohorts of drivers who obtained their learner licence in and . There appears to be a small jump in progression at around months ( years) after obtaining a learner licence. The expiry of learner licences after years appears to have spurred some people to progress to subsequent licence stages. We also anal ysed the time taken to progress for drivers who had progressed to a full licence by the end of and analysed whether there are differences in driver characteristics and crash rates for drivers who progress in the minimum time (or close to it) versus th ose who progress more slowly. To simplify the analysis of progression duration and crash rates, we focussed on drivers without advanced certificates (relationships between advanced certificates and crash rates are analysed separately in section .).
Figure Expected national BCRs for activities by GPS period of first approval and analysis group (improvements activities only). Note some activ ities may be in more than one analysis group
Figure Fouryear progression status for drivers who were aged under years old at the time of obtaining their learne r licence, by gender and year of obtaining a learner licence (percent).
Figure Percentage of activities by weighted category, separated into two groups approvedcommitted for funding in the NLTP and probablepossible in the NLTP Summary When used to understand mode shift promoting activities, the TIO Activity Classes can obscure some of these activities. This is because an activity is assigned to one Activity Class while supporting more than one mode. Therefore, weighted categories, as applied in this report, are suggested for improved reporting accuracy on the Activity Class funding. When reported by weighted categories, the percentage of mode shift promoting activities increased by between and . In roading and activePT projects, the approved percentage increased over the three GPS periods. This increase was much greater for the activePT activities compared with the roadingother activities.
Figure Distribution of total approved and probable funding across BCR ranges by GPS period of first approval and analysis group (improvements act ivities only). Expenditure associated with some activities may be in more than one analysis group. Alignment of investments with GPS priorities As noted above, BCRs are just one factor influencing investment decisions, and the degree of alignment with GPS priorities is another key consideration. Figure shows a breakdown of investment approvals by activity class under NLTP by priority ordering based on the combination of GPS alignment and BCR. The definitions of the six priorities are shown in T able . For NLTP , this was known as GPS results alignment. Earlier NLTPs used the similar concept of strategic fit in investmen t prioritisation. The percentages shown in Figure are calculated from data provided by Waka Kotahi as part of the GPS annual reporting. Similar data is not available for GPS or .
Figure Fatal and serious at fault light motor vehicle crash involvements per , licensed drivers per year to the end of for drivers aged under who obtained their learner licence between and , by progression status as at the end of and licence stage, with confidence intervals.
Figure Value for money assessment model key questions The Value for Money assessment model uses five elements to focus assessment over the whole intervention lifecycle: Impactsoutcomes: defining and articulating outcomes are we focusing on the right thing Business requirements: translating outcomes into business requirements can we deliver it in practice Value indicators: quantitatively measuring against business requirements is it a good use of funds Benefits gap factors: recognising the gaps between outputs and outcomes can we achieve the outcomes Capability and capacity: acknowledging the importance of skills, capabilities, and behaviours to delivering results do we have the right people Are we focusing on the right thing The GPS and have enabled the prioritisation and funding for mode shift promoting activi ties and have changed the conversation about mode shift as an outcome. But there were concerns expressed in this evaluation that it does not provide the planning and funding mechanism for the broader reaching, complex programmes such as the network and cor ridorlevel interventions needed to deliver substantial mode shift. For example, better integration between land use and transport was identified multiple times in this evaluation as a critical driver of mode shift that is not currently linked as a measure . This is a critical gap, and there will be others that are important to consider when deciding what changes are needed.
Figure Distribution of progression durations for drivers aged under who obtained a learner licence in and progressed to subsequent stages by the end of by driver gender (months).
Figure NLTP investment approvals ( of total expenditure in each activity class) by priority based on the degree of alignment with GPS priorities a nd BCR ( highest
Figure Fatal and serious at fault light motor vehicle crash involvements per , licensed drivers per year for drivers aged under who obtained a l earner licence in to and progressed to a full licence by the end of without an advanced driving certificate and who progressed to a full licence in at least months, by duration of progression from learner to full licence and licence stage , with confidence intervals.
Figure Te Manat Waka Value for Money assessment model The model is in the process of application to the sector and was not implemented for GPS implementation. At the time of data collection, it was too soon for the model to be explored comprehensively for the purpos es of this evaluation. Interviewees, in response to questions on value for money, did not explicitly reference the Value for Money Framework. This might be expected, given the framework is in the early stages of use and implementation. Some interviews ind icated that, in line with our investment analysis, a BCR of at least one continued to be the primary criterion for GPS . However, consideration was also given to strategic fit criteria. The interviews also indicated that the approach and methods to be used for benefits realisation is still a work in progress and that there has been limited implementation to . This is likely to be an ongoing challenge for the alignment of future GPS implementation with the VfM model. Analysis of realised benefits is necessary to complete the feedback loop shown in Figure . . Potential directions forward for future GPS A key finding from this evaluation is the tension between using the GPS as a tool for transformative change and, at the same time, having sufficien t consistency between successive GPS to build delivery momentum. The longstanding priorities established in earlier GPS sustained initiatives such as the RoNS programme over an extended period. Similarly, if the shifts envisaged by GPS are to be maint ained, then future GPS need to reflect and build on these directions as GPS has already done. It is also acknowledged that change brings with it initial impacts on service efficiency as they adapt to new priorities. A further challenge for GPS in the future will be aligning transport investment with broader policy settings. For example, the need for significant and sustained emissions reductions, which in our cities may mean fewer people driving, driving less often, and taking up other transport optio ns.
Figure Fatal and serious at fault motorcycle crash involvements per , licensed riders aged to per year by riders gender and licence stage with confidence intervals ( to ).
Figure Results of automated topic analysis applied to transport projects in the analysis dataset Despite the limitations noted abov e, a manual review of the topics detected for a sample of activities suggested that the NLP topic detection worked very well. A random sample of activities was manually reviewed, and of these, were judged to be classified correctly across all five t opics described above. Given the available descriptive text, had one error and four correct topics, and had more than one error.
Figure Fatal and serious at fault motorcycle crash involvements per , licensed riders per ye ar by rider age and licence stage with confidence intervals ( to ).
Figure : July December Figure : January March We have redefined our RAG rating system so initiatives can be consistently reported and interpreted We have made a concerted effort in recent months to improve how redamber green (RAG ) ratings are determined so that the ratings are consistent and meaningful. Notably, we have added a black rating to indicate initiatives that have been discontinued due to Mini sterial decision or because they have not received funding (refer to Appendix A for full definitions). We note that in some cases initiatives have shifted from a green to amber rating in part due to the refined rating system or where more information has become available. Additionally, our previous rating of projects that were inactive was mostly green. This quarter, we have taken a more thorough approach to determine if they are on track and have rated them red, amber, or green accordingly. Consequently, progress ratings on initiatives may appear more severe than previously rated. We have consulted with the Secretariat for the IEB ahead of the amendments to the monthly report to ensure alignment between our reporting methodology. Transport agencies have played a key role in assisting with improvements to the next monthly report given the size and complexity of the ERP transport chapter. The new black rating has been applied to five discontinued or unfunded initiatives which may impact our ability to reach emissions targets and deliver on equity During the quarter the Government announced it was discontinuing the Sustainable Biofuels Obligation, Clean Car Upgrade and Social Leasing Scheme. The decision to discontinue the Clean Car Upgrade and Social Leasing Scheme had a flow on effect for Initiative .. Investigate whether further targeted support is required to make lowemissions vehicles more accessible and affordable for other disadvantaged groups and communities which has also now been discontinued as it was dependent on the results of the trials. These initiatives are no w rated black, and the rating will not change in further reporting unless there are relevant Ministerial decision.
Figure : Risk adjusted percentage of reoffending for dri nk driving offences, after to years, by offender group.
Figure : Weekly Bus and Train Patronage
Figure : Weekly trips by purpose () Figure : Weekly trips by time in hours ()
Figure Conceptual model showing the pathway between the GPS and mode sh ift In the conceptual model, the process of getting from the GPS to the observable mode shift in the transport system happens in multiple ways and stages. First, the GPS influences a series of decision points, starting with directional investment signals, the development of broad programmes, and the (re)setting of priorities. This influence continues through the business case process, the distribution of funds, and the management of projects for investment and operation of the network. And this lin ear process within the transport system, other factors at national, Regional, and local scales also influence what happens. These factors include policies and plans related to land use, such as urban growth areas and the investment priorities of both the p ublic and private sectors. In addition, broader, less tangible societal processes also influence what happens. These include wider societal trends and events (such as political shifts towards wellbeing or pandemics), technological developments (such as sha red mobility services), and values and social norms related to mobility (such as perceived status and attitudes towards public transport use). Feedback loops between these factors and decision points are acknowledged but need to be shown in Figure for si mplicity. In addition, rather than being a linear process, the conceptual pathway recognises that the transport system evolves through a continuous cycle of decisions that occur through the prioritisation and investment, design and development (implementat ion), operation, and optimisation stages. The decision cycle is illustrated in Figure , taken from Waka Kotahis report of the alignment of measuring and monitoring between Waka Kotahis One Network Framework (ONF, developed with REG Road Efficiency Gro up) and the Benefits Framework. Based on this cycle of decision making, several key points were identified where there are opportunities to observe signs of the GPSs influence investment priorities, funding and implementation, and what is monitored (out comes and performance and operations).
Figure Fatal and serious at fault light motor vehicle crash involvements per , licensed drivers per year for to combined by licence stage and drivers age with confidence intervals.
Figure GPS Theory of Change
Figure Review Two Phased Methodology . STRUCTURE OF THIS REPORT This Report is structured to reflect the Review methodology with key sections as follows: Background context : Provid ing information on the historical context of value for money as a concept and its application in New Zealand l and t ransport policy . Benchmark Value for Money Frameworks: An overview and comparative analysis of value for money fram eworks employed in the UK and Australia to assist in the delivery of transport outcomes. Policy and Framework Analysis: Assessment of the performance of the existing MoT value for money framework, identifying current challenges and opportunities for improv ement. Recommendation s: Leveraging learnings from benchmark value for money frameworks and feedback from stakeholders to address key findings of the policy and framework analysis through a recommended value for money framework and assessment model.
Figure The Transport Outcomes Framework Measuring progress and using evidence Good decision making requires robust and objective evidence. There is a range of data and evidence available to inform your decisions. The Ministry, the transport agencies, and SOEs have access, and the ability to analyse, numerous datasets, including vehi cle fleet statistics and emissions data, and the Freight Information Gathering System. This enables agencies to offer evidence based insight into trends, future projections and possible impacts on policy decisions. We can help you better understand the consequences of your decisions, from modelling the impacts, to monitoring and evaluating the effectiveness of policies and investment in infrastructure. The Ministry has recently developed a National Transport Model (Monty) . This agent activity based microsimulation model can simulate how people interact with the transport system to understand the behavioural impacts of an intervention (e.g., policy andor investment) and its effect on transport outcomes, (e.g., accessibility, travel time, emissions). It can also identify how impacts from intervention could be distributed, such as across population characteristics or locations. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT A transport systernthat lmprovas well.being and llveablllty FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
Figure The Transport Outcomes Framework Measuring progress and using evidence The Ministry, the transport agencies, and SOEs have access to, and the ability to analyse, numerous datasets, including vehicle fleet statistics and emissions data, and the Freight Information Gathering System. This enables agencies to offer evidence based insight into trends, future projections, and possible impacts of policy decisions. We can help you better understand the implications of your decisions, from modelling the impacts, to monitoring and evaluating the effectiveness of policies and investment in infrastructure. For example, the Ministry has developed a National Transport Model (Monty) to understand how people interact with the transport system The Ministrys Transport Sector Monitoring Framework provides a consistent approach to monitor the progress of interventions to help understand whether the right outputs are delivered efficiently and economically to deliver the desired outcomes and impacts effectively. The Transport Evidence Base Strategy (TEBS) and the Decarbonising Transport Research Strategy (DTRS) set out the paths to ensure the transport sector has the right data, information, research and evaluation to support policy decisions. Implementation of the TEBS and the DTRS is the responsibility of your transport agencies (e.g. through the Land Transport Sector Research Programme managed by Waka Kotahi) and SOEs, working alongside local government and other stakeholders. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Inclusive access . , Enabling all people to participate in society through access to social and economic opportunities . such as work. education, and healthcare . Economic prosperity Supporting economic activity via local, regional, and international connections. with efficient movements of people and products. A transport system that Improves wellbelng and llveablllty Protecting people from transportrelated Injuries and harmful pollution, and making active travel an attractive option. Environmental sustainability Transitioning to net zero carbon emissions , and maintaining or improving biodiversity, water quality. and air quality. Minimising and managing the risks from natural and humanmade hazards, anticipating and adapting to emerging threats, and recovering effectively from dlsruptlve events, THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS
Figure The Transport Outcomes Framework Measuring progress and using evidence The Ministry, the transport agencies, and SOEs have access to, and the ability to analyse, numerous datasets, including vehicle fleet statistics and emissions data, and the Freight Information Gathering System. This enables agencies to offer evidence based insight into trends, future projections, and possible impacts of policy decisions. We can help you better understand the implications of your decisions, from modelling the impacts, to monitoring and evaluating the effectiveness of policies and investment in infrastructure. For example, the Ministry has developed a National Transport Model (Monty) to understand how people interact with the transport system The Ministrys Transport Sector Monitoring Framework provides a consistent approach to monitor the progress of interventions to help understand whether the right outputs are delivered efficiently and economically to deliver the desired outcomes and impacts effectively. The Transport Evidence Base Strategy (TEBS) and the Decarbonising Transport Research Strategy (DTRS) set out the paths to ensure the transport sector has the right data, information, research and evaluation to support policy decisions. Implementation of the TEBS and the DTRS is the responsibility of your transport agencies (e.g. through the Land Transport Sector Research Programme managed by Waka Kotahi) and SOEs, working alongside local government and other stakeholders. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Inclusive access . . Enabling all people to participate in society through access to social and economic opportunities . such as work. education, and healthcare . Economic prosperity Supporting economic activity via local, regional. and international connections, with efficient movements of people and products. A transport system that Improves wellbelng and llveablllty I I Protecting people from transportrelated Injuries and harmful pollution, and making active travel an attractive option. Environmental sustainability Transitioning to net zero carbon emissions, and maintaining or improving biodiversity. water quality. and air quality. Minimising and managing the risks from natural and humanmade hazards, anticipating and adapting to emerging threats, and recovering effectively from disruptive events, THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS
Figure The Transport Outcomes Framework Supporting policy development with data and modelling The Ministry, transport agencies and SOEs have access to data and analysis from numerous datasets, including vehicle fleet statistics , freight movement, and emissions data. This means we can offer evidence based insight into trends, future projections, and possible impacts of policy decisions. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Inclusive access . . Enabling all people to participate in society through access to social and economic opportunities . such as work. education, and healthcare . Economic prosperity Supporting economic activity via local, regional, and international connections. with efficient movements of people and products. A transport system that Improves wellbelng and llveablllty I I Protecting people from transportrelated Injuries and harmful pollution, and making active travel an attractive option. Environmental sustainability Transitioning to net zero carbon emissions, and maintaining or improving biodiversity. water quality. and air quality. Minimising and managing the risks from natural and humanmade hazards, anticipating and adapting to emerging threats, and recovering effectively from disruptive events, KEY TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES
Figure The Transport Outcomes Framework Supporting policy development with data and modelling The Ministry, transport agencies and SOEs have access to data and analysis from numerous datasets, including vehicle fleet statistics , freight movement, and emissions data. This means we can offer evidence based insight into trends, future projections, and possible impacts of policy decisions. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Inclusive access . . Enabling all people to participate in society through access to social and economic opportunities . such as work. education, and healthcare . Economic prosperity Supporting economic activity via local, regional, and international connections, with efficient movements of people and products. A transport system that Improves wellbelng and llveablllty I I Protecting people from transportrelated Injuries and harmful pollution, and making active travel an attractive option. Environmental sustainability Transitioning to net zero carbon emissions, and maintaining or improving biodiversity. water quality. and air quality. Minimising and managing the risks from natural and humanmade hazards, anticipating and adapting to emerging threats, and recovering effectively from disruptive events, KEY TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES
Figure . Total petrol consumption is forecast to decrease, despite a continuing increase in road travel distances, due to an increase in the fuel efficiency of vehicles and the shift to electric vehicles. Source: Ministry of Transport NLTF revenue model . ........ Petrol VKT (billion kms)Petrol (billion litres) Litres of Fuel Total VKT (km)
Figure . Total petrol consumption is forecast to decrease, despite a continuing increase in road travel distances, due to an increase in the fuel efficiency of vehicles and the shift to electric vehicles. Source: Ministry of Transport NLTF revenue model . ........ Petrol VKT (billion kms)Petrol (billion litres) Litres of Fuel Total vkt (km)
Figure . Vehicle Kilometres Travelled (VKT) vs. fuel consumption
Figure . Vehicle Kilometres Travelled vs. fuel consumption
Figure Actual (black dots) and modelled (red line, with confidence bands) monthly crash rates for riders aged under versus riding experience (measured as the amount of time since obtaining a learner licence), from to combine d.
Figure Fatal and serious at fault motorcycle crash involv ements per , licensed riders aged to per year by licence stage and crash time period with confidence intervals ( to ).
Figure Progression status and CBTA status as at the end of for all riders who received a learner licence between October and the end of .
Figure Distribution of time spent at each licence stage as at the end of of riders who obtained a learner licence between October and the end of and who progressed to a full licence, by CBTA status (months).
Figure Fatal and serious at fault motorcy cle crash involvements per , licensed riders per year by licence stage and CBTA status for riders who received a learner licence from October until the end of , with confidence intervals.
Figure Cumulative proportion of riders who received a learner licence and who had progressed to a full licenc e in a given amount of time, by year of learner licence start .
Figure illustrates rider progression more generally by showing cumulative progression of cohorts of learners to a full licence (for each cohort, progression is measured up to the end
Figure Fouryear progression status for riders who obtained a learner licence bet ween and , by gender and year of obtaining a learner licence (percent).
Figure Fatal and serious at fault motorcycle crash involvements per , licensed riders per year to the end of for riders who obtained their learner licence between and , by progression status as at the end of and licence stage.
Figure Distribution of progression durations for riders who obtained a learner licence in to and progressed to subsequent stages by the end of by gender (months).
Figure : Risk adjusted percentage of reoffending for disqualified driving offences, after to years, by offender group
Figure Actual and forecasted NLTF revenue, as reported in the Pre Election Fiscal Update
Figure Actual and forecasted NLTF revenue, as reported in the Pre Election Fiscal Update Transport regulatory agencies are primarily funded from fees, charges, and levies As Minister, you have responsibility for seeking Cabinets agreement to the rates at which fees, charges, and levies are set. These are critical decisions because they determine the resourcing available to the transport agencies to deliver their regulatory responsibilities. Crown funds can supplement transport revenue and be used to purchase specific projects or programmes Not all of the investment Government has wanted in the transport sector has been able to be met from the NLTF. Increasingly the Crown has made direct investments in specific activities in the transport system .The annual budget process led by the Minister of Finance is another opportunity for Crown funds to supplement the NLTF. Unlike investment from the NLTF where the Waka Kotahi Board has an independent role in overseeing and monitoring expenditure, ministers are accountable for activities funded by the Crown directly and retain decision making rights when changes are needed to the budget, scope or timeframes for these projects. While bodies like Waka Kotahi or KiwiRail may deliver Crown funded activities and investment programmes, the Crown usually establishes additional oversight arrangements for any projects or programmes with Crown funding. These arrangements give Ministers assurance that the intended investment outcomes are being achieved. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT , , w , C ,g I ,l,I ::i: , C: ,l,I ,l,I .. . :i , z , JuneYear THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS
Figure Key decision points in the investment and operational cycle (ONF) Therefore, the evaluation framework for this project needed to include the influence opportunity points, the differing scales of decision making, and the change over time. Decisions about prioritisation, funding and monitoring are made at national, regional, and local scales. If the GPS had an influence, we would expect to see differences in prioritis ing, funding, and monitoring decisions before and after the GPS and whether that change has continued or accelerated. The intersection of these dimensions is represented in the matrix design shown in Figure , with three horizontal influence opportun ities and three vertical decision scales, each broken down into the three GPS periods. The intersections of the vertical and horizontal domains show points to look for in the data.
Figure Learner licences issued versus the drivers age at the time of obtaining their learner licence, for and .
Figure Scop e of GPS influence (conceptual diagram)
Figure . The private share of public transport costs has been falling since . In , private share of public transport costs was less than percent . Source: NZTA
Figure . The private share of public transport costs has been falling since . In , the private share of public transport costs was less than percent . Source: NZTA Percentage share Local Share Private share NLTF and Crown share
Figure . Variance from proposed treatment strategy and health indices
Figure Fatal and serious at fault motorcycle crash involvements per , licensed riders per year for riders who obtained a learner licence in and and progressed to a full licence by the end of , by duration of progression from learner to full licence and licence stage, with confidence intervals.
Figure Motor vehicle traffic crash fatality and hospitalisation rates per , people in New Zealand.
Figure Rate of driver fatalities and hospitalisations per , licensed drivers.
Figure Fatal and injury crashes per , licensed drivers per month for drivers who obtained a restricted licence between and in New Zealand .
Figure : Focus area , Ju ly December Figure : Focus area , January March Key highlights During this quarter : . Waka Kotahi hosted webinars and surveys with Councils and advocacy groups on the draft revised national mode shift plan ahead of this being provided to you. Engagement with councils got underway on delivering a national plan to increase the safety and attr activeness of cycling and micro mobility and drafting for a plan on walking has also commenced . Detailed design work has been prog essed with Environment Canterbury to prepare for the delivery of nationally integrated ticketing for public transport. . The Transport Choices programme has progressed, with several councils demonstrating confidence in delivery and projects progressing to implementation. Funding Agreements have been finalised for all councils . . Waka Kotahi has progressed all party MoUs (with each PTA, bus operator and union). To , five have been completed (including Auckland and Canterbury), and seven are in progress (including Wellington). . Waka Kotahi project emissions estimation tool (PEET) was to include considerations for climate change which will have positive implications for both emissions reduction and updating measures for resilience. This will help to improve the assessment of enabled and embodied emissions arising from infrastructure activities. Changes to initiative ratings We note that two initiatives under the action to integrate land use planning, urban development and transport planning were previously classified as red due to resourcing issues. These initiatives were delayed due to staff turnover, however new resource has been allocated to these within the responsible team and engagement with relevant stakeholders has recently c ommenced. Notably, the initiative to incorporate transport emissions impact assessments into transport plans is back on track to meet respective milestones . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of The initiatives under the action to embed nature based solutions as part of our response to reducing transport emissions were previously rated red as work on these had not commenced. These have been re categorised as amber because overall timeframes are still likely to be met. Initiative .c. to support initiatives to increase the uptake of e bikes has been re categorised as discontinued (black) following unsuccessful bids for funding. Although successful trials have taken place through the Waka Kotahi innovation fund, we note that these are relatively small in scale and not sufficient in size to report that we have met the intent of the ERP through the delivery of this initiative. Red initiatives and mitigations Four initiatives that have a red status sit under Focus area : . Initiative .e. to investigate opportunities to improve school bus services is red because this work led by the Ministry of Education has been paused. This remains the same as from the previous quarterly report to you No timeframe was set in the ERP or Decarbonising Transport Action Plan ( DTAP ), but the work was paused with agreement from the then Minister of Education. We are in discussion with the Minist ry of Education to determine how this prioritisation decision was made, and whether they will consider progressing this work again. . Initiative .c .: Provide support for local government to develop network plans for walking and cycling has not commenced. However, a range of related initiatives are underway, in partnership with councils, to assess existing walking and cycling networks, develop network standards, and model strategic future modal networks. This work will be an input for the urban VKT reduction programmes, which are in development for Tier urban areas . . Initiative .d : Incentivise local government to quickly deliver bikescooter networks, dedicated bus lanes and walking improvements by reallocating street space (including during street renewals ) has not progressed as relevant resource has prioritised related initiatives (regulatory changes through reshaping street s as well as Transport Choices ). As resource become available, we expect work on this will start to progress . . Initiative .f.: Work with local government to deliver public transport, cycling and walking improvements in low socio economic areas and for transport disadvantaged groups (i ncluding disabled people) has not progressed due to Te Manat Waka resourcing issues. We will provide you further advice that will consider equity related issues across the ERP which will consider how to address this initiative .
Figure : Percentage change in trips by mode Figure : Percentage change in distance by mode
Figure : Risk adjusted percentage of reoffending for other (non drinkdisqualified driving) offences, after to years, by offender group
Figure Crashes involving yearold drivers, by year, with confidence bands showing the plausible range of the number of crashes in each year given random variation in crash rates.
Figure Framework for evaluating the impact of the GPS In the Orientation workshop, the RLTP was identified as a point in the pathway where local and regional priorities meet with national investment priority signals expressed in the workshop as bottom up meets top down. What is put forwar d into the RLTP was seen as reflecting local conditions and history (for example, underinvestment in some areas of the network) and local and regional interpretation of the investment signals from the GPS and Waka Kotahi. Therefore, what is funded for impl ementation through the NLTF would represent regional and local priorities in the submitted RLTP, which were then filtered through the national priorities expressed in the GPS. What is monitored would be a combination of what was funded and developed and wh at needed to be assessed and valued. For example, the historical emphasis on roads and vehicles has meant that active modes needed to be more visible in monitoring indicators, impacting the ability to report on the outcomes for these modes. Three key concl usions emerged from the Orientation workshop to inform the next phase of populating the framework and gap analysis. The conclusions were: Follow the money: without changes in funding, little else in the transport system will change There is a considerabl e lag between the GPS and behaviour change, notably the time taken for projects to be approved and implemented ahead of observable change. The Regional Land Transport Plans (RLTP) that feed into the NLTP represent the intersection between the bottom up i nterests of Regional and local councils and the top down interests of central government. . Data gathering and assessment Phase .. Populating the evaluation framework Phase started with a stocktake to gather and assess quantitative and qualit ative data and data sources to populate the evaluation framework. The stocktake sought data from the following sources: Data reported by Te Manat Waka as part of GPS annual reporting. Te Manat Wakas Transport Indicators related to mode shift, with particular reference to the healthy and safe people, environmental sustainability, and inclusive access outcomes from the Transport Outcomes Framework . The Sustainable Urban Mobility Benchmarking prototype . Waka Kotahi data, including NLTF data from Transport Investment Online (TIO). Regional Land Transport Plans (RLTPs) and relevant regional strategies (for selected stakeholders). Other data (where available and relevant), such as local authority maintained data. The stocktake identified a wide range of data and reporting sources. Full details of the stocktake are contained in the GPS Mode shift Evaluation Stocktake spreadsheet (Appendix ). The first tab (GPS Indicator Maturity) indicates where in dicators are available across the framework, with more details for each indicator given in the Indicators tab. In addition, the stocktake included qualitative information from documents (such as the signalling of priorities through wording) and quantitativ e reporting accessed through Transport Investment Online (TIO). Existing reporting has been referenced in this report (rather than downloaded). The stocktake did not include quality . STUDY PHASES
Figure Illustration of funding allocation for a hypothetical investment activity . Figure Number of activities included in the analysis by analysis group . . Figure Topics detected among activities by analysis group . . Figure Actual expenditure on transport activities . . . Figure Distribution of actual expenditure on transport activities . . Figure Breakdown of approved funding in each GPS period by type of activity and period of first approval . . . . . Figure Total approved and planned expenditure for activities first approved in each GPS period by the analysis group. Costs associated with some activities are included in more than one group. Ex penditure on baseline activities is excluded. . . Figure Distribution of total approved and p lanned expenditure for activities first approved in each GPS period by analysis group . . . Figure Distribution of total approved and planned expenditure over all years for activities first approved in each GPS period by the analysis group. Some activities are included in more than one group . . . . . Figure Distribution of funding for improvements activities first approved in each GPS period . . . . . Figure Expected national BCRs for activities by GPS period of first a pproval and analysis group (improvements activities only). Note some activities may be in more than one analysis group . . . . . Figure Distribution of total approved and probable funding across BCR ranges by GPS period of first approval and analysis group (improvements activities only). Expenditure associated with some activities may be in more than one analysis group. . . Figure NLTP investment approvals ( of total expenditure in each activity class) by priority based on the degree of alignment with GPS priorities and BCR ( highest . Figure Te Manat Waka Value for Money assessment model . . Figure Results of automated topic analysis applied to transport projects in the analysis dataset . . . . .
Figure Illustration of funding allocation for a hypothetical investment activity .. Identifying baseline activities Baseline activities, such as routine maintenance, were identified based on advice from Waka Kotahi. This was done by classifying the type of TIO template used for the funding applications of investment phases (see Appendix for details). However, baseline activities were excluded from the subsequent analysis for the above reasons. .. Investment activities included in the analysis As described, this analysis examines how the mix of the newly funded investments under GPS differed from those newly funded under GPS and . The Criteria list below summarises the criteria for selecting the subset of transport investment activities included in the subsequent analysis. Of the , investment activities included in the combined dataset, , satisfy these criteria, of which were first approved un der GPS , were first approved under GPS , and were first approved under GPS . These activities are associated with , investment phases, excluding phases with negative total costs.
Figure Roles and responsibilities of the Minister, Crown entity and monitoring department
Figure Transports role within the wider system Notes Key groupings Secretary for Transport atten ds ODESC as required Infrastructure Climate and Environment Freight and Supply ChainEnergy Transport SystemMaritime security strategy Border Executive Board TourismSpace strategy Provincial Growth FundSchool transport SuperGold CardTotal mobility scheme Climate Change CEs Board RMA reforms Transport workplaces such as ships, aircraft, ports, airports etc. Housing supply Intelligent Transport Systems Aviation Security Collection of fuel based levies and taxes Setting fuel standards Net Zero emissions by Major IT projects Movement of goods locally, nationally and globallyCoordination of major infrastructure projects, eg ALR Air Services AgreementsCoordination of complex emergency responses Regional Spatial StrategiesClimate change adaption and mitigationTransitioning to new sources Te Waihanga New Zealand Infrastructure CommissionODE SC Knoa Regional Economic Development Unit (MBIE)Sector Leadership GroupMSOC RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT APPENDIX EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SEARCH AND RESCUE FUNCTIONS
Figure Transports role within the wider system Notes Key groupings Secretary for Transport attends ODESC as required Infrastructure Climate and Environment Freight and Supply ChainEnergy Transport SystemMaritime security strategy Border Executive Board TourismSpace strategy Provincial Growth FundSchool transport SuperGold CardTotal mobility scheme Climate Change CEs Board RMA reforms Transport workplaces such as ships, aircraft, ports, airports etc. Housing supply Intelligent Transport Systems Aviation Security Collection of fuel based levies and taxes Setting fuel standards Net Zero emissions by Major IT projects Movement of goods locally, nationally and globallyCoordination of major infrastructure projects, eg ALR Air Services AgreementsCoordination of complex emergency responses Regional Spatial StrategiesClimate change adaption and mitigationTransitioning to new sources Te Waihanga New Zealand Infrastructure CommissionODE SC Knoa Regional Economic Development Unit (MBIE)Sector Leadership GroupMSOC RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TRANSPORTS ROLE WITHIN THE WIDER SYSTEM
Figure Transports role within the wider system Notes Key groupings Secretary for Transport attends ODESC as required RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TRANSPORTS ROLE WITHIN THE WIDER SYSTEM
Figure shows the annual number of annual crashes involving yearold drivers in years prior to the i ncrease of the minimum learner age. On average across all years shown ( to ), yearolds were involved in crashes per year. Based on trends in the proportion of the yearold population with a driver licence and the total population of yearolds in , we estimate there would have been around , yearold licensed drivers in . Using a model of crash involvements (described in section .. in the Technical Report ), we estimate that these yearold drivers would have been invo lved in . crashes in if the minimum learner age had remained at years old (with a confidence range from . to . crashes).
Figure : Recent years have seen large increases in the amount of Capex and Opex invested by the Crown into rail. Source: The Treasury. Crown funding ( millions) Capex funding Opex funding
Figure : The amount of rail freight has been in steady decline despite significant Crown capital investment. Capital investment in rail compared with tonnage carried ( ). Source: Ministry of Transport KiwiRail. Walking and cycling Investment in walking and cycling s hould only take place where there is either clear benefit for increasing economic growth or clear benefit for improving safety and demonstrated volumes of pedestrians and cyclists already exist. All investment in walking and cycling will come from the Walking and Cycling activity class , including investment in maintaining the existing walking and cycling network . Billion tonne km Total rail freight investment ( million) Total rail freight investment Tonnekm
Figure Actual (black dots) and modelled (red line, with confidence bands) monthly crash rates for drivers aged under versus driving experience measured as the amount of time since obtaining a learner licence, from to combined.
Figure Actual and forecasted NLTF revenue, as reported in the Pre Election Fiscal Update The decrease in revenue from is due to the previous Governments cost of living package which provided a percent reduction in RUC and cent per litre reduction in FED. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT , , ;;; , ,Q . ., ::, C: ., , , , .,.. JuneYear THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
Figure NZ Land Transport Operating Structure
Figure Number of activities included in the analysis by analysis group ... Topic analysis The NLTP dataset includes descriptive text relating to the purpose and objectives of each activity and phase. Figure shows the proportion of activities in each of the analysis groups defined above where five key topics were detected (see Appendix , page , for details). For example, among activities in the road improvements group, safety was detected as a relevant topic for of activities and walking for . It is common for multiple topics to be detected in the descriptive text for an activity. Of the , activities included in this analysis, more than one of the five topics listed above was detected for , (). On th e other hand, none of the five topics was detected for () activities, noting that no descriptive text was available for activities. A further fell into the investment management, planning sector research analysis group.
Figure Transports role within the wider system
Figure What is prioritised SUM policies and plan supporting mode shift. Taken from the SUM benchmarking report (, p. ) The TIO analyses in .. provide a more detailed example of how to monitor change over time in what is funded and developed at national and Regional scales. The TIO analyses demonstrated national and Regional priorities in what is included in plans and what was subsequently approved for funding. Unfortunately, local district level breakdowns still nee d to be completed for this report. However, they could be available for analysis, although small numbers restrict in depth analysis in many regions. Figure illustrates two indicators used to benchmark mode share in SUM . Stats NZ Census data was used to compare mode share for transport to education, and the Household Travel Survey was used to measure the gender difference in cyc ling mode share (moving average ).
Figure . The amount of state highway rehabilitation and resealing has not increased , despite a increase in funding. State highway maintenance funding , excluding emergency works . Source: Ministry of TransportNZTA. Figure . Maintenance funding trends Local roads
Figure : Percentage of commuter trip growth by origin Figure : Percentage of commuter trip growth by destination
Figure : The amount of rail freight has been in steady decline despite significant Crown investment. Crown investment in rail compared with tonnage carried ( ). Source: Ministry of Transport KiwiRail. Walking and cycling Investment in walking and cycling s hould only take place where there is either clear benefit for increasing economic growth or clear benefit for improving safety and where there is an existing or reliably forecast demand for walking or cycling . Investment in walking and cycling is expected to make a contribution to economic growth and productivity. To achieve this, project specifications should take a no frills approach and funding should be directed to reducing congestion andor improving pedestrian safety. Consideration should be given to concentrating investment in fewer more targeted areas, rather than investing in broader areas with a lower overall level of return. The Government expects that walking and cycling investment will undergo robust consultation with community members and business owners that could be affected by the investment, prior to any investment decisions being made. Investment in walking and cycling is expected to primarily come from the Walking and Cycling activity class, including investment in maintaining the existing walking and cycling network . Billion tonne km Total investment ( million) Total Crown rail freight investment Tonnekm
Figure Estimated change in the annual number of crash involvements due to changing the minimum driving age (with confidence bands).
Figure Topics detected among activities by analysis group .. Analysis of actual expenditure data Public data on annual actual transport expenditure was obtained from Waka Kotahis website and was categorised for analysis. This gives informa tion about actual annual expenditure, which may relate to ongoing projects that were approved and started in earlier GPS periods. However, this means that it provides limited information about the impacts of each GPS on funding decisions, given the signifi cant time lag between funding decisions and actual expenditures. Expenditure by Waka Kotahi and local authorities was combined, and some reported categories were combined to summarise actual expenditure, like the analysis groups described above. The categ ories that were defined are described in the Appendix. . Qualitative research objectives and approach The qualitative research components of the evaluation are intended to uncover some of the key drivers of investment decision making and to explore perc eptions of the extent the intentions of GPS are realised. In total, twelve interviews were held with stakeholders in June July . Of these, ten interviews were undertaken with stakeholders with general insights into GPS , comprising four stakeholders from Waka Kotahi and seven from external organisations (Automobile Association, Cycle Action Network, Living Streets Aotearoa, Local Government NZ, and Transporting NZ). In addition, two further interviews were held with three representatives from Auckland Transport and Waka Kotahi to explore two case studies of GPS investment (these case studies will be discussed in subsequent reporting and do not form part of this analysis).
Figure What is monitored SUM indicators for mode share. Taken from the SUM benchmarking report (, p. ) Overall, indicators were identified across the evaluation framework. Data sources included RLTP documents, council strategy documents, Waka Kotahis StoryMaps tool and Transport Investment Online, Stats NZ Census, the Transport Indicators of the Transport Outcomes Framework, and the previously mentioned New Zealand Household Travel Survey and SUM . Identifying indicators that corresponded to the GPS periods was challenging. While considered significant for influencing mode shift, the policies and plans that could be used to observe local transport priorities were generally not tied to a specific period. While several indicators were successfully identified to populate the What is monitored domain, historical data was less readily available. Several monitoring indicators reported in SUM reporting were calculated based on data capturing the status of the network. However, it is unclear whether point in time historical data would be available for earlier periods, allowing comparisons over time (for exampl e, retrospectively extracting data on access to public transport levels for the and periods). A further temporal challenge to populating the framework was that the timing of key data collections and reporting (such as the Census and the Household Travel Survey) often did not correspond with the three time periods of interest. This limited the capacity to monitor changes in outcomes by GPS period. Rich information on the local and Regional priorities for funding and project rationales was available in the most recent RLTP documents. However, the quality of information varied and extracting information was time consuming and historical records would need to be obtained from councils in many cases.
Figure value for money key elements Note that whilst the value for money assessment model may be used to prioritise investments, it has not been designed as a project or programme selection tool. This is considered further in the Implementation Plan. .. Principles The fundamental principles of achieving value for money begin with understanding and articulating the intended outcomes sought from initiatives, projects , and programmes, informed by strategic priorities contained within the TOF and LSF. The value for money framework will also be underpin ned by a common language with clear definitions that can be applied consistently across organisations involved in delivery value for money. Table provides an overview of the terminology employed in developing this framework.
Figure . The amount of local road rehabilitation and resealing has not increased despite a significant increase in funding. Local Road maintenance funding excluding emergency works . Source: Ministry of TransportNZTA. Percentage change since State Highway Maintenance funding Lane kilometres resealed Lane kilometres rehabilitated Percentage change since Local Road Maintenance funding Lane kilometres resealed Lane kilometres rehabilitated
Figure . The amount of state highway rehabilitation and resealing has not increased , despite a n increase in funding. State highway maintenance funding , excluding emergency works . Source: Ministry of TransportNZTA. Figure . Maintenance funding trends Local Roads
Figure Actual expenditure on transport activities
Figure Example of variable information for cycling levels of service indicator. Taken from SUM benchmarking report (, p. ) In other indicators, information might be more widely available but does not correspond with the councils responsible for the infrast ructure. For example, data on injuries to people who walk, and cycle is available as hospitalisation rates for a DHB, which in many cases do not align with local authority boundaries (eg, Capital Coast DHB includes Wellington city and the Kapiti Coast, Figure ).
Figure Fatal and serious at fault light motor vehicle crash involvements per , licensed drivers aged to per year by licence stage and crash time periods, with confidence intervals ( to combined).
Figure Proposed Value For Money Assessment Model Table Definitions
Figure . The amount of local road rehabilitation and resealing has not increased despite a significant increase in funding. Local Road maintenance funding excluding emergency works . Source: Ministry of TransportNZTA. Percentage change since State Highway Maintenance funding Lane kilometres resealed Lane kilometres rehabilitated Percentage change since Local Road Maintenance funding Lane kilometres resealed Lane kilometres rehabilitated
Figure . The number of crash deaths involving alcohol or drugs continues to increase. Deaths in crashes involving alcohol or drugs . Source: Ministry of Transport Deaths
Figure : Focus area , July December Figure : Focus area , January March Key highlights Te Manat Waka and Waka Kotahi successfully held workshops to discuss aspects of the policy design for a Clean Truck Discount scheme, and the public consultation and legislative change needed to accelerate the uptake of zero emission heavy vehicles. We sought your direction on next steps for progressing a simple (rebates only) Clean Truck Discount scheme and based on Ministerial direction have instead progressed an alternative method of providing discounts for zero emission trucks through a fund managed by EECA . Changes to initiative ratings T he Sustainable Biofuels Obligation is now rated as black due to the decision to discontinue. We noted in the last quarterly report that all initiatives to decarbonise aviation and maritime had halted because they were not invited to the next stage of Budget . For that reason, they were rated red. However, over the quarter some progress was able to be made on the maritime related initiatives and as a result they are now rated amber. Te Manat Waka has been focused on meaningfully participating in International Maritime Organization (IMO) negotiations on the adoption of an international strategy to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from ships and seeking to influence the outcome towards the adoption of a high ambition strategy in line with the strategic interests of New Zealand and the Pacific. These negotiations are expected to conclude in July with the adoption of a strategy that will set an international maritime emissions reduction target and agree at a high level on a suite of measures that states will use to reduce maritime emissions. The final form of this IMO strategy will largely determine the content for any national action plan for New Zealand and new targets to reduce maritime emissions, so these ERP initiatives will remain inactive until the second half of . Once the IMO Strategy is adopted, the focus will shift to the development of the Maritime Action Plan and targets, however anticipated resourcing challenges mean these actions are
Figure Distribution of actual expenditure on transport activities . NLTP activities approvals: Overview of approved funding by GPS period An overview of NLTP funding in each of the three GPS periods calculated from the NLTP and ap provals data described above is shown in Figure . Funding for investment activities in each three year GPS period is separated into baseline activities (as described above) and non baseline (investment) activities. In each three year period, baseline ac tivities accounted for around half of the funding, and expenditure associated with activities first approved in prior GPS periods accounted for around one third of funding. Activities entirely funded from non NLTF sources (ie, Crown or debt funding) are excluded from these totals.
Figure Example of variable information for a cycling waking safety indicator. Taken from the SUM benchmarking report (, p. ) ... Overall insights and implications from data gathering and assessment The SUM benchmarking exercise highlighted the challenges to developing a multi modal set of indicators, but also the opportunities of incr easing the visibility of active and public transport modes in the transport system. Lessons learnt relevant to the development of GPS evaluation indicators include: Working with stakeholders to agree on indicator and evaluation priorities increases the val ue of reporting to all parties. Optimizing alignment between monitoring and reporting programmes (such as the One Network Framework , Land Transport Benefits Framework , and Transport Indicators ) can reduce the burden on reporting and make the most of available data. Active modes were less visible in e xisting indicators and datasets. The increasing expectation for collecting high quality data on active modes will help normalise the inclusion of non vehicle, non road transport into standard reporting. Not everything needs to be measured all the time. Bel lwether indicators such as the gender ratio of cycling mode share can be used as proxies where data is constrained (for example, age and ethnicity cycling mode share was not able to be calculated at city level due to small numbers). Input type indicator s provided valuable insights into how mode shift is being planned and prioritised for but is time consuming to gather. A key difference between developing indicators for the SUM and populating the evaluation framework here is the timeframe. SUM indicators were de veloped using the latest data available at whereas evaluating change across GPS periods requires historical data for the relevant periods. Further, the evaluation framework sought to cover national, regional, and local decision making scales, compared with the city scale of SUM . While many indicators have been used to populate the evaluation framework, it is not an optimised list. It is likely a smaller number will add significant value relative to the effort required to create them at the appropriate scales and periods. The following insights and considerations made in SUM could be applied to guide the prioritisation and refinement of future GPS evaluation indicators: Insights related to effort We can categorise the indicators into three categories in terms of the effort involved in capturing and reporting: i Low effort currently reported (example, mode share ), which are easy to incorporate in a prototype. ii High effort where processing and calculation is required (e.g., Cost to travel by public transport comp ared to the cost to travel by private vehicle, and Time to travel by public transport compared to the time to travel by private vehicle). These are time consuming to incorporate in a prototype and calculations need methodology and definition to be meani ngful. iii High effort where judgement is required to assess the indicator, leading to effort in drilling into data sources and trying to make useful comparisons across . STUDY PHASES
Figure Proportion of full licences issued to drivers aged under where the driver held an advanced certificate by drivers gender and year (percent).
Figure . The number of crash deaths involving alcohol or drugs continues to increase. Deaths in crashes involving alcohol or drugs . Source : Ministry of Transpor t Deaths
Figure Breakdown of approved funding in each GPS period by type of activity and period of first approval This illustrates the extent to which transport funding in any given GPS period is constrained by activities already in progress that were started in a prior GPS period and baseline activities. For exa mple, in the three year GPS period, we estimate that about . billion out of . billion total approved funding () was for non baseline activities first approved in the GPS period. A greater proportion of approved funding (. billion or ) was for non baseline activities that were first approved before GPS took effect. This highlights the limited ability of an individual GPS to influence transport investments in the three years it is in effect. . Trends in transport investment d ecision making Figure summarises the total cost associated with activities first approved in each GPS period in the eight analysis groups described above (noting that some activities fall into more than one analysis group). The costs shown reflect the t otal cost of all phases of relevant activities across all years. They are separated into costs for phases approved for funding in the same GPS period as the first phase of the activity (dark blue), and phases subsequently approved (light blue). Future expe nditure for phases not yet approved (as of April ) with probable funding status is also shown (grey). This is considerably larger for activities first approved under GPS than in earlier periods, presumably because less time has elapsed for such funding to be approved. The small am ounts for maintenance, operation, and renewals in Figure reflect the fact that most such expenditure was classified as baseline (as defined above) and was excluded from this analysis. In practice, such baseline activities make up a substantial proport ion of actual expenditure in each GPS period (see Figure above).
Figure Percentage of activities by TIO Activity Class A different story can be seen in the percentage of activities by weighted category. The percentage of roading activities was lower after this categorisation than the TIO Activity Class analysis due to the reclassification of roading activities into the accurate (ie, multiplemultimodal catego ries) and weighting process. The percentage of mode shift promoting categories was greater in (.) and (.) compared with (.), and a larger difference can be seen between and , where the proportion of mode shift promoting activities increased by . percentage points. The proportion of public transport activities is relatively consistent across all three periods, while more variation can be seen in the active transport category.
Figure Proportion of full licences issued in where the driver he ld an advanced certificate by the drivers age at the time of obtaining their full licence (percent).
Figure : Focus area , July December Figure : Focus area , January March Key highlights This quarter, Waka Kotahi research on New Zealands experience of transitioning to a zero emission public transport fleet and a literature review of the effectiveness of interventions to reduce light vehicle travel. Waka Kotahi has also contracted further research into the zero emission bus lifecycle and how working from home impacts on travel and land use. This research is crucial to developing a strong evidence base to inform further policy development. Red initiatives and mitigations One initia tive, to provide people and businesses with information and education to support behaviour change as we transition to a low carbon economy, has maint ained a red RAG rating this quarter as it is currently not resourced by Te Manat Waka.
Figures Figure Relationship between you, the Ministry, SOEs and agencies . Figure The Transport Outcomes Framework . Figure Transports role within the wider system . Figure Indicative funding flows in land transport . Figure Actual and forecasted NLTF revenue, as reported in the Pre Election Fiscal Update . Figure Roles and responsibilities of the Minister, Crown entity and monitoring department .
Figures Figure Transport Outcomes Framework . . . Figure Conceptual model showing the pathway between the GPS and mode shift . Figure Key decision points in the investment and operational cycle (ONF) . .. Figure Framework for evaluating the impact of the GPS . . Figure What is prioritised SUM policies and plan supporting mode shift. Taken from the SUM benchmarking report (, p. ) . . . Figure What is monitored SUM indicators for mode share. Taken from the SUM benchmarking report (, p. ) . . . . Figure Example of variable information for cycling levels of service indicator. Taken from SUM benchmarking report (, p. ) . . . Figure Example of variable information for a cycling waking safety indicator. Take n from the SUM benchmarking report (, p. ) . . . Figure Percentage of activities by TIO Act ivity Class . . . Figure Percentage of activities by weighted category . . .. Figure Percentage of cost for activities by TIO Activity Class . . Figure Percentage of cost for activities by weighted category . . Figure Comparing Regional variation in the percentage of activities and percentage of cost by weighted category . . . . Figure Percentage of activities by weighted category, separated into two groups approved committed for funding in the NLTP and probablepossible in the NLTP . Figure Value for mone y assessment model key questions . .
Figures Figure Transport investments , relative to the expected range of investment for each activity class . . . . Figure GPS Theory of Change . . . Figure Scope of GPS influence (conceptual diagram) . . . CONTENTS
Final Future Demand report released
Final Regulatory Impact Statement Land Transport Rule Setting of Speed Limits
Final draft Rule and cover briefing to Minister for signature Wednesday July
Final report on PED refunds and regional fuel tax rebates released
Final report on transport system data
Final thoughts The c hallenges ahead are daunting, but I am encouraged by the collaborative approach SAA endeavours to take. I thank my fellow Ministers, Hon Drs , Woods and Verrall for jointly sponsoring this important work and reminding us that this is not just about aviation , but about how it fits into the broader New Zealand and global context. And I thank you all for showing up and playing your par t. Thank and conclude remarks as appropriate. ENDS
Final version of paper released by Minister
Financial assurance regime consultation
Financial measurements Correct Incorrect million (use in sentences) million, . million m (use in tables and graphs) M, m
Financial penalties for transport offences are one of the many tools that regulators can use to enforce the requirements of the system. Unlike some of the other regulatory tools, such as education, warnings, and licencing, financial penalties tend to become outofover time. Some transport penalties, particularly for more serious offences, were set three decades ago. In addition, many penalty levels have been developed in relation to a specific topic or legislation, in isolation to other transport legislation or comparable regimes.
Financial security regime for offshore installations
Find more information about EV charging and infrastructure on Waka Kotahis website.
Find more information about the fund and how to apply for funding on the Energy Efficiency and Conservation (EECA) website.
Find out about the Air Navigation System Review which was carried out by a panel of independent experts between and .
Finding a solution for the upper North Island supply chain strategy has many issues and implications. Officials have deferred providing any further policy analysis until .
Fiona Pimm Chairperson Te Rnanga o Arowhenua
First Rail Network Investment Programme approved
First in by the Ministry for the Environment and Stats NZ, the Environment Aotearoa report noted that New Zealands air quality is good in most places and at most times of the year. However, vehicle emissions contributed to poor air quality in places, particularly for nitrogen dioxide pollution, which can cause serious health problems.
First reading speaking points Bill Title: Land Transport Management (Time of Use Charging) Amendment Bill
First round of contestable fund projects announced
First test train journeys through City Rail Link tunnel
Fiscal Impact of COVID on the Transport Sector
Focuses on the establishment of multiple physical areas (or sandboxes) for certificate holders to conduct their experimental or developmental operations freely
Follow the guidance provided by Digital.govt.nz :
Following a robust and competitive RfP process a number of airlines were selected to provide connectivity under the scheme. Negotiations have now concluded with the selected carriers.
Following a robust procurement and testing process, NZ Police were unable to identify a device that met the legislative criteria to recommend to the Minister of Police for approval.
Following agreement to a resilient and reliable rail system, Government approved the new longterm planning and funding framework for rail, and authorised the Minister of Transport to issue instructions to begin drafting the Land Transport (Rail) Legislation Bill.
Following by the large maps, state highway concepts for selected regions (Auckland region, Waikato expressway and Wellington region) and selected urban areas are explained in detail. NZTA Monitoring and reporting on investments Website Information: https:www.nzta.govt.nzpl anningand investmentplanning and investment knowledge basemonitoring and reporting oninvestments About monitoring and reporting on investments The purpose of monitoring and reporting on investments is to closely monitor costs and show that services and infrastructure the NZTA has invested in fulfil their intended purpose and achieve their expected outcomes and benefits.
Following consultation on the PTOM review and engagement with sector stakeholders, in August Cabinet agreed to replace PTOM with the Sustainable Public Transport Framework (SPTF). Establishing the SPTF will result in the following key reforms:
Following consultation, Maritime New Zealand will refine the draft Rules based on the submissions and will focus on implementation of the Rules through a variety of activities. This will include developing comprehensive guidance for how to comply with the new marine protection Rules.
Following consultation, the Ministry of Transport will use the feedback to provide advice to the Minister of Transport on the final GPS . The final GPS comes into effect on July .
Following consultation, the Ministry of Transport will use the feedback to provide advice to the Minister of Transport on the final GPS . The final GPS will into effect by July .
Following its first reading, the Bill was referred to the Transport and Infrastructure select committee. Copies of the advice we and others presented to the select committee are available at
Following the cancellation of Project iReX (to replace KiwiRails Interislander ferries with two new, large railenabled ships) the Government asked the Ministry to assess the longterm requirements for a resilient Cook Strait now and once the Interislander ferries have reached the end of their lives.
Following the earlier public consultation on options to improve the financial security regime for offshore installations, Cabinet agreed we should consult on draft amendments to Part . These amendments would ensure the financial assurance provided by permit holders was more aligned with the risk associated with their activity.
Following the introduction of the regional fuel tax in Auckland we carried out a review to help determine which offroad uses of fuel should be eligible for a regional fuel tax rebate. We also reviewed the situations where people can claim a refund of petrol excise duty (PED). As a result of this work, the range of situations where someone may claim a regional fuel tax rebate was expanded. We released our final report in March .
For More Information For more information about th is project and the associated report, please contact: evaluationtransport.govt.nz
For a list of fonts that the Ministry uses please refer to page of the Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines.
For a time, the only access to and from the town was by air, limiting supplies and services that the community had access to. And for many months, the entire New Zealand supply chain was impacted, as workarounds were found that enabled goods to be moved from the North Island and down through the South Island.
For an activity to be considered to support a particular mode, it had to contain an element that was directly associated with that mode. For example, if a roading activity stated that it would support buses and cyclists because they could also use the road (along with private vehicles), it would not b e categorised as such unless it included a specific active or public transport component such as a cycle path or bus lane. Where a category could not be determined for a particular activity (eg, administrative activities or those with a lack of information ), it was marked as unknownother and included in the roadingother category for further analysis ie, was not a mode shift promoting activity. Table outlines several examples to demonstrate how the categorisation was carried out. Table Examples of categorisation Example activity TIO Activity Class Categorisationrationale Mt Victoria tunnel duplication (Wellington) State highway improvements Categorised as both roading and public transport since the activity involves the investigation of a second Mt Victoria tunnel, one of which would be used for bus rapid transit, while the other would be used for regular vehicle traffic. Eastern Pathways project (Waikato) Walking and cycling improvements Categorised as both public transport and active transport since the activity involves the provision of improved public transport facilities and safe cycling routes to local schools. Medallion Drive upgrade (Auckland) Local road improvements Categorised as both roading and active transport since the activity involves the construction of a new link road along with footpaths and a cycleway.
For answers to questions such as when the official Christmas holiday period starts, why a crash might be excluded from our figures, where to find current and historical data and more, please see:
For any further information please contact the Engagement and Communications team. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Te Aratohu Brand Guidelines V. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Kia hora te marino, kia whakapapa pounamu te moana, kia tere te krohirohi i mua i t huarahi.May peace be widespread, may the sea glisten like greenstone, and may the shimmer of light guide you on your way. This whakatauk reflects how our brand is on a journey a journey to make a positive difference in the transport system so all New Zealanders may flourish. V. Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT E te kaitiaki o mtau tohu, mtau tohu hoki, tn koe M Te Aratohu nei e rahi, e aratohu an hoki kia hiki ake ai i ng waitohu o Te Manat nei ki na ake taumata ka tika. Ko ng waitohu kei roto nei, ko ng mata tini o Te Manatu Waka e whakakanohitia atu ai ki te marea kia kitea whnuitia. Ko t te Manat waitohu matua ko te whet, , ko te tohu o Hei Arataki tr e noho ngtahi ana ki tna taha hei whakatnana ake i tr whakaaro kia noho taurite ai te Kwanatanga me te Mori. N rua i whakamaru ai i na waitohu katoa e noho tamariki mokopuna ana.To the guardians of our brand elements, we greet you These branding guidelines provide guidance on our high level brand elements and their use. These brand elements provide the many faces of Te Manat Waka, and are principally guided by the guiding whet (star) and the Hei Arataki whare (house of Hei Arataki). The collection of visual elements sit within the care of the the whet and Hei Arataki and are a visual reflection of Te Manat Waka and its CrownMori role and aspiration. V. Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Rrangi upoko Contents M Mtau Who we are Kete Waitohu Brand Kete Whakahngai Waitohu Brand Application This document has been prepared to give a high level overview of our core brand elements and their use. Talk to the Comms team if you have any questions V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT M Mtau Who we are We are one contributor to how we live as New Zealanders. Our mahi contributes in many ways to the success of Aotearoa and our success in the wider world. That is why what we do is so important. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Te Take o Te Manat Our Purpose This is our purpose. It is central to everything we do. Hpaitia ana ng tngata o Aotearoa kia eke Enabling New Zealanders to flourish V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Te Hanga o te Waka Strategic Framework This is our story. It explains why we exist. These are the foundations behind what we do and how Te Manat Waka should be represented through its communications. Alongside our strategic framework sits Hei Arataki, our Mori strategy, which represents our commitment to our CrownMori partnership responsibilities. Hei Arataki acknowledges that New Zealanders are not flourishing if Mori are not flourishing, and sets out our strategic direction to identify issues and opportunities for Mori in transport design and delivery. Find out more about our FrameworkFind out more about Hei Arataki Hei Arataki V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Hei Arataki Our Mori Strategy E whai ana a Hei Arataki kia whakapai ake i ng hua waka m ng Mori. Ko mtau tohu e whitu e whakaatu ana i ng pou rautaki e , me ng mtpono rahi e wh o Hei Arataki. Hei Arataki aims to improve transport outcomes for Mori. Our icons are a visual expression of the strategic pou and guiding principles of Hei Arataki. The symbol for Hei Arataki represents: . The inside of a wharenui, thuhu (ridge pole), heke (rafters) and the pou which support the thuhuand reprensent the pou th (front post), the poutokomanawa (centre post) and the pou tuarongo (backwall post). This is symbolic to the housing of our Uara,Pou and Mtpono which are on the carvings andtukutuku panels inside this wharenui. . Maunga (Mountains) which represent the pae maunga (ranges) and maunga of Aotearoa. . Piki ake kake ake is a metaphorical term that means to climb and to ascend and symbolises the hopes andaspirations of our people. Find out more about Hei AratakiNg pou me ng uaratanga matua Our Mori strategy guides us all Hei Arataki Ng pou Strategic priorities Ng mtpono Guiding principlesKAUPAPA AKO CAPABILITY DEVELOPMENTMAHI TAHI WORKING TOGETHERWHAKAPAKARI IMPROVING OUTCOMES RANGATIRATANGA EMPOWERING AND LEADINGKAITIAKITANGA GUARDIANSHIP AND PROTECTIONWHANAUNGATANGA COLLABORATION AND UNITYMANAAKITANGA CARING FOR AND VALUING OTHERS V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Ng pou o Hei Arataki Hei Arataki has strategic pou, or pillars. mtau pou Our strategic prioritiesHei Arataki Ng pou Strategic priorities Whakapakari Improving Outcomes Ako Capability Development Mahi Tahi Working Together Ko te whakapakari, ko te whakapakeke, ko te whakatipu rnei tnei. Ko te poutama te tohu e whakaatu ana i te ekenga ki ng taumata tiketike, me te whakapai i ng hua. This means to strengthen, mature or develop. The icon is poutama tukutuku, expressing higher achievement and improving outcomes.Ko te ako me te whakaako tnei. Ko te ako, hei tirohanga ki te ao, e whakanoho ana i a mtau hei koanga, hei kaiako hoki. E mrama ai, e whakaputa hua ai ki Aotearoa tikanga rua, me whai mhiotanga, me whai pkenga, me whai mtauranga an hoki. Ka tutuki tnei m te ako. Ko te rranga harakeke te waitohu. Ko ng kete e toru, ko Te Kete Tuauri, ko Te Kete Tuatea, ko Te Kete Aronui. This is to teach and to learn. Ako, as a world view, positions us all as learners and as teachers. Understanding and making positive impact in bicultural Aotearoa requires knowledge, skills and mtauranga (understanding). We will achieve that through ako. The icon represents rranga harakeke, or the weaving of flax. The kete, or baskets of knowledge, are Te Kete Tuuri, Te Kete Tutea and Te Kete Aronui.E mea ana tnei ko te mahi tahi, ko te ttakitaki, ko te mahi tahi, ko te whai mramatanga, ko te ktui. E rua ng whanga o te waitohu. Ko te tniko e whakaatu ana i te whai i te mtauranga he arapaki te tukutuku kua whatua mai, ka noho ki ng marae, ka pupuri i ng krero m taua marae me na tngata. Ko te niho taniwha, ko te whiringa hua tapatoru nei te hanga, e whakaatu ana i t mtau kaha, i t mtau mhio ki te tauutuutu, me te mahi tahi. This means working together as one, engaging, collaborating, understanding, and partnering. The icon has parts. Tniko tukutuku is the pursuit of knowledge tukutuku are woven lattice pieces in a marae that tell a story, and hold knowledge of a place and its people. Niho Taniwha, the triangular pattern, represents our strength, reciprocity and working together. V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT mtau mtpono hei arataki Our guiding principles E wh ng mtpono o te rautaki Hei Arataki Hei Arataki is guided by four principles.Hei Arataki Ng mtpono Guiding principles Rangatiratanga Empowering and Leading Ko ng mtpono o te kokoraho, o te whakaaweawe, o te arataki. E mea ana tnei ka whai mtau ki te whakatutuki i t mtau mahi arataki i te pnaha e eke ai te hunga o Aotearoa i ng take waka. E whakaatu ana tnei waitohu i te r me ng whet. E mea ana a r ngti r, ko te r o te r, ko te korakora ira atua. He kanga whakarangatira te kanga ng whet whai e mea ana me toro ki ng whet. E whakatinana ana mtau mahi i te wawata me te awhero. He pae whakatere m te hua o t mtau arataki i a Aotearoa ki ttahi pnaha waka pakari. The principle of ownership, influence, and stewardship. This means we seek to fulfil our transport system leadership role to ensure that our transport system enables all New Zealanders to flourish. The icon represents the sun, and stars. R ngti r means sun of the sun, divine spark. Ng whet whai is empowering and leading, meaning to reach for the stars. Aspiration and ambition is exhibited in our mahi. It is a navigational point for how we will lead Aotearoa towards a stronger transport system.Kaitiakitanga Guardianship and Protection Ko te tiaki me te whakahaumaru tnei. M konei e hpaitia ai mtau haepapa tiaki taonga. E whakaaatu ana tnei waitohu i Te Ao Mrama, i te ao hurihuri. E hngai ana ki te hononga o Ranginui me Papatnuku me te hunga ora o waenganui hei tiaki m ttau. Ka huri tonu te hua o te waka, me te whi ki a mtau i roto i te hpai i ng mahi katiaki i te pnaha waka. This is guardianship and protection. It ensures that we work in a way that upholds our responsibilities to protect taonga. The icon represents Te Ao Marama, the ever changing world. Its about the relationship between Ranginui (sky father) and Papatunuku (earth mother), and all the lives in between that we need to guard and protect. Transport continues to evolve, and so does our role in upholding kaitiaki practices within the transport system. Whanaugatanga Collaboration and Unity Ko ng hononga tangata nei e hua mai nei i te whai ngtahi i te wheako, e t nei i runga i ng mtpono o te thono me te hononga hapori. He huarua poutama te waitohu nei (te huarua tukutuku) e whakatinana ana i te whakapapa, i te mahi ngtahi, i te kotahitanga, i ng taumata o te ako me te whai mtauranga. E kapi ana i tnei te hua o t te pnaha waka mahi ngtahi, m te phekoheko, e puta mai ai he pnaha waka e eke ai a Aotearoa. These are relationships through shared experiences and working together, built on connection and belonging. The icon is a double poutama (double patterned tukutuku) representing whakapapa, collaboration and unity, levels of learning and intellectual achievement. It embraces how we work together as a transport system, through engagement and collaboration, to create a transport system that enables Aotearoa to flourish.Manaakitanga Caring for and Valuing Others Ko te whakatinanatanga tnei o te whakaute, o te atawhai, me te manaaki i tahi atu. He taonga pounamu (he taonga kmehameha) te waitohu e whakaatu ana i te mahi tahi a tahi tngata e tutuki ai te whinga kotahi. E mea ana te whakatauk ahakoa iti, he iti pounamu he hirahira tonu mtau, ahakoa te triki. Ko te koru i te taha mau, ko te tipuranga hou, ko ng aho e toru e whakatinana ana i te mahi tahi a te tangata, i te manaaki me te matapopore ki tahi atu. Ko te koru i te taha matau, ko te pikorua ko te ngao i waenga i te ao wairua me te ao kiko. E tohu ana i te herenga tahitanga me te kotahitanga. Ko mtau ttahi o ng kaihoatu ki te hau o t ttau noho i Aotearoa. E whngai ana mtau mahi i ng ara rau e angitu ai aAotearoa i na whenua, i te ao an hoki. This is the expression of respect, generosity and care for others. The icon is a symbol from pounamu taonga (valued treasure) representing people working together for a common cause. The whakatauki ahakoa he iti, he pounamu signifies that, despite being small, we are of great value. The left koru is new growth, strands representing people working together for a common cause, caring for and valuing others. The right koru is Pikorua the energy between the spiritual and physical worlds. It signifies binding together and being united. V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Ng Uara Values Our values represent what Te Manat Waka stands for. They capture the behaviours and characteristics we value, and expect everyone in the Ministry to model on a daytoday basis. He Mia Bold We step up to challenge difficult issues, provide free and frank advice, and have the flexibility to change our approach or position if needed. We understand that sometimes our decisions wont be popular but we clearly articulate our rationale and adapt our delivery to give our advice the best chance of success. Kei Roto Mtau Invested We know our purpose and strive to make a difference, take pride in our work and hold ourselves accountable for delivering high quality outputs. We ensure our work is robust and thoughtful through the questions we ask and the people we involve. He Mahi Ngtahi Collaborative To make the biggest difference we maintain and grow strong relationships. We show we respect others, are open for business and connected to those around us. We invest energy to ensure we involve the right groups and actively seek opportunities to share our thinking. V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Kete Waitohu Brand Kete RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Waitohu Logo Introducing our logo Our logo represents the journeys that we all take. The marque At first you may see a whet (which represents any star or constellation we may use to navigate our journey when out at sea or traveling), but our marque means more than this. The following page reveals our unique and special narrative. V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Our narrative If we deconstruct the six points of the logo marque and the spaces between they symbolise: Pae Maunga Mountain ranges Maunga Mountains Roto Lakes Awa Rivers Awaawa Valleys or gorges Wharenui Homes Te MoananuiaKiwa The Pacific Ocean, Te TaioRehua The Tasman Sea Together, these represent the environment which enables all New Zealanders to flourish. As we journey (as if you were in a waka) from mountain tops, down through lakes, through rivers, gorges and valleys out to the ocean, we travel through our whenua and beyond. This narrative aligns closely with a pepeha, which is an identifier of where peoplelandmarks come from. The macron Our logo also contains a distinct macron shape which represents the forward movement of the journey of Te Manat Waka. This tohut symbolises the tauihu, the bow of the waka, where the waterline is forged by the bow indicating movement and journeys. The bottom border of the macron is the waterline, the top border is the horizon. Together, we are moving forward. V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Our logo is the most important, and most reproduced, element of our visual identity system. It positions us as a modern, forwardthinking organisation. It effectively blends our leadership position with a more friendly, cooperative personality. Components The standard Te Manat Waka logo lockup comprises three components: the whet marque, the words Te Manat Waka and the English translation Ministry of Transport. All text must remain together as shown. Logo variations For flexibility we have developed a single colour logo, which can be used when the use of colour is limited or when our full colour primary logo would clash with other visual elements on an application.Waitohu Logo Using our logoLogo Logo variations Full Colour Monotone Greyscale Black Reversed mmEnsure there is at least space to fit the height of a capital T around all sides of the logo. Reversed full colour Clearspace Minimum size Logos can be downloaded from Discover, search Logo V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Waitohu Logo The donts Please treat our logo with respect, and avoid the following. Please do not: Separate the logo elements (whet and type) Rotate, flip, skew, stretch, squash or reconfigure the logo Apply visual effects such as drop shadows Change the proportions of any element within the logo Recolour the logo Place the logo with conflicting colours, or multiple colours Place the logo on a background that makes it illegible, for example, a busy photo, pattern, or bright colour. V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Reo Language He taonga te reo Mori ki a ttau nei. Te Manat Waka has a role to play in the protection and revitalisation of te reo Mori as a living, everyday language of Aotearoa New Zealand. MoriEnglish Bilingual language is used in all the key entry points in all our collateral. Using bilingual language increases the awareness and status of our official spoken languages and encourages the use of te reo Mori in our everyday lives. Our design weaves the two languages together in a manner reflective of manaakitanga. All information does not need to be produced bilingually, it is only top level layers of information that should be, for example website headings, or titles of publications, or the heading of a template. Guidelines Mori is always displayed first when used in a sentence or title with English Translations should be carried out correctly andwith integrity (only by a person fluent in te reoMori) Both titles should be as concise as possible Te reo Mori should encapsulate the essence ofthe meaning it does not necessarily need to be a literal translation The languages should be visually separated toenhance readability for example, although theysit together and have the same font, they areseparated by a line device, and usually appear indifferent colours. Whatu ngarongaro te tangata, toit te whenua Though people perish, the land is permanent Talk to the Comms team if you require a Te reo translation. V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Together our tohu create our uara (values). Each one represents a different principle or strategic priority area, so each plays a significant part in our evolving journey. Publication matrix A matrix is being developed to help guide which tohu is relevant for each application. Applying a tohu When using any tohu, purposeful consideration must be taken to ensure its significance andintegrity is retained. Where a tohu should be clearly legible, it shouldbe used in full colour, on either midnight blue or white. Tohu can also be used as background tints in arepeated pattern (note that manaakitanga doesnot get used as a repeated pattern). Guidelines ofbackground tints are shown on the following page.Tohu Icons Hikina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by Green Paper Not Government Policy Talk to the Comms team if you are unsure which tohu to use V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Using our tohu can add relevance, vibrancy and interest to any cover, photo, or background. Correct use for tints The tohu can be used as subtle tints over imagery and flat colours. Always ensure the use of any tohu is strong and purposeful, avoiding any sense of gimmickry. If its use as a graphic device doesnt feel inspiring and purposeful, dont use it. Note that the Manaakitanga tohu does not get used as a repeated pattern in any context. Imagery When placing near people, it is important that the mana of the person is maintained, so the tohu should never go in front of people in particular the head. They can, however, go behind a persons headbody. Tohu Icons Tohu as background tints Cus maiossitium venimillab ilique cone voloreh endae. Axim nes as ex et et ea nobitas. Key point or fact picaeped ut ento iur aute occae erecull Key point or fact picaeped ut ento iur aute occae erecull V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Our logo consists of two blues a midnight blue for the text, and a midday blue for the marque. These represent the space we live in. To support the logo colours, we also have a range of strong dark colours within the primary brand palette. These are contrasted and complemented by our secondary palette from our vibrant range of uara. Both our primary and secondary colour palettes can be applied to a range of collateral. However, while the dark primary colours adhere to digital.govt.nz accessibility standards, the secondary colours are not so accessible. Therefore please ensure the brighter and lighter secondary colours are used at a large size, or only applied to small design elements where they do not communicate crucial elements of information.PRIMARY COLOUR PALETTE SECONDARY (UARA) COLOUR PALETTENg Tae Colours Kikorangi Midday Blue C M Y K PMS PROCESS BLUE C R G B ffKahurangi Midnight Blue C C M Y KR G B dcc Kwhai Yellow CC M Y KR G B fdb Krikirangi Turquoise C C M Y KR G B abKarakaOrange CC M Y KR G B feKrikikwhai Lime CC M Y KR G B addDark Green CC M Y KR G B aDark Blue CC M Y KR G B cDarkest Blue CC M Y KR G B Dark Grey CC M Y KR G B KkrikiGreen CC M Y KR G B barangihina GreyBlue CC M Y KR G B bcfKikorangi Light Blue CC M Y KR G B befAKO MAHI TAHI WHAKAPAKARI RANGATIRATANGAKAITIAKITANGAWHANAUNGATANGAMANAAKITANGA Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines V. Jan RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT R G B cefR G B cccee R G B a R G B ccffR G B Kikorangi Midday BlueKahurangi Midnight Blue R G B bdddaR G B cceR G B bbcR G B adbcbf R G B R G B eR G B ceR G B Dark Green Dark Blue Darkest BlueDark Grey R G B fcfcbR G B ceebefR G B fbecR G B eebaR G B efdR G B eebfR G B eeef AKO MAHI TAHI WHAKAPAKARI RANGATIRATANGAKAITIAKITANGAWHANAUNGATANGAMANAAKITANGA R G B fecdR G B bcR G B fR G B bedfR G B bfR G B cdR G B cf When the primary colour palette alone will not suffice, tints can be used to supplement a design. The lightest tints of each colour can be applied to highlight graphics and for backgrounds, but should never be used for text or core elements that communicate crucial information (unless on top of a darker shade which will provide sufficient contrast). Here are the tints we recommend: Ng Tae Colours Tints Alternatively, if you are creating an object in greyscale, use: greyscale: C M Y K, R G B, greyscale: C M Y K, R G B, greyscale: C M Y K, R G B, greyscale: C M Y K, R G B, eee R G B eed R G B bf R G B R G B R G B df R G B aede R G B df R G B adb R G B dea R G B fbba R G B bccd R G B ffdf Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines V. Jan RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Colours can be used to communicate different segments of information. In these instances, several colours may need to be chosen. Wherever possible follow the sequence of colours shown. Here some additional guidelines: To achieve maximum contrast, avoid having
For example, a household with vehicle that travels the average number of kilometres in a
For further information about GPS monitoring and evaluation, email:
For general queries about the Accessible Streets Package, contact us.
For general queries about the survey and results, email:
For information on the ERP and what it means for the public as well as the sector, can be found in these factsheets below in related documents and publications.
For more information For more information about this project and the associated report, please contact: evaluationtransport.govt.nz
For more information go to:
For more information on RUC see
For more information please contact
For more information please email us at
For more information, please see Maritime New Zealands website:
For multimodal operating intention, there are two planned programmes related to value for money . The Ministry plans to facilitate effective governance, performance and capacity of transport Crown agencies (to achieve long term goal ABD) o As a result, MoT w ill contribute to value for money from improved decisions, better government services and reduced costs for the transport sector. Work with the NZTA and local governments to deliver better value for money from the National Land Transport Fund (to achieve longterm goal ABC) o As results, MoT will deliver greater value for money by revising funding and procurement policies with regard to public transport and active modes, as well as regulations and legislation applying to public transport.
For multimodal operating, there is one planned programme of action relating to value for money : Facilitate effective governance, performance and capacity of transpor t Crown agencies (ABD) o Impact: Increased value for money delivered by transport Crown agencies For road operating, there is one planned programme of action relating to value for money: Working closely with the NZ Transport Agency and regional councils to i dentify and deliver options to improve value for money in public transport, walking and cycling funding and investment. o Impact: Increased value for money in the procurement of public transport infrastructure and services, and walking and cycling infrastructures.
For nonaviation transport services there can be no substitutable service now or in the short term, and if the service fails, there must be a low probability of a market resolution within a reasonable timeframe.
For nonrail projects, decision rights for funding from the NLTF rest solely with Waka Kotahi. The authority to approve a Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP) and NLTF funding for an RNIP sits with the Minister of Transport.
For our key lines across the whole of our network the below graph shows a trend back down towards target as the network recovers from the series of weather disruptions earlier in the year.
For our study, we commissioned Market Economic to interview:
For the Government of Brunei Darussalam:
For the Government of New Zealand :
For the Government of the Kingdom of Cambodia:
For the Government of the Republic of Indonesia:
For the Government of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar:
For the avoidance of doubt, the allowable variation is the sum of all borrowing made available to Waka Kotahi by the Minister of Transport and the Minister of Finance, reduced over time as that borrowing is expended.
For the public consultation we provided a paper that set out the results of our review and identified broad approaches for the future rules to govern how the SPS sector operates.
For the purpose of a regional fuel tax the Auckland region excludes the Great Barrier Local Board Area. Maps that provide the boundaries for the Auckland region and the Great Barrier Local Board Area are on the Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency website.
For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise stated, the term:
For the report, we the baseline data on the existing transport situation in Auckland and projected what the future situation would be like in the absence of congestion pricing.
For this RLTP, AT has undertaken a comprehensive review of its asset renewals programme to ensure that it is delivering a fitfor purpose level of service and achieving value for money.
For this report, vehicles are included in and omitted from the fleet according to their MVR
Forecasts showed that annual increases of . cents per litre would produce enough revenue to fund the priorities for land transport in the GPS.
Formal engagement is now closed on proposed transport Orders in Council to speed up cyclone recovery works
Foundation Outcomes . In we so ught feedback from CRL Sponsors on a set of draft foundation outcomes. The foundation outcomes translate the CRL Sponsors agreed vision and strategic choices drawn from the CRLL Blueprint masterplan, and working with mana whenua and local boards, transla te those into a set of outcomes that will guide the delivery of the development programme to regenerate the precinct. Your feedback on including affordable housing and the need to realise the value of investments over time has now been reflected in the ou tcomes.
Foundation report released outlining Aucklands current and future transport challenges
Founder NativebyNature Coordinator Tmaki Regional Mana Whenua Forum Auckland Regional Council CoHost, The Regenerative Practitioner Regenesis Group Cultural Design and Engagement Support Waterfront Auckland Eke Panuku
Four year progression status: Relationships to driver characteristic s Figure shows trends in four year progression status for cohorts of drivers who obtained their learner licence in each year from to and who were aged under years old at the time. In general, these outcomes have remained relatively stable o ver time, aside from the temporary disruption to progression caused by changes to the minimum ages in .
Four year progression status: Relationships to rider characteristics As with Class , the definition of non progression is arbitrary, so we defined a riders four year progression statu s as their progression on the fourth anniversary of obtaining their learner licence and analysed the relationship between four year progression status and crash rates. Figure shows trends in the four year progression status for cohorts of riders who obt ained their learner licence in each year from to . Overall, the proportion of riders who progressed to a full licence in four years was highest for those who obtained their learner licence in (.) and this subsequently declined (to . f or those who received their learner licence in ). Conversely, the proportion who remained on a learner licence after four years increased from a low of . for those who received their learner licence in to reach . for those who received the ir learner licence in . Four year progression status is similar across genders. Males are slightly more likely than females to progress beyond a learner licence, and the biggest difference in progression across genders is at the learner to restricted s tage. Of riders who do obtain a restricted licence, the proportion who subsequently progress to a full licence is almost identical across genders.
Four documents fall within the scope of your request of which, one is released with some information withheld, two are withheld, and one is refused in full. The document schedule at Annex details how the briefings have been treated. The following sections of the Act have been used:
Framework, which applies the Living Standards Framework to the transport system.
FrameworkMOT as a system steward
Freeze on new services lifted
Freight and Supply Chain Strategy released
Freight rail services KiwiRails freight operations including capital (e.g. locomotives, wagons, etc) and operating costs. Crown capital budget KiwiRail revenue KiwiRail revenue Tourist passenger services KiwiRails TranzAlpine, Northern Explorer and Coastal Pacific operations including capital (locomotives, passenger rail cars, etc) and operating costs. Crown capital budget KiwiRail revenue KiwiRail revenue Regional passenger services KiwiRail operated Capital Connection and Te Huia operations including capital (e.g. locomotives, passenger rail cars, etc) and operating costs Council contribution (Ratepayers) NLTF (Public Transport Infrastructure Activity Class) Crown oper ating budget Farebox Council contribution (Ratepayers) NLTF (Public Transport Services Activity Class) Metro passenger services Council operated commuter services in Auckland and Wellington including capital (EMU trains, ticketing infrastructure, etc) and operating costs Council c ontribution (Ratepayers) NLTF (Public Transport Infrastructure Activity Class) Crown oper ating budget Farebox Council contribution (Ratepayers) NLTF ( Public Transport Servi ces Activity Class) Locomotives used across different rail services EMU Electric Multiple Units (passenger trains) Crown capital budget contribution direct to rail, or via rail through other programmes, for example the NZ Upgrade Programme and the Provincial Growth Fund Below rail infrastructure National network maintenance and operations, renewals and upgrades Land, rail formation, bridges, tunnels, track, signals, power outside Auckland Wellington metro networks NLTF (Rail Network Activity Class) Crown operating budget NLTF (Rail Network Activity Class) Crown operating budget Metro network maintenance, renewals, and upgrades Land, rail formation, bridges, tunnels, track, signals, power in Auckland Wellington metro networks Farebox Council c ontribution (ratepayers) NLTF (Public Transport Infrastructure Activity Class) Crown operating budget NLTF (Rail Network Activity Class) paying for KiwiRails share of metro costs Farebox Council contribution (ratepayers) NLTF (Public Transport Services Activity Class) Crown operating budget NLTF (Rail Network Activity Class) paying for KiwiRails share of metro costs. Metro network catch up renewals Land, rail formation, bridges, tunnels, track, signals, power in Auckland Wellington metro networks Crown operating budget Crown operating budget Auckland Transport and Greater Wellington Regional Council have an expectation that under the existing Metropolitan Rail Operating Model (MROM) the Crown will meet the cost of deferred renewals to bring the network up to a level of serviceability. This expectation has played out in funding decisions since the Metropol itan Rail Operating Model was agreed by the Government in . Early work on the MROM Review has confirmed the MROM policy decisions did not include a commitment to meet the costs of deferred renew als, and we have not identified any subsequent commitment to this effect by the Minister of Transport or Crown.
Frequently Asked Questions
Frequently asked questions
Freshwater Fisheries Regulations
Friday September RMS Niagara Update This briefing to both you and Minister Doocey will update you about the wreck of the Royal Mail Ship Niagara, including the potential risks of an oil spill, recent work and engagement undertaken by Maritime NZ.
Friday October Decisions Confirmed Denied C onfirmed
From April , charges will be imposed on high emitting vehicles, and rebates given to lowemitting ones. This will be done on a sliding scale. This is an expansion of the Discount Scheme that started on July and provided rebates to buyers of battery electric and pluginhybrid vehicles.
From April electric vehicles and plugin hybrid vehicles under . tonnes will start paying RUC. These vehicles are currently exempt from paying RUC.
From April owners of light EVs and plugin hybrid vehicles under . tonnes will need to buy a RUC licence and display it on their windscreen.
From July , all new cars, vans, wheel drives and goods vehicles imported into New Zealand must have ESC. The requirement came into effect for other imported vehicles in , and . The requirement does not apply to some specialist vehicles.
From July , a cent per litre regional fuel tax on petrol and diesel applies in Auckland through the Land Transport Management (Regional Fuel Tax SchemeAuckland) Order . Later in , we reviewed who is entitled to a rebate of the regional fuel tax.
From July , the rate of PED is . cents per litre and the cost of a RUC distance licence for a light vehicle for example, a car, van or ute is NZD per km, including GST.
From July , the rate of PED was . cents per litre and the cost of a RUC distance licence for a light vehicle for example, a car, van or ute was NZD per km, including GST.
From July until May , Community Connect provided:
From May , Community Connect provides:
From November , currentmodel motorcycles and imported used motorcycles must have ABS fitted as standard.
From September the rate of PED was . cents per litre and, from October , the cost of a RUC distance licence for a light vehicle for example, a car, van or ute was NZD per km, including GST.
From October we are running an innovative public conversation forum that allows us to listen to a wide range of people and understand different perspectives in relation to how we should pay for the land transport system.
From December to July , we developed an interim indicative business case on the potential for rapid rail to help deliver the Governments aspirations for growth and economic development in the Corridor. This responded to a recommendation of the Shared Spatial Intent (known as Hei Awarua ki te Oranga) for the settlements between Cambridge, Te Awamutu and Papakura. The Shared Spatial Intent was produced in February by the Future Proof Partnership, recommending that that fast rail services between Hamilton and Auckland be considered to help integrate and strengthen the two economies.
From December to July , we worked closely with central and local government, and the Future Proof Partnership to develop the business case.
From December , newly issued and renewed learner and restricted driver licences will be valid for years. Upon renewal of these licences, licence holders will no longer have to sit and pass a relevant theory test.
From July , we changed the survey back to a face to face survey, asking people about days of their travel.
From an original shortlist of options, the business case examined main options in depth:
From hi s analysis, Lewis Evans () reached the following key conclusions about the New Zealand GDLS: Moving from a learner to a restricted license was associated with an increase in the risk of fatal and serious injury crashes of between . and . times, dep ending on the age of the driver (all these differences were statistically significant, and the increase in risk reduced with driver age). However, some of this increase was likely due to an increase in driving by people with restricted licenses compared to those with learner licenses, but driving exposure (i.e. the amount of time that each individual driver spent driving) was not measured and not controlled for in his analysis. There was a statistically significant increase in the crash rate among drivers with full licenses for those who gained their license in the discounted time of to months versus those who gained their full license in the standard time of months or more, raising questions about the effectiveness of the driver education programm es to qualify for the time discount. However, he also noted that drivers in the time discount group may be people who tend to drive more often and have a stronger incentive to get a full license earlier (highly motivated drivers), and this is a possible explanation for the increase in the crash rate among this group. There was no significant difference in crash rates between people who had not gained their full license by the end of the study period (December ) versus people who gained their full lice nse during the study period in the standard time of months. Lewis Evans () concludes this brings into question the value of having a final exit test before graduating to a full license. Among drivers with restricted licenses, crash rates were hig her for younger drivers, and for male drivers, all else being equal. Langley et al () examined the relationship between progression compared to non progression through the New Zealand GDLS stages and traffic offences. Non progressing drivers were defi ned as those who remained on a learner licence for at least . years (i.e. two years longer than the standard minimum time). For those who progressed, the relationship between speed of progression and traffic offences was also analysed. The authors found that, relative to those who progressed from a learner to a restricted licence in less than months, those who progressed more slowly or who had not progressed after . years were between and less likely to have a traffic offence record while on a restricted or full licence. Gulliver et al () examined the links between driving experience and crash involvement while on a restricted licence. The authors found that those drivers who were in the upper quartile of learner licence duration ( days or more) were between and less likely to be involved in a crash while on a learner licence compared to those who were in the lower quartile (less than days), but there was no statistically significant difference in crash involvement among drive rs in the lowest three quartiles of driving experience (up to days).
From the late s and early s maintenance and operations investment increased until , peaking at approximately M per annum. The next years witnessed a targeted flatlining of road maintenance investment (sparked by the Global Financial Crisis) until the Kaikoura earthquake increased expenditure. The GPS period has seen a increase from the period to approximately M per annum. The period has sought another step up to an investment level of approximately M per annum (which will be partly debt funded).
From these assessments, NZTA will start invoicing non compliant operators for unpaid RUC from November . This includes weight non compliance, and incorrect RUC type. NZTA is meeting with industry bodies, and large transport operators in the coming week to inform them of this change. Currently, the approach to screening heavy vehicles for RUC non compliance does not allow NZTA to find or target operators who are overloaded. This has a significant impact on road damage, maintenance, and unrecovered RUC. The change in approach allows for more targeted education and enforcement. Targeted screening and invoicing of heavy vehicles w ill ensure everyone is paying their fair share of road maintenance costs, and level the playing field for the heavy vehicle industry. Previously there has been some perception from industry that weigh inmotion invoicing is a type of fine. NZTA want s to emphasise that this is recovering unpaid RUC to ensure that everyone on our roads is paying for road maintenance and preventing road damage due to overloading. Driver Licensing wait times Summary for week ending Friday September Wait times for practical testing (restricted and full testing) have decreased again compared to last week. full tests down by days ( days) restricted tests down by days ( days)
From: Abby McRoberts parliament To: Richard Cross Cc: Helen FionaWhite Subject: Fw: NZTA level crossings briefing Wednesday, October Attachments: :) Get Outlook for iOS From: Abby McRoberts Sent: To: Tim Herbert t.herberttransport.govt.nz; Jess Edlin J.Edlintransport.govt.nzCc: Helen FionaWhite Helen.FionaWhiteparliament.govt.nz Subject: NZTA level crossings briefing Hi Tim and Jess, As discussed Tim, attached is the most recent NZTA briefing on level crossing removals in Auckland.Cheers, Abby Abby McRoberts Private Secretary (Transport) Office of Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Transport Minister for Auckland Minister for Energy I Minister for Local Government DDI: M: Email: abby.mcrobertsparliament.govt.nz Website: www.Beehive,govt.nz Private Bag , Parliament Buildings, Wellington , New ZealandDocument s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: Richard Cross To: Helen FionaWhite ; Abby McRoberts parliament Cc: David Wood ; Tim Herbert Subject: Level Crossings Aide Memoire Wednesday, October Attachments: image.png Hi HelenAbby Please find attached MOTs advice on the level crossing removals in Auckland. Happy to discuss if you have any questions.Thanks Richard. Richard Cross
From: Daran Ponter Daran.Pontermfe.govt.nz Sent: To: Subject: Fwd: TranganuiaKiwa: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years s ()(a) s ()(a) s () (a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s () (a) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT FYI
From: Jessica Ranger J.Rangertransport.govt.nz Sent: To: Talia Cohen Wolf Talia.CohenWolfnzta.govt.nz; Adam LawrenceAdam.Lawrencenzta.govt.nz; Andrew Wilson Andrew.Wilsonnzta.govt.nzCc: Liam Fechney L.Fechneytransport.govt.nz Subject: feedback ideally by midday tomorrow
From: Kevin Wright Kevin.Wrightnzta.govt.nz Sent: To: Tim Herbert t.herberttransport.govt.nz; Megan CampbellM.Campbelltransport.govt.nz; Chris Jones C.Jonestransport.govt.nz; Marcus SchutenkoM.Schutenkotransport.govt.nz; Andrew Hicks A.Hickstransport.govt.nz; Alexis GarlandA.Garlandtransport.govt.nz; Harriet Shelton (h.sheltontransport.govt.nz)H.Sheltontransport.govt.nz; Roselle Thoreau R.Thoreautransport.govt.nz; EmmaPetrenas E.Petrenastransport.govt.nz; Joanne Leung j.leungtransport.govt.nzCc: Amy Moorhead Amy.Moorheadnzta.govt.nz; Anaru Silao anaru.silaonzta.govt.nz; Kim Marshall Kim.Marshallnzta.govt.nz; Ian Melsom ian.melsomnzta.govt.nzSubject: Heads up information
From: Sent: Monday, June To: Tredegar Hall T.Halltransport.govt.nz Cc: Daran Ponter Daran.Pontermfe.govt.nz ; Rebecca Beals R.Bealstransport.govt.nz ;
From: Sent: To: Subject: RE: TranganuiaKiwa: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years
From: Sent: To: Tredegar Hall T.Halltransport.govt.nz; Rebecca Beals R.Bealstransport.govt.nz Cc: Daran Ponter Daran.Pontermfe.govt.nz;
From: Sent: To: Tredegar Hall T.Halltransport.govt.nz Cc: Daran Ponter Daran.Pontermfe.govt.nz ; Rebecca Beals R.Bealstransport.govt.nz Subject: RE: TranganuiaKiwa: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years
From: Sent: To: Tredegar Hall T.Halltransport.govt.nz Cc: Daran Ponter Daran.Pontermfe.govt.nz ; ; Rebecca Beals R.Bealstransport.govt.nz Subject: RE: TranganuiaKiwa: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Done.
From: Sent: To: Tredegar Hall T.Halltransport.govt.nz s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Cc: Daran Ponter Daran.Pontermfe.govt.nz ; ; Rebecca Beals R.Bealstransport.govt.nz Subject: RE: TranganuiaKiwa: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years
From: Sent: To: Tredegar Hall T.Halltransport.govt.nz Cc: Daran Ponter Daran.Pontermfe.govt.nz;
From: Sent: To: Tredegar Hall T.Halltransport.govt.nz Cc: Daran Ponter Daran.Pontermfe.govt.nz ; Dana Kirkpatrick Dana.Kirkpatrickparliament.govt.nz ;
From: Sent: To: Tredegar Hall T.Halltransport.govt.nz Subject: Te Wai Pounamu ki tepoti: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years
From: Tredegar Hall T.Halltransport.govt.nz Sent: To: Cc: Daran Ponter Daran.Pontermfe.govt.nz ; ; Rebecca Beals R.Bealstransport.govt.nz Subject: RE: TranganuiaKiwa: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years
From: Tredegar Hall T.Halltransport.govt.nz Sent: To: Cc: Daran Ponter Daran.Pontermfe.govt.nz ; Dana Kirkpatrick Dana.Kirkpatrickparliament.govt.nz ; Rebecca Beals R.Bealstransport.govt.nz Subject: RE: TranganuiaKiwa: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years
From: Tredegar Hall T.Halltransport.govt.nz Sent: Subject: Te Wai Pounamu ki tepoti: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years
From: Tredegar Hall Sent: To: Cc: Daran Ponter Daran.Pontermfe.govt.nz ; Dana Kirkpatrick Dana.Kirkpatrickparliament.govt.nz ; Rebecca Beals R.Bealstransport.govt.nz Subject: RE: TranganuiaKiwa: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years
From: Tredegar Hall Sent: To:
From: Tredegar Hall Sent: To:
Fuel industry regula tion and importer margins You have received the letter I wrote to you setting out my concerns about elevated importer margins last week. Thank you for your response. OR I look forward to your response. I am pleased that you made a submission on the Fuel Industry Amendment Bill. Once the Committee reports back to the House on the Fuel Industry Amendment Bill, I will be taking a closer look to determine if the current provisions in the Bill are strong enough to ensure a fair deal for New Zealand consumers, or if further changes are required. The purpose of introducing the regulatory backstop is to deter the misuse of market power and to ensure better competition in the wholesale market, which I expect wil l flow through to consumers at the pump in the medium to long term. If this regulation works as it is designed to, then the Commerce Commission will not have to use this new power as Z and other fuel companies will be more mindful of the prices that they are setting in the wholesale market.
Fuel prices increased substantially across the globe and in New Zealand following Russias invasion of Ukraine and increased demand as the world recovers from COVID.
Full licence test volumes overseas conversions vs. domestic tests monthly: Overseas conversations currently represent . of overall full test volume.
Full report Te rautaki ue me te rautaki whakawhiwhinga o Aotearoa New Zealand freight supply chain issues paper
Functions of IAF: Approve organisation and NZTA to assess and prioritise activities to be submitted for funding considerations. To assist NZTA in developing the NLTP and to make investment decisions Role of IAF: It is the framework used to develop an integrated prioritised NLTP that gives effect to the GPS by translating GPS priorities and expectations o It is used to develop land transport activities for inclusion in RLTPs Summary e o NZTA uses IAF to determine what proposals the RLTPs will be prioritised for inclusion in the NLTP and what proposals should be funded. It forms part of the Investment DecisionMaking Framework
Funding The proposed funding ranges is where this GPS, despite its purpose, framework outcomes and strategic priorities shows that it is largely more of the same with some tweaks . We find the funding allocations very disappointing, particularly the largest amounts going to state highway improvements in the short term. This is the time to be bold and set a new path. We do not believe you can get the modal shifts, safety outcomes and reduced emissions with the allocation as proposed.
Funding for the extension will be provided under the original IAFC funding appropriation. Since it was established in May , the scheme has supported over , flights in and out of New Zealand carrying over , tonnes of airfreight.
Funding for the rail network will now be channelled through the NLTF. KiwiRail will establish a rail network investment programme (RNIP) to take effect by July . The Minister of Transport is responsible for approving the RNIP, in consultation with KiwiRails Shareholding Ministers. This will allow the rail network to be funded from the NLTF.
Funding for the scheme was capped at NZD. million for the next years, with annual adjustments to account for inflation.
Funding the ATAP programme . The ATAP programme is funded through three main sources: The National Land Transport Fund ( NLTF), expected to provide . billion. The Governments Policy Statement on Land Transport (GPS LT) sets this expectation Crown funding: . billion. This includes the New Zealand Upgrade Programme (NZUP), the COVID Response and Recovery Fund (CRRF), and the Governments share of the City Rail Link Auckland Council : . billion . The funding sources are summarised in T able below. Table : The ATAP package by funding source as of July Funding source Funding amount ( billions) Auckland Council Funding for Auckland Transport (including Regional Fuel Tax) . Contribution to City Rail Link . Total . Government NLTF . Crown contribution to City Rail Link . Crown funded N ew Zealand Upgrade Programme (NZUP) . Crown funding from COVID response and recovery fund . Total . Total .
Further Roads of National Significance may be added over time. There were also a number of Roads of Regional Significance highlighted, including the second Ashburton Bridge, projects that improve and support the cyclone and flood recovery for the East Coast and Central North Island, and investment in a number of criti cally important bridges in the South Island. How will the draft GPS support the efficient movement of freight The Roads of National Significance Programme is expected to reduce congestion and increase freight efficiency. Increased spending on road maintenance is expected to improve safety and resilience for the movement of freight. Investment in rail will also be focused on the movement of freight between Auckland, Hamilton , and Tauranga. What does the draft GPS mean for investment in the rail network The draft GPS focuse s rail investment on the highest value parts of the network to support the efficient movement of freight , notably on the connections between Auckland, Hamilton , and Tauranga. This will complement investment in the State Highway network to deliver a productive and efficient supply chain. Investment in metro rail networks will support the efficient movement of people in Auckland and Wellington . Existing investments identified in the draft GPS include: completing the City Rail Link Wiri to Quay park third main line Papakura to Pukekohe electrification Drury rail stations Whang rei to Otiria Ashburton freight hub lower North Island rail improvements (includes new passenger rolling stock for the Wairarapa and Manawatu lines and related network infrastructure) rail network investment programme freight noncommercial rail investment rolling stock.
Further coverage of CAA pricing review consultation, in relation to agricultural operators. NZ Herald Wednesday September Whistleblower allegations: Civil Aviation Authority orders independent review into workplace culture.
Further entitlements were put in place for specific circumstances where fuel, mainly diesel, is used offroad. The final report recommended no additional entitlements due to the likely administrative cost and risk of fraud.
Further extension on temporary reductions to petrol excise duty, road user charges and public transport fares
Further graphs relating to wait times, as well as the interventions plan update can be found in Appendix one.
Further graphs relating to wait times, as well as the interventions plan update can be found in the appendices.
Further information about the GPS amendment can be found
Further information is available at:
Further information on KiwiRails approved RNIP can be found
Further information will be provided soon. This web page will be (around late April ) with guidelines on how to apply and the assessment framework we use.
Further information, including guidance on purchases, may be found here on
Further information, including the Indicative Business Case (IBC), can be found on the Auckland Light Rail website
Further work is underway on the next steps for roadside oral fluid testing.
Further work on rapid rail initiated
Furthermore, this proposal ignores some key issues around accessible transport and disabled people in general. By not recognising some of these issues below the government will be hindering a quarter of the population. Four further points that seriously need to be addressed on the Government Policy Statement on Land Transport: Assess diverse range of user perspectives on land transport Consult with the disability community and transport professionals Develop a way to collect data of disabled people and accessible transport. As the Government Policy Statement has high level goals that have no base line data Have the same standards across the whole country Recommendations Deaths and serious injuries should be disaggregated by impairment or access need and other atrisk groups, such as older people as well as by whether they are pedestrians. Disaggregate the indicators in Strategic Policy by impairment or access need. Desired result requres an additional indicator on the accessibility of public transport for disabled people. This new indicator should indicate the percentage of public transport vehicles that are accessible to disabled people. Desired result requires an indicator that looks at the number of disabled people using public transport. This new indicator should show the number of disabled people using and accessing public transport in urban areas (by region). The government should recognise the work done by the transport and disability sector in New Zealand and consult them on big projects like this. Conclusion Currently, the Government Policy Statement overlooks New Zealands disability community. By failing to consult with disabled people in the planning stage resulted in disabled people been essentially planed out. There is a strong need for indicators to be disaggregated by impairment or access need and for additional indicators to RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Future funding reports released
Future of Rail review underway
Future of Transport Technology
Future of Transport Technology
Future of the Transport Revenue System
Future projections show the number of people aged over continuing to grow. To keep reimbursing individual fares would mean the schemes costs would continue to rise rapidly. Moving to bulk funding also brought SuperGold Card funding in line with the way other public transport funding is allocated. Any cost overruns must be funded by councils, encouraging cost savings and efficiencies.
Future state model results
Futureproofing New Zealands airspace and air navigation system to ensure the safe, efficient movement of air traffic.
GDLS evaluation report released
GDP projections from Treasury
GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
GO Air Land Sea Logistics Group
GPS takes effect
GPS takes effect
GPS amended No change from the previous GPS with respect to key messages around value for money. d GPS questions and answers file:C:UsersejaDownloadsG PS Questions and Answers.pdf What are the key changes compared to the GPS GPS establishes national objectives for the land transport system as a whole, and sets out the results expected to be delivered from the allocation of funding from the National Land Transport Fund, and how these results will be measured. GPS more clearly links the investment in an activity class, the results to be achieved, and how these results will be measured: o It merges some activity classes together to make it easier for the NZ Transport Agency to shift resources to the most efficient form of investment o It places more emphasis on reporting of the measurable value delivered by investment. In terms of funding, GPS roughly continues the total amount of spending planned for in GPS . GPS provides more flexibility to the NZ Transport Agency and local authorities to identify and fund the best projects by increasing the ma ximum available funding for many activity classes including: o road policing and road safety promotion o public transport, walk and cycleways o State highway maintenance, local road improvements and local road maintenance. With greater flexibility and limited funding, the NZ Transport Agen cy and local authorities will need to do more prioritisation of investment.
GPS https:www.transport.govt.nzm ulti modalkeystrategiesandplansg psonlandtransportfundingprevio usgovernment policy statementsgps Executive summary GPS prioritised value for money as a key strategic objective, alongside economic growth and prod uctivity, and road safety. It had a strong focus on delivering infrastructure and services to meet current and future needs of communities in the most c ost effective way for households and businesses, putting the wealth generating capacity of the economy a t the top of the agenda, maintained a focus on improving the safety of travel, and the continued the focus on delivery of measurable value from land transport investment.
GPS identifies a much more direct link between the investment in activity classes, the anticipated results, and reportin g measures. Those measures include an increased focus on the repo rting of measurable returns, including benefit cost assessments. To Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee, From Minister of Transport re: THE GOVERNMENT POLICY STATEMENT ON LAND TRANSPORT : FINAL VERSION
GPS takes effect
GPS announced and released
GPS changed the approach for land transport system investment. It included new strategic priorities and amended objectives. The key strategic priorities are safety and access, with environment and value for money as supporting priorities.
GPS further developed through engagement
GPS has a total of measures that reflect its short to mediumterm results.
GPS presented a number of changes in direction, prioritising a safer transport system that:
GPS provided for rail funding, but the scope of this funding was limited. It supported investment in:
GPS short term result(s) Evaluation criteria (expected impact of GPS in ) Quantitative ev idence Qualitative evidence Level of confidence in the evidence, based on criterion Improved transport connections (including local roads, public transport and active modes) on key regional tourist routes to make these routes safer for all connectedness, and resilience of regional transport networks Measure C. of state highway and local road networks modified to align with safe and appropriate speed Measure A. of national cycling tourist routes completed Measure C. of Te Araroa at a road side without a path Measure E. investment in tourist routes for walking and cycling Measure B. Use of cycling tourist routes
GPS short term result(s) Evaluation criteria (expected impact of GPS in ) Quantitative ev idence Qualitative evidence Level of confidence in the evidence, based on criterion Public transport is more accessible and affordable, especially for those reliant on it to rea ch social and economic opportunities (including people with disabilities, low income people, and SuperGold card holders) Specialised services provide better access to transport for people (including people with disabilities) unable to drive themselves o r use scheduled public transport Increased focus of transport investment on accessibility and affordability of transport services, including for vulnerable and disabled people Measure E. Access to essential services Measure G. of people unable to make a beneficial land transport journey Measure A. of household spending on transport Measure B. SuperGold boardings To what extent have accessibility and affordability of public transport and other specialised services been a factor in transport decision making Are the needs of vulnerable and disabled people reflected in transport investment decisions Overall, what has enabled or challenged these shifts in Access outcomes towards what was intended by GPS Adequate, based on investment analysis and qualitative feedback on planning and priorities, limited data for vulnerable populations Improved resilience on routes where disruptions pose the highest economic and social costs Improved targeting of resilience risk and vulnerabilities through the use of an integrated whole of system approach, which may include investment in non transport infrastructure when th is has clear transport benefits When disruption to the network occurs, impacts of disruption are reduced at the parts of the network Increased investment in and delivery of transport projects that improv e resilience and optimise the response to any disruptions Measure A. Kilometres of road and rail infrastructure susceptible to coastal inundation with sea level rise Measure B. of routes of most economic and social importance that have viable alterna tive routes To what extent is resilience a consideration in transport investment decision making How is resilience considered, and is this sufficient Inadequate for this evaluation APPENDIX CRITERIA SELECTION
GPS short term result(s) Evaluation criteria (expected impact of GPS in ) Quantitative ev idence Qualitative evidence Level of confidence in the evidence, based on criterion Effective enforcement activity to promote safe behaviour by road users Safer road use through appropriate education and promotion activities and regulatory changes Increased focus on effective enforcement activity and appropriate education and promotion activities to promote safe behaviour and road u se by road users Measure E. Dedicated road policing staff Measure F. investment in road policing Measure A. of road safety advertising campaigns that meet or exceed their agreed success criteria Measure B. of road safety education programmes meeting targets for access to road safety information Measure E. investment in promotion of road safety and demand management To what extent do you see shifts in types of enforcement activity toward effective enforcement and appropriate education and promotion activities that encourage safe behaviour by road users Whats changingshifting in terms of enforcement activity, educa tion and promotion Overall, what has enabled or challenged these shifts in Safety outcomes towards what was intended by GPS Inadequate to assess effective or appropriate based on data available Priorities : Access A more accessible and better integrated transport network including public transport walking and cycling Improved land use and transport planning to create more liveable cities Improved throughput of people and goods in metropolitan areas Improved transport access to new and existing housing, including provision of public transport services Increased investment in a better integrated transport network, including public transport, walking and cycling and improved land use planning that aims to support improved throughput a nd access in metropolitan areas Measure H. investment in: public transport, rapid transit, transitional rail Measure C. investment in walking and cycling Measure A. of population with access to frequent public transport services Measure D. Access to jobs Measure E. Access to essential services Measure G. of people unable to make a beneficial land transport journey Measure A. of recently built re sidential dwellings with access to public transport services and active mode Measure C. of urban networks with speed limit of kmh or below To what extent are you seeing increased investment in a better integrated transport network, including public transport, walking and cycling Whats changingshifting in this investment category, and why To what extent are you seeing improved land use and planning to support transport accessibility Whats changingshifting in terms of transport and land use planning Adequate, based on investment analysis and qualitative feedback APPENDIX CRITERIA SELECTION
GPS short term result(s) Evaluation criteria (expected impact of GPS in ) Quantitative ev idence Qualitative evidence Level of confidence in the evidence, based on criterion Environment outcomes towards what was intended by GPS Priority : Value for money A more rigorous and transparent investment appraisal system Increased rigour and transparency of transport investment appraisals Measure A. investment in investment management Measure B. Total cost of managing the funding allocation system as a of the National Land Tr ansport Programme expenditure Measure C. Investment aligned to GPS priorities (assessed strategic case benefits) Measure D. Projected benefits for implementation activities at time of funding approval Measure F. Reporting of the assessment used in investment decisions Measure G. investment in activities with a benefit cost ratio of less than one Thinking of the outcomes we can see from GPS to , and in the context of other challenges we have faced, how do you see GPS delivering value for money overall What have been the key areas of value achieved, and where has it fallen short What have been the key shifts that GPS has enabled overall What have been the biggest challenges to GPS succeeding in its goals Adequate, based on investment analysis and qualitative feedback on planning and priorities Enhanced reporting, monitoring and evaluation of GPS investment Increased focus on reporting, monitoring and evaluation of GPS investment Proportion of GPS monitoring measures for which data is available Coverage of GPS monitoring measures vs GPS prioriti es Adequate, based on investment analysis and qualitative feedback on planning and priorities Better integrated transport research across government Better integrated transport research across government Measure A. alignment of funded research to the NZ Transport Research Strategy No data available More effective and efficient investment from innovation in systems, Transport investment makes better use of innovation in systems, No data available APPENDIX CRITERIA SELECTION
GPS short term result(s) Evaluation criteria (expected impact of GPS in ) Quantitative ev idence Qualitative evidence Level of confidence in the evidence, based on criterion Measure A. investment in providing public transport for new housing in metropolitan and high growth urban areas Measure B. Mode share people Measure C. Mode share freight Measure F. Number of passenger boardings using urban public transport services Measure A. Utilisation of key movement corridors for people and freight Nationally important transport connections are maintained or improved to support areas of growth, chan ges in population, freight and tourism, and to promote safety Adequate and appropriate investment in and maintenance of nationally important transport connections to support areas of growth, changes in population, freight and tourism and to promote safety Measure B. of key national and regional networks that meet One Network Road Classification (ONRC) customer levels of service for Safety, Resilienceaccess, Travel time reliability No data available Enhanced testing and deployment of intelligent transport systems and other technologies to make the best use of existing networks Transport investment and delivery include testing and deployment of intelligent transport systems and other technologies to make the best use of existing networks Measure A: Number of technology trials undertaken and implemented Measure B: investment in intelligent systems and other technologies, and level of research and evaluations in these To what extent are you seeing testing and deployment of intelligent transport systems and other new technologies as part of transport investments Adequate to assess shifts in planning and sector research investment Regional networks (including key re gional freight routes) are safer, better connected and more resilient Adequate and appropriate transport investment designed to improve and maintain the safety, Measure A. Lane kilometres of improved regional roading Measure B. of routes of most economic and social importance that have viable alternative routes Adequate, based on investment analysis and qualitative feedback on planning and priorities APPENDIX CRITERIA SELECTION
GPS short term result(s) Evaluation criteria (expected impact of GPS in ) Quantitative ev idence Qualitative evidence Level of confidence in the evidence, based on criterion standards, procurement and technology standards, procu rement and technology Improved returns from maintenance Transport investment seeks improved returns from maintenance Measure B. Maintenance cost per lane kilometre delivered for state highways and local roads Measure A. investment in: State highway maintenance, Local road maintenance No data available
GPS short term result(s) Evaluation criteria (expected impact of GPS in ) Quantitative ev idence Qualitative evidence Level of confidence in the evidence, based on criterion that have the most economic and social importance Priority : Environment Reduced greenhouse gas emissions from land transport using a whole of system approach Increased focus in transport investment decision making on reducing greenhouse gas emissions using a whole of system approach Measure B. investment in greenhouse gas emission reduction measures Proportion of transport projects invested in and delivered that include greenhouse gas reduction as an objective Measure A. Tonnes of greenhouse gases emitted per year from land transport To what extent are greenhouse gas emissions a consideration in tra nsport investment decision making How are emissions considered No data available Reduced significant harmful effects of land transport related noise Reduced significant harmful effects of land related air pollution Reduced significant negative effects on water quality and biodiversity from construction and ongoing use of transport infrastructure Increased investment in and delivery of transport projects that seek to reduce harmful external effects on noise, air pollution, wa ter quality and biodiversity Measure B. investment in stormwater quality management, biodiversity management practices Measure A. Tonnes of selected contaminants discharged from the land transport network into sensitive water bodies To what extent ar e noise, air pollution, water quality and biodiversity a consideration in transport investment decision making How are these factors considered No data available Increased uptake of active travel modes such as walking and cycling to support environm ental and public health objectives Increased investment in and delivery of transport projects that seek to promote uptake of active travel modes to support environmental and public health objectives Measure B. Network kilometres of walking and cycling facilities delivered Measure C. investment in walking and cycling Measure B. Mode share people To what extent is uptake of active modes a consideration in transport investment decision making How is active mode uptake considered Overall, what has e nabled or challenged these shifts in Adequate, based on investment analysis and qualitative feedback on planning and priorities APPENDIX CRITERIA SELECTION
GPS signalled publication of a second stage GPS to finalise the measures, as well as implement further policy decisions, such as the Future of Rail and Coastal Shipping. A second stage GPS was not , as Ministers decided it would be more effective to give GPS time to bed in, and that the new policy ideas would be best implemented through the GPS .
GPS supported an increased focus on public transport and reducing the reliance on single occupant vehicles. Rail has an important role to play in this as part of an integrated transport system. GPS enabled some beneficial passenger rail projects to progress by including rail in the same decisionmaking framework as other transport modes.
GPS takes effect
GPS builds on and consolidates the priorities of GPS . The strategic priorities for GPS are safety, better travel options, improving freight connections and climate change.
GPS Funding range Forecast funding range
GPS guides how funding for land transport will be invested and comes into effect on July . It includes billion of funding to be invested into the transport network over the next three years.
GPS is built around four strategic priorities Economic Growth and Productivity, Increased Maintenance and Resilience, Safety, and Value for Money.
GPS IPM LCLR NLTF NLTP RAMM RLTP SUM TIO VfM VKT
GPS Mode Shift Eva luation
GPS Mode Shift Eva luation
GPS Mode Shift Eva luation
GPS Mode Shift Eva luation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation iii
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation v
GPS Mode Shift Evaluation vii
GPS for Land Transport
GPS monitoring and evaluation work programme
Gaining an understanding of changing trip patterns and the likely causes of those changes involves looking across the Household Travel Survey, Census, Odometer and Statistics NZ dwelling consents and job location data.
Gary Caffell Mayor, Masterton District Council Gary was elected as the mayor of Masterton District Council in .
Gateway is not an audit and does not stop a project or programme. The Gateway proce ss: adds a third level of assurance increases confidence in alignment of projects with Government strategic objectives increases confidence in investment decisions Direct text e Literature Summary
Gateway reviews do not stop programmes or projects. However, if an initiative has significant issues it is useful to bring th ese to the attention of individuals and groups who will be able to assist in their resolution. Therefore, if a programme or project receives an Amber Red or Red delivery confidence rating in their Review Report, an enhanced notification and escalation process is triggered.
Gazetted on October
Gender inclusive language Gender inclusive language promotes gender equality. Do not reference gender unless necessary . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Gender Pay Analysis and Action Plan
General Comments . A lack of accessible transport options is one of the important issues Blind Low Vision NZ clients face every day. For our clients, accessible footpaths and being able to travel safely and confidently on these is essential to being able to access the environment, services and facilities, transport connections, social connections and undertake daily activities. . We actively work with central and local government to promote the safety of pedestrians who are blind, deafblind or have low vision, and we are also a member of the Living Streets Aotearoa coalition promoting safe and accessible footpaths. . The Draft Government Policy Statement on Land Transport impacts significantly on people who are blind, deafblind or have low vision . Blind Low Vision NZ would like to take the opportunity to advocate for more accessible public transport services and safer footpaths for people who are blind, deafblind or have low vision. . For those who are blind, deafblind or have low vision walking is important to enabling them to participate in the community, accessing services and facilities, travel to study and employment and accessing Public Transportation. Investment in infrastructure must ensure safe and accessible footpaths. The design should not be placing those who have impairments at risk (real or perceived). . Blind Low Vision NZ supports the strategic priorities of the Draft Government Policy Statement on Land transport, specifically the focus on safety and better travel options . Blind Low Vision NZ believes that the Draft Government Policy Statement on Land Transpo t needs to be accessible for people who are blind, deafblind, have low vision or have other disabilities. . Blind Low Vision NZ would like to see more consideration of people who are blind, deafblind, have low vision or have other disabilities in the Draft Government Policy Statement on Land Transport and how the strategy aims to improve access to transport. . The Draft Government Policy Statement on Land Transport refers to accessibility throughout the document. However, the context of these references suggests that accessibility means availability of services only. Accessibility means RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Generally, I would like the Agency to make its SPE more concise, consolidating its perfor mance measures and presenting information simply. I encourage the Board to continue to refine its public accountability measures and ensure the associated targets provide appropriate stretch to the Agency (particularly where system outcome measures are alr eady being achieved or exceeded).
Generational Investment Approach
Genevieve Woodall Manag er Urban Development and Public Transport
George Ross (he his) Kaitohutohu Matua Senior Advisor Investments Te Rautaki Pnaha Waka me te Ptea Haumi System Strategy Investment Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport E: g.rosstransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz
Get Outlook for iOS From: Tredegar Hall T.Halltransport.govt.nz Sent: To:
Getting sign off The level of sign off you need to get depends on the nature of your presentation. At the very least, ensure that you have sign off from your manager.
Given delays to Auckla nd light rail, and with Lets Get Wellington Moving (LGWM) in its early stages, we have an opportunity to repair the social contract . In the case of the LGWM program me, we note over of investments are nonroad investments. c. State of the network and its effect on safety GPS does not address the base condition of the road network and how this innately influence s safety.
Given that this change affected all drivers with learner and restricted licences, we compared crash rates for drivers with learner and restricted licences in the immediate period befo re and after the penalties were rebalanced. Given that changes to the minimum ages had significant effects on safety outcomes (see section .. ), we performed the analysis on the period from January to July , that is, months before the ch anges to penalties and months after. During this time, crash rates for learner and restricted drivers were also affected by changes in the characteristics of such drivers (e.g. the age and gender profile) and by general safety trends that affected all drivers (e.g. investments in road infrastructure). To account for this, we estimated a model of monthly crash involvements for drivers aged and under with learner and restricted licences that controlled for observed characteristics of such drivers and used fully licensed drivers as a control group who were affected by general safety trends but who were not directly affected by the rebalanced penalties. As shown in more detail in section .. of the Technical Report , the results of this difference indifferences model show that there was no measurable change in crash rates for learner and restricted drivers after the rebalanced penalties compared to before that cannot be explained by changes in driver characteristics and by general safety trends. .. Comparison of crash rates for restricted and fully licensed drivers We analysed crash rates for fully licensed drivers relative to restricted drivers, controlling for the amount of time since obtaining a learner licence (as a proxy for driving experience) a nd other characteristics (driver age, gender, and region of residence), to see whether progression to a full licence is predictive of any change in the odds of crash involvement over and above that caused by factors such as increasing age and driving exper ience. If so, it can be argued that the full licence practical test is effective at promoting road safety, for example by: preventing less competent drivers from progressing to a full licence and requiring them to continue driving under restricted licence conditions which may reduce their exposure to some risks (e.g. when carrying passengers), andor giving less competent drivers an incentive to improve their driving ability to pass the practical test and to be able to drive without restrictions under a fu ll licence. We estimated a logistic regression model of crashes for drivers in the licensing dataset who were aged under when they obtained a learner licence, who had progressed to at least a restricted licence by the end of , and who did not have an advanced driving certificate. The model predicts crash involvement of individual fully licensed and restricted drivers as a function of the amount of time since they obtained a restricted or full licence, their age, gender, region, amount of time since they obtained a learner licence (as a proxy for total
Giving direction to the transport sector.
Global locals In response to rising energy costs, society has invested in energyefficient technologies and virtual interfaces. Society has moved from car dependency to virtual confidence. People value adaptability, efficiency and ingenuity.
Glossary of terms Advanced certificate : A certificate issued to a holder of a car (Class ) licence who has successfully completed an approved advanced driver training course. Atfault crash involvement: For the purpose of analysis in this report, at fault crash involvements are defined as cras hes where the driver or rider involved was determined to be partly or primarily at fault in a multi party crash, or at fault in a single party crash. CBTA F certificate: A certificate issued to a holder of a motorcycle (Class ) licence who has successful ly completed the Competency Based Training and Assessment requirements for obtaining a full licence. CBTA R certificate: A certificate issued to a holder of a motorcycle (Class ) licence who has successfully completed the Competency Based Training and A ssessment requirements for obtaining a restricted licence. Characteristics (of drivers or riders): Observed demographic attributes of licence holders recorded in the licensing data used for this analysis. Observed characteristics of licence holders include the of birth (or age calculated at any given ), gender, region of residence at the time a licence was issued, and the amount of time that the person has held a licence. Class licence: A licence required to legally drive a car on public roads i n New Zealand. Class licence: A licence required to legally ride a motorcycle on public roads in New Zealand. Competency Based Training and Assessment (CBTA): An alternative to the standard practical tests for progressing to a restricted andor full motorcycle (Class ) licence. CBTA involves an assessment of riding skills by an approved CBTA assessor, plus optional rider training. CBTA can be chosen at either or both the restricted and full licence stages. Crash involvement: An event where a driver or rider was involved in a crash. A single crash could involve multiple drivers andor riders. The analysis in this report is limited to involvements in fatal and serious crashes where the driver or rider was at fault. Crash rate: The number of crashes i n a given period of time (typically one year) divided by a measure of licence holder exposure to crash risk during that period. For the purpose of analysis in this report, in per driver crash rates, exposure is measured by the total driver years of licence holding during the relevant period. Experience (driving or riding): Due to data limitations, in this report we measure driving or riding experience as the amount of time since the licence holder obtained the relevant licence. Exposure (to crash risk): A measure of the extent to which a group of people face the risk of being involved in a crash in a given period of time. Due to data limitations, in this report we measure exposure of drivers and riders based on the amount of time that people in the relevan t group held a licence, measured in driver years or rider years. For example, if a
Glossary of terms and abbreviations
Glossary of terms and abbreviations DOC Department of Conservation GPS LT Government Policy Statement Land Transport LTMA Land Transport Management Act MfE Ministry for the Environment Ministry Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport NAL North Auckland Line NLTF National Land Transport Fund NLTP National Land Transport Plan OiC Order in Council PNGL Palmerston North to Gisborne Line PWA Public Works Act RLTP Regional Land Transport Plan RMA Resource Management Act Recovery Act Severe Weather Emergency Recovery Legislation Act
Goal : Enabling New Zealanders to flourish a Literature Summary
Goal of MoT The Min istry wants to be more effective and meet the need to drive greater value for money in a fiscally constrained environment. Th ey have six goals to achieve in their organisational development programme. One of goal is to have business systems that support MoT so they can use the smart business systems to maximise staffs productivity in terms of delivery of value for money products and services. Direct text d Statement of intent https:www.transport.govt.nzab outgovernancestatementsofint entstatement ofintent The statement of intent sets out what the Minis try will be doing to support the government and how it plans to go about it.
Goal of MoT: Improve the performance of transport Crown agencies and achieve better value for money for the government from its investment in the transport system. Direct text Literature Summary
Gold Coast Auckland . . . Air NZ . . . Jetstar . . .
Gold Coast Christchurch . . . Air NZ . . . Jetstar . . .
Google uses this information to evaluate how you use this website, compiling reports for us on website activity, and providing other reporting and performance improvement services relating to website activity and internet usage. Google may also transfer this information to third parties but only where required to do so by law, or where these third parties process the information on Googles behalf.
Google will not associate your IP address with any other data held by Google, and Google Analytics terms and conditions prohibit us from accessing your IP address details.
Governance and leadership
Government Policy Statement for land transport
Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Capital Grant ( )
Government Policy Statement on Land Transport
Government Policy Statement on Land Transport .
Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Table . NZTA borrowing facilities Borrowing Facility Purpose of borrowing Size of facility Amount drawn down Repayment Period Management of cash flow (revolving credit facility) To manage seasonal cash flow variations in the NLTF m Annually Revenue and expenditure shocks (revolving credit facility) To manage any unexpected fluctuation in revenue or expenditure m m Within years of draw down Auckland Transport Package To progress the Auckland Transport package m m Before June Tauranga Eastern Link To bring forward construction of the Tauranga Eastern Link m m To be repaid through future tolls revenue by June Housing Infrastructure Fund To accelerate transport projects that support housing development m m Before June COVID To manage the shortfall in revenue resulting from COVID restrictions m m Before June NLTP facility To address the gap between planned investments in the NLTP and level of investment required to deliver GPS priorities b , m years from drawdown NLTP facility To address the gap between planned investments in the NLTP and level of investment required to deliver GPS priorities .b (Note: subject to NZTA Board approval) years from drawdown Note: This list does not include lending facilities related to NZTAs regulatory functions.
Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Allowable variation between expenditure and revenue NZTA is expected to match its expenditure to the target expenditure set out in Table . However, it is also legally required to limit its spending to the levels of available revenue in the NLTF. Because both the timing and levels of revenue and expenditure are subject to uncertainty, the Act provides that an allowable variation be set in a GPS as a way of managing any imbalances that arise. In practice this allowable variation is determined by the loan facilities provided to NZTA as these set the limit on the extent to which expenditure from the NLTF can exceed revenue inflows. For the avoidance of doubt, in GPS the allowable variation is the sum of all borrowing made available to NZTA by the Minister of Transport and the Minister of Finance, reduced over time as the borrowing is drawn down.
Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Section : Statement of Ministerial expectatio n The Act provides for the Minister, as part of the GPS, to make a statement of their expectations of how the Agency gives effect to the GPS on land transport . Although these are expectations of NZTA under the Act , most of the expectations also apply to other players in the sector including the Ministry, local government and other delivery agencies. Active cooperation of all players in the sector will be necessary to deliver the results that New Zealanders want and deserve. The Minister expects a focus on delivery The NZTA has a significant role to play in improving the performance and quality of our infrastructure. To deliver on this it will need to have a tight focus on its core statutory roles. All NLTP related activities need to be judged against the benchmark of whether the activity promotes delivery of this GPS. The Government is looking to the NZTA to deliver on its priorities at pace. The elimination of our infrastructure deficit will require new ways of thinking, maximising the use of new funding and financing tools, implementing new delivery models, and focusing on cost and value over the lifetime of any project. The Government expects NZTA to build a much more efficient business case process by the end of . Business cases have become increasingly costly and time consuming for the sector without necessarily leading to better investment choices and more efficient and timely infrastructure delivery. I expect NZTA to make business case decisions focussed on the core objectives of the project and in a timely fashion to ensure decisions on progressing projects can occur prior to projects increasing significantly in c osts. The NZTA needs to maintain a tight control on project scope and cost. Project specifications should take a no frills approach, focusing on delivery of the primary transport objectives that most cost effectively deliver on the strategic priorities in this GPS . The NZTA is expected to identify and report to the Minister every six months on any regulatory or other government controlled barriers to timely delivery , including what changes are needed to reduce project costs and speed up delivery . The Minister expects a focus on core business The Ministry is to lead the oversight and development of policy for New Zealands transport system. NZTA and other RCAs are to act primarily as delivery agen cies. The Minister expects the NZTA to focus on its core roles as defined in the Land Transport Management Act . While NZTA supports other agencies to deliver other parts of the transport network, it should ensure that its focus is on building and maintaining our state highway roading network and it is not doubling up on delivery where other agencies have specific obligations. Work on programs which are not aligned with NZTAs core purpose s or with the GPS should be discontinued .
Government Policy Statement on Land Transport The Minister expects a focus on value for money The NZTA is responsible for around billion of road usertaxpayer funds each year and manages one of New Zealands largest economic assets the state highway network. Businesses rely on that network to generate the wealth that sustains us all and individuals rely on it for access to jobs, families, and friends. The NZTA must exercise the highest level of stewardship of its assets and investment funding to enable the people of New Zealand to prosper. Obtaining value for money will require : Keeping costs under control and identify ing savings that can be reinvested back into maintaining or improving the network . Select ing and fund ing activities and projects that will make the greatest contribution to the governments long term goals and strategic priorities outlined in this GPS . Choos ing the most advantageous combination of whole of life cost and infrastructure quality to meet a no frills specification that deliver s the primary transport objective of the project in the most cost effective manner. Monitor ing operational expenditure and report ing to the Minister regularly on this expenditure, Reporting expenditure on temporary traffic management on a quarterly basis and reduc ing this expenditure, while maintaining the safety of workers and road users . NZTA was unable to provide a breakdown of its expenditure on temporary traffic management in preparation of this GPS . It is expected that NZTA will calculate its expenditure on temporary traffic management for each of the three previous financial years to form a baseline for future savings. Reduc ing expenditure on general advertising and identify ing the most cost effective and beneficial method for necessary advertising , such as road safety promotion. Focus ing on providing services that meet the needs and expectations of users . Standardis ing the deliver y of building and maintaining road ing infrastructure , while remaining open to new models of delivery that are likely to result in better and smarter services andor lower costs. Identifying more efficient ways to manage road tolling . Currently percent of total toll revenue is spent on administering tolls. This level of expenditure on toll administration is expected to reduce. The Minister expects consider ation of other revenue sources and other funding and delivery models There are several funding and procurement mechanisms already available to support investment in land transport and the government expects to implement more of these during the term of GPS . The NZTA is expected to maximize its own revenue and consider opportunities to supplement that revenue with contributions from beneficiariesusers whenever possible. Maximising its own revenue means ensuring that the amount spent on RUC investigations and enforcement is consistent with obtaining the most revenue, net of the investigation and enforcement costs.
Government Policy Statement on Land Transport However, just maximising revenue does not go far enough , and alternative funding tools are required for investment in land transport . The Government expect s the Ministry and NZTA to work together on the future of land transport revenue and report to the Minister within three months on this work. This work programme should include how each of the following funding tools will be incorporated into t he provision of investment in land transport : tolling time of use charging equity finance value capture . The NZTA will be required to find efficiencies in the delivery of its services. This includes developing digital and electronic systems and processes and allowing third parties to bid to operate these services. One example of where this can be used is wit h New Zealands road tolling arrangements, which currently require percent of total toll revenue to be spent on administering the tolls. Finding efficiencies in the tolling system can reduce administration costs, enabling greater focus on maintaining the road network . Existing digital infrastructure and information systems should be used where appropriate, in line with the Value for Money strategic prior ity. The NZTA should consider tolling to construct and maintain all new roads , includ ing the Roads of National Significance. The Government will support all recommendations by NZTA to toll roads . Opportunities for toll roads should be explored where: they are likely to meet the requirements set out in the Act, and toll revenues, net of the costs of the tolling scheme itself, will make a positive contribution to the costs of the project. Increased tolling on new roads will protect existing funding in the National Land Transport Fund for maintaining existing roads. PPPs, concessions, and other alternative delivery options are to be considered for all projects . The Board should ensure that it has undertaken a more specific set of tests including assu ring itself that : all relevant options have been examined in relation to any particular project . all relevant sources of funding and financing have been examined in relation to any particular project and those deemed suitable have been actively pursued and included in the projects funding mix. all relevant delivery models have been examined in relation to any particular project, including delivery models where NZTA may not be the delivery entity, but rather delivered by an expert third party. For the avoidance of doubt , any delivery model selected must represent value for money and balance appropriate levels of risk and timely delivery. The Government is considering how city and regional deals between central and local government can provide an opportunity to integrate long term strategy and planning, across the transport system. I expect that the Ministry and NZTA will engage with relevant entities to support this work and, once established , deliver on these deals . As described above, t he Government is also intending to amend the Act to require future GPSs to adopt a year investment plan, bringing them into line with local government Long Term Plans (LTPs). NZTA should consider how to adjust its own systems and processes so that it is ready to deliver a year plan as part of GPS . NZTA shall develop a strategic approach to the acquisition of land and other property interests , including reviewing existing land holdings , and route protection and land acquisition strategies , to determine alignment with the approach described above.
Government Policy Statement on Land Transport The Minister expects increased focus on performance and efficiency : Over the past five years investment has increased significantly in a number of activity classes but this has not resulted in improved outcomes. State Highway Maintenance funding has increased by percent , but lane kilometres resealed has reduc ed by percent and lane kilometres rehabilitated has reduc ed by percent Local Road Maintenance funding has increased by percent , but lane kilometres resealed ha s decreased by percent and lane kilometres rehabilitated has decreased by percent Investment in public transport has increased by percent since but there has been a percent decrease in patronage. Road maintenance has become less efficient , and productivity across the sector is not increas ing. The Ministry has advised that it is difficult to ascertain whether the amount spent on road maintenance is delivering value for money. NZTA will be expected to develop a Performance and Efficiency plan that will drive performance and efficiency across all transport investments . The Performance and Efficiency Plan will identify how NZTA and all road delivery agencies will : Improve the management of benefits, costs, risk and uncertainty at the programme and activity class level Increase the capability and capacity of the transport sector. Improve asset management practices across the sector. Provide analysis to inform pricequality trade offs for maintenance and operations expenditure. Ensure business case and cost estimation reflect best practice. Manage overheads and back office costs. The Performance and Efficiency Plan will also need to integrate with the refocussed Road and Efficiency Group (REG) to ensure activities and functions are aligned to drive better accountability, delivery and value for money from our transport investments. The exact scope, functions and reporting lines of the refocussed REG will be developed and approved as part of the Performance and Efficiency Plan. This plan should be developed in conjunction with the Ministry and submitted for approval by the Minister within three months of the release of draft GPS . The Minister expects NZTA to ensure that RCAs are follow ing the Ministerial expectations in GPS It is expected that NZTA will ensure that these expectations are, to the extent applicable, incorporated into the requirements placed on other road controlling authorities as a condition of the inclusion of their projects in the NLTP . Reporting on the expectations The NZTA is expected to demonstrate how it is giving effect to these expectations, and specifically how it is progressing with the Performance and Efficiency plan. Existing NZTA reporting mechanisms are likely to be used wherever possible in th is reporting. Possible mechanisms includ e: Statement of Intent and Statement of Performance Expectations Assessment of how the NLTP gives effect to GPS Annual Report on the NLTF and Annual Report Annual reporting on matters relating to the RNIP .
Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Section : Appendices Appendix A: Debt repayment schedule The expected NZTA debt repayment schedule is tabulated below. These repayments are a topslice from the NLTF and sit outside of the activity classes. The debt repayment schedule aggregates the repayments associated with the formal debt arrangements that are currently in place for NZTA and are outlined in Table NZTA borrowing facilities. The bulk of these repayments are formed by the . billion loan facility provid ed to NZTA to deliver GPS priorities. In addition to repayments on NZTAs borrowing facilities, the expected debt repayments include repayments on the Public Private Partnerships that have been used to deliver Transmission Gully and Puhoi to Warkworth projects included in the previous Roads of National Significance. As already indicated in Section , GPS represents a change in how borrowing is reported. The activities funded though borrowing (and any new PPPs) will be reported at the time of the investment as expenditure in the appropriate activity class. In practice this means that the repayments indicated in the below table will be top sliced from NLTF revenue outlined in Table NLTF Annual funding , before it is spent on activities included in the NLTP, reducing the NLTP expenditure targets in Table Expenditure targets and ranges. Table . Debt repayment schedule m m m m m m Expected debt repayments , ,
Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Appendix B: Crown Investment Programme
Government Policy Statement on Land Transport In addition to the forecast billion investment in land transport through the NLTF over the next years , the Crown also intends to contrib ute additional funding into transport infrastructure and operations. The following tables highlight the different projects and programmes that are currently identified for Crown funding. Roading projects Region SH Whangarei to Port Marsden Northland o Mahurangi Penlink Auckland South Auckland Package Auckland SH Papakura To Drury Auckland SH Intersection Improvement Piarere Waikato Takitimu North Link Stage Bay of Plenty Takitimu North Link Stage Bay of Plenty Sh Safety Improvements Wellington SH Melling Transport Improvements Wellington Otaki To North Of Levin Wellington Canterbury Package Canterbury Queenstown Package Otago Recovery and rebuild Nationwide Regional resilience Nationwide
Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Public Transport Region Public Transport Concessions Nationwide Eastern Busway Auckland
Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Appendix C: GlossaryDefinitions Activity Defined in the LTMA as a land transport output or capital project, or both Activity class Refers to a grouping of similar activities Approved organisations Organisations eligible to receive funding from NZTA for land transport activities. Approved organisations are defined in the LTMA Benefits realisation A process that demonstrates whether or not (and how well) the anticipated results have been achieved Capacity of network The amount of movement of people andor goods that the network can support at a given time Demand management Demand management refers to interventions which change the demand for transport. These interventions may seek to influence how, when and where people travel, and freight is transported. The purpose of demand management is to ensure the transport system is utilised efficiently and effectively, and to reduce the negative impacts of travel and freight movement Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) The New Zealand Emissions Trading Scheme. The ETS requires businesses to surrender one emissions unit (known as an NZU) to the Government for each tonne of emissions they emit. NZUs are tradeable. The ETS limits emissions by limiting the number of NZUs a vailable to emitters (i.e., that are supplied into the scheme) Fuel Excise Duty (FED) Fuel Excise Duty is a tax imposed by the government to fund land transport activities. FED includes excise duty paid on liquid petroleum gas and compressed natural gas (in addition to petrol excise duty), but these account for a very small proportion of overall fuel excise Hypothecation The direct allocation of all income from a tax or charge (e.g., FuelPetrol Excise Duty or Road User Charges) to a particular type of activity (e.g., the National Land Transport Fund) Lead investment Investment which acts as a catalyst for future development Land Transport Management Act (LTMA) The main Act governing the land transport planning and funding system Land transport revenue Revenue paid into the Fund under the LTMA Local road Defined in the LTMA as a road (other than a state highway) in a district that is under the control of a territorial authority Local share The contribution that communities make (through local government) towards transport projects that have shared national and local benefits Maintenance Care and upkeep of infrastructure so that it can deliver a defined level of service, while leaving the fundamental structure of the existing infrastructure intact Ministry of Transport (the Ministry, MoT) The governments principal transport policy adviser that leads and generates policy, and helps to set the vision and strategic direction for the future of transport in New Zealand
Government Policy Statement on Land Transport registration and licensing fees are defined as land transport revenue. The fees are intended to contribute to the maintenance of the Motor Vehicle Register where the details of motor vehicles are recorded National Land Transport Fund (NLTF, the Fund) The set of resources, including land transport revenue, that are available for land transport activities under the National Land Transport Programme National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) A programme, prepared by NZTA , that sets out the land transport activities which are likely to receive funding from the National Land Transport Fund. The NLTP is a three yearly programme of investment in land transport infrastructure and services from the Fund New Zealand Rail Plan Governments plan that guides investment to be made through the rail investment programme to achieve a reliable, resilient, and safe rail network One Network Framework A tool, prepared by NZTA , to help establish transport network function, performance measures, operating gaps and potential interventions for each road and street type Petrol Excise Duty (PED) Petrol Excise Duty is a tax imposed by the Government on petrol and is used to fund land transport activities Public transport Passenger transport infrastructure and services contracted by local and central government which may include shared on demand services identified in Regional Public Transport Plans as integral to the public transport network. Interregional passenger transp ort by means of a rail vehicle Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP) A ten year plan of projects, guided by the New Zealand Rail Plan, to achieve a reliable, resilient, and safe rail network. The programme is written by KiwiRail and approved by the Minister of Transport with guidance from NZTA Regional Land Transport Plans (RLTPs) Plans prepared by Regional Transport Committees, that set out each regions transport objectives and policies for a period of at least years. This includes bids for funding from the NLTP Regional Transport Committees (RTCs) A transport committee, which must be established by every regional council or unitary authority for its region. The main function of a regional transport committee is to prepare an RLTP Results The outcomes that the Crown wishes to achieve from the allocation of funding from the National Land Transport Fund. They are expressed by a measure change, and are impacted by the level of investments, activities and deliverables required to realise the change Road controlling authorities (RCAs) Authorities and agencies that have control of the roads, including NZTA , territorial authorities, Auckland Transport, the Waitangi Trust, and the Department of Conservation Road User Charges (RUC) Charges on diesel and heavy vehicles paid to the Government and used to fund land transport activity State highways A road designated as such by NZTA, as defined by the LTMA Track user charges (TUC) Charges paid for access touse of the rail tracks Total Mobility Scheme The Total Mobility Scheme provides subsidised licensed taxi services to people who have an impairment that prevents them from making a journey unaccompanied, on a bus, train or ferry in a safe and dignified manner New Zealand Transport Agency Waka Kotahi (NZTA) The government agency with statutory functions to manage the funding of the land transport system and manage the state highway system
Government Policy Statement on Land Transport
Government Policy Statement on land transport
Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) Evaluation
Government Policy Statement on land transport
Government Policy Statement on land transport
Government Policy Statement on land transport released
Government Policy Statement on land transport PDF; .MB
Government Policy Statement on land transport
Government Policy Statement on land transport
Government Policy Statement on land transport Summary at a Glance Funding Ranges June NLTF revenue will increase to billion over , an increase of over percent. The GPS proposes funding this increase through: two increases to Motor Vehicle Registration charges in January and . a return to regular increases in Fuel Excise Duty (and equivalent increase in Road User Charges) from January additional Crown funding and financing the Government expects public private partnerships, and other opportunities to use private expertise and finance, will be considered for all major projects. Forecast funding ranges (m) GPS funding ranges (m) Activity Class State Highway Maintenance , , , , Upper State highway pothole prevention Lower , , , , , , , Upper State highway operations Lower Local Road Maintenance , , , , , , , Upper Local road pothole prevention Lower Upper Local road operations Lower Other continuing programmes Upper Public transport services Lower Upper Investment management Lower Upper Safety Lower Improvements , , , Upper Public transport Infrastructure Lower , , , , , , , , , , Upper State highway Improvements , , , , , , , , , , Lower Upper Local road Improvements Lower Upper Walking and cycling improvements Lower Rail Network Upper Rail network LowerActivity Classes focus on pothole prevention Funding for pothole prevention on state highways and local roads will be separated out from other road maintenance funding. This will ensure a greater focus is placed on resealing, rehabilitation, and drainage maintenance works to achieve long term maintenance outcomes.Investment in land transport How does it work The GPS is reviewed every three years and guides investment in transport by providing a year outlook of how spending is prioritised for the transport network. Guided by the GPS strategic priorities, NZTA supports local government to create quality Regional Land Transport Plans (RLTPs). After community engagement, NZTA uses these RLTPs to create the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP). As the largest cofunderof NLTP projects, local government has an essential role in building strong, evidencebased projects and programmes for investment. This work is supported by the role of regional councils, territorial authorities and unitary councils in leading longterm planning for their area.A renewed focus on delivery The Government is looking to the NZTA to deliver on its priorities at pace. This will require a tight focus on its core statutory roles. All NLTPrelated activities need to be judged against the benchmark of whether the activity promotes delivery of this GPS. The Government is also signalling a number of system reforms that will be implemented in parallel with the delivery of this GPS. These reforms will provide more sustainable revenue, help contain costs and make it easier for delivery agencies to do their jobs
Government Policy Statement on land transport Summary at a Glance Strategic Priorities Major Transport Projects What is the GPS Transport plan for unlocking New Zealands economic potentialGPS strategic prioritiesJune Connecting people and freight quickly and safely, supporting economic growth and creating social and economic opportunities. Increased Maintenance and Resilience Increasing access to markets and resilience on our state highway, local and rural roads.Safety A focus on safer roads, safer drivers and safer vehicles.Value for Money Investment in transport must deliver better outcomes for present and future generations of New Zealand.Economic Growth and Productivity A focus on core business NZTA to focus on core roles ie build and maintain the SH network. Stop programmes not aligned with GPS. NZTA to ensure that RCAs are following the Ministerial expectations in GPS Ensure GPS expectations are applied to road controlling authorities and public transport authorities to the extent applicable re the NLTF NLTP.Consideration of other revenue sources and other funding and delivery models Maximising NLTF revenue Consider tolling for all new roads Future revenue system year investment plan Regional dealsA focus on value for money Cost control and identify savings. Ensure projects maximise benefits and align with govt priorities. Focus on services and users. New delivery models. Efficiencies in manging road tolling.A focus on delivery Ensure activities promote GPS delivery. Maximise use of new funding and financing and delivery models. More efficient business case process. Tight control on scope and cost. Increased focus on performance and efficiency Performance and Efficiency plan Improve management of benefits costs Improve asset management, business case and cost estimation Refocussed REG Group Drive accountability, delivery and value for moneyOutcomes expected through the GPS Increased Maintenance and ResilienceSafety Value for Money Economic Growth and Productivity Reduced journey times and increased travel time reliability. Less congestion and increased patronage on public transport. Improved access to markets, employment and areas that contribute to economic growth. More efficient supply chains for freight. Unlocked access to greenfield land for housing development and supporting greater intensification. More kilometers of the road network resealed and rehabilitated each year. Fewer potholes. A more resilient road and rail network. Reduction in deaths and serious injuries. Increased enforcement. Better use of existing capacity. Less expenditure on temporary traffic management.The GPS sets out the Governments priorities for expenditure from the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) and how Crown funding complements that investment. It also provides direction to local government, KiwiRail and NZTA on the type of activities that should be included in Regional Land Transport Plans (RLTP), the Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP) and the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) respectively. The results the Government wishes to achieve from NLTF investment are expressed via a set of strategic priorities. GPS includes an overarching strategic priority of Economic Growth and Productivity, supported by three priorities of Increased Maintenance and Resilience, Safety, and Value for Money
Government Policy Statement on land transport
Government Policy Statement on land transport
Government Policy Statement on land transport Optimising the use of existing networks and services to deliver an appropriate level of service for users will be critical. In addition, improving the productivity of the transport system, to help manage flows and congestion, will be important to allow use rs to make decisions in real time. It is expected that part of this optimisation will lead to greater use of digital infrastructure and information systems to improve productivity in the transport system, particularly in the management of New Zealands supply chain. Road pricing, such as tolling and time of use charging, will play a key role in the delivery of the Roads of National Significance programme, as part of a wider package of transport revenue and investment tools. Tolling provides an opportunity for an additional source of revenue and will support infrastructure which provides reduced travel times compared to alternative routes. Time of use charging will improve travel times and network performance, reducing overall costs for freight businesses and their customers. Investments in rail should be focused on the busiest and most productive parts of the existing rail network, to support efficient movement of freight. This will complement investment in our state highway network to deliver a productive and efficient supply chain. Investment in metro passenger rail networks will also support the efficient movement of people in Auckland and Wellington.
Government Policy Statement on land transport Roads of National Significance The Government will reintroduce the successful Roads of National Significance programme to achieve its strategic priorities. The Roads of National Significance are some of New Zealands most essential state highway corridors that require significant development and investment that, when complete, will reduce congestion, improve safety, support housing development to address New Zealands ongoing housing crisis, boost economic growth, and provide a more resilient roading network. To maximise the benefit of the Roads of National Significance programme, projects will be well integrated with wider transport networks and land use plans. The New Zealand Institute of Economic Research (NZIER) carried out a report that was focussed on t wo proposed Roads of National Significance , Warkworth to Wellsford and Cambridge to Piarere , finding significant economic benefits with these projects . The report found that, o nce operational, each of these projects would contribute up to million a year to New Zealands GDP. All Roads of National Significance will be fourlaned, grade separated highways, and all funding, financing and delivery options should be considered to deliver them in stages and as quickly as possible. The Government further expects that the NLTF can be used to fund the development of future Roads of National Significance. The Government expects that the NZTA will prioritise these strategic corridors in the development of the NLTP given their importance, alignment and impact on the Governments wider programme and the Governments focus on returning the NZTA to its core statutory activities and particularly , for this GPS period, maintaining and developing the state highway network.
Government Policy Statement on land transport Roads of Regional Significance The Government is committed to investment in a number of Roads of Regional Significance, which represent a regions most essential corridors that will reduce congestion, improve safety, support housing development, boost economic growth, and provide a more resilient roading network within a region . The Roads of Regional Significance include: O Mahurangi Penlink Waihoehoe Road State Highway Papakura to Drury Improvements State Highway Intersection State Highway Improvements Stage State Highway Melling Transport Improvements Canterbury Package Rural Intersections Canterbury Package Rolleston Upgrade Canterbury Package Halswell Second Ashburton Bridge Queenstown Package These projects are Crown funded and should not be considered for additional funding. The Government is also completing pre implementation of the Canterbury Package Brougham Street and SH Drury projects. Further Crown funding for these projects is subject to funding availability once the Roads of Regional Significance project costs are confirmed. These two projects may be considered for inclusion in the NLTP if they deliver on the objectives of this GPS. More detail on the Roads of Regional Significance can be found in Appendix B. Further Roads of Regional Significance may be added over time. Commitments to other projects The Government has identified a number of other projects it wants to progress in this GPS period . These includ e: projects that improve resilience and support the cyclone and flood recovery for the East Coast and Central North Island investment in resilience for a number of critically important bridges in the South Island. The Government will continue with identified projects that will be delivered outside of the NLTP through direct Crown and other funding approaches . Those priority projects previously funded through the Regional Fuel Tax, will be considered eligible for funding from the NLTF. The remaining Regional Fuel Tax revenue will be used to fund the Eastern Busway, local road improvements (e.g. Glenvar Road and Lake Road) and Electric Trains and Stabling. A list and map of the major transport projects the Government will deliver is contained in Appendix B. Additional Waitemat Harbour Connections The Government is committed to delivering a n additional crossing that, at a minimum, provides for additional road connections between Aucklands North Shore and the central business district (CBD) . It will seek to reduce the upfront cost of this project to taxpayers by tasking the NZTA with identifying options for private funding, including through equity financing and value capture mechanisms. Projects for further investigation The Government expects the NZTA will continue to plan and develop the state highway network to reduce congestion, drive economic growth , and increase safety and resilience. The NZTA should work with the wider transport sector to make progress on projects that deliver on these objectives .
Government Policy Statement on land transport Public Transport Effective public transport provides commuters with more choice and helps to reduce travel times, congestion, and emissions. Under GPS , existing public transport services will continue to be funded where they are cost effective, achieve value for money, and achieve the expected outcomes of less congestion and increased patronage. This GPS also includes investment in a number of major public transport projects that will deliver better public transport options for commuters , particularly in the ma in centres of Auckland and Wellington. A key focus of this strategic priority will be the completion of the City Rail Link and Eastern Busway in the next three years . Alongside this work, planning will also be undertaken in the next three years for the delivery of the Northwest Rapid Transit Corridor and the Airport to Botany Busway . The major public transport projects include: completion of the City Rail Link completion of the Eastern Busway Northwest Rapid Transit corridor Airport to Botany Busway Lower North Island Rail Integrated Mobility The Government expect s the NZTA to consider : alternative funding sources to deliver major public transport investments, including Build, Own, Operate, Transfer schemes and value capture new ways of thinking and different delivery models to increas e delivery speed . These major public transport projects will support u rban development and housing growth, which allows for increased public
Government Policy Statement on land transport There has been a percent increase in Crown NLTF funding for public transport over the past years (Figure ) . However , between and , patronage has decreased by percent . This has partly been caused by COVID restrictions , but numbers had not increased back to pre COVID restriction levels . There has also been a significant decrease in the private funding for public transport (fare revenue and third party funding). Private funding was able to fund percent of public transport in , in it funded less than percent of the total cost. Increased public transport fare box recovery and third party revenue will be expected from local government. Figure . Local, private and NLTFCrown share s of public transport services and infrastructure funding
Government Policy Statement on land transport Rail Rail plays a role in moving large volumes of goods between major cities and regions , particular ly within the Auckland, Hamilton and Tauranga triangle which carries high freight volumes between these centres . This Government will continue to invest in the national rail freight network to support the overall objective of economic growth and productivity while also ensuring that this investment delivers value for money to taxpayers . KiwiRail has received over billion in Crown funding over the past years, the split between capital and operating expenditure is shown in Figure below. Most of this funding has been used to progress large capital projects, including new rolling stock, Crown funded projects , and the South Island Mainline reinstatement. In recent years, KiwiRail has also received a significant amount of operating funding from the Crown for its RNIP . The Crown funding for rail over is outlined in detail in Table . Figure . Crown funding of rail capital expenditure (Capex) and operating expenditure (Opex) between and
Government Policy Statement on land transport In recent years, despite a significant increase in investment in the national rail freight network, which included cross subsidisation of the network by road users, the amount of freight being moved via rail has continued to decline (Figure ). Over the past six years there has been almost . billion in Crown funding invested but rail freight (net tonne kilometres ) is lower now than it was in . This Governments focus will be to invest in maintaining the network between the busiest and most productive parts of the existing rail network between Auckland, Hamilton, and Tauranga. While rail freight network investments will remain within the GPS, investment in the rail freight network will no longer be cross subsidised from revenue from road users. It is unfair to ask people using the roads to fund rail infrastructure . Rail investments will continue to be supported and funded through the RNIP , as agreed by Cabinet. Track User Charges paid by rail users wil l be used to support these investments . Figure . Total Crown investment in rail freight and freight tonnage
Government Policy Statement on land transport Strategic Priority: Increased Maintenance and Resilience New Zealand needs a transport system that is resilient to the impacts of weather events and other natural disasters . Increasing maintenance and resilience enables us to effectively manage and reduce current and future risk , and adapt to these challenges . Increasing m aintenance levels and improving resilience on our state highways, local and rural roads is critically important in achieving the Governments overall objective of supporting economic growth and productivity. Access to markets is essential and this means having a resilient network that is well maintained. New Zealand has faced significant challenges in recent years with weather events and the Christchurch and Kaikura Earthquake rebuilds , which have highlighted the need for a focus on resilience of the roading network. Increasing maintenance outcomes is critically important , as well as adopting a more proactive approach to maintenance , to achieve a more reliable network for individuals and businesses to be able to rely upon. Potholes have become increasingly apparent on our roading network in the past five years . While road maintenance funding has increased significantly , the amount of rehabilitation and resealing has not (Figures ). Figure . Maintenance funding trends State Highways
Government Policy Statement on land transport This GPS takes a new approach. GPS increases road maintenance funding by million, compared to the draft GPS released by the previous Government in August , and this Government will be requiring road maintenance to be undertaken with a proactive rather than reactive approach. GPS establishes new activity classes to ensure that maintenance funds are prioritised and ringfenced to fix potholes, and to prevent potholes by ensuring that state highways, local and rural roads are maintained to a higher standard. The State Highway Pothole Prevention and Local Road Pothole Prevention activity classes will ensure that maintenance funds are prioritised and ringfenced, with clear outcomes that must be achieved by both central and local government. Funding from these activity classes wi ll only be available for the following activities: road resealing, road rehabilitation and drainage maintenance. GPS introduces a new expectation for the NZTA to consider tolling to support the construction and maintenance of all new roads, including the Roads of National Significance. Increased tolling on new roads will protect existing funding in the NLTF for maintaining existing roads. Due to the deterioration of the road network, the Government will appoint independent members to the Road Efficiency Group (REG) , started by the previous National Government, and refocus it on ensuring that all investment in maintaining and improving resilience on the state highway, local and rural road network is spent in the most efficient manner. It is not acceptable that while funding for road maintenance activities has increased, the real outcomes on our road network continue to worsen.
Government Policy Statement on land transport Strategic Priority: Safety A safe transport system is critically important. The steady decline in deaths and serious injuries we observed between the s and early s has slowed over the past decade . Road deaths and serious injuries place a substantial burden on families, society, the economy, and the health sector each year , with significant direct costs incurred by the Accident Compensation C orporation (ACC) and other parties . The Government expects that the NZTA will make efforts to reduce barriers for third party investment into road safety, including enabling thirdparty and market based funding and delivery of safety initiatives and research. As part of this, the Government expects that the NZTA will make efforts to facilitate contributions from ACC to investments which improve road safety and to support ACCs injury prevention functions . There are examples of investments made by ACC , including investment in the Transmission Gully motorway and in motorcycle safety. The Government expects to see this approach extended further in all areas where investment by ACC will result in safety improvements that meet ACCs statutory criteria for investment . Poor road user choices affect everyone on the road. Alcohol and drugs are the leading contributor s to fatal crashes in New Zealand (Figure ), but only percent of drivers think they are likely to be caught drug driving, and only percent of people think they are likely to be caught drink driving. percent of drink drive offenders are repeat offenders. Similarly, wearing a seatbelt during a crash doubles the chances of surviving a serious crash, yet each year over people die in crashes not wearing a seatbelt. Every year, aroun d , people are disqualified from driving, and about , a year are prosecuted for driving while disqualified. Between and , people were killed in crashes involving disqualified drivers. Investment toward s road policing and enforcement is a priority in GPS as it is one of the most important tools for improving safety on New Zealands roads . It is expected that investment will be direct ed towards road policing and enforcement, alongside investment in other safety interventions such as building safer infrastructure, investing in safer drivers, and requiring safer vehicles. Figure . Deaths in crashes involving alcohol or drugs
Government Policy Statement on land transport Contents Contents . . . . . Ministers Foreword . . . . . Section : Introduction to GPS . . . . Section : System Reform . . . . Section : Strategic Priorities . . . . Strategic Priority: Economic Growth and Productivity . . . Strategic Priority: Increased Maintenance and Resilience . . . Strategic Priority: Safety . . . . Strategic Priority: Value for Money . . . . Outcomes the Government expects will be achieved by this GPS . . Section : Investment in Land Transport . . . Revenue . . . . . National Land Transport Fund . . . . Expenditure . . . . . Linking planned expenditure with revenue . . . Section : Statement of Ministerial Expectations . . . Section : Appendices . . . . Appendix A: Debt Repayment Schedule . . . Appendix B: Crown Investment Programme . . . Appendix C: GlossaryDefinitions . . . .
Government Policy Statement on land transport Police play a significant part in helping to make New Zealand roads safer through rigorous enforcement of the traffic laws including alcoholdrug and speed regulations, promoting good driving practices, and road safety education. The Government expects Police to provide sufficient enforcement levels of traffic laws to achieve specific, as well as general, deterrence aims. The Government also expects Police to identify high risk drivers and proactively intervene to reduce opportunities for offending. Vehicle technology can also play a role, such as mandatory alcohol interlocks for the most severe offenders and improved automated enforcement. Most of the financial penalties and demerit point levels for offences have not been reviewed since the Land Transport (Offences and Penalties) Regulations were set in . As a result, a number of these penalties are too low to deter unsafe behaviour. The infringement fees, in particular, are significantly lower than the equivalent fees in overseas jurisdictions.For example, almost all jurisdictions in Australia, the United Kingdom and Canada have higher penalties for not wearing a seatbelt compared to New Zealand. Bringing our penalties in line with Australia would require nearly tripling the infringement fee, while also adding demerit points. Delivering safe roading infrastructure is also critically important for improving road safety. GPS supports investment in safe roading infrastructure by fixing potholes and increasing the level of road maintenance completed on the road network , while also investing in new and safe Roads of National Significance and Roads of Regional Significance . Delivering improvements to level crossings, like installing safety barriers on rural roads and separating road s from rail in busy metropolitan networks, are a key safety priority for road and rail infrastructure to be funded by the NZTA, KiwiRails RNIP, and local councils.
Government Policy Statement on land transport Building and u pgrading road infrastructure to higher safety standards has a significant impact on improv ing road safety . Independent analysis has found the construction of eight new bypasses, between January and December , resulted in up to a percent reduction in deaths and serious injuries across those roads. Safety interventions should be retrofitted on high crash areas of the network, where they provide value for money and would materially improve road safety. The Government expects that there will be greater focus on cost effective treatments that achieve efficiency, and the views of affected road users and local communit ies. For example, it is expected that there will be greater use of rumble strips across the state highway, local and rural road networks. The Government will be introducing a new set of objectives and intended actions for road safety that will focus on safer roads, safer driver s and s afer vehicles . These will maintain as their foundation the internationally recognised Safe System approach that encourages improvements in the roading system to recognise that people make mistakes, and that the system should be forgiving and reduce the likelihood of deat h and serious injury when crashes occur. The Safe System approach is best practice and has bee n the basis of New Zealands road safety strategy since . However, the Government will rebalance the Safe System approach, particularly around resetting the approach to speed, to ensure that: road safety is delivered in an efficient and costeffective manner public sentiment and acceptability are considered more directly .
Government Policy Statement on land transport The Government will make a number of reforms to improve road safety during the timeframe of this GPS. These reforms will be targeted towards the highest contributing factors in fatal road crashes . We will: enact legislation to rollout roadside oral fluid drug testing and set targets for Police to undertake , roadside oral fluid tests per year once the new regime is in place increase central governments focus on drink driving and set targets for Police to undertake at least . million roadside alcohol breath tests per year , towards a target of . million tests per year review penalties for traffic offences including consideration of index ing the value of infringements to inflation review the vehicle regulatory system to (among other objectives) enable better management of the safety performance of the vehicle fleet, reduce regulatory burden s, and ensure our domestic rules are fit for purpose invest in road policing and road safety promotion to ensure an appropriate level of enforcement while promoting safer driving. While speed is a contributing factor to safety outcomes on our roads, the Government will not be continuing with a blanket approach to reducing speed limits. I nstead , we will be focused on improving road safety by build ing safer infrastructure, invest ing in safer drivers, and requir ing safer vehicles. We will replace the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits with a new rule that require s Road Controlling Authorities to reverse blanket speed limit reductions by July . Funding for reversing speed limit changes will be a priority for GPS . As part of this NZTA will consider the efficient delivery of changes, such as possible centralised procurement for new signs. The new speed rule will enable s peed limit reductions to focus on areas with high safety concerns. Where subsequent safety investments are made, speed limits should be restored to prior speed limits . We will also continue to prioritise the safety of young New Zealanders outside schools. Variable speed limits will be required outside of school gates at pick up and drop off times.
Government Policy Statement on land transport Strategic Priority: Value for Money There has been a significant increase in investment in transport in recent years, however, this is not translating to better outcomes. GPS will invest billion into the transport network, which is a significant amount of road user and taxpayer money. This investment must deliver better outcomes for present and future generations of New Zealanders. The Government wants to realise greater value from the financial investment made into our land transport system, and this is why value for money is a strategic priority guiding all transport investments under this GPS. As set out in the Ministry of Transports Value for Money assessment model, t o get the most from limited resources it is necessary to demonstrate both efficiency and effectiveness while delivering the intended outcomes. Value for money is not just about seeking the lowest initial cost for a project it must take the whole of life costs and benefits of a project into consideration. The NZTA , as the Governments delivery agent, will continue to take a leading role in securing improved effectiveness and efficiency within the priorities for investment established by the Government. This means a key focus on value for money in all parts of the t ransport sector. The following are key elements of this Governments focus on improving value for money from transport investment: the NZTA will be expected to reduce its head office expenditure by . percent, with those savings reinvested into delivering against the GPS objectives increased public transport fare box recovery and third party revenue will be expected from local government reduced expenditure on temporary traffic management, while maintaining the safety of workers and road users a focus on outcomes in road maintenance investment to deliver smoother and more reliable journeys for New Zealanders a review of road safety investment to be undertaken to ensure investment is focussed on efficient changes, which make improvements to the roading network at the lowest cost making better use of existing assets by allowing time of use charging or the use of dynamic lanes in main cities to manage demand a focus on whole oflife costs to maximise longrun value making better use of new or existing digital infrastructure and information systems where they support the strategic priorities of this GPS by reduc ing the cost of physical infrastructure delivery and operations and resolve or replace existing solutions at better value for money investigating opportunities for NZTA to run collaborative andor centralised procurement functions with local government, including centralising the procurement of speed signs. All entities involved in providing for the land transport system need to work together to improve the systems performance .
Government Policy Statement on land transport Outcomes the Government expects will be achieved by this GPS The NLTP and corresponding RLTPs are expected to prioritise projects and activities that progress the GPS priorities. In doing this, the focus should be on achieving the following impacts in the short to medium term: Economic Growth and Productivity reduc ed journey times and increased travel time reliability less congestion and increased patronage on public transport improved access to markets, employment and areas that contribute to economic growth more efficient supply chains for freight unlocked access to greenfield land for housing development and supporting greater intensification . Increased Maintenance and Resilience more kilometres of the road network resealed and rehabilitated each year fewer potholes a more resilient road and rail network. Improved safety reduction in deaths and serious injuries increased enforcement . Value for Money better use of existing capacity less expenditure on temporary traffic management.
Government Policy Statement on land transport Section : Investment in Land Transpor t This section describes how different funding and financing sources will contribute to land transport investments and it sets expenditure limits , including NLTF activity class funding ranges. Revenue Central and local government are partners in planning, building, maintaining, improving, and funding land transport infrastructure and activities. Some activities, like state highway activities, road policing and training and research, are fully funded by central government. However, if the activity aligns with the GPS priorities and is included in the NLTP, it will receive co funding from central government according to the relevant funding assistance rate. Sources of the local government funding share for land transport activities include rates, development contributions, borrowing and investments. The local funding share is not included in the GPS . National Land Transport Fun d Funding for the NLTF for will come primarily from: FED, RUC and motor vehicle registration and licensing fees direct Crown funding in the form of grants and loans. There will also be some contributions from other sources such as tolling, track user charges and the rental or sale of land. The annual licensing fee component of Motor Vehicle Registration (MVR) hasnt been increased since . Inflation since that time has reduced the real value of this NLTF contribution by a half. The Government is now proposing to increase MVR by in January , and a further in January to return MVR to the level, in real terms. This will increase the annual cost of MVR in by for most vehicle s, for motorcycles, trailers and ATVs and . for mopeds. The increase in MVR will add approximately million to the NLTF over the years . Table . NLTF funding sources NLTF Funding Source Amount ( billion) FEDRUCMVR . Crown grant capital expenditure . Crown loan . Crown funding for rail . Crown grant held in tagged contingency for the NLTP . Crown grant held in tagged contingency for the RNIP . Total revenue .
Government Policy Statement on land transport The MVR increase and Crown grant reflect our commitment to replace the revenue from fuel tax increases with an equivalent commitment, which provides the revenue stream required for repayment of the loan facilities. On an annual basis the expected revenue from all sources is as shown in Table . The Government plans to return to the previous practice of regular FED and RUC increases from January . The funding profile in Table assumes increases of cents per litre in January , a further cents per litre in January , followed by a cent per litre annual increase starting in January . As is shown in Table , these increases are not in themselves sufficient to fully replace the fixed term funding top ups that will be provided by the Government over the first three years. The Government is very aware of the need to address this potential reduction in funding. We are initiating policy work to determine the tools required to meet our future revenue needs and provide a predictable and sustainable revenue outlook. This is likely to include road pricing alternatives, time of use charging and the transition of all vehicles to RUC .
Government Policy Statement on land transport Linking planned expenditure with revenue A principle underlying land transport expenditure is that the NZTA will manage expenditure so that it links with the amount of revenue that is raised. The authority to approve police funding, RNIP , and NLTF funding for an RNIP , sits with the Minister of Transport. For other investments, decision rights for funding from the NLTF rests solely with the NZTA Board. The NZTA is expected to plan funding allocations for each activity class and approve funding for activities so that total planned expenditure in any year matches the expenditure target set out in Table for that year. It is accepted that the NZTA may not achieve the expenditure target in any one year, if expenditure is within the range specified in Table . The need to manage planned expenditure against revenue arises because expenditure and revenue are subject to uncertainty and fluctuation. Expenditure can vary due to factors such as unforeseen cost increases in key inputs andor unexpected changes in proje ct timing. As revenue is dependent on the level of economic and transport activity it will fluctuate according to economic conditions. As a result, there may be unplanned imbalances between expenditure incurred under the NLTP , and the revenue received into the NLTF . The NZTA has a specific short term loan facility to help it manage this situation. Policy on borrowing for the purposes of managing the delivery of the NLTP At times borrowing will be required to manage the delivery of the NLTP. Borrowing increases available funding in the short term, which can be used to manage cash flow, cope with unexpected shocks, or deliver additional activities. However, in the future th ere will be a corresponding decrease in available funding as the borrowing is repaid. At the time of publishing this GPS, formal arrangements are in place for the NZTA to use several borrowing facilities. Table provides details of these arrangements. A forecast of the expected debt repayments over the next six years is presented in Appendix A. If additional borrowing facilities are required, the NZTA must seek approval from the Ministers of Finance and Transport. Two of the facilities relate to revolving credit. These provide access to committed funding to manage fluctuations in cash flow either due to seasonal variations or shocks. A change in how borrowing is reported is being implemented in GPS . The activities funded though borrowing (and any new PPPs) will be reported at the time of the investment as expenditure in the appropriate activity class. Repayment of borrowing will b e reported as expenditure from the NLTF, separate from activity class spend. Put simply, the interest and debt repayments will be reflected separately from the activity class ranges in GPS . The Ministry of Transport will work with the NZTA to develop reporting practices to ensure both the spend on activities funded from borrowing and the repayments of borrowing are clearly reported.
Government Policy Statement on land transport Allowable variation between expenditure and revenue The NZTA is expected to match its expenditure to the target expenditure set out in Table . However, it is also legally required to limit its spending to the levels of available revenue in the NLTF. Because both the timing and levels of revenue and expenditure are subject to uncertainty, the Act provides that an allowable variation be set in a GPS as a way of managing any imbalances that arise. In practice this allowable variation is determined by the loan facilities provided to the NZTA as these set the limit on the extent to which expenditure from the NLTF can exceed revenue inflows. For the avoidance of doubt, in GPS the allowable variation is , at any time, the sum of all borrowing available to the NZTA as agreed by the Minister of Transport and Minister of Finance. Table . NZTA borrowing facilities Borrowing Facility Purpose of borrowing Size of facility Amount drawn down Repayment Period Management of cash flow (revolving credit facility) To manage seasonal cash flow variations in the NLTF m Annually Revenue and expenditure shocks (revolving credit facility) To manage any unexpected fluctuation in revenue or expenditure m m Within four years of draw down Auckland Transport Package To progress the Auckland Transport package m m Before June Tauranga Eastern Link To bring forward construction of the Tauranga Eastern Link m m To be repaid through future tolls revenue by June Housing Infrastructure Fund To accelerate transport projects that support housing development .m .m Before June COVID To manage the shortfall in revenue resulting from COVID restrictions m m Before June NLTP facility To address the gap between planned investments in the NLTP and level of investment required to deliver GPS priorities .b .b years from drawdown NLTP facility To address the gap between planned investments in the NLTP and level of investment required to deliver GPS priorities .b years from drawdown Note: This list does not include lending facilities related to the NZTAs regulatory functions.
Government Policy Statement on land transport Funding ranges for activity classes Funding in the NLTP is allocated to activity classes. The allocation of funding to these activity classes reflects the strategic direction the Government has set. For each activity class, a funding range determines how much can be spent. GPS takes a new approach to activity classes and expects that new multi modal projects will draw funding from multiple activity classes in line with different aspects of the projects. For example, if a project along a state highway corridor includes improvements to the existing road corridor, and a new shared path, then the improvements to the existing road corridor will be funded from the State Highway Improvements activity class and the shared path will be funded from the Walking and Cycling activity class. Funding for multi modal improvements along a local road corridor should primarily be funded through the Walking and Cycling activity class. Under GPS , the Rail Netwo rk activity class is funded primarily from the Crown top ups to the NLTF. To provide greater clarity on this, the Rail Network activity class is outlined in its own section below . The following activity classes will be used for the NLTP : State Highway Improvements This activity class is for the purpose of investment in new state highways , improv ing existing state highways , and end of life bridge and structures renewals . Investment in this activity class prioritises the strategic priorities of supporting economic growth and productivity, and a safe and resilient transport system . This activity class has a significant increase in funding , which will be used to deliver state highway infrastructure under the Roads of National Significance programme and priority resilience projects . The Government expects that funding in this activity class will not be used to invest in new multi modal improvements , i.e., cycleways and busways, or fund traffic calming measures, such as speed bumps , raised crossings and inlane bus stops . Where multi modal elements are required as a condition of an already in place consent, these elements can be funded from this activity class, but the NZTA is still expected to minimise costs needed to deliver these multi modal elements. Funding may be used to remove speed bumps and raised crossings that exist on high volume corridors . It is expected that the NZTA will prioritise reliable travel times in all investment decisions in this activity class. State Highway Pothole Prevention This activity class is for the purpose of investment in resealing , rehabilitating , and drainage maintenance on the state highway network . The State Highway Pothole Prevention activity class is intended to address the significant rise in the number of potholes and deterioration of the state highway network. Previous Government Policy Statements have funded resealing, rehabilitating, and drainage maintenance activities through the State Highway Maintenance activity class. The State Highway Pothole Prevention activity class differs from this approach as it is ring fenced to fund resealing, rehabilitating, and drainage maintenance activities on state highways and will not fund other maintenance activities . This activity class is paired wit h a focus on achieving longterm maintenance outcomes of percent of the state highway network rehabilitated each year and percent of the state highway network resurfaced each year , and increasing requirements for potholes to be fixed within hours . Achievement of these longterm maintenance outcomes will be tracked and monitored by the NZTA as part of the Performance and Efficiency Plan.
Government Policy Statement on land transport Ministers Foreword New Zealands economic prosperity is underpinned by a transport network that enables people and freight to move around efficiently , quickly, and safely. This Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS ), sets out the Governments ambitious land transport investment agenda, designed to boost economic growth and productivity, resilience, reliability, and safety. The GPS outlines the Governments land transport investment priorities, and guides expenditure of over billion from the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF), and around . billion from local government, each year. This GPS sets the balance between investing in new projects and ensuring we maintain and repair our existing infrastructure. It focusses on achieving four key strategic priorities: Economic Growth and Productivity Increased Maintenance and Resilience Safety Value for Money. As part of GPS , we are embarking on a significant programme of new and improved land transport infrastructure. Core to this is the reintroduction of the successful Roads of National Significance programme, which was started under the previous Nationa l Government in . A programme of Roads of Regional Significance is also included in GPS to direct investment towards vital transport links across the regions. These investments will ensure that key connections are provided so that Kiwis can get to where they need to go, quickly and safely. These investments will also reduce congestion on our roads, provide low emission transport options in our main cities, and c reate a more productive and resilient transport network, driving economic growth, and unlocking land for thousands of new houses. This GPS reintroduces a focus on increasing economic growth and productivity as a priority for land transport expenditure. Including economic growth and productivity as the overarching strategic priority in this GPS will help to ensure we meet our full potential as a nation. Moving people and freight as efficiently, quickly, and safely as possible is critical to achieving these priorities. GPS brings about a significant change in focus, realigning transport expenditure to better support economic growth , and to ensure all New Zealanders are provided with a well maintained and reliable transport network. We also recognise the importance of local and rural roads in connecting our communities and businesses to key routes, and the importance of ensuring the whole network is maintained to a reliable standard. Maintaining the road network is a priority in GPS . To fix the increasing number of potholes on our roads that has occurred in recent years, and to prevent further deterioration in roading quality, GPS increases road maintenance funding by million, compared to the draft GPS released by the previous Government in
Government Policy Statement on land transport The Government expects that funding in this activity class will not be used to make multi modal improvements. Funding should only be used to reseal , rehabilitate , and maintain drainage on the state highway network . State Highway Operations This activity class is for the purpose of investment in the o peration of the state highway network. Operation al activities include managing demand and operating services to optimise utilisation across the network. This activity class will fund all operational activities on the state highway network , and includes funding for emergency reinstatement after loss of service. Local Road Improvements This activity class is for the purpose of investment in new local roads and improving existing local roads , and end of life bridge and structures renewals. Investment in this activity class prioritises the strategic priorities of supporting economic growth and productivity, and a safe and resilient transport system. Funding in this activity class will be focused on improving efficiency and reducing congestion and travel times. The Government expects that funding in this activity class will not be used to invest in other new multi modal improvements, i.e., cycleways and busways, or fund traffic calming measures, such as speed bumps, raised crossings and in lane bus stops, which inconvenience motorists. However, funding in this activity class can be used to: deliver multi modal elements required as a condition of an already in place consent (these elements can be funded from this activity class, but the NZTA is still expected to minimise costs needed to deliver these multi modal elements ) fund footpath improvements, noting t here will be limited funding for footpath improvements in this activity class. Any investment in footpath improvements is expected to take a no frills approach and investment should only be made where the investment would improve efficiency of the road network and reduce travel times. Funding may be used to remove speed bumps , raised crossings and in lane bus stops that exist on high volume urban connectors and arterial routes . It is expected that the NZTA will prioritise reliable travel times in all investment decisions in this activity class.
Government Policy Statement on land transport Local Road Pothole Prevention This activity class is for the purpose of investment in resealing, rehabilitating, and drainage maintenance on the local road network . The Local Road Pothole Prevention activity class is intended to address the significant rise in the number of potholes and deterioration in our local road network. Previous Government Policy Statements have funded resealing, rehabilitating, and drainage maintenance activities through the Local Road Maintenance activity class. The Local Road Pothole Prevention activity class differs from this approach as it is ring fenced to fund resealing, rehabilitating, and drainage maintenance activities on local roads and will not fund other maintenance activities . Maintenance outcomes achieved through this activity class, including the percentage of the local road network resealed and rehabilitated each year, are expected to be measured and on an annual basis. The Government expects that funding in this activity class will not be used to make multi modal improvements. Funding should be used to reseal , rehabilitate , and maintain drainage on the local road network . Local Road Operations This activity class is for the purpose of investment in the o peration of the local road network. Operation al activities include managing demand and operating services to optimise utilisation across the network. This activity class will fund all operational activities on the local road network and includes funding for emergency reinstatement to loss of service. Public Transport Services This activity class is for the purpose of investment in the management and operation of contracted public transport services and total mobility transport services. This GPS expects that existing public transport services will continue to be funded, if they are cost effective, achieve value for money , and achieve the expected outcomes of less congestion and increased patronage . This GPS will expect greater farebox recovery and third party revenue by Public Transport Authorities (PTAs) in order t o help support the increased costs that are occurring through the public transport sector and to reduce pressure on ratepayers and taxpayers. Public Transport Infrastructure This activity class is for the purpose of investment in new infrastructure and the management , renewal and improvement of existing infrastructure, that supports public transport services. It is expected that funding in this activity class will be used to invest in projects that reflect the prio rities of this GPS , including a rapid transit network in Auckland and upgrades to rail in the lower North Island. It is also expected funding will be used to deliver the National Ticketing Solution to improve the efficiency of public transport. Funding for upgrading, main taining, or operating Public Transport Authorities ticketing systems should only be approved if they are actively working towards delivering, transitioning , or operating the National Ticketing Solution in partnership with the NZTA. The Government expects to realise the benefits of its investments in major public transport infrastructure, like the City Rail Link and Wellingtons new trains. Completing major network renewals (Rail Network Rebuild, Rail Network Growth Impact Management, Backlog Renewals) and upgrades (Wellingtons rail substations) is a key priority for the Government. Safety This activity class is for the purpose of investment in road policing and nationally consistent and coordinated road safety promotion and will be focused on improving
Government Policy Statement on land transport road safety through enforcement and encouraging behavioral change , not blanket speed limit reductions. Police must achieve road policing targets set by the Government through funding in this activity class . There will be a strong focus on performance in the next Road Policing Investment Programme (formerly the Road Safety Partnership Programme ). A small amount of the NLTF that is available to Police will be used to incentivise performance against enforcement targets relating to speed, alcohol breath testing , and oral fluid testing for drugs once the new regime is in place . Specific details of the Police activities, performance metrics and funding will be developed by the NZTA and approved by the Minister in accordance with the Act. These performance metrics will be evidence based and address the leading contributors to serious and fatal crashes. As part of the Safe System approach, the Government expects that i nvestment in road safety will be achieved across activity classes in GPS . This includes the delivery of new Roads of National Significance through the State Highway I mprovement s activity class, investment in other new or improved roading infrastructure, and investment in a well maintained road network through pothole prevention activity classes . Funding toward road safety will be focused on safer roads, safer drivers, and safer vehicles . This includes on initiatives necessary for reducing barriers for private sector investment into road safety, and on activities necessary to support the Governments approach to the setting of speed limits. The Government expects that investment from this activity class will not be made in traffic calming measures such as raised pedestrian crossings , raised platforms, speed bumps , and inlane bus stops on state highways and local roads. Council road safety advertising (including billboards, radio, television, digital and other print media advertising) will no longer be eligible for NLTF funding. Councils can continue to use NLTF funding for road safety education programmes, such as walking school buses. Investment Management This activity class is for the purpose of investment in the transport planning system, investment in strategic and operational research to support system planning and investment, and investment in the funding allocation system. This activity class will provide i nvestment for funding allocation management , includ ing the development of and administration of the NLTP, associated funding and procurement procedures, policies and guidelines, funding agreements with approved organisations, assistance and advice to approved organisations , and Regional Land Transport Committees. Walking and Cycling This activity class is for the purpose s of maintaining the existing walking and cycling network and investment in walking and cycling where there is either clear benefit for increasing economic growth or clear benefit for improving safety and where there is an existing or reliably forecast demand for walking or cycling . Investment in walking and cycling is expected to make a contribution to economic growth and productivity. To achieve this, funding should be directed to reducing congestion andor improving cyclist safety. To recognise the importance of walking and how it interacts with other modes, percent of funding on new improvements should be directed towards footpaths and other walking projects. A provision has been made in the Walking and Cycling activity class to fund the maintenance of walking and cycling infrastructure (including footpaths, shared use paths and cycle paths).
Government Policy Statement on land transport Prior to GPS , no funding from the NLTF was provided to local government to fund the maintenance of walking and cycling infrastructure (including footpaths, shared use paths and cycle paths). A provision has been made in the Walking and Cycling activity class to fund this infrastructure and it is expected that the NZTA Board will consider options to deliver value for money. This could include amending the funding assistance rate (FAR) for these maintenance activities. Any investment in walking and cycling must primarily be funded through this activity class (unless it is an already consented requirement for a roading project in the State Highway Improvements or Local Road Improvements activity classes , as noted above) . The Government expect s that any activities funded under this activity class will undergo robust consultation with community members and business owners that could be affected by the investment, prior to any investment decisions being made . Funding ranges The NZTA is required to allocate funding to activity classes within the funding ranges set out in Table on the following page, and within the overall expenditure targets set out in Table . The expenditure targets do not envisage funding being allocated at the top end of every activity class range. Specifying the funding allocations as a range provides the NZTA with some flexibility to respond to the actual funding applications received and t o manage issues such as weather delays affecting its own state highway investment programme. The funding range s for the Rail Network activity class is outlined in Table .
Government Policy Statement on land transport Table . Activity class funding ranges Activity class GPS funding ranges (m) Forecast funding ranges (m) State Highway Maintenance State Highway Pothole Prevention Upper , , , , Lower State Highway Operations Upper , , , , , , , Lower Local Road Maintenance Local Road Pothole Prevention Upper , , , , , , , Lower Local Road Operations Upper Lower Other continuing programmes Public Transport Services Upper Lower Investment Management Upper Lower Safety Upper Lower Improvements Public Transport Infrastructure Upper , , , Lower State Highway Improvements Upper , , , , , , , , , , Lower , , , , , , , , , , Local Road Improvements Upper Lower Walking and Cycling Improvements Upper Lower
Government Policy Statement on land transport Rail Network This activity class is for the purpose of investment in operation and maintenance, renewals and improvements to the national rail network. This includes both operational and capital expenditure as outlined in the RNIP. The Government expects that activities funded through this activity class will be targeted to parts of the rail network where the most significant economic benefits and opportunities for boosting the productivity of freight movement exist, i.e., the triangle of Auckland, Hamilton, and Tauranga. KiwiRail is currently working to produce the RNIP. The RNIP will be provided to the Minister of Transport by June and will be consistent with the priorities and expectations outlined in the GPS . In line with the GPS, KiwiRail should take a cautious and prudent approach to its investments and work scheduling, this includes prioritising investments and identify ing potential savings within the RNIP. The level of funding available for the Rail Network activity class will be capped at the level of revenue from Track User Charges (TUCs) and any additional Crown funding for rail investments. This is outlined in Table below. The work to develop the RNIP will inform any future funding requests over . The GPS expects that the RNIP will be equal to or less than the available funding outlined in Table and within the funding ranges set out in Table . Wider rail investments The Crown has made a large contribution to rail over the past six years and will continue to provide direct Crown funding for rail in addition to the RNIP. The Crown is committed to funding: the City Rail Link upgrade s to the Auckland Metro Network, ready for day one City Rail Link operations the new Drury Rail Stations the electrif ication of the rail network from Papakura to Pukekohe upgrades to the Wellington Metro Network, including a contribution for new trains on the Wairarapa and Manawat Lines new freight rolling stock the Marsden Rail Spur investigation . In total, the Crown has committed o ver billion of direct Crown funding over . Committed funding for rail programmes are outlined in detail in Table . Coastal Shipping Resilience Fund A new Coastal Shipping Resilience Fund of million over three years ( to ) has been established for activities that enhance the resilience of coastal shipping freight connections. This fund will be managed outside of the NLTP and will only be funded by reallocating Crown grant funding for rail.
Government Policy Statement on land transport Table . Rail Network funding sources over m m m m m m m m m m Funding available for the Rail Network activity class Crown funding for the RNIP Crown funding for NIWE TUC FEDRUCMVR Total funding available for the Rail Network activity class Direct Crown funding City Rail Link Wiri to Quay Park (Third Main Line) Papakura to Pukekohe Electrification Drury Railway Stations Wairarapa Rail Upgrades Northern Package Rolling Stock Mechanical Facilities EF Fleet Refurbishment Hillside Workshop Freight Hub Rail Tourism Investments Metropolitan Rail Maintenance and Renewals in Auckland and Wellington Auckland Metro Rail Upgrades Wellington Metro Rail Upgrades Total Direct Crown funding , , , , , Total funding for rail , , , , , Additional Crown funding for rail will be subject to the consideration of any future funding requests . Table . Rail Network activity class funding ranges GPS funding ranges (m) Forecast funding ranges (m) Upper Lower
Government Policy Statement on land transport Section : Statement of Ministerial Expectatio ns The Act provides for the Minister, as part of the GPS, to make a statement of their expectations of how the NZTA gives effect to the GPS on land transport . Although these are expectations of the NZTA under the Act , most of the expectations also apply to other players in the sector including the Ministry of Transport , local government and other delivery agencies. Active cooperation of all players in the sector will be necessary to deliver the results that New Zealanders want and deserve. The Minister expects a focus on delivery The NZTA has a significant role to play in improving the performance and quality of our infrastructure. To deliver on this it will need to have a tight focus on its core statutory roles. All NLTP related activities need to be judged against the benchmark of whether the activity promotes delivery of this GPS. The Government is looking to the NZTA to deliver on its priorities at pace. The elimination of our infrastructure deficit will require new ways of thinking, maximising the use of new funding and financing tools, implementing new delivery models, and focusing on cost and value over the lifetime of any project. The Government expects the NZTA to build a much more efficient business case process by the end of . Business cases have become increasingly costly and time consuming for the sector without necessarily leading to better investment choices and more efficient and timely infrastructure delivery. I expect the NZTA to make business case decisions focussed on the core objectives of the project and in a timely fashion to ensure decisions on progressing projects can occur prior to projects increasing significan tly in costs. The NZTA needs to maintain a tight control on project scope and cost. Project specifications should take a no frills approach, focusing on delivery of the primary transport objectives that most cost effectively deliver on the strategic priorities in this GPS . The NZTA is expected to identify and report to the Minister every six months on any regulatory or other government controlled barriers to timely delivery , including what changes are needed to reduce project costs and speed up delivery . The Minister expects a focus on core business The Ministry of Transport is to lead the oversight and development of policy for New Zealands transport system. The NZTA and other RCAs are to act primarily as delivery agen cies. The Minister expects the NZTA to focus on its core roles as defined in the Land Transport Management Act . While the NZTA supports other agencies to deliver other parts of the transport network, it should ensure that its focus is on building and maintaining our state highway roading network and it is not doubling up on delivery where other agencies have specific obligations. Work on programs which are not aligned with the NZTAs core purpose s or with the GPS should be discontinued .
Government Policy Statement on land transport The Minister expects a focus on value for money The NZTA is responsible for around billion of road usertaxpayer funds each year and manages one of New Zealands largest economic assets the state highway network. Businesses rely on that network to generate the wealth that sustains us all and indivi duals rely on it for access to jobs, families, and friends. The NZTA must exercise the highest level of stewardship of its assets and investment funding to enable the people of New Zealand to prosper. Obtaining value for money will require : keeping costs under control and identify ing savings that can be reinvested back into maintaining or improving the network select ing and fund ing activities and projects that will make the greatest contribution to the Governments long term goals and strategic priorities outlined in this GPS choos ing the most advantageous combination of whole of life cost and infrastructure quality to meet a no frills specification that deliver s the primary transport objective of the project in the most cost effective manner monitor ing operational expenditure and report ing to the Minister regularly on this expenditure reporting expenditure on temporary traffic management on a quarterly basis and reduc ing this expenditure, while maintaining the safety of workers and road users . The NZTA was unable to provide a breakdown of its expenditure on temporary traffic management in preparation of this GPS . It is expected that the NZTA will calculate its expenditure on temporary traffic management for each of the three previous financial years to form a baseline for future savings reduc ing expenditure on general advertising and identify ing the most cost effective and beneficial method for necessary advertising , such as road safety promotion focus ing on providing services that meet the needs and expectations of users standardis ing the deliver y of building and maintaining road ing infrastructure , while remaining open to new models of delivery that are likely to result in better and smarter services andor lower costs identifying more efficient ways to manage road tolling . Currently percent of total toll revenue is spent on administering tolls. This level of expenditure on toll administration is expected to reduce identifying opportunities for collaborative andor centralised procurement with local government, including centralising the procurement of speed signs. The Minister expects consider ation of other revenue sources and other funding and delivery models There are several funding and procurement mechanisms already available to support investment in land transport and the Government expects to implement more of these during the term of GPS . The NZTA is expected to maximise its own revenue and consider opportunities to supplement that revenue with contributions from beneficiariesusers whenever possible. Maximising its own revenue means ensuring that the amount spent on RUC investigations and enforcement is consistent with obtaining the most revenue, net of the investigation and enforcement costs. However, just maximising revenue does not go far enough , and alternative funding tools are required for investment in land transport . The Government expect s the Ministry of Transport and the NZTA to work together on the future of land transport revenue .
Government Policy Statement on land transport The Minister of Transport expects to announce next steps on the future of the revenue system by the end of . This work programme should include how each of the following funding tools will be incorporated into t he provision of investment in land transport : tolling time of use charging equity finance value capture . The NZTA will be required to find efficiencies in the delivery of its services. This includes developing digital and electronic systems and processes and allowing third parties to bid to operate these services. One example of where this can be used is with New Zealands road tolling arrangements, which currently require percent of total toll revenue to be spent on administering the tolls. Finding efficiencies in the tolling system can reduce administration costs, enabling greater focus on maintaining the road network. New or existin g digital infrastructure and information systems should be used where appropriate, in line with the Value for Money strategic priority. The NZTA should consider tolling to construct and maintain all new roads , includ ing the Roads of National Significance. The Government will support all recommendations by the NZTA to toll roads . Opportunities for toll roads should be explored where: they are likely to meet the requirements set out in the Act, and toll revenues, net of the costs of the tolling scheme itself, will make a positive contribution to the costs of the project. Increased tolling on new roads will protect existing funding in the NLTF for maintaining existing roads. PPPs, concessions, and other alternative delivery options are to be considered for all projects . The NZTA Board should ensure that it has undertaken a more specific set of tests including assu ring itself that : all relevant options have been examined in relation to any particular project all relevant sources of funding and financing have been examined in relation to any particular project and those deemed suitable have been actively pursued and included in the projects funding mix all relevant delivery models have been examined in relation to any particular project, including delivery models where the NZTA may not be the delivery entity, but rather delivery may be done by an expert third party. For the avoidance of doubt , any delivery model selected must represent value for money and balance appropriate levels of risk and timely delivery. The Government is considering how regional deals between central and local government can provide an opportunity to integrate long term strategy and planning, across the transport system. The Government will also work with Auckland Council on an integrated transport plan setting out an aligned strategic approach to planning and funding transport in Auckland. I expect that the Ministry of Transport and the NZTA will engage with relevant entities to support this work and, once established , deliver on these deals . As described above, t he Government is also intending to amend the Act to require future GPSs to adopt a year investment plan, bringing them into line with local government Long Term Plans (LTPs). The NZTA should consider how to adjust its own systems and processes so that it is ready to deliver a year plan as part of GPS . The NZTA shall develop a strategic approach to the acquisition of land and other property interests, including reviewing existing land holdings , and route protection and land acquisition strategies , to determine alignment with the approach described above.
Government Policy Statement on land transport August . This additional funding is reflected in the newly established State Highway Pothole Prevention and Local Road Pothole Prevention activity classes , to ensure that funding is focussed on fixing this growing problem. The targeted investments in Auckland and Wellington public transport will reduce congestion and help to unlock the potential of our main cities. This GPS will invest in public transport with up to . billion available for public transport services , and up to . billion available for public transport infrastructure over the next three years. Funding of billion is tagged to accelerate Roads of National Significance and major public transport projects and million is tagged for the Rail Network Inve stment Programme (RNIP). Road safety is a responsibility we all share, and improving road safety in an efficient manner is a priority for this Government. Road deaths and serious injuries (DSIs) place a substantial burden on families, society, the economy, and the health sector ea ch year. GPS acknowledges these impacts and directs investment toward road policing and enforcement, fixing potholes and increasing the level of road maintenance completed on the road network to make our roads safer, and costeffective infrastructure investments that will help to improve the safety of road users through safe infrastructure. Road safety investment is also directed to educating road users through road safety promotion. GPS also include s investment to reverse recent speed limit reductions, enabling people to get to where they need to go quickly and safely. This includes making it easier for the NZTA to increas e speed limits to kmh on roads that are engineered to that safety standard. Ensuring that investment in transport is resulting in better outcomes is a key focus of GPS . A significant amount of taxpayers money will be invested in transport over the
Government Policy Statement on land transport The Minister expects increased focus on performance and efficiency Over the past five years investment has increased significantly in a number of activity classes but this has not resulted in improved outcomes. state highway maintenance funding has increased by percent , but lane kilometres resealed have reduc ed by percent and lane kilometres rehabilitated have reduc ed by percent local road maintenance funding has increased by percent , but lane kilometres resealed have decreased by percent and lane kilometres rehabilitated have decreased by percent investment in public transport has increased by percent since but there has been a percent decrease in patronage. Road maintenance has become less efficient , and productivity across the sector is not increas ing. The Ministry of Transport has advised that it is difficult to ascertain whether the amount spent on road maintenance is delivering value for money. The NZTA will be expected to develop a Performance and Efficiency Plan that will drive performance and efficiency across all transport investments . The Performance and Efficiency Plan will identify how the NZTA and all road delivery agencies will : improve the management of benefits, costs, risk and uncertainty at the programme and activity class level increase the capability and capacity of the transport sector improve asset management practices across the sector provide analysis to inform pricequality trade offs for maintenance and operations expenditure ensure business case and cost estimation reflect best practice manage overheads and back office costs respond to the wider Ministerial Expectations in Section of the GPS meet the outcomes the government expects will be achieved in GPS , including: o achieving long term maintenance outcomes of percent rehabilitation of the state highway network each year o achieving long term maintenance outcomes of percent resurfacing of the state highway network each year o increasing requirements for potholes to be fixed within hours , and o reducing expenditure on temporary traffic management. The Performance and Efficiency Plan will also need to integrate with the refocussed REG to ensure activities and functions are aligned to drive better accountability, delivery and value for money from our transport investments. The exact scope, functions and reporting lines of the refocussed REG will be developed and approv ed as part of the Performance and Efficiency Plan. This plan should be developed in conjunction with the Ministry of Transport and submitted to the Minister by the end of June . The Minister will hold the NZTA Board accountable for delivery and performance against the Performance and Efficiency Plan.
Government Policy Statement on land transport The Minister expects NZTA to ensure that RCAs and PTAs are follow ing the Ministerial Expectations in GPS It is expected that the NZTA will ensure that these expectations are, to the extent applicable, incorporated into the requirements placed on other road controlling authorities as a condition of the inclusion of their projects in the NLTP . The same is expected for PTAs looking to have projects in the NLTP. In particular, the Government expects that all PTAs deliver the National Ticketing Solution (NTS) in partnership with the NZTA to make public transport more efficient. The NZTA should not co fund maintenance, operations or improvements to PTAs ticketing systems through the NLTF unless they are supporting the delivery of the NTS.
Government Policy Statement on land transport Section : Appendices Appendix A: Debt Repayment Schedule The expected NZTA debt repayment schedule is tabulated below. These repayments are a topslice from the NLTF and sit outside of the activity classes. The debt repayment schedule aggregates the repayments associated with the formal debt arrangements that are currently in place for the NZTA and are outlined in Table NZTA borrowing facilities. In addition to repayments on the NZTAs borrowing facilities, the expected debt repayments include repayments on the PPPs that have been used to deliver Transmission Gully and Puhoi to Warkworth projects included in the previous Roads of National Significance programme . As already indicated in Section , GPS represents a change in how borrowing is reported. The activities funded though borrowing (and any new PPPs) will be reported at the time of the investment as expenditure in the appropriate activity class. In practice this means that the repayments indicated in the below table will be top sliced from NLTF revenue outlined in Table NLTF annual funding , before it is spent on activities included in the NLTP, reducing the NLTP expenditure targets in Table Expenditure targets and ranges . Table . Debt repayment schedule m m m m m m Expected debt repayments
Government Policy Statement on land transport Appendix B: Crown Investment Programme
Government Policy Statement on land transport In addition to the forecast billion investment in land transport through the NLTF over the next years, the Crown also intends to contribute additional funding into transport infrastructure and operations. The following tables highlight the different projects and programmes that are currently identified for Crown funding , some of these projects are included in the Roads of National Significance and Roads of Regional Significance programmes. Roads Of National Significance Region Takitimu North Link Stage Bay of Plenty taki To North Of Levin Wellington
Government Policy Statement on land transport Rail projects Region City Rail Link Auckland Wiri To Quay Park Third Main Auckland Papakura To Pukekohe Auckland Drury Rail Stations Auckland Whangrei To Otiria Northland Ashburton Freight Hub Canterbury Lower north island rail improvements (includes new passenger rolling stock for the Wairarapa and Manawatu lines and related network infrastructure) Wellington Manawat Rail network investment programme freight Nationwide Noncommercial rail investment Nationwide Rolling stock Nationwide
Government Policy Statement on land transport Appendix C: GlossaryDefinitions Activity Defined in the LTMA as a land transport output or capital project, or both Activity class Refers to a grouping of similar activities Approved organisations Organisations eligible to receive funding from NZTA for land transport activities. Approved organisations are defined in the LTMA Benefits realisation A process that demonstrates whether or not (and how well) the anticipated results have been achieved Capacity of network The amount of movement of people andor goods that the network can support at a given time Demand management Demand management refers to interventions which change the demand for transport. These interventions may seek to influence how, when and where people travel, and freight is transported. The purpose of demand management is to ensure the transport system is utilised efficiently and effectively, and to reduce the negative impacts of travel and freight movement Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) The New Zealand Emissions Trading Scheme. The ETS requires businesses to surrender one emissions unit (known as an NZU ) to the Government for each tonne of emissions they emit. NZUs are tradeable. The ETS limits emissions by limiting the number of NZUs available to emitters (i.e., that are supplied into the scheme) Fuel Excise Duty (FED) Fuel Excise Duty is a tax imposed by the government to fund land transport activities. FED includes excise duty paid on liquid petroleum gas and compressed natural gas (in addition to Petrol Excise Duty), but these account for a very small proportion of overall fuel excise Hypothecation The direct allocation of all income from a tax or charge (e.g., FuelPetrol Excise Duty or Road User Charges) to a particular type of activity (e.g., the National Land Transport Fund) Lead investment Investment which acts as a catalyst for future development Land Transport Management Act (LTMA) The main Act governing the land transport planning and funding system Land transport revenue Revenue paid into the Fund under the LTMA Local road Defined in the LTMA as a road (other than a state highway) in a district that is under the control of a territorial authority Local share The contribution that communities make (through local government) towards transport projects that have shared national and local benefits Maintenance Care and upkeep of infrastructure so that it can deliver a defined level of service, while leaving the fundamental structure of the existing infrastructure intact Ministry of Transport (the Ministry, MoT) The governments principal transport policy adviser that leads and generates policy, and helps to set the vision and strategic direction for the future of transport in New Zealand
Government Policy Statement on land transport Motor vehicle registration and licensing fees Motor vehicles pay a registration fee when first registered to enter the fleet, and an annual licence fee to legally operate on the road network. Motor vehicle registration and licensing fees are defined as land transport revenue. The fees are intended to contribute to the maintenance of the Motor Vehicle Register where the details of motor vehicles are recorded National Land Transport Fund (NLTF, the Fund) The set of resources, including land transport revenue, that are available for land transport activities under the National Land Transport Programme National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) A programme, prepared by NZTA, that sets out the land transport activities which are likely to receive funding from the National Land Transport Fund. The NLTP is a three yearly programme of investment in land transport infrastructure and services from the Fund Public transport Passenger transport infrastructure and services contracted by local and central government which may include shared on demand services identified in Regional Public Transport Plans as integral to the public transport network. Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP) A ten year plan of projects, guided by the New Zealand Rail Plan, to achieve a reliable, resilient, and safe rail network. The programme is written by KiwiRail and approved by the Minister of Transport with guidance from NZTA Regional Land Transport Plans (RLTPs) Plans prepared by Regional Transport Committees, that set out each regions transport objectives and policies for a period of at least years. This includes bids for funding from the NLTP Regional Transport Committees (RTCs) A transport committee, which must be established by every regional council or unitary authority for its region. The main function of a regional transport committee is to prepare an RLTP Results The outcomes that the Crown wishes to achieve from the allocation of funding from the National Land Transport Fund. They are expressed by a measure change, and are impacted by the level of investments, activities and deliverables required to realise the ch ange Road Controlling Authorities (RCAs) Authorities and agencies that have control of the roads, including NZTA, territorial authorities, Auckland Transport, the Waitangi Trust, and the Department of Conservation Road User Charges (RUC) Charges on diesel and heavy vehicles paid to the Government and used to fund land transport activity State highways A road designated as such by NZTA, as defined by the LTMA Track user charges (TUC) Charges paid by rail freight operators for access touse of the rail tracks Total Mobility Scheme The Total Mobility Scheme provides subsidised licensed taxi services to people who have an impairment that prevents them from making a journey unaccompanied, on a bus, train or ferry in a safe and dignified manner New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) The government agency with statutory functions to manage the funding of the land transport system and manage the state highway system
Government Policy Statement on land transport
Government Policy Statement on land transport Section : Introduction to GPS The Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) sets out the Governments land transport strategy. This includes, among other things: what the Government expects to be achieved from its investment in land transport through the NLTF what the Government expects to be achieved from its direct investment in land transport how much funding will be provided and how the funding will be raised how it will achieve its outcomes and priorities through investment in certain areas, known as activity classes (e.g., the maintenance of state highways or road policing) a statement of the Ministers expectations of how the New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) gives effect to this GPS. In this way the GPS influences decisions on how funding from the NLTF is invested (see Figure ). It also provides direction to local government , KiwiRail and the NZTA on the type of activities that should be included in Regional Land Transport Plans (RLTP s), the RNIP and the NLTP respectively . Local government, the NZTA, the New Zealand Police, KiwiRail , and other approved organisations under the Land Transport Management Act (the Act) can receive funding from the NLTF for the land transport activities they deliver, such as the construction and maintenance of state highways , local and rural roads, road policing, and public transport. In turn, RLTPs must be consistent with the GPS. This means the direction and aims of the GPS have a direct influence on the funding that goes to regions and activities. The NZTA determines the specific activities funded from the NLTF based on the direction provided by the GPS. A GPS is issued by the Minister of Transport (the Minister) under terms specified in the Act. This GPS (the Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS )), covers the financial period to , and will take effect from July . The Government recognises that one of the action items in the current Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP), prepared under the previous Government, refers to ensuring the next Government Policy Statement on Land Transport guides investment that is consistent with the emissions reduction plan . Following the general election and a change of government in late , the intended emissions reduction policies foreshadowed by the previous Government are being reassessed. For this reason, GPS has not undertaken th e alignment exercise as anticipated in ERP . The Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) is the Governments key tool to reduce emissions. The Government acknowledges the emissions impact from the transport sector and that, in response to the ETS, steps need to be taken to reduce transport emissions in line with achieving emissions reduction budgets and the target of net zero emissions by . Public consultation is currently planned for mid on the second Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP), with the Government proposing to complement the overarching ETS with several key transport policies including supercharging electric vehicle (EV) charging infrastructure; continuing to apply the Clean Car Importer Standard; and its major public transport projects. The specific mix of policies and initiatives aimed at achieving the second emissions reduction budget , and net zero target by , will be conf irmed in ERP by the end of .
Government Policy Statement on land transport Alongside GPS , the Government is committed to doubling renewable energy through its Electrify NZ policy by removing red tape and regulatory constraints. The Government is also committed to delivering , public electric vehicle ( EV) chargers by , subject to cost benefit analysis . Doubling renewable energy and delivering a comprehensive, nationwide network of public EV chargers will reduce New Zealands emissions by enabling the electrification of New Zealands vehicle fleet. GPS covers NLTF spending of over billion across the next three years. Revenue to cover this expenditure comes from user charges such as Fuel Excise Duty (FED) , Road User Charges (RUC) , vehicle registration and tolls , and income from the sale and lease of state highway property . In addition, the NLTF is topped up by direct funding from the Crown in the form of grants and loans . Over the next decade, a significant portion of the NLTF is committed to maintaining and operating the system. This includes maintaining state highways , local and rural roads, continuing to deliver better public transport and maintaining public transport infrastructure, maintaining the rail network, promoting road safety, and road policing. The NLTF also needs to meet its debt repayment obligations including payments for existing roads built th rough PPPs . Figure . The role of the GPS in the land transport planning and funding system Figure . The GPS provides the strategic direction and sets the government funding contribution for Regional Land Transport Plans and the National Land Transport Programme. The remainder of this document consists of : Section : System Reform Section : Strategic Priorities Section : Investment in Land Transport Section : Statement of Ministerial Expectations Appendix A: Debt Repayment Schedule Appendix B: Crown Investment Programme Appendix C: GlossaryDefinitions
Government Policy Statement on land transport Section : System Refor m Transport is a critical economic enabler , ensuring that people and goods can move efficiently and safely, and connecting people with both economic and social opportunities. The Governments overarching priority for transport investment will be to support economic growth and productivity in the New Zealand economy. The Governments goal for transport is an effective, efficient, safe, secure, accessible , and resilient transport system that supports the growth of our countrys economy in order to deliver greater prosperity, security and opportunities for all New Zealanders. This GPS will reshape the direction of transport investment in New Zealand, with a significant focus on building and maintaining our state highway network to help achieve these objectives. New Zealand is facing an infrastructure deficit which has grown over time , due, in part, to the following factors : . The transport sector is facing significant cost increases resulting in the affordability of maintenance and new infrastructure projects becoming more challenging through the traditional funding models. . The usefulness of fuel usage as a proxy for road usage is rapidly diminishing , due to growing fuel efficiency of vehicles and the shift to EVs (Figure ) . . The current system is based on a payas yougo model, where revenue is spent as it is raised , with limited access to long term funding and financing tools. Long term funding and financing tools are used overseas to build transport infrastructure. . Consenting and property acquisition for major infrastructure projects has become more challenging, adding significant costs and delays to projects. For example , the Mount Messenger project in Taranaki has been the subject of repeated litigation relating to consenting and property acquisition. The result has been cost increase s, uncertainty for affected residents and a postponing of the benefits that will arise once the much needed project is complete .
Government Policy Statement on land transport The Government will be undertaking major reforms to address these challenges with the Ministers of Transport, Infrastructure , and Regional Development working closely together to establish a new framework for investment in New Zealands infrastructure, delivering on the Governments objectives. These reforms include: . Once established, the National Infrastructure Agency (NIA) will work closely with the N ZTA and KiwiRail to develop a year plan for transport infrastructure in New Zealand and connect local and offshore investors with transport projects. These projects will include the Roads of National Significance, major public transport projects , and other transport infrastructure which are identified as part of the Governments long term infrastructure plan. This GPS require s the NZTA to consider alternative funding a nd financing arrangements for all new infrastructure projects to ensure that New Zealand delivers more infrastructure sooner. . Fast tracking of consents for major infrastructure projects. Legislation is already underway to provide fast track consenting approvals. The changes are expected to support the major transport projects within this GPS, including the Roads of National Significance and rapid transit projects. This is a significant step change which means confidence is provided to the construction sector to invest in the capability and equipment needed to deliver these projects. . Making it easier to sell land that is no longer required for transport purposes. . Rapidly advancing reforms to the NLTFs revenue system. The first step of this is already underway, with light electric vehicles required to pay RUCs from April . The next steps include requiring all road vehicles to move from FED to RUC , which is a fairer way of charging for road use based on weight and distance. As part of these reforms, we will reform tolling legislation and allow for timeofuse charging on the most congested parts of New Zealands road network, helping to reduce congestion and maximise use of existing assets. Technology will be a critical enabler of these reforms . We expect to advance these reforms over the course of this GPS . Legislative changes will be required to achieve these reforms . The Minister of Transport expects to announce next steps on the future of the revenue system by the end of . . Amending the Land Transport Management Act to require future Government Policy Statements on land transport to adopt a year investment plan, bringing it into alignment with local government Long Term Plans (LTPs), and providing the NZTA Board with greate r confidence and certainty to invest in longterm projects and deliver on a longterm transport infrastructure pipeline. . Restoring the credibility of the ETS. The ETS is the Governments key tool to reduce emissions. The Government is committed to reestablishing a strong and stable ETS after the failed auctions in , which were caused by policy uncertainty and changes to the ETS auction settings. Other matters relating to climate changeemissions reduction issues are being worked through and will be addressed during development of the ERP . The specific mix of policies and initiatives aimed at achieving the second emissions reduction budget , and net zero target by , will be confirmed in ERP by the end of .
Government Policy Statement on land transport Section : Strategic Priorities The Government has four strategic priorities which this GPS will deliver against : Economic Growth and Productivity Increased Maintenance and Resilience Safety Value for Money. The Economic Growth and Productivity strategic priority is the overarching strategic priority for the direction of this GPS. Increased maintenance and resilience, safety and value for money are all equally weighted and important priorities that collectively support the delivery of a transport system that drives economic growth and productivity. Strategic Priority: Economic Growth and Productivity The Governments overarching priority for investment through this GPS is to support economic growth and productivity. Efficient investment in our land transport system connects people and freight quickly and safely, supporting economic growth and creating social and economic opportunities including access to land for housing growth. Core to this priority will be the re introduction of the Roads of National Significance programme, which was started under the previous National Government in , as well as investment in Roads of Regional Significance . The Government will also invest in major public transport projects alongside local government to deliver more travel choices and reduced congestion in our major cities. The NZTA Board is responsible for approving and declining funding for particular projects or combinations of projects. The Roads of National Significance and Roads of Regional Significance listed in GPS are priorities for the Government and may be con sidered for funding by the NZTA Board. The se priority projects are not an exhaustive list of projects that may be considered for funding by the NZTA Board. Strategic investments in land transport, including the Roads of National Significance, combined with better use of existing infrastructure, will boost New Zealands longterm growth prospects, and improve housing affordability making a material differenc e to our nations standard of living. New Zealand has among the least affordable houses in the world, the result of a persistent undersupply of houses. New Roads of National Significance , Roads of Regional Significance, and major public transport projects will unlock access to greenfield land for housing development and support greater intensification to ultimately improve housing supply, choice and affordability. These investments will also bring benefits for national economic growth and productivity, particularly given that state highways carry most of New Zealands inter regional freight and link major ports, airports and urban areas. The expectation is that land transport funding will be directed into projects and activities that will support improved productivity and economic growth. The transport sector supports economic growth and productivity by providing quality transport connections, which enable goods and people to reach their destinations efficiently.
Government Policy Statement on land transport Investment Prioritisation Method (assessment framework) Low Cost, Low Risk (funding category) National Land Transport Fund National Land Transport Programme Road Assessment and Maintenance Management Regional Land Transport Plan Sustainable Urban Mobility Benchmarking Transport Investment Online Value f or Money (assessment framework) Vehicle kilometres travelled
Government Policy Statements on Land Transport GPS draft for engagement GPS strategic priorities are safety, strategic corridors, transport choices and climate change. Value for money underpins the four strategic priorities rather than being a strategic priority in its own right.
Government Use uppercase when referring to the Government of the day.
Government agreed to consult
Government and Auckland Council establish The Congestion Question project
Government announced its commited to decarbonising public transport bus fleet
Government announced next steps for CCM project
Government announces advanced aviation package
Government board appointments held (current and previous, include years)
Government board appointments held (current and previous, include years) May present Member Hauraki Mori Trust Board
Government cuts c a litre off fuel excise in cost of living relief package
Government expects the National
Government has repealed Clean Car Discount scheme
Government helping advanced aviation take off
Government introduces new regulatory approach to advanced aviation
Government introduces roadside drug testing legislation
Government investment in Northland rail announced
Government projections on how many people would use the scheme were largely estimated as the initiative was new to New Zealand and there was little international data on similar schemes.
Government releases New Zealands Road Safety Objectives
Government releases second emissions reduction plan
Government strengthening frontline search and rescue capability
Government support for the transport sector
Government to enable tolling to accelerate investments in roads
Government updates EV charging coinvestment model
Government upgrading Lower North Island commuter rail
GovernmentImplementation by Waka Kotahi
Governments Long Term Outcomes: A. An efficient transport system B. A sustainable funding basis for transport infrastructure investments and use C. A high quality transport system for Auckland D. An accessible and safe transport system that contributes positively to the nations economic, social and environmental welfar e
Governments goal to have a world
Graduate research scholarship recipients
Grams per kilometre . (no change) . Disability vehicles are excluded from the Standard, and the definition of disability vehicle is amended to help prevent fraud ulent exemptions . . The weight adjusting formula e for passenger vehicles for and are amended so that the slope is ., and the slop e is .. . From January , the current minimum and maximum weights for light commercial vehicles are increased from , kilograms to , kilograms, and from , kilograms to , kilograms respectively . . An error in the Principal Regulations is corrected so that the publication dates for data concerning the weight adjusting formula e are determined by the obligation year rather than the reference period. Timing and day rule The Regulations come into force on October , aside from the changes to minimum and maximum weights, which come into force on January and t he exclusion for disability vehicles and the change to the definition of disability vehicle (regulations and ), which come into force on September . A waiver of the day rule is sought in relation to regulations and of the Regulations on the grounds that the exclusion of disability vehicles confers only benefits on the public (Cabinet Manual .(a)), and the change to the definition must come into force at the same time as the exclusion to avoid unfair commercial advantage being taken of the exclusion (Cabinet Manual .(d)). Compliance The Regulations comply with each of the following: . the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi (the Regulations are unlikely to have significant impact on Mori) ; xxfpyy PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E . advice from the Treaty Provisions Officials Group on any Treaty of Waitangi provisions ( no advice was sought as the Regulations do not contain any relevant provisions ); . the rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act or the Human Rights Act ; . the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act ; . relevant international standards and obligations; and . the Legislation Guidelines ( edition), which are maintained by the Legislation Design and Advisory Committee. Section C () of the Act specifies that before I may recommend the making of regulations prescribing targets for the level of CO emissions, I must: . Consult such persons as I consider appropriate, and . Take into account the expected reduction in vehicle CO emissions resulting from the targets, and the expected impact of the targets on vehicle safety, affordability, and availability, and . Be satisfied that the targets are set at an appropriate level to increase the supply of zero and lowemission vehicles in the market, and that the targets are consistent with transport specific policies and strategies set out in the emissions reduction plan made under section ZG of the Climate Change Response Act for meeting the emissions budget set under that Act. I have sought advice from officials on these matters and I consider that these requirements are met . Regulations Review Committee Officials have not identified any grounds for the Regulations Review Committee to draw these Regulations to the attention of the House of Representatives . Certification by Parliamentary Counsel The Regulations are certified by the Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) as being in order for submission to Cabinet. Impact Analysis A Regulatory Impact Assessment was prepared in accordance with the necessary requirements, and was submitted at the time that Cabinet approval was sought of the policy relating to the Regulations (CAB Min, CBC MIN refer) . Publicity On July I issued a media release announcing the Governments decisions on the Standard. I will issue a further media release when the Regulations are made. Information to publicise the new regulations will also be made available on the New Zealand Transport Agency and Ministry of Transport websites. The New Zealand Transport Agency will also engage directly with the vehicle industry. xxfpyy PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C EProactive release I propose to proactively release this paper within days of Cabinet making final decisions. Consultation The Motor Industry Association (MIA), the Imported Motor Vehicle Industry Association (VIA), the Motor Trade Association (MTA) and the New Zealand Automobile Association (AA) were consulted on the proposals that the Regulations will give effect to . The following agencies were consulted on the Regulations and this Cabinet paper: New Zealand Transport Agency, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, the Treasury, Ministry for the Environment, New Zealand Customs Service, Ministry of Social Development, Ministry for Disabled People, and Ministry for Primary Industries . The Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority was consulted on this Cabinet paper . The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet has been informed . Recommendations I recommend that the Cabinet Legislation Committee: note that on Monday July Cabinet agreed to confirm the decisions taken by the Cabinet Business Committee that: (CAB Min, CBC MIN refer) . the CO targets for the Clean Vehicle Standard (the Standard) be reset to align with Australias . disability vehicles be excluded from the Standard, and that the exclusion come into force as soon as possible after the amending regulations are made . the weight adjusting formula e for passenger vehicles for and be amended so that the slope for is . and the slope for is . . the minimum and maximum weights for light commercial vehicles be increased from , kilograms to , kilograms, and from , kilograms to , kilograms respectively . an error in the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Regulations be corrected so that the publication dates for data in the weight adjusting formula are determined by the obligation year rather than the reference period note that the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Regulations will give effect to the decision s referred to in recommendation above note that the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Regulations come into force on October , except that c hanges to minimum and maximum weights for light commercial vehicles will come into force on January , and provisions relating to disability vehicles on September agree to waive the day rule for the provisions relating to disability vehicles : xxfpyy PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E. so that the provision s can come into force as soon as possible after the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Regulations are made, and . on the grounds that the exclusion of disability vehicles confers only benefits on the public (Cabinet Manual .(a)), an d the change to the definition must come into force at the same time to avoid unfair commercial advantage being taken of the exclusion (Cabinet Manual .(d)) note that section C() of the Land Transport Act requires that the responsible Minister must, before recommending that regulations be made prescribing targets for the level of carbon dioxide emissions from light vehicles imported annually: . consult such persons as the Minister considers appropriate, . take into account the expected reduction in vehicle carbon dioxide emissions resulting from the targets, and the expected impact of the targets on vehicle safety, affordability, and availability, and . be satisfied that the targets are set at an appropriate level to increase the supply of zero and lowemission vehicles in the market, and that the targets are consistent with transport specific policies and strategies set out in the emissions reduction plan made under section ZG of the Climate Change Response Act for meeting the emissions budget set under that Act note the advice of the Minister for Transport that th ese requirement s have been met authorise the submission to the Executive Council of the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Regulations . Authorised for lodgement Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Transport xxfpyy :Order in Council is publicly available here https:www.legislation.govt.nzregulation publiclatestLMS.htmlsrcqs PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA I N C O N F I D E N C E LEGMIN noted that section C() of the Land Transport Act requires that the responsible Minister must, before recommending that regulations be made prescribing targets for the level of carbon dioxide emissions from light vehicles imported annually: . consult such persons as the Minister considers appropriate; . take into account the expected reduction in vehicle carbon dioxide emissions resulting from the targets, and the expected impact of the targets on vehicle safety, affordability, and availability; . be satisfied that the targets are set at an appropriate level to increase the supply of zero and lowemission vehicles in the market, and that the targets are consistent with transportspecific policies and strategies set out in the emissions reduction plan made under section ZG of the Climate Change Response Act for meeting the emissions budget set under that Act; noted the advice of the Minister for Transport that these requirements have been met; authorised the submission to the Executive Council of the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Regulations PCO .. Tom Kelly Committee Secretary Present: Officials present from: Rt Hon Winston Peters (Chair) Hon Paul Goldsmith Hon Judith Collins KC Hon Casey Costello Hon Nicole McKee Hon Simon Watts Hon Andrew Bayly Hon Scott Simpson, MP Jamie Arbuckle, MP Todd Stephenson, MPOfficials Committee for LEG Prime Ministers Office I N C O N F I D E N C E xxfpyy PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Grams per kilometre Commercial vehicles ( ie vans, utes, light trucks)
Grand Total , , , . , . .
Greater Wellington Regional Council
Green Freight : Strategic Working Paper
Green Freight working paper released
Green Report to Minister on outcomes from operational efficiency review by December .
Greenhouse gas emissions from land transport
Grouping of actual expenditure data Data on actual transport ex penditure by year and category obtained from Waka Kotahis website was re categorised as follows for analysis: Expenditure type Work category Analysis category Investment management na Investment management Road safety promotion na Roads: Road safety promotion Public transport Administration General PT: Other PT administration management PT: Other PT information PT: Services information PT infrastructure development PT: Infrastructure PT infrastructure maintenance renewals PT: Maintenance renewals PT services PT: Services information SuperGold Card PT: Other Total Mobility PT: Other Roads Administration General Roads: Other Bridges structures replacement Roads: Maintenance renewals Minor improvements Roads: Infrastructure New roads bridges Roads: Infrastructure Professional services Roads: Other Property purchase Roads: Infrastructure Resilience improvements Roads: Infrastructure Road reconstruction Roads: Maintenance renewals Traffic management Roads: Other Maintenance renewals Administration General Roads: Maintenance renewals Corridor Roads: Maintenance renewals Cycling facilities Walking cycling: Maintenance renewals Emergency reinstatement Roads: Maintenance renewals OVERALL CONCLUSIONS AND REFLECTIONS FOR THE FUTURE
Growth in Wellington needs to be supported through the delivery of new and stateoftheart public transport options that are safe, efficient and reliable, powered by renewable energy sources. This supports the city to reduce emissions, provide sustainable travel choices and ensure better connections to essential services.
Guide to New Zealands Maritime Security Arrangements
Guide to the use of Small Autonomous Surface Vessels (ASVs) in New Zealands Maritime Area
Guided by the GPS strategic priorities,
Guided by the GPS strategic priorities, Waka
Guidelines for Setting Charges in the Public Sector https:treasury.govt.nzpublicati onsguideguidelines setting charges public sector html The purpose of this guidance is to assist governm ent agencies in designing and advising on cost recovery regimes and to effectively manage and monitor cost recovery.
HAPINZ was cofunded by Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport, Waka Kotahi, Ministry for the Environment Manat M te Taiao and Manat Hauora Ministry of Health.
HAPINZ was undertaken by New Zealand experts in air quality, health and economics and is internationally peer reviewed. The researchers considered the sources of the air pollution, how much air pollution people are exposed to, and a range of health effects (e.g. cardiovascular disease and respiratory disease, including asthma) using New Zealand health records. They also estimated the overall social costs of air pollution. The research is an update to previous HAPINZ studies in and .
HEI ARATAKI MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT MORI STRATEGY He Whakakitenga Purpose: A transport system that enables Mori to flourish He Kkano Shortterm ( year) He Tipu Midterm ( years) He Pwai Longterm ( years)Capability Building and Evidence Analysis Develop staff cultural competencies to better engage with and understand our partners, and the evidence that identifies issues and opportunities for Mori in the design and delivery of transport. Enduring Partnership The Ministry forms natural partnerships with Mori, directly or leverages agency and partner networks. Embed a Kaupapa Mori World View into our Work The Ministry delivers outcomes for Mori in our policy design and advice. Ng hononga ki te rautaki o Te Manat Waka Links with Ministry Strategic Focus Areas Building our capability We are committed to the Treaty of Waitangi partnership between Mori and the Crown, and invest in developing the cultural competencies of our staff to deliver on these responsibilities underpinned by the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi. We recognise and value te reo Mori me na tkanga (Mori language and customary practices) in the fabric of the Ministry as a workplace. Being the system steward We develop our understanding as to why Mori are disproportionately impacted by transport outcomes. We recognise that Mori partnership is critical to understanding the issues and opportunities for Mori in transport, and we respect the vital role of iwi Mori in the economic and social fabric of New Zealand. Shaping the future We leverage partnerships and networks to reflect Mori aspirations in the future of transport design. This allows us to provide informed advice on decisions today which have longterm outcomes for Mori. Ng Pou Key Strategic Priority Areas Developing as a priority capability and capacity in te reo tkanga Mori, and knowledge and application of te Triti o Waitangi. Our policy design and advice delivers improved transport sector outcomes for Mori. Engaging effectively with Mori, and leveraging existing relationships. Working crossagency and collaboratively.Ako Capability Development Whakapakari Improve Outcomes Mahi Tahi Working TogetherOngoing Ministry develops internal capability to deliver improved outcomes for Mori Ng Mtpono Guiding Principles We engage and work with Mori people and organisations to leverage collective aspiration and capabilities.We recognise the Treaty of Waitangi and its principles. We communicate honestly, share and codesign, and understand the CrownMori relationship. Whanaungatanga Collaboration and unityRangatiratanga Empowering and leading We have a responsibility to actively improve outcomes for Mori to ensure that the transport system serves all New Zealanders equitably. Audrey Sonerson, CE He aha mtou e whai rautaki Mori ai Why are we doing this Supports good policy advice the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinets Policy Quality Framework states that advice is higher quality and more influential when we have identified the expectations of stakeholders and we connect those likely to be impacted by the policy. Effective engagement also contributes to the quality enabler of we generate and draw on relationship capital. Supports our purpose Enabling New Zealanders to flourish. Unfortunately, Mori are often overrepresented in the nonflourishing statistics including high unemployment and poor health outcomes. Mori also disproportionately feature in road fatalities from road crashes. Supports our value of collaboration we are connected and journey with others. Supports our obligations as a Treaty Partner.Whinga Matua Goals We recognise the role we play to safeguard and protect the transmission of Mori knowledge and taonga.Kaitiakitanga Guardianship and support We support and encourage each other, and we create environments that respect and value Mori people and Mori ways of seeing, thinking and feeling.Manaakitanga Caring for and valuing others
Half price public transport fares also ended, with some discounts continuing through the Community Connect scheme. You can find out more about Community Connect here:
Hamilton to Auckland Indicative Business Case
Hamilton to Auckland rapid rail indicative business case initiated
HamiltonAuckland Intercity Connectivity
HamiltonAuckland Intercity Connectivity Business Case developed and released
Harriet Shelton Manager Governance Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport . . .
Harriet Shelton Manager Governance Hon Kiri Allan Associate Minister of Transport . . .
Harriet Shelton Manager, Governance
Harriet Shelton Manager, Supply Chain Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport . . . Ministers office to complete : Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events Comments
Have Your Say on the Future of Road User Charges
Having said that, the issues outlined by my people from to are still relevant to all activities on the seabed and within the moana.
He Arotake i te neke i te Tauki Tikanga Here Kwanatanga m te waka whenua (GPS) February
He arotake i te neke aratau i te Tauk Tikanga Here Kwanatanga m te waka whenua (GPS) transport.govt.nz ISBN
He huarua poutama te waitohu nei (te huarua tukutuku) e whakatinana ana i te whakapapa, i te mahi ngtahi, i te kotahitanga, i ng taumata o te ako me te whai mtauranga.
He kupu rahi i ng kaipnui Writing for our readers
He rangi t Matawhiti, he rangi t Matawhnui The person with a narrow vision sees a narrow horizon, the person with a wide vision sees a wide horizon This whakatauk is a reminder to widen your horizon and look at the bigger picture. We use this whakatauk to describe the importance of assets supporting service delivery, and how we must look at all parts of the System to ensure its success assets being one of those.SECTION SIX ASSETS SUPPORTING SERVICE DELIVERY Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Findings and recommendations . We sought to identify the capacity (i.e., assets and people required to deliver services with the appropriate capabilities) available in the search and rescue system. We also sought to identify if this capacity is sufficient to meet current and future demands for search and rescue services. . The focus on search and rescue services reflects that service delivery is dependent on the combination of major assets including buildings, communications technologies, vehicles, vessels and aircraft. A number of these assets are also used to deliver frontline safety services. . Through our work, we reflect that: assets to support the delivery of services come from a mix of government and NGOs both charitable, and commercial. The size and scale of the NZSRR means the RCCNZ draws on vessels of opportunity operating across the NZSRR and neighbouring search and rescue jurisdictions to support operations at an aggregate level, capacity is available to respond to existing search and rescue demands (subject to risk tolerance levels); capacity constraints are known; and current risk tolerance levels are under assessment. A range of organisations have work underway to determine what changes may be required, including in response to future demand. This includes demand for both frontline safety and search and rescue services there is no systemswide view on what future demand might look like, and the capacity configuration required across the System in response. Work to support a systematic view, and complement the work of individual organisations underway, is required and should be revisited periodically. . We acknowledge that there will always be a tradeoff between capacity, the cost of that capacity, and the risk New Zealand is prepared to bear. This is a particular consideration for infrequent, but significant events. Work underway to reconsider the level of offshore capacity required to support stricken vessels at sea is a case in point. This work highlights that search and rescue is not the only consideration in determining whether, and what capacity might be required. . We also reflect the ongoing maturity within and between the Coordinating Authorities to identify the type of capacity required (e.g., asset specification and management) and the level of assurance required around those assets. Work underway between the NZSAR Secretariat, RCCNZ and the Police regarding helicopters is a case in point given their criticality, frequency of use, the operating risks involved, and costs. . For example, marine oil spill response. ASSETS SUPPORTING SERVICE DELIVERY Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue We recommend: System capacity . The NZSAR Secretariat develops a model to forecast future demand for frontline safety and search and rescue services, to inform the required Systemwide capacity (assets and people) and its configuration as soon as practicable. . Periodic assessment by the System Steward (once established) of System wide capacity to meet forecast demand, working with the Coordinating Authorities, NGOs and other operators as appropriate, including the identification of any changes required to Systemwide capacity in response. Aviation operations . Prompt conclusion of work underway through the NZSAR Secretariat to determine operational service standards for helicopter operations to support safe, effective, and efficient search and rescue responses.. Progression of work between the NZSAR Secretariat and the Coordinating Authorities to explore a revised model for the tasking and deployment of aviation assets for search and rescue operations, including identification of the capacity and funding uplift required. Telecommunications . The NZSAR Council works with the Next Generation Critical Communications entity to ensure that the NGOs delivering search and rescue services are appropriately accounted for in the new digital communications network for emergency services. Emergency management events . The roles of search and rescue and the NGOs involved in emergency management events, and associated funding arrangements, are included within any future event reviews that occur. ASSETS SUPPORTING SERVICE DELIVERY Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Current and future capacity and its sufficiency . Fixed assets are critical to the delivery of search and rescue services. These are owned by a mix of government and NGOs, both charitable and commercial. . Government agencies including the Coordinating Authorities have assets with a book value well in excess of million that could be used for search and rescue. However, only assets that are suited to the task are used in each operation, representing a small proportion of the asset base available. . Additional privately owned aviation assets (circa helicopters and fixed wing aircrafts) are also available for tasking. . Across the wider NZSRR assets tasked include vessels of opportunity and assets owned by neighbouring search and rescue authorities. . Within New Zealand, the NGOs (Coastguard NZ, Land Search and Rescue, and Surf Life Saving) hold assets with a replacement cost of circa million (June ). However, this figure understates the true amount as it excludes assets owned by volunteers or held by local clubs. These assets include vessels, equipment, technology, motor vehicles, and buildings.. Assets used by NGOs, notably Coastguard and Surf Life Saving, are also used interchangeably to deliver frontline safety services, therefore these services were captured in our assessment. The Review has not considered whether, at a systemwide level, assets related to service delivery are optimally located or optimally utilised. We conclude that at present, there is no systematic and reliable approach to measure optimal capacity. . At an aggregate New Zealandwide level, capacity to meet presenting demand is evident, but under pressure, and subject to New Zealands current risk tolerance. Most of the frontline safety and search and rescue operations are considered to be minor routine, and current capacity allows these operations to be delivered successfully (although there will always be some risk). We reflect that the people involved in delivering services go above and beyond to deliver these services. While operations are delivered successfully, people involved stretch themselves, and service delivery relies heavily on the goodwill of volunteers. We also reflect that service demands in adjacent systems draw on already stretched resources. . However, there are capacity constraints that organisations have identified. These are summarised below. . The Review considered whether current capacity is sufficient to meet frontline safety services and search and rescue services (Category I and II search and rescue operations). The term sufficiency of capacity to meet demand is currently not defined. However, for the purpose of the Review, we adopted the following definition: that there is an adequate availability of people and assets that can be deployed to respond to search and rescue operations in a reasonably effective and timely way, and the ability to maintain existing frontline safety service levels. ASSETS SUPPORTING SERVICE DELIVERY Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue . Availability of personnel This is most notable through the NGOs. There are constraints around the retention of volunteers and their ability to respond given other life demands including the time of day, day of the week, time of the year, and location. This is a known systematic risk discussed in Section Five. . Limitations of assetsCoastguard NZ data evidences an increase in the number of boaties venturing further out to sea and beyond the nautical mile (NM) limit with more incidents occurring past this limit. If Coastguard is to meet this growing demand, it will need to adapt its fleet to include sufficient vessels of appropriate specification and survey. In addition, Maritime NZ is undertaking a review of the rules for the design, construction and equipment for New Zealands commercial vessels, including rules around a vessels stability, towing capacity and the lifesaving appliances it must carry. The proposed rules, currently under development, may require some changes to the safety equipment required to be carried on board and the stability and towing assessments required to operate beyond NM. Coastguard NZ is working with Maritime NZ as the proposals develop. . Changes in the location of incidentsChanges in recreational patterns because of factors such as lifestyle and climate changes, and urbanruralholiday movements, For example: Coastguard NZ is observing recreational sea fishing moving west in the Auckland region, due to overfishing in the Hauraki Gulf that combined with rising sea temperatures are impacting existing marine habitats. Surf Life Saving has identified the potential need for additional lifeguard services for at least beaches (in Auckland, Northland and other parts of New Zealand). Ongoing awareness and monitoring by organisations observing these changes, includes work to consider what this means for the configuration of their operations including assets and people. . Availability of premisesAvailability of premises for NGO clubs, units and groups to operate from, and replacement of owned buildings. In the case of Surf Life Saving this involves circa s communitybuilt buildings coming up for replacement in an environment where volunteers do not have the capacity to buildrebuild their own clubhouses. We also reflect on the vulnerability of these buildings due to climate change related civil emergencies and rising sea levels. Funding for NGO assets is discussed in Section Seven.Capacity constraints identified during the Review ASSETS SUPPORTING SERVICE DELIVERY Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue . Low probability high impact eventsWhen such an event occurs, shortcomings in the capacity available can be exposed given the cost involved in holding and managing capacity that is used very infrequently. Most frontline safety and search and rescue activity is considered minorroutine and current capacity allows these operations to be delivered successfully (though there will always be some risk). However, there is a trade off between holding capacity and the cost of that capacity for events which have a low probability of occurring but high impact. The near miss event involving the Kaitaki ferry across the Cook Strait on Saturday January highlights this dichotomy. Maritime NZ has work underway to explore existing capacities, and options involving Offshore Emergency Response Capability to respond to incidents involving stricken vessels at sea (for both search and rescue and marine pollution response). We also note that the Nationally Significant Search and Rescue Exercise Whakarauora Tangata sequenced over the next months will evaluate the current crossagency policies, procedures, capabilities, and capacity, to respond to a large scale nationally significant event. These types of events would stretch the availability of resources in the conduct of search and rescue. The Exercise is using several distinct issues of varying levels of complexity to test capacity. . Long range responsesThe search and rescue system has relatively few vessels and aircraft that are able to reach and respond to the far corners of the NZSRR. Given the remoteness of our NZSRR, vessels of opportunity play a critical role as does the ability to draw on support from neighbouring search and rescue regions. Maritime NZs capability building work in the Pacific, funded by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, supports search and rescue prevention and capability within the Pacific (which forms part of the NZSRR). ASSETS SUPPORTING SERVICE DELIVERY Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Recommendations : Specific capacity considerations Working together to prepare for future demand . Organisations across the search and rescue system have work underway to consider current and future demands in relation to their operations. However, there is no systemswide view on what future demand might look like, and opportunities to evaluate capacity (assets and people, and their configuration) required in response. . We recommend development of a System wide model (the Futures Model) to support the forecast future demand for frontline safety and search and rescue services. This would support Systemwide consideration of the capacity and the configuration of that capacity required in response (including specialist technical expertise). The development of the Futures Model should occur as soon as practicable through the NZSAR Secretariat. . Further work to identify the datasets available to support the development of the Futures Model will need to be explored, but should include at a minimum, population changes through the work of Statistics New Zealand and Manat Hauora, and regional climate modelling through NIWA and others. Asset management and planning . Asset management planning potentially impacts on asset sufficiency to deliver services. Underdeveloped or poorly executed asset management plans could increase the risk of not having the right assets for the job. From a systemswide assurance perspective, we considered what asset management planning expectations were required.. At an organisational level we conclude: For government organisations, accountability for asset management planning should be in accordance with the Public Service Act and with the organisations that own them. NGOs have strong incentives to manage their assets well, as they are essential to the running of their businesses and maintaining service operability. NGOs demonstrate a good understanding of the condition of their assets, and the processes required when determining asset renewal or replacement needs. . We note there is some variability regarding asset management maturity across the NGOs, and a need to invest in asset management information system capability (proportional to the value of the assets). A funding recommendation is included in Section Seven. . To ensure assurance of the capacity required across the System, we recommend work led by the System Steward (working with the Coordinating Authorities, NGOs, and other organisations as appropriate) includes: utilisation of the Future Model to evaluate capacity and their configuration required in response, and identification of the specialisttechnical capabilities the System requires ongoing access to including roles, responsibilities, assurance and funding arrangements, as appropriate. . The coordination and delivery of search and rescue services relies on a number of specialisttechnical capacities (including the capability). This includes over water e.g., air observers and direction finding to support search activities, rescue swimmers, and winch capabilities to affect a rescue at sea; and on land, e.g., longline capabilities in mountainous terrain, search dogs, and canyoning and caving. ASSETS SUPPORTING SERVICE DELIVERY Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Aviation operations . The role of helicopters in search and rescue has evolved over the past years, reflecting the benefits they provide to secure an effective and efficient search and rescue response. The rise in the use of personal locator beacons and advances in cell phone technology means searching is reduced. Today, helicopters are, generally speaking, the most frequently used asset. . The Coordinating Authorities utilise National Ambulance Sector (NASO) contracted helicopters (Tier ) and other commercial operators (Tier ). Approximately percent of helicopters tasked by the Coordinating Authorities are Tier . . At an operational level, and in discussion with the Coordinating Authorities, we observe: RCCNZs operational situational awareness (both of the tasked aviation asset and the person in distress) alongside an increased role in aviation coordination, due to the growth in search and rescue taskings through the advent of beacons and other technologies during and immediately following Cyclone Gabrielle in February , RCCNZ provided multiagency aviation coordination in response to requests for assistance helicopter operations are technical, specialised, challenging and costly, and elements to ensure effective, efficient, and safe tasking include: operational capabilities standards, systems, tasking procedures and processes to support short, medium and long duration aviation operations financial responsibility relating to cost capture and auditable use of taxpayer money for helicopter operations legal responsibilities of the Coordinating Authorities specifically, overlapping PCBU responsibilities relating to health and safety between the Coordinating Authorities and helicopter operators. This requires the parties to effectively demonstrate how safety risks between the parties are managed. . We note that the NZSAR Secretariat has work underway to develop service level standards and methodologies for helicopter operations, including implementation considerations, and we recommend they progress this as soon as practicable. . We also note work is underway between the NZSAR Secretariat and the Coordinating Authorities to explore a revised model for the tasking and deployment of aviation assets for search and rescue operations (including in civil defence emergencies). One option, for example, could involve the tasking of, and daytoday contractual management arrangements with aviation operators residing with RCCNZ. . NASO contracted helicopters are required to comply with the Ambulance New Zealand Aeromedical and Air Rescue Standard that prescribes pilot experience levels, pilotcrew training requirements, minimum aircraft equipmentconfiguration requirements and personal protective equipment. There are no specific standards for Tier operators outside those set through Civil Aviation Rules and through the application of Health and Safety at Work Act (HSWA) requirements. . Person conducting a business or undertaking. . For the avoidance of doubt, this work does not mean that Police would be removed as the principle Coordinating Authority for Category I search and rescue operations or abdicate its responsibilities for those operations. ASSETS SUPPORTING SERVICE DELIVERY Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue . Combined, we observe that the work outlined in paragraphs and above would provide appropriate verification and assurance that operators have the: capability to do what they say they can do, and appropriate systems and processes in place for identifying and managing risks including under health and safety legislation. . The capability and funding needs for the Coordinating Authorities, and other entities as appropriate, to give effect to the outcomes of this work will need to be fed into future funding rounds (discussed in Section Seven). Telecommunications . Communications technology is critical to organisations delivering frontline safety and search and rescue services. Network and telecommunications assets are spread across different organisations, resulting in systems risks, including disparate operating networks and procedures, aging infrastructure, frequency usage, ownership of fixed repeaters, and incompatible network settings. . In response we note work is currently underway through the NZSAR Secretariat to develop a Telecommunications Strategy. Work is also underway to modernise New Zealands public safety communications through a new digital communications network (the Public Safety Network). . We recommend that the NZSAR Council through the NZSAR Secretariat work with the Next Generation Critical Communications entity, responsible for developing the Public Safety Network, to ensure that the NGOs delivering search and rescue services are appropriately accounted for within it. Emergency management events . New andor increasing demands are evident, including the demands on search and rescue NGOs in civil emergencies (particularly flood response work). Work between the NZSAR Secretariat, NEMA, the Coordinating Authorities, Fire and Emergency and the NGOs is underway to develop a framework to formalise how NGOs operate during a non search and rescue event. . We recommend that the role of search and rescue and the NGOs must be considered as part of future emergency management event reviews, including reviews into the North Island severe weather events that may occur. . Future funding considerations for search and rescue should also be considered as part of these reviews. We note that search and rescue services have been used to respond to an operation where a declared emergency is in place, but there is no clear funding mechanism from central government to support these operations. Search and rescue services should be considered in central government funding mechanisms for services provided during a declared emergency. . Next Generation Critical Communications is a cross agency entity comprising a core Government agency (the Police), a Crown entity (Fire and Emergency) and two nongovernment organisations (St John and Wellington Free Ambulance), which together form the Emergency Services. These agencies have a common vision to develop critical communications capability for emergency services. SECTION HEADING HERE Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue A funding framework for the System
He taonga pounamu (he taonga kmehameha) te waitohu e whakaatu ana i te mahi tahi a tahi tngata e tutuki ai te whinga kotahi. E mea ana te whakatauk ahakoa iti, he iti pounamu he hirahira tonu mtau, ahakoa te triki.
He turukitanga Followup
Health and Air Pollution in New Zealand (HAPINZ) . report released
Health and Air Pollution in New Zealand (HAPINZ) report in progress
Heavy vehicle operator understanding report released
Hedlund J, Fell J. Persistent drinking drivers in the U.S. Des Plaines IL: Association for the Advancement of Automotive Medicine, : .
Hei Arataki aims to improve transport outcomes for Mori. Our icons are a visual expression of the strategic pou and guiding principles of Hei Arataki.
Hei Arataki has strategic pou, or pillars.
Hei Arataki is guided by principles.
Hei Arataki was designed by our Mori Strategy Working Group, with input from across the Ministry and other government stakeholders. The group considered a Ministrywide approach to working with and for Mori in a way that is underpinned by the principles of Te Triti o Waitangi and informed by a kaupapa Mori approach.
Hei Arataki Improving transport outcomes for Mori
Hei arataki Quick Guide
Helen Robertson Senior Adviser Ministry of Transport July
Helen White Manager, Mobility and Safety Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport . . . Ministers office to complete : Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events Comments Contacts Name Telephone First contact Helen White, Manager, Mobility and Safety Jacob McElwee, Principal Adviser, Mobility and Safety Dominic Cowell Smith, Adviser, Mobility and Safety
Helen White Manager, Mobility and Safety Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport . . . Ministers office to complete: Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events Comments
Help New Zealand make the shift to zero emissions vehicles
Helping the public understand the Agencys organisational health
Here are the four capitals that should be taken into considerati on. o Natural Capital This refers to all aspects of the natural environment needed to support life and human activity. o Social Capital This describes the norms and values that underpin society. o Human Capital This encompasses peoples skills, knowledge and physical and mental health. These are the things which enable people to participate fully in work, study, recreation and in society more broadly. FinancialPhysical Capital This includes things like houses, roads, buildings, hospitals, factories, equ ipment and vehicles. These are the things which make up the countrys physical and financial assets which have a direct role in supporting incomes and material living conditions. Direct text a c Investment management system and Better Business Cases https:treasury.govt.nzinformati onandservicesstate sector leadershipinve stment management system
Here are the proactive documents released on th of October .
Highlevel results are summarized in the graphs below for the three offending categories, with more details presented in subsequent sections. Significant differences between AIO and Matched comparison offenders is indicated as follows: significant at p. significant at p. significant at p.
Hilary Penman Manager , Accountability Correspondence
Hilary Penman Manager , Accountability and Correspondence
Hilary Penman Manager , Ministerial Services
Hilary Penman Manager , Ministerial and Executive Services
Hilary Penman Manager , Ministerial and Executive Services k, MINISTRX. OF TRANSPORT p TE MANATU WAKA transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of
Hilary Penman Manager, Ministerial Services .. . . .. . Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport . . . Ministers office to complete : Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events Comments
Historically, innovations in transport have had significant effects on economic growth. For example, in New Zealand, railways opened up new areas of the country for the primary industries, refrigerated container shipping provided us with access to new international markets, and passenger planes provided the basis for a thriving tourist industry. Transport can also have a significant impact on the location of economic activity. The Auckland Harbour Bridge is a good example of this, as it opened up significant opportunities for economic development and activity north of central Auckland.
Holly Walker Manager, Environment and Emissions Strategy Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport . . . Ministers office to complete : Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events Comments
Holly Walker Manager, Environment and Emissions Strategy Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport . . . Ministers office to complete : Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events Comments Contacts Name Telephone First contact Holly Walker, Manager, Environment and Emissions Strategy
Hon Brooke van VeldenOfficials Committee for CBC
Hon Chris Bishop Minister of Transport
Hon DAVID PARKER , Minister of Transport RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Hon Grant Robertson Hon Michael Wood Minister of Finance Minister of Transport
Hon Grant Robertson Minister of Finance . . . Hon Kieran McAnulty Acting Minister of Transport . . .
Hon Grant Robertson Minister of Finance . . . Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport . . .
Hon Grant Robertson Minister of Finance Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport ylqdcxs RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E tyqdejwy Cabinet Economic Development Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Reallocation of Northern Pathway Funding to the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements
Hon James Meager Associate Minister of Transport
Hon Ki eran McAnulty Acting Minister of Transport . . .
Hon Kiri Allan Associate Minister of Transport
Hon Kiri Allan Associate Minister of Transport . . . Minister Wood Minister Allan note that the financial recommendations for Budget require Transport Ministers to determine a specified amount for the Civil Aviation Authority in i.e., the maximum amount of expenditure that the entity is eligible for in , including the level of funding it can receive from its Protection of Transport Sector Agency Core Functions appropriation NA NA agree that the specified amount for the Civil Aviation Authority in should be .m Yes No Yes No
Hon Kiri Allan Associate Minister of Transport Executive Offices Parliament Buildings WELLINGTON
Hon Megan Woods Minister of Housing . . . Ministers office to complete : Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events
Hon Michael Wood Hon Grant Robertson Minister of Transport Minister of Finance
Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport
Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Clean Car Sector Leadership Group
Hon Michael Wood Robyn Smith Minister of Transport Pou Turuki, Te Khui Tangata Deputy Chief Executive, Corporate Services
Hon Michael Wood has today announced the appointment of Honourable Dame Fran Wilde as Chair and both Lucy Tukua and Leigh Auton as Members of the Auckland Light Rail (ALR) Board.
Hon Nicola Willis (Chair)
Hon Nicola Willis Minister of Finance . . . Hon Chris Bishop Minister of Housing . . . s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of AUCKLAND LIGHT RAIL LAND DISPOSAL Background In December , as part of the day plan, Cabinet agreed to discontinue the Auckland Light Rail project. Auckland Light Rail Limited (ALRL) has now been reduced to a holding company with minimal functions and no permanent staff. It cannot be fully disestablished until the property (the Kiwi Bacon building) on New North Road in Kingsland has been disposed. ALRLs operating costs are covered by revenue from the landholding. In May (OC refers), Shareholding Ministers made decisions on a range of matters on ALRL which were then communicated to the ALRL Board. These decisions included ALRL working with NZTA and Auckland Council on whether the Kiwi Bacon building could be of use for another transport project, given its strategic importance and potential to unlock urban regeneration due to the proximity to the City Rail Link Maungawhau station and proposed transport paths. It was noted that if no use can be found then the land should be placed on the open market for sale. The Kiwi Bacon b uilding was acquired via the Strategic Land Acquisition appropriation rather than the Public Works Act (PWA). As a result, PWA obligations in relation to offer back to previous land owners, and right of first refusal to iwi, before land is released for sale on the open market, are not required to be satisfied. Proposal for l and swap between NZTA and Auckland Council The Ministry has been working with ALRL, NZTA, and Auckland Council Eke Panuku since you wrote to the ALRL Board requesting they explore opportunities to support the North West Rapid Transit Project. Consultation with NZTA in relation to acquiring the Kiwi Bacon building (OC refers ) resulted in an initial determination by NZTA that the Kiwi Bacon building was not required for the North W est Rapid T ransit project and therefore NZTA has no direct interest in the land. However, the Kiwi Bacon building is of interest to Auckland Council as a longterm urbanregeneration opportunity and the council owns several land parcels that are of interest to NZTA for the North W est Rapid T ransit project. This gave rise to a proposal for NZTA to acquire the Kiwi Bacon site under the PWA with the expectation of exchange, with Auckland Council, for property that is required for a Public Work. Both agencies have been working together since to identify specific land parcels that could be used for this exchange. NZTA acquiring the Kiwi Bacon building under the PWA Land purchased by NZTA becomes land owned by the Crown. Crown land is only able to be acquired under the PWA framework. There are separate processes within the PWA for where the land acquisition is by agreement, under compulsion, or RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of transferred from other Crown agencies. As the Kiwi Bacon building was not purchased by ALRL under the PWA in the first instance, any sale to NZTA is not a Crown toCrown transfer. In this instance it would be a strategic purchase by NZTA, likely to be by agreement under s of the PWA, and therefore NZTA need to satisfy LINZ that the land is required by NZTA for future transport projects. NZTA will also need Board approval before seeking LINZ approval to the acquisition. N ZTA acquisition will enable the land to be used in future transport projects and avoids the risk of the property needing to be reacquired at a higher price at later stage. We expect NZTA to request drawdown of funding from the GPS on Land Tr ansport tagged contingency for the North W est Rapid Transit project. NZTA Board approval to commence negotiation for this acquisition will be sought on December . A timeline and high level process for acquisition is detailed in Annex Two. We unders tand that the NZTA Board are unlikely to approve acquisition of the Kiwi Bacon building without some form of binding agreement that the sale of Auckland Council owned land will proceed as they only have a strategic interest in the Kiwi Bacon building. Mayor Brown has now written a letter to the ALRL Board confirming inprinciple agreement to investigate further (Annex One refers) ; however , the two parties signing a binding agreement is the key risk in the process proceeding. Further advice received from Auckland Council now suggests the approval process may take until September , significantly longer than the initial six months advised, given the number of governance groups that require consultation (Annex Two refers). Sale on the open market We now consider that a sale on the open market is likely to be the fastest path to disposal and therefore enabling ALRL to be disestablished. Estimates from ALRL is that this process will take approximately six months. An outline of key milestones for an open market sale is set out in Annex Three. I f this is Ministers preferred disposal method, we recommend that the Minister of Transport discusses this intent with the Mayor of Auckland before proceeding to provide ALRL with directions . We note that Auckland Council has separately indicated a potential interest in purchasing the property directly from ALRL. You may wish to discuss this option directly with the Mayor. As noted above, while we anticipate this process will be the fastest, the opportunity for the Council to lead an urban regeneration development in this area will be foregone unless the Council successfully tenders to acquire the property. Another consideration is that a sale on the open market will be subject to commercial agency fees (usually . of the sale price). Notwithstanding the above issues, sale on the open market now may be the fastest and most direct path to dispose of the land. It is now the Ministry s preferred approach given the uncertainty and possible delays that will arise with the land swap transaction between NZTA and Auckland Council. Sale of the Kiwi Bacon building on the open market now to a party other than NZTA, will not compromise NZTAs process to acquire lands owned by Auckland Council RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of required for the North W est Rapid Transit project. The implication is that if a party requires the Kiwi Bacon building for a future public work, this will need to be reacquired at that time. Financial implications We expect, whether via acquisition under the PWA or sale on the open market, an impairment of the asset will be required due to the softer commercial property market in Auckland since purchase. However, ALRL recently commissioned a valuation report that indicated the market value of the property was . million compared with the million purchase price. This valuation suggests the market has strengthened somew hat as previous indications were for a more significant drop of between million. ALRL rec ognised an impairment loss of . million in their annual report to account for the drop in value of the property and to reflect their intention to dispose of it within the next financial year. The acquisition by NZTA of the Kiwi Bacon building would effectively transfer the property to NZTAs balance sheet. As noted above, approval to draw down capital for this acquisition would be requested separately by NZTA and is expected to be from the GPS on Land Transport tagged contingency.
Hon Simeon Brown Action required by:
Hon Simeon Brown Minister for Transport RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Out of Scope Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Transport
Hon Tracey Martin WRLC Independent Chair Experienced past Member of Parliament (including former Minister for Children, Seniors, Internal Affairs and Associate Minister of Education) and board member. Daran Ponter Chair , Greater Wellington Regional Council Daran has been Chair of GWRC since Oct . He served for one term from and was re elected in .
Horizons Regional Council
Household Travel Analysis
Household Travel Survey
Household Travel Survey Insights
Household Travel Survey methodology
Household Travel Survey to a day online travel diary and run
Household travel in New Zealand under COVID alert levels (Transport Knowledge Hub Webinar series)
Household travel: Age and purpose travel by residents onwards
Household travel: Age groups travel by residents onwards
Household travel: Ethnicity travel by residents onwards
Household travel: Gender and purpose travel by residents onwards
Household travel: Gender travel by residents onwards
Household travel: Main urban areas travel by residents onwards
Household travel: Mode and purpose travel by residents onwards
Household travel: New Zealand Deprivation Index travel by residents onwards
Household travel: Regions travel by residents onwards
Households are randomly selected around the country with everyone in the household is asked to take part. The survey methodology includes:
Households were randomly selected around the country with everyone in the household asked to take part. The survey methodology included:
Households were randomly selected with travel recorded for all members of the household over the age of .
Households were randomly selected with travel recorded for all members of the household over the age of . The survey methodology included:
Houwing , S. (). Alcohol interlock and drink driving rehabilitation in the European Union: Best practice and guidelines for Member Strates. Brussels, European Transport Safety Council.
How New Zealanders Travel report
How do I provide feedback
How does the Emissions Reduction Plan impact the GPS Reducing transport emissions is critical for reaching New Zealands net zero emissions target by . In , transport was responsible for percent of carbon emissions and percent of New Zealands total gross emissions, with most of these emissions coming from light vehicles (eg, cars) with internal combustion engines. Under the Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP), we need to reduce transport emissions by percent (from levels) by and reach net zero emissions by . Reducing emissions is a strategic priority of the draft GPS . The draft GPS outlines the Ministers expectations for Waka Kotahi to manage the risk that NLTF investment conflicts with emissions reductions objectives. Why is railcoastal shipping being funded by road users Investment from the NLTF will help make rail and coastal shipping a more competitive way of carrying freight. This should help reduce the number of trucks on the roads. Road users will also benefit from reduced emissions, more resilient freight options, safer roads with fewer trucks and less damage to roads.
How important was the NLTF for achieving change Having new explicit mode shift promoting activity classes and funding enabled change, but: Small margins to play with, given what was already committed and contracted. NLTF was only one part of the overall transport dollar.
How land transport is funded
How long before we might see a change in the outcomes Five to ten years to see changes in mode shift, especially for changing networks complex programmes. It is not just getting the intervention funded and built, the indicators have lags in reporting.
How much did GPS help negotiations for mode shift projects There was more opportunity for mode shift initiatives in bigger cities, but Still constrained to projects rather than programme scale change. Council share funding restrictions (as part of wider council spend) played a significant role in what can be put forward. Smaller councils are restricted by the type of mode shift projects they could put forward what works in a metro setting may not be useful or relevant in a provincial or rural setting. Small councils were constrained a lower ratepayer base to pay for maintaining a relatively large road network. Improved use of data and evidence could reduce the (relative) invisibility of active and public transport, the impact of the limited evidence base for effective mode shift promoting interventions because the type of project . STUD Y PHASES
How much funding is forecast under the draft GPS The draft GPS signals the Governments transport priorities and guides investment in land transport of billion over a year period. This is made up of billion from the NLTF per annum, and is supported by . billion from local government, each year. In addition to this the Government has committed a further billion Crown funding over the next decade.
How should equity considerations be included in transport policy and planning
How should we fund the transport system in the future
How the Auckland region is defined
How the data can be used by central and local government
How the increases affected RUC
How the report is structured
How the visible smoke test works
How this fits with our other work
How to access any personal
How we contribute to major cross government initiatives The transport system contributes to New Zealands economic development and social wellbeing, and it interacts with most parts of the economy and society on a daily basis. This means that the Ministry is engaged in several government wide initiatives to ensure that the role of transport is appropriately taken into account through other agencies policy development processes. Key examples of our cross government engagement are: Climate change Resource Management Act reforms Auckland Transport Alignment Project Engagement with local government.
How we have used Taking flight
How will the Government fund the investments outlined in GPS Investments in GPS will be funded from the NLTF, Crown grants, a Crown loan and private finance. The Government recognises increasing pressure on the NLTF and the need to increase revenue. GPS proposes to do this from a range of sources, including: Increasing the annual licensing fee component of Motor Vehicle Registration (MVR) by in January and a further in January . Returning to the previous practice of regular FEDRUC increases from January . an increase of cents per litre in January , a further six cents in January , followed by a four cent per litre annual increase starting in January . A Crown grant of . billion and Crown loan of . billion. The final GPS also now includes an additional billion in Budget for accelerating key transport projects over the coming years including Roads of National Significance and the Northwest Rapid Transit public transport project. The Government is aware of the costofliving crisis experienced by New Zealanders and is delivering on its commitment to not increase fuel taxes this term.
How will the Government fund the investments outlined in the draft GPS Investments in the draft GPS will be funded from the NLTF, direct Crown grants and private finance. The NLTF funds transport projects, often with co investment from local government for projects that benefit their communities. The NLTF is largely made up of revenue from Fuel Excise Duty (FED) and Road User Charges (RUC) . Other sources of NLTF revenue include motor vehicle registration and licensing fees , the sale of surplus land and property, road tolls and freight rail track user charges . The draft GPS proposes that additional Crown f unding and financing be injected into the NLTF over . Additional funding and financing approaches will also be developed and utilised to meet our transport investment needs. The first step of this is already underway, with light electric vehicles required to pay road user charges (RUC) from April . The next steps include requiring all road vehicles to move from fuel excise duty (FED) to road user charges (RUC) . The Government expect s NZTA and the Ministry of Transport will work together to examine how alternative funding and financing arrangements could be used for all new major transport infrastructure projects such as tolling, time of use charging, equity finance and value capture . How does the GPS guide how projects are fund ed The GPS sets the strategic direction and funding allocation s for land transport investment s, and provides guidance on how to invest the NLTF . NZTA has responsibility for which projects or investm ents receive funding through the development of the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) , which gives effect to the GPS . To be considered for funding from the NLTF, an activity or transport project needs to be referenced in a Regional Land Transport Plan (RLTP) . RLTPs are developed by local authorities , identify investment priorities at a regional level and must be consistent with the GPS. Why is the GPS needed Transport investments have long lead times, high costs and leave long legacies. Transport planning and investment need to be guided by a long term strategic approach; with a clear understanding of what outcomes the Government wants . The GPS influences decisions on how money will be invested and guides local government and NZTA on the type of activities that should be considered for inclusion in RLTPs and the NLTP. When will GPS take effect GPS will take effect from July , at which point it replaces the previous GPS (GPS ). What if a draft RLTP is developed before the GPS was released Some councils may have developed their draft RLTP and commenced public consultation on their RLTPs before the draft GPS was released. Others may choose to make changes to their draft RLTPs and go through another round of consultation to improve their alignment with the GPS. Ultimately , these are decisions for Regional Transport Committees (RTCs) to make. To be considered for funding from the NLTF, an activity or transport project needs to be referenced in a RLTP , and RLTPs and must be consistent with the GPS. Releasing the final GPS by June provides councils time to make amendments to improve alignment with the GPS. What has changed since GPS A lot has changed since both GPS and the previous Governments draft GPS that was released for consultation before the election. Key areas of focus in the draft GPS include : Four new strategic priorities: o economic growth and productivity ( this priority represents the overarching objective of the GPS ) o increased maintenance and resilience o safety o value for money. Reintroducing the successful Roads of National Significance programme , which was started under the previous National Government in . Increasing investment in road maintenance, with a focus on proactive management of road condition s to reduce the risk of pot holes . Progressing different funding and financ ing tools that will play a greater role in infrastructure delivery . Increasing levels of enforcement , including roadside alcohol testing , begin ning roadside oral fluid testing for drug use , and reviewing fines for traffic offences alongside a wider regulatory programme to improve vehicle standard s. Enhancing the focus on achieving better value for money , performance and efficiency in how transport investments are managed . Leveraging technology and innovation as critical enablers for how transport is invested in in future . Outcome of Governments investment in land transport What are the strategic priorities in the draft GPS The outcome s the Government wants to achieve from NLTF investment are outlined via a set of strategic priorities. These are: economic growth and productivity increas ed maintenance and resilience safety value for money . The economic growth and productivity strategic priority is the overarching objective of the draft GPS this reflects the significant role that quality transport connections will play in supporting New Zealands economic growth and productivity in the coming years. The other strategic priorities of increased maintenance and resilience , safety , and value for money , are all equally weighted and support the overarching objective of economic growth and productivity. What specific outcomes does the Government expect will be achieved by the draft GPS The NLTP and corresponding RLTPs are expected to prioritise projects and activities that progress the GPS priorities. In doing this, the focus should be on achieving the following impacts:
How will the Government fund the major transport projects outlined in GPS Delivering the Roads of National Significance and major public transport projects will require the use of alternative delivery models, and a broader range of funding options and financing models. The Government expects Public Private Partnerships (PPPs), and other new and innovative funding and financing options will be considered for all major projects.
How will the draft GPS ensure value for money The draft GPS outlines how value for money should be considered, looking beyond the traditional economic value to the standards, practices, capabilities and strategic alignment of investment. A performance framework will be established to support monitoring of value for money.
How will the draft GPS support the efficient movement of freight The draft GPS has been developed alongside the draft Freight and Supply Chain Strategy and the New Zealand Rail Plan. In addition, the ERP has a number of actions relating to decarbonising the freight sector including providing funding to support the freight sector to purchase zero and low emissions trucks.
How you can support the MetService through the implementation of the Hau Nuku review The Hau Nuku review is being led by MBIE and Treasury with Ministers Paul Goldsmith and Judith Collins as decision making Ministers. As per your delegation, you hold the contract between the Minister of Transport and the MetService. Your interests in the Hau Nuku review will be in ensuring the MetService continues to deliver the weather forecasting services in scope of this contract. You can influence decisions about the MetService and NIWA through conversations with your colleagues, especially with Ministers Goldsmith and Collins. We recommend that you focus these discussions with your colleagues on matters that impact on the MetServices ability to deliver its contracted services.
However, it is important to note that the distinction between light passenger vehicles and light commercial vehicles is based on the (body) type of the vehicle, not its ownership or use. Both light passenger vehicles and light commercial vehicles may be owned and used by private households or commercial enterprises.
Huia Puketapu Trustee, Port Nicholson Block Settlement Trust Experienced in education delivery, management, leadership, advi sing, governance, trade via NZ Army and the fashion industry. Active doer for her iwi.
HurunuiKaikura Earthquakes Recovery (Coastal Route and Other Matters) Order
HurunuiKaikura Earthquakes Recovery Order in Council signed
Hyphens are used to join:
Hkina te Kohupara discussion document released
Hkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by
I (the Minister) am concerned that there are currently shortcomings in these underpinning factors that limit our ability to drive positive outcomes across the system. These include: Inconsistent data and inputs being used across transport modes. Outofand narrow values being used in costbenefit analysis. A lack of appropriate evaluation processes.
I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E In Confidence Office of the Minister of Transport Cabinet Economic Policy Committee
I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C EAppointment In Confidence Office of the Minister of Transport Chair, Cabinet Appointments and Honours Committee AUCKLAND LIGHT RAIL BOARD: APPOINTMENT OF CHAIR AND MEMBERS Proposal On behalf of the Minister of Finance, Minister of Housing and myself as Sponsors of the Auckland Light Rail Project, this paper outlines our intention to appoint the following individuals to the Auckland Light Rail Board for terms commencing from the of appointment until June : . Honourable Dame Frances (Fran) Wilde as member and Chair; and . Lucy Tukua and Leigh Auton as members. Background Auckland Light Rail (ALR) will be New Zealands largest and most complex infrastructure project. It is the first spine of a wider rapid transit network for Auckland, bringing farreaching benefits to communities, increasing access across the region and catalysing urban development opportunities across the corridor. The ALR Establishment Unit was set up in March , governed by representatives from central government (the Ministry of Transport, Ministry of Housing and Urban Development, The Treasury, Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency and Kinga Ora ), Auckland local government (Auckland Councillors, Auckland local boards, Auckland Council and Auckland Transport), and mana whenua. In December , the ALR Establishment Unit recommended a preferred route and mode, which Cabinet agreed to take forward into the detailed planning phase, (estimated to be around two years) to inform a final investment decision (CAB MIN ) . Cabinet also agreed that the Minister of Transport, Minister of Finance and Minister of Housing would act as Sponsor Ministers, alongside representation from Auckland Council and mana whenua, and take decisions setting up the governance arrangements in consultation with Auckland Council and mana whenua. The Government intends to appoint a skillsbased board (the ALR Board) to transition from the current representative board. The ALR Board will drive the detailed planning phase and transition the project through to a formal legal entity by the end of . That entity will be responsible for overseeing the completion of the detailed planning and the delivery of the project following a final investment decision. The ALR Board will endure through the phases of the project, continuing to be the responsible board once the new legal entity is created. The ALR Board is established as a Ministerial Advisory Committee in accordance with Te Kawa Mataahos Mach inery of Government guidance. This structure enables consideration of issues across multiple portfolios. As Sponsors, we have agreed in principle that the ALR Board will consist of between five and seven members, including a Chair. ghqygg PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Comment The Sponsor Ministers intend to make three priority appointments to the ALR Board through this paper, and the remaining appointments in the third quarter of . These appointments were prioritised to ensure that continuity of knowledge exists between the two Boards, and key leadership roles were identified early in this important period of work . It enables a quorum for decision making, which will then be finalised in the Terms of Reference that Sponsoring Ministers have been delegated to approve as per recommendation in CABMIN . A staggered appointments process also enables the incoming Chair to consider the best direction for the ALR Board and the competencies needed for the remaining member positions to achieve that vision. An Organisation Form is attached, setting out the overall structure and membership of the Board, as well as the prospective appointees CVs. The Chair s role The competencies and attributes for the Chairs role are different from, and in many respects more demanding than, other Crown delivery entit y chairs. The Chair will be the public face of the ALR Project in local communities and will need to confidently navigate issues in the three very different political environments of central government, Auckland, and iwi in Tmaki Makaurau. The Chair must be capable of fronting issues and challenges in each of these spheres . Their ability to personally demonstrate leadership and accountability for the impacts of the ALR Boards decisions will be necessary to maintain the P rojects c redibility and social license throughout its lifecycle. In addition, the Chair must be able to demonstrate an appreciation of the types of financial, technical, commercial or legal issues, which could be expected to arise from designing and delivering a project of this nature. The Chair will also be critical in creating an environment for the ALR Board to make effective decisions. The Chair will also be the Senior Responsible Officer (SRO) for the ALR Project . The SRO is ultimately accountable for the delivery of the project and for ensuring the project meets its objectives, delivers the projected outcomes, and realises the required benefits. Hon Dame Frances (Fran) Wilde (Chair) We intend to appoint Hon Dame Wilde as Chair of the ALR Board. Hon Dame Wilde is a highly experienced director who has served as a Cabinet Minister, Mayor, and in senior governance roles on many significant central and local government boards. Her diverse range of experiences in governance, politics, community involvement, working with iwi, and delivering transport and urban development outcomes meet the requirements we are seeking from the ALR Board Chair. Member roles Members of the ALR Board need to have a range of technical, policy, commercial and social attributes. Required competencies include significant governance experience of projects of scale and complexity, deep understanding of Te ao Mori, Te Tiriti o Waitangi and engagement with mana whenua and mataawaka in Tmaki Makaurau, and the ability to operate collaboratively and navigate a politicised environment. ghqygg PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Lucy Tukua (Member) We intend to appoint Lucy Tukua as a member of the ALR Board. Ms Tukua is an experienced director and leader, who is currently the Technical Director of Regenerative Outcomes Kaihaut Whakarito at Mott M acDonald. She has been heavily involved with driving and advocating for positive change with regards to kaupapa Mori for her whanau, iwi and Tmaki Makaurau. Ms Tukua offers significant experience in both serving as mana whenua and working closely with mana whenua, communities and Treaty Partners to improve outcomes across Tmaki Makaurau. Her experiences include working to establish governance and operations for mana whenua partnership at Eke Panuku, and leading a number of regeneration projects; chairing mana whenua forums; and working with a wide range of iwi to deliver plans and programmes. The ALR Board will benefit from Ms Tukuas experience and relationships in working with mana whenua in Tmaki Makaurau. While Ms Tukua is not appointed to represent mana whenua in Tmaki Makaurau (mana whenua will be represented alongside the Crown and Auckland Council as project Sponsors), her appointment will ensure te ao Mori is embedded into the Board from its inception. Leigh Auton (Member) We intend to appoint Leigh Auton as a member of the ALR Board. Mr Auton is the current Independent Chair of the ALR Establishment Unit Board. He is also founding Director of Auton Associates Ltd , Chair of the Papakura Kootuitui Trust, and Deputy Chair of Ako Mttupu: Teach First NZ . Mr Auton has extensive local government experience with a particular background in planning, infrastructure and transport. He has been involved in issues at natio nal, regional and local levels in New Zealand, and has had significant engagement with iwi over a number of decades. He was the Chief Executive of Manukau City Council, and has been either a chair, director or trustee for many other organisations, including Auckland Council Property Ltd, Recovery Solutions Group Trust, Emerge Aotearoa, Ng puhi Asset Holding Company and its subsidiaries, Sistema Aotearoa and Housing New Zealand. Mr Autons appointment will provide continuity from the ALR Establishment Unit Board. The ALR Board will benefit from his experience in governance, urban design and infrastructure planning, local government and community engagement. Representativeness of appointments On behalf of the Sponsor Ministers for the ALR Project, I am satisfied the se initial appointments provide a strong base for a wellbalanced ALR Board in terms of gender, age, ethnicity and geographic representation, and the appropriate mix of skills and experience. Two of the three appointees are female, while Ms Tukua identifies as NZ Mori (Ngti Paoa, Ngti Whanaunga, Ngti Karewa, Ngti Tahinga ) and Mr Auton identified as both NZ European and NZ Mori (Te Hikutu, Ngpuhi) .
I N C O N F I D E N C E The Land Transport (Road User ) Amendment Rule (the Amendment
I N C O N F I D E N C E xxfpyy
I N C O N F I D E N C E xxfpyy
I N C O N F I D E N C E ygffdk
I N C O N F I D E N C E note that the Civil Aviation (Offences) Regulations come into force on April
I N C O N F I D E N C E . A new offence has been added for rule .(bb) (relating to private pilot
I N C O N F I D E N C E umdw
I N C O N F I D E N C E foddii
I N C O N F I D E N C E As the Land Transport Management (Regional Transport Committees)
I N C O N F I D E N C E Impact Analysis
I N C O N F I D E N C E In Confidence
I N C O N F I D E N C E Publicity
I N C O N F I D E N C Em increase(decrease)
I N C O N F I D E N C EOffice of the Minister of Transport
I also wish to acknowledge the ongoing work you, your Boards and organisations, will continue to do going forward as we continue to recover from severe weather events, and prepare the system.
I am circulating for your information documents that were mentioned at the most recentmeeting of NZTAMoT managers. Below is a brief explanation about each document.
I am passionate about creating and implementing strategy into our Ministry.
I am pleas ed to see that the Board intends to undertake a value for money review of the Agencys operational budget. I encourage the Agency to work with the Ministry of Transport on developing the terms of reference and completing the review and I look forward to r eceiving a briefing on the conclusions reached.
I am requesting information about the m allocated by the previous government in March for the Public Transport Futures programme in tautahi Christchurch. I would like information about where that funding was held after it was allocatedannounced i e by NZTA or Treasury and any cabinet papers that refer to the decision to allocate the funding. I would also like any papers that relate to the funding or any advice from NZTA about it to the you and any cabinet papers that rescind the decision to allocate the funding to PT Futures or advice on what to do with the allocation to the current government. If the funding has been reallocated, please tell me what it has been allocated to. If it is still allocated for the PT Futures project, where is it held and what process is needed to access it If you do not hold this information please pass it to the relevant authority that does as appropriate.
I am resending the email below as MFE has informed me that there were some tangata whenua groups missed from the original email. Aroha mai if this is the second time you are receiving this email.
I am the main contact for Te Aitanga a Mahaki. You know that.
I am therefore refusing parts two and three of your request under section (d) of the Act as the information is publicly available. You have the right to seek an investigation and review of this response by the Ombudsman, in accordance with section () of the Act. The relevant details can be found on the Ombudsmans website www.ombudsman.parliament.nz
I am therefore refusing your request under section (g) of the Act as that information is not held by the Ministry. I note that NZTA will respond separately to the other parts of your request. For further information on the approval of alcohol interlock devices , the Ministry has previously released briefings regarding the approval of new devices here (pages ): https:www.transport.govt.nzassetsUploadsRequestForBriefingsFromApril Part.pdf
I am very passionate about business travel and how we intertwine the need to reduce our emissions whilst retaining the capability to deliver on so many issues that are critical to the success of the transport sector. A small organisation where everyone matters, knowing almost everyone individually in the organisation (they have to endure my building tours) is a big driver for me. I am here to ensure everyone feels they have the tools and support they need to succeed.
I am writing to accept your resignation from the Clean Car Sector Leadership Group and to thank you for your valuable contributions, both to the group, and more broadly as part of your role as Chief Executive Officer at MIA.
I am writing to invite the MIA to nominate a new member to be a part of the Clean Car Sector Leadership Group (CCSLG). The MIA has a critical role in the motor industry , meaning that your organisation can offe r contributions that would be invaluable to the development of the Governments clean car policies.
I appreciate the hard work that your organisation has put into the drafting of this years SPE. I can confirm that I do not have any direct comments to raise in respect of your SPE but would like to thank you for your ongoing and proactive engagement during our regular meetings.
I had a really good krero with Liz a few weeks ago to understand more of the hau kinga landscape of Pneke and treaty settlement space noting the importance of the CBD and Port space to Te Atiawa and Taranaki Whnui and others.
I have attached a draft paper to the Cabinet Legislation Committee (LEG) and Amendment Order for your consideration that would give effect to this recommendation. Treasury officials have also been consulted on the draft paper and no substantial issues were raised.
I have been advised that arrangements need to be made to reassign Ministerial responsibility for the Kiwi Share in Air New Zealand Limited. The Kiwi Share in Air New Zealand is a single special rights convertible preference share issued to the Crown. It is primarily intended to give the Government the ability to maintain substantial ownership and effective control of the airline in New Zealand. The Air New Zealand Constitution provides that any Minister may from time to time give written notice to the Company Secretary of the name of the person who may exercise the rights and powers of the Kiwi Shareholder. At present that person is MP Phil Twyford , the previous Minister of Transport. Since , the normal practice has been for the Minister of Transport to be the person assigned the rights and responsibilities of the Kiwi Shareholder.
I have copied in the key people of each of these groups and have included my Chair Pehimana Brown for Te Aitanga a Mahaki instead of Dr Ian Ruru who led a lot of the activities at the time. So the people copied in are:
I hope this is helpful, please do keep in touch if you have any further ptai.
I joined Te Manat Waka in in the Data and Analytics team. We work with everyone from policymakers within the Ministry to analysts in other organisations to the wider public. We dont just report on transport statistics we undertake research and analysis of complex and sensitive issues to bring evidence and insights into transport decisions.
I look forward to your response.
I note that good progress is being made overall towards delivery of the Knowledge Transfer System project. I look forward to seeing how this eads to wider organisational improvements and continued achievement of your strategic intentions. I also acknowledge the decision to scale the changes to the Commissions performance measures following the increased funding towards the Commissions investigati ve function, and wish the Commission well with its work in this area. As always, the insights provided by TAIC are highly valued and much appreciated. I look forward to continuing to work with you to improve transport outcomes for New Zealanders. Yours sincerely
I r efer to your email dated March , requesting the following under the Official Information Act (the Act):
I raro i te manaakitanga nui me ng whakaaro pai ki a koutou i tenei wa puku mahi o mtou o te ao mori.
I recently returned to places I used to call home in London Paris. If the ability to be the other side of the world in a day wasnt enough to highlight the intrinsic value of transport then the strike action on London rail services certainly was.
I recommend that the Cabinet Legislation Committee:
I ref er to your email dated March , requesting the following under the Official Information Act (the Act) :
I refe r to your Official Information Act (the Act) request received on June requesting the following information:
I refer to y our email dated April , requesting the following under the Official Information Act (the Act): I wish to seek all correspondence that the Ministry of Transport has sent to, andor received from, local councils, regarding the Government Policy Statement which is currently being developed.
I refer to your email dated December , requesting the following under the Official Information Act (the Act):
I refer to your email dated November , requesting the following under the Official Information Act (the Act):
I refer to your email dated January , requesting the following under the Official Information Act (the Act):
I refer to your email dated January , requesting the following under the Official Information Act (the Act):
I refer to your email dated January , requesting the following under the Official Information Act (the Act):
I refer to your email dated July requesting the following under the Official Information Act (the Act):
I refer to your email to Minister Brown dated January in which you requested the following information under the Official Information Act (the Act):
I refer to your emailletter dated July , requesting the following under the Official Information Act (the Act):
I refer to your emailletter dated December requesting the following under the Official Information Act (the Act):
I refer to your emailletter dated February , requesting the following documents under the Official Information Act (the Act):
I refer to your two Official Information Act (the Act) requests received on April and May requesting the following information:
I started at Te Manat Waka in as a Facilities Coordinator in the Business Support Team. I was drawn to the role for a number of reasons including the great waterfront location (did a walkaround the premises before hitting the submit button), remaining in the transport family and the smaller size of the organisation.
I suspect you will both be busy at He Mori Ahau today, but I wanted to give you both this email to introduce Rebecca and Oscar who are our Te Manat Waka (MoT) team working on the Port Permit extension project (info email attached).
I understand the Agency has increasingly managed a b roader work programme over recent years, Because of this, developing a performance framework supported by relevant and informative performance measures can be a challenging task. Consistent with the Governments priorities and my Letter of Expectations, I would like you to consolidate your performance framework and strengthen performance measures so they can easily be understood by the public and are outcomes focused.
I want to clarify the projects and programmes that are part of the PMO monthly reports.
I will touch base with the other Iwi CEs and look to make a formal submission on this issue but would appreciate seeing and inputting to the final advice that goes from MOT and MFE based on this feedback. I acknowledged that you may advocate something but ultimately it is Ministers who determine these matters.
I wish the Agency the best for the upcoming year As the responsible Minister, I want the Agency to be clear on its priorities and how it will achieve them, so that the public can be confident the Agency is well placed to meet future challenges . I look forward to a successful year ahead.
I wish you all the best in your retirement.
I would greatly appreciate your or your organisations participation on this forum. Please let me know by return email who you wish to represent MIA on the group . Te Manat Waka will follow up shortly with dates and arrangements for the upcomin g meetings.
I would like the SPE to be clear on the key priorities for the Agency in . This will improve transparency around the Agencys work programme and provide a basis to assess performance.
I would like the SPE to outline the A gencys objectives for the development of the organisation and investment in capability for the year ahead. This will help the public better understand how the Agencys resources will be efficiently and effectively utilised to improve services.
I, as AuditorGeneral, and my appointed auditors, accept no responsibility for any changes that may have occurred or may occur to financial statements audited by us in regard to the presentation of those financial statements on this website.
IAF document: https:www.nzta.govt.nzpl anningand investmentnational land transport programmeinvestment assessment framework nltp
ICAO has a particular focus on safety and security, although en vironmental issues have been of
ICAO is a UN technical agency that sets standards and global norms for safe, secure civil aviation.
IN CONFIDENCE series reform engagement One of Maritime NZs priorities is a multi year project to update and simplify the series rules that relate to the design, construction, and equipment of our domestic commercial fleet. The series reform seeks to eliminate duplication and inconsistencies in the current rules and will allow the rules to be easily to cater for new innovations. The rules will be clearer, giving greater confidence to workers across maritime design and construction that their creations fall within the com pliance rules. As we progress this work, we are testing key areas of potential change with stakeholders including surveyors, owners, operators, boat builders, and equipment suppliers. In the week of September , we are planning to release exploring change documents that set out preliminary proposals for accommodation, personal safety, access and escape; anchors and cables; navigation; and radio communications. This follows the release of exploring change documents on life saving appliances, electrical, fire protection, survey, stability, drainage and freeboard, watertight and weather tight integrity, and machinery. This engagement is not formal consultation and is considered business as usual for this project. The feedback we receive will be used to inform the development of formal proposals and draft rules that will be publicly consulted on, subject to your approval. We are working towards opening this public consultation in . Media update We received one request from NewstalkZB asking about the emergency towage report which was prepared for the Associate Minister of Transport. We re directed the request to Minister Dami en OConnors office.
IN CONFIDENCE Transport Crown entity and state owned entity (SOE) updates
IN CONFIDENCE Transport Crown entity and state owned entity (SOE) updates
IN CONFIDENCE August Talkback radio also covered the FIFA Womens World Cup players being permitted to skip the queue. Radio host was firmly against the practice; callers were of mixed opinions. Newstalk ZB Christchurch morning show
IN CONFIDENCE After the Masters initial plan of transferring the crewman to the nearest hospital via a Coastguard vessel was ruled out, a rescue helicopter was dispatched. The patient was winched off the ship at sea, emergency medical assistance was provided on the helicopter, and he was flown to Auckland Hospital for surgery. He has now been discharged and is recovering well. Without effective coordination of all involved, the outcome for the seafarer could easily have been tragic. Maritime NZ in the Media A local Northland newspaper is following up about the wreck of the Niagara and has asked questions around budget bid processes and whether Maritime NZ has responded to any reports of oil or had to clean up any oil. The reporter also contacted Minister Allans Office. Maritime NZ will provide responses to her requests. Minister Allans Office gave her an update on its position on the Niagara. Other requests include a query about ownership of a former Americas Cup yacht which ran aground, and we continue to receive calls about distress beacon activations, other search and rescue operations and RCCNZ involvement.
IN CONFIDENCE Aviation Security Queues Taskforce As previously reported, the Authority established a Queues Taskforce on June to support a specific focus on how the Authority can address unacceptable queues at Aviation Security screening points. The work of the Taskforce continues with regular (weekly updates) provided to stakeholders. The Taskforce has spurred the establishment of an industry group the Aviation Security Stewardship Group (SSG) which will have a focus on identifying, discussing, and collaborating on system wide security issues, including but not limited to issues such as queues. The SSG terms of reference have been worked through with key stakeholders (Board of Airlines Representatives NZ BARNZ, and the NZ Airports Association. The intention is to have the first meeting of the SSG early in September. In the meantime, on August , the Authority will host a broader industry meeting with operational representatives of organisations with an interest in, and responsibility for aviation security. This is part of a series of meetings that started late in to support the overall operation of the aviation security system.
IN CONFIDENCE Capital Connection The new Capital Connection carriages were launched at a successful event on July and entered service on July . Passenger feedback has been positive, noting the new carriages provide a smoother ride. The service will be unable to use the Shannon platform initially due to the change in carriage height, and passengers are being bused to and from Levin in the interim. In July, there was a total of passengers carried, with an average of passengers per day. The equates to a percent increase in patronage for July when compared to July . MAJOR PROJECTS Ashburton Freight Hub The earthworks for the Ashburton (Fairton) freight hub are progressing well with our build partner Tarbotton Land Civil providing an impressive aerial photo of the works progress (see below). Consents have been granted and construction works on KiwiRail land are currently in progress. The preliminary design for the Works Road level crossing new road layout has been reviewed, and we have also finalised the detailed construction programme, which has been developed jointly with Fulton Hogan. The new hub will allow much higher volumes of rail freight, which will benefit local freight suppliers and have a very positive impact on regional economic activity. The development is a joint initiative between KiwiRail, Wareing Group, the Ashburton Distr ict Council and the New Zealand Government (through the NZ Upgrade Programme). PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
IN CONFIDENCE Communications and External Engagement September Media plan days from September Nil Media mentions days to September Activity Channel September Huge increase in police drone use: Sensible solution or spies in the sky Quoted from article: On July , Police gained Civil Aviation Authority certification allowing them to significantly expand their operations, and do things such as fly over property without prior notification, extend the range of flights beyond line of sight, and fly indoors The number of police drone flights has increased since this certification, and a new IT system allows flights to be logged and tracked.
IN CONFIDENCE Contents Actions from transport officials meeting . . Upcoming briefings . . . Key priorities . . . Cabinet papers . . . Cabinet papers led by other agencies . . Transport Crown entity and state owned entity (SOE) updates .
IN CONFIDENCE Contents Actions from transport officials meeting . Upcoming briefings . Key priorities . Cabinet papers . Cabinet papers led by other agencies . Transport Crown entity and state owned entity (SOE) updates .
IN CONFIDENCE Contents Actions from transport officials meeting . Upcoming briefings . Key priorities . Cabinet papers . Cabinet papers led by other agencies . Transport Crown entity and state owned entity (SOE) updates .
IN CONFIDENCE Contents Actions from transport officials meeting . Upcoming briefings . Key priorities . Cabinet papers . Cabinet papers led by other agencies . Transport Crown entity and state owned entity (SOE) updates .
IN CONFIDENCE DRURY STATIONS The High Court confirmed to KiwiRail on July that the application by developer MADE Group for a Judicial Review concerning the process leading to the site selection of Ngkroa Station has been dismissed. This station is being built as part of the New Zealand Upgrade Programme (NZUP). The High Court hearing was held in March . KiwiRail understands the High Court has informed media of the outcome and will upload it on its website. The below is KiwiRail s media holding statement which will be used only if requested by media: KiwiRail and its partners Waka Kotahi and Auckland Transport welcome the decision to dismiss the Judicial Review on the proposed location of Ngkroa Railway Station (Drury West). We intend to continue with the consenting process currently underway for the station. This is a positive outcome, as it means KiwiRail will not need to restart the month public consultation process which would delay the delivery of the station. INTERISLANDER Interislander Kaiarahi has left New Zealand for dry dock in Singapore from August . It will be in dry dock for days, before returning to New Zealand. This is scheduled maintenance and is key to KiwiRails programme to lift service reliability for the existing Interislander fleet. OIA release by M aritime New Zealand Maritime New Zealand (MNZ) will be releasing information to TVNZ, Stuff and Herald on July seeking correspondence between MNZ and Kiwirail about safety and maintenance concerns on ferries. KiwiRails response will be to note that: Safety is a priority for Interislander, and we respect MNZs role as regulator in delivering safety. We have worked to enhance safety and reliability processes across our fleet since the Kaitaki loss of power early in . Six of the nine non conformities found in the MNZ audit have been resolved, and the other three will be closed off at our next annual audit. None concerned the safety of our fleet. The correspondence from MNZ raised the issue of Interislander seeking exemptions, which are part of normal business , and that on average Interislander applies for fewer than exemptions a year (outside of the intense COVID period). Requests for exemptions are a way to proactively raise potential issues of non compliance with MNZ to ensure that MNZ are satisfied that we are safe to sail.
IN CONFIDENCE Activity Channel September Laser strike on Police Eagle helicopter A man was arrested and charged for shining a laser at the Police Eagle helicopter on September in Auckland. The incident received wide media coverage and CAA was approached for comment by Newshub.
IN CONFIDENCE From July , the Fiji Hydrographic Service hosted a Maritime Safety Information Training Course to provide practical guidance for those who issue marine navigational warnings to shipping within their coastal areas. The course was co led by Maritime New Zealand and the Australian Maritime Safety Authority to countries in the South West Pacific. The course was conducted on behalf of the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) and was attended by students from: Cook Islands Fiji the Federated States of Micronesia Kiribati Papua New Guinea Republic of Marshall Islands Republic of Palau Samoa Solomon Islands SPC (Pacific Community) Tonga Vanuatu. The course objectives were to assist these countries to meet their international obligations with respect to warning ships of navigational hazards, increase the flow of navigational warning information to the NAVAREA X and NAVAREA XIV Coordinators and to e mphasise the importance of establishing expertise in the countries. The opportunity to work with their counterparts from across the region fostered strong relationships and sharing of knowledge. Each student completed a post course survey and all strongly agreed that the training was worth their while. Maritime in the media We provided a proactive update on the Achilles Bulker to Bay of Plenty and industry media on July . In it we confirmed to media the vessel is detained and the operators are responsible for managing any future towage. We will provide information when the situation changes. MUNZ put out a press release about the vessel raising issues around the quality of foreign flagged vessels.
IN CONFIDENCE Funding Review consultation now live Following Government approval, Maritime NZ has opened public consultation on proposed changes to Maritime Levies and Oil Pollution Levies. This is the first funding review in five years, as the Government agreed to delay the mid point review due to COVID impacts. To develop the proposed changes, we worked closely with the sector and looked closely at areas where additional levies funding will need to be invested between July and June . The consultation is open until August . During this t ime, we will hold webinars to go over the proposals in the consultation document, provide stakeholders the opportunity to ask questions and encourage their submissions. Following the consultation, we will carefully review and analyse all submissions, then prepare advice and recommendations on levies changes before the end of . Maritime I ndustry Forum The Maritime Industry Forum met online last week. The Forum is an opportunity for commercial maritime sector leaders to exchange information and views about the current key issues impacting the industry, to agree on priorities , and collectively work on solutions. Membership includes representatives from all parts of the commercial sector, and the Ministry of Health, with representatives from other government agencies attending as issues require. It is chaired by Maritime NZ. The Forum reiterated that its priority issues continue to be in the areas of seafarer welfare and workforce issues. The Forum agreed to convene a sub group to undertake a stocktake of current measures and work in the area of seafarer welfare, and received an update from Maritime NZ covering cross industry work underway in the area of workforce. Each Forum member spoke to their current concerns and issues, with much cross over evident in the sector. The next meeting will pick up on one of those priorities, with the planned attendance of Customs to discuss changes on the border, and will also include a workshop session designed to extend and document common issues across the sector. Medical emergency aboard Singapore vessel Maersk Rio Delta The emergency helivac of a seafarer needing urgent appendix surgery highlights the complexities that can arise in supporting international seafarer welfare. The chain of events started with the Master of Singaporean flagged ship, Maersk Rio Delta, advising the Bay of Plenty Harbourmaster that a crewmember was seriously ill with suspected appendicitis. The Harbourmaster contacted Maritime NZ because, while the ship was en route to the Port of Tauranga, it was still some distance at sea, there were no berths immediately available, and it was unable to divert to Auckland. Maritime NZs Regulatory Operations group and Rescue Coordination Centre NZ worked together with the Harbourmaster, the ships Master, the ships representatives in New Zealand who worked with the overseas operators, Coastguard, a rescue helicopter, and medical services, including getting confirmation of where the crewmember could be admitted for urgent surgery, which turned out to be in Auckland. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending July
IN CONFIDENCE Graphical summary of registrations:
IN CONFIDENCE Hawkes Bay photos The first new temporary bridge spans going into place at Bridge . PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
IN CONFIDENCE Hewletts Road KiwiRail is working with Waka Kotahi as the Road Controlling Authority for Hewletts Road on potential safety improvements to the two pedestrian crossings. This follows the tragic incident resulting in a fatality on July . KiwiRail and Waka Kotahi previously proposed improvements but these were not funded. KiwiRail and Waka Kotahi have been engaging with local principals to discuss the options for improvements, which include installing maze fencing to require pedestrians to turn in both directions before crossing and removing vegetation to increase lines of sight. We are also discussing the eventual addition of automatic gates which will be integrated into the signalling system, and the initial fencing will be designed to enable later additions. The intention is to address the vegetation as soon as practicable, install the maze fencing in the coming months, and to integrate gates into the signalling system at a later stage. KiwiRail is working closely with Tauranga City Council on these proposals and responding to local enquiries to keep people informed. KiwiRail is also maintaining contact with the family of Jorja Ray Smith. Line reopening to Port of Napier On September , KiwiRail will be celebrating the official reopening of the rail line to Napier, connecting Port of Napier once again to the main trunk line. This section of line between Hastings and Napier, particularly around Awatoto, was badly dam aged in February by Cyclone Gabrielle. Track and embankments were washed away and there was major damage to Bridge , which lost piers and spans in the floods. Rebuilding has been a huge effort from our teams and our contracting partners, such as United Civil and local firms like Eastbridge, who have helped to bring the railway back online. The work has included rebuilding two metre high embankments, replacing sleepers, metres of rail, laying , cubic metres of formation (the rock foundat ion under the tracks) and , tonnes of ballast. The rebuild of Bridge is a temporary solution, so that we can get rail freight moving as quickly as possible. A permanent new bridge will be designed and built over the next couple of years. Freight will start moving again on September welcome news for our key customers Winstone Pulp International (WPI), Team Global Logistics, Silver Fern Farms and the port. Port of Napier is a key part of the regional economy, and to once again get our customers freight to and from the port efficiently, and using low emissions rail, is an important step toward reinstating the Hawkes Bay supply chain and ensuring the regions economic success.
IN CONFIDENCE Hillside Solid progress is being made with above ground works for the main building continuing with the roof install completed, and the installation of the structural steel frame and precast panels now complete. The office building has made good progress with precast panels and roof install complete. Redesign work of the rail yard has continued this month, with work on the formation bulk fill and contamination cut continuing. Stage demolition is substantially complete, only part of one final building remains in place as the team is awaiting the relocation of electrical equipment (transformers) which currently power the site. However, delays to the contractor handover to January has impacted wagon assembly and Hillside construction completion milestones. The wagon assembly milestone has been delayed by two months to January . The Hillside construction completion milest one is May . PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of November OC Hon Michael Wood Action required by: Minister of Transport Thursday, November Hon Grant Robertson Minister of Finance REALLOCATION OF NORTHERN PATHWAY FUNDING TO GREATER CHRISTCHU RCH PUBLIC TRANSPORT FUTURE S BUS IMPROVEMENTS Purpose Provide background to the reallocation of funding from the cancelled Northern Pathway project to the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Future s Bus Improvements progr amme Key p oints In September , Cabinet agreed to cancel the Northern Pathway project and reallocate the project funding towards an alternative mix of investments CAB MIN. refers . This project was part of the wider New Zealand Upgrade Programme (NZUP). To give effect to this decision, a portion of th e pro ject funding was returned to the existing New Zealand Upgrade Transport Projects Tagged Capital Contingency appropriation, lea ving the rest to cover sunk costs and further work on the Northern Pathway. Cabinet authorised you (as Minister of Transport ) and the Minister of Finance to take final decisions on the alternative investment mix, and to make consequential changes to approp riations to give effect to those decisions CAB MIN. refers . Cabinet approval is required for the reallocation of funding from the tagged capital contingency for NZUP mentioned above to the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Impro vements programme The reasons for the requirement to seek Cabinet approval include the magnitude of the funding allocation, the affordability challenges from the acceleration of the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme Additionally, neither of these two projects are part of NZUP which is experiencing cost pressures estimated to be . billion BRI refers. Reallocating Northern Pathway funding to projects outside of NZUP will mean that the options for addressing cost pressures in NZUP will be more limited as a result. Document Out of Scope Out of Scope Out of Scope Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TE MANATU WAKA p MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IUtoCScope You are also seeking Cabinet to approve c million for the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme from the same appropriation but authorise you (as Minister of Transport) and the Minister of Finance to draw down on this funding later and make consequential changes to appropriations once the funding structure of this project has been confirmed. The Crown will not own any assets created by the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme, which means the tagged capital contingency funding will need to be swapped from capital to operating expenditure with a corresponding impact on the operating balance and net Crown debt. However, Put of Scope The attached Cabinet paper requires a series of decisions to approve and drawdown funding for these two projects. The Cabinet paper provides you with context and rationale for supporting the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme and the u oCScope IN CONFIDENCE Page of IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Recommendations We recommend you: Minister of Transport Minister of Finance .agree to lodge the attached Cabinet paper on Thursday December with any requested changes, to seek agreement from Cabinet and approve million for the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme from the same appropriation but authorise you and the Minister of Finance to draw down this funding later and m ake consequential changes to appropriations once the funding structure of this programme is confirmedYes No Yes No Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport . . . Hon Grant Robertson Minister of Finance . . . Fleur DSouza Manager, Programme Assurance and Commercial Ministry of Transport . . . Ministers office to complete : Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE Comments Contacts Name Telephone First contact Prince Siddharth, Senior Adviser, Programme s(RaJ Assurance and Commerci al Fleur DSouza, Manager, Programme Assurance and Commercial IN CONFIDENCE Page of RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT In Confidence Office of the Minister of Finance Office of the Minister of Transport IN CONFIDENCE Cabinet Economic Development Committee Document Reallocation of Northern Pathway Funding to Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements Prop o s a I This paper seeks agreement from Cabinet to a series of policy decisions and financial recommendations required to approve funding of million for the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme Relation to government priorities The Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme contributes to the Governmen ts objectives of building a productive, sustainable and inclusive economy by enabling greater transport choice in Greater Christchurch and moving greater numbers of people faster through rapid transit. Additionally, this programme promotes rapid transit and higher density living on main corridors. Ou ofscope Transition to a clean, green and carbonneutral New Zealand is strongly supported by these investments by encouraging people to move away from private car travel to public and active modes of transport. Executive Summary Cabinet has authorised us as Joint Ministers to undertake final decisions on reallocating funding from the cancelled Northern Pathway project to suitable alternative investments. The Northern Pathway project was part of the wider New Zealand Upgrade Programme (NZUP). We support a fixed funding allocation of million for the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme u o cope Neither of these projects are part of NZUP. The Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme is an opportunity to improve the level of public transport services in Greater Christchurch, which will promote rapid transit and higher density living on main corridors. It is expected to be cofunded by the Christchurch City Council, Environment Canterbury, Selwyn District Council and Waimakariri District Council and may have some contribution from the National Land Transport Fund (NL TF). This funding profile has not yet been finalised. :Out of Scope IN CONFIDENCE ylqdcxs I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Both projects require additional funding due to either changes in the delivery schedule leading to affordability challenges or cost pressures. Delivery of the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme is expected to be accelerated before substantive increases in service frequency are implemented, which may create affordability challenges.
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of February OC Hon Chris Bishop Action required by: Minister of Transport Monday, February TIER TWO BRIEFING TO THE INCOMING MINISTER OF TRANSPORT TIME OF USE CHARGING Purpose To brief you on the status of the time of use charging work and advise on the next steps with the Land Transport Management (Time of Use Charging) Amendment Bill . Key p oints Time of use charging works by introducing a charge to travel on certain parts of the road network at congested times, encouraging people to change the time or mode of their travel. It is used in a handful of cities around the world, including London, Stock holm and Singapore. Currently, there is no effective framework to establish time of use charges on the road network in New Zealand. Work done in Auckland and a subsequent Select Committee inquiry showed that it would be beneficial in New Zealands large urban areas. The Land Transport Management (Time of Use Charging) Amendment Bill (the Bill) establishes an enabling framework for time of use charging and was introduced to the House in December last year. The Bill gives effect to Cabinets policy approval for time of use charging legislation in July (CAB MIN ). Cabinet agreed that the Government propose to enact the Bill by the end of (CAB MIN ). You have indicated the Bill will have its first reading early this year and will be referred to the Transport and Infrastructure Committee thereafter . We have attached a draft first reading speech , based on a similar speech that we prepared for Minister Brown late last year . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT MINISTRX. OF TRANSPORT p TE MANATU WAKA RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE Recommendations We recommen d you: provide feedback on the first reading speech notes attached to this briefing ,r Daniel Cruden Acting Manager, Revenue Ministers office to complete: D Approved Hon Chris Bishop Minister of Transport . I . I . Declined YesNo Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister D Overtaken by events Comments Contacts James McDevitt, Senior Adviser, Revenue IN CONFIDENCE Page of IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of TIER TWO BRIEFING TO THE INCOMING MINISTER OF TRANSPORT TIME OF USE CHARGING Time of use charges are used in several cities around the world to manage road network demand Charging people to drive on certain parts of the network at peak times has been shown to improve network efficiency and reduce congestion. People are encouraged to change the time or mode of their travel to avoid paying the charge. Various cities around the world are using this approach, including London, Singapore and Stockholm. Most recently, New York City also instituted a scheme that went live in January . Scheme design and charges vary widely depending on the location, but the evidence suggests they have generally been successful where they are used to manage network demand where congestion is significant, rather than being used for revenue raising purposes . Work to has demonstrated that time of use charging could be beneficial in New Zealand The Congestion Question project investigated the potential effects of time of use charging in Auckland. This project brought together central government and Auckland Council agencies to investigate the potential for congestion pricing in Auckland. The study found that introducing a charge on all state highways and other major arterial roads could improve traffic flow to levels similar to those seen in the school holidays . Following The Congestion Question project report the Transport and Infrastructure Committee conducted an inquiry into an Auckland scheme . The Committee report unanimously recommended that legislation be introduced to enable a demand based charge on the road network. Despite the focus of both The Congestion Question and the subsequent Committee inquiry on time of use charging in Auckland, the Committee recommended that the Government progress legislation that enabled time of use charging nationally as other high growth urban areas may benefit from the policy. Legislative change is required, and a bill was introduced to the House last year The Land Transport Management (Time of Use Charging) Amendment Bill (the Bill) establishes an enabling framework to introduce time of use charging on the road network. The Bill adds a new s ubpart to the Land Transport Management Act (the LTMA) to: . introduce a framework to enable time ofuse charging to improve traffic flow to improve network productivity;
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of May OC Hon Michael Wood Action required by: Minister of Transport Monday, May CLEAN CAR SECTOR LEADERSHIP GROUP MEMBERSHIP UPDATES Purpose Provide you with a letter seeking a nomination for a replacement for David Crawford as the Motor Industry Association of New Zealand (MIA) nominee for the Clean Car Sector Leadership Group (CCSLG). Key points The CCSLG was established in August to advise you on measures to accelerate th e uptake of clean vehicles . The current membership comprises Mark Gilbert (Chair), David Crawford, David Vinsen , Simon MacKenzie , Nicola Nation , Jon Duffy , Mike Burrell , and Hineamaru Ropati . To , the CCSLG has provided valuable insight and guidance t o officials and ministers on the development and implementation of much of our advice and policy, including most recently the clean vehicles programme and the EV Charging Strategy. The CCSLG was established within Group and the category of members appointed to bodies in which the Crown has an interest of the Cabinet fees framework , which allows you to appoint members directly, consulting your colleagues or the Cabinet Appointments and Hon ours Committee (APH) only if you deem it necessary OC refers . Members that are not directly compensated by their organisations for their time spent participating in the CCSLG receive per day. David Crawford recently announced his retirement fr om his role of Chief Executive of MIA, effective from mid . Aimee Wiley will be his replacement , and commenced in the role from April . The MIA has an important role , represent ing the majority of the importers and distributors of new cars, trucks and motorcycles to New Zealand. David Crawfords contribution to the CCSLG has been value d, and more broadly, close engagement between the MIA and officials has helped significantly to improve the quality of our advice and policy. Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of
IN CONFIDENCE INCIDENTS Mt Maunganui Fatality On August , an empty logging train running from Mt Maunganui to Kawerau hit a cyclist at the Hewlett Road level crossing in Mount Maunganui. Sadly, police confirmed that a young person passed away as the result of the collision. Events like this are deeply traumatic for all those involved, and our thoughts are with the family and all those affected. The incident has attracted media coverage, and we have answered a few limited questions on the event, referring most follow up queries to the Police. There will be a full investigation of this incident to confirm what happened and identify and changes, if any, that could be made. In line with our standard practice, our locomotive engineer has been offered counselling and support. KiwiRail will also be supporting him with some time away from work. In , KiwiRail was involved in a proposal by Tauranga City Council to implement a shared path development in the area. As part of this development programme, Hewletts Road level crossing improvements were proposed including pedestrian gates to complement the signals and barrier arms on the road. The programme, and therefore the level crossing chang es, were not supported into the National Land Transport Programme in . Signal Passing At Danger (SPAD) Event On August , a SPAD A event occurred in the Westfield yard with a Shunt driver passing a red signal in the yard. The driver has been stood down while this event is investigated. There was no risk to any other services as this occurred in an isolated area of the yard, and there were no conflicting movements. As noted previously, SPAD events are uncommon and taken very seriously by KiwiRail, with an internal safety investigation is underway. KiwiRail has notified Waka Kotahi our rail regulator about this event as required. Carterton Collision On July , a vehicle carrying one person collided with a northbound Wairarapa commuter train at a level crossing on Norfolk Road in the Carterton District. Emergency services attended, and the driver has been discharged from hospital with moderate in juries. None of the passengers or crew onboard the train were injured. The level crossing, which has flashing lights and warning bells, suffered extensive damage. The cause of the collision is being investigated. The Norfolk Road level crossing where the collision occurred, and the Norman Avenue level crossing are at either end of the Waingawa log yard. There are tracks in the yard, between the level crossings, where log trains are put together. This can involve wa gons being shunted across the level crossings at times and, because signals for the two crossings are linked, shunt movements that come close to either level crossing can activate the bells and lights. This has led to observed risky driving behaviour in th e past. We appreciate that having to wait for shunt movements can be frustrating for motorists. However, to ensure safety, we urge everyone to be cautious when approaching any level crossing and comply with the requirement to stop when a level crossings lights an d bells are going. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
IN CONFIDENCE KiwiRail and Kaiarahi update Achilles Bulker update On September , the ocean going tug Vallianz Prestige arrived in N ew Zealand from Singapore. The tug was issued a notice of direction by MPI on arrival due to biofouling non compliance. The tug was directed to go outside of N ew Zealand territorial waters ( nautical miles from the coast) until compliant with N ew Zealand regulations. This has delayed the departure tow of the Achilles Bulker from the Port of Tauranga to a foreign port. The Marine Warranty Surveyor (MWS) has also arrived in N ew Zealand and has begun inspecting the ship and its proposed towing arrangement. Maritime NZ is engaging with the MWS and we have emphasised our function as a regulator with oversight responsibilities rather than approval granting functions. The MWS and the Captain of Achilles Bulker have expressed their appreciation for Maritime NZs presence. MV Atherina (IMO ) detention On September , bulk carrier Atherina experienced an engine failure during berthing at CentrePort, Wellington. There was a failure of the main engine control system and the main engine was not operational as designed. Maritime NZ issued a notice of detention to the vessel on September . The vessel was detained until repairs to the main engine were completed and it was operating to the satisfaction of the ships classification society. The detention was lifted on September after the conditions for release were met. International Oil Pollution Compensation visitors On September , two representatives from the International Oil Pollution Compensation Funds visited Maritime NZ. The International Oil Pollution Compensation Funds (IOPC Funds) provide financial compensation for oil pollution damage that occurs in Member States, resulting from spills of persistent oil from tankers. The Funds were established to create international agreement on liability and compensation following the oil spill from the Torrey Canyon in and are financed by contributions from entities that receive certain types of oil by sea. s (c) TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED E NTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending September
IN CONFIDENCE MT Golden Unity detention The Golden Unity underwent a routine Port State Control (PSC) inspection at Port Taranaki on July. It was found to be operating at a substandard level and resulted in deficiencies being raised and a detention noticed being issued. The reason for detention was the number of deficiencies and their potential cumulative effect on the safety of the vessel no one deficiency on its own was a serious risk. The following day the vessel met the conditions for release from detention and departed to an overseas ort. The port state is the country visited by a ship that is not registered (flagged) in that country. The flag state is where the ship is registered. PSC is used to inspect foreign flagged ships under international maritime conventions.
IN CONFIDENCE Maritime NZ Public Consultation Levies Funding On July , Maritime NZ released a consultation document on its review of levies funding for . To few submissions have been received, however, based on previous funding reviews we anticipate that the number of enquiries and submissions received will increase over the n ext two weeks and reach a high point close to the end of the consultation period. Webinars covering the funding review consultation document are scheduled for August and August . The C hief Executive Director and members of the senior leadership team will be making a presentation to attendees on the content of the consultation document , and will include a Question and Answer segment. The submissions period closes on August . Further details on the funding review are contained within the Briefing to the Incoming Associate Minister, which is scheduled for sending in the week ending August . Achilles Bulker update At the time of writing the Achilles Bulker to tow their ship into Port of Tauranga, where it will be fully unloaded before being towed to a foreign dry dock for repairs. The log carrying Achilles Bulker has been anchored off Tauranga since July when it experienced steering loss and it was subsequently found that its rudder had detached. The Panamanian flagged ship had just departed the port for China. The owners of the vessel are responsible for managing the towage process, however, Maritime NZ is working closely with the Bay of Plenty Regional Council and the Port of Tauranga on arrangements to bring the vessel back to the port to be unloaded. A Maritime NZ detention notice is in place against the ship, meaning it can only depart once certain conditions have been satisfied. Maritime NZ has started an investigation into the rudder failure. Australian Recreational Boating Safety Council Maritime NZ attended the Australian Recreational Boating Safety Committee (ARBSC) virtually on July as an observer. The ARBSC is a committee comprising senior officers with responsibility for Marine Safety in their respective state and territory ju risdictions , and meet a minimum of twice a year. Their mission is to improve recreational boating safety, reduce injuries and deaths, and promote uniform approaches to the regulation of recreational vessels. This is the first time that Maritime NZ has been invited to attend and it was an opportunity to learn of work being undertaken in recreational boating safety across Australia. The Australian Maritime Safety Authority is also a member of ARBSC although does not have responsibilities for recreational boating. There are many similarities in the issues and challenges New Zealand and Australia face, however, Australia has greater regulation and controls in place such a certification and licensing of recreational craft. We expect an invitation to attend the next in person ARBSC meeting to be held in Perth, Western Australia in December , and will likely attend and grow participation.
IN CONFIDENCE Maritime in the media Following TAICs release of its recommendations into the capsizing of the i Catcher, which sunk near Kaikoura last September claiming the lives of five of its passengers, Maritime NZ proactively issued a media release outlining its response. TAICs report and Maritime NZs release were widely reported. The Post is following up its previous reporting and requested an update on the advice being provide to the Associate Minister of Transport around emergency towage vessels. This request was handled by the Associate Minister of Transport, Damian OConnor.
IN CONFIDENCE Maritime incident response On Scene Commander training Maritime NZ has conducted the annual, week long Regional On Scene Commander Assessment Course at our Marine Pollution Response Service facility in Te Atatu. Ten candidates from councils around New Zealand and a port company attended; five were new to the role and five were completing their periodic revalidation. Classroo m sessions were followed by exercises, leading teams of peers. Maritime NZ CEO, Kirstie Hewlett, visited during the course and was able to view one of the exercises in progress. The last day included a prolonged exercise during which the candidates moved t hrough different leadership roles, and final assessment by National On Scene Commanders and members of Maritime NZs incident management team. The course is intense and exhausting for all involved and aims to produce response leaders who can work in any region of the country and can support a national response if necessary.
IN CONFIDENCE Media mentions days to Wednesday August Activity Channel August Northland news in brief: CAA to investigate planes problem; oven fire in Kensington
IN CONFIDENCE NETWORK UPDATE CYCLONE RECOVERY The North Island rail network is mostly open, with commuter and freight services running. Affected lines: North Auckland Line (Swanson Whangarei) closed Work is completed repairing more than kilometres of line north of Swanson (to near Makarau), including repairs to significant washouts in north Auckland. A design to temporarily remediate two slips (at the and km marks) under the rail line south of Tahekeroa (km mark) is underway, following successful testing. We are aiming to have work done and the line open for work trains to deliver track for rebu ilding the line at Tahekeroa slip, in the next month. At Tahekeroa, where a , cubic metre slip fell across the road and rail line, works have continued to progress despite continued wet weather during July, which significantly impacted progress. Repair of two under slip sites very close to Tahekeroa and remediation of the scoured embankment just to the east of the landslide have been completed. An existing, aging culvert under the rail line in the area is being replaced with a larger version follo wing a recent assessment by KiwiRails Structures team. The installation of both rail and road culverts at the Tahekeroa slip site is now complete, with the associated rock apron for scour control also finished. Works to construct the road embankment, with a finished level of nearly four metres over the culvert s, is now approximately complete. Work is underway rebuilding the rail line, with formation (the rock foundation under the tracks) reconstruction progressing in parallel with the road embankment work. Civil works, including track formation replacement, are expected to be completed by mid late August, depending on weather. Track installation will follow as soon as possible after the completed formation is handed over. There have been more than damage sites along the NAL, including overslips, slumps, washouts and underslips, and ongoing weather has seen some sites worsen. More than minor sites along the NAL have been repaired, and inspections are being planned to approve those repairs. Around sites require moderate repairs, and KiwiRail will shortly appoint civil contractors to repair these. Another more significant damage sites require an engineering response to remediate. Engineering design contracts have been awarded for these sites, geotechnical assessments are being planned, and early engagement with civil contractors is underway. Where possible KiwiRail is aiming to undertake temporary repairs, to allow the NAL to reopen faster. However, for of the significant sites temporary repairs may not be possible. Permanent repairs will take longer to complete so could delay the line r eopening. At this stage we still expect the NAL to remain closed until at least the end of this year. We are developing a work programme and expect to have a clearer idea of reopening timeframes once investigations and designs have all been completed. This may take until October . PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
IN CONFIDENCE No update this week.
IN CONFIDENCE PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
IN CONFIDENCE Page of AIDE MEMOIRE: GPS IMPLEMENTATION UPDATE FOR THE MONTH ENDING SEPTEMBER To: Hon Simeon Brown, Minister of Transport From: Bryan Field, Manager, Programme Monitoring and Investment Management November OC Number: OC Purpose This aide memoire provides you with a highlevel assessment o n the delivery of the Government Policy Statement ( GPS ) , and New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) revenue and activity class expenditure, as at the end of September . A more detailed briefing, which will include NZTAs quarterly report covering both GPS implementation and progress against the Performance and Efficiency Plan (PEP), Statement of Intent, and Statement of Performance Expectations will be provided in the wee k commencing November . Context You have directed the Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) and NZTA to provide regular reporting on the delivery of GPS . To meet your expectations, the Ministry and NZTA have worked together to coordinate a range of inputs to produce reporting that ca ptures progress across GPS actions. This aide memoire includes brief progress updates on GPS implementation (at Annex One) by the Ministry, NZTA, and other government agencies for the month of September . It also provides a table setting out NZTAs September revenue and expenditure position (at Annex Two). GPS Implementation Programme The transport sector policy programme is progressing well , with almost of projects on track The policy work programme is progressing well, with one further NZTA action (Public Transport Funding) completed in September, in addition to the two completed actions reported for August (OC refers). All projects are broadly on track. At this stage, two of the projects have been assessed as amber, both predominantly in relation to timing challenges and resource constraints: Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE Page of Action : Reforms to the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) revenue system (Ministry led) Action : Rail Network Ten year investment planning (RNIP is Kiwirail led but all advice on the programme is led by the Ministry) note that this has shifted from red to amber this month. In addition, action .: Review of road safety investment, remains at moderate risk as formal scoping is not yet completed. A scoping note is being prepared that will outline timing, key questions and methodology for this review, which should be completed for the October monthly report. We are expecting more comprehensive and consistent information and analysis about the risks, issues, and barriers in NZTAs reporting on GPS actions for both the forthcoming quarterly performance update and the update for the month ending October . NLTP Forecast NZTA has provided a table (Annex Two) of financial information on revenue and expenditure for the month ending September, including for funding outside the NLTF. More detailed information will be provided as part of the quarterly report, aligned with updates from approved organisations. In the year to , NZTA has received . ( million) more revenue than it had budgeted for, largely due to higher thanexpected Fuel Excise Duty revenue and a higher drawdown on Crown funding for the RNIP. This was offset in part by lower than expecte d Road User Charges. The position has stabilised slightly since August with the inmonth revenue being just above the budget. Inmonth expenditure was higher than the budget, which has reduced the year tounderspend position. Overall, NZTA has spent million () less than expected in the year to. The State Highway Improvements activity class is still significantly underspent (by , million), most likely due to projects taking longer than expected to start up. The Rail activity class has spent ( million) more than expected, while most of the other activity classes are starting to stabilise close to budg eted levels. We will continue to work with NZTA to understand the causes of any variances in expenditure, and the forecasting implications for the rest of the financial year. Further insight will be provided in the quarterly and monthly reports. Next steps You will receive a detailed quarterly report from NZTA in or before the week commencing November , along with our second opinion advice. The next monthly GPS report (for the month ending October ) will be provided in early December . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE Page of Contacts Name Telephone First contact Bryan Field, Manager, Programme Monitoring Investment Management James Turner , Principal Advisor, Programme Monitoring Investment Management s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE
IN CONFIDENCE Performance On Time Performance (OTP) has been affected slightly due to some minor mechanical issues, and crewing levels. However, all sailings have departed as planned. The below shows the month trend for OTP and reliability data
IN CONFIDENCE Planned releasepublish What Type Why September Plane Talking GAP video To educate the aerodrome community about standard radio calls. This video is the first educational product to be released as part of the Work Together, Stay Apart campaign. JulyDecember (multiple dates) Dangerous Goods (DG) Face toface event To provide training and qualification for the carriage of DG October Weight and balance GAP booklet (update) BAU version update October Vector special issue: accidents that have common causes Aviation industry magazine To highlight the most common causes of fatal accidents that safety investigators go to. TBC In, Out and Around Queenstown GAP booklet (update) BAU version update TBC In, Out and Around Christchurch GAP booklet (update) BAU version update TBC In, Out and Around Manawatu GAP booklet (update) BAU version update
IN CONFIDENCE Port Health and Safety Leadership Group A Port Health and Safety Leadership Group meeting was held on July at the Ports of Auckland. Representatives from Maritime NZ, the Rail and Maritime Transport Union, the Maritime Union of New Zealand (MUNZ) , and C hief Executives from port and stevedore companies attended the meeting. The following agenda items were discussed: Agreement on the consultation process for the Approved Code of Practice for the Loading and Unloading of Cargo. The consultation will start in mid August and run for six weeks. Update on the Implementation of the Fatigue Risk Management Guidelines, led by the Port Industry Association. The leadership group was briefed on a range of work being done in the workforce space to address qualification, skill and training gaps. The leadership group agreed that the timing was right to bring together the ports, unions, stevedores, the Workforce De velopment Council and MNZ to discuss all of the work to ensure there was good understanding of connections, overlaps and gaps. AskYourTeam worker survey discussion on the importance of getting feedback on how and if we are making a difference on the ground , and of finding a way to continue the survey. An update on the overall programme and the Action Plan initiatives. The group continues to work well together, despite challenging conditions in the sector. Serious harm accident Maritime NZ has opened up an investigation into a serious harm accident that happened on board the N ew Zealand fishing ship while operating off the East Coast of the North Island on July . While retrieving a full net of fish on to the deck the crew member walked behind the suspended net. The net then swung due to movement and crushed the crew member against an open hatch. The incident resulted in serious injuries to the crewmans lower limbs. The ship returned to port and the crewman was taken to hospital where he has undergone surgery. Rescue Coordination Centre NZ support multi agency search and rescue operation Maritime New Zealands Rescue Coordination Centre and the Maritime Incident Readiness and Response Team recently supported a search and rescue exercise in Tauranga, Bay Of Plenty. The exercise was primarily aimed at the Regional Police Incident Management team and supporting agencies, as opposed to the work MNZ would lead for this kind of incident. The exercise scenario was a bespoke cruise ship with people aboard which grounded on Astrolabe Reef and was subsequently abandoned due to a fire on board. Over participants from more than different agencies and private companies worked together to enable the rescue and recovery of all passengers and crew. The Rescue Coordination Centre supported Exercise Control with shaping the rescue activities, allo wing the Police lead team to focus on the reconciliation and welfare support component once people had made it to shore. The Maritime Incident Readiness and Response Team provided expert knowledge on large vessel operations and the ongoing requirements from Maritime New Zealand for the recovery phase of this type of incident. This exercise demonstrated the benefits in close cooperation between agencies, while educating local partners on the roles and responsibilities of the national level teams that would be involved. Key lessons were identified that will be worked on in preparation for the next exercise in November .
IN CONFIDENCE Rail Network Rebuild (RNR) update Work on Stage (Eastern Line Otahuhu Britomart) is progressing well, following the resumption of work after the FIFA Womens World Cup. It remains on schedule to be completed in January . Since the stage began on March to September : , metres of formation (the compacted rock foundation below the track) has been excavated and replaced , metres of ballast (the larger rocks the tracks sit in) has been replaced , metres of drainage has been improved metres of rail has been replaced With million additional funding from Waka Kotahi confirmed, planning for the next stage of the rebuild (in conjunction with Auckland Transport) is well advanced. We expect to publicly announce it in early October . RNR Stage will run from Labour Weekend to June and has two parts: Stage a: Major upgrades to the Western Line between New Lynn and Newmarket, including replacing aging formation. Stage b: More minor drainage focussed work on the Southern Line between Pukekohe and Puhinui, to improve resilience and the performance of the rail foundations in this low lying part of the network. For Stages (Southern Line Otahuhu Newmarket) and , whole sections of rail line were fully closed for periods of time. Stage takes a different appr oach working on evenings, some weekends and over the usual public holiday shutdowns to avoid full and lengthy line closures. Stage is more complex and though disruption to some customers is unavoidable, the impact of Stage will be much less than the impact of Stages and . SCENIC SERVICES Coastal Pacific Scenic Train Returns The iconic Coastal Pacific scenic train will once again return to the South Islands East Coast next week with the first service for the season scheduled for September . The strong demand of this journey has also allowed us to introduce a daily service from December which is earlier than anticipated. We will also be showcasing a new offering for our visitors in time for the summer season, with the launch of the Coastal Pacific Scenic Plus dining experience, with our brand new kitchen carriage. Customers will be treated to the experience of not only seeing and hearing the scenery but tasting local produce and wines as well. The Coastal Pacific is a key part of both the Kaikoura and Marlborough regional economies, giving visitors an insight into these stunning East Coast regions, with local tourism operators welcoming the return of the service. The Coastal Pacific runs from September to April each year. UPCOMING M EETINGSEVENTS September Event is being held at the Bridge site to mark the reopening of the line between Hastings and Napier. Hon Kieran McAnulty has been invited to attend.
IN CONFIDENCE Rolling Stock programme The DM class South Island Mainline locomotives and are now in production with the first prototype locomotives expected to arrive late . For the DL class locomotives, all ten DLs arrived earlier than anticipated, and these were shunted to Te Rapa depot for commissioning. The first was commissioned in early April with commissioning expected to be completed by September , with four alread y introduced into service. In addition, the remaining CY CFT Wagons arrived in New Zealand last week and are ready for distribution around the country.
IN CONFIDENCE September Vector Spring Issue . Aviation industry magazine . A way of getting relevant information to industry in an easy toread format . October Weight and balance . GAP booklet . BAU version update . Planned releasepublish What Type Why October Vector special issue: accidents that have common causes Aviation industry magazine . To highlight the most common causes of fatal accidents that safety investigators go to. TBC In, Out and Around Queenstown. GAP booklet BAU version update TBC In, Out and Around Christchurch GAP booklet BAU version update TBC In, Out and Around Manawatu GAP booklet BAU version update September November (multiple dates) Plane Talking . Face toface workshop . This series of seminars, as part of the Work Together, Stay Apart campaign, serves the aerodrome communities and will be held in aero clubs and flying schools throughout New Zealand. There are dates in total. September Plane Talking . GAP video . Good Aviation Practice video to educate the aerodrome community about standard radio calls. This video is the first educational product to be released as part of the Work Together, Stay Apart campaign.
IN CONFIDENCE September Plane Talking GAP video To educate the aerodrome community about standard radio calls. This video is the first educational product to be released as part of the Work Together, Stay Apart campaign. JulyDecember (multiple dates) Dangerous Goods Face toface course for industry To provide training and qualification for the carriage of DG October Weight and balance GAP booklet BAU version update October Vector special issue: accidents that have common causes Aviation industry magazine To highlight the most common causes of fatal accidents that safety investigators go to. TBC In, Out and Around Queenstown. GAP booklet BAU version update TBC In, Out and Around Christchurch GAP booklet BAU version update TBC In, Out and Around Manawatu GAP booklet BAU version update
IN CONFIDENCE Stakeholder Engagement on Drug and Alcohol matters in the Civil Aviation Act The new Civil Aviation Act sets up a requirement for most organisations participating in the aviation system to develop drug and alcohol management plans (called DAMPs in the Act) , and undertake random drug and alcohol testing of certain workers (safety critical workers). Before the Act comes into force (in April ) Civil Aviation Rules need to be put in place to give effect to the requirements in the new Act. We also need to develop guidance for participants of the content of management plans and random testing. In August , CAA will contact some airline operators, adventure aviation companies, airports and others who have experience with drug and alcohol management. The aim is to better understand current practices and the challenges and benefits of developing the DAMPs. This early engagement will help inform the Rule development process and subsequent formal consultation processes. Aviation New Zealand Annual Conference Aviation New Zealands annual conference takes place August in Christchurch. The Civil Aviation Authority will have a strong presence. Keith Manch, Director Civil Aviation, will do a virtual presentation on The Regulatory Outlook, and D eputy Chief Executive Aviation Safe ty, David Harrison will present the Directors award on behalf Keith Manch. Authority staff will give presentations on: Safety and Activity statistics, CAAs Walking the Talk initiative, Certification, Monitoring, and Safety Management Systems (SMS). The Work Together Stay Apart safety campaign will be also be promoted at the conf erence. Communications and External Engagement July Media plan days from Sunday August (planned) Item Description Targeted media August TV story (reporting retrospectively) Interview on TVNZ Breakfast about pilot licensing requirements; in response to an earlier interview with Chief Executives from Aviation NZ and Ardmore Flying School. TVNZ No Comment or statement Multiple CAA staff attending Aviation NZ conference. Media coverage is anticipated. Topics may include pilot training and licensing, safety statistics, certification, regulatory action and challenges for the UAV sector. na
IN CONFIDENCE Tahekeroa photos Indicative design for the Tahekeroa rebuild showing the road over a bound (top left), culverts and basin area to protect the rail line, and rail line (bottom right)
IN CONFIDENCE The IOPC Funds representatives spent time with operational staff at the Marine Pollution Response Service (MPRS) in Auckland, and then with head office based staff in W ellington. Their presentations covered how the funds conventions work in conjunction with other liability conventions and insurance regimes, the types of claims that might succeed (or fail), clean up processes, and environmental damage. The visit was important so that a broad range of staff understand how IOPC Funds could support NZ should a spill of persistent oil from a tanker occur here, and critically how we would need to manage processes and practices to record information around claims to enable them to be successful. It was also an important event to promote ongoing international relationships for Maritime NZ personnel.
IN CONFIDENCE This included KiwiRails outcomes and recommendations, an update on the E uropean Train Control System (ETCS) implementation timeline, and discussed an agreed a joint approach to tackling SPADs. We also provided our Auckland Metropolitan network SPAD risk assessment and our so far as reasonably practical statement referencing Section of the Railways Act which holds that a rail participant must ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that none of the rail activities for which it is responsible causes, or is likely to cause, the death of, or serious injury to, individuals . We are promoting alternative arrangements to the requirement for ETCS, which is a bespoke technology set which will take years to design, install, commission, and certify . Waka Kotahi will review the information provided and will come back to us with any further questions. On July , Waikato Regional Council hosted a closed door meeting in Hamilton with regional councillors and local mayors. They requested KiwiRail and Waka Kotahi as regulator attend to explain the recent SPADs , responses to it and to understand the decision by the regulator to impose the condition. KiwiRail attended, as Waikato is our customer. The regulator declined the invitation; however, the Waikato and Bay of Plenty Waka Kotahi Regional Director attended . Passenger numbers After a very successful period which has seen Te Huia carry well above its target numbers, there has been a sharp decline in passenger volumes since the condition. The week pri or ( July July ) saw an average of passengers carried across the weekday services. For the four days where Te Huia has only travelled to Papakura, we have seen an average of passengers, and the average has been buoyed by a high number of passengers being carried on the Thursday service prior to Matariki. Passenger numbers for July have been , and respectively. SAFETY CULTURE As previously reported, KiwiRail is partnering with global safety leadership firm dss (formerly DuPo nt Safety Solutions) to complete a whole of KiwiRail safety leadership cultural and maturity assessment programme. We are now beginning to share the results of the survey with our teams on the ground, through mirror walk sessions. To almost staff have attended a session and we will continue the roll these out over the next couple of months. The end goal is to produce a KiwiRail focus on the right initiatives to build a safety mindset, visible leadership, critical risk and controls, front line engagement and the right assurance and accountability discipline, to ensure we work to care and protect our people and build a highperformance safety culture. We will keep your Office informed as this work progresses. UPCOMING MEETINGSEVENTS July Event at Wellington Station to celebrate the launch of the new Capital Connection carriages on July . Minister Parker to attend and unveil carriages. August Otira Tunnel centenary celebrations. KiwiRail Chief executive and Board Chair attending. August Rail Safety Week launch Minister Parker will be attending and opening the event. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT
IN CONFIDENCE UNCLASSIFIED Page of December OC H on Simeon Brown Action required by: Minister of Transport Friday, December cc Rt Hon Winston Peters Minister for Rail RAIL POLICY RESPONSIBILITIES AND DECISION MAKING FOR THE RAIL NETWORK INVESTMENT PROGRAMME Purpose Describe responsibilities for rail policy and associated decision making for the Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP). Key p oints As the Minister of Transport, you are responsible for transport investment, regulation and system stewardship As Minister of Transport, you are responsible for investment in transport infrastructure and services, transport regulation (eg, safety and security) and developing the transport system more broadly . This includes responsibility for: oissuing the Government Policy Statement (GPS) on land transport, which guides how funding for the land transport system will be invested across road, rail and coastal shipping including: the rail freight network (below rail only) metro rail network and services (below and above rail) oa broad range of land transport legislation, including the Land Transport Management Act (LTMA) and the Railways Act . The LTMA : osets out requirements for the operation, development and funding of land transport including rai l Below rail refers to the railway infrastructure like tracks and signalling systems, while above rail includes the trains, locomotives, and carriages that operate on this infrastructure. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT MINISTRX. OF TRANSPORT p TE MANATU WAKA IN CONFIDENCE UNCLASSIFIED Page of osets out requirements for the RNIP a three year investment programme for the below rail network (freight and metro) with a year horizon oestablishes the New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) , responsible for delivering the National Land Transport Programme a three year programme that sets out how NZTA plans to invest the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) in accordance with the GPS. NZTA is responsible for advising you on the RNIP and its fundingfrom the NLTF oestablishes the Director of Land Transport (Brent Alderton) , who is responsible for regulating rail safety in New Zealand. The Railways Act sets out the safety framework for rail operations in New Zealand. The Ministry of Transport is your lead adviser on transport , including rail . We advi se you on a broad range of things within your transport portfolio, including: olegislative, regulatory and policy settings otransport investments, and overall funding levels and priorities otransport revenue , including Road User Charges, Fuel Excise Duty, and Track User Charges (TUC) oacting on behal f of the Crown as purchase rs of key transport investments funded outside the NLTF, and oCrown agency governance, appointments, performance and monitoring, including ofNZTA. Responsibility for funding the majority of KiwiRails capital programme (for below rail) sits with you as the Minister of Transport through Vote Transport. Almost all o f the rail freight network is funded through Budget, with a very small portion funded through Track User Charges paid by KiwiRail. Shareholding Ministers are responsible for setting expectations and priorities for KiwiRail, the New Zealand Rai l ways Corporation and Ferry Holdings Limited As shareholding Ministers, the Minister for Rail and Minister of Finance are jointly responsible setting expectations and priorities for: o KiwiRail Holdings Limited ( KiwiRail), a stateowned enterprise, and its commercial activities including rail freight, tourist rail, and ferry services (Interislander) o the New Zealand Railways Corporation (NZRC) a stateowned enterprise that owns the land beneath the KiwiRail rail network on behalf of the Crown. The TUC is a fee that KiwiRail, as the national rail freight operator, pays for use of the rail freight network. The TUC contributes to the cost of maintaining and renewing the below rail infrastructure, arising from wear and tear, which includes tracks, bridges, tunnels, overhead electrical systems, train signals, and maintenance equipment. As Minister of Transport, you are responsible for setting the regulations for this charge, ensuring it is fair and transparent, and overseeing their implementation to support rail maintenance and renewals. Though NZRC does not have shares or shareholders, the Ministers are generally referred to as the shareholding Ministers for this company to reflect the terminology used in the SOE Act. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE UNCLASSIFIED Page of The Minister for Rail is also responsible for the new procurement entity tentatively named Ferry Holdings Limited (Ferry Holdings) . Shareholding Minister s are: o responsible for overseeing and managing the Crowns interests, risks and relationships with KiwiRail and NZRC o answerable to Parliament and the public for these interests o responsible for appointing directors to the boards of these companies and entity, subject to Cabinet confirmation. The Treasury is responsible for monitoring KiwiRail, NZRC and Ferry Holdings on behalf of shareholding Ministers. Shareholding Ministers are responsible for funding and signing equity injections into KiwiRails commercial activities. Rail Network Investment Programme The Land Transport Management Act (Sections A F refer) set s out the requirements associated with: othe RNIP oNLTF funding for activities included in the RNIP. The RNIP sets out a three year investment programme with a year horizon of activities that KiwiRail recommend be funded , or partially funded , through the NLTF. The legislative requirements stipulate that: oevery three financial years, KiwiRail must prepare an RNIP by a set by you as the Minister of Transport oyou must dec ide to approve (or not) the RNIP and make reasonable efforts to do so before the start of the financial year to which it applies obefore you approve the RNIP: NZTA must provide you advice on the RNIP and rail activities proposed to be funded through the NLTF that you must consider you mus t consult KiwiRail shareholding Ministers before you approve it . oat KiwiRails request, you may also approve a rail activity or a combination of rail activities in the RNIP to be fully or partially funded through the NLTF KiwiRails RNIP must (under Section (A)()) take into account the Acts purpose and the Government Policy Statement on land transport, indicate any significant rail activities likely to be included in the next RNIP, and provide necessary information for NZTAs advice to the Minister. NZTA must (under Section (C)()) advise the Minister on whether the RNIP contributes the purpose of the Act, is consistent with the GPS on land transport, takes into account relevant regional plans, includes necessary financial and activity details, and he should ultimately approve it. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE o before you approve the funding, you must consider NZTAs advice and consult shareholding Ministers. A flow diagram on decision making is attached in Annex . Recommendations We recommend you: agree to share this briefing with the Minister for Rail Yes No note we have concurrently supplied a range of Rail Briefings to your office to share n . with the Minister for Rail V JAlj Oj David Wood Deputy Secretary, Investment and Monitoring Hon Simeon Br terofT it App ,o Declined Min Not seen by Minister e ven Ministers office to complete: Comments UNCLASSIF IED Page of UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of ANNEX Figure : Rail Network Investment Programme decision making f low diagram
IN CONFIDENCE UNCLASSIFIED Page of June OC Hon Kiri Allan Action required by: Associate Minister of Transport Monday, June cc Hon Kieran McAnulty Acting Minister of Transport APPROACH TO UPCOMING INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANIZATION (IMO) GREENHOUSE GAS (GHG) NEGOTIATIONS Purpose Update you on the New Zealand delegations approach to the upcoming IMO GHG negotiations in June and July . Key points Under the Kyoto Protocol New Zealand is required to pursue the international limitation or reduction of maritime GHG emissions through the IMO. Shipping is critical to New Zealands supply chains and trade. The upcoming IMO negotiations will see the adoption of a revised IMO GHG reduction Strategy. Many member States , including New Zealand and some Pacific countries , support a goal of zero GHG emissions by no later than , in line with the .oC Paris Agreement temperature limit. However, w e suspect that it may be difficult to secure agree ment to this goal at the negotiations . Our approach to these negotiations will be informed by our cur rent Cabinet International Maritime Organization Climate Change Negotiation Mandate . This mandate provides the necessary flexibility to actively and constructively participate in the JuneJ uly negotiations, and support the adoption of an ambitious, .oC Paris aligned GHG Strategy. These negotiations will also include discussion on mid and long term measures to decarbonise the maritime sector. New Zealand is supportive of the development of a basket of measures to: a) make zero carbon fuels price com petitive with fossil fuels; and b) reduce the GHG intensity of fuels. As discussions evolve on the development of measures (beyond July ) , our Cabinet negotiating mandate may need to be revised to ensure we can negotiate at the required level of granu larity. If this occurs, we will flag it in advance. Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport and Maritime New Zealand are also pursuing work to decarbonise shipping outside of the IMO (namely exploring the establishment of green shipping corridors). Progressi ng this work will be important given that the Climate Change Commission will provide the Government advice (by the end of ) on whether and how Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE UNCLASSIFIED Page of APPROACH TO UPCOMING INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANI ZATION (IMO) GREENHOUSE GAS (GHG) NEGOTIATIONS Background The IMO regulate s GHG emissions from shipping . General background information on the IMO and its key treaties can be found in Annex . In , the IMO adopted the Initial IMO Strategy on the Reduction of GHG Emissions from Ships. The provisions in the Initial Strategy are not consistent with the commitment in the Paris Agreement for States to pursue efforts to limit temperature rise to .oC. IMO member States will continue to negotiate towards a revised GHG Strategy setting out key next steps for decarbonising shipping at the th session of the Intersessional Working Group on Reduc tion of GHG Emissions from Ships (ISWG GHG ) in June . This will then be adopted at the Marine Environment Protection Committee (MEPC) in July (note these negotiations are back toback ). This includes an opportunity to set a goal aligned with the Paris Agreement. Negotiations will also include how the revised Strategy accounts for an equitable transition and progress on mid and long term practical measures to achieve the targets. These negotiations , including the key meeting s in June and July, are important for New Zealand in relation to : . The economy. Shipping is fundamental to New Zealands economy, with percent of the volume of goods New Zealand trades moved by ships. Like other island nations far from markets, New Zealand relies on supply chains maintained by a highly globalised shipping industry. . Domestic emissions reductions. Reducing shipping GHG emissions is a key part of the New Zealands response to climate change . Domestic shipping accounts for . percent of New Zealands transport emissions. This would at least quadruple if international shipping emissions were also included . Consistent with the United Nations Framework Convention for Climate Change (UNFCCC ), New Zealand does not currently account for international shipping emissions in our domestic target. The Climate Change Commission has a legislated requirement to provide advice to the Minister of Climate Change by the end of on whether and how this could be done. . Global emissions reductions. In , the IMO reported that , in , global GHG emissions from shipping (international, domestic and fishing) were , million tonnes (around percent of global emissions) . This was a . percent increase on shippin g emission levels . By way of comparison, this is slightly more than Japan s emissions the fifth highest of all nations . Shipping
IN CONFIDENCE UNION NEGOTIATIONS UPDATE We have reached a settlement with two of our Maritime unions (AMEA and NZMSG), subject to finalisation of the Terms of Settlement and then ratification by members. Bargaining is now underway with RMTU (coverage of employees). We have had two productive days of bargaining in July, and we are meeting again on and of August . UPCOMING MEETINGSEVENTS August tira Tunnel centenary celebrations. KiwiRail Chief Executive and Board Chair attending. August Rail Safety Week launch Minister Parker will be attending and opening the event.
IN CONFIDENCE We are focused on keeping Picton residents and the community informed as construction work continues (excluding those that PMNZ are not permitting). Main Works contractors Downer HEB JV have set up office and will soon be establishing a construction laydow n area in Waitohi Domain. They are also beginning work on a temporary jetty at Westshore that will be used to transfer materials to and from the main wharf construction site. Last month Dublin Street in Picton was closed to prepare for works on the Dublin Street overbridge, and we are working closely with Waka Kotahi and Marlborough District Council to minimise disruption to traffic. At Kaiwharawhara, iReX and the Downer HEB JV team are working on relocating staff and car rental car parking to make way to hand over the site for construction. LONG DISTANCE PASSENGER TRAINS Te Huia SPAD Rail regulator Waka Kotahi lifted its recent condition on Te Huia travelling through the Auckland metro network to The Strand in Parnell. The Hamilton to Auckland commuter service will resume travelling to The Strand on August , as KiwiRail has compl eted driver familiarity training. Te Huia will continue to operate under the existing safety case. Since July , Te Huia has carried passengers only as far as Papakura after Waka Kotahi required a specific piece of equipment (European Train Control System or ETCS) to be installed, which would take up to months to achieve. Instead, alternative safety measures are being used for Te Huia with KiwiRail installing Electronic Train Protection (ETP) on Te Huia, which automatically stops the train if it passes a red signal. This safety measure is bolstered by a very safe rail system design, which causes other signals to turn red if one is passed, to stop all trains in the area. ETCS is a predictive system, which slows a train as it approaches a red signal. We have reiterated our view to the regulator that ETCS will be required if the current rolling stock running rights is extended for a further five years after the existing five year trial concludes in . A decision on funding the installation of ETCS fo r Te Huia locomotives will be needed in , alongside any decision to extend the service. Passenger numbers After a very successful period which has seen Te Huia carry well above its target numbers, there has been a sharp decline in passenger volumes since the ban. The week prior ( July July ) saw an average of passengers carried across the weekday services. However, post July when services started terminating at Papakura we have seen the average drop to passengers per day. For July as a whole: Total of passengers carried, with an overall average of passengers carried on weekdays and on Saturdays. With Bikes and Scooters carried, and Wheelchair passengers plus Walkers with the Hoist used on services. Average weekday passengers had an percent decrease for July when compared to July Weekday patronage has decreased by percent for July ( days of operation) when compared to June ( days of operation) Saturday patronage has decreased by percent for July when compared to June . PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August i
IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending September i
IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending July i
IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August i
IN CONFIDENCE Wellington Wellington The Downer HEB JV continued early works at the Wellington ferry terminal continues. This relates to new Interislander commercial and passenger vehicle marshalling yards, a site village on Kaiwharawhara Point, and a temporary jetty to barge material around to the main wharf construction site. Waitohi Picton Enabling and early works continue in Waitohi Picton. Work continues around the Dublin Street and Auckland Street intersection. In recent weeks we have carried out work to reconnect underground pipes, including one night of activity overnight when close residents w ere offered alternative accommodation. Road closures to allow for safe working continue and we engage with local residents and businesses on that. Downer HEB JV has a team working at Westshore (on the Bluebridge side of the harbour) and on September , will begin constructing a temporary jetty, as part of the main wharf construction set up. Marine Mammal Observers will be out monitoring when piling is being undertaken, with hydrophones (water based microphones) and land based monitoring equipment also in place for monitoring of noise and vibrations. Bubble curtaining is also being installed to lessen the impact.
IN CONFIDENCE Work on the NZ Upgrade Programme funded renewals of the line north of Whangrei to Kauri, where Fonterra have a dairy plant, continues to make good progress and is close to per cent complete. So far , new concrete sleepers have been laid to replace life expired timber sleepers and .km of new rail laid. This work will raise the standard of the track to handle heavier trains ( tonne axel loads). Palmerston North Gisborne Line (Hastings Wairoa) closed The line from Palmerston North Hastings is open and freight services are running. KiwiRail continues to assess and make permanent repairs at some sites along the line. A temporary Container Terminal in Hastings is operational, enabling freight to be road bridged between Hastings to Napier and the port. Work with the Transport Rebuild East Coast (TREC) Alliance is continuing. The execution of the full Project Alliance Agreement occurred on July. A tender for professional services to be utilised by TREC has gone to market on behalf of KiwiRail, via Waka Kotahi. KiwiRail is continuing to share information with TREC to improve on the concept thinking currently in place for reopening Napier to Wairoa. Hastings Napier section of line is expected to reopen in September . We have made good progress in the badly flood damaged Awatoto area. Substantial amounts of debris have been cleared, damaged sections of rail removed, and design work for the washed out embankment completed. We have also removed damaged parts of the rail Bridge , which lost a number of concrete piers and spans during the cyclone, and the temporary rebuild is well underway. Steel casings for temporary piers have been railed from Christchurch to Hastings and our contractor has made good progress installing all the piles and some of the headstocks for these temporary bridge piers. The piles are pushed metres into the riverbed, compared to the metres depth of the previous piers, to meet the temporary bridg e modern design standards. A crane pad has been built on the north side of the river to allow for time savings by completing the northern most piling and span installation from that side. With the piling driving complete they are now being followed by the installation of temporary h ead stocks and rail spans from KiwiRails spare span stocks, which are kept for such emergency works. The first two temporary spans have been successfully craned into place. Undertaking temporary repairs will allow the rail line to Napier to open faster . Initial assessments of damage on the line are complete with more than damage sites now identified. The majority of these have minor damage. We have established a specific team which will focus on understanding and quantifying the time, cost and material requirements for repairing the line. They have undertaken site visits, building off the experience they gained in doing the damage inspections . We continue to make improvements to our GIS database and digital tools, with the aim of using D digital models to help assess and design repair solutions for damage sites. We are sharing this information with the TREC team. TREC members have commenced integrating with KiwiRails team to ensure co ordinated planning of rebuild works. Works are underway for make safe works. These are to make the Napier Wairoa rail corridor safe for winter by unblocking drainage paths and removing wood debris off bridges and out of rail waterways. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
IN CONFIDENCE switched off, protected from damage, and protected from inadvertent activation.
INCONFIDENCE m Delivery Agency Stage Project Previously Approved Funding KiwiRail Delivery Wellington Railway Station Safety KiwiRail Delivery Wairarapa Rail Upgrades Waka Kotahi Delivery SH KiwiRail Delivery Papakura to Pukekohe Electrification Waka Kotahi Delivery Takitimu North Link Stage Waka Kotahi Delivery Penlink KiwiRail Delivery Capital Connection Rolling Stock KiwiRail Delivery Otiria to Whangarei Waka Kotahi Delivery Eastern Busway KiwiRail Delivery Ashburton Freight Hub . Waka Kotahi Delivery Community Connect . Waka Kotahi Delivery s ()(b)(ii), s ()(f)(iv) s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
INCONFIDENCE m Delivery Agency Stage Project Previously Approved Funding Waka Kotahi Delivery Christchurch Public Transport Futures Waka Kotahi Delivery Northern Pathway Close Down Total of projects in delivery or near delivery , Waka Kotahi Business Case taki to North of Levin Waka Kotahi Business Case South Auckland Package Waka Kotahi Business Case Whangrei to Port Marsden KiwiRail Business Case Marsden Point Rail Link Total of projects in early stages , Total across NZUP ,
INCONFIDENCE . This fund s most projects, which are at various stages of delivery and pre delivery, to the P cost estimate level, with six exceptions (see Annex One and t he table below). We note that the SH and Papakura to Drury South projects are currently funded to an amount below the latest P estimates and that this means those projects carry greater risk than other projects. . We consider that this should be sufficient funding certainty for the following projects in delivery without additionalchanged scope to continue to progress , with a total approved funding envelope of . Agency Project Waka Kotahi SH Waka Kotahi SH Waka Kotahi Takitimu North Link Stage Waka Kotahi Takitimu North Link Stage Waka Kotahi Papakura to Drury South Waka Kotahi Penlink Waka Kotahi Melling Waka Kotahi Total KiwiRail Wiri to Quay Park KiwiRail Papakura to Pukekohe Electrification KiwiRail Wellington Railway Station Safety KiwiRail Wairarapa Rail Upgrades KiwiRail Capital Connection Rolling Stock KiwiRail Otiria to Whangarei KiwiRail Total Total
INCONFIDENCE . In the interim, if you agree with the proposed approach, we will prepare you a letter for delivery agencies outlining the proposed change in approach with the detail of how it would work in practice to be worked through amongst officials and Ministerial decisions in and given effect to through the delegation letters . Communications and timing challenges . A number of projects, in particular the larger four projects that are being deferred for now, have established expectations and will require careful management of communications. . We recommend that you advise delivery agencies that in taking the decisions in this paper, you acknowledge: a. that costs have increased substantively on the four larger projects and that this will need to be communicated publicly by the delivery agencies while you take time to work your options through; b. that while you appreciate the expectations that have been created that these projects will keep moving forward, and this approach creates uncertainty for stakeholders, you consider that the substantive calls for additional funding need to be considered carefully and against the Crowns broader capital investments through the Budget proc ess given the scale; c. that this means that some projects will be placed on pause until you have considered your options further, and this may mean resourcing at the agencies is diverted to projects in train in the interim ; d. that this approach will have timing implications for those larger projects, which could add additional cost risk in ; e. and endorse that for those projects in delivery where funding is set at the P level, delivery agencies are empowered to make scope calls as a result of choosing to fund at a lower level, and that this may have trade offs in terms of total outcomes. . We, therefore , recommend that in the interim letter , you also address the communications expectations outlined above. This should recognise the community expectations about these projects proceeding, and acknowledge that the process will likely create attention and uncertainty about whether the projects will proceed. Consultation and Engagement . The Treasury and Ministry of Transport worked closely with Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail on the development of this joint report, and we consider that all key issues have been reflected in the advice. We will continue to engage on the delegation letter. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
INCONFIDENCE . note that the SH and the Papakura to Drury projects are currently funded below the P estimates, meaning there is a greater risk that the costs overrun the approved funding for these projects , than the other projects ; . agree that delivery agencies should prioritise delivering the following projects in or near delivery within the following Approved Amounts , noting that in doing so, the agencies may need to make scope and scaling decisions to manage within means:
INCONFIDENCE Enclosure: No Executive Summary This briefing has been to reflect decisions made by Cabinet DEVMIN refers and jointly by the Ministers of Finance and Transport (OC T refers) subsequent to the previous version of this briefing being provided to you. Those decisions mean your agreement to some of the recommendations in the previous version of this briefing are no longer required. Those recommendations have been removed. The remaining considerations and recommendations remain relevant . This briefing proposes a revised approach to the New Zealand Upgrade Programme (NZUP) that: focuses the remainder of the programme on delivering the projects within a fixed funding constraint , noting that in doing so there is likely to be a reduction in outcomes on some projects or across the programme ; gives delivery agencies increased flexibility to develop options to focus on cost risk across the programme, including reducing the scope to fit within the funding envelope(s) , subject to advising you on the scope and outcomes that would not be delivered. The P cost estimate as at December for the entire programme was relates to four large pro jects still in the early stages of development: taki to North of Levin, South Auckland Package, Whangrei to Port Marsden, and Marsden Point Rail Link. These projects are in the early stages, the scale of the estimated funding shortfall of these projects is , and there remains a significant risk that the cost of these projects will increase. In February (OC T refers) , you: The total approved funding for NZUP less those four projects is
INCONFIDENCE Financial implications
INCONFIDENCE Joint Report: New Zealand Upgrade Programme: Overarching Advice Purpose of Report . This report seeks your agreement to programme level decisions to support progress on the New Zealand Upgrade Programme (NZUP) that: a. focuses the remainder of the programme on delivering the projects within a fixed funding constraint , noting that in doing so there is likely to be a reduction in outcomes on some projects or across the programme; and b. gives delivery agencies increased flexibility to develop options to focus on cost risk across the programme, including reducing the scope to fit within the funding envelope(s), subject to advising you on the scope and outcomes that would not be delivered. Background . In October , Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail provided you with delivery agency advice on how to take NZUP forward (BRI refers). That advice indicated a potential funding gap of up to to complete the full programme as currently scoped . This was driven by a mixture of cost escalation, risk materialisation, scope , and other changes . . . . In De cember , Cabinet also agreed to reallocate of Northern Pathway funding to the Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements and DEV MIN refers . The Northern Pathway funding is now fully reallocated towards other projects and close down. You made decisions relating to four major NZUP projects . There are four major NZUP projects funded to . billion in total with Business Cases yet to be approved. These projects are: Project Approved Funding (m) taki to North of Levin , South Auckland Package s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(b)(ii) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
INCONFIDENCE Recommended Action We recommend that you:
INCONFIDENCE Reduced outcomes will st ill contribute towards transport objectives . We recognise that managing projects within the funding envelope(s) could mean reducing some scope components and consequently reducing the benefits and outcomes from those originally intended through NZUP. . However, a reduction in outcomes in NZUP projects is balanced by other ongoing levers such as the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) and the Climate Response Emergency Fund (CERF), which are also contributing towards achieving the Crowns transport objectives as mentioned in the Government Policy Statement for land Transport (GPS) , similar to those being delivered by NZUP. These include safety, improved public transport services and infrastructure, improved walking and cycling, improved rail network, etc. s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
INCONFIDENCE Residual cost risks exist and further funding may be required . We consider that the amount of funding outlined above should be sufficient to ensure the continued delivery of projects. However, as not all projects are funded to the P level, and some are at earlier stages and still have work to go before contracts are let, there remains a risk that further costs materialise over the course of delivery. . . . We consider that in the meantime these projects can be managed within existing expectations and total approved funding across t he programme for Waka Kotahi, although the risk is higher of further funding being required or a reduction in outcomes occurring across the remaining programme to manage the cost risk. . In the first instance, we would expect that delivery agencies exercise their judgement to manage the projects within the approved funding envelope. We anticipate this could occur either through managing scope (including reprioritising from the scope change provision) or, where appropriate, reprioritising underspends from other projects (e.g., from projects funded to P). This approach is intended to maintain the incentive for agencies to manage projects efficiently within the approved funding envelopes. . However, we acknowledge that it may not be possible to manage all cost pressures through this approach, and some additional risk may materialise that requires further funding (especially where unforeseen risks materialise) . . . s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
INCONFIDENCE Updates to the delegation letters will provide delivery agencies with authority to manage flexibly within the approved funding envelope . We consider in adopting this approach to cost management and expectations, it is necessary that delivery agencies have sufficient flexibility within their delegation to trade off decisions across their projects to manage within their means. This represents a shift from existing arrangements to acknowledge that the key priority is to ensure that projects are delivered within the approved funding envelopes . . We acknowledge that this also represents a s hift for you and you will want visibility of the outcomes and scope that would be traded off to stay within the funding envelope. The proposed approach, therefore , endorses delivery agencies to develop options that are affordable within the fixed funding envelope and advise you of the proposal and the components of scope or outcomes that would not be delivered. . The delegation letter is also not specific on how appropriated funding should be moved between projects . We, therefore , recommend updating the delegation to provide clarity on this matter , the change in expectations with a focus on delivery, and providing delivery agencies with the flexibility required to manage costs and develop scaled options . . Subject to further work and working through the implications with the delivery agencies , updates to the delegation letter could include: a. revised risk ratings of all projects, noting that most of the current in delive ry projects are lower risk projects and there are additional risks that could materialise in these projects throughout delivery b. revisiting escalation thresholds to focus on giving joint Ministers notice that a scope change or other call has been, or will be, made to manage projects within approved funding noting the reduction in outcomes or otherwise c. revised appropriated amounts and tagged contingency allocations for new and existing projects where appropriate d. clarity that it is your expectation to focus on in delivery projects and for delivery agencies to continue considering how forecast underspends across these projects could fund the forecast overspends to manage these projects within the approved funding envelope, i.e. the appropriated amount e. clarit y that if there are scope or outcome components of a project that cannot be delivered within the approved funding envelope, then the delivery agencies have the authority to stop or defer some of those components , and are expected to advise Joint Ministers accordingly noting that Ministers would no longer have decision making rights. . It will take time to work through changes to the delegation letters to provide confidence to both you and the delivery agencies around the implications of the revised approach , and the impacts on outcomes.
INCONFIDENCE Updating delegati ons
INCONFIDENCE We consider t hat the current approved funding and the approach above should be sufficient to ensure the continued delivery of most of the NZUP outcomes , less those f our projects deferred to Budget . he current environment also remains volatile, and unknown risks may materialise , so t he above approach does not provide absolute certainty that costs will remain within the funding envelope. In the first instance, we expect that delivery agencies exercise their judgement to manage the projects within the approved funding envelopes. We consider that this puts the incentives correctly on the delivery agencies to maximise the projects outcomes within the funding constraint. We note that delivery agencies are not expected to take on the risk of having to fund projects beyond the approved funding envelopes; however, the expectation is that they will take appropriate risk based action to manage the projects within the approved funding envelope. Delivery agency judgements may involve managing scope or, where appropriate, reprioritising underspends from other project s. We recognise this means delivery agencies may need to develop options and make decisions that decrease the outcomes achieved by NZUP (such as by managing scope) to ensure projects are delivered within the approved funding envelope(s) wherever possible. This is a shift from the existing arrangements, reflecting that the context has changed since NZUP was initiated in . The proposed approach means a shift away from Ministers having levers to make detailed calls on scope and outcomes for those projects in or near delivery and better enabling delivery agencies to ensure there is confidence in delivery and taking a risk based approach to managing cost. We, therefore , recommend you endorse delivery agencies to develop options that are affordable within t he funding envelope, including reducing and scaling the scope and outcomes of projects or across the programme, subject to advising you of the affordable option and the scope and outcomes that would not be delivered. To enable them to make these decisions, we consider that it is necessary to update the delegation letters. The delegation letters will take time to work through to ensure that the respective Boards have confidence in the implications of this shift in arrangements . If you are comfortable with the proposed approach, we will prepare an interim letter to provide clarity of the above expectations and acknowledge the implications and next steps for decisions for the programme. The table below summarises the change at the programme level , with the project byproject information provided in Annex One : s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
INCONFIDENCE Whangrei to Port Marsden Marsden Point Rail Link Total ,
INCONFIDENCE within the funding constraint, rather than maximising the outcomes and seeking further funding from the Crown at this point .
INDIVIDUAL TRANSTASMAN ROUTES, MARCH
INTERISLANDER Kaiarahi Dry Dock Kaiarahi is tracking well through the Coral Sea on the return journey home and is expected in Wellington on September . It will return to service shortly after completing final checks. The dry dock is an important component of Interislander maintenance procedures to support reliable services. Valentine sale KiwiRail briefed shareholding Ministers on September of the confirmed sale of the Valent ine. The sale supports more reliable Interislander services by maintaining a three ferry fleet operation and contributing to the budgeted investment in fleet maintenance. The Valentine was acquired in following its leasing to provide replacement tonnage while the Kaiarahi was out of service. Performance On Time Performance and sailings have recovered after the recent weather events and the Kaitaki weather related disruption. The below shows the trend data for OTP and reliability:
ISBN: Acknowledgement The Ministry and Waka Kotahi would like to thank the many individuals across the two organisations who have contributed their knowledge and expertise to the development of this document. We were grateful for the willingness with which people engaged with this review and the commitment both organisations shared on wanting to improve the system. Special recognition is given to the following:
Identifying how to manage the funds and spend gathered by a congestion pricing scheme.
Identifying the potential economic benefits of drones to New Zealands business and transport sectors.
Identifying ways to manage the impacts of congestion charging on vulnerable groups including exemptions, rebates or discounts.
If a country becomes party to MARPOL, then MARPOL applies to ships registered to that state, wherever they operate. New Zealand joined MARPOL in and is party to of the annexes. After consultation in , the Government announced that New Zealand would sign up to Annex VI from late , taking into account the time required to align domestic legislation with obligations under Annex VI.
If a driver fails a CIT test police may then require them to undertake a blood test. Evidential blood tests could continue to be taken from injured drivers, and the Bill also enables police to require a driver to have a blood test if they have failed oral fluid tests and have been involved in a crash that has resulted in another person being injured or killed. If qualifying drugs are found in their blood sample, they could be subject to either infringement or criminal penalties, depending on the levels of the drug in their system.
If appropriate: RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
If congestion pricing is implemented, there will be social impacts, particularly on vulnerable communities. We are assessing how to mitigate these impacts for example, we have interviewed people who may be affected.
If readers of this website are concerned about the inherent risks arising from electronic data communication, they should refer to the hard copies of the audited financial statements to confirm the information.
If required, we carry out reviews on transport Crown entities on behalf of the Minister of Transport. We may also commission external agencies to review matters, for example to identify best practice and how to improve performance.
If the officer has good cause to suspect a driver has consumed drugs, they can require the driver to carry out a CIT. This can only be done in certain circumstances:
If you adapt this work in any way or include it in a collection, and publish, distribute or otherwise disseminate that adaptation or collection to the public, the following attribution to the Ministry of Transport should be used:
If you agree to take the attached paper to LEG, please countersign this letter.
If you agree to the proposed specified amount in recommendation : note that the majority of the specified amount will be funded by the Authoritys levies revenue , with the remaining .m funded by the liquidity facility appropriation NA NA note that Transport Ministers, and the Minister of Finance, may agree to increase the specified amount you set for the Civil Aviation Authority in to cover the cost of a shock, andor the emergence of other unforeseen costs (should they arise)
If you agree to the proposed specified amount in recommendation : note that most of the specified amount will be funded by the Authoritys nonCrown revenue , with funded by the liquidity facility appropriation NA NA note that Transport Ministers, and the Minister of Finance, may agree to increase the specified amount you set for Maritime New Zealand in to cover the cost of a shock, andor the emergence of other unforeseen costs (should they arise) NA NA note that officials will confirm the outcome of your decision in this paper to Maritime New Zealand , so it can finalise its Statement of Performance Expectations before the statutory deadline of June NA NA s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of MARITIME NEW ZEALAND LIQUIDITY FUNDING IN . On April , the Ministers of Transport and Finance agreed detailed financial recommendations for Budget initiatives . These included conditions on how Maritime New Zealand (MNZ) and the Civil Aviation Authority can use the funds from the Protection of Transport Sector Agency Core Functions appropriation (liquidity facility) in i.e., that the actual funding provided to the Maritime New Zealand from the Multi Year Appropriation Protection of Transport Sector Agency Core Functions will be the difference between forecast expenditure for agreed core functions for Maritime New Zealand , and revenue forecast to be received in , up to a specified amount agreed by the Ministe r of Transport and the Associate Minister of Transport (which will be no more than the total amount of the appropriation available for Maritime New Zealand ); that the specified amount described in the recommendation above will be set by the Minister of Tr ansport and the Associate Minister of Transport prior to the finalisation of Maritime New Zealands Statement of Performance Expectations , and the setting of the specified amount will take into account the latest available information on actual exp enditure and revenue for and forecast expenditure and revenue for . . In line with these financial recommendations, we have worked with MNZ to determine what the specified amount should be in i.e., the maximum amount of funding for core functions that MNZ should be eligible for in , including the amount it can receive from its liquidity facility appropriation. . A specified amount is required for two reasons: to enable Te Manat Waka, as the administrator of the liquidity fac ility appropriation, to assess if MNZ is using Crown funding appropriately; and to limit MNZs expenditure to a prudent level. This is important because: .. Budget provided MNZ with a marginal financial buffer in the event of a revenue shock and because its reserves are relatively low , this buffer should not be exceeded; .. The result of the ongoing funding review will be a move to a new baseline of staffing levels i.e., the capability and capacity required by MNZ to undertake its functions; and .. any sustained increases to staffing and expenditure approved by Cabinet before the completion of the funding review, will be included in the new funding model for cost recovery from the sector. Te Manat Waka and MNZ recommend that the specified amount for is set at . We seek your joint agreement to set the specified amount at Most of this amount would be funded by MNZs revenue from the Maritime Levy and Oil Pollution Levy , with funded by the liquidity facility appropriation. This amount would cover the difference between MNZs forecast expenditure for core functions (including managing the New Zealand Oil Pollution s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Fund (OPF)) , revenue forecast to be received in and other Crown funding . It includes to fund the OPF capital programme. . Officials have assessed the proposed specified amount, taking into consideration the latest available information on actual expenditure and revenue for , forecast expenditure and revenue for , and the total amount of the appropriation available for MNZ . We note that: There is sufficient funding in the Protection of Transport Se ctor Agency Core Functions appropriation in : .. Based on current expectations of MNZs revenue this will be sufficient to fund the difference (including for the OPF capital programme) between forecast expenditure and revenue for . .. The overall funding level of is consistent with MNZs draft Statement of Performance Expectations (SPE) and its Budget bid .. We note that Te Manat Waka officials have assessed MNZs draft SPE, and that Minister Allan has provided feedback on the document for MNZ to consider ahead of its finalisa tion. The SPE laid out the areas of core business that would be funded with the specified amount: Regulation, Compliance, Response, Safety Infrastructure and Engagement. .. The Budget bid was also assessed by Te Manat Waka officials, as well as Treasu ry officials and joint Ministers There are a few noteworthy factors affecting expenditure in .. .. .. s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of .. The proposed amount will enable MNZ to deliver its core functions in the coming financial year, and the activities outlined in its draft SPE: .. MNZ has made commitments in its draft SPE to continue to be an effective regulator , reduce emissions in line with the Carbon Neutral Government Programme, deliver its Te Tiriti o Waitangi obligations and achieve its Safe, Secure, Clean and Sustainable outcomes. There is a risk that an unexpected shock, andor the emergence of other unfore seen costs could arise: .. In this instance , the financial recommendations for Budget enable unexpected shocks and or unforeseen costs to be covered by the liquidity facility i.e., the specified amount you both agree to in this paper may subsequently b e adjusted subject to the joint agreement of the Ministers of Transport and Finance. Next steps . Officials will confirm the outcome of your decision in this paper to MNZ , so it can finalise its SPE before the statutory deadline of June . . As noted above, Joint Ministers are also required to agree on the maximum amount of funding that MNZ is eligible for, from the liquidity facility, in . This advice will be provided to you separately and in accordance with the financial recommendatio ns for Budget prior to the finalisation of MNZs SPE .
If you are exploring opportunities at the Ministry of Transport we will be happy to accommodate additional support you may need. If you prefer flexible working or other reasonable accommodation arrangements, we work with you to tailor a solution that works for us as a team. We also have a dress for your day policy, so you choose what is appropriate for the situation.
If you are just starting out, you will be able to see how New Zealands democratic processes operate. If you are looking to take the lead on significant work, we have plenty of big projects, and work alongside, influence and achieve with a very large and productive sector.
If you are planning to email submissions through an automated process or online petition platform, please first email the GPS team at
If you are wanting to have a view of this Kaupapa please do reach our team. I note the following ports below which you have interests in:
If you do not disable cookies, you consent to the processing of data about your use of the website by Google, in the manner and for the purposes set out below.
If you have any enquiries about how we treat your personal information during this process, please email us at
If you have any enquiries about our information gathering activities, or believe we have not acted in accordance with this statement, you can email us.
If you have any feedback we would love to hear from you.
If you have any questions about the review, contact us at
If you have any questions contact us on GPStransport.govt.nz
If you have any questions on the Orders in Councils, please contact:
If you have queries please email
If you publish, distribute or otherwise disseminate this work to the public without adapting it, the following attribution to the Ministry of Transport should be used:
If you specifically authorise us to, we may also provide information to other people who are relevant to your review (for example, health professionals), or ask them for information. More information about this is available on the application form.
If you want any further information about this Kaupapa please feel free to give me a call on the number below.
If you wish to go further than the above changes, we suggest meeting with the Minister of Justice to determine a way forward. The Bill is being finalised for introduction in the coming month, so any further additions will need to be progressed at pace. Alternatively, you could look to make changes through the programme to modernise transport legislation. Bus driver safety screen funding
If you work in an area likely to be impacted by sanctions, for example: exporting or importing, financial transactions, or providing professional services, please
If you would like to discuss any aspect of authorisation of airline cooperation agreements, please contact us here
If you would like to engage with us on the Strategy, please email us at
If your car produces clearly visible smoke during the test, you must repair it before you can drive it again.
Impact analysis The Treasurys Regulatory Impact Analysis team has determined that the Proposal , that the Amendment Order gives effect to, is exempt from the requirement to provide a Regulatory Impact Statement on the grounds that it has no or only minor impacts on businesses, individuals, and not forprofit entities.
Impact of COVID on the NLTF further advice
Impacts of COVID on Revenue to the NLTF and GPS
Implement mandatory antilock braking systems (ABS) for motorcycles
Implementation is now the focus of the strategy, with a series of actions underway. A second action plan is intended for . Working with the sector to develop this is part of the initial work programme.
Implementation report to ATAP political Implementation report to ATAP political sponsors sponsors
Implementation will include investment policies, processes, tools, and guidance (including updates to the business case approach, criteria for prioritisation and assessment, and evaluation methodologies). Office of the Minister of Transport to Chair Cabinet Economic Development Committee Update on the New Zealand Transport Agencys investment decisionmaking framework review https:www.transport.govt. nzassetsImportUploadsR esearchDocumentsCabinet PapersbabUpdate ontheNZTAsinvestment decisionmakingframework review.pdf The Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) signalled a stepchange in the priorities for land transport investment in New Zealand.
Implementation: To achieve t hese long term outcomes, the Ministry has a number of planned programmes of action targeting different operating intentions, including multimodal, road, rail, aviation and maritime.
Implementing the new model would provide better value for money, and act as an incentive for the private sector to invest and improve how regional councils designed public transport networks.
Implications for driver licensing Our analysis found relatively large variations in crash rates across drivers of different genders, ages, and regions of residence, and at different licence stages. In general, the GDLS can seek to influenc e road safety by encouraging or inhibiting groups of people from driving (e.g. people below the minimum driving age cannot legally drive), or by giving people incentives and ability to become more competent drivers (e.g. via testing required to progress th rough the licence stages), and by protecting less experienced drivers from some risks (e.g. the conditions imposed on learner and restricted drivers). However, there are practical constraints on how finely the GDLS rules can be adjusted to compensate for differences in crash risk and exposure across groups of drivers. For example, there would be practical and ethical implications of having different licensing rules for males versus females, or for drivers in Southland versus Auckland. Thus, the GDLS should focus on population level factors rather than narrowing on particular sub groups identified within the analysis in a way that could be considered discriminatory. Overall crash rates at the learner licence stage are not significantly different from crash rates at the full licence stage, for drivers aged to years old. This suggests that the supervision requirements and learner theory test may be adequate to prepare learner drivers for risks that they face while driving, at least relative to fully lice nsed drivers. However, as noted above, crash rates for active learner drivers may be higher than those calculated here, as it is possible that there is a higher proportion of people with learner licences who are not active drivers compared to full licence holders. Further research into rates of active driving for learners is needed to determine whether learner crash rates are in fact the same as those for fully licensed drivers. The most obvious safety related outcome for Class that the GDLS could attemp t to influence is the relatively high crash rate for drivers with restricted licences, particularly those aged and years old. Given that the transition from supervised to unsupervised driving must occur at some point, the question is whether the cond itions under which this occurs are optimal, that is, whether the GDLS is adequately designed to cope with the change in crash rates that accompanies the transition from a learner to a restricted licence. Possible changes include increasing the minimum age for obtaining a restricted licence (currently . years) or increasing the minimum learner licence duration (currently months) so that drivers are older andor have held a learner licence for longer and presumably have more driving experience on averag e when they obtain their restricted licence. However, such changes would have a range of effects including delaying peoples progression through the licensing stages, which may affect ability access employment or education. Further strengthening the prac tical driving test for obtaining a restricted licence could also be considered, but in this study we found no clear evidence that an earlier strengthening of this test led to a reduction in crash rates (see section . below). In any case, any safety related benefits of such changes would need to be balanced against other impacts in a broader analysis of their effects, which is beyond the scope of this report.
Implications for rider licensing . . . .. Estimated safety impacts of the to GDLS changes . Context for analysis of the changes . . Estimated effects on crash rates of increasing the minimum riding ages (August ) . . . . Estimated effects on crash rates of strengthening the learner and restricted practical tests (October ) . . . Estimated effects on crash rates outcomes of rebalancing penalties for licensing breaches (December ) . . . .. Comparison of crash rates for restricted and fully licensed riders . .. Is the night time riding restriction for restricted riders effective . .. Comparison of characteristics and crash rates for riders choosing CBTA versus those choosing traditional pr actical tests . . . Characteristics of riders choosing CBTA versus those choosing practical tests Comparison of crash rates for riders choosing CBTA versus those choosing practical tests . . . . .. Relationships between progression through the motorcycle licensing stages, rider demographics, and crash rates . . . Fouryear progression status: Relationships to rider characteristics . Progression vs non progression: Relationships to crash rates . Progression duration: Rel ationships to rider characteristics . Progression duration: Relationships to crash rates . . . Appendix: Literature review . . . .. Introduction and scope of this literature review . . .. Studies of the New Zealand GDLS . . . Effects of introducing the three stage GDLS . . Relationships between crash rates and driving experience or progression through the licensing stages . . . Other studies of the New Zealand GDLS . . .. A selection of international literature . . . Meta studies of the effects of introducing a GDLS . . Effectiveness of specific driving restrictions and compliance with restrictions Effectiveness of targeted training for motorcycle riders . Selected other studies . . . References . . . .
Important disclaimer by the AuditorGeneral on audited financial statements on this website
Important parts of the strategy include:
Improved return from maintenance Ongoing improvements to further improve the returns from maintenance .
Improvements along the corridor could include a new second river crossing providing improved pedestrian and cycling access. A second bridge alone would not resolve resilience issues, this would require a replacement of the SH bridge. Work could start in for preimplementation and property purchase for a second bridge, with construction starting in and taking two years to complete.
ImprovementsUpper , , ,
ImprovementsUpper
Improving the driver licensing system, while maintaining road safety.
In , Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency began a national monitoring programme to assess vehicle emissions across the state highway network. This assessment used data gathered from selected sites using passive samplers to measure nitrogen dioxide as a proxy for vehiclerelated air pollution.
In the Land Transport Rule: Vehicle Exhaust Emissions was amended to make changes to the requirements relating to exhaust emissions standards for new and imported used vehicles operating on New Zealand roads. Several minor technical amendments were also made.
In and , we papers on topics: future travel demand, transport and economic development, and future funding of the transport system. These were followed in by a paper that looked at how regulation of transport might need to change in response to new technologies.
In public transport was primarily planned by local authorities, subsidised by local and central government, and based on large physical infrastructure. In our urban transport systems could be very different. As our cities grow and new transport technologies and services open up, so do new opportunities and risks. How we plan and use public transport must evolve so we can make our cities better places to live, while making mobility cheaper, safer, more accessible and better for our environment.
In , as part of this project, we released a series of papers which examine different approaches to regulation and the potential influence of new technologies. These are available on request.
In , the Government and Auckland Council joined up to address these challenges and ensure the opportunities of a growing and diverse city are maximised. This strategic approach to transport was agreed through the Auckland Transport Alignment Project (ATAP). ATAP will ensure Auckland has a transport system that encourages more people to use public transport, to walk and to cycle, addresses congestion, increases accessibility, reduces negative impacts on the environment and sees a reduction in deaths and serious injuries on our roads.
In , we released a series of foundation papers as part of our Regulation project, which examined different approaches to the regulation and potential influence of new technologies. These papers were commissioned to generate new thinking and help stimulate debate.
In , we undertook a review of the SPS regulatory environment to consider if it was fit for purpose and flexible enough to accommodate new technologies. New SPS rules came into effect on October as part of the Land Transport Amendment Act , as did related Land Transport Rules Operator Licensing , Work Time and Logbooks and Driver Licensing .
In , officials from the Ministry of Transport and the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment reviewed each aspect of the financial security regime for offshore installations to determine their relevance, effectiveness and suitability.
In , the Government and Auckland Council signed a heads of agreement, under which the Government would fund of the City Rail Link (CRL), subject to the terms of the agreement being put in place.
In , the Minister of Transport, following support from Auckland Council, asked us to do work to enable a regional fuel tax in Auckland. At the end of , we provided briefing papers about how a regional fuel tax in Auckland could be implemented and the Minister took proposals to Cabinet. Early in , Cabinet approved the introduction of a Bill and we prepared regulatory impact assessments (RIAs). The Bill was considered by the Finance and Expenditure Select Committee and was passed by Parliament into law. The Land Transport Management (Regional Fuel Tax) Amendment Act came into effect in June .
In , we set up a working group to complete a review of the upper North Island supply chain. The Government released the groups final report in November , and Cabinet tasked Ministry of Transport officials to work with Treasury and the Provincial Development Unit to consider the options the working group explored for moving the Port of Auckland (POAL). To help our analysis of the working groups options and recommendations, we commissioned Sapere, an economic consultancy, to produce an independent report. The report was released in July .
In MEPC adopted the Initial IMO Strategy on reduction of GHG emissions from ships The Initial Strategy sets out a clear vision for international shipping, the levels of ambition to reduce GHG emissions, guiding principles, as well as short , mid and long term measures. The levels of ambition agreed to in the Initial Strategy include: . reducing CO emissions by at least percent by , pursuing efforts towards percent by , compared to ; and . peaking GHG emissions as soon as possible and reducing the total annual GHG emissions by at least percent by compared to .
In the Ministers of Transport and Regional Economic Development asked us to look at the case for investing in rail in Northland, including building the MPL.
In , the Government transport agencies agreed a common outcomes framework for the sector that ties in with our strategic framework.
In Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency consulted on a number of improvements to the driver licensing system that would be made through the Land Transport (Driver Licensing Rule) . Options on how to progress this work are still being considered.
In we developed Hei Arataki the Ministrys Mori strategy to improve transport outcomes for Mori. Hei Arataki
In we some models to reflect:
In we, together with the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, commissioned a study to quantify the potential benefits of drones to the New Zealand economy and support crossgovernment work towards the efficient integration of drones into our transport system. The study was released by the Minister of Transport in June and we followed this up with a presentation in August for government and aviation sector stakeholders.
In , Cabinet agreed to accede to Annex VI, subject to undertaking a National Interest Assessment. This assessment was completed in June and it was recommended that accession to Annex VI was in New Zealands interests.
In , we worked with Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency, NZ Police, local government and other relevant agencies to finalise a set of measures to assess progress against GPS priorities and objectives. Where the data are available, we reported these measures in the first years progress report in July .
In the Ministry of Transport commissioned Richard Paling Consulting to undertake an analysis of the Auckland content of the National Household Travel Survey over the period from to . The results are set out in the report
In , the Ministry of Transport commissioned MRCagney to research equity in Aucklands transport system and to identify potential policy approached to address inequities.
In , the Ministry of Transport commissioned MRCagney to research equity in Aucklands transport system and to identify potential policy approaches to address inequities. Equity in this research refers to the different distributional impacts experienced by different population groups.
In , Te Manat Waka commissioned MartinJenkins to conduct an independent review of the Road Safety Investment and Delivery.
In , the Ministry of Transport engaged Deloitte to undertake an independent review of system issues impacting the Auckland metro rail network (AMRN). As part of this, Deloitte was to identify and articulate whether any system level issues may have contributed to the rolling contact fatigue (RCF) issues experienced on the AMRN and make recommendations on future changes to the system. This work was driven by the identification that severe RCF on the AMRN in and caused significant disruption.
In , the Public Transport Operating Model (PTOM) was reviewed, with a focus on:
In , the Ministry of Transport conducted baseline research to understand the transport attitudes, perceptions and behaviours of Community Service Card holders before the Community Connect programme launched in July . The survey was run between August and October which was over the period that universal half price public transport fares were available.
In , the Secretary for Transport set up an Interim Aviation Council (IAC) to provide system
In April , NZ Infra approached the Government with an unsolicited option for an alternative plan for the delivery and financing of CCM. Recognising that the approaches of Waka Kotahi and NZ Infra were different, later in , the Minister of Transport sought further advice about the models.
In April , the Infrastructure Industry Reference Group (IRG), supported by Crown Infrastructure Partners, started the process of identifying infrastructure projects that could be part of an economic stimulus package to respond to the impacts of COVID within New Zealand.
In August , the Government established the NZD million Urban Cycleways Fund, which led to the NZD million Urban Cycleways Programme being delivered. The purpose of the programme was to improve how cycling infrastructure was set up in the main urban centres.
In August , the Minister of Transport established an Electric Vehicles Programme Leadership Group across business, local and central government, to champion the programme and promote the initiatives within it. Its initial intent was to find out what stops people buying EVs and recommend ways to remove those barriers.
In August , on behalf of the Minister of Transport, Waka Kotahi consulted on proposed changes to Land Transport Rules, set out in Land Transport Rule: Regulatory Stewardship (Omnibus) Amendment .
In August , on behalf of the Minister of Transport, Waka Kotahi consulted on proposed changes to Land Transport Rules, set out in Land Transport Rule: Regulatory Stewardship (Omnibus) Amendment . This included a number of minor and technical changes to the Land Transport Rule: Vehicle Dimensions and Mass .
In August , Cabinet agreed to replace PTOM with the Sustainable Public Transport Framework (SPTF).
In August we issued a draft advice note to Public Transport Authorities (PTAs) which sets out how NZTA intends to work with PTAs to increase the private share of public transport expenditure. This can be found on our website https:www.nzta.govt.nzassetsWalkingCycling andPublic Transportdocsincreasingtheprivateshareofpublic transportexpenditurepta advicenote august.pdf The note contains a website link to definitions of private share of public transport which will enable a common basis for reporting: Investment and expenditure NZ Transport Agency Waka Kotahi (nzta.govt.nz). I encourage you to ensure that your staff are familiar with these specific requirements in relation to your organisations activities. To assist with streamlining reporting, it would be helpful if you could nominate to your NZTA Director of Regional Relationships a person from your organisation who will be responsible for quarterly reporting. If you have any questions, please contact the Director of Regional Relationships for your region. We look forward to continuing to work closely with you in coming months as we refine what approved organisations are expected to focus and report on from January onwards.
In Confidence Office of the Minister of Transport Cabinet Legislation Committee
In December , the Minister for Transport announced increases to petrol excise duty and road user charges for , , and . In order to use the funds by these increases to complete the Roads of National Significance project by the deadline, some small changes were made to GPS :
In December , Cabinet agreed to the release of a discussion document on options to improve the financial assurance regime and address the issues found during the review. A document describing the results of modelling of oil spill scenarios in New Zealand was also released.
In December , Cabinet considered the working groups final report and noted the POAL was not viable as the upper North Islands primary port over the long term.
In December , Te Manat Waka released the Transport Evidence Base Strategy (TEBS) that comprises the Evaluation Strategy and the Domain Plan and Research Strategy . The purpose of the TEBS is to create an environment to ensure data, information, research and evaluation play a key role in shaping the transport policy landscape and enable evidencebased decision making.
In December , The Ministry released the Transport Evidence Base Strategy (TEBS ) that comprises the Evaluation Strategy and the Domain Plan and Research Strategy . The purpose of the TEB S is to create an environment to ensure data, information, research and evaluation play a key role in shaping the transport policy landscape and enable evidence based decision making.
In December , The Ministry released the Transport Evidence Base Strategy (TEBS) that comprises the Evaluation Strategy and the Domain Plan and Research Strategy . The purpose of the TEBS is to create an environment to ensure data, information, research and evaluation play a key role in shaping the transport policy landscape and enable evidencebased decision making.
In December the Minister of Transport sought Cabinet approval to a work programme that supports the Governments commitments to decarbonise the public transport bus fleet.
In December , the Independent Expert Panel on Drug Driving (the Panel) provided Ministers with recommendations for criminal limits and infringement thresholds for blood drug concentrations.
In February , Cabinet agreed to a public consultation on the draft amendment rules in the Accessible Streets Regulatory Package. Waka Kotahi hosted the consultation between March and May.
In February the Minister of Transport agreed to a first principles review to determine what the Government wants to achieve for an air navigation system now and into the future.
In January , the Government announced the NZD billion New Zealand Upgrade Programme, which included NZD. billion of Crown investment across land transport projects in rail, roads, public transport and walking and cycling infrastructure across New Zealand.
In January , the Government announced its committed to decarbonising the public transport bus fleet. By , the Government will only allow zeroemission public transport buses to be purchased. This commitment targets complete decarbonisation of the public transport bus fleet by .
In January Ministers announced Cabinets decisions on a preferred way forward for the Auckland Light Rail project. This includes decisions on the Governments preferred option and the approach to detailed project development, governance and delivery. This is in response to the recommendations that project sponsors received from the Establishment Unit.
In July , the Government confirmed that users of the Tauranga Eastern Link would pay a toll. Construction began on the road in early . Tolling the road meant construction was brought forward by around years.
In July the research report and supplementary information were released.
In June Cabinet decided not to proceed with the tests following advice it would be more expensive and less effective than originally anticipated. However, Cabinet did agree to amend the Vehicle Exhaust Emissions Rule to introduce requirements for a visible smoke test, to check vehicles do not emit a continuous stream of smoke for a certain amount of time. This came into effect in October after a regulatory impact and business compliance cost statement were completed.
In June , the Government announced Crown funding to accelerate a number of regionally important state highway projects that would be rolled out in tranches across the country.
In June , the Land Transport Management (Regional Fuel Tax) Regulations came into effect defining the situations when someone could claim a regional fuel tax rebate.
In June , Cabinet directed us to run a parallel process, also known as the twintrack process, with Waka Kotahi and NZ Infra so their options for developing CCM could be evaluated against a common set of criteria and the Government could choose a preferred delivery partner.
In June , Cabinet directed us, together with Treasury, to build on the previous work. With support from ATAP agencies, and the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development, we are developing options for the public service delivery of CCM that could be presented to the new Government following the general election.
In June , the IM O adopted two short term measures which came into effect this year
In March , Cabinet asked us to investigate the feasibility and desirability of road pricing and parking levies in Auckland.
In March , we released the business case, which explored options in depth. In September and January the Government announced investment in Northland rail.
In March Government set aside million for an aviation relief package as part of the . billion COVID support package. Of the million, million was allocated to provide short term funding support to airlines and other aviation carriers to ensure capacity is provided on key international airfreight routes the IAFC scheme.
In March , the Government established a COVID support package including an initial NZD million to support the aviation sector. From this amount, million was committed to the International Air Freight Capacity (IAFC) scheme to ensure critical supplies could continue to flow to and from New Zealand. The IAFC scheme ended in April .
In March , the investment package was announced.
In March , the Minister announced the next steps for the City Centre to Mngere (CCM) project. This announcement followed months of collaborative work between the Ministry, the Treasury and other central and local government agencies to inform the Governments decision.
In March a Bill to establish the SPTF was introduced to Parliament.
In March and April we held roadshows across the country for local government representatives and regional stakeholders. Overall, we received support for a more ambitious approach, as well as positive feedback on the direction and content of the document we planned to consult the public on later in .
In May we commissioned research into what impacts PTOM had on bus driver employment conditions and wage rates. The research found PTOM had resulted in a more competitive market for operators tendering for contracts and its impacts on bus drivers employment conditions and wage rates varied by region, and largely depended on whether bus drivers remained with the same operator, moved to a new operator, left or entered the industry.
In May Cabinet authorised ministers to develop the draft amendments to the Land Transport Rules for the proposed Accessible Streets Package. The amendments were designed to reflect the new ways that people travel and to increase their safety when using the transport system.
In May , Cabinet agreed to proposals to strengthen the financial security regime for offshore installations, which would need more legislative change than previously agreed on, including a Maritime Transport (Offshore Installations) Amendment Bill and amendments to Part and Part of the Marine Protection Rules.
In May , based on the Future of Rail review, the Government agreed in principle to a resilient and reliable rail system that would deliver on the transport outcomes and wider benefits it sought.
In November and November , we commissioned CBG Health Research Ltd to gather information from the panel on attitudes to transport technologies such as autonomous vehicles and electric vehicles. Two reports were produced.
In November , the Government announced the Provincial Growth Fund (PGF), an NZD billion, year investment focused on regional economic development in New Zealand.
In November , the Government agreed to publish the Road to Zero strategy for and the initial year action plan. We the strategy and plan in December .
In November , the Minister for Disability Issues launched the Disability Action Plan , which replaces the previous Disability Action Plan . As part of the Disability Action Plan, we will conduct a strategic assessment of the services provided for people with different transport needs. This includes a review of the SuperGold Card Scheme. We have yet to confirm when this review will start.
In October , we changed the survey from a face to face survey with a day travel diary to a day travel diary completed online. Participants were also offered the option of using a Travel Logger (GPS device) to help them remember where they travelled.
In October , Cabinet agreed that a new Bill would be drafted, making a number of amendments to the current legislation.
In October , Cabinet agreed that a new Bill would be drafted, making a number of amendments to the current legislation. Key policy decisions included:
In October , Cabinet considered options to address the significant number of expiring learner and restricted driver licences, and that not enough people were aware that they expired after years.
In October , Cabinet considered options to address the significant number of expiring learner and restricted driver licences, as not enough people were aware that they expired after years.
In October , the New Zealand government agreed the following timetable setting out when stricter noxious emission standards apply to vehicles entering the country:
In October , the Government released New Zealands Road Safety Objectives, which outlines a plan over the next three years for tackling our most challenging road safety issues.
In October , the Government replaced Road to Zero with New Zealands Road Safety Objectives, which set the Governments road safety priorities for the next three years. You can find out more about this
In Phase , a stocktake of funding, charging and pricing arrangements across road, rail and maritime transport was completed. An analysis on the gap between the requirements for costs and charges information and what is currently available is also included in the report.
In Phase , data on the estimated costs of road safety and freight transport was collected as well as the costs and benefits of selected road vehicle technologies.
In September the Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee agreed on the key public policy transport objectives for the metro rail transport system.
In September the Government agreed on the public policy transport objectives for the metro rail transport system in Auckland and Wellington. Since then, the Government has funded a number of metro rail projects in both cities, which has significantly increased the number of passengers on metro rail services.
In September , the Government agreed New Zealand would participate in CORSIA when it comes into effect on January . In , the Government reconfirmed this decision agreeing that CORSIA would be implemented in New Zealand via the Civil Aviation Bill, which will be given effect to in the
In September we consulted stakeholders about drone safety and regulation, and released a summary of their feedback in late . We expect to consult the public on the proposals later this year.
In September we invited public feedback on the Green Freight Background Paper which explored the challenges and opportunities of transitioning road freight transport to alternative fuels. In May we released Green Freight: , a strategic working paper which incorporated stakeholder feedback from the Green Freight Background Paper and outlined options that the Government could implement over the next years.
In September , we went out to selected stakeholders across the aviation sector and drone user groups to test our early thinking on a range of possible regulatory options.
In September , the Government agreed to extend the IAFC scheme until the end of March .
In September , the previous Ministers agreed to amend the Panels TOR to enable the Panel to recommend criminal limits and thresholds based on:
In September the then Associate Minister of Transport agreed that the Ministry and Maritime
In September , Cabinet agreed to a set of actions to support the Governments goal that, by
In accordance with the laws and regulations of each Party , the designated airline of a Party shall have the right:
In addition to Board appointments for CAA, Maritime NZ and TAIC, you have been delegated
In addition to funding provided through the LTMA process, the Government can also contribute additional Crown funding directly to transport projects or programmes to advance or achieve certain outcomes, priorities or objectives outside of the LTMA process.
In addition to the core accountability mechanisms, you will have regular meetings with Crown entity chairs to discuss entity governance, performance and key risks. The Ministry will provide you with advice to assist in your engagement with board chairs. We also recommend you regularly engage with the entity boards, to discuss key opportunities and risks across the entities . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
In addition, GPS also:
In addition, I have asked for the Government Policy Statement (GPS) on Land Transport to have a greater focus on reconstruction of damaged infrastructure, as well as building greater resilience so our transport network can better withstand the increasing frequency of extreme weather events.
In addition, I would like you to reflect how the Agencys priorities will help the public better understand your contribution to the rebuild and recovery of roading assets, outline how Budget initiatives will successfully be implemented and performance assessed, and set out the steps that are being taken to address areas where performance has been below exp ectations, including safety (in particular improving performance within the Road to Zero programme) and achievement of significant capital milestones.
In addition, ownership and operation of the camera network will transfer from the police to Waka Kotahi, and safety cameras will be located on the highest risk parts of the network and have clear signage.
In addition, there has been a lack of integration between road and rail network investments.
In an integrated system, we will have confidence that all manned and unmanned aircraft are appropriately equipped and can operate safely in any given airspace. This means we need to address the challenges presented by safety, physical security, cyber security, privacy and enforcement.
In collaboration with KiwiRail, we also held hui in March . These were held in Otiria, Whangrei and Te Hana.
In collaboration with other government departments, we have Taking flight: an aviation system for the automated age. This paper sets out the Governments vision, highlevel objectives and the fundamental building blocks that will be the basis for ongoing work to integrate drones into the aviation system and wider transport sector.
In collaboration with the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, we commissioned a study to quantify the potential benefits of drones to the New Zealand economy, and to support crossgovernment work towards the efficient integration of drones into our transport system.
In delivering value for money, investment decisions need to transparently demonstrate the: return on the investment expected benefits compared with expected cost contributio n towards the desired GPS results reason for the decisions, especially where there is a benefit cost ratio lower than would normally be required for inclusion in the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP).
In determining a view on the value for money from the State Highway Maintenance Activity Class, the Review Team considered the context of how the investment level was established and how the investment was delivered.
In highdensity urban areas, we envisaged a greater need for rapid transit systems that is, high frequency buses, light rail, and trains travelling on dedicated corridors to move large volumes of people quickly, safely and cleanly.
In late and early , we carried out public consultation on proposals for inservice emissions testing as part of Warrant and Certificate of Fitness requirements for all vehicles on New Zealand roads.
In most cases, it is the responsibility of the Policy team member to develop their own presentationspeech material. At each stage of developing your material, there are different aspects to consider. The following points are not an exhaustive list, but act as a guide and a prompt. Research and prepare
In order to identify the role of drones and drone integration in the future aviation system, we needed to understand more about how they can be used and the full extent of the benefits that they provide.
In our September letter regarding decisions on the National Land Transport Programme, we informed you of the relevant Ministerial expectations set out in the Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS ) that apply to approved organisations and the terms and conditions relating to those expectations. We are following up with specific requirements in relation to and private share of public transport expenditure, and reporting. This information is set out in Attachment and on the NZTA website and may be from time to time. We will notify your organisation of any changes . Ministerial expectations in GPS The GPS includes a Statement of Ministerial Expectations for NZTA and the sector in general. NZTA is expected to ensure that Road Controlling Authorities and Public Transport Authorities take appropriate steps to meet the Ministerial expectations, where applicable, and comply with selfassessment and reporting requirements . This is to demonstrate the steps that an approved organisation has taken to meet relevant expectations (including those for which there may be specific requirements).
In recognition of the importance of these proposals and their potential impacts, the Minister has extended engagement on the transport OICs to working days.
In response to ATAPs findings, the Government and Auckland Council established The Congestion Question project. A terms of reference was agreed, with the overall goal being to, undertake a thorough investigation sufficient to support a decision on whether or not to proceed with introducing pricing for demand management purposes in Auckland.
In response to Russias invasion of Ukraine, the Government has imposed sanctions to restrict some ships and aircraft from entering New Zealand.
In response to continued high fuel prices placing pressure on household budgets, the Government has announced an extension to the temporary transport support measures:
In response to continued high fuel prices placing pressure on household budgets, the Government has extended the temporary transport support measures:
In response to the review and consultation the Government increased the schemes funding to provide for growing demand. They put a freeze on new services entering the scheme to limit how much it cost to maintain it.
In response to these natural events, and the needs of system users, the transport network has been built back better Additional safety barriers on SH provide greater protection to system users. Enhanced stopping areas consider the needs of the community by creating more opportunities for businesses to trade. A cycle walk facility provides the community and tourists with opportunities to explore the town in a more environmentally sustainable way. And rockfall protection and a seawall have streng thened the resilience of transport links.
In response, the Government
In summary Aucklanders are traveling further in less time
In terms of action points, I note Rebecca that you will send to me PDFs of:
In terms of the first issue, I would also like to see the structures and how those structures are locked into the seabed. As I said, I walk the Waikanae beach and see both the navigational aids and the area where ships harbour on top of the cruise ships that just park out in the bay.
In the Ministry of Transports vehicle type categorisation, light vehicles (those with a gross vehicle mass up to kg) have been categorised into light passenger vehicles and light commercial vehicles. This categorisation is consistent with international standards, such as the EMEPEEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook
In the coming years, the amount of money available for investment in our land transport network will come under increased pressure. In addition to the Governments road maintenance programme, funding is needed for:
In the financial years from to about . households were invited to participate in the survey. From June , the survey expanded to a sample of , households.
In the first drone forum we set out our work programmes, explained our achievements so far and discussed the next steps with stakeholders.
In the first five weeks after CAA certification, there were police drone flights. The Post September Patient privacy compromised at Nelson Hospital as unauthorised drone flights investigated Quoted from article: CAA deputy chief executive aviation safety, David Harrison, confirmed they had received a complaint from Nelson Hospital. At this time there is insufficient information to identify the operator(s), which restricts our ability to make further enquiries, he said. Civil aviation rules required drone operators to gain consent of the property owner or person in charge of the land they were flying over, and breaching those rules was an offence, he said. There are a number of enforcement options available to the Director of Aviation, which range from a formal written warning through to prosecution. Fees and penalties can vary. Any filming of people from drones without consent fell under the Privacy Act and was outside the CAAs jurisdiction, he said. Stuff
In the first phase of the project, from April to the end of , we established baseline data and summarised previous research and international schemes. The second phase, a more detailed investigation of options, began at the end of . No has been set for a decision, but at the end of the project, the Government and Auckland Council will have a clear understanding of the requirements and likely outcomes of a congestion pricing system for Auckland, and will be able to make decisions about whether to introduce it.
In the paper to cabinet from the Minister of Transport seeking agreement to the GPS , discussion on value for money inclu ded the following:
In the short term, our focus is on bringing back connectivity to communities impacted by recent events. The Government has committed an initial million for Waka Kotahi and local councils to assess and fix roads. And we have established a Cyclone Recovery Task For ce to advise the Government on the work that is required for the recovery and how we can improve the resilience of our system.
In the year to June, vehicles or people collided with trains across the national rail network and there were near misses. At public level crossings alone, there were collisions and near misses. Near misses at level crossings have steadily increased since a low of in . All of the collisions at level crossings and per cent of near misses were at crossings that already have active protection. UPCOMING MEETINGSEVENTS August Announcement of Government Policy Statement for Land Transport at Drury Interchange. Prime Minister Chris Hipkins and Minister Parker will be attending.
In this project we modelled the impact of agglomeration that is, businesses being located near each other to increase their access to resources and markets and a range of other factors that have an effect on the location of economic activity in New Zealand. We modelled different possible futures and the main insights from our work were that:
In this section, you can access copies of the advice the Minister of Transport provided to Cabinet, as well as records of the resulting decisions. This section also includes copies of Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transports regulatory impact assessments of these proposals.
In todays environment t he Treasury expects Chief Executives to ensure that finances of significant projects and programmes are managed, value is optimised, the objectives of the projects and programmes are achieved, and the benefits are realised.
In your rohe this is for Eastland Port
In your rohe this is for Port Otago Limited.
Inprinciple agreement to a resilient and reliable rail system
Intext citation Reference list .(Neville, ) or Neville () stated that . (p. ). Neville, C. (). The complete guide to referencing and avoiding plagiarism (nd ed.). New York, NY: Open University Press.
Intext citation The APA style consists mainly of the authors last name and the year of publication (and page numbers if it is directly quoted) in round brackets and placed within the text. If there is no discernible author, the title and are used.
Inadequate unacceptable Evidence shows large deficiencies in meeting key requirementstargets. Significant improvement required of systems, processes and procedures which are not understood or performed. Inadequate controls are established to achieve performance and could pose a risk of impact on customersroad users.
Include a new project in the Output Plan with a deliverable Provide advice to Minister on the scope of any changes required to the speed rule in Q.
Include a new project in the Output Plan with the following deliverables:
Include a new project in the Output Plan with two deliverables:
Include a new project in the Output Plan with two deliverables: Provide support for Cabinet oral item on ALR WHC in Q Draft Cabinet paper to Minister on emerging preferred option in Q
Include a new project in the Output Plan with two following deliverables:
Increase access to driver licensing and training
Increase understanding of vehicle safety
Increased levels of capital expenditure (typically on new or improved assets) is contributing the level of maintenance investment needed (noting the increased length and complexity of assets requiring maintenance). It was observed that the investment forecast to account for this over the period was realised and similar provisions made for the period.
Increases to PED and RUC announced for next years
Increases to Petrol Excise Duty and Road User Charges
Increases to parking and towage fees
Increasing PED and RUC following COVID
Increasing the safety and accessibility of our footpaths, shared paths, cycle lanes and cycle paths, and encouraging active modes of transport.
Increasing the uptake of electric vehicles to support decarbonisation of the transport sector.
Independent Expert Panel on Drug Driving (the Panel).
Independent Expert Panel on Drug Driving appointed
Independent Expert Panel on Drug Driving completes its final report on recommending statutory limits for drug concentrations related to impaired driving
Independent Expert Panel on Drug Driving provides interim advice on criminal limits and blood infringement thresholds
Independent Expert Panel on Drug Driving provides interim advice on criminal limits for THC and methamphetamine
Independent Expert Panel on Drug Driving provides interim advice on oral and blood drug concentrations in an impaired driving context
Independent Report on Upper North Island Supply Chain Strategy Released
Independent Review Function
Independent report released
Independent review of Road to Zero road safety investment released
Indicative Asset Sustainability ranges ( to )
Indicative package of improvements developed from the Recommended Programme of Investment
Indicative priorities for GPS
Indicative priorities for GPS Given the scale of the change sought, we are proposing to elevate emissions reduction to become an overarching focus for GPS , subject to further consultation. This is to ensure that the implications for emissions reduction are a core consideration for all investment decisions. This will be supported by five proposed strategic priorities : sustainable urban development safety integrated freight system maint aining and operating the system resilience .
Indicative strategic priorities
Indicative strategic priorities for GPS
Indicative strategic priorities for GPS
Indicative strategic priorities for GPS
Indicative strategic priorities for GPS
Influencing the international environment New Zealands transport regulatory systems are significantly shaped by international obligations, standards and recommended practices. New Zealand benefits strongly from international transport regulatory frameworks, which underpin our international connections and facilitate our trade in goods and services. As steward of the transport system, the Ministrys role is to: monitor and understand what is happening internationally, and how it affects, or may in future affect, New Zealands transport system influence relevant international standards to protect and promote New Zealands interests ensure New Zealand meets its international transport commitments . A wide range of international organisations influence New Zealands transport settings. Some of the key organisations the Ministry works with, and their role, are: The International Civil Aviation Organisation : sets standards and regulations for the aviation sector (international safety, security, and environmental protections). International Maritime Organisation: sets standards and regulations for the maritime sector (international safety, security, and environmental protections). International Labour Organisation: s ets conditions of work and employment on ships (under the Maritime Labour Convention). United Nations working parties: New Zealand has obligations as a party to two United Nations Agreements relating to road vehicle and road vehicle standards. Under these agreements, regulations and standards are set to improve road safety and facilitate international trade. World Meteorological Organisation: Fulfils New Zealands obligations under the World Meteorological Organization, the United Nations specialised agency for weather, climate, and water, by way of the Ministrys contract with MetService Your engagement at the international level is important The Ministry will provide advice on where we consider there will be good value in your engagement in Ministerial level forums. For example, airlines are able to operate international services only where the right to do so has been expressly permitted in a bilateral or multilateral air services agreement (ASA). The Ministers of Transport and Foreign Affairs jointly approve the mandate for air services negotiations and approve the outcomes where they involve a treaty action. Most recently, a new air services agreement was finalised in September , following the latest ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations) Working Group Meeting on Regional Air Services Agreement. This underlines the importance of air connectivity for trade, tourism, education and other people topeople links. Key opportunities over the next year may include: The Transport and Infrastructure Council Pacific Transport Ministerial level meetings RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT DELIVERING YOUR PRIORITIES
Influencing the international environment New Zealands transport regulatory systems are significantly shaped by international obligations, standards and recommended practices. New Zealand benefits strongly from international transport regulatory frameworks, which underpin our international connections and facilitate our trade in goods and services. The Ministry and the Crown Entities work together to: monitor and understand what is happening internationally, and how it affects, or may in future affect, New Zealands transport system influence relevant international standards to protect and promote New Zealands interests ensure New Zealand meets its international transport commitments . A wide range of international organisations influence New Zealands transport settings. Some of the key organisations the Ministry works with , and their role, are: The International Civil Aviation Organisation : sets standards and regulations for the aviation sector (international safety, security, and environmental protections). International Maritime Organisation: sets standards and regulations for the maritime sector (international safety, security, and environmental protections). International Labour Organisation: s ets conditions of work and employment on ships (under the Maritime Labour Convention). United Nations working parties: New Zealand has obligations as a party to two United Nations Agreements relating to road vehicle and road vehicle standards. Under these agreements, regulations and standards are set to improve road safety and facilitate international trade. World Meteorological Organisation: Fulfils New Zealands obligations under the World Meteorological Organization, the United Nations specialised agency for weather, climate, and water, by way of the Ministrys contract with MetService Your engagement at the international level is important The Ministry will provide advice on where we consider there will be good value in your engagement in Ministerial level forums. For example, airlines are able to operate international services only where the right to do so has been expressly permitted in a bilateral or multilateral air services agreement (ASA). The Ministers of Transport and Foreign Affairs jointly approve the mandate for air services negotiations and approve the outcomes where they involve a treaty action. Most recently, a new air services agreement was finalised in September , following the latest ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations) Working Group Meeting on Regional Air Services Agreement. This underlines the importance of air connectivity for trade, tourism, education and other people topeople links. Key opportunities over the next year may include: The Transport and Infrastructure Council Pacific Transport Ministerial level meetings RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT DELIVERING YOUR PRIORITIES
Influencing travel demand and transport choices.
Information and education can help people to make more informed travel decisions. Examples of these include travel planning apps , social media marketing, information provision, and mass media campaigns. The greatest benefits are often achieved when economic and educational instruments are used alongside complementary measures, such as infrastructure provision and legislative change. Regulation You have a range of tools in the transport regulatory system to deliver durable transport outcomes Transport regulation gives confidence to those who use the transport system. It create s an enabling environment for firms and individuals, protect s the rights , safety and security of citizens, and ensures the delivery of public goods and services. The system is comprised of primary and secondary legislation (which includes regulations, rules, and other instruments) and local government by laws. You are responsible for the passage of primary transport legislation through Parliament. The Ministry supports you to do this. Regulations set out associated offences and penalties, fees, and charges Transport regulations mainly set out the associated rule related offences and penalties, and fees and charges that fund the work of the transport agencies. The Ministry leads the development of these with involvement from transport agencies and SOEs , and the NZ Police depending on the subject. Regulations must be approved by Cabinet. Transport rules contain detailed standards, requirements and procedures that govern transport activities Transport rules are the most common form of delegated legislation for transport. Rules contain detailed technical standards, requirements, and procedures governing transport activities within modes. You are empowered under primary legislation to make these rules. You are expected to advise Cabinet you intend to make a rule if there would be wide ranging impacts. There is an expedited rule making process where urgent changes can be made by Order in Council . The transport Crown entities develop most transport rules with the Ministry s support , but the Ministry leads policy development on significant rules. Transport instruments support a more flexible regulator y system Transport instruments improve the flexibility of the rule making process by having more customised consultation requirements, meaning changes that only affect a small number of transport users can be progressed quickly. Transport instruments are more easily amended in response to technological innovation. As Transport Minister you have powers to amend, replace or disallow some local government by laws. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT KEY TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES
Information for the fuel industry is available on the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment Trading Standards website:
Information for the shipping industry and the new marine protection rules is on the Maritime New Zealand website:
Information in the report
Information release: Advice provided to the Minister on the potential impact of COVID on land transport revenue and the NLTF
Information sessions Euro VI consultation
Information sheet: Programme business case: Intervention Hierarchy https:www.nzta.govt.nza ssetsresourcesThe BusinessCase ApproachPBC intervention hierarchy.pdf The NZTA planning and investment principles include optimising the provision and use of the land transport system. In order to achieve value for money, the Transport Agency seeks an integrated, multimodal network that will optimise the use of and investment in the network.
Informing the Governments strategic approach to reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from road freight in New Zealand.
Infrastructure Industry Reference Group set up
InfrastructureUpper , , ,
Initial Briefing to Select Committee
Inland Revenue has issued tax advice on the
Innovation and technolo gy are used to increase the net benefits from land transport investment and use Co ordinated data collection and sharing. Invest in digital technologies and use and develop the latest traffic operations technology.
Innovation and technology are used to increase net benefits from land transport investment and use Innovation and technology can support value for money by providing alternatives or better choices in the way investments are made and used. Revised reporting measures for the GPS https:www.transport.govt.nzas setsImportUploadsOur WorkDocumentsFinal GPS measures Sept .pdf Page Table setting out short term results, proposed measures and reporting requirements for pr iority value for money.
Insights All regions are within the standard variance of hours completed ( hours per DTO per week, or higher). NZTA is continuing discussions with VTNZ on levers to increase DTO output (e.g., reduction in operational shrinkage the time when DTOs are not actively testing), increased overtime, and further expanded hours of operation.
Insights from our research
Insights from the project
Insights from this analysis are included below. NZTA can confirm that it does not anticipate a longer term trend of productivity issues based on our analysis to . NZTA is continuing to work closely with VTNZ to refine productivity reporting and analysis and will update you promptly if productivity becomes a notable concern.
Insights on EV charging: We will be releasing the draft EV charging strategy shortly. I encourage you to submit as part of the consultation process, and officials will engage with you and other industry players to ensure you can provide comment. I understand grid connection and cost is an important challenge for increasing EV charging infrastructure. In the short term, the Energy Efficiency Conservation Authority is prepared to continue to include connection costs as part of co funding public charging. EECA is willing to do what they can within the existing regulatory environment to reduce the pain of connections to the network. I recommend that you continue to engage with them in the first in stance. The Commerce Commission is reviewing the rules and processes that underpin price quality regulation and disclosure for electricity distribution businesses. This will also consider any barriers to creating new connections in a timely and cost effect ive manner. The Electricity Authority is assessing and addressing any significant first mover disadvantage issues facing customers connecting to distribution networks, with a view to removing barriers to new and expanding connections.
Instagram Community Guidelines
Instead, the previous Government made a strategic decision based on indicative scenarios supported by high level estimates of the potential externalities. Immediate next steps freight network We would like to meet with you to discuss rail freight, and your views on: . the likely long term level of funding support KiwiRail could expect, . what level of funding you want reflected in the next RNIP, and . the work you want officials and KiwiRail to carry out to better inform decisions for Budget . After meeting with you,
Instead, you can watch the presentation online. Presentations work best in fullscreen mode.
Integrated freight system Primary outcome economic prosperity Welldesigned transport corridors with efficient, reliable, and resilient connections will support productive economic activity. Supporting outcomes Healthy and safe people shifting the movement of freight from road to rail and coastal shipping will reduce the safety risks of travel. Resilience and security improving transport connections, alternative routes and integration of freight networks will boost the ability of the transport system to recover from disruptions. Environmental sustainability increasing movement of freight by lower emissions transport modes (including rail and coastal shipping), greater road freight efficiency, and low emissions infrastructure will reduce emissions and pollutants. Inclusive acces s improvements to the freight system will need to be fair, equitable and inclusive. How we will deliver these outcomes These outcomes require a long term and coordinated approach to our national freight network. This will be achieved in part through: Implementation of the freight and supply chain strategy. Managing resilience risk on important regional corridors where disruptions cause the highest economic and social cost. Improving the safe and efficient movement of freight through logistics planning and network optimisation. Enabling greater mode choice through more integrated networks to enable freight to travel on the most carbon efficient mode. The Government is committed to continuing to invest in rail through the Rail Network Investment Programme to achieve the priorities set out in the New Zealand Rail Plan . This includes investing in the national rail network to restore rail freight and provide a platform for future investments for growth .
Interregional public transport will play a crucial
Interim ATAP report released
Interim Aviation Council November meeting
Interim Aviation Council is established
Interim Aviation Council terms of reference
Interim Aviation Council May meeting
Interim Aviation Council July meeting
Interim Aviation Council September meeting
Interim Chief Executive Tauranga City Council
Interim North western Bus Improvements All design work was completed during the reporting period and good progress w as made on construction of the shoulder running lanes along sections of SH and the bus stops on the ramps and connecting roads. The bus facilities at Te Atatu were largely completed in the period and construction work is well underway at Lincoln Road. Auckland Transport is separately progressing other works on local roads, including stops and priority lanes, expected for completion in late .
Interlock installation data can only be retrieved from the interlock providers. One provider reported that between and their service network had performed installations for new participants (reinstallations are not included in these figures). The other provider suggested having done around installations per year. These equate to approximately installations, which while not definitive, are similar to the AIO numbers in table (n). An offender does not have a set timeframe in which they must have an interlock fitted to any vehicle they drive. To leave the programme there are exit criteria that must be fulfilled and until meeting t he exit criteria the interlock stays on the vehicle. One of the interlock providers reports, quote, that: One thing is sure, the average sentence length is more than months. Again unsure of the exact figures, but Id estimate we see around of clients have their sentence extended due to alcohol or missing a test. This can be anywhere from one month added to the sentence, to six months added to the sentence. Other clients have their sentence extended multiple times One of the interlock providers also reported that: The devices were fitted for an average time of months (lowest fitted time: month, longest fitted time: months). A more in depth review of the disqualified driving offences for the AIO sentence group and the matched comparison group in year one ( Table page ) shows that the percentages of new offences which are Drove While Disqualified third or Subsequent (two year maximum penalty) are very similar for AIO and matched comparison offenders but over half of new offences for AIO offenders were Drove while disqualified compared with only for Drove Contrary To An Alcohol Interlock Licence. (Table below) . These two offences have the same maximum penalty ( months).
International Air Freight Capacity (IAFC) Scheme
International Airfreight Capacity (IAFC) Scheme
International Airfreight Capacity Scheme
International Airfreight Capacity Scheme Extended to end of April
International Airfreight Capacity scheme extended
International aviation and maritime are major sources of emissions. Although they do not count as part of New Zealands emissions profile, the Ministry for the Environment estimates that if they did then international aviation would be responsible for of transport emissions and international maritime for .
International aviation is governed by a network of thousands of bilateral air services agreements that set out the routes and capacity that airlines can operate between any two countries. Airline cooperation agreements are a common feature of international aviation but require authorisation as they might otherwise breach competition law, and to ensure the benefits to the public outweigh the risk of lessening competition. Airlines can enter into cooperation agreements with one another and agree to cooperate on aspects of pricing, scheduling and service delivery in a particular market. Examples include alliances and codeshares:
International aviation is responsible for approximately . of global carbon dioxide emissions, and aviation emissions are forecast to grow in the coming years. Projected annual improvements in aircraft fuel efficiency of around to are surpassed by forecast traffic growth of around each year.
International currencies AU, US, etc.
International publications Value for money framework Moving Britain Ahead https:www.gov.ukgovern mentpublicationsdft valueformoneyframework Purpose of this framework is to ensure that decisionmakers receive straightforward, clear and consistent messages on value for money which guide them through the evidence to arrive at a judgement. This promotes sound decisionmaking and helps provide the Permanent Secretary with assurance that this duty is met. The document has the following major sections: Principles of value for money assessment o This chapter explains what a value for money assessment is and how value for money is assessed through three elements: Option development Measuring costs and impacts Consideration of risks and uncertainties Value for money assessment o This chapter introduces two value for money metrics : the Benefit Cost Ratio and Net Present Public Value. o This chapter also introduces how to assess value for money by taking considerations of three types of monetised impacts, nonmonetised impacts and uncertainty. Value for money categories o This chapter introduces the various categories used by the Department and explains how they correspond to the value for money metrics. Reporting value for money o This chapter focuses on how value for money conclusions should be presented in a Value for Money Statement. Summary
International publications Value for money framework Moving Britain Ahead https:www.gov.ukgovernment publicationsdft value for money framework Purpose of this framework is to ensure that decision makers receive straightforward, clear and consistent messages on value for money which guide them through the evidence to arrive a t a judgement. This promotes sound decision making and helps provide the Permanent Secretary with assurance that this duty is met.
International report released
International treaty examination of the Annex VI regulations for the prevention of air pollution from ships contained in the Protocol of to MARPOL
Interpreting VFM VFM often has different meaning s for different areas of invest ment and therefore difficult to consistently interpret . Clear and consistent definition of VFM can help improve differences of interpretation. Assessing VFM NZ Treasurys preferred method for assessing VFM is through Cost Benefit Analysis (CBA) measured using Benefit Cost Ratios (BCR) . This is the official Treasury position. Reliance on BCR seems juxtaposed to the outcomes sought in the Living Standards Framework i.e. approach to appraisal has not kept pace with the policy drivers. This is a ch allenge that needs to be considered as part of this Review. GPS still needs to resolve the question of VFM measures . MoT visibility of decision making (and supporting evidence) as project s progress through lifecycle stage gates is insufficient and is decreasing . MEETING DETAILS TITLE MoT Value for Money Review Stakeholder Workshop Thursday rd April
Intervention Logic Mapping
Interventions plan update: priority actions to reduce wait times: s ()(g)(i) s ()(g)(i)
Interviewees included central and local government transport advisors, public transport operators, community groups, vehiclesharing and ridesharing service providers, and academics.
Interviews focusing on general insights into GPS explored the following issues: general influence of GPS on transport investment and planning changes in investment mix towards the overarching priorities of GPS key transport projects funded through GPS and the extent to which they reflect GPS prior ities process shifts occurring through GPS implementation (eg, procurement and contracting) signals of GPS delivering on safety, access, environment, and value for money outcomes key shifts achieved by GPS overall, and challenges to achievin g such shifts potential case studies of GPS implementation. Case study interviews explored the following: overview of how the case study was developed and implemented alignment of case study with GPS objectives significance of the case study considering GPS factors that enabled or hindered alignment with GPS Value for Money assessments, benefits realisation and reporting of benefits lessons of the case study for future GPS implementation. Qualitative findings were explored using thematic analysis approaches. Thematic analysis methods are used to comprehensively and systematically explore and map out emerging themes from the range of qualitative data. This follows a process of familiarisatio n with the interview data, generating initial codes, searching for themes, reviewing and mapping themes, defining and naming themes, and reporting. Braun V, Clarke V. . Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual. Res. Psychol. , . TO WHAT EXTENT HAS GPS INFLUENCED CHANGES IN NLTF INVESTMENTS , IMPLEMENTATION AND EARLY STAGE OUTCOMES
Intro to Part rules for unmanned aircraft
Introduce a modern registration regime for airports (replacing the current Airport Authorities process) and, for some airports, a requirement called a regulatory airport spatial undertaking (RASU).
Introduce a new approach to tackling unsafe speeds
Introduce a process for aviation participants to seek independent review of decisions made by or on behalf of the Director of Civil Aviation (in addition to the existing process for decisions made on a medical basis).
Introducing legislation to implement a regional fuel tax in Auckland.
Introduction . Auckland International Airport (Auckland Airport) welcomes the opportunity to submit on the application by Air New Zealand (NZ) and Singapore A irlines (SQ) to the Minister of Transport (the Minister) to reauthorise their strategic airline joint venture .
Introduction Tn koe Minister and congratulations on your appointment as Minister of Transport. Transport plays a pivotal role in providing liveable cities and thriving regions. It gives people access to family and whnau, places of learning and employment, and supports their participation in society. Transport contributes to the economic prosperity of rural communities, towns and cities, and connects Aotearoa New Zealand economically and culturally with the rest of the world. It shapes land use, urban form, and street level interactions. Transport also affects our health by influencing how people and goods travel, how physically active we are, and how safe it is to journey between places. It affects the quality of our environment, including air and water quality, biodiversity gains or losses, and global greenhouse gas emissions. Many organisations, both public and private, are responsible for planning, designing, building, and providing services within the transport system. These organisations operate within a web of laws, rules, processes and funding mechanisms. The transport system is dynamic, needing to constantly adapt and change in the face of public expectations and external influences. You and the Government will want transport to support your specific transport priorities, as well as your broader priorities such as how we grow our economy, reduce emissions, and address pressures in our cities. For example, the Ministry and the wider transport system are playing a key role as Aotearoa New Zealand works to recover from the effects and devastation of extreme weather events, such Cyclone Gabrielle. A focus on rebuilding transport infrastructure and ensuring that our system is resilient in the face of the impacts of climate change is a critical priority. Additionally, increasing climate resilience includes reducing transport emissions to support Aotearoa New Zealand reaching net zero carbon emissions by . The transport system we have today has been shaped over many decades, and decisions made in the past have determined the options that are available to people today. Achieving meaningful change in such a large and complex system takes time, but the decisions that you make over your term as Minister will shape the system well into the future. This briefing sets out how you can give effect to your priorities and influence the longer term direction of transport as a system. These choices, about how you match your priorities with interventions, will offer many opportunities as well as challenges. To help you to utilise these opportunities and resolve the challenges, we have outlined the levers available to you for influencing the transport system. This briefing also describes the roles and responsibilities of the government transport agencies, stat eowned enterprises and some of the other stakeholders you will work with. This briefing is complementary, and should be read in conjunction with, the strategic BIM. In our role as system lead, we look forward to giving you the advice, support and the rigorous evidence needed to put your priorities in place. Nku noa, n Audrey Sonerson Secretary for Transport
Introduction Tn koe Minister, and congratulations on your appointment as Minister of Transport. Transport plays a pivotal role in providing liveable cities and thriving regions. It underpins how New Zealanders get to their places of work and study, how families and communities connect, and how businesses move goods and services. A well functioning transport system contributes to the economic prosperity of our cities, towns, neighbourhoods and rural communities. It shapes land use, urban form and street level interactions, and contributes to our well being and livelihood. On a broader scale, transport also connects New Zealand economically and culturally with the rest of the world. Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport plays an influential role by shaping transport policy, and is here to support your vision for the transport system along with broader government priorities. The Ministry is the Governments system lead on transport. We work in partnership with agencies across the sector to shape the future of transport. Delivering and maintaining a transport system that enables New Zealanders to flourish is central to our work . The transport system we have today is shaped over many decades, and previous decisions have determined the transport options New Zealanders have today. In turn, the transport system of the future will be based on decisions made today. This briefing describes our role and responsibilities along with those of government transport agencies, State Owned Enterprises and key stakeholders you will work with. It also outlines the tools available to you for influencing the transport system and enabling better outcomes for everyone in New Zealand. This briefing should be read in conjunction with the Strategic BIM. In our role as system lead, we look forward to giving you the advice, support and rigorous evidence needed to put your priorities in place to help advance New Zealands transport system. Nku noa, n
Introduction of CO emission standard for imported new and used light vehicles announced
Introduction of carbon dioxide emission standard for imported new and used light vehicles announced
Introductory remarks Mr Speaker, I move that the Land Transport Management (Time of Use Charging) Amendment Bill be now read a first time. I nominate the Transport and Infrastructure Committee to consider the Bill. House of Representatives: First reading speech: Land Transport Management (Time of Use Charging) Amendment Bill RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Background Congestion is a tax on time and productivity. It means we are away from home for longer, sitting in gridlock. It results in fewer jobs being done, fewer goods being moved, and delays to services. Faster, more reliable travel times will increase productivity, and lower costs for businesses and their customers. That is why we are enabling time of use schemes on our road network to be put in place. Today, I am pleased to present the Land Transport Management (Time of Use Charging) Amendment Bill , a vital step toward improving the performance of our transport networks through a nationally consistent yet locally adaptable framework. This piece of legislation represents a strategic response to some of the most pressing challenges in the transport network, including congestion and the demand for better transport solutions. Overseas, time of use and congestion charging have been implemented with varying degrees of success. These experiences have provided useful lessons for the policy design we have adopted some of the key lessons include: o Schemes need to be scalable so there is an option to start small, build support, and expand where needed. o The purpose of the charge needs to be clear and the performance against this purpose needs to be measured and monitored . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of o We have seen that the overuse of exemptions can undermine the fairness of schemes and erode public support. o Revenue needs to be reinvested into the area paying the charge and used to improve mobility and transport in the area. o Charges need to be easily adjustable and linked to network service levels. o Central and Local Government need to collaborate for schemes to be effective aligned in all aspects of the schemes from their operation to the subsequent revenue investment decisions. Key features of the bill Im proposing a set of legislative amendments to the Land Transport Management Act and the Land Transport Act designed to improve traffic flow and improve network productivity. The Land Transport Management (Time of Use Charging) Amendment Bill is enabling legislation it creates a framework for time of use charging but does not actually put a scheme in place. It takes a p artnership approach At its core, the Bill adopts a partnership approach. It empowers local authorities to collaborate with the New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) in forming scheme boards tasked with proposing and developing time ofuse charging schemes. This approach ensures that decisions take full account of those closest to the challenges, fostering local ownership and tailored solutions. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Neighbouring councils within the region are invited to participate, promoting regional collaboration and alignment. This is a significant step in creating a more connected and efficient transport network that works seamlessly across boundaries. A network solution to a network problem Schemes are not about generating revenue from drivers. All net revenue from the schemes will be reinvested directly into transport projects in the region where the revenue is collected . This creates a self sustaining cycle of continuous improvement, enhancing mobility and infrastructure over time. These funds will be additional supplement ing rather than replac ing existing national and local transport funding. This ensures that the schemes genuinely contribute to making our transport systems better, without compromising other essential investments. Time of use s chemes can even defer the need for network investment . By reducing peak demand and improving traffic flow successful schemes optimis e the use of existing infrastructure. We have prioritised a fair and transparent implementation to protect the social licence for schemes We have seen from overseas experience that public trust is crucial, and this Bill is designed to ensure fair and transparent implementation. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of All proposed schemes will undergo mandatory public consultation and detailed impact assessments. This guarantees that public input is considered from the outset, fostering accountability and community engagement. Once proposals are developed, they are submitted to the Government to assess the schemes to ensure they are robust, fair, and effective. Approved schemes are then implemented through an Order in Council, providing a clear and legally binding framework for their operation. Flexibility with strong oversight is a key design feature of this Bill Schemes will be run by scheme boards this model allows for central and local government to work collaboratively . Scheme boards are given the authority to manage and adapt their schemes over time, ensuring they remain effective in addressing evolving challenges. Within established limits, boards can adjust charges with a day notice period, balancing the need for flexibility with the obligation to maintain transparency. Charging areas within a scheme area can also be adjusted with a day notice period, after u ndergoing public consultation. Significant changes, such as altering the maximum charge limit or service levels, require further public consultation and impact assessments. This ensures that any adjustments continue to align with public interests and the broader goals of the scheme. The Bill does not limit schemes to a specific type of technology RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of The legislation is technology neutral. In New Zealand, both central and local gov ernment have extensive experience with Automatic Number Plate Recognition (ANPR) for tolling and parking charges. Therefore, ANPR is probably the most likely approach in the short term but o ver time there may be opportunities to explore more sophisticated collection and operation technology. We are proposing a gradual rollout with safeguards in place The Bill is set to commence months after receiving Royal Assent, with an expected start in late . From that point, scheme boards can be established and begin their work on proposals. This timeline allows for careful preparation and implementation, ensuring the framework is robust from the outset. NZTA chairs all scheme boards and holds a casting vote to resolve deadlocks, ensuring alignment with national transport priorities. Scheme boards are also required to set traffic flow targets and report annually on their performance. The Secretary for Transport maintains an ongoing oversight role, regularly reporting to the Minister of Transport on scheme performance. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Should issues arise, the Minister of Transport can intervene. These include directing charge adjustments, appointing a commissioner to oversee underperforming schemes, or even terminating schemes that fail to meet their objectives. Provisions are in place in the Bill to protect privacy and data security, ensuring public confidence in the system. Closing remarks This Bill is informed by global best practices and insights from studies such as The Congestion Question. It emphasises informed public engagement and strong governance, key pillars of any successful transport initiative. By enabling local solutions within a nationally consistent framework, we are tackling network productivity head on while enhancing economic productivity and quality of life for all New Zealanders. This Bill is not just about addressing immediate issues; its about building a transport system fit for the future one that supports our aspirations for a thriving, connected, and sustainable nation. This is a good Bill, and I am pleased to commend this to the House.
Invest in safety treatments and infrastructure improvements
Investigating the future of public transport.
Investigating the potential for a new rapid rail service between Hamilton and Auckland.
Investigating whether congestion pricing should be introduced in Auckland.
Investment Assessment Framework (IAF) was ahead of NLTP to reflect the GPS on land transport and the key priorities of safety and access. IAF is the framework that NZTA uses to assess and prioritise land transport activities for inclusion in the NLTP. Prioritisation is based on the two assessment factors of results alignment and cost benefit appraisal.
Investment Management and Asset Performance in the State Services;
Investment Package pending further decisions relating to the Drury Stations projects;
Investment Package, and not the budget allowances;
Investment Principles .. Guiding investment decisions stemming from GPS are high level guiding principles to try and: ... underpin how investments should be made ... ensure decisions are transparent ... ensure decisions represent value for money ... ensure the most is made of the existing system but include planning and lead investment ... use innovation. .. Positive aspects of this GPS for the BCA include: ... billion investment in transport ... No increases in Fuel E xcise Duty (FED) or Road User Charge (RUC) . . RAIL AND COASTAL SHIPPING .. Road users contribute to the National Land Transport Fund ( NLTF ) and other road asset funding primarily via FED, RUC and p roperty rates for providing accessibility to the network . This creates a direct connection between asset funding and user fees and charges . For roading, benefit and use are essentially aligned. This is not the case for rail or coastal shipping currently, and nor will it be the case unde the purview of this GPS. .. This GPS, if the proposed Land Transport (Rail Legislation) Amendment Bill (the Rail Bill) passes , would undo longstanding road related NLTF hypothecat ion. The direct links between use and payment and benefit to all therein of the current NLTF road arrangeme nt are not and cannot be align ed with any proposal to use the NLTF for rail or coastal shipping . There is also little realistic possibility of rail ever being able to contribute what it would need to withdraw from the NLTF via proposed Track User Cha rges or similar. .. We disagree with ideological statements such as Improving the rail network is good for our roads our position is that Improving the road network is good for our roads. As such, the BCA continues to oppose the use of NLTF funds for rail. Our submission on the Rail Bill in February contains more information on the rationale for this opposition. .. This being said we do support ligning and integrat ing rail and coastal shipping planning with that of other modes. Funding levers aside, to create a properly functioning transport system, all modes should share the same planning process. Mode neutrality in planning is sensible , as long as each mode is benefitting in a manner directl y attributable to their contribut ions and benefit s. . NLTF PRESSURE .. As noted in our submission on the Rail Bill , the NLTF is already under substantial pressure and its future sustainability even without funding being siphoned off to rail and coastal shippi ng is of concern to all who contribute large amounts to it such as commercial transport operators . .. In basic economic terms, the clear opportunity cost of siphoning will be the maintenance and renewal of existing roading infrastructure infrastructure used by, and paid for, by more organisations and people than rail or coastal shipping . It is not realistic nor fair to expect the NLTF to be able to fund two rundown infrastructure sets and three competitive freight modes in this way .
Investment assurance framework The investment assurance framework provides assurance about the services and infrastructure the Transport Agency invests in. It also systematically identifies opportunities to improve both the Transport Agencys and the transport sectors performance. The framework covers three audit and monitoring activities: Investment audits Benefit realisation reviews Investment performance measurement (including performance measures, and closely linked to benefit realisation reviews) The Transport Agencys benefit realisation assessment has two parts: . Benefit realisation reviews . Performance measures Investment Audits The Transport Agency has a legal obligation to audit organisations that are funded through the National Land Transport Programme. The audits take place on a cycle of two to four years. This section introduces the audit process, and what is included in the audit.
Investment context Investment in operating and maintaining state highways occurs via the State Highway Maintenance Activity Class as part of the wider National Land Transport Programme (NLTP). The programme is funded from National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) permanent legislative authority (PLA), in accordance with the requirements and priorities of the applicable GPS issued by the Minister. The GPS is the Governments main statutory lever to ensure investment in land transport by Waka Kotahi and local government reflects government priorities over the next three to ten years. The GPS
Investment in New Zealands land transport system is funded through the National Land Transport Fund under the framework set out in the Land Transport Management Act (LTMA) . This framework ensures that funding contributes to an effective, efficient and safe land transport system.
Investment management is prioritised as one of other programmes and activities. Page provides detailed information of investment management. This activity covers transport planning, sector research and Investment in the Funding Allocation System (IFAS). A single factor Results Alignment assessment is applied for this activity.
Investment performance measurement This monitoring activity includes performance measures and forms part of benefit realisation reviews. The Transport Agency has developed a list of performance measures to be used through the Business case process.
Investment profile and asset health Although the majority of state highways pavement and surfacing condition is performing adequately, there is a dramatic degradation in the state highways worst performing sections (as illustrated by the Health indices in the figure below). This bottom (approximately lane kms) of the network shows significant and rapidly reducing pavement and surfacing health, and the extent of infrastructure in this condition is growing. The agreed investment level for t he funding period is intended to start to arrest the rate of declining health of the worst performing sections of the network as well as maintain the remaining standards of the remaining network. State Highway Investment Profile to
Investments are at the best cost Cost benefit analysis should consider the full range of costs and benefits. Evaluation tools need to transparently and robust ly capture and evaluate these. Decisions need to demonstrate delivery of net positive benefits that exceed whole of life costs. Evaluations normally occur at project level, but there is flexibility to do this at programme level.
Ipsos produced the research. The National Road Carriers Association, Ia Ara Aotearoa Transporting New Zealand and the New Zealand Trucking Association had significant roles in making this work possible. The Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority and the New Zealand Transport Agency advised on the work.
Issues and considerations paper to ATAP political sponsors Project R: Waitemat Harbour Connections (WHC): Work with Waka Kotahi to provide advice on WHC . Manager: Karen Lyons Director, Auckland Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE)
It also sets out a series of projects the Government has identified as strategically important to New Zealands transport system in the coming decades.
It embraces how we work together as a transport system, through engagement and collaboration, to create a transport system that enables Aotearoa to flourish.
It identified the following key priorities subject to funding:
It is disappointing that no one from MfE was able to participate given that it was forwarded to me by an MfE contractor when they realised that I had been left out of direct contact.
It is especially important due to the poor track record of change initiatives demonstrating that the benefits they were estab lished to deliver have been realised. International studies have shown that organisations with high benefits m anagement maturity have greater success with their projects and programmes.
It is expected, given increasing passenger and freight volumes that the Avondale Onehunga Link will be needed by the s. If Ports of Auckland were to be closed or curtailed it could be needed earlier. Increased capacity on Aucklands rail network has the potential to carry greater volumes of freight and support additional passenger services, reducing congestion on the roading network, improving safety, and helping to reduce emissions. Work on the engineering design for the Avondale Onehunga will start as soon as funding is approved and may take three years to complete.
It is important that your organisations respond appropr iately to the Governments climate change commitments through measures and reporting against the Emissions Reduction Plan and Carbon Neutral Government Programme.
It is important to realize that access for disabled people is not just about getting from destination A to destination B, accessible transport for disabled people is about full participation and inclusion in society which they are guaranteed under the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Inclusion means having a feeling of belonging. So, having the ability to move in society for employment, education, social interaction and participation is key to disabled people belonging as equal citizens. Section .: Indicators for how progress will be measured The government has included some good indicators in their Government Policy Statement on how they will measure their progress. However, these indicators overlook a significant group of people. of the New Zealands population in stated they had a disability (Statistics New Zealand, ). The indicators need to be disaggregated by impairment or access need. Put simply disabled people need to be visible in the Government Policy Statements indicators. Strategic Policy It is important to assess the safety of the whole transport system for everyone. This means that at risk groups such as disabled people and pedestrians should be visible in the road safety data. Deaths and serious injuries should be disaggregated by impairment or access need and other atrisk groups, such as older people, as well as by whether they are pedestrians. It is vital to see if some groups are experiencing more deaths and injuries than others. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
It is intended to be implemented in June , in time for the NLTP to be developed.
It is unlikely that level vehicles will be operating on New Zealand public roads (outside of controlled trials) before , and highly unlikely that level vehicles will be operating before .
It is vital that Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport has an effective stakeholder Engagement Strategy, to create policy that enables New Zealanders to flourish and responds to the needs of everyone in the transport system. Through engagement activity we share what were working on, ask for input and learn what matters to our stakeholders. Our Rautaki Phekoheko Engagement Strategy outlines the principles and values that underpin our approach to engagement.
It lays the groundwork for a strategic approach, and identifies what the Government aims to achieve through the transport system.
It outlines what needs to be done over three timehorizons:
It proposes a strengthened focus on maintaining assets and services and enhancing resilience, recognising recent flood and weatherrelated recovery efforts.
It provides aviation security services at securitydesignated airports through the Aviation Security Service (Avsec).
It regulates civil aviation in New Zealand by establishing and monitoring civil aviation safety and security standards, carries out air accident and incident investigations, and promotes aviation and personal security.
It set minimum standards for new vehicles, and required older vehicles to have been built to an approved standard applicable at the time of the vehicles manufacture. However, this meant older, used imported vehicles only had to meet older and less stringent emissions standards when entering the New Zealand fleet.
It sets out the Governments vision, highlevel objectives and the fundamental building blocks that will be the basis for ongoing work to integrate drones into the aviation system and wider transport sector.
It used the Household Travel Survey as well as other data sources to show travel patterns, the current picture and tell some of the stories behind the data.
It was a lengthily and staged process, which required close collaboration between Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail to coordinate the rebuild of road and rail, often requiring repair teams to work through the night.
It was a oneoff survey using similar methodology to the Household Travel Survey.
It was developed as the Government recognised the need to provide the aviation sector with guidance on future development and modernisation for New Zealands airspace, as well as principles to follow when making decisions on airspace matters.
It will be governed by an inclusive governance board, involving an independent chair, key agencies and community and Mori representatives. The Project will be sponsored by the Minister of Transport, Minister of Finance and the Mayor and Deputy Mayor of Auckland.
Its now expected that all of the rules and regulations needed to enable New Zealand to be a party to MARPOL Annex VI will be in place by late February early March . This means that MARPOL Annex VI requirements under those rules and regulations will now likely become effective by late May early June .
Iwi, council and other stakeholder would be invited to celebrate the milestone. NZTA recommends as this is close to the expected opening but would also allow the road to open ahead of schedule if works continue to progress well. Yes No Maybe
Ill make sure to direct any future coms directly you for Te Aitanga a Mhaki.
Ill walk over some hard copies shortly. Give me call if you have any questions.
Im writing to make a request for information relating to your website and printed materials. Specifically, Id like access to: your technical style guidestylebookguidelinesbrand manual for producing online and printed material. details of what fonts and colours you uses on their we bsite and in print, including the licenses theyre provided under and the cost of those licenses.
Ive ccd my colleague Rebecca Beals who is our principal planner for this kaupapa and add further detail. As I understand it this is process was joint decision from Ministers Brown and Bishop, for MoT to progress with extending the Port Permits while MFE continues with the RM reforms.
Ive listed the actions for your reference below: . Public Transport Funding
Jane Meares Chief Commissioner Transport Accident Investigation Commission jane.mearescliftonchambers.co.nz Dear Jane, Thank you for providing the me with a final draft of the Transport Accident Investigation Commissions Statement of Performance Expectations (SPE) for .
Janet Holborow Mayor, Kpiti Coast District Council Janet was elected the mayor of KCDC in .
Jenny Vickers Committee Secretary
Jessica Ranger (sheher) Kaiwhakahaere Manager Urban Development and Public Transport Ministry of Transport Te Manat Waka E: j.rangertransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz
Jessica Ranger, Manager, Placemaking and Urban Development
Jetstar Jetstar, all reported transTasman routes
Jetstar reported that air traffic control ground movement delays, weather related delays (in Christchurch and Wellington) combined with offschedule and consequential delays impacted performance. . .... .... ... .. .. . . . . .. .... . ...... Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar OnTime Departures () OnTime Arrivals () Cancellations ()
Jetstar reports that the following factors affected transTasman ontime performance in March: tarmac congestion (air traffic control ground delays) passenger boarding induced delays combined with consequential delays. .. ... ... ... ... ... . . . .... . .. ...... Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar OnTime Departures () OnTime Arrivals () Cancellations () AIRLINES PERFORMANCE, TRANSTASMAN ROUTES, MARCH
Joanna Heard Manager , Safety
Joanne Leung Chief Economist and Manager Economics
Join prefixes and suffixes directly to words Prefixes and suffixes are increasingly joined directly to other words. Note how e mail became email.
Joint Ministers received Auckland Councils proposal to vary the Scheme, which proposes changes to funding allocation, the activities and timeframes within the existing programme of capital projects The Scheme was established by the Land Transport Management (Regional Fuel Tax Scheme Auckland) Order . The Scheme commenced on July and imposes a cent per litre regional fuel tax on petrol and diesel sold in the Auckland region until June . Auckland Council is not proposing changes to the Scheme area, the end of the Scheme, or the rate of the tax. Revenue from the Scheme contributes to Auckland Councils funding share towards a set of transport capital projects listed in Schedule of the Land Transport Management (Regional Fuel Tax Scheme Auckland Order . Each transport capital project contains a list of initiatives detailing the activities for funding. Capital expenditure is the focus, but operating expenditure can also be included when it is required to deliver a capital project.
Joint Ministers media statement:
Joint Te Manat Waka and Treasury paper proposing a relief package for the aviation sector including support for airlines to maintain services which provide vital international connections to New Zealand.
Joint report to Ministers on the Land Transport Revenue Review options for supporting the short medium term sustainability of the NLTF this will include how mega projects and approach to MRT funding will be progressed Draft Cabinet paper to Minister on Penlink Tolling Order Final recommendations submitted to Joint Ministers of Transport and Finance for consideration Programme : Revenue and Investment SRO Bryn Gandy Ph:
Journey to Work Patterns in the Auckland Region Analysis of Census Data for .
Jul : Air New ZealandAir China Alliance
Jul : QantasAmerican Airlines Joint Business Agreement
Julia Hoare, Incoming Chair, Auckland Airport Julia Hoare was appointed a director of Auckland Airport in . Prior to her governance career, Julia had extensive chartered accounting experience in Australia, the United Kingdom and New Zealand and was a partner with PwC New Zealand for years until . Her expertise spans finance, commercial, tax, regulatory, sustainability and climate change. Julia is also the Chair of Port of Tauranga Limited, a Director of Meridian Energy Limited and a Director of Comvita Limited. Julia is also a member of the Chapter Zero New Zealand Steering Committee.
Julian King Associates explains the broadness of value for money as: VfM is a broader construct than efficiency. It is an eva luative question about how well resources are used, and whether a resource use is justified. Something might be worth investing in fo r efficiency andor other reasons (Social or distributive justice). Economic methods of evaluation can help answer a question about value for money, but often they are not enough on their own.
Just Culture is the principle that a person should not be unduly punished for minor and unintended breaches of civil aviation law, if they openly and honestly report safetyrelated information.
Just a quick follow up, did you want to a krero about this Kaupapa Happy to coordinate a hui with our MoT and MFE teams for a teams hui or have an initial krero you and I directly first, if needed
Justice, the Treasury, Ministry of Mori Development, Te Puni Kkiri and the Civil
Juston Anderson Acting Manager, Commercial and Institutional Performance , The Treasury Richard Cross Director, System Performance and Governance , Ministry of Transport s ()(b)(ii), s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Ka huri tonu te hua o te waka, me te whi ki a mtau i roto i te hpai i ng mahi katiaki i te pnaha waka.
Kaikoura earthquake In , multiple landslides and slips from the Kaikura earthquake closed State Highway , the Main North Line railway between Picton and Christ church, and damaged all roads in and out of the area isolating Kaikura and the surrounding rural communities nearby.
Kaikura earthquake recovery work programme
Kaikura earthquake response
Kaitiakitanga Guardianship and support
Kapai Rebecca and I can do today at pm, I can send teams invite to everyone in this email. I am not sure if I can get the MFE team who are working on the RM reform to join but certainly from us at MoT well be able to speak directly to the ports permit process.
Karen Lyons Director Auckland Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport . . . Ministers office to complete: Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events Comments
Karen Lyons Director, Auckland
Katja Lietz General Manager Urban Planning and Design Kinga Ora
Kay Robertson (individual)
Ke te kupuia e wahti Ki te kpuia e kore e whati When we stand alone we are vulnerable but together we are unbreakable This whakatauk refers to the strength in unity. When we come together we can achieve greatness. We draw on this whakatauk to reflect the important work of our volunteer base, and how the System relies on the work of many volunteers to succeed. The whakatauk is also a reminder to look after people, that if we are not working together, or if the System is not working for our volunteers it will fail. Only together with people supporting people and the System supporting our volunteers will we succeed. SECTION FIVE PEOPLE SUPPORTING PEOPLE Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Findings and recommendations . The Review set out to develop a capability plan that considers the benefits of the volunteer model, alongside other workforce capability needs. Areas of focus as specified in the Terms of Reference included: the right balance of volunteer and paid people to support the systems and delivery of outcomes barriers affecting volunteer participation, retention, and diversity, and how these could be addressed the drivers of, and opportunities for volunteer participation and greater diversity, and how these could be harnessed the competencies required of volunteers and other workforce personnel the ongoing training of volunteers and other workforce personnel to support competencies and volunteer management and retention. . Key areas of focus within the Review were: the formal volunteer network, working in risky environments delivering frontline safety and search and rescue services Mori in search and rescue an area that has not been previously explored.. Through the Review we observed: Volunteers play a critical role in both New Zealands recreational safety and search and rescue systems, and the organisations that support them work hard to ensure that their volunteers have what they need to be successful. These volunteers offer their time to support New Zealanders in the outdoors, and they do so largely to give back to their local communities, whilst also seeking to connect with others and be part of a community with a shared interest. The volunteer model has significant tangible benefits. Volunteers are an engaged, communitybased workforce and cost less than a paid workforce. New Zealand receives considerable value from this network which saves lives on a weekly basis. However, there are risks within this model for service delivery that need to be carefully managed. Changes and challenges facing the volunteer network mean that it is becoming increasingly difficult for people to volunteer. These challenges include the costs incurred to volunteer and changes in lifestyles and economic pressures. . Volunteers who are members of NGOs delivering services but does not include spontaneous or informal volunteers. PEOPLE SUPPORTING PEOPLE Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue In addition, high volunteer turnover, recruitment gaps, heavy workloads, and a monocultural and aging workforce are putting pressure on the longterm sustainability of the volunteer model underpinning the System. We also observed that the balance between paid staff and volunteers will be agency specific. It will depend on the functions of the organisation, how it is structured, and the services it delivers. We observe the need for clear expectations around what an organisation expects a volunteer to do. While a small number of people who identify as tangata whenua form part of the volunteer network, Mori communities participate and volunteer in search and rescue through their marae and hap. However, they do not feel like they are recognised as part of the search and rescue system and would like their contributions to be supported and harnessed. . It is equally important that workforce capability and sustainability needs across the System are visible with respect to paid staff and volunteers. We reflect on future opportunities to consider workforce development and retention across paid staff within NGOs, and to cast a wider net to consider volunteer issues within other parts of the recreational safety sector. In response, we recommend: . Adopting the Haumata Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Volunteer Strategy and implementing it using the Haumata Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Volunteer Plan to: embed a systematic and sustained approach to support and encourage volunteers and volunteerism provide for a universal and consistent approach to support the NGOs and their volunteers, including: baseline staffing requirements volunteer reimbursements personal protective equipment and gear community engagement and recognition programmes training. . Marae, hap, and community members were interviewed kanohikitekanohi from across the North Island, representing both inland and coastal communities: Makaurau, Kokiri, Ngaiotonga, Harataunga, Kaiuku, Waahi Paa, Taupiri, Wainuiomata, Whareroa, Pourerere, Waimarama ( whnau members). Individuals who identify as Mori and currently volunteer or work for Coastguard NZ, Fire and Emergency, the Police, and Surf Life Saving were also interviewed. PEOPLE SUPPORTING PEOPLE Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue . New Zealand receives considerable value from the volunteer network which is vital to: the longterm health and performance of the System the delivery of services to support the wellbeing of New Zealanders and visitors comply with our international obligations. . Volunteers offer their time to support New Zealanders and visitors to head outdoors and head home safely. They play a critical role in the System, however there are significant headwinds facing volunteering and volunteerism: Changes to peoples lifestyles and economic pressures mean that people increasingly feel they do not have the time to commit to formal volunteering (i.e., with a voluntary organisation) longterm; the preference is increasingly for episodic volunteering (shorttermirregulartimelimited). High volunteer turnover and recruitment gaps, heavy workloads, and a generally monocultural and aging workforce are putting pressure on the longterm sustainability of the volunteer model.. The Review has taken a systematic approach to respond to these headwinds through the development of a Volunteer Strategy and supporting implementation plan. Through the Plan, we seek to: shine a light on the criticality of the Systems volunteers and celebrate the work they do acknowledge the true cost of volunteering highlight the investment needed to remove the barriers to, and harness the drivers of volunteerism, to ensure that volunteers can continue to be a capable and competent workforce for the future. . Creating an enabling environment and removing barriers is at the heart of this new approach. A positive and proactive approach to inclusion, equity, diversity, and accessibility must be taken by the System to ensure the longterm viability of its volunteer workforce. . While initiatives in the Plan target the network of volunteers delivering frontline safety and search and rescue services, the Strategy and its implementation plan are relevant across the System more broadly. Recommendation : Volunteer Plan . For example, approximately , dedicated volunteers make up percent of the highly trained and skilled personnel delivering frontline safety and search and rescue services. . The Plan builds on the existing Search and Rescue Guiding Principles for Volunteer Involvement. https:nzsar.govt.nzassetsDownloadableFilesSARGuidingPrinciplesforVolunteerInvolvement.pdf . The network of NGO volunteers focused on in the Volunteer Plan come from Amateur Radio Emergency Communications, Coastguard NZ, Land Search and Rescue and Surf Life Saving. . We did not have the capacity to engage on the Plan with smaller volunteer organisations and their volunteers delivering recreational safety services. However, feedback received from some of our Advisory Group members confirmed that the Vision, Objectives and Outcomes in the Plan are equally applicable. PEOPLE SUPPORTING PEOPLE Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Table : The Volunteer Strategy Volunteers have the capability, competency, and capacity to deliver services when and where we need them. Objective (Defines the Systems role and objective) To support and create an enabling environment for volunteerism, strengthening the adaptability of the System, and supporting volunteers to flourish. Outcomes (Longterm results that the System aims to achieve) OUTCOME ONE The System has a sufficient number of volunteers to ensure the delivery of safe and effective services, and to allow flex in the System, acknowledging that volunteers time may not always allow them to respond.OUTCOME TWO All volunteers have the knowledge, skills, personal protective equipment, and support they need to be able to carry out their roles safely, effectively, and with confidence.OUTCOME THREE Barriers to volunteering are minimised and incentives are maximised to make volunteering more accessible, equitable, and appealing.OUTCOME FOUR Increased diversity and inclusivity to ensure the System can draw from a wider pool of volunteers to help build the sustainability of the Systems capability, and bring new ideas and learnings to improve delivery of services to the communities the System serves.OUTCOME FIVE All volunteers feel their contribution is valued, they are engaged, and have a sense of pride in being part of the System. Peoples efforts should be recognised, supporting their commitment and retention in the System. Vision (What the System aspires to doachieve) . The Outcomes are numbered for ease of reference it does not indicate any order of priority. PEOPLE SUPPORTING PEOPLE Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Table : Principles and Initiatives to Support Implementing the Volunteer Strategy Principles Initiatives Volunteers need to be supported in their work; organising and supporting volunteers requires resources.Organisational support for volunteers Funding should be provided to functions within the NGOs that: directly support volunteers in their roles support compliance and health, safety, and wellbeing support capability and development Funding should be provided for the NGOs to employ kaihaut, cultural, andor diversity advisor(s). A systemwide youth engagement and development strategy should be developed. Volunteers should not be expected to personally incur financial costs when volunteering.A universal and consistent approach to cost reimbursements At a minimum, reimbursements for travel and accommodation associated with search and rescue operations should be consistently applied. Other reimbursement options for example, dependent care, medical costs where appropriate (e.g., skin cancer checks), loss of wages, and koha, should also be investigated and costed for further consideration, recognising that this will involve more complex policy development and require more time to implement. A universal and consistent approach to the provision of personal protective equipmentgearuniforms Funding should be provided to ensure that all volunteers have or have access to the right and sufficient basic personal protective equipmentgearuniforms. The System should be guided by the NGOs to determine what basic personal protective equipmentgearuniforms is required. continued overleaf PEOPLE SUPPORTING PEOPLE Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Table : Principles and Initiatives to Support Implementing the Volunteer Strategy Principles Initiatives The System is dependent on volunteer support networks, both formal and informal. These contributions need to be recognised.Community engagement and recognition Funding should be provided to support the NGOs to recognise their volunteer support networks (e.g., whnau, employers). The System should explore ways to recognise and support all contributions in this System, including those of informal volunteers. Access to training should be equitable and transparent.A systematic and systemwide approach to funding for training All training should be centrally funded through government, with the System developing a funding policy for training to inform decisionmaking, and include parameters around the division and prioritisation of funding if funding is limited. The System should be assured that training is effective and effectively provided.System leadership The System should develop a quality assurance policy to provide assurance at the systemlevel that the NGOs training is effective and effectively provided. The System should develop a working relationship with the Workforce Development Councils to explore opportunities for harnessing their expertise. PEOPLE SUPPORTING PEOPLE Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue . A full copy of Haumara Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Volunteer Plan accompanies this Report. . Funding to support the initiatives identified in the Plan are discussed in Section Seven. Ongoing strategic considerations . People supporting people is fundamental to the delivery of frontline safety and search and rescue services. The NGOs that support the formal volunteer network play a critical role. We are not proposing a shift away from the volunteer model at this time. . We recognise that decisions around the roles and responsibilities for volunteers vis vis paid staff are not always straightforward for NGOs and observe the need for clear expectations around what an organisation expects a volunteer to do. . However, the structure of the NGOs supporting their formal volunteer network (the Federation Model), the balance between paid and unpaid roles to support cost effective service delivery, and the associated assurance around government funding received, will need to be ongoing considerations within the System across the medium term. . The NGOs, the System Steward, and the Coordinating Authorities will need to gear up for this, and it will require ongoing and sustained consideration between them. . Federated not for profit organisations with a national office and geographically dispersed ClubsGroupsUnits around New Zealand with their own levels of autonomy. PEOPLE SUPPORTING PEOPLE Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Enabling Mori capability and capacity in search and rescue . We sought the views of hapori, marae, and hap to understand how they view and see themselves in search and rescue in particular. . We consistently heard that local communities do participate and volunteer in the search and rescue system. But it is through their marae as opposed to through the NGOs. . We heard that it is common for communities to open their doors and their marae to those delivering frontline safety and search and rescue services. This also extends to the families of the lost, missing, or injured. They provide support, aroha, kai, and a safe space or base for people to work and process events. . This is an example of mahi aroha i.e., unpaid work intrinsic to concepts of duty, wellbeing, whnau, and cultural identity. This is so much a part of everyday life in such communities that its not viewed as work or needing to be classified as anything separate its just life. . Despite this contribution, local communities do not feel they are part of the search and rescue system. They do not feel their capability and contribution is fully appreciated or recognised. Many people interviewed reflected their knowledge of the wai and the whenua, and how understanding whakapapa and tikanga could be brought to bare in any response. Also a desire to see more opportunities to move into the mahi of search and rescue. . People interviewed noted that they would like some level of search and rescue training. This is so that they can help their communities, for instance, when immediate assistance is required. . They also queried to what extent the members of organisations involved in operations understand tikanga. They noted that in not appreciating and respecting tikanga, those involved could be exposed to more grief and distress. Practicing tikanga can afford a sense of support, safety, and closure that may not otherwise exist. . Finally, they saw a need for deeper and ongoing arrangements to ensure clarity about whose responsibility it is to support marae on those occasions when they are involved in a search and rescue operation. . We are aware that the questions and opportunities arising with regards to local community involvement are an ongoing area of focus for organisations involved in local responses. We understand work within the Police continues, exploring engagement with marae, hap and iwi at a Police District level to develop longterm sustained relationships. . Connecting the recreational safety and systems together, and viewing the System and volunteering in its broadest sense, brings a richness to understanding the size, scale, and complexity of the System, and what is needed to make it hum. We would encourage this journey of discovery to continue at all levels of the System and expect that the proposed Chief Mori Adviser within the System Steward will play a key role in driving and supporting efforts to build Mori capability and capacity in and for the System. . Office for the Community and Voluntary Sector, Mahi Aroha: Mori Perspectives on Volunteering and Cultural Obligations, April , pp. , . PEOPLE SUPPORTING PEOPLE Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue . Outside the formal volunteer network, we observe New Zealanders also volunteer informally. This is where their voluntary work is not coordinated by an organisation or institution. . We see this in the search and rescue system, for instance, with spontaneous volunteers individuals who want to help in specific search and rescue operations in their communities, typically on oneoff occasions and in relation to largescale or wellpublicised events. . We recognise the desire of the NZSAR Council through the NZSAR Secretariat and Coordinating Authorities to develop a set of processes and procedures to support spontaneous volunteers in search and rescue operations. We agree that these should be developed as soon as practicable to ensure the safe and effective utilisation of spontaneous volunteers. Consideration of ways to support, enhance, and celebrate the efforts of spontaneous volunteers into the future should continue.Spontaneous volunteers . In , , operational people hours were provided by spontaneous volunteers.NGO workforce, skills training, and education . The Review has focused on volunteers involved with NGOs delivering frontline safety and search and rescue services. We were unable to consider issues, opportunities, and initiatives required to support workforce capability and sustainability associated with paid employees within these NGOs. While we have identified baseline funding needs to support the NGOs, the opportunity to explore workforce development opportunities for paid staff within them needs to be explored through the System. cast the net more widely to consider the workforce and volunteer needs of NGOs delivering harm prevention activities across the land and water safety subsystems, for example, training and education. These activities, and the knowledge and skills both young and old alike gain from them, are critical to support safer recreation. We understand there are a number of stressors impacting the recruitment and retention of both volunteers and paid staff. This is an area for further work that needs to be explored through the System, acknowledging the number of organisations involved in delivering facilitated training and education and national bodies that support them. SECTION HEADING HERE Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Assets supporting service delivery
Keep a modified status quo.
Kelly Bevan Raukawa ki te Tonga Trust Current positions: Board member of Te Pae Tahuhu, business executive for Te Runanga o Raukawa. Interim board member for the establishment of the Whnau Ora Raukawa Provider organisation.
Key Recommendations: Waka Kotahi The New Zealand Transport Agency Asset management business process improvement . Finalising and approving (preferably by Chief Executive) an appropriate asset management policy and asset management strategy which clearly set out the organisations plans and objectives for the assets it manages. . Developing an overarching Asset Management Framework to manage its assets. This should aim to facilitate improved integration, planning, and management of the assets and to align with the delivery of the Waka Kotahi Strategic Plan and attain successful performance in asset management. . Refining asset sustainability performance measures (or similar) within an Asset Management Strategy to better understand appropriate targets and manage th e associated longer term risk exposure. . Document the approach to prioritisation of available funding across the maintenance, operations and renewals work categories and their associated work tasksprogrammes as part of NLTP business case development. . Devel oping a suitable suite of lifecycle asset management plans for all asset types to increase the robustness of the funding submission. . Identifying and implementing a programme of business processes and procedure improvements such as those associated with programme development, budget monitoring and reporting, managing, and approving contractual variation, managing, and approving changes to programmes (Change Management Requests). . Establishing a governance function for emergency works and undertake a review of existing processes, controls, and monitoring. . Developing a Quality Manual in a way that both serves ISO but also enables Waka Kotahi to align itself with ISO . . Formalising the management approach for collecting condition and performance data linked to the asset lifecycle, based on asset type. Including identifying asset condition and data quality gaps across the entire asset base and developing a prioritised prog ramme of data quality improvement initiatives to close these gaps. This may require the development of an asset criticality framework and formal identification of critical vs non critical assets to help address data quality issues for asset groups outside of pavements and surfacing. Capability and competency . Establishing a centralised team within the Transport Services Group to ensure an ongoing commitment to continual professionaltechnical development of internal workforce skills and capabilities is maintained. This may likely build from the work already undertaken by the Operating M odel embedment project and Draft Asset Management Competency Framework developed by Waka Kotahi from the Treasurys Investor Confidence Rating review. . Developing and implementing a training programme to further enhance internal staff awareness and use of the systems and processes underpinning programme development, management, and delivery of asset renewal projects. . Initiating joint training activities with Suppliers to further embed the processes and procedures within all Contract Plans under the Network Outcome Contract to help ensure consistent use and adherence to the processes set out in these plans, notably forward works programme development within the Network Outcome Contract Maintenance Management Plans for more robust forward works program mes outside of () pavement and surfacing and () bridges structures. . Undertake awareness level training in the Waka Kotahi Emergency Works funding and delivery processes across relevant personnel. Performance monitoring . Quantifying the proposed outputs for all asset types programmes for the funding period to enable more robust analysis of variance of budget versus actual. . Implementing a stage expansion of programme tracking activities to cover all asset types (such as guardrails, Side Water Chan nel reshaping, Reforming Side Drains, delineation, signs, ITS, traffic signals, streetlights, rutting and roughness treatments, environmental renewal sites, tree removals, etc.) . Expanding the use of the pavement and surfacing performance tracker to capture actual asbuilt costs. . Compiling a detailed national annual programme for bridge and structures component replacements and its delivery performance tracked monthly to ensure transparency in the efficient and effective use of this investment. . Compiling a national consolidation of bridge and structures component replacement programme, using the latest revision (and future revisions) of the regional Lifecycle Management Plans (or other similar sources) to identify the proposed year programme. . Developing and tracking a suitable performance metric(s) to monitor the improvement in the post construction design assessment performance. . Developing congestion and travel time metrics across the entire State Highway system to better enable more focused system optimisation investment opportunities to be identified. Assurance and evaluation . Refining the organisations contract variation processes to include the role of the Activity Class Manager to ensure that f unding is available before agreements are made. . Undertaking an efficiency and effectiveness review (or similar) on the Waka Kotahi Alliance maintenance contracts to verify that the Waka Kotahi is getting value for money for the services provided from these contracts. . Investigating cost variances to understand if there are further controls that could be put in place to ensure expenditure better aligns with targets and budget. . Carrying out financial forecasting accuracy reviews across work categories on a qua rterly basis as opposed to annually. . Undertaking more in depth variance analysis to understand the trends for each work category for all contracts. Then undertake suitable deep dives into those contracts to explore root causes and areas where efficiency savings could be applied locally and nationally (where practicable). . Conducting further analysis on OPM trends to understand the root causes of breaches and actions that could be implemented to enhance corresponding processes and procedures utilised by the Network Outcome Contract Suppliers. . Reviewing the OPM and KRA to ensure they are measuring the right parameters given that they may not be reflecting the outcomes observed. . Increasing independent surveillanceaudit activities on OPM and KPI reporting from the Network Outcome Contract Suppliers (in a nationally consistent manner). . Increases in key materials costs require further investigation (including bitumen, steel and aggregates) to understand possible opportunities to better manage inflat ionary risk. . Putting further arrangements in place to ensure compliance with its out ofseason work approval process and reviewing the performance of out ofseason pavement and surfacing works against the performance of those that were in season and disseminating lessons learnt across the teams that manage renewal delivery. . Increasing independent surveillanceaudit activities on the Network Outcome Contract Supplier construction works to help enhance the effectiveness andor adherence of the quality assurance and control activities undertaken by Network Outcome Contract Suppliers. . Carrying out a root cause analysis on the post construction performance challenges to develop and implement a prioritised programme of initiatives to rectify quality issues. . Establishing a national team to undertake Post Construction Design Assessment reviews of completed pavement and surfacing works and leading negotiations to drive enhanced compliance and continual improvements in a nationally consistent manner. . Undertakin g a likeforlike benchmarking comparison of ONRC classification performance across both state highway and local roads. . Undertaking a review of the economic justification (NPV) for pavement renewals using actual pavement renewal costs (for a sample or all rehabilitation projects) to review if the economic assessment used to justify the projects were still valid. Consider developing more robust renewal justification process that broadens the investment considerations beyond just economic justification to aspects such as constructability, impact on customers, materials, environment etc. . Quantifying the impact of the sites delivered that are not performing to required standards on the networks condition and performance measures. INTRODUCTION This summary report presents the overall findings of a jointly conducted review by Te Manat Waka The Ministry of Transport (The Ministry) and Waka Kotahi The New Zealand Transport Agency on the investment into state highway maintenance and operations services. It addresses the expenditure and outcomes achieved against the Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) for both the previous ( ) and current ( ) investment period. This review is intended to inform the develop ment of future GPSs and National Land Transport Programmes (NLTPs). The two organisations share responsibility for the findings of this review which will be implemented in partnership. The Review Team wishes to acknowledge Waka Kotahi on the open, transpar ent and collaborative approach it has provided to this review. We have based our findings on the Waka Kotahi investment proposals for the two funding periods ( and ), the data and information presented to the Review Team by Waka Kotahi, interviews with the Waka Kotahi staff, information provided by Waka Kotahi and responses to subsequent written questions. Our findings are also informed by recent audits of the organisation. This final report considers the comments made by Waka Kotahi on our draft report. This report is supported by a technical report (part two). Transport context The Transport and Logistics sector (road, logistics, rail, coastal shipping, and air) plays a critical role in the economic growth of New Zealand, supporting , jobs and contributing b to the countrys national income (. of GDP). With of all freight transported by truck, New Zealands roading network provides a crucial service in supporting our economy at both national and local level s. State highways (although they comprise only of New Zealands total road network) carry of freight and of vehicle journeys, making them major connectors between New Zealands cities, towns, regions, and wider transport networks (air, rail, se a, local roads). Growing freight and general traffic volumes on the state highway network are a direct reflection of growing economic production and population. Heavy vehicle use and volumes on the network has grown by over the past years. There was a increase in kilometres travelled by heavy vehicles across state highways during the funding period alone, compared to .
Key Results Area measures
Key Updates CAA Safety Investigations into Fatal Accident ()
Key Updates Emerging Technologies Unit conducts survey with industry This week the Authority has been in attendance at the Aerospace Summit in Christchurch, where representatives from the Emerging Technologies Unit (ETU) have participated in panel discussions. We have also convened the Emerging Aviation Technologies Forum at the Air Force Museum on the side of the Aerospace Summit, hosting local industry forum members and with participation by Canadian, Australian and Singaporean aviation regulators. Recently, the Authority conducted a survey with innovators and operators to understand how effective the ETU has been at connecting with and supporting industry. The survey results indicated that the establishment of the ETU has resulted in improved communication between the Authority and innovators. Respondents also provided a range of feedback to continue to improve the ETU. We have attached a summary of the survey results for you in Appendix and have also provided this summary to the Office of the Minister for Space. s ()(f)(iv)
Key Updates Kapua Medical now live The next phase of the Kapua (EMPIC) project went live on Monday September with medical certificate information now being available in Kapua. Kapua is our specialist aviation regulatory software replacing ASMS. We provided you a full briefing on our transition from ASMS to Kapua in March refer EMPIC Project Ministerial Briefing. Following on from medical, we are working towards moving our next group of regulatory processes onto Kapua before the end of this year. Security screening weekly update There were no queue observations last week. Queues for the Wellington Southern Domestic screening point which are constantly monitored using LiDAR technology showed: Week Passengers processed in less than minutes . Passengers processed in less than minutes . (Continued next page) s (c)
Key Updates Near collision in flight between Whangarei and Auckland Crew of an Air New Zealand aircraft flying between Whangarei and Auckland had to take action to avoid collision with a smaller aircraft on August . There was only feet ( metres) between the aircraft when the Air New Zealand crew took evasive action. The Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC) has launched an investigation and is working with Air New Zealand. CAA is also investigating the incident and we are currently reviewing data and records from both operators and Airways NZ (the air navigation service provider). Our investigation is still in its early stages, and we will continue to keep you . Engine issues affect Air New Zealand planes In an NZX announcement on September , Air New Zealand announced that an American aerospace engine manufacturer, Pratt Whitney, disclosed a condition affecting the required maintenance plan for the global fleet of Geared Turbo Fan jet engines. Air New Zealand has Airbus A Neo aircraft potentially affected by this condition. These aircraft fly domestically and to Australia and the Pacific. It is too early to say what the impact will be on the airline and its operations. CAA will monitor the situation and work with Air New Zealand as we receive more advice from the manufacturer and the Federal Aviation Administration in the USA on the likely effects and corrective actions that may need to be taken.
Key Updates No key updates for this week.
Key Updates Research into the Prevalence of Abuse, Aggression and Violent Threats Toward Drone Operators A Massey University masters student is embarking on research to examine the prevalence and severity of abuse, aggression, and sometimes threats of violence with firearms to drone operators. Unmanned Aerial Vehicle New Zealand (UAVNZ) has reported anecdotal evidence of such behaviour and the CAA has been called upon by industry to help change public perception of drones. The primary research method will be to survey drone operators. CAA will have access to the findings of the study which will help to inform any public communication on this issue. The preliminary research findings are likely to be available in early . CAA will support the research with some communication activity at the launch of the survey, for example, a coordinated media release with UAVNZ.
Key Updates Western Springs College incident On Monday September, Police requested assistance from AvSecs Explosive Detector Dog Unit (EDDU) in response to a bomb scare at Western Springs College in Auckland. The incident received media coverage, although Avsecs attendance was not mentioned. Where operational commitments allow this, EDDU regularly assists Police in this capacity in which advanced EDDU handlers are deployed alongside Police Specialist Search teams. An EDDU handler attended to assist Police to quickly search the school, with no explosive devices being found.
Key Updates s ()(b)(ii) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
Key actions BecaHKA Review team to make contact with NZTA representatives involved in the benefits management initiative when appropriate (note, on hold until further notice). BecaHKA Review team to follow up Ministry attendees wc th May as required to discuss specific point as Review solutions start to formulate. APPENDIX F STAKEHOLDER WORKSHOP NOTES OF MEETING DETAILS TITLE MoT Value for Money Review Stakeholder Workshop Central Government Wednesday nd July (NZST) AGENCY REPRESENTATIVES Ministry of Transport Infrastructure Commission Waka Kotahi Treasu ry WORKSHOP NOTES ITEM NOTES General feedback The elements are all relevant to determining value for money, however, may not be easily applicable to the system level. The Review team should consider how the framework can apply at the system level across the portfolio investment and how agencies interact. It may be useful to describe the framework on a spectrum with different measurement instruments used at a project level to a system level. Some of the framework explanations need to be strengthened for those who have not had involvement in its development. Query how the framework fits in to the overall investment, assurance and policy landscape. Need to consider how this relates to Investment Decision Making Framework (IDMF) for example. ImpactOutcomes Analysis MoT has to report on its contribution to the Living Standards Framework. The link between the National Land Transport Program and GPS outcomes needs to be strengthened. Capability The capability concept was generally well received and accepted as a key contributor to value for money. An example was provided of the UK Infrastructure and Projects Authority (IPA) that assesses maturity to inform funding decisions. Capability can be used by the MoT to give the Minister a more informed position on the relative deliverability of programs or projects. Review team need to consider the complexity of assessing capability at different levels of the system. Measuring capability at the GPS level may be difficult Capability may be interpreted as solely people capability, therefore greater level of definition is required to encompass all different elements including process, systems and people as well as a consideration of capability within the supply chain. Approved Organisations mostly contract their work out therefore important to understand supply chain cap ability. Value Ratio Existing value for money statements are generally centred around Benefit Cost Analysis (BCA) which doesnt necessarily provide visibility of trade offs. OF TOTEX Ra tio The introduction of a new term is confusing. Opportunity to leverage the term Whole Life Cost (WLC) which is already widely used and understood. Additionally, whether an output delivers the stated benefits can be influenced by external eventschanges ( e.g. demographic changes) not in the control of the agencies.
Key conclusions from the economic assessment are: Conventional assessments undertaken for each RoNS assessed at a portfolio level, indicate that the RoNS portfolio generates substantial economic benefits with an NPV of the portfolio of over .bn and a BCR of approximately . (in other words, for every of capital invested, the portfolio generates approximately . in return); Estimates of regional WEBs and of national economic and productivity benefits indicate that the potential exists for further additional benefits to the economy by the RoNS over and above conventional transport economic benefits; There is not a materially significant difference between the outcomes of implementing the RoNS under an aspirational versus compliant timetable the inclusion of WEBs does not change this outcome; Notwithstanding this, the results indicate that the total benefits remain larger than total costs for the RoNS portfolio as a whole, whether delivered as an aspirational program, or a compliant program; The results indicate that there is no major difference in economic outcome in substantially delivering the RoNS within a ten year timeframe (an aspirational scenario) compared to a longer delivery timeframe. Indeed if funds are available to invest sooner, economic benefits by the RoNS, both conventional and wider, can be realised sooner. c NZ Transport Agency assessment of behavior change advertising programme Various websites: https:www.nzta.govt.nzs afetyour advertisinganalysis and evaluation
Key facts about disability and access needs In there were an estimated . million disabled New Zealanders, almost one in four o the population. There are an estimated , people with a physical impairment ( of the total population). There are an estimated , people with a sensory impairment ( of the total population). An estimated , people have a learning disability ( of the total population) and , people have a psychologicalpsychiatric condition ( of the total population). Further, of disabled people have more than one impairment type (Statistics New Zealand, ). RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Key implementation measures M Waikato Mayoral Forum and transport partners to continue advancing the roading workstream through the Road Asset Technical Accord work programme underpinned by the One Network Road Classification and Roading Efficiency Group, and through other shared service arrangements. M Local authorities and approved organisations to continue to advance internal efficiencies in integrated land use and transport planning, roading maintenance and development. M The RTC to advocate for integrated national road and rail funding and to advocate for significant central government funding subsidy for a start up Hamilton to Auckland interregional passenger rail service. M The RTC and transport partners to explore innovative and collaborative alternative transport funding solutions, including co investment arrangements, and including supporting investigations for the application of a future regional or subregional fuel tax. M Local authorities and approved organisations to target alternative funding sources for cycling and to work collaboratively with cycling stakeholders to fund cycle infrastructure, uptake and supporting activities. M WRC to uptake opportunities as alternative transport funding measures become available.
Key policy papers, subject to necessary redactions, will be on this webpage when they become available.
Key principles of the IAF: The IAF must help the Transport Agency give effect to the GPS and it must ensure there is a visible pathway from GPS priorities and results through to investment. The Transport Agency gives effect to the GPS by partnering with approved organisations and other sector stakeholders. The IAF is a translation of the GPS priorities and results into a prioritisation framework rather than a simple reiteration of the GPS which does not provide the granularity required for investment decision making. The GPS defines the outcomes and results from the sector which the government is looking for. The IAF interprets those results by defining the investment outputs which have been prioritised in the programme of work delivered under the NLTP. The IAF aims to achieve value for money by prioritising investment proposals which are targeted to achieve the GPS priorities and make efficient use of the available resources. Efficient use of available resources requires costbenefit appraisal which is tailored for the type of interventions required and the context of those interventions to achieve the GPS outcomes sought. Any activity already approved for local authorities is treated as committed ie they will not be required to be reviewed under the IAF. Any investment proposal seeking funding approval in the NLTP must be assessed and prioritised under the IAF by the Transport Agency.
Key priorities and highlights Community Grants for Seafarer Welfare Maritime NZ is finalising offers to successful grant applicants for , in total funding for the delivery of welfare services and facilities to seafarers visiting New Zealands major international ports. The nine successful grant applications were for a total of more than . million, however, the total pool of funding available is ,. This week, Maritime NZ has been engaging with successful applicants to finalise offers and in some cases discussing their acceptance of grants for less than they requested. Once this engagement is complete and grant offers have been completed, Maritime NZ will send recipients a media pack and disseminate a media release and social media post.
Key projects to guide
Key questions the AMP should answer under a business case approach: Does the AMP demonstrate the proposed programme represents value for money by doing the right thing in the right place at the right time for the right place and in the right way to achieve the desired outcomes and benefits for addressing key issues andor the contextual state of play in the district. Page Why do we have to do the business case approach It is important all investments are able to clearly show the value they would have in addressing RCAs strategic problems and undertaking core business activities, and how this will provide benefit to customers and represent value for money . Applying the business case principles is about demonstrating a compelling investment story with rational logic. GUIDE
Key stakeholders and partners such as user representatives, public transport operators and regional councils were asked for feedback on the options to change the scheme.
Key transport actions in the ERP include:
Keynote speech from Acting Transport Secretary Bryn Gandy
Keynote speech from Transport Minister Hon Michael Wood
Ki te kore ng ptake e mkkngia e kore te rkau e tupu If the roots of the tree are not watered the tree will never grow This whakatauk refers to manaakitanga, taking care of people or nature so that they may flourish. We draw on this whakatauk to describe the importance of nurturing and feeding the System with the resources needed in order for it to thrive. Funding is a critical part of the Systems growth, and if this is not taken care of, the System will never grow. It is a reminder to put the necessary resources and funding frameworks in place, in order for the System to thrive. SECTION SEVEN A FUNDING FRAMEWORK FOR THE SYSTEM Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Findings and recommendations . We sought to: identify whether available funding sources, mechanisms and allocations are adequate, stable and ongoing, and equitable for the systems, and how more sustainable funding could be achieved taking into account the characteristics of organisations and their needs develop a funding framework and criteria to assess whether the funding options provide for the efficient and effective delivery of recreational safety and search and rescue services. . Through our work we have determined that: government organisations delivering services within the systems are covered by their baseline funding, and any investment decisions need to include consideration of the systems requirements funding from multiple sources including government will continue for NGOs across the proposed new System. There is a solid return on government funding through the services delivered, and we consider additional funding across the System is warranted to support organisations to maintain service delivery there are a range of potential changes in the funding landscape which organisations in the System and the System Steward will need to stay closely attuned to. NGOs rely on existing lotteries and gaming funding sources that are under increasing pressure due to a reduction in gambling and an increase in the volume of applications made for these sources nationally based NGOs delivering key services in the System require standard core business functions to remain sustainable and support the delivery of services from which New Zealand benefits in its broadest sense. Additional skills and support are also required to support the NGOs and their volunteers delivering services, and for organisations distributing funding to other organisations. . Increased funding needs have been identified in relation to the NGOs in response to New Zealands broad reliance on their services. Additional government funding is warranted, and the return on investment would still represent very good value for money. It will provide the organisations with a more sustainable base to operate from, provide greater support to their volunteers, and allow them to plan strategically. . We acknowledge Fuel Excise Duty (FED) funding, one of the predominant sources of government funding to the System, is at risk. Alternative sources outside the current FED base will need to be identified through work underway within Te Manat Waka. . Section () of the Land Transport Management Act (LTMA) allows the estimated FED contribution of recreational boating and aircraft users to be allocated to specified activities within the systems. These specified activities include search and rescue (regardless of its context), safety and safety awareness activities (in the context of recreational boating and aviation), and the administration of specified activities. A FUNDING FRAMEWORK FOR THE SYSTEM Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue In response to these findings, we recommend: . Preparation of business cases in the next available funding rounds to provide: a. baseline funding for NGOs to support service delivery within the System that provide broad public benefits nationally, and b. additional funding required by NGOs to support their volunteers (as identified through the Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Volunteer Plan), and c. additional support to funders within the System supporting recreation based NGOs and smaller community based groups delivering recreational safety services. . Fixed assets for the NGOs to be funded by government on a casebycase basis through the appropriate funding source.. Te Manat Waka to confirm the set of funding principles developed through the Review to guide government funding into the System, to deliver Systemwide outcomes. . The System Steward once established: a. builds sustained relationships with funders who support the System and the delivery of System outcomes through the funds they provide, and b. maintains longterm insights through an awareness of the sources and levels of funding available to the System. A FUNDING FRAMEWORK FOR THE SYSTEM Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Existing funding sources . Across the systems, services are delivered through: government organisations funded by a combination of general taxation through the government Budget process, and FED through a triannual FED funding round. Maritime NZ is also able to get variable funding when operational activity through the RCCNZ materially exceeds planned levels local government where services are carried out directly, or contracted, and are generally funded through rates. In addition, Regional Councils can apply for annual contestable FED funding through Maritime NZ for recreational boating activities in their regions NGOs receive diverse funding including donations, sponsorship, and grants (e.g., the Lotteries Grant Board and Class Gambling institutions); fees and charges; local government funding, the government Budget process, the triannual FED funding round, and government organisations paying for services. . This broadly follows the distinction between public, club and private goods. The idea is that there is a line of sight between the service provided and the beneficiary of that service.
Kia ora Many thanks for the reminder of our combined history in this area.
Kia ora Tredegar, . Port Otago Limited tkou Surrendered Otago Regional Council . South Port New Zealand Limited (Blu) Motu Phue In use Southland s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT H p.i .i, n. n . t:irii;;it; Aoe;iro; km eke En blini: cw Ze landers to flourish A request has come back for either a link to a site where we can access more details on what the costal permit extension for in our case Port Otago covers, or more detail to determine if a Zoom meeting is required with yourself. Without detail we are not able to comment
Kia whakatmuri te haere whakamua I walk backwards into the future with my eyes fixed on my past This whakatauk describes Mori perspectives of time, where the past, present, and future are intertwined. This Mori conceptualisation of time does not leave the past behind but carries ones past into the future. In the context of this Review, we draw on this proverb to explain how we bring with us the legacy, history, and whakapapa of recreational safety and search and rescue into this work, carrying the rich experiences and learnings of the past with us to guide the future.SECTION ONE SETTING THE SCENE Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Image Background to the Review . The Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Review (the Review) involved an assessment of the health and performance of the recreational safety and the search and rescue systems (the systems). This was to ensure they are fit for purpose, and supporting community, national and international needs.. The term system encompasses a set of things that work together towards a common goal. In this case, it includes organisations and groups of people who support wellbeing outcomes for those who are connecting and recreating in New Zealand and operating across the New Zealand Search and Rescue Region (NZSRR). The worlds oceans and seas are divided into areas of responsibility (known as Search and Rescue Regions), with responsibility for each Region assigned to a specific country. The New Zealand Search and Rescue Region which includes the New Zealand landmass spans million square kilometres and covers one of the largest Search and Rescue Regions in the world. This area extends from the midTasman Sea, halfway to Chile, and from the South Pole, almost up to the Equator. The New Zealand Search and Rescue Region has strong links with the traditional voyaging area of Mori and their ancestors within East Polynesia. New Zealand has a highly varied terrain with mountain ranges and hilly front and back country. The Southern Alps run almost the length of the South Island, and mountain ranges run across the North Island with four volcanic peaks, including Mt Ruapehu. These mountains along with fjords, glaciers, lakes, rivers and many other natural features are surrounded by approximately ,km of coastline. In addition, Stewart Island Rakiura, Chatham Islands, Great Barrier Island (Aotea Island), Rangitoto ki te TongaDUrville Island and Waiheke Island have their own diverse and unique landscapes.
Kind regardsDavid Crawford, Chief Executive Officer ListingMIA RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Top total new vehicle registrations (pass and commercial) Toyota Toyota Mitsubishi Mitsubishi Mitsubishi Toyota Ford Suzuki Ford Kia Hyundai Hyundai Mazda Honda Kia Nissan Mazda Mazda Hyundai Kia Suzuki Suzuki Ford Nissan Volkswagen MG MG Honda Volkswagen Honda MG Skoda LDV Tesla Nissan Isuzu Isuzu MercedesBenz Tesla MercedesBenz Subaru Volkswagen Subaru Audi Merce esBenz OTHERS , . OTHERS , . OTHERS , . Total Total Total Top new passenger carSUV registrations Toyota Toyota Mitsubishi Mitsubishi Mitsubishi Toyota Kia Suzuki Kia Suzuki Hyundai Hyundai Mazda Honda Suzuki Hyundai Mazda Mazda Nissan Kia MG Volkswagen MG Honda Honda Skoda Tesla MG Volkswagen Nissan Ford Subaru Volkswagen Tesla Nissan Haval Subaru Mercede Benz Ford Haval Audi MercedesBenz MercedesBenz M ni Subaru OTHERS , . OTHERS . OTHERS , . Total Total Total Top new commercial vehicle registrations Ford , Fo d Ford Toyota , Toyot Mitsubishi Mitsubishi , Fuso Toyota Nissan , Nissan LDV LDV , Isuzu Trucks Isuzu Isuzu , Hino Nissan Mazda , Mitsubishi Mazda Great Wall , MercedesBenz Great Wall Hyundai , Isuzu Fuso Volkswagen , Scania Volkswagen Fuso , Volkswagen Isuzu Trucks Isuzu Trucks , Fiat Hino Fiat UD Trucks MercedesBenz Hino Iveco Hyundai MercedesBenz Renault Fiat OTHERS . OTHERS . OTHERS , . Total Total Total Note The MIA registrations are counted only once. During the year some vehicles are deregistered, and accordingly the YTD figures in these tables will be less than the YTD figures provided by the NZTA. Full year Full Year Full Year Month of April YTD April YTD April Month of April YTD April Month of April RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Top fifteen new carSUV models MITSUBISHI OUTLANDER MITSUBISHI OUTLANDER MITSUBISHI OUTLANDER TOYOTA RAV TOYOTA RAV TOYOTA RAV MITSUBISHI ASX MITSUBISHI ECLIPSE CROSS TESLA MODEL TOYOTA COROLLA HONDA JAZZ MITSUBISHI ECLIPSE CROS TESLA MODEL SUZUKI SWIFT SUZUKI SWIFT MAZDA CX MAZDA CX MG ZS SUZUKI SWIFT TOYOTA COROLLA HONDA JAZZ MG ZS HYUNDAI IONIQ HYUNDAI KONA KIA STONIC MG ZS MAZDA CX NISSAN XTRAIL TOYOTA YARIS KIA SPORTAGE HYUNDAI KONA HYUNDAI KONA KIA STON C KIA SELTOS TOYOTA HIGHLANDER NISSAN XTRAIL KIA SPORTAGE TOYOTA YARIS CROSS MITSUBISHI ASX NISSAN QASHQAI SUZUKI BALENO HAVAL JOLION MITSUBISHI ECLIPSE CROS KIA SPORTAGE HYUNDAI TUCSON Top fifteen new commercial models FORD RANGER FORD RANGER FORD RANGER TOYOTA HILUX TOYOTA HILUX MITSUBISHI TRITON MITSUBISHI TRITON NISSAN NAVARA TOYOTA HILUX NISSAN NAVARA ISUZU TRUCKS F SER ES ISUZU DMAX ISUZU DMAX MITSUBISHI EXPRESS NISSAN NAVARA TOYOTA HIACE TOYOTA HIA E TOYOTA HIACE MAZDA BT HINO MAZDA BT GREAT WALL GWM CANNON ISUZU DMAX GREAT WALL GWM CANNO FORD TRANSIT MERCEDESBENZ SPRINTER LDV T HYUNDAI ILOAD FIAT DUCATO LDV DELIVER FIAT DUCATO HINO LDV G LDV G ISUZU TRUCKS N SERIES HYUNDAI STARIA LOAD LDV T FUSO CANTER CITY TIP MERCEDESBENZ SPRINTE MITSUBISHI EXPRESS FOR TRANSIT FIAT DUCATO MERCEDESBENZ SPRINTER RENAULT MASTER FORD TRANSIT MITSUBISHI OUTLANDER KIA STONIC HYUNDAI IONIQ MITSUBISHI OUTLANDER KIA STONIC TOYOTA RAV MG ZS MITSUBISHI TRITON SUZUKI SWIFT SUZUKI SWIFT SUZUKI VITARA HYUNDAI IONIQ MERCEDESBENZ SPRINTER MERCEDESBENZ SPRINTER MINI COUNTRYMAN MITSUBISHI ASX MITSUBISHI ECLIPSE CROS TOYOTA HILUX MITSUBISHI ASX MITSUBISHI ECLIPSE CROSS KIA SORENTO HYUNDAI TUCSON MAZDA CX KIA CARNIVAL FIAT DUCATO KIA SPORTAGE LEXUS RX TESLA MODEL MERCEDESBENZ EQA RENAULT KOLEOS YTD April YTD April Top Rental Vehicles YTD Top Rental Vehicles for the Month of April Full year Full year Month of April Month of April RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Please note there is a difference between the year to total numbers in these tables compared to NZTA data. This is due to the fact the numbers below exclude all deregistrations from the earlier months In these cases the vehicles in question are recorded in the month they are re registered. They are not doubled counted as is the case with the NZTA tables. VFACTS Segments Sales Share VFACTS Segments Sales Share VFACTS Segments Sales Share Total Total Total SUV Compact SUV Medium Pick UpChassis Cab X SUV Medium SUV Compact SUV Medium Pick UpChassis Cab X Light SUV C mpact SUV Large Small SUV Large Pick UpChassis Cab X SUV Large Pick UpChassis Cab X Light Heavy Commercial Light Small Pick UpChassis Cab X Vans Vans Medium Medium Heavy Commercial Pick UpChassis Cab X Sma l Medium Vans Heavy Commercial SUV Luxury Micro SUV Luxury Others Large Large Large Others Others Sports Sports Sports Micro SUV Luxury Micro People Movers People Movers People Movers Light Buses Upper Large Light Buses Upper Large Light Buses Upper Large Small Segment Profile YTD MITSUBISHI OUTLANDER FORD RANGER Total TOYOTA RAV MITSUBISHI TRITON SUV Compact MITSUBISHI ECLIPSE CROSS MITSUBISHI OUTLANDER SUV Medium HONDA JAZZ TOYOTA HILUX Light SUZUKI SWIFT TOYOTA RAV Small FORD RANGER TESLA MODEL Medium MAZDA CX MITSUBISHI ECLIPSE CROSS Micro TOYOTA COROLLA SUZUKI SWIF HYUNDAI IONIQ ISUZU DMAX Small Segment Profile April MG ZS MG ZS Total TOYOTA YARIS NISSAN NAVARA SUV Medium HYUNDAI KONA HONDA JAZZ SUV Compact TOYOTA HIGHLANDER HYUNDAI KONA Light TOYOTA YARIS CROSS MAZDA CX Small SUZUKI BALENO KIA SPORTAGE Medium Micro YTD April Month of April Full Year Total Vehicle Sales by Model YTD Total Vehicle Sales by Model April RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT May Strong New V ehicle Registrations of Hybrids and PHEVs in April but Light Commercial Vehicles Crash Motor Industry Asso ciation Chief Executive David Crawford says that as anticipated following the introduction of the Clean C ar Discount fees that became operative on April, registrations of , vehicles for the month are the weakest month of April since . Registrations of , passenger cars and SUVs were the second strongest month on record, largely due to sales of hybrid vehicles that are now eligible for a discount. However, registrations of , new commercial vehicles were down with sales of light commercial vehicles coming in at just units for the month . It is the fir st time on over a decade that a ute has not made it to a top three monthly registrations. It is anticipated sales of ute will gradually recover as the year progresses. Overall, r egist rations of , new vehicles were down . (, units) on April . Year to the market is up (, units) compared to the first four months of . Key points Ov erall, April registrations of . vehicles were down . (, units) on the same month in , and are . up ( , units) on year to . There were pure electric vehicles, , PHEVs and , hybrid vehicles sold for the month . Registrati on of , p assenger and SUVs for April were down . ( units) on April , whil e commercial vehicle registrations of , were down . (, units) compared to April . The top three mod els for the month of April were the Mitsubishi Outlander ( units), followed by the Toyota RAV ( units) with the Mitsubishi Eclipse Cross in third place ( units). It is the first time in over a decade that a ute has not appeared in the top three models registered in a month. Registrations of heavy vehicles remains solid with units for the month, while registrations of light commercial vehicles were down in April last year. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Market leaders in April Toyota regained the overall market leader with market share ( , units), followed by Mitsubishi with (, units) and Suzuki in third spot with market share ( units). Market share ye a r to , Mitsubishi ( ) is ahead of Toyota ( ) and Ford ( ). BEVs, PHEVs an d Hybrids There were light vehicle and heavy vehicle full battery electric vehicles registered in April. The top selling models were the Polestar ( units) followed by the Nissan Leaf ( units) and the Hyundai Kona ( units). Registrations of plugin hybrids were strong with , units registered for the month. The top selling models were the Mitsubishi Eclipse Cross ( units) followed by the Mitsubishi Outlander ( units ) and then the MG HS ( units). As anticipa ted sales of petrol hybrid vehicles recover ed in April with some purchasers delaying their purchase to take advantage of the rebate these vehicles now attract under the Clean C ar Discount. There were , hybrids registered in the month of April, with the top selling models being the Toyota RAV ( units) followed by the Honda Jazz ( units) and the Toyota Corolla ( units). SUV and passe nger vehicle sales April Toyota regained the mar ket lead for passenger and SUV registrations with market share (, units) followed by Mitsub shi with (, units) and then Suzuki with market share ( units). The top sellin g passenger and SUV models for the month were the Mitsubishi Outlander ( units) followed by the Toyota RAV ( units ) and the Mitsubishi Eclipse Cross ( units). Commercial vehicle sales April In a weak market f or light commercial vehicles, Ford regained the market lead with market share ( units) followed by Toyota with ( units) and Fuso in third with market share ( units). The Ford Ranger took top spot for the month of April as the bestselling commercial model with share ( units) followed by the Toyota Hilux with share ( units) and the Nissan Navara in third place with market share ( units). Market share ye ar to , the Ford Ranger ( share and , units ) leads followed by the Mitsubishi Triton ( share and , units ) and then the Toyota Hilux ( share and , units ). Segmentatio n Growth in the Sm a ller SUV s RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT AB C D E F G H I LICENSED VEHICLES BY TYPE AS AT END OF YEAR FROM Vehicle Type CARS , , , , , , , , RENTAL CARS , , , , , , , TAXIS , , , , , , , TRUCKS , , , , , , , BUSESCOACHES , , , , , , , , TRAILERSCARAVANS , , , , , , , , MOTORCYCLES , , , , , , , MOPEDS , , , , , , , TRACTORS EXEMPTVEHICLES , , , , , , , , MISCELLANEOUS TOTAL ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, NB data source December (year) table RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT JKLM N OP Q RS ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, , ,, ,, ,, ,, RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT T U V W X Y Z AA AB AC ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, , ,, ,, ,, ,, RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT AD AE AF AG AH AI AJ AK AL AM ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, , ,, ,, ,, ,, RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT AN AO AP AQ AR AS AT AU AV AW ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT AX AY AZ BA BB BC BD v v . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Passenger Car by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S New ExOverseas Total , Jan , , Feb , () Mar , . Apr , May , Jun , Jul () Aug . Sep Oct Nov Dec , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan , Jan , Jan , Feb , Feb , Feb , Mar , Mar , Mar , Apr , Apr , Apr , May , May , May , Jun , Jun , Jun , Jul , Jul , Jul , Aug , Aug , Aug , Sep , Sep , Sep ,
Kingham et al () compared time trends in road traffic crash mortality among young adults in New Zealand from to versus similar trends in Great Britain. They argued that New Zealand and Great Britain are similar in terms of many factors that could affect traffic crash mortality, but since there were no significant changes to driver licensing in Great Britain during the period of analysis, it is a useful control for assessing whether the reduction in mortality in New Zealand can be attributed to the introd uction of the three stage GDLS in (and changes to the GDLS in ), or whether these trends reflect global trends, for example, due to improved motor vehicle safety and road engineering. Kingham et al () found that the road traffic crash mortalit y rate among young adults in New Zealand declined after the introduction of the GDLS, but some of this could be attributed to other factors such as vehicle safety and road engineering, as evidenced by downward trends in mortality in Great Britain at the ti me. The authors also noted that (as at ), traffic crash mortality rates among various young adult age groups in New Zealand were still two to three times higher than in Great Britain. Kingham et al () concluded that This casts doubt on the belief that the implementation of the graduated licence scheme in New Zealand has seen a reduction in road traffic accident mortality among youth. Using a rich dataset of police traffic crash reports linked to hospital inpatient records, Begg et al () esti mated the impact of the night time curfew, restrictions on carrying passengers, and low blood alcohol limit imposed on drivers with restricted licenses under the GDLS. Controlling for driver age and gender, and year, Begg et al () found that the introd uction of the three stage GDLS reduced rates of crashes at night, where passengers were involved, and where alcohol was suspected to be involved, for drivers with restricted
Kiwi Best Practice Manual
Kiwi Best Practice Manual(external link)
KiwiRail KiwiRail planned for increased work to be completed over the Christmas and New Year period when commuter and freight demand is reduced. Highlights include: Completion of four kilometres of ballast cleaning between Westfield and Quay Park and installation of one crossover at Wiri. C onstruction of an electric train stabling yard at Quay Park began as part of the Wiri to Quay Park project. F ive damaged crossovers and one turnout on the Auckland Metro Rail system were replaced. Network Services completed track renewals at various sites within the Metro and at Westfield Yard.
KiwiRail has owned a corridor of land between Avondale, through Onehunga to its major freight container terminal in Southdown since the s. The corridor is already designated for rail use. The funding signaled in the GPS could allow detailed engineering design to be undertaken as a first step in eventually building a rail line between AvondaleSouthdown for both passenger and freight trains. The Avondale Onehunga Link would provide significant metro commuter service and connectivity improvements for Aucklanders. The potential to run EastWest commuter services on the Avondale Onehunga Link, would establish a true metropolitan passenger network for Auckland with an inner loop (CRL) and an outer loop (centre to west, west to south, south to east, east to centre). Another key benefit of the line is that it would help remove rail freight from the centre of the Auckland metro network, creating more space for commuter services, while also significantly improving efficiency for freight and logistics, and resilience right across the network. For example, freight services from the north currently have to travel through Newmarket, the busiest commuter junction in Auckland where Southern and Western Line services meet. Draft GPS Strategic Investment Programme
KiwiRail manages the contract.
KiwiRail owns and operates the metro rail track network. It works with Auckland Transport and Greater Wellington Regional Council to align their metro rail priorities.
Ko mtau ttahi o ng kaihoatu ki te hau o t ttau noho i Aotearoa. E whngai ana mtau mahi i ng ara rau e angitu ai a Aotearoa i na whenua, i te ao an hoki.
Ko ng hononga tangata nei e hua mai nei i te whai ngtahi i te wheako, e t nei i runga i ng mtpono o te thono me te hononga hapori.
Ko ng mtpono o te kokoraho, o te whakaaweawe, o te arataki. E mea ana tnei ka whai mtau ki te whakatutuki i t mtau mahi arataki i te pnaha e eke ai te hunga o Aotearoa i ng take waka.
Ko te ako me te whakaako tnei. Ko te ako, hei tirohanga ki te ao, e whakanoho ana i a mtau hei koanga, hei kaiako hoki. E mrama ai, e whakaputa hua ai ki Aotearoa tikanga rua, me whai mhiotanga, me whai pkenga, me whai mtauranga an hoki. Ka tutuki tnei m te ako.
Ko te koru i te taha matau, ko te pikorua ko te ngao i waenga i te ao wairua me te ao kiko. E tohu ana i te herenga tahitanga me te kotahitanga.
Ko te koru i te taha mau, ko te tipuranga hou, ko ng aho e toru e whakatinana ana i te mahi tahi a te tangata, i te manaaki me te matapopore ki tahi atu.
Ko te rranga harakeke te waitohu. Ko ng kete e toru, ko Te Kete Tuauri, ko Te Kete Tuatea, ko Te Kete Aronui.
Ko te tiaki me te whakahaumaru tnei. M konei e hpaitia ai mtau haepapa tiaki taonga.
Ko te tmanako he pai to wkene.
Ko te whakapakari, ko te whakapakeke, ko te whakatipu rnei tnei. Ko te poutama te tohu e whakaatu ana i te ekenga ki ng taumata tiketike, me te whakapai i ng hua.
Ko te whakatinanatanga tnei o te whakaute, o te atawhai, me te manaaki i tahi atu.
Ko ttai arorangi, he kaiarataki i te r The astronomical bodies guided people throughout their daily lives This whakatauk refers to how the objects of the night sky determine the activities of the day. To truly understand the earth, Papatnuku you have to look up and understand the sky. In leadership, the sky is often used to represent a lofty leader, an aspirational leader, or leadership of high quality. From a Te Ao Mori perspective, the sky also connects to astronomy, which was embedded in celestial navigation, the stars that guided our people across oceans to the shores of Aotearoa. We draw on this whakatauk to describe how leadership and governance must be both aspirational (visionary, future focused, looking ahead) and connected to the environment to determine our activities. How we are guided by the environment the sun, moon or stars to light the way forward in our work.SECTION FOUR REVISED GOVERNANCE AND LEADERSHIP ARRANGEMENTS Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Findings and recommendations . The Review set out to understand whether the current governance and leadership within and between the recreational safety and the search and rescue systems: encourages effective coordination and provides for transparent accountabilities and responsibilities, including what modifications might be necessary to support this, and whether changes might be required to support effective operational and non operational coordination. . Through the work of the Review, we observed: A lack of strategic oversight across the systems with respect to recreational safety and associated search and rescue prevention. The Forums are split across land, water, and search and rescue. They naturally focus on the delivery of actions and activities within their own spheres of influence. This has meant that there is often no one entity that can understand the System and its risks. This has led to overlaps and gaps in accountability for parts of the systems. It has also created tensions between organisations, and some inefficiencies due to duplication of effort. It has also made it more difficult at times, for Forums to: resolve cross cutting issues, or maximise opportunities. For example, there are gaps in the strategic consideration of recreational safety risks associated with where the whenua and the wai connect in and around beaches, rivers and lakes. Variable governance arrangements across the systems (including at a Ministerial level). The systems largely run under the radar of Ministers, yet they deliver critical safety services. Governance is not always representative of the make up of the sector (for example key delivery organisations), local government, or Mori. Strategic policy and support from central government to the organisations operating in the systems is limited and dispersed across government. NGOs have limited resources and levers to navigate across government. A need for more joined up strategic thinking with adjacent systems. The recreational safety and the search and rescue systems intersect with several other systems and sectors across government, the commercial sector, and internationally. Closer strategic policy collaboration is needed to maximise wellbeing outcomes for New Zealand between systems and adjacent systems (local and international) including the Education, Emergency Management, Health and Tourism systems. Data is not readily available to all of the organisations within the systems or the wider public. While some groups have data that is collected, analysed and shared to inform interventions, data is not always analysed or utilised in work informing research, the targeting of interventions, or evaluation of those interventions between the systems. . We note that the search and rescue system has strategic direction and oversight through the NZSAR Council. . We note that some parts of the System do have Board and Ministerial governance and that it is representative of the sector makeup e.g., recreational boating and craft, and rescue coordination. . For example, injury prevention through ACC, the Health system through Manat Hauora the Ministry of Health, the Education system through the Ministry of Education, the Tertiary Education Commission and the Workforce Development Councils, and civil defence through the National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA). However, it is not always clear where accountability and responsibility for crosscutting strategic policy issues sit including funding (e.g., Safer Walking initiatives and flood response). REVISED GOVERNANCE AND LEADERSHIP ARRANGEMENTS Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue We observed very little Mori representation within the search and rescue system and though recreational safety has had varied engagement with Mori over the years, stronger alignment to Te Tiriti o Waitangi and Te Ao Mori is needed across the System. Systems participants have indicated their keenness to live the Tiriti principles of partnership, participation, and protection , through enhanced engagement with Mori. However, they have noted that the capability and competence to do this effectively is varied. There is limited local government representation across the collective forums (with the exception of the Recreational Craft Leaders Forum and the associated Safer Boating Forum). Yet local government administers large tracts of land and water that people connect with and recreate in, on and around. . Through these findings we see meaningful opportunity to have more strategic and Systemwide support for the System and Ministerial focus. We propose revised arrangements to provide for clearer lines of accountability and responsibility from and to Ministers through the appointment of a System Steward within Government, supported by an Advisory Board (comprising key leadership organisations in the System responsible for the coordination and delivery of services), and a Mori Khui Advisory Board (accountable for providing expert advice on things Mori within the System). . It is proposed that Te Manat Waka would be appointed as the System Steward. REVISED GOVERNANCE AND LEADERSHIP ARRANGEMENTS Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue We make the following recommendations: . Revised governance and leadership arrangements for the System through: a. the establishment of a Ministerial Oversight Group b. the establishment of an Advisory Board c. the establishment of a Mori Khui Advisory Board d. the appointment of a System Steward within government. The appointment of Te Manat Waka as the System Steward. . Stronger alignment to, and the implementation of, the principles of Te Tiriti o Waitangi in the proposed governance and leadership structure. This requires stronger partnership, participation and protection of Mori within the System, and across all levels, including governance and leadership through: a. Mori representation at the Ministerial Oversight Group b. Mori representation at the Advisory Board c. the establishment of a Mori Khui Advisory Board as a dedicated space for Mori in the System d. the appointment of a supported Chief Mori Adviser within the System Steward.. Te Manat Waka confirms an implementation plan to give effect to the new arrangements for the System as soon as practicable, including the approach to implement the System Strategy. . Te Manat Waka works to standup its stewardship capability, including Mori capability and competency, finalises the System Strategy and arrangements to implement the Strategy, and implements the proposed new governance and leadership arrangements by mid . . Oversight and monitoring of Water Safety New Zealand transfers from Sport New Zealand to the System Steward in mid . . Te Manat Waka to work with government, local government, iwi and NGOs to explore roles, responsibilities, regulations, and funding arrangements for recreational safety around coastal and inland waterways, including perspectives on risk and risk management, and the strategies, tools and funding availablerequired. REVISED GOVERNANCE AND LEADERSHIP ARRANGEMENTS Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Recommendation : Governance and leadership arrangements . The proposed governance and leadership arrangements streamline the existing arrangements in play across the systems. The new look governance and leadership arrangements are depicted in Diagram above. Appendix compares and contrasts the existing governance and leadership arrangements and proposed new look arrangements to illustrate what changes and what remains.. The design reflects the mauri or lifeforce of the System, through the establishment of: a Ministerial Oversight Group an Advisory Board a Mori Khui Advisory Board a System Steward within Te Manat Waka Standing Groups and focused Working Groups to connect organisations within the System and adjacent systems.Diagram : Proposed governance and leadership arrangements Responsible for the establishment and management of, including advice and supportSupport and advice; accountable to SupportSupport Expert Advice Expert Advice Expert Advice and SupportExpert Advice and SupportExpert Advice Expert Advice Providing expert operational and tactical adviceAccountable for Includes hui on the System Stewards annual work programme Sector SummitsWorking GroupsSubgroupsMinisterial Oversight Group (Lead Minister) Senior Government Officials GroupAdvisory Board System StewardMori Khui Advisory Board REVISED GOVERNANCE AND LEADERSHIP ARRANGEMENTS Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Roles, accountabilities, and responsibilities at a glance . The recommendations provide for the following arrangements: A Ministerial Oversight Group accountable for the System. A Lead Minister (the Minister of Transport) within the Ministerial Oversight Group accountable for the System Steward (Te Manat Waka). The System Steward within government accountable to the Lead Minister. This will include Mori expertise to implement Te Tiriti o Waitangi, uphold the mana of the Wai Puna model and build Mori capability and capacity within the System. An Advisory Board, representing key participants in the System including Mori representation, accountable for providing expert operational and technical advice to the System Steward, the Mori Khui Advisory Board, and the Ministerial Oversight Group. A Mori Khui Advisory Board (a collective of Kaihaut from across the System) accountable for providing expert advice on things Mori within the shared system to the System Steward, the Advisory Board and the Ministerial Oversight Group. Standing Groups with specific focus areas and timelimited focused Working Groups to deliver oneoff projects. Systemwide Summits to bring together stakeholders and decisionmakers from New Zealand and international jurisdictions to facilitate collaboration and information sharing across the System, and adjacent systems.. Appendix sets out: The roles and responsibilities of the Ministerial Oversight Group, the Advisory Board, the Mori Khui Advisory Board, and the System Steward. The proposed membership of the Ministerial Oversight Group, the Advisory Board, and the Mori Khui Advisory Board. Further information on the concept of Standing Groups and Working Groups and the Sector Summits. . The recommendations reflect: the positive intent and the trust between government and NGOs, supporting each other to make the best decisions for the wellbeing of the System and delivery of System outcomes a growing expectation in New Zealand generally that the role of Mori, iwi and hap in decisionmaking and at all other levels needs to be more firmly established; that inclusivity and equality are vital to a thriving society normalisation of the role of a government entity (Te Manat Waka) to provide stewardship and strategic policy advice and coordination across the System. . We are not proposing any changes to the legislative and constitutional mandates of organisations responsible for: the delivery of recreational safety and search and rescue services; including the coordination of search and rescue operations through the Coordinating Authorities, and the regulation and funding of these activities. REVISED GOVERNANCE AND LEADERSHIP ARRANGEMENTS Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue . We observe that organisations have their own strategies, areas of focus, work programmes and partnerships in play, to give effect to their legislative and constitutional mandates. Through their work, they also deliver System outcomes and outcomes in adjacent systems. The System Stewards role will be to help navigate challenges across the System and adjacent systems, facilitating collaboration, the resolution of strategic policy issues, and maximisation of opportunities. Alternate options considered . As part of the Review, we considered whether the recreational safety and the search and rescue systems should remain separate but linked. This option would involve the establishment of a second Council for the recreational safety system working alongside the NZSAR Council to support the shared strategic framework. . The Recreational Safety and NZSAR Councils would have aligned mandates set out in new Terms of Reference. The Terms of Reference for each would include strict reporting and accountability requirements to Ministers. Clear guidance around performance expectations for the systems and ways of working between the two Councils would also be specified. . The existing NZSAR Secretariat would need to be enlarged to provide support to the additional Recreational Safety Council. In addition, the NZSAR Council would be reconstituted to include government, NGO, and Mori representatives, to better reflect the mix of organisations operating in the system and the Governments commitment to the principles of Te Tiriti o Waitangi. The Recreational Safety Council would need to have a similar mix of representation. . However, limitations would remain, and the two Councils would simply maintain the disaggregation between the systems. Therefore, this would not adequately address some of the challenges and risks identified, and the reality that the systems together deliver a pipeline of safety services as discussed earlier. We also note that delivery of the shared strategic framework would be split across two governance entities, and we believe would make the outcomes and impacts difficult to achieve. It would severely limit collaboration, and the ability of decision makers to consider the optimisation of harm prevention and search and rescue response services and associated investments. . We also considered more formal machinery of government changes through the establishment of an Interdepartmental Executive Board, for example. However, there are limitations on the type of entities that can be part of the more formal machinery of government structures, meaning they are not appropriate for this type of System. We also considered a Departmental Agency, but decided at this point in time an Office Business Unit within Te Manat Waka was the best option. . Align and coordinate strategic policy, planning, and budgeting activities for two or more departments with responsibilities in a subject matter area, to support them to deliver on relevant crossdepartmental initiatives. . Operationally autonomous agencies hosted by a government department. REVISED GOVERNANCE AND LEADERSHIP ARRANGEMENTS Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Recommendation : The System Steward . Te Manat Waka, as the System Steward, will be responsible for: providing cohesive strategic policy support and coordination from government providing continuous oversight of the health and performance of the System implementing Te Tiriti o Waitangi, upholding the mana of the Wai Puna model and building Mori capability and capacity within the System. It is critical, therefore, that a supported Chief Mori Adviser be appointed within the System Steward structure to provide the necessary cultural expertise to lead this work. working with organisations in the System to consider the optimal configuration of preventative and response services, and effective funding for both leading the Systems research programme to inform evidence based decisionmaking having due regard for and harnessing capability across the System collaborating with participants in the System, and in adjacent systems, to tackle and resolve complex policy and strategic problems and seize opportunities to drive improved achievement of agreed outcomes. Appendix summarises the proposed functions of the System Steward. . Given the proposal for a System Steward, we recommend the disestablishment of the NZSAR Council, Consultative Committee and Secretariat, with the functions and work of the Secretariat reviewed and folded into Te Manat Wakas System stewardship function. . In a complex system with many organisations involved, understanding roles, responsibilities and perspectives is critical. Organisations in the System should not shy away from having more regular and explicit discussions about their roles and responsibilities, to better navigate them and maximise outcomes in the System. We have seen evidence of this increasingly occurring throughout the period of the Review. Where roles and responsibilities are unclear then there is a role for the System Steward to facilitate work to resolve them, working with relevant organisations within the System and adjacent systems. . This requires a change to the existing Cabinet Minute that established the current governance structures for search and rescue. Te Manat Waka, working with the Associate Minister of Transport, will include the required Cabinet process as part of its work to standup the new System. . Including central government, local government, NGOs, marae, hap and iwi, private entities and landowners. REVISED GOVERNANCE AND LEADERSHIP ARRANGEMENTS Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Supporting an evidence rich System . Data, research, and insights, including evaluation, will continue to be critical commodities in the System to support the delivery of Systemwide outcomes. We observe work underway across organisations to better understand, decide on, and do more of what really works, to support people to stay safe and return home safely; including work underway to understand better how communities form their attitudes, and behaviours to inform interventions. We observe closer working relationships between organisations to share data and analytics, although tensions remain. . We recommend, as a matter of priority, the System Steward establish a standing Data and Research Group to support regular information sharing and draw together data, research and insights across the System. . The Data and Research Group would also act as an important enabler to: identify Systemwide issues and opportunities to support the prioritisation of a multiyear work programme, and annual review process, driven through the System Steward, and systemswide reporting to the Ministerial Oversight Group and both Advisory Boards through the Steward. . Ongoing identification and analysis of System wide trends and exploring the implications of them will be necessary to support a more adaptable, changeready System. The System Steward will be expected to harness capability from across the System to support evidence based decisionmaking to: statistically analyse past event data to identify the trends in deaths and injuries including near misses and undertake further research as required to understand the causal factors across the System undertake environmental scanning (an assessment of future trends and influences, including futures thinking) and the development of plausible hypotheses to test the impact of them on the System, including users of the System, and the people and assets operating within. . These forecasts would inform planning and investment needs to deliver System outcomes and impacts identified within the System Strategy. . Comprising sector experts that hold data across the System. . The System Steward would be responsible for convening, managing and administering Working Groups and Standing Subgroups. Working Groups will be stood up as appropriate to support delivery of the Systemwide multiyear work programme. These Groups would comprise organisations from both within and outside of the System with key inputs and interests in that particular topic to ensure the right people to make decisions are around the table. Standing Subgroups will be established to support longterm programmes or approaches. REVISED GOVERNANCE AND LEADERSHIP ARRANGEMENTS Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Recommendation : Recognition of Te Tiriti and Te Ao Mori . Through our work, we observed varied engagement with Mori across the recreational safety system, and limited Mori engagement within the search and rescue system. That said, we acknowledge a number of organisations have work underway to build capability and acknowledge the willingness of others to explore this. The proposed new System provides the foundation to pursue stronger alignment to, and implementation of the principles of Te Tiriti o Waitangi and Te Ao Mori within the System longterm. This needs to be reflected at all levels of the System including System governance and leadership. This will be explored as part of the Review implementation phase and through the work of the System Steward once established. As a foundation, within the proposed governance and leadership arrangements, we recommend dedicated Mori representation through the establishment of a Mori Khui Advisory Board, and a Chief Mori Adviser within the System Steward, to build from.. The primary function of a Chief Mori Adviser within the System Steward will be to provide dedicated kaitiakitanga of the Wai Puna model that forms the basis of the System Kaupapa and build Mori capacity and capability within the System. Their focus is primarily on Te Ao Mori, Mori community engagement and upholding the mana of Te Tiriti o Waitangi. The role as tangata whenua is to manaaki and take care of others, those represented as tangata tiriti (people of the treaty which includes migrants and other ethnic minorities who have come to New Zealand under the mana of the Crown) and tangata moana (people of the Pacific). A potential space that the implementation phase will focus on is the role of the Chief Mori Adviser in building cultural capacity and capability for not only Mori (tangata whenua) but similarly for Pacific peoples (represented as tangata moana who have close association to tangata whenua) and migrant, refugee and ethnic communities (who are represented under the mana of tangata tiriti).
Kotahi supports local government to create
Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua
LATAM Airlines LATAM Airlines, all reported transTasman routes
LATAM reports that unscheduled maintenance affected their OTP this month. .. ... . ... .. ... . ... .. ... . .. . ...... Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar OnTime Departures () OnTime Arrivals () Cancellations () AIRLINES PERFORMANCE, TRANSTASMAN ROUTES, MARCH
LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: David Crawford To: Barbara Kuriger ; Brent Johnston ; Davey Uprichard ; David Crawford ; Elena Hood ; Ewan Delany ; Haobo Wang ; Helen White ; J Genter (MIN) ; Hugh Mazey ; Jason Familton ; Kerry Lambeth (Parliament) ; M Wood (MIN) ; Hon Michael Woodhouse ; Peter Mersi ; Seb (Parliament) Brown ; Simon Court Subject: MIA Press Release Monday, May Attachments: April Sales Table.xlsx April New Vehicle Sales Press Release.docx Registration data onwards YTD April .xlsx Hi all Please find attached an MIA press release with supporting data for the month of April. As anticipated registrations of light commercial vehicles were weak while hybrids and PHEVs sawstrong increases for the month.
LEG MIN Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits Amendment Portfolio: Transport CONFIRMED
LEGMIN Land Transport Rules: Setting of Speed Limits :
LGWM November public engagement
LINZ executes both s PWA agreements.
Land Sale and Development Partner Selection Process . To select development partners a two stage process would be followed. . . .
Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Discount Scheme Charges) Amendment Regulations
Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Discount Scheme Charges) Regulations
Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Discount Scheme Repeal) Amendment Act .
Land Transport (Clean Vehicles) Amendment Act (No )
Land Transport (Clean Vehicles) Amendment Act
Land Transport (Clean Vehicles) Amendment Bill
Land Transport (Driver Licensing) Amendment Rule
Land Transport (Driver Licensing) Rule
Land Transport (Drug Driving) Amendment Bill (New Zealand Parliament)
Land Transport (NZTA) Legislation Amendment Bill
Land Transport (Rail) Legislation Act
Land Transport (Rail) Legislation Act comes into effect
Land Transport (Railway Track User Charges) Regulations (LI ) Contents New Zealand Legislation
Land Transport (Register of Land Transport RecordsSpeed Limits) Regulations
Land Transport (Road User) Amendment Rule
Land Transport (Road User) Amendment Rule give effect to the decision
Land Transport (Road User) Amendment Rule to amend the Land
Land Transport Fund (the NLTF) to
Land Transport Manag ement (Regional Fuel Tax Scheme Auckland) Amendment Order
Land Transport Management (Apportionment and Refund of Excise Duty and ExciseEquivalent Duty) Regulations
Land Transport Management (Regional Fuel Tax SchemeAuckland) Order
Land Transport Management (Regional Fuel Tax) Amendment Act
Land Transport Management (Regional Fuel Tax) Amendment Bill submissions and advice
Land Transport Management (Regional Fuel Tax) Amendment Regulations (No )
Land Transport Management (Regional Fuel Tax) Amendment Regulations
Land Transport Management (Regional Fuel Tax) Regulations
Land Transport Management (Regional Transport Committees) Regulations
Land Transport Management (Road Tolling Scheme for Takitimu Drive (Route K)) Order
Land Transport Management (Road Tolling Scheme for Tauranga Eastern Link) Order
Land Transport Management Act (LTMA) for tolling schemes to contribute to costs
Land Transport Management Act on the advice and with the consent of
Land Transport Management Amendment Act
Land Transport Records Speed Limits) Regulations to reference the
Land Transport Revenue Stakeholder Reference Group
Land Transport Rule Vehicle Exhaust Emissions Rule As at April
Land Transport Rule: Driver Licensing Amendment
Land Transport Rule: Light vehicle Brakes
Land Transport Rule: Lightvehicle Brakes
Land Transport Rule: Operator Licensing
Land Transport Rule: Regulatory Stewardship (Omnibus) Amendment
Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits consultation Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency (nzta.govt.nz)
Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits (nzta.govt.nz)
Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits Amendment Proposal This paper seeks agreement to targeted amendments to the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits (the Rule) . The amendments will require speed limits on transit corridors and State highway rural connectors reduced since January to rever t to the previous higher speed limit, with limited exceptions. T he reversals must take effect by July . This paper also recommends th e Cabinet Legislation Committee authorise the submission of the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits Amendment (the Amendment Rule) to the Executive Council to give effect to the changes outlined above . Relation to government priorities This paper relates to the Governments commitment to sign a new speed limit rule to reverse the previous governments blanket speed limit reductions . Executive Summary The Rule requires speed limits on specified roads reduced since January to rever t to the previous higher speed limit, with limited exceptions . The reversals must take effect by July . The public consultation document that led to the Rule included broad references to specified road types that would be subject to the reversal provisions. These road types included arterial roads primarily designed for the efficient movement of people and goods between different parts of urban areas, and rural State highways. The Rule includes technical road classifications that are narrower in scope than the broader references used in the consultation documen t. I propose that the Cabinet Legislation Committee approves targeted change s to expand the list of specified roads subject to the Rules reversal provisions . The targeted change would include transit corridors and State highway rural connectors within the reversal provisions, aligning with the policy intent described in the public consultation document . Background In May , the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee approved the release of a draft Rule and associated public consultation document and invited me to report back following consultation ECO MIN refers. In September xpmpm PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E , following public consultation, Cabinet Expenditure and Regulatory Review Committee agreed to some changes to the Rule and noted my intention to sign the Rule EXP MIN refers. I signed the Rule on September , and the Rule came into for ce on October . The Rule requires speed limits on specified roads reduced since January to be reversed , with limited exceptions . The reversals must take effect by July . Under the Rule, responsibility for setting speed limits and reversing the speed limits on specified roads sits with Road Controlling Authorities (RCAs). The New Zealand Transport Agency Waka Kotahi ( NZTA ) is the RCA for State highways, and territorial authorities are the RCAs for local roads. I propose a targeted Rule amendment to expand the types of roads subject to speed limit reversals The public consultation document for the Rule included broad references to specified road types that would be subject to the reversal provisions. This included arterial roads primarily designed for the efficient movement of people and goods between different parts of urban areas, and rural State highways. The Rule includes technical road classifications (urban and interregional connectors) narrower in scope than the broader references used in the public consultation document . I am therefore proposing to expand the list of specified roads subject to the reversal provisions in the Rule to align more closely with what was described in the public consultation document, and what was intended . The specified roads I propose to add to the reversal process in Schedule of the R ule are: . Transit corridors this road classification covers mass transit corridors primarily through urban areas. They are mainly urban State highways managed by NZTA. Some transit corridors are under the jurisdiction of territorial authorities . I propose the lower speed limits on these roads set since January will reverse back to the higher speed limit by July . This aligns these roads with the treatment of other arterial roads (urban connectors) already being reversed under the Rule. . State highway rural connectors these are State highways that link rural roads with interregional connectors. Interregional connectors (the significant State highways run ning the length of the country) are already covered by the reversal provisions. I propose that, like interregional connectors, the lower speed limits on these roads must reverse back to the previous higher speed limit by July unless NZTA is satisfied th ere is public acceptance for the lower speed limit, ascertained through a fresh c onsultation exercise. Transit corridors are currently referenced in another part of the Rule as urban transit corridors. This will be renamed transit corridors to align with the NZTA xpmpm PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E One Network Framework road classification system. This is a minor technical change to ensure clarity for RCAs. Legislative Implications Under section A of the Land Transport Act (the Act) , ordinary land transport rules may be made, amended or revoked by the Governor General by Order in Council, on the recommendation of the Minister of Transport. The other relevant empowering provisions for making rule and rule amendments are section ()(d) and (e) of the Act, which specify that rules may provide for the setting of speed li mits for roads and empower or require RCAs and RTCs to set speed limits for roads within their jurisdiction. To give effect to the recommendations referred to above, I recommend the Amendment Rule be made under these provisions of the Act . Timing and the day rule The Amendment Rule will come into effect days after it is notified in the New Zealand Gazette . This will enable RCAs to undertake the necessary steps to reverse speed limits on transit corridors and State highway rural connectors before the July deadline already specified in the Rule. Compliance The Amendment Rule complies with: . the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi; . the rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act and the Human Rights Act ; . the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act ; . relevant international standards and obligations; and . the Legislation Guidelines ( edition), which are maintained by the Legislation Design and Advisory Committee. Section A() of the Act requires me to have regard to the criteria specified in section () of the Act before making a recommendation that the Governor General make a rule under section A(). The Ministry provided advice to me under section ( ) of the Act in September when I signed the rule. The Ministry has reiterated its advice on these matters. I can confirm that I have had regard, and have given such weight as I considered appropriate , to those criteria in recommending the Governor Gene ral make the Amendment Rule. xpmpm PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Regulations Review Committee I have been advised it is unlikely there are any grounds for the Regulations Review Committee to draw the Amendment Rule to the attention of the House of Representatives under the Standing Orders. Certification In accordance with section A() of the Act, the Amendment Rule was drafted by NZTA and reviewed by the Ministry. The Chief Legal Adviser, Ministry of Transport, has certified the Amendment Rule as being in order for submission to Executive Council. Cost ofliving Implications Reversing speed limits would likely result in reduced travel times on roads where speed limits are reversed . Depending on funding availability through the National Land Transport Fund, some of the costs of undertaking speed limit reversals may fall to territorial authorities, which could be passed on to ratepayers . See Financial Implications section below . Financial Implications There are no direct financial implications to the Crown . The Amendment Rule will have financial implications for RCAs. NZTA has indicated funding is available to support territorial authorities implementing the Rule through the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF), with priority being given to reversals . The changes to the scope for reversals proposed in this paper could have implications for those funding decisions and work already underway with councils to determine activities eligible for funding . Any costs not covered by the NLTF will fall to territorial autho rities. I expect these will be minimal, as the majority of the roads subject to the Amendment Rule provisions are the responsibility of NZTA. Impact Analysis Regulatory Impact Statement The Ministry for Regulation has determined that this proposal is exempt from the requirement to provide a Regulatory Impact Statement on the grounds that it has been addressed by existing impact analysis EXPMIN and the Regulatory Impact Statement for the Rule. The proposal aligns the technical road classifications in the Rules reversal provisions with the policy intent as explained in the Regulatory Impact Statement and public consultation document .
Land Transport Rule: Vehicle Dimensions and Mass
Land Transport Rule: Vehicle Dimensions and Mass Consultation
Land Transport Rule: Vehicle Efficiency and Emissions Data
Land Transport Rule: Vehicle Exhaust Emissions
Land Transport Rule: Vehicle Exhaust Emissions Amendment
Land Transport Rules Setting of Speed Limits
Land Transport Rules: Setting of Speed Limits : Consequential
Land transport Crown investment packages
Language influences how we think When using gender pronouns and referring to gender identity consider that: we are a diverse group of people from across the gender spectrum labelling people as male or female can reinforce outdated stereotypes and influence how men and women are perceived gender exclusive language for example man made, can alienate people who do not identify as men. Tips Use gender neutral pronouns (they, them) by default especially if youre writing about a hypothetical person or do not know a persons pronoun. Respect a persons pronouns when referring to them. Do not ask your users for their title or gender unless necessary . If you do require users to indicate their title or gender, make provision for multiple options, including gender neutral options. Allow users to select more than option. Avoid words that are gender exclusive for example use firefighter not fireman. Examples of gender neutral language
Large amounts of information and data relating to the transport system were produced, managed, analysed and communicated following the Kaikura earthquake.
Last Last March .
Late in , the European Commission a comprehensive study demonstrating how the Euro (light vehicles) and Euro VI (heavy vehicles) standards significantly reduced the emissions of nitrogen oxides, particulates, carbon monoxide, and other harmful vehicle exhaust pollutants. The report by the European Commission and a summary by the Ministry of Transport outline the pollution reductions of adopting these vehicle standards.
Latin forms (eg, ie, etc) Place a comma before and after a Latin form without using use full stops. Dont use etc if theres an eg before it in the sentence .
Leader of the Houses Office
Leadership group established
Leading advice to Government on the Auckland Transport Alignment Project (ATAP), as a crossagency partner.
Learn more on how to make a submission on the New Zealand Parliament website.
Legend Roadingother activities Active transport activities Public transport activities EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Legislation Design and Advisory Committee
Legislation Design and Advisory Committee.
Legislation Guidelines ( edition) for infringement offences are removed
Legislation being drafted
Legislation for this is being drafted as part of Civil Aviation Bill. Subject to government priorities, the Bill may be passed in mid.
Legislation in New Zealand governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Legislation to enable roadside drug testing passes third reading
Legislative change would be required to put PTOM in place as public transport services were regulated under the Public Transport Management Act .
Legislative statement : I present the legislative statement on the Land Transport Management (Time of Use Charging) Amendment Bill. The speaker will state that the legislative statement is under the authority of the House and can be found on the Parliamentary website First reading speech :
Let me know if any questions.
Let me know if there is anything I have missed or needs to be amended.
Lets Get Wellington Moving
Letter from Chair of Waka Kotahi, NZ Transport Agency about the financial impacts of COVID on the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF).
Letter from the Chair of the Waka Kotahi
Lets Get Wellington Moving
Lets Get Wellington Moving (LGWM) was a joint initiative between Wellington City Council, Greater Wellington Regional Council, and the New Zealand Transport Agency Waka Kotahi to make major investments over years in mass rapid transit, walking and cycling, public transport and state highway improvements in Wellington city.
Lets Get Wellington Moving began as a response to the termination of Basin Reserve flyover plans. There was a protracted stalemate over this project that ended up in the High Court and was finally dropped in . The partners involved in improving the route from Ngauranga to Wellington Airport decided to then take a fresh, wider look at the citys transport system.
Lifesaving motorcycle technology to be mandatory from April
Light Commercial Vehicles
Light Used Import Disability vehicles will have extra time (January ) before they need to meet the Euro d standard.
Light motor vehicle registrations (including average CO emissions)
Limitations due to inability to accurately measure exposure to crash risks . .. Other limitations of this study . . . . Evaluation results for the driver licensing system (Class ) . . .. Context: Overall patterns and trends in crash rates . . Crash rates by licence stage and driver gender . . Crash rates by licence stage and driver age . . Crash rates by licence stage and driver region of residence . Crash rates by licence stage and two way combinations of driver age, gender, and region . . . . Trends in crash rates over time . . . Implications for driver licensing . . . .. Estimated safety impacts of the to GDLS changes . Context for analysis of the changes . . Estimated effects on crash rates of increasing the minimum driving ages (August ) . . . . Estimated effects on crash rates of strengthening the restricted test (February ) Estimated effects on crash rates of rebalancing penalties for driver licensing breaches (December ) . . . .. Comparison of crash rates for restricted and fully licensed drivers . .. Is the night time driving restriction f or restricted drivers effective . .. Demographics of advanced certificate uptake and comparison of crash rates for drivers with and without advanced certificates . . . Demographics of advanced certificate uptake and time discounts . Comparison of crash rates for drivers with and without advanced certificates .. Relationships between progression through the driver licensing stages, driver demographics, and crash rates . . . Fouryear progression status: Relationships to driver characteristics . Progression vs non progression: Relationships to crash rates . Progression duration for drivers who do progress: Relationships to driver characteristics . . . . Progression duration: Relationships to crash rates . . . Evaluation results for the motorcyclist licensing system (Class ) . .. Context: Overall patterns and trends in crash rates . . Crash rates by licence stage and rider gender . . Crash rates by licence stage and rider age . . Crash rates by licence stage and rider region of residence . Trends in crash rates . . .
Limitations for Class due to the small number of licensed riders For Class , the number of licensed riders and their crashes in any given year are relatively low. This means that crash rates for Class are subject to relatively high levels of uncertainty, particularly when calculated for individual years or for subset s of riders. This makes it more difficult to determine whether observed differences in Class crash rates are due to underlying differences in safety or are due to random variation. To partially overcome this, we have used crash rates calculated for combi ned three year time period, as described above. However, for Class it is still difficult to reach strong conclusions about differences in crash rates in many cases. Limitations due to inability to accurately measure exposure to crash risks We cannot obs erve the actual amount and type of driving or riding done by each licence holder, for example vehicle kilometres travelled (VKT), for any given licence holder in any given period of time. Therefore, the analysis of per driver and per rider crash rates impl icitly assumes that each licence holder has the same exposure to crash risk per period of time. That is, in all cases in this report we use the amount of time that people have held licences in the calculation of exposure to crash risk and as a measure of d riving or riding experience. In reality, the amount of time that a person has held a licence may not be perfectly correlated with actual experience or exposure to crash risk. For example, some people may obtain a learner licence as a form of identificatio n but not actually drive, and thus the amount of time they have held a licence does not accurately reflect their exposure to crash risk or actual driving experience. Thus, the calculated crash rates for learners may appear relatively low compared to people with restricted and full licences, but some of this difference is
Limited (M) .
Limits (the Speed Rule), which comes into force on October
Limits post consultation report back . Cabinet agreed to me as Minister
Limits were placed on how the respondents could engage with stakeholders while preparing their proposals. This was to ensure that both respondents had equal access to information and to avoid engagement before a preferred delivery partner was selected.
Limits) Amendment Regulations , the Land Transport Management
Link Stage and , and an Penlink tolling proposal . A draft Cabinet paper aligned
Links to certified copies of documents incorporated by reference into the OiCs are set out below. The documents, or the specified parts of the documents have the same legal effect as the OiCs.
List of figures Figure Fatal and serious at fault light motor vehicle crash involvements per , licensed drivers aged to per year for t o combined by drivers gender and licence stage with confidence intervals. . . . Figure Fatal and serious at fault light motor vehicle crash involvements per , licensed drivers per year for to combined by licence stage and drivers age with confidence intervals. . . . . Figure Learner licences issued versus the drivers age at the time of obtaining their learner licence, for and . . . . . Figure Crashes involving yearold drivers, by year, with confidence bands showing the plausible range of the number of crashes in each year given random variation in crash rates. . . . . . Figure Actual (black dots) and modelled (red line, with confidence bands) monthly crash rates for drivers aged under versus driving experience measured as the amou nt of time since obtaining a learner licence, from to combined. . .. Figure Estimated change in the annual number of crash involvements due to changing the minimum driving age (with confidence bands). . . Figure Fatal and serious at fault light motor vehicle crash involvements per , licensed drivers aged to per year by licence stage and crash time periods, with confidence intervals ( to combined). . . . Figure Proportion of full licences issued to drivers aged under where the driver held an advanced certificate by drivers gender and year (percent). . . Figure Proportion of full licences issued in where the driver held an advanced certificate by the drivers age at the time of obtaining their full licence (percent). . Figure Distribution of time discounts obtained by drivers who received full licences with advanced certificates in by the drivers age the time of obtaining their full licence. . Figure Fatal and serious at fault light motor vehicle crash involvements per , fully licensed drivers per year for drivers aged to years old in to by gender, advanced certificate status, and time discount status, with confidence intervals. . Figure Snapshot of progression at the learner and restricted stages and achievement of full licences by the end of for drivers who obtained a learner licence in aged under . . . . . Figure Cumulative proportion of drivers who received a Class learner licence aged under and who had progressed t o a full licence in a given amount of time. . Figure Four year progression status for drivers who were aged under years old at the time of obtaining their learner licence, by gender and year of obtaining a learner licence (percent). . . . . Figure Fatal and serious at fault light motor vehicle crash involvements per , licensed drivers per year to the end of for drivers aged under who obtained their learner licence between and , by progression status as at the end of and licence stag e, with confidence intervals. . . . Figure Distribution of progression durations for drivers aged under who obtained a learner licence in and progressed to subsequent stages by the end of by driver gender (months). . . . . Figure Fatal and serious at fault light motor vehicle crash involvements per , licensed drivers per year for drivers aged under who obtained a learner licence in to
List of funding under the ETC
List of tables Table Combinations of years and licence holder ages for which the licensing dataset can be assumed to contain records of all licence holders. . . Table Ratios of crash rates by licence stage, driver gender, and age, to overall crash rates for each licence stage, for the combined period from to . . .
List of tables Table : Groups contained in study Appendix by numbers . Table : Risk adjusted percentage of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for drink driving offences, after to years, by offender group . Table : Actual and expected percen tage of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for drink driving offences, and risk adjusted percentages, after years, by offender group . Table : Actual and expected percentage of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for drink driving offences, and risk adjusted percentages, after years, by offender group . Table : Actual and expected percentage of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for drink driving offences, and risk adjusted percentages, after years, by offender group . Table : Actual and expected percentage of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for disqualified driving offences, and risk adjusted percentages, after year, by offender group . Table : Actual and expected percentage of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for disqualified driving offences, and risk adjusted percentages, after years, by offender group . Table : Actual and ex pected percentage of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for disqualified driving offences, and risk adjusted percentages, after years, by offender group . Table : Actual and expected percentage of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for disqualified driving offences, and risk adjusted percentages, after years, by offender group . Table : Actual and expected percentage of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for other (non drinkdisqualified driving )offences, and risk adjusted percentages, after yea r, by offender group . Table : Actual and expected percentage of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for other (non drinkdisqualified driving)offences, and risk adjusted percentages, after years, by offender group . Table : Actual and expected percentage of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for other (non drinkdisqualified driving)offences, and risk adjusted percentages, after years, by offender group . Table : Actual and expected percentage of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for other (non drinkdisqualified driving)offences, and risk adjusted percentages, after years, by offender group . Table Total number of Alcohol Interlock Licences granted between January July . Table Number of new proved disqualified driving offences within months by offence for AIOeligible and matched comparison offenders from to () . Table Numbers of Police Detections for Drink Driving by Year . Table Police PassiveScreening Breath Tests by Download Year . Table : Study Participants by Multivariate Percentages .
Listed below are the most commonly used grounds from the OIA.
Lists should: complete a sentence be frontloaded with the most important information start with the same language element, like verb, noun, adjective be short ( to items) use only level of nesting be grammatically correct. For single sentence lists: start with a stem sentence that all the points have in common start each point in lower case, and only use a full stop on the last point check that each point makes a full sentence when read with the stem.
Living Standards Framework
Local Government . An RLTP must contribute to the purpose of the LTMA , which seeks an effective, efficient and safe land transport system in the public interest. It is also required to be consistent with the GPS. (p ). Must be doable for councils, with limited funds. Government should provide more resources to councils. There are numerous legislative blocks that limit councils ability to innovate, e g minimum road widths. It is very important that this strategic GPS is followed by action by th e government and Waka Kotahi. We and many councils are still waiting for a ride share app from Waka Kotahi. If you say you are going to do something and dont deliver, that can stifle innovation. Making the most of our existing land transport network We see this as a crucial element and must be the first consideration when considering investigating new roads or improvements. There are many opportunities to use our current networks better and to meet the four strategic priorities.
Local Government Road Safety Summit held
Local bodies, and other eligible agencies, can purchase expansions through a closed syndicated procurement agreement. Please contact the Ministry for more information.
Local government agencies
Logic maps increase the likelihood that proposed interventions will be successful because they: . Become a reference point for everyone involved in the proposal . Improve expertise in planning, implementation, and evaluation . Identify potential obstacles to the implementation of the proposed intervention to enable risk management early on . Reduce the risk of missing the key mechanisms and outcomes of a proposed intervention.
Logos and templates can be found in Discover under Our Visual Identity . It is important our logo is used correctly and treated with respect. If you require a logo with different dimensions or file types, please email the Engagement and Communications team. We currently have templates for: PowerPoint presentations Word documents Letterheads RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Logos, emblems and trade marks
Logos, emblems and trade marks on the website should not be used in any way which infringes any provision of the Flags, Emblems, and Names Protection Act or would infringe such provision if the relevant use occurred within New Zealand. In the case of the Ministry of Transport, attribution should be in written form and not by reproduction of the Ministry of Transport logo. Permission to use the Ministry of Transport logo can be sought by emailing the Ministry Webmaster. Use of Ministry material does not extend to the websites design elements.
Long term result: Improved returns . More effective and efficient investment from innovation in systems, standards, procurem ent and technology o A. Realised benefits relating to innovation for internal and external projects (size and scope appropriate . Improved returns from maintenance o A. investment in: State highway maintenance Local road maintenance o B. Maintenanc e cost per lane kilometre delivered for: State highway Local roads Annual Reports https:www.transport.govt.nzab outgovernanceannualreports The Annual Reports provide information about the Ministry of Transport, reports on the Ministrys achievements over the course of the year against its targets, and provides financial statements and management information.
Long term ongoing monitoring requirement s need to be factored in. Whilst they are required as part of the Management Ca se within business cases, historically this has not been done well. Benefits realisation needs to be strength ened to ensure benefits are delivered. Potential for TOTEX gaming need to consider how to mitigate this. Existing tools that may contribute to the framework include: ImpactOutcomes Analysis Benefit Management Approach and Framework IDMF New guidance for Economic Evaluation Model (EEM) Regional Land Transpor t Plans, ATAP, Arataki Business Requirements NonMonetised Benefits Management Manual Appraisal Summary Tables (AST) Better Business Case Treasury Investor Confidence Rating REG Excellence Right Sizing Business Cases Procurement Investment Objectives Risk AnalysisUncertainty (throughout lifecycle) Value Ratio New Guidance for EEM WEB NonMonetised Benefits Management Manual AST Totex Ratio Benefits Realisation OF Strengthening of the Management Case (funding sources and responsibilities) The link between TOTEX and ImpactOutco me Analysis demonstrates a gap in how uncertainty is managed, and there is an opportunity to make better use of shared evidence.
Long term results we are seeking The Regional Land Transport Plan is fully funded. Increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of transport solutions. Value for money in regional land transport planning, maintenance and development. Innovative collaborative funding and investment arrangements. Better informed decision making. Monitoring measurements: KPI : Increase funding from sources other than the National Land Transport Fund from levels. KPI : Reduce costs from levels in delivering road maintenance activities through improved asset management practices across the Waikato region.
Longterm Insights Briefing
Longterm Insights Briefings (LTIB) are future focussed documents that are intended to provide greater visibility of future challenges and opportunities that may affect New Zealand and New Zealand society. The Ministry has chosen to investigate the impact automated vehicles could have on the transport system and transport outcomes. This is an opportunity to take a deep dive into a specific area of transport that we believe will present significant challenges and opportunities for the transport system over the next years.
Longterm vision: To deliver a safe, effective and efficient land transport network that supports the regions economic prosperity in a way that is environmentally and socially sustainable
Loop Road North Safety Improvements
Low Emission Vehicles Contestable Fund
Low emission vehicle work underway
Lowincome households have fewer resources and choices to reduce their transport carbon footprints. One solution could be to lease low emission vehicles rather than to own them. To investigate this, we are exploring a pilot social leasing scheme for lowemission vehicles.
Lower , , ,
Lower
Lower
Lower
Lower Investment in land transport
Lower
Lower
Lower , ,
Lower
Lower , , , ,
Lower , , , , , , , , ,
M: E: r.crosstransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz Document s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: Rebekka Jobson To: Ministers Office Cc: Richard Cross ; David Wood ; Bryan Field Subject: Attn Abby: Thursday, December Attachments: Kia ora Abby, Please find attached a briefing for Minister Brown on the Level Crossing Removal Programme in Auckland. I will be delivering six hard copies to the Office shortly. Please let me know if you have any questions or if there are any issues. Ng mihi Rebekka Jobson (she her) Kaitohutohu Matua Senior Adviser Programme Monitoring Investment Management Ministry of Transport Te Manat Waka M: E: R.Jobsontransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz Document s ()(f)(iv), s ()(h) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(a) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Oliver FindlayBadham From: Oliver FindlayBadham Sent: Wednesday, December To: Abby McRoberts parliament Cc: Charlotte Vannisselroy; Tim Herbert; Richard Cross; David Wood; Jenny Smith Subject: OC Proposal for GPS tagged contingency Cabinet Paper Attachments: Consult Proposal for GPS and NZUP tagged contingency Cabinet Paper tracked changes version.docx; Consult Proposal for GPS and NZUP tagged contingency Cabinet Paper clean version.docx Kia ora Abby, Find attached Cabinet paper following feedback from NZTA and TSY. In order to get the paper down to pages for lodging Id recommend removing tables and , and paragraphs .., and , but will leave this up to the oice. On para relating to nancial implications, the Ministry is providing a brieng next week on the level crossings removal programme and the ability to fund this through capex. We see the level crossings removal as the most signicant risk for opex in the proposed projects. As discussed NZTA also provided the below comment on the paper, FYI David the oice will grab you to review while youre over there. Oliver FindlayBadham (hehim) Kaitohutohu, Rpu Haumi Adviser, Investment Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport M: E: o.findlaybadhamtransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz Document s ()(g)(i) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: David Wood To: Karen Lyons ; Lou Lennane Subject: FW: Confirming next steps Auckland Level Crossings Friday, August FYI From: Abby McRoberts Abby.McRobertsparliament.govt.nz Sent: To: Sara Lindsay Sara.Lindsaynzta.govt.nz; David Wood D.Woodtransport.govt.nzCc: Tim Herbert t.herberttransport.govt.nz; Josh Driscoll Josh.Driscollparliament.govt.nz; Helen FionaWhite helen.fionawhiteparliament.govt.nzSubject: Confirming next steps Auckland Level Crossings Kia ora Sara and David, Thanks for your time at the officials meeting on Monday to discuss Auckland Level Crossings.This email is to confirm that on Monday the Minister: Agreed for officials to engage with Auckland Transport further on the Level Crossings removal programme Please let me know if Ive missed anything.Ng mihi, Abby Abby McRoberts Private Secretary (Transport) Office of Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Transport Minister for Auckland Minister for Energy I Minister for Local Government DDI M: Email: abby.mcrobertsparliament.govt.nz Website: www.Beehive,govt.nz Private Bag , Parliament Buildings, Wellington , New ZealandDocument s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of August OC Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Transport AUCKLAND TRANSPORT ALIGNMENT PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION REPORT JULY TO JUNE Purpose This report provides you with a three year summary of the Auckland Transport Alignment Project (ATAP) over the period July to June . The report summarises delivery of key projects , monitors progress against wider outcomes from the programme and details funding and expenditure for the programme over the period. Key points The July to June period included COVID lockdowns in Auckland as well as significant weather events. Despite a challenging operational environment, transport investment in Auckland from the Government and Auckland Council of b illion between July and June resulted in significant progress for several key projects and improvements across the transport network. Aucklands transport network is emerg ing from the disruption of recent years . Most roads have been successfully repaired from the weather events, the rail network rebuild is progressing and is on track for completion, and public transport patronage isrecovering from COVID impacts . Aucklands transport network has benefited from the ATAP delivery agencies joinedup approach to planning and delivery. This has prioritised capital delivery, along with maintenance and renewals as well as public transport operations. In addition, the ATAP process has continued to provide a useful forum to align Government andAuckland Council objectives . Key capital projects have been completed including the Northern Corridor Improvements, Ara Thono Phoi to Warkworth Motorway and s tage one of the Eastern Busway . November also saw t he introduction of the interim Northwest Bus service (WX) as a pre curser to the Northwest Busway . Investment from the ATAP programme is intended to support wider objectives across Auckland; including enabling and supporting Aucklands growth, improving travelchoices for Aucklanders, keeping Auckland moving and making Aucklands transport safe (environmental and human health). Despite significant external disruption, ATAP Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of AUCKLAND TRANSPORT ALIGNMENT PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION REPORT JULY TO JUNE Introduction In March , the previous Government and Auckland Council agreed on the ATAP package. This was an indicative package of . billion over ten years, funded from sources including the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF), the Crown funding, and Auckland Council. ATAP is delivered and report ed against in successive three year increments. The ATAP package included a focus on the rapid transit network and investment across public transport, roading, safety, renewals of assets and maintenance, as well as providing sufficient operating expenditure to run the network. The package aimed to improve economic growth and productivity as well as reduce emissions . As the Minister of Transport, you are a political sponsor of ATAP along with the Mayor of Auckland. We have provided ATAP Implementation reports to you over the past nine months . This report provides you with a three year summary report , covering the period July to June . The content in this report is based on data from the New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA ), Auckland Transport, Auckland Council and KiwiRail. The Chief Executives of these ATAP organisations have endorsed this report, as part of their role in the ATAP Governance Group. Context Over the past three years, the ATAP programme has supported significant progress at increasing operational integration and planning across delivery agencies , which has helped suppor t delivery of Government initiatives. In addition, ATAP has continued to be a useful forum for aligning Government and Auckland Council objectives and facilitating dialogue between senior leaders in the transport sector in Auckland. Alongside capital delivery, a key focus has been prioritisation of maintenance and renewals as well as public transport operations. These have contributed towards ATAP investment aligning with the programme objectives , despite a challenging external environment with COVID , rail disruption and weather event recovery. Rebuild from COVID Between August and December , Auckland was in an extended COVID lockdown, which resulted in supply chain disruptions, higher construction costs, project delays, and uncertainty about when larger projects could begin. Lockdown reduced usage of the transport network, with significantly lower patronage on public transport, and lower congestion on arterial roads and motorways. COVID also resulted in changes to travel patterns, in part due to increased preferences for RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of working from home andor hybrid working environments. These trends have persisted after the pandemic , with the number of travellers having returned to pre COVID levels but the frequency of trips remaining lower. Since the end of COVID restrictions, usage of arterial roads and the motorway network has recovered and is now at pre COVID levels. Public transport patronage was slower to recover relative to pre COVID levels. The impact of the pandemic was compounded by operational challenges with bus driver and ferry staff shortages. These factors temporarily reduced public confidence in public transport and impeded efforts to restore patronage levels. Despite COVID and on going disruptions, sustained efforts by delivery agencies to rebuild the public transport network and restore public confidence have shown success. T he bus driver shortage has been resolved through work by Auckland Transport alongside Government initiatives , allowing for greater frequency and reliability of bus services. Patronage has recovered to per cent of what it was pre COVID , as of June ( million annual boardings) . The Accelerated Training Programme for new ferry staff is showing progress in restoring frequency and reliability ferry services. In June , Auckland Transport introduced additional ferry services to Halfmoon Bay, Devonport, Bayswater and BirkenheadNorthcote. Set against these positive developments has been increased instances of threatening and aggressive behaviour on buses and at bus stations , creating safety concerns for bus drivers and commuters. Rail disruption Auckland has faced major disruption from the Rail Network Rebuild (RNR). Since , staged closures of the railway lines have been required in order to conduct invasive works to the tracks, such as replacing ageing track foundations and drainage upgrades . While necessary for the long term viability of the rail network, these works have contributed to a significant loss of commuter confidence in the rail network and unlike bus and ferry patronage, rail patronage has struggled to recover to pre COVID levels . Weather event recovery In early , Auckland was struck by extreme weather events, which resulted in extensive damage to significant sections of the transport network. As a result of the weather, other areas of the network were weakened, leading to increased risk of damage in the future. R esourc e from delivery agencies needed to be diverted to carry out a program me of repairs to the transport network. Auckland Transport reported more than , slips and roading issues across the Auckland region. Within three months of the weather events , Auckland Transport had resolved around , small slips and roading issues. As of June , Auckland Transport has repaired ( per cent) of the remaining sites ( minor repairs and major repairs ). RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of million for the NZUP rail programme following a re baselining in to fund scope increases to the Drury Rail stations project, and a further million in late to address cost pressures for NZUP funded rail projects million in response to Cyclone Gabrielle and the Auckland Anniversary floods, provided to Auckland Transport to help repair local roads m illion in additional CRL funding. Additional Auckland Council funding Since the ATAP package was agreed, Auckland Council has provided additional funding for transport projects that reduce emissions through the Climate Action Transport Targeted Rate (CATTR) . To June , the CATTR has raised . million in revenue . This enabled million in total expenditure, with the CATTR contributing million and million from NZTA cofunding. This has supported delivery of five new frequent bus routes across Auckland and is jointly cover ing operating costs associated with the WX. The CATTR has also supported Auckland Transports planning to deliver kilometre s of safer cycle facilities, kilometre s of walking improvements, procurement of low emission ferries and supporting charging infrastructure, as well as new electric buses (with delivery expected from July ). Auckland Council has also provided an additional million in additional CRL funding. Removal of the RFT The RFT was r epealed by the Government in March . Collection of the RFT ceased on June . Between July and June , million was collected through the Auckland Regional Fuel Tax. Of that, million was spent over the three year period. Over the three year reporting period, the RFT enabled additional investment in major projects such as the Eastern Busway, CRL Day One (e.g. rolling stock and level crossings), roading projects (Matakana Link road, Medallion Drive Link) as well as road safety initiatives. As of June , there is a remaining surplus of million, which includes surplus funds collected prior to July . The Governments expectation is that the remaining RFT will be used to fund the Eastern Busway, electric trains and stabling, road corridor improvements and growth related transport infrastructure. Based on this direction, Auckland Transport have revised their capital and operational programme s to allocate RFT surplus as follows : million to the Eastern Busway million to electric trains and stabling RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of KiwiRail In , KiwiRails programme was rebaselined to reflect increased cost pressure and additional works being added to the Rail Network Growth Impact Management project . In addition, the scope of the NZUP Drury stations project was increased to include access roads and active paths for stations and a third station located at Paert. KiwiRail also received additional Crown funding for the NZUP rail programme in . From July to June , KiwiRail spent million in capital expenditure for NLTF funded projects , which is per cent of planned expenditure . KiwiRail data from April to June is based on draft financial data and could be subject to auditors revision in the coming months. New Zealand Upgrade Program NZUP was a Crown fund ed package under the previous government , with projects being delivered by either NZTA or KiwiRail. The NZUP funded projects are: O Mahurangi Penlink Wiri to Quay Park Papakura to Pukekohe Electrification Drury Rail Stations State Highway Papakura to Drury Mill Road . From July to June , . b illion of NZUP capital funding was spent , which is per cent of planned expenditure. Good progress has been made on delivering Wiri to Quay Park, Papakura to Pukekohe Electrification and State Highway Papakura to Drury , with initial works going well on O Mahurangi Penlink and Drury Stations as well. Moving forward, the Government Policy Statement on Land Transport (GPS ) reintroduces the Roads of National Significance programme and introduces a programme of Roads of Regional Significance across New Zealand. State Highway Papakura to Drury, O Mahurangi Penlink and Mill Road that were being delivered though the previous NZUP programme, will now be incorporated into these new programme s. City Rail Link Limited (CRLL) From July to June , . billion of CRLL funding was spent , which is per cent of planned expenditure.
M: E: r.crosstransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz Document s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: Rebekka Jobson To: Ministers Office Cc: Richard Cross ; David Wood ; Bryan Field Subject: Attn Abby: Thursday, December Attachments: Kia ora Abby, Please find attached a briefing for Minister Brown on the Level Crossing Removal Programme in Auckland. I will be delivering six hard copies to the Office shortly. Please let me know if you have any questions or if there are any issues. Ng mihi Rebekka Jobson (she her) Kaitohutohu Matua Senior Adviser Programme Monitoring Investment Management Ministry of Transport Te Manat Waka M: E: R.Jobsontransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz Document s ()(f)(iv), s ()(h) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(a) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Oliver FindlayBadham From: Oliver FindlayBadham Sent: Wednesday, December To: Abby McRoberts parliament Cc: Charlotte Vannisselroy; Tim Herbert; Richard Cross; David Wood; Jenny Smith Subject: OC Proposal for GPS tagged contingency Cabinet Paper Attachments: Consult Proposal for GPS and NZUP tagged contingency Cabinet Paper tracked changes version.docx; Consult Proposal for GPS and NZUP tagged contingency Cabinet Paper clean version.docx Kia ora Abby, Find attached Cabinet paper following feedback from NZTA and TSY. In order to get the paper down to pages for lodging Id recommend removing tables and , and paragraphs .., and , but will leave this up to the oice. On para relating to nancial implications, the Ministry is providing a brieng next week on the level crossings removal programme and the ability to fund this through capex. We see the level crossings removal as the most signicant risk for opex in the proposed projects. As discussed NZTA also provided the below comment on the paper, FYI David the oice will grab you to review while youre over there. Oliver FindlayBadham (hehim) Kaitohutohu, Rpu Haumi Adviser, Investment Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport M: E: o.findlaybadhamtransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz Document s ()(g)(i) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: David Wood To: Karen Lyons ; Lou Lennane Subject: FW: Confirming next steps Auckland Level Crossings Friday, August FYI From: Abby McRoberts Abby.McRobertsparliament.govt.nz Sent: To: Sara Lindsay Sara.Lindsaynzta.govt.nz; David Wood D.Woodtransport.govt.nzCc: Tim Herbert t.herberttransport.govt.nz; Josh Driscoll Josh.Driscollparliament.govt.nz; Helen FionaWhite helen.fionawhiteparliament.govt.nzSubject: Confirming next steps Auckland Level Crossings Kia ora Sara and David, Thanks for your time at the officials meeting on Monday to discuss Auckland Level Crossings.This email is to confirm that on Monday the Minister: Agreed for officials to engage with Auckland Transport further on the Level Crossings removal programme Please let me know if Ive missed anything.Ng mihi, Abby Abby McRoberts Private Secretary (Transport) Office of Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Transport Minister for Auckland Minister for Energy I Minister for Local Government DDI M: Email: abby.mcrobertsparliament.govt.nz Website: www.Beehive,govt.nz Private Bag , Parliament Buildings, Wellington , New ZealandDocument s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of August OC H on Simeon Brown Minister of Transport AUCKLAND TRANSPORT ALIGNMENT PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION REPORT JULY TO JUNE Purpose This report provides you with a three year summary of the Auckland Transport Alignment Project (ATAP) over the period July to June . The report summarises delivery of key projects , monitors progress against wider outcomes from the programme and details funding and expenditure for the programme over the period. Key points The July to June period included COVID lockdowns in Auckland as well as significant weather events. Despite a challenging operational environment, transport investment in Auckland from the Government and Auckland Council of b illion between July and June resulted in significant progress for several key projects and improvements across the transport network. Aucklands transport network is emerg ing from the disruption of recent years . Most roads have been successfully repaired from the weather events, the rail network rebuild is progressing and is on track for completion, and public transport patronage isrecovering from COVID impacts . Aucklands transport network has benefited from the ATAP delivery agencies joinedup approach to planning and delivery. This has prioritised capital delivery, along with maintenance and renewals as well as public transport operations. In addition, the ATAP process has continued to provide a useful forum to align Government andAuckland Council objectives . Key capital projects have been completed including the Northern Corridor Improvements, Ara Thono Phoi to Warkworth Motorway and s tage one of the Eastern Busway . November also saw t he introduction of the interim Northwest Bus service (WX) as a pre curser to the Northwest Busway . Investment from the ATAP programme is intended to support wider objectives across Auckland; including enabling and supporting Aucklands growth, improving travelchoices for Aucklanders, keeping Auckland moving and making Aucklands transport safe (environmental and human health). Despite significant external disruption, ATAP Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of AUCKLAND TRANSPORT ALIGNMENT PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION REPORT JULY TO JUNE Introduction In March , the previous Government and Auckland Council agreed on the ATAP package. This was an indicative package of . billion over ten years, funded from sources including the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF), the Crown funding, and Auckland Council. ATAP is delivered and report ed against in successive three year increments. The ATAP package included a focus on the rapid transit network and investment across public transport, roading, safety, renewals of assets and maintenance, as well as providing sufficient operating expenditure to run the network. The package aimed to improve economic growth and productivity as well as reduce emissions . As the Minister of Transport, you are a political sponsor of ATAP along with the Mayor of Auckland. We have provided ATAP Implementation reports to you over the past nine months . This report provides you with a three year summary report , covering the period July to June . The content in this report is based on data from the New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA ), Auckland Transport, Auckland Council and KiwiRail. The Chief Executives of these ATAP organisations have endorsed this report, as part of their role in the ATAP Governance Group. Context Over the past three years, the ATAP programme has supported significant progress at increasing operational integration and planning across delivery agencies , which has helped suppor t delivery of Government initiatives. In addition, ATAP has continued to be a useful forum for aligning Government and Auckland Council objectives and facilitating dialogue between senior leaders in the transport sector in Auckland. Alongside capital delivery, a key focus has been prioritisation of maintenance and renewals as well as public transport operations. These have contributed towards ATAP investment aligning with the programme objectives , despite a challenging external environment with COVID , rail disruption and weather event recovery. Rebuild from COVID Between August and December , Auckland was in an extended COVID lockdown, which resulted in supply chain disruptions, higher construction costs, project delays, and uncertainty about when larger projects could begin. Lockdown reduced usage of the transport network, with significantly lower patronage on public transport, and lower congestion on arterial roads and motorways. COVID also resulted in changes to travel patterns, in part due to increased preferences for RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of working from home andor hybrid working environments. These trends have persisted after the pandemic , with the number of travellers having returned to pre COVID levels but the frequency of trips remaining lower. Since the end of COVID restrictions, usage of arterial roads and the motorway network has recovered and is now at pre COVID levels. Public transport patronage was slower to recover relative to pre COVID levels. The impact of the pandemic was compounded by operational challenges with bus driver and ferry staff shortages. These factors temporarily reduced public confidence in public transport and impeded efforts to restore patronage levels. Despite COVID and on going disruptions, sustained efforts by delivery agencies to rebuild the public transport network and restore public confidence have shown success. T he bus driver shortage has been resolved through work by Auckland Transport alongside Government initiatives , allowing for greater frequency and reliability of bus services. Patronage has recovered to per cent of what it was pre COVID , as of June ( million annual boardings) . The Accelerated Training Programme for new ferry staff is showing progress in restoring frequency and reliability ferry services. In June , Auckland Transport introduced additional ferry services to Halfmoon Bay, Devonport, Bayswater and BirkenheadNorthcote. Set against these positive developments has been increased instances of threatening and aggressive behaviour on buses and at bus stations , creating safety concerns for bus drivers and commuters. Rail disruption Auckland has faced major disruption from the Rail Network Rebuild (RNR). Since , staged closures of the railway lines have been required in order to conduct invasive works to the tracks, such as replacing ageing track foundations and drainage upgrades . While necessary for the long term viability of the rail network, these works have contributed to a significant loss of commuter confidence in the rail network and unlike bus and ferry patronage, rail patronage has struggled to recover to pre COVID levels . Weather event recovery In early , Auckland was struck by extreme weather events, which resulted in extensive damage to significant sections of the transport network. As a result of the weather, other areas of the network were weakened, leading to increased risk of damage in the future. R esourc e from delivery agencies needed to be diverted to carry out a program me of repairs to the transport network. Auckland Transport reported more than , slips and roading issues across the Auckland region. Within three months of the weather events , Auckland Transport had resolved around , small slips and roading issues. As of June , Auckland Transport has repaired ( per cent) of the remaining sites ( minor repairs and major repairs ). RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of million for the NZUP rail programme following a re baselining in to fund scope increases to the Drury Rail stations project, and a further million in late to address cost pressures for NZUP funded rail projects million in response to Cyclone Gabrielle and the Auckland Anniversary floods, provided to Auckland Transport to help repair local roads m illion in additional CRL funding. Additional Auckland Council funding Since the ATAP package was agreed, Auckland Council has provided additional funding for transport projects that reduce emissions through the Climate Action Transport Targeted Rate (CATTR) . To June , the CATTR has raised . million in revenue . This enabled million in total expenditure, with the CATTR contributing million and million from NZTA cofunding. This has supported delivery of five new frequent bus routes across Auckland and is jointly cover ing operating costs associated with the WX. The CATTR has also supported Auckland Transports planning to deliver kilometre s of safer cycle facilities, kilometre s of walking improvements, procurement of low emission ferries and supporting charging infrastructure, as well as new electric buses (with delivery expected from July ). Auckland Council has also provided an additional million in additional CRL funding. Removal of the RFT The RFT was r epealed by the Government in March . Collection of the RFT ceased on June . Between July and June , million was collected through the Auckland Regional Fuel Tax. Of that, million was spent over the three year period. Over the three year reporting period, the RFT enabled additional investment in major projects such as the Eastern Busway, CRL Day One (e.g. rolling stock and level crossings), roading projects (Matakana Link road, Medallion Drive Link) as well as road safety initiatives. As of June , there is a remaining surplus of million, which includes surplus funds collected prior to July . The Governments expectation is that the remaining RFT will be used to fund the Eastern Busway, electric trains and stabling, road corridor improvements and growth related transport infrastructure. Based on this direction, Auckland Transport have revised their capital and operational programme s to allocate RFT surplus as follows : million to the Eastern Busway million to electric trains and stabling RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of KiwiRail In , KiwiRails programme was rebaselined to reflect increased cost pressure and additional works being added to the Rail Network Growth Impact Management project . In addition, the scope of the NZUP Drury stations project was increased to include access roads and active paths for stations and a third station located at Paert. KiwiRail also received additional Crown funding for the NZUP rail programme in . From July to June , KiwiRail spent million in capital expenditure for NLTF funded projects , which is per cent of planned expenditure . KiwiRail data from April to June is based on draft financial data and could be subject to auditors revision in the coming months. New Zealand Upgrade Program NZUP was a Crown fund ed package under the previous government , with projects being delivered by either NZTA or KiwiRail. The NZUP funded projects are: O Mahurangi Penlink Wiri to Quay Park Papakura to Pukekohe Electrification Drury Rail Stations State Highway Papakura to Drury Mill Road . From July to June , . b illion of NZUP capital funding was spent , which is per cent of planned expenditure. Good progress has been made on delivering Wiri to Quay Park, Papakura to Pukekohe Electrification and State Highway Papakura to Drury , with initial works going well on O Mahurangi Penlink and Drury Stations as well. Moving forward, the Government Policy Statement on Land Transport (GPS ) reintroduces the Roads of National Significance programme and introduces a programme of Roads of Regional Significance across New Zealand. State Highway Papakura to Drury, O Mahurangi Penlink and Mill Road that were being delivered though the previous NZUP programme, will now be incorporated into these new programme s. City Rail Link Limited (CRLL) From July to June , . billion of CRLL funding was spent , which is per cent of planned expenditure.
MARPOL Annex VI will come into force in New Zealand three months after New Zealand legislation has been aligned and the instrument of accession has been deposited with the International Maritime Organization. The Government had originally signalled that New Zealand would become a party to MARPOL Annex VI in late , but this has been delayed due to COVID disruptions.
MBIE provided an update on the progress on the Aerospace Strategy and identified risks related to the Airspace Integration Trials Programme (AITP). The CAA has had indepth engagement with aerospace stakeholders to understand potential challenges and identify regulatory pathways. All agencies will work together to set up a new format for sector engagement to address ongoing developments in the sector.
MIAC support levels will be scaled back and ultimately end as international flight frequencies and passenger numbers recover, and international airlines return between now and March .
MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Wellington (Head Office) Ground Floor, Queens Wharf PO Box Wellington NEW ZEALAND Tel: Auckland NZ Government Auckland Policy Office Level , B Victoria Street West PO Box Auckland City Auckland NEW ZEALAND Tel: Disclaimer: This email is only intended to be read by the named recipient. It may contain information which is confidential, proprietary or the subject of legal privilege. If you are not the intended recipient you must delete this email and may not use any information contained in it. Legal privilege is notwaived because you have read this email. Please consider the environment before printing this email. This message, together with any attachments, may contain information that is classified andor subject to legal privilege. Any classification markings must be adhered to. If youare not the intended recipient, you must not peruse, disclose, disseminate, copy or use themessage in any way. If you have received this message in error, please notify usimmediately by return email and then destroy the original message. This communicationmay be accessed or retained by Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency for informationassurance purposes. s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: To: Cc: Subject: Attachments: Mitrb Macaulay Kim Marsballon:a govt oz; amy moorheadozta govt oz Jim Herbert; Rory I eonard RE: Draft briefing for consultation: PEP and GPS Reporting Tuesday, July ;mageQQJ png Document GPS Implementation Work programme Jojnt MoJ NZJA yjew v dooc Relevant excerpt provided as Document Thanks Rory. Ive also the Implementation Programme as per the feedback you have both sent through (thank you both) See attached for your info. If you have any further updates needed let me know by noon tomorrow (but it all should be about right, as Ive just drawn on what youve provided me). S :J(l)(T)(IV) Mitch From: Rory Leonard R.Leonardtra nsport.govt .nz Sent: To: Kim.Marshallnzta .govt.nz; amy.moor headnzta .govt.nz Cc: Tim Herbert t.herberttransport .govt.nz; Mitch Macaulay M.Macaulaytransport.govt.nz Subject: Draft briefing for consultation: PEP and GPS Reporting Hi Amy and Kim, Please find attached an draft briefing, weve made changes based on our conversation yesterday and the feedback you provided Mitch today. If you have any additional feedback please get that across to us by noon tomorrow. With this being due to the Ministers office tomorrow we wont be able to include any feedback after then as well need to get this through DCE sign off etc. Thanks heaps for your contribution on this and please let Mitch or I know if you have any questions. All the best, Rory Leonard (hehim) Kaitohutohu Matua I Senior Adviser Investment Te Manatu Waka Ministry of Transport E: r.leonardtransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz
MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Wellington (Head Office) Ground Floor, Queens Wharf PO Box Wellington NEW ZEALAND Tel: Auckland NZ Government Auckland Policy Office Level , B Victoria Street West PO Box Auckland City Auckland NEW ZEALAND Tel: Disclaimer: This email is only intended to be read by the named recipient. It may contain information which is confidential, proprietary or the subject of legal privilege. If you are not the intended recipient you must delete this email and may not use any information contained in it. Legal privilege is notwaived because you have read this email. Please consider the environment before printing this email. This message, together with any attachments, may contain information that is classified andor subject to legal privilege. Any classification markings must be adhered to. If youare not the intended recipient, you must not peruse, disclose, disseminate, copy or use themessage in any way. If you have received this message in error, please notify usimmediately by return email and then destroy the original message. This communicationmay be accessed or retained by Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency for informationassurance purposes. s ()(a) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: Tim Herbert To: Investment Subject: FW: Heads up information Friday, October Attachments: image.png Template letter to councils re specific requirements re Ministerial expectations v .docx fyi
MNZ is governed by a member Board appointed by the Minister of Transport.
MO Aratere grounding near Picton June Investigation update No change TAIC are still in the evidence gathering phase of our investigation and are in the process of interviewing witnesses. We have identified several lines of inquiry that we will be pursuing. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
MONTH YEAR TO FULL YEAR NLTP
MTA covers maritime safety and marine environmental protection and establishes Maritime NZ as
Main North Line and State Highway reopened
Main features of IAF: Use of the Business Case Approach Results alignment rates the degree of alignment with the results specified in the GPS Costbenefit appraisal considers how well the proposed solution maximises the value of what is produced from the resources used, and the timeliness of intervention Programme support assesses urgency to address the problem in the time frames of the GPS
Maintain air connectivity with key tourism markets to enable fast recovery when border restrictions and isolation requirements are relaxed or lifted.
Maintain air connectivity with key trading partners, ensuring our exports that travel by air still make it to those markets.
Maintaining International Air Connectivity (Phase )
Maintaining International Air Connectivity Scheme (Phase )
Maintaining International Air Connectivity Scheme Extended to end of March
Maintaining International Air Connectivity scheme announced
Maintaining a network that delivers effective international air connectivity is vital for New Zealands social and economic wellbeing, and is critical for the COVID recovery.
Maintaining and operating the system Primary outcome The condition of the existing transport system is efficiently maintained at a level that meets the current and future needs of users . How we will deliver these outcomes Ensure there is a clear focus on achieving value for money and the achievement of all outcomes through all maintenance and operations programmes across the system. For example, w e maintain or renew around nine percent of the entire roading network every year. A key part of the GPS investment program me to achieve reduction in tr ansport emissions will involve building back better. This means, rather than replacing like forlike, as part of maintenance and renewal programmes roads need to be upgraded to achieve their desired future state. This may, for example, mean resilience an d safety improvements, or creating additional space for a bus lane or active transport. Resilience Primary outcome Minimising and managing the risks from natural and human made hazards, anticipating and adapting to emerging threats, and ensuring the transport system recover s effectively from disruptive events. How we will deliver these outcomes Aspects of resilience are covered by different strategies including the Natural Disaster Resilience strategy , the National Adaptation Plan , and the National Security System coordinated by the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet. The overall approach, known as the Rs, encompasses: Reduction : identifying and analysing long term risks and taking steps to eliminate these risks if practicable, or if not, to reduce their likelihood and the magnitude of their impact. Readiness: developing operational systems and capabilities before an emergency happens. Response: taking action immediately before, during or directly after a significant event. Recovery: using coordinated efforts and processes to bring about immediate, medium term, and long term regeneration. For example, t he National Adaptati on Plan contains a number of actions related to climate change adaption that will be implemented, in part, through GPS . Actions directly relevant to transport infrastructure include: reducing the vulnerability of assets exposed to climate change ensuring all new infrastructure is fit for a changing climate using renewal programmes to improve adaptive capacity . NEXT STEPS
Maintaining the transport sector so that it is resilient during e vents is not without challenges. To do so effectively requires significant planning, investment, and resources in the short term to recover and rebuild, but then in the long term to meet the scale severe weather events and natural disasters.
Make a submission on the Land Transport (Drug Driving) Amendment Bill
Make it easy to get around without a car
Make sure the language settings on your device are changed to English (New Zealand).
Make the original document available as the fine print.
Making better use of existing networks.
Making public transport more affordable.
Making shared and active modes more attractive.
Mana Whenua Representative and Co Chair Mtauranga Mori Reference Group s ()(a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT IN CONFIDENCE CO () v IN CONFIDENCE
Manaakitanga Caring for and valuing others
Management (Regional Transport Committees) Regulations as the
Management (Regional Transport Committees) Regulations .
Manager: Helen White Mobility and Safety
Manager: Megan Moffet Regulatory Policy Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a high level of resourcing ( FTE)
Managing board appointments
Manufacturers mean tare weight and vs actual and target CO
Manukau Harbour Crossing Construction of new bridge for Active Modes A new metre active mode crossing of the Manukau Harbour was official l y opened on Saturday , August . A community celebration was held after the opening and over , people visited the new bridge that weekend.
Manukau Harbour Feasibility Study
Manukau Harbour Feasibility Study released
Manukau Harbour Feasibility Study. working papers released
Manukau Harbour was the highest ranked option, although consenting could be problematic.
Many among those interviewed thought that rail would be fully autonomous, car ownership would decline, and ticketing would be more like the way we buy a telecommunications plan.
Many disabled people report that they do not use public transport because of a lack of driver disability education leading to a lack of driver disability responsiveness. Investment in improving disability responsiveness would go a long way to improving accessibility for disabled people. Recommendation that the Policy Statement be re framed to incorporate the concept of the accessible journey. Recommendation that the Policy Statement signals Governments intent that transport infrastructure must be accessible and a for this to be achieved. Recommendation that the Policy Statement provide for a programme of public transport driver disability education in order to improve disability responsiveness. Accessible Buses We are disappointed that the Policy Statement does not provide a by which all buses must be wheelchair accessible. The Policy Statement would be the place for Government to notify the transport authorities and companies of the by which all buses used for public transport are to be accessible. Recommendation that the Policy Statement incorporate a by which all buses used for public transport must be fully wheelchair acces sible. Standardisation of Access We would also like the Policy Statement to propose standardisation across Aotearoa in for example: the types of mobility devices that can be taken on buses, the length of such devices etc.
Many parts of the system are outside of governments direct control. For example, in the freight, aviation and maritime sectors, the majority of decisions are made by the private sector. Local government also plays a particularly significant role in regional level transport investments. Effective, meaningful engagement with stakeholders, is critical to achieving government priorities. Outside of existing collaboration between government agencies and SOEs, collaboration with other stakeholders in the transport system is critical to realising positive transport outcomes. These stakeholders include: The private sector plays a significant role in the transport system, as a major employer and significant investor in the transport system. This is particularly the case in the aviation and maritime sectors. The private sector can be a partner in helping to achieve transport outcomes , while also leading innovation in areas such as autonomous vehicles, drones, and shared mobility . Key private sector stakeholders that we would expect you to engage with would include Air New Zealand, Auckland Airport, and the Board of Airline Representatives New Zealand (BARNZ) which represent the airline industry in New Zealand. Iwi and hap Government has responsibilities under Te Tiriti o Waitangi to acknowledge Mori as partners and their status as tangata whenua the indigenous people of Aotearoa. Effective, meaningful partnership with Mori is key to improving transport and broader social outcomes for Mori, and to ensure the transport system serves all New Zealanders equitably. Mori are disproportionately represented in transport statistics such as drink driving, and Mori in regional New Zealand are strongly impacted by investment in infrastructure like roads. Government has a responsibility to improve transport outcomes for al l New Zealanders including Mori, while Mori and iwi groups will also have an expectation that they are meaningfully consulted on transport decisions that impact their everyday lives. Iwi and hap also have access to local peoples, connections, and expertise that may otherwise be missing from a Crown and central government perspective in policy development. Non government organisations, industry associations, or other groups advocate for the perspectives and interests of particular parts of the sector. This includes groups advocating for particular types of transport (e.g., cycling advocacy groups), neighbourhood groups (e.g., for a public road) and other groups that may be established to support or oppose a specific policy or initiative. Engaging with these groups is a critical aspect of a democratic process and good policy development, as they can bring important perspectives, data and evidence to the policy process, and draw attention to issues that might otherwise be overlooked.
Maps of the Auckland region
Mar : QantasEmirates Master Coordination Agreement
Mar , , , Mar , Mar , Apr , , , Apr , Apr , May , , , May , May , Jun , , , Jun , Jun , Jul , , , Jul , Jul , Aug , , , Aug , Aug , Sep , , , Sep , Sep , Oct , , , Oct , Oct , Nov , , , Nov , Nov , Dec , , , Dec , Dec , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan , , , Jan , , , Jan , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Mar , , Apr , , , Apr , , , Apr , , May , , , May , , , May , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jun , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Jul , , Apr Apr Difference Percentage IncreaseDecreasePassenger Cars by Month By Year Total YTD Total YTD Difference Percentage IncreaseDecrease Page LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Passenger Car by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S Aug , , , Aug , , , Aug , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Sep , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Oct , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Nov , , Dec , , , Dec , , , Dec , , , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan , , , Jan , , , Jan , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Mar , , Apr , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , May , , , May , , , May , , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Aug , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Sep , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Oc , , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Dec , , , Dec Dec , , , , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan , , , Jan , , , Jan , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Mar , , , Mar , , Mar , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , Ap , , , May , , , May , , , May , , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jul , , , Jul , , Jul , , , Aug , , , Aug , , Aug , , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Nov , , , Nov , , Nov , , , Dec Dec , , Dec , , , , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOvers as Total New ExOverseas Total Jan , , , Jan , , , Jan , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Feb , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Mar , , Apr , , , Apr , , , Apr , , May , , , May , , , May , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jun , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Jul , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Aug , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Sep , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Oct , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Nov , , Dec , , , Dec , , , Dec , , , , , , , , , , Page LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Passenger Car by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan , , , Jan , , , Jan , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , May , , , May , , , May , , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Aug , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Oct , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Dec , , , Dec , , , Dec , , , , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total N w ExOverseas Total Jan , , , Jan , , , Jan , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , May , , , May , , , May , , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jun , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Oct , , , Oct , , Oct , , , Nov , , , Nov , , , N v , , , Dec , , , Dec , , , Dec , , , , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan , , , Jan , , , Jan , , , Feb , , , Feb , , Feb , , , Mar , , , Mar , , Mar , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , May , , , May , , May , , , June , , , June , , , June , , , July , , , July , , July , , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Dec , , , Dec , , , Dec , , , , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May June June June Page LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Passenger Car by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S July July July Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May June June June July July July Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec D c New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May June June June July July July Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May June June June July July July Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec Page LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Passenger Car by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May June June June July July July Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total New Ex Overseas Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May June June June July July July Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOverseas Total New Ex Overseas Total Jan Jan Feb Feb Mar Mar Apr Apr May May June June July July Aug Aug Sep Sep Oct Oct Nov Nov Dec Dec Page LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Passenger Car (new) by months A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O Year Jan Feb Mar April May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec TOTALS , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , Passenger Cars by Months Page LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Passenger Car(used) by months A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Used Passenger Car Registrations by Months Year Jan Feb Mar April May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec TOTALS change , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . Page LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Commercials by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S New ExOversea Total , Jan , , Feb , , Mar , . Apr , May , Jun , Jul (,) Aug . Sep Oct Nov Dec , New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan , Jan , Jan , Feb , Feb , Feb , Mar , Mar , Mar , Apr , Apr Apr , May , May , May , Jun , Jun , Jun , Jul , Jul , Jul , Aug , Aug , Aug , Sep , Sep , Sep , Oct , Oct , Oct , Nov , Nov , Nov , Dec , Dec , Dec , , , , New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan , , Jan , Jan , Feb , , Feb , Feb , Mar , , Mar , Mar , Apr , , Apr , Apr , May , , May , May , Jun , , Jun , Jun , Jul , , Jul , Jul , Aug , , , Aug , Aug , Sep , , Sep , Sep , Oct , , Oct , Oct , Apr Apr Difference Percentage IncreaseDecreaseCommercial Vehicles by year by Month Total YTD Total YTD Difference Percentage IncreaseDecrease Page LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Commercials by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S Nov , , , Nov , Nov , Dec , , , Dec , Dec , , , , New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan , , Jan , , Jan Feb , , Feb , , Feb Mar , , Mar , , Mar Apr , , Apr , , Apr May , , May , , May Jun , , Jun , , Jun Jul , , Jul , , Jul Aug , , Aug , , Aug Sep , , Sep , , Sep Oct , , Oct , , O ct Nov , , Nov , , Nov Dec , , Dec , , Dec , New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun , Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec , New ExOversea Total New Ex Oversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec Page of RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Commercials by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec Commercial Vehicles by years New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec Page LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Commercials by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Page of LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Commercials by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOversea Total New ExOvers a Total Jan Jan Feb Feb Mar Mar Apr Apr May May Jun Jun Jul Jul Aug Aug Sep Sep Oct Oct Nov Nov Dec Dec Page LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Commercials(new) by month A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O Year Jan Feb Mar April May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec TOTALS , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , Page of LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Commercials(used) by month A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O Year Jan Feb Mar April May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec TOTALS , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
Mar , , , Mar , Mar , Apr , , , Apr , Apr , May , , , May , May , Jun , , , Jun , Jun , Jul , , , Jul , Jul , Aug , , , Aug , Aug , Sep , , , Sep , Sep , Oct , , , Oct , Oct , Nov , , , Nov , Nov , Dec , , , Dec , Dec , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan , , , Jan , , , Jan , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Mar , , Apr , , , Apr , , , Apr , , May , , , May , , , May , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jun , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Jul , , Mar Mar Difference Percentage IncreaseDecreasePassenger Cars by Month By Year Total YTD Total YTD Difference Percentage IncreaseDecrease Page RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Passenger Car by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S Aug , , , Aug , , , Aug , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Sep , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Oct , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Nov , , Dec , , , Dec , , , Dec , , , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan , , , Jan , , , Jan , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Mar , , Apr , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , May , , , May , , , May , , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Aug , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Sep , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Oc , , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Dec , , , Dec Dec , , , , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan , , , Jan , , , Jan , , , Page RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Passenger Car by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S Feb , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , May , , , May , , , May , , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Oct , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Dec Dec , , , Dec , , , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan , , , Jan , , , Jan , Feb , , , Feb , , , Feb , Mar , , , Mar , , , Mar , , Apr , , , Apr , , , Apr , , May , , , May , , , May , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jun , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Jul , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Aug , Sep , , , Sep , , , Sep , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Oct , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Nov , , Dec , , , Dec , , Dec , , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOver as Total New ExOverseas Total Page RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Passenger Car by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S Jan , , , Jan , , , Jan , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , May , , , May , , , May , , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Sep , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Nov , , Dec , , , Dec , , , Dec , , , , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New Ex Overseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan , , , Jan , , , Jan , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , May , , , May , , , Ma , , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jun , , , Jul , , , Jul , , , Jul , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Nov , , , Nov , , Nov , , , Dec , , , Dec , , , D c , , , , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOvers as Total New ExOverseas Total Page RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Passenger Car by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S Jan , , , Jan , , , Jan , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Feb , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Mar , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , Apr , , , May , , , May , , , May , , , June , , , June , , , June , , , July , , , July , , , July , , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Aug , , , Sep , , , Sep , , , Sep , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Oct , , , Nov , , , Nov , , , Nov , , Dec , , , Dec , , , Dec , , , , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New Ex Overseas Total N w ExOv rseas Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May June June J ne July July July Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOverseas Total New ExOvers as Total New ExOverseas Total Page RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Passenger Car by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May June June June July July July Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total N w ExOv rseas Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May June June J ne July July July Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOverseas Total New ExOvers as Total New ExOverseas Total Page RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Passenger Car by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May June June June July July July Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total N w ExOv rseas Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May June June J ne July July July Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOverseas Total New ExOvers as Total New ExOverseas Total Page RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Passenger Car by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May June June June July July July Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan Jan Feb Feb Mar Mar Apr Apr May May June June July July Aug Aug Sep Sep Oct Oct Nov Nov Dec Dec Page RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Passenger Car (new) by months A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O Year Jan Feb Mar April May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec TOTALS , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , Passenger Cars by Months Page RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Passenger Car(used) by months A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Used Passenger Car Registrations by Months Year Jan Feb Mar April May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec TOTALS change , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . Page RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Commercials by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S New ExOversea Total , Jan , , Feb , , Mar , . Apr May , Jun , Jul , Aug . Sep Oct Nov Dec , New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan , Jan , Jan , Feb , Feb , Feb , Mar , Mar , Mar , Apr , Apr Apr , May , May , May , Jun , Jun , Jun , Jul , Jul , Jul , Aug , Aug , Aug , Sep , Sep , Sep , Oct , Oct , Oct , Nov , Nov , Nov , Dec , Dec , Dec , , , , New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan , , Jan , Jan , Feb , , Feb , Feb , Mar , , Mar , Mar , Apr , , Apr , Apr , May , , May , May , Jun , , Jun , Jun , Jul , , Jul , Jul , Aug , , , Aug , Aug , Sep , , Sep , Sep , Oct , , Oct , Oct , Mar Mar Difference Percentage IncreaseDecreaseCommercial Vehicles by year by Month Total YTD Total YTD Difference Percentage IncreaseDecrease Page RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Commercials by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S Nov , , , Nov , Nov , Dec , , , Dec , Dec , , , , New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan , , Jan , , Jan Feb , , Feb , , Feb Mar , , Mar , , Mar Apr , , Apr , , Apr May , , May , , May Jun , , Jun , , Jun Jul , , Jul , , Jul Aug , , Aug , , Aug Sep , , Sep , , Sep Oct , , Oct , , Oct Nov , , Nov , , Nov Dec , , Dec , , Dec , New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun , Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec , New ExOversea Total New Ex Oversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec Page RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Commercials by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec Commercial Vehicles by years New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec Page RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Commercials by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Page RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Commercials by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total New ExOversea Total Jan Jan Jan Feb Feb Feb Mar Mar Mar Apr Apr Apr May May May Jun Jun Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug Aug Aug Sep Sep Sep Oct Oct Oct Nov Nov Nov Dec Dec Dec New ExOversea Total New ExOvers a Total Jan Jan Feb Feb Mar Mar Apr Apr May May Jun Jun Jul Jul Aug Aug Sep Sep Oct Oct Nov Nov Dec Dec Page RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Commercials(new) by month A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O Year Jan Feb Mar April May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec TOTALS , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , Page RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Commercials(used) by month AB C DEFGH I JKLMN O Year Jan Feb Mar April May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec TOTALS , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , Page RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Top total new vehicle registrations (pass and commercial) Toyota Mitsubishi Mitsubishi Mitsubishi Toyota Toyota Ford Ford Ford Kia Mazda K a Mazda Hyundai Hyundai Nissan Tesla Mazda Hyundai Isuzu Nissan Suzuki LDV Suzuki Volkswagen Kia MG Honda Nissan LDV MG MG Tesla Tesla MercedesBenz Isuzu Isuzu Suzuki Honda MercedesBenz Volkswagen MercedesBenz Subaru Haval Volkswagen OTHERS , . OTHERS , . OTHERS , . Total Total Total Top new passenger carSUV registrations Toyota Mitsubishi Mitsubishi Mitsubishi Tesla Kia Kia Toy ta Toyota Suzuki Hyundai Hyundai Mazda Mazda Mazda Hyundai Kia Suzuki Nissan MG MG Volkswagen Suzuki Tesla Honda Haval Honda MG Honda Haval Ford Land Rover Ford Tesla MercedesBenz Nissan Subaru Nissan MercedesBenz Haval Ford Subaru MercedesBenz Volkswagen Volkswagen OTHERS , . OTHERS , . OTHERS , . Total Total Total Full year Full Year YTD March YTD March Month of March Month of March RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Top new commercial vehicle registrations Ford , Mitsubishi Mitsubishi Toyota , Ford Ford Mitsubishi , Toyota Toyota Nissan , LDV LDV LDV , Isuzu Isuzu Isuzu , Nissan Nissan Mazda , Great Wall Mazda Great Wall , Mazda Great Wall Hyundai , Hyundai Volkswagen Volkswagen , Volkswagen Fuso Fuso , MercedesBenz Hyundai Isuzu Trucks , Isuzu Trucks MercedesBenz Fiat Fuso Hino Hino Hino Isuzu Trucks MercedesBenz RAM Fiat OTHERS , . OTHERS . OTHERS , . Total Total Total Note The MIA registrations are counted only once. During the year some vehicles are deregistered, and accordingly the YTD figures in these tables will be less than the YTD figures provided by the NZTA. Full Year Month of March YTD March RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Top fifteen new carSUV models MITSUBISHI OUTLANDER TESLA MODEL MITSUBISHI OUTLANDER TOYOTA RAV MITSUBISHI OUTLANDER TESLA MODEL MITSUBISHI ASX TOYOTA RAV MG ZS TOYOTA COROLLA MAZDA CX TOYOTA RAV TESLA MODEL MG ZS HYUNDAI KONA MAZDA CX HAVAL JOLION SUZUKI SWIFT SUZUKI SWIFT HYUNDAI TUCSON MAZDA CX MG ZS MITSUBISHI ECLIPSE CROSS MITSUBISHI ECLIPSE CROS KIA STONIC MITSUBISHI PAJERO SPORT KIA SPORTAGE NISSAN XTRAIL HYUNDAI KONA KIA STONIC HYUNDAI KONA SUZUKI SWIFT NISSAN XTRAIL KIA SELTOS NISSAN XTRAIL HONDA JAZZ KIA SPORTAGE KIA STONIC HAVAL JOLION NISSAN QASHQAI KIA SPORTAGE MITSUBISHI ASX MITSUBISHI ECLIPSE CROS HONDA CRV HYUNDAI TUCSON Top fifteen new commercial models FORD RANGER MITSUBISHI TRITON MITSUBISHI TRITON TOYOTA HILUX FORD RANGER FORD RANGER MITSUBISHI TRITON TOYOTA HILUX TOYOTA HILUX NISSAN NAVARA ISUZU DMAX ISUZU DMAX ISUZU DMAX NISSAN NAVARA NISSAN NAVARA TOYOTA HIACE TOYOTA HIACE TOYOTA HIACE MAZDA BT LDV DELIVER MAZDA BT GREAT WALL GWM CANNON GREAT WALL GWM CANNON GREAT WALL GWM CANNO FORD TRANSIT MAZDA BT LDV T HYUNDAI ILOAD LDV T LDV DELIVER FIAT DUCATO HYUNDAI STARIA LOAD LDV G LDV G LDV G HYUNDAI STARIA LOAD LDV T FORD TRANSIT MERCEDESBENZ SPRINTE MITSUBISHI EXPRESS LDV V FIAT DUCATO MERCEDESBENZ SPRINTER MERCEDESBENZ SPRINTER LDV V YTD March YTD March Full year Full year Month of March Month of March RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TOYOTA RAV KIA STONIC KIA STONIC MITSUBISHI OUTLANDER MITSUBISHI OUTLANDER TOYOTA RAV MITSUBISHI ECLIPSE CROS MITSUBISHI TRITON HYUNDAI TUCSON SUZUKI SWIFT TESLA MODEL MERCEDESBENZ SPRINTER RENAULT KOLEOS TOYOTA HILUX TOYOTA HILUX MITSUBISHI ASX ISUZU MUX MITSUBISHI ECLIPSE CROSS HYUNDAI STARIA LOAD HYUNDAI TUCSON MERCEDESBENZ GLE KIA CARNIVAL VOLKSWAGEN T TESLA MODEL MERCEDESBENZ SPRINTER KIA SPORTAGE SUZUKI VITARA RENAULT KOLEOS MITSUBISHI TRITON ISUZU MUX Top Rental Vehicles YTD Top Rental Vehicles for the Month of March RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Please note there is a difference between the year to total numbers in these tables compared to NZTA data. This is due to the fact the numbers below exclude all deregistrations from the earlier months In these cases the vehicles in question are recorded in the month they are re registered. They are not doubled counted as is the case with the NZTA tables. VFACTS Segments Sales Share VFACTS Segments Sales Share VFACTS Segments Sales Share Total Total Total SUV Compact Pick UpChassis Cab X Pick UpChassis Cab X SUV Medium SUV Medium SUV Medium Pick UpChassis Cab X SUV Compact SUV Compact SUV Large Pick UpChassis Cab X Pick UpChassis Cab X Pick UpChassis Cab X SUV Large SUV Large Light Medium Light Small Vans Vans Vans Light Medium Heavy Commercial Heavy Commercial Heavy Commercial Medium Small Small SUV Luxury SUV Luxury SUV Luxury Others Others Others Large Large Large Sports Sports Sports Micro Light Buses People Movers People Movers People Movers Micro Light Buses Micro Light Buses Upper Large Upper Large Upper Large Small Segment Profile YTD MITSUBISHI TRITON MITSUBISHI TRITON Total FORD RANGER FORD RANGER SUV Compact TOYOTA HILUX TOYOTA HILUX SUV Medium TESLA MODEL MITSUBISHI OUTLANDER Light ISUZU DMAX TESLA MODEL Small MITSUBISHI OUTLANDER ISUZU DMAX Medium TOYOTA RAV NISSAN NAVARA Micro MAZDA CX MG ZS MG ZS TOYOTA RAV HAVAL JOLION HYUNDAI KONA HYUNDAI TUCSON SUZUKI SWIFT NISSAN NAVARA MAZDA CX TOYOTA HIACE MITSUBISHI ECLIPSE CROSS MITSUBISHI ECLIPSE CROSS KIA SPORTAGE MITSUBISHI PAJERO SPORT KIA STONIC YTD March Month of March Full Year Total Vehicle Sales by Model YTD Total Vehicle Sales by Model March RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT April Rush to Beat Clean Car Discount Fees leads to highest ever monthly sales of new vehicles. Motor Industry Asso ciation Chief Executive David Crawford says that as anticipated in the lead up to the Clean C ar Discount fees that became operative on April, the March figures of , vehicles are the strongest for any month of the year ever, a massive , units over the previous strongest in October (, units) Sales were do minated by the largest ever monthly registrations for light commercial vehicles , , units (including heavy commercial vehicles) as buyers rushed to avoid fees for high CO emitting vehicles that began on April. Registrations of , were up . ( units) on March . Year to the market is up . (, units) compared to the first three months of . Key points Ov erall, March registrations of , vehicles were up . (, units) on the same month in , and are . up (, units) on year to . There were , pure electric vehicle s, PHEVs and hybrid vehicles sold for the month . Registrati on of , passenger and SUVs for March were up . (, units) on March , whil e commercial vehicle registrations of , were up . ( units) compared to March . The top t hree models for the month of March were the Mitsubishi Triton (, units), followed by the Ford Ranger (, units) with the Toyota Hilux in third place (, units). Market leader s in March Mitsubishi took the overall market leader with market share ( , units), followed by Toyota with (, units) and Ford in third spot with market share ( , units). Market share ye a r to , Mitsubishi () is ahead of Toyota ( ) and Ford ( ). RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BEVs, PHEVs an d Hybrids There were , light vehicle and heavy vehicle full battery electric vehicles registered in March . The top selling models were the Tesla Model ( units) followed by the MG ZS ( units) and the Polestar ( units). The Tesla Mode l was the top passenger vehicle for the month. There were plugin hybrid electric vehicles registered in March . The top selling models were the Mitsubishi Eclipse Cross ( units) followed by the Mitsubishi Outlander ( units ) and then the MG HS ( units). As anticipa ted sales of petrol hybrid vehicles were soft in March with some purchasers delaying their purchase until April to take advantage of the rebate these vehicles now attract under the C lean Car Discount. There were hybrids registered in the month of March , with the top selling models being the Toyota RAV ( units) followed by the Honda Jazz ( units) and the MercedesBenz C Class ( units). SUV and passe nger vehicle sales March Mitsubishi retained the market lead for passenger and SUV registrations with market share ( , units) followed by Tesla with ( units) and then Toyota also with market share ( units). The top sellin g passenger and SUV models for the month were the Tesla Model ( units) followed by the Mitsubishi Outlander ( units ) and the Toyota RAV ( units). Commercial vehicle sales March Mitsubishi stormed to the market lead with market share ( , units) followed by Ford with (, units) and Toyota in third with market share ( , units). The Mitsubishi Triton took top spot for the month of March as the bestselling commercial model with share ( units) followed by the Ford Ranger with share ( , units) and the Toyota Hilux in third place with market share ( , units). Market share ye ar to , the Mitsubishi Triton () leads followed by the Ford Ranger () and then the Toyota Hilux (). Segmentatio n Growth in the Small er SUV s With the st rong sales of utes for the month, not surprisingly the top spot for March went to the Pick UpChassis x segment with sh are followed by SUV medium vehicles with then the SUV Compact with market share . Pick UpChassis Cab x were in fourth with share. Year to t here has been a reduction on the overall share of the market for small vehicles, down from for most of the to for March . This reflects the strong RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT
March : QantasEmirates alliance reauthorised
Marian Willberg Manager, Demand Management Revenue . . . Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport . . . Ministers office to complete : Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events Comments Contacts Name Telephone First contact Marian Willberg, Manager, Demand Management Revenue Sam Harris, Senior Adviser, Demand Management Revenue
Maritime NZ supports Pacific neighbours with critical training s (c) s (c) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
Maritime NZ will be consulting for four weeks, until
Maritime New Zealand (MNZ) promotes commercial and recreational vessel safety, marine environment protection standards and monitors port and ship security. It controls entry to the maritime system, advises on international conventions and investigates maritime accidents and leads response to major maritime incidents.
Maritime New Zealand is working closely with the Ministry of Transport and other government agencies to implement MARPOL Annex VI and ensure the new requirements are introduced in a way that supports New Zealands fleet to comply with the changes.
Maritime New Zealand will be consulting on the marine protection rules and associated regulations later this year.
Maritime New Zealand will provide detailed guidance to the shipping industry about MARPOL Annex VI obligations, such as the timing of new survey and certification obligations. Similarly, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment will be providing guidance to oil fuel suppliers in relation to the new marine fuel oil requirements.
Maritime Security Project: Maritime Security Strategy Tools investment No update. Project: Maritime Security Strategy Tools investment Briefing: Maritime Security Tools Investment This briefing will update you on the Maritime Security Strategys surveillance and response tools investment, provide you with a draft Cabinet paper, and seek your direction on next steps. Wednesday November
Maritime Security Strategy
Maritime Transport (MARPOL Annex VI) Amendment Bill Open for Submissions
Maritime Union of NZ (MUNZ)
Maritime decarbonisation has a role in access to markets and international
Maritime in the media Following a tragic boating accident on the Riverton bar which claimed the lives of three people, we were asked about whether the incident will be investigated and what work is being undertaken to reduce instances of harm. We have also been investigating opportunities to highlight the number of significant incidents over the winter.
Maritime security is one of core issues in the
Maritime transport will play an important role for our economy to increase the resilience of our supply chains and to achieve our goal of reducing emissions from freight transport.
Market Sounding on Toll Road Concession Opportunities
Market sounding will inform our analysis of toll road concessions and support the Minister of Transport to make decisions about taking concessions forward.
MarpolAnnexVIProjectmaritimenz.govt.nz
Martin Connelly Mayor, South Wairarapa District Council Martin was elected as a mayor in . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE Page of Hon Ron Mark Mayor, Carterton District Council Ron was re elected Mayor of Carterton in , following being a Member of Parliament for NZ First (including as past Minister Defence).
Mass Rapid Transit (Wellington CBD to Island Bay)
Mass rapid transit NZD. billion has been allocated to provide mass rapid transit as part of the wider public transport network from the railway station to Newtown, and Newtown to the airport. Mass rapid transit for example, light rail would improve travel choices through Wellington with an attractive public transport option to the hospital and airport that creates an opportunity to share a more compact and sustainable city.
Material incorporated by reference
Material to be incorporated by reference
Matt Skinner Manager, Environment and Emissions Policy Design Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport . . .
Maximising new opportunities to influence travel demand.
May : British AirwaysQatar Airways Alliance
May Jun Jul
McCartt AT, Geary LL, Nissen WJ. Observational study of the extent of driving while suspended for alcohol impaired driving (DOT HS ). Washington DC: U.S. Department of Transportation, National Highway Traffc Safety Administration, .
McCartt, A. T. E. R. Teoh (). Tracking progress in teenage driver crash risk in the United States since the advent of graduated driver licensing programs. Journal of Safety Research , : . McCartt, A. T., D. R. Mayhew, K. A. Braitman, S. A. Ferguson H. M. Simpson (). Effects of age and experience on young driver crashes: Review of recent literature. Traffic Injury Prevention , : . Poirier, B., E. Blais, C. Faubert ( ). Graduated driver licensing and differential deterrence: The effect of license type on intentions to violate road rules. Accident Analysis and Prevention , , . Reeder, A. I., J. C. Alsop, J. D. Langley, A. C. Wagenaar (). An evaluation o f the general effect of the New Zealand graduated driver licensing system on motorcycle traffic crash hospitalisations. Accident Analysis Prevention , : , . Russell, K. F., B. Vandermeer, L. Hartling (). Graduated driver licensing for red ucing motor vehicle crashes among young drivers (Review). Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews , , Art. No. CD. Scott Parker, B. J., L. Bates, B. C. Watson, M. J. King M. K. Hyde (). The impact of changes to the graduated driver licensing program in Queensland, Australia on the experiences of Learner drivers. Accident Analysis and Prevention , , . Scully, M., S. Newstead, M. Keall (). An evaluation of Queenslands graduated licensing system: Analysis of police reported crash outcomes, and individual GLS components. Monash University Accident Research Centre. Senserrick T., S. Boufous, J. Olivier J. Hatfield (). Evaluation of Queenslands graduated licensing system. Transport and Road Safety Research Report TMR, University of New South Wales. Shope, J. T. (). Influences on youthful driving behaviour and their potential for guiding interventions to reduce crashes. Injury Prevention , (suppl): i i. Shope, J. T. (). Graduated driver licensing: Review of evaluation results since . Journal of Safety Research , , . Simpson, H. M. (). The evolution and effectiveness of graduated licensing. Journal of Safety Research , , . Symmon s, M. C. Mulvihill (). A simulator comparison of riding performance between new, returned and continuing motorcycle riders. Public Policy Center, University of Iowa. Vanlaar, W., D. Mayhew, K. Marcoux, G. Wets, T. Brijs, J. Shope (). An evalua tion of graduated driver licensing programs in North America. Traffic Injury Research Foundation. VicRoads (). Examination of the impact of the graduated licensing system on young novice driver safety. Williams, A. F. S. A. Ferguson (). Rational e for graduated licensing and the risks it should address. Injury Prevention , (Suppl II): ii ii. Williams, A. F. (). Teenage drivers: Patterns of risk. Journal of Safety Research , : .
Mean gap between vehicles CO
Measuring progress and using evidence The Transport Outcomes Framework The Transport Outcomes Framework (the Framework ) (Figure ) sets out a way of assessing the sectors performance and measuring progress against a range of outcomes. There are five inter related outcomes, and the Framework is closely aligned with the Treasurys Living Standards Framework. The Ministry developed the Framework with input from sector stakeholders. The Framework provides a consistent approach to assessing the effectiveness of policy proposals and delivery. The Framework helps us understand transports many areas of influence across society and the economy and be more explicit about the trade offs between the outcomes that are sometimes required. Because the outcomes are inter related, they need to be met through a range of interventions. Different Governments can place their own emphasis across the outcomes and there is no single right approach. To support the Framework, there is a set of quantitative indicators to track transports contribution against the five outcomes over time.
Measuring progress and using evidence The Transport Outcomes Framework The Transport Outcomes Framework (the Framework ) sets out a way of assessing the sectors performance and measuring progress against a range of outcomes (see Figure ). There are five interrelated outcomes, and the Framework is closely aligned with the Treasurys Living Standards Framework. The Ministry developed the Framework with input from sector stakeholders. The Framework provides a consistent approach to assessing the effectiveness of policy proposals and delivery. It helps us understand transports many areas of influence across society and the economy and be more explicit about the trade offs between the outcomes that are sometimes required. Because the outcomes are inter related, they need to be met through a range of interventions. Different Governments can place their own emphasis across the outcomes and there is no single right approach. To support the Framework, there is a set of quantitative indicators to track transports contribution against the five outcomes over time.
Meat Industry Association
Media heads up General comments Nil MO Aratere grounding near Picton June Investigation update s ()(g)(i), s ()(ba)(i) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Media heads up General comments Nil MO Aratere, grounding, near Picton, June Investigation update s ()(f)(iv)
Media heads up General comments Nil MO Aratere, grounding, near Picton, June Investigation update s ()(g)(i)
Media heads up General comments Nil MO Aratere, grounding, near Picton, June Investigation update s ()(g)(i), s ()(ba)(i) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Media heads up General comments Nil MO Aratere, grounding, near Picton, June Investigation update s ()(g)(i), s ()(ba)(i) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of
Media heads up General comments Nil. MO Aratere , grounding, near Picton, June Investigation update s ()(f)(iv)
Media heads up General comments Nil. MO Aratere, grounding, near Picton, June Investigation update s ()(g)(i)
Media mentions NB: This covers the days to Tuesday September Activity Channel Tuesday September Agriculture industry hits out at proposed tax on a tax Agricultural aviators hit out at proposed increase of industry levy .
Media mentions days to Tuesday August Activity Channel Thursday August Minister appoints five new CAA Board members in major shakeup NBR Thursday August Transport Minister, Simeon Brown, has today announced a refreshed Board for the Civil Aviation Authority to ensure that the organisation is focussed on delivery. Mark Darrow has been appointed as the new Chair while Darin Cusack has been appointed as Deputy Chair. Inside Government
Media mentions days to Tuesday August Activity Channel Tuesday August CAA in continued coverage of staff concerns and our new investigation approach. NZ Herald Tuesday August Pilots call for ministerial investigation into CAA NZ Herald Tuesday August Pilots want toxic culture probe NZ Herald Tuesday August Air safety solution NZ Herald Monday August CAA mentioned in an article about the latest WhakaariWhite Island activity . Notes that GNS is working alongside NEMA, Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation Authority, to mitigate the risk of reduced monitoring service on WhakaariWhite Island and understanding future monitoring requirements. Geonet News Monday August Article about CAA staff complaints and concerns with our new approach to investigations. NZ Herald Wednesday August CAA is mentioned in a few articles about a collision between two light aircrafts. The crash happened at Waihi Beach airfield on Tuesday August . News, Stuff, Waikato Times, Bay of Plenty Times Wednesday August CAA is mentioned in an article about a cameraman using a drone to record WhakaariWhite Island images. Bay of Plenty Times Wednesday August CAAs new Board members mentioned in article. Autocar magazine
Media mentions days to Tuesday August Activity Channel Tuesday August Several mentions of CAA in continued coverage about our new investigation approach. NZ Herald Wednesday August CAA mentioned in an article about airport queue monitoring. The CAA are working with other agencies and the wider aviation sector to gain a clearer and more accurate picture of the passenger journey through New Zealands main airports. Newsroom Thursday August CAA mentioned in an article regarding staff concerns. NZ Herald Friday August CAA mentioned in an article about New Plymouth airports fire trucks. Taranaki Daily News Monday August CAA in continued coverage about our new investigation approach. NZ Herald
Media mentions days to Tuesday August Activity Channel Thursday August The CAA is mentioned in an article about the Raglan Airfield, which was temporarily shut by the local council. Waikato Times
Medium term strategies that use a package of interventions to address specific issues may be developed or amended. For example, the Freight and Supply Chain strategy was developed to prepare and respond to substantial change and to articulate a long term vision to be: underpinned by zero emissions freight transport resilient, reliable, and prepared for potential disruptions highly productive and efficient. The strategy outlines what needs to be done to reach this long term vision over three time horizons. Transport sector agencies also support a range of cross government strategies. For example, the Ministry and the CAA also have important roles in supporting the implementation of the Aotearoa New Zealand Aerospace Strategy, led by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment. Additionally, there are short term transport sector delivery plans, many of which are governed by Acts of Parliament and are key components of the transport planning and funding system. For example, the Decarbonising Transport Action Plan ( ) sets out what the Government will do to implement the transport actions in the first Emissions Reduction Plan, and what we need to do to reduce our transport emissions by by and reach net zero by . Transports role within the wider system Outside of existing collaboration between government agencies and SOEs, collaboration with other stakeholders in the transport system is critical to realising positive transport outcomes. Effective and meaningful engagement with stakeholders from local government, the private sector, researchers and iwi will be critical to achieving government priorities and shaping the transport system. We can provide you with further advice on engagement that you should prioritise, and when. There are other important levers that transport does not own, but there are actions that can be taken to influence these. For example, land use is an important lever that requires cross system collaboration and agreement. Given its role as a key enabler of social and economic connections, the transport system intersects with a wide range of other systems at the local, national and global levels. This underlines the need to coordinate and recognise the impacts decisions in transport may have on other sectors. Figure below illustrates some of the key relationships with the transport system, and Appendix includes further detail on some key areas where a coordinated response and decisions are required, including maritime security, border security and climate response . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TRANSPORTS ROLE WITHIN THE WIDER SYSTEM
Medium term strategies that use a package of interventions to address specific issues may be developed or amended. For example, the Road to Zero strategy was developed to respond to a sustained high level of deaths and serious injuries on New Zealand roads. The strategy supports a range of actions to reduce road trauma which can be monitored and adjusted over time. Transport sector agencies also support a range of cross government strategies. For example, the Ministry and the CAA also have important roles in supporting the implementation of the Aotearoa New Zealand Aerospace Strategy, led by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment. Additionally, there are short term transport sector delivery plans, many of which are governed by Acts of Parliament and are key components of the transport planning and funding system. For example, the Decarbonising Transport Action Plan ( ) sets out what the Government will do to implement the transport actions in the first Emissions Reduction Plan, and what we need to reduce our transport emissions by percent by and reach net zero by . Transports role within the wider system Outside of existing collaboration between government agencies and SOEs, collaboration with other stakeholders in the transport system is critical to realising positive transport outcomes. Effective and meaningful engagement with stakeholders from local government, the private sector, researchers and iwi will be critical to achieving government priorities and shaping the transport system. We can provide you with further advice on engagement that you should prioritise, and when. There are other important levers that transport does not own, but there are actions that can be taken to influence these. For example, land use is an important lever that requires cross system collaboration and agreement. Given its role as a key enabler of social and economic connections, the transport system intersects with a wide range of other systems at the local, national and global levels. This underlines the need to coordinate and recognise the impacts decisions in transport may have on other sectors. Figure below illustrates some of the key relationships with the transport system, and Appendix includes further detail on some key areas where a coordinated response and decisions are required, including maritime security, border security and climate response . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TRANSPORTS ROLE WITHIN THE WIDER SYSTEM
Meeting with the Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) Monday August Due EV charging infrastructure Underway Com plete Environment Officials to progress Cabinet paper . Officials to provide package of material to support the Ministers decisions as referenced in the briefing. Underway Complete Public transport policies direction Office to provide feedback on paper. Complete Approval of legislative changes to increase land transport fees Office to confirm approach for communications with councils. Complete Review of NZTA s hort term borrowing facility Officials to provide further advice aligned with broader Treasury work. The Ministry are working with Treasury on this and will provide a in the week commencing Monday August for when additional advice will be provided. s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Meeting with the Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) Monday July Due Metro rail renewals Officials to provide update on work regarding Auckland Councils share of this years routine maintenance costs. Complete Auckland
Megan Moffet Mana ger, Regulatory Policy Hon David Parker Minister of Transport .. . .
Megan Moffet Manager, Regulatory Policy . . . Hon Kiri Allan Associate Minister of Transport . . . Ministers office to complete : Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events Comments Contacts Name Telephone First contact Bronwyn Turley, Deputy Chief Executive, Strategy and Regulatory Design Megan Moffet, Manager, Regulatory Policy
Megan Shields Team Leader, Official Correspondence
Melbourne Christchurch . . . Air NZ . . . Qantas . . . Jetstar . . .
Melbourne Wellington . . . Air NZ . . . Qantas . . .
Member Christchurch City Council Section a Review of Three Waters Member Housing New Zealand Corporation
Member Hauraki Mori Trust Board Cultural Director, Te Tauoma Development Shundi Group NZ Founder NativebyNature
Members discussed a range of topics including testing of drones and new regulations.
Members discussed current projects and reported on work they were doing within their agencies.
Members gave updates on current work. The Ministry reflected briefly on the meeting with Minister Wood on drones and the proposed regulatory programme and gave an update on the drone discussion document. MBIE provided an update on the Airspace Integration Trial Programme (AITP).
Members gave updates on current work. The Ministry reflected briefly on the meeting with Minister Wood on drones and the proposed regulatory programme, and gave an update on the drone discussion document. MBIE provided an update on the Airspace Integration Trial Programme (AITP).
Members gave updates on the work currently going on. The Ministry of Transport also gave an update its regulatory work programme and MBIE talked about the potential further development of the Airspace Integration Trial Programme (AITP).
Members of academic institutions
Members of the public and others interested in the proposals are invited to read the
Members the group on their current work and discussed some drone incidents in the United Kingdom.
Members the group on work they had been doing including current projects and the drone forum.
Membership User Pays Fundraising of Total Income of Total Expenditure Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue APPENDIX . The income across the NGOs is thinly spread across all lines of expenditure that are required to run any business, particularly those with large volunteer and asset bases. The lights are kept on, but funding does not necessarily cover resources required to deliver the work. Employees work well beyond their employment contracts or volunteers fill the gaps to ensure the organisations remain sustainable and that services continue to be delivered across New Zealand. . Government funding to the NGOs and their volunteers is around percent of all income received. We observe that the government receives considerable benefit from the NGOs and the , volunteers supported by them delivering frontline safety and search and rescue services. In the government invested million in the NGOs and their volunteer networks the return on investment through search and rescue alone is :. This excludes any benefits from recreational safety services including frontline safety services. . Services through the NGOs and their volunteers are provided without fear or favour and in the absence of additional funding there is a risk: at least of services and outcomes degrading over time, or at worst a system failure where an NGO can no longer deliver its role within the System.. Through the work of the Review, we have identified additional funding needs for the NGOs summarised in Section Seven. We would argue that investment in NGO baselines and the volunteers that deliver services across the systems will continue to represent considerable value for money for the government. . Replacing the NGOs and the volunteer workforce with government provided services andor paid employees would be quite simply put, unaffordable. Therefore, every effort must continue to be made to support the NGOs and their volunteers to support the wellbeing of New Zealand. . Adapted from NZSAR Council data. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Appendix : Customer journey mapping . As part of the Haumara Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Review, we prepared a series of customer journey maps to examine the experiences of people who became customers of recreational safety and search and rescue services. Through this work, we reflected on the pipeline of safety services provided across the System to support people to head outdoors and get home safely, and to help people avoid distressing incidents or minimise the impact of them should they occur. . Customer journey maps provide a visual storyline of events focused on the emotions people feel before, during and after the journey they have taken. The maps reflect imagined people and experiences, based on a collection of real experiences. With real experiences, we are quickly bound up in what happened, where someone was, what they were doing and when, and where fault lies. By focusing on events which are not factual, but accommodate truths, we are able to consider the experience of the people involved and reflect on the valuable emotive responses. . Through our customer journey maps, we identified moments that matter to support safe outcomes for people connecting and recreating across New Zealand. These moments reflect key points in time that shape the journey and peoples experience and how they view it: preactivity preparation (including the information, skills and behaviours a person draws on before they head outdoors) trip contact and reporting getting help when they get in trouble communication channels before and after a search and rescue incident (in relation to everyone involved including the person rescued, their whnau and friends, and the people involved in the rescue), and the post event relationships and learnings for the organisations and across the systems. This also includes the recovery of people if a death occurs, and rhui and connection with the whenua to heal. . We found that customers do not distinguish between recreational safety and search and rescue services. The services are seen as part of the same pipeline of activity. . We see ongoing opportunities for the System Steward and organisations involved in delivering these services to build on this work. Further exploration could include mapping a wider range of experiences including: the experience of those who do not find themselves injured, missing andor in distress; and those who do not require search and rescue services in their outdoor journeys. the experience of those who deliver recreational safety and search and rescue services. the benefits from the services across the System. . An example of our customer journey maps is attached below.APPENDIX Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue APPENDIX Sally I dont think we need to bring much there are shops down by the lake marina if we need anything. Its a pretty nice day and everyone has their phones in case we need anything. Jack Weve got life jackets were safe as.Sally This is easier than I thought and pretty neat. But its more tiring than Im used to Im actually starting to feel pretty zonked. Jack reckons were nearly there. I dont want to spoil the fun so Ill just rest after. . Planning . PreparationCustomer journey map: Jack Smith Phases Actions Emotions Thoughts. Implementation . Triggering Incident . Response . PostResponse Jack and Sally decide to celebrate Matariki by going kayaking with some friends at the lake. Jack is a somewhat experienced kayaker, while Sally has done it only once before. They manage to borrow a double kayak and life jackets from one of their university friends. Jack , is a secondyear Engineering major at University. He has much older brothers and attributes his now naturalathleticism to having to keep up with them from a young age. Jack religiously goes to the gym and runs for at least minutes daily. He met his girlfriend Sally through friends. She is a firstyear Chemistry major at the same university. They have been going out for months now. Jack and Sally are excited to spend the upcoming break together. He is keen to share his love for sports and fun outdoor activities with her. If all goes well, Jack plans to invite Sally to his family Christmas do later in the year.While they have life jackets, they do little else to prepare for the excursion beyond getting food and drinks: . They do not check any detailed weather forecasts the weather that week has been sunny and warm. . They do not have any type of beacon. . They have cell phones but no secure waterproof holders for them. . They do not bring any additional clothing layers. . They do not have any other type of safety equipment, such as helmets. Day , The group of sets out from the lake marina at about midmorning. There is a bit of a breeze, but it is manageable. Day , After lunch, the group splits up some head back to the marina, others decide to go to the other side of the lake, and Jack and Sally decide to paddle down a river from the lake. They had read about a cool rock formation just minutes paddle downstream. Their friends agree to pick them up at the car park a few kilometres down the river in around hours. Day , Sally and Jack arrive at the rock formation. While initially calm, the weather starts to turn. The wind starts to blow much harder with big gusts and the temperature drops about degrees. Despite this, Jack and Sally decide to push on, they still have about km to go. They enter a narrow stretch of the river where the current speeds up suddenly. They lose balance and the kayak rolls. Sally hits her head against the rocks and loses consciousness. Jack surfaces and sees the kayak being swept downstream but no sign of Sally. He swims around trying to find Sally but the current is stronger than he anticipates. He goes on shore and scrambles along large rocks on the shoreline to try and spot Sally from up far, calling out her name. There is no sign of Sally. His phone is gone. It must have fallen out of his pocket when the kayak rolled. He cant call for help. At this point he decides to hurry along the river downstream towards the carpark, scanning for Sally the whole way. Day , Jack reaches the carpark but still no signs of Sally. He runs up the beach to the carpark where his friends were waiting. Day , He tells them what happened. They call while Jack and two other friends rush back down along the river to try to locate Sally. Day , Sallys flatmates get in contact with her parents, who live up in Auckland.Day , Within minutes, the Police arrive, and they take a detailed statement from Jack. The Police search boat soon arrives, and they begin searching along the river. Day , A group of Land Search and Rescue volunteers arrive and set off on a ground search. The Police instruct Jack and his friends to stay behind. Day , As night falls, Sally is still missing. The Police and Land Search and Rescue volunteers must stop searching but plan to resume the next morning. Day , Sallys parents arrive that evening. Her parents and friends want to keep searching through the night, but the Police advised against this as it is unsafe. The Police inform the group that a dive squad has been requested, but theyre completing another search and are about a day away. Day , Sallys parents reach out to their good friend who lives nearby for help. Sallys family friend tells her kaumtua about Sallys disappearance. Day , The next morning, a group from the local iwi arrive to help. They set up a tent and provide refreshments and a place to rest for volunteers. The kaumtua places a rhui on the river and the group says a karakia. The beach becomes a hive of activity with the Police on the water, a helicopter in the air, and many ground search volunteers. Day , Around midafternoon, the helicopter radios in. They spotted something kms downstream. The Police and Land Search and Rescue work together to recover Sallys body, walking her out. An ambulance takes Sally to the local hospital. Day , Sallys parents, Jack and his friends follow the ambulance to the hospital. Together, they identify her body. Day The next day, the coroner examines Sally. An autopsy finds drowning as the cause of death but also that Sally had suffered a traumatic head injury. It seems she had hit her head on the rocks when the kayak rolled. The Police consult with local iwi and the rhui remains in place for the rest of the week. But when Sallys parents, Jack and their friends return to the river to lay down flowers and sing waiata to restore the noa for the river, they see people already using in the water for recreational purposes. Victim Support calls Jack and Sallys parents to offer help. But they both decline. A week after the incident The university offers counselling services to those who were impacted by Sallys death. Sallys parents and friends set up a memorial fund in her name to make emergency beacons available to students at the university for outdoor activities free of charge. Ongoing. Jack rejects help from official sources as well as friends and family. He loses interest in his studies and takes a break. He retracts into himself and becomes a bit of a recluse. He struggles with what happened and turns to alcohol to manage his thoughts and pain. Jack Sallys doing great, I knew this was gonna be great. Um, this part is not as calm and even as the lake, Im starting to feel scared. Jack you said therell only be easy paddle bits You lied The river should be an easy paddle together weve all had a rest and eaten lunch. Itll be fun.How to read this document This journey map is fictional but based on truths gathered from interviews with individuals who have experienced a search and rescue response. The map tells the highly likely scenario from the perspective of the enduser. The scenario is organised into key phases. Under each phase are actions, emotions and thoughts experienced by the customer within these moments that matter. In this map, we feature a primary and secondary personas story to help tell the story of the impact incidents have on companions. Key Moments that matter Jacks emotions Sallys emotions Jacks thoughts Sallys thoughts Jack Persona key Sally Woah we rolled didnt see that coming Better check on Sally. Wheres Sally Where is she She should be here I was only under for a second and came up right here. She should be right next to me Where can she be Jack What do I do Ill keep running downstream with the river, its flowing pretty fast along here. I gotta keep looking What if she got swept downstream I need help I wish our mates were here. so stupid for going off on our own. Omg, Sallys parents, I dont know how to face them. Im too ashamed. Dont stop searching We need to keep searching until we find her. This is bullst. No Sallys dead. I dont want to believe it. No, Sally, Im so sorry. Im so so so sorry.Jack Dont these people know theres a rhui in place Sallys gone because of me. It was all my fault. We shouldve been more prepared and careful. I was so stupid.I dont want to talk about it. No one can help me. I dont want any help. I dont deserve any help. Im so worthless and stupid.Jack Im so looking forward to having a long weekend away. Getting into the kayaks with everyone will be a highlight for sure. Sally I feel a bit out of my comfort zone. Ive only kayaked once at school camp. But I dont feel as nervous since well be in the same kayak together.Sally seems a bit nervous, but I remind her she is a natural athlete and she will be all good.Jack Thank God, help has arrived. If we all hurry and spread out we can find her. Everyone needs to be moving quickly whats happening I shouldve been more careful. Im supposed to protect her. Im so sorry Sally. I failed you. No one is saying it, but everyone is acting like Sally is gone. Ive got to try to stay positive. She could be hurt somewhere unable to walk There are so many of us, were bound to find her soon.There are so many people here helping us find Sally. Its unbelievable. Thank you everyone. Sallys parents say it wasnt my fault. the kaumtua asked me how I was coping. He seemed really nice and concerned, but I cant focus on anything other than finding Sally right now. Everything else is a waste of time. ExcitedThankful Hopeful RelievedConfidentConfident Startled UnpreparedRelieved AlarmedNervous ScaredAnxious DistressedFrustratedIn shock Numb Desperate Fearful GuiltyAngry DistraughtSelfloathing AshamedAnnoyed Angry Guilty In despair GuiltyNervousRelaxedSafeConfident TiredHappy Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue APPENDIX Appendix : Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue System Strategy (working draft) Purpose (Why the System exists) Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai supporting peoples wellbeing (waiora and mauriora) and safer recreation from the mountains to the sea Vision (What the System aspires to do, strives to achieve) Everyone connecting, recreating and operating in, on and around the air, water and land comes home safely Mission (Defines what the System does, its business and objective) Enabling people to connect, recreate and operate in the outdoors with the skills and knowledge to do it safely. Safely rescuing, recovering, and returning loved ones home with respect and dignity. Outcomes (Longterm results that the System aims to achieve for New Zealanders and visitors to New Zealand (including our New Zealand Search and Rescue Region) . People have the knowledge, skills, and experience to take personal responsibility for the outdoor activity they are doing.. Our services support the safe return of loved ones to their whnau and friends.. Competent providers deliver services safely and effectively.. New Zealanders and our partners have trust and confidence in what we do.. Effective system stewardship underpinned by accountability, cohesion, and partnership at all levels. Our impacts (Mediumterm results which will contribute to outcomes. They tell us how the initiatives and services in the system have led to positive change measurable) Multiple aligned mediums are available for people to obtain information and learn about how to recreate and operate safely in the outdoors. Targeted activities within New Zealand improve risk awareness. People acquire mtauranga and build tikanga to make the right decision when judgement is required. Standards and rules are current and are evaluated. Targeted prevention activities are successfully undertaken where required. Serious search and rescue incidents are minimised. Improved outcomes for everyone involved including returning home. Appropriate customary practices are followed. Personnel with appropriate skills, training, assets, and equipment working to agreed standards. Agencies (providers) maintain required service delivery levels in a changing world. Resilient leadership or funded organisations fulfil their roles and functions. Best practice underpins service delivery. Compliance with relevant New Zealand legislation is maintained. Compliance with international obligations is maintained. The System is recognised and understood. There are strong connections with local communities to support service delivery. Actions are grounded in evidence based on research and development and evaluated. Purposeful engagement within international organisations and jurisdictions to get the search and rescue outcomes New Zealand needs. Shared current strategic framework embedded across the system. Clarity of the roles, accountabilities, and responsibilities of organisations and people involved within the system. Clarity of roles, accountabilities and responsibilities between the system and adjacent systems. System activity is fully aligned to effect change. Resourcing appropriately balanced between prevention and response services. The appropriate strengthening of cultural relationships across the system. Mediums include but are not limited to social media, websites, magazines, pamphlets, newsletters, etc. Activities is an umbrella term to capture programmes, projects, interventions, initiatives, including training and education etc. Mtauranga refers to knowledge and Tikanga to skills. Targeted prevention measures include but are not limited too patrolling flagged areas, warning people of dangers, rescuing swimmers and boaties who are in immediate danger before it becomes a search and rescue operation, and temporarily closing areas where people can recreate through Rhui. Captures those lost, missing and in distress, and those who have passed, as well as those involved in the delivery of search and rescue. Improved outcomes not just from a health and safety perspective, but from a cultural perspective too. Appropriate is as it relates to the person being rescued or returned, and their whnaufamily. Underpins the other outcomes too. Clarity for all involved, including organisations (NGOs, central and local government), the people involved, marae, hap and iwi. Adjacent systems include civil defence, transport, education, and health. Indicators (How the System will measure delivery of impacts and outcomes) Reducing death and hospitalisation rates. Reducing near misses. Increasing public safety awareness and preparedness. People can increasingly access information in the manner that works for them. Increasing numbers of people are safely involved in outdoor activity. Improving positive behaviours result from current standards and rules. Reducing number and type (e.g., hiking, rock fishing, canyoning, etc) of serious search and rescue incidents responded to. Number of lives saved increases (trend in relation to people involved in the activity). Increase in social costs averted. All services maintain the whakapapa of the person returned. Evaluate targeted prevention activities for effectiveness. Increasing compliance with targeted prevention measures (for example, beach closure, Rhui, etc). All personnel meet competency requirements. All tasked search and rescue services are responded to on request in line with agreed standards. All leadership and funded organisations deliver to their mandate and measures. All lessons learnt are implemented. Currency and evaluation of service standards, operational strategies, guidelines, and plans. Effectiveness of service delivery evaluated. All New Zealand legislation is complied with. ICAO and IMO audits as they relate to search and rescue are unqualified. Increasing public awareness and satisfaction. Positive feedback received from other jurisdictions. All decisions cite evidence used. Everyone can see themselves in the system. Actively participate at international forumsmeetings. Appropriate agreements are in place with international partners. Increasing number of sector organisations who reference the shared strategic framework. Collaboration between organisations within the systems is increasing. Collaboration between the system and adjacent systems is increasing. Increasing percentage of organisations satisfied with access to data in the system. Increasing percentage of organisations satisfied with how expertise is used and respected in the system. Te Tiriti o Waitangi principles underpin all that is done. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue APPENDIX Appendix : Current and proposed future governance and leadership arrangements Current governance and leadership arrangements Department of Conservation Land Safety Forum Subgroups KEY Dark blue lines link the players, but do not reflect accountabilities, or responsibilities. Proposed governance and leadership arrangements Working GroupsSubgroups SummitsMinister of Transport Minister of Conservation System StewardMinisterial Oversight Group (Lead Minister) Recreational Craft Leaders ForumMinistry of TransportMinister of Transport Maritime NZ SubgroupsWater Safety NZSport NZMinister of Sport and Recreation Ministry of Culture and Heritage SubgroupsWai Ora (Water Safety) Leaders ForumNZSAR Council (Ministry of Transport Chair) NZSAR Secretariat (Ministry of Transport) NZ Land Search and Rescue Safer Walking Reference GroupJoint Search and Rescue Ministers Lead: Minister of Transport Ministry of Transport Civil Aviation AuthorityMaritime New ZealandNew Zealand Search and Rescue System Advisory BoardMori Khui Advisory Board Senior Government Officials GroupThe Recreational Craft Leaders Group has a dual purpose, fulfilling multiple roles across Recreational Safety and the wider Maritime Regulatory System. Maritime NZ has indicated that Group will continue to operate but will be embedded into the new structure proposed.International obligations and associated accountabilities for search and rescue, residing with the Minister of Transport, the Ministry of Transport, Maritime New Zealand and the Civil Aviation Authority. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue APPENDIX Appendix : Roles and membership of the proposed governance and leadership arrangements . The roles of the proposed Ministerial Oversight Group, the Advisory Board, the Mori Khui Advisory Board and the System Steward are summarised in the table below. Membership of the Ministerial Oversight Group and the Advisory Boards will be confirmed during implementation; however, some indications are provided below. . Further work is required to identify the Standing Groups that will be established to support longterm programmes or approaches. Working Groups that will be stood up to support delivery of the System wide multiyear work programme and for oneoff projects as required. The System Steward would be responsible for convening, managing and administering Standing and Working Groups. . Through the work of the Review to , we think the Systemwide Standing Groups needed include: Data and Research Communications and Media Operational Coordination Search and Rescue Recreational Boating Leadership Group and Forum Safer Walking Technology Volunteer Network Education and Training.. Currently, a number of search and rescue related committees operate through the NZSAR Secretariat and are not reflected within the above list. We recognise that subgroups under the Operational Coordination Search and Rescue Group may be required for specific areas of focus. However, during the Review implementation, every effort must be made to streamline these existing committees and their work through that Group to ensure the most effective and efficient use of time. . The proposed Sector Summits would include: biannual sector specific huis providing an opportunity to bring together stakeholders and decisionmakers to facilitate collaboration and information sharing, and an annual combined summit bringing together stakeholders and decision makers from New Zealand and international jurisdictions to facilitate collaboration and information sharing across the System, and adjacent systems. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue APPENDIX Ministerial Oversight GroupAdvisory Board Mori Khui Advisory BoardSystem Steward (Te Manatu Waka) Accountable for the health and performance of the System. Strategic advice to Ministers, the Mori Khui, and the System Steward on the health and performance of the System, including strategic issues, risks, and mitigations. Monitoring and advising on performance against the System Strategy including the outcomes, impacts, and strategic priorities. Undertakes assurance across the System to assess capacity and capability to support delivery of the Strategy. Strategic advice to Ministers and the System Steward on the health and performance of the System, including strategic issues, risks, and mitigations. Monitoring and advising on performance against the System Strategy including the outcomes, impacts, and strategic priorities that impact Mori. Undertakes assurance across the System to assess capacity and capability to support delivery of the Strategy. Responsible for the health and performance of the System. Responsible for the implementation of Te Tiriti o Waitangi, upholding the mana of the Wai Puna model and Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki (the System Strategy), and for building Mori capability and capacity. Leads development of and maintains the System Strategy. Implements and maintains the Volunteer Strategy. Monitors delivery of the System Strategy and the Volunteer Plan including the achievement of outcomes, impacts, and strategic priorities. Provides regular insights and reporting about the System to the Ministerial Oversight Group, the Advisory Board and the Mori Khui Advisory Board to enable effective monitoring of the Strategy, System performance, and implementation risks. Shapes, influences and drives the delivery of policy reform to advance System performance. Supports the identification of clear levers to influence and shape the System. Supports the identification of clear levers to influence and shape the System. Provides effective, high quality strategic policy advice and coordination across the System. Identifies and escalates potential issues and risks across the System to the Advisory Board and the Mori Khui Advisory Board. Supports the effective delivery of directions and decisions from the Ministerial Oversight Group, the Advisory Board, and the Mori Khui Advisory Board. Supports coordination across Ministerial portfolios to enable System performance. Enables effective coordination across central and local government, NGOs, and iwi operating within the System, and adjacent systems. Enables effective coordination across central and local government, nongovernment organisations, and iwi operating within the System, and adjacent systems. Represents the System across government. Supports effective coordination across central and local government, nongovernment organisations, and iwi operating within the System, and systems adjacent.Table : Outline of the proposed governance and leadership roles and membership . A Senior Officials Group, comprising Government organisations will be established to ensure all Government organisations whether they are represented on the Advisory Board or not can meet sufficiently in advance of each meeting to discuss the Agenda and associated papers. The purpose of this meeting is to ensure that these organisations have awareness of the papers for discussion; can advise on any issues or risks that have not been picked up as part of any earlier consultation; can adequately brief their Chief Executive in advance of the Advisory Board meeting; and for those organisations not represented on the Advisory Board signal their CEs attendance for items that relate to their organisation. The Group will not have any decision rights. . Appendix sets out the proposed functions of the System Steward in further detail. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Ministerial Oversight GroupAdvisory Board Mori Khui Advisory BoardSystem Steward (Te Manatu Waka) Proposed membership: To be confirmed through Ministerial engagement. Ministers who identified with key portfolio interests are the Ministers for Sport and Recreation, of Transport (Lead Minister), Police, Local Government, Internal Affairs and ACC. The final membership would not preclude other Ministers being included in discussions where there are cross portfolio linkages. Proposed membership: Government entities: Department of Conservation Maritime New Zealand NZ Police Mori Khui Advisory Board Chair Nongovernment organisations: Coastguard New Zealand Mountain Safety Council New Zealand Land Search and Rescue Surf Life Saving New Zealand Water Safety New Zealand Local government representation. An independent Chair will be appointed.Proposed membership: Government entities: Department of Conservation Maritime New Zealand NZ Police Nongovernment organisations: Coastguard New Zealand New Zealand Land Search and Rescue Surf Life Saving New Zealand Water Safety New Zealand Tangaroa Ara Rau iwi and hap representation. Note: other entities that require further engagement and consultation are the Accident Compensation Corporation (injury prevention), the National Emergency Management Agency (emergency response) and Te Puni Kkiri (Mori wellbeing and development) as these entities impact on Mori outcomes within the System in varying ways. The Chief Mori Adviser will be appointed as Chair. APPENDIX Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue APPENDIX Appendix : Proposed functions of the System Steward . The proposed functions to be consolidated within the System Steward to support the Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue System, that will include harnessing current capability across the System, are: Sector strategy and policy advice Champion the System ensure the value of the System to New Zealands wellbeing, today and into the future is recognised. Building Mori capability and capacity across the System and the implementation of Te Tiriti o Waitangi. Lead the implementation, coordination and monitoring of the shared strategic framework for the System Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai and upholding its mana. Lead the implementation, coordination and monitoring of the Volunteer Strategy and supporting implementation of the plan. Uphold the mana of the Wai Puna model. Collaborate with System participants to tackle and resolve complex problems and seize opportunities: within the System that span multiple organisations particularly ones that fall between organisational mandates across adjacent systems working with adjacent system leads including the National Emergency Management Agency; the Ministry of Health; the Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC); Tourism New Zealand; and the Ministry of Education, the Tertiary Education Commission and the Workforce Development Councils. Ensure that the needs of the System, and the policy problemsopportunities within the System are well represented across government and with Ministers. Draw together data and analytics, including research, surveys, and environmental scanning from across the System and adjacent systems to consider and respond to future trends and influences, and the resolution of Systemwide policy problemsopportunities. Troubleshoot issues and roadblocks across the System impacting on the availability of, access to, and sharing of data, across the System and more broadly, in accordance with New Zealand Data and Information Management Principles. Lead the development and delivery of a Systemwide research programme. Lead the development and maintenance of Systemwide frameworks, plans and standards. Work with organisations in the System to continually support clarity and transparency around roles and responsibilities. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue APPENDIX Assurance Deliver comprehensive advice to the Ministerial Oversight Group and both Advisory Boards about the performance of the System and delivery of the Strategy outcomes. This includes secretariat support to the Ministerial Oversight Group and Advisory Boards and Standing Groups to support the delivery of work across the System. Monitor funding in accordance with Service Level Agreements and Memorandums of Understanding that the System Steward is responsible. Investment, funding and procurement Work with other government funders to maintain a funding framework informing the approach to government funding across the System linked to the System Strategy (including clarity around government funding sources and purpose of those sources). Work with organisations in the System to identify investment priorities and funding levels linked to delivering the System Strategy. Maintain ongoing relationships with funding bodies, for example, the Department of Internal Affairs, the Lottery Grants Board, ACC, Pub Charities Limited, and local government. Explore and enable the benefits of bulk procurement within the System for example travel, insurance, software licensing, etc (without limiting the freedom decision making rights of organisations).Communications and media Support Systemwide communications (sharing lessons, publications technology updates, system work updates). Work with organisations to deliver and distribute key and consistent safety messaging, and other messaging as required (e.g., COVID responses). Develop and maintain a System Charter for a public audience, describing what the System intends to achieve, its component parts, the roles and functions of the various organisations involved and how they work together, funding arrangements, and relationships with adjacent systems. Communications and media support to Ministers. Copyright Information Disclaimer: all reasonable endeavours are made to ensure the accuracy of the information in this document. However, the information is provided without warranties of any kind including accuracy, completeness, timeliness or fitness for any particular purpose. Te Manat Waka excludes liability for any loss, damage or expense, direct or indirect, and however caused, whether through negligence or otherwise, resulting from any persons or organisations use of, or reliance on, the information provided in this document. Under the terms of the New Zealand Creative Commons Attribution . BY licence, this document, and the information contained within it, can be copied, distributed, adapted and otherwise used provided that Te Manat Waka is attributed as the source of the material the material is not misrepresented or distorted through selective use of the material images contained in the material are not copied. The terms of the Ministrys Copyright and disclaimer apply, available at: www.transport.govt.nzNg Uara Te Manat Waka Te Manat Waka Values AKO CAPABILITY DEVELOPMENT MAHI TAHI WORKING TOGETHER RANGATIRATANGA EMPOWERING AND LEADING KAITIAKITANGA GUARDIANSHIP AND PROTECTION WHANAUNGATANGA COLLABORATION AND UNITYWHAKAPAKARI IMPROVING OUTCOMES MANAAKITANGA CARING FOR AND VALUING OTHERS ISBN More information Review steward: Te Manat Waka Queens Wharf, Wellington PO Box , Wellington Telephone: Email: infotransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz
MetService Metrological Service of New Zealand Ltd MNZ Maritime New Zealand Monty National Transport Model MSOC Maritime Security Oversight Committee NEMA National Emergency Management Agency NLTF National Land Transport Fund NLTP National Land Transport Programme NZSAR New Zealand Search and Rescue ODESC Officials Committee for Domestic and External Security Coordination RNIP Rail Network Investment Programme RUC Road User Charges SAR Search and Rescue SOE State Owned Enterprise TAIC Transport Accident Investigation Commission TEBS Transport Evidence Base Strategy the Framework Transport Outcomes Framework the Minister Minister of Transport the Ministry Ministry of Transport Te Manat Waka TRT Transport Response Team Waka Kotahi Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency WMO World Meteorological Organization
Methodology The aim of this research is to assess the effect of receiving an Alcohol Interlock Order (AIO) sentence on drink driving reoffending rates. Other offences were also included for completeness. A matched case comparison method was used to compare the drink d riving reoffending rates for those who received an AIO sentence, in comparison to those who were eligible for, but did not receive, an AIO. The comparison group has instead received a detention, community work or something else. The study period was from January to December . The matched comparison group has been created to be similar to those receiving an alcohol interlock sentence in terms of their demographics, current and prior offending characteristics. Matching was carried using propensity score matching, which is described in section . below, at a ratio of on average :. The study covers the time period when the AIO sentence was an option at Court but not mandatory. It is worth noting at this point that while those in the AIO sentence group received an AIO sentence, it is not known whether they had an interlock fitted. The number of offenders with actual devices fitted is unknown. . AIO and Matched Comparison Group Inclusion Criteria Eligible offenders are either those with two offences within five years (based on offence dates) or one offence of EBA (excess breath alcohol) of or more micrograms per litre of breath . Criteria for inclusion in the analysis for both the AIO and matched control groups were as follows: () had a finalised case with an Alcohol or Other Drug eligible conviction from to AND () the offender was aged or above AND () includes only those receiving a home detention sentence through to fine.
Metro rail provides rapid, mass transit to and from the city centres, providing access to jobs, education and social opportunities. It helps reduce congestion on roads and supports productivity in our cities. It also supports more sustainable urban development, housing and growth. Metro passenger rail services share the network with freight and interregional services, and use electric trains, which are faster, quieter and more energy efficient with low emissions.
Metro rail review underway
Metropolitan (metro) Rail
Metropolitan Rail Operating Model One Rail Report s ()(f)(iv) s ()(b)(ii) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Rail Service Disruption Declining levels of customer satisfaction of rail users reflect the increased disruptions from ongoing renewals and upgrades of the network. You have been regularly meeting with the Mayor and Deputy Mayor of Auckland and senior officials from KiwiRail and Auckland Transport to discuss upcoming service disruptions relating to the integration of the CRL and the wider network rebuild. At the October meeting, an approach was agreed that would result in the least disruption on the network. This includes: Single line running for seven weeks total Extended Christmas block of l ines (six weeks passenger, four weeks freight ) day Easter school holidays block of line (passenger and freight) Kings Birthday, Matariki and Labour weekends fourday block of lines June or September school holidays single line running contingency . City Rail Link and AOR The CRL project is making good progress as it continues to advance into the complex testing and commissioning phase. Th is phase involves testing and integrating a range of systems on the CRL before Day operations, from signalling to ensuring station air conditioning is fully operational .
Metropolitan Rail Operating Model agreed
MidOctober Coastal Shipping Resilience Fund Office to share briefing with Minister of Finance and Minister of Regional Development. Complete Decisions Confirmed Denied Agree to extend the deadline for submissions on Aviation Security Services consultation by two weeks to Tuesday October . Confirmed Government Quarterly Plan Approved. Confirmed Officials to provide further advice to inform consideration of the Regional Aviation Ministers Meeting in February . Confirmed s ()(f)(iv)
Millions of Mother s Alicia Hall and Olivia Hyatt
Mingha Bluff to Rough Creek Realignment
Minister Bishop met with Ministry of Transport Officials (Chief Executive and Chief of Staff) on Friday January . This was an introductory meeting with no formal agenda. There had not been any meetings with Minister Meager as at January . I am therefore refusing your request for agenda for the meeting with Minister Bishop and Minister Meager under section (e) of the Act that the documents requested do not exist.
Minister McAnulty Minister Allan note that the financial recommendations for Budget require Transport Ministers to determine a specified amount for Maritime New Zealand in i.e., the maximum amount of funding for core functions that the entity is eligible for in , including the amount it can receive from its Protection of Transport Sector Agency Core Functions appropriation NA NA agree that the specified amount for Maritime New Zealand in should be Yes No Yes No
Minister agreed to reauthorisation
Minister authorised British AirwaysQatar Airways Alliance
Minister for Regional Development
Minister of Climate Change;
Minister of Finance Grant Robertson Parliament Buildings
Minister of Finance and the Minister of Transport (Joint Ministers) to report back on several
Minister of Transport ) in response t o multiple increasing security pressures. The Ministry also sits
Minister of Transport agree to sign the attached letter to the Chair of Auckland Light Rail Ltd on behalf of shareholding Ministers, subject to any changes you wish to make.
Minister of Transport Monday, November
Minister of Transport and other Ministers in your collective work to implement the Governments
Minister of Transport briefed about introduction of a regional fuel tax
Minister of Transport has released the
Minister of Transport released the
Minister of Transport to determine matters that arise in the course of drafting
Minister of Transport to issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel
Minister of Transport
Minister of Transports media release
Minister, we have covered the areas included in aviation and the delegations.
Minister. You have received a letter from the Minister of Transport setting out these delegations,
Ministerial Briefings received by the Ministers Office Wednesday August Tuesday August Briefing title Requestor requested due received Briefing on NZALPA Safe Haven The Ministers Office Ministerial Briefing Presenting DAMP Transport Instrument to the House Internal NA NA Int ernal NA
Ministerial Briefings received by the Ministers Office Wednesday July Tuesday August No Briefings were sent during this period.
Ministerial Official Information Act Requests Due to Ministers Office Due to Requester Requester Summary of request CAA workplace culture Uptake of electric vehicles Extended Extended All advice relating to the closure of ALRL Advice on cycleway spending Advice on whether the government has explored the loss of road tax through Odometer operation. Advice received on the efficiency of Road freight All communication between the Minister of transport and Mayor of Auckland Advice on cycleway spending Speed limit increase advice on time saved and economic results
Ministerial Official Information Act Requests Due to Ministers Office Due to Requester Requester Summary of request Extended by Office CAA workplace culture Communication between the Minister of Transport and Mayor of Auckland Advice on cycleway spending Advice on whether the government has explored the loss of road tax through odometer operation. Advice on cycleway spending Advice received on the efficiency of road freight Extended Extended Advice relating to the closure of ALRL The Clean Vehicle Standard paper taken to Cabinet Committee and paper withheld under active consideration . WPQ () relates All correspondence regarding international travel opportunities for you as Minister s ()(a)
Ministerial Official Information Act Requests Due to Ministers Office Due to Requester Requester Summary of request Information about the appointment of medical conveners Information on transport expert advisory group Extended Extended Any correspondence received or sent by the Office regarding the Lower North Island Rail Integrated Mobility Programme (LNIRIM) Any safety analysis undertaken relating to the proposed Speed rule, such as modelling of the expected change in deaths and serious injuries (DSI), or analysis of historical DSI data Regarding the use of Te Reo Mori in the public service All communication regarding the increase of parking fines All communication between the Ministers Office and departments he is responsible for, about new spending or baseline savings in Budget
Ministerial Official Information Act Requests Due to Ministers Office Due to Requester Requester Summary of request Requesting the Cost Benefit Analysis on removing the blanket speed restrictions and the information on the drafting process Correspondence between the Minister or his Office and Minister Jones and Peters and their Offices on the Aratere grounding Requesting correspondence between the Ministers Office and MoT on the Clean Car Standard Requesting advice provided on achieving New Zealands emissions budgets in the draft GPS Seeking information on EV chargers Requesting the document Changes to Budget Public Transport Decisions Requesting statistics in relation to the Cost Benefit Analysis on removing the blanket speed restrictions
Ministerial Official Information Act Requests Due to Ministers Office Due to Requester Requester Summary of request Advice on projected road toll if the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits is adopted from NZTA and the Ministry Correspondence between the Ministers Office and Greater Wellington councillors on the Lower North Island Rail Integrated Mobility Programme CAA workplace culture Uptake of electric vehicles Extended Extended All advice relating to the closure of ALRL Advice on cycleway spending s ()(a)
Ministerial Oversight Group
Ministerial briefings received by the Ministers Office NB: This covers the period Wednesday September Tuesday September Title Nil Nil
Ministerial briefings received by the Ministers Office NB: This covers the period Wednesday September Tuesday September Title Nil Nil
Ministerial expectations on value for money The NZTA is required to seek value for money when making funding decisions Having expectations on value for money will assist in clarifying the handling of priorities when there is: High alignment and low efficiency (programme examples) High efficiency and low effectiveness (project examples) Prioritisation could have A lignment as the factor with the greatest weighting with Effectiveness and Efficiency as supporting factors GPS https:www.transport.govt.nzm ulti modalkeystrategiesandplansg psonlandtransportfunding Pg GPS strategic priorities were safety, access, environment, and value for money. Value for money was described as delive rs the right infrastructure and services to the right level at the best cost.
Ministerial expectations We have developed specific requirements relating to aspects of theMinisterial expectations applicable to approved organisations. The specific requirements relateto public transport private share and reporting requirements.Attached is a proposed letter to approved organisations which is going through our signoffprocess, then will be provided to the Ministers officer for the Ministers information and thensent to approved organisations. Ng mihi Kevin
Ministers considered advice on the selection of a preferred delivery partner for CCM and engaged in crossparty discussions.
Ministers is required to progress these negotiations. We will brief you in February on this matter.
Ministers worked hard to balance the ambitions of the programme with what was affordable within the broader context of committed and predicted transport funding across the country.
Ministers office to complete : Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister
Ministers office to complete: Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events Comments
Ministry for Environment website.
Ministry for Primary Industries (MPI)
Ministry of Transport Queens Wharf Wellington PO Box Wellington Telephone: Email: evaluationtransport.govt.nz www.transport.govt.nz June
Ministry of Transport New Zealand (Facebook)
Ministry of Transport New Zealand (LinkedIn)
Ministry of Transport New Zealand (Twitter)
Ministry of Transport Summary of Euro to pollution reductions
Ministry of Transport Te Manat Waka Briefings Novembe r
Ministry of Transport attendees Audrey Sonerson, Chief Executive Ruth Fairhall, Deputy Chief Executive Policy Part Ministry of Transport Lead Paper reference . Key items to note Questions from the Weekly Report Upcoming milestones announcements events advice Audrey Sonerson Weekly Report as at September
Ministry of Transport attendees Audrey Sonerson, Chief Executive Ruth Fairhall, Deputy Chief Executive Policy Part Ministry of Transport Lead Paper reference . Portfolio work programme update Audrey Sonerson Priority documents . Key items to note Questions from the Weekly Report Upcoming milestones announcements events advice Audrey Sonerson Weekly Report as at August
Ministry of Transport b riefing: Proactive Release of papers relating to consultation on reform of the maritime design, construction and equipment rule set This briefing will seek your agreement to proactively publish Cabinet material and key papers relating to consultation on the proposed reforms to Maritime Rules . Week ending Friday August Project: Maritime Workforce Maritime sector representatives met on Monday August and Thursday August to discuss their response to the consultation on the reform of vocational education that was launched by Minister Simmonds on Thursday August . They are preparing a proposal for the structure and oversight of maritime training arrangements and will copy Minister Doocey into this proposal. Ports are also likely to prepare a joined up submission to the consultation.
Ministry of Transport discusses previous GPS with
Ministry of Transport on behalf of the Minister
Ministry of Transport releases EV charging strategy
Ministry of TransportVALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK REVIEW Report
Ministry of Transports (the Ministry) priority work on aviation and maritime, including upcoming
Ministry to draft paperwork for APH to consider appointment.
Ministry to draft paperwork for Cabinets Appointments and Honours Committee (APH) to consider appointment. Minister Doocey to advise Ministry of preferred action.
Ministry to seek disclosure and agreement to conduct background checks. Background checks to commence upon receipt of consent.
Minor and technical Rule changes consulted on and come into effect
Minute and Paper COVID Response Essential Transport Connectivity ( May )
Minute and Paper proposal to address shortfall in Airfreight Capacity ( March )
Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority.
Mission statement: Identify opportunities and barriers to the uptake and accessibility of low emission vehicles, to support an ambition to increase zero emissions vehicles to percent of the light vehicle fleet by .
Mitch From: Rory Leonard R.Leonardtransport.govt.nz Sent: To: Kim.Marshallnzta.govt.nz; amy.moorheadnzta.govt.nzCc: Tim Herbert t.herberttransport.govt.nz; Mitch Macaulay M.Macaulaytransport.govt.nzSubject: Draft briefing for consultation: PEP and GPS Reporting Hi Amy and Kim, Please find attached an draft briefing, weve made changes based on our conversation yesterday and the feedback you provided Mitch today. If you have any additional feedback please get that across to us by noon tomorrow. With this being due to the Ministers office tomorrow we wont be able to include any feedbackafter then as well need to get this through DCE sign off etc. Thanks heaps for your contribution on this and please let Mitch or I know if you have any questions. All the best, Rory Leonard (hehim) Kaitohutohu Matua Senior Adviser Investment Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport Document Relevant excerpt provided as Document ()(f)(iv) ()(f)(iv) ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT E: r.leonardtransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT OUTPUTS lnc;;reas;e farebox r.ooniry end lhid)any reven.ue by PubUc Tport A.Uhorltlea. LEAOAGENCY TfA.M SUPPORT HOT OvtRALL PlllOORAMP: .. :. NZTA PUBLICTRANSPORT . ,..,, J J.I A, ,q (,I N., , NIOntillyKlflWCptMllf.,. , WIO.,,.IOii .. PUbk .,.,. .,. .,. .,.,.. . . .,.,..,. .. .. tanC)Of.otfr RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: To: Cc: subject: Mitch Macaulay Bcyao Beld nm Herhect RE: PMO Monthly Report: Request to update the July report Wednesday, July Document Attach men ts: imageOOLpng Relevant excerpt Final OC GPS Reporting and Performance and Efficiency Plan Briefing Policy .docx provided as Document From: Victoria Joy Acharya Y Acharyatraosport govt oz Sent: To: Tim Herbert t herberttraosport govt oz; Bryan Field B Eieldtraosport govt oz; Mitch Macaulay M.Macaulaytransport.govt.nz Cc: Tony Frost t.frosttransport.govt.nz Subject: RE: PMO Monthly Report: Request to update the July report Kia ora koutou I want to clarify the projects and programmes that are part of the PMO monthly reports. The sections highlighted in orange are the reports you are responsib le for updating . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Out of Scope GPS Priority Actions Actions in scope of the report: Out of Scope . Public Transport Funding Out of Scope Please feel free to reach out if you have any questions . Nga mihi Victoria Acharya (she I her) Tim Herbert Mitch Macaulay Bryan Field Kaitatari Poronao I Reporting AnalystProgramme Management Office (PMO) ()(a) E: V.Acharyatransport.go vt.nz I transport.govt.nz J From: Victoria Joy Acharya Sent: Wednesday , To: Tim Herbert t.herberttransport.govt.nz ; Bryan Field B.Fieldtransport.govt.nz; Mitch Macaulay M.Macaulaytranspo rt.govt.nz Cc: Tony Frost t.frosttransport.govt.nz Subject: PMO Monthly Report: Request to update the July report Morena koutou This email details the reports and key dates for the July reporting period. We have created an report layout for you from this month. It has been brought to our attention that the Investment team is developing a monthly reporting for the Minister of RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Transport. To minimise any reporting duplication from your team, the scope of the GPS reporting has been to only cover the GPS Priority Actions . This approach was discussed with and approved by David Wood. He also advised that both the Investment and PMIM teams are to contribute to this report. Ive listed the actions for your reference below: . Public Transport Funding The PMO team is keen to support you in making the process easier for you. Please let me know if theres any way I can help you with this (eg. Is there an opportunity for me to prepopulatethe report for you) The reporting templates and guidance are linked for you below: Document titleNotes TARDIS link GPSPriorityActionsThis is thereportingtemplate tobeupdated.For thePMO report,we areafterinformationyou alreadyknowhaveon theactionswhereotheragenciesareinvolved.We are notasking forNZTA tocompletethis report. Out of Scope Out of Scope Out of Scope s ()(k) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT The reports are due to be completed by COB August . Please note that the PMO might be in touch at any point after your submission as part of the QA of the report process. Feel free to get in touch should you have any questions or feedback.Ng mihi Victoria Acharya (she her) Kaittari Prongo Reporting Analyst Programme Management Office (PMO) E: V.Acharyatransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz s ()(a) Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Public transport funding: Increase farebox recovef)I and thirdparty revenue by Public Trans port Authorities . I Action descnpt,on NZTA Public Transport Authorities Minislry of Transport Lead Agency(s) Wooc is underway in three phases to develop and impement initiatives that wiR increase farebox recovery and third party revenue. For clarity, we expect to see an increase in recovery in Phase t our rrent year end results. Recovery will increase over time as new initiatiVes are progressively implemented . complete by December Phase Establih foundations and set interim targets Establish nationally consistent private share definitions, measures, and baselines across all public transport authorities, including data colection and analysis Identify and set interim private share targets vlith each public transport authority Identify and develop initiatives for increasing private share funding for pubic transporl with each pubic transport authority s ()(f)(iv) Document IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Milestones s (f(f)(iv s ()(f)(iv) Page of . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: Andrew Wilson To: Jessica Ranger ; Talia Cohen Wolf ; Adam Lawrence Cc: Liam Fechney ; Chris Young Subject: RE: feedback ideally by midday tomorrow Thursday, October Attachments: image.png Hi Jess, We suggest wording along the lines of the following: Additionally, to implement the GPS direction, NZTA has initiated a programme of work with PTAs focused on increasing private share funding. This includes farebox recovery andthirdparty revenue across all public transport modes. The programme involves settingregionspecific interim targets this year to drive shorterterm improvements, as well asidentifying longerterm initiatives and targets to sustain progress over time. Let me know if any questions. Cheers, Andrew Wilson (hehim) Team Leader Public Transport From: Jessica Ranger J.Rangertransport.govt.nz Sent: To: Talia Cohen Wolf Talia.CohenWolfnzta.govt.nz; Adam LawrenceAdam.Lawrencenzta.govt.nz; Andrew Wilson Andrew.Wilsonnzta.govt.nzCc: Liam Fechney L.Fechneytransport.govt.nz Subject: feedback ideally by midday tomorrow Kia ora Talia and team We have drafted this para and were keen to get your feedback on whether any changes are needed. The briefing is due shortly, so it would be good if we could get any comment fromyou by middayish tomorrow. Additionally, NZTA is currently investigating how to increase the private share (which includes the farebox recovery) across other public transport modes. This work will include setting regionspecific targets that take into account local network design and role. Document s ()(a) Out of Scope Out of Scope s ()(f)(iv) Out of Scope ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT . Auckland and Wellington are likely to have the most ambitious private share targets, given they are our two largest PTAs, and currently and historically have had among the highest private share levels. Ng mihi Jess Jessica Ranger (sheher) Kaiwhakahaere Manager Urban Development and Public Transport Ministry of Transport Te Manat Waka E: j.rangertransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Wellington (Head Office) Ground Floor, Queens Wharf PO Box Wellington NEW ZEALAND Tel: Auckland NZ Government Auckland Policy Office Level , B Victoria Street West PO Box Auckland City Auckland NEW ZEALAND Tel: Disclaimer: This email is only intended to be read by the named recipient. It may contain information which is confidential, proprietary or the subject of legal privilege. If you are not the intended recipient you must delete this email and may not use any information contained in it. Legal privilege is notwaived because you have read this email. Please consider the environment before printing this email. This message, together with any attachments, may contain information that is classified andor subject to legal privilege. Any classification markings must be adhered to. If youare not the intended recipient, you must not peruse, disclose, disseminate, copy or use themessage in any way. If you have received this message in error, please notify usimmediately by return email and then destroy the original message. This communicationmay be accessed or retained by Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency for informationassurance purposes. s ()(a) ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Mitch Macaulay Principal Advisor Investment E: m.macaulaytransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz
MoT Our full name is Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport, then after the first mention you can use the Ministry or MoT.
MoTAnalyticstransport.govt.nz
Mobile phone penalties increased
Mobility market Cars rule, for both personal travel and ridesharing. Travellers purchase customised mobility packages with prepaid allowances to use on different travel modes and services, including bus and rail options.
Mode shift The principle of mode neutrality has receded in GPS with a stronger focus on achieving mode shift, moving people to public transport and active modes for environmental, congestion, public health, and safety benefits. While we support investments aimed at mode shift where these provide demonstrable transport benefits , investments into public transport and active modes cannot be an end in themselves, as these modes will not always improve peoples ability to get places and be fit for purpose transport for the future. We support an approach that chooses the best mode for the task at hand. That needs to be achieved through a transparent and balanced assessment process. Mode shift plans must be realistic abou t the potential for change, transparent , and deliver value for money. Plans need to be based on actual level of desire (not just the stated level of desire) to change modes, and an understanding of why people choose to live and travel the way they do. One important consideration not well captured in GPS is peoples different circumstances, and what they need from the transport system. For example, private vehicles are indispensable for many people due to health reasons or family commitments. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Modifications are also made to the Railways Act and the NZ Railways Corporation Act to allow KiwiRail a shorter notice period when undertaking recovery works.
Modifications to the Resource Management Act , the Conservation Act , the Wildlife Act , the Reserves Act and the Freshwater Fisheries Regulations , are in relation to truncating the process for making an application, the level of detail required, and the decisionmaking frameworks.
Monday September Officials Attending: TBC up to four from MoT and NZTA Tuesday September and Friday September .am .am Meetings with the Hugo Group in Auckland and Wellington Briefing Due: Friday September Officials Attending : NA
Monday September Wednesday September
Monitoring and evaluating the delivery and impact of the GPS is important to:
Monitoring and tracking of outcomes going forward requires an enduring investment stream to support.
Monitoring arrangements for transport sector Crown entities
Monthly Motor Vehicle fleet
Monthly Motor Vehicle registrations
Monthly airline on time performance data contains details of arrivals, departures and cancellations for jet services across New Zealands main domestic and transTasman routes.
Monthly registrations makemodel
More broadly, I would like to thank you for the close engagement that the MIA has maintained with me and my officials over the past few years. We are exploring new territory in New Zealand with proposals like the Clean Car Standard, the Clean Car Discount, and the Euro VI proposals, and your willingness to engage constructively on these matters h as been a critical part of ensuring the policy is robust and properly thought through.
More details can be found in the following documents:
More information about how NZ Police will implement and enforce the Act can be found on their website:
More information about the RNIP can be found
More information and questions for you to consider can be found in the consultation document.
More information and related documents
More information can be found on the
More information for consumers and vehicle dealers is available from the
More information for vehicle dealers is available from the
More information is available on the NZTA website
More information on NZUP can be found on
More information on the Phase report, and the wider review, can be found at
More renewal work will take place at night on SH between Trigg Road and Tapu Road from Monday September to Friday October . During this time, the highway will be partially open with a stop go in place.
More templates are being developed and will be available soon.
More than of the panel members identified a lack of confidence in their safety as the biggest barrier to having selfdriving cars on the roads. Residents of Auckland were more likely to feel safe and be receptive to selfdriving cars than other regions.
More than people representing government agencies and the private sector attended the forum.
Most heavy vehicles did not pay more
Most of our imports and exports move by sea . percent of New Zealands export goods by
Most of the documents relating to the evaluation process are confidential as they contain commercially sensitive information about the contents of the proposals.
Most small and mediumheavy vehicles of more than . tonnes and up to tonnes had increases of between zero and .
Most taxi companies, rental car companies, tourism operators and aviation operators who do not run scheduled services will not be eligible. Tourism operators may be eligible for the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employments tourism recovery package.
Motor Industry Association
Motor vehicle registration and licensing fees Motor vehicles pay a registration fee when first registered to enter the fleet, and an annual licence fee to legally operate on the road network. Motor vehicle
Ms Jennifer Page Company Secretary Air New Zealand Limited Private Bag AUCKLAND Dear Ms Page With reference to Article .(a) of the Constitution of Air New Zealand Limited, notice is hereby given that I, Kiri Allan , Associate Minister of Transport, am henceforth the person entitled to exercise the rights and powers of the Kiwi Shareholder in Air New Zealand Limited on behalf of the Crown. Yours sincerely
Mt Messenger and Awakino Gorge projects
Multi sentence lists are introduced by a complete sentence. Each point in the list is also a complete sentence . Each point can be sentences long. Each point begins with a capital letter and ends with a full stop.
Multiple other roles in Wellington and NZ wide groups (including a number of Chair roles) in business or community groups, education, arts and youth.
Multiple packages of work were evaluated, using a value for money framework using the following method: Value for money assessments considered both network wide effects and isolating the contribution of projects at a subregional level, through an assessment of their impact on throughput and travel times relative to cost. These proxies for value for money were used to identify projects worth taking forward into the next round of evaluation.
My mahi and role is coming to an end at MoT this Friday.
My people who gave evidence on both resource consent applications years ago included Rapiata Ria (Senior), Nona Haronga, Kingi Smiler, Peter Gordon, Vivienne Pohatu and Nuna Wyllie. I met with them all and recorded their evidence, and was there when the evidence was presented in the independent commissioner led committee and the Planning Tribunal before Judge Turner.
M pango, m whero, ka oti te mahi By black and red together, it is done This whakatauk refers to the collaborative effort of leaders (rangatira represented by the colour red) and volunteersworkers (represented by the colour black) coming together to get the work done. It is a powerful appeal calling for volunteers, and acknowledging the role of rangatira in uniting people. We draw on this whakatauk to reflect the coming together of the two systems, Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue which both have strong leaders and volunteers working together for the wellbeing of people.SECTION THREE CONNECTING THE SYSTEMS TOGETHER Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue . The Review was tasked to deliver outcomes and measures for the recreational safety and the search and rescue systems, to support the systems to meet current and future community, national, and international needs and responsibilities. . Through the work of the Review and in discussion with our Advisory Group, we: observed the organic growth of the two systems over the past years, and the growing intersection between them, including the Forums, the organisations, and people involved. We reflected on the pipeline of safety services delivered between them to support the health and wellbeing of New Zealand covering the land, water and air explored the strategies and strategic plans of a range of organisations and Forums some of which were developing and evolving. We observed significant synergies between them in what they are trying to achieve. We also reflected on earlier reports commissioned by the NZSAR Council which recognised the connection between recreational safety and search and rescue, including recommendations around a joint strategy considered how to give effect to the Crowns obligations under Te Tiriti o Waitangi by ensuring the design and development of the proposed System, and System Strategy, reflect Te Ao Mori perspectives, knowledge and tikanga identified the opportunity to draw on a Te Ao Mori world view through the Wai Puna model, and its alignment to the Rs of emergency management, reflecting the synergies between them. We explored how they might best come together to form the foundation of a strategic framework for the combined systems. . New Zealands Search and Rescue Governance Review () and the Haight Report Reducing SAR Responses ().Findings and recommendations In response, we make the following recommendations: . Connect the recreational safety and the search and rescue systems together to better reflect the pipeline of safety services provided across the systems to support wellbeing (waiora and mauriora) and safer recreation. . Finalise and implement a System Strategy Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai supporting peoples wellbeing (waiora and mauriora) and safer recreation from the mountains to the sea to connect the systems together, harness the power of the collective, and to inspire and guide the organisations involved. . Develop a set of values within the System Strategy reflecting the Wai Puna model in alignment with Te Tiriti o Waitangi and the shared responsibility for the System. . Develop measures and confirm the data required for those measures to report progress on the System Strategy, and address any gaps. CONNECTING THE SYSTEMS TOGETHER Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue . Connecting the systems together reflects the growing intersection between them, the organisations involved, and the pipeline of critical safety services they provide. As part of the Review, we also took a peoplecentric approach, preparing a series of customer journey maps to examine the experiences of people who became customers of recreational safety and search and rescue services. . Taking a peoplecentric view, allowed us to reflect on the pipeline of safety services provided across the systems together, to support people to head outdoors to recreate and head home safely, helping them avoid distressing incidents or minimise the impact of them should they occur. This includes search and rescue operations where a person becomes lost, missing, andor in distress. . The draft System Strategy developed through the Review provides the foundation to connect the systems together. The System will be supported by revised governance and leadership arrangements including the appointment of Te Manat Waka as the System Steward (discussed in Section Four). . From the System perspective, we want New Zealanders and visitors to Aotearoa to head outdoors to connect, recreate and operate in te taiao i.e., outdoors with knowledge, skills, attitudes, and behaviours to do so safely. This means that sufficient focus needs to be put on harm prevention services i.e., the knowledge, skills, attitudes and behaviours that people need to stay safe to support a reduction in the number and severity of search and rescue incidents. . However, we know that it is not possible or reasonable to eliminate all risks, and from the System perspective search and rescue of people who are lost, missing andor in distress will always be needed no matter the activity or who is involved. Recommendation : Connect the systems together The System Kaupapa Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai supporting safer recreation from the mountains to the sea. The System Kaupapa depicts the coming together of two cresting waves, which we use to symbolise the recreational safety and the search and rescue systems. The core business of these systems is to support wellbeing waiora and mauriora. It also represents the coming together of two worlds Te Ao Mori (tangata whenua) and Te Ao Pkeh (tangata tiriti): acknowledging the MoriCrown relationship and honoring Te Tiriti o Waitangi; and blending the Wai Puna model and the Rs of emergency management together.RECREATIONAL SAFETY SEARCH AND RESCUE . A customer journey map provides a visual storyline of events focused on the emotions customers, in this case of recreational safety and search and rescue services, feel before, during and after the journey they have taken. . Further information about the customer journey work explored through the Review is attached at Appendix . CONNECTING THE SYSTEMS TOGETHER Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue . Search and rescue is provided with no fear or favour in New Zealand and across the NZSRR. This includes search and rescue for: people recreating in Aotearoa in, on, and around the water, on the land, and in the air commercial entities conducting sporting events and adventure activities for hire and reward businesses commercial airlines; fishing vessels, and other maritime vessels who require assistance. . As a country, we must continually uphold the mana of search and rescue locally, nationally, and internationally supporting wellbeing outcomes at home and globally in accordance with our international obligations. Wai Puna explained . The Wai Puna model is at the heart of the System Kaupapa. A Wai Puna approach is about strengthening ones connection to the wai (water) and the whenua (land) through tikanga (behaviours, skills), mtauranga (knowledge) and whakapapa (attitudes, beliefs, identity). Connecting to the environment encourages safer recreation resulting in positive health outcomes, supporting waiora and mauriora (thriving and flourishing people). . The Wai Puna imagery depicts a rain drop and two ripples, reflecting the analogy of three puna (wellsprings) of knowledge that are transmitted from one generation to the next to keep people safe and well. The rain drop symbolises the mtpuna (source, origin), the inner ripple is the tpuna (ancestor) and the outer ripple depicts the mokopuna (grandchildren). Each puna represents the pillars of whakapapa, mtauranga and tikanga respectively. . The pillars of the Wai Puna follow a cyclic nature and a ripple effect like the anatomy of a wave. A wave starts as ripples that gain energy to develop into a chop and then into a wave over time, growing larger as they move through the water. The wave will crest and crash, but it then rebuilds again from momentum and potential. Through the System, we need to continue building on momentum and the potential of others to ensure success. Whakapapa The first drop or mtpuna The source Mtauranga The inner ripple or tpuna The traditional knowledge Tikanga The outer ripple, or mokopuna The application of knowledgeThe Wai Puna model The three core pillars as they pertain to wai: CONNECTING THE SYSTEMS TOGETHER Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue . Each phase of the harm prevention and search and rescue pipeline is an opportunity to learn and grow from, much like the wave that cycles back again. A System approach explained through Wai Puna and the Rs of Emergency Management . We have adapted the Wai Puna model for the System, which resonates with the Rs of emergency management. Readiness and Reduction the activities people engage in to prepare themselves to head outdoors and head home safely, including knowing what to do if they get into trouble to avoid or minimise harm. Recovery and Response the delivery of frontline safety services and search and rescue to support those who are lost, missing andor in distress, and to return them to a place of safety. . In Te Ao Mori, the cresting wave also lends itself to other important symbolism around the water including huktai (sea foam) and rehutai (sea spray). Huktai and rehutai are metaphors taken from a canoe in passage on the sea. The sea foam or wake by the canoe in motion symbolises the pursuit of knowledge transforming into wisdom, with accumulated knowledge, practice and experiences coming together. CONNECTING THE SYSTEMS TOGETHER Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue The connection between Wai Puna and the Rs of Emergency Management Papatnuku I Earth Mother To support wellbeing, the Wai Puna model of Whakapapa, Mtauranga, and Tikanga, is represented hereRanginui I Sky Father Aligns with the Rs of Emergency Management Reduction, Readiness, Response and Recovery Tikanga is about having the right skills, behaviour, and practices needed to safely connect, recreate, and operate in the outdoors. Tikanga derives from the root word tika meaning to be correct, true or right. It forms a crucial part of the Reduction and Readiness stage of the Systems pipeline. Reduction involves eliminating or avoiding the risks of harm injury where practicable, and also focuses on reducing the likelihood of the risk andor the magnitude of its impact. Readiness refers to how prepared people are (their skills and practice) and how prepared the System is to respond to an event or incident. Mtauranga is about the knowledge needed to ensure ones safety. Mtauranga derives from two words mtau meaning to know or understand and ranga meaning to raise up or pull up by the roots. It forms a crucial part of the Readiness and Response stages of the Systems pipeline. Readiness again refers to the preparation of people who head outdoors to connect, recreate, and operate. But also, in relation to organisations and people delivering services in the System (their knowledge and preparation). Response refers to the specific actions taken in response to an event or incident; how the System responds.Whakapapa is about the physical and spiritual connection to the taiao that provides a sense of belonging, safety and wellbeing. Whakapapa derives from the root word papa meaning foundation, base or ground. It also reflects Papatnuku, the earth and land. It forms a crucial part of the Response and Recovery stages of the pipeline. Response and recovery are about returning loved ones home, back to their whakapapa, with dignity, respect, and integrity. Recovery refers to the action of returning loved ones home by search and rescue responders. But also, the time afterward, as the whnau, community, responders and environment enter a period of healing and recovery. At the heart of the system is Wai Puna Reduction Readiness Response RecoveryRanginui Whakapapa Mtauranga TikangaPapatnuku CONNECTING THE SYSTEMS TOGETHER Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Recommendation : Finalise and implement the draft System Strategy OUTCOME TWO Our services support the safe return of loved ones to their whnau and friendsOUTCOME THREE Competent providers deliver services safely and effectivelyOUTCOME FOUR New Zealanders and our partners have trust and confidence in what we doOUTCOME FIVE Effective system stewardship underpinned by accountability, cohesion, and partnership at all levelsOUTCOME ONE People have the knowledge, skills and experience to take personal responsibility for the outdoor activity they are doingSystem Strategy at a glance WHAKAPAPA Recovery Response MTAURANGA Reduction TIKANGA ReadinessPURPOSE The System Kaupapa is Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai supporting peoples wellbeing (waiora and mauriora) and safer recreation from the mountains to the sea VISION Everyone connecting, recreating and operating in, on and around the air, water and land comes home safely MISSION Enabling people to connect, recreate and operate in the outdoors with the skills and knowledge to do it safely. Safely rescuing, recovering and returning loved ones home with respect and dignity System Strategy at a glance . Through the work of the Review we have developed the draft System Strategy to connect the systems together, harness the power of the collective, and to inspire and guide the organisations and people within it. The draft System Strategy at a glance is provided above. . The draft System Strategy in full is attached at Appendix . Finalisation and implementation of the System Strategy is discussed in Section Four. CONNECTING THE SYSTEMS TOGETHER Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue . Across the System, services are delivered by government, nongovernment, and local government organisations, and marae, hap and iwi, who have a range of interests and multiple roles in the System. The Strategy itself is dependent on organisations involved working together, bringing their respective skills, capabilities and relationships to bear to deliver wellbeing outcomes for people connecting, recreating, and operating across the NZSRR. . The identification of values to include within the System Strategy will be a critical addition to the Strategy. These values will need to act as a compass over the longterm to inform collective behaviours, ways of working, decisionmaking and the shared delivery of outcomes. Values are more than words on a page and will need to be lived in action within the System. . The principles of Te Tiriti o Waitangi and the pillars of Wai Puna should be the springboard for future values discussions.Recommendation : Develop System values . The System Steward will be responsible for understanding and reporting on the performance of the System through the outcomes identified. Work to confirm the impacts and indicators in the Strategy, and work to identify the associated measures and data sources required to report progress, will be critical. The development of measures and data sources will be an iterative process over the longerterm. . The establishment of the System Strategy is not a set and forget exercise and it will require periodic review to be led by the System Steward. We reflect that the mauri (lifeforce) of the System will continue to adapt and evolve including activities within the System informed by data, research and intelligence, and new conditions as they emerge.Recommendation : Measure System performance . Indicators and measures are essential to help central and local government, funders, commercial entities, and the public understand the value of the System, the outcomes it delivers and the return on the investment provided. SECTION HEADING HERE Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Revised governance and leadership arrangements
Mori English Mia Bold Ngkaunui Invested Mahi ngtahi Collaborative Minita Minister Kaitohutohu Adviser Uiuinga Consultation Hui Meeting Ptitanga Election Hh riri Frustratedangry Whakarongo To listen Krero To speak Ptea Finance Ture Lawrule Taiao Environment Ora Wellbeing mra Email Rorohiko pnaho Laptop Waea pkoro Cell phone Khini Kitchen Whar paku Toilet Huarahi rori Road Taraka Truck Tereina Train Pahi Bus Waka rererangi Aeroplane Motok waka Car Waka hiko Electric vehicle Motopaika Motorbike Kutarere Scooter Paihikara Bicycle
Mori and Council engagement
Mori have always seen the value of travel and exploration.
NA NA note that officials will confirm the outcome of your decision in this paper to the Civil Aviation Authority , so it can finalise its Statement of Performance Expectations before the statutory deadline of June .
NA NA RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of CIVIL AVIATION AUTHORITY EXPENDITURE IN . On April , Joint Ministers ( Transport and Finance) agreed detailed financial recommendations for Budget initiatives , including conditions on how the Civil Aviation Authority (the Authority) and Maritime New Zealand (MNZ ) can use the funds from the Protection of Transport Sector Agency Core Functions appropriation (liquidity facility) in i.e., that the actual funding provided to the Authority (including Avsec) from the Protection of Transport Sector Agency Core Functions appropriation will be the difference between f orecast expenditure for core functions for the Authority, and revenue forecast to be received in , up to a specified amount agreed by the Minister of Transport and the Associate Minister of Transport (which will be no more than the total amount of the appropriation available for the Authority); that the specified amount described in the recommendation above will be set by the Minister of Transport and the Associate Minister of Transport prior to the finalisation of the Authoritys Statement of Per formance Expectations , and the setting of the specified amount will take into account the latest available information on actual expenditure and revenue for and forecast expenditure and revenue for . . In line with the se financial rec ommendations, w e have worked with the Authority to determine what the specified amount should be in i.e., the maximum amount of expenditure that the Authority should be eligible for in , including the level of funding it can receive from its liquidity facility appropriation . . A specified amount is required for two reasons: to enable Te Manat Waka, as the administrator of the liquidity facility appropriation, to assess if the Authority is using Crown funding appropriately; and to limit the Authority s expenditure to a prudent level. This is importan t because: .. .. the funding review is undertaking a programme of work to determine baseline staffing levels i.e., the capability and capacity required by the Authority to undertake its functions ; .. any sustained increases to staffing and expenditure approved by Cabinet before the completion of the funding review, will be included in the new funding model for cost recovery from the sector. Te Manat Waka and t he Authority recommend that the specified a mount for is set at .m . We seek your joint agreement to set the specified amount at .m . The majority of this amount (.m or ) would be funded by the Authoritys levies revenue , with the remaining .m funded by the liquidity facility appropriation which will fund the difference between the Authoritys forecast expenditure for core functions, and revenue forecast to be received in . s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of . Officials have assessed the proposed specified amount , taking into consideration the latest available information on actual expenditure and revenue for , forecast expenditure and revenue for , and the total amount of the appropriation available for the Authority . We note that: There is sufficient funding in the Protection of Transport Sector Agency Core Functions appropriation in : .. Based on current expectations of the Authoritys revenue this will be sufficient to fund the .m difference between forecast expenditure and reven ue for . .. We note that s ignificant decreases in passenger activity would require additional Crown support although, at the time of writing, volumes were holding at around percent and around percent of pre COVID domestic and international passenger levels . The overall expenditure level of .m is consistent with the Authoritys draft Statement of Performance Expectations (SPE) and its Budget bid .. We note that Te Manat Waka officials have assessed the Author itys draft SPE, and that Minister Allan has provided feedback on the document for the Authority to consider ahead of its finalisation . .. The Budget bid was also assessed by Te Manat Waka officials , as well as Treasury officials and joint Ministers Two unforeseen cost pressures have emerged since March : .. The Civil Aviation Act was enacted in March , giving the Authority and Te Manat Waka two years for implementation, a timeframe that was not anticipated in its Budget bid which assumed enactment in . .. In addition , the Authority is returning to market for the fitout of its offices at Asteron House, delaying the reoccupation of its head office and leading to an increased lease costs for its temporary offices. .. These cost pressures have resulted in an .m increase from the expenditure level provided in the Authoritys Budget bid. We do not consider this increase to be material and note that, where possible, t he Authority has sought to mitigate unforeseen cost increases . . Notably the Authority has offset .m, by adopting the latest BEB moderate forecast in its own forecasting projecting higher international passenger activity levels that increase the Authoritys forecast revenue in . The proposed amount will enable the Authority to deliver its core functions in the coming financial year, and the activities outlined in its draft SPE: .. The Authority has made commitments in its draft SPE to continue its work to become a modern regulator ; enable the Civil Aviation Act to come into force within two years ; meet New Zealands international obligations including RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of achieving ICAOs audit requirements ; and regulate emerging technology developments in a timely manner . There is a risk that an unexpected shock, andor the emergence of other unforeseen costs could arise: .. In this instance , the financial recommendations for Budget enable unexpected shocks and or unforeseen costs to be covered by the liquidity facility i.e., the specified amount you both agre e to in this paper may subsequently be adjusted subject to the join t agreement of Transport Ministers and the Minister of Finance. Next steps . Officials will confirm the outcome of your decision in this paper to the Authority, so it can finalise its Statement of Performance Expectations before the statutory deadline of June . . As noted above, Joint Ministers are also required to agree on the maxi mum amount of expenditure that MNZ is eligible for, from the liquidity facility, in . This advice will be provided to you separately and in accordance with the financial recommendations for Budget prior to the finalisation of MNZs Statemen t of Performance Expectations .
NBA and SPA introduced to Parliament and referred to NBA and SPA enacted select committee
NETWORK Bay of Plenty Regional Transport Committee The Bay of Plenty R egional Transport Committee (of which KiwiRail is a member) heard a public presentation on the benefits of public transport planning for potential inter regional services in Bay of Plenty (Hamilton Tauranga) and intra regional services (within Bay of Plenty). The committee agreed to include provision for a co funded (with NLTF) detailed business case on potential passenger rail services in its Regional Land Transport Plan. KiwiRail expressed support for the approach on the basis that no decisions can be taken without informed planning and cost benefit assessments.
NLTF Crown funded expenditure , , , , , ,
NLTF revenue to rise from . billion
NLTF was identified as only one part of the transport dollar, limiting the reach of the GPS signals into transport funding. And at an even wider scale, transport funding for mode s hift was recognised as needing to be coordinated with other mode shift drivers, such as land use, to optimise the synergies between them. Recommendation : Greater strategic alignment between transport funds to increase the mode shift benefits from NLTF in vestment and reduce potential adverse impacts. There is also a need for greater coordination and alignment with current changes in land use priorities and policies. Councils ability to contribute funds was constrained by their non transport spending need s and political buy in, limiting the scale of activities that could be put forward even if NLTF dollars were available. The current prioritisation and funding methods were considered to favour larger councils and focus on congestion and emission reduction (per the specified investment strategy within GPS ). This was evident in the TIO analysis demonstrating a higher proportion of mode shift promoting funding in the largest city, Auckland. However, the range of mode shift promoting activities appropriat e in smaller councils was considered narrower. In addition, smaller populations meant the opportunity for large mode shifts was less relative to larger, more urban councils. In this evaluation, mode shift was also valued for improving access to viable tran sport options and through transport to participation in society, contributing to equitable wellbeing outcomes. Recommendation : Recognise and value the mode shift benefits of accessibility in Regional and provincial settings, alongside emissions and congestion reduction in urban areas. Can we achieve the outcomes While there has been an increase in the proportion of mode shift promoting activities since following the GPS, achieving the outcome of meaningful mode shift will likely require a subst antially greater increase in mode shift promoting activities within the NLTP. The current funding model means the operation and maintenance of the current road network take up most of the available NLTF capital, limiting the ability to change direction sub stantially. However, because of the typical lag between a GPS and measuring the outcomes from invested activities, the extent of impact will remain unclear for several years. This will depend on the scale of the project. Observing changes on the pathway t o outcomes should provide useful information on progress towards mode shift, however, and provide insights on which investments are most likely to achieve the desired mode shift outcome (that is, provide value for money). The SUM benchmarking model could provide the basis for a national approach to monitoring across all investment types: the inputs (such as policies and funding allocat ions) and outputs (such as spending and infrastructure levels of service) that contribute to the desired outcomes. Recommendation : Improve the ability to monitor progress towards mode shift within the transport investment and operations system (inputs, o utputs, and outcomes) and respond to opportunities to optimise mode shift within the existing network, for example, through temporary changes in infrastructure and responding to emerging trends, such as the impact of Covid on travel patterns and behaviours , electrification of the fleet, remote working and so on. Evaluations of investment need to account for the time lag between investment, construction and use and include measures of inputs and outputs that cover all modes. . STUDY PHASES
NLTF, to support metro and interregional rail services
NONSCHEDULEDCHARTER AIR SERVICES
NOTE: Some other international examples identified during the literature review include Axelos, the UK Office of Government Commerce (OGC), the Investment Logic Mapping (ILM) process developed by the Victoria State Government and Managing Benefits by APMG. Literature Summary
NOTE: this list does not include briefings that accompany responses to Official Information Act requests either Minister receives, nor briefings relating to the proactive release of documents.
NZ Infra unsolicited bid to deliver CCM received
NZ Port Company CEOs Group
NZ Representative APEC Business Advisory Council (ABAC)
NZ TRANSPORT AGENCY WAKA KOTAHI NLTP DECISION LETTER Public Transport (incr easing private share of expenditure)
NZ TRANSPORT AGENCY WAKA KOTAHI NLTP DECISION LETTER Chief Executive RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I
NZ TRANSPORT AGENCY WAKA KOTAHI NLTP DECISION LETTER Attachment Specific Requirements relating to Ministerial expectations: reporting requirements, and private share of public transport expenditure. . Specific Requirements: This document sets out other requirements permitted by the existing approval terms and conditions ( General Terms) that apply to funding from the National Land Transport Fund during the National Land Transport Programme period (Specific Requirements). . Description: These Specific Requirements: . relate to Ministerial expectations set out in the Government Policy Statement on land transport ( GPS ); . need to be read together with the September letter from the chief executive of NZTA to each approved organisation with the heading National Land Transport Programme Final Decisions which refers to how NZTA will apply the Ministerial expectations to approved organisations; . apply to all relevant approved activities (and their associated funding approvals) carried out by an approved organisation and NZTA (for its own activities); . must be complied with as a condition of receiving funding from the NLTF during the NLTP period for the relevant approved activities; and . apply from October (although NZTA will take into account when notice of these requirements was given to a relevant organisation and when the Reporting Schedule (referred to in clause . below) first became available or included relevant reporting details). . Review: These Specific Requirements reflect that the relevant Ministerial expectations may require approved organisations and NZTA (for its own activities) to add to, or change, existing approaches, and arrangements (including with third party suppliers) and that a reasonable period will be required for this to occur. NZTA intends to monitor progress during FY and may review (and update or add to) these Specific Requirements (andor the associated reporting) to ensure that they remain appropriate for the relevant Ministerial expectations. . Reporting: . Approved organisations and NZTA (for its own activities) must: (a) provide reports relating to (and on its level of achievement against) each Specific Requirement and other Ministerial expectations, including as described in Reporting Schedule; and (b) monitor, collect and retain all information (including by reference to relevant time periods) reasonably required to support the reporting required by the Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
NZ TRANSPORT AGENCY WAKA KOTAHI NLTP DECISION LETTER Reporting Schedule that relates to the Specific Requirements and other Ministerial expectations. . NZTA will provide fuller detail about reporting in a separate document to be called the Reporting Schedule (or something similar). The Reporting Schedule will be made available via NZTAs website. The Reporting Schedule may be or replaced from time to time and will set out (by reference to each Specific Requirement and other Ministerial expectation) details about the following, in each case as reasonably provided for by NZTA: (a) the for delivery of the first report, the frequency of that report and the relevant period it needs to cover (e.g. monthly, quarterly or annually); (b) the format of the report, how the report is to be delivered (e.g. which reporting tool or process) and the content of the report (e.g. expenditure and revenue; activity volume, type, and location; actual performance against baseline, prior performance and target performance; and reasons for under performance). . The frequency, format, content, and delivery of reports may differ between Specific Requirements and other Ministerial expectations and may also differ across different time periods. . For convenience, the Reporting Schedule may also be used by NZTA to specify other matters on which NZTA would like approved organisations to report, including so that NZTA can meet other reporting and information requests made of it by the Minister (e.g. monthly reporting on the percentage of the sealed local road network in lane kilometres with resealed and resurfaced pavement and rehabilitated pavement). . NZTA expects that, wherever possible, existing reporting tools and processes will be used for this reporting (e.g. Programme Monitor, Transport Investment Online, end of year achievement returns and via regular reporting to and by the Road Efficiency Group, including via the Transport Insights web portal). . These Specific Requirements relate to the following: Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Out of Scope Approved Activities relevant to Public Transport (Share of Expenditure) Ministerial Approved Activity and Specific Requirement Expectation Funding Approval Specific Public Transport (i) Actively work towards expectations Services increasing the private share relating to public Public Transport of public transport transport Infrastructure expenditure on an annual basis (e.g. ensuring passenger fares and third party revenue covers a greater portion of public transport expenditure). (ii) Actively engage with NZTA to agree and set interim private share targets by December and lonaer NZ TRANSPORT AGENCY WAKA KOTAHI NLTP DECISION LETTER RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Ministerial Approved Activity and Specific Requ irement Expectation Funding Approval term targets by Decembe r . (iii) Demonstrate support for the National Ticketing Solution and actively work towards delivering and operating the National Ticketing Solution in partnership with NZTA, including by meeting NZTA fares and pricing requirements set out in the development guidelines for regional public transport plans. The primary relevant Ministerial expectation has been listed. A Specific Requirement may also be relevant to other Ministerial expectations set out in the GPS. A Specific Requirement may also be relevant to other approved activities and funding approvals that include, or relate to, the same content. . The Specific Requirements apply in addition to the General Terms and do not limit them, or NZTAs powers under them. . NZTA may at any time impose other specific requirements (and associated reporting) for approved activities and funding approvals (including for other Ministerial expectations set out in the GPS). NZ TRANSPORT AGENCY WAKA KOTAHI NLTP DECISION LETTER RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Attachment Reporting schedule The required content of the quarterly report on Ministerial expectations and specific requirements is set out in the table below. This applies for the quarter October to December . Unless otherwise advised or , this applies to subsequent quarter reports . Unless otherwise advised, the quarterly report shall be provided by the th of the month after the end of the quarter. Supporting delivery on the Minister of What was achieved in the Method of Transport s expectations outline in GPS Specific requirements quarter collection or reporting A focus on delivery Selfreport : Word documen t Approved organisations are expected to: red unlikely to meet expectation template demonstrate contribution of their orange tracking towards proposed activities to the GPS strategic expectation priorities and GPS expectations. green likely to meet expectation actively seek to progress and deliver their Unable to assess insufficient funded activities in line with the GPS information expectations. ensure their business cases are focussed Narrative comment is required: on the primary transport objective(s) of One sentence on each bullet their projects, are completed in a timely point may be sufficient where fashion to control costs and deliver on the reporting compliance. An example strategic priorities of the GPS. can be given to demonstrate maintain a tight control on the scope and compliance. cost of their projects and adopt a no If reporting noncompliance , give frills approach. (GPS gives explanation. examples of no frills and NZTA is RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Supporting delivery on the Minister of What was achieved in the Method of Transport s expectations outline in GPS Specific requirements quarter collection or reporting considering providing further guidance around this approach). A focus on core business Selfreport red orange green grey Word document Road controlling authorities are expected to: template act primarily as delivery agencies Narrative comment is required on (alongside NZTA), recognising that the how the Approved Organisat ion is Ministry of Transport is to lead the focusing on its core delivery role. oversight and development of policy for New Zealands transport system. A focus on value for money Selfreport red orange green grey Word document Approved organisations are expected to: template choose the most advantageous Narrative comment is required on combination of whole of life cost and the first, third and fourth bullet infrastructure quality to meet a no frills points. specificat ion that delivers the primary One sentence on each bullet transport objective of the project in the point may be sufficient where most costeffective manner. This requires reporting compliance. An example identifying the projects primary can be given to demonstrate objectives and will affect option selection. compliance. (NZTA is currently revising its guidance in If reporting noncompliance, give this regard). explanation. Reporting monitor its operational expenditure to expenditure ensure that it is achieving value for Report expenditure for the quarter continues to be money and that it can deliver within for each activity class in via Transport approved NLTF funding approvals. accordance with NTLF investment NZ TRANSPORT AGENCY WAKA KOTAHI NLTP DECISION LETTER RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Supporting delivery on the Minister of What was achieved in the Method of Transport s expectations outline in GPS Specific requirements quarter collection or reporting focus on providing services that meet the Claims and Obligations Policy Investmen t needs and expectations of users. National Land TransQort Fund Online. in the case it has approved funding for a Investmen t Claims and road safety promotion programme, will Obligations Polic:t I NZ TransQort identify the most cost effective and Agenc:t Waka Kotahi Forecasting future beneficial method for carrying out that (nzta.govt.nz). expenditure programme . This may be supporting Report forecast expenditure for continues to be national advertising, rather than engaging the rest of the NLTP period for via the in regional or local advertising and only each activity class. Programme engaging in advertising where necessary . Monitor. Report on effectiveness of completed road safety promotion Word document activities template Ou orscope NZ TRANSPORT AGENCY WAKA KOTAHI NLTP DECISION LETTER RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Supporting delivery on the Minister of What was achieved in the Method of Transport s expectations outline in GPS Specific requirements quarter collection or reporting Jut of Scope Consider other revenue sources and other Selfreport red orange green grey Word documen t funding and delivery models template Approved organisations are expected to: Narrative comment is required. NZ TRANSPORT AGENCY WAKA KOTAHI NLTP DECISION LETTER RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Supporting delivery on the Minister of What was achieved in the Method of Transport s expectations outline in GPS Specific requirements quarter collection or reporting consider relevant funding and financing One sentence on each bullet options in relation to each of their point may be sufficient where projects. reporting compliance. An example consider relevant sources of third party can be given to demonstrate funding in relation to their projects and compliance. actively pursue those deemed suitable If reporting noncompliance , give and include in each projects funding mix. explanation. consider relevant delivery models that represents value for money and balance appropria te levels of risk and timely delivery. ourorscope NZ TRANSPORT AGENCY WAKA KOTAHI NLTP DECISION LETTER RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Supporting delivery on the Minister of Transports expectations outline in GPS Out of Scope NZ TRANSPORT AGENCY WAKA KOTAHI Specific requirements What was achieved in the quarter Method of collection or reporting NLTP DECISION LETTER RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Supporting delivery on the Minister of What was achieved in the Method of Transport s expectations outline in GPS Specific requirements quarter collection or reporting Out of Scope Specific expectations relating to public transport Public transport authorities are expected to: (i) Actively work towards Report baseline private share of Word document actively work towards increasing farebox increasing the private public transport expenditure for and Excel recovery by June . This includes share of public transport for total PT services in template operating within approved funding of expenditure on an annual accordance with NZTAs advice public transport continuous programmes , basis (e.g. ensuring note to PTAs Increasing the reviewing services that are delivering passenger fares and thirdprivate share of public transport very low farebox recovery and party revenue covers a expenditure dated August . considering appropriate fares. greater portion of public support and actively work towards transport expenditure) . Report private share of public transition to, delivery of and operation of transport expenditure for the the National Ticketing Solution in (ii) Actively engage with quarter. Provide an explanation if partnership with NZTA. This includes NZTA to agree and set there has been a decrease during aligning concessionary fare structures interim private share the quarter. with national policy to make the National targets by December Word document Ticketing Solution cost effective and and longerterm Identify initiatives taken during the and Excel value for money for customers . targets by December quarter to increase private share. template . NZ TRANSPORT AGENCY WAKA KOTAHI NLTP DECISION LETTER RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Supporting delivery on the Minister of What was achieved in the Method of Transport s expectations outline in GPS Specific requirements quarter collection or reporting Narrative comment is required on Word documen t (iii) Demonstrate support for steps taken by the PTA to support and Excel the National Ticketing the NTS. template Solution and actively work towards delivering and operating the National Ticketing Solution in partnership with NZTA, including by meeting NZTA fares and pricing requirements set out in the development guidelines for regional public transport plans. Authorised person from Approved Organisation to signoff report. If unable to report on a Ministerial expectation, please provide an explanation. NZ TRANSPORT AGENCY WAKA KOTAHI NLTP DECISION LETTER RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Document .Some rouah notes from the meetina wLthJhe Total Mobilitv coordinator iust..now .. Jhe..vre not..comorehensive .. Out of Scope Out of Scope There was a question re farebox recovery from Total Mobility (as it falls under public transport activity class). Adam Lawrence of NZTA response was that TM is considered searately from bus. train. ferry private share. Out of Scope Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
NZ Transport Agency Waka Kotah
NZ Upgrade Programme kept on track Beehive.govt.nz
NZ Upgrade Programme, which pledged more than NZD billion for rail projects in early .
NZ should review high priority elements of the MTA and Maritime Security Act (the Review). Gaps
NZAA submission: Government Policy Statement on Land Transport of
NZAA submission: Government Policy Statement on Land Transport of
NZAA submission: Government Policy Statement on Land Transport of
NZAA submission: Government Policy Statement on Land Transport of
NZAA submission: Government Policy Statement on Land Transport of
NZAA submission: Government Policy Statement on Land Transport of
NZAA submission: Government Policy Statement on Land Transport of
NZAA submission: Government Policy Statement on Land Transport of
NZAA submission: Government Policy Statement on Land Transport of
NZAA submission: Government Policy Statement on Land Transport of
NZD million for new railway stations in Drury, along with park and ride facilities.
NZD million to complete Aucklands third main rail line, removing a key bottleneck for freight and passenger services, and providing additional capacity for the increased services once the City Rail Link is completed.
NZD million to electrify the railway track between Papakura to Pukekohe, speeding up trips to the CBD. The addition of new platforms at Pukekohe station will allow additional lines for future growth.
NZIER Report, June Cross modal risk analysis of substance impairment
NZTA Waka Kotahi have funded an expansion of participants since early .
NZTA intervention hierarchy NZTA website information: https:www.pikb.co.nzho methewayweworknz transport agencyplanning andinvestment principlesoptimise the provision anduseofthe landtransport network
NZTA is running this initiative for the third time in collaboration with NZ Police and local councils across four NZ P olice districts; Bay of Plenty, Wellington, Canterbury and Southern. The focus is to address drink driving with a coordinated approach to communications, public information and education throughout the month of October , followed by increased enforcement in November . The initiative has indicative positive results with deaths and serious injuries figures combined in the three Better Together districts in June being the lowest in a number of years, and a drop when compared to June . If you are interested in attending one of the Police Operations, NZTA will work with NZ Police to accommodate a visit.
NZTA is working as quickly as possible to establish the extend of exposure by NZTA funding claimed between , secure assurance on capability and processes going forward, implement additional process controls and checks and re establish funding under the N ational Land Transport Programme . NZTA expect s to be in a position to make a decision about future funding by the end of September . NZTA is working with the Department of Internal Affairs , National Emergency Management Agency and other agencies impacted to align with an all of government approach. Driver Licensing wait times Summary for week ending Friday August Wait times for practical testing (restricted and full testing) have increased compared to last week : full tests up by days ( days) restricted tests up by days ( days) At an individual site level, of full test sites and of restricted test sites met the days or less target last week. The backlog of tests remains at , ( ).
NZTA led actions Progress on Actions to the end of September
NZTA will continue to provide updates in the Weekly Report before any community engagement or roadside activity occurs. Driver Licensing wait times Summary for week ending Friday September Wait times for practical testing (restricted and full testing) have marginally increased compared to last week: full tests up by day ( days) restricted tests up by day ( days) At an individual site level, percent of full test sites and percent of restricted test sites met the days or less target last week.
NZTA will initially set interim farebox recovery targets on a regionbyregion basis to reflect the context andcircumstances of each region. Longerterm targets will be set by the end of next year after gathering further evidence and feedback fromcouncils.
NZTAs proposal to review toll rates against the Consumers Price Index every three
NZUP funds the following Auckland metro rail projects by providing:
NZUP is a Crownfunded infrastructure package that includes targeted rail investment in Auckland and Wellington metro networks, to support rail and improve passenger services.
Name (family name in upper case; include title if appropriate) Honourable Dame Frances (Fran) Helen WILDE The Position OrganisationEntity Auckland Light Rail Board Position (chairmember etc.) Chair and member Term of appointment to June Payment (per day per year) per day. How the Candidate Meets the Needs of the Position Skills and attributes the candidate will bring to the position (e.g. business skills, community involvement, cultural awareness, regional perspective as relevant to the needs of the position) Hon Dame Wilde is a highly experienced director who has served as a Cabinet Minister, Mayor, and in senior governance roles on many significant central and local g overnment boards. Her diverse range of experiences in governance, politics, working with iwi, community involvement, and delivering transport and urban development outcomes meet the requirements we are seeking from the ALR Board Chair. Possible conflicts of interest Hon Dame Wilde has disclosed that she is a director o f Frequency Limited, an infrastructure consultancy firm that has staff seconded into the ALR Establishment Unit following a successful tender to supply. Proposals for conflict management (if applicable) Conflict of interest management policies will be put in place for the ALR Board. Members will recuse themselves from decision making for any issues which may conflict with their other roles.
Name Telephone First contact Karen Lyons, Director Auckland Breanna Hawthorne, Adviser Auckland Document s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of MEETING WITH THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE AND BOARD MEMBERS OF AUCKLAND AIRPORT Key points The Chief Executive and Board members have indicated key items for discussion are Auckland Airports capital investment, working with the New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) and Auckland Transport, congestion across the airport precinct, and alternative delivery arrangements for aviation security . Auckland Airport has been working with NZTA and Auckland Transport on key issues across the transport network in and around the airport. They have agreed with NZTA and Auckland Transport to reestablish the Transport Collaborative Operations Group (COG) to manage the upcoming summer peak. Going forward, they are wanting to reestablish governance arrangements across the Southwest Gateway Programme to enable the three Road Controlling Authorities to coordinate in the airport area. Auckland Airport have identified three key current issues with regards to ground transport. These are load on the network in and around the airport, limited public transport to and from the airport and congestion on State Highway . Consultation is currently open on a discussion document on the delivery of a viation security service s. Auckland Airport has requested further information from the Aviation Security Service ( AvSec) on the detail of their work in Auckland to determine their interest. Auckland Airport Auckland Airport passenger numbers are approaching pre COVID levels Auckland Airport passenger numbers are beginning to return to prepandemic numbers, with . million passengers reported in the months to June , compared to the record setting financial year, with overall passenger numbers of . million. Summer p eak numbers reached one million international passengers in January , representing a monthly level not experienced since January . In the financial year, Auckland Airport handled thousand tonnes of international cargo valued at . billion, accounting for per cent of New Zealands international air cargo. More than , people, across more than businesses, work in and around the airport. Auckland Airport has undertaken a million land transport investment programme over the past five years to improve the resilience and reliability of the network within and surrounding the airport. This programme includes new transit and bus priority lanes on Laurence Stevens Drive, a new , space Park and Ride, additional lanes and the removal of roundabouts . They have also been rebuilding their terminal road network to provide a one way system to improve the ease at which people can access and depar t from the international terminal . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of There are medium term challenges across the airport precinct Auckland Airport has identified that increasing throughfare on the airports road network is adding to congestion and increasing journey times for those who use the precinct. State Highway congestion is a key constraint for people accessing the airport, particularly at peak times. Auckland Transport has identified that a southbound ramp connecting State Highway A and State Highway would help address this constraint. In September , Auckland Airport o pened Mnawa Bay, a new outlet mall on the airport precinct. This, alongside other development around Puhinui and around S tate Highway B has increased traffic and congestion towards the eastern end of the precinct. Auckland Airport is seeking continued coll aboration with both NZTA and Auckland Transport NZTA is working with the airport on short, medium and longterm interventions. This ranges from signal optimisation, changes to the transit lanes and enforcement as well as exploring options for new or upgraded infrastructure. Historically, the airport has worked with NZTA and Auckland Transport on a summer transport programme to mitigate impacts on the network. This includes prioritising traffic to the terminals and providing additional remote carparking. Auckland Airport have developed a Surface Access Network Operations Plan for summer to support the operation of the transport network through the air traffic peak. They have suggested a number of immediate steps that can be taken, including around better use of T lanes and more efficient use of the state highway system. These will be discussed with NZTA and Auckland Transport. T lanes are currently in place along State Highway B, but as there are no enforcement cameras , compliance has been affected. NZTA are discussing with Auckland Transport the potential to use the existing Auckland Transport enforcement system and applying it to parts of the NZTA network rather than needing to invest in new cameras . This includes collaboration through governance of the Southwest Gateway Programme The Southwest Gateway Programme dates from when NZTA, Auckland Transport and Auckland Airport began working together to look at options to reduce congestion and improve travel options and journey time reliability for customers travelling to Auckland Airport. The Programme is a series of transport projects, some of which have already been completed such as improvements to State Highway B, the Puhinui interchange and Auckland Airports precinct improvements . Joined up g overnance between Auckland Transport, NZTA and Auckland Airport on the Southwest Gateway Programme was initiated by Auckland Transport as a way to coordinate across the three Road Controlling Authorities operating in the area. Membership also includes Te kitai Waiohua as mana whenua. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of All parties have expressed a desire to reset the Programme and to resume their collaboration. Auckland Airport have suggested that the focus is on small tomedium investments in infrastructure and public transport services to better facilitate access to the airport and surrounding areas. In June , a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) was signed which articulates how the organisations will operate and work together. This MOU indicates implementation funding is to be discussed. Aviation Security Services Review Consultation is under way on alternative delivery arrangements for aviation security services On August , a discussion document was released to a targeted group of stakeholders, seeking views from airports and airline operators on the delivery of aviation security services. The focus of the discussion document was on options for outsourcing aviation security services to the airlines and airports, either in full or in part, to gauge the interest of airports andor airlines to deliver specific aviation security services. Outsourcing of aviation security services is allowed for under the Civil A viation Act . AvSec is currently the sole provider of aviation security services at aerodromes and airports where security services are needed. Concerns have been raised around whether the model has inefficiencies and additional costs through the lack of competition, the inability to tailor the delivery of services to specific situations, and a limited focus on customer experience. Consultation closes on October . Feedback received through this consultation will help determine the direction of any next steps for this work. Auckland Airport requested information During consultation, industry members signalled that additional information was needed around functions and costs, in order develop a clear position on whether they have an interest or ability to provide aviation security services.
Naomi Sadlier Senior Adviser Hei Arataki Strategy, Engagement and Communications
Napier Port Access Package funding was to develop the package, which is now complete, with individual projects identified.
Napier Port are supportive of the integrative nature of rail into the National Land Transport Plan (NLTP) . This provide s for key partners to be collaborative in road and rail planning . Both these modes of transport are vital to the Port in providing efficient and effective freight movement to and from the Port.
Napier to Hastings SH Tauranga to Tauriko SH
Napier to Hastings State Highway
National Association of Steel Framed Housing (NASH)
National Environmental Standards for Plantation Forestry (
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (USA)
National Land Transport Fund Funding for the NLTF for will come primarily from: fuel excise duty , road user charges and motor vehicle registration and licensing fees direct Crown funding in the form of grants and loans. There will also be some contributions from other sources such as tolling , track user charges and the rental or sale of land. The annual licensing fee component of Motor Vehicle Registration (MVR) hasnt been increased since . Inflation since that time has reduced the real value of this NLTF contribution by a half. The government is now proposing to increase MVR by in January , and a further in January to return MVR to the level, in real terms. This will increase the annual cost of MVR in by for most vehicle s, for Motorcycles, trailers and ATVs and . for Mopeds. The increase in MVR will add approximately million to the NLTF over the years . Table . NLTF funding sources NLTF Funding Source Amount ( billion) FEDRUC MVR Crown grant capital expenditure . Crown loan . Total revenue .
National Land Transport Fund expenditure update August received on August
National Land Transport Programme
National Policy Statement for Indigenous Biodiversity, Appendix
National Policy Statement for Indigenous Biodiversity, Appendix (external link)
National Road Carriers Association
National Security Strategy
National Transport Commission (Australia)
National air quality (NO) monitoring network
National and international format Domestic . Do not use dashes to separatenumbers. International . numbers .
National electric vehicle charging strategy
National guidance for public electric vehicle charging infrastructure
Nationalising the Total Mobility Scheme There are a number of regional variations and inconsistencies in the Scheme that we wish to see standardised throughout the country. These include issuing a national TM card that can be used in all locations; and standardising the regional fare subsidy. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Recommendation that the Total Mobility scheme card be a nationwide card and that the regional fare subsidy be standardised. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Swanson Roa d, PO Box , Henderson, Auckland Ph www. healthyfamilieswaitakere org.nz FEEDBACK Draft Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Healthy Families Wait kere April Healthy Fami lies Waitkere contact: Kerry Allan Healthy Families Waitkere Manager Phone: Email: kerry.allansportwaitakere.nz Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT About Sport Waitakere and H ealthy Families Waitakere Sport Waitakere (SW) was registered as a Charitable Trust in and is a Regional Sports Trust (RST). Sport Waitakere has extensive experience in working strategically, collaboratively, and across sectors and settings to achieve positive outcomes for ou r community by engaging with communities by offering locally led solutions and a wide range of services via projects, events and programme delivery. We align with the strategic outcomes of Aktive Auckland Sport and Recreation and as such provide a means to reach local communities through the Auckland Approach by offering a local presence. We also work closely with the strategic outcomes of central and local government and work within the boundaries of Auckland Councils three Local Boards Whau Waitakere Ranges and Henderson Massey. Healthy Families Waitkere is a prevention based initiative, uniting community leadership to improve health and wellbeing equity where we live, learn work and play. Funded by the Ministry of Health, Healthy Families NZ is implemented in ten regional locations with higher than average rates of preventable chronic diseases (such as diabetes and obesity) andor high levels of deprivation. Our team work to make the changes in our communities and empower people to eat well, be ph ysically active, be smoke free and only drink alcohol in moderation . Through the collaboration and co design, community leaders identify, ideate and implement systems change to help people make healthier choices, lead healthier lives and communities to thrive. These environments include, but are not limited to early childhood education settings, schools, workplaces, food outlets, sports clubs, marae, businesses, places of worship and more. Healthy Families Waitkere is led by Sport Waitkere and is one of t en Healthy Families NZ communities across the country.
Nearly of New Zealands state highway network has a star KiwiRAP safety rating . star roads have deficiencies such as roadside hazards, poorly designed intersections, a lack of safe passing opportunities and narrow lanes . According to KiwiRAP , a third of all the driving on sta te highways takes place on star roads. Upgrading these roads from star to star quality (where the deficiencies in the features of the road are far fewer), would effectively halve the trauma from crashes, b ut requires an upgrade programme at the necessary scale. The SNP, based on current levels of funding and delivery, has made lit tle progress upg ading them. GPS presents no major plan to address this, initially increasing safety treatments spending as part of Road to Zero by aroun d (by m p.a. in ), but this is not proportionate to the current condition of the network and the scale and typ es of work required. The moderate increase in Road to Zero over the full years is eclipsed by the si gnificant reductions in state highway and local roads improvements which are a major determinant of the networks safety. Road m aintenance and road building are road safety issues The AA is concerned that the fundamental influence investments in new road s and road maintenance have on the road toll is not covered in GPS :
Need for close monitoring of wider competition in international and domestic market
Negotiating priorities Participants talked about the need to negotiate across multiple parties within councils, between councils, transport and non transport teams, council officers and elected officials, and councils and Waka Kotahi (or, in the case of Auckland, directly with Cabinet). This was partly due to councils recognising the need for a wide range of place based projects to achieve mode shift. Transport initiatives, therefore, needed to be aligned with urban form initiatives and plans, including statutory District Plans, Long term Plans, and non statutory spatial plans. Aligning transport projects with a councils urban form goals was therefore critical to gaining political buy in. As a council officer: Constantly balancing the tension between technical expertise and political representation. And its neither. Its always murky. The amount of funding requested w as also constrained by the ability of a council to contribute their share. In general, smaller councils often struggle with competing priorities more than their larger counterparts due to smaller ratepayer funded budgets and comparatively large road networ ks for the size of their populations. This constrained their ability to respond to new priorities, whether it was mode shift or any other transport activity. A low population density also means there is less opportunity for mode shift. (In a) small rural area (mode shift) does not have as much relevance, particularly due to pressing local road maintenance and safety issues. Other mode shift drivers All participants talked about the non transport drivers that act as opportunities and barriers for mode shif t. These include: Aucklands Regional Fuel Tax fund was seen as the biggest driver of change in the city because of the additional funding available for new work. The need for alignment across other types of infrastructure. Examples were given of missed op portunities to implement mode shift projects as part of flood protection work. Varying levels of political will within councils for mode shift. Other transport initiatives include the Urban Cycleways Programme (UCP) and Lets Get Wellington Moving (LGWM). Land use also consistently came up as a significant driver of mode shift and, in some cases, was talked about as the primary means for achieving significant change with transport seen as an enabler (or constraint). If youre managing speed, and youre m anaging transport projects, and youre managing spatial plans, those three things are the levers that you need to transform. However, participants also talked about the difficulty of fitting urban form projects (such as town centre developments) into th e activity classes. . STUDY PHASES
Nelson (Rocks Road) shared path State Highway
Nelson Future Access Project
Nelson Pine Industries Ltd
Nelson Regional Development Agency
Nelson Hope Bypass SH
Network kilometres of walking and cycling facilities delivered
New Land Transport Rule released for public consultation
New Maritime NZ Board emerging director In July the Board appointed Lara Ariell as an Emerging Director for a month term. Lara has been an Independent Advisor to the Board Audit and Risk Committee since July . Lara has a broad range of senior leadership, finance, strategy, planning, business support and change management roles in a variety of organisations across the public service. She was previously the CFO of Inland Revenue, leading their Enterprise Support S ervices transformation workstream, and is currently the Tumu Whakarae Chief Executive of Education Payroll Limited.
New Rule in force days after notification in the New Zealand Gazette
New Rules drafted and consulted on
New Southern Sky is a year programme to implement the National Airspace and Air Navigation Plan (the plan) and modernise New Zealands aviation system.
New Zealand ASEAN Air Services Agreement and Protocol
New Zealand Air Line Pilots Association
New Zealand Air Line Pilots Association, and
New Zealand Airline Authorisation Agreement Guidelines
New Zealand Council of Cargo Owners (NZCCO)
New Zealand Defence Force.
New Zealand Disability Strategy
New Zealand Fish Passage Guidelines
New Zealand Fish Passage Guidelines(external link)
New Zealand Household Travel Survey
New Zealand Household Travel Survey Analysis of the Auckland results for the period .
New Zealand Journal of Ecology
New Zealand Logistics Services
New Zealand Post prefers no full stops, commas or spaces between numbers in addresses:
New Zealand Rail Plan released
New Zealand Shipping Federation
New Zealand Transport Agency These appointments were announced this week. We will work with your Office on any remaining steps for NZTA appointments that may arise following the meeting. Independent Review Function Civil Aviation Act An position description has been provided to your Office for approval. We await comment from your Office and will look to list this advert in parallel with the consultation process for the scope of the role.
New Zealand Transport Agency and Health New Zealand have also advised that they do not this information. You have the right to seek an investigation and review of this response by the Ombudsman, in accordance with section () of the Act. The relevant details can be found on the Ombudsmans website www.ombudsman.parliament.nz The Ministry publishes our Official Information Act responses and the information contained in our reply to you may be on the Ministry s website. Before publishing we will remove any personal or identifiable information.
New Zealand Transport Agency will consider and give effect to the GPS in developing its National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) later this year.
New Zealand Transport Agency: Crown Funding for Transport Projects (Capital)
New Zealand Transport Agencys website.
New Zealand Upgrade Programme (NZUP) underway
New Zealand Upgrade Programme announced
New Zealand Upgrade Programme Transport
New Zealand Upgrade Programme: Report Back
New Zealand Upgrade Transport Projects
New Zealand and the European Union cooperate to boost maritime safety and security
New Zealand attended the st International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) General Assembly in September .
New Zealand attended the st International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) General Assembly in September . The New Zealand delegation participated in the Assembly using the Cabinet agreed negotiating mandate for ICAO environmental matters. For environment agendas at the ICAO Assembly, the Resolutions for a longterm aspirational goal and the CORSIA (with new baseline being average of and of ) were both agreed.
New Zealand freight and supply chain strategy
New Zealand grants exemptions to vehicles entering the country that do not comply with existing prescriptive compliance standards. Waka Kotahi has the power to grant exemptions pursuant to section of the Land Transport Act . This requires the assessment and evaluation of each individual case. Granting exemptions on a case by case basis is appropriate for testing and trialling AVs.
New Zealand has a graduated driver licensing system (GDLS) which means drivers move from a learner to a restricted and then a full licence. Currently, learner, restricted and full licences must be renewed every years.
New Zealand has adopted the International Standard J developed by the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE). This framework describes vehicles from SAE level , meaning no automation, to SAE level , which describes fully automated vehicles. See More Information for detail on the specific levels
New Zealand has committed to decisive action on road safety under Road to Zero: New Zealands road safety strategy for . Road to Zero adopts a vision of a New Zealand where no one is killed or seriously injured in road crashes, and a target for reducing annual deaths and serious injuries by percent by .
New Zealand has now acceded to MARPOL Annex VI
New Zealand has signed up to MARPOL Annex VI. This means that communities living near New Zealands ports will start to see improvements in air quality due to new requirements to reduce harmful emissions from ships.
New Zealand is currently finalising its domestic legislation alignment in order to deposit the instrument of accession with the International Maritime Organization (IMO) so it can accede to MARPOL Annex VI.
New Zealand is mainly a taker of technology. Vehicles imported into New Zealand come from a number of international markets, with new vehicle technologies increasingly being developed by a number of nontraditional car manufacturers. We are developing an understanding of how New Zealand can best ensure the safety of the vehicle occupants, other road users, and the general public.
New Zealand is working through its accession to the International Maritime Organization (IMO) convention, MARPOL Regulations for the Prevention of Air Pollution from Ships. It is also the platform for IMO action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from ships, with further measures set to be adopted in .
New Zealand largely relies on international shipping lines for domestic freight coastal movement,
New Zealand legislation does not specifically require a driver to be present for a vehicle to be legally operated on a public road. However, most regulations and relevant international frameworks strongly imply the presence of a driver in the vehicle given that automation was not a consideration at the time of drafting the legislation.
New Zealand participates in ICAOs Universal Audit Programme s
New Zealand relies on international shipping to move most of its imports and exports. Any New Zealandflagged ship that enters the port of another country that is a party to Annex VI must meet the treatys requirements.
New Zealand under maritime and aviation conventions. New Zealand has an allocated search and
New Zealand uses a preventioncontrolresponserecovery framework to regulate offshore exploration and production. The primary focus is on minimising hazards and preventing spills from occurring by ensuring permit holders have the capability, plans and resources necessary to minimise the likelihood, and reduce the effect, of any adverse event.
New Zealand will continue to accept vehicles tested to similar standards developed by the United Nations, Japan, the United States, and Australia.
New Zealand will continue to monitor progress made by other markets moving to even stricter standards and review our standards in an ongoing fashion.
New Zealand s domestic aviation network is well served . Air New Zealand travels to domestic
New Zealands social and economic wellbeing is critical for the COVID recovery.
New Zealanders must be able to trust in the steadiness of economic policy. Ludwig Erhard once said that percent of economics is psychology. We therefore need a government that is predictable and steady. The last things we need are policy uncertainty, political surprises and monetary experiments. What we do need is a recovery based on sound economic principles . . The RTF concurs with Dr Hartwich.
New Zealands Road Safety Objectives
New Zealands Road Safety Objectives replaces Road to Zero.
New Zealands goal is to be carbon neutral by and the Government has committed to reducing greenhouse gas emissions (primarily carbon dioxide CO
New Zealands motorcycle fleet is imported from overseas. To improve motorcycle safety and reduce the number of serious injuries and fatalities, the Land Transport Rule: Lightvehicle Brakes Amendment (No ) came into effect in April . This means that by we expect to see of all motorcycles imported to New Zealand fitted with ABS or CBS.
New Zealands ports, freight services and coastal shipping are critical to New Zealands economy, and promote opportunities for regional development and employment, as well as international freight. Understanding future freight and logistics demand is critical to ensure that New Zealands supply chain is fit for purpose in the longer term. The North Island supply chain is particularly important because about of New Zealands freight originates in or is destined for the Northland, Auckland, Waikato and Bay of Plenty regions.
New Zealands search and rescue system. It was established in and comp rises
New independent review function for civil aviation decisions
New inquiries International Assistance A new marine inquiry, MO was opened by the Commission on July . Maritime New Zealand notified the Commission on July of an incident involving the bulk carrier M.V Achilles Bulker, that occurred near Tauranga harbour at about , on July . The circumstances reported to are that the vessel lost its rudder and subsequently suffered a steering failure in the main channel as it was departing Tauranga harbour. The vessel dropped anchor and was later assisted by tugs to a safe anchorage without further incident. The Commissioner has opened an inquiry under Section () of the TAIC Act and appointed Jeremy Dann as the lead investigator for this inquiry. Jeremy will be supported by Avinash Figueiredo. In accordance with the IMO casualty code, the Commissioner has notified the vessels Flag State Panama of the incident , and invited their participation in the Commissions inquiry.
New inquiries International assistance MO opened by the Commission Sunday September . Maritime New Zealand notified the Commission on Sunday September of a grounding involving the Manahau self propelled barge that occurred near Carters Beach south of Westport on Saturday August at about hours. The circumstances reported to are that the Manahau, a self propelled barge with crew on board, was anchored outside Westport Harbour due to poor weather when the anchors dragged resulting in the vessel grounding on Carters Beach, near Westport. The Commission will notify the vessels Flag State, Niue, in accordance with the International Maritime Organizations Casualty Investigation Code. I have opened an inquiry under Section () of the Transport Accident Investigation Commission Act and appointed Avinash Figueiredo as investigator in charge. They will be supported by Jeremy Dann and Penglin Song. AO opened by the Commission Sunday September . The Civil Aviation Authority notified the Commission on Sunday September of a reported issue with the left engine involving a passenger ATR aircraft, registration ZK MVL, that occurred on approach to Wellington airport at about . The circumstances reported to are that the aircraft was approaching Wellington airport at approximately feet when there was a low oil pressure caution, followed by an engine fault and engine fire warning. The Pilot declared a mayday then landed safely. The passengers and crew were deplaned on the runway and the airport emergency services attended. I opened an inquiry on Sunday September , under Section () of the TAIC Act and appointed Ian McClelland as investigator in charge. They will be supported by Jeffrey Shearer and Graham Thomas.
New inquiries International assistance MO opened by the Commission on Sunday September . Maritime New Zealand notified the Commission on Sunday September of a grounding involving the Manahau self propelled barge that occurred near Carters Beach south of Westport on Saturday August at about hours. The circumstances reported to are that the Manahau, a self propelled barge with crew on board, was anchored outside Westport Harbour due to poor weather when the anchors dragged resulting in the vessel grounding on Carters Beach, near Westport. The Commission will notify the vessels Flag State, Niue, in accordance with the International Maritime Organizations Casualty Investigation Code. The Commissioner has opened an inquiry under Section () of the Transport Accident Investigation Commission Act and appointed Avinash Figueiredo as investigator in charge. They will be supported by Jeremy Dann and Penglin Song.
New inquiries International assistance Nil
New inquiries International assistance Nil.
New inquiries International assistance Notice of a new rail inquiry RO opened by the Commission on Saturday August The New Zealand Transport Agency Waka Kotahi notified the Commission on Friday August of a SPAD A that occurred at about the same day at Keroeone crossing station on the East Coast Main Trunk Line. The reported circumstances are that an eastbound freight train, enroute from Auckland to Tauranga went past two red stop signals and continued to travel into the next section of track before stopping on request from Train Control. A high rail vehicle had j ust entered into the crossing loop minutes prior to the train passing the signals at danger in the opposite direction. There was no collision or injury as a result of this near miss incident. The Commissioner has opened an inquiry under section ()b of the Transport Investigation Commission Act (TAIC Act) and appointed Jason Lawn as the lead investigator for this inquiry. Jason will be assisted by David Manuel.
New inquiries International assistance Notice of a new rail inquiry RO opened by the Commission on Saturday August The New Zealand Transport Agency Waka Kotahi notified the Commission on Friday August of a SPAD A that occurred at about the same day at Keroeone crossing station on the East Coast Main Trunk Line. The reported circumstances are that an eastbound freight train, enroute from Auckland to Tauranga went past two red stop signals and continued to travel into the next section of track before stopping on request from Train Control. A high rail vehicle had just entered into the crossing loop minutes prior to the train passing the signals at danger in the opposite direction. There was no collision or injury as a result of this near miss incident. The Commissioner has opened an inquiry under section ()b of the Transport Investigation Commission Act (TAIC Act) and appointed Jason Lawn as the lead investigator for this inquiry. Jason will be assisted by David Manuel.
New inquiries International assistance Notice of a new rail inquiry RO opened by the Commission The New Zealand Transport Agency notified the Commission on Wednesday September of an overhead line electrification traction incident at Parnell, Auckland involving two on track workers that occurred at about . The circumstances reported to are that two workers were in the boom basket of an elevated work platform on the down main of the Newmarket branch line (near Parnell station) when both workers received an electric shock. The Commissioner has opened an inquiry under Section () of the Transport Accident Investigation C Act and appointed Louise Cook as investigator in charge. They will be supported by Hans Boon and Barry Stephenson.
New inquiries International assistance Notice of a new rail inquiry RO opened by the Commission The New Zealand Transport Agency notified the Commission on Wednesday September of an overhead line electrification traction incident at Parnell, Auckland involving two ontrack workers that occurred at about . The circumstances reported to are that two workers were in the boom basket of an elevated work platform on the down main of the Newmarket branch line (near Parnell station) when both workers received an electric shock. The Commissioner has opened an inquiry under Section () of the Transport Accident Investigation C Act and appointed Louise Cook as investigator in charge. They will be supported by Hans Boon and Barry Stephenson.
New legislation establishing the new speed limits framework
New legislation to plan, procure, operate and manage local public transport services through PTOM was established in the Land Transport Management Amendment Act .
New marine protection rules that reflect Annex VI will come into force three months after the that the instrument of accession is deposited with the IMO. By complying with these new rules you will be benefiting the marine and costal environment as well as human health.
New passenger service rules
New requirement comes into effect
New research shows need for drone users to share the skies
New road policing programme targets drunk and drugged drivers
New road safety strategy work began
New speed limit classifications include kmh speed limits for certain state highways The new Rule removes the requirement for the Director of Land Transports approval for kmh speed limits. The new speed limit classifications enable kmh as a speed limit available for state highways that meet certain requirements ( median divided, with two or more traffic lanes in each direction, grade separated intersections, access controlled and with a straight or curved alignment ). NZTA advises there are likely to be cost implications to meet the proposal to require a speed limit of kmh on all expressways under the new Rule. These costs relate to road design of new roads or retrofitting existing roads, for example corridor width in some sections, or sight distance and gradients. There may also be costs associated with meeting resource consent conditions, such as noise mitigation and potentially obligations to provide compensation for increased wear under roading operation contract s. For this reason, th e new Rule enables, rather than requires, kmh on expressways. This approach will help NZTA to manage cost implications, by allowing some expressways to keep a kmh speed limit where it would be too cost prohibitive to upgrade or build them to support a sp eed limit of kmh. We understand the NZTA is providing you with regular updates on the progress of its review of the suitability of kmh speed limits on specified roads. Deadline for r eversals of speed limits reduced since Rule came into force on September We have the reversal deadline , to align with your expectation that speed limits that have reduced since the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits Rule came into force will be rever sed by the end of , unless there is strong evidence to support the lower speed limits or one of the exceptions applies. To meet this deadline, RCAs wi ll need to provide evidence to support retaining lower speed limits to the Director of Land Transport by June . The Director must consider submissions and recertify the speed limits or request more information from RCAs by October . RCAs then have until December to implement all necessary changes to the network, including installing new speed limit signs. This is a tight implementation timeline for RCAs and the Director. NZTA has also raised concerns about having the deadline as December , given it is in the middle of the holiday period when most people are not working. We expect to receive feedback on the implementation deadlines through the consultation process. We will consider further the implementation deadlines as part of the final recommendations to you on the final Rule. Threshold for reversals of speed limits reduced since Rule came into force on September PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Next steps Once the preferred process is chosen and the Mayor of Auckland advised, we will prepare the necessary notifications to the ALRL Board, NZTA, and Auckland Council and keep you on progress. Should your decision be to proceed with a sale on the open market, ALRL will respond to Ministers with next steps on sale process. s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of ANNEX ONE: LETTER FROM AUCKLAND COUNCIL
Next steps It is critical that the new ALR Board chair is given the opportunity to input in the development of the terms of reference. Following confirmation of that appointment officials will work with the new chair on this. Further feedback from Sponsors and the new ALR Board chair s feedback will inform a final draft which will be given to Sponsoring Minsters for approval. This is expected to take place in MayJune. Consultation Officials from all Sponsoring agencies have been involved in discussions and provided feedback on the development of the terms of reference. Guidance was provided by the Sponsors Representatives Forum, which has enabled Auckland Transport to also provide feedback. These agencies will continue to be engaged through to the finalisation of the terms of reference.
Next steps As indicated, the priorities outlined in this document represent a preliminary signal of the intended directions for GPS . T he details will continue to be refined , and we expect to formally consult with the public on a draft GPS in early . The Ministry of Transport would welcome the opportunity to engage with you on the directions outlined in this document, as well as the ongoi ng development of the GPS document. You can contact the GPS team via gpstransport.govt.nz
Next steps Assessing the impact of the GPS on mode shift outcomes (such as changes in public transport and cycling behaviours, and private vehicle traffic) will not be possible until the projects invested in since have been built and are bedded in with communities. However, evaluating the key points on the pathway between the GPS and mode shift identified in this report will provide insights on how th e GPS can ultimately influence mode shift outcomes over time. It will also provide information on how long it takes for the GPS to take effect, considering the planning, investment, design and construction, and behaviour change lag. Taking advantage of im proved capacity to monitor activities through TIO and enabling better monitoring and benchmarking of all modes within the network would allow for better evaluation of the effectiveness and efficiency of changes to the transport system, ultimately feeding b ack into improved investment decision making. Working with stakeholders will be critical to identify the readily available and high effort high value indicators needed to monitor outcomes and the prioritising and funding steps along the path to mode shi ft.
Ng Ng waitohu me ng ttauira Logos and templates
Ng aratohu waitohu Branding guidelines
Ng aratohu Guidelines Plain English in the Readability Guidelines The writing style we use is consistent with Content Design Londons Readability Guidelines. Some key points are to: choose easy and short words , not formal or long ones avoid using jargon and buzzwords write conversationally, in first person, using an active voice test your content with your audience.
Ng ataata Visual design
Ng ingoa o ng rp me ng kamupene Organisation and company names
Ng ingoa o mtou hoa Kwanatanga me rtou ingoa rpoto Our Government transport partners names and abbreviations
Ng ingoa whi Place names
Ng ira kati Full stops Dont use full stops in page names, photo captions, headings, subheadings or initials. Use full stops after web addresses if they are at the end of a sentence. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Ng kopipiko Semicolons . Ng tohu wehe o te rerenga krero Sentence spacing . Ng kupu popoto Shortened words . Ng whakaaturanga me ng kauhau Presentations and Speeches . T tranga Your role . Te hunga mtakitaki The audience . Te whakamahinga o ng prongo kawa Dealing with sensitive information . Whakaharatau Practice . Te whakaaturanga me te kawenga o ng mahi Presentation and delivery . He turukitanga Follow up . Te whakamahinga o te reo Mori Using te reo Mori . T mtou kaupapa Our Kaupapa . Ng mihi Greetings . Ng kupu noa Common terms . mtou kupu toru tekau Our words .
Ng kupu mahue Ellipses
Ng kupu noa Common terms
Ng kupu popoto Shortened words
Ng kupu rpoto o te ture Legal term abbreviations Correct Incorrect The briefing should state what level of engagement should be carried out, eg, involving or collaborating, the highest level would be The briefing should state what level of engagement should be carried out, e.g. involving or collaborating, the highest level would be etc Correct Incorrect section s , s ()(a) subsection subs () paragraph para (a), paras (a) and (b) subparagraph subpara (i) clause clause regulations reg , regs RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Ng kupu kaupapa, tkau, rpoto Jargon, initials and acronyms
Ng mihi nui ki koutou me ng ahuatanga o te wa. He uri no Ngti Twharetoa tenei, e whakaarotia mo ng Take Ao Mori o roto i te tari o Te Manat Waka, e tuku mihi ki koutou.
Ng mihi, s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s () (a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Tredegar
Ng mhua Measurements Generally abbreviate commonly used measurements, with no space between number and measurement:
Ng nama waea Phone numbers
Ng phono Dashes Use an en dash ( ) when breaking up a sentence. Always leave a space before and after the en dash. Create an en dash by holding Ctrl and pressing the minus symbol of the number pad. Dont use hyphens ( ) in this context and never use em dashes () because they are a USA standard.
Ng p matua Capital letters Capitalise proper nouns only Proper nouns are people and place names. If a noun is plural or preceded by a or an, it is not a proper noun.
Ng r me ng w Dates and time
Ng taiepa pewa Brackets
Ng taitara kawa Official titles
Ng tohu krero Quotation marks
Ng tohu matarau Bullet points
Ng tohu wehe o te rerenga krero Sentence spacing
Ng tohu whika Page number references
Ng tohutoro ahurea Cultural references
Ng tohutoro References
Ng tono waitohu Design requests
Ng whakaaturanga me ng kauhau Presentations and Speeches
Ng whi noho Addresses
Nichols JL , Ross H. The effectiveness of legal sanctions in dealing with drinking drivers. Alcohol Drugs Driving ;(): .
Nieuwkamp, R., Martensen, H., Meesmann, U (), Alcohol interlock, European Road Safety Decision Support System, developed by the H project SafetyCube.
Nigel Corry CEO Greater Wellington Regional Council
Nineteen documents fall within the scope of your request and are detailed in the document schedule attached as Annex . The schedule outlines how the documents you requested have been treated under the Act.
No change (they do not get rebates)
No changes are proposed or forecast for petrol excise duty and road user charges in GPS .
No decisions have been made on whether to enable congestion charging in New Zealand.
No decisions on funding have been made and we are still working through the full extent of the damage inflicted by Cyclone Gabrielle.
No device was found that could satisfy the criteria and could be used to issue infringement offences.
No photograph or graphic work on this website, nor in any Ministry of Transport publication, may be reproduced separately from the document or resource from which it came, without the express written permission of the Ministry of Transport. To enquire about the process for obtaining permission for using a photograph or graphic work, please contact us.
No specific reference to value for money. Summary c Auditor General documents on value for money Principles behind good practice https:oag.parliament.nzgood practice There are some fundamental principles that apply to most aspects of managing public resources. This section summarises the most important aspects of good practice for a range of topics (with further guidance provided in other documents, such as the procurement guidance for public entities): Accountability: Public organisations should be accountable for their performance and be able to give full and accurate accounts of their activities. They should have in place governance and management arrangements suitable to address any concerns. Fairness: Public organisations have a fundamental publi c law obligation to always act fairly and reasonably. What public organisations do should be open and impartial. Integrity: Anyone who is managing public resources should do so with the utmost integrity. Lawfulness: Public organisations must act within the law, and meet their legal obligations. Openness: Public organisations should act in a way that is and is seen to be transparent. Value for money: Public organisations should use resources effectively, economically, and without waste in achieving their policies and delivering services to New Zealanders
No update this week. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
Nonaviation services must also:
Nonbinary is an umbrella term for gender identities that are neither male or female.
Noncopyright (open access) material on the website may be copied and reused without restriction. Open access material is identifiable by endorsement of a no known rights statement on the material.
None this week. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending July
Normanby Overbridge Realignment
North Auckland Line Business Case
North Link Stage Route Protection into the lowerrisk category;
NorthWest Rapid Transit Detailed Business Case A preferred team of consultants were appointed in Dec em ber . The consultants have been working closely with Auckland Light Rail and WHC to ensure project integration and alignment, including in the city centre. Work on the Detailed Business Case will commence first quarter and be completed by the end of , enabling subsequent route protection.
Northern Infrastructure Forum
Northland Corridor NZTA is continuing to move at pace to progress the Northland Corridor and will hold a technical workshop with Northland leaders in October . The workshop will provide an update on the Te Hana to Port Marsden Highway (Brynderwyn Hills alternative) section.
Northland dry dock business case
Northland is widely acknowledged as a region that needs regional development assistance to reach its full social and economic potential. For this reason, Northland has been identified as a region for prioritised investment. As substantial investment is needed to provide a reliable and modern rail system in Northland that also connects to the port at Marsden Point, the Government asked for an analysis of the costs and benefits of any potential public investment.
Northland rail rejuvenation
Northport have progressed their own work in this area, such as including a dry dock facility in their V
Northport should be developed to take over much or all of Aucklands existing and projected future freight business.
Northport, as recommended by the working group
Not Government policyTe Tauk Kaupapa Here a te
Notably, the Emissions Reduction Plan sets out the Governments target of achieving a percent reduction in transport emissions by from levels.
Notably, these improvements took time to implement, and were completed by December , some years after natural events spurred their implementation.
Note that Waka Kotahi Bridge Design Manual is only incorporated under the Waka Kotahi Order in Council
Note that although we lodged documents for Cabinet consideration in November ,Cabinet consideration was postponed due to full Cabinet committee agendas. Some documents were subsequently amended before being considered by Cabinet in February .
Note that any information you provide us with is viewable by website administrators, certain Ministry staff and contractors (including third parties providing services related to the administration, improvement, and securing of the website and the information it contains) and, if , members of the public. Please note this if you choose to provide us with information of a sensitive nature.
Note that not all models were . We may update additional models if we or other government agencies require that information.
Note that shortterm resilience improvements will be considered through the Cyclone recovery work for SH Brynderwyns including local road detours: SH and The state highway alternate route is via SH Mangatapere, Dargaville, Maungarutoro (additional hour) and numerous townships. OakleighMangapai to Paparoa (local road) To the west this route runs between Mangapai and Paparoa where it exits on SH. It adds an additional minutes to the journey, has six one lane bridges and travels through rural and small communities. Waipu to Kaiwaka (local road) To the east, Cove Road provides access via Langs Beach, Mangawhai, Kaiwaka where it exits onto SH. It adds an additional minutes to the journey and has a high density of populations, townships, and tourist destinations. This route has two one lane bridges and is not suitable for long vehicles due to a hairpin.
Note that your submission is subject to the Official Information Act (OIA). This means other people will be able to obtain copies of submissions by making a request under the OIA. If you think there are grounds for your information to be withheld under the OIA, note this in your submission. We will take your reasons into account and may consult with you when responding to requests under the OIA. The Ministry may also be required to share submissions with a Parliamentary Select Committee. We will first consider, for example, whether the submissions contain personal or commercially sensitive information.
Note where we have serious concerns regarding potential threats to the physical security of staff, or the security of information or places, we will engage an appropriate authority (such as the NZ Police).
Notes Key groupings Secretary for Transport attends ODESC as required
Notes Key groupings Secretary for Transport attends ODESC as required Wider collaboration within the Transport System Local government, the private sector, researchers and iwi are also key players in shaping the transport system. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT WIDER COLLABORATION WITHIN THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM
Noting the amount of work required to complete the National Aviation Policy Statement, the Council agreed to extend the timeframe to mid , to complete the work.
Nov : Air New ZealandUnited Airlines Side Agreement
Number Primaryccd Ministers Paper Reference Number Received by Office Title of Paper Brown OC Independent Review Function Update on Scope and Cost Recovery: Next Steps Brown OC Land Transport Management (Time of Use Charging) Amendment Bill Draft LEG Paper Brown OC New Zealand Airports Association Hui Brown OC Multi Ministers Meeting on ReEstablishing Disability Leadership Group: Talking Points Brown OC GPS Implementation Update for the Month Ending September Doocey OC Revocation of a Scheduled International Air Service Licence Brown OC Withheld Brown OC Meeting with Infrastructure Partners Australia Brown OC Meeting with CentrePort and Greater Wellington Regional Council Brown OC Withheld Brown Willis Bishop OC Auckland Light Rail land disposal Brown OC Withheld Doocey OC Maritime New Zealand and Transport Accident Investigation Commission Annual Report for Brown OC Withheld
Number of registrations in selected period.
Nuna Wyllie is the only person still alive of those who gave evidence. Along with Vivienne Pohatu he outlined, on behalf of Ngai Tamanuhiri, the tide movements and all the fishing grounds that would be affected by the discharge of dredgings back into the moana. He had a map that was produced.
Nu te rourou, nku te rourou, ka ora ai te iwi With your food basket and my food basket the people will thrive This whakatauk refers to working together and pulling together our strengths, knowledge, and resources, so that our people will thrive together. We use this whakatauk to describe the overview of the Review, how we can draw on the baskets of knowledge from both recreational safety and search and rescue, to ensure the wellbeing of our people.SECTION TWO THE SYSTEMS IN FOCUS AND WHY THEY MATTER Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Diagram : Delivering wellbeing outcomes together In the beginning In the beginning Ranginui (Sky Father) and Papatnuku (Earth Mother) held each other in a tight embrace with their numerous children living in darkness between them. For the children to live in the world of light, Tne (deity of forests and birds) separated them by propping his father up to become the heavens and pushing his mother below to become the earth, thus creating Te Ao Mrama, the world of light we live in today. The primordial parents and their numerous children then became the various elements of the natural world, reflecting the intrinsic connection between land, sea, and sky. From a Te Ao Mori perspective, the human condition is intimately connected to the wider domains of Ranginui and Papatnuku and has a number of implications for health. Waiora (health, soundness) and mauriora (flourishing wellness) are two Mori terms for health that are intricately linked to the natural environment. We draw on the symbolism of Ranginui and Papatnuku in this Review to depict the close relationship between recreational safety and search and rescue, and how these systems interact and operate to support peoples wellbeing (waiora and mauriora). Search and rescue The search and rescue system broadly captures operations to locate and retrieve people who are lost, missing or injured. The intention of the operation is to save lives, prevent or minimise injuries, and remove persons from situations of peril by locating the persons, providing for initial medical care or other needs, and then delivering them to a place of safety. Assistance will be provided to any person in distress, regardless of the nationality or status of such person, or the circumstances in which the person is found. This also captures search and rescue operations for commercial airlines, fishing, cargo and other maritime vessels, who require assistance. The search and rescue system captures the agencies, organisations and individuals, their assets, resources and funding, and the activities involved in the governance and preparation for the delivery of search and rescue operations.Recreational safety The recreational safety system delivers a range of harm prevention services, including information and guidance, education campaigns, assets, and infrastructure and frontline safety services, supporting people to stay safe in the outdoors. Monitoring compliance with information and guidance, and other regulatory settings (including rules and associated enforcement activities) are also delivered through the system. Harm prevention services are targeted to a range of outdoor activities including (but not limited to) walking, tramping, caving, climbing, mountain biking, kai gathering (including rock fishing, diving and hunting), swimming in lakes, rivers and in the sea, boating, and paddle boarding. Harm prevention services are delivered by a range of agencies, organisations and individuals, assets, resources and funding, working collaboratively together. The meeting place between the two systems is depicted in this image as the space where the two cresting waves meet. It is within this space, where the Review Team and Advisory Group worked together during the Review to understand the connections between the two systems and the organisations and the people involved. THE SYSTEMS IN FOCUS AND WHY THEY MATTER Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue . Over the past decade the intersection between the systems has grown, including the links between the collective governance and leadership forums (the Forums), the organisations operating within them, and the work they do. Broad recognition of the pipeline of safety services delivered across the systems is evident; specifically, the relationship between recreational safety services and better search and rescue outcomes.. In the context of the Review, a pipeline of safety services refers to the activities that cover the Rs of emergency management readiness, reduction, response and recovery. In a nutshell, the pipeline of activities: informs a persons skills, knowledge, behaviour and attitudes when they are planning for, preparing and undertaking recreational safety activities, to support them to avoid harm or minimise the impact if it occurs; and provides for search and rescue in those instances where a person becomes lost, missing, andor in distress, and return to a place of safety. THE SYSTEMS IN FOCUS AND WHY THEY MATTER Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue The journey so far . A description of each system is set out below. The search and rescue system is the more mature of the two systems and is described firstup. The search and rescue system . The search and rescue system has a twopart origin: people supporting people in times of trouble through whnau and communities for over years. Local action for local people who are lost, missing andor in distress, and international aviation and maritime conventions which gave rise to the global search and rescue system in the s. . The link between domestic and international search and rescue evolved into the current search and rescue system configuration in the early s. . New Zealands international convention obligations are included as appropriate in New Zealand legislation specifically, the Civil Aviation Act and the Maritime Transport Act , which provide for: the establishment of a rescue coordination centre for the relevant search and rescue region, staffed hours a day, seven days a week, and the prompt provision of search and rescue services within our search and rescue region, and national machinery for the overall coordination of search and rescue services. . The Minister of Transport, through the two statutes, is responsible for the organisation and conduct of particular search and rescue activities within the NZSRR. . Other New Zealand statutes that relate to the provision of search and rescue services include the Policing Act and the Coroners Act . Giving effect to the international framework for search and rescue . There are two mandated Coordinating Authorities: Maritime NZ through the Rescue Coordination Centre New Zealand (RCCNZ) delivering international and national search and rescue functions, and the Police delivering local functions. . A range of government organisations, NGOs and commercial entities provide people and assets to support the delivery of search and rescue services tasked through the Coordinating Authorities. . Governance and leadership of the system to provide national coordination is provided through the NZSAR Council, established in , reflected in Diagram below. . Appendix provides further information about the international framework and domestic legislative environment for search and rescue, and the collective governance and leadership arrangements in place. THE SYSTEMS IN FOCUS AND WHY THEY MATTER Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Diagram : Collective governance and leadership arrangements for search and rescue Category ll SAROPsNSS: National Security System SAROPs: Search and Rescue Operations NZSAR Consultative Committee New Zealand Search and Rescue SectorCabinet Ministers of Transport, Conservation, Defence Police Category l SAROPsStrategic
O fficials to engage with Disabled Peoples Organisations Coalition (DPO Coalition) and provide feedback to Minister in advance of Terms of Reference being confirmed. Underway. Underway. The DPO provided feedback on Wednesday August and we are looking at how to incorporate it into the Terms of Reference . July Underway July Aviation Friday August July Ongoing July Ongoing July Aviation Officials to provide further advice on aligning the New Zealand regime with Australia. Friday August July EV Charging Officials to: s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s (a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
OAGs procurement guidance and NZTAs procurement guidance desc ribe value for money as means using resources effectively, economically, and without waste, with due regard for the total costs and benefits of an arrangement, and its contribution to the outcomes the entity is trying to achieve. In addition, the principl e of value for money when procuring goods and services does not necessarily mean Summary a Literature Summary
OC December
OC January Tena koe MINISTRX. OF TRANSPORT p TE MANATU WAKA I refer to your email dated December , requesting the following under the Official Information Act (the Act): in relation to the private share targets for public transport set by the current government. . Any communication from the Ministry of Transport to NZTA about these targets . All internal communication within the Ministry of Transport about these targets, including but not limited to emails, texts, and Teams messages. . Any impact analysis or investigation that has been done by the Ministry of Transport about changing these targets. . For example, impact analysis on costs, environment I green house gas emissions, uptake of public transport, etc. . Any communication that has been sent by the Ministry of Transport to councils about these targets. . Any communicatio n that has been sent by councils to the Ministry of Transport about these targets. documents fall within the scope of your request and are detailed in the document schedule attached as Annex . The schedule outlines how the documents you requested have been treated under the Act. Certain information is withheld under the following sections of the Act: ()(a) ()(f)(iv) ()(g)(i) ()(k) to protect the privacy of natural persons to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their duty to prevent the disclosure or use of official information for improper gain or improper advantage. transport.govt. nz I heiarataki.nz HEAD OFFICE: PO Box , Wellington , New Zealand. PH: AUCKLAND OFFICE: NZ Government Auckland Policy Office. PO Box , Auckland , New Zealand. PH: With regard to the information that has been withheld under section of the Act, I am satisfied that the reasons for withholding the information at this time are not outweighed by public interest considerations that would make it desirable to make the information available. Four documents have been supplied to you as excerpts from a larger document, as provided for by section ( )(e) of the Act. This has been done because the relevant material to your request is only a small section of the overall document. You would otherwise receive around additional blank pages marked outofscope . Documents supplied as excerpts are clearly identified in Annex . You asked for information on the following: Any impact analysis or investigation that has been done by the Ministry of Transport about changing these targets. o For example, impact analysis on costs, environment I green house gas emissions, uptake of public transport, etc. Any communication that has been sent by the Ministry of Transport to councils about these targets. Any communication that has been sent by councils to the Ministry of Transport about these targets I am refusing this part of your request under the following section of the Act: (e) that the document alleged to contain the information requested does not exist or, despite reasonable efforts to locate it, cannot be found You have the right to seek an investigation and review of this response by the Ombudsman, in accordance with section () of the Act. The relevant details can be found on the Ombudsmans website www.ombudsman .parliament.nz The Ministry publishes our Official Information Act responses and the information contained in our reply to you may be on the Ministry website. Before publishing we will remove any personal or identifiable information . Naku noa, na . : Liz Anderson Manager (Acting) Urban Development and Public Transport transport.govt.nz I heiarataki.nz Page of Annex : Document Schedule Doc Reference Title of Document Proposed decision on request number RE: PT Meeting GPS Released , some outofscope material Funding Farebox withheld Recovery Draft GPS Released, some outofscope material implementation work withheld programme briefing ANNEX GPS Supplied as excerpt. Implementation Work Attachment to Document Programme Joint MoT NZTA view.docx Released, some outofscope material withheld, along with some information withheld under s()()(f)(iv) . FW: public transport Released , some outofscope material funding project GPS withheld, along with some information timelines please withheld under s()()(f)(iv). extra information by midday please GPS Priority Actions Attachment to Document . Milestones and timelines for Released, some information withheld delivery ( to ) under s()()(f)(iv) . OC GPS Released in full. Implementation Programme Overview Briefing OC GPS Implementation Supplied as excerpt. Programme Overview Attachment to Document . Briefing Released , some information withheld under s()()(f)(iv) . RE: GPS Monitoring Released, some information withheld briefing and work under s()()(f)(iv) and s()()(g)(i) . programme RE: Draft briefing for Released, some information withheld consultation : PEP and GPS under s()()(f)(iv) and s()()(g)(i) . Reporting GPS Implementation Supplied as excerpt. Work Programme Joint MoT NZTA view v.docx Attachment to Document . Released , some information withheld under s()()(f)(iv) . RE: PMO Monthly Report: Released , some outofscope material Request to update the July withheld, along with some information report withheld under s()()(k) . transport.govt .nz I heiarataki.nz Page of Doc Reference Title of Document Proposed decision on request number Final OC GPS Supplied as excerpt. Report and Performanc e Attachment to Document . and Efficiency Plan Briefing Policy Released, some information withheld .docx under s()()(f)(iv). question (not for a story just Released, some information withheld yet) under s()()(a) . RE: Out of Scope Released, some outofscope material feedback ideally by midday withheld, along with some information tomorrow withheld under s()()(f)(iv) . FW: Heads up information Released, some outofscop e material withheld, along with some information withheld under s()()(a) . Template letter to Attachment to Document . councils re specific Released , some outofscope material requirements re Ministerial withheld. expectations v.docx Teams Message Released, some outofscope material withheld. Teams Message Released in full. Teams Message Released in full. transport.govt.nz I heiarataki.nz Page of From: Nick Potter To: Adam Lawrence Cc: Liam Fechney ; Marieka Curley ; Andrew Wilson Subject: RE: PT Meeting GPS Funding Farebox Recovery Friday, April Attachments: image.png Great. Ill send through a meeting invite now. Enjoy your weekend,Nick Nick Potter (hehis ) Principal Adviser Urban Development and Public Transport Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport E n.pottertransport.govt.nz From: Adam Lawrence Adam.Lawrencenzta.govt.nz Sent: To: Nick Potter N.Pottertransport.govt.nzCc: Liam Fechney L.Fechneytransport.govt.nz; Marieka Curley M.Curleytransport.govt.nz; Andrew Wilson Andrew.Wilsonnzta.govt.nzSubject: RE: PT Meeting GPS Funding Farebox Recovery Nick, Thank you for your email, and good to see you again. Andrew and I are happy to meet up and discuss how we can work together. We are available ..am on Tue Apr, if you can please send an invite. I also need to check with some of our other teams who may need to be looped in. Ng mihi Adam Adam Lawrence Lead Advisor Public Transport Transport Services Mobile: Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency From: Nick Potter N.Pottertransport.govt.nz Sent: Document s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT To: Adam Lawrence Adam.Lawrencenzta.govt.nz ; Andrew Wilson Andrew.Wilsonnzta.govt.nz Cc: Liam Fechney L.Fechneytransport.govt.nz ; Marieka Curley M.Curleytransport.govt.nz Subject: PT Meeting GPS Funding Farebox Recovery Kia ora Andrew and Adam It was good to see you again yesterday. Were keen to follow up with you on a couple of related issues that need some quick attention: and farebox recovery rates. As you know, the draft GPS includes an action to Increase farebox recovery and thirdparty revenue by Public Transport Authorities. Weve been asked by the Ministers officeto draft some milestones and timelines for delivering on this proposed action (at very shortnotice) and weve suggested this for starters: MilestoneTiming (next three years high level is OK) Complete review of opportunities toincrease farebox recovery rates and thirdparty revenue and implications foreffective and efficient servicesBy end of Q (By end ofSeptember ) Implement recommendations from review Q onwards (October onwards) Our view is that its important to review the opportunities and implications of increasing farebox recovery rates before setting any specific requirementsexpectations to ensurethat this is part of broader work to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of PT networksbefore a strict policy is set. It would be great to meet with you to discuss what a reviewcould cover, who should lead it and be involved (were keen for our agencies to worktogether on this), and also timeframes. Were also keen to get a better understanding ofhow this action relates to development of the NLTP, as we understand that NZTA isintending to address the PT aspects of this in May. Given final policy decisions on the GPS are imminent, could we please arrange to meet early next week to discuss this Some possible meeting times are: Out of Scope Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Monday April Tuesday April: Any time between or pm. Feel free to extend the invite to anyone else at your end too. Cheers, Nick Nick Potter (hehis ) Principal Adviser Urban Development and Public Transport Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport E n.pottertransport.govt.nz MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Wellington (Head Office) Ground Floor, Queens Wharf PO Box Wellington NEW ZEALAND Tel: Auckland NZ Government Auckland Policy Office Queen Street PO Box Auckland City Auckland NEW ZEALAND Tel: Disclaimer: This email is only intended to be read by the named recipient. It may contain information which is confidential, proprietary or the subject of legal privilege. If you are not the intended recipient you must delete this email and may not use any information contained in it. Legal privilege is notwaived because you have read this email. Please consider the environment before printing this email. This message, together with any attachments, may contain information that is classified andor subject to legal privilege. Any classification markings must beadhered to. If you are not the intended recipient, you must not peruse, disclose,disseminate, copy or use the message in any way. If you have received this messagein error, please notify us immediately by return email and then destroy the originalmessage. This communication may be accessed or retained by Waka Kotahi NZTransport Agency for information assurance purposes. s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Document From: Geome Ross To: Rory Leonard; Rebea;a Ellery; Bryan Eield; Joanna Heard; Bey Driscoll; Matthew Skinner; Erin Wynne Rosene Thoreau; Jessica Rangec; Harriet Shelton Cc: Jim Herbert; Mitch Macaulay; Qljyer EindlayBad ham: Quaid Forbes Subject: Draft GPS implementation work programme briefing Monday, June Attachments: wiroaaeQ,.,,.,.O..,.J nn . a. p:ofScope ANNEX GPS Tmolementatjon Work programme Jojnt MoJ NJA yjew docx . Relevant excerpt provided as Document Kia ora koutou, have also attached the GPS work programme that Mitch has been working on and If you have any comments , can you send them across by COP tomorrow. Nga mihi George George Ross (he his) Kaitohutohu Matua I Senior Advisor Investments Te Rautaki Punaha Waka mete Putea Haumi I System Strategy Investment Jfiaahi Waka Ministry of Transport E: g.rosstransport .govt.nz I transport.govt.nz RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I Action descnption I I I OufofScope Public transport funding: Increase farebox recovery and thirdparty revenue by Public Transport Authorities . Lead Agency(s) NZTA Public Transport Authorities Ministry of Transport Milestones Phase Establish foundations : By end of (by end of June ) s ()(f)(iv) o Establish nationally consisten t private share definitions, measures , and baselines across all public transport authorities . Private share includes farebox recovery and thirdparty funding sources (Lead: NZTA). o Establish interim target for each public transport authority (Lead NZT A) o Monitor and report on progress (lead: NZTA) Delivery from July RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT ,. llfbfo::aOIW T s.,.:t: fW:p,ta:lINl)OtlfuldliO GPSupG:lltdamtlNSl)kesee:drl IJ,rntddlyllplelR OltlK Rldly, I JZ l. em fl:tdYeatr:s MJcslmni flit: IrzlPSPS Of m n PrcMoeo aoocunent s from: Andrew Wilson Andrew.Wilsonnzta.govt.nz sent: Friday, June . Z To: Rebecca Elle.ry R.Ellerytransport,golt .nz; r;Jia OOhen Wolf ralia.COhenWolf)nzta,golt.nz subject: Rf: public transport fundiog project GPS timelines please extra information by midday please Hi Rebecca, Attached is the latest version of the rri:lestones. Let us know if any questions. Regards, Andrew from: Rebecca Ellery R Fleryrrampga CP oz sent: Friday, June . Z . To: Talia oohen wotf Dia QQheoWQ(fozta em oz subject: RN: pu.bic transport fundirg project G:PS timeliles please extra information by midday please I Yhtoftaptcwlfroa r..aarvlramartPi.Laaraffldmisia;parwlt Hi Tatis Can you please send me the last version of the milestones for farebox recOYeryas discussed on the phone just nYW I need to use this to inform the PT funding timeline that will be going to the Minister thias morning. Where there are key decisions required from the Minister, particutsrtyacross would be really helpful Thanks a lot Rebeoce Ngamn Rebecca Ellery Portfolio Manager Programme Managemen t Office Te Manatu Waka Ministry of Transport l()(a C ellfotlrn nspgrt OPYI DZ spgrt OPYI DZ NZ GCHemm..t Al.di PollC)Offlce LeVel, Vk:l:NSreeWe..AUCS.lano Av: I IKlt llllltld rw:,,nor, y. L from: Rebecca Ellery sent: To: Talia oohen wotf Dia QQheoWQffona gpyr m; Mitch Mac.au.lay M Marnlivtcaosoon erua oz subject: Rf: public transport fund project GPS timelines please extra information by midday please Importance: Hiol Morning Tatis Document Can you please gtve us some more detsilon this project The timeline betow is what I have based on your information you prOYided but the Minister will want to see more detail than thhJ .. C , PUBllCTPAHSPORTFU NDING OUTIVTS L::,::c.:iry PubelcTrltltl)On . We received the below previously. EatabUah foundations: July to December o Establish nationally consistent private share definitions, measures. and baselines across all public transport authorities. Private share includes farebox recovery and thirdpa funding sou roes (Lead: NZT A) o Establish interim target for each public transport authQrity (Lee: NZTA). fOo Monitor and reoort on DfOetess flead: NZTAl LJf)(iv) l,s any oCthiidetailstKt refevint Are there anydiston polntswrth the Mintster this year that we coua flag Apologies for the quick turn around required for this. Could you ptea.se send something OYeJ t,,, midday so we can get this in the final pack for review and sent to the Minister on time Ptease respond to both Mitch a.nd I. Thanks a lot Rebeoce from: Tal:ia COhen Wolf Jal CQttfnWQlfon:a gpyt oz sent: Wednesday. Junes, To: Rebecca flJe.ry s FDeNtcaosoon erua oz subject: Rf: public transport fund project GPS timelines please Kia ora Rebecca, sorry for the delay. Regarding the dates, there is one nistaJ:e in the second milestone, the milestone starts at . . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT .SO just to clarify: Milestone .. until .. i(J(ijirv Hope that is dear, If you need anythiog else let m,e know. Talia from: Rebecca Ellery R Flen,rramooa em oz sent: Wednesday. Junes, : AM To: Talia oohen wotf Dia QQheoWQffona ggyr oz subject: public transport funding proj:,ect GPS timelines please I Youdontolticngetemaltofl:r: r:otazxrtgqytnz l:r:,roffitiiimxrt:ol Hi Tatis For the Miniasters top priorities in the OPS, one of which is public tra.nsport funding I am putlingtogether e hightewt dmetine which I wl keep reguis.rty but is also going to be attached to the next OPS paper going to the Minister on Friday. I heve the following stages of work for this that I received from Nick Potter (table betow)who pointed out that you were the lead on this. Can you please confirm ff these high level stages are stll appropriate and whether you have any key milestones that I ooutd also inctude The betow is sts.rt a.nd end . Esbbish kk.ndation s and set nterrn targets ,) s ()(f)(iv) The output for this phase will took similar to the below. Keen to include milestones es welt es phases like you have above. le. las there a key decision or milestone at the end or within any of these phases Dut of Scope MI menonabowhisneeds to goto he Minister on Friday so letme know as soon as )OJ can. icaled llgamii Rebecca Ellery Portfolio Manager Programme Managemen t Office TP M.vi.ffli W.k Min by of Transport ()(a) F rellfryJrnospgn OPYI oz lPPYI oz NZ GCHemm..t Al.di PollC)Offlce LeVel, Vk:l:NSreeWe..AUCS.lano Av : I IKlt llllltld rtotnon y. L MINISlRY OF TRAHSPORT Welingt,on (Head Office) I Gn:l.nd Floor, .Jeens I PO Box Wellington IEWZEAI.Afll) I Tel: I Auckland I NZGowmrrertALdland PdicyOffice lewf . VctcriaStreetWest I PO Box tl: I Auctland City I Auckland NEW ZEAlAJIO I Tel: JO I Oisdaimer. Ths email is ty intended to be read by lhenamed ttqlient ltmayccntan infonnaoon WhCtl is confidential . popnetary a lhe sa.qec:t d legal pri..iege. If you are nd the intended recipiert )OJ RlJSt dMe his email and may not use an, information ccntained n l. Legal pri.tege is not waived becaJse )OJ haw read this emai. Rease consider he en.ironment before pmtirv this emal. This message , together with any attachments, may contain information that is classified andor subject to legal privilege. Arry classification markings must be adhered to. If you are not the intended ,ecipient, you must not peruse, disclose. disseminate. copy or use the message in anyway. ff you have ,eceived this mess.age in error. please notify us immediately by rnturn email and then destroy the original message. This commun ication may be accessed or retained by Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency for information as.suranoe purposes. This message , together with any attachments, may contain information that is classified andor subject to legal privilege. Arry classification markings must be adhered to. If you are not the intended ,ecipient, you must not peruse, disclose. disseminate. copy or use the message in anyway. ff you have ,eceived this mess.age in error. please notify us immediately by rnturn email and then destroy the original message. This commun ication may be accessed or retained by Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency for information as.suranoe purposes. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Document GPS Priority Actions Milestones and timelines for delivery ( to ) Action name: Public transport funding: Increase farebox recovery and thirdparty revenue by Public Transport Authorities. Lead: NZ Transport Agency Waka Kotahi (NZTA) . Timing (next three years Milestone high level is OK) Phase Establish foundations and set interim targets a) Establish nationally consistent private share definitions, measures , and baselines across all public transport authorities, including data collection and analysis. b) Set interim private share expectations for each PTA and NZT A to work with PT As to start increasing private share on annual basis towards levels. c) Identify initiatives to increase private share: Obtaining cost efficienci es and maximising value for money spent on public transport. Maximising patronage and therefore passenger fare revenue. Develop third party revenue streams. Jul to Dec (Q ) . From: George Ross To: Abby McRoberts parliament Cc: Tim Herbert ; Mitch Macaulay ; David Wood ; amy.moorheadnzta.govt.nz ; Anaru Silao ; Chris Bunny Subject: OC GPS Implementation Programme Overview Briefing Friday, June Attachments: image.png OC GPS Implementation Programme Overview Briefing Policy.docx Kia ora Abby,
OC February
OC February
OC February
OC February
OIA Request for Different Papers
Objective .. Affordability () Investment in the transport system maximises use of available resources and achieves value for money . Achieving this objective will mean transport infrastructure assets are maintained to fit for purpose levels of service. Future sources of revenue and whole of life costs will be taken into account to ensure that current decisions do not compromise the regions ability to maintain its assets in the future. Key performance indicators Mostly direct text b No decline in local road network conditioncost indices from levels. No decline in State Highway conditioncost indices from levels. No adverse movement in the rail network Track Quality Index on National Strategic Routes from levels.
Observing change Timelines There was general agreement that seeing the mode shift impacts from the GPS will take many years. The time taken from conception to its use is typically five to six years for medium sized projects and eve n longer for larger projects. Therefore, it could take around a decade or more before mode shift caused by initiatives starting now is observed in travel behaviours. Participants also talked about the need for network wide improvements to deliver substanti ve change, meaning that the timelines could be longer. Say you poured a whole lot of money into cycling. It would probably take us four years to get things on the ground and at enough scale. To get a network effect, youre probably looking at closer to ten. Participants also talked about the challenge and delays that arise from needing to coordinate with other processes, such as Long term Plans, whose timelines sometimes differ from the RLTP process. This makes it harder to disentangle the impact of the GPS from these other significant drivers. Observing changes in priorities Observing change in what is prioritised for funding was seen as difficult because of how much of the walking and cycling work is funded through local road activity classes, LCLR fun ding, and the pre Urban Cycleways Programme (UCP). However, participants felt there was value in monitoring the proportion of the mode shift promoting activities being put forward for NLTF funding, as this will reflect what is considered important and possible at a given time. However, delving into funding is more complicated. The proportion of funding given to mode shift promoting projects is messy but observing the change in the total proportions across activity classes was considered useful. Howev er, it was felt there was too much noise at a project level which would require deep dives into the detail of business cases over the different GPS cycles. .. Overall insights and implications from interviews The interview participants provided valuable insights into how the GPS process in recent years influences what is prioritised and what is funded and built. Based on the interviews, the following points consider what this means for evaluating the impact of the GPS on mode shift: Some saw the GPS aligning with their councils strategic direction, while for others, it was more of a change. But even when there was already strong alignment, the GPS was still seen as better in enabling active and public transport modes. Implication: a difference sh ould be observable in what was prioritised for funding. Interviewees regarded the current GPS NLTF process as not well suited to the projects that will bring about a substantial mode shift. They discussed the need for long term, network wide, urban form in itiatives to achieve the level of mode shift desired. Transport projects need to be integrated with and in support of changes to land use, urban intensification, and place making. The reliance on the IAF (for ) and IPM (for ) process for prioritisi ng was seen by some interviewees as leading to bias against more complex and effective mode shift promoting work. Implication: what was funded may reflect something other than what is most effective at achieving mode shift. . STUDY PHASES
Observing changes Changes in the total allocated funding in each activity class (but messier given cross activity funding of mode shift promoting activities). Allocating an activity to a single activity class does not easily allow for projects that span multiple classes. It means active mode projects that are part of a wider project are less visible and undercounted, especially for smaller councils who are less likely to put forward a single mode shift project than to look at how to incorporate into roading projects.
Observing changes Were there alternative sources identified to observe impact empirically No further sources of information other than what has been identified to
Oct , Oct , Oct , Nov , Nov , Nov , Dec , Dec Dec , , , , , , , , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOvers as Total New ExOverseas Total Jan , , , Jan , Jan , Feb , , , Feb , Feb ,
Oct : Air New ZealandSingapore Airlines Strategic Alliance Agreement
OctNov Plane talking GAP booklet (update) BAU revision OctNov Helicopter performance GAP booklet (update) BAU revision OctNov Night VFR GAP booklet (update) BAU revision OctNov Survival GAP booklet (update) BAU revision TBC In, out, and around Milford GAP booklet (update) BAU revision Dec Vector magazine (Summer issue) Aviation safety education magazine To educate the aviation community on various aviation safety topics.
October : Air New Zealand and Cathay Pacific alliance reauthorised
October to December Data tables
October to December Key graphs
Of the six briefings requested, four are released with some information withheld and two are refused.
Office for secondary legislation relating to civil aviation offences and penalties ECO
Office of Future Transport Technology (Australia)
Office of Hon Chris Bishop
Office of Hon Michael Wood MP for Mt Roskill Minister of Immigration Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety Minister of Transport Associate Minister of Finance Minister for Auckland
Office of the Acting Minister of Transport
Office of the Auditor General undertaking an independent review of climate policies The Office of the Auditor General (OAG) is undertaking an independent review of New Zealands climate policies, including relating to transport. This feeds into a broader international assessment by several other countries national auditors (the climate scanner). The combined international assessment will be tabled at the Conference of the Parties to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP) later this year. The OAG i ntends most of the assessment to be completed by desktop analysis. We have been asked to provide information along with several other agencies, including the Ministry for Primary Industries, MfE, the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet , and the Treasury . The OAG will produc e a draft report for consultation with agencies in late August. The R eport will then be presented to the Climate Change Chief Executives Board . We will provide an update through the Weekly Report if the transport content is substantive. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Official Information Act
Official Information Act (OIA), be released. W here that is the case, the relevant section
Official Information Act (OIA), be released. Where that is the case, the r elevant section
Official Information Act (OIA), be released. Where that is the case, the relevant section
Official Information Act .
Officials Committee for ECO
Officials from the Te Manat Waka the Ministry of Transport, Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency, the Energy Efficiency Conservation Authority and Parliamentary officials will also attend.
Officials have found that a larger strategic corridors scheme would be the most beneficial option for congestion pricing in Auckland, and could be phased in. Initially starting in the city centre, it could be expanded to align with planned public transport improvements.
Officials to discuss approach to sector engagement with the Office. This will be provided in the WR for the week commencing September
Officials to model impact of the RUC transition on hybrid and EV uptake.
Officials to provide advice on the ZEHV EV RUC exemption and additional options to include in ERP. Complete MidOctober
On July the Minister announced an amendment to the Land Transport Rule: Lightvehicle Brakes , which would make ESC mandatory for light vehicles entering the New Zealand fleet from July the following year.
On July , a cent per litre regional fuel tax on diesel and petrol came into effect in Auckland. The regional fuel tax intends to raise revenue from road users for transport projects in Auckland.
On July , PED increased by . cents per litre and RUC increased by about ..
On July , PED increased . cents per litre and RUC was increased by ..
On March , the Land Transport (Drug Driving) Amendment Act came into force. This amended the Land Transport Act to introduce a range of measures to deter impaired driving on our roads.
On March , the Land Transport (Drug Driving) Amendment Act came into force. This amended the Land Transport Act to introduce a range of measures to deter impaired driving on our roads. This included:
On May , the Ministry of Transport opened consultation proposing stronger harmful emission standards for vehicles entering New Zealand.
On May , the Ministry of Transport opened consultation proposing stronger harmful emission standards for vehicles entering New Zealand. The consultation seeks feedback on imposing new standards (Euro d, Euro VIE, and some other similar standards) on new and used vehicles imported to New Zealand. The requirements would be progressively phased in between and . The proposal covers nearly all forms of vehicles entering New Zealand from cars, vans and utes, to buses and trucks, and includes motorcycles and mopeds.
On March the Minister of Transport, Michael Wood and Auckland Mayor Phil Goff released the ATAP programme that invests around . billion into critical transport infrastructure and services around Auckland. It focuses on encouraging the shift from private cars to public transport, walking and cycling and addressing Aucklands longerterm challenges of climate change and housing development.
On September , the Associate Minister of Transport signed an amendment to the Land Transport Rule: Light vehicle Brakes , mandating ABS or CBS for motorcycles entering New Zealands vehicle fleet.
On December , State Highway reopened during the day, although areas remained closed overnight from .pm as a safety precaution. On April , the highway reopened for hour travel.
On September , freight rail services resumed in a limited capacity on the Main North Line.
On July , the Independent Expert Panel on Drug Driving provided interim advice on criminal limits for THC and methamphetamine. The Panel initially focussed on cannabis and methamphetamine, as these are the most prevalent drugs detected in deceased, hospitalised and impaired drivers in New Zealand.
On April the Government announced their intention to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years.
On December the Government, Mayor of Wellington City Council, and Chair of Greater Wellington Regional Council jointly announced they had agreed in principle to dissolve Lets Get Wellington Moving.
On October , the Cabinet Legislation Committee:
On September , the Independent Expert Panel on Drug Driving provided interim advice on oral and blood drug concentrations in an impaired driving context.
On December , the Government announced its proposal for a new drug driver testing scheme, which
On November , British Airways and Qatar Airways jointly applied for authorisation to coordinate their air passenger services on routes between Auckland and the UK or Europe, which incorporate the LondonDoha trunk route. Currently, British Airways has no direct flights to or from New Zealand, while Qatar Airways offers daily flights from Auckland to Doha.
On June , Cabinet agreed that a track user charge be implemented which applies to any rail freight operator undertaking freight business on the national rail network in New Zealand, and this charge be specified as land transport revenue and paid into the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF). The two attached documents (
On February , the Associate Minister of Transport agreed to reauthorise the Strategic Alliance Agreement between Air New Zealand and Singapore Airlines for a further years until March . The Minister of Transport first authorised the alliance in May and reauthorised in March .
On September , following reference from the Cabinet Business Committee, Cabinet:
On December , Qantas and Japan Airlines lodged an application seeking authorisation for a Joint Business Agreement for years.
On July a flight from Kaitaia to Whangarei experienced an issue with its landing gear and issued an alert for emergency services to be on standby. It orbited Whangarei Harbour while it resolved the issue. The plane landed successfully. An incident report has been received and a CAA investigation will take place. We were approached for details of the incident. Northern Advocate NZ Herald July Company and director charged over fatal Otago helicopter crash Charges laid against Lister Helicopters after Dan Harrisons fatal crash in Central Otago
On October , Cabinet made the following decisions on the work of the Cabinet Legislation
On August , the Associate Minister of Transport authorised a Commercial Framework Agreement, Codeshare Agreement, and various related agreements between Air New Zealand and Virgin Australia for a period of years until August .
On October , the Associate Minister of Transport reauthorised the North Asia Alliance Agreement between Air New Zealand and Cathay Pacific for a further years until October . The Minister of Transport first authorised the alliance in and reauthorised in and .
On September , the RUC exemption for light electric vehicles was extended until December . This saves the average electric vehicle driver approximately NZD per vehicle each year.
On July , Qantas Airways and American Airlines jointly applied for authorisation to continue to coordinate their operations between and within Australia, New Zealand and the United States, Canada and Mexico.
On February , the Cabinet Business Committee:
On August , Hon Phil Twyford, Minister of Transport released the findings of the business case. These present a strong case for further investigation of rapid rail in the Corridor.
On September , the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee: noted that in March , the then Ministers of Transport and Foreign Affairs authorised officials to negotiate an air services agreement with members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN); noted that in September , following four rounds of negotiations, officials concluded negotiations with their ASEAN counterparts on: . the Air Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand (the Agreement), attached as Attachment to the paper under ECO SUB ; . the associated Protocol to the Air Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand on Third, Fourth and Fifth Freedom Traffic Rights between Parties (the Protocol), attached as Attachment to the paper under ECO SUB ; noted that the Agreement establishes the legal framework permitting services by New Zealand and ASEAN international airlines, as well as operational provisions, doing business provisions and general treaty provisions; noted that the Protocol: . sets out the capacity that airlines of New Zealand and ASEAN may operate, the routes that they can operate, and the traffic they may carry; . contains specific restrictions on New Zealand airlines that were insisted upon by some ASEAN members; noted that the Agreement and the Protocol would replace New Zealands air services agr eements with each of the ASEAN members (with the exception of Brunei and Singapore where the Multilateral Agreement on the Liberalization of International Air Transportation is the current air services treaty); noted that, in the event of any discrepancy between the Agreement and the Protocol, and the existing air services agreements, the more open provision would prevail; PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA I N C O N F I D E N C E ECO MIN I N C O N F I D E N C E iaobcml approved the text of the Agreement and the text of the Protocol; agreed that New Zealand may sign the Agreement, subject to any changes of a minor or technical nature that might arise from the verification process; agreed that New Zealand may sign the Protocol, subject to any changes of a minor or technical nature that might arise from the verification process; noted that, as they are multilateral treaties, the Agreement and Protocol are required to undergo parliamentary treaty examination in accordance with Standing Order ; approved the National Interest Analysis, attached as Attachment to the paper under ECO SUB ; agreed that the National Interest Analysis be presented to the House of Representatives following New Zealands signature of the Agreement and Protocol; agreed that New Zealand may deposit with the ASEAN Secretariat an instrument of ratification for the Agreement and an instrument of ratification for the Protocol; noted that the Agreement will enter into force on the of deposit of the instrument of ratification, acceptance, or approval with the Depositary (the ASEAN Secretariat) by New Zealand and at least two ASEAN member states; noted that the Protocol will enter into force on the of deposit of the instrument of ratification, acceptance, or approval with the Depositary (the ASEAN Secretariat) by New Zealand and at least two ASEAN member states; authorised the Associate Minister of Transport to issue a media statement advising Cabinets decision to approve signing and ratification by New Zealand of the Agreement and of the Protocol.
On August , the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Transport, the Mayor of Auckland and an Auckland Councillor signed the ATAP
On June , the Government announced increases in PED and RUC over years. They came into effect on September , July and July .
On March , the Associate Minister of Transport agreed to reauthorise the alliance (Restated Master Coordination Agreement) between Qantas and Emirates for years from March until March . The Minister of Transport first authorised the alliance in and reauthorised in .
On September , the Minister of Transport signed the new Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits , replacing the Rule. You can find the new Rule on the NZTA website here:
On January , the Government announced the NZD billion New Zealand Upgrade Programme, which includes NZD. billion of Crown investment across land transport projects in rail, roads, public transport and walking and cycling infrastructure across New Zealand.
On June , we advised you of an extension to the time period for responding to your request. The extension was due to consultations necessary to make a decision on your request being such that a proper response could not reasonably be made within the original time limit. We have now completed the necessary consultations.
On April , Minister Brown
On June , KiwiRail signed a contract with the Korean shipyard Hyundai Mipo Dockyard (HMD) for the delivery of two new ferries to service Cook Strait. This is part of a wider project (Project iReX) to procure new ferries and develop the landside infrastructure in Picton and Wellington to accommodate the new ferries.
On June , KiwiRail signed a contract with the Korean shipyard Hyundai Mipo Dockyard (HMD) for the delivery of two new ferries to service Cook Strait. This is part of a wider project (Project iReX) to procure new ferries and develop the landside infrastructure in Picton and Wellington to accommodate the new ferries. Given the significance of Project iReX, KiwiRails status as a StateOwned Enterprise, and the fact that Crown funding has been allocated towards Project iReX, KiwiRail has engaged with Ministers and Government departments throughout this process.
On December , the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee:
On June , the Government confirmed the direction and funding commitment to deliver the NZ Upgrade Programme (NZUP).
On May , the Government announced its Electric Vehicles Programme. This included measures to increase the number of electric vehicles in New Zealand with a goal of reaching approximately , electric vehicles on our roads by the end of .
On May , Auckland Council submitted to us as joint Ministers a proposal to vary the Scheme. On December , the Cabinet Economic Development Committee agreed that the Scheme be varied in the manner set out in the Councils proposal. The changes include reallocating funding among the existing programme of capital projects and changing project descriptions and timeframes.
On October , Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport released Charging our future: National electric vehicle charging strategy for Aotearoa New Zealand .
On this request was refined , via email to you, to include responses from the following categories related to the summary of engagement for the draft Government Policy Statement on Lan d Transport : Construction, engineering and commercial sectors Road and rail groups Other groups
On Wednesday September , NZTA met with HBRRA to confirm the clear direction that councils, as road controlling authorities and approved organisations, are to deal directly with NZTA, and should not work through the HBRRA going forward regarding their recovery funding applications. In the meantime, NZTA is working to expedite the release of funding and bespoke FAR, as well as assessing how to support an increasing programme of work on local roads.
On releasing the GPS , Cabinet recognised the importance of changing the NZ Transport Agency investment decisionmaking framework to recognise the wider costs and benefits that land transport investment can have. This work is key to ensuring that the Governments vision for transforming the land transport system can be realised.
On the May the Minister of Transport released Te Manat Wakas (the Ministry of Transports) green paper Hkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by . It sets out potential pathways and policies to phase out emissions across the transport system.
On time performance is an aviation industry measurement, defined as a flight
Onroad vehicles are the largest source of nitrogen oxides and a significant source of particulate matter smaller than . microns (PM.). When vehicles burn fuel they produce a variety of gases and particles that vary depending on the type and quality of fuel used, and the combustion process itself. Many of the most hazardous pollutants are formed from incomplete combustion. The main pollutants emitted are carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, volatile organic compounds and nitrogen oxides.
One of its first priorities is to develop a National Aviation Policy Statement setting out the longterm principles, objectives and outcomes and act as an enduring direction for the system.
Ongoing Finance Officials to provide additional information on the Transport Choices year claims situation. Complete Safety Setting of Speed Limits Rule Officials to provide advice on variable speed limits and implementation dates for schools .
Ongoing Metropolitan rail funding Officials to discuss with KiwiRail the timing of funding decisions. Complete Decisions Confirmed Denied Publish the Total Mobility Review terms of reference on Ministry website . Confirmed
Ongoing appropriation management
Only vehicleuse exhaust CO
Opening up special vehicle lanes to EVs is a decision for RCAs, in consultation with communities.
Operating cost pressures Existing rail strategies could better reflect climate change priorities Officials from KiwiRail and Waka Kotahi note that the Rail Plan is very good at laying out the priorities for the next years from a resilience and reliability perspective, Recent inclement weather events have reconfirmed the pressing need to realistically appraise the costs of climate change adaptation on the transp ort network (including rail) and prioritise investment accordingly. A pragmatic focus on adaptation may mean tightly prioritising mitigation investments into areas where they are likely to generate the largest reductions in emissions. s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of The current Rail Plan is largely silent on climate change initiatives, noting these as future opportunities. GPS points to the Rail Plan in respect of its priorities, without providing specific guidance. Critically, a resilient and reliable network is needed at baseline to deliver both mitigation and adaptation benefits and is the foundation for future projects to deliver increased capacity for freight and passenger transport. Availability and reliability are central to attracting commercial and passenger users to the network and enabling this mode sh ift.
Operating environment Waka Kotahi manages the countrys state highway network on behalf of the Crown and is directly responsible for the operation and maintenance of over ,km or , lane km of roads. This includes the management of traffic flows and the response to crashes and natural events using traffic operations centres staffed a nd operated in partnership with local road network providers. Waka Kotahi also manages the maintenance of state highway infrastructure including a network of roads, bridges, tunnels, and retaining walls and supporting assets such as drains and water channe ls, Intelligent Transport Systems (i.e., equipment which supports traffic operations and incident management), delineation (road markingslines), and signage. Road maintenance services are outsourced through year contracts tendered on a multi year sta ggered schedule. Each NLTP period (triennially), Waka Kotahi prepares a detailed business case that provides the proposed investment in the operating, maintenance and renewal expenditure required to best give effect to the words written in the GPS and to m eet its obligations relative to One Network Road Classification (ONRC) outcomes for Access Resilience, Mobility, Amenity and Safety. In , this was called the State Highway Investment Proposal (SHIP) and in it was renamed the State Highway Activity Management Plan (SHAMP). Waka Kotahi has been through a significant amount of change with a number of organisational restructures since its formation, with major changes occurring at the start of the investment period and another a t the start of the investment period. The latest restructure intends to enhance the operating model of the Transport Services group responsible for overseeing design, delivery and management of the land transport system and its infrastructure. Both the NLTF and Road Controlling Authorities are under significant financial pressures and face wider industry resourcing challenges. For this reason, it is important for The Ministry and Waka Kotahi to ensure value for money is front of mind for everything they do, whilst ensuring investment decisions deliver the best outcomes possible for New Zealand.
Operational Performance Measures (OPMs)
Operations and maintenance delivery performance
Opiates, such as morphine, and cocaine.
Opportunity to visit an Auckland maintenance work site. Paving work is scheduled for the th, with the road being closed from pm and the new pavement being laid from am. This work will be weather dependent. Yes No Maybe Upcoming Media items of release Subject Week beginning Monday September WaikatoBay of Plenty SH road rehabilitation: A media statement is planned for release during the week beginning September advising of road rehabilitation work on Athenree Gorge, SH. Stopgo traffic management will be in place for two to three weeks. Week beginning Monday September Central North Island work progress at White Pine Bush (SH): A media statement is planned for release during the week beginning September to mark the completion of a project at White Pine Bush on SH, which saw a retaining wall built, and the restoration of two lanes following cyclone damage. Week beginning Monday September Top of the South SH Weld Pass night closures: A media statement will be sent to regional media about planned maintenance and night closures planned for October October . The road will be closed between pm and am with midnight openings to let queued traffic through. No appropriate local road detours are available and those that are in situ cannot be used by heavy vehicles. Week beginning Monday October Top of the South SH Tunnicliffe Bridge closures: A media statement is planned for release to preview six weeks of night closures planned from late Oct oberearly Nov ember for road rebuild at SH Tunnicliffe Bridge, Motupiko, Tasman. Week beginning Monday October Top of the South SH road rebuild, Canvastown: A media statement is planned for release to preview three weeks of stopgo traffic management planned to allow road rebuild works on SH Canvastown scheduled for OctoberNovember . Tuesday October Central North Island Devils Elbow media site visit: A media site visit is planned for October to Devils Elbow on S H to highlight the progress on work in the area. TBC Lower North Island SH Remutaka Hill emergency works: A media release is planned to preview emergency works planned for SH Remutaka Hill to repair an underslip and overslip on the Featherston side of the hill. This work will require Sunday Thursday night closures over the next two months starting October .
Option was recommended for further exploration and the business
Options for the public service delivery model being developed
Options on how to progress this work are still being considered.
Order in Council. Ministry of Transport officials investigated with the
Orders in Council , will come into force on October .
Orders in Council engagement material Severe Weather Transpor t Response June
Orders to the attention of the House of Representative under Standing Order
Organisation names can be written in full first, with the accepted abbreviation in brackets.
Organisations should always be spelled as they want to be spelled.
Otago Southland Regional Transport Committee
Other Activities to Support Future Evaluations . Transport Investment Input Cost Drivers The buying power of transport investment appears to be diminishing as many transport investment proposals are suffering from cost increases. This study aims at identifying the causes of recent changes in transport sector infrastructure costs. Findings from this study will provide insights that support decisions across the projectprogramme life cycle, including evaluations and reviews of transport investments. Oneoff Phase Study completed Conduct a Phase study to investigate into infrastructure project cost estimation process and opportunities for mitigate such effects through adoption of relevant international best practice Disseminate findings
Other Projects Region Recovery and rebuild Nationwide Regional resilience Nationwide
Other Region Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure Nationwide
Other actions: Action : Implementing alternative funding, financing, and delivery models Action .: Considering alternative funding and financing Completed Wave Public Private Partnership candidate assessments. The Northland RoNS, Mt Victoria Long Tunnel, and the Waitemata Harbour Connections are the next logical candidates. The Northland Corridor Investment Case is progressing well. Our current recommendation is that it is considered as a staged Public Private Nil Green Report back to Cabinet on the Northland Corridor (cost, funding, and delivery) November .
Other activities . Since the last sponsors meeting, we have focused on:
Other amendments included:
Other changes proposed in the rule change included removing the need for licence endorsements for specialtype vehicles like forklifts, and improving Waka Kotahis oversight of providers approved to teach people to drive.
Other infrastructure providers (such as Transpower) have limited functions and face economic regulation, which encourages efficiency and a stronger focus on asset management . You have options to progress further reform and address these issues We can provide advice on a work programme to address these issues . We will seek your direction around scope, approach, and timing of any further work you wish to commission. Rail How the rail system works As the Minister of Transport, you are responsible for rail investment, regulation and system stewardship. You also approve the Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP) and associated Budget bids. KiwiRail owns and operates below rail network infrastructure (e.g. , tracks, bridges, and tunnels) . It also owns and operates freight and tourism services including some above rail assets (e.g. , locomotives, wagons, carriages , and facilities). Councils also own above rail assets for metro passenger services and contract out operations to third parties. NZTA oversees land transport planning and investment activities, which includ es rail (including providing a statutory assessment of the RNIP) , and serves as the rail safety regulator. The Ministry is responsible for regulation, strategy, funding arrangements, system performance assessment and Crown entity performance monitoring (including of NZTA in its rail safety regulatory role ). We also have a monitoring role in key projects such as the City Rail Link (CRL). Shareholding Ministers (the Minister for Rail and Minister of Finance) set expectations and priorities for KiwiRail for its commercial activities, as well as the New Zealand Railways Corporation and Ferry Holdings Limited. The Treasury is responsible for monitoring KiwiRails above rail commercial performance and advising on Crown funding for rail. The Crown is a significant funder of rail through the NLTF and the Budget process. Other funding include s KiwiRail customer revenue, Track User Charges, passenger fares from metro r ail, and council rates. Priority work underway includes : reforms to metro rail , to address issues with system management, governance, maintenance , and the existing funding model. Supporting Treasury to provide advice on the procurement of new Cook Strait ferries. Working with Greater Wellington Regional Council to deliver an improved schedule of commuter services between Wellington and the Wairarapa and Manawat . Monitoring delivery of the Auckland City Rail Link and working with other agencies to ensure we are prepared for day operations.
Other legislative changes
Other new legislation associated with the new framework is linked below:
Other points Program versus project reporting and management considerations to be carefully considered i.e. when to treat an initia tive as a project and when to treat it as a program.
Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications
Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications Committees Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) Wednesday September Live Animal Exports Review This initiative relates to the Governments coalition agreement to reverse the recent ban on live animal exports while ensuring the highest standards of animal welfare.
Other renewal programme delivery performance
Other requirements include limits on nitrogen oxide emissions from many installed ship engines over kW, controls on ozone depleting substances and restrictions on the incineration of waste. Ships GT or more are required to reduce overall carbon emissions through more energy efficient ship design and operations. Implementing these changes will be good for our coastal communities and the marine and coastal environment.
Other significant topics included a presentation by Airways on uncrewed aircraft management, addressing workforce shortages in the aviation sector, and incorporating a Te Ao Mori perspective into the Councils work.
Other studies of the New Zealand GDLS Effects of changing the minimum driving age Begg and Langley () qualitatively examined various arguments made (at the time) against raising the minimum driving age in New Zealand from to years old, which was subsequently implemented in . Of relevance to the current study, the authors e xamined the argument that increasing the minimum age would simply shift crashes from yearold drivers to andor yearold drivers and there would be no net reduction in crashes. The authors noted the evidence that crash rates generally decline wit h age (all else being equal), and hence any increase in crashes among or yearold drivers due to reduced driving experience should be less than the number of crashes involving yearold drivers that were prevented as a result of raising the minimu m age, and thus there should be a net reduction in the number of crashes. Parental influences on restricted drivers Brookland et al () examined the extent to which parents influenced compliance with driving conditions and crashes of their adolescent c hildren while holding restricted licences. The authors found that various parental factors affected the compliance of their children with restricted driving conditions, including parental knowledge of these conditions, permitting their children to own vehi cles, and parent crash involvement. Adolescents were also more likely to be involved in a crash while on a restricted licence if their parents actively delayed their children from obtaining a driver licence, permitted their children to own vehicles, or had been involved in a crash themselves. Advanced driver training Begg and Brookland () analysed the relationship between participation in advanced driving courses (with and without time discounts) at the restricted licence stage and traffic offenses whe n fully licensed. The main finding was that drivers who received a time discount for advanced driver training were between and more likely to receive a traffic offense notice while on their full licence. .. A selection of international literature Meta studies of the effects of introducing a GDLS Russell et al () reviewed evaluations of introducing a GDLS in the United States, Canada, New Zealand, and Australia and reported that all of these studies found that this led to a reduction in crash es among teenage drivers. However, the estimated effects varied considerably across studies, depending on country specific and implementation factors, as well as the data and empirical methods used. For example, among the studies that analysed all types of crashes involving yearold drivers, in the first year after introducing a GDLS, population based rates of such crashes were found to reduce by and after adjusting for other factors that may also have reduced crash rates at the same time. Long term reductions in crashes were found to be similar at between and . Williams et al () did a similar review, focussing on research on graduated licensing between and . They report that all evaluations in their review found that introducing a GDLS was associated with a reduction in crash rates among yearold drivers. They also report more limited evidence of positive effects for yearold drivers, but unclear effects for and yearold drivers. In terms of the effects of specific driving
Our report also compared the adoption of electric cars, hybrid cars, electric bikes and selfdriving cars in New Zealand with the United States, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Norway, China and Singapore.
Our Acting Chief Executive
Our Future Demand project explored how our personal travel needs might change by developing scenarios for the future of transport through to . They were not predictions or preferences for the transport system, but rather a range of plausible ideas that could help to inform government transport investment decisions
Our Future of the Transport Revenue System work will enable New Zealand to move with confidence and certainty towards a renewed transport revenue system that will be fit for purpose for the next to years.
Our Senior Leadership Team
Our aim was to explore the challenges and opportunities ahead rather than come to a definitive policy position. The work reflected our thinking and the papers were designed to stimulate debate.
Our audit reports refer only to those financial statements named within a particular audit report. They do not provide an opinion on any other information that may have been hyperlinked tofrom those audited financial statements.
Our aviation regulatory system needs to be agile and internationally credible
Our aviation security settings are guided by and based on international standards, known threats,
Our conclusions were that we need to:
Our current focus is on the question How can government play an effective part in ensuring the cybersecurity of automated vehicles acknowledging the need for cybersecurity governance frameworks, risk management frameworks, and the roles and responsibilities of private companies.
Our focus is on issues around data privacy as this is a primary concern of the public. We will seek to answer the question How fitforpurpose are New Zealands current privacy laws in the age of AVs and will include reference to public perception of AVs and a short component outlining the EUs AV policy.
Our focus is on understanding the importance and relevance of network connectivity in AVs deployment, and identifying the most important components of a connected ecosystem for the operation of automated vehicles in New Zealand.
Our followers can expect to receive regular updates including:
Our initial analysis compared the percentage of activities in each TIO Activity Class (grouped into roadingother, active transport, and public transport refer to Table ) with the percentage of activities in each weighted category. This analysis aimed to identify differences between the TIO Activity Classes assigned to activities with the activities categorised by which modes they support (Categorisation). Figure demonstrates that the percentage of mode shift promoting TIO Activity Classes (active and public transport) relative to road ingother classes was relatively consistent between GPS and . However, in GPS , both mode shift promoting classes saw a noticeable increase (), while the percentage of roading and other classes decreased. The graph also shows how the public transport classes consistently have a larger share of activities than the active transport class, which increased in the period.
Our monthly reporting covers
Our officials together with Treasury and the Provincial Development Unit within the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) were tasked with undertaking further work on the issue. They considered options for relocating the Port of Auckland:
Our overall finding from the first phase of the project was that congestion pricing shows real promise as a means to help address Aucklands congestion. We learnt valuable lessons from international experiences of congestion pricing about the importance of public engagement and the need to take a staged approach.
Our paper aims to provide the drone that is, unmanned aircraft (UA) sector with a clear understanding of the Governments role and strategic direction in safely integrating drones into the aviation system and broader transport system.
Our paper explained how this approach can be applied to transport projects and how to carry out a real options analysis. It was informed by a report on adaptive investment management that we commissioned from ACIL Allen Consulting in .
Our people have different backgrounds and experiences its part of what makes this a great place to work. You can get involved in a range of different subject matter areas, and work with a variety of people at all levels across groups and teams.
Our plan is to make information available (including thinkpieces and background material) as these are developed.
Our regime sought to use these devices as a roadside testing tool, a device that detects qualifying substances above a threshold to allow the issuing of roadside infringements, similar to how alcohol breath testing is run in New Zealand.
Our research explored the longterm future of public transport in New Zealands cities, in a world where transport technologies and services are rapidly changing. This work and the discussion it provoked has helped to inform transport planning.
Our research showed that public transport needs to be at the core of a future where shared mobility dominates or we risk facing higher levels of congestion and more cars in our cities.
Our review considered the SPS regulatory framework contained in the Land Transport Act and Land Transport Rule: Operator Licensing . We worked with the Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency and the police to review the SPS sector.
Our role has been to support the Minister of Transport to assess the Governments share of the project including the funding arrangement, any wider policy implications, and subsequently the withdrawal of central government.
Our second forum included updates from government agencies and
Our secondary objectives:
Our social media accounts are monitored Monday to Friday .ampm. We will respond to private messages, as soon as we can, during business hours.
Our third forum was solely focussed on the Colmar Brunton drone survey conducted in New Zealand.
Our vision for New Zealands transport system includes:
Our work at the Ministry covers policy, legislation and regulation, reviewing and setting RUC levels, and the system performance. We work closely with New Zealand Transport Agency Waka Kotahi to ensure that the RUC system is responsive to changes in the sector and Government priorities.
Our work includes the Government work programme, focusareaspecific deliverables and organisational foundations.
Our work is guided by a strategic framework that aligns with the Governments aim to improve New Zealanders wellbeing and quality of life no matter where they live in the country.
Our work programme seeks to reduce transport emissions and contribute to New Zealands international commitments.
Our working paper, Public transport , was intended to provoke dialogue, and to challenge the assumptions that public transport in would be only slightly different from or alternatively, that it would look completely different in every way.
Out of Scope R E L E A S E D U N D E R T H E OF F I C I A L I N F OR MA T I ON A C T
Out of the fonts that we use , Domine is a font that we use under the Google font licence. Our other three fonts are included in either our Microsoft or Adobe packages.
Outcomes Outcomes are a key element in value for money assessments. The GPS directs short term investment focus year plan but emphasis is on yearly increments. However, the time horizon for the realisation of benefits and outcomes can be much longer.
Outcomes management: The Ministry monitors the progress that the whole transport sector is making. The Ministry will publish new outcome measures and indicators i n , based on our refreshed outcomes framework. outcome indicators are used as a measure of the overall progress being made, and to help identify further opportunities for the Ministry to contribute. We wil l report on these measures annually T he Ministry will publish these indicators in its annual report each year to assess its cost effectiveness and identify areas for improvement.
Outline of transport work programme for Extreme Weather Recovery Committee included in briefing to Minister
Outlining the Governments longterm vision and priorities for New Zealands national rail network.
Output Plan March
Outputs of MoT will be: Policy advice, including advice relating to all modes of transport and associated rules programmes Governance and performance advice and support Land transport revenue forecasting and strategy Refund of fuel excise duty Road user charges collection, investigation and enforcement Airport operation and administration, which is for the operation of Milford SoundPiopiotahi Aerodrome Statement of intent https:www.transport.govt.nzab outgovernancestatementsofint entstatementofintent
Outputs will be: New and investment principles and policies. and new monetised benefits. Better understanding, measurement, and consideration of how transport investment impacts social, environmental, cultural, and economic outcomes. Changes to how investment proposals are assessed and prioritised. Improvements to website navigation and new or resources
Outside of work, Paul lives in Karori with a poorly trained but very cute dog and runs a daily poetry mailing list thats been going since .
Over years, while Northports efforts to remake the harbour for the port industrys increasing profitmaking, the Te Parawhau Hapu has been alienated from te reo Maori me nga tikanga Maori language and culture, continual land grabs of the tribal land and sea, wetlands, sacred sites, and fish, birds, and plants at Te Koutu, Te Poupouwhenua. Northports legacies are profoundly discriminating, inequitable, and unequal; a form of industrial colonisation of the land and sea, the fresh and the coastal water, the marine, bird, and plant life, and the Ahikaaroa living on the ancestral land in Takahiwai. The rare and endangered species, Indigenous flora and fauna, marine creatures, and birds at Te Koutu, Te Poupouwhenua are at risk of the multiple potential harmful impacts of s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT industrial invasion, from the noise of the machinery that harms wildlife, to the activity killing animals and plants on the seabed that are ancient and cannot be remade. Of course, the Tangata Whenua, Te Parawhau Hapu, prefer to be the designers of our relationship with the Ministry of Transport and Northport Ltd. Liberal democracy exists because we all think differently. The Hapu, the Ministry, and Northports people bring different experiences, values, and aspirations to our ideas about what governments and their agencies should and shouldnt do. There is no objective truth in the business of government. Democracy developed to manage these differences. Sometimes, however dominant populations use the democratic system to protect their selfinterest rather than accommodate the rights and interests of others. On a general policy position, the modern paradox proclaimed by the Waitangi Tribunal accepts that a Maori presence and ancestral values underpin Resource Management Act matters. The Te Parawhau Hapu understands from the modern paradox that the regional interests actively disrespect the local, the global interests disrespect the local, the regional, and the national. All citizens, though, are entitled to a parity of esteem; in other words, a fair go that strikes a reasonable balance between the interests of the Hapu, Maori, the Ministry, other publics, and private interests. Thinking about what general policy should achieve from an Indigenous cultural perspective or through an Indigenous language should not be a disadvantage. Otherwise, the Te Parawhau Hapu lose our rangatiratanga and mana, and the wildlife lose our voice, and all of life loses equal respect. It is fair , then, to ask the Ministry to recognise and provide for the whanaungatanga relationship of the Te Parawhau Hapu as the Tangata Whenua to Te Koutu, Te Poupouwhenua, and our Whanaungatanga with all life that will be affected by the Ministrys action. This is a strong direction as per the Privy Council in McGuire versus the Hastings District Council; as well as the Supreme Court wherein Justice Joe Williams in TransTasman Resources Ltd described relationships of this type as: the longeststanding human related interests in that place. As with all interests, they reflect the relevant values of the interestholder. Those valuesmana, whanaungatanga and kaitiakitanga are relational. They are also principles of law that predate the arrival of the common law in . No reira, ka mihi. Naku noa na Mere
Over several months we met with a wide range of people with an interest in road safety, including regional and local road safety groups, industry and advocacy groups, and iwi. We heard a broad range of perspectives and concerns about road safety. Stakeholders clearly wanted substantial change but held different views about how and when change should happen.
Over the three years of the programme, (M) of expenditure is related to activities where performance is linked to the Network Outcomes Contract Key Results Area performance framework and associated Operational Performance Measures. Overall, results indicate that contract teams are, on average, meeting acceptable (or better) standards of contract performance against the key areas. However, instances were observed where a supplier exceeded thresholds in operational performance measures and triggered a performance penalty. Waka Kotahi revised the performance framework in to move away from a selfassessment model, although operational performance measures which reflect the Contractors ability to successfully manage the network, physical works programmes, incident, and customer care remain self audited. Based on the performance framework results, the performa nce indicates that this component () of the investment, although M above budget, can be considered generally efficient. However, the breaches in operational performance measures are potentially indicating a lower level of effectiveness in the underpi nning systems and processes used by Network Outcomes Contract Suppliers to meet requirements. A level of independent supervision on operational performance measures by Waka Kotahi would increase transparency and credibility of this performance framework. Given the declining condition of the State Highways, further consideration is needed to ensure the framework is measuring the right parameters to ensure optimal value for money is realised from this investment. Pavement and surfacing renewal programme delivery performance
Over the three years of the programme, approximately of expenditure is related to pavement and surfacing renewals. Waka Kotahi maintains comprehensive information on this aspect of the investment. A large pavement and surfacing work programme were successfully delivered, achieving of targeted quantities, treating , lane kilometres, approximately of the network. Whilst the majority () of the pavement and surfacing renewal outputs were delivered to target quantities across the funding block and recognised by the Review Team as a significant achievement, it was observed that: i. of the targets were notdelivered and unapproved work was completed ii. material cost variances from budgets occurred, indicating a level of inefficiency converting agreed investment into delivered outputs. The pavement rehabilitation programme delivered less length and cost more than targeted (resulting in unit costs being more than budgeted). Across the surfacing programme, less was resurfaced than expected at more cost than budgeted correlating to a increase in unit cost. iii. of all works completed were identified as having potential post construction performance issues (from very minor texture deficiencies through to significant rutting and roughness issues). This equates to a potential contractual refund to Waka Kotahi of approximately M, which represents approximately of the total state highway maintenance in vestment over the period. iv. Waka Kotahi also appeared to have deviated somewhat from its treatment intervention strategy with lower classification roads receiving greater quantities of work than proposed in the Business Case. The level of variance and related condition health is illustrated below.
Overall impact of the GPS What could improve or enhance the impact of the GPS Optimise the small funding margins for funding and address the piecemeal nature of mode shift project portfolios. NLTF could have a greater impact by funding the long term, complex projects needed to achieve mode shift. GPS could better consider wider national local strategies, plans, policies, and aspirations. Take advantage of opportunities for mode shift from other factors affecting land use an d urban form.
Overall wait times compared to the day target:
Overall, linking benefits realisation to outcomes is a good thing. Clearly articulating all outcomesbenefits may help to discourage reliance on benefit cost ratios. However, the current benefits fr amework needs to be further developed. The Investment Decision Making Framew ork (IDMF) is revising the benefit framework and management approach. As part of this, a nonmonetised benefits manual is being drafted. Adopting ap proaches like the UK Appraisal Summary Tables (ASTs) may offer advantages; multi criteria analysis an d environmental and social impact statements may also cont ribute to considering wider outcomes.
Overall, the Review Team concluded investment enabled the successful delivery of a significant work programme, resulting in , lane kms of roads being resurfaced or rehabilitated, more than , maintenance interventions being undertaken, , incidents responded to (including , crashes attended) and , customer enquires managed. Waka Kotahi also managed to resolve of all incidents within targeted timeframes despite growing demand on the network and number of incidents closing the State Highways. An assessment of the relationship between input and outputs for the period was conducted to determine whether the investment delivered optimal outputs with minimal wasted effort, resources, or expense. To do this we reviewed a range of efficiency and effectiveness measures (identified in the table below). This was done with the intent of assessing whether we are getting the best value for money from this investment, taking into consideration whole of life costs.
Overview of GPS .
PED increased by . cents per litre on September and RUC increased by around . on October .
PEP Public Engagement Projects
POALs CBD freight operation is no longer economically or environmentally viable, and is constrained by landside infrastructure failure. It is in the interests of taxpayers and ratepayers that it be progressively closed and the land it currently occupies be progressively rezoned for better uses.
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA . Each Party may request consultations at any time concerning the safety standards maintained by another Party in areas relating to aeronautical facilities, flight crew, aircraft , and the operation of aircraft. Such consultations shall take place within days of that request. . If, following such consultations, one Party finds that the said other Party does not effectively maintain and administer safety standards in the areas referred to in paragraph that meet the ICAO Standards established at that time pursuant to the Convention , that other Party shall be informed of such findings and of the steps considered necessary to conform with the ICAO Standards . That other Party shall then take appropriate corrective action. Failure by the other Party to take appropriate corrective action within days or such longer period as may be agreed, shall be grounds for the application of Article (Withholding, Revocation, Suspension and Limitation of Authorisation). . Notwithstanding the obligations mentioned in Article of the Convention, it is agreed that any aircraft operated by or, under a lease arrangement, on behalf of the airline or airlines of one Party on services to or from the territory of the other Party may, while within the territory of the other Party, be made the subject of an examination by the authorised representatives of the other Party, on board and around the aircraft to check both the validity of the aircraft documents and those of its flight cre w and the apparent condition of the aircraft and its equipment (hereinafter referred to as ramp inspection), provided this does not lead to unreasonable delay. . If any such ramp inspection or a series of ramp inspections gives rise to serious concerns that:
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA . With reference to paragraph , if it is determined that one Party remains in non compliance with ICAO Standards when the agreed time period has lapsed, the Secretary General of ICAO should be advised thereof. The latter should also be advised of the subsequent satisfactory resolution of the situation.
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA ARTICLE FAIR COMPETITION
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA (b) an airline or airlines of a third country ,
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA (b) that the financial benefit to be obtained by the lessor airline will not be dependent on the profit or loss of the operation of the designated airline concerned; and (c) that the responsibility for the continued airworthiness and the adequacy of operating and maintenance standards of any leased aircraft operated by the designated airline concerned w ill be established in conformity with the Convention. . A designated airline is not otherwise prohibited from providing air services using leased aircraft (or aircraft and crew) provided that any lease arrangement entered into satisfies the conditions listed in paragraph .
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA ARTICLE RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER AGREEMENTS
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA ANNEX I
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA (c) Air service, international air service, airline, and stop for non traffic purposes have the meanings assigned to them in Article of the Convention;
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA Operational Flexibility
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA ANNEX II
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA ANNEX III
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA (j) D esignated airline means an airline which has been designated and authorised in accordance with Article (Designation and Authorisation);
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA (b) the Party designating the airline is in compliance with the provisions set forth in Article (Safety) and Article (Aviation Security); and
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA (b) the other Party is not maintaining and administering the standards as set forth in Article (Safety) and Article (Aviation Security); or
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA I N C O N F I D E N C E ECO MIN I N C O N F I D E N C E iaobcml Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Minute of Decision
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCEINCONFIDENCE INCONFIDENCE Annex Offic e of the Associate Minister of Transport Chair: Cabinet Economic Policy Committee NEW ZEALAND ASEAN AIR SERVICES AGREEMENT AND PROTOCOL Proposal This paper seeks approval for New Zealand to sign and ratify: the Air Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand (the Agreement); and the associated Protocol to the Air Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand on Third, Fourth and Fifth Freedom Traffic Rights between Parties (the Protocol) . Relation to government priorities The signing and ratification of the Agreement and Protocol supports the Government s target t o double the value of exports in ten years . Trade, tourism and people topeople linkages are dependent on the ability of airlines to respond quickly to changing market conditions and to new opportunities. The Agreement and Protocol will provide the opportunity to enhance New Zealands international connectivity. The New Zealand Governments strategic interest in ASEAN aims to foster a politically cohesive, economically integrated, and socially responsible region. This partnership enhances New Zealands engagement in ASEAN led mechanisms, promoting peace, prosperity, and sustainable development. Over the past years, New Zealand ASEAN trade has grown significantly, from US million in to nearly NZD billion this year. Executive Summary In September , New Zealand and the ten members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) concluded the negotiation on an Air Services Agreement and associated Protocol. T he Agreement and Protocol are intended to enhance, and replace , the ten individual air services agreements New Zealand has signed with ASEAN member countries. The replacement treaties create new opportunities for New Zealand and ASEAN airlines. The Protocol was concluded at ASEANs request . It specifies the traffic rights that are available to the parties. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCEINCONFIDENCE INCONFIDENCE This outcome is consistent with New Zealands long standing air services policy , i.e., it: lifts the overall quality of New Zealands air services arrangements with the ten ASEAN members ; and standardises air services provisions such as aviation safety, aviation security and doing business, e.g., provisions relating to opening airline offices, employing staff and repatriating funds , across the ten ASEAN members . The Agreement and Protocol also further enhance the overall New Zealand ASEAN relationship, given air services are a key enabler of tourism, trade and people to people links. The Government has committed to significantly enhancing New Zealands priority bilateral relationships in Southeast Asia: Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Viet Nam, as well as with ASEAN generally. An opportunity to formalise and expand these linkages will occur at the ASEAN Transport Ministers meeting in Malaysia in November , where a signing ceremony for the Agreement and Protocol has been proposed. As the Agreement and Protocol are multilateral treaties, Cabinet approval is required and they must undergo parliamentary treaty examination in accordance with Standing Order . Accordingly, a National Interest Analysis is attached for presentation to the House of Representatives. Background Under an international system dating back to the s, airlines are able to operate international services only where the right to do so has been expressly permitted in a bilateral air services agreement (ASA) or one of the limited number of multilateral agreements. Among other things, ASAs set out the routes airlines may operate , the amount of capacity they are entitled to provide, and the origindestination of their passenger traffic . Aviation safety and security articles are standard, as are provisions relating to doing business matters such as the establishment of local offices , the employment of staff and the repatriation of earnings. New Zealands long standing International Air Transport Policy promotes the negotiation of air services agreement s that will increase New Zealands global connectivity. A precondition to negotiating the Agreement was the conclusion of bilateral air services agreements with each of the ten ASEAN members. T his was in order to provide confidence that , in the event o f the Agreement being denounced, the bilateral agreements would be there to fall back on. The precondition was achieved with the signing of an ASA with Myanmar in September (negotiated in July ). In March , the then Ministers of Transport and Foreign Affairs authorised officials: . to negotiate an ASA with ASEAN representatives , which would seek to raise the overall quality of New Zealands air services arrangements with the ASEAN community PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCEINCONFIDENCE INCONFIDENCE . to negotiate the most liberal air services arrangements acceptable to both sides in the event ASEAN was unable to agree to an open skies outcome . to seek a grandfathering provision in respect of any air services rights New Zealand had already secured with individual ASEAN members that would exceed what ASEAN, as a collective, was willing to exchange, and . directed officials following the conclusion of the negotiations to report back to Cabinet for authorisation of the ASA text. Analysis The first round of negotiations, in September , resulted in the near completion of the Agreement text. However, three further rounds of negotiations were required to conclude the more contentious aspects centred on the rights that would be available to the airlines of each side. The particular significance and value of the Agreement and Protocol are that they create new opportunities for New Zealand and ASEAN airlines. This includes two key enhancements : (i) allowing no limits on the number of non stop flights that may be operated by New Zealand and ASEAN carriers ; and (ii) New Zealand airlines gaining increased flexibility to operate flights between ASEAN members and third countries. Taking the Philippines as a representative example: . New Zealand airlines are currently limited to operating five services per week beyond the Philippines to a single destination in China. . Under the Protocol, New Zealand airlines will be able to operate an additional seven times per week between a choice of four cities in the Philippines and any destination in a third country. With the exception of Manila, which will stay at seven, such flights at the other three cities will subsequently increase to services per week. . Ai rlines of the Philippines get a similar i ncrease in opportunities when operati ng t o New Ze aland. Full det ails of the enhanc ements ar e in the attached National I nt erest A nalysis. New Zeal and pressed f or a hi ghlevel out come t hat w ould create t he most open operating environment for ai rlines bu t not all ASEAN m embers sh ared t his level of ambiti on, as reflected i n the final out come. Although some A SEAN members remained resistant t o arguments for gr eater openness, and have placed restrictions on flights t hat may be ope rated by New Zealand carriers be tween their country and t hird countries, the Prot ocol represents an i mprovement on t he rights currently ava ilable with ASEAN members as a whole. Officials di d not pl ace reciprocal r estrictions on A SEAN ai rlines beca use: (i) t he overall N ew Zealand aim w as to create new oppo rtunities f or airlines, and this w ould not be achieved by imposing restrictions in return; and (ii) s ()(j) s ()(j) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE INCONFIDENCE INCONFIDENCE enabled by this proposal are difficult to quantify and are more likely to be taken up by ASEAN airlines. Population Implications Approval to sign and ratify the Agreement and Protocol would not have implications for any specific population groups . Human Rights Use of external resources No external resources were involved in the negotiation of the Agreement and Protocol. Consultation This paper was prepared by the Ministry of Transport , The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, The Treasury, New Zealand Customs Service, the Ministry for Business, Innovation and Employment (Immigration New Zealand and Tourism ), the Ministry for Primary Industries (Biosecurity New Zealand) and Ministry for the Environment were consulted on the contents of this paper, and agree with its recommendations . The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet was informed. Communications The Associate Minister of Transport will issue a media statement announc ing the successful negotiation of the Agreement and Protocol . ASEAN may choose to issue a media statement as well . Proactive Release The Associate Minister of Transport intends to release this Cabinet paper , on the new air services arrangements with ASEAN, within business days of Cabinets decision, with redactions as appropriate . Recommendations The Associate Minister of Transport recommends that the Committee: note that, in March , the then Ministers of Transport and Foreign Affairs authorised officials to negotiate an air services agreement with members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) note that, in September , following four rounds of negotiations , officials concluded negotiations with their ASEAN counterparts on:
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Proposal Feedback Options Proposal : Consultation General support for the same public consultation process for all RCAs, including NZTA. Many RCAs felt the consultation requirements were already being met and didnt need to be prescribed. View expressed by the AA that the week consultation window is too short; weeks was preferable. As noted above the AA suggested a more prescriptive list of information is included in consultation. The AA also suggested that the Rule should require RCAs to be satisfied with the level of public support before proceeding with changes. Retain as drafted. The draft Rule requires a minimum week consultation, so RCAs could consult over a longer period if they choose. Alternatively, this minimum period could be increased. As noted above, consideration could be given to requiring a more prescriptive list of information being when speed limit consultation occurs. Or this could be left to NZTAs guidance. Similarly, expecting RCAs to be satisfied with the level of public support could be considered further for the Rule or guidance. Proposal : Variable speed limits outside school gates RCAs and other stakeholder groups provided a lot of comment on the school proposals. RCAs and the AA seemed to want to maintain flexibility for RCAs to work with communities and implement variable speed limit times that works for each school. Some raised the option of permanent or variable speed limits. Existing permanent zones being well supported by communities being cited. Concerns that the definition of outside the school gate does not consider walking routes and will not address congestion, or realise other benefits of active, independent travel to school. Retain as drafted. Allow a more flexible approach to variable speed limit times and distances for each school environment, as well as existing option to activate speed limits for special events outside these times (for example sports event or assembly). This is likely to req uire maintaining the use of electronic signs on main roads. Allow for variable and permanent speed limit changes outside of schools. Proposal : Ministerial Speed Objective Some concerns raised over the risk of the Speed Objective interfering with local decision making and that it potentially signalled a less evidence based approach. Suggestion that the GPS is a better mechanism for the Government to outline its objectives for speed management. Retain as drafted. Remove and leave GPS to signal the Governments objectives for speed management. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E In Confidence Office of the Minister of Transport Cabinet Legislation Committee
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of May OC Hon Simeon Brown Action required by: Minister of Transport Monday, May DRAFT SETTING OF SPEED LIMITS RULE FOR CONSULTATION Purpose Provide you with an draft Cabinet paper, the Regulatory Impact Statement, draft consultation document and draft Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits (the draft Rule) . Following Ministerial and departmental consultation, the Cabinet paper needs to be lodged by am, Thursday May for consideration at the Economic Policy Committee on Wednesday May . Key p oints Following our recent discussion with you, we have the draft Cabinet paper, consultation document , draft Rule and the Regulatory Impact Statement . Officials have continued to follow an iterative development process with the draft Rule. The documents propose a narrower scope of roads subject to speed limit reversal s. The criteria for retaining lower speed limits have also been revised and RCAs will only need to demonstrate public support to retain the lower speed limits on arterial routes and rural State highways . This has been narrowed to rural State highways since the discussion with you. This is discussed further in this briefing. Further work is still required on the draft Rule before it goes to Cabinet, in particular, clause cross references need to be , and the reversal provisions need to explicitly enable reduced speed limits on rural State highways to be considered for various segments of the same corridor. There are also some drafting comments still remaining that are being worked through. The final draft Rule will be provided prior to lodgement . We propose renaming the Ministerial Speed Direction to the Ministerial Speed Objective and have changed the wording around its use. This is to reflect our conversation with you about the role of this tool, where you indicated your preference that RCAs should have regard to it, rather than give effect to. This briefing include s further information about consequential amendments to other land transport rules to enable static variable speed limit signs outside schools . The briefing also includes information about how variable speed limits outside marae are controlled , as you requested . RFXPHQW PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of DRAFT SETTING OF SPEED LIMITS RULE FOR CONSULTATION Changes from the previous iteration of the draft Cabinet paper Following our recent discussions with you we have the suite of documents for you to take to Cabinet. The changes are outlined in more detail below. Refining the scope and process for speed limit reversals The scope of roads to be considered for reversal has been narrowed from all roads that had speed limits reduced since the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits came into effect, to certain roads with speed limits reduced since Road to Zero came into effect ( January ). The documents now propose to reverse speed limits reduced since January in the following areas: . Local streets with permanent kmh due to the presence of a school . Urban connectors (arterial roads) . rural State highways. The stretch of road outside a school gate will need to meet the new variable speed limit requirements and the streets in the surrounding area will need to reverse to their previous speed limit. Reduced speed limits on arterial roads and rural State highways can only be retained if the Road Controlling Authority (RCA) can demonstrate public support for the lower speed limit. For urban connectors the speed limit for the whole corridor will either be reversed or retained. For rural State highways, the RCA would be able to segment the corridor to consult on retaining reduced speed limits on sections where the topography changes, i.e. segmenting a cor ridor by straight segments and windy, hilly segments . Regarding State highways, we understand your concerns are primarily around speed limits being reduced from kmh to kmh (or lower) . To capture this we have referred to rural State highways in the draft Rule. This will exclude State highways in urban environments or passing through town centres. The ability to segment rural State highways is not in the draft Rule as it currently stands. We will ensure it is covered off in the Rule prior to lodgement. The RCA will need to undertake consultation in line with the new consultation requirements in the draft Rule. As part of obtaining public support, RCAs can present economic and safety analysis to inform the consultation process, but this is not mandatory (this is not explicitly covered in the Rule, but can be covered in guidance) . The narrowed scope is expected to deliver the reversals that you are expecting. It is also expected to be a less onerous task for RCAs as they will need to identify fewer roads to be considered for reversal . To retain lower speed limits, RCAs will only need PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of to demonstrate public support rather than the previously proposed criteria of public support, positive economic analysis and a high rate of compliance. Changes to the proposed Ministerial Speed Direction Following our discussion with you, we propose renaming the Ministerial Speed Direction to the Ministerial Speed Objective. This is to reflect our conversation with you about the role of this tool, where you indicated that RCAs should have regard to it, rat her than give effect to. Therefore, the draft Rule requires RCAs to have regard to the Ministerial Speed Objective (alongside the Government Policy Statement on land transport) when considering speed limit changes. The change in scope provides more flexibility for RCAs to respond to safety concerns on their network beyond what may be included in the Objective . Any proposed speed limit changes would have to align with the new speed limit classifications in the draft Rule, and be subject to cost benefit analysis and public consultation . Variable speed limits outside marae You asked for more information on speed limit reductions around marae. NZTA has advised there are two marae (Mahimaru and Karepnia marae) on the State highway network with variable speed limits outside them. They are both on State highway near Awanui i n Northland with a posted speed limit of kmh. In both cases, the electronic variable speed limit signs are activated automatically through sensor pads embedded in the highway and the marae driveways. The sensors can detect when a vehicle is slowing down to turn into the marae. Once activated , the variable speed limit sign will display a kmh speed limit so vehicles can turn in and out of the marae safely. The speed limit returns to kmh five seconds after a vehicle has left the sensor. Karep nia marae also has a manual SMS solution that can be used when people are walking along the road from the marae to the urupa (cemetery) . A designated person can send an SMS to activate the speed limit sign and reduce the speed to kmh for minutes. There are limits to who can use this system and how often. This information is set out in a memorandum of understanding between NZTA and t he marae , including : . Only three users hav e access to the SMS system . Only six activations per hour period, each activation lasting ten minutes . Access to system can be r evoke d if used inappropriately . NZTA contact details if the system is not working as intended. We have included an image at A nnex One showing where the variable speed limits apply. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Static variable speed limit signs outside school gates NZTAs manual of traffic signs and marking contains minimum legibility requirements for road signs to ensure drivers can read, comprehend and react to the information at a given speed. The static variable speed limit signs (static signs) contain quite a lot of information the variable speed limit, times, school days and schoolkura. For this reason, the Land Transport Rule: Traffic Control Devices (TCD Rule) only allows static signs to be used on side roads adjacent to a main road with electronic signs. This is because vehicles are generally slowing down for a give way or stop sign on the side road and can read it. An amendment is required to allow them on the main road without an accompanying electronic sign. To meet the legibility requirements for a main road, the font on the static sign would need to increase. The increased font would substantially increase the size of the sign to the point that it would require two poles and would not be practical in many instances. To enable RCAs to use the existing static sign (not the large signs) we propose to consult on an amendment to introduce default variable speed limit times into the Land Transport Rule (Road User) . The standard drop off and pick up times will be in the Rule and reflected in the Road Code. Drivers will be expected to know the school travel times and slow down when they see the school sign, even if they cannot read and comprehend all the information on the sign. Any amendments to the Land Transport ( Road User ) Rule (the Road User Rule) need to be drafted by the Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) . We are discussing the proposed change with PCO . The consultation document will consult on the proposal, rather than the amendments to the Road User Rule. We will work with PCO during and post the consultation to draft the required amendments. Attached at Annex Two are examples of the static variable speed limit signs that will be outside schools. Changing road categories You asked for more information on when or how an RCA can change the categorisation of a road. The NZTA has advised that there are two circumstances where this can occur through: . Annual revie ws or updates councils are expected to do an annual review or update to the road or street classification; however, any changes must be aligned with the guidance and is moderated by the NZTA. . Future network planning councils may want to plan for longer term changes to a road or street classification (i.e. a year timeframe), but this would be dependent on RCA investment to support those changes. You also asked for examples of road classifications, we have attached these at Annex Three . PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of ANNEX Marae variable speed limit schematic PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of ANNEX Static variable sign examples Static variable kmh signs PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Static urban variable kmh signs PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Static rural variable speed limit signs PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of ANNEX Examples of road classifications Jevois Quay, Wellington PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Examples of road classifications Oriental Bay, Wellington PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Examples of road classifications Auckland CBD PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of May OC Hon Simeon Brown Action required by: Minister of Transport Thursday, May SETTING OF SPEED LIMITS RULE PACKAGE FOR PUBLIC CONSULTATION Purpose Provide an Cabinet paper seeking agreement to proceed to public consultation on the draft Setting of Speed Limits Rule. The paper needs to be lodged with the Cabinet Office on May for the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) meeting on May . Key p oints We have the draft Cabinet paper and associated documents following departmental consultation and our recent discussion with you . Should you agree, the Cabinet paper needs to be lodged by am Thursday May for consideration at the ECO meeting on May . Following the officials meeting on May , we have the attached documents to reflect the changes we agreed with you. Th ese are that: oyou will return to Cabinet following consultation; oarterial road speed limit s reduced since January will reverse; oonly State highway speed limit s reduced since January can be retained if the Road Controlling Authority ( RCA ) can demonstrate public support through a new consultation process; and othe deadline for reversals (or retaining lower speed limits on State highways) is October . Departmental and Ministerial c onsultation took place on the package of draft documents from May . We received comment s from the New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA), the Ministry of Education, the Department of Internal Affairs, the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC) and the New Zealand Police . We have made minor editorial changes to the consultation overview and regulatory impact statement in response to feedback. We have included a comment from Police in the Cabinet paper. RFXPHQW PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of ANNEX PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of August OC Hon Simeon Brown Action required by: Minister of Transport Monday, August SEEKING DIRECTION ON THE NEW SPEED RULE POST CONSULTATION Purpose Seek your direction on any changes to the draft Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits after public submissions . Key p oints The draft Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits (the draft Rule) was released for consultation between June and July . A high volume of submissions on the draft Rule was received, with , survey responses and email responses . A draft summary of submissions is attached (see Annex ). Further work is being done to finalise the summary. We have done an initial check for duplicates or other erroneous responses on the survey responses (over , in total ) but have not yet cross checked the survey responses against the email responses for duplicates. We will provide you with a final version prior to you taking any policy changes to Cabinet. The attached table seeks your direction on some key choices officials have identified post consultation to the draft Rule for your consideration (see Annex ). The key choices reflect a combination of suggestions from submission feedback and matters that officials have identified. Please indicate on the table which option(s) you want included in the final Rule. Following your confirmation of any changes , we will work with the NZ Transport Agency (NZTA) to update the Rule. We are also working our way through other possible changes to the draft Rule with NZTA , including technical and operational improvements . If we propose to progress any other more substantive changes, we will seek your decision on these through the Weekly Report. Seeking approval to engage some RCAs on implementation of the draft Rule The following RCAs raised concerns about the operational ability to meet the July deadline for reversing speed limits: NZTA, Dunedin City Council , West Coast RFXPHQW PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA INCONFIDENCE fatigue among local communities. These submitters suggested a network approach to speed changes would be more appropriate. Some submitters suggested four weeks is not long enough. Officials consider the consultation proposals overall to be appropriate. But note that as per the suggestion for an alternative approach to CBA under proposal b that the description of costs and benefits should be disclosed and consulted on. .b Increase the minimum period for consultation, from weeks to weeks.Agree Disagree .c In addition to disclosing safety and travel time impacts, and implementation costs, require the following information to be as part of the consultation material: the role and function of the road(s) that are proposed to have new speed limits how the road (s) isare used, including the different types of road users why speed limit changes are proposed, rather than any other intervention .Agree Disagree Proposal : Variable speed limits outside school gates This proposal contains several aspects and as such received very mixed feedback. Flexibility was sought to work with schools to determine what works best for each school. Some RCAs preferred the option of permanent or variable limits, while some noted the proposed school travel periods are much longer than existing variable speeds (most operate for minutes per day; the draft rule proposed hours to capture variances amo ng schools). Submitters pointed out that the current rule enables schools to turn on the lower speed limit for minutes to enable, for example, children to safely get onto buses for school trips, and asked that this be retained. Concerns that the definition of outside the school gate does not consider walking routes and will not address congestion, or realise other benefits of active independent travel to school. .a Retain as drafted.Agree Disagree .b Allow for both variable and permanent speed limit changes outside of schools.Agree Disagree .c Provide more flexibility in the setting of variable speed limits outside of schools, for example: removing the set times for drop off and pick up and allow RCAs to set variable speed limits that suit each school (i.e. by changing the definition of school travel period to mean the start and end time of each school day with up to minutes either side of the bell). enabling electronic or larger static signs on the main road and leave it to RCA discretion to determine what works best for each location. This would mean NZTA would need to develop a larger static sign for use on main roads. for schools that have electronic signs, enabling lower speed limits to be switched on for minutes outside drop off and pick up times when there is significant activity outside of the school (for example a school assembly or sports event). If you agree to taking a more flexible approach to setting of variable speed limits, the amendment to introduce standard school travel periods into the Land Transport (Road User) Rule would not be progressed. Agree Disagree PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA INCONFIDENCE Proposal : Ministerial Speed Objective Most submitters supported this proposal. . However, others pointed out that t he option of using the GPS to do this is already available. Officials consider that h aving multiple guiding documents could lead to inconsistency. .a Retain as drafted.Agree Disagree .b Remove the option of a Ministerial Speed Objective and rely on the current tool of the GPS to signal the Governments objectives for speed management.Agree Disagree Proposal : Speed limit classifications Overall, most supporters either supported this proposal or supported it with some exceptions. Concerns were raised that the speed limits would not be set road byroad and would fail to address unique circumstances of individual roads. Some RCAs recommended the schedule uses classifications consistent with the One Network Framework. A number of submitters suggested providing ranges for urban streets from kmh. A smaller number of submissions included suggested ranges for inter regional connectors (for example, kmh or kmh). Some submitters were unsure whether the speed limit classifications apply to seasonal, variable or temporary speed limits. .a Retain as drafted, with the clarification that the speed limit classifications apply only to permanent speed limits.Agree Disagree .b Retain most classifications but amend the exemption for significant pedestrian and cycling activity to allow kh or kmh.Agree Disagree .c Include an additional exception for interregional connectors that have a history of serious road crashes and allow kmh to be set on these stretches. If this approach is taken, t he NZTA has raised a question of how the history of serious road crashes would be defined . We would continue to work through this with the NZTA.Agree Disagree .d Align all the classifications with the One Network Framework .Agree Disagree Proposal : Directors criteria Some submitters acknowledged this was largely administrative and needed to be consistent with the requirements of the Rule. Some submitters suggested setting speed limits should be left to RCAs. .a Retain (ensure it is to align with any potential changes to the Rule). Agree Disagree .b Remove requirement for Director to certify speed limits .Agree Disagree Proposal : Reversals Overall the reversal provisions received the most submissions. Of the , individuals who commented on this proposal, , supported and , did not support. of those who supported wanted the reversals actioned sooner than the proposed . .a Retain as drafted.Agree Disagree PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA INCONFIDENCE Some key technical questions were raised on the provisions. A key question was why only NZTA can retain lower speed limits if there is public support and suggested this is extended to other road types. Some technical submissions sought clarification about what the presence of a school means for the kmh speed limit reductions on local streets, e.g if a school was only one of a number of reasons for a reduced speed zone would reversal be required Clarification sought around change in use or classification of the road and whether there should be exemptions for these scenarios (where the higher speed limit would not make sense). Concerns that where the road has been reengineered, such as speed calming measures, and reversing the speed limit would not align with the new engineering. Comment that some urban connectors (arterial streets) are multimodal, narrow and have high volumes of people using them, and there needs to be an ability to appropriately balance the competing interests of safety with efficiency. RCAs raised concerns around the cost and timeframes for reversals. Some suggested the implementation period for reversals should be extended to months or years. NZTA suggested that the Director of Land Transports certification role for the speed limit reversals be removed to streamline the process. NZTA pointed out that several hundred technical speed limit corrections were made following the release of the National Speed Limits Register. If these are not excluded from the reversal process, this would impose a significant administrative burden on RCA s to reverse and reinstate the corrected speed limits. Examples include where a posted speed limit aligned with the relevant bylaw, but the start and end point for the speed limit did not. In other cases, the relevant bylaw .b Enable all RCAs to be able to retain reduced speed limits if they complete new consultation and public support requirement (in line with the State highway approach).Agree Disagree .c Clarify that the reversal requirement for local roads with permanent kmh applies where one of the reasons for introducing the lower speed limit was because there is a school in the area.Agree Disagree .d Exempt roads where the reversals would be inappropriate due to changes in the road or surrounding environment, due to: changes in land use (for example, new residential developments) resource consent requirements, where a reversal of the lower speed limit would result in a resource consent breach (for example, where resource consent for a new supermarket is subject to a lower speed limit being introduced) changes to road infrastructure (for example, a new roundabout) requiring the lower speed due to the risk of crashesloss of control at the higher speeds.Agree Disagree .e Clarify reversals for urban connectors to be urban connectors with two or more lanes in one direction e.g. a three lane road with two lanes in one direction and one lane in the other direction would be captured .Agree Disagree .f Clarify that speed limit reductions made to correct speed limit records are not subject to reversals.Agree Disagree .g Officials to explore approaches to meeting the reversal deadline, like removing the certification process.Agree Disagree PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA INCONFIDENCE k mh speed limits, over fewer roads designed for k mh. Other submissions noted the speed differential between heavy vehicles (k mh) and light vehicles travelling at k mh, and that driver trainingbehaviour would need to change before these speed limits are introduced . .b Do not include kmh option .Agree Disagree PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of August OC Hon Simeon Brown Action required by: Minister of Transport Monday, September DRAFT SETTING OF SPEED LIMITS RULE POST CONSULTATION REPORT BACK Purpose To provide you with a Cabinet paper on the draft Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits following public consultation. Key p oints You are due to sign a new Setting of Speed Limits Rule by September , as set out in the Governments Q Action Plan . We have prepared a Cabinet paper that summarises the feedback received on the draft Rule through consultation and seeks Cabinets agreement to key changes , which are : othe introduction of the requirement to consult on a cost benefit disclos ure statement. This will include information on travel time and safety impacts of the proposed change, as well as the rationale for the change ; othe requirements for variable speed limits outside schools will be amended by removing standardised times for drop off and pick up (when lower speed limits will apply) and allowing RCAs to set these times for each school ; othe Ministerial Speed Objective, speed management committee and regional speed management plans will be removed from the Rule; oa speed limit of kmh will be enabled on roads built and maintained to a standard to safely support this speed. The Cabinet paper attaches an Regulatory Impact Statement. A draft summary of submissions is attached to this briefing . With your approval, w e will publish this on our website after the final Rule has been signed. We have included a timeline below with the steps required to meet the Governments Q Action Plan deadline of having the Rule signed by September . Subject to your approval of the documents, we recommend ministerial and departmental consultation commences on September for one week. Document PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of We are working with the New Zealand Transport Agency to update and finalise the draft Rule. We will provide this to you by September to sign by September . Timeline The below timeline will ensure you meet the Governments Q Action Plan deadline to sign the Rule by September : Ministerial and departmental consultation September Cabinet paper lodged September draft Rule provided to your office September Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) consideration September Cabinet approval of ECO decisions September Final Rule to you for signing After Cabinet consideration New Rule in force Late October ( days after notification in the NZ Gazette) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of ANNEX DRAFT CABINET PAPER PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending July
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending July
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending July
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Candidate for appointment Lucy T ukua We intend to appoint Lucy Tukua as a member of the ALR Board. Ms Tukua is an experienced director and leader, who is currently the Technical Director of Regenerative Outcomes Kaihaut Whakarito at Mott MacDonald. She has been heavily involved with driving and advocating for positive change with regards to kaupapa Mori for her whanau, iwi and Tmaki Makaurau.
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT IN CONFIDENCE CO () v IN CONFIDENCE
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT IN CONFIDENCE CO () v IN CONFIDENCE
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT IN CONFIDENCE CO () v IN CONFIDENCE Master of Arts (Honours), Geography University of Auckland
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT IN CONFIDENCE CO () v IN CONFIDENCE
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT IN CONFIDENCE CO () v IN CONFIDENCE
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Item Auckland Light Rail Board: Terms of Reference May Purpose The purpose of this paper i s to summarise the draft Auckland Light Rail Board Terms of Reference (t erms of reference) and seek direction from Sponsors on specific issues that need to be addressed to finalise the Terms of reference.
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT IN CONFIDENCE CO () v IN CONFIDENCE The Candidate Name (family name in upper case; include title if appropriate) Leigh Alexander AUTON Address Yasbel Crescent The Gardens Manukau AUCKLAND, Ethnicity(s) NZ European NZ Mori (Te Hikutu, Ngpuhi) Age range Gender M Current or most recent Employment (specify position and employer, include years) present
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT IN CONFIDENCE CO () v IN CONFIDENCE The Candidate Name (family name in upper case; include title if appropriate) Lucy Anne TUKUA Address Ethnicity(s) NZ Mori: (Ngti Paoa, Ngti Whanaunga , Ngti Karewa, Ngti Tahinga) Age range Gender Female Current or most recent Employment (specify position and employer, include years) February present
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT RESTRICTED To support achievement of these outcomes, within the context of advancing New Zealands national interests, I am proposing a revised Cabinet mandate for our negotiators at the IMO . I am also proposing that Cabinet delegates authority to the Associate Minister of Transport, the Minister for Climate Change, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, and the Minister of Trade to take any final decisions on issues in the negotiations. This would allow Ministers to provide further direction to officials on New Zealands position in the negotiations . Should the negotiations move outside the bounds of the revised Cabinet mandate, any final decisions with regards to New Zealands position would, where possible, be considered by Cabinet. However, where there are fast moving developments in the negotiations and time constraints, it may not be possible to convene Cabinet to take final decisions. Therefore, I propose that Cabinet authorises, the Prime Minister, the Minister of Finance, the Associate Minister of Transport, the Minister for Climate Change, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, and the Minister of Trade, to take together any final decisions on other issues in the negotiations. This paper is seeking Cabinet agreement to a principles based negotiating mandate that identifies New Zealands interests and priorities, consistent with the Governments Climate Change Strategy . It gives delegated Ministers power to act to provide further direction on the detailed design of measures as the negotiations develop.
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT CABINET PAPERS LED BY OTHER AGENCIES RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending July
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending July
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT The Government intends to appoint a skills based board (the ALR Board) to transition from the current representative board. The ALR Board will drive the detailed planning phase and transition the project through to a formal legal entity by the end of . That entity will be responsible for overseeing the completion of the detailed planning and the delivery of the project following a final investment decision. The ALR Board will endure through the phases of the project, continuing to be the responsible board once the new legal entity is created. As Sponsors, we have agreed in principle that the ALR Board will consist of between five and seven members including a Chair . It also enables a quorum for decision making, which will then be finalised in the Terms of Reference that Sponsoring Ministers have received delegat ion to approve through Cabinets decisions in December . Details about these appointments We intend to make three priority appointments at this stage, with the remaining appointments appointed in the third quarter of . These appointments were prioritised to ensure continuity of knowledge exists, and key leadership roles were identified early , and allow the incoming Chair to shape the direction of the Board. The Chair will have a very demanding role which will be different and, in many respects, more demanding than other Crown Chairs. The Chair will be the public face of the ALR Project in local communi ties and will need to confidently fro nt and navigate issues in the three very different political environments of central government, Auckland, and iwi in Tmaki Makaurau. Their ability to personally demonstrate leadership and accountability for the impacts of the ALR Boards decisions will be necessary to maintain the Projects credibility and social license throughout its lifecycle. In addition, the Chair must be able to demonstrate an appreciation of the types of financial, technical, commercial or legal issues, which could be expected to arise from designing and delivering a project of this nature. They will also hold the role of Senior Responsible Officer for the Project at this stage until the final Delivery Entity is formed. Members of the ALR Board n eed to have a range of technical, policy, commercial and social attributes. Required competencies include significant governance experience of projects of scale and complexity, deep understanding of Te ao Mori, Te Tiriti o Waitangi and engagement with man a whenua and mataawaka in Tmaki Makaurau, and the ability to operate collaboratively and navigate a politicised environment. Candidate for appointment Hon Dame Fran Wilde We intend to appoint Hon Dame Wilde as Chair of the ALR Board. Hon Dame Wilde is a highly experienced director who has served as a Cabinet Minister, Mayor, and in senior governance roles on many significant central and local g overnment boards. Hon Dame Wi ldes diverse range of experiences in governance, politics, community involvement, working with iwi, and delivering transport and urban development outcomes meet the requirements we are seeking from the ALR Board Chair.
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Auckland Project: Waitemat Harbour Connections
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Officials agenda
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Updates on other matters Vehicle system reform Fasttrack Approvals Bill listed projects Emergency Ocean Response Capability (EORC) business case
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Other upcoming Ministry of Transport Cabinet papers Associate Minister of Transport New Zealand Air Services Agreement and Protocol This paper seeks approval for New Zealand to sign and ratify the Air Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand, and the associated Protocol to the Air Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand on Third, Fourth and Fifth Freedom Traffic Rights between Parties. Progress Update: We have provided the Associate Minister with a draft Cabinet paper. To lodge: Thursday September To Committee: Wednesday September Civil Aviation Act Implementation Independent Review Function cost recovery This paper seeks approval to release a consultation document Independent reviews of the Director of Civil Aviations decisions: Proposed fees for applicants, which proposes the introduction of partial cost recovery for the new independent review function created by the Civil Aviation Act . Progress Update: A draft Cabinet paper was provided to the Minister on Thursday August for feedback. To lodge: Wednesday September To Committee: Wednesday September (ECO)
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Other briefings and aide memoires to Minister of Transport Note: Papers we propose to be included in your weekend bag will be submitted by close of business Wednesday in the week they are submitted. Due to Office Title Week ending August Week ending September Interim advice on the Metropolitan Rail Operating Model Review This briefing will provide you with interim advice on: Week ending September Week ending September Vote Transport: Certification of Unappropriated Expenditure for This briefing seeks the Ministers certification of the Vote Transport unappropriated expenditure for the financial year. Week ending September Draft Strategic Intentions This briefing will seek your agreement to the Ministrys new Strategic Intentions , including your Ministerial foreword. Week ending September Ministry of Transport Draft Annual Report This briefing will provide you with a copy of the Ministrys draft Annual Report and seek your agreement to an Addendum to the Report (as required under the Public Finance Act) for certain nondepartmental appropriations. Week ending September Meeting with Emirates Airline This briefing will provide you with information to support your meeting with the President of Emirates Airline. Week ending September Meeting with Air New Zealand This briefing will provide you with information to support your meeting with the Air New Zealand Chief Executive. Week ending September s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Due to Office Title Week ending September Civil Aviation Act implementation workstream detail This brief ing provides you with additional detail you requested on some workstreams being delivered as part of the Civil Aviation Act Implementation programme. Week ending September Letter of Comfort to the Civil Aviation Authority This briefing seeks your approval for a Letter of Comfort to the Civil Aviation Authority Week ending September Cit Rail link Limited Extension of Foreign Currency Accounts and Derivatives Protocol This joint Treasury and Transport briefing seeks approval from the Minister of Finance and you to extend City Rail Link Limiteds (CRLL) Foreign Currency and Derivatives Protocol to June in order for CRLL to continue to pay foreign currency contracts and hedge currencies. Week ending September Public Transport Bus Decarbonisation Fund Week ending October Emergency Weather Authorisation to release tagged contingency This briefing seeks authorisation to draw down the Budget tagged contingency of . million for Severe Weather Response Readiness, Resilience, and Recovery, which will enable four non government organisations to repairrebuild damaged facilities and improve future emergency response preparedness.
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of . Departmental Official Information Act requests Due to Requester Requester Summary of request Extended June Briefings Information on Sustainable Aviation Aotearoa Internal guidelines on policies, or procedures that relates to neurodiversity, disability, or accessibility Direction given to the Ministry by the Minister of Transport around Auckland Transport on its congestion charging plans All advice produced for the Climate Implications of Policy Assessment regarding the Clean Car Standard changes announced by the government on July Information surrounding the requesters medical convener tribunal hearing A copy of the consultation document regarding the increase to parking fines across NZ Any correspondence that relates to the Ministrys involvement in advice on visa fee increases this year Information held on weather modification A copy of Road to Zero progress reports to the Ministerial Oversight Group since March Regarding the Change process Any summary reports on feedback received on GPS All Ministry documents held in relation to the original drafting of Part in relation to Wn airport. Information on the Community Roadwatch programme Specific correspondence in full relating to the Public Service Commission initiated Performance Improvement Review Programme assessment s ()(a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Due to Requester Requester Summary of request Requesting a detailed breakdown of all credit card expenses incurred by the Ministry since January Seeking Crash data filtered by young people at fault for the previous years Seeking analysis conducted by the Ministry on the previous change in drivers licensing age requirements Seeking an unredacted copy of the Oral Fluid Testing RIS
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Updates Northwest Rapid Transit Update A targeted social media campaign is underway to promote the community information sessions being held at venues across the northwest between Wednesday August and Wednesday September . This includes Facebook posts about the events as well as promoting a project video on Facebook and LinkedIn. The level of detail provided at the events will be similar to what was in your media release on the project on July and involves an update on the project and talking through the indicative alignment and station locations. SH Papakura to Drury Stage A open ahead of programme As of Thursday August , SH Papakura to Drury Stage A is now fully open with three lanes open in both directions. The project team scheduled to open southbound on the evening of Sunday August , however great progress was made over the past few weeks and the third lane was opened ahead of programme. The project is now open at kph with all lanes running on final design geometry. The team is on track with quality assurance documentation to submit the application for Practical Completion this week two weeks ahead of the contract completion . The final running surface layer will be laid in OctoberNovember. It has an epoxy component requiring warmer and dryer conditions than asphalt only. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Upcoming Ministerial Items Upcoming Briefings to Minister of Transport Due to Office Title Wednesday September BRI Transport Legislative Reform Tolling Infrastructure Provide advice on potential legislative changes that would drive down costs and enable efficiencies for Tolling infrastructure. Friday September BRI Road Safety Partnership Programme Report Key messages from the Road Safety Partnership Programme (RSPP) Q Ministers report, relating to the delivery of road policing activities by NZ Police during the financial year. Upcoming OIA requests for potential consultation Reference and Requester Request Due to the O ffice OIA All advice from NZTA on Emissions Reduction Plan. Thursday September OIA MEDIA Correspondence from councils about potential funding, outlined in the GPS, about removing speed bumps. Thursday September OIA Information regarding Capital Connection funding. Friday September OIA Information regarding Kop Hikuai State Highway A rebuild. Friday September OIA Information regarding NZTAs investigation into MotorWeb privacy breach. Thursday September OIA Information regarding Mt Messenger Bypass from May NZTA Board meeting minutes. Tuesday September OIA MEDIA All information between NZTA and contractors for proposed alternative Brynderwyns route. Tuesday September OIA Information relating to taki to north of Levin Road project and wildlife. Tuesday September s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Upcoming Transport events Event Event Details Saturday August pm Auckland kmh speed consultation media stand up Opportunity to announce consultation on the speed limit for the Northern Gateway Toll Road and Puhoi to Warkworth commencing soon. MINO Monday September TBC NLTP announcement Media standup to launch the NLTP . Tuesday September TBC kmh Kpiti Expressway announcement Opportunity to announce the decision following consultation to lift the speed limit on the Kpiti Expressway from kmh to kmh. Wednesday September .am Minister of Workplace Relations and Safety visit to Gisborne Downer Depot Hon Brooke van Velden, Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety, is scheduled to meet a roading crew at the depot to discuss their work. The Minister will be hosted by Linda Stewart, NZTA Director Regional Relationships. BRI
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Upcoming Media items of release Subject Week commencing Monday September National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) announcement: NZTA will host you in a media stand up on Monday September to announce the publication of the NLTP. A national media statement, region specific media statements, regional factsheets and supporting QA material have been drafted to support the announcement. Week commencing Monday September kmh speed limit consultations : Three separate media statements are scheduled to be issued on Tuesday September to announce the beginning of consultation for the proposed kmh speed limits on the Northern Motorway from Orewa to Warkworth, the Kapiti Expressway and the Christchurch Southern Motorway. Week commencing Monday September Lower North Island SH Hutt Valley resurfacing: A traffic bulletin is planned for release during the week beginning Monday September to preview the next phase of resurfacing work on SH through Hutt Valley. The works are ongoing through September and October. The traffic bulletin will outline the next section of highway to be repaired during night works, and the associated traffic detours required while the section of SH is closed to northbound traffic. Week commencing Monday September Top of the South Richmond lights resurfacing work: A media release will be sent to T op of the South media about resurfacing works planned for SH in Richmond. The night works will affect traffic on a main arterial route out of Nelson. Week commencing Monday September Top of the South SH Whangamoa Hill slip: An media statement is planned for release during the week beginning Monday September outlining the next steps for managing and repairing this SH work site.
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Statistics page Ministerial correspondence figures from Thursday August to Wednesday August Item Number Ministerial Correspondence Written Parliamentary Questions MinisterMinister Office queries Ministerial OIA requests Themes SH median barriers, Penlink bridge redesign delays, driver licence testing
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings to Associate Minister of Transport Due Week Ending Title Friday September Request to table a Class Exemption Notice in the House This briefing will notify Minister Doocey that the Director of Maritime NZ has made a new class exemption, as the Maritime Transport Act allows, and requests that Minister Doocey table the Exemption Notice in the House of Representatives no later than Tuesday September . The exemption permits a master of a roll onroll off ship operating between Wellington and Picton to allow on board an empty vehicle for the purposes of a delivery voyage, where that vehicle does not have the required information plate or vehicle securing points. Friday September Options for Maritime legislation This joint MinistryMNZ briefing will set out options for advancing critical changes to Maritime legislation. Friday September Changes needed to maritime legislation to address issues arising from the exercise of local navigation safety regulatory powers Friday September Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek Minister Dooceys agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rules relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. Friday November s ()(g)(i) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of IN CONFIDENCE New inquiries International assistance Nil Media heads up General comments Nil MO Aratere, grounding, near Picton, June Investigation update s ()(g)(i), s ()(ba)(i) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
PTOM focused on developing a robust operating environment to deliver urban bus and ferry services. Central to the development was designing efficient public transport networks, and rebuilding relationships between regional councils and operators to provide the basis for genuine partnership.
PTOM impact research commissioned, completed and released
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Associate Minister of Transport Weekly Report week commencing September
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Associate Minister of Transport Weekly Report week commencing August
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Associate Minister of Transport Weekly Report week commencing September
Page of RESTRICTED Associate Minister of Transport Weekly Report week commencing August
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Associate Minister of Transport Weekly Report week commencing September
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Associate Minister of Transport Weekly Report week commencing September
Page of November OC
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Key updates Atlas Wind update Atlas Wind is an internationally flagged vessel which carries dangerous goods like ammonia within its cargo. We, and the Australian Maritime Safety Authority (AMSA), have had significant ongoing safety concerns with this vessel, with numerous deficiencies identified, and the vessel being detained on a number of occasions. Our latest detention of the vessel was on July during a Port State Control (PSC) Inspection in Dunedin and AMSA detained the vessel on Wednesday August . The Vanuatu registered Atlas Wind is owned by MOVe Oceans Singapore, which is a wholly owned subsidiary of the New Zealand based company, MOVe Logistics. We have also been discussing our concerns with MOVe. We are pleased to hear that after all of this work the vessel is scheduled to discharge import cargo and then is scheduled to proceed directly to Singapore , around Monday September , to be sold. MOVe is then looking to charter a safer vessel. This shows the importance of maritime inspections and good engagement with other regulators, like AMSA, in managing poor quality vessels round our coast. KiwiRail update Maritime NZ is preparing for an additional I nternational Safety Management verification of KiwiRails safety management system , scheduled for the week of Monday September . This audit will look at KiwiRails processes, procedures, training, risk management and how it brings on new equipment and familiarises staff. KiwiRail advised that the Aratere was out of service from Saturday August Tuesday August for the installation of a new gearbox part, and that the ships Classification Society was involved throughout this process. Once the gearbox is fixed this is likely to result in KiwiRail seeking to resume passage through the Tory Channel before the school holidays. The Kaitaki is currently in Singapore for a routine dry dock to carry out scheduled checks and repairs, and is due to return in early October . This means that the Kaiarahi was the only KiwiRail vessel in operation from Saturday August Tuesday August .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Key updates MV Connemara Maritime NZ is continuing to make enquiries about the Cook Strait ferry, MV Connemara , losing power late Thursday September , south of Wellington. The Strait NZ operated ferry is currently under a detention notice. Over the weekend of September , it moved under its own steam between wharves to unload cargo. It is now located at Glasgow Wharf. The ferry will remain under detention until all conditions are satisfied and Maritime NZ, as the regulator, has assurance about the vessel. To be released from det ention the cause of the power loss must be identified , all repairs need to be made, assurances need to be given by the vessels Flag State (Bahamas) and Classification society and these need to be passed on to Maritime NZ , and Maritime NZ will carry out a Port State Control Inspection.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of RESTRICTED
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: Maritime Workforce NZ Shipping Federation, Marine Transport Association and Confederation of Commercial Fishermen have submitted a joint proposal to Minister Simmonds on the future of maritime training in New Zealand, in response to the consultation on the reform of vocational education that was launched on Thursday August . This proposal has been copied to you as well as Ministers Brown and Jones . Project: RMS Niagara Briefing: RMS Niagara Update This briefing to both you and Minister Brown will update you about the wreck of the Royal Mail Ship Niagara. Week ending Friday September Project: Maritime Rules Reform Consultation continues on the first package of Design, Construction and Equipment rules changes, and will run to October . Stakeholder workshops were held on Tuesday and Wednesday August . Feedback at these sessions was valuable and discussion was positive and constructive; with a significant focus on the on the impacts for the inshore fishing fleet. Consultation on the International Omnibus package of rules changes finished this week . Briefing: Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek your agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rules relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. These changes are sought by the sector and reduce costs and complexity. Week ending Friday September Briefing: International Omnibus: Results of Consultation and Final Decisions This briefing will seek your agreement to changes in rules following consultation on the International Omnibus package. Week ending Friday November
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of We recommend you: Minister of Transport Minister of Finance Yes No Yes No Yes No Yes No Yes No Yes No Agree City Rail Link Limited owned land be subdivided with Auckland Council owned land at Ruru Street that is surplus to any rail station or roading need. The subdivision is in line with City Rail Link Limiteds Blueprint masterplan and would create three dev elopment blocks that includes Auckland Council land. Yes No Yes No Yes No Yes No Agree to Kinga Ora being given the oppo rtunity to deliver approximately state units within the Maungawhau and Karanga a Hape development programme via land purchase at the unencumbered market value, noting that this will be subject to due diligence and decision process by Kinga Ora. Yes No Yes No Agree that the Joint Executive Steering Group be retained between Eke Panuku , City Rail Link Limited, Auckland Council, and Kinga Ora to provide urban development programme delivery executive oversight for the implementation phase and to ensure alignment with the f oundation outcomes. Yes No Yes No Agree for the foundation outcome affordable homes being addressed through the planning provision of state units by K inga Ora and with the ability to accept good quality offers from parties which may include additional affordability outcomes within the lower pa rt of the valuation advice range. Yes No Yes No s ()(b)(ii), s ()(j) s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Investment Project: Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Road Efficiency Group (REG) Ministry officials have provided your O ffice with an update on the work underway with the NZTA on the Road Efficiency Group (REG) as requested on Monday September . NZTA Debt Treasury provided a briefing on options to restructuresmooth NZTAs existing debt facilities on Thursday September (T refers) . Project: Budget
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Day timetable On Wednesday August the Ministry Chaired a meeting of the CRL One Client Governance Group (OCGG), which includes the Chairs and CEOs of City Rail Link Limited, KiwiRail, Auckland Transport and Auckland One Rail. The substantive agenda item was to discuss the work undertaken by Auckland Transport and KiwiRail to determine the level of confidence in achieving the Day timetable of trains per hour set out in the CRL business case.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: Road safety objectives We are awaiting your feedback on the draft Road Safety Objectives document before commenc ing departmental and Ministerial consultation. We require your approval before Tuesday August to enable the Cabinet paper and objectives document to meet the proposed timeline for consideration at ECO on September . Cabinet paper: Releasing the final Road Safety Objectives document This paper seeks agreement to publish the final New Zealand Road Safety Objectives document. Departmental and Ministerial consultation: TBC Final papers to your Office: TBC To lodge: September To Committee: September (ECO) To Cabinet: September Project: Land Transport Fees Amendment Package We have provided you with a final copy of the LEG paper for lodging on Thursday August . PCO will lodge the Amendment Regulations. We have also provided you with a draft media release and talking points for LEG on Thursday August . Cabinet paper: Approval of legislative changes to update land transport fees To lodge: Thursday August To Committee: Thursday August (LEG) To Cabinet Executive Council: Monday August Press release: week commencing Monday August Final to Gazette: September In force: October s ()(h), s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: Triennial review of Section () Search and Rescue (SAR) funding Officials await direction from you on including or excluding Maritime New Zealands two Section () SAR funding requests from the triennial review (OC refers). To ensure key milestones can be met for the triennial review, we will condense the timeframe for funding applications to be drafted and submitted to the Ministry. Project: Northern Corridor
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Investment Project: Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Road Efficiency Group (REG) Ministry officials are working with NZTA officials to confirm the scope, role and functions of the REG by the end of September (in line with your letter to the NZTA Board Chair on Friday August ). NZTA officials have drafted a briefing for you in response to your letter which is currently with the REG Chair for his review. We expect this briefing to come to you soon. NZTA Debt Treasury provided a briefing on options to restructuresmooth NZTAs existing debt facilities on Thursday September (T refers) .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: Budget
Page Explaining K ey Concepts Direct text f Literature Summary
Page of ANNEX THREE GWRC LETTER TO MINISTER MCANULTY RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Wellington o ffice PO Box Manners St, Wellington Upp er Hutt PO Box Fergusson Drive Masterton office PO Box Masterton www.gw.govt.nz infogw.govt.nz June File Ref: EXTREL Hon Kieran McAnulty Acting Minister of Transport Parliament Buildings Wellington Tna koe Minister Budget Expanding the Community Connect Initiative Greater Wellington Regional Council fully supports the recent announcement regarding e xpanding the Community Connect Initiative . As you may be aware, Greater Wellington faces a significant challenge in the implementation of this initiative; specifically in respect of the age registrationidentity verifi cation associated with two groups: year olds who are not in secondary or tertiary education; and to year olds. This was signalled to Waka Kotahi well in advance of Budget . To enable Greater Wellington to provide fare subsidies from July , w e ask that you consider a flexible approach to the use of implementation funding to support interim fare arrangements ahead of our full deployment of the initiative from later in Q . Between July and the completion of an age verification portal, Greater Wellington will look to continue half price fares until mechanisms are in place to o ffer free fares for under s, and half price fares for year olds who are not in secondary or tertiary education . We seek a Crown contribution of million per month to support these transitional arrangements . Greater Wellington will use best endeavours to implement the new fares concessions as soon as possible. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings copied to Associate Minister of Transport Nil this week .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings to Associate Minister of Transport Due Title Wednesday September RMS Niagara Update This briefing to both you and Minister Brown will update you about the wreck of the Royal Mail Ship Niagara, including the potential risks of an oil spill, recent work and engagement undertaken by Maritime NZ. Week ending Friday September Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek your agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rules relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. Week ending Friday November International Omnibus: Results of Consultation and Final Decisions This briefing will s eek your agreement to rule changes following consultation on the International Omnibus package. Week ending Friday December Maritime Transport Act Review Joint briefing with the Ministry of Transport on policy options and legislative prioritisation for changes to the Maritime Transport Act.
Page of RESTRICTED Upcoming briefings to Associate Minister of Transport Due Week Ending Title Friday August Meeting with NZ Shipping Federation, September As per the request from your Office, this briefing will support the Ministers meeting with John Harbord and David Borcoski of the NZ Shipping Federation. Friday August RMS Niagara Update This briefing to both you and Minister Brown will update you about the wreck of the Royal Mail Ship Niagara, including the potential risks of an oil spill, recent work and engagement undertaken by Maritime NZ. Friday September Options for Maritime legislation This joint MinistryMNZ briefing will set out options for advancing critical changes to Maritime legislation. Friday September Ministry of Transport briefing: Proactive Release of papers relating to consultation on reform of the maritime design, construction and equipment rule set This briefing will seek your agreement to proactively publish Cabinet material and key papers. Friday September Changes needed to maritime legislation to address issues arising from the exercise of local navigation safety regulatory powers Friday September Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek your agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rule s relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. Friday November
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings to Associate Minister of Transport Due Week Ending Title Friday September Options for Maritime legislation This joint MinistryMNZ briefing will set out options for advancing critical changes to Maritime legislation. Friday September Friday September RMS Niagara Update This briefing to both you and Minister Brown will update you about the wreck of the Royal Mail Ship Niagara, including the potential risks of an oil spill, recent work and engagement undertaken by Maritime NZ. Friday September Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek your agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rules relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. Friday November International Omnibus: Results of Consultation and Final Decisions This briefing will s eek your agreement to rule changes following consultation on the International Omnibus package.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: RMS Niagara Briefing: RMS Niagara Update This briefing to both you and Minister Brown will update you about the wreck of the Royal Mail Ship Niagara. Week ending Friday September Project: Maritime Rules Reform Consultation continues on the first package of Design, Construction and Equipment rules changes, and will run to October . Consultation on the International Omnibus package of rules changes has completed and a summary of the consultation next steps is set out under Key updates below . Briefing: Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek your agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rules relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. These changes are sought by the sector and reduce costs and complexity. Week ending Friday September Briefing: International Omnibus: Results of Consultation and Final Decisions This briefing will seek your agreement to changes in rules following consultation on the International Omnibus package. Week ending Friday November
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: Triennial review of Section () Search and Rescue (SAR) funding Officials provided advice to your Office on August seeking approval to initiate the triennial review of Search and Rescue funding and parallel review of Section funding (OC refers). T o ensure key milestones can be met for the triennial review, we will condense the timeframe for funding applicants to draft and submit funding applications from the originally planned weeks ensuring these are submitted to the Ministry for assessment by late October . Project: Northern Corridor
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Investment Project: Government Policy Statement on Land Transport GPS Monitoring and Reporting The Ministry is currently working with NZTA on the first monthly report for GPS delivery. This report will be provided to you by Friday August . Road Efficiency Group (REG) Ministry officials are working with NZTA officials to confirm the scope, role and functions of the REG by the end of September (in line with your letter to the NZTA Board Chair on Tuesday August ) . Ten Year Investment Planning Officials are currently scoping work to require future Government Policy Statements on Land Transport to include a ten year investment plan (including considering the potential legislative and system changes needed and the interaction with long term planning by NZTA and local government). We will brief you on this work by September . Review of NZTA Short te rm Borrowing Facility (the Review) Briefing: Ten year investment planning: project scope This briefing will set out the proposed scope of work, and timeline, to require future Government Policy Statements to adopt a ten year investment plan. September
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Revenue Project: Fleetwide transition to the Road User Charges system At our first meeting with the Stakeholder Reference Group on Monday September , we talked the group through the long term objectives and key policy considerations, We will ensure that views represented by the group are included as part of our upcoming advice, where these options will be outlined more fully. Project: Time of use charging
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: Budget Project: Triennial review of Section () Search and Rescue (SAR) funding Officials provided advice to your Office on August seeking approval to initiate the triennial review of Search and Rescue funding and parallel review of Section funding (OC refers). To ensure key milestones can be met for the triennial review, we will condense the timeframe for f unding applicants to draft and submit funding applications from the originally planned weeks ensuring these are submitted to the Ministry for assessment by late October . Project: Northern Corridor s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Revenue Project: Fleetwide t ransition to the Road User Charges system W e have provided material on the RUC transition to support your discussion at the Infrastructure and Investment Ministers meeting on Tuesday September . Project: Time of use charging Project: Tolling r eform We have provided advice regarding tolling reform policy decisions and are due to use those decisions to prepare a draft Cabinet paper due with your Office by Wednesday September . Project: Increasing motor vehicle registration (MVR) annual licence fees Departmental consultation on the draft Land Transport (Motor Vehicle Registration and Licensing) Amendment Regulations (No ) , and accompanying draft Cabinet Legislation Committee paper, has closed. No substantive feedback was received. Ministerial consultation has begun, and minor edits to the Regulations and Cabinet paper will be made once this feedback has been received. s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv)
Page Table setting out short term results, proposed measures and reporting requirements for priority value for money. Measures include: Long term result: Better informed investment decision making . A more rigorous and transparent in vestment appraisal system o A. investment in investment management o B. Total cost of managing the funding allocation system as a of the National Land Transport Programme expenditure o C. Investment aligned to GPS priorities (assessed strategic case be nefits) o D. Projected benefits for implementation activities at time of funding approval o E. Projected versus realised benefits and costs of funded activities o F. Reporting of the assessment used in investment decisions o G. investment in activities w ith a benefit cost ratio of less than one
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) TBC Mid September Live Animal Exports Review
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Key updates Public consultation on recovering the costs of goods management activities at the border Following Cabinet Economic Policy Committee and Cabinet agreement in August , Customs and the Ministry for Primary Industries (MPI) are now consulting on cost recovery proposals for goods management at New Zealands borders. As noted previously, the proposals will lead to some significant cost increases for the maritime sector. Customs and MPI met with representatives of Shipping New Zealand on Monday September , who represent the majority of international shipping companies coming to New Zealand ports. A Maritime NZ representative attended as an observer. The Shipping New Zealand representatives expressed strong opposition to the proposals at the meeting. A particular focus was the proposed new , fee for commercial ships. Concerns included the potential for New Zealand to become an unattractive destination for major shippers due to rising costs, potentially resulting in a reduction of services with longer periods for getting goods to markets, and the prospect of some of the costs arising from the new fee being passed on to consumers. A further, follow up meeting with Shipping New Zealand in early October is planned. Customs and MPI are currently planning to provide policy advice to Ministers on the fee proposals in the first quarter of . MyMNZ We are developing MyMNZ, an online interface to enable far greater, and more efficient, digital interaction with the sector for services and activities we undertake. As a regulator, notifications and enquiries are important sources of information used to inform the delivery of our proactive and reactive work. A key milestone was achieved with a new online event notification form launched in support of the new HSWA designation on ports from July . We are continuing this work to address feedback our stakeholders provided about using our digital channels and services. This includes the need for a consistent and coordinated system to provide a single place to submit or apply for notifications , certifications and licences, provide more transparency about where they are in a process, and reduce the time spent repeating information. We are currently working on the requirements for creating another online form for specific types of notifications, and requirements for making more of our services for recreational craft departing for overseas available onl ine. Having these tools in place will enable a more efficient and effective use of our resources. High quality digital information will both reduce the time spent following up with applicants, and lead to better insights and decision making. Connemara Incident The Connemara lost power at approximately .pm on Thursday September , near Sinclair Head. It was towed back to Pipitea Wharf by the tugs Tapuhi and Tiaki. Maritime NZ will be making preliminary enquiries on Friday September into what caused the vessel to lose power. Those enquiries will determine its next steps. The vessel will remain alongside until its deemed safe to resume operations. In this instance, due to the location of the Connemara, towage vessels out of Wellington were able to assist and bring the vessel back to port. s ()(f)(iv)
Page of RESTRICTED Key updates Inaugural New Zealand Seafarer Welfare Council The inaugural New Zealand Seafarer Welfare Council (The Council) meeting was held Monday August with all member representatives present. The Council is an equal participation of member organisations from government, industry, unions, and service delivery within the seafarer sector. A planning day will be held in November to develop a strategy and associated action plan. This will look at transforming seafarer welfare service delivery and outcomes, in compliance with the Maritime Labour Convention (MLC) requirements. New Zealand Cruise Association Conference On Thursday August , the Director of Maritime NZ attended and presented at the N ew Zealand Cruise Association conference . The focus of her presentation was on the wide range of work Maritime NZ does with and in support of the cruise sector. Areas of interest from participants included work being done to facilitate the availability of alternative fuels and shore power, safety and security. A strong theme of the conference was concern about rising costs with short timelines that make it impossible to build the costs into tickets already sold, increasing debt on a sector already holding high debt from COVID . In particular , the current consultation processes proposing increased levies across a range of agencies was having cumulative impact. Customs has recently written to submitters indicating, post consultation, that because of lowered projections of cruise visits, and higher aviation visits, that levies will have to rise further than originally proposed on cruises. This will likely incr ease frustration markedly, as the sector argue that lower cruise activity in New Zealand is a direct result of high costs. Biofouling also was a concern; not so much that it was required, but that there was a need for the sector and government to urgently find ways to safely clean the vessels. Winter cruise has been cancelled this year and cruise is down on last year. The sector is forecasting a further reduction in . New Zealand was seen as a safe and high interest location to visit, and there are ships available and more being built, but there was a real sense that the cost and difficulty of doing business here was too high and ships were being directed to other places in the Asia Pacific. Maritime in the Media Sadly there was another fatal incident after a vessel capsized on Saturday August while crossing the Catlins River bar. One person died as a result of the capsizing, and the other person on the vessel made it safely ashore. Our partners in the water safety sector publicly commented on bar safety risks and skipper responsibilities. Our previously agreed content was used as talking points by Coastguard when they spoke on the capsizing.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Key updates Maritime NZ Board Stakeholder day in Auckland The Maritime NZ Board (the Board), and Executive Leadership team (ELT) stakeholder engagement day was held in Auckland on Monday August . This initiative is part of the Boards regular engagement programme, which includes meet ing with stakeholders three times a year in conjunction with the Boards routine business meetings. Engagement included a breakfast session with senior leaders from the maritime community discussing The future of maritime activity in New Zealand and our collective responsibilities in ensuring a safe, secure, clean, and sustainable maritime sector , a me eting with the Port of Auckland to discuss their strategy and their plans , and a visit to the Auckland Marine Rescue Centre (AMRC), with briefings from Coastguar d NZ, Surf Lifesaving NZ and three recreational craft community grant recipients about their work . We have received extremely positive feedback from stakeholders about the value of these cross sector discussions. Southern Tiare Detention On Wednesday August , during a Port State Control (PSC) Inspection in Timaru, Maritime NZ detained the vessel Southern Tiare. The inspection identified concerns with environmental protection, safety equipment, watch keeping, machinery, general maintenance and failure to effectively implement the Safety Management System. The vessel was released from detention on Sunday September , however, one deficiency concerning watch keeping arrangements remains outstanding and is required to be addressed to the satisfaction of the Flag State (Cook Islands) and Maritime NZ before the vessel can depart. Maritime NZ are currently waiting on information from the vessels management regarding this unresolved deficiency. The Southern Tiare is operated by Chatham Islands Shipping Ltd, serving as a vital transport link between the Chatham Islands and New Zealand. The detention and eventual departure delay may disrupt the import and export of goods including fuel and livestock. Manahau Update Tugs commissioned by the operator, Westland Mineral Sands, for the salvage operation, MMA Vision and smaller Kurutai, are now in Westport and the operator and crews are preparing for a salvage attempt over the next few days, as conditions permit. The operators plan is for the Manahau to be towed to Nelson Port for repairs. Maritime NZ is actively engaging with the operator to encourage them to update the public about salvage plans and to understand crew welfare needs. We will continue to engage with stakeholders to support the operation. Maritime NZs team on the ground in Westport include investigators, public information management, legal and a National On Scene Commander, supported by a Maritime NZ response team in Wellington. Once the Manahau is in a safe port, we will move quickly from a response role to a regulatory role. We continue to publish regular media updates about the Manahau as interest in the barge continues to be high, particularly from West Coast media outlets.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings to Associate Minister of Transport Due Title Week ending Friday September Week ending Friday September RMS Niagara Update This briefing to both you and Minister Brown will update you about the wreck of the Royal Mail Ship Niagara, including the potential risks of an oil spill, recent work and engagement undertaken by Maritime NZ. Week ending Friday September Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek your agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rules relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. Week ending Friday November International Omnibus: Results of Consultation and Final Decisions This briefing will s eek your agreement to rule changes following consultation on the International Omnibus package.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Revenue Project: Fleetwide transition to the Road User Charges system Project: Time of use charging Project: Tolling reform Project: Increasing motor vehicle registration (MVR) annual licence fees The final draft of the Land Transport (Motor Vehicle Registration and Licensing) Amendment Regulations (No ) , and accompanying draft Cabinet Legislation Committee paper, has been provided to your Office for lodgement on Thursday September . No feedback was received through Ministerial consultation. Cabinet paper: Approval for Land Transport (Motor Vehicle Registration and Licensing) Amendment Regulations (No ) This LEG paper will seek authorisation to submit regulations to the Executive Council. Ministerial consultation: Complete Lodged: Thursday September To Committee: Thursday September To Cabinet: Monday September Publication Gazetting: October s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: Triennial review of Section () Search and Rescue (SAR) funding Following discussions with yourself, the Ministry considers that it would be appropriate to brief yourself and the Minister of Finance on our proposed approach to the triennial review of Section () SAR funding and the parallel review of Section funding, including efforts to: Briefing: Expectations for triennial review of Section () SAR funding This briefing will seek confirmation from yourself and the Minister of Finance on the approach to the triennial review of Section () SAR funding,Thursday August Project: Budget
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Rail Budget Briefing: Budget Approval to drawdown funding for metro renewals This briefing will seek your agreement to drawdown the AT portion of the . million for metro renewals. It will provide advice on the priorities for investment, monitoring and reporting on the investment, and the response from ACAT. week ending Friday August
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: Tolling reform Project: Increasing motor vehicle registration (MVR) annual licence fees The Land Transport (Motor Vehicle Registration and Licensing) Amendment Regulations (No ) were considered by the Cabinet Legislation Committee and are due to be approved by Cabinet on Monday September . Once the regulations are gazetted, NZTA will update its systems ahead of sending out advance notices in mid October to key customers (e.g. owners of large vehicle fleets) advising them of the fees. Cabinet paper: Approval for Land Transport (Motor Vehicle Registration and Licensing) Amendment Regulations (No ) Lodged: Complete To Committee: Complete To Cabinet: Monday September Publication Gazetting: Thursday October
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Revenue Project: Fleetwide transition to the Road User Charges system Y ou are taking an item to Infrastructure and Investment Ministers Group on September covering the next steps for the transition. This will provide and opportunity for early discussion with Ministers on the proposed Cabinet paper content at a high l evel. Slides have been provided to your Office and we will provide talking points for the discussion early next week. Project: Time of use charging Project: Tolling reform Project: Increasing motor vehicle registration (MVR) annual licence fees Ministerial consultation on the draft Land Transport (Motor Vehicle Registration and Licensing) Amendment Regulations (No ) , and accompanying draft Cabinet Legislation Committee paper, is underway. Once feedback has been received, final edits will be made to the Regulations and Cabinet paper, prior to lodgement on Thursday September . Cabinet paper: Approval for Land Transport (Motor Vehicle Registration and Licensing) Amendment Regulations (No ) This LEG paper will seek authorisation to submit regulations to the Executive Council. Ministerial consultation: September To lodge: Thursday September To Committee: Thursday September To Cabinet: Monday September Publication Gazetting: October
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Cabinet paper: Approval for Land Transport (Motor Vehicle Registration and Licensing) Amendment Regulations (No ) This LEG paper will seek authorisation to submit regulations to the Executive Council. Departmental consultation: August Ministerial consultation: September To lodge: Thursday September To Committee: Thursday September To Cabinet: Monday September Publication Gazetting: October
Page Six basic principles which are considered to be relevant to the use of all public funds. Accountability Openness Value for money o Public entities should use resources effectively, economically, and without waste, with due regard for the total costs and benefits of an arrangement, and its contribution to the outcomes the entity is trying to achieve. Where practical, this may involve considering the costs of alternative supply arrangements. Lawfulness Fairness Integrity
Page The seven categories of funding arrangements Minor conventional purchases Major conventional purchases Minor relational purchases Major relational purchases Conditional grants Grants with limited conditions Gifts In the text content of conventional purchases, it says that ordinary marketbased procurement techniques and competitive processes are likely to be effective as a way of managing the price and value for money . Road policing information relating to Value for Money NZTA board meeting minutes https:www.nzta.govt.nza boutusaboutthenz transport agencyour boardboard meeting minutes Interim chief executive noted in August meeting minutes that the Transport Agency had worked with NZ Police to develop an outcomes based framework that allows progress to be monitored and outcomes measured. This is a change from the more recent process that has been focussed on inputs only. The Board noted that had been a year with low DSIs and at that time the Police were measured for outcomes. There is a regular item on agendas about financial performance and the NLTF. Development of the Road Policing Programme https:www.nzta.govt.nzpl anningand investmentplanning and investment knowledge basedeveloping programmesdevelopment oftheroadpolicing programme The NZTA website sets out the steps by which the road policing programnme is developed and the parties involved. The Transport Agency expects a range of requirements to be met when developing the road policing programmes. This includes: Planning and investment principles Use of the Business Case Approach Evidencebased justification Road policing activities that are proposed for funding assistance under the NLTP must be supported by robust evidence. The Investment Assessment Framework needs to be used to assess and prioritise activities.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings copied to Associate Minister of Transport Nil this week .
Page of RESTRICTED Upcoming briefings copied to Associate Minister of Transport Nil this week .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings copied to Associate Minister of Transport Nil this week .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Key updates International Omnibus Project : completion of consultation In April , we informed you of work on proposed amendments to the Maritime and Marine Protection Rules (the International Omnibus Project). New Zealand, as a signatory to international maritime conventions, must update its rules when these conventions are amended. Countries are understood to have agreed to proposed amendments unless they have expressly objected.
Page of Economic social well being (Community well being): Provide amenities that enhances the existing community and enables people to thrive. Value realisation: Cr eating enduring investments for the community and realise value over time. Preferred Delivery Option . We have identified a set of steps that we consider are needed to give effect to accelerating delivery of the Maungawhau and Karanga a Hape urban developmen t programme and seek your approval of those as described below.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Aviation Project: Consultations with the aviation sector Cabinet paper: New Zealand Air Services Agreement and Protocol (Associate Minister) To lodge: Thursday September To Committee: Wednesday September To Cabinet: Monday September On Time Performance (OTP) We met with Air New Zealand, Qantas, Jetstar and BARNZ to discuss our approach to OTP following our discussion at the officials meeting on Monday September. The airlines noted that they already publish their OTPs on their websites and were curious about the purpose of the Ministrys reporting. The meeting provided an opportunity to work through the revised scope of the initial reporting, and to discuss what data is required. We have asked the airlines to supply the data directly, as this should be the most accurate source (and is consistent with Australian practice to source the data direct). However, we are continuing to explore sourcing data from Airport Coordination Limited (ACL), the company responsible for airport slot co ordination. We informed the airlines that if we are unable to source data from either the airlines or ACL, we will use the Cirium data (which they are opposed to, because of concerns about its accuracy) to meet our September timeframe. We also discussed the intention to build out the reporting to cover regional and international OTP. We expect to provide you with the revised draft report next week so that it can be in September. s ()(f)(iv)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE September
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Investment Project: Government Policy Statement on Land Transport GPS Monitoring and Reporting The Ministry is currently working with NZTA on the first monthly report for GPS delivery. This report will be provided to you by Friday August . Ten Year Investment Planning Officials are currently scoping work to require future Government Policy Statements on Land Transport to include a ten year investment plan (including considering the potential legislative and system changes needed and the interaction with long term planning by NZTA and local government). We will brief you on this work by September . Review of NZTA Short term Borrowing Facility (the Review) Briefing: Teny ear investment planning: project scope This briefing will set out the proposed scope of work, and timeline, to require future Government Policy Statements to adopt a ten year investment plan. September Project: Triennial review of Section () Search and Rescue (SAR) funding Following discussions with yourself, the Ministry considers that it would be appropriate to brief yourself and the Minister of Finance on our proposed approach to the triennial review of Section () SAR funding and the parallel review of Section funding, We will provide your Office with advice on this matter in the week commencing Monday August .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Aviation
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Aviation Project: Consultations with the aviation sector We met with BARNZ, Airports NZ, and Air NZ to share the draft on time performance report and invite comments. Key feedback covered: . The scope of the report : which airlines and airports to include, and in particular whether to include regional airports and carriers (ie airlines other than Air NZ and Jetstar). The data source that we use: we had planned to contract a commercial provider (Cirium) to provide monthly OTP data. We need to investigate the Cirium dat a source further to confirm whether or not it is the best provider. . The process for finalising the report each month: whether airlines should have a chance to review the report before publication, to check the numbers and provide context such as details about causation. We will provide your office with a short outline of some options for the scope of reporting for discussion with officials on Monday September . Project: Airports (Cost Recovery for Processing of International Passengers) Act Officials have now concluded the analysis of submissions from the consultation on the establishment of cost recovery regulations under the Airports (Cost Recovery for Processing of International Travellers Act) . The Ministry for Primary Industries (MPI), in consultation with the Ministry of Transport, New Zealand Customs Service (Customs) and the Civil Aviation Authority, are now finalising advice to the Minister for Biosecurity, which will include a summary of the submissions received. This advice is expected to be sent to the Minister for Biosecurity on Tuesday September and will be forwarded to the Ministers of Transport and Customs. Almost all submitters opposed the development of cost recovery regulations, preferring the establishment and ongoing costs for new and restarting airports be funded from MPI and Customs respective Border Processing Levies. However, some submitters indicated that if cost recovery regulations were to be developed, their preference is for these to recover establishment costs only (Option B of the consultation). Option B is the preferred option for officials. s ()(f)(iv)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Aviation Project: Consultations with the aviation sector Briefing: Civil Aviation Act implementation workstream detail This briefing provides you with additional detail you requested on some workstreams being delivered as part of the Civil Aviation Act Implementation programme. Week ending September s ()(f)(iv)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications
Page of RESTRICTED Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) TBC Mid September Live Animal Exports Review
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications Committees Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) Wednesday September Recovering the cost of border processing services for travellers The Ministers of Customs and Biosecurity are proposing to present a Cabinet Paper and Cost Recovery Impact Statement (CRIS) on amendments to the Customs and Excise (Border Processing Levy) for consideration at ECO on Wednesday September and Cabinet on Monday September . The paper contains proposals for amendments to levy rates for recovering the costs of processing international travellers. The proposals include a substantial increase in the levy on arriving cruise ship passengers to recover Customs costs incurred in their processing. We have provided comment to Customs that the paper and CRIS would benefit from more evidence on the harms or risks associated with arriving cruise ship passengers, and the effectiveness of the Customs interventions to address those harms or risks, to make a stronger case for the increase in the levy. The C abinet Paper and CRIS note that the cruise industry is opposed to the increase and has expressed concerns regarding the cumulative impact of recent increases in Government fees and levies on their businesses. We can confirm that this was a strong theme at the recent New Zealand Cruise Association Conference held on August . Since the initial consultation, Customs have written to submitters on the levy proposals, indicating that because of lowered projections of cruise visits, levies on arriving cruise ship passengers will need to rise further than what was initially proposed in the consultation process. This is likely to increase cruise sector frustration markedly, as the sector is already on record as saying that the lower cruise visit activity is a direct result of high costs. Wednesday September Biosecurity System Strategy Minister Hoggard has begun Ministerial consultation on the Biosecurity System Strategy package. Consultation will run until Friday August , before proposed ECO lodgement on Thursday September , for consideration on Wednesday September . The strategy aims to address the policy, operational, and participatory challenges in the functioning of the biosecurity system, and is connected to the Biosecurity Act Amendment Bill proposals. While the proposal does not contain any obvious concerns for the maritime transport system, Maritime NZ has asked the Ministry for Primary Industries to involve us in any future work that touches on our functions such as: our current approach to Ballast Water Management the role of Regional CouncilsHarbourmasters; and vessels and those on board (particularly with regard to safety).
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Manahau response After being refloated on Friday September , the Manahau was towed from Westport to Port Nelson on Sunday September . The barge was towed into Tasman Bay by the offshore vessel MMA Vision with the tug Kurutai in support. The Kurutai and Port Nelson harbour tugs then towed the barge into port. Maritime NZ placed the vessel under detention for safety reasons. Maritime NZ was the lead Government agency for the response. Our role included engaging with the vessel owner and operator, the salvage team, councils and Nelson Harbourmaster to provide expertise and support, and monitor plans for safety and compliance. We were also responsible for implementing the restricted public access areas. Our involvement was misreported in media on several occasions and we wrote to editors to have the record corrected. The cause of the grounding has yet to be identified and Maritime NZ and TAIC are each running separate investigations. The operator has also hired an independent investigator. The Manahaus repairs will need to be certified by its Classification Society and Flag State (Niue) before it can be released from detention. Maritime NZ will also inspect the vessel and require that any deficiencies found have been repaired satisfactorily before it is released. Maritime NZ maintained reduced restricted access areas around the site where the Manahau grounded for public safety, while the area was remediated. We will formally lift the restrictions once we are advised it is safe to do so. Chatham Islands: supply vessel and Harbourmasters Direction An outstanding deficiency on the vessel Southern Tiare (non compliance with revised watch keeping requirements) , caused the operator, Chatham Islands Shipping Ltd, to raise concerns about the impact of this on vessel operations and the movement of livestock from the I slands. As the Southern Tiare is a foreign flagged vessel Maritime NZ has no jurisdiction in this case and these questions can only be addressed by the Flag State, the Cook Islands . It is the responsibility of the ship owner and operator to ensure that ship, crew, and equipment on board meet the flag state and international requirements that all shipping companies must adhere to. Maritime NZ met with a representative of the Cook Islands to discuss the possibility of a limited transition period to allow the vessel to operate whilst providing the operator time to find the additional crew required. Maritime NZ is now awaiting confirmation from the ship that they are able to meet the flag states requirements. Maritime NZ is also seeking a meeting with the Chatham Islands H arbourmaster about a Harbourmasters Direction he has issued that places restrictions on vessels of more than metres length seeking to dock at the main wharf. We are seeking to understand the underpinning risk assessment behind the direction and whether a national control, like a pilotage area, might be more appropriate. We note that, as it stands, the Direction could make it difficult for vessels currently planning to transport livestock from the Islands to do so.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Emissions Project: Clean Car Importer Standard Cost Recovery s ()(f)(iv)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: Triennial review of Section () Search and Rescue (SAR) funding Briefing: Expectations for triennial review of Section () SAR funding This briefing will seek confirmation from yourself and the Minister of Finance on the approach to the triennial review of Section () SAR funding,Week commencing Monday August Project: Budget s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Revenue Project: Time of use charging Drafting instructions We are working with PCO to clarify aspects of the drafting instructions. Proactive Release We have the July Cabinet paper, Regulatory Impact Statement and associated Minutes available on the Ministrys website. We are responding to OIA requests for further information outside of the proactive release on a case bycase basis, pending your agreement to further proactive release of material. Project: Tolling r eform Following our workshop with you on Wednesday August , we are preparing advice that will seek your agreement to the key policy decisions. We are also working with NZTA to coordinate the tolling legislative reform programme with upcoming tolling decisions, following your approval this week of NZTA conducting public consultation on tolling proposals and pursuing increases to rates on existing toll roads (NZTA BRI refers) . Briefing: Tolling reform policy decisions (title TBC) This paper will seek agreement to the policy decisions regarding tolling law reform, following a workshop in the coming weeks. September
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Emissions s ()(f)(iv)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of RESTRICTED
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) TBC Mid September Live Animal Exports Review This initiative relates to the Governments coalition agreement to reverse the recent ban on live animal exports while ensuring the highest standards of animal welfare.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Maritime NZ media escalation process Maritime NZ maintains a duty team, which includes a duty media officer. The duty team is in frequent contact with the Rescue Coordination Centre NZ (RCCNZ), which is staffed , and has established ways of contacting harbourmasters, councils and emergency services as required. The duty media officer will provide a heads up to your or Minister Browns Press Sec retary or Private Sec retary when we are responding to a significant event. This will include information about the event, response, media queries we have received and our approved replies. Examples of when we would do this include major search and rescue incidents coordinated by RCCNZ, high profile recreational craft events , commercial shipping incidents and major pollution spills . We note that Minister Brown retains delegation for Cook Strait ferry issues. Your O ffice can ask Maritime NZ to assist with reactive media lines for queries the Minister might receive. In many cases the work of Maritime NZ is operational in nature and responding to maritime incidents is business as usual for the agency. The Ministers media role would likely be to acknowledge victims and public concerns, confirm they are being kept informed, provide assurance to the public, state the Governments established position if there is one, and refer operational questions to Maritime NZ. . Sector Engagement Engagement with the Fishing Health Safety Forum On Thursday September , Maritime NZ met with the New Zealand Fishing Health and Safety Forum , with which we have a long standing collaborative relationship. The Forum brings together commercial fishing operators and representative organisations to discuss health and safety issues and collaboration opportunities. The Forum also provides Maritime NZ with feedback around the operational impacts of policy and regulatory changes being considered. We had a constructive session with Forum attendees. Two particular topics discussed were how we might further support the sector to provide feedback to us on regulatory proposals, and some new potential collaboration opportunities to address risk. The industry, for example, is concerned about recreational vessels on the West Coast reportedly chasing Bluefin Tuna attracted by large Hoki trawlers. The potential risks with this behaviour is that recreational craft may voyage beyond thei r limits or capabilities and may get too close to the commercial vessel creating risks to themselves, their craft (and the commercial crew and vessel as well in some inst ances) . We are meeting again with members of the Forum to discuss how we might raise awareness of the risks in this area. Engagement with Bay of Plenty regional Council Senior Maritime NZ staff attended the Bay of Plenty Regional Council Monitoring and Operations Committee meeting on Wednesday September , to outline progress made in national and local maritime incident preparedness since the MV Rena grounding and oil spill in . Deputy Chief Executive for Response, Security and Safety Systems, Graham MacLean, presented councillors with an update on key focus areas that Maritime NZ has worked on to enhance its capabilities for managing complex incidents, particularly in the Bay of Plenty. These included: readiness and response strategies and plans capability development, including targeted training development and implementation ensuring fit forpurpose appropriately maintained equipment Iwi and community and volunteer partnerships establishment of enhanced specialist support arrangements with both New Zealand and international parties The Council expressed assurance that Maritime NZ has implemented the recommendations of the Simon Murdoch report () and that New Zealand was in a much better position to manage maritime incidents, large and small, into the future.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: Clean Car Importer Standard Cost Recovery Project: EV Charging Infrastructure
Page of IN CONFIDENCE September
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: Fleetwide t ransition to the Road User Charges system We have provided your Office with timeframes and more detailed scopes for our upcoming advice leading up to the draft Cabinet paper. We propose a further workshop with you in the week of September to discuss our initial advice on the RUC policy framework, which will support us to further refine policy options and work towards the Cabinet paper. Project: Increasing motor vehicle registration (MVR) annual licence fees The draft Land Transport (Motor Vehicle Registration and Licensing) Amendment Regulations (No ) , and the accompanying draft Cabinet Legislation Committee paper, have been sent out for departmental consultation. Cabinet paper: Approval for Land Transport (Motor Vehicle Registration and Licensing) Amendment Regulations (No ) This LEG paper will seek authorisation to submit regulations to the Executive Council. Departmental consultation: August Ministerial consultation: September (or can send this out earlier if you wish) To lodge: September To Committee: September To Cabinet: September Publication Gazetting: October
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: EV Charging Infrastructure The Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority (EECA) is preparing to launch the Request for Information to seek feedback from the market on the co investment approach. EECA is working with your Office to prepare communications material to support the launch. Decision sought: Agree for the Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority to launch the Request for Information in the second half of the week commencing Monday September . Yes No
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Emissions Project: Clean Car Importer Standard Cost Recovery O n Wednesday September we will send you a draft response to the Regulations Review Committee regarding its letter concerning the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Regulations. Response letter to the Regulations Review Committee This letter will respond to the views of the Regulations Review Committee. Wednesday September Project: EV Charging Infrastructure I n parallel, the Taskforce is continuing to progress work programme actions, such as establishing an industry reference group and preparing the Request for Information to launch following Cabinet decisions. Project: Second Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP) Officials are analysing submissions from ERP consultation and will provide you with a briefing on the results of the consultation before September . Officials have developed additional proposals to discuss with you following our initial analysis of the transport submissions on the transport chapter in the ERP discussion document. These are set out in the A sent to your office on Friday September (OC refers), and will be discussed with you on Monday September. The next Climate Priorities Ministerial Group (CPMG) meeting is set for Monday September . We will provide you with a briefing by Wednesday September . Process Dates Briefing in support of CPMG meeting Wednesday September Climate Priorities Ministerial Group meeting Monday September Briefing on the results of the ERP consultation By Monday September Briefing on final content of the transport chapter for ERP By Monday October
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Emissions Project: Clean Car Importer Standard Review of the Clean Car Importer Standard (the Standard) The regulations setting new targets for and exempting disability vehicles from the Standard were made by the Executive Council on Monday September . Clean Car Standard Fees On Wednesday September we will send you a draft response to the Regulations Review Committee regarding its letter concerning the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Regulations. Response letter to the Regulations Review Committee This letter will respond to the views of the Regulations Review Committee. Wednesday September Project: EV Charging Infrastructure I n parallel, the Taskforce will continue to progress work programme actions, such as establishing an industry reference group.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings copied to Associate Minister of Transport Nil this week .
Page of required. This funding issue will become part of Auckland Councils Long Term Plan process.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: Second Emissions Reduction Plan Officials are analysing submissions from ERP consultation and will provide you with a briefing on the results of the consultation on Wednesday September . Following your recent quarterly meeting with road transport sector stakeholders, we met the group on Tuesday September to discuss ERP development and to test their support for including a general statement of direction about the heavy vehicle transition. The group supported including a general statement. Other points raised by the stakeholders who attended the meeting will be set out in the Wednesday September briefing to you on the results of the ERP public consultation process. Process Dates Briefing in support of CPMG meeting Friday September Climate Priorities Ministerial Group meeting Monday September Briefing on the results of the ERP consultation Wednesday September Advice through the Weekly R eport on extending the: ZEHV RUC exemption and modelling the impact of the RUC transition on hybrid and EV uptake Wednesday October Briefing on final content of the transport chapter for ERP By Wednesday October The Minister of Climate Change has instructed his officials to bring the dates forward for the completion of ERP so that it can be confirmed by Cabinet on November . We will discuss with you the timeframe for the completion of the ERP transport ch apter at the officials meeting on Monday September . s ()(f)(iv)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Aviation
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Revenue Project: Stakeholder reference group We have now sent letters to the proposed members to confirm membership. We are planning the first meeting with them, at which we propose to discuss: confirming the T erms of Reference and the groups purpose the possible future state for the transport revenue system key matters within the fleetwide transition to RUC project, including: o likely timeframes and roadmap, o options and challenges of communicating the proposals with the public , and o options and challenges for ensuring compliance with the new system. We propose to schedule regular monthly meetings but will reconsider following each meeting subject to the live matters that are worth the groups consideration. We will use the Weekly Report following each meeting to summarise discussion with the group and build any relevant content from the meetings into our ongoing advice to you. Project: Time of use charging Drafting instructions We are working with PCO to clarify aspects of the drafting instructions. Proactive Release We have the July Cabinet paper, Regulatory Impact Statement and associated Minutes available on the Ministry s website. We are responding to OIA requests for further information outside of the proactive release on a case bycase basis, pending your agreement to further proactive release of material. Project: Tolling r eform Following our workshop with you on Wednesday August , we are preparing advice that will seek your agreement to the key policy decisions. Briefing: Tolling reform policy decisions (title TBC) This paper will seek agreement to the policy decisions regarding tolling law reform, following a workshop in the coming weeks. September
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: Second Emissions Reduction Plan Officials provided you with a briefing on Wednesday September setting out the results from the ERP consultation and a revised transport chapter for the final ERP including high level content on the additional complementary policies discussed with you on Monday September . Subject to any comments, we will provide the final draft chapter to the Ministry for the Environment. Process Dates Briefing on the results of the ERP consultation and revised draft ERP transport chapter Wednesday September Final draft ERP transport chapter sent to the Minister of Climate Change by MfE Friday October
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Auckland Project: Waitemat Harbour Connections We have provided you with a letter for the chair of the NZTA Board outlining your expectations for the next phase of work based on minutes from the Infrastructure and Investment Ministers Group (IIMG) meeting on August . Letter to the chair of the NZTA Board Thursday September
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications Committees Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) Wednesday September Recovering the cost of border processing services for travellers The Ministers of Customs and Biosecurity are proposing to present a Cabinet Paper and Cost Recovery Impact Statement (CRIS) on amendments to the Customs and Excise (Border Processing Levy) for consideration at ECO on Wednesday September and Cabinet on Monday September . The paper contains proposals for amendments to levy rates for recovering the costs of processing international travellers. The proposals include a substantial increase in the levy on arriving cruise ship passengers to recover Customs costs incurred in their processing. We have provided comment to Customs that the paper and CRIS would benefit from more evidence on the harms or risks associated with arriving cruise ship passengers, and the effectiveness of the Customs interventions to address those harms or risks, to make a stronger case for the increase in the levy. The C abinet Paper and CRIS note that the cruise industry is opposed to the increase and has expressed concerns regarding the cumulative impact of recent increases in Government fees and levies on their businesses. We can confirm that this was a strong theme at the recent New Zealand Cruise Association Conference held on August . Since the initial consultation, Customs have written to submitters on the levy proposals, indicating that because of lowered projections of cruise visits, levies on arriving cruise ship passengers will need to rise further than what was initially proposed in the consultation process. This is likely to increase cruise sector frustration markedly, as the sector is already on record as saying that the lower cruise visit activity is a direct result of high costs.
Page of Annex : Land development proposal evaluation criteria
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Auckland Project: Waitemat Harbour Connections We have provided you with a letter for the chair of the NZTA Board outlining your expectations for the next phase of work based on minutes from the Infrastructure and Investment Ministers Group (IIMG) meeting on August .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Emissions Project: Clean Car Importer Standard Review of the Clean Car Importer Standard (the Standard) We have completed departmental consultation on the draft Cabinet Legislation Committee paper . This paper seeks approval for the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Regulations to be made. The paper is ready for lodgement, pending any changes from Ministerial consultation. The regulations set new targets for and exempt disability vehicles from the Standard. Cabinet Paper: Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Regulations Provided to Minister: Tuesday August To Lodge: Thursday August To Committee: Thursday August (LEG) To Cabinet and Executive Council: September Response letter to the Regulations Review Committee This Letter will respond to the views of the Regulations Review Committee. September Project: EV Charging Infrastructure s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: Fleetwide t ransition to the Road User Charges system Following the workshop on Wednesday August , we will next week provide your O ffice with timeframes and more detailed scopes for our upcoming advice leading up to the draft Cabinet paper. Project: Increasing motor vehicle registration (MVR) annual licence fees We have provided your Office the draft Land Transport (Motor Vehicle Registration and Licensing) Amendment Regulations (No ) , and the accompanying Cabinet Legislation Committee paper, prior to departmental and Ministerial consultation. Cabinet paper: Approval for Land Transport (Motor Vehicle Registration and Licensing) Amendment Regulations (No ) The accompanying briefing note will seek agreement to consult with other agencies and Ministers on the draft regulations and LEG paper. First draft to Minister: Wednesday August Departmental consultation: August Ministerial consultation: September To lodge: September To Committee: September To Cabinet: September Publication Gazetting: October
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Auckland Project: Waitemat Harbour Connections We have provided you with a letter for the chair of the NZTA Board outlining your expectations for the next phase of work based on draft minutes from the Infrastructure and Investment Ministers Group (IIMG) meeting on August .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE City Rail Link project update Commercially Sensitive
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Auckland Project: Waitemat Harbour Connections We are preparing a letter for the chair of the NZTA Board outlining your expectations for the next phase of work based on minutes from the Infrastructure and Investment Ministers Group (IIMG) meeting on August . Letter to the chair of the NZTA Board Thursday September
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) Wednesday September Biosecurity System Strategy Minister Hoggard has begun Ministerial consultation on the Biosecurity System Strategy package. Consultation will run until August , before proposed ECO lodgement on Thursday September , for consideration on Wednesday September . The strategy aims to address the policy, operational, and participatory challenges in the functioning of the biosecurity system, and is connected to the Biosecurity Act Amendment Bill proposals. While the proposal does not contain any obvious concerns for the maritime transport system, Maritime NZ has asked the Ministry for Primary Industries to involve us in any future work that touches on our functions such as: our current approach to Ballast Water Management the role of Regional CouncilsHarbourmasters; and vessels and those on board (particularly with regard to safety). Thursday September Live Animal Exports Review This initiative relates to the Governments coalition agreement to reverse the recent ban on live animal exports while ensuring the highest standards of animal welfare.
Page of Annex : Foundation outcomes The masterplan (Blueprint Report) for the Maungawhau and Karanga aHape development programme was approved by the project sponsors in . It set out the vision and key strategic choices for the programme . The vision for the programme set out in this masterplan was: Our vision is for each precinct to become one of the best quality, high density urban villages in the country, which is highly accessible to all parts of the Auckland region. It will be a high ly sought after, contemporary, sustainable, residential led, mixed use urban village The strategic choices for the programme were housing affordability , employment diversity and a s ustainable futur e. The foundation outcomes for the Maungawhau (Mt Eden) an d Karanga aHape station development s ites that the Eke Pnuku and Kinga Ora propose will guide delivery of the development programme and achieve the vision and choices are : Environmental vitality and climate action: An exemplar net zero carbon urban regeneration development that is resilient to climate change and focuses on the prioritisation of sustainable modes of transport and environmental vitality. Mana whenua partnership: Partner with mana whenua to integrate their mtauranga and reflect their ident ity in the precinct. Homes: Provide healthy homes with a mix of typologies and accessible homes to cater for a diverse community. Affordable homes: Provide an adequate supply of quality, affordable homes in the precinct to make the most of the location b eing adjacent to a significant transport connection. Accessibility: Create an accessible precinct that encourages the use of public transport and provides a safe and connected neighbourhood. Economic social well being (Community well being): Provide am enities that enhances the existing community and enables people to thrive. Value realisation: Creating enduring investments for the community and realise value over time. As well as achieving the stated vision and choices for the work, and progressing the Governments Urban Growth Agenda and General Policy Statement Housing and Urban Development , and Auckland Councils Development Strategy, these outcomes closely align with Eke Panukus focus on urban regeneration and Kinga Oras goal to deliver quality urban developments that connect homes with jobs, transport, open spaces and the facilities tha t communities need. The foundation outcomes also support the investment objectives for the development programme agreed by stakeholder s in , namely: Transforming Maungawhau and Karanga aHape station precinct into exemplar net zero transit oriented ur ban neighbourhoods RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Board Appointments Civil Aviation Authority Induction planning for new members is underway. Maritime New Zealand The shortlisting briefing was provided to Minister Dooceys Office this week. Auckland Light Rail Limited Letters giving effect to the decision you made regarding the reappointment of Auckland Light Rail Limited directors (OC refers) were be provided to your Office for signing on Monday September . New Zealand Transport Agency Induction planning for new members is underway. Independent Review Function Civil Aviation Act This is now publicly listed at: https:www.boardappointments.co.nzVacancies . Nomination letters were sent to New Zealand First, the Act Party and your caucus colleagues on Friday September . The deadline for nominations closing is Monday September .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Aviati on
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Board Appointments Civil Aviation Authority An induction for new Board members has been set for Friday October . Internal planning for this is underway. Maritime New Zealand The shortlisting briefing was submitted on Thursday September . We await feedback. Auckland Light Rail Limited Letters giving effect to the decision you made regarding the reappointment of Auckland Light Rail Limited directors (OC refers) were provided to your Office on Monday September . New Zealand Transport Agency Induction planning for new members is underway. Independent Review Function Civil Aviation Act The independent reviewer vacancies are publicly listed at: https:www.boardappointments.co.nzVacancies . N omination letters were sent to New Zealand First, the Act Party and your caucus colleagues on Friday September . The deadline for nominations closing is Monday September .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Board Appointments Civil Aviation Authority Induction planning for new members is underway. Maritime New Zealand The call for nominations for Maritime New Zealand closed on Thursday September , with over nominations received. The Ministry has since met with the Chair to work through a recommended longlist and intends to brief Minister Doocey on our recommendations next week. Auckland Light Rail Limited Letters giving effect to the decision you made regarding the reappointment of Auckland Light Rail Limited directors (OC refers) will be provided to your Office for signing by Friday September . New Zealand Transport Agency Induction planning for new members is underway. Independent Review Function Civil Aviation Act This is now publicly listed at: https:www.boardappointments.co.nzVacancies . Nomination letters were sent to New Zealand First, the Act Party and your caucus colleagues on Friday September . The deadline for nominations closing is Monday September . Transport Accident Investigation Commission: Chief Commissioner Appointments in Confidence On Tuesday September , Ministers confirmed their agreement to progress David Clarke to the Chief Commissioner role. Following this decision, Minister Dooceys O ffice will receive the draft Cabinet paperwork so that the appointment can be finalised before Ms Meares retirement takes effect on Monday September (OC refers).
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Board Appointments Civil Aviation Authority Induction planning for new members is underway. Maritime New Zealand The call for nominations for Maritime New Zealand closes on Friday September . Following the closure, the Ministry will work through the candidates and provide a recommended longlist for interview to yourself and Minister Doocey, in consultation with the Chair . Auckland Light Rail Limited Your Office received a briefing seeking your decision on the changing the company name and reappointing the directors of Auckland Light Rail Limited (OC refers). The advice noted that the paperwork previously provided for reappointing both directors can be easily to progress these reappointments at the next available APH meeting. Ministerial consultation is still to take place on these reappointments. New Zealand Transport Agency Induction planning for new members is underway. Independent Review Function Civil Aviation Act This is now publicly listed at: https:www.boardappointments.co.nzVacancies . Nomination letters for sending to New Zealand First, the Act Party and your caucus colleagues were provided to your Office on Thursday September .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of Delivering quality residential choices that are affordable and secure to accommodate future growth, and Creating enduring infrastructure and local amenities to match community needs and enable low carbon urban living.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Auckland Project: Waitemat Harbour Connections
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Emissions Project: Clean Car Importer Standard Review of the Clean Car Importer Standard (the Standard) Once you have confirmed your decisions on the briefing Prerequisites for the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Regulations (OC refers ), we will update the draft Cabinet Legislation Committee paper and provide this to your Office. Following confirmation from your Office we will then commence departmental consultation. The regulations set new targets for and exempt disability vehicles from the Standard. Cabinet Paper: Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Regulations Provided to Minister: Tuesday August To Lodge: Thursday August To Committee: Thursday August (LEG) To Cabinet and Executive Council: September Project: EV Charging Infrastructure
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Updates on other matters
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(f)(iv)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Recreational Safety and SAR Project: Next Steps Following Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Review No update. Project: Fuel Excise SAR Funding The Ministry provided advice to the Minister of Transport on August outlining the parameters and timeline for the triennial review of Section () SAR funding and seeking approval to initiate the review. We are awaiting approval from the Minister of Transport to share the advice with your Office. Following a meeting with the Maritime New Zealand (Maritime NZ) Chief Executive on Monday September , the Minister of Transport has also sought advice from officials on considering Maritime NZs funding requests outside of the planned triennial review. We are drafting advice for the Minister of Transport on the implications of this and will seek his approval to share this with your Office.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Recreational Safety and SAR Project: Next Steps Following Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Review No update. Project: Fuel Excise SAR Funding W e understand the Minister of Transport will consider this advice in the forthcoming Weekend Bag and will provide your O ffice with a copy of the advice following consideration.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: Rain Radar Upgrades No update.
Page of RESTRICTED Recreational Safety and SAR Project: Next Steps Following Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Review The Ministry is continuing to engage with key sector NGOs to provide them with an update on the Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Review (the Review). A key message in this update is that we have revisited the key Review recommendations on system strategy, governance and leadership and will not be proceeding with implementing these recommendations. We are also letting sector NGOs know that the New Zealand Search and Rescue Council (the Council) is wanting to reset its purpose and will be updating its Strategic Plan. The Council will be looking to engage NGOs on this plan in the coming months. Project: Fuel Excise SAR Funding No update.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Recreational Safety and SAR Project: Next Steps Following Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Review No update. Project: Fuel Excise SAR Funding The Ministry provided advice to the Minister of Transport on Friday August outlining the parameters and timeline for the triennial review of Section () SAR funding and seeking approval to initiate the review. We are awaiting approval from the Minister of Transport to share the advice with your Office.
Page of The Ministry s position on the final proposals is that:
Page of Your early feedback on these indicative priorities, and feedback received during the formal public consultation on the full draft of the GPS later this year will help in the development of the final version of GPS. The GPS is planned to be finalised by mid (a year ahead of Waka Kotahi adopting the next National Land Transport Programme). The National Land Transport Programme is a three year programme that allocates the National Land Transport Fund to national and regional activities in a way that gives effect to the GPS priorities. How can we ensure we maintain acceptable levels of service with the available funding The land transport funding system is facing significant pressures due to rising demands and costs. In the shorter term it will be necessary to prioritise effectively and strengthen the focus on value for money. For the longer term, work is underway on the Future of the Revenue System that will consider how we pay for transport to years into the future. The project is a first principles approach on how the land transport revenue system, might be configured in future to make it more sustainable in our changing context of climate change and increasing cost pressures. This project will take time , and we expect to undertake substantive stakeholder and public engagement . In the meantime, officials will continue to advise Ministers on current land transport revenue settings (including petrol excise duty, road user charges, and Crown contributions) to support delivery of the GPS and the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Officials agenda
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Officials agenda
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Officials agenda
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Officials agenda
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming priority briefings to Associate Minister of Transport Due Week Ending Title Friday August Proposed reform of the Maritime Transport Act The Ministry and Maritime NZ have started scoping a review of primary maritime legislation to ensure it is fit for purpose given technological changes and long standing gaps in the regulatory framework. This briefing will provide background information on the issues with the current legislation and approaches to the scope and timing of a review. Key updates The Ministry of Transport has no key updates this week. Upcoming other briefings to Associate Minister of Transport Due Week Ending Title Friday August Meeting with Dame Jo Brosnahan, Maritime NZ Chair, on Tuesday August This briefing will provide you with background advice for your meeting with Dame Jo Brosnahan. Friday August Oil Pollution Advisory Committee Terms of Reference This briefing seeks your approval of a Terms of Reference for the Oil Pollution Advisory Committee.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Officials agenda
Page of Annex : Business case evaluation The business case has detailed strategic, economic, commercial, financial and management cases. Key aspects are summarised below. A wide range of options were considered for the regeneration of Maungawhau and Karanga aHape. Under the Auckland Unitary Plan, the development sites have a capacity for approximately homes. Maximising development to the view shaft height controls would increase this capacity to . It is recommended that this be undertaken through resource consents by d evelopers. The wider precinct has a capacity for , homes to be developed under the Auckland Unitary Plan. Maximising development to the view shaft height controls increases this capacity to ,. Eke Panuku and Kinga Ora have been working alongside C RLL, Auckland Councils Development Programme Office (DPO), Auckland Transport and utilities providers to better understand the infrastructure requirements around the CRLL sites. They note that m uch of the local infrastructure for the development sites wil l be funded and delivered by CRLL as part of its scope which de risks the short term development. Some of the larger precinct projects are already underwa y such as Watercares trunk sewer connection to Western Springs. The development aligns with the Auckl and Plan () , the Newtown and Eden Terrace Plan , and the Karangahape Road Plan The Karangahape Road P lan notes that the new CRL station on Karangahape Road ridge will be a significant catalyst for revitalising the area, opening oppo rtunities for private development, encouraging new business and residential growth, and providing a high level of public transport access for all. The opportunity to accommodate high quality growth and integrate the CRL station, while protecting and enhanc ing Karangahape Roads heritage and keeping the edge and grit, which the area is known for, is the key challenge for Karangahape Road in the future . Benefits from the wider precinct programme are described, and will be used to inform phase of the CRL Benefits Realisation Plan (BRP), which is currently being developed. A formal Benefits Realisation Plan for the Maungawhau and Karanga a Hape development precinct programme will also be developed The benefits analysis in the proposal looks at benefits out to , and highlights a range of financial and non financial benefits including economic development (including commercial and retail sites), urban renewal, social, sustainability and climate change benefits. Risks result from uncertain events that impro ve or undermine the achievement of benefits. The main risks that might create, enhance, prevent, degrade, accelerate or delay the achievement of the Foundation Outcomes are reflected in the project schedule and it is proposed they will be reported monthly to the Executive Steering Group to ensure that the assigned risk owners take the necessary steps to implement the mitigation response at the appropriate time during the schedule. The proposal notes that it is important to recognise that development projec ts will be subject to market and economic forces that will govern investment decisions. Any adverse market conditions will limit both public sector and private sector ability to invest. The current economic climate already presents a number of challenges i n the next three years; the impact of Covid and the pace of the recovery and return to normal presents a number of uncertainties that will need to be proactively managed. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Updates on other matters
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Board Appointments Civil Aviation Authority Induction planning for new members is underway. Maritime New Zealand The call for nominations for Maritime New Zealand is currently underway, with the publicly listed advert available here: https:www.boardappointments.co.nzVacancies . Letters seeking nominations from New Zealand First, ACT and National Party colleagues were provided to your Office for sending on Tuesday August . The deadline for applications is September . New Zealand Transport Agency Induction planning for new members is underway. Independent Review Function Civil Aviation Act An position description has been provided to your Office for approval. We await comment from your Office and will look to list this advert in parallel with the consultation process for the scope of the role. City Rail Link Limited Following a meeting with the City Rail Link Limited Chair on Wednesday August , advice is under development regarding three member terms that will expire at the end of October . Consultation is underway on the draft briefing. Subject to significant feedback, we envisage providing Shareholders a briefing on this matter in the week commencing Monday August .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Transport stakeholder updates Stakeholder Update
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Updates on the Government Quarterly Plan for Approval Update Required Action Delivery Update Please provide your progress update for this action Delivery Status A Cabinet paper on the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits was submitted to ECO for consideration on September . The Cabinet paper provides an update on the consultation outcomes and seeks policy agreement to minor changes to the final Rule. Subject to Cabinet approval, the Minister of Transport is due to sign the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits by the end of September. Probable
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Updates on other matters Vehicle system reform : timelines
Page of Project governance The proposal recommends Eke Panuku Board be the lead agency t o take the programme development sites to market. This would include negotiating, managing and concluding a development agreement(s) on behalf of CRLL and receipt of sale payment back to CRLL shareholders. This would be subject to the parameters agreed in advance with the shareholders. This requires formal delegations be provided to the Eke Panuku Board. A Joint Executive Steering Group representing Eke Panuku, CRLL , Auckland Council, and Kinga Ora is proposed to manage this programme delivery as it moves to the implementation phase. The Joint Executive Steering Group will ensure alignment with the foundation outcomes which give effect to Sponsors vision and strategic objectives. As an extra layer of assurance the proposal recommends an independent r eviewer shadow the development process to have oversight of the key process decisions and approvals. This would provide assurance to the CRL Sponsors around the market approach and decision making. The alignment of the programme with Eke P anukus strategic focus and the Councils wider strategy, and the leadership it has demonstrated in the development of the programme business , suggest Eke Panuku are well placed to lead the project. The business case also outlines the process for property where a right of first refusal (RFR) exists under the Ng Mana Whenua o Tmaki Collective Redress Act . Programme activities will align with the requirements of the Act where RFR areas overlap with proposed development blocks.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Transport stakeholder updates Stakeholder Update
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Auckland
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Appointments in Confidence Transport Accident Investigation Commission: Jane Mearess retirement At her meeting with Minister Doocey on Tuesday August , Jane Meares, Chief Commissioner of the Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC), advised that she intends to retire on September . As a result of this decision, she has tendered her resignation from TAIC. TAIC staff were informed on Wednesday August . We understand TAIC will look to make a public announcement in due course, and will liaise with Minister Dooceys Office on timing and content. We understand Minister Doocey is considering the Chief Commissioners recommendation to elevate David Clarke, currently a Commissioner at TAIC, to Chief Commissioner. Should this be the preferred option, this can be done quite quickly as the Responsible Mi nister has the power to appoint a Chief Commissioner from within the Board. In order for the appointment to be completed before Ms Meares leaves the Commission, we have advised that we would appreciate confirmation by the end of August . A new appointment would take a lot longer and would likely be completed near the end of the calendar year at the earliest. T he Crown Entities Act allows the Deputy Chief Commissioner to exercise the functions of the Chief Commissioner if no Chief Commissioner is appointed by the time Ms Meares leaves the Commission.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Upcoming Minister of Transport meetings Meeting Meeting Details Tuesday October .pm .pm Meeting with Cath OBrien of BARNZ Briefing Due: Monday September Officials Attending Siobhan Routledge Tuesday October .pm .pm Meeting with Billie Moore of NZ Airports Briefing Due: Monday September Officials Attending Siobhan Routledge Tuesday October .pm .pm Meeting with ASP Ships and the New Zealand Shipping Federation Briefing Due: Monday September Officials Attending : None Thursday October Bus and Coach Association (BCA) Keynote Speech Briefing Due: Friday September Officials Attending: None
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Updates on other matters Second Asia Pacific Ministerial Conference on Civil Aviation The second International Civil Aviation Organisation ( ICAO) Asia Pacific Ministerial Conference on Civil Aviation is in India between September. The first conference was held in China in , however due to the Covid pandemic this will be the first since then. ICAO Member States are in the Asia Pacific region and expected to participate. New Zealand will be represented by the High Commissioner to India, Mr Patrick Rata. We understand Ministers (or Associate Ministers) from Singapore, Japan, Republic of Korea, Solomon Islands, Micronesia, Fiji, Tonga, Samoa and PNG will be attending. The Conference will discuss issues on regional collaboration, safety and security initiatives, sustainability in the aviation industry, and aviation connectivity. India has emerged as one of the fastest growing aviation markets globally and Indian PM Modi will deliver a keynote address to the conference, signalling that India has elevated this conference in importance. Officials will report back on any significant outcomes from the meeting.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Transport stakeholder updates Stakeholder Update National Public Transport Workforce Steering Group NZTA has reinstated the National Public Transport Workforce Steering Group, which was established to help foster a growing and sustainable public transport workforce in New Zealand. Membership includes NZTA, the Ministry of Transport, the Ministry of Education, the Bus and Coach Association, and representatives from Public Transport Authorities and the unions.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Upcoming Minister of Transport meetings Meeting Meeting Details Friday September .am .am Meeting with Turners Automotive Group Briefing Due: Wednesday September Officials Attending: NA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Updates on other matters Department of Internal Affairs Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill Amendments The Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) is developing a Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill (RSAB). An RSAB is a vehicle for non controversial policy changes that improve regulatory systems, and typically includes amendments to several Acts. The Department administers the Commissions of Inquiry Act (the Act) and is proposing to remove redundant references to the Act through the RSAB. This includes removing the redundant references to the Act in section () of the Waitara Harbour Act . The Department also proposes to remove the Shipping Act from Schedule of the Inquiries Act , as the relevant clause in the Shipping Act has been repealed. The Department has assessed the proposals as minor, non controversial, and contributing to maintaining the regulatory system. The Ministry agrees with this assessment and recommends these references be removed from the legislation. The Department will provide you with a Cabinet paper seeking Cabinet policy decisions in October , with the Bill expected to be introduced into the House in mid .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: Waitemat Harbour Connections
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Other upcoming Ministry of Transport Cabinet papers There are no other upcoming Ministry of Transport Cabinet papers.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Update on monthly GPS implementation reporting and quarterly reporting on the SOISPEPEP measures The second monthly GPS implementation report is due to your Office on Wednesday October. In our advice on the previous report (OC refers) we noted that NZTA were unable to provide financial reporting on GPS activity class expenditure in the July report and that this information would be available in the August report. NZTA have since informed us that this data will be provided as part of its quarterly reporting due to your Office in November. Furthermore, NZTA are planning to produce a single consolidated quarterly report which will contain SOI, SPE, PEP, and GPS implementation measures. This report is due to be considered by the NZTA board on November and is due to your Office on November . We will produce secondary advice on this report which we will deliver to your Office during the week commencing November . Northland Road of National Significance
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming Minister of Transport m eetings Meeting Meeting Details Tuesday September .pm .pm Meeting with Fast track Ministers Briefing Due: Friday September Officials Attending : TBC Thursday September .pm .pm Meeting with David Boyce, Chief Executive, NZ Trucking Association Briefing Due: Tuesday September Offic ials Attending : NA Tuesday September and Friday September .am .am Meetings with the Hugo Group in Auckland and Wellington Briefing Due: Friday September Offic ials Attending : NA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Other briefings and aide memoires to Minister of Transport Note: Papers we propose to be included in your weekend bag will be submitted by close of business Wednesday in the week they are submitted. Due to Office Title Week ending September Week ending October Total Mobility Scheme Review: Overview of Policy Direction Week ending October Emergency Weather Authorisation to release tagged contingency This briefing seeks authorisation to draw down the Budget tagged contingency of . million for Severe Weather Response Readiness, Resilience, and Recovery, which will enable four non government organisations to repairrebuild damaged facilities and improve future emergency response preparedness. Week ending October Vote Transport: October Baseline Update This briefing seeks your approval of changes to Vote Transport in the October Baseline Update (OBU) and agreement to submit these changes to the Minister of Finance. OBU includes confirming inprinciple expense transfers and other changes joint Ministers are able to approve under CO () , as well as an opportunity to update the Treasury with any Cabinet or joint Ministers decisions taken since Budget . Week ending October Week ending October s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Board Appointments Civil Aviation Authority Induction planning for new members is underway. Maritime New Zealand Following feedback from your Office, the Ministry has commenced the process for seeking nominations, including public advertisement. Nomination letters will also be provided to your Office. New Zealand Transport Agency Induction planning for new members is underway. Independent Review Function Civil Aviation Act An position description has been provided to your Office for approval. We await comment from your Office and will look to list this advert in parallel with the consultation process for the scope of the role. City Rail Link Limited Following a meeting with the City Rail Link Limited Chair on Wednesday August , advice is under development regarding three member terms that will expire at the end of October . Subject to consultation, we envisage providing Shareholders a briefing on this matter in the week commencing Monday August . Appointments in Confidence Transport Accident Investigation Commission Jane Meares, Chief Commissioner of the Transport Accident Investigation Commission, met with Minister Doocey on Tuesday August . At this meeting, she advised of her intention to retire on September . She intends to inform the organisation at a later . She has also provided Minister Doocey with a recommendation for her successor (supported by her fellow Commissioners), which he is considering. We recommend you discuss this matter with Minister Doocey. The Ministry provided context in advance of the meeting, which your Office also received (OC refers). We expect further advice will be commissioned.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Other briefings and aide memoires to Minister of Transport Note: Papers we propose to be included in your weekend bag will be submitted by close of business Wednesday in the week they are submitted. Due to Office Title Week ending October Week ending October Emergency Weather Authorisation to release tagged contingency This briefing seeks authorisation to draw down the Budget tagged contingency of . million for Severe Weather Response Readiness, Resilience, and Recovery, which will enable four non government organisations to repairrebuild damaged facilities and improve future emergency response preparedness. Week ending October Vote Transport: October Baseline Update This briefing seeks your approval of changes to Vote Transport in the October Baseline Update (OBU) and agreement to submit these changes to the Minister of Finance. OBU includes confirming inprinciple expense transfers and other changes joint Ministers are able to approve under CO () , as well as an opportunity to update the Treasury with any Cabinet or joint Ministers decisions taken since Budget . Week ending October Week ending October Total Mobility Scheme Review: Overview of Policy Direction Week ending October s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Transport stakeholder updates Stakeholder Update
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Other upcoming Ministry of Transport Cabinet papers There are no other upcoming Ministry of Transport Cabinet papers this week.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Proactive Releases Due to Office Title planned for release Friday September Proactive release of Vote Transport Baseline Savings documents This briefing will seek your approval to release two documents provided during the Budget baseline savings exercise. TBC Wednesday October Monday November TBC Proactive release of Extending the Time for Overseas Driver Licence Conversions This proactive release briefing (OC refers) will seek your approval to publish Cabinet material related to the Cabinet Paper: Extending the Time for Overseas Driver Licence Conversions. Monday October
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Updates on other matters Emergency Ocean Response Capability (Cook Strait) business case Department of Internal Affairs Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill Amendments The Department of Internal Affairs (the Department) is developing a Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill (RSAB). An RSAB is a vehicle for non controversial policy changes that improve regulatory systems, and typically includes amendments to several Acts. The Department administers the Commissions of Inquiry Act (the Act) and is proposing to remove redundant references to the Act through the RSAB. This includes removing the redundant references to the Act in section () of the Waitara Harbour Act . The Department also proposes to remove the Shipping Act from Schedule of the Inquiries Act , as the relevant clause in the Shipping Act has been repealed. The Department has assessed the proposals as minor, non controversial, and contributing to maintaining the regulatory system. The Ministry agrees with this assessment and recommends these references be removed from the legislation. The Department will provide you with a Cabinet paper seeking Cabinet policy decisions in October , with the Bill expected to be introduced into the House in mid .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Proactive Releases Due to Office Title planned for release Wednesday October Proactive Release of August Weekly Reports This proactive release briefing ( OC refers) will seek your approval to release all W eekly Reports for August provided to yourself and Minister Doocey November Wednesday October November
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Upcoming Minister of Transport meetings Meeting Meeting Details Tuesday September .pm .pm Infrastructure and Investment Ministers Group Talking points due:
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Other briefings and aide memoires to Minister of Transport Note: Papers we propose to be included in your weekend bag will be submitted by close of business Wednesday in the week they are submitted. Due to Office Title Thursday September Ministry of Transport Draft Annual Report This briefing will provide you with a copy of the Ministrys draft Annual Report and seek your agreement to an Addendum to the Report (as required under the Public Finance Act) for certain nondepartmental appropriations. Week ending September Draft Strategic Intentions This briefing will seek your agreement to the Ministrys new Strategic Intentions , including your Ministerial foreword. The timing for this briefing has been delayed by one week as it has taken longer to finalise the S trategic Intentions than expected. Week ending September City Rail Link Sponsors Options for the Maungawhau and Karanga aHape development precinct This is a joint briefing with Treasury, which seeks your approval to progress with some options regarding the development sites in the Maungawhau and Karangaa Hape precinct. Week ending September Week ending September Letter of Comfort to the Civil Aviation Authority This briefing seeks your approval for a Letter of Comfort to the Civil Aviation Authority This briefing has been delayed by one week as agreed by your Office. Week ending September Public Transport Bus Decarbonisation Fund This briefing is being jointly prepared with EECA and will seek your agreement to the funding criteria for the roll out of the public transport bus decarbonisation funding in Budget .
Page Demonstrating efficiency Agencies need to demonstrate that their service offering is efficient, in that it meets the needs of st akeholders, and represents value for money. Efficiency is not necessarily about making the service as low cost as possible. Agencies should test with stakeholders the wa y which they should be charged. Direct text f CBAx Tool User Guidance Guide for departments and agencies using Treasury https:treasury.govt.nzpublicati onsguidecbax tooluser guidance This document helps agencies complete fit forpurpose cost be nefit analysis (CBA) by using CBAx tool. CBAx tool is an excel based spreadsheet model with a database of quantified impact values. It is an important element to ensure that robust wellbeing and value for money assessment is applied to investment and budge t decisions.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Ministerial correspondence and OIAs Ministerial Correspondence of Ministerials Topic Key themes Safety Requests to make seatbelts on school buses mandatory Concerns around speed limit increases Further questions on drug driving legislation Request to reinstate third party insurance
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Transport stakeholder updates Stakeholder Update CAA Aviation Industry Meeting On Monday August , officials attended the Civil Aviation Authoritys quarterly Aviation Industry Meeting. Meeting attendees included the Tier airports, Air New Zealand and Qantas, industry associations, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, Police and Ministry of Health. A key focus of discussion was on the economic importance of the aviation sector, and the challenges the industry is currently facing with reducing traveller volumes and rising costs. The industry was positive about the work being undertaken by the CAA and AvSec but is feeling under pressure responding to the number and breadth of government consultations. Civil Aviation Rules engagement The Civil Aviation Act requires all civil aviation rules to be remade to carry over settings in place under the Act, with any necessary updates to reflect the Act and other technical changes. Draft revision of all civil aviation rules has been completed. Sector engagement on the realigned rules will be undertaken for eight weeks, from the week starting September until October . We expect to provide the suite of rules for your approval and signature by December . Local Government CEOs Invitation to Address Local Government CEOs on transport policy You received an invitation from Auckland Council CEO Phil Wilson to address a group of local government CEOs (just over half of all regional, city and district council CEs) in Auckland on Wednesday September . We understand you were unable to accept the invitation. Mr Wilson has queried whether a senior executive from the Ministry can attend instead. The theme suggested by Mr Wilson is Government policy direction with transport policy, funding and delivery, though he has indicated flexibility over the topics that are covered. He has noted the intention to release the CityRegional deal framework shortly, and expects the CEOs to participate in a broader discussion about economic development, jobs growth and alignment of infrastructure investment. DCE David Wood has capacity to accept the invitation. As you will appreciate officials can explain government policy, but are bound by convention not to promote policy. If the Ministry does participate in the proceedings, we will provide the Office with an advance draft of the presentation for review and feedback. Decision sought: Agree to Ministry participation at the local government CEOs meeting Yes No PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Transport stakeholder updates Stakeholder Update Max Fletcher, Co Founder, Digital Plates Officials will meet with Mr Fletcher for a further discussion on digital plates. We understand he expects that his proposal can be implemented quickly.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Ministerial correspondence and OIAs Ministerial Correspondence of Ministerials Topic Key themes Safety Concerns around speed limit increases Support for speed limit increases Thoughts around specific speed limits Request to speed up speed limit increases
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Other upcoming Ministry of Transport Cabinet papers There are no other upcoming Ministry of Transport Cabinet papers.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Due to Office Title Week ending September Total Mobility Scheme Review: Overview of Policy Direction Week ending October Emergency Weather Authorisation to release tagged contingency This briefing seeks authorisation to draw down the Budget tagged contingency of . million for Severe Weather Response Readiness, Resilience, and Recovery, which will enable four non government organisations to repairrebuild damaged facilities and improve fut ure emergency response preparedness. On hold pending further direction from CCIEB Aligning the first Emissions Reduction Plan with the governments Climate Strategy This briefing is on hold while we await further directions from the Climate Change Interdepartmental Executive Board.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Written Parliamentary Question s Received Number Topics Due () What modelling, if any, have officials undertaken on the impact of the changes to the Clean Car Standard targets on the number of zero emission and plug in hybrid vehicles that are forecast to be registered in New Zealand for each year to
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming Minister of Transport m eetings Meeting Meeting Details Monday August Meeting with Fast track Approvals Bill Ministers Briefing Due: Friday August Officials Attending: Ruth Fairhall, DCE Policy Thursday August Meeting with the Rental Vehicle Association on COF frequency, registration fees, and transport modernisation Briefing Due: Tuesday August Officials Attending: TBC Thursday August .pm Meeting with Heavy Vehicle and Machinery Solutions on decarbonising the heavy vehicle sector Briefing Due: Tuesday August Officials Attending: Marian Willberg, Manager, Maritime and Freight
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming Minister of Transport m eetings Meeting Meeting Details Thursday August Meeting with the Rental Vehicle Association on COF frequency, registration fees, and transport modernisation. Briefing Due: Completed Officials Attending: TBC
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Due to Ministers Office Due to Requester Requester Summary of request The letter of comfort sent to the chair of the NZTA board on June Speed limit increase advice on time saved and economic results
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Other briefings and aide memoires to Minister of Transport Note: Papers we propose to be included in your weekend bag will be submitted by close of business Wednesday in the week they are submitted. Due to Office Title Monday September Tuesday September Briefing for Civil Aviation Authority Officials Meeting with the Minister This briefing will support your discussion with Civil Aviation Authority Officials on Wednesday September. Week ending September Draft Strategic Intentions This briefing will seek your agreement to the Ministrys new Strategic Intentions , including your Ministerial foreword. The timing for this briefing has been delayed by one week as it has taken longer to finalise the Strategic Intentions than expected. Week ending September Letter of Comfort to the Civil Aviation Authority This briefing seeks your approval for a Letter of Comfort to the Civil Aviation Authority This briefing has been delayed by one week as agreed by your Office. Week ending September Public Transport Bus Decarbonisation Fund This briefing is being jointly prepared with EECA and will seek your agreement to the funding criteria for the roll out of the public transport bus decarbonisation funding in Budget . Week ending September Civil Aviation Authority Quarter Four Performance Report This briefing will provide you with a summary of the Civil Aviation Authoritys performance over Quarter Four April June . Week ending September Total Mobility Scheme Review: Overview of Policy Direction s ()(h) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Proactive Releases Due to Office Title planned for release Wednesday September Proactive release of Cabinet papers on Civil Aviation Authority funding sustainability and alternative delivery arrangements for the Aviation Security Service This proactive release briefing will seek your approval to release the Cabinet paper that approved the release of the CAA funding review public consultation document and the discussion document on investigating alternative delivery arrangements for aviation security services. Monday September Wednesday September Proactive Release of August Briefing Titles This proactive release briefing (OC refers) will seek your approval for all transport agencies to release their August list of briefing titles provided to yourself and Minister Doocey. Monday September Wednesday September Proactive Release of July Weekly Reports This proactive release briefing (OC refers) will seek your approval to release all Weekly R eports for July provided to yourself and Minister Doocey. Monday September Wednesday September Proactive release of Request to Use a Section of State Highway One for Film Production This proactive release briefing (OC refers) will seek your approval to publish Cabinet material related to the Cabinet Paper: Request to Use a Section of State Highway One For Film Production . Monday October Wednesday September Proactive release of the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Regulations This proactive release briefing (OC refers) will seek your approval to publish Cabinet material related to the Cabinet Paper: Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Regulations . Monday October Wednesday September Proactive release of Extending the Time for Overseas Driver Licence Conversions This proactive release briefing (OC refers) will seek your approval to publish Cabinet material related to the Cabinet Paper: Extending the Time for Overseas Driver Licence Conversions . Monday October Wednesday September Proactive release of advice on parking, towage, and storage fees review This briefing will seek your approval to release the policy papers, final Cabinet materials, and the targeted consultation document for the above review. By Thursday October
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Received Number Topics Due () What official advice (excluding advice sourced from the Motor Industry Association), if any, has the Minister received on the number and proportion of light vehicles that were forecast in to comply with or have emissions lower than the previous targets under the Clean Car Standard, which were repealed under the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Act () What official advice (excluding advice sourced from the Motor Industry Association), if any, has the Minister received on the number and proportion of light vehicles that were forecast in to comply with or have emissions lower than the previous targets under the Clean Car Standard, which were repealed under the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Act () How much, if anything, did the Government expect to charge vehicle importers in total for exceeding the Clean Car Standard in under the previous targets, which were repealed under the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Act () What official advice (excluding advice sourced from the Motor Industry Association), if any, has the Minister received on the number and proportion of light vehicles that were forecast in to comply with or have emissions lower than the previous target s under the Clean Car Standard, which were repealed under the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Act () How much, if anything, does the Government expect to charge vehicle importers in total for exceeding the Clean Car Standard targets in () How much, if anything, did the Government expect to charge vehicle importers in total for exceeding the Clean Car Standard in under the previous targets, which were repealed under the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Act
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Other upcoming Ministry of Transport Cabinet papers New Zealand Air Services Agreement and Protocol This paper seeks approval for New Zealand to sign and ratify the Air Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand and the associated Protocol to the Air Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand on Third, Fourth and Fifth Freedom Traffic Rights between Parties. Progress Update: We will provide the Associate Minister with a draft Cabinet paper in the week commencing Monday August . To Associate Minister: week commencing Monday August To lodge: September To Committee: September
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Other upcoming Ministry of Transport Cabinet papers New Zealand Air Services Agreement and Protocol This paper seeks approval for New Zealand to sign and ratify the Air Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand, and the associated Protocol to the Air Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand on Third, Fourth and Fifth Freedom Traffic Rights between Parties. Progress Update: We will provide the Associate Minister with a draft Cabinet paper in the week commencing Monday August . To Associate Minister: week commencing Monday August To lodge: September To Committee: September Civil Aviation Act Implementation Independent Review Function cost recovery This paper seeks approval to release a consultation document Independent reviews of the Director of Civil Aviations decisions: Proposed fees for applicants, which proposes the introduction of partial cost recovery for the new independent review function created by the Civil Aviation Act . Progress Update: We will provide the Minister with a draft Cabinet paper for feedbac k on Thursday August . To lodge: September To Committee: September (ECO)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Received Number Topics Due () What advice, if any, has the Minister received regarding other congestion management strategies besides time ofuse charging for Auckland, by and title () What, if any, congestion reduction targets have been set for the time ofuse charging scheme, and how will its effectiveness be measured () What is the timeline for drafting and introducing the necessary legislation for time ofuse charging () What steps, if any, are being taken to ensure comprehensive consultation with Auckland local boards, mana whenua, and other stakeholders during the development of time ofuse charging in the city () What, if any, economic impact assessments on timeofuse charging, particularly focusing on Auckland have been undertaken, by and title () How will the government ensure that Aucklands public transport system is adequately prepared before implementing time ofuse charging () How does the Government plan to decide between a cordon based system and a corridor based system for time of use charging in Auckland and what factors will be considered in this decision () What advice, if any, has the Minister received regarding for a mid implementation of time of use charging in Auckland, and what specific milestones need to be met to achieve this timeline, by and title () What isare the title(s) of any briefing(s), email(s), report(s), or other advice, if any, he has received that support the claim that the proposed Setting of Speed Limits Rule () aligns with those of other high income countries that have the lowest rates of road deaths including Norway, Sweden, Iceland, Japan, Denmark, and the United Kingdom, where these six countries all have default speed limits of kilometres per hour or more on urban roads, with exceptions for lower speeds. () What update, if any, can the Minister provide on the preferred system approach for congestion charging in Auckland
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Due to Office Title Week ending September Week ending October Emergency Weather Authorisation to release tagged contingency Resilience and Security This briefing seeks authorisation to draw down the Budget tagged contingency of . million for Severe Weather Response Readiness, Resilience, and Recovery, which will enable four nongovernment organisations to repairrebuild damaged facilities and improve future emergency response preparedness. Week ending October Vote Transport: October Baseline Update This briefing seeks your approval of changes to Vote Transport in the October Baseline Update (OBU) and agreement to submit these changes to the Minister of Finance. OBU includes confirming inprinciple expense transfers and other changes joint Ministers are able to approve under CO () , as well as an opportunity to update the Treasury with any Cabinet or joint Ministers decisions taken since Budget .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Due to Office Title planned for release TBC TBC TBC TBC
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Received Number Topics Due () How much, if anything, did the Government expect to charge vehicle importers in total for exceeding the Clean Car Standard in under the previous targets, which were repealed under the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Act () How much, if anything, does the Government expect to charge vehicle importers in total for exceeding the Clean Car Standard targets in () How much, if anything, does the Government expect to charge vehicle importers in total for exceeding the Clean Car Standard targets in () Is his statement Advice provided to me by the Ministry of Transport found that under current targets set by the former Government, Clean Car Standard penalties are forecast to amount to approximately . million of cost to consumers purchasing a new ca r in reflected in any official Government fiscal accounts; if not, why not () What is the total sum, if any, of projected future spend on redundancy payments to staff at ministries, departments and agencies, if any, for which the Minister is responsible as at September , by month and agency () What is the total sum, if any, of redundancy payments made to staff at ministries, departments and agencies, if any, for which the Minister is responsible during the period November September , by month and agency
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Other briefings and aide memoires to Minister of Transport Note: Papers we propose to be included in your weekend bag will be submitted by close of business Wednesday in the week they are submitted. Due to Office Title Week ending August City Rail Link Limited Special Resolution in lieu of Annual General Meeting This briefing seeks your agreement to authorise City Rail Link Limited (CRLL) to complete business by way of special resolution in lieu of an annual meeting (often referred to as the annual general meeting, or AGM). Week ending August Emergency Weather Authorisation to release tagged contingency This briefing seeks authorisation to draw down the Budget tagged contingency of . million for Severe Weather Response Readiness, Resilience, and Recovery, which will enable four non government organisations to repairrebuild damaged facilities and improve future emergency response preparedness. Week ending August Week ending August Aviation Industry Association Conference This briefing will provide background information to support your attendance and speech at the Aviation Industry Association Conference in Christchurch on Tuesday August . Week ending August Civil Aviation Authority Monitoring Plan The Ministry is developing monitoring plans for each of the Crown Entities in Vote Transport. This briefing seeks your agreement on a monitoring plan for the Civil Aviation Authority. Week ending August Manukau Harbor Port Feasibility Study Advice and Next Steps This briefing will provide you with the final Manukau Harbour Port Feasibility Study, our advice on its conclusions, and possible next steps for you to consider. Week ending August Review of Bus Decarbonisation Mandate and Target Week ending August The Interim Aviation Council and the National Aviation Policy Statement This briefing will update you on the work being undertaken by the Interim Aviation Council to develop a National Aviation Policy Statement.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Other briefings and aide memoires to Minister of Transport Note: Papers we propose to be included in your weekend bag will be submitted by close of business Wednesday in the week they are submitted. Due to Office Title Week ending August Civil Aviation Authority Monitoring Plan The Ministry is developing monitoring plans for each of the Crown Entities in Vote Transport. This briefing seeks your agreement on a monitoring plan for the Civil Aviation Authority. Week ending August Manukau Harbor Port Feasibility Study Advice and Next Steps This briefing will provide you with the final Manukau Harbour Port Feasibility Study, our advice on its conclusions, and possible next steps for you to consider. Week ending August Review of Bus Decarbonisation Mandate and Target Week ending August The Interim Aviation Council and the National Aviation Policy Statement This briefing will update you on the work being undertaken by the Interim Aviation Council to develop a National Aviation Policy Statement. Week ending August Civil Aviation Authority Statutory Functions This briefing will provide further advice on aligning the New Zealand regime with Australia. Week ending August Week ending August Auckland Light Rail Return of Working Capital This briefing is being prepared for Shareholding Ministers, Minister s of Finance, Housing and Transport , to seek approval of the proposed return of working capital from Auckland Light Rail Limited. Week ending August Auckland Transport Alignment Project (ATAP) I mplementation Report July to June This briefing provides you with a three year summary of the ATAP investment programme over the period July to June . The report summarises delivery of key projects, monitors progress against wider outcomes from the programme, and details funding and expenditure for the programme over the reporting period.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Received Number Topics Due () How much, if anything, does the Government expect to charge vehicle importers in total for exceeding the Clean Car Standard targets in () What Cabinet papers, if any, has the Minister taken to Cabinet Committees during the week beginning September , by Cabinet Committee, title and () What papers, if any, did the Minister take to Cabinet during the week beginning September , by title and () How many employees are in the Ministers departments, if any () Prior to September, what work, if any, has the Ministers departments, if any, done to scope or evaluate work from home policies () What current policies, if any, does the Ministers department, if any, have on working from home or flexible working arrangements () How many square meters of office space, if any, does the Ministers department currently possess in the Wellington City Council area, if any () How many square meters of office space, if any, does the Ministers department currently possess, if any () Has the Minister read and seriously considered the Open Letter from the Global Road Safety Partnership Re: Draft Speed Rule and Its Impact on Road Safety () What, if anything, is proposed to be the default for twolane undivided rural highways in New Zealand under the proposed Setting of Speed Limits Rule () How many restructures, change processes or proposals, or any other sort of organisational process which led to reshuffling responsibilities or laying off employees has the Ministers departments had, if any, since November
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Proactive Releases Due to Office Title planned for release Thursday September Proactive release of the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Regulations This proactive release briefing (OC refers) will seek your approval to publish Cabinet material related to the Cabinet Paper: Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Regulations . Monday October Wednesday September Proactive release of Extending the Time for Overseas Driver Licence Conversions Safety This proactive release briefing (OC refers) will seek your approval to publish Cabinet material related to the Cabinet Paper: Extending the Time for Overseas Driver Licence Conversions . Monday October Wednesday September Proactive release of advice on parking, towage, and storage fees review This briefing will seek your approval to release the policy papers, final Cabinet materials, and the targeted consultation document for the above review. By Thursday October Wednesday September Proactive release of Request to Use a Section of State Highway One for Film Production This proactive release briefing (OC refers) will seek your approval to publish Cabinet material related to the Cabinet Paper: Request to Use a Section of State Highway One For Film Production. Monday October TBC TBC TBC TBC
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Other portfolio Cabinet p apers with t ransport implications Committees Cabinet Deferred to be confirmed Cabinet Economic Policy Committee September TBC s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv)
Page Chapter Best value for money spent This chapter provides an overview of how procurement ensures that best value for money spent can be obtained when purchasing goods or services to deliver activities approved under s of the Land Transport Management Act (LTMA). This chapter provides guidelines on the: Identify best value for money at the activity selection stage Maintain or enhance value for money spent through the procurement process Financial and nonfinancial attributes that are appropriate to value during the procurement process Page Chapter Strategic approach to procurement This chapter sets out how a strategic approach to procurement will enable an approved organisation more likely to obtain best value for money. The strategic approach has the following steps: . Document the policy context (strategic objectives and outcomes, procurement objectives and outcomes, compliance with other relevant policies) . Document the procurement programme . Document the approved organisations understanding of the procurement environment . Develop an approach to delivering the work programme . Implement the procurement strategy Page Chapter Supplier selection process The supplier selection process is the means of obtaining the preferred supplier to deliver the outputs based on best value for money principles.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Departmental Official Information Act requests Due to Requester Requester Summary of request Crash data filtered by young people at fault for the previous years Analysis conducted by the Ministry on the previous change in drivers licensing age requirements All Draft Cabinet papers relating to ALRL Extended Information held on weather modification Any decision making papers or correspondence related to the Virgin Australia Air New Zealand code share agreement. In relation to the Civil Aviation Act Independent Review Function Public consultation, how many submissions has the Ministry received, and how many are medical convener related Advice on the assessment of long term requirements for a Resilient Cook Strait Connection July Briefings July Briefings Advice provided on the review of the Total Mobility Scheme Directives or instructions given by Ministers to departments since December Extended Any summary reports on feedback received on GPS
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Due to Office Title Wednesday September Week ending September Emergency Weather Authorisation to release tagged contingency This briefing seeks authorisation to draw down the Budget tagged contingency of . million for Severe Weather Response Readiness, Resilience, and Recovery, which will enable four non government organisations to repairrebuild damaged facilities and improve future emergency response preparedness. Week ending September change is consistent with output plan milestone ( September ) Interim advice on the Metropolitan Rail Operating Model Review This briefing will provide you with interim advice on: Week ending September Vote Transport: Certification of Unappropriated Expenditure for This briefing seeks the Ministers certification of the Vote Transport unappropriated expenditure for the financial year. Week ending September Draft Strategic Intentions This briefing will seek your agreement to the Ministrys new Strategic Intentions , including your Ministerial foreword. Week ending September Ministry of Transport Draft Annual Report This briefing will provide you with a copy of the Ministrys draft Annual Report and seek your agreement to an Addendum to the Report (as required under the Public Finance Act) for certain nondepartmental appropriations. Week ending September Next steps for transport actions in the first Emissions Reduction Plan This briefing will provide you with advice on discontinuing selected actions in the first Emissions Reduction Plan. Week ending September Week ending September Public Transport Bus Decarbonisation Fund s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Due to Office Title Week ending August Week ending August Civil Aviation Authority Statutory Functions This briefing will provide further advice on aligning the New Zealand regime with Australia. Week ending August Week ending September change is consistent with output plan milestone ( September ) Interim advice on the Metropolitan Rail Operating Model Review This briefing will provide you with interim advice on: Week ending September Next steps for transport actions in the first Emissions Reduction Plan This briefing will provide you with advice on discontinuing selected actions in the first Emissions Reduction Plan. Week ending September Public Transport Bus Decarbonisation Fund
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Departmental Official Information Act requests Due to Requester Requester Summary of request All draft Cabinet papers relating to ALRL Extended Information held on weather modification Decision making papers or correspondence related to the Virgin Australia Air New Zealand code share agreement. In relation to the Civil Aviation Act Independent Review Function Public consultation, how many submissions has the Ministry received, and how many are medical convener related Advice on the assessment of long term requirements for a Resilient Cook Strait Connection July Briefings July Briefings Advice provided on the review of the Total Mobility Scheme Directives or instructions given by Ministers to departments since December Extended Any summary reports on feedback received on GPS In relation to the Ministrys PSC review: Requesting the full email chain between Martin Kessick and Audrey Sonerson and emails previously withheld.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications Committees Cabinet Business Committee September Response to the Climate Change Commissions Emissions Monitoring Report The Minister of Climate Change will undertake ministerial consultation from to September on a draft Cabinet paper setting out a draft response to the Climate Change Commissions first Emissions Monitoring Report . The paper is expected to be lodged on September .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Cabinet Economic Policy Committee TBC Strengthening national and regional emergency management to improve New Zealands disaster resilience DPMC will consult on the draft Cabinet advice with agencies and Ministers from Thursday August Thursday September. This paper seeks agreement to release the proposed Government response to the report of the Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events. The National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) is currently the recognised steward of the emergency management system, responsible for providing strategic leadership for risk reduction, readiness, response, and recovery activities. The Ministry considers that there must be an agency with responsibility for the strategic leadership of risk reduction and recovery, however, the Ministry does not have a preference for the responsible agency.
Page of Recommendations We recommend you: note Auckland Transport and public transport authorities (PTAs) using the Regional Integrated Ticketing Scheme (RIT S) can implement the full Community Connect concessions on July agree to the proposed regional interim transitional arrangements, specifically: .. agree that (for RITS councils) Crown funding will be available for under s ( yearolds) who board services without a smartcard but are recorded by a driver Yes No .. agree to fund an exten sion to universal half price fares for all eligible G reater Wellington Regional Council (GWRC) services until July not recommended OR .. agree to fund half price fares for existing GWRC child concessions and a proportion of tertiary verified users (to reflect under yearold patronage) until July recommended OR .. agree to not provide Crown funding to GWRC for its interi m proposal Yes No
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings to Associate Minister of Transport Due Title Wednesday October Monitoring Plans for the Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC) and Maritime NZ (MNZ) This briefing (OC) seeks your approval of the draft monitoring plans for TAIC and MNZ. The Ministry has needed additional information to develop the monitoring plans, which has delayed their finalisation. Week ending October Wednesday November Maritime Security Tools Investment This briefing will update you on the Maritime Security Strategys surveillance and response tools investment and seek your direction on next steps.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings to Associate Minister of Transport Due Week Ending Title Friday August Oil Pollution Advisory Committee Terms of Reference This briefing seeks your approval of a Terms of Reference for the Oil Pollution Advisory Committee. Friday September Options for Maritime Legislation The Ministry and Maritime NZ have started scoping a review of primary maritime legislation to ensure it is fit for purpose given technological changes and long standing gaps in the regulatory framework. This briefing sets out options for advancing critical changes to maritime legislation, for discussion with you. The title and description of this deliverable have been amended to align with the portfolio work programme update. Friday September Speech for the launch of Zespris Green Shipping Corridor: Tauranga to Zeebrugge report You have been invited to speak at Zespris launch of its Green Shipping Corridor: Tauranga to Zeebrugge report. This briefing includes information to support your attendance . Friday September Proactive Release of August Briefing Titles This proactive release briefing (OC refers) will seek your approval for all transport agencies to release their August list of briefing titles provided to yourself and Minister Brown. Friday September Proactive Release of July Weekly Reports This proactive release briefing (OC refers) will seek your approval to release all Weekly Reports for July provided to yourself and Minister Brown. Friday September Air New Zealand Cathay Pacific Alliance Reauthorisation This briefing will provide the Ministrys preliminary view on the application from Air New Zealand and Cathay Pacific for a reauthorisation of their alliance agreement.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Aviation Tourism Project: Air Services Agreement ( ASAS) You have received a Cabinet Paper and National Interest Analysis for the Air Services Agreement with ASEAN. Cabinet paper: New Zealand ASEAN Air Services Agreement and Protocol This paper is currently undergoing Ministerial consultation. To Committee: Wednesday September (Economic Policy Committee) To Cabinet: Monday September Project: CodeshareAlliance Authorisations Briefing: Air New Zealand Cathay Pacific Alliance Reauthorisation This briefing will provide the Ministrys preliminary view on the application from Air New Zealand and Cathay Pacific for a reauthorisation of their alliance agreement. Week ending Friday September
Page of RESTRICTED Upcoming briefings to Associate Minister of Transport Due Week Ending Title Friday August Oil Pollution Advisory Committee Terms of Reference This briefing seeks your approval of a Terms of Reference for the Oil Pollution Advisory Committee. Friday September Options for Maritime Legislation The Ministry and Maritime NZ have started scoping a review of primary maritime legislation to ensure it is fit for purpose given technological changes and long standing gaps in the regulatory framework. This briefing sets out options for advancing critical changes to m aritime legislation, for discussion with you. The title and description of this deliverable have been amended to align with the portfolio work programme update.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Portfolio work programme update Milford Opportunities Project: Milford Aerodrome Financial Sustainability No update. The new charges for aerodrome users do not come into effect until April . Project: Masterplan Business Case No update. Thursday September
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Maritime Security
Page of COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE
Page of As signalled in the Decarbonising Transport Action Plan , the draft GPS will include a high threshold for investments that are inconsistent with emission reduction objectives . More work (led by the Ministry of Transport) is underway to confirm how this threshold will operate. We are open to feedback on how the emissions reduction focus is incorporated and communicated to drive the right incentives and outcomes and avoid any unintended consequences. The release of the draft GPS (anticipated in April ) will provide another opportunity to provide feedback on this. While the overarching foc us on emissions reduction signals a clear intent from the Government, in practice, it does not mean that every individual investment must reduce emissions. It means that the suite of investments covered by the GPS will reduce emissions as a whole.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Actions from Transport Officials Meeting Meeting with the Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) Monday September Due
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Aviation Civil Aviation Act cost recovery Ruth Fairhall OC Part NZTA Ministry of Transport Lead . Speed Speed rule implementation timelines Paul OConnell Verbal
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Part Ministry of Transport only Lead Paper reference . Weekl y Report Audrey Sonerson At August . Aviation Release of aviation consultation and discussion documents Ruth Fairhall Verbal update . Vehicle System Reforms Scope of Work Paul OConnell OC . David Wood OC
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Actions from Transport Officials Meeting Meeting with the Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) Monday September Due Weekly Report Driver Licensing Officials to engage with NZTA to confirm timing of overseas license conversion information being included in the Immigration information pack. Complete
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Update On Time Performance reporting Siobhan Routledge Email provided to Office . Emissions Reduction Plan Transport Chapter options for additional content. Ruth Fairhall OC . Coastal Shipping Resilience Fund Ruth Fairhall OC
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming Cabinet papers Committees Cabinet Appointments and Honours Committee Tuesday October Wednesday August International Maritime Organisation Climate Change Negotiation Mandate draft Cabinet paper International Maritime Organisation (IMO) member states are negotiating measures to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and ensure international shipping meets its net zero emissions target. This Cabinet paper proposes a revised Cabinet mandate for these negotiations and seeks delegated Cabinet authority for the Associate Minister of Transport, and other relevant Ministers, to provide direction to officials on New Zealands position in these negotiations, as necessary. This will be considered at Cabinet Economic Policy Committee on Wednesday August and then at Cabinet on September . . Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications There are no other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications this week . s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of IN CONFIDENCE Key priorities and highlights Community Grants for Seafarer Welfare Maritime NZ is finalising offers to successful grant applicants for , in total funding for the delivery of welfare services and facilities to seafarers visiting New Zealands major international ports. The nine successful grant applications were for a total of more than . million, however, the total pool of funding available is ,. This week, Maritime NZ has been engaging with successful applicants to finalise offers and in some cases discussing their acceptance of grants for less than they requested. Once this engagement is complete and grant offers have been completed, Maritime NZ will send recipients a media pack and disseminate a media release and social media post. N ew Maritime NZ Board emerging director In July the Board appointed Lara Ariell as an Emerging Director for a month term. Lara has been an Independent Advisor to the Board Audit and Risk Committee since July . Lara has a broad range of senior leadership, finance, strategy, planning, business support and change management roles in a variety of organisations across the public service. She was previously the CFO of Inland Revenue, leading their Enterprise Support Services transformation workstream, and is currently the Tumu Whakarae Chief Executive of Education Payroll Limited. C onsultation on the reform of the design, construction and equipment rules for domestic commercial vessels On Monday July , Cabinet agreed to Maritime NZ initiating public consultation on proposals to reform the design, construction and equipment rules for domestic commercial vessels. Consultation will occur in three tranches over a month period. The first tranche of proposals opened for consultation on Wednesday August and will run until October . To support consultation, Maritime NZ has directly contacted about regulated parties and will be including information in a range of stakeholder publications. Throughout the consultation Maritime NZ will run online information sessions for stakeholders. Maritime in the media Following a tragic boating accident on the Riverton bar which claimed the lives of three people, we were asked about whether the incident will be investigated and what work is being undertaken to reduce instances of harm. We have also been investigating opportunities to highlight the number of significant incidents over the winter. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Rail Metropolitan Rail Operating Model Review Preliminary Advice David Wood OC . Safety OFT Bill Paul OConnell Verbal update . Aviation IAC and the NAPS Siobhan Routledge OC
Page What is a business case approach The business case approach seeks at the earliest stage of the process, to clearly define the problems and contextual state of the district, with engagement of key partners and stakeholders where necessary. The business case approach also seeks to make sure during the lifecycle of a programme or project that the reason for doing it are still sound, and that it has a clear link back to organisational priorities and issues.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Proactive Releases Due to Office Title planned for release Friday August Proactive release of Land Transport (Drug Driving) Amendment Bill This briefing will seek your approval to release a collection of Cabinet material related to the Land Transport (Drug Driving) Amendment Bill. Monday September Wednesday August Proactive release of Civil Aviation Act : Implementation This briefing will seek your approval to release a collection of Cabinet material related to the Civil Aviation Act : Implementation. Monday September
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Proactive Releases Due to Office Title planned for release Friday August Proactive release of Land Transport (Drug Driving) Amendment Bill This briefing will seek your approval to release a collection of Cabinet material related to the Land Transport (Drug Driving) Amendment Bill. September
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Cabinet Economic Policy Committee TBC TBC Strengthening national and regional emergency management to improve New Zealands disaster resilience DPMC will consult on the draft Cabinet advice with agencies and Ministers from Thursday August Thursday September. This paper seeks agreement to release the proposed Government response to the report of the Government Inquiry into the Response to the North Island Severe Weather Events. The National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) is currently the recognised steward of the emergency management system, responsible for providing strategic leadership for risk reduction, readiness, response, and recovery activities. The Ministry considers that there must be an agency with responsibility for the strategic leadership of risk reduction and recovery, however, the Ministry does not have a preference for the responsible agency. s ()(f)(iv) s ()(g)(i) s ()(g)(i)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Ministerial correspondence and OIAs Ministerial correspondence of Ministerials Topic Key themes Petrol Tax and Road User Charges Request s to continue charging the petrol tax at the pump Complaint s against paying tax on petrol cars Request to increase RUC on trucks Highlighting potential issues with people altering odometers
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Other portfolio Cabinet p apers with t ransport implications Committees Cabinet
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Other portfolio Cabinet p apers with t ransport implications Committees Cabinet Cabinet Business Committee Monday September
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Ministerial correspondence and OIAs Ministerial correspondence of Ministerials Topic Key themes Auckland Issues with Auckland Transport and Council Safety Questions around drug driving legislation Concerns around Council speed limit changes Miscellaneous requests and concerns Road User Charges Concerns regarding all road users moving to RUC Advice on tolling and pricing options Miscellaneous questions, ideas, and complaints
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Due to Ministers Office Due to Requester Requester Summary of request All advice prepared by central government agencies for the Minister or his Office on time of use charging, including substantial email correspondence between officials and the Office All advice to the Minister about Auckland Transport Advice on projected road toll if the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits is adopted from NZTA and the Ministry Correspondence between the Ministers Office and Greater Wellington councillors on the Lower North Island Rail Integrated Mobility Programme CAA workplace culture Uptake of electric vehicles All advice relating to the closure of ALRL Advice on cycleway spending
Page We will apply the intervention hierarchy to shape the appropriate mix of interventions for any opportunity or challenges. With our coplanning and investment partners we need to consider the full range of options to implement the right combination of responses. Our priority will always be to get the most from existing infrastructure and different travel options that are available and avoiding or delaying the need to invest in new infrastructure. The intervention hierarchy is to consider first: Integrated planning Plan and develop an integrated landuse and transport pattern that maximises use of existing network capacity, reduces travel demand and supports transport choice Then managing demand Keep people and freight moving and reduce the adverse impacts of transport, such as congestion and emissions at peak times, through demandside measures eg supporting mode shift or road pricing Then make best use of the existing system through optimised levels of service across networks and public transport services, and allocation of network capacity Then invest in new infrastructure Consider investment in new infrastructure, matching the levels of service provided against affordability and realistic need
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Updates NZTA App update An update to the NZTA App was released on Thursday September (version ..). The update provides improved functionality, with users now able to apply for a Certificate of Particulars (currently only available through the contact centre), updateretain vehicle information when logging in and out, and to copy and paste driver licence numbers. The team are working on in App notifications for licensing (Rego), road user charges (RUC) and warrant of fitness (WoF) reminders, as well as in App RUC payments.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Ministerial correspondence and OIAs Ministerial correspondence There have not been five or more pieces of Ministerial correspondence on any one topic this week. Ministerial Official Information Act Requests Due to Ministers Office Due to Requester Requester Summary of request Extended Extended Any correspondence received or sent by the Office regarding the Lower North Island Rail Integrated Mobility Programme (LNIRIM) All advice received from departments on the removal of carbon emission subsidies for vehicles, reduced emissions standards, and the implications for New Zealands car fleet All documents relating to the February meeting with Port Company CEOs Information on EV chargers Advice or correspondence between the Minister of Transport and officials regarding the development of the new GPS June Briefings All correspondence and communication with nonGovernmental organisations regarding the Setting of Speed Limits Information about the appointment of medical conveners Information on transport expert advisory group Any safety analysis undertaken relating to the proposed Speed rule, such as modelling of the expected change in deaths and serious injuries (DSI), or analysis of historical DSI data Regarding the use of Te Reo Mori in the public service
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Ministerial correspondence and OIAs Ministerial correspondence There have not been five or more pieces of Ministerial correspondence on any one topic this week. Ministerial Official Information Act Requests Due to Ministers Office Due to Requester Requester Summary of request Requesting advice provided on achieving New Zealands emissions budgets in the draft GPS Requesting the document Changes to Budget Public Transport Decisions Requesting statistics in relation to the Cost Benefit Analysis on removing the blanket speed restrictions All advice received from departments on the removal of carbon emission subsidies for vehicles, reduced emissions standards, and the implications for New Zealands car fleet Requesting all documents relating to the February Meeting with Port Company CEOs Seeking information on EV chargers Advice or correspondence between the Minister of Transport and officials regarding the development of the new GPS June Briefings
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Actions from Transport Officials Meeting Meeting with NZ Transport Agency Waka Kotahi (NZTA) Due NZTA to carry out an analysis of driver testing officer (DTO) productivity over the last week s to determine if there is a longer term trend of productivity issues. NZTA to also advise how many of the new driver testing officers (DTOs) are located Christchurch. Provided below NZTA to provide a copy of planned media release for SHB Telephone Road and an update on the proposed solution. Provided below NZTA to provide advice on the number of Raised Safety PlatformsSpeed Bumps (or similar) on local roads that wont be funded during the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) period. Complete NZTA to provide an update on the summer maintenance programme for . Complete
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Due to Ministers Office Due to Requester Requester Summary of request Advice on whether the government has explored the loss of road tax through Odometer operation. Advice received on the efficiency of Road freight
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Received Number Topics Due () What changes to levy rates, if any, have been made in the Ministers department, if any, since November () What Cabinet papers, if any, has the Minister taken to Cabinet Committees during the week beginning August , by Cabinet Committee, title and () What papers, if any, did the Minister take to Cabinet during the week beginning August , by title and . Departmental Official Information Act requests Due to Requester Requester Summary of request Information on Sustainable Aviation Aotearoa Information surrounding the requesters medical convener tribunal hearing Any correspondence that relates to the Ministrys involvement in advice on visa fee increases this year Information held on weather modification A copy of Road to Zero progress reports to the Ministerial Oversight Group since March Regarding the Change process Any summary reports on feedback received on GPS All Ministry documents held in relation to the original drafting of Part in relation to Wn airport. Information on the Community Roadwatch programme Specific correspondence in full relating to the Public Service Commission initiated Performance Improvement Review Programme assessment A detailed breakdown of all credit card expenses incurred by the Ministry since January Crash data filtered by young people at fault for the previous years s ()(a)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Due to Ministers Office Due to Requester Requester Summary of request Requesting all correspondence and communication with non Governmental organisations regarding the Setting of Speed Limits Seeking information about the appointment of medical conveners Information on transport expert advisory group Extended Extended Any correspondence received or sent by the Office regarding the Lower North Island Rail Integrated Mobility Programme (LNIRIM) Any safety analysis undertaken relating to the proposed Speed rule, such as modelling of the expected change in deaths and serious injuries (DSI), or analysis of historical DSI data Regarding the use of T e Reo Mori in the public service Requesting Correspondence and documents relating to the Milford Opportunities Project Seeking all advice prepared by central government agencies for the Minister or his Office on time of use charging, including substantial email correspondence between officials and the Office All communication regarding the increase of parking fines All advice to the Minister about Auckland Transport
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Due to Ministers Office Due to Requester Requester Summary of request All communica tion between the Ministers Office and departments he is responsible for, about new spending or baseline savings in Budget All advice prepared by central government agencies for the Minister or his Office on time of use charging, including substantial email correspondence between officials and the Office All advice to the Minister about Auckland Transport Advice on projected road toll if the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits is adopted from NZTA and MoT Correspondence between the Ministers Office and Greater Wellington councillors on the Lower North Island Rail Integrated Mobility Programme
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Updates SH Weekend Closure Your Office was advised earlier in the week that Auckland Transport (AT) plans to close SH Main Road between Station Road and Tapu Road. AT is applying a new, faster method to complete the work over one weekend and minimise disruption to the community (previously a day closure was proposed but cancelled).
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Due to Requester Requester Summary of request Any summary reports on feedback received on GPS All Ministry documents held in relation to the original drafting of Part in relation to Wn airport. Information on the Community Roadwatch programme Specific correspondence in full relating to the Public Service Commission initiated Performance Improvement Review Programme assessment A detailed breakdown of all credit card expenses incurred by the Ministry since January Crash data filtered by young people at fault for the previous years Analysis conducted by the Ministry on the previous change in drivers licensing age requirements All Draft Cabinet papers relating to ALRL Any decision making papers or correspondence related to the Virgin Australia Air New Zealand code share agreement. In relation to the Civil Aviaition Act Independent Review Function Public consultation, how many submissions has the Ministry received, and how many are medical convener related Advice on the assessment of long term requirements for a Resilient Cook Strait Connection July Briefings July Briefings Advice provided on the review of the Total Mobility Scheme
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Due to Requester Requester Summary of request Analysis conducted by the Ministry on the previous change in drivers licensing age requirements All Draft Cabinet papers relating to ALRL Any decision making papers or correspondence related to the Virgin Australia Air New Zealand code share agreement.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Received Number Topics Due () How many staff, if any, were employed in the Ministers departments, if any, on July that worked on climate change adaptation, categorised by work on corporateorganisational climate adaptation or national climate change adaptation or both () What are the median and mean salaries of the staff, if any, of the Ministers department, if any () What papers, if any, did the Minister take to Cabinet during the week beginning August , by title and () What Cabinet papers, if any, has the Minister taken to Cabinet Committees during the week beginning August , by Cabinet Committee, title and
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Written Parliamentary Questions Received Number Topics Due () Seeking the rationale for changing NZTAs standard cost benefit analysis methodology when performing a cost benefit analysis of speed limits () Seeking the analysis undertaken of the safety implications of the draft Speed Rule () Does the Ministry of Transport briefing: OC Cook Strait Resilience Phase Two Report Options Assessment of June make recommendations about the legal personality of a new entity to procure andor operate the Cook Strait ferries () Does the briefing OC make recommendations about the ownership of the Cook Strait ferries () Who is the author of OC () What will OC become available to the public () Reversal of permanent safe speed zones around schools () Cabinet papers the Minister has taken to Cabinet Committees during the week beginning August () Cabinet papers the Minister has taken to Cabinet during the week beginning August
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Better Together initiative Better Together is an initiative to build effective coordination and collaboration between local councils, NZ TA and NZ Police to make our roads safer through education, advertising and enforcement.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Departmental Official Information Act requests Due to Requester Requester Summary of request Three recent Value for Money studies Documents on potential changes to the tolling system All written advice provided to Ministers that informed the draft second Emissions Reduction Plan Tolling briefings All documents held by the Ministry relating to the Clean Car Standard created post October Information on the use of AI within the Ministry Salary information All communication regarding the baseline savings excise in budget between tier , and staff Seeking June Briefings Seeking June Briefings Seeking June Briefings Extended The Draft Land Transport: Setting of Speed Limits RIS and correspondence on this topic Extended to Internal correspondence with NZTA on the proposed Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits Consultation reports for the draft GPS June Briefings Correspondence held between the Ministry and PSC about the Performance Improvement Review Programme June Briefings and Waitemat Harbour crossing project briefings and papers Requesting a list of job titles that hold Ministry credit cards and the number of cards shared s ()(a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Due to Requester Requester Summary of request Correspondence between the Minister and the Ministry regarding the Clean Car Standard Direction given to the Ministry by the Minister of Transport around Auckland Transport on its congestion charging plans All advice produced for the Climate Implications of Policy Assessment regarding the Clean Car Standard changes announced by the government on July Light Rail documents such as the superfunds presentation, and project updates Information surrounding the requesters medical convener tribunal hearing A copy of the consultation document regarding the Increase to parking fines across NZ Any Correspondence that relates to the Ministrys involvement in advice on visa fee increases this year Information held on weather modification A copy of Road to Zero progress reports to the Ministerial Oversight Group since March Regarding the Change process Any summary reports on feedback received on GPS All Ministry documents held in relation to the original drafting of Part in relation to Wn airport. Information on the Community Roadwatch programme Specific correspondence in full relating to the Public Service Commission initiated Performance Improvement Review Programme assessment
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Update on safety cameras NZTA continues to transfer cameras from NZ Police according to plan and has started issuing reminder notices for unpaid infringements. Roadside testing of the first average speedpoint topoint (PP) corridor at Matakana Road (an AT local road) is on track to commence in early October . Testing will provide confidence to both NZTA and the public that the cameras are accurate and can operate in a range of conditions prior to starting enforcement.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming Ministerial Items Upcoming Briefings to Minister of Transport Due to Office Title Wednesday September BRI Level crossings Priority ranking of sites and funding options Provide data, modelling, and understand the potential ranking of priority level crossing sites. Wednesday September BRI Waitemat Harbour Connections Next Steps Provide advice on the next stepsstage of work for the Waitemat Harbour Connections project . Upcoming OIA requests for potential consultation Reference and Requester Request Due to the O ffice OIA Greater Auckland Request for East West Link Cost Estimate. September OIA obo Tangi Utikere MP Request for tolling assessments for Te Ahu a Turanga and taki to North of Levin. October OIA (Media) Request for information in relation to Hope Bypass, SH between Nelson and Blenheim and Rocks Road. October OIA (Media) Request for information regarding Information regarding the Manahau. October OIA (Media) Request for advice and correspondence regarding the introduction of tolls on Te Ahu a Turanga. October OIA Request for information regarding Peka Peka to taki traffic signal installation. October OIA (Media) Request for all informationcorrespondence regarding NZTA top enterprise risks from Q report. October OIA Request regarding Iwi members employed on the Te Ahu a Turanga project. October s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Due to Requester Requester Summary of request Requesting the Northport dry dock business case Information held regarding ending the public transport subsidies Requesting information relating to any planning for minute cities or regional areas in NZ Seeking information on Sustainable Aviation Aotearoa Information surrounding the requesters medical convener tribunal hearing Further information surrounding the requesters medical convener tribunal hearing Correspondence between the Minister and the Ministry regarding the Clean Car Standard Direction given to the Ministry by the Minister of Transport around Auckland Transport on its congestion charging plans Requesting internal guidelines on policies, or procedures that relates to neurodiversity, disability, or accessibility All advice produced for the Climate Implications of Policy Assessment regarding the Clean Car Standard changes announced by the government on July Seeking Light Rail documents such as the superfunds presentation, and project updates Information surrounding the requesters medical convener tribunal hearing Requesting information held on weather modification Requesting a copy of the consultation document regarding the Increase to parking fines across NZ
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Updates Southern Corridor Public Private Partnership On Monday September , NZTA officials attended a meeting organised by to discuss a potential public private partnership for the Drury area. It was attended by several developers and a number of senior central and local government agency officials. Mill Road and SH Drury to Bombay were mentioned as examples of projects that the private sector would like brought forward. NZTA staff will attend the next workshop, hosted by Kiwi Property, to develop a priority order for infrastructure and financing options for the next five years. Update on Safety Cameras The overall transfer schedule is on track. Transfer of the first Police camera located at Candia Road, Henderson, Auckland has been completed and the camera is now enforcing. Reminder notices have started to be sent to those that have received an infringement but have not paid within days. The next step if the infringement is not paid after the reminder is sent is to transfer the outstanding notice to Ministry of Justice for further action.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Driver Licensing wait times Update on interventions: Preparation is underway for the Monday September announcement about the increase in time period that drivers can use an overseas licence before requiring a licence conversion. This is focused on supporting messaging and expected questions about what it means for people prior to the November legislation change. NZTAs next social media campaign has been developed and is under review. The launch of this is planned to coincide with the end of the fee change transition period ( October ). A trial of stand by slots at the Vehicle Testing New Zealand ( VTNZ ) Porirua site is underway and will be used to inform any decision to scale this intervention.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Reference and Requester Request Due to the O ffice OIA (Media) Request for tolling assessments for Te Ahu a Turanga and taki to North of Levin October OIA Request for information regarding proposed tolling of Takitimu North Link . October Potential future Transport events Event Event detail Ministers interest As soon as possible Crown Resilience Programme announcement Opportunity to announce the recently approved programme.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Driver Licensing wait times Update on interventions of note: Following completion of the recent surge DTO training, internal NZTA staff who were supporting the training have been redeployed to progress the review of the Driver Testing Officer Manual (DTOM) and Driver Testing Officer Certification process. The review is focused on assessing the DTOM and the certification process for potential effectiveness and efficiency gains that would support managing the wait time challenges. We are working closely with Vehicle Testing New Zealand (VTNZ) on this. They have provided several initial suggested changes, two of which have already been implemented. We are updating plans for implementing the extension to the time period for conversion of overseas licences, following the change in announcement (from Monday September to late October ). We have withheld any communications on the matter and will be liaising with your office in the coming weeks to manage briefing the Automobile Association and VTNZ appropriately in preparation for these changes. This week the NZTA contact centre begins an outbound call campaign to speak with individuals who have repeatedly failed to attend their booked practical test time. Well be working with these customers to ensure they attend future bookings and therefore reduce the number of tests that arent utilised due to no shows. Insights from these customers on why theyre not attending will also be considered to inform further potential changes to our processes and approaches.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming Ministerial Items Upcoming Briefings to Minister of Transport Due to Office Title Wednesday September BRI Transport Signage (Proactive) Proactive advice on transport signage. Wednesday September BRI Transport Legislative Reform Tolling Infrastructure Provide advice on potential legislative changes that would drive down costs and enable efficiencies for Tolling infrastructure. Wednesday September Wednesday September BRI NZTA procurement for speed signs (Proactive) Advice on the possible role of NZTA regarding centralised procurement for speed signs on behalf of other road controlling authorities .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Event Event detail Ministers interest S H Mangamuka Gorge event Event to mark the (near) completion of works on SH Mangamuka Gorge.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Updates NZTA determination made on legality of e scooter remote operation function This update confirms the verbal update on this matter that we provided to your Office on Monday August . Escooter company Ario was recently given approval by Auckland Council to operate remotely controllable e scooters in and around the suburb of New Lynn, Auckland. Globally, these Ario e scooters are the first share scheme devices to have remote operation functionality (a person physically removed from the device can drive it via on board cameras and sensors). NZTA has obtained external legal advice on this matter and has determined that the remote operation of e scooters without a rider does not fall within the ES cooter (Declaration Not to be Motor Vehicles) Notice , or the Land Transport (Road User) Rule . The law specifies that on such devices (which are defined as a wheeled recreational device), the motors are auxiliary propulsion motors. When operated remotely the motors are the only source of propulsion, so cannot be considered auxiliary. The effect of the determination is that the remote operation function must be deactivated or simply not used. The devices are otherwise legally compliant and can continue to be used. NZTA is working with officials at Auckland Council and Christchurch City Council, who are c urrently assessing future e scooter contract providers to ensure a joined up approach and smooth implementation of the NZTA determination. NZTA does not see this as meaning that this sort of technology could not be considered or used in New Zealand in the future. A wider piece of work will need to be done to ensure safe operations and understand risks and benefits. Ario has written to you seeking a review of this decision. The Ministry of Transport will provide you with further advice. Supporting Motorcycle Awareness Month NZTA is supporting ACCs Motorcycle Awareness Month in September by promoting the annual injury prevention campaign and sharing relevant safety reminders for riders and drivers via our own internal external communication channels at no cost. Our latest motorcycling safety advertising is relaunching during the month, and this is funded as part of our National Road Safety Promotion Programme. The activities are planned to take place in September as people on motorcycles are significantly over represented in deaths and serious injuries on the roads, with a spike in September each year , when many riders return to the roads after winter. Speed Management Plan certifications Under the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits (the current Rule), the Director of Land Transport has a role to approve anomalies in speed limits and specific speed limit decisions made by Road Controlling Authorities (RCAs), as well as to certify speed management plans. Over recent months, the Director has received requests from RCAs to certify speed management plans under the current Rule. Currently any request made by an RCA must be considered and determined by the Director in accordance with the current Rule. With each request NZTA first confirmed with the RCA that it wished to proceed under the current Rule, noting the progress of the proposed Rule and impacts that may have on them when the new rule comes into effect. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE The total standard hours for one FTE are hours (this is a standard hour working week minus breaks) . o Over hours per DTO FTE indicates overtime or longer operational hours have been used. o Under hours per DTO FTE indicates operational shrinkage (the time when DTOs are not actively testing). This can be caused for example by DTOs taking holiday or sick leave, DTO training time, or travel time to complete tests outside of a DTOs home site. NZTA uses a standard rate for anticipated operational productivity shrinkage of percent . This results in a standard productive range of or higher hours of tests completed per DTO per week.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming Ministerial Items Upcoming Briefings to Minister of Transport Due to Office Title Monday September BRI Update on Northland recovery works costs Thursday September BRI Provide advice on Dairy Flat and Westgate projects Thursday September BRI Advice on KiwiRails progression of new metro rail activities proposed to be funded by the Public Transport activity class Upcoming OIA requests for potential consultation Reference and Requester Request Due to the O ffice OIA Copy of tolling assessment for Te Ahu a Turanga. Tuesday September OIA Cost analysis and business cases for proposed kmh speed limit increases. Thursday September OIA Information relating to the public consultation on implementing kmh speed limits in Kpiti and Wellington. Friday September OIA Information relating to implementing kmh speed limits in Kpiti and Wellington. Monday September OIA (Tax Payers Union) Information relating to NZTA staff attending Wall Walks courses . October OIA Costings for Road of National Significance. October OIA (Media) Request for privacy Impact Assessment regarding automatic number plate recognition (ANPR) cameras on Transmission Gully . October OIA (Media) Briefings regarding proposals to toll Te Ahu a Turanga and taki to north of Levin . October s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming OIA requests for potential consultation Reference and Requester Request Due to the O ffice OIA Information regarding hiring and staffing changes in your department since November . Thursday September OIA Request for all correspondence relating to proactively releasing advice provided to Ministers . Friday September OIA Request for advicedirective regarding walking and cycling option for Waitemata Harbour Connections project . Friday September OIA Media) Request for Crash data for Hamilton intersections. Monday September OIA All documents, advice and analysis of the proposed National Land Transport Programmes and its impact on emissions. Tuesday September OIA (Media) Correspondence between the NZTA Board and the Minister of Transport (and others) regarding the Pages Road Brid ge. Tuesday September OIA Copy of geotech site investigation works for Cambridge to Piarere Expressway. Wednesday September
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Statistics page Ministerial correspondence figures from September to September Item: Number Ministerial Correspondence Written Parliamentary Questions MinisterMinister Office queries Ministerial OIA requests Themes Public Transport, Waitemat Harbour Connections, N orth Island Weather Event Local Road Recovery Funding, Safety Cameras, Tolling
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Actions from Transport Officials Meeting Meeting with NZ Transport Agency Waka Kotahi (NZTA) Monday August Due Wednes day August Monday August
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Release of Quarter Public Attitudes to Road Safety survey The Quarter Public Attitudes to Road Safety survey (covering the period April June ) will be to the NZTA website on Thursday September . The survey details the results of responses to a broad range of questions focussed on specific road safety topics, including attitudes to enforcement, speed, vehicle safety, impaired driving, distraction, driver fatigue and personal safety. Key findings include: Public sentiment is in favour of greater Police presence (, down on the last survey) and more effort being put into catching people breaking road safety laws (), with the latter down on the previous quarterly survey. A total of of those surveyed think that penalties for breaking road safety laws should increase, down on the last survey. A increase in agreement to the statement someone who drinks and drives is likely to get caught, up from to . Most New Zealanders () support lower speed limits (kmh or lower) around schools in urban areas. Three in five () support lowering speed limits in highrisk areas, with supporting kmh speed limits in urban areas generally (not necessarily with schools nearby). These figures are unchanged from the previous survey. A total of support compulsory roadside drug testing of drivers (down on the previous survey). Just under half () think safety cameras help to reduce road deaths (up on previous survey); support more safety cameras (down three percent on previous survey); while at least somewhat agree that safety cameras are effective for reducing the number of people driving over the speed limit (down ). The quarterly report has a margin of error of around plus or minus . based on a sample size of , (slightly up on the previous quarter of , respondents). This will be the last quarterly survey, with the frequency now moving to annual. Driver Licensing wait times Summary for week ending Friday August : Wait times for practical testing (restricted and full testing) have improved compared to last week. full tests down by days ( days) restricted tests down by days ( days) At an individual site level, of full test sites and of restricted test sites met the days or less target last week. The backlog of tests remains at , ( ). While still outside of targets, testing wait times have reduced from last week. The reduction was achieved because VTNZ were able to publish additional testing slots.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming Ministerial Items Upcoming Briefings to Minister of Transport Due to Office Title Monday September BRI National Ticketing Solution Financial and Programme Update Update on the National Ticketing Solutions (NTS) current financial status and the overall progress of the work programme as it moves towards the late go live Monday September BRI National Land Transport Fund Expenditure Overview of any National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) expenditure that does not align with the direction and expectations set out in the Government Policy Statement on Land Transport (GPS) Tuesday October BRI Multi lane free flow tolling solution procurement outcomes (Proactive) Advice on the costs for Tolling Roadside Technology identified from the Request for Proposal (RFP) Wednesday October BRI Taranaki King Country Electorate Visit Advice to support your visit to Taranaki with Barbara Kuriger MP , on October Wednesday October BRI NIWE Recovery Update Update on the NIWE Recovery ahead of the first monthly NIWE report Friday October BRI Gisborne Visit Advice to support your visit to Gisborne on October
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Reference and Requester Request Due to the O ffice OIA Request for nation wide survey completed on raising speed limits. October Upcoming Media items of release Subject Week commencing Monday September State highway summer maintenance: Several region specific media statements are planned for release over the next two weeks to provide road users with details of the upcoming state highway summer maintenance programme. The regionally focussed statements will follow a high level national statement from yourself on Friday September . Week commencing Monday September AucklandNorthland SH Paert Roundabout, Pukekohe: A media statement is planned for release during the week beginning September to announce that the tender has been awarded for the SH Paert roundabout and that construction will commence in the weeks following. Construction will mostly be offline and is scheduled to take months, opening before KiwiRail completes constr uction of the Paert train station. Week commencing Monday September WaikatoBay of Plenty Trau to Waiouru SH Accelerated Maintenance programme: A media release will be issued marking progress on the Trau to Waiouru SH Accelerated Maintenance programme. It will update work on the Trau to Putruru and tiamuri to Wairakei sections, and look forward to the next section, which starts late Septembe r on SH Piarere to North Trau. Week commencing Monday September WaikatoBay of Plenty Takitimu North Link: A media statement is planned for release during the week beginning September to announce completion of the new local road layout between Bethlehem and Tauriko for the Takitimu North Link project. Week commencing Monday September Central North Island Mangahauini Gorge works: A media statement is planned for release during the week beginning September to outline the work underway focussing State Highway at Mangahauini Gorge and stabilising the hillside and protecting the road from the energy of the Mangahauini River. The Transport Rebuild East Coast team, who will deliver the work alongside local contractors, are currently in the initial design stage for these additional recovery works. The crews will start with ground investigations at locations through the gorge to inform the design. Week commencing Monday September Central North Island Hikuwai Bridge project advances with local cutting edge surveying methods: A media statement is planned for release to Gisborne media during the week beginning September detailing pre construction surveying work starting at Hikuwai River, north of Tolaga Bay, ahead of construction of the new Hikuwai No. bridge.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Potential future Transport events Event Event detail Ministers interest Late September Consistent Condition Data Collection (CCDC) survey vehicle opportunity
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Key updates Maritime New Zealand Authority Appointments The briefing with the long list of candidates was provided to you and Minister Brown for consideration on September . We await your feedback.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Key updates Maritime New Zealand Authority Appointments The call for nominations for Maritime New Zealand is currently underway, with the publicly listed advert available here: https:www.boardappointments.co.nzVacancies . Letters seeking nominations from New Zealand First, ACT and National Party colleagues will be sent by your Office on Thursday August . The deadline for applications is Wednesday September . Civil Aviation Authority funding review Release of documents for public consultation The Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) funding review consultation commenced on Tuesday August and will end on October .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: Maritime Security Strategy Tools investment Briefing: Maritime Security Tools Investment This briefing will update you on the Maritime Security Strategys surveillance and response tools investment, provide you with a draft Cabinet paper, and seek your direction on next steps. Wednesday November
Page of RESTRICTED Key updates Maritime New Zealand Authority Appointments The call for nominations for Maritime New Zealand is currently underway, with the publicly listed advert available here: https:www.boardappointments.co.nzVacancies . Letters seeking nominations from New Zealand First, ACT and National Party colleagues were provided to Minister Browns Office for sending on Tuesday August . The deadline for applications is September . Civil Aviation Authority funding review Release of documents for public consultation The Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) funding review consultation will commence from Tuesday August . Two documents are being released: the public consultation document titled Civil Aviation Authority Pricing Review and the Cost Recovery Impact Statement (CRIS). CAA costs have not been met by income from fees, levies and charges since due to a decrease in domestic and international passengers, as well as inflation, changing security standards and other cost pressures. This pricing review focuses on returning CAA to financial self sustainability by July . The quantum of increases will be a contentious issue for airlines. This concern is likely to be compounded by recent immigration visa fees increases, an increase to the International Visitor Conservation and Tourism Levy, and airport instigated increases to charges for airlines. The Aviation Industry Associations Letter on Friday August mentioned the CAA review directly when talking about Immigration NZ. INZ, like the CAA, largely works on a cost recovery model but it could be argued increases on the scale proposed by Erica Stanford are an over correction. This is why we must be on guard for the upcoming Funding Review of CAA. Appendix of the CRIS contains a Ministry provided price elasticity analysis that indicates that the proposed increase in passenger safety and security levies could lead to a decrease in travel. Specifically, it suggests a drop of approximately . in international travel and a drop of at least . in domestic travel based on the low scenario. Guide to Using Autonomous Surface Vessels (ASVs) in New Zealands Waters U NCLASSIFIED The Ministry of Transport as the lead policy agency for maritime security has led the development of this guidance note, and has approved the final version for publication. The note summarises the statutory responsibilities and relevant enforcement powers of nine government agencies as embodied in three international instruments, eight Acts of Parliament, and separate pieces of secondary legislation. This four page guidance note is now with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, to be passed onto embassies. We have shared the note with FVEY partners as part of our continuous collaboration with them, and have also used our joining IORIS as an opportunity to share the note with our Pacific partners via the platform.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Aviation Tourism Project: Air Services Agreement ( ASAS) You have received a Cabinet Paper and National Interest Analysis for the Air Services Agreement with ASEAN. Cabinet paper: New Zealand ASEAN Air Services Agreement and Protocol This paper is currently undergoing M inisterial consultation. To Committee: Wednesday September (Economic Policy Committee) To Cabinet: Monday September Project: CodeshareAlliance Authorisations We have started work on the Air New ZealandCathay Pacific Alliance reauthorisation application. We will provide you with an update in September. Briefing: Air Services Agreement with Hungary This briefing seeks your agreement, in consultation with the Minister of Foreign Affairs, to sign the ASA with Hungary. Friday September Briefing: Air New Zealand Cathay Pacific Alliance Reauthorisation This briefing will provide the Ministrys preliminary view on the application from Air New Zealand and Cathay Pacific for a reauthorisation of their alliance agreement. Friday September
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings to Associate Minister of Transport Due Title Thursday September Wednesday September Proactive Release of August Briefing Titles This proactive release briefing (OC refers) will seek your approval for all transport agencies to release their August list of briefing titles provided to yourself and Minister Brown. Wednesday September Proactive Release of July Weekly Reports This proactive release briefing (OC refers) will seek your approval to release all Weekly Reports for July provided to yourself and Minister Brown. Monday September Meeting with TAIC Officials and TAIC Six Monthly Report for January to June This briefing will provide you with advice for your meeting with the Chief Commissioner and Chief Executive of TAIC on Thursday September , and about TAICs half year report for the period January to June , to inform your meeting. Wednesday September Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC) Monitoring Plan This briefing seeks your approval of a draft monitoring plan for TAIC. Wednesday September Maritime NZ Monitoring Plan This briefing (OC) seeks your approval of a draft monitoring plan for Maritime NZ. Week ending Friday September Air New Zealand Cathay Pacific Alliance Reauthorisation This briefing will provide the Ministrys preliminary view on the application from Air New Zealand and Cathay Pacific for a reauthorisation of their alliance agreement. Week ending Friday September Maritime New Zealand: Longlist following advertisement This briefing will provide you with a recommended longlist of candidates following the closure of the advertisement period. Week ending Friday September Air Services Agreement with Hungary This briefing seeks your agreement, in consultation with the Minister of Foreign Affairs, to sign the ASA with Hungary. s ()(f)(iv)
Page of How should we integrate VKT (Vehicle Kilometr es Travel led) reduction into the development of our Regional Land Transport Plan (RLTP) The ERP sets a target to reduce total vehicle kilometres travelled (VKT) by our light vehicle fleet by percent (relative to projected growth) by through improved urban form and providing better travel options, particularly in our largest cities. This target applies to all light vehicles, not j ust those directly powered by fossil fuels. This represents about a one percent reduction in VKT compared to levels, assuming ongoing population growth and urban development. Later this year, the Government will publish sub national VKT reduction targets for Tier and urban areas. These proposed targets have been calculated based on each urban areas ability to reduce VKT, and will add up to ensure we meet the national target. Later in , Waka Kotahi will publish a national plan to outline wha t it will take to reduce VKT by light vehicles in ways that create better cities for people. This will provide a framework for Waka Kotahi to work with councils, i wi, and communities to develop programmes for reducing car dependency and use by improving al ternatives. These programmes for Tier and Tier urban areas will need to be integrated with the RLTPs. While this work is underway, you should consider how any proposed activities in your RLTP could affect VKT by light vehicles. Projects that reduce VK T by light vehicles are more likely to be funded than projects that significantly increase VKT. As signalled through the Indicative Strategic Priorities, GPS is likely to support councils to invest in activities that reduce car dependency and use, by allocating funding to activities such as improvements to public transport and active travel networks. What does this mean for funding These indicative priorities signal the overall direction for land transport investment. As with any GPS, any funding of projects or services from the NLTF must be consistent with the direction set through the Strategic Priorities. GPS will also need to cover other sources of funding that t he Crown may decide to contribute. This includes, for example, Crown contributions to rail, the Climate Emergency Response Fund and the New Zealand Upgrade Programme. This document does not set out projections about available transport investment, including the National Land Transport Fund. This information will be included in the draft GPS.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Ongoing actions from transport officials meeting Officials meeting Action Due August August Vehicle Safety Officials to discuss approach to sector engagement with the Office. Complete September Complete September Metropolitan Rail Operating Model Review Officials to provide advice October . This will be delivered concurrently with the next set of MROM Review advice September Oral Fluid Testing Complete Complete
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Actions from Transport Officials Meeting
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Actions from Transport Officials Meeting Meeting with the Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) Monday August Due Monday A ugust Civil Aviation Implementation Officials to consult on three options for cost recovery and amount to be recovered . We aim to provide a draft Cabinet paper for your feedback on Thursday August RUC admin fee Officials to provide draft letter to NZTA Board. Wednesday August Speed Rule Officials to provide advice on implementation timeframes . Week ending Friday August Decisions Confirmed Denied Conf irmed Hamilton Airport Engagement Move to monthly reporting. Confirmed
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Ongoing actions from transport officials meeting Officials meeting Action Due August September Metropolitan Rail Operating Model Review Officials to provide advice Monday October . This will be delivered concurrently with the next set of MROM Review advice September Rail Regulatory Officials to provide advice on options to: By Wednesday October September Public Transport Complete September Update on time performance reporting Officials to publish on time performance report for Auckland, Wellington, Christchurch, Queenstown and Dunedin. September September Emissions Reduction Plan Transport Chapter Officials to model impact of the RUC transition on hybrid and EV uptake. Officials to provide advice on the ZEHV EV RUC exemption and additional options to include in ERP. MidOctober
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Actions from Transport Officials Meeting Meeting with the Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) Monday September Due
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Actions from Transport Officials Meeting Meeting with the Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) Monday September Due C omplete Budget Officials to provide initial advice on scope and approach for Budget . Friday September Advanced aviation Officials to update Cabinet paper in advance of lodgement. Complete C omplete Decisions Confirmed Denied C onfirmed Updates on the Government Quarterly Plan Approved P rovide Briefing
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Appendix One Driver Licensing wait times status Overall wait times compared to the day target:
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Update on interventions of note: Overseas conversion testing continues to drive high demand within the system; interventions to reduce this demand are expected to have positive impacts on wait times. We are prioritising work with the Ministry to finalise Cabinet papers to progress legislation changes that enable the extension of the period for drivers on overseas licences from to months before requiring conversion. A VTNZ trial for those converting overseas licences (OVC) commenced on Thursday August and an additional trial led by the Driving Change Network (DCN) is being scoped. The DCN proposal is for a more intensive support model. Both trials will help understand impactful interventions that can help move people through the system and to inform potential more substantial changes to the graduated driver licencing system in the future. VTNZ have noted that the numbers being referred to the OVC trial are slowly ramping up. Diverting people to the trial is a manual process at the front counter and is a voluntary referral for additional support. Further feedback on the progress of the trial is expected in September . Wait times, staffing and productivity for the week Monday Sunday August : Wait times Staffing Productivity Region Full Change (last week) Restricted Change (last week) VTNZ DTO Headcount Tests Completed Northland Auckland North West , Auckland Central South , Waikato Bay of Plenty Central Wellington , Canterbury Otago Southland National Average Total: , Further graphs relating to wait times, as well as the interventions plan update can be found in Appendix One.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Updates State Highway (SH) Hydro Road planned maintenance closure State Highway (SH) between Mangorei and Kent Roads will be under a single lane closure for weeks from Monday September to allow for this km stretch of the road to be rebuilt. This will be the first major site of the Taranaki maintenance and operations summer maintenance season. This section of road has proven challenging to work o n safely, despite having a passing lane, due to its narrow width and high traffic volume. NZTA is unable to run the site under contraflow controls due to the width of the road, nor are we able to run stopgo traffic controls during the day due to the high volume of traffic. As a result, we will alternate the single lane closure between both northbound and southbound traffic to accommodate peak traffic flows, being particularly mindful of work commuters and public transport schedules. The road will be closed to southbound traffic between midnight and midday and closed to northbound traffic between midday and midnight. The closures will be clearly signposted so that road users can take alternative routes easily in advance of approaching the site. The alternative state highways are SHA or SH. The timeframe for works includes contingency for poor weather and other delays outside our control (such as staff sickness or plant breakdowns). This plan has been developed in consultation with freight and is currently being communicated with key stakeholders and the wider public. Northwest Rapid Transit NZTA is continuing to engage with government agencies and key stakeholders on Northwest Rapid Transit, ahead of community engagement on the preferred option which commences on Wednesday August and runs until Wednesday September . The project team is holding information sessions across venues in the northwest to talk through the investigations into a busway alongside SH. The information sessions include an update on the project, as well as discussing the indicative alignment and station locations, with a similar level of detail to your media release of Thursday July . A media release will also be put out to promote the events. Information on this media release is provided further in this report. Consultation on Medical aspects of fitness to drive: a guide for health practitioners After completing consultation with relevant government departments and considering their feedback, NZTA will start consulting on Medical aspects of fitness to drive with health practitioners, impacted industry organisations and interest groups on Monday August . Consultation will close on September . The guide assists health practitioners to assess peoples fitness to drive. It also sets out the responsibilities and obligations of health practitioners. Publication of the guide is planned for later in the year.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming OIA requests for potential consultation Reference and Requester Request Due to the O ffice OIA All correspondence with Minister of Transport regarding Te Ahu a Turanga Thursday October OIA Bilingual sign consultation and costs Thursday October OIA (Media) Advice provided to the Minister on speed Thursday October OIA (Media) Information relating to advertising through social media including costs Friday October OIA Request for traffic counts and costs for the Saddle Road, Pahiatua Track and Ballance Valley Road. Friday October OIA Te Ahu a Turanga assessments and information Friday October OIA Copies of tolling assessment for NL, Te Ahu a Turanga and Takitimu North Link Monday October OIA (Media) Information relating to forensic audit of Buller District Council Tuesday October OIA (Media) Alleged fraudulent use of fuel tax by NZTA Tuesday October OIA Request for information on the number of employed staff and pay Tuesday October OIA (Media) Request for advice provided to the other agencies on the safety and economic implications of high speed limits, since the change of government. Wednesday October OIA Request for copies of papersadvice provided to the Minister during July Wednesday October OIA Request for correspondence with the Ministry of Transport on the proposed Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits Wednesday October s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE of release Subject Week commencing Monday September Lower North Island SH Hutt Valley resurfacing: An traffic bulletin will be sent to Wellington media during the week beginning September previewing week four of this project, which sees resurfacing work on sections of SH through the Hutt Valley ongoing into September . Week commencing Monday September Top of the South SH Richmond resurfacing: A reminder traffic bulletin will be sent to top of the south media during the week beginning September about these night works and road closures (commencing Sunday September ) which will be occurring south of Nelson. Statistics page Ministerial correspondence figures from Thursday September to Wednesday September Item: Number Ministerial Correspondence Written Parliamentary Questions MinisterMinister Office queries Ministerial OIA requests Themes Road safety, speed limits, driver licence testing, tolling, Wellington Long Tunnel, bridge replacements.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming Media items of release Subject Week commencing Monday September Tolling consultation North Island highways: Separate media statements are planned for release on Monday September announcing the opening of public consultation on proposed tolling schemes for the Takitimu North Link, Te Ahu a Turanga: Manawat Tararua Highway, and taki to north of Levin (NL). The consultation process will run through to Monday October . Consultation material will include details on the potential toll rates for light and heavy vehicles for each of the new roads as well as expected travel time savings for drivers and freight vehicles. Week commencing Monday September SH closures, tiamuri to Wairakei: A media statement is planned for release during the week beginning Monday September to advise of daytime closures from Monday September until Friday October . It will be open at nights pm am and on Sundays. This is part of the SH Tirau to Waiouru accelerated maintenance project. Week commencing Monday September Night closures, SH Piarere to SH North Trau: A media statement is planned for release during the week beginning Monday September to advise of night closures from Sunday September until Friday October . SH will be closed during nights. During this time all traffic will be detoured from SH via SHSH. This is also part of the SH Tirau to Waiouru accelerated maintenance project. Week commencing Monday September Waikato Expressway, Ngruawhia section: A media statement is planned for release during the week beginning Monday September , advising that we are aiming to return traffic to all four lanes on the Ngruawhia section of the Waikato Expressway by the end of and that remedial work and safety improvements are on track for completion by midDecember . The installation of new lighting in early will then allow traffic to travel at the same kmh speed limit as neighbouring sections. Week commencing Monday September Northland Summer maintenance programme: A media statement is planned for release during the week beginning Monday September to signal an early start to the roading renewal program for , commencing in September in the Far North. This accelerated timeline will enable the delivery of nearly km of renewal work from Cape Reinga to Awanui, taking advantage of higher daytime and low overnight temperatures, which are favourable for quality delivery. TBC Waikato and BoP S ummer maintenance programme: Two separate media statements are planned for release (timing TBC) previewing road maintenance work planned for the state highway network in Waikato and BoP during the upcoming summer roadwork season.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Full licence test volumes overseas conversions vs. domestic tests monthly: Overseas conversations currently represent . of overall full test volume.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Meeting with the Imported Motor Vehicle Industry Association (VIA) You met with the VIA on Wednesday August to discuss the forward looking regulatory work programme. Following this meeting you have sought further advice from NZTA on aligning equivalency between Euro and the Japanese emissions standards, as well as sandblasting and recertification of vehicles. This work is underway as part of the wider Exhaust Emissions Rule review, and further advice will be provided to you in mid October . Seatbelts advertising campaign NZTA has launched a new road safety campaign focused on encouraging people to wear seatbelts. In , there were deaths and serious injuries (DSIs) in light vehicles (e.g. everyday cars) where people werent wearing a seatbelt, and there has been a steady increase in seatbelt related deaths on our roads since . The campaign has been launched across digital and social channels (TVNZ, TikTok, Instagram, Facebook) as well as promoted on radio. This is a tactical education campaign for target audiences e.g. yearold males, living in rural areas, aimed at reminding them why they should always wear their seatbelts. The approach is in line with the Governments new set of objectives and intended actions for road safety that will focus on safer roads, safer drivers and safer vehicles .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE t o reflect NZTAs interpretation of policy as to how schemes should be developed or funded. Driver Licensing wait times Summary for week ending Friday August July Wait times for practical testing (restricted and full testing) have increased compared to last week. full tests up by days ( days) restricted tests up by days ( days) At an individual site level, of full test sites and of restricted test sites met the days or less target last week. While the monthly backlog increased steadily from October , it has remained consistently at K ( ) since the end of June . Demand for testing has been steady compared to last week, however the increase in wait time metric was due to fewer future testing hours being loaded into the scheduling system and D river Testing Officer (DTO) illness. The amount of scheduled testing varies day to day for several reasons, such as driver testing officer illness and scheduled customer care and staff training. None of these individually are impactful on wait times, but they are, in combination, impactful. V TNZ is continuing to confirm staffing availability and increase available hours where possible (more testing slots were being opened for booking on Tuesday August which should help mitigate the current issue). Our demand forecasting shows that high wait times will continue, until practical test capacity increases (through meaningful increases to the DTO workforce) to meet demand. We expect to see improvements in early September as the current cohorts of trainees are certified and begin testing. (Continued over next page) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Potential future Transport events Event Event detail Ministers interest Tuesday October .pm Maintenance site visit SH Auckland
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE of release Subject Week commencing Monday September Central North Island Summer maintenance work preview, Taranaki: A media statement is planned for release during the week beginning Monday September previewing road maintenance work planned for the state highway network in Taranaki during the upcoming summer roadwork season. Week commencing Monday September Central North Island Mt Messenger progress: A media statement is planned for release during the week beginning Monday September to mark the coming start of the third season of construction on Te Ara o Te Ata Mt Messenger Bypass, including the start of construction of the projects metre tunnel. Week commencing Monday September Central North Island Mangahauini Gorge works: A media statement is planned for release during the week beginning Monday September to outline work underway State Highway (SH) at Mangahauini Gorge stabilising the hillside and protecting the road from the energy of the Mangahauini River. Week commencing Monday September Lower North Island Te Ara Tupua NP update: A project newsletter will be shared with reporters about this Wellington shared pathresilience project. Week commencing Monday September Top of the South Summer maintenance programme: A media statement is planned for release during the week beginning Monday September previewing road maintenance work planned for the state highway network in Marlborough during the upcoming summer roadwork season. Week commencing Monday September South Island Southland, Central Otago, Queenstown Lakes Districts summer maintenance programmes: A media statement is planned for release on Tuesday September previewing road maintenance work planned for the state highway network in Southland, Central Otago and Queenstown Lakes Districts during the upcoming summer roadwork season.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Interventions plan update: priority actions to reduce wait times: s ()(g)(i)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming Ministerial Items Upcoming Briefings to Minister of Transport Due to Office Title Monday August BRI Crown Resilience Programme Investment Programme for PROACTIVE Provide a briefing seeking approval of the next tranche of resilience projects on state highways and local roads. Wednesday August BRI Transport Legislative Reform Tolling Infrastructure Provide a briefing on potential legislative changes that would reduce costs and enable efficiencies. Wednesday August BRI Digital Drivers Licence Provide advice on options to deliver a Digital Drivers Licence quickly and affordably. Wednesday August BRI Peacocke Bridge Opening Event Provide a briefing to support your attendance at the Peacocke Bridge opening event. Thursday August BRI Transport Signage PROACTIVE Provide advice on transport signage. Upcoming OIA requests for potential consultation Reference and Requester Request Due to the O ffice OIA Information relating to the He Tohu Huarahi Mori bilingual traffic signs next steps. Thursday September OIA Information relating to staffing expenditure. Friday September OIA Copy of the business case for the NZTA app. Monday September OIA Information relating to costs for Roads of National and Regional Significance projects. Monday September OIA Information regarding overseas trips taken by NZTA officials. Tuesday September OIA Costings for road cones and TTM. Wednesday September OIA MEDIA Copies of quarterly reports. Wednesday September OIA Copy of Koha and payments for advice and cultural services policy. Wednesday September s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Update on other interventions of note: The review of the Driver Testing Operating Manual to identify and address any further process challenges and opportunities is underway. The first intervention has been delivered, which was to improve the marking system for DTOs. The intended result is a hi gher pass rate for trainee DTOs while ensuring we maintain a high calibre of staff progressing into the DTO endorsements. The success of this intervention will be tracked through the current cohorts (more information can be found in the Driver Licensing wait times weekly update reporting in A ppendix One against intervention d). Wait times, staffing and productivity for week Monday Sunday August : Wait times Staffing Productivity Region Full Change (last week) Restricted Change (last week) VTNZ DTO Headcount Tests Completed Northland Auckland North West , Auckland Central South , Waikato Bay of Plenty Central Wellington . Canterbury Otago Southland National Average Total: , Further graphs relating to wait times, as well as the interventions plan update can be found in Appendix One.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Statistics page Ministerial correspondence figures from Thursday September to Wednesday September Item: Number Ministerial Correspondence Written Parliamentary Questions MinisterMinister Office queries Ministerial OIA requests Themes Tolling, Speed limits, Speed bumps, Wellington Long Tunnel, Buller District Council forensic audit, North Island Weather Event (NIWE) recovery
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Appendix One Driver Licensing wait times status Overall wait times compared to the day target:
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Statistics page Ministerial correspondence figures from August to September Item: Number Ministerial Correspondence Written Parliamentary Questions MinisterMinister Office queries Ministerial OIA requests Themes Tolling, speed limits, road maintenance, local road funding
Page How is cost benefit information used in budget decision making CBAx informs value for money advice when considering different options for investment. The initiatives are not ranked and prioritised exclusively on the Return on Inves tment (RoI). The RoIs are considered in the context of the assumptions and the evident base, as well as unmonetised impacts. For example, an initiative with a lower RoI and a solid evidence base may be considered better value for money than a high RoI init iative with optimistic assumptions and limited evidence based. In the budget context, the CBAx analysis is used primarily by the Treasury vote team in developing value for money advice. Direct text f The Treasury Gateway Reviews https:treasury.govt.nzinformati onandservicesstate sector leadershipinvestment managementgateway review sprocess planning Gateway is an assurance methodology for major investments which was developed by the United Kingdoms Office of Government Commerce (OGC) in . It is an independent and confidential peer review process that examines projects and programmes at key points in their lifecycles to assess their progress and to rate the likelihood of successful delivery of their outcomes. A Ga teway review takes one week.
Page Specifying the performance expected in return for funding Reporting expectations Linkage should ensure the reporting of information shows or can be used to show value of money. Appropriation and reporting systems are most useful when they produce needed va luefor money information. The Government can use such information to channel the funding for services that under delivered into services that improves lives of citizens in more cost effective ways.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(g)(i)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming Ministerial Items Upcoming Briefings to Minister of Transport Due to Office Title Tuesday August BRI Meeting with NZ Retail Property Group Provide a briefing to support your upcoming meeting to discuss Westgate Station and public transport. Upcoming OIA requests for potential consultation Reference and Requester Request Due to the Office OIA MEDIA Cost breakdown for installation of median barriers on SH Hawkes Bay Wednesday August OIA MEDIA Information relating to the RoNS waves and delivery within NLTP periods Wednesday September OIA MEDIA Advice relating to the East West Link project Wednesday September Upcoming Transport events Event Event Details Friday August Business East Tamaki Breakfast You have been invited to speak to the group on four areas of specific interest to the group. BRI due Friday August
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming Transport events Event Event Details Tuesday August Christchurch kmh speed consultation media stand up Opportunity to announce consultation on the speed limit for the Christchurch Southern Motorway commencing soon. MINO TBC Saturday August Auckland kmh speed consultation media stand up Opportunity to announce consultation on the speed limit for the Northern Gateway Toll Road and Puhoi to Warkworth commencing soon. MINO Upcoming Media items of release Subject Week commencing Monday August AucklandNorthland Bombay Interchange traffic lights: A media statement is planned for release during the week commencing Monday August to let people know that traffic lights are about to be installed at the Bombay Interchange and the adjacent BP Bombay service centre exit on Mill Road Bombay from late August in an effort to address existing safety and access issues. The project will take around six months to complete and is expected to be finished in early . Week commencing Monday August WaikatoBay of Plenty Telephone Road level crossing: A media statement is planned for release during the week commencing Monday August announcing that NZTA has a preliminary design agreed with KiwiRail that would allow the rail crossing to reopen at Telephone RoadSHB in the Waikato. A formal decision on whether to proceed will be made after the detailed design and approval process is complete, which will take several weeks. Week commencing Monday August WaikatoBay of Plenty summer maintenance: A media statement is planned for release during the week commencing Monday August detailing work coming up in the Bay of Plenty over the summer maintenance season. Week commencing Monday September WaikatoBay of Plenty SH closure: A media release will be issued during the week commencing Monday September on the imminent closure of SH just south of Trau as the first phase of the accelerated maintenance programme.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Full licence test volumes overseas conversions vs. domestic tests monthly: Overseas conversations currently represent . of overall full test volume.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Appendix One: Driver Licensing wait times status: Overall wait times compared to the day target:
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(g)(i)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE of release Subject Week commencing Monday August WaikatoBay of Plenty SH roundabout: A media statement is planned for release during the week commencing Monday August confirming that the new SH roundabout at Piarere is on track to be open to traffic by the end of September. Week commencing Monday August WaikatoBay of Plenty SH Te Puna roundabout: A media statement is planned for release during the week commencing Monday August advising of night works on the SH Te Puna roundabout. This has the potential to be disruptive, with traffic using ramps during the day. Week commencing Monday August Central North Island SH closure: A traffic bulletin will be issued advising road users of a four hour road closure of SH between Waipukurau and Waipawa on September for a Central Hawkes Bay District Council led community clean up day with volunteers working on the road side. The Maintenance and Operations team will use the closure to do some other minor works. A detour has been approved which will add approximately minutes to peoples journey. Week commencing Monday August Central North Island Waikare Gorge Bailey Bridge new deck: A Traffic Bulletin will be issued advising road users of two nights of closures on SH at Waikare Gorge Bailey Bridge on September and October , for essential maintenance to be carried out, including laying a new deck on the bailey bridge. There are no viable detours and the bridge will be closed between pm and am both nights. Week commencing Monday August Central North Island summer construction season: Two separate media releases are planned to mark the start of the construction season in Taranaki and in Manawatu Whanganui. Week commencing Monday August Top of the South SH Richmond lights: A media release will be sent to NelsonTasman media previewing planned resurfacing works at the SH Richmond lights (SH, Richmond DeviationGladstone Road). Two weeks of nightworks under stopgo traffic management are scheduled. Traffic delays of minutes are expected. TBC Lower North Island SH Safety improvements: Planning is underway for a media release about the suspension of these works. Funding constraints mean the final phase of the project cannot be completed with currently allocated funding. Timing of the release is to be confirmed, dependent on a decision from the NZTA Board.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Potential future Transport events Event Event detail Ministers interest TBC early September Takitimu North Link Tauriko Enabling Works site visit There are several construction milestones coming up for each of these projects, presenting good photo opportunities and the option to release a PR on the progress being made. Takitimu North Link Work is starting on the Fifteenth Avenue on ramp bridge, which will link Cameron RoadFifteenth Avenue with State Highway Takitimu Drive Toll Road. Site clearance, drainage, and earthworks are underway, with construction due to start in September. Tauriko Enabling Works There has been considerable construction progress at the Stathe Highway Redwood Lane site. We note a site visit in early September may line up with the NLTP being finalised, so these visits could also be packaged up with an announcement on the NLTP. Yes No Maybe Any between August or August Auckland Transport Operation Centre (ATOC) site visit NZTA would like to invite you to visit ATOC. This visit would provide an opportunity to demonstrate the complexity of operating the transport network and what ATOC is responsible for and how it delivers its operations. During the visit, we will also demonstrate how ATOC plans for and manages incidents and events, and how transport operating centres could potentially optimize the existing network. Brett Gliddon, Group General Manager Transport Services will host you on a day that suits, with recommended dates provided. Yes No Maybe
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Interventions plan update: priority actions to reduce wait times: s ()(g)(i)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Full licence test volumes overseas conversions vs. domestic tests monthly: Overseas conversations currently represent . of overall full test volume.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(g)(i)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Statistics page Ministerial correspondence figures from Thursday to Wednesday August Item Number Ministerial Correspondence Written Parliamentary Questions MinisterMinister Office queries Ministerial OIA requests Themes Project cost estimates, staff numbers, elderly driver licence renewals
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming Media items of release Subject Monday August AucklandNorthland Northwest Rapid Transit public information sessions A media release is scheduled to be issued on Monday August ahead of information sessions across venues in the N orthwest in August and September, giving people an opportunity to meet the project team, learn more about the investigations, ask any questions they have and share their views on whats important to them. Week commencing Monday August WaikatoBay of Plenty SH East Taup safety improvements A media statement will be released during the week commencing Monday August advising of the completion of the SH East Taup safety improvements stage . Week commencing Monday August Central North Island SH Hydro Road rehabilitation A traffic bulletin is planned for release during the week commencing Monday August ahead of pavement rehabilitation and reseal work on SH in Taranaki. The work, over a km stretch of road, will take approximately eight weeks to complete, and is intended to be complete before Labour Weekend and the busy summer season in Taranaki. The work will also mark the official start of Taranakis summer maintenance season. Week commencing Monday August Central North Island Transport Rebuild East Coast (TREC) visits Tutira School A localised media release is planned for release following a visit on Wednesday August to Tutira School by workers from the TREC alliance. This is an opportunity to provide local primary school aged children an educational experience which shows the importance and excitement of careers in engineering and science. The visit will culminate in a site visit to the work at Devils Elbow, on S H. Week commencing Monday August Central North Island Captains Culvert work A media statement is planned for release during the week commencing Monday August updating progress on Captains Culvert repairs on State Highway Napier Taupo Road. The culvert suffered extensive damage as a result of Cyclone Gabrielle. The work is nearing completion, and a video has been taken of the work and will be used alongside the media release. Week commencing Monday August Lower North Island SH Hutt Valley resurfacing works A media statement is planned for release during the week commencing Monday August outlining five weeks of resurfacing work that will run through September and October on SH through the Hutt Valley Korokoro to Totara Park. This will require night closures and detours. Supporting comm unications will be issued as the works progress.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(g)(i)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Interventions plan update: priority actions to reduce wait times: s ()(g)(i)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Appendix One: Driver Licensing wait times status: Overall wait times compared to the day target:
Page of IN CONFIDENCE of release Subject Week commencing Monday August Top of the South summer maintenance programme A media statement is planned for release during the week commencing Monday August outlining the key projects planned for the region in this years summer maintenance season. Most work is scheduled to be completed before the summer holiday break Week commencing Monday August South Island Port Chalmers highway rehabilitation A traffic bulletin is planned for release during the week commencing Monday August to advise road users of upcoming extensive state highway rehabilitation work on the main street of Port Chalmers.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(g)(i)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(g)(i)
Page Expectations of Fiscal Prudence and Value formoney Value for money is particularly important when having a dominant supplier limits Ministers ability to compare products and c osts.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Appendix Two Officials Meeting Forward Looking Agenda Item for discussion Lead September October November December s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Full licence test volumes overseas conversions vs. domestic tests monthly : Overseas conversations currently represent . of overall full test volume.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Statistics page Ministerial correspondence figures from Thursday to Wednesday August Item: Number Ministerial Correspondence Written Parliamentary Questions MinisterMinister Office queries Ministerial OIA requests Themes Median barriers, speed limits, level crossings
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Appendix One: Driver Licensing wait times status: Overall wait times compared to the day target:
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(g)(i)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(g)(i)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Appendix One: Driver Licensing wait times status: Overall wait times compared to the day target :
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Full licence test volumes overseas conversions vs. domestic tests monthly: Overseas conversations currently represent . of overall full test volume.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(g)(i)
Page Periodic Review of Costs and Value for Money Budget Inputs Outputs Outcome Accurate output costing is needed. One of reason is that it can improve decision makers information about value for money. Managing Benefits from Projects and Programmes: Guide for Practitioners October https:treasury.govt.nzsitesdef aultfiles managingbenefits guidance.pdf Improving benefits management is important for the NZ government to: optimise the value from existing resources and new investments increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the investment management system enable investments to achieve their intended investment objectives manage within its fiscal strat egy and priorities.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Security screening weekly update There were no queue observations last week. Queues for the Wellington Southern Domestic screening point which are constantly monitored using LiDAR technology showed: Week Passengers processed in less than minutes . Passengers processed in less than minutes . Installation of equipment at Auckland Domestic was expected to be completed by Thursday September but is now expected to be completed by Thursday September due to additional work being required on the infrastructure supporting the new equipment. This is not expected to cause any delays or impact queueing times. There are no major events scheduled that are expected to impact queues this coming week. Please see the Appendix at the end of this report for data on where queues are predicted during the coming week.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Full licence test volumes overseas conversions vs. domestic tests monthly : Overseas conversations currently represent . of overall full test volume.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Appendix Two Officials Meeting Forward Looking Agenda Item for discussion Lead September October November
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(g)(i)
Page of REGIONAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR IMPLEMENTING COMMUNITY CONNECT EXTENSIONS Government has provided initial direction on the intent of the Community Connect funding Cabinet agreed to establish Community Connect (a half price subsidy on adult public transport fares) for Community Service Card (CSC) holders through Budget . Com munity Connect for CSC holders is on track to start on July at the end of universal half price fares . Many public transport authorities (PTAs) have opened digital portals to enable concession registrations. Through Budget , the Community Connec t programme was expanded to make funding available from July to deliver: . half price fares for yearolds (under s) . half price Total Mobility fares for Total Mobility card holders . free public transport fares for yearolds (under s). This briefing focuses on the Community Connect extension as noted in paras . and .. In advance of Budget announcements, we provided initial implementation advice OC refers. Through this advice and subsequent weekly reports , Minister Wood confirmed that: . halfprice fares for under s should result in a passenger paying half the price of any age based fare they are currently eligible for (e.g., a child andor youth fares, and adult fares), and noted the subsidy will not apply to existing Tertiary fares. . smartcard implementation is preferable but interim options, can be explored. . Crown funding can contribute towards the establishment of age verification processes and PTA administrative costs (including customer support, scheme set up, and application programming interface or portal maintenance) . . Crown funding be provided on the b asis of existing fare products and fare levels as of May (i.e., in advance of Budget announcements) This advice also noted that some decisions may need to be revisited following engagement with PTAs to understand regional feasibility. PTAs have developed interim options to enable delivery of Community Connect in July PTAs are responsible for setting public transport fares and adopting fare concessions. There is regional variability in fare products and ticketing systems used. Following s ()(k) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings copied to Associate Minister of Transport Due Week Ending Title Friday September
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings copied to Associate Minister of Transport None this week.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings to Associate Minister of Transport Due Title Wednesday September Monitoring Plans for the Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC) and Maritime NZ (MNZ) This briefing (OC) seeks your approval of the draft monitoring plans for TAIC and MNZ. Thursday September Week ending Friday September Air New Zealand Cathay Pacific Alliance Reauthorisation This briefing will provide the Ministrys preliminary view on the application from Air New Zealand and Cathay Pacific for a reauthorisation of their alliance agreement. Week ending Friday September Maritime New Zealand: Longlist following advertisement This briefing will provide you with a recommended longlist of candidates following the closure of the advertisement period. Wednesday November Maritime Security Tools Investment This briefing will update you on the Maritime Security Strategys surveillance and response tools investment and seek your direction on next steps. This deadline has moved one week later to accommodate preparation of the RFI that will seek information from the market on potential tools investments, now due for release on Thursday September .
Page of RESTRICTED Appointments in Confidence Transport Accident Investigation Commission: Jane Mearess retirement At her meeting with you on Tuesday August , Jane Meares, Chief Commissioner of the Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC), advised you of her intention to retire on September . As a result of this decision, she has tendered her resignation from TAIC. TAIC staff were informed on Wednesday August . We understand TAIC will look to make a public announcement in due course, and will liaise with your Office on timing and content. Transport sector Chairs and Chief Executives will also be informed in advance of a public announcement. We understand you are considering the Chief Commissioners recommendation to elevate David Clarke, currently a Commissioner at TAIC, to Chief Commissioner. If you would like to do so, this can be done quite quickly as the responsible Minister has the power to appoint a Chief Commissioner from within the Board (rather than the Governor General, who appoints Commissioners on your recommendation). A timeline outlining steps that need to be taken for the appointment to take effect by October is listed below. If your preference is to elevate Mr Clarke, we would appreciate your confirmation by the end of this month. A new appointment would take a lot longer and would likely be completed near the end of the calendar year at the earliest. Officials note that the Deputy Chief Commissioner can exercise the functions of the Chief Commissioner under clause of schedule of the Crown Entities Act if no Chief Commissioner has been appointed by the time Ms Meares leaves the Commission on September . Time period Action for September APH meeting Action for September APH meeting Week August Minister Doocey to advise Ministry of preferred action.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings to Associate Minister of Transport Due Week Ending Title Friday September Options for Maritime Legislation The Ministry and Maritime NZ have started scoping a review of primary maritime legislation to ensure it is fit for purpose given technological changes and long standing gaps in the regulatory framework. This briefing sets out options for advancing critical changes to maritime legislation, for discussion with you. The title and description of this deliverable have been amended to align with the portfolio work programme update. Friday September Proactive Release of August Briefing Titles This proactive release briefing (OC refers) will seek your approval for all transport agencies to release their August list of briefing titles provided to yourself and Minister Brown. Friday September Proactive Release of July Weekly Reports This proactive release briefing (OC refers) will seek your approval to release all Weekly Reports for July provided to yourself and Minister Brown. Friday September Maritime NZ Monitoring Plan This briefing (OC) seeks your approval for a draft monitoring plan for Maritime NZ. Friday September Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC) Monitoring Plan This briefing seeks your approval for a draft monitoring plan for TAIC. Friday September Air New Zealand Cathay Pacific Alliance Reauthorisation This briefing will provide the Ministrys preliminary view on the application from Air New Zealand and Cathay Pacific for a reauthorisation of their alliance agreement. Friday September TAIC Six Monthly Report for January to June This briefing will provide you with advice about TAICs half year report for the period January to June .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Due Title Wednesday November Maritime Security Tools Investment This briefing will update you on the Maritime Security Strategys surveillance and response tools investment and seek your direction on next steps.
Page of There is likely to be substantial pressure on the availability of funding from the National Land Transport Fund. As in the past, there will be the need to prioritise investments and make difficult trade offs, including deferring andor scaling co funding commitments to prioritise those projects, activities or services that can best support the strategic priorities in GPS . Strengthening partnership with Mori The Government has highlighted in the Indicative Strategic Priorities that those involved in the transport sector have responsibilities to work in a way that is consistent with te Tiriti o Waitangi and section H of the Land Transport Management Act . This involves building enduring partnerships with whnau, hap and iwi, and national organisations to reflect Mori aspirations in future transport initiatives. Does this affect the current National Land Transport Programme No. The current GPS applies until the end of this NLTP period ().
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Ongoing actions from transport officials meeting September Public Transport
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Ongoing actions from transport officials meeting Officials meeting Action Due February ALR Officials to provide monthly updates of expected winddown costs of ALR. Ongoing March GPS Officials to provide weekly updates on next steps across programmes of work signalled in the GPS. Ongoing May Chatham Islands update Officials to provide a weekly joint M inistry , MNZ, DIA, MBIE, and MPI briefing on the situation in the Chatham Islands, covering fuel, livestock, and the boat purchase. Ongoing June Public Transport Officials to provide monthly update on bus driver shortage numbers. Ongoing June Appointments Future appointment advice should include consideration of the transport board remuneration and (as appropriate) seek agreement in upcoming Cabinet papers. Ongoing June Driver Licensing NZTA is progressing the operational work programme to reduce wait times to under days. Underway July Public Transport O fficials to engage with Disabled Peoples Organisations Coalition (DPO Coalition) and provide feedback to Minister in advance of Terms of Reference being confirmed. Complete
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Ministerial priorities Safety Project: Speed limits The Cabinet paper was considered by Cabinet on Monday September . We are preparing a short paper for you to take to the Cabinet Legislation Committee (LEG) to seek approval to regulations to amend the Land Transport (Road User) Rule and the Land Transport (Register of Land Transport Records Speed Limits) Regulations . The proposed amendments to these two pieces of legislation will update the references to the speed Rule in this legislation from to .The Land Transport Management (Regional Transport Committees) Regulations will also be revoked. Proce ss Dates Final Rule to Minister for signing Complete Cabinet Legislation Committee for consequential amendments Thursday October Cabinet for consequential amendments Monday October Executive Counsel for consequential amendments Monday October New Rule in force Wednesday October
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Decisions Confirmed Denied NA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Ongoing actions from transport officials meeting Officials meeting Action Due August August Civil Aviation Implementation Officials to consult on three options for cost recovery and amount to be recovered. Draft Cabinet paper provided for your feedback on Thursday August August RUC admin fee Officials to provide draft letter to NZTA Board. Complete August Speed Rule Officials to provide advice on implementation timeframes. Complete August Vehicle Safety Officials to discuss approach to sector engagement with the Office. We will confirm approach following your direction on timelines.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Communications and External Engagement Media plan anticipated media NB: This covers the days from Monday September (planned) Item Description Targeted media Nil Nil Nil Nil Media mentions NB: This covers the days to Tuesday September Activity Channel Thursday September Attempts to dazzle Kapiti Coast Aero Club pilots
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE December
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE The Civil Aviation Authority has been notified of the accident. In the coming days well make enquiries to understand what has happened and why, and to determine if any further CAA action is required. Upcoming education publications and products Planned releasepublish What Type Why JulySeptember Occurrence Investigation Workshop Face toface event To provide training for operators about investigating occurrences, to comply with requirements under CAR Part September Vector magazine (Spring issue) Aviation safety education magazine To educate the aviation community on various aviation safety topics September In, out, and around Queenstown GAP booklet (update) BAU revision September October How to be an aerodrome manager GAP booklet (new) As part of the WTSA campaign, new guidance material for aerodrome managers is being produced, in the GAP booklet format September Drone safety brochure Safety education product BAU revision September October Plane talking GAP booklet (update) BAU revision September October Helicopter performance GAP booklet (update) BAU revision TBC Night VFR GAP booklet (update) BAU revision TBC In, out, and around Milford GAP booklet (update) BAU revision TBC Survival GAP booklet (update) BAU revision
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Certification monthly update The update below shows the average working days taken to complete ( and the month trend) the following applications as of August : Applications for amendment to existing certificates Applications for new certificates The renewal of existing certificates. The data is provided on a monthly basis and all data is a rolling month data set. Please note that Part (Regulated Air Cargo Agent) and Part (Aerodrome Certification, Operation and Use) have not been included as the data is not yet available.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Appendix Predicted queues during the coming week During the coming week, queues are predicted at the existing known busy periods (indicated below), using the following colour code: Light blue: No passenger volume forecast Green: Passenger volume forecast to be less than of available capacity Orange: Passenger volume forecast to be between and of available capacity Red: Passenger volume forecast to exceed of available capacity
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Installation of equipment at Auckland Domestic was expected to be completed by September but is now expected to be completed by September due to additional work being required on the infrastructure supporting the new equipment. This is not expected to cause any delays or impact queueing times. There are no major events scheduled that are expected to impact queues this coming week. Please see the Appendix at the end of this report for data on where queues are predicted during the coming week.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Security screening weekly update The following instances of longer screening queues were recorded this week: Time Location Passengers affected Queue time (mins) Cause Mitigation Wellington Southern Domestic Unexpected presentation due to large numbers of business travellers accessing lounge Meal breaks were moved, and other duties deferred to keep an additional lane open. Trainees were redeployed to assist with queue management Queues for the Wellington Southern Domestic screening point which are constantly monitored using LiDAR technology showed: Week Passengers processed in less than minutes . Passengers processed in less than minutes . There are no major events scheduled that are expected to impact queues this coming week. Please see the Appendix at the end of this report for data on where queues are predicted during the coming week.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Christchurch International
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Communications and External Engagement Media plan anticipated media NB: This covers the days from Monday September (planned) Item Description Targeted media Monday September Comment or statement Reactive messaging prepared in relation to pending announcement from Waikato Regional Airport Ltd., regarding international flights. NA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Ministerial briefings received by the Ministers Office NB: This covers the period Wednesday August Tuesday September Title Nil Nil
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Auckland Domestic
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: Maritime Rules Reform Consultation continues on the first package of Design, Construction and Equipment rules changes, and will run to October . Stakeholder workshops are being held on Tuesday and Wednesday August.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Thursday September Microlight plane crashes in Northland paddock, pilot injured.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Communications and External Engagement Media plan anticipated media NB: This covers the days from Monday September (planned) Item Description Targeted media Nil Nil Nil Nil Media mentions NB: This covers the days to Tuesday September Activity Channel Tuesday August CAA and AvSec are both mentioned in coverage about a potential monthly on time performance system for airlines, and options to introduce public reporting on airfares. Stuff, Newstalk, ZB Wednesday August Paraplegic former helicopter pilot wins award for invention
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Christchurch Domestic
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings to Associate Minister of Transport Due Week Ending Title Friday August Meeting with NZ Shipping Federation, September As per the request from Minister Dooceys Office, this briefing will support his meeting with John Harbord and David Borcoski of the NZ Shipping Federation. Friday August RMS Niagara Update This briefing to both you and Minister Doocey will update you about the wreck of the Royal Mail Ship Niagara, including the potential risks of an oil spill, recent work and engagement undertaken by Maritime NZ. Friday September Options for Maritime legislation. This joint MinistryMNZ briefing will set out options for advancing critical changes to Maritime legislation. Friday September Ministry of Transport briefing: Proactive Release of papers relating to consultation on reform of the maritime design, construction and equipment rule set This briefing will seek Minister Dooceys agreement to proactively publish Cabinet material and key papers. Friday September Changes needed to maritime legislation to address issues arising from the exercise of local navigation safety regulatory powers Friday September Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek Minister Dooceys agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rules relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. Friday November
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Ministry of Transport briefing: Proactive Release of papers relating to consultation on reform of the maritime design, construction and equipment rule set This briefing will seek Minister Dooceys agreement to proactively publish Cabinet material and key papers relating to consultation on the proposed reforms to Maritime Rules. Week ending Friday August Project: Maritime Workforce Maritime sector representatives met on Monday August and Thursday August to discuss their response to the consultation on the reform of vocational education that was launched by Minister Simmonds on Thursday August . They are preparing a proposal for the structure and oversight of maritime training arrangements and will copy Minister Doocey in to this proposal. Ports are also likely to prepare a joined up submission to the consultation.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings to Minister of Transport Due Week Ending Title
Page of IN CONFIDENCE September October Plane talking GAP booklet (update) BAU revision September October Helicopter performance GAP booklet (update) BAU revision TBC Night VFR GAP booklet (update) BAU revision TBC In, out, and around Milford GAP booklet (update) BAU revision TBC Survival GAP booklet (update) BAU revision
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Activity Channel Monday August Discussing the Pricing Review and agricultural aviation industry
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings to Associate Minister of Transport Due Week Ending Title Friday August Changes needed to maritime legislation to address issues arising from the exercise of local navigation safety regulatory powers Friday August Ministry of Transport briefing: Proactive Release of papers relating to consultation on reform of the maritime design, construction and equipment rule set This briefing seeks Minister Dooceys agreement to proactively publish Cabinet material and key papers relating to consultation on the proposed reforms to Maritime Rules. Friday August Meeting with NZ Shipping Federation, September As per a request from Minister Dooceys Office, this briefing will support the Ministers meeting with John Harbord and David Borcoski of the NZ Shipping Federation. Friday September Options for maritime legislation This joint MinistryMNZ briefing will set out options for advancing critical changes to maritime legislation. Friday September Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek Minister Dooceys agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rules relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. Friday November
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Key updates Inaugural New Zealand Seafarer Welfare Council The inaugural New Zealand Seafarer Welfare Council (The Council) meeting was held Monday August with all member representatives present. The Council is an equal participation of member organisations from government, industry, unions, and service delivery within the seafarer sector. A planning day will be held in November to develop a strategy and associated action plan. This will look at transforming seafarer welfare service delivery and outcomes, in compliance with the Maritime Labour Convention (MLC) requirements. New Zealand Cruise Association Conference On Thursday August , the Director of Maritime NZ attended and presented at the N ew Zealand Cruise Association conference . The focus of her presentation was on the wide range of work Maritime NZ does with and in support of the cruise sector. Areas of interest from participants included work being done to facilitate the availability of alternative fuels and shore power, safety and security. A strong theme of the conference was concern about rising costs with short timelines that make it impossible to build the costs into tickets already sold, increasing debt on a sector already holding high debt from COVID . In particular , the current consultation processes proposing increased levies across a range of agencies was having cumulative impact. Customs has recently written to submitters indicating, post consultation, that because of lowered projections of cruise visits, and higher aviation visits , that levies will have to rise further than originally proposed on cruises . This will likely increase frustration markedly, as the sector argue that lower cruise activity in New Zealand is a direct result of high costs. Biofouling also was a concern; not so much that it was required, but that there was a need for the sector and government to urgently find ways to safely clean the vessels. Winter cruise has been cancelled this year and cruise is down on last year. The sector is forecasting a further reduction in . New Zealand was seen as a safe and high interest location to visit, and there are ships available and more being built, but there was a real sense that the cost and difficulty of doing business here was too high and ships were being directed to other places in the Asia Pacific. Maritime in the Media Sadly there was another fatal incident after a vessel capsized on Saturday August while crossing the Catlins River bar. One person died as a result of the capsizing, and the other person on the vessel made it safely ashore. Our partners in the water safety sector publicly commented on bar safety risks and skipper responsibilities. Our previously agreed content was used as talking points by Coastguard when they spoke on the capsizing.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Appendix Predicted queues during the coming week During the coming week, queues are predicted at the existing known busy periods (indicated below), using the following colour code: Light blue: No passenger volume forecast Green: Passenger volume forecast to be less than of available capacity Orange: Passenger volume forecast to be between and of available capacity Red: Passenger volume forecast to exceed of available capacity
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Planned releasepublish What Type Why TBC Night VFR GAP booklet (update) BAU revision TBC In, out, and around Milford GAP booklet (update) BAU revision TBC Survival GAP booklet (update) BAU revision
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: RMS Niagara Project: Maritime Rules Reform Consultation continues on the first package of Design, Construction and Equipment rules changes, and will run to October . Consultation on the International Omnibus package of rules changes has completed and a summary of the consultation next steps is set out under Key updates below . Briefing: Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek Minister Dooceys agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rules relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. These changes are sought by the sector and reduce costs and complexity. Week ending Friday September Briefing: International Omnibus: Results of Consultation and Final Decisions This briefing will seek Minister Dooceys agreement to changes in rules following consultation on the International Omnibus package. Week ending Friday November
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Key updates Minister engagement on RMS Niagara with the Hauraki Gulf Forum Minister Doocey has received an invitation to meet with Lucy Baragwanath, Executive Officer of the Hauraki Gulf Forum (the Forum). The wreck of RMS Niagara is a frequent agenda item for the Forum as the risk it presents has the potential to impact the Hauraki Gulf. Maritime NZ has previously engaged with the Forum to discuss the wreck, and has a positive and productive relationship with them. Any advice provided to the Forum has been consistent with advice to Ministers. We recommend Minister Doocey visits the Maritime NZ, Maritime Response Team in Te Atatu Auckland prior to meeting with Lucy Baragwanath. The Oil Spill Response capabilities and people that Maritime NZ employs, equips, trains and maintains through the Oil Pollution Fund (financed through the Oil Pollution Levy) would be the responder to a significant oil spillrelease from the RMS Niagara . This will give Minister Doocey a clearer understanding of the condition and risk associated with the RMS Niagara and Mar itime NZs capabilities and readiness generally to respond to marine oil spills. The team is also meeting with Iwi and members of the Forum in the week ending Friday August , so will be able to provide more information on what the Forum may be seeki ng. Maritime Digital Transformation Maritime in the Media KiwiRail is due to be sentenced on September for Kaitakis loss of propulsion incident in January . We are currently working through our external communications approach. Due to the ongoing investigation into KiwiRail following the grounding of the Aratere in June , we will be taking a short media statement only approach. Once the sentence is delivered we will proactively update both your Office and Minister Dooceys of the sentence. We are developing our approach around recreational craft safety for the springsummerautumn. Already this year we have seen some major events in the recreational craft sector. We will be working to have a people focused approach to our recreational craft free media harm prevention approach.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings copied to Associate Minister of Transport Nil this week .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Key updates Atlas Wind update Atlas Wind is an internationally flagged vessel which carries dangerous goods like ammonia within its cargo. We, and the Australian Maritime Safety Authority (AMSA), have had significant ongoing safety concerns with this vessel, with numerous deficiencies identified, and the vessel being detained on a number of occasions. Our latest detention of the vessel was on July during a Port State Control (PSC) Inspection in Dunedin and AMSA detained the vessel on Wednesday August . The Vanuatu registered Atlas Wind is owned by MOVe Oceans Singapore, which is a wholly owned subsidiary of the New Zealand based company, MOVe Logistics. We have also been discussing our concerns with MOVe. We are pleased to hear that after all of this work the vessel is scheduled to discharge import cargo and then is scheduled to proceed directly to Singapore, around Monday September , to be sold. MOVe is then looking to charter a safer vessel. This shows the importance of maritime inspections and good engagement with other regulators, like AMSA, in managing poor quality vessels round our coast. KiwiRail update Maritime NZ is preparing for an additional I nternational Safety Management verification of KiwiRails safety management system , scheduled for the week of Monday September . This audit will look at KiwiRails processes, procedures, training, risk management and how it brings on new equipment and familiarises staff. KiwiRail advised that the Aratere was out of service from Saturday August Tuesday August for the installation of a new gearbox part, and that the ships Classification Society was involved throughout this process. Once the gearbox is fixed this is likely to result in KiwiRail seeking to resume passage through the Tory Channel before the school holidays. The Kaitaki is currently in Singapore for a routine dry dock to carry out scheduled checks and repairs, and is due to return in early October . This means that the Kaiarahi was the only KiwiRail vessel in operation from Saturday August Tuesday August .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Queenstown International
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Appendix Predicted queues during the coming week During the coming week, queues are predicted at the existing known busy periods (indicated below), using the following colour code: Light blue: No passenger volume forecast Green: Passenger volume forecast to be less than of available capacity Orange: Passenger volume forecast to be between and of available capacity Red: Passenger volume forecast to exceed of available capacity
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings to Associate Minister of Transport Due Title Week ending Friday September Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek Minister Dooceys agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rules relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. Week ending Friday November International Omnibus: Results of Consultation and Final Decisions This briefing will s eek Minister Dooceys agreement to rule changes following consultation on the International Omnibus package. Week ending Friday December Maritime Transport Act Review Joint briefing with the Ministry of Transport on policy options and legislative prioritisation for changes to the Maritime Transport Act.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings copied to Associate Minister of Transport Nil this week . Upcoming Cabinet papers Nil this week .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) TBC Mid September Live Animal Exports Review
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings copied to Associate Minister of Transport Nil this week . Upcoming Cabinet papers Nil this week. . Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications Committees Cabinet Business Committee (CBC) Monday September Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) Wednesday September Biosecurity System Strategy Minister Hoggard has begun Ministerial consultation on the Biosecurity System Strategy package. Consultation will run until Friday August , before proposed ECO lodgement on Thursday September , for consideration on Wednesday September . The strategy aims to address the policy, operational, and participatory challenges in the functioning of the biosecurity system, and is connected to the Biosecurity Act Amendment Bill proposals. While the proposal does not contain any obvious concerns for the maritime transport system, Maritime NZ has asked the Ministry for Primary Industries to involve us in any future work that touches on our functions such as: our current approach to Ballast Water Management the role of Regional CouncilsHarbourmasters; and vessels and those on board (particularly with regard to safety). s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Wellington Southern Domestic
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Christchurch International
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Key updates Public consultation on recovering the costs of goods management activities at the border Following Cabinet Economic Policy Committee and Cabinet agreement in August , Customs and the Ministry for Primary Industries (MPI) are now consulting on cost recovery proposals for goods management at New Zealands borders. As noted previously, the pr oposals will lead to some significant cost increases for the maritime sector. Customs and MPI met with representatives of Shipping New Zealand on Monday September , who represent the majority of international shipping companies coming to New Zealand ports. A Maritime NZ representative attended as an observer. The Shipping New Zealand representatives expressed strong opposition to the proposals at the meeting. A particular focus was the proposed new , fee for commercial ships. Concerns included the potential for New Zealand to become an unattractive destina tion for major shippers due to rising costs, potentially resulting in a reduction of services with longer periods for getting goods to markets, and the prospect of some of the costs arising from the new fee being passed on to consumers. A further, follow up meeting with Shipping New Zealand in early October is planned. Customs and MPI are currently planning to provide policy advice to Ministers on the fee proposals in the first quarter of . MyMNZ We are developing MyMNZ, an online interface to enable far greater, and more efficient, digital interaction with the sector for services and activities we undertake. As a regulator, notifications and enquiries are important sources of information used to inform the delivery of our proactive and reactive work. A key milestone was achieved with a new online event notification form launched in support of the new HSWA designation on ports from July . We are continuing this work to address feedback our stakeholders provided about using our digital channels and services. This includes the need for a consistent and coordinated system to provide a single place to submit or apply for notifications , certifications and licences, provide more transparency about where they are in a process, and reduce the time spent repeating information. We are currently working on the requirements for creating another online form for specific types of notifications, and requir ements for making more of our services for recreational craft departing for overseas available online. Having these tools in place will enable a more efficient and effective use of our resources. High quality digital information will both reduce the time spent following up with applicants, and lead to better insights and decision making.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) TBC Mid September Live Animal Exports Review
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Auckland Domestic
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming Cabinet papers Committees Cabinet Appointments and Honours Committee Tuesday November Cabinet Foreign Policy and National Security Committee Tuesday December Maritime Security Tools Investment This paper seeks direction on next steps for the Maritime Security Strategy Tools investment. Cabinet Monday September Transport Accident Investigation Commission: Chief Commissioner Appointment This paper informs Cabinet of your intent to appoint a new Chief Commissioner to the Transport Accident Investigation Commission.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming Cabinet papers Committees Cabinet Appointments and Honours Committee Tuesday October Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Wednesday September New Zealand Air Services Agreement and Protocol This paper seeks approval for New Zealand to sign and ratify the Air Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand and the associated Protocol to the Air Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand on Third, Fourth and Fifth Freedom Traffic Rights between Parties. Cabinet Business Committee Monday September International Maritime Organisation Climate Change Negotiation Mandate draft Cabinet paper International Maritime Organisation (IMO) member states are negotiating measures to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and ensure international shipping meets its net zero emissions target. This Cabinet paper proposes a revised Cabinet mandate for these negotiations and seeks delegated Cabinet authority for decisions on issues in the negotiations . An Cabinet paper responding to feedback from the Prime Ministers Office was provided to your Office on Friday August .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Key updates Maritime New Zealand Authority Appointments The briefing with the long list of candidates was provided to you and Minister Brown for consideration this week. International Maritime Organization Reducing Greenhouse Gass Emissions from International Shipping Member states of the International Maritime Organization (IMO) will be meeting between Monday September and Friday October to negotiate the design of measures to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in international shipping and meet the agreed targets in the IMOs Strategy to reduce GHG emissions in shipping. The New Zealand delegation in attendance may seek decisions from Ministers with the Power to Act . If decisions are sought from Ministers with Power to Act, a briefing will be provided at the end of the week of Monday September, or the beginning of the week of Monday September (with the timing dependent on how the discussions progress). We expect the turnaround time for decisions will be very tight, in order to provide directions to the delegation in time (we would most likely need a unanimous decision from Ministers within or working days).
Page of RESTRICTED Associate Ministers Office to lodge the APH paperwork by September at am . Week September APH meeting to take place on September . Minister Doocey to conduct Ministerial consultation.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Key updates Maritime New Zealand Authority Appointments The call for nominations for Maritime New Zealand closes on Thursday September . Following the closure, the Ministry will work through the candidates and provide a recommended longlist for interview, in consultation with the Chair . Civil Aviation Authority funding review Release of documents for public consultation The Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) funding review consultation commenced on Tuesday August and will end on October . Follow up from your recent meeting with the MetService CEO and Board Chair Following your recent quarterly meeting with the MetService CEO and Board Chair you asked for the following advice:
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Key updates Maritime New Zealand Authority Appointments The call for nominations for Maritime New Zealand closed on Thursday September , with over nominations received. The Ministry has since met with the Chair to work through a recommended longlist and intends to brief you on our recommendations next week. Transport Accident Investigation Commission: Chief Commissioner Appointments in Confidence On Tuesday September , Ministers confirmed their agreement to progress David Clarke to the Chief Commissioner role. Following this decision, your Office will receive the draft Cabinet paperwork so that the appointment can be finalised before Ms Meares retirement takes effect on Monday September . The below timeline outlines the remaining steps as discussed with your Office: Timeframe Action September Ministry to submit draft Cabinet paperwork for approval. September Ministerial consultation. Thursday September Cabinet paperwork to be lodged before am Thursday September . Tuesday September Cabinets Appointments and Honours Committee to consider appointments. Ministry to provide appointment letter and gazette notice to Minister Browns Office, so that the appointment can be finalised while you are overseas. Monday September Cabinet to confirm appointment. Minister Brown to send appointment letter and return the signed gazette notice to the Ministry. Tuesday October Appointment commences.
Page of If Ministers do not agree to the recommendations , Eke Panuku will be asked to report back to Auckland Council with an set of recommendations and subsequent advice would be provided to Ministers following this consideration . Having the project led by Eke Panuku means Auckland Council will have a key role in providing assurance and monitoring of the work. The Councils role as cofunder of CRL strongly incentivises them to fulfil this role . Kinga Oras presence in the governance of the project , and the use of an independent reviewer, provide an additional level of protection of the Crowns interest in the p roject. Officials therefore recommend Ministers support the proposal. Land development proposal evaluation criteria are attached as Annex . Details of the foundation outcomes, and analysis of the business case are appended as Annexes and respectively. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Annex : Eke Pnuku Kinga Ora joint advice letter to Ministers Page of May Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport Hon Grant Robertson Minister of Finance Cc: Wayne Brown, Mayor of Auckland Cc: Councillor Desley Simpson, Depu ty Mayor of Auckland CITY RAIL LINK (CRL) MAUNGAWHAU AND KARANGA A HAPE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME ADVICE TO SPONSORS Purpose .This letter of advice records Kinga Ora and Eke Panuku Development Aucklands recommendations to City Rail Link (CRL) Sponsors on progressing the City Rail Link Development Programme for the station sites and the wider precincts surrounding the Maungawhau and Karanga a Hape stations. .It describes and seeks your approval of: a.a set of foundation outcomes that are formed from the vision and objectives of the City Rail Link Limited (CRLL) Blueprint masterplan and will guide the delivery of the development program me; and b.the steps we have identified as necessary to progress with the preferred delivery option. .It outlines recommended approaches for timing, staging, and quality to deliver on the preferred delivery option for Maungawhau and Karanga a Hape. The progr amme business case includes a precinct development plan which will be the key document to guide development partners to deliver on CRL Sponsors agreed vision and strategic choices. .We note that any d ecisions concerning implementation require agreement f rom CRL Sponsors. Key points .On July Hon Michael Wood, Minister of Transport, representing CRL Sponsors, the Minister of Finance, the Mayor and Deputy Mayor, asked Eke Panuku and Kinga Ora work in consultation with CRLL to deliver advice and be accountable to CRL Sponsors for the development programme delivery for station sites and precincts at Maungawhau (Mt Eden) and Karanga a Hape. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of .The programme business case recommends Eke Panuku Board be the lead agency to take the programme development sit es to market . This would include negotiat ing, managing and concluding a development agreement (s) on behalf of CRLL and receipt of sale payment back to CRLL shareholders. This would be subject to the parameters agreed in advance with the shareholders. This requires formal delegations be provided to the Eke Panuku Board. .A Joint Executive Steering Group representing Eke Panuku, C RLL, Auckland Council, and Kinga Ora is proposed to manage this programme delivery as it moves to the implementation phase . The Joint Executive Steering Group will ensure alignment with the foundation o utcomes which give effect to Sponsors vision and strategic objectives. .We note that CRLL has been represented on the Executive Steering Group which oversaw the development of the Programme Business Case and Precinct Development Plan. CRLL has had full visibility of these documents. We understand that CRLL is comfortable with the advice we provide in this letter but for clarity we note that we have not requested or received written endorsement of our final recommendations. We have worked closely with CRL Sponsor representatives to finalise our advice to ensure it is aligned wit h related advice regarding CRLLs budget and programme. . .The table below outlines the recommendations that require approval from the CRL Sponsors. .The Auckland Council Governing Body approved the recommendations set out below at its meeting on th April as a confidential item. s ()(b)(ii), s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Ministerial priorities Safety Project: Speed limits The Cabinet Expenditure and Regulatory Review Committee (EXP) considered the Cabinet paper on Tuesday September . The Cabinet paper will be considered by Cabinet on Monday September . We have provided responses to your Office to questions on the draft Rule. We will provide the final Rule to you after Cabinet on Monday September . We are preparing a short paper for you to take to the Cabinet Legislation Committee (LEG) to seek approval to regulations to amend the Land Transport (Road User) Rule and the Land Transport (Register of Land Transport Records Speed Limits) Regulations . The proposed amendments to these two pieces of legislation will update the references to the speed R ule in this legislation from to .The Land Transport Management (Regional Transport Committees) Regulations will also be revoked. Proce ss Dates Cabinet confirmation of E XP decisions Monday September Final Rule to Minister for signing After Cabinet, on Monday September Cabinet Legislation Committee for consequential amendments October Cabinet for consequential amendments October Executive Counsel for consequential amendments October New Rule in force October
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Ongoing actions from transport officials meeting July Ongoi ng July Ongoing July Aviation Officials to provide further advice on aligning the New Zealand regime with Australia. Friday August July EV Charging Officials to: July Auckland Ongoing August EV charging infrastructure August Environment Officials to progress Clean Car Standard legislation Cabinet paper. Underway Cabinet paper provided to the Office for Ministerial consultation on Thursday August August s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Ongoing actions from transport officials meeting Officials Meeting Action Due February ALR Officials to provide monthly updates of expected winddown costs of ALR. Ongoing March GPS Officials to provide weekly updates on next steps across programmes of work signalled in the GPS. Ongoing May Chatham Islands update Officials to provide a weekly joint M inistry , MNZ, DIA, MBIE, and MPI briefing on the situation in the Chatham Islands, covering fuel, livestock, and the boat purchase. Ongoing June Public Transport Officials to provide monthly update on bus driver shortage numbers. Ongoing June Ongoing June Driver Licensing NZTA is progressing the operational work programme to reduce wait times to under days. Underway June Revenue The Ministry and NZTA are to incorporate opportunities from existing and developing technology in the Revenue programme being developed, for discussion in a workshop. The above advice should align with the broader tolling workstream and: cover the tolling solutions being explored, and highlight potential legislative changes required to support efficientcost effective tolling implementation and operations.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: Road safety objectives On Tuesday September , the Road Safety Objectives document was considered at ECO . It will be considered by Cabinet on Monday September . We are finalising the formatting of the document ahead of a confirmed announcement . Cabinet paper: Releasing the final Road Safety Objectives document This paper seeks agreement to publish the final New Zealand Road Safety Objectives document. Cabinet: Monday September Project: Driver licensing Extending conversion period for overseas licences and Croatia exemption On Monday September , Cabinet agreed to extend the timeline for converting overseas driver licenses. Cabinet also agreed to give full driver licence holders from Croatia an exemption from completing drivers licence tests when they convert their licences, subject to the mutual driver licence recognition arrangement being finalised. We expect the Rule change to come into effect on November when the required Order in Council is gazetted. We have shared drafts of the Order in Council with NZTA and are on track for LEG on Thursday October . We are continuing to work with MFAT, who need to finalise the driver licence arrangement with Croatia . We have advised MFAT that it needs to be signed before LEG. Cabinet paper: Rule Change to Extend the Time for Converting Overseas Licences: Approval of Order in Council This paper seeks Cabinets agreement to the Order in Council necessary to implement the Rule change. LEG papers to your Office: Wednesday October LEG meeting: Thursday October Cabinet meeting: Tuesday October Rule change effective: November
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Ongoing actions from transport officials meeting Officials meeting Action Due August August Vehicle Safety Officials to discuss approach to sector engagement with the Office. We will confirm approach following your direction on timelines September September Budget Officials to provide initial advice on scope and approach for Budget . Complete
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Media heads up General comments On Saturday August there was a fatal recreational boating accident at Riverton. A recreational vessel carrying people overturned when crossing the bar, resulting in the loss of lives. The Commission determined not to open an inquiry into this incident as it was unlikely to result in any new systemic safety issues being identified. In May , the Commission issued a report into a similar accident at Manukau Bar (MO ). In that accident, which occurred on October , a recreational boat carrying four people overturned while crossing the bar, resulting in the deaths of persons. TAIC identified the following safety issues: In New Zealand there is little regulation of the recreational boating sector. There is no registration or licensing system, there are no minimum standards for the design and construction of pleasure boats and there is no minimum requirement for assessments and licensing of recreational skippers to ensure a minimum standard of competency.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Ministerial priorities Safety Project: Speed limits We have provided you with an draft Cabinet paper, Summary of Submissions and Regulatory Impact Assessment. Ministerial and departmental consultation commenced on Wednesday September . Process Dates Ministerial and departmental consultation Underway September Cabinet paper lodged Thursday September Cabinet paper speaking points and draft press release to Minister Friday September Draft Rule to your Office for consideration Friday September Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Wednesday September Cabinet confirmation of ECO decisions Monday September Final Rule to Minister for signing After Cabinet, on Monday September New Rule in force Late October ( days after notification in the NZ Gazette)
Page Key principles IAF have a number of key principles to ensure it can achieve what the government seeks from investments in the transport sector. Here is a principle with regard to value for money: The IAF aims to achieve value for money by prioritising investment proposals which are targeted to achieve the GPS priorities and make efficient use of the available resources. Page Cost benefit appraisal The cost benefit appraisal is the current evaluation tool used to assess the efficiency of proposed investments. Coast benefit appraisal and results alignment ratings determine what projects and programmes are included in the NLTP and inform priority for investment. Page Prioritisation for programmes Activities are prioritised and classified to three groups: Improvement activities Continuous programmes Other programmes and activities Activities relating to value for money: e
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings copied to Associate Minister of Transport Nil this week . Upcoming Cabinet papers Committees Cabinet Economic Policy (ECO) Wednesday September
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Communications and External Engagement Tuesday August Media plan anticipated media days from Monday August No media planned or anticipated for next week.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Ministerial Briefings received by the Ministers Office Wednesday August Tuesday August NB: No Briefings were sent during this period.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: RMS Niagara Briefing: RMS Niagara Update This briefing to both you and Minister Doocey will update you about the wreck of the Royal Mail Ship Niagara. Week ending Friday September Project: Maritime Rules Reform Consultation continues on the first package of Design, Construction and Equipment rules changes, and will run to October . Consultation on the International Omnibus package of rules changes has completed and a summary of the consultation next steps is set out under Key updates below . Briefing: Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek Minister Dooceys agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rules relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. These changes are sought by the sector and reduce costs and complexity. Week ending Friday September Briefing: International Omnibus: Results of Consultation and Final Decisions This briefing will seek Minister Dooceys agreement to changes in rules following consultation on the International Omnibus package. Week ending Friday November
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Christchurch Domestic
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications Committees Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) Wednesday September Live Animal Exports Review This initiative relates to the Governments coalition agreement to reverse the recent ban on live animal exports while ensuring the highest standards of animal welfare.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming education publications and products Planned releasepublish What Type Why JulySeptember Occurrence Investigation Workshop Face toface event To provide training for operators about investigating occurrences, to comply with requirements under CAR Part September Vector magazine (Spring issue) Aviation safety education magazine To educate the aviation community on various aviation safety topics. September In, out, and around Queenstown GAP booklet (update) BAU revision September How to be an aerodrome manager GAP booklet (new) As part of the WTSA campaign, new guidance material for aerodrome managers is being produced, in the GAP booklet format. September Drone safety brochure Safety education product BAU revision SeptemberOctober Plane talking GAP booklet (update) BAU revision SeptemberOctober Helicopter performance GAP booklet (update) BAU revision TBC Night VFR GAP booklet (update) BAU revision TBC In, out, and around Milford GAP booklet (update) BAU revision TBC Survival GAP booklet (update) BAU revision
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming education publications and products Planned releasepublish What Type Why JulySeptember Occurrence Investigation Workshop Face toface event To provide training for operators about investigating occurrences, to comply with requirements under CAR Part September Vector magazine (Spring issue) Aviation safety education magazine To educate the aviation community on various aviation safety topics. September In, out, and around Queenstown GAP booklet (update) BAU revision September How to be an aerodrome manager GAP booklet (new) As part of the WTSA campaign, new guidance material for aerodrome managers is being produced, in the GAP booklet format. September Drone safety brochure Safety education product BAU revision TBC In, out, and around Milford GAP booklet (update) BAU revision TBC Plane talking GAP booklet (update) BAU revision TBC Night VFR GAP booklet (update) BAU revision TBC Survival GAP booklet (update) BAU revision TBC Helicopter performance GAP booklet (update) BAU revision
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Queues for the Wellington Southern Domestic screening point which are constantly monitored using LiDAR technology showed: Week Passengers processed in less than minutes . Passengers processed in less than minutes . Flight loadings remain slightly higher than normal at Queenstown and Wellington this week, contributing to the queues at Wellington Southern Domestic on . There are no major events scheduled that are expected to impact queues this coming week. Please see the Appendix at the end of this report for data on where queues are predicted during the coming week.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings to Associate Minister of Transport Due Week Ending Title Friday September Friday September RMS Niagara Update This briefing to both you and Minister Doocey will update you about the wreck of the Royal Mail Ship Niagara, including the potential risks of an oil spill, recent work and engagement undertaken by Maritime NZ. Friday September Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek Minister Dooceys agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rules relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. Friday November International Omnibus: Results of Consultation and Final Decisions This briefing will s eek Minister Dooceys agreement to rule changes following consultation on the International Omnibus package.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Appendix Predicted queues during the coming week During the coming week, queues are predicted at the existing known busy periods (indicated below), using the following colour code: Light blue: No passenger volume forecast Green: Passenger volume forecast to be less than of available capacity Orange: Passenger volume forecast to be between and of available capacity Red: Passenger volume forecast to exceed of available capacity
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Key updates International Omnibus Project : completion of consultation In April , we informed Minister Doocey of work on proposed amendments to the Maritime and Marine Protection Rules (the International Omnibus Project). New Zealand, as a signatory to international maritime conventions, must update its rules when these conventions are amended. Countries are understood to have agreed to proposed amendments unless they have expressly objected.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Ministerial Briefings received by the Ministers Office Wednesday August Tuesday August NB: No Briefings were sent during this period.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: Maritime Workforce NZ Shipping Federation, Marine Transport Association and Confederation of Commercial Fishermen have submitted a joint proposal to Minister Simmonds on the future of maritime training in New Zealand, in response to the consultation on the reform of vocational education that was launched on Thursday August . This proposal has been copied to you as well as Ministers Doocey and Jones . Project: Maritime Rules Reform Consultation continues on the first package of Design, Construction and Equipment rules changes, and will run to October . Stakeholder workshops were held on Tuesday and Wednesday August . Feedback at these sessions was valuable and discussion was positive and constructive; with a significant focus on the on the impacts for the inshore fishing fleet. Consultation on the International Omnibus package of rules changes finished in the week ending Friday September .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Christchurch International:
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Manahau response After being refloated on Friday September , the Manahau was towed from Westport to Port Nelson on Sunday September . The barge was towed into Tasman Bay by the offshore vessel MMA Vision with the tug Kurutai in support. The Kurutai and Port Nelson harbour tugs then towed the barge into port. Maritime NZ placed the vessel under detention for safety reasons. Maritime NZ was the lead Government agency for the response. Our role included engaging with the vessel owner and operator, the salvage team, councils and Nelson Harbourmaster to provide expertise and support, and monitor plans for safety and compliance. We were also responsible for implementing the restricted public access areas. Our involvement was misreported in media on several occasions and we wrote to editors to have the record corrected. The cause of the grounding has yet to be identified and Maritime NZ and TAIC are each running separate investigations. The operator has also hired an independent investigator. The Manahaus repairs will need to be certified by its Classification Society and Flag State (Niue) before it can be released from detention. Maritime NZ will also inspect the vessel and require that any deficiencies found have been repaired satisfactorily before it is released. Maritime NZ maintained reduced restricted access areas around the site where the Manahau grounded for public safety, while the area was remediated. We will formally lift the restrictions once we are advised it is safe to do so. Chatham Islands: supply vessel and Harbourmasters Direction An outstanding deficiency on the vessel Southern Tiare (non compliance with revised watch keeping requirements) , caused the operator, Chatham Islands Shipping Ltd, to raise concerns about the impact of this on vessel operations and the movement of livestock from the I slands. As the Southern Tiare is a foreign flagged vessel Maritime NZ has no jurisdiction in this case and these questions can only be addressed by the Flag State, the Cook Islands . It is the responsibility of the ship owner and operator to ensure that ship, crew, and equipment on board meet the flag state and international requirements that all shipping companies must adhere to. Maritime NZ met with a representative of the Cook Islands to discuss the possibility of a limited transition period to allow the vessel to operate whilst providing the operator time to find the additional crew required. Maritime NZ is now awaiting confirmation from the ship that they are able to meet the flag states requirements. Maritime NZ is also seeking a meeting with the Chatham Islands H arbourmaster about a Harbourmasters Direction he has issued that places restrictions on vessels of more than metres length seeking to dock at the main wharf. We are seeking to understand the underpinning risk assessment behind the direction and whether a national control, like a pilotage area, might be more appropriate. We note that, as it stands, the Direction could make it difficult for vessels currently planning to transport livestock fro m the Islands to do so.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming education publications and products Planned releasepublish What Type Why JulySeptember Occurrence Investigation Workshop Face toface event To provide training for operators about investigating occurrences, to comply with requirements under CAR Part September Vector magazine (Spring issue) Aviation safety education magazine To educate the aviation community on various aviation safety topics September In, out, and around Queenstown GAP booklet (update) BAU revision September How to be an aerodrome manager GAP booklet (new) As part of the WTSA campaign, new guidance material for aerodrome managers is being produced, in the GAP booklet format September Drone safety brochure Safety education product BAU revision SeptemberOctober Plane talking GAP booklet (update) BAU revision SeptemberOctober Helicopter performance GAP booklet (update) BAU revision TBC Night VFR GAP booklet (update) BAU revision TBC In, out, and around Milford GAP booklet (update) BAU revision TBC Survival GAP booklet (update) BAU revision
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Briefing: International Omnibus: Results of Consultation and Final Decisions This briefing will seek Minister Dooceys agreement to changes in rules following consultation on the International Omnibus package. Week ending Friday November
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Auckland Domestic:
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Wellington Northern Domestic:
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Appendix Predicted queues during the coming week During the coming week, queues are predicted at the existing known busy periods (indicated below), using the following colour code: Light blue: No passenger volume forecast Green: Passenger volume forecast to be less than of available capacity Orange: Passenger volume forecast to be between and of available capacity Red: Passenger volume forecast to exceed of available capacity
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Engagement with the Fishing Health Safety Forum On Thursday September , Maritime NZ met with the New Zealand Fishing Health and Safety Forum , with which we have a long standing collaborative relationship. The Forum brings together commercial fishing operators and representative organisations to discuss health and safety issues and collaboration opportunities. The Forum also provides Maritime NZ with feedback around the operational impacts of policy and regulatory changes being considered. We had a constructive session with Forum attendees. Two particular topics discussed were how we might further support the sector to provide feedback to us on regulatory proposals, and some new potential collaboration opportunities to address risk. The industry, for example, is concerned about recreational vessels on the West Coast reportedly chasing Bluefin Tuna attracted by large Hoki trawlers. The potential risks with this behaviour is that recreational craft may voyage beyond thei r limits or capabilities and may get too close to the commercial vessel creating risks to themselves, their craft (and the commercial crew and vessel as well in some inst ances) . We are m eeting again with members of the Forum to discuss how we might raise awareness of the risks in this area. Maritime NZ media escalation process Maritime NZ maintains a duty team, which includes a duty media officer. The duty team is in frequent contact with the Rescue Coordination Centre NZ (RCCNZ), which is staffed , and has established ways of contacting harbourmasters, councils and eme rgency services as required. The duty media officer will provide a heads up to your or Minister Dooceys Press Sec retary or Private Sec retary when we are responding to a significant event. This will include information about the event, response, media queries we have received and our approved replies. Examples of when we would do this include major search and rescue incidents coordinated by RCCNZ, high profile recreational craft events , commercial shipping incidents and major pollution spills . We note that you retain delegation for Cook Strait ferry issues. Your O ffice can ask Maritime NZ to assist with reactive media lines for queries you might receive. In many cases the work of Maritime NZ is operational in nature and responding to maritime incidents is business as usual for the agency. Your teams media role would likely be to acknowledge victims and public concerns, confirm they are being kept informed, provide assurance to the public, state the Governments established position if there is one, and refer operational questions to Mari time NZ. Engagement with Bay of Plenty regional Council Senior Maritime NZ staff attended the Bay of Plenty Regional Council Monitoring and Operations Committee meeting on Wednesday September , to outline progress made in national and local maritime incident preparedness since the MV Rena grounding and oil spill in . Deputy Chief Executive for Response, Security and Safety Systems, Graham MacLean, presented councillors with an update on key focus areas that Maritime NZ has worked on to enhance its capabilities for managing complex incidents, particularly in the Bay of Plenty. These included: readiness and response strategies and plans capability development, including targeted training development and implementation ensuring fit forpurpose appropriately maintained equipment Iwi and community and volunteer partnerships establishment of enhanced specialist support arrangements with both New Zealand and international parties The Council expressed assurance that Maritime NZ has implemented the recommendations of the Simon Murdoch report () and that New Zealand was in a much better position to manage maritime incidents, large and small, into the future.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings to Minister of Transport Due Week Ending Title
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Christchurch Domestic:
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Queenstown Domestic:
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Christchurch International:
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings copied to Associate Minister of Transport Nil this week . Upcoming Cabinet papers Committees Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Wednesday September
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings to Associate Minister of Transport Due Week Ending Title Friday September Options for Maritime legislation This joint MinistryMNZ briefing will set out options for advancing critical changes to Maritime legislation. Friday September Friday September Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek your agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rules relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. Friday November International Omnibus: Results of Consultation and Final Decisions This briefing will s eek your agreement to rule changes following consultation on the International Omnibus package.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Security screening queues weekly update There were no queue observations in this week. Queues for the Wellington Southern Domestic screening point which are constantly monitored using LiDAR technology showed: Week Passengers processed in less than minutes . Passengers processed in less than minutes . There are no major events scheduled that are expected to impact queues this coming week. Please see the Appendix at the end of this report for data on where queues are predicted during the coming week.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications Committees Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) Wednesday September Recovering the cost of border processing services for travellers The Ministers of Customs and Biosecurity are proposing to present a Cabinet Paper and Cost Recovery Impact Statement (CRIS) on amendments to the Customs and Excise (Border Processing Levy) for consideration at ECO on Wednesday September and Cabinet on Monday September . The paper contains proposals for amendments to levy rates for recovering the costs of processing international travellers. The proposals include a substantial increase in the levy on arriving cruise ship passengers to recover Customs costs incurred in their processing. We have provided comment to Customs that the paper and CRIS would benefit from more evidence on the harms or risks associated with arriving cruise ship passengers, and the effectiveness of the Customs interventions to address those harms or risks, to make a stronger case for the increase in the levy. The C abinet Paper and CRIS note that the cruise industry is opposed to the increase and has expressed concerns regarding the cumulative impact of recent increases in Government fees and levies on their businesses. We can confirm that this was a strong theme at the recent New Zealand Cruise Association Conference held on August . Since the initial consultation, Customs have written to submitters on the levy proposals, indicating that because of lowered projections of cruise visits, levies on arriving cruise ship passengers will need to rise further than what was initially proposed in the consultation process. This is likely to increase cruise sector frustration markedly, as the sector is already on record as saying that the lower cruise visit activity is a direct result of high costs.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Wellington Northern Domestic:
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Key updates Maritime NZ Board Stakeholder day in Auckland The Maritime NZ Board (the Board), and Executive Leadership team (ELT) stakeholder engagement day was held in Auckland on Monday August . This initiative is part of the Boards regular engagement programme, which includes meet ing with stakeholders three times a year in conjunction with the Boards routine business meetings. Engagement included a breakfast session with senior leaders from the maritime community discussing The future of maritime activity in New Zealand and our collective responsibilities in ensuring a safe, secure, clean, and sustainable maritime sector ; a me eting with the Port of Auckland to discuss their strategy and their plans, and a visit to the Auckland Marine Rescue Centre (AMRC) , with briefings from Coastguard NZ, Surf Lifesaving NZ and three recreational craft community grant recipients about their work . We have received extremely positive feedback from stakeholders about the value of these cross sector discussions. Southern Tiare Detention On Wednesday August , during a Port State Control (PSC) Inspection in Timaru, Maritime NZ detained the vessel Southern Tiare. The inspection identified concerns with environmental protection, safety equipment, watch keeping, machinery, general maintenance and failure to effectively implement the Safety Management System. The vessel was released from detention on Sunday September , however, one deficiency concerning watch keeping arrangements remains outstanding and is required to be addressed to the satisfaction of the Flag State (Cook Islands) and Maritime NZ before the vessel can depart. Maritime NZ are currently waiting on information from the vessels management regarding this unresolved deficiency. The Southern Tiare is operated by Chatham Islands Shipping Ltd, serving as a vital transport link between the Chatham Islands and New Zealand. The detention and eventual departure delay may disrupt the import and export of goods including fuel and livestock. Manahau update Tugs commissioned by the operator, Westland Mineral Sands, for the salvage operation, MMA Vision and smaller Kurutai, are now in Westport and the operator and crews are preparing for a salvage attempt over the next few days, as conditions permit. The operators plan is for the Manahau to be towed to Nelson Port for repairs. Maritime NZ is actively engaging with the operator to encourage them to update the public about salvage plans and to understand crew welfare needs. We will continue to engage with stakeholders to support the operation. Maritime NZs team on the ground in Westport include investigators, public information management, legal and a National On Scene Commander, supported by a Maritime NZ response team in Wellington. Once the Manahau is in a safe port, we will move quickly from a response role to a regulatory role. We continue to publish regular media updates about the Manahau as interest in the barge continues to be high, particularly from West Coast media outlets.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Planned releasepublish What Type Why September In, out, and around Queenstown GAP booklet (update) BAU revision September How to be an aerodrome manager GAP booklet (new) As part of the WTSA campaign, new guidance material for aerodrome managers is being produced, in the GAP booklet format. September Drone safety brochure Safety education product BAU revision TBC In, out, and around Milford GAP booklet (update) BAU revision TBC Plane talking GAP booklet (update) BAU revision TBC Night VFR GAP booklet (update) BAU revision TBC Survival GAP booklet (update) BAU revision TBC Helicopter performance GAP booklet (update) BAU revision
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) Wednesday September Biosecurity System Strategy Minister Hoggard has begun Ministerial consultation on the Biosecurity System Strategy package. Consultation will run until August , before proposed ECO lodgement on Thursday September , for consideration on Wednesday September . The strategy aims to address the policy, operational, and participatory challenges in the functioning of the biosecurity system, and is connected to the Biosecurity Act Amendment Bill proposals. While the proposal does not contain any obvious concerns for the maritime transport system, Maritime NZ has asked the Ministry for Primary Industries to involve us in any future work that touches on our functions such as: our current approach to Ballast Water Management the role of Regional CouncilsHarbourmasters; and vessels and those on board (particularly with regard to safety). Thursday September Live Animal Exports Review This initiative relates to the Governments coalition agreement to reverse the recent ban on live animal exports while ensuring the highest standards of animal welfare.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Queenstown Domestic:
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings copied to Associate Minister of Transport Nil this week .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Wellington International:
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Other portfolio Cabinet papers with transport implications
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Auckland Domestic:
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) TBC Mid September Live Animal Exports Review This initiative relates to the Governments coalition agreement to reverse the recent ban on live animal exports while ensuring the highest standards of animal welfare.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Christchurch Domestic:
Page of an accurate proxy to determine the number of under yearold boardings . By funding a proportion of tertiary concessionaires, we are able to capture some of this cohort. Environment Canterbury has proposed to provide half price fares for under s until free fares can be implemented Given limitations of its ticketing system, Environment Canterbury ( ECAN ) can only implement one age related concession . ECAN officers have advised it propose s to apply halfprice fares to yearolds until changes to the ticketing system are implemented in August . This a pproach means under s will pay half price fares in July , with free fares implemented in August . As this interim solution is time bound (i.e. , one month) and aligns with the policy intent of Community Connect (to provide reduced fares for targe ted groups) , we recommend Crown funding is provided . ECAN also seeks confirmation that a reduced Crown reimbursement is available for on demand services Ondemand services are provided in Auckland, Wellington, Timaru, Waikato and Hawkes Bay. We have advised PTAs that they have discretion to apply the Community Connect concessions to on demand services (providing flexibility for implementation that works best for their networks). MyWay is the sole public transpo rt service in Timaru. ECAN has informed officials that: . For under s: it will not implement free fares . For yearolds: it will not implement half price fares . For under yearolds (existing adult fares): it can implement a percent fare reducti on given ticketing system limitations. ECAN is seeking confirmation that the Crown will fund the percent fare reduction . While Government has not signalled whether Community Connect funding is limited to provision of a percent discount, we have assum ed this is the preferred approach for permanent implementation options . We consider this is an acceptable interim solution as ECAN works to find a permanent ticketing system solution that offers the percent discount. We do not have an expected timeframe for this solution but anticipate this interim proposal could be in place for six months to one year. Officials will engage with ECAN as the work progresses and can keep you .
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings copied to Associate Minister of Transport There are no upcoming briefings copied to the Associate Minister of Transport.
Page of RESTRICTED Upcoming briefings copied to Associate Minister of Transport Due Week Ending Title Friday September
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings copied to Associate Minister of Transport Due Week Ending Title Friday September Vote Transport: Certification of Unappropriated Expenditure for This briefing seeks the Minister of Transports certification of the Vote Transport unappropriated expenditure for the financial year. The unappropriated expenditure includes one breach of the non departmental appropriation Supporting a Chatham Islands Replacement Ship.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Follow up from your recent meeting with the MetService CEO and Board Chair Following your recent quarterly meeting with the MetService CEO and Board Chair you asked for the following advice: How you can support the MetService through the implementation of the Hau Nuku review The Hau Nuku review is being led by MBIE and Treasury with Ministers Paul Goldsmith and Judith Collins as decision making Ministers. As per your delegation, you hold the contract between the Minister of Transport and the MetService. Your interests in the Hau Nuku review will be in ensuring the MetService continues to deliver the weather forecasting services in scope of this contract. You can influence decisions about the MetService and NIWA through conversations with your colleagues, especially with Ministers Goldsmith and Collins. We recommend that you focus these discussions with your colleagues on matters that impact on the MetServices ability to deliver its contracted services. Performance reporting provided by the MetService As per the contract, the service provider ( the MetService) must report to the Minister on performance of the Operational Services each quarter by email to the Ministry. The current process is that the Ministry, on your behalf, receives and summarises the quarterly report then provides it to you in a Weekly Report entry. The indicators that must be included in the MetServices quarterly report are listed below (Schedule of the contract refers): a) The timeliness of the issue of routinely issued weather forecasts b) Accuracy measures, expressed as Probability of Detection (POD) and False Alarm Ratio (FAR) of routinely issued marine wind warnings for coastal areas and advice of broad scale severe weather c) The number of forecasts, watches, and warnings issued for severe weather events d) The availability of key elements of the observing network e) Participation of MetService personnel at World Metrological Organisation (WMO) meetings.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Ministerial priorities Safety Project: Speed limits We are continuing to work with NZTA to prepare the pack of documents for Cabinet and the final Speed Rule. Process Dates Briefing to Minister on outcome of consultation Complete Draft Cabinet paper, final Regulatory Impact Assessment and final Summary of submissions to Minister Wednesday August Ministerial and departmental consultation September Cabinet paper lodged September Cabinet paper speaking points and draft press release to Minister September Cabinet Economic Policy Committee September Cabinet confirmation of ECO decisions September Final Rule to Minister for signing After Cabinet, on September New Rule in force Late October ( days after notification in the NZ Gazette)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Ongoing actions from transport officials meeting July Publ ic Transport
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Rail Project: Metropolitan Rail Operating Model settings review Briefing: Metropolitan Rail Operating Model (MROM) Further Policy Advice This briefing will provide further advice on roles and responsibilities and the funding model for metro rail. It follows our preliminary advice to you on the MROM review (OC refers), and your feedback on that advice. Monday October Project: Wellington Substations Upgrade Programme Friday October
Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Ministerial priorities Safety Project: Speed limits Ministerial and departmental consultation on the Cabinet paper ended on September . We incorporated feedback and the Cabinet paper is lodged for consideration at Cabinet Expenditure and Regulatory Review Committee on Tuesday September . We have provided you with an draft Rule for your consideration. Process Dates Cabinet Expenditure and Regulatory Review Committee Tuesday September Cabinet confirmation of ECO decisions Monday September Final Rule to Minister for signing After Cabinet, on Monday September New Rule in force Late October ( days after notification in the NZ Gazette)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: Road safety objectives We are awaiting your feedback on the draft Road Safety Objectives document before commencing departmental and Ministerial consultation. Once we receive your feedback, we will work with your Office on the timelines for progressing to Cabinet. Cabinet paper: Releasing the final Road Safety Objectives document This paper seeks agreement to publish the final New Zealand Road Safety Objectives document. Departmental and Ministerial consultation: TBC Final papers to your Office: TBC To lodge: TBC To Committee: TBC To Cabinet: TBC Project: Rule change to e xtend the t ime for c onverting overseas licences You have requested a Rule change to extend the time for converting overseas licences from to months (OC of July refers). On Monday September , Cabinet agreed to extend the timeline for converting overseas driver licenses. Cabinet also agreed to expand the rule change to allow full driver licence holders from Croatia an exemption from completing drivers licence tests when they convert their licences. We expect the rule change to come into effect on November when the required Order in Council is gazetted. PCO drafting instructions have been issued and a drafter has been allocated. We have provided your Office with a draft press release announcing your decision to extend the conversion time along with draft QAs. We will work with MFAT on next steps regarding the Croatia Driver License arrangement. Cabinet paper: Rule Change to Extend the Time for Converting Overseas Licences: Approval of Order in Council This paper seeks Cabinets agreement to the Order in Council necessary to implement the rule change. LEG papers to your Office: Wednesday October LEG meeting: Thursday October Cabinet meeting: Tuesday October Rule change effective : November Project: Digital driver licences
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Media heads up General comments On Saturday August there was a fatal recreational boating accident at Riverton. A recreational vessel carrying people overturned when crossing the bar, resulting in the loss of lives. The Commission determined not to open an inquiry into this incident as it was unlikely to result in any new systemic safety issues being identified. In May , the Commission issued a report into a similar accident at Manukau Bar (MO ). In that accident, which occurred on October , a recreational boat carrying four people overturned while crossing the bar, resulting in the deaths of persons. TAIC identified the following safety issues: In New Zealand there is little regulation of the recreational boating sector. There is no registration or licensing system, there are no minimum standards for the design and construction of pleasure boats and there is no minimum requirement for assessments and licensing of recreational skippers to ensure a minimum standard of competency.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: Maritime Workforce Maritime NZ met with sector representatives on Thursday September to discuss workforce and training issues. This is a standing monthly meeting that has recently been focused on the vocational education training reforms. The discussion focused on the short and long term amendments to the seafarer certification rules and upcoming IMO Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping (STCW) discussions. Project: RMS Niagara Briefing: RMS Niagara Update Week ending Friday October Project: Maritime Rules Reform Consultation continues on the first package of Design, Construction and Equipment R ule changes, and will run to Friday October . Consultation on the International Omnibus package of R ule changes has been completed and a summary of the consultation next steps is set out under Key updates below . Briefing: International Omnibus: Results of Consultation and Final Decisions This briefing will seek your agreement to changes in rules following consultation on the International Omnibus package. Week ending Friday November
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming Cabinet papers Committees Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Wednesday September New Zealand Air Services Agreement and Protocol This paper seeks approval for New Zealand to sign and ratify the Air Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand and the associated Protocol to the Air Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand on Third, Fourth and Fifth Freedom Traffic Rights between Parties. Cabinet Appointments and Honours Committee Tuesday September Transport Accident Investigation Commission: Chief Commissioner Appointment This paper informs Cabinet of your intent to appoint a new Chief Commissioner to the Transport Accident Investigation Commission. Tuesday November Cabinet Foreign Policy and National Security Committee Tuesday December Maritime Security Tools Investment This paper seeks direction on next steps for the Maritime Security Strategy Tools investment.
Page of RESTRICTED Upcoming Cabinet papers Committees Cabinet Appointments and Honours Committee Tuesday October Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Wednesday September New Zealand Air Services Agreement and Protocol This paper seeks approval for New Zealand to sign and ratify the Air Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand and the associated Protocol to the Air Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand on Third, Fourth and Fifth Freedom Traffic Rights between Parties. Wednesday September International Maritime Organisation Climate Change Negotiation Mandate draft Cabinet paper International Maritime Organisation (IMO) member states are negotiating measures to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and ensure international shipping meets its net zero emissions target. This Cabinet paper proposes a revised Cabinet mandate for these negotiations and seeks delegated Cabinet authority. An Cabinet paper was provided to your Office on Tuesday August for further Ministerial consultation. The paper incorporates feedback received from departmental consultation (particularly MFAT) and the first round of Ministerial consultation.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming Cabinet papers Committees Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Wednesday September New Zealand Air Services Agreement and Protocol This paper seeks approval for New Zealand to sign and ratify the Air Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand and the associated Protocol to the Air Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand on Third, Fourth and Fifth Freedom Traffic Rights between Parties. Cabinet Appointments and Honours Committee Tuesday October
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings copied to Associate Minister of Transport There are no upcoming briefings copied to the Associate Minister of Transport.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Ongoing actions from transport officials meeting July Ongoing
Page of IN CONFIDENCE The final proposals will go before Cabinet and Executive Council on Monday August . We are working with your Office to confirm the content and for communicating the fee changes to the public and RCAs. PCO will arrange gazettal of the Regulations, and we will arrange gazettal of the Notice by September . Cabinet paper: Approval of legislative changes to update land transport fees To Cabinet Executive Council: Monday August Press release: week commencing Monday August Final to Gazette: September In force: October
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Miscellaneous: Below rail funding D ate: TBC reliant on the Treasury
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Project: Road safety objectives We have responded to your feedback on the draft Road Safety Objectives document . We understand departmental and Ministerial consultation will commence imminently . Cabinet paper: Releasing the final Road Safety Objectives document This paper seeks agreement to publish the final New Zealand Road Safety Objectives document. Final papers to your Office: Wednesday September To lodge: Thursday September To Committee: Wednesday September To Cabinet: Monday September Project: Rule c hange to e xtend the t ime for c onverting overseas licences On Monday September , Cabinet agreed to extend the timeline for converting overseas driver licenses. Cabinet also agreed to give full driver licence holders from Croatia an exemption from completing drivers licence tests when they convert their licences, subject to the mutual driver licence recognition arrangement being finalised. We expect the rule change to come into effect on November when the required Order in Council is gazetted. Drafting instructions have been issued and PCO is drafting the Order in Council. We are continuing to work with MFAT on finalising the Croatia driver license arrangement. Cabinet paper: Rule Change to Extend the Time for Converting Overseas Licences: Approval of Order in Council This paper seeks Cabinets agreement to the Order in Council necessary to implement the rule change. LEG papers to your Office: October LEG meeting: October Cabinet meeting: October Rule change effective: November
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Rail Project: KiwiRail Rail freight Network Monday September
Page . Prioritising significant activities. Significant activities have been prioritised using a methodology based on the regions desired benefits and objectives identified in sections . and .. The prioritisation process is summarised in Figure . This was a collaborative process undertaken by representatives of the regional council, city and district councils and the NZTA.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings to Associate Minister of Transport Due Week Ending Title Friday September Request to table a Class Exemption Notice in the House This briefing will notify you that the Director of Maritime NZ has made a new class exemption, as the Maritime Transport Act allows, and requests that you table the Exemption Notice in the House of Representatives no later than Tuesday September . The exemption permits a master of a roll onroll off ship operating between Wellington and Picton to allow on board an empty vehicle for the purposes of a delivery voyage, where that vehicle does not have the required information plate or vehicle securing points. Friday September Options for Maritime legislation This joint MinistryMNZ briefing will set out options for advancing critical changes to Maritime legislation. Friday September Changes needed to maritime legislation to address issues arising from the exercise of local navigation safety regulatory powers Friday September Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek your agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rules relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. Friday November
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming briefings to Associate Minister of Transport Due Title Week ending Friday October RMS Niagara Update Monday October Week ending Friday November International Omnibus: Results of Consultation and Final Decisions This briefing will s eek your agreement to R ule changes following consultation on the International Omnibus package. Week ending Friday December Maritime Transport Act Review Joint briefing with the Ministry of Transport on policy options and legislative prioritisation for changes to the Maritime Transport Act.
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of RESTRICTED
Page of IN CONFIDENCE
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming Cabinet papers Committees Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Wednesday September New Zealand Air Services Agreement and Protocol This paper seeks approval for New Zealand to sign and ratify the Air Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand and the associated Protocol to the Air Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand on Third, Fourth and Fifth Freedom Traffic Rights between Parties. Cabinet Appointments and Honours Committee Tuesday October Tuesday September Transport Accident Investigation Commission: Chief Commissioner Appointment This paper informs Cabinet of your intent to appoint a new Chief Commissioner to the Transport Accident Investigation Commission.
Page of Recommendations We recommend you: Minister of Transport Minister of Finance Agree the foundation outcomes for the Maungawhau (Mt Eden) and Karanga a Hape station development sties that will guide delivery of the development programme: a. Environmental vitality and climate action: An exemplar net zero carbon urban regeneratio n development that is resilient to climate change and focuses on the prioritisation of sustainable modes of transport and environmental vitality. b. Mana whenua partnership: Partner with mana whenua to integrate their mtauranga and reflect their identity in the precinct. c. Homes: Provide healthy homes with a mix of typologies and accessible homes to cater for a diverse community. d. Affordable homes: Provide an adequate supply of quality, affordable homes in the precinct to make the most of the location being adjacent to a significant transport connection. e. Accessibility: Create an accessible precinct that encourages the use of public transport and provides a safe and connected neighbourhood. f. Economic social well being (Community well being): Provide a menities that enhances the existing community and enables people to thrive. g. Value realisation: Creating enduring investments for the community and realise value over time.Yes No Yes No Agree that Eke Panuku Board be delegated decision making governan ce as the lead agency to take the programme development sites to market. This would include negotiating an agreement on behalf of C ity Rail Link Limited to concluding development agreements and receipt of sale payment back to C ity Rail Link Limited shareho lders. This would be subject to the parameters agreed with the shareholders in advance of the process . Yes No Yes No RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Rail Project: KiwiRail Rail freight network Monday September
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Ministerial priorities Safety Project: Speed limits We met with you on Monday August to discuss the policy changes to the draft Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits (the Speed Rule). We are now working on issuing drafting instructions to NZTA to give effect to these changes. Process Dates Briefing to Minister on outcome of consultation Complete Draft Cabinet paper, final Regulatory Impact Assessment and final Summary of submissions to Minister Wednesday August Ministerial and departmental consultation September Cabinet paper lodged September Cabinet paper speaking points and draft press release to Minister September Cabinet Economic Policy Committee September Cabinet confirmation of ECO decisions September Final Rule to Minister for signing After Cabinet, on September New Rule in force Late October ( days after notification in the NZ Gazette)
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Rail Project: Budget Briefing: Budget Approval to drawdown funding for metro renewals This briefing will seek your agreement to drawdown the AT portion of the . million for metro renewals. It will provide advice on the priorities for investment, monitoring and reporting on the investment, and the response from ACAT. Week ending Friday August Project: KiwiRail Rail freight Network September City Rail Link Monthly progress report ( Continued over page) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(g)(i) s ()(b)(ii) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Investment Project: Government Policy Statement on Land Transport N ZTA Debt The Ministry has previously provided advice on increasing the NZTA Seasonal and Shock Facility (OC refers) . Treasury has subsequently provided a supporting briefing on restructuringsmoothing the NZTAs debt facilities (T refers). The Office is to advise officials if any additional information is required to support the Minister s decision. Project: Budget
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Rail Project: KiwiRail Rail freight Network Monday September Project: Budget Metro Renewals
Page of IN CONFIDENCE Investment Project: Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Road Efficiency Group (REG) Ministry officials are working with NZTA officials to confirm the scope, role and functions of the REG by the end of September (in line with your letter to the NZTA Board Chair on Tuesday August ). Review of NZTA Short term Borrowing Facility (the Review) Treasury will provide a briefing on options to restructuresmooth NZTAs existing debt facilities by Friday September .
Page numbers Page numbers can be inserted under the Insert section on Word. Accent bar four is the Ministry standard. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Pan Pac Forest Products Ltd
Pandemic shows transports essential role
Para Value for money is expressed as a principle that applies to all investments, rather than a strategic priority that could change as Government changes.
Para Waka Kotahi will be responsible for advising the Minister of Transport on how KiwiRails proposed Rail Network Investment Progra mme (RNIP), and the activities under it, fit with its broader land transport investment programme under the NLTP. This involv es confirming that the rail network activities are aligned with the LTMAs purpose and the GPS, and advising the Minister that t he activities represent good value for money.
Para Support The Port agrees that a collaborative approach on funding creates the right mix to ensure relevant agencies are included in the funding discussions that impact on their business. Para
Para Improving GPS monitoring When considering the draft GPS , Cabinet decided that it would be looking for improved reporting by the Ministry of Trans port on the delivery of the investment strategy within GPS .
Para. Quality of investment GPS signals a greater focus on value for money and getti ng better value from investment, particularly through the quality of investment decision making. The ongoing commitment to the investment management activity class is designed to secure high quality investment assessment and reporting across the entire inv estment portfolio.
Parameters for managing and accessing tagged contingency funds
Parliamentary Counsel Office for secondary legislation relating to civil aviation
Parliamentary Counsel Office if amendments to the Land Transport (Register
Part Direction to require screening . Authorised aviation security service providers must use their aviation security o icers to search for substances at international screening points Authorised Aviation Security Service Providers must ensure that, at every international screening point at which they are operating, aviation security o icers employed by them use all or any of the powers in section of the Act to undertake searches for () inorganic powders () liquids, aerosols, and gels, including (but not limited to): a. water and other drinks, soups, syrups, jams, stews, sauces, and pastes (including toothpaste); and b. foods in sauces or containing a high liquid content; and c. creams, lotions, cosmetics, and oils; and d. gels (including hair and shower gels); and e. contents of pressurised containers (including shaving foam, other foam, and deodorants); and f. waxy substances (including hair wax); and g. mascara, lipstick, lip gloss, and lip balm; and h. any item of similar consistency at room temperature to the items specied in paragraphs (a) to (g). Clause : amended on April by clause of the Civil Aviation (Direction to Require Searching for Inorganic Powders, Liquids, Aerosols, and Gels) Amendment Notice . Made at Wellington on March Hon James Meager, Acting Minister of Transport Civil Aviation (Direction to Require Searching for Inorganic Powders, Liquids, Aerosols, and Gels) Notice Explanatory Note This note is not part of the Notice but is intended to indicate its general e ect. This notice, which comes into force on April , replaces the Direction to Require Screening Notice (SR ) and the Civil Aviation (Direction to Require Screening and Searching) Notice (), which are revoked by section of the Civil Aviation Act . This notice is secondary legislation and is by the Ministry of Transport on its website and notied in the Gazette as required by the Legislation Act . It sets out the direction given by the Acting Minister of Transport to authorised aviation security service providers that all or any of the powers conferred on aviation security o icers under this subpart be used by its aviation security oicers to detect the items or substances specied in the direction. The notice is consistent with recommended security control guidelines for screening inorganic powders, liquids aerosols, and gels, including those issued by the International Civil Aviation Organization.
Part amendments consultation
Part of the Land Transport Act (as amended by the Clean Vehicles Act) sets out the legislative framework for the Clean Vehicle Standard, including:
Part : Key Issues a. Link between what is announced in the GPS, what is planned, and information about what is delivered.
Part Execution of the two agreements (Indicatively by September ) The (separate) Kiwi Bacon Property agreement and the Auckland Council land agreement come into LINZ through the accredited supplier, signed by the landownersvendors ALRL and the Auckland Council, respectively. The Minister (via delegation to Land Information New Zealand) executes both agreements to effect the acquisitions by NZTA. These will be executed contemporaneously. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of Part Settlement of the Kiwi Bacon Property (i.e. transfer from ALRL to the CrownNZTA) Settlement of the Kiwi Bacon Property could occur approximately one month following execution of the agreement and would then become Crown owned land held under the PWA and sit on NZTAs balance sheet. Part Settlement of the NWRT required land and settlement of the Kiwi Bacon Property Settlement of the NWRT required land and the subsequent settlement of the Kiwi Bacon Property (i.e. transfer to the Auckland Council) can occur once the final values have been determined. There may need to be an offset payment by either party as part of that settlement in the event there is a difference between the final values of the NWRT required land and the Kiwi Bacon Property.
Part : Maritime NZ attendees Kirstie Hewlett, Chief Executive Dylan Page, Chief Advisor, Response Security Safety Services Part Maritime NZ Lead Paper reference . Maritime Digital Transformation Indicative Business Case Kirstie Hewlett MNZ . HMS Niagara emerging issues Kirsti Hewlett Verbal update
Part : Maritime NZ attendees Kirstie Hewlett, Chief Executive Peter Brunt, Deputy Chief Executive, Regulatory Frameworks Part Maritime NZ Lead Paper reference . Kirstie Hewlett To be sent Sept . Manahau Response Kirstie Hewlett Verbal update
Part One: Outcomes for the transport sys tem The overall purpose of transport system is to improve peoples wellbeing, and the liveability of places. It does this by cont ributing to the following five key outcomes: o Inclusive access Enabling all people to participate in society through access to social and economic opportunities Direct text a Literature Summary
Part Two: Mode neutrality Mode neutrality involves two important aspects: . Making sure all modes and options are considered and evaluated to find the best system solution. . Making users and decision makers more aware of the benefits and costs of transport choices, to incentivise robust decision making and smart travel choices.
Part of this system from the beginning was that road user revenue would subsidise public transport fares to a reasonable level, as public transport benefited motorists if it reduced congestion, and this fun ding cou d be planned for and delivered without c ompromising the principles above referred to by the Ministry of Transport as the social contract . Road user revenue for major nonroad capital projects GPS introduced the use of road user revenue to fund rail capital and rapid transit infrastructure but implementing this change has proven more challenging than was envi saged. GPS proposes even more funding for these purposes, including incorporating the Rail Plan into the National Land Transpo rt Programme . In actual National Land Transport Fund spending was substantially under budget (by ) . Most of the under spend was in activity classes relating to rapid transit, rail and p ublic transport infrastructure. This meant the increases to F ED and RUC provided additional revenue that was not spent. Fuel taxes should not be increased as a means of raising and saving money to deliver projects in the longer term raising transport taxes in advance of needing the revenue is inconsistent with the payasyougo principle of the land transport funding system. In addition, GPS reduced funding for state highway improvements by .B over years to fund these new uses , meaning projects Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency (the Agency) previously as sessed of high value for communities and New Zealanders all around the country stopped . The NZ Upgrade Programme (NZUP) has largely replaced this funding with .B for road projects , which we support. However, this approach has: delayed shovel ready proj ects decreased infrastructure capacity we compete in a global market for capital and when improvements allocations were dialled down, capital and skills moved offshore, and are not immediately available again, which further delays these shovel ready proj ects.
Part of your request was transferred to the New Zealand Transport Agency, and you will hear directly from them on the Hill Street Intersection and T he Strand Optimisation project .
Participants also talked about the limits of the activity classes for getting funding for long term, network wide, urban form projects which were identified as essential to achieving significant mode shift. The importa nce of the NLTF for achieving large scale change In bigger cities, the NLTF was seen as an end that the council was already working towards and the changes in GPS mainly made it easier for them to sell their case. Participants from smaller councils discussed the need to unlock funding from the NLTF by packaging mode shift promoting projects with other work. Many projects were seen as having a mode shift promoting aspect which could be used to support a funding request. In almost all cases, the realit y of a co funding model was that if a project were not funded through the NLTF, it would not proceed. A common point discussed by all participants was that they observed it being easier to get piecemeal projects through and harder to get more complex, long er term projects through (such as a network wide programme). It is not surprising that simpler projects are easier to get approval for. However, many participants felt it would be easier to see substantive change with a greater focus on more ambitious mode shift initiatives. Changing priorities Getting mode shift projects prioritised Participants recognised that the NLTF could not cover all requests and that a process for prioritising was needed. Some also reflected on changes in prioritising activities ove r the three GPS periods, with implications for activities included in the NLTP. Following Ministerial concerns with implementing the GPS changes to the investment decision making process developed with the sector, participants talked about the increas ed emphasis on the business case process in . The Investment Prioritisation Method (IPM) used to prioritise projects was referred to several times as more focused on evidence, in contrast to the more strategic approaches used previously (such as the In vestment Assessment Framework used for the NLTP). While recognising that not everything could be funded, most participants discussed the difficulty in gathering sufficient evidence to make a case for prioritising mode shift promoting projects. It was felt that the high evidence requirements of the IPM tend to favour larger councils and certain types of projects where evidence is more readily available. The shift away from a more strategic approach to relying on business cases and the IPM was seen by ma ny as inflexible and unresponsive to projects leading to mode shift. Interviewees provided Place making and Travel Demand Management (TDM) as two comprehensive initiatives considered effective for mode shift but for which evidence was difficult to obtain f or specific component projects. Discussion indicating a preference for a more strategic approach signals the difficulties councils face in getting the full range of projects needed to support mode shift funded. Evidence gathering in smaller councils was al so seen as more difficult because they need capacity, and there is less to see (for example, less foot traffic) compared to larger urban areas. Some participants raised the interpretation and application of the IPM in as an example of how the priori tising process limited what was eligible for funding in the mode shift promoting activities. For example, Low Cost, Low Risk (LCLR) funding was described as an important avenue for much of the work to maintain and improve walking and cycling infrastructure . However, in the previous cycle, this was considered primarily directed towards larger urban areas (as directed by GPS ). . STUDY PHASES
Participation in CORSIA reconfirmed
Particular areas of focus Two guiding principles for the transport sector. Firstly, transport planning and investing should be mode neutral. Secondly, urban transport systems should be modern and efficient.
Partnering with SBC on a feasibility study into a marketled low carbon freight mechanism was one of the immediate actions identified in the Aotearoa New Zealand Freight and Supply Chain Strategy.
Partners and abbreviations English name Mori name Aviation Security Service (Avsec) Kaiwhakamaru Rereangi Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) Te Mana Rererangi Tmatanui o Aotearoa Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC) Te Kmihana turotro Aitu Waka Maritime New Zealand ( MNZ ) N te rere moana Aotearoa MetService Te Ratonga Tirorangi New Zealand Police (NZ Police) Ng Pirihimana o Aotearoa Statistics NZ (Stats NZ) Tatauranga Aotearoa Local Government NZ (LGNZ) Te Khu auniera Aotearoa New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) Waka Kotahi
Passengers, baggage, cargo , and mail in transit through the territory of each Party and not leaving the area of the airport reserved for such purpose shall not undergo any examination except for reasons of aviation security, narcotics control, prevention of illegal entry , or in special circumstances. Baggage, cargo , and mail in direct transit shall be exempt from customs duties and other similar taxes.
Passing the Act is the first step that needs to be taken so that New Zealands legislation aligns with the rules in MARPOL Annex VI. This legislation includes new marine pollution rules which will be administered by Maritime New Zealand. Changes to regulations made under the MTA are also needed. Marine Protection (Offences) Amendment Regulations will prescribe new offences and infringements for breaches of the marine protection rules. Maritime (Charges) Amendment Regulations will provide for charges for additional categories of work and services (such as certifications) required by MARPOL Annex VI.
Pathway funding, drawdown of tagged capital contingency funding is subject to the
Paul OConnell, Deputy Chief Executive, Sector Strategy Group
Paul joined the Ministry in . Pauls career in the public service started out at the Treasury, and in New Zealand he has also held leadership roles at the Ministry of Justice, the Social Investment Agency, and the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet.
Paula Rose QSO (Commissioner) Paula Rose is a safety professional. She is the Deputy Chief Commissioner for the Criminal Cases Review Commission and Deputy Chair for WorkSafe New Zealand. She also holds board positions at the Broadcasting Standards Authority the Social Workers Registration Board and St John South Island Regional Trust Board. She is a member the Parole Board.
Pavement and Surfacing Health Index
Peck RC, Sadler DD, Perrine MW. The comparative effectiveness of alcohol rehabilitation and licensing control actions for drunk driving offenders: a review of the literature. Alcohol Drugs Driving ; .
People can readily and reliably
People may also: be unfamiliar with the subject matter and related jargon have poor communication skills.
People using fuel offroad can apply for a PED refund and a regional fuel tax rebate in specific situations, including for fuel used:
Percent of population with access to frequent public transport services
Percentage of GPS Outcome Measures Total possible contribution to GPS outcomes Achieved contribution to GPS outcomes Maintenance activities attributed towards the achievement of strategic outcomes. When split across the GPS outcomes, maintenance contribution was highest amongst value for money and safety objectives (achieving of their possible contribution), followed by accessibility and enviro nment (where of their possible contribution was achieved). This shows that although, maintenance activities cannot contribute significantly to the GPS overall, the performance in the relevant measures are considered to meet the requirements set out in the GPS.
Performance reporting provided by the MetService As per the contract, the service provider ( the MetService) must report to the Minister on performance of the Operational Services each quarter by email to the Ministry. The current process is that the Ministry, on your behalf, receives and summarises the quarterly report then provides it to you in a Weekly Report entry. The indicators that must be included in the MetServices quarterly report are listed below (Schedule of the contract refers): a) The timeliness of the issue of routinely issued weather forecasts b) Accuracy measures, expressed as Probability of Detection (POD) and False Alarm Ratio (FAR) of routinely issued marine wind warnings for coastal areas and advice of broad scale severe weather c) The number of forecasts, watches, and warnings issued for severe weather events d) The availability of key elements of the observing network e) Participation of MetService personnel at World Metrological Organisation (WMO) meetings.
Permission to use or reproduce Ministry of Transport material does not extend to include any material on this website that is the copyright material of a third party. Authorisation to use or reproduce such material must be obtained from the copyright holders concerned.
Personalised pods Fleets of autonomous pods have replaced all bus services and most privately owned cars. Pods offer affordable ondemand travel from point to point, with people using pods privately or sharing rides for cheaper trips.
Petrol excise duty and road user charges help fund our land transport system.
Petrol excise duty refund and regional fuel tax rebate entitlements reviewed
Petrol excise duty remains at its current reduced rate of . cents per litre until June
Petrol excise duty returned to its usual rate of . cents per litre
Petrol excise duty, road user charges and public transport fares reduced for two more months
Pg , section . Value for money in GPS : increases the emphasis on value for money to maximise the impact of money spent to achieve the Governments outcomes indicates that deci sionmakers should take into account the full range of benefits and costs over the whole life of investments, and be cognisant of possible future changes and uncertainty, so that investment is made in options that perform best across a wide range of differ ent scenarios places greater emphasis on transparent investment decision making and on enhanced reporting on the outcomes achieved by investment.
Pg Strategic priority value for money Need a land transport system that is effective in enabling the movement of people and freight in a timely manner, and efficient in delivering the right infrastructure and services to the right level at the best cost. This relies upon a robust and transpare nt prioritisation of investme nt. Summary d Literature Summary
Pg , section . Value for money in infrastructure is about delivering the right infrastructure and serv ices to the right level at the best cost. Decision makers should consider a range of options, the costs and benefits (both short and long term) and the GPS strat egic direction. They should also consider possible future changes and uncertainties so that inv estment can be made in options that perform best across different scenarios.
Pg Reporting Expectation: The Agency will take a lead role in securing prudent activity management, particularly in road asset management and public transport. The Minister expects the Agency will: support whole of life asset and service management at standards appropriate to demand from road freight and light vehicles, at the best whole of life cost for the standard ensure ongoing value for money including: o better aligning the costs of maintaining each part of the network with its use and function, with a focus on improving the network productivity of p arts that have higher than average costs due to different asset management practices o achieving productivity improvements that are at least in line with those gained in the rest of the economy
Pg Appendix C Appendix C: Summary of key policy directi on (or strategy) documents Connecting New Zealand (see www.transport.govt.nz) Connecting New Zealand contains the Governments broad long term policy direction for the whole transport sector to assist investment decision making. It is a key document for la nd transport, and identifies economic growth and productivity, road safety and value for money as areas of focus.
Pg Replacement, maintenance and renewal activities The LTMA requires Regional Land Transport Plans to prioritise regionally significant activities, however, replacement, maintenance and renewal activities are not required by the LTMA to be included as a regionally significant activity. They are, however, a key priority for our region and account for a significant proportion of investment in order to maintain our existing network. Waikato Regional Land Transport Annual Monitoring Update https:www.waikatoregion. govt.nzassetsWRCWRC Annual Transport Report CardUPDATEDPR.pdf This is the latest monitoring report specific to land transport in the Waikato. The purpose of this report is to demonstrate progress in the financial year against the connected communities performance measures in the Long Term Plan, and the targets in the following strategies, programmes and plans: Regional Road Safety Strategy Regional Land Transport Programme Regional Walking and Cycling Strategy Regional Stock Truck Effluent Strategy Regional Public Transport Plan Regional Land Transport Strategy . Some of this information is shown as snapshot data, others such as road safety show trend information.
Pg Introduction to GPS Key messages were: Public expenditure in the land transport sector to deliver the right infrastructure and services to the right level and at the best cost. Transport objectives to be achieved without placing an unreasonable funding burden on the population or economy. The sector to deliver results that a re clear, achievable and measurable. The Agency to continue work it had started on improving the productivity of the land transport system and the way it invests in the system.
Pg. Corresponding polices for this strategic objective: PT . The wide benefits of public transport will be recognised when planning the transport network including network efficiency, land use and transport integration, and contribution to environmental, social, economic and health outcomes. PT . The public transport network will be continually improved to ensure that public transport services: a. go where people want to go, at times they want to travel Summary d b. provide competitive journey times c. provide value for money d. are easy to understand and use e. are safe, comfortable and reliable f. provide flexibility, allowing people to change their plans. PT . The public transport network will include core, local, and targeted services. PT . Public transport will be increasingly accessible through the provision of improved information, facilities, and services that are available to all members of the public.
Pg. Concepts for New Zealands State Highways The maps showing the proposed carriageway standards for New Zealand highways over the next years can be found in this section. The map shows the state highways which are proposed or more laning within years, possible or more laning or within years and possible passing and overtaking opportunities within years.
Pg. Other key strategic objectives A reliable and effective strategic road network An effective network for the movement of freight A safer system for all users of our regional transport network An increasingly resilient transport network A well planned, connected and integrated transport network An attractive and safe walking and cycling network An efficient and optimised transport system that minimises the impact on the environment Pg. Outcomes, measures and targets under each strategic objective area Tables under this section will be used in the Annual Monitoring Report to monitor the progress of the target.
Pg. Summary of strategic approach
Phase evaluation commenced Complete phase evaluation and disseminate findings . Impact of the introduction of random roadside testing of drivers for drugs An evaluation of the immediate and medium term impacts of the anticipated introduction of random roadside testing of drivers for drugs. Multiyear evaluation between ) Baseline data collection completed Support Waka Kotahi on the delivery of the evaluation Support Waka Kotahi on the delivery of the evaluation Support Waka Kotahi on the delivery of the evaluation . Community Connect evaluation Community Connect is a joint project with the Ministry of Social Development, Auckland Transport and other public transport authorities, Ministry of Health, MoT and Waka Kotahi. It provides a public transport (PT) concession to Community Services Card (CSC) holders across New Zealand. Multiyear evaluation between Evaluation commenced Ongoing data collection and analysis Complete evaluation
Phase : December to March
Photographic and graphic work
Plan and writ e: A logical structure, strong content and user friendly layout help to make a good presentation. Use the Ministrys writing standard checklist to help you write and structure your presentation. Consider the main points that you want to communicate on behalf of the Ministry. What new information can be shared with the audience What interesting stories can be shared or reflections made If the Minister (or anyone from the Ministry) is speaking, make sure content of all presentations are aligned. Material should not be repeated by the different speakers, but should be reinforced by each speaker. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Plan and programme in place
Plan to address international emissions reconfirmed
Planned accession announced to reduce harmful air pollutant emissions
Planning and Investment Knowledge Base https:www.nzta.govt.nzpl anningand investmentplanning and investment knowledge base The Planning Investment Knowledge Base sets out the policies, principles and processes for all investment from the National Land Transport Fund in land transport. This guides all organisations to plan, develop and manage the activities for which they seek funding assistance from the Transport Agency.
Planning and investment principles include . A partnership approach to planning and investment . Development of a robust, evidence based investment case . An integrated approach to land use and transport planning . Optimising the maintenance, use and provision of the land transport network . Right outcomes, at the right time and at the right cost . Riskbased approach . A safe system approach . Working in a socially and environmentally responsible manner . Those who pay should benefit from land transport investment . Scrutiny principle Value for money is a key component of principles and .
Please also include any correspondence from such companiesgrou ps containing the phrase ute tax Statutory deadline Wednesday, March Risks Given the reasonably broad request, not all relevant material may have been captured. Only a very small amount of the material is proposed to be redacted. Our review and consultation on the information proposed for release has identified that there is minimal release of this material. Document s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Recommendations We recommend you: consider the proposed response to t he request under the Official Information Act sign the attached letter to . Yes No
Please also include any correspondence from such companiesgroups containing the phrase ute tax. documents fall within scope of this request. The documents are listed in table which describes their treatment under the Act. Some material has been withheld under the following section of the Act :
Please consider the environment before printing this email. s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT tfl,. TE MAHAIU WAKA IP M SHI Of fRAr,IISP()Rl H, paim ;ina ng;i lrrig;.ih o Aohmroa ir eke En bling New Zea.landers flourish RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Oscar CasswellLaird From: Sent: To: Cc: Tredegar Hall Wednesday, June s a Rebecca Beals Subject: RE: Te Wai Pounamu ki Otepoti: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Attachments: Extending the duration of existing port coastal permits.pdf Kia Ora )() Thank you for the email. Ive attached an info doc with generic krero on the scope of the sA permit extension of port activities like navigation aids such as buoys, lights and fog signals, exclusive occupation areas such as safe anchor areas, and some structures such as wharves. The table below shows all the ports which are on a section A permit and that the government is wanting to give an additional year extension to before they transition to a resource consent. Port Otago Ltd, is unique in that they have already transitioned to a resource consent and are not on a sA permit. In effect this consultation would not be affecting them directly however should your rnaka may have connections to other ports in the table below. I have ccd in my colleague Rebecca who is our lead and Principal Adviser on this Kaupapa who be able to confirm my statement above and provide any further context. Port Company Coastal Permit Status Regional Council . Northport Limited (Marsden) I Tai Tokerau In use Northland Regional Council . Port of Auckland Limited I Tamakimakaurau In use Auckland Council . Port of Tauranga Limited In use ay of Plenty Regional Council . Port Taranaki Limited In use rf aranaki Regional Council . Eastland Port (Gisborne) I TuranganuiaKiwa In use K,isborne District Council . Napier Port Holdings Limited I Ahuriri In use Hawkes Bay Regional Council . Centre Port Limited Wellington I Te Whanga nui a Tara Not in use, still held Greater Wellington Regional Council . Port Nelson limited In use Nelson City Council . Port Marlborough NZ Limited I Te Tau lhu In use Marlborough District Council . Lyttelton Port Company I Riritana Te Waka a Maui In use :nvironment Canterbu ry . Prime Port Timaru Limited In use :nvironment Canterbury
Please consider the environment before printing this email. s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT H. pah:i ;.na ng. lrng:it, o Aole;roa kiri eke Enabling New Zealanders flourish RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT tLZN DEPTHS IN METRES . ,, GISBORNE HARBOUR ANDENRANCE :, ,;, p ,, M, .. ., V E R T ,. y B A y .. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT l .. NF.WlllI.Jl,;l) NORTH ISLAND POVERTY BAY AND APPROACHES TO . . GISBORNE t fil . ,.,,., .. E .. E Wwisheo. Al.td:llind.Aort . btlbeOffice otbe Rov.,J NClllZWlldertte S.,pelfrintendeoce of Commander R.J. Gillbanks. RNZN.,Hydrograp her. DEPTHS IN METRES .. , .. ,.,, .;.;;,, RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT ; ; ; ; ; ; t, .:r ; ; e IS O . Be ,, c..oo,,ta.l p,.,.rn, Sc:o I : :JOOo (s.b..A e i ct) u II cs ,. ,. .. : .. ,.,, . . ,,.,.. .. ;,.,. .,.,.., . . .,,,., s. ) r: ,,. .. ,..,,. ,. ., ,.,.. IS ,.,. SEE R.UILEO PVBUCATIONS: NOJICES TO MAJlt.lERS la,ua, r,e,:,em, IITIITl,.,.E andterwy cfingas;. AOMJRAUY SAILtNGDOtECTIONS(ki,: coridlticns; ijjre,:tia:I ragulaoons.ld ,pon irrfllfmllDOfll , INZ NAUTICAlAU.INAC tKl s:. kgtitli:IL wu,hoer ,tadiobtatORl),ADIMJRAllY OST OF AAOI() SIIGtUl.S itn,a,.,gtionati WO,nngJ. pito Bnd p,;wt O;PelBbOrd se,r,CtS , tntfik r J. MA..JtS AnDBOOt (:fle inonNTlorll . NZ sylr.t. ttrms ar:i abtirir.MICMISI EltSII.JSIE nu,, ClitllfTS. AMC tPUIEILICATIONS ME ,k,EPT COFULECT ED. Oscar CasswellLaird From: Tredegar Hall Sent: Wednesday, June To: Cc: Rebecca Beals; Oscar CasswellLaird; Ben White Subject: Coastal permit extension under section A of the RMA Attachments: FW: Te Whanganui a Tara: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years ; Extending the duration of existing port coastal permits.pdf Tn koe
Please consider these comments when finalising your SPE. Once finalised, the Agency is required to provide a final SPE to me and publish on its website as soon as practicable , ideally before the start of the financial year . I will then table the SPE in the House of Representatives .
Please email your feedback to
Please find a copy of OC GPS Implementation Programme Overview Briefing attached.
Please find attached my r esponse s to the Standard Estimates Questionnaire , as requested by the Chairperson in her letter of April .
Please let me know who the decision maker is for this issue.
Please note that the approach proposed by Te Aitanga a Mahaki is supported by Ngai Tamanuhiri.
Please note that the maintenance and integrity of the financial statements in parliamentary papers on this website is the responsibility of the Office of the Clerk of the House of Representatives.
Please note that these are preliminary results from the New Zealand Household Travel Survey and may be subject to change (initial release , September for data). These results from the new survey are not directly comparable to the results from the or earlier travel surveys. The detail and breadth of information available based on the new survey will improve as the sample size increases over the years. More analysis will be made available on these pages as they are completed.
Please note the following section of content is possibly being delivered from an external source (IFRAME in HTML terms), and may present unusual experiences for screen readers.
Please note: The GPS Year Safety Report and the associated spreadsheet have been to correct the data reported against pedestrian and cyclist injuries.
Please pass this krero onto anyone I have missed and reach out if you would like any further information or would like to coordinate a hui.
Please provide all advice reports prepared by the Ministry of Transport, and its consultants or advisors, to Ministers of the Crown, other Government entities (including to KiwiRail) on proposed policy settings that may impact the future of rail in New Z ealand. For the avoidance of doubt this includes any advice that discusses plans to abandon, mothball, wind down or close any parts of the national rail freight and passenger network or services thereon.
Please provide the basis for any conclusions reached on the viability or otherwise of the rail network including any external advice or consultants reports on this matter taken into account in the Ministrys advice. I seek all advice provided in the above context to the Coalition government since November to the present time.
Please see documents proactively released.
Please send all information to me from MOT. Not to our general address.
Points of Origin Intermediate Points Points of Destination Beyond Points Any points in New Zealand Any points Any points in ASEAN Member States Any points
Points of Origin Intermediate Points Points of Destination Beyond Points Any points in an ASEAN Member State designating the airline Any points Any points in New Zealand Any points
Police detections can only ever be used as a proxy for actual offending data but the Police report around twenty five thousand detections a year ( Table below) . This i s a increase in detected offending from .
Policies P Support collaborative arrangements that maximise efficiencies across the regional transport system. P Pursue new and alternative funding sources and coinvestment opportunities to fund regional and interregional transport activities. P Support integrated modal funding and advocate for integrated road and rail funding.
Policy . Affordability Develop and implement activity management plans that deliver fit for purpose and affordable levels of service consistent with the One Network Road Classification. (NZTA, city and district councils) Ensure that rail assets are maintained to protect the integrity of the network and minimise operating costs. (KiwiRail) Work collaboratively to identify efficiencies and improve value for money in the delivery of road network maintenance activities. (NZTA, city and district councils). Page . Prioritising significant activities. Significant activities have been prioritised using a methodology based on the regions desired benefits and objectives identified in sections . and .. The prioritisation process is summarised in Figure . This was a collaborative process undertaken by representatives of the regional council, city and district councils and the NZTA. Chapter : Monitoring and Review
Policy Level Evaluation Activities (Including key transport outcome(s) the policy intends to achieve) Healthy and safe people Environmental sustainability Inclusive access Resilience and security Economic prosperity . Impact of alcohol interlocks sentencing on reoffending An evaluation on the effects of receiving an alcohol interlocks order on reoffending Oneoff Evaluation completed Disseminate findings . Vehicle Licensing Reform (VLR) evaluation As a result of the Ministrys Vehicle Licensing Reform (VLR), a number of changes were made to the WoF and CoF systems in , primarily around reducing the frequency at which inspections were required. These changes were expected to lead to savings of . billion over years, while having minimal safety impacts. Oneoff Phase evaluation completed (jointly with Waka Kotahi).
Policy Statement (NAPS) by June . The NAPS will outline key issues for the sector and
Policy Statement on Land Transport
Policy decisions finalised
Policy proposals presented to Cabinet
Population Implications Progressing the projects referenced in this paper is likely to cause short to medium term disruption to residents near both construction corridors. Potential disruptions will need to be well communicated to residents as work progresses. Human Rights The proposal in this paper is not inconsistent with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act and Human Rights Act . Consultation This paper was prepared by the Ministry of Transport. The Treasury , DPMC and the NZTA, were consulted on this Cabinet paper. xxfpyy I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Communications I intend to announce Cabinet decisions in due course. Proactive Release I intend to proactively release this advice with some material withheld subject to any grounds under the Official Information Act . Recommendations The Minister of Transport recommends that the Committee: Existing funding within Vote Transport note that Budget established the GPS tagged capital contingency , to enable the NZTA to accelerate delivery of projects in the Governments land transport priorities as set out in the GPS that would otherwise be phased to begin from onwards . note that the New Zealand Upgrade Transport Projects Tagged Capital Contingency was initially established for the former New Zealand Upgrade Programme and that, following subsequent decisions taken to appropriate and reallocate funding from the contingency, the remaining balance and indicative funding profile is as follows: note that million held within the above capital tagged contingency in recommendation was allocated to the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvement project by the previous Government, contingent on confirmation of the funding profile of potential co funders DEV MINCAB MIN refers, and that any drawdown of the contingency would have seen it reclassified as operating expenditure . Reallocation towards projects at risk note that a range of projects have been identified (Melling Interchange, Waikare Gorge realignment , Second Ashburton Bridge, SH Brougham Street Corridor Improvements , Auckland Level Crossings , and the Roads of National Significance ) that are at risk of delayed delivery without early confirmation of funding availability and that to access this funding requires a change in scope of the tagged contingency . m increase(decrease) Outyears New Zealand Upgrade Transport Projects Tagged Capital Contingency . . . Total Capital . . . xxfpyy I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E note that the conditions attached to the Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Tagged Contingency have only been partially met and that the unmet conditions will remain a requirement for the NZTA Board . agree to expand the scope of the GPS tagged contingency to include the projects included in recommendation . agree to rescind the previous decision to allocate million towards the Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvement project and reallocate the funding towards the projects identified in recommendation . Drawdown of the tagged contingencies to provide funding certainty for identified projects note that the Minister of Transport was invited to report back to Cabinet by June with an update on the implementation of the GPS . agree to fund the projects at risk in recommendation by drawing down billion from the Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Tagged Contingency and million of the New Zealand Upgrade Transport Projects Tagged Capital Contingency . note that the Melling Interchange and Canterbury Brougham St projects are part of the Roads of Regional Significance programme that NZTA is responsible for delivering on behalf of the Crown . agree to delegate allocation of funding decisions on the Melling Interchange and Canterbury Brougham St projects to the NZTA Board , subject to NZTAs standard decision making processes, and with due consideration to the impact on the Governments fiscal strategy . agree to establish the following new multi year appropriation, to run from July to June : Vote Appropriation Minister Appropriation Administrator Title Type Scope Name Minister of Transport Ministry of Transport New Zealand Transport Agency: Crown Funding for Transport Projects (Capital) Non Department al Capital Expense This appropriation is limited to Crown funding for transport projects that will result in assets owned by the Crown approve the following change to appropriations to give effect to the decision to provide funding for Melling Interchange and SH Brougham Street Corridor Improvements in recommendation above, with a corresponding impact on net debt:
Population growth and travel growth
Port of Taurangas existing expansion plans should proceed to accommodate economic growth.
Portfolio Acting Transport
Portfolio Associate Transport
Portfolio work programme update Maritime NZ Project: Critical Changes to M aritime Legislation Maritime NZ and Ministry of Transport officials have provided Minister Doocey with joint advice on the proposed scope for legislative changes . Briefing: Maritime Transport Act Review Joint briefing with the Ministry of Transport on policy options and legislative prioritisation for changes to the Maritime Transport Act. Week ending Friday December Project: Maritime Workforce Maritime NZ, the Port Industry Association, and, jointly, the New Zealand Shipping Federation, Marine Transport Association and the Federation of Commercial Fishermen submitted a response to the consultation on the reform of vocational education that closed on Thursday September . A copy of each submission was provided t o Minister Dooceys Office. Maritime NZ will meet with sector representatives on Thursday September to discuss workforce and training issues. This is a standing monthly meeting that has recently been focused on the vocational education training reforms. We expect the group will now focus more on the short and long term amendments to the seafarer certification rules. As identified below, we will brief Minister Doocey on the Consultation on Rules Relating to SeaCert and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels on Thursday September .
Portfolio work programme update Maritime NZ Project: Critical Changes to M aritime Legislation Maritime NZ and Ministry of Transport officials have provided Minister Doocey with joint advice on the proposed scope for legislative changes . Briefing: Maritime Transport Act Review Joint briefing with the Ministry of Transport on policy options and legislative prioritisation for changes to the Maritime Transport Act. Week ending Friday December s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv)
Portfolio work programme update Maritime NZ Project: Critical Changes to M aritime Legislation Maritime NZ and Ministry of Transport officials have provided Minister Doocey with joint advice on the proposed scope for legislative changes . Project: Maritime Workforce The Port Industry Association has submitted a response to the consultation on the reform of vocational education that was launched on Thursday August . This follows the joint proposal for maritime training that was submitted by NZ Shipping Federation, Marine Transport Association and the Federation of Commercial Fishermen. Education officials have encouraged regulators with links to the vocational education sector to submit. Maritime NZ has therefore also provided its own short submission (outlining our role and supporting submissions made by the maritime and ports sectors). A copy will be provided to Minister Dooceys Office. The consultation closes on Thursday September .
Portfolio work programme update Maritime NZ Project: Critical Changes to M aritime Legislation Maritime NZ and Ministry of Transport officials have provided you with joint advice on the proposed scope for legislative changes . Briefing: Maritime Transport Act Review Joint briefing with the Ministry of Transport on policy options and legislative prioritisation for changes to the Maritime Transport Act. Week ending Friday December
Portfolio: TransportCONFIRMED
Portfolios Finance Transport
Portfolios Finance Transport On December , the Cabinet Economic Development Committee: Background noted that on September , Cabinet: . agreed to cancel the Northern Pathway project and to reallocate the project funding towards an alternative mix of investments; . authorised the Ministers of Finance and Transport to take final decisions on the alternative investment mix, and to make consequential changes to appropriations to give effect to those decisions; CAB MIN . noted that in October , the Ministers of Finance and Transport expressed support for the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme and the project using funding available from the cancelled Northern Pathway project; Climate Implications of Policy Assessment noted that Cabinet has agreed that new projectsprogrammes that are funded from the reallocated Northern Pathway funding must have a full Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) completed before the tagged contingency can be drawn down CAB MIN ; noted the CIPAs for the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements programme which are attached as Appendices and to the paper under DEV SUB ; noted that as per Cabinets requirements, the New Zealand Upgrade Programme continues to demonstrate a net reduction in emissions after accounting for the findings of the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements CIPAs; Document DEVMIN Out of Scope Out of Scope Out of Scope Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E DEVMIN I N C O N F I D E N C E tyqdejwy Policy proposals noted that a tagged capital contingency has been established of up to the amount below in Vote Transport to provide additional funding for the New Zealand Upgrade Programme following baselining and reprioritisation CAB MIN and CAB MIN .:
Possessive apostrophes something belongs to someone or something. If something belongs to one person, then put the apostrophe before the s.
Pou Whakahaere Director Investment Monitoring Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport M: E: r.crosstransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz Document s ()(a) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: Richard Cross To: Abby McRoberts parliament ; Tim Herbert Cc: David Wood ; Helen FionaWhite Subject: RE: Level Crossings Aide Memoire Thursday, October Attachments: image.png Thanks Abby. We will pull something together. It may not be a work of art given the timeframes but well do what we can. Richard Cross M: E: r.crosstransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz From: Abby McRoberts Abby.McRobertsparliament.govt.nz Sent: To: Richard Cross r.crosstransport.govt.nz; Tim Herbert t.herberttransport.govt.nzCc: David Wood D.Woodtransport.govt.nz; Helen FionaWhite helen.fionawhiteparliament.govt.nz Subject: RE: Level Crossings Aide Memoire Hi Richard and Tim, Thanks for the calls before. As discussed, can we please request a It would be great to receive this by midday tomorrow for the weekend bag. Please sing out if any questions. Cheers, Abby Abby McRoberts Private Secretary (Transport) Office of Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Transport Minister for Auckland Minister for Energy I Minister for Local Government DDI: M: Email: abby.mcrobertsparliament.govt.nz Website: www.Beehive,govt.nz Private Bag , Parliament Buildings, Wellington , New Zealand From: Richard Cross r.crosstransport.govt.nz Sent: Wednesday, October To: Helen FionaWhite Helen.FionaWhiteparliament.govt.nz ; Abby McRoberts Abby.McRobertsparliament.govt.nz Cc: David Wood D.Woodtransport.govt.nz ; Tim Herbert t.herberttransport.govt.nz Subject: RE: Level Crossings Aide Memoire Hi peeps Amended version of the aide memoire attached. Will get hard copies across tomorrow morning. Thanks, Richard. Richard Cross
PowerPoint presentation tips
Preface Research, Economics and Evaluation The Research, Economics and Evaluation team operates within the System Performance and Governance Group of the Ministry of Transport. The team supports the Ministrys policy teams by providing the evidence base at each policy development stage. The team i s responsible for the following: Providing sector direction on establishing and using the Transport Evidence Base (see below) including the collection, use, and sharing of data, research and analytics across the transport sector and fostering the develop ment of sector research capabilities and ideas. Leading and undertaking economic analyses, appraisals and assessments, including providing economic input on business cases and funding requests. Performing the evaluation function for the Ministry, includin g designing monitoring and evaluation frameworks and approaches, developing performance metrics and indicators, and designing, conducting and procuring evaluations.
Preface Research, Economics and Evaluation The Research, Economics and Evaluation team operates within the System Performance and Governance Group of the Ministry of Transport. The team supports the Ministrys policy teams by providing the evidence base at each policy development stage. The team i s responsible for: Providing sector direction on establishing and using the Transport Evidence Base (see below) including the collection, use and sharing of data, research and analytics across the transport sector and fostering the development of sector research capabilities and ideas. Leading and undertaking economic analysis, appraisals and assessments, including providing economic input on business cases and funding requests. Providing the evaluation function for the Ministry, including designing monit oring and evaluation frameworks and approaches, developing performance metrics and indicators, and designing, conducting and procuring evaluations. The Transport Evidence Base The Transport Evidence Base Strategy creates an environment to ensure data, information, research and evaluation play a key role in shaping the policy landscape. Good, evidence based decisions also enhance the delivery of services provided by the public an d private sectors to support the delivery of transport outcomes and improve wellbeing and liveability in New Zealand. This report is listed on the Evaluation Programme, which forms part of the Transport Evidence Base implementation plan. Acknowle dgements We want to thank the following agencies and people for their input and assistance in this project and in preparing this report. The report was presented by Vivienne Ivory, Daniel Cooper and Louise Malcolm of WSP . The following organisations contributed to workshops, interviews and data gathering: Waka Kotahi the NZ Transport Agency Te Manat Waka the Ministry of Transport Auckland Transport Greater Wellington Regional Council Wellington City Council Kaipara District Council Otago Regional Council WSP
Preliminary investigation into addressing tampering with emissions controls
Prepared by Aaron Schiff of Schiff Consulting July
Prepared for Ministry of Transport Prepared by Beca Limited
Present: Officials present from:
Present: Officials present from: Hon David Seym our Hon Chris Bishop (Chair) Hon Shane Jones Hon Brooke van Velden Hon Simeon Brown Hon Louise Upston Hon Todd McClay Hon Tama Potaka Hon Matt Doocey Hon Simon Watts Hon Melissa Lee Hon Andrew Bayly Hon Andrew Hoggard Hon Mark Patterson Simon Court MP Office of the Prime Minister Office of Hon Simon Watts Officials Committee for ECO s (a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA
Present: Officials present from: Hon David Seymour Hon Shane Jones Hon Nicola Willis (Chair) Hon Chris Bishop Hon Simeon Brown Hon Paul Goldsmith Hon Louise Upston Hon Judith Collins KC Hon Tama Potaka Hon Simon Watts Hon Melissa Lee Hon Nicola Grigg Hon Andrew Hoggard Hon Mark Patterson Simon Court MP Office of the Prime Minister Office of Hon Chris Bishop Office of Simon Court MP Ministry of Transport Officials Committee for ECO PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Present: Officials present from: Hon Grant Robertson (Chair) Hon Dr Megan Woods Hon Nanaia Mahuta Hon Damien OConnor Hon Stuart Nash Hon Michael Wood Hon Kiri Allan Hon Dr David Clark Hon Priyanca Radhakrishnan Hon Meka Whaitiri Hon Phil Twyford Rino Tirikatene MP Dr Deborah Russell MP Office of the Prime Minister Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet Officials Committee for DEV Office of the Chair of DEV Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Presentation of the Drone benefit study
Preserve connections to New Zealands key international partners, including the Pacific islands
Pressures Waka Kotahi has faced a range of pressures over the funding period including increasing demand on the network, a growing asset base, a more complex network, all whilst managing organisational restructures. This has been perpetuated by a range of other internal and external factors (outlined below) which have restricted the potential efficiency of the investment with the final spend reconciling nearer to the upper GPS band of .B, for example: o Greater focus on health and safety risk ma nagement associated with the Code of Practice for Temporary Traffic Management (CoPTTM) has resulted in increased costs over the period (and periods moving forward). Variations directly attributed to this were observed totalling .M over the three years . o Recovering from more severe emergency works over the period resulted in an additional M spend. The majority of this cost increase appears to be outside of the organisations control, however, more robust governance and adherence to more effective processes would further assist in managing these events. o Increased maintenance on new assets accounted for M (direct cost impacts). The ongoing costs of managing reinstatement of the network and costs associated with new assets installed following the Kaikoura earthquake and Manawatu Gorge was in the order of M over the funding period. o The significant amount of change and restructures Waka Kotahi have experienced since its formation may have led to a level of ambiguity in acc ountabilities and responsibilities that could have resulted in some level of duplication of some activities and functions and possibly contributed to a lower than desired level of efficiency and effectiveness in service delivery. Increasing administrative overheads may require some offsetting of service delivery spend in future investment periods if funding is constrained. o Heavy vehicle use and volumes on the network has grown by over the past years, with a increase in kilometres travelled by heavy vehicles experienced across the State highways during the funding period alone, compared to . Growth has been largest on Arterial and Primary Collector class roads. This may have resulted in Waka Kotahi changing its investment strategy to accommodate the greater wear andtear caused by trucks on those roads. o It was noted that the budget, forecasted a financial impact of M from external uncontrollable cost pressures for cost escalationinflation, traffic, and freight growt h that was realised. Asset investment sustainability The Review team assessed Asset Investment Sustainability and Consumption as a proxy measure to determine whether levels of investment were suitable to maintain assets.
Prevents threats by seeking opportunities to mitigate threats early
Previously, investment in New Zealands rail network lacked a longterm view about rails role in our transport system. This resulted in shortterm investment decisionmaking. We need a new approach to how we plan and fund our rail network.
Previously, owners were required to prove they had financial security of approximately NZ million. Modelling and comparisons with other jurisdictions suggested this level was too low to meet the potential costs of an offshore incident. We amended the regime in so that in the event of an oil spill, offshore installation owners have financial security in line with the amount that would be required if there was a spill from their installation.
Pricing and other economic instruments can be used to encourage more efficient use of the network and can be used by local government to drive travel choices and decisions. Such instruments include differential charging of public transport (e.g., reduced off peak fares), subsidised public transport fares, tolling, congestion charging, and parking fees. For example, tolling can contribute to the cost of building and maintaining new roads. You are the key decision maker and responsible for recommending to the Governor General that a road is tolled under the LTMA. The Ministry will provide advice on tolling proposals, liaise with the Road Controlling Authorities (RCAs), and advise on the legislative process to establish a tolling order. There are three existing toll roads: Northern Gateway, Tauranga Eastern Link, and Takitimu Drive . Penlink, which is scheduled to open by late has also been approved as a toll road. Information and education are used in road safety and can help to nudge people to make more informed travel decisions by communicating or consolidating information about their travel choices. Examples of educational instruments to influence travel choices and decisions include travel planning, social media marketing, information provision, mass media campaigns. The greatest benefits come from combining economic and educational instruments with compl ementary measures, such as infrastructure provision and legislative changes. In doing so, these measures can help to more effectively achieve the outcomes you want to see in the transport system, such as reduced congestion, reduced emissions and better health outcomes . Regulation You have a range of tools in the transport regulatory system to deliver durable transport outcomes Regulation is indispensable to the proper functioning of economies and societies. Regulation underpins markets, create an enabling environment for firms and individuals, protect the rights and safety of citizens , and ensure the delivery of public goods and services. The system is comprised of primary and secondary legislation (which includes regulations, rules, and other instruments ). Some transport regulation involves the direct prohibition or authorisation of some commercial activity. Foreign ships are explicitly prohibited from carrying coastal cargo, except in specified circumstances and with specific approval., Airlines operating scheduled international services require an international air services licence, issued within parameters set out in Air Services In , the total tolling revenue raised from these roads was . million, with million going to collection costs and . million to repay debt https:www.nzta.govt.nzassetsresourcesannual report nzt a waka kotahi annual report .pdf RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS
Primary legislation Temporary changes The intention is for agreement to be reached with owners to avoid the need for compulsory acquisition. Waka Kotahi will only be able to use the simplified land acquisition processes for temporary rights in land for access and occupation required while the recovery works are undertaken. It will need to rely on existing PWA processes if compulsory acquisition for freehold title is required for works undertaken under its proposed OiC. No modification to Te Ture Whenua Maori Act is proposed as part of these t emporary changes. Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail will need to comply with this Act as part of the repair and rebuild works.
Prior to become CEO in March , was d eputy Chief Executive of Greater Wellington since September , as well as serving as General Manager Environment, General Manager of People Customer and a number of other environmental roles at Greater Wellington in a career with the Council dating back to .
Prior to being Acting Chief Executive, Ruth led the Policy Group, which is responsible for leading our advice on a range of transport policy issues, including maritime and freight, aviation, transport resilience and security, urban development and public transport, and policies to support improved environmental outcomes and climate change adaptation.
Prior to joining the Ministry he held senior executive roles at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Treasury, and in the health sector. David has also held leadership roles at Auckland Council, United Kingdom local government, and the Ministry of Education.
Prior to the COVID pandemic, of New Zealands airfreight was carried in the bellyhold of passenger aircraft, with the remaining carried by cargoonly freighters. PreCOVID there were approximately international passenger flights into and out of New Zealand per week.
Priorities . Continue to maximise efficiencies and value for money across the transport system.
Priority Minimise demand Manage the reasons why transport is needed and the context in which transport demand is derived, to deliver the same access to services and activities with less poweredmotorised transport. Priority Enable modal shift Enable the choice of transport modes with the lowest environmental impacts, and enable easier ch anges between modes. Priority Optimise system efficiency Increase all efficiency measures of transport modes and their use, particularly in terms of gCO km for passengers and gCO tkm for freight. Priority Increase capacity After optimisation of the first three steps, any capacity increases that are required should be prioritised to the most efficient and sustainable modes.
Privacy and transparency statement
Private Bag , Parliament Buildings, Wellington New Zealand m.woodministers.govt.nz www.beehive.govt.nz
Private andor voluntary sector board appointments held (current and previous, include years
Proactive Release International Maritime Organisation Climate Change Negotiation Mandate
Proactive Release
Proactive Release Section Description of ground (a) as release would be likely to prejudice the security or defence of New Zealand or the international relations of the New Zealand Government (b) as release would be likely to prejudice the entrusting of information to the Government of New Zealand on a basis of confidence by (i) the Government of any other country or any agency of such aGovernment; or (ii) any international organisation (c) prejudice the maintenance of the law, including the prevention, investigation, and detection of o ffences, and the right to a fair trial ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information ()(ba)(i) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely to prejudice the supply of similar information, or information from the same source, and it is in the public ()(ba)(ii) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely otherwise to damage the public interest ()(f)(ii) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect collective and individual ministerial responsibility ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their du ty ()(h) to maintain legal professional privilege ()(i) to enable a Minister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry out, without prejudice or disadvantage, commercial activities ()(j) to enable a Mi nister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry on, without prejudice or disadvantage, negotiations (including commercial and industrial negotiations) This docu ment i s proactively r eleased by Te Manat Waka the Ministry of Transport. Some informati on has been withhel d on the basis that it would not, if request ed under the Official Information Act (OIA), be releas ed. Where that is the case, the relevant section of the OIA has been noted and no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Listed below are the most commonly used grounds from the OIA. ACTIONS FROM TRANSPORT OFFICIALS MEETING
Proactive Release Section Description of ground (a) as release would be likely to prejudice the security or defence of New Zealand or the international relations of the New Zealand Government (b) as release would be likely to prejudice the entrusting of information to the Government of New Zealand on a basis of confidence by (i) the Government of any other country or any agency of such aGovernment; or (ii) any international organisation (c) prejudice the maintenance of the law, including the prevention, investigation, and detection of o ffences, and the right to a fair trial ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information ()(ba)(i) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely to prejudice the supply of similar information, or information from the same source, and it is in the public ()(ba)(ii) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely otherwise to damage the public interest ()(f)(ii) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect collective and individual ministerial responsibility ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their du ty ()(h) to maintain legal professional privilege ()(i) to enable a Minister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry out, without prejudice or disadvantage, commercial activities ()(j) to enable a Mi nister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry on, without prejudice or disadvantage, negotiations (including commercial and industrial negotiations) This docu ment i s proactively r eleased by Te Manat Waka the Ministry of Transport. Some informati on has been withhel d on the basis that it would not, if request ed under the Official Information Act (OIA), be releas ed. Where that is the case, the relevant section of the OIA has been noted and no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Listed below are the most commonly used grounds from the OIA. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT CONTENTS
Proactive Release Section Description of ground (a) as release would be likely to prejudice the security or defence of New Zealand or the international relations of the New Zealand Government (b) as release would be likely to prejudice the entrusting of information to the Government of New Zealand on a basis of confidence by (i) the Government of any other country or any agency of such aGovernment; or (ii) any international organisation (c) prejudice the maintenance of the law, including the prevention, investigation, and detection of o ffences, and the right to a fair trial ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information ()(ba)(i) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely to prejudice the supply of similar information, or information from the same source, and it is in the public ()(ba)(ii) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely otherwise to damage the public interest ()(f)(ii) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect collective and individual ministerial responsibility ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their du ty ()(h) to maintain legal professional privilege ()(i) to enable a Minister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry out, without prejudice or disadvantage, commercial activities ()(j) to enable a Mi nister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry on, without prejudice or disadvantage, negotiations (including commercial and industrial negotiations) This docu ment i s proactively r eleased by Te Manat Waka the Ministry of Transport. Some informati on has been withhel d on the basis that it would not, if request ed under the Official Information Act (OIA), be releas ed. Where that is the case, the relevant section of the OIA has been noted and no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Listed below are the most commonly used grounds from the OIA. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT CONTENTS RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending August i RESTRICTED Contents Actions from transport officials meeting . Upcoming briefings . Key priorities . Cabinet papers . Cabinet papers led by other agencies . Transport Crown entity and state owned entity (SOE) updates . PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
Proactive Release Section Description of ground (a) as release would be likely to prejudice the security or defence of New Zealand or the international relations of the New Zealand Government (b) as release would be likely to prejudice the entrusting of information to the Government of New Zealand on a basis of confidence by (i) the Government of any other country or any agency of such aGovernment; or (ii) any international organisation (c) prejudice the maintenance of the law, including the prevention, investigation, and detection of o ffences, and the right to a fair trial ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information ()(ba)(i) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely to prejudice the supply of similar information, or information from the same source, and it is in the public ()(ba)(ii) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely otherwise to damage the public interest ()(f)(ii) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect collective and individual ministerial responsibility ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their du ty ()(h) to maintain legal professional privilege ()(i) to enable a Minister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry out, without prejudice or disadvantage, commercial activities ()(j) to enable a Mi nister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry on, without prejudice or disadvantage, negotiations (including commercial and industrial negotiations) This docu ment i s proactively r eleased by Te Manat Waka the Ministry of Transport. Some informati on has been withhel d on the basis that it would not, if request ed under the Official Information Act (OIA), be releas ed. Where that is the case, the relevant section of the OIA has been noted and no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Listed below are the most commonly used grounds from the OIA. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT RESTRICTED RESTRICTED Page of s ()(j) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT IN CONFIDENCE Page of ANNEX CABINET MINUTE IMO: CLIMATE CHANGE NEGOTIATION MANDATE (DEV MIN) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of
Proactive Release Section Description of ground (a) as release would be likely to prejudice the security or defence of New Zealand or the international relations of the New Zealand Government (b) as release would be likely to prejudice the entrusting of information to the Government of New Zealand on a basis of confidence by (i) the Government of any other country or any agency of such aGovernment; or (ii) any international organisation (c) prejudice the maintenance of the law, including the prevention, investigation, and detection of o ffences, and the right to a fair trial ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information ()(ba)(i) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely to prejudice the supply of similar information, or information from the same source, and it is in the public ()(ba)(ii) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely otherwise to damage the public interest ()(f)(ii) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect collective and individual ministerial responsibility ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their du ty ()(h) to maintain legal professional privilege ()(i) to enable a Minister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry out, without prejudice or disadvantage, commercial activities ()(j) to enable a Mi nister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry on, without prejudice or disadvantage, negotiations (including commercial and industrial negotiations) This docu ment i s proactively r eleased by Te Manat Waka the Ministry of Transport. Some informati on has been withhel d on the basis that it would not, if request ed under the Official Information Act (OIA), be released. W here that is the case, the relevant section of the OIA has been noted and no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Listed below are the most commonly used grounds from the OIA.
Proactive Release Section Description of ground (a) as release would be likely to prejudice the security or defence of New Zealand or the international relations of the New Zealand Government (b) as release would be likely to prejudice the entrusting of information to the Government of New Zealand on a basis of confidence by (i) the Government of any other country or any agency of such aGovernment; or (ii) any international organisation (c) prejudice the maintenance of the law, including the prevention, investigation, and detection of o ffences, and the right to a fair trial ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information ()(ba)(i) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely to prejudice the supply of similar information, or information from the same source, and it is in the public ()(ba)(ii) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely otherwise to damage the public interest ()(f)(ii) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect collective and individual ministerial responsibility ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their du ty ()(h) to maintain legal professional privilege ()(i) to enable a Minister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry out, without prejudice or disadvantage, commercial activities ()(j) to enable a Mi nister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry on, without prejudice or disadvantage, negotiations (including commercial and industrial negotiations) This docu ment i s proactively r eleased by Te Manat Waka the Ministry of Transport. Some informati on has been withhel d on the basis that it would not, if request ed under the Official Information Act (OIA), be released. W here that is the case, the relevant section of the OIA has been noted and no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Listed below are the most commonly used grounds from the OIA. () ) ovsnmd Document Out of Scope Out of Scope PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA ovsnmd Out of Scope PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA I N C O N F I D E N C E ECOMIN Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Independent Review Function for Aviation: Scope of Decisions and Review Fees Portfolio Transport On December , the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee: noted that the Civil Aviation Act (the Act), which comes into force on April , introduces a new independent review function (IRF) to enable applicants to seek expert independent reviews of decisions made by (or on behalf of) the Director of Civil Aviation (the Director); noted that the Act leaves the scope of decisions to be covered by the IRF to be specified in regulations, and that the Ministry of Transport has consulted publicly on options for setting the scope of the IRF ECOMIN; agreed that the scope of reviewable decisions will comprise: . the key relevant categories of decisions taken by (or on behalf of) the Director that are appealable to the District Court; . decisions taken by (or on behalf of) the Director on the granting of individual exemptions from regulations and the Civil Aviation Rules; noted that the Ministry of Transport has also publicly consulted on options to partially recover the costs of IRF reviews from applicants ECOMIN; agreed that a twotiered fixed fee be applied of , (excl. GST) per IRF review application for individuals, and , (excl. GST) per IRF review application for organisations; invited the Minister of Transport to issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office to create new regulations to set: . the scope of reviewable decisions, as set out in paragraph above; . fees to partially recovery the costs of reviews, as set out in paragraph above; authorised the Minister of Transport to make final decisions on the detail of the regulations and to make changes, consistent with the policy intent of the paper under ECOSUB, in response to any issues that arise during the drafting of the regulations; I N C O N F I D E N C E gmtqxxq Document PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA I N C O N F I D E N C E ECOMIN noted that the Minister of Transport intends to report back to the Cabinet Legislation Committee seeking approval of regulations setting the scope of the IRF and IRF review fees by the end of February . Rachel Clarke Committee Secretary Present: Officials present from: Rt Hon Winston Peters (Chair) Hon David Seymour Hon Shane Jones Hon Brooke van Velden Hon Chris Bishop Hon Simeon Brown Hon Erica Stanford Hon Louise Upston Hon Judith Collins KC Hon Todd McClay Hon Tama Potaka Hon Matt Doocey Hon Simon Watts Hon Melissa Lee Hon Penny Simmonds Hon Chris Penk Hon Nicola Grigg Hon Andrew Bayly Hon Andrew Hoggard Hon Mark PattersonOffice of the Prime Minister Office of Hon Chris Bishop Office of Hon Erica Stanford Office of Hon Simon Watts Officials Committee for ECO I N C O N F I D E N C E gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCEIN CONFIDENCE Office of the Minister of Transport Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Independent review function for aviation: scope of decisions and review fees Proposal I seek the Committees agreement to create regulations to: set the scope of the new independent review function (IRF) established by the Civil Aviation Act (the Act) apply fees to partially recover the costs of IRF reviews from review applicants. Relation to government priorities The Government is committed to rebuilding the economy, easing the cost of living and delivering the frontline services New Zealanders need in an efficient way. The IRF will enhance the rights of aviation participants by providing them with an alternative avenue to challenge regulatory decisions, and support improvements in the performance of the civil aviation regulatory system over time. Executive summary I have considered the outcome of public consultation on the decisions to be covered by the IRF and propose that the scope of the IRF comprise: the key relevant categories of decisions taken by (or on behalf of) the Director of Civil Aviation (the Director) that are appealable to the District Court decisions taken by (or on behalf of) the Director on the granting of individual exemptions from regulations and the Civil Aviation Rules (the Rules). Following public consultation on options to partially recover the costs of IRF reviews from applicants, I propose that fixed fees be set at , (excl. GST) per review for individuals, and , (excl. GST) per review for organisations. I seek Cabinets authorisation to issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) to create new regulations to bring these proposals into effect . I intend to ask the Cabinet Legislation Committee (LEG) to approve regulations setting the scope of the IRF and IRF review fees by the end of February . Background The IRF will carry out reviews of specified decisions made by (or on behalf of) the Director from April when the Act comes into force. The function was created in response to stakeholder concerns expressed in submissions on the Civil Aviation Bill about the time and costs of appealing decisions made by the Director through the courts, and the court systems lack of expertise on civil aviation matters. The IRF will provide an expert independent review option that is faster and less costly than the court system. It will also promote transparency, timeliness and accountability, and support improvements in decision making over time. The final decision in response to each IRF review rests with the Director. This is to ensure that the Director retains the ultimate responsibility for the safe and secure operation of the civil aviation system. gmtqxxq Document PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCEThe Act requires that regulations specify the scope of the function The Act leaves the categories of decisions to be covered by the IRF to be specified in regulations. The IRF will not c over medical certification decisions, as these are already reviewable through the medical convener procedure that the Act continues . In July , Cabinet agreed that the Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) release a consultation document and seek stakeholder feedback on three options to set the scope of the IRF ECO MIN refers. The consultation was undertaken over four weeks to September . The three IRF scope options consulted on were: . Option includes the relevant categories of Director decisions that are appealable to the District Court . This option focuses reviews primarily on decisions centred on aviation documents that affect the ability of individualsentities to operate within the civil aviation system . Around , decisions within this scope are made annually. . Option based on Option , with the addition of decisions on the granting of individual exemptions from regulations and Rules. Fewer than decisions on exemptions are made each year . . Option includes all regulatory Director decisions, except where inappropriate or inapplicable. Around , decisions a year are covered by this option. Submissions on the scope of the function expressed a range of views The Ministry received submissions on the options for the scope of the IRF three from individuals and from civil aviation organisations, including from the Civil Aviation Authority (C AA). The CAA indicated it strongly supports participants being able to challenge decisions that have a major bearing on their ability to participate in the sector in a way that is more accessible t han the court system . It submitt ed that the IRF scope should be limited to significant decisions that are appealable under the Act (effectively Option ) . It submitted that Option would not support the policy intent for the IRF because there is a significant risk that the function would be overloaded with the demand for reviews of more minor decisions, which would inhibit the timely reviews of more impactful decisions. The relevant categories of appealable decisions are set out in s ection of the Act. Some categories of Director decisions w ould be excluded from Option , as it would be inappropriate for the IRF to review them eg medical certification decisions section () (g) (k) given these are covered by the medical convener function; and decisions relating to investigation and enforcement section ( ) (e)(f) where there is a need for the CAA to act promptly to address public safety or security risks. Exemption decisions applying to any class of aviation participant, aeronautical product, aircraft, aerodrome, aviation related service or other thing section ()(b) of the Act would not be reviewable, as these class exemptions are deemed secondary legislation under section (), and thus they are effectively part of the settings of the regulatory framework. Any decisions on individual exem ptions from medical standards and certification Rule requirements would also be excluded under this option. In addition to the exclusion of the medical certification decisions and decisions relating to security, monitoring, investigation and enforcement, other exclusions under Option would include decisions governed by the Solicitor Generals prosecution guidelines or established Court processes (in the case of infringement offence notices) , and decisions on pecuniary matters relating to invoicing and payment of fees and charges . gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Three organisations favoured Option on the grounds it would enable reviews of decisions on exemptions while ensuring the demand for reviews would be likely to be manageable. Five organisations indicated they favoured Option to ensure a wider range of decisions would be reviewable. Discussions officials later held with some of these submitters, however, clarified that many of the decisions they advocated for inclusion would in practice be covered under Option (for example because they were applications for exemptions to Rules, so would fall within the scope of Option ). The three submissions from individuals offered no comment relevant to the scope options. I consider O ption to be the most appropriate option to achieve the policy intent of the function Option most effectively meets the policy intent of providing fast and accessible reviews, while supporting impactful improvements in decision making in the aviation regulatory system over time. Like Option , Option provides a faster and less costly avenue to challenge appealable decisions than going through the courts. However, Option also includes decisions on individual exemptions a feature supported by many submitters and thereby provides more complete coverage of decisions that could have a significant impact on aviation participants. Option , with its broad scope including lower order decisions, is less likely to facilitate the faster review pathway that the IRF is intended to provide, as there are risks that the likely higher demand for reviews under this option would: limit the reviewers capacity to deliver timely reviews of the categories of decisions that have the most significant impact on applicants (this wasacknowledged by several submitters) im pose demands on CAA resources that intrude on the agencys day today regulatory operations, and limit the Directors ability to make final decisions on reviewers recommendations within the statutory time frame dilute the incentives for participants to resolve issues with the CAA beforeescalating them to the level of an IRF review. Implementing Option minimises the risks to managing the IRF within available resources. This will be especially important during the initial months of its operation, when the process is new and reviewers are settling into their respective roles. The risk of overwhelming the function might be mitigated to some extent by the intended introduction of partial cost recovery for reviews (see following section), but it could not be expected to significantly limit the prospect of numerous requests for reviews of more minor decisions. This is because IRF fees are to be set at a (partial cost recovery) level that does not present an undue barrier to applicants. Some submitters suggested introducing a materiality threshold to reduce the risk of applications for reviews under Option overwhelming the IRF. However, this would not be possible as reviewers have no powers under the Act to have the discretion to make judgements as to what decisions that have a material impact on an aviation participant (and therefore should be subject to an IRF review). gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCEThe Ministry has also completed public consultation on cost recovery options In September , Cabinet agreed that the Ministry should publicly consult on options to partially recover the costs of the IRF through application fees for reviews. A partial cost recovery approach reflects that applicants are the primary beneficiaries of the review function, while enabling review fees to be kept at a relatively affordable level for sector participants. ECO MIN refers The consultation document set out three options and fee levels to partially recover the costs of IRF reviews: Option a single fixed fee for all participants, set at , (excl. GST) per application. Option a two tiered fixed fee of , (excl. GST) per application for individuals, and , (excl. GST) per application for organisations preferred option. Option an hourly fee up to a cap, comprising a base fee of (excl. GST), plus an hourly fee of (excl. GST), up to a cap of , (excl. GST) for individuals and , (excl. GST) for organisations. The Ministry undertook four weeks public consultation during October . Three submissions were received one in favour of each of Option and Option , while the third submission favoured a variable approach, based on the outcome of a review, with no fees being applied at all in cases where the review is successful and a Directors decision is reversed. I consider Option to be the most appropriate option for partial cost recovery I consider that the two tier fixed fee approach of Option is more appropriate than the uniform fee structure under Option as: decisions affecting organisations are likely to be more technically complex and therefore more time consuming to review than decisions affecting individuals organisations can generally be expected to have a greater capacity to paythan individuals. Option also utilises a fixed fee structure that is more straightforward to administer than the hourly fees under Option and would thus provide more certainty about potential costs for applicants. It would also likely raise (marginally) more revenue than either Option or Option . Next steps Subject to your agreement, I will issue drafting instructions for the P arliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) t o create regulations setting the scope of the IRF and review fees proposed in this paper . I also intend to bring a paper to the Cabinet Appointment s and Honours Committee (APH) on the appointment of IRF reviewers in February . gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCECost ofliving Implications The scope of reviewable decisions for the IRF and the review fees proposed in this paper will not have a material impact on the cost ofliving. Financial Implications The residual costs of the operation of the IRF (not covered by review fees) will be met by the Ministry out of Crown funding approved in Budget for the implementation of the Act . Legislative Implications Section of the Act provides that the scope of decisions to be covered by the IRF is to be specified in regulations. Section () of the Act provides statutory authority for the Government to apply IRF review fees. PCO has been consulted on the upcoming work to deliver the regulations in February . Impact Analysis A Regulatory and Cost Recovery Impact Statement has been completed and is attached at Appendix . It has been reviewed by the Ministrys Regulatory Impact Analysis Review Panel. The panel considers that the information and analysis summarised in the statement meets the criteria necessary for Ministers to make informed decisions on the proposals in this paper. Climate Implications of Policy Assessment The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team has confirmed that the CIPA requirements do not apply to these proposal s, as the threshold for significance is not met. Population Implications There are no population implications associated with this paper. Human Rights There are no human rights implications. Regulations developed to set the scope of decisions covered by the IRF and review fees will be consistent with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act . Use of E xternal Resources The Ministry has not engaged external resources to develop the proposals outlined in this paper. Consultation The following agencies were consulted on the contents of this paper: the Ministry of Justice, the Treasury, the Parliamentary Counsel Office and the Civil Aviation Authority. The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet w as informed. Communications Once the Executive Council approves the two sets of regulations, they will be notified in the New Zealand Gazette and the Ministry will provide information on the Ministrys website and inform key stakeholders. gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCEProactive Release The Ministry will proactively release this paper within business days after it has been confirmed by Cabinet. It will be subject to redactions, as appropriate, under the Official Information Act . Recommendations The Minister of Transport recommends that the Committee: note that the Civil Aviation Act (the Act), which comes into force on April , introduces a new independent review function (IRF) to enable applicants to seek expert independent reviews of decisions made by (or on behalf of) the Director of Civil Aviation (the Director) note that the Act leaves the scope of decisions to be covered by the IRF to be specified in regulations, and that the Ministry of Transport has consulted publicly on options for setting the scope of the IRF ECO MIN refers agree that the scope of reviewable decisions will comprise: . the key relevant categories of decisions taken by (or on behalf of) the Director that are appealable to the District Court . decisions taken by (or on behalf of) the Director on the granting of individual exemptions from regulations and the Civil Aviation Rules note that the Ministry has also publicly consulted on options to partially recover the costs of IRF reviews from applicants ECO MIN refers agree that a twotiered fixed fee be applied of , (excl. GST) per IRF review application for individuals, and , (excl. GST) per IRF review application for organisations invite the Minister of Transport to issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office to create new regulations to set: . the scope of reviewable decisions, as set out in recommendation above . fees to partially recovery the costs of reviews, as set out in recommendation above authorise the Minister of Transport to make final decisions on the detail of the regulations and to make changes, consistent with the policy intent of this paper, in response to any issues that arise during the drafting of the regulations note that the Minister of Transport intends to ask the Cabinet Legislation Committee to approv e regulations setting the scope of the IRF and IRF review fees by the end of February . Authorised for lodgement Hon S imeon Brown Minister of Transport gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Proactive Release Section Description of ground (a) as release would be likely to prejudice the security or defence of New Zealand or the international relations of the New Zealand Government (b) as release would be likely to prejudice the entrusting of information to the Government of New Zealand on a basis of confidence by (i) the Government of any other country or any agency of such aGovernment; or (ii) any international organisation (c) prejudice the maintenance of the law, including the prevention, investigation, and detection of o ffences, and the right to a fair trial ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information ()(ba)(i) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely to prejudice the supply of similar information, or information from the same source, and it is in the public ()(ba)(ii) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely otherwise to damage the public interest ()(f)(ii) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect collective and individual ministerial responsibility ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their du ty ()(h) to maintain legal professional privilege ()(i) to enable a Minister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry out, without prejudice or disadvantage, commercial activities ()(j) to enable a Mi nister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry on, without prejudice or disadvantage, negotiations (including commercial and industrial negotiations) This docu ment i s proactively r eleased by Te Manat Waka the Ministry of Transport. Some informati on has been withhel d on the basis that it would not, if request ed under the Official Information Act (OIA), be released. W here that is the case, the relevant section of the OIA has been noted and no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Listed below are the most commonly used grounds from the OIA. I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E In Confidence Office of the Minister of Transport Cabinet Economic Policy Committee
Proactive Release Section Description of ground (a) as release would be likely to prejudice the security or defence of New Zealand or the international relations of the New Zealand Government (b) as release would be likely to prejudice the entrusting of information to the Government of New Zealand on a basis of confidence by (i) the Government of any other country or any agency of such aGovernment; or (ii) any international organisation (c) prejudice the maintenance of the law, including the prevention, investigation, and detection of o ffences, and the right to a fair trial ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information ()(ba)(i) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely to prejudice the supply of similar information, or information from the same source, and it is in the public ()(ba)(ii) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely otherwise to damage the public interest ()(f)(ii) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect collective and individual ministerial responsibility ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their du ty ()(h) to maintain legal professional privilege ()(i) to enable a Minister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry out, without prejudice or disadvantage, commercial activities ()(j) to enable a Mi nister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry on, without prejudice or disadvantage, negotiations (including commercial and industrial negotiations) This docu ment i s proactively r eleased by Te Manat Waka the Ministry of Transport. Some informati on has been withhel d on the basis that it would not, if request ed under the Official Information Act (OIA), be released. W here that is the case, the relevant section of the OIA has been noted and no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Listed below are the most commonly used grounds from the OIA. I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C EIn Confidence Office of the Minister of Transport Cabinet Legislation Committee Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Regulations Proposal This paper seeks authorisation for submission to the Executive Council of the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Regulations (the Regulations). Executive Summary The Regulations implement various changes to the Clean Vehicle Standard (the Standard), as decided by Cabinet on Monday July (CAB Min, CBC MIN refer). These changes result from a review of the Standard that I was required to undertake und er section A of the Land Transport Act (the Act) (the Review). A review of the achievability of the CO targets for vehicle importers under the Standard was also included in the National Partys manifesto commitments. The Regulations amend the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Regulations (the Principal Regulations) to: . align the CO targets for vehicle importers under the Standard with Australia, . exclud e disability vehicles from the Standard and improve the definition of disability vehicle to limit fraudulent exemptions , . amend the weight adjusting formulae slopes for and , . amend the minimum and maximum weights for light commercial vehicles, and . correct an error relating to publication dates. A waiver of the day rule is sought relating to the changes for disability vehicles. No compliance issues have been identified, and I consider that the requirements in section C() of the Act are met . Policy The Standard reduces the average CO emissions of vehicles that are imported through annual CO targets that progressively decrease . Vehicle importers are required to meet the targets each year, on average, across the vehicles they import. The framework for the Standard is set out in the Principal Regulations and Part s and of the Act. xxfpyy PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E The Government is committed to retaining the Standard to support us to achieve New Zealands net zero climate goal by accelerating the supply of low and zero emission vehicles. However, to better realise the potential of the Standard and to reduce mot oring costs for New Zealanders, the Government committed to the Review to ensure that the Standards targets are achievable. The Regulations implement Cabinets decisions through the following changes to the Principal Regulations : (CAB Min, CBC MIN refer) . . The CO targets for the Standard are reset to align with Australia and are: Year Passenger vehicles ( ie cars and SUVs)
Proactive Release Section Description of ground (a) as release would be likely to prejudice the security or defence of New Zealand or the international relations of the New Zealand Government (b) as release would be likely to prejudice the entrusting of information to the Government of New Zealand on a basis of confidence by (i) the Government of any other country or any agency of such aGovernment; or (ii) any international organisation (c) prejudice the maintenance of the law, including the prevention, investigation, and detection of o ffences, and the right to a fair trial ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information ()(ba)(i) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely to prejudice the supply of similar information, or information from the same source, and it is in the public ()(ba)(ii) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely otherwise to damage the public interest ()(f)(ii) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect collective and individual ministerial responsibility ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their du ty ()(h) to maintain legal professional privilege ()(i) to enable a Minister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry out, without prejudice or disadvantage, commercial activities ()(j) to enable a Mi nister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry on, without prejudice or disadvantage, negotiations (including commercial and industrial negotiations) This docu ment i s proactively r eleased by Te Manat Waka the Ministry of Transport. Some informati on has been withhel d on the basis that it would not, if request ed under the Official Information Act (OIA), be released. W here that is the case, the relevant section of the OIA has been noted and no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Listed below are the most commonly used grounds from the OIA. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Proactive Release Section Description of ground (a) as release would be likely to prejudice the security or defence of New Zealand or the international relations of the New Zealand Government (b) as release would be likely to prejudice the entrusting of information to the Government of New Zealand on a basis of confidence by (i) the Government of any other country or any agency of such aGovernment; or (ii) any international organisation (c) prejudice the maintenance of the law, including the prevention, investigation, and detection of o ffences, and the right to a fair trial ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information ()(ba)(i) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely to prejudice the supply of similar information, or information from the same source, and it is in the public ()(ba)(ii) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely otherwise to damage the public interest ()(f)(ii) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect collective and individual ministerial responsibility ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their du ty ()(h) to maintain legal professional privilege ()(i) to enable a Minister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry out, without prejudice or disadvantage, commercial activities ()(j) to enable a Mi nister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry on, without prejudice or disadvantage, negotiations (including commercial and industrial negotiations) This docu ment i s proactively r eleased by Te Manat Waka the Ministry of Transport. Some informati on has been withhel d on the basis that it would not, if request ed under the Official Information Act (OIA), be released. W here that is the case, the relevant section of the OIA has been noted and no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Listed below are the most commonly used grounds from the OIA. Page of Associate Minister of Transport Weekly Report week commencing August Associate Ministers comments: PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Proactive Release Section Description of ground (a) as release would be likely to prejudice the security or defence of New Zealand or the international relations of the New Zealand Government (b) as release would be likely to prejudice the entrusting of information to the Government of New Zealand on a basis of confidence by (i) the Government of any other country or any agency of such aGovernment; or (ii) any international organisation (c) prejudice the maintenance of the law, including the prevention, investigation, and detection of o ffences, and the right to a fair trial ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information ()(ba)(i) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely to prejudice the supply of similar information, or information from the same source, and it is in the public ()(ba)(ii) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely otherwise to damage the public interest ()(f)(ii) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect collective and individual ministerial responsibility ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their du ty ()(h) to maintain legal professional privilege ()(i) to enable a Minister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry out, without prejudice or disadvantage, commercial activities ()(j) to enable a Mi nister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry on, without prejudice or disadvantage, negotiations (including commercial and industrial negotiations) This docu ment i s proactively r eleased by Te Manat Waka the Ministry of Transport. Some informati on has been withhel d on the basis that it would not, if request ed under the Official Information Act (OIA), be released. W here that is the case, the relevant section of the OIA has been noted and no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Listed below are the most commonly used grounds from the OIA. UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of December OC Hon Simeon Brown Action required by: Minister of Transport Friday, January SETTING OF SPEED LIMITS RULE REVIEW TERMS OF REFERENCE Purpose Seek your approval of the Terms of Reference for the review of the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits . Key p oints The Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) has prepared a draft Terms of Reference for a review of the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits (the Rule) for your approval . The Governments day plan includes a commitment to Stop blanket speed limit reductions and start work on replacing the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits . On December you announced amendment s to the Rule , including revok ing the deadline for road controlling authorities (RCAs) and regional transport committees (RTCs) to submit their speed management plans to the NZ Transport Agency ( NZTA ). You have signalled your intention to draft a new rule t o ensure RCAs and RTCs take a more balanced approach to setting speed limits and consider economic impacts, travel times, and the views of road users and local communities alongside safety when making decisions. You have also signalled your preference for variable speed limits approaching schools at drop off and pick up times. The draft Terms of Reference and proposed timeline in Annex outline s a targeted review that considers the issues you have raised . We have also recommended considering some broader matters to achieve your outcomes, such as the roles and responsibilities under the rule, including in relation to the Speed Management Committee , the Director of Land Transport and the NZTAs guidance. The review is intended to result in a new rule and associated guidance. The Ministry will lead the policy development process and the NZTA will draft the rule and make associated changes to its guidance as required. Following your feedback on th e Terms of Reference , we can amend the scope of the work as required. We would also recommend publishing the Terms of Reference on the Ministry s website once approved. Document PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of ANNEX TERMS OF REFERENCE PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Proactive Release This document is proactively released by Te Manat Waka the Ministry of Transport. Some information has been withheld on the basis that it would not, if requested under the Official Information Act (OIA), be released. Where that is the case, the relevant section of the OIA has been noted and no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Listed below are the most commonly used grounds from the OIA. Section Description of ground (a) as release would be likely to prejudice the security or defence of New Zealand or the international relations of the New Zealand Government (b) as release would be likely to prejudice the entrusting of information to the Government of New Zealand on a basis of confidence by (i) the Government of any other country or any agency of such a Gov ernment; or (ii) any international organisation (c) prejudice the maintenance of the law, including the prevention, investigation, and detection of offences, and the right to a fair trial ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) to protect information where the making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information ()(ba)(i) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely to prejudice the supply of similar information, or information from the same source, and it is in the public ()(ba)(ii) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely otherwise to damage the public interest ()(f)(ii) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect collective and individual ministerial responsibility ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the cou rse of their duty ()(h) to maintain legal professional privilege ()(i) to enable a Minister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry out, without prejudice or disadvantage, commercial activities PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA ()(j) to enable a Minister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry on, without prejudice or disadvantage, negotiations (including commercial and industrial negotiations)
Proactive documents released
Proactive release April
Proactive release July
Proactive release June
Proactive release October
Proactive release January
Proactive release th March
Proactive release May
Proactive release October
Proactive release September
Proactive release of Cabinet material and advice papers
Proactive release of Cabinet paper and briefings relating to the Enabling Drone Integration discussion document
Proactive release of advice relating to improving our harmful emissions standards
Proactive release of documents from the development of GPS
Proactive release: Entity form review
Proactive release: Gisborne Line Business Case Advice to Ministers
Proactive release: KiwiRails purchase of new interisland ferries
Proactive release: Official information regarding the entity form review of KiwiRail and New Zealand Railways Corporation
Proactive release: Railway Track User Charges
Proactive release: Review on Auckland Metro Rail System Issues
Process Status for metro rail Initial Baseline Exercise KiwiRail has not proposed any savings from metro rail initiatives. Budget Capital Pipeline Review process KiwiRail has identified several cost pr essures for metro rail in both Wellington and Auckland including: m for the Auckland Rail Network Rebuild (support in full) m for Wellington substation renewals (support in full) Auckland and Wellington Network Management Plan shortfalls (support .m for ) catch up renewals in Auckland and Wellington ( support m for only ) The Budget process for new spending (operating) The Minister of Finance did not invite KiwiRail to submit into this process. Consultation and finalising GPS The draft GPS signals metro rail operating costs will continue to be co funded from the public transport infrastructure activity class. The preparation of the Rail Network Investment Plan KiwiRail need s to submit to you a RNIP by June that reflects the GPS and funding allocated to metro rail Additional funding is required to ensure reliability of metro rail services s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of KiwiRail has submitted four cost pressure bids via the Capital Pipeline Review that relate to the metro passenger network. All four are focused on reducing the risk of future service disruption, and are summarised below: . Completing the Auckland Rail Network Rebuild would avoid further line closures to carry out this work following City Rail Link (CRL) opening and will enable the benefits of CRL to be realised. . Completing the Wellington metro substation renewals would avoid potential service disruptions from substation failures and will enable future improvements to service levels. . Meeting local funding shortfalls for Rail Network Management Plans would avoid deterioration of infrastructure and future service disruption. . Meeting the cost of catch up renewals in Auckland and Wellington would avoid operational restrictions, mitigate the risk of line closures in Wellington, and avoid service disruptions. The Auckland Rail Network Rebuild and Wellington substations cost pressures may be priorities for funding from the National Land Transport Fund Funding the Auckland Rail Network Rebuild (RNR) and Wellington substations projects are required to reduce the risk of network failure. In the case of the Auckland RNR there is also benefit of doing the work before CRL opens . KiwiRail has provided scaled options for both, which would mean
Procurement Guidance for Public Entities https:oag.parliament.nzp rocurement guidedocsprocu rement guide.pdf Public entities need to be clear about the overall objective of the procurement and select a procurement method that will giv e them the best value for money. To do this, public entities must have a detailed understanding of what they are p rocuring, the value and risk of the procurement, and how important the procurement is to achieving their overall goals and business strategy.
Productivity review There have been six new DTOs placed across Christchurch sites this year. The breakdown by site and recruitment round is: Site February recruitment round May recruitment round August recruitment round VTNZ Northwood VTNZ Jipcho Road VTNZ Lichfield Street VTNZ Rangiora Total Rangiora included as a Christchurch site due to proximity to the city and subsequent anticipated overflow to this site.
Productivity review approach and caveats NZTAs approach to reviewing productivity is being refined and enhanced. The current approach to review productivity involves converting the number of tests completed into total hours of tests completed (we do this because the number of tests completed isnt a highly accurate measure of productivity, due to the difference in time it takes to deliver a restricted vs. full licence test; this conversion equalises productivity where the proportion of full test may be higher than restricted tests). NZTA then averages the number of hours worked across the DTO Full Time Equivalents (FTE) to produce a baseline per FTE number of working hours. Average hours per DTO per week only represents a simplified indication of productivity. The analysis of FTE per location is based on where each DTO is contractually based, however DTOs do travel between sites. This is not accounted for here. (Continued over page)
Professor Ian Shaw (toxicology and biochemistry).
Programm e delivery performance Based on available information at the time of this review, the Review Team was able to form a view on the efficiency and effectiveness of approximately (.b) of the investment with a reasonable (or better) level of confidence. The most material aspects are discussed in the section below. The Review Team was informed that the delivery of works programmes in the final year of the funding period was impacted by Covid , which has also led to reduced delivery notably with the bridge and structures works programmes.
Programme (the Programme) following baselining and reprioritisation, Cabinet invited the
Programme : Decarbonising Transport
Programme : Transit p. Programme : Other Key Initiatives p. Project A: Auckland Light Rail p. Project A : Resource Management Act Reform p. Project C: Transit Framework p Project D : Reshaping Streets p. Project D : Christchurch Mass Transit p. Project E :: Northland Dry Dock p. Project E: Inter Regional Passenger Rail Select Committee Inquiry p. Project G : Auckland Transport Alignment Project Tmaki Makaurau Transport Plan p. Project J: Manukau Harbour Feasibility Study p.
Programme : Revenue and Investment
Programme : Other Key Initiatives
Programme : Other Key Initiatives Sep Dec Jan Mar Apr Jun Jul Sep Project A: Resource Management Reform: Influencing the design of the new resource management system and supporting the transition into the new system. Manager: Jess Ranger Placemaking and Urban Development Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a mediumhigh level of resourcing ( FTE)
Programme Programme description Regularity Evaluation activity complete plan indicative indicative . Transport Investment Input Cost Drivers The buying power of transport investment appears to be diminishing as many transport investment proposals are suffering from cost increases. This study aims at identifying the causes of recent changes in transport sector infrastructure costs. Findings fro m this study will provide insights that support decisions across the projectprogramme life cycle, including evaluations and reviews of transport investments. Oneoff Complete study and disseminate findings . The New Zealand Rail Plan The New Zealand Rail Plan outlines the Governments long term vision and priorities of New Zealands national rail network. The Plan includes a set of draft indicators which will be refined to support continuous monitoring and evaluation. Oneoff Supported the development of draft indicators Publish draft indicators in the New Zealand Rail Plan Continue to work with stakeholders to refine the indicator set Continue to work with stakeholders to refine the indicator set . The New Zealand Upgrade Project (NZUP) The NZUP includes investments on roads, rail and walking and cycling infrastructure to future proof economy. A benefitoutcome framework is required to capture the contribution of individual projects and overall programmes. Ongoing Support the development of a benefitoutcome framework To be defined To be defined . Public Transport Operating Model (PTOM) evaluation To improve understanding of the impact of PTOM on a range of outcomes, e.g. service performance, customer satisfaction with services. This evaluation would build on findings from a piece of research conducted in on bus operator employment conditions and wage rates in Auckland and Wellington . Oneoff Commenced in , an expansion of the project scope and impact of COVID on relevant parties have delayed the delivery of the evaluation to Complete evaluation and disseminate findings (carried over from ) . Impact of the reduction in blood alcohol limit for drivers A preliminary evaluation of the immediate and longterm impacts of the reduction to the drink drive limit for drivers, introduced in (youth drink drive limit) and (adult drink drive limit) . Existing data from Crash Analysis System (CAS) will be used. Oneoff Support the completion of the preliminary evaluation as a Master student research project
Programme Programme description Regularity Evaluation activity complete plan indicative indicative . Vehicle Licensing Reform (VLR ) evaluation As a result of the Ministrys Vehicle Licensing Reform (VLR), a number of changes were made to the WoF and CoF systems in , primarily around reducing the frequency at which inspections were required. These changes were expected to lead to savings of . billion over years, while having minimal safety impacts. Oneoff Initial project planning and scoping Complete evaluation and disseminate findings . Impact of the introduction of random roadside testing of drivers for drugs An evaluation of the immediate and medium term impacts of the anticipated introduction of random roadside testing of drivers for drugs. Ongoing (Multi year evaluation between ) Project scoping with partner agencies Support Waka Kotahi on the commissioning and development of the baseline study To be defined . Other policy evaluation Manage andor undertake evaluation of other transport policies. Oneoff Topic TBC Contributions to External Led Cross Agency Projects and Initiatives . Provincial Growth Fund (PGF) monitoring and evaluation MBIE has responsibility for administering this fund and lead the monitoring and evaluation work. As part of the Evaluation Advisory Group, we are responsible for providing input on the monitoring and evaluation approach, and contributing knowledge, information, data and technical advice. Ongoing Provided input and technical advice as required Provide input and technical advice as required Provide input and technical advice as required . Urban Growth Agenda (UGA) MHUD plays a lead role in the overall monitoring and reporting for the UGA. We are responsible for providing input to the development of and reporting against the performance framework. Ongoing Provided input to the development of and reporting against the performance framework Provide input and technical advice as required Provide input and technical advice as required Provide input and technical advice as required Support the implementation of the Evaluation Strategy . Improve access Use appropriate channels to disseminate evaluation findings to ensure that they are discoverable and accessible Ongoing Proactively disseminate findings to stakeholders Proactively disseminate findings to stakeholders Continue to build on work from previous year Continue to build on work from previous year
Programme Programme description Regularity Evaluation activity complete plan indicative indicative Develop a shared, opened platform to host transport related evaluation reports conducted or commissioned by different agencies Continue to promote awareness and use of the shared, opened platform Continue to promote awareness and use of the shared, opened platform . Improve governance Ensure sharing, integration and governance of key data and information products Ongoing Support the sector on development of common measure, indicators and analytical approaches Develop a repository of commonly used measures and indicators in transport evaluation Continue to expand the repository as needed . Invest in the right projects Ensure we invest in the right activities and projects Ongoing Incorporate evaluation concepts and processes into training Continue to build on work from previous year Continue to build on work from previous year . Facilitate collaboration Foster cross agency collaboration and relationship with the wider transport sector Ongoing Develop and publish Ministry of Transports evaluation work programme Update and publish work programme Update and publish work programme . Develop capacity and capability Ensure that the sector has access to the right skills and knowledge Ongoing Compile or develop evaluation templates and tools for the sector to use Continue to build on work from previous year Continue to build on work from previous year Investigate the feasibility of having a sector wide evaluation programme Investigate the feasibility of having a sector wide evaluation programme Develop a sector wide evaluation programme (dependent on the outcome of earlier investigation and discussion) Developed and delivered in house training exercises to cover the purpose of evaluation and the commissioning process Delivered inhouse training exercises to cover the purpose of evaluation and the commissioning process Continue to build on work from previous year Continue to build on work from previous year
Programme Programme description Regularity Evaluation activity complete plan indicative indicative Investment and Policy Level Evaluation Activities . Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) annual reporting GPS sets out how money from the National Land Transport Fund is allocated towards achieving the Governments transport priorities. Each GPS sets up the priorities for the following year period, and is reviewed and every years. Progress against GPS strategic priorities are reported annually. Ongoing Released Year annual report against GPS Proposed indicators included in draft GPS for public consultation Developed an ongoing monitoring and evaluation regime. Year annual report against GPS Continue to work with stakeholders to refine the indicator set as necessary Year annual report against GPS Continue to work with stakeholders to refine the indicator set as necessary Year annual report against GPS Continue to work with stakeholders to refine the indicator set as necessary Develop indicators for GPS . Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) evaluations reviews Up to two evaluations reviews are undertaken each year to: ) further improve understanding of the impact and effectiveness of GPS, and ) support the continuous improvement of the GPS and the transport investment appraisal system. A review of the approach of value for money Oneoff Review commenced, however, i mpact of COVID on relevant parties has delayed the delivery of the review to Complete review, disseminate findings , and develop implementation strategies A review of state highway maintenance investment Oneoff Complete review and disseminate findings A review of the road safety activity class Oneoff Complete review and disseminate findings Topics TBC Oneoff Up to evaluations reviews (topics TBC) Up to evaluations reviews (topics TBC)
Programme Programme description Regularity Evaluation activity complete plan indicative indicative System Level Evaluation Activities . Transport Outcomes Framework Transport Indicators reporting The Transport Outcomes Framework was developed in to enable ongoing assessment of the transport system to assist Governments long term strategic planning and tracking. Ongoing Released the first annual reporting of the Transport Indicators (i.e. ) in April reporting Continue to work with stakeholders to refine the indicator set as necessary and embed the Framework reporting Continue to work with stakeholders to refine the indicator set as necessary and embed the Framework reporting Continue to work with stakeholders to refine the indicator set as necessary and embed the Framework Strategy Level Evaluation Activities . Road to Zero : New Zealands Road Safety Strategy for in December , Road to Zero outlines a plan to stop people being killed or injured on our roads. Ongoing Finalised and an outcomes framework as part of the Strategy and the st Action Plan Supported the development of data capture mechanisms Provide technical advice to support the compilation of the Year reporting Develop a new set of intervention indicators for the nd Action Plan Additional activities may be required to support the evaluation of the Strategy To be defined . Transport Emission Action Plan The Transport Emission Action Plan, currently under development, is a strategic plan for how New Zealand could reduce its transport emissions, and will form the basis of the transport section in the Governments Emission Reduction Plan for the emission budget. Ongoing Support the development of a monitoring and evaluation framework To be defined . Maritime Security Strategy in December , t he Maritime Security Strategy provides direction for New Zealands maritime security sector by setting out a vi sion for a sector that contributes to the advancement of national security though a common approach, coordinated inv estment decisions and effective resource prioritisation. Ongoing Supported the refinement of the monitoring framework Continue to work with stakeholders to refine the indicator set as necessary Continue to work with stakeholders to refine the indicator set as necessary Continue to work with stakeholders to refine the indicator set as necessary
Programme Programme description Regularity Evaluation activity complete plan indicative indicative . Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) annual reporting GPS sets out how money from the National Land Transport Fund is allocated towards achieving the Governments transport priorities. Each GPS sets up the priorities for the following year period, and is reviewed and every years. Progress against GPS strategic priorities are reported annually. Ongoing Year annual report against GPS Year annual report against GPS Year annual report against GPS Develop indicators for GPS Year annual report against GPS
Programme Programme description Regularity Evaluation activity complete plan indicative indicative . Transport Investment Input Cost Drivers The buying power of transport investment appears to be diminishing as many transport investment proposals are suffering from cost increases. This study aims at identifying the causes of recent changes in transport sector infrastructure costs. Findings from this study will provide insights that support decisions across the projectprogramme life cycle, including evaluations and reviews of transport investments. Oneoff Review commenced Complete study and disseminate findings . The New Zealand Rail Plan The New Zealand Rail Plan outlines the Governments longterm vision and priorities of New Zealands national rail network. The Plan includes a set of draft indicators which will be refined to support continuous monitoring and evaluation. Oneoff Publish draft indicators in the New Zealand Rail Plan Continue to work with stakeholders to finalise the indicator set . Public Transport Operating Model (PTOM) evaluation To improve understanding of the impact of PTOM on a range of outcomes, e.g. service performance, customer satisfaction with services. This evaluation would build on findings from a piece of research conducted in on bus operator employment conditions and wage rates in Auckland and Wellington. Oneoff Complete . Impact of the reduction in blood alcohol limit for drivers A preliminary evaluation of the immediate and longterm impacts of the reduction to the drink drive limit for drivers, introduced in (youth drink drive limit) and (adult drink drive limit). Existing data from Crash Analysis System (CAS) will be used. Oneoff Complete . Impact of alcohol interlocks sentencing on reoffending An evaluation on the effects of receiving an alcohol interlocks order on reoffending Oneoff Evaluation began Complete study and disseminate findings
Programme Programme description Regularity Evaluation activity complete plan indicative indicative . Vehicle Licensing Reform (VLR) evaluation As a result of the Ministrys Vehicle Licensing Reform (VLR), a number of changes were made to the WoF and CoF systems in , primarily around reducing the frequency at which inspections were required. These changes were expected to lead to savings of . billion over years, while having minimal safety impacts. Oneoff Initial project planning and scoping Complete phase evaluation (a joint evaluation with Waka Kotahi).
Programme Programme description Regularity Evaluation activity complete plan indicative indicative . Facilitate collaboration Foster crossagency collaboration and relationship with the wider transport sector Ongoing Develop and publish Ministry of Transports evaluation work programme Update and publish work programme Update and publish work programme Update and publish work programme . Develop capacity and capability Ensure that the sector has access to the right skills and knowledge Ongoing Compiled and developed evaluation templates and tools for internal external use Continue to build on work from previous year Continue to build on work from previous year Continue to build on work from previous year Initiated discussions with Waka Kotahi on a joint evaluation approach Establish joint evaluation projects with other agencies Investigate the feasibility of having a sectorwide evaluation programme Develop a sector wide evaluation programme (dependent on the outcome of earlier investigation and discussion) Develop a sector wide evaluation programme (dependent on the outcome of earlier investigation and discussion) Developed and delivered inhouse training exercises to cover the purpose of evaluation and the commissioning process Delivered inhouse training exercises to cover the purpose of evaluation and the commissioning process Continue to build on work from previous year Continue to build on work from previous year
Programme Programme description Regularity Evaluation activity complete plan indicative indicative Contributions to ExternalLed CrossAgency Projects and Initiatives . Provincial Growth Fund (PGF) monitoring and evaluation MBIE has responsibility for administering this fund and lead the monitoring and evaluation work. As part of the Evaluation Advisory Group, we are responsible for providing input on the monitoring and evaluation approach, and contributing knowledge, information, data and technical advice. Ongoing Provided input and technical advice as required Provide input and technical advice as required . Urban Growth Agenda (UGA) Ministry of Housing and Urban Development plays a lead role in the overall monitoring and reporting for the UGA. We are responsible for providing input to the development of and reporting against the performance framework. Ongoing Provided input to the development of and reporting against the performance framework Provide input and technical advice as required Provide input and technical advice as required Provide input and technical advice as required Support the implementation of the Evaluation Strategy . Improve access Use appropriate channels to disseminate evaluation findings to ensure that they are discoverable and accessible Ongoing Proactively disseminate findings to stakeholders Proactively disseminate findings to stakeholders Continue to build on work from previous year Continue to build on work from previous year . Improve governance Ensure sharing, integration and governance of key data and information products Ongoing Support the sector on development of common measure, indicators and analytical approaches Develop a repository of commonly used measures and indicators in transport evaluation Continue to expand the repository as needed . Invest in the right projects Ensure we invest in the right activities and projects Ongoing Incorporate evaluation concepts and processes into training; develop Policy Assessment Tool (PAT) into a tool with evaluationoriented output Continue to build on work from previous year Continue to build on work from previous year
Programme Programme description Regularity Evaluation activity complete plan indicative indicative System Level Evaluation Activities . Transport Outcomes Framework Transport Indicators reporting The Transport Outcomes Framework was developed in to enable ongoing assessment of the transport system to assist Governments long term strategic planning and tracking. Ongoing Developed and an online dashboard, with data (i.e. up to June ) and additional indicators. reporting Continue to work with stakeholders to refine the indicator set as necessary and embed the Framework Publish the first insight report that provides more indepth analyses on household expenditure on transport. reporting Continue to work with stakeholders to refine the indicator set as necessary and embed the Framework Publish additional insights report(s) reporting Continue to work with stakeholders to refine the indicator set as necessary and embed the Framework Publish additional insights report(s) Strategy Level Evaluation Activities . Road to Zero: New Zealands Road Safety Strategy for in December , Road to Zero sets out a vision for a New Zealand where no one is killed or seriously injured in road crashes. Ongoing Provided technical advice to support the compilation of Year reporting. Provide technical advice to support the compilation of Year reporting. Develop a new set of intervention indicators for the nd Action Plan To be defined To be defined . Hikina te Kohupara Hikina te Kohupara, is a strategic plan for how New Zealand could reduce its transport emissions, and form the basis of the transport section in the Governments Emission Reduction Plan for the emission budget. Ongoing Draft a monitoring and evaluation framework To be defined To be defined Investment and Policy Level Evaluation Activities
Programme Programme description Regularity Evaluation activity complete plan indicative indicative System Level Evaluation Activities . Transport Outcomes Framework Transport Indicators reporting The Transport Outcomes Framework was developed in to enable ongoing assessment of the transport system to assist Governments long term strategic planning and tracking. Ongoing the online dashboard (i.e. up to June ) and incorporated additional indicators. reporting Continue to work with stakeholders to refine the indicator set as necessary and embed the Framework reporting Continue to work with stakeholders to refine the indicator set as necessary and embed the Framework reporting Continue to work with stakeholders to refine the indicator set as necessary and embed the Framework Strategy Level Evaluation Activities . Road to Zero: New Zealands Road Safety Strategy for in December , Road to Zero sets out a vision for a New Zealand where no one is killed or seriously injured in road crashes. Ongoing Provided technical advice to support the compilation of the annual reporting. Provide technical advice to support the compilation of the annual reporting. Review and develop intervention indicators for the nd Action Plan Provide technical advice to support the compilation of the annual reporting. Provide technical advice to support the compilation of the annual reporting. . Decarbonising Transport Action Plan Decarbonising Transport Action Plan outlines a range of actions for how New Zealand reduce its transport emissions to meet the targets set out in the Governments Emission Reduction Plan. Ongoing Apply the Transport Sector Monitoring Framework to develop a monitoring framework and reporting indicators (refer to item .) Provide technical advice to support the compilation of the reporting. Provide technical advice to support the compilation of the reporting.
Programme and assurance that supports individual CIPAs for the projects where estimates
Programmes and projects should allow the entire process, from notification that a review is required to receipt of the final report, to take two months. The Gateway review itself takes one week including presenting the final report.
Progress ion duration: Relationships to rider characteristics As with Class , to simplify the analysis of progression duration we focussed on a single cohort: those riders who obtained a learner licence in to and who progressed to subsequent stages by th e end of . Figure shows the distribution of progression durations for this cohort, overall and by gender (the labelled values are the lower quartile, median, and upper quartile of progression duration for each progression step and gender). For rider s who did progress from a learner to a full licence, there is virtually no difference in duration across genders. The median rider progressed from learner to full licence in around months, with half of riders progressing between around months and months. At the restricted stage, the median rider who progressed to a full licence took just over months.
Progress is measured against the strategic priorities: safety, access, environment and value for money, and their associated objectives.
Progressing options for costrecovered advisory services
Progression duration: Relationships to crash rates Figure shows a simple comparison of crash rates versus progression du ration, at each licence stage (see section .. of the Technical Report for further analysis). Given the complexities of progression duration, the results in this figure are based on drivers who obtained a learner licence in to (combined), were aged under at the time, and who progressed to a full licence by the end of in at least months (i.e. did not shorten their progression by being aged or older at the time of obtaining their full licence or by having an advanced certificate). In each case we compare the crash rate for drivers who progressed from a learner to a full licence in to months (i.e. within one year of the standard minimum time) with those who took longer to progress. At all licence stages there is some variation i n crash rates by progression duration, but the crash rates are similar and none of the differences in our analysis are statistically significant ( pvalues range from . to .). Thus, at a high level, it appears that progression duration for drivers who do progress is not strongly related to crash rates at any licence stage.
Project C: ERP Decarbonising Transport Monitoring Framework: To develop a high level and flexible monitoring framework that support agencies to monitor a variety of ERP transport interventions Manager: Joanne Leung Research, Economics and Evaluation Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE) Draft complete for internal review Draft monitoring provided to Minister in December Monitoring framework finalised and
Project D: National Freight and Supply Strategy: To produce a shared view of the supply chain system and develop a future direction for the supply chain Manager: Harriet Shelton Supply Chain Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a high level of resourcing ( FTE) Supply chain Draft Strategy produced in March Drafting of implementation plans and research Draft implementation framework Ministers strategy programme underway conversation document to Minister Project F: Public Transport Operating Model: Review the framework for operating and contracting public transport services Manager: Helen White Mobility and Safety Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a high level of resourcing ( FTE) Provide a draft Cabinet paper seeking approval to introduce legislation
Project G: Support initiatives to increase the uptake of e bikes: To identify initiatives to support uptake of ebikes. Manager: Ewan Delany Environment, Emissions and Adaptation Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project H VKT reduction targets: Set subnational VKT reduction targets for Aotearoa New Zealands major urban areas (Tiers and ) by the end of Manager: Holly Walker Environment Emissions Strategy Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a medium level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project I: ICE Vehicles: Consider further measures needed from to increase the fuel efficiency of the imported fleet and avoid highemitting vehicles being dumped onto our market. This will help avoid Aotearoa being a dumping ground for high emitting vehicles Manager: Matt Skinner, Environment Emissions Policy Design Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project M Decarbonising Aviation Leadership Body: Establish a public private leadership body focussed on decarbonising aviation, including operational efficiencies, infrastructure improvements, and frameworks to encourage research, development and innovation in sustainable aviation Manager: Holly Walker, Environment Emissions Strategy Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project N: Sustainable Aviation Fuel Mandate: Implement a sustainable aviation fuel (SAF) mandate Manager: Holly Walker, Environment Emissions Strategy Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project O Euro VI: Implement Euro VI standards Manager: Matt Skinner Environment Emissions Policy Design Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project P: International Work: International aviation and maritime emissions work Manager: Holly Walker, Environment Emissions Strategy Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a medium level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project Q Clean Vehicle Standard: Implement the Clean Vehicle Standard to increase the quantity and variety of low and zero emission vehicles supplied to Aotearoa Manager: Matt Skinner, Environment Emissions Policy Design Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project R Transport Choices: million of Budget funding to support activities, services and infrastructure that reduces reliance on cars and enables the uptake of active and shared travel modes, such as walking, cycling and PT. Manager: Tim Herbert Investment Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project T: Clean Car Discount Review: This will review the ongoing settings for the Clean Car Discount Scheme Manager: Matt Skinner Manager, Environment Emissions Policy Design Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project A: Auckland Light Rail Detailed Planning Phase: This phase of the Auckland Light Rail project will ultimately support Ministers (in consultation with other Sponsors) to make a Final Investment Decisions, whilst making the necessary preparations for delivery and operation. Manager: Garet h Fairweather Auckland Light Rail Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a high level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project B: Rapid Rail Hamilton to Auckland Corridor: Business case process investigating faster rail between Hamilton and Auckland to integrate and strengthen the respective labour, housing, and business markets. Manager: Jess Ranger Placemaking and Urban Development Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project D: Christchurch Mass Transit: Investigation by the joint government agency and local authority Whakawhanake Kinga Committee (Urban Growth Partnership for Greater Christchurch) into the potential of mass rapid transit. Manager: Jess Ranger Plac emaking and Urban Development Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project E: Inter regional passenger rail select committee inquiry: Transport and Infrastructure Committee inquiry into the future of interregional passenger rail in New Zealand. Manager: Jess Ranger Placemaking and Urban Development Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project F: Lets Get Wellington Moving: WCC, GWRC, and Waka Kotahi initiative for investments in mass rapid transit, walking and cycling, public transport, and State highway improvements to develop a transport system that provides greater liveability, enhanced urban amenity and development; efficient and reliable transport access; mode shift carbon emissions reduction vehicles; improves safety for all users; and provides resilience and adaptability to disruptions and unplanned events. Manager: Marian Willberg Demand Management and Revenue Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project A: GPS: The Government Policy Statement will set the Governments investment strategy for the land transport system from to . Manager: Tim Herbert Investment Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a high level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project B: Budget : The Ministry will support the Minister of Transport to develop the Budget Vote Transport package (including the Climate Emergency Response Fund), for the Minister of Finances consideration. Manager: Tim Herbert Investment Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a high level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project C: Future of the Revenue System: Design how we will pay for land transport in the future in response to changes in the way New Zealanders will travel and shifting expectations about the purpose and function of the transport system Manager: Marian Willberg Demand Management and Revenue Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a high level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project D: Network Funding and Revenue: Stewardship of the existing revenue system: ensuring that the rates and settings of the revenue system are effective, efficient, and fit for purpose. Work under this activity includes revenue monitoring, FED and RUC rates, RUC Reforms , Land Transport Revenue Review (joint project), assessing tolling proposals, Regional Fuel Tax, Funding and Financing Toolkit Manager: Marian Willberg Demand Management and Revenue Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a high level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project E: Section Triennial Review: The review for additional funding under section () is carried out triennially to ensure adequate financial resources are provided to the search and rescue, recreational boating safety, and safety awareness sectors so they may continue to provide their services. Manager: Tim Herbert Investment Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a medium level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project B Air Navigation System Review: To undertake a first principles review of the air navigation system, the regulatory and policy, funding, and institutional settings of the system. Manager: Tom Forster Economic Regulation Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a high level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project C: Partnership with Ngai Tahu: Demonstrate the feasibility of new housing developments that incorporate shared transport options to incentivise reduced private vehicle ownership Manager: Donna Provoost Strategic Policy and Innovation Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project D: Reshaping Streets: Revisions to the regulatory framework to make it easier for road controlling authorities to make street changes. Manager: Jess Ranger Placemaking and Urban Development Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a high level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project E: Northland Dry Dock Business Case: Single stage business case to assess whether Government should invest in a dry dock Manager: Harriet Shelton Supply Chain Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project F: Rail Plan Review: Monitor, review and updating of the Rail Plan Manager: Harriet Shelton Supply Chain Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a medium level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project G: Auckland Transport Alignment Project (ATAP) Strategic Programme: Deliver a set of outcomes and associated measures endorsed by Cabinet and Auckland Council Manager: Karen Lyons Auckland Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project H: Auckland Transport Alignment Project (ATAP) Implementation Reporting: To provide a report to the political sponsors on ATAP delivery and wider considerations Manager: Karen Lyons Auckland Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project I: Tamaki Makaurau Equity Programme: Working across Government agencies in Tmaki Makaurau to provide an equity issues and considerations paper. Manager: Karen Lyons Auckland Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project J: Manukau Harbour Feasibility Study: To assess the engineering feasibility of a potential port in Manukau Harbour Manager: Harriet Shelton Supply Chain Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project K: Road to Zero Action Plan : Develop a public document that sets out the key actions for Government to deliver on the Road to Zero Strategy for the next three years. Manager: Helen White Mobility and Safety Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a low level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project M: Criminal Activity Intervention Bill (CAI Bill) and possible Road Safety Bill (RS Bill): Expansion of the power for Police to seize and impound vehicles Additional work to address fleeing drivers and
Project N: Regulatory Systems Transport Amendment Bill (): Makes several regulatory stewardship changes to transport legislation Manager: Megan Moffet Regulatory Policy Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a lowmedium level of resourcing ( FTE)
Project Approved Amount (m) Eastern Busway Ashburton Freight Hub . Community Connect . Christchurch Public Transport Futures Northern Pathway Close Down Melling General Cost Escalation Total
Project: CAA funding review On Friday August , we provided your Office with advice on the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) funding review public consultation document and Cost Recovery Impact Statement (CRIS), which has undergone minor updates to ensure consistency and final figures following Cabinet. You and the Minister of Finance will need to sign this off before CAA commences consultation. Given the change to the release for this document, from Monday August to Thursday August , the CAA is proposing to extend the consultation period until October to ensure weeks of consultation. We will provide an timeframe to your Office to set out the impact of this on the post consultation processes and decisions. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Project: CAA funding review We have passed on your updates to the Ministerial f oreword to CAA for inclusion in the consultation document, and it is on track to be released following your speech at the Aviation Industry Association C onference on Tuesday August . As requested by Minister Dooceys Office, we have included an update on the funding review in the Weekly Report to the Associate Minister of Transport, which includes some information on the potential impact of increased levies on tourism. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Project: CAA funding review and provision of Aviation Security Services Briefing: Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) funding review release of public consultation document and Cost Recovery Impact Statement (CRIS). Summary: Current versions of the CRIS and consultation document contain draft financial and technical figures. Work is continuing to confirm final figures (including final levy increase, sizenature of the resourcing requirements of CAA and associated costs) The purpose of the briefing is to seek joint ministerial approval of the final versions of both documents before public consultation begins on Monday August . Wednesday August PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Project: Consultations with the aviation sector Briefing: Civil Aviation Act implementation workstream detail This briefing provides you with additional detail you requested on some workstreams being delivered as part of the Civil Aviation Act Implementation programme. Week ending September Cabinet paper: New Zealand Air Services Agreement and Protocol (Associate Minister) To lodge: Thursday September To Committee: Wednesday September To Cabinet: Monday September s ()(f)(iv)
Project: Consultations with the aviation sector Cabinet paper: New Zealand Air Services Agreement and Protocol (Associate Minister) To lodge: Thursday September To Committee: Thursday September To Cabinet: Monday September
Project: Consultations with the aviation sector Consultation on the scope of the Independent Review Function closed on Tuesday September . submissions were received nine from organisations and four from individuals . An initial scan of the submissions indicates general support for the function and useful suggestions for how it can operate effectively. The Ministry will be undertaking a detailed assessment of the feedback over the coming weeks. s ()(f)(iv)
Project: Consultations with the aviation sector Following your speech at the New Zealand Aviation Industry Association Conference on Tuesday August , consultations have now opened on: CAA pricing review (public consultation) , scope of reviewable decisions for the Independent Review function (public consultation) , and investigating alternative delivery arrangements for aviation security services (targeted consultation). The Ministry has sent out emails to key organisations alerting them to the consultations that we are leading. As part of this we have let organisations know that we are happy to meet if that would be helpful for them to better understand the background or options that are being considered. The Ministry will also attend CAAs webinars on the funding review, both to participate in any discussions (as appropriate) on the funding review, and to take questions on the other consultations. We have also contacted key umbrella organisations (BARNZ, Airports Association, and the Aviation Industry Association) to see if they would like a briefing from the Ministry. As of close of play Wednesday August , most of the questions we have fielded have been on on timeperformance reporting (on the methodology and data sources). As part of implementing the Civil Aviation Act we are also: currently engaging with airport operators on the airport registration and Regulatory Airport Spatial Undertaking (RASU) processes , and engaging with the sector on the draft suite of realigned civil aviation rules, from the week of Monday September . PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Emissions Project: Clean Car Importer Standard Review of the Clean Car Importer Standard (the Standard) The Cabinet Legislation Committee paper and draft regulations were lodged with the Cabinet Office for consideration by the Committee on Thursday August . The regulations set new targets for and exempt disability vehicles from the Standard. Cabinet Paper: Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Regulations To Lodge: Thursday August To Committee: Thursday August (LEG) To Cabinet and Executive Council: Monday September Response letter to the Regulations Review Committee This letter will respond to the views of the Regulations Review Committee. Wednesday September Project: EV Charging Infrastructure
Project: Fuel Excise SAR Funding The Ministry will brief both the Minister of Finance and Minister of Transport the week beginning Monday August on the process for the triennial review of Section () SAR funding, We will ensure your O ffice receives a copy of this advice.
Project: Maritime Rules Reform Consultation continues on the first package of Design, Construction and Equipment rules changes, and will run to October . Stakeholder workshops are being held on Tuesday and Wednesday August .
Project: Maritime Rules Reform Consultation continues on the first package of Design, Construction and Equipment rules changes, and will run to October . Stakeholder workshops were held on Tuesday and Wednesday August .
Project: Maritime Workforce Maritime NZ met with sector representatives on Thursday September to discuss workforce and training issues. This is a standing monthly meeting that has recently been focused on the vocational education training reforms. The discussion focused on the short and long term amendments to the seafarer certification rules and upcoming IMO Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping (STCW) discussions. Project: RMS Niagara Briefing: RMS Niagara Update Week ending Friday October Project: Maritime Rules Reform Consultation continues on the first package of Design, Construction and Equipment rules changes, and will run to Friday October . Consultation on the International Omnibus package of rules changes has completed and a summary of the consultation next steps is set out under Key updates below . Briefing: International Omnibus: Results of Consultation and Final Decisions This briefing will seek Minister Dooceys agreement to changes in rules following consultation on the International Omnibus package. Week ending Friday November
Project: Oral fluid testing regime
Project: Oral fluid testing regime Project: Road safety objectives We are awaiting your feedback on the draft Road Safety Objectives document before commencing departmental and Ministerial consultation. Depending on your preferences, we may need to reduce the length of time for departmental and Mi nisterial consultation or shift to a later Committee . Cabinet paper: Releasing the final Road Safety Objectives document This paper seeks agreement to publish the final New Zealand Road Safety Objectives document. Departmental and Ministerial consultation: TBC Final papers to your Office: TBC To lodge: September To Committee: September (ECO) To Cabinet: September Project: Land Transport Fees Amendment Package s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Project: Oral fluid testing regime Submissions on the Land Transport (Drug Driving) Amendment Bill (the Drug Driving Bill) closed on Thursday August . Oral submissions will be heard on Monday September .
Project: Oral fluid testing regime The Transport and Infrastructure Committee invited submissions on the Bill from Thursday August until Thursday August .
Project: Oral fluid testing regime s ()(f)(iv)
Project: RMS Niagara Briefing: RMS Niagara Update This briefing to both you and Minister Brown will update you about the wreck of the Royal Mail Ship Niagara. Week ending Friday September Project: Maritime Rules Reform Consultation continues on the first package of Design, Construction and Equipment rules changes, and will run to October . Consultation on the International Omnibus package of rules changes has completed and a summary of the consultation next steps is set out under Key updates below . Briefing: Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek your agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rules relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. These changes are sought by the sector and reduce costs and complexity. Week ending Friday September Briefing: International Omnibus: Results of Consultation and Final Decisions This briefing will seek your agreement to changes in rules following consultation on the International Omnibus package. Week ending Friday November
Project: Road safety objectives Departmental and Ministerial consultation on the draft Road Safety Objectives document is complete. We have provided you with final papers . Cabinet paper: Releasing the final Road Safety Objectives document This paper seeks agreement to publish the final New Zealand Road Safety Objectives document. ECO : Tuesday September Cabinet: Monday September Project: Driver licensing Extending conversion period for overseas licences and Croatia exemption On Monday September , Cabinet agreed to extend the timeline for converting overseas driver licenses. Cabinet also agreed to give full driver licence holders from Croatia an exemption from completing drivers licence tests when they convert their licences, subject to the mutual driver licence recognition arrangement being finalised. We expect the Rule change to come into effect on November when the required Order in Council is gazetted. We have received initial drafts of the Order in Council from PCO. We are continuing to work with MFAT on finalising the Croatia driver license arrangement. Cabinet paper: Rule Change to Extend the Time for Converting Overseas Licences: Approval of Order in Council This paper seeks Cabinets agreement to the Order in Council necessary to implement the R ule change. LEG papers to your Office: October LEG meeting: October Cabinet meeting: October Rule change effective: November
Project: Second Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP) Consultation on the ERP closed on Sunday August . , submissions were received including around substantive transport submissions. Officials are analysing submissions and will provide you with a briefing on the results of the consultation by Monday September . Officials would like to explore with you some possible new content for the final ERP transport chapter. Drawing on themes raised during the public consultation period, officials have identified some options that are consistent with current Government policy. Further options may also be identified through submissions analysis. The of the next Climate Priorities Ministerial Group (CPMG) meeting has changed from Monday September to Monday September . We will provide you with a briefing by Wednesday September . Process Dates Briefing in support of CPMG meeting Wednesday September Climate Priorities Ministerial Group meeting Monday September Briefing on the results of the ERP consultation Monday September Briefing on final content of the transport chapter for ERP Monday October
Project: Second Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP) Consultation on the ERP closed on Sunday August . submissions were received. This includes substantive submissions from key transport stakeholders such as: Air New Zealand The Automobile Association The New Zealand Ports CEO Group The Sustainable Business Council. Officials are analysing submissions, and will provide you with a briefing on the results of the consultation by Friday September . Officials would like to explore with you some possible new content for the final ERP transport chapter. Drawing on themes raised during the public consultation period, officials have identified some options that are consistent with current Government policy. Further options may also be identified through submissions analysis. The of the next Climate Priorities Ministerial Group (CPMG) meeting is likely to change from Monday September to Wednesday September . We will provide you with a briefing before the CPMG meeting. Process Dates Briefing in support of CPMG meeting Wednesday September Climate Priorities Ministerial Group meeting Tbc Wednesday September Briefing on the results of the ERP consultation Monday September Briefing on final content of the transport chapter for ERP October
Project: Second Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP) Consultation on the ERP has been extended four days until Sunday August . Public submissions have now reached . Officials would like to explore with you some possible new content for the finalising ERP transport chapter. Drawing on themes raised during the public consultation period, officials have identified some options that are consistent with current Government policy. Further options may also be identified through submissions analysis. The Minister of Climate Change is likely to write to you and seek a bilateral discussion to help finalise policy content for ERP. Also, the next Climate Priorities Ministerial Group (CPMG) meeting is scheduled for September . We will provide you wi th briefings to support these meetings. Process Dates End of ERP consultation (extended) Sunday August Briefing in support of CPMG meeting September Climate Priorities Ministerial Group meeting September Briefing on the results of the ERP consultation September Briefing on final content of the transport chapter for ERP October
Project: Second Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP) Consultation on the ERP started on Wednesday July and will end on Wednesday August . This week, we attended the remaining two consultation webinars with local government and on the Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) hosted by the Ministry for the Environment (MfE). There have been submissions so far across the ERP. Themes from the webinars continue to be seeking further information and details on the EV charging policy and how it would support EV uptake; what role mode shift would play in ERP whether related to public transport, active transport or freight; and the extent of modelling and the impact of the ETS. Once the consultation period ends , we will work with MfE on the submissions analysis, and we will provide you with a briefing on the results of the consultation. We will continue to update you on development of transport content for ERP through the Weekly Report. Key dates are summarised below. Process Dates End of ERP consultation Wednesday August Briefing on the results of the ERP consultation September Briefing on final content of the transport chapter for ERP October
Project: Time of use charging Communications We understand you are planning to publicly announce policy decisions for time of use charging on Monday August . We have provided your Office with materials to support that announcement. We issued drafting instructions to PCO on Friday August . We are also preparing a briefing seeking your agreement to proactive release of time of use charging papers now that design decisions have been made.
Project: Tolling r eform We have a workshop with you next week to discuss options for legislative reform. Briefing: Tolling reform policy decisions (title TBC) This paper will seek agreement to the policy decisions regarding tolling law reform, following a workshop in the coming weeks. September
Projects added to the Output Plan
Projects added to the Output Plan (g) Project T Clean Car Discount Review
Projects removed from the Output Plan
Projects that are part of LGWM
Projects to be funded by the increases
Projects with amended deliverables
Projects with amended deliverables (d) (e) Project A GPS Change and move two deliverables: Cabinet approves release of draft GPS for consultation (February ) and engagement roadshow in Q to Cabinet approves release of draft GPS for consultation (May ) and engagement roadshow occurs in Q. Change and Move deliverable Cabinet approves publication of final (MayJune ) in Q to Cabinet approves publication of final (JulyAugust ) in Q .
Property Valuation . Construction is expected to be staged over a period from . The first development blocks could be completed in .
Proportion of children who travel to and from school using active modes
Proposal : Directors criteria Some submitters acknowledged this was largely administrative and needed to be consistent with the requirements of the Rule. Some submitters suggested setting speed limits should be left to RCAs. Retain (ensure it is to align with any potential changes to the Rule). Remove and leave decisions to RCAs.
Proposal : Reversals Very mixed and strongly held views, particularly between RCAs and individuals. Individual submissions also tend to be strongly in favour or strongly against. RCAs expressed concerns about overriding local decisions that went through robust consultation processes and overriding community wishes. Many queried why only NZTA has ability to retain lower speed limits if there is public support and suggested this is extended to other road types. Some technical submissions sought clarification about what the presence of a school means for the kmh speed limit reductions on local streets, e.g if a school was only one of a Retain as drafted. Enable all RCAs to be able to retain reduced speed limits with a new consultation and public support (in line with the State highway approach). If the school was only one reason for introducing kmh, clarify that reversal applies. Exempt roads where the land use has changed or there is a consent for a business that is subject to the reduced speed limit. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Proposal Feedback Options Proposal : requiring CBA While there appears to be principle level support for considering the costs and benefits of a speed limit proposal from some submitters, those more familiar with the practicalities of completing CBA have raised some concerns with their application.
Proposal Feedback Options Proposal : Speed limit classifications Some submitters supported the clarity the classifications would provide to ensure consistency. We also need to consider further individual submitters views on the proposed speed limit classifications. However, a number of the RCA and stakeholder submissions raised concerns that the speed limits were based on road type, rather than the form and function of the road and that the classifications moved away from NZTAs One Network Framework. Suggestions were made about providing ranges for urban streets from kmh. A smaller number of submissions included suggested ranges for inter regional connectors ( kmh or kmh). Retain as drafted. Retain most classifications but amend urban streets to allow kmh or amend the exemption for significant pedestrian and cycling activity to allow kh or kmh. Include a range for inter regional connectors to allow speed limits of less than kmh. Align the classifications and ranges with the existing One Network Framework.
Proposal Feedback Options Regional Speed Management Plans Some submissions supportive of retaining the option of Regional Speed Management Plans to ensure a region wide approach where there is a desire for that . Alternative view is that Regional Speed Management Plans are not necessary, as achieving greater consistency in setting speed limits across regions can be achieved more simply through collaboration between local councils and NZTA (for adjacent state highway speeds) . Retain option for Regional Speed Management Plans . Remove option for Regional Speed Management Plans . Enabling kph on roads built and maintained to that standard Many individuals were supportive (noting the question was framed around roads being built and maintained to this standard). However, NZTA noted that no roads have been constructed for kmh and the cost to upgrade or build for this speed limit is likely to be considerable. Many RCAs expressed the view that investment is better directed at delivering more state highway projects designed for k mh speed limits, over fewer roads designed for k mh. Other submissions noted the speed differential between heavy vehicles (k mh) and light vehicles travelling at k mh, and that driver trainingbehaviour would need to change before these speed limits are introduced. Include option for kmh on roads buil t and maintained to a standard to safely support this higher speed limit, to future proof the Rule for this possibility . Do not include kmh option. Ask officials to consider this issue further next year as part of the development of the RONS.
Proposal Feedback Options number of reasons for a reduced speed zone would reversal be required RCAs raised concerns around the cost and timeframes for reversals. Some suggested the implementation period for reversals should be extended to months or years. Clarification sought around change in use or classification of the road and whether there should be exemptions for these scenarios (where the higher speed limit wouldnt make sense). Concerns about where the road has been reengineered and reversing the speed limit would not align with the new engineering. General concerns about safety impacts of reversals. Comment that some urban connectors (arterial streets) are multimodal, narrow and have high volumes of people using them, and there needs to be an ability to appropriately balance the competing interests of safety with efficiency. Some legal and ethical standard issues have been raised that officials are looking into further. Enable speed limits to be retained where a road has been reengineered. Clarify reversals for urban connectors to be urban connectors with two or more lanes. Additional matters Speed management committee More RCAs support retaining the Committee than not. Even split between interest groups. Some RCAs feel NZTA has the resource and expertise to audit itself. Chair of the Speed Management Committee submitted the view that as the Rule stands, there seems to be little value in continuing the Committee. Retain the Committee as is. Remove the Committee.
Proposal for GPS and NZUP tagged contingency for Transport Projects Proposal This paper seeks approval to: . amend the scope for drawdown of the Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Tagged Contingency of billion created through Budget . reallocate million held in the New Zealand Upgrade Transport Projects Tagged Capital Contingency . authorise drawdown against both the Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Tagged Contingency and New Zealand Upgrade Transport Projects Tagged Capital Contingency to provide funding for priority projects to be progressed now, which will otherwise be delayed until . Relation to government priorities This will support the delivery of the G overnment s land transport priorities as outlined in GPS . Executive Summary In June , I released t he Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS ). This outlines the Governments ambitious . billion transport plan over to boost productivity and support economic growth . This includes re introducing the successful R oads of National Significance (RoNS) programme and delivering Roads of Regional Significance (RoRS ). I am reporting back to Cabinet with an update on the implementation of GPS and seeking Cabinets agreement to draw down the billion tagged contingency established in Budget to accelerate priority GPS investments that would otherwise be delivered from CABMIN. . I am also seeking agreement to reallocate million of the remaining tagged contingency from the Northern Pathway project , part of the New Zealand Upgrade Programme (NZUP), that is no longer needed. This . billion of tagged contingency funding will enable NZTA to progress high priority projects that will otherwise be de layed until and support delivery of the RoNS programme. The tagged contingency f unding will be allocated to: . Melling interchange . Waikare Gorge realignment . Auckland Level Crossings Removal Programme xxfpyy I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E . Second Ashburton Bridge . SH Brougham St Corridor Improvements . Roads of National Significance . Update on the implementation of GPS In September , NZTA released its NLTP for outlining how . billion will be invested from the NLTF across activities that support economic growth and productivity, provide better maintenance of our roads, and build greater resilience and safety into the network. The main deliverables of the NLTP are: . . billion of improvements to New Zealands state highway network, including commencing construction on wave one RoNS and planning and design on the remaining waves . . billion in fixing potholes across the state highway and local road network . . . billion in state highway and local road maintenance operations . . . billion in public transport to support transport services, service improvements (including improvements to support City Rail Link operations), and constructing significant public transport infrastructure (e.g. the Eastern Busway and Northwest Rapid Transit). . . billion in road policing and safety promotion , . . billion in local road improvements . The State Highway Improvements activity class provides the sector with a pipeline of work to build capacity and capability over the first three years, to help deliver a larger programme in years four to ten. A summary of expected RoNS delivery is provided below, with key updates for Wave projects. Table : Roads of National Significance project phasing xxfpyy s ()(g)(i) I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Table : Roads of National Significance Wave project updates Project Update Warkworth to Te Hana ( North land Corridor) Property acquisition for Stage (Warkworth to Te Hana) is underway. Market engagement is ongoing with potential suppliers. Cambridge to Piarere Further preimplementation funding is being requested at NZTAs December Board meeting. The project has been split into three distinct work packages to enable accelerated progress once consents are obtained and property acquisitions are completed for each package. Tauriko West Omanawa Bridge NZTA is currently in the pre implementation phase with property acquisition underway and detailed design work about to commence. Hawke s Bay Expressway The project investment case for stage will be going to the NZTA Board for approval in December . Enabling works for Stage are underway. Belfast to Pegasus The investment case was approved at NZTAs November Board meeting, and the project is now moving into the design phase. Mill Road Stage One The investment case is under development and is expected to be considered by the NZTA Board in April . The design update and detailed estimate stage will commence in NovemberDecember . Drawing down t agged contingencies to accelerate transport priorities Budget established a tagged capital contingency within the Transport portfolio of up to billion (Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Tagged Contingency ) CABMIN. refers . The purpose of the tagged contingency funding is to enable the New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) to bring forward investments in the Governments land transport priorities as set out in the GPS that would otherwise be phased to begin from onwards. Following the development of the National Land Transport P rogramme (NLTP) and consultation with my colleagues, NZTA has identified priority projects with unfunded cost pressures that are at risk of not being delivered or facing significant delays. I am seeking agreement that the billion of tagged contingency is made available to the NZTA Board to commence deliver y on specific projects that may otherwise be delayed or deferred. I am also proposing to reallocate million of remaining tagged contingency from the Northern Pathway project DEV MIN refers. This funding was put into a tagged contingency for the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Programme. NZTA h as advised that work on the Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures has stopped, and it will no longer require the million set aside in the tagged contingency. xxfpyy I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Projects to be funded from GPS and NZUP tagged contingenc ies I am seeking agreement to draw down the full billion tagged contingency , and million in NZUP tagged contingency (. billion in total) and make this funding available to the NZTA Board (the Board) to accelerate the projects listed in Table . Accelerating the delivery of these projects will allow construction to begin before . This will bring forward the expected economic growth and congestion reduction benefits of these projects. NZTA has advised me that : . despite significant effort to identify cost savings and scope reduction opportunities , the Melling Interchange is unaffordable within the current available Crown funding. This additional funding will provide confidence to the Board to proceed with contracting . while some of the projects outlined above are included within the NLTP, without confirmation of the additional funding , the decisions needed to progress these projects cannot be undertaken in the timeframes desired. . The NZTA Board will prioritise the additional funding provided to the proposed projects through their business asusual processes. In addition, following a scoping exercise to confirm the RoRS programme, Joint Ministers (Transport and Finance) agreed to remove the Canterbury Brougham St Corridor Improvements project from the Crown funding envelope. An overview of these projects , including the indicative allocation of the . billion , is detailed below in Table . Further detail on each of the projects is included as Annex One. The NZTA Board will confirm how best to allocate funding (across the Crown appropriations and the NLTF) to ensure these projects progress at pace. Table : Projects and proposed allocation of . billion tagged contingency . Project Overview Status and expected progress with the money Indicative allocation (m) Indicative const ruction start Melling Interchange The Melling project partners are urgently seeking certainty on the project delivery and funding. Additional funding will allow commercial agreements to be signed and delivery to proceed . The a dditional fu nding is also required to deliver the full scope and associated project benefits and allow NZTA Board to proceed with contracting
Proposals affecting used vehicles received the most attention from submitters and in the media. Submissions from those involved in importing used vehicles were strongly opposed to the Rule as proposed and wanted timing of specific standards delayed. Most of these submissions cited research from saying the Rule would have little effect on levels of harmful emissions over years. Submissions from the new vehicle industry and those interested in air quality generally supported the Rule as drafted.
Proposals from Waka Kotahi and NZ Infra evaluated
Proposals to the NLTP need to be assessed for: . how they contribute to the strategic pri orities and programmes. . Effectiveness how the investment delivers on results . Efficiency return on investment investment levers.
Proposed Improvements to New Zealands Graduated Driver Licensing System
Proposed amendment consulted on
Proposed rule amendment consultation
Proposing a new drug driver testing and enforcement scheme to improve road user safety.
Protecting Our Crowded places from Attack: New Zealands Strategy
Provide advice to Minister on the scope of any changes required to the speed rule Project P: Cyclone Recovery: Providing advice on the implications of Cyclone Gabrielle on the transport system, including how transport the transport services can be restored and enhanced to provide greater resilience for the future. Manager: Richard Cross Director, System Performance Governance Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a high level of resourcing ( FTE)
Provide draft Cabinet paper seeking agreement Drafting instructions provided to PCO Drafting underway by PCO (subject to to policy proposals engagement with PCO) roadsi de oral fluid testing:
Provide support for Cabinet oral item on Draft Cabinet paper to Minister on ALR WHC emerging preferred option
Providers will be selected for support through an open and competitive process. We the Request for Proposals on March and applications closed pm, April.
Providing all eligible New Zealanders aged years or over, and those under who receive the New Zealand Superannuation or the Veterans Pension, with free offpeak travel on public transport.
Providing strategic guidance and oversight of the work programme to achieve the safe integration of drones as unmanned aircraft (UA) into New Zealands airspace.
Providing subsidised licensed taxi services for people of all ages who cannot use buses, trains or ferries because they have a physical, intellectual, psychological, sensory or neurological disability.
Provincial Growth Fund Regional Investment Opportunities Projects July received on July
Provincial Growth Fund announced
Provincial Growth Fund, to support rail projects that accelerate regional development and productivity, including an additional NZD million for regional rail projects as part of Budget , and
Public Finance Act, jointly established by the Crown and Auckland Council to deliver Aucklands City Rail Link (CRL). You have different roles and responsibilities in relation to each of these agencies.
Public Transport Operating Model
Public Transport Region Public Transport Concessions Nationwide Eastern Busway Auckland
Public TransportUpper
Public consultation for the draft Marine Protection Rules to support the implementation of MARPOL Annex VI is now open
Public consultation on the Ministrys freight and supply chain issues paper ran between April and June . The feedback we received will shape how we develop and focus the freight and supply chain strategy. Links to the full report and a summary are below:
Public consultation on the draft GPS is now open, please visit The Ministry of Transport website to provide your feedback via our questionnaire.
Public consultation on the issues paper
Public engagement before any decision to implement could be made.
Public feedbackNLTF pressures
Public information relating to Maintaining International Air Connectivity Scheme (phase ).
Public information relating to Maintaining International Air Connectivity Scheme (phase ).
Public information relating to the International Airfreight Capacity Scheme.
Public private partnership for Phoi to Warkworth confirmed
Public private partnership for Transmission Gully confirmed
Public submissions are being called for on the Bill
Public submissions were from a variety of groups, including: private individuals; academics, universities, research institutions and student bodies; government agencies, such as local councils and State Owned Enterprises; hap and iwi; NGOs andor community groups; private companies; and businessindustry bodies.
Public transport (city and north) approximately NZD million to build a dual public transport spine through the central city on the Golden Mile and waterfront quays, and improve rail network and bus priority on Thorndon Quay and Hutt Road. This will contribute to a reliable public transport system that enables Wellington to grow and encourages people to use public transport, giving them better public transport choices to the north leading to a increase in rail patronage at peak times.
Public transport decarbonisation
Public transport experts interviewed
Public transport fares remain at half price until June . Community Connect (ongoing halfprice public transport for community services cardholders) will commence on July and halfprice fares for Total Mobility users will continue indefinitely.
Public transport needs to be at the core of a shared mobility future.
Public transport scenarios in
Publication of feedback on issues paper
Publicly consulted on a new draft Setting of Speed Limits Rule
a paper about the integration of drones into our aviation system
Purpose The purpose of this document is to signal the results that the Government is intend ing to achieve through the Government Policy Statement on Land Transport (GPS ). These priorities are not final but have been provided as an early signal of likely directions . Local authorities may wish to use this to inform the initial preparation of Regional Land Transport Plans , as well as other transport relating planning and decisions. The Ministry welcomes any feedback on this document and the priorities that it signals, and will consider this as part of preparing the draft GPS .
Purpose This Terms of Reference will guide work on replacing the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits (the current Rule) .
Purpose This briefing provides an overview of priority work underway by the Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) across roading , rail and maritime , including upcoming milestones. Aviation matters will be covered in a separate briefing to the Associate Minister of Transport . We have focused on areas where you have already expressed interest . As such , this is not a comprehensiv e summary of all work and responsibilities undertaken by the Ministry. There is work underway in a range of other areas including safety, regulatory reforms, emissions , and public transport . You will receive advice on these matters in due course. Road ing The roading network has a significant impact on economic growth, productivity, and the Crowns fiscal position . For example: The road network is the dominant mode of freight transport within New Zealand. It account s for of the total tonnes of freight moved . Treasury report s that s tate highways are the Crowns third most valuable physical asset (valued at billion), behind only Crown land ( billion) and buildings ( billion). Roading investment is by far the single biggest category of infrastructure investment with future intentions totalling . billion out of a total of . billion for all infrastructure sectors . Given its significance, t his section sets out in more detail the work underway and issues that remain in how New Zealand invests in, prices, and delivers the ro ading network. Key land transport system settings are under reform The Ministry is progressing changes to revenue tools, demand management, and transport spending . We will provide detailed advice on these work programmes in coming weeks . A summary of each is set out below, with more detail in Annex One. Strengthening our suite of revenue tools : o Transitioning all light petrol vehicles into the Road User Charges (RUC) system to ensure light vehicle owners are contributing to road costs based on their usage , and to provide a more stable source of re venue than fuel excise duty. o Legislative reform of tolling, including enabling tolls to be set across entire corridors, ensuring toll rates better reflect costs and benefits, and allowing the Minister of Transport to require heavy vehicles to use specific toll roads. o Contributing to the Ministry of Housing and Urban Developments policy work to improve infrastructure funding and financing to support urban growth under the Going for Housing Growth initiative. Developing demand management tools : o Legislati on to enable local authorities to implement time of use charging schemes .
Purpose of the Output Plan
Putting the HTS and Census together
PwC to undertake the business case work
QA with Transport Minister
Qantas Qantas, all reported transTasman routes
Qantas and Emirates have lodged an application seeking reauthorisation of their alliance (the Restated Master Coordination Agreement).
Qantas reports that the following factors affected their ontime performance in March: Seasonal weatherrelated delays (Tropical Cyclone Alfred in Brisbane) in addition to a spike in cancellations leading up to Tropical Cyclone Alfreds landfall. Industry congestion at airports, exacerbated by weather conditions Late arriving inbound aircraft as a result of weatherrelated delays Consequential boarding and ramp delays as a result of offschedule operations. .. . .. .... .. .. . .... . . . . . .. .. ...... Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar OnTime Departures () OnTime Arrivals () Cancellations () AIRLINES PERFORMANCE, TRANSTASMAN ROUTES, MARCH
QantasJapan Airlines Joint Business Agreement Consultation
Qualifications and experience (include significant work history and community involvement)
Quantitative vs. Qualitative Categorisation of impactoutcomes analysis as qualitative is questionable due to the need to articulate outcomes quantitatively. The distinction between quantitative or qualitative may not be necessary. Many tools are in existence but not always applied well.
Quarterly fleet statistics
Queenstown Auckland . . . Air NZ . . . Jetstar . . .
Queenstown Brisbane . . . Qantas . . . Virgin Australia . . .
Queenstown Wellington . . . Air NZ . . . Jetstar . . .
Queenstown International:
QueenstownAshburtonWarkworthThe GPS is developed by Te Manat Waka
Query regarding whether the framework will create an opportunity to remove duplicate reporting, and other reporting now considered redundant.
Queues for the Wellington Southern Domestic screening point which are constantly monitored using LiDAR technology showed: Week Passengers processed in less than minutes . Passengers processed in less than minutes
R E L E A S E D U N D E R T H E OF F I C I A L I N F OR MA T I ON A C T
RAIL SAFETY WEEK Rail Safety Week launched on August at our Auckland head office, with the introduction of a memorable cowboy called Steely Stan who encouraged pedestrians, motorists and cyclists to take a decent look each way (a steely stare) before crossing the tracks. Engagement metrics will be provided once available, however initial feedback has been overwhelmingly positive. With his signature campaign phrase, Steely Stare. Steely Stare. All clear, Steely Stan was a popular choice for promoting rail safety awareness, and our staff have been out in schools across New Zealand spreading the safety messages as well. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
RCAs have raised concerns about CBA be ing timeconsuming and costly. Certain speed limit proposals could be exempted from CBA requirements . Retain as drafted. An alternative approach is to require a description of the key costs and benefits, including the estimated safety time impacts, travel time impacts, impacts on operating speeds and implementation costs. If the CBA requirement is retained, consideration could be given to technical changes to the way it is applied, for example: Enable CBA to be conducted over road, area or network level, depending on the nature of the proposed speed limit changes . Only apply to CBA to higher volume roads where speed limit changes are proposed over longer stretches.
RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Thank you again for your letter and for taking an active interest in our collective challenge to decarbonise Aotearoas transportation system. I hope this provides further context and rationale behind our efforts to encourage the uptake of EVs. Yours sincerely Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT From: M Wood (MIN) To: Tristan Culpan (parliament) Subject: FW: Barriers to electric truck uptake and potential policy responses Thursday, July Attachments: Webdeaaade.png Facebookcaadbbbfbcafedb.png Linkedinacaaecebc.png Instagramadfacfcefed.png Youtubecafbdeafaae.png image.png FUSOeCanter Brochure.LR FINAL April .pdf Briefing to Minister WoodFusoNZ.pdf From: Kathy Schluter mailto:kathy.schluterfuso.co.nz Sent: Wednesday, June To: M Wood (MIN) M.Woodministers.govt.nzSubject: Barriers to electric truck uptake and potential policy responses Dear Minister,Congratulations on the announcement and imminent start of the Clean Car Discount scheme.Since we last made contact we have been successful in delivering to he New Zealand market, first series, fully integrated safety feature, zero emiss on eCanters. We would like to draw your attention to the barriers for the New Zealand commercial market to fully engage in planning, learning and changing their businesses to an EV future, whilst thepressure of research and development still rests heavily on these early adopters. Please find attached a briefing covering the above and a little about our eCanters.We would dearly appreciate your consideration and should you wish to discuss this further, please contact either myself or Kurtis Andrews our Managing Directorkurtis.andrewsfuso.co.nz Thank you very much for your time, we look forward to hearing from you. Kathy Schluter Group Manager Sales Customer Experience FUSO New Zealand E kathy.schluterfuso.co.nz M RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT s ()(a) WARNING: This email message and accompanying data is copyright and may contain information that is confidential and subject to privilege. If you are not the intended recipient, you are notified that any use, dissemination, distribution or copying of this message or data is prohibited. If you have received this email in error, please notify the sender immediately and delete all material pertaining to this email. Thank you. RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Fuso New Zeal and Landing Drive Airport Oaks Auckland Hon Michael Wood, Minister of Transport Dear Minister , Congratulations on the announcement and imminent start of the Clean Car Discount scheme. This policy will deliver increased uptake of light electric vehicles in New Zealand and help the country meet its commitment to net zero emissions by . It aligns w ith the Climate Change Commissions recommendations to accelerate uptake of electric vehicles. The Climate Change Commission has also recommended that the government create options to decarbonise heavy transport and freight. The first Fuso New Zealan ds eCanter electric trucks arrived in the country this month and will shortly be entering service with the countrys largest freight operators through a trial supported by EECA. These are battery electric trucks with advanced safety features from a New Zealand market leader in diesel truck sales. Electric trucks offer an opportunity to deliver greater CO emissions reductions and air quality improvements per vehicle than light vehicles. Electric trucks face the same upfront cost barriers as electric light vehicles and policies are needed to help overcome these initial barriers. The barriers to electric truck uptake and potential policy responses are discussed in the Concept Consulting report Shifting Gear: Electric Vehicle Up ake Policies ava ilable here https:www.concept.co.nzupdates.html Fuso New Zealand is proud to be a co funder of this policy investigation work, which covers heavy electric vehicles as well as light EVs. Important ly, the report shows that New Zealand will be better off by accelerating the uptake of electric vehicles with policies such as incentives, due to the long term benefits they will bring to both vehicle operators and the public. We encourage you to direct your officials to investigate incentives to accelerate the uptake of electric trucks on New Zealands roads t deliver public benefits. The existing policies of funding specific projects through EECA and the Road User Charges exemption for electric trucks have been a welcome start but more needs to be done to address the barriers to electric truck uptake, as has been recognised and is being implemented for light electric vehicles. We would be pleased to have an opportunity to meet with you to discuss this further. We would also like to extend to you an invitation to view our electric trucks in operation at a time convenient to you. Yours sincerely Kurtis Andrews Managing Director Fuso New Zealand
RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT s ()(a) August Hon Michael W ood Minister of Transport m.woodministers.govt.nz Timing of Euro d and WLTP testing for new vehicles entering New Zealand Dear Minister I write to rais e with you a material concern with two aspects of decisions Cabinet agreed to when you presented the Clean Car Standard Cabinet paper. These relate to transitioning the new vehicles fleet to WLTP testing for vehicles manufactured from January and a transitioning to moving the fleet to Euro . These are covered in paragraphs to of that Cabinet paper. The statements i n these paragraphs are causing confusion in the new vehicle sector and has potentially significant impacts for us. To avoid conf usion going forward we seek urgent clarification o f what you intend. The Problem Par agraph states (and its subsequent recommendation ), with the part of the paragraph we need clarified highlighted in yellow : New Zealand will transition to the WLTP to enable a better assessment of vehicle emissions and our progress towards CO targets. To facilitate this, I propose that vehicles manufactured from January (regardless of whether used or new when imported) will need to include WLTP fuel economy and CO emissions information in order to be certified for use on New Zealand roads. This should not create a supply constraint on vehicles given our major source markets of Europe and Japan will have had to align to WLTP testing prior to that , though it may create impacts on suppliers using Australian models who have not adopted WLTP . Recommendat ion that relates to the above paragraph states: agree that ve hicles manufactured from onwards must have their fuel efficiency RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT and CO emission values assessed through a WLTP cycle test, or if not available, by the American Environmenta l Protection Agency (EPA) test. However, befo re dealing with the clarification sought, I must first dispel some less than accurate information in paragraph , as underlined above. While it is true that WLTP testing is required for vehicles entering those markets, it is not true for vehicles made for other markets as these are tested to what is required in those markets. Also, and more importantly, our major source market is vehicles made for the Australasian market. Saying our ma jor source markets are Europe and Japan only relates to where those brands originate from. European brands and Japanese brands that come to New Zealand are made for the Australasian (read Australian) marke t. Australia does not accept nor require WLTP testing and will not for some time. This is furthe r exacerbated by the implication in your Cabinet paper that introduction of Euro and WLTP testing can be done separately. This is not accurate WLTP testing is a part of Euro d. Euro b and Euro standards rely on the NEDC testing protocols. We have provi ded advice to your officials on the timing of when brands can move to Euro d, which in effect is at the same time as Australia adopts Euro d Apart from a few low volume models there is no unique New Zealand market. Implications of my points above are: Currently over of light vehicles entering the New Zealand market are complied toEuro with a smaller number to Euro b. Only a few mo dels are complied to the Euro d standards . This means come January , over of new light vehicles entering New Zealandwill not be able to be tested using the WLTP testing protocol as these vehicles are homologated fo the Australian market under Euro or Euro b which uses the NEDC testing protocol. I dont believe t he Government intends to exclude over of new light vehicles from being able to be complied for entry into service come January . The Solution C urrently under the Land Transpo rt Rules, vehicles can be complied if tested to NEDC or WLTP four cycle (what is used in Europe). Vehicles tested in Japan use the WLTP three cycle protocol which is not yet provided for under y our Land Transport Rules. The MIAs view is that you need to: Allow all three testing protocols now (enable WLTP three cycle testing in addition toNEDC and WLTP four cycle) Liaise with Industry to arrive at a when WLTP testing for new model new vehiclescan be introduced (ties in with the Australian timeline) Liaise with industry on a later for when existing model new vehicles also transfer to WLTP only testing, and Align those dates with the introduction of Euro d, noting the linkage of the NewZealands market to the Australian market. RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Require fuel cons umption and Co data derived from WLTP four cycle or NEDC testing protocols to be converted to WLTP three cycle values. In other words, t ie together Euro d and WLTP test protocol work programmes as these are directly inter related standards. I would be grat eful if you could consider the issues raised in my letter as a matter of urgency. January is not far away and our sector needs to understand what your intentions are. Kind regards David Crawford C hief Executive Officer. RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT From: Glynn Tulloch To: Elena Hood Cc: Richard Giltrap ; Dane Fisher ; E.Delanytransport.govt.nz Subject: Next steps from July EV pathways meeting between Minister of Transport and Giltrap Group Monday, September Attachments: image.png image.png Support letter draft from Minister Wood on supply issues to VW group July final.docx Transport Minister Michael Wood letter th Sep .pdf EV and Hybrid Report July .pdf Minister Wood EV background data July final.pptx Hello Elena, We met with the Minister of Transport, Hon. Michael Wood on the th of July, during which he invited us to send some follow up information, which is attached. Would you pass it on for his attention please Glynn Tulloch Chief Executive OfficerEuropean Motor Distributors Limited RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT s ()(a) RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Giltrap Group Holdings Limited Level , Great North Road, Grey Lynn P O Box , Shortland Street, Auckland , New Zealand Telephone: Hon. Michael Wood , Minister of Transport Private Bag Parliament Buildings Wellington Cc: Hon Megan Woods, Minister of Energy th September Dear Minister Wood, Thank you for speaking with us on the th of July . We agree on the direction that Aote aroa needs to travel and feel we can be part of the innovative solutions required to reduce the carbon footprint of the light vehicle fleet. We are supportive and thankful for the bold steps in a short period of time this Go vernment has taken in the EV space. We found the meeting constructive and believe there are several opportunities where the Giltrap Group can support if there is willingness to do so. We the largest local family owned auto group in NZ and we are passionate about New Zealanders mobility during the ICE era, and now the elect ic one . We have been around for over years and intend to be around for over more , so we take a long term view of industry change . As discusse d, we support the Clean Car Legislation Import Standard; however, we believe the arrival time of the Light Commercial Vehicles required to meet the CO targets, is overly optimistic. A sufficient supply source of BEV and PHEV Commercial Vehicles does not presently exist. We believe this concern will be reiterated in an upcoming survey of product launch timetables from the Motor Industry Association ( MIA) members (we are represented on the board) . We are concerned that an unintended effect of the legislation will be an increase in the cost of vans from , in addition to the Clean Car Fee from . We discussed with you t o support decarbonisation efforts, the following proposals that will support the future EV pathways programme of work, including: . .Ultra fast charging hubs : Designed to r educe range anxiety , an urban ultra fast charging hub should be piloted . This would increas e visible access to charging , build the EV profile in urban communities, and provide access to super fast charging in stra egic urban hub locations . This could be leverage d with access to EV new mobility solutions that include EVs. .Upgrade to a national EV mission : Upgrade the current Clean Car Standard and existing interventions to a full scale national mission that is time bound, empowered, and resourced with an EV Leadership Group to orchestrate state and private sector activity. The literature and practice of mission orientated approaches is gaining momentum globally (UK, Chile, EU, Columbia) across several economic, industrial and environmental policy spheres and could have some value as a methodology for increasing innovation and unblocking bottlenecks in th e system. s ()(b)(ii) RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Giltrap Group Holdings Limited Level , Great North Road, Grey Lynn P O Box , Shortland Street, Auckland , New Zealand Telephone: .Align FBT tax structures with existing settings : To bring EVs closer to ICE price parity , FBT needs to be remove d. This will incentivise corporate fleets to shift to EVBEVs ( within years) and incentivi se new mobility companies like Sixt to take more EVs onto the fleet to sell as corporate subs criptions . We have had detailed discussions with major lease indus try players regarding this. This is the ultimate try before you buy and will also increase the supply of second hand EVs onto the private market over time. We have included a copy of the background information we prepared for the meeting on the th, as well as some further information which may be of use. If there is a desire to advance any of the proposals above, w e welcome the opportunity to have further discussions with yourself and or your offic ials on how to do so most effectively. Speeding the EV evolution in NZ is a top priority for the leadership at the Giltrap Group. Yours sincerely , Glynn Tulloch CEO European Motor Distributors Cc: Richard J Giltrap Giltrap Group, Dane Fisher Sixt NZ RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT New Zealand Hybrid and EV Monitoring Report YTD Sales Channel Split Make and Model Segment Type YTD Private Corporate Rental GovtDealer Importer Hatch Cooper SE A BEV BMW i A BEV BMW i REX A BEV BMW IS A BEV Hyundai IONIQ BEV kW A BEV Hyundai IONIQ BEV kW A BEV Hyundai IONIQ BEV kW A BEV Hyundai Kona A BEV MercedesBenz EQA A BEV Nissan Leaf A BEV Renault Zoe A BEV Ford Focus A BEV Kia NIRO BEV A BEV Mazda MX A BEV MG ZS EV A BEV Volkswagen eGolf A BEV Jaguar IPace B BEV MercedesBenz EQC B BEV TESLA MODEL STD B BEV TESLA MODEL PERF B BEV Audi etron quattro C BEV Audi etron quattro C BEV Audi etron Sportback quattro C BEV Audi etron GT quattro C BEV Audi RS etron GT C BEV Porsche Taycan S C BEV Porsche Taycan Turbo C BEV Porsche Taycan Turbo S C BEV Porsche Taycan Cross Turismo C BEV TESLA MODEL S C BEV TESLA MODEL S C BEV TESLA MODEL S C BEV TESLA MODEL S D C BEV TESLA MODEL S C BEV TESLA MODEL S C BEV TESLA MODEL S D C BEV TESLA MODEL S PD C BEV TESLA MODEL S S C BEV TESLA MODEL S STD C BEV TESLA MODEL S LR C BEV TESLA MODEL S PERF C BEV TESLA MODEL X D BEV TESLA MODEL X D BEV TESLA MODEL X D D BEV TESLA MODEL X X D BEV TESLA MODEL X PD D BEV TESLA MODEL X D BEV TESLA MODEL X D D BEV TESLA MODEL X D BEV TESLA MODEL X LR D BEV TESLA MODEL X PERF D BEV TESLA MODEL X D BEV Total , , , Countryman Cooper SE A PHEV Audi A etron A PHEV BMW Series XE A PHEV Hyundai IONIQ PHEV A PHEV Kia NIRO PHEV A PHEV Kia Sorento PHEV A PHEV Mercedes Benz AE A PHEV MG HS A PHEV Mitsubishi Eclipse Cross PHEV A PH V Mitsubishi Outlander PHEV A PHEV Toyota Prius PHEV A PHEV Volvo XC T PHEV A PHEV BMW Series E B PHEV BMW X E B PHEV Ford Escape PHEV PHEV Jaguar FPace B PHEV Mercedes C E B PHEV Mercedes C E B PHEV Mercedes Benz GLC B PHEV Range Rover Velar PHEV B PH Skoda Superb IV B PHEV Skoda Superb IV Wagon B PHEV Volvo XC T B PHEV Audi Q etron C PHEV BMW E C PHEV BMW X E C PHEV BMW X E C PHEV Porsche Cayenne S EHybrid C PHEV Mercedes Benz GLE C PHEV Volvo XC T C PHEV S T C PHEV V T C PHEV S T AWD C PHEV Range Rover PHEV Vogue C PHEV Range Ro r Spo PHEV HSE Dynamic C PHEV Range Rover Sport PHEV E Dynamic C PHEV BMW i D PHEV BMW i Roadster D PHEV BMW E D PHEV BMW E D PHEV BMW LE D PHEV BMW LE D PHEV SF Stradale D PHEV Porsche Panamera EHybrid D PHEV Porsche Panamera Turbo S EHybrid D PHEV Mercedes Benz S E D PHEV Mercedes Benz S E D PHEV Total , TOTAL EV Segment , , , , , Total Passenger Market , , , , EV Share . . . . BEV BEV , , , , PHEV PHEV , BEV PHEV . . . . . . . . . BEV of TM . . . . RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT By Brand Make YTD YTD EV Share Audi . BMW . Ferrari . Ford . Hyundai . Jaguar . Kia . Mazda . MG . Mercedes . Mini . Mitsubishi . Nissan . Porsche . Range Rover . Renault . Skoda . TESLA . Toyota . Volkswagen . Volvo . Total RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT From: David Crawford To: Barbara Kuriger ; Brent Johnston ; Davey Uprichard ; David Crawford ; David Lorier (Parliament) ; Elena Hood ; Ewan Delany ; Freddie Holmes ; Haobo Wang ; Helen White ; J Genter (MIN) ; Hugh Mazey ; Jason Familton ; Kerry Lambeth (Parliament) ; M Wood (MIN) ; Hon Michael Woodhouse ; Peter Mersi ; Seb (Parliament) Brown ; Simon Court Subject: David CrawfordFrustrated, the Motor Industry Association withdraws support for the Clean Car Standard under the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle) Amendment Bill Friday, September Attachments: MIA withdraws support for the Land Transport clean vehicle amendment bill.docx Ltr to M Wood on timing of WLTP testing and Euro for new vehicles.docx Cabinet paper The Clean Car Standard.pdf Hi all Please find attached: MIA press release on the recently introduced bill Land Transport (Clean Vehicles)Amendment Bill, and In relation to that press release, attached for your information is a letter we hadpreviously sent to the Minister on aspects of policy on the clean car initiatives and theCabinet paper on the same subject. David Crawford, Chief Executive Officer ListingMIA RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Friday Septe mber Frustrated, t he Motor Industry Association withdraws support for the Clean Car Standard under the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle) Amendment Bill The Government rec ently introduced the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle) Amendment Bill into the House. The MIA has stated on many occasions that we support well thought out and constructive policies that will lead to an increased rate in the reduction of CO emissions from the light vehicle fleet. However, in i ntroducing the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle) Amendment Bill the Government has demonstrated an appalling lack of understanding o f how to effectively reduce emissions from the light vehicle fleet and will instead impos e unwarranted and significant costs on to consumers. They have ignored well thought and considered advice from industry. Worldwide, t he aim of fuel economy standards (the clean car standard) is to set a clear pathway for a consistent reduction in CO emissions from vehicles entering the fleet where that pathway rewards those that respond and achieve reductions in line with t he targets and chastises those that dont with penalties. The Bill as tab led in Parliament deviates from standards implemented in other countries and is poorly designed. The rate of reduction (emission targets) is so steep that no current distributors ap art from those solely supplying battery electric vehicles, can reach them in the time span required under the Bill. The targets are particularly severe on light commercial vehicles where there are few options for alternative low emissions vehicles this s ide of . The target s are a nasty surprise . Under the targets in the Bill, there is a reduction in emissions required from now until the end of and then a reduction required over the next two years to the end of . No jurisdiction anyw here in the world requires this rate of reduction and which will see us get ahead of what Europe requires for that same time period. There is no obvious rationale and it seems it is a revenue gathering exercise for New Zealand to have ta rgets that are tougher than other jurisdictions like Europe. New Zealand new vehicle importers parent companies are already making their production plan out to and these will be based on what Europe , Asia and Australia need not what our government wan ts. RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT When combining fees under the clean car discount with penalties under the clean car standard, t he price for light vehicles will need to increase on average by about to percent to offset the penalties. Because the clean standard is applied on a weighted basis, even small vehicles will be hard hit. Also alarming, was a Cabinet decision to require all vehicles, whether new or used, manufactured from January to be tested using the Worldwide Harmonised Light Vehicle Test Procedure ( WLTP ) protocol , or if that is not available by the American Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) test. Th e WLTP protocol is only required for the Euro (d) vehicle exhaust emissions standard which Australia and New Zealand have not adopted . Further the Cabinet paper incorrectly stated our source market for vehicles is Europe and Japan who already require WLTP testing. Th is was based on incorrect advice from officials who, at the time it was written, did not understand that New Zealands major source of vehicles are those made for Australia and complied to their standards, which currently do not require WLTP. As drafted, the Bill will impose crippling penalties on the vast majority of current new vehicle distributors operating in New Zealand and ultimately onto consumers. Due to the unreasonableness of the Bill as drafted the Motor Industry Association withdraws support for the Clean Car Standard under the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle) Amendment Bill. ENDS For Further Information: Also attached Letter sent to the Minister of Transport on August outlining issues with less than accurate information in his Cabinet Paper titled The Clean Car Standard Cabinet Paper The Clean Car Standard.pdf David Crawford Chief Executive Officer, Motor Industry Association Phone: Email: davidmia.org.nz RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT s ()(a) Page of In Confidence Minister of Transport Chair, Cabinet The Clean Car Standard Proposal . This paper seeks agreement to : introduc e a vehicle import carbon dioxide ( CO ) standard called the Clean Car Standard (the Standard) ; and the Standards key design features, which have been improved following consultation with the public and the vehicle industry. Relation to G overnment priorities . This proposal is intended to be one of a number of actions taken in response to Parliaments declaration of a climate change emergency . It also gives effect to the commitment in the Labour Party s Clean Energy Policy and to the Cooperation Agreement between the Labour and Green parties, to regulate a vehicle CO standard to increase the supply and variety of low emissions vehicles . . The Standard will be one of a number of transport policies included in the Governments first Emission Reduction Plan , which must be by December . This Plan, led by the Minister for Climate Change, will outline the strategies and policies that will be used to achieve the first e missions budget for and will be built on to deliver the second and third budgets. Executive Summary . The Climate Change Response (Zero Carbon) Amendment Act requires CO emissions to be reduced to net zero by . As transport is responsible for percent of New Zealands domestic CO emissions, this target cannot be achieved without largely decarboni sing transport. . Twothirds of transport emissions come from our light vehicles, which are cars, sport utility vehicles ( SUVs ), vans, utes and light trucks all under . tonnes. Fortunately, low emission light vehicles offer a substantial, achievable and costeffective opportunity to decarbonise . . It is critical to take immediate action to realise this opportunity . Without intervention, every high emitting vehicle that enters the fleet today will be driven until it is, on average, years old. For new vehicles, this means it may be until there is another opportunity to switch these vehicles for low carbon ones. Cars and other light vehicles produced kT of CO emissions in . This compares to the domestic transport sector total of , kT and to New Zealand s total CO emissions of , kT. New Zealands emissions including methane and other gases is , kT CO e (Ministry for the Environment, New Zealands Greenhouse Gas Inventory publishe d in ). RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of . Increasing the up take of zero emission vehicles and introducing clean car standards are areas of cooperation under the Cooperation Agre ement between the New Zealand Labour Party and the Green Party of Aotearoa New Zealand . This policy was initially worked on by Hon Julie Anne Genter as Associate Minister of Transport in the last term of Parliament. . To realise the light vehicle opportunity , on June Cabinet agreed to release the consultation document: Moving the light vehicle fleet to low emissions: discussion paper on a Clean Car Standard and Clean Car Discount CAB MIN refers. The Standard outlined in this doc ument is the same as that proposed in Labours Clean Energy Policy . . Following consultation in , Ministry of Transport officials worked with the vehicle industry and the Automobile Association to improve the design of the Standard. I am now seeking Cabinet agreement to introduce the Standard and its improved design . . The Standard will help incentivise the transition to low er carbon vehicles which is key to achieving emission reductions in the transport sector. Depending on the year chosen a g target could reduce emissions by around . million tonnes by ( million tonnes by ). This is complemented by the Government investigation of a biofuels obligation to reduce vehicle emissions of the existing fleet. . If Ministers agree , I will include the legislative amendments needed for the Standard in a Bill amend ing the Land Transport Act , and if necessary, the Land Transport Management Act . I will seek a priority of Category for the Bill on the Legislative Programme meaning that it must be passed in the year . The design of the St andard I am proposing include s: Vehicle CO targets : the initial headline vehicle CO target will be gram s. There are three target years proposed for Cabinets consideration. and more stringent targets will be introduced in future years Adjustments for vehicle weight and types : CO targets will vary by vehicle weight allowing all vehicle types to attract an appropriate target. There will also be lower target for cars and SUVs, and a higher one for vans, utes and light trucks . Compliance regime : allowi ng the new vehicle distributors and used vehicle importers to take different approaches to meeting their CO obligations, and instituting banking, borrowing and transfers, to manage target over and under achievement. Charges : to incentivise meeting CO targets and generate funds to contribute to wards projects that will lower emissions across the transport system . Offences and p enalties : for failing to keep the necessary records required for the Standard and administrative misconduct. Exceptions : for vehicles of social and historic value . Administration of the scheme : allocating responsibility to Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency (Waka Kotahi) . This includes to establish processes to mitigate gaming and rorting of the Standard and to ensur e consistency for vehicle CO emission values. RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of . All oth er OECD countries bar Russia have now implemented a light vehicle emissions standard, including the countries we import most used vehicles from . Many have also now set dates after which new petrol and diesel vehicles will be banned, from as early as . . Our average vehicle has higher emissions because of the foll owing supply and demand factors: Manufacturers do not supply us with their most efficient vehicle models . When they do it is often with a delay of several years. In , the most efficien t vehicle models on our market had, on average, percent higher emissions than their counterpart models in the United Kingdom. Vehicle manufacturers are able to supply less efficient vehicles because we have insufficient regulations, or meaningful incentives, to lower vehicle CO emissions. This allows manufacturers to minimise their costs by providing vehicles with older and cheaper technologies. Consumers are increasingly buying heavier new vehicles with higher emission s. The graphs below show the shift in consumers buying patterns f or new vehicles over the last five years. Another way to appreciate this shift, is that in small vehicles were . percent of new vehicle sales. By their share of sales halved to . percent. Half of the vehicles that come into New Zealand each year are used imports . In , the average ag e of the e v hicles was around seven years. In average age had increased to around years. Generally, for the same vehicle model, newer versions tend to be more energy efficient and thus have lower emissions. . New Zealand is an outlier among developed countries, along with Australia and Russia, in not regulating vehicle CO emissions fuel efficiency. Australia will move forward in through its vehicle industry having a voluntary CO standard of gkm in . New Zealand stands to benefit substantially from implementing a Clean Car Standard . Vehicle CO standards are used widely internationally and have been effective in mobilising large, low cost reductions in vehicle CO emissions. Introduced here , a Clean Car Standard would: progressively reduce the average emissions of light vehicles coming into New Zealand ; increase the range of low emitting vehicles available to New Zealander s across all vehicle types (for example, vans, utes, SUVs and cars) ; This includes the right hand drive markets, United Kingdom () , Tokyo (), and remainder of Japan (mid s). International Energy Agency , Technology Roadmap, Fuel Economy of Road Vehicles, OECDIEA, Paris RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of lower the average age of used imports coming in , as younger vehicle models tend to have lower emissions tha n older versions of the same model ; give New Zealanders earlier access to the world s best low emission vehicles through increasing the leverage new vehicle distributors have with their parent companies ; reward vehicle suppliers that choose to import and m arket low emission vehicles, and in so doing will make them more competitive. . From a national perspective, implementing the S tandard will provide a net benefit. The largest portion of these benefits will come from fuel savings to households and businesses. Compared to other vehicle emission reduction policies investigated by officials, the Standard is estimated to deliver the largest reduction in emissions and largest net benefit to the country. The Standard would also contribute to reducing har mful local air pollution, which imposes a multi bi lion dollar social cost on New Zealand annually due to its impact on human health. A Clean Car Standard would reduce motoring costs for people and bus nesses . The poor fuel efficiency and higher emissions of our vehicles comes at a significant cost to households and businesses. On average, New Zealanders pay percent more in annual vehicle fuel costs than people in the European Union, even though Europes petrol prices are higher . . By having no vehicle CO standards we are forgoing a cost effective way to decarbonise as the resultant fuel savings are significant. Research from the United States, over the period , suggests that the households that benefit the most from vehicle CO fuel efficiency standards are low income ones. This is because as a percentage of income, savings from improved fuel efficiency are highest for households with lower incomes . How the Standard would work . The Standard would achieve the above effect by setting increasing ly tighter CO emission targets, which would vary by vehicle weight . A large SUV will not be expected to meet the same CO emission target as a small car . The CO targets would be fleet based averaged across all the vehicles sold rather than applying to individual cars . This would allow suppliers to import vehicles with emissions over the target without charge, as long as they are balanced by sufficient numbers of vehicles with emissions under the target. In this way suppliers would decide how they will configure their mix of vehicles to meet the target. . The Standard would apply to all new and used light vehicles sold for the first time in New Zealand . The vehicles already in New Zealand and being re sold would not be affected. The key design decisions for the Standard () Vehicle CO targets A fleet average of grams CO per kilometre Policies investigated included the Clean Car Discount, varying annual vehicle licenses, fringe benefit tax exemptions for EVs , GST exemptions for EVs, increased depreciation rates for EVs, and emissions testing as part of Warrants of Fitness. http:bakercenter.utk.eduwp contentuploadsEquity Impacts ofFuelEconomy Reportfinal.pdf RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of . The consultation document and Labour Partys Clean Energy Policy advocate a fleet average CO target of grams CO per kilometre (g CO km) in . The industry has requested more time to adjust so additional options of and are added for Cabinets consideration . . A target of (g CO km) by the original timeframe is technically plausible for New Zealand . A target would put us five years behind the European Union. It would be around two years behind the targets in countries such as Canada, China and the USA states that have joined California in setting their own emission standards. However the vehicle industry has argued strongly that globally, low and zero emission vehicles are priorit ised for Europe, which has the strongest regulated targets, consumer incentives, and penalties, and that this heavily reduces what can be supplied to New Zealand in the short term. . Japan reached gkm in , although does so with a higher proportion of small vehicles than what New Zealand buys , and offers subsidies to low emission vehicles . Nevertheless, Japan has steadily increased its manufacture of hybrid vehicles and electric vehicles for its domestic market , increasingly enabl ing our used import market to transition to low emission vehicles. . The vehicle industry has argued a target year of could present a real risk to the vehicle market. Some suppliers have said they would be unlikely to secure enough affordable lower emission vehicles, and this would limit supply and push up vehicle prices. This could reduce public confidence in the policy . . The new vehicle industry has requested a arget of and officials last year recommended , as the earliest the industry c ould achieve a gkm target. A or goal could be achieved by the Clean Car Standard without many additional emission reduction policies, and gives the global auto motive market more time to supply New Zealand with more affordable low and zero emission vehicles Current t ansport policies, with the addition of a Clean Car Standard, will already fall short of deliver ing emissions reductions with the urgency that we need to tackle our and climate commitments , and a lat er target would increase that gap . . In order to accelerate th is change , and ensure the success of this transition, I will come back to Cabinet with further proposals for a feebate scheme or variant on this that creates stronger incentivesdisincentiv es to encourage the purchase of low emission vehicles and measures to increase access to low emissions transport options for lower income households. It is unlikely that the Clean Car Standard target can be met in or or more stringent targets achieved without additional polic ies such as these. Targets would be phased in with annual changes . The consultation document outlined two approaches for phasing in the CO emissions targets. These were: having annual CO targets that lower to the headline target through time, or requiring that an increasing percentage of suppliers fleets meet the headline target. . I am proposing to phase in this policy by having annual CO targets , which is in line with the feedback of most submitters. Annual targets better communicate the need for all vehicle importers to achieve emission reductions. All data is from the International Council for Clean Transportation. RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of . The first year of the Standard, , would be an importer registration, education and familiarisation period only. This also gives suff icient time for Waka Kotahi to develop necessary systems. Suppliers would not be obliged to meet any targets until January . . The tables in Appendix show how progressive annual targets would be phased in depending on whether a target year of , , or is set. Each scenario assumes an init ial rate of improvement of to percent in emissions per year, followed by much higher rates closer to the target year. This gives the industry and public more time to adjust . The average rate of improv ement for the past year s has been percent , although in some vehicle segments, such as utes, there has been no emission reduction in several years. Light Passenger Vehicles and Light Commercial Vehicles have separate targets . I also propose that the gkm target be split into separate targets for light passenger vehicles (cars and SUVs) of gkm , and light commercial vehicles (vans, utes and light trucks under . tonnes) of gkm. The two vehicle categories refer to body type. They do not distinguish between vehicles used for a commercial or an individual purpose. . The two separate targets should result in an average CO level being achieved across th e whole light fleet of gkm . Separate targets were recommended by the International Council for Clean Transportation and the vehicle industry They are proposed because: the rate of annual efficiency improvements in light commercial vehicles has historically been lower than that for li ght passenger vehicles ; leading edge technology is first applied to light passenger vehicles, which makes a lower target appropriate for them ; and it is what all other jurisdictions have. This will make our system easier to understand for overseas manufacturers and enable us to make better comparisons with other countries . For example, Europe has a split target for light commercial vehicles of gkm by . Vehicle weight adjust ment and small vehicle target . I propose that the CO targets be weight adjusted. This would mean a van or a ute would not be expected to meet the same CO target as a small car. . A weight adjusted target would ensure there is equal pressure to increase the supply of lower emissions vehicle s across all vehic le types (i.e. small and medium cars, SUVs, vans and utes). A diagram showing how the weight adjustment would be done, and t he formula that would be used are in Appendix . . The vehicle industry and Ministry of Transport officials have , however, identified that the weight adjust ed formula tends to give small vehicles very low targets relative to the average vehicle. The vehicle industry and my officials have recommended an exception to this formula for small vehicles with a tare weight under , kilograms. For these vehicles a single target would apply each year irrespective of the weight differences between them. Provisionally, t he targets Light passenger vehicles includes all sedans, hatchbacks, convertibles, station wagons and SUVs in the vehicle class MA. Light commercial vehicles are utility type vehicles in the following vehicle classes: NA, MD , MD and MB. Modelling assumes a reduction in the market share of vans and utes back to levels experienced earlier this decade (from . to around ) , as this will generate a reduction in emissions . Alternatively, with no market share change, carsSUVs would need to reduce by an additional g or utesvans by an additional g in the target year . For example a popular small car is the Suzuki Swift with models ranging in tare weight from kilograms. RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of would be those set by the weight adjusting formula for a vehicle of , kilograms . I propose to confirm the slope and minimum threshold for the weight adjusted target in the process of implementing this initiative. . This will avoid the potentially perverse outcome of suppliers reduc ing the number and type of small vehicles on the market because th ey cannot meet strict targets derived from the formula. . A weight adjusted target does not provide an incentive for consumers to opt for smaller vehicles over larger ones. Additional policies that influence consumers vehicle decisions are still needed, such as a clean car discount (which would not be weight adjusted) and targeted public engagement on this issue. Targets will be reviewed periodically . The key challenge in setting the CO targets is ensuring they create the right level of tension for suppliers. They should drive suppliers to secure the supply of more low emission vehicles. . If targets are too aggressive, however, they could reduce the range of vehicle s available, increase p rices, and reduce the number of vehicle suppliers. At the same time, there is the potential for the increase in the supply of low emission vehicles to be much faster than predicted, and weak targets would risk New Zealand continuing to be a dumping ground for the worlds higher emitting vehicles. . Given the uncertainty, the industry suggested having a review of the suitability of the mandated CO targets . If the targets prove too aggressive, or not aggressive enough, they would be reset. I support their suggestion with a first review done in . . To lessen the risk of the review undermining the perceived durability of the Standard, the review would focus on what industry leaders in em ssion reductions are achieving , both in New Zealand and globally . It would also be informed by the Climate Change Commissions advice on the rolling set of three yearly emission budgets. . After the review, the ongoing review period is expected to be on five year intervals . For example, a review of the provisional target would occur in and a review of the target would occur in . This enables the future targets to be ambitious, achievable, and clear. The Minister of Transport would retain the ability to update target intervals and commission further reviews necessary due to changes in the vehicle market . . I also recommend that the terms of reference for the reviews of targets be agreed by the Minister for Transport. I envisage that the reviews would involve the vehicle industry, and include advice from overseas experts, such as the International Committee on Clean Transportation. () Compliance regime Fleet averaging and vehicle byvehicle targets . All new vehicle di stributors , and some used vehicle importers, would be required to ensure the average emissions of their fleets of vehicles meet the CO target for that year . At the end of each year, the average CO emissions of the vehicles they supply would need to be equal to, or less than, the annual target. If it were higher the y would have to pay a charge imposed under Transport regulation. RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of . A fleet based target gives importers the flexibility to meet the annual, average CO target over the course of a year and offset the sale of high emitting models with low emitting models overtime. . For most used vehicle suppliers I propose a simpler default compliance model. Used vehicle importers would comply with the CO target on a vehicle byvehicle basis. This would take place at the point of vehicle entry certification, where the vehicles CO emissions would be compared to the applicable target. If the emissions are higher, then the importer would pay a charge before the vehicle is released . If its emissions were lower than the target , the vehicle would be released to the importer and the importer would accrue a CO credit. This credit could be used to offset the emissions of future high emission vehicles. Appendix shows worked ex amples of this approach. . The design ensures that used vehicle importers are incentivised to achieve the same result over the course of a year that businesses using a fleetaveraging model do. This design would be administratively simpler for smaller used vehicle importers who purchase vehicles on an ad hoc basis through online auctions. As they cannot ensure which vehicles they will win at auction, it will provide greater certainty about the costs they will face , and therefore the bids they can make. It wo uld also significantly reduce the risk of non compliance. This option has been put forward by the used vehicle representative body and co designed with Ministry of Transport officials. . Reputable used vehicle importers would still be able to opt for the f leetaveraging approach if they meet specific criteria. Banking, borrowing, and transferring . The Standard will increase compliance costs for the vehicle industry. To help minimise these costs, I propose the following three flexibili y mechanisms: Banking, the ability for suppliers to carry forward any annual overachievement of their CO targets to offset future underachievement over the following three years (this would only apply where fleet averaging is used) . Borrowing, the ability for suppliers to underachieve an annual emissions target and to make the underachievement up in the following year by overachieving (this would only apply where fleet averaging is used) . Transferring, which allow s supplier s to transfer overachievement of their CO target to one or more other supplier s operating within the same compliance regime . This creates larger fleets of vehicles over which the CO from high emitting vehicles can be offset by low emitting ones . This flexibility is considered important to enabling the industry to reduce Vehicle offsetting would be enabled within this appr oach through each importer having a CO account analogous to a bank account. The currency of the credit would be grams CO km. The accounts would be set up and maintained by Waka Kotahi. The vehicle industry is concerned about the number of transitory traders in the used vehicle industry. They consider that man y would actively evade their obligations to meet annual average fleet CO targets and pay any charges , for example, by dissolving t heir businesses and establishing new ones. These criteria would include that the supplier: is registered as a vehicle importer with Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency has been operating continuously for at least five years and can reasonably be ex pected to remain in the business of importing vehicles and trading as the same company for the coming two years has not been convicted under the Fair Trading Act or the Motor Vehicle Sales Act in the past five years has not been convicted of a cr iminal offence involving dishonesty in the past five years. RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of . The proposed charges are lower than those in the consultation document. These changes have been made in response to issues identified by the vehicle industry . Specifically: The per gram charge for new vehicle fleets has been reduced from per gram to . This recognises t hat irrespective of the vehicles sought by domestic distributors, the final decisions about the vehicles supplied are made by overseas vehicle manufacturers . The per gram charge for used import fleets has been reduced from per gram to . This recogni ses that used vehicles have lower lifetime emissions in New Zealand than new vehicles . There is a new charge of per gram for used vehicle suppliers who comply on a vehicle byvehicle basis and per gram for individuals who import new vehicles and co mply on a vehicle byvehicle basis. The lower amounts recognise that a per vehicle charge is imposed immediately. As well, with vehicle byvehicle compliance, a supplier would only fully benefit from offsetting within its fleet if it imports sufficient num bers of low emission vehicles ahead of high emission ones. . The charges are likely to be as low as they can be without compromising their effectiveness as an incentive to change behaviour . They are initially set at a low er evel to enable a transition for the industry, and will then increase by in . After this increase, the resulting figures will still be below th ose originally proposed by the consultation document. . However, as it is difficult to know with certain ty the effect the charges will have as an incentive to meet the targets , I propose an initial review of charges be carried out in together with the wider CO target review. Reviews of charges will be performed with a view that rates continue to increa se over time, so that overachievement is increasingly rewarded and underachievement increasingly discouraged . . Waka Kotahi would be the administrator and enforcement agency for the Standard. It would be empowered to impose charges . It would also have the ability to require all necessary data from suppliers that it needs to fulfil this function. Offences for administrative misconduct . To ensure the integrity of the data underpinning the Standard, I propose that offence s be created for failing to keep the necessary accounts, or records, required for the Standard, or to provide information that is misleading, incorrect or incomplete. These offence s would apply from . I also propose that the penalty for the offence s be: for an individ ual, a fine not exceeding , ; for a person or an organisation other than an individual, a fine not exceeding ,. . Waka Kotahi would be empowered to bring court proceedings where there appears to be intentional or reckless breaches of the reportin g requirements, and penalties would be imposed on conviction. ()Exceptions . I propose that the Standard does not apply to the following light vehicles: The penalty per gram in European regulation is NZD per gram. This penalty is the same as applies for the offence of failing to keep and provide records for the administration and enforcement of the regional fuel tax. RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of vehicles intended primarily for military operational purposes agricultural vehicles equipment that are primarily driven on farms, such as tractors, harvesters, mowers, toppers, bailers special interest vehicles vintage vehicles and veteran vehicles scratch built vehicles and modified vehicles certified by the Low Volume Vehicle Technical Association Incorporated.. . These exceptions acknowledge that some vehicles have specific social and historic value to some New Zealanders. The impact of not including these vehi cle types on New Zealands CO emissions would be minimal, as the number of vehicles imported each year is very low and they tend to be driven less than other vehicles. . The importation of damaged vehicles not covered by the above exceptions will remain subject to the Standard when they reach entry certification , otherwise they could be deliberately imported and repaired as an avoidance strategy. Vehicles over years of age would also remain subject to the Standard, where not covered by exceptions above . () Administration of the scheme . Waka Kotahi would administer and enforce the Standa d and the Ministry of Transport would provide ongoing policy support. The Standard will be supported by an online tracking and forecasting tool . To help importers comply, Waka Kotahi w ll develop an online tracking and forecasting tool. This tool will allow importers to see how their CO accounts would be affected if they purchase particular vehicles in international auctions. It would also help importers complying on a fleet basis by easily allowing them to monitor how their actual average fleet CO emissions are tracking, against their fleet targets. It would be populated with vehicle data obtained in the vehicle certification process Standardising vehicle CO values . Currently New Zealand accepts vehicles assessed through five different drive cycle tests. This can lead to different CO values even for the same vehicle. Over time this issue will be improved through manufacturers using the Worldwide Harmonised Light Vehicle Test Procedure (WLTP) . Thus f or the Standard the WLTP will be the default test for determining values and values from other tests will be converted to it . The methodology and conversion formulas will be specified in Transport regulation using figures shown in Appendix . All figures in this Cabinet Paper and the consultation document are New European Driving Cycle ( NEDC ) figures. . Currently , the majority of vehicles entering New Zealand are assessed by the NEDC and the Japanese JC and tests . These tests under report emissions compared to the WLTP. European manufacturers have been required to use the WLTP from September , a nd Japan ese manufacturers will be required to do so from January . Special interest vehicles are defined in Transport regulation as vehicles with historic value, or vehicles such as classic ca rs. Vintage vehicles are motor vehicles constructed on or after January and are at least years old on the that the y were registered, reregistered, or licensed. Veteran vehicles are motor vehicles constructed before January . RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of . New Zealand will transition to the WLTP to enable a better assessment of vehicle emissions and our progress towards CO targets. To facilitate this, I propose that vehicles manufactured from January (regardless of whether used or new when imported) will need to include WLTP fuel economy and CO emissions information in order to be certified for use on New Zealand roads . This should not create a supply constraint on vehicles given our major source markets of Europe and Japan will have had to align to WLTP testing prior to that , though it may create impacts on suppliers using Australian models who have not adopted WLTP . . American manufactured vehicles are assessed by a different , but modern, Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA) test cycle which would continue to be accepted . These vehicles are under percent of vehicle imports. . I also propose that New Zealand stop allowing traditional petrol and diesel vehicles into the fleet that have been assessed with the old Japanese drive cycle test from July . The CO values from this test are too variable and could result in importers being either unfairly penalised with charges, or not penalised enough relative to other importers. . Originally I considered restricting all vehicles certified to the Japanese drive cycle test including hybrids and electric vehicles . However, this would restrict a proportion of older, and therefore more affordable, low emission hybrid vehicles. To enable low income households to access fuel saving s and contribute to the g target, we will permit hybrid and electric vehicles on the old Japanese test cycle for now . . The Dieselgate scandal has revealed in Europe and USA a deliberate and growing gap between the emissions measured in testing versus real world performance. One result has been the development of more modern Euro standards that place increasing pressure on manufacturers that tested emissions are reflected in real world performance , plus more recently the inclusion of CO into vehicle laboratory esting . Euro became mandatory in Europe in and equivalent standards are now incorporated in North America, India and China. New Zealand presently accepts Euro on new vehicles and Euro on used vehicles , which were supers eded respectively and years ago. Less than of Euro standard based vehicles entering New Zealand in meet Euro . I will therefore establish a phased approach over this decade for New Zealand light vehicles to transition to the latest Euro st andards for new and used vehicles , and equivalent standards from other markets . The phasing will need to take into account our used vehicle import market and provide notice to our new vehicle industry as it would require the industry to supply improved vehicles . In addition to this giving greater certainty that stated CO figures conform to real world performance , this will have an important impact on reducing harmful NOx, carbon monoxide, and particulate emissions. . In my review, I will consider how sufficient the current light vehicle emission policy is on reduc ing CO emissions and in enabling good quality emissions data . I will review whether it is appropriate to progressively stop allowing entry certification of vehicles assessed to the other drive cycle tests , such as the Japanese JC test . I will also review findings from international research regarding the degree that WLTP values reflect realworld emissions, to determine whether future policy changes are warranted. I will consider impacts on vehicle safety in performing my review. VW was fo und to have defeat devices meaning NOx was times higher in real world than in testing . An ICCT study showed an average European realworld CO emission divergence of in . https:theicct.orgsitesdefaultfilespublicationsICCT RoadTested .pdf The EU plans to perform ongoing real world testing of WLTP values and publish findings throughout th is decade , due to historical and present discrepa ncies between vehicle emission test cycles and real world results . RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of . Also there will be a small number of vehicles with no manufacturers CO value. In this situation I propose that Waka Kotahi be empowered to ascribe a suitable value based on authoritativ e information about the same or similar vehicles , and that if no suitable value can be found, the vehicle will be deemed to exceed its weight adjusted target by a set value of g km. Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade view on the Standards alignment with our trade obligations . The Ministry of Transport considers that charges are necessary to incentivise meeting CO targets. However, the ideal outcome is for importers to adjust the mix of vehicles they are supplying s o that no charges are imposed. The proposed design of the Standard seeks to incentivise this outcome by: reviewing the stringency of the CO targets in . If the targets prove too aggressive, or not aggressive enough, they would be reset ; having split targets for passenger and commercial vehicles ; having a single target for small vehicles up to , kilograms (tare weight) ; allowing the used vehicle sector to meet the target on a vehicle consignment basis, which allows low emitting vehicles to offset h igh emitting vehicles (as shown in Appendix ); the flexibility mechanisms of transferring credits , banking and borrowing. . Another mitigating factor is the requirement, since March , for all used vehicle imports to have electronic stability control (ESC). Anecdotal data suggests this is already having the co benefit of increasing the supply of low emission vehicles. . . . RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of . . . Implementation . The Ministry of Transport will work with the Parliamentary Counsel Office to develop the necessary legislation for th e Standard. Waka Kotahi will develop, build, test and implement the Information Technology system and business processes to operationalise it. . The intention is for a Bill to be drafted and introduced in early and for the Standard and accompanying reg ulations to be in force and taking effect early . Waka Kotahi will need months to fully operationalise the Standard, meaning this wont occur until mid . Financial Implications . Implementation of the Standard is not possible without additional funding RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of million tonnes to million tonnes . The marginal abatement cost per tonne of CO ranges from to . This indicates that the benefits in fuel savings and CO reductions are in the order of to from every tonne of CO avoided through the Standard. . These results were based on a sales weighted target of gram of CO emissions by with a per gram charge for new imports and per gram charge for used vehicle imports. . Since the costbenefit analysis was completed, the design of the Standard has been improved by the changes suggested by the vehicle industry. These changes will make the Standard easier to comply with and increase the likelihood that the Standards targets will be achieved. . The level o f uncertainty is likely to increase over the next two to three years, as the economy recovers from the impact of Covid . Given the impending global economic slowdown with consumers and businesses being less likely to take on additional risk, th s would h ave significant impact on vehicle purchase decisions, which will affect the supply of vehicles over the next few years. Regulatory Impact Statement . A Regulatory Impact Statement has been prepared and is attached to this Cabinet paper. It has been assess ed by an inter agency panel as partially meeting the quality assurance criteria. . The Regulatory Impact Statement provides some indicat on of the impact the proposal will have on businesses. However the Regulatory Impact Statement acknowledges that some imp acts are unknown and will depend on business performance and COVID recovery. As such, the Ministry of Transport and Waka Kotahi will monitor the changes in the industry as the policy is implemented. Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA . The Ministry for the Environment (MfE) has been consulted and confirms that the CIPA requirements do apply to this proposal. MfE is highly supportive of the proposal and expects that it will deliver substantial reductions to CO emissions over time. The mo delling of the emissions reductions are subject to high levels of uncertainty, but it is MfEs view that the estimated impact will likely be at the high end of the emissions reductions range provided. This assessment is based on analysis of the Ministry of Transports modelling, comparative modelling and the effects of similar international schemes. . The CIPA Disclosure Sheet is attached as Appendix . Population impact . There are no significant gender, disability, or other population implications from the Standard. Modified vehicles needed by people with disabilities are to be exempt from the Standard. . People and businesses who require vehicles such as utes, where emission reducing technology is still coming to the market , could potentially face an increase in vehicle prices in the early years of the scheme . However, the supply of low emission options is expected to continue to A marginal abatement cost is a measure of the cost effectiveness of the policy intervention in reducing GHG emissions. It is calculated by dividing the net present value (NPV) of the intervention with the expected reduction in emissions from implementation of the intervention. When the estimated MAC is negative, it indicates implementation of the policy intervention has a net benefit. RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of increase across all vehicle classes and prices are expected to fall . For example, a Toyota Hilux hybrid ute and a fully ele ctric LDV ute could be available in New Zealand in late . Ford is working to release a plug in hybrid Ford Ranger ute in other countries vehicle markets in . . As well, where higher emission vehicles, such as utes, are imported and the supplier offsets the higher emissions with lower emitting vehicles then no charges would be imposed. . Over percent of annual vehicle sales are of vehicles already in the New Zealand fleet. These vehicles will not be subject to the Standard . This minimises the likelihood that groups such as lower income households and younger workers and students would be negatively affected by the Standard. Human Rights . The proposals in this paper are consistent with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act and the Human Right s Act . Consultation Departmental consultation . The following agencies were consulted in the development of this paper: Waka Kotahi, Treasury, Ministry for the Environment, Department of Conservation, Department of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Defence, New Zealand Defence Force, Ministry of Social Deve lopment, Office for Disability Issues, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, New Zealand Customs Service, Ministry for Primary Industries, Inland Revenue, Te Puni Kokiri, and the Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority. The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet have been informed. Outcome of the public consultation on the Clean Car Reforms . The consultation on the Clean Car Reforms took place over July August . People could comment through Survey Monkey , or by emailing a submission to the Ministry of Transport (the Ministry). An extension to September was granted for key stakeholder organisations to enable them to canvass their members views. . The Ministry received Survey Monkey responses, email submissions and , emails from the actioncampaignnow .co email address set up by the New Zealand National Party. The actioncampaignnow.co emails did not comment on the Standard. A summary of consultation responses and copies of submissions are on the Ministrys website. . There was significant support for th e Standard from Survey Monkey respondents ( percent) and from those who made a written submission ( percent). Overall, percent of submitters who engaged with the discussion document supported the Standard. Opposition to the Standard came from a few individuals, and the motor vehicle industry. https:www.driven.co.nznewsa hybrid version ofthetoyota hiluxuteisonitsway https:www.driven.co.nznewsnz sfirstevutefullyelectric ldvtsettolandin https:www.stuff.co.nzmotoringford working onplugin ranger RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of View of the motor vehicle industry and the Automobile Association . There are a range of views within the vehicle industry about how best to incentive low emission vehicle s. During the consultation process the Motor Industry Association (MIA) (representing new vehicle distributors ) and the Automobile Association expressed a strong prefer ence for a consumer demand based incentive such as the Clean Car Discount. They opposed the Standard, as consulted on, as they consider ed the target to be too aggressive . . Toyota New Zealand, was an exception to this opposition in the new vehicle sector . It support ed the Standard (albeit with a more gradual phase in), arguing it woul d enable new vehicle distributors to better negotiate the supply of larger volumes of low emission vehicles from their overseas manufacturers. . The MIA now supports the Government introducing a fuel economy standard , but with a target year, and only i f it is implemented alongside a progressive feebate scheme so that the two policies work in combination to accelerate the uptake of low emission vehicles . . The Imported Vehicle Industry Association (representing used importers) has consistently opposed both the Standard and Clean Car Discount Nevertheless it has been constructive in suggesting a number of modifications to the design of the Standard . Communications . I intend to announce the Clean Car Standard in consultation with the Prime Ministers Office . Waka Kotahi will develop communication and education materials for the vehicle industry. Proactive Release . I propose to proactively release this Cabinet paper, and the associated cost benefit analysis, the Regulatory Impact Statement, and the climate implications of policy assessment, subject to any necessary redactions. This would be done within business da ys of decisions being confirmed by Cabinet Recommendations The Minister of Transport recommends that Cabinet : .note that the recommendations on the Clean Car Standard have been informed by public consultation and by workshops with the vehicle industry Application and commencement of the Clean Car Standard .agree that the Clean Car Standard will come into effect during with vehicle importers being subject to its registration and reporting requirements and with the obligations to meet annual CO targets applying from January .agree that the Clean Car Standard apply only to new and used light vehicles (vehicles under . tonnes) being imported into New Zealand of the following vehicle classes: MA (passenger car), These are Waka Kotahi vehicle equipment standards classifications RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of MB (forward control passenger vehicle), MC (off road passenger vehicle), MD and MD (omnibus vehicles) and NA (light goods vehicle) .agree that the measurement of vehicle CO emissions and fuel efficiency be grams CO per kilometre Headline CO targets .agree that the first headline CO target be grams CO per kilometre (based on the New European Drive Cycle, or NEDC, test cycle) .agree that the grams CO target be split into separate targets for cars and sport utility vehicles (SUVs ) of grams, and vans, utes and light trucks of grams .agree that to build confidence to proceed with the Clean Car Standard, the suitability of the CO targets (including the split targets) be reviewed in the first half of , with a view to recalibrating them if they prove either too aggressive, or not aggressive enough , but only in a way that is consistent with the Emissions Reduction Plan. .agree that the review take into account impacts on emissons, vehicle safet y, affordability, and availability .invite the Minister of Transport to determine the terms of reference for the above revie w and to commission further interim reviews of targets as and when deemed necessary due to changes in the vehicle market Headline target year and f uture CO targets .agree that the headline target year will be EITHER .. set for , acknowledging that this will be very challenging for the vehicle industry to supply sufficient numbers of affordable low and zero emission vehicles, even with further policies to lower the upfront cost of low emission vehicles OR .. set for , acknowledging that policies to lower the upfront cost of low emission vehicles will be essential to hitting this target OR .. set for , and note that this will increase the gap between the trajectory of transport emissions and with the wider climate change targets the Government has set. .invite the Minister of Transport to report back to the Cabinet Environment, Energy and Climate Committee with recommendations for provisional CO targets for and informed by the advice of the Climate Change Commission at the same time in as the Committee considers decisions on the Emissions Reduction Plan to respond to New Zealands first emissions budgets . .agree to set CO targets on an ongoing basis such that there are always targets set for at least months into the future, and to maintain one or more provisional CO targets that are at least five or more years in the future, an d that such targets are to be ambitious, achievable, and clear RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of Annual targets to phase in the headline CO targets .agree that the CO targets be phased in progressively from and strengthen annually until reaching gkm in the headline target year , as described by Appendix . Determination and labelling of vehicle CO values .note that a vehicles CO emissions will be determined by its manufacturer .agree that where vehicles have no manufacturers CO value , Waka Kotahi will ascribe a suitable value based on author itative information on the same or similar vehicles , and that if no information exists the vehicle will deemed to exceed its weight adjusted target by g .agree the values of vehicle CO emissions for all targets and vehicles be determined by, or converted to, the three phase Worldwide Harmonised Light Vehicle Test Procedure (WLTP) with the methodology and conversion formulas for this purpose being prescribed in Transport regulation .agre e that vehicles manufactured from onwards must have their fuel efficiency and CO emission values assessed through a WLTP cycle test, or if not available, by the American Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) test. .note that vehicle fuel labelling information will need to be transitioned to using WLTP and expanded to include CO emission information . .agree that from July New Zealand stop allowing vehicles into the fleet whose fuel efficiency and CO emission values have been assessed through the pre Japanese drive cycle test, except where they are hybrid or electric vehicles. .agree to update the Land Transport Rule: Vehicle Exhaust Emissions by the end of with a phased approach on used and new light vehicles to meet the latest Euro and equivalent standards from other markets this decade. .agree that in a review consider staged timeframes for ending or restricting the entry certification of vehicles certified to the Japanese , the New European Drive Cycle and the Japan drive cycle tests , and review international research regarding accuracy of WLTP values reflecting realworld emissions, and that such reviews consider any adverse effects or opportunities on vehicle emission policy has on vehicle safety .invite the Minister of Transport to determine the terms of reference for the review The targets for individual vehicle suppliers will be weight adjusted .agree that the headline targets be weight adjusted formulaically to afford heavier vehicles, such as utes, numerically higher targets than lighter vehicles .note that weight adjusted targets provide no incentive for people to opt for smaller vehicles over large r ones, and additional policies that influence consumers vehicle decisions are still needed , such as a clean car discount .agree that small vehicles with a tare weight under a specific value all have the same non weight adjusted annual targets and that the targets would be set through the weight adjustment formula , provisionally for vehicles under , kilograms , with the final weight value to be agreed by the Minister of Transport following further advice on the most recent vehicle registration data and how to apply appropriate pressure on emission reduction on vehicles with different weights RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of There will be two compliance regimes fleet based and vehicle byvehicle .agree that the default fo r the Clean Car Standard is that it applies to all new vehicles imported by the official vehicle distributors on a fleet average basis, and to all imported used vehicles and to new vehicles imported by individuals on a vehicle byvehicle basis .agree that importers of used vehicles may apply to Waka Kotahi to implement the Clean Car Standard on a fleet average basis and the criteria to assess their applications be that the importer: .. is registered as a vehicle importer with Waka Kotahi .. has operated continuously as a vehicle importer for at least years and can reasonably be expected to remain in the business of importing vehicles and trading as the same company for the coming years .. has not been convicted under the Fair Trading Act or the Mot or Vehicle Sales Act in the past years .. has not been convicted of a criminal offence involving dishonesty in the past years CO accounts for vehicle importers .agree that Waka Kotahi will establish and maintain CO accounts for all importers whe ther complying on a vehicle byvehicle or a fleet average basis For vehicle importers complying on a vehicle byvehicle basis .agree that when an importer complying on a vehicle byvehicle basis brings in vehicles with CO emissions below their respective targets, credits would accrue in its CO account, and if the account has sufficient credits these credits would offset the debits from any vehicles that exceed their relevant targets .agree that when a vehicle cau es an importers CO account to move into deficit, a per CO gram charge be paid (or CO credit be transferred from another willing account holder) before the vehicle can be cleared through the vehicle certification process For vehicle importers complying on a fleet averag e basis .agree that when an importer complying on a fleet average basis brings in vehicles, the vehicles CO emission credits and debits offset each other, and the end of year CO emissions result will show separately the light passenger vehicle and the light comm ercial vehicle fleets average weight, average actual CO emissions, and average target emissions , and any adjustments made by CO t ansfers with other importers, .agree that for importers , complying on a fleet average basis, a per CO gram charge be paid on the amount the imported fleets average CO emissions (adjusted for any CO transfers made with other importers) exceed the fleets average target emissions multiplied by the number of vehicles in the fleet Charges and offences .agree to have the following charges imposed under the Land Transport Act to incentivise meeting CO targets: RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of for a period of up to five years . Waka Kotahi will also have the power to investigate and access records .agree that Waka Kotahi be empowered to impose the charges in recommendation above and to take court proceedings where breaches of the reporting requirements in recommendation above have occurred Flexibility mechanisms .agree that new vehicle distributors and used vehicle importers that comply on a fleet average basis be able t o bank any overachievement of their annual CO targets to offset future undera chievement over the following three years, and this ability apply from .agree that new vehicle distributors and used vehicle importers that comply on a fleet average basis be able to underachieve an annual CO target in and and (but not subsequently) and make the underachievement up in the following year by overachieving .agree that a new vehicle distributor (transferor) is permitted to transfer some or all of its CO target overachievement to one or more other new vehicle distributors (transferee) , and do so during the course of a year, and that a corresponding credi t will be applied to the transferees CO account and debit taken from the transferors CO account , and that any price or other conditions o f such transfers are to be determined by the distributors in question .agree that in the same fashion as outlined in recommendation , used vehicle importers may transfer over achievement of CO targets to other used vehicle importers .agree that in providing for credit transfers between suppliers that Waka Kotahi would recover the system and administration costs involved .agree that limits on distributing or receiving transfers of CO credits may be later added if unintended consequences are occurring Standard does not apply to certain v ehicles .agree that the Clean Car Standard does not apply to the following vehicles : .. vehicles intended primarily for military operational purposes .. agricultural vehiclesequipment that are primarily driven on farms, such as, tractors, harvesters, mowers, toppers, bailers .. special interest vehicles . vintage vehicles and veteran vehicles .. scratch built vehicles and modified vehicles certified by the Low Volume Vehicle Technical Association Incorporated Waka Kotahi will be the administrator .agree that Waka Kotahi will be responsible for the implementation, administration and enforcement of the Clean Car Standard RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of Additional incentives .agree in principle to support the introduction of the Clean Car Standard by implementing additional incentives to increase the purchase of low emission vehicles and reduce the number of high emission vehicles in the market Financial implications .note that new funding will be required to implement and administer the Clean Car Standard International Trade Obligations Communications .note that this Cabinet paper, and the associa ted cost benefit analysis, the Regulatory Impact Statement, and the climate implications of policy assessment, will be proactively released, subject to any necessary redactions within business days of decisi ons being confirmed by Cabinet Legislation .invite the Minister of Transport to issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office to give legislative effect to the policy proposals above (including for primary legislation and associated regu lation s) including any necessary consequential amendments, savings and transitional provisions .authorise the Minister of Transport , in consultation with the Minister of Climate Change, to make decisions that are consistent with the overall policy, and support its achievement of emissions reductions, provided that these decisions are confirmed when the Bill is considered for introduction. Cooperation agreement support .note that the Clean Car Standard is included in the Cooperation Agreement between the Labour and Green parties and that the Green Party has been involved in the development of this Cabinet paper .note that the Green Party supports the Clean Car Standard, and c onsiders the headline target year should be either or and that additional policies to reduce transport emissions are necessary. RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of Authorised for Lodgement Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport Dated: RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of Appendix : The CO weight adjusted standard For individual importers fleet targets, the headline targets will be weight adjusted using the following formula: Suppliers CO fleet target annual light vehicle (car and SUV) target a x (M Mo) annual light vehicle (ute and van) target a x (M Mo) a the slope of the limit line. This line will be derived through correlati ng vehicle tare weights and vehicle CO emissions of the vehicles (cars and SUVs or ute s and vans) entering New Zealand in a past year (eg ) M the weighted average tare weight of the light vehicles (cars and SUVs) imported by a supplier M the weighted average tare weight of all light vehicles (utes and vans) imported. For individual vehicles the headline targets will be weight adjusted using the following formula: Cars and SUVs vehicle CO target annual Cars and SUV vehicle targe t a x (V Vo) Utes and vans vehicle CO target annual Utes and Vans vehicle target a x (V Vo) a the slope of the limit line. This line will be derived through correlating vehicle tare weights and vehicle CO emissions of the vehicles (cars and SUVs or ute s and vans) entering New Zealand in a past year (eg ) V the tare weight of the vehicle V the weighted average tare weight of all light vehicles imported (cars and SUVs or utes and vans). RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of Vehicles below kg are to be treated as though they weigh kg. This figure is subject to being finalised. Using vehicle data, the value of a is . and the average weight was kg for cars and SUVs . The value of a is . and the average weight was kg for utes and vans . These figures will be recalculated closer to the adoptio n of the Clean Car Standard using more recent data. RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT August Hon Michael W ood Minister of Transport m.woodministers.govt.nz Timing of Euro d and WLTP testing for new vehicles entering New Zealand Dear Minister I write to rais e with you a material concern with two aspects of decisions Cabinet agreed to when you presented the Clean Car Standard Cabinet paper. These relate to transitioning the new vehicles fleet to WLTP testing for vehicles manufactured from January and a transitioning to moving the fleet to Euro . These are covered in paragraphs to of that Cabinet paper. The statements i n these paragraphs are causing confusion in the new vehicle sector and has potentially significant impacts for us. To avoid conf usion going forward we seek urgent clarification o f what you intend. The Problem Par agraph states (and its subsequent recommendation ), with the part of the paragraph we need clarified highlighted in yellow : New Zealand will transition to the WLTP to enable a better assessment of vehicle emissions and our progress towards CO targets. To facilitate this, I propose that vehicles manufactured from January (regardless of whether used or new when imported) will need to include WLTP fuel economy and CO emissions information in order to be certified for use on New Zealand roads. This should not create a supply constraint on vehicles given our major source markets of Europe and Japan will have had to align to WLTP testing prior to that , though it may create impacts on suppliers using Australian models who have not adopted WLTP . Recommendat ion that relates to the above paragraph states: agree that ve hicles manufactured from onwards must have their fuel efficiency RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT
RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT and CO emission values assessed through a WLTP cycle test, or if not available, by the American Environmenta l Protection Agency (EPA) test. However, befo re dealing with the clarification sought, I must first dispel some less than accurate information in paragraph , as underlined above. While it is true that WLTP testing is required for vehicles entering those markets, it is not true for vehicles made for other markets as these are tested to what is required in those markets. Also, and more importantly, our major source market is vehicles made for the Australasian market. Saying our ma jor source markets are Europe and Japan only relates to where those brands originate from. European brands and Japanese brands that come to New Zealand are made for the Australasian (read Australian) marke t. Australia does not accept nor require WLTP testing and will not for some time. This is furthe r exacerbated by the implication in your Cabinet paper that introduction of Euro and WLTP testing can be done separately. This is not accurate WLTP testing is a part of Euro d. Euro b and Euro standards rely on the NEDC testing protocols. We have provi ded advice to your officials on the timing of when brands can move to Euro d, which in effect is at the same time as Australia adopts Euro d Apart from a few low volume models there is no unique New Zealand market. Implications of my points above are: Currently over of light vehicles entering the New Zealand market are complied toEuro with a smaller number to Euro b. Only a few mo dels are complied to the Euro d standards . This means come January , over of new light vehicles entering New Zealandwill not be able to be tested using the WLTP testing protocol as these vehicles are homologated fo the Australian market under Euro or Euro b which uses the NEDC testing protocol. I dont believe t he Government intends to exclude over of new light vehicles from being able to be complied for entry into service come January . The Solution C urrently under the Land Transpo rt Rules, vehicles can be complied if tested to NEDC or WLTP four cycle (what is used in Europe). Vehicles tested in Japan use the WLTP three cycle protocol which is not yet provided for under y our Land Transport Rules. The MIAs view is that you need to: Allow all three testing protocols now (enable WLTP three cycle testing in addition toNEDC and WLTP four cycle) Liaise with Industry to arrive at a when WLTP testing for new model new vehiclescan be introduced (ties in with the Australian timeline) Liaise with industry on a later for when existing model new vehicles also transfer to WLTP only testing, and Align those dates with the introduction of Euro d, noting the linkage of the NewZealands market to the Australian market. RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT Require fuel cons umption and Co data derived from WLTP four cycle or NEDC testing protocols to be converted to WLTP three cycle values. In other words, t ie together Euro d and WLTP test protocol work programmes as these are directly inter related standards. I would be grat eful if you could consider the issues raised in my letter as a matter of urgency. January is not far away and our sector needs to understand what your intentions are. Kind regards David Crawford C hief Executive Officer. RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT s ()(b)(ii) s ()(b)(ii) RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT s ( ) (b ) (ii) s ()(b)(ii) s ()(b)(ii) RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: David Crawford To: M Wood (MIN) Cc: Elena Hood Subject: David CrawfordClean Car Standard WLTP and Targets. Monday, October Attachments: LPV graph with NZ NEDC plotted.pdf LCV graph with NZ NEDC plotted.pdf Dear Minister (firstly apologies for the false start to this email. I was having IT problems in a hectic Fridayafternoon and I thought I had saved this email to complete today and I didnt notice I hadinadvertently sent it to you until this morning. Your SPS, as efficient as always (thanks Elena),responded quickly when I asked her to pull Fridays draft from your inbox.)Thank you for your letter of October responding to questions I had earlier raised around WLTPtesting. We appreciate your response.You will recall that just after the Land Transport (Clean Vehicles) Amendment Bill was in roducedinto the House I put out a press statement saying that that MIA withdrew our support for the Billas it related to the Clean Car Standard.I did so at the request of members to indicate that while we had supported the need for a fueleconomy standard, we did so only if it contained targets that were realistically achievable with abit of effort. Our view is the targets in the Bill are not achievable and we wanted you and theSelect Committee to know with any doubt where we stood on that.By contrast, the steepness of the targets under the Bill compared to a range of other countrieswith fuel economy standards in place is shown in the two attached graphs (light passengervehicles, and light commercial vehicles). I note that the EU targets are the current enactedtargets, not the ones under discussionconsultation.We did not lightly withdraw our support in uch a public manner, but felt it was important toindicate our strong view on the lack of achievability of the targets and the resulting large costpenalty this will create for over percent of new vehicle importers and consumers of newvehicles.Contrary to what some are saying about our position, the MIAs policy position is clear. Climatechange is a serious issue that has not been properly addressed with necessary policy responsesby any single government the world over, New Zealands included. We simply must and can domore, business as usual is not enough. In this regard we are not disagreeing with you and yourgovernments stated ambition to address climate change and the need to ensure transportcontributes to a reduction on CO emissions as fast as possible.MIA accepts and has publicly stated on numerous occasions that transport must play its part andwe in the new vehicle sector want to do that.I said this before and I will say it again and again. There is nothing more we like to do than selllow emissions vehicles. We want to sell as many as we can get our hands on and therein lies therub. There seems to be a significant difference of opinion between you and the new vehicleimporters on what is achievable and at what rate.The purpose of this email to you is to clarify we still believe a fuel economy standard is necessaryin the Governments policy mix. However, what we really need is for you and your Governmentto help us to help you achieve your goals. If the new vehicle sector is going to perform betterthan business as usual then we need carefully thought out and welldesigned policies to facilitatefaster change.The MIA believes the feebate part of the Bill is mostly OK, there are just some implementationissues to tweak.The Clean Car Standard part of the Bill is altogether a different matter, but only for two issues: RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT the targets (particularly the targets for and which are new); and where Class MC vehicles sit. You know we resisted the grams of CO per km NEDC target by , believing is thebest solution. Moving the NEDC target to is a tough ask but the subsequent two yearstargets in the Bill, which have not been consulted on before, are impossible for New Zealand toreach in those years. Moreover, the point that you want to reach by is more stringent thanany other currently enacted fuel economy standard anywhere in the world.Also, we were somewhat confused to see Class MC vehicles, otherwise known of four wheeldrive offroad vehicles (more commonly known as large heavy duty SUVs), have been movedfrom the light commercial group to the passenger vehicle group. This has been done withoutconsultation with industry who has already made production plans based on your earlier Cabinetdecisions you announced in January. Making changes unannounced that cut across previouslyannounced Cabinet decisions heightens the perceived sovereign risk manufacturers face and thechange is not insignificant. It further negatively impacts our ability to meet the targets, espec allyfor companies that mostly operate at the smaller end of the market as it makes their arget evenlower (tougher) than it previously was.The policy mix the MIA believes is best to adopt is: we want the feebate scheme which you are delivering so thank you, and a reasonable fuel economy standard, which you are not, at this stage delivering. We will be submitting to the select committee on what we believe will be challenging, fasterthan business as usual targets for the Clean Car Standard We believe the targets we will suggestin our submission, while they will not be as aggressive as the ones in the Bill, better enable bothyou and us (industry) to jointly achieve a year on year reduction in CO emissions that is fasterthan business as usual. More importantly we will be suggesting targets we believe will help NZreach carbon neutrality by .The purpose of this email to urge you to work with the select committee so that when the Bill isreported back into the house it contains a workable solution. We ask that you will give oursuggested targets serious consideration.David Crawford, Chief Execut ve Officer ListingMIA RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT David Crawford davidm ia.org.nz Dear David Thank you for your email of October regarding the Clean Car Standard (the Standard) and the classification of heavy duty sport utility vehicles (SUVs). As you know, address ing climate change is a key priority for this Government, and we are committed to implementing policies which will shift New Zealands vehicle fleet to zeroemissions, and decrease transport emissions more widely. It is therefore great to hear that the Motor Industry Association are supportive of a fuel economy standard, the feebate scheme, and of course, selling low emission vehicles. Your feedback on the feas ibility of the and targets as part of the Clean Car Standard will be considered as part of the select committee process . Regarding the MC class vehicles, Cabinets decisions in January confirmed light commercial vehicles (LCVs) includes utility type vehicles in the NA, MD, MD and MB classes. However, as youve noted, the MC class was omitted, so no Cabinet decision has been made on its treatment. The definition of the MC vehicle class in the Land Transport Rule: Vehicle Standards Compliance (page ) as offroad passenger vehicles is consistent with the definition of the Type A or Light Passenger Vehicle (LPV) in the Clean Vehicles Amendment Bill and as a result, we have placed the MC vehicle class within the Type A or passenger vehicle category n the Bill. That said, I acknowledge that the Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) document in February showed MC vehicles as part of the LCVType B grouping, so the treatment of the MC class remains to be resolved. I understand Ministry official, Ewan Delany, has been in touch with you regarding this subject and passed on similar information. Thank you again for getting i n touch and engaging with myself and officials regarding the Clean Vehicles Bill. Yours sincerely Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: Tom Ruddenklau To: Hon Michael Wood Subject: Follow up from meeting on .. Thursday, November Dear Minister Woods Thank you for your time on the call on Tuesday.As discussed, we are very supportive of the implementation of the Clean Car Discount and thethen following Clean Car Standard. You will see a growing level of support of C reductionfrom our Brands ( Peugeot, Citroen, Opel Vauxhall) later this quarter, ramping up significantly inQ as we near the April Clean Car Discount juncture.Thank you also for your offer of assistance in securing supply of low emission vehicles for NewZealand.Your support will genuinely have a meaningful impact on securing supply. If you are open to abrief meet and greet with our Manufacturing principle in Europe, it would be mostadvantageous. Alternatively, a letter of support from yourself would be equally as influential.The content of the letter could be a simple as reiterating New Zealand s seriousness of itscommitments to CO reduction and that allocation of more low emission vehicle supply to ourmarket will be used very wisely. It will have a measurable impact.If this is possible, I will prepare a proper brief and background on the intended audience for yourfurther consideration.I am sure your team will have plenty of submissions on the Clean Vehicles Amendment Bill towade through. There will be one from us ( Auto Distr butors NZ Limited)It will be deeply supportive of the amendment bill, with a couple of tweaks suggested in orderfor us to make sure we ( the nation) meet the targets on time: . Increase the CCS cap of K a little to allow access to more PHEV vehicles. Tweak the weight base calculation to not penalise smaller vehicle under the CCD. Allow those manufacturers who will be in credit under the CCD to redeem those credits early. This will enable the passing on to consumers early to further reduce pricing andstimulate demand of smaller more efficient vehicles Please note, I do have a vested biased interest in these suggestions. They are geared towardour Brands, of which are poised to create the momentum required to create the paradigm shiftour market needs.Thanks again for your time I do appreciate you have a reasonably full dance card.Kind Regards TOM RUDDENKLAU GENERAL MANAGER e.tom.ruddenklauautodistributorsnz.com a. Nugent Street, Grafton, Auckland, cidimage.jpgDE.EDEB Confidentiality notice This email is intended only for the person(s) named in the message header. Unless otherwise indicated, it contains information that is confidential, privileged andor exempt from disclosure under applicable law. If you have received thismessage in error, please notify the sender of the error and delete the message. Thank you. RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT s ()(a) From: Mark Gilbert To: Ewan Delany Cc: M Wood (MIN) Subject: Clean Car Discount Communications Wednesday, January Hi Ewan, I am receiving many questions relating to the clean car discount continuing after April.I know there was approx mill advanced and I have no idea how much has beenconsumed.Naturally the penalties were to top that up and repay it over time. Might be useful if the Minister could perhaps communicate exactly what will happen as of April , as it is a question being asked at a number of new and used EV dealershipsgiven people have to preorder in the main Thanks KRMark MARK GILBERT CHAIRMAN M: E:W:A:markdriveelectric.org.nzdriveelectric.org.nzPO Box , Auckland, , New Zealand PrivilegedConfidential Information may be contained in this message. If you are not the addressee indicated in this message (or responsible for delivery of the message to suchperson), you may not copy or deliver this message to anyone or use the containedinformation. In such case, you should destroy this message and kindly notify the sender byreply email. Please advise immediately if you or your employer do not consent to internetemail for messages of this kind. Opinions, conclusions and other information in thismessage that do not relate to the official business of Drive Electric, shall be understood asneither given nor endorsed by it. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT s ()(a) From: David Crawford To: Barbara Kuriger ; Brent Johnston ; Davey Uprichard ; David Crawford ; Elena Hood ; Ewan Delany ; Haobo Wang ; Helen White ; J Genter (MIN) ; Hugh Mazey ; Jason Familton ; Kerry Lambeth (Parliament) ; M Wood (MIN) ; Hon Michael Woodhouse ; Peter Mersi ; Seb (Parliament) Brown ; Simon Court Subject: MIA Press Release on reduced fees for used imported vehicles Thursday, March Attachments: MIA Press Release on reduced fees for used vehicles under the clean car discount.docx Hi all Please find attached a press release from the MIAs president setting out our disappointment at reduced fees on old used imported vehicles under the clean car discount that comes into effectfrom April this year. Kind regardsDavid Crawford. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT Changes to Clean Car Discount Fees for Used Imported Cars is an Insult to Sensible Environmental Policies Andy Sincla ir, President of the Motor Industry Association of New Zealand says The Governments decision, announced yesterday, to lesson fees on used imported vehicles under the clean car discount, which comes into effect from April this year, is disappointing and a slap in the face for sensible environmental outcomes We have a fleet wi th an average age of over years. Older vehicles are less clean than brand new models and comparably less safe. Invariably arriving in the country with worn tyres and batteries creating immediate recycling issues. He says we do no t need increased numbers of older high poll uting vehicles on our roads. However this is exactly what will happen with the change in fees, as it will make it easier for used importers to continue importing dirty old clunkers. It is hard to f athom the rational e for this decision and continues a pattern of puzzling and illogical decisi ons by the government rather than a range of sensible policies that would facilitate cleaning up our dirty old fleet. ENDS For further info rmation Andy Sincla ir President of the Motor Industry Association of New Zealand M: RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: M Wood (MIN) To: Transport Portfolio ; Travis Mills Subject: FW: MIA Press Release Buyers Rush to beat Clean Car Discount Fees Tuesday, April Attachments: Registration data onwards YTD March .xlsx March Sales Table.xlsx March New Vehicle Sales Press Release.docx FYI From: David Crawford mailto:davidmia.org.nz Sent: Tuesday, April To: Barbara Kuriger Barbara.Kurigerparliament.govt.nz; Brent Johnstonb.johnstontransport.govt.nz; Davey Uprichard Davey.Uprichardnzta.govt.nz; DavidCrawford davidmia.org.nz; Elena Scheule Elena.Scheuleparliament.govt.nz; EwanDelany E.Delanytransport.govt.nz; Haobo Wang h.wangtransport govt.nz; Helen Whiteh.whitetransport.govt.nz; J Genter (MIN) j.genterministers.govt nz; Hugh MazeyHugh.Mazeyparliament.govt.nz; Jason Familton jason.familtonacc.co.nz; Kerry LambethKerry.Lambethparliament.govt.nz; M Wood (MIN) M.Woodministers govt.nz; HonMichael Woodhouse Michael.Woodhouseparliament.govt.nz; Peter Mersip.mersitransport.govt.nz; Seb Brown Seb.Brownparliament.govt.nz; Simon CourtSimon.Courtparliament.govt.nzSubject: MIA Press Release Buyers Rush to beat Clean Car Discount Fees Hi all Please find attached a MIA press release on new vehicle sales for the month of March. It was thestrongest month of all time for new vehicle sales in New Zealand. David Crawford, Chief Executive Officer ListingMIA RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT A B C D E F G LICENSED VEHICLES BY TYPE AS AT END OF YEAR FROM Vehicle Type CARS , , , , , , RENTAL CARS , , , , , , TAXIS , , , , , TRUCKS , , , , , , BUSESCOACHES , , , , , , TRAILERSCARAVANS , , , , , , MOTORCYCLES , , , , , , MOPEDS , , , , , , TRACTORS EXEMPTVEHICLES , , , , , , MISCELLANEOUS TOTAL ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, NB data source December (year) table RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT H I J K L M N O P , , ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT Q R S T U V W X Y ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, , ,, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT Z AA AB AC AD AE AF AG AH ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, , ,, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT AI AJ AK AL AM AN AO AP AQ ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE O ICIAL INFORMATION ACT AR AS AT AU AV AW AX AY AZ ,, ,, ,, ,, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,, ,, ,, , ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BA BB BC BD v v . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,, ,, RELEASED UNDER THE CIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Passenger Car by years A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S New ExOverseas Total , Jan , , Feb , () Mar , . Apr May , Jun , Jul , Aug . Sep Oct Nov Dec , , , New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total New ExOverseas Total Jan , Jan , Jan , Feb , Feb , Feb , Mar , Mar , Mar , Apr , Apr , Apr , May , May , May , Jun , Jun , Jun , Jul , Jul , Jul , Aug , Aug , Aug , Sep , Sep , Sep ,
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT P a g e Submission on the Draft Government Policy Statement on Transport Introduction This submission is made on behalf of the Grey Power New Zealand Federation Inc. The Grey Power New Zealand Federation (GPF) is a non sectarian and non party political, advocacy organisation that aims to advance, promote and protect the welfare and well being of older people. Made up of some individual Associations with an overall membership of approximately ,, GPF is the premier organisation representing older New Zealanders . We wish to be heard in support of our submission. Contact: Pete Matcham email Summary We strongly support the draft GPS on land transport , noting that it is in essence , a refinement to the GPS . We have accordingly limited our comments here to those elements that have changed and continue to endorse t he fundamental principles, especi ally basing the transport Outcomes Framework on the Living Standards Framework. We continue to support the (redefined) strategic priorities of Safety Better Travel options, addressing Climate change and improving freight connections . Noting that older people are over represented in road related deaths and injuries on a per capita basis and that the number of deaths per , of older people in road crashes stayed constant against a falling overall trend in the period , we particularly welc ome the emphasis on safety and a people centric design philosophy . As such we fully endorse the commitment in the draft GPS to the Road to Zero and its inclusion as a specific activity class . We consider that the reframing of the activity classes relat ing to public transport in GPS into two activity classes separating services and infrastructure gives greater clarity on investment, and more transparency in the evaluation of delivery against both outcomes and strategic priorities. We also support the inclusion of the Rail Network and Coastal Shipping as new activity classes. Document s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT of jobs are accessible by public transport com pa red to o,f jobs accessible by car within minutes during weekdaY morning peak () . of people in Auckland, . of peo,ple in Welilington .and . of peopre in Chiristchmcil fl.ave access to frequeru pubic nranspon services. ( tiilirds oftiile harm caused by airpollutiolll. his causes: , premature deatlls foraidultNew Zealanders , hospital admissions for respiratory and cardia( iJlnesses , cases o childlod astiilma social costs of . billlion Fat.alities (: Road: deaths . ime: recreation al deaths, . c,ommercial t commercial vehicles Out of the total ,km ofkeysodal and economic corridors a.cross the country, ,.Skm) have viable altematr.ie routes. T e reult is lower in the South Island compared with the North Island. (:) lnfla:stn..:rure essets tlkm state highways ,kr.n IQGII roads Ded.ica ed bus. lanes ,km track in ii network A. Separated cycleways X km footpaths Vehicle fleet There are over . million vehicles in the fleet, equating to vehicles per people, or xx vehicles per full driver licences . of fleet is lilht passerigerhii;les arefossil ruet powered are hfbfid tr plugin hybrid I are electric of fleet is Upt commercial vehicles ti of fleet is heavy vehides SHAPING OUR TRANSPORT SYSTEM
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Under section G of the LTMA , Auckland Council is required to prepare a proposal to vary the Scheme if it intends to change a material aspect of the programme of capital projects supported by the Scheme. This include s reallocating funding between projects.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT To: The Ministry of Transport Aotearoa New Zealand portsconsulttransport.govt.nz
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Para and Figure Support The draft GPS strategic priorities are consistent with the Port s strategic purpose of: Together, we build a thr ving region by connecting our customers, people and community to the worlds. The Port supports the strategic intent. The Port agrees that the overlap of the four strategic priorities Safety, Better travel options improving freight connections and climate change, will for many investment and built solutions see multiple beneficial outcomes being achieved. An example of this is provided in par agraph of the draft GPS Para Support Napier Port s strategic purpose is : Together , build a thriving region by connecting our customers, people and community to the world. Napier Port support s this draft GPS context around improving freight connections. The Port is vital to the local economy , as it relies upon sustainable freight connections to undertake one of its core functions . As a key driver in the regional economy, i n the financial year Napier Port supported the .B Hawkes Bay economy, and with that directly and indirectly , full and part time jobs in the region. Nearly percent of exports are primary products produced regionally from the fertile soils of the Heretaunga Plains. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Freight connection s on roa d and rail form the transport backbone for the movement of products and people to and f om the Port. A resilient transportation network is a critical infrastructure. Para Support Napier Port is strongly in favour of the Primary outcome that seeks to support productive economic activity. Well designed transport corridors with connections that are efficient , reliable and resilient signal to all businesses and industry that the critical transport corridors, both road and rail are key infrastruc ture asset s for the safe movement of goods and people. Economic activity creates a thriving business and economy plus it has the added advantage of supporting employment and the movement of goods and products within and beyond the region. Section . Support The co benefit Inclusive access is incorrectly listed here, it should read Environmental sustainability. The Port is an essential contributor to the wellbeing of the Napier and the local economy through the export of local goods such as pipfr uit and other primary produced goods, along with logs and import of a wide range of goods and products. This aligns with the economic prosperity outcome being sought. Napier Port supports the listed co benefits of Environmental sustainability , Healthy and safe people and Resilience and security . The Port has a sustainability framework that is being embedded into the day to day decision making and operations. The Port is an essential lifeline provider and facility within th e region and is therefore a critical infrastructur e asset. The criticality of this infrastructure is reflected in the need to ensure i t can function effectively and efficiently and be resilient to disruptive events and natural disasters. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Consultation has also been carried out with key stakeholders during the policy development process of the Amendment Order including: Auckland Council and Auckland Transport . Recommendations
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Activity Class Framework Support Napier Port is supportive of the new activity class coastal shipping that has been provided for. The initial proposed funding of M to M (low to high) from to , provides an opportunity for the coastal shipping sector to undertake foc used research to achieve the government goal of mode neutrality. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT March OC Hon M ichael Wood For noting Minister of Transport Click to enter a or delete this Action required by: ELECTRIC VEHICLE (EV) CHARGING WORK PROGRAMME OPTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION AND GOVERNANCE FOLLOWING PUBLICATION OF NATIONAL STRATEGY Purpose This briefing updates you on Officials current thinking about appropriate options for short and long term governance and implementation arrangements following the publication of a final National EV Charging Infrastructure Strategy later this year. Key points Consultation on the draft National EV Charging Strategy will determine the final content of the Strategy, which will in turn inform an eventual EV charging infrastructure work programme. Document s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Recommendations We recommend you: note the contents of this briefing forward this briefin g to the Minister of Energy and Resources
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT . Section . Activity Class Framework; page . Para discusses in some detail the Road to Zero harm reduction initiative proposed by that policy, but having commented on that particular programme in our Road to Zero response to the discussion document, little benefit is gained by repeating our views here. . Para Rail Network and para costal shipping are covering off the intention using altruistic nuances to encourage freight and logistics enterprises into using these modes as alternatives to what is presently used. Probably the biggest point of sensitivity for the road freight sector is the continuing financial support that rail needs just to maintain its present service capability, putting aside the cost of enhancing its capability, especially when the aftermath of the Covid experience has thrown a dark shadow across much of the productive New Zealand economy. We have to question the value of a freight mode that has to be so heavily subsidised by the public purse and the equity of that Statesubsidy situation with businesses that have to survive by running normal business efficiency models. . Concluding comments . The natural draw money from the National Land Transport Fund, using road user charges (RUCs) and fuel excise to artificially support rail projects and coastal shipping initiatives, seem all the more shortsighted. The Covid hit to the economy has left a legacy that will take some time to overcome invest in and subsid se rail over roads in this environment. . The GPS policy was written for more settled economic climate and we wonder how much of it will continue to be valid within the foreseeable future. . The re engineering of the transport system to satisfy ideology is not only costly, but flies in the face of economic reality. Using market manipulation, it attempts to engineer out choices for businesses who need to move freight to survive in a highly competitive global market. This makes it even more shortsighted to ignore the development of new roads critical to the national freight task, in order to put money into rail projects of dubious economic benefit. . RTF has continued to support asset renewal for verdue, particularly for its Government, through policy documents such as the GPS, continually selling the notion that rail investment is or unsafe truck movements on our roads. RTF also rejects investment in rail over new, safer roads. Arguably, there should be investment in both road and rail infrastructure. . the roads. They are not unsafe; this is purely a perception pushed by the RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT sectors of government and society that are opposed to the use of fossil fuelled vehicles. Where there are safety concerns it is due to lack of infrastructure spend making New Zealand roads unsafe for the traffic demands placed on them; nothing to do with the performance of the Zealand laws, rules and regulations. . Road freight is simply more flexible and immediate than rail will ever be. There are some , kms of road in New Zealand, about of which are State highways, going to change significantly and the freight customers (the market) will continue to make businessbased choices. We do not support any heavyhanded State intervention to counter market choices. . Fewer trucks on the road means fewer jobs, less economic activity, and less money in the pockets of all New Zealanders. The National Freight Demand Study proves that people and businesses choose the transport mode that best suits their requirements. In the st Century economy where timeliness and responsiveness are critical, more often than not, delivery by road stacks up best. . ve Director Dr Oliver Hartwich when he presented to the Epidemic Response Committee outlining his vision for New , made the following observations to the committee. It would also be a big mistake to spend money on projects just because
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT A SNAPSHOT OF YOUR PORTFOLIO
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT A SNAPSHOT OF YOUR PORTFOLIO MOCK UP
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT APPENDIX CROSS SYSTEM COLLABORATION
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT APPENDIX SUMMARY OF TRANSPORT AGENCIES, CROWN ENTITIES, SOES, AND THEIR FUNCTIONS
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT APPENDIX GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Active and public transport has been underfunded and this should now be rectified by making their funding the first priority, not just an increase in share. What we want We must not build more roads; we have an extensive network already. More roads and lanes will lead to more vehicles and more emissions. It must stop now. Our current system is not equitable and safe. To build new roads they must pass a tough test, of all the framework outcomes and the purpose. Any new roads must meet a very narrow criteria of building resilience (e.g. earthquakes) and adapting to climate change, such as sea level rise. We may struggle to afford to maintain our current network in the future with the increasing number and severity of extreme weather events (e.g. high rainfall events and flooding in Tasman District in recent years, with repairs ongoing)
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT As we look ahead, the full value of this future investment will only be realised by the national and regional economies if it is supported by prudent and timel y investment in supporting infrastructure, much of which is publicly funded. In particular, it will be important for Auckland Airport to work closely with the Government, the New Zealand Transport Agency and Auckland Transport to ensure that future public transport options can be sensibly integrated with aeronautical infrastructure investment so that all projects can be provided in a n integrated, timely and cost effective matter. In this submission, we provide some initial observations on the topics ra ised in the draft Government Policy Statement on Land Transport ( GPS ). Submission Points Auckland Airport generally supports the GPS. Our feedback on the consultation document is as follows : Economic prosperity is a fundamental consideration for future transport funding and investment. Post COVID , it is imperative that the GPS is reviewed to ensure that transport priorities and funding allocation is optimised to deliver value for money infrastructure but also infrastructure that supports both the local and national economy . The strategic priorities for land transport investments are supported, especially those that seek to provide people with better transport options to access social and economic opportunities and improve freight connection s for economic development. Auckland Airport is the second largest import and export port by value, processing more than BN worth of goods annually. In the post COVID recovery phase, there will be a greater focus on the role cargo has to play at Auckland Airport. We are encouraged to see the priority given to improved freight connections and agree that efficient, reliable, safe and resilient freight transport within cities, between regions and to ports (and airports) is vital for economic recovery and prosperity. The GPS needs to support the movement of freight to Auckland Airport through the investment in the transport network (including State Highways) that provides improved access and greater resilience . Auckland Airport encourages consideratio n of other funding mechanisms (e.g. congestion charging) for the delivery of transport priorities. Greater clarity is also required in the GPS to support the delivery of transport infrastructure through public private partnerships . Auckland Transport Align ment Project ( ATAP ) should be as necessary to align with the GPS and tak e into account any contributions to land transport from Budget . It is considered that a stepchange is required in the way that publicly funded infrastructure is planned, prioritised, procured and delivered, and tangible efforts are needed to reduce hurdles that can block or frustrate infrastructure developments, particularly those of national significance or support infrastructure andor activities of national sig nificance . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT ENGINEERING NEW ZEAL AND :: MAY PAGE OF SUBMISSION: DRAFT GOVERNMENT POL ICY STATEMENT ON LAND TRANSPORT Engineering New Zealand (formerly IPENZ) is New Zealands professional home for engineers. We are New Zealands strongest and most influential voice on engineering issues, with more than , members who want to help shape the public policy agenda and engineer better lives for New Zealanders. The Transportation Group New Zealand is a Technical Interest Group of Engineering New Zealand, comprised of approximately , members. Members are largely transportation engineers and planning professionals working within Government, academia and the private sector. The Transportation Group has submitted separately to the Ministry of Transport on the Government Policy Stateme nt on Land Transport (GPS LT ) . Engineering New Zealand supports that submission and will reflect on some of the Transportation Groups key points in this submission. Furthermore, Engineering New Zealand has worked with the Railway Technical Soc iety of Australasia (RTSA) to submit on the draft New Zealand Rail Plan, which is also out for consultation and referenced in the draft GPS LT . This submission references our submission on the draft New Zealand Rail Plan . WE SUPPORT THE DRAFT GPS LT Thank you for the opportunity to provide comment on the draft GPS LT . We support the strategic priorities of the draft GPS LT , noting the significant change in direction from the GPS LT . We commend the focus on wellbeing and e nhancing liveability of spaces as outlined in the Outcomes Framework. We support the four strategic priorities outlined: safety, better travel options, improving freight connections and climate changes. WE SUPPORT THE INCLU SION OF RAIL IN THE GOVERNMENT S POLICY STATEMENT The inclusion of rail in the GPS LT is new and a welcome signal of the Governments intent to prioritise investment in rail. We also consider that rails inclusion in the GPS LT signals a wider commitment to the consideration of rail in supply chain management, as well as the role of rail in supporting a safer, more economic and sustainable multi modal transport sector. We commend this approach . Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT ENGINEERING NEW ZEAL AND :: MAY PAGE OF WE SUPPORT THE PRIORITISATION O F MASS TRANSIT In line with the Transportation Groups submission, we strongly support the GPS LT s prioritisation of funding for public transport services and public transport infrastructure. One of the recommendations of Engineering New Zealands thought leadership work, Engineering a Better New Zealand , is the prioritisation of mass transit. We have previously stated: Lets make space for mass rapid transit along development co rridors in urban centres and consider the feasibility of light rail, road trams and, where appropriate, heavy rail. But, crucially, we need to avoid the politicisation of transport projects by holding to a clear vision if we want to deliver the best result s for New Zealand. The traffic, road, and civil engineers and traffic planners have to be given objectives and allowed to propose the best way forward together. We consider the focus of GPS LT on public transport systems and infrastructure supports th s vision for a better New Zealand. WE SUPPORT MODE SHIF T INITIATIVES We are encouraged by the attention in the GPS LT to accelera ing transportation mode shift. We support this direction and would like to see bold methods for achieving this. We agree that local government, business and communities will all need to play a part but that the Government should take a strong lead using regulatory tools and investment to influence travel demand and transport choice s. We support the Governments focus on position ing public transport, walking and cycling as attractive transport options. To that end we support, in principle, the raising of revenue from fuel exc ise duty and equivalent road user charges to appropriately reflect to the true cost of road use and to drive urban change. To effectively achieve good outcomes for all New Zealanders, we consider the use of smart road pricing must be balanced by the availa bility of alte na ive transport options. To th is regard, we support the Transportation Groups recommendation of using fuel excise duties and road user charges to increase funding allocations for public transport, walking and cycling. WE SUPPORT THE INCLU SION OF CLIMATE CHAN GE AS A STRATEGIC PR IORITY We are heartened to see climate change as a strategic priority of the GPS LT . As stated in the GPS LT , transport accounts for nearly percent of New Zealands domestic gree nhouse gas emissions. Any plan to reduce New Zealands emissions will need to consider transport and the infrastructure we will need for New Zealand to transition to a low carbon transport future. Engineering New Zealand supports the Climate Change Response (Zero Carbon) Bill . We believe the inclusion of climate change as a strategic priority in the GPS LT supports the Zero Carbon Bill and is a bold, long term vision. We look forward to the work of the Ministry of Transport, and other agencies, to reducing emissions . We consider the GPS LT appropriately positions the sector to respond to the carbon budget requirements coming in (as per the work of the Climate Change Commission). WE SUPPORT INVESTMEN T IN ROAD SAFETY THAT IS BASED ON BEST PRACTICE EVIDENCE One of the key considerations of the Transportation Groups submission on the GPS LT is the embedding of road safety interventions in best practice evidence . The Transportation Group stated in their submission regardless of how road safety activities are funded all investment in road safety should all be RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT ENGINEERING NEW ZEAL AND :: MAY PAGE OF based on strong and cons istent evidence about the potential for harm reduction . We support the Transportation Groups recommendation to the Ministry of Transport, recognising that investment in road safety is often highly polit icised, possibly to the determinant of outcomes. Furthermore, we support the focus in the GPS LT on enhancing the safety and accessibility of footpaths, bike lanes and cycleways, as this will further drive down road demand and encourage alternative mobility optio ns. CONCLUSION As outlined in this submission, we support the direction the Ministry of Transport has set through the GPS LT . We support the strategic priorities outlined in the GPS LT , particularly the focus on better travel options, includ ing mass transport options. We are encouraged by the inclusion of rail in the GPS LT and consider this will support supply chain management and a sustainable multi modal transport sector. Engineers are at the forefront of the work needed to drive ch ange and innovation in New Zealands transport sector. As such, we would value the opportunity to be involved in the ongoing conversation. If we can be of additional support, please do not hesitate to contact Jodi Caughley, Policy and Projects Lead at Eng ineering New Zealand ( jodi.caughleyengineeringnz.org ). RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Submission on Government Policy Statement on Land Transport draft for engagement Federated Farmers of New Zealand May Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT SUBMISSION ON GOVERNMENT POLICY STATEMENT ON LAND TRANSPORT DRAFT FOR ENGAGEMENT TO: GPS Team Ministry of Transport gpstransport.govt.nz May ADDRESS FOR SERVICE Name Position Phone Number Email Address Postal Address Jacob Haronga Senior Policy Advisor jharongafedfarm.org.nz P O Box , Wellington OTHER CONTACTS Karen Williams Federated Farmers Board Member kwilliams fedfarm.org.nz PO Box Wellington Nick Clark Manager General Policy nclarkfedfarm.org.nz P O Box , Christchurch ABOUT FEDERATED FARMERS Federated Farmers of New Zealand is a membership organisation, which is mandated by its members to advocate on their behalf and ensure representation of their views. Federated Farmers does not collect a compulsory levy under the Commodities Levy Act and is funded from voluntary membership. Federated Farmers represents rural and farming businesses throughout New Zealand. We have a long and proud history of representing the needs and interests of New Zealands farmers . Federated Farmers aims to empower fa rmers to excel in farming. Our key strategic outcomes include provision for an economic and social environment , within which: (a) Our members may operate their business in a fair and flexible commercial environment; (b) Our members families and their staff have access to services essential to the needs of a vibrant rural community; and (c) Our members adopt responsible management and sustainable food production practices. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of May OC Hon Michael Wood Action required by: Minister of Transport Friday, May TRANSPORT ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION COMMISSION DRAFT STATEMENT OF PERFORMANCE EXPECTATIONS FOR Purpose Provides you with advice on the Transport Accident Investigation Commiss ons (TAICs) draft Statement of Performance Expectations (SPE) for , and a draft letter to the Chief Commissio ner with proposed comments. Key points TAIC provided you with copies of its draft SPE on April . You have working days (until May ) to provide feedback on both documents, in accordance with section I of the Crown Entities Act . TAICs focus is to continue delivering its w der strategic intentions, while also maintaining core business. Its successful Budget bids have been reflected in the draft SPE, with TAIC intend ing to scale its performance measures over the next few years to reflect the time taken for the impacts of the funding increase to be realised in its outputs . The increased funding provided through Budget will also enable TAIC to return to a neutral budget in . TAIC is forecasting a small budget deficit for this year (,) , with the main effect for its deficits being property related . The Ministry considers that the expectations set by TAIC accurately reflect the organisations position and operating context. Good pr ogress continues to be made towards delivery of its wider strategic intentions, and its SPE responds well to your Letter of Expectations. We recommend that you write to the Chief Commissioner to confirm this. A draft letter is attached at Appendix One for your consideration. TAIC must consider any comments you make before finalising its SPE. It is required to publish the final versions of its SPE as soon as practicable, but no later than July . Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of TRANSPORT ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION COMMISSION DRAFT STATEMENT OF PERFORMANCE EXPECTATIONS FOR The Statement of Performance Expectations (SPE) provides an important opportunity for you to i nfluence an entitys short term priorities The SPE is a statutory planning and accountability document governed by the Crown Entities Act (the Act). Its purpose is to: . enable you, as responsible Minister, to participate in the process of setting annual performance expectations; . enable the House of Representatives to be informed of those expectations; and . provide a base against which actual performance can be assessed. Your Letter of Expectations (LOE) for to TAICs Chief Commissioner provided context and input for TAICs draft SPE. The Ministry has assessed TAICs draft documents against the expectations set in your LOE, and considers that it accurately reflects the expectations set. TAIC is expected to be a large way through achieving the strategic intentions set in its Statement of Intent for On July , TAIC received a baseline increase to enable delivery of the Knowledge Transfer System project. This project was a programme of work that sought wider organisational improvements in terms of investigation software development, improving organisational capability, and furthering the use of data and research in its investigative work. TAICs focus for will be around implementing and embedding new processes that have been developed over the past two years through this programme. This includes finalising the migration process for the new case management system (TAIC expect s to have all cases in th e new system by December ) , further testing of the major accident plan developed in , and improving investigator capacity through training. Once these systems have been implemented, TAIC will look to further its research capacity to allow greate r searchability of its findings. Internal organisational capability development work will also continue through . This includes continued work on meeting good employer obligations, and integration of tikanga Mori into TAICs work. Integration of ti kanga, te reo Mori, and improving protocols for engagement with Mori are newer initiatives developed since the publication of the Statement of Intent and are being weaved into the wider strategic objectives . The Ministry considers that TAIC is making good progress overall towards achieving its Statement of Intent objectives, with most delays being minor in nature . Some changes have occurred to its work programme (such as phasing the overall documentation of in vestigation process rather than working on each process one at a time), and these appear to be largely organic and reasonable . The main deferral has been around the Research Programme, as TAIC decided it would be better to RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of implement its Research Strategy o nce the new case management system is fully operational . It is expected that this activity will become of greater focus for TAIC in the second half of the financial year. Scaled changes are being made to delivery expectations following the outcome of Budget TAIC is funded for one output class: accident and incident investigation and reporting. Within this output class, it sets expected parameters for timeliness, volume (expected ranges for completed inquiries, and caseloads) and cost. The increases to TAICs budget for rail inquiries will result in one minor change to its reporting this year, with the number of domestic reports it expects to publish per annum increasing from a range of to . Given the time it takes fo investi gators to be recruited and become fully effective, TAIC made the decision to scale its performance expectations to reflect the impacts of growth over time. The Ministry agrees with TAICs decision to scale its performance targets , and we had discussed it a s an option when they were considering changes to its measures . In the next few years, you can expect to see the expected number of publications increase to a range of around per annum with the number of active domestic cases expecting to reach arou nd per annum. It is unclear from discussions to if the metrics will change significantly for the average cost for domestic inquiries or the expected proportion of domestic inquiries being completed within working days. This is because the longer inquiries are typically aviation inquiries. Over the last five years, rail inquiries have taken an average of . working days to complete , with only two of completed inquiries in that time taking longer than working days. The average cost metric will be affected by the expected actual cost of the rail inquiries themselves, as well as the general impact of indirect costs across the busine ss from increased staff numbers and activity (which is a percentage of the average cost calculation). Following the previous baseline increase, this metric increased from a range of ,, to , , over two years. TAIC expect s this mea sure will increase from . Financial performance TAIC is currently forecasting an overall budget deficit of , for , with a view to return to a neutral budget in . These changes are largely a result of impacts to lease, rental and outgoings . The successful Budget bids will alleviate those financial pressures. Staffing costs will increase throughout as TAIC recruits the new staff enabled by its successful Budget bids. The full changes of TAICs successful Budget bids are reflected in its budget forecasts for the financial year.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of AIDE MEMOIRE: NIWE FUNDING APPPROACH To: Hon Simeon Brown , Minister of Transport From: Bryan Field, Manager, Programme Monitoring and Investment Management October OC Number: OC Purpose This Aide Memoire p rovide s you with advice on delivery of North Island Weather Events (NIWE ) projects and on alternative approaches to funding councils , including the potential impacts and risks of any change in approach . Context You recently received a progress update on NIWE activity NZTA BRI refers. This advice noted that million () of the million NIWE Crown funding allocated to NZTA from Budget for local road recovery in has been allocated to councils, with an additional million in local road response funding (already allocated) carrying over into . The following table summarises appropriated funding (subject to the IPET). Phase Response (all allocated) m (subject to IPET) Recovery m ( m, allocated) m (subject to IPET) Total m ( m, allocated) m As the table above demonstrates, t he situation has changed since the briefing, and a s of October , almost all current funding requests received from councils have been approved. All recovery applications have been approved on the normal Funding Assistance Rate (FAR) . Some councils have applied for a bespoke FAR and the NZTA Board will consider this at its next meeting ( October ). Further Except for requests from two councils (that were submitted at the end of September) for million. Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of funding requests are in the pipeline to be assessed, or are expected by mid October, totalling approximately million . Most councils have their total recovery programme approved and are expected to complete works in enerally , funding has been set on the maximum likely to be achieved by a council this financial year. Most councils now have their total recovery programme s approved and are expected to complete works in . Councils with recovery works needed for and beyond are: Central Hawkes Bay District Council Gisborne District Council Hastings District Council Napier City Council Tararua District Council (this work programme has already been verified by NZTA) Wairoa District Council (this work programme has already been verified by NZTA). To all but million of the response work has been completed ( a total of million has been claimed since February ). Slower than anticipated spend is not a result of the funding approach NZTA has advised the following reasons for the slower than anticipated spend in : . Recovery works are funded at normal FAR . Even with only of local share needed, in districts with a large recovery programme this is still a significant amount of local funding that they need to free up and get approv ed by their councils, along with other competing demands for funding (such as Water Services investments) . . The planning and design of recovery works is taking longer than some councils originally forecast, particularly for bridge works. . The robustness of the initial project proposals from councils and timeliness of responses to subsequent information requests from NZTA, impacts the time taken to complete assessment s and agree funding s ()(g)(i) s ()(g)(i) s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of The status quo option is preferrable This existing approach requires a council to submit an application with information about the scope of work, costs (pre tender) , and timeframe for delivery. NZTA then assess es the programme to ensure the work is eligible recovery work, could be achieved in the funding period , and represents value for money (no frills). Once this assessment has been completed, NZTA authorises the funding to be released. This option is preferred because : . NZTA can be confident about the scope of what will be delivered and that it represents value for money for the Crown (and council). . The council has confidence on the cost of the programme and understands it must manage delivery of the whole programme within the funded amount . s ()(g)(i) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of . The risk of councils using funding to improve the level of service beyond necessary recovery is reduced due to capped funding . . Most of the million available and a significant portion of the proposed IPET is ready to be approved on this basis. . Experience has shown that initial estimates for recovery works can be over inflated and working with councils to assess recovery works programmes result s in more realistic estimates . . NIWE In Principle Expense Transfer NZTA ha s requested a transfer of million from to through the October Baseline Update (OBU) which is the majority of the underspend in local road recovery and response in . Next steps BUDGET SENSITIVE You will receive an OBU letter to submit to the Minister of Finance which includes the NIWE transfers. Contacts Name Telephone First contact Bryan Field, Manager, Programme Monitoring Investment Management Andrew Hicks, Principal Advisor, Programme Monitoring Investment Management s ()(f)(iv) s ()(a) s ()(g)(i) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of Annex One: Alternative funding approaches Annex one is withheld under section ()(f)(iv). RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of October Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Transport AIDE MEMOIRE: APPROPRIATENESS OF CURRENT MARITIME OFFENCES AND PENALITIES REGIME To: Hon Simeon Brown, Minister of Transport From: Ruth Fairhall, Deputy Chief Executive, Policy Group Friday October OC Number: OC Purpose This paper provides you with a detailed overview of the current maritime offences and penalties regime, and its appropriate ness . You requested this advice on September at your regular transport officials meeting, i n the context of discussion about emergency ocean response capability and Cook Strait ferry incidents. Overview A range of legislation (transport and non transport ) places responsibilities on vessel owners and operators, and prescribes varying offences and penalties for breaching these responsibilities. When a vessel experiences an adverse incident, an investigation may be undertaken to identify the cause. If an investigation identifies a breach of applicable rules, the regulator (s) may seek to prosecute under the relevant legislation. Applicable charges and a decision to prosecute against these will be assessed on a case bycase basis by the person(s) charged with the ability to prosecute under relevant legislation. Any decision to prosecute is made in accordance with relevant prosecuto rial guidelines, including the guidelines issued by the solicitor general. In the case of maritime legislation, many penalties have not been since the s. In , the Ministry of Transport and Maritime New Zealand completed a review of the offences and penalties which identified several anomalies affect ing their coherence . Policy proposals to address these anomalies were approved by Cabinet but have not been implemented . Contacts Name Telephone First contact Ruth Fairhall, Deputy Chief Executive, Policy Group Natasha Rave, Manager, Resilience and Security Document s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of AIDE MEMOIRE: APPROPRIATENESS OF CURRENT MARITIME OFFENCES AND PENALITIES REGIME Maritime New Zealand regulates under a number of statutes Maritime N ew Zealand (Maritime NZ) regulates the maritime sector for safety, security, and environmental protection through various legislation , including the: . Maritime Transport Act (MTA) . Health and Safety and Work Act (HSWA) . Hazardous Substances and New Organisms (HSNO) Act . Maritime Security Act (MSA) You have delegated responsibility for the MTA and the MSA to the Associate Minister of Transport . These Acts are administered by the Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) . Offences and penalties under the Maritime Transport Act operate at two levels Serious offences and penalties are often set in primary legislation rather than regulations Serious offences and penalties are set in primary legislation , reflecting the potential for multiple deaths or serious injuries that warrants significant penalty levels. The s afety offences in Part of the MTA address acts or omissions that can cause unnecessary danger or risk to people and property, or that have caused actual harm or damage. These offences are: . unnecessary danger caused by holder of maritime document (s) , . dangerous activity involving ships or maritime products (s) , . proceeding without pilot contrary to Maritime Rules or direction given under section A (sA) , . communicating false information affecting safety (s) , . offences for submerged load lines (sA) , and . other offences (sB) such as: .. operating a ship without the prescribed number of seafarers or qualified personnel , .. operating a ship outside its prescribed operating limits , and .. knowingly breaching any requirement in the MTA or in regulations or Rules made under the MTA for carrying dangerous goods. The current penalty level for an individual is imprisonment for a term not exceeding months or a maximum fine of , and for a body corporate a maximum fine of ,. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of In addition, the court may order a person to pay an amount not exceeding three times the value of any commercial gain resulting from the commission of the offence if the court is satisfied that the offence was committed in the course of producing a commerc ial gain. Regulations set out the offences and subsequent penalties for breaching maritime rules The MTA stipulates broad principles of maritime law, while maritime rules , which are secondary legislation made by the Minister of Transport under the MTA, contain detailed technical standards and procedures. Maritime rules relate to the safety of ships and people , requirements for ship design, construction, equipment, crewing, operation and tonnage measurement, and the carriage of passengers and cargo. The MTA enables regulations to be made to prescribe breaches of maritime rules constitut ing an offence andor infringement offence against the MTA , and to: . Prescribe penalties for each offence which in the case of: .. An individual, shall be a fine not exceeding , , and .. A body corporate, shall be a fine not exceeding , . . Prescribe infringement fees for each infringement offence which in the case of: .. An individual, must not exceed , , and .. A body corporate, must not exceed , . The Maritime (Offences) Regulations (the Regulations) set out the offences and subsequent penalties for breaching requirements in select maritime rules. Offences and penalties under the Maritime Transport Act are out of Penalties for safety offences differ across legislation In the case of the MTA and the Regulations , penalties have not been since the s. In , the Ministry and Maritime NZ completed a review of the offences and penalties which identified several anomalies affect ing their coherence : . Penalties not reflect ing the potential or actual severity and likelihood of harm that could or has occurred (for example, a serious injury or death) , . Some penalty levels being well below levels applied for similar offending in more modern legislation such as the HSWA , . Offences creat ing inequities between domestic commercial ships and domestic recreational ships , . Some offences not provid ing for infringements when infringement offences would be a suitable enforcement tool , and
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of May OC Hon Michael Wood A ction required by: Minister of Transport Friday, May cc Hon Grant Robertson Minister of Finance cc Hon Megan Woods Minister of Housing AUCKLAND LIGHT RAIL LIMITED DRAFT STATEMENT OF PERFORMANCE EXPECTATIONS Purpose Supports you to provide feedback to Auckland Light Rail Limited (ALRL) on its draft Statement of Performance Expectations (SPE) on behalf of shareholding Ministers. Key points As shareholders in ALRL , you have an important role to play in setting expectations for the entity and influencing its public accountability documents, including the SPE. You received a draft SPE for ALRL on April which is attached as Appendix One. You are required to provide comments (if any) on this draft SPE no later than working days after receipt (i.e., by May ). Te Manat Waka the Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) has reviewed the draft SPE to ensure it meets the statutory requirements of the Crown Entities Act and the expectations set out in the Crown Sponsors Expectations Supporting Upcoming Decision Making letter of April . The Ministry notes that the SPE does not cover the Urban Development aspect of the project . In addition, t he performance measures in the SPE could be improved to provide better clarity on how the Companys performance will be assessed, particularly in relation to transparency of its outputs, how the project will be integra ted with other Auckland transport projects , and how stakeholder engagement will be measured . The Ministry has consulted with the Treasury and the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development (MHUD) on the proposed feedback included within the letter (attached as Appendix Two). Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of Recommendations We recommend you: Minister of Finance Minister of Housing Minister of Transport Minister s of Finance and Housing agree to the Minister of Transport signing the attached letter which provides feedback on Auckland Light Rail Ltds draft Statement of Performance Expectations on behalf of shareholding Ministers, subject to any changes you wish to make.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of rated ambe r. We are unlikely to deliver fully on what the ERP envisages without additional funding. Red initiatives and mitigations Two initiatives that sit under the actions to decarbonise aviation and maritime remain as red for this quarter. These are: . Initiative ..: Implement a sustainable aviation fuel (SAF) mandate. MBIE has now indicated that they intend to lead the policy development work for a SAF mandate. We are currently working to clarify the intended timeframes and expected contribution from Te Manat Waka with MBIE colleagues. Once this has been confirmed, we expect that the RAG rating will be . . Initiative ..: Undertake research to advance the development and uptake of alternative low and zero carbon fuels for shipping in Aotearoa and develop safety and environmental standards for their use . Te Manat Waka does not currently have the resource or technical expertise to progress this research therefore planning for this initiative has not progressed. Focus area : Support cross cutting and enabling measures that contribute to the delivery of a low emissions transport system
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of Section : Using appraisals, monitoring and evaluation to understand the impact of initiatives The February quarterly report focused on delivery progress against the milestones and timeframes in the DTAP. While this is a good indicator of delivery performance, we are aware that you are seeking further information about the performance of the transport sector initiatives in terms of impact on the focus area targets and overall abatement targets. Data and resource constraints as well as the lead in t ime required to develop and complete appraisals, projections and evaluations have constrained our ability to evaluate the performance of the ERP in near terms. Te Manat Waka is developing a range of improvements to maximise the usefulness of findings from appraisal, monitoring and evaluation activities and to better prioritise the three type s of activities. However, delivering these improvements while managing business as usual activities take time and we will provide updates on our progress in future quar terly reports. We want to be able to provide you with a transparent and cohesive picture on whether the right outputs are delivered efficiently and economically to deliver the desired outcomes and impacts effectively. This requires having an evidence based assessment of what we plan to achieve (via exante appraisals ) and collecting the right info mation to help assess what and how best we have achieved (via ex post monitoring and evaluation ). The following sections describe the work we have underway to support this for the initiatives in the ERP . We are available to discuss this with you andor your Office in more detail if desired Prioritising our appraisals effort Appraisals refer to the assessment of expected effects before interventions are put in place. They involve the use and the creation of projections (also referred as forecasts or estimates). These analyses use appropriate inputs and make relevant and realis tic assumptions to estimate the likely impacts of interventions. In the contex of the ERP, projections for initiatives were used to obtain an overall picture around how likely the next three emissions budget periods would be met. The total projected emissions reduction for transport for the first emissions budget was .. Mt at the time of the ERP release. Projections are inherently uncertain, and the actual impact of an intervention can vary significantly compared to projections depending on the quality of information available to inform the analyses and the level of uncertainty in the underlying factors. Depending on the nature and purpose of the appraisals and projections, updates are sometimes required as new or evidence emerges. For example, information about the behavioural response to the Clean Car Discount has informed the revision of the central estimate of its emissions reduction potential which is now closer to the high end of the original range of estimates. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of We are currently working with the CCIEB Secretariat to clarify when emissions projections need to be and how to communicate this information consistently across sectors. Not all initiatives in the DTAP have been appraised as there is a lack of appropriate data andor capacity to estimate all the initiatives and many activities are foundational or complementary in nature that could result in double counting if included. Not all initiatives that can be appraised will be, due to limited capacity and we will prioritise effo rt to initiatives that will add the most value, especially those that are useful for the ERP. Targeting monitoring and reporting effort Monitoring requires continuous effort to track progress of activities, the inpu s used, and the outputs delivered as well as to track specific measures related to outcomes. Meaningful reporting requires monitoring indicators to be collat ed into a report with the appropriate use of trend analyses and commentaries While monitoring and reporting do not inform actual abatement effects of particular initiatives, they can be used to track progress towards desired outcomes. This requires selecting indicators that provide clear alignment between the policy problems or opportunities and related inputs, activities outputs outcomes and impacts throughout the intervention lifecycle. Te Manat Waka is developing the Decarbonising Transport Monitoring Framework (DTMF) that sets out linkages between action indicators (e.g., infrastructure delivery or policy change) and outcome indicators (e g., fleet changes or travel behaviour) and shows how they relate to the ERP targets This framework will make it possible to monitor progress against key objectives in each of the focus areas. We are carrying out further work to refine the framework and to map out the framework with relevant, reliable and feasible indicators. Most of the relevant indicators that have been identified so far are only available on an annual basis, only a small number of indicators are available on a quarterly basis and some indicators are yet to be defined or collected. Ongoing effort will be needed from across agencies to ensure relevant data is collected and reported on consistently and in a timely manner. We are developing a DTMF guiding document to support the delivering agencies in the process. The frequency with which we can meaningfully report to you on the indicators and the nature of this reporting is yet to be confirmed. We will test our proposed approach with you next quarter. Investing in evaluation Evaluation involves the examination of all aspects of the Ministrys value for money (VFM) assessment model to understand the economy, efficiency, effectiveness and impact of activities in achieving specific objectives or targets. While ex post evaluation aims to understand the link between causes and effects, it cannot accurately separate effects from policy and non policy changes that have RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of occurred simultaneously. However, through evaluation, it is possible to find out more specific information about how successful initiatives are beyond those collected through regular monitoring and reporting. Depending on the scale of the evaluation and the availability and the quality of data or information, evaluation can take anywhere between several months and one year or more to complete. We plan to update the Ministrys evaluation strategy to help prioritise limited resources to high value interventions as well as evaluation of trial programmes or schemes to inform successful roll out of such interventions. There is an opportunity to utilise evaluation to support an adaptive management approach regarding the direction of travel and if further amendment or adjustments would improve outcomes. The Te Manat Waka Emissions Reduction Government Group will consider the prioritisation of evaluation effort across the transport ERP initiatives in the coming quarter.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of Appendix A: RAG(B) definitions for reporting Colour Definition R Initiative appears unable to achieve overall ERP delivery timeframes andor emissions reduction objective. A Initiative could feasibility meet overall ERP timeframes andor achieve emissions reduction objective but issuesrisks exist requiring management attention. G Initiative is on track to meet overall ERP timeframes and achieve emissions reduction objectives and there are no outstanding issues. B Initiatives that are discontinued due to Ministerial decision or because they have not received funding.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of Section : Delivery progress across the programme Programme wide delivery update
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of The audit opinion for the financial year has also been In parallel to the provision of the SPE, the Office of the Auditor General issued an unmodified audit opinion of TAIC for the financial year on May . Its opinion graded the Commission as Very Good across all three aspects of its audit. Risks There is an inherent risk to TAICs accident and investigation reporting output measures, as the nature of TAICs work mean that sudden influxes of inquiries within a small portfolio of cases can affect the overall measures. This risk is largely outside of TAICs control ; however, it is always present. Regular engagements with the Commission allow for opportunities to discuss capacity and workload, and any possible assistance that can be offered. Next Steps Please review the attached letter of feedback at Appendix One , alongside TAICs draft SPE, and provide your feedback to TAIC before May . Once received, TAIC must consider your comments before finalising its SOI and SPE. TAIC is required to publish the final versions of their SPE as soon as pr acticable, but no later than July . Final versions of TAICs SPE will be provided to your Office upon completion. You will be required to table these documents in the House of Representatives, and you can either do this upon receipt, or when you tab le TAICs Annual Report for .
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of PTAs should be able to apply the discount to cash fares for under s at their discretion PTAs may seek to confirm whether the subsidy for under s can be applied to cash fares in conjunctio n with smartcards . We recommend the subsidy be applicable to cash fares at the discretion of PTAs . Community Connect for CSC holders can use cash fares, although no PTA has chosen to do this. We understand PTAs are working to reduce the role of cash in fa re payments for safetysecurity and network efficiency reasons as well as to transition towards the National Ticketing Solution (NTS). However, some PTAs still accept cash on public transport services. Therefore, to ensure there are no barriers to access t he subsidy (obtaining a smartcard remains a challenge for some) we recommend providing PTAs the choice to apply the subsidy to a cash fare at their discretion. We will also come back to you with advice on whether this initiative should cover the cost of t he first smartcard. We seek your comfort with a low verification approach to eligibility We expect PTAs will have limited options to verify age, especially in the immediate term. The large PTAs currently do not operate with age based verifications. For ch ild concessions they have either no verification or secondary school based identifications. To minimise fraudulent use (and additional cost to the Crown) we will consider what mechanisms are available for a PTA to utilise or adopt to verify age. Irrespect ive of whether a smartcard is used there is no simple verification process that can be adopted for the two age groups under and between . We seek your direction on providing funding for additional costs that PTAs may incur as part of this initiative PTAs may want to strengthen their age verification processes over time Where PTAs implement age verification processes, they will likely seek funding to cover the cost. We developed the initiative including these costs and seek your confirmation that funding can be provided for this purpose. s ()(g)(i), s ()(k) s ()(g)(i), s ()(k) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of There are limited options to mi tigate the increased peak demand, and we have not explored the options in detail. PTAs have suggested applying the subsidy to off peak services only, reducing the age of free fares to under , reducing to off peak services, providing heavily discounted fa res instead of free fares or providing universal half price fares. We recognise these options are inconsistent with the policy parameters underpinning Community Connect. It is difficult to predict the uptake of the subsidy and the impact on patronage at pe ak times. Some of the induced demand may be mitigated by school buses predominately serving intermediate and secondary schools (children aged over ). However, we note that many intermediate school services are already heavily patronised, and we also expe ct growth in demand for primary services because of this initiative. Additionally, parental guardians and children may have different levels of perceived safety, resulting in varying levels of independence and uptake of the concession. We will monitor patr onage of the concessions where possible and provide further advice if required. Next steps Throughout this briefing we have highlighted a number of areas where we expect to provide further advice. We will also keep you regularly following our meetings with PTAs. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of May OC Hon Michael Wood A ction required by: Minister of Transport Monday, May WAKA KOTAHI DRAFT STATEMENT OF PERFORMANCE EXPECTATIONS Purpose This briefing will support you to comment on Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agencys (Waka Kotahi) draft Statement of Performance Expectations (SPE). Key points As Responsible Minister for Waka Kotahi, you have an important role to play in setting expect ations and influencing its public accountability documents . The SPE enables you, and the House of Representatives, to participate in the process of setting annual performance expectations for the entity and provides a basis to assess performance against. You received the Waka Kotahi draft SPE on May . You are required to provide comments on this no later than working days after receipt, i.e. by May . Due to the complexity and the level of detail in the draft SPE, the Ministry has required additional time to appropriately review the draft SPE. The Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) has reviewed the draft SPE to ensure that it meets statutory requirements, follows good practice, and adequately reflects your expectations and priorities. The Ministrys assessment in Appendix One provides you with a summary to better understand Waka Kot ahis strategic context, alignment to your expectations, basis to assess performance, financial performance, and key risks. The Ministry notes that Waka Kotahi continues to face challenging operatingconditions. The land transport network is growing, and so is its complexity. Severeweather events are becoming increasingly common and highlight the challenge of balancing the needs of the current land transport system with the need to prepare for the future. Ensuring adequate long term funding sustainability to meet increased demand for new and expanded programmes of work and increasing costs remains a critical concern forthe Agency. The Ministry understands the Agencys breadth and scale of work programme has evolved over recent years, creating pressures on funding. This adds additional pressure on the Board to make trade offs and prioritise its work programme. Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of R evenue is finite and will never be sufficient to address all demands placed on the land transport system at any one time . The Ministry recommends Waka Kotahi prioritises delivery that will add the most value to the land transport system within available funding. Clarifying key priorities and outlining trade offs within the SPE will ensure the public can clearly understand what is expected to be delivered in . The Ministry has identified four themes which will strengthen alignment around your expectations and Government priorities, improve clarity and transparency around priorities, and ensure the SPE provides a good basis to assess performance against . The themes are: o Being clear around priorities for the year ahead o Helping the public understand the Agencys organisational health o Ensure the Agencys performance measurement framework conti nues to be fit for purpose o Building resilience in the land transport system. The Ministry has drafted a letter for your consideration encompassing the themes outlined above. Please refer to Appendix Two for the dra t letter. Waka Kotahi must consider your comments before finalising the SPE by June . Waka Kotahi must then publish the SPE on its website as soon as practicable. You have flexibility as to when you table the SPE in the House of Representatives. Section L of the Crown Entities Act allows responsible Ministers to table final SPEs upon receipt, or at the same time as the Waka Kotahi Annual Report (thereby providing Parliament with a backward and forward looking view of the Agency).
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Building resilience in the land transport system
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of ANNEX THREE: OPEN SALE OPTION TIMELINE Nov Dec Jan
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of March OC Hon Michael Wood Action required by: Minister of Transport Wednesday, March UPDATE ON FULLERS WAIHEKE FERRY SERVICE AND SUPERGOLD CARD TRAVEL Purpose Key p oints The Crown funds the SuperGold Card Scheme (the Scheme) to provide free off peak public transport for eligible cardholders. Crown funding is capped but adjusted annually against the CPI. The Fullers Waiheke service is currently an exempt service. In , Auckland Transport (AT) (on behalf of Te Manat Waka) entered an agreement with Fullers which set out the terms and conditions for Fullers to receive Crown funding for providing free travel to SuperGold cardholders. Figures have been rounded. Document s ()(j) s ()(j) s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of Recommendations We recommend you: Yes No Yes No Yes No
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of The highlevel process for NZTA to acquire the Kiwi Bacon building for use in exchange as consideration for property that is required for a Public Work is as follows: Part A The Kiwi Bacon building agreement NZTA Board approval to fund the acquisition and commence negotiations with ALRL. The shareholding Ministers direct ALRL to transfer the land to the Crown (through NZTA as acquiring authority) under the PWA. NZTA instructs an accredited supplier to conduct due diligence and agree a purchase price with ALRL (subject to financial approval by NZTA). Following this, the accredited supplier will prepare a s PWA agreement ready for approval by LINZ outlining the strategic need for the land to be acquired by NZTA, and then for the parties to sign. Part B The Auckland Council land agreement NZTA Board approval for the acquisition of the Auckland Council land required for the NWRT project and to commence negotiations with the Auckland Council (the NWRT required land). The Auckland Council resolves to transfer the NWRT required land to the Crown (through NZTA as acquiring authority) under the PWA. NZTA instructs the same accredited supplier to conduct due diligence and negotiate with the Auckland Council for the various properties which comprise the NWRT required land. Following this, the accredited supplier will prepare a s PWA agreement ready for approval by LINZ and then for the parties to sign. Because of the Auckland High Court case presently being heard (NZTA and the Auckland Council as parties to the proceedings) to give direction on the valuation of reserve land, the agreement will aim to finalise all terms and conditions except for land value. Further, because of the status of the NWRT projects design with no advanced land requirement drawings, there will need to be a pro rata value adjustment provision. This is effectively an advance agreement because of these two outstanding factors which may both take until midlate to resolve. Notes on the Auckland Council land agreement: The agreement must bind the Auckland Council to receive the transfer of the Kiwi Bacon Property in satisfaction of the final compensation for the NWRT required land. Settlement of the NWRT required land will need to be scheduled to occur once the value of the NWRT required land has been finalised. The Kiwi Bacon Property value is to be reassessed during the value finalisation of the NWRT required land, i.e. the Kiwi Bacon Property value to the Auckland Council will reflect the market value at that same (possibly late or early ).
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of November OC Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Transport Hon Nicola Willis M inister of Finance Hon Chris Bishop Action required by: Minister of Housing Friday, November AUCKLAND LIGHT RAIL LAND DISPOSAL Purpose This paper: updates you on progress with Auckland Light Rail Limited (ALRL) negotiations with the New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) on the acquisition of Auckland Light Rail Limiteds property on New North Road, Kingsland under the Public Works Act (PWA); and seeks your endorsement of a preferred disposal approach. Key points Auckland Light Rail Limited (ALRL) has now been reduced to a holding company withminimal functions and no permanent staff. It cannot be fully disestablished until theproperty (the Kiwi Bacon building) on New North Road, Kingsland has been disposed. The Ministry of Transport (the Ministry), ALRL, NZTA and Auckland Council EkePanuku have been working together to explore potential uses for the site for transport or urban development projects. ALRL, NZTA, and Auckland Council have agreed inprinciple to proceed with negotiations for NZTA to acquire the Kiwi Bacon building under the PWA to be usedfor an exchange with Auckland Council for a range of land parcels that are required for the Northwest Rapid Transit project. However, based on Auckland Councils proposed process and timelines we anticipate the land swap process will take longer than the six months originally outlined. Proceeding to sale on the open market now is therefore likely to be the fastest path to disposal of the property and enabling ALRL to be disestablished. We recommend you dis cuss this matter with Mayor Wayne Brown before taking a decision to proceed with Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of sale on the open market, including whether Auckland Council has an interest in purchasing the property directly from ALRL. A LRL advise that a recent valuation of the K iwi Bacon property highlights the potential loss from the sale has reduced from earlier estimates with fair market value of . million compared with the million original purchase price. Recommendations We recommend you: Minister of Transport Minister of Finance Minister of Housing note that the critical precondition for the disestablishment of Auckland Light Rail Limited is the sale of its landholding on New North Road, Kingsland. note that the ALRL Board and NZTA along with Auckland Council have reached in principle agreement on a process for NZTA to acquire the site under the Public Works Act. note that based on information from Auckland Council we anticipate the land swap proposal will take longer than the six months initially advised, and that sale on the open market is likely to be materially faster. not e that the current market v aluation is . m illion less than the original purchase price. agree to y our preferred process for the disposal of ALRLs landholding on New North Road, Kingsland, either: progress to sale on the open market (Ministry of Transport preferred option)
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of November OC Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Transport Meeting with CentrePort and Greater Wellington Regional Council Snapshot You have a meeting to discuss Emergency Ocean Response Capability and to understand the risks to CentrePorts business from responding to these incidents. CentrePort and Greater Wellington Regional Council have expressed concerns about the risks they are facing given the current lack of a dedicated EORC to respond to large vessels in distres s in Cook Strait. Time and Thursday November, , Venue Parliament EW. Attendees Anthony Delany (CE CentrePort), Nigel Corry (CE Greater Wellington Regional Council ) Officials attending Kirstie Hewlett, (Director Maritime NZ), Ruth Fairhall (DCE, Policy, Ministry of Transport) Agenda To discuss EORC business case work and to understand risks to CentrePorts business from responding to these incidents. CentrePort and Greater Wellington Regional Council have expressed concerns about the risks they are facing given the current lack of a dedicated EORC to respond to large vessels in distress in Cook Strait. Talking points Please refer page Contacts Name Telephone First contact Kirstie Hewlett , Director , Maritime NZ Dylan Page , Chief Advisor, Response, Security and Safety Services , Maritime NZ Document s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of Meeting with CentrePort and Greater Wellington Regional Council Purpose . The meeting has been called to discuss where the Government is at on Emergency Ocean Response Capability (EORC) business case work and to outline risks to CentrePorts business from responding to these incidents and concerns the two entities have. CentrePo rt and Greater Wellington Regional Council (GWRC) have expressed concerns in a recent letter to you (attached) about the risks they are facing given the current lack of a dedicated EORC to respond to large vessels in distress in Cook Strait. Background and issues . In recent years a number of high profile incidents have highlighted the lack of a dedicated vesse Zealand waters. Because of a number of factors including passenger volumes and sea conditions, the Cook Strait is an area where this presents a particularly heightened risk. In Budget you provided funding to Maritime New Zealand (Maritime NZ) to develop a business case to consider solutions for an EORC. . . .
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of Appendix: Brief biographies
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Decisions All decisions and planning at the local though to central government level must be put through the outcome framework lenses, particularly those with a climate lens of mitigation and adaptation and the Zero Carbon Act. This must be mandatory with targets .
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Definitions in GPS Road to Zero Summary in section .: Investment through the Road to Zero activity class will be targeted towards those interventions identified as being key to achieving the target reductions in deaths and serious injuries sought through Road to Z ero, focussing on: Safety infrastructure and speed management: safety treatments and speed management on roads across New Zealand where data show the highest concentrations of deaths and serious injuries occur, as well as road engineering to support speed reductions around urban and rural schools Road policing: maintaining the number of existing dedicated road po icing staff plus necessary wage increases over time, non dedicated staff time undertaking road policing activities, and associated equipment and o verheads, new roadside drug testing equipment, and court imposed alcohol interlocks subsidy scheme Automated enforcement: expanding the safety camera network and its operation and management Road safety promotion: national and localregional campaigns and initiatives to achieve safety outcomes. System management activities: strengthen system leadership, support and coordination. Outside of this activity class, investment from other activity classes may be used to fund activities with a safety outcome. Safety infrastructure Investment in safety infrastructure and speed management treating high risk corridors and intersections Road policing Investment in road policing and associated equipment Automated enforcement Investment in automated en forcement Road safety promotion Investment to support behavioural changes to improve road safety outcomes Public Transport Services Summary in section .: Public transport moves large numbers of people through the network. It also can shape the urban landscape and create more liveable cities. The reframed Public Transport Services and Public Transport Infrastructure activity classes in GPS allow Waka Kotahi to separate regular investment to support continual services, from investment in bran d new infrastructure. By incorporating rapid transit funding (e.g. for busways and light rail infrastructure) and metro rail funding into the Public Transport Infrastructure activity class, Waka Kotahi will have the flexibility to work with local governme nt and KiwiRail to plan and deliver the most appropriate improvements as urban areas grow. The potential significant cost of rapid transit infrastructure means that alternative RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT funding and financing arrangements may be required to deliver rapid transit and supplement the funding available in the Fund. Projects approved under the Transitional Rail activity class for the Auckland and Wellington metropolitan rail networks in GPS and certain approved interregional rail projects will now be funded through t he Public Transport Infrastructure and Public Transport Services activity classes. Achieving resilient and reliable metropolitan rail networks in Auckland and Wellington will continue to be the priority for investment for rail from the Public Transport activity classes. All investment in metropolitan rail through the Public Transport Infrastructure activity class must align with the New Zealand Rail Plan before being considered for investment. Service operation Investment in the operation of existing publ ic transport networks and services to improve utilisation and maintain existing levels of service Service improvement Investment in new public transport services to improve the level of service and encourage the uptake of public transport Public Transpo rt Infrastructure Summary in section .: Public transport moves large numbers of people through the network. It also can shape the urban landscape and create more liveable cities. The reframed Public Transport Services and Public Transport Infrastructure activity classes in GPS allow Waka Kotahi to separate regular investment to support continual services, from investment in brand new infrastructure. By incorporating rapid transit funding (e.g for busways and light rail infrastructure) and metro rail funding into the Public Transport Infrastructure activity class, Waka Kotahi will have the flexibility to work with local government and KiwiRail to plan and deliver the most appropriate improvements as urban areas grow. The potential significant cost of rapid transit infrastructure means that alternative funding and financing arrangements may e required to deliver rapid transit and supplement the funding available in the Fund. Existing Investment in maintaining the level of service of existing public transport infrastructure New Investment in new public transport infrastructure to improve the level of service Walking and Cycling Improvements Walking and cycl ng Investment to improve the level of service and increase uptake for walking and cyclin g including promotional activities Local Road Improvements Existing Investment in improving the capacity or level of service on existing local roads New Investment to optimise utilisation, improve the level of service and improve capacity where needed RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT State Highway Improvements Existing Investment in improving the capacity or level of service on existing state highways New Investment to optimise utilisation, improve the level of service and improve capacity where needed State Highway Maintenance Operate Investment in the operation of existing state highways to optimise existing infrastructure and deliver an appropriate level of service Maintain Investment in the maintenance of existing state highways to deliver an appropriate level of service, excluding asset upgrades Renew Investment in renewal of existing state highways to deliver an appropriate level of service Emergency Urgent response to transport network disruptions to restore an appropriate level of service Local Road Maintenance Operate Investment in the opera tion of existing local roads to deliver an appropriate level of service Maintain Investment in the maintenance of existing local roads to deliver an appropriate level of service, excluding asset upgrades Renew Investment in renewal of existing local ro ads to deliver an appropriate level of service Emergency Urgent response to transport network disruptions to restore an appropriate level of service Investment Management Planning Investment in the transport planning research and funding allocation m anagement Sector research Investment in the transport planning, research and funding allocation management Management Investment in the transport planning, research and funding allocation management Coastal Shipping Summary in section .: New Zealands coastal shipping sector fulfils a critical role in New Zealands freight system. It provides a safe and sustainable mode for transporting large, heavy cargo such as petroleum products, cement and aggregate. There is potential to increase the use of coastal shipping as an alternative to other freight transpo t. Ultimately, the Governments expectation for investment in coastal shipping is to embed mode neutrality and choice for freight transporters, to allow New Zealand flagged coastal shipping to operate on a level playing field with other freight operators, and to enhance the sustainability and competitiveness of the domestic sector. It also reflects the Governments interest in partnering with industry to understand the challenges facing coastal shippin g and working with it to address these RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT challenges. The initial three years of funding will include relevant research to see what future support for the sector may help achieve Governments aims. Coastal shipping Investment in coastal shipping to support the efficiency and resilience of the coastal shipping sector Rail Network Summary in section .: Rail is an integral part of the transport system in New Zealand. Rail enables access and mobility, transporting people and goods, supporting productivity and business growth, reducing emissions, congestion and road deaths, and strengthening social and cultural connections between communities. GPS implements the findings of the Future of Rail review. The purpose of this activity class is to implement the New Zealand Rail Plan by funding approved activities from the RNIP (prepared by KiwiRail). The priority is to ensure a reliable and resilient national rail network. It provides funding to KiwiRail to maintain and renew the national rail freight network. The activity class does not show the funding to be provided by the Crown to be invested in RNIP activities. The agreed funding for this is set out in Section . Rail network Investment to enable KiwiRail to deliver a reliable and resilient national rail network
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT For reference LTMA Activity (a) means a land transport output or capital project; and (b) includes any combination of activities An activity class is a grouping of similar activities. Combination of activities means or more activities from (a) the same activity class, (b) or more activity classes Funding decisions The GPS must include the Crowns land transport investment strategy, which must address the activity classes to be funded from the NLTF, and their (forecast) funding ranges, for the next financial years ( ). Waka Kotahi must prepare an NLTP that contributes to the purpose of the LTMA and gives effect to the GPS. The NLTP must include, among other things, the proposed level of funding for each activity class, and approved activities and combinations of activities. Waka Kotahi must be atisfied that the activities or combinations of activities it approves as qualifying for paymen t from the NLTF: are included in the NLTP, which continues to give effect to the GPS and contributes to the purpose of the LTMA are consistent with the GPS are efficient and effective contribute to Waka Kotahis objective have, to the extent practicable, been assessed against other land transport the relevant consultation requirements have been complied with
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: David Crawford To: M Wood (MIN) Cc: Ewan Delany ; Freddie Holmes (Parliament) ; Sigurd Magnusson Subject: Clean Car standard Relief sought Monday, March Attachments: Letter to M Wood requesting changes to be made to the CCS March .pdf FCAI Rules for Calculating CO Compliance voluntary FES Final FOR DISTRIBUTION.pdf To: Hon Michael Wood, Minister of Transport. Please find attached a letter that follows up on discussion my Council held with you on Thursday March.Kind regardsDavid Crawford, Chief Executive Officer ListingMIA RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Monday March Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport m.woodministers.govt.nz Clean Car Standard Further Request for Reconsideration of Various Aspects of the Clean Car Standard. Thank you for meeting with the MIA Council by video on Thursday March. Since that meeting I have been liaising with my members on various po nts raised at the meeting . We have also been discussing the decisions Cabinet made on January, when considering the Clean Car Standard (CCS) . Our reaction s to Cabinets decisions are: We are grateful that the penalties have been reduced, but in our view is they are still too high. Nevertheless the reductions made are significant and we acknowledge that. We are pleased that you hold the view that to make the CCS effective it needs to be accompanied by strong incentives. Thank you for further clarify ing your intent at our meeting of March. However it is fair to reflect that as a sector we were flabbergasted at the timeline for grams COkm target quantum and . Our reaction is sticking to this undoes the benefits of the above two points because with the best will in the world, we simply cannot make that target by that timeline. Many doubt ou sector when we say we cannot make that timeline. For this reason I set out below: Normal production planning and delivery timelines, and Given this, changes to the CCS that we believe will help to ameliorate the penalties we as a sector will pay. It is our clear view that the levels of penalties we will accrue will simply mean a price increase for all new vehicles, including low emission vehic les. Normal Production Planning and Delivery Timelines For most distributors, year model vehicles start production in June July this year so they are barely over one year away from model production to be sold here in . It is important to note that m odel year designation at factories is not n ecessarily Year of Manufacture but often the timing of start of production of a model year specification update. This means that t o get new models in some countries by a new year it takes months RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT prior, to set up, manufacture and ship cars around the world so production is always started well in advance. Most distributors will have seen their initial prototypes of models at their factory meetings some months ago, and the factory had probably been working on them for at least years before that. Model planning and prototyping has already happened for models, so Cabinet Minister s expectation in terms of our ability to quickly change production priorities for the design and manufacturing lead time processes is, sadly, misplaced. Coming awa y from our video meeting with you on Thursday March the observation of members was we are not sure how the authorities think all the dies, moulds, small parts, looms, outside vender supply, production line machinery robots all get made for new models. It is not a five minute process, that is why model cycles are to years all the parts have to be designed, prototyped, made to production standard and then tested for prolonged periods, crash tested and possibly redesigned all over again prior to actu al use in any production vehicle, possibly in or five different countries. The above explanation is why we consistently requested at our industry liaison meetings with officials and Minister Genter when consulting on the clean car policies, a timelin e to at least preferably as that would sit across two model cycles. That is not possible with the target of . Nor is it possible to simply take left hand drive low emission vehicles which are being made in the priority markets of China, Europe and North America and get our factories to turn them into right hand drive models Changes made to existing models means each model changed must be re homologated. Even though we accept type certification, the cost of homologating a model is in the hundreds of thousands of dollars, which must then be recuperated from sales of units. Our small market means that is uneconomical. I t needs to be done for the Australasian market and Australia is not going at the same pace as us. They remain a handbrake on our asp rations. Finally, commentators have stated surely, we must be able to get right drive models as they are being made for th e UK. Apart from the fact that the UK want as many models and volume as they can get, these vehicles might also need re homologation if they have safety assist technology in them. Often these technologies have software that is geo ringfenced to a particula r region (e call, navigation systems for example). UK vehicles are also specd different to New Zealand consumer preferences. I write all this not to imply we do not want to reach our targets. Far from it, we do. However, with a timeline we are pushi ng water up a hill with a piece of string. Request for Relief from High Penalties Given Cabinet decisions around target quantum, timeline and penalties are in your view now nonnegotiable, there are some minor changes we believe are necessary to help us ameliorate the severity of likely penalties up to . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT When your officials were c onsulting on the proposed clean car standard the MIA agreed that in order to keep the calculation of CO status as uncomplicated as possible, we did not support the use of off cycle credits. We did, however, argue for super credits. We would like both r econsidered. Using super credits for EVs is a low cost non financial impost for Government. We suggest these are permitted for the period up to and their continuation after that is a key item for review in . We also believe the use of off cycle credits should be permitted. In between new model cycles the one thing that is more in control of the local distributor is seeking small changes to various technology on vehicles where these technologies do not require the model to be recertified . I attach for your consideration the FCAI voluntary code on the industrys fuel economy standard. Section deals with off cycle credits. This is a good model which we believe can easily be adapted for the NZ market. Again, the continuation of off cycle credi ts post should be reviewed in . We seek you r urgent consideration of this request and look forward to hearing from you or your officials on this matter. Kind regards David Crawfo d CEO Motor Industry Association of NZ. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED . CO Standard: Rules for Calculating Brand Targets and Assessing Brand Compliance Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries Level , Wentworth Avenue KINGSTON ACT Phone: Facsimile: Contact s: Mr Ashley Sanders , Technical Director th March (ver .) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED DOCUMENT CONTROL Document Management The CO Standard: Rules for Calculating Brand Targets and Assessing Brand Compliance has been prepared under the direction of the FCAI Board with input and review by members of the Technical Committee and CO Working Group. Prior to implementation by FCAI members, this document will be approved by the FCAI Board. Purpose of Document The purpose of the document is to define the rules and methods to be used by FCAI when calculating their members brand target s and assess ing brand compliance against the CO Standard agreed by the FCAI Board on April . Version Control Version Nature of changecomments Editor (s) Oct . (draft) Initial draft to define overall procedures J Hurnall Jan . (draft) draft including calculation of credits, banking and carry forward of credits and debits J Hurnall Feb . (draft) Overview J Hurnall Apr . (draft) Update calculation and transfer of credits . Super credits only apply to sales volumes in assessing brand compliance Include solarthermal con rol technologies table from US scheme in off cycle technologies J Hurnall Aug . (draft) W Carpenter Oct . (draft) Update calculation responsibility. Detailed process changes A Sanders Nov . (draft) Detailed process changes (for Board Mtg) A Sanders Mar . Final document for Official Publication A Sanders RATIONALE FOR THE FCAI VOLUNTARY CO STANDARD .In the absence of Government policy certainty arising from the Commonwealths interdepartmental Vehicle Emission forum, this standard generally adopts international practice but with flexibilities to reflect Australian market conditions. .Adoption of a voluntary approach by all FCAI members, not mandated by government .FCAI and its members will provide all administration and resou rcing to support reporting of compliance with this standard .All FCAI members will be included in this scheme .There are l imited Federal Government complementary measures to incentivi se the uptake of low emission technologies .This scheme provides for a phase in period but with tracking mechanisms and CO targets covering the period . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED EXECUTIVE SUMMARY The Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries (FCAI) is the peak industry organisation representing the importers of passenger vehicles, light commercial vehicles and motorcycles in Australia. The FCAI supports the Ministerial Forum on Vehicle Emissions and has strongly supported a comprehensive approach to addressing motor vehicle emissions that includes fuel quality standards, introduction of Euro along with the introduction of a realistic, achievable and market relevant CO standard. At the meeting on April , the FCAI Board approved the FCAI Proposal for a CO Standard and Introduction of Euro . The widespread availability of EN standard fuels is a key enabler for globally consistent vehicle emissions standards and proposed Australian CO targets . Fuel quality standards determinations for Petrol and Diesel were made in providing clarity for fuel quality , at effectively the current minimum fuel quality level , through to . This limits members ability to introduce wide spread advanced engine and after treatment technologies until . Whilst not ali gned with European Fuel Standards from the current fuel determinations give sufficient certainty for members on Australian market fuels to p an for and adopt this CO standard . This document outlines how automotive brands compliance against the agreed CO Standard (A nnex A) will be calculated . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED TABLE OF CONTENTS EXECUTIVE SUMMARY . . . . . . OVERVIEW . . . . . . CALCULATING BRAND TARGET . . . . . ASSESS ING BRAND COMPLIANCE . . . . . COMPLIANCE RESULT . . . . . CREDITS . . . . . . SUPER CREDITS . . . . . . . . BANKING AND CARRY FORWARD OF CREDITS DEBITS . . . . . . . EXEMPTIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . CONCLUSION . . . . . . . GLOSSARY . . . . . . . . ANNEX A: FCAI PROPOSAL FOR A C O STANDARD AND INTRODUCTION OF EURO . ANNEX B: EXPLANAITON OF US OFF CYCLE TECHNOLOGIES . . . . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED Figure . Overview Each brand s (supplier s) own targets will be calculate d (i.e. one for MA Category vehicles and another for NAMC Category vehicles) for each calendar year from the mass based limit value curve: CO Limit Value CO Target slope x (Mass MRef) Where: CO Target is the annual target for each category as outlined in Tables . and . . Mass sales weighted Mass In Running Order (MIRO) of individual brand sales for that calendar year . Slope slope of the line for that target year from Tables . and .. MRef reference sales weighted MIRO for that target year from Tables and .. Table .. Limit Curve Parameters MA Category CO Target Slope . . . . . . . . . . . MRef Table . Limit Curve Parameters NAMC Category CO Target Slope . . . . . . . . . . MRef For example the value limit curves for each category for target year will be : MA category: CO Limit Value . (Mass ) NAMC category: CO Limit Value . (Mass ) And the value limit curves for each category for target year will be MA category: CO Limit Value . (Mass ) NAMC category: CO Limit Value . (Mass ) FCAI will assess each Brand s Compliance (sect ion .) against their Brand Target (s) (Section .). The data used in calculating brand targets and assessing brand performance will be sourced from Vfacts. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED . CALCULATING BRAND TARGET . Overview FCAI will calculate e ach brand s (Supplier s) individual, yearly targets based on their total annual sales , using data (sales and unlad en mass) recorded in Vfacts for that target (calendar ) year. Separate targets will be calculated for: All MA Category models and sales All NAMC Cat egory models and sales . Methodology To calculate each brand target (i.e. a MA category target and a NAMC category target) , the sales weighted average mass is needed. Note s: Sales total sales in calendar year Mass In Running Order (MIRO ) Unladen mass kg Unladen ( kerb ) mass the mass of the vehicle in running order unoccupied and unladen with all fluid reservoirs filled to nominal capacity including fuel, and with all standard equipment. Step .: Total mass for all modelsvariants sold in calendar year Total mass for each variant; Total mass of variant ( ) Mass(variant()) x Sales(variant()) Total mass of variant(n) Mass(variant(n)) Sales(variant(n)) Total mass for each model: Total mass of Model ().. () Step .: Total sales for all modelsvariants sold in calendar year Total sales for each modelvariant; Total sales of variant ( ) Sales(variant()) Total sales for each model: Total sales of model ().. () The data added to Vfacts should be consistent with the data used for the vehicle Type Approval and recorded in the RVD and Type Approv al documents. Each vehicle model is included in the CO Target that corresponds it vehicle category as per its Type Approval. As per its Type Approval Vehicle Standard (Australian Design Rule Definitions and Vehicle Categories) , compilation RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED Step .: Calculate sales weighted average mass for brand Total sales weighted mass for all models (in that vehicle category target group) sold by brand: Brand total mass () () Brand total sales () () Sales weighted average mass for brand Step .: Calculate brand target (s) Each brand s target(s) are calculate d using the mass limit curve; CO Limit Value CO Target slope x (M ass MRef) (Equ .) Where: CO Target is the annual target for each category as outlined in Tables . and . . Mass sales weighted average mass calculated in step Slope slope of the line for that target year from Tables . and . MRef reference sales weighted mass (in running o der) for that target year from Tables . and .. Note s: Separate targets need to be calculated for MA category and NAMC Category vehicles. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED . ASSESSING BRAND COMPLIANCE . Overview of Brand Compliance FCAI will assess e ach brand s (Supplier s) compliance against the brand s own target (s) (Section . ) by calculating their sales weighted average CO emissions , using data (sales and CO emissions) recorded in Vfacts for that target ( calendar ) year . Compliance against the separate targets are to be calculated for: All MA Category models and sales All NA MC Category models and sales NOTE: Sp ecific vehicles are excluded, refer Section . Methodology To calculate the brand sales weighted average CO . Note s: CO CO emissions reported against ADR as part of the vehicle (model variant ) type approval Sales total sales (in each vehicle category target group) in calendar year Step .: Total CO for all modelsvariants sold in calendar year Total CO emissions for each variant; Total CO of variant ( ) CO (variant()) x Sales(variant()) Total CO of variant(n) CO (variant(n)) x Sales(variant(n)) Total mass for each model: Total CO of Mode l () () Step .: Total sales for all modelsvariants sold in calendar year Total sales for each modelvariant; Total sales of variant ( ) Sales(variant()) Where a variant has a super credit (Section .), the Sales volume for that variant is multiplied by the super credit: Sales(variant(n)) Super credit multiplier x sales volume Total sales for each model: Total sales of model ().. () Excludes exempt vehicles, refer Section . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED Step .: Calculate sales weighted average CO for brand Total sales weighted mass for all models (in that vehicle category target group) sold by brand: Brand total CO () () Brand total sales () () Brand sales weighted average CO CO Step .: Subtract credits from that target year Any credits are then subtracted from the Brand sales weighted average CO to achieve the Brand CO Performance (prelim ) see equation . below. Brand CO Performance (prelim) Brand sales weighted average CO Credits (Equ .) Notes: Calculation of (sales weighted average) credits is from Equ . (see Section .). Step .: Carried forward credits andor debits Any credits or debits that have been banked and are to be carried forward are then added to the Brand sales weighted average CO to achieve the final Brand CO Performance (final) see Equation . below. Brand CO Perform ance (final) Brand CO Performance (prelim) Carry forward Credits Carry forward Debits (Equ . ) Notes: Rules for banking and carry forward credits and debits are detailed in Section .. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED . COMPLIANCE RESULT . Overview of Compliance Result FCAI will assess e ach brand s (supplier s) compliance against the brand s target ( calculated above ) by calculating their sales weighted average CO emissions. Separate compliance results are to be calculated for: All MA category models and sales All NA MC Category models and sales . Methodology To calculate the Brand Compliance Result. Brand Compliance Result CO Limit Value Brand CO Perfo mance (final) (Equ .) Note s: CO Limit Value Equ . Brand CO Performance (final) Equ . A positive Brand Compliance Result (i.e. Brand CO Performance CO Limit Value) shows that the brand has met the target and can carry forward credits. A negative Brand Compliance Result (i e. Brand CO Performance CO Limit Value) s hows that the brand has not met the target and needs to carry forward a debit. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED . CREDITS . Credits The FCAI CO Standard provides for a range of Credits for both : Airconditioning credits Offcycle credits Credits will be calculated annually against each brands annual target. Credits are to be calculated for: All MA category models and sales All NA MC Category models and sales This section details how to calculate credits and the methodology for transferring credits between MA and NAMC targets (within a single Supplier) and between Suppliers at a high level . . Airconditioning credits An air conditioning (AC) credit is incl uded to encourage the i ntroduction of low GWP air conditioning gas. The following credits are available for each un t sold with an air condition system charged with a gas with a GWP ; gkm for MA category vehicles gkm for NAMC category vehicles. Note: For Low and Zero Emission Vehicles, it s acceptable for these vehicles to achieve a negative CO result for credit calculation purposes .. Methodology to calcula e AC credits To calculate the airconditioning credits . Step . .: Total AC credits for each model: Total AC credit for each model Total AC credit of variant ( ) AC credit(variant()) x Sales(variant()) Total AC credits of variant(n) AC credit (variant(n)) x Sales(variant( n)) Total AC credits of Model () () Notes: Where the model is an MA Category vehicle the AC credit is gkm. Where the model is an NA or MC Cat egory vehicle the AC credit is gkm Where a variant has a super credit (Section .), the Sales volume is multiplied by the super credit: oSales(variant(n)) Super credit multiplier x sales volume Step . .: Calculate sales weighted average AC credit for brand RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED Total sales weighted AC credit for all models (in that vehicle category target group) sold by brand: Brand total AC credit ACcredit () ACcredit () Brand total sales () () Brand sales weighted average AC credit AC credit . Offcycle credits Credits for other eco innovation and fuel saving technology not measured on the ADR drive cycle are to be included. To be consistent with overseas markets, up to a maximum of gkm per unit of off cycle credits can be claimed be each brand towards their target. Any offcycle credit techno logy e.g. ecoinnovation , fuel saving technology that is accepted in either the US or EU will be accepted, and the same credit level will apply .. EU Offcycle Credits While the EU continues to ut ilise the NEDC test for their CO tandard, the value provided for off cycle credits can be directly used in the Australian CO Standard. Once the EU adopts the WLTP test only for their CO standard, a conversion factor will need to be developed. .. US Off cycle Credits The US provides a menu of echnology and credits in their regulation (in Table II and Table II ). These technology and values (converted to gkm see Table s . and . ) are to be directly used in the Australian CO Standard. US Federal RegisterVol. , No. Rules and Regulations; Department of Transportation, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, and Later Model Year Light Duty Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards: Final Rule RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED Table . OffCycle Technologies and Credits Offcycle Technology Credit for MA Category Vehicles Credit for NAMC Category Vehicles US (gmile) Aust (gkm) US (gmile) Aust (gkm) High efficiency exterior lights . . . . Waste heat recovery . . . . Solar panels battery charging only . . . . Solar panels active cabin ventilation and battery charging . . . . Active aerodynamic improvements (for a aerodynamic drag reduction) . . . . Engine idle stopstart with heater circulation system . . . Engine idle stopstart without heater circulation system . . . Active transmission warm up . . . . Active engine warm up . . . . Solarthermal control . . . . Table . OffCycle SolarThermal Control and Credits Offcycle Technology Credit for MA Category Vehicles Credit for NAMC Category Vehicles US (gmile) Aust (gkm) US (gmile) Aust (gkm) Glass or glazing . . . Active seat ventilation . . . Solar reflective paint . . . . Passive cabin ventilation . . . . Active cabin ventilation . . . . Notes: .Offcycle technology approved under US CO Standard .US (gmile) converted to Aust (gkm) at . mile km. The conversion is calculated using significant figures and rounded to significant figure. .Offcycle solarthermal control technology credits (outlined in Table .) have credits limits as shown in Table .. .These are the o ffcycle solarthermal control technology credits allowed under US CO Standard (further details included in Annex B) . .. Calculation of sales weighted average off cycle credits Step . ..: Total Offcycle cred its for each model: Total off cycle credits for each model Total off cycle credit of variant() Off cycle credit(variant()) x Sales(variant()) Total off cycle credits of variant(n) Off cycle credit(variant(n)) x Sales(variant(n)) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED Notes: Offcycle c redit value is taken from relevant rowcolumn form Table . Where a variant has a super credit (Section .), the Sales volume is multiplied by the super credit: oSales(variant(n)) Super credit multiplier x sales volume Total Off cycle credits of Model () () Step . ..: Calculate sales weighted average Offcycle credit for brand Total sales weighted Off cycle credit for all models (in that vehicle category target group) sold by brand: Brand total Off cycle credit credit () credit () Brand total sales () () Brand sales weighted average Offcycle credit credit . Calculation of total credits AC credits and off cycle credits are then combined to reach a total credit per unit s old: Total (sales weighed average) credit Brand sales weighted average AC credit Brand sales weighted average off cycle credit Credits transferred (Equ .) . Transfer of credits debits Credits (and debits) are calculated against either target (i.e. MA Category or NAMC Category), on a total sales basis. After calculating the Compliance Result; Any credit to be transferre d between targets (or between brands) are converted from a per unit basis to total sales gCO km. Any credit or debit to be carried forward are calculated on total sales . See Example . following. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED Example .: Calculation and Transfer of Credits (and or debits) Total Brand Credits for MA Category in Sales weighted average mass , , , kg CO Limit Value CO Target slope x (Mass MRef) .x( ) gkm Sales weighted average CO CO , , , gkm Compliance Result CO Limit Value Sales weighte d average CO gkm (i.e. brand complies with MA target with gkm per unit credit) Total MA CO Credit Compliance Result x Brand total sales x , ,gkm Total Brand CreditsDebits for MCNA Category in Sales weighted average mass , , , kg CO Limit Value CO Target slope x (Mass MRef) .x( ) gkm Sales weighted average CO CO , , , gkm Compliance Result CO Limit Value Sales weighted average CO gkm (i.e. brand does not comply with MCNA target with gkm per unit debit) Total MCNA CO Debit Compliance Result x Brand total sales x , ,gkm Brand result The credits from the MA Compliance Result (, gkm) can be transferred to the MCNA Compliance Result ( , gkm) to give: MA Compliance Result COMPLIES carrying a , gkm credit forward MCNA Compliance Result DOES NOT COMPLY in its own right but COMPLIES by transferring credit from MA compliance Overall Brand co mpliance MA CO Credit MCNA CO Debit COMPLIES , (,) , gkm Credits to be carried forward , gkm Therefore, the brand meets both MA and MCNA targets and has , gkm that can be carried forward (or transferred to another brand). RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED Note: During the report p hase ( ), only credit s are recorded and banked for future use. Considering the same Example . above but where MANA compliance result is ( ,) : MA Compliance Result COMPLIES carrying a , gkm credit forward MCNA Compliance Re sult Does NOT COMPLY in its own right And d oes NOT COMPLY by transferring all existing credit from MA result Overall Brand co mpliance MA CO Credit MCNA CO Debit Does NOT COMPLY , (,) , gkm But not reported as noncompliance in period Debits to be carried forward gkm Report Phase MA MCNA Net Carry Forward (debit) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED . Worked Example s To d emonstrate how Super credits work, and may change from year to year, following are example s. Example : To demonstrate calculation of super credit value and how this will change with changes to the CO Limit Value curve each year MA category vehicle with unladen mass of kg and CO emissions of g. : To calculate the CO limit value for this vehicle: Mass in running order kg CO limit value .( ) . The super credit limi ts are: Super credit value of for CO over grams and up to g ( x ) Super credit value of . for CO values over g and up to g ( x ) Therefore, this model will receive a super credit value of . in and sales of this model variant will be multiplied by . . : The same vehicle in will have a different (lower) CO limit value and super credit boundaries would also change (decrease). CO limit value .( ) . The super credit limits are: Super credit value of for CO over grams and up to and including g ( x ) Super credit value of . for CO values over g and up to and including g ( x ) Therefore, this model will not receive a super credit in . Example : Pure battery electric vehicle wi h gkm tail pipe emissions. Super credit All sales for this model are multiplied by regardless of year of target. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED . BANKING AND CARRY FORWARD OF CREDITS DEBITS . Overview Credits and debits can be banked and carried forward for up to years. Credits and debits are banked and carried forward on a total sales basis (Section .) . Banking and carry forward of credits Credits can be banked and carried forward for up to years (from the year of accruing the Credit) starting in . For example, Credits accumulated against the target can be used for compliance against targets in any of the following five () yearly targets, i.e. up to and including the target year. . Banking and carry forward of debits Debits can be banked and carried forward for up to years (from the year of accruing the debit ) starting in . NOTE: For the schemes phase in period, , net debits are counted as zero. All debit s must be cleared within years. For example, De bits accumulated against the target can be banked and then acquitted against targets in any of the following five () yearly targets, i.e. up to and including the target year. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED . EXEMPTIONS Emergency services and the Defence Forces rely heavily on the use of light commercial vehicles tail ored for specific requirement . Any vehicles eligible for exemption under the Commonwealth Department of Environment and Energy Product Emissions Standards Rule s will be exempt under the CO standard to ensure no disruption is caused to these valuable services . Refer: https:www.legislation.gov.auDetailsFC Sales of vehicles for Emergency Services and Defence Forces may be excluded from the data used to Calculate Brand Targets (section .) and Assessing Brand Compliance (section .). Any vehicles not inclu ded in Assessing Brand Compliance also cannot be used for calculation of Credits (section .). For Illustrative purposes Products that will be used only by the Australian Defence Force or a law enforcement or security agency (within the meaning of the Independent National Security Legislation Monitor Act ) and only for national security purposes; and Products that will be used only by an emergency services organisation and only for rescue or emergency services purposes An emergency services organisation is a body that: (a) is, or is part of a body that is: (i) established for a public purpose by or under a law of the Commonwealth, of a State or of a Territory; or (b)is any of the following: (i) a police force or service; (ii) a fire service; (iii) an ambulance service; (iv) a coast guard ervice, rescue service or emergency service; (v) a surf lifesaving organisation. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED . CONCLUSION At the meeting on April , the FCAI Board approved the FCAI Proposal for a CO Standard and Introduction of Euro . This document outlines how FCAI members will calculate their compliance against the agreed CO Standard (Appendix A). The agreed CO Standard also includes the need for regular reviews of the standard to consider any changes to Australian market conditions and to monitor the vehicle industrys ability to meet these standards. This document will be reviewed and as the CO Standard is reviewed and ooo RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED GLOSSARY Term Abbreviation Description Australian Design Rule ADR National Standards for vehicle safety, emissions and theft reduction. Mass in running order MIRO Unladen mass kg Road Vehicle Descriptor RVD Form used by the Government (DIRDC) to record information used to assess compliance of a vehicle with some of the requirements of the Australian Design Rules. It also provides information required for bulk registration and other purposes to the State and Territory registering authorities. Type Approval A Type Approval is granted by the Administrator of Vehicle Standards to a vehicle that meets the relevant ADRs Unladen Mass ADR D finition: the mass of the vehicle in running order unoccupied and unladen with all fluid rese voirs filled to nominal capacity including fuel, and with all standard equipment. The Unladen mass is recorded in Vfacts . RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED ANNEX A: FCAI PROPOSAL FOR A CO STANDARD AND INTRODUCTION OF EURO At the meeting on April , the FCAI Board approved the FCAI Proposal for a CO Standard and Introduction of Euro . .Introduction The FCAI supports the Ministerial Forum on Vehicle Emissions and has strongly s upported a comprehensive approach to addressing motor vehicle emissions that includes fuel quality standards, introduction of Euro along with the introduction of a realistic, achievable and market relevant CO standard. The widespread availability of EN standard fuels is a key enabler for globally consistent vehicle emissions standards and proposed Australian CO targets. This proposal for a CO standard and introduction of Euro is based on the Fuel Quality Standards Determinations for Petrol and Diesel and assumes that the Australian market fuel will not harmonise with current EU fuel quality standards until . .CO Standard To be acceptable to Government the CO standard needs to: Be comparable with overseas standards in terms of annual reduction (from an agreed starting point) and Use internationally recognisable and publicly available testing regimes and measurements (e.g. UN Regulations) A to timeline is proposed as : A year lead time is required for introduction for new modelstechnology. It is consistent with international practice (i.e. the US fuel efficiency standards were introduced in ) , noting that the US system had a phase in allowing voluntary participation in the initial period . It allows time for the introduction of infrastructure and deployment of incentive programs to encourage the uptake of alternative powertrains including low and zero emission vehicles. It aligns with the Paris Agreement target . It allows flexibility with time to implement new fuel quality standards and Euro (also believed fundamental to success). Annual targets allow both the Government and brands to monitor and track progress against the long term target . .. Targets and Timeframe The FCAI is proposing the following targets for : gkm for MA category vehicles (i.e. passenger cars and smallmedium SUVs). gkm for NAMC category vehicles (i.e. light commercial vehicles and large SUVs). In addition to targets, the FCAI propose interim targets from to as outlined in Table . RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED Table . Annual CO Targets MA NAMC Note: these targets are at an industry wide level, based on a reference mass (M Ref see following). .. Brands compliance with Targets Each brand (supplier) will have their own target (for each calendar year) from a mass based limit value curve: CO Limit Value CO Target slope x (Mass MRef) Where: CO Target is the annual target for each category as outlined in Table (above) and Tables a and b. Mass sales weighted mass (in running order) of individual brand sales for that calendar year. Slope slope of the line for that target year from Tables a and b. MRef reference sales weighted mass (in running order) for that target year from Tables a and b. Table a. Limit Curve Parameters MA Category CO Target Slope . . . . . . . . . . . MRef Table b. Limit Curve Parameters NAMC Category CO Target Slope . . . . . . . . . . . MRef For example, the value limit curves for each category for target year will be: MA category: CO Limit Value . (Mass ) NAMC category: CO Limit Value . (Mass ) And the value limit curves for each category for target year will be MA category: CO Limit Value . (Mass ) NAMC category: CO Limit Value . (Mass ) FCAI will calculate e ach brand s (Supplier s) individual, yearly targets based on th at brands total annual sales for that target year. RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED Each vehicle (makemode lvariant) CO values will be measured in accordance with ADR . A regular review (every years or as required ) will be needed to consider if the average mass of the new vehicle sales has changed, and if the value of M Ref andor slope need to be changed to reflect change in consumer preference andor technology. .. Flexibility Provisions: Credits The proposed standard will incl ude flexibility provisions. Credits will be calculated annually against each brands annual target. ... Airconditioning credits: An air conditioning credit of gkm (MA category) and gkm (NAMC catego y) to encourage; Introduction of low GWP air conditioning gas Improved air conditioning efficiency Elimination of leakage in air conditioning systems. ... Offcycle credits: Credits for other eco innovation and fuel saving technology not measured on the ADR drive cycle are to be included. To be c onsistent with overseas markets up to a maximum of gkm can be claimed be each brand towards their target. Any eco innovation or fuel saving technology that is accepted in either the US or EU will be accepted, and the same credit level will be available . ... Super credits Credits for zero emission vehicles (ZEV) and low emission vehicles are to be included. These are referred to as super credits in both the EU and US CO standards. The supe credit boundaries are linked to the targets and value limit cur ve for each target year: Vehicles emitting gkm will be counted as vehicles. Vehicles between of value limit curve for that target year will be counted as vehicles. Vehicles between of value limit curve for that target year will be counte d as . vehicles. ... Transfer of credits Credits can be transferred between MA and NAMC targets within a brand on a one forone basis. Credits can be transferred between brands. ADR is harmonised with UN R and currently uses the NEDC drive cycle. When the new WLTP drive cycle is introduced the CO targets will need to be reviewed. RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED ... Banking and carry forward of creditsdebits Credits can be banked and carried forward for up to years starting from target year. Debits can be banked and carried forward for up to years starting from target year. NOTE: During the schemes phase in period , net debits are counted as zero .. Penalties The penalty for non compliance with the CO standard will be public reporting of non compliant brands . No financial penalty is to be applied. The effectiveness of a public reporting regime is to be monitored and reviewed. .. Brand Reporting All F CAI member brands will participate in the CO standard, i.e. measure target against the mass limit curve and be able to access the credits. .. Responsible Entity (Supplier) The responsible entity for the CO standard must be the entity that is responsible for the importation and distribution of a new light vehicle (ADR categories MA, MC and NA). The following definition is proposed: Supplier means any person who first supplies a road motor vehicle in Australia to; (a)a licensed new car dealer or (b)the market .. Application The CO standard will begin in with: Reporting of brands performance against brand CO targets for the target years to with no accumulation of net debits . oCredits can be accumulated and carried forward from for up to years. Reporting of brands performance against brand CO targets and level of compliance from target year . oCredits and debits can be acc umulated and carried forward from for up to years. .. Emergency and Defen ce Vehicles Exemptions Emergency services and the Defen ce Forces rely heavily on the use of vehicles (often tailored for specific requirement) and therefore vehicles for these services will be exempt under the proposed CO standard to ensure no disruption is caused to these valuable services. RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED .Euro The FCAI supports the introduction of Euro by harmonising ADR with UN R ( and series) along with the introduction of the necessary fuel quality standard. The earliest introduction timing for Euro (Euro b only) is for new models. Ability for a vehicle to meet the subsequent levels of Euro ( i.e. c and d); especially the OBD and in service requirements are dependent on market fuel quality: .. Petrol (all grades); Euro b: Petrol with low sul fur levels (ppm) must be available. Euro c: Petrol with ppm sul fur (max) must be widely available. Euro d: Petrol with ppm sul fur (max) and aromatics (max) must be widely available. .. Diesel: Euro b: Diesel with low PAH must be available. Euro c and Euro d: Diesel with PAH (max) must be widely available. Note: Current experience shows that Euro b compliant vehicles are operating satisfactorily on PULP (RON) with sul fur levels up to ppm and aromatic levels up to . .Fuel Quality Standard Australian fuel quality standards must align with European fuel standards to deliver the proposed CO targets and provide for implementation of UN R (Euro b and Euro c) and R series (i.e. Euro d along with the WLTP and RDE) into ADR . RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED .Review The Government, in conjunction with the industry, must undertake regular reviews of the Australian market conditions to monitor the vehicle industrys ability to meet these standards. The reviews will need to consider: Current Australian market fuel quality and any changes required to introduce new CO or pollutant emission standards. Change in Australian buyer behaviour and vehicle choice that will influence CO targets and limit curve parameters. Change in vehicle technology in major overseas markets and potential to impact on Australia. Change in international vehicle pollutant emissio n regulations. Compliance with overseas CO targets and change in overseas CO targets. .. Initial Review The initial review should occur years (around ) after the introduction of the CO standard to: Confirm short term (out to next years) CO targets. Confirm mass limit curve parameters. Evaluate current market conditions against assumptions made at time of implementation of CO standard including: oImplementation timing of the various levels of Euro . oImplementation of WLTP and RDE oCurrent f uel qua ity standards oImplementation timing of any change to fuel quality standards. .. Subsequent Reviews Subsequent reviews would then occur at year intervals or as required to: Confirm short term (out to next years) CO targets and mass limit curve. Develop long term (out to years) CO targets. Consider introduction timings for any new pollutant emission standards. Confirm compatible fuel quality standards. ooo RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED ANNEX B: EXPLANAITON OF US OFF CYCLE TECHNOLOGIES Following is an extract from the US EPA Report Greenhouse Gas Emission Standards for Light Duty Vehicles, Manufacturer Performance Report for the Model Year (pp. ), Section E. Credits Based on Off Cycle Technology ; . Off Cycle Credits Based on the Menu The regulations clearly define each technology and any requirements that apply for the technology to generate credits. The definitions may be summarized as follows: Active aerodynamics These technologies are auto matically activated to improve the aerodynamics of a vehicle under certain conditions. These include grill shutters, which allow air to flow around the vehicle more efficiently, and suspension systems that improve air flow at higher speeds by reducing the height of the vehicle. Credits are variable and based on the measured improvement in the coefficient of drag, a test metric that reflects the efficiency of airflow around a vehicle Thermal control technologies These systems reduce the air temperature of the vehicle interior, lowering GHG tailpipe emissions by reducing he fuel demand on the AC system. Thermal control technologies are subject to a per vehicle cap on credits of . gmi for cars and . gmi for trucks. oActive and passive c abin ventilation Active systems use mechanical means to vent the interior, while passive systems rely on ventilation through convective air flow. Credits range from . to . gmi. oActive seat ventilation These systems move air through the seating surf ace, transferring heat away from the vehicle occupants. Credits are . gmi for cars and . gmi for trucks. oGlass or glazing Credits are available for glass or glazing technologies that reduce the total solar transmittance through the glass, thus red ucing the heat from the sun that reaches the occupants. The credits are calculated based on the measured sola transmittance through the glass and on the total area of glass on the vehicle oSolar reflective surface coating Credits are available for sola r reflective surface coating (e.g. paint) that reflects at least percent of the infrared solar energy. Credits are . gmi for cars and . gmi for trucks. Active engine and transmission warmup These systems use heat from the vehicle that would typically be wasted (exhaust heat, for example) to warm up key elements of the engine, allowing a faster transition to warm operation. A warmed up engine andor transmission consumes less fuel and emits less tailpipe CO. Systems that use a single heatexchanging loop that serves both transmission and engine warmup functions are eligible for either engine or transmission warmup credits, but not both. oActive engine warmup Uses waste heat from the engine to warm up the engine. Credits are . gmi for cars and . gmi for trucks. oActive transmission warmup Uses waste heat from the engine to warm up the transmission. Credits are . gmi for cars and . gmi for trucks. RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Page of PROTECTED Engine idle stop start These systems allow the engine to turn off when the vehicle is at a stop (e.g., at a stoplight), automatically restarting the engine when the driver releases the brake andor applies pressure to the accelerator. If equipped with a switch to disable the system, EPA must determine that the predominant operating mode of the system is the on setting (defaulting to on every time the key is turned on is one basis for such a determination). Thus some vehicles with these systems are not eligible for credits. Credits range fr om . to . gmi, and depend on whether the system is equipped with an additional technology that allows heat, when demanded, to continue to be circulated to the vehicle occupants when the engine is off during a stop start event. High efficiency exterio r lights These lights reduce the total electric demand, and thus the fuel consumption and GHG emissions, of the lighting system in comparison to conventional lighting technologies. Credits are based on the specific lighting locations, ranging from . g mi for turn signals and parking lights to . gmi for low beams. The total of all lighting credits may not exceed . gmi. Solar panels Vehicles that use batteries for propulsion, such as electric, plug in hybrid electric, and hybrid vehicles may re ceive credits for solar panels that are used to charge the battery directly or to provide power directly to essential vehicle systems (e.g., heating and cooling systems). Credits are based on the rated power of the solar panels. RELEASED UNDER THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT From: Hire A Holden To: M Wood (MIN) Subject: Suspect Sender RUC for PHEV ZEV Friday, June Hello Honorable Michael Wood, Minister of Transport, Thank you for announcing the Clean Car Package on June .Back in Sep , the National Party announced there will be no RUC payable for light plug in hybrids (PHEVs) and zero emission vehicles (ZEV) until Dec .Are we expecting an announcement for an extension to this policy, until at least the end of We have a small fleet of vehicles doing deliveries, each operating around ,km a month.Having a long term exemption would mean we will be saving per vehicle per month.This would give us some form of help to get a bigger range EV , so we are not reliant on a public fast charger most of the time, as it negatively affects the battery capacity in the longrun. The larger range vehicles are just at or over the , cap for the Clean Car Package. , cap would open up more opportunities. Another hurdle for a business owner converting vehicles to electric most car companies would only offer year warranty instead of years for private owners.The replacement and repair costs are very high without a warranty. Any reduction in running or ownership costs would definitely help us.Thank youKind Regards, Yonny Yeung LEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UN R THE OF CIAL INFORMATION ACT Yonny Yeung yonnyhireaholden.co.nz Dear Yonny Thank you for your emai l of June regarding purchasing and using electric vehicles (EVs) as a business with a small vehicle fleet . Please accept my apologies for the delay in replying. As you are aware, nonpetrol vehicles such as diesel and EVs are generally subject to Road User Charges ( RUC). The purpose of the RUC system is to recover the costs each vehicle imposes on the land transport network, as well as to provide funding for new roads and infrastructure. However, vehicles that use petrol pay fuel excise duty on any petrol purchased rather than RUC. The Government has extended the RUC exemption for light EVs to March , which will save New Zealanders around a year This will encourage further uptake of EVs to reduce transport emissions and support meeting the Governments carbon neutral target. For more information visit please visit the website: https:www.beehive.govt.nzreleasecleancar packagerevsruc exemption extension. Regarding your comm ents on the , cap for the Clean Car Discount scheme (the Discount), the government is conscious that many consumers are already willing and able to afford high value lowemission vehicles. For social equity reasons, it would be inappropriate to provide a discount for them and this is why only low emission vehicles of , or less receive a rebate. I understand that this is frustrating if you were looking to purchase a vehicle which is slightly over this amount. However, we have been pleased by the response of several car companies who have made more options available under ,. There are now a variety of electric and plugin electric options available which would receive the discount. I am sorry to hear that you have only been offered a year warranty instead of years, and how this can lead to higher costs for yourself. This may be reconciled as the uptake of EVs increases in the coming years. As you noted, the current ownership and operating costs of EVs can be more expensive for companies as you shift away from internal combustion vehicles . But we hope the existing measures will support your transition into and operation of EVs for your business.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT General Feedback
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Annex : Talking Points for your meeting with the Icelandic Minister of Finance
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of March OC Hon Michael Wood Action required by: Minister of Transport Monday, March CHANGES TO LAND TRANSPORT REGULATORY CHARGES AND FEES UPDATE ON DRAFT CABINET PAPE R CONSULTATION Purpose To provide you with a draft Cabinet paper outlining proposed changes to land transport regulatory charges and fees for Ministerial consultation, prior to a final version of the Cabinet paper being lodged. This briefing also updates you on key themes from agency consultation. Key p oints The attached draft Cabinet paper ( Appendix One ) seeks approval to issue drafting instructions on a package of seven cost recovery proposals. This includes: ochanging land transport regulatory fees and charges as specified in the Cost Recovery Impact Statement (CRIS) , and ocharging actual and reasonable costs, including those incurred by third party providers for the provision of specialist services . The draft Cabinet paper should be read in conjunction with the following documents: oThe CRIS provides comprehensive information for each proposal and details current and proposed charges and fees . It also provides information about impacts on businesses and households, and oThe T ake, t mia (Regulatory Strategy: ) which will guide Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agencys work over the next decade. The Ministry of Transport has consulted with agencies on the draft Cabinet paper. Refer to Appendix Two for key feedback themes from consultation and the M inistry of Transport response to this feedback . Feedback was supportive of the proposed changes , with general feedback focused on strengthening the draft Cabinet paper and further analysis suggested for specific population groups . The draft Cabinet paper focuses on an implementation of October for newcharges and fees to come into effect . This is because the existing loan of million is expected to be exhausted between the period October to December , depending on revenue and spending patte rns. If the implementation is deferred beyond December , then Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency will either : seek further fundingfinancing Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of from the Crown to maintain current levels of services; or reduce the level of service for all the areas of fr ontline regulatory activity that the loan currently sustains. There is expected to be a shortfall of funding of approximately million each month to maintain current levels of services (including loan repayments) . The nature of the land transport system means nearly all New Zealanders and businesses will be impacted by the changes proposed to fees and charges. Fees and charges currently have a portion of cross subsidisation, notably an additional cost for driver lic ences which funds other parts of the land transport system. The proposed changes remove the cross subsidisation, making a driver licence more attainable for those facing economic hardship, and moves the costs over to the areas where work is performed. Whil e there are a high number of changes the overall impact is low. The Ministry understands that feedback from agency consultation reinforced the proposal for the free resit of driver licensing tests. This is expected to have a positive impact and will lead to better employment options, road safety, and better justice system outcomes. The Ministry of Transport is working towards finalising the draft Cabinet paper for consideration by the Cabinet Economic Development Committee (DEV) on March . The Ministry will provide a briefing and talking points to accompany the final Cabinet paper being lodged on March .
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of ANNEX TWO NZTA REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE MONTHLY UPDATE SEPTEMBER National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) Revenue This table shows the breakdown of NLTF revenue including the contribution from Crown funding that flow into the NLTF. MONTH YEAR TO FULL YEAR NLTP Actual Budget Actual Budget Variance Forecast Budget Forecast Budget m m m m m m m m m Fuel Excise Duty , , , , Road user charges () () , , , , Total FED and RUC , , , , MV registration Lic , , Other revenue () () Less disbursements () () () () () () () () () NLTF revenue , , , , Crown (Capital grants) , , Crown (NLTP loan) , , Crown (NIWE) () () , Crown (RNIP) Crown (HIF) () () Crown revenue top ups () () , , , , Total NLTF revenue incl. Crown topups , , , , , ,
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of July Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Transport AIDE MEMOIRE: AUCKLAND LEVEL CROSSING PROGRAMME UPDATE To: Hon Simeon Brown From: Lou Lennane, Auckland Strategic Programme Lead July OC Number: OC SummaryPurpose A brief update on the Auckland level crossing removal programme including the Takaanini Cluster. Takaanini Cluster Programme Following the completion of the rail level crossing removals required for the City Rail Link Day One operation,
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of October OC Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Transport MEETING WITH THE ICELANDIC MINISTER OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC AFFAIRS Snapshot Both Iceland and New Zealand have recently introduced distance based road user charges (RUC) for light electric vehicles. Iceland plans to expand RUC to all vehicles next year, while New Zealand is also working towards implementing RUC across its entire ve hicle fleet beginning in . Time and . to pm, October Venue Virtual meeting Attendees Sigurour Ingi Jhannsson, Minister of Finance and Economic Affairs Officials attending Chris Nees, Acting Chief of Staff Andrew de Montalk, Senior Adviser Revenue Agenda Network outcome s contract s Transition to road user charges Talking points Annex Contacts Name Telephone First contact Daniel Cruden , Acting Manager, Revenue Andrew de Montalk, Senior Advis er, Revenue Document s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of MEETING WITH THE ICELANDIC MINISTER OF FINANCE Key points You are meet ing Sigurour Ingi Jhannsson (pronounced Sig urdur), Icelands Minister of Finance and Economic Affairs. He previous ly served as the countrys Prime Minister ( ) and has had a range of portfolios , including serving previously as the Minister of Infrastructure, Transport and Local Government ( ). Annex is a short biography. You initially requested this meeting to discuss Icelands transition to road user charges (RUC). Minister Jhannsson has previously expressed an interest in New Zealands approach to contracting roading activities (network outcomes contracts , or NOCs ). In New Zealand, the private sector is involved in constructing transport projects through competitive contracting. The Government sets highlevel objectives for value for money, competition, and efficiency. NZTA has created a NOC model, which means that instead of specific task based contracts, NZTA enters broad regional contracts for various activities . To address lost fuel tax revenue from the increased adoption of electric vehicles, Iceland implemented a distance based RUC system . Iceland has modelled its RUC system on New Zealands, explicitly setting the charge for light electric vehicles based on New Zealands RUC rate for light vehicles ( per ,km) . However, Icelands system has some aspects of innovation (not seen in New Zealand), such as monthly billing based on estimated distance travelled. Annex provides talking points to support your meeting. Annex compares key facts between New Zealand and Iceland. Iceland has implemented distance based road user charges for electric vehicles and is working to transition the rest of the fleet to road user charges Iceland has a road reform agenda focused on revenue. The reform, titled Our Roads to the Future, includes: . Step : as of January , a distance based charge for electric vehicles (battery electric, plug in hybrids) and courier vehicles . Step : by , distance and weight based charges for other remaining vehicles. The implementation of distance and weight based charges is to reform or replace a variety of existing charges, including an excise duty. In Iceland, excise duty on petrol equates (in NZD) to around cents per litre (the New Zealand excise rate is cents per litre). Iceland has a higher proportion of electric vehicles in its fleet than New Zealand. Before the introduction of RUC, the uptake of EVs in Iceland posed a threat to fuel tax revenue(around of the vehicle fleet) . Annex provides some additional comparative statistics between the two countries. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Step Iceland has applied RUC to electric vehicles Between percent of electric vehicles entered Icelands road user charges system on time in January . The system charges: . battery electric vehicles (BEVs) Icelandic Krna (ISK) per kilometre, equivalent to approximately . New Zealand Dollars (NZD) per kilometre, similar to New Zealands light vehicle RUC rate . plug in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs) ISK per kilometre, about . NZD per kilometre, lower than New Zealands PHEV rate of . NZD per kilometre. Key aspects of Icelands RUC reform include: . clear communication: The Iceland government emphasised that paying for road usage should be as simple as paying the electric bill. Road users will receive a monthly bill based on an estimated annual mileage. This estimate will be based on the national average in the first y ear and the individual vehicles mileage from the previous year. A yearly reconciliation will adjust for any difference between the estimated and actual distance travelled. . streamlined online platform: All RUC transactions, including payments and annual odometer readings, are managed through a single, established government portal. This portal is a central hub for accessing various government services, such as healthcare, tax, parental leave, and passpo rtimmigration services. It is a familiar and convenient platform for users. Step The rest of the fleet is planned to transition in to RUC The rest of the fleet, including heavy vehicles, will transition into RUC next year. The system will include weight based charges to reflect the wear and tear costs of heavy vehicles on the road. These have proven challenging because they are quite high. We have provided Icelandic officials with information and support, including our RUC cost allocation model, to help them develop an evidence based approach for calculating RUC rates. Like New Zealand, Iceland has the issue of non plugin hybrid vehicles underpaying in terms of excise duty, so transitioning the rest of the fleet to RUC could address variances in the system. We inquired about Icelandic officials interest in implementing a system that uses electronic devices to record and report distance, for example, using GPS based technology. This is part of their long term vision and included in their communications approach, but is not an immediate part of their transition. Vehicle odometer readings will be used in Iceland for the foreseeable future. s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Iceland has expressed an interest in New Zealands network outcome contracting model for transport expenditure Iceland also outsources road maintenance to the private sector through competitive contracts. Iceland does not have a centralised department responsible for road construction. Instead, like in New Zealand, the role of government is focused on planning and contrac t management. New Zealands approach to procurement enables the New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA ) to set procurement procedures to ensure best value for money. In deciding on procurement procedures, NZTA must: . ensure fair competition among all parties , and . foster competitive and efficient markets. Over time, the NZTA has transitioned to an outcome focused contracting model for the State highway network. This means that rather than contracting for specific tasks or pieces of work, it now enters broadly defined, regionally focused contracts that encompass a package of works . This approach has simplified contract management (reduced the need for ongoing contract variations) . It has allowed the agenc y to shift its focus from the administrative aspects of contract management to monitoring performance and delivery. As NOCs is a contracting model of NZTA, you might consider proposing to your counterpart that if they wish to understand the details or workings of the model, a meeting can be arranged at an official level . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Annex : Biography: Sigurour Ingi Jhannsson, Min ister of Finance and Economic Affairs
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of March OC Hon Michael Wood Action required by: Minister of Transport Friday, March ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGER CONNECTION COSTS Purpose You requested advice on public EV charger connection costs after several industry stakeholders raised this issue with you and the Minister of Energy and Resources . The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment provided advice to their Minister on this matter on March (MBIE briefing ) and forwarded that advice to your office. This briefing provides a brief response from Transport officials to the issues raised. Key p oints A range of stakeholders have raised concerns with you, the Minister of Energy and Resources, and officials about the cost and difficulty of connecting new public chargers to the electricity network, especially when compared to other countries. Those stakeh olders include Electricity Distribution Businesses (EDBs) like Vector, EV charging providers like ChargeNet , and industry groups like Drive Electric. Document s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of While the Emissions Reduction Plans (ERPs) target and actions related to EV uptake actions are in the transport chapter, the solutions to cost of connection issues fall primarily in the Energy and Resources portfolio. There are no levers immediately available to the Minister of Transport or Te Manat Waka to address these issues. Recommendations We recommend you: note that MBIE has briefed their Minister on the cost of connecting new public EV chargers to the grid and forwarded this to your office (MBIE briefing ). note that this is primarily an energy issue, and the Mi nistry of Transport does not have oversight of the electricity market participants. note your best option may be to work with other Ministers to ensure relevant agencies maintain focus on progress.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of May OC Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport Hon Kiri Allan Action required by: Associate Minister of Transport Wednesday, May CIVIL AVIATION AUTHORITY EXPENDITURE IN Purpose Seek your joint approval o f the maximum amount of expenditure that the Civil Aviation Authority (the Authority) is eligible for in , including the level of funding it can receive from its Protection of Transport Sector Agency Core Functions appropriation (liquidity facility ). Key points The financial recommendations for Budget require Transport Ministers to agree a specified amount for the Authority in , prior to the finalisation of the Authoritys Statement of Performance Expectations (SPE) , i.e., the maximum amount of expenditure that the Authority should be eligible for in , including the level of funding it can receive from its liquidity facility appropriation. Officials have worked closely with the Authority to determine a specified amount for , and seek your joint agreement to set the amount at .m . This level of expenditure is consistent with the Authoritys draft SPE and its Budget bid. The majority of this amount (.m or ) would be funded by the Authoritys levy revenue , with the remaining .m funded by the liquidity facility appropriation which will fund the difference between the Authoritys forecast expenditure for core functions an d levies revenue forecast to be received in . Based on current expectations of the Authoritys revenue , the appropriation has sufficient funds to absorb the difference . The proposed specified amount would enable the Authority to deliver its core functions in the coming financial year, and the activities outlined in its draft SPE. However, any unex pected shocks, or unforeseen changes in operational activity would require further funding from the liquidity facility and are subject to Transport Ministers and the Minister of Finances approval. Significant decreases in passenger activity would requ ire additional Crown support although, at the time of writing, volumes were holding at around percent and percent of pre COVID domestic and international passenger levels . Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Recommendations We recommend you:
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of A package of temporary modifications has been developed to streamline approval processes Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) has worked closely with Waka Kotahi, KiwiRail, the agencies responsible for the relevant legislation , Te Puni Kkiri and Te Arawhiti to develop a package of temporary modifications to progress repair and r ecovery works at pace and scale. The result of this work is three initial OiCs that will: . streamline certain requirements in the Land Transport Management Act that could make it difficult for recovery activities to get funding from the National Land T ransport Fund . support repair and recovery works by Waka Kotahi within the legal road boundaries and within m of th ose boundaries . support repair and recovery works by KiwiRail within legal rail boundaries and outside those boundaries when realigning rail lines at Awatoto and Esk Valley in the Hawkes Bay. The OiCs supporting repair and recovery works by the two agencies cover the following regulatory frameworks: . Modifications to the Resource Management Act to simplify and expedite the resource consent and alteration to designation processes. . Modifications to the Public Works Act to streamline land acquisition processes and make changes to survey plan requirements, the proclamation process, and other administrative changes. . Modifications to a suite of conser vation legislation to streamline the Conservation Act concessions process and Wildlife Act authorisation process and modify the Reserves Act. . Modifications to Freshwater Fisheries Regulations to exempt Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail from the setback requirement for taking fish near fish traps. . Modifications to the Railways Act to make it easier for KiwiRail to trim or remove trees and hedges, lower fences andor walls, and implement measures to protect land where rail infrastructure is located, and to broaden the right of entry for existing rail infrastructure. . Modifications to the New Zealand Railways Corporation Act to make it easier for KiwiRail to cease, withdraw or reduce services on a railway line when doing repair and recovery works, and to get owners to tr im or remove trees and hedges, and close branch lines and sidings. Relevant Ministers agreed to the proposed modifications to the legislation they are responsible for. They also agreed the Minister of Transport would take the lead on progressing the OiCs through the Cabinet approval process.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Table Document Description of information withheld Previously released Email Clean Car Discount Questions (MIA) na No Email Clean Car Discount Communications (Drive Electric) Some information withheld under section ()(a) No (not approved) Email Clean Car standard Relief sought (MIA) na No Email Attachment MIA Letter to M Wood requesting changes to be made to the CCS March na No Email Attachment FCAI Rules for Calculating CO Compliance voluntary FES Final FOR DISTRIBUTION na No MIA state s this document is publicly available Document Correspondence from the Hon Michael Wood David Crawford Aug na No Email: David Crawford Clean Car S tandard WLTP and Targets. na No Email Attachment: LPV graph with NZ NEDC plotted na No Email: Attachment: LCV graph with NZ NEDC plotted na No Email: David Crawford Frustrated, the Motor Industry Association withdraws support for the Clean Car Standard under the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle) Amendment Bill na No Email Attachment: MIA withdraws support for the Land Transport clean vehicle amendment bill Some information withheld under section ()(a) No Email Attachment: Cabinet paper The Clean Car Standard The document included in this OIA response is the one attached by the original sender of the email, which came from a previous Ministry proactive rele ase. It does not include a description of the redactions. Yes Email Attachment: Ltr to M Wood on timing of WLTP testing and Euro for new vehicles na No Email: Follow up from meeting on .. (Auto Distributors NZ) Some information withheld under section ()(a) No Email: FW Barriers to electric truck uptake and potential policy responses (Fuso) Some information withheld under section ()(a) No Email Attachment: FUSOeCanter Brochure.LR FINAL April na No RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Document Description of information withheld Previously released Email Att achment: Briefing to Minister WoodFusoNZ (Fuso, June ) na No Email: FW MIA Press Release Buyers Rush to beat Clean Car Discount Fees na No Email Attachment: Registration data onwards YTD March () na No Email Attachment: March Sales Table () na No Email Attachment: March New Vehicle Sales Press Release () Rush to Beat Clean Car Discount Fees leads to highest ever monthly sales of new vehicles (MIA) na No Email: FW Urgent Clarification sought. (MIA) Some information withheld under section ()(a) No Email Attachment: Ltr to M Wood on timing of WLTP testing and Euro for new vehicles () na No Email: Industry question on the Clean Car Standard Can the Minister provide comment please (VIA) na No Email: Land Transport (Clean Vehicles) Amendment Bill No (MIA) na No Email: Letter from the MIA on Clean Car Discount na No Email Attachment: CCD Limit Change Request July (MIA) na No Email: Letter from the MIA on how to exclude Class L Vehicles from the ambit of the CCS. na No Email Attachment: Ltr to Minister of Transport on how to exclude Class L vehicles from CCS obligations Sept (MIA) na No Document M Regarding the clean car discount and purchasing vehicles for (Hire a holden) na Note no response from stakeholder about release. No Document M Clean Car standard WLTP and Targets Ministerial (MIA) na No Email MIA Press Release new vehicles Sales Nov na No Email Attachment Vizulite BEV PHV HEV Nov (MIA) na No Email Attachment Registration Data onwards YTD November (MIA) na No Email Attachment November Sales Table (MIA) na No Email Attachment November New Vehicle Sales Press Release (MIA) Some information withheld under section ()(a) No Email MIA Press Release on reduced fees for used imported vehicles na No Email Attachment MIA Press Release on reduced fees for used vehicles under the clean car discount na No RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Document Description of information withheld Previously released Email MIA Press Release (re April ) na No Email Attachment April Sales Table na No Email Attachment April New Vehicle Sales Press Release Some information withheld under section ()(a) No Email Attachment Registration data onwards YTD April na No Email Next steps from July EV pathways meeting between Minister of Transport and Giltrap Group na No Email Attachment Support letter draft from Minister Wood on supply issues to VW groupJulyfinal (Giltrap) Withheld in Full ()(b )(ii) No Email Attachment Transport Minister Michael Wood letter th Sep (Giltrap) One paragraph withheld. ()(b )(ii) No Email Attachment EV and Hybrid Report July na No Email Attachment
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of ATTACHMENT : DRAFT LETTER TO AIMEE WILEY
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Progress a gainst the Rail Plan has been significant, despite contextual setbacks New Zealand is at the start of its year journey to lift the rail network to a resilient and reliable state, alongside a long term and sustainable maintenance regime as is seen with the road network. COVID and supply chain issues have significantly i mpacted delivery, but progress has been made and momentum continues to build, with productivity and delivery continuing to accelerate. Over the last five years, over billion has been committed to rail in addition to RNIP , generating momentum in achievin g the Rail Plan priorities. Around million of works to ha ve been delivered through the RNIP including significant recruitment and planning for future years, alongside works delivered for the New Zealand Upgrade Programme (NZUP) and other rail pr ojects. Contracts are in place for the replacement of KiwiRails commercial (above rail) assets, such as ferries and rolling stock. Crown funding has been committed to deliver non commercial, public benefit outcomes through projects such as Hillside Works hops and electric EF fleet refurbishment, many of which are well underway. While there is a heightened ambition for rail due to it being an energy efficient and lower emissions mode of transport, the existing commitments and planned work are already of sig nificant scale, representing a historic change in the way the rail network is planned and funded. The improvements contained in the RNIP focus on restoring the rail network . They are required to support mode shift for both freight and passengers to rail, contributing to economic efficiency and emissions reduction. Expected benefits from projects such as the City Rail Link and those within the NZUP will reduce without a resilient and reliable network. Cost pressures exist across the current rail investment portfolio Current confirmed funding is . billion, broadly equally split between direct Crown funding and the NLTF.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of A Cabinet decision is required by March to ensure changes to charges and fees can be implemented by October . The proposed timeline to ensure changes to regulatory charges and fees can be successfully implemented is as follows : Action Timeframe DEV approves funding model March Parliamentary Counsel Office (P CO) drafting regulations April July Waka Kotahi delivery build May September Cabinet approval of legislationregs August Gazette notice Late August Go live October . A Cabinet decision is required by March to allow sufficient time for the PCO (approximately three months) to make changes to legislation ahead of the go live of October . The existing loan of million is expected to be exhausted between the period October to December , depending on revenue and spending patterns. If the implementation is deferred beyond December , there is expected to be a shortfall of funding of approximately million each month to maintain current levels of services (including loan repayments) . . If the loan is exhausted the Agency is likely over time to reduce the level of service for all the areas of front line regulatory activity that the loan currently sustains. In this instance it is likely Waka Kotahi will require funding to bridge the gap between the period the loan is exhausted and the implementation . If there are any delays in decisions this will likely require further fundingfinancing sought from the Crown to maintain current levels of services.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of . Infrastructure
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of . The role of the Ministry of Transport To provide secretarial support to the CCSLG, including an agenda before each meeting and minutes To consider ad vice provided to the Minister by the CCSLG
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Appendix Two: Summary of themes from agency consultation Theme Response Broad support for increased funding levels to improve regulatory performance, oversight, and transparency within the land transport system Noted by the Ministry of Transport High levels of support for proposal two Changes to class driver licence and testing fees, including no resit fees. Recognition that the removal of resit fees will have a positive impact. Noted by the Ministry of Transport Strengthen impact analysis around Treaty of Waitangi and for specific groups , including ethnic, rural and disability communities The Ministry has included additional analysis for the following areas: Treaty of Waitangi Ethnic communities Disabled people Rural and remote communities Funding support for the disabled community to support mobility appears to be complex and a challenge for individuals in some cases The Ministry has noted proposed changes are expected to have a very limited downstream impact on the disabled community A greater level of digital processing is likely to impact rural and remote communities that do not have reliable access to internet The Ministry notes proposed changes are not expected to have a specific or substantive difference on rural and r emote communities Councils are experiencing general funding pressures The Ministry notes the motor vehicle register data is primarily used by Councils to enforce ticketing at a profit. The total impact across councils is expected to be approximately . . million annually
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of ATTACHMENT : DRAFT LETTER TO DAVID CRAWFORD
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE Page of March OC Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport WELLINGTON REGIONAL LEADERSHIP COMMITTEE MEETING ON MARCH Snapshot You are attending the next Wellington Regional Leadership Committee (WRLC) meeting as one of the two Crown representatives on this Committee . The other Crown representative who will be attending is Associate Minister of Housing, Hon Barbara Edmonds . This meeting will include presentations on the Trentham and taki Complex Development Opportunities (CDOs) , and updates on the Future Development Strateg y, and the WRLC Programme Report . Time and , Tuesday , March Venue Greater Wellington Regional Council Chamber, Cuba St, Wellington Attendees WRLC members. Biographies are attached in Attachment . Officials attending Alex Voutratzis, Principal Policy Adviser, Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport Rebecca Maplesden, Partnership Director, Ministry of Housing and Urban Development Emma Speight, Director Regional Relationships (Wellington and Top of the South Island), Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency Agenda A copy of the agenda and papers is attached as Attachment .Apologies .Conflict of interest declarations .Public participation .Confirmation of the public minutes of December .Complex Development Opportunities Project Briefs .Future Development Strategy update .Programme Direc tors report March .Wellington Regional Leadership Committee Programme Report Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE Page of Talking points Separate talking points are attached in Attachment .
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE Page of The recovery of the transpor t network in and out of Kaikura required a significant effort from a large group of people to reconnect the town and improve access for the remainder of the South Island.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE Page of But how do we, as a Government and as a sector, not just respond to events when they occur, but maintain and build a resilient transport network that is capable of mitigating their impact
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE Page of Role of Boards As Board members, you can s upport our work and enable the resilience by planning and delivering investment in the network; ensuring that it is effective, safe for its users, but also resilient in times when it is needed most.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE Page of Attachment : Wellington Regional Leadership Committee March order paper Agenda and papers attached separately RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of March OC Hon Michael Wood Action required by: Minister of Transport Thursday, March LAND TRANSPORT MANAGEMENT (REGIONAL FUEL TAX SCHEME AUCKLAND) AMENDMENT ORDER Purpose To provide the following draft paper and supporting instruments for your consideration , and to allow you to commence Ministerial consultation on the draft paper and accompanying Order in Council : Cabinet paper for the Cabinet Legislation Committee ( LEG) Land Transport Management (Regional Fuel Tax Scheme Auckland) Amendment Order (Amendment Order ) Letter to the Minister of Finance regarding the Amendment Order . Key p oints A regional fuel tax scheme in the Auckland region ( Auckland RFT scheme ) commenced from July for a year period to June . Section K of the Land Transport Management Act allows the Governor General to vary a regional fuel tax scheme , by Order in Council made on the recommendation of the Minister of Transpo rt and the Minister of Finance . The attached draft L EG paper and Amendment Order give effect to Cabinets agreement on December to vary the Auckland RFT scheme in the manner set out in Auckland Counci ls proposal DEVMIN refers and cover b riefing OC refers. The changes to the Auckland RFT scheme include reallocating funding among the existing programme of capital projects and changing project descriptions and timeframes . Department of Internal Affairs, the Treasury, Auckland Council, Auckland Transport and Waka Kotahi have been consulted on the Amendment Order. The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet has been informed . No substantial matters were raised with feedback incorporated. Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of A draft version of the Amendment Order is attached . Any feedback provided following Ministerial consultation will be incorporate d and certified copies of the Order provided by Parliamentary Co unsel Office to Cabinet Office for lodging. In addition to your agreement, Minister of Finance approval is also required before a variation may be made to the Auckland RFT scheme. We have attached a letter to the Minister of Finance for your signature. We note that the Treasury has been consulted on the changes. Auckland Cou ncil has requested that the Amendment Order commence at the latest by June to provide certainty for Councils planning and reporting purposes . To support this request, we suggest the Amendment Order be considered by LEG on April with Cabinet on April . This would also support compliance with the day rule . Recommendations We recommend you: note that on December , the Cabinet Economic Development Committee agreed that the Auckland regional fuel tax scheme be varied in the manner set out in Auckland Councils proposal to vary the regional fuel tax scheme DEV MIN refers. Noted note that the Land Transport M anagement (Regional Fuel Tax Scheme Auckland Region) Amendment Order will give effect to recommendation above. Noted agree to commence Ministerial consultation o n the attached paper and Amendment Order . Yes No sign the attached letter to the Minister of Finance seeking his agreement to the matters raised in the attached paper. Yes No note that, subject to any changes arising from Ministerial consultation, we will provide you with the final LEG paper and Amendment Order in time for you to lodge them with the Cabinet Office by . am on Thursday March . Noted
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT INTRODUCTION
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Level , Albert Street , Auckland , New Zealand Private Bag , Auckland aucklandcouncil.govt.nz Octob er Dam e Fran W ilde Chair Auckland Light R ail Limited Via email: franfranwilde.com Auckland Light Rail Property Holding New North Road, Kingsland Thank yo u for your letter of May seeking the councils interest or otherwise in the Auckland Light Rail Limited (ALRL) property holding at New North Road, Kingsland, known as the Kiwi Bacon site. The site is in a strategically important location .km from the Maungawhau City Rail Link station and next to Dominion Junction, which has been identified as a long term urban regeneration opportunit y. Council st aff have been working with of ficials to obtain an ea rly, highlevel view of t he merits o f a potential l and exch ange between the C rown and the council. I am aware of the Cabinet deadline of October for Auckland Council and NZ TA to confirm that a land exchange, involving the ALRL property holding, is a proposal we want to progress discussion on, to understand the commercial impacts. Any deal must stack up for ratepayers and would require resolutions from elected members. I write to confirm my in principle agreement to progressing discussion on a land exchange, or similar to get a good deal for ratepayers. I look forward to working with relevant government officials to negotiate a solution. An alternative would be the property being sold on the open market, the condi tions of which are not particularly favourable to vendors of properties purchased at an optimistic premium during the height of the market. Yours sincerel y, Wayne Brown MAYOR OF AUCKLAND CC David Rankin, Chief Executive, Eke Panuku Development Auckland RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of ANNEX TWO: PWA ACQUISITION PROCESS AND KEY MILESTONES (NOVEMBER SEPTEMBER )
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Office of Hon Michael Wood MP for Mt Roskill Minister of Immigration Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety Minister of Transport Associate Minister of Finance Minister for Auckland
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT P a g e
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Programme : Other Key Initiatives
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Public submissions process undertaken. We understand that much of the year programme will commence construction in , and the detailed business case for the transformational components (mass rapid transit and state highway improvements) will be in progress. The Ministry will participate in the mega projects work being led by the Treasury, including (or separately) work on the approach to funding MRT. We will update your office on timing for advice, subject to further discussion with Treasury. Programme : Transit SRO Brent Johnston Ph:
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT About RWNZ Rural Women New Zealand (RWNZ) is a not forprofit, member based organisation that reaches into all rural communities and has an authoritative voice on rural environment, health, education, technology, business and social issues. RWNZ strives to ensure that all rural residents, workers and families have equitable access to services, inequalities are addressed by Government, and the wellbeing of rural communities is considered from the beginning of all policy and legislative development. RWNZ is affiliated to the Associated Country Women of the World and as such up holds all United Nations, ILO, FAO and WHO conventions and outcome statements as they relate to women and rural women in particular. RWNZ would like to draw particular attention to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal , which seeks to m ake human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient, and sustainable ; Goal : Ensure healthy lives and promote well being for all at all ages; Goal : Build resilient infrastructure, promote sustainable industrialization and foster innovation ; Goal : Reduce inequality within and among countries and; Goal : Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls . Nku noa, n Angela McLeod Manager, Government, Public Sec tor and Acad em c Relationships Rural Women New Zealand Ng W hine Taiwhenua o Aotear oa E: angela.mcleodruralwomennz.nz C: s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Submission on the Draft Government Policy Statement on Land Transport May Millions of M others is a group of largely parents and wider whnau, concerned with our families and particularly childrens future in a rapidly warming world. Our parents come from a range of backgrounds and experience. We are ordinary parents standing up for climate action, to ensure all children have a livable planet to thrive on. We are very concerned for those already vulnerable, marginalised and without a voice in our society. They are most at risk of the consequences of climate change and poorly thought out mitigation measures and it is the role of our society, led by the government to ensure that no one is left behind. Our lack of urgency and action today will be felt by our children tomorrow. Many people, particularly women and children are hurting today around the world, from the consequences of the warming. The next years ar e crucial for mitigating climate change and limiting its adverse effects. Transport emissions are key in climate change mitigation AND human health. Transport emissions have been driving NZs emission upward in recent times. At the same time, reducing and ultimately eliminating emissions from transport is one of the more straightforward (low hanging fruit), when compared to other emission sources. Reducing emissions have a multitude of co benefits, its a no brainer. The timeline of this Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) overlaps this crucial time and its outcomes will have implications that will affect our zero carbon goal as well. It is vital that this GPS is ambitious and looks at both the short and long term, allows for innovation and be flexible. We make the foll owing recommendations and comments Covid We acknowledge that we are in the middle of a global pandemic which will no doubt have impacts on not only our economic wellbeing but on upcoming policies. In turn we believe this will allow more innovation and ability for the government to invest not only in our peoples needs now, but future ones. New Zealanders have embraced active modes during lockdown and must continue to be heard, consulted and brought along in these decisions. In particular, tangata whenua, disabled and vulnerable communities. People want and need choice and appropriate infrastructure must be prioritised to provide this . Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Purpose and outcome framework of the GPS We support the purpose of A transport system that improves wellbeing, and livability and the outcomes framework of the Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS). We do not, however, see these reflected in the rest of the GPS as we think they should. Currently, we would argue that very few of the outcomes are being met and that our current system is worsening wellbeing and livability . It is important to put the purpose at the heart of this GPS , not just as a nice goal at the start. Strategic Priorities We support the strategic priorities, but think they lack ambition. This is a problem because public and active transport is starting from a low base. So using terms such as more or increased (e.g Public transport and active modes are more available andor accessible and Increased share of travel by public transport and active modes page ) is not going to be enough to get the large changes we need. Public and active transport should become the key options, not just more available andor accessible. Emissions, air pollution and noise will not reduce significantly if we do not get significant modal shifts. Councils need to be empowered to put targets on modal shifts. As the strategic priorities are currently written we expect a continuation of slow modal shifts.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of AUCKLAND LIGHT RAIL LIMITED DRAFT STATEMENT OF PERFORMANCE EXPECTATIONS Your expectations were set out in the Crown Sponsor Expectations Letter of April On April , ALR Sponsors (the Ministers of Finance, Housing and Urban Development and Transport) sent a letter to ALRL setting out their expectations on urban development and decisions regarding route and station locations. This letter also set out your expectations for the SPE, namely: . That it provides transparency on its outputs for This set the expectation that the SPE should include a concise description of what ALRL intends to achieve in and how performance will be assessed. Including performance outcomes will increase transparency and allow ALRLs progress against key outputs to be assessed now that is expected to start delivering on key aspects of the project over the coming year . . That it emphasises the need to maintain good r elationships with key stakeholders This set the expectation for good working relationships with key agencies and stakeholders . In particular, it outlined the need for ALRL to continue to engage with Kinga Ora to support alignment between Crown investments in transport and urban development and ensure integration with other transport projects such as the Additional Waitemata Harbour Crossing. The draft SPE could be improved with more detail about Urban Development and performance targets ALRLs draft SPE does a good job setting out the background and context of the ALRL project, but it cou d be strengthened with more details about the benefits light rail will create. For example the SPE briefly mentions housing supply and urban development in its Strategic Objectives and Purposes but does not detail the benefits of urban development and its links to the pro ject. Urban development is particularly relevant with the change in purpose of ALRL and the start of the Early Property Programme. The SPE has three Strategic Areas with performance targets. These are: . Integration with other projects, including Additional Waitemat Harbour Connections and North West Rapid Transit Corridor ; . Building confidence in the delivery of the project ; and . Maintaining good relationships with stakeholders, local and central government, mana whenua and local communities. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of Officials note that the performance measures set out in the SPE do not provide clarity about key milestones that ALRL intends to achieve over the upcoming financial year and do not provide a basis to assess its performance against its key deliverables. The Ministry believes these outcomes would benefit from performance targets and measures that outline the key steps and milestones ALRL will undertake in . In addition, Urban Development should be included as a Strategic Area with performance targets to reflect the investment in this area and change in purpose. ALRL should also consider including Health and Safety as a Strategic Area with the start of the delivery phase. Risks and impacts Key financial and non financial performance risks for CRLL during include: . Delays to delivery of the Detailed Business Case could occur andor potential for there to be insufficient information which Ministers need in order to make decisions with confidence; . ALRL being able to build and maintain public confidence and stakeholder support, . ALRL maintaining confidence in financial forecasting and managing potential cost pressures ; . Significant changes to the scope of the Project may lead to delays; and . ALRL may not be able to deliver on all of its Early Property Programme without the additional funding sought through Budget . Next steps Step By May You may sign and send the letter to ALR to provide feedback on its draft SPE. By June ALRL must consider your comments by this . By July ALRL must finalise its SPE and publish it on the internet by this . After this Tabling the SPE. Section L of the Crown Entities Act allows responsible Ministers to table final SPEs upon receipt, or at the same time as the entitys Annual Report for the previous financial year (providing Parliament with a backward and forward looking view of the entity). ALRL RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of APPENDIX ON E: DRAFT A UCKLAND LIGH T RAIL S TATEMENT OF PERFORMANCE EXPECTATIONS Attachment refused under Section (d) as the final statement of performance expectations will soon be available online.https:www.lightrail.co.nzresources RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of May BRIEFING OC (MoT) T (TSY) Hon Michael Wood Action required by: Minister of Transport Friday, May Hon Grant Robertson Minister of Finance CITY RAIL LINK LIMITED DRAFT STATEMENT OF PERFORMANCE EXPECTATIONS Purpose This briefing supports you to provid e feedback to City Rail Link Limited (CRLL) on its draft Statement of Performance Expectations (SPE) Key points As shareholders in CRLL you have an important role to play in setting expectations for the entity and influencing their public accountability documents, including the SPE. You receiv ed a draft SPE for CRLL on April which is attached as Appendix One. You are required to provide comments (if any) on this draft SPE no later than working days after recei pt (i.e., by May ). Officials recommend requesting CRLL consider in clusion of additional information, and a potential performance measure, relating to the C Henderson contract. Te Manat Waka the Ministry of Transport and the Treasury have consulted with Auckland Council on the proposed feedback included within the letter, attached as Appendix Two , to the CRLL Chair. Auckland Council officials are comfortable with its content. Te Manat Waka has reviewed the draft SPE , and confirms the document meets statutory requirements, specifically those contained in the Crown Entities Act .Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of CITY RAIL LINK LIMITED DRAFT STATEMENT OF PERFORMANCE EXPECTATIONS The Statement of Performance Expectations (SPE) provides an important opportunity for you to influence an entitys priorities and provides a basis to assess performance against City Rail Link Limited ( CRLL ) is a single objective company with performance accountability for the City Rail Link (CRL) project managed through a separate Project Delivery Agreement (PDA). The combinatio n of the PDA and the SPE provides a comprehensive accountability framework for CRLL and the CRL project. Your most recent Letter of Expectations (LoE) of March to the CRLL Chair sets out expectations for the Board of CRLL for the year. A copy of this letter is attached as Appendix Three . The draft SPE incorporate s expectations from the LoE that go beyond what is already covered in the PDA , including perf ormance measures for health and safety and for community and stakeholder engagement. Te Manat Waka has reviewed the draft SPE , and confirms the document meets statutory requirements, specifically those contained in the Crown Entities Act . Delivery expectations and performance The SPE sets out the key milestones expected to be achieved over as well as establishing performance targets over five key strategic areas. For the Funding Envelope , Sustainability and Social Outcomes , and Community an d Stakeholder Engagement strategic areas, there have been some changes that are appropriate for the progression of the project. Officials consider that the targets are consistent with the expectations contained in your LoE . For the remaining two strategic performance areas, officials highlevel comments are: Health and Safety : CRLL have made some changes to the targets in this area to increase its ambition . The Ministry recommend s thanking CRLL for this and encouraging it to continue to strive for better performance. Project Delivery : The Ministry recommend s that Sponsors request CRLL consider adding additional information, and a performance measure, regarding the C Henderson contract. Additional funding for this contract was recently approved as part of the funding request, and work to determine the design and ultimate delivery of this work is progressing. Oversite development has not been included as a strategic performance area and there are no specific targets for thi s in . CRLL does note (on page of the draft SPE) its support for the development work being led by Kinga Ora and Eke RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of Panuku. As CRLL has noted their supporting role for this development work, we do not recommend asking them to include an additio nal measure in its SPE. Financial performance CRLL is budgeting a deficit of million for , compared to a forecast deficit of million in . Being in a deficit position is normal for CRLL (with Shareholders contributions being recorde d as contributed equity capital rather than revenue) and results can vary significantly from year to year as the contracts progress and assets are vested upon completion to their ultimate owners. The SPE shows total contributions from Shareholders as million (Crown share million) for the year, which is consistent with the funding appropriated for the delivery of the project. The forecast total contribution from Shareholders for is million, which is in line with the completion of the civil works in that year. Risks Key financial and non financial performance risks for CRLL during include: transitioning the project from civil construction to rail systems installation and fitout , a shortage of skilled staff and labour due to a tight construction market, thereby impacting skilled and general labour availability and cost , higher than expected construction cost inflation , The CRL project is managed in a manner consistent with other large infrastructure projects. A risk register is managed by CRLL and is under constant revie w. Sponsors officials receive monthly reporting from CRLL on both project delivery and financial performance. The anticipated final cost of the contracts and project overall are risk adjusted every month. This information is also reviewed by the independe nt Sponsors Assurance Manager and advice is provided to Sponsors officials based on those reviews , which in turn informs our reporting to you as Sponsors . Consultation The Ministry and the Treasury have consulted with officials from Auckland Council, as the other Sponsor for the project, on the proposed feedback included within the attached letter ( Appendix Two). Auckland Council is comfortable with the letters contents. s ()(ba)(i), s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of Comments to the Chair Based on our review of the draft SPE, and in cons ultation with Auckland Council, we suggest the following themes are reflected in the response to the Chair ( Appendix Two): note the importance of health and safety to Shareholders, note the decrease in the Total Recordable Injury Frequency Rate target and increase in Risk Management Maturity Model target, and request CRLL continue to strive for better performance in this area , request that CRLL consider any changes to the performance delivery targets in light of the latest programme schedule expected to be received from the Link Alliance soon, request that CRLL consider whether to add a performance measure for the C Henderson contract , note that while CRLL have not added a specific performance measure for oversite development work, Sponsors expect them to continue to support Eke Pnuku and Kinga Ora who are leading this work. Next steps CRLL must consider your comments (if any) on the draft SPE and provide final documents to you by June . You are t hen required to table the SPE in the House of Representatives as soon as reasonably practicable . Appendices: Appendix One: CRLLs Draft Statement of Performance Expectations Appendix Two: Draft letter to the Chair of CRLL on the Statement of Performance Expectations Appendix Three: CRLLs Letter of Expectations Appendix one is refused under Section (d) as its available here: https:www.cityraillink.co.nzpublications RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Office of Hon Michael Wood MP for Mt Roskill Minister of Immigration Minister of Transport Minister for Auckland Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety Associate Minister of Finance Private Bag , Parliament Buildings, Wellington New Zealand m.woodministers.govt.nz www.beehive.govt.nz John Bridgman Chair City Rail Link Limited Dear John Draft Statement of Performance Expectations for Thank you for providing City Rail Link Limiteds (CRLLs) draft Statement of Performance Expectations (SPE). We appreciate the time and effort that has gone into preparing this document. Sponsors have high expectations for the City Rail Link (CRL) project, both in how construction is managed and also in enabling future benefits of the investment to be realised once operational. CRLLs SPE, while only one element of project monitoring , provide s important public transparency and accountability around the performance of the CRL project. In this regard, it is important that this document continue s to incorporate a comprehensive range of performance measures and targets providing a clear basis against which performance can be assessed . Comments on draft SPE In accordance with the Crown Entities Act (the Act), we wish to provide the following comme nts on your draft SPE on behalf of Shareholders. We appreciate that the draft SPE has retained a similar format to previous versions, with slight changes being made to both to reflect the progress of the projects and shifts in CRLLs strategic c ontext and operating environment. We consider the coverage and set of measures and targets is comprehensive and reflects our expectations . We provide the following comments for your consideration: Health and safety: This is an area of critical importance to Shareholders. We are pleased with the reduction in the Total Recordable Injury Frequency Rate (TRIFR) target to six injuries per million hours worked, and commitment to continuousOC Appendix Two s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT improvement shown by increasing ambition in your Risk Management Maturity Model indicator . We encourage CRLL to continue to strive for a TRIFR that is lower than targeted and a Health and Safety Performance Index score that is higher than targeted. Project Delivery: We note that CRLL is awaiting receipt of the TAP Rev. programme from the Link Alliance. Once this has been provided, we encourage CRLL to consider whether any changes to the performance targets and measures are appropriate. Now that funding for C Henderson has bee n approved by Sponsors, we also suggest that you include in the SPE more information for readers on the status and progress of this contract. Sponsors encourage CRLL to consider whether a performance measure could be set relating to this contract , and if CRLL chooses not to include a measure, to continue to keep Sponsors officials up to on this work as it progresses. Community and Stakeholder Engagement: Sponsors appreciate the hard work that continues on CRLLs part to administer the Targeted Hardship Fund and work with local businesses that are experiencing disruption . We encourage CRLL to continue with its efforts to communicate to the public the progress of the individual station and overall project works, and the benefits CRL will bring to the Auckland Metro network. While there are no specific deliverables or milestones for the oversite development work this year, we expect that, as noted in the SPE, CRLL will continue to support Kinga Ora and Eke Pnuku in this work. Next step s Please consider these comments when finalising the SPE. Te Manat Waka is available to assist in this process. Once finalised, CRLL is required to publish the SPE on its website by June . I will then table the SPE in the House of Representative s after the start of the financial year. Sponsors appreciate the hard work by CRLL to settle COVID claims and prepare the request for additional funding submitted earlier this year. We wish CRLL the best for the upcoming year and look forward to co ntinued progress being made on the project. I look forward to seeing the final SPE and to working with you and CRLL over the coming year. Yours sincerely Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport on behalf of Shareholding Ministers cc Hon Grant Robertson, Minister of Finance Wayne Brown, Mayor of Auckland Desley Simpson, Deputy Mayor of Auckland Dr Sean Sweeney, Chief Executive, City Rail Link Limited Audrey Sonerson, Chief Executive, Ministry of Transport RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Office of Hon Michael Wood MP for Mt Roskill Minister of Immigration Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety Minister of Transport Associate Minister of Finance Minister for Auckland March John Bridgman Chair City Rail Link Limited
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of Focus area : Begin work now to decarbonise heavy transport and freight
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of Meeting with Whakawhanake Kinga K omiti May Key points The Komiti will be asked to endorse the Draft Greater Christchurch Spatial Plan and the Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) Indicative Business Case (IBC). The alignment of these two projects through the joint work programme is critical for the future growth of Greater Christchurch. Your attendance at the meeting will s upport this alignment. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Development has provided Minister Woods with a separate briefing (HUD ) on the K omiti meeting, which will be forwarded to you. This briefing provides information about the meeting and agenda items more generally. Waka Kotahi has also provided you with an update on the MRT IBC (BRI ) and will provide you with talking points . Waka Kotahi has si gnal led there is no funding available to progress projects that have not already been agreed to by the Waka Kotahi Board. This also applies to projects set to commence in the National Land Transport Programme. We will work through what this means for the DBC with Waka Kotahi . We consider it will be important to determine funding arrangements with Greater Christchurch partners prior to commencing development of the DBC. We are preparing advice for you on a paper updating Cabinet on key mass rapid transit projects
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of LAND TRANSPORT (ROAD SAFETY) AMENDMENT BILL IMPLEMENTATION APPROVED VEHICLE SURVEILLANCE EQUIPMENT Background Safety camera systems, namely speed and redlight safety camera systems, have been in use in New Zealand for over years. These have largely been operated by NZ Police , although camera systems are in use by some local authorities, with infringements issu ed by NZ Police . In order to be used, vehicle surveillance equipment must first be approved by the Minister of Transport or the Minister of Police by notice in the New Zealand Gazette . This is authorised through the definition of approved vehicle surveillance equipment (AVSE ) in section () of the Land Transport Act (LTA) . There are currently seven AVSE notices in effect. The Road to Zero, the Governments road safety strategy provided for the expansion of the camera network through the introduction of average speed cameras, and the transfer of the current camera network from NZ Police to Waka Kotahi . The Land Transport ( Road Safety ) Amendment Bill (Road Safety Bill) will make changes to the LTA to allow for average speed cameras. However, an AVSE notice is still necessary to authorise the use of specific types of camera systems. The Road Safety Bill will allow for the use of average speed cameras Average speed cameras rely on two images, each with a time stamp, and a formula for calculating speed travelled over the distance between the two points, typically at least two kilometres apart. This contrasts with traditional speed and red light safety cameras, which capture an image and record speed at a single location. International evidence demonstrates that average speed cameras are one of the most effective and cost efficient means of reducing speeds as well as reducing emissions. Recent trials undertaken b y Auckland Transport detected an average of , offences per day. The introduction of this technology will be an effective tool in reducing travel speeds on New Zealand roads. The Road Safety Bill incorporates average speed camera offence detection and evidentiary requirements to support the current safety camera network . It does this by creating new provisions in the LTA to clarify the enforcement of average speed camera offences. These provisions are compl ementary to those for speed offences captured b y fixed safety cameras but focus on the new issues raised by the introduction of average speed safety cameras. In particular , the Road Safety Bill: . amends section () of the LTA to clarify , for the purposes of a moving vehicle offence, multiple images w ill be used to enforce average speed RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of offences , and for the way the evidence is collected , to cater for how the new cameras will operate . introduce s a clear definition of average speed as it pertains to a corridor with a single or multiple speed limits . introduces limits on challenging evidence from average speed cameras in relation to speed, distance and elapsed time . These limits are justified by provisions that require accurate and assured measurement, calibration, or certification of the key functions o f the cameras and associated systems . Further to this, the LTA clarif ies that a licensed surveyors certificate will be admissible as evidence to confirm the distance between the two cameras. Members of the public will have the same options available to them to raise complain ts or challenge offences detected by average speed cameras as they do for fixed safety cameras currently, including submitting information for the enforcement authority to consider, challenging the offence in court or mak ing written submissions to the judge. However, the enforcement authority will be Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency (Waka Kotahi) , rather than NZ Police. but an AVSE notice is necessary to approve new camera systems The Minister of Transport or Minister of P olice must issue an AVSE notice under s() of the LTA before a new camera system can be operated. As part of the Road to Zero, Waka Kotahi is seeking to use several new camera systems, including one average speed system. W ith the support of NZ Police , Waka Kotahi has conducted comprehensive field testing on the Redflex Halo and Halo Distributed camera systems to establish their reliability and accuracy prior to your approval via the New Zealand Gazette as AVSE. The testing programme undertaken included extensive functional, environmental and accuracy tests, to cover the proposed camera deployment situations. Hundreds of field tests were conducted on these camera systems. During these tests the camera systems operated correctly and did not produce any err oneous readings or exposures that did not relate to valid, actual or simulated offences. The testing report is attached at Annex One. In addition, the independent verification organisation, the Measurement Standards Laboratory (MSL) reviewed the Gazette testing plan and also attended and observed the testing at Masterton . MSL was satisfied that the process followed captured the necessary variables providing reliable results to verify vehicle speeds delivered by the camera system . Testing demonstrates that these systems are suitable for use in New Zealand as they are both reliable and accurate. During testing, the camera unit and associated equipment performed accurately and did not produce any false readings. On this basis, Waka Kotah i recommend s that you approve, by notice in the New Zealand Gazette , the following Redflex safety camera systems as a type of AVSE. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of . Redflex Halo red light and speed camera system . Redflex Halo speed and average speed camera system . Redflex Halo Distributed speed and average speed camera system We also seek several o ther changes to AVSE notices Several existing camera systems can only by used by NZ Police The Land Transport (Approved Vehi cle Surveillance Equipment) Notice , which authorises the use of the REDFLEX redradar NK red lightspeed camera system , includes references which limit access to the data to NZ Police only. This means that only NZ Police can issue infringement notices. The Land Transport (Approved Vehicle Surveillance Equipment) Notice (the notice) , which authorises the REDFLEX speed radar NK speed camera system (NK camera system) has the same issue. These two notices need to be amended so that Waka Kotahi can also access the data produced by the se cameras to issue infringement notices , after these have been transferred to Waka Kotahi . Waka Kotahi seeks to use auxiliary cameras with one camera system to improve effecti veness In addition, Waka Kotahi seeks an amendment to the notice that would allow for an auxiliary camera to be used as an attachment to the NK camera system. This would improve the utility of the NK camera system until such a time as they are repla ced by the modern Halo cameras in the future. Waka Kotahi has sought Crown law advice to support the drafting of these notices. The NK system current ly captures only the front of the vehicle, meaning that motorcycles (which only have rear facing registrat ion plates) cannot be identified by the system. Inclusion of an auxiliary camera would allow for the capture of the rear of the vehicle, enabling enforcement action against motorcycles and trailers that exceed the speed limit. Waka Kotahi has also tested these auxiliary cameras to ensure that they capture the images correctly and do not interfere with the normal operation of the main camera or create any anomalous readings. Waka Kotahi considers them to be suitable for use. Additional changes NZ Police have also notified us that three of the existing seven notices authorise the use of camera systems that are no longer in use. These notices can therefore be revoked. A fourth notice has been replaced, and is also no longer in use. The below tabl e sets out the various notices and the proposed action with regard to each.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of CHANGES TO MINISTERIAL DIRECTIONS FOR CLEAN CAR UPGRADE, SOCIAL LEASING, AND CLEAN CAR DISCOUNT PROGRAMMES The Ministerial Direction to Waka Kotahi to administer the Clean Vehicle Discount require s updating Background The Clean Vehicle Discount (the Discount) aims to be a financially neutral programme , where people who buy low emitting vehicles are eligible for a rebate, funded by charges imposed on those who buy high emitting vehicles. This encou rages the demand for low and zero emission vehicles in New Zealand and discourages the purchase of high emission vehicles . The Discount came into effect in two stages . Electric vehicles and plug in hybrid vehicles received rebates from July . From April charges came into place for high emissions vehicles, along with rebates for a broader selection of low emission vehicles (i.e. hybrids and very low emissio n petrol and diesel vehicles). The Crown provided . million to support the payment of rebates through the first stage of the Discount, and to act as a buffer in future if charges were not sufficient to fund the rebates claimed. Waka Kotahi uses fundi ng available through the Discount in accordance with the process recorded in the Clean Vehicle Discount Scheme Funding Deed (the Funding Deed), between the Crown and Waka Kotahi. The Funding Deed sets Maximum Grant Amount, which is the amount agreed in w riting between the Crown and Waka Kotahi . Waka Kotahi is required to administer the Discount in accordance with the Direction to New Zealand Transport Agency: Administration of Clean Vehicle Discount Scheme Rebates (Section of the Crown Entities Act) (the Direction). The Discount outperform ed expectations and adjustments are needed Uptake of zero and low emission vehicles eligible for rebates has exc eeded expectations , reaching levels not forecast until . This meant that the funding from high emission vehicles was insufficient to pay for the expense of issuing rebates. As a result, the initial funding for the policy was expected to be exhausted du ring . On April , the Cabinet Economic Development Committee (DEV) agreed to adjust rebates and charges in response to the high uptake of the Discount (DEV MIN refers). This was affirmed by Cabinet on April (CAB MIN refers). Budget included million for for the Discount, to cover the forecast shortfall , while changes to the balance of rebates and charges take effect. We and Waka Kotahi consider that the Funding Deed does not require updating to give effec t to the changes. However, w e have attached a letter for you to send to Dr Paul Reynolds , Chair of Waka Kotahi, outlining th e addition of million to the Maximum Grant Amount as defined in the Funding Deed (Appendix One). RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of In addition, using the power to amend directions under section () of the Crown Entities Act (CEA) , we propose you amend the Direction so that Waka Kotahi can administer the Discount in accordance with the latest agreed changes . The proposed Amendment to the Direction i ncludes core government policy decided by Cabinet The proposed Amendment to the Direction include s the core government policy relating to issuing rebates as decided by Cabinet. This consists of: . focusing the Clean Car Discounts rebates on the lowest emi ssion vehicles (all figures include GST), by: .. lowering the emissions threshold for rebate eligibility from grams of CO per kilometre to grams . The amounts of each rebate were also amended as part of the recent changes. However, the Direction note s that the rebate for each eligible vehicle is the amount agreed by Cabinet from time to time , but does not include specific rebate amounts. Therefore, the Direction does not need to be amended to give effect to these. Waka Kotahi has been successfully imp lementing this scheme since July and we do not expect th e amended direction to change how it administers rebates . Appendix Two, which we recommend you sign and provide to Waka Kotahi , is notice of the proposed section () Amendment to the Direction . Detail of the agreed changes to rebate amounts for eligible vehicles , and notification of the Amendment to the Direction is included in the attached letter (Appendix One). Additional changes to the Discount have been made throug h regulatory changes Cabinet also agreed o n April to reduce the need for additional Crown funding by increasing the level and coverage of high emission vehicle charges . This has been done through the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Discount Scheme C harges) Amendment Regulations , coming into force from July . This is therefore not included in the Amend ment to the Direction , however t he changes to charges are also noted in the attached letter (Appendix One). Legislative authority Section of the CEA provides for a Minister to direct a Crown entity to give effect to government policy that relates to the entitys functions and objectives. Section () of the CEA allows a Minister to amend a direction in the same way that it may be given. The objective of Waka Kotahi under section of the Land Tra nsport Management Act ( LTMA ) is to undertake its functions in a way that contributes to an effective, efficient, and safe land transport system in the public interest. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of The Clean Vehicles Act assigns Waka Kotahi the function of administering the Disco unt The Clean Vehicles Act received Royal Assent on February and came into force on February . The Act inserted section ()(ma) into the LTMA which gave Waka Kotahi the following function: . To administer the clean vehicle discount scheme funded under section (E) and (F) in accordance with this Act, the regulations made under section ()(j) of the Land Transport Act for the purpose of section A of that Act, and any direction under section of the CEA . The government p olicy in the amended direction relates to the administration of rebates under the Discount scheme and Waka Kotahis objectives. The Amendment to the Direction remains consistent with Waka Kotahis objectives under section of the LTMA because it increase s the efficien cy of light vehicles in the fleet, and serv es the public interest by reducing greenhouse gas emissions. It remains consistent with Waka Kotahis functions under section , because it enables it to administer the Discount in accordance with the LTMA . In particular , the Amended Direction should enable Waka Kotahi to meet its requirements under section ()(ma) and section ()(E), which requires it to not incur expenses beyond revenue collected through charges under the Di scount . The high uptake of low emission vehicles had meant the expenses of rebates issued to vehicle purchases was significantly greater than the revenue collected. The changes agreed by Cabinet and that would be in the Amendment to the Direction are expec ted to correct this, by reducing costs and increasing revenue. Section of the CEA states that you may not direct a Crown entity in relation to a statutorily independent function or require the performance or non performance of a particular act in resp ect of a particular person or persons. The proposed Amendment to the Direction does not conflict with this section. Waka Kotahi has been consulted on this Amendment to the Direction , which fulfils the requirement for you to consult the relevant entity und er section () of the CEA. Section of the CEA requires you, as soon as practicable after giving this Amendment to the Direction , to publish it in the Gazette and present a copy of it to the House of Representatives. This will be arranged by officia ls following your signature of the Amendment to the Direction. The Ministerial Directions for the trial Clean Car Upgrade and Social Leasing schemes should be revoked The trial Clean Car Upgrade and Social Leasing Scheme programmes were aimed at helping an equitable transition to low emissions vehicles and low emission transport alternatives by providing New Zealanders on low and moderate incomes with access to low and zero emission forms of transport . On October the Minister of Transport signed the New Zealand Transport Agency ( Trial Clean Car Upgrade ) Direction (Trial Clean Car Upgrade Direction) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of pursuant to section ()(t) of the LTMA and sections and of the CEA to give Waka Kotahi the function of establishing and administering the Clean Car Upgrade. On October the Minister of Transport signed the New Zealand Transport Agency ( Trial Social Leasing Scheme ) Direction (Trial Social Leasing Scheme Direction) pursuant to section ()(t) of the LTMA and sections and of the CEA to give Waka Kotahi the function of establishing and administering the Social Leasing Scheme. On March Cabinet agree d to stop work on the Trial Clean Car Upgrade and Trial Social Leasing Scheme. Section (A) of the CEA allows yo u to revoke a Direction by Notice in writing to the entity and by publishing that Notice in the Gazette. Two proposed Revocation Notice s, which revoke the Trial Clean Car Upgrade Direction and Trial Social Leasing Scheme Direction are attached (Appendix Three), which we recommend you sign and provide to Waka Kotahi. The attached letter informs Waka Kotahi of the Revocation of the Direction s (Appendix One). Next steps The changes to the Discount are due to come into effect from July . While it would be best practice for you to sign the Amendment to the Direction by June in order to formalise the decisions, Waka Kotahi is still able to progress with the changes to the Discount if that timing is not possible . Subject to your approval, t he Ministry will arrange for the publication of the notices in the Gazette on your behalf . We will also continue to monitor the performance and funding position of the Discount, and will advise you in due course of the impact of the changes. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT APPENDIX : DRAFT LETTER TO WAKA KOTAHI CHAIR Dr Paul Reynolds Chair Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency Dear Dr Paul Reynolds , Funding for the Clean Vehicle Discount Scheme As part of Budget , Cabinet agreed to provide million additional funding in for the Clean Car Discount Scheme (the Discount). Under the Clean Vehicle Discount Scheme Funding Deed the Maximum Grant Amount for the Discount can be to (b) such other amount agreed between Waka Kotahi and the Crown in writing from time to time. I request that you provide a response in writing to this letter agreeing to update the Maximum Grant Amount to , which is to add the million agreed by Cabinet. Amending Direction to New Zealand Transport Agency: Administration of Clean Vehicle Discount Scheme Rebates (Section of the Crown Entities Act) This letter further informs you that I have amend ed the Direction to New Zealand Transport Agency: Administration of Clean Vehicle Discount Scheme Rebates (Section of the Crown Entities Act) (the Direction) to give effect to recent changes in eligibility criteria as decided by Cabinet (DEV MIN refers). Cabinet agreed that: the emissions threshold for rebate eligibility would be lowered from grams of CO per kilometre to grams. Please find a copy of the amended Direction attached and note that o fficials from Waka Kotahi were consulted during the development of the policy and the drafting of the Amendment. As required by the Crown Entities Act , a copy of the amended section Direction will be in the New Zealand Gazette and presented to the House of Representatives as soon as practicable . Notice of changes to rebate amounts under the Discount , as agreed by Cabinet The Direction further allows for changes to the amount of Rebate for each eligible vehicle as agreed by Cabinet from time to tim e. I wish to inform you that o n April , Cab inet agreed to the following (figures below include GST) : reduce the rebate for new battery electric vehicles (BEVs) from , to ,; increase the rebate for used import BEVs from , to ,.; reduce the rebate for low emission vehicles, inc luding plug in hybrid electric vehicles, by amending the existing rebate formula for: https:gazette.govt.nznoticeid go RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT onew vehicles to , plus . for every gram of CO per kilometre below grams, with a maximum rebate of ,; oused imports to . plus . per gram of CO per kilometre below grams, with a maximum rebate of ,.; fix the rebate f or a new or used import disability vehicle, as defined by the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Discount) Regulations , at , if it is a BEV, and , if it is a plug in electric vehicle (PHEV) or hybrid. I request that Waka Kotahi implement the ab ove changes to rebate amounts on vehicles registered from July . I note that Waka Kotahi has been successfully providing rebates since July , and this is contributing to New Zealand moving to a low carbon economy. I do not expect the se change s to affect how Waka Kotahi administers rebates under the Discount. Changes to the level and coverage of charges under the Discount have been made through regulatory changes Accompanying the adjustments to rebates above, from July the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Discount Scheme Charges) Amendment Regulations will come into effect and will (prices include GST) : widen the pool of vehicles subject to charges by lowering the emissions threshold from grams of CO per kilometre t o grams; increas e the level of charges by amending the formulae: ofor new vehicles, plus . per gram above grams; ofor used imports, . plus . per gram above grams; increas e the maximum cap on charges for vehicles with very hig h emissions from , to , for new and from , to , for used imports. I request that Waka Kotahi implement these changes to charge amounts on vehicles registered from July . I likewise note that Waka Kotahi has been successfully collecting charges since April and I do not expect the se change s to affect how Waka Kotahi administers charges under the Discount. Revocation notices for the Clean Car Upgrade and Social Leasing Scheme trials. I also attach Notice s of Revocation of the New Zealand Transport Agency (Clean Car Upgrade) Direction and the New Zealand Transport Agency (Social Leasing Scheme) Direction . These Direction s, which the Minister of Transport signed on October , assigned Waka Kotahi with the additional function of administering trials of the Clean Car Upgrade and Social Leasing Scheme . On March Cabinet agree d to stop work on the trial Clean Car Upgrade and Social Leasing Scheme. Accordingl y, these Directions are no longer require d. In accordance with section (A) of the Crown Entities Act , I will publish the attached Notice s of Revocation in the Gazette as soon as practicable. Yours sincerely Hon David Parker Minister of Tr ansport RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Amend ment to Direction to New Zealand Transport Agency : Administration of Clean Vehicle Discount Scheme Rebates (Section of the Crown Entities Act) Pursuant to section () of the Crown Entities Act : .The Direction dated March (the Direction) is amended by inserting the red and underlined text into the definition of Eligible vehicle : c. from April to June , a vehicle with between and grams of CO emissions (inclusive) (based on grams CO km WLTP P). d.from July , a vehicle with between and grams of CO emissions (inclusive) (based on grams CO km WLTP P). .All other parts of the Direction are unchanged and remain in effect . Dated this XXth day of June Hon DAVID PARKER , Minister of Transport APPENDIX RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Revocation Notice: New Zealand Transport Agency (Trial Clean Car Upgrade Scheme) Direction In accordance with section (A) of the Crown Entities Act , this is notice of revocation of the New Zealand Transport Agency (Trial Clean Car Upgrade Scheme) Direction . This Direction, dated October , directed the New Zealand Transport Agency to carry out the additional function of establish ing and admin ister ing the Trial Clean Car Upgrade . Dated this XXth day of June Hon DAVID PARKER , Minister of Transport APPENDIX RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE Page of Annex : Draft speech Minister Wood Speaking Points Transport Board Forum Vision for a resilient transport network minutes Introduction Kia ora koutou, thank you for your warm welcome Richard and to the hosts of this forum, Te Manat Waka, for providing an opportunity for transport sector boards to come together and discuss important topics like the one we are discussing today, resilience. Id like to talk to you about the Governments vision for a resilient transport network and the role your boards will have in getting us there.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE Page of PTAs using the Regional Integrated Ticketing Scheme (RITS) can implement the Community Connect concessions by July . PTAs are encouraging the use of smartcards for under s but note their policy to not leave children behind. I f a child boards without a smartcard , drivers will manually record the boardings. We recommend funding is provided for boardings without a smartcard, and we will work with PTAs to monitor usage and develop a transition to a permanent solution (which may li mit funding to smartcard boardings). Greater Wellington Regional Council ( GWRC ) needs to update its ticketing system to enable delivery of Community Connect. GWRC passed a motion on June whether to extend universal half price fares or extend half price fares for child, tertiary, and accessibility concessionaires until August while work on the ticketing system is completed. GWRC has sought Government funding to exten d universal half price fares while the technical work is underway. If Crown funding is provided to support th is interim solution, w e recommend it be limited to costs associated with halfprice fares for existing child and a proportion of tertiary concessio ns (to reflect under patronage) until July . This better aligns with the intent of Community Connect and the scope of the appropriation . Environment Canterbury (ECAN) is implementing a fare trial (with a flat fare) from July . ECAN prop oses to deliver Community Connect by implementing a percent discount to the flat fare for yearolds from July . Due to technical challenges in changing their ticketing system , free fares for under s will be delivered from August . We recommend ECANs interim proposal be eligible for Crown funding. ECAN s fare trial will result in cheaper fares for most users . However, children ( years old) who travel in zone (which covers most of the metro area) will see a small fare increase. These users paid . throughout the universal half price fares period and their fares will increase to . under this approach. ECAN has also confirmed it will not deliver free fares for under s or half price fares for yearolds on the on demand service in Timaru (MyWay) . It is seeking Government confirmation that funding can be provided to deliver a percent fare reduction for yearolds using these services. Although Government h as not signalled whether Community Connect funding is limited to provision of a percent discount, we have assumed this is the preferred permanent approach. We consider this an acceptable interim solution as ECAN works to find a ticketing system solutio n that enables the percent fare reduction . We do not have an expected timeframe for this solution but expect this interim proposal could be in place for six months to one year . Government agreed to fund the first smartcard for Community Services Cardh olders. PTAs have asked for clarification on whether free smartcards will be available for under s and under s. We recommend the Crown does not meet the cost of smartcards for the Community Connect extensions This includes Gisborne, Northland, Waikato, Bay of Plenty, Taranaki, Hawkes Bay, Nelson City, Otago, Invercargill City, and Horizons. ECAN will transition to the National Ticketing Solution from July . Note: half price fares have since been extended until September s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Private Bag , Parliament Buildings, Wellington , New Zealand k.allanministers.govt.nz beehive.govt.nz Next steps Once you have provided the draft financials for your SPE, Ministers and Te Manat Waka will be able to appropriately consider this information and set a specified amount before your Board signs off on the final version. I ask that you consider my feedback and prov de final documents by June for me to table the SPE in the House of Representatives. I recognise the financial and resourcing pressures facing MNZ and that these may have an impact on the delivery of activities outlined in the SP E. I expect MNZ to continue to work with Te Manat Waka on implementing these. I would like to be on your progress at our next meeting. I look forward to our continued engagements and work to improve transport outcomes for New Zealanders and wish you the best for
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE Page of Terry Paddy BSc, MInstD Terry has over years of experience in military and civilian airline aviation and was a qualified flying instructor, check training captain and Civil Aviation appointed flight examiner. Terry is the Managing Director of the software development company Cortexo and has held posit ions as the President of the New Zealand Software Association and Canterbury Software Incorporated.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT P a g e
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT P a g e Key Contacts: DCE: Bryn Gandy Director : Karen Lyons Overall Status RAG : s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of May OC Hon Michael Wood A ction required by: Minister of Transport Thursday, June QUARTERLY REPORT ON IMPLEMENTATION PROGRESS OF THE EMISSIONS REDUCTION PLAN TRANSPORT CHAPTER ACTIONS : JANUARY MARCH Purpose This briefing updates you on implementation progress and risks related to the transport chapter commitments of the Emissions Reduction Plan for the period January March and signals the priorities for the next quarter. This quarterly report also outlines our progress in developing a wider performance story for emissions reductions in the transport sector . Key points Good progress has occurred across the transport emissions portfolio over the January March quarter. Across your key priority areas, most delivery milestones are on track. The number of red initiatives have decreased across all focus areas from in the previous quarter to in this quarter . This is partially due to five initiatives being recategorised to black because they are discontinued, or to amber as the overall timeframes may still be met despite some milestones slipping. During the quarter, the Government decided to discontinue several transport initiatives which has impacted our confidence of meet ing the current and future emissions budget s. The Climate Change Chief Executive Board (IEB) has examined whether existing policies could be ramped up or new policies could be implemented to increasethe expected emissions reduction to the original level anticipated when the Emissions Reduction Plan was released but has not yet identified any that would deliver significant abatement in the Emissions Budget (EB) period. More advice on this issue will be provided to Ministers in May . The key challenge for delivery remains inadequate resourcing. Most of the initiatives with a red status are unfunded, or progress has been delayed due to lack of resourcing. Funding uncertainty is a risk across all focus areas and the funding required for the scale of the transport transformation is significant. In addition to providing you with regular updates on delivery progress of transport chapter initiatives , we are improv ing how we use appraisals, monitoring and evaluation in order to provide you with a transparent and cohesive picture on whether the right outputs are delivering the desired outcomes and impacts effectively . Delivering these improvements while managing business as usual activities takes time, but we will continue to provide updates on our progress in future quarterly reports. Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of QUARTERLY REPORT ON IMPLEMENTATION PROGRESS OF THE EMISSIONS REDUCTION PLAN TRANSPORT CHAPTER ACTIONS : JANUARY MARCH Background Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport (Te Manat Waka) delivered you the first quarterly report on implementation progress of the Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP) transport chapter actions in February (OC refers). This you on the implementation progress and risks for the period J ulyDecember and signalled the priorities for the next quarter. The first six monthly all of government progress report on ERP was prepared by the Climate Change Chief Executives Board ( IEB) for the Climate Re sponse Ministerial Group (CRMG) also in February . Both reports indicated that work was well underway to deliver the most significant transport initiatives set out in the plan. Resourcing and funding constraints were identified as the key risks to implementation and meeting the ERP timeframes. S ince the information in both reports was finalised, the context of the ERP work programme has changed significantly. The Government is focused on reducing cost of living pressures, which has resulted in decisions to rescope or delay key ERP initiatives. Additionally, Cyclone Gabrielle has increased the priority of climate adaptation policies which has also heightened attention on the delivery of the most critical actions for emissions reductions. This second quarterly report (January March ) updates you on the delivery performance of the transport initiatives using the same RAG rating format and also provides an update on how we are using appraisals, monitoring and evaluation to provide a transparent and cohesive picture of whether the right outputs are being delivered efficiently to deliver the desired outcomes.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT P a g e
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE Page of Stephen Davies Howard (Deputy Chief Commissioner ) Term expiring on October , but reappointment in progress Stephen is a former fighter pilot who flew with the Royal Air Force and also the Royal New Zealand Air Force. He has knowledge of the aviation sector, safe ty management systems and regulation. Stephen chairs the Commissions Audit and Risk Committee and the Remuneratio n Committee.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT P a g e
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of June OC Hon David Parker Minister of Transport CHANGES TO MINISTERIAL DIRECTIONS FOR CLEAN CAR UPGRADE, SOCIAL LEASING, AND CLEAN CAR DISCOUNT PROGRAMMES Purpose Seek ing your agreement to : amend a Ministerial Direction to allow Waka Kotahi to give effect to recent Cabinet decisions on the Clean Vehicle Discount Scheme (the Discount) revoke Ministerial Directions to Waka Kotahi regarding the Trial Clean Car Upgrade and Trial Social Leasing Scheme as these Directions are no longer needed write to Waka Kotahi to inform them of the proposed changes . Key p oints On April , Cabinet agreed to adjust rebates and charges for the Discount in response to the high uptake. Budget also provide d million additional funding for to enable rebates to continue without funding running out . As the Discount is subject to the Clean Vehicle Discount Scheme Funding Deed (the Funding Deed) , we have attached a letter for you to send to Waka Kotahi that confirms the additional funding is provided within the terms of the Funding Deed . The Direction to New Zealand Transport Agency: Administration of Clean Vehicle Discount Scheme Rebates (Section of the Crown Entities Act) (the Direction ) sets out Ministerial expectations on Waka Kotahi in its administration of the Discount . The attached letter informs Waka Kotahi of the new rebate amounts . A section () Crown Entities Act amendment to the Direction is also needed , as the eligibility criteria for the Discounts rebates was changed by Cabinet . We have attached a draft Amendment to the Direction for your consideration. On March , Cabinet agree d to stop work on the trial s for the Clean Car Upgrade an d the Social Leasing Scheme. This means that two relevant Directions to Waka Kotahi are no longer needed. We have attached draft Revocation Notices for these Directions for your consideration. Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of The attache d letter to Waka Kotahi Chair, Dr Paul Reynolds , informs him of the issuance of the Amendment to the Direction , the revocation of the Clean Car Upgrade and Social Leasing Scheme directions , the regulatory changes to the levels and charges of the Discount, and the increased Maximum Grant Amount defined in the Funding Deed . Recommendations We recommend you: agree to issue an Amendment to the Direction to New Zealand Transport Agency: Administration of Clean Vehicle Discount Scheme Rebates (Section of the Crown Entities Act) (Amendment to the Direction) under section () of the Crown Entities Act Yes No note that the Amendment to the Direction will give effect to the government policy agreed by Cabinet on April ( CABMIN refers) sign the enclosed Amendment to the Direction Yes No agree to revoke the existing New Zealand Transport Agency ( Trial Clean Car Upgrade ) Direction (Trial Clean Car Upgrade Direction) to give effect to Cabinets decision on March Yes No sign the enclosed Revocation Notice for the New Zealand Transport Agency ( Trial Clean Car Upgrade ) Direction . Yes No agree to revoke the existing New Zealand Transport Agency ( Trial Social Leasing Scheme ) Direction (Trial Social Leasing Scheme Direction) to give effect to Cabinets decision on March Yes No sign the enclosed Revocation Notice for the New Zealand Transport Agency ( Trial Social Leasing Scheme ) Direction Yes No sign the enclosed letter to the Chair of Waka Kotahi inform ing Waka Kotahi of the issuance of the Amendment to the Direction, the revocation of the Trial Clean Car Upgrade and Trial Social Leasing Scheme Directions, the regulatory changes to the levels and charges of the Discount , and written agreemen t of the changes to the Maximum Grant Amount in the Clean Vehicle Discount Scheme Funding Deed Yes No
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of APPENDIX TWO: DRAFT LETTER TO WAKA KOTAHI CHAIR RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT May Dr Paul Reynolds Chair Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency Dear Paul Draft Statement of Performance Expectations for Than k you for providing the Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency s (the Age ncy) draft Statement of Performance Expectation s (SPE) for my comment. I recognise the effort that ha s gone into preparing thi s document an d the h ard work undertaken by the Agency in responding to numerou s devastating weather event s this year. The draft SPE provide s useful context around the operating environment an d the challenge s that the Agency continu es to manage . I would also like to commend its wor k on proposed changes to land transport regulatory charge s and fees I look forw ard to seeing these changes successfully implemented later this year. As communicated i n my Letter of Expectations dated March , I would like the Agency to focus on the rebuil d, continue to work towards being a leader in cost and a sset management, exemplif y value for money, look to the future state of the land transport system, ensure the public is well informed and information is accessible, and be a good employer. I would like the SPE to further consider each of these expectations by outlining what w ork will be undertaken to reflect a good level of alignment with each of the themes noted in the letter. The Government has provided significant levels of funding to address cost pressures and support new priorities within the land transport system over consecutive Budget cycles. I appreciate the immediate pressure on the National Land Transport Fund, particularly as New Zealand moves to a land transport system that i s more resilient t o climate change. Budget will support the emergen cy response and improve networ k resilience t o help communities impacted by severe weather events. Whilst I am working to ensure there i s adequate funding in the lan d transport system, I would like Waka Kotahi to improve prioritisation of available funding, as revenue i s finite and will ne ver be sufficient to address all demand s placed on the land transport system at any one time. s ()(a) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT In addition, I would like the Board to take this opportunity to consider how the Agencys SPE can clarify and rationalise its key priorities and intended work programme to ensure the public ca n clearly understand what is expected to be delivered in . To enable this, I have grouped my comments around four themes within this letter.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Activity Class Structure preworkshop material: Purpose of Activity Classes: From GPS : Activity classes provide signals about the balance of investment across the GPS. Funding is divided into activity classes as a means of achieving the results specified in GPS . Principles of the Activity Class structures: . Clear and understandable a. It should be easy to understand what each activity class is allocating funding to and what that funding has be spent on , including where any activity classes may overlap . It should be clear how much is being spent on improvements and how much is spent on maintaining the system. b. It should be clear where an activity can be funded from, and activities should not be able to be shifted between activity classes to access funding. . Enables delivery of strategic priorities and multiple outcomes through: a. Individual activity classes delivering on multiple strategic priorities in the GPS , and b. More than one activity class allocating funding to a single project . Activity Classes should be oversubscribed so that Waka Kotahi has real choices about which projects to fund a. Having a range of organisations submit a range of activities to an activity class enables real choices to be made about which ac ivities to fund. The right activity class structure will: . Enable system level control a. Outlines the outcomes sought and the types of activities that are expected to achieve these outcomes , while leaving discretion to Waka Kotahi to determine the combination of individual activities that ach ieve GPS priorities . b. Specifies a complete set of the types of activities that are inside and outside of scope of the GPS c. Is able to put pressure on or reduce areas of spend and redirect it towards other priorities . Signal to industry and Waka Kotahi where future priorities will lie to ensure sufficient capability to effectively deliver on future investment priorities. . Suppor s meaningful and transparent performance reporting where the contribution of different activities to achieving the Crowns land transport strategy is separately reported on . Should enable long term tracking of expenditure a. Individual activity classes delivering on multiple strategic priorities in the GPS, and b. More than one activity class allocating funding to a single project
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Rail patronage has increased from million to million boardings per year and has reached per cent of pre COVID patronage numbers ( million in ). Keeping Auckland moving Progress towards this outcome is measured by a reduction in congestion on Auckland arterial s and state highways , as well as the impact of congestion on freight movements. Auckland Transport data shows the percentage of the arterial network that experienced congestion during the morning peak (between am and am). Auckland Transport define congested conditions as travelling at a speed that is per cent of the posted speed limit or slower. COVID lockdowns had a significant impact on congestion levels. Congestion increased between June and June following the easing of lockdown restrictions, and then decreased between June and June , as Auckland underwent a second lockdown. Levels of congestion have now returned to pre COVID levels of approximately per cent of the arterial network experiencing congested conditions during the morning peak.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of contributing to longer term outcomes such as supporting Aucklands growth and improving travel choices. Roading Northern Corridor Improvements Completion of the Northern Corridor Improvements in November has resulted in a new motorway connection between State Highway and , additional traffic lanes on State Highway , walking and cycling infrastructure , as well as an extension of the Northern Busway. It has opened more direct access to the Western Ring Route and airport, as well as improved transport options on the North Shore. The project commenced in April and was completed in November . There was a slight delay to the original completion target of June as a result of COVID . The project was per cent funded by the NLTF and cost million . O Mahurangi Penlink O Mahurangi Penlink will be a new seven kilometre two lane highway between Whangaparoa Road and State Highway , with a separated shared walking and cycling path adjacent to the road corridor. The project will create a more resilient network and support growth in the Silverdale and Milldale areas. Construction began in January . Site works are underway, with four of the six bridges underway, two marine piles placed for Witi River Bridge, and all other drainage, culverts and earthworks underway . O Mahurangi Penlink is expected to cost million and will be delivered as a R oad of Regional Significance. SH Papakura to Drury The Papakura to Drury section ( stage ) of the wider Papakura to Bombay project has been consented and is being constructed in three stages (A, B and B) as a Road of Regional Significance. The project supports economic growth by improving access to and along the motorway, enhancing local connectivity and resilience, and allows for more efficient and reliable journeys. The project includes a series of improvements between Papakura and Drury South, including motorway widening to three lanes in each direc tion. Construction of Stage A (Papakura interchange and Park Road bridge) began in April , and early works for construction of Stage B (the Bremner Road bridge over the North Island Main Trunk Line) commenced in August . Notices of Requirement and resource consent applications were approved for Stage B (Otuwairoa Slippery Creek bridge) in June . Stage A is scheduled for completion in AugustSeptember , with final asphalt surfacing in November. Stages B and B are expected to be completed around . The project is Crown funded with an allocation of million. Stage (Drury to Bombay) n otices of requirement were lodged with Auckland Council in February . They were notified by Council in June and submissions closed on July . A hearing is scheduled in November . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Ara Thono Phoi to Warkworth Motorway The opening of the Ara Thono Phoi to Warkworth Motorway in June has resulted in the extension of the Northern Motorway (SH) from Johnstones Hill Tunnels to Warkworth . The motorway improves the safety, connectivity, and resilience of the transport network between Auckland and Northland. Project completion was originally expected by May , however construction faced disruption due to COVID lockdowns. Te Honohono ki Tai Matakana Link Road In June , completion of Te Honohono ki Tai Matakana Link Road occurred. This is a . kilometre road that connects Matakana and State Highway to support significant population growth and to improve transport in Warkworth. Its delivery, in addition to the Puhoi to Warkworth project, is expected to halve congestion around Warkworth. Local road renewals and maintenance Over the reporting period, Auckland Transport has increased their focus on road renewals and maintenance. Over July to June , Auckland Transport achieved approximately per cent of the cumulative three year resurfacing and rehabilitation target, which was around kilometre of road resurfacing (asphalt and chipseal) . In the year to June , Auckland Transport achieved per cent delivery of asphalt road resurfacing. Supporting Growth Programme This programme of work by NZTA and Auckland Transport aims to secure long term route protection for future urban areas across the region. N ine area wide business cases have been endorsed by the Auckland Transport and Waka Kotahi boards. These business cases cover: Warkworth North Auckland North West Auckland Airport to Botany Rapid Transit Level Crossings in Takanini South Rail South Frequent Transit Network Routes Drury and Opaheke Pukekohe, Paerata and South Drury. The final phase of the programme is underway, involving the lodgement of Notices of Requirement with Auckland Council . All hearings have been completed for the RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of future transport corridor designations, including the Airport to Botany Rapid Transit project. It is anticipated that the designations should be finalised by the end of , subject to resolution of any appeals that are filed. Point Chevalier to Westmere This project includes delivery of a new stormwater system for Point Chevalier and complete reconstruction and strengthening of Meola Road and cycle route improvements. The rebuild of the central section of Meola Road was completed in May. Work to complete the new stormwater system in Point Chevalier Rd was completed in July . There is still work required to construct a new roundabout at the Meola Road and Point Chevalier intersection and to do the same at the Garnet Road and Meola Road intersection. Work is currently underway to construct the link sections of cycle route in Point Chevalier Road and Garnet Road . The whole project will complete by MayJune . Public Transport Eastern Busway The Eastern Busway project will create a dedicated busway from Panmure Station to Botany Station for high frequency bus services . This will connect Botany, Pakuranga, and nearby suburbs to the rail network in Panmure. When complete, the Eastern Busway will make local trips easier and more efficient , as well as creat ing a reliable bus and train service to Waitemat Station (Britomart). The project is being delivered in four sections. The first section of the Eastern Busway project (Panmure Station to Pakuranga ) was completed in December . In November , resource consents were granted on Eastern Busway sections and R (from Pakuranga Town Centre to the east of Ti Rkau Bridge). Site works at these sections have commenced. Local businesses made appeals to the N otice of Requirement for Eastern Busway section , however this is now resolved. Completion of the Eastern Busway (Pakuranga to Botany) is expected in . There is . million in proposed funding to develop the Botany station section, however this is not anticipated to be completed within years. The total project cost is estimated at . billion (Eastern Busway sections ) and is being funded from the NLTF and Auckland Council, along with million in Crown funding (reassigned from the cancelled Northern Pathway project in December ). Interim Northwest Bus Improvements (WX) The WX service from Auckland city centre to Westgate commenced in November . Buses now travel along State Highway (SH) bus shoulder lanes during peak times and use interim bus stops that were constructed at Lincoln Road, Te Atat Road, and Westgate interchanges. The project enables more reliable bus journeys, with improved connections both locally and into the city centre and improved journey times. The WX service has carried more than , passengers in the seven months since opening. At the end of June , boardings were consistently at , passengers per weekday. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of The projects capital investment was delivered and funded jointly by Auckland Transport, NZTA and Crown Infrastructure Partners, costing million. Auckland Councils CATTR and the NLTF are co funding the operating costs. NZTA are also currently developing a detailed business case for a rapid transit busway along SH from the city centre to Westgate. Work is underway to deliver a new bus station at Westgate by mid . Electric train procurement and retrofit Auckland Transport are procuring and delivering new electric trains (electronic multiple unit (EMU)) to provide additional capacity for growth expected when the CRL opens. The contractor constructing the electric trains (CAF Mexico) are confident they can maintain their programme to deliver new EMUs within approval and shipping deadlines, despite some factory testing and supply chain issues. The first three units are expected to begin passenger service in December , with all trains are expected to be in service by September . Auckland Transport have also completed retrofit stage works on the existing fleet ( trains), with all completed trains returned to service. The retrofit programme updates the technology in the current EMU fleet to match the new trains. Updates include switching out exterior headlights and interior lights to LEDs and fitting a new high voltage transformer. The procurement and retrofitting of electric trains is estimated to cost million and is being funded by Auckland Council and the NLTF . Northern Busway extension The Northern Busway extension was completed in May as part of the wider Northern Corridor Improvements project. It expanded the busway from Constellation to Albany bus station and also upgraded C onstellation station with a new northbound platform and connecting pedestrian over bridge. The project has delivered a more reliable minute route between Albany and the city centre, by providing a fully separated busway . Walking and Cycling Manukau Harbour Crossing Construction of new bridge A new metre walking and cycling bridge across the Manukau Harbour was officially opened on August . This project was delivered by NZTA. Glenn Innes to Tmaki Drive Shared Path Section of the Glenn Innes to Tmaki Drive Shared Path was officially opened on May . Section connects St Johns Road with rkei Basin, joining up with the already completed s ections and to give a continuous shared path between Glen Innes and rkei Road. Stage A (underpass of rkei Road and access to the station) was completed in . Procu rement of section B is now complete and construction will start in October . This project is being delivered by NZTA and Auckland Transport.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Road to Zero Bryan Sherritt Director Road to ZeroAgenda Item . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Road Deaths per , inhabitants in New Zealand . Australia . Victoria . NSW . Best performing countries in Europe New Zealand we have a problem NEW SOUTH WALESVICTORIASOUTH AUSTRALIAAUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORYAUSTRALIAQUEENSLANDWESTERN AUSTRALIANEW ZEALANDTASMANIANORTHERN TERRITORYROAD DEATHS PER , POPULATION AUSTRALASIAN JURISDICTIONS RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Annual Social Cost of Road Death and Serious Injury in New Zealand Social costs of road trauma have recently been as part of a review of the value of statistical life and these are as follows: Road Death . million Road Serious Injury . million Social cost measures the total cost of road crashes to the nation, including loss of life and life quality, loss of productivity, medical, legal, court and vehicle damage costs.We have calculated the social cost of road related death and serious injury on New Zealand roads for the month period between October and September . Over this period there were road deaths, and serious injuries recorded. This equates to a road death and serious injury social cost over this month period of . billion Subject to change as the underlying injury data hasnt been finalised. Please note this figure does not include minor injury crashes andas such this should not be mistaken for a social cost figure for all road trauma in New Zealand. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Source: International Traffic Safety Data and Analysis Group ( IRTAD ) Road Safety Annual Report and Transport Accident Commission (TAC) Road Safety quarterly statistics RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Strategy Safe System . Why RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT What does Zero mean in Road to Zero We have zero tolerance that death and serious injury as that price that we must pay to simply use New Zealand Roads It is a human centred strategy based on the safe system approach to road safety. Humans are fallible in that we make mistakes, and make poor choices Humans are vulnerable in that there is a finite amount of force that human body can withstand in a crash before death and serious injury is the result. The system must be designed and operated such that humans are protected this means all parts of the system operating together. The focus of Road to Zero is the ultimate elimination of death and serious injury due to road trauma it is about reducing as much as we can the likelihood of crashes that result in Death and Serious Injury, but importantly it is about managing the consequence of all crashes such that we have every chance of zero death and serious injuries RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Key RtZ Outcomes Road to Zero has strong focus on interventions that have been proven to work .The challenge in New Zealand is to implement these interventions at the scale and pace that will be necessary to achieve the target of a reduction in DSI by . The most significant DSI reducing safe system interventions from Road to Zero are: Infrastructure at least km of flexible median barriers, more than intersections upgraded with primary safe system treatments such as roundabouts and raised platforms. Speed limits speed management applied to at least , km of the highest risk roads on the network to align speed limits with safe and appropriate speeds. Safety Cameras new safety cameras (including point to point cameras) to lower average network speeds (including levels of fines and penalties ). Enforcement increase levels of enforcement from levels, particularly for restraints, impairment, distraction, and speed (including levels of fines and penalties ). Vehicle Safety substantially improve vehicle safety standards via a revised regulatory framework along with practical progress on modern safety features an increasing exit of less safe vehicles. s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Questions RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Road to Zero Action Plan Bryan Sherritt Director Road to ZeroAgenda Item . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Action plan TheFOCUS AREAS arewhere wewilldirect oureffort inthestrategy. Thestrategy issupported bythefirstACTION PLAN ( ) withthefollowing immediate priority actions identified under each focus area. WORK RELATED ROAD SAFETY ROAD USER CHOICE VEHICLE SAFETY SYSTEM MANAGEMENT :INVEST INSAFETY TREATMENTS AND INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS:STRENGTHEN SYSTEM LEADERSHIP AND COORDINATION: RAISE SAFETY STANDARDS FOR VEHICLES ENTERING THE FLEET:PRIORITISE ROAD POLICING :INTRODUCE A NEW APPROACH TO TACKLING UNSAFE SPEEDS :REVIEW INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES : ENHANCE THE SAFETY AND ACCESSIBILITY OF FOOTPATHS, BIKE LANES AND CYCLEWAYSINFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS AND SPEED MANAGEMENT Improve road safety ofour cities and regions through infrastructure improvements and speed management :INCREASE UNDERSTANDING OF VEHICLE SAFETY : IMPLEMENT MANDATORY ANTI LOCK BRAKING SYSTEMS (ABS) FOR MOTORCYCLES:ENHANCE DRUG DRIVER TESTING :INCREASE ACCESS TODRIVER LICENSING AND TRAINING :SUPPORT MOTORCYCLE SAFETY:STRENGTHEN COMMERCIAL TRANSPORT REGULATION : SUPPORT BEST PRACTICE FOR WORK RELATED ROAD SAFETY :REVIEW ROAD SAFETY PENALTIESSignificantly improve thesafety performance of the vehicle fleetEnsure that businesses and other organisations treat road safety asacritical health and safety issueEncourage safer choices and safer behaviour onourroadsDevelop a management system that reflects international best practice Released inDecember . What Highly effective DSIreductionKey enabler RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Draft A ction plan TheFOCUS AREAS arewhere wewilldirect oureffort inthestrategy. Thestrategy issupported bythesecond ACTION PLAN ()withthefollowing priority actions identified under each focus area. s (d) s (d) s (d) s (d) s (d) s (d) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT New Actions for s (d) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Questions RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT ROAD TO ZERO MINISTERIAL OVERSIGHT GROUP
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT SHAPING OUR TRANSPORT SYSTEM UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Submission by the Bus and Coach Association NZ to the Ministry of Transport on the GPS May Bus and Coach Association (New Zealand) Incorporated Level , Boulcott Street, PO Box , Wellington T: E: infobusandcoach.co.nz W: www.busandcoach.co.nz Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TRANSPORTS ROLE WITHIN THE WIDER SYSTEM
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Table Document Treatment under the Act Email Clean Car standard Relief sought (MIA) Released in full Email Attachment MIA Letter to M Wood requesting changes to be made to the CCS March Released in full Email Attachment FCAI Rules for Calculating CO Compliance voluntary FES Final FOR DISTRIBUTION Released in full Email Suspect Sender RUC for PHEV ZEV Released in full Document M Regarding the clean car discount and purchasing vehicles for (Hire a holden) Released in full Email: FW Barriers to electric truck uptake and potential policy responses (Fuso) Some information withheld under section ()(a) Email Attachment: FUSOeCanter Brochure.LR FINAL April Released in full Email Attachment: Briefing to Minister WoodFusoNZ (Fuso, June ) Some information withheld under section ()(a) Email: FW Urgent Clarification sought. (MIA) Some information withheld under section ()(a) Email Attachment: Ltr to M Wood on timing of WLTP testing and Euro for new vehicles () Released in full Email Next steps from July EV pathways meeting between Minister of Transport and Giltrap Group Some information withheld under section ()(a) Email Attachment Support letter draft from Minister Wood on supply issues to VW groupJulyfinal (Gi ltrap) Withheld in full under section ()(b)( ii) Email Attachment Transport Minister Michael Wood letter th Sep (Giltrap) Some information withheld under section ()(b)(ii) Email Attachment EV and Hybrid Report July Released in full Email Attachment Minister Wood EV Speeding the EV Era in NZ: Roundtable with the Minister of Transport and Giltrap Group July final Polis Group. Released in full Email: David CrawfordFrustrated, the Motor Industry Association withdraws support for the Clean Car Standard under the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle) Amendment Bill Released in full Email Attachment: MIA withdraws support for the Land Transport clean vehicle amendment bill Some information withheld under section ()(a) Email Attach ment: Cabinet paper The Clean Car Standard Released in full Email Attachment: Ltr to M Wood on timing of WLTP testing and Euro for new vehicles Released in full Email RE: Land Transport (Clean Vehicles) Amendment Bill No (MIA) Released in full RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Document Treatment under the Act Email RE: Next steps from July EV pathways meeting between Minister of Transport and Giltrap Group Withheld in full under section ()(b)( ii) Email Attachment Transport Minister Michael Wood letter th Sep Withheld in full under section ()(b)( ii) Email Attachment Support letter draft from Minister Wood on supply issues to VW groupJulyfinal Withheld in full under section ()(b)( ii)) Email: David CrawfordClean Car Standard WLTP and Targets. Released in full Email Attachment: LPV graph with NZ NEDC plotted Released in full Email: Attachment: LCV graph with NZ NEDC plotted Released in full Document M Clean Car standard WLTP and Targets Ministerial (MIA) Released in full Email: Follow up from meeting on .. (Auto Distributors NZ) Some information withheld under section ()(a) Email Clean Car Discount Communications (Drive Electric) Some information withheld under section ()(a) Email MIA Press Release on reduced fees for used imported vehicles Released in full Email Attachment MIA Press Release on reduced fees for used vehicles under the clean car discount Released in full Email: FW MIA Press Release Buyers Rush to beat Clean Car Discount Fees Released in full Email Attachment: Registration data onwards YTD March () Released in full Email Attachment: March Sales Table () Released in full Email Attachment: March New Vehicle Sales Press Release () Rush to Beat Clean Car Discount Fees leads to highest ever monthly sales of new vehicles (MIA) Released in full Email MIA Press Release (re April ) Released in full Email Attachment April Sales Table Released in full Email Attachment April New Vehicle Sales Press Release Some information withheld under section ()(a) Email Attachment Registration data onwards YTD April Released in full Email Clean Car Discount Questions (MIA) Released in full Email: Letter from the MIA on Clean Car Discount Released in full Email Attachment: CCD Limit Change Request July (MIA) Released in full Document Response to Kit Wilkerson (VIA) Released in full RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Document Treatment under the Act Email VIAs statement r egarding withdrawing support for the Clean Car Programme Embargoed Some information withheld under section ()(a) Email Attachment VIA Clean Car Programme End of Support Press Release Released in full Document Correspondence from the Hon Michael Wood David Crawford Aug Released in full Email RE: URGENT CCS and motorcycles (MIA) Released in full Email: Letter from the MIA on how to exclude Class L Vehicles from the ambit of the CCS. Released in full Email Attachment: Ltr to Minister of Transport on how to exclude Class L vehicles from CCS obligations Sept (MIA) Released in full Email RE: Further MIUA advice on excluding Class L vehicles from the ambit of the CCS (MIA) Some information withheld as it is out of scope Email RE: Thanks from the VIA for the Ministers time. Some information withheld under section ()(a) Email Thanks from the VIA for the Ministers time. Some information withheld under section ()(a) Email: Industry question on the Clean Car Standard Can the Minister provide comment please (VIA) Released in full Email RE: Industry question on the Clean Car Standard Can the Minister provide comment please (VIA) Some information withheld under sections ()(a) and ()(g)(i) Email RE: Clean Car Standard phased implementation (VIA) Some information withheld under section ()(a) Email: Land Transport (Clean Vehicles) Amendment Bill No (MIA) Released in full Email MIA Press Release new vehicles Sales Nov Released in full Email Attachment Vizulite BEV PHV HEV Nov (MIA) Released in full Email Attachment Registration Data onwards YTD November (MIA) Released in full Email Attachment November Sales Table (MIA) Released in full Email Attachment November New Vehicle Sales Press Release (MIA) Some information withheld under section ()(a)
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Agenda Road to Zero Deputy Chief Executive Management Group March Page of UNCLASSIFIED .pm Road to Zero Quarterly Update Audrey Sonerson . Quarterly update on Road to Zero Bryan Sherritt
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of ANNEX : Background information Sustainable Aviation Aotearoa (SAA) gives effect to an action in the Emissions Reduction Plan ( ERP) SAA heeds the ERP action to establish a public private leadership body focused on decarbonising aviation Establishing a public private leadership body focused on decarbonising aviation, including operational efficiencies, infrastructure improvements and frameworks to encourage research, development and innovation in sustainable aviation, was included in the ERP under Action ... The ERP also includes actions to implement a sustainable aviation fuel (SAF) mandate, and to set domestic emissions reductions targets for aviation. The Climate Change Commission (CCC) is to review the inclusion of international aviation emissions in our domestic targets by , as directed by the Climate Change Response Act . It will be important to work with industry on these actions. The SAA leadership body compris es Chief Executive or Deputy Chief Executive level represe ntatives to provide governance and strategic direction, and influence actions within their own organisation. Acknowledging the energy sector implications of sustainable aviation, and significant need for technological and innovative advancements, SAA is j ointly endorsed by the Associate Minister of Transport, Minister of Research, Science and Innovation, and the Minister for Energy. See Annex for a list of current members. SAA: Roles and responsibilities
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of SAA provides advice on the government and the sectors ambitions for low and zero emission aviation SAA aims to identify cross government work on aviation to avoid duplication, create synergies, and make better use of limited resources. In part, this will be achieved through SAA establishing working g roups to accelerate progress on decarbonising Aotearoas aviation sector. The leadership body does not have any decision making powers; th ese lie with the SAA sponsoring Ministers as relevant to their respective portfolio responsibilities. The core body is a policy reference group that report s to officials, who then pass on information or recommendations to Ministers as needed. The Ministry Deputy Chief Executive Bryn Gandy chairs the SAA Leadership Body, which convenes quarterly . At the inaugural SAA hui in November , the following three working groups were agreed upon: SAF, with a particular focus on exploring a SAF mandate, cost, importation, and production ZeroEmissions Aviation, including hydrogen and electric aircraft and its enabling infrast ructure Strategic policy, which will consider the ERP action to establish domestic emissions reductions targets, update the New Zealand State Action Plan for aviation, and assist the CCC with their consideration of including international aviation emission s within our domestic targets. More broadly, SAA links to the ambitions outlined in the draft national aerospace strategy. In September , your predecessor, Minister McAnulty jointly released consultation document on a national aerospace strategy with the Minister for Economic and Regional Development and the Minister for Research, Science and Innovation. Goal one of that strategy is to build a sustainable air passenger journey by . Despite SAAs relative infancy, there is already significant buy in from key agencies and industry players In establishing SAA, the Ministry considered what options were available in consultation with the Ministry for Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) and Air New Zealand who advocated for the establishment o f the SAA and provided proposals to Ministers and officials. Air New Zealand has expressed and reiterated support of the SAA initiative. They see SAA as playing a critical role in breaking down silos, both at the interagency level, but also between industr y players, and government. Since the inaugural hui, Airways and Airbus contacted the Ministry under their own volition to request membership in the SAA leadership body.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of Internationally, there are other examples of Government led sustainable aviation group s New Zealand aviation industry participants regularly refer to international examples of successful, private public aviation decarbonisation partnerships, which the New Zealand SAA can learn from. These are listed below, for your reference : United Kingdo ms Jet Zero Council is a forum bringing together government, industry, and academia to speed up the aviation green transition. The Council was established in , to work with the aviation industry towards achieving net zero in aviation and developing su stainable aviation fuels (SAF) facilities in the UK. Singapores International Advisory Panel (IAP) on a Sustainable Air Hub was formed in February and bring s together industry, technology, and knowledge partners from Singapore and around the world to discuss how international aviation can be made more sustainable and accessible for all, and how Singapore can contribute to this international effort . Australias Jet Zero style Council is part of the Federal Governments efforts to collaborate with the industry to achieve a sustainable aviation sector that supports emission reduction targets en route to net zero by . In February , representatives from various sectors of the aviation industry attended an Industry Roundtable, to discuss the establi shment and objectives of the Council. Key international aviation trends and emerging issues Aviation account s for over percent of global energy related CO emissions, having grown faster in recent decades than road, rail, or shipping. Over the next years, i nterim solutions are needed until more advanced technologies (such as hydrogen aircraft that are truly net zero), have reached maturation , if we are to reach to net zero aviation by . ICAO outlines a basket of measures necessary t o decarb onise aviation : Aircraft technologies Operational improvements Sustainable aviation fuels Carbon o ffsetting RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of The following ICAO chart depicts the relative makeup and phasing of decarbonisation measures : The chart highlights sustainable aviation fuel ( SAF) as the most viable solution for long haul aviation for the next years. However, there are significant challenges with the procurement, production , and cost of SAF, as demand grossly outstrip s supply. From the perspective of the purchaser (i.e., airlines such as Air New Zealand) SAF poses sizeable operation al costs , with estimates putting SAF at anywhere between times the cost of existing jet fuel . Beyond pricing issues , there are other broader considerations regarding the sustainability and ethics behind the different feedstock s. Another interim decarbonis ation measure is t he Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA ). CORSIA complement s the other elements of the basket of measures by of fsetting the amount of CO emissions that cannot be reduced through technological improvements, operational improvements, and sustainable aviation fuels with emissions units from the carbon market. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of With current understanding of technology, electric aircra ft may only be able service short haul flights and hydrogen aircraft (for longer distances) are unlikely to be viable until the second half of the century. However, in Aotearoa, Air New Zealand is investigating hydrogen and electric aircraft options for shorthaul flights on their journey to start replacing their short haul fleet by . Given New Zealands relative isolation, and currently limited scope to produce commercial quantities of SAF or develop electrichydrogen aircraft , working with our intern ational counterparts is critical to reaching our net zero ambitions .
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of Recommendations We recommend you: provide any feedback on the attached Maritime New Zealand Monitoring Plan Yes No agree to the Ministry sharing the attached monitoring plan with the Board of Maritime New Zealand . Yes No agree to establish quarterly, structured performance discussions with the Maritime New Zealand Board Chair, beginning in November Yes No provide any feedback on the attached TAIC Monitoring Plan Yes No agree to the Ministry sharing the attached monitoring plan with the Board of TAIC. Yes No agree to establish quarterly, structured performance discussions with the TAIC Chief Commissioner , beginning in November Yes No
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of ANNEX : Speaking Notes SUSTAINABLE AVIATION AOTEAROA HUI
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of ANNEX : Draft agenda SAA April hui .am .am, Tuesday April Ministerial Meeting Room ., Level , Executive Wing (the Beehive) or via Zoom
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of Full list of SAA leadership body members: Name Title Organisation Bryn Gandy (Chair) DCE Te Manat Waka Airlines Andrew Crawford CEO Sounds Air Andrew David CEO Qantas Kiri Hannifin Chief Sustainability Officer Air New Zealand Niels Meinderts Regulatory Affair Manager Air New Zealand Rhyan Wardman Chair and Director Sounds Air Airports Andrea Marshall (stand in) Head of Master planning Auckland Airport Billie Moore Chief Executive New Zealand Airports Association Carrie Hurihanganui Chief Executive Auckland Airport Claire Waghorn Sustainability Transition Leader Christchurch Airport Clodagh OConnor McKenna (stand in) Government Relations Manager Auckland Airport Jenna Raeburn General Manager Wellington Airport Malcolm Johns CEO Christchurch Airport Mark Thompson CEO Nelson Airport Steve Riden Sector Development Manager and Decarbonisation Lead NZ Airports Association Air navigation service provider James Young Chief Executive Airways Jamie Gray Manager Deputy Chief Executive Airways Pilots Andrew Ridling CEO New Zealand Pilots Association LisaMarie Richardson Government, Regulatory and Public Affairs New Zealand Air Line Pilots Association Manufacturers Mark Rocket CEO Kea Aerospace Stephen Forshaw Chief Representative of Australia, New Zealand and the Pacific Airbus MoriIwi RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of Name Title Organisation Ben Bateman Chief Operating Officer Te Rnanga o Ngi Tahu Parekawhia McLean Representative, Director Waikato Tainui, Transpower GovernmentCrown entities Audrey Sonerson Chief Executive Te Manat Waka Keith Manch CEO Civil Aviation Authority Leah Murphy Principal Adviser Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment Lisa Daniell (stand in) Executive Director Climate Change Chief Executives Board Peter Bartlett Director Sector Engagement, Energy and Resource Markets Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment Vicky Robertson CEO Ministry for the Environment
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLA SSIFIED Page of March OC Hon Michael Wood Action required by: Minister of Transport Wednesday, March PROACTIVE RELEASE OF CABINET PAPER ON THE FUNDING RE ALLOCATION FROM THE NORTHERN PATHWAY TO THE EASTERN BUSWAY Purpose Seek your approval to proactively publish the Cabinet paper and associated minute titled Funding reallocation from the Northern Pathway to the Eastern Busway on Te Manat Wakas website. Number of papers Two Deadline for publishing March Risks We do not consider there are any significant risks with releasing the information proposed. However, some comments in the Cabinet paper around emissions reductio n modelling and estimates may be questioned. Recommendations We recommend you: approve Te Manat Waka to publish the Cabinet paper and associated minute with redactions as marked on the Ministrys website Yes No note the documents must be by March Karen Lyons Director Auckland . . . Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport . . . Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLA SSIFIED Page of Ministers office to complete : Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events Comments Contacts Name Telephone First contact Abigail Wyatt, Auckland Advisor Karen Lyons, Director Auckland
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLA SSIFIED Page of Annex one: Document schedule
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSI FIED Page of March OC Hon Michael Wood Action required by: Minister of Transport Wednesday, March UPDATE ON LETS GET WELLINGTON MOVING Purpose To brief you on some emerging issues with the Lets Get Wellington Moving programme and seek your views on how you wish to proceed. Key points Lets Get Wellington Moving (LGWM) is reaching an important point , as a detailed business case gets underway for the mass rapid transit and state hig hway elements (the Transformational Programme). This will not be completed until the end of , but we expect to start seeing cost estimates in mid . In , Cabinet agreed that the Government would contribute . billion ( percent) of th e overall programme cost of . billion. This was mostly to be provided through the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) , with financing arrangements for mass rapid transit. We expect that the . billion contribution agreed by Cabinet in will no longer be sufficient to deliver LGWM as currently scoped. In , you agreed to a . billion funding envelope for public consultation on options. This has become the commonly accepted figu re, and the basis for modelling undertaken by LGWM. We expect that this cost will increase further, driven mainly by the Transformational Programme. This likely means that Cabinet will need to make decisions about whether to increase the Crowns contributi on, and how to fund it. We understand that it may be difficult for the local partners to provide more funding. Other matters that require consideration include governance arrangements for the Transformational Programme (ensuring appropriate representation and decision making ability for the Crown). We also need to think about how to achieve good Document s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSI FIED Page of integration between transport in vestments and the urban developmentintensification opportunities that represent a large part of the benefits associated with LGWM. We are keen to discuss your thoughts on the role of officials. There are opportunities to influence how LGWM progresses, and to manage the fiscal risk to the Crown. Broadly, we see two options for you to consider. You could wait until we receive cost estimates from the detailed business case, and then engage with Cabinet on the desire to directly fund the Governments c ontribution and any required increases in that contribution. If you wish to intervene earlier, you could write to the LGWM local partners (Wellington City Council and Greater Wellington Regional Council ), to seek clarity on the availability and limits on t he local contribution.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSI FIED Page of We expect LGWM costs to escalate further, particularly on the Transformational Programme There are several reasons for expected cost escalation, with inflation being an important factor but not the only one. The year to June saw the highest rise in civil construction inf lation since records began at the end of the s (roughly double the previous record high). Other factors include a better understanding of geotechnical risks, which has increased the costs of some projects. We understand that the partners (WCC and GWRC) will find it difficult to commit more funding to cover cost escalation.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Annex : Talking Points MEETING WITH MARTIN KEARNEY CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER , AUCKLAND ONE RAIL Thank you for your time today and for the trip on the rail network . Safety I know safety of customers and staff on public transport is front of mind for you currently. Aucklanders will see a greater police presence on public transport services to boost safety and reassure public transport workers and passengers We are committed to delivering practical, long term improvements to ensure safer and more secure conditions for public transport workers and passengers. Whether its tougher sentencing or immediate safety upgrades, we are working to ensure that everyone who uses or works in public transport can do so with confidence. The Ministry of Transport and NZTA are also working together to ensure there is a consistent policy across New Zealand for how public transport workers can address anti social or violent behaviour aboard public transport services. Discussions will continue with the NZ Police and Public Transport Authorities about other measures that may be needed for Kiwis to have greater assurance to use public transport. Rail disruption and CRL integration I am interested to hear your view on the readiness of the network for CRL day one. Are there any risks or areas of concern associated with the timetable development, crewing or safety assurance (areas which Auckland One Rail is responsible for) MROM The bottom line is that commuters need a service they can rely on one that turns up on time and gets them where they need to be. s ()(b)(ii) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Annex : Talking Points MEETING WITH THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE AND BOARD MEMBERS OF AUCKLAND AIRPORT Auckland Airport Acknowledge Auckland Airports million capital investment programme including creating additional lanes, installing bus and transit lanes, and a new , car Park and Ride. Support collaboration with NZTA and Auckland Transport on the Southwest Gateway Programme . You may wish to explore the key priorities for Auckland Airport in this programme and reinforce the Governments commitment to the Airport to Botany busway in the next three years . Discuss the Airports plans for managing congestion over the summer period, and any areas where NZTA could provide support. Discuss the impact of the opening of the Mnawa Bay Mall and how traffic flow will be managed in the upcoming months, particularly the summer peak. Time of Use Charging Update Auckland Airport that legislation will be introduced later this year and note that any scheme will be developed in partnership with NZTA to ensure integration across the State Highway and local network. Encourage their participation in the submissions process and note that local authorities are expected to engage with the local community and stakeholders before a scheme is considered. Aviation Security Services Review Note that th e current consultation on the delivery of aviation security services is the first step in ensuring a more efficient aviation security service, that enables airlines and travellers to get where they want to go, quickly and safely. Discuss Auckland Airports views on fulfilling the aviation security role.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of October OC Hon Kieran McAnulty Action required by: Associate Minister of Transport Monday, October URGENT PROPOSAL TO NOTIFY COMMENCEMENT OF PART MARINE PROTECTION RULES TRANCHE Purpose This paper seeks your agreement to notify the commencement of specified sections of the Part Marine Protection Rules (Part Rules) and lift the suspension on those rules in accord ance with section () of the Maritime Transport Act (MTA) . The suspension needs to be lifted to enable New Zealand to implement new provisions of Annex VI of the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL) , relating primarily to energy efficiency and carbon intensity of ships . These provisions come into force globally on November . Key p oints The Part Rules are the key legislative instrument that enables New Zealand to implement MARPOL Annex VI, the International Maritime Organization Convention for the Prevention of Air Pollution from Ships. The Part Rules were made by the Minister of Transport on March and gazetted on April . The commencement of the rules was suspended under section () of the MTA until the of New Zealands accession to MARPOL Annex VI was known. New Zealand acce ded to MARPOL Annex VI on May and the Convention came into force in New Zealand from August . On July a Gazette notice was notifying that the suspension on most of the Part Rules (tranche ) would be lifted on August . Some parts of the Part Rules (tranche ) remained suspended pending the coming into force globa lly of new MARPOL Annex VI regulations on November . We are now seeking your agreement to notify the lifting of the suspension on these parts and their commencement . The tranche rules will come into effect days after gazetting. There will be a short delay between November ( when the relevant MARPOL Annex VI regulations come into force) and the commencement of the tranche rules . However, this has no practical effect as surveys of ships for compliance with the new rules do not commence until January . R E L E A S E D U N D E R T H E OF F I C I A L I N F OR MA T I ON A C T
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of May OC Hon Michael Wood Action required by: Minister of Transport Tuesday, June QUARTER OUTPUT PLAN REPORT Purpose Provide a progress report on key initiatives in the Output Plan . Key points The Ministry previously agreed to provide you with quarterly updates against identified initiatives from the Output Plan . The Quarter (Q) Output Plan Report is attached (Appendix A refers). This briefing includes some additional initiatives to provide a broader picture of our delivery against the Output Plan. The Ministry will also be providing you with a briefing on the Quarterly report on implementation progress of the ERP Transport actions ( OC ). These briefings, togethe r, will constitute the Ministrys Q reporting to you. Three pr ojects are assessed as being amber, meaning there is some risk to the Ministry achieving the forecasted September position. Resourcing is a key issue for these issues, and there are tim ing challenges for the GPS initiative. The amber initiatives are: oTransit Framework oChristchurch Mass Transit oGPS . The other twelve initiatives are assessed as being green, meaning the Ministry expects to achieve the forecasted September position. Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT P a g e Appendix A Quarter Output Plan Report to the Minister of Transport
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of June OC Hon Kieran McAnulty Action required by: Acting Minister of Transport Monday, June ESTIMATES POST BUDGET QUESTIONS To provide you with draft responses to the post budget Estimates questions sent to the Minister of Transport from the Transport and Infrastructure Committee. Key points The Ministry has previously provided the Minister with responses to the standard and supplementary Estimates questions (). Draft responses are now attached for the post budget questions you received from the Transport and Infrastructure Committee. Please review the responses and provide feedback to the Ministry if changes are needed. The Ministry will work with your Office to make any amendments . Once you are satisfied with the responses, please sign the attached letter, and send it by June , along with the responses, to the Transport and Infrastructure Committee. Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of ESTIMATES POST BUDGET QUESTIONS This briefing provides you with draft responses to Select Committee questions . The Minister of Transport answered standard and supplementary Estimates questions for Vote Transport. The Minister of Transport received post budget questions ( ) on May . Responses to the post budget questions are due to the Transport and Infrastructure Committee by Monday June . Draft responses to questions are attached to this briefing (attachment ). As well as the accompanying Appendices (attachment ). We have also prepared a draft cover letter (attachment ) for you to email to the Committee. These are new questions. We have approached the response to the postbudget questions in the same way as the first tranche of Supplementary questions ( ). The M inistry considers the responses to be low risk. We have provided information from Crown entities in cases where the question asks for information about entities funded under Vote Transport. This includes City Rail Link Limited (CRLL) and Auckland Light Rai l Limited (ALRL). If the question does not refer to entities funded by Vote Transport, answers are about the Ministry of Transport. In the introduction to the responses (page ) we explain that KiwiRail and MetService, although funded under Vote Transport, are the responsibility of the Minister for State Owned Enterprises and we do not include them in this response. Please review the responses and provide feedback to the Ministry if changes are needed. The Ministry will work with your office to make any ame ndments. We will finalise the formatting of the response to the post budget questions once we have addressed any issues that you may raise. Hearing before the Transport and Infrastructure Committee The hearing for Vote Transport is scheduled for Thursday June . We have provided you with support material for your review prior to the hearing . Attachments and are refused under Section (d) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Jayden Blake Clerk of Committee Transport and Infrastructure Committee Parliament Buildings WELLINGTON TIparliament.govt.nz Kia ora Jayden Response to the Post Budget to the E stimates for Vote Transport Attached are my r esponse s to the post budget questionnaire in response to the Chairpersons letter of April . The departmental liaison officer for Committee staff to contact is Prashila Dayal, Senior Adviser Corporate Accountability , phone or em ail: P.dayaltransport.govt.nz. Ng mihi Hon Kieran McAnulty Acting Minister of Transport Attachment s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of June OC Hon Ki ri A llan Action required by: Associate Minister of Transport Thursday, June cc Hon Kieran McAnulty Acting Minister of Transport PORTS OF AUCKLAND LIMITED CONSTITUTION AMENDMENTS Purpose Seeks your approval to proposed changes to the Ports of Auckland Limited (POAL) constitution and provides you with a letter and a consent form to the Mayor of Auckland for your signature. Key p oints On May , the Mayor of Auckland wrote to Hon Michael Wood, in his capacity as Minister of Transport, seeking approval for changes to the POAL constitution. Under section of the Port Companies Act (the Act), no amendment may be made to the constitution of a port company without the prior written approval of the Minister of Transport. Auckland Council is the sole shareholder of POAL. As Associate Minister of Transport, you have been delegated decision making powers relating to the maritime sector . You can consent to the proposed changes if they are consistent with the purpose of the Act, which is to promote and improveefficiency, economy, and performance in the management and operation of thecommercial aspects of ports. The Ministry recommends that you approve these proposed amendments , which are summarised in Appendix One , together with the Ministrys advice on each of the proposed changes . A copy of POALs existing constitution showing the proposed changes is also attached as Appendix Two. We consider the changes to be technical in nature and consistent with the Act . They will simplify , in a positive way, the appointment process for directors, the Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson of POAL. The Ministry of Transports governance and legalteams have reviewed the proposed amendments and do not have any concerns. If you agree to approve the proposed changes to POALs existing constitution, attached for your signature is a letter to the Mayor of Auckland ( Appendix Three ) and accompanying consent form ( Appendix Four ). Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT APPENDIX RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT CONTENTS . DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION . . GENERAL . . . SHARES . . . ISSUE OF NEW EQUITY SECURITIES . . ALTERATION OF SHAREHOLDER RIGHTS . . ACQUISITION OF COMPANYS OWN SHARES . . SHARE CERTIFICATES . . EQUITABLE INTERESTS IN SHARES . . CALLS ON SHARES . .. . FORFEITURE OF SHARES . . LIEN ON SHARES . .. . SALE OF SHARES SUBJECT TO FORFEITURE OR LIEN . . TRANSFER OF SHARES . . DISTRIBUTIONS . . EXERCISE OF POWERS OF SHAREHOLDERS . . MEETINGS OF SHAREHOLDERS . . NOTICE OF MEETINGS OF SHAREHOLDERS . . PROCEEDINGS AT MEETINGS OF SHAREHOLDERS . . CHAIRPERSON OF MEETINGS OF SHAREHOLDERS . . VOTING AT MEETINGS OF SHAREHOLDERS . . RESTRICTIONS ON VOTING . . POLLS . . . PROXIES . . . CORPORATE REPRESENTATIVE . . SHAREHOLDER PROPOSALS AND MANAGEMENT REVIEW . . DIRECTORS . . . ALTERNATE DIRECTORS . . MANAGING DIRECTORS . . REMUNERATION AND OTHER BENEFITS OF DIRECTORS . . INDEMNITY AND INSURANCE . . POWERS OF DIRECTORS . . INTERESTS OF DIRECTORS . . PROCEEDINGS OF BOARD . . METHOD OF CONTRACTING . . INSPECTION OF RECORDS . . NOTICES . . . AUDIT . . . LIQUIDATION . . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT v AKL CONSTI TUTION OF PORTS OF AUCKLAND LIMITED . DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION . Definitions : In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires: Act means the Companies Act . Alternate Director means a person appointed by a Director as his or her alternate under section . Board means Directors who number not less than the required quorum acting together as the board of directors of the Company.Class means a class of Shares having attached to them identical rights, privileges, limitations and conditions.Company means Ports of Auckland Limited. Constitution means this constitution, as altered from time to time. Director means a person appointed as a director of the Company in accordance with this Constitution.Distribution has the meaning set out in section () of the Act. Interest Group has the meaning set out in section of the Act. Interested , in relation to a Director, has the meaning set out in section of the Act. Managing Director means a person appointed as a managing director of the Company under clause ..month means calendar month. New Equity Securities has the meaning given in clause . of this Constitution. Ordinary Resolution means a resolution that is approved by a simple majority of the votes of those Shareholders entitled to vote and voting on the question. person includes an individual, partnership, firm, company, body corporate, corporation, association, organisation, trust, a state or government or any agency thereof, a municipal, local or regional authority, and any other ent ity or organisation, whether incorporated or not (in each case whether or not having a separate legal personality). Records means the documents required to be kept by the Company under section () of the Act. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of ANNEX DOCUMENT SCHEDULE
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of March OC Hon Kiri Allan Action required by: Associate Minister of Transport Monday, March cc Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport AIR NEW ZEALAND KIWI SHAREHOLDER Purpose Advise you of the steps necessary for you to take over the rights and responsibilities of the Kiwi Shareholder in Air New Zealand. Key points The Kiwi Share is a special rights convertible preference share issued by Air New Zealand to the Crown. It confers certain rights and responsibilities on the holder. Its primary intent is to protect Air New Zealands access to other countries under inter government air services agreements , by ensuring that substantial ownership and effective control of the airline remains in New Zealand hands. Among other things, the consent of the Kiwi Shareholder is required for certain changes in the ownership of Air New Zealand. At present , Hon Phil Twyford , the previous Minister of Transport , is the Kiwi Shareholder . . The attached letter to the Prime Minister proposes that you be assigned the responsibility of Kiwi Shareholder. Recommendations We recommend you: sign the attached letter to the Prime Minister which proposes that you, as Associate Minister of Transport, be the person entitled to exercise the rights and powers of the Kiwi Shareholder in accordance with Article . of Air New Zealand Limiteds constitution; Yes No and, if the Prime Minister agrees with the above proposal, Document s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of sign the attached letter to Air New Zealand, notifying the company that you are the person entitled to exercise the rights and powers of the Kiwi Shareholder . Yes No
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of March OC Hon Kiri Allan Action required by: Associate Minister of Transport Wednesday, March cc Hon Minister Michael Wood Minister of Transport OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT REQUEST FROM RELATING TO MARPOL ANNEX VI Purpose Seek your agreement to the proposed response to an Official Information Act request. Name of Requester Request copies of any advice MNZ provided to the Minister about the application of Marpol Annex VI, Chapter in NZ And a copy of the relevant Cabinet paper (if any) if MNZ holds a copy of the Cabinet paper Statutory deadline Wednesday, March Risks Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport ( The Ministry ) foresees no risks with this response. This request was transferred to the Ministry from Maritime New Zealand on March . OIA BRIEFING TE MANATU WAKA p MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Document s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Recommendations We recommend you: consider the proposed response to the request under the Official Information Act sign the attached letter to Yes No Holly Walker Manager, Environment and Emissions Strategy Hon Kiri Allan Associate Minister of Transport . . . Ministers office to complete: Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events Comments Contacts Name Telephone First contact Holly Walker, Manager, Environment and Emissions Strategy Bryn Gandy, Deputy Chief Executive, System Strategy and Investment s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT REQUEST FROM RELATING TO MARPOL ANNEX VI Purpose Provides a suggested response to an Official Information Act (the Act) request received from . request under the Act On March , made a request under the Act seeking: could I please get copies of any advice MNZ provided to the Minister about the application of Marpol Annex VI, Chapter in NZ And a copy of the relevant Cabinet paper (if any) if MNZ holds a copy of the Cabinet paper . This request was transferred to Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport (the Mini stry) from Maritime New Zealand (MNZ) on March . Six documents fall within the scope of the request Table below sets out the documents that fall in the scope of request and our proposed response. Table Document Description of information withh eld Previously released Cabinet paper Approval to consult on accession to the International Maritime Organization Treaty MARPOL Annex VI: Prevention of Air Pollution from Ships Refused in full under section (d) of the Act as the document is publicly available on Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transports (the Ministrys) website. Yes Cabinet Paper MARPOL Annex VI Regulations for the Prevention of Air Pollution from Ships: Approval to Accede Refused in full under section (d) of the Act as the document is publicly available on the Ministrys website. Yes National Interest Analysis Proposes accession to Annex VI regulations for the prevention of air pollution from ships contained in the Protocol of to the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL) Refused in full under section (d) of the Act as the document is publicly available on the Ministrys website. Yes s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Table Document Description of information withh eld Previously released Briefing OC MARPOL Annex VI: Recommended policy approach implementation and funding Certain information : withheld under section ()(a) of the Act relating to protect ing the privacy of natural persons ; and excluded as out of scope of this request.No Briefing OC Supporting material for the Maritime Transport (MARPOL Annex VI) Amendment Bill for Committee of the Whole house Certain information : withheld under section ()(a) of the Act relating to protect ing the privacy of natural persons ; and excluded as out of scope of this request.No Briefing OC Urgent Proposal to notify commencement of Part Marine Protection Rules Tranc he Certain information withheld under section ()(a) of the Act relating to protect ing the privacy of natural persons . No Consultation and Risks The Ministry has consul ted MNZ on its suggested response and they are comfortable with our response . The Ministry foresees no risks with this response. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of March OC Hon Michael Wood Action required by: Minister of Transport Friday, March OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT REQUEST FROM REGARDING RANDOM ROADSIDE D RUG TESTING Purpose Seek your agreement to the proposed response to an Official Information Act request. Name of Requester Request all communications (whether that be via written communications, emails, text messages, or any other form of electronic communication) that Minister Michael Wood received that included any advice on random roadside drug testing, specifically the rollout of random roadside drug testing, within the past months Statutory deadline Monday, April Risks No risks were identified. Much of t he information proposed for release is publicly available. Recommendations We recommend you: consider the proposed response to the request under the Official Information Act sign the attached letter to Yes No Helen White Manager, Mobility and Safety Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport . . . OIA BRIEFING Document s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Ministers office to complete: Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events Comments
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of BRIEFING March O C Hon Michael Wood Action required by: Minister of Transport Monday, April Cc Hon Kiritapu Allan Associate Minister of Transport PROACTIVE RELEASE OF THE INFRINGEMENT AND REMINDER NOTICES AMENDMENT REGULATIONS CABINET PAPER Purpose Seek your approval t o proactively publish the Cabinet paper and Minute for Amendment to the Land Transport (Infringement and Reminder Notices) Regulations on Te Manat Wakas (the Ministrys) website. Number of papers Ther e are two documents in the proposed release. Deadline Monday April . Risks We have not identified any risks associated with the release of these documents. Recommendations We recommend you: note that to meet the timeliness required by Cabinet Office circular (), the documents must be by April approve the Ministry to publish the two documents in full on Te Manat Waka website Yes No Helen White Manager, Mobility and Safety Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of . . .
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of May OC Hon Michael Wood Action required by: Minister of Transport Friday, June TOTAL MOBILITY REVIEW (TERMS OF REFERENCE) Purpose To seek your approval of the finalised Terms of Reference for the review of the Total Mobility Scheme. Key points The Total Mobility Scheme provides discounted transport services to people who are unable to use buses, trains or ferries in a safe and dignified manner because of a physical, intellectual, psychological, sensory or neurological disability. In August , Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency the research report Transport experiences of disabled people in Aotearoa New Zealand . This research found that Total Mobil ity costs time and effort and is sometimes an unreliable or unavailable transport option . It is timely to review the Total Mobility Scheme to identify key issues and take action to improve the effectiveness of the scheme . We are seeking your approval of th e finalised Terms of Reference for the Total Mobility review (Annex ) We shared the draft Terms of Reference with you in April OC refers . Since then, it has been circulated to stakeholders and their feedback has been incorporated into the finalised version .
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Appendix : Climate Action Targeted Rate and Climate Emergency Response Fund Climate Action Targeted Rate (CATR) . CATR was originally planned to fund new projects in addition to the core ATAP programme of works, including additional funding to deliver new and extended frequent bus routes throughout the region, new electric buses and ferries, and improved cycling and walking connections. The initial investment package is as follows : Table : Planned CATR expenditure CATR transport expenditure , million Auckland Transport operating expenditure (admin and additional depreciation) Auckland Transport Bus improvement Auckland Transport Ferry improvement Auckland Transport Cycling project Auckland Transport Walkways project Total ,
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Great North Road cycleway Construction is taking place in two phases. The Phase enabling works involved laying new sewers and identifying locations for tree pits that will feature in the completed scheme, agreeing resource consent for the new street trees and installing the ducts and some of the signalling hardware ready for new pedestrian crossings and dynamic bus lanes. This work was completed in March . Phase of the work will be to install the bus lanes, cycle lanes, relocate bus stops, and install side road entry treatments. This work is currently out to tender and due to start in OctoberNovember . Rail Papakura to Pukekohe Rail Electrification (PP) This project completes the last kilometre electrification of the Auckland train network from Papakura to Pukekohe, eliminating the need for passengers to transfer to diesel trains at Papakura. Construction works at Pukekohe Station were completed at the end of July , allowing for a greater number of trains to operate and accommodate electric trains . In June , the new overhead electric lines were commissioned, and the first EMU test train reached Pukekohe in early July . A uckland Transport plans to commence passenger train services in early , after the testing and commissioning stage and completion of KiwiRails RNR works. Spend to the end of June is . million. Wiri to Quay Park (WQP) Over the period, the t hird main rail line between Wiri and Westfield Junction has been completed which alleviates rail congestion in the busiest part of the network and better separates freight from commuter services . The programme provides a third rail line (third main) to ease the bottleneck between Wiri and Westfield Junction, increases capacity around Westfield Junction and improves rail access to the Ports of Auckland at Quay Park. The scope also includes future proofing works for a potential fourth line between Wiri and Westfield Junction to meet future rail demand. Construction works at Westfield Junction were complete in April . Civil construction works for the t hird main (excluding Middlemore site) were completed in March and track works completed in May . Quay Park civil works were completed in March . Work is well advanced at Middlemore Station, which is scheduled to be complete in January . Final signals commissioning for the third main is forecast for October and Quay Park over Easter . Spend to the end of June is . millio n. Auckland Integrated Rail Management Centre Construction of the new Auckland Rail Operations Centre in Ellerslie was delivered under budget and operations commenced in March . The centre sees the co RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of City Rail Link Update Over the past three years, significant process has been achieved on the CRL despite major disruption from COVID . As of June , the CRL project is tracking within revised budget (. billion ) and the Link Alliance report that key project milestones remain on track. Practical completion of the construction works is currently expected to happen in late . After that, the next priority will be additional work that needs to be undertaken by Auckland Transport and KiwiRail before CRL can be operational for the public, including extensive testing of complex system infrastructure, as well as staff training and operational set up. This is critical to ensure that CRL can operate as intended and deliver the expected results once opened to the public. Assuming the testing and commissioning process proceeds smoothly, the opening to the public is likely to be in . The exact opening will ultimately be determined by Auckland Transport and KiwiRail. Delivery updates Delivery of the CRL project faced challenges from the COVID pandemic. Lockdowns delayed construction and tunnelling works, while supply chain disruption and cost escalations placed additional pressure on the project. However, significant delivery milestones have still been achieved. In June , completion of the twin . kilometre long tunnels that connect Waitemat Station (Britomart) with a re developed Maungawhau Station (Mt Eden) on the Western Line was achieved, when the tunnel boring machine Dame Whina Cooper broke through at Te Waihorotiu (Aotea) Station. This work transforms Waitemat Station (Britomart) into a two way through station. Alongside tunnelling, significant progress has been made on construction of the t wo new underground stations , Karangah ape Station and Te Waihorotiu station (Aotea Square). These stations will open up access into more of the central city from the rail network for commuters . S upporting works for the CRL project are progressing well. The RNR, which is critical for Day One operations of the CRL, is advancing well and is on track for completion prior to the CRLs opening. The level crossing removals , also critical for Day One operations , are progressing. The current focus of the project is on the fit out of stations and tunnels, landscaping and upgrades to the surroundings of the stations and preparations for testing the first train in . The activities involved in the fit out programme include the installation of lifts, escalators, security systems, CCTV, electricity, signalling and communications. ATAP Outcomes To measure the impact of ATAP transport investment, the programme reports against key outcomes. Full analysis of these is outlined in Appendix One: ATAP Outcomes. s ()(b)(ii) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of P ublic transport patronage has recovered over the reporting period from its lowest point since in July , increas ing from million boardings (in July ) to million in the year to June . This recovery has been led by bus and ferry patronage, with rail lagging due to ongoing disruption to the rail network. Over the three year period, Death and Serious Injuries on the Auckland transport network have also been fluctuating. Serious injuries increased by per cent between June and June following the end of lockdown restrictions and has since been decreasing. Congestion on arterial roads and state highways has returned to pre COVID levels. Approximately per cent of the arterial network experienc es congested conditions during the morning peak. Since the end of COVID lockdowns, average speeds have reduced across the state highway network, to as low as per cent of freeflow speeds on some corridors as of June . Freight congestion rose to per cent of the network in March (compared to per cent in FY) and has remained at this level. Looking forward The Ministry of Transport will recommend this report for proactive release. The three year reporting and investment period for the ATAP programme concluded on June . An ATAP programme has not been developed and agreed to inform the period. The GPS sets out the strategic direction for Auckland including progressing Roads of National Significance (Mill Road Stage , the East West Link and the SH Northwest alternative highway , Warkworth to Wellsford ), as well as Roads of Regional Significance (O Mahurangi Penlink, State Highway Papakura to Drury Improvements , Wai hoehoe Road Upgrade). Key public transport projects are being progressed across Auckland, including the planned completion of the CRL and Eastern Busway, as well as development of the Northwest rapid transit busway and Airport to Botany interim solution. The Auckland Council Long term Plan has allocated Auckland Council funding of . billion in capital funding and . billion in operational funding for the Auckland Transport programme. An additional . billion has been allocated to the CRL. Th e Long Term Plan funding includes a per week fare cap for public transport. T he Auckland RLTP has been approved by the A uckland Transport Board following consultation with Aucklanders. The NZTA will shortly advise Auckland Transport of the allocations for funding from the NLTF, which will result in A uckland Transport prioritising their RLTP list of projects .
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Budget T he following funding allocations for Auckland have been approved as part of Budget : . million that will be used to complete a major upgrade of the Auckland rail network ahead of the opening of the City Rail Link A . million share of . million in funding to continue to repair storm damaged roads and state highways A share of . million in funding for metropolitan rail renewals, along with the Wellington region.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Appendix One ATAP OUTCOMES The ATAP Outcomes are: Enabling and supporting Aucklands growth Improving travel choices for Aucklanders Keeping Auckland moving Making Aucklands transport safe (environmental and human health) Enabling and supporting Aucklands growth Transport investment identified in ATAP plays a key role in enabling and supporting Aucklands growth. One way to track whether growth in happening in line with transport investment is to monitor new dwelling consent activity. This report monitors new dwelling consent activity between the and financial years (July to June). It should be noted that, at the time of reporting, only July to May data was available for the financial year. Building consent activity increased after the adoption of the Auckland Unitary Plan (AUP) through to . This was supported by more responsive housing supply resulting from the AUP and low interest rates from March . Consenting activity peaked, on a month basis, in late . The annual number has decreased over the last two financial years, as higher interest rates have increased financing costs and dampened house pr ices and demand. Figure shows that, over the to reporting period, townhouses, flats and units became the predominant dwelling typology, standalone houses became less common, and apartment typologies fluctuate on a year byyear basis. This trend reflects the more flexible land use policy settings of the Auckland Unitary Plan and the demand for new homes that use less land per dwelling.
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of . There have been additional sources and reallocation of ATAP funding since the package was agreed: .. In December , million of funding was reallocated from the cancelled Northern Pathway project to the Eastern Busway, allowing for land acquisitions to occur in December . .. During this reporting period, the NZUP received million of additional funding to manage cost escalations for Auckland specific projects . .. The Governments Climate Emergency Response Fund (CERF) Transport Choices Package has provided an indicative funding package to Auckland, announced in December . Projects and funding are being finalised later this month, with the indicative package detailed in Appendix . . Work since the finalisation of the ATAP programme has confirmed that higher thannormal funding assistance rates for some rapid transit projects, as contemplated in the ATAP work, cannot be realised. This reflects funding pressures on the NLTF and the inability of Auckland Council to raise sufficient local share. . More recently, Auckland Council have proposed savings to address the current million budget shortfall. These proposed cuts include: million of operating savings for Auckland Transport, made up of: o million increased projected revenue resulting from the decision of the Auckland Transport Board on December to increase public transport fares by . per cent this financial year o million reduction in Auckland Council operating funding provided to Auckland Transport. The current number of public transport services (as of December ) will be maintained for , but this may lead to passenger overcrowding . . Auckland Council have also agreed to consult on reprioritising the Climate Action Targeted Rate (CATR) funding to fund existing bus services as compared to some of the new bus services originally planned, new electric buses and ferries, and improved cycling and walking connections . Capital programme changes . Cost pressures, Covidrelated delays and less thanexpected revenue led to Auckland Council agree ing to rephase Auckland Transports capital programme in June (see Table ). This released additional operational funding by delaying some of Auckland Transports capital projects planned between and . The operating expenditure is supporting public transport services in light of decreased passenger revenue. . KiwiRail rephased its capital programme in late in response to cost pressures and delay s (OC refers). They have also submitted claims through the Treasury led Centralised Cost Escalation process. Decisions taken by Cabinet will be communicated to the KiwiRail Board in the early to mid . The projects to be
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of . Please review the responses and provide feedback to the Ministry if changes are needed. The Ministry will work with your office t o make any amendments. Hearing before the Transport and Infrastructure Committee . The for your attendance with the Committee for the Estimates hearing for Vote Transport is yet to be finalised. . The Ministry will provide you with a briefing pa ck to support your attendance. The pack will contain speech notes for your opening comments, information on the Committee members, and up toinformation (including some possible questions and answers) on topics we believe the Committee may want to que stion you about. . We would like to discuss attendance at the meeting, including which transport officials you would like to be there. We would also like to discuss what other support you require. Attachment refused under Section (d) as the Standard Estimates responses will soon be available on the Parliament website. https:www.parliament.nz enpbscsclfinanceandexpendituretabsubmissionsandadvice RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Office of Hon Michael Wood MP for Mt Roskill Minister of Immigration Minister of Transport Minister for Auckland Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety Associate Minister of Finance
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Annex Document schedule
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of APPENDIX : HOW THE CAM WORKS
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Operational pressures Public transport patronage . Public transport patronage for the month of December reached per cent of preCovid levels , up from per cent for the month of July and up from per cent for the month of December . While this is positive, Auckland Transports RLTP expected patronage to reach per cent of preC ovid levels by July .
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of APPENDIX : HISTORY OF THE CAM The establishment of the CAM dates to the New Zealand Transport Policy Study which recommended the abolition of regulatory restrictions on the use of trucks in competition with New Zealand Railways and instead proposed the use of pricing to ensure efficient allocation of traffic between the modes. To achieve this, it recommended a cost a llocation study as a basis for the calculation of user charges and the appropriate level of non user contributions. The Officials Committee established to consider and where appropriate implement the Studys recommendations developed proposals for what bec ame the RUC system. The CAM has been subject to several substantive reviews. In the model was to reflect the expansion of the National Road Fund. Later in the CAM was independently reviewed which informed a final report in from an officials Working Group. The group was chaired by the Ministry of Transport and included representatives from Transfund NZ, Transit NZ and The Treasury. o The recommendations from this report were used to develop an Excel spreadsheet an evolution of which is currently used to by the Ministry. o An extensive review in assessed land transport cost allocations. The purpose of this review was to ensure costs were being allocated to road users in an appropriate way. Prior to this RUC licences were self nominated by operators based on the maxim um weight the vehicle could be at any time during the licence. o Recommendations from this review included re evaluations to use related CAM parameters, so ESA measures could properly reflect the uncertainties of attributing the effects of road wear to heavy vehicles. o The review was followed by a review of all engineering assumptions in the CAM by GHDMerrik in . This resulted in a new heavy vehicle parameter being added, along with some other minor changes. As a result of the review NZTA undertook further research into the appropriate way of estimating road damage on different types of pavements and whether the so called fourth power rule was a reasonable assumption for the rate at which road damage increases with axle weight. This research concluded that while a lower power may be appropriate for some roads (typically new State highways built to a high standard) and higher for others (local roads built to a poor standard), the fourth power continues to represent a reasonable average. The CAM is broadly consistent with methodology used overseas, which has developed over similar timeframes. o A similar method is currently used in Australia for calculation of annual licensing fees for heavy vehicles. Their model is based on average historical cost in terms of road investment and uses similar cost drivers for allocating costs between different heavy vehicle types as used in our CAM. o Weight related costs are allocated using the fourth power rule. This rule is based on historical research from New Zealand, South Africa and the USA, and is widely accepted as a rule of thumb for road design. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT WIDER COLLABORATION WITHIN THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT WIDER COLLABORATION WITHIN THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT , Te Kiwanatanga o Aotearoa New Zealand Government
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT , Te Kiwanatanga o Aotearoa New Zealand Government Briefing to the Incoming Minister (System) He pepa whakamhiotanga m te Minita Ministry of Transport Te Manat Waka November RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TE MANATU WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT CONTENTS
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT , Te Kiwanatanga o Aotearoa New Zealand Government He pepa whakamhiotanga m te Minita Briefing to the Incoming Minister (System) Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport October RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TE MANATU WAKA p MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT CONTENTS
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT A nn Minister of Consults and notifies Shareholding Advises Transport subsequent approval Ministers whether it RNIPshould be approved Submits for approval L,, i Rail Network New Zealand Investment Approves Transport Agency Programme RNIP (or (NZTA) Provides requests for review (RNIP) variation) Develops KiwiRail Kiwi Rail is required to prepare an RNIP every three financial yea rs under the Land Transport Management Act
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Document Ministry of Transport: Management Structure Responsibilities Group DCE EA DirectorManager Team Responsibilit ies Name Performance Chief of HanLing Transport Support to the Minister of Staff: Petredean Private Transport Governance Brent f ()(a) I Secretary Daytoday oversight of Johnston (Lead) transport private secretaries scnaiHilary Penman Ministerial Corporate Accountability, r(Ra) I Executive Planning and Reporting Services Ministerial and Official Director: Correspondence Helen White I Daniel Cruden Revenue Time of Use Charging ()(a) fActing) Tolling (RaJ I EA: Matt Skinner RUC Transition Fleetwide Transition to RUC Nicole Rose gceai I s ()(a) I Matt Skinner Funding NZTA Regulatory Funding r.ctig) Reviews Review ()(a) I CAA Phase Review Director Kaupapa Maori Currently vacant Sector DCE: Paul Jo Heard Safety Drug Driving (introduction of Strategy OConnell I fna I Oral Fluid Testing) ()(a) I Review of Driver Licensing system Director: Road Safety Penalties Review Chris Nees Alcohol Interlocks Review I r)ca, Joanne Leung Economics Economic analysis and support EA: f()aJ to policy teams, including cost Anna benefit analysis. Northcott Dan Jenkins National Maintenance and developme nt f()aJ I f((a) Transport of the strategic national land Modelling transport model (Monty) used for modelling movements on the land transport network for policy and investment decision making (e.g. tolling reform, funding and financing work) Roselle Thoreau Insights Household travel survey rrcRaJ I Analytics Modelling and data reporting e.g. safety statistics, vehicle fleet modelling, emissions modelling TessaAvso n Strategic fCRfY(IVJ I f ()(a) I Priorities Long term insights briefing Temporary traffic management policy and operational review RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Transport sector performance reporting Katrina Regulatory Transport Rules Reform Quickenden Reform Programme f()(a) I Vehicle Regulatory Reform Anti social road users Investment DCE: David Richard Cross Director Auckland City Rail Link Monitoring Wood i ()(a) I Auckland Level Crossings fff()(a) I Karen Llons Director Transport Governance Reform (J(a) Auckland in Auckland Director: Waitemata Harbour Connection Richard Reporting on Auckland Cross transport programme, including s(J(a) Northwestern Rapid Transit and EA: Natalia Eastern Busway Waiker Coordination and overview of ls(T(a Auckland work Bev Driscoll Rail Rail Network Investmen t ()(a) I Programme (JfJ IV) Metropolitan Rail Operating Model Review Bryan Field Programme Chathams Vessel Replacement ;(J(a) I Monitoring Lower North Island Integrated Investment Rail Mobility Managemen t Joint Venture Airports Auckland Light Rail disestablishmen t Monitoring of the implementation of GPS and the Performance and Efficiency Plan (PEP) Mark Hodge Transport )(,(ii ), s g()(fJ(iv J f(J(a, I Financing Tim Herbert Crown Entity Crown Entity Monitoring and (Acting) Liz Monitoring performance advice Anderson from Board Appointments February. f(J(a) I Tim Herbert Investment Budget r(J(a) I GPS Tenyear Investment Plan Section bids RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Policy DCE: Ruth Liz Anderson (to Urban RMA Fairhall Jan) Development r(Jf(iv) f(Ra) I Genevieve Public Woodall (from Transport Satellite February) Total mobility rf. m, rrtRaJ I Marian Willberg Maritime Cook Strait ferries rrtRaJ I Freight Coastal shipping resilience fund Director: Maritime legislative reform Siobhan Routledge Natasha Rave Resilience Transport Response Team f(RaJ I Security Aviation Security, incl AVSEC )() I reforms EA: Michelle Emergency Ocean Response Dawson Nick Paterson Environment ERP Transport Implementation f((a) I f(Ja I Clean car importer standard Electric vehicles coinvestment model International aviation and maritime emissions Tom Forster Aviation Alliance agreements ()(a) I Interim Aviation Council Aviation Rules Programme Advanced aviation Erin Wynne Regulatory CAA Decision Independent f(Rai I Operations Review process Aviation operational approvals Regulatory advice and approvals Gary Tonkin (fixed Civil Aviation term to June) Act f(RaJ I lmplementatio n Corporate DCE: Sarah Davies NZ Search and As per team title Services Carmen Mak f()(a) I Rescue sRai(NZSAR) Secretariat Matthew Green Legal EA: Megan f()) I Procurement De Roo Penelope Leith Finance sRaJ I f(J(a) I I Richard Kelly Business (RaJ I Enablement Support Suzanne Communicatio Cookson ns rrtRaJ I Engagement Suzanne Human Williams Resources faJ I
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Inclusive Access Enabling all people to participate in society through access to social and economic opportunities, such as work, education and healthcare of jobs are accessible by public transport compared to of jobs accessible by car within minutes during weekday morning peak () . of people in Auckland, . of people in Wellington and . of people in Christchurch have access to frequent public transport services. ( Economic Prosperity Supporting economic activity via local, regional and international connections, with efficient movement of people and freight . of freight trains arriving on time (within inutes : of domestic freight was moved by road and by rail () Resilience and Security Minimising and managing risks from natural and humanmade hazards, anticipating and adapting to emerging trends, and recovering effectively from disruptive events Out of the total ,km of key social and economic corridors across the country, l,.km) have viable alternative routes. The result is lower in the South Island compared with the North Island. () Infrastructure assets ,km state highways ,km local roads Xxkm Dedicated bus lanes ,km track in rail network Xxkm separated cycleways Xxkm footpaths Healthy and Safe People Protecting people from transport related injuries and harmful pollution, and making active travel an attractive option Transport (largely diesel vehicles) is responsible two thirds of the harm caused by air pollution. This causes: , premature deaths for adult New Zealanders , hospital admissions for respiratory and cardiac illnesses , cases of childhood asthma social costs of . billion Fatalities () Road: deaths Rail: deaths Maritime: recreational deaths, commercial Environmental Sustainability Transitioning to netzero carbon emissions and maintain or improving biodiversity, water quality, and air quality ifransport accounted for . of total gross domestic GHG emissions Road emissions made up . of total transport emissions ransport CO emissions are from: Light passenger vehicles Heavy vehicles light commercial vehicles Vehicle Fleet There are over . million vehicles in the fleet, equating to vehicles per people, or xx vehicles per full driver licences of fleet is light passenger vehicles are fossil fuel powered are hybrid or plugin hybrid are electric of fleet is light commercial vehicles of fleet is heavy vehicles SHAPING OUR TRANSPORT SYSTEM
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Main sourc,es Fu Excise Duty ( b Roacl User Charges ,(b) Motor Ve hide Rego (:. )) Ta ,eted Ge er,a Ra es (.b) Dev,e oper Co ributions (b) :as r s fares pai:d ( b Rail eratofS Track User Charges Taxpayers lhe Governmen t can use general funding to support the delivery of programmes or projects This fllCI tides, for example: Contributions to Rail Pl an NZ Upgirade Pmgrn mme , Prov ncial Growih Fund Climate E:mergen cy Response Fund (CERF) Ma:jo r aclivities lilnd Tport f State Iighways) Ro:ad polici Loral roads PublDc transport Emissions Reduction lnitiatlves Major proe . ts Widrer go,v.emment pormes Iii e,g Sup.erGOld concess:on) THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT DELIVERING YOUR PRIORITIES UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
RESTRI CTED Cabinet papers led by other agencies
RESTRI CTED AvSec Taskforce update The FIFA Womens World Cups impact on Aviation Security screening points is being monitored to enable prompt resolution in the event of any issues. An Authoritys Aviation Security Queues Taskforce (Taskforce) was established on June to address unacceptable queues , to consider solutions and address any roadblocks for queues management, alongside existing strategies and actions in our work plan. Regular updates from the Taskforce have been provided in recent Ministerial updates and the Taskforces work continues. Regular stakeholder updates have received positive feedback and has set a foundation for further constructive discussion and consultation. The focus of the Taskforce has shifted from quick wins identified in early workshops, to medium and long term initiatives including queue monitoring technology, operating procedures, and ongoing passenger education. As such, updates will be reduced to an as needed basis.
RESTRI CTED New IMO secretary general The International Maritime Organizations (IMO) Council last week elected Arsenio Dominguez (Panama) as its next Secretary General. Mr Dominguez has a long history with the IMO, initially as a Panamanian representative ( ) then as a senior manager in the secretariat, through to his current role as Director Maritime Environment Division. Mr Dominguez has campaigned on a desire to bring solutions from day one and promising greater impartiality and transparency. Immediately after the election he was quoted as saying Im not afraid of disturbing things a little bit to actually get change. Mr Dominguez has also indicated a desire to build the capability and capacity of the secretariat addressing long standing issues of morale and retention. There were six candidates for the role taking vot ing to four knock out rounds. Support for candidates from China, Kenya and Dominica largely transferred to Mr Dominguez as they were knocked out. The final round saw support Dominguez, support the Turkish candidate and support the Finnish candidate. Maritime NZ Board satisfied with progress over past year Progress on our organisational strategy was acknowledged at the July Board meeting, celebrating our achievements despite challenges in the past year. It was fitting with Matariki to reflect and celebrate and think about future aspirations with our Board. We also discussed our key enterprise risks and the Funding Review with our Board and the Audit and Risk Committee at their July meetings. Highlights of the past year include: the work of our new maritime inspections team our improvements to timeliness and clearing licensing backlogs our new harm prevention programmes in partnership with the sector our Weaving the Cloak work (including work on Te Ao Mori, diversity and inclusion, sustainability, connection, much of which did not exist a year ago) the release of our new vision, outcomes, principles and values our responses to a number of events, such as the Shiling vessel , and playing a crucial role in the East Coast flooding response, which we have managed well and also gained valuable insights from. s (a) s (a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending July
RESTRI CTED Upcoming communications and engagement Planned releasepublish What Type Why July August Make time to make it in time Digital campaign social Educate passengers about what to expect at airport security, including allowing enough time to avoid queues. July August Make time to make it in time Digital campaign advertising Display and search advertising to educate passengers about what to expect at airport security, including allowing enough time to avoid queues. Targeting will include FIFA world cup spectators. July September (multiple dates) Airworthiness and maintenance Face toface workshop with industry Education for owners and operators to increase their understanding of the requirements for maintaining their aircraft . July December (multiple dates) Dangerous Goods (DG) Face toface course for industry To provide training and qualification for the carriage of DG . From mid July All stories from Vector Winter issue Vector Online articles Ongoing education by putting some Vector articles online for anyone to access . August How to be a pilot junior GAP booklet (new version of existing booklet) Business as usual (BAU) version update. September Vector Spring Issue Aviation industry magazine A way of getting relevant information to industry in an easy toread format . October Vector special issue: accidents that have common causes Aviation industry magazine To highlight the most common causes of fatal accidents that safety investigators go to. TBC Weight and balance GAP booklet (new version of existing booklet) BAU version update. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending July
RESTRICTED July Breakfast Interview regarding pilot licensing requirements features Aviation NZ, Ardmore Flying School, Air Milford
RESTRICTED Transport Crown entity and state owned entity (SOE) updates
RESTRICTED Communications and External Engagement August Media plan days from Sunday August Nil Media mentions days to Wednesday August Activity Channel August Live shot gun cartridge found in overhead cabin locker on Air NZ aircraft raises concern about aviation The journalist received a tip about this case from an airline crew member. Aviation Security Service was approached for information and confirmed that a live shotgun cartridge was found in an overhead locker on July . The investigation did not determine how the cartridge got onto the aircraft, how long it had been there, or whether it had passed through security screening. Our response explained the procedure, that it is highly unlikely that the single cartridge fell out of a bag with multiple cartridges, and that the most likely scenario is that it was in a hunters jacket pocket, and fell out in the overhead locker. New Zealand Airline P ilots Association President Andrew McKeen was quoted in the article as foll ows, Thats our argument with Avsec, we have to go through all these things, but they cant find a cartridge in a passengers carry on bag. In the months to August there were instances where live rounds of ammunition were removed from bags none of these were determined to be deliberately concealed. This data was also provided and included in the article. Stuff August Invercargill Airport to manage Milfords new aerodrome status CAA is mentioned briefly in regard to the certification of the aerodrome. NBR (paywalled August Christchurch drone expert calls for greater public tolerance Experienced drone operator and trainer John Moss is advocating for more understanding and open mindedness from the public towards the small flying machines, in response to feedback drone operators receive , and comments on social media about shooting down drones. Star News (Canterbury)
RESTRICTED Contents Actions from transport officials meeting . Upcoming briefings . Key priorities . Cabinet papers . Cabinet papers led by other agencies . Transport Crown entity and state owned entity (SOE) updates .
RESTRICTED Activity Channel August Hospital drone yet to get off the ground A drone operation between the Australian company Swoop Aero and Te Whatu Ora in the West Coast, which was to start early this year, has yet to beg in as an application has not been made to the CAA. Greymouth Star August Any necessary measures: How airline crew handle potentially dangerous passengers In response to the Malaysian Airlines bomb threat incident on August , we provided comment yesterday about disruptive or unruly passengers on flights. The article had input from the Flight Attendants Association of New Zealand about when and why a plane might be diverted, and how airlines deal with disruptive or unruly passengers. We provided information about unruly passenger offences under the Civil Aviation Act, and the right to restrain passengers under the Civil Aviation Crimes Act. Stuff Upcoming communications and engagement Planned releasepublish What Type Why August September Becoming a licensed aircraft maintenance engineer . GAP booklet (new version of existing booklet) . Minor update and then reprint . July September (multiple dates) Airworthiness and maintenance . Face toface workshop with industry . Education for owners and operators to increase their understanding of the requirements for maintaining their aircraft . September Vector Spring Issue . Aviation industry magazine. A way of getting relevant information to industry in an easy toread format .
RESTRICTED Dry Dock Kaiarahi has arrived in Singapore for its scheduled dry dock from August , and is now in day of the docking. It will be in dry dock for days, before returning to New Zealand. We have been impressed with how quickly the dockyard have sprung into action with work both inside and outside of the vessel now well under way. This is scheduled maintenance, and is key to KiwiRails programme to lift service reliability for the existing Interislander fleet. Dry docks are scheduled outside of the peak seasons as the remaining fleet is able to meet demand.
RESTRICTED FREIGHT Kmart have this month opened their new Distribution Centre at the Ruakura Freight Hub. Kmart have confirmed that KiwiRail (in partnership with Nexus, Ruakura Inland Port, the Ports of Auckland, and Tauranga) will move their import containers on rail to their distribution centres around the coun try. This is a five year initial commercial agreement , with approximately , truck movements removed from the roading network. The transition to rail will begin in September . INTERISLANDER Kaitaki Incident On August , the .pm sailing of the Kaitaki returned to Wellington after developing software issues in the steering system just outside of the Wellington Heads. The ship did not lose steering control at any time, with full control maintained through the first of two backup sys tems. However, using an appropriately cautious approach, the ships master decided to return to Wellington and also not to berth at Kaiwharawhara without being guided by tugs. This was a safe and sensible decision. Unfortunately, the tugs were not available until around am the following morning so passengers were forced to remain onboard overnight. There were passengers onboard, primarily commercial vehicle drivers. Each was provided a cabin for the night. Maritime New Zealand were advised of the incident. The steering issue was due to a computer software fault, with the software that controls open sea sailing not working as it should. The Kaitaki has three levels of steering backup, and the second level kicked in as it should. We stress that at no point was there a loss of control of the vessel the decision to turn back to Wellington was about caution and ensuring safety. There have been no issues with the steering software previously (it was upgraded a few years ago), and Interislander is working with the manufacturer to investigate why it occurred. An external specialist software technician from Sperry, the equipment supplier used in the Kaitaki navigation system, boarded Kaitaki on the morning of August when she was able to berth, and promptly resolved the software issue. The technician found the auto pilot system settings required adjustment. Out of precaution he also replaced the main electronic control board in the system that evening on return to Wellington. There have been no problems since, and no further issues are expected. We are sorry for the impact this has had on our freight customers and private passengers , however safety has to be our priority in these situations. Aratere Between August , Aratere was out of service to undergo remediation work on the Megastar, the ships power management system. This is complex work, and significant effort was made to ensure the work was completed in a timely fashion over the weekend, to ensure she returned to service promptly. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
RESTRICTED IREX UPDATE Terminals update In Waitohi Picton we are offering accommodation to a group of residents who we know will be disrupted by night works happening nearby on August . We continue to have a communications presence in the community with Downer HEB JV holding a coffee drop in session on August . The first of what will be ongoing cultural inductions for workers joining the project was hosted by our Mana Whenua partners , Te tiawa o te Waka a Mui Trust Te Atiawa at Wakaiwa Marae in the week ending August . At Kaiwharawhara, the Downer HEB JV team are starting geotechnical investigations in the week ending August to evaluate the current ground conditions prior to ground improvement works starting. They are coordinating with Interislander operations to minimise disruptions to ferry loadings and unloadings. A wnanga (workshop) on the project is organised for August . This is being led by our Wellington Mana Whenua partners , Taranaki Whnui Ki Te Upoko o Te Ika and Ngti Toa Rangatira. MAJOR PROJECTS DrurySouthern Stations On August KiwiRail will be hosting the Prime Minister, Rt Hon Chris Hipkins, the Minister of Transport, Hon David Parker and other officials and media at the Drury Station site for their announcement of the Government Policy Statement for Land Transport. The event will be held in collaboration with Waka Kotahi, who are holding the speeches and media stand up at its Drury Interchange site. NETWORK UPDATE Auckland Network Signalling issue On August , an issue relating to an axel counter which was not working properly caused delays to commuter services across Auckland. For two days the system in the area experienced intermittent failures. The counter, which is attached to the tracks, is integral to the safe operation of the signals system by registering that a train is in a particular section of line. KiwiRail teams investigated the issue once we had access to the Parnell Tunnel overnight to enable detailed diagnostics to be carried out. The failure was resolved in time for the morning peak on August . While peak services normally operate at minute intervals, Auckland One Rail ran services across the network at minute intervals, with Onehunga Penrose services running at minute intervals. In addition, Western Line services stopped at Newmarket, Manukau services at Otahuhu and Onehunga Line services at Penrose , which required commuters to change trains. We regret the disruption to commuters. FIFA Womens World Cup With the final whistle of the Spain vs Sweden match marking the end of the matches in New Zealand, KiwiRail can be proud of its efforts in getting fans to the games. KiwiRail worked closely with Auckland Transport, Wellingtons Metlink, Auckland One Rail and Transdev to plan and prepare for the FIFA Womens World Cup (FIFA) . PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
RESTRICTED Page of Regulatory Impact Statement National security considerations within the civil aviation regime Agency Disclosure Statement . The Ministry of Transport has prepared this Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS). It analyses options to provide a regime to address risks to national security arising from civil aviation activities. This RIS accompanies the Cabinet paper entitled Review of the Civil Aviation Act and Airport Authorities Act: Key Policy Decisions . . We identified the need for this legislation during the drafting of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill. During the development of the space and high altitude regulatory regime, we became aware of a range of technologies being developed to perform similar functions to satellites. These technologies could be used in New Zealands airspace . This includes earth observation, internet connectivity and surveillance activities. . The Civil Aviation Act provides sufficient powers to regulate aviation safety and security (in relation to risks to safety from the carriage of dangerous goods and the risk to aviation security by unlawful interference with an aircraft). However, the CA Act does not provide sufficient powers to mitigate the risk of certain technologies from being used in a way that poses a threat to New Zealands national security. . The preferred option in this RIS is to amend the Civil Aviation Act (through the Civil Aviation Reform Bill), to include national security considerations. This will provide the foundations in primary legislation to address this regulatory gap. It is possible that Civil Aviation Rules will be necessary to fully implement the proposal. These will be developed (if necessary) following the passage of the Civil Aviation Reform Bill. . Consultation has been undertaken with interested government departments but not publically. Consultation with the wider public and aviation industry will take place when the Civil Aviation Reform Bill is before the Select Committee.
RESTRICTED Page of Status quo . The CA Act and Civil Aviation Rules regulate aviation safety and security including (but not limited to) personal security. Security in this context relates to civil aviation security. This is relatively narrow in scope only covering safety risks arising from the carriage of dangerous goods and the risk to aviation security by unlawful interference with an aircraft. . Since the September terrorist attacks on the United States, global aviation security concerns have broadened to include: .. using civil aircraft for the purpose of causing death, serious bodily injury or serious damage .. using aircraft for surveillance or information gathering under circumstances that may give rise to national security or privacy concerns .. using civil aircraft for the delivery or any nuclear, biological or chemical (NBC) weapon for the release of any biological, chemical or radiological (BCR ) agent in a manner intended to cause death, serious bodily injury or serious damage or prolonged denial of access to an area .. using any biological, chemical, radiological or similarly hazardous substance on board or against civil aircraft .. the unlawful transport of any NBC weapon or BCR agent or similarly hazardous substances .. the possibility that New Zealand may be used as a development or testing environment for an aircraft of any type where there is a risk that it may be used for any of the above purposes relating to NBC weapons or BCR agents .. cyber attacks on air navigation facilities and aircraft operating systems. Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill . The Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill will be introduced in September . The imminent commencement of space launches in New Zealand by a company, Rocket Lab, has precipitated the need for this legislation. During the development of this legislation, officials identified that there is a wide range of technologies being developed to operate at very high altitudes that perform similar functions to satellites. This includes earth observation, internet connectivity and surveillance activities . . In order to futureproof the space activ ities regime for developments in technology, and to ensure that different technologies providing similar applications and services are treated consistently, the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill proposes that activities taking place at high altitude (near space) be brought within the scope of the space regime.
RESTRICTED Page of . High altitude activities are those activities taking place above controlled airspace (i.e. above , feet or approximately km from the ground). People operating a high altitude vehicle in this area will require a licence. . The Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill proposes a process to address any national security risks associated with activities taking place above New Zealands controlled airspace. Civil Aviation Act and national security . There is the potential for the range of technologies being developed to operate at high altitudes, to also operate in lower regions of New Zealands airspace. Problem definition . There is the potential for aircraft to carry and use certain technologies (e.g. remote sensing, communications, surveillance and navigation technologies) that, in the wrong hands, may pose a threat to New Zealands national security. ..
RESTRICTED Page of costs for industry and costs on government, and is consistent (where appropriate) with the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill. Options . The following options were considered to address the problem: .. Option one: status quo .. Option two : develop a standalone national security legislation to address the national security issues. .. Option three: amend the Civil Aviation Act to replicate the national security requirements for high altitude activities (as expressed in Part subpart of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill) . A national security check would be a requirement to operate in the aviation system (albeit with provision to exempt certain types of operationspersons ). .. Option four (preferred option): amend the Civil Aviation Act to include national security considerations but not make it a requirement to obtain a national security check to operate in the aviation system . National security considerations could be reflected in the Civil Aviation Act in the following ways: in the purpose statement providing the Minister of Transport with the ability to make Civil Aviation Rules relating to national security providing the Director of Civil Aviation (the Director) with the ability to make emergency rules relating to national security providing the Director with the ability to revoke, suspend or impose conditions on an opera tors certificate on the advice of the Minister Responsible for the Government Communications Security Bureau or the Minister in Charge of the New Zealan d Security Intelligence Service providing a right of appeal to the InspectorGeneral of Intelligence and Security in relation to advice given by the NZSIS and GCBS. A high altitude licence is required if a person intends to operate a high altitude vehicle from New Zealand, that is capable of travelling, or intended to travel above controlled airspace. Based on similar process relating to security check determinations in section G of the Civil Aviation Act. RESTRICTED Page of . The status quo does not meet the policy objectives. The existing regulatory gap would be maintained; meaning risks to national security cannot be effectively managed. Assuming the passage of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill, there would also be inconsistent regulatory treatment of similar activities, from a national security perspective. . We have ruled out option two on the basis that protecting New Zealands national security is just one of a suite of objectives that are relevant to civil aviation activities and it is not efficient from a regulatory perspective to design a standalone regulatory tool to achieve this objective. . We have assessed options three and four against the following criteria: Regulatory efficiency. Technology neutrality different technologies offering similar functions should be regulated consistently. Regulatory effectiveness the identified risks are appropriately addressed. . Options three and four appear similar in terms of regulatory effectiveness and technology neutrality. . Option three does not meet the regulatory efficiency criterion. A process similar to the high altitude licence regime (whereby most participants would need to undergo a national security check) is not practical. There are , licensed individuals, certificated organisations and licensed aircraft in the aviation system. Requiring most of them to undergo a national security check would be a disproportionate response to the problem, and would create a lot of work for the NZSIS and GCBS. . We considered whether the CA Act could stipulate that activities using certain types of technology (e.g. remote sensing, communications, surveillance and navigations technologies) would require operators to undergo a national security check. However, many aircraft use these kinds of technology in normal operation. It would be very difficult to distinguish use that may pose a risk to national security. If such a distinction in how technology is used could be specified, civil aviation rules could be developed to require a national security assessment along the lines of the high altitude licence requirements in the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill. . Option four is the preferred option. .. It addresses the regulatory gap that prevents the New Zealand government from considering national security risks in the civil aviation regime. Figures from CAA Annual Report for . Withheld for security reasons
RESTRICTED Page of .. It would make it possible to align the civil aviation regime with the high altitude activities regime as expressed in the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill. Impacts Government . The government security community may in the future need to provide advice on whether an operation has national security implications. Close collaboration between the Ministry of Transport, CAA and the security community, would ensure any requests could be closely monitored. Aviation participants . An operation or operator will be impacted where the government security community has provided advice to the Director. The impact will depend on the specific situation. It may mean that conditions are imposed on an operation, an operation may be suspended or if the risk is considered unmanageable, an operators aviation document may be revoked. . If civil aviation rules are developed to place national security requirements on certain types of operations, aviation participants undertaking certain activities using certain types of technology may be required to undergo a national security check. We do not anticipate the number of affected participants to be large. The impact will be assessed in development of the rule. . Aligning civil aviation regulation with the requirements of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill could reduce uncertainty or complexity for operators who may be subject to both regimes. For example, the Civil Aviation Act or Rules could provide that an operator who already held a High Altitude Licence, and had already undergone a national security and national interest assessment, would not require a further national security assessment to operate in civil aviation. Consultati on . The Ministry has discussed this issue with the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet and government security community and they agree with the proposal. Consultation with the wider public and aviation industry will take place through the Select Committee process. Conclusions and recommendation .Withheld for security reasons
RESTRICTED Page of . The proposal to include the ability to consider issues of national security in the Civil Aviation Act addresses this problem. It enables regulatory efficiency, effectiveness and provides some consistency in how different technologies offering similar functions are regulated, regardless of where in New Zealands airspace they are operating. Implementation . The legislative changes proposed in this RIS (subject to Cabinet approval) will be progressed as part of a Civil Aviation Reform Bill. An implementation plan will be developed for the Bill. . In addition to the implementation plan associated with the Civil Aviation Reform Bill, officials from the Ministry of Transport , Civil Aviation Authority, Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, NZSIS and GCSB, will continue to engage to resolve any outstanding policy issues, and issues of legislative design. . We need to assess whether changes to Civil Aviation Rules are necessary to support the provisions in primary legislation. If rules are necessary, these will be developed following the passage of the Civil Aviation Reform Bill, through the normal Transport Rules Programme. Monitoring, evaluation and review . There will be a review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act three years after its enactment. This will provide an opportunity to ensure harmonisation between the two regulatory regimes.
RESTRICTED Performance On Time Performance and sailings have been affected by weather events and the Kaitaki disruption. The below shows the trend data for OTP and reliability:
RESTRICTED Planned releasepublish What Type Why September November (multiple dates) Plane Talking. Face toface workshop. This series of seminars, as part of the Work Together, Stay Apart campaign, serves the aerodrome communities and will be held in aero clubs and flying schools throughout New Zealand. There are dates in total. September Plane Talking. GAP booklet (new version of existing booklet) . To educate the aerodrome community about standard radio calls. This video is the first educational product to be released as part of the Work Together, Stay Apart campaign. July December (multiple dates) Dangerous Goods (DG). Face toface course for industry . To provide training and qualification for the carriage of DG . October Weight and balance. GAP booklet (new version of existing booklet) . Business As U sual (BAU) version update. October Vector special issue: accidents that have common causes . Aviation industry magazine. To highlight the most common causes of fatal accidents that safety investigators go to. TBC In, Out and Around Queenstown, Christchurch and Manawatu editions . GAP booklet (new version of existing booklet) . BAU version update.
RESTRICTED Planned releasepublish What Type Why TBC In, Out and Around Queenstown. GAP booklet (new version of existing booklet) BAU version update. TBC In, Out and Around Christchurch GAP booklet (new version of existing booklet) BAU version update. TBC In, Out and Around Manawatu GAP booklet (new version of existing booklet) BAU version update.
RESTRICTED Ports of Auckland plead guilty to stevedore death charges On August , Ports of Auckland Limited (POAL) pled guilty to two charges filed by Maritime NZ under s of the Health and Safety at Work Act , following the death of Palaamo Kalati, a stevedore , on August . The two charges relate to the company failing to comply with its health and safety duties, and exposing workers to the risk of death or serious injury. Two other charges for reckless and adverse conduct by POAL were withdrawn by Maritime NZ. The sentencing for Ports of Auckland will be on December . Proceedings against POALs former chief executive officer, Anthony Gibson, are ongoing. Maritime in the media Last week, the Transport Accident Investigation Commission released its findings about the Enchanter , the fishing charter vessel that capsized in March . As the matter is currently before the courts, we did not undertake any interviews. Instead we provided a proactive media statement, which was widely reported by media. Our statement talked about issues raised about vessel surveyors , and included comments from the Rescue Coordination Center New Zealand that it would be interested in any recommendations for improvements to the S earch and R escue sector. Maritime NZ will be included as part of a Fair Go piece about a boating accident in Southland in July (see report item above for more details) .
RESTRICTED Prior to special event services running on Aucklands Eastern Line on FIFA game days, our Rail Network teams worked hard to re connect the tracks affected by the Rail Network Rebuild and get it up to standard for passenger trains. To ensure fans travel to and from the games at Eden Park went smoothly, Auckland Metro teams supported Auckland One Rail and Auckland Transport with dedicated special event infrastructure management and response teams covering track, signals, traction and protection. Their first call out came only an hour before the opening ceremony on July after a bus broke down on a level crossing at Morningside, next to Eden Park. While directing traffic around the incident , the team via the bus companys radio on board, with their control room mechanic managed to move the bus off the crossing, minimising delays to road users and rail passengers eager to get to the opening ceremony on time. The team sprung into action again on July , when a slip on the line near Parnell Station threaten to disrupt travel to the U nited States of A merica vs Vietnam game. In Wellington, aside from some minimal Wairarapa Line re railing works during the day when interpeak services werent running, KiwiRail project and maintenance works across the network were put on hold between July August to make sure people could travel smoothly to and from the matches. Greater Wellington Regional Council (Metlink) and Transdev, who run the passenger trains, have worked hard to support the World Cup. For every one of the nine games played in Wellington, Metlink allowed for an extra capacity of about , passengers on its services almost doubling capacity. Funding for Auckland Rail Network Rebuild (RNR) As you have been advised previously, we are waiting on the funding recommendation from Waka Kotahi following its Board meeting on August . We have been asked by media about the availability of funding for the RNR works following comment by Auckland Transport that there was insufficient funding to complete the works. In our response we have noted that one of the key focuses of the RNR is replacing the formation, the rock foundation that can be a metre under the tracks. The exact amount of formation that needs to be replaced and the amount of civil work required to achieve this was always subject to confirmation once physical works commenced and the below ground condition could be fully determined. The outcome of RNR work in the areas completed so far has resulted in more extensive formation replacement than our geotechnical investigations predicted, which has resulted in significant funding pressure. s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
RESTRICTED Public Consultation on Maritime and Oil Pollution Levies The public consultation on Maritime Levies and Oil Pollution Levies is now closed. The levies rates changes proposed in this funding review are consistent with a return to full cost recovery from July , as Cabinet has directed. Putting these changes in place from July would remove the need for further Crown liquidity funding. During the consultation, we held two webinars covering the proposals in the consultation document , and the recordings of these are on our website. We also shared the Frequently Asked Questions received from the webinars and email queries to ensure equitable access to the same information. We received approximately submissions. Our next steps will include analysing the submissions (including identifying themes and assessment of all feedback) and based on that, preparing final recommendations on regulatory changes. The Ministry will also participate in this process. Within the next few weeks we will meet with the Oil Pollution Advisory Committee (OPAC) on any recommended changes to the Oil Pollution Levies methodology and rates. Under the Maritime Transport Act there must be cons ultation with OPAC ahead of advising the Minister on the imposition of, and the rate or rates of oil pollution levies. We will then prepare and present the Cost Recovery Impact Statement (CRIS) to the Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA) panel, organised by the Ministry . This ensures the impact analysis meets the quality assurance criteria before a Cabinet paper is drafted. We expect to complete the CRIS process by the end of October . Upcoming item on TVNZ s Fair Go In the week ending August , Maritime NZ was contacted by Environment Southland about a story being undertaken by Fair Go. The current affairs programme was approached by a family that asked it to look into the process around maritime incident investigations following an accident that took place last year. The accident involved members of a family that were in a rowing skiff, which collided with a motorboat. The daughter of the family that contacted Fair Go received facial injuries in the accident. Maritime NZ made initial inquiries, however, the incident was later passed to Environment Southland to investigate as it was a navigational issue and they were best placed to investigate as the local regulator. As a result of the investigation, the motorboats skipper was given a infringement fine. The family considered the fine to be too small given the impact on the family as a result of their daughters injuries. Environment Southland provided a compliance staff member for interview, while Maritime NZ and the Ministry provided statements. Our statement covered work we do assisting Regional councils as the local regulators, our compliance model and the work we did i nitially investigating this incident. The reporter also asked questions around how the amounts for fines are set, and whether there is or is going to be the potential for licensing for skippers of recreational craft. The questions around fines and licensing were handled by the Ministry. To support our statement we also provided information on how we support safer boating initiatives focused on reducing harm , and the rules recreational craft users should be following. The item is expected to air on August .
RESTRICTED Spreading the rail safety message at Sheffield School in Canterbury
RESTRICTED Temporary Speed Restrictions (TSR) Overall, the number of speed restrictions on our network are trending down, leading to better on time performance and fewer network delays. The tables below show the trend for the last six months on our two key metropolitan networks. We are exceeding our target for TSRs for these networks, enabling our commuter partners to run a reliable train service. The two graphs below show the six week trend for the two key metropolitan networks.
RESTRICTED The Board expressed their appreciation for the progress made and our staffs hard work. They are also really pleased and proud of our progress as an organisation and how we all carry out our role each day. In June, the Board appointed Lara Ariell, an Independent Advisor to the Board Audit and Risk Committee, for a month term. Shes the Tumu Whakarae Chief Executive of Education Payroll Ltd, a Crown entity and is a member of Manat Hauora: the Ministry of Healths Risk and Assurance Committee. Laras strong financial background and her experience in senior roles within the public sector, including Chief Financial Officer of Inland Revenue and roles at various other government organisations (Ministry of Social Development, Tertiary Education Commission , Ministry of E ducation , Callaghan Innovation), make her a valuable addition to the team. The Maritime NZ Boards next regional visit to Whangarei in August will involve engaging with local stakeholders and conducting their Board meeting. Maritime New Zealands Rescue Coordination Centre hosts Rescue Aviation Leadership Forum The Rescue Coordination Centre New Zealand (RCCNZ) , in cooperation with the NZSAR Workshop , hosted senior rotary (helicopter) aviation sector leaders from across New Zealand for a two day forum in July . The Forum was well attended and included CEOs, chief operating officers, chief pilots and chief paramedics from key New Zealand aviation operators across the country. Taken together the organisations who attended represented crews and machines who completed over of all rescues coordinated by the RCCNZ. New Zealand Police and the National Ambulance Sector Office also attended. The forum was focused on fostering relationships, improving operational processes associated with the tasking and support of rescue aviation , and agreeing a way forward for the updating of standards and agreements. Excellent feedback was received on the value of this forum and there is a desire to make this a regular activity and further meetings are planned. The immediate focus of the group will be to collaborate on the development of practical and effective Search and Rescue aviation standards. These standards will underpin and drive continued improvement in how we deliver safe and responsive lifesaving services across New Zealand. Maritime in the media On July Maritime NZs Government Services provided three O fficial Information Act responses (OIAs) to reporters from the NZ Herald , TVNZ and The Post . The OIAs were focused on correspondence between Maritime NZ and KiwiRail. The NZ Herald ran an article on July , while by July , Stuff and TVNZ were yet to run any articles. from the NZ Herald had a follow up request which focused on the Valentine, the freight only ferry that KiwiRail is looking to sell. The questions relating to Maritime NZ regarded what deficiencies were identified with the vessel and what an interim certificate was. KiwiRail also received a query from the reporter about the Valentine. Interest is continuing in the Niagara , which sank in the Hauraki Gulf in and still has an indeterminate amount of oil on board. The story has recently been covered by a range of media outlets including Stuff and podcasts. Last week, the Northern Advocate asked for information about previous budget bids and how many times Maritime NZ has responded to oil from the vessel. We provided straightforward responses. A response was also provided by t he Associate Minister of Transport.
RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending July i
RESTRICTED TIRA TUNNEL CENTENARY On August , current and former rail workers joined the local community to celebrate the centenary of the tira Tunnel, which has linked the West Coast to the rest of the South Island for the past years. The tunnel, opened in , travels . kilometres through the Southern Alps, completing the Christchurch to Greymouth rail link. The tunnel remains a vital link on the Midland Line and a gateway to the West Coast. Each week, around trains travel through the tunnel, carrying freight and visitors on TranzAlpine. As part of the commemoration events planned, a special themed TranzAlpine service took guests to tira township and tunnel, alongside speeches, guided walks, lunch, historical displays and celebratory cake, along with live entertainment.
REVISED GOVERNANCE AND LEADERSHIP ARRANGEMENTS Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Recommendations : Implementing the new System Change management process . We note Te Manat Waka will need to be adequately resourced to give effect to its System stewardship role and deliver the functions assigned to it. This will be explored as part of the implementation phase following Ministerial consideration of the Review findings. . We recommend that Te Manat Waka stands up its stewardship capability, finalises the System Strategy including indicators, and implements the proposed new governance arrangements and support structures, in order for the new System to go live in mid . This includes the identification of effectiveness and impact measures and monitoring arrangements associated with its System stewardship role. . The level of change proposed will require Te Manat Waka to work closely with organisations across the System to ensure that they are effectively engaged in the process and that any risks arising within the transition are effectively managed. . Section Eight covers the proposed implementation process. Accountability and reporting arrangements retained . We do not propose any change to the accountability and reporting arrangements for Maritime NZ through its Board and the Minister of Transport, as a result of these changes. These remain unchanged. Nor do we propose any change to the accountability and reporting arrangements of other government agencies involved in the System and their Ministers and Boards (where relevant), except for Sport New Zealand (Sport NZ) as detailed in paragraph below. We note that the relationships between Te Manat Waka as the System Steward and other government agencies in the System (including Maritime NZ) will need to be appropriately managed. Location of the System Steward within government . As part of the Review, we considered where the System stewardship role in government should reside. Our view is that it needs to be close to Ministers and part of the core executive branch of the government through a government department. We observe some System synergies with a number of departments in addition to Te Manat Waka, including: the Department of Internal Affairs, which is the policy lead across government on community and volunteer policy and local government, monitors Fire and Emergency, and has oversight of the Lottery Grants Board the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, given it hosts NEMA (an autonomous Departmental Agency) providing stewardship of the emergency management system. . There is no perfect match. However, Te Manat Waka has a number of critical roles and links into the System which makes it an appropriate home for the System stewardship function. For example, through international obligations and domestic legislation for search and rescue that reside within Te Manat Waka, Maritime NZ and the CAA; Te Manat Wakas current role as the home of the NZSAR Secretariat; existing relationships with a number of System stakeholders; and the role of Maritime NZ (a transport Crown Entity) in the water safety sector and regulatory role for on water activities (and its coregulatory role with regional councils in this regard). . For details of New Zealands international obligations see Appendix . REVISED GOVERNANCE AND LEADERSHIP ARRANGEMENTS Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Implementation Plan System . The System Steward will be required to develop an Implementation Plan for the Strategy in consultation with System participants (and participants in adjacent systems) to achieve strategic outcomes. Its work programme will be prioritised across harm prevention relating to both landbased and waterbased services, and search and rescue. . We expect to see an increase in joint ways of working to support the achievement of the Implementation Plan(s) through: Standing Groups working across the Systems pipeline e.g., data and research, media and communications, and technology, and focused Working Groups engaging on specific timebound issues or opportunities relevant across the System. . Standing Groups and focused Working Groups would be supported and funded by the System Steward. Groups will be led by organisations with the relevant expertise; in some cases, this will be the Steward. . However, despite the System providing a pipeline of safety requiring joint work to achieve the strategic outcomes, this is not the complete picture. We acknowledge the System contains three subsystems water, land, and search and rescue. Each subsystem has distinct issues to tackle, opportunities to explore, and individual actions to take that will also be required to achieve the Systems strategic outcomes. . The Implementation Plan will need to include specific areas of focus relating to each of the subsystems with the responsibility sitting with nationally recognised and mandated organisations within each subsystem. Further work following the Review will confirm how this will work in practice, including roles and responsibilities. However, we share some views below about how this could work. Implementation Plans Subsystems . We envisage the development of Subsystem Implementation Plans (with a fiveyear horizon) with sector participants, led by the recognised national organisation (referred to as a Lead Agency) supported by the Steward. . We reflect that the Lead Agency(ies) will need the right capability and capacity including organisational design, resourcing, and governance to undertake this role; operational policy; a strong sector mandate; appropriate focus to lead and drive the Plan; and close working relationships with partners responsible for delivery activity. The Lead Agency (and sector participants) would be supported by the Steward, especially for activities containing more complex policy issues. . The Lead Agency would be funded to lead the Implementation Plan and enter into funding contracts with others to deliver services to achieve the outcomes in line with prioritised activities. The ability to contract over a period of time would be critical to gauge the success of the service, given services take time for change to start and embed. REVISED GOVERNANCE AND LEADERSHIP ARRANGEMENTS Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue . The NZSAR Secretariat currently operates as the lead national organisation for search and rescue. Given the Secretariats functions will be folded into the Stewards functions, the Steward will retain national strategic coordination for search and rescue. This will also form the basis of the System Stewards work programme reflected in its Business Plan. . Maritime NZ will remain the lead national organisation for on water recreational safety, given its role as the regulatory, compliance and response agency for the safety, security and environmental protection of coastal and inland waterways. . Responsibility for the development and delivery of Implementation Plans for the water (in and around) and the land subsystems will be confirmed during the transition phase. . Within the water safety sector, we recognise the role of Water Safety NZ as the water safety sector lead with responsibility for Wai Ora Aotearoa the New Zealand Water Safety Sector Strategy. However, we observe that there are longstanding tensions and strained relationships across the water safety sector, including with the sector strategy and delivery is challenged by a lack of funding. We recommend working with Water Safety NZ and sector partners to determine what changes are required if it is to be considered as a lead national organisation in the System including the capability and capacity required.. We recommend that oversight of Water Safety NZ transfers from Sport NZ to Te Manat Waka once it has established its System Steward reflecting that System Strategy outcomes are delivered through Water Safety NZ. Sport NZ currently fulfils a monitoring and oversight role in relation to Water Safety NZ from a government perspective. However, this role is due to circumstance rather than design. This monitoring and oversight role does not align well with Sport NZs strategy and areas of focus which relate to supporting increased participation in play, active recreation, and sport rather than oversight of the safety related aspects of participation in activities. . Within the land safety sector, we also observe some tensions, and note there is no one organisation with the capability currently to fulfil the delivery of an Implementation Plan (there is also no land equivalent of the Water Safety Strategy for land). Currently, DOC leads the Land Safety Forum in line with its intermediate outcome that New Zealanders and international visitors are enriched by their connection to New Zealands nature and heritage. While the Mountain Safety Council has a similar structure to Water Safety NZ in a land context, it does not allocate funding. Its areas of focus are limited by its current organisational capacity and mandate. We recommend working with landrelated agencies and sector partners to consider who would be the lead national organisation in the System. . Lead Agencies will be expected to work closely with each other and the System Steward, to ensure alignment between the Lead Agencies, Implementation Plans, and funding (including sources and quantum). . The proposed System design includes a Search and Rescue Operational Standing Group to support compliance with New Zealands international obligations for search and rescue and ensure operational matters across the System and between organisations are well accounted for. Also a Safer Walking Standing Group focused on activities to support, educate, and reduce the risk of people that, potentially or actually, get lost or go missing due to cognitive impairment in New Zealand. REVISED GOVERNANCE AND LEADERSHIP ARRANGEMENTS Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Recommendation : Recreational safety around coastal and inland waterways . Through the Review we were often asked the question who is responsible for recreational safety around coastal and inland waterways for example, beaches, rivers, and lakes. These are hugely popular places for people to hike, swim and fish, but they can also be hazardous. A lack of knowledge and skill about how to stay safe, how to avoid a distressing situation, or know what to do if it does occur, can have serious and sometime devastating consequences. . Through our work we were unable to reach any definitive conclusion on the question above and reflect this is dependent on a range of factors and circumstances. . We believe a national strategic conversation is warranted to identify what changes or opportunities could be pursued nationally to clarify roles and responsibilities and support greater wellbeing outcomes for New Zealanders and visitors who head out to connect, recreate, and operate in and around these spaces. This could include, but is not limited to, the production of a national policy statement or code setting out best practice guidance roles and responsibilities; risk management strategies, tools and services; and funding arrangements. . We recommend that over the next months, Te Manat Waka brings together key representatives from government, local government, iwi and NGOs, to share views on recreational safety around coastal and inland waterways. The work would look to holistically explore: the range of recreational activities that take place in and around coastal and inland waterways, and perspectives on recreational safety risks risk mitigation strategies, tools, interventions, and partnerships at local, regional and national levels, to support people to have the knowledge and skills to head out and head home safe perspectives on roles and responsibilities, including an assessment of the existing regulatory environment and moral and ethical considerations funding arrangements. . We note that there is scope to review the regulatory regime for recreational safety given that the regime could have significant impact on safety outcomes. Te Manat Waka and Maritime NZ have started work to scope the review of maritime legislation, which would cover the recreational safety issues. It will be important to ensure that the regulatory work is wellaligned with the work detailed in paragraph . SECTION HEADING HERE Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue People supporting people
RLTP priorities are summarised on page and include: Maintaining what we have maintenance of existing transport assets maximising efficienciesvalue for money Summary b Page includes an Affordability underpinning objective template, as summarised below. This is broader than value for money but included the concept within the wider affordability objective. Issues : The regional land transport system needs adequate maintenance and development funding. Rising costs, declining national and local revenue and constrained funding have resulted in and will continue to present funding challenges. Objective: An efficient land transport system where collaborative funding options result in optimal delivery of transport outcomes that best meet our communities needs in an affordable way.
RRD). This is a key document as it outlines the information that NZ Infra and Waka Kotahi needed to include in their proposals. It also set out the main outcomes the Government was seeking, and the criteria and weightings we would use in the evaluation. Government, and agencies from central and local government, collaborated to produce the RRD and the outcomes framework.
RUC exemption ends for electric vehicles
RUC for light diesel vehicles, up to . tonnes, increased by around . . For example, it cost about NZD more to drive a diesel car ,km that is, . cents more per kilometre.
RUC for some increased by up to .
RUC invoicing using weigh inmotion scales From Monday September , NZTA will start using the data collected from weigh inmotion scales at our commercial vehicle safety centres to assess heavy vehicles for RUC non compliance.
RUC is a distance charging system that applies to all vehicles using a motive power other than petrol. Owners of vehicles that dont use petrol as their primary fuel, such as diesel cars, and heavy vehicles weighing over . tonnes, such as trucks, buses and some trailers, must pay RUC.
RUC is paid mainly by owners of diesel vehicles and from April by owners of electric vehicles and plugin hybrid vehicles. RUC is purchased from New Zealand Transport Agency Waka Kotahi or approved agents in advance of kilometres travelled.
Rach el Hayward Secretary of the Cabinet Out of Scope Out of Scope PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Rachel Clarke Committee Secretary
Rail Level Crossing Removal Programme
Rail Track User Charge Phase Cost Regulatory Impact Statement
Rail investments of NZD. billion through Budget , and NZD million through Budget , are the first funding instalments in a year investment programme to achieve a resilient and reliable rail system.
Rail is a major contributor to national and regional economic growth. It reduces emissions, congestion, road deaths and injuries, delivers wider social benefits, and provides resilience and connection between communities. Previous investment in New Zealands rail network has only looked at how much was needed to maintain it on an annual basis, which is unsuitable for a longlived strategic asset like rail.
Rail network Upper
Rail projects Region City Rail Link Auckland Wiri To Quay Park Third Main Auckland Papakura To Pukekohe Auckland Drury Rail Stations Auckland Whangarei To Otiria Northland Ashburton Freight Hub Canterbury Lower north island rail improvements (includes new passenger rolling stock for the wairarapa and manawatu lines and related network infrastructure) Wellington Manawat Rail network investment programme freight Nationwide Noncommercial rail investment Nationwide Rolling stock Nationwide
Raise safety standards for vehicles entering the fleet
Raising benefits management maturity will increase the value obtained from change investments and enable the government to in vest more in critical areas.
Raising revenue to invest in land transport
Rangatiratanga Empowering and leading
Rangitata audit and detention On April, Maritime NZ conducted an initial verification audit of the New Zealand flagged general cargo ship, Rangitata . It became apparent that the approved safety management system had not been adequately implemented on the vessel. The audit was suspended, and a short term safety management certificate was issued for three months, with conditions to manage safety and requiring remedial work to be carried out. On June, Maritime NZ auditors returned to complete the audit and found that the vessel had incorrectly piped, and non approved modifications made to the bilge pumping arrangements, which directly affected the safety of the vessel. The vessel was detained and prevented from sailing until it was made safe, and the remedial work carried out was approved by its classification society, Norwegian based DNV (formerly, Det Norske Veritas) . The auditor then extended the short term certificate for a further six months. On July, Maritime NZ was satisfied Rangitata had met the necessary requirements, released it from detention and allowed it to sail. Maritime NZ is currently developing a plan for increased oversight of the vessel, which will likely include more frequent safety inspections until the operator can demonstrate this approach is no longer necessary. Classification societies are recognised organisations which develop and apply technical standards for the design, construction and survey of ships and which carry out surveys and inspections on board ships.
Rapid transit funding allows investment in rapid transit infrastructure, for example busways and light rail infrastructure, indicated in ATAP and for other metropolitan transport plans.
Rapidly adopt lowemissions vehicles
Rates of petrol excise duty and road user charges
Raub, R. A., Luc ke, R. E., Wark, R. I. (). Breath Alcohol Ignition Interlock Devices: Controlling the Recidivist. Traffic Injury Prevention , .
Rautaki Phekoheko Engagement Strategy
Rebalanced NZ Upgrade Programme announced
Read about what to pay, how and when on
Read more about the consultation, and read the discussion document and related documents,
Read more in the media release from Te Manat Waka and the terms of reference.
Read the Action Plan and the related documents below.
Read the Request for Proposal on GETS
Read the annoucement on the company website
Read the consultation document here
Read the press release from the NZTA
Reallocation of Northern Pathway Funding to Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements (reference OC) Release d with some information withheld as out of scope. Cabinet paper:
Reallocation of Northern Pathway Funding to Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements Release d with some information withheld as out of scope. Cabinet minute: DEV MIN
Reallocation of Northern Pathway Funding to Greater Christchurch Public Transport Futures Bus Improvements Release d with some information withheld under section ()(a), and some information withheld as out of scope.
Reason for change: The Transport Plan work has been commissioned since agreeing this deliverable and it makes sense to incorporate the outcomes work into the Transport Plan.
Reason for change: The change is necessary to ensure that the GPS appropriately responds to the impacts of Cyclone Gabrielle and that local authorities are able to engage effectively in he consultation process.
Reason project included in the Output Plan: Cabinet recently agreed to narrow the focus of the Speed Management Programme and delegated authority to the Minister of Transport to make changes to the relevant Land Transport Rules if required. We need to consider whether any changes are needed to the Rule and provide advice. s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of (j) Project P Cyclone recovery
Reason project included in the Output Plan: This is a new project that addresses the Ministrys response activities to Cyclone Gabrielle.
Reason project included in the Output Plan: This is a significant project that will impact the future operation of the scheme and its contribution to emissions reduction.
Rebalancing the penalties for licensing breaches in had no measurable effect on crash rates As with Class , the effect of this change on crashes is too small to detect given the variability in crash rates over time. We found no effect on crash rates of strengthening the learner and restricted tests in Controlling for differences in rider age, gender, region of residence, and time since obtaining a Class licence, our analysis found no statistically significant difference in crash rates for riders who obtained licences after the tests were strengthened compared to those who obtained licenc es before the tests were strengthened (p value . for the strengthened learner test and . for the strengthened restricted test). It is plausible that the strengthened tests reduced crash rates, but this is difficult to measure due to the relatively s mall number of riders and crashes. This was compounded by the introduction of CBTA at the same time as the tests were strengthened, which substantially reduced the number of riders choosing the practical test to obtain their restricted licence. Effectiven ess of the night time riding restriction The night time restriction for riders with restricted licences is generally effective Riders with Class restricted licences are effectively prohibited from riding between pm and am. Despite this, a small number of night time crashes involving riders with restricted licences occur, but the night time crash rate for restricted riders aged to is almost the same as that for fully licensed riders (around one crash per , licensed riders per year). Given th e small number of such crashes and the similarity of the crash rate for restricted and fully licensed riders, the restriction appears to be effective in practice and the safety related benefits of trying to further reduce the night time crash rate of restricted riders are limited. CBTA CBTA gives riders an alternative to the traditional practical tests to progress from learner to restricted, andor from restricted to full licences. It requires riding skills to be assessed by an approved assessor, plus opti onal training. Riders who choose CBTA can reduce the minimum time required at the learner and restricted licence stages. Given the relatively recent introduction of CBTA we do not yet have sufficient data to determine if there is a difference in crash rat es between those who progress using CBTA versus those who progressed via the traditional tests In general, our analysis found no statistically significant difference in crash rates between riders who progressed via CBTA and riders who progressed via tradi tional practical tests, since CBTA was introduced in October .
Rebecca Beals (she her Ms) Principal Adviser Whakaaweawe I ng Taura Here Urban Development and Public Transport Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport E: r.bealstransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz
Recent Crown investments in metro rail include the Auckland City Rail Link, the New Zealand Upgrade Programme and funding through Budget .
Recipient HON SIMEON BROWN MINISTER OF TRANSPORT Copy the report to Hon Matthew Doocey as Associate Minister of Transport
Recipients of MIAC funding announced
Recognising this success, and reflecting the importance of seeking continuous improvement in delivering public services, this project explored these questions.
Recommendation : Understand and prioritise the underlying determinants and mechanisms of mode shift that can be addressed through tran sport funding, for example, integrating transport and land use planning. Limited visibility of the full range of mode shift promoting activities in the investment cycle and the relative invisibility of active modes in output and outcome monitoring hinders strategic oversight about what changes are made and what changes will deliver the intended mode shift outcomes. Assessing outcome delivery through Transport Investment Online is challenging due to changes in what is captured over different GPS periods and limited documentation to guide analysis. In addition, the current approach to TIO Activity Classes within a single activity class does not recognise how activities are intended to support multiple modes and outcomes. Recommendation : Increasing the visib ility of all modes within the investment process and in the transport system operation and management. Existing opportunities include a extending benchmarking of sustainable urban mobility to cover regions and high growth urban areas b continued development with councils of the One Network Framework streets classification and service outcomes and performance measures c allowing for more nuanced ways of categorising and reporting activities in Transport Investment Online, such as Section .. of this report, a nd d incorporating a longitudinal capacity within TIO to evaluate projects over time. Can we deliver it in practice The current prioritisation process to determine what was included in the NLTP was reported to rely heavily on evidence to support a business case, compared to a previous, more strategic approach. Even in larger councils with more capacity to undertake business cases, if evidence was less available for mode shift programmes and activities (such as complex, long term programmes or novel approache s), they were less likely to be identified and funded. Recommendation : Consider where the appropriate balance lies between the evidence based business case and strategic approaches so that there is sufficient flexibility in prioritisation to facilitate funding a diverse range of mode shift activities. GPS funding timelines did not align well with other planning and funding processes that impact mode shift. Without a longer term strategic view, the three year time frame and small marginal funds available for new activities would mean shorter term, piecemeal projects being favoured in the funding process. Recommendation : Support a higher level focus on investment, strategic planning and monitoring across activities and organisations over longer periods. Is it a good use of funds A common theme of the in depth enquiry was that most of the NLTF is spent on committed and contracted activities. As a result, despite strong signals in the GPS and aspirations from decision makers, there was relatively little mar gin for delivering change in what is funded turning the ship was slow. . STUDY PHASES
Recommendation that Government work with all transport authorities to i ncrease the number of wheelchair accessible taxis by incentivising the purchase and running of accessible vehicles.
Recommendations I recommend that the Committee: note that following consultation on its pricing review, the Civil Aviation Authority has identified fulltime equivalent reductions that will enable lower levies, fees, and charges than it consulted on RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E note that the Civil Aviation Authority has made two alternative proposals for the Minister of Transports consideration to increase revenue to fund its regulatory functions, reduced to reflect identified cost savings EITHER agree to accept the Authoritys proposal to increase revenue for the Civil Aviation Authority consistent with Option it consulted on, consisting of: . a percent increase in passenger safety levies, and . no increase to other levies, fees, and charges OR agree to accept the Authoritys proposal to increase revenue for the Civil Aviation Authority through a Hybrid Option, consisting of: . a percent increase in passenger safety levies, and . a percent increase to other levies, fees, and charges note that the Civil Aviation Authority has made a revised proposal for the Minister of Transports consideration to increase revenue to fund the Aviation Security Service, at a reduced rate compared to its consultation proposals, to reflect identified cost savings agree to the Boards preferred option for the Aviation Security Service to increase revenue through . a percent increase in the domestic passenger security levy, and . a percent increase in the international passenger security levy s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E Once the Minister has approved the draft Cabinet paper for lodgement for Cabinet or a Cabinet committee, this section should be to state Authorised for lodgement.
Recommendations We recommend you: Hon Wood Hon Allan note that Waka Kotahi will continue to make decisions on the allocation of the National Land Transport Fund to repair the network during the recovery phase Yes No Yes No Yes No Yes No Brent Johnston Acting Deputy Chief Executive , System Performance and Governance . . . Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport . . . Hon Kiri Allan Associate Minister of Transport . . . Ministers office to complete : Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Comments
Recommendations We recommend you: Minister of Finance Minister of Transport . note Auckland Council Governing Body approved the development proposal from Eke Panuku and Kinga Ora on April . review the proposal in the joint advice letter from Eke Panuku and Kinga Ora (attached as Annex ) and approve their recommendations Yes No Yes No . note the proposal includes a set of foundation outcomes that reflect the vision for the precinct agreed in via a range of social, community, environmental, economic and well being benefits . . . Yes No Yes No
Recommendations and Next Steps
Recommendations from both reports will be implemented as part of the following:
Recommended Programme of Investment presented to the Minister of Transport by LGWM
Recommended strategic approach released
Records Speed Limits) Regulations and revoke s the Land Transport
Recreational Safety and SAR Project: Next Steps Following Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Review For the Ministers awareness, Sport NZ has sought feedback from the Ministry and Maritime NZ on their draft briefing for Minister Bishop (Minister for Sport and Recreation), which provides an overview of the agency and Ministerial responsibilities in relation to Water Safety NZ (WSNZ). The briefing updates Minister Bishop on the recent Ministry of Transport decision not to progress with the key system strategy and governance recommendations from the New Zealand Recreational Safety Search and Rescue Review. These recommendations would have included the establishment of a System Steward at the Ministry. It was intended at the time of the review that Sport NZs responsibilities in relation to WSNZ, a membership based NGO that has a focus on safety in and around the water, would transfer to the System Steward. The Ministry and Maritime NZ had met with Sport NZ and provided joint feedback on an earlier draft of the briefing. Our key feedback was that it is important that the briefing is clear that the issue at hand is responsibility for water safety in and around water, and that there are already clear roles and responsibilities for the search and rescue system (led by the NZSAR Council) and recreational boating safety (led by Maritime NZ). We had also noted that the recommendation to set up a System Steward was made within the context of the review and as part of a set of system strategy and system leadership recommendations (e.g. setting up of a Ministerial Advisory Group). This set of recommendations are not being progressed. Setting up a System Steward (even as a scaled down version) to resolve the issue of a lack of clarity around government responsibilities for water safety does not therefore make sense. We are comfortable that Sport NZ has reflected our feedback in the current draft briefing. The briefing notes that the decision not to progress the R eview recommendations means that in practice Minister Bishop is likely to remain as the default Minister for water safety issues (other than those relating to recreational boating which are the responsibility of the Associate Minister of Transport). In practice, these issues do not arise often and could be managed through close liaison between the relevant communications teams and Ministers Offices. Project: Fuel Excise SAR Funding The Ministry provided advice to the Minister of Transport on August outlining the parameters and timeline for the triennial review of Section () SAR funding and seeking approval to initiate the review. We are awaiting approval from the Minister of Transport to share the advice with your Office. Following a meeting with the Maritime New Zealand (Maritime NZ) Chief Executive on Monday September , the Minister of Transport has also sought advice from officials on considering Maritime NZs funding requests outside of the planned triennial review. We are drafting advice for the Minister of Transport on the implications of this, and will seek his approval to share this with your O ffice.
Recreational Safety and SAR Project: Next Steps Following Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Review No update. Project: Fuel Excise SAR Funding The Ministry provided advice to the Minister of Transport on Friday August outlining the parameters and timeline for the triennial review of Section () SAR funding and seeking approval to initiate the review. We are awaiting approval from the Minister of Transport to share the advice with your Office.
Recreational Safety and SAR Project: Next Steps Following Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Review The Ministry has been engaging with key sector NGOs to provide them with an update on the Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Review (the Review) . A key message in this update is that we have revisited the key Review recommendations on system strategy, governance and leadership and will not be proceeding with implementing these recommendations. We are also letting sector NGOs know that the New Zealand Search and Rescue Council (the Council) is wanting to reset its purpose and will be updating its Strategic Plan. The Council will be looking to engage NGOs on this plan in the coming months. These engagements with NGOs have gone well so far. They have appreciated the update and look forward to discussing the Strategic Plan with the Council. s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Recruitment : Testing productivity (number of tests completed) will increase through September as our trainee cohorts begin graduating. Of our current cohorts: trainees have successfully passed their certifications and are able to progress to driver testing. trainees are undergoing their certifications this week and pass rates will be confirmed next week. The next round of recruitment has started, aiming for up to recruits to start training on Monday September , graduating out to testing in early November .
Recruitment and training new Driver Testing Officers (DTO) have been added to the DTO workforce this week as recruits who have passed certifications are now active in the testing schedule. The new DTOs have been distributed across all regions, except for Wellington as this region is the best performing region. Another trainees have passed their certifications and will be added to the testing schedules within the next week. There are five trainees who must re sit their certifications this week to progress as DTOs. The next round of recruitment is underway; aiming for up to recruits to start training on Monday September and graduating out to testing in early November .
Recruitment: The latest cohort of driver testing officers ( DTOs ) completed their training on Tuesday August and are undergoing certification testing. DTOs who pass the certifications are due to begin testing in September . As your office was on Wednesday August , Vehicle Testing New Zealand (VTNZ ) has agreed with the Driving Change Network that VTNZ will contract driver testing services from both individuals and organisations. This will support the efforts to scale up qualified testers. Over the past two months, NZTA has been handling recruitment of temporary surge driver testing officers, while VTNZ recruited additional permanent driver testing officers. NZTA and VTNZ have reached an agreement this week that VTNZ will assume responsibility for surge recruitment, making it responsible for leading (with support and oversight from NZTA) all resourcing and training to meet the on going forecasted demand for tests. NZTA will continue to closely monitor VTNZs progress with recruitment and performance in bringing down wait times. NZTA will also continue to support the pace of recruitment by providing trainers and certifiers to train and test new DTOs, as well as continued monthly updating of the test demand forecasting from which required DTO resourcing levels are modelled and implemented.
Reduced road user charges rates have been reintroduced and apply until June . All rates are reduced by percent. You can contact Waka Kotahi with questions about individual rates.
Reducing greenhouse gas emissions from transport.
Reducing greenhouse gases from ships
Reducing harmful ship emissions that affect the climate and public health.
Reducing light vehicle emissions by introducing a CO emissions standard for imported new and used light vehicles.
Reducing noxious vehicle emissions from road transport
Reducing red tape and regulation, including removing the requirement for a resource consent for the installation of public EV chargers.
Reducing reliance on cars and support people to walk, cycle and use public transport including by:
Reducing the number of motorcyclists killed or injured on New Zealand roads by making antilock braking systems (ABS) or a combined braking system (CBS) mandatory.
Refer to all place names by their official names. For information on official names, see the LINZ websites Gazetteer of place names .
Reference list The reference list should be ordered alphabetically by the last name of the first author of each work. References with no author are ordered in the reference list alphabetically by the first significant word of the title. Use only the initials of the authors given names. Use full stops and spaces between the initials. Last name comes first. Here is an example that cites a book with one author using APA style.
References Baker, S. P., L. H. Chen, G. Li (). Nationwide review of graduated driver licensing. AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety. Bates, L. J., J. Davey, B. Watson, M. J. King K. Armstrong (). Factors contrib uting to crashes among young drivers. Sultan Qaboos University Medical Journal , : . Bates, L., B. Scott Parker, M. Darvell B. Watson (). Provisional drivers perceptions of the impact of displaying P plates. Traffic Injury Prevention , : . Begg, D. J. Langley (). A critical examination of the arguments against raising the car driver licensing age in New Zealand. Traffic Injury Prevention , , . Begg, D. R. Brookland (). Participation in driver educationtraining cours es during graduated driver licensing, and the effect of a time discount on subsequent traffic offenses: Findings from the New Zealand Drivers Study. Journal of Safety Research , : . Begg, D. J. S. Stephenson (). Graduated driver licensing: The New Zealand experience. Journal of Safety Research , , . Begg, D. J., S. Stephenson, J. Alsop, J. Langley (). Impact of graduated driver licensing restrictions on crashes involving young drivers in New Zealand. Injury Prevention , , . Boele Vos, M. J. S. de Craen (). A randomized controlled evaluation study of the effects of a one day advanced rider training course. Accident Analysis and Prevention , : . Brookland, R. D. Begg, J. Langley S. Ameratunga (). Parental influence on adolescent compliance with graduated driver licensing conditions and crashes as a restricted driver: New Zealand Drivers Study. Accident Analysis and Prevention , , . Carpenter, D. J. C. Pressley (). Graduated driver licence nigh ttime compliance in U.S. teen drivers involved in fatal motor vehicle crashes. Accident Analysis and Prevention , : . Chapman, E. A., S. V. Masten K. K. Browning (). Crash and traffic violation rates before and after licensure for novice California drivers subject to different driver licensing requirements. Journal of Safety Research , : . Chen, L. H., S. P . Baker, G. Li (). Graduated driver licensing programs and fatal crashes of yearold drivers: A national evaluation. Paediatrics , : . Crundall, D., A. W. Stedmon, E. Crundall R. Saikayasit (). The role of experience and advanced tra ining on performance in a motorcycle simulator. Accident Analysis and Prevention , : . Curry, A. E., M. R. Elliott, M. R. Pfeiffer, K. H. Kim, D. R. Durbin (). Long term changes in crash rates after introduction of a graduated driver licensing decal provision. American Journal of Preventive Medicine , : . Curry, A. E., M. R. Pfeiffer, M. R. Elliott (). Compliance with and enforcement of graduated driver licensing restrictions. American Journal of Preventive Medicine , : .
Refocussed Terms of Reference
Regarding the information that has been withheld under section of the Act, I am satisfied that the reasons for withholding the information at this time are not outweighed by public interest considerations that would make it desirable to make the information avail able.
Regenerative Practitioner Regenesis Group
Regional On Scene Commanders (ROSC), their assessors and course leaders from the fiveday ROSC assessment course
Regional costs by lane density (VKTlane km) Asset renewal costs variance
Regional council bulk funding began
Regional fuel tax comes into effect in Auckland
Regional fuel tax in Auckland came into effect with the same eligibility for rebates as for the refund of PED
Regional fuel tax legislation becomes law
Regional fuel tax quarterly reports
Registered Master Builders Association
Regular reviews of the Output Plan will make it a living plan Regular reviews of this plan will keep it uptoand enable the Ministry to make resource reallocations, if needed. The review process will also facilitate trade off discussions as new work is contemplated during the year.
Regulation report released
Regulation You have a range of tools in the transport regulatory system to deliver durable transport outcomes Transport regulation gives confidence to those who use the transport system. It create s an enabling environment for firms and individuals, protect s the rights , safety and security of citizens, and ensures the delivery of public goods and services. The system is comprised of primary and secondary legislation (which includes regulations, rules, and other instruments) and local government by laws. You are responsible for the passage of primary transport legislation through Parliament. The Ministry supports you to do this. Regulations set out associated offences and penalties, fees, and charges Transport regulations mainly set out the associated rule related offences and penalties, and fees and charges that fund the work of the transport agencies. The Ministry leads the development of these with involvement from transport agencies and SOEs, and the NZ Police depending on the subject. Regulations must be approved by Cabinet. Transport rules contain detailed standards, requirements and procedures that govern transport activities Transport rules are the most common form of delegated legislation for transport. Rules contain detailed technical standards, requirements, and procedures governing transport activities within modes. You are empowered under primary legislation to make these rules through delegated responsibilities. You are expected to advise Cabinet you intend to make a rule if there would be wideranging impacts. There is an expedited rule making process where urgent changes can be made by Order in Council . The transport Crown entities develop most transport rules with the Ministrys involvement, but the Ministry leads policy development on significant rules. Transport instruments support a more flexible regulator y system Transport instruments improve the flexibility of the rule making process by having more customised consultation requirements, meaning changes that only affect a small number of transport users can be progressed quickly. Transport instruments are more easily amended in response to technological innovation. Transport instruments are outlined in a rule made by you as Minister of Transport, with the design and management delegated to a specified official (such as the Director of the relevant transport agency). Several transport instruments exist in Maritime legislation, with more planned in other modes as part of work on secondary legislation. The Civil Aviation Act (which comes into force in ) also empowers the Minister to creat e transport instrument s. Your statutory functions As Minister, you have statutory functions under both maritime and civil aviation legislation. For instance, under the Civil Aviation Act, you are: As Transport Minister you have powers to amend, replace or disallow some local government by laws. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT KEY TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES
Regulations were made by Order in Council they need to be revoked by
Regulations PCO .;
Regulations PCO ;
Regulations Review Committee
Regulations Revocation Order (the Regional Transport
Regulations Revocation Order (together the Orders) ;
Regulations are no longer required to implement the Speed Rule.
Regulations are now redundant.
Regulations expanding the entitlement to regional fuel tax rebates came into effect
Regulations to the attention of the House of Representatives.
Regulations will be developed prior to the regime becoming mandatory in .
Regulatory Impact Assessment
Regulatory Impact Statement Regulatory and Cost Recovery Impact Statement: Scope of independent review function and application of review fees Coversheet Purpose of Document Decision s sought: To inform final Cabinet decision s on regulations to: specify which regulatory decisions will be reviewable by the independent review function (IRF) created by the Civil Aviation Act (the Act) apply fees to partially recover the costs of IRF reviews . Advising agencies: Ministry of Transport Proposing Minister s: Minister of Transport finalised : December Problem Definition The Act requires that regulations specify the scope of regulatory decisions covered by the IRF. We need to evaluate options for setting the scope based on how well they meet the policy intent of the function which is to p rovide a more timely and less costly alternative to contest decisions made by the Director of Civil Aviation (the Director) than court action , and to support improved regulatory decisions over time. The Minister of Transport (the Minister) has also agreed to regulations being implemented to partially recover the direct and indirect costs of IRF reviews . We need to evaluate options for setting review fees in line with agency cost recovery principles. Executive Summary This Regulatory and Cost Recovery Impact Statement is set out in two sections: Part A : covers the setting of the scope of decisions to be covered by the IRF Part B: covers the application of review fees. The regulatory impact analysis elements relate to Part A and the cost recovery analysis elements relate to Part B. Overview of Part A setting the scope of the IRF The Act creates a new function for independent reviews of regulatory decisions made by (or on behalf of) the Director. The Act requires the scope of decisions that are covered by the function (reviewable decisions) to be specified in regulations. In July , Cabinet agreed to the Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) releasing a consultation document and carrying out public consultation on three options to set the scope of reviewable decisions. ECO MIN refers gmtqxxq Document PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Regulatory Impact Statement Following a four week public consultation, we propose that the scope of reviewable decisions should comprise key Director decisions that are appealable to the District Court , and decisions on granting individual exemptions from regulations and the Civil Aviation Rules (the Rules ). This approach most effectively meet s the policy intent of providing a more timely and less costly alternative to contest the Directors decisions than court action and minimise s risks to managing the IRF within available resources . It also captures the most significant decisions made by the Director . Overview of Part B application fees for reviews To help meet the operational costs of the function including reviewer remuneration and expenses, technical advice and administrative costs Cabinet agreed that the Ministry consult stakeholders on options for partial cost recovery and fee levels for the IRF. ECO MIN refers Following consultation, the Ministry proposes a twotier fixed fee of , (excl. GST) per review application for individuals, and , (excl. GST) for organisations. This two tier approach reflects that application costs are more likely to be a barrier for individuals than organisations, and reviews of decisions affecting organisations are expected to be typically more complex and therefore more expensive to conduct . Limitations and Constraints on Analysis It is difficult to p redict the likely level and nature of IRF demand and the likely nature, duration and cost of reviews . There are no directly applicable data that can be used to forecast accurately the level and nature of demand and costs , and only limited wider contextual information is available. The weight of opinion expressed in submissions does not provide a clear indication of the likely level of demand and costs . Responsible Manager(s) (completed by relevant manager) Tom Forster , Manager Aviation Ministry of Transport December Quality Assurance (completed by QA panel) Reviewing Agency: Ministry of Transport Panel Assessment Comment: The Ministry of Transports Regulatory Impact Analysis Review Panel has reviewed the Regulatory and Cost Recovery Impact Statement on the scope of the independent review function and application of review fees. The panel considers that the information and analysis summarised in the statement meets the criteria necessary for Ministers to make informed decision s on the proposals in this paper. gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Regulatory Impact Statement Part A Scope of independent review function What is the context behind the policy problem . Under the current civil aviation regulatory system, applicants may appeal key regulatory decisions to the District Court, under section of the Act (previously section of the Civil Aviation Act ). Appealable decisions are the most impactful decisions the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) makes affecting individuals and organisations. They primarily control participation in the aviation system including licensing pilots and air operators, and controlling the use of aircraft, equipment and flight systems. . During Select Committee consideration of the Civil Aviation Bill over , submitters expressed concerns about the drawbacks of challenging the Directors decisions through the courts. They noted that undertaking judicial action is costly and there is typically a long interval between when a contested decision is made and the conclusion of the court process it was cited that participants can wait around years for a District Court hearing and associated costs can exceed , a case. Submitters also expressed concerns about the courts lack of sector expertise. . The submissions advocated for an independent, specialist body to consider challenges to CAA regulatory decisions, including decisions concerning matters under the Rules . . In response, Parliament agreed to include provisions in the Civil Aviation Bill to enable regulatory decision making by the CAA to be subject to additional scrutiny, by providing for independent reviews of how the Director exercises their functions and powers. . The empowering provisions did not specify which decisions were to be reviewable, and are not linked to the appeal provisions. Instead, they leave the scope of reviewable decisions to be determined by regulations under the new enactment. The use of regulations is intended to provide more flexibility than prescribing reviewable decisions in the primary legislation, whilst retaining a high level of executive scrutiny. The Ministry and CAA will support the operation of the review function . The Ministry will provide secretariat and functional support for the review process, and also meet the costs of the remuneration of the two reviewers, who are to be appointed in early , and the costs of any contracted expert advice (where necessary) fo r reviews involving technical matters. Reviewers will be expected to have a range of skills and experience, including legal andor regulatory expertise . . The CAA will be required to provide relevant case information to reviewers on request, and the Director will also be required to consider and make final decisions in response to the reviewers recommendations in each case. The Act sets out the key features of the new function . Subpart of Part of the Act sets out the key feature s of the new function. Reviews are to be available to a person in respect of whom a decision specified in regulations is made or an owner, operator or person for the time being in charge of an aircraft or aeronautical product that is the subject of a specified decision. . In order to determine the content of th e regulations that specify the categories of decision that are to be reviewable , we need to evaluate options based on how well they meet the underlying policy intent of the function, as set out in paragraphs below. The submissions were silent on the issue of the scope of CAA decisions that are appealable to the District Court. gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Regulatory Impact Statement What is the policy problem or opportunity . The IRF enables people or organisations who are dissatisfied with a reviewable decision to challenge it without incurring the expense of court proceedings or being subject to the delays inherent to the court system. By providing for regulations to specify the scope of reviewable decisions, however, the design of the IRF also makes it possible to open up to review a wide range of decisions in respect of which the primary legislation does not afford an appeal right. . An applicant for review could be any of the , individuals who hold an aviation document (as at June ), or a person seeking to become an aviation document holder. This includes pilot licence holders , engineer s, flight instructor s and air traffic controller s. Additionally, organisations h old aviation documents, such as air operator, aircraft maintenance organisation, aerodrome operator and aircraft registration certificates. . Potential scrutiny through the IRF process is expected also to strengthen the quality of, and sector confidence in, decision making by the CAA in its capacity as the aviation safety regulator. Th is has a public benefit over time . What objectives are sought in relation to the policy problem . The regulations will need to ensure the achievement of the intent of the IRF at the time it was included in the Civil Aviation Bill, which is to: provide an expert independent review mechanism for appealable decisions that is quicker and less costly than consideration by the courts promote good decision making by strengthening accountability and good practice around regulatory decision making thus enhancing the effectiveness of, and public confidence in , the regulatory system over time . . However, the fact that the Act opens up a much wider range of decisions to the possibility of review than just decisions that are subject to appeal to the District Court requires us to evaluate whether there is a compelling case to include additional categories of Director decisions (other than those appealable to the District Court) within the scope of the IRF. . This requires assessing the impact and potential benefits of including these other decisions against the need to maintain a manageable workload for the IRF, to ensure it can still achieve its primary purpose of carrying out timely reviews of the most impactful (appealable) decisions, as outlined in paragraph above. . It will therefore likely be necessary to strike a balance between the breadth of reviewable decisions and the manageability of the function. The main risk is that including reviews of decisions on the wide range of more minor matters made by (or on behalf of) the Director within the scope of the IRF could effectively overload the function and compromise its ability to deliver timely reviews of more significant decis ions. . The need to strike this balance reflects the Legislation Design and Advisory Committee (LDAC) guidelines on creating systems of appeal, review, and complaint: The value of an appeal must be balanced in the particular circumstances against a consideration of the potential costs, implications of delay, significance of the subject matter, competence and expertise of the decision maker in the first instance, and th e need for finality. Source: Civil Aviation Authority of New Zealand , Annual Report () . Ministerial briefing of May ( OC ) refers. Legislation Design and Advisory Committee, Legislation Guidelines ( edition) . gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Regulatory Impact Statement Section : Deciding upon the IRF scope to address the policy problem What scope will options be considered within . The range of options is limited by the nature of the categories of decisions made by the Director. . Certain categories of decisions are excluded from the scope of the IRF on the grounds they are inappropriate or inapplicable. The key exclusions are: medical certification decisions these are covered by the existing medical convener review function decisions relating relating to security, monitoring , investigation and enforcement , where there is a need for the CAA to act promptly to address public safety or security risks decisions to initiate proceedings in respect of offences under the Act, or Rules or regulations made under the Act or to issue an infringement offence notice these are respectively governed by the Solicitor Generals prosecution guidelines or establi shed Court processes (in the case of infringement offence notices) decisions on pecuniary matters relating to invoicing and payment of fees and charges decisions made under the CAAs authority as the designated agency in respect of the aviation sector under the Health and Safety at Work Act (rather than the Act) decisions made to set standards the IRF only covers decisions made with respect to the application of standards, rather than the setting of standards matters relating to non decisions or the timeliness of decisions. . With the exception of the above matters, however, any regulatory decision of the Director or delegate is potentially reviewable if so specified by the regulations. What criteria will be used to compare options to the status quo . The criteria used to assess options to determine the scope of reviewable decisions are: Effectiveness: how well would the option achieve the intended policy objectives namely to provide an a readily accessible expert independent review option that is quicker and less costly compared to consideration by the courts, which also strengthens a ccountability and supports impactful improvements in decision making in the aviation regulatory system over time. Equityfairness : would the option achieve the fair treatment of participants What options are being considered . We considered three options for setting the scope of reviewable decisions for the IRF as set out below. . We did not however assess their relative merits relative to the status quo (as is generally done under the standard RIS format). This is because the status quo would represent making no regulations to activate the review function given that it would fail to give effect to the function that the Act has created, the status quo is not a credible option. gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Regulatory Impact Statement Option Aligning with right of appeal to the Courts . This option set s the scope of decisions based on the relevant categories of decisions that are already subject to appeal to the District Court , which are set out in section () of the Act. . It focus es reviews primarily on decisions linked to the granting, renewal, suspension, revocation, or imposition of conditions of aviation documents e.g. a pilots licence or an air operators certificate, airworthiness certificate or maintenance engineers licence. These decisions primarily determine whether an applicant is a fit and proper person or operator to participate in the civil aviation system and set the key conditions for their participation. . Around , decisions a year are made covering the above categories. Option Based on Option One with decisions on individual exemptions . This option include s all the categories of decisions covered under Option , but also include s decisions made by (or on the behalf of) the Director to grant, or not to grant, individual exemptions from regulations or Rules . . Exemptions may be granted, with appropriate conditions, where an aviation participant is unable to comply with a prescriptive Rule requirement and there is no alternative means of compliance available to them. The critical issue for an exemption decision is whether it enables the same level of safety, or risk control, to be achieved as the Rule is intended to achieve. . Exemption decisions can relate to requirements specified in most of the Rule Parts. Fewer than decisions on exemptions are made each year. Option The broadest scope . Under this broader option, all decisions taken in relation to sector participants by (or on behalf of) the Director are potentially reviewable. The only exceptions would be categories of decisions that are inappropriate or inapplicable, as detailed in paragraph above. . This option includes the Directors decisions covered under Option and Option but would also include a wide range of more minor miscellaneous decisions made by personnel (delegated by the Director) under the Rule parts. . In the region of , decisions a year are made covering all the categories within scope of this option, including operating, technical, training and competency approvals, acceptance of alternative means of compliance with Rule requirements, and acceptance of amendments to operators operational and technical arrangements. Results of public consultation . On July , Cabinet agreed that the Ministry release a consultation document and seek stakeholder feedback on the three options set out above. T he Ministrys Regulatory Impact Analysis Review Panel reviewed the consultation document and determined that it contain ed sufficient impact analysis to support Cabinets decision to Certain categories of decisions set out in section () would need to be outside the scope of the IRF as it would be inappropriate, or not relevant, to include them for example, medical certification decisions s() (g) (k), which are covered by the medical convener function, and decisions relating to investigation and enforcement s() (e) (f) where there is a need for the CAA to act promptly to address public safety or security risks. However, decisions applying to any class of aviation participant, aeronautical product, aircraft, aerodrome, aviation related service or other thing section ()(b) of the Act would not be reviewable, as class exemptions are deemed secondary legislation under section (), and thus they are effectively part of the settings of the regulatory framework. Any d ecisions on individual exemptions from medical standards and certification Rule requirements would also be excluded under this option. gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Regulatory Impact Statement release it. Therefore, a separate regulatory impact statement (RIS) was not required. ECO MIN refers . The Ministry carried out the public consultation from August to September , and received submissions, including two submissions from the CAA. . The CAA was strongly supportive of the IRF function. It favoured Option , submitting that the IRF scope should be limited to significant decisions . In its view, Option would not support the policy intent for the IRF , as there would be a significant risk that the function would be unable to cope with the likely d emand for reviews of minor decisions. . Three organisations favoured Option , on the grounds it would enable reviews of decisions on exemptions while ensuring the demand for reviews would be likely to be manageable. . Five organisations indicated they favoured Option to ensure a wider range of decisions would be reviewable. Discussions officials later held with some of these submitters, however, clarified that many of the decisions they advocated for inclusion would i n practice be covered under Option (for example because they were applications for exemptions to Rules, so would fall within the scope of Option ). . Three submissions offered no comment relevant to the scope options. Impact Analysis . Our assessment of the three options, drawing on the feedback from consultation is outlined in Table below. Key: much better than doing nothing better than doing nothing about the same as doing nothing worse than doing nothing One of the CAA submissions was on the medical convener process, so was out ofscope. gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Regulatory Impact Statement Table : How do the options compare Option Aligning with right of appeal to the Courts Option Based on Option with decisions on exemptions Option The broadest scope Effectiveness Supports the policy intent of providing an accessible, fast and cost effective independent review process . Focuses reviews on core decisions that affect the ability of individuals and organisations to operate in the civil aviation system . Provides a degree of certainty that the function would be able to operate on a manageable basis. There is a risk that some decisions made by CAA that may be (or may be seen to be) significant would not be captured under this option. Based on stakeholder feedback, the most prominent of these would be: odecisions on exemptions from Rules and regulations odecisions made under the Rules on approval of changes to certain operating specifications (Op Specs) such as changes to operation locations, aircraft maintenance programmes and senior personnel. Would minimise risks of not being able to effectively manage demand for the IRF within available resources. Offers essentially the same advantages as Option but, by making decisions on exemptions reviewable, would provide a more complete coverage of Rulerelated decisions which can potentially have a significant impact on aviation participants. Would enable decisions on changes to Op Specs to be reviewable in cases where they are considered by the Director as applications for exemptions. ( Feedback from consultation indicated the most significant contested Op Specs decisions cited by stakeholders were considered as applications for exemptions.) Would ensure the widest possible range of CAA decisions that could affect sector participants could be subject to review decisions including decisions on exemptions and the numerous relatively minor Rulerelated decisions that would not be covered under Option or Option . Would capture numerous but relatively low level CAA decisions made under the Rules. Reviews of such decisions could place demands on the review function and the two reviewers, which could compromise its capacity to deliver timely reviews of decisions that have a more material impact on applicants. The risk of overloading the function might be mitigated to some extent by the intended introduction of partial cost recovery for reviews ( see Part B of this RCRIS ), but it could not be expected to significantly limit the prospect of numerous requests for reviews of more minor decisions. This is because the fee is to be set at a level that does not present an undue barrier to access to reviews of reviewable decisions . . gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Regulatory Impact Statement EquityFairness Focuses resources to deal with largely significant decisions in a timely manner. May not meet some participants expectations of the IRF as some decisions made by CAA that are, or are seen to be, significant by sector participants may not be included within scope including decisions on individual exemptions. Provides a more complete coverage of decisions which potentially have a significant impact on aviation participants than Option One. May not meet some participants expectations of the IRF , as some decisions made by CAA that are, or are seen to be, significant by sector participants may not be included within scope. Would maximise sector participants rights in the sense that a broad range of CAA decisions would potentially be subject to review. Applications for reviews of decisions on the broader range of decisions, including the numerous more minor decisions, could mean that resources would be stretched more thinly and be less available to progress more significant cases in a timely manner . gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Regulatory Impact Statement What option is likely to best address the problem, meet the policy objectives, and deliver the highest net benefits . We consider Option would most effectively meet the policy intent of providing fast and accessible reviews, while supporting impactful improvements in decision making in the aviation regulatory system over time. . Like Option , Option provides a faster and less costly avenue to challenge appealable decisions than going through the courts. However, Option also includes decisions on individual exemptions and thus provides more complete coverage of decisions that c ould have a significant impact on aviation participants, compared to Option . . Option , with its broad scope including lower order decisions, is less likely to facilitate the faster review pathway that the IRF is intended to provide because (even despite the application fees that are being put in place ) there is a residual risk that the demand for reviews under this option could: limit the reviewers capacity to deliver timely reviews of the categories of decisions that have the most significant impact on applicants (this was acknowledged by several submitters) impose demands on CAA resources that intrude on the agencys day today regulatory operations, and limit the Directors ability to make final decisions on reviewers recommendations within the statutory time frame dilute the incentives for participants to resolve issues with the CAA before escalating them to the level of a IRF review. . Implementing Option w ould minimise the risks to managing the IRF within available resources . This will be especially important during the initial months of its operation, when the process is new and reviewers are settling into their respective roles. . Option may be viewed by some aviation participants as a less equitable approach to setting the scope of the IRF than Option particularly by those who have concerns about specific types of decisions excluded under Option but included under Option . On the other hand, Option itself could be viewed as potentially impinging on the rights of those seeking reviews of the most impactful decisions, as there is a greater risk of IRF resources being stretched more thinly and the performance of the function being compromised under Option . Taking account of the range of views from public consultation, we are satisfied that Option is the appropriate option. Future flexibility . As experience with implementation of the IRF accumulates after the IRF becomes operational, the Ministry would be prepared to consider expanding the scope of decisions subject to review under Option , if compelling evidence were to emerge that additional categories of decisions should be included. gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Regulatory Impact Statement Table : C ombined marginal costs and benefits of the preferred options for scope Additional benefits of the preferred option compared to taking no action Affected groups Comment Impact Evidence Certainty Regulated groups (individuals organisations ) Applicants will benefit from not having to meet legal costs and lengthy delays inherent in court action. In cases where an IRF review leads to the overturning of a Directors decision, the applicant will benefit from the change in the decision. Benefits will vary widely according to circumstances that cannot be reliably predicted. High Regulator (CAA) Reviews will introduce greater scrutiny of the Directors decision making. This could be expected to strengthen the robustness of, and increase public confidence in, the regulatory system over time. In some cases, an aviation participant may opt to apply for an IRF review rather than take court action, which could be expected to be less costly for the CAA. It is not possible to quantify these benefits at this stage. Low Consumers The operation of the IRF can be expected to raise public confidence in the performance of the civil aviation regulators. Not quantifiable benefits will need to be assessed over time through performance measurement and sector feedback. Low Additional costs of the preferred option compared to taking no action Regulated groups (individuals organisations) Costs will be c onfined to review application fees, which will only affect those who elect to apply for a review. Low we are recommending that fees be set at a partial cost recovery level that does not present an undue barrier to access to reviews (see Part B of this RCRIS ). There will be no cost implications for aviation participants that do not use the IRF mechanism. High Regulator (CAA) The CAA will incur costs in responding to a review application and the reviewers recommendations. The preferred option is expected to moderate demand for reviews (compared to Option ). The costs to the CAA will be highly contingent on demand, subject matter and complexity , which are unknown factors at this stage. Low Consumers The preferred option will impose no costs on consumers. Nil High gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Regulatory Impact Statement Section : Delivering an option How will the new arrangements be implemented . As the department responsible for administering the Act, the Ministry of Transport will provide administrative and functional support necessary to ensure the effective delivery of the review function. This role will include secretarial support for the reviewer(s). The Ministry will establish and maintain procedures for handling review applications, record keeping, provision of guidance to applicants and liaison between applicants, the reviewer(s), and the CAA. The Ministry will be responsible for the remuneration of the reviewer(s). How will the new arrangements be m onitor ed, evaluat ed, and review ed . The Ministry will provide administrative support for the IRF and monitor its performance once it is operational. . This will include assessing the volume of review applications and the resources required to carry out reviews e.g. the time, expertise and costs of the review process and feedback from stakeholders on the utility of the function. . As experience with implementation of the review function accumulates, the scope of decisions subject to review could be amended, if compelling evidence were to emerge that certain categories of decisions not covered under this option should be included. gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Regulatory Impact Statement Part B Fees to partially recover the operational costs of the function Problem definition . The independent review function will be administered by the Ministry, which will incur the associated operational costs, including reviewer remuneration and related expenses, and the costs of independent technical advice where required. . In the absence of a cost recovery charge, the costs of the review function would need to be met entirely by the general taxpayer. Because reviews will provide a direct benefit to review applicants, there is a strong case to apply some degree of cost recovery to help meet the costs of the function. Policy decision . The Minister of Transport has instructed the Ministry to progress work to cost recover for expenses that it incurs directly and indirectly in relation the IRF, including, as appropriate, remuneration of the reviewers. Statutory authority to charge . Section () of the Act provides statutory authority for the Government to apply IRF review fees. Given applicants will be the primary beneficiaries of reviews there is a sound rationale to consider applying cost recovery for the function. Cost Recovery Principles and Objectives . The principles guiding the cost recovery proposal are as follows: allocation of review costs should broadly reflect public and private benefits of the service all relevant direct and indirect departmental costs should be included in the base cost of the function fees should not be set at levels that preclude or significantly impede the statutory rights of sector participants seeking well founded reviews fees should be structured simply, fairly, and efficiently. . These principles are derived from Treasury and Office of the Auditor General guidance and informed by the Ministrys transport regulatory system funding principles and the Ministry of Justice cost recovery principles. . The objectives of the proposa l are that: fees reflect private benefits to IRF users and Crown funding reflects public benefits from the civil aviation regulatory system fees are set at a level sufficient to encourage efficient use of the IRF resources but not so high as to preclude or significantly impede applicants of limited means commencing a well founded review . Policy Rationale: Why a user charge And what type is most appropriate The review function provides private good benefits . The IRF benefits aviation participants, enabling them to challenge a Directors decision through a process that avoids the costs and delays involved in challenging a Directors decision in court. Subject to the scope of decisions that regulations specify a s reviewable, it may also allow participants to challenge decisions that are not gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Regulatory Impact Statement appealable . If a review results in a Directors decision being overturned, the applicant would also benefit from being able to exercise the rights or privileges they were previously denied as a consequence of the original decision. It will also provide p ublic good benefits . The IRF is expected to promote good CAA decision making by strengthening accountability and supporting improvements in regulatory decisions over time, which will generate public good benefits through: enhanced effectiveness of the regulatory system increased public confidence in the regulatory system. . While they will be valuable , such benefits will be less immediately evident than the benefits of participants access to the right to challenge a Directors decision. Improvements to CAA regulatory decision making, and sectorpublic confidence in the performance of the regulatory sys tem as a result of IRF scrutiny can be expected to take time and will emerge only gradually. Full or partial cost recovery . While a review directly benefits the applicant, charging applicants the full cost of reviews is likely to compromise the policy intent of the review function by deterring sector participants of lesser means from exercising their statutory right to seek reviews. . Full cost recovery would thereby not reflect the broader public good objective of promoting better regulatory performance and public confidence in the CAA as the aviation safety regulator. . Therefore there is a strong rationale to apply partial costrecovery, given that it would: present less of a barrier for individuals of lesser means to access reviews than full cost recovery, and so ensure that the intent of the review function is not compromised broadly reflect the mix of private and public good benefits the review function is expected to generate support efficiency in the operation of the function. . In exploring what an appropriate level of cost recovery for review applications might be, the Ministry considered relativity to the CAA fees applicable to reviewable transactions, such as the granting of a licence. However, those fees ( at present generally ranging from to incl uding GST), if used as a benchmark for IRF fees, would result in a very low level of cost recovery and be of limited value in terms of managing potential IRF workload. . The Ministry recognises that, at the proposed partial cost recovery level, the Crown will bear a higher proportion of costs than users of the review function. In the Ministrys view, this is unavoidable if, on the one hand, fees are not set so high as to compromise the purpose of the IRF and, on the other, sufficient funding is available to ensure that the IRF established by the Act can be delivered effectively, efficiently and fairly. The Ministry identified three partial cost recovery options Option a single fixed fee for all participants. This would be based on a representative average review cost (rather than based on the actual costs of each respective review, which will vary from case tocase). The proposed fee would be , (excl. GST) per application. Option a two tiered fixed fee . Organisations would pay a higher fixed fee than i n Option . This reflects that reviews of decisions affecting organisations are likely to be more technical and complex . The proposed fees would be , (excl. GST) per application for individuals, and , (excl. GST) per application for organisations. gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Regulatory Impact Statement Option an hourly fee up to a cap . This option would provide the potential to base the level of cost recovery more closely on the actual costs arising from each respective review. There would be a base fee of (excl. GST) payable on application, plus an hourly fee of (excl. GST) payable at the conclusion of the review, up to a cap of , (excl. GST) for individuals and , (excl. GST) for organisations. This two stage payment process is an additional administrative factor compared to Optio n and Option . Table : Assessment of options against cost recovery principles Principle Option Single fixed fee Option Tiered fixed fee s Option Hourly charge Allocation of IRF costs should broadly reflect the public and private benefits of the service Partial cost recovery reflects the mix of both private benefits to IRF users and the public benefits relating to the operation of the civil aviation regulatory system. Partial cost recovery reflect s the mix of both private benefits to IRF users and the public benefits relating to the operation of the civil aviation regulatory system . Partial cost recovery reflect s the mix of both private benefits to IRF users and the public benefits relating to the operation of the civil aviation regulatory system . All relevant direct and indirect departmental costs should be included in the base cost of the IRF IRF costs include direct reviewer costs and IRF related direct and indirect costs incurred by the Ministry. IRF costs include direct reviewer costs and IRF related direct and indirect costs incurred by the Ministry. IRF costs include direct reviewer costs and IRF related direct and indirect costs incurred by the Ministry. Fees should not be set at levels that preclude or significantly impede applicants seeking well founded reviews The fee level recognises the likely limited ability of some individuals to pay a high fee. It does not factor in organisations likely greater ability to pay (or to pass on costs ). Not does it reflect that reviews relating to organisations are likely to be more complex and costly to consider. This two tiered fee approach, with a higher fee for organisations, recognises that organisations tend to have a greater ability to pay than individuals , and that their review applications are likely to involve more complex considerations. The approach r ecovers marginally more revenue than Options and . Capping fees at the same levels as for Option would take into account the same ability to pay and complexity of review considerations. Under this option, fees for organisations might potentially be lower than the fixed fee in a simple case but that is very unlikely in the case of the fee for an individual. Fees should be structured simply, fairly, and efficiently All applicants pay the same fee and have certainty as to costs. A fixed fee is simple to administer. This option though does not take into account likely differences between individuals and organisations ability to pay. Applicants have certainty as to costs. A higher fee for organisations better reflects higher expected review costs (given complexities of decisions affecting organisations) and greater capacity to pay compared to individuals . Fees would be simple to administer. A variable charge is more complex to administer than a fixed fee. It could also result in added collection costs to the Ministry if applicants dissatisfied with their review outcome declined to pay the, second, hourly fee component . Provisional overall assessment Meets the cost recovery principles but does not fully take into account differences between individuals and organisations ability to pay. Is relatively simple to administer. Preferred approach. Meets the cost recovery principles. Better recognises ability to pay and that reviews of decisions affecting organisations are likely to be more costly. Is relatively simple to administer. Is complex to administer , creates revenue risk and is less efficient than fixed fee(s) , while being unlikely to result in fees that differ materially, if at all, from the fees that would be payable under Option . gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Regulatory Impact Statement Option is the preferred option . The proposed partial cost recovery approach under Option supports the objectives for the IRF. The principal strengths of Option are that: unlike the single fee under Option, a two tier fixed fee would accommodate the likelihood that organisations will generally have greater capacity to pay than individuals, and the tendency for decisions affecting organisations to be more technical and complex Option utilises a fixed fee structure it would be reasonably simple to administer, unlike Option Option will raise (marginally) more revenue than Option , and is not subject to the revenue uncertainty that Option would involve . Type of charge proposed: a fixed fee Rationale . A fixed fee is preferred because, while the amount of reviewers time required for a review can be expected to vary from case to case, the likely degree of variation for this new function is uncertain. The administrative steps will be largely the same for all applications. A fixed fee will also provide applicants with certainty as to costs and be simpler and more efficient for the Ministry to administer. Who will pay the cost recovery charges . A review applicant could be any of the , individuals that hold an aviation document (as at June ) , or a person seeking to become an aviation document holder. Most individual aviation document holders are pilot licence holders (, individual licences) . Other licensing categories include engineer, flight instructor and air traffic control ler. Additionally, organisations hold aviation documents , such as air operator , aircraft maintenance organisation, aerodrome operator and aircraft registration certificates. . While the number of aviation document holders is large, only a relatively small proportion of those persons would, in any given year, be subject to a reviewable decision, such as a decision to issue or renew a document or to impose conditions on, suspend o r revoke a document. The Ministry anticipates that a very much smaller proportion of decisions will result in a review application. . Drawing on experience with the medical convener function, and based on the recommended scope of the IRF proposed in Part A of this document, the Ministry estimates t he number of independent review applications will be between and a year, and that the average IRF review will involve around hours of a reviewers time. Organisations are subject to many more, and more detailed, Rules than individual , and reviews of decisions affecting them are more likely to be complex and time consuming (eg a irworthiness approval s of avionics equipment ) and thus more costl y. Source: Civil Aviation Authority of New Zealand , Annual Report (). This is based on high and low demand scenarios, and assumes that, because the IRF will apply to more than just the one type of Directors decision, the number of IRF review applications is likely to be greater than the typical medical review applica tions. gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Regulatory Impact Statement The level of the proposed fee and its cost components (cost recovery model) Design of cost recovery charges . The cost recovery model upon which the proposed fee levels are derived is based on data from the m edical convener function, which carries out reviews of the Directors medical certification decisions, and is the model upon which the IRF was designed . The two main elements comprising the estimated costs of the IRF are set out below. Remuneration of reviewers . The daily remuneration rate for the independent review function is yet to be determined but we assume it will align with the , daily rate ( per hour ex cl. GST) for the medical convener. . Based on the estimate of reviews being carried out a year the annual cost of reviewer remuneration would range between , and ,. Within that average, the actual effort and cost for individual reviews can be expected to vary considerably, depending on the subject matter and complexity of the decision at issue. Costs of secretariat and functional support for the review process . For all options, the following assumptions apply to the costing of Ministry administrative support for the IRF application process: work will be performed by a mid range Level advisor at a salary of , including KiwiSaver and ACC oncosts, plus an overhead of for corporate costs, equating to , or based on , available person hours in a year, an average hourly cost of based on workflow process mapping for all administrative steps from receipt of an application through to notification of a final decision, the Ministry estimates that each application will involve a cumulative four hours of administrative effort. . The resulting cost to the Ministry therefore equates to per application. Forecast revenue . Revenue from fees will be driven by the number of review applications and the proportions of applications submitted by individuals and organisations. Based on the expectation that most review demand will come from individuals, we assume a : ratio for app lications from individuals and organisations. Applying this assumption to the estimated range of application numbers, estimated annual revenue and costs under Option will be as shown in Table below. . Based on the estimates in Table , the residual cost to the Ministry of the IRF function will range from , for annual reviews to , for annual reviews. This would be met from the Crown funding provided in Budget for the implementation of the Act , which totals . million over four years, with . million per year in the Ministrys baseline in and out years. Some IRF reviews may involve technically complex issues so reviewers may require specialist advice. The Ministry expects such instances to be rare, given CAA technical expertise will feed into the evidence that the Director must provide to the reviewer on the matter at issue under the review. The impact of any such costs on IRF funding cannot realistically be gauged. gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Regulatory Impact Statement Table : Costs and fee revenue estimates (ex. GST) Total review applications Total applications Reviewer remuneration , , Ministry staff costs , , Total costs , , Fee revenue Number Revenue Number Revenue Individuals , , Organisations , , Total revenue , , Impact analysis Number of people and businesses affected . The proposed fee will only apply to a person, business or other entity that applies for the review of a Directors decision. We assume that the maximum level of demand will be around reviews per annum and that most applicants will be individuals rather than businesses. . For review applicants, the application fee would be additional to any fee applicable to the CAA in respect of the original relevant decision. It would, however, be far lower than the costs associated with court action (if applicable) to challenge that same decision. Impact on the Ministry . Based on the expected volume of review applications, the Ministry considers that the collection and administration of review application fees is an isolated activity that can be managed from within existing Ministry capability, without materially affecting other business activities. Reasonableness of proposed fee . These fee levels are based on an assessment of expected review costs and the Ministry assessment of what would be a fair and reasonable level of cost recovery in the context of the purpose of the IRF. There are few examples of charges for reviews of a comparable nature, either in other jurisdictions o r under domestic legislation. . In the case of reviews of decisions of the Australian Civil Aviation Safety Authority (CASA), reviews are undertaken by the Australian Administrative Appeals Tribunal. The Tribunals standard application fee of AU, applies to those reviews . . In other comparable jurisdictions, most notably the United Kingdom, no fee applies to applications for review of aviation safety regulator decisions. . There is no clear basis for a local fee comparison, although we note that the fee for appeals to the New Zealand Immigration and Protection Tribunal under the Immigration and Protection Tribunal Regulations is set at . gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Regulatory Impact Statement Consultation . In September , Cabinet directed the Ministry to consult stakeholders on options for partial cost recovery. The Ministrys advice to Cabinet was underpinned by a Stage Cost Recovery Impact Statement (CRIS), which was assessed by the Ministrys Regulatory Impact Analysis Review Panel as partially meeting the quality assurance criteria, as the proposal had not yet been subject to public consultation ECO MIN refers . . The Ministry undertook four weeks public consultation on the three partial cost recovery options during October . Three submissions were received one in favour of each of Option and Option , while the third submission favoured a variable approach, based on the outcome of a review, with no fees being applied at all in cases where the review is successful and a Directors decision is reversed . Conclusions and recommendations . Taking into account the feedback provided from consultation, t he Ministry considers Option to be the most appropriate option for partial cost recovery. . The different fee levels for organisations and individuals under Option are appropriate, as decisions affecting organisations are likely to be more technically complex and therefore more time consuming to review, and organisations can generally be expect ed to have a greater capacity to pay than individuals. Option also utilises a fixed fee structure that would be more straightforward to administer than the hourly fees proposed under Option , and would raise (marginally) more revenue than Option , whi le providing more certainty about potential costs for applicants. . The Ministry w ill meet the remaining costs of the review function from within the baseline funding provided in Budget to help meet the costs of implementing the Act . A Crown contribution to IRF costs would ensure that the public policy objective of the review function is not compromised and would reflect that, over time, the review function is expected to produce public good benefits through improvements to regulatory performa nce and confidence in the civil aviation regulatory system. Implementation plan . Subject to Cabinet approval, and regulations being drafted, fees will apply with effect from April , when the Act come s into force. The fee and the application procedure will be notified on the Ministrys and CAAs websites. Fees will be handled and accounted for through the Ministrys manual payments system. (The expected annual volume of applications and revenue will be insufficient to justify the expense of designing and implementing an IT solution. ) . The Ministry will collect the fee at the time an application for a review has been accepted, with the fee payable through internet banking. As the fee must be paid on acceptance, no enforcement action will be necessary in the event of nonpayment . Monitoring and evaluation . The Ministry will monitor the performance of the reviewerreviewers, record the time that it takes for a reviewer to review each application, and monitor and record associated costs such as costs for specialist technical expertise to assist in consideratio n of a review application. . The Ministry will also monitor and record the time spent by Ministry staff in dealing with review applications, and will evaluate the results to ensure that the associated procedures are being undertaken in a timely and efficient manner. gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Regulatory Impact Statement Review . Once the IRF is bedded in and monitoring of the IRF has sufficient performance and cost data to do so with a reasonable level of confidence, the Ministry will review the IRF cost recovery arrangements. With the benefit of that hard data, the review will be able to revisit demand, effort and cost assumptions, assess implications for the level of cost recovery, and identify any consequential fee changes that might be necessary . As part of th e review, the Ministry will also consider whe ther the fee has had any impact on uptake of the right to seek independent reviews of Directors decisions. . The Ministry expects sufficient information to have become available to undertake the review within the three year cycle that is best practice for reviews of fees and charges. gmtqxxq PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of November OC Hon Simeon Brown Action required by: Minister of Transport Tuesday, November INDEPENDENT REVIEW FUNCTION SCOPE AND COST RECOVERY: NEXT STEPS Purpose Seek your feedback on our proposed next steps for setting the scope of the independent review function (IRF) for civil aviation and i ntroducing fees for IRF reviews. Key points The Ministry consulted on three options for setting the scope of the IRF over four weeks to September . We received submissions and subsequently met with four organisations to discuss their feedback . Drawing on the feedback received , our assessment is that the scope of decisions covered by the IRF should comprise: othe key categories of decisions taken by the Director of Civil Aviation (the Director) that are appealable to the District Court odecisions taken by the Director on the granting of individual exemptions from regulations and the Civil Aviation Rules . The above approach labelled Option in the consultation document would most effectively meet the policy intent of providing fast and less costly reviews of appealable decisions than the Courts , while supporting impactful improvements in decision making over time. It would also help ensure the function is manageable within available resources. We also received three submissions on the public consultation carried out in October on options to partially recover the cost of IRF reviews. Drawing on this feedback, our assessment is that it is appropriate for regulations to set twotier fixed fee s of , (excl. GST) per review application for individuals, and , (excl. GST) per review application for organisations. Document PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Subject to your agreement, we propose to draft a Cabinet paper for your consideration and feedback seeking Cabinet: oagreement to proceed with the options identified above for setting the scope of the IRF and the application of IRF review fees oauthorisation for you to issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) to create regulations on this basis. The Cabinet paper will need to be considered by the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) and Cabinet during December , to ensure the regulations can be in place by early March to support the Acts commenc ement on April . We recommend you: agree that the Ministry draft a Cabinet paper f or your consideration , which seek s Cabinets agreement for regulations to be created to set the scope of the independent review function and introduc e review fees, based on the preferred options identified in this paper. Yes No Siobhan Routledge Director Aviation, Policy Group November Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Transport . . . Ministers office to complete : Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events Comments Contacts Name Telephone First contact Siobhan Routledge , Director Aviation, Policy Group Tom Forster , Manager, Aviation Laurence Tyler, Senior Adviser s ()(a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of INDEPENDENT REVIEW FUNCTION SCOPE AND COST RECOVERY : NEXT STEPS The Civil Aviation Act ( Act) that comes into force on April introduces a new independent review function (IRF) The IRF enables applicants to seek expert independent reviews of decisions made by (or on behalf of) the Director of Civil Aviation (the Director) . It provide s an independent review option that is faster and less costly than the court system. It also promote s transparency, timeliness and accountability, and will support improvements in decision making in the aviation regulatory system over time. The Act requires that regulations specify the scope of the function The Act leaves the categories of decisions covered by the IRF to be specified in regulations. On July , Cabinet agreed that the Ministry release a consultation document seeking stakeholder feedback on three options to set the scope of the IRF ECO MIN refers. The three scope options consulted on were: . Option scope includes the relevant categories of Director decisions that are appealable to the District Court . This option focuses reviews primarily on decisions centred on aviation documents that affect the ability of individualsentities to operate within the civil aviation system . Around , decisions a year would be covered by this option. . Option scope includes Option with the addition of decisions on the granting of individual exemptions from regulations and Civil Aviation Rules (Rules). Fewer than decisions on exemptions are made each year . . Option scope includes all regulatory Director decisions except where inappropriate or not relevant . Around , decisions a year would be covered by this option. The Ministry received submissions three from individuals and from civil aviation organisations, including two submissions from the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA). The submissions expressed a range of differ ent views The CAA indicated it strongly supports participants being able to challenge decisions that have a major bearing on their ability to participate in the sector in a way that is more accessible t han the court system . It submitt ed that the IRF scope should be Certain appealable decisions would not be included within the scope of the IRF under this option, where this would be inappropriate or not relevant eg medical certification decisions (that are covered by the existing medical convenor review function); securityenforcement decisions and decisions made by the Secretary of Transport (rather than the Director). Examples of excluded decisions include medical certification decisions, decisions where prompt action is necessary to address immediate public safety or security risks, decisions governed by the Solicitor Generals prosecution guidelines, and decisions on pecuniary matters relating to invoicing and payment of fees and charges. One of the CAA submissions focused on the medical convener process, which is outside the scope of the IRF. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of limited to significant decisions that are appealable under the Act (effectively Option ) . It submitted that Option would not support the policy intent for the IRF because there is a significant risk that the function would be overloaded with the demand for reviews of more minor decisions , which would inhibit the timely reviews of more impactful decisions. Three org anisations favoured Option on the grounds that it would enable reviews of decisions on exemptions while ensuring the demand for reviews would likely be manageable. Five organisations favoured Option on the grounds that it would ensure the widest range of decisions are reviewable. Subsequent discussions held with some of these organisations clarified that many of the decisions they advocated for inclusion would in practice be covered under Option . In particular , Air New Zealand, the New Zealand Airports Association (NZ Airports) and the Aviation Industry Association (AIANZ) submitted that approvals of changes to certain operating specifications (Op Specs) should be reviewable by the IRF. They referred to recent examples of approvals of changes to operation locations, aircraft maintenance programmes and senior personnel. Subsequent discussions we held with these organisations, however, clarified that many examples they gave of these Op Spec decision s had in fact been considered by the Director as applications for exemptions, so they would have been within scope of Option . Some other issues they cited with recent approvals of Op Specs were more about how strictly the Rules are currently drafted, rather than the quality of judgements made by (or on behalf of) the Director in applying them. The three submissions from individuals offered no comment relevant to the scope options. Annex One provides a more detailed summary of the submissions. We consider Option to be the most appropriate option to achieve the policy intent of the function Option most effectively meets the policy intent of providing fast and less costly reviews than the court system , while supporting impactful improvements in decision making in the aviation regulatory system over time. Option would also respond to submitter feedback that supported including decisions on individual exemptions , and in doing so would provide more complete coverage of decisions that can have a significant impact on aviation participants . Option , with its broad scope including lower order decisions , is less likely to facilitate the faster review pathway that the IRF is intended to provide . There are risks that the demand for reviews of the numerous lower order decisions covered by this option c ould: limit the reviewers capacity to deliver timely reviews of the categories of decisions that have the most significant impact on applicants (this was acknowledged by several submitters) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of impose demands on CAA resources that intrude on the agencys day today regulatory operations, and limit the Directors ability to make final decision s on reviewers recommendations within the statutory time frame dilute the incentives for participants to resolve issues with the CAA before escalating them to the level of a IRF review. The risk of overloading the function under Option might be mitigated to some extent by the intended introduction of review fees (see following section). However, we do not expect this would significantly limit the prospect of numerous requests for review s of more minor decisions under Option , given that review fees are to be set at a partial cost recovery level so as not to present an undue barrier for applicants . Implementing Option will minimise the risks to manag ing the IRF within available resources . This will be especially important during the initial months of its operation, when the process is new and reviewers are settling into their respective roles. The Ministry has completed public consultation on cost recovery options On September , Cabinet agreed that the Ministry should publicly consult on options to partially recover the costs of the IRF through the application of review fees. ECO MIN refers. A partial cost recovery approach recognises that applicants are the primary beneficiaries of the review function, while enabling review fees to be kept at a relatively affordable level for sector participants than full cost recovery . The consultation document set out three options and fee levels to partially recover the costs of IRF reviews, based on the key principles for cost recovery derived from agency guidelines : Option a single fixed fee for all participants, set at , (excl. GST) per application. Option preferred option a two tiered fixed fee of , (excl. GST) per application for individuals, and , (excl. GST) per application for organisations. Option a base fee of (excl. GST), plus an hourly fee of (excl. GST), up to a cap of , (excl. GST) for individuals and , (excl. GST) for organisations. These fee levels are broadly comparable to those set for similar purposes in other contexts. For example, the Australian Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAAT) applies a standard single application fee of AU, for reviews of decisions made by the Australian Civil Aviation Safety Authority (CASA). At this stage t he Ministry estimates that review costs will average , (excl . GST) per review, though it is difficult to predict the nature and complexity of reviews that will be carried out once the function is operational. The principles were derived from the Ministrys Transport regulatory system funding principles, and Treasury and Office of the Auditor General guidelines for cost recovery . The Ministry and Treasury guidelines stipulate that an agency should factor the users ability to pay into the setting of fees , to ensure a cost recovery regime does not undermine the policy intent of providing the service. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of The Ministry received three submissions in response to the consultation The consultation closed on October . We received three submissions: Flying New Zealand supported Option . AIANZ favoured Option as they considered it would create a level paying field between individuals and organisations , while also noting that Option would be acceptable. The New Zealand Aviation Federation supported a varied approach depending on the outcome of the review. The y advocated that no fee at all should be applied in cases where a review leads to a Director decision being overturned, while Option should be applied if a review is unsuccessful and the Directors decision is upheld. We consider Option to be the most appropriate option The different fee levels for organisations and individuals under Option is appropriate as decisions affecting organisations are likely to be more technically complex and therefore more time consuming to review, and organisations can generally be expected to have a greater capacity to pay than individuals. Option also utilises a fixed fee structure that would be more straightforward to administer than the hourly fees proposed under Option , and would raise marginally more revenue than Option , while providing more c ertainty about potential costs for applicants . Next steps Subject to your agreement, we will prepare a draft Cabinet paper for your consideration seeking Cabinets agreement to proceed with the preferred options identified above for setting the scope of the IRF and the application of IRF review fees. The Cabinet paper will also seek authorisation for you to issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) to create the new regulations on this basis. Once you are comfortable with the draft Cabinet paper, we propose to consult the Treasury, the Ministry of Justice, the CAA and Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) on the draft , and inform the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet. We propose that the Cabinet paper be lodged with Cabinet Office by December , to enable it to be considered by the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO) on December and Cabinet on December . This timeframe will enable the Cabinet Legislation Committee (LEG) to consider the two sets of regulations by the end of February . Regulations must be in place in advance of the Acts implementation on April . Organisations are subject to many more, and more detailed, rules than individual , and reviews of decisions affecting them are more likely to be complex and time consuming (eg a irworthiness approval s of avionics equipment ) and thus more costl y.. This may not be true in all cases. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Related work on the IRF In November , t he Ministry will be carrying out interviews for the appointment of two IRF reviewers. Subject to your agreement, we propose that the Cabinet Appointment and Honours Committee (APH) consider the appointment of the selected reviewers in February . We will be providing you a separate update on the appointment process in December . PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of ANNEX Summary of submissions on IRF Options A total of submissions were received from: Civil Aviation Authority (provided two submissions) Kea Aerospace an unmanned aircraft operator Ardmore Flying School Air New Zealand NZ Airports Association NZ Aviation Federation representing member organisations Aviation Industry Association NZ (AIANZ) representing industry sectors Gliding NZ NZ Airline Pilots Association (NZALPA) representing pilots, air traffic controllers and flight service operators individuals . Not all submissions offered comment relevant to the scope options. Two individual submissions offered views on the medical convener process, with no further comment. The third individual submission commented on a range of procedural issues but offered no comment on the scope options. Some submissions suggested the inclusion within scope of matters that go beyond what is feasible within the definition of a Directors decision under section of the Civil Aviation Act . Those views are not detailed in this summary.
Regulatory Impact Statement What option is likely to best address the problem, meet the policy objectives, and deliver the highest net benefits . We are satisfied that this tolling proposal meets the statutory criteria in the LTMA (it is a new road and has a feasible, untolled alternative route), provided the Minister of Transport is satisfied with the adequacy of consultation, the level of community support and the effectiveness and efficiency of the scheme. The preferred option depends on the priority placed on the relative benefit of additional revenue produced by the proposal against the potential for project disbenefits . This a matter of judgement for the Minister of Transport, and further information about the extent of these disbenefits would help clarify that judgement , but the following could be considered: a. Tolling does not influence when the infrastructure will be delivered . Whether or not tolling is implemented, the road will be delivered at the same time, meaning users will gain no direct benefits from the road being tolled. b. Diversion reduces project benefits , such as travel time and safety . With fewer users on NL , its travel time savings, travel time reliability, health emission reduction benefits , crash cost savings, and wider economic benefits would be reduced versus the status quo. The available evidence about safety, which is the only area where these impacts have been quantified, suggests they could be significant. c. An untolled option incurs fewer collection costs . Compared to other land transport revenue streams, tolling NL is inefficient, with of gross revenue going towards collection costs. However, this scheme is more efficient than previous tolling schemes. d. A tolled option will impact the supporting urban areas objective . All tolled option s will likely increase the number of vehicles using the current SH through Levin town centre, including heavy vehicles , versus an untolled option . . Our analysis has also been limited in assessing this tolling schemes efficiency and effectiveness as NZTA ha s been unable to complete benefit cost analysis comparing the tolled version of the project with the untolled version of the project and considering the most up toproject costs, due to the time constraints. This analysis is essential to the Ministrys ability to assess the economic efficiency of the tolling scheme. For example, the detailed business case indicates over . billion in benefits from vehicle travel time savings and crash cost benefits. Any diversion away from NL would reduce these benefits and the overall benefit cost ratio. What are the marginal costs and benefits of the option . The section below sets out an analysis of option , NZTAs preferred tolling option. . Toll Road Users: a. Our ability to measure the overall costs and benefits of the tolled option on toll road users is limited , because the impact on travel time savings, carbon emission reductions and wider economic benefits (reduced agglomeration) have not been calculated in the time available . However, we would expect a reduction in these benefits roughly commensurate with the diversion rate when compared with an untolled scenario.
Regulatory Impact Statement b. Toll road users (south of the Tararua Road Interchange) would also pay and the costs of collection which make up of total gross revenue. . Users of alternative routes : Modelling also shows that in annual crash cost savings would decrease by versus an untolled scenario due to a diversion rate onto the less safe existing SH route. . Frequent andor local users: Frequent users of the road or people that would use the road regularly in the absence of a toll will face either an increased cost of living if they choose to pay the toll regularly, or a decrease in benefits associated with the road if they choose to use one of the alternative routes. As the alternative route take s longer, motorists may need to avoid some shorter trips, which has participation disbenefits for society (in relation to employment, social, cultural related travel), especially for low income people . . Levin residents local businesses : Local residents and businesses would see an increase in vehicle traffic versus an untolled scenario, decreasing the benefit of NL in moving state highway traffic, including many heavy vehicles, off of the main street. . Horowhenua District CouncilAlternative Route RCA : In the absence of alternative arrangements, once the current SH returns to Horowhenua District Council as the RCA, the road will face increased traffic . The of vehicles that will choose not not to use NL will use the current SH (where trips are not avoided as a result of a toll). This will result in increased maintenance costs to keep the roads to an appropriate standard. . NZTANLTFWider road network : The m NPV toll that would be raised to cover maintenance, operations, and a portion of construction costs will allow an equivalent amount to be retained by the NLTF and re invested in the wider road network. s ()(j) s ()(j) s ()(j) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Regulatory Impact Statement Section : Delivering an option How will the new arrangements be implemented . If a tolling order is imposed on NL , it needs to be in place before the road is opened. Currently, project completion is estimated to be in . If more time is requested for NZTA to formulate additional analysis on the tolling proposal, there is enough time to do this before the road is opened. However, Cabinet timeframes may have to shift. No further action will need to be taken if the Minister chooses not to proceed with the tolling proposal, apart from communication of this decision. . Project teams may also reassess the design of the road based on the differing requirements and traffic demand created by the tolling scheme. NZTA will make the operational decisions to implement this. How will the toll order be implemented if the Minister wishes . The toll order will be brought into effect via an Order in Council. The toll order will contain some preconditions that need to be satisfied prior to commencement . . The Ministry will work with NZTA on the form of these preconditions and the mechanism by which they will be satisfied. Based on previous tolling orders and the requirements of this toll road , we envisage the preconditions will stipulate that NZTA sets out in a report to the Minister details of the following matters at least weeks prior to tolling commencing: a. that the entire road would be declared a toll road, but tolling would be only carried out south of the Tararua Road interchange, with the northern km of the road zero rated b. the service standard obligation to road users c. the method of publicising the toll in advance of the road opening d. the signage and other information that will be used to inform drivers approaching the road of the toll and options for paying e. a technical description of the proposed components of the toll collection system and key performance indicators, inclusive of error rates, revenue levels and health and safety issues f. the structure of the administration fees for all payment methods and all penalty fees g. the continued existence of a feasible alternative route . . Preconditions will also include clauses relating to the ongoing function of the toll road, including : a. setting toll tariffs within a maximum limit and with adjustments being made three yearly or possibly more regularly based on the results of tolling reform b. the ability to provide exemptions and toll free days c. toll collection mechanisms . How will the new arrangements be monitored, evaluated, and reviewed . The Toll Order will also contain on going conditions to ensure the intent of the tolling remains and that the public arent disadvantaged by the toll. As with the preconditions, this is a work in progress, but we envisage it will include regular public disclosure and reporting to the Minister of: a. actual traffic volumes compared to forecast traffic volumes for each class of vehicle b. actual toll revenue compared to forecast toll revenues PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Regulatory Impact Statement c. the ongoing status of the alternative route d. a network utilisation performance report to include an analysis of the response of traffic to tolling, and any traffic management method used to vary the response e. if there has been a significant change to that method of payment since the previous annual report to the Minister, a description of the new method. . These reports will be closely monitored by the Ministry as part of our regulatory and system stewardship function. How a toll would be implemented north of the Tararua Interchange at a future . In future, traffic patterns may change to a point where NZTA believes that the northern section of the road that is currently untolled should be tolled in order to make a contribution to the project. The preferred option includes the entirety of the road a s a toll road, but just zero rated for the northernmost kilometres. . If as part of the regular monitoring and evaluation of this toll road, NZTA observe that this section of road can make a meaningful contribution to project costs, they could propose to increase the zero rated toll with the written permission of the Ministe r. This flexibility is included in the Cabinet paper attached to this RIS. . The Ministry would offer advice to the Minister about the effects of such a toll on the efficiency and effectiveness of the whole scheme if this scenario arises. In addition, the Minister would need to be satisfied in the context of the scheme, whe ther NZTA has carried out adequate consultation on the proposed tolling scheme, as is required under the LTMA.
Regulatory Impact Statement Annex One: Route map of proposed tolling scheme
Regulatory Impact Statement routes to choose from . Modelling also indicates annual crash costs will increase by by compared to an untolled scenario , equating to an extra . deaths and serious injuries per year . It is also expected that tolling would have reduced benefits in travel time savings than a n untolled scenario due to increased use , but specific estimates of these disbenefits have not been produced in the time available. NZTA ha s provided four options which we have assessed as part of this RIS: Option : Untolled Proceed with the road with capital costs funded by the Crown , with any overruns, operations and maintenance funding coming from the NLTF (status quo) Option The option consulted on with the public, one toll point south of the Tararua Road intersection and the Northern section untolled (. .) (NZTA recommended) Option Adds a second gantry for the northern section of the road and has a toll rate of . per gantry passed for light vehicles and . for heavy vehicles (. .. .) Option An internationally comparable toll rate with the same number of toll points as option () . Option has a higher toll rate than other option s, leading to increased diversion onto alternative routes. NZTAs t raffic modelling indicates a commensurate reduction in crash costs savings with increased rates of diversion. There would also likely be a reduction in time travel savings benefits and wider economic benefits roughly equivalent to the diversion rate , but these have not been modelled given the time available . Option has a lower rate of diversion south of the Tararua Road intersection than the NZTA recommended option but would have higher diversion north of the intersection as it would be tolled . This option has higher annual monetised crash cost savings, but less in NPV revenue over years. Public consultation on option was undertaken between September and October . It received , unique submissions. The majority were opposed to tolling NL, with of submitters not supporting the scheme. The most predominant themes from those who did not support the proposal were a belief that the toll rate was too high, or a rejection of the user pays principle. of submitters supported the scheme as is, or with changes. Most submitters who supported the scheme expressed agreement with the user pays principle and some said that the benefits of the new road warrant a toll. We are satisfied that this tolling proposal meets the statutory criteria in the LTMA (it is a new road and has a feasible, untolled alternative route), provided the Minister of Transport is satisfied with the adequacy of consultation, the level of communit y support, and the effectiveness and efficiency of the scheme. We consider that the effectiveness and efficiency of the scheme should be assessed based on the impact diversion has on project benefits. An benefit cost ratio for this project accounting for the toll is not available, but the available estimates a bout safety indicate the impact on overall project benefits could be significant. The relative benefit of additional revenue produced by the proposal against the potential for project disbenefits is a matter of judgement for the Minister of Transport, and further information about the extent of these disbenefits would help clarify that judgement.
Regulatory Impact Statement Section : Diagnos ing the policy problem What is the context behind the policy problem and how is the s tatus quo expected to develop NZTA has proposed tolling taki to north of Levin to recover costs . taki to north of Levin (NL) is a new road that is expected to begin construction in . . The need for a new road to replace the existing State Highway from taki to North of Levin has firstly been highlighted by the existing roads poor safety record. In the five years to , there were deaths and serious injuries along SH and SH within the NL project area. Secondly, t here is a lack of resilience in the transport system along this corridor. Journeys are regularly disrupted by crashes and the route is at high risk of closure due to regular flooding, which is likely to increase due to climate change impacts. Lastly, population growth in Horowhenua is occurr ing at the fastest rate in a generation, outpacing many Stats NZ growth projections , meaning that the demand for the route is growing rapidly. . The road will be an off line four lane road and have a design speed of kmh . Construction of the new highway is due to start in and be completed in . NLs project objectives are to: a. enhance safety of travel on the state highway network b. enhance the resilience of the state highway network c. provide appropriate connections that integrate the state highway and local road network to serve urban areas d. support inter and intraregional growth and productivity through improved movement of people and freight on the state highway network, and e. enable mode choice for journeys between local communities by providing a walking and cycling facility. . NL was initially provided funding from the Crown of m from the New Zealand Upgrade Plan in . Additional funding from the project was provided during the reprioritisation and re baselining of NZUP during . In , NZTA was made responsible for all NZUP roading projects , including NL. . Key details of the final form of the road are presented in Annex . NZTA has proposed tolling NL to recover maintenance, tolling infrastructure costs, and to reimburse the NLTF for a portion of the notional debt accrued where capital costs of NL exceed Crown funding. The tolling scheme design NZTA proposed is summarised in the route map in annex . Tolls are an established way of raising additional transport revenue under existing settings . Under the LTMA, to toll a new road, the Minister must be satisfied: a. that there has been adequate public consultation on the proposed tolling
Regulatory Impact Statement scheme b. with the level of community support for the proposed tolling scheme in the relevant region or regions c. that a feasible, untolled, alternative route is available to road users d. that the proposed tolling is efficient and effective e. that it is not an existing road unless they are satisfied that the existing road is located near and is physically or operationally integral to the new toll road. . The statutory criteria provides the Minister with broad discretion in recommend ing an Order in Council for tolling. Toll revenue can only be applied to costs associated with the toll road and the implementation of the tolling scheme itself . . The statutory criteria for tolling are currently under review, however the tolling scheme for NL and any other schemes that will be considered before reforms are implemented are being considered under existing tolling settings. . Our dedicated (hypothecated) land transport revenue system raises revenue from road users. The majority of this revenue is used to maintain existing levels of service. The three major revenue levers are: a. Distance and weight based Road User Charges (RUC) for nonpetrol and heavy vehicles. The RUC system raises about . billion () of the gross revenue of the NLTF and costs about of the revenue collected for its administration b. Fuel Excise Duty (FED) applied on imported petrol (and non diesel vehicle fuels ). FED raises about billion () of the NLTF and costs a negligible amount to administer c. Motor Vehicle Registrations (MVR) and licensing fees applied at the point of import and annually to every vehicle on the road. MVR raises about million () of the NLTF. . Tolling makes a relatively minor revenue contribution to the land transport system. Approximatel y . million p.a in gross revenue was raised in from the three existing toll roads in the State Highway network : Tauranga Eastern Link; the Northern Gateway; and Takitimu Drive. The Ministry has recommended against several tolling schemes in the past because of their modest revenue raising ability, the relatively high costs to operate the tolling business ( of overall tolling revenue), and the traff ic diversion tolls cause. Despite this, tolling can provide a useful alternative source of revenue that is significant at a project level and specific to the users of a particular road. It is also a useful revenue tool for accelerating the delivery of a specific project. . Tauranga Eastern Link and the Northern Gateway Toll Road aim to repay capital funding provided by the Crown that meets about and of their construction cost respectively . Maintenance costs on these toll roads are being met by the NLTF. NL w as considered for tolling due to Government policy . The GPS includes an expectation that NZTA should consider tolling to construct and maintain all new road s, to protect existing funding in the NLTF for maintaining existing roads. According to the tolling proposal, all previous engagement with the public on NL has positioned the road as possibly being proposed for tolling. A tolling study on the road was undertaken in July . What is the policy problem or opportunity . NL has been funded by the Crown . In the absence of tolling, its maintenance and operations costs, as well as any notional debt accrued during construction costs where capital costs exceed the s ()(g)(i) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Regulatory Impact Statement Crown funding allocation, will be met by future NLTF revenue. Generally, it is prudent to give maintaining existing assets priority over investment in new assets. Without tolling, NLs maintenance , operations and construction costs will reduce the NLTFs ability to meet expenditure ambitions over the current NLTP period . This in turn has a minor effect on the new capital projects able to be funded from the NLTF. What objectives are sought in relation to th e policy problem . The primary objective of the tolling scheme is to collect an additional source of revenue, within the current legislative settings, that can contribute to the cost of tolling infrastructure, road maintenance, operations, and a portion of the notional debt that may accrue to the NLTF during construction (over the Crown contribution). . In addition, the secondary objectives of the tolling scheme are : a. to ensure users of the roading network pay for what they use, in line with the expectation in GPS for NZTA to supplement revenue with contributions from beneficiaries and users of infrastructure , and b. to maintain project benefits as much as possible while raising toll revenue. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Regulatory Impact Statement Section : Deciding upon an option to address the policy problem What criteria will be used to compare options to the status quo . The following criteria will be used to evaluate options for achieving the policy objective . These criteria draw on the LTMAs purpose of contributing to an effective, efficient, and safe land transport system: a. Effective : the extent to which the option is likely to contribute to meeting the policy objective, as well as broader Government policy such as GPS b. Efficient : the scale of impacts associated with implementing the toll on project objectives, benefits, and the wider road network c. Safe : the impact of the proposal on the safety benefits of the project. . We have selected these criteria in order to provide a holistic view of the proposals efficiency and effectiveness, rather than some of the more descriptive tolling criteria in the LTMA (the new road and alternative route requirement) which leave relativel y little room for judgement. What scope will options be considered within . For the purposes of this RIS, the particulars of the tolling options are limited to those described in the tolling proposal. This includes the placement of the tolling infrastructure (gantries) and the toll pricing or structure . However, it is worth noting that NZTA assessed more options than just those shortlisted in the proposal. . Timeframes have limited our ability to request more information from NZTA to support our analysis (such as benefit cost analysis) or to request additional modelling . There are timeconstraints around delivery of these tolling proposals to Cabinet before the end of the year. . For the purposes of this section, a comparison is made between NL in its tolled and untolled (status quo) forms. What options are being considered Public consultation was limited to one proposal . From September to October , NZTA undertook a public consultation on a tolling proposal for NL . The public consultation included details of the tolling infrastructure, the road, travel time savings, and the proposed toll rates of . for light vehicles and . for heavy vehicles , and no toll rate for the km northernmost section of the road. It received , unique responses from the community and a range of key stakeholders. The following points are a high level summary of the feedback receiv ed: a. ( submissions ) support tolling NL . ( submissions ) support is as proposed and ( people) support tolling but with changes . b. (, submissions ) of respondents do not support the tolling scheme. ( submissions ) do not support the tolling of the road and ( submissions ) do not support the tolling of any road . . Suggestions were made by respondents about what kind of tolling they would support. ( submissions ) expressed conditional support if changes were made that include : a. lower toll rates b. providing discounts or concessions for high volume users PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Regulatory Impact Statement c. only charging heavy vehicles . NZTA ha s not recommended any changes to its proposed tolling scheme from that which was consulted on. Four options have been identified . The Minister received advice on a range of toll prices as part of NZTAs request to him to consult. However, s ome of the below options differ significantly from the tolling scheme that was consulted on. Some options have a higher toll price or have a structure that varies from the toll as consulted on, such as adding distance based pricing. This would need to be c onsidered when the Minister assesses whether he is satisfied that NZTA has carried out adequate consultation on the proposed tolling scheme, as is required under the LTMA. . Across all options, even a very small toll creates quite high levels of diversion. This is because approximately of NL users are expected to be local users who have multiple alternative routes to choose from to avoid the tolled route . Option One Untolled Status Quo . The construction of NL is expected to begin in and to open in . On completion, future maintenance costs (m) and any capital costs that exceed the Crown funding would have to be met by the NLTF . . According to traffic modelling, approximately , vehicles will use NL south of the Tararua Road interchange per day (which is just south of Levin) and , north of the interchange but before it intersects with State Highway (the main road between SH at Levin and Palmerston North) . In this scenario, only , vehicles would use the old SH south of Levin per day and between , and , would use SH through Levin . In , annual crash cost savings versus no NL will be . million and there would be . fewer DSIs, the highest savings of any option. Option Two Tolled at . (recommended by NZTA) . Construction would be completed, and t olling infrastructure would be introduced between the onoff ramps at Taylors Road and the Tararua Road interchange . The toll rate for light vehicles would be . . Heavy vehicles would pay double , in line with most existing toll roads . . NZTA would declare the entire road a toll road but rate the northernmost km at zero dollars . This would create future flexibility to toll this section of road should traffic demand or travel patterns change. . Once established, the operating costs of the scheme would require approximately of gross tolling revenue over the life of the tolling scheme. This is to meet the NZTA standard for tolling and to del iver an end toend technology solution that would support the delivery of a back office verification, processing and issuance of toll charges, and associated customer interface. . Travel on the existing SH and the local road network through Levin would remain untolled. The current SH and SH in the project are classified as high risk rural roads and have a lower safety profile than NL , which will have a rating of stars or above on the KiwiRAP safety rating, versus stars for the existing SH. . Revenue raised through tolling, estimated to be million NPV over years, would
Regulatory Impact Statement be ring fenced for the maintenance and operations of the road and to pay for a portion of the notional debt if the roads cost exceeds its Crown funding. Toll rates would be adjusted every three years by the same percentage as the total percentage increase of the Consumers Price Index (all groups) (CPI) as by Stats NZ, rounded to the nearest cents. . According to traffic modelling, the proposed toll rates will result in less traffic north of the Tararua Road interchange and the State Highway intersection and less traffic south of the Tararua Road interchange in relative to an untolled scenario . This will result in , vehicles per day using the SH between taki and Levin and between , , vehicles per day driving on the main road through Levin. For this option, t he annual crash cost savings of the new road are forecast to be million in . There would also likely be a reduction in travel time savings benefits and wider economic benefits roughly equivalent to the diversion rate, but these have not been modelled due to the time available. Option s Three to Four . For options three to f our, tolling would proceed on taki to north of Levin as noted in option two, but with changes to the toll rate, which ha ve commensurate impacts on diversion and safety benefits as noted below. . Option would implement an additional toll point north of the Tararua Road interchange and charge based on how many tolling points a vehicle passes, constraining the free part of the road to North east of the roundabout at the intersection with SH . This has the effect of offering a discount to some local traffic travelling only on one portion of the road. . Options and only include traffic volumes at a single point on the road, south of Levin as these were the only figures available in the tolling proposal.
Regulatory Review Committee when policy decisions were taken on the
Regulatory Systems (Transport) Amendment Bill No. Policy Approval (OC) Some information is withheld under this section of the OIA: ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Minsters of the Crown and officials
Regulatory Systems (Transport) Amendment Bill Policy Approval Some information is withheld under this section of the OIA: ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Minsters of the Crown and officials
Reinforce separate markets for taxis and private hire services, with separate regulatory burdens.
Release of New Zealand freight and supply chain strategy
Released in late , Road to Zero was a previous Governments road safety strategy. The strategy included a vision for a New Zealand where no one is killed or seriously injured in road crashes, and a targeted a reduction in death and serious injuries (from levels) by .
Relying on memory from plus years ago.
Relying on past trends to decide investment in longlived transport infrastructure such as roads, railways or ports is subject to uncertainty. Failure to manage this uncertainty can result in costly mistakes.
Remaining projects in delivery should be prioritised .
Removes or updates lowrisk operations so they no longer
Removing level crossings improves the safety of both the road and rail networks, allows more frequent trains and, particularly with grade separation, improves the efficiency of the road network with vehicles not having to stop at barrier arms when trains pass. It benefits both commuters and drivers.
Renewable Freight Certificate Assessment
Repairing damaged state highways and railway lines
Repeal of the Clean Car Discount scheme
Replace deliverable Deliver a set of outcomes and associated measures endorsed by Cabinet and Auckland Council in Q to Deliver the Tmaki Makaurau Transport Plan in Q.
Replacement of Act approved
Report back to joint Ministers on proposed Stand up design and delivery model projects within each investment area established
Report into certification of low emissions freight
Report into certification of low emissions freight today
Report of the Cabinet Legislation Committee: Period Ended
Report of the Cabinet Legislation Committee: Period Ended December On December , Cabinet made the following decisions on the work of the Cabinet Legislation Committee for the period ended December :
Report on Auckland congestion pricing released
Report on equity in Aucklands transport system
Report on equity in Aucklands transport system released
Report on taking a real options approach to transport planning released
Report prepared and further investigation recommended
Reporting back on the detailed planning phase
Reporting on the expectations The NZTA is expected to demonstrate how it is giving effect to these expectations, and specifically how it is progressing with the Performance and Efficiency Plan. Existing NZTA reporting mechanisms are likely to be used wherever possible in this reporting. Possible mechanisms include: Statement of Intent and Statement of Performance Expectations assessment of how the NLTP gives effect to GPS Annual Report on the NLTF and NZTA Annual Report annual reporting on matters relating to the RNIP .
Reporting on the revenue and how it is used
Reporting requirements Waka Kotahi must prepare an annual report on the NLTF which includes a statement of performance for each activity class and an explanation of how the funding of activities or combinations of activities under the NLTP has contributed to the achievement of any outcomes, objectives or impacts set out in the relevant GPS on land transport .
Reports about the feasibility and desirability of road pricing and parking levies in Auckland released
Reports on economic development and transport released
Representatives from our ministry, MBIE, Airways New Zealand and the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) attendees on their work since the last forum.
Representatives from our ministry, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), Airways New Zealand and the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) attendees on how the research will be used to inform their work.
Request dated May : copy of each of the briefings provided to the Minister of Transport in March , as listed on the Ministry of Transports briefing list for March . BriefingListMarch.pdf (transport.govt.nz) On May , we advised you of an extension to the time period for responding to your request. The extension was due to consultations necessary to make a decision on your request being such that a proper response could not reasonably be made within the original time limit. We have now completed the necessary consultations.
Request dated April : a copy of all reports, briefings and advice that the Ministry provided to the Minister of Transport in March , excluding Weekly Reports.
Request for proposal opens
Requiring Euro for light vehicles, motorcycles and mopeds
Requiring Euro for vehicles modified for disabled people
Requiring Euro VI for heavy vehicles
Research , Economics and Evaluation The Research , Economics and Evaluation team operates within the System Performance and Governance Group of the Ministry of Transport. The team supports the Ministrys policy teams by providing the evidence base at each stage of the policy development. The team is responsible for: Developing the Transport Evidence Base (see below) and the Transport Knowledge Hub which connects people from across the wider transport sector and promotes the sharing of transport data, evidence, knowledge, research, information, capabilities, and ideas. Providing economic input on business cases, funding requests, competition issues and specific projects such as value capture, natural disasters, and the social impacts on environment and health. Providing the evaluation function for the Ministry, including designing evaluation frameworks, developing performance metrics and indicators, and designing, conducting and procuring evaluations. The Transport Evidence Base The Transport Evidence Base Strategy creates an environment to ensure data, information, research and evaluation play a key role in shaping the policy landscape. Good, evidencebased decisions also enhance the delivery of services provided by both the publ ic and private sectors to support the delivery of transport outcomes and improve wellbeing and liveability in New Zealand. Acknowledgements We would like to thank the following people for their input and assistance to this project and the preparation of this report: The Ministry of Justice The Ministry of Transport New Zealand Police Waka Kotahi the New Zealand Transport Agency The New Zealand interlock providers Paul Marques (Draft Reviewer) Mary Sheehan (Draft Reviewer) Isis Fynn (Research Assistant)
Research findings from the survey were presented by Colmar Brunton and participants were able to ask questions about the research.
Research into the crash risk associated with pace of progression through the driver licensing system released
Research presented at Transport Knowledge Conference
Research shows that many illicit and prescription drugs have the potential to impair driving, and studies show New Zealanders are using those drugs and driving. Over , an average of people were killed each year in crashes where a driver was found to have drugs other than alcohol in their system. This represented around of all road deaths. While drug drivers already face serious criminal penalties if they are caught, the current law makes it hard for police to carry out more tests that could deter drug driving. It is clear that we are not effective as we could be in deterring drug driving on our roads.
Researching and regulating the use of drones in New Zealand.
Researching the impact of technology on future transport policy to stimulate wider debate and inform the development of good policy.
Resetting funding expectations would mean KiwiRail changes how it runs its business In the short term, i.e. in the period up to June when KiwiRail has to submit to its next RNIP to you , your expectation would be that KiwiRail This would likely
Reshaping how we travel in our capital city is vital to enable growth, get more people using a variety of travel choices and to help reduce emissions. With the potential for significant residential growth to the east and south of Wellington, a range of improvements to build network capacity and travel choice, making getting about the city easier, more accessible and reliable.
Resilience and security have been the dominant area of focus for several years now, with extreme weather events just one example of disruptive events faced by communitie s throughout the country. It is imperative that resilience of the land transport system continues to be strengthened against disruptive events of all types including not only natural hazards, but also security and other threats.
Resilience is becoming increasingly important as i t helps people, communities, and systems to thrive in the face of adversity, and to manage stress and uncertainty . Resilience goes to the heart of culture and organisational capability, assets and taonga, and an Agencys response to a range of events. I would like the Agency to better communicate in its SPE how it plans to improve its governance and organisational resilience processes and practices, and what steps it will take to improve resilience in the land transport system.
Respond to the offences severity (through assessment of the expected types of harm)
Responds with the right mix of interventions.
Response Requirements Document (
Response Requirements Document (RRD)
Response to an OIA request for:
Response to an OIA request relating to ETC funding.
Responses are sought by pm on June .
Results of topic analysis Figure illustrates the results of this analysis by showing the estimated probability of each of the five topics for activities in three improvements groups based on activity class and work categories assigned to NLTP activities. In general, high probabi lities (greater than .) are estimated for the topic(s) like the analysis group, eg, the roads topic was detected with high probability for most road improvement activities and walking and cycling topics were detected for most walking and cycling improvem ent activities. The safety topic was also frequently detected for roads and walking and cycling improvements, but less so for public transport improvements. It is also apparent that analysis groups do not always capture the full objectives or intent of each activity, as topics unrelated to the analysis group were detected with high probability for Topic detection is done using a method known as zero shot sequence classification. For an overview, see https:joeddav.github.ioblogZSL.html . https:huggingface.codatasetsmultinli APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
Retrofitting existing highways with engineering treatments will p roduce safety gains . However, n ew roads built to modern engineering and safety standards will achieve greater safety gains in both preventing crashes and also decreasing their severity G ood quality road surfaces can play a big role in reducing crashes across the entire network .
Revenue Action Plan to support delivering infrastructure sooner
Revenue from the NLTF is invested in state highways, coastal shipping, local roads, road policing, walking and cycling, public transport , and the rail network . Local government contributes funding towards activities in the NLTP that it is responsible for delivering. You are responsible for approving Waka Kotahis recommendations for funding road policing activities. National rail network maintenance and renewals are also funded through the NLTF as part of the GPSs Rail Network activity class. KiwiRail is required to prepare a Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP) every three years, and you are also responsible for approving the Programme . Main sources of revenue for the NLTF () FED RUC Registration and licensing fees RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT KEY TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES
Revenue from the fund is invested in state highways, coastal shipping, local roads, road policing, walking and cycling, and public transport. Local government matches the billion contribution from the NLTF with another billion per year of its own funding. National rail network maintenance and renewals investment is also funded through the NLTF as part of the Rail Network activity class. KiwiRail is required to prepare a Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP) every three years, and you are responsible, as Minister for Transport, for approving KiwiRails RNIP You can adjust the rate of charges and duties for the NLTF to meet your priorities RUC rates are set through the RUC Rates Regulations and changes must be confirmed by Parliament. FED is generally set through amendments to the Customs and Excise Act and sometimes by an Order in Council. Main sources of revenue for the NLTF () FED RUC Registration and licensing fees RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT KEY TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES
Revenue from the fund is invested in state highways, coastal shipping, local roads, road policing, walking and cycling, and public transport. Local government matches the billion contribution it receives from the NLTF with another billion per year of its own funding. National rail network maintenance and renewals are also funded through the NLTF as part of the GPSs Rail Network activity class. KiwiRail is required to prepare a Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP) every three years, and you are responsible, as Minister for Transport, for approving KiwiRails RNIP . Section of the LTMA also allows for some land transport revenue to be used for other purposes, subject to the approval of the Minister of Transport and the Minister of Finance. This includes search and rescue and recreational boating activities, W aka Kotahi s regulatory function, and activities to maintain the integrity of the land transport revenue system. Agencies that receive funding through this avenue include the Ministry, Waka Kotahi, MNZ and some non governmental organisations, such as Coastguard and Land Search and Rescue NZ . Main sources of revenue for the NLTF () FED RUC Registration and licensing fees RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT KEY TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES
Revenue from the fund is invested in state highways, the rail network, coastal shipping, local roads, road policing, walking and cycling, and public transport. Local government matches the billion contribution from the NLTF with another billion per year of its own funding. You can adjust the rate of charges and duties for the NLTF to meet your priorities RUC rates are set through the RUC Rates Regulations and changes must be confirmed by Parliament. FED is generally set through amendments to the Customs and Excise Act and, sometimes, by an Order in Council. The Ministry is required to provide forecasts of NLTF revenue at each Government economic and fiscal update (six monthly intervals). The figure below is the forecast run for the Pre election Economic and Fiscal Update . It shows NLTF revenue has been rising , primarily due to increased travel and increases in FED and RUC rates. Revenue from FED will become less certain and unstable over time as vehicles continue to become more fuel efficient and people increasingly choose to travel by other modes . The decrease in revenue from is due to the previous Governments cost of living package which provided a percent reduction in RUC and cent per litre reduction in FED. Foregone revenue from the package was backfilled from a . billion Crown appropriation so that Waka Kotahi had sufficient funds to meet the expenditure range set out in the NLTP .
Revenue from the fund is invested in state highways, the rail network, local roads, road policing, walking and cycling, and public transport. Local government matches the billion contribution from the NLTF with another billion per year of its own funding. You can adjust the rate of charges and duties for the NLTF to meet your priorities RUC rates are set through the RUC Rates Regulations and changes must be confirmed by Parliament. FED is generally set through amendments to the Customs and Excise Act and, sometimes, by an Order in Council. The Ministry is required to provide forecasts of NLTF revenue at each Government economic and fiscal update (six monthly intervals). The figure below is the forecast run for the Pre election Economic and Fiscal Update . It shows NLTF revenue has been rising , primarily due to increased travel and increases in FED and RUC rates. Revenue from FED will become less certain and unstable over time as vehicles continue to become more fuel efficient and people increasingly choose to travel by other modes . The decrease in revenue from is due to the previous Governments cost of living package which provided a percent reduction in RUC and cent per litre reduction in FED. Foregone revenue from the package was backfilled from a . billion Crown appropriation so that Waka Kotahi had sufficient funds to meet the expenditure range set out in the NLTP .
Review function being established under the Act, and appointments to the Oil Pollution
Review group conducted independent review of RUC
Review harmful emission star ratings of vehicle models at
Review has strong support from the maritime sector. We will brief you further on the Review
Review infrastructure standards and guidelines
Review of Civil Aviation Authority organisational culture released
Review of Maritime legislation
Review of Vehicle Dimensions and Mass
Review of fuel refunds and rebates
Review of the Investment in Operating and Maintaining New Zealands State Highways
Review of the Total Mobility scheme
Review of the public transport operating model (PTOM)
Review results consulted on
Review road safety penalties
Reviewing road safety penalties to ensure they are proportionate to the risk of harm and reflect societys expectations.
Reviewing the rules that govern the size and weight of vehicles that can travel on New Zealand roads.
Reviewing the situations where someone may claim a regional fuel tax rebate.
Reviewing transport licensing requirements for taxis, shuttles, private hire vehicles and dialadriver services.
Revised Reporting measures for the GPS (as at September ) Policy Statement MoT
Revocation Notice: New Zealand Transport Agency (Trial Social Leasing Scheme) Direction In accordance with section (A) of the Crown Entities Act , this is notice of revocation of the New Zealand Transport Agency (Trial Social Leasing Scheme) Direction . This Direction, dated October , directed the New Zealand Transport Agency to carry out the additional function of establish ing and administer ing the Trial Social Leasing Scheme. Dated this XXth day of June
Revocation Order PCO .;
Revocation of the year limited licences policy
Richard Cross Acting Deputy Chief Executive Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Transport . . .
Richard Cross Acting Deputy Chief Executive, Investment and Monitoring Hon Matt Doocey Associate M inister of Transport . . . Ministers office to complete : Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events Comments
Richard Kelly Business Enablement and Support Manager
Richmond Hope Bypass State Highway
Right of First Refusal . The majority of the Maungawhau land proposed for development is owned by CRLL. The exception to this is the former Mount Eden Station site of Ruru Street, which is owned by Auckland Council. Part of the Ruru Street title has a right of first refusal (RFR) noted on it under the Ng Mana Whenua o Tmaki Collective Redress Act .
Risks and mitigations The decisions around timing of this project are subject to further Cabinet decision. There are minimal risks associated with withholding this information.
Risks and mitigations There are minimal risks associated with releasing this information. This document provides a detailed analysis to the issue and options considered to address it. It sets out the reasoning and logic behind the proposals to amend the Director of Land Transports powers, which supported Cabinet decision making. Appendix Four to the Cabinet paper, referenced Regulatory Impact Statement Maritime (Offences) Regulations and Marine Protection (Offences) Regulations This document is released in full.
Risks and mitigations There are minimal risks associated with releasing this information. This document provides a detailed analysis to the issue and options considered to address it. It sets out the reasoning and logic behind the proposals to amend the Maritime (Offences) and Marine Protection (Offences) Regulations, which supported Cabinet decision making.
Risks and mitigations There are minimal risks associated with releasing this information. This document provides a highlevel summary of submitter feedback on each of the land proposals, and does not include submitter details. Appendix Two to the Cabinet paper, referenced Summary of maritime proposals and consultation feedback This document is released in full.
Risks and mitigations There are minimal risks associated with releasing this information. This document provides a highlevel summary of submitter feedback on each of the maritime proposals, and does not include submitter details. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Appendix Three to the Cabinet paper, referenced Regulatory Impact Statement Director of Land Transport powers during emergency and time critical events This document is released in full.
Risks and mitigations There are minimal risks in releasing this document. The talking points are a highlevel, summarised version of what is in the Cabinet paper that is proposed to be released. The RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of talking points do not contain detail on anticipated timeframes for this work. Cabinet Minute:
Risks and mitigations There is minimal risk in releasing the Cabinet minute, as the minute only confirms the decision of the Cabinet Economic Development Committee and does not contain detail of specific proposals that were approved. Cabinet Economic Development Committee Minute:
Risks and mitigations There is minimal risk in releasing the Cabinet minute, as the minute reflects the same content as the Cabinet paper which we are proposing to release. Appendix One to the Cabinet paper, referenced Summary of land proposals and consultation feedback This document is released in full.
Risks and mitigations We have not identified any risks with the release of this paper .
Risks and mitigations We have not identified any risks with the release of this paper . Minute LEGMIN Amendments to the Land Transport (Infringement and Reminder Notices) Regulations This document is proposed to be released in full.
Risks arising from capability that could impact value for money should be accounted for in the risk profile of a program or project business case.
Road Efficiency Group publications related to value for money Activity Management Planning: A Guide to integrating the NZTAs Business Case Approach Self assessment Draft Whole Document:
Road Policing, Automated Enforcement, and Road Safety Promotion.
Road User Charges (RUC) exemption for heavy electric vehicles took effect
Road User Charges (Rates) Amendment Regulations
Road User Charges (Rates) Amendment Regulations
Road User Charges (Rates) Amendment Regulations
Road User Charges (Temporary RUC Reduction Scheme) Amendment Bill
Road User Charges Act
Road User Charges Act came into force
Road User Charges Amendment Regulations
Road User charges calculator moves to Waka Kotahi site
Road controlling authorities (RCAs) set speed limits for roads under their control. The New Zealand Transport Agency Waka Kotahi (NZTA) is the RCA for State highways and local councils are RCAs for local roads. The Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits sets the framework for how RCAs plan for, consult on and implement speed limit changes on their roads.
Road controlling authorities, such as local councils, still have the authority to approve specialist vehicles and decide where heavier vehicles can travel.
Road deaths over the holiday period frequently asked questions (Dec )
Road details Route Length km Road Classification National road Projected usage , southern end , northern end (average per day, untolled ) Design fly through video https:www.yo utube.comwat chvxx imCfaU
Road embankment under construction currently approx. m cover over the culverts. Limecement stabilization has enabled the earthworks to continue through a very wet July. Completion of road and rail culverts and the graded rock apron in the basin between them. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
Road freight is vital to New Zealands economy and is predicted to grow substantially over the next years. We see reducing GHG emissions for these types of vehicles, especially longhaul road freight, as one of the most challenging areas of transport.
Road safety is a strategic priority for the Government. The objectives document includes a range of actions targeting the highest contributors to fatal road crashes, focusing on safer roads, safer drivers, safer vehicles and resetting our approach to speed limits.
Road safety is, and always has been, the cornerstone of the AAs advocacy work. While we have strongly supported the Governments road safety work, we have repeatedly raised concerns about the availability of funding.
Road safety partners Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport, Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency and New Zealand Police welcome this Review and accept the findings and recommendations set out in the Review.
Road to Zero Action Plan
Road to Zero Annual Monitoring Report
Road to Zero Annual Monitoring Report
Road to Zero finalised and launched
Road to Zero is supported by an Action Plan for , which sets out initial actions under the five focus areas of the strategy.
Road to Zero quarterly insights reporting
Road to Zero remains in place until the Government has released a new objectives document.
Road to Zero strategy consultation
Road to Zero strategy consulted on
Road to Zero to the state highway and local road
Road to Zero will be replaced with an objectives document that sets out the NationalACTNZ First Coalition governments road safety priorities.
Road tolling scheme for Takitimu Drive (Route K) comes under Land Transport Management Act
Road user charges exemption extended
Road user charges exemption for light electric vehicles extended until March
Road user charges reduced between April and July
Road user charges returned to their previous rates. You can contact Waka Kotahi with questions about individual rates.
Road user charges review released
Road users help pay for New Zealands land transport system through petrol excise duty (PED) or road user charges (RUC).
Road users help pay for New Zealands land transport system through petrol excise duty (PED) or road user charges (RUC). The rates of PED and RUC are specified in legislation and money raised goes into the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF), which helps fund the improvement, operation and maintenance of our land transport system.
Road users may purchase discounted road user charges until July from Waka Kotahi. Road user charges should only purchase enough kilometres for three months of travel. This Act includes safeguards to prevent and address road users stockpiling the cheaper road user charges. This includes:
Roading State highway improvements State highway maintenance Local road improvements Local road maintenance Road safety promotion Promotion of road safety and demand management Road to Zero Mode shift promoting Public transport Public transport services Walking and cycling improvements Rapid transit Public transport infrastructure Transitional rail Other Regional improvements Road policing Investment management Coastal shipping
Roadingother activities Active transport activities Public transport activities . STUDY PHASES
Roads Of Regional Significance Region O Mahurangi Penlink Auckland Waihoehoe Road Auckland SH Papakura To Drury Improvements Auckland SH Intersection Improvement Waikato SH Improvements Stage Wellington SH Melling Transport Improvements Wellington Canterbury Package Rural Intersections Canterbury Canterbury Package Rolleston Upgrade Canterbury Canterbury Package Halswell Canterbury Queenstown Package Otago These projects are Crown funded and should not be considered for additional funding. The Government is also completing pre implementation of the Canterbury Package Brougham Street and SH Drury projects. Further Crown funding for these projects is subject to funding availability once the Roads of Regional Significance project costs are confirmed. These two projects may be considered for inclusion in the NLTP if they deliver on the objectives of this GPS.
Roadside drug driver testing Bill introduced
Roadside oral fluid testing wasnt able to be rolled out at that time, as a suitable device that met the device approval criteria in the legislation wasnt identified. The Land Transport (Drug Driving) Amendment Bill was introduced into Parliament in to address this issue, and implement a new roadside oral fluid testing regime. The Bill is expected to pass through its remaining legislative stages in .
RobustAdvanced Evidence confirms that requirements are being met above and beyond expectations. No further improvements are required. Efficiency Measures Evaluation Unit Costs (Cost per lane km)
Robyn Smith Deputy Chief Executive, Corporate Services ... .. .. Hon Kiri Allan Wood Associate Minister of Transport . . . Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport . . .
Rod Vaughan tells his story about his plane crash in Waihi NZ Herald Sunday August and Monday August Crews respond to airplane engine fire at wellington airport
Roles and responsibilities Role of the GPS Responsibilities .
Romosz, A. M., Scherer, M., Voas, R. B., Romano, E., Nochajski, T. H., Taylor, E. P., Manning, A. R. (). Understanding non installers of the ignition interlock device: A qualitative analysis. Drug and alcohol review .
Roselle Thoreau Insights, Data and Evaluation Manager
Ross HL, Gonzales F. The effects of license revocation on drunk driving offenders. Albuquerque NM: University of New Mexico, Department of Sociol ogy, .
Roth R, Voas R, Marques P. Mandating interlocks for fully revoked offenders: the New Mexico experience. Traffc Inj Prev ; .
Round brackets Use round brackets ( ) to add definition, clarification or comment. They also help to break up a long sentence and minimise overusing commas. Dont use brackets within brackets use commas or en dashes (not hyphens). Type an en dash by holding the Ctrl button and the minus key on the number pad on your keyboard.
Route K, an existing toll road, was brought under the tolling legislation as a state highway in the Land Transport Management Act in June . Route K was previously a toll road, but as a local road under its own legislation, the Tauranga District Council (Route K Toll) Empowering Act .
Route Sectors OnTime Departures OnTime Arrivals Cancellations Route total Airline Scheduled Flown No. No. No. Brisbane Auckland . . . China Airlines . . . Air NZ . . . Qantas . . . Jetstar . . . Solomon Airlines . . .
Route Sectors OnTime Departures OnTime Arrivals Cancellations Route total Airline Scheduled Flown No. No. No. Jetstar . . .
Route Sectors OnTime Departures OnTime Arrivals Cancellations Route total Airline Scheduled Flown No. No. No. Melbourne Queenstown . . . Air NZ . . . Qantas . . . Jetstar . . . Virgin Australia . . . Grand Total , , , . , . .
Route Sectors OnTime Departures OnTime Arrivals Cancellations Route total Airline Scheduled Flown No. No. No. Qantas . . . Auckland Melbourne . . . Air NZ . . . Qantas . . . Jetstar . . . Melbourne Auckland . . . Air NZ . . . Qantas . . . Jetstar . . . Sydney Christchurch . . . Emirates . . . Air NZ . . . Qantas . . . Queenstown Sydney . . . Air NZ . . . Qantas . . . Jetstar . . . Virgin Australia . . . INDIVIDUAL TRANSTASMAN ROUTES, MARCH
Route Sectors OnTime Departures OnTime Arrivals Cancellations Route total Airline Scheduled Flown No. No. No. Wellington Melbourne . . . Air NZ . . . Qantas . . .
Route Sectors OnTime Departures OnTime Arrivals Cancellations Route total Airline Scheduled Flown No. No. No. Wellington Sydney . . . Air NZ . . . Qantas . . .
Rt Hon Chris Hipkins Prime Minister
Rt Hon Chris Hipkins Prime Minister Level EXECUTIVE WING
Rt Hon Christopher Luxon (Chair)
Rule can come into force following publication in the Gazette on October
Rule) , which I intend to sign subject to Cabinet agreement regarding the
Rules and regulations for unmanned aircraft in New Zealand
Ruth joined the Ministry of Transport in . She was previously at the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet in the Policy Advisory Group and as the Head of Strategy and Policy at the COVID All of Government Group. She is an experienced public sector leader having held senior management roles at the Ministry for Primary Industries and the Ministry of Justice.
S E N S I T I V E ECO MIN S E N S I T I V E foddii Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Minute of Decision T his document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority. Land Transport Revenue Action Plan: Report back on Tolling Reform Portfolio Transport On December , the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee: B ackground noted that in June , the Cabinet Business Committee agreed to the greater use of tolling as part of decisions on the Revenue Action Plan CBC MIN ; agreed that as part of using tolling more often, the principles of supporting investment, customer pays, clear benefits for users, and the availability of a free alternative route should apply; noted that the Minister of Transport (the Minister) expects the New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) to make the following changes to the way it undertakes tolling assessments to meet the principles described in paragraph above: . undertaking public consultation at a time that enables benefits associated with tolling schemes to be made clear to the public; . considering the wider impacts of tolling schemes; . making all relevant information, including tolling assessments, publicly available at the start of the consultation process; Enabling corridor tolling noted that the Land Transport Management Act (LTMA) limits tolling to new roads, with existing roads only able to be tolled where they are physically or operationally integral to a new road; agreed to expand the criteria of roads that can be tolled to include existing roads where users receive benefits from the construction of a new road on the same corridor; noted that t olling revenue may only be used on a new road, even where an existing road is included in a tolling scheme or a toll road induces traffic onto alternative routes; agreed to enable toll revenue gathered through a tolling scheme to be used for all new and existing roads covered by that scheme; PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA S E N S I T I V E ECO MIN S E N S I T I V E foddii agreed to enable toll revenue to be used for the maintenance of alternative routes where the local road controlling authority is unable to fund this itself; The alternative route requirement noted that before agreeing to a tolling proposal, the Minister must be satisfied that a feasible untolled alternative route is available to users; agreed to create an exception to this requirement for the purposes of requiring heavy vehicles or certain classes of heavy vehicles to use a certain toll road; Strengthening toll price setting noted that recent tolls have generally been set at low levels that limit their revenue potential; agreed to set requirements in legislation for the Minister to consider the following factors when setting toll prices: . the maximum revenue potential of the toll road; . the level of service and value a user receives from a toll road; . the effects of the proposed toll on the wider road network; agreed to set a requirement in the LTMA for toll rates to be automatically adjusted by the Consumers Price Index every three years; Liability fo r tolls noted that drivers of a vehicle are currently liable to pay tolls, which can cause challenges for NZTA to identify and collect tolls from the driver; agreed to amend the LTMA to make a vehicles registered person liable for tolls; Next steps noted that the Minister will seek agreement to add the Bill to the Legislation Programme at the appropriate time; s ()(i) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA S E N S I T I V E ECO MIN S E N S I T I V E foddii invited the Minister to issue drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office to give legislative effect to the above decisions (including for primary legislation and any associated regulations), including any necessary consequential amendments, savings, and transitional provisions; authorised the Minister to make further decisions consistent with the overall policy, provided that any such decisions are confirmed by Cabinet, when the Bill is considered for introduction.
S PWA agreement drafted between ALRL and NZTA for Kiwi Bacon Building
S PWA agreement drafted for the land swap between Auckland Council and NZTA.
SBC and Te Manat Waka are now working together to look at what the next steps might be to design and create a market led freight decarbonisation system, including options for funding.
SECTION HEADING HERE Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Supporting information Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue GLOSSARY Glossary Definition Adventure Activities RegulationRefers to activities as defined in Regulation () of the Health and Safety at Work Act (Adventure Activities) Regulations : https:www.legislation.govt.nzregulation publiclatestDLM.htmlDLM Capacity Refers to the combination of assets and people required to deliver frontline safety services and search and rescue services, and the capability of those assets and people to deliver the services. Distress The International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue defines the distress phase of a search and rescue operation as a situation wherein there is reasonable certainty that a person, a vessel, or other craft is threatened by grave and imminent danger and requires immediate assistance. Facilitated Training and EducationBroadly captures practical andor classroom guidance and tuition provided by an organisation that is recognised andor approved andor registered for that purpose. Frontline safety servicesDirect harm prevention activityinterventions in the outdoors including providing safety messaging on the ground, lifeguard patrols, and rescuing swimmers and recreational craft users who are in immediate danger before it becomes a search and rescue operation. Fuel Excise Duty (FED) fundingFuel Excise Duty is a tax on petrol paid by recreational boat users. Under section () of the Land Transport Management Act , the funds through this tax can be used to support search and rescue activities, recreational boating safety and safety awareness, and maritime safety services. Mountains to the sea Encapsulates all natural environments (mountains, bushforest, lakes, rivers, creeks, estuary, ocean etc) that we may consider the outdoors as well as all recreation, activities, and operations (SAR) that takes place within them. Nongovernment organisations (NGOs)For the purpose of this Report we define an NGO as a nonprofit, independent, community organisation that is broadly speaking not affiliated with central government, although they may receive financial andor other support from the government. Personal recreation Captures recreational pursuits that people can do which are largely unregulated, and not for hire or reward, including tramping, hiking, mountain biking, caving, canyoning, hunting, fishing, diving, kai gathering, swimming (at the beach, river or lake), and boating (or any other recreational watercraft activity). Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Recreational safety Methods and measures that support people to undertake personal outdoor recreation safely to reduce the risk of death and serious injury, and to support them to avoid distress situations or survive them should they occur. Regulated Transport OperationsBroadly captures organisations and people, and the activities they engage in, including their vehicles, vessels and craft, regulated by transport legislation (including transport rules and regulations). Search and rescue servicesMeans the performance of distress monitoring, communication, coordination, and search and rescue functions, including provision of medical advice, initial medical assistance, or medical evacuation, using public and private resources, including cooperating aircraft, vessels, and other craft and installations. System A regularly interacting or interdependent group of people andor organisations that function together as a whole to achieve the same or similar outcomes. Tangata moana People of the Pacific Tangata tiriti Treaty partner, people of the Treaty, nonMori. Tangata whenua Mori, people of the land Water Safety Methods and measures to reduce the risk of people drowning causing death and injury in, on and around bodies of water. Wai Puna A theory of Mori water safety and health developed by Dr Chanel Phillips (Ngti Hine, Ngpuhi), Centre of Indigenous Science, University of Otago.GLOSSARY Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue APPENDIX Appendix : Overview recreational safety and search and rescue Together the recreational safety and the search and rescue systems provide a pipeline of safety services supporting the wellbeing of everyone who connects, recreates, and operates across our wider search and rescue region. Recreational safety Kaupapa philosophy . As New Zealanders, our connection to the wai (water) and the whenua (land) is integral to who we are and our sense of belonging from early voyaging to Aotearoa and generations of kai gathering. New Zealanders continue to participate in a wide variety of outdoor recreation activities such as hiking, tramping, climbing, skiing, hunting, diving, fishing, kayaking, and watercraft activity. . For some, a swim at the beach, lake, or river, or a day hike through a regional park is a much enjoyed and refreshing activity. Others like to push themselves further, to test their skills and endurance by, for example, scaling the heights of Aoraki Mount Cook. And for some, fishing and hunting puts kai on the table to feed whnau and friends.. We observe a philosophy of outdoor recreation to encourage people to get active, for their health and wellbeing, and engage with the natural environment, with the knowledge, skills and behaviours to return home safely. Preparedness and prevention are critical to achieving safer recreation. . Through our work we observed no agreed definition of recreational safety. It can capture safety services offered by a range of organisations to reduce the risk of preventable death and injury across a broad range of environments and pursuits indoors and outdoors, personal recreation and facilitated recreation (e.g., sporting activities and activities for hire and reward including adventure activities). . For the purposes of this Review, we have focused on personal recreation in the outdoors specifically, recreational safety services that reduce the risk of preventable death and injury, supporting people to avoid distressing situations or survive should they occur. . The term system encompasses a set of things that work together towards a common goal. In this case, this includes organisations and groups of people who support wellbeing outcomes for those who are connecting and recreating here in New Zealand and operating across the New Zealand Search and Rescue Region. . Personal recreation captures activities that people can do which are largely unregulated and not for hire or reward, including tramping, hiking, mountain biking, caving, canyoning, hunting, fishing, diving, swimming at the beachlakeriver, and boating or any other recreational watercraft activity. It is the intersection between personal recreation and safety, and search and rescue which has been a key area of focus for the Review. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue APPENDIX Services . A mix of government, local government and nongovernment organisations (NGOs) deliver services within the system to support people to stay safe in the outdoors. The services include: dedicated websites with information, guidance, and education on how to stay safe in the outdoors, for example Plan My Walk, the New Zealand Avalanche Advisory service, Safer Walking, Safer Boating, Safe Swim, Water Safety and Adventure Smart. generic guidance documents on how to stay safe in the outdoors including the Land Safety Code, the Water Safety Code, and the Boating Safety Code targeted safety campaigns, for example, track specific tramping videos, the Swim Reaper campaign, promoting new for old life jackets, and personal locator beacon (PLB) use and registration; and generic harm prevention campaigns through ACC, for example have a hmm visitor safety services online and in situ, and infrastructure provided by Councils and the Department of Conservation (DOC) to manage visitor risk safety in accordance with legislation, plans (statutory or otherwise), policies, and management procedures regulatory and compliance activity to support people to follow the rules, including the No excuses national on water compliance campaign involving Maritime New Zealand (Maritime NZ) and regional councils, and enforcement action when rules are broken frontline safety services in, on, and around the water and land adjacent through Surf Life Saving New Zealand (Surf Life Saving) and Coastguard New Zealand (Coastguard NZ) including people (e.g., lifeguards at beaches, and onwater patrols), and the provision of equipment and infrastructure (e.g., observation towers, signage, and watercraft). . Recreational related experiences including how to stay safe in the outdoors also comes from whakapapa, and whnau and friends sharing their knowledge and guidance. Also, through memberships of an Association or Club participating in activities and learning from others. . For more information, see the following: https:planmywalk.nz; https:www.avalanche.net.nz ; https:safer(walking.nz ; https:saferboating.org.nz; https:www.theswimguide.org ; https:www.dpanz.org.nzelearning ; https:www.watersafetynz.orgresources; https:www.adventuresmart.nz . . See for example: https:www.mountainsafety.org.nzexplorevideoimpactresearch ; https:swimreaper.co.nz ; https:www.coastguard.nzboatingsafelylifejacketsoldnew ; https:beacons.org.nz ; https:www.acc.co.nznewsroomhaveahmmm . . As an example, see the Visitor Risk Safety Policy here: https:www.doc.govt.nzaboutusourrolemanagingconservationrecreation managementvisitorriskmanagementdocsvisitorriskmanagementpolicy , and track classification here: https:www.doc.govt.nzparksandrecreationthingstodowalkingandtrampingtrackcategories . . There are very limited recreational safety rules in place across the recreational safety system the exception being recreational boating. Rules to guide recreational craft users are contained in Maritime Rule Part https:www.maritimenz.govt.nzcontentrulespartPartmaritimerule.pdf , and Regional Council Bylaws with corresponding penalties for those who cause risk to themselves or others. Note there is no skipper licensing mandatory qualification or warrant of fitness for recreational marine vessels (beyond Consumer Guarantees Act requirements). In some areas vessel registration is in place but the approach varies across regional bylaws. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue APPENDIX . In addition, facilitated training and education programmes provide young and old alike with a broad range of recreational skills and qualifications. Several programmes have critical safety components that feed into better recreational safety outcomes across New Zealand. Of significance is Water Skills for Life the national standard for aquatic education in New Zealand. It includes a range of resources and professional development opportunities for schools and teachers through Kia Maanu Kia Ora (Water Safety New Zealand). Drowning Prevention Auckland also delivers water competency education. . We acknowledge that the organisations involved in delivering recreational safety activities, individually and collectively, are passionate, committed, and strive to support safe outcomes for people who head outdoors to connect and recreate in the wai and the whenua. Search and rescue Kaupapa philosophy . New Zealand is part of an international ecosystem committed to assisting persons who are lost, missing, or in distress, regardless of nationality or circumstance, and ensuring that persons in distress are delivered to a place of safety (without fear or favour). . The worlds oceans and seas are divided into areas of responsibility (known as search and rescue regions), with responsibility for each Region assigned to a specific country. The New Zealand Search and Rescue Region (NZSRR) which includes the New Zealand landmass spans million square kilometres and covers one of the largest search and rescue regions in the world. This area extends from the mid Tasman Sea, halfway to Chile, and from the South Pole, almost up to the Equator. . New Zealand, through the international conventions it is a party to, is (in summary) required to arrange for: establishment and prompt provision of search and rescue services within our search and rescue region establishment of a rescue coordination centre for the relevant search and rescue region, staffed hours a day, and establishment of a national machinery for the overall coordination of search and rescue services. . This includes lessons supporting recreational competency including swimming, diving, boating, surfing, etc, and outdoor education through organisations like the Alpine Clubs of New Zealand, Outdoor Education New Zealand, Graham Dingle Foundation, Outwood Bound, and Hilary Outdoors. . For more information, see: https:www.waterskills.org ; https:kmko.nzrauemiresources ; https:www.dpanz.org.nzeducation . . The Convention on International Civil Aviation : Annex SAR Standards and Procedures; the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) : Chapter V Search and Rescue; the Convention on the High Seas : Article ; the International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue : the Provision of Regional SAR Services and RCC and the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (): Article Duty to Render Assistance. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue APPENDIX . These requirements are implemented in New Zealands legislation including the Civil Aviation Act (Section B) and the Maritime Transport Act (Section ). The Minister of Transport, through these two statutes, is responsible for the organisation and conduct of search and rescue activities within the NZSRR. Other New Zealand statutes that relate to the provision of search and rescue services include the Policing Act (Sections and ), and the Coroners Act (Section ). . Search and rescue services include distress monitoring, communications, and the coordination and delivery of search and rescue. This includes the provision of medical advice, initial medical assistance, or medical evacuation, through the use of public and private resources such as vessels of opportunity. It is a resource intensive system with nearly , operational people involved as well as many hundreds of vehicles, vessels, and aircraft.. Search and rescue operations are coordinated by the two mandated search and rescue Coordinating Authorities: NZ Police (the Police) are responsible for the coordination of Category I operations, which are those that include land searches; subterranean searches; river, lake, and inland waterway searches; and closeto shore marine searches usually within nautical miles. Maritime NZ through the Rescue Coordination Centre New Zealand (RCCNZ) is responsible for the coordination of Category II operations, which are those that involve major maritime searches; major aviation searches; and landbased missions involving the activation of a distress beacon. . Special coordination arrangements are in place for search and rescue services in Antarctica. . The Police and RCCNZ can coordinate land, sea and air search and rescue operations anywhere within the NZSRR, hours a day, seven days a week. . Countriesstates with a coastline have what is called a Territorial Sea to a limit of nautical miles. The Territorial Sea is that part of the sea adjacent to the coast of a state that is considered to be part of the territory of that state and subject to its sovereignty. . RCCNZ operates in accordance with internationally agreed procedures and protocols established by the International Aeronautical and Maritime Search and Rescue Manual. Maritime NZ is also responsible for conducting maritime response and recovery activities (e.g., salvage, marine pollution response). . National Antarctic Programmes are the Coordinating Authorities for all Category I search and rescue operations in Antarctica. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue APPENDIX . A mix of government agencies (including the New Zealand Defence Force, Fire and Emergency New Zealand, DOC, and the Police), commercial operators (e.g., helicopter operators), and NGOs deliver search and rescue services. The NGOs are Amateur Radio Emergency Communications, Coastguard NZ, New Zealand Land Search and Rescue (Land Search and Rescue) and Surf Life Saving their volunteers make up percent of the personnel delivering frontline safety and search and rescue services. . In addition, the Coordinating Authorities can request the assistance of vessels of opportunity to undertake search and rescue functions and request support from neighbouring search and rescue jurisdictions. Reciprocally, New Zealand supports search and rescue operations in neighbouring search and rescue regions when requested, in line with our expertise, capabilities, and legal authority. International cooperation is critical in the interest of the safety of New Zealand citizens who travel or live worldwide and consistent with New Zealands humanitarian goals. . The search and rescue system is also an integral part of New Zealands wider emergency management framework, and its people and assets are often called upon to support large scale emergency responses (e.g., civil defence emergencies such as the response to Cyclone Gabrielle). Supporting wellbeing outcomes globally . Through RCCNZ, Maritime NZ is a key player in the Pacific Search and Rescue Steering Committee and is funded through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade to deliver the Pacific Maritime Safety Programme. The Programme focuses activity across five key areas: community education and awareness, regulatory frameworks, maritime training, domestic vessel safety and search and rescue, and marine pollution response. . Search and rescue specific activity through the Programme includes growing capacity within Pacific Island countries to respond to search and rescue related events within their countrys own nautical mile limit. In addition, the breadth of safety work captured in the Programme (including safe vessels, safe operations, education to artisanal fishers etc) has search and rescue prevention benefits potentially reducing the frequency and severity of the search and rescue response required by Maritime NZ across the NZSRR. . We note too that Coastguard NZ and Surf Life Saving aim to support the work of, and play a role within, the International Life Saving Federation and the International Maritime Rescue Federation (in addition to Maritime NZ through RCCNZ and Water Safety New Zealand). The expertise of Surf Life Saving is often recognised internationally in requests from Pacific nations for assistance to help in the development of water and beach safety initiatives. . The duty to render assistance at sea is a longstanding rule of international law, which applies to all vessels (including but not limited to private vessels, commercial vessels, and government owned vessels) and to all areas of the sea around the globe. . A collective of search and rescue agencies from five principal nations Australia, Fiji, France, New Zealand, and the United States of America that hold responsibility for significant search and rescue regions in the central and southeastern Pacific. Each of these nations is committed to working with other Pacific Island Countries or Territories within or neighbouring their areas of responsibility to build search and rescue response capability. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Future trends and influences . As part of our work, we reviewed environmental scans undertaken in New Zealand and worldwide to identify trends across recreational safety and search and rescue in the near and longerterm future. From these trends, we have identified a smaller set of megatrends, which have been benchmarked against those identified by leading international organisations that specialise in futures thinking. . We identified the following uncertainties that the systems and organisations within them will need to be able to respond to and plan for together now and into the future to ensure that recreational safety and search and rescue services are fit for purpose. These trends include: an increase or decrease in the number of people recreating, driven by population and demographic changes, balanced against changes in lifestyle and recreational choices, and technological advances changes in personal attitude to risk while recreating outdoors, through social media for example, where people become less risk averse, coupled with less predictable environmental conditions due to climate change, that may lead to greater risk exposure the changing nature of risk tolerance across society, which shapes what and how risks should be mitigated and by whom (i.e., the individual or the System), including expectations around the level of risk mitigation required potentially exceeding the capacity of the System to respond more rescues and less search activity as advances in technology are made, but an increase in the ongoing complexity of search and rescue events due to more extreme weather patterns and an increase in climaterelated natural disasters across New Zealand and the wider NZSRR an increase or decrease in funding, through changes in government and local government priorities and commercial and noncommercial funding streams pressures on the volunteer model of operating, due to changing lifestyles and increase in the scope of role and compliance activities uncoordinated and ineffective engagement with iwihapmaraehapori leading to fragmented and inconsistent arrangements and unproductive collaboration. . Addressing these uncertainties requires the systems and organisations together to prepare for and respond to potentially opposite outcomes. Also to develop systemswide policy responses that can be implemented as trends develop and solidify. APPENDIX . These trends were identified using the GEEST model, which examines trends under categories including Geopolitical, Economic, Environmental, Social, and Technological. . We also reflect that organisations responsible for the coordination and delivery of search and rescue activity across the wider NZSRR work within a wider geopolitical context that will continue to evolve. Strategic competition is increasingly out in the open, including in the Pacific, including ongoing pressure on both the international rules system and the established framework of multilateral cooperation that govern activities across maritime, aviation, space, and Antarctica. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue APPENDIX Appendix : Current governance and leadership arrangements Recreational Safety . There are several national organisations with a core focus on supporting safe outcomes for people when they head outdoors to recreate. This includes the Mountain Safety Council, New Zealand Land Search and Rescue (Land Search and Rescue) the Department of Conservation (DOC), Water Safety New Zealand (Water Safety NZ), Maritime New Zealand (Maritime NZ), Coastguard New Zealand (Coastguard NZ), Surf Life Saving New Zealand (Surf Life Saving) and the New Zealand Search and Rescue (NZSAR) Council through the NZSAR Secretariat. We also acknowledge Drowning Prevention Auckland given its dedicated drowning prevention role across the Auckland region, and the wider work it has underway, and the information and education material it has publicly available online. . Collective leadership forms with a dedicated focus on recreational safety within the scope of the Review are described within Table below. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Leadership ForumAdministered byFunding and oversightMembership includes Purpose Wai Ora (Water Safety) Leaders ForumWater Safety NZ (NGO)Sport NZ Water Safety NZ, Mountain Safety Council, Coastguard NZ, Drowning Prevention Auckland, NZSAR Secretariat, Recreation Aotearoa, Maritime NZ, Coastguard Boating Education, Surf Life Saving, Swimming New Zealand, Coastal People: Southern Skies.To provide effective collaboration across the water safety sector in the delivery of the Wai Ora Strategy and provide strategic advice to the CE of Water Safety NZ. The Wai Ora Strategy represents the water safety sectors collective approach to drowning prevention and saving lives. Safety Walking Reference GroupLand Search and Rescue (NGO)NZSAR CouncilLand Search and Rescue, NZSAR Secretariat, Age Concern, Alzheimers NZ, Autism NZ, Dementia New Zealand, Disabled Persons Assembly, Grey Power NZ, Health Care NZ, Home Community Health IHC, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Social Development, People First, NZ Police (the Police), Retirement Village Association, Royal NZ College of GPs, WanderSearch. To collectively engage and provide leadership and governance to achieve positive outcomes for the Safer Walking sector supporting safer walking for people with cognitive disabilities who are at risk of going missing. Its objectives include representing and raising awareness of the Safer Walking framework; having oversight of the effective achievements of the Safer Walking framework; providing and promoting wanderrelated reduction, readiness, response and recovery guidance, and good practice documentation. Land Safety ForumDepartment of ConservationNZSAR CouncilDOC, NZSAR Secretariat, Land Search and Rescue, Mountain Safety Council, the Police, Water Safety NZ, Deerstalkers Association, Federated Mountain Clubs, Game Animal Council, NZ Alpine Clubs, Herenga a Nuku Walking Access Commission.The purpose of the Land Safety Forum is to maximise opportunities and to enhance collaboration in the land safety sector for improved outcomes. Its goals include working together to enable people to recreate more safely in the outdoors; encouraging active and constructive sector wide discussion and examplesetting amongst member organisations; and identifying and enhancing the effectiveness of land safety initiatives. NZSAR Consultative CommitteeNZSAR SecretariatNZSAR Council Amateur Radio Emergency Communications, Ambulance NZ St John, Antarctica New Zealand, the Aviation Industry Association, the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), the Federation of Commercial Fisherman, Land Search and Rescue, Maritime NZ including the Rescue Coordination Centre New Zealand (RCCNZ) and the Maritime Operations Centre, Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport, the New Zealand Defence Force, DOC, Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire and Emergency), the Mountain Safety Council, the Police, Coastguard NZ, Surf Life Saving, the National Emergency Management Agency.To provide a national forum for all NZSAR stakeholders, including voluntary groups. Its objectives include informing the strategic decisionmaking process of the NZSAR Council; sharing initiatives, processes and knowledge as appropriate; working collectively to deliver objectives within the national search and rescue strategic plan. This includes search and rescue prevention. Recreational Craft Leaders ForumMaritime NZ Maritime NZ Coastguard NZ, Harbour Masters, Kaihaut, Maritime NZ, Paddle Company, Yachting New ZealandProviding leadership, direction, and influence in the recreational craft space. The Forum has developed a new Recreational Craft Strategic Framework for , focused on reducing the number of fatalities and serious injuries from recreational boating.APPENDIX Table : Collective Governance and Leadership Forums Recreational Safety . Collective governance and leadership arrangements for landbased recreation is also evident through the Mountain Safety Council, comprising organisations with a focus on land safety. Council members representatives form the basis of the organisations governance structure that provides strategic direction. The Mountain Safety Councils focus is on the development and promotion of safety messaging by identifying and responding to insights provided through the ongoing collection and analysis of data, and by building partnerships with relevant organisations. Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue APPENDIX Search and rescue . Governance and leadership of the search and rescue system comes through the NZSAR Council, supported by a Secretariat and Consultative Committee. These arrangements were confirmed by Cabinet in . Table : Governance and leadership arrangements for search and rescue NSS: National Security System SAROPs: Search and Rescue Operations Category ll SAROPsNZSAR Consultative Committee New Zealand Search and Rescue SectorCabinet Ministers of Transport, Conservation, Defence Police Category l SAROPsStrategic CoordinationStrategic
SECTION OR PARAGRAPH NUMBER OPPOSE SUPPORT POSITION STATEMENT Para and
SETTING THE SCENE Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Recreational safety . There is no one definition of recreational safety. The Review focused on personal recreation in the outdoors; and recreational safety services that reduce the risk of preventable death and injury, supporting people to avoid distressing situations or survive should they occur. . We observe a philosophy of outdoor recreation in New Zealand to encourage people to get active, for their health and wellbeing, and engage with the natural environment, with the knowledge, skills and behaviours to return home safely. Preparedness and prevention activities are critical to achieving safer recreation. . There is a range of government, local government and NGOs in New Zealand delivering recreational safety services to support people to head outdoors and return home safely. Services include information, guidance, and education online; targeted safety campaigns; visitor safety services in situ; compliance and regulatory activities; and frontline safety service on the ground. . Further detail about the organisations involved and the services delivered within the recreational safety system is provided in Appendix .Search and rescue . Search and rescue is defined through international conventions that New Zealand is a party to, domestic legislation, and the Operational Framework for the NZSRR. Search and rescue involves the coordination and delivery of services to people who are lost, missing andor in distress, locating them and returning them back to a place of safety. . New Zealand has one of the largest search and rescue regions in the world as depicted in Image above. We are part of an international ecosystem that collectively provides search and rescue services across the globe the philosophy being that search and rescue should be available to anyone and any entity (charitable, commercial or otherwise), anytime, and anywhere they need it. . Search and rescue services include distress monitoring, communications, and the coordination and delivery of search and rescue, including medical advice, initial medical assistance, or medical evacuation. These services are delivered through government, NGOs, and commercial organisations. . Further detail about the organisations involved, and the services delivered within the search and rescue system is provided in Appendix . . Personal recreation captures activities that people can do which are largely unregulated and not for hire or reward, including tramping, hiking, mountain biking, caving, canyoning, hunting, fishing, diving, swimming at the beachlakeriver, and boating or any other recreational watercraft activity. . https:nzsar.govt.nzassetsDownloadableFilesOperationalFrameworkfortheNZSRRThirdEditionMarch.pdf . The International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue defines the distress phase as a situation wherein there is reasonable certainty that a person, a vessel, or other craft is threatened by grave and imminent danger and requires immediate assistance. SETTING THE SCENE Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Reflecting a pipeline of safety services . Together the systems deliver a pipeline of safety services supporting the wellbeing of everyone who recreates, and gathers kai in New Zealand, and operates across our wider search and rescue region. . Through our work, we reflected deeply on the growing intersection between the two systems, and the work they do to support people to head outdoors with the knowledge and skills to stay safe and return home safely. This included their relationships with adjacent systems some of which are depicted in Diagram above. . While not reflected in Diagram above, there are other systems closely connected, for example: the Emergency Management system. New and increasing demands on search and rescue during civil emergencies. These have become far more evident through recent civil defence responses the Health system. Increasing demand for Safer Walking and Wander Search services for people with cognitive impairment (and their whnau and friends), administered, delivered, and funded through the search and rescue system, is evident. Demand for medivac services from NGOs also continues. Diagram : Recreational safety and search and rescue systems interface In the air, on the land and in, on and around the water. Adventure Activities Regulation Regulated Transport Operations Facilitated Education and Training Recreational Safety (Outdoor Recreation) Information, Guidance and Education CampaignsInfrastructure and AssetsCompliance, Monitoring and EnforcementFrontline Safety ServicesSearch and Rescue Recreational Safety Domestic Search and Rescue Domestic and International Recreation and CommercialAdjacentRelated Systems Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai supporting safer recreation from the mountains to the sea SETTING THE SCENE Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Diagram : Areas of focusSpecific areas of focus . The Review Terms of Reference articulated the scope of the Review. It specified the following key areas of focus depicted in Diagram below, namely: outcomes and measures for the systems governance mechanisms, including the alignment of accountabilities and responsibilities within and between the systems, and systems adjacent the sustainability of the volunteer model and delivery of a Workforce Plan covering capability and sustainability the sufficiency of capability (assets and people) to deliver services, with a specific focus on search and rescue funding sources, funding needs, and the role of government funding. . Deepdive assessments into the individual organisations operating in the systems were out of scope. Therefore, our recommendations are focused primarily at a strategic level. Direction Results Implementation Risk and Assurance Management . https:www.transport.govt.nzareaofinterestsafetyrecreationalsafetyandsearchandrescuereviewExternal Environment Context, legislative and constitutional mandates, stakeholder expectations, trends and developments (e.g. demographic, technology, environmental)Systemwide Outcomes Effective and efficient delivery of System wide harm prevention outcomesStrategyGovernance and Leadership Relationships CultureStructure Role accountabilities responsibilitiesAssets Buildings, equipment, vehicles, craftPeople Paid, partially paid, volunteersFunding Government charitable, local, other Technology Data analysis and insights SETTING THE SCENE Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue How the Review was conducted . Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport conducted the Review over an month period. The Review Team included a small group of policy advisers supported by specialists with experience and practical involvement across the systems, including Michael BassettFoss and two Mori specialist advisers (Kaihaut). Michael BassettFoss has been an active volunteer Surf Lifeguard for more than years. He is currently a Water Safety New Zealand Board member, the independent member on the NZSAR Council, and Surf Life Saving New Zealands past Chair. Through the Review he has acted as an advisor in relation to nongovernment delivery organisations and a voice for the , volunteers delivering frontline safety and search and rescue services. Two Mori specialist advisers (Kaihaut) were involved in the Review to ensure it reflected a Te Ao Mori worldview. The Review has drawn heavily on the principles underpinning the Wai Puna model. This is an Indigenous model of Mori water safety and health developed by Dr Chanel Phillips (Ngti Hine, Ngpuhi), Centre of Indigenous Science, University of Otago. Chanel was part of the Review Team. Rob Hewitt (Ngti Kahungunu) is a Mori water safety exponent with over years experience as a Navy diver and water safety expert. He is the Kaihaut Mori for Water Safety New Zealand, cofounder of Tangaroa Ara Rau a kaupapa Mori water safety collective, a Coastguard Boating Education tutor for Mori and Pacific communities, a cultural adviser for Maritime New Zealand, and Kaihaut for the Land Safety Forum. Their expertise has been fundamental in bringing a Mori lens to this work. . The Team was supported by an Advisory Group comprising the following core government agencies and NGOs that have governance and leadership roles in one or both systems: the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) Coastguard New Zealand (Coastguard NZ) the Department of Conservation (DOC) Fire and Emergency New Zealand (Fire and Emergency) Maritime New Zealand (Maritime NZ) Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport the Mountain Safety Council New Zealand Land Search and Rescue (Land Search and Rescue) the NZSAR Secretariat NZ Police (the Police) Surf Life Saving New Zealand (Surf Life Saving), and Water Safety New Zealand (Water Safety NZ). SETTING THE SCENE Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue . Consultation and engagement were also undertaken with other government agencies and NGOs that are either part of one or both systems or adjacent systems, or provided expert guidance to the Team during the development of recommendations. . The Review was carried out in partnership with Mori and aligned with the principles of Te Tiriti o Waitangi through partnership, participation and protection. The work of the Review has drawn heavily from the principles underpinning the Wai Puna model. . Our work included research and engagement with participants in the systems and adjacent systems. We also considered previous reports, reviews, and investigations, focused on various aspects of the systems relevant to the Review. . This work heralds the next evolution of the recreational safety and the search and rescue systems together. . The Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC), Amateur Radio Emergency Communications, the Department of Internal Affairs, the New Zealand Defence Force, Drowning Prevention Auckland, the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Public Service Commission, Sport New Zealand (Sport NZ), the National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA), and the Treasury. . Further information about the Wai Puna model can be found here: https:kmko.nzwaipuna . SECTION HEADING HERE Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue The systems in focus and why they matter
SH Christchurch to Ashburton Travel movements between Christchurch and Ashburton have risen significantly, and the Christchurch to Dunedin Corridor Management Plan considered corridor pressures, intervention triggers and appropriate levels of investment related to safety. Further work is needed to review the corridor to determine what is needed to support safety, resilience and growth.
SH Piarere to Taup The level of service along SH between Piarere and Taup varies significantly and is out of keeping with its classification as a national (high volume) highway. The corridor business case included a strategy of operational and capital improvements, including improved emergency management, maintenance regimes, traveller information and township amenities.
SH Taup to Desert Road The journey between Taup and Waiouru is one of the most variable and least approachable sections of SH and provides an inconsistent level of service. The recommended programme aimed to address road user safety and provide a reliable and efficient corridor commensurate with the route classification and wide range of users.
SH Melling to Upper Hutt The transport link between Te Marua and Ngauranga is congested, unsafe and lacks resilience. A corridor business study focusing on the wider corridor between Te Marua and Ngauranga identified a potential fourlane from Silverstream to Upper Hutt andor grade separated intersections for safety, resilience and economic outcomes. This study identified the work needed on Melling which is being progressed through NZUP, and the refresh will look at any remaining parts.
SH Kiahere (km) earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance, stormwater management Auckland SH Puhoi to Dome Valley ( km) earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance, stormwater management SH Puhoi Pohuehue (km) earthworks and vegetation clearance SH South of Warkworth (m) earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetat ion clearance, stormwater management Northland Region SH Brynderwyns (km) earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance, stormwater management SH Waitangi River Bridge (m) earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance, stormwater management
SH Piarere to Tauranga SH is the preferred route for roadbased freight between Tauranga and Auckland. SH has a low safety record, poor resilience and a higher cost of travel due to the gradients over the Kaimai Range. The corridor business case included operational and capital improvements which were safety focused to improve DSIs and improve freight reliability on that route.
SPS framework and sector reviewed
SSCs strategic outc omes: Strong constitutional role Diverse and inclusive Commitment to Mori and Te Tiriti o Waitangi Modern, agile and adaptive Better outcomes and services
SSCs strategic vision: A leading edge, unified, trusted Public Service that serves Aotearoa and its people.
STAKEHOLDER BRIEFING NOTES VFM within GPS The G overnment Policy Statement (GPS) utilised similar approach to Value for Money (VFM) as the GPS and , where VF M was considered a priority area rather than an underlying principle that addressed how the GPS was delivered. GPS first introduced concept of VFM as a concept. The four priorities sat alongside each other but were n ot well integrated. GPS sought to better integrate the priorities with mixed success. Previously , VFM has been interpreted more as a reporting requirement . Insufficient emphasis on VFM in underpinning investment decisions. GPS more effectively integrated the priorities, however, VFM was still treated as a standalone requirement rather being cross cutting. Opportunity to be clear on what VFM mean s in relation to the results , and how to measure t he value of money spent . GPS is therefore seeking to establish VFM as a means of evaluation across priorities. Previously NZTA made an effort to make VFM more of an underlying principle but this has not taken root.
STAKEHOLDER WORKSHOP RECORD PAGE
STAKEHOLDER WORKSHOP RECORD PAGE
STONE C M Y K R G B BARK C M Y K R G B B DARKEST BLUE V. Jan Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Typography is a key element of any brand, and careful consideration of how the typefaces are used should be implemented to maintain the integrity of Te Manat Wakas brand. Open Sans and Domine (both are free Google fonts) are our primary typefaces. They can be used in all available weights within brand applications to suit messaging and typographic hierarchy. When our primary typefaces are not available or appropriate for example on government documents and in Microsoft programmes these fonts can be substituted for the system defaults Arial and Georgia respectively.PRIMARY BRAND TYPEFACE DEFAULT SUBSTITUTE FONTSMomotuhi Typography AaBbCc aeiou Open Sans ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz() AaBbCc aeiou Arial ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz()AaBbCc aeiou Domine ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz() AaBbCc aeiou Georgia ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz() V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT PRIMARY BRAND TYPEFACE Momotuhi Typography Typesetting and hierarchy Our fonts Open Sans and Domine and our colour styles have been designed to makes the content as easy as possible to understand and navigate. Accessibility, efficient use of space and contrast have all been taken into consideration. External document styles Please follow the styles shown here. Consider the accessibility standards set out by digital.govt.nz for items such as downloadable documents. We follow these guidelines where it is practical, for example, body copy is always at least pt. TITLE HEADING Te Reo Mori Domine Regular TITLE HEADING English Domine Bold INTRO PARAGRAPH Domine RegularTITLE SUBHEADING Open Sans Light SUBHEADING Domine Bold SUBHEADING Open Sans Bold SUBHEADING Open Sans Bold SUBHEADING Open Sans Regular SUBHEADING Open Sans Italic Gulibus conissedit; nit. Ut res egeroruribus bonsultor liissimiliam is. Gra intiam ariusat anumurs et; egeris licaederet L. Solum quam etrisus, diorumum inam orum in Ita, movenam ina nos senductala depertem.Te Reo Mori Heading English headingSECTION SECTION SECTION SECTION Te reo Mori heading English heading Title subheading style e.g. for financials Sub heading level one Subheading level two Excepe dem as et int eos erionestotat doluptatem sam que consequatem as dolorep rovidebis veliqua tiaeceari consed ut ium as nissimu scitatene iliquis audi cusam, optae voluptatur Qui necaerum ra atur aut aut eaquis qui offic to est, et ex et litibus dolore aute es alitia volorer ibersperiate prectot atenimet eossequibus voluptam laborum is debitibus net alit, sit quameniti qui dolorem. Nem quiatem hilibus, consequodi duntorepra iumque ped eatur, velest, inctibea dolut haribusdam eseque coremquis alit as as exceper ferores si remporessin nes voluptas nis reni non placiis sendem laborent unt hitaspe rferess inctatem etum ressunt iorepud icitatior aspelest, videm quatur, qui con et precturisim rem est velecab orerum est, ulpa ipsantinciam harchic tota porepuda cupta venda andamusto occus aspieni moluptatatet ommossendae eosae doluptasitem fugia de nimusapic te nemolorum net officid quiatur Qui re, experfere pratiam illiquunt provid quia nimporiam quia provit que vit, cum utemqui nis alit adi rem harupta cor sapitate corunt, tecum re, officiae quam aspietus, eostiatemqui debitia pore derchil lesequae nullutenias dolor accae. Facimin pos quo odis doluptibus qui bearis explabo reruptae pro cuptate mporectium numendenimil eum volestium que comniet plia conse pe expliqu atibusanis dunte reprature dessus et ides nem harumqu ostius, sae. Itas vitatur sam cor simo doluptium simodiate si nam harum eniet lacid qui dolore voluptatet ommolor rumquam et expedit iuntusa perores voluptatint apis eosanti ossitendenis aut alit endundae. Ro corion net undaepe runtiun tempos cone ped que vollabo. Agnihici num sendi in rem utatibere re quianim aiorrovitat. Subheading level two Officid ut aut ipsamus pra que dem fuga. Me et ut eiur, odiaspe llandis temodisi id et ut arcient eventorro tem ut quatus nus, omnimol orehendiciis sim num que sitio magnimus parum et ini volores totaquia vel maximint. Subheading level three Excepe dem as et int eos erionestotat doluptatem sam que consequatem as dolorep rovidebis veliqua tiaeceari consed ut ium as nissimu scitatene iliquis audi cusam, optae voluptatur Qui necaerum ra atur aut aut eaquis qui offic to est, et ex et litibus dolore aute es alitia volorer ibersperiate prectot atenimet eossequibus voluptam laborum is debitibus net alit, sit quameniti qui dolorem. Nem quiatem hilibus, consequodi duntorepra iumque ped eatur, velest, inctibea dolut haribusdam eseque coremquis alit as as exceper ferores si remporessin nes voluptas nis reni non placiis sendem laborent unt hitaspe rferess inctatem etum ressunt iorepud icitatior aspelest, videm quatur, qui con et precturisim rem est velecab orerum est, ulpa ipsantinciam harchic tota porepuda cupta venda andamusto occus aspieni moluptatatet ommossendae eosae doluptasitem fugia de nimusapic te nemolorum net officid quiatur Subheading level three Officid ut aut ipsamus pra que dem fuga. Me et ut eiur, odiaspe llandis temodisi id et ut arcient eventorro tem ut quatus nus, omnimol orehendiciis sim num que sitio magnimus parum et ini volores totaquia vel maximint.Te Manat Waka Document Name Month SECTION HEADING BODY COPY Open Sans Light always a minimum of pt Further information can be found in the Style Guide V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT PRIMARY BRAND TYPEFACE Momotuhi Typography Typography and colour use Colour and typography should work in harmony to engage the audience and serve its functional purpose of delivering information in a succinct and legible way. Our approach is highly adaptable, allowing the use of varying type weights and our full colour palette providing it suits the intended purpose and context, however no matter what the application, accessibility is aways key: For functionality, black () should always beused for the bulk of the text. For coloured typography, only the dark coloursfrom the primary colour palette should be usedwhere the content must be accessible. The supporting lighter tohu colours may be usedas accents when used on a light background however, they should only be used to repeatcontent, or display it at a large size or assupporting graphic elements that are not crucialto the communication of any content.Heading Alias ulpa voluptassi te sumque parumquo volore, cum volorest id et volendit a qui a Dae voluptatem dustius eum eicima sita volupta voloratem. Eprae es intia vernat. Restias volupta tioresciis ut ma ad modissi mporibus rerios eat volupta doluptatur, cus ipidus demolut quam, sed ea dolupta. Heading Alias ulpa voluptassi te sumque parumquo volore, cum volorest id et volendit a qui a Dae voluptatem dustius eum eicima sita volupta voloratem. Eprae es intia vernat. Restias volupta tioresciis ut ma ad modissi mporibus rerios eat volupta doluptatur, cus ipidus demolut quam, sed ea dolupta.Heading Alias ulpa voluptassi te sumque parumquo volore, cum volorest id et volendit a qui a Dae voluptatem dustius eum eicima sita volupta voloratem. Eprae es intia vernat. Restias volupta tioresciis ut ma ad modissi mporibus rerios eat volupta doluptatur, cus ipidus demolut quam, sed ea dolupta.Heading Alias ulpa voluptassi te sumque parumquo volore, cum volorest id et volendit a qui a Dae voluptatem dustius eum eicima sita volupta voloratem. Eprae es intia vernat. Restias volupta tioresciis ut ma ad modissi mporibus rerios eat volupta doluptatur, cus ipidus demolut quam, sed ea dolupta. Heading Alias ulpa voluptassi te sumque parumquo volore, cum volorest id et volendit a qui a Dae voluptatem dustius eum eicima sita volupta voloratem. Eprae es intia vernat. Restias volupta tioresciis ut ma ad modissi mporibus rerios eat volupta doluptatur, cus ipidus demolut quam, sed ea dolupta.Heading Alias ulpa voluptassi te sumque parumquo volore, cum volorest id et volendit a qui a Dae voluptatem dustius eum eicima sita volupta voloratem. Eprae es intia vernat. Restias volupta tioresciis ut ma ad modissi mporibus rerios eat volupta doluptatur, cus ipidus demolut quam, sed ea dolupta. V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Whakaahua Imagery Subject matter The images we use represent enabling New Zealanders to flourish. We show all sorts of authentic New Zealanders being able to move around in the way they want to for work and play. We avoid images of just motorways or ships instead we focus on the human benefits. Image library Te Manat Waka has an image library use images from this library wherever possible. Image selection criteria As the images you select will be representing our transport system when selecting images from outside of the library, keep the following in mind: Only use images from New Zealand Represent various modes of transport (unless anitem is mode specific) Represent a range of Kiwis and their differentlifestyles and needs Images should be safe and positive. Eg: peopleshould be wearing seat belts and where possible show more environmentally friendly vehicles Images should be bright, modern, fresh andpositive. Image treatment Images should be treated naturally by being used in full colour. For the website, duotones may also be used (as shown opposite). Respect Peoples heads should not be cropped, and nothing should cover faces. Talk to the Comms team if you need to buy an image not currently in the library. V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Whakahngai Waitohu Brand Application RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Pae tukutuku Website Our website is our hero communication channel, and it sets the tone of our brand. Our website has been created with many different levels of templates ranging from full colour images at the top, down to simple plain templates at the bottom. Youll notice that the website uses the colour, bold use of typography and tohu in a considered manner.Homepage Design: Full colour Ng Kaupapa Matua Areas of interestDesign: Duotone Third levelDesign: tohu in masthead Fourth levelDesign: light tohu in backgroundSecondary pages Design: Tohu on dark background V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Te hanga pnui Publication design Our range of publications align with our websites look and feel. The following pages clarify what templates are to be used for what context. XXX June Consultation Document Hkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by XXX June Hkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by Government Policy XXX June Consultation Document Hkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by Te Reo Mori Translation Striving for Manaakitanga F. Prongotau Annual Report Hikina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by Green Paper Not Government Policy Hikina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by Green Paper Not Government Policy Hikina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by Green Paper Not Government Policy Translation Cover Slide Subheading Hikina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by Green Paper Not Government Policy Hikina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by Green Paper Not Government Policy Te reo heading translation Heading March OCXXXX Hon Name of Minister Action required by: A Jones Minister of XX cc Hon Name of Minister Minister of XXUNCLASSIFIED Heading Page of Title of Briefing Purpose Provide a short, clear purpose statement setting out the what and the why. Begin with a verb, e.g. Seek your approval to, Update you on. Explain any timeframe for action. Key points This is the elevator pitch (or TLDR), so make it count. It does not need to summarise the briefing or be in the same order as the body of the briefing. What does the Minister need to know Why is it important What do we want the Minister to do Include key context, e.g. decisions already made. Identify key risks. Aim for no more than five short Key Points ( lines each). The whole front section should stay within two pages. Supershort briefings, including cover briefings for some Cabinet papers, should use only the front secti on (Purpose, Key points and Recommendations plus attachments). (Style: MOT Key Points) Recommendations We recommend you: .note noting recommendations should be avoided, as the information should be in the key points section above. Recommendations should be selfcontained and not require the Minister refer to the report .agree to delete this section if there are no actions for the Minister Yes No .add additional recommendations by going to the far right of the table and pressing enter (as in a standard table). You will need to copy and paste the Yes No section press Tab to get across to the righthand box (but you wont be able to see the cursor in there). To delete rows, right click delete cells delete entire row. Yes No Kia ora Firstname Lastname, Heading level one has a righthand indent of mm.. onest volum alignita num Body text style. enimpo rruptate ne in nobis alit, te non consed ut volore voluptat mo dolupie mon ntemped magniet que necerum quia net vernam hiciliquam et quam haribeatibus magnit eumpeto. Subheading level style Body text style. Ihilia dolo berovit pro magnit ium et quasimolut laut apidunte rem. Atemperes de plitat aut et quo beaquibus, voluptuscil mi, sum quae ipient volor aut et estor . Subheading level style Level Bullets quae quodit expe volorerspis es eumenti. Level Bullets quae quodit expe volorerspis es eumenti. Level Bullets quae quodit expe volorerspis es eumenti. Level Bullets quae quodit expe volorerspis es eumenti. Subheading level style Atemperes de plitat aut et quo beaquibus, voluptuscil mi, sum quae ipient volor aut et estor soluptate offic tecea aborepe lectorehenis apernate lam etusam voluptiur. Subheading level style Atemperes de plitat aut et quo beaquibus, voluptuscil mi, sum quae ipient volor aut et estor soluptate offic tecea aborepe lectorehenis apernate lam etusam voluptiur. Ng mihiYours sincerely signature Firstname Lastname Title Te Manat Waka Ministry of TransportAB Sample Sample Envelope Street Sample Address Sampleton June transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz HEAD OFFICE: PO Box , Wellington , New Zealand. PH: AUCKLAND OFFICE: NZ Government Auckland Policy Office, PO Box , Auckland , New Zealand. PH: Page of XXX June Hkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by Government Policy XXX June Consultation Document Hkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by XXX June Consultation Document Hkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by Hikina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by Green Paper Not Government Policy Job Title Graduate Policy Adviser Reporting to Policy Manager Location WellingtonAuckland Salary band November Te Reo Translation Job Description Heading style for general preamble Public Service Purpose Te Aronga o te Ratonga Tmatanui Mahi tp ai ng Kaimahi Tmatanui e whai tikanga ai te noho a ng tngata o Aotearoa. Hei t te Public Service Act ko te ptake o ng Kaimahi Kwanatanga, ko te tautoko i te kwanatanga whai ture me te kwanatanga manapori; ko te whina i te Kwanatanga o te w nei me anamata ki te whakawhanake, ki te whakatinana hoki i rtou kaupapa here; ko te tuku i ng ratonga tmatanui e nui ana te kounga, e nahanaha ana an hoki; ko te tautoko i te Kwanatanga e troa ai te whai oranga o te marea; ko te huawaere i te whai whitanga o te kirirarau ki te ao tmatanui me te whakatutuki i ng mahi i runga i t te ture i whakahau ai. E hiranga ana te whi ki a mtou ki te tautoko i te Karauna i ana hononga ki ng iwi Mori i raro i te Tiriti o Waitangi. Ahakoa he nui ng momo tranga mahi, e tapatahi ana ng kaimahi tmatanui i roto i te whakaaro nui ki te hpai i ng hapori, ka mutu, e arahina ana mtou mahi e ng mtpono matua me ng uara o ng Kaimahi Tmatanui. The public service works collectively to make a meaningful difference for New Zealanders. The Public Service Act states that the purpose of the public service is to support constitutional and democratic government, enable both the current Government and successive governments to develop and implement their policies, deliver high quality and efficient public services, support the Government to pursue the longterm public interest, facilitate active citizenship and act in accordance with the law. We have an important role in supporting the Crown in its relationships with Mori under the Treaty of Waitangi and te Tiriti o Waitangi. Whilst there are many diverse roles, all public servants are unified by a spirit of service to the community and guided by the core principles and values of the public service in our work. How we do things our values COLLABORATIVE We are connected and journey with othersBOLD We are courageous, shaping our place in the worldINVESTED We are committed and responsible Page of Hikina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by Green Paper Not Government Policy Hikina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by Green Paper Not Government Policy Hikina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by Green Paper Not Government Policy Minutes Weekly Senior Leadership Team Meeting TimeVenue Attendees Peter Mersi (Chair), Paul Laplanche, Nick Brown, Bryn Gandy, Robyn Smith, Karl Simpson, Karen Lyons In attendance Sharyn Forty (Minutes) Apologies . Minutes of SLT meeting held on (item number) The Minutes of the meeting held on were confirmed subject to the following changes. . Action Register ... Managers meeting attendees . Items for Waka Kotahi MoT Senior Officials meeting . Prep for all MoT staff stand up at .am (item number) . . Action: for completion: . Page of Te reo translation Minutes Weekly SLT Meeting XXX June Hkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by Government Policy Hkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by XXX June Consultation DocumentFlagship publications Ki waho Externally produced publications Ki rotoInternally produced items Talk to the Comms team if you need to engage with an external desinger. V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Ki waho External publications Top level covers These external publication covers are for projects at the top level, after they have moved through the draft stages and are finalised. To ensure that the cover design accurately reflects the content of the document, a matrix will determine which uara aligns with the document this will determine the te reo, tohu and image selection. Covers should be like the covers shown. Details follow: Header area The Te Manat Waka logo sits in the top left, always fully reversed. Titles and dates should be as shown, with thedocument status within a lime box. The background is midnight blue. Type colours for this level of publication are always the bright lime and white as shown. Image box Images are always full colour, and follow thephotography guidelines. On the occasion where multiple images must beused, images should be proportionate to eachother, and work in a simple grid system. Tohu Tohu are used as an overlay, to add a deeper levelof meaning to a document. The tohu should never cover a persons face. Tohu texture should sit behind any people in an image. XXX June Hkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by Government Policy XXX June Hkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by Government Policy XXX June Hkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by Government Policy Hkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by Government Policy XXX June XXX June Hkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by Government Policy V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Ki waho External publications Draft level covers These covers are used for draft consultation documents. They follow all the guidelines of the top level covers, except: Header area The background can be in any primary dark colour, except midnight blue. Type colours for this level of publication aredetermined by the tohu used. Document status appears in a white keyline box as shown. Tohu At this level, the relevant tohu is shown in astitched style, to represent the workinprogresselement of the document. XXX June Consultation Document Hkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by Hkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by XXX June Consultation Document XXX June Consultation Document Hkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by XXX June Consultation Document Hkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by XXX June Consultation Document Hkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Ki waho External publications Internal pages These designs enable the content to be communicated clearly, allow easy navigation, and use space efficiently. Inside front cover This is a set design. It should be either: a full page design: which contains a specific whakatauk relating to the appropriate uara. All uara are at the bottom of the page. a sidebar design. This option is only used when space is limited. Design as shown. Divider pages Our divider pages reflect the shape of a pou. They contain the document tohu and a relevant photo. Text pages Accessibility is key, so body copy is no smaller thanpt, and any highlighted element (e.g. a key stator pull quote) must be repeated in the text. When displaying graphs, ensure high levels ofcontrast are used, and the key includes essentialinformation, laid out in a logical way. When Hei Arataki is mentioned in the body text,the graphic box (shown) should be near this text. Photos Photos may have the Hei Arataki texture subtlyapplied at the top of the image. It is essential thatthe pattern does not cover any people. Outside back cover Use the Te Kwanatanga o Aotearoa logoas shown (follow the Tuakiri Whaitohu o teKwanatanga, AllofGovernment, Identity System). Add tohu and contact details as shown. Officid ut aut ipsamus pra que dem fuga. Me et ut eiur, odiaspe llandis temodisi id et ut arcient eventorro tem ut quatus nus, omnimol orehendiciis sim num que sitio magnimus parum et ini volores totaquia vel maximint. Excepe dem as et int eos erionestotat doluptatem sam que consequatem as dolorep rovidebis veliqua tiaeceari consed ut ium as nissimu scitatene iliquis audi cusam, optae voluptatur Qui necaerum ra atur aut aut eaquis qui offic to est, et ex et litibus dolore aute es alitia volorer ibersperiate prectot atenimet eossequibus voluptam laborum is debitibus net alit, sit quameniti qui dolorem. Nem quiatem hilibus, consequodi duntorepra iumque ped eatur, velest, inctibea dolut haribusdam eseque coremquis alit as as exceper ferores si remporessin nes voluptas nis reni non placiis sendem laborent unt hitaspe rferess inctatem etum ressunt iorepud icitatior aspelest, videm quatur, qui con et precturisim rem est velecab orerum est, ulpa ipsantinciam harchic tota porepuda cupta venda andamusto occus aspieni moluptatatet ommossendae eosae doluptasitem fugia de nimusapic te nemolorum net officid quiatur Qui re, experfere pratiam illiquunt provid quia nimporiam quia provit que vit, cum utemqui nis alit adi rem harupta cor sapitate corunt, tecum re, officiae quam aspietus, eostiatemqui debitia pore derchil lesequae nullutenias dolor accae. Facimin pos quo odis doluptibus qui bearis explabo reruptae pro cuptate mporectium numendenimil eum volestium que comniet plia conse pe expliqu atibusanis dunte reprature dessus et ides nem harumqu ostius, sae. Itas vitatur sam cor simo doluptium simodiate si nam harum eniet lacid qui dolore voluptatet ommolor rumquam et expedit iuntusa perores voluptatint apis eosanti ossitendenis aut alit endundae. Ro corion net undaepe runtiun tempos cone ped que vollabo. Agnihici num sendi in rem utatibere re quianim aiorrovitat. . Officid ut aut ipsamus pra que dem fuga. Me et ut eiur, odiaspe llandis temodisi id et ut arcient eventorro tem ut quatus nus. . Officid ut aut ipsamus pra que dem fuga. Me et ut eiur, odiaspe llandis temodisi id et ut arcient eventorro tem ut quatus nus, omnimol orehendiciis sim num que sitio magnimus parum et ini volores totaquia vel maximint.Te reo Mori heading English heading Te Manat Waka Document Name Month SECTION HEADING Sub heading level one Officid ut aut ipsamus pra que dem fuga. Me et ut eiur, odiaspe llandis temodisi id et ut arcient eventorro tem ut quatus nus, omnimol orehendiciis sim num que sitio magnimus parum et ini volores totaquia vel maximint. Excepe dem as et int eos erionestotat doluptatem sam que consequatem as dolorep rovidebis veliqua tiaeceari consed ut ium as nissimu scitatene iliquis audi cusam, optae voluptatur Qui necaerum ra atur aut aut eaquis qui offic to est, et ex et litibus dolore aute es alitia volorer ibersperiate prectot atenimet eossequibus voluptam laborum is debitibus net alit, sit quameniti qui dolorem. Nem quiatem hilibus, consequodi duntorepra iumque ped eatur, velest, inctibea dolut haribusdam eseque coremquis alit as as exceper ferores si remporessin nes voluptas nis reni non placiis sendem laborent unt hitaspe rferess inctatem etum ressunt iorepud icitatior aspelest, videm quatur, qui con et precturisim rem est velecab orerum est, ulpa ipsantinciam harchic tota porepuda cupta venda andamusto occus aspieni moluptatatet ommossendae eosae doluptasitem fugia de nimusapic te nemolorum net officid quiatur To find out more about our Mori Strategy, visit heiarataki.nz Qui re, experfere pratiam illiquunt provid quia nimporiam quia provit que vit, cum utemqui nis alit adi rem harupta cor sapitate corunt, tecum re, officiae quam aspietus, eostiatemqui debitia pore derchil lesequae nullutenias dolor accae. Facimin pos quo odis doluptibus qui bearis explabo reruptae pro cuptate mporectium numendenimil eum volestium que comniet plia conse pe expliqu atibusanis dunte reprature dessus et ides nem harumqu ostius, sae. Itas vitatur sam cor simo doluptium simodiate si nam harum eniet lacid qui dolore voluptatet ommolor rumquam et expedit iuntusa perores voluptatint apis eosanti ossitendenis aut alit endundae. Ro corion net undaepe runtiun tempos cone ped que vollabo. Excepe dem as et int eos erionestotat doluptatem sam que consequatem as dolorep rovidebis veliqua tiaeceari consed ut ium as nissimu scitatene iliquis audi cusam, optae voluptatur Qui necaerum ra atur aut aut eaquis qui offic to est, et ex et litibus dolore aute es alitia volorer ibersperiate prectot atenimet eossequibus voluptam laborum is debitibus net alit, sit quameniti qui dolorem. Nem quiatem hilibus, consequodi duntorepra iumque ped eatur, velest, inctibea dolut haribusdam eseque coremquis alit as as exceper ferores si remporessin nes voluptas nis reni non placiis sendem laborent unt hitaspe rferess inctatem etum ressunt iorepud icitatior aspelest, videm quatur, qui con et precturisim rem est velecab orerum est, ulpa ipsantinciam harchic tota porepuda cupta venda andamusto occus aspieni moluptatatet ommossendae eosae doluptasitem fugia de nimusapic te nemolorum net officid quiatur Qui re, experfere pratiam illiquunt provid quia nimporiam quia provit que vit, cum utemqui nis alit adi rem harupta cor sapitate corunt, tecum re, officiae quam aspietus, eostiatemqui debitia pore derchil lesequae nullutenias dolor accae. Facimin pos quo odis doluptibus qui bearis explabo reruptae pro cuptate mporectium numendenimil eum volestium que comniet plia conse pe expliqu atibusanis dunte reprature dessus et ides nem harumqu ostius, sae. Itas vitatur sam cor simo doluptium simodiate si nam harum eniet lacid qui dolore voluptatet ommolor rumquam et expedit iuntusa perores voluptatint apis eosanti ossitendenis aut alit endundae. Ro corion net undaepe runtiun tempos cone ped que vollabo. Agnihici num sendi in rem utatibere re quianim aiorrovitat. Picaeped ut ento iur aute occae erecull picaeped ut ento iur aute occae erecull picaeped ut ento iur aute occae erecull.Te Manat Waka Document Name Month SECTION HEADING V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Ki waho External publications Flagship publications Our flagship publications, like Annual Reports, are treated differently to other publications, and focus on the uara of Manaakitanga. The tohu: Manaakitanga Ko te whakatinanatanga tnei o te whakaute, o te atawhai, me te manaaki i tahi atu. This is the expression of respect, generosity and care for others. This is why this tohu is reserved for our flagship publications. Design significance The space between the solid lines of the tohu is representative of the space between Ranginui and Papatnuku the space where we live and where all the action happens. Internal pages These should expand upon the Ministry styles, however, they are also an opportunity to extend our awareness of Hei Arataki in an individually considered way (while still looking part of our brand, and retaining accessibility). Te Reo Mori Translation Striving for Manaakitanga F. Prongotau Annual Report Te Reo Mori Translation Striving for Manaakitanga F. F. Prongotau Annual Report F.Prongotau Annual ReportTe Reo Mori Translation Striving for ManaakitangaImages sit in the grey the space between Ranginui and Papatnuku V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Ki waho External publications Transport sector wide covers When a document represents the entire transport sector (not just Te Manat Waka), the Minister will have the ultimate say on the final document. In these instances, start with the template opposite. Design approach Follow the Ministry document styles. However, here are a few key changes: The Te Manat Waka logo is no longer on thefront cover, instead the Te Kwanatanga oAotearoa logo sits on the bottom right, within adark blue band (follows the Tuakiri Whaitohu o teKwanatanga, AllofGovernment, Identity System). Any third party logos can go in the top right areasindicated by the dotted pinks lines (align right). The background at the top should be white, andthe position of the image has moved up slightly,due to the dark blue band being added to thebottom of the cover. XXX June Consultation DocumentHkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by Hkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by XXX June Consultation Document XXX June Consultation DocumentHkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by XXX June Consultation DocumentHkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by XXX June Consultation DocumentHkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Ki waho External publications Transport sector wide internal pages Because Te Manat Waka leads the publications and the sector, the internal designs follow the Te Manat Waka styles except: Inside front cover This only features a whakatauk on an image, not the additional information about our uara. Inside back cover This is where the uara information is nowdisplayed (vertically as shown). Outside back cover The Te Manat Waka logo moves to the outsideback cover as shown. Any logo from collaborative partners can sit nextto the Ministrys logo. V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Ng pronga ka whakaputa atu Externally produced fact sheets From time to time, A fact sheets, or A infographics may be required. Like other pieces of brand collateral, the designer should be guided on which tohu to use, and provided with te reo translations for the title (and any relevant subheadings). V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Pae ppho ppori Social media Hei Arataki Hei Arataki Hei Arataki Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport (NZ): Title can go here. transport.govt.nzTe Manat Waka Te Manat Waka has a presence across several social platforms. It is important that the brand is reflected consistently across all of these. These pages are led by Te Manat Waka, and a range of information is disseminated across the platforms. This page shows some recommendations when creating social content for LinkedIn, Twitter, Instagram or facebook. In general, for the body copy, always start with Te Manat Waka in bold (talk to the Comms Team on the preferred font converter to achieve this). These template styles are applicable across a range of content, with elements like a masthead,the stitching texture, icons and typographicstyles used to elevate simple posts.Both image text templates contain a short titlethat sits on the image (text can only be of animage). The image should relate to the content. Applying textured boxes with key text overphotos is a good way to easily highlight parts ofa story or data story. Statistics can be placed on a graphicbackground, and should use typography in a waythat highlights the most important information.Additional, more detailed text can sit below themain statistics. Recruitment posts have a standard Tomo mai Apply now message that can be used on a range of different coloured tohu tiles with a photo.When talking about Hei Arataki online, there arethree suggested styles to be used one with anychosen image, that relates to the content, andtwo with the Hei Arataki marque lockup. More sophisticated tiles could be created for major stories.Media releasesarticlesblogsdocuments Storydata story Statistics RecruitmentHei Arataki More sophisticated tiles Talk to the comms team if you would like to post something on social media V. March Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Kia ora Thank you For more information, contact the Te Rpu Whakawhiti Krero, Whakap Tngata Engagement and Communications Team at Te Manat Waka. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
SUBMISSION AUTHOR : Tim Oakes AUTHOR E MAIL : AUTHOR PHONE : ()
SUBMISSION AUTHORISED BY : Simon Douglas National Manager Policy and Research , Motoring Affairs New Zealand Automobile Association Incorporated PO Box , Wellington ,
SUBMISSION ON THE REAUTHORISATION OF THE AIR NEW ZEALAND SINGAPORE AIRLINES ALL IANCE
SUBMISSION TO THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT ON THE GOVERNMENT POLICY STATEMENT ON LAND TRANSPORT DRAFT FOR ENGAGEMENT
SUBMISSION TO: NZ Ministry of Transport REGARDING: Government Policy Statement on Land Transport May
Safer, more resilient travel choices on State Highway along the waterfront with a new shared walking and cycling path would better connect the communities of Nelson and Richmond. With better travel choices, the city can reduce emissions and develop a more sustainable and resilient transport system. This work would include separated and enhanced walking and cycling facilities. Construction work could start as early as and would take around five years to complete.
Safety Upper
Safety infrastructure and speed management will now be funded from the State Highway Improvements and Local Roads Improvements Activity Classes. This will better integrate the wider network and deliver a wider range of outcomes. In addition, many safety investments occur as part of investments in other activity classes. For example, intersection improvements, wider road shoulders, rumble strips, and improved skid resistance.
Sarah Carson Acting Manager , Rail dkMINISTRY OF TRANSPORT p TE MANATO WAKA transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of Annex : Document in scope of the request
Schedule of the Road User Charges (Classes of RUC Vehicles) Exemption Order
Scheme reviewed and consulted on
Scheme reviewed and
Scope and procure phase evaluations Complete phase evaluation and disseminate findings . Impact of the introduction of random roadside testing of drivers for drugs An evaluation of the immediate and medium term impacts of the anticipated introduction of random roadside testing of drivers for drugs. Ongoing (Multiyear evaluation between ) Project scoping with partner agencies Support Waka Kotahi on the commissioning and development of the baseline study Support Waka Kotahi on the delivery of the evaluation Support Waka Kotahi on the delivery of the evaluation Support Waka Kotahi on the delivery of the evaluation . Community Connect evaluation A crossagency initiative involving MoT and MSD as well as input from WK, Health and AT. This pilot program will distribute concession fare hopper cards (via AT) to Aucklandarea Community Service Card holders in order to make public transit more affordable to lowincome people. Oneoff (Multiyear evaluation between ) Developed an intervention logic map and undertook initial scoping Develop a monitoring and evaluation plan. Collect baseline data. Ongoing data collection and analysis Complete Year evaluation . Clean Car Policies evaluation A Clean Car Standard and Clean Car Discount were introduced to reduce emissions produced by the light vehicle fleet. The first policy focuses on improving the quality of vehicles being imported into New Zealand, while the latter incentivises the uptake of electronic vehicles. Ongoing (Multiyear evaluation) Develop a monitoring and evaluation plan. Collectcollate baseline data. Ongoing data collection and analysis Ongoing data collection and analysis . Reshaping Streets evaluation Changes to regulatory and funding settings to accelerate widespread street changes that support public transport, active travel, and placemaking. Oneoff Project scoping. Collectcollate baseline data (as required) To be defined . Other policy evaluation Manage andor undertake evaluation of other transport policies. Oneoff Topic TBC
Scope of the review The review is expected to result in a new setting of speed limits rule and supporting guidance. The work will consider a range of issues including but not limited to : Ensuring RCAs and RTCs sufficiently consider economic factors, including impacts on travel times alongside safety and the views of road users and communities when setting speed limits. Clarifying c onsultation requirements, including a stronger focus on the quality and responsiveness of RCAs and RTCs to community and road user views . Providing flexibility for RCAs and RTCs to address speed limits approaching schools in line with community views, including exploring the role of variable speed limits at pick up and drop off times . Prioriti sing speed management on the highest riskbenefit roads . Enabling RCAs and RTCs to raise speed limits where roads are safely engineered to allow higher speed s, including enabling new and existing Roads of National Significance to have speed limits of kmh where it is safe to do so. Enabling RCAs and RTCs to trial new speed limits before making them permanent . PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of February OC Hon Simeon B rown Action required by: Minister of Transport Monday, February NEW SETTING OF SPEED LIMITS RULE TIMELINE AND POLICY CONFIRMATION Purpose Provide you with a timeline and policy scope to deliver on your day commitment to replace the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits . Key p oints Following our meeting with you on January , we understand the key matters you want delivered through the new rule are: oEnsure a stronger economic focus is brought into the rule to require Road Controlling Authorities (RCAs) to determine speed limits using consistent benefit cost analysis criteria. oEnsure RCAs undertake g enuine consultation with relevant parties, including communities and road users, on proposed speed limit changes and take feedback into account before finalising changes. oTake a targeted approach to speed limit reductions , focusing on areas with high safety risks. As discussed with you, the definition of high safety risk roads needs to be considered further to ensure it reflects your intent. We will work with NZTA to consider alternative options and report back to you as this develops. oRequire s chools that have not yet had reduced speed limits introduced to implement variable speed limits outside the school gate during drop off and pick up times using static or electronic signs . Static signs are not currently widely permitted. Officials will consider whether any other regulatory amendments are required to ensure static signs are also available for RCAs. oReview s peed limits on suburban streets that have had wide spread kmh introduced since the speed rule was introduced and consider for increased speed limits unless outside school gates or on main streets in town centres. oReview key State highways that have had speed limits reduced since the speed rule was introduced. This review will consider where Document PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of infrastructure improvements enabling limits to be raised where safe to do so. It will also include reviewing the speed limits to ensure the speed limit reductions are not applied for longer stretches than are necessary to address areas with the high safety risk parts of the network (noting high safety risk needs further definition as noted above) . oEnsure expressways have a kmh speed limit from inception where they are engineered to safely have this speed limit. R aise speed limits to kmh on current expressways where they are engineered to be safe at this limit , pending a briefing from NZTA as to whether speed limits on these roads will already be increased under the current rule. oTighten the scope of the NZ Transport Agency Waka Kotahi (NZ TA) guidance to RCAs to ensure it aligns with the new rule. oStrengthen accountability across NZTA and other RCAs to meet the intent of the rule to focus on high safety risk roads, as well as reviewing the role of the speed management committee and the Director. Our initial view is that we should strengthen the role of the Director to enable the Director to not certi fy speed limit changes if they do not meet the requirements or the intent of the rule, this includes considering whether the Director would review consultation or BCR quality. We note these changes will i mpact NZTA resourcing requirements for speed limit reviews Officials are working to develop the criteria for the Directors role further and can report back to you on any key risks in this area. We have prepared a draft timeline that would deliver these changes noted above. We are confident the rule could be finalised for your signature in August . There are risks and assumptions embedded in the timeline, including the speed at which drafting will be required and the tight consultation timeframe. It will be difficult for us to engage with RCAs and industry bodies ahead of public consultation. We are seeking your agreement to this approach and timeline and for the Ministry to work with the NZTA on drafting the new rule. We note there is a risk that introducing stronger economic analysis and consultation requirements may not always result in speed limits being reversed. The Ministry s economists will work with the NZTA to consider further how to implement this requirement. We will also consider whether there are other factors that RCAs need to review speed limit reductions against. We have enquired with the NZTA about whether RCAs are continuing to progress speed management plans (SMPs) despite the letters you sent out late last year. The NZTA has advised that eight RCAs have confirmed in writing that they intend to progress with their SMPs. These RCAs are: Hutt City Council, Northern Transportation AllianceFar North District Council North Hokianga Schools, Timaru District Council, Waitomo District Council, Hamilton City Council, Wellington City Council Berhampore and Newtown, Wairoa District Council, an d Waimate District Council. s ()(h) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of The NZTA is awaiting a response from Porirua City Council and from NZTA (as RCA) on State Highway . This list does not include RCAs that have not yet submitted SMPs to the Director. We have recommended a tighter timeline for developing the new rule given the advice of NZTA that the RCAs above are proceeding. You may want to communicat e with all RCAs again , informing them of your intention to require speed limits that have been changed since the rule was put in place to be reviewed, to avoid them unnecessarily wasting time and resources. We also recommend that you meet with Auckland Transport to understand its plans for progressing or otherwise with its speed management plan and what changes it might consider based on the proposed changes for the new rule. We expect that many of the concer ns about speed limit changes in urban areas may be in Auckland and it would be useful to understand if AT is considering any changes to some of the speed limits they have already reduced. Officials will also continue to engage with AT to understand its pla ns. You may wish to consider if you want Cabinet approval to the policy points above before you communicate them to RCAs. We could support you to do this. Recommendations We recommend you: agree to officials focusing on delivering a rule that will deliver on the points noted in this briefing Yes No agre e to officials working to the indicative timeline provided at Appendix One Yes No agree to meet with Auckland Transport to discuss its plans for its Speed Management Plan Yes No advise whether you would like to receive advice on exploring funding options for speed limit reviews Yes No note that eight RCAs are continuing to progress with their speed management plans that they have already submitted to the Director of Land Transport s ()(g)(i) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of February OC Hon Simeon Brown Action required by: Minister of Transport At your convenience. CABINET PAPER: UPDATE ON OUR DAY COMMITMENT TO STOP BLANKET SPEED LIMIT REDUCTIONS AND START WORK ON A NEW RULE FOR SETTING SPEED LIMITS Purpose This briefing accompanies a draft Cabinet paper for your consideration, which provides an update to Cabinet on your policy direction for the new Rule for setting speed limits . Key p oints In response to previous advice (OC and OC refer) and through meetings with you, you have indicated your priorities for a review of the Rule and we have provided advice on a draft timeline that would deliver those changes. We also indicated our awareness that several road controlling authorities ( RCAs ) continue to progress speed management plans despite previous communications about your expectations. You have decided to advise Cabinet of your approach prior to announcing it at the Automobile Association conference on March , and subsequently communicating th em to RCAs and RTCs by letter . The Ministry of Transport has prepared a draft Cabinet paper which updates Cabinet on your policy directio n. Limited agency consultation has occurred with New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) and New Zealand Police NZTA focused its comments on the downstream financial implications of the approach. RCAs are unlikely to have in house capability for cost benefit analysis of speed limit changes. It would likely entail high levels of reliance on external contractors for most RCAs to undertake fully informed economic analysis. The Ministry is working with NZTA on what guidance or tools could be provided to RCAs to minimise these costs. Police has sought to include comment outlining its view. This is noted in the consultation section of the Cabinet paper. Regulatory impact analysis will be required in due course The Treasury has advised that Cabinets impact analysis requirements apply to the proposals in the attached draft paper, and the Treasury has not exempted the proposal from the impact analysis requirements. We have not prepared an accompanying Regulatory Impact Statement for this paper because this paper is only noting your policy intentions and does not seek Cabinet Document PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of agreement . Given the early stages of the polic y development process any analysis at this time will be incomplete. You will be returning to Cabinet with a draft Rule in May to seek permission to consult the public. As part of this, we will prepare regulatory impact analysis necessary to inform Cabinets substantive consideration of the draft proposal and public consultation on the draft Rule. Final impact analysis and material to support consideration of matters required by in section of the Land Transport Act will be provided to you after consultation, prior to you making a final Rule. We propose minor amendments to the policy direction from our previous briefing setting out the policy direction ( OC ) You noted you would like a targeted approach to speed limit reductions, focusing on areas with high safety concerns . We suggest that public acceptability is considered alongside this, as the roads of highest safety concern may not align with public sentiment on acceptability of speed limit changes . We will report back to you through the Rule development process on what this will mean in practice (what roads it would likely be applied to ) before final definitions are agreed in the Rule. We recommend broadening the reviews of urban speed limit reductions to include ensuring the approach to urban arterial and collector roads is appropriate, as well as areas reduced to kmh since the introduction of the Setting of Speed Limits Rule (excluding speed limits outside school gates or on main streets in town centres). NZTA has advised there may be contractual repercussions from raising certain expressways to kmh. Further advice on this will be provided as part of the May Cabinet paper and RIA. You are awaiting a briefing from NZTA about whether certain expressways and State highways can have speed limits raised under the current Rule.
Scoping completed Review and updates Public consultation (with GPS) if required Final publication of Rail Plan completed, if required
Scoping report (May )
Sebastien Crane Facilities Adviser
Second Meeting of the Emerging Aviation Technologies Forum July The second meeting of the Emerging Aviation Technologies Forum was held in Wellington on July . This initiative was started by the CAA, supported by the Ministry , New Zealand Defence Force and Industry. The meeting was co chaired by the CAA and Wisk, who represented industry. Since the first meeting, a wider range of expertise was assembled with airports, Aerospace Research Centre, and security representation added to the mix, strengthening the richness of the discussions. The Forum then considered the input since the last meeting by the members , reflected on the unpredictable rate of change in many technology areas , and the importance of regularly revisiting the timelines of the fastest moving aviation related technologies. The implications of this is particularly important to guide investments (both regulatory and by industry) , and to understand infrastructure requirements to ensure a safe and secure aviation system. The CAAs Emerging Technologies Unit led an intensive information sharing exercise in a workshop setting that drew significant and valuable insights from the participants. The Forum will meet again on September after the Aerospace Summit.
Second Mt. Victoria Tunnel and Upgrades to Basin Reserve and Arras Tunnel State Highway
Second interim report released
Second phase of The Congestion Question under way
Secretarys Note: This minute replaces CBCMIN. Cabinet agreed to add a new paragraph .
Section Principles Persons with powers or functions in relation to public transport services must be guided by various principles including: (c) competitors should have access to regional public transport markets to increase confidence that public transport services are priced efficiently.
Section . Value for Money The projects Terms of Reference require consideration of the costs and benefits of alternative combinations of interventions and whether better returns can be achieved from transport investment than current plans. Value for money is normally assessed through cost benefit analysis, which compares the level of benefits against the size of an investment. Outputs from Aucklands regional transport models were used to estimate the total quantum of benefits from the Indicative Package (relative to a base investment). In undertaking this value for money assessment, large differences between the cost benefit calculations at a packagewide level and at a project level became clear. In particular, more refined project level analysis appeared to capture project benefits to a much greater degree than the package wide analysis. Limitations of the strategic modelling tools were considered to be the likely cause of this difference and therefore we did not rely on package wide cost benefit assessment based on modelling outputs. Instead, focus was on assessing the Indicative Packages value for money in the following ways: . Ensuring identified early priorities are likely to provide value for money if they are implemented over the next decade. Our prioritisation framework assessed the likely relative costs and benefits of major investments. . A number of identified early priorities have existing value for money assessments indicating they deliver benefits that exceed their costs. . Analysis against our evaluation framework showed the Indicative Package will deliver better regionwide outcomes than current plans and significantly better results than a higher investment package that did not include smarter pricing. This finding suggests that the inclusion of smarter pricing is key to achieving value for money.
Section Matters to take into account when adopting a Regional Public Transport Plan include (c)(iv) the need to obtain the best value for money, h aving regard to the desirability of encouraging a competitive and efficient market for public transport services. Summary Literature Summary
Section Approval of activities and combinations of activities ()(c)(ii) In approving a proposed activity or combinations of activities the Agency must be satisfied that the activity is efficient an d effective and consistent wi th the GPS on land transport.
Section Procurement procedures () For the purposes of this Part, the Agency must approve or more procurement procedures that are designed to obtain the b est value for money spent by the Agency and approved organisations, having regard to the purpose of this Act. () In approving a p rocurement procedure, the Agency must also have regard to the desirability of enabling persons to compete fairly for the right to supply outputs required for approved activities, if or more persons are willing and able to provide those outputs; and (b) encouraging competitive and efficient markets for the supply of outputs required for approved activities.
Section . This section sets out principles for investing and how transport investment decisions need to be transparent and provide best possible impact and value to NZers. For investment using the Fund this mea ns seeking value for money through alignment, effectiveness and efficiency.
Section . outlines a summary of how and what projects are determined and categorized through Priority Bands. Many of the projects listed in the programme identified efficiency and value for money as a key project outcome. A main focus however was on the Public Transport and the Maintenance, Operations and Renewals Programmes, where value for money for ratepayerstaxpayers was highlighted. Summary d Otago Southland Regional Land Transport Plans (June ) https:www.orc.govt.nzm ediaotago southland regional transport plans .pdf The benefits that the update to the RLTPs seeks to realise are: improved network performance and capability, and network resilience improved safety and reduced social impact of fatalities and injuries a focus on areas of regional development, productivity and connectivity increased customer voice on connectivity, accessibility and mode shifts optimisation of the transport system through communication technology, innovation and improved people capability greater value for money delivered by transport investments
Section K() of the Land Transport Management Act allows the GovernorGeneral to vary the Scheme by Order in Council made on the recommendation of the Minister of Finance and Minister of Transport ( joint Ministers ).
Section of the LTMA also allows for some land transport revenue to be used for other purposes, subject to the approval of the Minister of Transport (the Minister) and the Minister of Finance. This includes search and rescue and recreational boating activities, Waka Kotahi s regulatory function, and activities to maintain the integrity of the land transport revenue system. Agencies that receive funding through this avenue include the Ministry , Waka Kotahi , MNZ and some non governmental organisations, such as Coastguard and Land Search and Rescue NZ . You can adjust the rate of charges and duties for the NLTF to meet your priorities RUC rates are set through the RUC Rates Regulations , and changes must be confirmed by Parliament. FED is generally set through amendments under the Customs and Excise Act and sometimes by an Order in Council. Crown funds can supplement transport revenue and be used to purchase specific projects or programmes It is no longer possible for investment in the land transport sector to be met solely from the NLTF. Increasingly, the Crown has made direct investments in specific transport activities through the annual budget process led by the Minister of Finance. Unlike investment from the NLTF, where the Waka Kotahi Board has an independent role in overseeing and monitoring expenditure, Ministers are accountable for Crown funded activities. Ministers have decision making rights when changes are needed to the budget, scope or timeframes for these projects. While bodies like Waka Kotahi or KiwiRail may deliver Crown funded activities and investment programmes, the Crown usually establishes additional oversight arrangements for any projects or programmes with Crown funding, such as the NZ Upgrade Programme. These arrangements give Ministers assurance the intended investment outcomes are being achieved. The CAA and MNZ are primarily funded from fees, charges and levies collected from passengers and participants in the aviation and maritime sector s. Economic and educational tools You can use travel demand management tools to drive behaviour change within the transport system Pricing and other economic tools can be used to encourage more efficient use of the network and can be used by local government to influence travel choices and decisions. Such tools include differential charging of public transport (eg, reduced off peak fares), subsidised public transport fares, tolling, congestion charging, and parking fees. Tolling , for example, can contribute to the cost of building and maintaining new roads. You are the key decision maker and responsible for recommending to the Governor General that a new road be tolled under the LTMA . The Ministry will provide advice on tolling proposals, liaise with the Road Controlling Authorities , and advise on the legislative process to establish a tolling order. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT KEY TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES
Section Objective, Section Function the objective and function of the Agency is to undertake its functions in a way that contributes to an ef fective, efficient and safe land transport system in the public interest.
Section Operating principles In meeting its objective and functions, the Agency must (a) exhibit a sense of social and environmental responsibility, (b) use its revenue in a m anner that seeks value for money ((i) if the revenue is part of the national land transport fund, in accordance with section () ; and (ii) in all other cases, for the purpose for which it is collected, and ensure it acts and accounts for expenditure in a transparent manner.
Section Agency must consider delegating or contracting out functions and powers The Agency must consider whether it could most efficiently and effectively perform its functions and exercise its powers by means of its own operations, or by delegating or contracting out those operations to appropriate persons.
Section Description of ground
Security screening queues weekly update The following instances of longer screening queues were recorded this week: Time Location Passengers affected Queue Time (Mins) Cause Mitigation Queenstown International Unexpected passenger presentation, with large groups arriving at once Additional lane opened with available staff drawn from other duties Wellington Domestic High passenger volumes, combined with both rugby teams and their staff arriving at the same time earlier than expected Opened additional lane with skeleton staff
Security screening queues weekly update The following instances of longer screening queues were recorded this week: Time Location Passengers affected Queue Time (Mins) Cause Mitigation Auckland International High volume of passengers presented before lanes opened at Additional lane opened with available staff drawn from other duties Wellington Domestic High passenger volumes due to higher than expected flight loadings, combined with passengers from a later flight presenting earlier than expected Unable to open a second land due to staff shortages. Queue combers were deployed into queues to mitigate the issue PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Security screening queues weekly update There were no queue observations in the last week. Queues for the Wellington Southern Domestic screening point which are constantly monitored using LiDAR technology showed: Week Passengers processed in less than minutes . Passengers processed in less than minutes There are no major events scheduled that are expected to impact queues this coming week. Please see the Appendix at the end of this report for data on where queues are predicted during the coming week.
Security screening weekly update The following instances of longer screening queues were recorded this week: Time Location Passengers affected Queue time (mins) Cause Mitigation Auckland Domestic Equipment failure on one lane reducing capacity Additional queue combing service provided Queues for the Wellington Southern Domestic screening point which are constantly monitored using LiDAR technology showed: Week Passengers processed in less than minutes . Passengers processed in less than minutes . There are no major events scheduled that are expected to impact queues this coming week. Please see the Appendix at the end of this report for data on where queues are predicted during the coming week.
See an overview of all Auckland Light Rail documents under More Information
Select Committee held inquiry into congestion pricing
Select Committee inquiry into Congestion Pricing
Sensitivity: General STAKEHOLDER WORKSHOP RECORD WORKSHOP DETAILS
Sensitivity: General VFM is often not monitored or assessed during program project delivery , or at completion by reporting on achieved benefits and comparing these to benefits set out at the outset . MoT is seeking gr eater transparency in project reporting. NZTA currently implementing an initiative to create a cultural shift in terms of benefits management etc and is trying to consolidate language used. Evaluation VFM with respect to road policing is considered very important. The revised framework should seek consider expenditure of this nature. Revised VFM framework should provide sufficient guidance without being too prescriptive.
Sentences Graphs, tables, etc am to am am am to .pm am.pm
Sep Dec Jan Mar Apr Jun Jul Sep
Sep Dec Jan Mar Apr Jun Jul Sep Project B ERP Action Plan: Produce an action plan that more clearly articulates roles, responsibilities, and timeframes for transport actions in the ERP Manager: Ewan Delany Environment, Emissions and Adaptation Resourcing: This project is identified as needing a medium level of resourcing ( FTE) Draft action plan completed in September Finalised action plan in December
Sep Dec Jan Mar AprJun Jul Sep
Separate each item in a simple list with a comma, except the last two items And does the work of a comma at the end of a list.
Separate hapu and Iwi have taken their own action subsequently with the Port andor Gisborne District Council or its LATEs in this area (including tributaries that affected by the Port) based on where the activities took place and the impacts on the catchment, moana and the life in the catchment and moana. These include:
Separate hapu and Iwi have taken their own action subsequently with the Port andor Gisborne District Council or its LATEs in this area (including tributaries that affected by the Port) based on where the activities took place and the impacts on the catchment, moana and the life in the catchment and moana. These include: s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT . Ngati Oneone Te Runanganui o Ngati Porou . Rongowhakaata . Ngai Tamanuhiri . Te Aitanga a Mahaki . Te Runanga o Turanganui a Kiwa
Set out the responsibilities for the operation of new and emerging technologies and provide new intervention powers to respond to the serious misuse of remotely piloted aircraft.
Setting out how funding will be allocated for transport activities from .
Setting out how funding will be allocated for transport activities in .
Setting out how funding will be allocated for transport activities over .
Setting out the Governments priorities for allocating transport funds.
Setting out the Governments vision for how drones can be better integrated into the transport system to develop a thriving, innovative and safe drone sector in New Zealand.
Settlement of the Kiwi Bacon building (ALRL to NZTA) occurs. Settlement of the land swap occurs.
Seven critical freight related issues were identified in the Story: Strategic Road and Rail Network Constraints Delivery of the High Productivity Motor Vehicle (HPMV) programme Utilisation of industrial land Lack of strategic, integrated land use and transport planning and investment Lack of shared and accurate data Need to understand costs of freight supply chains for critical industries in the upper North Island Challenging local government and central government funding structures Strong emphasis was placed on sharing of information and evidence, and on adding value to the Upper North Island in order to reduce the cost to do business. This is to be achieved through collective evidence and shared decision making. No discussion on value for money specifically. The Evidence Base is the support document to the Summary of Critical Issues and includes the shared evidence base for each of the identified critical issues. This document provides decision makers with a greater depth of information relating to the critical issues identified in the Story and will be used as a key reference for any relevant freightrelated decisions by the partner organisations. To ensure that the shared evidence base remains current the responsibility for ensuring the currency of each critical issues evidence set will sit with the organisation that has the lead role. The Upper North Island Story has been in from which can be used to understand how the statisticsevidence has changed. Summary c Auckland RLTP Website Information:
Severe Weather Emergency Recovery (KiwiRail Holdings Limited) Order
Severe Weather Emergency Recovery (KiwiRail Holdings Limited) Order and
Severe Weather Emergency Recovery (Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency) Order
Severe Weather Emergency Recovery KiwiRail Holdings Limited and Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency Orders
Severe Weather Emergency Recovery KiwiRail Holdings Limited and Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency Orders has now closed.
Severe Weather Emergency Recovery Legislation Act
Severe Weather Emergency Recovery Legislation Act .
Severe Weather Emergency Response Legislation Act
Shaping New Zealands transport system Introduction This briefing describes your role and responsibilities as the Minister of Transport , along with those of the Ministry of Transport Te Manat Waka (the Ministry) , government transport agencies, transport Crown entities, State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) , and key stakeholders you will work with. It also outlines the tools available to you for influencing the transport system and enabling better outcomes for everyone in New Zealand. This briefing should be read with the Strategic Briefing to the Incoming Minister . The transport portfolio The transport system is a significant part of New Zealands economic and social infrastructure, providing the links that help establish and sustain the economy and society. The transport system includes: vehicles that move people and products physical infrastructure (eg, airports, seaports, the rail network, roads, busways, cycleways) transport services (eg, public transport, bike sharing, ride sharing) digital infrastructure (eg, satellite based navigation infrastructure and aids, travel apps, communications technologies) institutions and regulatory systems that influence how the transport system functions and develops (eg, through their management practices, rules, policies, and investment tools). Transport is a delivery arm of many broader government strategies, and many key government priorities will not be achieved unless transport plays its part: reaching New Zealands emissions targets , growing the economy and connecting to markets , and enabling economic and social mobility in New Zealands cities, towns and regions . Transport cannot achieve these priorities by itself, but its absence can slow or prevent their delivery. Your role in the system As the Minister of Transport , you have a range of responsibilities, some of which you must do by law. These responsibilities provide you with opportunities to influence the system. Your role as the Minister is to set the overall direction for the transport system, including through: setting the overall direction for investment in the land transport system through the Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) set ting the regulatory framework by developing legislation and regulation appointing board members to the transport Crown entities, setting their expectations and overseeing their delivery and performance seeking Cabinets agreement to the rates at which fees, charges, and levies are set. These are critical decisions because they determine the resourcing available to the transport agencies to deliver their regulatory responsibilities. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT SHAPING NEW ZEALANDS TRANSPORT SYSTEM
Shaping a supportive urban form.
Shaping our transport system Introduction This briefing describes your role and responsibilities as Minister of Transport , along with those of Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) , government transport agencies, State Owned Enterprises , and key stakeholders you will work with. It also outlines the tools available to you for influencing the transport system and enabling better outcomes for everyone in New Zealand. This briefing should be read in conjunction with the Strategic BIM. The Transport Portfolio The transport system is a significant part of our social and economic infrastructure, providing the links that help establish and sustain our economy and society. The transport system includes: vehicles that move people and products physical infrastructure (e.g., airports, seaports, the rail network, roads, busways, and cycleways) transport services (e.g., public transport, bike sharing, ride sharing) digital infrastructure (e.g., satellite based navigation infrastructure and aids, travel apps, communications technologies) institutions and regulatory systems that influence how the transport system functions and develops (e.g., through their management practices, rules, policies, and investment tools). Transport is a delivery arm of many broader government strategies, and many key government priorities will not be achieved unless transport plays its part: reaching New Zealands emissions targets , growing the economy and connecting to markets , and enabling economic and social mobility in our towns and cities. Transport cannot achieve these priorities by itself, but its absence can slow or prevent their delivery. Your role in the system As Transport Minister you have a range of responsibilities, some of which you must do by law. These provide you with opportunities to influence the system. Your role as Minister is to set the overall direction for the transport system, including through: setting the overall direction for investment in the transport system through the Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) . set ting the regulatory framework by developing legislation and regulation to influence individual and business behaviour appointing board members to the transport Crown entities, setting their expectations and overseeing their delivery and performance. seeking Cabinets agreement to the rates at which fees, charges, and levies are set. These are critical decisions because they determine the resourcing available to the transport agencies to deliver their regulatory responsibilities. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT SHAPING OUR TRANSPORT SYSTEM
Shaping our transport system Introduction This briefing describes your role and responsibilities as Minister of Transport , along with those of Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) , government transport agencies, transport Crown entities, State Owned Enterprises , and key stakeholders you will work with. It also outlines the tools available to you for influencing the transport system and enabling better outcomes for everyone in New Zealand. This briefing should be read in conjunction with the Strategic BIM. The transport portfolio The transport system is a significant part of our social and economic infrastructure, providing the links that help establish and sustain our economy and society. The transport system includes: vehicles that move people and products physical infrastructure (eg, airports, seaports, the rail network, roads, busways, cycleways) transport services (eg, public transport, bike sharing, ride sharing) digital infrastructure (eg, satellite based navigation infrastructure and aids, travel apps, communications technologies) institutions and regulatory systems that influence how the transport system functions and develops (eg, through their management practices, rules, policies, and investment tools). Transport is a delivery arm of many broader government strategies, and many key government priorities will not be achieved unless transport plays its part: reaching New Zealands emissions targets , growing the economy and connecting to markets , and enabling economic and social mobility in our towns and cities. Transport cannot achieve these priorities by itself, but its absence can slow or prevent their delivery. Your role in the system As Transport Minister you have a range of responsibilities, some of which you must do by law. These provide you with opportunities to influence the system. Your role as Minister is to set the overall direction for the transport system, including through: setting the overall direction for investment in the transport system through the Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) set ting the regulatory framework by developing legislation and regulation appointing board members to the transport Crown entities, setting their expectations and overseeing their delivery and performance seeking Cabinets agreement to the rates at which fees, charges, and levies are set. These are critical decisions because they determine the resourcing available to the transport agencies to deliver their regulatory responsibilities. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT SHAPING OUR TRANSPORT SYSTEM
Shaping our transport system The Transport Portfolio The transport system is a significant part of our social and economic infrastructure, providing the links that help establish and sustain our economy and society. The transport system includes: vehicles that move people and products physical infrastructure (e.g., airports, seaports, the rail network, roads, busways, and cycleways) transport services (e.g., public transport, bike sharing, ride sharing) digital infrastructure (e.g., satellite based navigation infrastructure and aids, travel apps, communications technologies) institutions and regulatory systems that influence how the transport system functions and develops (e.g., through their management practices, rules, policies, and investment tools). Your role as Minister is to set priorities for investment through the GPS , set expectations for our entities and appoint Board members. You will make policy decisions that will direct and influence actors in the system, which provide choices to transport users. As Minister, you are responsible for making sure the transport system supports the aspirations of small communities, rural communities, towns and cities, and regions. In doing so, it is important to recognise that each part of the system operates differently. For example, while government funds and delivers most of the land transport infrastructure, much of the aviation and maritime sector is delivered by the private sector. Transport is also a delivery arm of many broader government strategies, and a number of key government priorities will not be achieved unless transport plays its part: reaching New Zealands emissions targets; growing the economy and connecting to markets; and enabling economic and social mobility in our towns and cities. Transport cannot achieve these priorities by itself, but its absence can slow or prevent their delivery. The different parts of the transport system Central government is heavily involved in the transport system as a planner, funder, partner, enforcer, and regulator. In your day today work, you will be closely interacting with transport sector agencies. Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) is a government department, while Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency (Waka Kotahi), the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), Maritime New Zealand (MNZ) and the Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC) a re transport agencies, with TAIC as an independent Crown entity. There are three state owned enterprises (SOEs): KiwiRail, Airways Corporation of New Zealand Ltd (Airways), and Meteorological Services of New Zealand Ltd (MetService). Auckland Light Rail Limited (ALRL) was established in late under Schedule of the Crown Entities Act . Additionally, City Rail Link Limited is the sole company under Schedule A of the RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE TRANSPORT OUTCOMES FRAMEWORK
Shaping our transport system The Transport Portfolio The transport system is a significant part of our social and economic infrastructure, providing the links that help establish and sustain our economy and society. The transport system includes: vehicles that move people and products physical infrastructure (e.g., airports, seaports, the rail network, roads, busways, and cycleways) transport services (e.g., public transport, bike sharing, ride sharing) digital infrastructure (e.g., satellite based navigation infrastructure and aids, travel apps, communications technologies) institutions and regulatory systems that influence how the transport system functions and develops (e.g., through their management practices, rules, policies, and investment tools). Your role as Minister is to set the overall direction for the transport system, including through setting investment priorities (through the GPS), developing legislation and regulation to influence behaviour of both businesses and individuals; and by setting expectations for our entities and appointing their Board members. As Minister, you are responsible for making sure the transport system supports the aspirations of small communities, rural communities, towns and cities, and regions. In doing so, it is important to recognise that each part of the system operates differently. For example, while government funds and delivers most of the land transport infrastructure, much of the aviation and maritime sector is delivered by the private sector. Transport is also a delivery arm of many broader government strategies, and a number of key government priorities will not be achieved unless transport plays its part: reaching New Zealands emissions targets; growing the economy and connecting to markets; and enabling economic and social mobility in our towns and cities. Transport cannot achieve these priorities by itself, but its absence can slow or prevent their delivery. The different parts of the transport system Central government is heavily involved in the transport system as a planner, funder, partner, enforcer, and regulator. In your day today work, you will be closely interacting with transport sector agencies. Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) is a government department, while Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency (Waka Kotahi), the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), Maritime New Zealand (MNZ) and the Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC) a re transport agencies, with TAIC as an independent Crown entity. There are three state owned enterprises (SOEs): KiwiRail, Airways Corporation of New Zealand Ltd (Airways), and Meteorological Services of New Zealand Ltd (MetService). RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE TRANSPORT OUTCOMES FRAMEWORK
Shared Socioeconomic Pathway . medium confidence projection
Shared Themes: a documents sharing a similar strategic focus and largely the same time period () b documents sharing a similar strategic focus and largely the same time period (influenced by GPS) c monitoring focus d documents s haring a similar strategic focus and largely the same time period (influenced by GPS) e decision making tools f financial management procurement NOTE: Some other international examples identified during the literature review include Axelos, the UK Office of Government Commerce (OGC), the Investment Logic Mapping (ILM) process developed by the Victoria State Government and Managing Benefits by A PMG. APPENDIX E MOT STAKEHOLDER WORKSHOP NOTES
Shared Themes: a documents sharing a similar strategic focus and largely the same time period () b documents sharing a similar strategic focus and largely the same time period (influenced by GPS) c monitoring focus d documents sharing a similar strategic focus and largely the same time period (influenced by GPS) e decision making tools f financial management procurement Nonmonetised assessment o This chapter explains when to undertake a nonmonetised assessment, how to undertake a nonmonetised assessment and how to report outcomes of a nonmonetised assessment. Analytical assurance statements and value for money
Shared shuttles Choices abound for those willing to share. Ridesharing and minibus services shuttle many people around town, when they arent walking, biking, and scooting around compact urban centres.
Sharing views and research on the future of drones in New Zealand.
She was formerly National Manager, Road Policing with NZ Police, Deputy Chair of the Independent Taskf orce on Workplace Health and Safety, and Executive Advisor on the Childrens Action Plan
Sheehan M., Watson B., Schonfeld C., Wallace A. and Partridge B. (). Drink driver rehabilitation and education in Victoria. Research report . Noble Park North, Victoria: Royal Automobile Club of Victoria (RACV) Ltd. ISBN .
Ships that operate only in domestic waters will have until early to meet requirements. This gives shipping and fishing industries enough time to prepare for the new regulations.
Should Frequency Ltd decide to re tender or submit further tenders for work relating to ALR, Hon Dame Wilde will recuse herself from t he procurement process across both boards where this specifically relates to Frequency Limited . PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT IN CONFIDENCE CO () v IN CONFIDENCE
Should any dispute between the Parties arise, the Parties involved shall seek to resolve the dispute through consultation s. In the event that no agreement is reached, it shall be settled through diplomatic channels .
Should we identify a need to gather information in scope of the model standards in future, we will ensure compliance with Information Gathering Model Standards, and update this transparency statement.
Show numbers in brackets for word numbers FAMILY ( ) Use the wo rd phone for landlines and mobile for cellphone numbers Dont use a colon after phone or RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Show start and end times in full Use to to separate ranges in proper sentences.
Significant Government investment in rail in recent years is primarily aimed at addressing decades of underinvestment and restoring the rail network to a level where it can play its proper role in New Zealands transport system. The commitments the Government has made are multi year investments in many cases this represents once in a generation investment in long life infrastructure assets.
Significant housing growth will also generate significantly more vehicle trips, and regardless of how much active mode infrastructure is provided, the majority of new trips would still be carbased. The funding provided in the draft GPS could enable further design work and consenting to progress over the next years ().
Signing up to MARPOL Annex VI is an important move in our domestic effort to decarbonise maritime transport and supports the collective international effort to reduce the global impact of shipping on the environment.
Signing up to MARPOL Annex VI will now mean many New Zealand flagged ships will need to meet Annex VI requirements. New laws, including new marine protection rules, implementing MARPOL Annex VI requirements will come into force in New Zealand on August .
Sigurur Ingi Jhannsson ( pronounced Sig urdur ) has been a member of the Icelandic Parliament for the South Constituency since . The Icelandic Parliament is composed of members. He is the Leader (known as the Chairperson) of the Progressive Party, which has governed since in coalition with the Independent Part y. The Progressive Party is predominantly concerned with issues related to farmers. He is a trained livestock veterinarian by trade. He has served in various ministerial roles, including Prime Minister from April to January . He has held multiple other ministerial positions, including Minister of Fisheries and Agriculture and Minister for the Environment and Natural Resources.
Silverans, P., Alvarez, J., Assum, T., Drevet, M., Evers, C., Hagman, R., Mathijssen, R. (). Del iverable D : Description , results and discussion of the alcolock field trial Alcolock implementation in the European Union. Brussels, Belgium.
Similarly we consider that whilst the intent in the statement of Ministerial expectations is laudable it lacks concise clarity. We are concerned that as presented this could become the object of goal transference, with a tick box approach to each componen t rather than a focus on these as a means of delivering the strategic objectives. We are equally concerned that these criteria as presented could be subverted to accommodate the status quo. We agree that the indicators proposed for the strategic objective s are relevant and necessary. At this stage we reserve judgement as to whether they are sufficient. At a funding level we support the hypothecation of the Land Transport Fund to all forms of surface transport, noting again the interconnectedness of each mode to the strategic priorities and the impact that investment in any given mode can have on these. We acknowledge that significant changes to surface transport in mode share , energy input, and usage patterns, are required to meet all strategic objectives, but in particular the Road to Zero and Climate change objectives . We consider the latter will require both greater funding and economic incentives , both positive and negative, if they are to be achieved within the r equire d time frame . We consider that within the scope of the fund, these incentives should be revenue neutral. We also consider that, to conform to the principles of mode neutra ity as well as to have maximum efficiency as a price signal, fiscal incentives to minimise clim te change emissions should be universally applied to all forms of surface transport , not restricted to fuel purchased for on road use. With regard to specific activity classes, we consider that public transport and active mode infrastructure has been grossly under funded in the past and that the increased priority given to environmental effects is long overdue, noting especially the strong correlation between transport emission density and excess mortality and morbidity amongst the elderly. We also consider that there should be a specific acknowledgement in the Public Transport Service class, of the need for innovative solutions in parts of NZ where the population density is insufficient to support traditional public transport solutions Deta iled comments Strategic D irection We support and acknowledge the refinement of the four strategic goals of Safety, Better Travel options , Climate Change and Improving freight connections. We also agree with the re definition of Value for money as a prin ciple across all objectives, rather than a separate objective. We heartily endorse the requirement to fully consider and evaluate co benefits when developing business cases. We are also particularly pleased to note the inclusion of Climate Change as a st rategic objective in accordance with our submission on GPS . We a gain emphasise the need to recognise and consider the need to link transport an d urban development strategies, and the essential role of increased public transport, both traditional and mass rapid transit in both facilitating and increasing equity of access (para ) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Similarly, a government official described how the three year cycle could impact funding security and certainty, and therefore moment um, within the continuous programme: continuous programmes are there for a continuous reason not necessarily something you want to stop and think about every three years everything sort of hits a hiatus until the funding can be approved deliverables can is deferred and delayed (Government official) One interviewee felt the GPS process should be more responsive to the regional strategic direction established at the RLTP level and the timing of regional activity management plans. The researchers under stand that work is currently underway to enhance alignment between these respective planning inputs, to achieve a more standardized approach, and to balance bottom up and top down influence over regional investment decisions. . Impact of the continuous p rogramme Consistent with the quantitative analysis, several interviewees recognised that a relatively small proportion of the investment under each GPS was available for discretionary investment. Baseline commitments are significant, including the continu ous programme, debt repayments, existing funding approvals and activities from previous GPS, and investment to maintain existing levels of service. As the land transport system increased in size faster than available funding, an increasing proportion of the NLTF was needed just to keep the lights on. One interviewee noted that for rural road controlling authorities, most of the investment was via the continuous programme, thus limiting the strategic relevance and impact of the GPS for rural areas. For examples: In the context of a huge rural roading networkthe issues are not about getting people out of carsthe issues are all about replacing wooden bridges (Government official) the biggest issues in rural region are roading infrastructure project snot about putting people onto buses there are not thousands of people to put onto bikeswhen you have a very strong focus in that line you are disenfranchisingthat part of the country, youre taking away their ability to actually make progress in their priority areas (Government official) One sector interviewee noted the ongoing pressure that existing services face in the current economic environment and the pressure this will place on the continuous programme in the future: Given the post COVID impact on PT patronage, the slow recovery and the impact on revenue from PT fares, sustaining PT services at current levels is not affordable. The future GPS will need to consider providing additional OPEX funding to continue maintaining existing services and introduce new services. (Sector stakeholder) Reflecting on the above, some interviewees saw recent Crown investments (outside of the GPS) in transport as indicative of the investment pressure. Continuous programme is a term that was frequently used by interviewees. For the purposes of this report, continuous programme refers to a range of non discretionary funding commitments, such as maintenance programme and public transport services. WHAT ARE THE KEY FACTORS THAT AFFECT THE EFFICIENCY AND EFFECTIVENESS OF CONVERTING INPUTS TO OUTPUTS AND HENCE TO OUTCOMES
Similarly, the results can be filtered by other dropdown menus or, where relevant, the size of CO
Simon Court MPOffice of the Prime Minister
Simple words make: sentences easier to scan content more accessible to a wider range of people, including people whose first language is not English.
Simpson HM. Who is the persistent drinking driver Part II: Canada and elsewhere. Transp Res Circ ; : .
Since , the partnership has delivered a series of strategic reports and develops an indicative package of transport investments for Auckland (the ATAP package) every three years. This package informs statutory processes including the National Land Transport Programme and Aucklands Regional Land Transport Plan.
Since as far back as oral histories extend, travel and transportation has been integral to hap and whnau wellbeing. Movement patterns varied significantly between different areas, depending on aspects like available resources and climate.
Since joining the Ministry I have worked on such a wide range of projects from the Household Travel Survey to the Transport Knowledge Hub. I have really enjoyed working on road safety projects including Road to Zero; from the very early stages of its development through to where we are now in its implementation. This is a program that will save lives and its great to have a role in that.
Since the Act came into force, regulations covering exemptions, RUC rates, infringements and other aspects have passed into law.
Since the Committees decision a number of significant metro rail project decisions have taken place that have in some cases reinforced, and in some cases varied, the Committees decision. These projects have been approved by Cabinet. They include the purchase of new electric multiple units for Auckland, further upgrade of the Wellington rail network, decisions on the ownership of rolling stock and metro rail stations, and on the funding of metro rail capital and operations.
Since the completion of the research, bus operators and councils have made further progress in their own work to transition to zeroemission bus fleets and the Ministry is preparing to engage with the sector on how central government can best support the transition.
Since the early s, the Government has progressively introduced stronger exhaust emission requirements on vehicles to reduce the harm on human health. Despite improvements to vehicles, the growth in the vehicle numbers (especially diesel vehicles) and an increase in the number of people exposed to air pollution means health effects and social costs have increased over time.
Since the group was established in August , I have very much appreciated the input of David Crawford and the MIA and would look forward to similar cont ributions continuing in future.
Since the publication of TEBS, Te Manat Waka has developed a value for money assessment model , which provides a structured framework for incorporating value for money thinking into the development, monitoring and evaluation of transport policies and initiatives. Te Manat Waka is also developing a Transport Sector Monitoring Framework (TSMF) to provide consistencies across the transport sector and to improve efficacy in reporting.
Siobhan Routledge Acting Deputy Chief Executive . . . Hon Simeon Brow n Minister for Transport . . . Ministers office to complete : Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events Comments Contacts Name Telephone First contact s ()(g)(i) s ()(g)(i) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Siobhan Routledge, Acting Deputy Chief Executive Bev Driscoll, Manager Rail
Siobhan Routledge Director Aviation
Siobhan Routledge is our DCE leading this for MoT.
Six documents fall within the scope of your request and are detailed in the document schedule attached as Annex . The schedule outlines how the documents you requested have been treated under the Act.
Small passenger services review
Smarter transport network NZD million has been allowed to implement smart transport initiatives, including integrated ticketing and demand management tools. These changes will lead to a wellmanaged transport system that makes best use of infrastructure and supports other projects in LGWM.
Snapshots of household travel
So far in the CAA has reported laser strikes at airports across New Zealand. That compared to incidents in , and in . CAA deputy chief executive David Harrison said laser strikes were a serious threat to aviation safety. It can completely disorient pilots or even incapacitate them. Whanganui Chronicle PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending July
So what do you think Attitudes from people in the New Zealand Household Travel Survey
Social Cost of Road Crashes and Injuries
Social cost of road crashes and injuries
Social cost of road crashes and injuries Methodology and user guide
Social cost of road crashes and injuries update
Social costs measure the total cost of road crashes to the nation, including loss of life and life quality, loss of productivity, medical, legal, court and vehicle damage costs. Injury costs are classified into fatal, serious, and minor injuries as reported by crash investigators. Te Manat Waka updates the social cost of road crashes and injuries annually to allow comparison of the costs and benefits of any road safety actions in current dollars.
Solomon Airlines Solomon Airlines, all reported transTasman routes
Solomon Airlines began weekly Brisbane Auckland and Auckland Brisbane flights in February . ... . .. ...... Feb Mar OnTime Departures () OnTime Arrivals () Cancellations () AIRLINES PERFORMANCE, TRANSTASMAN ROUTES, MARCH
Some Activity Classes could not be directly associated with a particular mode (such as Investment Management). Therefore, these activities were left uncategorised. Mode shift promoting weighted categorisation: A keyword search was conducted in this stage. This was performed to identify: activities that supported multiple modes (eg, roading activities that supported active and public transport). roading activities that wer e incorrectly classified (eg, those in the roading Activity Classes related to active or public transport). This involved searching the list of activities for the following keywords: Active transport keywords and phrases: active, walk, pedestrian, cycle, c ycling, cyclist, scooter, footpath, cycleway, and shared path. Public transport keyword, phrases and acronyms: public transport, passenger transport, public transit, PT, bus, train, rail and ferry. Every occurrence of each keyword was checked. No further c hecks were performed for those keywords that matched the category (eg, train in the public transport category). Any activity identified by a keyword search not already marked with the corresponding category was assessed to see whether further categorisat ion was needed. Where an activity was identified as an active or public transport activity in step , this classification was left as is (though other categories could still be added). The text containing the identified keyword was reviewed to determine th e activitys intent (ie, whether it was mode shift promoting or not). Where necessary, other information about the activity was reviewed to understand its purpose better. (Often, the keyword text did not provide enough information to determine the activity s intent because it is common for activities to include sections of generic text that do not apply specifically to the associated activity). Activities identified during the keyword review could be marked with categories. For example, if an activity was f ound to support roading, active transport, and public transport, it was categorised as all three. For activities initially categorised as roading, this could also be removed if found unrelated to the activity. . STUDY PHASES
Some background thinking was undertaken in , and then picked up again in late . Previous papers are linked below.
Some feedback indic ated turnover within the government sector to GPS , as new mindsets and skillsets were required to implement signalled shifts in investment direction. Some interviewees described the increased number of activity classes and wider scope of GPS as creating funding pressure as the available resource was spread more thinly, some suggested that this process might also reduce impact overall. Due to the change in government, GPS was finalised later in the planning cyc le, meaning there were limited opportunities for RLTPs around New Zealand to respond, except Auckland. Some stakeholders reported that many existing planned projects were re defined to fit new funding priorities rather than these projects changing substant ially. A range of broader factors that highlight the complexity of the transport system was seen to be either enabling or acting counter to GPS objectives, which can ultimately affect outcomes. These include: impact of rising fuel prices on behaviour chan ge impact of the COVID pandemic on behaviour change (eg, public transport mode shift) increasingly, transport related funding outside the GPS and NLTP, such as through direct Crown funding. There was a view that such investment reflected that the fundin g available from the NLTF was insufficient to address transport investment needs and the governments policy priorities. . Conclusions To some extent, GPS investments are delivering their intended results, particularly in the changes in the mix of investments towards safety and public transport. These are now flowing through to delivery, but their ultimate outcomes are yet to be determined. Not surprisingly, several key informants observed that the level of funding allocated to each activity class w as a key change mechanism, as project proposals to the NLTF tended to follow the money. Key informants commonly described the investment direction of GPS as clearly signalling the need for a broader understanding of land transport and the land transp ort investments needed to address transport priorities. These signals were generally picked up in investment decision making by Waka Kotahi, but the timing of the GPS limited its influence in RLTPs outside of Auckland. As a result, the process that unfolds , particularly at a regional level, may sometimes be more of alignment than direct influence. A key finding from this evaluation is the tension between using the GPS as a tool for transformative change and, at the same time, having sufficient consistency b etween successive GPS to build delivery momentum. The longstanding priorities established in earlier GPS sustained initiatives, such as the RoNS programme, over an extended period. The disruptive nature of GPS signalled significant shifts in investmen t strategy and required shifts in capability and capacity that are still in progress. The continuity of direction in GPS is likely to enhance the contribution to intended outcomes over time. Although a GPS presents a ten year plan, relatively small p roportions of funds are available for discretionary investment within every three years that a GPS is in effect. Increasing costs GPS had activity classes, with two of these being new classes transitional rail and rapid transit. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Some informati on has been withhel d on the basis that it would not, if request ed under the
Some key exporters are facing carbon charges to access markets such as the EU. Costs for
Some noted that there is a disparity between the actual number of drones and incidents involving them, and what is reported.
Some of the Governments key actions for improving road safety include:
Some of the thinking we follow:
Some parts of these papers have been redacted as they are not appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act (the Act). Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it.
Some presentationsspeeches may include material that is sensitive, confidential or controversial. Keep in mind that that the very nature of presenting means the content of your presentationspeech may become public knowledge, even if you are presenting to a closed group. For example, a person at the meeting may talk to other colleagues who were not at the meeting or use social media to talk about what was discussed at the meeting. Ideally, the content of your presentation should be of a level that, if it were made public either deliberately or accidently, there would be no negative impacts on the Ministry or for the government. To help mitigate risk from accidental release, if your material is discussing elements of policy not yet agreed to by government, make sure that your presentation material has Draft andor Not government policy either as watermarks or the footnoteheader. In some circumstances, it may be appropriate to signal your expectation that matters discussed in the meeting are under Chatham House Rules.
Some rules that imposed costs on operators but no longer provided significant benefits would be removed to allow for fair competition between operators.
Some suggestions to improve the data quality and make it more widely available are included in the last section, based on the experience of preparing this analysis. . Investment analysis data so urces Analysis of the impacts of GPS on changes to funding investment decisions is primarily based on an extensive set of data extracted from Waka Kotahis Transport Investment Online (TIO) system, described below. This data gives detailed information about actual historical and planned future funding for transport activities and enables funding that has been approved (up to a point when the data was extracted) to be distinguished from funding not yet approved. Some publicly available information publ ished by Waka Kotahi about actual annual expenditure on transport activities was also used. This gives information about financial year expenditure in broad categories by Waka Kotahi and local authorities. .. NLTP extracts Full NLTP extracts were obt ained from TIO for the , and NLTPs. We use these extracts to analyse transport investment decisions made under GPS , , and respectively. Combined, these extracts include information about , unique investment activiti es, further broken down into , investment phases. This includes some ongoing phases that were approved for funding before GPS took effect, some that were subsequently approved after GPS , and some that have not had funding approved, ie, are s till waiting for approval or have had funding declined. Any investment phases ongoing across NLTP periods are included in more than one of these extracts. As we are interested in initial funding decisions, in such cases, we used funding information from t he NLTP extract corresponding to the time when funding for the phase was first approved. .. Funding approvals Monthly funding approvals reports from August to April were extracted from TIO and combined into a single funding approvals dataset. This includes records of , funding approvals to increase or decrease funding for activities already in progress. As described above, we focused on first approvals for new funding only. We scanned the approvals dataset for each investment phas e to find the earliest month funding for that phase was approved. We used this as the of approval for the phase. These dates were matched with GPS periods to determine whether funding decisions were made under GPS , , or (or before GPS after GPS ). .. Data limitations Transport investment funding is a complex process, with projects often being revised over time in scope and cost. The NLTP snapshots only provide a partial window into this process. Available at https:www.nzta.govt.nzplanning andinvestmentlearning andresourcestransport datadata andtools . For phases (. of phases recorded as having a status of funding approved in the NLTP extracts), no approvals record could be found. Most () of such phases appear to have started before , ie, before the beginning of the approvals dataset. In all cases where the approval for a phase could not be determined, the starting year of the phase as recorded in the NLTP extract was assumed to be the year that funding for the phase was approved. METHODS
Source: Auckland Council , , , , , , Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep DecTotal Auckland Fuel Use (m rolling, millions of litres) Jun Jun Jun Jun Dec RFT funding surplus (, millions) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of March OC Hon Michael Wood Action required by: Minister of Transport Thursday, April PROACTIVE RELEASE OF CABINET PAPER FOR APPROVAL TO INTRODUCE THE LAND TRANSP ORT MANAGEMENT (REGULATION OF PUBLIC TRANSPORT) AMENDMENT BILL Purpose Seek your agreement to publish three documents relating to Cabinet approval to introduce the Land Transport Management (Regulation of Public Transport) Amendment Bill (the Bill) , on the Te Manat Waka (the Ministry) website. Number of paper s We propose to proactive ly release three documents . Other relevant documents have already been a s part of introducing the Bill to Parliament . Deadline for proactive release The documents should be by April , which is business days following Cabinet consideration. Risks Mitigations BRIEFING Document s ()(g)(i) s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Recommendations We recommend you: approve the Ministry to publish three documents relating to Cabinet approval to introduce the Land Transport Management (Regulation of Public Transport) Amendment Bill on the Ministrys website. Yes No
Source: Auckland Council Jan May Sep Jan May Sep Jan May Sep Jan May Sep Jan May Sep Jan May Sep Jan May Sep Jan May Sep Jan May SepAuckland consents by type month rolling total Houses Apartments Townhouses, flats, units, other Retirement village units Oct Apr Oct Apr Oct Apr Oct Apr Oct Apr Oct Apr Oct Apr Oct Apr OctAuckland dwelling consents by distance from a RTN month rolling total Month Rolling Total Withinm Month Rolling TotalWithinm Month Rolling TotalWithinm RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Keeping Aucklands transport safe . Deaths were increasing from June , but peaked at in December . . There were road deaths in Auckland in the year to December , which is a decrease of five from the year ending December . This is on par with deaths for the year ending December . . National road deaths were the highest in four years at over the same period, an increase of ( per cent) from the previous calendar year. Australias road deaths were , over the same period, an increase of ( six per cent) from the previous calendar year. . Auckland Transports Safe Speeds programme was introduced in , and results from the first phase are promising. Auckland roads in the Safe Speeds Programme experienced a per cent reduction in deaths from July to July , and the programme is estimated to have reduced deaths or serious injuries by . a year. Auckland roads not in the programme experienced a nine per cent increase in deaths over the same period.
Source: Auckland Transport Jun Jun Jun Jun Jun Junpercentage of arterial congestion month rolling totalArterial congestion in the AM Peak on the Auckland Network July March RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Pre COVID interpeak levels of congestion were at per cent of the freight network, on average, for financial year . Congestion then dropped to per cent during COVID lockdown conditions from September to July . Following the end of C OVID lockdowns, freight network congestion rose to per cent of the network in March and has remained at this level.
Source: Auckland Transport Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun DecAuckland network deaths month rolling total Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun DecAuckland network serious injuries month rolling total RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Keeping Auckland moving . The percentage of local roads with congestion at the morning peak is at per cent for the year ending December , which is similar to the year ending December at . per cent. . Congestion on state highways has worsened throughout the year to December . While March is typically the busiest month, this was not observed in due to Covid restrictions. . Although demand (vehicle kilometres travelled per day) on the motorway network was noticeably lower than preCovid levels in the first quarter of , demand is now close to levels. In December, the motorway networks average workday demand was per cent of that in .
Source: Auckland Transport . Serious injuries have increased to for the year ending December , up from the year ending December .
Source: Auckland Transport . In October , Auckland Transport removed services per day (equating to just less than six per cent of trips) on services that were regularly experiencing cancellations to provide increased certainty to passengers. . More bus drivers will be required to provide the new bus services needed for the upcoming rail network repairs and the FIFA Womens World Cup. . Operators have indicated that job and visa applications have increased following the creation of a new temporary residence pathway for skilled drivers and the bus driver pay increases funded by Auckland Council, Waka Kotahi and the Government in mid to late . . Auckland Transport is working with the Ministry of Social Development (MSD) to attract individuals that have obtained a class licence through programmes offered by MSD . Bus operators and Auckland Transport have delivered community based job fairs and digital campaigns to attract additional drivers. . Many operators have expanded their international recruitment efforts. Bus operators are recruiting in wider Asia, the Philippines and the Pacific Islands. Ferry operators have sought experienced skippers from the Philippines, South Africa and Europe. Upcoming rail closures . In October , Auckland Transport and KiwiRail publicly released the planned rail closure programme. This will enable works need ed to support the increased patronage and more frequent trains associated with City Rail Link and address historic underinvestment in the Auckland rail network. Bus cancellations in Auckland RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of . KiwiRail and Auckland Transport have been working closely to minimise disruption to commuters. Auckland Transport are providing rail replacement buses (including two express services), optimise traffic lights for buses travelling on those routes, provide enhanced customer wayfinding and have launched a customer communicati ons campaign. Asset renewals . A combination of funding constraints, wet weather and Covid delays have led to a backlog in the maintenance of existing assets. The backlog of works is increasing the number of potholes on the Auckland network as roads and highways lose waterproofing.
Source: Auckland Transport Harmful emissions to people and the environment Auckland Council measures the quantities of several air pollutants across ten Auckland sites to determine the air quality across the region and whether this complies with the World Health Organisation (WHO) guidelines and targets set in the Auckland Unitary Plan (Auckland targets). These standards are the minimum requirements that outdoor air quality should meet to guarantee a set level of protection for human health and the environment. During the reporting period, air quality across Auckland as a whole remained within WHO guidelines and the Auckland targets, and slightly improved (by . per cent ) , potentially due to COVID lockdowns. However, air pollution levels remain high in the city centre, and on occasion, have exceeded WHO guidelines during this period. The Customs Street monitoring site exceeded the WHO guideline of micrograms of nitrogen dioxide per cubic metre of air in to , but not the Auckland Unitary Plan target (gm), registering an annual average per year of around gm. Motor vehicles are the primary source of nitrogen dioxide, and higher volumes reflect increases in traffic in the city centre.
Source: Auckland Transport Making Aucklands transport safe (environmental and human health) Deaths and serious injuries Over the three year period from July to June the annual number of deaths and serious injuries (DSI) on the Auckland network fluctuated. The annual combined total of DSIs decreased from in July to DSIs (during the COVID lockdown), before increasing to in June . This exceeded the Auckland Transport target trajectory at the time which was annual total DSIs. Since June , annual DSIs have decreased. The total number of DSIs for the year to June was . This meant Auckland Transport were within their new target for the financial year of having no more than DSI incidents on Aucklands road network. The target trajectory was readjusted in August , using the financial year performance results as a new baseline, to better align Auckland Transports work plan, budget and schedule of the safety programme. In light of this performance, Auckland Transport has further revised down their DSI targets to no more DSI by June in the Draft Statement of Intent to . This target better aligns with A uckland Transports safety programme plan, schedule and budget (including prospective allocations from the NLTF) . of freight netowkr experiencing congestion month rolling totalProportion of the Auckland freight network experiencing congestion during the interpeak period July June RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of
Source: Auckland Transport The impact of halfprice fares . While patronage is slowly recovering, supported by half price fares, t he bus driver shortage and high level of cancellations, rail disruptions, lack of international students and changing customer behaviour continue to hinder patronage recovery . . A Waka Kotahi national survey from June to August found that halfprice fares an additional seven per cent journeys on public transport: one per cent were completely new, three per cent came from cars taxis and three per cent came from walking or cycling. . The same survey found people chose more expensive private vehicle use over public transport use because of the distance to access public transport, lack of services at times needed and longer travel times. . Future transport demand remains uncertain as Aucklanders may have shifted their travel patterns following Covid . Early indications show fewer Aucklanders spending the full week in the office or education facilities.
Source: Auckland Transport. Regional Fuel Tax (RTF) . From its introduction in July to December , the RFT has raised million in revenue and has been spent progressing projects. . As of December , Auckland Council has million in RFT which is yet to be spent, down from million from year ending June . Auckland Council expects the capital programme to step up in future years, which will further reduce the funding surplus.
Source: Begg and Stephenson ().
Source: Lewis Evans (). The blue annotations have been added for clarity.
Source: Waka Kotahi . Aucklands bus patronage fare revenue has decreased by per cent from the financial year ending to the financial year ending .
South Island Regional Transport Committee Chairs
Speech to Aerospace Summit
Speed Reference Group met
Speed Rule and consequential amendments .
Speed limit change s are guided by the current Rule, which introduced a more structured approach to setting and managing speed limits than previous processes . It did this by introducing a requirement for road controlling authorities (RCAs) and regional transport committees (RTCs) to produce speed management plans. It also introduced a National S peed Limits Register administered by the NZ Transport Agency (the NZTA ).
Speed limit reduction reversals begin
Speed plays a significant role in determining the outcome in all road crashes. The framework for setting speed limits plays a vital role in promoting and improving road safety. Ensuring the framework for setting speed limits enables RCAs and RTCs to set speeds that are safe and appropriate for their roads and that are aligned with the expectations of road users and communities will support compliance.
Square brackets Only use in quotations to add clarity to somebodys quote or to avoid confusion:
Stakeholder engagement sought
Stakeholder relationships have improved, despite mixed views about Ministry and lower familiarity
Stakeholders and the public were invited to watch our presentation video and provide feedback on the strategic investment priorities detailed in the draft Rail Plan. Consultation with a wider group of stakeholders took place in conjunction with the GPS consultation.
Stakeholders generally agreed with the overall approach we were taking, although some suggested that registration and training should be a high priority. There was general support for the current riskbased regulatory regime which is set out in the Civil Aviation Rules Parts and . Some respondents thought that the Part rules could be simpler and clearer.
Stakeholders often focused on driver behaviour as a key factor in road safety. Many also noted the importance of speed and were keen to see streamlined processes for setting speed limits. Some stakeholders stressed that the strategy needed to take into account rural needs, and access to jobs and services.
Starting July , the Clean Car Discount will make it cheaper for New Zealanders to switch to an electric vehicle (EV) or plugin electric hybrid vehicle (PHEV).
Starting in , we researched and a range of papers with a view to stimulating wider debate on the future of transport in New Zealand.
Starting in , Matariki holiday covers the period from pm on the Thursday to am on the Monday.
Starting in August , the respondents were given months to develop their proposals. They were invited to take part in an interactive engagement process so they could check in with the project team and other experts if they wished to clarify any of the requirements. An advisory group of chief executives assisted the Secretary for Transport and a Ministerial oversight group was established.
State Highway Slow Vehicle Bays
State highways . Due to wet weather and Covid restrictions in financial year , . kilometres of state highway renewals work was deferred into the programme. . During the reporting period, Waka Kotahi delivered . kilometres ( per cent of the planned year to ). Local roads . During the reporting period, Auckland Transport delivered kilometres ( per cent of the planned year to ). . Funding constraints mean that Auckland Transport cannot meet all the renewal needs of the network , resulting in a backlog of around , kilometres of asset renewals . Auckland Transport estimates it will take between five to ten years to clear the backlog. Rail . During the reporting period, KiwiRail ; . Delivered one kilometre of rail replacement ( per cent of the year to target). . Replaced nine turnouts ( per cent of the year to target). . Remediated eight turnouts ( per cent of the year to target). . Decreased user pays revenue is impacting Auckland Transports ability to pay KiwiRail for maintenance on the rail network, which is impacting KiwiRails ability to deliver essential maintenance and renewals.
State housing . Kinga Ora has determined a requirement for state housing units in the area. The preferred delivery option is units at Karanga a Hape and units at Maungawhau on the Fenton Street si te.
Statement of Intent Sets out the entitys strategic intentions against the Governments priorities and direction. The Statement of Intent is developed by an entity for at least a four year period. Statement of Performance Expectations Sets out the entitys annual delivery and performance expectations against your Letter of Expectations and the Statement of Intent. Entities are required to provide their final drafts of their Statements of Performance Expectations for your comment before May each year.
Steps to developing a logic map: The Theory of Change evaluation strategy
Strategic Investment Programme Project Descriptions
Strategic Policy The government also needs to disaggregate the indicators in Strategic Policy by impairment or access need. The government must ensure that disabled people are getting the same opportunities as nondisabled people and are not being isolated, preventing them from accessing work, social, and educational opportunities (Article Accessibility, ). Furthermore, when considering the poor welfare experienced by disabled people, the safety concerns that prevent them from using different forms of transport it is clear these factors need to be addressed and that failure to do so will place a burden on disabled people and the whole population Invalid source specified. .This can be addressed by measuring participation of disabled people in the transport system. CCS Disability Action and its partners have developed and trialled a system to do this and demonstrated that access improvements improve participation by disabled people (Burdett, Locke, Scrimgeour, ). Desired result needs an additional indicator on the accessibility of public transport for disabled people. We believe the government in the long term should aim to make New Zealands transport systems accessible overall. But for now, this new indicator needs to be an extension to the already proposed indicator. This new indictor should measure the percentage of public transport vehicles that are accessible to disabled people This should include access for people with a diverse range of impairments including vision, hearing, physical impairments as well as learning disability. By adding a new indicator about accessibly on public transport for disabled people the government will be complying with article of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. This article requires the Government to ensure disabled people have access, on an equal basis with others, to the physical environment. This includes transportation (Article Accessibility, ). Desired result needs an indicator that looks at number of disabled people using public transport. It is important to as this indicator as it will help the government anticipate and respond to the future demand for accessible transport. The new indicator should be similar to indicator K number of disabled people using and accessing public transport in urban areas (by region). RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Strategic coordination of maritime security in New Zealand
Strategic policy projects for transport
Strategic priorit ies Safety Primary outcome healthy and safe people The primary focus of this priority is to develop a transport system that advances New Zealands vision that no one is killed or seriously injured while travelling. Transport will be substantially safer. Supporting outcomes Healthy and safe people safer roads, footpaths and cycleways will en able more New Zealanders to travel by active modes. Economic prosperity welldesigned and safe travel networks support productive economic activity as a result of fewer crashes, and more reliable travel times. Inclu sive access improved options for travelling by public transport and active modes will give New Zealanders better options for accessing places. Resilience and security increasing the range of options people have for travel. How we will deliver these outcomes Through the Road to Zero strategy, the Government has committed to a New Zealand where no one is killed or seriously injured in road crashes, with an intermediate target to reduce deaths and serious injuries on our roads by by . We will de liver this through five focus areas: Infrastructure improvement and speed management Vehicle safety Work related road safety Road user choices System management GPS will contribute to several of these focus areas by further embedding our road safe ty principles into infrastructure planning, design, operations and maintenance decision making. GPS safety expenditure will include investment in safer infrastructure, speed management, road policing, safety cameras and promoting responsible behaviour .
Strategic priorities Strategic context Strategic priorities for GPS Strategic Investment Programme Government commitments Meeting the land transport needs of different users How progress will be measured . Investment in land transport Context for investment Investment delivered through the National Land Transport Fund Activity class framework Activity class expenditure upper and lower limits Crown funding for land transport Changes to transport funding and prioritisation processes in NLTP . Statement of Ministerial expectations Deliver GPS outcomes in a way that provides value for money Investments must be efficient and effective Waka Kotahi to advise the Government on priority activities for Crown funding CONTENTSTe Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport DRAFT DRAFT Appendices Appendix : Activity class definitions Appendix : Changes from GPS through to GPS Appendix : Expected debt repayments Appendix : Crown direct funding commitments to land transport Appendix : Glossary Appendix : GPS Monitoring framework Appendix : Change compared to GPS Tables Table : Monitoring the outcomes sought Table : Main sources of land transport investment Table : National Land Transport Fund expected revenue to Table : National Land Transport Programme funding ranges to Table : Waka Kotahi borrowing facilities Table : Activity classes and funding ranges Table : Total land transport investment Figures Figure : Strategic priorities for GPS Figure : Transport outcomes framework Figure : Previous and Forecast NLTF Share of Road Maintenance Expenditure Figure : Intervention hierarchy Figure : Main Land Transport funding flows Figure : Previous changes to rate of Fuel Excise Duty Figure : New funding decision process CONTENTS Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT DRAFT SECTION SECTION SECTION SECTION SECTION Section . Overview of GPS DRAFT DRAFT DRAFT The Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS ) outlines the Crowns land transport investment strategy over the next ten years, the funding available, and where funding should be directed to deliver on this strategy. GPS provides direction and guidance to those who are planning, assessing, and making decisions about land transport investment. The roles and responsibilities of the key players in this system are outlined in Section .GPS expresses the Crowns land transport investment strategy and consists of five sections: Section : Roles and responsibilities This section describes the role of the GPS in land transport investment and the responsibilities of the different players in the system. Overview Roles and responsibilities Strategic priorities Investment in land transport Statement of Ministerial expectations OVERVIEW OF GPS Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT Figure : Strategic priorities for GPS Reducing emissions Transitioning to a lower carbon transport system.Increasing resilience The transport system is better able to cope with natural and anthropogenic hazards.Maintaining and operating the system The condition of the existing transport system is efficiently maintained at a level that meets the current and future needs of users. Safety The primary focus of this priority is to make transport substantially safer for all.Integrated freight system Welldesigned and operated transport corridors and hubs that provide efficient, reliable, resilient, multimodal, and lowcarbon connections to support productive economic activity.Sustainable urban and regional development People can readily and reliably access social, cultural, and economic opportunities through a variety of transport options. Sustainable urban and regional development is focused on developing resilient and productive towns and cities that have a range of lowemission transport options and low congestion. Section : Strategic priorities The six strategic priorities for GPS are outlined below. These strategic priorities reflect the need to rebuild after recent weather events and strengthen the resilience of the entire transport system. These priorities must be supported by firm foundations, which is why GPS includes as a priority maintaining and operating our existing transport system, including our roads and public transport services.The strategic priorities are national land transport objectives under section () of the Land Transport Management Act (the LTMA). Together, these priorities support environmental sustainability, resilience and security, economic prosperity, access, and healthy and safe people. These strategic priorities underpin the work of all government transport agencies. The priorities will guide investment decisions by Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency (Waka Kotahi) and its coinvestment partners, including local authorities and KiwiRail. OVERVIEW OF GPS Te Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport DRAFT DRAFT Section : Investment in land transport The Government directs funding to activities that help deliver on these priority areas through multiple funding sources. Different funding sources will focus on contributing to different strategic priorities and programmes. For example, the Government has developed specific funds for emissions reduction and climate adaptation projects. In contrast, the priority for available funding from the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) is to ensure the ongoing operation and maintenance of the system. The NLTF receives revenue of over billion each year. Waka Kotahi determines the specific activities funded from the NLTF based on the direction provided by the GPS. A key focus of GPS is maximising what can be delivered in the shortterm with available revenue, while optimising investment to achieve longerterm objectives. Over the next decade, a significant portion of the NLTF is committed to maintaining and operating the system. This includes continuing to deliver public transport, maintaining state highways and local roads, maintaining the rail network, promoting road safety and road policing. The NLTF also needs to meet its debt repayment obligations (see page ). The Government is increasingly supporting the NLTF with Crown funding. Over the next three years ( ), there is forecast to be . billion of Crown investment in addition to the . billion in forecast NLTF revenue. Crown investment includes programmes targeting emissions reduction and climate adaptation, funded from the Climate Emergency Response Fund (CERF). Additional Crown funding supports other programmes including the recovery and rebuild from North Island weather events in , the National Resilience Plan, the New Zealand Upgrade Programme (NZUP), the City Rail Link (CRL), Auckland Light Rail (ALR) and the Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP). The Government expects to make further announcements about how it will provide additional funding for Cyclone Gabrielle recovery efforts, and advance other strategic priorities, in the coming months and future Budgets. Section : Ministerial expectations Section of GPS includes several specific, formal expectations from the Minister of Transport (the Minister) to Waka Kotahi setting out how the Minister expects Waka Kotahi to give effect to the GPS. In summary, the Minister expects Waka Kotahi to deliver on the results and outcomes sought in GPS in a manner that: delivers value for money makes most efficient use of the NLTF to deliver on outcomes aligned with the strategic priorities carefully considers the most effective ways to build back better so the transport system is optimised to support future expectations, including better resilience to adverse weather conditions. This is likely to include finding ways to make the most of the considerable maintenance and renewals work programme to improve, rather than just replace, the existing asset base. OVERVIEW OF GPS Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT DRAFT SECTION SECTION SECTION SECTION SECTION Section . Roles and responsibilities DRAFT DRAFT DRAFT Role of the GPS The GPS outlines the Crowns ten year land transport investment strategy, the objectives and outcomes the Crown is seeking from the land transport system, and guides Waka Kotahi and local authority investment. This longerterm strategic approach is necessary because transport investments often have long lead times, high costs and leave long legacies. The LTMA sets out the full scope and requirements for the GPS. The GPS is focussed on making the most of the Governments transport investment, comprising the NLTF and any additional Crown funding. Waka Kotahi allocates the NLTF to transport investments in accordance with the GPS, while projects delivered through Crown appropriations will generally align with GPS priorities but may also contribute to wider outcomes.The GPS sets out the expected available NLTF funding to contribute to the outcomes sought, and how the Government wants NLTF funding to be allocated across different types of activities (for example, roads, public transport, active transport, or road safety). It also describes other contributions the Crown has allocated to progress its land transport investment strategy. Local government often supplements the NLTF and other Crown funding with its own funding (local share) to help meet the cost of investments that benefit their communities. This is discussed further in Section . Crown funding commitments vary over time and do not necessarily align with the release of a GPS. Section signals the types of investments that are likely to attract direct Crown funding in the future, while Section outlines existing Crown funding commitments. The land transport investment strategy and direction on allocation of NLTF funding guide local government and Waka Kotahi on the type of activities that should be included in Regional Land Transport Plans (RLTPs) and the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP). ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT Responsibilities The Minister of Transport The Minister of Transport (the Minister) must issue a GPS covering the Crowns land transport investment strategy (among other things), that covers a period of six financial years. The Minister must review the Crowns land transport investment strategy at least once every three financial years. Except for rail investments and road policing, the Minister is not responsible for individual NLTF funding decisions. The Minister must be satisfied that the GPS contributes to the purpose of the LTMA . Before issuing a GPS, the Minister is required to have consulted Waka Kotahi, and have regard to the views of Local Government New Zealand (LGNZ) and representative groups of land transport users and providers. The Minister submits transport investments for Crown funding consideration, through the annual Budget process. Activities delivered through Crown appropriations will generally align with GPS priorities but may also contribute to wider outcomes.Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) is responsible for strategy, policy, funding, monitoring and regulation of New Zealands transport system. It advises the Minister on transport matters, including regulation and investment, to improve wellbeing and liveability, as described in the Transport Outcomes Framework. The Ministry leads advice on the Crowns longer term land transport investment strategy (for inclusion in GPS and beyond the next decade). This includes advising on the role that transport system revenue sources and investments have in achieving the Governments longerterm goals such as reducing emissions, ensuring climate resilience, and reducing road deaths and serious injuries. The Ministry also provides annual advice on Crown funding decisions. The Ministry works in partnership with Waka Kotahi to consider how expectations on Waka Kotahi may fit with future GPSs and wider Government priorities. As part of the wider government commitment to the MoriCrown relationship, the Ministry has a responsibility to engage with Mori and consider Mori outcomes. The Ministrys commitment to this is expressed in its Mori strategy Hei Arataki. Te Manat Waka is responsible for strategy, policy, funding, monitoring and regulation of New Zealands transport system ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIESTe Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport DRAFT DRAFT Local government Local government works to promote the social, economic, environmental and cultural wellbeing of their communities. Regional councils, territorial authorities and unitary councils lead longterm planning for their localities. This includes Long Term Plans, Regional Policy Statements, Regional Public Transport Plans, District Plans, Spatial Plans, and RLTPs. RLTPs set out objectives, policies and priorities for transport networks and services in each region for at least ten years. RLTPs include activities that seek NLTF cofunding and must also include all regionally significant expenditure to be funded from nonNLTF sources. This may include Crown funding contributions. Local government collaborates with Waka Kotahi, Kinga Ora and others to progress investments that align with the Governments land transport investment strategy in the GPS. As the largest cofunder of NLTP projects, local government has an important role in identifying strong, evidence based projects and programmes for investment. They work closely with Waka Kotahi to make sure projects run smoothly from proposal to delivery. Critically for the GPS, this includes engaging with stakeholders and communities on land transport projects and broader transport strategies, consistent with an array of legislative requirements. An RLTP must contribute to the purpose of the LTMA , which seeks an effective, efficient and safe land transport system in the public interest. It is also required to be consistent with the GPS.Local governments are partnering with Waka Kotahi and the Ministry to develop urban light fleet Vehicle Kilometres Travelled (VKT) reduction programmes, with an initial focus on programmes for Tier urban environments. Local government engages extensively with local communities as part of its planning processes. Reflecting the LTMA , local government also has a responsibility to engage and partner with Mori and understand the Treaty of Waitangi context in which they operate. Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency Waka Kotahi works with a range of partners across central and local government to plan, invest in, build, manage and operate the land transport system within the priorities and outcomes set in the GPS. It leads on the state highway programme, nationally delivered programmes (such as speed camera monitoring) and delivers other investments on behalf of the Crown, such as NZUP and several initiatives funded out of the CERF. Waka Kotahi collaborates with local government and other agencies to develop integrated plans for transport and land use. It supports local government to develop capability and create quality RLTPs, which it draws from to create the NLTP and allocate the NLTF to give effect to the GPS. Waka Kotahi also supports the Ministry in advising Government on how Crown funding could supplement NLTF and local share contributions to better deliver on GPS priorities (or wider priorities specified by the Government). . Tier urban environments include: Auckland (Auckland Council), Christchurch (Canterbury Regional Council, Christchurch City Council, Selwyn District Council and Waimakariri District Council), Wellington (Wellington Regional Council, Wellington City Council, Porirua City Council, Hutt City Council, Upper Hutt City Council, Kpiti Coast District Council), Tauranga (Bay of Plenty Regional Council, Tauranga City Council and Western Bay of Plenty District Council), and Hamilton (Waikato Regional Council, Hamilton City Council, Waikato District Council and Waipa District Council). ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT In partnership with the Ministry, Waka Kotahi is developing a national VKT reduction plan that will guide VKT reduction programmes. Additionally, Waka Kotahi is responsible for advising the Minister of Transport on KiwiRails RNIP and the funding of rail activities within it, including providing advice on alignment with the LTMA and the New Zealand Rail Plan. Waka Kotahi has a role monitoring the delivery of the RNIP. It also provides recommendations on Police activities to be funded from the GPS. In addition to the LTMA requirements for Mori engagement and in accordance with the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi, Waka Kotahi shares the Crowns commitment to the Mori Crown partnership, which is expressed in its Mori Strategy: Te Ara KotahiOur Mori Strategy. Waka Kotahi, as a Crown agent, is a participant in the Carbon Neutral Government Programme, along with all government departments and departmental agencies. Waka Kotahi voluntarily reports its climaterelated disclosures to demonstrate how the agency is managing climaterelated risk.KiwiRail KiwiRail owns and maintains the national rail network infrastructure. KiwiRail is responsible for planning, operating and maintaining the rail network. It also provides freight, tourism and commuter services, property services and the Interislander ferry service. KiwiRail is responsible for developing and delivering the threeyear Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP). Consistent with the GPS and RLTP planning processes, the RNIP also includes an indication of significant rail network activities expected in the next RNIP and a tenyear forecast. The funding signals in the GPS and the investment priorities in the New Zealand RaiI Plan guide the development of the RNIP. The RNIP is funded from the NLTF, through the rail network activity class and the public transport infrastructure activity class for metropolitan rail activities, supported by Crown funding. Auckland Transport and Greater Wellington Regional Council fund and deliver metropolitan rail public transport services, with assistance from the NLTF. KiwiRail supports these activities, funded by the NLTF and access agreements with these parties, by maintaining, renewing, and improving the metropolitan rail networks. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIESTe Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport DRAFT DRAFT Ministry of Housing and Urban Development and Kinga Ora Homes and Communities The Ministry of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) is responsible for strategy, policy, funding, monitoring and regulation of New Zealands housing and urban development system. HUD administers and tracks progress on the Government Policy Statement on Housing and Urban Development (GPSHUD) and the national Mori housing strategy (MAIHI Ka Ora) which set the Governments longterm vision, direction, and priorities for housing and urban development. Kinga Ora is the Governments public housing landlord. It also has roles in urban development including delivery, partnering and facilitation. The vision of the GPSHUD is that everyone in Aotearoa New Zealand lives in a home, and within a community, that meets their needs and aspirations. The GPSHUD also highlights that land transport that is good for people and the planet is critical to transforming housing and urban outcomes for New Zealanders, including improving housing supply, choice, and affordability. At the same time, decisions that shape our urban areas play a major role in shaping peoples transport options and choices. Together, this GPS and the GPSHUD provide strategic direction to help our towns and cities to function well, support growth and to invest in transport infrastructure and services needed to support this. Ministry for the Environment The Ministry for the Environment (MfE) is leading the reforms of New Zealands resource management system. These reforms will replace the Resource Management Act with three Acts covering the natural and built environment; spatial planning; and climate change adaptation. Each of these focus areas need to integrate with the development of transport infrastructure and services to provide resilient, liveable spaces and achieve our environmental objectives. MfE has also led the development of the first Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP) and the National Adaptation Plan (NAP). The ERP sets four transport targets that are approximately equivalent to a percent reduction in transport emissions by compared to levels. The transport actions in the ERP and the NAP inform the strategic priorities and results sought in GPS . The resource management reforms aim to better enable development, while protecting and restoring the environment, give proper recognition to the principles of Te Tiriti o Waitangi and to Te Ao Mori, better prepare New Zealand to adapt to climate change, and improve system efficiency and effectiveness. Under these reforms, the Resource Management Act will be replaced with three new pieces of legislation, two of which are currently before Parliament. These reforms are expected to improve transport and landuse investment planning through Regional Spatial Strategies, which will see central government, local government and Mori working together with communities to identify how their region will grow, adapt, and change over the next thirtyplus years. . The Spatial Planning Bill and the Natural and Built Environment Bill are both before Parliament. A separate Bill is expected to be introduced to Parliament in covering climate adaptation, following public consultation on the early policy ideas for the Climate Adaptation Act in mid. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT DRAFT SECTION SECTION SECTION SECTION SECTION Section . Strategic priorities DRAFT DRAFT DRAFT This section sets out the strategic priorities, or objectives, for the national land transport system over the next ten years and the expected contribution to longer term outcomes. The strategic priorities are aspirational, longterm in nature and are expected to be advanced through investment from a variety of different sources. This section also outlines a strategic investment programme that aligns with the strategic priorities, and is expected to serve as a focus for any new investment. The strategic priorities and the strategic investment programme reflect the results the Crown aims to achieve from the allocation of funding from the NLTF under section ()(a) and national land transport objectives and policies under section () of the LTMA in combination with investment from other sources. This section also outlines how decisionmakers should consider the needs of different users when making investments contributing to the strategic priorities, and how progress will be measured against the outcomes sought.Reducing emissionsIncreasing resilience Sustainable urban and regional developmentSafetyStrategic Direction Maintaining and operating the system Integrated freight system STRATEGIC PRIORITIES Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT Strategic context The land transport system needs to improve wellbeing and liveability Transport is about people. It determines how people get to work and school, influences how they connect with their whnau and communities, and determines when they have the materials, equipment, and services they need. Transport enables and shapes broader social, economic and environmental outcomes. New Zealands transport system should support everyone to get where they need to go, access the things they need, spend time with the people they care about, and take part in the activities that are meaningful to them.Transport is also a critical enabler of new housing supply. Effective integrated land use and transport planning and investment can ensure that the places where people live are accessible and connected to employment, education, social and cultural opportunities. The Transport Outcomes Framework (Figure ) describes how the transport system is intended to support and improve intergenerational wellbeing and liveability across five outcome areas. Prioritising interventions that deliver benefits across multiple strategic objectives (rather than simply assessing trade offs between objectives) will help to deliver a range of positive outcomes for New Zealand. Figure : Transport outcomes framework A transport system that improves wellbeing and liveabilityInclusive access Economic prosperityHealthy and safe people Environmental sustainability Resilience and securityEnabling all people to participate in society through access to social and economic opportunities, such as work, education, and healthcare. Supporting economic activity via local, regional and international connections, with efficient movements of people and products.Protecting people from transport related injuries and harmful pollution, and making active travel an attractive option. Transitioning to net zero carbon emissions, and maintaining or improving biodiversity, water quality, and air quality. Minimising and managing the risks from natural and humanmade hazards, anticipating and adapting to emerging threats, and recovering effectively from disruptive events. STRATEGIC PRIORITIESTe Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport DRAFT DRAFT How transport investment contributes to the Governments response to climate change Our investment approach will support a move towards a lowcarbon, sustainable transport system, while also improving our resilience to climate change by protecting against physical risks and making better decisions in the face of uncertainty. In the Government introduced the ERP and the NAP to support a whole of government response to climate change. The ways in which the GPS will guide investment in the land transport system and contribute to the ERP and NAP are outlined below. The Emissions Reduction Plan sets the context for reducing transport emissions Reducing transport emissions is critical for reaching New Zealands net zero emissions target by . In , transport was responsible for percent of carbon emissions and percent of New Zealands total gross emissions, with most of these emissions coming from light vehicles (e.g., cars) with internal combustion engines.To deliver the ERP, we need to reduce transport emissions by percent (from levels) by and reach net zero emissions by . GPS will help deliver on the ERP by guiding appropriate investments The GPS guides investment that supports the ERP. Crown funding may support all four of the transport targets listed below, whereas the NLTF will primarily support Target to reduce VKT by light vehicles. For example, the NLTF will support changes and improvements that make it easier and more attractive for people to travel by public transport, walking and cycling. To a lesser extent, the NLTF will also support Target to reduce freight emissions by investing in rail and coastal shipping. Target and Target are less likely to be substantively supported by NLTF investment and will require other interventions and funding sources. The Government is pursuing these targets through broader interventions, including regulatory interventions that are beyond the investment focus of this GPS. For example, the Government has introduced initiatives to accelerate the uptake of cleaner vehicles. Many of these actions are outlined in the transport chapter of the ERP. T. Reduce total vehicle kilometres travelled (VKT) by the light fleet by percent (relative to projected growth) through improved urban form and providing better travel options, particularly in our largest citiesThe ERP sets four transport targets to be met by to enable us to meet these commitments: T. Increase zeroemissions vehicles to percent of the light vehicle fleet T. Reduce emissions from freight transport by percent T. Reduce the emissions intensity of transport fuel by percent. STRATEGIC PRIORITIES Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT The National Adaptation Plan outlines how we adapt to climate change to improve resilience and security Climate adaptation considers our resilience to extreme weather events, and our ability to respond effectively to incremental change, such as rising sea levels. The first NAP contains strategies, policies and actions that will help New Zealanders adapt to the changing climate reducing the potential harm of climate change, as well as seizing opportunities that arise. The NAP recognises the importance of an integrated approach to management across multiple sectors. The recent extreme weather has highlighted the interdependencies and risks of colocating multiple forms of infrastructure (e.g., power, water, and telecommunications). There are a range of transport sector actions in the NAP, including Waka Kotahi developing and implementing a national climate adaptation plan for land transport and integrating adaptation into its investment decisionmaking. Waka Kotahi its climate adaptation plan Tiro Rangi in December . GPS guides investment that supports the NAP. As with the ERP, Crown funding and the NLTF are both expected to support the NAP and improve the resilience of our transport infrastructure. The Government has committed an initial billion towards a National Resilience Plan to support significant medium and longterm infrastructure investments which focus on the resilience of New Zealands critical infrastructure, including transport, with plans for further funding in future Budgets. Given recent weather events, the programme will first focus on projects that support recovery and building back better. The recent extreme weather has highlighted the interdependencies and risks of colocating multiple forms of infrastructure STRATEGIC PRIORITIESTe Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport DRAFT DRAFT Strategic priorities for GPS Six strategic priorities set direction for the system. These are: Maintaining and operating the system Increasing resilience Reducing emissions Safety Sustainable urban and regional development Integrated freight system. These priorities overlap and complement one another. For example, investments in the rail system and port infrastructure will lead to stronger interregional connections, contributing to sustainable regional development, while making freight movements safer and more resilient. Investment to enable greater mode choice in freight movements will also enhance resilience and reduce emissions. Primary objective The condition of the existing transport system is efficiently maintained at a level that meets the current and future needs of users.Strategic priority: Maintaining and operating the system Contribution to transport outcomes Healthy and safe people the level of safety across the network is maintained and opportunities are taken through maintenance activities to improve the safety, and health outcomes, of the network. Economic prosperity efficiency gains are realised from better utilising existing infrastructure, and key routes are maintained to ensure reliable and efficient movement of people and freight. Inclusive access the level of service across the network ensures equitable access across all modes, opportunities are taken through maintenance activities to reallocate road space for bus lanes or active transport modes. Resilience and security maintenance activities provide a resilient network that is able to adapt to changes over time and incorporate new technologies. Environmental sustainability using lower carbon materials, reducing waste, supporting a circular economy, and making use of naturebased solutions to improve resilience to climate change. Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua STRATEGIC PRIORITIES DRAFT DRAFT Figure : Previous and Forecast NLTF Share of Road Maintenance Expenditure Figure . Previous changes to rate of Fuel Excise Duty.B .B .B .B.B .B .B .B Actual maintenance expenditure Activity class upper bound Activity class lower bound Cents per litre How we will deliver these outcomes New Zealands existing land transport system is one of our most important and valuable assets. It requires ongoing care to keep at a standard that meets the needs of New Zealanders. Deferred investment in maintenance can result in the deterioration of assets that can be costly and disruptive to fix. Efficient and effective maintenance and operation of transport networks are crucial investments. Maintaining and operating the land transport system is a core enabler for the delivery of all other strategic priorities and outcomes. Extreme weather events caused by climate change are taking a greater toll on the condition of the network, increasing the size of the maintenance task. Other threats to resilience and security also need to be considered, including seismic activity and other physical risks. Figure shows that, after being relatively flat from to , funding for maintenance has increased significantly in recent years and received a further substantial increase in this GPS. The previous period of flat expenditure, and increased pressures on our roading network, mean that we will need to ensure we are investing in the right places at the right time to make the most of the available funding. The Government expects there will be a focus on achieving value for money through all maintenance and renewals programmes. Decisions need to be based on the needs and contribution within the wider network rather than necessarily replacing likeforlike. This may, for example, mean resilience and safety improvements, or creating additional space for a bus lane or active transport. This requires asset management plans that are forwardlooking and outcomesfocused, so that they can anticipate the necessary longterm changes and integrate those changes into maintenance schedules. This should also involve using a maintenance need as a trigger to reshape the network to meet current and future needs, including adjusting the required levels of service to be consistent with the One Network Framework. Te Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport STRATEGIC PRIORITIES DRAFT DRAFT Contribution to transport outcomes Healthy and safe people improvements to roads, public transport and walking and cycling networks will reduce deaths and injuries, and support more physically active travel. Resilience and security anticipating and adapting to natural hazards and the effects of climate change will increase collective resilience and security. Economic prosperity transport networks will be less susceptible to disruption, reducing barriers to participation in educational, employment and economic opportunities.How we will deliver these outcomes New Zealand experiences a wide range of natural hazards from earthquakes and volcanoes to extreme weather events, erosion, and landslides. Climate change is increasing the severity and frequency of some of those hazards, including flooding, and gradually increasing hazards associated with rising sealevels. This is putting increasing pressure on the sectors capacity and resources to respond to climaterelated events. The impacts are often particularly acute in rural areas due to a lack of alternate routes and the travel distances to access markets and services. The strategic priorities work together to improve resilience. For example, maintenance and renewal programmes will recognise the impacts of climate change, with appropriate drainage upgrades and mitigation measures put in place to manage risks. A freight system that better integrates roads, rail and our port infrastructure will improve resilience when land transport disruptions occur. While it is important to respond to events when they occur, urgent work is also required to proactively reduce the impacts of climate change over time. This includes, for example, considering managed retreat and the retirement of at risk assets, reducing known hazards, and taking measures to reduce future risk, such as nature based solutions to absorb rainfall. Aspects of resilience are covered by different strategies including the National Disaster Resilience Strategy, the National Adaptation Plan, the Waka Kotahi Resilience Framework, Future Development Strategies (and joint spatial plans), the RNIP and the Waka Kotahi Climate Adaptation Plan (Tiro Rangi). Primary objective The transport system is better able to cope with natural and anthropogenic hazards.Strategic priority: Increasing resilience Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua STRATEGIC PRIORITIES DRAFT DRAFT Increasing resilience to the current and future impacts of climate change will be delivered through: building capability at central and local government to assess, plan and deliver the necessary investments and services needed for a transport network that is both resilient and contributes to other outcomes building a dynamic understanding of the transport systems overall exposure to risks and the interdependencies with other systems (especially lifeline utilities) reducing exposure to known hazards and proactively reducing future risk through strategic investment (e.g., by building in locations that are informed by floodhazard mapping and using climate scenario analysis) ensuring all new infrastructure is fit for a changing climate strengthening resilience to longterm climate impacts and other hazards when making decisions to maintain, upgrade, repair or replace existing infrastructure embedding naturebased solutions, where suitable (for example, creating a wetland to slow runoff) implementing Tiro Rangi, the Waka Kotahi Climate Adaptation Plan.Contribution to transport outcomes Environmental sustainability land transport investment will contribute to reducing greenhouse gas emissions. This will improve outcomes for the natural and built environment. Healthy and safe people people will be less exposed to harmful levels of land transport related pollution. Improvements to roads, public transport and walking and cycling networks will reduce deaths and injuries and support more physically active travel. Economic prosperity transport networks will provide affordable, accessible and lowemissions choices for New Zealanders to participate in educational, employment and economic opportunities, and move freight. Primary objective Transitioning to a lower carbon transport system.Strategic priority: Reducing emissions Te Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport STRATEGIC PRIORITIES DRAFT DRAFT How we will deliver these outcomes The Governments overall transport investment programme will need to reduce emissions. This will involve NLTF and direct Crown investment. The GPS expects that: Waka Kotahi will satisfy itself that each threeyear NLTP contains a programme of activities that: makes an appropriate contribution to the transport emissions reduction targets, within the available NLTF funding, the NLTPs scope of influence, the expectations set out in Section of this GPS, and other interventions to reduce emissions including land transport investment outside of the NLTF meets the expectations set out in Section of this GPS, and takes into account other interventions that impact on greenhouse gas emissions (including land transport investment outside of the NLTF). This will involve prioritising interventions that can deliver emissions reduction and benefits across a range of strategic priorities and outcomes. VKT reduction programmes will be developed and delivered for urban areas to meet VKT reduction targets. Waka Kotahi, councils, iwi, businesses, communities, and other Crown entities are expected to work together to develop urban VKT reduction programmes that identify investments and other measures that make it easier and more attractive for people to move using public transport or active modes. Investments that reduce VKT are expected to be included in RLTPs to inform investments made under the NLTP and future Crown funding decisions. For the avoidance of doubt, the GPS does not expect that every individual investment within the NLTP must reduce emissions. For example, we expect the NLTP to include safety improvements, such as median barriers, that will not reduce emissions on their own. Other safety improvements, such as traffic calming and speed management, may be effective ways of delivering safety benefits while also reducing emissions. The right intervention will depend on the circumstances. Prioritising emissions reduction will look different depending on local circumstances. For example, we expect the NLTF to prioritise activities that improve the reach, frequency and quality of public transport. But we know that shifting travel from cars to public transport will often be easier to achieve and result in larger emissions reductions in urban areas. Improving walking and cycling facilities, and lowzeroemissions vehicles are likely to play a greater role in mitigating climate change in some regions. Increasing adoption of lowzero emissions vehicles is supported by nonNLTF funding levers such as the Clean Car Discount. Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua STRATEGIC PRIORITIES DRAFT DRAFT Contribution to transport outcomes Healthy and safe people safer roads, streets, footpaths, cycleways and public transport facilities will enable more New Zealanders to travel by active modes, which can help improve peoples health, and reduce deaths and serious injuries. Economic prosperity welldesigned and safe travel networks support productive economic activity as a result of fewer serious crashes, better public health outcomes and more reliable travel times. Inclusive access a larger number of New Zealanders will have access to public transport services and safe options for active modes to travel to the places they need to go. Resilience and security increasing the range of options people have for travel and reducing the risk from natural and manmade hazards. Environmental sustainability safe roads, streets, footpaths, cycleways and public transport facilities will enable more people to travel by public transport and active modes, which will help reduce emissions and manage demand on the transport system.How we will deliver these outcomes The Government has committed to a target of reducing deaths and serious injuries on our roads by percent by . This will be delivered through five focus areas: Infrastructure improvement and speed management Vehicle safety Workrelated road safety Road user choices System management. GPS will contribute to several of these focus areas by further embedding our road safety principles into infrastructure planning, design, operations, maintenance, and investment decisionmaking. Safety expenditure will include investment in safe infrastructure (including for public transport and active modes), speed management, road policing, safety cameras and promoting safe behaviour. Primary objective Transport is made substantially safer for all.Strategic priority: Safety GPS will further embed our road safety principles into infrastructure planning, design, operations, maintenance and investment decisionmaking Te Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport STRATEGIC PRIORITIES DRAFT DRAFT Contribution to transport outcomes Economic prosperity efficient and effective transport networks, underpinned by reliable and frequent public transport systems, integrated with active travel networks, will help to manage road congestion, enable efficient flows of people and goods, and support housing and urban growth. Healthy and safe people more active travel will support physical and mental health. Safe walking and cycling infrastructure and more travel by public transport will reduce deaths and serious injuries, and reduce illness caused by air pollution. Inclusive access a larger number of New Zealanders will have access to public transport services and safe options for active modes to travel to the places they need to go. Environmental sustainability reduced private vehicle travel and more travel by lowemission modes, such as active modes and public transport will reduce greenhouse gases and pollutants. Improving resilience such as better integrating naturebased solutions can support broader environmental and biodiversity outcomes. Resilience and Security improving transport network design and integrating planning across multiple disciplines will reduce the risk of disconnected communities and reduce the harm caused during emergency events. How we will deliver these outcomes Sustainable urban and regional development involves improving the quality of life in our urban and regional centres. By improving access, affordability, community connectivity and environmental outcomes, we will see more efficient land use and resource use. This GPS supports the achievement of wellfunctioning urban environments as specified in the National Policy Statement on Urban Development . Transport is a key enabler of housing supply choice and affordability. Urban planning and transport planninginvestment will be closely coordinated, via current and future Urban Growth Partnerships, to support increased housing supply, and higher density development along wellconnected transport corridors and in town centres. It will also give people more choices about where they live and work, and how they travel, by improving access to a range of transport modes and making it easier to access places using public transport and active modes. Traffic and congestion can be better managed by implementing policies and programmes that reduce the need for users to travel long distances and enable others to use dedicated active travel routes and frequent public transport services. New Zealands economy is also built on our regions. Ensuring our regional communities have the infrastructure and services they need to thrive and grow, boosts regional economies, and creates jobs. The Government wants to make regional economies stronger and more resilient to improve Primary objective People can readily and reliably access social, cultural, and economic opportunities through a variety of transport options. Sustainable urban and regional development is focused on increasing housing supply, choice and affordability, and developing resilient and productive towns and cities through effective transport networks that provide a range of lowemission transport options and low congestion.Strategic priority: Sustainable urban and regional development Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua STRATEGIC PRIORITIES DRAFT DRAFT the economic prospects, wellbeing and living standards of all New Zealanders. Many of these initiatives, which are designed to better align land use plans with transport, will focus on the biggest urban centres. However, it is also important to consider smaller towns and cities, particularly housing availability, affordability, and equity issues. This will be delivered by: implementation of changes via the resource management system, including those that enable significantly more housing in urban areas (via the National Policy Statement on Urban Development and implementing Medium Density Residential Standards) close to economic, social and cultural opportunities connected to public transport, walking and cycling routes Waka Kotahi, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development, Kinga Ora and other Crown agencies partnering with local authorities as they develop their Future Development Strategies and VKT Reduction Programmes demand management tools, including greater use of road pricing and parking management investing in networks for rapid transitpublic transport, cycling, walking and freight, and maintaining them at the required level of service for the demand investing in metropolitan rail as part of the implementation of the New Zealand Rail Plan and support rail investigations and route protection actions to meet the emission reduction challenge investing in new and maintaining existing interregional public transport connections ensuring development is resilient to the current and future effects of climate change Waka Kotahi and Public Transport Authorities will adopt the Sustainable Public Transport Framework and commit to decarbonising public transport by . Te Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport STRATEGIC PRIORITIES DRAFT DRAFT Contribution to transport outcomes Healthy and safe people efficient freight movement and shifting the movement of freight from road to rail and coastal shipping, where appropriate, will reduce the safety risks of travel and improve air quality. Resilience and security improving transport connections, alternative and multimodal routes and integration of freight networks will boost the ability of the transport system to respond to and recover from disruptions. Environmental sustainability decarbonising freight by increasing movement of freight by lower emissions transport modes (including rail and coastal shipping) will reduce carbon emissions and other pollutants. Economic prosperity improving the resilience and efficiency of freight routes will help to reduce the cost of moving goods and services around New Zealand, easing pressure on peoples cost of living and supporting a more productive overall economy. How we will deliver these outcomes These outcomes require a longterm and coordinated approach to our national freight network. This will be achieved in part through: Finalising and implementing the New Zealand freight and supply chain strategy Managing resilience risk on important regional corridors where disruptions cause the highest economic and social cost Improving the safe and efficient movement of freight by taking the needs of freight operators into consideration in transport design and urban planning, and through network optimisation and optimal vehicle regulation Enabling greater mode choice and efficiency through more integrated networks to enable freight to travel on the most carbon efficient mode and route, such as the rail network Improving mode choice for moving freight by coastal shipping, by investing in infrastructure and supporting services and relevant research. While it is important to boost the share of freight carried by lower emissions modes like rail and coastal shipping, percent of freight travels under km and is largely in urban settings. Therefore, the road freight sector will continue to carry the largest volume of freight in our supply chain. We will continue to work with the sector to build a resilient network, including through increased investment in maintenance. Consistent with the ERP, the Government will also work on policy options to accelerate the uptake of lower emissions road freight options. The Government is committed to continuing to invest in rail through the RNIP to achieve the priorities set out in the New Zealand Rail Plan. This includes investing to restore rail freight and provide a platform for future investments for growth where they align with outcomes sought through the GPS. The Ministry is leading the development of the New Zealand freight and supply chain strategy, which seeks to identify what is needed to optimise the system in the coming decades. The GPS will support this strategy. Primary objective Welldesigned and operated transport corridors and hubs that provide efficient, reliable, resilient, multimodal, and low carbon connections to support productive economic activity.Strategic priority: Integrated freight system Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua STRATEGIC PRIORITIES DRAFT DRAFT Strategic Investment Programme The Government has identified a number of strategic projects that it considers present an opportunity for transformational change, and to develop an integrated, sustainable, resilient, safe, and lowcarbon land transport network. The projects included in the strategic investment programme are listed below.The authority to approve a Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP) and NLTF funding for an RNIP sits with the Minister of Transport. For the nonrail projects, decision rights for funding from the NLTF rests solely with Waka Kotahi. But by highlighting these projects, the Minister expects that their strategic importance will be given particular consideration during NLTP development, given their alignment and potential impact on the wider government priorities outlined in this document. The Strategic Investment Programme has been used to inform the Activity Class ranges on page , and any additional funding provided to the NLTF. Warkworth to Whangrei State Highway , including: Te Hana to Brynderwyns Warkworth to Wellsford Whangrei to Brynderwyns Auckland Northwest Rapid Transit Auckland rail third and fourth rail mains Avondale to Onehunga rail link Auckland and Wellington Metropolitan Level Crossing Upgrade and Removal Programme Cambridge to Piarere State Highway Tauranga to Tauriko State Highway Napier to Hastings State Highway Wellington CBD to Airport State Highway Second Mount Victoria Tunnel and upgrades to Basin ReserveArras Tunnel Wellington CBD to Island Bay Mass Rapid Transit Nelson (Rocks Road) shared path State Highway Nelson Hope Bypass State Highway Christchurch Northern Link State Highway Ashburton Bridge State Highway STRATEGIC PRIORITIESTe Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport DRAFT DRAFT Government commitments In addition to the Strategic Investment Programme, the Minister expects that, where appropriate, the development of the NLTP should be informed by the following: Many of these programmes are expected to be supported by a mixture of NLTF and direct Crown funding. The extent of NLTF funding is subject to Waka Kotahi decisions to approve activities within the programmes (except for the New Zealand Rail Plan, where the Minister approves funding of activities). Some of these programmes also rely on local share contributions. It will be important for councils and Waka Kotahi to consider how NLTF, Crown and local funds can be optimally used to meet the Governments expectations. We expect Waka Kotahi to take an integrated investment approach across funding sources to ensure the NLTF can be leveraged to deliver the greatest benefits across multiple priorities and outcomes. Waka Kotahi, working closely with approved organisations, is expected to report to the Minister on any investment and delivery progress towards these commitments. Road to Zero Safety Strategy New Zealand Rail Plan Auckland Transport Alignment Project (ATAP) Lets Get Wellington Moving (LGWM) Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP) National Adaptation Plan (NAP) Disability Action Plan Interregional public transport STRATEGIC PRIORITIES Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT Road to Zero Safety Strategy Road to Zero is focused on making our roads safer, by providing a map for change, with a vision of a New Zealand where no one is killed or seriously injured on our roads. Road to Zero sets a target of a percent reduction in deaths and serious injuries by (from levels). It charts a path to achieving this with a focus on infrastructure improvements and speed management; vehicle safety; workrelated road safety; road user choices and system management. Road to Zero activities will be delivered across the state highway and local road improvement and safety activity classes. New Zealand Rail Plan The New Zealand Rail Plan outlines the Governments vision and priorities for rail. The vision is for New Zealands national rail network to provide modern transit systems in our largest cities, and to enable increasing volumes of freight to be moved off the roads and onto rail. Over the next decade investment is needed to achieve a reliable and resilient national rail network. This requires investment in both the national rail freight network and our metropolitan rail networks. The rail network activity class was created to support investment in KiwiRails national rail network to restore rail freight and provide a platform for future investments for growth in rail freight. The NLTF is one contributor to funding this alongside the Crowns direct contribution. The public transport infrastructure activity class also delivers rail network investment within the Auckland and Wellington metropolitan networks.The Government is committed to continuing to invest in rail through the RNIP to achieve the priorities set out in the New Zealand Rail Plan and outlined in this GPS . This includes investing in the national rail network to promote rail freight and future metro investments where they align to the outcomes sought. Auckland Transport Alignment Project (ATAP) ATAP is a strategic initiative between the Government and Auckland Council to develop a transformative transport programme that addresses Aucklands key challenges over the next years and beyond. ATAP is funded by a mixture of sources, including the NLTF, Auckland Council local share and Crown funding for the City Rail Link, NZUP and the Covid Response Recovery Fund (CRRF). Auckland is currently developing the Auckland Integrated Transport Plan, which will present the short and longterm strategic priorities for Auckland across an integrated network. The Minister and the Mayor of Auckland have jointly commissioned this work to develop a set of shared transport outcomes for Auckland and expect key decisions to be finalised prior to July , when GPS takes effect. Any changes to ATAP will need to reflect the challenging funding environment, with the NLTF and local share under increasing pressure. It is expected that ATAP will inform the Auckland RLTP and the Auckland component of the NLTP. STRATEGIC PRIORITIESTe Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport DRAFT DRAFT Lets Get Wellington Moving (LGWM) LGWM is a joint initiative between Wellington City Council (WCC), Greater Wellington Regional Council (GWRC), and Waka Kotahi to make major investments over years in mass rapid transit, walking and cycling, public transport, and state highway improvements to support urban development in Wellington City. Emission Reduction Plan (ERP) New Zealands first ERP laid down the challenge: we need to reduce our transport emissions by percent by (from levels) and largely decarbonise transport by . The ERP sets four transport targets, outlined in Section . To meet these targets, we need to focus on three things: Making it easier to get around without a car Helping people and businesses make the switch to zero emission vehicles Encouraging lowemissions freight options. National Adaptation Plan (NAP) The first NAP was in August . It contains Governmentled strategies, policies and actions that will help New Zealanders adapt to the changing climate and its effects. Major actions signalled in the NAP include: a platform to work with Mori on climate actions risk, resilience and adaptation information portals which will provide access to information, and a rolling programme of targeted guidance a programme of work to unlock investment in climate resilience.Disability Action Plan The Disability Action Plan identifies outcomes and work programmes to advance implementation of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the New Zealand Disability Strategy . The GPS relates most directly to the Accessibility work programme. Interregional public transport Through this GPS the Government signals its intention to make improvements to the inter regional passenger transport network through a dedicated activity class that will enable partnership with other parties including local government, KiwiRail, and the private sector, to begin developing new interregional public transport services, including rail. In addition, the Government is already investing in interregional rail passenger transport, through the Te Huia and Capital Connection services. STRATEGIC PRIORITIES Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT Meeting the land transport needs of different users Users of the land transport system have a diverse range of needs, and it is critical that the system is accessible to all New Zealanders. This includes, for example, disabled people, lowincome earners, and people of different ages, genders, and ethnicities. Transformational change to the transport system creates opportunities to address existing inequities. Care will be needed to avoid further entrenching disparities that already exist.Mori Decisionmakers across the transport system have responsibilities to work in partnership with Mori and in a way that is consistent with the Governments commitments to te Tiriti o Waitangi. In the land transport system, this means: demonstrating good governance (kwanatanga) by ensuring Mori interests are considered and addressed at all levels actively protecting tino rangatiratanga and enabling Mori to exercise kaitiakitanga with respect to natural, physical, and spiritual resources ensuring equitable outcomes for all users of the land transport system. A focus for GPS is on ensuring Mori aspirations for the transport system are better reflected at the strategic level. This will require enduring partnerships across the system between the Ministry of Transport, Waka Kotahi, KiwiRail and local government, with relevant whnau, hap and iwi, and national organisations. . The principal statutory obligations with respect to Mori are set out under section of the Land Transport Management Act . STRATEGIC PRIORITIESTe Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport DRAFT DRAFT Supporting rural and regional communities GPS recognises the diverse transport needs of communities across New Zealand. Transport is essential for ensuring connections between primary production and markets, as well access to social opportunities such as health, education, and work. Local funding pressures, exposure to natural hazards, and the increasing pressures of climate change are placing stress on our rural and regional communities to maintain these connections. It is critical that sufficient funding is available to maintain networks to the condition required to ensure they are safe, resilient, sustainable, and accessible. Through the NAP, we expect that new funding and asset management tools will be developed that support councils to better manage land transport infrastructure. New investment to improve resilience will be expected once the necessary plans and strategies are in place. In the short term, the land transport sector will continue to work collaboratively to share insights and tools and improve decisionmaking. Key strategic priorities for rural and regional communities include resilience, maintaining and operating the existing system, safety, and better freight integration. Funding for activities that reduce emissions in these areas should be encouraged where it delivers value for money consistent with the GPS.Supporting disabled people Inclusive access is one of the main outcomes sought in the Transport Outcomes Framework. Disabled people need access to transport services so that they have equitable access to key locations such as work, study, shops, and community spaces. Transport operators are required to make reasonable accommodations so that disabled people have equitable access to the services these companies provide. Investment decisionmakers also need to consider how their investments will impact on disabled people so that the transport system enables people with disabilities to access these opportunities. Transport is essential for ensuring connections between primary production and markets, as well as access to social opportunities such as health, education and work STRATEGIC PRIORITIES Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT How progress will be measured The Ministry and Waka Kotahi have together developed a GPS monitoring framework for GPS . The framework in Appendix shows how the strategic priorities, action plans and policies work together to deliver the intended outcomes. Draft outcome indicators are detailed in Table below. These indicators will be as part of ongoing framework development. Waka Kotahi is expected to report on these outcomes, as well as progress on specific actions that will be required to deliver the GPS . Section provides further detail about how the Minister expects Waka Kotahi to plan, manage and report on its investment activity. Value for money is embedded throughout the framework, recognising that a range of factors influence this. Waka Kotahi is expected to report on how value for money is achieved, depending on the type of investment, the business case phase, the level of complexity, affordability or uncertainty that may need to be considered. Focussing only on traditional indicators of economic efficiency (such as BenefitCost Ratio) is not sufficient on its own to improve value for money. STRATEGIC PRIORITIESTe Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport DRAFT DRAFT Table : Monitoring the outcomes sought Strategic priorityContribution to Transport OutcomesMeasures we will use to monitor progress Maintaining and operating the systemInvestments in maintenance renewals and replacements support base asset condition Proportion of the state highway network that meets minimum asset condition requirements Proportion of travel on smooth roads (local roads) Asset sustainability ratio (state highways) Increasing resilienceExisting infrastructure will have increased adaptive capacity Percentage of highrisk, highimpact routes with a viable alternative (also a measure under Integrated freight system) The proportion of unplanned state highway road closures resolved within standard timeframes Urban planning and development will minimise risk of climate change to communities Te Manat Waka will work with Waka Kotahi and other agencies to develop improved adaptation and resilience measures Reducing emissionsThe ERP will be on track to achieve its emissions reduction targets Greenhouse gas emissions from the land transport system Light vehicle kilometres travelled Proportion of light vehicle fleet that are nolow carbon vehicles Emissions from freight transport Safety The system is on track to achieve the Road to Zero targets Deaths and serious injuries (DSIs) on the land transport system Target percent reduction by Headon, runoffroad and intersection DSIs DSIs involving low safety rating vehicles Sustainable urban and regional developmentReduced reliance on cars in urban areas Increase access to social and economic opportunities by public transport and active modes Mode share of PT and active modes Proportion of new housing with access to frequent public transport Perceived safety of walking and cycling Percentage of people that view active modes as an attractive and feasible alternative to driving for their most recent journey Private vehicle occupancy Improved transport journeys Commute length Trip rate (measure of how often people leave their homes) Predictability on key urban roads (good indication of urban congestion) User experience by mode (increasing for shared and active modes) Integrated freight system Improved freight supply chain efficiency Rail travel time reliability (freight) More freight is moved by low carbon modes Freight mode share Freight routes are more resilient Proportion of outages that are restored within agreed timeframes Number of rail freight derailments Percentage of highrisk, highimpact routes with a viable alternative STRATEGIC PRIORITIES Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT DRAFT SECTION SECTION SECTION SECTION SECTION Section . Investment in land transport This section describes how different funding and financing sources will contribute to land transport investments and sets NLTF activity class funding ranges. DRAFT DRAFT DRAFT Context for investment The focus of Government Policy Statements on land transport are on transport outcomes that are addressed by direct and ongoing investment. Infrastructure investment is one of the levers we use to achieve transport outcomes. However, funding of transport infrastructure and services is only one way of achieving transport outcomes there are many other ways to influence those outcomes. For example, regulatory changes such as vehicle safety standards, speed limits and pollution emission standards, also play a critical role in improving safety and reducing emissions. Integrated transport and planning tools and investment in rural broadband can also help to connect communities and help reduce the need to travel. Often a combination of levers will be required to achieve any one outcome. When it comes to direct investment in land transport services and infrastructure, the following intervention hierarchy applies. Figure : Intervention hierarchy New infrastructure Consider investment in new infrastructure, matching the levels of service provided against affordability and realistic needBest use of existing system Best use of existing system through optimised levels of service across networks and public transport services, and allocation of network capacityManage demand Keep people and freight moving, and reduce the adverse impacts of transport, such as emissions and congestion at peak times, through demand side measures, e.g. supporting mode shift or road pricingIntegrated planning Plan and develop an integrated landuse and transport pattern that maximises use of existing network capacity, reduces travel demand and supports transport choiceConsider first Consider last Cost Lower Higher INVESTMENT IN LAND TRANSPORT Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT The infrastructure intervention hierarchy should be applied when generating and considering alternatives and options. The intervention hierarchy is used to help drive value for money by promoting lowcost investment ahead of more costly physical infrastructure and technological investment. Given the constrained funding environment, it is more important than ever that: investment planning works through the intervention hierarchy and considers all the other levers available for the land transport system to influence outcomes, before investing in a transport infrastructure improvement solution all spending provides value for money. This means robust options analysis, seeking opportunities to deliver cobenefits across multiple outcomes, and ensuring fitfor purpose investment processes. Sources of land transport investment The table opposite summarises some of the key considerations for how different funding sources are used for land transport investment. The main funding pathways for land transport investment are shown in Figure . Figure : Main Land Transport funding ows Transport programmes, projects and activitiesMinisters choose investmentsNZUP, PGF, CERF, RNIP State highways, safety programmes etcWaka Kotahi chooses investmentsNLTF PT subsidies, local roads etcRegional councils approve RLTPsLocal share Taxpayers Ministers determine direct funding Road users Ministers determine FEDRUC rates Rate payers Regional and local authorities set rates . For clarity, this diagram does not attempt to show every funding pathway. For example, Ministers determine the Crown topup for rail to go to the NLTF and approve the RNIP. Ministers have also provided additional funding to the NLTF for flood recovery works. INVESTMENT IN LAND TRANSPORTTe Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport DRAFT DRAFT Table : Main sources of land transport investment National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) The NLTF is a dedicated fund for maintaining and developing local and national transport infrastructure, services and activities. The NLTF is largely made up of revenue from fuel excise duty (FED) and road user charges (RUC). Smaller amounts of revenue come from motor vehicle registration and licensing, the sale of surplus land and property, tolls and freight rail track user charges. Waka Kotahi also has access to debt facilities to manage shortterm cashflow issues, and for other purposes, as prescribed by the Crown from time to time. Waka Kotahi is responsible for allocating NLTF funding to give effect to the GPS. This includes contributing to the results sought in Section , which guide investments to support the Transport Outcomes Framework: inclusive access, economic prosperity, healthy and safe people, environmental sustainability and resilience and security. The NLTF will fund activities in accordance with the activity class ranges set in the GPS. The NLTF is required to fund previously approved activities (subject to narrow exceptions) and debt commitments. For GPS , the priority for funding from the NLTF is to ensure the ongoing operation and maintenance of the system. The activity class ranges in the GPS allocate approximately percent of funding towards the maintenance, operation and optimisation of the existing land transport system over the next ten years. This is in accordance with the Maintaining and Operating the System strategic priority and as a core enabler for the delivery of all other strategic priorities and outcomes. Available funding beyond maintenance, operation and optimisation of the existing system will be prioritised to fund improvement activities to contribute to the strategic priorities. Climate and Emergency Response Fund (CERF) Revenue from the Emissions Trading Scheme is allocated to CERF. Cabinet allocates CERF funding to support emissions reductions and reducing vulnerability or exposure to the impacts of climate change, including the implementation of the ERP and NAP. CERF funding may be used to support the implementation of transport activities, as a means of supplementing investments made through the GPS with a focus on emission reduction andor mitigating the impacts of climate change. Direct Crown funding Cabinet may choose to allocate additional funding for transport projects to support the achievement of GPS or wider government priorities that are not affordable within the NLTF. These tend to be investments that are very large; projects that have multiple objectives; or investments that respond to specific events or wider strategic needs. This may include, for example, major infrastructure projects, regional development projects and largescale system shocks (e.g., COVID or recovery from natural disasters). There will typically be a broader set of considerations applied to these investments than to projects and activities that centre purely on transport objectives. When proposing investments for Crown funding, Cabinet is responsible for determining the rationale for investment and relative priority. Officials have responsibility for ensuring that Ministers are well informed before making such decisions, including providing advice about the fit of a proposed investment with relevant government strategies and plans such as the ERP, the NAP and the NPSUD. The nature of direct Crown funding is such that the timing of its approval does not necessarily align with the publication of a GPS. Local share Regional councils, unitary authorities and territorial authorities collectively known as local government play a key role in the transport planning and funding system. Local government is responsible for developing, maintaining and operating a large network of local roads and for delivering public transport infrastructure and services. It also has a key role in achieving integrated transport planning. Local government contributes ratepayer funding towards activities in the NLTP that it is responsible for delivering, and this supplements investment from the NLTF. These activities include local road construction, operations and maintenance; public transport infrastructure and services; and walking and cycling infrastructure. INVESTMENT IN LAND TRANSPORT Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT Investment delivered through the National Land Transport Fund The Government is proposing to make a substantial increase in the funds available to the NLTF. The Government is proposing to make a substantial increase in the funds available to the NLTF. Including all contributions, revenue available to the NLTF will rise from . billion in to . billion in , an increase of percent. This additional funding will be used to ensure that New Zealanders have a quality roading network that is resilient, and the transport system is optimised to support future expectations. This includes being resilient to adverse weather conditions. Given the recent weather events, the programme will also focus on projects that support recovery and building back better. Investment in maintenance and operation of the system will also be a key focus for GPS . In March , the Government cut FED and RUC rates by cents a litre to provide cost of living relief through the global energy crisis, triggered by the war in Ukraine. The FED and RUC cuts concluded on July . Balancing the increase in FEDRUC, following removal of the cent reduction, is critical to minimising the cost increases that households are facing. A balance has been struck which covers the critical increase in investment by funding this through: Proposed gradual increases in FED and RUC Hypothecation of traffic infringement fee revenue to the NLTF Crown grants A Crown loan. In proposing this combination of revenue sources, the Government has aimed to balance: The cost pressures on household and business budgets The need for more investment to maintain and improve the resilience of transport infrastructure Significant price increases in the sectors that provide transport infrastructure and services The absence of a FEDRUC increase to the NLTF since September The value of maintaining price signals for road users to help to manage demand Delivery constraints. These factors have led to the proposed funding package, totalling . billion of expenditure over the first three years of GPS . While recognising the desirability of additional expenditure, ultimately that must be balanced against affordability and delivery constraints. Proposed increases to FED and RUC The Government is proposing to return to the previous practice of regular, small increases in FEDRUC to maintain the spending power of the NLTF (see Figure ). Officials advised the Government that it should make larger increases to FEDRUC to provide most of the additional funding from this source. However, the amount that would be required to fund the NLTF in full would be a oneoff increase of cents per litre to fund the essential expenditure and another oneoff increase of cents per litre to fund the Strategic Investment Programme. Given the significant impact that this would have on the cost of living for many households, the Government does not consider that an increase of this kind would be acceptable. Accordingly, the draft GPS proposes to supplement the NLTF with direct Crown funding and financing to reduce the size of the proposed FEDRUC increases. To ensure that revenue matches investment, and the land transport system continues to be maintained, we propose two sixmonthly cents per litre increases for the first year, followed by two annual cents per litre increases, reaching . Noting that the Government supported households from March to June with temporary reductions in FED and RUC. During this time, Crown funding maintained expected cashflows into the NLTF. INVESTMENT IN LAND TRANSPORTTe Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport DRAFT DRAFT Figure : Previous and Forecast NLTF Share of Road Maintenance Expenditure Figure . Previous changes to rate of Fuel Excise Duty.B .B .B .B.B .B .B .B Actual maintenance expenditure Activity class upper bound Activity class lower bound Cents per litre a total of cents per litre in July . A cent per litre increase is the equivalent to an additional cost per week of . to the average motorist, increasing to . per week by July . The proposed increase, phased in by July , will generate an additional . billion in revenue over . This additional revenue will, in part, be used to meet the rising costs of maintaining roads, which is forecast to cost between . billion and . billion over . Hypothecation of traffic infringement fee revenue to the NLTF Fee revenue from traffic offences currently goes into the Crown account. To help deliver on the critical investment in land transport required through GPS and reflecting the safetyfocus of traffic infringement notices, it is now proposed that infringement fees will be hypothecated to the NLTF where it will be directed to support safety investments through the Road to Zero programme. Infringement fees currently amount to approximately million per annum. INVESTMENT IN LAND TRANSPORT Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT Crown grants The Government is proposing to provide Crown grants totalling . billion to the NLTF over the period . This will include million from the CERF, which will be directed to the Walking and Cycling Activity Class to increase uptake of walking and cycling and reduce emissions. Crown loan The final funding component is a Crown loan of . billion. This will be repaid over ten years from the additional FED and RUC revenue. Together, FEDRUC increases, Crown grants, a Crown loan and traffic infringement fee hypothecation will ensure the essential expenditure necessary to maintain our land transport infrastructure and the continued operation of transport services. Future of the Revenue System The proposals above will provide confirmed revenue for the period . However, as some of this revenue is coming from oneoff grants, expected revenue drops in . The land transport system is undergoing major transitions. This involves: a shift from private cars to active modes or public transport; moving more freight from road to rail and coastal shipping; a move to decarbonise transport modes; and changes in where we live and work. Consequently, revenue from road users will be impacted. At the same time, additional investment is required to support emissions reduction and safety programmes. The Government has commenced a review, called Future of the Revenue System (FoRS) to determine how land transport should be funded in the future, to ensure sustainability in the longterm. The Ministry is currently examining options, with a view to public consultation in early . Detailed design work and development of the preferred options, and staged implementation, will come after that. It is expected that this work will be completed in time to inform GPS . It is expected that the Governments transport funding approach for the period from will be informed by the results of the FoRS review. National Land Transport Programme The LTMA requires Waka Kotahi to prepare and adopt a NLTP, for the following three financial years. The NLTP must: contribute to the purpose of the LTMA give effect to the GPS, and take into account any: regional land transport plans national energy efficiency and conservation strategy relevant national policy statement and any relevant regional policy statements or plans that are for the time being in force under the Resource Management Act . Table : National Land Transport Fund expected revenue to m m m m m m NLTF revenue , , , , , , INVESTMENT IN LAND TRANSPORTTe Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport DRAFT DRAFT Table : National Land Transport Programme funding ranges to Note this expenditure target relates specifically to NLTF spend i.e., Waka Kotahi share (excluding local share contributions and other external funding sources). Table shows the total expenditure target along with the maximum and minimum for the ten years of GPS . The expenditure target for the NLTP reflects the NLTF funding that can be invested into land transport activities net of expected debt repayments (see Appendix ). It is based on the expected level of NLTF revenue (noting that additional revenue decisions relating to onwards are yet to be taken), the net impact of borrowing and any surpluses carried forward from one financial year into the next. Allowable reasons for varying the expenditure targets The Minister may vary the expenditure targets. Where it is likely that actual revenue levels will vary significantly from expenditure targets or it is not possible to spend at the expected rate (e.g., a pandemic), the Ministry and Waka Kotahi will advise the Minster on options for aligning expenditure and revenue. Allowable variation Waka Kotahi is required to match its expenditure to the target expenditure set out in Table . However, it is also legally required to limit its spending to the levels of available revenue in the NLTF. Because both the timing and levels of revenue and expenditure are subject to uncertainty, the LTMA provides for an allowable variation to be set in a GPS as a way of managing any imbalances that arise. In practice this allowable variation is determined by the loan facilities provided to Waka Kotahi as these set the limit on the extent to which expenditure from the NLTF can exceed revenue inflows. For the avoidance of doubt, in GPS the allowable variation is the sum of all borrowing made available to Waka Kotahi by the Minister of Transport and the Minister of Finance, reduced over time as that borrowing is drawn down. Policy on borrowing for the purposes of managing the delivery of the NLTP At times borrowing will be required to manage the delivery of the NLTP. Borrowing increases available funding in the shortterm, which can be used to manage cash flow, cope with unexpected shocks or to deliver additional activities. However, in the future there will be a corresponding decrease in available funding as the borrowing is repaid. A change in how borrowing is reported is being implemented in this GPS. The activities funded though borrowing will be reported at the time of the investment as expenditure in the appropriate activity class. Repayment of borrowing will be reported as expenditure from the NLTF, separate from activity class spend. Put simply, although the m m m m m m Expenditure target , , , , , , Maximum expenditure , , , , , , Minimum expenditure , , , , , , INVESTMENT IN LAND TRANSPORT Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT NLTF will be responsible for repayment of the borrowing, the interest and debt repayments will be reflected separately from the activity class ranges in GPS . The Ministry will work with Waka Kotahi to develop reporting practices to ensure both the spend on activities funded from borrowing and the repayments of borrowing are clearly reported. This includes borrowing drawn down before July . At the time of publishing this GPS, formal arrangements are in place for Waka Kotahi to use several borrowing facilities. Table provides details of these arrangements. A forecast of the expected debt repayments over the next six years is presented in Appendix . If additional borrowing facilities are required, Waka Kotahi must seek approval from the Ministers of Finance and Transport. Two of the facilities relate to revolving credit. These provide access to committed funding to manage fluctuations in cash flow either due to seasonal variations or shocks. Table Waka Kotahi borrowing facilities Borrowing Facility Purpose of borrowing Size of facilityAmount drawn down Repayment Period Management of cash flow (revolving credit facility) To manage seasonal cash flow variations in the NLTFm Annually Revenue and expenditure shocks (revolving credit facility)To manage any unexpected fluctuation in revenue or expenditure m mWithin years of draw down Auckland Transport PackageTo progress the Auckland Transport package m m Before June Tauranga Eastern LinkTo bring forward construction of the Tauranga Eastern Linkm mTo be repaid through future tolls revenue by June Housing Infrastructure FundTo accelerate transport projects that support housing development m m Before June COVID To manage the shortfall in revenue resulting from COVIDm m Before June NLTP facility To address the gap between planned investments in the NLTP and level of investment required to deliver GPS prioritiesb m years from drawdown NLTP facility To address the gap between planned investments in the NLTP and level of investment required to deliver GPS priorities.b years from drawdown Note: This list does not include lending facilities related to Waka Kotahis regulatory functions. Amounts drawn down as at June . INVESTMENT IN LAND TRANSPORTTe Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport DRAFT DRAFT The NLTF funds activity classes, each of which represent a grouping of similar activities. The activity class funding ranges outlined in Table provide signals about the balance of investment expected across the GPS. The focus of the investment in the activity classes is on maintaining and operating the system, with additional investment coming from other sources to support the other strategic priorities. For each activity class, a funding range is given with an upper and lower expenditure limit. Waka Kotahi is responsible for allocating funding within these ranges to specific activities, while also staying within the overall expenditure target. There may be additional funding from other sources (such as Crown funding or local government) towards some projects and activities. Except for rail (see page ), any funding from other sources is additional to the expenditure target and the activity class funding ranges.GPS allocates funding ranges to twelve activity classes. The activity classes are: Public transport services State highway maintenance Local road maintenance Investment management Rail network Public transport infrastructure State highway improvements Local road improvements Safety Walking and cycling improvements Coastal shipping Interregional public transport. The activity classes follow on from GPS , with the addition of one new activity class, Interregional public transport and renaming the Road to Zero activity class to be the Safety activity class.Activity class framework INVESTMENT IN LAND TRANSPORT Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT Interregional public transport activity class Interregional public transport will play a crucial role in achieving our emissions reduction targets. Currently there are two interregional public transport rail services, Te Huia (between Hamilton and Auckland) and the Capital Connection (between Palmerston North and Wellington). The interregional public transport activity class provides for investment in existing and new interregional services, encouraging Regional Councils and Unitary Authorities to work together to expand and improve interregional public transport service offerings. This activity class also provides funding to support the delivery of new services. This activity class will work in a similar way to the Coastal Shipping activity class in the GPS, by providing a dedicated funding source to partner with other players to develop and deliver new services. It is expected that Waka Kotahi will develop key principles and objectives shortly after the Government has responded to the Select Committee Inquiry into the Future of Inter Regional Passenger Rail, and that Waka Kotahi will then work with public transport agencies, KiwiRail, and the private sector to support proposals that will extend and improve services. The Government expects this activity class will initiate extensions to interregional passenger rail, but it can also be applied to other forms of Interregional public transport including bus and ferry services.Safety activity class The Safety activity class represents an update to the Road to Zero Activity Class introduced through GPS . Investment through the Safety Activity Class will be targeted towards interventions that support reductions in deaths and serious injuries, including in Road Policing, Automated Enforcement, and Road Safety Promotion. The difference between the Road to Zero Activity Class and the Safety Activity Class, is that safety infrastructure and speed management will now be funded from the State Highway Improvements and Local Roads Improvements Activity Classes. This will better integrate the wider network and deliver a wider range of outcomes. Activity Classes are defined in detail in Appendix . INVESTMENT IN LAND TRANSPORTTe Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport DRAFT DRAFT Table : Activity classes and funding ranges GPS Funding range Forecast funding range Activity Class m m m m m m m m m m Continuing programmes Public transport servicesUpper , , , , , , , , Lower , , State highway maintenanceUpper , , , , , , , , , , Lower , , , , , , , , , Local road maintenanceUpper , , , , , , , , , , Lower , , , , Investment managementUpper Lower Rail network Upper Improvements Public transport InfrastructureUpper , , , Lower State highway ImprovementsUpper , , , Lower , , , Local road improvementsUpper Lower Safety Upper Lower Walking and cycling improvementsUpper Lower Coastal shipping Upper Lower Interregional public transportUpper Lower Table below sets out the activity class funding ranges for . Activity class expenditure upper and lower limits INVESTMENT IN LAND TRANSPORT Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT Direct Crown funding supplements the NLTF, increasing the amount of funding available to achieve the strategic objectives. A full view of Government transport funding needs to incorporate the NLTF and these other funding pools. Crown funding is appropriated by Parliament for a particular purpose and is (usually) spent by Waka Kotahi or KiwiRail acting as the Crowns delivery agent.Crown funding for land transport Table : Total land transport investment Activity Class NLTF mCrown mTotal mNLTF mCrown mTotal m Lower Upper Lower Upper Public transport services , , , , , , , , , State highway maintenance , , , , , , , , Local road maintenance , , , , , , , , Investment management Rail network , , , , , , Public transport infrastructure , , , , , , , , , State highway improvements , , , , , , , , , Local road improvements , , , , , , Safety , , , , , , , , Walking and cycling improvements , , , , , , Coastal shipping Interregional public transport Other Debt and PPP repayments , , , , , , , , Unallocated revenue , na , na Crown expenditure that doesnt map to an Activity Class e.g., regulatory, clean car discounts, etc Totals , , , , , , , , , , . Note that NLTF Rail Network investment in Table doesnt reconcile with Table because of direct Crown funding into this Activity Class. Direct Crown funding has been removed from the Rail NLTF Activity Class in Table to avoid double counting.Based on BEFU NLTF revenue forecasts. INVESTMENT IN LAND TRANSPORTTe Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport DRAFT DRAFT Direct Crown funding for the period currently stands at . billion (see Table : Total land transport investment and Appendix ). The largest components of this are NZUP funding and support for RNIP. As many of the NZUP projects are underway (if not completed) the NZUP expenditure shown in Table is an estimate of the residual funding from the original allocation that remains to be spent in this period. The Government has also announced funding of billion for a National Resilience Plan and that it expects to announce further funding to support the regions affected by the recent extreme weather events. Transport investments have received an initial share of this funding, with further decisions likely. Major Government commitments to direct funding for transport investment programmes and projects currently include: Details of all direct Crown commitments are listed in Appendix .Cyclone Gabrielle emergency relief The Government initially committed million to Waka Kotahi for Cyclone Gabrielle emergency relief, and million to support the reinstatement of operating sections of the rail network. In July, it confirmed a further million to Waka Kotahi for immediate works on state highways in Tairwhiti, Wairoa, Hawkes Bay, Coromandel and Northland from the billion National Resilience Plan. The Government has also indicated that more support will be provided once there is a clearer picture of the costs to each region. The New Zealand Upgrade Programme In January , the Government committed billion to the NZUP. The transport component of this funding (. billion) is supporting specific projects that further the Governments ambition for the transport system. NZUP reflects the Governments balanced transport policy with investments across road, rail, public transport and walking and cycling infrastructure. It is a significant investment programme that builds on investment made through the NLTF and is delivering important projects that will speed up travel times, ease congestion and make our roading and rail networks safer and more resilient. Major NZUP projects include: Penlink providing a twolane road and a shared walking and cycling path bridge which will provide improved travel times between Whangaparoa and wider Auckland Melling Transport Improvements providing a safer, more resilient and accessible transport system in Lower Hutt, as well as supporting flood protection and revitalisation of the Hutt Valley Cyclone Gabrielle interim emergency relief package New Zealand Upgrade Programme Climate Emergency Response Fund Rail Network Investment Programme INVESTMENT IN LAND TRANSPORT Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT The Queenstown Package providing locals and visitors with better access to public transport and improved, safer connections for those who walk or ride bikes A third main rail line between Westfield and Wiri in Auckland enabling more frequent and reliable passenger and freight rail services Extending Aucklands electrified rail network from Papakura to Pukekohe. Many NZUP projects have already been completed. Details of progress with the programme can be found at www.nzta.govt.nznzupgrade. Climate Emergency Response Fund (CERF) The CERF provides a dedicated funding source for public investment on climaterelated initiatives, using proceeds from the Emissions Trading Scheme. CERF funding can support other funding sources, such as the NLTF and local government revenue, to accelerate improvements to transport infrastructure and services that support emissions reduction andor reduce vulnerability or exposure to the impacts of climate change. Through Budget and Budget , . billion of CERF funding (not including million for the, now discontinued, clean car upgrade (scrappage) and social leasing car schemes), was allocated to transport investments. Announcement of any additional CERF transport initiatives is likely to be linked to the annual government budget process.Rail Every three years KiwiRail is required to prepare the RNIP for the Minister of Transport to approve. The RNIP outlines the set of rail network activities KiwiRail proposes to deliver over the next three years and a year investment forecast for the national rail network. KiwiRail must take into account the purpose of the LTMA, and the current GPS on land transport, when developing the RNIP. The first RNIP was approved by the Minister in June . Additional funding was also provided through the annual Crown Budget process to the NLTF to support investment in the RNIP. This Crown support is included as NLTF revenue and in the relevant Activity Class in Table . Other In addition to the major investments described above, the Government has provided direct Crown funding to other transport initiatives such as the Super Gold card fare subsidies, PT bus decarbonisation, City Rail Link and planning for Auckland Light Rail. . billion of CERF funding was allocated to transport investments through Budget and Budget INVESTMENT IN LAND TRANSPORTTe Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport DRAFT DRAFT Process for collating and assessing bids for different funding channels Transport investment funding and decision making is becoming increasingly complex. Over the period of this GPS, the Government may wish to consider making additional investments to support progress towards the strategic priorities, especially where there is not sufficient revenue available within the NLTF. The highlevel process is outlined in Figure below. The Government already uses Waka Kotahi expertise to advise on andor implement directly funded transport investment decisions. This sits within the statutory functions of Waka Kotahi but outside of the autonomous role it plays with respect to the NLTF. This aspect of the Waka Kotahis role is facilitated through direction under the Crown Entities Act , or by letters of agreement between the Minister and the Waka Kotahi Board. Working with the Ministry, Waka Kotahi is expected to identify and advise on time critical investment programmes for Crown funding consideration, where supplementing the NLTF and local share funding could better deliver GPS priorities (or wider priorities specified by the Government). This expectation is included in Section .Changes to transport funding and prioritisation processes in NLTP Figure : New funding decision process Waka Kotahi prepares:Decision rightsDelivery programmes Performance monitoringProposed activitiesStrategic priorities and signalsAn optimised NLTFfunded package based on the funding ranges set up in the GPS (i.e. the current NLTP process) Advice on investment options for Government consideration through Budget (incl. CERF)Waka Kotahi Board CabinetNTLP CERF and other Crownfunded programmesOutcomes, objectives and results the Crown wishes to achieve Regional Land Transport Plans National longterm view of system needsGPS sets INVESTMENT IN LAND TRANSPORT Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT Figure : New funding decision process Waka Kotahi prepares:Decision rightsDelivery programmes Performance monitoringProposed activitiesStrategic priorities and signalsAn optimised NLTFfunded package based on the funding ranges set up in the GPS (i.e. the current NLTP process) Advice on investment options for Government consideration through Budget (incl. CERF)Waka Kotahi Board CabinetNTLP CERF and other Crownfunded programmesOutcomes, objectives and results the Crown wishes to achieve Regional Land Transport Plans National longterm view of system needsGPS sets DRAFT Mass Rapid Transit Projects Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) projects are likely to require additional Crown funding due to their scale and their broader and more complex range of benefits and outcomes, particularly as these projects become cityshaping in that they significantly impact economic decisions, such as where people choose to live and work. Work is planned to develop a comprehensive framework for funding, financing and integrating decision making processes for MRT projects, with new policy expected after GPS is adopted. This work is expected to outline how the NLTF is used to support the operation and maintenance of new and supporting infrastructure and how different government policy levers work together to deliver the best outcomes. Current MRT projects are at various stages in the investment pipeline, and include: Northern Busway enhancements A Detailed Business Case has identified a number of enhancements to improve the reach and attractiveness of the Northern Busway, which is experiencing passenger growth exceeding that of both the rail network and the rest of the bus network in Tmaki Makaurau Auckland. The project includes station and platform upgrades as well as improved bus priority on State Highway and local roads in the city centre. These projects will be rolled out as funding is made available and as growth requires. City Rail Link This is the only MRT project in the construction phase. To realise the full benefits of CRL, several improvements are required to other parts of the metro rail network, notably the removal of level crossings, to increase the throughput of people across the whole system. These projects are funded separately and prioritised in the ATAP programme. INVESTMENT IN LAND TRANSPORTTe Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport DRAFT DRAFT Auckland Light Rail This proposed light rail corridor serves to connect the Auckland Airport and Mngere with the city centre. The Indicative Business Case estimated a cost of . billion to deliver the entire route. The project is now in the Detailed Business Case phase. cost estimates, a phasing plan, and route and station locations are expected to be announced after GPS is adopted. Waitemat Harbour Connections Nationally significant resilience, network capacity and travel choice deficiencies across the Waitemat Harbour need to be addressed over the coming decades through a significant improvement that includes rapid transit, road, and active mode improvements. An Indicative Business Case to direct future investment is scheduled for completion in . It is expected to include provision for a rapid transit connection to the City Centre. Northwest Rapid Transit Corridor Urban development to the northwest of Auckland will be supported by a new rapid transit corridor connecting Westgate with the city centre. This will take the pressure off the overburdened State Highway and provide a lowercarbon transport alternative to serve the expected population growth in this area. Interim improvements, including longer bus priority lanes and the Te Atat and Lincoln Road interchanges, are currently being delivered. Any new investment or improvements in this corridor should allow for an eventual grade separated public transport service to be operated, and ensure provision is made for connection points with other services (e.g., rail stations and bus interchanges). New investments may include strategic land acquisition to secure those connection points. Any grade separation should also ensure that at future stages the type of service could be upgraded (i.e., bus rapid transit being upgraded to a light rail or metro type operation). Any future investment should also ensure interlinkages with other services (e.g. rail stations and bus interchanges) to produce a step change improvement in travel choice and network capacity to the wider northwest part of Auckland. Lets Get Wellington Moving This programme seeks to provide more attractive travel choices and reshape how people get around Wellington. The MRT elements of LGWM are now entering the Detailed Business Case phase, investigating light rail or bus rapid transit options to the south from the Wellington Railway Station. New metropolitan rapid transit programmes Through the Urban Growth Partnerships the Crown, iwi and local government have developed joint spatial plans to ensure all our Tier cities grow successfully over time. Underpinning all the spatial plans are shifts towards greater use of public transport and active modes. The key implementation action to achieve this is establishing a core network of rapid and frequent public transport corridors as future spines for these urban areas. New networks that will become key enablers of future urban development and transport planning include the HamiltonWaikato Metro Rapid Transit network, the Greater Christchurch Mass Rapid Transit corridor, and the TaurangaWestern Bay of Plenty Frequent Public Transport network. INVESTMENT IN LAND TRANSPORT Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT DRAFT SECTION SECTION SECTION SECTION SECTION Section . Statement of Ministerial expectations DRAFT DRAFT DRAFT The Act provides for the Minister, as part of the GPS, to make a statement of their expectations of how Waka Kotahi gives effect to the GPS on land transport. The purpose of the statement is to provide greater clarity about government policies and objectives relevant to Waka Kotahis implementation of the GPS. The statement is specific to the GPS and is in addition to the statutory objectives and functions in Part of the LTMA, the Crown Entities Act , and general public sector advice and guidance such as the Codes of Conduct and Model Standards promulgated by the Public Service Commission.These expectations on Waka Kotahi are supplemented by the annual letter of expectations provided by the Minister of Transport, relating to the wider role of Waka Kotahi. Waka Kotahi is expected to demonstrate how it is giving effect to these expectations, working with the Ministry to agree an appropriate reporting and publication format, to be agreed with the Minister prior to GPS coming into effect. Existing Waka Kotahi reporting mechanisms are likely to be appropriate, including its: Statement of Intent and Statement of Performance Expectations Assessment of how the NLTP gives effect to GPS Annual Report on the NLTF and Annual Report on Waka Kotahi Annual reporting on matters relating to the RNIP. STATEMENT OF MINISTERIAL EXPECTATIONS Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT The Minister expects Waka Kotahi to use the NLTF to contribute to the results sought in Section in a manner that provides value for money throughout the investment lifecycle by efficiently and effectively allocating the NLTF to activities. When developing the NLTP, the Minister expects Waka Kotahi will: Incorporate GPS priorities into its investment prioritisation framework: prior to publishing the NLTP, establish, implement, and publish its investment decisionmaking approach (including rules, criteria and procedures) to prioritising and managing investments in the NLTP that contribute to the GPS outcomes in a way that demonstrates value for money. This includes giving consideration to how the Ministrys Value for Money Assessment Model may be incorporated and applied to the activity classes. Consider the full range of options and alternatives: to contribute to the outcomes in Section , require consideration of options that prioritise integrated planning, demand management and making the best use of the existing system ahead of new infrastructure investment, consistent with the Intervention Hierarchy. Ensure a robust programme and portfolio approach: ensure investments are not undertaken in a siloed manner, but rather delivery is integrated in a way that maximises available funding, the delivery of benefits and value for money. Set performance expectations: report on the expected costs and benefits from its investment decisions and describe the monitoring and risk management approaches that will be in place to drive value for money and to manage risk. Evaluate its performance: determine whether the expected benefits of its investments are being realised, and the progress it is making towards the outcomes and results sought in its NLTP.Deliver GPS outcomes in a way that provides value for money STATEMENT OF MINISTERIAL EXPECTATIONSTe Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport DRAFT DRAFT The Minister expects Waka Kotahi to demonstrate that its decisions to approve funding for activities have been reasonably informed by evidence of: expected benefits and costs (both monetised and nonmonetised) and the level of uncertainty associated with benefit and cost estimation. potential for funding contributions from the beneficiaries and users of the investments, including local government revenue sources, pricing (e.g., parking demand management) and forms of user charges. Below are specific areas that the Minister expects Waka Kotahi to focus on when investing towards the results and outcomes sought in Sections and in a manner that provides value for money.Building back better and achieving value for money from maintenance and renewals spend Waka Kotahi will need to carefully consider the most effective ways to build back better so the transport system is optimised to support future expectations, be fit for purpose, and be resilient to future system shocks. Build back better has several dimensions but generally means upgrading rather than just replacing. This may, for example, occur as part of routine maintenance activities, when replacing flooddamaged structures, or when proactively constructing an alternative to a route that has been identified as fragile. While additional funding is being provided to rebuild or replace damaged infrastructure, Waka Kotahi also needs to find ways to leverage its considerable maintenance and renewals work programmes to contribute to the wider set of outcomes within GPS , rather than just replace the current asset, during routine maintenance activities.Investments must be efficient and effective Build back better has several dimensions but generally means upgrading rather than just replacing STATEMENT OF MINISTERIAL EXPECTATIONS Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT The Minister expects that Waka Kotahi will: adopt an asset management approach, consistent with the One Network Framework and, where appropriate, adaptive decision making, that achieves the best value for money for maintenance and operations for the funding allocated and takes a whole of life approach to decisionmaking prior to renewing longterm contracts, review how to contract for maintenance and renewals activities in a way that: ensures an effective, competitive and sustainable workforce and supply chain to deliver both response and maintenance services; demonstrates value for money in the delivery of response and maintenance services; encourages innovation and best practice to drive both efficient and effective maintenance and response outcomes; prioritises the effective integration of improvement activities into routine maintenance schedules, where feasible; and gives the Government confidence that programme management and governance is in place to effectively share risk and support innovation with the private sector. when considering any changes to the State Highway network, assess and where appropriate incorporate into all improvement options (including renewals and maintenance) the provision of public transport to meet current and future demand. Any changes should take into account local and regional plans, and population growth projections. Additionally, the Minister expects Waka Kotahi to work with and support regional and local authorities to include the same considerations when developing investment proposals relating to local transport networks.Growth in the capacity, frequency and quality of public transport services is critical to our future. High quality public transport supports economic productivity through the efficient movement of growing populations, provides safe and affordable travel options for New Zealanders, and supports the achievement of our emissions reduction objectives. While we cannot change decisions of the past, it is essential we ensure that infrastructure planning and investment decisions take account of both immediate and anticipated public transport requirements of each corridor, looking out years. The impact of substantively repurposing and or expanding transport corridors to respond to changing demands is extremely high. This can include the direct financial costs of improvements, as well as the time and disruption costs for road users and for those who live and work alongside the corridor. This is especially the case in geographically constrained areas predominantly in our major urban centres where we are, and will continue to face, increasingly difficult decisions about how to integrate additional public transport capacity into heavily spaceconstrained transport corridors. The Minister expects Waka Kotahi will demonstrate how it is investing and collaborating with the sector to build capability in innovative and efficient transport infrastructure and service delivery STATEMENT OF MINISTERIAL EXPECTATIONSTe Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport DRAFT DRAFT Building sector capability The Minister expects that Waka Kotahi will: Demonstrate how it is investing and collaborating with the sector to build capability in innovative and efficient transport infrastructure and service delivery, including accelerating existing, or developing new programmes to build planning and delivery excellence for: asset management and network planning processes that use the One Network Framework; integrated investment planning, monitoring and evaluation that stops poorly aligned investment earlier in, and before the investment pipeline, improving system delivery and efficiency; programme management and governance, including effective community engagement and risk sharing; and wider government commitments, including the ERP, the Carbon Neutral Government Programme and the NAP. Waka Kotahi to set targets for, and report on, its operating costs The Minister expects Waka Kotahi will: prior to July , set annual targets for its own NLTFrelated costs as a proportion of the NLTF, broken down by activity class (net of debt repayments) and publish these targets in its Statement of Performance Expectations. report on its performance against its annual targets for its own NLTF related costs in its Annual Report, including explaining reasons for any variances against those targets.Climate change and the NLTP The Minister expects that Waka Kotahi will, when adopting the NLTFfunded programme: be satisfied that the overall NLTP makes an appropriate contribution to the transport emissions reduction targets of the ERP in accordance with the direction in the reducing emissions strategic priority above ( Page ). be satisfied that the NLTP makes an appropriate contribution to delivery of the NAP. within each region, be satisfied that the NLTP makes an appropriate contribution to any relevant urban light VKT reduction programme. Waka Kotahi is expected to report on how its new NLTF investment decisions are contributing to the Governments emissions reduction objectives, working with the Ministry to agree an appropriate publication format. Maximising revenue The Minister expects Waka Kotahi will: develop a strategic approach to the acquisition and disposal of land and other property interests (land andor property rights). review existing land holdings and route protection or land acquisition strategies to determine alignment with the strategic approach described above. ensure that net revenue available to the NLTF is maximised. This includes pursuing all available sources and ensuring there is full transparency and accountability on the collection of revenue, particularly in relation to RUC investigations and enforcement. STATEMENT OF MINISTERIAL EXPECTATIONS Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua DRAFT DRAFT Additional Crown funding will likely be required to make significant progress on GPS priorities, such as addressing climate change. As part of the annual Crown Budget process, the Minister expects Waka Kotahi will: determine investment programmes that progress GPS priorities for Crown funding consideration, informed by available evidence included in relevant national and regional strategies and plans, including RLTPs and spatial plans. work with the Ministry of Transport to advise the Government on investment programmes that support GPS priorities (or wider priorities specified by the Government). The Crown Budget process occurs annually and does not always align with RLTP and NLTP development. It is acknowledged that full information on activities that Waka Kotahi considers a high priority against GPS priorities, but that do not qualify for NLTF funding, will not necessarily be available when Crown Budget decisions are made each year.Waka Kotahi to advise the Government on priority activities for Crown funding STATEMENT OF MINISTERIAL EXPECTATIONSTe Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport DRAFT DRAFT Each activity class directs NLTF funding towards different types of activities. Each activity class can invest in every step of the intervention hierarchy including: Integrated planning Demand management Making the best use of the existing system New infrastructure. The below definitions outline which activities can be funded from each activity class. Public Transport Services Investment in the operation and maintenance of existing public transport networks, to improve utilisation andor maintain the level of service. Investment in new public transport services to improve the level of service and support an increase in uptake of public transport. Public Transport Infrastructure Investment in the maintenance, renewal of, or improvements to existing public transport infrastructure to improve utilisation. Investment in new public transport infrastructure to improve the level of service and support an increase in the uptake of public transport. Walking and Cycling Improvements Investment to improve the level of service and increase uptake of walking and cycling (including micro mobility). Safety Investment in road policing and associated equipment Investment in automated enforcement Investment in road safety promotion and system management Investment to support behavioural changes to improve road safety outcomes. Local Road Improvements Investment to optimise the utilisation andor improve levels of service across all modes on the local road network. State Highway Improvements Investment to optimise the utilisation andor improve levels of service across all modes on the state highway network. State Highway Maintenance Investment in the ongoing maintenance, operations, and renewal of the state highway network to deliver an appropriate level of service across all modes. Urgent response to transport network disruptions to restore an appropriate level of service. Local Road Maintenance Investment in the ongoing maintenance, operations, and renewal of the local road network to deliver an appropriate level of service across all modes. Urgent response to transport network disruptions to restore an appropriate level of service.Appendix . Activity class definitions Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua APPENDIX DRAFT DRAFT Investment Management Investment in the management and delivery of transport planning. This includes the development of Regional Land Transport Plans (RLTPs), the development of Activity Management Plans (AMPs), the development of speed management plans, parking management plan, development of Programme Business Cases (PBCs) and the delivery of post implementation reviews. Investment in integrated land use and transport planning, including long term system planning, urban growth plans, transport emissions reduction plans, climate adaptation plans, VKT reduction plans, and Regional Spatial Strategies. Investment in the management and delivery of research into land transport issues to support sound system planning and investment. Investment into funding allocation management. This includes the development of and administration of the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP), associated funding and procurement procedures, policies and guidelines, funding agreements with approved organisations, assistance and advice to approved organisations and regional land transport committees.Coastal Shipping Investment in coastal shipping to support the efficiency and sustainability of the coastal shipping sector and achieve decarbonisation and safety outcomes. Rail Network Investment in a reliable and resilient national rail network, including enabling KiwiRail to deliver ongoing maintenance, renewals and improvements to the rail network. InterRegional Public Transport Investment to partner with other players to develop and deliver new, extended and improved services. Investment to support planning for new inter regional public transport services, with a focus on rail but can also be applied to interregional bus and ferry services. Te Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport APPENDIX DRAFT DRAFT Appendix . Changes from GPS through to GPS GPS builds on the strategic direction of GPS and GPS , and also reflects changes in the funding environment. The table below shows how the strategic priorities have evolved through GPS and GPS to GPS .The other major change is the funding environment. GPS describes the Crowns land transport investment strategy and seeks to achieve more than what can be achieved through NLTF funding alone. It outlines a process whereby advice on investments will be provided to the appropriate decisionmaker(s) for funding through the NLTF, and other Crown funding sources. GPS GPS GPS na na Maintaining and operating the system The condition of the existing transport system is efficiently maintained at a level that meets the current and future needs of users. na na Increasing resilience The transport system is better able to cope with natural and anthropogenic hazards. Environment Reduced greenhouse gas emissions, as well as adverse effects on the local environment and public health.Climate change Transform to a low carbon transport system that supports emissions reductions, aligned with national commitments, while improving safety and inclusive access.Reducing emissions Transitioning to a lower carbon transport system. Safety A safe transport system, free of death and serious injury.Safety Develop a transport system where noone is killed or seriously injured. Safety Transport is made substantially safer for all. Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua APPENDIX DRAFT DRAFT GPS GPS GPS Access Providing increased access to economic and social opportunities.Better travel options Provide people with better travel options to access places for earning, learning, and participating in society.Sustainable urban and regional development People can readily and reliably access social, cultural, and economic opportunities through a variety of transport options. Sustainable urban and regional development is focused on developing resilient and productive towns and cities that have a range of lowemission transport options and low congestion. Enabling transport choice and access.Improving freight connections Improve freight connections to support economic development.Integrated freight system Welldesigned and operated transport corridors and hubs that provide efficient, reliable, resilient, multimodal and lowcarbon connections to support productive economic activity. Value for money Delivers the right infrastructure and services to the right level at the best cost.GPS embedded the value for money throughout the GPS as a principle that should always be expected from investments. GPS encourages cobenefits to be considered when developing business cases (e.g., for health, resilience, or environmental sustainability).GPS retains the principle that value for money should always be expected from investments. GPS encourages cobenefits to be considered for both maintenance and new investment activities. GPS has a greater focus on longterm value and recognises that different indicators will be required, depending on the decisions being made. Te Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport APPENDIX DRAFT DRAFT Appendix . Expected debt repayments m m m m m m Expected debt repayment , , Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua APPENDIX DRAFT DRAFT Appendix . Crown direct funding commitments to land transport s s s s s s s s s s KiwiRail Maintenance renewal of rail network, , KiwiRail Investment Crown Contribution, , , Rail grants , , , , , , , , , , PGF Rail projects , SuperGold card admin SuperGold Card Public Transport Concessions , , , , , , , , , , Public Transport Community connect concessions, , , , , , , , , , Clean car standard operation, , , , , , , , , , Clean vehicle discount scheme admin, , , NZ Upgrade Program Funding ,, , , , , , PT Bus decarbonisation , , , , , , , , , , Public Transport Workforce Sustainability, , ALR detailed planning Auckland City Rail Link Targeted Hardship Fund Auckland City Rail Link Operating, Enabling the Timely Delivery of City Rail Link, Auckland City Rail Link MYA, , Lower North Island Rail Integrated Mobility, Regional resilience , , , , , , Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure, , NIWE response and recovery funding, Total ,, ,, ,, , , , , , , , Te Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport APPENDIX DRAFT DRAFT Appendix . Glossary Activity Defined in the LTMA as a land transport output or capital project, or both. Activity class Refers to a grouping of similar activities. Active modes Transport by walking, cycling or other methods, which involve the direct application of kinetic energy by the person travelling. Approved organisations Organisations eligible to receive funding from Waka Kotahi for land transport activities. Approved organisations are defined in the LTMA . Benefits Measurable improvements from investment in programmes and projects. Benefits realisation A process that demonstrates whether or not (and how well) the anticipated results have been achieved. Capacity of network The amount of movement of people andor goods that the network can support at a given time. Cobenefits Additional outcomes associated with a strategic priority. Demand management Demand management refers to interventions which change the demand for transport. These interventions may seek to influence how, when and where people travel and freight is transported. The purpose of demand management is to ensure the transport system is utilised efficiently and effectively, and to reduce the negative impacts of travel and freight movement. Mode shift is one way of managing demand. Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) The New Zealand Emissions Trading Scheme. The ETS requires businesses to surrender one emissions unit (known as an NZU) to the Government for each tonne of emissions they emit. NZUs are tradeable. The ETS limits emissions by limiting the number of NZUs available to emitters (i.e., that are supplied into the scheme). Fuel Excise Duty (FED) Fuel Excise Duty is a tax imposed by the government to fund land transport activities. FED includes excise duty paid on liquid petroleum gas and compressed natural gas (in addition to petrol excise duty), but these account for a very small proportion of overall fuel excise. Hypothecation The direct allocation of all income from a tax or charge (e.g., FuelPetrol Excise Duty or Road User Charges) to a particular type of activity (e.g., the National Land Transport Fund). Lead investment Investment which acts as a catalyst for future development. Land Transport Management Act (LTMA ) The main Act governing the land transport planning and funding system. Land transport revenue Revenue paid into the Fund under the LTMA . Local road Defined in the LTMA as a road (other than a state highway) in a district that is under the control of a territorial authority. Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua APPENDIX DRAFT DRAFT Local share The contribution that communities make (through local government) towards transport projects that have shared national and local benefits. Maintenance Care and upkeep of infrastructure so that it can deliver a defined level of service, while leaving the fundamental structure of the existing infrastructure intact. Micromobility Light, short haul modes of transport such as electric scooters, skateboards, sharebicycles. Ministry of Transport (the Ministry, MoT) The Governments principal transport policy adviser that leads and generates policy, and helps to set the vision and strategic direction for the future of transport in New Zealand. Mode neutral Mode neutrality means considering all transport options for moving people and freight, including multimodal options, when identifying the best, valueformoney transport solutions to deliver transport outcomes. Mode shift Replacement of one travel mode with another. For example, a reduction in short car journeys due to replacement by public transport, walking or cycling. Motor vehicle registration and licensing fees Motor vehicles pay a registration fee when first registered to enter the fleet, and an annual licence fee to legally operate on the road network. Motor vehicle registration and licensing fees are defined as land transport revenue. The fees are intended to contribute to the maintenance of the Motor Vehicle Register where the details of motor vehicles are recorded. National Land Transport Fund (NLTF, the Fund) The set of resources, including land transport revenue, that are available for land transport activities under the National Land Transport Programme. National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) A programme, prepared by Waka Kotahi, that sets out the land transport activities which are likely to receive funding from the National Land Transport Fund. The NLTP is a threeyearly programme of investment in land transport infrastructure and services from the Fund. New Zealand Rail Plan The Governments plan that will guide investment to be made through the rail investment programme to achieve a reliable, resilient and safe rail network. One Network Framework A tool, prepared by Waka Kotahi, to help establish transport network function, performance measures, operating gaps and potential interventions for each road and street type. Petrol Excise Duty (PED) Petrol Excise Duty is a tax imposed by the Government on petrol and is used to fund land transport activities. Primary outcome The most important and relevant outcome of a strategic priority. Public transport Passenger transport infrastructure and services contracted by local and central government which may include shared ondemand services identified in Regional Public Transport Plans as integral to the public transport network. Interregional passenger transport by means of a rail vehicle. Te Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport APPENDIX DRAFT DRAFT Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP) A tenyear plan of projects, guided by the New Zealand Rail Plan, to achieve a reliable, resilient and safe rail network. The programme is written by KiwiRail and approved by the Minister of Transport with guidance from Waka Kotahi. Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) A quick, frequent, reliable and highcapacity public transport service that operates on a permanent route (road or rail) that is largely separated from other traffic. Regional Land Transport Plans (RLTPs) Plans prepared by Regional Transport Committees, that set out each regions transport objectives and policies for a period of at least years. This includes bids for funding from the NLTP. Regional Transport Committees (RTCs) A transport committee, which must be established by every regional council or unitary authority for its region. The main function of a regional transport committee is to prepare an RLTP. Results The outcomes that the Crown wishes to achieve from the allocation of funding from the National Land Transport Fund. They are expressed by a measure change, and are impacted by the level of investments, activities and deliverables required to realise the change. Road controlling authorities (RCAs) Authorities and agencies that have control of the roads, including Waka Kotahi, territorial authorities, Auckland Transport, the Waitangi Trust and the Department of Conservation.Road User Charges (RUC) Charges on diesel and heavy vehicles paid to The Government and used to fund land transport activity. State highways A road designated as such by Waka Kotahi, as defined by the LTMA . Track user charges (TUC) Charges paid for access touse of the rail tracks. Total Mobility Scheme The Total Mobility Scheme provides subsidised licensed taxi services to people who have an impairment that prevents them from making a journey unaccompanied, on a bus, train or ferry in a safe and dignified manner. Urban Environment Any area of land (regardless of size, and irrespective of local authority or statistical boundaries) that is, or is intended to be, predominantly urban in character; and is, or is intended to be, part of a housing and labour market of at least , people. Waka Kotahi, the NZ Transport Agency (Waka Kotahi) The government agency with statutory functions to manage the funding of the land transport system and manage the state highway system. Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua APPENDIX DRAFT DRAFT Appendix . GPS Monitoring framework Impacts What are the objectives of investing in each GPS strategic priority Outcomes In the short to medium term, how will investment in each priority contribute to achieving the Transport Outcomes Actions What will be invested in and delivered to achieve these outcomes How will the way we invest and deliver promote value for moneyInputs Activity class management Sector capability and capacity building Investment decisionsActivities Programmes, services and policies that will be delivered to achieve GPS objectivesOutputs Products, goods and services delivered through GPS activitiesSustainable urban and regional development: Better choices for people in urban and regional areas to access social and economic opportunities Improved transport choices High quality urban form Reducing emissions: A more accessible, inclusive, lowcarbon, sustainable transport system The Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP) will be on track to achieve its emissions reduction targetsIncreasing resilience: A transport system that is more resilient to a changing climate, which keeps our communities connected and safe Existing infrastructure will have increased adaptive capacity Urban planning and development will minimise risk of climate change to communitiesMaintaining and operating the system: Our existing system is maintained at a level that meets current future needs Investment in existing assets and services improves longterm value for moneySafety: A land transport system where no one is killed or seriously injured The system is on track to achieve the Road to Zero targetsIntegrated freight system: Efficient and effective freight connections Improved freight supply chain efficiency More freight is moved by low carbon modes Freight routes are more resilient Te Manat Waka Draft Government Policy Statement on land transport APPENDIX DRAFT DRAFT Appendix . Change compared to GPS Notes: . The Safety Activity Class was previously called Road to Zero. The main change between these is that the Safety Activity Class does not including any funding for safety infrastructure. The funding for safety improvements has been reallocated to State Highway and Local Road Improvements, to enable safety improvements to be delivered as part of the wider improvements programme. It is expected that the overall level of funding going towards safety projects will remain constant.Activity Class m m m m m m m Continuing programmes Public transport servicesUpper Lower State highway maintenanceUpper Lower Local road maintenanceUpper Lower Investment managementUpper Lower Rail networkUpper Lower Improvements Public transport InfrastructureUpper Lower State highway ImprovementsUpper Lower Local road ImprovementsUpper Lower Safety Upper Lower Walking and cycling improvementsUpper Lower Coastal Shipping Upper Lower Interregional Public TransportUpper Lower Te Manat Waka Te Tauk Kaupapa Here a te Kwanatanga m ng waka whenua APPENDIX DRAFT DRAFT DRAFT Ng Uara Te Manat Waka Te Manat Waka Values AKO CAPABILITY DEVELOPMENT MAHI TAHI WORKING TOGETHER RANGATIRATANGA EMPOWERING AND LEADING KAITIAKITANGA GUARDIANSHIP AND PROTECTION WHANAUNGATANGA COLLABORATION AND UNITYWHAKAPAKARI IMPROVING OUTCOMES MANAAKITANGA CARING FOR AND VALUING OTHERSCopyright Information Disclaimer: all reasonable endeavours are made to ensure the accuracy of the information in this document. However, the information is provided without warranties of any kind including accuracy, completeness, timeliness or fitness for any particular purpose. The Ministry of Transport excludes liability for any loss, damage or expense, direct or indirect, and however caused, whether through negligence or otherwise, resulting from any persons or organisations use of, or reliance on, the information provided in this document. Under the terms of the New Zealand Creative Commons Attribution . (BY) licence, this document, and the information contained within it, can be copied, distributed, adapted and otherwise used provided that Te Manat Waka is attributed as the source of the material the material is not misrepresented or distorted through selective use of the material images contained in the material are not copied. The terms of the Ministrys Copyright and disclaimer apply, available at: www.transport.govt.nz DRAFT DRAFT DRAFT Te Manat Waka Queens Wharf Wellington PO Box Wellington Telephone: Email: infotransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz DRAFT DRAFT
Strategic priorities What outcomes are expected to be achieved by the GPS The NLTP and corresponding RLTPs are expected to prioritise projects and activities that progress the GPS priorities. It expected that NZTA and local authorities focus on achieving the following outcomes:
Strengthen system leadership, support and coordination.
Strengthen the management of the risk of drug and alcohol impairment in the commercial aviation sector.
Strengthen the regulation of commercial transport services
Stronger emissions standards proposed from
Study of Road Trauma Evidence and Data
Study to identify vehicle emissions options
Subject to and without impacting on the decision of any other hapu or Iwi, the position of Te Aitanga a Mahaki is:
Subject to the national laws and regulations of each Party, any designated airline and indirect providers of cargo transport ation of each Party shall be permitted, without restriction, to employ in connection with international air freight services any surface transport ation for cargo to or from any points within or outside the territories of the Parties, including transport to and from all airports with customs facilities, and including, where applicable, the right to transport cargo in bond under applicable laws and regulations. Such cargo, whether moving by surface or by air shall have access to airport customs processing and facilities . Subject to the national laws and regulations of each Party, the designated a irlines may elect to perform their own surface transport ation or to provide it through arrangements with other surface carriers, including surface transport ation operated by other airlines and indirect providers of cargo air transport ation. Such intermodal cargo services may be offered at a single, PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA through price for the air and surface transport ation combined, provided that shippers are not misled as to the facts concerning such transport ation .
Subject: FW: TranganuiaKiwa: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years
Subject: FW: TranganuiaKiwa: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Importance: High
Submission must be emailed by pm, Monday August .
Submission open on Qantas Airways American Airlines Reauthorisation
Submissions are open until midnight Sunday June and can be made
Submissions closed pm Friday June .
Submissions closed on May . In total, submissions were received.
Submissions closed on February . We received submissions in response to the application.
Submissions have now closed.
Submissions on the consultation are now closed
Submissions open on Air New Zealand Cathay Pacific alliance reauthorisation
Submissions open on Air New Zealand Air China Reauthorisation
Submissions open on Air New ZealandSingapore Airlines Reauthorisation
Submissions open on Air New ZealandSingapore Airlines alliance reauthorisation.
Submissions open on Air New ZealandVirgin Australia application for proposed partnership
Submissions open on British AirwaysQatar reauthorisation
Submissions open on British AirwaysQatar Airways codesharing application
Submissions open on QantasEmirates Reauthorisation
Submissions should be emailed to
Submissions showed a high level of support from the motorcycling community for mandatory ABS technology.
Submissions will be on the Ministry of Transport website. Please indicate if there is any information in your submission that you consider should be withheld in accordance with the Official Information Act .
Submitters concerns included that:
Subpart F Unmanned non selfpropelled (UNSP) barges This subpart is currently suspended and will come into force at a later .
Subscribe to the drones newsletter
Subsection BC Operational carbon intensity This subsection is currently suspended and will come into force at a later .
Successive GPSs have focused on impr ovements to the system (rather than maintaining it), including within the strategic priorities, and the outcomes sought. Despite state highway maintenance making up around of the NLTF investment, we estimate the maximum contribution to the GPS measures is around (attributable mainly to the value for money and safety measures). This means maintenance activities are delivering approximately of the theoretical maximum (see figure below). This is somewhat driven by minimal alignment between the metrics used to measure outcomes sought from maintenance.
Summary Te rautaki ue me te rautaki whakawhiwhinga o Aotearoa New Zealand freight supply chain issues paper
Summary We support investment being closely aligned to desired outcomes and would like to see funding tied to use of best practice standards, particularly for active mode infrastructure. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT We must not further entrench the dominance of motor vehicles in the land transport system, and exacerbate the marginalisation of walking, cycling and other active modes. We are very concerned the investment proposals in the draft GPS appear to place considerable weight on New Zealands economic growth and, as such, will lead to underemphasis on social, cultural and environmental well being. Proposed investments are oriented towards efficiency of road transport for people and freight but do not ensure equitable access for people who cannot or choose not to drive in private vehicles. The funding levels for the activity classes in the draft GPS will further entrench our reliance on road transport and the marginalisation of active transport. Without a more comprehensive shift away from a motor vehicle centric land transport system, New Zealands longer term environmental goals (in particular, its commitments under the Paris Agreement to reduce greenhouse gas emissions) will fail. The level of funding proposed for walking and cycling in the draft GPS does not adequately support the overarching purpose of improved social, cultural and environmental well being, and improved livability of places. Throughout the GPS there needs to be a far more integrated app oach to achieving well being. Without a much greater level of funding the GPS will not ensure that transport investment goes in the overall strategic direction sought, much less result in the necessary step change. The GPS in needs to be a document not just for and the following two years, but a foundation for a genuinely integrated approach to well being for the st century. The co benefits of active transport for health need to be explicitly recognised as this provides further justification for increased levels of funding in the walking and cycling improvements activity class. Physical inactivity contributes to a rapidly growing taxpayer burden of non communicable diseases such as diabetes, cardio vascular disease and some cancers Encouragement of active travel including cycling, walking and public transport is known to increase public health outcomes and reduce healthcare expenditure. Building on the key point made above, that an integrated approach is needed to well being, which is a recurring theme in our submission, Millions of Mothers recommends that the Climate Change Commission and the Ministry for the Environment should be added to the list of agencies in para. , especially given the greater emphasis given to climate change in the transition from the GPS to the GPS . Our current emission reduction goal is inadequate (and under review) and is not consistent with the purpose of the Zero Carbon Act of keeping global temperatures to .C. It is highly likely that our reduction target will change, this GPS needs to be prepared for this and furthermore, a more ambitious emission reduction, would very likely help meet the other strategic goals.
Summary for Framework and Tool
Summary of Ministry of Transport information The statements of intent show that over time there has been a strong Ministry of Transport focus on value for money. The most recent statement of intent has moved away from value for money being a priority in itself. This aligns with the change to the draft GPS also. There is currently a strong focus on the transport outcomes framework focussed on five key outcomes for transport, with suppo rting transport indicators that look at measuring progress towards the transport outcomes. New Zealand Treasury guidance on value for money Living Standards Framework The Treasury Approach to the Living Standards Framework
Summary of Submissions Hkina te Kohupara
Summary of changes, for both new and used imports.
Summary of main findings The New Zealand Government identified drink drivers as high risk and high priority area of concern in , and legislation was later passed introducing Alcohol Interlock Orders as a sentencing option in New Zealand in September . An alcohol interlock is a device similar to a breathalyser that is hard wired into the ignition of a vehicle. When Alcohol Interlock Orders (AIO) are given, this gives the driver convicted of a drink driving offence the option of having an alcohol interlock device fitted for a period of time, rather than detention or community service, if that was an outcome at Court. This study aimed at understanding whether reoffending rates amongst people given an AIO is different than those who do not receive such an order. This study compares data from those given an AIO as a result of a driving offence with those who were eligible but did not receive an AIO. This study examines data from driving offences that were issued between January and December , which is a period of ti me just after AIO sentencing was introduced to New Zealand, during which this sentence was presented as an option for the court, but not mandatory. The Ministry of Justice (MoJ) provided the data, including the reoffending analysis and propensity score, w hich was used to create the matched comparison group. Over the four year period post the index event, t he AIO group reoffended significantly less than the matched comparison group, up to: less than the matched comparison group for drink driving les s than the matched comparison group for disqualified driving.
Summary of stakeholder feedback
Summary of submissions Draft Land Transport Rule Setting of Speed Limits
Summary of submissions made through the public consultation process.
Summary of submissions preparation
Summary of submitter support for options Option The CAA submitted that the IRF scope should be limited to significant decisions that are appealable under the Act. It considered that Option would not support the policy intent for the IRF because there is a significant risk of the function be ing overloaded with demand for reviews of more minor decisions, which would inhibit the timely reviews of more impactful decisions. Option Kea Aviation and Gliding NZ favoured this option, noting that their primary concerns relate to Directors decisions on exemptions from rule requirements. They also suggested Option would likely result in overload ing the function . The NZ Aviation Federation also favour ed Option , primarily as it would enable decisions on exemptions to be challenged. Air New Zealand indicated they could accept Option as a minimum but strongly favoured Option .
Summary statistics of national rail freight movements obtained from Kiwirail through the Freight Information Gathering System (FIGS). Full report view available
Summary Literature Summary
Summary: The NZ Transport Agency has a significant process dedicated to achieving value for money, from the high level investment decision making framework and planning documents such as Arataki, through the business case approach for programmes or projects, and the Investment Assessment Framework as it relates to the National Land Transport Plan. There appears to be some reporting against benefits of business cases, and financial management of the NLTP.
Sunday August Auckland kmh speed consultation media stand up Opportunity to announce consultation on the speed limit for the Northern Gateway Toll Road and Puhoi to Warkworth commencing soon. MINO Tuesday August Christchurch Southern Motorway kmh speed consultation media stand up Opportunity to announce consultation on the speed limit for the Christchurch Southern Motorway commencing soon. MINO
SuperGold Card public transport funding
SuperGold Card scheme introduced
Supercharging EV Infrastructure
Supplementary research resulted in reports covering the costs of:
Support Napier Port is a key stakeholder and significant regional infrastructure in Hawkes Bay. It maintains a good relationship with Central government representatives from Waka Kotahi and Kiwi Rail, along with local government agencies including Hawkes Bay Reg ional Council, Napier City Council and Hastings District Council.
Support The princip les for investing under the N ational Land Transport Fund (NLTF) are underpinned by: Effectiveness, () Alignment, and () Efficiency . The Port agrees that these are sound and robust principles to adopt and apply by the decision makers (i.e. Waka Kotahi and lo cal government) on whether to fund land transport projects.
Support best practice for workrelated travel
Support motorcycle safety
Support the longterm competitiveness and sustainability of the aviation sector in New Zealand, given its importance to trade, business, employment and travel in New Zealand.
Support this information with the full story in plain English, separately, for audiences who need it.
Supporting and monitoring the legislation to ensure the effective functioning of the road user charges (RUC) system.
Supporting metro passenger rail services in Auckland and Wellington.
Supporting policies P.. Approved Organisations competently use Business Cases planning techniques, ensuring that the benefits to be gained from projects are really worth the cost. P.. Approved Organisations develop costbenefit analysis on first principles (or access the expertise to do this). P.. Advocate for economic evaluation methodology that better recognises the benefits of walking, cycling, public transport, and new bridges. P.. Advocate for public funding to be available for transport related changes with clearly substantive wider benefit (possible examples include increased walking and cycling, or getting more freight on rail). P.. Advocate for more national public funds to be invested to keep infrastructure fit for purpose where there is clear wider benefit (e.g. economic productivity benefitting the whole country), and a low rating base.
Supporting the Minister of Transport to agree the Governments share of this transport initiative for the Wellington region.
Supporting the uptake of zeroemission public transport buses.
Supporting transport projects through alternative funding or delivery methods.
Survey Purpose, Design and Response Rate
Survey questions included respondents reasons for travel, their chosen modes of transport, and the impacts of costs and public transport issues on their travel choices.
Sustainable Aviation Aotearoa takes flight
Sustainable urban development Primary outcome inclusive access People living in our towns and cities can readily access places to work, study, shop, and access other amenities nearby and through a variety of transport options. The transport and land use system s are integrated and enable more people to live and travel in urban areas by prioritising space efficient modes such as public transport, walking, a nd cycling while also reducing congestion and travel times . Supporting outcomes Economic prosperity efficient and effective transport networks, underpinned by high capacity and frequent publi c transport systems, integrated with active travel networks, will help to reduce road congestion , improve travel times, and enable efficient fl ows of people and goods. Healthy and safe people more physically active travel will support physical and mental health, and people will also benefit from less air and noise pollution. Safe walking and cycling infrastructure, and more travel by public tra nsport, will also reduce deaths and serious injuries. Environmental sustainability more travel by low emissions travel modes, such as active modes and public transport will reduce greenhouse gases and pollutants . How we will deliver these outcomes Sustainable urban development involves improving the quality of life in towns and cities, by improving access, affordability, community connectivity, and environmental health. Urban planning and transport planninginvestments will be closely co ordinated to enable and support more medium and high density, mixed use urban developments that are well connected by public transport and active travel networks . This will allow more people to live in urban areas, where social and economic opportunities are greatest. These changes will improve the attractiveness of active and shared modes . This is expected to reduce congestion on our roads, improve travel times for all, and encourage more efficient use of existing road space . Further improvements in travel times for motorists and users of active and shared modes may also be delivered through congestion charging schemes . This will be delivered through: Waka Kotahi , the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development, and Kinga Ora partnering with local authorities as they develop their Future Development Strategies and VKT Reduction Plans . Government co investment in priority rapid transit systems , including investing in metropolitan rail as part of the Rail Network Investment Programme . Further investments to substantially improve public transport, walking, and cy cling infrastructure and services . Enabling congestion chargin g and other demand management tools as signalled in the ERP . STRATEGIC PRIORITIES
Swire Shipping NZ Limited
Sydney Auckland . . . China Eastern Airlines . . . LATAM . . . Air NZ . . . Qantas . . . Jetstar . . .
Sydney Wellington . . . Air NZ . . . Qantas . . .
Systems Funders Broad PurposeBeneficiaries Government Commodity or services with broad, indirect, or very widely distributed benefits available to all members of a society (Crown Appropriation), or for a specific purpose within defined criteria and ringfenced (e.g., FED, ACC). Local government (Annual Plan or grants)Shared and beneficial for all or most of those living in the Council rohe. Council investment and funding responds to local needs and preferences, and the Council determines what services to deliver and how to deliver them. Community (grants, sponsorship, donations, and fundraising)Community betterment in line with the funding organisations criteria sometimes with tradeoffs e.g., advertising, naming rights etc. Contributions are towards improving community services. Tradingother income (membership and user pays)Goods or services paid for by the recipient for the Private Good. Where an individual is accruing private benefit from a service they should pay for it under the appropriate equivalent of a contract of service, including membership fees and fees for service. . Revenue from FED placed on petrol is hypothecated to the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF). This revenue is primarily used to fund maintenance of, and improvements to, the land transport system. Recreational boating and aviation users pay FED when purchasing petrol for their boats and aircraft. Te Manat Waka has estimated the FED paid by recreational boating users per annum between . million and . million. Section () of the LTMA allows the Ministers of Transport and Finance to allocate revenue collected from FED to several activities, including search and rescue activities, recreational boating safety and maritime safety activities, and the administration of these activities by the Secretary of Transport. . Regional Councils and Territorial Authorities (District and City Councils). A FUNDING FRAMEWORK FOR THE SYSTEM Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Government organisations . Government organisations delivering services within the System are covered by their baseline funding, and any investment decisions by them need to include consideration of the Systems requirements. Funding for the organisations needs to be appropriately sourced and robust to ensure that their contribution to the System and continued service delivery is secure. This includes funding required to cover contracted services through commercial operators, as required. Nongovernment organisations . The work of the Review focused on NGOs operating in the System given the multiplicity of funding sources reflected above. . We observed several consistent themes regarding funding stressors facing the NGOs, that are impacting on their sustainability. This came through in our discussions with the NGOs who are seeking funding, and through some of the organisations who distribute funding andor manage funding frameworks (Te Manat Waka, Water Safety NZ, Maritime NZ, and the Department of Internal Affairs). . The themes are summarised below: Funding is time limited and often for a specific purpose with the fundable value unlikely to reflect the complete (wholeof life) cost e.g., baseline operational costs are often excluded from fundable criteria. Funding criteria encourages organisations to chase funding for what it is possible to get funded rather than what is needed. Collaborative applications are not encouraged, and organisations are often competing against each other; funding one application from a system participant is seen as funding the system. A lack of transparency in funding decisions results in a perceived view that inconsistent treatment of applications occurs, including differing decisions on the granting of funding for the same purpose and delivery of operations. The workload for multiple applications is vast and the processes require detailed submissions that are often not commensurate with the funding being applied for. All funding comes with monitoring and compliance of varying degrees; multiple sources means multiple applications, monitoring, and compliance requirements to meet. Organisations apply annually for funding from the same funder with the expectation that they will continue to receive that funding, and they do. This means that the funding is relied on, nonreceipt is a challenge, and new organisations are unable to get funding as allocations are reasonably predetermined. . We observe a tension here service delivery needs to be undertaken by the NGOs who are best placed to do this; the agility and creativity of smaller organisations needs to be balanced against the bigger national organisations that have more scale and reach. Fragmentation, lack of scale, minimal impact and alignment to outcomes are the risks inherent in spreading funding too thinly; a balance that needs to be better managed. We observe this is an ongoing area of focus for water safety sector fund managers (Maritime NZ and Water Safety NZ). A FUNDING FRAMEWORK FOR THE SYSTEM Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Recommendations : Funding needs identified Nationally based NGOs dedicated to the System . The predominant source of funding for nationally based NGOs dedicated to the System, who deliver services across New Zealand, are grants, donations and sponsorship. NGO income exceeded million over the last four years of which only million () came from government, fundraising in its broadest sense accounted for million () of the income. . For NGOs supporting the volunteers delivering services across New Zealand through Groups, Clubs and Units, their income received is thinly spread across all lines of expenditure required to run a business so that the lights are kept on. However, the ability to operate a sustainable organisation is challenging employees work well beyond their employment contracts andor volunteers fill the gaps.Operational funding recommendations . Multiple funding sources will remain a reality for the NGOs operating in the System, reflecting a line of sight between the funder and the beneficiaries of the services provided. . There are two main dedicated sources of ongoing government funding FED funding for search and rescue activities and Crown appropriation for frontline water safety services. ACC also contributes some ongoing operational funding to Water Safety NZ. . Through the work of the Review, we recommend that operational funding for NGOs should be universally and consistently government funded to ensure the sustainability of NGOs and the services they deliver with broad public benefits in the System. A balance needs to be struck, and the level of operational funding will depend on size and scale of the services delivered in the System and the broad public benefits that accrue. NGOs are businesses, and they need additional resources (either inhouse or through contracts) to ensure effective: governance and functional management administration, financial management, facilities, asset and inventory management, procurement, preparation of business cases for investment, human resources, training, and project management compliance including legal obligations, and risk management functions technical and ICT support, including maintenance and repair of assetsequipment. . The exact baseline funding requirements will be specific to each organisation. The Review has not attempted to define requirements by organisation as identified earlier, the level of operational funding will depend on the size and scale of the services delivered in the System and the broad public benefits that accrue. A FUNDING FRAMEWORK FOR THE SYSTEM Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue . Through the Haumata Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Volunteer Plan (attached to this Report) we have also identified the following areas of operational funding that should consistently be government funded to ensure the sustainability of the NGOs and the services they provide through their volunteer networks. . The key areas of operational funding identified are: volunteer support and management including support for Health, Safety and Wellbeing compliance, human resources, and group support management recognition of the support provided by whnau and employers to formal volunteer networks training for all personnel at all levels, including exercises the provision of base level personal protective equipment as agreed with NGOs for all active volunteers reimbursing volunteer costs related to participating in operations and training including exercises employment of Kaihaut, cultural andor diversity advisors to better support greater diversity, inclusion and cultural competency. . As identified in Section Six, we also propose government funding for appropriately sized asset management systems. Source of the funding uplift . In the short to medium term, we expect that FED funding will continue to be the predominant source of government funding available to the NGOs to support the delivery of search and rescue and associated prevention services. As the current funding agreements terminate on June , we propose that organisations can apply for funding covering the areas set out above both jointly and severally as part of the next FED funding round (expected to be scheduled during ). At that time Te Manat Waka and joint Ministers will need to consider if there is sufficient head room in the NLTF to fund these activities. . We acknowledge there are some immediate pressures on the availability of FED funding; therefore, additional funding through Budget might also need to be sought. These pressures and the need for longterm alternate sources of funding are discussed in paragraphs . . We also propose that funding for Coastguard NZ and Surf Life Saving to support the delivery of frontline safety services is considered as part of Budget . . Tertiary Education Commission (TEC) funding will also continue to be an important source of funding for search and rescue training within the System. Negotiations between the NZSAR Secretariat (on behalf of the NZSAR Council) and TEC are already underway for the next threeyear funding cycle. We recommend that the NZSAR Secretariat leverage off the Review work in its negotiations with TEC to provide a complete picture of training needs and costs, and the drivers for additional funding identified. We also recommend an ongoing focus that all available TEC funding is appropriately spent annually. A FUNDING FRAMEWORK FOR THE SYSTEM Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Assets contribution on a casebycase basis . As identified in Section Six assets are critical to the delivery of frontline safety and search and rescue services and require wholeoflife investment. NGOowned assets are funded from multiple sources including grants, donations, and some government funding. Grants and donations tend to be limited to covering only the cost of the asset rather than the wholeoflife cost. We observe that NGOs are left absorbing or prioritising ongoing operating and maintenance costs against other expenditure if alternative funding sources can not be found. . We conclude that funding to cover the wholeoflife cost of NGO assets will continue to come from multiple sources, including government, reflecting the beneficiaries of these services. However, government funding will, as is standard practice, be considered on a casebycase basis with the appropriate mix of sources in line with service beneficiaries being identified for each case.. Any application for government funding would require a business case in support of the wholeoflife cost covering strategic, economic, commercial, financial and management aspects of the work including procurement and costbenefit analysis at a level of detail appropriate to the funding being applied for. The Futures Model referred to in Section Six would allow the System Steward to provide some assurance to government as to the appropriateness of the investment proposed. . We note that NGOs with large asset bases are developing strategies to achieve many operational, financial and volunteer benefits from improved procurement practices, including the establishment of organisation wide contracts for asset purchase and ongoing maintenance. This approach by the NGOs needs to be encouraged. A FUNDING FRAMEWORK FOR THE SYSTEM Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Funders within the System supporting recreationbased NGOs and smaller communitybased groups . There are many recreationbased NGOs, and communitybased groups, providing their members and the communities they serve with a range of outdoor experiences. Knowledge and skills on how to stay safe in the outdoors is one of several things they might focus on. A range of safety related information, guidance and tools are available to these NGOs and smaller communitybased NGOs through the work of nationally based organisations working in the System. . In addition to this broader support available, funding for recreationbased NGOs, and smaller communitybased groups again comes from a range of sources. This includes membership, sponsorship, charitable sources, and grants (through local government and the Lottery Grants Board). . Reflecting on the reality of multiple funding sources, and the themes identified, we identified two critical things: the need for ongoing awareness and insights into the broader funding ecosystems, and opportunities that might accrue through the System Steward (discussed at paragraphs ) more funding is required to support recreationbased NGOs and smaller communitybased groups, and the delivery of services provided through them, and the need for greater more sustained engagement between funders.. We note that System funders need appropriate baselines to support the funding work they do. Currently, there are two main funding organisations in the System Water Safety NZ (in and around the water) and Maritime NZ (on the water). We propose additional government funding be made to funders so that they can more effectively: facilitate a partnership approach with the applicants using a high trust model help with alignment between what they are prepared to fund and the outcomes the applicant organisation is trying to achieve where the funding is going to and what it is being used for, and fund sustainably over time encourage a focus on innovation and research rather than always continuing to fund the accepted ways of delivering services support multiorganisational collaborative bids consider exit strategies when funding of agencies is not meant to be ongoing so that agencies do not become reliant on the funding, allowing more funding to become available over time for others advocate for improvements to the funding system, such as promotion of best practice, support for multiyear funding, development of funding tools and technology, and increase in the funding quantum include the use of different tools and processes e.g., allowing audio applications and regionally based resources to support agencies making applications to reduce bureaucracy around applications and the ensuing monitoringreporting compliance requirements ensure appropriate tender processes and evaluation for large scale investments. . E.g., Water Safety NZ, Drowning Prevention Auckland, Maritime NZ, the NZSAR Secretariat, the Mountain Safety Council, DOC, Amateur Radio Emergency Communications, Coastguard NZ, Land Search and Rescue, and Surf Life Saving. . Maritime NZ provides funding support to the recreational safety sector, allocating FED money on an annual basis for communitybased recreational craft initiatives to improve water safety sector outcomes. Water Safety NZ provides funding support to the water safety sector utilising Lottery Grants Board funding through Sport NZ. A FUNDING FRAMEWORK FOR THE SYSTEM Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Source of the funding uplift . For the role as a funder, we expect that any funding uplift for Maritime NZ would be built into its next triennial FED funding application, and for Water Safety NZ, a Budget bid would be required. There will also be other funding requirements for national organisations to pass on to operational deliverers. Other funding considerations . As discussed in Section Four, Te Manat Waka will need to be adequately resourced to give effect to its System stewardship role and deliver the functions assigned to it. Resourcing and funding commitments will be explored as part of the implementation phase following Ministerial consideration of the Review findings. . As discussed in Section Six, additional funding will be required to implement a revised model for the tasking and deployment of aviation assets for search and rescue operations (including in civil defence emergencies). A FUNDING FRAMEWORK FOR THE SYSTEM Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Recommendations : Ongoing strategic considerations Funding principles . We have developed the following funding principles to support government funding into the System (for both government agencies and NGOs) through FED funding, future government Budget bids, and other legislative sources. (The following principles are in addition to basic management funding principles.) . We recommend that Te Manat Waka confirms these funding principles as part of the work required to finalise the System Strategy referred to in Section Four.
TAIC independently investigates the circumstances and causes of significant sea, air and rail accidents and incidents, looking at how to avoid similar events in the future. TAIC does not investigate road events.
TAIC is an independent Crown entity.
TBC RMS Niagara Update This briefing to both you and Minister Brown will update you about the wreck of the Royal Mail Ship Niagara, including the potential risks of an oil spill, recent work and engagement undertaken by Maritime NZ.
TBC RMS Niagara Update This briefing to both you and Minister Doocey will update you about the wreck of the Royal Mail Ship Niagara, including the potential risks of an oil spill, recent work and engagement undertaken by Maritime NZ.
TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT
THC the psychoactive ingredient in cannabis
TIO Activity Classes Years included in GPS Category (new) Public transport infrastructure Public transport services Debt funding , , Other (uncategorised at this stage) External funding , , Investment management , , Regional improvements , , Road safety promotions ,
TOTEX TOTEX introduces optimism bias into upfront operational considerations and signals that benefits realisation is impo rtant, and agencies need to evidence how they have achieved benefits previously.
TOTEX ratio Understanding this aspect is currently an area of weakness in the system. Benefits realisation process is not well esta blished or implemented and requires longer term view of how and when benefits will be managed. Existing tools that may contribute to t he framework include: ImpactOutcomes Analysis Long Term Plan (LTP) Customer Management Measures, stakeholder benchmark ing (Roading Authority Technical Accord (RATA)) Quality of Life Survey Benefit Management Approach and Framework Investment Decision Making Framework (IDMF) REG performance measures reporting tools (Root Cause Analysis report, Asset Management Competency Framework, Data Quality Management etc.) Business Requirements Activity Management Planning Council Mark and REG R oad Controlling Authority Reports REG tools (delivery models and procurement) Waka Kotahi audits (Infrastructure Commission, National Infrastru cture Pipeline) OAG reporting Better Business Case Value Ratio Cost performance benchmarking Transport Investment Online (TIO) but needs to be fixed to capture right information Infrastructure Sustainability Council of Australia (ISCA) rating TOTEX Ratio Benefits Management Framework (TIO) Waka Kotahi audit processes Post Implementation Reviews (PIR) Capability Waka Kotahi strategic procurement (procurement planning, maintenance management plans and intervention) REG Competency Framework Council Mark (prima rily Asset Management but plans to expand to procurement, service delivery etc.) Treasury Investment Confidence Rating (ICR) Broader Outcomes Framework PM
TOTEX ratio Understanding this aspect is currently an area of weakness in the system. Benefits realisation process is not well established or implemented and requires longer term view of how and when benefits will be managed. Existing tools that may contribute to t he framework include: ImpactOutcomes Analysis Long Term Plan (LTP) Customer Management Measures, stakeholder benchmarking (Roading Authority Technical Accord (RATA)) Quality of Life Survey Benefit Management Approach and Framework Investment Decision Making Framework (IDMF) REG performance measures reporting tools (Root Cause Analysis report, Asset Management Competency Framework, Data Quality Management etc.) Business Requirements Activity Management Planning Council Mark and REG R oad Controlling Authority Reports REG tools (delivery models and procurement) Waka Kotahi audits (Infrastructure Commission, National Infrastructure Pipeline) OAG reporting Better Business Case Value Ratio Cost performance benchmarking OF Transport Investment Online (TIO) but needs to be fixed to capture right information Infrastructure Sustainability Council of Australia (ISCA) rating TOTEX Ratio Benefits Management Framework (TIO) Waka Kotahi audit processes Post Implementation Reviews (PIR) Capability Waka Kotahi strategic procurement (procurement planning, maintenance management plans and intervention) REG Competency Framework Council Mark (primarily Asset Management but plans to expand to procurement, service delivery etc.) Treasury Investment Confidence Rating (ICR) Broader Outcomes Framework PM
TOTEX ratio is enabled by clear articulation of desired outcomes.
TRANSPORT OUTCOMES FRAMEWORK
TTPT are happy to support this mahi.
Tabl e Evaluative ratings of the influence of GPS as of mid Evaluation criteria Increased transport investment mix toward safety oriented investments Adequate Increased investment in a better integrated transport network, including public transport, walking and cycling and improved land use planning that aims to support improved throughput and access in metropolitan areas Adequate walking and cycling investment On track public transport investment Adequate improved land use pla nning Increased investment in and delivery of transport projects that seek to promote the uptake of active travel modes to support environmental and public health objectives Adequate walking and cycling investment On track public transport investment No impact rapid transit Increased focus on transport investment in ways that aim to promote active transport and public transport via improved infrastructure, better connections, and improved safety Adequate Increased rigour and transparency of tran sport investment appraisals Adequate
Table Accountability mechanisms Accountability Mechanism Description Letter of Expectations Your primary mechanism to set priorities and performance expectations on an annual basis. You can expect to receive draft letters from the Ministry around OctoberNovember. These letters are sent out well in advance of the financial year, so Crown entities can respond effectively.
Table Combina tions of years and licence holder ages for which the licensing dataset can be assumed to contain records of all licence holders. Age na na na na na na
Table : Actual and expected percentage of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for other (nondrinkdisqualified driving)offences, and risk adjusted percentages, after years, by offender group
Table : Actual and expected percentage of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for other (nondrinkdisqualified driving)offences, and risk adjusted percentages, after years, by offender group
Table Total number of A lcohol Interlock Licences granted between January July
Table Number of new proved disqualified driving offences within months by offence for AIO eligible and matched comparison offenders from to ( )
Table Numbers of Police Detections for Drink Driving by Year
Table : Study Participants by Multivariate Percentages
Table : Groups contained in study Appendix by numbers
Table Definition of priority orders shown in Figure (Waka Kotahi investment prioritisation framework) Priority Results alignment Cost benefit appraisal Very high Low Medium High Very High Low Medium High Very high (BCR ), PV EoL High High (BCR .) High Medium (BCR .) Medium High (BCR .) High Low (BCR .)
Table Ratios of crash rates by licence stage, driver gender, and age, to overall crash rates for each licence stage, for the combined period from to . Comparison Licence stage Driver age Drivers by age vs all drivers aged to L . . . . . . . . . . . . R . . . . . . . . . . . . F na . . . . . . . . . . . Female drivers by age vs all drivers aged to L . . . . . . . . . . . . R . . . . . . . . . . . . F na . . . . . . . . . . . Male drivers by age vs all drivers aged to L . . . . . . . . . . . . R . . . . . . . . . . . . F na . . . . . . . . . . .
Table in New Zealands historically rare terrestrial ecosystems set in a physical and physiognomic framework by P A Williams, S K Wiser, B Clarkson, and M C Stanley
Table summarises available data and indicators that could be used to track differences in the activities and projects funded and developed over time. As only some of the activities included in NLTP were approved for funding within a given GPS period, observing the types of activities that were successfully approved for funding was identified as a potential indica tor. Other data sources identified included operational information on active and public transport assets and service levels. Table Opportunities to see the influence of the GPS on funding decisions in existing data and indicators (for full details, see Appendix ) Decision making scales National Regional Local What is funded and developed NLTP Proportion of total projects by mode shift promoting activities: approved for funding Regional proportion of total projects by mode shift promoting activities approved for funding Allocated funds in the RLTP by category, by local council NLTP Proportion of total funding by mode shift promoting activities approved for funding Regional proportion of total funding by mode shift promoting activities approved for funding Number of funded projects in the RLTP by category, by local council Public transport funding per capita (Regional Public Transport Plan) Footpath Cycleway maintenance funding per capita (AnnualAsset Management Plan) Public transport concessions Increased KM of cycle network
Table . Efficiency and Effectiveness Measures Assessed
Table . NLTF Annual funding m m m m m m NLTF revenue , , , , , , Expenditure Table shows the expenditure target (the expected level of expenditure) along with the maximum and minimum range for National Land Transport Programme expenditure for the first three years of this GPS . The total level of funding represents a balance between achieving the governments expected impacts set out above , and the level of revenue that can be raised.
Table . NLTF annual funding m m m m m m NLTF revenue , , , , , , Expenditure Table shows the expenditure target (the expected level of expenditure) along with the maximum and minimum range for NLTP expenditure for the first three years of this GPS . The total level of funding represents a balance between achieving the Governments expected impacts set out above, and the level of revenue that can be raised.
Table : Actual and expected percentage of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for drink driving offences, and risk adjusted percentages, after year, by offender group
Table : Metropolitan rail funding
Table GPS evaluative criteria GPS short term result(s) Evaluation criteria (expected impact of GPS in ) Quantitative ev idence Qualitative evidence Level of confidence in the evidence, based on criterion Priority : Safety Renewed strategic focus to have the greatest impact on reducing death and serious injury Renewed strategic focus to have the greatest impact on reducing death and serious injury Analysis of shifts in transport investment mix toward safety oriented investments Measure C. Investment aligned to GPS priorities (assessed strategic case benefits) Measure D. Projected benefits for implementation activities at time of funding approva l Measure A. Total road deaths and serious injuries To what extent has the strategic focus shifted toward safety improvements Adequate, based on investment analysis and qualitative feedback State highways and local roads are safer for everyone Cyc ling and walking are safer Increased investment in and delivery of projects that make state highways and local roads safer for everyone and that make cycling and walking safer Measure C. of state highway and local road networks modified to align with sa fe and appropriate speed Measure D. investment in state highway improvements, local road improvements Measure B. Network kilometres of walking and cycling facilities delivered Measure C. investment in walking and cycling investment in state highway, local road, walking and cycling improvements by degree of alignment with GPS safety priorities Measure A B. Road deaths and serious injuries and road crash hospitalisations by road type and mode Measure A. Pedestrian and cyclist injuries To what extent do you see increased investment in making state highways and local roads safer To what extent do you see increased investment in making cycling and walking safer Whats c hangingshifting in these investment categories Are they meeting the intentions of the GPS Adequate, based on investment analysis and qualitative feedback
Table Opportunities to see the influence of the GPS in what is monitored in existing data and indicators (for full details, see Appendix ) Decision making scales National Regional Local What is monitored Transport mode share to work, education (Census) NZHTS VKT Emissions Cycling mode share by gender ToF Transport Indicators , reporting measures from the GPS on Land Transport Annual Report proposed indicators from the GPS on Land Transport specific indicators identified in Appendix Average punctuality of bus services, perception customer surveys Public transport journey time cost comparison Access to PT stops Space dedicated to sustainable urban mobility Footpath level of service Pedestrian crossings per km Cycling and walking safety
Table summarises the types of data and indicators available for monitoring mode shift at national, regional, and local scales. Note that while the availability of indicators means monitoring is possible, it does not indicate the extent to which indicator s were being used to observe progress by decision makers. It included nationally available outcome indicators that can be disaggregated at smaller scales (such as VKT) and those which have been measured at local scales only to (such as space dedicated to sustainable urban mobility). For the Transport Outcomes Framework Transport Indicators (released in ) and the reporting measures from the GPS on Land Transport Annual Report, Appendix contains indicators relevant to monitoring mode shift. Some indicators are directly relevant (such as the time spent travelling by active modes), and others are generally relevant but report different modes (such as transport related injuries). Appendix also includes proposed indicators from GPS , where there is no comparable reporting measure from GPS or the ToF Transport Indicators. . STUDY PHASES
Table . Expenditure targets and ranges m m m m m m Expenditure target , , , , , , Maximum expenditure , , , , , , Minimum expenditure , , , , , , NB. Current funding profiles show the inclusion of billion p.a. of potential grant or debt funding from onwards. Treasury, the Ministry of Transport and NZTA are working on options around this additional billion.
Table . Expenditure targets and ranges m m m m m m Expenditure target , , , , , , Maximum expenditure , , , , , , Minimum expenditure , , , , , , NB. Current funding profiles show the inclusion of billion p.a. of potential grant or debt funding from onwards. Treasury, the Ministry of Transport and NZTA are working on options around this additional billion that will be further detailed or revised in the final version of the GPS.
Table Damaged rail network sections Region Significance and scale of issue Manawatu Wanganui Region Palmerston North to Gisborne Line ( PNGL ): multiple damage sites requiring slip remediation between Dannevirke and the Kopua Viaduct (km), involving earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance, stormwater management and coastal activities . Hawkes Bay Region PNGL: mass and multiple damage sit es from the south of Hastings through to Wairoa (km) involving earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance, stormwater management. PNGL: Wairoa to regional boundary (km) has not been inspected yet, KiwiRail has responsibility to make safe, involving earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance, stormwater management. Works at Awatoto and Eskdale Valley to include off corridor recovery works. Gisborne PNGL: full distance in Gisborne Regi on (km) inspection pending, although not operational KiwiRail has responsibility to make safe involving earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance, stormwater management Auckland North Auckland Line ( NAL): Kanohi to regional boundary (km) slip remediation, mud spotover slip remediation and remediation at two bridges, involving earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance, stormwater management and coastal activities Northland Region NAL: r egional boundary to south of Whangrei (km) slip remediation, mud spotover slip remediation involving earthworks and associated works in watercourses, vegetation clearance, stormwater management and coastal activities
Table : Actual and expected percentage of AIO eligible offenders reoffending for disqualified driving offences, and risk adjusted percentages, after years, by offender group
Table for discussion with the Minister July . Key points to note about the following table: We are working through the large number of submissions received on the draft Setting of Speed Limits Rule There have been a range of views expressed about the proposals, both in support and in opposition. We will provide a summary of the submission analysis in our briefing due on August The following table summarises some of the key technical matters that officials have identified for consideration to enable the Rule to be finalised. These have primarily been raised by RCAs and stakeholder groups who are more familiar with the technical detail of applying speed limit rules. However, officials are continuing to test these matters against the views of individual submitters as the submissions analysis is completed. These comments are not representative of all the submissions received, but are presented to test the Ministers appetite to amend any of the technical details of the Rule.
Table of number of vehicles registered in selected month.
Table one: Regional Fuel Tax funding freed up by Crown investment Crown investment programme Project Freed up regional fuel tax revenue NZ Upgrade Programme Penlink million Mill Road million COVID Shovel Ready Programme Puhinui Interchange million Downtown Ferry Basin Redevelopment million Freed up regional fuel tax revenue million
Table two: Proposed funding changes to the regional fuel tax programme of capital projects (total contribution includes capital expenditure and operational expenditure) Capital Project s regional fuel tax: Total contribution ( millions) Proposal to vary the regional fuel tax: Total contribution ( millions) Proposed Regional Fuel Tax Variation ( millions) . Bus and Active Transport Improvements . City Centre Bus Infrastructure . Improving Airport Access . Eastern Busway (formerly AMETI) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT . Park and Ride . Electric trains and stabling . Ferry Network Improvements (was Downtown Ferry Basin Redevelopment ) . Road Safety . Active Transport . Penlink . Mill Road corridor . Road Corridor Improvements . Network Capacity and Performance Improvements . Growth Related Transport Infrastructure
Tables Table Accountability mechanisms . Table NZ transport organisations . Table Agencies, State owned enterprises, and their functions .
Tables Table Evaluative ratings of the influence of GPS as of mid . . Table Definition of priority orders shown in Figure (Waka Kotahi in vestment prioritisation framework) . . . . Table GPS evaluative criteria . . . Table Classification of phases as baseline activities based on TIO template types . Table Topics and keywords used in the topic analysis . . . Table Analysis groups definitions . . . ..
Tables Table Legislation where temporary changes are proposed . Table : Proposed temporary changes . Table Damaged state highway network sections . Table Damaged rail network sections .
Tables Table Opportunities to observe the influence of the GPS on determining priorities in existing data and indicators (for full details, see Appendix ) . . Table Opportunities to see the influence of the GPS on funding decisions in existing data and indicators (for full details, see Appendix ) . . . Table Opportunities to see the influence of the GPS in what is monitored in existing data and indicators (for full details, see Appendix ) . . . Table What is prioritised changes in the composition of activity classes over GPS periods . Table Summary of findings from Phases . . . Table Summarised statements of the implications of the evaluation of the GPS on mode shift . . . . . Table Initial categorisation using Activity Classes . . . Table Examples of categorisation . . . .. Table Number and percentage of activities included in RLPTNLTP by weighted category, and number and percentage of activities with multiple categories . .
Tagged Capital Contingency ,.
Taking action on fuel prices temporarily reducing petrol excise duty and road user charges
Tampering with emissions controls by fitting devices intended to bypass them or to avoid repairs can lead to an increase in the levels of harmful emissions released by a vehicle. This is especially a concern for particulates and nitrogen oxides from diesel vehicles, as well carbon monoxide as from petrol vehicles. Many countries are trying to work out how to deal with this issue, as defining and policing tampering can prove difficult.
Target : reduce total kilometres travelled by the light fleet by by through improved urban form and providing better transport options, particularly in our largest cities
Target : increase zeroemissions vehicles to of the light fleet by .
Target : reduce emissions from freight transport by by .
Target : reduce the emissions intensity of transport fuel by by .
Targeting investments to the most significant challenges.
Targets shown are indicative only and are subject to legislation.
Tashima HN, Helander CJ. annual report of the California DUI Management Information System (CAL DMV RSS). Sacramento CA: California Department of Motor Vehicles, Research and Development Section, .
Tauranga ( percent of volume s), Auckland ( percent) and Lyttleton ( percent). Tauranga is
Tauranga to Tauriko State Highway
Tauriko is a significant growth area in the Bay of Plenty where route protection is crucial. This will ensure the community that develops is wellconnected to the neighbouring areas and Tauranga, and there is efficient and reliable interregional freight access to the port. The area needs to provide choice in how people want to travel, protect strategic freight routes, improve safety, and achieve better resilience and environmental outcomes.
Tauki Tikanga Here Kwanatanga m te arotake waka whenua (GPS)
Tauk Tikanga Here Kwanatanga m te arotake waka whenua (GPS) transport.govt.nz ISBN
Taxing Kiwi motorists Set up in , t he hypothecated approach to land transport funding (and the justification for taxing motorists) is based on the principles that: the level of road use generate s funding prop ortionate to demand: when there i s more use of the roads t here i s more money to develop, maintain and manage them revenue is spent as it comes in: there is a pipeline of projects that benefit motorists, and resources can be moved between differe nt investments if there i s a delay in one area.
Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport Ministry of Transport
Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport is currently working with airlines to confirm routes and services. We will attach over the coming weeks, a document outlining these routes and services.
Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport is holding information sessions in June about the proposals in the consultation on Euro VI vehicle emissions standards. These will be informative and interactive sessions covering different aspects of the proposals. Topics and timing are outlined below. To register, please indicate which session or sessions you would like to attend by emailing:
Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport is progressing with the OiC that will modify the Land Transport Management Act (LTMA) within Tranche as planned. Next steps include submission of the OiC to the Review Panel and the Regulations Review Committee.
Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport is working with the aviation sector to undertake a broad, first principles review focusing on settings in three key areas of the air navigation system:
Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport partnered with the Sustainable Business Council (SBC) on a feasibility study which found that a system of r
Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport protocol on dealing with Official Information Act requests involving the Mini ster of Transport and the proactive release of information
Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport provided secretarial support for the review. The views expressed by the panel, and in their reports, are their own.
Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport staff are involved in a range of speaking opportunities, from relatively informal presentations at a meeting, through to representing the Ministry or government at major conferences. No matter what the occasion, all Ministry presentationsspeeches should be professional and consistent with our brand.
Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport welcomes the Phase report.
Te Manat Waka administer the Maintaining International Air Connectivity (MIAC) and Essential Transport Connectivity (ETC) schemes.
Te Manat Waka are reviewing the GDLS to ensure the regulatory settings do not create unnecessary barriers to driver licensing, while improving road safety outcomes.
Te Manat Waka has been aware that we need to reconsider the land transport revenue system for a few years now.
Te Manat Waka is also holding specific online hui to engage directly with Councils and Mori on what the proposed Orders in Council will do. These hui are being held between June and July.
Te Manat Waka received submissions on the proposals, and is currently analysing the information provided by submitters. Te Manat Waka will provide the Minister of Transport with advice on amending the Land Transport Rule: Vehicle Exhaust Emissions in early August along with a summary of the submissions received. A summary of the submissions will be online alongside any decisions around changes to the rule.
Te Manat Waka recognises the timing for the engagement and notice given for the Cyclone Recovery OIC engagement is short. This reflects the timelines set by the SWERL Act, which provides for an engagement period for OICs of three days unless this period is extended by the Minister.
Te Manat Waka uses the APA style citation method. The APA style uses the author system.
Te Manat Waka will follow the Te Taura Whiri i te Reo Mori Guidelines for Mori Orthography: Ng Tikanga Tuhi a Te Taura Whiri i te reo Mori which you can find here: Guideline for Mori Lanaguge Orthography . Orthography is the written system selected for any language. Orthography includes spelling conventions, use of diacritics (the tohut or macron for te reo Mori to indicate vowel length), and features of punctuation such as use of capital letters and hypenation.
Te Manat Waka The Ministry of Transport (The Ministry) Tim Herbert Manager, Investment Chris Jones Acting Manager, Governance Robert Anderson Acting Manager, Mobility and Safety Warner Peel Adviser, Gover nance Brittany Farrant Smith Senior Adviser, Investment
Te Rnanga o tkou Inc officetro.org.nz () Tamatea Rd I tkou RD I Otago Peninsula TN
Te Waihanga Infrastructure Commission
Te aratohu tuhituhi Writing Style Guide
Te hunga mtakitaki The audience
Te momo tuhituhi o Te Manat Waka Te Manat Waka writing style
Te pkeke me te Ira Tangata Age and gender
Te whakaaturanga me te kawenga o ng mahi Presentation and delivery
Te whakamahinga o ng prongo kawa Dealing with sensitive information
Te whakamahinga o te reo Mori Using te reo Mori
Technical Director Regenerative Outcomes Mott MacDonald
Technical Guidelines for Disposal to Land
Technical Guidelines for Disposal to Land(external link)
Technical amendment to GPS to clarify rail funding
Technical documents, including the Recommended Programme of Investment
Tender will close on Friday, October , and a supplier briefing session is being hosted on October, .
Tensions also emerge in areas of housing growth, where activepublic transport investment typically lags the construction of housing developments, where as planners wish to see a greater front loading of these investments early in the development process. Benefits realisation is an area under development, with the intention that over time, the benefits of key projects will be tracked and reported. It was also noted that BCRs tend to have a lower influence on RLTP prioritisation than previously, while they were included in the assessment methodology in , they were not included in the assessment methodology, with delivery on prioritised outcomes hol ding greater influence. .. Looking ahead A lesson of the GPS was that it was delivered in an environment where there was in place an established groundswell of support for the investment direction proposed. If a GPS is incompatible with the goals of a region, it will be less likely to achieve its aims, as councils are unlikely to have projects in line for funding and will not wish to seek match funding through the NLTF. For a GPS to have a substantial effect, it needs to fall onto relatively fertile ground. This requires a process of building a case for change that councils can take on board. One area highlighted by interviewees as a potential area of GPS development is integrated spatial planning. There was seen to be value in future G PS signalling desired spatial outcomes and, in turn, enabling greater investment in transport planning that connects and supports outcomes in the economic, health, environmental, social and educational spheres. These could be supported by an infrastructur e alignment plan with a broader scope than a transport alignment plan. Such opportunities were seen to offer the potential for greater value for money from transport investment in the future. WHAT ARE THE KEY FACTORS THAT AFFECT THE EFFICIENCY AND EFFECTIVENESS OF CONVERTING INPUTS TO OUTPUTS AND HENCE TO OUTCOMES
Terms of Reference New Land Transport Rule for Setting Speed Limits
Terms of reference decided
Testing was undertaken as a part of the Police procurement process. The testing looked at the accuracy of devices and whether a device would be able to indicate recent use of a qualifying drugs.
Thank you again for taking the time to be here.
Thank you for you time today to discuss the Ports Permits extension process. Key points I took away from the krero: In Whakat there are Iwi who are kaitiaki, mana whakahaere and have connections to the port Nelson and marine space. Ngti Rrua would only endorse a year term to extend the permit. This is consistent a shared position with iwi and other Taiao resource consent in their rohe. o Endorsement of a year term is on the basis there is no new activities or additions of infrastructure. Whakat only has a unitary authority in the Nelson District Council.
Thank you for your time yesterday and the email below.
Thank you to everyone who provided feedback. Well review, analyse and advise the Minister of Transport on the feedback received. This feedback will inform the final GPS which is
Thanks for taking the time to meet with me this afternoon. I really appreciated it.
Thanks for your assistance.
That would be great. I can do this afternoon before pm if that is not too short a notice. So today is best for me. Then not available until next week.
The . billion of Crown funding and financing includes a contribution of million of the Climate Emergency Recovery Fund, transferring the traffic infringement fee revenue to the NLTF, . billion of direct Crown funding and a . billion Crown loan.
The surge DTOs have graduated and start testing this week therefore we anticipate higher testing numbers again next week.
The New Zealand Travel Survey and report
The RPP outlines how much NLTP investment will be allocated to different road policing activities over three years, what are key performance indicators that NZ Police will achieve and how NZ Police will deliver them. Summary d NZ Transport Agency Waka Kotahi Documents relating to Value for Money NZTA Investment DecisionMaking Framework review Website information: https:www.nzta.govt.nzpl anningand investmentplanninginvestThe IDMF is used by NZTA to assess and prioritise investment in land transport. It is used to identify, assess and prioritise NLTP investment proposals. Summary a e mentdecisionmaking framework review
The Rules benefit both the heavy vehicle industry and other road users, easing congestion by increasing weight limits for heavy vehicles and reducing the number of trips they can make.
The Rules mean heavy vehicles can carry more freight or passengers on fewer trips. This increases efficiency while maintaining safety for other road users.
The statement of intent introduces the transport outcomes framework (discussed above).
The Our Air report found that PM. levels were declining at sites where transport was important, suggesting that polices to reduce emissions are working.
The Annual Report notes that: The Ministry of Transport has been working with agencies and stakeholders over the past months to implem ent an outcomes framework for the transport system. This framework identifies the five key outcomes that transport contributes to, namely; in clusive access, healthy and safe people, economic prosperity, environmental sustainability, and resilience and secu rity.
The Act contains policy changes that enhance the legislative framework
The future scenarios explored the possible impacts on travel of our use of digital technology and also the impact of energy costs on future travel demand. They were:
The scenarios we developed were:
The strategic priorities for GPS were safety, access, environment and value for money. Safety and access were elevated as the most important (key) strategic priorities, which reflected the Governments intention to address the level of death and serious injuries on our roads, and its desire to create more liveable cities and thriving regions.
The AIO group and the matched comparison group were compared over three reoffending categories: Drink Driving Disqualified Driving All other offending
The ALR Board Terms of Reference are a key component to provide clarity to the Board of its role within the bespoke governance arrangements for the project
The AOI group reoffended less than the matched comparison group for other types of offending, but this was not statistically significant. The data does not indicate whether the AIO group had an interlock fitted but there does appear to be a correlation between the number of sentences, alcohol interlock licences issued and the numbers of interlocks installed. In , alcohol was the second biggest contributing factor to road crashes in New Zealand. Further research could reveal a much clearer picture of AIO effectiveness and reoffending if direct measures longitudinal data for those who received the sentence and those who had the interlock installed was made available. An evaluation framew ork needs to be established linking all the relevant data including employmentincome data to understand if cost is a barrier for installing an alcohol interlock device.
The ATAP crossagencies and agreed to the indicative package to reflect higher population growth projections and revenue and expenditure expenses.
The ATAP crossagency project team developed Better Travel Choices, a plan to help enable a mode shift from private vehicles to walking, cycling and public transport over the next five years.
The ATAP includes a crossagency partnership including the Ministry of Transport, Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency, KiwiRail, the Treasury, Auckland Council, Auckland Transport and State Services Commission.
The ATAP indicative package for period was to reflect the Governments and Auckland Councils shared transport priorities. Around billion of transport funding was likely to be available for investment in Auckland over the next decade.
The Act amends the Maritime Transport Act (MTA) to allow New Zealand to accede to Annex VI of the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL). MaRPOL Annex VI seeks to address the effects of shipping emissions on human health, environments in and around port communities, as well as on climate change, and depletion of the ozone layer.
The Act came into force on August , bringing about changes to how the RUC system worked and allowing the making of regulations to support the implementation of the legislation.
The Act enables the creation of Orders in Council (OICs) so that approvals for recovery efforts in affected areas can be streamlined and sped up, for a limited period of time.
The Acting Minister of Transport is
The Agency has made good progress delivering on its resilience and security obligations, including establishing a recent Security Team to address vulnerabilities in the land transport network. The success in delivering Tiro Rangi Climate Adaptation Plan sho uld also be recognised as a critical step in strengthening the land transport system against climate change. I would like the Agency to continue embedding these achievements by developing a mature assessment of the networks key security risks and deliveri ng on its commitments in the National Adaptation Plan, including integrating adaptation into its decision making frameworks.
The Air Navigation System Review panel their
The Amendments provide more protection
The Associate Minister of Transport held a day Local Government Road Safety Summit in Wellington for more than senior local government representatives from across New Zealand.
The Associate Minister of Transport introduced the Land Transport (Drug Driving) Amendment Bill into Parliament on July .
The Associate Minister to sign the letter of appointment, and return the Gazette notice to the Ministry for publication. APH meeting to take place on September . Week September October Appointment commences October . Cabinet to consider the appointment on September .
The Associate Minister to sign the letter of appointment, and return the Gazette notice to the Ministry for publication. Appointment commences October .
The Auckland CRL is a . km doubletrack underground rail line running beneath the central business district from Britomart to the Western (North Auckland) Line near the existing Mount Eden Station, with two new underground stations in the CBD at Aotea and Karangahape.
The Auckland Light Rail project involved a plan to expand Aucklands mass transit system through a new light rail line from Aucklands centre to the airport. The project was first announced in and cancelled in December
The Auckland Transport Alignment Project (ATAP) concluded that investment in both infrastructure and demand management tools are needed to reduce congestion in Auckland. In response, The Congestion Question, initially known as the Auckland Smarter Transport Pricing Project, was established by the Government and Auckland Council to investigate whether to introduce congestion pricing in Auckland.
The Auckland regional fuel tax scheme (the Scheme ) was established by the Land Transport Management (Regional Fuel Tax SchemeAuckland) Order and commenced on July .
The Automobile Association
The Aviation Security Service (AvSec), a business unit within the CAA is responsible for the
The BEB is an interdepartmental executive board established under the Public Service Act ,
The BEB is charged with ensuring there are no gaps in end toend border processes and
The Beehive press release is available
The Bill also amends or clarifies some policies from the current legislation including:
The Bill also proposes to limit the sentencing discounts that the courts can apply for mitigating factors. Overall, this will result in tougher sentences, including for more serious offending on buses and public transport generally.
The Bill passed its First Reading on August , and has been referred to the Select Committee for consideration. The Committee will meet to consider the Bill after the General Election and will have months to examine the Bill and prepare a report for the House.
The Bill proposes a new random roadside oral fluid testing regime. This oral fluid testing regime would sit alongside the current compulsory impairment test (CIT), approach to drug driving.
The Bill underwent several stages of consultation and parliamentary debate
The Bill was introduced to Parliament on March and was referred to the Financial and Expenditure Select Committee for consideration and public submissions.
The Bill, Bill commentary and the departmental disclosure statement
The Border Executive Board focuses on a joined up approach to border processes
The CAA is governed by a member board appointed by the Minister of Transport.
The CCDC survey vehicles will support the project by carrying out automated single pass pavement condition inspections for all local authority sealed roads. Yes No Maybe
The CCSLG co mprises: Drive Electric, Sustainable Business Council, Motor Industry Association, Vehicle Importers Association, kina Foundation, Consumer New Zealand, and Vector.
The CCSLG group has played a n important role in helping this Government shape some of our key policies, including the clean car policies and the EV Charging Strategy . It has also had a hand in shaping our thinking around vehicle policies in the Emissions Reduction Plan. I have appreciated the insight and expertise you have brought to the se conversations and to the advice you have given .
The CCSLG is able to discuss and provide advice to the Minister on the following range of relevant topics, including:
The CCSLG will operate in accordance with the following:
The COVID pandemic slowed consideration of the cabinet paper as the Governments full focus was on the health and economic response to the virus. Crossparty consultation eventually took place in late May. Near the end of that process it became clear that Government parties would be unable to make a decision on a preferred delivery partner. Cabinet then decided to end the proposal process and ask for options on a public service delivery approach to be presented to the new Government following the general election.
The Census journey to work data provides an insight into the distribution of commuting that probably carries over into other shorter, more local trips. The small sample size of the Household Travel Survey limits the ability to look at trip distribution using the Household Travel Survey data alone.
The Census reveals that most commuter trips () and most commuter trip growth () occurred in the outer parts of the Auckland urban area (Pink on the map). This distribution of travel growth closely corresponds with where households, firms and services are locating (Ministry analysis of Stats NZ dwelling consent and job location data refers).
The Chatham House Rule is as follows: When a meeting, or part thereof, is held under the Chatham House Rule, participants are free to use the information received, but neither the identity nor the affiliation of the speaker(s), nor that of any other participant, may be revealed. See more information about the Chatham House Rule here. If you are unsure if the information you are using is sensitive talk to your manager or the Engagement and Communications team.
The Chief Executive of the Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport has certified these copies as correct.
The Civil Aviation Act governs New Zealands civil aviation system and sets the overall
The Civil Aviation Act governs New Zealands civil aviation system and sets the overall framework for aviation safety, security and economic regulation.
The Civil Aviation Act allows for authorisation of cooperation agreements, that involve New Zealand destinations. An agreement, once authorised by the Minister, enables airlines to cooperate on various aspects of their operations without breaching competition laws.
The Civil Aviation Act came into force on April . The Act makes some changes to the way applications for cooperative airline agreements will be assessed.
The Civil Aviation Act provides for greater transparency and consistency for authorising airline agreements.
The Civil Aviation Act provides for greater transparency and consistency for authorising airline agreements. The Act comes into force on April .
The Civil Aviation Authority can confirm that this matter has been brought to our attention, and that we have been in touch with Police. We will assist with any enquiries as needed. Reflecting sunlight at an aircraft could be a serious threat to aviation safety, by impacting a pilots vision which could disorientate or af fect their ability to fly the aircraft safely. The Post Saturday September Coroner releases finding into tandem skydiving death of US tourist Tyler Nii who plunged into Queenstown lake
The Civil Aviation Authoritys (CAA) has key functions: regulatory and security.
The Civil Aviation Bill passed its third reading in March , and received Royal Assent on April . You can read the Associate Transport Ministers media release on the Beehive website
The Civil Aviation Bill passed its third reading in March .
The Civil Aviation Bill project responded to changes in the aviation industry and the government regulatory environment since the Acts came into effect. We consulted stakeholders in and again in when an exposure draft was . We also consulted affected groups on specific policy changes throughout. We are grateful for all feedback received throughout this almost decadelong process.
The Civil Aviation Bill was considered by Parliament between late and early . Information about that process, and copies of the Ministrys advice and other submissions to the Transport and Infrastructure Select Committee, are available on the
The Civil Aviation Bill was developed following a review of the legislation in . This page contains information about the Bill process, which ended with passage of the Civil Aviation Act on April . The new legislation comes into force on April .
The Civil Aviation Bill was introduced to the House of Representatives on September . To see the Minister of Transports statement on the Bill, you can visit
The Clean Car Discount Scheme encourages demand for low and zero emission vehicles.
The Clean Car Discount scheme makes it easier to choose to buy an electric or lowemission light vehicle
The Clean Car Discount started in to provide rebates and charges based on carbon emissions for new and used vehicle imports. Repealing the scheme means that:
The Clean Car Programme from
The Clean Car Standard encourages supply of low and zero emission vehicles.
The Clean Vehicles Act primarily amends the Land Transport Act and Land Transport Management Act .
The Climate Change Response (Zero Carbon) Amendment Act introduced emissions reduction targets that are consistent with the Paris Agreements commitment to limit warming to .C above preindustrial levels. The targets require gross emissions of biogenic methane to reduce to at least below levels by and to at least to by . Emissions of all other greenhouse gases must reach net zero by . This last target is the one that applies to transport.
The Committee agreed that the roles of the parties involved in the purchase and delivery of metro rail services should be as clear as possible.
The Congestion Question was established as a result of testing and evaluation carried out in the first phase of ATAP.
The Council agreed that work on an ambition statement should be given priority and it would set up a working group to work on the various topics that would form part of the NAPS.
The Council agreed to discuss and provide feedback on a draft NAPS at its next meeting in March , and to discuss key strategic issues facing the sector at future meetings in .
The Council also reviewed and provided feedback on the following working papers:
The Council approved a draft template for working papers going forward.
The Council discussed the ambition paper and requested that it be shortened.
The Council noted that the NAPS should have actionable outcomes but should avoid overly complex approaches.
The Council requested that working papers should be presented to Council in a consistent format and requested that a template be developed to enable this.
The Council reviewed and provided feedback on:
The Council was established following the Air Navigation System Review which called for a more formal approach to system leadership and direction. It first met in March and meets bimonthly.
The Council will be working on matters of national significance to the aviation sector including future workforce, infrastructure, regulation, innovation and emerging technology, safety and security and international engagement.
The Crown Infrastructure Partners website lists the projects that have been announced in principle by the Government.
The Crown needs to demonstrate that it is actively living up to these obligations, while recognising that the MoriCrown partnership is an evolving relationship.
The DTCC does not aim to deliver any conclusions about how costs or charges can or should be changed in the future. The study outputs will encourage policy decisions in the transport and related sectors based on sound evidence. When used with information on other benefits and costs of policy proposals, this information can help with policy problem definition, assessment of multimodal policy and investment, greenhouse gas emissions interventions, social and environmental impacts and transport funding and charging system.
The DTCC study has the following documentation that details the methodologies, the data, and the cost and charges estimates across different modes of transport.
The DTCC will not deliver any conclusions about how costs or charges can or should be changed in the future and is not part of any policy reviews. It is part of a wider work programme and will help us monitor the overall performance of the transport system against desired outcomes in the Transport Outcomes Framework.
The Decarbonising Transport Action Plan sets out the areas that we will focus on to reduce transport emissions:
The Decarbonising the Transport System Conference
The Decarbonising the Transport System Conference, held on March , brought together experts and leaders from across the transport, social and health sectors to discuss ways of reducing emissions for our future.
The Departmental Report to Select Committee
The Director may inspect a ship to determine whether the Ship Energy Efficiency Management Plan (SEEMP) relating to the ship is implemented in accordance with regulation of Annex VI.
The Domestic Transport Costs and Charges Study (DTCC) aims to improve our understanding of the costs of the New Zealand transport system, including road, rail and coastal shipping (domestic passenger aviation was subsequent removed from the scope due to Covid), on the countrys economy, environment and population. It also looks at costs relative to the charges or burdens facing transport users.
The Driver Licensing Amendment Rule was amended to include a year time limit on new learner, and restricted car or motorcycle driver licences, and stronger identity evidence requirements for licence applicants. The changes meant Waka Kotahi could eventually move to online driver licensing and driver testing transactions.
The Driver Licensing Rule was amended to include a year time limit on new learner, and restricted car or motorcycle driver licences, and stronger identity evidence requirements for licence applicants.
The Drone Benefit Study was commissioned to help inform the ongoing work on drone integration, especially the Taking Flight vision paper.
The ERP sets four transport targets that will support our vision and align with achieving a reduction in transport emissions by from levels.
The ETC scheme provides support for transport providers in the short to medium term. The schemes goal is to ensure capacity, regional connectivity and essential services continue in the wake of COVID.
The EY Report highlights, essentially, that without rail there would be an additional . . billion cost each year to New Zealand, through increased congestion, transport emissions, and the like.
The Easter holiday covers the period from pm on the Thursday to am on the Tuesday.
The Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP) contains targets and actions to achieve a reduction in transport emissions by . Te Manat Waka will work together with transport agencies, local government, iwiMori and communities across Aotearoa to achieve this.
The Energy Innovation (Electric Vehicles and Other Matters) Amendment Act amended the Land Transport Act to allow Road Controlling Authorities (RCAs) to make bylaws to identify EVs as a class of vehicle that can access special vehicle lanes. This also required changes to the Road User Rule and the Traffic Control Devices Rule.
The Energy Innovation (Electric Vehicles and Other Matters) Amendment Act included legislation to introduce an RUC exemption for heavy electric vehicles such as buses and trucks, until they make up of the heavy vehicle fleet.
The Engagement Document is available
The Engagement and Communications team provides in house design services for reports and presentations. Depending on the size or type of the work the team may ask you to complete the design commissioning form . If you are speaking or presenting at an event where it is likely that external stakeholders will be present, please talk to the Engagement and Communications team if you need any assistance. For more information read our guide to presentations and speeches by staff .
The Establishment Unit will be a collaboration between central and local government, drawing on expertise from a range of agencies including Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency, Auckland Transport, Auckland Council, the Ministry of Transport, Kinga Ora and others.
The Evaluation Strategy is a key accompanying document for this Evaluation Programme. Together, the Evaluation Strategy and Evaluation Programme aim to ensure that the Ministry plays an active role in ) generating and utilising robust evaluation findings , and ) supporting the transport sector to do the same.
The Evaluation Strategy is a key accompanying document for this Evaluation Programme. Together, the Evaluation Strategy and Evaluation Programme aim to ensure that the Ministry plays an active role in ) generating and utilising robust evaluation findings, and ) supporting the transport sector to do the same.
The Future of Rail is a crossagency project to identify the purpose rail serves, and how it can contribute to New Zealands transport system. We led a review to define the role of rail, consider the challenges it has faced, and recommend significant changes so rail can play its part in the transport system. A key outcome of the review was the development of a new planning and funding framework for rail, to better integrate rail into the land transport system.
The Future of Rail review included recommendations for government to ensure a resilient and reliable rail network. In August , Cabinet agreed we should incorporate these recommendations into a draft Rail Plan and that the LTMA should be amended to implement a new planning and funding framework for the rail network through the Land Transport (Rail) Legislation Bill.
The Future of Rail was initially led by Treasury to review KiwiRails operations. The project was transferred to the Ministry of Transport in December and the scope changed to identify the purpose rail serves and how it can contribute to New Zealands transport system, and to provide the Government with certainty on what investment is needed for rail to play a successful role in the system.
The Future of the Transport Revenue System is a longterm piece of work.
The GPS allows you to guide investment from the NLTF The Land Transport Management Act (LTMA) requires you to issue a Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) . This statutory document allows you to outline what the Government wants to achieve in land transport, and how it expects to see funding allocated between types of activities ( eg, roading, public transport and road safety) across the land transport system. T he NLTF can be used both to maintain a level of service and drive change on the land transport network, while delivering value for money. This is done through applying the Ministry s value for money assessment model in the appraisal and evaluation process and establishing funding ranges for activity classes. Each GPS sets out the priorities for the following year period and is reviewed and every three years. The LTMA gives Waka Kotahi statutory independence to select projects for the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) . However, the GPS can set an expectation for Waka Kotahi to consider government programmes and priorities when allocating funding through the NLTP .
The GPS describes: the results the Government wishes to achieve from its investment in land transport through the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) over the next ten years how much funding will be provided to the NLTF for Waka Kotahi to allocate to transport investments how the NLTF funding will be raised how the government wants NLTF funding to be allocated across areas of investment known as activity classes (for example, safety, state highway improvements, walking and cycling improvements).
The GPS is developed by the Ministry of Transport on behalf of the Minister before
The GPS is reviewed every three years
The GPS is reviewed every three years and
The GPS reporting indicators and Transport Indicators also supplement other government reporting frameworks and dashboards, such as Treasurys Living Standards Framework and Stats NZs Indicators Aotearoa
The GPS sets out the Governments priorities
The GPS sets out the Governments priorities for expenditure from the NLTF.
The GPS was also amended by the Minister of Transport to make clear the Crown funding which has been contributed to the NLTF to support funding of the rail network.
The GPS will define the three Es as they apply to the NLTF. The Es alone do not provide a transparent basis for distinguish ing good VfM from excellent or poor VfM. These terms are also definable, and thats where the IDMF comes in and will need to apply judgement and interpretation of the criteria set in the GPS to evaluate projects and programmes.
The Glossary of this guide states that Value for money means using resources effectively, economically, and witho ut waste, with due regard for the total costs and benefits of an arrangement, and its contribution to the outcomes the entity is trying to achie ve. In addition, the principle of value for money when procuring goods or services does not necessarily mean sel ecting the lowest price but rather the best possible outcome for the total cost of ownership (or whole oflife cost). Value for money is achieved by selecting the most appropriate procurement method for the risk and value of the procurement, and not necess arily by using a competitive tender. f Auditor General: Spending public money wisely and well: How to put Whole Document:
The Government Policy Statement on Land Transport included a range of measures to improve the safety of vulnerable road users, including considering mandating ABS for motorcycles.
The Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Funding (GPS ) came into force on July .
The Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) sets out how money from the National Land Transport Fund is allocated towards achieving the Governments transport priorities. It sets out ranges for funding for activities such as public transport, state highway improvements, local and regional roads and road policing we call these activity classes. Each GPS sets out the priorities for the following year period, and is reviewed and every years.
The Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) sets out how money from the National Land Transport Fund is allocated towards achieving the Governments transport priorities. It sets out ranges for funding for activities such as public transport, state highway improvements, local and regional roads and road safety we call these activity classes. Each GPS sets out the priorities for the following year period, and is reviewed and every years.
The Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) sets the Governments priorities for land transport investment over the next year period. It also sets out how money from the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) is spent on activities such as public transport, state highway improvements, local roads, and road safety we call these activity classes. Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency and local authorities need to ensure spend on transport reflects Government priorities outlined by the GPS.
The Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS ) came into effect on July .
The Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS ) came into effect on July .
The Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS ) came into force on July , and is the current GPS until GPS comes into effect on July .
The Government Rules of Sourcing principles state that agencies should: Get best value for money account for all costs and benefits over the lifetime of the goods or services, and Make balanced decisions consider the social, environmental and economic effects of the deal.
The Government agreed that New Zealand would participate in CORSIA when it comes into effect in .
The Government agreed to consult on the new Road to Zero road safety strategy and initial set of actions. A review of road safety penalties was named as a priority action for the initial action plan.
The Government agreed to consult on the new Road to Zero road safety strategy and initial set of actions. A systematic review of the licensing system was named as a priority action for the initial action plan.
The Government agreed to consult on the new Road to Zero road safety strategy and initial set of actions. One of the initial actions is to introduce a new approach to tackling unsafe speeds.
The Government agreed to consult on the new Road to Zero road safety strategy and initial set of actions. One of the initial actions was mandating ABS for motorcycles.
The Government agreed to consult on the new road safety strategy and proposed actions. Over , submissions were received through the public consultation process, with the majority of submitters broadly supportive of the strategy and action plan.
The Government agreed to extend some expiring licences while we review the GDLS to look at what challenges learner drivers face and why many of them choose not to progress through to gaining a full licence.
The Government agreed to introduce the Clean Car Standard a Co
The Government agreed to undertake public consultation on enhancements to New Zealands drug impaired driving regime
The Government and Auckland Council accepted the reports recommendation to proceed to the second phase of the project.
The Government and Auckland Council established the company City Rail Link Limited (CRLL) to deliver the project and this took effect from .
The Government and Council recognised that Auckland needs significant investment in its transport system in the coming decades to provide for its forecast growth. Through this agreement, they committed to ensuring Aucklands transport system is able to meet the regions needs. They also sought to ensure that investment in the system addresses the regions transport challenges and provides value for money.
The Government announced a review would take place after the first months to identify any refinements required to ensure the schemes longterm financial sustainability.
The Government announced an NZD. million investment in Northland rail, which builds on the previous NZD. million investment announced in September , and NZD. million to undertake geotechnical assessments along the route of a proposed spur line to Marsden Point
The Government announced an NZD. million investment in Northland rail, which builds on the previous NZD. million investment announced in September , and NZD. million to undertake geotechnical assessments along the route of a proposed spur line to Marsden Point.
The Government announced its plan to change learner and restricted car or motorcycle driver licence time limits to encourage drivers to move through the GDLS.
The Government announced that owners of light electric vehicles (EVs) and plugin hybrid vehicles will start paying road user charges (RUC) when the current exemption expires at the close of March .
The Government approved the release of a Discussion Document on drug driving, subject to editorial changes.
The Government confirmed that, for the changes to come into effect, legislation would need to be amended.
The Government decided to create a reduced RUC rate for plugin hybrid vehicles. A reduced rate reflects that plugin petrol hybrid owners already pay some fuel excise duty when they buy petrol.
The Government established a contestable fund of NZD million to support projects that encourage innovation and investment in EVs and other low emissions vehicles in New Zealand.
The Government expects to formally consult with stakeholders on the draft GPS early next year, with a view to finalising it by the middle of .
The Government gave Waka Kotahi approval to deliver the Phoi to Warkworth motorway project through a public private partnership.
The Government gave Waka Kotahi approval to deliver the Transmission Gully project through a public private partnership.
The Government has agreed that Disability Vehicles should for the purposes of the Clean Vehicle Standard be deemed as Type B vehicles rather than Type A vehicles. This will assign less strict CO targets to distributors of these vehicles. The definition of a disability vehicle will be the same used by the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Discount Scheme Charges) Regulations .
The Government has agreed to a final extension of the Maintaining International Air Connectivity (MIAC) scheme to March .
The Government has agreed to a set of actions
The Government has agreed to extend the IAFC scheme to the end of April . Phase of the IAFC scheme was originally scheduled to the end of March . The one month extension gives businesses that rely on airfreight and airlines stability as the Government reviews its support for international air connectivity during the COVID recovery.
The Government has agreed to extend the MIAC scheme to the end of March . This extension ensures that there continues to be a predictable and regular schedule of air services to and from New Zealand. Maintaining a network that delivers effective international air connectivity is vital for New Zealands social and economic wellbeing and is critical for the COVID recovery particularly as New Zealand looks to increase international passenger travel over the coming months.
The Government has announced a further extension to the reductions to petrol excise duty and road user charges. Halfprice public transport is also being extended.
The Government has announced new measures to take action on reducing transport emissions to help meet New Zealands carbon neutral target.
The Government has cancelled the Auckland Light Rail project. Cancelling the project was one of the actions in the Governments day plan released on November .
The Government has now announced additional investment to support the transport projects in NZ Upgrade Programme. The Government has set aside an additional . billion in the multiyear capital allowance to support the targeted investments. In addition, some of the projects with the largest cost increases identified through the baselining exercise have been rescoped to manage costs, while still delivering on the Governments objectives for the original projects.
The Government has passed legislation repealing the Clean Car Discount scheme by December .
The Government has provided additional funding to meet these pressures in the short term. Longer term, a project is already underway to look at the future of revenue in the transport system, and it is considering how to make the system more sustainable in the context of climate change and increasing cost pressures.
The Government has released the final Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS ).
The Government has released the final Government Policy Statement on land transport . It sets out the Governments land transport strategy including:
The Government has signal led an expectation for a more balanced approach to speed limit setting , including : ensuring RCAs and RTCs consider not only safety impacts, but also economic impacts, including travel time, and the views of road users and communities when setting speed limits a focus on variable speed limits on roads approaching schools during pick up and drop off times.
The Government has signalled the indicative transport priorities signed off by Cabinet last year will change in the wake of Cyclone Gabrielle.
The Government identified rail as a key opportunity to improve Northlands transport connections, particularly the potential future development of the NAL. In late we began to develop a business case to understand the merits and costs of investing in, renewing and upgrading the NAL and constructing the proposed Marsden Point Rail Link (MPL), a potential new section of track to connect Northport at Marsden Point to the NAL. The MPL would run approximately km from Oakleigh, south of Whngrei, to Marsden Point.
The Government indicated that it intends to make further decisions at the end of the year on how the project will be taken forward, including the entity that will be responsible for its delivery.
The Government is committed to having a thriving, innovative and safe drone sector as it will bring the commercialisation of new products and services, and create more jobs.
The Government is committed to kickstarting work on longdelayed transport solutions for the city. Local authorities agree that the Government should take the lead on projects on the state highway network.
The Government is keen to support the uptake of electric vehicles alongside other lowemission forms of transport. Electric vehicles will not only help us to reduce climate damaging emissions but also reduce harmful local air pollution. Supporting the uptake of electric vehicles also supports the Governments overall drive towards a netzero emissions economy.
The Government is not intending to reinstate the farebox recovery ratio policy at this stage. Ng mihi, Liam Fechney (he him ) Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Kaitohutohu Adviser Urban Development and Public Transport Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport E: l.fechneytransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz From: Jessica Ranger J.Rangertransport.govt.nz Sent: To: Dominic CowellSmith Dominic.CowellSmithparliament.govt.nz ; Media Mailbox mediatransport.govt.nz ; Tim Herbert t.herberttransport.govt.nz Cc: Suzanne Cookson S.Cooksontransport.govt.nz ; Abby McRoberts parliament Abby.McRobertsparliament.govt.nz ; Nick Potter N.Pottertransport.govt.nz ; Liam Fechney L.Fechneytransport.govt.nz Subject: RE: question (not for a story just yet) No prob well work with Comms to get something to you. Ng mihiJess From: Dominic CowellSmith Dominic.CowellSmithparliament.govt.nz Sent: To: Media Mailbox mediatransport.govt.nz ; Jessica Ranger J.Rangertransport.govt.nz ; Tim Herbert t.herberttransport.govt.nz Cc: Suzanne Cookson S.Cooksontransport.govt.nz ; Abby McRoberts parliament Abby.McRobertsparliament.govt.nz Subject: FW: question (not for a story just yet) Afternoon team Please see below query from could the office please have some lines in response by the end of the dayMany thanks and happy to discuss,Cheers Dom
The Government is reviewing New Zealands critical air transport requirements for the future to ensure appropriate levels of air connectivity are maintained and the Government is getting value for money from the IAFC scheme. Further announcements are expected in the coming weeks.
The Government is seeking feedback on options to accelerate the transport sector to meeting the draft advice and recommendations of the Climate Change Commission, and moving to a net zero carbon transport system by .
The Government plans to significantly increase the number of public electric vehicle chargers across New Zealand, aiming for a network of , public charge points by .
The Government reconfirmed the decision to participate in CORSIA from , and agreed to implement it through the Civil Aviation Bill. Participating in CORSIA will strongly support the Governments climate change priorities as it aims to address any annual increase in total carbon dioxide emissions from international civil aviation above levels.
The Government released an independent report by Sapere on the options for relocating the Port of Aucklands freight operations.
The Government released the working groups final report, which examined the issues around the POALs future and concluded that POAL freight operation in central Auckland is no longer economically or environmentally viable. The working group considered scenarios to determine the most efficient arrangement of upper North Island ports.
The Government removed the freeze on new services entering the scheme, which increased the range of services available, particularly in rural and provincial areas.
The Government revoked the year timelimited licence policy to remove barriers created by the policy for learner and restricted licence holders needing to renew their licence.
The Government shifted to a bulk funding approach for the scheme instead of individual fare reimbursements, with the level of funding agreed between regional councils and Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency.
The Government took the submissions, and policy advice from officials, into account as when it considered options to improve New Zealands drugimpaired driving scheme.
The Government will publicly consult on the draft Emissions Reduction Plan shortly, which will include transport content that has taken account this feedback.
The Government will support regional councils to achieve it targets through a million fund over years. We plan to engage with the sector on how the million fund is spent, and how barriers to decarbonisation can be overcome in the fastest, most economically efficient way.
The Government would also:
The Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations ( ASEAN ), namely Brunei Darussalam, the Kingdom of Cambodia, the Republic of Indonesia, the Lao Peoples Democratic Republic, Malaysia, the Republic of the Union of Myanmar, the Republic of the Philippines, the Republic of Singapore, the Kingdom of Thailand, and the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam (hereinafter referred to collectively as the ASEAN Member States and individually as an ASEAN Member State) , and the Government of New Zealand (New Zealand); AFFIRMING the strategic partnership established between ASEAN and New Zealand; NOTING the existing bilateral air services agreements betw een the ASEAN Member States and New Zealand ; AFFIRMING that the integrity, solidarity , and integration of ASEAN be accorded priority in the realisation of an Air Services Agreement between the ASEAN Member States and New Zealand;
The Governments day plan includes a commitment to Stop blanket speed limit reductions and start work on replacing the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits .
The Governments response to the report of the Transport and Infrastructure Committee can be found
The Green Freight Project is part of our Climate change emissions work programme.
The Green freight project, which was initiated in April , looks specifically at the role alternative green fuels electricity, green hydrogen and biofuels could play in reducing emissions from heavy vehicles carrying freight on New Zealands roads. The project is focused on heavy trucks involved in road freight because they account for nearly of all GHG road transport emissions.
The Grow Regions website has further information.
The Guide to New Zealands Maritime Security Arrangements has been today by the Maritime Security Oversight Committee. This aims to support the Working Together strand of the National Security Strategy which recognises national security as an allofnation activity where everyone has a role to play in securing New Zealands maritime interests for future generations.
The HAPINZ . report was released in July . The report highlights the harmful impacts of air pollution in New Zealand, with motor vehicles and domestic fires the biggest factors.
The HamiltonAuckland Corridor connects two of New Zealands fastest growing cities. The parallel road and rail alignments, as well as the Waikato River, make it New Zealands most significant transport corridor.
The Hawkes Bay relies on the roading network between Napier to Hastings to support the regions economic growth. Capacity improvements along the corridor will boost resilience, productivity and efficiency of the network, as well as connections between the two cities. This work would include building resilience along SH expressway from Omahu Road to Taradale Road and upgrading existing bridges and associated intersections. Additional capacity would support freight and prioritise public transport between Hastings and Napier. Main construction works could start in the next GPS period (around ) and would take five years to complete.
The Household Travel Survey and Census are complementary
The Household Travel Survey captures
The Household Travel Survey was set up to allow agencies such as Waka Kotahi, NZ Transport Agency, and local bodies to buy expansions in sample size in areas of interest. For example a local council may use this to update their local transport model. This improves the range of analysis that can be done at a local level, and the overall survey sample.
The Hkina te Kohupara discussion document was open for public consultation until the end of June .
The IDMF is being reviewed, prompted by changes in the GPS which places more emphasis on social, economic, cultural and environmental outcomes in transport planning. The GPS also required an investigation of the NZTAs evaluation methods and this has been incorporated as a core part of the review.
The IMO is the United Nations body that regulates emissions from shipping by setting global
The Independent Expert Panel on Drug Driving (the Panel) completed its final report in April on recommending statutory limits for drug concentrations related to impaired driving.
The Independent Expert Panel on Drug Driving (the Panel) completed its final report in April on recommending statutory limits for drug concentrations related to impaired driving. This Report provides further explanation for the Panels earlier advice on blood infringement thresholds and criminal limits.
The Independent Expert Panel on Drug Driving has been established to provide advice to the Government on the limits to be specified for drugs in legislation, the lowlevel tolerance thresholds to be applied to the detection of drugs in blood, and the cutoff thresholds to be included in oral fluid testing devices.
The Infrastructure Commission has a public private partnership coordination and oversight role.
The International Maritime Organisation
The International Maritime Organization (IMO) adopted the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL) in . MARPOL aims to prevent and minimise ship pollution in the marine environment and is the primary international regulation for addressing the impacts of climate change on shipping other countries representing of world tonnage are party to it. There are annexes categorised by pollution type. Annex VI seeks to limit air pollution from ships around ports and harbours. It came into force in .
The International Omnibus Project aims to update the rules to reflect changes to international maritime conventions and correct rule drafting errors. Subsequently in May , Minister Doocey agreed to release an Invitation to Comment (ITC) document and approve a list of stakeholders to consult with OC refers. The consultation list covered a range of maritime stakeholders including operators, industry groups, iwi, surveyors, government agencies, and NGOs. Maritime NZ provided a copy of the ITC and the draft rules to its stakeholder list and publicised the consultation through key maritime sector publications and on social media channel s. Consultation closed on Monday September . No submissions were received. This result is not concerning and is similar to previous International Omnibuses given the highly specialised subject matter and low impact of the proposals. We do not believe that we have missed any significant stakeholders or concerns. Officials will now prepare a briefing and finalise the rules for Minister Dooceys signature. We aim to provide him with this package by October . KiwiRail p rosecution Kaitaki , , fine and costs On January the Interislander ferry Kaitaki was enroute from Picton to Wellington when it had a sudden loss of power while off Sinclair Head. The ship drifted in high winds and large waves towards the rocky shore, which required the dropping of both anchors in order to stop it from running aground with almost people on board. What followed was a comprehensive investigation and some in depth regulatory work including a specific audit to delve into KiwiRails safety system. In respect of the investigation, Maritime NZ laid a charge and KiwiRail subsequently pleaded guilty to it. On Monday September KiwiRail made a public apology in court for its failings. KiwiRail was fined , and ordered to pay costs of ,. It is important that as a regulator we hold people to account where appropriate and shine a light on critical safety issues this case delivered both of these outcomes. Alongside our audits and inspections of KiwiRail, it has clearly set out our expectations for operators to implement and manage a robust maintenance system to keep people and the environment safe.
The International Omnibus Project aims to update the rules to reflect changes to international maritime conventions and correct rule drafting errors. Subsequently in May , you agreed to release an Invitation to Comment (ITC) document and approve a list of stakeholders to consult with OC refers. The consultation list covered a range of maritime stakeholders including operators, industry groups, iwi, surveyors, government agencies, and NGOs. Maritime NZ provided a copy of the ITC and the draft rules to its stakeholder list and publicised the consultation through key maritime sector publications and on social media channels. Consultation closed on Monday September . No submissions were received. This result is not concerning and is similar to previous International Omnibuses given the highly specialised subject matter and low impact of the proposals. We do not believe that we have missed any significant stakeholders or concerns. Officials will now prepare a briefing and finalise the rules for your signature. We aim to provide you this package by October . KiwiRail p rosecution Kaitaki , , fine and costs On January the Interislander ferry Kaitaki was enroute from Picton to Wellington when it had a sudden loss of power while off Sinclair Head. The ship drifted in high winds and large waves towards the rocky shore, which required the dropping of both anchors in order to stop it from running aground with almost people on board. What followed was a comprehensive investigation and some in depth regulatory work including a specific audit to delve into KiwiRails safety system. In respect of the investigation, Maritime NZ laid a charge and KiwiRail subsequently pleaded guilty to it. On Monday September KiwiRail made a public apology in court for its failings. KiwiRail was fined , and ordered to pay costs of ,. It is important that as a regulator we hold people to account where appropriate and shine a light on critical safety issues this case delivered both of these outcomes. Alongside our audits and inspections of KiwiRail, it has clearly set out our expectations for operators to implement and manage a robust maintenance system to keep people and the environment safe.
The International Transport Forum (ITF) released a report looking at principles for regulating appbased ride and taxi services. These recommendations and principles endorsed the changes the Government announced in April .
The Investment A ssessment Framework (I AF) is a means to prioritise projects and program me proposals based on how they align to the strategic priorities set in GPS . The IAF applies four key lenses to assess proposals including, use of the Business Case Approach, results alignment, cost benefit appraisal and programme support. Table provides an overview of each of these areas. Table IAF overview IAF area Overview Use of the Business Case Approach Used as a precursor to the IAF assessment and ensures a consistent input into the investment decision making process and transparency of assessment. Results alignment Rates the degree of alignment with the outcomes specified in the GPS. Cost benefit appraisal Considers how well the solution maximises the value of what is produced from the resources used. Primarily measured using benefit cost ratios (BCR) . Programme support Assesses the urgency of the solution in the timeframes of the GPS.
The Investment and Monitoring Groups functions include Crown entity monitoring, investment, rail, programme monitoring and investment management, and transport financing.
The Kaikura earthquake on November caused widespread damage, and impacted the lives of thousands of New Zealanders. The Kaikura earthquake recovery work programme included a number of departments and Crown agencies that collaborated on workstreams relating to freight, safety, legislation, and the month and longterm recovery of the transport network.
The LGWM website has more information about open consultations, the early delivery programme and other work they are doing to progress the programme of work.
The Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Regulations
The Land Transport (Drug Driving) Amendment Legislation was passed in March .
The Land Transport (NZTA) Legislation Amendment Bill, which is currently going through the parliamentary process, includes aspects of speed management.
The Land Transport (Rail) Legislation Act (the Rail Act) came into force on July . The Rail Act amends the Land Transport Management Act (the LTMA) and the Land Transport Act (LTA) to implement a new longterm planning and funding system for the heavy rail track network owned by KiwiRail
The Land Transport (Rail) Legislation Act (the Rail Act) came into force on July . The Rail Act amends the Land Transport Management Act (the LTMA) and the Land Transport Act (LTA) to implement a new longterm planning and funding system for the heavy rail track network owned by KiwiRail.
The Land Transport (Rail) Legislation Act (the Rail Act) came into force on July . The Rail Act amends the Land Transport Management Act (the LTMA) and the Land Transport Act to implement a new longterm planning and funding system for the heavy rail track network owned by KiwiRail.
The Land Transport Management (Regional Fuel Tax SchemeAuckland) Order
The Land Transport Management (Regional Fuel Tax) Amendment Regulations came into effect on August which define additional situations when someone could claim a regional fuel tax rebate
The Land Transport Management Amendment Act came into effect on June , and PTOM provisions led to a new round of bus service procurement in most regions between and .
The Land Transport Rule: Vehicle Dimensions and Mass (VDAM Rules) set heavy vehicle size and weight limits, and performance and use requirements, while balancing productivity, efficiency, safety and cost objectives.
The Land Transport Rule: Vehicle Exhaust Emissions was the first Rule to set emissions standards for vehicles entering New Zealand.
The Low Emissions Transport Fund has already begun cofunding a range of initiatives to accelerate transport decarbonisation. So far, funding has been provided for batteryswap electric truck technology for milk tankers and concrete mixers.
The Manufacturing Alliance
The Maritime Security Strategy ensures New Zealand has a maritime security sector that is able to continue to secure New Zealands marine economic, cultural and environmental interests for future generations.
The Maritime Transport (MARPOL Annex VI) Amendment Act (the Act) came into force on November .
The Maritime Transport (MARPOL Annex VI) Amendment Bill aims to align the MTA with Annex VI. This will enable New Zealand to accede to Annex VI.
The Maritime Transport (MARPOL Annex VI) Amendment Bill had its first reading on June and now the Transport and Infrastructure Select Committee is calling for submissions.
The Maritime Transport (MARPOL Annex VI) Amendment Bill would allow the Minister of Transport to make marine protection rules in relation to Annex VI. It would also grant the Director of Maritime New Zealand the power to conduct inspections and audits in relation to Annex VI requirements, and to detain ships that breach Annex VI requirements.
The Maritime Transport (Offshore Installations) Amendment Act came into force on January and clarified the liabilities of insurers to the Crown and to other third parties entitled to claim compensation from an owner in the event of an oil spill. In the case of financial security, the Act clarifies the extent of the liabilities of those providing the financial security.
The Maritime Transport Act (MTA) is the main act for the regulation of maritime activity. The
The Mayor of Auckland Dear Mayor or Dear Phil Goff (Your Worship is considered archaic and individual Mayors usually make it known how they wish to be styled) High Court Judges The Hon Justice Lang Dear Judge or Dear Sir Justices The Hon Justice Glazebrook Dear Judge or Dear Madam Chief Justice The Chief Justice, Dame Helen Winkelmann Dear Chief Justice Councillors Councillor John Pertwee Dear Mr Pertwee
The Metropolitan Rail Operating Model applies similarly to Auckland and Wellington metro rail services.
The Minister announced a temporary Establishment Unit would be formed with a month work programme including:
The Minister directed us to draft a Cabinet paper and agreed to consult the Ministers of Finance and Local Government about the policy.
The Minister for Transport amended GPS on April to:
The Minister for Transport announced the release of GPS on June . It took effect on July .
The Minister for Transport released the NZ Rail Plan, outlining a year vision to support increased investment and resilience in New Zealands rail network.
The Minister has released the findings of the business case and Cabinet has agreed that we initiate a process to develop the next stages of the project.
The Minister may grant authorisation if the Minister is satisfied that:
The Minister of Transport Simeon Brown joined the meeting to discuss the Councils work and he noted that the National Aviation Policy Statement (NAPS) being developed by the Council will be an important document to align government and sector views about aviation priorities.
The Minister of Transport agreed to authorise an alliance between British Airways and Qatar Airways for years until May .
The Minister of Transport agreed to reauthorise the Master Coordination Agreement between Qantas Airways and Emirates for years. The Minister first authorised the Master Coordination Agreement in May for years.
The Minister of Transport agreed to reauthorise the North Asia Alliance Agreement between Air New Zealand and Cathay Pacific for years until October . The Minister first authorised the Alliance Agreement on November , and reauthorised it on August for a period ending October .
The Minister of Transport agreed to reauthorise the Strategic Alliance Agreement between Air New Zealand and Singapore Airlines until March . The Minister first authorised the Alliance in August for a period of years.
The Minister of Transport agreed to reauthorise the alliance between Air New Zealand and Air China for years from March until March .
The Minister of Transport agreed to reauthorise the alliance between Qantas and American Airlines for years from November until November .
The Minister of Transport agreed to reauthorise the alliance between Qantas and American airlines for years from November until November .
The Minister of Transport authorised the Side Agreement to the Alliance Expansion Agreement between Air New Zealand and United Airlines, which was authorised in .
The Minister of Transport commissioned a review of PTOM to assess whether it had met the original objectives and whether it remains fit for purpose to support the Governments objectives.
The Minister of Transport commissioned a review of PTOM to assess whether it had met the original objectives and whether it remains fit for purpose to support the Governments objectives. The review will include stages: an Impact Evaluation, and a Policy and Legislative Review. The timing of the review was delayed by the impacts of COVID on the public transport sector and we anticipate it will now be completed in .
The Minister of Transport decided to review the Public Transport Management Act (PTMA) and develop a policy to increase the use of urban bus and ferry services, and decrease their reliance on government funding.
The Minister of Transport extended consultation until May .
The Minister of Transport today released the draft Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) for feedback.
The Minister of Transport, with support from the Mayor of Wellington and the Chair of GWRC, announced the LGWM indicative package of improvements on May , following Cabinets endorsement. This is made up of a number of components to improve walking, cycling, public transport and liveability in Wellington.
The Minister received feedback about the challenges local government faced regarding speed management and potential interventions that would effectively address these challenges.
The Minister when considering granting or declining an application, must publicly notify their proposed decision and allow for written submissions on the proposed decision.
The Ministers decision to review the PTMA reflected the Governments concern that it gave regional councils too much control over bus and ferry operators, and did not encourage private sector investment or innovation.
The Ministry (in conjunction with partner agencies Waka Kotahi, Auckland Transport, Auckland Council, Treasury and the Public Service Commission) has released a technical investigation report into Auckland congestion pricing.
The Ministry and NZTA are to incorporate opportunities from existing and developing technology in the Revenue programme being developed, for discussion in a workshop. The above advice should align with the broader tolling workstream and: cover the tolling solutions being explored, and highlight potential legislative changes required to support efficientcost effective tolling implementation and operations. To be discussed as part of a workshop on tolling reform (scheduled for Wednesday August) and followed by formal advice in late August July Public Transport Officials to engage with Disabled Peoples Organisations Coalition (DPO Coalition) and provide feedback to Minister in advance of Terms of Reference being confirmed. Underway. Detailed update in Section Underway. We have contacted the DPO and are awaiting feedback July Underway July Complete July Speed Officials to provide updates on themes from submissions. Complete July Aviation Friday August July Ongoing s ()(b)(ii), s ()(j) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s (a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
The Ministry conducts other assurance, funding, contracting and review activities In addition to overseeing and monitoring the Crown entities and companies on your behalf, the Ministry also conducts other activities for government transport initiatives and programmes, Crown entities and Crown companies. This includes, for example, providing advice on and monitoring programmes such as the NZ Upgrade Programme, the Climate Emergency Response Fund (CERF) , and managing the MetService contract to ensure New Zealand has a service that fulfils the World Meteorological Organi zation Technical Regulations. The Ministry uses the Transport Sector Monitoring Framework, which provides a structured approach to monitor interventions. This is used to assess entity governance, capability and performance, how entities communicate information to the board, their assurance mechanisms for key projects and programmes, and whether the board is receiving the necessary information from an entity. The approach is informed by your priorities and the Ministry s assessment of key risks for each entity. Influencing the international environment New Zealands transport regulatory systems are significantly shaped by international obligations, standards and recommended practices. New Zealand benefits strongly from international transport regulatory frameworks, which underpin our international connections and facilitate our trade in goods and services. The Ministry and the Crown entities work together to: monitor and understand what is happening internationally, and how it affects, or may affect, New Zealands transport system influence relevant international standards to protect and promote New Zealands interests ensure New Zealand meets its international transport commitment s. A wide range of international organisations influence New Zealands transport settings. Some of the key organisations the Ministry and transport agencies work with , and their role, are: International Civil Aviation Organization ICAO : sets standards and regulations for the aviation sector international safety, security, and environmental protections (under the Chicago Convention) . International Maritime Organization IMO: sets standards and regulations for the maritime sector (international safety, security, and environmental protections). International Labour Organization ILO: sets standards for work and employment , including on ships (under the Maritime Labour Convention). United Nations working parties: New Zealand has obligations as a party to two United Nations Agreements relating to road vehicle standards. Under these agreements, regulations and standards are set to improve road safety and facilitate international trade. World Meteorological Organization WMO: New Zealands obligations under the World Meteorological Organization, the United Nations specialised agency for weather, climate, and water, are fulfilled by way of the Ministry s contract with MetService. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT DELIVERING YOUR PRIORITIES
The Ministry developed an issues paper following extensive engagement with a broad range of stakeholders including those operating or using the freight transport system, partner government agencies and local government.
The Ministry feels like one big inclusive team. There is always someone who will offer their help with a project so you always have the support you need. We are all trying to achieve the best results for New Zealanders, and this is evident in the collaborative vibe of our workplace. This is a place for people who want to get stuck in and make a difference.
The Ministry focuses on improving the overall per formance of the transport system, improving the performance of government transport agencies, and enhancing the value for money that the government receives from its investment in the transport system.
The Ministry for the Environment has released the first Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP).
The Ministry has a large work programme to implement the Act.
The Ministry has contributed to the draft Cabinet paper. It suggests a high level approach to this response, which acknowledges the Commissions report, provides an overarching strategic narrative on the Governments climate change priorities, and responds to the key findings. The draft public facing response will be attac hed to the paper.
The Ministry has documented a draft assessment framework and standard assessment requirements to enable:
The Ministry has issued a tender on GETS seeking an experienced provider familiar with the
The Ministry has led the development of the Aotearoa New Zealand freight and supply chain strategy, which provides longterm strategic direction for our freight and supply chain system. The strategy was released on August .
The Ministry is committed to delivering value for mon ey throughout the transport system, including Road, Rail, Aviation and Maritime.
The Ministry is proposing to progress the temporary law changes through three OICs that will:
The Ministry is taking a staged approach to reviewing transport penalties, as and when specific projects allow.
The Ministry is the Chair of the Transport Response Team, the Transport Sector Coordinating
The Ministry is undertaking an assessment of the longterm requirements for a resilient connection across Cook Strait to connect people and enable freight movements. The Cook Strait is a strategic link in New Zealands transport system and must be safe and resilient for the public and freight sector.
The Ministry is working alongside the Treasury, the Public Service Commission and KiwiRail to advise Ministers on the extent to which the current entity form of KiwiRail Holdings Limited (KiwiRail) and the New Zealand Railways Corporation (NZRC) as two StateOwned Enterprises (SOEs) support Government objectives. The review will also advise if any changes to the status quo would better enable KiwiRail and NZRC to achieve outcomes sought by Government, including making changes from the SOE form. The Terms of Reference for the review are here, together with advice to Ministers about the Terms of Reference and the process for developing this advice.
The Ministry issues tender on GETS
The Ministry leads advice on
The Ministry led process to advise you of savings beyond the IBE process that could help offset cost pressures in the Transport Sector KiwiRail have proposed a
The Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) is leading a review of the Total Mobility scheme. The purpose of the review is to establish how this scheme operates and how it can be improved to create better outcomes for disabled people.
The Ministry of Transport Te Manat Waka (the Ministry) does not hold information on money spent on driving tests. Therefore, I am refusing your request under section (g) of the Act that the information requested is not held by the Ministry.
The Ministry of Transport and Waka Kotahi received feedback from many stakeholders, including local and regional councils. The Ministry of Transport and Waka Kotahi are in the process of analysing submissions and will provide advice to the Minister of Transport on changes to the draft rule based on feedback received through consultation. It is expected that the final rule will come into effect in December .
The Ministry of Transport commissioned Ernst and Young to deliver the Value of Rail Report to estimates the benefits that rail produces ever year.
The Ministry of Transport completed a review of PTOM to understand how was working and whether it can be improved.
The Ministry of Transport has appointed Air New Zealand, Cathay Pacific, China Airlines,
The Ministry of Transport has established a Land Transport Revenue Stakeholder Reference Group to support regular engagement with our key stakeholders.
The Ministry of Transport has proactively released the advice and Cabinet materials that supported Cabinets April decisions on the Supercharging EV Infrastructure work programme.
The Ministry of Transport has undertaken an analysis of Auckland household travel over years to . The work is intended to help inform future work on transport related policy issues like climate emissions, land use, housing, freight, and equity issues in Auckland and nationally.
The Ministry of Transport is developing documents about how we implement changes to authorising cooperative airlines agreement under the new Act (Part subpart ) that comes into force April .
The Ministry of Transport is exploring concession opportunities on New Zealand toll roads.
The Ministry of Transport is now preparing a proactive release briefing comprising Cabinet material and key advice for Minister Dooceys consideration.
The Ministry of Transport is now preparing a proactive release briefing comprising Cabinet material and key advice for your consideration. Briefing: Consultation on Rules Relating to SEACERT and Non Commercial use of Commercial Vessels This briefing will seek your agreement to consult on improvements to seafarer certification rules, and rules relating to non commercial use of commercial vessels. These changes are sought by the sector and reduce costs and complexity. Week ending September s ()(g)(i) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
The Ministry of Transport is releasing the Manukau Harbour Feasibility Study, completed by Tonkin Taylor in . This study investigates whether it would be technically feasible to establish reliable and safe marine access to a largescale port in the Manukau Harbour.
The Ministry of Transport is releasing the technical working papers, which supplement the Manukau Harbour Feasibility Study.
The Ministry of Transport is seeking feedback on the how applications for cooperative airline agreements will be assessed under the new Civil Aviation Act.
The Ministry of Transport is the governments system lead on transport. The Ministry
The Ministry of Transport is working with the Parliamentary Counsel Office to draft a bill so to be introduced to the House before the end of . After that, the draft bill will be referred to the Transport and Infrastructure select committee which will take public submissions on it. You can keep track of the Transport and Infrastructure select committees activities, and find out how to make a submission on the draft bill, by visiting this website:
The Ministry of Transport provided some advice to the Minister of Transport in May outlining the options for taking forward a programme of work. The Minister agreed to the Ministry of Transport:
The Ministry of Transport provided updates on advanced aviation, highlighting the Governments commitment to a worldclass regulatory environment by with a lighttouch approach.
The Ministry of Transport recognises the vital importance of monitoring how effectively the Governments transport investment str ategy delivers on the desired results, including how the Agency gives effect to the GPS. Consequently there has been significant co nsideration of the manner in which GPS will be measured going forward, reflecting a substantial change in approach to the developmen t of GPS from previous GPSs. GPS sets out the Governments investment strategy for the land transport plannin g and funding and the returns (results) that the Government, as funder, expects to yield over its short, medium and long term horizons.
The Ministry of Transport will develop a comprehensive, modeneutral transport assessment and evaluation system consisting of four main components. These are: System performance measures develop measures that can be applied across different transport modes, to show how well strategies and initiatives across the transport system are performing and where intervention is required to deliver on the Governments priorities and desired outcomes for the transport system. This could include measures for areas in which transports impact is currently not comprehensively measured, for example, public health. System values and parameters build a set of quantified system values and parameters across different transport modes that go across a range of transport outcomes, particularly for those that have not been traditionally sought from transport, such as inclusive access, environmental effects, wellbeing and liveability. System and strategic modelling develop a system and strategic modelling suite that can be used to design, estimate and evaluate the impacts of changes to policy settings alongside choices for investment, especially related to revenue and investment policy. System appraisal methodologies create a consistent, integrated transport systemwide approach to assessment, which addresses current deficiencies in costbenefit analysis and expands the range of outcomes that can be considered. NZTA Arataki version for engagement https:www.nzta.govt.nzpl anningand investmentplanningarataki Arataki is the Transport Agencys year view of what is needed to deliver on the governments current priorities and longterm objectives for the land transport system . It is currently open for feedback that is intended to be incorporated into the document around April . Arataki includes a national and regional summary of the issues facing the land transport system. It sets out: Five step changes where we see there is the need for a change (over and above maintaining base levels of service) to meet the governments shortterm priorities and longterm outcomes. o Improve urban form o Transform urban mobility o Significantly reduce harms o Tackle climate change o Support regional development Six key drivers trends that influence the choices we make today and the future land transport system. o demographic change o climate change o technology o customer desire o changing economic structure, and o funding and financing challenges. This states that the way vehiclebased infrastructure is funded is no longer affordable or feasible. We must prioritise our investment to deliver the most effective, longterm solutions to move people and freight. This needs to recognise the other drivers affecting funding such as climate change, ageing populations, growth, investment required in other sectors (eg the three waters), change in way people pay for and use transport. A more sophisticated approach to planning, developing and managing the land transport system is needed with a focus on desired outcomes rather than assets. Six levers actions to be taken directly and in partnership with others to deliver the governments objectives for the land transport system. o Policy and regulation o Spatial and placebased planning o Network design, management and optimisation (Changing the form and function of the current land transport system so that it delivers the most effective and efficient transport solutions for the movement of people and goods) o Investment (in infrastructure, platforms and services) o Economic tools o Education, engagement and awareness a
The Ministry of Transports models and datasets (except for crash analyses), including vehicle fleet statistics, the Transport Dashboards, and the Vehicle Fleet Emissions Model, classify road vehicles into five vehicle type categories: light passenger vehicles, light commercial vehicles, motorcycles, heavy trucks, and buses. This vehicle type categorisation may be different from that found in the publications of the New Zealand Transport Agency, although the Motor Vehicle Register (MVR) is the primary data source for both organisations.
The Ministry of Transports Hkina te Kohupara Kia mauri ora ai te iwi Transport Emissions: Pathways to Net Zero by sets out potential pathways and policies to phase out emissions across the transport system. The discussion document does not represent Government policy.
The Ministry provided an update on the progress of the consultation process on the discussion document on Enabling Drone Integration. Road shows have been taking place in Wellington, Auckland, Christchurch and Queenstown and both the public events and the meetings with stakeholders are going well.
The Ministry publishes our Official Information Act responses and t he information contained in our reply to you on the Ministry website. B efore publishing we will remove any personal or identifiable information. Nku noa, n
The Ministry publishes our Official Information Act responses and the information contained in our reply to you may be on the Ministry website. Before publishing we wil l remove any personal or identifiable information. Yours sincerely
The Ministry publishes our Official Information Act responses and the information contained in our reply to you may be on the Ministry website. Before publishing we will remove any personal or identifiable information.
The Ministry publishes our Official Information Act responses and the information contained in our reply to you may be on the Ministry website. Before publishing we will remove any personal or identifiable information. Nku noa, n
The Ministry publishes our Official Information Act responses and the information contained in our reply to you may be on the Ministry s website. Before publishing we will remove any personal or identifiable information.
The Ministry publishes our Official Information Act responses and the information contained in our reply to you may be on the Ministry s website. Before publishing we will remove any personal or identifiable information. Nku noa, n
The Ministry publishes our Official Information Act responses and the information contained in our reply to you may be on the Ministry s website. Before publishing, we will remove any personal or identifiable information.
The Ministry publishes our Official Information Act responses, and the information contained in our reply to you may be on the Ministry website. Before publishing we will remove any personal or identifiable information.
The Ministry publishes our Official Information Act responses, and the information contained in our reply to you may be on the Ministry website. Before publishing we will remove any personal or identifiable information. Nku noa, n
The Ministry received a total of submissions on Hkina te Kohupara. of these were unique individual or group submissions, and of these were Greenpeace template submissions.
The Ministry recently completed two independent evaluations of GPS .
The Ministry set out the crossagency work on drones and emerging aviation technologies and provided an update on the work on Enabling Drone Integration measures. MBIE proposed the inclusion of adjacent technology partners in the Airspace Integration Trials Programme (AITP). All agencies will start thinking on a new format for sector engagement.
The Ministry supports the Minister of
The Ministry uses the Stakeholder Reference Group to share updates on the revenue work programme progress and activities, collect feedback, test ideas and discuss issues that are important to member organisations, including policy options.
The Ministry will also run a series of online hui for iwi, hap and Mori in regions affected by the severe weather events, and local authorities in areas covered by the proposed OiCs . We are aware other government agencies are engaging on other OiCs at a similar time. Where possible, we are looking to work alongside each other as much as possible.
The Ministry will consider transport connectivity between the islands and the needs of New Zealanders using the Cook Strait to identify any market failures. We will then consider a range of options to address them.
The Ministrys Business as Usual (BAU) programmes The Ministry has a large volume of BAU work that either forms part of our wider policy and operational programme or provides support for those wider programmes. Some of this work we are required to do by statute. Examples of BAU work includes Crash data analysis and reporting Crown entity monitoring Major investment programme monitoring Ministerial correspondence draft replies to approximately items of Ministerial correspondence OIAs respond to approximately OIA requests Six monthly National Land Transport Fund revenue forecasting Regulatory stewardship work programme Transport Rules Programme
The Ministrys assessment will complement that of the independent Ministerial Advisory Group established to provide additional independent assurance and advice on KiwiRails advice and work to operate, maintain and replace the fleet.
The Ministrys outcomes relating to value for money: Improved performance of transport sector
The NLTF alone cant do what we need the Land Transport system transformation to do (Government official) Increasingly it is outside the GPS process and NLTF process that the Government has made its big calls on transportCity Rail Linkclimate response fund (Government official) Looking into the future, on e official suggested that future GPS could be increasingly focused on continuous programmes, with improvements increasingly funded via direct Crown investments. NLTF could be scaled back to being a fund that provides for maintenance and renewalsnot buil ding new motorwaysthere are still going to be areas where we have to spend money on infrastructure (Government official) Some officials also felt that the continuous programme, including maintenance, could be more explicitly aligned to GPS objectives, thu s increasing the overall impact of the investment on desired outcomes. Our analysis suggests that around to of NLTP funding (from Waka Kotahi and local authorities combined) is committed to baseline activities such as maintenance and ongoing publi c transport services (see Figure , page ). A further is typically committed to activities started under a prior GPS, leaving only around of the funding available to support new activities during a three year GPS period. However, the strategic f ocus was on system development and improvements. These officials reported that less attention had been paid historically as to how the continuous programme could be better used to lever change. For example, a recent analysis of maintenance investments conf irmed an underperformance in contribution to outcomes relative to the proportionate size of the investment: The GPS has probably not historically put an emphasis on existing assets may be as much as it would have the other more ribbon cutting orientated i nvestments (Government official) We focus less on the bulk of our programmes, maintenance operations and renewals and public transport we tend to miss that, theres not a lot of guidance on those programmes from the GPS (Government official) However, officials also noted there were natural constraints on the extent to which maintenance investments could be tailored to enhance the contribution to broader GPS outcomes, with the contribution expected to continue to be most significant under access. . Relationship with RLTP Several interviewees described system performance issues in the relationship between GPS and RLTPs. Issues raised included the politically determined three year timeframes of the GPS compared to th e longer term planning timeframes required for RLTPs (as noted earlier), a perceived disconnect at times between regional and national priorities, and perceived inequities in GPS relevance and benefits delivered to urban and rural areas respectively. One i nterviewee illustrated these issues through the example of rural bridge replacements. While critical to regional resilience, national priorities were directing investment priorities elsewhere. However, this need doesnt go away. The overall dynamic repor ted was more money going to a few urban areasless money in the rural areas. APPENDIX TRENDS OBSERVED IN GPS OUTCOMES MONITORING
The NLTF activity classes largely follow on from GPS
The NLTF is administered by the NZ Transport Agency (NZTA) and all the revenue that goes into the fund is spent on our land transport system through the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP).
The NLTF is mainly funded by motor vehicle users The NLTF is administered by Waka Kotahi and collects about . billion per annum. The main sources of revenue for the NLTF are: Fuel Excise Duty (FED) is a tax applied at a rate of cl to petrol and .cl to liquid petroleum gas . Road User Charges (RUC) is a distance based charge applied to diesel vehicles and heavy vehicles over . tonnes. Different RUC rates apply to vehicle classes depending on weight and axle configuration and range from to over , per ,km travelled. M otor vehicle registration and annual licensing fees.
The NLTF is mainly funded by motor vehicle users The NLTF is administered by Waka Kotahi and collects about . billion per annum. The main sources of revenue for the NLTF are: Fuel Excise Duty (FED) which is a tax applied at a rate of cl to petrol and .cl to liquid petroleum gas . Road User Charges (RUC) which is a distance based charge applied to diesel vehicles and heavy vehicles over . tonnes. Different RUC rates are applied to vehicle classes depending on weight and axle configuration and range from to over , per ,km travelled.
The NLTF is mainly funded by motor vehicle users The NLTF is administered by Waka Kotahi and collects about . billion per annum. The main sources of revenue for the NLTF are: Fuel Excise Duty (FED) which is tax applied at a rate of cl to petrol and .cl to LPG Road User Charges (RUC) which is a distance based charge applied to diesel vehicles and heavy vehicles over . tonnes. Different RUC rates are applied to vehicle classes depending on weight and axle configuration and range from to over , per , km travelled. Motor vehicle registration and annual licensing fees Main sources of revenue for the NLTF () FED RUC Registration and licensing fees RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS
The NLTF is mainly funded by motor vehicle users The NLTF is administered by Waka Kotahi and collects about . billion per annum. The main sources of revenue for the NLTF are: Fuel Excise Duty (FED) which is tax applied at a rate of cl to petrol and .cl to liquid petroleum gas . Road User Charges (RUC) which is a distance based charge applied to diesel vehicles and heavy vehicles over . tonnes. Different RUC rates are applied to vehicle classes depending on weight and axle configuration and range from to over , per , km travelled. Motor vehicle registration and annual licensing fees
The NZ Transport Agency has initiated a review across its investment decision making framework to ensure that the direction set in GPS is properly embedded at all levels of the investment process. This work also provides a comprehensive basis for significantly improving how the transport investment system operates and performs. The improvements will: Align transport investments to Government outcomes including the Living Standards Framework and Transport Outcomes Framework. Improve the methodology and frameworks for how investments are made and managed (e.g. good portfolio management and business case process). Build capability in the sector to use and apply investment tools in a more consistent manner. Initial changes to the IAF have: Ensured that proposed safetyrelated investments will be given highest priority. Introduced performance indicators to allow a wider range of objectives to be recognised in the business case process, such as access and public health. Initial changes to the EEM have: and clarified the way that the benefits and costs of specific safetyrelated interventions are valued. Improved the accuracy of the costs used to account for factors including vehicle emissions, value of time, reliability and comfort. The Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) is playing both a monitoring and governance role in the review. As the responsible monitoring agency, the Ministry is partnering with the NZ Transport Agency to refine the approach to the wider investment decisionmaking framework review, in particular, to ensure that the review: Is properly coordinated, and that the focus on the IAFEEM is not diluted. Encompasses a monitoring and reporting approach in respect of benefits realisation throughout the investment process. Is sufficiently resourced, particularly to support the sector to adapt to changes made at the implementation stage.
The NZTA Would you rather antidrink driving public information campaign will also run nationally, with targeted advertising in the participating NZ Police and council regions throughout October and November . To increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the campaign, councils have been provided with messages and resources to promote the messaging through their owned channels such as websites, communications channels, newsletters and social media. Summer public information and communications NZTA is currently planning its public information and communications activity throughout the traditionally busy summer period (November February). There are two priority focus areas for this activity, reinforcing core road safety behaviours in support of police enforcement (restraints, impairment, distraction, speed), and raising awareness around roadworks and road worker safety throughout the maintenance season.
The National Airspace Policy stated the Governments views and expectations for airspace, air navigation and air traffic management and clarified for the aviation industry how New Zealands airspace would be developed and modernised.
The National Airspace and Air Navigation Plan, a guidance document developed by the CAA in collaboration with the aviation sector, was approved by Cabinet in early . The plan sets a direction to modernise New Zealands aviation system, incorporating new and emerging technology into the aviation system under the New Southern Sky programme.
The New Zealand Government has since extended final MIAC support to the aviation sector until March to help rebuild international reconnections and economic recovery. This extended support aligns with the reopening of the border under the Governments Reconnecting New Zealand plans.
The New Zealand Household Travel Survey measures the travel New Zealanders do by asking everyone in randomly selected households to record their travel over days.
The New Zealand Household Travel survey was carried out from July to June
The New Zealand Rail Plan
The New Zealand Rail Plan sets out the Governments vision and priorities for rail until , and the levels of investment needed to achieve it. It is a product of the recommendations from the Future of Rail review.
The New Zealand Search and Rescue Council provides strategic governance and leadership for
The New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) is in the process of integrating th e framework into its business case approach, requiring all future investment cases to demonstrate alignment to the five key outcomes. The application of the outcomes framework is also being integrated within other Crown transport agencies and is an importa nt tool to guide our regulating and monitoring performance across the transport network.
The New Zealand Travel Survey provided data to help develop policy and evaluate programmes relating to road use and safety.
The New Zealand Upgrade Programme is currently funding the build of about km of rd Main Line in South Auckland between Westfield and Wiri Junctions (north of Puhinui to south of Middlemore). This will alleviate existing congestion in the busiest part of the Auckland Metro Network and help separate commuter from freight services. The funding made available via the GPS could allow KiwiRail to undertake detailed engineering design, construction methodology as the start of a project to build a th Main between Westfield and Wiri and both rd and th Mains about km to Pukekohe. This is about future proofing rail in Auckland to cater for the commuter and freight growth to come. The southern part of Auckland is an important part of the largest freight movement area in New Zealand (Golden Triangle: Auckland Hamilton Tauranga). The rd Main extension and th Main are expected to be needed in the s to ensure the reliability of increasing passenger (metro and interregional) and freight rail services in the Auckland metro area. They will also help enable more trains to run between Port of Tauranga and Auckland, supporting mode shift from our highways to rail and reducing transport emissions. The rd Main extension and th Main allows the maximum commuter service frequency enabled by the City Rail Link, over time. They would also allow more interregional services (such as Te Huia) to operate. It is a first step in a much larger project to shift more peoplefreight onto rail and reduce our transport emissions over the next decade. An estimated million tonnes of freight moves in and out of the Auckland network each year and that avoids more than , long distance heavy truck trips. Improvements and upgrades to Aucklands rail network are important to improve passenger and interregional freight services. With additional lines, rail will play a greater role in supporting urban and economic growth, improving access and helping reduce emissions. Design work will start as soon as funding is approved and may take three years to complete. Avondale to Onehunga Rail Link
The North Auckland Rail Line (NAL) runs between Westfield in Auckland and Otiria, approximately km north of Whngrei. The operational part of the line runs from Swanson in West Auckland to the Fonterra plant at Kauri, around km north of Whngrei.
The OiC for Waka Kotahi is unlikely to address all the approvals required for the recovery and rebuild works. The Ministry continues to work with Waka Kotahi to ascertain any requirements for a future OiC and what that might enable. If a future OiC is prop osed, it will be subject to its own future engagement process ; however we draw this to your attention now for your awareness and to avoid any future confusion. Key checks and balances have been maintained A key consideration for the proposed OiCs is the importance of balancing the need for speed and certainty for recovery and rebuild works , with protecting the rights and protections provided by the primary legislation that are proposed to be modified. The Ministry is not proposing to remove any existing rights and protections. The following will be retained: engagement requirements with iwi, hap, Mori and affected stakeholders consent or approval s for works are still required the need to provide the necessary detail to ensure an application can be robus tly evaluat ed conditions remain able to be imposed on approvals compliance monitoring and enforcement powers remain with Councils Requirements will largely be shortened or replaced with simpler processes. Upholding Mori rights and interests is an import ant consideration Restoring access to, and providing a safe and resilient transport network for, Mori populations as soon as possible is a key priority for transport agencies. Waka Kotahi, KiwiRail, the Department of Conservation and local authorities will still need to engage with iwi, hap and Mori in relation to any potential impacts on public, private and Mori owned land, Treaty settlements and cultural values. The proposed OiCs will not modify Acts including the Te Ture Whenua M aori Act , and therefore those existing obligations and processes remain. No temporary changes are proposed to key provisions in the primary legislation covered by the OiCs that provide for Te Tiriti and Crown obligations. Relevant rights and protections for Mori that will need to be upheld in any specific area will become apparent when the temporary changes are implemented in that area. Examples include: culturally significant areas as defined in section B() of the Resource Management Act protected and av ailable rights and interests under the Marine and Coastal Area (Takutai Moana) Act and the Nga Rohe Moana o Nga Hapu o Ngati Porou Act notification requirements under section B of the Resource Management Act
The OiCs do not apply to all recovery and rebuild works. Annex sets out the specific parts of the state highway and rail networks that will be covered by the OiCs and provides a summary of the types of works required to address the damage. These are locations where emergency works processes are not sufficient to enable the recovery and rebuild. . OiC : Modifying the LTMA to streamline planning and funding approval processes The Ministry is proposing an OiC that will streamline certain requirements in the LTMA that could make it difficult to do recovery and rebuild works quickly and divert resources away from the recovery and rebuild effort. This OiC will be in place until August . Waka Kotahi and the Minister of Transport in relation to rail activities m ust meet various requirements before approving activities through the National Land Transport Fund ( NLTF ). While the LTMA largely exempts emergency works activities from these requirements, the usual processes apply once basic access and public safety is r estored. This makes it challenging to plan and deliver recovery works activities. For example, without this OiC, recovery activities could not receive NLTF funding without Waka Kotahi or KiwiRail modifying existing three yearly planning documents including the Government Policy Statement on land transport ( GPS LT), the National Land Transport Plan ( NLTP ) and Regional Land Transport Plans ( RLTP ). This can be timeconsuming and complex. This OiC will extend the exemptions that apply to emergency works activities to recovery activities. This will streamline the planning and approval of NLTF funded transport recovery works, and provide minimal need to change existing planning documents or procurement procedures. The OiC will not apply to rebuild works.
The OiCs incorporate material by reference. Incorporation by reference is a legal way of making technical, lengthy, complex documents, models or information part of our law.
The OiCs will be in place until the close of March
The Order in Council was signed to restore the existing State Highway and rail corridor along the coastal route to the north and south of Kaikura, with additional improvements to increase safety and resilience.
The Order makes modifications to the Land Transport Management Act by streamlining approval processes relating to National Land Transport Fund funded transport recovery works, enabling a faster response to the damage sustained from the severe weather events.
The Order modified provisions of the Resource Management Act and other pieces of legislation to streamline the recovery work.
The Order will be in place until the close of June .
The Orders are expected into effect on October
The Orders in Council will facilitate recovery works over the next few years to be undertaken on significantly damaged state highway and rail infrastructure by Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail.
The Orders will be in place until the close of March .
The Output Plan is an agreement between you and the Chief Executive of the Ministry of Transport, Audrey Sonerson. It sets out the key deliverables we expect to deliver for you in .
The Output Plan provides clarity on what the Ministry intends to deliver The purpose of the Output Plan is to provide clarity on what is expected of the Ministry throughout the year. This provides the Minister, as the Responsible Minister, with a deeper understanding of the work that the Ministry will undertake and the ongoing trade off decisions that have to be made.
The PGF is administered by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employments Provincial Development Unit and is overseen by a core group of Regional Economic Development Ministers the Ministers for Finance, Regional Economic Development, Economic Development and Transport. We have an advisory, monitoring, and reporting role over PGF transport projects.
The PMO team is keen to support you in making the process easier for you. Please let me knowif theres any way I can help you with this (eg. Is there an opportunity for me to prepopulatethe report for you)
The Panel has initially been established until April .
The Panel have made nine recommendations to respond to the feedback and concerns they heard from the sector. They range from improving system leadership and protecting air navigation infrastructure, through to engaging better with iwi and Mori.
The Panel will also prepare advice on specifying lowlevel tolerance thresholds to be applied to oral fluid tests and detecting drugs in blood by the Institute of Environmental Science and Research, to avoid penalising drivers who have:
The Panel will provide advice on setting criminal limits for drug concentrations in blood.
The Parliamentary Counsel Office drafted the amendments, but the consultation was put on hold because there was not enough time to consult the public, finalise the amendments and put the changes in place before the general election.
The Parties shall conclude Implementing Protocols between ASEAN Member States and New Zealand , which shall form integral parts of this Agreement, for exchange of traffic rights.
The Police also provide information ( Table below) on reductions in passivescreening breath tests from to (). These reductions have previously been reported (Waters ). Table Police PassiveScreening Breath Tests by Download Year
The Proposal to vary the Scheme changes the scope of existing capital projects and reallocates funding across existing projects
The Provincial Growth Fund
The RIA that accompanied the Cabinet paper requesting approval to introduce the Bill covered:
The RLTP Annual Report Card tracks a range of transport indicators to enable trends to be m easured over time, for example, traffic flows, public transport usage, and the amount of freight carried by road and rail.
The RLTP Annual Report Card tracks a range of transport indicators to enable trends to be measured over time, for example, traffic flows, public transport usage, and the amount of freight carried by road and rail. This is visually demonstrated with data, as well as a summary card showing progress towards each target. Summary c Summary The RLTPs refer to value for money as it was a strategic objective of the GPS for Land Transport in . Many have used an ILM process to identify regional strategic priorities and guide investment There is some reporting against transport indicators in the RLTPs to enable trends to be measured over time, however this doesnt appear to be consistent across the board.
The Rail Plan aims to enable investment in the national rail network to restore rail freight and provide a platform for future investment for growth and to support metropolitan rail growth and productivity in our largest cities.
The Recommended Programme of Investment also contained a proposal for how to split the funding between central and local government. Recognising that the investment package would have local benefits from opening up development opportunities, they proposed that Wellington would fund more of the work than would be required under standard government funding arrangements.
The Regulation project explored the potential impact of technology on transport in New Zealand alongside how we as a society might be willing to adopt new technology. The projects key question was whether we could simply adapt the current regulation to meet future needs, or if we would require a new regulatory system to support changes to transport in the future.
The Report provides detail on progress made in the last year of implementing the Road to Zero strategy and the actions taken so far.
The Review Team acknowledges that GPS investment priorities, means Waka Kotahi has had to prioritise investment across all activity classes to best give effect to the GPS. This has resulted in Waka Kota hi having to trade off investment in maintaining the existing assets with investments that address signalled priorities through capital improvement, mode shift, rail and public transport. It will be important that GPS provides improved signalling of priorities and outcomes (and metrics) for local road and state highway maintenance to return the system to appropriate levels of service without creating large future spending backlogs. Future funding periods will also need to consider the effect of the substantial capital improvement programmes will have on the corresponding maintenance investment need. Capital Expenditure Profile Maintenance Expendi ture Profile Spend Expenditure performance over the current funding block has been generally consistent with the GPS bands. The proposed investment level was reflective of the upward expenditure trend as observed in figure below and this represents a increase on the previous funding period, coming on the back of a increase experienced over . Actual expenditure for the period is at the upper end of the GPS band at .B with increases experienced across all targeted One Network Road Classification outcomes. After considering adjustments for uncontrollable cost impacts such as Covid , market and demand increase s, there is still a material difference between actual expenditure and the investment proposal. The material increase in expenditure is related to increased costs incurred through emergency works events, administrative costs and contractor costs notably associated with Agency approved measure and value works (such as renewing a culvert, replacing a streetlight etc.). A relative plateauing of expenditure occurred from in response to the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) with the GPS targeting a more f latlined road maintenance investment. The Government established the Road Maintenance Task Force to identify opportunities to increase the effectiveness of road maintenance. Findings resulted in reduced spending in maintaining the state highway network and seeking efficiency gains across all activities. The Office of the Auditor General review on Waka Kotahi noted that in response Waka Kotahi effectively reduced the quantum of early renewals being undertaken stating: The Agency has strengthened the process it uses to decide when to resurface and rehabilitate state highways to ensure that this work is done at the right time, the right place. The Agency told us that it had previously over invested in the condition of the network by renewing state highways too early. The business case set cost saving targets at per year (M over years) through value for money initiatives, with the Network Outcomes Contracts considered a significant contributor to this target. Further analysis is need ed to understand the organisations approach to chase down cost savings and identify any lessons learnt for future funding periods. Although the Waka Kotahi Alliance maintenance contracts equating to approximately of total expenditure, the Review Team, at the time of this review, was not able test the efficiency and effectiveness of the investment in these contracts to determine if Waka Kotahi is realising optimal value for money for the services provided. A further review would be required to veri fy that Waka Kotahi is getting value for money for the services provided from these contracts.
The Review Team recognises that in establishing investment priorities an increased breadth and depth of investment needs, alongside growing cost drivers has had to be considered. Investment priorities have also needed to respond to challenges in mode shift, reliability, capacity, climate change response, safety improvements an d rail and public transport.
The Review and the Response to the review has now been .
The Review has identified potential improvement opportunities, including that: o The GPS needs to more clearly signal the outcomes sought from maintenance activities o Internal financialbudget management processes need further refinement to ensure the planned level of work is programmed and delivered on time and to budget o Improvements are required to ensure that all work (maintenance and renewal) is completed to the required specification the first time, with reduced performance and quality issues o Statement of Performance Expectations (SPE) measures are not fully representative of the difficulties Waka Kotahi is facing, and they appear to mask degradation in condition and service.
The Richmond Programme Business Case (PBC) was endorsed by Waka Kotahi and Tasman District Council in . This work identified an emerging programme of transport options that could be delivered over the short, medium and longterm out to the year . Waka Kotahi and Tasman District Council are currently undertaking shortterm improvements to the road network, including: Cycle lanes along key routes, Priority lanes for freight and public transport, targeted safety upgrades for pedestrians and cyclists.
The Road Efficiency Group (REG) CCDC project, in conjunction with the sector, will improve both local road asset management planning and decision making by: Developing national data standards, specifications and methodologies to ensure consistent condition data collection, accuracy, processing and management. Establishing a national approach to data management and quality assurance to ensure consistency. Undertaking condition data collection of some assets on behalf of RCAs to meet new requirements using modern international technologies.
The Road User Charges Review Group conducted an independent review of the RUC system and examined land transport cost allocations, options for improving the current RUC system and the merits of alternative methods of collecting revenue from diesel vehicles.
The Road to Zero Annual Monitoring Report has been jointly released by Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport, Waka Kotahi and NZ Police.
The Roads of Regional Significance include: O Mahurangi Penlink Waihoehoe Road State Highway Papakura to Drury Improvements State Highway Intersection State Highway Improvements Stage State Highway Melling Transport Improvements Canterbury Package Rural Intersections Canterbury Package Rolleston Upgrade Canterbury Package Halswell Second Ashburton Bridge Queenstown Package These projects are Crown funded.
The Rule does not require ABS or CBS to be retrofitted to existing motorcycles.
The Rules were a significant component of the system governing access to and use of New Zealands roads. Their objective was to:
The SORTED study intends to provide a more comprehensive view of trauma from road crashes by linking datasets across transport and health agencies.
The SORTED study intends to provide a more comprehensive view of trauma from road crashes by linking datasets across transport and health agencies. The study was a jointeffort between Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport, National Trauma Network, Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC), Manat Hauora, St John Ambulance, Wellington Free Ambulance, Waka Ktahi, NZ Police, and the Health Quality and Safety Commission. The findings have useful implications for Road to Zero as they highlight several data gaps and key focus areas for intervention design and monitoring.
The SPTF has the following objectives:
The SPTF legislative and operational reforms will be progressed over the course of and . Following the reforms, the SPTF will be implemented through future service planning and delivery.
The SPTF will have a new focus and new objectives. It will prioritise modeshift, fair and equitable treatment of employees, and improved environment and health outcomes.
The SUM Policies and Plans indicators demonstrate the type of information available to monitor local and Regional priorities through the p resence of inputs to mode shift (see Figure and the link available here for greater details). The policies and plans provided info rmation on the maturity of inputs for mode shift in recent years taken from indicator development for benchmarking SUM in five high growth urban councils. The indicator shown was a baseline for future policy and plan development and could be used to align with subsequent changes in the GPS in the future. While all five councils had plans to support walking, cycling, and public transport, there were differences in whether targets were set and the extent of monitoring and reporting of performance towards goals. . STUDY PHASES
The Safety Activity Class proposed in the draft GPS represents an update to the Road to Zero Activity Class introduced through GPS . Investment through the Safety Activity Class will be targeted towards interventions that support reductions in deaths and serious injuries, including in
The Safety activity class was previously called Road
The Secretary for Transport presented his advice to the Minister of Transport in February, which led into the Cabinet process for selecting a preferred delivery partner for CCM.
The Sector Strategy Group is responsible for the Ministrys advice on safety, regulatory reform, economics, data and analytics, strategic priorities, and transport modelling.
The Select Committee Inquiry will inform next steps on congestion pricing in Auckland. The timeframe for final recommendations from the Inquiry is yet to be confirmed.
The Select Committee has invited public submissions on the Bill by Friday, February . Once submissions have closed, the Committee will then hold public hearings to listen to some of those who made submissions. After hearing submissions they work through the issues raised, and decide what changes, if any, should be made to the Bill.
The Select Committee treaty examination has been completed and we expect to engage with stakeholders between July and October .
The Severe Weather Emergency Recovery (Land Transport Funding) Order
The Severe Weather Emergency Recovery KiwiRail and Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency Orders
The Severe Weather Emergency Recovery Legislation Act (the Act) came into force on April ( Severe Weather Emergency Legislation Act No , Public Act Contents New Zealand Legislation ). As well as making urgent changes to statutes to facilitate recovery in the areas affected by recent weather events, the Act enabled the Governor General to make Orders in Council to modify other statutes to provide those affected by the severe weather with relief from legislative requirements that are overly burdensome. Modifications are also permitted where necessary to enable prompt action for an efficient and timely recovery. Why is this needed The recent severe weather events in the North Island, including Cyclones Hale and Gabrielle and the Auckland floods, have caused widespread damage to land, waterways, infrastructure, businesses and homes. The extent of the damage is on a comparable scale to that caused by the Canterbury and HurunuiKaikura earthquakes. We are now moving away from the response phase and into a long period of recovery. The recovery needs will be broad and complex, and the damage caused to may be further exacerbated by future weather events. The recovery has two main objectives. First, to bring back normality to those affected as quickly as possible so individuals can get on with their lives and their operations. The second is to restore and enhance the infrastructure on which communities and the economy depends. The status quo regulatory environment has been designed for non emergency times. Some laws that work well during normal times are not fit for purpose for emergency situations and the associated recovery phase. For example: there is no relief from legislative obligations after an emergency, which may result in perverse outcomes whereby individuals, groups and business need to redirect their resources and focus from recovery efforts to instead focus on accessing relevant files from flood damaged properties in order to meet the usual deadlines; there is no flexibility to adapt legislation to changed requirements; and there is no means to address the volume of changes required to allow for speedy and timely decisions. For these reasons, the Government found it desirable to establish a mechanism to enable the regulatory environment to be modified, where necessary, for a limited time to support an efficient and effective recovery. Similar steps were taken following the Canterbury and HurunuiKaikura earthquakes and this model is being followed again as part of the response to the recent severe weather events. UNCLASSIFIED Page of UNCLASSIFIED What can Orders in Council be used for The objectives of the Order in Council process are to: support economic recovery, planning processes, rebuild and recovery of land, infrastructure, people, and built and natural environments; enable safety enhancements and improved resilience of infrastructure; ensure that an adequate and appropriate regulatory framework is in place as soon as possible, to expedite the pace and trajectory of the recovery, i ncrease resilience and avoid placing undue burdens on those most directly affected; and give people and communities affected by the severe weather events confidence that an enabling regulatory framework is in place to maximise recovery opportunities. In determining that, officials will consider whether there are any alternatives available (such as amending legislation by the standard amendment bill process, or using discretion to choose not to apply a penalty), and if so, what the outcome would be of using those alternatives . If there are no alternatives, or they would have undesirable effects, then an amendment may be considered, provided it is necessary or desirable for the purpose of the Act. The modification must go no further than is reasonably necess ary to achieve its purposepolicy objective. In working out if this is the case, consider scope, time, geographical limit and viability of alternatives. What is the Order in Council Process Who is responsible for proposing Orders in Council The agencies responsible for the statutes listed in Schedule will propose Orders in Council and take them through the Order in Council process. For example, amendments to the Local Government Act will be progressed by the Department of Internal Affairs . For complex Orders in Council agencies will work together with a nominated lead agency and lead Minister, to enable the policy development, approvals and consultation processes to take place in a joined up way. When will the Orders in Council be made The Order in Council process is following a tranche approach, with scheduled tranches progressing along set timelines. This is to manage the workload of high numbers of Orders in Council to be drafted and advised on, while ensuring proper processes are f ollowed to inform quality decision making. There are five proposed tranches of Orders, bring enacted as follows: tranche one enacted week of June (policy decisions are being made for this tranche concurrent with this briefing); tranche two enacted week of July (policy advice is being finalised for this tranche concurrent with this briefing); tranche three enacted week of August; tranche four enacted week of August; and tranche five enacted week of September.
The Severe Weather Emergency Recovery Legislation Act (the Act) came into force on April ( Severe Weather Emergency Legislation Act No , Public Act Contents New Zealand Legislation ). As well as making urgent changes to statutes to facilitate recovery in the areas affected by recent weather events, the Act enabled the Governor General to make Orders in Council to modify other statutes to provide those affected by the severe weather with relief from legislative requirements that are overly burdensome. Modifications are also permitted where necessary to enable prompt action for an efficient and timely recovery. Why is this needed The recent severe weather events in the North Island, including Cyclones Hale and Gabrielle and the Auckland floods, have caused widespread damage to land, waterways, infrastructure, businesses and homes. The extent of the damage is on a comparable scale to that caused by the Canterbury and HurunuiKaikura earthquakes. We are now moving away from the response phase and into a long period of recovery. The recovery needs will be broad and complex, and the damage caused to may be further exacerbated by future weather events. The recovery has two main objectives. First, to bring back normality to those affected as quickly as possible so individuals can get on with their lives and their operations. The second is to restore and enhance the infrastructure on which communities and the economy depends. The status quo regulatory environment has been designed for non emergency times. Some laws that work well during normal times are not fit for purpose for emergency situations and the associated recovery phase. For example: there is no relief from legislative obligations after an emergency, which may result in perverse outcomes whereby individuals, groups and business need to redirect their resources and focus from recovery efforts to instead focus on accessing relevant files from flood damaged properties in order to meet the usual deadlines; there is no flexibility to adapt legislation to changed requirements; and there is no means to address the volume of changes required to allow for speedy and timely decisions. For these reasons, the Government found it desirable to establish a mechanism to enable the regulatory environment to be modified, where necessary, for a limited time to support an efficient and effective recovery. Similar steps were taken following the Canterbury and HurunuiKaikura earthquakes and this model is being followed again as part of the response to the recent severe weather events. UNCLASSIFIED Page of UNCLASSIFIED What can Orders in Council be used for The objectives of the Order in Council process are to: support economic recovery, planning processes, rebuild and recovery of land, infrastructure, people, and built and natural environments; enable safety enhancements and improved resilience of infrastructure; ensure that an adequate and appropriate regulatory framework is in place as soon as possible, to expedite the pace and trajectory of the recovery, increase resilience and avoid placing undue burdens on those most directly affected; and give people and communities affected by the severe weather events confidence that an enabling regulatory framework is in place to maximise recovery opportunities. To achieve those purposes, while also ensuring the Orders in Council go no further than absolutely necessary, section of the Act sets out the parameters for the scope of any proposal as follows. a) It must grant exempti ons from, modify, or extend permitted legislation. Schedule of the Act lists the statutes that may be amended through this process. If a statute is not listed, it can be added through the same Order in Council Process. There are currently no plans to a dd additional statutes to Schedule . b) It must be connected to a severe weather event and regarding an affected area Orders in C ouncil must be in connection with a specified severe weather event , and must also be limited to a severe weather events affected area.
The Speed Reference Group workshops provided valuable insight into the issues RCAs face and the ways speed management could be improved in New Zealand. This included hearing about and testing potential options for improving how we manage speed on our roads.
The Stakeholder Reference Group is chaired by the Ministry and meets monthly. Membership is voluntary and by appointment, and includes the following representatives:
The Stakeholder Reference Group is not a technical forum or decisionmaking body. Its focus is to facilitate ongoing engagement between key bodies representing transport stakeholders and the Ministry of Transport.
The Strategic Investment Programme includes: Warkworth to Whangrei State Highway , including: o Te Hana to Brynderwyns o Warkworth to Wellsford o Whangrei to Brynderwyns Auckland Northwest Rapid Transit Auckland rail third and fourth Mains Expansion Avondale to Onehunga rail link Auckland and Wellington Metropolitan Level Crossing Upgrade and Removal Programme Cambridge to Piarere State Highway Tauranga to Tauriko State Highway Wellington CBD to Airport State Highway Second Mount Victoria Tunnel and Upgrades to Basin ReserveArras Tunnel Wellington CBD to Island Bay Mass Rapid Transit Napier to Hastings State Highway Christchurch Northern Link State Highway Nelson Hope Bypass State Highway Nelson (Rocks Road) shared path State Highway Ashburton Bridge State Highway
The Strategy should be read alongside the Defence Policy Strategy Statement , which is the main point of reference for matters relating to military maritime strategy and sovereign defence.
The Summary of Submissions Report will feed into the transport chapter of the Governments first Emissions Reduction Plan. Under the Climate Change Response Act , the Government must prepare Emissions Reduction Plans in response to the Climate Change Commissions (the Commissions) advice over fiveyearly emissions budget periods. New Zealands first Emissions Reduction Plan must be by December .
The SuperGold Card scheme was introduced in . It allows cardholders to travel free on scheduled offpeak urban public transport between .am and .pm and after .pm from Monday to Friday, and all day on weekends and public holidays. In the Auckland region, a special arrangement allows cardholders to travel for free during peak afternoon hours.
The SuperGold website has information about how eligible New Zealanders can get the SuperGold card, and the offers available for cardholders.
The Supplementary Order Paper also:
The TEAP will be finalised by June .
The Tacking Unsafe Speeds Programme is primarily established through the new Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits .
The Tauranga Eastern Link is a km, lane highway from Te Maunga to Paengaroa that bypasses Te Puke. The NZD million road was completed in July . It is estimated that all borrowing will be repaid from toll revenue within years, after which the tolls will be removed.
The Terms of Reference (the scope) for the review were developed in consultation with Total Mobility stakeholders and were set in July .
The Terms of Reference set out the task of developing a business case that considered the costs and benefits of:
The Tool is designed to support the application of the Framework, providing a stepbystep process to propose financial penalty levels for offences.
The Traffic Control Devices Rule changes included creating the markings and signage necessary to notify road users whether an EV may use special vehicle lanes.
The Transitions Guide explains what the differences between GPS and GPS .
The Transport Agency will work with its investment partners to take a wholeofnetwork approach to land transport investments to maximise the opportunities to improve efficiency and integration across the network. Optimisation is a core component of the Transport Agencys State Highway Network Strategy and Network Access and Use Strategy. While the Transport Agency aims to improve optimisation across the whole land transport network, the Agencys immediate focus will be on major urban areas under growth pressure and key strategic freight networks. Investment that optimises the provision and use of the land transport network will focus on two key areas: Network provision: Optimising the way the network is provided to users to manage the network more efficiently and improve safety, for example allocating space within corridors to high priority modes at peak times, providing for public transport, walking and cycling facilities, and utilising new and emerging technologies, Network use. Optimising the way the network is used by road users to get the most out of the network, for example providing realtime traveller information, implementing pricing and charging measures, and initiating marketing and education to influence the choices that road users make about their trip making. Direct text e Text about NZTA intervention hierarchy from Investment decisionmaking framework review: Pg. The team found the current application of the intervention hierarchy is not fitfor purpose as it: Cannot be applied to all transport outcomes, such as safety and resilience Is not effective for Transport Agency policies, such as mode neutrality Does not facilitate line of sight from strategy through to the business case Direct text https:nzta.govt.nzassets planningand investmentdocsInvestmen tDecisionMaking Framework review investigation stagereport October.pdf National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) Whole document https:www.nzta.govt.nzpl anningand investmentnational land transport programme nltp The NLTP contains a threeyear programme of planned activities and a year forecast of revenue and expenditure prepared by NZTA to give effects to the GPS.
The Transport Emissions Action Plan
The Transport Evidence Base Strategy aims to ensure the transport sector has the right data, information, research and evaluation to deliver an evidencebased transport system that improves wellbeing and liveability. Reporting against the GPS helps to develop the transport evidence base.
The Transport Evidence Base The Transport Evidence Base Strategy creates an environment to ensure data, information, research and evaluation play a key role in shaping the policy landscape. Good, evidence based decisions also enhance the delivery of services provided by the public and private sectors to support the delivery of transport outco mes and improve wellbeing and liveability in New Zealand. The GPS Evaluation is listed on the Evaluation Programme, which forms part of the Transport Evidence Base implementation plan.
The Transport Indicators are based on the Transport Outcomes Framework and track progress on the outcomes of the transport system inclusive access, healthy and safe people, environmental sustainability, resilience and security, and economic prosperity.
The Transport Indicators are multimodal and outcomefocused, while the GPS reporting indicators include input, output and outcome indicators relating to investment from the NLTF. The Transport Indicators and GPS reporting indicators were developed in parallel and reflect each other as much as possible.
The Transport Indicators provide a system view of the state of the transport system and can be used by a wide range of audiences in many different ways. The indicators are not intended to be a scorecard of the transport system. Some indicators will be mor e significant than other s in terms of their impact, and all of the indicators are influenced by a wide range of factors. The intention is that people will use the indicators to draw their own conclusions about where the system is performing well, and where we need to focus more o f our efforts. . Statement of intent https:www.transport.govt.nzab outgovernancestatementsofint entstatement ofintent The Statement of Intent sets out the Ministry of Transports work programme over a three year period by providing a full outline of work and priorities.
The Transport Outlook: Current State report looked at the current transport system and summarised the New Zealand transport system in one place for the first time.
The Transport Outlook: Future State report looks to the future, projecting transport demand over the next years for a base case and alternative scenarios.
The Transport and Infrastructure Select Committee held its inquiry into congestion pricing in Auckland. The Committee held hearings in Auckland and Wellington, received written submissions and heard evidence from oral submitters.
The Treasury Cost Benefit and Better Business Case guidance has a preference (for State Sector expenditure) to analyse benefits from a national economy perspective rather than a nar rower project, programme, agency or all ofgovernment perspective . It is helpful to keep this in mind when identifying benefits as it will assist later in the process.
The Treasury leads the governments investment management system and is responsible for developing and maintaining the integr ity of the system as a whole. In , the Treasury establ ished the Investment Management and Asset Performance (IMAP) team, with a specific focus on improving the effectiveness of investment management and asset performance in the State sector.
The U.S. Department of Transportation (USA)
The UA Integration Leadership Group first met in , and meets at least once every months. We chair and administer the group which is made up of senior officials from our ministry, the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), Airways New Zealand, and the Ministry of Business, Innovation, and Employment (MBIE). Other people with relevant expertise are sometimes invited to attend.
The VDAM Rules applied to heavy vehicles operating on New Zealand roads that move people, livestock, goods and other freight, materials and special equipment.
The VDAM Rules came into effect in and have been amended several times. In , we began working with Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency to review the Rules, and consulted the public on proposed changes in and in . This resulted in the Land Transport Rule: Vehicle Dimensions and Mass ( Rules), which took effect on February .
The Vehicle Dimensions and Mass (VDAM) Rules are designed to improve heavy vehicle productivity and efficiency, and reduce compliance costs for drivers and companies without compromising the road transport system and roaduser safety outcomes.
The Vehicle Exhaust Emissions Amendment Rule
The Vehicle Exhaust Emissions Rule says that vehicles registered after May may not be modified in such a way that they might fail the emissions test that forms part of the border inspection process. If a Warrant or Certificate of Fitness inspector suspects the vehicle has been modified, they can make the vehicle undergo a metered tailpipe emissions test before they issue a Warrant or Certificate of Fitness.
The Waka Kotahi Board ultimately have the power to approve projects funded from the National Land Transport Fund. By highlighting these projects, the Government expects that their strategic importance will be given particular consideration during the development of the National Land Transport Plan.
The Zero Carbon Act also put in place the institutional architecture to achieve the targets. This established the Climate Change Commission, and includes a system of emissions budgets that aim to achieve the reduction targets in a series of steps, and a requirement for governments to develop emissions reduction plans.
The above information is summarised in the document schedule at Annex .
The above information is summarised in the document schedule at Annex . With regard to the information that has been withheld under section of the Act, I am satisfied that the reasons for withholding the information at this time are not outweighed by public interest considerations that would make it desirable to make the information available. You have the right to seek an investigation and review of this response by the Ombudsman, in accordance with section () of the Act. The relevant details can be found on the Ombudsmans website www.ombudsman.parliament.nz
The above process was repeated for each of the following outcomes: () Proved outcomes for a drink driving (DD) offence over the following to years () Proved outcomes for a disqualified driving offence over the following to years () Proved outcomes for an other (non drinkdisqual ified driving) offence over the following to years
The action plan accompanies the strategy and contains initial actions within the strategys focus areas. The initial action plan lasts for years starting on January , although delivery of some actions will continue after . Some actions are currently in progress or in place.
The activity class for New and improved infrastructure for State Highways was increased by NZD million per year for the years and .
The advice to Cabinet on the indicative package included some detail on the following:
The aeronautical authorities of each Party may provide the aeronautical authorities of another Party, upon request, with periodic statistics or other similar information relating to the traffic carried on the agreed services.
The agencies responsible for the rebuild were Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail.
The aim of random roadside drug testing is to create an efficient method of deterring, detecting, and removing drivers who have taken qualifying drugs from the road. This is intended to allow for infringement notices to be issued to drivers at the roadside, which supports deterrence of drug driving (much like the alcohol testing).
The aim of the Review was to provide insights into the effectiveness of investment in road safety activities, as a part of the Road to Zero programme.
The airlines propose to continue to coordinate their operations on the transPacific, including in respect of marketing and sales, freight, pricing, scheduling, distribution strategies including agency arrangements, yield and inventory management, frequent flyer programmes, lounges, joint procurement and product and service standards.
The amended Part : Certificates of Insurance and Part : Offshore Installations Oil Spill Contingency Plans and Oil Prevention Certification:
The amendment provides a rebate if fuel was bought in Auckland and then taken:
The amendment rules came into effect in April .
The amendments to the LTA mean track user charges established through regulations can flow into the NLTF. This will ensure track users contribute to the network costs in a fair and transparent way.
The analysis of the Census Journey to Work results commissioned by Auckland Transport repeats a study of the Census Journey to Work results commissioned by the Minister of Transport. The results of that earlier study are set out in the report
The analysis was commissioned at the same time as Auckland Transport commissioned Richard Paling Consulting to undertake an analysis of the Census Journey to Work results. The results are set out in the report
The applicable charges, and vehicles excluded from the charges are set out in the
The assessment and evaluation frameworks used by transport sector entities, including the NZ Transport Agency, are underpinned by numerous key values, assumptions and approaches. These are used to measure costs and benefits, assess the likely impacts of different options, weigh up tradeoffs, and, ultimately, inform the decisions that we take. The quality of our decisions, and the delivery of desired outcomes, therefore depends on the robustness of these different components of the system and how well they work together.
The assessment framework will be complemented in due course with guidance on the application process for airlines.
The attached documents include KiwiRails cost and commercial estimates for the Wairoa to Gisborne rail line and advice from the Ministry of Transport to Regional Economic Development Ministers on the proposed Gisborne Rail Line Business Case.
The aviation industry directly employs thousands of people in New Zealand, including pilots, cabin
The aviation industry, technology and our regulatory and security environments continue to evolve. Its important the aviation system, and its critical supporting infrastructure, evolve with these changing needs. The air navigation system is no different, and this report will help set the foundation for future development.
The aviation sector is mainly owned and operated by the private sector. The Ministry provides
The backlog of tests has remained at ,.
The base year for the HAPINZ . assessment was , with data typically averaged over . was selected because it was the most recent year for which we had a complete set of suitable air quality, population and health data.
The business case explored the merits of upgrading rail in Northland and constructing a new section of track to connect Northport to the NAL, known as the MPL.
The business case identified that it would cost roughly NZD million for the NAL and NZD million to construct the MPL. Construction for all components would take at least years to complete. It would cost an estimated NZD million to reopen the Dargaville branch line from the NAL.
The business case offers four possible scenarios for a rapid rail connection between Hamilton and Auckland, including extending electrification of the existing route, to building an entirely new corridor.
The business case we commissioned was funded by the Provincial Growth Fund. At the same time the fund also provided funding for complementary work by KiwiRail Ltd to investigate the condition of the NAL, how much it would cost to renew and the cost of building the MPL.
The capability and performance of the transport entity boards is critical in delivering your priorities and expectations Each Crown entity and company is governed by a board. There are a maximum of ministerial appointed positions across the transport sector. This is comprised of up to positions on Crown entities, including positions on the ALRL Board, TAIC Commissioners, CRLL Board, Aviation Medical Conveners, and advisory committee positions. Crown entity boards have the primary responsibility for their entitys performance. They exercise the power, perform the functions of each entity and hold responsibility for the operational decisions of their entities. You appoint and oversee those boards as responsible Minister and are assisted by the Ministry as your monitoring agent, assisting you in discharging your statutory functions. Before appointments fall due, we will provide you with advice to support the appointment and re appointment of board members. As part of this process, we will provide you with an overall assessment of board capability and recommendations on the skills and capabilities needed to ensure your boards are well governed, effective, and high performing. As defined under section of the Crown Entities Act https:www.publicservice.govt.nzguidanceit takes three operating expectations framework forstatutory crown entities RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Parliament including select committees) Sets direction and funding Appoints the board Monitors performance THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS
The capability and performance of the transport entity boards is critical in delivering your priorities and expectations Each Crown entity and company is governed by a board. There are a maximum of ministerial appointed positions across the transport sector. This is comprised of up to positions on Crown entities and companies, two medical convener positions, and advisory committee positions. TAIC Commissioners are appointed by the Governor General on your recommendation and also act as the members of that entitys Board. Crown entity boards have the primary responsibility for their entitys performance. They exercise the power, perform the functions of each entity and hold responsibility for the operational decisions of their entities. You appoint (or recommend the appointment of) and oversee those boards as the responsible Minister and are assisted by the Ministry as your monitoring agent. Before appointments fall due, we will provide you with advice to support the appointment and re appointment of board members. As part of this process, we will provide you with an overall assessment of board capability and recommendations on the skills and capabilities needed to ensure your boards are well governed, effective, and high performing. Table Accountability mechanisms Accountability Mechanism Description Letter of Expectations Your primary mechanism to set priorities and performance expectations on an annual basis. You can expect to receive draft letters from the Ministry around OctoberNovember each year. These letters are sent out well in advance of the financial year so Crown entities can respond effectively.
The challenges and opportunities of decarbonising the transport system in a way that helps everyone in New Zealand was discussed, debated and challenged during the online event.
The change was a temporary measure that supported the EV Programme and allowed further work to be done on how the ACC levy system accommodates new vehicle technologies.
The changes mean the sector can respond better to customer needs. They also encourage competition, allow for new technology and maintain safety for drivers and passengers, with similar rules applying across a range of small passenger services.
The changes reduced compliance costs, simplified administration and allowed Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency to take greater advantage of electronic technology for the administration and collection of RUC. They included:
The charge will be calculated as follows:
The closing for submissions is May .
The complexity of the assessment and evaluation system means that, to properly ensure that Government can deliver on the outcomes identified in the Transport Outcomes and Living Standards Frameworks, we need an overarching, comprehensive assessment and evaluation framework. It is important that this can be applied consistently across the transport system, and used to weigh up all possible interventions, and all modes.
The condition of the existing
The consultation asked for feedback on options for setting a costsharing rate for facilitated carpooling, and new offences and penalties regulations needed to support the proposed Land Transport Rule amendments.
The consultation asked for feedback on a number of other proposed Rule changes aimed at making streets safer for vulnerable users. These include requiring a minimum overtaking gap when passing vulnerable road users like cyclists, horse riders or those walking on roads without footpaths. The proposed minimum overtaking gap is metre when the speed limit is kmh or lower and . metres when the speed limit is over kmh.
The consultation asked for feedback on the proposed new Land Transport Rule: Paths and Road Margins and proposed changes to three other Land Transport Rules:
The consultation focused on gathering feedback on the current Acts, specifically around the statutory framework, safety and security, airline licensing and competition, airports, fees and charges, and carriage by air airline liability for delay, death and injury, and lost and damaged baggage.
The consultation focused on how acceding to the treaty would benefit New Zealand by protecting trade interests, promoting the interests of Pacific Island countries, improving both public health and New Zealands influence on climate policy, and making it easier for New Zealandflagged ships to travel to other countries already signed up to Annex VI. It also noted the potential costs.
The consultation for the Government Policy Statement on Land Transport responses included both survey and written responses, for ease we have copied the survey output onto Word documents for both C andor and NZ Heavy Haulage Association responses.
The consultation on the Severe Weather Emergency Recovery KiwiRail Holdings Limited and Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency Orders has now closed
The consultation period of this project closes July please do reach out to our teams if you want any further information.
The contents of our social media accounts are intended for informational purposes only. The Ministry of Transport shall in no event accept any liability for loss or damage suffered by any person or body due to information provided on these sites or linked sites.
The coordination and provision of search and rescue services is an international obligation for
The copyright in other material may be owned by third parties and used with the copyright holders permission. Such material may not be reproduced without obtaining the permission of the copyright holder.
The cost of LGWM will be shared:
The cost varies depending on:
The current regulatory framework in New Zealand has performance based standards and prescriptive rules. Performance based standards include dangerous and careless driving prohibitions under the Land Transport Act (the Act), and elements of the road user rules, licencing of drivers, transport services, and prescriptive vehicle standards. This framework addresses vehicles with level automated features such as vehicles with lanekeep assist, collision mitigation systems, and automated emergency braking systems.
The current total amount of PGF funding approved for land transport is approximately NZD million as at July .
The denominator in the TOTEX ratio is benefits therefore benefits realisation should be the cornerstone of TOTEX. There also n eeds to be consideration as to how long term, and unintended outcomes are monitored and measured.
The departmental liaison officer for Committee staff to contact is Prashila Dayal, Senior Adviser Corporate Accountability , phone or em ail p.dayaltransport.govt.nz.
The deployment of AVs on public roads are still bound by existing rules and regulations on the operation of motor vehicles under the Land Transport Act , and other legislation that address the safe and secure operation of motor vehicles.
The designated airline of each Party shall be allowed to operate the agreed services on the following route:
The detail of the changes is found in the
The detailed business case is considering two routes to help manage growth and urban development: to the south from the Wellington Railway Station past the Wellington Regional Hospital and on to Island Bay, and to the east from the Basin Reserve through Mt Victoria, on to Miramar and the airport.
The different parts of the transport system Central government is heavily involved in the transport system as a planner, funder, partner, and regulator. A major part of your role will be working with transport sector agencies that help deliver the Governments objectives . These include: The Ministry is a government department Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency (Waka Kotahi), the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), Maritime New Zealand (MNZ) are transport agencies t he Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC) is an independent Crown entity and Standing Commission of Inquiry three state owned enterprises (SOEs): KiwiRail, Airways Corporation of New Zealand Ltd (Airways), and Meteorological Services of New Zealand Ltd (MetService) Auckland Light Rail Limited (ALRL) was established in late under Schedule of the Crown Entities Act . Additionally, City Rail Link Limited is the sole company under Schedule A of the Public Finance Act , jointly established by the Crown and Auckland Council to deliver Aucklands City Rail Link (CRL). You have different roles and responsibilities in relation to each of these agencies. Figure Relationship between you, the Ministry, SOEs and agencies
The different parts of the transport system Central government is heavily involved in the transport system as a planner, funder, partner, and regulator. A major part of your role will be working with transport sector agencies to help deliver the Governments objectives. These include: t he Ministry is a government department Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency (Waka Kotahi) , the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) , Maritime New Zealand (MNZ) are transport agencies t he Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC) is an independent Crown entity and Standing Commission of Inquiry three SOEs : KiwiRail, Airways Corporation of New Zealand Ltd (Airways) , and Meteorological Services of New Zealand Ltd (MetService) Auckland Light Rail Limited (ALRL) was established in late under Schedule of the Crown Entities Act . Additionally, City Rail Link Limited (CRLL) is the sole company under Schedule A of the Public Finance Act , jointly established by the Crown and Auckland Council to deliver Aucklands City Rail Link (CRL) . You have different roles and responsibilities in relation to each of these agencies.
The different parts of the transport system Central government is heavily involved in the transport system as a planner, funder, partner, enforcer, and regulator. A major part of your role will be working with transport sector agencies that help deliver the Governments objectives, these include: Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) is a government department. Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency (Waka Kotahi), the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), Maritime New Zealand (MNZ) and the Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC) are transport agencies, with TAIC as an independent Crown entity. There are three state owned enterprises (SOEs): KiwiRail, Airways Corporation of New Zealand Ltd (Airways), and Meteorological Services of New Zealand Ltd (MetService). Auckland Light Rail Limited (ALRL) was established in late under Schedule of the Crown Entities Act . Additionally, City Rail Link Limited is the sole company under Schedule A of the Public Finance Act, jointly established by the Crown and Auck land Council to deliver Aucklands City Rail Link (CRL). You have different roles and responsibilities in relation to each of these agencies.
The document analyses data based on the Auckland Plan Transport Network (APTN) looking at challenges facing Auckland transport. Section . New Transport Technologies Intelligent network management: Further investment in this area could lead to material accessibility and congestion improvements by enabling more comprehensive real time information and analytics, better traffic management tools (such as smarter traffic signals) and preparation for the rollout and management of new vehicle technologies through vehicletoinfrastructure communication. Additional investment is likely to deliver good value for money , by enabling more efficient use of existing infrastructure. Section . Indicative Package Development The three stages of option testing informed development of the strategic approach outlined in the Recommended Strategic Approach. This is an integrated approach that aims to balance transport demand with the capacity of our infrastructure and services. It requires a fundamental shift to a greater focus on influencing travel demand through smarter transport pricing and accelerating the uptake and implementation of new technologies, alongside substantial ongoing transport investment, and getting more out of existing networks. Target Investment to the most significant challenges prioritise investment to achieve best value for money , enable and support growth, strengthen strategic transport networks. Section . Prioritisation Framework Framework for identifying early priorities considered two broad factors, both of these are used as prioritisation methodology, being rated as low, medium or high; The extent to which investment targets the most significant first decade challenges, and The potential to deliver value for money in the first decade To enable a consistent comparison of potential value for money, a framework was developed that enabled measurement of the main value for money components, alongside the interventions estimated cost. See pg for table outlining this.
The document has the following major sections: Principles of value for money assessment o This chapter explains what a value f or money assessment is and how value for money is assessed through three elements: Option development Measuring costs and impacts Consideration of risks and uncertainties Value for money assessment o This chapter introduces two value for money metrics : the Benefit Cost Ratio and Net Present Public Value. o This chapter also introduces how to assess value for money by taking considerations of three types of monetised impacts, non monetised impacts and u ncertainty. Value for money categories o This chapter introduces the various categories used by the Department and explains how they correspond to the value for money metrics. Reporting value for money o This chapter focuses on how value for money conclusion s should be presented in a Value for Money Statement. Nonmonetised assessment o This chapter explains when to undertake a non monetised assessment, how to undertake a non monetised assessment and how to report outcomes of a non monetised assessment. Analyti cal assurance statements and value for money
The document schedule at Annex details how the bri efings have been treated. The following sections of the Act have been used:
The document schedule at Annex details how the briefings have been treated. The following sections of the Act have been used:
The document schedule at Annex summarises the above information.
The documents covered by this release are below.
The documents you have ask ed for, also known as Assented Versions, are not held by the Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) but are held by Archives New Zealand. We have not transferred your request under the Official Information Act as your request is dealt with under the Public Records Acts access regime.
The draft Bill also incorporated new drug and alcohol regulation for commercial operators, previously agreed by Cabinet under its Clear Heads policy.
The draft GPS recognises value for money as one of four strategic priorities. Correspondingly, the RLTP aligns with national priorities by setting up the regional strategic issues and objectives including a wellplanned, connected and integrated transport network, which aligns with the priority of value for money. Summary b Wellington RLTP annual monitoring reports https:www.gw.govt.nzam r Greater Wellington Regional Council has information on their website showing reporting on an annual basis over a year period since the RLTP was adopted, showing progress towards Wellington Regional Land Transport Plan (RLTP) indicators and targets.
The draft GPS includes a new strategic priority for maintaining and operating the system. This reflects the need to manage our current roading network and operate existing public transport services. There is also a new sustainable urban and regional development priority, which emphasises the need for our cities and towns, large and small, to have transport networks that are fit for the future, and that promote integrated landuse and transport planning.
The draft GPS sets out a series of projects that are strategically important for the development of New Zealands transport system in the coming decades.
The draft GPS outlines the Governments plan for investing in land transport over the next years by directing billion per year in expenditure from the National Land Transport Fund.
The draft GPS prioritises economic growth and productivity, increased maintenance and resilience, safety, and value for money from transport expenditure. It also reintroduces the Roads of National Significance programme that was started under the previous National Government in .
The draft New Zealand Rail Plan is a product of the recommendations of the Future of Rail review. The review aimed to identify the role rail can play in New Zealands transport system and put in place a sustainable approach to funding rail over the longer term.
The draft Terms of Reference was the first step in our formal work programme for the Future of the Revenue System project. Further work is underway to shape the details of this work programme, and some timeframes have since shifted.
The draft rail plan will also inform funding decisions in the Government Policy Statement on Land Transport (GPS) and future Budget decisions.
The draft rule and consultation overview can be found here:
The drone forums are a way for us to share what we are doing, where we are going and encourage the sector to get involved. Anyone interested in the use of drones in New Zealand can attend.
The early part of the role was centred around improving the facilities as we shifted to a more flexible work model. There was also a steep learning curve in matters of finance and procurement as I began to see the full cycle of purchasing. Various opportunities for collaboration included establishing Te Manat Wakas Carbon Neutral Government Programme (CNGP) brought great variety to the role.
The earthquake caused widespread damage, not just to the communitys transport links, but to homes and infrastructure. Business were cl osed, farms were left with damaged land and no access to markets for their goods, and communities were devastated by the loss of trade from passing traffic and tourists.
The economic costs would outweigh the economic benefits for all the options, including Manukau.
The effectiveness of the investment strategys delivery needs to be monitored within the context of long term goals. As long run investments, there can be substantial lag between investment and benefit realisation within the land transport sector. It is important therefore to ensure an appropriate mix of indicators is monitored; indicators that not only inform how effectively the curren t investment strategy is driving long term results, but will also inform future investment strategy, in particular the next GPS.
The effects of the COVID global pandemic continue to impact international aviation and New Zealands international connectivity has been drastically curtailed.
The effects of the COVID global pandemic continue to impact international aviation and New Zealands international connectivity has been drastically curtailed. Building on the success of the IAFC, and with the prospect of a recovery in international travel now in sight, the Government has set up a new scheme to support air services through to the end of October , with the potential for an extension to March .
The emissions from light vehicles we drive, are the largest source of transport emissions, accounting for nearly . We need to reduce light vehicle emissions if carbon dioxide emissions are to reach net zero.
The entitlements are set out in the Land Transport Management (Regional Fuel Tax) Amendment Regulations (No ) and came into effect on December .
The evaluation examined the:
The evaluation found changes to the RUC system had been relatively successful in creating greater equity, and that based on both industry and government perceptions, the new RUC system had more integrity.
The evaluation found that light diesel vehicles owners continue to have relatively limited knowledge of the RUC system, and identified that some owners overrun the distance covered by their RUC licences and that checking RUC compliance at the warrant of fitness test helps to ensure the integrity of the system.
The evaluation found that, as a whole, the Act was functioning effectively as a legislative basis for the RUC system.
The evaluation framework used to test how different options support the project objectives.
The evaluation process was based on the criteria in the
The evaluation process yielded valuable insights into the delivery of light rail including technical and service delivery aspects, commercial and financial considerations, and system and regulatory issues.
The event gave all attendees the opportunity to ask questions and have their say on the crossgovernment drone work programme.
The exact increases to RUC varied depending on the size, weight and axle configuration of a vehicle
The exemption depends on the type of vehicle and the distance it travels in a year, and means significant savings for heavy electric vehicle drivers.
The existing exemption from road user charges has been extended until March , which is around the time we expect the electric vehicles to make up two percent of the fleet. The purpose of the exemption is to encourage the uptake of electric vehicles given our climate change obligations. Increasing the uptake of zero emission vehicles will play an important part in reducing emissions from light vehicles in New Zealand. From March , owners of light electric vehicles will need to prepurchase road user charges like other road users.
The fact sheet below provides more detail about the scheme, and the next steps.
The fast development of the drone industry has given rise to significant opportunities for economic, innovation and social benefits for New Zealand, and in the Government committed to integrating drones into our transport system.
The feedback from attendees was incorporated into the business case.
The feedback we received helped to inform the Governments final decisions on the regulations.
The final GPS is required to be released by July , and the current consultation process will allow us to meet that timeframe.
The final extension of this scheme will provide muchneeded certainty as passenger travel recovers, protecting our links with the world, continuing to grow our export base, and getting timecritical supplies like medicines and special equipment into the country quickly.
The final indicative package endorsed by the Government attempts to balance delivering a stepchange in transport in Wellington, while not neglecting the rest of the Wellington region.
The final report on transport system data was the result of a collaborative project by Resilience to Natures Challenges National Science Challenge, QuakeCoRE (New Zealand Centre for Earthquake Resilience) and the Ministry of Transport. It summarised the results from a stakeholder workshop and interviews and recommended how to improve data and decisionmaking in the transport system.
The final terms of reference, including members of the Council is below:
The findings from the report and this report were relatively consistent. The report showed a decrease in the knowledge and awareness of selfdriving cars.
The findings will help crossgovernment work programmes understand the value to the New Zealand economy of using drones. They will also inform our approach to regulation and how we support technological innovation with regard to drones.
The first ever exemption under the Maritime Security Act Maritime NZ has issued the first exemption under the Maritime Security Act , providing a structure around a trial for Carnival Corporations OceanMedallion technology. The exemption allows nine specific ports to accept Pacific Cruise Lines medallions as alternative passenger identification, which is required when the passengers re enter a ports secure area to re board a cruise vessel. Under the current legislation passengers are required to supply original government issued tamper proof photo identification, and all other cruise vessels continue to require this. Maritime NZ is working with Carnival Corporation, Princess Cruise Lines, and nine por ts throughout the cruise season to gather information on the trial. This information will inform future use of technology within port security and include any potential risks and benefits. Maritime NZ is also engaged with our partner government agencies and international partners to ensure we are meeting our obligations. In , Maritime NZ and CentrePort met with Carnival to observe and test the process with a cruise vessel. This test provided the understanding and assurance we could trial the system as a method of identification. During the trial and the discussions after, we identified a number of benefits and risks, with the key initial benefit being a reduction in passenger processing times. The main key risk identified was technology failure, however Princess Cruise Lines and the ports have agreed to revert back to the current regime as per our legislation should it be required. Any unforeseen risks identified during the trial will be raised in a timely manner with Maritime NZ and discussed with a view to mitigation. Approved Code of Practice consultation begins From September , Maritime NZ starts six weeks of consultation on the draft of an Approved Code of Practice (ACOP) for loading and unloading cargo at ports and on ships. Consultation closes October and we expect to have a final draft for Ministerial approval in December . An ACOP provides confidence for port operators and P eople Conducting Business and Undertakings that if they comply with the practices described in it, then they are meeting the test of what is reasonably practicable under the Health and Safety at Work Act. The ACOP does not impose new requirements but instead clarifies for everyone (including operators, workers, the regulator, and unions) what is reasonably practicable and expected. Its aim is to reduce the number of serious injuries, illnesses, and fatalities among workers who carry out this work. The Approved Code of Practice was identified by the Port Health and Safety Leadership Group as a key safety action under the Port Sector Insights and Action Plan given the inconsistency around management of critical risks on ports. Consultation is likely to include some webinars to explain the intent of the ACOP.
The first Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP) has been approved by the Transport Minister in June . It was developed by KiwiRail and guided by the Governments strategic priorities outlined in GPS and the Rail Plan. Waka Kotahi advised the Minister of Transport on its approval, and KiwiRail shareholding Ministers were consulted. It follows amendments to the Land Transport Management Act last year.
The first Report examined the extent to which land transport investments were delivered in a manner aligned with GPS strategic priorities over . The second Report focused on how the GPS supports mode shift and where improvements can be made to enhance the impact of mode shift in future GPS iterations.
The first evaluation investigated early progress towards the objectives of the changes that came about in the Act. They compared the effectiveness of the modernised and previous systems, and investigated whether any further adjustments were necessary.
The first phase of The Congestion Question project focused on establishing baseline data and background information to provide a foundation for the rest of the project. The Congestion Question: Phase One Report was completed in November .
The first phase of contracts ran to the end of November .
The first stage of He Waka Maiangi is about creating a stronger evidence base, which will include gathering qualitative data. This knowledge will then be shaped into a narrative report that will outline areas where aspects of transport policy and planning could be improved to deliver better outcomes for Mori now and into the future.
The first step in the parallel process was to develop the
The first step in the review process is for a projec tprogramme to assess their schedule to determine when a Gateway review would be appropriate. A Gateway review should be held some weeks before key decision points, to enable review findings to be incorpor ated in the material for decision.
The first tranche of Orders in Council is well underway, with Cabinet having considered the policy decisions for three different Orders in Council on Monday May. Public consultation on Milestone Tranche One Tranche Two Tranche Three Tranche Four Tranche Five Cabinet approval of policy decisions May June June July July Ministerial public engagement on the draft policy Tuesday May Friday May minimum (but could extend to Friday May if longer period needed) Weds June Tuesday June minimum (but could extend to Tuesday June if longer period required) Tuesday June Friday June minimum (but could extend to Monday July if needed) Tuesday July Friday July minimum (but could extend to Tuesday July if needed) Tuesday July Friday July minimum (but could extend to Monday August if needed) Review Panel and Regulations Review Committee consideration of draft Order in Council Thursday May Tuesday May, plus Wednesday May to incorporate feedbackchanges Thursday June Tuesday July Wednesday July Friday July Thursday July Monday July Wednesday August Friday August Cabinet confirmation of Order in Council Tuesday June Monday July Monday August Monday August Monday September Submission of the Order to the Executive Council Tuesday June Monday July Monday August Monday August Monday September Enactment Wednesday June Tuesday July Tuesday August Tuesday August Tuesday September UNCLASSIFIED Page of UNCLASSIFIED the first tranche will take place between and May, and is being undertaken by the Department of Internal Affairs, Land Information New Zealand, and the Ministry for Primary Industries. More information is available from agency websites. What orders are being proposed The Orders in Council proposed under tranche one will amend statutory timeframes that councils or landowners in affected areas are unable to meet, and ensure that those subject to provisions under the Climate Change Response Act are not adversely affected due to the weather events. Officials at agencies are currently undertaking initial policy work for the second tranche of Orders in Council, which will be considered on May. Announcements will be made by the responsible agencies as to the content of those tranches and the process for consultation after May. Government agencies will be reaching out directly to councils, iwiMori and stakeholders in the coming weeks to discuss potential changes to be made to statutes through the Order in Council process to address needs or barriers identified on the ground and ensure they are included in future tranches . How can I feed into the process The Order in Council process provides three key opportunities for input: The policy development stage Information from you can help us determine what Orders may be required. The Review Panel stage The Convenor of the Severe Weather Events Review Panel may invite additional ad hoc subject matter experts to attend meetings to assist with their analysis of draft Orders in Council. These invitees could be any one whose qualifications or experience would be of assistance to the Panel . The ministerial public consultation phase Through the Ministers public consultation on the policy objectives for each Order in Council, where targeted consultation with sub ject matter experts may also be undertaken. Agencies will be reaching out via their existing communication channels to identified stakeholders to feed into these stages. What if there are other existing agreements or requirements for consultation The Severe Weather Emergency Recovery Legislation Act does not alter any existing consultation requirements in other legislation, such as that in Treaty of Waitangi Settlement Acts. Agencies are developing engagement plans for their proposed Orders in Council and ensuring that such obligations are accounted for in those plans. Where the consultation requirements of other legislation are not amended and they are not able to be satisfied within the timelines of the scheduled tranches, an Order in Council may begin the process in one tranche and be concluded in a later tranche once their consultation is complete. Where can I see the Orders in Council that have been made All Orders in Council will be on the legislation website ( https:legislation.govt.nz ). There is currently a box on the top right hand side of the homepage dedicated to highlighting new severe weather legislation, and new Orders in Council will be added to this box when they are made.
The first tranche of advice is expected in mid and advice on options to address any issues identified will be provided toward the end of the year.
The first work in the project was to release reports aimed
The five transport levers As Minister, you have a range of levers to influence the transport system. There are differences in the way that the various levers are exercised for each mode, and each mode has its own regulatory model. Our advice to you will focus on how you can make use of these levers. Investment and revenue Investing in transport infrastructure is a priority for any Government. Investment comes from dedicated and general funding sources to create capacity, and enhance or maintain existing infrastructure and services , Investment can influence choices by providing alternative travel options. The GPS allows you to guide investment from the NLTF The GPS allows you to guide investment from the NLTF and can be used both to maintain a level of service and drive change on the land transport network, while delivering value for money. This is done through applying the Ministrys value for money assessment model in the appraisal and evaluation process and establishing funding ranges for activity classes. Each GPS sets out the priorities for the following year period and is reviewed and every three years. While you can use the GPS to indicate what types of transport activities you want delivered, you cannot specify what individual projects are funded using hypothecated NLTF revenue. The LTMA gives Waka Kotahi statutory independence to select projects for the NLTP. However, the GPS can set an expectation for Waka Kotahi to consider government programmes when allocating funding through the NLTP.
The five transport levers As Minister, you have a range of levers to influence the transport system. There are differences in the way that the various levers are exercised for each mode, and each mode has its own regulatory model. Our advice to you will focus on how you can make use of these levers. Investment and revenue Investing in transport infrastructure is a priority for any Government. Investment comes from dedicated and general funding sources to create capacity, enhance or maintain existing infrastructure and services, and can influence choices by providing alternative travel options. The GPS allows you to guide investment from the NLTF The GPS allows you to guide investment from the NLTF and can be used both to maintain a level of service and drive change on the land transport network, while delivering value for money. This is done through applying the Ministrys value for money assessment model in the appraisal and evaluation process and establishing funding ranges for activity classes. Each GPS sets out the priorities for the following year period and is reviewed and every three years. While you can use the GPS to indicate what types of transport activities you want delivered, you cannot specify what individual projects are funded using hypothecated NLTF revenue. The LTMA gives Waka Kotahi statutory independence to select projects for the NLTP. However, the GPS can set an expectation for Waka Kotahi to consider government programmes when allocating funding through the NLTP.
The focus of the ATAP is to test whether better returns from transport investment can be achieved in the medium and longterm, particularly in relation to the following objectives: i. To support economic growth and increased productivity by ensuring access to employmentlabour improves relative to current levels as Aucklands population grows ii. To improve congestion results, relative to predicted levels, in particular travel time and reliability, in the peak period and to ensure congestion does not become widespread during working hours iii. To improve public transports mode share, relative to predicted results, where it will address congestion iv. To ensure any increases in the financial costs of using the transport system deliver net benefits to users of the system.
The focus of the Year report is to build a foundation for reporting in the future. More comprehensive analysis of the effects and impacts of GPS investments will be developed and built on in future years through the ongoing monitoring and evaluation programme.
The focus of the Year report is to continue to build upon the foundation for reporting made by the Year report, and to improve the way data and information are presented. Further data, comparisons, and breakdowns will be incorporated into the Year report where possible.
The focus of this conversation is
The focus of this project
The following age ncies are in scope for Gateway peer reviews: all departments (including departmental agencies) as defined by the Public Finance Act (PFA) the following types of Crown entities: o Crown agents o Autonomous Crown entities o Independent Crown entities o Crown e ntity companies, including Crown Research Institutes companies listed on Schedule A of the PFA.
The following amendments are made in Part on a to be notified by gazette Rule in Part Current reference in rule to Annex VI regulation Change Annex VI regulation reference to the following .()(a) .()(a) .()(c) .() .() .() .() .()(a) A. . .()(a) A .() .(b) A .()(a) A .()(a) .()(a) .()(c) .() .() .() .() .()(a) A. . .()(a) A .() R E L E A S E D U N D E R T H E OF F I C I A L I N F OR MA T I ON A C T
The following bar graphs of the change in weekly travel between and illustrate the sort of trends captured in the Household Travel Survey report.
The following briefing papers were all provided to the Minister of Transport Hon Simeon Brown or the Associate Minister of Transport Hon Matt Doocey by the Ministry of Transport Te Manat Waka during November . If you would like to request copies of any of these under the Official Information Act, please email oiatransport.govt.nz .
The following documents fall within the scope of your request and are enclosed:
The following pie graphs of travel per week illustrate the sort of snapshots captured in the Household Travel Survey report.
The following sections of the Act have been used :
The following steps should be followed to develop AMP (can be found in Appendix E Guidance steps to imbed a business case approach into AMPs) For Maintenance, operations, renewals and minor improvements, here are the steps to follow: . Point of Entry Discussion Discussions about what information you already have and what information you dont have and work out what you need to do to complete the BCA AMP. Early engagement meeting between RCA NZTA. . Strategic case Provides information on the RCAs operating environment, strategic issues and future aspirations. Identifies the case for change or maintaining the status quo. Contains the strategic context and assessment. Early engagement with key stakeholders. . Programme business case Provides the strategic response of the planned future state. Identifies a programme of works or activities that deliver on the strategic case. Assets management identifying maintenance, operations, renewals and improvementsnew work programme. It is the current activity management plan for all councils. For new and improvement projects, here are the steps to follow: Direct text e . Point of entry Agree approach and starting point in the business case approach process for identified capital projects. Meeting between RCA NZTA. Capital projects not identified in the BCA AMP may require the development of a strategic and programme case. . Indicative business case The point where individual activities are progressed. Provides the basis for telling the investment story on the long list of options, risks and trade offs on risk reverse benefits. Allow decision makers an early opportunity to choose a preferred option to progress for further investigation in the detailed case. . Detailed business case Detailed analysis of costs, risk and benefits on the preferred option. Provides decision makers with evidence that the preferred option is the best feasible option, addresses the problems and delivers the outcomes identified in the strategic cases and is affordable. . Implementation Post implementation Delivery of maintenance and operations. Delivery of capital projectsactivities. Review performance and delivery against the strategic case. Regional publications Upper North Island Freight Story Summary of Critical issues April
The foundation report is the first of three project deliverables.
The framework is a move in the right direction currently there is a good culture of delivery, but less so in checking whether outcomes were delivered.
The framework is also based on the principle that it must be clear and place emphasis on ensuring that achieving outcomes are consistently at the forefront throughout project lifecycles across the transport investment system. .. Measures The recommended methodology for measuring value for money to support decision making is illustrated in Figure . The model comprises five key assessment elements (. ImpactOutcomes, . Business Requirements, Value Indicators, . Benefits Gap Factor, and . Capacity and Capability), and is framed within two model dimensions Efficiency Effectiveness and Qualitative Quantitative. For the purposes of this model efficiency is defined as delivering optimal outputs with minimal wasted effort or expense and effectiveness is defined as successfully de livering outcomes. The nuance in defining what is efficient vs effective and what is me asured quantitatively vs qualitatively is reflected in gradated axis of the diagram.
The framework is supported by strategic plans and initiatives that help shape the direction of changes in the transport system, and we use it to help us work out the impact of those changes.
The framework needs to find the right balance between complexity and practicality to enable implementation. OF MEETING DETAILS TITLE MoT Value for Money Review Stakeholder Workshop Business Case Practitioners Thursday rd July (NZST) ORGANISATION REPRESENTATIVES Ministry of Transport QSP NB Consulting GHD AECOM Beca WORKSHOP NOTES TEM NOTES General Queries regarding the level at which the framework is intended to focus, i.e. whether it is system level, or program and project level. If it applies to all levels the Review team will need to work through ho w it will work in practice, ensuring all levels of the hierarchy are linked and consistent with each other. At present there is a business case appr oa ch for considering value for money at the program and project level that focuses on the why, what and how questions around investment. This works well in practice. Conceptually the framework applies to po rt folio, program and project level, and will assist in creating a common language around value for money. The framework promotes a top down approach and how the framework manifests itself at a practical level is to be worked through with agencies. Overall, the conceptual framework is co nsidered a positive step, especially the introduction of capabilit y. Capability Placing capability at the centre of value for money considerations is well supported as it moves away from traditional benefit cost ratios. However, capability is necessarily complex. Need decision makers to become more fa miliar with uncertainty and effect a shift away from reli ance on the BCR. Therefore, a large scale cultural shift that targets the decision makers and practitioners is be required. Dont underestimate the scale of the cultural change required. ImpactOutcomes Analysis The hierarchy of outcomes between the Li ving Standards Framework (LSF), Transport Outcomes Framework (TOF) and GP S is not clear. There is a link with the LSF as MoT needs to report on co ntribution to the Living Standards Framework, but this is not evident to practitioners. Link between National Land Transport Fund (NLTP) and GP S needs to be strengthened. View that GPS locks in transport output solutions but it may be advantageous to consider nontransport interventions investments to achieve the stated outcomes. Many activities are underway across agen cies and organ isations e.g. LSF, TOF, GPS, Arataki etc, and articulating th e outcomes can be quite fragmented and challenging at a national level. The syst em needs to consider how outcomes are translated into programs at a national level. OF Perception that GPS has a short term ( year) focus and view that positive work initiated in GPS was discarde d with introduction of GPS .
The framework provides a way to assess how policies and programmes will impact on these outcomes in the context of the Governments priorities. It forms an important part of the Ministrys strategy and is increasingly being supported by strateg ic plans and initiatives that help shape the direction of change in the transport system. For example, the Future of Rail policy, the Clea n Car Standard and the Road to Zero strategy.
The framework should take account of the different levels of investment, including the system, program and project levels.
The freight and supply chain system faces substantial changes over the coming years, including from climate change, geopolitical volatility, new technologies, and growing population and densification. There are also endemic problems in the system that prevent it from functioning optimally. Please see below for the strategy document and summary document.
The full is always written on the same line Correct Incorrect November November Write dates in full and day, month and year order Correct Incorrect November Wednesday June Wed Jun June th of June Financial year vs calendar year Use a forward slash for financial years (include the words financial year). Use a hyphen when writing about a period of two years. Correct Incorrect financial year financial year The years The years
The funding made available in the GPS could allow KiwiRail to identify the relevant level crossings, undertake engineering design for roadrail changes and traffic modelling as the start of a project to remove level crossings. Options could include some grade separation through over and under passes, or outright closure. KiwiRail expect a year timeframe for removing level crossings.
The funding made available in the draft GPS could enable consenting, property purchase, and final design work to be completed before works commence during the next GPS period ( ).
The group agreed to set up a meeting to brief ministers about their work and invite Land Information New Zealand (LINZ) to become a member of the group.
The group first met in , and meets every months or more often if necessary. It provides
The group shared highlights for the year and discussed work planned for .
The groups met times and considered speed, vehicles, vehicles as a workplace, road user behaviour, and road infrastructure.
The groups were made up of over representatives from across the transport sector and provided a range of knowledge, experiences and perspectives that contributed to the development of the Tacking Unsafe Speeds proposals.
The growth in the use of drones comes with risks so we need to manage it in a way that ensures opportunities can be captured while minimising those risks.
The icon has parts. Tniko tukutuku is the pursuit of knowledge tukutuku are woven lattice pieces in a marae that tell a story, and hold knowledge of a place and its people. Niho Taniwha, the triangular pattern, represents our strength, reciprocity and working together.
The icon is a double poutama (double patterned tukutuku) representing whakapapa, collaboration and unity, levels of learning and intellectual achievement
The icon is a symbol from pounamu taonga (valued treasure) representing people working together for a common cause. The whakatauki ahakoa he iti, he pounamu signifies that, despite being small, we are of great value.
The icon is poutama tukutuku, expressing higher achievement and improving outcomes.
The icon represents Te Ao Marama, the ever changing world. Its about the relationship between Ranginui (sky father) and Papatunuku (earth mother), and all the lives in between that we need to guard and protect.
The icon represents rranga harakeke, or the weaving of flax. The kete, or baskets of knowledge, are Te Kete Tuuri, Te Kete Tutea and Te Kete Aronui.
The icon represents the sun, and stars. R ngti r means sun of the sun, divine spark. Ng whet whai is empowering and leading, meaning to reach for the stars.
The idea behind time of use schemes is simple. By making it more expensive to drive during busy times, it encourages people to change their travel habits, so there are fewer people on the roads at the busiest times. For example, if you usually travel during rush hour, and you dont have to, you might choose to leave earlier or later to avoid the higher charges. This can help to spread out the traffic, making the roads less congested.
The impacts include increase d costs for projects . This experience demonstrates the complexities of combining the planning, management an d delivery of different types of (large scale) investments within a
The impacts of implementing the Euro VI emissions standards on equity
The impacts of implementing the Euro VI emissions standards on health and air quality
The improvements included:
The increase to PED for became law under the Excise and Exciseequivalent Duties Table (Budget MeasuresMotor Spirits) Amendment Act . The increase to PED on July was also legislated at this time.
The indicative package announced in May received unanimous support from WCC and GWRC councillors in December , and the partners have since approved funding for the current phase of the programme. This allowed the Detailed Investigation and Development Stage to begin.
The indicative package endorsed by the Government did not include all of the elements of the recommended programme of investment that was presented to ministers by the LGWM partners.
The individual submissions will also be publicly available on Te Manat Wakas website shortly.
The information about your use of the website is transmitted to, and stored by Google on servers in the United States. This consists of statistical information about your use of the website, including:
The information on our social media channels and all government websites is provided on the basis that persons accessing the website undertake responsibility for assessing the relevance and accuracy of its content.
The initial regulations provided the same entitlements to regional fuel tax rebates as those available for the refund of PED.
The instrument of accession is now expected to be deposited in April . The Government had originally signalled that New Zealand would become a party to MARPOL Annex VI in late , but this has been delayed due to COVID disruptions.
The interim Aviation Council exists to drive leadership, direction and performance across the civil aviation system.
The interim Aviation Council met for the first time in March . It discussed and provided feedback on the draft terms of reference. The Council also discussed the National Aviation Policy Statement (NAPS), and the need to prioritise NAPS topics.
The interim Aviation Council supports system leadership on the current and future direction of aviation in New Zealand, in recognition of the key role that a strong and successful aviation sector plays in our economy.
The interim report is the second of three reports that make up the Auckland Transport Alignment Project.
The interim report noted the results of the working groups initial investigations, stakeholder engagement and the main themes that had emerged.
The investment level in operating and maintaining state highways represents about of NLTF revenue and is approximately rd of all road maintenance expenditure across New Zealand. The investment represents an annual user cost of service of less than . cents per vehicle kilometre travelled on state highways. This is less than the equivalent cost of service of local roads.
The investment management system aims to optimise value from new and existing investments and assets for current and future generations of New Zealanders. The government is committed to ensuring that investment management and asse t performance policies, processes and practices remain fit forpurpose.
The investment programme also includes funding from the:
The invite will be sent to the Northland Mayors, Chief Executives, Regional Transport Committee and Northland MPs and will be attended by the NZTA Director of Regional Relationships and other members of the NZTA project team. The purpose of the meeting is to recap the three broad corridors that have been identified, giv e the group the opportunity to share their views and answer their questions. NZTA plans to make a decision by on an emerging preferred corridor for this section, which will be communicated to stakeholders at that time.
The key objectives of the scheme are to:
The key priorities of the PGF are to:
The key topics in the discussion document include:
The latest NLTP was prepared in for the time period . NZTA needs to ensure its investment decisions in the NLTP will support the Governments priorities for a land transport system, based on GPS . The Government has following priorities: Safe Access Environmental Value for money The NLTP outlines the Governments requirement of each priority, and NZTAs corresponding response. Page Value for money This section outlines the requirements of the GPS with regard to value for money and NZTAs practices.
The left koru is new growth, strands representing people working together for a common cause, caring for and valuing others,
The legislation also brought in the ability for Police to conduct roadside oral fluid testing. Following a robust procurement process, as of March , a suitable device had not been able to be found.
The legislation brought in a range of new offences and penalties to help reduce the harm that impaired driving caused on our roads.
The legislation includes a set of criteria that must be considered before an oral fluid testing device can be approved for use.
The legislation provides that a regional council may propose a regional fuel tax, consult the public on the proposal and submit the proposal to the Ministers of Transport and Finance for a decision. Ministers have complete discretion when deciding on a regional fuel tax proposal.
The level of asset consumption (i.e., the percentage of assets that are in as new condition) was determined to be about . This has been consistent over the past ten years and is within indicative ranges ( to ) across all asset types. This is likely reflective of the contribution to the valuation from the investment in extensive capital improvement programmes (which tends to be on a very small but important portion of the network such as Waterview Tunnel or the Waikato Expressway).
The link to that report is
The main feedback we received included:
The main findings of the project suggested further work that we could do, and these were considered when we developed our programme of work for and beyond.
The main objective of the IAFC is to maintain capacity for critical imports (such as medical supplies) and high value exports through the Covid response and early recovery period. The scheme requires importers and exporters to pay for their freight on a commercial basis and aims to help the sector recover as quickly as possible.
The main objectives of this work were to:
The main report provides a summary of the study findings based on the working papers. It brings together the findings from all aspects of the study, including crossmodal comparisons. The Study was undertaken for Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport by a consultant consortium led by Ian Wallis Associates Ltd. Peer review inputs have been provided by the Institute for Transport Studies at the University of Leeds (UK), supplemented by a local review team of staff from Te Manat Waka, Waka Kotahi (the NZ Transport Agency, NZTA) and other government agencies.
The major part of the work programme is the development of the Transport Emissions Action Plan (TEAP). This will be our strategic plan for how New Zealand could reduce its transport emissions. It will be the basis of the transport section in the Governments Emissions Reduction Plan for the emissions budget.
The majority of subjects were aware of the transport technologies, but not many were using them. The cost of electric cars was the biggest barrier to ownership and many participants said they would buy one if they could afford it.
The mandatory ABS requirement came into effect on April , through the Land Transport Rule: Lightvehicle Brakes Amendment (No ) .
The mandatory ESC requirement came into effect on July , through the Land Transport Rule: Lightvehicle Brakes . This means all owners of vehicles fitted with ESC, no matter when they were imported, must make sure their ESC works. This is checked at warrant of fitness inspections.
The maritime sector is also mainly owned and operated by the private sector, and covers
The maritime sector is an important enabler of economic productivity
The maximum amount of charge for vehicles with very high emissions will rise, from , to , for new vehicles and from , to , for used imports.
The measures in the GPS were listed as draft measures, subject to further work.
The members discussed a wide range of topics including wider engagement with interested parties and the regulation of drones.
The most compelling case for renewing the NAL and constructing the MPL is based on major benefits:
The new port configuration should be supported by a rejuvenated North Auckland rail line and spur to Northport, and a new inland freight hub in northwest Auckland to complement and be connected to Metroport in the south
The new Disability Action Plan and New Zealand Disability strategy are available on the Office for Disability Issues website.
The new Disability Action Plan was developed by the Office for Disability Issues in collaboration with the Disabled Peoples Organisations Coalition and a range of government departments. It consists of significant programmes of work to address key issues for disabled people, and will be carried out through government agencies. The new plan aims to deliver the outcomes in the New Zealand Disability Strategy .
The new Land Transport Rule: Setting Speed Limits is available on the Waka Kotahi website:
The new framework brings the planning and funding of the rail network under the land transport planning and funding regime set by the LTMA.
The new framework will help to make working in public transport a more attractive career option, in a sector that pays well and better looks after its people.
The new scheme would also include:
The next meeting will be on November .
The next stage of work will include:
The next step for Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail is to get started on recovery and rebuild works for more significant damage . Examples of these kinds of works include building a new bridge or retaining wall or realigning a state highway or rail line. It will take time to inspect th e damage, determine solutions, and then undertake the construction. While this happens, communities will remain disconnected or have less access than they are used to. The approval processes needed to get started on works is a key reason why it takes time to undertake recovery and rebuild works . Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail need to get approvals for planning, funding, and implementing works. However, these approvals are not well coordinated. They have different timeframes, different information requirements, and different decision makers. They must all be applied for separately. Sometimes it can take years to get them all sort ed so construction can begin. Temporary law changes will enable recovery and rebuild works to get underway more quickly The Ministry is proposing temporary law changes to enable Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail to use streamlined approval processes so they can get started on recovery and rebuild works more quickly and in a more coordinated way. This will help to reduce disruption, complexity, duplication of effort and cost. The mechanism to do this is a piece of secondary legislation called an Order in Council ( OiC). The Recovery Act enables OiCs to be put in place to help communities recover from the impacts of the severe weather events . Key steps in creating an OiC under the Recovery Act include public engagement and review by an independent panel. These temporary law changes will only apply to recovery and rebuild works undertaken by Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail on their state highways and rail lines. They will not apply to local r oads administered by local authorities. The OiC mechanism was successfully used to respond to the Kaikura earthquake for a range of response and recovery activities, including the successful rebuild of the Coastal Route by Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail. The Mi nistry has drawn on lessons from the Kaikura earthquake experience when developing the proposed temporary law changes. Three Orders inCouncil are proposed The Ministry is proposing to progress the temporary law changes through three OiCs that will: modif y the Land Transport Management Act ( LTMA ) to streamline some of the planning and funding approval processes that apply to activities funded by the National Land Transport Fund ( NLTF ); support recovery works by Waka Kotahi within the legal road boundary or within metres either side of it ; support recovery and rebuild works by KiwiRail, with realignment at two sites (Awatoto and Esk Valley ).
The objective of this guide is to help staff at Te Manat Waka write in a style that makes our work accessible and inclusive for all New Zealanders. Our writing needs to be easily understood and meet the needs of our audience. This is achieved by using language, structure and design that is clear and effective. Our aim is to give New Zealanders the best possible chance to find, understand and use our work.
The objectives document builds on the Government Policy Statement on land transport , which directs investment toward road policing and enforcement, increased road maintenance and renewal activities, and costeffective safety infrastructure. The objectives document is focused on achievable actions and resourcing the commitments outlined in the GPS.
The offpeak public transport scheme had key principles it was a national scheme, users traveled for free, and offpeak capacity could accommodate increased numbers.
The old legislation will be replaced from
The online forum for NGOs ran over weeks. Participants could see alternative views, shape the conversation together and come to an agreed position on key issues.
The options we identify in the report could be implemented over the next years. This timeframe has been deliberately chosen to align with the Climate Change Commissions advice to government on the first carbon budgets to .
The orders propose to incorporate material by reference. Incorporation by reference is a legal way of making technical, lengthy, complex documents, models or information part of our law.
The orders propose to incorporate the following material by reference:
The organisations and individuals who made a submission are listed below. Many submitters have allowed us to make their feedback public you can access these documents by clicking on the name.
The original Alliance Expansion Agreement allowed the airlines to coordinate services across their networks, although some fare categories on the AucklandLos Angeles route were not included. The Side Agreement included those fare categories and allowed the airlines to coordinate all fares between New Zealand and the United States.
The original HAPINZ study was in and in . The report found that harmful emissions from vehicles cause premature deaths every year in New Zealand, with social costs of NZD million. The report also identified that diesel vehicle emissions were the largest contributor to poor air quality in Auckland City.
The other two OiCs, which support recovery works by Waka Kotahi, and recovery and rebuild works by KiwiRail, will now be progressed as part of Tranche Orders, given their complexity and the need to provide sufficient time to reflect feedback from engagement and for drafting.
The outcome ssociated with enabling the benefits mentioned above is: Greater value for money of transport investments: Enhance system performance, and cost. b
The outcome of this work was reviewed by an overall evaluation team which presented its recommendations to the Secretary for Transport at the end of January .
The outcomes framework clarifies what the Government expects to achieve from the CCM project. An important part of the evaluation process was looking for evidence of the extent to which each proposal would achieve these outcomes.
The overall conclusion of the project was that the current regulatory framework could be adjusted to deal with the emerging transport technologies. However, an alternative approach might be to put in place a bespoke set of regulations, which would deal with risks common to all forms of transport. This could include the creation of a new regulator for intelligent transport systems. The new regulatory system would be needed in addition to the existing regulation current regulation would continue to cover the physical aspects of transport while the new regime would cover the regulation of the intelligent aspects of the transport system. Taking this approach would avoid the risk that crosssystem issues relating to new technologies might slip between the responsibilities of the regulators of different modes of transport.
The overall purpose of the changes was to:
The overall scale and focus of investment in the land transport system is set out in the Government Policy Statement (GPS) on Land Transport, which the Government produces every years.
The overarching goal of a time of use scheme is to make travel more efficient. It does this by:
The panel discussions, highlighted that decarbonising the transport system is a difficult challenge. It reemphasised the importance of bringing a wide range of people, sectors, businesses and ideas together to tackle this.
The paper and proposed response reference the transport findings at a high level and note how these findings relate to the Governments approach to climate change as set out in the Climate Change Strategy. Cabinet Deferred TBC
The paper draws heavily on the insights gained from engaging with stakeholders in the freight industry, energy sectors, academia and other Government agencies on the Green Freight Background Paper. The options we present reflect our best assessment of what interventions could have the greatest impact on GHG emissions from road freight over the next years.
The paper highlighted policy insights and recommended that governments:
The paper is not intended to set out exactly how drones will be used, or the rules and technological requirements that will apply to drones.
The paper outlines the responsibilities we have in this work and how we partner with other government agencies the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), Airways, and the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE). Senior staff from each agency have formed a UA Integration Leadership Group to provide strategic direction and oversight of the work. This group is supported by a crossgovernment forum that meets regularly and engages with the commercial drone sector.
The past few years have hit the sector hard, but we have seen air travel capacity levels return to
The plan to accede to Annex VI by late is consistent with the Governments commitment to taking action on climate change and recognises the time required to align domestic legislation with obligations under Annex VI.
The policy set the framework for the CAA to develop the National Airspace and Air Navigation Plan.
The policy sets out principles for the classification and design of airspace, the funding of air traffic management and air navigation services, and the resilience of the airspace system. The plan is New Zealands response to the Global Air Navigation Plan developed by the International Civil Aviation Organization to promote good practice and a harmonised global air navigation system. The policy and plan mean the aviation sector can plan and make air navigation and air traffic management investment decisions with certainty.
The ports current downtown Auckland location has about years capacity and there is a to year window for making a final decision on relocation.
The previous Rule set out emissions standards that largely existed at the time of its original drafting in . Since then many of those standards had been internationally. A revision was required to bring New Zealand into line with other countries.
The primary objective of aviation security is to protect passengers, crew, ground personnel and the
The primary purpose of this study is to identify whether a largescale port
The principle of ownership, influence, and stewardship. This means we seek to fulfil our transport system leadership role to ensure that our transport system enables all New Zealanders to flourish.
The prior rule, in and not showing the Euro changes, is available at
The process Ensure that your manager is aware that you have been invited to present, and what you intend to say. If you are speaking at an event where it is likely that external stakeholders will be present, please let the Engagement and Communication team know.
The programme is expected to prevent of up to . million tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions and will help with the upfront cost of switching to an EV or low emission vehicle.
The programme is led by the CAA in partnership with the Ministry of Transport and Airways. It implements the National Airspace and Air Navigation Plan and aims to ensure the safe, cohesive, efficient and collaborative management of New Zealands airspace and air navigation.
The programme provided increased investment to accelerate the delivery of cycling networks in New Zealands main urban centres. The Crown provided a greater share of funding to incentivise local councils to increase their investment in cycling and walking projects.
The programme was dedicated to improving urban cycling infrastructure between and and was developed based on recommendations from the Urban Cycleway Investment Panel.
The project has shifted into a Detailed Investigation and Development Stage to begin delivering the indicative package of improvements.
The project is expected to be complete by late .
The project looked at regulation in its broadest sense, including legislation, rules, education and social norms as they relate to all modes of transport road, rail, air, sea and active transport, such as walking and cycling.
The projects are described in more detail in this document.
The proposal also included wheeled variants and equivalent power in kW for electric powered variants. Mopeds, which are defined as having an engine size of cc or less, were not included.
The proposed . billion funding package is made up of: Semiregular increases in fuel taxes for three years (. billion), consistent with historic
The proposed amendments aimed to:
The proposed arrangement may include coordination of schedules, revenue planning and pricing, sales and marketing activities, and service parameters and standards. Authorisation is sought for a term of years.
The proposed changes, outlined in the draft
The proposed standards would lower the permitted level of nitrogen oxides by about percent for light diesel vehicles and percent for heavy vehicles, lower the permitted levels of particulate matter and other pollution, and introduce more accurate testing practices. This is expected to save over billion in social costs out to , against costs of less than . billion.
The proposition of a dry dock large enough to service New Zealands bigger commercial vessels (e.g. interisland ferries) has been considered for several years by local and central Government, as well as industry bodies. It is something the sector are highly supportive of.
The prospect of a recovery in international travel is now in sight but, continuing support for connectivity positions New Zealand well for recovery and supports the economic and social wellbeing of New Zealand. The MIAC ensures a predictable and regular schedule of air services to safeguard New Zealands international connectivity.
The purpose of sector research is to acquire new knowledge that can be applied by transport decision makers to deliver a more effective and efficient transport system.
The purpose of the Clean Car Sector Leadership Group (CCSLG) is to advise the Minister of Transport Hon Michael Wood on accelerating the uptake of clean vehicles (ultra low emission vehicles ULEVs) in New Zealand in pursuit of the net zero emissions targets set out in the Climate Ch ange Response Act.
The purpose of the Strategy is to drive the development of a more efficient and effective maritime security sector that:
The purpose of the consultation was to get public feedback about possible approaches to improving our drug driving system, including the methods that could be used to screen and test for drugs, the circumstances in which a driver should be tested, what drugs should be tested for and how police should deal with drug driving offences.
The purpose of the issues paper was to set out the strategic context for changing the way we do things and to hone in on the most important areas of focus for the strategy.
The purpose of the reference groups was to:
The purpose of the review and consultation on proposed changes to the VDAM Rules was to improve productivity and reduce compliance costs, while maintaining or improving safety.
The purpose of the review and consultation was to ensure the Acts were still fit for purpose, given the changes in the aviation sector and regulatory environment since they came into effect.
The purpose of the review was to look at how costeffective the SPS industry was, whether it was efficiently regulated, were regulations future proofed and did they allow for developments in technology.
The real options approach helps deal with this problem because it aims to encourage decision makers to consider uncertainty when they develop options, and incorporate flexibility into their investment decisionmaking process. It helps planners reduce the risk of a worsethanexpected outcome and take advantage of positive opportunities as they emerge. It is conceptually simple and is a useful adaptive investment management tool.
The rebate amount will reduce by approximately , to , for new vehicles and by a smaller amount of to for used vehicles.
The rebate offered to brand new models will reduce from , to ,, and for used imports will increase from , to ,..
The rebate will be , for a vehicle at grams, plus . for each gram below grams (new vehicles), up to a cap of . Used imports will receive one half of the dollar amount of new vehicles.
The recommended approach focused on three components:
The recommended programme reflects LGWMs ambitions for improving Wellingtons transport system over the next decades. The recommended programme was agreed by LGWM in late and used as the starting point for engagement with central government on the way to developing an indicative package of improvements.
The recovery of this one event shows us the scale of the cha llenge ahead of us, when natural events occur. Not just in the aftermath of an event, but in future proofing the transport network for years to come.
The recreational sector also contributes to our economy . It is estimated that cruise tourism injected
The reductions to RUC were put in placed by the
The reforms will be implemented through a combination of amendments to the Land Transport Management Act and through the development of operational policy, which will be progressed over the course of and .
The regional fuel tax legislation provides a way for regional councils, initially only Auckland Council, to raise revenue for transport projects that would otherwise be delayed or not funded.
The relevant legislation is found at the
The report also looked at how New Zealanders travel to work, school and leisure activities had changed over years.
The report also noted that:
The report centres on the following three research questions:
The report concludes that of all the population groups investigated, people on lowincomes are the most uniformly disadvantaged group in Aucklands transport system and that, above all other factors, income inequality is the biggest indicator someone will face transport poverty and disadvantage. The report provided research insights into other population groups, including Mori, ethnic minority groups, women, those with disabilities, older people and the LGBTQI community.
The report explores a number of different congestion pricing systems used overseas to reduce congestion and improve travel times. It found a congestion pricing system could reduce congestion in Auckland by around when fully implemented, like travel experienced during the school holidays.
The report found that people spent:
The report has been and split according to these priorities. Each priority also has supplementary spreadsheets that include the data presented in the respective report, as well as additional data and breakdowns.
The report has been in parts to match the priorities. The safety, access and environment priorities also have supplementary spreadsheets that include the data presented in the respective report, as well as additional data and breakdowns. The summary table details what data is included in each of the reports and spreadsheets.
The report identified trends including:
The report presents a number of policy recommendations to reduce transport poverty and disadvantage.
The report presents data and information on RLTP outcomes, each with at least one measure and target. This enables GWRC to make comment against short and longer term trends and to provide observations about progress towards the measures and targets and whether the target has been reached. Summary b d Christchurch RLTP Canterbury RLTP was unavailable on the website at the time of compiling this summary. d https:www.ecan.govt.nzy ourregionplans strategies andbylawscanterbury transport plans Initial Otago Southland Regional Land Transport Plans https:www.orc.govt.nzm ediaotago southland regionallandtransport plansjune .pdf This document is an amalgamation of both the Otago Regional Land Transport Plan and the Southland Regional Land Transport Plan . The Regional Transport Committees have developed a common transport strategy for the two regions. This strategy focuses on maintaining established transport networks, while making key improvements to transport services and infrastructure, focusing on: reducing the social cost of crashes; supporting economic productivity and growth by enabling freight journeys and visitor journeys; increasing network resilience; enabling all modes of transport appropriate access to the network; and ensuring value for money investments. The longterm goal set by the Committee for land transport in Otago Southland is: To provide accessible transport connections, giving users an appropriate choice of modes, and to gain improved performance from the land transport system, by focusing on: road safety; economic growth and productivity; value for money. Objective . Decisionmaking leads to infrastructure and services that are appropriate to function and demand, taking into account wholeoflife costs and benefits. Primary policies P.. Provide infrastructure and services for roading, active transport and public transport that are affordable and appropriate to function. Infrastructure and services: reflect population densities, so that in less densely populated areas, transport services may be less convenient and frequent; take into account the possible need for inbuilt flexibility or slight oversizing in transport infrastructure, based on foreseeable needs.
The report was based on the results on separate Household Travel Surveys in , and the ongoing Household Travel Survey from to .
The report was part of work being done by the Government to inform rebuild and support programmes, and investment in impacted infrastructure.
The reporting templates and guidance are linked for you below: DocumenttitleNotes TARDIS link GPSPriorityActionsThis is thereportingtemplate tobeupdated.For thePMO report,we areafterinformationyou alreadyknowhaveon theactionswhereotheragenciesareinvolved.We are notasking forNZTA tocompletethis report. Out of Scope Out of Scope Out of Scope s ()(k) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT The reports are due to be completed by COB August . Please note that the PMO might be in touch at any point after your submission as part of the QA of the report process. Feel free to get in touch should you have any questions or feedback. Ng mihi Victoria Acharya (she her) Kaittari Prongo Reporting Analyst Programme Management Office (PMO) E: V.Acharyatransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz s ()(a) Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Public transport funding: Increase farebox recovef)I and thirdparty revenue by Public Trans port Authorities. I Action descnpt,on NZTA Public Transport Authorities Minislry of Transport Lead Agency(s) Wooc is underway in three phases to develop and implement initiatives that wiH increase farebox recovery and third party revenue. For clarity, v,e expect to see an increase in recovery in Phase our CJrrent year end result. Recovery will increase over time as new initiatives are progressively implemented . complete by December Phase Establih foundations and set interim targets Establish nationally consistent private share definitions, measures, and baselines across all public transport authorities, including data colection and analysis Identify and set interim private share targets with each public transport authOfity Identify and develop initiatives for increasing private share funding for public transport with each public transport authority s ()(f)(iv) Document IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Milestones s (Jf)(iv s ()(f)(iv) Page of . From: Jessica Ranger To: Matthew Winthrop ; Liam Fechney Cc: Nick Potter Subject: RE: question (not for a story just yet) Monday, September Attachments: image.png image.jpg image.png Yup From: Matthew Winthrop M.Winthroptransport.govt.nz Sent: To: Jessica Ranger J.Rangertransport.govt.nz; Liam Fechney L.Fechneytransport.govt.nz Cc: Nick Potter N.Pottertransport.govt.nz Subject: RE: question (not for a story just yet) Ill mention in the email back to Dom that reinstating the farebox recovery ratio policy is an option provided as advice rather than official advice sound ok From: Jessica Ranger J.Rangertransport.govt.nz Sent: To: Matthew Winthrop M.Winthroptransport.govt.nz ; Liam Fechney L.Fechneytransport.govt.nz Cc: Nick Potter N.Pottertransport.govt.nz Subject: RE: question (not for a story just yet) Apologies just remembered one thing. It was just advice on potential stuff that could be looked at rather than policy development. From: Matthew Winthrop M.Winthroptransport.govt.nz Sent: To: Liam Fechney L.Fechneytransport.govt.nz Cc: Jessica Ranger J.Rangertransport.govt.nz ; Nick Potter N.Pottertransport.govt.nz Subject: RE: question (not for a story just yet) Looks good, no changes from me. Thanks Liam and team, will send this over now. From: Liam Fechney L.Fechneytransport.govt.nz Sent: To: Matthew Winthrop M.Winthroptransport.govt.nz Cc: Jessica Ranger J.Rangertransport.govt.nz ; Nick Potter N.Pottertransport.govt.nz Subject: RE: question (not for a story just yet) Hi Matt, Some lines below, Jess has approved, so happy to discuss if youd like to make any changes but otherwise good to go across to the Office I am committed to ensuring public transport is delivered efficiently and reliably in New Zealand. It is important the private share of funding for public transport increases to reduce funding pressure on councils and the National Land Transport Fund. NZTA is currently developing an approach to increase the share of public transport revenue from passengerfares. NZTA is working with councils to do this.
The request resulted in the Auckland Road Pricing Evaluation Study , which explored the economic and social impacts of several alternative schemes. A further phase of the work, the Auckland Road Pricing Study , evaluated specific roadpricing schemes and used feedback from a submissions process in Auckland to assess the publics response to road pricing in their region.
The requirement to have ESC does not apply to some specialist vehicles, such as vintage, motorsport and scratchbuilt vehicles. This is consistent with other Land Transport Rules.
The research concluded that none of the options considered could guarantee cost effective reductions in emissions. We did not recommend any of the options for further consideration by Government at that time.
The research confirmed that congestion pricing had significant potential to influence travel demand and reduce congestion in Auckland.
The research identified and then examined a large number of policy options put in place overseas, including where studies had been showing the costs and the effects of policy options. The options looked at included introducing localised emission standards, emission charges, low emission zones, road pricing, emissions testing, fuel switching and increases in fuel and road user charges. The report then presented a detailed analysis of options shown to be effective in other countries and that can be applied to a specific region, Auckland in this case. The options considered in detail were Low Emission Zones, regional emissions testing and road pricing. The study included a detailed cost benefit analysis of each of the selected options.
The responses made it clear there are conflicting opinions about the benefits of drones and the challenges of integrating them into the transport system. A common theme was the limitations of the current technology and the effects on existing users of introducing more drones into our airspace. Respondents thought the most benefits would be gained in agriculture, border protection and where drones could undertake tasks that would be high risk for people. Many were uncertain about how drone integration would be achieved and wanted to know specifically what the next steps would be. They were keen to be involved in developing the regulations and gave ideas about who should be represented in an industry advisory group.
The rest of this document provides an overview, including references, of all relevant New Zealand sources relating to VFM. We have also provided brief summaries of individual sect ions and highlighted key themes that run through a number of the documents. In brief, we have a number of observations , as follows :
The results of the Drone Benefit Study suggest drones could help lift productivity across large parts of the economy. However, it will be necessary to overcome industry resistance to using drones if we are to realise their benefits.
The results offer valuable insights into how, when and why New Zealanders travel and how this changes. It provides vital information for developing road safety, roading, public transport, pedestrian and cycling policies.
The results show not only significant reductions in reoffending for drink driving, but also in reoffending for disqualified driving for those who received an AIO (when compared to the matched control group who were eligible for an AIO but did not receive one). The ability to receive a licence to drive within a short timeframe ( days) for the AIO group appears to result in significant reductions for unlicenced driving when compared to the matched control group. Across all the years of reoffending for drink driving and unlicenced driving the reductions are significant for the AIO group excluding year one ( Table page ). This may be explained by the suggestion that for those not receiving an AIO they would have received a ban from driving for six months or more. This would however take further research to confirm. The year one drink driving reoffending results might suggest that those receiving a different sentence were complying with any licence restrictions they received. However the disqualified driving data shows significant reductions in all years versus the control group, Reports show that unlicensed drivers are twice as likely to be involved in a serious injury crash than licenced drivers ( Federal Office of Road Safety; FORS, ; Watson , ). The evidence suggests that the unlicenced recidivist offender is over represented in serious alcohol related crashes and more likely to have a serious drink driving problem ( Sheehan et al., ). There are reductions in all Other types of offending by the AIO group. The AIO group had significant lower re offending in years one and two, but there were no differences in years three and four. While the results of this study provide compelling evidence towards the effectiveness of the AIO in reducing both reoffending for drink driving and for unlicenced driving reoffending, as reported previously ( Waters , a ), there is no follow up on whether the device is fitted or not after the imposition of the AIO sentence. The AILs granted data provided can only supply information on licences granted and not interlock installation. The data provided by the interlock companies does provide evidence that the interlocks are being installed and although it does somewhat correlate to the sentence and AIL numbers this is ad hoc and provides no definitive connections to the AIO group. Additionally, no definite link between the sentence and interlock installation can be ascertained for this study. The results show that those who receive the sentence have significant reductions in reoffending. It would be of benefit to find and identify a means of linking the installation data, held only by the interlock companies, back to the MoJ data or Waka Kotahi AILs granted data to provide evidence of reoffending for those who have actually had the device fitted, if possible. Reasons why some offenders received the sentence whil e others did not may i nclude a multitude of factors including affordability (no information was available on employment or income) or even perhaps to replace another sentence including a home detention or jail term. It may also be the case that the drink driving offence was a l esser offence in an array of charges. Data to confirm any reason why the interlock group received the sentence and not others who were eligible has not been ascertained or sought after for this study, due to the complexity involved in retrieval of sentenci ng notes for each individual case from the judiciary .
The results showed a relatively modest impact on GDP, with a forecast reduction of . to . (NZD million to million) in the months following the event. Two contributing factors were increased freight transport costs and impacts on businesses from infrastructure damage and transport disruptions.
The results the Government wishes
The review aimed to develop recommendations to change the scheme in a way that was fair to all while delivering enough cost savings to make it financially sustainable for the next few years.
The review also ensured current cardholder entitlements stayed the same.
The review covers four areas:
The review found that changes to the current system were needed and recommended that legislation should be amended after a public consultation process.
The review found that the benefits rail can deliver to New Zealand are hampered by:
The review is timely given growing maintenance costs and degradation of the state highway network across all condition measures.
The review led to the enactment of the Road User Charges Act , which was introduced into Parliament on November .
The review recommended a year investment programme to rehabilitate the rail network. The programme would be delivered through the New Zealand Rail Plan.
The review will consider:
The review will focus on:
The review will result in changes to investment decision making principles and policies, processes, tools and systems to ensure: A shift to a systembased approach to identify, assess and prioritise proposals for future transport investment. All transport modes and alternatives (including walking, cycling, public transport and new transport options such as electric scooters and the use of technology) are considered when planning and investing in land transport. The inclusion of social, economic, cultural, and environmental outcomes in transport planning and investment, and consideration of the wider impact of transport proposals on communities, the environment and surrounding transport infrastructure. A revised system that is robust and easy to use. The review focuses on key workstreams: Improved strategic alignment providing a clear link between investment proposals and long and shortterm plans. We also want to understand how the Transport Agency can better coordinate urban development and infrastructure changes to mitigate climate change challenges and contribute to public health improvements. Building the case for investment developing tools and process that allow flexible development of investment proposals, making sure the right level of effort is put into proposals, and providing clarity on building the case for investment. Assessing a wider range of impacts of transport proposals making sure our evaluation methods are consistent with wholeof government, the GPS, and that they are informed by research and international best practice. This will mean a wider view of costs, impacts and benefits to be considered in investment decisionmaking. Prioritising investment proposals improve and simplify the method of prioritising proposals, and looking at how to include social, environmental and economic benefits and impacts in that prioritisation. Building sector capability and confidence making sure the Transport Agency advice and use of the decisionmaking framework is consistent, looking at how to build staff and sector capability, and providing information, guidance, tools that are easy to find, understand, and use.
The review will support the human rights of disabled people as outlined in New Zealands commitments under the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD).
The revised Total Mobility review terms of reference are provided on this webpage and are also available in the following formats:
The right koru is Pikorua the energy between the spiritual and physical worlds. It signifies binding together and being united.
The road closure will now take place between pm on Friday September and am on Monday September . If there is bad weather, the closure will take place the following weekend instead ( Friday October to Monday October ).
The roading project will extend the lane Northern Motorway .km from the Johnstones Hill tunnels to just north of Warkworth.
The role of observers on the Board
The rule changes were progressed separately under section A of the Land Transport Act .
The rules will be available soon and Maritime New Zealand will publish guidance on how and when to comply with them at
The same interviewee above also attributed funding pressure to the increased investment in walking, cycling, and public transport. Current scope extended beyond the primary historical focus on the contin uous programme, maintenance, and renewals: a huge amount of money trying to retrofit our streets putting lots and lots of money into walking and cycling all coming from that same pot that causes the issues around achieving the outcomes of the GPS (Government official) Another official saw risk in the GPS becoming increasingly aspirational, reaching beyond what could feasibly be achieved through the change levers available via land transport investments alone. For example, reflecting on other key d eterminants of mode shift, this interviewee commented: we cant change the economic wellbeing of New Zealand the unemployment rates there is diminishing value in putting really big weighting on land use change when thats such a tiny proportion of ou r business to make an impact on (Government official) This position reflects the view of another official who saw the need for a more whole of system approach, which better integrated land transport investment with other change levers. TO WHAT EXTENT HAS GPS INFLUENCED CHANG ES IN NLTF INVESTMENTS, IMPLEMENTATION AND EARLY STAGE OUTCOMES
The scope of the group is flexible and will , to some extent , be determined by the members. The main purpose is to provide an opportunity for sector leaders to bring ideas, opportunities, and challenges to the table . I have also appreciated the groups insight when I have brought live policy issues for discussion. T opics that the group has covered include electric vehicle supply, equity issues, technological innovations, and behavioural change, as well as other items related to low emission vehicle uptake in New Zealand. The group has played a n important role in the development and implementation of key policies, including the Clean Car Programme and the EV Charging Strategy.
The second evaluation included a particular focus on how the RUC system worked for light diesel vehicles.
The second phase of The Congestion Question focuses on understanding the social and network impacts of various congestion pricing scheme options, and their technical requirements. This research will inform advice to the Government and Auckland Council on whether to introduce congestion pricing in Auckland.
The section talks about value for money through making the most of our existing land transport network. This means applying an intervention hierarchy that considers integrated planning, demand management and optimization of existing networks before c onstructing new infrastructure as being a critical part of achieving value for money from transport investment. This section also talks a bout recognizing that sometimes lead investments ahead of demand will be appropriate to achieve value for money, e.g. m ultimodal transport corridor ahead of demand while land costs are lower. Summary a GPS Proposal for assessment and prioritisation This powerpoint provides an overview of what value for money means. It talks about the international understanding centring o n the three Es definition of Economy, Efficiency, Effectiveness.
The sections highlighted in orange are the reports you are responsible for updating. Document Relevant excerpt provided as Document Out of Scope RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Out of Scope GPS Priority Actions Actions in scope of the report: Out of Scope . Public Transport Funding Out of Scope Please feel free to reach out if you have any questions . Nga mihi Victoria Acharya (she I her) Tim Herbert Mitch Macaulay Bryan Field Kaitatari Poronao I Reporting AnalystProgramme Management Office (PMO) ()(a) E: V.Acharyatransport.go vt.nz I transport.govt.nz J From: Victoria Joy Acharya Sent: To: Tim Herbert t.herberttransport.govt.nz ; Bryan Field B.Fieldtransport.govt.nz; Mitch Macaulay M.Macaulaytranspo rt.govt.nz Cc: Tony Frost t.frosttransport.govt.nz Subject: PMO Monthly Report: Request to update the July report Morena koutou This email details the reports and key dates for the July reporting period. We have created an report layout for you from this month. It has been brought to our attention that the Investment team is developing a monthly reporting for the Minister of Transport. To minimise any reporting duplication from your team, the scope of the GPS reporting has been to only cover the GPS Priority Actions . This approach was discussed with and approved by David Wood. He also advised that both the Investment and PMIM teams are to contribute to this report.
The specific amendments to the Output Plan are set out below, along with a brief explanation for the amendment:
The specific modifications are to the Public Works Act in relation to compulsory acquisition powers.
The state highway system accounts for about of New Zealands roads and around half of the billion vehicle kilometres New Zealanders travel each year. Motor vehicles travelling on roads emit an array of air pollutants which can harm human health and create smog.
The strategic approach report built on the foundation and interim reports. It set out an agreed strategic approach for the development of Aucklands transport system over the next years, including an indicative billion investment package for .
The strategy articulates a longterm vision for the freight and supply chain to be:
The strategy outlines a plan to stop people being killed or injured on our roads. It includes our vision, principles, focus areas and targets including the target of a reduction in death and serious injuries (from levels) by .
The strategy outlines the Governments longterm strategic vision for a national electric vehicle (EV) charging infrastructure that can support a growing EV fleet, while helping New Zealand meet its climate commitments.
The strategy was informed by consultation on a draft EV charging strategy in May .
The study aims to produce:
The study finds that the total annual economic costs involved in the NZ domestic transport sector are approximately NZ billion, which represents an annual average of about NZ , per head of the NZ population, for .
The study identifies the considerable cost savings and gains in productivity that drones could offer a wide range of businesses and activities in New Zealand for example, emergency management, construction, utilities, forestry and dairying. It also suggests how drones could develop in the future, and examines the barriers to that development, which include reluctance to invest in emerging technologies, business costs and the current regulatory environment.
The study showed that the benefit to the economy of using drones could be between NZD. billion and NZD. billion over years. The industries which could benefit most from drones are dairy cattle farming and sheep, beef and grain farming, which could see benefits of NZD. billion and NZD. billion respectively.
The submission by the Takahiwai Maori Committee. Est. clarifies the impacts of the Ministry of Transports extension of Northport Ltds port coastal permit under the Resource Management Act upon the kainga and communities at Takahiwai and Te Poupouwhenua, in the following ways. When the first voyagers arrived in Aotearoa, they sought sheltered bays in which to draw up their canoes and come to land, hundreds of years later the first Europeans did the same. Our harbours are and have always been coveted and contested sites for navigation, industry, fishing, recreation, and settlement. Harbours are sites of intersection between land, freshwater and coast and often contain highly significant biodiversity, landscape and natural values, each with different legal treatment including: Landgenerally, private owned with clear boundaries and regulated by territorial authorities; and Water Coast generally now owned by anyone but with rights of access and use regulated by regional councils and government agencies. Historically they are important places of meeting, negotiation and exchange. The law relating to harbours is complex reflecting a web of competing and diverse interests. Consider for a moment that Maori antiquity Tangaroa the god of the sea, Tane Mahuta the god of the forest, Tawhirimatea the god of the winds, Papatuanuku the earth mother and Ranginui sky father, at bottom is not protected from the harmful effects of Northport Ltd.s visions for growth at Te Koutu Marsden Point, Te Poupouwhenua.
The summit provided the opportunity for local government to suggest and discuss actions that would have the greatest effect on road safety in their regions.
The survey has run in a range of forms since , mainly focusing on a day travel diary. In , the methodology was changed to collect days of travel information. However, in July we changed this back to days to make it easier for participants and get better data quality.
The survey is conducted by Ipsos, (formerly CBG Research). Participants should contact Ipsos if they have any question about the survey.
The system is comprised of primary and secondary legislation (which includes regulations, rules, and other instruments) and local government by laws. You are responsible for the passage of primary transport legislation through Parliament. The Ministry supports you to do this. Some transport regulation involves the direct prohibition or authorisation of some commercial activity. For example, f oreign ships are prohibited from carrying coastal cargo, except in specif ic circumstances and with approval . Airlines operating scheduled international services require an international air services licence, issued within parameters set out in Air Services Agreements. Some parts of the transport sector are subject to regulation by other agencies, e.g., the Commerce Commission regulates the disclosure of pricing by airports given their monopolistic nature. Regulations set out associated offences and penalties, fees, and charges Transport regulations mainly set out the associated rule related offences and penalties, and fees and charges that fund the work of the transport agencies. The Ministry leads the development of these with involvement from transport agencies and SOEs, and the NZ Police depending on the subject. Regulations must be approved by Cabinet. Transport rules contain detailed standards, requirements and procedures that govern transport activities Transport rules are the most common form of delegated legislation for transport. Rules contain detailed technical standards, requirements, and procedures governing transport activities within modes. You are empowered under primary legislation to make these rules through delegated responsibilities. You are expected to advise Cabinet you intend to make a rule if there would be wideranging impacts. There is an expedited rule making process where urgent changes can be made by Order in Council . The transport Crown entities develop most transport rules with the Ministrys involvement, but the Ministry leads policy development on significant rules. Transport instruments support a more flexible regulator y system Transport instruments improve the flexibility of the rule making process by having more customised consultation requirements, meaning changes that only affect a small number of transport users can be progressed quickly. Transport instruments are more easily amended in response to technological innovation. Transport instruments are outlined in a rule made by you as Minister of Transport, with the design and management delegated to a specified official (such as the Director of the relevant transport agency). Several transport instruments exist in Maritime legislation, with more planned in other modes as part of work on secondary legislation. The Civil Aviation Act (which comes into force in ) also empowers the Minister to creat e transport instrument s. Crown monitoring, assurance, and oversight You have a role in appointing board members to the transport agencies, setting their expectations and monitoring their performance. As Transport Minister you have powers to amend, replace or disallow some local government bylaws. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT KEY TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES
The table attached at Annex details how the briefing titles have been treated. Certain information has been withheld under the following sections of the Act:
The table below sets out the legislation where temporary changes are proposed. Table Legislation where t emporary changes are proposed Proposed OiC OiC to modify the Land Transport Management Act OiC for repair and recovery works to be undertaken by Waka Kotahi OiC for repair and recovery works to be undertaken by KiwiRail Relevant legislation Land Transport Management Act Resource Management Act Conservation Act Reserves Act Wildlife Act Freshwater Fisheries Regulations Public Works Act Resource Management Act Conservation Act Reserves Act Wildlife Act Freshwater Fisheries Regulations Public Works Act Railways Act New Zealand Railways Corporation Act
The table below shows the correspondence between the specific motor vehicle types used in the motor vehicle register and the Ministry of Transports vehicle type categories.
The table t hat follows outlines the Ministrys indicative evaluation activities for the period to , subject to funding and resourcing. The programme will be reviewed and as needed to ensure that it continues to align with the Government s strategic direction and is responsive to new evaluation requirements .
The table that follows outlines the Ministrys indicative evaluation activities for the period to , subject to funding and resourcing. The programme will be reviewed and as needed to ensure that it continues to align with the Governments strategic direction and is responsive to new evaluation requirements.
The table that follows outlines the Te Manat Wakas indicative evaluation activities for the period to , subject to funding and resourcing. The programme will be reviewed and as needed to ensure that it continues to align with the Governments strategic direction and is responsive to new evaluation requirements.
The targeted review looked at how the scheme operated and how the guidelines might change to keep it affordable, focusing on:
The temporary rate of petrol excise duty is . cents per litre of petrol, down from the ordinary rate of . cents per litre. This reduction was put in place by an Order in Council, namely the Excise and Exciseequivalent Duties Table (Temporary Reduction of Motor Spirits Duty) Amendment Order (copy below).
The temporary transport support measures ended on June :
The terms of the Ministrys Copyright and disclaimer apply, available at: www.transport.govt.nz
The third evaluation took a summative approach, aiming to make definitive judgements on the success, or otherwise, of the changes made by the Road User Charges Act .
The timeline below provides a highlevel summary of the key milestones for this process. Dec Jan Feb
The tran sport sectors role in an efficient transport network Firstly, I want to acknowledge the devastation that the floods and Cyclone Gabrielle brought in Auckland and across regions, such as Gisborne. The Cyclone caused major damage to the State Highway and r ail networks, and I want to thank you for the hard work of your organisations to respond to this damage and reconnect communities.
The transport component of NZUP represents the single largest transport investment directly funded by the Crown. It reflects the Governments commitment to addressing our nations infrastructure needs, while also providing a vital economic stimulus in response to the impacts of COVID.
The transport component of the programme is the single largest transport investment directly funded by the Crown. It reflects the Governments commitment to addressing our nations infrastructure needs, while also providing a vital economic stimulus to firms and households in response to the impacts of COVID.
The transport investment focuses on supporting priorities of safety and access in our main growth areas Auckland, Waikato, Bay of Plenty, Wellington, Canterbury and Queenstown.
The transport investment focuses on supporting priorities of safety and unlocking new housing opportunities in our main growth areas Auckland, Waikato, Bay of Plenty, Wellington, Canterbury and Queenstown.
The transport projects are being delivered by Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency and KiwiRail, and are overseen by the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Transport.
The transport projects will be delivered by Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency and KiwiRail, and are overseen by the Minister of Transport and the Minister of Finance.
The transport sectors operational functions are delivered through Crown entities with specialist functions. Each Crown entity is governed by a Board of Directors.
The transport system can and should do better for Mori
The transport system is better
The trends in crash rates summarised above for drivers aged under years old also raise a quest ion of whether further changes to the GDLS could be used to partly compensate for the flat or increasing trends in per driver crash rates that have been observed since around , in contrast to falling crash rates observed between and . It is no t clear if these trends are directly related to driver licensing, and similar trends have occurred for the entire population of licensed drivers. Regardless of the cause, it may be appropriate to investigate whether licensing rules can be adjusted to offs et these trends in crash rates. .. Estimated safety impacts of the to GDLS changes Context for analysis of the changes As discussed in section .. of the Technical Report , changes in driver demographics occurred around the same time of the change s to the GDLS, some of which were likely caused by the changes to driver licensing, and some of which reflected longer term socio economic trends: The median age of drivers receiving learner licences increased following the increase in the minimum age, fr om around years old before to around years old in . Similarly, the median age of people obtaining a restricted licence increased from around years old to around years old. The median age of people obtaining full licences also increased from around years old to around years old, but some of this increase appears to reflect a trend that started before the minimum learner licence age was increased. The gender distribution of people receiving Class learner and restricted licences remained roughly constant between and , with an almost equal proportion of licences issued to males and females. The change to the minimum age appears to have caused a temporary reduction in the proportion of learner and restricted licences issued t o males for about the first six months after the change. The proportion of full licences issued to males has also gradually declined over time, from around in to around in , which appears to reflect a longer term trend in driver licensing. The change to the minimum age appears to have caused a temporary increase and then decrease in the amount of time people spend at the learner and restricted stages. Before the minimum age increased, drivers aged and under took a median of around mo nths to obtain their full licence. In this had reduced to around months, with all of the reduction occurring at the restricted stage. Some people therefore appear to have responded to the increased minimum ages by speeding up their progression thro ugh the licence stages. This may reflect, for example, people who are planning to enter the workforce at years old and want to have a full licence by that time. Following the increase in the minimum learner age, such people needed to progress through th e licence stages more quickly in order to have a full licence by the time they turned .
The two OiCs modify several pieces of legislation that set the regulatory approval approaches for transport works. The two OiCs:
The types of projects the Government considered included shovelready land transport projects that have a public or regional benefit for New Zealand and its communities.
The update put greater weight on:
The licence testing demand forecast was provided to you on Friday July . This confirmed our current timeframe estimation for consistently achieving wait times under days as being early calendar year , though we expect to see improved wait times from October . July forecast accuracy was .; a variance of tests against forecast. Continued on next page Update on Driver Testing Officer (DTO) recruitment: Recruitment and training for permanent and temporary DTOs is scaling up, which will significantly increase testing capacity across September and October. We are working to confirm numbers of full time equivalent staff to improve confidence in the forecasted supply of tests. Confirmed next cohorts of DTO trainees are: August: permanent staff ( Auckland, Christchurch). August: temporary surge DTOs. The NZ Defence Force has been supportive by loaning trainer resource for the temporary recruitments. U pdate on other interventions of note: A trial to improve overseas conversion pass rates has begun, to run August to November . The trial is led from the VTNZ Auckland Business Chamber site in Manukau where , overseas applicants will receive additional education and training. Outcomes will be closely monitored to understand impact on pass rates for this participant group and if scaling the intervention would be beneficial. (Continued over page) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
The virtual event saw keynote speeches from Transport Minister Hon Michael Wood, Acting Chief Executive and Secretary for Transport Bryn Gandy, and two panel discussions focusing on the challenges of decarbonising transport.
The way we pay for the transport system has functioned well for decades, but it is time to reconsider how it works in the longerterm, because the way New Zealanders travel is changing.
The work being undertaken by AT is in close proximity of NZTAs SH Safety Improvements project. There is the potential that some motorists will believe the closure is part of the NZTA led project. State Highway B Telephone Road Media Release
The work illustrates the pressure placed on the transport system due to the changing distribution of households and destinations, the associated travel growth by existing households, and the growth in the total number of households.
The work to make transport networks around Kaikura safer and more resilient is due to be completed in December .
The working group also contracted EY to assist in developing an economic and multicriteria evaluation of the potential options for the future of the POAL.
The working paper provides the Government with a range of options to increase the uptake of alternative green fuels in the road freight sector. We are not running a formal consultation process, but we are keen to hear your views on the options presented in this paper.
There appears to be no data gathered by Waka Kotahi or any Government agency on interlock installations. The comparison data variables do not include any employment or income data.
There are briefing titles in scope of your request. Of which, are released in full, are withheld in full and are released with some information withheld.
There are exempt services in the scheme. These are not part of the relevant regions core public transport network, as outlined in the relevant Regional Public Transport Plan. Exempt services include the Waiheke Island ferry, Fullers ferry to Devonport, Sealink ferry to Waiheke Island, Wellington Airport Flyer and the Wellington Cable Car.
There are projects costing an estimated total of NZD. billion.
There are already more than , drones in New Zealand being used in a variety of ways and across many industries. New Zealand is a world leader in the UA sector due to our good safety regulations, the open way we work and our riskbased regulatory regime for drone operations. We want to retain these advantages and remain at the forefront of drone development by ensuring our approach to drone operations makes the most of the many opportunities they bring while addressing the challenges they trigger.
There are around , public transport buses in operation in New Zealand and fewer than of these are active electric buses.
There are currently no level or vehicles operating on New Zealand public roads. Although, Christchurch Airport has a fully autonomous shuttle designed by Ohmio for public use in restricted areas. The autonomous person shuttle runs along a preprogrammed route, without the need for a driver. In June , the public had the opportunity to ride the shuttle. The trial contributed to public awareness about AVs and the potential opportunities they provide.
There are five documents that fall within the scope of your request and are detailed in the document schedule attached as Annex . The schedule outlines how the documents you requested have been treated under the Act. Two documents have information withheld under the following sections of the Act:
There are many strategies that support th e consideration of capability, however it needs to be clear.
There are many vehicles operating on New Zealand roads that have up to level automation to assist the driver with some aspects of the driving task. Level capability is not yet available but we expect Tesla vehicles to be upgraded via software updates to have Level capability in the near future, allowing autonomous driving under certain conditions while the human driver remains ready to take back control at any moment.
There are no major events scheduled that are expected to impact queues this coming week. Please see the Appendix at the end of this report for data on where queues are predicted during the coming week.
There are other commitments to rail that fall outside the GPS NLTF and work is continuing to progress on these projects. Ministers are progressing further discussions around what further funding would be required for the rail network and will have more to say on that in due course. How does the draft GPS direct investment in public transport Effective public transport investment provides commuters with more choice and helps reduce travel times, congestion, and emissions. In Auckland, the Government is focused on completing the City Rail Link and Eastern Busway in the next three years . Alongside this work, planning will also be undertaken in the next three years for the delivery of the Northwest Rapid Transit Corridor and the Airport to Botany Busway. In Wellington, the Government will continue to deliver the Lower North Island Rail Integrated Mobility (LNIRIM) project, to upgrade rail network substations, and replace rolling stock for the Wairarapa and Manawatu lines. The draft GPS also supports work by local c ouncils to accelerat e the North South, East West, and Harbour Quays bus corridors. While there has been a percent increase in funding for public transport over the past five years, patronage has decreased by percent. This has partly been caused by COVID restrictions, but numbers have not increased back to pre COVID levels. The private share of funding for public transport over the same period has also fallen from approximately percent to percent which is putting significant funding pressure on local councils and the NLTF. The draft GPS expects that local government will seek additional revenue from public transport fares and other thirdparty revenue . How will the Government ensure value for money The draft GPS includes value for money as a strategic priority. This includes looking to improve the standards, practices, capabilities , and strategic alignment of its investment . The Government will require road maintenance contracts to be brought into line with the strategic priorit ies in the draft GPS . To ensure value for money, the following changes will be made: reducing NZTA head office overheads by . percent increasing farebox recovery and third party revenue (e.g. advertising) on public transport services reducing expenditure on temporary traffic management, while maintaining the safety of workers and drivers focussing on outcomes in road maintenance and safety investment making better use of existing assets by allowing time of use charging or the use of dynamic lanes in main cities to manage demand making better use of existing digital infrastructure and information systems . A performance framework will be established to support monitoring of value for money. See accountability below for more information. How will the Government improve the current state of the roads Maintaining the road network is a priority in draft GPS . To fix the growing number of potholes on our roads, and to prevent further deterioration in roading quality, the draft GPS increases road maintenance funding by million compared to the draft GPS released in by the previous Government . This additional funding is reflected in the newly established Pothole Prevention Fund, through the State Highway Pothole Prevention and Local Road Pothole Prevention activity classes. The prevention of pothol es, and improving resilience by addressing drainage problems , will lead to less costly reactive repair work. In addition to allocating different levels of funding for different types of maintenance activities, the Minister of Transport will hold NZTA (and indirectly, the wider sector) to account for how it delivers value for money. This will mean delivering a no frills approach to network management with a stronger focus on the fundamentals, including managing assets effectively, reducing congestion and enhancing safety and economic growth. Funding How much funding is forecast under the draft GPS The draft GPS signals the Governments transport priorities and guides investment in land transport of billion from the NLTF per annum . The draft GPS will also guide . billion per annum from local government. What changes to NLTF revenue are being proposed through the draft GPS The Government recognises the significant cost pressures the NLTF is facing and propos es to increase revenue by . billion from . billion in to . billion in , an increase of over percent. To do this , an additional funding package of . billion is being proposed . This comprises : Crown funding and financing of . billion to limit cost pressures on household and business budgets . Two increase s in the annual licensing fee component of Motor Vehicle Registration (MVR) in January , and January . This fee hasnt been increased since and inflation has reduced the real value of this NLTF contribution by half . The change will return MVR to the level, in real terms . Starting from January , semi regular increases in fuel taxes for three years, consistent with historic norms prior to . In January , FED and RUC will be increased by cents per litre, followed by cents per litre in January , and an annual cents per litre starting in . These increases will raise . billion by . These increases mean that the average driver of a petrol vehicle in would expect to pay an additional . per week (including GST, . GST exclusive). Is the Government raising fuel taxes The Government is aware of the costofliving crisis experienced by New Zealanders and will be providing additional Crown funding and financing to the draft GPS to reduce the impact on New Zealanders. The Government is delivering on its commitment to not increase fuel taxes this term . However, the cost pressures in the NLTF necessitate a return to previous practice of regular increase s in FED and RUC. The Government plans to return to regular FED and RUC increases from January . What changes are proposed to funding for the land transport system The land transport funding system is facing significant pressure due to rising demands and costs. This includes historic deferral of maintenance, increasing severity and frequency of extreme weather events, workforce pressures, and a period of heightened inflation. The Government has provided additional funding to meet these pressures in the short term . Longer term, a project is already underway to look at the future of revenue in the transport system and consider how to make the system more sustainable in the context of climate change and increasing cost pressures. The first step of this is already underway, with light electric vehicles required to pay RUC from April . The next steps include requiring all road vehicles to move from FED to RUC . The Government also expect s NZTA and the Ministry of Transport will work together to examine how alternative funding and financing arrangements could be used for all new major transport infrastructure projects such as tolling, time of use charging, equity finance and value capture . The Government is signalling a number of system reforms to be implemented in parallel with the delivery of this GPS. These reforms will provide more sustainable revenue, help contain costs , and make it easier for delivery agencies to do their jobs. Key among the changes is a move to a year NLTP, which will provide more certainty to local authorities and their commercial partners, and to the travelling public.
There are several requirements in New Zealand legislation that an autonomous vehicle might need to meet before being allowed to operate on public roads. These requirements are set out pursuant to the Land Transport Act . New Zealand is also party to the and United Nations Agreements on Wheeled Vehicle Standards and Regulations.
There are two key reasons for the discrepancy: . The weekly wait times reporting table below has presented DTO headcount as opposed to DTO full time equivalents (FTE). Headcount includes part time and casual DTOs employed by VTNZ and therefore productivity rates cannot be calculated using these numbers. To mitigate confusion going forward NZTA has added an additional column presenting DTO FTE. Please see below table for this inclusion and NZTA welcomes your feedback. . The week in question was the first week that the new permanent VTNZ DTOs were added to the testing schedule around the country. However, not all regions received newly trained DTOs. In their first week a new DTO has very low productivity and this increases over time as they become more confident and efficient, and they are assigned more testing slots in the booking schedule. A new DTO is counted as FTE (or their individual contracted FTE amount) and added to the total FTE for that region in the reporting, but they do not test at the same rate as an experienced DTO. Therefore, last week Wellington received zero new DTOs and their productivity rate represented experienced DTOs only. Other regions, such as Central and Canterbury, received new DTOs and therefore higher numbers of staff were reported but it didnt necessarily translate to higher testing productivity given those new DTOs. NZTA is committed to monitoring VTNZ DTO productivity directly. We have worked with VTNZ to develop its operational reporting to ensure productivity is being proactively managed by VTNZ leadership. We will continue to iterate this reporting.
There is a great deal of uncertainty around the deployment time, commercial availability, business models, and safety issues of level and vehicles. Manufacturers and technology companies alike are focused on safety as their primary concern, given that maintaining their reputation necessitates a cautious approach to avoid delivering products to market before they are ready.
There is a highlights package from the event, as well as the speeches from Acting Secretary of Transport Bryn Gandy, Transport Minister Hon Michael Wood, as well as a QA with Hon Michael Wood:
There is a limited allowance for classic and collectable motorcycles. Motorcycles first registered before January do not have to comply with the Rule. For motorcycles first registered after this , a new, special interest motorcycle permit allows collectable motorcycles to continue to be imported if there is no equivalent option with ABS available. Applicants can apply to Waka Kotahi for a permit. The number of special interest permits is limited to per year.
There is an increasing need for rapid transport systems in higherdensity areas.
There is an ongoing programme of regular updates (much like with other Apps). NZTA continues to incorporate user feedback into future improvements. Major changes and updates will be communicated in advance and promoted on NZTA channels. As of Tuesday September , there are , registered users. NZTA is promoting the App across NZTA channels. NZTA is also planning work with partner organisations (such as the Automobile Association (AA) and Vehicle Testing New Zealand (VTNZ)) to drive awareness and downloads through their channels.
There is at least one measure for each of the GPS short term results, but in several cases the same measure is used for more than one result. The set includes different types of measures: Input measures (often focussi ng on spent) Output measures (including measures from NZTA output class reporting, e.g. Number of passenger boardings using urban public transport services) Outcome measures (this is where we are moving towards but it is not possible to measure for a ll aspects at this stage) Summary b c
There is no risk in withholding the responsible manager and analysts names and contact numbers. on the release Cabinet Paper:
There is no specific cost for font licences .
There is no timetable for reviewing the policy. As it is based on highlevel principles, it is expected to be enduring and remain relevant even as new technologies are introduced.
There is one document that falls within the scope of your request and is detailed in the document schedule attached as Annex . The schedule outlines how the document you requested h as been treated under the Act.
There is work underway led by MBIE on international connectivity to enhance tourism and on
There was a general consensus that in much of our current public transport system will still be in place, although:
There were documents in scope of your request: are released with some information withheld or refused are withheld ( five of which also have their titles withheld) three are refused.
There were documents in scope of your request: are released with some information withheld or refused are withheld ( of which also have their titles withheld) two are refused.
There were presentations. Our ministry outlined our work programme, the CAA spoke about their work on drones, MBIE presented a paper about innovation in the UA sector, Airways talked about drone traffic management, and a representative from Unmanned Air Vehicles New Zealand (UAVNZ) gave the perspective of their organisation.
There were documents in scope of your request: are released with some information withheld or refused are withheld ( of which also have their titles withheld) three are refused.
There were a number of agreements reached on each application by agreement (with the Port) or through the Planning TribunalEnvironment Court.
Therefore the procurement process should c onsider the wider benefits that could be from investments and build these wider benefits into the business case, benefits realisation plan and procurement strategy.
These agencies must complete risk profile assessments for all significant investments identified on multi year plans. Agencies must provide to Treasury any RPA for any investment proposal that has a medium or high risk profile. The RPA must be completed as soon as practicable, to enable early central agency involvement with a programme or project if required. All investment proposals that are det ermined to be high risk by the RPA will have the appropriate investment review applied, including Gateway peer reviews The responsible Minister may also request that a project or programme be subject to Gateway peer reviews.
These are brief quarterly reviews of vehicle fleet statistics. They provide information on subsequent trends in vehicle buying patterns, vehicle emissions, vehicle fleet size and vehicle travel.
These are relationships through shared experiences and working together, built on connection and belonging.
These benefits form the high level transport priorities for the region. Each benefit is supported by one or more objectives and key performance indicators designed to measure whether the anticipated benefits are being realised (Figure ). While the key performance indicators have been arranged according to the primary objective they measure, many of them address more than one objective. Together the benefits and objectives align with the GPS priorities of: Safety; Access; Environment; and Value for money Objective .. Economic efficiency () The transport system is integrated with well planned development, enabling the efficient and reliable movement of people and goods to, from and throughout the region. Achieving this objective will mean ensuring development occurs in the most efficient and accessible locations to minimise transport costs and impacts on the functioning of the transport system. The design and operation of major transport corridors will maximise the throughput of people and goods using the most efficient means available. Key performance indicators Maintain a register of significant new commercial developments and their potential impacts on transport demand. Increase in regional contribution to national Gross Domestic Product above levels. Reduce delay per kilometre on key routes to the Port of Tauranga from levels. Reduce delay per kilometre on key routes between Rotorua Airport and Rotorua CBD from levels. Increase the volume of freight on the East Coast Main Trunk line above levels. Policy . Economic efficiency Policies relating to specific investmentsprojects.
These changes would prevent more than million tonnes of dangerous greenhouse gas emissions going into our atmosphere and make a major contribution to meeting New Zealands climate targets.
These companiesgroups might be but are not limited to Toyota, Mazda,, Mitsubishi, Motor Industry Association, Motor Trade Association, Ford, Holden, BMW, Global Motors NZ Ltd, Suzuki, Subaru
These documents have been proactively released by the Ministry of Transport alongside other Auckland Light Rail Business Case documents. It should be noted that the Auckland Light Rail project was cancelled and will not be progressing in any form. This cancellation occurred before the completion of the Detailed Business Case (of which this document forms a part). This document does not, therefore, represent government policy. This document must not be relied on in any way or treated as a finished product. A complete peer review process has not been undertaken of this document, and any analysis or conclusions contained in this document may contain errors and omissions. The Ministry accepts no responsibility for the consequences of this document being relied upon by any other party, or being used for any other purpose, or containing any error or omission.
These documents relate to the Governments decisions on the outcome of the review of the Clean Car Importer Standard. These decisions included setting the Standards annual CO targets for .
These documents were proactively released on June .
These documents were proactively released on September .
These documents were proactively released on the th of April
These efforts resulted in the first train travelling on the Main North Line from Christchurch to Kaikura in June , eight mon ths after the earthquake, albeit w th heavy restrictions on the line, which was quickly followed by the clearing of the majority of landslides on State Highway .
These findings were discussed in breakout groups where participants used a digital whiteboard to add comments and feedback and explored linkages b etween the data collected. Key questions discussed in the workshop included: How has the GPS supported mode shift . STUDY PHASES
These guiding principles underpin each of the seven priorities for the transport sector over the three year period. These are: Delivering a mode neutral transport system to provide a more sustainable New Zealand Delivering liveable cities Ensuring that transport supports regional development outcomes Transport plays a key role in transitioning New Zealand to a low carbon future Enabling affordable and easy access to allow all New Zeal anders to make the most of opportunities Delivering a transport system which is resilient, safe to use, and manages and promotes health and other social benefits Ensuring investment and regulatory settings further government priorities
These included port ownership, efficiency, social licence and community support, investment, optimal land use, and the wider context the strategy was being developed within. It also set out the groups plan to complete the review, explore scenarios and present a strategy.
These increases will raise . billion by . These increases mean that the average driver of a petrol vehicle in would expect to pay an additional . per week (including GST, . GST exclusive). What changes are proposed to funding for the land transport system The land transport funding system is facing significant pressure due to rising demands and costs. This includes historic deferral of maintenance, increasing severity and frequency of extreme weather events, workforce pressures, and a period of heightened inflation. The Government has provided additional funding to meet these pressures in the short term. Longer term, a programme is already underway to look at the future of revenue in the transport system and consider how to make the system more sustainable. The first step of this is already underway, with light electric vehicles required to pay Road User Charges from April . The next steps include requiring all road vehicles to move from Fuel
These investments include:
These limits and thresholds have been added to the Bill via Supplementary Order Paper and will be considered by the Transport and Infrastructure Committee.
These measures were included in the Vehicle Exhaust Emissions Rule , which was released for consultation in May . The amended Rule came into effect in November .
These people have been appointed to the Panel:
These priorities are not final. They have been provided as an early signal of likely directions and the results that the Government is intending to achieve through GPS .
These relate to Clean Car Discount policy changes which came into effect July .
These results are robust to controlling for differences in driver gender, age, and region of residence that may affect both progression and crash involvement. Using logistic regression models of crash involvements (see section .. of the Technical Report ), we found: At the learner stage, the odds of crash involvement were: o . times higher for drivers who remained on a learner licence compared to drivers who progre ssed to a full licence by the end of (p value .) o . times higher for drivers who remained on a restricted licence compared to drivers who progressed to a full licence by the end of (p value .). At the restricted stage, the odds of crash involvement for drivers who remained on a restricted licence were . times greater compared to drivers who progressed to a full licence by the end of (p value .). For all drivers who obtained a learner licence between and and were aged under at the time, we found that their four year progression status was highly predictive of their involvement in crashes while holding a learner or restricted licence, after controlling for driver age, gende r, region, and year (see section .. of the Technical Report ). In particular: For crashes that occurred while the driver held a learner licence: o The odds of crash involvement for drivers who remained on a learner licence after four year were . times hi gher than for drivers who had progressed to a full licence within four years (p value .). o The odds of crash involvement for drivers who remained on a restricted licence after four years were . times higher than for drivers who had progressed to a f ull licence within four years (p value .).
These tables cover road fatalities for . The data is strictly provisional. Numbers may change following further investigation, for example if a medical event is not counted in the official figures, or if a person dies from a crash within days of the crash.
These terms have been revised to give the review a clearer focus so it can deliver on its original purpose. The review will build on the work commenced under the previous Terms of Reference.
These terms of use apply to all of our social media accounts, unless otherwise specified. By using or accessing our social media accounts, you agree and affirm the conditions of use of the particular social media platform and our individual page or account.
These terms of use may be at any time without notice.
These updates provide estimates of average social costs that account for:
These works starting are subject to funding being approved. Yes No Maybe s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(g)(i) s ()(g)(i) s ()(g)(i)
They agreed the objectives should:
They announced that central government will build and fund the Basin Reserve upgrade and second Mt Victoria tunnel while Wellington City Council will bring the Golden Mile project inhouse and work on cost efficiencies, better bus routes, greater pedestrian access and closer engagement with local businesses.
They found the regime was mostly fit for purpose but main issues were identified with the financial assurance requirement for offshore installations set out in Part , and established under the Maritime Transport Act.
They will be able to do this either online or in person at an NZTA agent. There will be a month transition period to allow sufficient time for people to get registered in the RUC system without being penalised for unpaid RUC.
This Agreement and any amendment thereto shall be registered with the ICAO by the Depositary.
This Agreement applies only to air services between the ASEAN Member States and New Zealand. Unless expressly stated otherwise, no part of this Agreement is to be interpreted as applying to air services between the ASEAN Member States alone.
This Agreement may be terminated by New Zealand or PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA ASEAN Member States collectively , by giving written notice to the Depositary, who shall promptly notify the Parties of such termination. For ASEAN Member States, the of the collective notification will be the of the tenth notification. The termination shall become effective months following the of receipt of the notification by the Depositary.
This Domestic Transport Costs and Charges study aims to improve our understanding of the costs of the provision and use of New Zealands domestic transport system. It also looks at costs relative to the charges or burdens facing transport users to improve our understanding of the economic, environmental and social costs associated with different domestic transport modes and movement types.
This GPS replaced an earlier GPS released by the previous Government in August .
This Polis conversation is being run with support from Koi T: The Centre for Informed Futures, which is part of the University of Auckland and in collaboration with
This workproductapplicationetc uses data sourced from the Ministry of Transport which are licensed by the Ministry of Transport for reuse under the name of and link to or URL for applicable Creative Commons licence
This workproductapplicationetc uses data sourced from the Ministry of Transport. This material is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution . International (BY) Licence. To view a copy of this licence, visit
This also excludes all offenders where the probability of receiving an AIO is . OR . , to exclude AIO offenders who were outliers.
This analysis does not take account of change in travel by existing households over this period. Odometer readings suggest travel by car by households tends to fluctuate in line with economic cycles. The economy was relatively strong between and , with Auckland Odometer readings growing faster than population growth, suggesting significant travel growth due to increased travel by existing households.
This analysis focusses on those households where everyone in the household fully completed the travel diary and they are weighted to represent the New Zealand population.
This announcement needs to be made as soon as possible so that NZTA can inform road controlling authorities of decisions and then they can plan accordingly for the summer construction seasonYes No Maybe After October Eastern Busway site visit Opportunity to see how work is progressing on this Auckland Transport project. Yes No Maybe T e Ara o Te Ata Mt Messenger Tunnelling is due to commence at Mt Messenger toward and will be marked by a dawn blessing led by NZTAs iwi partner.
This approach should be fundamental and is applicable to all steps in the planning and investment process. It comprises: Firstly, planning and developing an integrated land use and transport pattern that stages growth to coincide with available capacity on the network Then identifying opportunities to manage traffic growth to utilise the network more efficiently and provide appropriate mode choice. Then optimising the use of the existing network through road marking, signage, phasing of signals, ramp metering, etc And finally, considering investment in new infrastructure, matching the levels of service provided against affordability and realistic need.
This approach will strengthen New Zealand as a highly competitive destination for investment in
This arrangement was previously approved from November until November . Reauthorisation is sought for a further term of years.
This background does not relate specifically to these permits because, as you noted, these permits were done by the Minister of Transport and I dont recall being consulted on those at the time. But I stand to be corrected.
This briefing provides an overview of your role as Associate Minister of Transport, as well as the
This briefing provides background informa tion to support discussions at this meeting. Time and . .am , March Venue Auckland Policy Office , Queen Street, Auckland (in person) Attendees The attendee list is being provided to the Minister directly Officials attending Karen Lyons, Director , Auckland Jacob McElwee, Principal Adviser , Mobility and Safety Anjela Frost, Senior Adviser , Mobility and Safety Agenda .am .am: Introductions and overview from Minister Wood .am .am: What are the challenges for ferry service reliability in Auckland and how can they be resolved .am .am: Wrap up from Minister Wood and next steps Contacts Name Telephone First contact Helen White , Manager, Mobility and Safety Anjela Frost , Senior Adviser, Mobility and Safety Document s ()(a) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of Key issues impacting ferry service reliability Reliability of ferry services in the Auckland region have been decreasing The reliability of ferry services in Auckland is being impacted by key issues including workforce shortages, vessel reliability issues, and conflicts with other port users (such as cruise ships). These issues have been exacerbated by demand for some ferry services outstripping vessel capacity and inadequate systems for notifying people of service cancellations. Auckland Transport (AT) report that their ferry service reliability has decreased over the past months. Ferry service punctuality dropped to . for the month of December , and averaged . for the month period up to December . In January , Fullers (Fullers) reported that . of their Waiheke ferr y services were reliable, and . were punctual. Although Fullers reliability and punctuality is reported as higher than AT, their definitions are less stringent. Workforce shortages are impacting the reliability of ferries services Workforce shortages has been reported by operators as the most pressing issue impacting the reliability of ferry services in Auckland. Timeframes for seafarer certification can be a barrier to filling vacancies One of the barriers to filling vacancies rai sed by Auckland ferry operators has been the time taken to certify seafarers brought in from overseas. Maritime NZ (MNZ) has recognised that its past performance on regulatory licensing, including seafarer certification, has needed improvement. Over the l ast year MNZ has made significant investments in the capability and systems of its licensing team (e.g. moving away from a fixed term workforce, better administration and workflow, training and targeted resources to address backlogs and priorities, removin g unnecessary steps in its processes). This has resulted in significant improvements in performance, including removal of the backlog for applications and processing times dropping by almost half, to well within agreed service levels of under days. MNZ expect to maintain this standard of performance and see further improvements to timeframes, including through further streamlining of processes, ease of access through mechanisms such as an online portal, and better up front communications with operators. However, it notes that maintaining standards and improving further will depend on early certainty on funding review outcomes. Where seafarers come into New Zealand with internationally recognised qualifications under the International Convention on Standar ds for Training, Certification and Watchkeeping (STCW), the issuing of certificates to operate here can happen simply and quickly (usually, well under the day service standard, where applications are of good quality and complete). MNZ has recently remov ed a requirement for
This briefing was proactively released on the th of March .
This change creates a consistent baseline for further work to be undertaken as part of the wider review of key road safety penalties. The review will include further analysis around what the most appropriate fees for key road safety related offences might be and may also include consideration of demerit points.
This change recognises that implementation of the timelimited licence policy has not addressed the barriers to
This consultation discusses the Governments proposed improvements to New Zealands Graduated Driver Licensing System (GDLS
This detailed report is supported by the Transport Outlook Overview a summary that provides a brief overview and important transport facts.
This distribution is likely to reflect the lower land costs and relative ease of access in outer parts of the Auckland urban area for individual household and firms. While households and firms may be further apart in outer parts of the urban area, housing costs are lower, and households are able to access suitable jobs and services in less time.
This docu m ent i s proactively r eleased by Te Manat Waka the Ministry o f Transport.
This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and
This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority.
This document was released on the th of October .
This draft GPS replaces the GPS that the former Government consulted on in August .
This email is to connect with you on the Ports permit extension project and seek views of hau kinga on this kaupapa (relevant info attached), and also start building a connection noting our tari sits on Queens wharf not far from Whare Waka, Pipitea and Kumutoto.
This exemption took effect from September .
This extended support aligns with the reopening of the border under the Governments Reconnecting New Zealand plans, helping to maintain international connections and support economic recovery. The extension period also enables a progressive scaling back of support as international airlines returns and passenger numbers recover without creating a shortfall in freight capacity.
This framework makes it clear what government is aiming to achieve through the
This framework will introduce a more consistent and transparent process to how speed limits are planned, managed and put in place through State highway and regional speed management plans. It also formalises and streamlines the regional approach to speed management Waka Kotahi is taking with RCAs, and aligns decisions about speed limit changes with investment in road safety infrastructure.
This funding would enable Waka Kotahi to lead the investigation, consenting or design of transport infrastructure projects across New Zealand. The tranches included:
This group is comprise d of eight members who hold leadership roles and bring wideranging expertise, including from the vehicle industry, climate change policy, mtauranga knowledge, and electric vehicle infrastructure . The terms of reference for the group are attached for your information.
This guidance clarifies standards and provides recommendations to help EV infrastructure investors set up a network of charging facilities that can be used by as many drivers as possible.
This guidance to the transport sector follows the decision of the New Zealand Government to impose sanctions to restrict some ships and aircraft from entering New Zealand, in response to Russias invasion of Ukraine.
This guide aims to helps operators of small autonomous surface vessels (ASVs) comply with New Zealand regulations when intending to operate their vessels within the territorial sea andor Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of New Zealand. The operation of small nonSOLAS, autonomous (uncrewed) surface vessel in New Zealands maritime area is a regulated activity. This includes launching into the territorial sea from the New Zealand coast or a port, being deployed from another vessel, or sailing into New Zealands EEZ, and territorial sea.
This includes all travel by all people in a household old and young, male and female, working or notworking.
This investment aims to renew the national rail network to restore it to a resilient and reliable state and to support freight rail and metropolitan rail growth and productivity in our largest cities as outlined in the Rail Plan.
This investment programme allows KiwiRail to improve the resilience of the rail network and invest in muchneeded assets so rail services can be more reliable. It also enables KiwiRail to maintain and grow its share of the freight market, which will help rail to deliver economic, social and environmental benefits.
This involved Ministers holding a transport summit in Wellington. We also met with national stakeholder groups and held regional forums across New Zealand with local government.
This is a joint briefing between the Ministry and NZTA on the actions signalled in GPS ,and how we will work together to monitor and deliver these actions.
This is a nonsignificant amendment to the Rail Network activity class funding ranges and description which provides clarity and enables Waka Kotahi to implement the funding of rail activities under the Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP).
This is a significant programme of change for the land transport system and will come into effect with the National Land Transport Programme .
This is an annual update of the Social Cost of Road Crashes and Injuries by the Ministry of Transport. This update provides estimates of the average social cost per injury and per crash at June prices. The update accounts for any changes in the numbers of crashes by area and severity and is based on crash and injury data from to , supplemented by hospital admissions data and Accident Compensation Corporations injury claims data.
This is an annual update of the social cost of road crashes and injuries by Ministry of Transport Te Manat Waka. This update provides estimates of the average social costs per injury and per crash at June prices and is based on crash and injury data from to .
This is an annual update of the social cost of road crashes and injuries by Te Manat Waka. This update provides estimates of the average social costs per injury and per crash at June prices and is based on crash and injury data from to .
This is an annual update of the social cost of road crashes and injuries by Te Manat Waka. This update provides estimates of the average social costs per injury and per crash at June prices and is based on crash and injury data from to .
This is an annual update of the social cost of road crashes and injuries by Te Manat Waka. This update provides estimates of the average social costs per injury and per crash at June prices and is based on crash and injury data from to .
This is an annual update of the social cost of road crashes and injuries by Te Manat Waka. This update provides estimates of the average social costs per injury and per crash at June prices and is based on crash and injury data from to .
This is an annual update of the social cost of road crashes and injuries by Te Manat Waka. This update provides estimates of the average social costs per injury and per crash at June prices and is based on crash and injury data from to . This update also incorporates the new Value of Statistical Life that was based on
This is guardianship and protection. It ensures that we work in a way that upholds our responsibilities to protect taonga.
This is not to suggest that every individual investment will result in reduced emissions. Some interventions that result in incr eased emissions may be necessary to support the achievement of wider objectives but there will be a high threshold for any such investments and the overall investment programme must deliver a reduction in net emissions to meet national targets . Effective partnerships to reduce emissions To deliver the ERP targets, we need to provide New Zealanders with better travel options so they are able to do the things they need to do, with fewer emissions. Transport investments must encourage new ways of d oing things and support people to change their travel habits. In addition, a uthorities at all levels of the transport system have responsibilities to work in a way that is consistent with te Tiriti o Waitangi and section H of the Land Transport Manageme nt Act . This will involve building enduring partnerships with whnau, hap and iwi, and national organisations , to reflect Mori aspirations in future transport initiatives .
This is secondary legislation issued under the authority of the Legislation Act . Title Civil Aviation (Direction to Require Searching for Inorganic Powders, Liquids, Aerosols, and Gels) Notice Empowering Act Civil Aviation Act Empowering provision(s) Section Maker name James Meager, Acting Minister of Transport Administering agency Ministry of Transport made March Publication March Notification March Commencement April
This is the expression of respect, generosity and care for others.
This is the report for airline ontime performance for November and December .
This is the report for airline ontime performance for October (domestic routes), and JulyOctober (TransTasman routes).
This is the report for the airline on time performance for July and August .
This is the report for the airline on time performance for September .
This is the report for the airline ontime performance for February .
This is the report for the airline ontime performance for January
This is the report for the airline ontime performance for March .
This is the third and final annual report on GPS , describing collective progress against the overall delivery of GPS objectives for .
This is to teach and to learn. Ako, as a world view, positions us all as learners and as teachers. Understand and making positive impact in bicultural Aotearoa requires knowledge, skills and mtauranga (understanding). We will achieve that through ako.
This is visually demonstrated with data, as well as a summary card showing progress towards each target. Summary c Summary The RLTPs refer to value for money as it was a strategic objective of the GPS for Land Transport in . Many have used an ILM process to identify regional strategic priorities and guide investment There is some reporting against transport indicators in the R LTPs to enable trends to be measured over time, however this doesnt appear to be consistent across the board.
This legislation is administered by the Ministry of Transport. For more information please see: Website: http:www.transport.govt.nz Contact phone: Contact address, PO Box , Wellington
This means that from May , when the new Speed Rule comes into force, a new regulatory framework will be used for setting speeds around the country, and safe speed limits around all schools must be in place by the end of .
This means to strengthen, mature or develop.
This means working together as one, engaging, collaborating, understanding, and partnering.
This message, together with any attachments, may contain information that is classified andor subject to legal privilege. Any classification markings must beadhered to. If you are not the intended recipient, you must not peruse, disclose,disseminate, copy or use the message in any way. If you have received this messagein error, please notify us immediately by return email and then destroy the originalmessage. This communication may be accessed or retained by Waka Kotahi NZTransport Agency for information assurance purposes. s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
This new function, created by the Civil Aviation Act , will provide the aviation sector with a timely, practical, and affordable avenue to challenge certain decisions made by (or on behalf of) the Director of Civil Aviation.
This oneoff report looked at New Zealanders travel patterns and how they changed over the years up to .
This page shows summaries of light (gross vehicle mass ,kg) motor vehicles registered per month or in selected ranges.
This page shows summaries of the motor vehicle fleet for light (gross vehicle mass ,kg), and heavy (GVM ,kg) motor vehicles and motorcycles.
This page will be monthly.
This paper will propose how the Government should respond to the Climate Change Commissions first Emissions Monitoring Report. The Government is required to respond by October .
This privacy information is in addition to that outlined in the Ministry of Transports
This privacy notice applies to personal and other information collected through this website
This proactive release contains official information in relation to the development of Project iReX, and engagement with Ministers in advance of the contract with HMD being signed on June . The documents have been collectively prepared by the Treasury, the Ministry of Transport and KiwiRail for proactive release.
This proactive release contains official information relating to an entity form review
This proactive release contains official information relating to an entity form review, undertaken by the Treasury and the Ministry of Transport, of KiwiRail Holdings Limited and New Zealand Railways Corporation. The release includes the Terms of Reference of the review, the two joint departmental briefings provided to Ministers while the review was underway, and Ministers subsequent letter to the Chair of KiwiRail Holdings Limited and New Zealand Railways Corporation advising of Ministers decision.
This proactive release contains official information relating to both Phase and Phase of the system review. These documents have been prepared by the Ministry of Transport for proactive release, in consultation with Deloitte, KiwiRail and Auckland Transport.
This process resulted in a highlevel plan known as the indicative package made up of the majority of the projects in the Recommended Programme of Investment.
This programme fits with a wider programme of work to strengthen the transport evidence base, including the Transport Evidence Base Strategy and Transport Indicators.
This programme is consistent with, and builds on,
This project came out of strategic papers released in , particularly Future demand and Economic development and transport, which showed that it is unwise to make decisions about investment in transport infrastructure based on existing information and simplistic projections from past trends. We researched an alternative approach that uses real options.
This project examined how our transport system can best support New Zealands economic development. We explored international theories of economic development and the specific contribution of transport, future transport options for New Zealand out to , and then invited discussion about the implications of these for our transport system.
This project explored different options to test the level of government investment in land transport
This project looks at the role alternative fuels electricity, green hydrogen and biofuels could play in reducing emissions from heavy road freight vehicles. We released a strategic working paper in May for public comment.
This project looks at the role alternative fuels electricity, green hydrogen and biofuels could play in reducing emissions from heavy road freight vehicles. We released a strategic working paper in May for public comment. This paper and its feedback will inform future policy development.
This project relates to upgrades on State Highway between Auckland and Whangarei, including: Te Hana (north of Wellsford) to Brynderwyns safety and resilience improvements to the existing route south of the Brynderwyns and a western bypass around the hills. Warkworth to Wellsford (Dome Valley) New km motorway Whangrei to Brynderwyns Upgraded km fourlane motorway and shared path between Whangrei and SH
This public engagement does not replace any engagement requirements on Waka Kotahi or KiwiRail prior to undertaking recovery work.
This publication is copyright New Zealand Crown and New Zealand Transport Agency . It may be reproduced for personal or in house use free of charge without further permission, subject to the following conditions: you must reproduce the material accurately, using the most recent version you must not use the material in a manner that is offensive, deceptive or misleading and you must acknowledge the source and copyright status of the material. Whilst every effort has been made to ensure its accuracy, the Crown and New Zealand Transport Agency will not be liable for the provision of any incorrect or incomplete information.
This report describes collective progress against the overall delivery of GPS objectives for , using the measures identified for GPS shortterm results.
This report describes collective progress against the overall delivery of GPS objectives for Year (), using the measures identified for GPS shortterm results.
This report explains the difficulty the Panel had in meeting its original Terms of Reference (TOR). The Panel advised that it could not meet its original TOR to recommend limits for drugs that align with a blood alcohol concentration of mg per mL the current level for a drink driving criminal penalty for drivers over . The Panel advised that this was not possible and recommended reframing their TOR to remove the link between blood drug concentration and impairment equivalence to a BAC of mg mL.
This report illustrates trends between and (historical data from are also included as baseline if available). More comprehensive analyses of the impacts of GPS investments are covered in an outcomes evaluation currently underway.
This report informed funding decisions and the development of Aucklands Regional Land Transport Plan.
This report is supported by a summary document, the Transport Outlook Future Overview.
This report is the first of annual monitoring reports on
This report looked at New Zealanders travel over the past years, between and .
This report looked at respondents attitudes towards a number of new and emerging transport technologies such as electric cars, hybrid cars, electric bikes and selfdriving cars.
This report outlines the methodology used to estimate the average social costs and provides some guidance on using the estimates. It should be read in conjunction with the estimates provided for the update onwards.
This report presented recommendations on how data and decisionmaking in the transport system could be improved prior to future shock and stress events.
This report provides a socioeconomic and financial appraisal of the existing New Zealand domestic transport sector (as it was in , prior to the Covid pandemic). It covers urbanlocal and longerdistance travel, covering both person and freight movements, using the road system (private vehicles and public transport, walking and cycling, truck transport), the rail system (freight movements, urban and longer distance passenger movements) and waterborne transport (urban ferry and interisland ferry services).
This report supports the Auckland Transport Alignment Project: Recommended Strategic Approach. A number of objectives have been listed in the document, the following are relevant: Objective: Increased financial costs deliver net user benefits Measure: Net benefits to users from additional transport expenditure Headline KPI: Increase in financial cost per trip compared to savings in travel time and vehicle operating cost Objective: Ensure value for money Measure: Value for money Headline KPI: Package benefits and costs
This report will help inform future work on improving equity in the transport system, both in Auckland and nationally. This work aligns well with our
This research investigated the factors that heavy vehicle operators consider when making operational and vehicle purchasing decisions. The report provides a range of useful insights into the financial and nonfinancial costs that influence these decisions, including a better understanding of barriers to adopting
This review comprised two phases. Phase focused on identifying the system level issues that may have contributed to the RCF issues experienced on the AMRN. Phase focused on recommendations to strengthen the AMRN System.
This scheme ensures a predictable and regular schedule of air services to safeguard New Zealands international connectivity. Continuing support through to the end of October helps to maintain critical air connectivity.
This second report built on the working groups interim thinking and provided a strategic investigation of the upper North Island supply chain. The group focused on determining the possible options that different stakeholders had and used a strategic approach to analyse whole system performance.
This section discusses the efficiency and effectiveness of decision making and consideration of alternatives. With respect to efficiency, it talks about the principle of efficien cy within value for money when procuring goods and services does not necessarily mean lower price by best possible outcome for the total cost of ownership (or whole of life costs). This includes considering appropriate fund ing sources and whole life costs and benefits (both short and long term and monetized and non monetised). An established technique supporting this is cost benefit analysis. This is aligned with MoTs system planning, appraisal, investment and evaluation frameworks and bu siness case proce ss.
This section of SH is part of the countrys most important transport corridor, between Auckland HamiltonTauranga, which carries a significant proportion of all road freight in Aotearoa. Improving safety, resilience and access is important to get to market and grow our economy and to make it safer for travel by a growing number of visitors and residents.
This sort of information would help the public to understand the implications of the prop osals and priorities in GPS and engag e in the consultation process.
This statement applies to information gathered by us, our contractors, or any other third parties engaged by us.
This study will help inform policy development in areas such as charging and managing revenue, managing travel demand and measuring social and environmental costs.
This transition should begin immediately and be fully completed by no later than , and preferably by .
This transparency statement explains how we collect, use and share information gathered about members of the public or other entities, directly or indirectly, in accordance with the Information Gathering Model Standards.
This webpage will be regularly
This webpage will be regularly as we
This website uses Google Analytics, a web analytics service provided by Google Inc. You can opt out of this by disabling firstparty cookies in your web browser, however doing so may affect your use of this and other websites.
This websites privacy statement applies to websites directly managed by the Ministry of Transport. You may be redirected to content hosted on thirdparty sites. In this case it is your responsibility to understand that partys privacy statements and policies.
This will be open for about a month and participants can check in throughout that time to see what else has been said and continue contributing to the opinions presented.
This will take place onsite, near the south tunnel entrance where a tonne road header machine will begin the excavations. Yes No Maybe Early November Hawkes Bay Expressway enabling works Enabling works are scheduled to start in November, involving the clearing of land (already designated), and compacting.
This work could include a staged delivery of a new or upgraded corridor along State Highway to improve access, including public transport prioritisation lanes. As per the recently completed detailed business case, the works are proposed to be completed in multiple stages: replacement of the Omanawa Bridge, the upgrading of parts of SHA to improve public transport prioritization, and a new highway along SH. The funding provided through the draft GPS could enable consenting for the larger parts of the projectenabling works for better public transport, as well as the work to start on the replacement of the Omanawa Bridge to take place over the next years ().
This work forms part of wider set of
This work is based onincludes the Ministry of Transports insert name of work or data which isare licensed by the Ministry of Transport for reuse under the name of and link to or URL for applicable Creative Commons licence
This work is a crucial input into the process of to determining where a future port in the upper North Island could be located. We are looking for credible providers who have the capability and expertise to deliver on a project with the potential to inform one of New Zealands largest infrastructure projects.
This work is supported by the role of
This work is supported by the role of regional
This work programme has parts:
This work relates to the Governments expectation in the Government Policy Statement on Land Transport (GPS ) that concessions and other alternative delivery options are considered for progressing all land transport projects.
This work was performed over a short timeframe in the first half of but due to COVID it was not possible to engage with councils and bus operators to test the implications of the options.
This work will focus on understanding how toll road concessions could be implemented here, and the different ways they could be structured, packaged and phased. Decisions have not yet been made on which toll roads would be subject to any concessions.
This work would include building safer and more reliable access along the corridor with additional lanes to link the Waikato Expressway with the intersection of State Highway and State Highway . Work on this corridor could start as early as , construction could get underway in and would take at least five years to complete.
This work would include improvements to the state highway and local road network, along with a second Mt Victoria Tunnel. A detailed business case is currently being progressed for this work. The funding made available in the GPS could enable early works to begin in , with main construction works getting underway in .
This year NZTA will approach the summer activity by focusing on positive local stories and demonstrating we are improving the state highway network for New Zealanders. NZTA will make the activity locally relevant, showing actual works in the regions representing real people working on the roads. Road safety public information and education campaign activity will see existing NZTA campaigns running at specific times throughout the period, such as anti drink driving and speed messaging running in the lead up to Christmas and the holiday period. The campaigns will run on channels including TV, digital display, billboards, radio, and social media. Hawkes Bay Engagement on North Island Weather Events ( NIWE ) On Friday September , NZTA met with Mayors and Chief Executives of the Hawkes Bay region as well as the Hawkes Bay Regional Recovery Agency (HBRRA). The meeting was constructive, and NZTA was able to clarif y the process the councils needed to follow regarding their recovery funding applications and their request for a bespoke Funding Assistance Rate (FAR).
Thomas H. Nochajski, Amy R. Manning, Robert Voas, Eileen P. Taylor, Michael Scherer Eduardo Romano () The impact of interlock installation on driving behavior and drinking behavior related to driving, Traffic Injury Prevention, :, , DOI: ...
Those opposed tended to think speed or speed limits should not be considered a priority and other issues such as driver behaviour and training, or investment in infrastructure were more important. Some submitters expressed concerns that journeys would take longer if speed limits were reduced.
Those using the Rule would be able to freely develop their product without needing to seek further approvals from the CAA
Three Year Evaluation A ctivities to
Three indicative analyses are shown below in Table , Figure and Figure as proof of concept for the framework and data. A change in what was prioritised nationally can be seen in additional mode shift promoting activities in and (Table ). For example, GPS introduced two new classes for public transport, and GPS separated public transport into services and infrastructure. Table What is prioritised changes in the composition of activity classes over GPS periods Activity Class . STUDY PHASES
Three overarching priorities: Supporting economic growth and productivity Delivering greater value for money Improving safety
ThreeYear Evaluation Activities to
ThreeYear Evaluation Activities to
Through ATAP, the Government and Auckland Council worked together in to develop a clear direction for Aucklands transport system over the next years.
Through our early engagement, stakeholders have indicated they would find it useful to see the Governments intended strategic priorities for land transport as early as possible to inform their planning. For this reason, we are releasing the indicative priorities for GPS .
Through our membership of ICAO, we influence the development of international best practice.
Tim Herbert Kaiwhakahaere Manager Rpu Haumi Investment
Tim Herbert Manager Investment
Tim Herbert Manager, Investment . . .. Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport . . .
Tim Herbert Vanessa Browne Manager, Investment Te Manat Waka National Manager, Programme and Standards Waka Kotahi
Time (indicative on ly) Item No Agenda Item Responsible .pm Introduction Audrey Sonerson . What is Road to Zero Bryan Sherritt . Update on Road to Zero Action Plan Bryan Sherritt
Time Item Lead Tea and coffee Meeting begins Welcome and o pening karakia Audrey Sonerson, Secretary of Transport Proposed focus for SAA in ICAO State Action Plan Bryn Gandy, Chair Opening remarks from Hon Kiritapu Allan Hon Kiritapu Allan, Associate Minister of Transport Feedback on working groups Working group terms of reference o Scope o Frequency of meeting o Membership: Criteria Nominations Size Phasing Bryn Gandy, Chair Morning tea General discussionupdatesany other business All Final comments and next steps Bryn Gandy, Chair Closing karakia Audrey Sonerson Meeting concludes
Time limit amendments consultation
Time of Use Charging Bill passes first reading
Time of use charging Cabinet material proactive release
Time of use charging is similar to congestion charging, but it has a broader focus. While congestion charging targets specific roads to reduce volumes and travel times, time of use schemes aim to improve traffic flow across an entire network, enhancing reliability and productivity overall.
Time of use schemes are a way to improve traffic flows and shorten journey times. It works by charging road users at certain times or locations, depending on how busy the roads are.
Time of use schemes fact sheet
Time of use schemes fact sheet (PDF)
Time of use schemes to be developed
Timing and the day rule
Tippetts, A. S., Voas, R. B. (). The Effectiveness of the West Virginia Interlock Programmeon Second Drunk Driving Offenders. In: Mercier Guyon, C. (Ed.) Alcohol, Dr ugs and Traffic Safety T. Proceedings of the th International Conference on Alcohol, Drugs and Traffic Safety, Annecy, France, September , . Annecy: CERMT, Vol., pp. .
Title Refer to as Begin letters with Ministers Hon Michael Wood, MP Dear Minister Wood Prime Minister Rt Hon Jacinda Ardern Dear Prime Minister Governor General HisHer Excellency the Governor General Your Excellency Knights Sir Raymond John Dear Sir Raymond Dames Dame Sian Elias Dear Dame Sian Ambassador Your Excellency or Ambassador Your Excellency or Dear Ambassador
To achieve a high quality, reliable public transport network , here are the key improvement areas for public transport: Continued modernising of public transport vehicles Measures to improve journey times and service reliability Enhancing the quality of stations, stops and interchanges Improving pedestrian access to public transport stops and stations Improving public transport fare, information and ticketing systems Improving the design of public transport networks to be more effective and efficient Ensuring value for money through new performance based operating contracts Maintaining and enhancing park and ride facilities Using customer feedback to improve the network Promoting public transport use
To achieve a road transport system that moves people and freight more efficient ly, safely and cost effectively, the Ministry has the following actions: Examine ways to improve the operation of the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) through simplification, efficiency improvements and other changes that will deliver value for money . o Contribution to outcomes: A more rational, economical and efficient gathering and allocation of funds. o Target: Increased value for money from the NLTF. Investigate barriers to improve performance in public transport, including the degree of regulation requi red to improve competition and achieve better value for money. o Contribution to outcomes: The public transport system achieves optimal productivity and value for money , and there is healthy and fair competition for contracted public transport services. o Target: Increased competition for contracted public transport services. . To achieve a rail system that moves people and freight more efficiently, safely and cost effectively, the Ministry has the following actions: Establish a transparent funding framework for commercial and subsidized rail activities o Contribution to outcomes: It supports the efficien cy of the transport system as a whole and provides value for money from government investment in rail. Direct text Revised Reporting measures for the GPS (as at September ) https:www.transport.govt.nzas setsImportUploadsOur WorkDocumentsFinal GPS measures Sept .pdf This document explains that t here is at least one measure for each of the GPS short term results, but in several cases the same measure is used for more than one result. The set includes different types of measures: Input measures (often focussing on spent) Output measures (including measures from NZTA output class reporting, e.g. Number of passenger boardings using urban public transport services) Outcome measures (this is where we are moving towards but it is not possible to measure for all aspects at th is stage) Summary b c Literature Summary
To achieve our net zero target climate goals, the Government will be looking to the transport sector to play a leading role in the development of a sustainable, low carbon transport system that supports emission reductions, while improving safety, health, and inclusive access to transport.
To achieve this goal, Cabinet has agreed to:
To achieve this, our functions include:
To achieve this, the Public Transport Management Act was repealed. Its provisions and PTOM were then incorporated into the amended Land Transport Management Act.
To analyse the combined effects of gender, age, and region of residence on progression duration, we estimated linear regression models of progression duration for the cohort of drivers aged under who obtained a learner licence in and who had progressed to subsequent stages by the end of (see section .. of the Technical Report ). This shows that the baseline driver (a female living in Northland who obtained their learner licence at years old) took an average of . months to progress from a learner to a full licence. Relative to that baseline: Males took slightly less time than females to progress (. months less from learner to full), but this difference is statistically significant (p value .). Progression duration initially rises, then falls, with the drivers age at the time of obtaining their learner licence (see the figures in section .. of the Technical Report). For example, drivers who obtained their learner licence at years old took . months longer to reach their full licence (p value .), and drivers who obtained their learner licence at years old took . months longer (p value .). However, drivers who obtained their learner licence aged to years old took a similar amount of time a s drivers who obtained their learner licence at years old. There is very little variation in progression duration across regions.
To assist us with the consultation on the proposal to extend costal permits granted to port companies for years, please co uld you provide us a list of permits held by each port that would be extended under this proposal.
To be considered for funding from the NLTF, an activity or transport project needs to be referenced in a Regional Land Transport Plan (RLTP). RLTPs are developed by local authorities and identify investment priorities at a regional level and must be consistent with the GPS.
To be part of the scheme, new services must:
To be successful, applications must set out how a project will achieve at least one of these objectives:
To continue to encourage the uptake of light electric vehicles, their owners do not need to pay road user charges until March .
To develop a clearer picture of how people currently think about the future of public transport in New Zealand, we interviewed public transport experts and stakeholders from New Zealand and further afield.
To develop the draft GPS , we ran an online forum for nongovernmental organisations (NGOs), held listening sessions with local government transport officials and attended Regional Transport Committee meetings to discuss any key transport issues that the regions were facing. These sessions provided an opportunity to better understand how the current GPS was used, what transport issues were emerging, and what changes could be included in future.
To develop the draft plan we looked at how rail fits into national and regional transport planning, and how rail infrastructure can be funded sustainably to give cities, regions and businesses, and KiwiRail, the certainty they need to plan for the future.
To develop the strategy, the Ministry engaged extensively through workshops and interviews with a broad range of leaders and experts in the system. A reference group comprising private sector experts with experience across various parts of the system was set up so we could test ideas and analyses with them. There was also a broader public consultation on an issues paper.
To do this, the Ministry will provide performance and investment oversight of the GPS function. Direct text d Summary of GPS Information: The GPS , and all refer to value for money, the need for quality decision making and the need for monitoring the effectiveness of decisions. The language around value for money appears to have changed slightly across time from Delivery of the right infrastructure a nd services to the right level, optimisation, efficiency and effectiveness to the broader term of value for money. There seems to be greater definition for the GPS around how value for money is to be determined, centred around the thre e Es and linked to the investment decision making framework. Ministry of Transport Documents MOT Transport Outcomes Framework and Transport Indicators https:www.transport.govt.nzm ulti modalkeystrategiesandplanstr anspo rtoutcomes framework
To enable a fit forpurpose performance framework, I would like the Agency to update ta rgets that have already been achieved and reflect in the SPE what steps it will take to improve performance for targets which have not been achieved in recent years.
To enable longterm commuter service growth in both Auckland and Wellington level crossings need to be removed. In the Auckland metro area, over time all level crossings need to be removed to enable the maximum capacity from the City Rail Link. To grow Wellington metro commuter service frequency, some level crossings will likely need to be removed over time.
To ensure we target our road safety resources most effectively, the cost of any safety interventions should be evaluated against the resulting benefit expressed in terms of social cost. When there are a number of potential solutions to a transport problem, using social cost information allows us to make consistent comparisons between solutions, especially when these solutions have different impacts on the risks of crashes and the injuries that may be sustained in them. social cost estimates are incorporated into Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agencys Crash Analysis System (CAS) to facilitate this.
To estimate the combined effects of gender, age, and region of residence on progression duration, we estimated linear regression models of progression duration for the cohort of riders who obta ined a learner licence in to and who had progressed to subsequent stages by the end of (see section .. of the Technical Report ). This shows that the baseline rider (a female living in Northland who obtained their learner licence at yea rs old) took an average of . months (just under . years) to progress from a learner to a full licence. In addition: There is no statistically significant difference in progression duration for males versus females (p value .). Progression duration generally falls with the riders age at the time of obtaining their learner licence. Riders aged to took around months less to progress from a learner to a full licence compared to riders aged under (p values .), and riders aged and ove r took months less (p values .). There does not seem to be a consistent pattern to progression duration across regions. Progression duration: Relationships to crash rates Figure compares crash rates for riders in each progression duration categ ory at each licence stage. There is no clear relationship between progression duration category and the crash rate, at each licence stage. Our analysis found no statistically significant differences in crash rates at each licence stage when comparing rider s who progressed in months or less versus those who progressed more slowly ( pvalues range from . to .).
To further explore the relationship between crash involvement and progression duration, we estimated a logistic regression model using data for the cohort of , riders who obtained a learner licence between and who had progressed to a full licence by the end of . Due to the relative ly small number of riders in this cohort, it was not possible to model crash involvements at each licence stage separately. The results of the model suggest no statistically significant difference in the odds of being involved in a crash for riders who progressed from a learner to a full licence in months or less versus more than months (pvalue .; see section .. of the Technical Report ).
To further investigate the relationship between progression duration and crash rates, we used data on individual drivers who obtained a learner licence in to and were aged under years old at the time, who pro gressed to a full licence by the end of , and who did not have an advanced driving certificate. We estimated a logistic regression model that predicted crash involvements of such drivers between when they obtained their learner licence and the end of as a function of how long it took each driver to progress from a learner to a full licence and driver age, gender, region of residence, and the total amount of time holding a driver licence (see section .. of the Technical Report for more
To help assess pricing schemes, we are:
To help quantify and measure MoTs progress towards improving wellbeing and liveability for all New Zealanders, they consulted with an extensive range of stakeholders to refine a set of indicators for each outcome. These proposed outcomes have now been finalised, and MoT will be implementing a reporting system shortly. The first set of reporting on the outcomes is expected to be release d in early . The reporting wi ll be matched by an increasing focus on using these outcomes in the Ministrys ongoing work and decision making. Direct text c Literature Summary
To help us and the Minister of Transport develop a final GPS , we had planned to hold briefings and workshops with a wide group of stakeholders including local government, the transport sector, and relevant nongovernment organisations. However, in response to COVID, its no longer appropriate to have facetoface events.
To increase revenue in by . billion, we require a funding package of . billion. This is because revenue over was propped up by a billion Crown loan.
To increase the uptake of EVs and plugin electric hybrid vehicles, a discount, in the form of rebate, is available for imported new and used light EVs
To increase the uptake of electric and low emission vehicles, the Government agreed to introduce the Clean Car Standard a Co emissions standard for imported new and used light vehicles.
To inform the crossgovernment work programme on drones, in collaboration with other government departments, we
To inform the finalisation of GPS we engaged with stakeholders in April .
To inform the policy analysis required to make this decision, the agencies commissioned a report by independent consultant Sapere.
To integrate drones into the transport system, the Government must
To make an appointment to inspect the incorporated material, please contact Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport on:
To provide an overview o f Ministry of Transports indicative evaluation activities for the three year period starting .
To provide an overview of Ministry of Transports indicative evaluation activities for the threeyear period starting .
To provide an overview of Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transports indicative evaluation activities for the threeyear period starting .
To provide you with the New Zealand Transport Agency s advice which recommend s a toll
To reach . billion, the GPS proposes
To read Te Manat Wakas final report to the Transport and Infrastructure Committee, visit Parliaments website
To read more about the Select Committee inquiry and make a submission, visit Parliaments website
To read the final report of the Transport and Infrastructure Committee, visit Parliaments website
To summarise, the work undertaken with the Household Travel Survey and Census illustrates how household travel patterns have changed in response to the changing environment in Auckland over the last years. Aucklanders are travelling further within the same travel time budget. The share of car travel, both as driver and passenger, has increased at the expense of slower modes.
To support domestic connectivity, the Government allocated NZD million to the Essential Transport Connectivity (ETC) Scheme for aviation initiatives and an additional NZD million for ETC nonaviation initiatives.
To support enhanced reporting, monitoring and evaluation of GPS investment, we have developed an ongoing GPS monitoring and evaluation work programme. This programme supports how we improve the GPS and how it achieves effective transport outcomes.
To support review and evaluation of impairment regulation across the transport sector, the Ministry commissioned a report to assess the relative risk of fatalities across transport modes, where alcohol and drug impairment are contributing factors in accidents.
To support the Framework, there is a set of quantitative indicators to track transports contribution against the five outcomes over time.
To understand the publics view about congestion pricing, the Transport and Infrastructure Committee is holding an inquiry into whether congestion pricing should be introduced in Auckland.
To view any personal information held by us, or if you have any concerns about personal information that we hold and wish to request its correction, you can:
To what extent is Aucklands transport system inequitable
To: Project Sponsors From: Auckland Light Rail Group Meeting May Title: Paper : ALR Group project update Pages: appendix
Todd Stephenson, MPOfficials Committee for LEG
Tokyo MOU PSC exchange Maritime NZ will be hosting a PSC Officer from the Incheon regional Office of South Koreas Ministry of Oceans and Fisheries from August. His trip will include visits to the Auckland, Tauranga and Wellington O ffices of Maritime NZ, port facilities in these cities, and the Rescue Coordination Centre NZ. He will also accompany Maritime NZ inspectors on PSC inspections. New Zealand is a signatory and active member of the Asia Pacific Memorandum of Understanding on Port State Control (Tokyo MOU) which consists of member authorities. This visit is part of the Tokyo MOUs port state control exchange programme which aims to achieve harmonized PSC inspection procedures among the Tokyo MOU member authorities.
Toll Road Concession opportunities
Toll Road Proposals: December
Toll for Tauranga Eastern Link confirmed
Toll road concessions being explored
Tolling and public private partnerships
Tom Forster Manager, Economic Regulation March Hon Kiri Allan Associate Minister of Transport . . . Ministers office to complete : Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events Comments Contacts Name Telephone First contact Bronwyn Turley, Deputy Chief Executive, System Regulatory Design Tom Forster, Manager, Economic Regulation
Tonkin Taylor to undertake technical feasibility study
Top domestic routes for ontime performance, March OnTime Departures OnTime Arrivals Route Route Queenstown Wellington . Queenstown Wellington . Wellington Queenstown . Wellington Queenstown . Christchurch Wellington . Queenstown Auckland . Queenstown Auckland . Christchurch Wellington . Auckland Dunedin . Auckland Queenstown .
Top transTasman routes for ontime performance, March OnTime Departures OnTime Arrivals Route Route Gold Coast Auckland . Auckland Gold Coast . Wellington Melbourne . Gold Coast Christchurch . Melbourne Queenstown . Gold Coast Auckland . Gold Coast Christchurch . Christchurch Sydney . Sydney Queenstown . Queenstown Melbourne .
Topic analysis for investment activities Overview National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) data obtained from Waka Kotahis Transport Investment Online (TIO) system includes various descriptive text fields for transport investment activities and phases within activities. This descriptive text contains inf ormation APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
Tori Whanau Mayor, Wellington City Council Tori is in her first term as Mayor after winning election in October . Prior to that she spent years as chief of staff for the Green Party. Campbell Barry Mayor, Lower Hutt City Campbell was elected to the Wain uiomata Community Board in and served as Wainuiomatas ward councillor for two terms before being elected Mayor in October .
Total Membership million members Just over million are personal members . million are business based memberships of licenced drivers Half of licenced drivers are AA Members Gender split Female Male RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT NZAA submission: Government Policy Statement on Land Transport of Age range Membership retention Half of AA Members have been with us for years or more. Under years old years old years old years oldAge of AA Members RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Total Mobility is a governmentsubsidised transport scheme. It helps disabled people to get to where they need to go, when using buses, trains or ferries is not possible because of a disability. Qualifying people can access subsidised taxis, and in some cases other forms of transport.
Total Mobility scheme review initial scope
Total allocations exceed the expenditure target for Total revenue is up by .B to .B for , as FED and RUC increases in GPS come fully on stream . However, allocations (based on the sum of the midpoint s for each activity class) in GPS for exceed the expenditure target by around .B, which has not been the case in previous GPS. GPS therefore announces mi dpoint allocat ions for activity classes ( most ncreased) that National Land Transport Fund revenue is not expected to be able to fund, without acknowledging this discrepancy. Subsequent versions need to clarify how shortfall s will be addressed, including how trade offs will be made between investments in different activities , and whether other funding options wil l be used . Absent thi s information, it is un clear what GPS is announcing and what will actually be delivered. Signalling difference s from one GPS to the next The AA would like to take this opportunity to stress the importance that the GPS signals changes from one document to the next. The Ministry of Transport trans tions guide was he lpful to some degree. However, GPS does not clearly pres ent some basic information , for example : the change to overall allocations for road and for non road activities what activities received more or less allocated funding (including the approximate change) how the additional FED and RUC revenue (hereafter re ferred to as road user revenue) is allocated funding for saf ety activities and how much is additional compared to .
Total costs comprise of the total costs of the transport system and its use total costs mean the financial, economic, social, safety, health and environmental costs. Transport user costs burden are financial payments made to use the transport system. These payments include vehicle operating costs and direct charges such as freight rates or passenger fares.
TotalMobilityReviewtransport.govt.nz
Track user charges from rail operators also contribute to the NLTF.
Tracker number : Choose an item. Background . You are scheduled to jointly meet with Z Energy ( Z) representatives on Wednesday , March . The meeting attendees (biographies included in Annex One ) from Z are: Mike Bennett Zs current Chief Executive, who is leaving the company this month Lindis Jones the current Chief Financial Officer, who will take over as Chief Executive . Z has indicated it would like to discuss ways it could partner with the Government to help the country transition to a low carbon future , including: modelling on current and future fuel demand ; insights on EV charging ; and feedback from customers towards future fuels. . Z Energy is one of the three major fuel importers in New Zealand, alongside BP and Mobil. Z Energy has a shareholding interest in Channel Infrastructure and a nationwide network of service stations and truck s tops. . Z Energy is owned by Ampol, which finalised its acquisition of Z Energy for billion in May last year. Ampol is dual listed on the Australian and New Zealand stock exchanges. Modelling on current and future fuel demand . According to MBIE fuel da ta, since early (just before COVID) total petrol use in New Zealand has declined by about per cent while total diesel use has increased by about per cent. This is likely the result of a variety of factors including higher pump prices, greater efficiency, more people working from home and the introduction of more EVs into the fleet. . This may represent the beginning of a more long term decline in demand for liquid fossil fuels because of changing travel patterns. There are different estimates about when peak petrol will be reached. For example, Channel Infrastructure recently released a study which estimated that petrol demand will peak within two years. The same study concluded that diesel use will remain strong for some time, and aviation fuel is likely to continue to increase. Diesel is used for things like heavy machinery, heavy transport and farm equipment which are more difficult to decarbonise. . Z will have its own internal projections on fuel use. . Either Minister may wish to say: I am interested to hear what your most recent modelling shows about current and future fuel demand. Do you agree with the recent report commissioned by Channel Infrastructure that New Zealand will reach peak petrol within two years How are you expecti ngforecasting diesel demand to hold up through to Insights on EV charging . Z has indicated it would like to discuss its insights on EV charging. Z is working on growing its charging network. To start with, it is focusing on the areas with the hig hest density of EVs: Auckland, Waikato and the Bay of Plenty. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Tracker number : Choose an item. . The Government will be releasing the draft EV charging strategy and associated discussion document for public consultation shortly . The draft strategy includes the following actions : Working with lines companies to identify opportunities, mitigate risks, and clarify responsibilities in developing EV charging infrastructure. Ensur ing the network connection process and pricing for firms wishing to connect public EV chargers to distributi on networks is efficient and enabling. Investigate changes to the current system that could reduce first mover disadvantage . Using vehicle and electricity supply data to identify and plan for electricity network requirements (i.e. avoid inefficient netw ork upgrades). Work ing with investors, charge point network operators and providers, and other key parties to support investment in public charge points. . Either Minister may wish to say: We will be releasing the draft EV charging strategy shortly. I encou rage you to submit as part of the consultation process, and officials will engage with you and other industry players to ensure you can provide comment. I understand grid connection and cost is an important challenge for increasing EV charging infrastruct ure. In the short term, the Energy Efficiency Conservation Authority is prepared to continue to include connection costs as part of co funding public charging. EECA is willing to do what they can within the existing regulatory environment to reduce the pain of connections to the network. I recommend that you continue to engage with them in the first instance. The Commerce Commission is reviewing the rules and processes that underpin price quality regulation and disclosure for electricity distr ibution businesses. This will also consider any barriers to creating new connections in a timely and cost effective manner. The Electricity Authority is assessing and addressing any significant first mover disadvantage issues facing customers connecting to distribution networks, with a view to removing barriers to new and expanding connections. Customer feedback on future fuels . Z has undertaken extensive engagement with their current commercial customer base, providing a strong evidence based understanding of the challenges facing New Zealand businesses in their decarbonisation journey. The topic is intended to be a general update on these insights, and what its customers are seeking in terms of future fuels options. Fuel industry regulation a nd importer margins . Z has not indicated that it wishes to discuss changes to fuel industry regulation or importer margins , however, given recent activity in relation to diesel margins in particular, we have provided some talking points. Fuel Industry Ame ndment Bill . In response to the fuel market study, the Government introduced changes through the Fuel Industry Act that promote greater competition in the fuel market at the wholesale level. This include d the creation of a terminal gate price ( TGP) regime that creates a wholesale spot market to encourage new entry and expansion in new areas by existing players. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Tracker number : Choose an item. . The market study also outlined risks that could prevent the implementation of a successful TGP regime that existing competition law and th e Act do not address. These risks include: The TGP regime being used as a vehicle for coordination; and Wholesale suppliers setting TGPs that incorporate a return on market power. . A regulatory backstop would complement existing interventions in the Act by providing a threat of price regulation to incentivise wholesale suppliers to offer competitive TGPs. . On November , the Government announced that Cabinet had agreed to progress a regulatory backstop to the TGP regime, with the objective of promo ting wholesale competition in engine fuel markets for the long term benefit of consumers CAB MIN . . The Fuel Industry Amendment Bill was introduced to the House and referred to the Economic, Development, Science and Innovation Committee in Novembe r . Six public submissions were received over the November January consultation period. The Committee will report back to the House in May . Fuel prices and margins . There were significant increases in prices at the pump in , follo wing Russias invasion of Ukraine and subsequent sanctions and embargoes placed on Russia. Regular petrol prices peaked at . per litre in June . Although fuel prices have subsided compared to the highs experienced in , the price of fuel continu es to be a concern for consumers and businesses. Pump prices for diesel, regular petrol and premium petrol were ., . and . per litre respectively as at March . . In March , the Government announced it would reduce petrol excise duty b y cents per litre for three months; reduc e road user charges by a similar measure, and halve public transport fares. This suite of measures has been extended to June . . On Thursday March , the Minister of Energy and Resources wrote to fuel co mpanies expressing concern, and seeking an explanation, following the publication of a Commerce Commission report which highlight ing that importer margins for the September quarter were higher than those at the time of the retail fuel market study . . Diesel margins over the three months ending February have also been elevated. The Minister of Energy and Resources also signalled that once the Fuel Industry Amendment Bill is reported back to the House, she will be working closely with officials to determine if the current provisions in the Bill are strong enough to ensure a fair deal for New Zealand consumers, or if further changes are required. . The Minister of Energy and Resources may wish to say: You have received the letter I wrote to you setting out my concerns about elevated importer margins last week. Thank you for your response . OR I look forward to your response. I am pleased that you made a submission on the Fuel Industry Amendment Bill. Once the Committee reports back to the House on the Fuel Industry Amendment Bill, I will be taking a closer look to determine if the current pr ovisions in the Bill are strong enough to ensure a fair deal for New Zealand consumers, or if further changes are required. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Tracker number : Choose an item. The purpose of introducing the regulatory backstop is to deter the misuse of market power and to ensure better competition in the w holesale market, which I expect will flow through to consumers at the pump in the medium to long term. If this regulation works as it is designed to, then the Commerce Commission will not have to use this new power as Z and other fuel companies will be mo re mindful of the prices that they are setting in the wholesale market.
Tracker number : Choose an item. Annex One: Biographies Mike Bennetts Outgoing Z Energy CEO Mike is the founding CEO of Z Energy , and has been in the role since . Prior to this he worked for BP with senior leadership roles in South Africa, China, Singapore and the UK . He is leaving the company on March . He is one of the founders and the convenor of the Climate Leaders Coalition, a group of companies representing almost of Aotearoa New Zealands emissions. Lindis Jones Incoming Z Energy CEO Lindis is Z Energys current CFO and has also been with the company since its founding. Prior to becoming CFO, Lindis was GM Corpora te and led the Strategy team, MA and Corporate Responsibility and Corporate Communications teams. Prior to Z he worked for ASB and Shell.
Tracker number : Choose an item. Annex Two: Talking points Current and future fuel demand: I am interested to hear what your most recent modelling shows about current and future fuel demand. Do you agree with the recent report commissioned by Channel Infrastructure that New Zealand will reach peak petrol within two years How are you expecti ngforecasting diesel demand to hold up through to
Traffic Control Devices Rule changes
Transformation of the Aucklands land transport system is critical to manage growth and support the economy. The Northwest of the city is a high growth area, where the acceleration of route protection, designation and property acquisition is essential to improving longterm access and travel choice. A rapid public transport corridor from the city centre to Brigham Creek would support emissions reduction from this highly cardependent area of the city.
Transitional rail funding enables beneficial passenger rail projects to progress before the future of rail study is completed.
Transmission Gully Project
Transmission Gully is a lane, km motorway project from Linden (near Porirua) to Mackays Crossing (near Kpiti).
Transmission Gully is the first land transport project in New Zealand procured through a public private partnership.
Transport (Road User) Amendment Rule which will come into force on
Transport (Road User) Rule to reference the Speed Rule and
Transport Accident Investigation Commission
Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC)
Transport Agency (NZTA) and the Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC) .
Transport Agency to give effect to government policy in the administration of rebates under the Clean Vehicle Discount Scheme.
Transport Agency to give effect to government policy in the administration of rebates under the Clean Vehicle Discount Scheme. Cabinet has agreed to changes to the scheme and the Direction needed to be amended to reflect that decision.
Transport Base Evidence Strategy project
Transport Committees) Regulations will come into force on October
Transport Evidence Base Strategy
Transport Evidence Base report A
Transport Indicators To support the Transport Outcomes Framework MoT has produced a set of quantitative indicators to track transports contributi on to wellbeing and liveability via the five outcomes over time.
Transport Management Ac t (LTMA) . NZTA recently concluded public consultation
Transport Minister signs new Speed Rule
Transport Orders in Council to facilitate the repair and rebuild Engagement
Transport Orders in Council to facilitate the repair and rebuild Engagement
Transport Orders in Council to facilitate the repair and rebuild Engagement
Transport Orders in Council to facilitate the repair and rebuild Engagement
Transport Orders in Council to facilitate the repair and rebuild Engagement
Transport Orders in Council to facilitate the repair and rebuild Engagement
Transport Orders in Council to facilitate the repair and rebuild Engagement i
Transport Orders in Council to facilitate the repair and rebuild Engagement iii
Transport Outcomes Framework
Transport Outlook Future State Report
Transport Outlook: Current State report released
Transport Outlook: Future State report released
Transport Plans (RLTPs), which it uses
Transport Portfolio Agency Reports
Transport Portfolio Weekly Report
Transport Programme (NLTP).
Transport Records Speed Limits) Regulations will come into force on
Transport Sector Guidance on Sanctioned Ships and Aircraft
Transport and infrastructure (parliament.govt.nz)
Transport and the transport agen cies: Maritime NZ (MNZ) , the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) , NZ
Transport continues to evolve, and so does our role in upholding kaitiaki practices within the transport system.
Transport costs and charges
Transport emissions are the fastest growing source of greenhouse gas emissions in New Zealand and account for of all the emissions we produce. Nearly of all transport CO emissions are from cars, SUVs, utes, vans and light trucks.
Transport has remade the existing suite of civil aviation rules. The rules include
Transport innovation and investment influence economic growth
Transport instruments are outlined in a rule made by you as the Minister of Transport, with the design and management delegated to a specified official (such as the Director of the relevant transport agency). Several transport instruments exist in Maritime legislation, with more planned in other modes as part of work on secondary legislation. The Civil Aviation Act (which comes into force in ) also empowers the Minister to creat e transport instrument s. Your statutory functions As the Minister, you have statutory functions under both maritime and civil aviation legislation. For instance, under Civil Aviation legislation , you are: the licensing authority to grant scheduled international air services licences to New Zealand international airlines responsible for designating countries or territories for open aviation market licences responsible for authorising airline alliances . Under the Maritime Transport Act , you are responsible for authorising the carriage of coastal cargo by foreign ships, if you are satisfied that there are no New Zealand ships or ships charter ed to a New Zealand based operator capable of carrying the domestic cargo. In addition to the statutory functions exercised by you as the Minister, statutory functions are exercised directly by the Secretary for Transport. The Secretary for Transport is: the licensing authority for foreign international airlines operating tofrom New Zealand the licensing authority for open aviation market licences (after the designation by the Minister ) responsible for authorising commercial non scheduled international flights. Waka Kotahi , the CAA and MNZ also have statutory positions (Director of Land Transport, Director of Civil Aviation and Director of Maritime NZ) that have legislative functions, powers and duties in relation to regulatory activities in their sectors. In some cases, those functions, powers and duties must be exercised independently, such as enforcement. These are known as statutorily independent functions. Crown monitoring, assurance, and oversight You have a role in appointing board members to the transport agencies and transport Crown entities , setting expectations for them and monitoring their performance. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT KEY TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES
Transport is one of sectors the first emissions reduction plan focuses on. It accounts for of New Zealands annual greenhouse gas emissions and is the fastest growing source of emissions. Between and , road transport emissions increased by , while emissions across the whole economy increased by .
Transport is one of our largest sources of emissions and we have a goal to reduce transport emission by by .
Transport is one of our largest sources of greenhouse gas emissions. Decarbonising our transport system rapidly will require big changes to the way we travel and move freight.
Transport is responsible for two thirds of the harm estimated to be caused by humanmade air pollution. Each year in New Zealand
Transport outcomes framework
Transport plays a major role in New Zealands society and economy. It contributes to job creation, our social, cultural and sporting interactions, and it supports growth in international trade and tourism.
Transport projects can be delivered in different ways, including through public private partnerships, also known as concessions. These usually involve a contract with a private sector party to finance, build, operate and maintain infrastructure for a specified period of time. The privatesector party receives payment from the Government (the publicsector party). Payment is usually based on the privatesector party meeting agreed targets.
Transport regulatory agencies are primarily funded from fees, charges, and levies As Minister, you have responsibility for seeking Cabinets agreement to the rates at which fees, charges, and levies are set. These are critical decisions because they determine the resourcing available to the transport agencies to deliver their regulatory responsibilities. Crown funds can supplement transport revenue and be used to purchase specific projects or programmes Not all of the investment Government has wanted in the transport sector has been able to be met from the NLTF. Increasingly the Crown has made direct investments in specific activities in the transport system . The annual budget process led by the Minister of Finance is another opportunity for Crown funds to supplement the NLTF. Unlike investment from the NLTF where the Waka Kotahi Board has an independent role in overseeing and monitoring expenditure, ministers are accountable for activities funded by the Crown directly and retain decision making rights when changes are needed to the budget, scope or timeframes for these projects. While bodies like Waka Kotahi or KiwiRail may deliver Crown funded activities and investment programmes, the Crown usually establishes additional oversight arrangements for any projects or programmes with Crown funding. These arrangements give Ministers assurance that the intended investment outcomes are being achieved. Economic and educational tools You can use travel demand management tools to drive behaviour change within the transport system Economic instruments can help to better inform people of the impacts of their travel choices by putting a price on those impacts. The price of transport can reflect the direct costs of using the network, the indirect costs and externalities (such as emissions), or it can be set relative to other modes to influence the use of one mode over another. Pricing and other economic instruments can be used to encourage more efficient use of the network and can be used by local government to influence travel choices and decisions. Such instruments include differential charging of public transport (e.g., reduced off peak fares), subsidised public transport fares, tolling, congestion charging, and parking fees. For example, tolling can contribute to the cost of building and maintaining new roads. You are the key decision maker and responsible for recommending to the Governor General that a road is tolled under the LTMA. The Ministry will provide advice on tolling proposals, liaise with the Road Controlling Authorities (RCAs), and advise on the legislative process to establish a tolling order. There are three existing toll roads: Northern Gateway, Tauranga Eastern Link, and Takitimu Drive . Penlink, which is scheduled to open by late has also been approved as a toll road. Information and education are used in road safety and can help to nudge people to make more informed travel decisions by communicating or consolidating information about their travel choices. In , the total tolling revenue raised from these roads was . million, with million going to collection costs and . million to repay debt https:www.nzta.govt.nzassetsresourcesannual report nzt a waka kotahi annual report .pdf RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS
Transport technologies: Attitudes from people in the New Zealand Household Travel Survey (Transport Knowledge Conference poster)
Transport to produce a Government
Transport to provide additional funding for the New Zealand Upgrade Programme
Transporting New Zealand: Ia Ara Aotearoa
Travel Research Panel established
Travel over the last years has changed, with the typical Aucklander now covering kilometres more a week in minutes less time. While people have switched to faster modes, the purpose of travel has hardly changed.
Travel to work by main urban areas (Statistics NZ)
Travellers paradise New Zealand is awash with cheap energy, which powers rapid growth. Citizens prefer to connect with one another facetoface as digital life feels less authentic. People support network pricing to ensure they have the transport system they need. They value individual liberties, privacy and selfreliance.
Treasurys Detailed Business Case process
Tredegar Rangitea Hall (he his Mr) Twharetoa, Te Arawa Kairahi Mori Director Mori E: t.halltransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz
Tredegar Rangitea Hall (he his Mr) Twharetoa, Te Arawa Kairahi Mori Director Mori E: t.halltransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz
Tree felling protocol(external link)
Trends in crash rates over time Analysis of trends in crash rates is constrained by the limitations of the licensing dataset (see section .). In general, crash rates for drivers aged to years old have been trending down over time. However, in most cases the reductions occurred before around , and per driver crash rates after that time have been constant or increased slightly. For drivers aged and older, crash rates have remained relatively constant, or increased slightly. Our analysis found only one case of a statistically significant increasing trend ( yearold learners). Section .. of the Technical Report has more detail on these trends.
Trends in household travel
Trustee Ako Mttapu: Teach First New Zealand
Trustee Emerge Aotearoa Trust Director Auckland Council Property Limited Chair Recovery Solutions Trust
Trustee Ngti Paoa Trust Qualifications and experience (include significant work history and community involvement) February present
Trustee Te Matapihi He Tirohanga mo te Iwi Trust
Trustee Whareana Mori Land Trust Previous Director Tu Whare Ora Limited
TrusteeChair Papakura Kootuitui Trust
Try leaving separate words separate instead of hyphenating them If a compound word cant be written as one word, try writing it as separate words without a hyphen.
Tumu Whakarae, Te Manat Waka Chief Executive, Ministry of Transport
Two GPS Evaluation reports
Two Orders in Councils (OiCs) that will streamline transport recovery works in parts of New Zealand affected by Cyclones Gabrielle and Hale and the Auckland flood events come into effect today ( October ). The OiCs are made under the
Typewriter fonts are monospaced, which means that every letter, whether its a wide letter such as m or a narrow letter like i, takes up the same amount of space. This makes for very open looking spacing, so the convention of adding an extra space between sentences was established to achieve a noticeable separation between sentences. Correct Incorrect Do not separate sentences with semicolons rewrite them to include full stops or en dashes. Do not separate sentences with semicolons. Its better to rewrite them to include full stops or en dashes. Do not separate sentences with semicolons, as its better to rewrite them to include full stops or en dashes. Do not separate sentences with semicolons; rewrite them to include full stops commas or en dashes . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
T mtou kaupapa Our Kaupapa
Tna koutou e ng uri o Te Wai Pounamu ki tepoti,
Tna koutou e ng uri o Tranga nui a Kiwa,
Tn an koutou o Tranga,
Tn k oe I refer to your email dated March , requesting the following under the Official Information Act (the Act):
Tn k oe I refer to your email to the New Zealand Transport Agency dated December , which was partially transferred to the Ministry on February , requesting the following under the Official Information Act (the Act):
Tn koe I refer to your email dated February, requesting the following under the Official Information Act (the Act):
Tn koe I refer to your email dated December , requesting the following under the Official Information Act (the Act):
Tn koe I refer to your email dated January , requesting the following briefings under the Official Information Act (the Act):
Tn koe I refer to your email dated January , requesting the following under the Official Information Act (the Act):
Tn koe I refer to your email dated December , requesting the following briefings under the Official Information Act (the Act):
UA Leadership Group Meeting
UA Leadership group meeting
UNCLASSIFIED A snapshot of y our portfolio RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT of jobs are accessible bV public transport compared to of jobs accessible by car within minutes during weekday morning peak () . of people in Auckland, . ,of peopl.e in Welllington and .. of people i Christchurd have arness to frequern public transort servrces. ( Transport (lairgely diesel .,ehicles) is re.spons,ible two thirds of the harm c:used by air pollution. This cau.ses: , premarture deaths foradult New Zealanden , hospital admissions fouesphto:rv and caroiac illnesses , cases ochildlilo:od asthma. social costs of . bimon Fat,alities ( Roadf: d e,aths. ime: recreational deaths, mmmericial Fiis D g within mi..,ut,:a missions r;a;;:;;;; m ade up, .,. of total ions mrssions are from: as.senger vehides vehicles lltrlDllt;.Ecommercial vehicle.s Out of the total ,km ofkeysocial and economic corridors across the country, l,.Skm) haYe viable altematile routes. The resulI is lower in the South Island compared with the North Island. () ,.rr.wu,,. . I .. km state highways ,km ca roads X:.m Dedicated bus laeS ,km track in rail netwmk . .. :Separated cydeWays xkm footpaths Vehicle Fleet There are over . million vehicles in the fleet, equating to vehicles per people, or xx vehicles per full driver licences . of fleet i lilflt passefller hides are fossil fUel powered are hYDftd or plugin ttybrid are electric of fleet is light commercial vehicles i of fleet is heavy vehides A SNAPSHOT OF YOUR PORTFOLIO UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
UNCLASSIFIED AgencySOE Key Functions Auckland Transport (AT) and Greater Wellington Regional Council (GWRC) are responsible for planning, funding and procuring operators for the passenger rail services in their regions. They also own the passenger rolling stock and related infrastructure required to support operations, such as station buildings and maintenance depots. KiwiRails core purpose is to move people and freight, and to cooperate with other players in the sector to create integrated transport solutions for customers. KiwiRail is focused on efficient freight movements (via rail and ferry) and helping customers to be more competitive. Meteorological Service of New Zealand Ltd (MetService) MetServices core purpose is to provide weather services that support safety of life and property and, as a SOE, add value to the New Zealand economy. The weather impacts significantly on New Zealands economy, transport safety, primary industries, energy productionconsumption and general public safety. MetService provides a wide range of weather information services and data to government (including other transport sector agencies), business, and directly to the public, to promote public safety and inform weather related risk management and decision making. MetService works closely with other transport sector agencies. It provides specialised road environmental information services to Waka Kotahi and its Network Operations Contractors (contracted to maintain the operations of road networks), and for the management of weather impacts on the State Highway network and other major roads. Airways Corporation of New Zealand Ltd (Airways) Airways is a commercial Air Navigation Service Provider (ANSP) that is committed to ensuring safe skies for today and tomorrow. Airways works with partners to provide global aviation customers with safe, integrated airspace management through a proactive safety culture, expert knowledge, and technology enabled solutions. Airways provides air traffic control services and infrastructure to enable safe, reliable and efficient air transport within the New Zealand Flight Information Region. Airways is also responsible for maintaining and investing in the aviation infrastructure that supports New Zealands air traffic management system. Airways invest in new technology that enhances safety, and delivers real economic and environmental benefits for customers and the public. As an ANSP, Airways is regulated by CAA and provides its service in line with Civil Aviation Rules and international standards. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
UNCLASSIFIED AgencySOE Key Functions Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC) TAIC is an independent Crown entity, and acts as a standing commission of inquiry . The Commissions core purpose is to determine the circumstances and causes of certain aviation, rail and maritime occurrences with a view to avoiding similar occurrences in the future, rather than to ascribe blame. TAIC was established to assist New Zealand to comply with its international aviation obligations of ensuring independently conducted, safety focused accident and incident (occurrences) investigations, a role that has since expanded to include investigations of maritime and rail occurrences. The Commission has a range of investigative (not enforcement) powers. City Rail Link Limited City Rail Link Limited is listed as a company under Schedule A of the Public Finance Act It was established in by the Crown and Auckland Council to deliver Aucklands City Rail Link (CRL) project. The Crown and Auckland Council jointly own City Rail Link Limited ( with a percent shareholding respectively ). You are jointly responsible, with the Minister of Finance, for the Crowns interest in City Rail Link Limited (as shareholding Ministers). Board appointments require joint agreement from the Crown and Auckland Council. The Board operates independently to shareholding Ministers and Auckland Council, in accordance with the Project Delivery Agreement. The Project Delivery Agreement is a contractual agreement between the Crown, Council and City Rail Link Limited that sets ou t the terms for City Rail Link Limited to manage the delivery of the CRL project on behalf of the Crown and Council, as joint Sponsors of the project. Auckland Light Rail Limited Auckland Light Rail Limited (ALRL) was established in late under Schedule of the Crown Entities Act to deliver a Detailed Business Case (DBC) by mid for the Crown to make a final investment decision on an Auckland light rail route from the Auckland city centre to Auckland Airport. Unlike City Rail Link, the Auckland Light Rail project includes urban development and integration with other transport initiatives and systems, such as the Additional Waitemat Harbour Crossing (AWHC). You are jointly responsible for ALRL along with the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Housing with each Minister having a share in ALRL. In addition, Auckland Council and Manu Whenau representatives are joint sponsors along with the Crown. The Board operates independently at arms length to shareholding Ministers and Sponsors, in accordance with the Project Planning and Funding Agreement (PPFA). The PPFA is a contractual agreement between the Crown, Council and ALRL that sets out the terms for ALRL to manage the delivery of the Auckland Light Rail project. KiwiRail KiwiRail is a commercially focused and vertically integrated SOE, responsible for operating freight and tourism passenger services on , kilometres of rail network and three interisland ferries. KiwiRail owns, maintains and upgrades the national rail network and associated infrastructure, including the rail networks used by Auckland and Wellington passenger rail services. KiwiRail will also be responsible for operating Te Huia (Hamilton to Auckland startup service), once it is operational. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT WIDER COLLABORATION WITHIN THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
UNCLASSIFIED Appendix Emergency Management and search and rescue functions Emergency Management The transport system is vulnerable to major natural events and manmade shocks that disrupt services. The Ministry exercises its system stewardship role by being the transport sector lead on resilience and security policy matters with other government agencies such as the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC), the National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA), and the National Security System. The Ministry works closely with the other transport Crown entities to plan for future needs and emergencies so that the transport sector can respond efficiently and effectively to system disruptions or damaged infrastructure. System planning and preparedness is reviewed during DPMC led ODESC forums and exercised as part of the NEMA led all ofgovernment National Exercise Programme. During significant responses the Ministry will activate and lead the Transport Response Team (TRT), which acts as the sector coordinating entity for transport under the Civil Defence and Emergency Management Act. As a non operational agency, the Ministrys role is to coordinate the transport sector and ensure a single transport voice is provided to the lead agency for the response and to Ministers. New Zealand Search and Rescue Council New Zealands million km Search and Rescue (SAR) region (the worlds third largest) extends from the South Pole to the southern border of the Honolulu region, halfway to Australia and Chile, and includes American Samoa, Cook Islands, Niue, Norfolk Island, Samoa, Tokelau, and Tonga. Collectively, the SAR sector comprises approximately , people from a wide variety of public, nongovernment and commercial organisations of whom around percent are volunteers. During the year, the sector saved lives, rescued people, and assisted a further people. These actions averted . billion in social costs to New Zealand. The New Zealand Search and Rescue (NZSAR) Council, established by Cabinet in provides strategic governance, leadership to the SAR sector, manages the governments investment into the sector and provides SAR advice to Ministers. The Council consists of the chief executives of departments with SAR responsibilities and includes the Ministry (chair), Maritime NZ (MNZ), the Civil Aviation Authority, the Department of Conservation, the NZ Police, the New Zealand Defence Force, Fire and Emergency NZ, and a non government independent member. The Ministry receives funding for and hosts the NZSAR Secretariat. Either the NZ Police or the Rescue Coordination Centre NZ (which is an operating group within MNZ) coordinates SAR operations. The responsible coordinating authority will request the use of SAR assets depending on the requirements of the operation. A wide variety of organisations may participate in SAR operations, including the Department of Conservation, NZ Land Search and Rescue, Coastguard NZ, Surf Life Saving NZ, rescue helicopters, the NZ Police, commercial vessels, Defence and a variety of smaller organisations or assets including members of the public. The SAR sectors revenue comes from a variety of sources, including Crown funding through Vote Transport, Vote Police, Vote Conservation, and Vote Defence, and hypothecated funding collected under the Land Transport Management Act (LMTA) (which recognises the Fuel Excise Duty (FED) paid by recreational boat users). Commercial sponsorship, local fundraising, community RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT WIDER COLLABORATION WITHIN THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
UNCLASSIFIED Appendix Summary of agencies, state owned enterprises, and their functions Table Agencies, State owned enterprises, and their functions AgencySOE Key Functions Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport The Ministry advises you, and government more widely, on all policy and regulatory matters within the transport system, and also on funding and governance of the transport Crown entities. With a budget of nearly million () and around staff, the Ministry plays key functions (under the five levers, previously detailed). Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency Waka Kotahi is a Crown entity primarily governed by the L and Transport Management Act (LTMA ) and Crown Entities Act . Waka Kotahis functions are specified in the LTMA and include investing in, and managing most aspects of the land transport network, including rail. Waka Kotahi also has regulatory compliance and enforcement responsibilities relating to aspects of rail safety, driver licensing, vehicle testing, and certification and revenue collection. Waka Kotahi has a set of statutorily independent functions, including determining which activities should be included in the NLTP. Waka Kotahi also approves activities as qualifying for payment from the NLTF, approving procurement procedures for land transport activities, issuing or suspending any land transport document or authorisation, and exercises enforcement powers. Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) CAA is a Crown entity primarily governed under the Civil Aviation Act and Crown Entities Act . Led by the Director of Civil Aviation, the Authority has two functional divisions: Civil Aviation Authority performs safety and security regulatory functions; and Aviation Security Service (known as Avsec) which delivers aviation security services at New Zealands six security designated airports. Under the Civil Aviation Act, the primary objective of CAA is to undertake its functions to facilitate the operation of a safe and secure civil aviation system . Maritime New Zealand (MNZ) MNZ is a Crown entity established under the Maritime Transport Act . It is responsible for promoting a safe, secure, clean and sustainable maritime environment for all commercial and recreational activities on the water and minimising the impact of maritime incidents and accidents on New Zealand and its people. The Agency has both a domestic and international focus. New Zealands maritime sector is complex, diverse, and a major contributor to and enabler of the New Zealand economy through activities such as international shipping, marine manufacturing, and fishing. International rulemaking and standards facilitate New Zealands trade, protect its maritime environment and enhance seafaring safety. MNZ takes an active role in international engagement to support New Zealands interests in the maritime sector. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT WIDER COLLABORATION WITHIN THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
UNCLASSIFIED Auckland Light Rail Limited (ALRL) was established in late under Schedule of the Crown Entities Act . Additionally, City Rail Link Limited is the sole company under Schedule A of the Public Finance Act, jointly established by the Crown and Auckland Council to deliver Aucklands City Rail Link (CRL ). You have different roles and responsibilities in relation to each of these agencies.
UNCLASSIFIED Board comprises of eight Chief Executives, is chaired by the Secretary for the Environment, and it is responsible to the Prime Minister for its operations . The Ministry of Transports Chief Executive serves on the Board to drive collaboration with other key departments alongside delivering on your transport portfolio commitments . The Boards role is to take a cross govern m ent view and provide collective advice to Ministers to: support Aotearoa New Zealand to meet the first three emissions budgets and deliver the national adaptation plan by coordinating an all ofgovernment approach to climate policy, build cross government understanding and strategic approach that aligns with and combines the Governments overall economic wellbeing strategy with its climate change response, inform how to respond to risks and opportunities as they arise. While the Board is responsible for overseeing the delivery of the first ERP and NAP as a whole, Te Manat Waka remains accountable for the delivery of actions within your portfolios. Extreme weather events in Nelson and the North Island over the past year have underscored the need for greater urgency and focus on reducing emissions and building New Zealands resilience to the effects of climate change. The Board is ready to advise on how to meet New Zealands ambitious future emissions budgets, and can support ministers with the delivery of the work programme to meet the current budget. While emissions budget is currently finely balanced, emissions budgets ( ) are projected to be more challenging to achieve and will require even more ambitious action than ERP and NAP. For more information on the Board and its work, please refer to the Climate Change Chief Executives Board BIM.
UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister iii
UNCLASSIFIED Figure Indicative funding flows in land transport Under Section of the LTMA, you and the Minister of Finance can agree to use a portion of FED for activities related to search and rescue, boating safety, Waka Kotahis regulatory functions and the Ministrys associated monitoring functions.
UNCLASSIFIED Figure Roles and responsibilities of the Minister, Crown entity and monitoring department Crown entity boards have the primary responsibility for their entitys performance. They exercise the power , perform the functions of each entity and hold responsibility for the operational decisions of their entities. You appoint and oversee those boards as responsible Minister and are assisted by the Ministry as your monitoring agent, assisting you in discharging your statutory functions. In addition to carrying out oversight and monitoring of the Crown entities and Crown companies on your behalf, the Ministry also conducts other assurance, funding, contracting and reviewing activities for government transport initiatives and programmes, Crown entities and Crown companies. These activities include: Providing advice on and monitoring of initiatives and programmes such as the NZ Upgrade Programme, the Climate Emergency Response Fund, and the Auckland City Rail Link . Transport sector funding reviews These reviews set the fees, charges and levies on third parties which fund regulatory functions for CAA, MNZ, and Waka Kotahi. These reviews are critical for determining value for money and the resourcing available to fund capacity and capability that these agencies require to deliver their responsibilities . MetService contract Under the Meteorological Services Act , you are responsible for ensuring that New Zealand has a National Meteorological Service that fulfils the World Meteorological Organisation Technical Regulations. The Ministry contracts MetService to deliver this . The Governor General appoints the TAIC board, based on your advice. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Parliament including select committees) Sets direction and funding Appoints the board Monitors performance THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
UNCLASSIFIED Foregone revenue from the package was backfilled from a . billion Crown appropriation so that Waka Kotahi had sufficient funds to meet the expenditure range set out in the NLTP . Tolling can contribute to the cost of building and maintaining new roads Road Controlling Authorities (RCAs) can submit tolling proposals to the Government to toll a new road using the powers set out in LTMA. You are the key decision maker and responsible for recommending to the Governor General that a road is tolled under the LTMA. The LTMA contains statutory criteria for establishing a toll, including the limitation that the powers can only be used for new roads and there must be a feasible free alternative route. If Government agrees to toll a road, a tolling order is established by an Order in Council. As system lead and statutory advisor for transport, the Ministry will provide advice on tolling proposals, liaise with the RCAs, and advise on the legislative process to establish a tolling order. The three existing toll roads Northern Gateway, Tauranga Eastern Link and Takitimu Drive are State highways and have Tolling Orders under the LTMA. The last Government also approved tolling Penlink, which is scheduled to open by late . In , the total tolling revenue rasied was .m with m going to collection costs and .m to repay debt. Rail funding comes from the NLTF National rail network maintenance and renewals investment is funded through the NLTF, as part of the Rail Network activity class. KiwiRail is required to prepare a Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP) every three years, and you are responsible, as Minister for Transport, for approving KiwiRails RNIP. KiwiRails freight business also pays a track user charge (TUC) to the NLTF, to ensuring that the main beneficiary of NLTF funding contributes in a fair and transparent way to the NLTF. Capital investment in the national rail network continues to be funded by the Crown, as part of the annual Budget process. Transport regulatory agencies are primarily funded from fees, charges, and levies As Minister, you have responsibility for seeking Cabinets agreement to the rates at which fees, charges, and levies are set. These are critical decisions because they determine the resourcing available to the transport agencies to deliver their regulatory responsibilities. CAA oversees aviation safety, the civil aviation rules, and the Aviation Security Service as a separate division. CAAs levies, fees and charges are collected from passengers and participants in the aviation sector, including airlines and other aviation businesses. CAA receives some Crown funding for activities, such as policy advice, international engagement and assistance to Pacific Island countries on aviation safety. https:www.nzta.govt.nzprojectspenlink https:www.nzta.govt.nzassetsresourcesannual report nzta waka kotahi annual report .pdf RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
UNCLASSIFIED He pepa whakamhiotanga m te Minita Briefing to the Incoming Minister Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport Your Guide to the Transport System UNCLASSIFIED RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT CONTENTS UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister i UNCLASSIFIED Contents Introduction . iii A snapshot of your portfolio . Shaping our transport system . The Transport Portfolio . The different parts of the transport system . The Transport Outcomes Framework . Measuring progress and using evidence . Five transport levers . Delivering your priorities . Transports role within the wider system . The five transport levers . Investment and revenue . Economic and education instruments . Regulation . Crown entity monitoring, assurance, and oversight . Influencing the international environment . Wider collaboration within the Transport System . Appendix Emergency Management and search and rescue functions . Emergency Management . New Zealand Search and Rescue Council . Appendix Cross system collaboration . Maritime Security . Border Executive Board . Collective action and collaboration for climate action . Appendix Summary of agencies, state owned enterprises, and their functions . Appendices Appendix Emergency Management and search and rescue functions . Emergency Management . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT CONTENTS
UNCLASSIFIED Influencing the international environment International frameworks play an important role in our transport system New Zealands transport regulatory systems are significantly shaped by international obligations, standards and recommended practices. New Zealand benefits strongly from international transport regulatory frameworks, which underpin our international connections and facilitate our trade in goods and services. As steward of the transport system, the Ministrys roles are to: monitor and understand what is happening internationally, and how it affects, or may in future affect, New Zealands transport system influence relevant international standards to protect and promote New Zealands interests ensure New Zealand meets its international transport commitments. A wide range of international organisations influence New Zealands transport settings. The table below shows some of the key organisations the Ministry works with and their functions. Table NZ transport organisations Organisation Role The International Civil Aviation Organisation Sets standards and regulations for the aviation sector (international safety, security, and environmental protections). International Maritime Organisation Sets standards and regulations for the maritime sector (international safety, security, and environmental protections). International Labour Organisation Sets conditions of work and employment on ships (under the Maritime Labour Convention). United Nations working parties New Zealand has obligations as a party to two United Nations Agreements relating to road vehicle and road vehicle standards. Under these agreements, United Nations working parties set regulations and standards to improve road safety and facilitate international trade. World Meteorological Organisation Fulfils New Zealands obligations under the World Meteorological Organization, the United Nations specialised agency for weather, climate, and water, by way of the Ministrys contract with MetService. A step change in our international engagement is required to leverage benefits for New Zealand In recent years, the Ministrys international engagement has tended to be piecemeal and focused on responding to urgent issues, with some exceptions notably leadership on Air Services Agreements and our open skies policy. We are working to improve our performance at the international level, recognising that international engagement is a key lever to achieving New Zealands transport outcomes, but being cogni sant that international travels add to our carbon emissions. We aim to find a balance where we: RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT WIDER COLLABORATION WITHIN THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
UNCLASSIFIED Introduction Tn koe Minister and congratulations on your appointment as Minister of Transport. Transport plays a pivotal role in providing liveable cities and thriving regions . It gives people access to family and whnau, places of learning and employment, and supports their participation in society. Transport contributes to the economic prosperity of rural communities, towns and cities , and connects Aotearoa New Zealand economically and culturally with the rest of the world. It shapes land use, urban form, and street level interactions. Transport also affects our health by influencing how people and goods travel, how physically active we are, and how safe it is to journey between places . It affects the quality of our environment, including air and water quality, biodiversity gains or losses, and global greenhouse gas emissions. Many organisations, both public and private, are responsible for planning, designing, building, and providing services within the transport system. These organisations operate within a web of laws, rules, processes and funding mechanisms. The transport system is dynamic, needing to constantly adapt and change in the face of public expectations and external influences. You and the Government will want transport to support your specific transport priorities, as well as your broader priorities such as how we grow our economy, reduce emissions, and address pressures in our cities. For example, the Ministry and the wider transport system are playing a key role as Aotearoa New Zealand works to recover from the effects and devastation of extreme weather events, such Cyclone Gabrielle. A focus on rebuilding transport infrastructure and ensuring that our system is resilient in the face of the impacts of climate change is a critical priority. Additionally, increasing climate resilience includes reducing transport emissions to support Aotearoa New Zealand reaching net zero carbon emissions by . The transport system we have today has been shaped over many decades, and decisions made in the past have determined the options that are available to people today. Achieving meaningful change in such a large and complex system takes time, but the decisions that you make over your term as Minister will shape the system well into the future. This briefing sets out how you can give effect to your priorities and influence the longer term direction of transport as a system. These choices, about how you match your priorities with interventions, will offer many opportunities as well as challenges. To help you to utilise these opportunities and resolve the challenges, we have outlined the levers available to you for influencing the transport system. This briefing also describes the roles and responsibilities of the government transport agencies, stat eowned enterprises and some of the other stakeholders you will work with. This briefing is complementary, and should be read in conjunction with, the strategic BIM. In our role as system lead, we look forward to giving you the advice, support and the rigorous evidence needed to put your priorities in place. Nku noa, n Audrey Sonerson Secretary for Transport RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT A SNAPSHOT OF YOUR PORTFOLIO UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
UNCLASSIFIED Legislation, however, is only part of the picture. Transport Crown entities, as well as the Ministry, need to deliver services, educate and inform and make sure that people follow the legal requirements. The regulatory system works together to shape peoples choices . Through the transport regulatory system, you are able to deliver your priorities through the licensing, certification and regulation of people, organisations, and vehicles. At an individual level, regulatory and enforcement powers are exercised by the transport agencies (through the actions taken by the Director in each of these agencies). The regulatory system also establishes the mechanisms used to gather revenue, invest in land transport infrastructure and public transport, and fund transport Crown entities through third party fees and charges. You have responsibility for a variety of legal instruments Legislation forms the core of the transport regulatory system comprising primary legislation, secondary legislation, and local government bylaws . You are responsible for transport Acts which set out: the roles and functions of the Ministry, transport agencies, and state owned enterprises (SOEs ) (like KiwiRail) the planning and funding arrangements for land transport the roles and powers of local authorities and road controlling authorities licensing and certification arrangements for transport system participants, vehicles and technology the requirements for making transport regulations and rules compliance tools to promote adherence to safety, security and environmental requirements across transport modes. You are responsible for the passage of primary transport legislation through Parliament, supported by the Ministry. Transport rules contain detailed standards, requirements and procedures that govern transport activities Transport rules are the most common form of delegated legislation for transport. Rules contain detailed technical standards, requirements, and procedures governing the construction, maintenance, licensing, certification and operation of transport activities within modes. You are empowered under primary legislation to make these rules through delegated responsibilities. You are expected to advise Cabinet that you intend to make a rule if there would be wide ranging impacts. There is an expedited rule making process where urgent changes can be made by Order in Council. The transport Crown entities develop the majority of transport rules with the Ministrys involvement, but the Ministry leads policy development on significant Rules . Regulations set out associated offences and penalties, fees, and charges Transport regulations mainly set out the associated rule related offences and penalties, and fees and charges that fund the work of the transport agencies. The Ministry leads the development of As Transport Minister you have powers to amend, replace or disallow some local government bylaws. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
UNCLASSIFIED Like CAA, MNZ covers the costs of its regulatory and operational functions from fees, charges and levies. Crown funding is provided for activities, such as policy advice, international engagement, and maritime security. MNZs levies and fees are collected from participants in the maritime sector, such as the maritime levy from commercial ship operators, and the oil pollution levy from offshore oil installations. MNZ also receives funding for specific activities, including recreational boating safety and search and rescue coordination, from FED. Under the LTMA, you and the Minister of Finance decide the level of funding from the FED allocated to MNZ. Waka Kotahi also funds its regulatory function through fees, levies, and charges. However, Waka Kotahis investment function is separately funded through the NLTF (as previously described). The impacts of COVID have reduced third party revenue for the transport agencies and SOEs, in some cases severely. The Ministry will provide you with early advice on the funding and financing of transport agencies. Crown funds can supplement transport revenue and be used to purchase specific projects or programmes Not all of the investment needed in the transport sector can be met from the NLTF. Increasingly the Crown has made direct investments in specific activities in the transport system . The annual budget process led by the Minister of Finance is another opportunity for Crown funds to supplement the NLTF. Budget is usually done through an annual assessment process running between October and April. However , adhoc investments can also be made using Crown funds with Cabinets agreement. Crown funding can be used to bring forward land transport investment, or to invest in broader priorities through the transport system. This includes investment that: would usually qualify for investment through the GPS, but has not gone ahead due to constraints on the NLTF, for example, projects in the New Zealand Upgrade Programme or has broader objectives than the GPS priorities that make it worth progressing, for example, recent investments in shovel ready transport projects were designed to create economic stimulus. Unlike investment from the NLTF where the Waka Kotahi Board has an independent role in overseeing and monitoring expenditure, ministers are accountable for activities funded by the Crown directly and retain decision making rights when changes are needed to the budget, scope or timeframes for these projects,. While bodies like Waka Kotahi or KiwiRail may deliver Crown funded activities and investment programmes, the Crown usually establishes additional oversight arrangements for any projects or programmes with Crown funding. These arrangements are to assure accountable Ministers that their intended outcomes are being achieved. Economic and education instruments You can use travel demand management tools to drive behaviour change within the transport system Economic instruments can help to better inform people of the impacts of their travel choices by putting a price on those impacts. The price of transport can reflect the direct costs of using the network, the indirect costs and externalities (such as emissions), or it can be set relative to other RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
UNCLASSIFIED New Zealand Search and Rescue Council . Appendix Cross system collaboration . Maritime Security . Border Executive Board . Collective action and collaboration for climate action . Appendix Summary of agencies, state owned enterprises, and their functions .
UNCLASSIFIED Notes Key groupings Secretary for Transport attends ODESC as required Figure Transports role within the wider system
UNCLASSIFIED Outside of existing collaboration between government agencies and SOEs, collaboration with other stakeholders in the transport system is critical to realising positive transport outcomes. These stakeholders include : The private sector plays a significant role in the transport system, as a major employer and significant investor in the transport system. This is particularly the case in the aviation and maritime sectors. The private sector can be a partner in helping to achieve transport outcomes , while also leading innovation in areas such as autonomous vehicles, drones, and shared mobility . Key private sector stakeholders that we would expect you to engage with would include Air New Zealand, Auckland Airport, and the Board of Airline Representatives New Zealand (BARNZ) which represent the airline industry in New Zealand. Iwi and hap Government has responsibilities under Te Tiriti o Waitangi to acknowledge Mori as partners and their status as tangata whenua the indigenous people of Aotearoa. Effective, meaningful partnership with Mori is key to improving transport and broader social outcomes for Mori, and to ensure the transport system serves all New Zealanders equitably. Mori are disproportionately represented in transport statistics such as drink driving, and Mori in regional New Zealand are strongly impacted by investment in infrastructure like roads. Government has a responsibility to improve transport outcomes for al l New Zealanders including Mori, while Mori and iwi groups will also have an expectation that they are meaningfully consulted on transport decisions that impact their everyday lives. Iwi and hap also have access to local peoples, connections, and expertise that may otherwise be missing from a Crown and central government perspective in policy development. Non government organisations , industry associations, or other groups advocate for the perspectives and interests of particular parts of the sector. This includes groups advocating for particular types of transport (e.g., cycling advocacy groups), neighbourhood groups (e.g., for a public road) and other groups that may be established to support or oppose a specific policy or initiative. Engaging with these groups is a critical aspect of a democratic process and good policy development, as they can bring important perspectives, data and evidence to the policy process, and draw attention to issues that might otherwise be overlooked. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT WIDER COLLABORATION WITHIN THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
UNCLASSIFIED Page of EVENT BRIEFING March OC Hon Kiri Allan Associate Minister of Transport cc Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport SUSTAINABLE AVIATION AOTEAROA Snapshot At the officials meeting on March , you agreed to host the upcoming second quarterly Sustainable Aviation Aotearoa (SAA) hui at Parliament on April and provide opening remarks . You also requested a package of background reading. This briefing provides : oRelevant c ontext about SAA and an outline of Te Manat Wakas proposed approach to the group in (main briefing) oSpeaking notes for your opening remarks (Annex ) oA draft agen da for the meeting and list of members of the SAA leadership body (Annex ) oBackground reading as requested (Annex ) The establishment of SAA (a public private leadership body to decarbonise aviation) is an Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP) action and a cornerstone of the Ministrys sustainable aviation work. Your presence at the first hui of will emphasise the importance of the group to the Government and help to set the tone for the year ahead . Please see Annex for suggested speaking notes . You are not expected to attend SAA hui on a regular basis , but we think meeting the group soon after your appointment as Associate Minister is a good opportunity to for you to meet key representatives of the aviation industry and familiarise yourself with some of the key challenges and opportunities with aviation decarbonisation. You are however welcome to attend the groups future meetings at any time. In future, we will update you about the work of SAA via the weekly report or in longer briefings as necessary. Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of SAA Meeting, April Time and .am.am, April Venue Ministerial Meeting Room ., level , Executive Wing , the Beehive Attendees Chief Executive or Deputy Chief Executive level representatives from the aviation sector are expected to attend . See Annex for ful l member list (noting that attendance is still TBC) Officials attending Audrey Sonerson, Chief Executive, Te Manat Waka Bryn Gandy, Deputy Chief Executive, Te Manat Waka Holly Walker, Manager, Environment and Emissions Strategy, Te Manat Waka Alessandro Aduso, Principal Advisor, International , Te Manat Waka Lucy Patterson, Advisor, Environment and Emissions Strategy, Te Manat Waka Relevant MBIE officials may also attend (TBC Run sheet .am Tea and coffee .am Meeting commences Welcome and opening karakia from Audrey Sonerson, Secretary of Transport .am Proposed f ocus for SAA in .am Opening remarks from Minister Media At this stage we do not plan to invite media. A press release may be issued follow the meeting if there is substantive progress to report. Speaking notes See Annex
UNCLASSIFIED Page of IN CONFIDENCE March OC T BRF Hon Michael Wood Action required by: Minister of Tr ansport Wednesday, March Hon Grant Robertson Minister of Finance Hon Dr Megan Woods Minister of Housing AUCKLAND LIGHT RAIL BOARD APPOINTMENTS , FEES, MANA WHENUA REPESENTATION AND NPS UD Purpose Seeks your decision on preferred candidates for appointment to priority roles on theAuckland Light Rail (ALR) Board (Section A) as well as a revised fee for this Board (Section B) Seeks your decision on an alternative approach to testing how mana whenua are invited to confirm representation at Sponsors level (Section C) Updates Ministers on the work that o fficials are undertaking with Auckland Council in respect of the implementation of the National Policy Statement o n Urban Development (NPS UD) (Section D ) Key points Section A At your direction, the following candidates were interviewed online for each of the below positions on the ALR Board between and March : oChair: oMember (wit h f ocussed consideration given to their credibility within mana whenua circles): , Lucy Tukua, was approached but declined the role due to her capacity. s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT UNCLASSIFIED Page of IN CONFIDENCE Following these interviews, we (the Ministry of Transport, the Treasury, and Ministry for Housing and Urban Development) in consultation with our supporting panellists recommend you agree to the following appointments: In developing this advice, we have explored the option of recommending additional appointments to the two priority positions identified by Ministers. Our preference is to only recommend the two appointments at this stage (in addition to Leigh Auton) as this enables the incoming Chair to consider the needs and direction they want to take the Board, and the individuals that are best suited to achieving that vision. Full summaries of all interviews are listed in Appendix One of this briefing. Appendix Two shows how the three priority appointments map to the draft ALR Board competency matrix . Section B Following Ministerial feedback, a revised fee has been proposed for the ALR Board, which brings this in line with the day rates associated with the City Rail Link Ltd andKinga Ora Boards s ()(a), s ()(g)(i) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT UNCLASSIFIED Page of IN CONFIDENCE Section D The M inistry of Housing and Urban Development, the Treasury and the Ministry of Transport are work ing with Auckland Council and the ALR Unit to undertake the necessary analysis to understand the implications of the implementation of the NPS UD as it relates to the ALR Corridor. Recommendations We recommend you: Minister of Transport Minister of Finance Minister of Housing SECTION A: BOARD APPOINTMENTS agree to appoint the following individual as Chair of the Auckland Light Rail Board Yes No Yes No Yes No Yes No Y es No Yes No Yes No Y es No Yes No Yes No Y es No Yes No agree to appoint the following individual as member of the Auckland Light Rail Board Yes No Yes No Yes No Yes No Y es No Yes No Lucy Tukua Yes No Yes No Yes No Yes No Ye s No Yes No agree for each preferred candidate to be informed about the preferred candidate for the other role, to inform their decisionmaking on consenting to the appointment Yes No Yes No Yes No s ()(f)(iv) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT UNCLASSIFIED Page of IN CONFIDENCE Minister of Transport Minister of Finance Minister of Housing agree for the Minister of Transport to approve the contents of the Cabinet paper and submit the paper to the Appointment and Honours Committee on behalf of Sponsor Ministers, so that Ministerial consultation can be undertaken as soon as practicable Yes No Yes No Yes No note that due diligence of preferred candidates and ongoing discussions with the Minister for the Public Service about the proposed fee exception will occur in parallel to Ministerial consultation to ensure timings are met Yes no Yes no Yes no SECTION B: REVISED ALR BOARD FEE EXCEPTION agree to propose the following revised fee for the Auckland Light Rail Board: , per day for the Chair; and , per day for membersYes no Yes no Yes no approve the contents of the letter (Appendix Three) to the Minister for the Public Service, including the document with the supporting rationale Yes no Yes no Yes no authorise the Minister of Transport to consult the Minister for the Public Service on behalf of Government Sponsors for a fee exception for Auckland Light Rail Board members Yes no Yes no Yes no Minister of Transport only sign and send the attached letter at Appendix Three to the Minister for the Public Servic e Sent not sent SECTION C: TESTING THE APPROACH TO IDENTIFYING MANA WHENUA REPRESENTATION s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT UNCLASSIFIED Page of IN CONFIDENCE SECTION A: BOARD APPOINTMENTS Rationale for recommended appointments The role of the ALR Board is uniquely challenging and requires the highest calibre of leadership The competencies and attributes for this role are different from, and more demanding than, other crown delivery entities. The chair will be the public face of the project in local communities and will need to confidently navigate the projects issues in three very different political environments of C entral Government, Auckland, and iwi in Tmaki Makaurau. The chair must be capable of fronting issues and challenges in each of these spheres, and will need to be able to demonstrate leadership in all these domains in their own right. Their ability to personally demonstrate accountability for the impacts of the Boards decisions will be necessary to maintain the p rojects credibility and social license throughout its lifecycle . It is important for board members to understand the complexity and scale of the project design and delivery, as well as demonstrate an ability to deliver outcomes in this fastpaced context. The Panel considered the c hair must be able to demonstrate an appreciation of the types of financial, technical, commercial or legal issues that could be expected to arise from designing and delivering a project of this nature. The Panel also acknowledged the intensive undertaking and pressure on the Board to lead ALR from detailed planning in to construction . To deliver the outcomes sought by Sponsors, the successful candidate s had to demonstrate astuteness and discernment for when to adapt, respond, or push through opposition from various communities, partners and businesses. The chair in particular will be critical in leading the culture and environment for the Boards decisionmaking. The Panel also recognised the specific depths of understanding and experiences the successful candidates needed to pos sess in navigating Moridom in Tmaki Makaurau. The individuals needed to articulate their understanding and respect for the Te Tiriti partnerships as well as an awareness of the impacts the Project will have for mana whenua and mataawaka. Maintaining the mana of the kaupapa and upholding the tikanga (values) is a critical element for successful leadership of the project. It will be incumbent on all Mori as members, to do the right thing . Candidates were assessed on the following competencies, values and attributes during the interview: . Their interest in applying for the role, and capacity to take it on. This was especially important for the Chairs role. . Their leadership, vision, and outlook for the Project Chair only: this included how they would communicate the Projec t to those in Tmaki Makaurau, and bring people along the journey. . Their ability to operate collaboratively. How Chair candidates worked to obtain consensus was a specific focus during their interview s. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT UNCLASSIFIED Page of IN CONFIDENCE . Their experience in governance of projects of scale and complexity. . Their ability and experience in navigating a politicised environment. This included Auckland Council, Wellington Central Government, and iwi in Tmaki Makaurau. . Their depth of understanding of Te ao Mori, Te Tiriti o Waitangi, and engagement with mana whenua and mataawaka in Tmaki Makaurau both roles. We consider that our recommended candidates bring the requisite leadership, knowledge and experience for the Project, and are best placed to advance the Project Of the candidates interviewed, the Panel unanimously agreed that these values, approaches and attributes were best demonstrated by
UNCLASSIFIED Page of Oc tober OC Hon Matt Doocey Associate M inister of Transport MARITIME NEW ZEALAND AND TAIC MONITORING PLAN S Purpose The Ministry of Transport Te Manat Waka (the Ministry) is developing monitoring plans for each of the Crown Entities in Vote Transport. The draft monitoring plans for Maritime New Zealand (Maritime NZ) and the Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC) are attached as Appendix One and Appendix Two respectively for your review and feedback. Key points We are seeking your feedback, prior to consulting with Maritime NZ and TAIC , on the attached monitoring plan s which aim to : Develop a shared understanding of the entities current performance, and what good look s like Confirm our monitoring priorities for the next months to support improvedperformance from the entities Confirm our monitoring deliverablesoutputs for the entities . This follows the template and purpose of monitoring plans that have been shared withthe Minister of Transport in recent weeks for the Civil Aviation Authority and NewZealand Transport Agency . The plan for the entities provides an assessment of its current performance across five key performance dimensions from the Public Service Commissions The Foundations of Good Practice: Guidelines for Crown Entity Monitoring . For Maritime NZ, it outlines four monitoring priorities that will require keen focus from the monitoring function during the period: .Supporting improvements to the quality and timeliness of performance information (including an SPE with new metrics, reflecting strengthened performance metrics and improved fiscal sustainability) https:www.publicservice.govt.nzassetsDirectoryFileGuidelines forCrown Entity monitoring.pdf MINISTRX. OF TRANSPORT p TE MANATU WAKA Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of . Establishing a stronger relationship with the refreshed board (including supporting you to have structured quarterly performance conversations with the Board Chair) . Taking a more joined up approach when providing advice to Ministers and identifying policy priorities . Support Maritime NZ to take a longer term view of its financial sustainability considering volatile levies and uncertainty around traditional funding sources For TAIC, it outlines the following monitoring priorities: . Supporting ongoing improvements to performance information (including an SPE with metrics that reflect the increased funding TAIC is receiving for additional investigators) . Establishing a strong relationship with the new Chief Commissioner The plan also identifies steps that the Ministry can take to improve its monitoring methodology and includes a timeline of key outputs and deliverables for the period. A key part of this is establishing quarterly, structured performance discussions between you and the Maritime NZ Board Chair and TAIC Chief Commissioner. The Ministry would support you in these discussions with a briefing each quarter drawing together information from a range of sources to provide a picture of how the entities are tracking against the monitoring plan, and any issues or areas of concern. We are seeking your feedback on the plan. Once you have agreed to the plan, we propose discuss ing it with the respective Board s.
UNCLASSIFIED Page of UNCLASSIFIED Orders in Council under the severe weather emergency legislation
UNCLASSIFIED Page of UNCLASSIFIED Orders in Council under the severe weather emergency legislation
UNCLASSIFIED Page of UNCLASSIFIED What orders are being proposed The Orders in Council proposed under tranche one will amend statutory timeframes that councils or landowners in affected areas are unable to meet, and ensure that those subject to provisions under the Climate Change Response Act are not adversely affected due to the weather events. Public consultation on the first tranche will take place between and May, and is being undertaken by the Department of Internal Affairs, Land Information New Zealand, and the Ministry for Primary Industries. More information is available from agency websites. Officials at agencies are currently undertaking initial policy work for the second tranche of Orders in Council, which will be considered on May. Announcements will be made by the responsible agencies as to the content of those tranches and the process for consultation after May. Government agencies will be reaching out directly to councils, iwiMori and stakeholders in the coming weeks to discuss potential changes to be made to statutes through the Order in Council process to address needs or barriers identified on the ground and ensure they are included in future tranches. How can I feed into the process The Order in Council process provides three key opportunities for input: The policy development stage Information from you can help us determine what Orders may be required. The Review Panel stage The Convenor of the Severe Weather Events Review Panel may invite additional ad hoc subject matter experts to attend meetings to assist wit h their analysis of draft Orders in Council. These invitees could be anyone whose qualifications or experience would be of assistance to the Panel. The ministerial public consultation phase Through the Ministers public consultation on the policy objectives for each Order in Council, where targeted consultation with subject matter experts may also be undertaken. Agencies will be reaching out via their existing communication channels to identified stakeholders to feed into these stages. Where can I see the Orders in Council that have been made All Orders in Council will be on the legislation website ( https:legislation.govt.nz ). There is currently a box on the top right hand side of the homepage dedicated to highlighting new severe weather legislation, and new Orders in Council will be added to this box when they are made.
UNCLASSIFIED Page of UNCLASSIFIED If there are no alternatives, or they would have undesirable effects, then consider ation must be given to whether the proposed amendment would be necessary or desirabl e for the purpose of the Act.
UNCLASSIFIED Page of UNCLASSIFIED What is the Order in Council Process Who is responsible for proposing Orders in Council The agencies responsible for the statutes listed in Schedule will propose Orders in Council and take them through the Order in Council process. For example, amendments to the Local Government Act will be progressed by the Department of Internal Affairs . They are not being centrally managed by any one agency, though the Department of Prime Minster and Cabinet is providing guidance and support to agencies as they navigate the process. There will be Orders in Council where multiple agencies have an interest, with multiple statues needing to be amended to achieve the desired amendment . For example, complex amendments involving land, roadrail corridors, and resource management. For these complex Orders in Council agencies will work together with a nominated lead agency and lead Minister, to enable the policy development, approvals and consultation processes to take place in a joined up way. When will the Orders in Council be made The Order in Council process is following a tranche approach, with scheduled tranches of Orders in Council progressing along set timelines. This is to manage the workload of high numbers of Orders in Council to be drafted and advised on, while ensuring proper processes are followed to inform quality decision making. There are five tranches currently planned. The table below provides a highlevel timeline for the five tranches. T IMELINE FOR TRANCHES OF THE ORDER IN COUNCIL PROCESS
UNCLASSIFIED Shaping our transport system The Transport Portfolio Forming over generations , the transport system is a significant part of our social and economic infrastructure, providing the links that help establish and sustain our economy and society. Transport also has deep connections with other systems. As Minister, you are also responsible for making sure the transport system supports the aspirations of small communities, rural communities, towns and cities , and regions. Transport is a delivery arm of many broader government strategies, and a number of key government priorities will not be achieved unless transport plays its part: reaching New Zealands emissions targets; growing the economy and connecting to markets; and enabling economic and social mobility in our towns and cities. Transport cannot achieve these priorities by itself, but its absence can slow or prevent their delivery. Your role as Minister is to set priorities for investment through the GPS, set expectations for our entities and appoint Board members . You will make policy decisions that will direct and influence actors in the system, which provide choices to transport users . In doing so, it is important to recognise that each part of the system operates differently. For exampl e, while government funds and delivers most of the land transport infrastructure , much of the aviation and maritime sector is delivered by the private sector . The different parts of the transport system The transport system includes vehicles that move people and products physical infrastructure (e.g., airports and seaports, the rail network, roads, busways, and cycleways) digital infrastructure ( e.g., satellite based navigation infrastructure and aids, travel apps, communications technologies) transport services ( e.g., public transport, bike sharing, ride sharing) institutions and regulatory systems that influence how the transport system functions and develops ( e.g., through their structures, management practices, rules, policies, and fundinginvestment tools). Central government is heavily involved in this system as a planner, funder, partner, enforcer, and regulator. In your day today work, you will be closely interacting with transport sector agencies. Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) is a government department, while Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency (Waka Kotahi), the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), Maritime New Zealand (MNZ) and the Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC) are transport agencies, with TAIC as an independent Crown entity. There are three state owned enterprises (SOEs): KiwiRail, Airways Corporation of New Zealand Ltd (Airways), and Meteorological Services of New Zealand Ltd (MetService) . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE TRANSPORT OUTCOMES FRAMEWORK UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
UNCLASSIFIED The LTMA gives Waka Kotahi statutory independence to select projects for the NLTP. However, the GPS can set an expectation for Waka Kotahi to consider government programmes when allocating funding through the NLTP. For example, Waka Kotahi must consider the Auckland Transport Alignment Project when making decisions under the current GPS. To help it plan for the medium to long term and to support regional planning, Waka Kotahi has developed Arataki which is a shared sector view of transport system needs in the next years. The GPS plays a key role in influencing local government to set its priorities for investment Engaging with local government as each GPS is prepared ensures that Governments priorities and local governments objectives are aligned as much as possible. The GPS helps to incentivise local government investment in land transport by setting priorities and highlighting Government objectives. Each local authority puts forward projects to align with the priorities of the GPS to qualify for funding assistance. The amount of funds allocated to local government activities from the NLTF are determined by funding assistance rates (FARs) that Waka Kotahi sets. Under the LTMA the GPS must be replaced every years, though you can choose how often you set GPS priorities. All previous Transport Ministers have chosen to release a new GPS every three years. Doing this can be necessary if Government priorities change, but this also limits Waka Kotahis and local governments ability to plan with certainty . The NLTF is mainly funded by motor vehicle users The NLTF collects about . billion year and is administered by Waka Kotahi. Its main sources of revenue for the NLTF are: Fuel Excise Duty (FED) which is tax applied at a rate of cl to petrol and .cl to LPG and makes up about percent of the NLTF revenue; Road User Charges (RUC) which is a distance based charge applied to diesel vehicles and heavy vehicles over . tonnes. Different RUC rates are applied to vehicle classes depending on weight and axle configuration and range from to over , per km travelled. RUC makes up about for of NLTF revenue; and Motor vehicle registration and annual licensing fees which make up about of NLTF revenue. Revenue from the fund is invested in state highways, the rail network, local roads, road policing, walking and cycling, and public transport. Local government matches the billion contribution from the NLTF with another billion per year of its own funding. The diagram below illustrates the funding flows in and out of the NLTF.
UNCLASSIFIED The Ministry is developing an Transport Regulatory Stewardship Plan that sets out how we fulfil our regulatory stewardship responsibilities in collaboration with the transport agencies (Waka Kotahi, CAA and MNZ). It includes the priority actions we will take to address some of the issues outlined below. The regulatory system requires constant review and renewal as part of our stewardship responsibilities. Otherwise, it might not cope well with emerging risks, shocks, or disruptive technologies. Parts of the current regulatory system have proven to be flexible and able to deal with most emerging issues without the need to change primary legislation, where other parts have not. Some parts of the regulatory system are out of , and changes have been made over time in an ad hoc way. This raises questions about whether the system remains coherent. Compliance with international conventions is patchy in some areas, leading to reputation and coordination issues. We are also developing a strategy to determine where, and how, we engage on the international agreements and conventions that affect our regulatory system, implement international standards, and how we meet our obligations. Crown entity monitoring, assurance, and oversight Crown entity monitoring and oversight is a key mechanism to deliver your priorities The Ministry and the transport Crown entities work collaboratively to develop and deliver a multi year programme of work which will progress your priorities and the delivery of transport outcomes, and other priority actions to maintain and renew the system. The Crown carries out service delivery and regulation activities in the transport system through Crown transport entities and Crown companies: Waka Kotahi, MNZ, CAA, Auckland Light Rail Limited (ALRL) and City Rail Link Limited (CRLL). Your role as responsible Minister of these entities is defined by section of the Crown Entities Act, which is to oversee and manage the Crowns interests in, and relationship with, a statutory entity While you are ultimately accountable for the performance of these entities, the Boards that you appoint to these entities are primarily responsible. The Ministry is your monitoring agent for the transport Crown entities. The roles and responsibilities of the Minister, Crown entity and monitoring department are outlined in the It Takes Three Framework , and summarised in the Figure below. https:www.publicservice.govt.nzguidanceit takes three operating expectations framework forstatutory crown entities RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
UNCLASSIFIED The Ministrys Transport Sector Monitoring Framework provides a consistent approach to monitor the progress of interventions to help understand whether the right outputs are delivered efficiently and economically to deliver the desired outcomes and impacts effectively. The Transport Evidence Base Strategy (TEBS) and the Decarbonising Transport Research Strategy (DTRS) set out the paths to ensure the transport sector has the right data, information, research and evaluation to support policy decisions, including the delivery of the Emissions Reduction Programme. The DTRS implementation plan identifies gaps in our knowledge in decarbonising transport and the research that can be used to fill these gaps over the next years. Implementation of the TEBS and the DTRS is the responsibility of your transport agencies and SOEs, working alongside local government and other stakeholders. Five transport levers As Minister, you have a range of levers to influence the transport system. There are differences in the way that the various levers are exercised for each mode, and each mode has its own regulatory model. Our advice to you will focus on how you can make use of five key levers. The five levers are: Investment and revenue Investing in the transport system from dedicated and general funding sources to create capacity, enhance or maintain existing infrastructure and services, and influence choices by providing alternative travel options. Economic and educational tools Using economic incentives, such as congestion pricing, in combination with soft measures like information campaigns, to drive behaviour change Regulation Influencing behaviour, and providing the legal frameworks that enable the system to operate effectively Crown m onitoring, assurance, and oversight Appointing Board members to the transport agencies, setting their expectations and monitoring their performance Influencing the international environment Influencing international rules and treaties that affect New Zealand More information on each of the levers can be found on page xx. Delivering your priorities As the transport system steward, the Ministry can help to embed your priorities and connect them with whole of government priorities and advises you on how to use the available levers to achieve your medium to longer term goals. This includes developing a coherent strategic view of the longer term needs for the transport system . Additionally, medium term strategies that use a package of interventions to address specific issues may be developed, for example: t o respond to a sustained high level of deaths and serious injuries on NZ roads, the Road to Zero strategy has been developed, which aims to reduce road user death and serious injuries by by RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT DELIVERING YOUR PRIORITIES UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
UNCLASSIFIED The capability and performance of the transport entity boards is critical in delivering your priorities and expectations Each Crown entity and company is governed by a board. There are a maximum of ministerial appointed positions across the transport sector. This is comprised of up to positions on Crown entities, including positions on the ALRL Board, TAIC Commissioners, CRLL Board , Aviation Medical Convener s, and advisory committee positions. Before appointments fall due, we will provide you with advice to support the appointment and re appointment of board members. As part of this process, we will provide you with an overall assessment of board capability and recommendations on the skills and capabilities needed to ensure your boards are well governed, effective and high performing. The Ministry has significantly enhanced its monitoring and governance functions The Ministry has improved its monitoring capability and performance in recent years, influenced by the review into regulatory failure at Waka Kotahi in and the review of CAAs organisational culture, which was finalised in early . The Ministry has implemented a Transport Sector Monitoring Framework that provides a more structured approach to monitor the life cycle of an intervention. This approach assesses entity governance, capability and performance particularly how entities communicate information to the board, their assurance mechanisms for key projects and programmes, and whether the board is receiving the necessary information from an entity. The approach is informed by your priorities and our assessment of key risks for each entity. Each quarter, the Ministry undertakes specific assessments against identified focus areas agreed with you to provide additional confidence over the entitys governance, capability and performance to the information you receive directly from boards. Examples of specific focus areas include risk and assurance, board capability and performance, organisational culture, regulation, and investment management. We use agreed lines of enquiry to provide insights against each focus area. The outcomes for these focus areas are reported back to you as the responsible Minister and can be used as part of your regular engagement with the boards. These assessments provide you with independent assurance that transport Crown entity boards are effectively governing the operation, performance and key risks of each entity. The primary focus of our monitoring assessments is on how the boards are discharging their functions. The Ministry will engage with you as soon as possible to assist in setting your expectations for the entities, which will inform a tailored monitoring programme over the next months. The Crown Entities will provide a separate BIM to give you more detail on your role and their responsibilities, and further detail is included at Appendix XX . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
UNCLASSIFIED The five transport levers Investment and revenue Invest ing in transport infrastructure should be a priority for this Government. Revenue is needed to keep on top of network maintenance loading and to close the infrastructure gap. We need to create a more productive and resilient network and use the available investment and revenue levers to drive economic growth, boost incomes, and unlock developable land. Internationally, methods of funding transport investment range from generating tax revenues and collecting fees from users, to imposing a cost on a wider group of beneficiaries, beyond the particular users . In New Zealand, core central Government investment for transport is from tax revenues and fees collected from road users. This is then dedicated, or hypothecated, to the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF). The NLTF is then re invested for road and road related expenses rather than going into general Government accounts. There is a growing gap between land transport revenue and investment . The Ministry is working on the delivery of a more certain and sustainable land transport revenue system. Complimenting this is a review of the investment system that aims to improve the planning and implementation of transport investments and initiatives. The GPS allows you to guide investment from the NLTF The GPS is the Governments strategy for investing in the land transport system. It outlines what the Government wants to achieve in land transport, and how it expects funding to be allocated from the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) across different types of activities (for example road maintenance, public transport, walking and cycling). Each GPS sets out the priorities for the following year period and is reviewed and every three years. There are typically three main components to the GPS: Strategic Priorities Investment in land transport The statement of Ministerial expectations. The GPS can be used both to maintain a level of service and drive change on the land transport network. This is done through establishing funding ranges for activity classes, such as road maintenance, road infrastructure, rail, walking and cycling infrastructure, coastal shipping, and public transport. It can also identify the role of other sources of funding, for example Crown funding. It includes a year financial forecast based on assumptions about how much revenue will be collected from expected vehicle use. The GPS is implemented by Waka Kotahi through its NLTP, which sets out a three year programme of land transport investments. The GPS is governments primary lever to guide expenditure from the NLTF. You set priorities; Waka Kotahi makes project level decisions While you can use the GPS to indicate what types of transport activities you want delivered, you cannot specify what individual projects are funded using hypothecated NLTF revenue. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
UNCLASSIFIED To support the Framework, the Ministry with input from sector stakeholders developed a set of quantitative indicators to track transports contribution to wellbeing and liveability through the five outcomes over time. The indicators provide high level insights to the performance of the transport system and help to inform decisions and policy across government. Because the Framework has been in place since , the Ministry is conducting a review of some aspects of it, but the outcomes are well established and supported by stakeholders across the system and will remain in place.
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Out of Scope R E L E A S E D U N D E R T H E OF F I C I A L I N F OR MA T I ON A C T
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of March OC Hon Michael Wood Action required by: Minister of Transport Wednesday, March TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROTOCOL FOR OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RESPONSES AND PROACTIVE RELEASES INVOLVING MINISTERS Purpose Seek your approval to sign the attached protocol document . Key p oints In his report OIA Compliance and Practice in the Ministry of Transport, publishedOctober , the Ombudsman recommended Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) adopt a protocol to govern interactions with Ministers Offices . The Ministry has prepared the attached protocol Ministry Protocol for OIA Responses and Proactive Releases Involving Ministers to provide guidance on both Official Information Act responses and proactive releases. It is based on the Ombudmans draft protocol and draws heavily on the protocol youhave already signed with Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency (signed September ). Your Office was consulted on an earlier version of this protocol and that feedback was incorporated, particularly as it relates to the proactive release of information. The protocol provides both the Ministry and your Office with a framework to guide any discussions relating to Official Information Act responses and provides guidancearound timings related to proactive release. Following your signature, the Ministry will provide a copy to the Associate Minister ofTransport with the recommendation that she also signs it. In line with the recommendation of the Ombudsman, the Ministry will publish thesigned protocol on the Ministry s website as part of its commitment to proactive release. Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Recommendations We recommend you: Sign the attached protocol document Note the Ministry will publish the signed protocol on its website in accordance with the recommendation from the Ombudsman
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Appendi x : Responses to possible questions
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of BRIEFING October OC Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport SUPPORTING MATERIAL FOR THE MARITIME TRANSPORT (MARPOL ANNEX VI) AMENDMENT BILL FOR COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE Purpose Provide you w ith material to support the consideration of the Maritime Transport (MARPOL Annex VI) Amendment Bill (the Bill) by the Committee of the Whole House. Key points On September , t he Transport and Infrastructure Committee (the Committee) reported back to Parliament on the Bill. On September , the Bill had its second reading. This briefing provides you with supporting material for the Committee of the Whole House stage, including: oan overview of the Bill othe key changes made to the Bill since its introduction oresponses to questions on key elements of the proposed regime (refer Appendix ) oa clause byclause breakdown of the Bill (refer Appendix ) The Committee of the Whole House is to take place on Tuesday October with the Third Reading the following day. R E L E A S E D U N D E R T H E OF F I C I A L I N F OR MA T I ON A C T
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Appendi x : Key issues raised in submissions on proposed Marine Protection Rules and recommended policy approach Complying with nitrogen oxide (NO x) emission limits Regulation of MARPOL Annex VI imposes NO x emission limits on all marine diesel engines of greater than kW output power installed on ships constructed since a specified . Limits also apply to engines on any ship that have been installed or undergone a major conversion since that . This requirement applies to a large number of New Zealand ships, including quite small recreational boats. Each engine subject to the regulation must have an EIAPP (Engine International Air Pollution Prevention) Certificate issued by a maritime administration or a recognised organisation. The engine must be surveyed regularly to check for ongoing compliance and to enable the periodic issue of the International Air Pollution Prevention Certificate (IAPP) for ships that travel internati onally. Maritime NZ proposed in the consultation document to exclude from these requirements engines on New Zealand flagged domestic operating ships constructed before May or engines installed on ships before May . This approach is consiste nt with the requirements and environmental objectives of Annex VI. However, this approach would mean that ship operators with engines installed after that did not have the EIAPP certificate would need to install a compliant engine or obtain an EIAPP for an engine they had previously purchased, by the of their next survey. Issues raised by stakeholders included: . Obtaining a new EIAPP for an existing engine installed on a ship is unworkable. The engine would have to undergo a complex testing process which would be both difficult and prohibitively expensive, with costs estimated in the tens of thousands for each engine. The only alternative under the original proposal would be engine replacement. . A number of ships have land based (automotive or stationary) engines installed that are used as generators, winches etc., and in some cases for propulsion. These engines are not eligible for an EIAPP certificate. This group of ship operators could face the cost of engine replacement even if their engine has low NO x emissions. Similar circumstances apply to spark ignition (petrol) engines . . There will be an issue in ensuring compliance with NO x limits by recreational ships, which are not subject to a prescribed regime of regular surveys. Recommended approach The Annex VI NO x requirements apply to engines on domestic operating ships unless such engine is subject to an alternative NO x control measure established by the
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of (b) a category A ship. . Attained energy efficiency existing ship index () The owner and the master of a ship must ensure an Attained EEXI is calculated at the following times, as applicable: (a) for a ship (i) that is a New Zealand ship on January , upon the scheduled time specified in Schedule ..(); or (ii) that becomes a New Zealand ship after January , before the ship opera tes as a New Zealand ship: (b) upon a major conversion of the ship. () Subject to subrule (), the owner and the master of a ship must ensure an Attained EEXI (a) is calculated for the ship in accordance with regulations and of Annex VI, taking int o account guidelines developed by the IMO titled Guidelines On The Method Of Calculation Of The Attained Energy Efficiency Existing Ship Index (EEXI) ; and (b) meets the standards and requirements in Annex VI; and (c) is accompanied by the EEXI technical fi le in accordance with regulation . of Annex VI; and (d) is verified by the Director. () The Director must verify the Attained EEXI under subrule ()(d) in accordance with regulation of Annex VI . () The Attained EEXI must be verified (a) at the intermediate, or renewal survey identified in regulation . of Annex VI or the initial survey identified in regulation .. and .. of Annex VI, whichever is the first, on or after the this subsection comes into force , in accordance with regulatio n .. of Annex VI; and (b) at the general or partial survey, according to the circumstances, after a ship has undergone a major conversion, in accordance with regulation .. of Annex VI. () For a ship to which subsection CA applies, the verified Atta ined EEDI may be taken as the Attained EEXI if the value of the Attained EEDI is equal to or less than that of the Required EEXI, in accordance with regulation of Annex VI. Subsection CC Operational carbon intensity This subsection is currently suspended and will come into force at a later .
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of () This subsection does not apply to any of the following ships: (a) a ship not propelled by mechanical means: (b) a category A ship. . Attained annual operational carbon intensity indicator () The owner and the master of a ship must ensure an Attained Annual Operational CII (a) is calculated for the ship in accordance with regulation of Annex VI, taking into account guidelines developed by the IMO titled as follows: (i) Guidelines On Operational Carbon Intensity Indicators And The Calculation Methods : (Ii) Guidelines On The Reference Lines For Use With Operational Carbon Intensity Indicators : (Iii) Guidelines On The Operational Carbon Intensity Reduction Factors Relative To Reference Lines : (Iv) Guidelines On The Operational Carbon Intensity Rating Of Ships ; and (b) meets the standards and requirements in Annex VI; and (c) is verified by the Director. () The Director must verify the Attained Annual Operational CII under subrule ()(c) in accordance with regulation . of Annex VI . () The Attained Annual Operational CII must be calculated, and reported to the Director, for each ship (a) from the initial time specified in Schedule ..(), before the end of March of each calendar year; or (b) in the event of a transfer of the ship a ddressed in regulations ., ., or . of Annex VI, at the times in accordance with regulation of Annex VI. . Operational carbon intensity rating () For each ship, and upon receipt of all the appropriate data and information required to do s o, the Director must verify the operational carbon intensity rating for the ship in accordance with regulation . of Annex VI. () If the rating verified under subrule () is such that a corrective action plan is required in accordance with regulation . of Annex VI, the owner and the master of the ship to which the rating relates to must (a) develop a plan of corrective actions to achieve the Required Annual Operational CII; and (b) review the SEEMP for the ship to include the plan of corrective actio ns; and (c) submit the reviewed SEEMP to the Director in accordance with regulation . of Annex VI. () The owner and the master must undertake the planned corrective actions in accordance with the SEEMP and regulation . of Annex VI.
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of . SEEMP inspection This rule is currently suspended and will come into force at a later .
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of (b) has no system, equipment, or machinery fitted that may generate emis sions regulated by Annex VI; and (c) is fit for purpose for use as a barge on a voyage with neither persons nor living animals on board. . Application for and i ssue of an exemption certificate () The owner of an unmanned non selfpropelled barge mu st apply to the Director for an IAPP Exemption Certificate (a) in accordance with section of the Act; and (b) including in the application a survey report by a surveyor confirming the conditions in rule . are met. () Upon an application under subrule () and, if satisfied with the survey report provided under subrule ()(b), the Director must issue an IAPP Exemption Certificate (a) in accordance with section of the Act; and (b) subject to such conditions as the Director c onsiders appropriate in the circumstances; and (c) subject to the condition in rule .(); and (d) for a period not exceeding years. () Each certificate issued by the Director must be in the form set out in Appendix XI of Annex VI. () Each IAPP E xemption Certificate is a marine protection document for the purposes of the Act. . to . Reserved R E L E A S E D U N D E R T H E OF F I C I A L I N F OR MA T I ON A C T
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of SCHEDULE Subsequent amendments to Part This schedule is currently suspended and will come into force at a later .
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of .(b) A .()(a) A .()(b) .()(c)(i) .()(d)(ii) . . .()(d)(ii) . .
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of . Section amended (Interpretation) Amends section by repeal ing the definitions of discharge, marine protection product, and reception facility. Those definitions are being moved with some changes to take into account Annex VI requirements by clause to section of the Maritime Transport Act. No change . . Section repealed (Power to require reception facilities) Repeals section which provides a power to the Director of Maritime NZ (the Director) to require, at ports, reception facilities for qualifying harmful substances from ships. That power is being provided for in new section A, inserted by clause . No change . A Section amended (Failure to comply with requirement of Director) Amends section by replacing with A. The reference in section to section (to be repealed by clause ) is replaced by section A. . Section amended (Acceptance of documents) Amends section which relates to the acc eptance of certain marine protection documents by the Director. The amendment expands subsection ()(c) to capture the wider environment and ensures that the section is wide enough for the purposes of implementing Annex VI. The subsection, as amended, prov ides that the Director must not accept a marine protection document if the Director has clear grounds for believing that a ship presents an unreasonable threat to the environment, including the marine environment . No change . . Section amended (Suspen sion of marine protection documents or imposition of conditions) Section provides the powers the Director has to suspend marine protection documents or impose conditions in relation to those documents. The amendment expands the list of the contexts in which those powers may be exercised to include where the holder of a document fails to take corrective action in respect of the condition of the ships equipment . Minor amendment made to include the word substantially i.e. that the condition of ship equipment must substantially correspond to the particulars of the relevant marine protection document. This modified wording aligns with the requirements of Annex VI. . Section amended (Marine protection rules in relation to harmful and other substances ) Section sets out the purposes for which the Minister may make marine protection rules. Clause inserts an additional purpose of prescribing requirements, etc, relating to the prevention of air pollution from ships for the purposes of i mplementing Annex VI . No change . Section amended (Director may grant exemptions from marine protection rules) Amends section , which provides the Director with the power to grant exemptions from marine protection rules. The amendment inserts the Directors power to grant an exemption if compliance with a requirement could impede research into the development of ship No change R E L E A S E D U N D E R T H E OF F I C I A L I N F OR MA T I ON A C T
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of How will the regime be implemented The Annex VI obligations will primarily be implemented by Maritime NZ through the Marine Protection Rules. However, there are also requirements on fuel suppliers that will be implemented by MBIE through amendments to the Energy Fuel Specifications Regulations . We expect all of the rules and regulations to be in place by the end of this year, enabling the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade to deposit the instrument of accession and the new requirements to come into force months later (March ). However, the following requirements will be phased in after the commencement o Some new Annex VI provisions, recently agreed by the IMO, that come into force on April and November (notably changes to the energy efficiency requirements). o Annex VI compliance will be p hased in across the New Zealand fleet over a . year period , giving ship operators time to prepare. S urvey and certification obligations for Annex VI compliance will begin from July and integrate into the existing survey schedule for each ship. What will it cost to implement the regime and how will it be funded
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Administration. This means New Zealand can allow domestic operating ships that cannot obtain an EIAPP to use alternative means of complying with the limits andor demonstrating compliance with the limits. The following recommended approach is generally similar to that currently being developed by the Australian Maritime Safety Authority . For domestic only commercial ships: . For engines that have been installed or undergone a major conversion from May until the commencement of the rules , the operator will be allowed to produce alternative evidence of compliance when an EIAPP cannot be obtained. These alternative forms of documentation must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the surveyor that the NO x limits are complied with. In addition, the operator must provide evidence that the engine and any emissions reduction equipment are correctly installed and have undergone regular maintenance as specified by the manufacturer. . Engines installed or modified after the commencement of the rules must have an EIAPP. This will prevent the installation of non compliant and second hand engines and ensure that the New Zealand domestic fleet is evolving towards the same rigorous standards of evidence as the international fleet. The advan tages of this approach are that it: sets a target for New Zealands domestic fleet on a path to achieve the full rigour of compliance with Annex VI ; incentivises the replacement of old engines; and addresses any perceived inequity between those that have invested in cleaner engines and those that have no t. . The ability to provide alternative evidence of compliance will have a sunset years after the commencement of the rules. After this the ability to provide alternative forms of evidence is removed, and it becomes mandatory for every engine without an EIAPP to be replaced or converted so that it can receive an EIAPP. The year sunset has been selected as an interval after commencement that does not impose unreasonable costs by requiring the replacement of near new engines. For domestic only recreational ships: . A different approach is proposed as they are not subject to a survey and certification regime. The overall emissions risks from a lighter touch approach for recreational ships are less than for commercial ships, as they generally run for fewer hours per year . . All engines on recreational ships installed or undergoing a major conversion after the commencement of the rules must have an EIAPP. . The sunset applies all engines must have an EIAPP within years after the commencement of the rules. . In order to ensure compliance, Maritime NZ will conduct an education campaign for recreational boaties and engage with marine engine suppliers on an ongoing basis to encourage them to provide good information on engine purchase and maintenance . R E L E A S E D U N D E R T H E OF F I C I A L I N F OR MA T I ON A C T
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of SUPPORTING MATERIAL FOR THE MARITIME TRANSPORT (MARPOL ANNEX VI) AMENDMENT BILL FOR COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE Overview of the Maritime Transport (MARPOL Annex VI) Amendment Bill . The objective of the Bill is to address the impacts of shipping emissions to air by aligning domestic legislation with Annex VI of the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL). At the end of , Cabinet agreed New Zealand would accede to Annex VI of MARPOL. . MARPOL Annex VI contains a set of r egulations that States must implement in order to formally accede. These regulations have been developed by the I nternational Maritime Organi zation (IMO) and any changes or additions are subject to debate by member states of the IMO. . New Zealands international obligations under other MARPOL Annexes are largely implemented through the Maritime Transport Ac t (MTA) , and maritime and marine protection rules made under the MTA . . Before New Zealand can accede to MARPOL Annex VI, changes to the MTA are needed to ensure that its rulemaking and enforcement provisions provide the authority required to fully im plement the legal obligations of MARPOL Annex VI. . Part of the Bill contains a number of amendments to the MTA to achieve this objective. Part of the Bill amends the Maritime Transport (Marine Protection Conventions) Order to insert MARPOL Annex V I into the list of international conventions declared to be marine protection conventions. This is so that MARPOL Annex VI can be counted as a marine protection convention for the purposes of the definition of marine protection convention in section of the MTA, and also wherever the phrase marine protection convention is used in Parts to of the MTA. . Key provisions in the Bill will: a. Provide a power for the Minister to make marine protection rules in relation to Annex VI substances. The MTA sets out the purposes for which the Minister may make marine protection rules. The Bill inserts an additional purpose of prescribing requirements relating to the prevention of air pollution for ships for the purpose of implementing Annex VI. b. Provide a po wer for the Director of Maritime New Zealand (Maritime NZ) to conduct inspections and audits in relation to Annex VI requirements. This is in addition to the existing power in the MTA giving the Director of Maritime NZ the power to conduct inspections and audits for matters other than in relation to Annex VI. c. Provide a power for the Director of Maritime NZ to detain ships and seize marine protection products that are in contravention of Annex VI requirements, and exercise related powers, such as imposing c onditions and prohibitions. These powers expand the existing powers of detention and seizure in the MTA so as to prevent air pollution from ships and to facilitate the implementation of Annex VI. R E L E A S E D U N D E R T H E OF F I C I A L I N F OR MA T I ON A C T
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of emission reduction technologies and ship engine design programmes. A further amendment is included to provide that granting an exemp tion from a marine protection rule made for the purposes of Annex VI must not significantly increase the risk of harm to the environment, human health, property, or resources. The amendments under this clause are also intended for the purposes of implement ing Annex V I. . Section amended (Inspections and Audits) Amends section to distinguish that provision from the new section A. The former relates to inspections and audits for matters other than in relation to Annex VI, while the lat ter relates to inspections and audits in relation to Annex VI . No change . Section A inserted (Inspections and Audits in relation to Annex VI) Inserts new section A, which relates to inspections and audits in relation to Annex VI. The Director wil l have the power to require, and to carry out, inspections and audits for the purposes of implementing Annex VI . No change . Section amended (Detention, etc of ships and seizure of marine protection documents) Amends section of the Maritime Transport Act, which provides the Director with the power to detain ships and seize marine protection products, etc. The amendm ents made by this clause ensure that the powers can be exercised to prevent air pollution from ships and to facilitate implementation of Annex VI. No change . Section amended (Failure to comply with Directors inspection or audit requirements) Amends section of the Maritime Transport Act, which provides an offence for failing to comply with the Directors inspection or audit requirements. That section is expanded to make it an offence to fail to comply with the Directors inspe ction or audit requirements in relation to Annex VI requirements under new section A() or (). No change . Section A inserted (Power to require reception facilities) Inserts new section A which provides the Director with the power to require, at ports, reception facilities for qualifying harmful substances, sediment , and Annex VI substances from ships. Those powers are expanded from the power in section of the Maritime Transport Act, which is being repealed by clause . The substances that are the subject of a requirement to provide a port reception facility has been amended to delete references to ballast water and instead insert sediment. The definition of ballast water in this clause has been deleted and a definition of sediment inserted.
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of o Upgrading or replacing non compliant engines and other equipment . o Improving the energy efficiency of the ship and setting up an energy efficiency management plan. Some ships will need to demonstrate they are meeting the plan. If a ship has a high carbon intensity rating, actions will have to be taken to reduce carbon intensity to an accepta ble level over time. This may have significant financial implications but only the worst performing ships will have to take immediate action. Costs will vary widely according to the extent of modification needed and the type and design of ship. Costs to industry (s hips under gross tons) (GT) The main impact on ships under GT is the nitrogen oxides (NO x) emissions requirements, which will require non compliant engines to be upgradedreplaced and certified. At a rough estimate there are up to registered ships with kW engines which may be captured by Annex VI requirements. There will also be a large number of unregistered ships (recreational vessels etc). The impact cannot be quantified more precisely because no data is available on how man y ships have engines that potentially have high NO x emissions, or what proportion of these engines are already compliant. Can anything be done to reduce costs Most of these costs are an inevitable result of accession to Annex VI , as they represent the co st of complying with the requirements and standards set out in the convention. Annex VI requirements will have only a marginal impact on the costs to industry, as the majority of Annex VI requirements, or a modified version of them, will already apply to most ships . There are areas of discretion in the application and implementation of Annex VI , which mainly affect s how Annex VI is applied to New Zealand flagged ships that only travel domestically . The Marine Protection Rules are being designed to mitigate possible cost impacts of the NO x emissions requirements on those ships, without compromising the requirement for those ships to reduce their NO x emissions. There are also advantages in applying t he requirements to domestic ships, e.g. o The energy efficiency requirements are the first step towards achieving a low carbon domestic fleet . o Ships will be encouraged to reduce energy consumption and therefore energy costs . o Ships that are compliant in New Zealand are compliant worldwide. This increases the value and reputation of N ew Zealand s fleet.
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of There will be no sunset for certain classes of engine that are not eligible for an EIAPP, e.g. stationary engines designed for land use installed on a vessel , or spark ignition engines . For these engines, the requirement that operators must hold evidence of compliance with a recognised international standard that is equal to or better than the Annex VI NO x requirements will continue indefinitely . A second round of targeted consultation was undertaken between and September on the proposed approach to the application of the NO x emission limits. Overall, consultees were satisfied with the revised approach and s uggested some minor refinements. Energy efficiency (carbon intensity) requirements for domestic operating ships The Annex VI energy efficiency requirements are the central pillar in MARPOL to support the reduction of carbon emissions from shipping. They include: . Ship Energy Efficiency Management Plan (SEEMP) . . Energy Efficiency Design Index (EEDI): design requirements for newly built ships, or ships that have undergone a major conversion. . Energy Efficiency (Existing Ships) Index (EE XI): energy efficiency c alculation for existing ships these measures become more rigorous over time to encourage ongoing reduction in carbon emissions . . Carbon Intensity Index (CII) measurement of operational carbon intensity and fuel use for ships GT and above. These requi rements apply to specified ships of GT and above that make international voyages. Annex VI allows Parties to exclude domestic only ships from the requirements of Chapter . However, the Annex also requires Parties to ensure that such ships are constructed and act in a manner consistent with the requirements so far as reasonable and practicable. New Zealand must decide how it will meet this requirement to apply consistent measures. In the consultation document, Maritime NZ proposed to apply all the applicable energy efficiency requirements to all New Zealand flagged ships GT or above , regardless of whether they travel internationally. This approach ensures that New Zealand will meet its Annex VI obligations, affords the highest level of environmental protection and climate change ambition, and minimises regulatory complexity. There is also a commercial advantage to domestic operators in having an Annex VI compliant ship, for example if they want to on sell it overseas. The recommended approach will impose compliance costs on those New Zealand flagged ships of GT or more that are not already compliant with Annex VI
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of MARPOL ANNEX VI IMPLEMENTATION AND FUNDING Development of new marine protection rules to implement MARPOL Annex VI The Maritime Transport (MARPOL Annex VI) Amendment Bill (the Bill) , which aligns New Zealands domestic legislation with Annex VI of the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL), is expected to receive Royal Assent midlate October . New marine protection rules and amendments to regulations are required to implement the new MARPOL Annex VI obligations. Public consultation on the new requirements was carried out between July and August . The consultation sought input on how New Zealand should implement certain obligations where discretion was provided for under MARPOL Annex VI. This included the application of certain requirements to ships that only operate within New Zealands territ orial waters (domestic only ships) . submissions were received with the majority () generally supportive of the intent of the proposed rules. Regional councils in particular were highly supportive of the proposed rules and their positive environmental impact. There was near unanimous support for the following proposals: . Applying the Annex VI requirements preventing emissions of ozone depleting substances (ODS) from ship systems to domestic only ships. . Applying the Annex VI requirements for the operation of shipboard incinerators from the earliest installation specified in Annex VI ( January ). . Introducing a mechanism for the approval of equivalent emission reduction measures that are as efficient as the Annex VI regulations. An example of a common equivalent is the use of exhaust gas cleaning systems (scrubbers) to clean exhaust from high sulphur fuel. . Establishing backstop provisions to prevent non compliant ships being registered in New Zealand after commencement of the new marine protection rules. Maritime industry stakeholders were also supportive of the rules overall but had concerns about individual requirements and how the requirements would be implemented in practice. This included: . How domestic only ships could demonstrate compliance with nitrogen oxide (NO x) emission limits . . Whether energy efficiency requirements should be appli ed to all New Zealand flagged ships GT or above, regardless of whether they travel internationally . . The need for domestic only ships to obtain and carry a bunker delivery note and a sample of delivered fuel as evidence of compliance with Annex VI fuel quality standards . R E L E A S E D U N D E R T H E OF F I C I A L I N F OR MA T I ON A C T
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of URGENT PROPOSAL TO LIFT THE SUSPENSION ON COMMENCEMENT OF PART MARINE PROTECTION RULES Background On March the Minister of Transport signed the Part Marine Protection Rules: Prevention of Air Pollution from Ships (Part Rules ) OC refers . Part is a key part of the suite of legislation that brings Annex VI of the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL) into effect in New Zealand. The Part R ules were gazetted on April . As the of New Zealands pend ing accession to MARPOL Annex VI was not known at the time, the commencement of the rules was suspended under section () of the Maritime Transport Act (MTA) , until a when they would be brought into force, in whole or in part, by a notice in the New Zealand Gazette . The commencement of the Part Rules is staged as follows: Tranche rules are now in force. Their suspension was lifted on August , three months after New Zealands accession to MARPOL Annex VI was lodged with the International Maritime Organi zation (IMO) . Tranche rules are suspended until scheduled amendments made by the IMO to Annex VI come into force globally on November . Tran che rules (section C of the Part Rules ) are suspended until amendments to the Part Rules are in place to make the nitrogen oxides ( NO x) requirements workable for domestic ships OC refers . This briefing seeks your agreement to gazette the notification of entry into force of the tranche rules . The form of the gazette notice is attached (Appendix ). As agreed by you, the tranche suspension will remain for the time being and will be lifted in November in order to put the amendments into effect OC refers . Your agreement to lift the suspension will be sought when we brief you on the proposed amendments. The tranche rules include new energy efficiency and carbon intensity requirements The tranche rules (Appendix ) cover the following areas, mostly intended to contribute to the reduct ion of greenhouse gas emissions: Subsections B B and CB: Energy Efficie ncy (Existing Ship ) Index for international and domestic voyaging ships respectively. These rules require certain existing ships at or over gross tonnage (GT) to have the energy efficiency features of their design calculated and , if necessary, brought into line with the requir ed energy efficiency rating. Subsections B C and CC : Operational carbon intensity for international and domestic voyaging ships respectively. These rules require certain ships at or over GT to measure their fuel consumption while in operation , report the result ing carbon intensity rating, and take corrective action if the rating is low . R E L E A S E D U N D E R T H E OF F I C I A L I N F OR MA T I ON A C T
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Change made to the Bill since introduction . The Bill was ref erred to the Transport and Infrastructure Committee on June and the final report of the Committee was on September . The Committees proposed amendments were largely minor and technical. Minor changes were made to two of the definit ions in the Bill to better differentiate between ballast water and sediment, and to replace an incorrect cross reference. The Committee had no issues with regard to the legislations design to bring to the attention of the House. . On September , the Bill had its second reading.
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of . Concerns that Maritime N ew Zealand (Maritime NZ) might use its power under the Maritime Transport Act (MTA) to direct the provision of reception facilities without first consulting with ports and waste management service providers . . Need for clarity around certification requirements for domestic only ships. A detailed analysis of the se issues and the recommended policy approach is included in Appendix . Amendments to regulations to implement MARPOL Annex VI Cabinet has agr eed to amend the following regulations required to implement MARPOL Annex VI obligations: . Marine Protection (Offences) Regulations under the MTA . . Maritime (Charges) Regulations under the MTA . . Engine Fuel Specification Regulations (EFS R) under the Energy (Fuels, Levies, and References) Act . Amendments to the Marine Protection (Offences) Regulations (Offences Regulations) are necessary to support enforcement of MARPOL Annex VI obli gations implemented by the marine protection rules. You previously agreed to PCO drafting amendments to these regulations based on the Ministry of Transport s (the Ministry) Penalties Framework (except for the introduction of new infringement fees) . We anticipate seeking approval from the LEG committee on November. Maritime (Charges) Regulations A mendments to the Maritime (Charges) Regulations (Charges Regulations) are necessary to enable the Director of Maritime NZ to charge for work and s ervices to support the new marine protection rules. Schedule of the regulations lists the work and services for which charges are payable at an hourly rate. Regulation of the regulations specifies the charges for Schedule work and services (hours x cost payable). The following services will be added to Schedule of the regulations : . International Energy Efficiency Certificate (IEEC) . . International Air Pollution Prevention Certificate (IAPPC) . . Engine International Air Pollution Prevention Certi ficate (EIAPPC) . . Statement of Compliance relating to fuel oil consumption to the ship (in accordance with Regulation and Appendix X of Annex VI). . Verification of a Ship Energy Efficiency Management Plan (SEEMP) . These services are charged as an hourly rate (rather than a fixed fee) as the work required in each instance is likely to vary depending on the completeness and R E L E A S E D U N D E R T H E OF F I C I A L I N F OR MA T I ON A C T
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Rule .: SEEMP inspection . This rule enables Maritime NZ to inspect a ship to determine whether the ships energy efficiency management plan (SEEMP) is being im plemented in accordance with the new Annex VI regulations. Subpart F: Unmanned non selfpropelled barges . These rules set the conditions upon which an unmanned non selfpropelled barge may have an exemption certificate issued in relation to it. Schedule : Subsequent amendments to Part . This schedule renumbers the references to MARPOL Annex VI regulations to align with the new numbering of MARPOL Annex VI that comes into force on November . Timing of tranche rules In accordance with Cabinet requirements, the tranche rules will come into effect days after they have been notified in the New Zealand Gazette . This means there will be a short delay between November , when the relevant MARPOL Annex VI regulations come into force, and the commencement of the entry into force of tranche . The notice of the entry into force of the tranche rules should be gazetted urgently in order to reduce this delay as far as possible. However, the delay has no practical effect, as surveys of ships for compliance with the tranche rules do not commence until January . We therefore do not recommend seek ing a waiver of the day rule. Next steps We seek you r agreement to the form of the Gazette notice at Appendix . We will have this in the New Zealand Gazette on your behalf as soon as possible after your agreement.
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of APPENDIX GAZETTE NOT ICE LIFTING SUSPENSION OF PART MARINE PROTECTION RULES TRANCHE Notification of Entry into Force of Marine Protection Rules This notice is seconda ry legislation under section () of the Maritime Transport Act . Marine Protection Rules Part Prevention of Air Pollution from Ships These rules were made by the Minister of Transport on March . The making of rules in Part was notified in the New Zealand Gazette , April , Notice No. sl , with commencement of rules in Part suspended until they are applied , either wholly or in part, by further notice in the New Zealand Gazette . In accordance with section () of the Maritime Transport Act , I hereby give notice that the following rules in Part enter into force on : (a) the rules in subsection BB: (b) the rules in subsection BC: (c) the rules in subsection CB: (d) the rules in subsection CC: (e) rule .: (f) the rules in Subpart F: (g) the rules in Schedule . . These rules are available for inspection free of charge, or for purchase, from Maritime New Zealand, Level , Grey Street, Wellington, or on the Maritime New Zealand website at: www.maritimenz.govt.nzrules . Dated at Wellington this HON KIER AN McANULTY , Associate Minister of Transport
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of equivalent certification regime (the NZAPPC and NZEEC) be established for domestic only ships. Submitters raised concerns about: . the additional complexity and cost of the proposed NZAPPNZEE certificates . how issue of these certificates would align with the existing MOSS survey and certification regime for domestic only commercial ships . wanting to ensure that domestic only ships are not precluded from getting international certificates if appropriate . Recommended approach T o reduce complexity and cost, Maritime NZ proposes to redraft the rules to: . Remo ve reference to NZAPP and NZEE certificates; compliance with Annex VI rules will be assured through the existing MOSS regime . Clarify that domestic only ships of over GT may be issued with an IAPP or IEE certificate. Implementation will include a range of initiatives to help MOSS surveyors develop capability in surveying for Annex VI compliance.
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of The Bills alignment with the Maritime Transport (Marine Protection Conventions) Order The Bills alignment with the Maritime Transport (Marine Protection Conventions) Order Clause of the Bill will add Annex VI to the Maritime Transport (Marine Protection Conventions) Order (the Order) as being a convention under the MTA . The Minister of Transport authorised the Ministry to instruct PCO to draft amendments to this Order on September (OC refers). Amendments to this Order are required to reduce operational and other risks identified by Maritime NZ with conventions and amendments that have not yet been declared through the Order, and there is some urgency for these amendments to be made. The way that clause of the Bill is worded does not align with the way the amendments to the Order will need to be drafted, given the significant number of additional conventions and amendments required to be added to the Order. Rather than drafting an SOP to align clause with the wording of the Amendment Order, PCO have suggested that the Bill be enacted first, with the Amendment Order coming into force closely following the enactment of the Bill. This is on PCOs understanding that the Minister of Transport, in collaboration and consultation with the Leader of the House, is keen to prioritise the enactment of the Bill in the next sitting block in October. Implementation Maritime NZ will implement most of the Annex VI requirements The Annex VI obligations will primarily be implemented by Maritime NZ through the Marine Protection Rules. However, there are also requirements on fuel suppliers that will be implemented by MBIE through the EFSR. We expect all of the rules and regulations to be in place by the end of this year, enabling MFAT to deposit the instrument of accession and new requirements to come into force months later (March ). However, the following requirements will be phased in after the commencement . Some new Annex VI provisions, recently agreed by the I nternational Maritime Organisation (IMO), that come into force on April and November (notably changes to the energy efficiency requirements) . . To give ship operators time to prepare, the survey and certification obligations for Annex VI compliance will begin from July and integrate into the existing survey schedule for each ship. As such, Annex VI compliance will be phased in across the New Zealand fleet over a . year period. The implementation plan includes: . Inclusion of Annex VI requirements in the existing survey and certification schedules for New Zealand flagged commercial ships, including materials and support for surveyors . R E L E A S E D U N D E R T H E OF F I C I A L I N F OR MA T I ON A C T
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of APPE NDIX FULL TEXT OF MARINE PROTECTION RULES PART TRANCHE Subsection BB Energy efficiency existing ship index This subsection is currently suspended and will come into force at a later .
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of () The Director must verify the Attained EEXI under subrule ()(d) in accordance with regulation of Annex VI . () The Attained EEXI must be verified (a) at the annual, intermediate, or renewal survey identified in regulation . of Annex VI or the initial survey identified in regulation .. and .. of Annex VI, w hichever is the first, on or after the this subsection comes into force , in accordance with regulation .. of Annex VI; and (b) at the general or partial survey, according to the circumstances, after a ship has undergone a major conversion, in accor dance with regulation .. of Annex VI. () For a ship to which subsection BA applies, the verified Attained EEDI may be taken as the Attained EEXI if the value of the Attained EEDI is equal to or less than that of the Required EEXI, in accordance with r egulation of Annex VI.
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of () The Attained Annual Operational CII must be calculated, and reported to the Director, for each ship (a) from the initial time specified in Schedule ..(), before the end of March of each calendar year; or (b) in the event of a transfer of the ship addressed in regulations ., ., or . of Annex VI, at the times in accordance with regulation of Annex VI. . Operational carbon intensity rating () For each ship, and upon receipt of all the appropriate data and information required to do so, the Director must verify the operational carbon intensity rating for the ship in accordance with regulation . of Annex VI. () If the rating verified under subrule () is such that a corrective action plan is required in accordance with regulation . of Annex VI, the owner and the master of the ship to which the rating relates to must (a) develop a plan of corrective actions to achieve the Required Annual Operational CII; and (b) review the SEEMP for the ship to include the plan of corrective actions; and (c) submit the reviewed SEEMP to the Director in accordance with regulation . of Annex VI. () The owner and the master must undertake the planned corrective actions in accordance with the SEEMP and regulation . of Annex VI.
UNCLASSIFIED You can adjust the rate of charges and duties for the NLTF to meet your priorities Changes to FED, RUC, and other transport charges directly affect the budgets of businesses and households across New Zealand. It is good practice to conduct public engagement on planned rate changes. For FED and RUC, this is usually done through engagement on the draft GPS. RUC rates are set through the RUC Rates Regulations and changes must be confirmed by Parliament. FED is generally set through amendments to the Customs and Excise Act and, sometimes, by an Order in Council. Parliament has this role because FED and RUC are taxes. The portion of the motor vehicle licensing fee that goes to the NLTF has not changed since . This fee can be amended through the Land Transport (Motor Vehicle Registration and Licensing) Regulations . The Ministry is required to provide forecasts of NLTF revenue at each Government economic and fiscal update (six monthly intervals). These forecasts are an opportunity to identify and respond to immediate revenue pressures. The figure below is the forecast run for the Pre election Economic and Fiscal Update . It shows NLTF revenue has been rising , primarily due to increased travel and increases in FED and RUC rates. Revenue from FED will become less certain and unstable over time as vehicles become more fuel efficient and people increasingly choose to travel by other modes.
UNCLASSIFIED grants, class gaming (including gaming machines from pubs and clubs) and the Lotteries Grants Board also provide funding to the wider search and rescue and recreational safety sectors. Ministers of Transport and Finance are empowered under the LTMA to allocate FED funding for SAR purposes. The NZSAR Council (on behalf of the Ministry) administers approximately . million per annum of FED investment into SAR sector agencies. The NZSAR Council (on behalf of the Ministry) also administers the governments investment of . million per annum into frontline water safety rescue and prevention services (Coastguard NZ and Surf Life Saving NZ).
UNCLASSIFIED ii Briefing to the Incoming Minister
UNCLASSIFIED modes to influence the use of one mode over another. Pricing can be used to encourage more efficient use of the network, for example congestion charging can encourage people to travel at different times and can reduce congestion. It can also result in better utilisation of networks, and defer the need for additional capacity to be built. Examples of economic instruments that can be used by local government to drive travel choices and decisions include: differential charging of public transport e.g., reduced off peak fares subsidised public transport fares congestion charging parking fees. Educational instruments are used in road safety and can help to nudge people to make better travel decisions by communicating or consolidating information about their travel choices. Examples of educational instruments to influence travel choices and decisions include travel planning, social media marketing, information provision, mass media campaigns. The greatest benefits come from combining economic and educational instruments with complimentary measures, such as infrastructure provision and legislative changes. In doing so, these measures can help achieve the outcomes you want to see in the transport system, such as reduced congestion, reduced emissions and better health outcomes in a more efficient way. There are opportunities to use transport charges to influence travel choices and decisions The use of other economic instruments can be an effective way to manage network demand. Existing transport charges, and the level at which they are set, affect the behaviour of users. However, there are limitations. For example, they are not related to time ofday or location of use. Internationally, there are examples of economic instruments ( e.g., congestion charging) being used in the transport system to achieve broad outcomes (including reduced congestion, improved air quality, and greater uptake of active modes and public transport). This can encourage some people to travel at different times, to travel by public transport, by active modes such as walking and cycling, or not at all (such as by remote working), rather than travelling by private car The primary objective of congestion charging is to improve network efficiency, not to raise additional funds from road users. While congestion charging does raise some revenue, and successful international schemes have used this to invest in transport projects, it should not be relied upon as a source of revenue. The Strategic BIM discusses the need to review the existing revenue system including the potential use of congestion charging in cities. Regulation You have a range of tools in the transport regulatory system to deliver durable transport outcomes The transport regulatory system helps protect New Zealanders from harm and achieve other transport outcomes. The system is comprised of laws made by Parliament (primary legislation) and second order regulations, rules and instruments that those laws allow (secondary legislation). RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
UNCLASSIFIED these with involvement from transport agencies and SOEs, and the NZ Police depending on the subject. Regulations must be approved by Cabinet. Transport i nstruments help support a more flexible regulator system Transport instruments are a new tool to help support a more flexible regulatory system. They improve the flexibility of the rule making process by having more customised consultation requirements, meaning that changes that only affect a small number of transport users can be progressed quickly. Transport instruments can also be more easily amended in response to technological innovation Transport instruments are outlined in a rule made by you as Minister of Transport, with the design and management delegated to a specified official (such as the Director of the relevant transport agency). For example, in the maritime sphere, a transport rule may describe the need to carry approved safety equipment on a vessel, and the related transport instrument could then set out what types of safety equipment are approved and details relating to their use. Several transport instruments now exist in Maritime legislation, with more planned in other modes as part of work on secondary legislation The Civil Aviation Act (which comes into force in ) empowers the Minister to enable the creation of a transport instrument. Once the Minster provides for an instrument to be made, the Director of Civil Aviation or Secretary for Transport is then e mpowered to enable their creation. The only restriction is that the Minister must consider that the matter is appropriate to be in the transport instrument, rather than the rule or regulation. The regulatory system, through legislation, rules, and regulation implements requirements under international conventions and agreements There are some international transport related agreements. However, only a small number require regular updates of our regulatory system. Regulatory stewardship is embedded in the Ministrys work The regulatory system has a dual function: to prohibit or control certain activity or behaviour and to create an enabling environment. Regulation is not just red tape but can (if used well) contribute to the economic opportunities and other outcomes. Regulating emerging technologies can also enable better market access to firms by providing a permissive and transparent environment with appropriate safeguards. This can support the uptake of emerging technology and increase productivity in the sector. For a long time, the transport system has followed certain basic assumptions, for example there is a human driver controlling aircraftsvessels vehicles or what is, or is not, a motor vehicle . Our regulatory frameworks generally reflect these assumptions. However, the swift changes in technology, climate change, and alternative fuels, among other things, have left some of our legislation scrambling to catch up. We have a responsibility to develop robust regulation that reflects considered choices about the best regulatory tool to use, the right type of regulatory design (performance based or prescriptive), and who is best placed to apply them. We also need our regulation to be able to respond quickly to change, ensuring New Zealanders can take advantage of new technologies while ensuring safety. Regulatory stewardship is a public service principle and statutory responsibility for all government departments, including the Ministry. It involves adopting a whole ofsystem, lifecycle view of regulation and requires a proactive and collaborative approach. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
UNCLASSIFIED Joint venture airports The Ministry administers a multi year appropriation ( to )) to manage the Crowns percent interest in Westport, Whakatne, Whanganui, Whangarei, and Taup joint venture airports The Milford Opportunities Project (MOP) is currently feasibility testing the MOP Masterplan, which was developed by a group including local authorities, central government, and Ngi Tahu. It makes significant recommendations regarding the preservation of and visitor experience at Milford Sound Piopiotahi, which could have significant implications for conservation, tourism, transport, and resource management You have a vital role in overseeing the delivery and performance of key transport agencies Your oversight role, supported by the Ministry, is vital in ensuring the transport Crown entities are effectively performing their functions, many of which deliver critical services to New Zealanders. Below are a range of accountability mechanisms that the Ministry will advise you on to assist you in overseeing the transport Crown entities and meeting your statutory responsibilities. Table Accountability mechanisms Accountability Mechanism Description Letter of Expectations Primary mechanism used to set the priorities and performance expectations on an annual basis. You can expect to receive draft letters from the Ministry around OctoberNovember. These letters are sent out well in advance of the financial year, so that Crown entities can respond effectively. Statement of Intent Sets out the entitys strategic intentions against the Governments priorities and direction. The Statement of Intent is developed by an entity for at least a four year period. Statement of Performance Expectations Sets out the entitys annual delivery and performance expectations against your Letter of Expectations and the Statement of Intent. Entities are required to provide their final drafts of their Statements of Performance Expectations for your comment before May each year. Annual Report Sets out entities annual non financial and financial performance against the expectations set out in the Statement of Performance Expectations. You can expect to receive annual reports from each entity around October. Quarterly reporting Performance reporting provided by the entity against the priorities and expectations set out in the Statement of Performance Expectations.
UNCLASSIFIED maximise our ability to influence international standards that directly affect our transport system mitigate the risks from non compliance, including safety, security economic and reputational risks draw on international expertise to support domestic policy outcomes. This is particularly important for emerging transport technologies and policy issues better support transport agencies to deliver their core roles particularly CAA and MNZ, who are heavily engaged in international work at an operational and technical level contribute to wider New Zealand policy outcomes, such as emissions reduction and engagement with Pacific Island countries. Your engagement at the international level is important Airlines are able to operate international services only where the right to do so has been expressly permitted in a bilateral air services agreement (ASA) or one of the limited number of multilateral agreements. The Ministers of Transport and Foreign Affairs jointly approve the mandate for air services negotiations and approve the outcomes where they involve a treaty action. Most recently, a new air services was agreed in September , following the latest ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations ) Working Group Meeting on Regional Air Services Agreement. This underlines the importance of air connectivity for trade, tourism, education and other people topeople links . The Ministry will provide advice on where we consider there will be good value in your engagement in Ministerial level forums. Key opportunities over the next year may include: The Transport and Infrastructure Council. The Council brings together Commonwealth, Australian State and Territory, and New Zealand Ministers with responsibility for transport and infrastructure issues, as well as the Australian Local Government Association. Pacific Transport Ministerial level meetings. New Zealand has a direct interest in the safety and security of Pacific Island countries transport systems, given our aviation and maritime links with the region and the number of New Zealanders who travel regionally under normal circumstances. The New Zealand Aid Programme funds MNZ to deliver the Pacific Maritime Safety Programme, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade funds CAA to deliver the Pacific Aviation Security Capacity programme. There is also a place for increased engagement and experience sharing at a policystrategic level. Wider collaboration within the Transport System Local government, the private sector, researchers and iwi are also key players in shaping the transport system. Many parts of the system are outside of governments direct control. For example, in the freight, aviation and maritime sectors, the majority of decisions are made by the private sector. Local government also plays a particularly significant role in regional level transport investments. Effective, meaningful engagement with stakeholders, is critical to achieving government priorities. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT WIDER COLLABORATION WITHIN THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM UNCLASSIFIED Briefing to the Incoming Minister
UNCLASSIFIED t o respond to the challenges within our supply chain system, the Aotearoa New Zealand Freight and Supply Chain Strategy has been developed to provide a long term strategic direction for a more productive and resilient system. In addition, new planning tools have been put in place to establish a medium to long term direction for the rail network. The New Zealand Rail Plan sets out a strategic objective to return New Zealands rail network to a resilient and reliable state. Rail is an essential mode of transport for certain commodities. It is important to the productivity of our port network, with our major ports in Tauranga, Auckland, and Christchurch particularly dependent on rail connections. The Rail Plan reflects the long term nature of rail as an asset, and the need to coordinate investment across several agencies and sources. The Rail Plan is not a statutory document. There are also several short term transport sector delivery plans , many of which are governed by Acts of Parliament and are key components of the transport planning and funding system . For example: the Govern m ent Policy Statement on Land Transport (GPS) , where you set Waka Kotahis investment and planning priorities every six years, with a review at three (this is covered in more detail under Investment and Revenue as a lever on page XX). the programme of road policing activities that you approve under the LTMA for funding every three years (i.e., the Road Safety Partnership Programme). the Rail Network Investment Programme produced by KiwiRail under the LTMA that you approve for funding every three years. The Rail Network Investment Programme has brought greater resilience and reliability to rail freight services. Transports role within the wider system There are other important levers that transport do not own, but there are actions that can be taken to influence these. For example, land use is an important lever that requires cross system collaboration and agreement. If we want public transport to be well used, this can be supported by land use zoning in areas to enable higher density development. Given its role as a key enabler of social and economic connections, the transport system intersects with a wide range of other systems at the local, national and global levels. Figure below illustrates some of the key relationships with the transport system. This underlines the need to coordinate and recognise the impacts that decisions in transport may have on other sectors.
UNISCS Timeline Adjustment in Response to COVID
UNISCS Timeline Adjustment in Response to COVID (no )
Unable to attribute to outcomes at this point The level of confidence in the evidence is not how confident are we that the GPS had a positive impact but rather how con fident are we that the evidence is good enough to let us judge APPENDIX CRITERIA SELECTION
Unblocking the Basin Reserve is estimated to cost NZD million. This will reduce conflict between different movements and types of transport and make it easier to travel through the Basin Reserve.
Under CORSIA, aeroplane operators will be required to purchase offsets, or emission units, for the growth in carbon dioxide emissions covered by the scheme.
Under section of the Crown Entities Act (CEA) the Minister of Transport directed the
Under the Act, owners must prove to Maritime New Zealand that they hold insurance or some other financial security to pay for any pollution they cause. This gives the Crown and the public more confidence in the operation because:
Under the Alliance, the two airlines coordinate their operations between and within New Zealand and China. The Alliance provides for varying levels of cooperation between the airlines on:
Under the Emissions Trading Scheme a levy of cents per litre (plus GST) is charged on every litre of petrol sold in New Zealand. Uptake of low emissions vehicles and fuel efficiency information The AA supports encouraging the uptake of lower emission vehicles, including electric vehicles, as a means of reducing the environmental footprint of the land transport system. Should the uptake of low emission vehicles increase substantially, we note that there will inevitably be a shortfall in road user revenue going into the National Land Transpo rt Fund which will need to be addressed, due to declining fuel excise and the (currently temporary) road user charge exemption for electric vehicles. We also support the ongoing provision of information on vehicle fuel efficiency (through EECAs fuel econ omy labelling programme), and educating consumers on the operating costs of different vehicles, to help them make informed choices. Alternative fuels Biodiesel offers a significant opportunity to reduce internal combustion engine emissions. However, the current regulatory regime incentivises bioethanol over biodiesel through an exemption on fuel excise, which should be addressed. Biofuels are one potential solution to the emissions of our relatively small heavy vehicle fleet which currently consume signif icant quan ities of fuel as well as for light passenger vehicles.
Under the GDLS drivers were not meant to stay on a learner or restricted licence indefinitely. However, at that time, of learner licence holders had held their licence for more than years and had held it for more than years. For restricted licence holders, had held their licence for more than years and had held it for more than years.
Under the Meteorological Services Act , the Minister of Transport is responsible for ensuring
Under the framework, RCAs will introduce safer speed limits around schools over the years of the Road to Zero strategy, which will include reducing speed limits:
Under the new regime, a police officer would be able to stop any driver of a motor vehicle and administer an oral fluid test, even if they do not have good cause to suspect a driver has consumed drugs. This is consistent with the existing approach to drink driving enforcement.
Under the new regulatory system set out in the Bill, SPS drivers would still need to hold a passenger (P) endorsement to ensure passengers can feel safe, regardless of the particular service they use. However, the removal of some requirements, including the need to take a course to get the P endorsement, meant the cost of obtaining P endorsements would be reduced.
Under the proposed new rules anyone riding a device on the footpath must give way to pedestrians, not exceed a speed limit of kmh, and the device must be no wider than cm. After consulting with their local community, local authorities would be able to reduce the maximum footpath speed limit and restrict which devices can be used on certain areas of footpaths or at particular times, such as during busy times or in areas with lots of pedestrians. The new rules also propose to allow people to cycle on the footpath this is primarily to allow children to cycle with confidence.
Under the proposed regime, if a driver fails consecutive oral fluid tests that show the presence of a drug, this leads to an infringement offence. Drivers that fail the oral fluid tests can choose to have an evidential blood test if they wish to dispute the results of the oral fluid test.
Under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution . International (BY) Licence, you are free to copy, distribute and adapt Crown copyright material on the website as long as you attribute the material to the Ministry of Transport and abide by the other terms of the licence. You can view a copy of this licence on the Creative Commons website.
Understanding Transport Costs and Charges Project completed
Understanding active travel challenges and opportunities
Understanding and measuring transport costs and charges.
Understanding the different facets of data and AVs such as privacy, ownership, storage, and utilisation
Understanding the network connectivity needed to support automated vehicles in New Zealand
Understanding the policy issues, risks, opportunities and benefits that automated vehicles (AVs) present.
Understanding your audience is crucial to a successful presentation. As part of your research and preparation, make sure you understand who you will be presenting to, so you can make sure that the content and tone of your presentation is appropriate. For example, how and what you present to a group of other government policy advisers will be different to how and what you would present to a community stakeholder group.
Understands the maritime domain
Unfortunately, my time and role at MoT is coming to an end and Ill be nishing this Friday, but I have ccd in our Port team Rebecca and Oscar who are leading this Kaupapa and can provide you with any further information or if you want to discuss this Kaupapa directly with them and provide feedback. Ive also ccd Ben in from MFE as this Port Permit extension project is also apart of the wider RM reforms which MFE is leading.
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
Units and currency In main text In graphs, tables and infographics million (in full) m (when using often in main text) m Correct Incorrect km km kph kph cm cm, centimetres percent, per cent, , . C degrees Celsius RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Unless otherwise specified the copyright of all web pages on this website is owned by the Crown. The copyright of downloads (pdfs), images, and Transport Indicators is owned by the Crown only where specified.
Unless something belongs to that plural dont use an apostrophe in the plural , unless something belongs to that plural Plurals that arent owners, like FAQs Decades that arent owners, like the s Made up words, like ifs and buts, and Ps and Qs .
Unmanned Aircraft Integration Leadership Group
Unmanned Aircraft Integration Leadership Group is established and meets regularly
Until , not being a party to Annex VI had limited material effect. However, a new low sulphur limit for marine fuels was introduced on January . This means that New Zealandflagged ships burning heavy fuel oil need to change to low sulphur fuel. In addition, new global greenhouse gas emissions regulations are also being negotiated at the IMO, and are likely to be put in place under Annex VI by .
Upcoming Cabinet papers Nil this week
Upcoming Media items of release Subject Monday September Regional summer maintenance programme: Several separate releases are planned for the week beginning September , summarising planned regional roadworks activity across the state highway network this summer. Timing of the releases is dependent on the timing of a high level Ministerial summer maintenance media statement. Week beginning September Lower North Island Otaki River Bridge shared path Peka Peka to taki ( PP ) revocation: The latest project newsletter will be shared with select Kpiti media providing an update on both the shared path project and also upcoming PP revocation works. Monday September Top of the South SH Mariri causeway resurfacing: A media release will be sent to Top of the South media on Monday September regarding a weekend closure and local road detour required for highway resurfacing planned for October reminder comms will be sent in October . Week beginning September or September Top of the South SH resilience work, The Wash: A media release will be sent to T op of the South media about resilience works that will see the road level raised at this location in the Wairau valley to mitigate against flooding. The project is funded from the Crown Resilience Programme. Work begins October . Monday September WaikatoBay of Plenty SHB Telephone R oad: A media statement is planned for release on Monday September advising that NZTA is working with KiwiRail towards a solution that may see the level crossing reopened at SHB Telephone R oad. s ()(g)(i) s ()(g)(i)
Upcoming briefings copied to Associate Minister of Transport Nil this week .
Upcoming briefings to Minister of Transport Due Title Week ending Friday October RMS Niagara Update Upcoming briefings to Associate Minister of Transport Due Title Monday October Week ending Friday November International Omnibus: Results of Consultation and Final Decisions This briefing will s eek your agreement to rule changes following consultation on the International Omnibus package. Week ending Friday December Maritime Transport Act Review Joint briefing with the Ministry of Transport on policy options and legislative prioritisation for changes to the Maritime Transport Act. Key updates MV Connemara Maritime NZ is continuing to make enquiries about the Cook Strait ferry, MV Connemara , losing power late Thursday September , south of Wellington. The Strait NZ operated ferry is currently under a detention notice. Over the weekend of September , it moved under its own steam between wharves to unload cargo. It is now located at Glasgow Wharf. The ferry will remain under detention until all conditions are satisfied and Maritime NZ, as the regulator, has assurance about the vessel. To be released from det ention the cause of the power loss must be identified, all repairs need to be made , assurances need to be given by the vessels Flag State (Bahamas) and Classification society and these need to be passed on to Maritime NZ , and Maritime NZ will carry out a Port State Control Inspection.
Upcoming communications and engagement Planned releasepublish What Type Why JulyAugust Make time to make it in time Digital campaign social Educate passengers about what to expect at airport security, including allowing enough time to avoid queues. JulyAugust Make time to make it in time Digital campaign advertising Display and search advertising to educate passengers about what to expect at airport security, including allowing enough time to avoid queues. Targeting will include FIFA world cup spectators. August How to be a pilot junior GAP booklet BAU version update AugSeptember Becoming a licensed aircraft maintenance engineer GAP booklet Minor update and then reprint JulySeptember (multiple dates) Airworthiness and maintenance Face toface workshop with industry Education for owners and operators to increase their understanding of the requirements for maintaining their aircraft September Vector Spring Issue Aviation industry magazine A way of getting relevant information to industry in an easy toread format September November (multiple dates) Plane Talking Face toface workshop This series of seminars, as part of the Work Together, Stay Apart campaign, serves the aerodrome communities and will be held in aero clubs and flying schools throughout New Zealand. There are dates in total. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
Upcoming communications, engagement and education Planned releasepublish What Type Why JulyAugust Make time to make it in time. Digital campaign social . Educate passengers about what to expect at airport security, including allowing enough time to avoid queues. JulyAugust Make time to make it in time. Digital campaign advertising . Display and search advertising to educate passengers about what to expect at airport security, including allowing enough time to avoid queues. Targeting will include FIFA world cup spectators. August How to be a pilot junior . GAP booklet (new version of existing booklet) . Business as usual (BA U) version update . August Drug and alcohol management plans under the new Civil Aviation Act . Engagement with stakeholders through email and online discussion . Seeking feedback on proposals for who will have to develop the plans and which workers would be subject to random drug and alcohol testing. JulySeptember (multiple dates) Airworthiness and maintenance . Face toface workshop with industry . Education for owners and operators to increase their understanding of the requirements for maintaining their aircraft . JulyDecember (multiple dates) Dangerous Goods (DG). Face toface course for industry . To provide training and qualification for the carriage of DG . PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
Upcoming education publications and products Planned releasepublish What Type Why JulySeptember Occurrence Investigation Workshop Face toface event To provide training for operators about investigating occurrences, to comply with requirements under CAR Part September Vector magazine (Spring issue) Aviation safety education magazine To educate the aviation community on various aviation safety topics. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Upcoming papers Please list any Cabinet Paper due for consideration in the next month. Paper name Action Lead Portfolio Committee Committee Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits post consultation report back Transport ECO September
Upcoming papers Please list any Cabinet Paper due for consideration in the next month. Paper name Action Lead Portfolio Committee Committee The Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits Final Policy approval Transport ECO September
Upcoming papers Please list any Cabinet Paper due for consideration in the next month. Paper name Action Lead Portfolio Committee Committee The draft Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits post consultation report back Transport ECO September
Updat e on Passenger Counting technology roll out We have initiated the procurement process for passenger counting equipment (such as LiDAR) infrastructure and related services. We anticipate this infrastructure will be in place by December . Currently, Wellington and Auckland International Airports are the only tier one airports with passenger monitoring data available. In parallel to this work, a multi agency working group has been established to explore collaborative opportunities for collection of airport data. This group is compiling a stocktake of border agency data collection sources to identify gaps in the customer journey. Extending this service to other areas in the airport is also being progressed with a Request for Information (RFI) to be completed to identify ideal end toend passenger sensor solutions that meet wider needs of both the Authority and our border agency partners. s ()(b)(ii) s ()(b)(ii) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Update on New Zealands Accession to MARPOL Annex VI
Update on New Zealands implementation of MARPOL Annex VI
Update on interventions of note There are no significant milestones this week, but work is progressing on other interventions including: The immigration pack information has been finalised and is now with Immigration NZ for inclusion. NZTA will notify you when Immigration NZ ha s confirmed the information has started to be rolled out to new arrivals. Uptake of the VTNZ wrap around support trial for migrants has been slow to . VTNZ expect this to resolve by the end of September . NZTA has increased reporting requirements with VTNZ to more closely monitor this and will work with VTNZ to bolster efforts if engagement remains lower than expected. The first proactive outbound call campaign for people not showing up for multiple booked tests without cancelling (non appearances) will be completed this week. Insights from these customers on why theyre not attending will be collated and shared next week.
Update on interventions: NZTA has been reviewing the testing wait times intervention action plan to ensure prioritisation of interventions in terms of impact and effort and to agree the delivery pathway over the next five months. We will update our reporting in the coming weeks to reflect the refreshed action plan.
Update on proposed transport Orders in Council to speed up cyclone recovery works
Update on the Drone Consultation
Update your browser to view this website correctly.
future state model results
Updates Buller District Council funding NZTA has paused all funding to Buller District Council while it review s and gains assurance that issues identified in KPMG report have been rectified satisfactorily.
Updates South Island severe weather event update Snow, ice and wintery conditions in the Central and Lower South Island resulted in many road closures between Tuesday July and Thursday August . These weather conditions and closures are expected during winter, and NZ Transport Agency Waka Kotahi (NZTA) contractors have managed them all well, however this winter is standing out as temperatures are back to the historic averages, with the previous years being milder. The prolonged negative temperatures experienced in places have meant more resource intensive de icing and gritting from our contractors. Road closures: Tuesday July: SH Lake Pukaki to Mt Cook: CLOSED due to snow SH Omarama to Lake Pukaki: CLOSED due to snow SH Lake Pukaki to Fairlie: CLOSED due to snow SH Palmerston to Kyeburn: CLOSED am pm due to snow SH Twizel to Fairlie: CLOSED pm Wednesday due to snow (planned overnight closure pm am due to winter conditions however was extended). Road closure length shortened to Tekapo to Fairlie at Wednesday. SH Lake Pukaki to Mt Cook: CLOSED pm Wednesday due to snow (planned overnight closure pm am due to winter conditions however was extended) SH Springfield to Castle Hill: CLOSED am Wednesday due to snow Wednesday July: SH Fairlie Gudex Rd to SH: CLOSED due to snow SH Palmerston to Kyeburn: CLOSED am pm due to snow SH Twizel to Fairlie: CLOSED (Thursday August) due to snow SH Ross to Fox Glacier: CLOSED am (Thursday August) due to high winds downed powerlines. With road closure lengths shortened at am Thursday August to either side of the powerline worksite. SH Kyeburn to Outram: CLOSED due to winter conditions
Updating relevant Rules for
Upgrade and Removal Programme
Upgrade and Removal ProgrammeWarkworth to Whangrei SH
Upgrading State Highway from the Waimakariri River to Ashley River, including a new alignment around Woodend, will improve safety, provide for more reliable journeys, support regional growth and greater accessibility for Woodend and Pegasus. This work could include additional lanes on SH from Lineside Road to Cam River and a new bypass alignment around Woodend and potential widening for the Ashley River Bridge. The funding made available in the GPS could enable further detailed design and work could start as early as . Construction is expected to take three years to complete.
Upper North Island Supply Chain Strategy
Uppercase is also required when referring to the following:
Uptake of advanced certificates declines substantially with the drivers age at the time of obtaining their full licence ( Figure ). Given that most drivers with advanced certificates obtain a time discount, this suggests that people who obtain their full licence at a younge r age were motivated to progress to a full licence relatively quickly. Most drivers who obtain advanced certificates and get time discounts tend to take close to the maximum discount available. The median time discount for drivers aged to years old at the time of obtaining their full licence in was between to months, while for drivers aged to it was around . months ( Figure ). In Figure , labelled values are the upper quartile, median, and lower quartile time discount for each dri ver age. Some drivers appear to have obtained discounts greater than the permitted maximums of six months or three months. The reasons for this are not clear.
Urban Cycleways Programme set up
Urban cycleways programme
Use a bulleted list to differentiate items in a complex sentence instead of using semicolons.
Use a comma to separate thousands ,.
Use a dash in tables, graphs, infographics or incomplete sentence.
Use a term in full instead of its initials or acronym Use part of the full term after its first use. Examples: Department of Internal Affairs then the Department Ministry of Education then the Ministry
Use commas before and after quoted speech A comma before the first quotation marks introduces quoted speech. Examples: He said , Tomorrow well go to the cafe. Ill be there at one, said Mavis. Dont use a comma after direct speech that ends with an exclamation or question mark Did you see that he asked
Use commas only for clarity If the meaning of a sentence would be clear without commas dont use them.
Use commas to separate information that is not essential to the meaning Separate a phrase or clause when the sentence would have the same meaning with or without that information.
Use language that our audience will understand Avoid language that is bureaucratic, academic, wordy orimprecise. Use everyday terms instead, eg: Use Avoid with accompanying extra additional promote, encourage advance helpful, useful advantageous impact affect
Use lists to split up long sentences.
Use lower case for job titles and locations in subsequent references to the same person or place, except when referring to someone with an official title (see Official Titles below). Example:
Use numerals only in graphs, tables and infographics. Exception:
Use single spaces between sentences. Dont use double spaces.
Use the hour clock Write am and pm in lower case, with no full stops or space after the hour. Use a full stop, not a colon, between the hour and minutes. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Use double quotation marks. Use single quotation for quotes within quotes.
Used imports will be charged one half of the dollar amount of new vehicles.
Using data available from around New Zealand to examine the current and future state of transport demand in New Zealand.
Using the restricted airspace will
Using the same core questionnaire and methodology as the and surveys, this survey was designed to sample a smaller number of households each year so data from a number of years could be combined for analysis.
VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General CONTENTS GLOSSARY OF TERMS EXECUTIVE SUMMARY PURPOSE BACKGROUND CONTEXT BENCHMARK VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORKS POLICY AND FRAMEWORK ANALYSIS RECOMMENDATIONS APPENDIX A NEW ZEALAND DOCUMENT REGISTER APPENDIX B BENCHMARK FRAMEWORKS (UK) APPENDIX C BENCHMARK FRAMEWORKS (AUSTRALIA) APPENDIX D DESKTOP REVIEW OF NEW ZEALAND DOCUMENTATION APPENDIX E MOT STAKEHOLDER WORKSHOP NOTES APPENDIX F STAKEHOLDER WORKSHOP NOTES VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General GLOSSARY OF TERMS ACRONYM MEANING ATAP Australian Transport Assessment and Planning Guidelines BCA Benefit Cost Analysis BCR Benefit Cost Ratio CBA Cost Benefit Analysis DfT Department for Transport GPS Government Policy Statement on land transport HM Her Majesty IAF Investment Assessment Framework IDMF Investment Decision Making Framework LSF Living Standards Framework MoT Ministry of Transport NAO National Audit Office NLTF National Land Transport Fund NLTP National Land Transport Program me NPPV Net Present Public Value NPSV Net Present Social Value NPV Net Present Value NSW New South Wales NZ New Zealand ONRC One Network Road Cl assification PIF Performance Information Framework REG Road Efficiency Group TfNSW Transport for New South Wales TOF Transport Outcomes Framework VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General EXECUTIVE SUMMARY OVERVIEW The Ministry of Transport (MoT) has commissioned Beca and HKA to jointly review its approach to value for money against New Zealand and international best practice and recommend whether and how the value for money framework can be improved (the Review) . This includes developing an implementation plan to assist in the definition, evaluation and monitoring of value for money recommendations in the Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) . The framework may also be applicable to other transport investment s to enable a consistent approach across projects and programmes. This Report sets out the proposed value for mon ey assessment model that will underpin the value for money framework and incorporates feedback from a range of key stakeholders. A high level Implementation Plan (BecaHKA, September ) has been developed separately. Key Dimensions During the process of producing a recommended value for money framework two key dimensions were consistently identified as being significant in understanding and evaluating value for money : . Distinguishing between Efficiency and Effectiveness. . Balancing assessment between Quantitative and Qualitative information. By using the above dimension s to frame the model there is an increased focus on the elements of the delivery process and how these are to be assessed to provide a holistic view of value for money . Systematic Focus on Delivering Effective Outcomes through Efficient Outputs The first aspect that is mentioned almost universally in trying to develop a sense of value , is outcomes. Outcomes are very broadly defined across social, economic and national strategic goals in most definitions across the world. Having a clear definition of wha t outcomes are, how they are defined and a clear articulation of what is trying to be achieved must be the starting point for any value for money assessment. An outcome assessment should be an assessment of the effective impact of delivery on the outcome a s a benefit of New Zealanders. To this end, the Review has placed emphasis on articulating the linkage between New Zealands policy frameworks that set out the national strategic objectives, specifically the Living Standards Framework (LSF), Transport Outcomes Framework (TOF) and the GPS (noting that these docu ments are effectively a hierarchy and as such a natural coalescence is anticipated) . Thus, the first step is the need to build a clear assessment of the alignment to outcomes ( effectiveness ), then the second area of assessment is how efficiently Outcomes are then translated into Outputs . Outputs are the definable and controllable approach to converting intended o utcomes into products or services. M any of the assessment s in this ar ea are focused on the what ( e.g. what are we building or what does the service look li ke). However, the focus should be on the efficiency of conversion of outcomes to outputs requiring a shift in thinking from the what to the how. In order to measure value for money more robustly , there should therefore be a focus on an organisations business requirements, technical standards, and operating methods as a way of measuring whether they are likely to be effective in the selection of outputs and deliver a set of appropriate outputs to achieve overall outcomes . R ole of Value in the New Paradigm Given the articulation of the effectiveness of the outputs in delivery of outcomes in the national context, and an assessment of how efficiently an organisation is going to deliver outputs , then a standard analysis of value for money (such as Cost Benefit Analysis (CBA)) remains a key aspect in forming a holistic view of overall value i.e. the quantitative assessment of efficiency. In support of the traditional CBA , part of which is a Benefit Cost Ratio (BCR), it is increasingly important to recognise that there is a significant amount of data emerging both locally in New Zealand and further afield that indicates the major infrastructure projects delivered are not the best outputs to deliver the VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General original intended benefits or outcomes. Optimism bias is often cited in the infrastructure space in respect of project development and delivery. However, it is generally not accounted for when adjusting for actual operational performance beyond the delivery of outputs i.e. operational performance is also often optimistically stated in the development stages . Therefore, it is recommended that development of benefits gap factor or adjustment is developed to consider the relative track record of various asset class per formance in this area. Including this element in the assessment model will place emphasis on ensuring benefits are effectively managed through development and delivery, and that appropriate monitoring and reporting is undertaken in operations to determine whether stated benefits are ultimately realised. It is noted that this will take time to mature and evolve. However, there is already a significant amount of work underway in th is space including through the previous Investment Assessment Framework (IAF) and the new Investment Decision Making Framework (IDMF) , including development of a more extensive benefits framework . The value for money framework must integrate with and leverage this work. The Human Factor Taking Account of Capacity and Cap ability Finally, and most important ly, is the impact of human behaviour on all aspects o n the emerging thinking above. Capability is often talked about in respect of delivering complex and large scale projects and forms part of G ateway assessment s. Although capability is discussed in depth in several document s and described as being at the heart of project delivery, it is rarely assess ed as part of the value for money case. There is now a real emergence into mainstream thinking of the impact of human behaviour in all aspects of finance and e conomics , through the nascent fields of Behavioural Economics and Behavioural Finance . Therefore, it is crucial that capability and behaviour across the transport investment system sit at the heart of any emerging thinking on truly assessing value for money during both development and delivery phases . Intrinsically linked with capability is capacity, which is defined as having enough of the right capability to deploy at the right time and is critical to delivering program mes and projects successfully. Likewise, capacity is often considered but not adequately assessed in investment decision making. Emerging Value for Money Assessment Model Given the above, the structure of the emerging assessment model is illustrated in Figure below. The model comprises five key assessment elements (. ImpactOutcomes, . Business Requirements, Value Indicators, . Benefits Gap Factor, and . Capacity and Capability), and is framed within two model dimensions Efficiency Effectiveness and Qualitative Quantitative. The nuance in defining what is efficient vs effective and what is measured quantitatively vs qualitatively is reflected in gradated axis of the diagram. Figure Prop osed Value for Money Assessment Model VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General At a high level, the model uses qualitative and quantitative measures of efficiency and effectiveness to determine value for money. For the purposes of this framework, efficiency is defined as delivering optimal outputs with minimal wasted effort or expense and effectiveness is defined as successfully delivering outcomes. The model also positions overall capability and capacity its heart, as the key element linking the four other elements , and is the common thread in t he delivery of value. This is largely a people factor and reflects the need to match capability with the complexity of the future needs of the transport investment programme and to ensure initiatives are adequately resourced. The model integrates these key elements that underpin the selection of programmes and projects . The model aims to provide MoT and the transport sector with a structured basis for evaluating how well proposed program mes and projects address each element and a shared understanding of what delivering value means. These elements are largely already applied in some form by the agencies and it is recognised that New Zealand has many structures in place that support practical implementation . This is including but not limited to : the New Z ealand Council Mark for Capability ; BCR methodologies for Value, and; gateway process es for assurance. Whilst there will be several new aspects that require development, it is considered that these existing structures can be le veraged effectively as part of the detailed design and implementation of the emerging model . As well as defined assessment aspects the model also links to the MoTs c rown monitoring role as there becomes a fixed link between on going delivery, capability and capacity, and outcomes. It is recommended this work links more closely with the MoTs crown monitoring function in the on going development and implementation of this mo del.
VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General
VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General BENCHMARK VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORKS . OVERVIEW Existing value for money framework s from the UK and Aust ralia were researched and reviewed in order to inform the comparative analysis. The UK has a well established guide on how to define, measure and monitor value for money during activities that require the use of public resources , offering an opportunity to identify areas in which the MoT framework can be matured. Australia also has some established guidelines on the subject and was considered of relevance given the relationship with New Zealand and shared market characteristics. . BENCHMARK FRAMEWORKS Value for money frameworks from the UK and Australia were researched and used as benchmark s to appraise the MoT value for money framework. Particular attention was paid to how value for money is conceived, measured, and implemented and whether learnings can be applied to the N ew Zealand context to improve the outcomes from policy initiatives. The below sections provi de a summary of the research findings with full details provided in Appendix B and Appendix C. .. Value for Money in the UK Four key UK government owned documents were reviewed including : Her Majestys (HM) Treasury Managing Public Money . Department for Transport (Df T) Value for Money Framework : Moving Britain Ahead . The Green Book: Central Government Guidance on Appraisal and Evaluation. National Audit Office (NAO) Commissioning Toolkit. ... HM TREASURY MANAGING PUBLIC MONEY Whilst no specific guidance is provided on measurement metrics, it does put the value for money concept at the core of managing public money through appraising options, monitoring the performance of initiatives and post implementation evaluation. ... HM TREASURY THE GREEN BOOK The Green book further develops HM Treasury s Managing Public Money by considering value for money within business cases from five dimension that have been summarized in Table . Table Five Cases of value for money DIMENSION DESCRIPTION Strategic What is the case for change What outcomes are expected and do they align with government policy and priority Economic What is the comparative net value to society Commercial Can a realistic commercial deal be struck Financial What is the impact on public resources Management Are there realistic and robust delivery plans
VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General The Green Book also advises the use of Net P resent Social V alue (NPSV) and BCR to summarise whole of life social cost benefit analysis within the Economic dimension. It further details the use of Benefits Management techniques to ensure social benefits are reali sed as the project or programme is imp lemented. T his includes setting up a benefits register at the outs et that is used to monitor and track actual outcomes delivered versus those intended. ... UK D FT VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK: MOVING BRITAIN AHEAD This document defines value for money as the use of public resources to create and maximise public value. Value is expressed in terms of the total impact on well being of UK citizens, the economy, as well as social and environmental climates . The value for money derived from initiatives is measured acro ss three dimensions including economic purchasing, efficiency in deriving outputs from inputs, and the effectiveness of outputs to achieve outcomes. Aligned with The Green Book, t he document advises the use of benefit cost analysis (BCA) to determine the net benefits expected from transport initiatives in the context of the resources expended to deliver those benefits. More specifically, it advises that benefit and costs are quantified wherever possible to measure the BCA through Benefit Cost Ratios (BCR) and Net Present Public Value (NPPV). The overall value for money offered is reported through categorisation of the overall score taking into account non monetised costs and benefits. This offers a comparable means in which to assess the relative value of different options in achieving wider objectives during early development phases. ... NATIONAL AUDIT OFFICE (NAO): SUCCESSFUL COMMISSIONING TOOLKIT The NAO is an independent organi sation that scrutinises public spending on behalf of the UK Parliament . Through their work, they have defined value for money as the optimal use of resources to achieve intended outcomes. They advise that value for money is an underlying principle in which to deliver in itiatives through an outcomes based commissioning process and should be assessed across three core components : Economy through m inimising the cost of resource used. Efficiency defined as the relationship between resources and the outputs that they derive. Effectiveness of the relationship between the intended and actual outcomes derived from outputs. The NAO also note that Equity is an additional dimension that can sometimes be useful to determine the extent to which outcomes are distributed across society. .. Value for Money in Australia The following Australian Government publications were reviewed: Transport and Infrastructure Council Australian Transport Assessment and Planning (ATAP) Guidelines . Infrastructure Australia Assessment Framework . Transport for New South Wales ( TfNSW) Principles and Guidelines for Economic Appraisal of Transport Investment and Initiatives. ... ATAP GUIDELINES The Australian Transport and Infrastructure Council delivers key reforms in Australias infrastr ucture and transport systems, ensuring they support economic growth, social connectivity, increase opportunities and ultimately enhance quality of life. The council is made up of Commonwealth , State , Territory and New Zeala nd Ministers with responsibilitie s for transport and infrastructure.
VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General The ATAP Guidelines is a transport focused appraisal methodology and w hilst the guidelines do not provide a formal definition of value for money , it does advise that it is measure d as a result o f cost benefit analysis using BCR and NPV metrics. ... INFRASTRUCTURE AUSTRALIA ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORK The assessment framework is used by Infrastructure Australia to consider initiatives and projects to be included on the infrastructure priority list. The framework assesses initiatives according to their strategic fit with government policy objectives, economic, social, and environmental merit as well as deliverability of the initiative. Calculation of BCRs and establishment of benefits reali sation plans are key tools used to appraise the econom y and deliverability of initiatives. ... TRANSPORT FOR NSW (TFNSW) PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ECONOMIC APPRAISAL OF TRANSPORT INVESTMENT AND INITIATIVES TfNSW economic appraisal framework is applied to program mes, projects, and initiatives within the NSW transport portfolio. The framework shows causal relationships between strategic objectives and the aim of providing greatest social and economic benefit for NSW at the greatest v alue. It encourages the use of traditional economic measures including BCR to comparatively measure the value for money of initiatives and inform investment decisions.
VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General POLICY AND FRA MEWORK ANALYSIS . OVERVIEW The following section provides an overview of the existing GPS policy and value for money approach informed by a review of relevant New Zealand documentation and a workshop with key MoT stakeholders involved in the development of GPS and . Key requirements, challenges, and opportunities that the emerging model should address have b een identified. . EXISTING VFM APPROACH A desktop review of various New Zealand material was undertaken to inform the understanding of current value for money practice . The review was based on material up to April and is included in Appendix D . The below section summarise s the key learnings from this desktop review. .. Value for Money in GPS Value for money was first introduced as a concept in GPS and was included as one of four independent strategic priorities . The concept of value for money and GPS approach to it has evolved over time. The latest GPS had again included the requirement to achieve value for money as a standalone strategic priority alongside safety, access, and environment. Within GPS , value for money was defined as delivering the right in frastructure and services to the right level at the best cost. This emphasised the need to report on the achievement of outcomes and improve transparency of decision making. A combination of measures were used to monitor delivery of value for money , inclu ding transparency (e.g. publishing BCR data, visibility of project performance metrics), the performance of actual outcomes delivered against the expected outcomes and expenditures (referred to as benefits in GPS ) . The g overnment agencies outlined in section . give effect to GPS a nd as such play a significant role in delivering value for money . Of these, Waka Kotahi has an integral role in establishing and influencing processes, tools, and systems to manage value for money across the transport investment system . .. Waka Kotahi Waka Kotahi is responsible for developing the National Land Transport Program me (NLTP). The NLTP supports government priorities and gives effect to the GPS. The NLTP contains a three year program me of planned activities and a year forecast of revenue and expenditure. Waka Kotahi relied on several processes, tools and systems to deliver value for money as defined in GPS , which are outlined in Table . Waka Kotahi is reviewing its Investment Decision Making Fr amework ( IDMF) and has recently announ ced a number of adjustments in response to drafts of the next GPS (i.e. GPS ).
VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General Table Waka Kotahi tools and practices to deliver value for money in GPS GPS value for money strategic direction Waka Kotahi response Deliver the right infrastructure and services Use of the Investment Assessment Framework (IAF) to ensure that NLTF investment aligns with the GPS and investment decisions are made consistently across the country for all modes of travel. Ongoing enhancements to the IDMF , most recently incorporating an approach to benefits management and realisation. Investments are at the best costs Provides frameworks and practicespolicies to guide procurement decisions by both Waka Kotahi and Approved Organisations. Undertakes cost efficiency benchmarking to assess the costs and benefits of programmes. Maintains the Economic Evaluation Model to ensure consistent approaches to calculating costs and benefits are followed. Improved returns from maintenance Works with local governments through Road Efficiency Group (REG) to utilise good practice including One Network Road Classification (ONRC) system, and share examples of best practice procurement.
VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General As part of refining the IAF ahead of the National Land Transport Programme , Waka Kotahi ha s recently a range of new tools that address aspects of value for mon ey as part of their IDMF review. In particular: The introduction of a new benefits framework to make identification, measurement and use of benefits easier and more consistent, including quantitative, qualitative and monetised benefits . The replacement of the Economic Evaluation Manual with the Monetised Benefits and Costs Manualand a Non Monetised Benefits Manual . Enhancements to guidance on business case development to assist right sizing of business casesbased on risk and complexity . Enhancement of processes for assessing b usiness cases, including assessment of monetised and non monetised benefits and consideration of a wider range of outcomes . Capability building initiatives to help the sector confidently apply to tools that have been developedand to build a community of practice for business case development . .. The Transport Investment System ( as a whole ) The signals sent within the GPS since , and the way in which they have driven evolution of Waka Kotahis investment management frameworks , have influenced how the trans port sector in New Zealand thinks about value for money . In parallel , other lead agencies such as Treasury and the Productivity Commission ha ve been producing similar guidance that touches on aspects of the transport system and carry a consistently evolvi ng theme regarding value for money , such as: Clarity of outcomes . Whole of life costs . Benefit realisation and benefits management . Efficiency and effectiveness . Confidence in decision making processes. The statutory frameworks enable these concepts to be given life but are not prescriptive. The review shows that the themes and concepts that underpin the policy approach to value for money are consistent but that implementation into practice has not been uniform across all aspects of the trans port investment system. Alignment and consistency between agencies could be strengthened. For instance, at a strategic level, outcomes are emphasised over output but beyond the strategic level, the value for money story becomes less clear as benefit real isation and benefit management is rarely reported and when it is there is no consistent and accessible approach to reporting. .. Local Government The review demonstrates that Local government in New Zealand ha s made a lot of progress over the last years or more to understand and link their communities desired outcomes (or levels of service), their willingness to pay, and the trade offs they are willing to make. However, this outcome and customer benefit stor y is not always clear when applied nationally (due to inconsistent use of measures) or for nationally funded activities where the value for individual customers or local communities is harder to articulate. Waka Kotahi and Local Government New Zealand (LGN Z) ha ve also identified capability and capacity development as key areas of focus, particularly for business case development and asset management practice. The interventions being put in place to develop business case capability and the local authority REG Excellence Programme are significant interventions that will assist embedding value for money thinking in the system.
VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General .. Ministry Stakeholder Feedback Select MoT stakeholders were engaged to participate in a one hour workshop to provide the Review team i nsight into the existing value for money framework, its evolution and current challenges faced. The feedback was used to inform the initial development of the proposed value for money framework concepts. ... VFM WITHIN GPS The stakeholders reported that the existing approach establishes value for money as a standalone concept to other strategic priorities within the GPS. This has meant that the value for money concept has not been integrated across GPS strategic priorities or used to underpin investment decisi ons and has instead been interpreted as a standalone reporting requirement. In response to the challenges, GPS is seeking to establish value for money as a means of evaluation to inform decision making across the strategic priorities, however GPS showed value for money measures needed to be improved. The revised approach (where value for money is embedded across the strategic priorities) is considered consistent with other good practice frameworks and represents a logical maturation of the MoTs value for money approach . With this revised approach, value for money should be considered as a core component of delivering each strategic priority. ... INTERPRETING VFM Stakeholders revealed that there are often challenges because of having a lack of a common language. Currently, value for money often has different meaning for different areas of investment (i.e. what is considered of value differs depending on the area of investment) . Therefore, there are inconsistent interpretations across organisations and teams. It was noted that Waka Kotahi is currently implementing an initiative to create a cultural shift in terms of benefits management, and subsequently trying to co nsolidate the language used to address inconsistent meanings and interpretations. In redefining value for money , the MoT should seek to standardise the language used across organisations , leveraging established practices and terminology wherever possible. ... ASSESSING VFM The New Zealand Treasurys preferred method for assessing value for money is through cost benefit analysis measured using BCRs. This can often cause conflicts at it does not easily lend itself to approaching appraisals in line with policy dr ivers including the LSF and TOF. It was noted that there is little visibility in the MoT on how value for money is considered when making project or program me decisions as well as a lack of an effective mechanism for reporting performance against the inte nded value for money . In order to better discharge its resp onsibilities, the MoT is seeking greater transparency in how value for money is considered in the decision making pro cess and reporting performance in delivering value for money . Full notes taken from the workshop are provided in Appendix E. . COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS Table is an initial analysis of how the relative jurisdictions identified compare on key common value for money elements . This is a subjective analysis based on reading the policy and the Review team s extensive experience in operating in these jurisdictions. Each element has been categorised as either strong, medium, or low depending on the how well each framework addresses each key value for money element. VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General Table V alue for money comparative analysis VALUE FOR MONEY ELEMENT UK GREEN BOOK IAA TFNSW NZ MOT Intended Benefits Outcomes Medium Medium Medium Medium Outcomes translated into outputs Low Low Low Low Methods for undertaking cost benefit analysis Strong Strong Strong Strong Consideration of operational performance Medium Low Low Low Influence of c apability and capacity Medium Low Medium Low Measures of efficiency (delivering optimal outputs with minimal wasted effort or expense) Strong Medium Medium Strong Measures of effectiveness (successfully delivering outcomes) Strong Low Low Strong Quantitative measures Medium Medium Medium Medium Qualitative measures Medium Medium Medium Medium T his highlights that existing approaches across jurisdictions, tend to ignore the translation of intended outcomes and benefits to physical outputs . Understand ing what must be delivered in order to achieve policy outcomes is an important step in defining projects and program mes. The analysis shows that the NZ approach to value for money has many similarities to that described in the UK Gree n Book. The NZ Treasury Better Business Case guidance places similar emphasis on aligning business cases to the outcomes sought through government policy , ensuring projects and program mes provide value in line with the priorities set. Additionally, both the UK Df T and NZ Treasury provide detailed guidance on the use o f economic appraisals through quantitative cost benefit analyses, to measure the net value to society . In both instances, the use of benefit cost ratios is central to the value for money assessment . Despite these similarities, there is little evidence to suggest that capability, capacity and past operational performance are explicitly considered as part of value for money assessments within the NZ approach. These elements can have significant influence on the effectiveness of projects and program mes to deliver the intended outcomes, and their efficient use of resources. . REQUIREMENTS, CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES .. Government Requirements To ensure future initiatives, projects and program mes contribute to improving transport outcomes and intergenerational well being, the MoT , and affiliated transport bodies, require a value for money framework that is aligned to TOF , LSF and delivered through GPS . The value for money framework must align the principle s, measures, and implementation methods such that i t enables greater success
VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General in delivering outcomes for the community in line with the intended outcome sought through these frameworks. Additionally, the value for money model must align to and enable adherence to relevant polic ies set by other government agencies where applicable . These include : The analysis of benefits from a national economy perspective as preferred by NZ Treasurys Cost Benefit and Better Business Case Guidance. Complem enting and aligning with NZ Treasury Better Business Case Guidance and the scope of its application . Making use of cost benefit analysis consistent with the NZ Treasury Cost Benefit Primer, CBAx tool and the Ministrys standards. Aligning operational app roaches from agencies such as the Waka Kotahi IDMF . .. Key Challenges and Opportunities The desktop review of relevant New Zealand documentation, benchmark frameworks from overseas, and MoT stakeholder feedback has highlighted a number of key themes that have provided a focus for the development of improvement recommendations. These include: Recognition of the importance of outcomes but a lack of a system atic approach to achieving and monitoring them over time. Value for money metrics, both within New Zealand and further afield, are typically applied on the basis of growth economic measures and not on broader living standards (despite the existence of policy statements to the contr ary in some instances , including the LSF ). Additionally, there is an opportunity to a ssess non transport related outcomes that are enabled by transport interventions (e.g. employment, economic development , urban development etc). Policy setting agencies, such as the MoT, lack ing proactive management andor visibility on program me and project implementation . Lack of consistently applied and effective mechanisms for reporting on whether outcomes (benefits) have been achieved at the project , program me or portfolio level through benefits realisation or benefits management . This is complicated by the fact that outcomes can only be assessed years after the initiative has been implemented. Failure to measure and report on whether benefits have been achieved means there is a lack of a feedback loop and basis for continuous improvement. Recognition of capability as a significant enabler to achieving value for money , however, there is a lack of processes, systems and tools to consider its influence in investment decision making at the outset. Understanding the perspectives and tangata whenua and how best to reflect different world views and values into concepts such as value for money. The desktop review highlighted improve ments are already being addressed within Waka Kotahis work on the IDMF and many processes, tools and systems are already in place within other agencies. The value for money framework has the opportunity to bring these elements together to demonstrate how they collectively contribute to value for money assessments across the system .
VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General RECOMMENDATIONS . OVERVIEW Value for money has traditionally been measured as a product of quantified CBA and reported through BCRs. Whilst value for money framework s still use BCR to measure the economic viability of projects and program mes, some framew orks, including th ose employed in the UK ha ve evolved to also place emphasis on broader policy and whole life deliverability considerations. The existing MoT value for money framework contained within GPS established value for money as a standalone strategic priority that was largely interpreted as a reporting requirement that utilised BCR to determine value for money . GPS offers the MoT an opportunity to ali gn the value for money framework with broader intergenerational well being outcomes sought through the LSF and TOF. . STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT The development of the proposed value for money framework has been informed by New Zealand government stakeholders involved in the deliver y of NLTF funded projects or program mes. Workshops were undertaken following completion of initial concept development and include d appropriate members of New Zealand Treasury, Waka Kotahi, business case practitioners, regional councils, and local council. Key feedback on the initial concepts and corresponding amendments to the proposed value for money feedback are provided in Table . The notes from the workshops are provided in Appendi x F. Table Stakeholder feedback Feedback Response The term Totex Ratio is not familiar in the New Zealand context . The propo sed framework has replaced Totex Ratio with Bene fits Gap Factor . Each of the framework quadrants has elements of qua ntitative and qualitative assessment methods as well as influence of efficiency and effectiveness. Therefore it would be more accurate to sh ow each axis as a sliding scale. Explanation of the model recognises that there is not a hard boundary between the qualititaive and quantitative elements of the model. The quantitativequalitative and efficiencyeffectiveness ax is have been revised to show that there is gradation between the se elements . Howe ver, this is still considered a useful dimension to frame the assessment model elements. The application of the model at the transport system level across the investment portfolio is unclear and requires clarification. Description of the assessment model has been amended to clearly articulate that the model is designed to apply system wide and at the project programme portfolio levels. The implementation plan will address how this will be applied. The framework explanations need to be strengthened to inform those who have not had involvement in its development. Definitions of the framework elements have been strenghtened to aid intepretation and avoid confusion.
VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General . FRAMEWORK Figure provides an overview of the key elements of the recommended value for money framework to successfully overcome the current challenges face d by the MoT. The framework guides the overall consideration of value for money across the system by bringing together a value for money assessment model, its scope and application and mechanisms fo r ongoing implementation mechanisms, all of which are guided by a set of fundamental principles. Each of the key elements are described in more detail in the below sections.
VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General
VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General . Impact Outcomes The assessment model recommends that an initial impact and outcomes assessment is undertaken , to determine whether strategic government policy has been translated into outcomes. To be effective in delivering outcomes through initiatives, projects, and program me, they must first be clearly defined and articulated at the outset. . Business Requirements From this , the next step is to assess whether desired outcomes have been translated into business requirements that are fed down into the organisation from which to derive output solutions. Business requirements are the set of high level technical, operational and functional requirements that the output solu tion must meet in order to deliver the intended outcom es. . Value Indicators Once output solution s have been defined, it is then recommended that traditional benefit cost analyses and benefit cost ratios are utilised to quantitatively measure how efficient each solution delivers against the business requirements. Retainin g the use of benefit cost analysis also allows the model to uphold New Zealand Treasury business case requirements and guidance . . Benefits Gap Factor It is recommended that a benefits gap factor is applied to the total whole life cost estimate of solutions to account for the potential that outcomes and benefits stated in the business case are not achieved from the outputs delivered. Therefore, requiring additional investment to achieve the desired benefits and biases in calculating forecast expenditure. The benefits gap factor can be informed by agency past performance in successfully delivering benefits. . Capacity and Capability The model is und erpinned by the capacity and capability of those involved in the complete process, and acknowledges the influence that skills, capabilities, and behaviours have on delivering successful results. As such, it is advised that this is taken accou nt of when appraising initiatives, projects and program mes and the value for money they offer. .. Scope and Application The scope of application is assumed to be across all transport related investments. The Implementation Plan (BecaHKA, September ) details the specific application criteria and how these will be deployed across the transport system . .. Mechanism Figure provides a means to perceive value for money maturity and support the development of the emerging value for money model . Traditional value for money models deal largely with BCR analys es based on quantifiable data and in some instance s supplemented with broader Outcomes that are trying to be achieved, and thus giving decision makers real knowledge. In several of the UK examples , and specifically through the Green Book approach , HM Treasury are moving towards develop ing real insight into a business case by encouraging insight across multiple dimensions. However, it does not account for the capability perspective enough which is where real insight and value can come from. VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General T he mechanisms through which the proposed model could be reasonably applied has been addressed in the Implementation Plan (BecaHKA, September ). . ALIGNMENT TO GPS GPS has incorporated some of the main value for money concepts proposed within this framework. The three principles included in GPS are alignment to strategic direction, effectiveness and efficiency. This is consistent with the high level elements of the proposed framework. The implementation plan will provide more direction on the delivery a nd implementation elements of the proposed framework, such as business requirements and capability. This will include the way value for money should be considered and expressed for projects and programmes requesting funding from the Land Transport Fund going forward, and how this will be fed back to Waka Kotahi and Ministers. Figure Maturity of Information and Understanding
VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General PURPOSE . PURPOSE OF THIS REPORT The purpose of this Value for Money Framework Review report (the Report) is to present the findings of an assessment of the Ministry of Transports (MoT) approach to assessing, monitoring and evaluating value for money . Emphasis has been placed on understa nding the strengths and limitations of the value for money approach adopted in Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) , how this compares to good practice in other jurisdictions, and how an optimised approach can be developed account ing for broader New Zealand Government policy (e.g. the New Zealand Living Standards Framework). The Report provides recommendations on how t he MoT may optimise the way in which value for money is defined and evaluated in the future. It provides recommendations on an assessment model that can be incorporated to evaluate value for money outcomes through GPS . . INTENDED AUDIENCE The intended audience for this Report includes internal MoT staff, particularly those involved in the development of GPS , as well as select representatives from other organisations impacted by the scope of the review as determined by the MoT. . OVERVIEW OF THE REVI EW The MoT is responsible for the development of the GPS , which is informed by the strategic objectives set out in the Transport Outcomes Framework and provides guidance on how the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) is to be invested. At the time of commissi oning this review, the MoT was developing GPS and was exploring alternative ways to articulate and embed value for money. At the same time, r ecent Performance Information Framework (PIF) reviews have outlined the challenges MoT is facing and provided several recommendations. Given the Ministrys stewards hip and leadership roles for the transport system, the recommendations were centred around four key areas ; achieving clarity of purpose; developing a medium term strategy underpinned by strong analytics; growing MOTs capability for collaboration; and re booting the organisation. In response to these recommendations and to ensure the Government continues to achieve the best value for money outcomes from its transport investments, the MoT has sought to review and optimise the way in which value for money is assessed , monitored and evaluated in the context of GPS. There will be a primary focus on Waka Kotahi given its crucial role in implementing the GPS . A partnership between Beca and HKA was established to undertake a review (the Review) of the current MoT value for money framework , as well as the review of international frameworks. With the intent to produce strategic recommendations on an appropriat e value for money framework applicable to GPS and a high level implementation plan . It is anticipated that the framework will be relevant and applicable to other transport modes and investment models. The Review has been undertaken following a two phased methodology illustrated in Figure .
VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General
VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General BACKGROUND CONTEXT . OVERVIEW This section provides an overview of the concept of value for money within the New Zealand policy context and provides background information on key Government frameworks and relevant agencies. A list of the relevant New Zealand documentation reviewed is contained in Appendix A. . THE VALUE FOR MONEY CONCEPT The definition and understanding of value for money often varies between groups , and individual government agencies depending on the perspective taken. Regardless of how it is perceived, value for money is commonly understood as the level of resources expended to achieve a positive impact. Moreover, it is a method used to assess whether the expected outcomes of an activity outweigh the use of resources to deliver that activity. . CURRENT PO LICY AND FRAMEWORK .. The Living Standards Framework The New Zealand L iving Standards Framework (LSF) is a tool developed and owned by Treasury to support and encourage the development of public policy on wellbeing, spending and other government agency interv entions that is aligned to achieving higher living standards and intergenerational well being for New Zealanders. It is an overarching model applicable to all government agencies and has been translated into a transport context through the MoTs Transport Outcomes Framework (TOF). The LSF includes twelve domains of current wellbeing outcomes; four capital stocks that support wellbeing now and into the future, and risk and resilience. Figure illustrates the LSF. Figure Treasury Living Standards Framework VALUE FOR MONEY FRAMEWORK PAGE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Sensitivity: General .. Transport Outcomes Framework The T OF was developed by the MoT in collaboration with other government agencies . This is an enduring framew ork that aims to make it clear what New Zealand wants to achieve from the transport system, with the overall purpose of supporting improved well being and liveability . Figure illustrates this framework. Figure Transport Outcomes Framework The TOF provides a common framework for transport agencies to align their strategic directions and goals to the se five outcomes . This is underpinned by the guiding principle of mode neutrality, ensuring all transport modes are considered in delivering against the outcomes. .. Government Policy Statement on land transport The GPS is owned by the Minister of Transport and sets out th e priorities for expenditure from the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) and how funding is allocated between different land transport activit y classes. GPS outlines the governments strategy to guide land investment over a year period and is refreshed every three years. GPS strategic priorities include safety, better travel options, improving freight connections, and climate change with value for money as an underpinning principle that guides transport investment decisions. The intended outputs to be delivered through the GPS will contribute to the delivery of TOF and LSF outcomes. . AGENCY STRUCTURE The MoT is the New Zealand Governments principal transport advisor, pro viding policy advice and support to Ministers across all transport mod es (maritime, aviation and land transport) . Figure provides a snapshot highlevel overview of the New Zealand land transport operating structure including other agencies involved in the transport investment system .
VDAM Rules come into effect
VDAM Rules reviewed and consulted on
Value Ratio Economic Evaluation Manual (EEM) The framework is in development and the workshop outputs will be used to inform the further development of the framework.
Value for Money Framework Review
Value for Money Review Summary April Overview Beca Ltd , in con junction with HKA, was commissioned by Ministry of Transport (MoT) to review and optimise the way in which the MoT defines, monitors and evaluates value for money (the Study) . As part of that commission we have collated, and where necessary summarised, information from all relevant New Zealand sources on VFM requirements. This includes past and present frameworks and delivery.
Value for Money Review Summary April Statement of intent https:www.transport.govt.nzab outgovernancestatementsofint entstatement ofintent The Statement of Intent is consistent with the policies and performance expecta tions of the Government.
Value for Money Review Summary April The governmen ts long term outcomes for transport are the same to MoTs Statement of Intent.
Value for Money Review Summary April
Value for Money Review Summary April The Annual report notes the outputs achieved and sets out financial management information for the ministry.
Value for Money Review Summary April The financial management system focuses on performance and value formoney to help the Government translate its strategy into action, promote informed decision making and accountability, encourage a responsive and efficient state sector, and deliver benefi ts to the public. Aspects of performance the state sector must focus on include: coordinating what the Government does and ensuring it achieves its policy goals (which may or may not require collective acti on) improving outcomes and value for money costeffective delivery against performance expectations ethical behaviour, including the fair treatment of all New Zealanders improving efficiency (and avoidance of waste) compliance with legal obligations, rules and budgets proper supervision, maintenanc e and use of the States assets awareness of the operating environment, what is working, what is not working and the need to shift priorities, spending and practices. All these perspectives are embedded in the financial management system.
Value for Money Review Summary April The Treasury, as lead for the investment management syst em, has responsibility for leading benefits management across government.
Value for Money Review Summary April increases confidence in delivery of required project benefits to time and budget Gateway is applied in a number of international jurisdictions including the United Kingdom, the Netherlands and Australia. It was implemented in New Zealand in on the direction of Cabinet, and to more than reviews have been completed.
Value for Money Review Summary April
Value for Money Review Summary April Summary: Treasury has a strong focus on making value for money decisions. The Better Business Case model has had a strong influence on the transport sector to inform smart investment decisions for pu blic value. State Services Commission guidance on value for mon ey State Services Commission Annual Report https:ssc.govt.nzassetsSSC SiteAssetsCorporate ServicesSSC Annual Report .pdf This report provides the Commissioners report on the perform ance of the State services and information to Parliament and the public on the performance of the State Services Commission.
Value for Money Review Summary April narrower focus on monetised benefit cost ratio calculati ons as a proxy for value for money that emerges as projects move through their lifecycle.
Value for Money Review Summary April Literature Summary Task: Collate and where necessary summarise information into a form that the HKA team can analyse and draw conclusions from Collate, compile into a package of information and summarise all value for money requirements from relevant NZ sources Publication Docum ent reference Text relating to Value for Money Is this a summary or direct text Shared themes (themes a, b, c, d, e and f are explained at the end of this document) Legislation Land Transport Management Act (as of October ) http:www.legislation.govt.nzac tpubliclatestDLM .html Section Purpose contribute to an effective, efficient and safe land transport system i n the public interest.
Value for Money Review Summary April
Value for Money Review Summary April
Value for Money Review Summary April
Value for Money Review Summary April selecting the lowest price but rather the best possible outcome for the total cost of ownership (or whole oflife cost). Value for money is achieved by selecting the most appr opriate procurement method for the risk and value of the procurement, and not necessarily by using a competitive tender.
Value for Money Review Summary April Value for Money objective: a land transport system that delivers the right infrastructure and services to the right level at the best cost. To deliver value for money, the focus is on investments that provide the best possible value to New Zealanders. The investment decisions made under the GPS must follow a process that delivers value for money (while considering the Governments priorities), allowing for changes in demand, technology and innovations. The GPS requires delivery of the right infrastructure a nd services to the right level by requiring a rigorous investment appraisal system such as the one used by NZTA to assess projects, as well as enhanced reporting, monitoring and evaluation on how the GPS has been delivered, as well as reporting over longer periods of time.
Value for Money Review Summary April All public bodies involved in providing the land transport system, including the Agency and local authorities, to work togeth er to improve the systems performance. The Agency, Governments delivery agent, to continue to take a leading role in securin g improved effectiveness and efficiency within the priorities for investment established by the Government. GPS to continues the process of building and maintaining a sound knowledge base about how the transport system is used, how investment in the n etwork is performing, and the measurable results of those investments on our economic, social and environmental wellbeing.
Value for Money Review Summary April An investment of around billion per year is a substantial invest ment funded from New Zealanders through the National Land Transport Fund. Ensuring New Zealanders enjoy strong benefits in return depends not only on whether the right activities are invested i n, but also on how activities and projects are delivered, how a ssets are managed, and the extent to which costs are minimised.
Value for Money Review Summary April o Health and safe people Protecting people from transport related injuries and harmful pollution, and making active travel and attractive option o Environmental sustainability Transitioning to net zero carbon emissions, and maintaining or improving biodiversity, water quality and air quality o Resilience and security Minimising and managing the risks from natural and human made hazards, anticipating and adapting to emerging threats and recovering effectively from disruptive events o Economic prosperity Supporting economic activity vis local, regional, and international connections, with efficient movements of people and products
Value for Money Review Summary April i Contents Overview . . . . Literature Summary . . .
Value for Money Review Summary April ii Revision History Revision N Prepared By Description Emily Au ton Issued to HKA April
Value for money is often included in business cases as a line item with a focus on the impact of options rather than outco mes. The proposed framework helps to elevate and change the perception of va lue for money across practitioners and decision makers.
Value for money: NZTA uses the IAF to help it achieve value for money in selecting the right investments. This section briefly introduces how IAF can assist to achieve better value for money, by: building off the business case for the programme or activity that has a clear understanding of the problems being addressed, the investment objectives and benefits to be realised, and ensures solution alternatives and options have been appropriately considered assesses the contribution that programmes and activities make against the results sought by the GPS and wider purpose of the Land Transport Management Act provides a consistent means of comparing and prioritising land transport activities based on their relative contributions to results takes into account the potential offering of proposed activities and considers the benefits and costs of solutions in a balanced way.
Value of Rail Report released
Variance from proposed treatment strategy and change in health indicies by ONRC
Variation letter to the Waka Kotahi NZTA COVID Loan
Variation to the master facility agreement dated June for the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF).
Variations by vehicle type and weight
Vehicle Efficiency and Emissions Data
Vehicle Energy Economy Label regulation
Vehicle Exhaust Emissions
Vehicle Exhaust Emissions Rule came into effect
Vehicle Exhaust Emissions Rule consulted on and amended
Vehicle Exhaust Emissions Rule reviewed and
Vehicle Industry Association
Vehicle emissions assessment undertaken
Vehicles and devices used on footpaths, shared paths, cycle paths and cycle lanes are categorised into different groups to help regulators, councils and the public understand where and how they can be used. However, the increased use of new vehicles and devices such as mobility scooters, ebikes and escooters have introduced both challenges and benefits. We need to update how we categorise vehicles and devices to help the Government and councils accommodate new and emerging forms of transport and ensure they are used in a safe way.
Vehicles classified in the Motor Vehicle Register as buses, but weighing kg or less are counted as light commercial vehicles as they are usually physically identical to vans.
Vehicles coming into New Zealand must have ESC. This includes:
Vehicles that are exempt from licensing (typically those used off road) and vehicles that may be licensed, but are not roadworthy (such as those with restoration licences) are not included in the Ministry of Transports statistics.
Vehicles that emit to grams
Vehicles that emit to grams
Vehicles that emit to grams
Vehicles that emit grams or higher
Vehicles that emit one to grams
Version Status Version: . Approved October Version: . March
Vezina, L. (). The Quebec Alcohol Interlock Program: Impact on Recidivism and Crashes. In: Mayhew, D. R., Dussault, C. (eds.) Alcohol, Drugs and Traffic Safety T. Proceedings of the th International Conference on Alcohol, Drugs and Traffic Safety. Montreal, August , . Quebec City: Societe de lassurance automobile du Quebec, pp. .
Vingilis E, Stoduto G, Macartney Filgate MS, Liban CB, McLellan BA. Psychosocial characteristics of alcohol involved and non alcohol involved seriously injured drivers. Accid Anal Prev ; : .
Virgin Australia Virgin Australia, all reported transTasman routes
Visible smoke check Rule amendment
Vision for the future We all share a commitment to delivering a safe and secure transport system that supports and improves the lives of New Zealanders a system that links us all together. And, as we know, the importance of this work has only grown recently.
Visual summary of the changes:
Voas RB, Marques PR, Tippetts AS, Beirness DJ. The Alberta Interlock Program: the evaluation of a province wide programme on DUI recidivism. Addiction ; (): .
Voas RB. Evaluation of jail as a penalty for drunken driving. Alcohol Drugs Driving ; .
Voas, R. B., Marques, P. R. (). Commentary: Barriers to Interlock Implementation. Traffic Injury Prevention (), .,
Voas, R. B., Tippetts, A. S., Bergen, G., Grosz, M., Marq ues, P. (). Mandating Treatment Based on Interlock Performance: Evidence for Effectiveness. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, , .
WCC and GWRC will pay or NZD. billion, which includes capital expenditure of NZD. billion, and
Waihote toipoto, kaua i te toiroa Let us keep close together, not wide apart This whakatauk speaks to the importance of staying connected, maintaining relationships and discussions so that we may keep moving forward together. We use this whakatauk as a reminder of the work in this Review, and how this is just the beginning. It is important now, to continue the work together, to implement the recommendations and carry forward the relationships and dialogue into the next stages, in order to support safer recreation and wellbeing (waiora and mauriora) from the mountains to the sea.SECTION EIGHT FINAL TAKE HOME MESSAGES Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Final take home messages The findings and recommendations in this Report herald a new strategic approach to support the wellbeing of everyone who connects, recreates and operates here in New Zealand and across the NZSRR. These recommendations reflect the pipeline of safety services delivered across the recreational safety and the search and the rescue systems together, to support people to head outdoors and head home safely. . The proposed System Strategy and new look governance and leadership arrangements will ensure that the systems are strategically well connected and coordinated. The proposed arrangements streamline accountability and responsibilities for the System, through the appointment of a Ministerial Oversight Group, Te Manat Waka as the System Steward supported by two Advisory Boards of key leadership organisations in the System including Mori. . The System Strategy, with Wai Puna at its heart, and Mori representation signals a clear intention for more sustained and deeper engagement with Mori across the System. This will act as a springboard to further explore the needs of Mori, and the needs of everyone who is supported by or through the System. Inclusivity and equality through the services delivered and within the organisations involved are vital to a flourishing New Zealand. . The recommendations contained in this Report will: streamline collaboration and coordination between the organisations involved herald stronger commitment to joint ways of working to resolve issues and maximise opportunities support informed decisionmaking to target resources more effectively across the pipeline of services to better support harm prevention outcomes for people recreating in Aotearoa provide the means to enable extra funding to create a more sustainable System with reduced risks support better collaboration with adjacent systems across government to pursue resources and funding to deliver System outcomes develop a sustainable workforce including volunteers who are well supported provide sustainable ongoing funding for the organisations involved. . Following Ministerial consideration of this Report, Te Manat Waka will confirm an implementation plan, with a goal to standup its stewardship capability, finalise the System Strategy, and implement the proposed new governance arrangements and support structures, in order for the new System to go live in mid . . Funding needs identified through this Report will be considered through the next available FED and Government Budget funding rounds. . We reflect that the level of change proposed will require Te Manat Waka to work closely with Mori Kaihaut and organisations across the recreational safety and the search and rescue systems to ensure that they are engaged in this process and that any risks arising within the transition are effectively managed. FINAL TAKE HOME MESSAGES Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue . The highlevel implementation timeframe and activities to establish the new System and System Steward are summarised in Table below. Implementation Table : Proposed implementation timetable for a new System and System Steward Timeframes What September Review Report and Volunteer Plan submitted to the Associate Minister of Transport. The Review Report and Volunteer Plan will subsequently be on the Te Manat Waka website October end June Implementation Design, Planning and Transition to the new System and System Steward October end March Implementation Plan confirmed following appropriate engagement. Design of the New System structure confirmed including: functions of the Ministerial Oversight Group, the Advisory Board, the Mori Khui Advisory Board, and Standing Groups, including membership and Terms of Reference functions of the System Steward, including structural design within Te Manat Waka (e.g., Office or Business Unit), options (size and scale) and costs. The approach to implement the System Strategy and the Volunteer Plan through the water safety, land safety, and search and rescue subsystems confirmed. Cabinet consideration of new System structure, including preferred option (size and scale) and the cost of the System Steward. Mid New OfficeBusiness Unit Leader appointed. Mid end Transition plan and change process confirmed. NZSAR Secretariat transfers to new OfficeBusiness Unit within Te Manat Waka. Recruitment for new positions underway. October on FED funding round (with funding agreements in place by July ). Beginning mid System Stewards Work Programme established. Transition NZSAR Council, NZSAR Consultative Committee, the Wai Ora Leaders Forum, and the Land Safety Forum disestablished, and the new System structure stoodup. July Go Live: New Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue System and System Steward fully operational including: fundingbudget for the System Steward and sector in place work Programme for the System Steward finalised new System Strategy confirmed oversight of Water Safety New Zealand transferred from Sport NZ to Te Manat Waka. FINAL TAKE HOME MESSAGES Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue . In addition, the following work identified within this Report should be progressed over the coming months as detailed in Table below. Table : Other work identified through the Review for progression over the coming months What Who Work to explore roles, responsibility, and funding arrangements for recreational safety around coastal and inland waterways, including perspectives on risk and risk management, and the strategies, tools and funding availablerequired.Te Manat Waka lead working with government, local government, iwi and NGOs Development of a model to forecast future demand for frontline safety and search and rescue services, to enable consideration of the Systemwide capacity (assets and people) required in response, and the configuration of that capacity.NZSAR Secretariat lead, with Maritime NZ including RCCNZ and the Police, NGOs and other organisations as appropriate. Work to determine operational service standards, tasking and day to day management arrangements for helicopter operations including the identification of resources and funding required.Coordinating Authorities, NZSAR Secretariat, and other stakeholders as appropriate. Ongoing work to develop a framework to formalise how NGOs operate and are funded during a nonsearch and rescue event in civil emergencies (e.g., flood work).NZSAR Secretariat, NEMA, Fire and Emergency, the Coordinating Authorities, NGOs and other organisations as appropriate. Preparation of business cases in the next available funding rounds (FED andor Government Budget) to support the continuation of current funding, and provide for: additional baseline funding for NGOs to support the level of services in the System, providing broad public benefits nationally, and funding required to support volunteer networks, and for the volunteers directly, and additional support to funders within the System supporting recreationbased NGOs and smaller communitybased groups delivering recreational safety services . We acknowledge that other Business Cases to address operational issues not covered by this Report are expected and will also require preparation.NGOs, Maritime NZ, Te Manat Waka, and other organisations as appropriate. FINAL TAKE HOME MESSAGES Haumaru Tngata Ki Uta Ki Tai Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue Krero whakakapi Waerea te rangi i t nei Waerea te papa e takato nei Whakapmautia tnei kawa uruora Te kawa ki a Matariki Clear the sky above Clear the sky below Establish the ceremony The formal ceremony of Matariki Waerea seeks to clear space and people from any obstruction in order for the work to commence. This Review has cleared the pathway for us to work together to change our thinking towards safer recreation and wellbeing of people from the mountains to the sea. For the time of the year that we are in we remember Matariki and the importance of each star: Matariki, Phutukawa, Tupunuku, Tupurangi, Wait, Wait, Waipunarangi, Ururangi and Hiwaiterangi. Phutukawa is the star who is connected to the dead or those who have passed on. She encourages us to reflect on the past and to be thankful for those who have contributed to our lives. Reflecting on what we have lost can guide us into the future. Let Phutukawa remind us of the work that we have done, and who this system of Recreational Safety and Search and Rescue is for; he tngata, he tngata, he tngata the people. Huihui te p, Huihui te ao, I te p, i te ao I te ao, i te p Haumi e, hui e Tiki e
Waikato Regional Council has prepared Annual Regional Transport Monitoring reports in a different format in previous years but these were unavailable online. Summary c
Wait times Staffing Staffing Productivity Region Full Change (last week) Restricted Change (last week) DTO Headcount DTO FTE Tests Completed Northland . Auckland North West . , Auckland Central South . , Waikato . Bay of Plenty . Central . Wellington . , Canterbury . , Otago Southland . National Average . ,
Wait times, staffing and productivity for week September At the Monday September Officials meeting you asked NZTA to provide advice on why there is such a significant disparity in the number of licence tests per DTO being completed in each region for example, Wellington completed , tests with DTO between September , but only were completed in Central with DTO over the same period.
Wait times, staffing and productivity for week Monday Sunday September Wait times Staffing Staffing Productivity Region Full Change (last week) Restricted Change (last week) DTO Headcount DTO FTE Tests Completed Northland . Auckland North West . , Auckland Central South . , Waikato . Bay of Plenty . Central . Wellington . Canterbury . , Otago Southland . National Average , .
Wait times, staffing and productivity for week Monday Sunday September Wait times Staffing Productivity Region Full Change (last week) Restricted Change (last week) VTNZ DTO Headcount Tests Completed Northland Auckland North West Auckland Central South , Waikato Bay of Plenty Central Wellington , Canterbury Otago Southland National Average , note: a correction for wait times in Auckland North West for last weeks report. Correct wait times last week were full tests at days and restricted tests at days.
Wait times, staffing and productivity for week Monday August Sunday September Wait times Staffing Productivity Region Full Change (last week) Restricted Change (last week) VTNZ DTO Headcount Tests Completed Northland Auckland North West , Auckland Central South , Waikato Bay of Plenty Central Wellington , Canterbury , Otago Southland National Average Total: ,
Waitemata Harbour Connections (WHC) Indicative Business Case A WHC Alliance f or the proj ec t was confirmed in September . Since then, the WHC Alliance team has commenced technical work and community engagement that was undertaken between November and December , including ministerial representation. Mid will see an emerging preferred options and completion of the Indicative Business Case is scheduled for early .
Waka Kotahi Bridge Design Manual
Waka Kotahi Bridge Design Manual(external link)
Waka Kotahi Clean Car Standard Webpage
Waka Kotahi Clean Car Website
Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency
Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency manages the programme, which brings forward and funds significant projects, allowing them to be built sooner. The package is designed to give the construction industry certainty and confidence about future work.
Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency worked closely with local and central government agencies, power companies, technology providers and the motor industry to develop and publish guidance on public charging infrastructure for electric vehicles.
Waka Kotahi allocates funding for land transport infrastructure and services, and manages access to the transport system through driver and vehicle licensing, vehicle inspections, driving tests and road user charges. It also manages the state highway network.
Waka Kotahi also has two trials to improve access to driver licences underway in Te Tai Tokerau and
Waka Kotahi also stated they have implemented the following budget process for the State Highway Maintenance and Operations activity: o The annual Waka Kotahi state highway maintenance programme is now endorsed by the National Manager Maintenance and Operations and funding is approved annually by the Senior Manager Programme and Standards. o An approach for the prioritisation of available funds across the m aintenance, operations and renewals work categories and their associated work programmes is being refined and proposed to be documented in State highway annual plan instructions manual (SM). o Monthly reports are now prepared by the Programme and Standard s team for the five Regional Managers Maintenance and Operations to review and approve. Regional Managers are required to explain variances in budget, delivery and performance to the National Manager Maintenance and Operations and Senior Manager Programme and Standards. o It is understood that under the new Transport Service Operating Model the Programme and Standards team will lead the development of the renewal programmes for the funding block. These programmes will provide a year proposed investment programme. This will be developed in collaboration with regional teams and their suppliers. Final programmes will be issued to the Maintenance and Operations team for delivery. o A suite of detai led Lifecycle Asset Management Plans (LAMPs) are being developed to inform the proposed forward works programmes for asset renewals and help with future funding proposals. o A detailed review and approval process has been established for investments in bridg e and structures assets including a specific technical approval gateway process. Detailed Lifecycle Management Plans are being maintained. Regular reporting from the Structures Maintenance Contracts is provided to regional maintenance delivery teams. A pri oritisation process is being developed to ensure funding is directed appropriately across the regions. A process is being developed to better track the delivery against risk. o Refinement of the Emergency Works funding and works delivery processes is underwa y. The Activity Class Manager is now required to endorse any funding request prior to release of funds. A detailed workflow process is being developed and will be implemented to establish a consistent approach to recovering the affected sections of network following significant events (Over M).
Waka Kotahi and NZ Infra agreed to respond to the RDD.
Waka Kotahi and NZ Infra submitted their proposals to us on November . We coordinated a confidential evaluation process through which both proposals were deemed credible. In February , the Secretary for Transport provided advice to the Minister of Transport on the appointment of the preferred delivery partner.
Waka Kotahi consulted on the draft amendment Rule and received submissions on the proposed changes, which we took into consideration in finalising the Rule.
Waka Kotahi funding decision
Waka Kotahi has also allocated NZD million to wider Auckland network renewals, including replacing km of worn out track, tens of thousands of sleepers, and over , tonnes of track bed.
Waka Kotahi has general information about individual road tolls. Email:
Waka Kotahi is accountable to the Minister of Transport for its performance. It is accountable to the Ministry of Transport for the delivery of some contracted services, such as rules development. For certain key functions it has statutory independence.
Waka Kotahi is currently reviewing submissions and will prepare a summary of the feedback received. Waka Kotahi is also preparing a Disability Impact Assessment and a revised Regulatory Impact Statement based on the consultation outcomes. Together with the summary of feedback, these will inform our advice to Government on what, if any, changes are required to the package of Rule changes.
Waka Kotahi is responsible for implementing the legislation. This includes:
Waka Kotahi issuing invoicesassessments for purchases that are unreasonable or excessive or abuse the temporary reduction scheme. Waka Kotahi invoices road users at the normal (nondiscounted) rate of road user charges for any distance purchased that is unreasonable, excessive or abusive.
Waka Kotahi led the programme, which has now closed. However, some projects remain underway as the delivery timeframe for Waka Kotahi and Local Government has been extended.
Waka Kotahi must report on revenue raised by the tax and what it costs them to administer it.
Waka Kotahi produces quarterly reports on the impact of the regional fuel tax on fuel prices, fuel distribution in Auckland and compliance with the legislation.
Waka Kotahi received submissions on the proposed changes which were taken into consideration when we finalised the changes. Most submitters supported the move to restrict time on learner and restricted licences to years, and agreed with allowing more flexible transactions. A number of submissions about ID evidence asked that the list of acceptable documents should be more flexible, especially in regard to producing ID with a photograph.
Waka Kotahi released the draft amendment to the Driver Licensing Rule for public consultation. The proposed changes included amending how long learner and restricted licence holders could hold their licences for.
Waka Kotahi released the proposed rule amendments for public consultation
Waka Kotahi should look to improve the administration of claims, which may result in greater efficiencies and lower administration costs
Waka Kotahi supports local government
Waka Kotahi was developing a business case for CCM when in April NZ Infra, a joint venture between the New Zealand Superannuation Fund and Canadian institutional investors CDPQ Infra, submitted an unsolicited bid to deliver CCM. This is the point at which we became involved in the project.
Waka Kotahi The New Zealand Transport Agency Vanessa Browne National Manager Programme and Standards Neil Walker National Manager Maintenance and Operations Wayne Oldfield Senior Manager Maintenance and Operations Jack Hansby Manager Tactical Asset Investment Sulo Shanmuganathan Chief Engineer Margarita Gonzalez Borrero Team Lead Maint enance and Renewal Programme Mark Yaxley Lead Advisor, Investments Partnerships and Policy Rochelle Leach Principal Advisor Maintenance Programmes Hinewai Hausman Senior Asset Investment Advisor Alastair Foster Senior Reporting and Data Analyst John MacDonald Lead Technical Advisor Asset Management Contents FOREWORD REVIEW STEERING COMMITTEE . . EXECUTIVE SUMMARY . . . . RECOMMENDATIONS . . . . INTRODUCTION . . . . KEY REVIEW FINDINGS . . . . KEY REVIEW OBSERVATIONS . . . OPERATIONAL RESPONSE . . . FOREWORD REVIEW STEERING COMMITTEE Tn koutou, On behalf of our organisations, the reviews Joint Steering Committee welcomes and accepts the findings of the Review on State Highway Maintenance. This review is a great result of the collaboration between Te Manat Waka and Waka Kotahi, bringing together the experience of these organisations to identify clear recommendations on how to further improve return on investment for operating and maintaining the state highway network. Our two organisations are committed to ensuring New Zealanders have access to an effective, efficient, and safe land transport system that supports economic growth and maximises value for money for taxpayers, passengers, and road users. For us to succeed, we must continually pursue opportunities to improve our efficiency and effectiveness in all that we do making sure that we get the best possible return on every dollar we spend whilst also ensuring other objectives such as emissions reduction and resilience are being met. This review is a testament to this commitment and sets out a roadmap to further enhance the value that we get from our state highway network. Aotearoas state highway network plays a pivotal role in connecting people and businesses, supporting society, and enabling the economy to thrive. They contribute to economic development and growth and bring important social benefits. Maintaining roads and road infrastructure is, therefore, essential to preserve and enhance thes e benefits. In achieving these benefits, Waka Kotahi must meet the challenges of increasing cost pressures and quality concerns as well as sector wide skills and resource shortages by being flexible and undergoing the significant transformation associated with emissions reduction. The review team saw evidence of positive efforts already underway to address these challenges within Waka Kotahi and concluded that investment is generally effective in terms of outcomes, user experience, customer satisfaction, an d is cost effective given the volume of use. As a result of the review, areas requiring further work andor improvement have been identified and Waka Kotahi is currently in the process of launching a fully resourced improvement programme to address these. It is our belief that the best organisations are also those that are committed to continually driving for greater efficiency and effectiveness in all that they do. The Joint Steering Committee are committed to the continuous long lasting improvement of how we operate and maintain state highways and in showing this commitment will actively monitor and report progress against each of the recommendations from this review.
Waka Kotahi, NZ Transport Agency
Waka Kotahis Clean Car Discount webpage
Waka Kotahis website has further information about the individual projects.
Warkworth to Whangrei State Highway
Waters, G. (). Internationally Recognised Best Practices for Drink Driver Rehabilitation and Drink Driver Rehabilitation in New Zealand. New Zealand.
Waters, G. (). DrinkDrug Driving Data and Preliminary Report on Interlock Uptake in New Zealand. New Zealand Automobile Association, Auckland.
Waters, G. (). Restraints Research: Offences, Offenders and Deceased Non Seat Belt Wearing Occupants in New Zealand
Waters, G. (a). The New Zealand Alcohol Interlock Programme A Process Review
Waters, G. (b). The Mandatory Alcohol Ignition Interlock Sentence in New Zealand.
Watson, B. C. (). The crash involvement of unlicensed drivers in Queensland. In Road Safety Research and Enforcement Conference.
Ways to support higher quality applications to reduce certification churn and increase the speed of certification.
We also advise the Minister of Transport on appointments to transport Crown entity boards, setting and clarifying expectations for each entity, and reviewing board performance.
We also analysed changes over time in night time crash rates by comparing crashes in the combined period from to with the combined period from to (due to data limitations this was only possible for drivers aged to years old). At n ight, the crash rate for fully licensed drivers declined by between these two periods, while the crash rate for restricted drivers only declined by . This provides further evidence that other factors affect the night time crash rate of restricted dr ivers compared to fully licensed drivers. Overall, this analysis suggests that the requirement to have a fully licensed supervisor does not lead to restricted drivers crashing at the same rate as fully licensed drivers of the same age at night. This could be due to some degree of non compliance with the supervision requirement, andor that in practice supervisors are not able to prevent all crashes at night that occur due to the restricted drivers relative inexperience. Other factors could also be respo nsible for this difference, for example, restricted drivers may tend to drive vehicles with lower safety ratings than fully licensed drivers, or restricted drivers who choose to contravene the night time driving restriction may also be more likely to engag e in other risky behaviour such as drinking and driving, or dangerous driving. This analysis does not suggest that the night time driving restriction should be removed given that restricted drivers crash significantly more often than fully licensed driv ers in during both the day (when they are mostly unsupervised) and the night, it is possible that there
We also commissioned Covec to undertake further environmental and economic modelling and considered this along with the submissions in revising the proposed Rule.
We also developed iconography for this website that reflects Hei Arataki.
We also estimated logistic regression models of crash involvement for individual riders to further explore the relationships between CBTA status and crash rates while controlling for rider age, gender, region of residence, and length of time since obtaining a licence (see section .. of the Techni cal Report ). These models produced similar results in terms of the relationships between CBTA status and crash rates at the restricted and full licence stages as those shown in Figure above. That is, the differences in crash rates for riders choosing CBTA versus those choosing practical tests were not statistically significant in our analysis (except for riders who progressed to a full licence with only a CBTA R certificate). However,
We also examined how driver characteristics relate to four year progression status by analysing the cohort of learners aged under (see section .. of the Technical Report ) and estimating logistic regression models to predict their progression as a function of driver age, gender, and region of residence. We found: Rates of progression are very similar across genders, but statistically significantly different. The odds of a male driver progressing to a full licence within four years is around greater than that for female drivers (p value .). The difference in progression across genders has reduced slightly over time.
We also examined how rider characteristics relate to four year progression status by estimating logistic regression models of progression status for the combined to cohort of learners, (see section .. of the Technical Report ). We found: The odds of progressing to a restricted licence within four years were higher for males compared to females (p value .). For those who progressed to a restricted licen ce, the odds of then progressing to a full licence were higher for males than for females (p value .). Fouryear progression status varies with the riders age at the time of obtaining their learner licence. For example, of the people who obtained t heir learner licence in :
We also found (see section .. of the Technical Report ): Advanced certificate uptake is relatively low among drivers aged under living in Auckland and Wellington compared to most other regions. Uptake is relatively high among drivers living in Marlborough, Nelson, Tasman, and Southland regions. Fully licensed drivers aged under years old at the end of who had an advanced driving certificate tended to obtain their learner licences at younger ages compared to people who did not have an advanced driving certificate. This suggests that people who obtain advanced driving certificates are also those who tend to start learning to drive at a younger age. Drivers with advanced certificate s also tended to spend less time at the learner stage compared to people without an advanced certificate. Among drivers aged under years old who were fully licensed at the end of : o Those with advanced certificates spent a median of . months on the ir learner licence if they subsequently obtained a time discount at the restricted stage, or . months if they did not obtain a time discount. o The median learner duration was . months for drivers who did not subsequently complete advanced driver traini ng and get an advanced certificate. Overall this analysis suggests a relationship between the choice to obtain an advanced certificate and a persons motivation to drive, either due to desire or necessity. For example, people who start learning to drive a t a younger age or who live in a less urbanised region are more likely to obtain an advanced certificate. The high uptake of time discounts suggests that their availability appears to be a strong motivation for obtaining an advanced certificate. Compariso n of crash rates for drivers with and without advanced certificates Figure shows a simple comparison of the crash rate for fully licensed drivers aged to years old for the combined period from to by advanced certificate and time discount status. Our analysis found that crash rates for drivers with advanced certificates are not statistically significantly different from those for drivers without advanced certificates ( p values range from . to .). We also performed similar comparisons of crash rates for drivers with and without advanced certificates broken down by the drivers age and region of residence (see section .. of the Technical Report ). Again, the differ ences in crash rates were not statistically significant in our analysis (all pvalues .).
We also found that the way revenue is collected sets up the expectation among road users that it should not be used for activities unrelated to road use, and should:
We also noted that regulations would be needed to decide who would be eligible for a rebate on petrol and diesel for offroad uses.
We also provided advice about:
We also ran engagement sessions in Auckland, Wellington, and virtually as part of public consultation on the PTOM review. Following submissions analysis we also undertook further engagement with key sector stakeholders to refine policy options.
We also reviewed previous investigations and research into congestion pricing for Auckland.
We also send out a newsletter when we have news, an update on our work, an upcoming event or have released new documents about drones.
We analysed the submissions made during the consultation period and met with stakeholders to progress the development of the freight and supply chain strategy.
We anticipate a final business case will be delivered in mid.
We are also engaging with the various working parties of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE), in particular Working Parties and , to stay on developing international standards and policies related to autonomous vehicles. We also frequently engage with our international counterparts in Australia and Canada to exchange insights and discuss matters of common concern related to AVs.
We are also working with likeminded countries to implement the IMOs Initial Strategy on the Reduction of Greenhouse Gas Emissions.
We are building an understanding of how and to what extent we need to futureproof our infrastructure and our investment frameworks to support future technology such as AVs, and what criteria New Zealand should adopt for infrastructure asset standards, maintenance, and management to be more prepared for accommodating AVs.
We are considering the potential impacts of AVs on the future transport system in New Zealand, including both opportunities and risks. We will identify trends and potential issues surrounding the deployment of AVs on public roads, and consider how to best support the safe introduction of AVs onto public roads.
We are currently drafting a new Setting of Speed Limits Rule and expect to release this for public consultation in late .
We are currently working to ensure the draft GPS has a greater focus on reconstruction of damaged infrastructure, as well as building greater resilience so our transport network can better withstand the increasing frequency of extreme weather events.
We are doing targeted consultation on Hkina te Kohupara. Full public consultation on initiatives to reduce transport emissions will follow in the nd half of .
We are following this twostep consultation process to get rapid feedback on options to reduce transport emissions, before refining these for inclusion in the transport chapter of the allofgovernment ERP.
We are interested in engaging with anyone who is working on or thinking about these issues, and building the capability and knowledge base across New Zealand. Email
We are investigating how a scheme could be configured. Congestion pricing will require new technology, systems and support, so we are assessing these requirements
We are inviting providers to submit a proposal for the Manukau Harbour port technical feasibility study contract via GETS.
We are keen to engage with firms that have experience in toll road concessions through the market sounding process. If you have experience in toll road concessions and wish to organise a discussion with our team, please contact us at
We are keeping track of progress in order to support ministerial considerations as necessary, particularly in relation to Government funding.
We are leading the crossagency project alongside KiwiRail, Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency, Treasury, Auckland Transport, Auckland Council and Greater Wellington Regional Council.
We are leading this review to define and develop the Future of Rail in New Zealand, so that rail can be integrated into the transport system. This will mean rail can be planned, funded and looked after alongside other transport modes.
We are likely to see an increasing number of requests to test vehicles in confined areas or on more complex terrain. This would probably lead to trials on separated transport corridors or defined public roads.
We are monitoring international work on tampering related to vehicle emissions control equipment.
We are now inviting submissions from interested parties.
We are now inviting submissions on this matter.
We are now seeking submissions on the application. Submissions close February .
We are now seeking submissions on the proposed authorisation application. Submissions close pm, Friday March .
We are one contributor to how we live as New Zealanders. Our mahi contributes in many ways to the success of Aotearoa and our success in the wider world.
We are part of a multiagency project led by the Ministry for the Environment to update the HAPINZ study into New Zealands health and air pollution. This began in December and the final report is expected to be in mid May .
We are proactively releasing five documents relating to the Enabling Drone Integration discussion document, including the Cabinet Paper seeking approval to release the discussion document.
We are proactively releasing ten documents that were key to the formulation of GPS , including the Cabinet Papers seeking approval to publish the draft GPS for engagement and then the final GPS.
We are proud to provide a safe and inclusive environment for all.
We are releasing these documents to support transparency and helping the public understand the ongoing policy work.
We are releasing these documents to support transparency by helping the public understand the choices taken for GPS , and the principles that determine why public money is being directed towards certain priorities.
We are seeking advice in the form of an independent study on whether the Manukau Harbour could serve as a location for a largescale port.
We are seeking feedback on a proposed approach to enhance the New Zealand drone regulatory regime and enable the integration of drones into the civil aviation system. Submissions close pm, May.
We are seeking feedback on the proposed application fees for reviews carried out by the new independent review function that comes into effect in April .
We are seeking feedback on three possible application fee options for partial cost recovery of some of the costs of operating this new function.
We are working with Auckland Transport and Greater Wellington Regional Council to review the metropolitan rail operating model. This work is taking place alongside the Future of Rail.
We are working with the public and stakeholders to develop regulations for the effective integration of drones into our aviation system.
We asked KPMG and Mott MacDonald to provide research on the options for transitioning away from diesel buses (including potential technologies, potential ownership, procurement and funding approaches).
We asked for feedback from the freight and energy sectors, academia and other government agencies about each of the fuel options, and invited discussion about the advantages of a range of alternative green fuels for New Zealand.
We asked for feedback on the approaches:
We asked stakeholders to consider a series of new regulatory measures, including registration, remote identification and geoawareness of drones, and basic pilot competency.
We asked submitters to respond to the key issues identified by the review:
We assessed other ways of raising revenue and used this assessment to identify which tools could best help those making decisions about how the transport system is funded. We concluded that:
We assisted with policy advice on the legislation, including preparing Cabinet papers on key elements of the legislation. We also supported the Transport and Industrial Relations Select Committee in considering the proposed legislation.
We can help you understand the implications of your decisions on the transport system , from modelling the impacts, to monitoring and evaluating the effectiveness of policies and investment in infrastructure. For example, the Ministry has developed a National Transport Model (Monty) to understand how people interact with the transport system . Monty will allow the impacts of potential and current policies to be evaluated in much quicker timeframes, with greater accuracy of their impact on the entire population and will give a richer understanding of the impacts of transport policies across multiple sectors . The Ministrys Transport Sector Monitoring Framework provides a consistent approach to monitoring how well services or interventions are being delivered, whether they have been delivered in a timely and fiscally responsible way and if outcomes have been achieved. The Transport Evidence Base Strategy (TEBS) and the Decarbonising Transport Research Strategy (DTRS) set out the paths to ensure the transport sector has the right data, information, research and evaluation to support policy decisions. Implementing the TEBS and the DTRS is the responsibility of transport agencies ( eg, through the Land Transport Sector Research Programme managed by Waka Kotahi ) and SOEs , working alongside local government and other stakeholders. Key transport respons ibilities As the Minister, you have a range of levers to influence the transport system. There are differences in the way the various levers are exercised for each mode, and each mode has its own regulatory model. The Ministrys advice will always focus on how you can achieve your objectives. You are responsible for transport Acts which set out: the roles and functions of the Ministry, transport agencies and TAIC , and SOEs the planning and funding arrangements for land transport the roles and powers of local authorities for transport activities and road controlling authorities licensing and certification arrangements for transport system participants and users, vehicles and technology the requirements for making transport regulations , rules , and transport instruments compliance tools to promote adherence to safety, security and environmental requirements across transport modes. Investment and revenue Investing in transport infrastructure is a priority for any Government. Investment comes from a range of funding sources, including the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) revenue, local authority funds, Crown funds , sector funding, and loans. This investment is used to build, operate and maintain transport network s and services and influence how people travel . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT KEY TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES
We can help you understand the implications of your decisions on the transport system , from modelling the impacts, to monitoring and evaluating the effectiveness of policies and investment in infrastructure. For example, the Ministry has developed a National Transport Model (Monty) to understand how people interact with the transport system . The Ministrys Transport Sector Monitoring Framework provides a consistent approach to monitoring how well services or interventions are being delivered, whether they have been delivered in a timely and fiscally responsible way and if outcomes have been achieved. . The Transport Evidence Base Strategy (TEBS) and the Decarbonising Transport Research Strategy (DTRS) set out the paths to ensure the transport sector has the right data, information, research and evaluation to support policy decisions. Implementing the TEBS and the DTRS is the responsibility of transport agencies ( e.g., through the Land Transport Sector Research Programme managed by Waka Kotahi) and SOEs, working alongside local government and other stakeholders. Key transport respons ibilities As Minister, you have a range of levers to influence the transport system. There are differences in the way the various levers are exercised for each mode, and each mode has its own regulatory model. Our advice to you will always focus on how you can make use of these levers to achieve your objectives. You are responsible for transport Acts which set out: the roles and functions of the Ministry, transport agencies, and SOEs the planning and funding arrangements for land transport the roles and powers of local authorities for transport activities and road controlling authorities licensing and certification arrangements for transport system users, vehicles and technology the requirements for making transport regulations and rules compliance tools to promote adherence to safety, security and environmental requirements across transport modes. Investment and revenue Investing in transport infrastructure is a priority for any Government. Investment comes from range of funding sources, including the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) revenue, local authority funds, Crown funds and loans. This investment is used to build, operate and maintain the network and services and influence how people decide to travel through funding alternative travel options . The GPS allows you to guide investment from the NLTF The GPS outlines what the Government wants to achieve in land transport, and how it expects to see funding allocated between types of activities (for example, roading, public transport and road safety) across the land transport system. Each GPS sets out the priorities for the following year period and is reviewed and every three years RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT KEY TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES
We can help you understand the implications of your decisions on the transport system , from modelling the impacts, to monitoring and evaluating the effectiveness of policies and investment in infrastructure. For example, the Ministry has developed a National Transport Model (Monty) to understand how people interact with the transport system . The Ministrys Transport Sector Monitoring Framework provides a consistent approach to monitoring how well services or interventions are being delivered, whether they have been delivered in a timely and fiscally responsible way and if outcomes have been achieved. The Transport Evidence Base Strategy (TEBS) and the Decarbonising Transport Research Strategy (DTRS) set out the paths to ensure the transport sector has the right data, information, research and evaluation to support policy decisions. Implementing the TEBS and the DTRS is the responsibility of transport agencies ( eg, through the Land Transport Sector Research Programme managed by Waka Kotahi) and SOEs, working alongside local government and other stakeholders. Key transport respons ibilities As Minister, you have a range of levers to influence the transport system. There are differences in the way the various levers are exercised for each mode, and each mode has its own regulatory model. Our advice to you will always focus on how you can make use of these levers to achieve your objectives. You are responsible for transport Acts which set out: the roles and functions of the Ministry, transport agencies and TAIC, and SOEs the planning and funding arrangements for land transport the roles and powers of local authorities for transport activities and road controlling authorities licensing and certification arrangements for transport system users, vehicles and technology the requirements for making transport regulations , rules , and transport instruments compliance tools to promote adherence to safety, security and environmental requirements across transport modes. Investment and revenue Investing in transport infrastructure is a priority for any Government. Investment comes from a range of funding sources, including the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) revenue, local authority funds, Crown funds , sector funding, and loans. This investment is used to build, operate and maintain transport network s and services and influence how people decide to travel . The GPS allows you to guide investment from the NLTF The Land Transport Management Act (LTMA) requires you to issue a Government Policy Statement on land transport ( GPS) . This statutory document allows you to outline what the Government wants to achieve in land transport, and how it expects to see funding allocated between types of activities ( eg, roading, public transport and road safety) across the land transport RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT KEY TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES
We can hui in person or online based on your preference and availability. In the interests of time, we would advocate for a rohe collective approach for an engagement or hui, based on the responses we receive.
We collaborated with MBIE to commission Market Economics to produce a report on the economic impact of the Kaikura earthquake. It looked at how the event would affect New Zealands GDP, including impacts on transport, business operations and tourism.
We collaborated with the CAA, Airways and MBIE to prepare the draft paper which was circulated to our stakeholders in the drone and aviation sectors, and also other government agencies.
We collect personal information that you choose to give us while using our website and its services, for example your email address if you sign up to a newsletter. We only use this personal information for the purposes specified at the point of collection. When you do provide information to us, please carefully read the privacy statement provided at that point.
We commissioned Covec to prepare a study that identified options, other than implementing vehicle emissions standards when vehicles enter the fleet, to address harmful emissions from vehicles already on the road in New Zealand, particularly in Auckland.
We commissioned Hyder Consulting to collect information to help us understand the effect of transport costs and charges
We commissioned Hyder Consulting to collect information to help us understand the effect of transport costs and charges.
We commissioned MRCagney to research equity in Aucklands transport system and to identify potential policy approaches to address inequities.
We commissioned an assessment of how PTOM would impact competition a competition assessment. This identified how PTOM would influence the procurement and delivery of urban bus and ferry services, and what it might mean for New Zealanders welfare.
We commissioned research on EVs that informed our work on the Programme.
We commissioned the Drone Benefit Study:
We concluded that it would not be practical to offer more extensive entitlements at this time because
We concluded that this approach is particularly helpful to decisions about investments in road, rail and port infrastructure because it:
We concluded that we could make improvements to current practice by
We consider applications for ETC funding support on a casebycase basis.
We consulted on a draft amendment to the Land Transport Rule: Lightvehicle Brakes in March .
We consulted on the proposals in July and August . The Clean Car Standard is a vehicle carbon dioxide standard, or fuel efficiency standard. It would require vehicle importers to lower the carbon dioxide emissions of the vehicles they are importing. The Clean Car Discount is a feebate scheme that would make low emission vehicles, like electric vehicles and petrol hybrids, more affordable for Kiwis to buy.
We continue to work with other government agencies on the work programme.
We contributed to both Environment Aotearoa reports.
We developed New Zealands National Airspace Policy (the policy) with the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) and the National Airspace and Air Navigation Advisory Forum. The policy was issued in and set the framework for the CAA to develop the plan, which was in .
We developed a draft package of regulatory changes for Cabinet to review. Initially called the Vulnerable Users and Pathways Package, it it was later named the Accessible Streets Regulatory Package. We worked closely with Waka Kotahi to develop the draft Cabinet paper and Regulatory Impact Statement, and also received feedback from the police.
We developed a draft package of regulatory changes for Cabinet to review. Initially called the Vulnerable Users and Pathways Package, it was later named the Accessible Streets Regulatory Package. We worked closely with Waka Kotahi to develop the draft Cabinet paper and Regulatory Impact Statement, and also received feedback from the police.
We developed the policy in collaboration with the CAA and an advisory forum, which included:
We do not give information about you to other government agencies, organisations or anyone else unless one of the following applies:
We do not have any law enforcement or regulatory compliance responsibilities, and do not gather any information for these purposes.
We encourage use of Mori greetings and signoffs in all of our communications.
We engage and work with Mori people and organisations to leverage collective aspiration and capabilities.
We expect a Rule amendment to come into force following Cabinet consideration in . To support the changes, we will prepare an implementation plan that will include details of any transitional arrangements, and a national public information and education campaign.
We expect legislation to implement the Clean Car Standard will be introduced in , with the policy taking effect in , although fees on suppliers will not apply until the beginning of
We expect to begin consultation on the Draft GPS in May .
We expect to provide the Associate Minister with advice in due course.
We had main messages for those attending.
We have a monitoring, assurance, oversight and reporting role across the transport projects in the programme.
We have a strong interest in supporting the testing and trialling of AVs in New Zealand.
We have an ongoing commitment to openness and transparency and publish information considered to be of interest to the public.
We have approached the response to standard questions in the same way as previous years . The standard questions are substantially the same as previous years and they have generally been answered in the same way. . We have provided information from Crown entities in cases where the question asks for information ab out entities funded under Vote Transport. This includes City Rail Link Limited (CRLL) and Auckland Light Rail Limited (ALRL). . In question one (page ) of the attached draft response, we explain that KiwiRail and MetService, although funded under Vote T ransport, are the responsibility of the Minister for State Owned Enterprises and we do not include them in this response.
We have commissioned a team of researchers led by Ian Wallis Associates to do the study. The Institute of Transport Study at the University of Leeds is providing technical advice and review.
We have developed a longterm insights briefing on the impact of automated vehicles operating on Aotearoa New Zealand roads.
We have developed a longterm insights briefing on the impact of automated vehicles operating on Aotearoa New Zealand roads. Longterm Insights Briefings (LTIB) are future focussed documents that are intended to provide greater visibility of future challenges and opportunities that may affect New Zealand and New Zealand society. The Ministry took a deep dive into an area that could have a significant impact on the transport system and transport outcomes over the next years.
We have developed specific requirements to achieve particular expectations including measures to assess whether an approved organisation is making appropriate progress. These requirements apply from October onwards.
We have drafted this para and were keen to get your feedback on whether any changes are needed. The briefing is due shortly, so it would be good if we could get any comment fromyou by middayish tomorrow.
We have identified specific topics as important to the operation of AVs in New Zealand and are exploring them through a series of short and sharp snapshot papers to encourage evidencedbased discussion and debate. These are aligned to the areas of focus in other jurisdictions such as those in Australia, the United Kingdom, Singapore and Canada.
We have included PowerPoints of presentations we gave to local council representatives and included these as indicative of verbal correspondence between us. They were informal and so staff have advised that there was no email correspondence following up on these to record feedback from these ses sions.
We have the first report on progress against GPS priorities.
We have the opportunity to reduce transport emissions in ways that benefit our society, economy, and environment.
We held regional workshops with local government and other stakeholders in MarchApril to understand the key issues for stakeholders before we began providing advice to ministers on GPS .
We held workshops with the Speed Reference Group to develop the Tackling Unsafe Speeds proposals. This group was one of the reference groups we worked with as part of developing the Road to Zero road safety strategy.
We hosted a presentation from Market Economics about the results of the study and the methodology used.
We hosted the first forum in June and further forums in November and August .
We identified opportunities to connect rapid transit services with other parts of a shared mobility system. For example, people could:
We initiated a second stage of research to look at the exact impacts on the wages and conditions of bus drivers who changed their role after the public transport tendering processes came into effect. However, this second stage of research was not ultimately progressed because the information required for the analysis was not provided by bus operators.
We invited Household Travel Survey participants to take part in further surveys as part of a Travel Research Panel.
We join the international community in applying tougher sanctions to severely limit the Putin regimes ability to continue its war in Ukraine.
We keep the information you provide on a secure system. Access to the system where we keep this information is strictly limited to Ministry of Transport employees who require access in order to progress your review, as well as the Civil Aviation Authority (who provides copies of information relating to your medical certification decision) and the Medical Convenor (who reviews this information).
We led the development of PTOM in collaboration with Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency, Auckland Transport, Greater Wellington Regional Council, Environment Canterbury, the Bus and Coach Association and representatives from other operators.
We made some minor amendments to the draft rules as a result of submissions.
We manage the security of our premises in accordance with our health and safety policy and in accordance with government procurement standards and government Protective Security Requirements. We manage the security of our information in accordance with our privacy statement and Information Security Policy, and in compliance with the Privacy Act , the Official Information Act and the Public Records Act . The information we hold is used only for the purpose for which it is collected or as otherwise advised, including as described in our Privacy Statement.
We may choose to retweet, repost, mention or post information by other organisations andor individuals for the interest and information of our followers. However, we do not endorse or guarantee the accuracy of this information.
We may followlike organisations and individuals that are relevant to our organisation. This does not imply endorsement or guarantee the accuracy of their information.
We may make use of web services that require the use of thirdparty software, particularly for the presentation of graphical or analytical information. These sites have their own privacy policies that you should be aware of.
We may publish a summary of submissions. If you do not want your name or identifying information to be included, please note the reasons why at the end of your submission. This will be taken into account when we respond to any Official Information Act requests that cover your submission. If you are planning to make a submission via an online petition page or other automated platform, please contact us first to ensure your submission is accurately identified and collected.
We may report, block or ban anyone who posts the above content or comments, or who breaches these terms of use or the terms of use of the relevant social media platform.
We may update this privacy statement from time to time, for example to reflect changes to the Privacy Act. This statement was last in April .
We monitor the performance of the transport Crown entities to ensure they operate efficiently and effectively. Monitoring these entities is important because they are owned by the public, and deliver key services. In some cases, those services involve significant amounts of public money.
We most strongly support policy initiatives aimed at encouraging people to make b etter travel choices. For example, providing New Zealanders with greater transparency about all the costs of different modes (e.g. economic, environment, safety, and other externalities) in order for them to make fully informed decisions.
We must be satisfied that, without Government support, the airfreight capacity would not be provided or would only be available at a cost that undermined the objectives.
We need to connect rapid transit with other parts of the shared mobility system, and with walking and cycling.
We need to shape innovations to support positive transport outcomes.
We need to significantly improve their fuel efficiency and reduce their emissions in order to achieve net zero CO emissions by . The Clean Car Standard will ensure our market has a good supply of low and zero CO emission light vehicles with uptotechnology for New Zealanders to buy.
We need to understand and measure the total costs of the domestic transport system and the cost burden facing transport users so we can make effective transport policies.
We paused the survey from March to June due to the COVID risk.
We prepared a regulatory impact assessment (RIA) on the increase to RUC. The increase to PED for was legislated in as part of budget legislation the Excise and Exciseequivalent Duties Table (Budget MeasuresMotor Spirits) Amendment Act .
We prepared an RIA that informed Cabinets decision. The Road User Charges (Rates) Regulation was amended in May to put in place the increased rates.
We produced a paper exploring the challenges and opportunities of transitioning New Zealands heavy truck fleet to using alternative green fuels
We propose emissions reduction to become an overarching focus for GPS , to ensure that the implications for emissions reduction are a core consideration for all investment decisions. This will be supported by five proposed strategic priorities:
We provide this to you to ensure we are focussed on the achievement of your priorities. There is a need to ensure that the Output Plan remains uptoas the year progresses and that it reflects changes in both priorities and the timing of work.
We provide transport policy advice to the Minister of Transport on tolling policy and public private partnerships. We advise the Minister on proposed tolling schemes and, with Treasury, approvals required for public private partnerships.
We provided a summary of the matters arising from those workshops to ministers in May .
We provided advice and assisted the Minister of Transport to change legislation and put in place an Order in Council for toll collection under the Land Transport Management Act. Responsibility for the road was transferred from Tauranga District Council to Waka Kotahi.
We provided advice to the Minister of Transport on the implications and approvals necessary for Waka Kotahi to enter the public private partnership arrangement.
We provided advice to the Minister that new legislation would be needed for a regional fuel tax in Auckland. We outlined alternative ways that councils could raise revenue for transport projects and potential issues associated with a regional fuel tax
We provided briefings to the Minister about how the Government could implement a regional fuel tax, focused on Auckland.
We provided the Associate Minister of Transport with background information on how New Zealanders use public transport, and when they walk and cycle. We also noted opportunities to increase the uptake of public transport and active modes of transport.
We provided the Minister advice concerning the application by Air New Zealand and Air China including a detailed analysis.
We provided the Minister advice concerning the application by British Airways and Qatar Airways including a detailed analysis.
We provided the Minister advice concerning the application by Qantas Airways and American Airways including a detailed analysis.
We provided the Minister of Transport with advice on approvals relating to leasing and delegations, and on the financial implications.
We provided the Minister of Transport with advice relating to tolling the road and the borrowing arrangement.
We publish spreadsheets showing the Chief Executives business expenses, gifts and hospitality over NZD .
We publish the minutes from each meeting.
We publish the social cost of road crashes report every year. The report looks at the social costs associated with road crashes and injuries in New Zealand.
We reports in about the current and future states of our transport system. The Current State report provided an overview of our transport system, which was the first time this information was collated in place. The Future State report provided common information, assumptions and projections for those involved in transport policy and planning.
We a discussion paper to seek feedback from the sector and the public to ensure we identified the relevant issues and opportunities as part of our review, and to inform how we design any changes to PTOM.
We the Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS ). This comes into effect on July .
We ran a second RFP process recognising that the first procurement round was done at a challenging time for the aviation sector and delivered to accelerated timeframes.
We ran the COVID travel survey via telephone from late Aprilearly August . Over , people were interviewed to find out how their travel changed or was affected in response to COVID. They were interviewed times over the course of weeks, in a minute telephone interview.
We received submissions in response to the consultation. We have a summary of these submissions and our responses to them. See below.
We received submissions. These included responses from drone manufacturers, the model aircraft association, commercial and training organisations, airlines, airports, pilot associations and local authorities
We received submissions in response to the consultation document. All but a small handful of submissions supported the scheme as it was and all argued that funding for the scheme should be increased to match the numbers using it.
We received responses from representatives of government bodies, professional and commercial bodies, associations and advocacy groups, as well as individual people.
We received submissions in response to
We received submissions in response to the consultation document.
We received submissions in the consultation process were in favour of accession. Many agreed that alignment of domestic and Annex VI regulations would be beneficial. Overall, stakeholder engagement showed strong support for New Zealand becoming a party to MARPOL, even those that would be most affected by the new regulations. The main concern related to the timing of accession. Fuel companies and large ship operators stressed the importance of setting clear, reasonable and transparent timelines so they could prepare in a way that would minimise the impact on their businesses.
We received submissions in response to
We received submissions, which all supported strengthening the financial security regime. The main themes in submissions relating to the Rules were:
We received submissions in response to the consultation document. As a result of the consultation, some aspects of the new Rules were amended.
We received submissions in response to the consultation, with the majority () supporting option . This was also the review teams preferred option.
We received submissions in response to the paper, which were generally supportive of the proposed changes. However, some submitters were concerned about proposed changes to the frequency of vision testing.
We received submissions and more than pages of feedback through the public consultation process on the freight and supply chain issues paper. We are grateful to all the individuals and organisations who made a submission.
We received submissions in response to the discussion document and many noted that the issues were complex.
We received submissions, which were assessed and used to inform the final GPS .
We received over submissions on the draft Rail Plan. We will publish a summary of submissions once they have been analysed.
We recognise Te Tiriti o Waitangi and its principles. We communicate honestly, share and codesign, and understand and commit to the CrownMori relationship.
We recognise the role we play to safeguard and protect the transmission of Mori knowledge and taonga.
We recommended that the Joint Business Agreement between Qantas Airways and American Airlines be reauthorised.
We recommended the authorisation of the proposed coodination.
We reissued the Sapere UNISCS Report on August to include additional sensitivity results in appendix B.
We released a draft paper to get feedback from interested stakeholders. The
We released a draft version of the first New Zealand Rail Plan for public feedback. The consultation process on the draft Rail Plan ran to May .
We released the discussion document Te Huringa Taraiwa: Te arotake I te pnaha utu kaiwhakamahi rori Driving Change: Reviewing the Road User Charges System.
We released the draft Government Policy Statement on Land Transport (draft GPS ) for public engagement.
We released the first draft in September and sought feedback from stakeholders in the drone sector and the general aviation sector. The final paper was released in July and has since helped to inform the crossgovernment work programme on drones.
We reserve the right to remove content that:
We review and update the GPS every years. The first GPS came into effect in , with subsequent versions in effect on July , and . We GPS in September .
We see reducing the number of cars on the road, at the same time as increasing active and public transport as the main way to achieve the strategic priorities, framework outcomes and purpose. When we have less cars, there is no need to build more roads, there is less pollution and emissions, safer streets and r oads, less network maintenance and more efficient freight. For urban areas, we must concentrate on getting people out of cars for most short distance trips. Do that by removing as many barriers as possible and make it more attractive easier and quicker than getting in the car. In saying this, it must be ensured disabled, elderly and vulnerable people are continually consulted with to ensure their needs are met every step of the way. We must rebalance the resources spent on roads for largely personal cars, primarily in urban and adjacent land with proper infrastructure for all active modes. Transport in NZ is expensive, particularly personal cars and is a massive drain on our familys resources. Many do not currently have a better choice. Space taken up by different modes of transport and their infrastructure is important, especially in urban areas, where land is in short supply. Previous investment in active modes is undermined because for example critical gaps that remain in urban cycling networks. Injuries and fatalities occur to cyclists in crashes on state highways and rural roads and safety is a major barrier to modal shift. The percentage of the population that would like to bike or walk for recreation and transport on urban streets and rural roads is much greater than the percentage that actually does walk and bike. This is very clear from the very visible increase in the number of people (including young children) who biked and walked during the Covid lockdown. Large investment in active modes of infrastructure is very important to our families. We acknowledge the inertia in the current road and car based system we have and there are so many examples of options that will meet the GPS purpose. It must be led by the local government, fully backed and supported by the central government. There are significant opportunities to innovate with low cost infrastructure to enable active modal shift, which gives time to test what works and doesnt in different places. Some of this is happening now as a response to the need for physical distancing. Bigger long term infrastructure projects can then be planned to follow.
We seek to understand how new technologies contribute to transport outcomes, such as influencing travel choices, congestion, reducing the road toll, or improving the liveability of our cities.
We set out the information requested for the October to December quarterly report (Reporting Schedule in Attachment ). This requires your organisation to selfassess in relation to most of the expectations and provide quantitative information relating to and private share of public transport. We want to gain an understanding of any gaps or issues and streamline reporting using an appropriate template. Lessons and improvements will be embedded into the January to March reporting period.
We set up an ongoing work programme to increase the quantity and quality of GPS monitoring and evaluation.
We set up engagement sessions with a range of stakeholders from the sector to understand the most important issues with the current regulatory framework, and what aspects of the SPS sector stakeholders thought were most important for the future. We also presented some options for change and asked for feedback.
We started development of the GPS in early . On behalf of the Minister of Transport we released a draft for public engagement in March . We used feedback from submissions to develop the final. GPS will take effect from July .
We started drafting GPS (GPS ) in . On behalf of the Minister of Transport, we engaged on the draft and used feedback from the submissions to develop the final. GPS was in June and took effect from July .
We started work on this project at the end of and interviewed public transport experts in the second half of . Further work was delayed by the Kaikura earthquakes so our working paper was not released until the end when we presented our findings at the Transport Knowledge Conference.
We started working with our government transport partners on a new road safety strategy and a planned programme of short to mediumterm initiatives to improve road safety. This included an initiative to amend transport rules to improve safety and accessibility for vulnerable users.
We started working with our government transport partners on a new road safety strategy and a planned programme of short to mediumterm initiatives to improve road safety. This included strengthening the detection and deterrence of drugimpaired driving.
We suggest throughout the GPS the language is strengthened and the priorities are more ambitious with targets for increases in active and public transport modes, reductions in emissions etc. Value for Money Value for money is also a key consideration for our future generations and fundamental to look at long term costs as well are value for money now. Especially when looking at infrastructure that will lock in emissions which will be very costly long term for public health, wellbeing and economy. We would expect to see very clearly laid out how these costs and benefits relate to future costs related to climate change. The whole of life cost is crucial to limiting further stranded assets and cost t o our future generations. This needs clear direction and examples of what weighing up the future costs or benefits could be and needs to be clear for decision makers at all levels of governance Urban design and land use We support a holistic approach with planning the transport system and the inclusion of urban design and land use. Where people live, work, produce food and do recreation is key in our transport decisions. We strongly agree with this statement : Shape land use, urban form and street design in a way that reduces car dependency, makes walking, wheeling, cycling and micro mobility safe and attractive travel choices, and reduces emissions from transport. from page . We see this is key to delivering on the outcomes and purpose. To do this we must limit new housing and commercial buildings outside of current urban limits and limit building new and larger roads that enable and connect these developments. We acknowledge the challenges with affordability, though also note that housing is not getting more affordable by urban sprawl. It is key that these sectors work closely together at all levels of governance with a common purpose of increased wellbeing and livability .
We suggest wording along the lines of the following:
We suggested circumstances when a rebate of the regional fuel tax would be appropriate. They were:
We suggested principles that could underpin the design of the new regulatory system, including that it would need to:
We summarised the feedback we received from stakeholders who responded to the Drone Safety and Regulation Summary of Engagement.
We support and encourage each other, and we create environments that respect and value Mori people and Mori ways of seeing, thinking and feeling.
We support no further increases to Fuel Excise Duty (FED) and Road User Charges (RUC) for , given the increase to these taxes in GPS . In Auckland there is a r egional fuel tax on top of these increases. Given the uncertainty about what might result from the recently established Infrastructure Industry Reference Group, we have comment ed on the GPS as it is, without second guessing what investment might arise fro m their work. We note th ere is likely to be change to GPS because of the impacts of COVID , and expect reasonable efforts at further consultation. We are very happy to meet with officials to discuss our feedback in mor e detail.
We thought it was important to develop this paper so we better understand the New Zealand context before identifying a way forward for industry and government.
We undertook a preliminary investigation into the potential scale of vehicle owners tampering with emissions control equipment and how to address this. We began this work after hearing concerns from the vehiclerelated industries and other government organisations.
We undertook public consultation on the proposed amendments to Maritime Protection Rules Part and Part . The consultation ran in parallel to the Maritime Transport (Offshore Installations) Amendment Bill passing through Parliament.
We undertook research into international experiences of congestion pricing to find out what lessons could be applied to Auckland. This looked at schemes that have been introduced in London, Stockholm, Singapore and other cities, as well as places where congestion pricing had been attempted but was not successful.
We undertook targeted consultation on the Tackling Unsafe Speeds proposals with key transport stakeholders including local government.
We use social media to communicate and engage with New Zealanders about transport policy and related issues.
We used data from the Household Travel Surveys to publish reports on specific types of transport and risks.
We used the information from these interviews to develop scenarios that explore how public and shared transport could be affected by major changes to life in our cities vehicle automation and increasing urban density.
We want to build on our understanding of te ao Mori in transport today to evolve and strengthen the system and ensure that progressively improves the wellbeing and liveability of Aotearoa New Zealand and all its people.
We want to hear your thoughts on the new draft assessment guidelines. Consultation closes at pm, Monday March .
We want to hear your thoughts. We would value any feedback from an airlines, airports, and all other stakeholders who have an interest in the assessment of airline agreement authorisations.
We welcome feedback on this discussion document from groups who have a strong interest in the transition to a zerocarbon transport system, including:
We welcome your feedback on this document. You can email us at
We were not able to get all the data and breakdowns we need to report against the measures in GPS , but we will incorporate those in future reports.
We were particularly interested in getting peoples response to the challenges and opportunities we had identified. We also wanted to know how aware people were of the information in the paper, and whether or not they agreed with it.
We will consider the Panels recommendations in depth and look at how to progress them in the context of other strategic work going on in aviation.
We will continue to progress work on vehicle and emissionsrelated matters through sector engagement and working groups.
We will continue to update this webpage and provide new material as the project progresses.
We will continue to work with Treaty partners and other agencies such as the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development, the Treasury, KiwiRail and Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency to progress this work.
We will investigate the potential impact of AVs on congestion and Greenhouse Gas emissions, accessibility and inclusivity, and increased road safety and reducing road deaths and injuries. We will also consider the issues arising from a mixed vehicle fleet containing autonomous and nonautonomous vehicles, the impacts of increased demands for on current roading infrastructure, as well as the perceptions of the public towards autonomous technologies.
We will proactively release Cabinet
We will provide further policy analysis in , including benefits, costs, risks and uncertainties associated with the options.
We will provide you with advice on reprioritisation opportunities on March . Recommendations We recommend you: Agree to meet with officials to discuss
We will publish a summary of submissions after the engagement period has closed and submissions have been analysed. If you do not want your name or any identifying information to be included in anything we publish (including because you believe your comments are commercially sensitive) please indicate this clearly in your submission.
We will strive to deliver the Output Plan The Ministry will strive to complete the initiatives and deliverables in this plan. But we know from experience that circumstances will change and that this will impact on when deliverables can be achieved.
We work closely with Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency to understand the potential new opportunities and risks AVs could introduce to the transport system.
We work in close partnership with the Crown entities as we develop advice to Governments on transport priorities and implementing Government policies.
We worked with reference groups made up of over representatives from across the transport sector. They provided a range of knowledge, experiences and perspectives that contributed to the development of the strategy discussion document.
We worked with Waka Kotahi, the police, local government and other relevant agencies to finalise a set of measures to assess progress against GPS priorities, objectives and desired results.
We worked with the Parliamentary Counsel Office and Waka Kotahi to draft the Rule changes. While drafting, it became apparent that it would be necessary to develop a new Rule (Land Transport Rule: Paths and Road Margins) because some of the proposed changes could not be accommodated in existing Land Transport Rules.
Were inviting stakeholders and the wider public to give feedback until
We, together with Treasury, provided advice to ministers about h
Weather Forecasting Project: System Review Ministers have received the report on the weather forecasting system review and are currently considering the recommendations. An announcement will be made after the report is considered by Cabinet. Project: Contract Expiry No update. Project: Rain Radar Upgrades No update.
Weather Forecasting Project: System Review No update. Project: Contract Expiry No update. Project: Rain Radar Upgrades No update.
Weather Forecasting Project: System Review No update. Project: Contract Expiry No update. s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv)
Web addresses and emails Dont underline website and email addresses on printed material .
Week September APH paperwork will be provided to the Office.
Week September Minister Doocey to conduct Ministerial consultation. APH paperwork will be provided to the Office.
Weekly Low Emission Vehicle report
Welcome Greet all attendees as appr opriate. I am thrilled to be here today to open the first Sustainable Aviation Aotearoa hui of . Aviation plays a critical role in connecting Aotearoa both inter regionally and across the globe As a country, we rely on aviation as an enabler of: o timely carriage of our high value goods to access key markets and contribute sizeably to our GDP , carrying about percent of our exports and percent of our imports by dollar value o travel, whether for leisuretourism, business or to connect whanau across the country and the world . Due to our relative isolation as a country, a viation plays a particularly critical and irreplaceable role in the transport system and will continue to for many years to come. We know that there are rising global and local pressures that present both significant challenges, but also great opportunities for improving the way we approach aviation in Aotearoa The impacts of climate change are already very real, as evidenced by the recent historic weather events in Aotearoa. Such events demand a kind of resilience and tenacity at a scale that we have rarely seen but will increasingly witness in the coming years. I want to acknowledge the incredible mahi of yourselves and your organ isations during what was a hugely challenging and unprecedented time. Even through such even ts, there is a dedication to upholding high standards across the sector, and mucking in when needed, and I see this translating into passion and commitment towards climate action. Decarbonising aviation is key to ensuring Aotearoa continues to have access to the world for years to come
Welldesigned and operated
Wellington (Head Office) Ground Floor, Queens Wharf PO Box Wellington NEW ZEALAND Tel:
Wellington Auckland . . . Air NZ . . . Jetstar . . .
Wellington Brisbane . . . Air NZ . . . Qantas . . .
Wellington Christchurch . . . Air NZ . . . Jetstar . . .
Wellington Queenstown . . . Air NZ . . . Jetstar . . .
Wellington Airport Act
Wellington CBD to Island Bay Mass Rapid Transit
Wellington CBD Second Mount Victoria tunnel
Wellington Head Office Te Manat Waka Queens Wharf Wellington PO Box Wellington Telephone: Email: infotransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz
Wellington Head Office Te Manat Waka Queens Wharf Wellington PO Box Wellington Telephone: Email: infotransport.govt.nz transport.govt.nz PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT
Wellington International:
Wellington Metropolitan Level Crossing
Wellington Northern Domestic
Wellington Northern Domestic:
Wellington RLTP Whole document http:www.gw.govt.nzrltpl an The RLTP sets out the strategic direction for land transport in the Wellington region over the next years and provides a programme of all land transport activities in the region between and . The overall national strategic direction for land transport (as described in GPS ) is to improved performance from the land transport system by focusing on: Economic growth and productivity Road safety Value for money
Wellington Southern Domestic
Wellington Southern Domestic:
Wellington and Auckland Central South are currently the most productive regions. Key drivers for this are: Wellington produces the most overtime hours in the country. Auckland Central South has the highest demand for minute full licence overseas conversions; the public are more likely to be able to find an available minute slot for these tests compared to other regions that have a higher demand for the one hour long restricted tests.
Wellington metro receives NZD million through NZUP for:
Wellington rail upgrades, including in the Wairarapa
Wellington station safety improvements and
Wellingtonian of the Year Bachelor of Arts Victoria University of Wellington Chartered Fellow NZ Institute of Directors
Well focus on the land transport revenue system. We are considering the role that revenue, funding and pricing can play in meeting the transport needs of New Zealanders in the future.
Well use common words frequently, becoming familiar with them and their use in the office, in our work and in our communities.
Were currently seeking feedback on the draft Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS)
Were inviting people to share their ideas and vote on the ideas of others in an interactive online conversation called
Were releasing the draft GPS as a signal to the sector and to help with their strategic planning. We expect to release the final following the election.
Whanaungatanga Collaboration and unity
Whangaparoa Peninsula and State Highway . The toll will cover tolling
What I like about working at Te Manat Waka is that it has a positive, inclusive and collaborative culture. With around people, Te Manat Waka has a relatively flat organisation structure. Everyone is invested in their work which makes it possible to deliver a large portfolio of quality work for our size.
What are the Roads of Regional Significance The Government is committed to investment in a number of Roads of Regional Significance, which represent a regions most essential corridors.
What are the barriers to inclusive access in Auckland
What are the next steps and when will the final GPS be available
What are the pros and cons of different approaches to collecting revenue
What are the strategic priorities in the draft GPS The results the Government wishes to achieve from NLTF investment are expressed via a set of strategic priorities and a strategic investment programme. The strategic priorities for the draft GPS are: maintaining and operating the system increasing resilience reducing emissions safety sustainable urban and regional development. an integrated freight system.
What are the strategic priorities
What are you doing to ensure there is enough revenue in the land transport system The land transport funding system is facing significant pressure due to rising demands and costs. This includes historic deferral of maintenance, increasing severity and frequency of extreme weather events, workforce pressures, and a period of heightened inflation.
What changes to NLTF revenue are being proposed through the draft GPS The Government recognises the significant cost pressures that the NLTF is facing and proposes to increase revenue by . billion from . billion in to . billion in , an increase of percent.
What does the elevation of emissions re duction to an overarching focus mean The intention of the overarching focus on emissions reduction is to set an expectation that emissions impacts are considered in all investment decisions , and the governments overall transport investment programme must be consistent with the Governments target of reducing transport emissions by percent (from levels) by , as outlined in the Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP) . However, it does not mean every individual investment must result in reduced emissions .
What enables improved observation of changes Shift towards mode neutral reporting, for example: Sustainable Urban Mobility Benchmarking prototype Crash Analysis System (CAS) includes cycle accidents (but level of under reporting is unknown) Census includes education travel (broader range of trips that are more likely to include active PT modes)
What first struck me about Te Manat Waka was its vibrant, friendly and fun culture. I find everyone very approachable and happy to help.
What has changed since GPS The draft GPS builds on the strategic priorities of GPS , including supporting improved transport choice, improving safety, improving freight connections and reducing the impact of travel on our environment. It proposes a strengthened focus on resilience, recognising recent flood and weatherrelated recovery efforts.
What is a logic map A logic map (also known as an intervention logic) is a visual depiction that demonstrates the relationship between proposed interventions and their intended effects. Interventions can be policies, programmes, or individual projects. Logic maps consist of the problemsituation, inputs, activities, outputs, outcomes, and impacts. Problem situation The issues being addressed and the context within which the intervention takes place Inputs What you have, i.e. resources required to achieve intervention objectives Activities What you do Outputs What you produce Outcomes Short, medium and longterm results Impacts Broader primarysecondary effects
What is in the GPS The GPS guides Waka Kotahi and local authorities on land transport investment.
What is in the GPS The GPS guides the NZTA, KiwiRail and local authorities on land transport investment. The GPS outlines: What the Government expects to be achieved from its investment in land transport through the NLTF over the next years. How much funding will be provided and how the funding will be raised. How the Government will achieve its priorities through investment in certain areas known as activity classes (for example State Highway Pothole Prevention, Public Transport Services, and Safety). GPS also references system reforms the Government is looking to undertake in the transport and infrastructure sectors to aid in the delivery of GPS priorities. How does the GPS guide how projects are funded NZTA has responsibility for which projects or investments receive funding through the development of the NLTP, which gives effect to the GPS. To be considered for funding from the NLTF, an activity or project needs to be referenced in a Regional Land Transport Plan (RLTP). RLTPs are developed by local authorities, they identify regional investment priorities and must be consistent with the GPS.
What is the Engagement and Communications teams role The Engagement and Communications team do not usually write presentations or speeches for staff. However, they can provide you with general advice. If you are speaking at an event where a Minister is also speaking, it is important that you let the Engagement and Communications team know. They will work with you to make sure that the messages and content in your speechpresentation complement the Ministers speech.
What is the GPS The GPS is the Government Policy Statement on land transport. It outlines what the Government wants to achieve in land transport, and how it expects to see funding allocated between types of activities (for example, roading, public transport and road safety) across the land transport system.
What is the purpose of these indicative strategic priorities The purpose of releasing the Indicative Strategic Priorities for the Government Policy Statement on Land Transport (GPS) is to signal the outcomes the Government is intending to achieve through its land transport priorities in the GPS. The Government wants to do this early to encourage councils to begin building these signals into their planning while also providing opportunities to provide feedback before formal consultation on the draft GPS takes place later in . What are the indicative prioritie s for GPS The Government is signalling an overarching focus on emissions reduction ensuring it is the core consideration across all investment decisions supported by five other proposed strategic priorities: Sustainable urban development Safety Integrated freight system Maintaining and operating the system Resilience.
What is the right approach to decide how much to invest in each category, for example local roads versus state highways, or new infrastructure versus maintenance
What is the right framework to decide the right overall level of investment
What is the role of the Ministers office For many Ministry speeches and presentations, the Ministers office may not have a direct role. Depending on the topicevent, you may want to give the Ministers Private Secr etary a heads up. If in doubt, check with your manager.
What is the strategic Investment Programme and what projects are included in it The draft GPS signals a Strategic Investment Programme containing several projects that the Government considers will help advance the strategic priorities in the draft GPS . These are:
What is useful to monitor Changes in the proportion of projects put forward in each activity class. . STUDY PHASES
What should land transport revenues cover and what mechanisms should we use to collect it
What sort of testing of devices was undertaken
What we have worked on previously
When I started here I wasnt expecting the wide range of skills which I would be able to utilise. Some days I am a data analyst, some days I am a researcher, some days I am a sector knowledge expert. Whatever day it is whatever work I am undertaking it is always intellectually stimulating and rewarding.
When Waka Kotahi and local government
When Waka Kotahi and local government make
When attributing the Ministry of Transport, you need to include some details about the original material and the licence. This includes crediting the source of the material as the Ministry of Transport. A hyperlink may also be included. For example:
When authorising the Minister must specify the duration of the authorisation and any conditions that apply to the authorisation.
When taking into consideration the change s in our environment, returning the transport network around Kaikura to what it was before the earthquake was not enough. In February , excyclone Gita wreaked havoc on an already earthquake affected coast, bringing down slips along the Kaikura c orridor.
When the group was established, EVs were in the early phase of adoption. With an increasing number of EVs on our roads and wider work across government to reduce carbon emissions, the groups focus had become too narrow, and so it was disestablished.
When we assess policies and programmes, we consider how they will deliver on the outcomes in the framework. We also measure them against the Governments priorities and ensure they fit into our strategic focus areas
When will GPS take effect GPS will take effect from July , and replaces GPS .
When you submit an Application for Review of a Medical Certification Decision, we require you to provide us with personal information, including in relation to your medical history. We use this information to administer your review.
When your car is tested for its Warrant or Certificate of Fitness, the inspectors also check to see if the car is emitting clearly visible smoke out of the tail pipe. To do this, they check your car does not emit smoke:
Where a document that falls under scope of this request cannot be released, please supply a summary of that documents contents. Where any document falls under the scope of this request, please release it in full, including sections which might otherwise b e considered out of scope .
Where a standard has a month long phasein, it will first apply to newly launched models of brand new vehicles. After months it will apply to all new and used import vehicles.
Where an overall meansum line is shown, this refers to the the vehicles
Where does the money outlined in the GPS come from The GPS provides guidance to Waka Kotahi on how the NLTF should be spent. The NLTF is largely made up of revenue from fuel excise duty and road user charges. Smaller amounts of NLTF revenue come from motor vehicle registration and licensing fees, the sale of surplus land and property, road tolls and freight rail track user charges. The draft GPS is proposing that additional Crown funding and financing will be injected into the NLTF over . The NLTF funds transport projects, often with the support of coinvestment from local government for projects that benefit their communities. How does the GPS inform which projects get funding The GPS sets the strategic direction and the funding envelope and provides guidance on how to invest the NLTF. Waka Kotahi has responsibility for which projects or investments can get funded through the development of the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP), which gives effect to the GPS.
Where relevant, projected targets can be shown for various years, based on the mean tare weight of vehicles in the selected period.
Where the owner of copyright is not specified as being the Crown, or is someone other than the Crown, contact us to enquire about the process for obtaining permission to use the material in question.
Which I then asked you to refine, which you have done to: Information that refers to the content of the GPS but excludes administrative correspondence that does not add any relevant information.
While in its discovery phase, the working group visited sites, including Northport and Ports of Auckland and was planning a visit to Port of Tauranga. The group had also received advice from Government, met stakeholders and completed an initial analysis of the supply chain to gain an understanding of the freight system.
While our knowledge is still developing, we know that Mori are unfairly impacted by aspects of the transport system.
While submitters supported amendments to the current assurance requirements, they also raised several issues. However, the general election meant no further action was taken.
While the Government funds state highways largely from petrol excise duty and road user charges, in some instances this funding may also be supplemented by tolls. In New Zealand tolling is mainly used so a project can be started earlier than would have been possible. Local roads may also be tolled.
While the main source of emissions for nitrogen oxides in was onroad vehicles, other emission sources included:
While the proposed transport sector approach looks comprehensive, we would suggest that much of this is getting picked up in the spatial planning work that regional councils are leading often in conjunction with central government agencies and local author ities from a land usespatial planning perspective (The one transport led example in the literature review is the Auckland Transport Alignment Project). There needs to be better integration between these non transport led planning exercises and the evalua tion of value for money from transport perspectives. Initiatives such as an agreed set of performance indicators between central and local government, mechanisms for ongoing collaborative working, and common decision making frameworks (recognising that ou tcomes can not be delivered by KPIs alone) may help.
While this document specifies Te Manat Wakas indicative evaluation activities over a threeyear period, the Evaluation Strategy outlines the approach to develop a culture that embeds evaluation into its policy life cycle, and improve the quality and efficiency of evaluation activities by working closely with both internal and external stakeholders.
While this document specifies the Ministrys indicative evaluation activities over a three year period , the Evaluation Strategy outlines the approach to develop a culture that embeds evaluation into its policy life cycle, and improve the quality and efficiency of evaluation activities by working closely with both internal and external stakeholders.
While this document specifies the Ministrys indicative evaluation activities over a threeyear period, the Evaluation Strategy outlines the approach to develop a culture that embeds evaluation into its policy life cycle, and improve the quality and efficiency of evaluation activities by working closely with both internal and external stakeholders.
While this study is a comparison between the AIO and the matched comparison group, the data also includes information on all other interlock eligible offenders (n ,) as well as those AIO offenders who were not able to be matched ( Table below). Non matches met all of the criteria described above, but were outli ers in propensity score (as described above in section .). The Appendix contains demographic and offending data for these four groups: Alcohol Interlock offenders (those sentenced to the Alcohol Interlock Order) included in the analysis Matched Comparison Other eligible offenders (those eligible for the interlock sentence but did not receive the sentence) AIO non matches ( AIO offenders wh o could not be matched to a control)
While we dont have specific requirements or guidance relating to the volume of charge, the advice from the FAA is ac curate. Restrictions in New Zealand are designed to maintain safety and security as determined by our National Aviation Safety Plan (NASP); wherever there are additional measures passengers may take to further increase safety and security, we welcome their cooperation.
While we manage and maintain the Motor Vehicle Register and revenue collection functions, which include collecting and refunding motor vehicle registration and licensing fees, road user charges and fuel excise duty, Waka Kotahi provides these services under an agreement with our chief executive.
While we will attempt to answer all questions, we cannot enter into any discussion related to politics. We will review replies and comments made to us, and pass any emerging themes or helpful suggestions to the relevant people in the Ministry of Transport. However, we may choose not to reply to irrelevant or offensive questions and statements.
While you can use the GPS to indicate what types of transport activities you want delivered, you cannot specify what individual projects are funded using hypothecated NLTF revenue. The Land Transport Management Act (LTMA) requires you to issue a GPS . This statutory document allows you to guide investment from the NLTF and can be used both to maintain a level of service and drive change on the land transport network, while delivering value for money. This is done through applying the Ministrys value for money assessment model in the appraisal and evaluation process and establishing funding ranges for activity classes. Each GPS sets out the priorities for the following year per iod and is reviewed and every three years. The LTMA gives Waka Kotahi statutory independence to select projects for the National Land Transport Programme ( NLTP) . However, the GPS can set an expectation for Waka Kotahi to consider government programmes and priorities when allocating funding through the NLTP.
While you can use the GPS to indicate what types of transport activities you want delivered, you cannot specify what individual projects are funded using hypothecated NLTF revenue. The Land Transport Management Act (LTMA) requires you to issue a GPS . This statutory document allows you to guide investment from the NLTF and can be used both to maintain a level of service and drive change on the land transport network, while delivering value for money. This is done through applying the Ministrys value for money assessment model in the appraisal and evaluation process and establishing funding ranges for activity classes. Each GPS sets out the priorities for the following year period and is reviewed and every three years. The LTMA gives Waka Kotahi statutory independence to select projects for the National Land Transport Programme ( NLTP) . However, the GPS can set an expectation for Waka Kotahi to consider government programmes and priorities when allocating funding through the NLTP.
Whirokino Trestle Bridge Replacement
Who could claim a regional fuel tax rebate
Who is exempt from road user charges
Who pays RUC is set out in the Road User Charges Act. We consulted on potential changes to the RUC legislation in . Read more about the
Why are you proposing to raise fuel taxes Given the real cost pressures facing households and businesses, the Government is proposing a cent increase in petrol taxes and equivalent increase in road user charges on July and again in January . This will be followed by cent increases on July and again in July . To keep the increases as small and gradual as possible, we are also proposing to top up the NLTF with other Crown funding over the next three years.
Why create a logic map A logic map explicitly documents the assumed effects and interactions of programmes, projects, or policies and by doing so increases the likelihood that effects will be realised. Logic maps: Foster collaboration: Enables communication of the purpose of the intervention and expected results Describes the actions expected to lead to the desired results Tells the story of the proposed intervention Enables a shared understanding and supports communication with stakeholders on what results or outcomes they may want and what they will do to achieve these Support implementation: Helps the proposers determine if they have created sufficient solutions to address the needs that are the basis for securing resources for the proposed intervention Demonstrates the purpose of proposals regarding how they will meet needs and support intended outcomes and impacts Helps to identify key metrics and data required Enables a standardised but flexible and fitfor purpose approach to evaluation Support evaluation: Having a clear expectation about what is supposed to happen and why Builds the foundation for a monitoring and evaluation framework. Introducing intervention logic mapping
Why did the Transport Agency introduce requirements for performance measures To help demonstrate that we are achieving value for money with land transport investments enable us to learn from our investments and apply what we learn to future investments align our investment review process with the Transport Agencys business case approach facilitate more efficient and effective postimplementation reviews by providing more comprehensive performancebenefits information. Procurement Manual For activities funded through the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) Whole document https:www.nzta.govt.nzre sourcesprocurement manual This manual contains a framework and tools to help approved organizations and NZ Transport Agency to: Take a longterm, strategic approach to procurement by developing a procurement strategy for activities funded through NLTP. Obtain the best value for money spent .
Why do we need the GPS Transport investments have long lead times, high costs and leave long legacies. Transport planning and investment need to be guided by a longterm strategic approach, with a clear understanding of what outcomes the Government is seeking to achieve. The GPS influences decisions on how money will be invested and guides local government and Waka Kotahi on the type of activities that should be considered for inclusion in RLTPs and the NLTP.
Why does GPS have such a focus on value for money returns on investment, and how will this be monitored Direct text d Literature Su mmary
Why is roadside oral fluid testing available in Australia, but not here in New Zealand
Why is the GPS needed Transport investments have long lead times, high costs and leave long legacies. Transport planning and investment need to be guided by a longterm strategic approach, with a clear understanding of what outcomes the Government wants. The GPS influences decisions on how money will be invested and guides local government and NZTA on the type of activities that should be considered for inclusion in RLTPs and the NLTP. Where does the money come from In general, revenue to cover expenditure comes from the NLTF, which is made up of taxes or fees people pay through Fuel Excise Duty (FED), Road User Charges (RUC), vehicle registration and licensing fees and tolls. The NLTF is also topped up by direct funding from the Crown in the form of grants and loans. About GPS When will GPS take effect GPS will take effect from July , at which point it replaces GPS . It covers the ten year period from to . What are the strategic priorities in GPS The outcomes the Government wants to achieve from NLTF investment are outlined via a set of strategic priorities. These are: Economic Growth and Productivity (this is the overarching strategic priority for GPS ) Increased Maintenance and Resilience Safety Value for Money. When did consultation on the draft GPS occur The Government consulted on the draft GPS between March and April . Over , submitters provided a range of views which were reviewed to inform the final document. What changes were made to the final GPS following consultation The final GPS has several key changes, including: Signalling a programme of investment in regionally significant corridors through the Roads of Regional Significance programme and includes two more Roads of National Significance. The final GPS now sets out Roads of National Significance and Roads of Regional Significance. Including the additional funding amounts announced through Budget for the North Island Weather Event rebuild, investments in rail, and the additional billion of funding tagged to accelerate Roads of National Significance and the Northwest Rapid Transit project. Clarifying that investment in walking and cycling can be made where there is either existing demand, or demand that can be reliably forecast, and requiring that percent of funding on new improvements from the Walking and Cycling Activity Class will be spent on footpaths and other walking projects. Clarifying that multimodal transport projects (for example, projects that include walking and cycling components) that are already consented can continue to be funded from their primary activity class, so that these projects can continue to make progress and be delivered. Updating the safety strategic priority to refer to the work underway on setting speed limits, outline proposed work by the NZTA on third party investment in safety, and to note the work underway on the new road safety objectives document. Further strengthening the requirements that the NZTAs Performance and Efficiency Plan will need to meet. Including funding for coastal shipping activities through a new Coastal Shipping Resilience Fund totalling million over three years. What are the Roads of National Significance The Government will reintroduce the Roads of National Significance programme to achieve its strategic priorities. By highlighting these projects, the Government expects their strategic importance will be focused on during the development of the NLTP. The Roads of National Significance include the following strategic corridors: Whangarei to Auckland, with the following stages prioritised: Alternative to Brynderwyns Whangarei to Port Marsden Warkworth to Wellsford. Tauranga to Auckland, with the following two stages prioritised: Cambridge to Piarere Tauriko West State Highway . Auckland roads: Mill Road the East West Link. Roads to unlock housing growth: Hamilton Southern Links Petone to Grenada Link Road and the Cross Valley Link the North West Alternative State Highway (SH ). Other major routes: Takitimu Northern Link Stage Takitimu Northern Link Stage Hawkes Bay Expressway taki to North of Levin Second Mt Victoria Tunnel and Basin Reserve upgrade the Hope Bypass The Belfast to Pegasus Motorway and Woodend Bypass. These projects are Crown funded.
Why rail was included in GPS
Why random roadside oral testing hasnt been introduced yet
Why the Rule needed amending
Wider collaboration within the Transport System Local government, the private sector, researchers and iwi are also key players in shaping the transport system. Many parts of the system are outside of governments direct control. For example, in the freight, aviation and maritime sectors, the majority of decisions are made by the private sector. Local government also plays a particularly significant role in regional level transport investments. Effectiv e, meaningful engagement with stakeholders, is critical to achieving government priorities. Outside of existing collaboration between government agencies and SOEs, collaboration with other stakeholders in the transport system is critical to realising positive transport outcomes. These stakeholders include: The private sector plays a significant role in the transport system, as a major employer and significant investor in the transport system. This is particularly the case in the aviation and maritime sectors. The private sector can be a partner in helping to achieve transport outcomes, while also leading innovation in areas such as autonomous vehicles, drones, and shared mobility . Examples of key private sector stakeholders across different modes that we would expect you to engage with include:
Will continue to be imposed with a charge, but now using the following formula (same as above), which will increase their charge:
Will local government and Waka Kotahi have time to incorporate the GPS into their plans The Government is releasing the draft GPS now to provide Waka Kotahi, local government and the sector with an indication on what activities to include in their transport planning and funding strategies.
Will no longer receive rebates.
Will send around the briefing tomorrow
Williams, A. F. (). Contribution of the components of graduated licensing to crash reductions. Journal of Safety Research , , . Williams, A. F. (). Graduated driver licensing (GDL) in the United States in : A literature review and commentary. Journal of Safety Research , , . Williams , A. F., A. T. McCartt L. B. Sims (). History and current status of state graduated driver licensing (GDL) laws in the United States. Journal of Safety Research , : . Williams, A. F., B. C. Tefft, J. G. Gabowski (). Graduated driver licen sing research review, present. Journal of Safety Research , , . Zhu, M., P. Cummings, H. Chu, J. H. Coben, G. Li (). Graduated driver licensing and motor vehicle crashes involving teenage drivers: An exploratory age stratified meta analysis. Injury Prevention , , .
Willing Household Travel Survey participants are invited to take part in a variety of short surveys to allow deeper research into peoples attitudes to transport, what might influence travel in their daily lives and any travel patterns.
Willis C, Lybrand S, Bellamy N. Alcohol ignition interlock programmes for reducing drink driving recidivism. Art. No. CD .pub. Cochrane Database Syst Rev ;( Issue ).
With Waka Kotahi, we released a discussion paper that proposed a number of improvements to the driver licensing system. These were mostly aimed at supporting commercial sector productivity and reducing unnecessary compliance costs.
With regard to the amount of revenue raised for land transport, we concluded that central governments existing revenue tools could cope with foreseeable changes for about the next to years, but that we needed indicators to monitor these changes.
With regard to the information that has been withheld under section of the Act, I am satisfied that the reasons for withholding the information at this time are not outweighed by public interest considerations that would make it desirable to make the information avail able.
With regard to the information that has been withheld under section of the Act, I am satisfied that the reasons for withholding the information at this time are not outweighed by public interest considerations that would make it desirable to make the information available.
With regard to the information that has been withheld under section of the Act, I am satisfied that the reasons for withholding the information at this time are not outweighed by public interest considerations that would make it desirable to make the information available. We are withholding information that is related to the content of GPS that is currently under active consideration ( s()(f)(iv)) as officials are still working on the content of GPS .
With regard to the information that has been withheld under section of the Act, I am satisfied that the reasons for withholding the information at this time are not outweighed by public interest considerations that would make it desirable to make the information available. You have the right to seek an investigation and review of this response by the Ombudsman, in accordance with section () of the Act. The relevant details can be found on the Ombudsmans website www.ombudsman.parliament.nz
With regard to the information that has been withheld under section of the Act, I am satisfied that the reasons for withholding the information at this time are not outweighed by public interest considerations that would make it desirable to make the information available. You have the right to seek an investigation and review of this response by the Ombudsman, in accordance with section () of the Act. The relevant details can be found on the Ombudsmans website www.ombudsman.parliament.nz .
With regard to the information that has been withheld under section of the Act, I am satisfied that the reasons for withholding the information at this time are not outweighed by public interest considerations that would make it desirable to make the information available. You have the right to seek an investigation and review of this response by the Ombudsman, in accordance with section () of the Act. The relevant details can be found on the Ombudsmans website www.ombudsman.parliament.nz The Ministry publishes our Official Information Act responses and the information contained in our reply to you may be on the Ministry s website. Before publishing we will remove any personal or identifiable information.
With regard to the information that has been withheld under section of the Act, I am satisfied that the reasons for withholding the information at this time are not outweighed by public interest considerations that would make it desirable to make the information available. k, MINISTRX. OF TRANSPORT p TE MANATU WAKA
With regard to the permits, I note:
With the support of the Civil Aviation Authority, we are reviewing New Zealands drone regulatory settings and exploring options to find progressive ways to integrate drones into our aviation system.
With the support of the Civil Aviation Authority, we are reviewing New Zealands drone regulatory settings to address current and emerging issues from the use of drones. We are also exploring a range of regulatory options to find progressive ways to integrate drones into the aviation system.
With the weekly breakdown of the statistics below. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTI TY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending July
Women of Influence Award Doctor of Laws (Honorary) Victoria University of Wellington
Work is already underway to implement improvements to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of investment for (and beyond). Where opportunities still exist, several recommendations have been provided to build on the lessons learnt from the funding period, including: o Getting the investment signals and forecasts right o Enhancing sector wide capability and competency o Asset Manage ment Business Process Improvement o Strengthening Waka Kotahis performance monitoring o Having more robust assurance and at the right level o Enhancing monitoring and evaluation of performance to drive continuous improvement These are explored in more detail in the recommendation section . RECOMMENDATIONS The following opportunities for improvement have been identified for the consideration of Te Manat Waka and Waka Kotahi to action: Key Recommendations: Te Manat Waka The Ministry of Transport Investment levels . Refining Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) investment signals and requirements to be better relate to the contribution and expectations from the maintenance investment and the emerging context. . Working closely with Waka Kotahi in the development of year forecasts to ensure these are more reflective of trends and pressures faced by the industry. Assurance and evaluation . Work with Waka Kotahi to determine the appropriate level of monitoring andor re conducting of this review (or similar) between GPS periods. . Consider undertaking further reviews under the GPS Work Programme to determine the efficiency and effectiveness of the Local Road Maintenanc e Activity Class. Capability and competency . Work with Waka Kotahi to determine how best to enhance sector wide capability and competency.
Work ongoing ALRL assigns IP to MoT via a deed of assignment. Special resolution that the Company should be removed from the register Tax clearance letter and resolution are filed with the Registrar Registrar removes Company from the register and final Annual report is submitted Approval of Orders in Council to remove ALRL from legislation Bank account closed residual funds retained by the Ministry to execute final accounts for Audit NZ, the Board and contractors final payments up to the of signing the Annual report
Work programme developed on decarbonisation
Work underway on the stern of the vessel with the dockyard team in the process of removing the rudders.
Working groups final report presented to the Government
Working groups recommendations
Working groups report considered and further analysis commissioned
Working papers related to the study will be released subsequently.
Working with Waka Kotahi we drafted and consulted on the new Rules, which allowed operators to carry more in fewer trips by making better use of heavy vehicles existing capabilities and the road network capacity.
Working with Waka Kotahi, we reviewed the driver licensing system as part of our Safer Journeys road safety strategy.
Working with Waka Kotahi, we reviewed the driver licensing system as part of our Safer Journeys road safety strategy. The review found that the driver licensing systems core policies were sound but there were areas where improvements could produce measurable social, safety and economic benefits, while maintaining or improving road safety.
Working with other agencies, we reports relating to transport and the effects of the earthquake. One looked at how the earthquake would affect New Zealands gross domestic product (GDP), transport, business operations and tourism and the second recommended how to improve data and decisionmaking in the transport system.
Working with other government agencies to deliver land transport priorities.
Working with the Electricity Authority on addressing barriers such as connection costs and ensuring consistent approaches to EV charging connections across all electricity distributors in New Zealand.
Working with the public and stakeholders to develop regulations for the effective integration of drones into our aviation system.
Working with the rautaki Mori strategy here at Te Manat Waka gives me a sense of pride knowing that I am a part of a collective who continue to work towards bringing out the meaning of partnership.
Wrap up I am confident in the sector and your entities ability to work with central government and the rest of the sector to meet these challenges. New Zealands experiences with previous national disasters show us that we are able to rebuild, but also that we ca n go beyond that and improve the resilience of the network for the future.
Write a plain English equivalent to a legal or technical document In the plain English equivalent, give just enough information for our audiences to act.
Write an acronym that can be read as a word with an initial capital letter followed by lower case letters.
Write compound words as one word Many compound words can be written as one word without a hyphen.
Write from the MoTs viewpoint Use the first person plural. You are representing the Ministry, not yourself.
Write numbers one to nine in full in proper sentences (this only applies to writing for print).
Written Parliamentary Question s Received Number Topics Due () How many staff, if any, were employed in the Ministers departments, if any, on July that worked on greenhouse gas emissions reduction efforts, categorised by whether they worked on organisationalcorporate emissions reduction or nationwide emissions reduction or both () How many staff, if any, were employed in the Ministers departments, if any, on July that worked on greenhouse gas emissions reduction efforts, categorised by whether they worked on organisationalcorporate emissions reduction or nationwide emissions reduction or both () How many staff, if any, were employed in the Ministers departments, if any, on July that worked on climate change adaptation, categorised by work on corporateorganisational climate adaptation or national climate change adaptation or both s ()(a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Written Parliamentary Question s Received Number Topics Due () How many staff employed at the ministries, agencies and departments for which the Minister is responsible have signed non disclosure agreements since November , listed by agency, role title and the the agreement was signed, if any () What teams, business units, and functions in the Ministers departments, if any, have increased FTEs since November , and how many FTEs have they been increased by () What advice, if any, has the Minister received on the impact of public service cuts, if any, within their department, if any () What teams, business units, and functions in the Ministers departments, if any, have been disestablished since November , and how many FTE were in them s ()(a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Received Number Topics Due () What teams, business units, and functions in the Ministers departments, if any, have lost or more FTEs since November , and how many FTEs have they been reduced by () What correspondence by title and , has he received from international organisations (such as the Australian College of Road Safety) about his proposed changes to speed limits () How many submissions from Territorial Local Authorities (i.e. local councils, regional councils or unitary authorities), if any, were received on the draft Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits () Did the New Zealand Transport Agency support the Ministry of Transport in drafting the proposed Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits () Will the summary of submissions on the Draft Setting of Speed Limits Rule be before or after Cabinet makes a final decision on the rule () Has the Ministry completed counting the submissions received on the Setting of Speed Limits , and if so, how many were received () What is the total sum of money spent, if any, on contractors and consultants to assist in any change processes, role disestablishments, andor restructures, at departments, ministries and agencies for which the Minister is responsible, since November , listed by month and agency () What papers, if any, did the Minister take to Cabinet during the week beginning August , by title and () What Cabinet papers, if any, has the Minister taken to Cabinet Committees during the week beginning August , by Cabinet Committee, title and
Written Parliamentary Question s Received Number Topics Due () In light of the recent announcement that SeaLink ferry workers will be engaging in strike action from September to October due to pay disparities between SeaLink workers and those employed by Auckland Transport ferry providers, what steps, if any, is the Minister taking to address the concerns of these workers regarding wage parity () What aides mmoire , briefings, memos, notes, reports, or any other advice, if any, has the Minister or their Office received regarding Te Wiki o te Reo Mori , by and title () What funding models is the government considering for a new Waitemat Harbour crossing, and how might this impact other transport projects in Auckland and across New Zealand () What studies, if any, have been conducted, or are currently being conducted, on the potential economic and social impacts of different Waitemat Harbour crossing options on surrounding communities, by and title () What, if any, public transport improvements in Auckland are planned to coincide with the introduction of time ofuse charging to ensure viable alternatives for commuters () What plans, if any, are being considered for the revenue from time ofuse charging in Auckland () What advice, if any, has the Minister received on the economic impact of congestion and the projected economic benefits of implementing timeofuse charging in Auckland s ()(a)
Written Parliamentary Question s Received Number Topics Due () What are the terms of reference for the review of parking fees, including the review of mobility parking fines () Is the Minister committed to continuing the review of the Total Mobility scheme that was started in July () Further to the Ministers response to WPQ . What work, if any, has the Minister undertaken on the Total Mobility scheme since the release of Budget in May () When will the review of parking fees, including the review of mobility parking fines conclude () When will the review of parking fees, including the review of mobility parking fines commence s ()(a)
Written Parliamentary Question s Received Number Topics Due () Did the Ministers department, if any, have a chief science advisor as of July () Did the Ministers department, if any, have a chief science advisor as of July ; and if not, are there any plans for future hire of a chief science advisor () What Cabinet papers, if any, has the Minister taken to Cabinet Committees during the week beginning September , by Cabinet Committee, title and () What papers, if any, did the Minister take to Cabinet during the week beginning September , by title and . Departmental Official Information Act requests Due to Requester Requester Summary of request Extended Information on Sustainable Aviation Aotearoa Extended Information held on weather modification A copy of Road to Zero progress reports to the Ministerial Oversight Group since March Regarding the Change process s ()(a) s ()(a)
Written feedback can be sent to
Written questionnaires . The standard Estimates q uestionnaire is the first set of questions for the Estimates process. . We are expecting your office to receive approximately Supplementary questions from the Transport and Infrastructure Committee. The Ministry and the transport Crown agencie s will work on responses to these in time for you to meet the Committees deadline. . You are also likely to receive around post hearing questions based on the discussion at the hearing.
XiaoJing Liu (individual)
Year progress report
Year progress report
Year progress report
Year granted Total , , Grand Total ,
Yes No (f) Project G Auckland Transport Alignment Project (ATAP) Change deliverable from Deliver a set of outcomes and associated measures endorsed by Cabinet and Auckland Council in Q to Deliver the Tmaki Makaurau Transport Plan in Q. Yes No s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of
Yes No (j) Project P Cyclone recovery Include a new project in the Output Plan with two deliverables: Outline of transport work programme for Extreme Weather Recovery Committee included in briefing to Minister in Q
Yes No Note we consider some level of additional funding for the metro networks in the short term is required to reduce the risk of network failures.
Yes No .. agree to fund Environment Canterburys ( ECAN ) interim proposal to provide half price fares for year(half price from the base fare) , until August recommended Yes No
Yes No agree that the Minister of Transport should advise the Mayor of Auckland of the governments preferred process for the disposal of the land before steps to implement the disposal are taken Yes No Yes No Yes No agree that the Ministry of Transport notify the ALRL Board of Shareholding Ministers endorsement. Yes No Yes No Yes No RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of Ministers office to complete: Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events Comments
Yes No RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of note we are liaising with other agencies about non transport legislation that we consider should be amended by OiC to assist transport infrastructure recovery works. Noted
Yes No Yes No (i) Project O Speed Management Rule Include a new project in the Output Plan with a deliverable Provide advice to Minister on the scope of any changes required to the speed rule in Q.
Yes No Yes No (k) roadside oral fluid testing
Yes No Yes No Yes No s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of
You are meeting with Sigurur Ingi Jhannsson ( pronounced Sig urdur ). At the time of the meeting, it will be Wednesday morning (. am) in Iceland. Introduction Iceland has had some challenges with volcanic activity near Reykjavik in the past two months , and MFAT advises that it would be appropriate to express sympathy for the people affected . General comments on RUC: New Zealand has had a distance and weight based RUC system for over years applying to light diesel and all heavy vehicles . Light electric vehicles joined this system in April . As a next step, we are looking to transition the entire light vehicle fleet (mainly petrol vehicles) into RUC. We see this as a fairer and more effective long term system. We are investigating what changes are needed to the existing system to enable this transition. Our officials have been working together, and are happy to offer further support to help you develop your RUC system. Questions on RUC: What are your thoughts on effective ways to build public support for the shift to RUC What w as the primary objective in moving to RUC Was it to ensure electric vehicle owners pay, to increase overall revenue, ensuring fairness, or is it a strategic move to shift towards a more sophisticated road pricing system What do you see as the long term role of RUC, including using technology (GPS tracking) rather than odometer readings What were the key challenges in applying RUC to electric vehicles in Iceland What potential challenges could arise when transitioning the remaining vehicles to RUC Network Outcome Contracts : New Zealands approach to procurement seeks to foster value for money and competitive and efficient markets. It is used on our national state highway network, but local councils use their procurement approaches for local roads. Our Auditor General did a review a few years ago and generally agreed NOCs are working efficiently. A big challenge for us is understanding the right level of investment in road maintenance to optimise long term investment. Our officials would be happy to discuss the contracting model in more detail with your staff. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Annex : Comparison of New Zealand and Iceland New Zealand Iceland Population . million , GDP per capita (USD) , , High est value export s Dairy then red meat Aluminium then fish Gini coefficient . . Number of light vehicle s . million vehicles , vehicles Percentage of light vehicle fleet that is electric . percent percent VKT per year (per vehicle) , km , km Vehicles per person . .
You are not required to provide us with your personal information, but if you do not provide sufficient information we will be unable to progress your review application.
You are responsible for the passage of primary transport legislation through Parliament. The Ministry supports you to do this. Transport rules contain detailed standards, requirements and procedures that govern transport activities Transport rules are the most common form of delegated legislation for transport. Rules contain detailed technical standards, requirements, and procedures governing the construction, maintenance, licensing, certification and operation of transport activities within modes. You are empowered under primary legislation to make these rules through delegated responsibilities. You are expected to advise Cabinet that you intend to make a rule if there would be wide ranging impacts. There is an expedited rule making process where urgent changes can be made by Order in Council. The transport Crown entities develop the majority of transport rules with the Ministrys involvement, but the Ministry leads policy development on significant Rules. Regulations set out associated offences and penalties, fees, and charges Transport regulations mainly set out the associated rule related offences and penalties, and fees and charges that fund the work of the transport agencies. The Ministry leads the development of these with involvement from transport agencies and SOEs, and the NZ Police depending on the subject. Regulations must be approved by Cabinet. Transport instruments help support a more flexible regulatory system Transport instruments improve the flexibility of the rule making process by having more customised consultation requirements, meaning that changes that only affect a small number of transport users can be progressed quickly. Transport instruments can also be more easily amended in response to technological innovation. Transport instruments are outlined in a rule made by you as Minister of Transport, with the design and management delegated to a specified official (such as the Director of the relevant transport agency). Several transport instruments now exist in Maritime legislation, with more planned in other modes as part of work on secondary legislation. The Civil Aviation Act (which comes into force in ) also empowers the Minister to enable the creation of a t ransport instrument. The regulatory system, through legislation, rules, and regulation implements requirements under international conventions and agreements There are some international transport related agreements. However, only a small number require regular updates of our regulatory system. Crown monitoring, assurance, and oversight You have a role in appointing Board members to the transport agencies, setting their expectations and monitoring their performance. Crown entity monitoring and oversight is a key mechanism to deliver your priorities The Ministry and the transport Crown entities work collaboratively to progress your priorities and the delivery of transport outcomes, and other priority actions to maintain and renew the system. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS
You are the lead Minister for Maritime Security and the Ministry is the Strategic Coordination
You can adjust the rate of charges and duties for the NLTF to meet your priorities RUC rates are set through the RUC Rates Regulations and changes must be confirmed by Parliament. FED is generally set through amendments under the Customs and Excise Act and sometimes by an Order in Council. Crown funds can supplement transport revenue and be used to purchase specific projects or programmes Not all investment in the land transport sector is able to be met from the NLTF. Increasingly, the Crown has made direct investments in specific transport activities through the annual budget process led by the Minister of Finance. Unlike investment from the NLTF, where the Waka Kotahi Board has an independent role in overseeing and monitoring expenditure, Ministers are accountable for Crown funded activities. Ministers have decision making rights when changes are needed to the budget, scope or timeframes for these projects. While bodies like Waka Kotahi or KiwiRail may deliver Crown funded activities and investment programmes, the Crown usually establishes additional oversight arrange ments for any projects or programmes with Crown funding, such as the NZ Upgrade programme. These arrangements give Ministers assurance the intended investment outcomes are being achieved. CAA and MNZ are primarily funded from fees, charges and levies collected from passengers and participants in the aviation and maritime sector s. Economic and educational tools You can use travel demand management tools to drive behaviour change within the transport system Pricing and other economic tools can be used to encourage more efficient use of the network and can be used by local government to influence travel choices and decisions. Such tools include differential charging of public transport (eg, reduced off peak fares), subsidised public transport fares, tolling, congestion charging, and parking fees. Tolling , for example, can contribute to the cost of building and maintaining new roads. You are the key decision maker and responsible for recommending to the Governor General that a new road is tolled under the LTMA. The Ministry will provide advice on tolling proposals, liaise with the Road Controlling Authorities , and advise on the legislative process to establish a tolling order. Information and education help people to make more informed travel decisions by communicating information about their travel choices. Examples of these include travel planning apps , social media marketing, information provision, and mass media campaigns. There are times when you can achieve more significant benefits from combining economic and educational instruments with compl ementary measures, such as infrastructure provision and legislative changes. In doing so, these measures help to achieve the outcomes you want to see in the transport system . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT KEY TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES
You can ask for any official information we hold. This includes:
You can download the Reports below.
You can find information about the work that led up to this point here:
You can find more information about the scheme here:
You can find more information on the Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency website.
You can find the ministers contact details on our website.
You can give feedback in writing by return email directly to me or make a submission to the portsconsulttransport.govt.nz email. We would be happy to arrange a meeting within the consultation period of which is currently open now until July, to explain the key elements of the ports permits extension process, permit duration, impacts, conditions and discuss any of your questions or views.
You can provide feedback on these questions or any comments you consider relevant to
You can read the Act and the Rule on the Legislation website.
You can read the OIA on the New Zealand Legislation website.
You can read the Rule on the Waka Kotahi website.
You can read the report on the CAA website.
You can see the original direction here
You have a role in overseeing and managing the Crowns interests in, and relationship with the
You have a role in overseeing the delivery and performance of key transport agencies Your oversight role, supported by the Ministry, helps to ensure the transport Crown entities are effectively performing their functions, many of which deliver critical services to New Zealanders. Below are a range of accountability mechanisms that the Ministry will advise you on to assist you in overseeing t he transport Crown entities and meeting your statutory responsibilities. The capability and performance of the transport entity boards is critical in delivering your priorities and expectations Each Crown entity and company is governed by a board. There are a maximum of ministerial appointed positions across the transport sector. This is comprised of up to positions on Crown entities and companies, two medical convener positions, and adv isory committee positions. TAIC Commissioners are appointed by the Governor General on your recommendation and also act as the members of that entitys Board. Crown entity boards have the primary responsibility for their entitys performance. They exercise the power, perform the functions of each entity and hold responsibility for the operational decisions of their entities. You appoint (or recommend the appointment of) and oversee those boards as responsible Minister and are assisted by the Ministry as your monitoring agent, assisting you in discharging your statutory functions. Before appointments fall due, we will provide you with advice to support the appointment and re appointment of board members. As part of this process, we will provide you with an overall assessment of board capability and recommendations on the skills and capabilities needed to ensure your boards are well governed, effective, and high performing. https:www.publicservice.govt.nzguidanceit takes three operating expectations framework forstatutory crown entities RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Parliament including select committees) KEY TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES
You have a vital role in overseeing the delivery and performance of key transport agencies Your oversight role, supported by the Ministry, is vital in ensuring the transport Crown entities are effectively performing their functions, many of which deliver critical services to New Zealanders. Below are a range of accountability mechanisms that the Ministry will advise you on to assist you in overseeing the transport Crown entities and meeting your statutory responsibilities. Table Accountability mechanisms Accountability Mechanism Description Letter of Expectations Primary mechanism used to set the priorities and performance expectations on an annual basis. You can expect to receive draft letters from the Ministry around OctoberNovember. These letters are sent out well in advance of the financial year, so that Crown entities can respond effectively.
You have a vital role in overseeing the delivery and performance of key transport agencies Your oversight role, supported by the Ministry, is vital to ensure the transport Crown entities are effectively performing their functions, many of which deliver critical services to New Zealanders. Below are a range of accountability mechanisms that the Ministry will advise you on to assist you in overseeing the transport Crown entities and meeting your statutory responsibilities. The capability and performance of the transport entity boards is critical in delivering your priorities and expectations Each Crown entity and company is governed by a board. There are a maximum of ministerial appointed positions across the transport sector. This is comprised of up to positions on Crown entities, including positions on the ALRL Board, TAIC Commissioners, CRLL Board, Aviation Medical Conveners, and advisory committee positions. Crown entity boards have the primary responsibility for their entitys performance. They exercise the power, perform the functions of each entity and hold responsibility for the operational decisions of their entities. You appoint and oversee those boards as responsible Minister and are assisted by the Ministry as your monitoring agent, assisting you in discharging your statutory functions. As defined under section of the Crown Entities Act https:www.publicservice.govt.nzguidanceit takes three operating expectations framework forstatutory crown entities RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Parliament including select committees) KEY TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES
You have the right to seek an investigation and review of this response by the Ombudsman, in accordance with section () of the A ct. The relevant details can be found on the Ombudsmans website www.ombudsman.parliament.nz The Ministry publishes our Official Information Act responses and the information contained in our reply to you may be on the Ministry website. Before publishing we will remove any personal or identifiable information. Nku noa, n James Macleod Manager , Engagement Communications
You have the right to seek an investigation and review of this response by the Ombudsman, in accordance with section () of the Act. The relevant details can be found on the Ombudsmans website www.ombudsman.parliament.nz
You have the right to seek an investigation and review of this response by the Ombudsman, in accordance with section () of the Act. The relevant details can be found on the Ombudsmans website www.ombudsman.parliament.nz .
You have the right to seek an investigation and review of this response by the Ombudsman, in accordance with section () of the Act. The relevant details can be found on the Ombudsmans website www.ombudsman.parliament.nz The Ministry publishes our Official Information Act responses and the information contained in our reply to you may be on the Ministry website. Before publishing we will remove any personal or identifiable information.
You have the right to seek an investigation and review of this response by the Ombudsman, in accordance with section () of the Act. The relevant details can be found on the Ombudsmans website www.ombudsman.parliament.nz The Ministry publishes our Official Information Act responses, and the information contained in our reply to you may be on the Ministry s website. Before publishing we will remove any personal or identifiable information.
You retain ultimate accountability and will need to maintain confidence that each entity continues to
You view the Supplementary Order Paper on the New Zealand Parliament website
You will have regular meetings with Crown entity chairs to discuss entity governance, performance and key risks. The Ministry will provide you with advice to assist in your engagement. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT KEY TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES
You will have regular meetings with Crown entity chairs to discuss entity governance, performance and key risks. The Ministry will provide you with advice to assist in your engagement. The Ministry also conducts other assurance, funding, contracting and reviewing activities In addition to carrying out oversight and monitoring of the Crown entities and companies on your behalf, the Ministry also conducts other activities for government transport initiatives and programmes, Crown entities and Crown companies. For example, this includes providing advice on and monitoring programmes such as the NZ Upgrade Programme, the Climate Emergency Response Fund (CERF), and managing the MetService contract to ensure that New Zealand has a service that fulfils the World Meteorological Organisation Technical Regulations. The Ministry uses a Transport Sector Monitoring Framework that provides a structured approach to monitor interventions. This assesses entity governance, capability and performance, how entities communicate information to the board, their assurance mechanisms for key projects and programmes, and whether the board is receiving the necessary information from an entity. The approach is informed by your priorities and our assessment of key risks for each entity. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS
You will have regular meetings with Crown entity chairs to discuss entity governance, performance and key risks. The Ministry will provide you with advice to assist in your engagement. The Ministry also conducts other assurance, funding, contracting and reviewing activities In addition to carrying out oversight and monitoring of the Crown entities and companies on your behalf, the Ministry also conducts other activities for government transport initiatives and programmes, Crown entities and Crown companies. For example. this includes providing advice on and monitoring programmes such as the NZ Upgrade Programme, the Climate Emergency Response Fund (CERF), and managing the MetService contract to ensure that New Zealand has a service that fulfils the World Meteorological Organisation Technical Regulations. The Ministry uses a Transport Sector Monitoring Framework that provides a structured approach to monitor interventions. This assesses entity governance, capability and performance, how entities communicate information to the board, their assurance mechanisms for key projects and programmes, and whether the board is receiving the necessary information from an entity. The approach is informed by your priorities and our assessment of key risks for each entity. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS
You will have regular meetings with Crown entity chairs to discuss entity governance, performance and key risks. The Ministry will provide you with advice to assist in your engagement. The Ministry also conducts other assurance, funding, contracting and reviewing activities In addition to overseeing and monitoring the Crown entities and companies on your behalf, the Ministry also conducts other activities for government transport initiatives and programmes, Crown entities and Crown companies. For example, providing advice on and monitoring programmes such as the NZ Upgrade Programme, the Climate Emergency Response Fund (CERF), and managing the MetService contract to ensure New Zealand has a service that fulfils the World Meteorological Organisation Technical Regulations. The Ministry uses the Transport Sector Monitoring Framework which provides a structured approach to monitor interventions. This assesses entity governance, capability and performance, how entities communicate information to the board, their assurance mechanisms for key projects and programmes, and whether the board is receiving the necessary information from an entity. The approach is informed by your priorities and our assessment of key risks for each entity. Influencing the international environment New Zealands transport regulatory systems are significantly shaped by international obligations, standards and recommended practices. New Zealand benefits strongly from international transport RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT DELIVERING YOUR PRIORITIES
You will have regular meetings with Crown entity chairs to discuss entity governance, performance and key risks. The Ministry will provide you with advice to assist in your engagement. The Ministry conducts other assurance, funding, contracting and review activities In addition to overseeing and monitoring the Crown entities and companies on your behalf, the Ministry also conducts other activities for government transport initiatives and programmes, Crown entities and Crown companies. This includes, for example, providing advice on and monitoring programmes such as the NZ Upgrade Programme, the Climate Emergency Response Fund (CERF ), and managing the MetService contract to ensure New Zealand has a service that fulfils the World Meteorological Organisation Technical Regulations. The Ministry uses the Transport Sector Monitoring Framework, which provides a structured approach to monitor interventions. This assesses entity governance, capability and performance, how entities communicate information to the board, their assurance mechanisms for key projects and programmes, and whether the board is receiving the necessary information from an entity. The approach is informed by your priorities and our assessment of key risks for each entity. Influencing the international environment New Zealands transport regulatory systems are significantly shaped by international obligations, standards and recommended practices. New Zealand benefits strongly from international transport regulatory frameworks, which underpin our international connections and facilitate our trade in goods and services. The Ministry and the Crown Entities work together to: RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT DELIVERING YOUR PRIORITIES
You will never get bored working at Te Manat Waka as there are ample opportunities to work on different interesting projects that help shape the wellbeing and liveability of the current and future generations of New Zealand.
Your browser is outof
Your emails and contributions to the website may constitute public records and be retained to the extent required by the Public Records Act . We may also be required to disclose those materials under the Official Information Act or to a Parliamentary Select Committee in response to a Parliamentary Question.
Your engagement at the international level is important The Ministry will provide advice on where we consider there will be good value in your engagement in Ministerial level forums. Key opportunities over the next year may include: t he Australian Transport and Infrastructure Council Pacific Transport Ministerial level meetings International Transport Forum (ITF) Annual Ministerial Summit AsiaPacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Ministerial meeting . Delivering your priorities The Ministry can help you to achieve your priorities a nd connect them with government wide priorities , including advis ing you on us ing the available tools within the transport portfolio to achieve your short , medium and longer term goals. This includes working with the transport agencies to develop a coherent strategic view of the longer term needs for the transport system. Strategies that use a package of interventions to address specific issues may be developed or amended. For example, the New Zealand Freight and Supply Chain Strategy was developed to prepare and, respond to substantial change affecting the sector . It articulate s a long term vision for the freight and supply chain to be: underpinned by zero emissions freight transport resilient, reliable, and prepared for potential disruptions highly productive and efficient. The strategy outlines what needs to be done to reach this long term vision over three time horizons. Transport sector agencies also support a range of cross government strategies. For example, the Ministry and the CAA also have important roles in supporting the implementation of the Aotearoa New Zealand Aerospace Strategy, led by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment. Additionally, there are short term transport sector delivery plans, many of which are governed by Acts of Parliament and are key components of the transport planning and funding system. For example, the Decarbonising Transport Action Plan ( ) sets out what the Government will do to implement the transport actions in the first Emissions Reduction Plan, and what New Zealand needs to do to reduce transport emissions by by and reach net zero by . Transports role within the wider system Outside of existing collaboration between government agencies and SOEs , collaboration with other stakeholders in the transport system is critical to realising positive transport outcomes. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TRANSPORTS ROLE WITHIN THE WIDER SYSTEM
Your feedback will help inform final policy decisions on the fees to be charged to review applicants.
Your guide to the Transport System
Your guide to the Transport System
Your guide to the Transport System
Your guide to the Transport System
Your guide to the Transport System
Your guide to the Transport System
Your guide to the Transport System
Your guide to the Transport System
Your guide to the Transport System
Your guide to the Transport System
Your guide to the Transport System
Your guide to the Transport System i
Your guide to the Transport System iii
Your guide to the Transport System v
Your guide to the Transport system transport.govt.nz
Your guide to the Transport system transport.govt.nz ISSN ISSN print delete if empty ISSN ISSN electronic delete if empty RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT , Te Kiwanatanga o Aotearoa New Zealand Government He pepa whakamhiotanga m te Minita Briefing to the Incoming Minister (System) Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport October RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TE MANATU WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT CONTENTS
Your guide to the Transport system transport.govt.nz ISSN ISSN print delete if empty ISSN ISSN electronic delete if empty RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT , Te Kiwanatanga o Aotearoa New Zealand Government He pepa whakamhiotanga m te Minita Briefing to the Incoming Minister (System) Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport October RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TE MANATU WAKA p MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT CONTENTS
Your guide to the transport system transport.govt.nz
Your request was processed by the office of Minister Bishop, as the new Minister of Transport. Minister Bishops office advised you on February that the first part of your request was transferred to the Ministry of Transport Te Manat Waka (the Ministry) under section of the Act. That was because the information requested was not held by the Minister and was more closely related to the functions of the Ministry. Three documents are within scope of the transferred part of your request and are released with some information withheld. The document schedule at Annex details how the paper s have been treated. The following section of the Act has been used:
Your role as Associate Minister
Your role as responsible Minister of these entities is to oversee and manage the Crowns interests in, and relationship with those entities . While you are ultimately accountable, the boards you appoint to these are primarily responsible for their performance . The Ministry is your monitoring agent for the transport Crown entities. The roles and responsibilities of the Minister, Crown entity and monitoring department are summarised through Figure and outlined further within the It Takes Three Framework. . Figure Roles and responsibilities of the Minister, Crown entity and monitoring department
Your role as responsible Minister of these entities is to oversee and manage the Crowns interests in, and relationship with, a statutory entity. While you are ultimately accountable for the performance of these entities, the Boards that you appoint to these are primarily responsible. The Crown carries out service delivery and regulation activities in the transport system through Crown transport entities and Crown companies: Waka Kotahi, MNZ, CAA, Auckland Light Rail Limited (ALRL) and City Rail Link Limited (CRLL). The Ministry is your monitoring agent for the transport Crown entities. The roles and responsibilities of the Minister, Crown entity and monitoring department are outlined in the It Takes Three Framework,
Your submission is public information
Youre invited to share your views
Zealand Police, New Zealand Defence Force, Fire and Emergency New Zealand, and an
Zealand are still below the pre levels at around percent . In contrast globally, commercial
Zealand or the international relations of the New Zealand Government
Zealand) are negotiating a plan to mitigate GHG emissions from shipping. The approach will likely
Zealands obligations under i nternational aviation agreements are implemented. It is supported by
Zero emission vehicles (EVs)
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Ministerial priorities Safety Project: Speed limits We have provided you with a briefing seeking your direction on the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits (the Speed Rule) following public consultation. Once we receive your direction, we will issue drafting instructions to NZTA. We are working to meet the Governments Quarter Action of signing the final Speed Rule by September . We are proposing that you report back to Cabinet with the outcomes of the public consultation and key policy changes on the Speed Rule. However, to enable NZTA sufficient drafting time on the Speed Rule, we propose that you do not take the Speed Rule itself back to Cabinet. Process Dates Briefing to Minister on outcome of consultation Wednesday August weeks Draft Cabinet paper , final Regulatory Impact Assessment and final Summary of submissions to Minister Wednesday August weeks Ministerial and departmental consultation September week Cabinet paper lodged September Cabinet paper speaking points and draft press release to Minister September Cabinet Economic Policy Committee September Cabinet confirmation of ECO decisions September Final Rule to Minister for signing After Cabinet, on September New Rule in force Late October ( days after notification in the NZ Gazette)
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE . Safety Speed Rule Consultation Paul OConnell OC . Public Transport Policies Direction Jess Ranger OC . Approval of legislative changes to increase land transport fees Paul OConnell OC
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Updates on other matters Year End: Transport Choices claims exceeding appropriation Transport Choices appropriation breach There is an appropriation breach within Vote Transport in in the Mode Shift Planning, Infrastructure, Services, and Activities appropriation for the Transport Choices Initiative. The appropriation breach is a result of Third Party claims from Councils exceeding the expenditure available in the appropriation by approximately . million. NZTA have informed us that this is a phasing issue Councils have claimed more in than the appropriation allowed but will claim less in , and the programme is expected to cost less overall that initially anticipated. The Schedule projects (pre implementation) were given an end of June to submit claims and complete projects. Schedule projects (implementation) have an end of June . NZTA base their estimated spend from Councils on the average monthly claim amounts (with some allowance for a spike in June when final claims were expected). NZTA have informed us that monthly averages were . million in claims between July and May , with June jumping to . million. NZTA have also advised that their funding agreements with Councils do not align with the parameters of the appropriation (MCA) each funding agreement covers multiple years (ending in ), not separating spending into financial years. Next steps In discussing the appropriation breach with NZTA, the Ministry has suggested to NZTA that the Chair could write to you on this issue outlining the steps NZTA will put in place to prevent future breaches. The Ministry are in the process of updating the Transport Choices Funding Agreement to reflect the Governments decisions in Budget . Officials will include clauses in the Supplementary Funding Agreement to mitigate the risk of this occurring again. We are undertaking a review of appropriations within the Vote to assess whether appropriation structures are fit for purpose and to ensure the Ministry has a good understanding of the risks within each appropriation.
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Transport stakeholder updates Stakeholder Update Carma Officials from the Ministry and NZTA met with Carma, who wrote to you recently requesting to meet to discuss their technology for tolling. The company is US based, and has developed an app (GoCarma) that uses smartphones to track vehicles for road pricing purposes. The company is currently focused on tolling and high occupancy vehicle (HOV) lane verification, but is interested in expanding into other areas of road pricing including RUC and congesting pricing. They currently have one primary market in Texas that is trialling this approach, with , vehicles using the app to pay for tolls and to run the HOV lane system. Their technology requires a single install of their app on a phone, registration to a vehicle, and connecting to the vehicle using Bluetooth for more modern cars to verify the phone is present in the correct vehicle. Once the app is installed, it works in the background each time it detects that the Bluetooth is connected to the registered vehicle. Vehicles using HOV lanes are detected via ANPR cameras. If there was no smartphone present in the vehicle with the GoCarma app running in the background at the t ime, the vehicle is subject to a full toll. If a phone running and the app is detected in the vehicle at the time , the user pays a toll at a percent discount via the GoCarma app. For basic distance based RUC, they consider their approach will work by: charging based on distance for whenever the phone is present in the vehicle, charging based on regular updates of odometer distance provided via a photo taken in the app for when the vehicle is used without a phone with the app present , and manual washup via enforcement methods (point of vehicle sale or inspection) at a higher rate if the GoCarma kilometres differ from the vehicle odometer.
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming Minister of Transport m eetings Meeting Meeting Details Wednesday August .pm .pm Meeting with the Imported Motor Vehicle Industry Association (VIA) on VIA s request for a forward looking regulatory programme Briefing Due: Friday August Officials Attending: TBC Wednesday August pm Meeting with Air Chathams Limited Briefing Due: COB Monday August Officials Attending: Richard Cross, Director, Investment Monitoring Chelsea Whitfield, Senior Adviser, Programme Monitoring Investment Management Wednesday August .pm .pm Meeting with the National Road Carriers Association (NRC) on data, freight productivity, regulatory reform, and land transport funding Briefing Due: Received
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Other upcoming Ministry of Transport Cabinet papers There are no other upcoming Ministry of T ransport Cabinet papers this week.
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Other briefings and aide memoires to Minister of Transport Note: Papers we propose to be included in your weekend bag will be submitted by close of business Wednesday in the week they are submitted. Due to Office Title Week ending August Advanced Aviation Reform Advisory Group Recommendations The Introduction to the drone work programme has now been subsumed into the work being undertaken by the Advanced Aviation Reform Advisory Group. We will be providing recommendations to you and the Minister of Space on changes needed to ensure New Zealand has a world leading regulatory system for advanced aviation. Week ending August Chatham Islands Shipping Service Early Confirmation of In Principle Expense Transfer This briefing seeks Joint Ministers (Transport, Agriculture and Finance) agreement to transfer forward Ministry of Transport and Ministry for Primary Industries underspends of . million each from to , early confirmation of an in principle expense transfer of million from to in Vote Transport and million in Vote Agriculture, Biosecurity, Fisheries and Food Safety to address animal welfare concerns on the Chatham Islands. Week ending August Week ending August Week ending August Aviation Industry Association Conference This briefing will provide background information to support your attendance and speech at the Aviation Industry Association Conference in Christchurch on Tuesday August . Week ending August Public Transport Bus Decarbonisation Fund Week ending August Review of Bus Decarbonisation Mandate and Target
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE . Proactive Releases Due to Office Title planned for release Wednesday August Proactive release of Land Transport (Drug Driving) Amendment Bill This briefing will seek your approval to release a collection of C abinet material related to the Land Transport (Drug Driving) Amendment Bill. Monday September Wednesday August Proactive release of Civil Aviation Act : Implementation This briefing will seek your approval to release a collection of C abinet material related to the Civil Aviation Act : Implementation Bill. Monday September
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE . Other portfolio Cabinet p apers with t ransport implications Committees Cabinet Cabinet Business Committee Monday August New Zealand Emissions Trading Scheme Technical Updates and New Zealand Emissions Trading Scheme unit limits and price control settings for The Minister of Climate Change (MCC) will be presenting two papers related to the Emissions Trading Scheme. The first is a routine technical regulatory update, which is required annually, while the second paper will set the unit limits and price control settings. This second paper has important implications for emissions reductions and the second Emissions Reduction Plan. The second paper presents two options to draw down (or reduce) the surplus stockpiled credits (NZUs) available on the market. The NZU surplus creates challenges for achieving emissions budgets, so drawing down the surplus will assist in the ETS achieving the Governments emissions goals. The paper presents two options to reduce the surplus by reducing the number of NZUs the government auctions between and : the first option proposes reducing the auction volume so that of the surplus stockpile is removed, and the second option proposes reducing the auction volume so that of the surplus stockpile is removed. MCC recommends this option. The recommended option is fully consistent with the Governments proposed ERP policy of the ETS being the primary tool for emissions reduction. The Cabinet paper notes that the preferred option would result in a consumer price index (CPI) increase of approximately . for every increase in NZU price. Since the preferred option would increase NZU price by , this would result in an increase of . increase in CPI out to . s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Ministerial correspondence and OIAs Ministerial correspondence We did not receive five or more pieces of Ministerial correspondence on any one topic this week.
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE . Departmental Official Information Act requests Due to Requester Requester Summary of request All advice on Clean Car Standard changes Any documents from the Ministry that accompanied the Report of the Ministerial Advisory Group on Future Ferry Services on the Cook Strait Three recent Value for Money studies A summary of responses received on the consultation into the GPS A copy of the review undertaken by the Ministry into the Clean Car Standard Advice or analysis on the C lean Car Standard between the Ministry and members of the industry, as well as between the Ministry and the Ministers Office Documents on potential changes to the tolling system All written advice provided to Ministers that informed the draft second Emissions Reduction Plan Tolling briefings All documents held by the Ministry relating to the Clean Car Standard created post October Information on the use of AI within the Ministry Salary information All communication regarding the baseline savings excise in budget between tier , and staff Seeking June Briefings Seeking June Briefings Seeking June Briefings Extended The Draft Land Transport: Setting of Speed Limits RIS and correspondence on this topic s ()(a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Actions from Transport Officials Meeting
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE An opportunity to amend the Marine and Coastal Area (Takutai Moana) Act to better enable transport infrastructure delivery Minister Goldsmith has initiated a review of parts of the Marine and Coastal Area (Takutai Moana) Act (the Act), with legislative changes proposed to define the terms exclusive use and occupation and substantial interruption (section ) and to clarify that applicant groups are required to prove exclusive use and occupation from to the present day (section ). The Act has implications for how NZTA delivers road infrastructure in the coastal marine area. Such infrastructure can include bridges over estuaries, seawalls that protect roads, and culverts for the discharge of stormwater runoff.
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Appendix One Driver Licensing wait times graphs and interventions plan update as at Friday August :
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Auckland s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv), s ()(g)(i) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Aviati on
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Board Appointments Civil Aviation Authority These appointments were announced this week. We will work with your Office on any matters arising from these announcements. Maritime New Zealand On Friday August , the Ministry sought feedback on the draft letters to five Maritime New Zealand Board members whose terms have expired or will expire on Thursday August . We have received your feedback on these letters, and will send them on Thursday August . Once sent, the Ministry will be in a position to publicly seek nominations for the director roles. We will look to provide further information on this next week.
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Bus Driver Workforce Reporting July Update In general, PTAs are reporting high levels of seasonal illness, which is impacting on driver availability and bus cancellation rates. This occurs every winter and is not a cause for concern. SuperGold Card and Waiheke Island ferry services
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Coastal Shipping updates The Government Policy Statement on Land Transport included an activity class for coastal shipping. Following an open market tender process, NZTA co invested with suppliers that contributed to the activity class objectives such as enhancing domestic shipping services, reducing shipping emissions, improving efficiency and upgrading maritime infrastructure. A summary of our investments can be found here: https:www.nzta.govt.nzplanning and investmentnational land transport programme nltpactivity classescoastal shipping This update advises you of two updates of note regarding two of the suppliers. Shire Shipping (Pacifica) NZTA contributed towards the initial operating cost of a second coastal vessel for Pacifica; the Takutai Chief. The Takutai Chief has been operating since November , but Pacifica has advised that it is withdrawing the vessel from service due to a downturn in trade. NZTA under wrote the monthly operating costs of The Takutai Chief, to a maximum of . million. Our co investment with Pacifica concluded in June when this funding was fully utilised. Westland Mineral Sands Ltd Our investment with Westland Mineral Sands Ltd included a contribution to the capital costs of a new barge. The barge Manahau undertook significant upgrades in dry dock in Indonesia and has recently arrived in New Zealand. Following a Port State Control inspection by Maritime NZ, and remediation of some identified deficiencies, on August the Manahau was released into service. NZTA contacting owners of vehicles imported with falsified documentation We advised your office in the week commencing M onday July , that a joint operation between NZTA and the New Zealand Customs Service (Customs) led to the arrest of a man for importing second hand vehicles mostly trucks from Japan using falsified vehicle documents. Customs issued a media release on Wednesday July with information from NZTA stating that there are no immediate safety concerns with these vehicles. Our investigation is ongoing, and well start contacting affected vehicle owners from next week (week commencing Monday August ) with information on what they must do to correct the odometer, year of manufacture andor gross vehicle mass. We will engage with entry inspecting organisations before contacting vehicle owners to ensure they are fully aware of the vehicle issues and the remediation required. We will also issue a media release. Safety cameras update We previously advised that installation of the SH P keno to Mangtawhiri average speed camera would take place in July and the site would become our second point to point test corridor. Site installation has now paused while the programme team prioritises transferring the first cameras from NZ Police. The timeline for installation at this site is currently being reworked because of this.
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Consultation on the reform of the design, construction and equipment rules for domestic commercial vessels opened on Wednesday August On Monday July , Cabinet agreed to Maritime NZ initiating public consultation on proposals to reform the design, construction and equipment rules for domestic commercial vessels. Consultation will occur in three tranches over a month period. The Ministry is supporting this process. The first tranche of proposals opened for consultation on Wednesday August and will run until October . The consultation is seeking feedback on proposals related to: Fire Protection; Life saving Appliances; Machinery and Ancillary Equipment; and Anchors and Cables. To support consultation, Maritime NZ has directly contacted approximately regulated parties and will be including information in a range of stakeholder publications. In addition, throughout consultation Maritime NZ is holding online information sessions for stakeholders to discuss the proposals. Maritime NZ will update Minister Doocey as consultation progresses.
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE of release Subject Week commencing Monday August WaikatoBay of Plenty SH safety improvements A media statement is planned for release marking the completion of a range of safety improvements on State Highway , for the Cambridge Piarere project. Wednesday August South Island SH realignment Dunedin north NZTA, Dunedin City Council (DCC) and Otago Regional Council, as part of Connecting Dunedin transport group, may issue a joint media release on Wednesday August after a DCC meeting to discuss this proposed minor realignment of SH around the new Dunedin Hospital.
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Due to Requester Requester Summary of request Extended to Internal correspondence with NZTA on the proposed Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits Consultation reports for the draft GPS June Briefings Correspondence held between the Ministry and PSC about the Performance Improvement Review Programme June Briefings and Waitemat Harbour crossing project briefings and papers Requesting a list of job titles that hold Ministry credit cards and the number of cards shared Requesting the Northport dry dock business case Information held regarding ending the public transport subsidies Requesting information relating to any planning for minute cities or regional areas in NZ Seeking information on Sustainable Aviation Aotearoa Information surrounding the requesters medical convener tribunal hearing Further information surrounding the requesters medical convener tribunal hearing Correspondence between the Minister and The Ministry regarding the Clean Car Standard Direction given to the Ministry by the Minister of Transport around Auckland Transport on its congestion charging plans Requesting internal guidelines on policies, or procedures that relates to neurodiversity, disability, or accessibility All advice produced for the Climate Implications of Policy Assessment regarding the Clean Car Standard changes announced by the g overnment on July s ()(a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Due to Requester Requester Summary of request Seeking Light Rail documents such as the superfunds presentation, and project updates
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Due to Ministers Office Due to Requester Requester Summary of request All advice received from departments on the removal of carbon emission subsidies for vehicles, reduced emissions standards , and the implications for New Zealands car fleet Any correspondence received or sent by the Office regarding the Lower North Island Rail Integrated Mobility Programme (LNIRIM) Requesting all documents relating to the February Meeting with Port Company CEOs Advice or correspondence between the Minister of Transport and officials regarding the development of the new GPS June Briefings
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Due to Office Title Week ending August Interim advice on the Metropolitan Rail Operating Model Review This briefing will provide you with interim advice on: Week ending August The Interim Aviation Council and the National Aviation Policy Statement This briefing will update you on the work being undertaken by the Interim Aviation Council to develop a National Aviation Policy Statement. Week ending August Week ending August Civil Aviation Authority Statutory Functions This briefing will provide further advice on aligning the New Zealand regime with Australia.
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Emissions Project: Clean Car Importer Standard Review of the Clean Car Importer Standard (the Standard) We have provided your Office with the draft Cabinet Legislation Committee paper to progress the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Regulations (the Regulations), which have also been sent. The regulations set new targets for and ex empt disability vehicles from the Standard. These documents are accompanied by a briefing that sets out the factors you must consider under section C() of the Land Transport Act before recommending that the Regulations be made. Cabinet Paper: Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Regulations Provided t o Minister: Tuesday August To Lodge: Thursday August To Committee: Thursday August (LEG) To Cabinet and Executive Council: September Briefing: Pre requisites for the Land Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Regulations Week ending Friday August Project: EV Charging Infrastructure
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Engaging with Road Controlling Authorities regarding the National Speed Limit Register NZTA, in its capacity as regulator, plans to engage with a small sample of Road Controlling Authorities (RCAs) within the next two weeks to help mitigate the risk of speed limit reversals (proposed in the draft Setting of Speed Limits Rule (the Rule)) not being entered into the National Speed Limits Register (NSLR) within the timeframes specified in the draft Rule. Discussion will be strictly limited to potential technical process improvements by RCAs or NZTA (as the regulator) to complete speed limit reversals efficiently and effectively, should the Rule as currently drafted become law. Engagement will be targeted at Christchurch City Council, Dunedin City Council, Hutt City Council, Queenstown Lakes District Council and NZTA (as RCA), as they are amongst the RCAs expected to have the most significant administrative changes associated with reversals. Driver Licensing wait times Summary for week ending Friday August Wait times for practical testing (restricted and full testing) have improved compared to last week. full tests down by days ( days) restricted tests down by days ( days) At an individual site level, of full test sites and of restricted test sites met the days or less target last week. While the monthly backlog increased steadily from October , it has remained consistently at K ( ) since the end of June . Testing forecast
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Full licence test volumes overseas conversions vs. domestic tests monthly Overseas conversations currently represent . of overall full test volume.
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Investment Project: Government Policy Statement on Land Transport GPS Monitoring and Reporting We have also provided you with a draft letter to the NZTA Board Chair setting out your feedback on the NZTAs first iteration Performance and Efficiency Plan (PEP). The feedback set out in this draft letter aligns with the advice we provided you on Wednesday July (OC) that the first iteration plan meets most of the requirements in GPS , but that the PEP needs updating to: provide more information on how it will meet the percent State Highway rehabilitation target; and note that NZTA will set and report against a baseline of actual spend on Temporary Traffic Management (TTM) over the past three years. We have outlined in the letter that NZTA should address the requirements above in the PEP before it is released on Friday August . We have also requested that the NZTA develop and provide more information on the Road Efficiency Groups role, scope, and reporting by Friday August and that this information should then be made publicly available. Ten Year Investment Planning Officials are currently scoping work to require future Government Policy Statements on Land Transport to include a ten year investment plan (including considering the potential legislative and system changes needed and the interaction with long term planning by NZTA and local government). We are currently working on a briefing setting out the status quo, problem definition, and scope of work to implement ten year investment plans. We will provide this briefing to you by September . Briefing: Ten Year Investment Planning: Project scope This briefing will set out the proposed scope of work, and timeline, to require future Government Policy Statements to adopt a ten year investment plan. September Project: Triennial review of Section () Search and Rescue (SAR) funding Following discussions with yourself, the Ministry considers that it would be appropriate to brief yourself and the Minister of Finance on our proposed approach to the triennial review of Section () SAR funding, We will provide your Office with advice on this matter in the week commencing Monday August .
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE July hour pothole initiative results In June , NZTA submitted a month variation request to all maintenance contract suppliers (excluding Public Private Partnerships) to achieve hour (temporary) pothole repairs, to be implemented from July . Achievement targets for high classification roads were set at , and for lower classification roads at . National results for July : Category Resolution Time Band Completed Count Total Completion Percentage Achieved Target National State Highways Up to Hours National High Volume State Highways Up to Hours Regional State Highways Up to Hours Regional Collector Highways Up to Hours Regional Distributor Highways Up to Hours Undetermined Up to Hours Total Each item counted represents a single pothole repair attendance. An attendance would typically relate to a single pothole but may represent multiple potholes if they exist in very close proximity. Figures for previous periods can change if contractors correct transactions retrospectively. Any such changes are minor and not material to the overall result. Undetermined (in category) relates to road sections within RAMM (source data) without a classification In July , of those that did not meet target threshold ( dispatches) (noting repairs with long lead times are often due to the need to establish temporary traffic management prior to executing the repair ): were completed within hours, and a further were completed between two and seven days. The remainder took longer than this, with dispatches recorded as still outstanding as at Sunday August (noting dispatches recorded up until Wednesday July ). Throughout July , NZTA has been working closely with suppliers with daily operational standups to monitor performance and trends by network and this will continue. Outliers are assessed to identify if there are data or compliance issues.
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Northland Corridor Road of National Significance Vehicle Regulatory System Reform We briefed you on vehicle regulatory reform (OC BRI refers). You agreed to meet with officials to discuss your preferences for a review of the vehicle regulatory system, including your priorities, expectations, and anticipated phasing. Officials would like to discuss: our approach to sector engagement, including public discussion of the reform proposals , and our proposed work programme and key deliverables for FY . We will work with your Office to arrange a time for this meeting.
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Officials agenda
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Ongoing actions from transport officials meeting July Ongoi ng July Aviation Officials to provide further advice on aligning the New Zealand regime with Australia. Friday August July EV Charging Officials to: Up dates will be provided in the Weekly Report.
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Ongoing actions from transport officials meeting June Revenue
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Ongoing actions from transport officials meeting Officials Meeting Action Due February ALR Officials to provide monthly updates of expected winddown costs of ALR. Ongoing March GPS Officials to provide weekly updates on next steps across programmes of work signalled in the GPS. Ongoing April Speed Officials to complete sensitivity testing across different road classifications to support the development of NZTAs cost benefit analysis guidance. Complete May GPS Friday August May Chatham Islands update Officials to provide a weekly joint M inistry , MNZ, DIA, MBIE, and MPI briefing on the situation in the Chatham Islands, covering fuel, livestock, and the boat purchase. Ongoing June Public Transport Officials to provide monthly update on bus driver shortage numbers. Ongoing June Auckland Complete June Ongoing June Driver Licensing NZTA is progressing the operational work programme to reduce wait times to under days. Underway s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Project: Budget Week beginning September
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Project: Budget funding for metro rail renewals Briefing: Budget Approval to drawdown funding for metro renewals This briefing will seek your agreement to drawdown the GWRC portion of the . million for metro renewals. It will provide advice on the priorities for investment, monitoring and reporting on the investment, and the response from GWRC. Week ending Friday August Briefing: Budget Approval to drawdown funding for metro renewals This briefing will seek your agreement to drawdown the AT portion of the . million for metro renewals. It will provide advice on the priorities for investment, monitoring and reporting on the investment, and the response from ACAT. week ending Friday August
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Project: Fleetwide t ransition to the Road User Charges system We have a workshop with you on Wednesday August , Project: Increasing motor vehicle registration (MVR) annual licence fees Draft regulations have been prepared by Parliament ary Counsel Office for increasing the annual vehicle licence fees by in January and in January . The next step will be for you to review the draft Land Transport (Motor Vehicle Registration and Licensing) Amendment Regulations (No ) , and the accompanying Cabinet Legislation Committee paper, prior to departmental and Ministerial consultation.
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Project: Increasing motor vehicle registration (MVR) annual licence fees Cabinet paper : Approval for Land Transport (Motor Vehicle Registration and Licensing) Amendment Regulations (No ) The accompanying briefing note will seek agreement to consult with other agencies and Ministers on the draft regulations and LEG paper. First draft to Minister: Wednesday August Departmental consultation: August Ministerial consultation: September to September To lodge: September To Committee: September To Cabinet: September Publication Gazetting: October
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Project: Road safety objectives On Tuesday July , your Office provided feedback on the draft Road Safety Objectives document. We have responded to your feedback and provided you with an document for your consideration. Following your approval, we can commence Departmental and Ministerial consultation from Tuesday August . Cabinet paper: Releasing the final Road Safety Objectives document This paper seeks agreement to publish the final New Zealand Road Safety Objectives document. Departmental and Ministerial consultation: August August Final papers to your Office: Wednesday August To lodge: August or September To Committee: September (ECO) To Cabinet: September Project: Land Transport Fees Amendment Package Following Ministerial consultation from to August, we will provide a final copy of the LEG paper for lodging on Thursday August . PCO will lodge the Amendment Regulations. We will provide you with a draft media release and talking points for LEG on Thursday August . Cabinet paper: Approval of legislative changes to update land transport fees Ministerial consultation: August Final LEG paper to your Office: August To lodge: Thursday August To Committee: Thursday August (LEG) To Cabinet Executive Council: Monday August Press release: week commencing Monday August Final to Gazette: September In force: October s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Project: Second Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP) Consultation on ERP started on Wednesday July and will end on Wednesday August . The transport webinar on Tuesday July had attendees. We will continue to participate in a series of consultation webinars hosted by the Ministry for the Environment (MfE). There have been submissions so far across the ERP, but most are expected to be submitted toward the end of the consultation period. In the online webinars, there has been interest and clarifications sought across all aspects of the transport chapter of ERP. Some themes included seeking further information and details on the EV charging policy and how it would support EV uptake; what role mode shift would play in ERP whether related to public transport, active transport or freight; and the extent of modelling and the impact of the ETS. Once the consultation period ends on Wednesday August we will update you on the key transport themes from the consultation through the Weekly Report . PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Project: Triennial review of Section () Search and Rescue (SAR) funding Briefing: Expectations for triennial review of Section () SAR funding This briefing will seek confirmation from yourself and the Minister of Finance on the approach to the triennial review of Section () SAR funding,Week commencing Monday August Project: Budget
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Project: Waitemat Harbour Connections
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Rail Project: Budget funding for metro rail renewals On May you wrote to Auckland Council (AC) and Greater Wellington Regional Council (GWRC) regarding Budget funding for metro rail. We now have responses from both councils, which will help inform our advice to you. We are awaiting advice from KiwiRail on the We have met weekly with AT and KiwiRail subsequently, and can provide the following update: AT and KiwiRail are bringing NZTA into the discussions to provide some clarity around what constitutes an AT are meeting with KR on a weekly basis as We have agreed to stay in regular contact with AT in addition to KiwiRail and will give you a weekly readout on the We had originally advised that we would provide you with a Briefing s ()(j) s ()(j) s ()(j) s ()(j) s ()(j) s ()(j) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Revenue Project: Revenue system report back Update on Cabinet paper proposing a Revenue Action Plan We will provide materials to your O ffice for the workshop scheduled for Wednesday August . Establishment of a stakeholder reference group We expect to have concluded discussions with potential members of the stakeholder reference group by the end of this week, are preparing appointment letters and will provide a more substantive update next week. Update to the Infrastructure and Investment Ministers Group (IIMG) Treasurys Secretariat for the IIMG has asked whether you would be prepared to take an item to the group on September to update Ministers on tolling and RUC progress. We consider that this would be a relatively timely opportunity for an update, which can incorporate aspects of our workshops with you scheduled for Wednesday August , and our advice on both subjects in early September . Decision sought: Please indicate if you agree to the above approach Yes No
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Stakeholder Update Aviation Sector Preparation is in progress for the Monday August release of consultation documents on the Independent Review Function and provision of aviation security services. We are working with CAA to coordinate our engagement as much as possible with the CAA led consultation on the CAA pricing review, which will also be released on Monday August (pending approval by Cabinet on Monday August ). We are working with your Office on the approach being taken. Please let us know if you would like more detail.
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Statistics page Ministerial correspondence figures from to August Item: Number Ministerial Correspondence Written Parliamentary Questions MinisterMinister Office queries Ministerial OIA requests Themes Potholes, temporary traffic management, driver licence renewals
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE The Ministry estimates that the impact of the preferred option on petroldiesel prices would be an increase of . out to . This is broadly in line with the Cabinet paper estimate, as petroldiesel is a component of the ETS impact on CPI. The Ministry recommends you support the second option, as recommended by MCC. Economic Policy Committee Wednesday August Consultation on ACC levies MBIE is consulting on a draft Cabinet paper and public consultation documents, seeking approval for ACC to publicly consult on levy proposals on behalf of the Minister for ACC. We have no concerns with the paper. The proposal is to increase the average Motor Vehicle Account (MVA) levy from . to . in , . in and . in (Net change of . over years). Alongside this, the following setting changes relate to the transport portfolio: Amending motorcycle risk groups and ACC levy portions of the annual vehicle licence fee accordingly. There are also some minor changes to reduce cross subsidisation between different groups of motorcyclists and other road users. The biggest increase will be for larger motorcycles (cc). Increasing the ACC levy portion of the annual vehicle licence charges for non petrol powered plug in hybrid electric vehicles (e.g. diesel PHEVs), and battery electric vehicles (BEVs ). Currently any EV pays the same ACC levy rate as a petrol car, despite not paying the cents per litre ACC levy on petrol. Adjusting this likely means an increase of . per year for BEVs. We note this increase could be in place by July which is in between the January and January increases to the N LTF component of the annual vehicle licence fees ( each). We would need to be mindful of this in public facing communications, to avoid creating confusing about how much people have to pay. Introducing discounted levies for participants in motorcycle safety programmes. Removing the FleetSaver scheme. We note GPS includes the Governments expectation that NZTA will make efforts to facilitate contributions from ACC to investments which improve road safety and to support ACCs injury prevention functions. With that in mind, we would like to see NZTA and ACC work together to identify alternative approaches to workplace and fleet road safety, in line with ACCs functions and statutory criteria for investment. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Thorndon Quay raised safety crossings (Wellington City Council project) The ownership of Thorndon Quay Hutt Road (TQHR) upgrade project was transferred to Wellington City Council (WCC) after former Lets Get Wellington Moving (LGWM) programme was disestablished in early . The transfer included retaining funding approved by the NZTA Board. In June this year, WCC decided to not progress with delivering the Hutt Road section of the project. The Thorndon Quay section of the project which WCC intends to deliver includes five raised safety crossings (RSC). WCC deciding to change the approved scope by not delivering the Hutt Road section of TQHR upgrade triggers a re assessment of the project and returning to the NZTA Board for re approval. This is to ensure value formoney investment and alignment with the GPS . NZTA communicated to WCC that elements of the scope such as RSCs are identified in GPS as not being eligible for funding in the local road improvements activity class. WCC has challenged NZTA that the RSCs proposed design was the preferred safety intervention and was aligned with the NZTA Safety guidance at the time the design was approved. There have been public comments by council representatives and several media requests on the Thorndon Quay RSC topic in the past couple of weeks. NZTA is going to work with WCC to understand the impacts of the changes to the scope, prior to the NZTA Board considering funding approvals. Risk based approach to TTM and innovations help repair SH Tairwhiti after the North Island weather events A case study has recently been outlining the risk based approach to TTM and innovations to help repair SH Tairwhiti following the severe weather events. Last year, in the aftermath of Cyclone Gabrielle, we had to repair pavements on state highways in Tairwhiti while dealing with the onset of winter. To manage this, we changed our typical method of working, using an uncommon solution to rehabilitate the road, and a lighttouch traffic management approach to help repair the road to Tair whiti, meaning less cones were used, and instead pilot vehicles managed the speed of traffic through worksites. Roadworkers report theyve never felt so safe and pack down was faster , leading to less time on the road and the programme being delivered under budget. This is a great example of the new risk based approach leading to safer, more efficient and effective TTM. It also highlights the approach to rebuild an enduring state highway asset that will last longer and deliver a better level of service to East Coast communities and road users . The full case study can be found at: https:www.linkedin.compulsecase study fixing weather damaged state highways tairCwhiti bsnctrackingIdECZYFoDEuYMEWRVidFQDD .
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Transport Portfolio Weekly Report
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Upcoming Ministerial Items Upcoming Briefings to Minister of Transport Due to Office Title Friday August BRI Business East Tamaki breakfast Provide a briefing to support your upcoming attendance at the Business East Tamaki breakfast event on Friday August . Upcoming OIA requests for potential consultation Reference and Requester Request Due to the O ffice OIA Indicative route maps for the Roads of National Significance projects Wednesday August OIA MEDIA Use of ANPR cameras on Transmission Gully Friday August OIA Design documents for the Melling Interchange project Friday August OIA MEDIA Studies and analysis on speed related fatal crashes Friday August OIA MEDIA Correspondence and advice relating to Auckland congestion charging Friday August OIA Copy of SH median barrier report Friday August OIA Copy of NZUP Queenstown business case and revised scope Monday August OIA MEDIA Copies of advice provided to the Minister in June Tuesday August OIA Communications and advice regarding Motu Move and NTS Wednesday August Upcoming Media items of release Subject Week commencing Monday August WaikatoBay of Plenty road rehabilitation A media statement is planned for release advising of weeks of upcoming daytime work to complete road rehabilitations on SH near Pongakawa and SH near Paengaroa in the Western Bay of Plenty. Week commencing Monday August WaikatoBay of Plenty Takitimu North Link Stage A media statement is planned for release updating construction progress for Takitimu North Link Stage . s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Updates on the Government Quarterly Plan for Approval Update Required Action Delivery Update Please provide your progress update for this action Delivery Status Advice has been provided to the Minister of Transport following consultation on the draft Speed Rule. Once feedback is received officials will work to finalise the Speed Rule for the Ministers signature before September . Feasible The Land Transport (Drug Driving) Amendment Bill has been introduced and referred to the Transport and Infrastructure Committee. Completed
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Wait times, staffing and productivity for week ending August Wait times Staffing Productivity Region Full Change (last week) Restricted Change (last week) VTNZ DTO Headcount Tests Completed Northland Auckland North West , Auckland Central South , Waikato Bay of Plenty Central Wellington , Canterbury Otago Southland National Average Total: , Further graphs relating to wait times, as well as the interventions plan update can be found in Appendix One. SPE Measures Mori Partners Survey Results Each year , NZTA undertakes a Mori partnerships survey , conducted by independent research agency, Maarama Consulting. We are now planning to release the latest insights into the health of our relationships with our Mori partners . Our relationship with Mori has seen positive movement on most of our relationship drivers in , resulting in our overall relationship SPE measure increasing by over the last year from to . Driving this improvement are significant increases in reliability, fostering relationships, and cultural awareness and competency. Continuing to focus on our key relationship drivers for our Mori partners will reinforce NZTAs commitment to Mori and meeting our legal obligations under relevant legislation and rules (including the Land Transport Management Act , Land Transport Rules, Resource Management Act and Takutai Moana Act ).
IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Written Parliamentary Questions Received Number Topics Due () Staffing across the Ministers Departments in July broken down by Job title and Salery Band. () Staffing across the Ministers Departments in July broken down by Job title and Salery Band. () What was the budget and how much was spent, on the Ministers departments on the carbon neutral government programme from July to June () What was the budget and how much was spent, on the Ministers departments on the carbon neutral government programme from July to June () Cabinet papers, taken to Cabinet Committees during the week beginning July . () Cabinet papers, taken to Cabinet during the week beginning July . () Can the Minister provide the rationale for changing NZTAs standard cost benefit analysis methodology when performing a cost benefit analysis of speed limits, beyond the statement in Proposal concerning simplifying the approach for RCAs, and is the Minister confident that this modified methodology will accurately capture the costs and benefits () Can the Minister provide the analysis undertaken of the safety implications of the draft Speed Rule, including how many deaths and serious injuries will take place under the speed limits proposed, compared to the current speed limits
IN CONFIDENCE s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
INCONFIDENCE A competitive and efficient aviation sector is an important enabler of economic and
INCONFIDENCE Board appointments
INCONFIDENCE Global standards are a key driver of our regulatory settings: New Zealand is a member of
INCONFIDENCE Maritime Security
INCONFIDENCE and testing of advanced aviation vehicles and technology while maintaining current levels of safety.
INCONFIDENCE international terrorism and applies to international shipping and the parts of ports that serve
Name job title organi sation Email address cc. DRR name and email address
heading delete if empty
subheading delete if empty body text delete if empty transport.govt.nz ISSN ISSN print delete if empty ISSN ISSN electronic delete if empty RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT He pepa whakamhiotanga m te Minita Briefing to the Incoming Minister (System) Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport October RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TE MANATU WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT CONTENTS
National rail network maintenance and renewals investment is funded through the NLTF as part of the Rail Network activity cla ss. KiwiRail is required to prepare a Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP) every three years, and you are responsible, as Mini ster for Transport, for approving KiwiRails RNIP RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS
National rail network maintenance and renewals investment is funded through the NLTF as part of the Rail Network activity cla ss. KiwiRail is required to prepare a Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP) every three years, and you are responsible, as Mini ster for Transport, for approving KiwiRails RNIP RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT , , ;;; C: , g ., , :, C: ., , z , . JuneYear THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS
Using this classification, across all activities in the dataset, there are no activities with a mix of baseline and non baseline phases, ie, baseline activities can be excluded from the analysis entirely. Phases with negative costs reflect debt repayments or other financing arrangements. Ou r understanding is that these phases are matched by costs in other phases of the same activity, and thus the negative phases can simply be excluded to calculate the total cost of an activity.
This can be caused by activities that have multiple phases across more than one activity class or work category (eg, road improvements and public transport improvements phases), or by activities with individual phases that are split across two activity classes (eg, public transport improvements and public transport services). Where an activity is in two analysis groups because one of its phases has been split across two activity classes, it is not straightforward to divide the total cost of the activity across the two analysis groups. In such cases, we include the total cost of the activity in both analysis groups. This means that there is some double counting of funding across analysis groups METHODS
Around ,m () of this planned future funding for public transport improvements is associated with the Lets Get Wellington Moving initiative which was first approved under GPS and is expected to run from to , based on information in the NLTP snapshot. Blewden, M., Mackie, H., MacArthur Beadle, S. (a). Urban Cycleway Programme : Lessons learnt and future direction Report prepared by Mackie Re search and Consulting for Waka Kotahi. TO WHAT EXTENT HAS GPS INFLUENCED CHANGES IN NLTF INVES TMENTS, IMPLEMENTATION AND EARLY STAGE OUTCOMES
BCRs with a value of exactly . were excluded from this analysis as we understand that this is a default value that is often used when a BCR estimate is not yet available. In addition, the BCR appears to have cha nged over time for some activities that appear in more than one of the three NLTP extracts used in this analysis. This may reflect updates to the BCR analysis and changes to the scope of the project that changed the BCR. Ideally, the analysis of BCRs would use the estimate of the BCR for each activity that was available at the time the funding for an activity was first approved. However, national BCRs are recorded for only activities in the NLTP extract and activities in the NLTP extrac t, compared to activities in the NLTP extract. Due to this data limitation, the analysis in this section is based on the most recent national BCR recorded for each activity, which in many cases is from the NLTP extract. Costs include those already approved (as of April ) and costs of phases not yet approved that have probable funding status. TO WHAT EXTENT HAS G PS INFLUENCED CHANGES IN NLTF INVESTMENTS, IMPLEMENTATION AND EARLY STAGE OUTCOMES
Base graphic retri eved from https:www.nzta.govt.nzplanning andinvestmentplanningone network frameworkonf useinother frameworks .
a . billion funding package made up of:
a year outlook of how spending is prioritised
a corresponding offence. The penalty for this offence is specified as a fine of
a draft ambition statement
a draft workforce working paper
a final report combining all the data collected and the results from the working papers.
a harm minimisation approach to drug driving, providing both optin and compulsory health referrals.
a letter being sent to selected households
a letter being sent to the selected household
a letter being sent to the selected households
a low residual level of a drug that is unlikely to impair driving in their blood due to previous but not recent use
a modeneutral approach to transport planning and investment decisions
a new medical defence for drivers issued infringement notice where they have taken medication in accordance with their prescription or under instructions of their health practitioner.
a new port in the Firth of Thames
a new port in the Manukau Harbour.
a parent company or the international insurance market is prepared to stand behind the owner for an amount akin to the costs likely to be incurred for cleanup and compensation, and
a range of rebates for imported new and used
a report outlining the scope of work
a shared increase in capacity at both Northport and Port of Tauranga
a shift of the base year (last year of historical data) from to
a similar pattern, increasing from around years old in to just under years old in , before falling slightly to around years old in . The median age of riders receiving full licences has tended to increase consistently over time, from around years old in to around years old in . The introduction of CBTA in late appears to have led to a temporary increase in the number of relatively young riders obtaining full licences. The propo rtion of motorcycle licences issued to males (at all three stages) generally increased between and , from around to at the learner stage, to at the restricted stage, and to at the full stage. Most of these changes occurred after . The introduction of CBTA in late appears to have caused a reduction in the amount of time that riders spend on learner and restricted licences, with most of the reduction occurring at the restricted stage. In , the median rider (aged u nder ) spent around months on their restricted licence, and this increased to months prior to the introduction of CBTA. Subsequently, the median restricted licence duration reduced to about months. Estimated effects on crash rates of increasing the minimum riding ages (August ) As with Class , it is likely that the changes to the Class minimum ages had both temporary and long term effects on the profile rider demographics and crash rates. However, the majority of motorcycle learners were unaffected by the changes to the minimum ages since very few yearolds were obtaining learner licences prior to the change anyway (see below), and the temporary effects of this change are impossible to distinguish from general random variation in crash rates. As with Class , in terms of long term crash rates, increasing the minimum age for obtaining a learner licence from to years old will prevent crashes among yearold riders and may also cause an increase or decrease in crashes among riders a ged and older due to changes in the age and experience profile of those riders (again, we measured experience by the amount of time since each rider obtained their motorcycle learner licence). Prior to the minimum learner age increasing, only about of motorcycle learner licences issued each year were to yearolds (see section .. of the Technical Report ). The change to the minimum age therefore had a relatively minimal impact on the distribution of ages at which people obtained learner licences. On average between and , licensed yearold riders were involved in . crashes per year. Based on trends in the proportion of the yearold population with a motorcycle licence and the actual population of yearolds in , we estimate t here would have been around yearold licensed riders in . Using a model of crash involvements (described in section .. in the Technical Report ), we estimate that these yearold riders would have been involved in . crashes in (with a confidence range from . to . crashes). Figure shows the actual and modelled relationship between experience (measured as the amount of time since obtaining a learner licence) and the crash rate (see section .. of the Technical Report ). In c ontrast to Class , the overall crash rate generally declines with experience, particularly during the first months (contrast with Figure above). This is possibly because riders are exposed to solo riding immediately, unlike drivers.
a statement of the Ministers expectations of how the New Zealand Transport Agency gives effect to this GPS.
a summary of prevailing views on the future of public transport in New Zealand, based on our interviews with transport experts and other stakeholders
a threemonth reduction to petrol excise duty and road user charges to help support families and businesses facing higher fuel costs.
a threemonth reduction to petrol excise duty and road user charges to help support families and businesses facing higher fuel costs. To support the uptake of public transport, public transport fares were also reduced (halved).
a) The proposals are consistent with the legislative criteria in the LTMA, provided
a) that the relevant public road controlling authority or authorities have carried
a)Te Ahu a Turanga is a National Land Transport Fund funded road that
able to cope with natural and
about the objectives and expected benefits of the investment (among other things). Given the large number of activities in the NLTP, a manual review of this descriptive text is not possible, so automated methods were applied to extract summary inf ormation. The combined descriptive text for each investment activity was analysed using a natural language processing (NLP) algorithm. The aim was to identify potential categories of impacts of transport investments that are not always reflected in activi ty class or work category classifications. For example, an activity may primarily deliver road improvements and so is classified in a road related activity class, but it may also deliver some improved walking or cycling facilities as part of the project. I n addition, text analysis can pick up crosscutting impacts such as safety that may be relevant for many investments. The results of this analysis can therefore be used to understand the extent to which impacts of transport investments may extend beyond e xisting activity class or work category classifications. Examples The following examples illustrate the potential for NLP analysis to extract information from descriptive text about activities. The following description is for an activity that was classe d as a road improvement based on activity class and work category but was also included in the cycling, safety, and public transport topics based on the NLP analysis of this text (bold text added to highlight the cycling and public transport features): To improveenhance the road network in line with the CTSP. Annex Road, Birmingham Drive, Wrights Road and Matipo Street are key links in the Middleton Business area and provide access from Blenheim Road and Lincoln Road to the commercial and industrial uses that are located within the area. To improve the transport network in line with the CTSP. The CTSP shows the Birmingham to Matipo link (minor arterial route) forms part of the strategic road network, so the route upgrade should be designed to cater for th e additional demands on the link because of the Wigram Magdala Link and maximise journey efficiency and reliability. This will ensure residential and business growth is facilitated in the southwest. Wrights Road (Main distributor) and Annex Road should be designed appropriately for the road hierarchy classification. Freight movements in the immediate area (all links) should be catered for through appropriate design, and conflict between access movements for freight and through movements for general traffic needs to be managed. There is also a freight hub identified in the area, so provision for that function (which is somewhat existing) should be made. Accommodate the Major Cycleways that route on Annex Road and across Wrights Road. Provide cycle facilities on Birmingham Road and Matipo Street (local cycle routes in t he CTSP ) and ensure that cycling can be accommodated on Wrights Road. Provide bus stops for the existing bus routes and ensure newfuture bus routes can be accommodated. Based solely on the descriptive text captured in the TIO data, it also appears that, in some cases, the activity class and work category do not reflect the main intent of the activity. For APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
above on a projectbyproject basis subject to:
accelerating the development of Aucklands rapid transit network, particularly to unlock housing and urban development opportunities.
access social, cultural, and economic
accessible.streetsnzta.govt.nz
accidental or passive exposure to drugs
account with Waka Kotahi in order to progress vehicles through entry certification. This ensures systems are in place to monitor importers against targets from January .
achieve a reasonable balance between the risks that heavy motor vehicles present to public safety and the efficient operation of the heavy vehicle fleet within the constraints imposed by the road network.
acknowledges that New Zealanders are not flourishing if Mori are not flourishing, and sets out our strategic direction to identify issues and opportunities for Mori in transport design and delivery.
adapt our system to changes in internation al settings.
added a definition of EVs: a motor vehicle with motive power wholly or partly derived from an external source of electricity
additional funding for the project to the satisfaction of Joint Ministers;
address aviationrelated safety and security issues
administrative efficiency of the scheme. Ideally, efficiency impacts would be
adults spend more time driving
advance of Cabinet confirmation, to finalise the drafting;
advanced aviation. The Minister for Space is responsible fo r this work and will keep you informed.
advises on the total set of transport interventions and levers including investment,
affordability within the National Land Transport Fund for central government share
agencies from central and local government
agency coordinating the audit project. The Ministry is working closely with CAA and TAIC to
agency or organisation in the course of their du ty
agreed by the previous government DEVMIN;
agreeing and refining the
agreement to progress consequential amendments through two Orders in
agreement to progress the amendment and revocation proposed in this paper.
agrees to implement an economic measure to reduce shipping emissions. As environmental
air traffic is largely above prepandemic levels at around percent .
airnavigationtransport.govt.nz
airservicestransport.govt.nz
aligning rapid rail with other proposals and work happening in the Corridor,
alignment with investment decision making, which is also driven by shared central and regional government objectives, particularly in Auckland. Any individual GPS has limited ability to influence transport outcomes because of the ongoing influence of previous GPS, other funding avenues, and ongoing business as usual interventions. . Context: Actual expenditure by GPS period Figure and Figure on the following pages show breakdowns of actual expenditure by type of activity based on Waka Kotahi data. Infrastructure expenditure has been aggregated and includes the following categories of expenditure: Public transport: Infrastructure developmen t Roads: Minor improvements, new roads and bridges, property purchases, and resilience improvements Walking cycling: Walking facilities and cycling facilities . Noting that actual expenditure in any given year or GPS period partly reflects funding decisio ns made in prior years or GPS periods, this shows: While actual dollar expenditure on roads related activities was higher during GPS than during GPS and (Figure ), the proportion of expenditure on roads fell continuously during the GPS period (Figure ). Actual expenditure on public transport activities grew during GPS (Figure ), reflecting a continuation of a trend that appears to have started during GPS (and noting that expenditure fell in compared to ). This was due to increased expenditures on public transport infrastructure and servicesinformation. In proportionate terms, the relative shift towards public transport activities accounts for most of the road expenditure reduction during GPS (Figure ). There were also increases in expenditure on walking and cycling during GPS , particularly in the financial year. This appears to be due to footpath maintenance becoming eligible for specific funding in . The proportion of actual expenditure on walking and cycling has increased gradually over time, starting in the latter stages of GPS and continuing during GPS (Figure ). Investment management expenditure is excl uded from Figure . As shown in Figure , this is a small and relatively constant proportion of actual expenditure in each year. TO WHAT EXTENT HAS GPS INFLUENCED CHANGES IN NLTF INVESTMENTS, IMPLEMENTATION AND EARLY STAGE OUTCOMES
alignment with regional plans also driven by shared central and regional government objectives, particularly in Auckland. It is also apparent that any single GPS is limited in its short term effect on outcomes, and it is more likely that a sustained direction in successive GPS produces a change in outcomes over time. .. Investment analysis It is estimated that only approximately . billion out of . billion () total approved funding during the three year GPS period was for activities that were not baseline and were first approved under GPS . A greater amount of approved funding in these three years (. billion or ) was for non baseline activities that were firs t approved before GPS took effect, while the remainder (. billion or ) was for baseline activities that are less likely to be affected by GPS policy directions. This highlights the constrained ability of an individual GPS to influence transpor t outcomes during the three years that it is in effect and means that outcomes during that period are strongly influenced by decisions made under earlier GPS. In terms of investment activities first approved in each GPS period, and including future proba ble funding, GPS saw a shift towards funding for public transport improvements compared to earlier years. However, much of this shift is due to . billion of probable future funding, with around . billion for a single activity (the public trans port improvements components of Lets Get Wellington Moving). The proportion of funding for walking and cycling improvement activities first approved under GPS was less than for activities first approved under GPS but greater than GPS . GPS also saw an increase in total funding associated with road improvement activities compared to GPS and , but this reflects a substantial amount of probable future funding (around . billion). Compared to GPS and , a greater propo rtion of funding for public transport improvement activities that first started under GPS was approved during the three year GPS period itself rather than in subsequent years after GPS was no longer in effect. This may indicate that the pace of investment in public transport improvements increased under GPS . Walking and cycling improvements also saw an increase in the funding for activities first approved under GPS compared to earlier periods if probable future funding is included. However, funding for such activities approved during the GPS period (rather than subsequently approved or tagged as probable future funding) was lower than funding approved during the three year GPS period. Topic analysis of the descriptive tex t associated with investment activities indicates that safety is a descriptive characteristic of more than half of road, public transport, and walking and cycling improvements. Walking and cycling are also descriptive characteristics of around of ac tivities primarily classified as road and public transport improvements. This suggests that considering only activities funded by the walking and cycling activity class may understate the investment in these activities. Still, the amount of any understatem ent and the quality of walking and cycling facilities delivered as part of road improvements is unknown. Addressing this issue would require greater disaggregation of funding data than is currently available so that all expected and actual impacts and bene fits of investments are recorded systematically. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
all existingmodel and used motorcycles between cc and cc entering the fleet for the first time must be fitted with ABS or CBS from November
all existingmodel and used motorcycles over cc entering the fleet for the first time must be fitted with ABS from November
all new light passenger and goods vehicles classified as MA, MB, MC and NA certified for entry into service from July
all newmodel new motorcycles between cc and cc entering the fleet for the first time must be fitted with ABS or CBS from April
all newmodel new motorcyclesover cc entering the fleet for the first time must be fitted with ABS from April
all other used light passenger and goods vehicles classified as MA, MB and NA inspected at the border from March .
alliancestransport.govt.nz
allow for monitoring and rapid removal of technologies which fail or create unacceptable risks
allow for the management of risk from new technologies
allow tendering on the Waiheke Island route where there is competition
allowed Waka Kotahi and local authorities greater flexibility in permitting and standardising the treatment of loads under permit to provide regulatory efficiency and reduce compliance costs
allowing Auckland Council to make a proposal for the tax
allowing passenger services south of Whngrei, and
altered the definition of special vehicle lanes, for example bus and transit, to include EVs as permitted users if RCAs make relevant bylaws
alternatives to a regional fuel tax
amendments are required to existing rules and regulations.
amends the Gazette notice requirements for approved oral fluid testing devices to require inbuilt thresholds to be
amends the criteria in the Bill to enable criminal limits and infringement thresholds to be set and amended in future
an aeronautical product to
an assessment of their feasibility
an emerging strategic approach to developing Aucklands transport system
an extension of the model projections from to
an interactive workshop focusing on the consents needed before someone can fly a drone.
an interviewer visiting the household to see if they want to participate. If they agree to take part, the interviewer answers any questions and provides any resources needed so the household can record their travel
an interviewer visiting the household to see if they wanted to participate. If they agreed to take part, the interviewer answered any questions and provided any resources needed so the household could record their travel
an interviewer visiting the household to see if they wanted to participate. If they agreed to take part, the interviewer gathered household information and left a memory jogger for each participant
an interviewer visiting the household to see if they wanted to participate. If they agreed to take part, there was a facetoface interview to gather household information and the household was provided with memory jogger forms.
and Communications team know.
and Malaysia Airlines. These providers are successfully operating under Phase of the scheme. Any subsequent provider appointments will be announced on the website as contracts are finalised.
and Transport (Clean Vehicle Standard) Amendment Regulations
and affordability, and developing
and appropriate mitigations that support delivery and the achievement of outcomes;
and came into effect on September .
and capability of an organisation
and consider Mori outcomes.Developing the GPS
and detection of o ffences, and the right to a fair trial
and effectively manage the associated risks
and for an existing tolling proposal to be under section () of the Land
and guides investment in transport by
and how the Minister of Transport expects you to work with him. In this Briefing to the Associate
and local government over years
and operate with varying levels of statutory independence bec ause of the nature of their roles and
and regional development is focused
and response. The MTA either directly regulates or enables the creation of rules to regulate most
and securityEconomic prosperityInclusive accessHealthy and
and the Net Zero target. Later in , the Government will need to consider its response to
and those new projectsprogrammes to be funded from the reallocated Northern
and unitary councils in leading long
and upgrades to Basin ReserveArras Tunnel SH
any changes in the average number of injuries involved in a crash by region, area, and severity.
any changes in the number of crashes by region, area, and severity
any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely otherwise to damage the public interest
any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely to prejudice the supply of similar information, or information from the same
any inflationary effects that affect different cost components
any road user charges licence purchased for a heavy vehicle whilst discounted becomes invalid month after the discounted period ends.
apply only to petrol and diesel, and
appointment of board members. As part of this process, we will provide you with an overall
approach employed, and has provided a qualified quality assurance statement for the whole
approach has two main aspects that the regulatory framework ensures safety, while enabling
approach would better account for under and over counting mode shift activities). Data was then compared across the three GPS periods (data limitations precluded m ore detailed regional analyses). What we found Indicators of mode shift outcomes (e.g., number of people travelling by travel mode) were generally readily available, but it takes longer to see any change in outcomes, and it is difficult to attribute any ch ange to the GPS (compared to other factors). The activities included and funded through the NLTP demonstrate changes in priorities and can provide an early indication of the degree of GPS influence. While a wide range of indicators and data sources were id entified to populate the evaluation framework, the maturity of indicators varied considerably. Many were not available at the necessary spatial and temporal scales required to evaluate the impact of GPS on mode shift fully. The GPS was seen as a significant departure from previous iterations. While mode shift activities are often funded through local road activity classes, the GPS change in direction expanded the range of possible mode shift projects. However, committed projects left little m argin for change, and other priorities, capacity, and local funding limitations within local authorities constrained mode shift investment opportunities. The results from the regional breakdown reinforce the gradual shift towards mode shift promoting activ ities. Most regions have seen a drop in the percentage of roading activities and an increase in the percentage of active and public transport activities compared to (see Fig ). However, the results also highlight how different regions are at differen t stages of their mode shift journey. They provide insights for the regions to look at patterns over time and provide prompts to review activities when unexpected events occur. What we recommend Using the Value for Money (VfM) assessment model, the followi ng recommendations are provided for the development of GPS and associated reporting: Understand and prioritise the underlying determinants and mechanisms of mode shift that can be addressed through transport funding . Increas e the visibility of modal i nformation in the investment process and operation and management of the transport system . Consider where the appropriate balance lies between the evidence based business case and strategic approaches so that there is sufficient flexibility in priorities to facilitate funding a diverse range of mode shift activities. Support a higher level focus on investment, strategic planning and monitoring across activities and organisations and over longer periods (e.g., coordinating with other drivers of mode shift su ch as changes in land use) . Greater strategic alignment between transport funds to enable more targeted investment can increase the mode shift benefits from NLTF investment and reduce potential converse impacts. Accommodate greater coordination and alignme nt with current changes in land use priorities and policies. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
are exempt, either for promotional or sponsorship reasons or for traffic
are exhausted, the tertiary colours shown may also be used. Only use these in instances where the Ministrys colour palette is not enough. They should not take up more than of the entire colour scheme. Images, graphs and tables: Sit on a greyscale background (no border). Each colour should have a thin white keyline (to separate them). An accent colour (
are more likely to trust and adopt these innovations. Over the next year, we plan to focus our work
around rural schools to a maximum of kmh.
around urban schools to kmh, with the option of allowing kmh speed limits if appropriate
arrangements of these services. We will brief you shortly on work to , including the outcomes
as a developed nation our focus is on responding to the transport pressures created by economic growth
as the engine is being rapidly accelerated to approximately rpm or approximately half the maximum engine speed whichever is lower.
as we are in a time of growth we need to ensure we do not add to inflationary pressures through our approach to investment in transport infrastructure.
aspects werent able to be
assess them to ensure that appropriate and proportionate risk mitigation measures are in place to
assessing environmental impacts
assessment of board capability and recommendations on the skills and capabilities needed to
assessment processes for people applying for Total Mobility and whether these processes are fitforpurpose
assessments of indicators or the extent to which indicators and data have been used for reporting purposes. The stocktake detailed the range of indicators available in each horizontal influence opportunity dimension, along the vertical dimensions of the decision scale, and for each GPS period. Some indicators were available f or all scales and periods, such as transport mode share from the New Zealand Household Travel Survey. Others were more limited and were only available at certain geographical scales and periods. For example, several indicators from the Sustainable Urban Mobility Benchmarking prototype were originally only calculated for selected cities but could be calculated for others as needed. The stocktake was used to populate the evaluation framework in Appendix . For ease of reading, the stocktake has been summarise d in Tables , and below. Table summarises opportunities to observe the GPSs influence on priorities in existing data and indicators. It describes the sources of information and indicators that could be used to track differences in what is considere d a priority across the three decision making scales national, regional, and local. For example, priorities for transport have been set at a national level in the GPS strategic priorities, regional priorities in plans such as Arataki and RLTP KPIs, and local plans in specific mode plans such as Auckland . National level changes in priorities could also be seen in the composition of activity classes, differences in the allocation of funds in the GPS to activity classes supporting active and public transport modes (mode shift promoting), and what is included in the NLTP for each period. Regional priorities were seen in RLTP region submissions to the NLTP programme and what was included in the NLTP. Wh ile not directly within the transport arena, several significant local priority setting processes were also identified as relevant to mode shift, notably local Long Term Plans, District Plans and Infrastructure Strategies. Table Opportunities to observe the influence of the GPS on determining priorities in existing data and indicators (for full details, see Appendix ) Decision making scales National Regional Local What is a priority Strategic priorities Regionally focused long term strategic plans, including Arataki Specific mode plans Activity class composition and funding range RLTP KPIs Long Term Plans Funding allocation and band position Infrastructure Strategy Proportion of total projects included in NLTP by mode shift promoting activities Proportion of total projects included in RLTP by mode shift promoting activities District Plans Proportion of total projects included in NLTP by mode shift promoting activities Proportion of total funding included in RLTP by mode shift promoting activities . STUDY PHASES
associated with public transport. Wellington and Otago also show high er percentages of public transport costs. However, active transport cost is similar across all regions. Wellington and Otago are again noticeable as the two regions which have seen a consistent drop in the percentage of cost for roading and increases in ac tive and public transport costs. Other regions, particularly Northland and Waikato, have seen the percentage of cost for roading, active, and public transport stay consistent.
associated with the construction of projects in the Programme, which could help further
associated with three new roads: Manawat Tararua Highway Te Ahu a Turanga, taki to
at achieving an agreed strategic approach for developing Aucklands transport system over the next years.
at the Transport Knowledge Conference in Wellington.
authorise the submission to the Executive Council of the following Orders in
available in an benefit cost ratio for each project (as has been the
aviation rules are required to be remade under Schedule () of the Act before
b) The efficiency and effectiveness of each scheme should be assessed in light
b) with the level of community support for the proposed tolling scheme in the
b)taki to north of Levin (NL) is a Major Crown Investment Project (MCIP)
back to LEG by February , seeking approval to regulations for offences and
bands changed or ranges set for comparison.
barriers to the driver licensing system preventing entry to the system and progression
be administered by Waka Kotahi and collected when fuel is distributed to a retailer.
be contracted to regional council
be critical for emergency and resilience purposes.
be located in the Manukau Harbour, not whether it
because the current RUC were at an appropriate level, although
been noted and no public interest has been identified that would outweigh
before beginning the oral fluid testing process once a driver has been required to undergo a CIT, they cannot be required to take an oral fluid test
before public engagement begins.Strategic Investment Package
benefits could be significant, however it is ultimately a matter of judgement for
better access to Northland for land transport to help the Northland region grow and develop rail is only part of the transport solution in this case
between Auckland, Wellington, Christchurch, Dunedin and Queenstown
between its titular areas. The toll will cover tolling infrastructure costs , road
bodies have confidence that safety and operational standards are m et. Global cooperation is
boost social inclusion and participation
breaches legislation, copyright or intellectual property rights
breaches of rule provisions are offences under the Act, the maximum fines that
bringing all the NAL up to a standard that could carry modern freight
broad support for the proposed new regulatory framework, although there were mixed views about the distinction between State highway and regional speed management plans and decisionmaking powers
build resilient communities, and
building staff capability and cultural competencies to consider te ao Mori perspectives in all we do
builds on the strategic priorities of GPS , including supporting improved transport choices, improving safety, improving freight connections and reducing the impact of transport on our environment.
business case requirements);
but there is a domestically owned coastal shipping sector with around large domestic vessels.
but we have seen the market adju sting to ensure service to most parts of the country. To build
by on Monday July . This is the that the engagement closes.
by pm on Friday January .
by pm on Friday May .
by pm on Monday February .
by pm on Thursday February .
by pm on Tuesday September .
by pm, Wednesday April .
by Joint Ministers and the Minister of Climate Change, the overall Programme will
by a holder agency under the Privacy Act for the purposes of enforcing toll payments,
by the Chief Parliamentary Counsel under the editorial changes sections
by the Minister of Transport. Road user charges for a light vehicle will cost per , kilometres during the reduction period, down from the ordinary rate of per , kilometres.
c It is about the better use of data rather than new and more data. .. TIO analyses An analysis of Regional Land Transport Plan (RLTP) and National Land Transport Plan (N LTP) activities was conducted to assess the impact of GPS investment on mode shift objectively. ... Prioritisation assessment method Seven of the seventeen Regional Transport Committees (RTCs) in New Zealand were selected as cases to analyse Northlan d, Auckland, Waikato, Bay of Plenty, Wellington, Canterbury, and Otago. These cases represent a range of different transport environments, from large urban areas such as Auckland and Wellington to more rural populations and smaller urban areas such as Northland and Otago. Waka Kotahis Transport Investment Online (TIO) tool was selected as the master data source, providing a relatively standard way of capturing information from RLTPs across all regions. TIO was chosen rather than the RLTP documents themselv es. While these provided very useful, detailed information on Regional priorities, there was variability in how the data was presented across different authorities and how much detail was provided. Hence, extracting and formatting the necessary information directly from the RLTPs was beyond the scope of this study. The Waka Kotahi TIO team provided historical manual extracts from each GPS period after consultation. The extracts contained a complete list of activities (either standalone or a phase of a large r programme) submitted to and included in the , , and RLTPsNLTPs. In addition, each activity included in the extract had a range of supplementary information that included details of the TIO Activity Class classification, what the activity in volved, an assessment against relevant funding criteria, status, cost, funding approvals, and project notes left by staff from Waka Kotahi and the RTC who put it forward. The analysis aimed to identify patterns in the proportion of activities identified as mode shift promoting and the proportion of cost by activity type over the three GPS periods. Mode shift promoting activities involve work supporting mode shift (such as walking, cycling, scooting, and public transport projects). The Activity Class catego ry provided in the TIO extract was not a sufficient indication of mode shift promoting activities for two reasons: The Activity Classes and the funding allocated to them have changed across each GPS period. An activity can be included under a particular cl ass but also have aspects relating to a different class for example, an activity may be classified as local roads but include an active travel component, such as footpath improvements. Advice from practitioners and stakeholders in the orientation works hop emphasised the importance of local roads Activity Classes for funding improvements to walking and cycling infrastructure, for example, upgrading footpaths as part of road maintenance. Relying on the Activity Class categorisation alone could result in under counting mode shift promoting work undertaken in the NLTP. Consequently, a manual categorisation process was applied to observe changes in the types of activities represented in NLTP over the three periods. . STUDY PHASES
c) It must be necessary or desirable for the purpose of the Act Consider ation must be given to whether there are any alternatives available (such as amending legislation by standard amendment bill process, or using discretion to choose not to apply a penalty), and if so, what the outcom es of using those alternatives would be. Specified severe weather events are: Cyclone Hale, which crossed the North Island during the period commencing on January and ending on January . Heavy rainfall commencing on January and ending on February in the Northland, Auckland, Waikato, and Bay of Plenty regions . Cyclone Gabrielle, which crossed the North Island during the period commencing on February and ending on February Severe weather event affected areas are: The districts or regions of the local authorities affected (whether directly or indirectly) by one or more severe weather events . The districts or regions of the local authorities where land, infrastructure, other property, resources, or services are required to support an area affected by one or more severe weather events . The parts of the coastal marine area (within the meaning of section () of the Resource Management Act ) that are part of, or adjacent to, those districts and regions.
c) The available information about safety indicates the impacts on project
c) the road is not an existing road, unless the existing road or part is located
c)Takitimu North Link is a two stage road connecting Tauranga, Te Puna, and
campaignsmessages from other transport agencies, such as Waka Kotahi, NZ Transport Agency and Maritime NZ.
can be imposed by a Court and infringement fees where that option is available.
cap Crown funding for exempt services at their current levels
case with previous schemes ), however updating these has not yet been
cc Secretary of the Cabinet Chief Executive, Ministry of Transport Chief Executive, New Zealand Transport Agency Waka Kotahi
cc: Nicole Rosie, Chief Executive, Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency Audrey Sonerson, Chief Executive, Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport
chairs, setting strategic direction, and ongoing monitoring . Over the last year, the Ministry has
change in the roadside infrastructure.
changes to reflect the Act and remade rules. The Regulations identify which
changes to the Regulations are minor and are required by the Civil Aviation Act
changes to the authorisation framework for airline alliances
changes to the framework for exempt services (including commercial and interregional public transport services)
changing the legislative requirements around airport price setting and when airports have to operate commercially
charges end for all vehicles registered after . pm on December
cities through effective transport
civil aviation offences and penalties, and noted that the Minister intended to report
civilaviationacttransport.govt.nz
clarification of aviation security powers.
clarified that vehicles must be fitted with onboard diagnostic equipment if required by the emissions standard to which they have been manufactured
clarify the expectations placed on aviation system participants
clarifying how the Public Works Act applies to land acquired for airport purposes
clarifying that the Disputes Tribunal is an avenue for passenger redress under provisions relating to consumer rights for delay or loss of baggage.
clarifying the powers, protections and tools that are available to aviation security officers at security designated aerodromes
class regulatory environment by the end of that allows rapid iteration and testing of advanced aviation vehicles and technologies.
closely with the CAA and other government agencies to ensure we know about any prevailing
cohort and, by the end of , had progressed to a full licence while remained on a restricted licence. CBTA can be chosen at either or both the restricted and full licence stages and hence there are four possible pathways from a learner lic ence to a full licence: No CBTA: Standard practical tests to progress from both learner to restricted and restricted to full licences. CBTA R only: CBTA to progress from learner to restricted and the standard practical test to progress from restricted to full. CBTA F only: Standard practical test to progress from learner to restricted and CBTA to progress from restricted to full. CBTA R F: CBTA to progress from both learner to restricted and from restricted to full. Learner riders who obtain a CBTA R certificate can progress to a restricted licence at any time (provided they are at least . years old), whereas riders without a CBTA R certificate must remain on their learner licence for at least six months before attempting the standard restricted l icence practical test. Riders who obtain a CBTA F certificate can progress to a full licence after holding their restricted licence for at least months, while riders without a CBTA F certificate must spend at least months on the restricted licence before attempting the standard full licence practical test. Choosing CBTA at both stages can thus reduce the minimum time for progressing from a learner licence to a full licence from months to months, provided the rider meets the minimum age require ments. We compared rider characteristics and crash rates for riders choosing the three CBTA pathways against riders choosing the pathway of practical tests at both the restricted and full licence stages. At the end of among riders who obtained a learn er licence and who had progressed to at least a restricted licence: had no CBTA certificate. had a R certificate only. had a F certificate only. had both R and F certificates. Characteristics of riders choosing CBTA versus those choosing practical tests Overall, since CBTA was introduced, the majority of riders progressing beyond a learner licence have chosen CBTA. As shown in Figure , around two thirds of riders in the cohort who remained on a restricted licence at the end of had a CBTA R certificate. Among those riders who had progressed to a full licence by the end of , only about did not have any kind of CBTA certificate, and around had both R and F certificates. The uptake of CBTA is very similar across g enders, with females only slightly less likely than males to choose CBTA.
collaboration between neighbouring RCAs. As a result of this, the RTC
collecting the tax from fuel companies
collecting the tax when fuel is distributed to retailers.
collective and individual ministerial responsibility
combustion in manufacturing and construction, which includes offroad vehicles such as construction machinery ()
combustion in primary industries (), and
come into force following publication in the Gazette on October ;
comfortable with the projects with completed CIPAs moving forward and with funding from
coming into force. The revocation of the existing offences regulations and the
commencement of the scheme;
commercial companies such as Zephyr Airworks
commercial industry associations for airlines, airports and general aviation
commercial, recreational and tourist operations. The Ministry provides strategic advice on the
commitment to the MoriCrown
community are required to comply with. The Maritime Security Act is mainly focused on
competitive advantage and reduce the over all cost of doing business.
completion of the CIPAs, have been agreed by Joint Ministers as:
comply with these regulations without incurring penalties or additional costs. This can provide a
comprehensive support for the new approach to safety cameras, including transferring ownership and operation of the camera network to Waka Kotahi.
comprehensively briefed to support decision making.
concessionstransport.govt.nz
conducting up to evaluations each year
confidence in the evidence and excludes criteria where the evidence is inadequate to support a judgement or where there is no evidence available. (A th rating level, high confidence, was initially defined but was found not to apply to any of the evidence). Adequate : Our judgement is more likely than not to be accurate, given the available evidence. Inadequate : We cannot confidently reach a conclusion from the available evidence. No evidence available . The upshot of this criteria selection process is that the eval uation focuses on the following GPS outcomes, drawing on quantitative analysis of committed forward expenditure and qualitative analysis: increased transport investment mix toward safety oriented investments increased investment in a better integrat ed transport network, including public transport, walking and cycling and improved land use planning that aims to support improved throughput and access in metropolitan areas increased focus of transport investment to promote active transport and public tr ansport via improved infrastructure, better connections, and improved safety increased investment in and delivery of transport projects that seek to promote the uptake of active travel modes to support environmental and public health objectives increased rigour and transparency of transport investment appraisals.
confirmed by Cabinet. It will be subject to redaction, as appropriate, under the
connections to support productive
connects Manawat with Tararua. The toll would cover tolling infrastructure,
consequential amendments CAB MIN refers .
consequential rewriting of the rules and offences regulations was addressed by
consider the costs and benefits of various improvements, and
considered different approaches to setting funding bands based on affordability and need. We released the papers with the aim of informing and stimulating wider debate.
considered the introduction of a diesel tax but determined that RUC continued to be the most appropriate charging system for diesel vehicles
considered the outcomes of the public consultation on the draft Land Transport Rule: Setting
considering a national policy for the use of smartcards under the SuperGold card travel concession scheme
considering a variation to the
considering reimbursement calculation methods including average fare calculations.
consistent assessment by the Ministry of applications developed by airlines
consistent provision of information, data and analysis in applications developed by airlines
constructing a branch line to Northport.
consultation occurred prior to signing the Speed Rule.
consultation on the draft Land Transport Rule : Setting of Speed Limits
consultation survey here.
consumed a prescribed dose of a prescription or overthecounter medicine that is unlikely to impair driving.
consumers know that new technologies have been approved by a credible reg ulatory body, they
contains the detail of the Clean Car Discount.
contains the detail of the Clean Car Standard
contingency, based on advice from officials;
continue the RUC system by imposing charges on nonpetrol vehicles for their use of the roads in proportion to the costs that the vehicles generate
continuing to incentivise the uptake of low and zeroemissions vehicles through the Clean Vehicle Discount scheme and consider the future of the Road User Charge exemption for light electric vehicles beyond
contribute to a wellfunctioning land
contribute to investigations of the current road safety problems
contribute to services that result in less road congestion.
cost of measures to prevent or reduce pollution damage
cost of reasonable measures to reinstate the environment, and
costs faced by Total Mobility users (such as assessment fees)
councils (example, Presence and details of an overarching sustainable urban mobility strategy). These are time consuming to incorporate in a prototype and need definition and guidance to be meaningful. Given that around half of the indicators are not currently reported and fall into categories (ii) and (iii), three implementation considerations em erge: i Quality control will need to be an important part of implementing the prototype programme and ensuring calculations are consistent across councils. Council capacity will be a big factor in the prototype success. Reducing the number of indicators in t he prototype or otherwise considering how to reduce the burden will enhance the chance of success. Support is needed from Waka Kotahi to refine and develop novel indicators to reduce the burden on councils. . In depth insights Phase The third phase focused on stakeholder engagement and case study interviews to provide a qualitative assessment of the pathway between the GPS and mode shift to complement the insights from quantitative analysis. Throughout this phase, we sought to identify the relevant issues and lessons learnt from stakeholders on the interpretation and application of GPS investment signals concerning mode shift. We conducted ten interviews with stakeholders from Waka Kotahi, Regional Councils, and local councils representing urban and rural areas. Purposive sampling included people at Waka Kotahi who translate the GPS into the Investment Decision Making Framework (IDMF) and those who develop the NLTP, people at Regional Councils who develop RLTPs, people at local authorities who were in volved with Annual Plans and Long Term Plans (LTPs), and those who developed work plans. In addition, several interviewees were in relevant positions over the years and could report from their experience in different agencies and positions. Interviewees we re recruited from the following agencies: Greater Wellington Regional Council Wellington City Council Auckland Transport Otago Regional Council Kaipara District Council Waka Kotahi (national and Regional Northland, Auckland, Canterbury, and Otago offices). Interviews (approximately half an hour to an hour long) were held with each of the interviewees via Microsoft Teams. The interviews built on our understanding of the relationship between investment and operational and planning decisions with the follo wing topics discussed: Extracted from Benchmarking Sustainable Urban Mobility in Five New Zealand Cities. Prototype Technical report (), available from Waka Kotahi. . STUDY PHASES
councils in leading longterm planning for
councils, territorial authorities and unitary
cover government agencies, operators and participants within the aviation system. CAA is the main
cover related services whose costs are caused by road use, such as traffic policing, safety programmes and Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency overheads
creating new entitlements might:
crew, ground staff, and maintenance workers. Additionally, it supports indirect employment in
criminal limits for drugs in blood to be prescribed in legislation, based on advice from an independent panel of experts
current CIT should be used more often
current and future needs of users.
current and projected funding needs for the Total Mobility and how these needs could be met to enable the longevity of this scheme
current civil aviation rules will be revoked when the Civil Aviation Act (the
current levels of safety.
current regime, or of minor or consequential policy detail, without further reference to
customer benefits. However, these benefits are also typically made available to customers of these two airlines through their shared membership of the Star Alliance.
d) It must be no broader than is reasonably necessary to address the need for the order The modification must go no further than is reasonably necessary to achieve its purposepolicy objective. In working out if this is the cas e, consideration should be given to the scope, time, geographical limit s and the viability of alternatives. The purpose of the Act Section tells us the purpose of the Act is to assist communities and local authorities affected by the severe weather events to respond to, and recover from, the impacts of the severe weather events and, in particular, to: Provide for the planning, rebuilding, and recovery of affected communities and persons, including: o the rebuilding of land, infrastructure, and other property of affected communities or of any affected persons; o the development, building, or rebuilding of land, infrastructure, or other property or access to resources or services in areas not affected by the severe weather events; safety enhancements to, and improvements to the resilience of, that land, infrastructure, or other property; o facilitating co ordinated efforts and process es for short term, medium term, and long term recovery; o facilitating the restoration and improvement of the economic, social, and cultural well being, and enhancing the resilience, of affected communities or of any affected persons; and facilitating the restoration and resilience of the environment. Provide for economic recovery. The Act also has the purpose of: ensuring that certain activities normally undertaken by people and agencies interacting with government agencies, Crown entities, and local authorities can continue to be undertaken after the severe weather events (whether in the same or a different way); and supporting the operation of other legislation or enabling it to be relaxed or operate more flexibly, to take account of: o the severe weat her events; or o actions taken to respond to, or recover from, the severe weather events.
d) that a feasible, untolled, alternative route is available to road users; and
d)Penlink is a New Zealand Upgrade Programme funded road connecting the
dark colours in these areas to increase visibility. Textures (eg thin stripes of a uara white) can help create a more refined colour palette. However, this option is not always technically possible. Consider the amount of colours to be used: Less than colours: only use colourstints within our official colour palette. More than colours: If all the possible colour combinations within our colour palette
data from the scientific literature.
decarbonisation of the public transport bus fleet
decision referred to in paragraph and above;
decisions on transport investments, they give
decreased state highway improvements to rebalance investment across the transport portfolio
deduction from a toll account held by the toll operator);
delete reference to the previous rule.
deliver its core functions appropriately and in line with the Governments expectations. Your k ey
delivering improvements in health, safety, the environment and access, including disability access.
delivering the Governments land transport objectives of reducing carbon emissions, crash risk, congestion, road maintenance costs, and increasing the transport options.
delivery of security services on behalf of the government. To deliver a more efficient, flexible and
demonstrating New Zealands commitment
departmental consultation was not considered necessary given the minor
design and construction, and behaviour change lag. Taking advantage of the improved capacity to monitor activities through T IO and enabling better monitoring and benchmarking of all modes within the network would allow for better evaluation of the effectiveness and efficiency of changes to the transport system, feeding back into improved investment decision making. Working with stakeholders will be critical to identify the low hanging fruit and high effort, high value indicators needed to monitor not just outcomes and the prioritising and funding steps along the path to mode shift.
design of studies including poor control for confounding factors, small sample sizes, and short follow up times af ter training. The authors concluded that there is some evidence that mandatory pre licence training may reduce crashes by impeding people from obtaining motorcycle licences (i.e. by reducing exposure to crash risk), but that it is not clear whether or what type of training reduces the risk of motorcycle crashes. A subsequent study by Ivers et al () analysed the results of a randomised controlled trial of on road rider coaching for newly licensed provisional (i.e. restricted) riders in Victoria, Australi a. Riders who were selected for the trial were given four hours of on road rider coaching in small groups and other related training. After months, Ivers et al () found no statistically significant difference in crash rates for the group of riders w ho received training relative to a similar control group of riders. In addition, riders who received the training reported increased riding exposure, speeding behaviours, and confidence, which may be associated with increased crash risk. In contrast, Boel eVos and de Craen () analysed the effects of a one day advanced rider training course via a randomised controlled trial of motorcyclists in the Netherlands. They found that participation was associated with improved performance on a hazard perception test and an on road riding skills test. However, Boele Vos and Craen () did not analyse the effects of rider training on subsequent involvement in crashes. A study by Crundell et al () of riding performance in a simulator found that experienced riders and those who had undertaken advanced training displayed riding behaviours that could potentially reduce the risk of crashes, but again actual involvement in crashes was not analysed. Selected other studies The following is a brief summary of selecte d individual studies of the impacts of introducing a GDLS and various related issues. Given the size of this literature, the review in this section is not intended to be comprehensive but is intended to give a general overview of the methods and issues ari sing in GDLS evaluation. Estimated effects of introducing a GDLS in the United States Several studies have evaluated the effects of introducing a GDLS in the United States, taking advantage of the fact that graduated systems were introduced in different U S states at different times. Chen et al () used panel data for US states to estimate negative binomial regression models of the effect on quarterly per capita crash rates of introducing a GDLS in a state, controlling for state, quarter, and year. On av erage across US states (noting that different states imposed different restrictions on young drivers), they estimated that introducing a GDLS was associated with an reduction in the fatal crash rate for yearolddrivers (with a confidence interv al from to ). In comparison, no statistically significant effects on the fatal crash rate were found for drivers aged between and . As drivers over years old were not typically exposed to the GDLS, this suggests that the reduction in th e fatal crash rates estimated for yearold drivers could be attributed to the GDLS rather than other safety related improvements that may have occurred at the same time. Similar methods were used by Baker et al () to analyse the effects of introdu cing a GDLS in the United States on fatal and injury crashes. For yearold drivers, they estimated statistically significant reductions from introducing a three stage GDLS of and for fatal and injury per capita crash rates respectively. No stati stically significant
design regulation that is flexible and can evolve when circumstances change
destinations, while Jetstar travels to five. In addition to main trunk routes, Air New Zealand services
details the legislative progress, including speeches, debates, public submissions, and reports.
details). The results of the model suggest no statistically significant difference in the odds of being involved in a crash for drivers who progressed from a learner to a full licence in to months versus those who progressed in to moths or months or m ore (pvalues . and . respectively). We also modelled crash involvements of individual drivers while on a full licence for all drivers who obtained a learner licence between and , who were aged under at the time of obtaining their learner licence, and who progressed to a full licence by the end of without an advanced certificate (see section .. of the Technical Report ). Controlling for driver age, gender, region of residence, the year in which the driver obtained their learner licence, and time trends, we found that the number of months taken to progress from a learner to a full licence had no statistically significant effect on the odds of being involved in a crash while on a full licence ( pvalue .).
determine an appropriate package of project components that balanced the aspirations for Wellington with affordability, and local and national priorities.
determining the best form for the delivery entity.
develop innovative products or systems for EVs.
developing a framework for the funding and implementation of future investment in rapid rail.
developing a set of reporting indicators for each GPS
developing strategic partnerships with other agencies that respond to and support the unique needs and aspirations of Mori as tangata whenua
development. Under the Commerce Act , the Commerce Commission plays a role in
device to have ongoing effects after removal in the absence of additional programme features. Unless interlocks are combined with interventions that seek to address the underlying issues that contribute to recidivis msuch as alcohol abuse and the lack of perceived alternatives to driving after drinkingit is likely that many offenders will continue to drive after drinking once the device is removed. A key element involved in extending the effect of interlock programm es is to combine their use with participation in an alcohol rehabilitation program. This would allow treatment providers to take advantage of the recorded interlock data which contains valuable information about alcohol use to inform on treatment planning. One test of this approach found that the interlock provides useful information for treatment providers in promoting the recovery of drink drive offenders ( Voas et al., ). More recent research ( Thomas et al., ) suggests that interlock users tend to make changes to where and how they consume alcohol, as well as the quantity they drink. The New Zealand Government, in its Safer Journeys initiative , identified drink drivers as high risk and high priority area of concern. In , to tackle this problem and based on the evidence of alcohol ignition interlocks effectiveness to do so, P arliament passed legislation allowing for the introduction of an Alcohol Interlock Programme (AIP) in New Zealand for repeat drink drivers and some first time drink drivers. Alcohol interlock orders have been a sentence option in New Zealand since September . Waters () found that only of those eligible received the sentence in its first year as a sentencing option. From July , alcohol interlock orders (AIOs) became mandatory for alcohol eligible offences either those with two driving under the influence or refusal offences within five years (based on offence dates) or EBA ( excess breath alcohol) of or more micrograms per litre of breath (blood alcohol of or more milligrams per millilitres of blood). Included in this study is data from the NZ Police on drink driving detections and yearly breath tests, as well as information from Waka Kotahi the New Zealand Transport Agency on alcohol interlock licences (AILs) granted and information from the interlock providers. The study further attempts to identify any gaps in data or any data that should be includedcollected to establish a more robust framework for further evaluations. Data issues with the interlock programme have been reported recently ( Waters , a; Waters , b) one of which is the affordabilit y of the device, and associated low take up rates, a concern that has also been reported in other recent research ( Romosz, ).
different offences and penalty levels to align with the different levels of risk each offence poses.
disadvantage, negotiations (including commercial and industrial negotiations) This docu ment i s proactively r eleased by Te Manat Waka the Ministry of Transport.
disclosure is necessary to uphold or enforce the law, including for the conduct of court or tribunal proceedings to simplify it but okay if it is left as is too.
discretion to make this judgement:
discussions with other IMO members ahead of the negotiations, we think further direction from
draft GPS Transport Minister directs development of GPSWaka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency and local government reflect
drawdowns from the tagged capital contingency can now proceed;
drivers who are impaired by prescription drugs should receive the same penalties as those impaired by illicit drugs but have a medical defence if they are not impaired
driving experience), and year indicators (see section . of the Technical Report for more details). The key result from the model is that the overall odds of crash involvement for drivers aged under with full licences is around lower than for drivers with restricted licences, and in our analysis this difference is statistically significant ( pvalue .). While not all of this difference may be due to the full licence test on its own, this su pports the hypothesis that drivers with full licences are safer drivers than those with restricted licences, after accounting for differences in the driver characteristics listed above. That is, it appears that drivers who progress to a full licence are le ss likely to be involved in crashes than drivers with restricted licences even after accounting for the fact that fully licensed drivers tend to be older and have held a driver licence for longer than drivers with restricted licences. The main implicatio ns of this are: The difference in crash rates for fully licensed drivers suggests that there is value in maintaining the distinction between the restricted and full licence stages for driver licences. The available evidence supports the hypothesis that the full licence test promotes road safety via the mechanisms outlined above. However, it is not clear whether the full licence test promotes safety by causing drivers to become safer, or by preventing less competent drivers from progressing (or both). As lo ng as the restricted licence conditions protect less competent drivers who do not progress to a full licence from some crash risks, preventing these drivers from progressing to a full licence is beneficial for road safety. To investigate this further, it would be useful to compare safety outcomes for drivers with restricted licences who failed the full licence test with the general population of restricted drivers. It could also be useful to compare safety outcomes for fully licensed drivers who passed the full licence test on the first attempt versus those who passed after more than one attempt. .. Is the night time driving restriction for restricted drivers effective Drivers with restricted licences are prohibited from driving between the hours of pm an d am unless a fully licenced supervisor is in the front passenger seat. If the night driving restriction is fully effective, all else being equal we should expect to see a similar rate of crashes for restricted drivers between pm and am as for fully l icensed drivers, assuming that supervisors are able to prevent any crashes that a competent fully licensed driver would not have been involved in. We compared the crash rate during the day (am to pm) and night (pm to am) for restricted versus fully licensed drivers aged to years old for the combined period from to (see section . of the Technical Report ). The results shown in Figure suggest that the night time crash rate for restricted drivers is around . times greater than that for fully licensed drivers of the same age and in our analysis this difference is statistically significant ( pvalue .).
driving revenue raising and investment choices
drug and alcohol management
drug concentrations in impaired drivers in New Zealand
e) that the proposed tolling scheme is efficient and effective.
e.g. Road to ZeroMinister s prioritiesViews from
each progression step and gender). For d rivers who did progress from a learner to a full licence, there is virtually no difference in duration or the variation of duration across genders. The median driver progressed from learner to full licence in around months, with half of drivers progress ing between around months and months.
each vehicle having its own permanent RUC weight
effect to the strategic priorities set out in the GPS.
effective aviation security service model, we have been workin g on options for alternative delivery
efficiency and effectiveness .
efficiency and growth; and that the market continues to work effectively.
efore the Minister of Transport could ask Cabinet to endorse the LGWM indicative package and the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) contribution, there needed to be further understanding of what was affordable within the broader context of committed and future transport funding.
electricity generation by noncommercial organisations, charities, and local and central government agencies.
eligibility criteria for Total Mobility users and whether these criteria are fitforpurpose
embrace dataled regulation to improve outcomes for society.
emission ratings based on international testing protocols and calculated using the World Harmonized Lightduty Vehicles Test Procedure (WLTP). Rebates and fees will be reviewed regularly.
emission vehicles will be charged a fee, the higher the CO
emission vehicles. High CO
emissions and their target emissions vs number of registrations (of top models).
emissions and their target emissions.
emissions are captured in our emissions target.
emissions are considered.
emissions come from transport, of which twothirds come from light vehicles cars, SUVs, vans, utes and trucks under . tonnes.
emissions for vehicles are to be determined from April .
emissions standard for imported new and used light vehicles.
emissions standard for imported new and used light vehicles. We expect legislation to implement the Clean Car Standard will be introduced in , with the policy taking effect in , although any charges on suppliers who do not meet the Standard will not apply until the beginning of .
emissions standpoint, used vehicles are the responsibility of the importer of those vehicles, not the manufacturer (where those a different entities). Use the
emissions, and what rebate or charge could apply to different vehicles, if you become the first registered owner of that vehicle.
emissionstransport.govt.nz
employment and engagement of the public transport workforce is fair and equitable, providing for a sustainable labour market and sustainable provision of public transport services
enable Mori to reach their full potential
enable Waka Kotahi to implement the New Zealand Business Number
enable Waka Kotahi to implement the land transport components of the Housing Infrastructure Fund
enable continued essential passenger movements,
enable innovation and development in the drone sector
enable new transport technologies
enables the Director of Maritime New Zealand to accept insurance policies that cover the main risks associated with offshore installations
enabling Waka Kotahi to move to online driver licensing and driver testing transactions, instead of just in person.
enabling different asset ownership arrangements, including public transport authorities owning assets directly
enabling inhouse delivery of public transport services (public transport authorities will be able to operate public transport services, e.g. own buses, employ bus drivers, and run services themselves)
enabling safety enhancements and improved resilience of infrastructure
encourage greater collaboration between regional councils and territorial authorities in preparing regional public transport plans
encourage greater public acceptance of drones.
encourage innovative and more flexible regulation of forhire transport services
encouraged fleet renewal by allowing industry to access a wider range of vehicle suppliers who could provide vehicles built to international dimensions and mass limits while taking into account modern safety, emissions, and performance technologies
encouraging walking and cycling and making these active modes safer for Aucklanders.
end of the current Qantas and American Airlines alliance authorisation from November to March .
enewable freight certificates
enforcement agency for each of the road tolling schemes;
enforcement of the remade rules and replicate the Regulations, with necessary
engaging with stakeholders and communities
enhance economic development opportunities
ensure New Zealanders can be confident the Government is investing in transport efficiently and effectively
ensure disabled people are not overlooked. This would also inform government decisionmaking by providing evidence of participation by disabled people. New Zealands future roads and public transport need to be accessible, affordable, integrated, safe, responsive and sustainable for not only disabled people but also the general public. Bibliography Article Accessibility. (). Retrieved from https:www.un.orgdevelopmentdesadisabilitiesconventionontherightsof personswithdisabilitiesarticleaccessibility.html Burdett, B., Locke, S., Scrimgeour, F. (). The Economics of Enhancing Accessibility: Estimating the Benefits and Costs of Participation. Statistics New Zealand. (). Disability Survey: . Wellington: Statistics New Zealand. Statistics New Zealand. (). Disability Survey: . Wellington: Statistics New Zealand. Traffic Design Group. (, July). Measuring Accessible Journeys Pilot Project Summary Report. Retrieved , from CCS Disability Action: http:www.ccsdisabilityaction org nzimagesmeasuringaccessiblejou rneystdgfinalreport.pdf
ensure your boards are well governed, effective, and high performing.
ensures insurance policies and other financial security provided for offshore oil and gas installations are subject to New Zealand law and the jurisdiction of New Zealand courts.
ensuring safer streets and wellplanned urban areas.
ensuring that an adequate and appropriate regulatory framework is in place as soon as possible, to expedite the pace and trajectory of the recovery, increase resilience and avoid placing undue burdens on those most directly affected
ensuring that internationally available best practice insurance policies can be used
ensuring the indicative package delivers the best possible value for money, including broader nonmonetary costs and benefits.
environment directly influences New Zealands aviation security s ettings. The Ministry works
environment is at times confusing, inefficient, and costly for both the sector and regulators. The
environmental sustainability, and
essential for addressing challenges such as air traffic management, security threats, and
essential role in building strong,
establish a framework for electronic management of RUC.
establishing a new regulatory framework for speed management on New Zealands roads using speed management plans
establishing fairer offences and penalties especially for light diesel vehicles.
establishing new objectives for the planning, procurement and delivery of public transport services, to be embedded in the Land Transport Management Act
evaluationtransport.govt.nz
every months from the that tolling begins:
every four years. The Ministry negotiates and monitors this contract on your behalf.
every three years on the same for every scheme, starting July ;
evidencebased projects and
example discussed was the potential to drive change via the vehicle fleet throu gh investment in electric vehicle charging infrastructure and the conversion of the heavy vehicle fleet to electric. They noted that footpath improvements had been signalled as appropriate via the NLTF and that this had lifted direct investment in walking. .. Ongoing perceived outcomes Several interviewees described later, or more recent, outcomes that they believed could be attributed to GPS . These reports reflected the time lags across GPS, often referring to emerging activity pipelines or area s of focus within GPS proposals. Reports were also often at a higher level and are perhaps most useful for illustrating interviewees understanding or perceptions of GPS impacts rather than necessarily being full or detailed descriptions. A gover nment official noted that the development of national and regional mode shift plans had been a direct outcome of the mode shift priorities in GPS . The development of these plans was unprecedented, and the plans were considered to have been key to the more recent delivery of cycling and walking infrastructure in larger urban areas, and other initiatives such as the Northern Busway and better use of dedicated bus networks on both state highways and local roads. Reflecting on the time needed to reorienta te the delivery system in response to GPS , several interviewees described an increased focus on walking, cycling, public transport, and rail initiatives within RLTPs. Consistent with these comments, one government official noted that some coun cils were not prepared to respond immediately to these shifts in . Capacity and capability development were necessary first steps. Similarly, another official noted that GPS had supported renewed attention to passenger rail as a first step in the planning and delivery response. now starting to get people talking about passenger rail again on the main line GPS and the subsequent reinforcement assisted those conversations (Government official) GPS sent an important signal that future funding would depend on ensuring projects were focused towards these areas, leading to them being better prepared for GPS . Several interviewees described observable shifts towards a more integrated, programmatic approach, reflecting the emphasi s in GPS towards joined up solutions. A common example gives increased attention to urban form, liveability, movement and place strategies within programmes such as Lets Get Wellington Moving and Access for All (Auckland). A government official a lso described ongoing work to support investment in demand management strategies and programmes of smaller connected activities that would deliver multiple outcomes. big shift in the last two GPS away from projects NLTF funded more reliance upon l ocal share funding, tricky stuff like taking away carparks to build cycleways (Government official) A sector stakeholder was encouraged by the more recent focus on reducing motor vehicle travel and recognition that this was a critical area for future trans port investment. The Emission Reduction Plan had been a key driver of this. However, it was seen as a plan built upon the shifts signalled in GPS . TO WHAT EXTENT HAS GPS INFLUENCED CHANGES IN NL TF INVESTMENTS, IMPLEMENTATION AND EARLY STAGE OUTCOMES
example, the following descriptive text was provided for an activity in the walking cycling improvements group (based on its activity class and work c ategory) that appears to relate to road improvements and where the walking and cycling topics were not detected (noting that the provided descriptive text is very brief): General roading improvement projects, including bridge widening, passing lanes, and intersection improvements on State Highways throughout the BOP region. Road improvements, including possible realignment, widening, intersection sight improvements, and storm damage slip repair mitigation. The following activity was classified as a road imp rovement based on its activity class and work category, but the roads topic was not detected by the NLP analysis, which may reflect a classification error: Replace aging timber structure with a new single span structure. To repair a failing restricted brid ge that provides sole access to ,, rural farming land over rail. Failing restricted bridge providing sole access to land valued at ,, over the North Island Main Trunk Railway. Limitations This analysis is limited to identifying potential secondary impacts of transport investments. It cannot determine the extent of those impacts or the quality of the outcomes that were delivered in practice. Understanding the extent and quality of secondary impacts would require a more detailed manual revie w of investment activities, possibly including an ex post evaluation of what was delivered. The analysis also depends on the clarity and comprehensiveness of the descriptive text recorded in the NLTP extracts for each activity. Some classification errors d o occur, particularly where the descriptive text provided is very brief or uses technical jargon. Despite these limitations, text analysis is a useful way to understand the potential secondary impacts of transport investments and identify activities for fu rther manual analysis if necessary. Defining descriptive text for activities Text information in the following fields from the TIO NLTP extracts was combined to create context text for each activity (not all fields were available for all activities). Wh ere information in these fields differed across phases of activity, information from all phases was combined to create a single block of context text for each activity. Activity description Transport problems Primary benefit Project background Project obj ective Phase scope Topic detection The context text for each activity was analysed using the BART LARGE MNLI pretrained NLP model. This model was originally developed by Facebook and can estimate the https:huggingface.cofacebookbart large mnli APPENDIX INVESTMENT DATA ANALYSIS
exemptions and proposed on which tolling will begin at least once in each of the four
existing and new interregional commuter rail services to support housing and employment opportunities.
existing commitments including the year publicprivate partnerships (PPP) contracts relating to large roading projects, and
existing stock are very different to modern carriages, and the extent to which these should be continued further is an open question. The two year review will help uncover these and other lessons from the first two years and benefits realisation in such areas as emissions saved, patronage, accessibility and other indicators. Te Huia has further highlighted that there is a gap in interregional rail policy and the challenges of multiple councils working together on this issue. Each council has thei r own boundaries, structures and constituents that do not always align with a national or interregional model. Finally, Te Huia reveals a tension between the tactical three year time horizon of the GPS and the longer term planning needs. It is ch allenging to deliver infrastructure projects in a short timeframe with the degree of planning required. Simple considerations of stock procurement extend well beyond the remit of any one GPS. There is also a need for longer term outcomes planning and speci fication, within which strategic decisions on such areas as interregional rail can be made and implemented. APPENDIX TRENDS OBSERVED IN GPS OUTCOMES MONITORING
expenditure, and that appropriated amounts will be adjusted accordingly through future
explored eligibility for a refund of PED and a rebate of regional fuel tax.
expressed concerns about what they see as unfair pricing in the domestic air market and reduced
expressed via a set of strategic priorities.Ministers
expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service
extended from the original deadline of pm, Monday April due to COVID.
extended the application of bus traffic signals to EVs.
feedback helped us refine the paper, and balance the concerns of the aviation sector against the benefits drones might provide.
feedback on them as they were developed .
filter if you wish to see only data for new vehicles and how that relates to their targets.
final GPSEngagement period
financial compensation for service providers, to ensure that the Total Mobility scheme remains attractive for service operators, including fair compensation for the installation and maintenance of essential equipment like wheelchair hoists.
findings of those individual project CIPAs;
focus policy regarding forhire passenger transport on the needs of consumers and society
following baselining and reprioritisation:
for Regional Transport Committees to set speed management plans has been
for a commercial purpose, but not in a motor vehicle, vessel or aircraft for example, fuel used in commercial electricity generators, portable lighttowers or in the construction industry.
for a continuous period of seconds when the engine is idling, or
for expenditure from the NLTF and how Crown
for more information from KiwiRails shareholding Ministers Hon Nicola Willis and Hon Paul Goldsmith.
for previous tolling proposals, but they are complex. The list of recommendations will
for public safety. Meteorological Service of New Zealand Limited (MetService) is the national
for the Fund beyond years and
for the transport network.
force earlier than the th day after their notification in the Gazette.
force on April . The Act establishes the operational rules and divisions of responsibility
framework for aviation safety, security and economic regulation. The Civil Aviation Act (
free fares for children aged and under.
from December , importers of vehicles must have a CO
from or arriving at its destination within minutes of the scheduled departure or arrival time.
from the infringement penalty regime, making them criminal offences to be
fuel). Negotiations in did not achieve agreed design of these measures so a further round of
functions. Each entity is governed by a board. The boards are primarily responsible for entity
funded outside the GPS and the NLTF.
funded road that will provide a more efficient and safe State Highway
funding and managing the Programme going forward;
funding complements that investment.
funding for equitable access to driver licences to improve employment, wellbeing and safety outcomes. Waka Kotahi is collaborating with the Ministry of Social Development to improve driver licence support for people most disadvantaged by barriers to driver licences.
funding is required, including rescoping projects and reallocating funds between projects.
funding stream established to accommodate on e type of investment , as well as the difficulties effectively moving funding between these investments. The current situation and an ongoing issue The NZUP rebalance d funding in th e short term. Now GPS further decreases state highway funding ( by .B over ten years compared to GPS ) and local road funding (down .B) , falling away by greater amounts in later years. As the NZUP drops off in four to five years so does GPS funding . In the last five years of GPS funding allocated to improveme nts ( state highways and local roads combined ) averages m p.a . To provide context, in .B was allocated to improvements. Road user revenue in each of the last five years of GPS is projected to be over B higher than it was in . This situation contributes to uncertainty in the transport sector including the construction sector who bu ild transport infrastructure and impac ts capacity to deliver transport investments. It also potentially di srupts the R egional Land Transport Planning process. Value for mone y is reduced, and some communitie s are left without clear plans. There are better ways to do this We support capital investment in metro rail and rapid transit , as important part s of the transport system, and these investments nee d to be planned and co ordinated with road investments. However, these investments need separate funding sources and delivery processes. Given the Government is clear that the benefits ( including making streets more inviting places, recreation and comm unity connectedness, land use) of these cap tal investments will accrue to the nations health, economy, society and environment, the funding required to achieve this should come from come from the Crown, as well as those using these services. Furthermor e, investment in high density corridors will increase the value of properties close to these services. We support targeted funding whereby those who directly and significantly benefit from a project meet more of the cost (a levy on developers, or targeted rates on home owners), alongside local government funding and financing. We would like to see significant policy emerge on these other funding sources.
funding, before the tagged contingency can be drawn down;
further reference to Cabinet;
general information about how long each component would take and the order they would be delivered in.
generate million net present value revenue;
get health benefits from using high quality infrastructure which encourages more active travel, such as walking and cycling, to and from public transport stations.
gives airport authorities a range of functions and powers to establish and operate airports.
giving effect to the agreement would result, or be likely to result, in a benefit to the public that would outweigh any lessening in competition.
giving people and communities affected by the severe weather events confidence that an enabling regulatory framework is in place to maximise confidence.
government and industry will be clear ly defined, taking a national perspective rather than a sector
government has an essential role in building
government processes. We will also provide your office with an overview of upcoming advice
government, signalling desired shifts, and including specific actions. It will be owned by all
graduated sanctions, including infringement and criminal penalties for drug driving offences, based on exceeding the limits prescribed in legislation
greater contingency for, higher risk projects;
greater transparency of aviation system performance, the Ministry reports monthly on airlines on
greenfreighttransport.govt.nz
greyscale) may be used for lines etc. Ng Tae Colours Using the colours in graphstables Possible sequence of colours: Possible sequence for colours:Possible sequence of colours: MIDDAY BLUE MIDNIGHT BLUE LIME ORANGEMIDDAY BLUE MIDNIGHT BLUE LIME ORANGE GREEN TURQUOISE YELLOW DARK GREENTIP: A white keyline around each element prevents the colours butting up together and clashing.MIDDAY BLUE MIDNIGHT BLUE LIME ORANGE GREEN TURQUOISE YELLOW DARK GREEN GREYBLUE DARK GREY DARK BLUE Tertiary colours (only use at )RED C M Y K R G B f
group of million drivers held licences for a given three year period, we would calculate exposure to crash risk in that period as million driver years. Fatal crash: A crash where at least one person died within days of when the crash happened due to an injury or multiple injuries sustained in the crash. Fouryear progression status: An indicator of a licence holders progression through the licence stages on the fou rth anniversary of obtaining their learner licence, that is, whether they remained on a learner licence, had progressed to a restricted licence but not yet obtained a full licence, or had progressed to a full licence by that . Light motor vehicle cras h: A crash involving a vehicle that could be legally driven on a Class licence, that is, a car, van, ute, or SUV. For the purpose of analysis in this report, moped crashes where the rider did not have a Class licence at the time of the crash were defin ed as light motor vehicle crashes and included in the Class analysis. Motorcycle crash: A crash involving a vehicle that could be legally ridden on a Class licence, that is, a motorcycle. For the purpose of analysis in this report, moped crashes where the rider had a Class licence at the time of the crash were defined as motorcycle crashes and included in the Class analysis. Odds: The probability of an event occurring divided by the probability of it not occurring. For example, an event that occur s with probability . has odds of . . .. Region of residence: The geographic region of New Zealand in which a licence holder lived at the time of receiving their relevant licence. Serious crash: A crash where at least one person was seriou sly injured. Serious injuries include fractures, concussions, internal injuries, crushings, severe cuts, lacerations, severe general shock necessitating medical treatment, and any other injury requiring admittance or detention in hospital. Statistically s ignificant: A finding that is unlikely to have occurred by random chance. In this report, results that we expect to observe less than of the time by chance are deemed to be statistically significant. Time discount: Drivers who hold an advanced certific ate and who progressed from a restricted to a full licence in less than the standard minimum time are said to have obtained a time discount at the restricted stage. The standard minimum time at the restricted stage is months for drivers aged under at the time of applying for their full licence, and months for drivers aged and over. For holders of advanced certificates, these minimums reduce to months and months respectively.
guides investment in transport by providing
half price fares for Community Services Card holders
half price fares for people aged and under
half price fares on total mobility services
halffare public transport is extended until the end of August .
halfprice public transport
halfprice public transport will continue until January (instead of ending on August ).
handed form of regulation, called info rmation disclosure. The Commission anticipates publishing
handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be
has accessible and affordable transport
has been passed to assist local authorities, Mori and communities affected by the recent severe weather events to respond to and recover from the impacts of the events.
has not been certified or approved before
have a maximum rate and have a maximum duration of years
have considered the completed CIPAs, alongside the Programme level CIPA, and are
have exhausted all other sources of funding support, including the Governments COVID Economic Response Package, bank loans, support from shareholders and so on
have flexible investment models that respond to changing patterns in demand
have focused on actions needed to meet legislative requirements or comply with time sensitive
have proposed a more inexpensive tolling option with a single toll point and a
having a restricted license was associated with a statistically significant reduction in intention to violate road rules and that this was mostly explained by restricted licenses having a moderating effect on peer pressure. However, the authors did not exa mine actual involvement in crashes. Evaluation of changes to an existing GDLS VicRoads () evaluated the effects of enhancements to the GDLS in Victoria, Australia, that were introduced in and . These enhancements included a minimum requireme nt of hours of supervised driving practice for learner drivers under years old, allowing probationary (restricted) drivers to carry no more than one peer passenger (i.e. a passenger who is not an immediate family member) in the first year, and exten ding the overall probationary period from three to four years. Key findings were a . reduction in fatal and serious injury crashes for drivers aged between and , compared to a reduction for drivers aged over in the same time period (it is u nclear from the reported results if this difference is statistically significant). Statistically significant reductions in crash rates were found for drivers aged to , but no significant effect was found for drivers aged to . Scully et al () evaluated the effects of changes to the GDLS that were applied in Queensland, Australia, in July . The key changes included requiring hours of supervised practice for learner drivers (including hours of night driving), extending the learner period from to months, reducing the minimum driving age from . years to years, and allowing restricted drivers to carry at most one peer passenger between pm and am. Changes in crash rates per licensed driver for young drivers around the time of the changes were compared to changes in crash rates for drivers aged between and years old with full licenses at the same time. Fixed effects panel data models were estimated to explain crash rates per licensed driver. Key findings of Scully et al () include: Overall, the changes were associated with a reduction in the rate of fatal crashes and a reduction in fatal and serious injury crashes across all novice drivers (including some who started learning to drive prior to the c hanges), although this reduced to no significant difference in fatal crashes and a significant reduction of in fatal and serious injury crashes if the analysis was restricted to drivers who had completed at least one licensing phase under the new system . The largest and most of the statistically significant reductions in crash rates were estimated for drivers with learner licenses. Reductions in crash rates for restricted or fully licensed drivers were generally smaller or statistically insignificant. A mong the group of drivers who had fully completed all stages of the new system, a statistically significant increase in crash rates for drivers in the first year of the restricted license phase was observed. Scully et al () also analysed the effects o f the changes to Queenslands GDLS on rates of driving related offences for young drivers. They found: Rates of offences related to breaching driving conditions were very small, suggesting that novice drivers are generally compliant with the new cond itions, but this could also be due to low intensity of enforcement of these conditions by police and the driver licensing authority.
having the tax in place for a maximum of years before it was reviewed
he Clean Car Standard and Clean Car Discount were
he length of the official holiday period varies depending on where the statutory holidays fall in relation to the weekend.
help meet New Zealands climate change targets.
help move to a digital licensing environment
helping to replace the current Interislander ferries and landside assets that are nearing the end of their useable life.
highfrequency services will use fixed routes while other journeys will be served by services that respond to demand for example, ridesharing
highly productive and efficient.
home heating, including water heating
how LGWM would affect demands on the NLTF
how RUCs compliance regime can be improved.
how Total Mobility and the transport needs of disabled people have changed over time and how these could keep evolving in the future.
how a regional fuel tax could be implemented in any region
how data might be managed and used in transport system monitoring to improve resilience in the future.
how it was transferred between organisations, and
how it will achieve its outcomes and priorities through investment in certain areas, known as activity classes (eg. the maintenance of state highways or road policing)
how many kilometres they travel
how much funding will be provided and how the funding will be raised
how other government initiatives to support transport accessibility for disabled people are funded, and the interactions between these funding sources
how regional councils could propose a regional fuel tax and the information they needed to providein a proposal
how the collection of the tax would be managed.
how the different components of the investment package would fit with the Governments direction for land transport as set out in the Government Policy Statement (GPS) on Land Transport .
how the scheme aligns with the human rights of disabled people under the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
how their use could improve efficiency and savings
how we will engage with you
https:at.govt.nzabout ustransport plans strategiesregional land transport plan The RLTP has a year programme which focuses on improvements to public transport, rapid transit, walking and cycling. It also includes network initiatives to help to address congestion, safety and support for greenfield and urban redevelopment.
https:bills.parliament.nzvccacaedfcbbdTabsub
https:creativecommons.orglicensesby.
https:nzta.govt.nzresourcesrulessettingofspeedlimits
https:oag.parliament.nzreport sspeeches andOn August , Nicola White (Assistant Auditor General, Legal) presented slides and a supporting paper at the New Zealand Law Societys CLE Ltd Administrative Law Intensive. It set out: The basic principles The different types of funding arrangements The life cycle of the funding arrangements The advice on choosing an appropriate type of arrangement Direct text f
https:treasury.govt.nzinformati onandservicesstate sector leadershipinvestment managementbetter business cases bbc Investment Management System Owning the right assets, managing them well, funding them sustainably, and managing risks to the Crown balance sheet are all critical to the ongoing provision of high quality and cost effective public services that New Zea landers value. This means that the quality of investment management is vital to maintaining New Zealanders living standards now and in the future. It explains why the Gov ernment is committed to ensuring investment management and asset management practices remain fit forpurpose.
https:treasury.govt.nzpublicati onstptreasury approach living standards framework html Living Standards Framework (LSF) has been developed by the N ew Zealand Treasury to consider the collective impact of polices in intergenerational wellbeing. This framework is an overview of an approach to understanding and measuring living standards.
https:www.beehive.govt.nzreleasebillhelpaviationrecoverytake
https:www.beehive.govt.nzreleasenewlawenhancessafetyandsecurityaviationsector
https:www.complexconversations.nzfuturetransport
https:www.eea.europa.euthemesairemepeeaairpollutantemissioninventoryguidebookemep
https:www.maritimenz.govt.nzpublicconsultationmarpolannexVIdefault.asp
https:www.maritimenz.govt.nzrulesMARPOLAnnexVIdefault.asp
https:www.nzta.govt.nza ssetsRoad Efficiency GroupdocsActivity Management PlanningA Guidetointegrating theNZ Transport AgencysBusiness CaseApproach Self assessment.pdf The purpose of the guide is to help Road Controlling Authorities (RCAs) to develop their current Activity Management Plans (AMP) to incorporate the NZTA Business Case Approach (BCA). The selfassessment tool is used to identify areas of learning and development for imbedding BCA into an RCA activity management planning.
https:www.nzta.govt.nzpl anningand investmentplanning and investment knowledge base nltp investment assessment framework iafabout the nltpinvestment assessment framework This page briefly introduces IAFs functions, roles and features. It summarises how IAF can help NZTA to achieve value for money. All contents can be found in the official document.
https:www.nzta.govt.nzpl anningand investmentplanning and investment knowledge baseassessment of activitiesbyactivity classassessment ofroad safetypromotion programmes
https:www.nzta.govt.nzpl anningand investmentplanning and investment knowledge baseassessment of activitiesbyactivity classassessment ofroad safetypromotion programmes The purpose of the National Advertising and Education Programme is to influence road user behaviour. It comprises multiple interventionscampaigns that support specific strategic priorities within New Zealands Road Safety Strategy , Safer Journeys . The programme works in conjunction with other parts of the Transport Agency business and with key external stakeholders such as the New Zealand Police to support key safety messages, to influence road user behaviour, support enforcement and to ensure alignment of messaging across the sector. The programme contributes to achieving the Safe System vision, which is a safe road system increasingly free of death and serious injury. The programme focuses effort on key areas of concern identified in the strategy, and emerging issues of public concern, such as visiting drivers and keeping left on multilaned roads to influence and encourage the correct behaviours on our roads. Evidencebased researchdriven advertising The national road safety advertising and enforcement campaign is based on a very high level of research. Crash data analysis forms the statistical basis of the entire campaign. Crash data is analysed to identify who is crashing and where theyre crashing. This information is used to form the basis of each advertising brief. Using these detailed briefs, the contracted advertising agency develops creative concepts. They use realistic scenarios to reach specific target audiences. To ensure that the correct message is taken from each individual campaign, all advertising is highly researched and tested with the relevant target audience from concept stage through to the end product. Measuring effectiveness The effectiveness of the campaign is determined by a set of intermediate and overall outcome measures. Both enforcement and advertising contribute to these outcome measures. Output measures Media space purchased and delivered, eg target audience rating points (TARPs) delivered, website visits and magazine readership. Offence notices issued. Intermediate outcomes Audience recall and relevance. Summary c Key public attitudes to road safety, eg drinkdriving, speed. Behavioural outcomes Reduced drinkdriving and speeds. Overall outcomes Reduced road deaths and injuries.
https:www.police.govt.nzadviceservicesdrugsandalcoholnewdrugdrivinglegislation
https:www.tradingstandards.govt.nz
https:www.transport.govt.nzaboutuswhatwedoregulatoryimpactassessmentSearchForm
https:www.transport.govt.nzareaofinterestpublictransportcommunityconnect
https:www.transport.govt.nzconsultationsnewzealandairlineauthorisationagreementguidelines
https:www.transport.govt.nzm ulti modalkeystrategiesandplanstr ansport indicators The purpose of this framework is to define a set of outcomes for New Zealands transport system and explain how government should work toward these outcomes through a gu iding principles of mode neutrality. This framework does not identify how government will deliver on the outcomes. This framework gives broad direction to the transport system, across the five connected outcomes.
https:www.unisa.nzwp contentuploadsU NISAUpperNorthIsland Story.pdf The purpose of the Story is to take a collective partnership approach within an upper North Island freight lens to determine issues or areas that are limiting our ability to reduce the cost to do business in New Zealand. The purpose of the Upper North Island Freight Story is for key partners in the upper North Island to work together on: a Story, based on reducing the cost to do business in New Zealand through an upper North Island lens to support informed decision making on key land use, infrastructure and investment, to improve the economic performance of the upper North Island and New Zealand a shared approach for key partners to make decisions together. The Story is about stakeholders and partners identifying those critical freight related issues within the upper North Island and then developing a shared evidence base to support future discussions and decision making.
https:www.unisa.nzwp contentuploadsU pperNorthIslandFreight StorySharedEvidence BaseDocument FINALApril .pdf
identified the opportunity to further harness technology, for example, an electronic collection system, and other administrative changes to reduce compliance costs and evasion.
identify potential opportunities to address these problems and support a safe road system.
identifying changes needed to the current legislative and regulatory regime to allow for the delivery and operation of mass rapid transit systems this work continues
identifying topics of interest that would benefit from more detailed evaluation.
if the freeze was lifted, determining what criteria would be used to determine entry into the scheme
if the investment proposal was affordable
if there were a significant oil spill, the availability of the thirdparty assurance reduces the financial risk to the Crown and others by creating a direct right of action against the thirdparty assurance provider if the owner is unable to meet its obligations, if, for example, the owner was insolvent.
if you have any questions or comments.
impact efficiency that is, processing many small claims would have a substantial administrative cost, and
implemented in June in time for the NLTP (while also applying to new business cases comm encing after June ). Government officials noted that limitations in the existing business case approach became increasingly apparent through GPS . The shifts signalled reinforced the need for BCR analysis to include a wider range of values and b e complimented with non monetised benefits. For example, it was noted that under the existing approach, safety projects that reduced speed generally struggled to achieve a sufficient BCR, as higher monetised benefits were attributed to reduced travel time and vehicle operating costs or conversely seeking high BCRs for small risk reductions at low cost that did not address the priorities of reducing fatal and serious injuries. Reflecting on the new IDMF on current practice, a government official reported th at a much broader range of criteria was now being used to assess value and benefits. A BCR was now only one component of what we think about, greater attention was now given to strategic alignment and non financial impacts. This interviewee commented: I think were nowmaking much more deliberate choices about the way we deliver multiple outcomes, not just sort of charging off to pursue a single outcome (Government official) . Case study: Auckland RLTP .. Alignment with GPS The Auckland R egional Land Transport Plan was notable for its strong alignment with GPS . From the outset, the plan notes its requirement to be consistent with the GPS and specifically acknowledges the four strategic priorities of safety, access, environme nt and value for money, and the accompanying objectives. Specific details regarding challenges that Auckland faces around safety, accessibility, environment and value for money are noted alongside other challenges, such as growth and freight. These are fu rther reflected in sections detailing plans to address these challenges and asset maintenance. Finally, specified measures and targets are adopted around each of the four strategic priorities. The RLTP also reflects the context of the Auckland Plan, detail ing the strategy for Aucklands growth over years, the Auckland Transport Alignment Project (ATAP), the National Energy and Conservation Strategy , Mori outcomes, and Auckland Transport Mori Responsiveness Plan. .. Influence or alignment The RLTP could pick up a stronger emphasis on public and active transport, reflecting the priority of the GPS towards transport choice and access, and also aligned strongly with the environmental priority. However, interviewees for this case study noted th at there had been strong policy directions in the region for some time, reflected in the intensification directions of the Unitary Plan, the regions growth and the City Rail Link. Furthermore, the ATAP process preceded the RLTP and established a governm ent to government agreement on key transport priorities for the region between the central and regional governments. GPS had been designed from the outset to reflect ATAP, which we understand is a relatively rare situation where a policy position (AT AP) is timed to occur with the GPS cycle. A key outcome of ATAP was the establishment of the regional fuel tax, TO WHAT EXTENT HAS GPS INFLUENCED CHANGES IN NLTF INVESTMENTS, IMPLEMENTATION AND EARLY STAGE OUTCOMES
implementing a more effective approach to using road safety cameras using a mixed highly visible and anytimeanywhere general deterrence approach.
implements a scaled framework, to a maximum of NZD. billion, to ensure owners of offshore installations have financial security that matches the risks posed by their operations
improve access to transport and not just mobility for example with good spatial planning or by improving digital access
improve compliance with, and the recovery of, RUC
improve regulatory decisionmaking
improve the assessed emissions impact;
improve the availability of servicing or charging infrastructure in areas where demand is uneconomic or not fully developed
improve the customer experience when applying for or renewing a licence
improve the legislations usability.
improve the quality of our policy work.
improvements activity classes. This will enable
improvementsUpper
improving EVcharging infrastructure across Aotearoa to ensure that all New Zealanders can charge when they need to.
improving our access to relevant data and our ability to analyse that data. This needed to managed within a framework that ensured systematic and repeatable integration of the data and analysis.
improving the Graduated Driver Licensing System
improving the reach, frequency and quality of public transport and making it more affordable for lowincome New Zealanders.
improving the system to enable greater compliance
improving the transparency and robustness of the process for authorising airline alliances.
improving urban rail services for passengers accessing housing, major employment and metropolitan areas where demand is outstripping capacity
in spent hours and minutes a week travelling kilometres at an average of kph. They made return journeys away from home, each visiting destinations before the return home. On average each of these return journeys covered kilometres with an average of kilometres between each destination.
in to . billion in
in a commercial vessel, including boats used for search and rescue purposes
in a licensed vehicle, specifically petrol vehicles that weigh over . tonnes that are subject to road sser charges
in an exempt vehicle mainly vehicles exempt from the motor vehicle licensing requirement, such as farm or agriculture vehicles
in the regulatory framework are creating safety, environmental and security risks. The regulatory
in the userselected filtering.
in the year to September .
include a per tonne GHG levy on emissions and a technical measure (GHG intensity regulation of
included new activity classes to deliver increased investment in public transport:
included in the Supplementary Estimates and that, in the interim, the increases be
including hotels, restaurants, and attractions. Visitors generate substantial revenue and help create
including ondemand public transport services (services like MyWay in Timaru and AT Local in South Auckland) in the SPTF.
incompatibility between financial assurance requirements and conventional insurance policies.
incorporated into the New Zealand system through Civil Aviation Rules, and we are required to
incorporating technology and innovation into the design and delivery of land transport investment
increase demand for low emission vehicles
increase economic growth and productivity by reducing congestion on urban roads and by more efficient utilisation of the transport network
increase the funding range for the walking and cycling activity class
increase the variety and supply of low emission vehicles
increased investment across some activity classes, including public transport, maintenance, local and regional roads, policing and walking and cycling,
increased petrol excise duty and road user charges by cents per litre (and equivalent in road user charges) in , , and .
increasing Waka Kotahis powers to manage approved course providers.
increasing access to low and zeroemissions vehicles for lowincome households by supporting social leasing schemes and trialling an equityoriented vehicle scrap and replace scheme
increasing importance over recent years. ICAOs standards and recommended practices are
increasing support for walking and cycling, including initiatives to increase the use of ebikes
individual package components and indicative costs
individual project CIPA being completed and considered by Joint Ministers and the
industry representatives like DairyNZ and FilmNZ
influence of external factors on transport outcomes, such as the COVID pandemic and responses to it during and , also poses a challeng e for attributing changes in outcomes to GPS itself. To detail this further, Figure below compares the funding ranges set out in GPS for each activity class with actual funding approved by Waka Kotahi, in total, for the three years from to . Approved funding is further disaggregated into that which has been claimed by approved organisations and that which is unclaimed. This indicates that most areas recorded investment approvals within the intended range. However, in many of the key areas of transformation, the GPS investments did not meet the intended levels: Claimed funding for state highway improvements is only around half of approved funding. Total approved funding for state highway maintenance is slightly higher than the upper limit in GPS , although the amount claimed is substantially lower. This may reflect unexpected increases in maintenance costs and more emergency remediation than anticipated. Approved funding for walking and cycling improvements is near the top of the GPS range, but the amount claimed is below the lower limit of the range. Appro ved and claimed funding for transitional rail is at the low end of the GPS range. Approved and claimed funding for the promotion of road safety and demand management is below the low end of the GPS range. Approved funding for rapid transit is less than ha lf of the low end of the GPS range and claimed funding is minimal. This suggests that funding for transformational aspects of GPS , such as continued walking and cycling improvements, transitional rail, road safety promotion, and rapid transit, faced challenges in meeting the minimum funding expectations in the GPS over the three years shown. Some of these challenges may reflect delays to projects caused by the COVID pandemic. GPS funding ranges are calculated from Ta ble of the GPS document. Approved funding figures were obtained from the Waka Kotahi NLTP funding da ta dashboard EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
influencing development of international standards
influencing to achieve broader government outcomes
information about recruitment
infrastructure and road maintenance. Following a cost efficiency review, NZTA
infrastructure, road maintenance and a portion of the construction costs for
innovation and emerging technology.
innovation researchers including Callaghan Innovation, and DroneLab at the University of Canterbury
innovations, including in advanced aviation, meet the requirements of multiple markets. When
instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office for secondary legislation relating to
integrate rail with other modes of transport
integrated freight system
integrating GPS reporting with our other reporting
integrating land use, transport planning and delivery.
intent of the current regime, or of minor or consequential policy detail, without
interregional connectivity using drone passenger services.
internal policies or guidelines for decisionmaking, and
international airports such as Hamilton and Dunedin.
international shipping may also increase further if the International Maritime Organisation (IMO)
into force on April .
introduced emissions testing of used vehicles at entry to the New Zealand vehicle fleet
introduced, and thus this high crash rate reflects a small number of crashes and has a relatively wide confidence interval.
introduces a medical defence pathway for oral fluid infringement offences that does not require a blood test
introducing a framework for the electronic management of RUC
introducing roadside oral fluid drug testing
investigating a possible extension of Hamilton to Auckland rapid rail to Tauranga (focusing within the Waikato region) where this is important for informing the Hamilton to Auckland business case work or does not require additional resource.
investigating new, targeted safety requirements for vehicles entering the fleet.
investigating the technology requirements, and
investing in new and safe Roads of National Significance and increasing road policing and enforcement
investment activities first appro ved under GPS , and . GPS and are used as reference points to compare GPS . Funding decisions for baseline activities such as routine maintenance is also excluded from most of the analysis to focus on the subset of available fu nding in each GPS period that is most likely and able to be influenced by policy directions in the GPS. Transport investments have many interdependencies and external factors that affect performance and outcomes. Unfortunately, the scope of this evaluatio n and available data do not allow these to be identified exhaustively. .. Qualitative data collection and analysis The qualitative research components of the evaluation were intended to uncover some key drivers of investment decision making, factors aff ecting the relationships between inputs, outputs and outcomes, and perceptions of the extent to which the intentions of GPS are being realised. In total, twelve interviews were held with stakeholders in June July . Ten interviews were undertake n with stakeholders with general insights into GPS , comprising four stakeholders from Waka Kotahi and seven from external organisations. Two more interviews were held with three representatives from Auckland Transport and Waka Kotahi to explore two case studies of GPS investment. Interviewees were selected for their expert knowledge of the GPS and transport planning and to gain insight from different sectoral perspectives on GPS . Consequently, there is a wide diversity of views, particular ly among external stakeholders, and we stress that a consensus view on GPS is often elusive and has not been sought. Note also that while the policy direction of GPS was beyond scope, some stakeholders inevitably commented on this as they reflected on GPS influence. These comments are included in this report as they help illustrate the factors that shape stakeholders experience and understanding of the GPS. . To what extent has GPS influenced changes in NLTF investments, implementation and earl y stage outcomes Using predetermined criteria (aspects of performance reflecting key GPS priorities of safety, access, environment, and value for money), standards (rating definitions), and evidence (investments relative to GPS target ranges, combine d with reflection across the quantitative and qualitative analysis in this report), we present evaluative judgements on the extent to which GPS has influenced transport investment decisions. The following rating definitions were used: Adequate: Not m eeting all expectations but meeting minimum bottom line expectations and showing acceptable progress overall for . On track: GPS influence meets reasonable expectations for (ie, as planned) . Excellent: GPS influence exceeds expectations for . Overall, GPS is showing adequate progress toward expectations, particularly in the intended changes in the mix of investments towards public transport. These investment decisions are now flowing through to delivery, but it is too soon to eval uate their ultimate outcomes, given the time lags between investment decisions and delivery. In addition, the EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
investment in transport in areas of economic decline will not on their own support growth
investment provided by Crown funding.
investments that have implications
investments will continue to grow after the GPS period due to decisions made in that period. New funding for walking and cycling improvements that have been approved was slightly lower under GPS than under GPS but was substantially greater than under GPS . Suppose all planned funding for walking and cycling improvements that are not yet approved but have probable funding status is subsequently approved. In that case, investment decisions made under G PS will reflect a gradual increase in such improvements over time (also note qualitative findings in Section that indicate that councils were not necessarily prepared to respond to the additional investments available immediately). New approved fund ing for road safety promotion, road policing, and demand management was higher under GPS compared to GPS and . In addition to the above, it should be noted that rapid transit was introduced as a new activity class in GPS . Data by Waka Kotahi shows total approved funding for the rapid transit activity class of m in total from to , of which m has been claimed. This compares to an expected funding range for rapid transit in GPS of between m and m for this period (cf, Figure ). Figure shows the distribution of total costs across improvement activities and all other activities combined. The left panel shows only funding that has been approved (as of April ), ie, only the blue segments of Figu re . The right panel also includes probable future funding, ie, the blue plus grey segments of Figure . This shows: The proportion of funding for road improvement activities first approved under GPS was lower than under GPS and was lower t han under GPS if probable future funding is included. The proportion of funding for public transport improvement activities first approved under GPS was greater than under GPS and was greater than under GPS if probable future funding i s included. The proportion of funding for walking and cycling improvement activities first approved under GPS was less than under GPS but greater than under GPS . We note that while some infrastructure investments that are primarily roading focused can include investments in walking and cycling facilities, the design of such facilities may not always be optimal for walking and cycling outcomes. As noted in the evaluation of the Urban Cycling Programme, for example, the requirement to integra te multi modal facilities within a roading project may result in new cycling infrastructure not being well integrated with the existing network plan. Therefore, if the accompanying walking and cycling infrastructure developed is poorly designed or discon nected from existing networks, only marginal improvements in walking and cycling outcomes might be expected, if any. Note that the quality of investments under GPS is outside the scope of this review.
invitations to provide us with feedback
is a business arrangement between two or more airlines who want to advertise the same flight involving New Zealand destinations, but under their own airline names and flight numbers.
is a key document explaining the purpose and design of the policy and associated legislation.
is an allencompassing term that refers to any aviation capability that:
is an extensive commercial arrangement in which two or more airlines agree to cooperate on various aspects of pricing, scheduling, operations and service delivery in a particular market.
is broadly satisfied that points c and d are met, but for points a, b, and e you have
is crucial for New Zealands trade, especially for high value and perishable goods like seafood,
is deemed offensive, abusive or obscene
is free from death and injury
is prioritised in the transport network.
is regular monitoring and reporting against indicators set out in the strategys outcomes framework. This can help drive action and hold relevant agencies accountable for the delivery of the strategy.
is relevant to decisions about preserving future opportunities and deciding whether to mothball redundant facilities
is the final form of the legislation.
issues, such as transport security and the supply chain.
it is required or authorised by the Privacy Act or by any other law, for example:
it will prevent or lessen a serious threat to public health or safety or to somebodys life or health, or
its final report on Auckland Airports pricing this quarter. The Ministry is involved in a MBIE led
iv GPS Mode Shift Evaluation
iv Your guide to the Transport System
jobs in the tourism sector. International visitors contributed . billion to New Zealands economy
keep the regulation framework of forhire passenger transport services as simple and uniform as possible
keeping the current compulsory impairment test (CIT), with some restrictions on police officers switching between the CIT and the oral fluid testing processes
key performance indicators, inclusive of error rates, revenue levels, and health and
knowledgehubtransport.govt.nz
land transport investments) that are
lay the early groundwork for future integration of drones into our transport system, and
leadership for the aviation sector. The IAC is focused on the development of a National Aviation
leading system direction and strategy
least weeks prior to tolling commencing with details on the following matters:
legal limits for illicit and prescription drugs could be explored in the future
less than . travelling by motorcycle.
levers to oversee performance are board appointments , your regular interactions with the board
licence holders who hold medical certificates) that was added in without
licences (i.e. all three restrictions were individually effective at reducing cras hes among this group of drivers). For drivers with full licenses obtained after GDLS was introduced, Begg et al () also found a reduction in night time crashes, but no significant effects associated with the other two restrictions applied to drivers wi th restricted licenses. In terms of effects of introducing the three stage GDLS on motorcycle riders in New Zealand, Reeder et al () found that it was associated with a significant reduction in motorcycle traffic crash hospitalisations for riders aged to years old, controlling for national trends in injury events. The authors noted that this reduction in crashes may be largely attributable to a reduction in participation in motorcycle riding after the introduction of the GDLS, that is, a redu ction in overall exposure to motorcycle riding and associated crash risk. Relationships between crash rates and driving experience or progression through the licensing stages Lewis Evans () used matched driver licensing and crash data from to to analyse the relative probabilities of crashes for drivers with learner, restricted, and full licenses using statistical significance tests and logistic regression models controlling for driver age, gender, and driving experience. Figure shows the o verall profile of crash rates that he calculated for drivers who obtained a restricted license between and as they gain driving experience (measured by the amount of time since obtaining a learner licence). This clearly shows a significant increa se in the rate of crashes associated with the transition from a learner to a restricted license, followed by a gradual decline as driving experience increases. This decline appears to reverse slightly before and during the period when some drivers can grad uate to a full license with a time discount for completing advanced driver training ( to months). The gradual decline then appears to resume after the standard time for graduating to a full license ( months onward).
likely to gain access to international markets. This is because other countries and regulatory
limits set in other jurisdictions
little or no effect on the public.
looking at useful intellectual property in the proposals that could inform the next phase of the project discussions are underway on which elements could be acquired for this next phase.
loss of profit from impairment of the environment.
lowemission transport options
made significant progress over this time and undertook work that is fundamental to achieving the best result for Auckland. This included:
maintain a safe and secure aviation system
maintained at a level that meets the
maintained by or on behalf of the toll operator for the duration of the road tolling scheme;
maintaining and operating the system
maintenance, and any debt accrued where capital expenditure exceeds the
maintenanceUpper , , , , , , , , , ,
maintenanceUpper , , , , , , , , , ,
make better use of New Zealands considerable investment in roads.
make decisions on transport investment
makes a minor change to the wording of drug driving offences to align them with drink driving offences.
makes sure owners of offshore installations have financial assurance for oil wellcontrol measures, and
making public statements or taking initiatives of any sort without the knowledge and approval of the
manage funding and investment to support changes in the transport system
manage road safety risk resulting from vehicle dimensions and mass, and
management of system level, border related risks. Transport related work of specific interest to the
managementUpper
maritime activity. Maritime rules contain the detailed standards and requirements that the maritime
materials like tape recordings, videos or computer records
matters that are delegated to you by the Minister of Transport, with the approval of the Prime
may submit pa pers to Cabinet committees or Cabinet within their designated area of responsibility,
medicalconvenertransport.govt.nz
meet projected increases in landbased freight and the demand for passenger transport
meet specific requirements for airports and airlines, aviation support services and nonaviation transport services.
meeting , subject to appropriate redactions .
million Coastal Shipping Resilience Fund.
modernise and simplify the system
modify the Land Transport Management Act (
momentum within the system. The reasonably rapid rollout of the Roads of National Significance (RoNS) programme, under earlier GPS, was cited as an example: One GPS alone possibly cant do that much in the short term maybe over the longer term it can if its consistentlike the RoNS focus was very consistent over multiple GPSthis directed a huge proportion of NLTF investment into a set of projects (Government official) Reflecting on the above, several interviewees reported that the disruptive nature of GPS had resulted in some initial loss of system efficiency, primarily because of the level of system adaptation required. For example, some turnover in the government sector was attributed to GPS , given the need for new mindsets and skillsets. people who were used to building new roads, they had to shift to managing a project that was achieving a safety outcome, or it was achieving a multimodal approach The re was a huge turnover in staff at our own organisation just because they werent getting the big road building projects and they were required to do something different and either it wasnt a good fit for them, or we required new skills (Government offic ial) On the demand side of the system, a government official noted that GPS had provided some discretion for officials to come up with the right mix of activities under the broad outcomes of safety and access. The degree of discretion was described as somewhat unprecedented, meaning that officials had limited historical precedents to guide their responses to the document. Interpreting and then articulating appropriate responses took time and careful deliberation, given the wide scope of activities p otentially eligible for prioritisation: what did it mean to have a reduced focus on state highway improvements What did it mean to have an increased focus on walking and cycling (Government official) We had to figure out what were the priorities wit hin the priorities what did it meant to support mode shift to define specific aspects of access otherwise, its everything (Government official) Interviewees also described some stall in supply side momentum, as the market also sought to understand and then adjust to new priorities, for example: In the transport planning world was turned upside down any efficiencies you might think that youve gotwent out the window (Government official) Youve got to change the industrys response mov ing from large projects to small projects it takes a lot of peoples time to get their heads around it (Government official) Noting the investment data findings of an initial decline in walking and cycling funding, this may be due to some councils not be ing sufficiently advanced in their planning to take advantage of walking and cycling investment opportunities. This may also indicate the difficulty of turning a broad agenda for walking and cycling into reality. some Councils werent ready for a funding boost in walking and cycling and public transportthey didnt have good projects ready to go (Government official) massive change has a ripple effect it was only partway through the period that we started to get our feet under the table and get the pipeline moving (Government official) WHAT ARE THE KEY FACTORS THAT AFFECT THE EFFICIENCY AND EFFECTIVENESS OF CONVERTING INPUTS TO OUTPUTS AND HENCE TO OUTCOMES
monitoring and evaluating system and government agency performance
more diverse groups of people will use public transport
more heavily on adopting best practice regulatory tools in place in overseas jurisdictions.
more than , hospital admissions for respiratory and cardiac illnesses,
more than half of their time travelling is as a driver in a private car or van for
most of the regional routes. There are around eight smaller airlines providing scheduled services,
mostly connecting smaller towns with cities, and charter services.
motanalyticstransport.govt.nz
move to the Manukau Harbour.
msocsecretariattransport.govt.nz
multimodal, and lowcarbon
na No Email RE: Clean Car Standard phased implementation (VIA) Some information withheld under section ()(a) No Email RE: Further MIUA advice on excluding Class L vehicles from the ambit of the CCS (MIA) Some information withheld as it is out of scope No Email RE: Industry question on the Clean Car Standard Can the Minister provide comment please (VIA) na No Email RE: Land Transport (Clean Vehicles) Amendment Bill No (MIA) na No Email Withheld in Full ()(b )(ii) No Email Attachment Withheld in Full ()(b )(ii) No Email Attachment Withheld in Full ()(b )(ii) No Email RE: Thanks from the VIA for the Ministers time. Some information withheld under section ()(a) No Email RE: URGENT CCS and motorcycles (MIA) na No Document Response to Kit Wilkerson (VIA) na No Email Suspect Sender RUC for PHEV ZEV na Note no response from stakeholder about release No Email Thanks from the VIA for the Ministers time. Some information withheld under section ()(a) No s ()(b)(ii) s ()(b)(ii) s ()(b)(ii) s ()(b)(ii) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Document Description of information withheld Previously released Email VIAs statement regarding withdrawing support for the Clean Car Programme Embargoed Some information withheld under section ()(a) No Email Attachment VIA Clean Car Programme End of Support Press Release na No
nature of the consequential amendments and because full departmental
near, and is physically or operationally integral to, the new road in respect of
necessary updates to align them with the Act, take account of changes in
need a detailed review , which we will incorporate alongside any feedback you have, in
need to continue to demonstrate a net reduction in emissions after accounting for the
negotiations will be held in April. Consideri ng our existing Cabinet mandate and the current
networks that provide a range of
new combination offences (at the infringement and criminal level) for people found with multiple types of drugs, or drugs and alcohol.
new criminal offences and penalties for drivers who have high levels of impairing drugs, as well as new infringement offences and penalties for drivers with lower levels of impairing drugs.
new drafting instructions as part of this process.
norms prior to Crown funding and financing (. billion) to limit cost pressures on household and business budgets
north of Levin, and Takitimu North Link;
not be identified as an exempt service be identified within a Regional Public Transport Plan.
not sought from the Treaty Provisions Officials Group.
notwithstanding the lack of statistical significance, these models al so estimated that riders choosing CBTA were up to twice as likely to be involved in crashes as riders who did not choose CBTA. Given the relatively recent introduction of CBTA we do not yet have sufficient data to precisely estimate crash rates by CBTA st atus. However, given the relatively high crash rates observed for CBTA so far, we make the following recommendations: CBTA crash rates should be closely monitored in the coming years, to determine whether crash rates for riders choosing CBTA are higher th an those not choosing CBTA. Further investigation of the differences in the characteristics of riders choosing CBTA versus those choosing traditional tests should be undertaken to determine the extent to which these could be underlying causes of any difference in crash rates. .. Relati onships between progression through the motorcycle licensing stages, rider demographics, and crash rates As with Class (see section . above), we analysed relationships between progression through the motorcycle licensing stages and rider characteristic s and crash rates. Compared to Class , a much larger proportion of riders do not progress beyond a learner licence (within a given period of time). Figure gives a snapshot of the progression pathways taken by riders who obtained a learner licence in , as at the end of . By that time, remained on a learner licence, had progressed to a restricted licence but not yet obtained a full licence, and had progressed to a full licence. For this cohort, around onethird progressed via CBTA to o btain a restricted licence, and around two thirds progressed via CBTA to obtain a full licence. Figure Snapshot of progression by the end of for riders who obtained a learner licence in .
o Of those aged under at the time of obtaining their learner licence, only had progressed to a full licence within four years. o Of those aged to at the time of obtaining their learner licence, had progressed to a full licence within four years. Rates of progression to a full licence have generally been falling for most age groups, with the biggest changes observed for riders aged between and at the time of obtaining their learner licence. For riders who obtained a learner licence in the combined period from to , the odds of progressing to a restricted andor full licence were around higher for riders who obtained their learner licence aged in their s and s compared to riders aged under . Similarly, for those who progressed to a restricted licence, the odds of progressing to a full licence within four years were around higher for riders who obtained their learner licence in their s and s compared to riders aged under . Progres sion vs non progression: Relationships to crash rates We tested whether progression was predictive of involvement in motorcycle crashes by analysing: . For the cohort of riders who obtained a learner licence in and (i.e. under the licensing system that applied after the introduction of CBTA) whether their progression status at the end of was predictive of involvement in crashes up to that time. . For riders who obtained a learner licence between and , whether four year progression status was predictive of involvement in crashes while holding a learner or a restricted licence. For the cohort of riders who obtained a learner licence in and , we found no statistically significant relationships between crash rates and progression sta tus as at the end of ( Figure ; pvalues range from . to .). Essentially the same results were obtained when controlling for differences in rider gender, age, and region of residence (see section .. of the Technical Report ). For all riders w ho obtained a learner licence between and , we found no evidence that four year progression status is predictive of crash involvements while on a learner or restricted licence, after controlling for rider age, gender, and region of residence (see section .. of the Technical Report ).
of , so the curves for later cohorts are shorter). Historically, it has taken around month s ( years) for one third of each cohort of learners to have progressed to a full licence. Furthermore, the progression curve for the cohort is still increasing after months ( years). Thus some riders in that cohort are expected to continue to p rogress in years after . For Class , rates of progression to a full licence have increased then decreased over time. For example, of the cohort of riders who obtained a learner licence in , after months had progressed to a full licence. For the cohort, had progressed to a full licence after months, but for the cohort, had progressed.
of Land Transport Records Speed Limits) Regulations could be made
of Speed Limits (the Speed Rule) EXPMIN;
of Transport instruct ing the Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) to draft the
of Transport, Finance and Climate Change CABMIN;
of consultation with key stakeholders, and next steps.
of drafting secondary legislation in relation to offences that are inconsistent with the
of maintaining the growing system could place further constraints on the ability of the NLTF to fund new initiatives. Within t his context, greater attention to the continuous programme of precommitted investments to GPS objectives may offer a strategy for increasing the contribution of the overall investment response to GPS objectives. Investment priorities are an important driver of decision making and implementation. However, an investment model alone will be limited in achieving the transformations needed. Therefore, it seems apparent that future GPS will increasingly look to enhance the integration between the investment levers available through the NLTF and other levers such as regulation, pricing, land reform, and spatial planning. INTRODUCTION
of providing a second highquality connection that links Northport to Auckland
of reoffending, for the AIO group, for drink driving offences than the matched group within one year.
of the Government expectation that it be tolled;
of the impact that diversion has on project benefits, and not just on the
of the progression pathways taken by drivers who obtained a learner licence in and were aged under years old at the time, as at the end of .
offers the potential to achieve good transport outcomes while spending substantially less than with the classic approach that is limited by the information available at the start of a development.
on Te Ahu a Turanga Manawat Tararua Highway, taki to north of Levin, Takitimu North
on a regional fuel tax in Auckland, including the projects it would fund. We completed an RIA on the proposal.
on increasing housing supply, choice
on land transport What is the GPS
on our experience of working with the NLTP snapsho t and funding approvals data from TIO, the following improvements could be useful: Create documentation for the fields in the data, including what is measured, where the data is obtained from, how frequently it is , any revisions to the data or definition over time, and any data quality limitations. Apply minimum standards for the quality of all data recorded in the NLTP extracts to improve the consistency of information. Develop a consistent way of categorising the type and objectives of projects that are independent of GPS policy priorities and create guidelines for applying these categories in practice. This could involve creating a relatively large set of narrow categories that can be aggregated as needed. The introduction of new categories that overlap with existing categories should be avoided. A separate set of reporting categories could be developed that are linked to the base categories if needed, eg, to report investments related to policy priorities like road to zero that can span multiple types of activity. If feasible, historic ac tivities could be coded to a consistent set of categories to facilitate analysis of trends over time. Publish a combined set of funding approvals data reflecting the aggregation of the existing monthly extracts . Publish detailed NLTP and funding approvals data, including information about individual investment activities, as publicly accessible datasets outside TIO to facilitate greater use and analysis of this data. Given the evolving nature of this data over time, this would ideally be as a set of monthl y or quarterly snapshots with historic snapshots retained rather than only the latest data. Providing a set of consistent snapshots would enable an analysis of changes in funding decisions over time. Clearly distinguish budgeted expenditure from actual exp enditure in the NLTP extracts. Our understanding is that the current extracts include budgeted expenditure for future years and actual expenditure for past years. Ideally, the past budgeted expenditure would be retained and reported separately from the act ual expenditure for each investment phase so that actual and budgeted expenditure can be easily compared. Review and clean the BCR data to remove indicators of missing values (eg, or ) and clearly distinguish where a default BCR value has been used or if the BCR value is an initial or final estimate. APPENDIX TRENDS OBSERVED IN GPS OUTCOMES MONITORING
on the National Security Board, where it represents maritime security and other national security
on the assigned days the participants filled in the memory jogger to record their travel
on the assigned days the participants record their travel using a Travel Logger (GPS device) andor a paper travel diary
on the assigned travel days participants recording their travel details on the memory jogger form.
on the assigned days the participants filled in an online travel diary or could record their travel using a Travel Logger (GPS device)
on the draft GPS on Land Transport . We wanted to find out what stakeholders thought of PED increases of between and cents per litre, with equivalent increases to the rates of RUC, across years. We also prepared an RIA.
on the three new schemes and its analysis of the schemes is outlined in annex one:
ondemand public transport services
one of the purposes we obtained the information was to give it to someone else
ongoing improvements to the Ministrys monitoring and evaluation functions.
open up access again for touristoriented services.
operational activities. It also ensures that key stakeholders, including your Office, are regularly and
operational performance, and delivery and the establishment of international air services and newly
opportunities for the greatest proportion of Mori businesses to be involved in providing services to the project in the next phase.
opportunities through a variety of
opportunities to deliver more innovative services to Total Mobility users
or the Human Rights Act ;
or you can submit feedback via a
order for submission to Cabinet.
organisation holding the information to carry on, without prejudice or
organisation holding the information to carry out, without prejudice or disadvantage, commercial activities
organisations involved with emergency management including the Police, New Zealand Search and Rescue, and Fire and Emergency New Zealand.
other countries by imposing stronger requirements progressively from to to significantly reduce health harm to New Zealanders. This will bring our emissions standards in line with those that have been in place for many years in Europe, Japan, North America, China, and most developed countries.
other incidental matters such as screen resolution and the language setting of your browser.
other major roading projects including the new route replacing the Manawat Gorge road, and the Mt Messenger bypass.
out adequate consultation on the proposed tolling scheme; and
out of New Zealand for example, exported to the Pacific Islands, or
outcomes for Auckland Light Rail that were included in the Response Requirements Document (RRD) these had been expressed only in broad terms in ATAP
outlines key decisions for you as Associate Minister of Transport through to February . We
over , cases of childhood asthma, and
over working papers detailing the methodologies, the data, and the cost and charges estimates across different modes of transport
overhaul its facilities and the proposed increases to landing fees that would cover the costs of the
ow to fund and finance the elements of the recommended programme of investment. This included:
paper (Cabinet Manual .).
paragraph above available to the public generally by including it in its annual report and
participants shared their views, concerns and ideas for changing the existing consent provisions for drones flying above people and property. There was a presentation outlining the current consent provisions under Part of the Rules and Regulations for unmanned aircraft (UA). The forum then considered options for the future. We gathered feedback about these in the forum and through an online survey afterwards.
particularly through fostering interregional rail. Environmental benefits could also be identified through reduced vehicle emissions. The project offered a service innovation with delivery in a rapid timeframe, with a launch in early . This could bring the delivery of the service forward by many years, compared to the construction of a high speed rail link between Auckland and Hamilton. The five year cost of Te Huia, at million, was far lower than the estimated billion required to establish a high speed rail link. These positives, however, were undermined by the age of the stock (extended to last another five years), the relatively low frequency of the service, and the travel time of the j ourney, at . hours, undermining its value as a commuter service. These contributed to a relatively low BCR. .. Implementation The service was launched in April , stood up in a remarkably short months, and was implemented as a five year trial service (coinciding with the life of the carriages) with a review period planned after two years by Waka Kotahi. The rolling stock co nsists of substantially refurbished carriages, which were nevertheless still some years old at the time the service was launched. Te Huia was implemented very rapidly. However, doing so posed a range of constraints that limited its implementation, incl uding integrated ticketing, limitations on disability access, options for station interchanges, and integration with Auckland Metro services. From customer feedback surveys, Te Huia appears to offer strong reliability, customer service and price but perfo rms less well on frequency and speed of the connection. The service was initially intended as a connection service from Hamilton to Auckland but scheduling also allows for Auckland to Hamilton returns with an overnight stay. Despite its commuter target, the service has uncovered a latent demand for weekend travel and travel by SuperGold Card users, and the current price point is proving attractive for many. .. Looking to the future Te Huia was purposefully funded as a trial service. It is critical to explore the learning from the service and the lessons it offers for future interregional rail policy and planning over longer term horizons. In part, a key value of Te Huia is exploring what the service heralds for the future and what a suitable interregi onal service could and should look like. The implementation of Te Huia to reveals that there are potentially other customer groups, with other outcomes possible from such a service. The five year time horizon of the trial provides the opportunity to test who are the customer groups, their value drivers (such as frequency, reliability, level of amenity, value for money and speed) and what they are seeking from an interregional rail proposition, and the different solutions that could be offered. Notabl y, procuring new rolling stock is a five year process. The two year review will, therefore, likely pose questions of if and how to extend the current stock and what could or should replace the existing stock. It is also worth noting that the safety standar ds of the Waikato Regional Council. . Te Huia Customer Satisfaction Survey . Report to Waikato Regional Council Te Huia Train Service Subcommittee. WHAT ARE THE KEY FA CTORS THAT AFFECT THE EFFICIENCY AND EFFECTIVENESS OF CONVERTING INPUTS TO OUTPUTS AND HENCE TO OUTCOMES
partnering with Mori to identify opportunities
passed on November and provides a month phasein period for charges and transfers, and, clarifies that motorcycles and mopeds are not part of the Clean Car Standard.
payable, and the payment methods offered by the toll operator, are on a website
penalties ECOMIN, CABMIN refer.
performance of its member States, to ensure a safe, secure and integrated international aviation
performance. Auckland, Wellington and Christchurch international airports are subject to a light
petrol excise duty will increase by . cents per litre on February and March
pg , pg Objective: A land transport system that delivers the right infrastructure and services to the right level at the best cost. Primary Long Term Results: . Delivery of the right infrastructure and services to the right level, . Improved returns from road maintenance, . Improved returns from public transport.
policy , and Chair of the relevant national security committee (the Maritime Security Oversight
policy and regulatory settings for the maritime system .
policy priorities throughout the transport sector. You are supported in this work by the Ministry of
population projections provided by Stats NZ
portfolio Minister (Cabinet Manual .). The Cabinet Manual also states that Associate Ministers
possible in the time available .
possibly due to lower levels of exposure by learners relative to people with restricted or full licences. .. Other limitations of this study In analysing changes in crash rates over time, external factors may also have affected crash rates. Where possible, we control for external factors by comparing the impacts of GDLS changes between groups of licence holders who were affected by the changes versus groups not affected by those changes. We also include time trends or year specific dummy variables in most models to try to capture external factors. However, these methods will not control for all factors that may have affected crash rates at the s ame time as the changes to the GDLS. For example: Safety campaigns or investments could reduce crashes and the impacts of these interventions could be confounded with the impacts of changes to the GDLS. Changes in vehicle safety ratings over time, and re lationships between safety ratings and licence holder age andor licence stages may affect crash rates in ways that appear to be linked to licensing but are unrelated (e.g. younger licence holders may tend to drive cheaper second hand vehicles which tend t o be older and less safe). The legal maximum blood alcohol level for drivers and riders under years old was reduced to zero in August . As this change occurred around the same time as the changes evaluated in this report, and because it applied to all licence holders under years old regardless of licence stage, it is not possible to clearly separate the effects of that change from the other changes evaluated in this report.
potential policy interventions
prepandemic levels on many domestic routes. International air traffic volumes to and from New
preliminary findings and conclusions from the work undertaken to
prepare for the audit, includin g engaging with stakeholders. We will brief you about your role in the
preparing a social impact assessment and developing options to mitigate negative social impacts
prescribe information that motor vehicle traders must display when offering motor vehicles for sale.
prescribes efficiency and emissions data requirements for vehicles entering New Zealand and replaces the earlier Fuel Consumption Information Rule.
prescribes how tailpipe CO
previous annual report to the Minister, a description of the new method;
previously revoked rules. ygffdk
prices, quality services, more travel options and connectivity. Som e sector participants have
probability that a block of English text relates to a given topic, such as cycling. The BART LARGE MNLI model was trained using the Multi Gentre Natural Language Inference (MultiNLI) dataset. This dataset is a collection of , pairs of sentences that have been classified as a positive entailment (ie, one sentence implies the other), a negative entailment (one sentence contradicts the other), or neural (the sentences are unrelated). Analysis of this training data allows the NLP model to estimate the probability that two blocks of text relate to si milar concepts. When used for topic detection, the NLP model does not simply check for the presence or absence of the topic keyword in the context text. Rather, the NLP model uses a semantic understanding of the English language derived from the training d ata to determine whether the context text relates to a topic expressed by a keyword, even if that keyword itself is not included in the text. Given that transport activities may be described in various ways, a set of topic keywords were checked for each activity (Table ). The NLP model returns the probability that the context text for each activity relates to the topic implied by each of the keywords. The highest probability across all keywords in each of the five topics was used as the probabili ty that the context text related to that topic. If the estimated probability of the context text for an activity relating to a topic was greater than ., the activity was assigned to that topic. It is possible for an activity to belong to more than one to pic, depending on the estimated probabilities across all keywords. Table Topics and keywords used in the topic analysis Topic Topic keywords Walking walking, pedestrians Cycling cycling, bicycles Roads roads, highways, driving, cars Public transport trains, railways, buses, ferries Safety safety
proceeding with the proposed work required to complete an indicativelevel business case
processes to support the passing of the Civil Aviation Bill.
produced a comparison of New Zealands CO
producing and publishing annual monitoring reports against these reporting indicators
productivity, and represent good value for money. You do this thro ugh collaborating with the
products to international markets quickly, maintaining their quality and competitiveness.
programme requires changes to the Land Transport Act , the Land Transport Management Act and the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits .
programme) mean that much transport investment expenditure may have been precommitted under prior GPS. Proposalsbusiness cases that were stopped due to changing priorities or circumstances. Investments that commence d in the three years when GPS was in effect but which are not concluded in that period. Other related policy and investment areas independent of the GPS or regional land transport plans (RLTPs) can be influenced by the GPS, and also determine local priorities. Together these can consume a significant amount of available funding. Accordingly, in the short term, the range of investments influenced by any GPS period may be quite limited, with substantial transport expenditure (historically around three quarters of the transport investment in a ny year) precommitted or allocated to baseline activities such as ongoing maintenance. On the other hand, the GPS can provide certainty by setting important long term signals that are realised beyond the immediate three year NLTP. This can produce change s over a decade and is gradually reflected in transport investment decisions made by Waka Kotahi, territorial authorities, and regional councils. However, the pace of change is an issue in the face of urgent strategic imperatives such as climate change and the road safety burden. We also note a top down and bottom up relationship in the GPS, in that the Minister and Te Manat Waka prepare the GPS, which sets the overall direction. Local and regional councils prepare Regional Land Transport Plans (RLTPs), with Waka Kotahi developing and implementing the NLTP and managing expenditure within the NLTF. Because of the limitations of any one GPS in delivering outcomes over the short term, this report focuses largely on investment decision making and the factors that affect investments, ultimately resulting in outcomes. Stakeholder discussions explored the impact of GPS in investment planning and implementation and where these could be identified. Some discussion is included. However, these were generally less evi dent in the short time since GPS was . For the future, it would be useful to explore the range of projects that resulted from GPS investments and any monitoring of benefits realisation undertaken to provide a clearer picture of GPS impact and , ultimately, transport system outcomes. Appendix details a selection of observed trends in GPS outcomes for contextual information. INTRODUCTION
programmes for investment.
progress the schemes. This is in annex two. The paper outlines key features of the
progressing a business case to enable decisions to be made on mode and route, and providing cost estimates (which are mode and route dependent) and funding and financing options
progression that some communities face but instead has made it harder to retain a licence. The barriers to progression through the Graduated Driver Licensing System will be considered and addressed through the current review of the driver licensing system.
prohibited removal of, or tampering with, a vehicles emissions control equipment if such an action would adversely affect the vehicles emissions
project, and has not been completed for the rescoped Whangrei to Port Marsden (road) and
projects and the Programme as a whole, and those CIPAs being considered by the Ministers
projects except the Whangrei to Port Marsden (road), the South Auckland project
projects, local government has an
provide effective competition and licensing regulation for international air services
provide efficient, reliable, resilient,
provide for the protection and security of personal data and system integrity.
provide funds for a programme of transport projects that benefits a region that would otherwise not be funded or would be delayed
provide transport choice for users
provided for certain vehicles that do not have to comply with the Rule.
provided for more effective planning in the safer movement of large loads
provided funding for local government to maintain footpaths so they are safer and easier to use
provided that all participants in such arrangements hold the underlying traffic rights and appropriate authorisation and meet the requirements applied to such arrangements. For clarity, frequencies used by the marketing airline, including with airlines of a third country, shall not be counted against that marketing airlines capacity entitlement.
provided that the portfolio Minister has been consulted and agrees with the submission of the
provides a searchable database of vehicles by type, make, model, or number plate. This allows you to look up the CO
provides co ordination functions during major emergencies, which ensures clear reporting lines
providing a year outlook of how spending
providing funding to support the freight sector to purchase zero and lowemissions trucks
provision of services supports value for money and efficiency from public transport investment while achieving the first three objectives.
public against acts of unlawful interference with civil aviation. The international threat
public electricity and heat production ().
public engagement begins.
public transport patronage projections from Auckland Transport and the Wellington Regional Council.
public transport services supports modeshift from private motor vehicles, by being integrated, reliable, frequent, accessible, affordable, and safe
publicly consulted on and agreed to
a paper called Taking flight: an aviation system for the automated age
quality Regional Land Transport Plans (RLTPs),
rating the greater the fee.
reallocated Northern Pathway funding, as the scope of these projects has not yet been
reasons for decisions made about you.
rebate applications will also close after . pm on December .
recognise that the investment decisions we make will shape patterns of demand and not just respond to them we should debate the sort of access we want to help us decide how to invest for the future.
recognise the land transport impacts of the November earthquake.
recreational aviation interest groups
reduce the environmental impact of the transport system.
reduced the weight that vehicles could carry so operators were less likely to overload their vehicles.
reduces emissions and delivers value for money.
reducing congestion: By encouraging drivers to travel at different times, time of use schemes can reduce the number of cars on the road during peak times.
reducing public heath effects of marine pollution on communities close to ports and harbours
reducing the frequency of vision testing to enable online driver licensing transactions
reductions were found for drivers aged , , and , suggesting that the reduction estimated for yearolds could be attributed to GDLS rather than other factors affecting all drivers. Fell et al () used similar dat a to the above studies but instead of comparing separate results for younger versus older drivers, the dependent variables in their models were crash counts for and yearold drivers divided by crash counts for drivers in order age groups. This divis ion is assumed to directly adjust for other factors aside from GDLS that may have affected crash rates for all drivers. Fell et al () estimated autoregressive integrated moving average models applied to panel data for US states, controlling for differe nces in other traffic safety related interventions across states (e.g. seatbelt enforcement and drink driving laws). They found that a GDLS was associated with between a . and . reduction in fatal crashes involving and yearold drivers relati ve to to yearold drivers. Karaca Mandic and Ridgeway () estimated a sophisticated statistical model using United States crash data from to to attempt to separate the impacts of a GDLS on teenage driving behaviour from effects arising from a simple reduction in teenage driving. They estimated that most of the impacts of a GDLS on crash rates in the US could be attributed to a reduction in driving (particularly caused by restrictions on night time driving), rather than by improved teena ge driving behaviour. Effects of decals to identify restricted drivers Curry et al () studied the effects of changes to New Jerseys GDLS in that required young drivers on intermediate licenses (similar to restricted licenses in New Zealand) to d isplay decals on their cars to make it easier for police officers to identify such drivers and increase enforcement of restrictions on night time driving and carrying passengers. They used data on vehicle crashes linked to driver licensing records to estimate negative binomial regression models explaining crash rates per , licensed drivers for , , , and yearold drivers. Controlling for age, gender, monthly average fuel prices, and crash rates among to yearold drivers, Curry et al () found the changes to the GDLS rules were associated with an overall . reduction in crashes among drivers on intermediate licenses. Curry et al () also considered whether crash rates among intermediate drivers might have had unique trends pri or to the GDLS changes that were not fully accounted for by the crash rate among older drivers included as a control variable in the model. They addressed this issue by estimating piecewise time trend models for crash rates among intermediate drivers and t ested whether the rates of change different types of crash rates were significant different after the GDLS changes compared to before. They found that the overall crash rate for intermediate drivers was reducing at . per year before the changes and . per year in the two years afterward, and this difference was statistically significant. Bates et al () surveyed the perceptions of provisional (i.e. restricted) licence holders regarding the display of P plates in Queensland, Australia. They found relatively high compliance with the requirement to display P plates, with of drivers on first stage provisional (P) licences and of drivers on second stage provisional (P) licences reporting that they nearly always displayed the required plates. A key finding of the study
references to the Speed Rule.
referred to in recommendation ;
refers to commercial activity, including advertising.
refresh our demand models to reduce uncertainty and better understand the factors affecting the changing patterns of demand this includes looking at social trends and the impact of new technologies
refreshed its monitoring approach. As part of this, each entity has a monitoring plan approved by
regional connectivity. We will brief you further on these matters.
regional councils, territorial authorities
regional fuel tax, unlike petrol excise duty, also applies to diesel, which is more widely used offroad than petrol.
registered between July and December
regulations become stricter, companies that invest in decarbonisation will be better positioned to
regulatory frameworks, which underpin our international connections and facilitate our trade in goods and services. The Ministry and the Crown Entities work together to: monitor and understand what is happening internationally, and how it affects, or may affect, New Zealands transport system influence relevant international standards to protect and promote New Zealands interests ensure New Zealand meets its international transport commitments . A wide range of international organisations influence New Zealands transport settings. Some of the key organisations the Ministry works with, and their role, are: The International Civil Aviation Organisation : sets standards and regulations for the aviation sector (international safety, security, and environmental protections). International Maritime Organisation: sets standards and regulations for the maritime sector (international safety, security, and environmental protections). International Labour Organisation: s ets conditions of work and employment on ships (under the Maritime Labour Convention). United Nations working parties: New Zealand has obligations as a party to two United Nations Agreements relating to road vehicle and road vehicle standards. Under these agreements, regulations and standards are set to improve road safety and facilitate international trade. World Meteorological Organisation: Fulfils New Zealands obligations under the World Meteorological Organisation, the United Nations specialised agency for weather, climate, and water, by way of the Ministrys contract with MetService. Your engagement at the international level is important The Ministry will provide advice on where we consider there will be good value in your engagement in Ministerial level forums. Key opportunities over the next year may include: The Transport and Infrastructure Council . Pacific Transport Ministerial level meetings . International Transport Forum (ITF) Annual Ministerial Summit. AsiaPacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Ministerial meeting. Delivering your priorities As the transport system steward, the Ministry can help to embed your priorities and connect them with whole of government priorities and advise you on how to use the available levers to achieve your short , medium , and longer term goals. This includes working with the transport agencies to develop a coherent strategic view of the longer term needs for the transport system. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TRANSPORTS ROLE WITHIN THE WIDER SYSTEM
regulatory frameworks, which underpin our international connections and facilitate our trade in goods and services. The Ministry and the Crown Entities work together to: monitor and understand what is happening internationally, and how it affects, or may affect, New Zealands transport system influence relevant international standards to protect and promote New Zealands interests ensure New Zealand meets its international transport commitments . A wide range of international organisations influence New Zealands transport settings. Some of the key organisations the Ministry works with, and their role, are: The International Civil Aviation Organisation : sets standards and regulations for the aviation sector (international safety, security, and environmental protections). International Maritime Organisation: sets standards and regulations for the maritime sector (international safety, security, and environmental protections). International Labour Organisation: s ets conditions of work and employment on ships (under the Maritime Labour Convention). United Nations working parties: New Zealand has obligations as a party to two United Nations Agreements relating to road vehicle and road vehicle standards. Under these agreements, regulations and standards are set to improve road safety and facilitate international trade. World Meteorological Organisation: Fulfils New Zealands obligations under the World Meteorological Organisation, the United Nations specialised agency for weather, climate, and water, by way of the Ministrys contract with MetService. Your engagement at the international level is important The Ministry will provide advice on where we consider there will be good value in your engagement in Ministerial level forums. Key opportunities over the next year may include: The Transport and Infrastructure Council . Pacific Transport Ministerial level meetings . International Transport Forum (ITF) Annual Ministerial Summit. AsiaPacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Ministerial meeting. Delivering your priorities As your Ministry, we can help to embed your priorities and connect them with whole of government priorities and advise you on how to use the available levers to achieve your short , medium , and longer term goals. This includes working with the transport agencies to develop a coherent strategic view of the longer term needs for the transport system. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TRANSPORTS ROLE WITHIN THE WIDER SYSTEM
related sectors such as tourism, logistics, and manufacturing.
relationship, the Ministry has a
released, including under the Official Information Act , by persons with the appropriate authority.
relevant region or regions; and
remotely piloted or autonomous aircraft
removed from the Speed Rule following consultation as Road
removing licence endorsements for specialtype vehicles such as forklifts or bulldozers
removing the time licence system
renew the existing line to Kauri
renew the existing line to Otiria and construct a connection to Northport
replacing and upgrading assets, including container wagons, locomotives and maintenance facilities that are at the end of their useable life, and
replacing like for like)Maintaining and operating
report looks at the feasibility of freight certificates to speed up decarbonising heavy freight transport in Aotearoa New Zealand.
reporting arrangements for the Programme:
reports, memos, letters, notes, advice and emails
representative groups from the public and passengers
representatives from the Ministry ( Chair), Maritime NZ, CAA, Department of Conservation, New
representatives of major airlines
require SuperGold Card holders to purchase smartcards as smartcard ticketing systems become available.
require the approval of the Ministers of Finance and Transport, before a regional fuel tax could be implemented
required tighter emissions standards for used vehicles imported into New Zealand
required to be released by July
required to support enforcement of the remade civil aviation rules and invited the
requiring only zeroemissions public transport buses to be purchased by
requiring services to be procured, contracted andor delivered in such a way that ensures transparency around aspects of service delivery
rescue area covering over million square kilometres, extending from the Pacific Islands to
resilient and productive towns and
resilient, reliable, and prepared for potential disruptions
respond to changes in technology and infrastructure needed to support the integration of drones
respond to changes in the threat environment .
responsibility for appointing two Aviation Medical Conveners, reviewers for the Independent
responsibility to engage with Mori
restoring the track network and other supporting infrastructure by addressing legacy maintenance issues across the rail network
restricted airspace areas exclusively for testing technologies
restrictions on crashes, Williams et al () also report studies that found positive effects of night and passenger restrictions, despite mixed evidence about rates of compliance with such restrictions. Williams () the r eview cited above, covering research between and . Key safety related findings about driver licensing from this literature were: Introducing a GDLS led to a reduction in total crashes of for yearolds and for yearolds, but there was evidence that a reduction in distance driven (induced by graduated licensing) was responsible for some or all of these reductions in crashes. Among and yearold drivers, Williams reports mixed evidence, with a small number of studies sho wing that introducing a GDLS increased crashes among this group (presumably due to reduced driving experience), while other studies found no effects on this age group, or reductions in crashes. Williams concluded that The case is not closed, but these stu dies suggest that if there is any negative effect it is likely to be minimal, supporting the conclusion that the overall crash reduction effect of GDL in the United States is strongly positive. Some limited evidence of safety benefits of a minimum learner licence period of months versus or months, but no evidence of safety benefits of required hours of supervised driving at the learner stage. Restrictions on night driving and carrying passengers at the restricted licence stage are generally effectiv e at reducing crashes, but many such crashes still occur and compliance with such restrictions is not perfect. Earlier multi country reviews by Simpson () and Shope () found that introducing a GDLS was associated with crash rate reductions among y oung drivers from to and from to , respectively. Vanlaar et al () reviewed studies from North America and found strong evidence in support of a GDLS, with an estimated reduction in relative fatality risk for yearold drivers of , but no significant effects for drivers aged over . Zhu et al () carried out a meta study focussed on whether the impacts of introducing a GDLS on crash rates vary with the drivers age. Overall, they found that introducing a GDLS was associated with a reduction in crash rates among yearold drivers, a reduction for yearold drivers, and no significant effect for year old drivers (however, they noted that few studies were available for older age groups). Effectiveness of specific driv ing restrictions and compliance with restrictions Several meta studies have focussed on the relative effectiveness of the various restrictions that are typically imposed in the first two licensing stages under a three stage GDLS: McKnight and Peck () found positive effects associated with increasing the duration of the learner period, making obtaining a full license dependent on having a clean driving record, and restrictions on night driving and carrying passengers. Williams () similarly found th at longer learner periods and restrictions on night time driving and passenger carrying were effective at reducing crash rates among young drivers. Fell, Todd and Voas () found that restrictions on night time driving and carrying passengers were effec tive at reducing fatal crashes by around among and yearold drivers in the United States.
retain air connections to key routes and hubs important for tourism recovery,
retain air connectivity with New Zealands principal trading partners,
retain important air connections to the Pacific,
revenue from . billion to . billion
review of the Commerce Act, but airport regulation specifically is not currently in scope of the
review the research, evidence and best practice approaches being used in New Zealand and overseas
review. We can brief you further on these matters.
reviewing major airports pricing and spending decisions, to improve transparency about their
reviewing penalties for traffic offences
reviewing whether the freeze on new transport services entering the scheme could be lifted
ride a moped were deemed to be more similar to the skills required to ride a motorcycle, compared to the skills required to d rive a light motor vehicle. For example, if the probability that a driver is involved in a crash in a year is , the odds of crash involvement is ()() , which is very similar to the probability.
risks and vulnerabilities . Together with the CAA and domestic security partners, we regularly
risks associated with implementing the tax and how they can be managed
road maintenance, and a portion of the debt accrued from construction.
road user charges consultation
road vehicle technologies and its benefits
road, of the toll and options for paying;
roadsafetystrategytransport.govt.nz
role in achieving our emissions reduction targets.
roles and relationships in the public transport sector
rule .(b) (relating to private pilot licence holders).
rule reflecting these changes will be soon available on the Waka Kotahi website.
rules and invited the Minister of Transport to issue drafting instructions to the
s (a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
s (c), s ()(h) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
s ()(a) TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending September
s ()(a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
s ()(a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending July
s ()(a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
s ()(a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Due to Ministers Office Due to Requester Requester Summary of request All advice prepared by central government agencies for the Minister or his Office on time of use charging, including substantial email correspondence between officials and the Office All advice to the Minister about Auckland Transport Advice on projected road toll if the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits is adopted from NZTA and MoT Correspondence between the Ministers Office and Greater Wellington councillors on the Lower North Island Rail Integrated Mobility Programme CAA workplace culture Uptake of electric Vehicles
s ()(a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Consultation on the draft National EV Charging Strategy will determine the final content and related work programme At the time of writing, the release of the draft National EV Charging Infrastructure Strategy for public consultation ( and associated discussion document ) is imminent. The draft Strategy sets out the governments vision for EV charging infrastructure , five high level outcomes it seeks to achieve with the Strategy, and several focus areas under each outcome . Publishing the Strategy is a key initiative in th e first Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP). Another key initiative in the ERP is to continue to develop an EV charging infrastructure work programme to coordinate policy, investment and engagement with stakeholders . The draft Strategy currently contains a list of further actions under each focus area that, if implemented effectively, would help to meet the Strategys outcomes. We expect s ubmissions from the public and key stakeholders on these draft actions to inform more specific outcomes, focus areas, and actions to be in the final Strategy. We therefore expect to be able to use the final Strategy to generate a detailed cross agency EV charging work programme, with a list of agreed actions, organised according to priority, and with a lead agency attached to each. Appropriate governance and implementation arrangements will need to be in place in both the short and long term to support the ongoing implementation of this work programme . s ()(f)(iv) The remaining five pages of this briefing are withheld under S()(f)(iv). RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT EVENT BRIEFING Meeting with Z Energy March Priority: Medium Security classification: In Confidence Tracking number: (MBIE) Action sought Action sought Deadline Hon Dr Megan Woods Minister of Energy and Resources Note the contents of this briefing March Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport Note the contents of this briefing March Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone st contact Dominic Kebbell Manager, Gas and Fuel Supply Policy Sarah Holdem Senior Policy Advisor Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone st contact Holly Walker Manager, Environment, Emissions and Adaptation Marcus Boomen Senior Policy Advisor The following departmentsagencies have been consulted Ministers office to complete: Approved Declined Noted Needs change Seen Overtaken by Events See Ministers Not es Withdrawn Comments Document MOT and MBIE Joint Briefing MOT reference number on the next page s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Tracker number : Choose an item. EVENT BRIEFING Title March Priority: Medium Security classification: In Confidence Tracking number: OC Purpose You are meeting jointly with Z Energy on Wednesday, March . This event briefing provides talking points and notes for that meeting. Recommendations The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment and Te Manat Waka recommend that you: a Note the contents of this briefing Noted Dominic Kebbell Manager, Resources, Gas and Fuel Supply Energy Resource Markets , MBIE Holly Walker Manager, Environment, Emissions and Adaptation Te Manat Waka Hon Dr Megan Woods Minister of Energy and Resources . . . Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport . . . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Contents
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of PROACTIVE RELEASE OF CABINET PAPER FOR APPROVAL TO INTRODUCE THE LAND TRANSPORT MANAGEMENT (REGULATION OF PUBLIC TRANSPORT) AMENDMENT BILL We propose to proactively release three documents relating to Cabinet approval to introduce t he Bill Table below sets out the three documents we propose to proactively release. Table also identifies risks and possible mitigations for each document. Other documents relating to the Bill have already been as part of introduc ing the Bill to Parliament . In preparing these documents for proactive release we consulted with the Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO). PCO did n ot have any concerns with the information to be , and noted the revised approach to on demand services achieved the same outcome using different terminology.
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of CHANGES TO LAND TRANSPORT REGULATORY CHARGES AND FEES UPDATE ON DRAFT CABINET PAPER CONSULTATION A comprehensive and robust review of road land transport regulatory charges and fees has been completed . The Ministry of Transport and Waka Kotahi have worked together to carry out a comprehensive review (the Review) of charges and fees with consultation, policy analysis, and finalising eight interconnected proposals . The Review has determined that million per annum (or an additional million from Waka Kotahis pre loan position of million) is required to effectively regulate the land transport system. . You and the Minister of Finance approved Proposal which includes funding under section (A) of the Land Transport Management Act () as outlined below: . Due to Proposal being approved, the funding scope of the decision in the draft Cabinet paper focuses on changes to fees and charges that equate to an increase of . million based on projected volumes of tr ansaction. This has also enabled Proposal s to be an average of . percent lower than levels that would otherwise be required. The remaining balance of approximately million relates to funding approved by joint Ministers in under section () of the Land Transport Management Act () to support refund and recover y functions regarding Fuel Excise Duty and Road User Charges. . The Board of Waka Kotahi endorsed an regulatory strategy T ake, t mia in December . This will guide the implementation of enhanced regulatory services and prioritises safety in the land transport system. Waka Kotahi has developed a Regulatory Performance Framework, underpinned by over one hundred performance measures. A selection of the performance measures will be reported in the Statement of Performance Expectations for . Changes to revenue described above support the implementation of T ake, t mia. A draft Cabinet paper has been prepared for Ministerial consideration and comment . The draft Cabinet paper and accompanying CRIS (refer to Appendix One ) presents seven distinc t proposals (proposal s from the Review) to change or combine what previously had been fees and charges into a total of that arise from Waka Kotahis funding model. The funding model reflects best practice in cost recovery and seeks to ensure those that benefit directly from the Agencys regulatory services or create risk in the land transport system that need s to be managed, pay. . The Ministry of Transport has consulted with agencies during the period February on the draft Cabinet paper. A summary of key themes from consultation is included in Appendix Two . The feedback was supportive of the proposed changes, with general feedback focused on strengthening the draft Cabinet paper and
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of APPROVAL OF TRANSPORT AND PUBLIC WORKS LEGISLATION TO BE INCLUDED IN SEVERE WEATHER EMERGENCY RESPONSE BILL The Severe Weather Emergency Response Bill needs to identify legislation that can be modified by OrdersinCouncil to support recovery DPMC is currently preparing a Cabinet paper that will seek Ministers approval to introduce the Severe Weather Emergency Response Bill (the Bill). We are uncertain at the time of writing whether this will go to EWR or straight to Cabinet. The Ministry of Transport, Land Information New Zealand (LINZ) and other agencies are being consulted on the draft Cabinet paper and draft Bill. The Bill will assist communities and councils affected by the recent severe weather events to respond to, and recover from, the impacts of these events. The Bill will enable the creation of OrdersinCouncil (OiCs) to support recovery by granting exemptions from, modifying, or extending legislation listed in a schedule of the Bill. DPMC has requested that agencies obtain Ministerial approval for legislation to be listed in the schedule by Wednesday March . DPMC has indicated that the Bill is likely to be introduced on Tuesday March, with a select committee process from Wednesday March to Tuesday April (inclusive). DPMC has advised that agencies will need to provide representation for appearance at select committee to provide advice on amendments to their agencys legislation. The Ministry has identified four pieces of transportadministered legislation that need to be included in the Bill The Ministry of Transport has identified three broad areas where OiCs will need to be made to support recovery from a transport perspective: . broadening Directors powers to enable changes to the powers of the Director of Land Transport and to enable the electronic service of documents under the Land Transport Act . streamlining planning, funding approvals and procurement procedures of National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) funded road, rail and public transport recoveryrelated activities under the Land Transport Management Act (LTMA) . streamlining and coordinating approval processes for transportrelated infrastructure works so Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail can undertake these works efficiently and effectively (multiple pieces of land use legislation including the Government Roading Powers Act and Railways Act ). To enable these OiCs, the following pieces of legislation administered by the Ministry of Transport need to be listed in the schedule: . Land Transport Act RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of . Land Transport Management Act . Government Roading Powers Act . Railways Act . Modifications to the Land Transport Act The Ministry proposes the Land Transport Act is modified and extended to extend the powers of the Director of Land Transport and to: . extend the duration of land transport documents, and . partial recall powers for vehicles and vehicle products. In addition, it is proposed to enable the electronic service of documents. We have discussed these proposed amendments with Waka Kotahi, who are supportive. Modifications to the Land Transport Management Act The Ministry proposes several amendments to the LTMA to streamline planning, funding approvals and procurement procedures of NLTF funded road, rail and public transport recoveryrelated activities until June (i.e., prior to the commencement of the GPS ). These amendments would support any Cabinet agreed NLTF topup prior to GPS coming into effect on July . We have discussed these proposed amendments with Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail, and continue to work through the detail with them. Modifications to the Government Roading Powers Act and Railways Act The Ministry have been working with a range of other agencies to consider the modifications required to land use legislation so Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail can use more integrated and efficient approval processes when designing, consenting and constructing transport infrastructure as part of the recovery. Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail are providing us with information from an operational perspective to inform these discussions with other agencies. The Ministry is still working through the detail, but considers it is likely modifications will be needed to the Government Roading Powers Act and the Railways Act . These modifications would enable Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail to manage access to their respective networks in a more streamlined manner. Including the Government Roading Powers Act will also give Waka Kotahi the ability to undertake works on local roads if required. s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of We also seek approval of the Minister for Land Information in relation to the Public Works Act (parts administered by Land Information New Zealand) The Ministry and LINZ agree modifications are needed to the processes for land acquisition in the Public Works Act so Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail can efficiently and effectively reinstate and rebuild the transport network in the areas affected by the severe weather events. We propose making similar modifications to those in the OiC used to support the rebuild of the Coastal Route by Waka Kotahi and KiwiRail after the Kaikura earthquake. These shortened the process for compulsory acquisition of land for recovery works, by modifying the notice and survey requirements and removing the ability for landowners to object to the acquisition. The damage to state highways and roads is extensive, and there may be a need to look at options such as realignment or safety and resilience improvements. While the intention is a willing seller situation is reached, this may not always be the case. Agencies will also be expected to make best endeavours to work with landowners when temporarily or permanently occupying their land to avoid the need for compulsory acquisition. LINZ and the Ministry of Transport will continue to engage with other entities (for example local authorities) that use the PWA to ensure that the scope of any future OiC meets their requirements. Alongside the Bill development, we are in the early stages of developing OiCs DPMC have asked agencies to begin developing OiCs so they can be progressed quickly following enactment of the Severe Weather Emergency Response Bill. There are a number of processes any OiC will need to comply with: . departmental and Ministerial consultation . policy approval through EWR . Severe Weather Emergency Response Bill Panel consultation . public consultation . Regulations Review Committee consideration . Cabinet Legislation Committee approval . Cabinet and Executive Council approval. We are working through the next steps on policy approvals, based on advice from DPMC Agencies have been provided yesterday with guidance from DPMC on the steps that need to be completed before policy approvals for OiCs can be obtained from Ministers. Several of these need to be undertaken in conjunction with the Cyclone Recovery Unit, Crown Law Office and the Parliamentary Counsel Office. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of For this reason, the Ministry will need to revisit the timing of the two separate briefings that we are intending to provide: . The first briefing will seek the Minister of Transports policy approval to the OiC focusing on transport administrative matters that is to the Directors powers and the LTMA changes as outlined above. . The second briefing will seek approval from relevant Ministers to regionally based OiCs related to streamlining and coordinating approval processes for transportrelated infrastructure works. Relevant Ministers are required to agree to modifications proposed to Acts they are responsible for. The Ministry of Transport will update the Minister of Transport via the Weekly Report on timeframes for briefings to be submitted to you. LINZ will also update the Minister for Land Information through its Weekly Report.
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of CYCLONE GABRIELLE AND UPPER NORTH ISLAND FLOODING TRANSPORT RECOVERY AND REBUILD Progress is being made to repair infrastructure to provide a basic level of access . Work to repair transport connections is progressing well. All State highways have had a level of access restored, with the exception of Napier to Wairoa ( SH), Coromandel (SHA) and south of Te Puia Springs (SH). On the railway, freight services will resume from Woodville to Hastings on April . Despite this progress, parts of the transport network , including many local roads, remain severely impacted. Restrictions remain in some areas , and it will be some time before full access is restored. . To , w ork has been focused on restoring basic a ccess . Bailey bridges have been installed, slips have been clear ed and small temporary bypass roads have opened. Despite being repaired and re opening to the public, some roads remain highly vulnerable because of the damage sustained by the cyclone. High level assessments for infrastructure that cannot be immediately repair ed . Alongside work to repair infrastructure to provide a basic level of access, assessments are underway on potential longer term rebuild options for infra structure that remains severely damaged and vulnerable. Technical assessments will provide high level rebuild options. . The following parts of the S tate highway network have sustained significant damage, and technical input is needed to decide on potential rebuild options: .. SH Esk Valley .. SH Wairoa to Ptrino .. SH Tolaga Bay to Te Puia Springs . Waka Kotahi will also have a clearer picture of any rebuild and resilience work which may be required for: .. SH ptiki to Te Puia Springs and Tolaga Bay to Gisborne .. SH ptiki to Gisborne .. SH Gisborne to Napier .. SH Napier to Taup .. SH Wairoa to Murupara .. SH Brynderwyns .. SHA Coromandel s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of . KiwiRail has reinstated damaged sections of the Auckland Metropolitan Rail Network, North Island Main Trunk and East Coast Main Trunk . The kil ometre Woodville to Hastings section will reopen on April using a temporary container transfer site in Hastings. Further remediation is required in parts of these sections but operations have resumed. . KiwiRails reinstatement and recovery focus is related to the: .. North Auckland Line there were damaged sites along the kilometre section between Swanson and Whangrei. of these sites have been repaired. There were critical damage sites including major slips and washouts. Ten of these have been restored. A large slip at Tahekeroa is expected to take months to recover, but work is now underway. .. Palmerston North to Gisborne Line will take several months to restore operations between Hastings and Napier. Bridge is completely washed out and teams are working on a temporary reinstatement option while further resilience works and design options are considered. . . Waka Kotahi notes that the ex pected c ost to rebuild the State highway and local road networks are very uncertain at this time.
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE Page of Attachment : Agenda item talking points Agenda item Summary Potential t alking points . Apologies . Conflict of interest declarations . Public participation . Confirmation of public minutes Standing items. You have no specific conflicts of interest that relate to this meeting agenda. At this point in time, we are not aware of any member s of the public attending this meeting. No comments for Minister of Transport. . CDO project reporting This paper provides an update on six (of seven) Complex Development Opportunities that the Partnership has identified as priority areas for growth and development. The report back does not cover Let s Get Wellington Moving (LGWM) CDO. LGWM has its own governance and reporting processes and will likely be the focus of a future meeting. The one pagers are a good start they set context, key opportunities, and challenges . It would be helpful if they could provide clear information about the infrastructure investment required to support the CDOs both committed and shortfalls as well as the key opportunities. It would be helpful for the one pagers to demonstrate what interest there is from the develo pment sector in these locations. For example, the Government has made a significant commitment to infrastructure for the Riverlink project through the New Zealand Upgrade Programme (NZUP) and Infrastructure Acceleration Fund (IAF), so it would be good to u nderstand what development and actions are underway to ensure the housing benefits of these investment s are realised . . CDO presentations Two presentations are proposed, providing detail on: Trentham CDO o this is a good example of mixed use Transit Oriented Trentham You may wish to note support for the Trentham CDO as an important opportunity for a master planned Transit Oriented Development, and an example of the type of urban development that will be needed to support emission VKT reduction. There RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE Page of Development looking to use underutilized land. o Has IAF funding (.m) for transport and water infrastructure . o Proposes mixed tenure housing development with dwellings, in addition to retail, comme rcial, conference facilities. This is a good concept and has council funding agreement in place. taki CDO o a planned and coordinated approach to future housing development. o Has IAF funding (.m) for transport and water infrastructure improved housi ng outcomes (particularly for Mori) in an area of high need. IAF funding is required to upgrade water supply and roading infrastructure to enable new homes at three locations in taki . are good rail co nnections to amenities in Silverstream and to Upper Hutt city centre. taki The presentation notes that improved public transport, including extending of rail services to taki is a key dependency for sustainable growth in taki . You may want to emphasise the importance of integrated land use and transport planning in locations such as taki , and ensuring we have clarity about what public transport investment is required, ensuring the timing of this aligns with housing. You may wa nt to note that work on the Wellington Regional Rail Programme Business Case is almost complete (it is expected to be endorsed by Waka Kotahi Board in April), and that it is important there is alignment between enabling significant growth in taki and when improvements to rail services are expected to occur. . Future Development Strategy (FDS) update Paper provides an update on FDS process and seeks endorsement of a revised set of objectives. Waka Kotahi staff a re working constructively with councils on preparing the Future Development Strategy. While emissions reduction and VKT reduction is being assessed as part of this RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE Page of The revised objectives have more focus on sustainability, productive land, resilience, and Mori housing, thereby providing more focus on these matters. The objectives will inform analysis of different growth scenario for the region.
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT INCONFIDENCE Page Joint Report: New Zealand Upgrade Programme: Overarching Advice March Report No: T OC File Number: SH Action sought Action sought Deadline Hon Grant Robertson Minister of Finance Note this briefing has been and supersedes previous advice to account for decisions made by Cabinet (DEV MIN refers) as well as jointly by Ministers (OC T refers) Agree to progress remaining projects in delivery with in a fixed funding envelope Note that the proposed approach will require delivery agencies to reduce scope and outcomes on some projects or reprioritise funding across projects in or near delivery Agree to empower delivery agencies to make decisions on scope and outcomes trade offs across projects to enable them to manage within the approved funding envelopes April Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone Mobile st Contact Mark Hodge Senior Analyst, National Infrastructure Unit, Treasury NA David Taylor Manager, National Infrastructure Unit, Treasury NA Andrew Hicks Principal Advisor, Programme Assurance and Commercial NA James ODonnell Acting Manager , Programme Assurance and Commercial NA Ministers Office actions (if required) Return the signed report to the Treasury, Ministry of Transport, Waka Kotahi NZTA, and KiwiRail Document s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Monitoring Plan for Maritime NZ July Dec TE MANATU WAKA p MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Purpose of the monitoring plan This monitoring plan is intended to set out how we will go about supporting Maritime NZ to succeed. Its purpose is to: Develop a shared understanding of Maritime NZs current performance, and what good would look like Confirm our monitoring priorities for the next months to support improved pe rformance from Maritime NZ Confirm our monitoring approach, and our key monitoring deliverablesoutputsI RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Assessing Maritime NZs current performance The following slides provide an assessment of Maritime NZs current performance across the five key performance dimensions from the PSCs Foundations of Good Practice for Crown Entity Monitoring Performance dimension Key Considerations for Maritime NZ Alignment: Is the Crown Entity aligned to the priorities, strategic direction and policies of the Minister and Government Does Maritime NZ understand the shifts the Government is looking for Results: Is the Crown Entity delivering outputs and outcomes in accordance with expectations, managing resourcing effectively, and meeting legal requirements Are safe, secure, clean outcomes and value for money improving over time Is Maritime NZ operating effectively and efficiently Are fee and levy payers satisfied with the level of service Is Maritime NZ meeting its statutory obligations Risk management (and assurance): Does the Crown Entity understand its key risks, and have effective risk identification and management frameworks in place Does Maritime NZ have a mature approach to monitoring and mitigating risks Is Maritime NZ effectively monitoring delivery of key projects, for example the Emergency Ocean Response Capability for the Cook Strait Organisational capability: Does the culture of the Crown Entity support a healthy, safe, inclusive work environment, and is the agency well placed to have the capacity and skills necessary for success now and in the futureDoes Maritime NZ have a clear view of the skillsexpertise it requires, and what it needs to do to build its capability Governance performance: Is the Board working effectively to provide effective Crown Entity Governance including holding the executive to account Is the Board operating effectively, getting to the right level of detail at the right time, and asking the right questions of the Executive I RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Alignment: Government priorities expectations Maritime NZ is working to ensure efficiency and effectiveness of current spend while ensuring regulatory outcomes improve. Maritime NZ takes an approach of continuous improvement to ensure sustainability. This means ongoing revision of measures to ensure efficiency and effectiveness are at the fore and accountability documents reflect Government strategy direction. Maritime NZ has a culture of innovation and is actively looking for opportunities for improvement across all its operations. Where appropriate, it replicates approaches that have worked well in other jurisdictions. Current State: What are we observing Future State: What would we like to see Maritime NZ is responsive to feedback on its non financial performance measures and amenable to an approach of continuous improvement. There is an opportunity to work with it on improving measures relating to core functions (not just new activities) to emphasise efficiency and effectiveness.Maritime NZ should begin early work on a first principles funding review to ensure that the organisation is well placed to respond to future events while treating bids for new funding as a last resort. Maritime NZ has been engaging with the Governments baseline savings expectations but there are concerns about future sustainability. Current funding sources are being used well so that even if avenues for additional funding are limited, Maritime NZ retains a focus on core business rather than discretionary activities.I s ()(g)(i) s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Results: Outcomes, value for money and customer experience Fundi ng review proposals are being embedded. This means we would expect to see an improvement in areas where additional expenditure has been allocated like the percentage of certification and registration applications processed on time, the overall quality of ships in New Zealand waters and corresponding improvements in safety outcomes.Current State: What are we observing Maritime NZ considers the overall funding model of its search and rescue operations to ensure it focuses on core activities and is resilient in the face of future uncertainties.Participants can see that steps are being taken to improve services and reduce costs. They understand why decisions are made, and what is required to get a positive outcome. Wait times return to acceptable levels, the overall quality of ships improves, and this is reflected ins safety outcomes. While operating within an evolving legislative framework (as the MTA review progresses) and retaining its focus on core activities, Maritime NZ avoids unnecessary barriers and costs on applicants, while maintaining our international standing and reduces regulatory burden. It retains a focus on co ordination with the wider sector. This should be supported by appropriate stakeholder satisfaction measures.Future State: What would we like to seeI s (a) s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Risk Management, including delivery of key projects Maritime NZs risk maturity and approach to risk management is not always communicated in a straightforward way in its accountability documents and there is a need for greater transparency and an understanding of how risks are quantifiedMaritime NZs risk based intelligence led regulatory approach is fit for purpose for a maritime sector where there are serious strategic risks. The Ministry and Maritime NZ have a mutual understanding of the key risks at Maritime NZ and how the Board is identifying, prioritising and managing risks including the delivery of its key projects. This should be supported by appropriate documents like Board Papers and Risk Matrices.Future State: What would we like to see Current State: What are we observing I s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Organisational capability: Leadership, culture skills An agreed upon set of relationship principles that include a greater level of transparency between Maritime NZ and the Ministry. While recognising our respective roles, this would enable greater feedback between Maritime NZ and the Ministry and ensure the Minister is getting the best quality, most relevant advice. Future State: What would we like to see Maritime NZ is continuing to improve its approach to fiscal discipline and aligning with Government expectations around baseline savings. However, its growth in expenditure has significantly outpaced inflation since , nearly doubling. For example, its personnel expenditure for is budgeted to be m, roughly in line with but compared to m in . The link between this increased expenditure and outcomes need to be more apparentThe Board and Executive are setting and driving the budgets from the top to keep costs as low as possible and focus on funding they are currently receiving rather than seeking additional funding to address problems. We would expect to see this focus reflected in outcomes and benefits.Current State: What are we observing The Ministry is not aware of any systemic issues or concerns related to workplace culture at Maritime NZ. As the Board is refreshed, it retains an interest in workplace culture and operates on a no surprises basis . Early warning signs of issues are identified, and any concerns are appropriately responded to. I . . s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Governance performance Maritime NZ has a good mix of governance, regulatory, financial, legal and public sector knowledge and experience. New members are appointed and come up to speed as quick as possible, and the Board works effectively in its leadership of Maritime NZ. They should contribute to a high performing Board and retain what works in the current state, particularly after the current Chair retires with: continued trust and confidence from the Government of the day a governance culture that speaks externally with one voice, but also draw s on individual experiences and encourages healthy and robust conversation internally and with the executive a deep understanding of the organisation, the operating environment, and a n a bility to strategically position the organisation to meet the needs of today and the future effective management of delivery, risk and budgets within the org anisation, and seeking reporting to inform board decision making; the ability to identify issues early and proactively continued credibility within the sector. Future State: What would we like to see Current State: What are we observing OPAC operates with an agreed upon terms of reference with a high level of continuity, representation from industry organisations and the ability to effectively and quickly respond to oil pollution incidents.I . s ()(f)(iv) s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT How will we know if Maritime NZ is heading in the right direction We will determine whether Maritime NZ is heading in the right direction through performance reporting, regular engagements with the Board Chair, feedback from the Maritime sector, and reviews of key accountability documents. Key things we will look for include: Performance reporting A process of continuous improvement for performance measures, including those related to core business Declining certification wait times and increasing quality of ships Evidence of satisfaction and positive engagement with industry Robust monitoring of outcomes related to the safety, security and cleanliness of the maritime sector Reduced costs and activities funded through current sources before seeking more funding Benchmarking against other comparable jurisdictionsBoard engagement The Board supports a culture of innovation and challenges the executive while actively monitoring and managing its key risks Information is shared and issues raised early on no surprises basis including Board papers and risk matrices the Board understands its cost drivers and closely monitors budget and cost metrics the Board maintains ongoing focus on organisational culture OPAC is operating with clear terms of reference and a full contingent of membersSector feedback Stakeholder expectations are reflected in funding allocation including Maritime NZs first principles funding review When appropriate, Maritime NZ replicates approaches that have worked well in other jurisdictions. Ongoing positive feedback from stakeholders (through stakeholder surveys, informal conversations, ministerial engagements) Relevant sector feedback is shared proactively with the Ministry to inform the MTA reviewAccountability documents Written narrative aligns with Government priorities and strategic direction and is clear and concise Expenditure tracking below current forecasts evidence that savings are being sought and realised Compliance with legislation Active risk management ongoing evidence of limiting, managing, or eliminating risks Drafts are shared with the Ministry as early as practicable so that our advice can be fully informed.I RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Our monitoring priorities The key areas of focus for our monitoring function for the period July December are: .Supporting improvements to the quality and timeliness of performance information (including a SPE with new metrics, reflecting strengthened performance metrics and improved fiscal sustainability) .Establishing a stronger relationship with the refreshed board (including supporting you to have st ructured quarterly performance conversations with the Board Chair) .Taking a more joined up approach when providing advice to Ministers and identifying policy pri orities .Support Maritime NZ to take a longer te rm view of its financial sustainability considering volatile levies and uncertainty around traditional funding sourcesI RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Enhancing our monitoring methodology The Ministry recognises the need to improve our monitoring methodology for Maritime NZ. We propose some changes to our current approach. This includes: Establishing quarterly, structured performance discussions between you and the Chair, supported with rob ust advice from the Ministry Strengthening our capacity to support the Board to improve its performance metrics Taking a more active approach to our monitoring, including through: oreceiving Board agendas in advance and papers after they have been considered oRegular engagements with the sector to gain feedback and insights Developing an agreed set of relationship principles to guide the relationship between the Ministry and Ma ritime NZ The purpose of our monitoring is not to second guess the Board, but to ensure that we are well positioned to provide you with good second opinion advice on how issues and risks are being managed, and to enable us to support the Board to meet your expectations. I RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Monitoring plan: Key outputs deliverables SepOctNovDec JanFebMar AprMay JunJulAugSepOctNovDec Quarterly performance report from Maritime NZ Q Q Q Q Q Quarterly performance meeting with ChairQ Q Q Q Q Annual reports Draft Final Draft Final Letter of Expectations LOE Statement of Performance Expectations Draft Final Additional monitoring outputs will be agreed with you as required, e.g. where there is a need to undertake additional assurance on key risks or areas of concernI RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Monitoring Plan for The Transport Accident Investigation Commission July Dec TE MANATU WAKA pi MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Purpose of the monitoring plan The Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC) is a standing commission of inquiry with a specific purpose under the Transport Accident Investigation Commission Act (the TAIC Act) to determine the circumstances and causes of transport accidents and incidents with a view to avoiding similar occurrences in the future, rather than to ascribe blame to any person. As a small organisation almost totally funded by the Crown that is reactive in nature, TAIC is distinct from other Crown Entities. This monitoring plan reflects TAICs unique status and specific purpose and differs from other monitoring plans with a more focused set of expectations. This monitoring plan is intended to set out how we will go about supporting TAIC to continue to fulfil its statutory purpose and succeed. The purpose of this plan is to: Develop a shared understanding of the TAICs current performance, and what good looks like Confirm our monitoring priorities for the next months that will support TAICs performance of its statutory purpose Confirm our monitoring approach, and our key monitoring deliverablesoutputs On ce this plan has been confirmed with you, we intend to discuss it with the Chief Commissioner. I RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Assessing the TAICs current performance The following slides provide an assessment of TAICs current performance across the five key performance dimensions from the PSC s Foundations of Good Practice for Crown Entity Monitoring Performance dimension Key Considerations for TAIC Alignment: Is the Crown Entity aligned to the priorities, strategic direction and policies of the Minister and Government Are there further opportunities for the Commission to influence a safer transport system in New Zealand, which supports wider Government priorities Results: Is the Crown Entity delivering outputs and outcomes in accordance with expectations, managing resourcing effectively, and meeting legal requirements Are there further opportunities available to more effectively achieve TAICs statutory purpose, as well as Government objectives Is TAIC is issuing credible findings and practical recommendations that seek to prevent repeat accidents Is TAIC continuing to make the best use of its funding and resourcing Risk management (and assurance): Does the Crown Entity understand its key risks, and have effective risk identification and management frameworks in place Does TAIC have a mature approach to monitoring and mitigating its risks What contingency planning does TAIC have in place for a large scale incident or incidents Organisational capability: Does the culture of the Crown Entity support a healthy, safe, inclusive work environment, and is the agency well placed to have the capacity and skills necessary for success now and in the future Does the Commission continue to have the skillsexpertise it requires, and have appropriate measures in place to maintain capability and organisational resilience Is TAIC meeting its obligations to be a good employer Governance performance: Is the Board working effectively to provide effective Crown Entity Governance including holding the executive to account Are Commissioners, operating effectively, getting to the right level of detail at the right time, and asking the right questions of the Executive I RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Current state What are we observing . TAIC is fulfilling its principal statutory purpose a nd is delivering against its metrics for investigations and reports but there is an opportunity to review TAICs performance outputs to ensure they are up toand reflect potential changes in costs of investigations and the increased funding to TAIC. Recruitment had been on hold while funding decisions were confirmed in Budget . It will take time for TAIC to recruit more investigators and boost capabilities and for the impacts to flow through to TAICs performance outcomes. . TAIC is a small organisation with a small budget and limited resources. It can take two to three years before an investigator has th e necessary qualifications and experience to lead investigations. Capability risks can arise if it loses experienced investigators or has its resources stretched. . Stakeholder survey results have indicated that while most respondents thought TAIC did well getting to the bottom of what happened in an occur rence, they thought TAIC could do better at identifying the most pressing risks in the transport system. . TAIC has been implementing its new case management system. TAIC has been reporting on the implementation and it is important th a t TAIC continues to manage the risks of embedding the new system to ensure it delivers on its benefits. . A new Chief Commissioner is in the process of being appointed. This will be a key period of change for the Commission, and it is i mportant that the transition occurs well.I RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Future state What would we like to see . TAIC continues to fulfil its core statutory purpose, delivers against its performance metrics, operates effectively and effic ient ly and contributes to a safer transport system. . TAIC reviews its performance measures and updates its outputs and targets as necessary. . TAIC continues to issue credible findings, based on evidence with practical recommendations, that seek to prevent repeat inci dent s. . TAIC continues to monitor the acce ptance of its recommendations, including long term trends, and address stakeholder feedback where appropriate. . The Ministry and TAIC have a mutual understanding of key TAIC risks and how the Board is identifying, prioritising and managi ng r isks including the delivery of key projects and investigations. TAIC has contingency planning in place for how it will respond to a large scale event and manage high caseloads. . TAIC is a resilient organisation that invests in the right training and resources to support its specialist investigators and staff. It has people with the right skills and experience to perform its statutory role. . TAIC maintains the professional standards of its people, fosters relationships with peer organisations and is adaptable to ne w wa ys of working and technology to support productivity. . We expect the Commission to continue to be well run, and to effectively deliver on its mandate. Key characteristics of a high perf orming board are: maintains the trust and confidence of the Government of the day having a governance culture that speaks externally with one voice, but also draws on individual experiences and encourages he al thy and robust conversation internally and with the executive. having a deep understanding of the organisation, the operating environment, and an ability to strategically position the organ i sation to meet the needs of today and the future effectively managing delivery, risk and budgets within the organisation, and seeks reporting that best informs board decision maki ng; has credibility within the sector.I RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT How will we know if TAIC is heading in the right direction We will determine whether TAIC is heading in the right direction through performance reporting, regular engagements with the Chief Commissioner, feedback from stakeholders, and reviews of key accountability documents. Key things we will look for include: Performance reporting TAIC is meeting its performance targets and outputs as set out in its SPE and SOI. These outputs include the number of reports , average time to complete inquires and average costs. TAIC has performance measures that better reflect Government priorities and the increased funding. Board engagement The Board understands its role, what is needed to deliver and key risks to TAIC, which are actively monitored and managed. Information is shared with the responsible Minister and the Ministry of Transport and issues are raised early on a no surprises basis. The Board understands cost drivers and closely monitors budget and cost metrics. The Board maintains ongoing focus on organisational culture.Sector feedback and action Stakeholders view TAICs recommendations about transport safety as credible and influential. Stakeholders are better able to find the information they need about transport safety issues. TAIC supports a safer transport system, including working with the Ministry to identify system improvements. No successful challenges or reviews of TAIC inquiries or recommendations. Accountability documents Objectives align with Government priorities and strategic direction. Budget is kept within forecasts and is well managed. Active risk management ongoing evidence of limiting, managing, or eliminating risks.I RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Our monitoring priorities The key areas of focus for our monitoring function for the period July December are: .Supporting any ongoing improvements to performance information. .Establishing a strong relationship with the new Chief Commissioner. .Continuing to work on improvements around transport safety, and the wider system. .The Commissions monitoring of responses to its recommendations. I RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of October OC Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Transport MEETING WITH THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE AND BOARD MEMBERS OF AUCKLAND AIRPORT Snapshot You are meeting with Carrie Hurihanganui, Chief Executive Auckland Airport, Dr Patrick Strange, outgoing Chair, and Julia Hoare, i ncoming Chair of Auckland Airport. They have indicated that they wish to talk to you about ground transport in and around the airport, and the Aviation Security Services review . Time and .am , October Venue Leonard Isitt Drive, Auckland Attendees Carrie Hurihanganui, Chief Executive, Dr Patrick Strange, o utgoing Chair, and Julia Hoare, i ncoming Chair of Auckland Airport. Officials attending To be confirmed. Agenda Auckland Airport have indicated they are interested in talking to you about their ground transport programme, congestion across the airport precinct and the Aviation Security Services review. Talking points Talking points are included in annex one. Contacts
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT ROAD TRANSPORT FORUM NEW ZEALAND INC SUBMISSION TO MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT ON THE GOVERNMENT POLICY STATEMENT ON LAND TRANSPORT DRAFT FOR ENGAGEMENT Road Transport Forum NZ PO Box Wellington Ph: () Email: forumrtf nz MAY Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RTF SUBMISSION TO MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT ON THE GOVERNMENT POLICY STATEMENT ON LAND TRANSPORT DRAFT FOR ENGAGEMENT
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of SUSTAINABLE AVIATION AOTEAROA Context In November , Te Manat Waka (the Ministry) convened the inaugural SAA hui. Ministers McAnulty (your predecessor) and Verrall (Research, Science, and Innovation) attended, along with airline, airport and pilots association executives and relevant officials. Minister Woods (Ener gy and Resources) was to attend but gave apologies due to another commitment. The inaugural SAA hui focused on introductions, reaching agreement on the T erms of Reference (ToR) for the group, agreeing on the establishment and focus areas for three working groups, and suggestions for additional membership. The following three working groups were agreed upon at the first SAA meeting: Sustainable Aviation Fuel (SAF ), with a particular focus on exploring the policy settings for a SAF mandate, cost, importation, and production ZeroEmissions Aviation, including hydrogen and electric aircraft and its enabling infrastructure Strategic policy, which will consider the ERP action to establish domestic emissions reductions targets, update the New Zealand State Action Plan for aviation, and assist the CCC with their consideration of including international aviation emissions within our domestic targets. According to the ToR, SAA meetings will occur quarterly. The second meeting was due to be held in February but was postponed while we awaited clarity on Ministerial delegations. Since the inaugural hui, we have continued regular informal discussions with members of the gr oup, including Air New Zealand who are strong advocates of sustainable aviation and supportive of SAA , and with our counterparts at MBIE. Two new SAA members have been added since the first meeting: Airways and Airbus. We have also extended an invitation t o Boeing but are yet to receive confirmation of whether or not they will take this up. Relationship of SAA to the ERP and our international obligations The first Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP) establishe d three key actions for decarbonising aviation: Estab lish a public private leadership body focused on decarbonising aviation, including operational efficiencies, infrastructure improvements , and frameworks to encourage research, development and innovation in sustainable aviation (this has now been actioned w ith the establishment of SAA) . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of Develop and set specific targets for decarbonising domestic aviation in line with our targets. Implement a SAF mandate . New Zealand is also a member state of the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) , which ha s had an increasing focus on aviation decarbonisation in recent years. ICAO member s tates are invited to submit State Action Plans (SAPs) and update them every three years. SAPs are designed to help M ember States establish a long term strategy on climate c hange for the international aviation sector, involving all interested parties at national level. ICAO encourage s these parties to work together to define a quantified baseline scenario, select appropriate emissions mitigation measures, and calculate the expected results of implementing those measures. New Zealand submitted its first SAP in . We are currently overdue to provid e an version. In line with ICAOs guidance to Member States to work with aviation stakeholders to progress decarbonisation, officials plan to propose at the April meeting that SAA focuses its agenda on developing and agreeing content for N ew Zealands next ICAO SAP, with each of the three proposed SAA working groups contributing to relevant sections. Making the SAP the focal point for SAA in serves multiple functions: Advancing all the aviation actions in the ERP Developing an evidence base and supporting material to inform the Climate Change Commissions upcoming advice on whether to include international aviation emissions in our domestic emissions budgets Flagging potential emerging challenges and opportunities with aviation decarbon isation, including tourism and trade implications . Enhancing New Zealands international reputation as a high ambition country in the aviation decarbonisation space (since the SAP is an internationally recognised document and states are members of ICAO ). Ensuring key parties are involved in framing up a plan that will have strategic importance to both the aviation sector and government for at least three years Building a strong case for the critical role of aviation from a n NZ Inc perspective i.e., not only as a standalone sector but highlighting its vital role as a facilitator and connector for trade and the tourism sector for a small, remote country like ours . We discussed this proposal with officials from MBIE s Innovative Partnerships team as well as with Air New Zealand . Both are both strongly supportive. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of As part of that conversation, Air New Zealand raised the importance of linking the work of SAA with broader policy programmes such as feeding outputs from th e SAP into the second Emissions Reduction Plan ( ) and other related policy decisions. We agree that this will be important. To get work on the SAP underway, we propose establishing th e SAA working groups late Aprilearly May Standing up the three working groups could involve asking for nominees from the core leadership body at the upcoming hui. We want to clearly articulate the need for dedicated resource to these working groups, so members hip will likely be conditional based on a certain level of compulsory attendance across the year.
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLA SSIFIED Page of PROACTIVE RELEASE ON THE FUNDING RE ALLOCATION FROM THE NORTHERN PATHWAY TO THE EASTERN BUSWAY CABINET PAPER Background On October , Cabinet made a decision on the paper titled Funding Re allocation from the Northern Pathway to the Eastern Busway . We propose publishing the Cabinet paper and associated minute with redactions as marked (included in Annex one) on Te Manat Wakas (the Ministrys) website. Cabinet circular (CO) () states that all Cabinet and Cabinet Committee papers and minutes be proactively released and online within business days of final decisions being taken by Cabinet. This is the case unless there is good reason not to publish. In line with CO (), the Ministry was due to release the Cabinet paper and associated minute on its website on December . However , this was delayed due to : time required to liaise with Auckland Transport in releasing costs and funding contributions aligning with decisions related to the funding reallocation of the remaining Northern Pathway funding to other projects and other N ew Zealand Upgrade Programme related decisions. Additionally, given your final standard weekend ba g for was the week ending Friday December (which was prior to the public announcement made on the Eastern Busway funding), and the first weekend bag was Friday January, it is reasonable that these documents have not been within business days of final decisions being taken by Cabinet . Please note the Cabinet paper was recently part of an Official Information Act (the Act) request received from . The Cabinet paper was withheld in full on the advice of your office. It is worth highlighting that most of the information held in the Cabinet paper is publicly available and, because of this, we would propose only withholding some information under section ()(j) . Review The Ministry has reviewed these documents and proposes some content is withheld which is consistent with the grounds contained in the Act . Note that whilst agencies withhold information in proactive releases consistent with the Act, Section of the Act, which protects Ministers and agencies from civil or criminal liability where information is released under the Act, does not apply to information that is proactively released. s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLA SSIFIED Page of We recommend that information is withheld under the following section s of the Act: ()(f)(iv) information relating to the confidentiality of advice ()(j) enable a Minister or agency holding the informat ion to carry on, without prejudice or disadvantage, negotiations Please note that the Ministry has pre viously withheld figures relating to the New Zealand Upgrade Projects Tagged Contingency Fund under section ()(b)(ii) unreasonable prejudice to a third partys commercial position. However, we have recently received advice from the Legal team that, bas ed on case studies from the Ombudsmen guidance, the more appropriate ground to withhold these figures would be under section ()(j). This change has been in the proposed redactions accordingly. Risks and mitigations We do not consider there are any significant risks with releasing th is Cabinet paper or associated minute. . Figures relating to the New Zealand Upgrade Pr ojects Tagged Contingency Fund have been redacted as this would show Waka Kotahis willingness to pay , harming Waka Kotahis ability to carry on, without prejudice or disadvantage, negotiations with construction companies in the future. . Figures relating to the total cost increase across the project are proposed to be released. We note there is a n explanation in the document that outlines that th e increase has been from inflationary pressures seen across the construction sector. . Some emissions estimates and modelling included in the Cabinet Paper hold a high degree of uncertainty and outline that a total net benefit in emissions is only expected to occur after . The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment team ha s reviewed these figures and considers the estimates to be reasonable and follow good practice . Consultation We have consulted with Treasury, Waka Kotahi and Auckland Transport on the release of the Cabinet paper.
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of May OC Hon Michael Wood Action required by: Minister of Transport Monday, May UPDATING THE MINISTRYS STRATEGIC INTENTIONS Purpose To request you review, and if necessary, amend the draft Ministers foreword to the Ministrys revised Strategic Intentions. Key points You previously agreed that the Ministry prepare an Strategic Intentions for tabling in the House (the Weekly Report on March refers). The reason for the update was to remove the first of our six priorities to : Enable transport to effectively respond to, and recover from, COVID . Our work in this area has become part of our business asusual activity. Content for the other parts of the documen t has not substantially changed except where references to six priorities now become five, and to the Ministerial and Chief Executive sections. A full copy of the Strategic Intentions, showing all changes, is attached. We have amended the foreword from the Minister to reflect the update as well as referencing the cyclone Gabrielle recovery. We have attached a draft for your consideration (Appendix A refers). As we now have a new Chief Executive, we have made some minor amendment s to the Ch ief Executives introduction. Please review your foreword and let us know if any changes are needed. Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of APPENDIX A Draft foreword from the Minister of Transport The Ministry and the wider transport system will be a key part of the effort as Aotearoa works to recover from the effects and devastation of Cyclone Gabrielle. Ensuring New Zealanders have accessible transport options that are built to withstand future weather events will be a focus for our transport system going forward. Extreme events such as Cyclone Gabrielle have shown us that we cannot afford a delay in the fight against climate change. Reducing carbon emissions is a key priority for the Government, and transport has a c ritical role to play in the transition to a net zero carbon economy by . This work must be a priority for the Ministry now and into the future. It is vital we take a systems wide approach to decarbonise the wider transport system and the Hkina te Kohu para Kia mauri ora ai te iw: Transport Emissions Pathways to Net Zero by strategy provides a strategic basis for this work. On average one person is killed every day and another is injured every hour on our roads. The ripple effects of these hund reds of deaths and thousands of injuries are traumatic for whnau, friends, communities and our nation. This Government has reaffirmed its commitment to achieving a significant reduction in deaths and serious injuries on our roads through the Road to Zero road safety strategy, and the Ministrys system overview role is vital to its successful outcome. In addition to these priorities, the Ministry has a diverse programme of work across the transport system, from oversight of major investments in our cities and regions, to ensuring a fit for purpose regulatory regime across the sector. In this challenging time, I look forward to continuing to work with the Ministry to ensure the transport system enables social and economic growth, plays its part in our respon se to the climate emergency, builds back better for a more resilient future and improves peoples safety and well being. Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport Attachment is refused under section (d) as the final version can be found here: https: www.transport.govt.nz RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE Page of EVENT BRIEFING May OC Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport Transport Sector Board Forum Snapshot Te Manat Waka the Ministry of Transport is hosting its Transport Sector Board Forum (the Forum) on May , at the Majestic Centre in Wellington . The Forum is an annual conference for board members of transport sector Crown entities and State Owned Enterpris es to build relationships and discuss emerging issues across the sector. The theme of this years forum is resilience, reflective of the changing requirements of the transport sector in light of recent severe weather events. You have agreed to provide a minute speech on your vision for a resilient transport network . Time and .pm .pm, May Venue Level , Majestic Centre, Willis Street, Wellington Attendees Chief Executives and board members from the following transport sector entities: Waka Kotahi N ew Zealand Trans port Agency Civil Aviation Authority Maritime New Zealand Traffic Ac cident Investigation Commission Air System Navigation Review Panel City Rail Link Limited Auckland Light Rail Limited KiwiRail MetService Airways New Zealand . Biographies of the attendees are included for your reference in Annex . Officials attending Bryn Gandy, Deputy Chief Executive System Strategy and Investment Group Karen Lyons, Director Auckland Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE Page of TRANSPORT SECTOR BOARD FORUM The forum is an annual conference for board members of transport sector Crown entities and State Owned Enterprise s to build relationships and discuss emerging issues across the sector. At the time of writing , board members had confirmed their attendance at the event, including the Chair and Chief Executive of Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency , the Chair of Auckland Light Rail Limited , the Chief Executive of City Rail Link Limited, and the Chief Commissioner of the Transport Accident Investigation Commi ssion all of whom you meet with on a regular basis in your capacity as responsible Minister for their entities . Before your arrival, Hon Kieran McAnulty will present on strengthening regional and rural resilience , and Hon Kiri Allan will present her account of the emergency response to Cyclone Gabrielle in Tranganui aKiwa Gisborne . A full run sheet is provided in Annex . When you arrive at the venue you will be met by Bryn Gandy at the entrance to level of the Majestic Centre . Attendees will be seated, before the lectern, having heard a summary of the m orning s events. The Forum s Master of Ceremonies will introduce you to the stage. The theme of this years forum is resilience, reflective of the changing requirements of the transport sector in light of recent severe weather events. In line with this theme, you have agreed to provide a minute speech which gives your vision for a resilient transport network . A draft speech is provided for your review and feedback in Annex You may wish to feedback to officials on the content to ensure it reflects your perspective accurately. After your speech , there is an opportunity to join attendees for the beginning of the lunch break. Biographies for confirmed atten dees are provided for your information in Annex , we note that (of the boards you are responsible for) only one members term is expiring in : Stephen Davies Howard , Deputy Chief Commissioner of TAIC , who you have agreed to progress their reappointment .
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of AUCKLAND TRANSPORT ALIGNMENT PROJECT (ATAP) IMPLEMENTATION REPORT JULY DECEMBER Background . In March , the Government and Auckland Council agreed the Auckland Transport Alignment Project (ATAP) investment package. ATAP focuses on encouraging the shift from private cars to public transport and active modes, developing the rapid transit network, increasing road safety, maintaining transport infrastructure, and providing sufficient operating expenditure to run the network . . The Ministry of Transport provides regular ATAP Implementation reports, generally two per year. This report covers the period July to December . . The content in this report is based on data from Waka Kotahi , Auckland Transport, Auckland Council and KiwiRail. These organisations have contributed to this report. The ATAP Governance Group, with members from these organisations, has endorsed this report.
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of AIR NEW ZEALAND KIWI SHAREHOLDER The Kiwi Shareholder is a mechanism to protect Air New Zealands rights as a New Zealand airline The Kiwi Share is a single special rights convertible preference share issued by Air New Zealand to the Crown. It confers certain rights and responsibilities on the holder . T he primary intent is to protect Air New Zealands access to other countries by ensuring that substantial ownership and effective control of the airline remains in New Zealand hands. This is a requirement of many of the air services agreements under which Air New Zealand operates. Air New Zealands c onstitution sets out the rights and powers of the Kiwi Share and the Kiwi Shareholder. Among other things, the written consent of the Kiwi Shareholder is required for any amendment , removal, or alteration in effect of specified provisions in the constitution. These include the name of the company, its place of incorporation, its principal place of business, the location of its head office and the nationality of its directors. In addition, the rights attaching to the Kiwi Share itself are entrenched and cannot be changed without the consent of the Kiwi Shareholder. The consent of the Kiwi Shareholder is also required in relation to specified circumstances or events, including: a) for an owner or operator of an airline business to hold or have an interest in an equity security in the company; and b) for a non New Zealand national to hold or have an interest in shares that confer per cent or more of the total voting rights in the company . The Kiwi Shareholders role is separate from the ownership rights exercised by the Minister of Finance. The Minister of Finance holds percent of the ordinary shares in Air New Zealand on behalf of the Crown. We propose that you become the Kiwi Shareholder Air New Zealands constitution provides that any Minister may give written notice to the Company Secretary of the person who can exercise the rights and powers of the Kiwi Shareholder. Long standing practice has been for the Minister of Transport to be assigned the rights and responsibilities of the Kiwi Shareholder in accordance with Air New Zealands constitution, provided they held no personal shareholding in the airline. At present , MP Phil Twyford , the previous Minister of Trans port, is the named person .
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT REQUEST FROM REGARDING RANDOM ROADSIDE DRUG TESTING The requester has asked for all communications received by the Minister that include advice on random roadside drug testing Table below sets out the documents that fall in the scope of request and our proposed response. There are documents in scope of the request. The documents show advice provided to you about random roadside drug testing. They outline progress towards implementing roadside oral fluid testing, Road to Zero program progress and statistics , and public relations decisions on drug driving communication. As indicated in Table below, we propose withholding document and in their entirety under section ()(f)(iv) active consideration. The briefing s discuss the outcomes of th e Police device procurement process and Crown Law advice which are still being considered by Ministers and Cabinet. Document also contains legal advice from the Crown Law Office, which we suggest is withheld under section ()(h) legal privilege. Document and content relevant to document have already been released. Therefore, we propose to refuse that part of the request under s(d), as the information is publicly available. We also propose withholding information in document under section ()( f)(iv) the information is under active consideration . The information withheld concerns policy options for consideration on the future of the drug driving regime . We propose withholding information in document under section ()(g)(i) to maintain th e effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions. . Risks We have identified no risks for this release. Most of the released information is public knowledge. Consultation NZ Police have been consulted on the release of documents and . They requested that these documents be withheld in full as the contents remain under active consideration. The following agencies were consulted on the proposed response for document : NZ Police, Waka Kotahi, ACC, WorkSafe, and Road to Zero Director Bryan Sherritt. These agencies have conf irmed their support for the release of this documen t. s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Table documents in scope
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of PROACTIVE RELEASE OF INFORMATION RELATING TO REGULATORY SYSTEMS (TRANSPORT) AMENDMENT BILL POLICY APPROVALS Background On November , Cabinet made decisions on the paper titled Regulatory Systems (Transport) Amendment Bill Policy Approval . Cabinet Office circular CO () states that all Cabinet and Cabinet Committee papers and minutes be proactively released and online within business days of final decisions being taken by Cabinet. This is the case unless there is good reason not to publish. The proactive release of this paper and accompanying documents has been delayed due to the endofyear shutdown. As such, we have not met the business days timeframe for publishing these documents on the Ministry of Transports website. We propose to publish the following documents on the Ministrys website by Wednesday, March : . Cover Briefing, titled Regulatory Systems (Transport) Amendment Bill No. Policy Approval (OC) . Cabinet Paper, titled Regulatory Systems (Transport) Amendment Bill Policy Approval . Talking points to the Cabinet paper . Cabinet Minute, referenced CABMIN . Cabinet Economic Development Committee Minute, referenced DEVMIN . Appendix One to the Cabinet paper, referenced Summary of land proposals and consultation feedback . Appendix Two to the Cabinet paper, referenced Summary of maritime proposals and consultation feedback . Appendix Three to the Cabinet paper, referenced Regulatory Impact Statement Director of Land Transport powers during emergency and time critical events . Appendix Four to the Cabinet paper, referenced Regulatory Impact Statement Maritime (Offences) Regulations and Marine Protection (Offences) Regulations Review The Ministry has reviewed these documents and proposes some content is withheld, consistent with the grounds contained in the Act. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Note that whilst agencies withhold information in proactive releases consistent with the Act, section of the Act which protects Ministers and agencies from civil or criminal liability where information is released under the Act, does not apply to information that is proactively released. We recommend that information is withheld under the following sections of the Act: ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Minsters of the Crown and officials The proposed redactions relate to: . the name and signature of the responsible manager at the Ministry of Transport . timing for when decisions will be sought from Ministers and Cabinet, which are at the discretion of Ministers and Cabinet, and under active consideration. Consultation undertaken The following agencies were consulted on the release of these documents: Waka Kotahi Maritime New Zealand The New Zealand Federation of Commercial Fishermen were also consulted, with regards to a reference to a submission they made to the Maritime consultation document. All detail is included in the document schedule attached at Annex . Risks and mitigations We do not consider there are any further risks, other than those outlined in the document schedule attached at Annex One. Next steps One you have approved the release of the documents, we will publish them on the Ministry of Transports website. Annexes The following documents are attached to this briefing: Annex Cover Briefing, titled Regulatory Systems (Transport) Amendment Bill No. Policy Approval (OC) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Annex Cabinet Paper, titled Regulatory Systems (Transport) Amendment Bill Policy Approval Annex Appendix One to the Cabinet paper, referenced Summary of land proposals and consultation feedback Annex Appendix Two to the Cabinet paper, referenced Summary of maritime proposals and consultation feedback Annex Appendix Three to the Cabinet paper, referenced Regulatory Impact Statement Director of Land Transport powers during emergency and time critical events Annex Appendix Four to the Cabinet paper, referenced Regulatory Impact Statement Maritime (Offences) Regulations and Marine Protection (Offences) Regulations Annex Talking points to the Cabinet paper Annex Cabinet Economic Development Committee Minute, referenced DEVMIN Annex Cabinet Minute, referenced CABMIN
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of PROACTIVE RELEASE OF THE INFRINGEMENT AND REMINDER NOTICES AMENDMENT REGULATIONS CABINET PAPER We recommend you proactively release two documents on amendment s to the Land Transport (Infringement and Reminder Notices) Regulations The Land Transport (Drug Driving) Act ca me into force on March and provides for a medical defence to be used by drivers charged with a drug driving infringement offence if they have consumed qualifying drugs in accordance with a valid prescription and instructions from a prescribing health care practitioner. To ensure drivers who receive infringement or reminder notices for drug driving offences are aware of the qualifying drug they have tested positive for and the medical defence provisions amendments to the Land Transport (Infringement and Reminder Notices) Regulations . On February , Cabinet considered the paper Amendment to the Land Transport (Infringement and Reminder Notices) Regulations . The amendments to the Regulations incorporate information about the drug offence, the alleged qualifying drug(s) and the medical defence into the Infringement Notice and information about the medical defence in the Infringement Reminder Notice. In line with Cabinet Office circular CO (), w e recommend the following documents be proactively on Te Manat Waka website by April : . Amendment to the Land Transport (Infringement and Reminder Notices) Regulations Cabinet paper . LEGMIN Amendments to the Land Transport (Infringement and Reminder Notices) Regulations We propose to release these documents in full. Consultations undertaken The following agencies were consulted on the release of these document s and had no concerns with the proposed release : . NZ Police, Waka Kotahi, the Ministry for Women, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry for Pacific Peoples, Te Puni Kkiri, the Ministry of Justice and Parliamentary Counsel Office. Risks and mitigations We do not foresee any risks with the release of these documents. Next steps Once you have approved the release of the documents, we will publish them on the Ministrys website. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Annexes The following documents are attached to this briefing: Annex Cabinet paper: Amendment to the Land Transport (Infringement and Reminder Notices) Regulations . Annex LEGMIN Amendments to the Land Transport (Infringement and Reminder Notices) Regulations .
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of We propose that you take on the role of Kiwi Shareholder. It fits closely with your delegated function as the airlines licensing authority under the Civil Aviation Act . It relates to the grounds under which other countries could deny access to New Zealand airlines under air services agreements negotiated with those countries . Next Steps If you agree to the proposal, please sign the attached letter to the Prime Minister proposing that you be assigned the responsibility of Kiwi Shareholder. I f the Prime Minister agrees to the proposal, we have prepared a letter for your signature. The letter advis es Air New Zealand, in accordance with Article .(a) of the companys constitution, that you are the person entitled to exercise the rights and powers of the Kiwi Shareholder. We will provide you with a briefing if Air New Zealand proposes an amendm ent to its constitution requiring your consent, or a specified event occurs that triggers the requirement for the consent of the Kiwi Shareholder. This may necessitate seeking external legal advice . Applications for consent have, in the past, been very inf requent. Consultation We consulted The Treasury , which supports our recommendation that you become the Kiwi Shareholder.
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT e o.. .w We are checking in to see if you have any queries about ports permits extension process, or whether you would like to share any views or insights. We note there are potential cultural, and Te Tiriti impacts which need to be considered and that this process is also a part of the wider Resource Management reforms currently taking place through MFE.
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT H. pah:i ;.na ng. lrng:it, o Aole;roa kiri eke Enabling New Zealanders flourish Oscar CasswellLaird From: Rebecca Beals Sent: Tuesday, June To: Ports Consultation Feedback Subject: FW: TranganuiaKiwa: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Importance:High
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT J Te lunanga O Arowhenua Society Inc. AORAKI fNY l RNIIEO AL COHSULTANCV LID
s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT OUTPUTS lm.reaae fare box r.oow,ry and Chideny reve.n.ue by Public T,.,.port AUhorltlea. lf.AOAGE NCV TfA.M SUPPORT HOT OvtRALL PlllRAME .. : NZTA PUllCTRANS.pQRT . , J .I A, I I, N ,., , I AIIOntlyKlWC.,..o, . .,..,.,. .lOil .. Pl.lbicnniPOl. .,.,. .,. .,.,ISWtot,..,.fObPlde.,.,.,. .,IIMCllllt .,IC)Of..r From: Mitch Macaulay To: Bryan Field Cc: Tim Herbert Subject: RE: PMO Monthly Report: Request to update the July report Wednesday, July Attachments: image.png Final OC GPS Reporting and Performance and Efficiency Plan Briefing Policy .docx From: Victoria Joy Acharya V.Acharyatransport.govt.nz Sent: To: Tim Herbert t.herberttransport.govt.nz ; Bryan Field B.Fieldtransport.govt.nz ; Mitch Macaulay M.Macaulaytransport.govt.nz Cc: Tony Frost t.frosttransport.govt.nz Subject: RE: PMO Monthly Report: Request to update the July report
s ()(a) s () (a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s () (a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I also note that there were a number of submissions by the motor vehicle industry and others to the Clean Vehicles Bill. I have not included these within scope of this request, but submissions, many of which are from the companies and groups you asked about, were in December at the following address: https:bills.parliament.nzvabfe ade fa ab fabafdTabsub You have the right to seek an investigation and review of this response by the Ombudsman, in accordance with section () of the Act. The relevant details can be found on the Ombudsmans website www.ombudsman.parliament.nz
s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Private Bag , Parliament Buildings, Wellington , New Zealand k.allanministers.govt.nz beehive.govt.nz You have the r ight to seek an investigation and review of this response by the Ombudsman, in accordance with section () of the Act. The relevant details can be found on the Ombudsmans website www.ombudsman.parliament.nz . Yours sinc erely Hon Kiri Alla n Associate Minister of Transport RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Private Bag , Parliament Buildings, Wellington , New Zealand k.allanministers.govt.nz beehive.govt.nz Annex Document Schedule
s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT REQUEST FROM REGARDING CORRESPONDENCE WITH LOCAL COUNCILS RELATING TO THE GOVERNMENT POLICY STATEMENT No documents fall within the scope of the request You received the following request: . Under the Official Information Act , I wish to seek all correspondence that the Minister for Transport has sent to, andor received from, local councils, regarding the Government Policy Statement which is currently being developed. Your office has been unable to find any correspondence that the Minister for Transport has sent to, andor received from, local councils, regarding the Government Policy Statement . Therefore, the Ministry is recommending the request is refused under section (e) , that the document alleged to contain the information requested does not exist or, despite reasonable efforts to locate it, cannot be found. Risks The requester may be unsatisfied with the response as there is no information being released. There may be risk of media interest in this OIA due to the recent media interest in GPS . There may be a risk that the requestor believes the Minister is not considering regional views around the GPS. Consultation We have contacted the Ministers Office who were satisfied that there was no materi al inscope for this request.
s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of RAIL FUNDING INCLUDING THE CAPITAL PIPELINE REVIEW Several parallel funding and planning related processes are underway for rail Several budget related funding and planning process are underway that relate to rail: . Initial Baseline Exercise (IBE) leading to invitations to submit budget savings to generate savings of . to be returned to the centre. . The Ministry led process to advise you of savings beyond the IBE process that could help offset cost pressures in the Transport Sector (i.e. these savings are not returned to the centre) . . Budget Capital Pipeline Review process (giving the opportunity for capital intensive agencies to submit both savings, cost pressures and new spending initiatives) . . The budget process for new spending (operating), which the Minister of Finance has not invited KiwiRail to submit into . . Consultation and finalising G overnment Policy Statement (GPS) that set out the Government priorities for rail and the funding range for the rail activity class. . The preparation of the Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP) that KiwiRail need to submit to you by which will be based on your direction given in the GPS. This advice provides a consolidated view of rail investment and is in two parts covering rail freight and metro rail. We have also attached as Annex A, a table setting out the range of funding sources for Rail. Rail freight Table R ail freight overview across the funding and planning processes underway Process Status for rail freight Initial Baseline Exercise (IBE)
s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT I,. TE MANIATU WAKA J IP li ,Jrf, Of T, H. p.utln . n; n , ltngnt, o Aolenroa km eke En bling cw Zealanders to ourish
s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT H p.i .i, n. n . t:irii;;it; Aoe;iro; km eke En blini: cw Ze landers to flourish RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Oscar CasswellLaird From: Sent: To: Cc: Subject: Attachments : Kia ora Trede gar, s Q)a s (Ha) Wednesday , June : pm Tredegar Hall Rebecca Beals; Oscar CasswellLaird; Rawiri Faulkner FW: Port Permit enqaqement FW: Te Whanganui a Tara: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years ; Extending the duration of existing port coastal permits.pdf Thank you for this update and aintroduction (kia ora korua). Ill leave Rawiri to make the connection and progress the korero when he gets back. Thanks again and all the best for whatever comes next Mauri Ora A Block Wbitireja Polytech, Wi Neera Drive, Porjrua t ngatitoa.iwi.nz A TE RNANGA V TOA RANCiATIRA TE AO TROA I OHANGA I ORANGA I WHAi MANA I NGATI TOA RANGATIRATANGA From: Tredegar Hall T.Halltransport.govt.nz Sent: To::.(a) Cc: Rebecca Beals R.Bealstransport.govt.nz; Oscar CasswellLaird .Casswell Lairdtransport.govt.nz Subject: Port Permit engagement Some people who received this message dont often get email from t.halltransport.govt .nz. Learn why this is important Tena korua, I suspect you will both be busy at He Maori Ahau today, but I wanted to give you both this email to introduce Rebecca and Oscar who are our Te Manatu Waka (MoT) team working on the Port Permit extension project (info email attached). My mahi and role is corning to an end at MoT this Friday. If you are wanting to have a view of this Kaupapa please do reach our team. I note the following ports below which you have interests in:
s ()(a) s ()(a) s () (a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s () (a) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: Daran Ponter Daran.Pontermfe.govt.nz Sent: To: Subject: Fwd: TranganuiaKiwa: The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years
s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT REQUEST FROM REGARDING MEETINGS AND CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN THE MINISTERS OFFICE AND THE VEHICLE INDUSTRY ON THE CLEAN CAR STANDARD AND CLEAN CAR DISCOUNT documents comprising pages fall within the scope of the request Table below sets out the documents that fall in the scope of request and our proposed response. Given the wide scope of the information included in the request, there is a risk that not all correspondence has been identified. However, we have sought to include everything that we have on file, and your office has provided all relevant information that it found within scope. Much of the material is already intended to be public (for example in the case of press releases from industry), or consistent with publicly released material (for example wher e the industry has sent you emails consistent with public submissions they made to the Clean Vehicles Bill at select committee in ). Some material from the industry was not intended to be public. However, we consider that in most cases, sufficient time has passed that there is minimal risk in releas ing it . An email from , item , mentions attached comments of which we do not have a record. Consultation was attempted with all stakeholders All of the em ails and attachments have been shared with the stakeholders who sent or received them as part of consultation on the proposed release to identify any potential issues with the release of information. Two did not reply (DriveElectric and Hire a Holde n). Of those consulted, only one stakeholder raised concerns, . It stated that the release of some of their correspondence to you
s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Q(I,. TE MAHATU WAKA IP M SHIVOFT Hapaitm an. ng;i lrlilJ:r;lh o Aolearoa kiri eke Enabling New Zealanders ourish In your rohe this is for Eastland Port
s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT TE MANIATO WAKA iiiP M HIV OF Tl H pah .. na ng. l:r:oh o Aolearoa ki eke En bling c Zea.landers liourish Consistent with the Ministrys Te Tiriti obligations, and in our ongoing eort to build our relationships with Te Iwi Mori, we are eager to receive your views to the ports permits extension process. If we have missed any important Iwi, Hap, PSGE or tangata whenua groups in this email please let me know. We are checking in to see if you have any queries about ports permits extension process, or whether you would like to share any views or insights. We note there are potential cultural, and Te Tiriti impacts which need to be considered and that this process is also a part of the wider Resource Management reforms currently taking place through MFE.
s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT H. pa,tm ;.na ng. lrngot; o Aole;roa kiri eke Enabling New Zealanders flourish Ng mihi nui ki koutou me ng ahuatanga o te wa. He uri no Ngti Twharetoa tenei, e whakaarotia mo ng Take Ao Mori o roto i te tari o Te Manat Waka, e tuku mihi ki koutou.
s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s () (a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Just a quick follow up, did you want to a krero about this Kaupapa Happy to coordinate a hui with our MoT and MFE teams for a teams hui or have an initial krero you and I directly first, if needed
s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a)
s ()(a) s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of UPDATE ON FULLERS WAIHEKE FERRY SERVICE AND SUPERGOLD CARD TRAVEL The SuperGold Card scheme (the Scheme) provides free off peak travel for cardholders In , Cabinet agreed to fund free off peak travel on public transport for SuperGold cardholders CAB Min () refers. The then M inister for Senior Citizens, Minister of Finance and the Acting Associate Minister for Seniors agreed to define off peak for the purposes of the concession as: . on weekdays, from .am .pm and from .pm until the end of services for the day and . on weekends and public holidays, all day and night. Concessionary eligibility in Auckland is from .am to the end of services of the day, with no cut off in the afternoon. Auckland Council and AT fund free travel for SuperGold cardholders in the afternoo n peak . In , Cabinet clarified that a condition of the Crown providing funding for SuperGold concessions is that free, off peak travel is available to all SuperGold cardholders for the full financial year EGI MIN . refers. At the same time, Cabinet agreed to shift SuperGold from a demand driven model to a bulk funding model EGI MIN refers. Crown funding was initially capped at million and is adjusted annually in line with the consumer price index (CPI). This funding is distributed acros s contracted services and exempt services. For the financial year, the total Crown appropriation is approximately million . This includes additional funding from a Budget cost pressures initiative that increase d the total Crown appropriatio n by million over four years. Exempt services are not contracted to a PTA and do not receive funding from the National Land Transport Fund . Operators of exempt services set their own fares and receive all fare revenue, including SuperGold Card reimburs ements. Under the bulk funding model, funding for exempt services was initially capped at . million per annum, with annual CPI adjustments. There are currently three exempt services receiving Crown funding for carrying SuperGold passengers Fullers W aiheke, SeaLink Waiheke, and the Wellington Cable Car. In November , the Wellington Airport Flyer service (which was previously included in the Scheme) ceased operating and was brought back as a contracted service in July .
s ()(a) s ()(g)(i) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT H p;:; . n. n . I ri;::t Aoe:ro;, kin eke En blini: ew Ze landers to llourish RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Oscar CasswellLaird From: Sent: To: Cc: Friday, June : pm Tredegar Hall;) a Rebecca Beals Subject: RE: List of permits captured by the Port extension section A Kia ora Tredagar , Thank you for the below, we will work through this and come back with any patai. Senior Policy Advisor Te Runanga o Ngai Tahu sT a Te Runanga o Ngai Tahu From: Tredegar Hall T.Halltransport .govt.nz Sent: Friday, June , : PM To: RaJ Cc: Rebecca Beals R.Bealstransport .govt.nz Subject: RE: List of permits captured by the Port extension section A Caution: This is an EXTERNAL email. Please consider safe cyber security practices. Kia Ora an Amelia, RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Also attached is South Ports variation consent. T From: Tredegar Hall Sent: Friday, June , : PM To:f (, Cc: Rebecca Beals R.Bealstransport.govt .nz Subject: RE: List of permits captured by the Port extension section A Kia Ora Amelia, Aro ha mai for the delay please find see below the consent detail you have requested. Attached is the South Port permit. PrimePort (Timaru) attached, and also ECan resource consent number CRC active Lyttelton Port Company ECan resource consent number CRC active Port Otago sA coastal permit surrendered, no longer active South Port Southland regional council active and attached. If it helps with your advice to your rnaka, the duration of the permit has been a talking point for iwi and also port companies also consideratio n of conditions which could apply to the permits. Happy to have call if needed. Nga mihi, Nga mihi (kind regards), Tredegar Rangiatea Hall (he, his, Mr) TOwharetoa , Te Arawa Kaiarahi Maori I Director Maori s (Ha, I E: t.halltransport .govt.nz I transport.govt.nz k. TE MANATO WAKA I , l , O r,.,,,.. f RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT From: Ja) Sent: To: Tredegar Hall T.Halltransport.govt.nz Cc: (a) Rebecca Beals R.Bealstransport.govt.nz Subject: RE: List of permits captured by the Port extension section A Kia ora Tredagar Thank you for the below. For the four ports in the Ngai Tahu takiwa (Lyttelton, Timaru, Dunedin, Bluff) do you have a list of the relevant SA consents i.e., consent number, status, activity This will greatly assist Papatipu ROnanga and Te ROnanga in our consideration of this proposal, and may help to refine any response . Nga mihi ()( I Senior Strategy Advisor I Te Runanga o Ngai Tahu From: Tredegar Hall T.Halltransport.govt.nz Sent: To (lfa Rebecca Beals R.Bealstransport.govt.nz Subject: RE: List of permits captured by the Port extension section A Caution: This is an EXTERNAL email. Please consider safe cyber security practices. Tena koe Amelia, krua ko Tanya, Thank you for the email and apologies for the delayed response. The table below outlines all the ports and their SA permits. Ive attached a pager info doc but will highlight that the SA permits are specifically for occupation of structures, navigational aids (buoys, lights, fog signals, exclusive occupation areas such as RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT safe anchor areas, and some structures such as wharves. Other activities such as dredging, discharging and land reclamation etc are RMA processes being covered by MFE in the RM reforms. We are undertaking this process with MFE, and I acknowledge that cultural impacts are holistic and while for example the scope of this sA approach is narrow to the points above, any feedback we receive on the wider impacts and Te Tiriti requirements we will still receive and share with our MFE colleagues. Port Company Coastal Permit Status Regional Council . Northport Limited (Marsden) I Tai Tokerau In use Northland Regional Council . Port of Auckland Limited I Tamakimakaurau In use Auckland Council . Port of Tauranga Limited In use Bay of Plenty Regional Council . Port Taranaki Limited In use Taranaki Regional Council . Eastland Port (Gisborne) I Turanganu iaKiwa In use isborne District Council . Napier Port Holdings Limited I Ahuriri In use Hawkes Bay Regional Council . Centre Port Limited Wellington I Te Whanga nui a Tara Not in use, still held reater Wellington Regional Council . Port Nelson limited In use Nelson City Council . Port Marlborough NZ Limited I Te Tau lhu In use Marlborough District Council . Lyttelton Port Company I Riritana Te Waka a Maui In use :nvironment Canterbury . Prime Port Timaru Limited In use nvironment Canterbury . Port Otago Limited I takou Surrendered btago Regional Council . South Port New Zealand Limited (Bluff) I Motu Pohue In use Southland Ive included my colleague Rebecca Beals who is our Principal Advisor (Urban Development and Public Transport) who is our lead on this kaupapa, to provide any further context. We are happy to set up a teams hui should your team or any of a rnaka want to have a krero. Nga mihi (kind regards), Tredegar Rangiatea Hall (he, his, Mr) TOwharetoa , Te Arawa Kaiarahi Maori I Director Maori s () E: t.halltra nsport.qovtn z I transport.go vt.nz TE MANA.TU WAKA ..,,, ., c,, ru t From: Sent: To: Tredegar Hall T.Halltransport.govt.nz Cc: Subject: List of permits captured by the Port extension
s ()(b)(ii) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
s ()(b)(ii) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending August
s ()(b)(ii) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending July
s ()(b)(ii) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Upcoming Minister of Transport m eetings Meeting Meeting Details Wednesday September .am .pm Meeting with Mayor Brown, Deputy Mayor Simpson, Auckland Transport, Auckland One Rail and KiwiRail Briefing Due: Monday September Officials Attending: TBC Wednesday September .pm .pm Meeting with Dean Kimpton, Chief Executive, Auckland Transport Briefing Due: Monday September Officials Attending: TBC Wednesday September .pm .pm Meeting with Sir Timothy Clark, President Emirates Airline Briefing Due: Monday September Officials Attending: TBC Thursday September .am .am Ride on hydrofoiling tourism vessel with Fullers Briefing Due: Monday September Officials Attending: NA Thursday September .am .am Meeting with Greg Foran, Chief Executive, Air New Zealand Briefing Due: Monday September Officials Attending: TBC Thursday September .am .am Meeting with Cath Handley, Chair Waiheke Island Local Board on Waiheke Island issues Briefing Due: Monday September Official Attending : No
s ()(b)(ii) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of November OC Hon Simeon Brown Action required by: Minister of Transport Monday, December COST ALLOCATION MODEL AND ROAD USER CHARGES Purpose Provide background information relating to the cost allocation model (CAM) , how it is used to set road user charges (RUC), and potential changes to improve the approach . Key p oints The RUC system aims to charge rates to vehicles that are proportionate to the costs they impose on the network. The Ministry is responsible for the CAM, which breaks down expenditure from the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP) and assigns costs to every kilometre travelled on the network. The CAMs main influence is on RUC rates for heavy vehicles , as light vehicles (up to . tonnes ) pay very few weight related costs due to their negligible impact on road wear. Instead, light RUC rates are made up predominantly of common costs that do not vary with vehicle weight and are charged equally to all powered vehicles. The CAM is typically used as a guide to consider user pays when setting RUC rates rather than for precise rate setting. It has no legislative standing and given the significant averaging within the model , and regular fluctuations in CAM recommended rates year by year, successive governments have applied discretion in setting rates . As a result, RUC rates have always differed from CAM rates. There has been regular review of the CAM, and most changes have been at the margins. From a road engineering perspective, it remains fit for purpose. The most substantive recent review s in and identified some improvements , most of which were minor. Since , the road transport industry, while not necessarily agreeing with every assumption in the CAM, has generally accepted the way it informs the setting of rates. The CAM is only used when RUC rates are being reviewed. This means that it has not been since . As a result it is unclear to what extent current RUC rates diverge from the CAM. We intend to update the expenditure and travel data in the CAM in as a first step towards re setting of RUC rates in . There are some adjustments we could consider improving the CAM, which can support movement towards fair user pays RUC rates in future. However, there is not a strong Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of case for a new independent review of engineering assumptions , particularly given the cost and resource required . Potential areas of focus include : oupdates to vehicle weight averaging assumptions . These would mainly affect the distribution of costs between different classes of heavy vehicle oconsidering the treatment of Crown funding and local share . This has significant potential to affect the level of costs allocated across all vehicle types oconsidering changes to support the transition of petrol vehicles (including motorcycles) into the RUC system. The overall impact of such changes on recommended RUC rates and revenue would be minor. Recommendations We recommend you: agree that the Ministry report back to you in May with advice on how the cost allocation model is to be used to set rates for the increases scheduled for January and to transition petrol vehicles to road user charges Yes No Matt Skinner Manager RUC Transition Hon Simeon Brown Minister of Transport . . . Ministers office to complete : Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events Comments Contacts Name Telephone First contact Matt Skinner , Manager RUC Transition Jonathan Petterson, Principal Adviser, RUC Transition s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of COST ALLOCATION MODEL AND ROAD USER CHARGES The CAM seeks to charge RUC to recover the costs of investment The cost allocation model (CAM) is used by the Ministry to guide the setting of road user charges ( RUC ) and fuel excise duty (FED) . It is the primary tool to support the RUC systems purpose to impose charges on RUC vehicles for their use of the roads that are in proportion to the costs that the vehicles generate . The CAM takes the costs of delivering the National Land Transport Programme (NLTP), including Crown funding and local share, and allocate s them to vehicles. In this way, the RUC rates aim to, on average, recover the full costs of investment into the system , as a proxy for the costs that each vehicle imposes on the road network. History of the RUC system and the CAM The original purpose of the RUC system when it was implemented in was to produce all the funding necessary to meet the costs of maintaining, operating and improving the road network. The cost allocation methodology was developed to ensure that the costs were reco vered in a manner that indicated the relative cost responsibility of the different types of vehicles that used the roads. In this way, RUC acts as both a cost recovery tool, but also a pricing signal to road users to ensure efficient choices of vehicles to reduce unnecessary damage to the road network. Initially, the RUC system was designed specifically for heavy vehicles. As uptake of light diesel vehicles increased, the RUC system grew. Even though light vehicles now make up over percent of all RUC vehicles, the core focus of the CAM remains on ensu ring heavy vehicles are subject to appropriate rates. The CAM has always been a feature of the system, and its core methodology is largely unchanged since the original development of the RUC system. Over the years, as the funding system and RUC system have evolved, there has been regular review and revision. Most substantively, in , An Independent Review of the New Zealand reported back to Hon Steven Joyce on its findings. While broadly focused on the RUC system, it included several specific and technical recommendations in relation to how the CAM allocates costs. This resulted in the biggest change to the RUC system since the s, and as a result we now charge based on the carrying capacity of a vehicle rather than the maximum weight as nominated by the operator. However, despite these changes, the CAM m ethodology is still largely unchanged. Appendix includes a summary of the evolution of the RUC system, and the relevant reviews and updates of the CAM. The current CAM methodology Appendix shows how the allocation of costs works, using the example of the rates output by the CAM for the setting of RUC rates. There are four substantive steps. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of . The CAM calculates the number of units of five different cost drivers to be assigned to each RUC vehicle type based on the estimated impact each vehicle type has on the costs of investing in the network . . Total annual NLTP expenditure is broken down into the five cost drivers . . Based on total vehicle kilometres travelled, the CAM calculates how much needs to be charged per unit in order to cover the full costs of investment within each cost driver. . The unit cost for each cost driver (from step ) is multiplied by each vehicle types units (from step ) to identify the rate required to ensure each vehicle is subject to a rate that covers its costs from using the network. The five cost drivers are: Cost driver Costs intended to be recovered How are costs allocated Examples of costs included Heavy vehicle (HV) Costs attributable only to heavy vehicles unit to every vehicle T Polices Commercial Vehicle Safety Team and some land purchases Passenger car equivalents (PCE) Costs that vary based on the amount of space a vehicle takes up unit for light vehicles and trailers, units for heavy vehicles Some costs of new roads and land purchases Gross vehicle weight (GVW) Costs that support roads to manage heavy loads unit per tonne of maximum vehicle weight Bridges and strengthening pavement Equivalent standard axles (ESA) Cost to repair pavement wear caused by axle weight A factor of axle weight to the power of four Pavement maintenance, resurfacing and rehabilitation Powered vehicle (PV) Common costs that do not relate to weight or use per powered vehicle ( for trailers) Road repairs due to age or weather related damage, road signage, road markings, routine maintenance, traffic lights, road policing and public transport subsidies Treatment of other costs and revenue The CAM takes into account all investment and revenue related to the NLTP. This means that local government investment (e.g. into local roads) and Crown funding where directed via the NLTP (e.g. towards State highway projects) is included within the costs to be allocated. However, because that revenue is already sourced, it is taken off the total needed to be collected from common costs (PV). Similarly, revenue from motor vehicle registration and licensing fees is deducted from common costs. FED revenue is treated similarly to light RUC, in that the CAM assumes that the contribution made from FED is proportionate to the same cost drivers as for a light diesel vehicle. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Key limitations of the CAM and areas for further consideration The CAMs focus is on setting rates for heavy vehicles Heavy vehicles travel over billion kilometres per year, about percent of all kilometres travelled on the road network. However, through RUC, heavy vehicle operators pay for approximately percent of the costs of road wear. This is the result of the fourth power rule which reflects that the damage to roads increases exponentially based on vehicle axle weight. As a result, small changes to how the ESA parameter in the CAM is calculated, or in the amount of costs attributed to ESA, can have a major impact to the total costs of heavy RUC. The CAM has a relatively limited impact on light vehicle RUC rates As only ESA has an exponential factor , the other cost drivers are spread more evenly across all kilometres travelled and have a smaller impact on rates. As the ESA component for light vehicles is small, there is limited rationale to charge different rates of RUC to light vehicles weighing up to . tonnes. The following table shows what differentiated weight RUC rates would have been at two extremes for different light vehicles , based on the methodology for the CAM .
s ()(b)(ii) s ()(b)(ii)
s ()(b)(ii) s ()(b)(ii) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES RESTRICTED Weekly Report to Minister week ending July
s ()(b)(ii) s ()(b)(ii) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Biographies Martin Kearney Mr Martin Kearney was appointed CEO of Auckland One Rail (AOR) on October . Originally from the UK, Martin has more than years experience in the transport sector in the UK, Australia and New Zealand. Martin has previously overseen the introduction of the fleet of three car EMUs onto Aucklands rail network which included implement ing a new high frequency timetable.
s ()(b)(ii) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
s ()(b)(ii), s ()(f)(iv) s ()(b)(ii), s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv), s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Immediate n ext steps metro funding We will look to refine our advice in the lead up to your budget bilateral with the Minister of Finance. O ur current advice would be to seek at least million to support metro rail though . This reflects: . That it makes sense for certain works to be completed before the CRL is opened. . The growing risk that without more funding, there may be significant service disruptions on the metro systems in both Auckland and Wellington. . . That although we have commenced a MROM review to develop a sustainable funding model, this work will not be completed until the end of the year, T he budget bids for metro funding have been useful for identifying issues and risks and establishing a potential overall funding envelope. However, we think there is merit in a process to bring all relevant parties (i.e. KiwiRail, NZTA, A uckland Transport , Greater Wellington Regional Council ) together to refine Metro priorities within whatever funding envelope is agreed. It would also be important that we structure any additional crown funding in manner that reduces the risk of setting a precedent or expectation that the crown continue to fund shortfalls in funding. We will prepare further advice to you on this in the lead up to your budget bilateral meeting. Longer term working leading into Budget
s ()(b)(ii), s ()(g)(ii) s ()(g)(ii) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of Talking points
s ()(ba)(i) s ()(b)(ii), s ()(j) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
s ()(ba)(i) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv)
s ()(f)(iv) TRANSPORT CROWN ENTITY AND STATE OWNED ENTITY (SOE) UPDATES IN CONFIDENCE Weekly Report to Minister week ending September
s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE INCONFIDENCE INCONFIDENCE i. the A ir Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand at Attachment ; ii. and the associated Protocol to the Air Services Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of New Zealand on Third. Fourth and Fifth Freedom Traffic Rights between Parties at Attachment note that the Agreement establishes the legal framework permitting services by New Zealand and ASEAN international airlines, as well as operational provisions, doing business provisions and general treaty provisions note that the Protocol sets out the capacity that airlines of New Zealand and ASEAN may operate, the routes that they can operate and the traffic they may carry, and contains specific restrictions on New Zealand airlines that were insisted upon by some ASEAN members note that the Agreement and the Protocol w ould replace New Zealands air services agreements with each of the ASEAN members (with the exception of Brunei and Singapore where the Multilateral Agreement on the Liberalization of International Air Transportation is the current air services treaty ) note that, in the event of any discrepancy between the Agreement and the Protocol, and the existing air services agreements , the more open provision would prevail approve the text of the Agreement and the text of the Protocol agree that New Zealand may sign the Agreement subject to any changes of a minor or technical nature that might arise from the verification process agree that New Zealand may sign the Protocol subject to any changes of a minor or technical nature that might arise from the verification process note that, as they are multilateral treaties, the Agreement and Protocol are required to undergo parliamentary treaty examination in accordance with Standing Order approve the National Interest Analysis at Attachment agree that the National Interest Analysis be presented to the House of Representatives following New Zealands signature of the Agreement and Protocol agree that New Zealand may deposit with the ASEAN Secretariat an instrument of ratification for the Agreement and an instrument of ratification for the Protocol note that the Agreement will enter into force on the of deposit of the instrument of ratification, acceptance, or approval with the Depositary (the ASEAN Secretariat) by New Zealand and at least two ASEAN m ember states PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANATU WAKA
s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Investment Project: Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Road Efficiency Group (REG) Ministry officials are working with NZTA officials to confirm the scope, role and functions of the REG by the end of September (in line with your letter to the NZTA Board Chair on Tuesday August ). Ten Year Investment Planning Officials are currently scoping work to require future Government Policy Statements on Land Transport to include a ten year investment plan (including considering the potential legislative and system changes needed and the interaction with long term planning by NZTA and local government). We will brief you on this work by Wednesday September . Review of NZTA Short te rm Borrowing Facility (the Review) Briefing: Ten year investment planning: project scope This briefing will set out the proposed scope of work, and timeline, to require future Government Policy Statements to adopt a ten year investment plan. Wednesday September
s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Project: Time of use charging Following Cabinets approval to develop the Land Transport Management (Time of Use Charging) Amendment Bill on July , drafting instructions have been provided to the Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) and the Ministry has received a first draft . s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Project: Increasing motor vehicle registration (MVR) annual licence fees The draft Land Transport (Motor Vehicle Registration and Licensing) Amendment Regulations (No ) , and the accompanying draft Cabinet Legislation Committee paper, have been sent out for departmental consultation. Cabinet paper: Approval for Land Transport (Motor Vehicle Registration and Licensing) Amendment Regulations (No ) This LEG paper will seek authorisation to submit regulations to the Executive Council. Departmental consultation: August Ministerial consultation: September (or can send this out earlier if you wish) To lodge: Thursday September To Committee: Thursday September To Cabinet: Monday September Publication Gazetting: October
s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Aviation
s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of . Other portfolio Cabinet p apers with t ransport implications Committees Cabinet Cabinet Economic Policy Committee
s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Ministerial correspondence and OIAs Ministerial correspondence There have not been five or more pieces of Ministerial correspondence on any one topic this week. Ministerial Official Information Act Requests Due to Ministers Office Due to Requester Requester Summary of request All correspondence and communication with non Governmental organisations regarding the Setting of Speed Limits Information about the appointment of medical conveners Information on transport expert advisory group Extended Extended Any correspondence received or sent by the Office regarding the Lower North Island Rail Integrated Mobility Programme (LNIRIM) Any safety analysis undertaken relating to the proposed Speed rule, such as modelling of the expected change in deaths and serious injuries (DSI), or analysis of historical DSI data Regarding the use of Te Reo Mori in the public service All communication regarding the increase of parking fines All communication between the Ministers Office and departments he is responsible for, about new spending or baseline savings in Budget
s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Project: Road safety objectives We are awaiting your feedback on the draft Road Safety Objectives document before commencing departmental and Ministerial consultation. Once we receive your feedback, we will work with your Office on the timelines for progressing to Cabinet. Cabinet paper: Releasing the final Road Safety Objectives document This paper seeks agreement to publish the final New Zealand Road Safety Objectives document. Departmental and Ministerial consultation: TBC Final papers to your Office: TBC To lodge: TBC To Committee: TBC To Cabinet: TBC Project: Land Transport Fees Amendment Package The Amendment Regulations have been approved by Cabinet and Executive Council. Gazettal will be at pm on Thursday August . We will support RCAs and the towage industry to implement the fee increases by October . Cabinet paper: Approval of legislative changes to update land transport fees Gazette Thursday August In force: October
s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Project: Digital driver licences
s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Rail Project: Budget Metro Rail Funding Through B udget the Government agreed .m for one year of metro network renewals to avoid critical network failure risks in Auckland and Wellington. This funding has been appropriated and does not require Cabinet approval before being allocated. Week ending Friday September (if not before)
s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Advice on design and membership of public private leadership body, First meeting of the leadership body (subject to Ministers decisions) Briefing and Cabinet paper on proposed high level policy settings, (subject to Ministers decisions on timing of biofuels work) Cabinet paper seeking approval to consult on rule change Public consultation undertaken and Cabinet decision on rule change Participation in ICAO negotiations Participation in IMO negotiations Completed targeted consultation on draft regulations Regulation approved by Cabinet Programme : Decarbonising Transport SRO Bryn Gandy Ph:
s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE
s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Extract OC Metropolitan Rail Operating Model Investment and Level of Service Scenarios November Most information in OC is outside the scope of the request. The information related to the level crossing removal programme in Auckland is provided as an extract below. We are aware of other investments required to deliver increased service levels in Auckland, which are identified in the Auckland Rail Programme Business Case. These include: . the level crossing removal programme with an estimated cost of million over years for the Tak nini cluster . .
s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE
s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Appendix Three: High level tables illustrating impact to businesses and households The following tables are extracted from Appendix five within the Cost Recovery Impact Statement:
s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Recommendations We recommend you: Note the key themes identified from agency consultation Agree to carry out consultation between March with your Ministerial colleagues Yes No Provide feedback on the draft Cabinet paper by March Yes No
s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Recommendations We recommend you:
s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Next steps . The Ministry will incorporate your feedback post Ministerial consultation and work towards finalising the Cabinet paper for consideration by the Cabinet Economic Development Committee (DEV) on March . The Ministry will provide a briefing and talking points to accompany the final Cabinet paper being lodged on March . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Appendix One: Draft Cabinet paper: Changes to land transport regulatory charges and fees Note this appendix includes accompanying documents which should be considered in conjunction with the draft Cabinet paper, including the : o Cost Recovery Impact Statement prepared by Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency and reviewed by the Ministry of Transport o T ake, t mia (Regulatory strategy: ) which was approved by the Board in December . This will guide Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agencys regulatory services over the next decade.
s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of
s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Appendix One: Maritime New Zealand Draft Statement of Performance Expectations The appendix is withheld under Section ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE June OC Acting Minis ter of Transport KEY ISSUES BRIEFING Purpose This paper provides you with a Key Issues Briefing on transport portfolio matters that you will need to consider while Acting Minister of Transport. Key p oints At your request , Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) and Waka Kotahi New Zealand Transport Agency (Waka Kotahi) have prepared a Key Issues Briefing (attached as Annex ). The Key Issues Briefing should be read in conjunction with other briefing material you receive and your Weekly Report. The Key Issues Briefing contains brief information on key issues where you might be expected to make decisions over the next month . In addition to matters raised in the Key Issues Briefing, you may receive papers of a procedural and technical nature for your action. An example is approving regulations to implement decisions taken by Cabinet Economic Development Committee on March to set new land transport fees and charges. Papers of this nature will be provided to your office as required, but are not discussed in the Key Issues Briefing. Information that sits in the delegated portfolio of Associate Minister of Transport, Hon Kiritapu Allan is not covered in this Key Issues Briefing. A copy of her delegations letter is attached as Annex for reference. Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT February Hon Kiritapu Allan Associate Minister of Transport Delegated functions and responsibilities Congratulations on your appointment as Associate Minister of Transport Role and responsibilities In your capacity as Associate Minister of Transport, I delegate to you the following functions and responsibilities of the Transport portfolio: Delegated functions and responsibilities Congratulations on your appointment as Associate Minister of Transport Role and responsibilities In your capacity as Associate Minister of Transport, I delegate to you the following functions and responsibilities of the Transport portfolio: . All matters relating to: .. The Land Transport (Road Safety) Amendment Bill and any matters concerning fleeing drivers; .. Roadside drug testing and the drug driving regime; .. The maritime sector, including ov ersight of Maritime New Zealand ; .. The aviation sector, including over sight of the Civil Aviation Authority of New Zealand and Aviation Security Service; .. The Milford Opportunities Project, including matters relating to the Milford Aerodrome; .. The Essential Transport Connectivity Scheme; .. Oversight of Search and Rescue (SAR); .. Initiatives and policy concerning the Chatham Islands; .. Management of the Regulatory Systems (Transport) Amendment Bill No. , and responsibility for its implementation; .. Initiatives relating to bilingual signage; .. The towage and storage policy review. . You will also have a particular role in helping to develop and communicate the governments transport policy for and to regional communities and councils. This will specifically include: Annex RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT .. Working with me on plans to make the regional roading network more resilient. .. Working with me to ensure that there is a strong regional perspective in GPS , noting that I will retain overall responsibility for the content of the GPS. .. Engaging with regional Councils and communities about the governments transport policies and projects, both to communicate our policies and hear their views.
s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Appendix : Rail Plan and the Transport System
s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Private Bag , Parliament Buildings, Wellington , New Zealand k.allanministers.govt.nz beehive.govt.nz I look forward to our continued engagements and work to improve transport outcomes for New Zealanders and wish you the best for .
s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of OIA BRIEFING March Hon M ichael Wood Action required by: Minister of Transport Tuesday, March OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT REQUEST FROM REQUESTING BRIEFING TITLED UPDATE ON NZ FREIGHT AND SUPPLY CHAIN STRATEGY Purpose Seek your agreement to the proposed response to an Official Information Act request. Name of Requester Request Under the Official Information Act , I wish to seek a copy of the Update on NZ freight and supply chain strategy received by Minister Michael Wood on November , including the Executive Summary of the Strategy. Statutory deadline Tuesday, March Risks We do not foresee any risks with the proposed response. Recommendations We recommend you: consider the proposed response to the request under the Official Information Act sign the attached letter to . Yes No Seona Ku Policy Delivery Lead, Supply Chain Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport . . . Document OC s ()(a) s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Ministers office to complete: Approved Declined Seen by Minister Not seen by Minister Overtaken by events Comments Contacts Name Telephone First contact Seona Ku, Policy Delivery Lead Supply Chain Nesta Jones, Adviser Supply Chain s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT REQUEST FROM REQUESTING BRIEFING TITLED UPDATE ON NZ FREIGHT AND SUPPLY CHAIN STRATEGY Two documents fall within the scope of the request Table below sets out the documents that fall in the scope of request and our proposed response. These documents are attached to this briefing. The Ministry recommends withholding both documents We recommend withholding both documents in full under section ()(f)(iv) of the Official In formation Act to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials. Document is advice that was provided to you in December with an update on the key principles, goals, and priority actions the Ministry is proposing in the New Zealand Freight and Supply Chain Strategy (the Strategy). Document is the accompanying Executive Summary for the Strategy . The Strategy, and its release for public consultation, is still subject to approval by Cabinet, which is expected to be sought in May . If approved, the Strategy will be released publicly in mid to late May.
s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of The Takanini Level Crossings cluster includes: .. Closure of Spartan Road and Manuroa Road .. Grade separation of Manuia Road, Taka Street and Walters Road. The Mayor has indicated in his pre LTP announcement that he is willing to increase the funding to million for the Takaanini Cluster and is seeking NLTF matched funding. If the increased funding is approved through the LTP, the RLTP will be changed to reflect this. Level Crossing Design Detail Conceptual designs have been completed by the Supporting Growth Alliance (SGA) and are described below. The SSBC will provide more detailed construction design. s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Fast Tr ack Consenting and potential to bring forward the Takaanini cluster s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Yourself, Minister Bishop and Minister Jones will have the final decision on which projects to include in the fast track process. You will receive advice from the expert advisory group which has been set up to consider applications for inclusion in the Fasttrack Approvals Bill. The Environment Committee is due to report back on the Bill to Parliament on September and the projects will be included in the Bill shortl y afterwards.
s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Patronage Auckland Transport have modelled rail patronage across the network in and in . In with the CRL Day One crossings removed the patronage estimate is million trips per year. Wider interventions on the rail network The Rail Network Rebuild programme (RNR) is well underway across the network. Completion of the RNR is required to optimise the CRL timetable. Budget includes an allocation of full funding to complete Aucklands Rail Network Rebuild Programme through . million in Budget and . million in . s ()(g)(i) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Next Steps
s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Appendix : Level Crossing Supporting Information
s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT March Road to Zero Quarterly Progress Period October to December Quarter TwoPolice Performance Road PolicingAgenda Item RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Road Policing Operational Performance Police are seeing an upward trend in performance for Road Policing in the quarter ended Dec , of , (up from last quarter) , Exceeded the quarter target of , For the months to Dec , Police delivered ,, tests (RSPP Expected Delivery Level (EDL) millionFY) . Up from the previous quarter of . (EDL ) Increased from the previous quarter Police continues to support work to transition mobile cameras to Waka Kotahi Slightly up from previous quarter (EDL ) Operation Rural Roads support Police to maintain improvementRestraint Offences Breath Tests kmh Speed Notices Mobile Camera Hours Rural Speed Notices RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Road Policing Holiday Christmas and New Year Polices recent review of the Christmas and New Year holiday shows that this period does not present a significantly greater risk on our roads. RIDS Restraints, Impairment, Distraction and Speed are the main contributing factors This highlights Police resources are best focused on speed enforcement on high risk routes and high intensity breath testing. The review indicates focussing on media and comms over long weekends making use of increased coverage. Operation Open Roads National Road Safety Operation Dec June The primary focus of the operation is high visibility police enforcement activity on rural road networks predominantly urban b ased traffic units being deployed to the rural road network. of road deaths occur on our rural roads The operation aims to reverse this road death trend Police will evaluate the operation on its conclusion when meaningful insight can be drawn. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Work continued establishing a partnership between government agencies (ACC, TeManat Waka, Waka Kotahi, NZ Police and WorkSafe), drivers unions and private sector organisations to support best practice for work related road safety. TeAra Ki TeOra Ng whakamahuki ki teHune Road toZeroquarterly insights December Onaverage, one person iskilled every dayonNew Zealand roads, and another seven areseriously injured. Each and every one of thelives lostand people injured onourroads isadevastating tragedy, that hasalasting impact onourcommunities. Road to Zero is our plan to build the safest road system we can, and work towards zero deaths and serious injuries on Aotearoa New Zealand roads. Road to Zero is not about any single initiative but about how we develop a Safe System that includes safe vehicles, safe speeds, safe road users and safe roads. A safe system approach means looking at all aspects of the transport system and making evidence based interventions across a wide range of activity to make a difference. Road to Zero quarterly insights December highlights progress across a number of areas across the full system response. Each of these has a part to play in contributing to Road to Zero. Every New Zealander has a role to play. It takes everyone to get to no one M ttou e kore ttahi e hinga.As of December , Police had conducted TeManat Waka provided the Minister of Transport with initial process advice on options to regulate for vehicle safety improvements in light vehicle imported into New Zealand. Further advice will be provided by April .km Median barriers installed across all infrastructure projects since (up from km last quarter)Provisional road deaths for Q : (Up from in Q)Road deaths for Q average : Road to Zero Deputy Chief Executive Management Group workshop held in October to develop an implementation plan to align with the Road to Zero Action Plan. Road to Zero Chief Executive Governance Group held in November. ,, breath tests for the rolling months to the end of December . From October to December , breath tests were conducted. This is up from , last quarter. TeManat Waka has been given Cabinet approval on legislative change to support average speed delivery through the Land Transport (Road Safety) Amendment Bill. We expect this to be in force by the end of .Policy work Roundabouts delivered to out of a target of by (up from last quarter) . Q Calendar year (Oct Dec) Data from MOT websitekm Side barriers completed this quarter. GovernanceAgenda Item b RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of March OC Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport cc Hon Grant Robert son Minister of Finance cc Hon Dr Duncan Webb Minister for State Owned Enterprises NEW ZEALAND RAIL PLAN PROGRESS, PRIORITIES, COST PRESSURES, AND NEXT STEPS Purpose To provide an update on progress to on investment since the New Zealand Rail Plan (Rail Plan) was , an overview of current significant rail projects and programmes, and a suggested way forward for maintaining progress under the existing Rail Plan and aligning this with the Government Policy Statement (GPS) on Land Transport . Key points The Rail Plan , alongside the GPS, is key to aligning short term funding and investment decisions ( onetothree year timeframe) and longterm strategic goals ( tenyear timeframe) through the Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP), to help lift the rail network out of a state of managed decline. The first Rail Plan was in , establishing an overarching goal to achieve a resilient and reliable rail network, with strategic investment priorities of: Investing in the national rail network to restore rail freight and provide a platform for future investments for growth (funded through the Rail Network Activity Class). Investing in the metropolitan rail network to support growth and productivity in our largest cities (funded through the Public Transport Infrastructure Activity Class). The first RNIP was approved in . KiwiRail has made considerable progress over the first two year s of the RNIP, with around million being spent to . However, there is still a significant amount of work required to deliver a resilient and reliable network. Current confirmed RNIP funding is . billion, Without fully funding the programme, the network will Document s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of not be able to be rest ored to a resilient and reliable state and in the longer term may revert to a state of managed decline. In addition to the RNIP, the Government has committed around billion of funding for major improvements to the rail network including the Marsden Point Rail Link project in the New Zealand Upgrade Programme , iREX and others . Funding these projects in an environment of significant cost pressures will remain challenging ,
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGER CONNECTION COSTS High connection costs for new public chargers are a barrier to EV uptake Charging companies like JOLT and ChargeNet have indicated that the cost of conne cting new chargers to the electricity network is materially higher in New Zealand than in Australia and other jurisdictions. Further, they have indicated that there are material differences in those connection costs between EDBs across the country. These companies have indicated that they see the se high costs of connection as a potential barrier to further roll out of public chargers in certain parts of the country. As noted in Charging our future , the draft National EV Charging Strategy released for public consultation today ( March ) the absence of available public EV chargers or even the perceived absence of such could be material barrier to further EV uptake in Aotearoa New Zealand in the near future . While most EV charging happens when EVs are parked for long periods (commonly at home overnight ) a reliable network of public EV chargers has been found to reduce range anxiety among EV owners and prospective owners . While the challenge is a transport matter, the solutions sit primarily under the Energy and Resources portfolio High EV charging connection costs primarily relate to electricity supply and grid connection issues. MBIE is the lead agency for policy matters relating to energy and electricity, reporting to the Minister of Energy and Resources. Officials at Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport do not have any direct lever s at our disposal to directly influence outcomes in the electricity sector. We will nonetheless continue to encourage our colleagues in other agencies to exercise the levers at their disposal to influence change in this area. and specifically with independent regulators . The Electricity Authority is responsible for distribution pricing guidance for EDBs, including how revenue should be recovered from consumers across time. Current guidance states that EDBs should design pricing that reflects underlying costs or expected future investment to reliev e congestion. . The Commerce Commission sets the maximum revenue a regulated EDB can earn from its regulatory asset base. EV charger connections are not included in that regulatory asset base, so the connection charges are not regulated, and are currently costrecovered through a user pays model. The Commission does impose transparency requirements: EDBs are required to publish their pricing s ()(ba)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of methodology annually and to set out their policy for how contributions towards network costs from customers (capital c ontributions) are determined. MBIE suggests three options to address connection costs. We recommend working with other Ministers to ensure agencies maintain focus on progress The Minister of Energy and Resources holds the policy levers in that portfolio, including over whether to pursue additional funding for E ECA. The relevant MBIE officials work under the direction of the Minister of Energy and Resources. s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of One potential way to ensure the independent regulators maintain focus on EV charging is via the letter s of expectation that relevant Ministers set for Crown entities. The Minister of Energy and Resources is responsible for the letter of expectation for the Electricity Authority , while the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs is responsible for the letter of expectati on for the Commerce Commission.
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(b)(ii) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Rail Investment in Auckland Budget included million to complete Aucklands rail network rebuild and an additional investment of . million to support KiwiRail to carry out further critical work on rail assets on the network in Auckland. This includes upgrading retaining walls, points equipment, sleepers and tunnels, replacing culverts, strengthening bridges and improving drainage. The combined investment will ensure the network has improved reliability and efficiency and will also help ready the network in time for the opening of the CRL. As part of MROM,
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(b)(ii), s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of March Hon Michael Wood M inister of Transport AUCKLAND TRANSPORT ALIGNMENT PROJECT (ATAP) IMPLEMENTATION REPORT JULY DECEMBER Purpose This report updates you on how the Auckland Transport Alignment Project (ATAP) programme has progressed over the period July to December . Key points This reporting period has seen a continuation of some key challenges from the previous period. Overall, the first months of the ATAP period has been characterised by Covidrelated delays, cost escalation, pressure on revenue, and funding uncertainty. Some systemic issues have also come to the fore including the renewals required by the Auckland rail network, bus driver shortages and a backlog in Auckland Transports asset renewals. Agencies are carefully managing their work programmes as a result, and the capital programme has been rephased meaning that the ATAP programme will take longer to deliver than originally planned. Capital expenditure for the rephased ATAP programme was at per cent of planned expenditure in the July t o December period. Operational expenditure was at per cent of planned expenditure. Despite the challenges, several key delivery milestones were met this period. These include: the opening of the Manukau Harbour active mode bridge; progress on construction of the interim Northwest Bus Improvements; Matakana Link Road improvements; completion of the Westhaven to CBD Cycleway ; and the completion of the tunnel boring works for City Rail Link. Road deaths decreased by nine per cent in Auckland in the year to December , compared to per cent nationally. This partly reflects the first phase of the Safe Speeds Programme. The shortage of bus drivers has lessened, although an additional drivers were still required in Auckland as at December . Pay increases, reduction of services and recent immigration changes will help ease operational pressures. The aim is for increased recruitment ahead of the FIFA Womens World Cup and upcoming rail disruptions. Document OC RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Half price fares are supporting public transport patronage recovery, however the bus driver shortage and resulting cancellations, the rail disruptions , the lack of international students and changing customer behaviour are keeping patronage well below preC ovid levels. The reporting period concluded before the recent cyclone and Auckland flooding. Rebui ld in Auckland and nationally will be a key priority for the ATAP agencies and will likely to put further pressure on the delivery of the current ATAP programme. The programme is set for review in the GovernmentAuckland Council Tmaki Makaurau Transport Plan. This integrated plan will consider the longer term needs of the transport system and an indicative year and detailed year programme. It will include consideration of the nature of the rebuild in Auckland. Recommendations We recommend you: note the content of this report share this report with the Minister of Finance in his capacity as ATAP Sponsor Yes No
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(b)(ii), s ()(g)(i) s ()(b)(ii), s ()(g)(i) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(b)(ii) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of . Metro passenger rail Like rail freight, metro rail is also subject to multiple budget and planning related processes, which are summarised in the table below.
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(ba)(i) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Transport stakeholder updates Stakeholder Update Bus and Coach Association (BCA)
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv)
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Project: Budget
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Revenue Project: Fleetwide t ransition to the Road User Charges system The Ministry and NZTA have been working together on the improvements needed to the RUC system to initiate the transition in .
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Updates on the Government Quarterly Plan for Approval Update Required Action Delivery Update Please provide your progress update for this action Delivery Status A draft Cabinet paper has been provided to the Minister of Transport along with a summary of submissions and an Regulatory Impact Assessment. Officials are continuing to work on the final Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits . Probable The Land Transport (Drug Driving) Amendment Bill is currently before the Transport and Infrastructure Select Committee. Completed
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of . Proactive Releases Due to Office Title planned for release Friday August Proactive release of Land Transport (Drug Driving) Amendment Bill This briefing will seek your approval to release a collection of Cabinet material related to the Land Transport (Drug Driving) Amendment Bill. Monday September Wednesday September Proactive Release of August Briefing Titles This proactive release briefing (OC refers) will seek your approval for all transport agencies to release their August list of briefing titles provided to yourself and Minister Doocey. Monday September Wednesday September Proactive Release of July Weekly Reports This proactive release briefing (OC refers) will seek your approval to release all Weekly R eports for July provided to yourself and Minister Doocey. Monday September TBC Proactive release of advice on parking, towage, and storage fees review This briefing will seek your approval to release the poli cy papers, final Cabinet materials, and the targeted consultation document for the above review. TBC TBC Proactive release of advice on the new Speed Rule This briefing will seek your approval to release all of the policy papers and the final Cabinet material related to the Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits . TBC
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Cabinet Economic Policy Committee
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of NEW ZEALAND RAIL PLAN PROGRESS, PRIORITIES, COST PRESSURES, AND NEXT STEPS Background The Rail Plan articulates the long term strategy for rail The first New Zealand Rail Plan (Rail Plan) was pu blished in April and is part of the new planning and funding framework for rail (appendix refers ). The Rail Plan represents progress from a largely ad hoc annual fundin g model to a more coherent and stable investment model. Under this model, invest ments are made in the context of wider network needs and priorities within a funding envelope. The Rail Plans highest priority was to achieve a resilient and reliable rail network , with strategic investment priorities of investing in the : . national rail network to restore rail freight and provide a platform for future investments for growth , and . metropolitan rail network s to support growth and productivity in our largest cities. Whereas the Rail Plan sets out the long term strategic direction for rail, the Government Policy Statement on Land Transport (GPS) sets the strategic direction over the next years for the entire land transport system. The GPS is informed by the Rail Plan where appropriate. The Rail Network Investment Programme (RNIP) identifies all rail activities to be funded through the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) over the next three years. It is prepa red by KiwiRail and must consider the GPS (and hence the Rail Plan to the degree it has informed the GPS). While the RNIP focuses on a three year timeframe, this is the funded portion of a longer continuous ten year programme of maintenance, renewals and i nvestment. To manage pressures on the NLTF, the government has topped up the NLTF and limited direct NLTF investment in the RNIP to between million and million. The government also introduced a Track User Charge (TUC), which is paid into the NLTF in recognition of the wear out cost from rail freight operation on the network , similar to the Road User Charge. Approval of the RNIP rests with the Minister of Transport, not the Waka Kotahi Board. The first RNIP was approved in and set out plann ed network maintenance, management renewal and improvement on the rail network until . The RNIP is currently under development and is expected to be submitted to you in April ahead of its statutory approval deadline in June .
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Programme : Decarbonising Transport SRO Bryn Gandy Ph: Sep Dec Jan Mar Apr Jun JulSep
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE BUDGET SENSITIVE Page of May OC Hon Kiri Allan Action required by: Associate Minister of Transport Friday, May cc Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport DRAFT STATEMENTS OF PERFORMANCE EXPEC TATIONS OMNIBUS MARITIME NEW ZEALAND AND CIVIL AVIATION AUTHORITY Purpose This briefing provides advice on the draft Statement of Performance Expectations (SPEs) for Maritime New Zealand (MNZ) , as well as he Civil Aviation Authoritys (CAAs) draft SPE for and draft Statement of Intent (SoI) . Key points As Responsible Minister for MNZ and CAA, you have an important role to play in setting expectations for the entities and influencing their public accountability documents, including the : oSPE which enables you, and the House of Representatives, to participate in the process of sett ng annual performance expectations for the entity; and oSoI which set s out the strategic intentions of the entity for a period of four years . On May , y ou received MNZ and CAAs draft SPEs , and CAAs draft SoI . Te Manat Waka notes that a new SoI was expected next year , but CAA has prepared it to reflect significant changes to its operati ng context , such as the enactment of the Civil Aviation Act which will impact its work programme in . Te Manat Waka has reviewed the draft SPEs , and CAAs draft SoI , to ensure the documents meet statutory requirements, particularly the Crown Entities Act , and other requirements including good practice guidance by the Treasury and central agencies. Te Manat Waka is largely comfortable with the documents but note s: oMNZs draft SPE did not include any financial information . It has indicated that it will provide this to you by May . oCAAs Enabling Drone Integration (EDI) work programme has not been included in either its SPE or SoI , as Cabinet has not approved the Cabinet paper Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT BUDGET SENSITIVE
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(ba)(i) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Lower North Island Rail Integrated Mobility (LNIRIM) Programme update The Ministry joined the LNIRIM Governance Group meeting last week which provided an update on how the programme is progressing. Key updates were: The Governance Group noted that the programme has successfully reached several key milestones this month, including: The programme funding agreement being signed by all relevant stakeholders ensuring full support and alignment. This has enabled KiwiRail to commence work on the programme. The LNIRIM Rolling Stock Design, Build, and Maintenance Request f or Proposal (RfP) has been released The prog ramme is on schedule to select the preferred supplier and award the contract by mid. The most critical risk to the programme is the delivery of the programme dependencies as outlined in the Detailed Business Case, such as the Wellington Metro Upgrade Programme IV substation improvements. We intend to continue to provide you with updates following these monthly Governance Group meetings.
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f) (iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv)
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Board Appointments Civil Aviation Authority Induction planning for new members is underway. Maritime New Zealand The call for nominations for Maritime New Zealand is currently underway, with the publicly listed advert available here: https:www.boardappointments.co.nzVacancies . Letters seeking nominations from New Zealand First, ACT and National Party colleagues will be sent by Minister Dooceys Office on Thursday August . The deadline for applications is Wednesday September . New Zealand Transport Agency Induction planning for new members is underway. Independent Review Function Civil Aviation Act This role will be publicly listed here by Friday August : https:www.boardappointments.co.nzVacancies . City Rail Link Limited This briefing is now with your Office for consideration.
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Actions from Transport Officials Meeting Meeting with the Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) Monday August Due Com plete Com plete Vehicle Safety
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Ongoing actions from transport officials meeting Officials meeting Action Due July Aviation Complete July Aviation Officials to provide further advice on aligning the New Zealand regime with Australia. Complete July Auckland Complete August NZTA to lead supported by the Ministry August Complete August Civil Aviation Implementation Officials to consult on three options for cost recovery and amount to be recovered. Draft Cabinet paper provided for your feedback on Thursday August August RUC admin fee Officials to provide draft letter to NZTA Board. Friday August August Speed Rule Officials to provide advice on implementation timeframes. Week ending Friday August
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT Recommendations provided to Sponsoring Ministers on the second round of appointments to the ALR Board Advice on legislative pathway for Auckland Light Rail Hamilton to Auckland Intercity Connectivity Indicative Business Case completed. Land use and transport integration study completed Programme : Transit SRO Brent Johnston Ph:
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s (a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Ministerial priorities Safety Project: Speed limits We have provided you with a draft Cabinet paper, Summary of Submissions and Regulatory Impact Assessment. Process Dates Briefing to Minister on outcome of consultation Complete Draft Cabinet paper, final Regulatory Impact Assessment and final Summary of Submissions to Minister Complete Ministerial and departmental consultation September Cabinet paper lodged Thursday September Cabinet paper speaking points and draft press release to Minister Friday September Draft Rule to your Office for consideration Friday September Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Wednesday September Cabinet confirmation of ECO decisions Monday September Final Rule to Minister for signing After Cabinet, on Monday September New Rule in force Late October ( days after notification in the NZ Gazette)
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv)
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Recommendations We recommend you: Note the significant progress to and comm itted investments under the Rail Plan Agree that the highest rail priority for government, as expressed in the Rail Plan , remains investing in: the national rail network to restore rail freight and provide a platform for future investments for growth , and the metropolitan rail networks to support growth and productivity in our largest cities
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv)
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT ASSOCIATE MINISTER OR TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES Programme : Other Key Initiatives Sep Dec Jan Mar Apr Jun Jul Sep
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSI FIED Page of You have choices about when and how to intervene There does not appear to be a good reason to engage wi th Cabinet until we have received cost estimates in JuneJuly , which will provide a realistic picture of the actual cost of LGWM. This may also be a sensible point to provide clarity to the partners on the timing of Government decisions, and what ( if any) decisions the Government intends to make before the election.
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv), s ()(j) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv), s ()(b)(ii) s ()(f)(iv)
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv), s ()(j) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Corridor specific legislation for the Northland Roads of National Significance Bus driver shortage update August
s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv), s ()(b)(ii) s ()(f)(iv)
s ()(g)(i) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of March OC Hon Simeon Brown Action required by: Minister of Transport Monday, March APPROACH TO THE NEW SPEED RULE Purpose Seek your approval to our proposed approach for the new Land Transport R ule for setting speed limits. We would appreciate your feedback on whether these changes align with you r policy intent as soon as possible to meet the timelines for the rapid development of the new Rule. Key p oints The attached table provides more detail on how the rule could implement your policy direction Cabinet has agreed to the broad policy intent of the new Land Transport Rule for setting speed limits (the new Rule) CAB MIN refers . This briefing includes a table that provides more detail on how the policy objectives can be delivered through the new Rule. Some main points of interest are discussed below. The table provides more detail on how we recommend to implement your key changes, including: orequiring consistent cost benefit analysis (CBA) in the new R ule ostrengthened consultation requirements orequiring variable speed limits to be introduced on roads outside school gates during drop off and pick up off times, including allowing for static variable speed limit signs oreversing speed limits in urban areas and on state highways reduced since , unless they meet certain criteria . There are also a number of other changes we recommend are included in the new R ule We note there are limitations to the use of CBAs for making decisions on speed management changes. For example, initial analysis of the impacts of increasing speed limits on expressways to kmh can produce negative Benefit Cost Ratios (BCRs) , due to the modelled increase s in speed leading to modelled increased crashes . Therefore, we do not consider CBAs should be the sole decision making RFXPHQW PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of tool. Rather, the CBA should be considered alongside consultation feedback when making decisions on speed limit changes. We also do not recommend CBA is used when setting a speed limit on a new road as a CBA is generally used to a measure a change. Given the limitations of CBA as a decision making tool w e also recommend the new Rule introduce s a Ministerial Speed D irection as a tool to direct RCA s on where the Government would like to see speed changes targeted . This would allow you , and your colleagues to consider the types of roads you want to target and th e pace of change for RCAs. This will be important to consider as part of the overall new road safety objectives document and the level of DSI reduction you wish to achieve . We could provide you with further advice on how you might like to set this Ministerial Speed Direction , alongside progressing drafting of the new Rule. We suggest further consideration is given to whether the Government continues to target the highest volume routes that were previously being targeted to achieve greatest modelled DSI reduction. Often this meant targeting long straight non divided state highways where operating speeds were much higher than NZTAs recommend safe and appropriate speed limit. As these roads were seeking the greatest reduction in operating speeds they often are the most controversial. Alternatively, you may prefer RCAs to focus on roads that are likely to have higher public and road user acceptability as operating speeds are already lower and have greater alignment with the proposed safe speed. For example , windy roads where speed s are already lower. We also suggest consideration is given to whether the NZ Transport Agency Waka Kotahi (NZTA) should review the safe and appropriate speed ranges it currently provides in its guidance , to better integrate safety with mobility and public acceptance . Alternatively, the new Rule could outline speed limit classifications for specific locations and circumstances (taking into account the use and function of the road) . This is discussed in the attached table and we have provided examples of how Victoria classifies roads and the suggested speed limits it provides in the annex . To deliver on the Coalition Governments commitment to reverse speed limits, we are seek ing your views on what will amount to strong evidence to retain the lower speed limits . We would like to test your thoughts on these criteria , which are discussed further in the attached table. The focus to has been on reversing speed limit reductions on urban roads and state highways. We have provided a recommendation below to get a steer from you as to whether you inte nd for rural roads to be captured by this too. If so, we recommend rural roads are considered against the same criteria. The proposals in the table would involve reinstating some of the parts of the Rule revoked under the December amendment Firstly, w e propose the Rule re introduces the three yearly speed management plan process as the mechanism for changing speed limits. Speed management plans are a mechanism for identifying and consulting on targeted speed limit changes and safety infrastructure as a package over a three year period, rather than making ad hoc proposals on an ongoing basis. This improves efficiency and provides more predictability for planning and funding purposes . However, we suggest the new Ministerial Speed Direction tool is introduced to enable the Government to set the PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of pace , scale and focus o f speed limit changes as noted above. We recommend the Rule require RCAs speed management plans to outline how they are consistent with the Ministerial Speed Direction. Secondly, we propose to reintroduce a target for having all speed limits on roads outside the school gate reduced at pick up and drop off times. Reducing speed limits around schools has been one of the most widely supported elements of the current Rule. In addition, consistency with having variable speed limits outside schools will help improve road user compliance. We recommend you set a target of all roads outside school gates to be treated with variable speed limits by December . The attached table also outlines some additional matters that we are still working through , and some trade offs for you to consider. We note further issues for consideration are likely to arise as we work through the drafting process with the NZTA . We will keep you on these through either the Weekly Report or briefings for more substantive issues. We recommend consulting on opportunities to streamline processes and reduce costs under the new rule While focusing on the policy objectives outlined in your recent Cabinet paper, reviewing the Rule has highlighted opportunities to streamline and simplify the process. We propose to include two other issues in the consultation document for feedback , which we will take into account before providing final advice to you . The first issue is whether to continue with the Speed Management Committee (the Committee) . As discussed at our January meeting, the Committees role is to independently review NZTAs speed management plan and provide oversight of the information and guidance NZTA provides RCAs . To , the Committee has reviewed NZTAs interim State highway speed management plan , but has not reviewed the guidance as the Committee was not established at the time the guidance was . NZTA has raise d with us the cost s of training and maintaining the Committee for what is a relatively small amount of work , noting the independence of the Director of Land Transport who certifies the plans. If this is removed , we may need to consider alternative assurance mechanisms on NZTAs guidance, for example requiring Ministerial approval. This approach could help to ensure alignment with Government direction. The second issue is the role of Regional Transport Committees under the Rule . Regional speed management p lans are designed to support regional consistency of speed limits . Under the process, the intent is for RCA s to develop and consul t on their speed management plan s, then submit them to a Regional Transport Committee for consolidation into one regional speed management plan. NZTA has received one regional plan for certification from a unitary authority. NZTA notes that while some regional councils have tried to co ordinate plans, progress has been slow due to regional council capacity and difficulty reaching alignment with other RCAs. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of We could consider whether there is a simpler way to ensure regional consistency, particularly on boundary roads between different RCAs. For example , requiring RCAs to consult with neighbouring RCAs . To , we have not discussed reversing speed limit reductions on rural roads that arent state highways. We anticipate that you would like these to be captured too. We recommend these are treated under the same reversal criteria, with the strong evidenc e to support the reduced speed criteria aligning with that for state highways. Next steps We will continue to work with NZTA on the draft new Rule, and supporting documentation (public consultation document, interim Regulatory Impact Statement and Cabinet paper). We are aiming to provide this material to you by Wednesday April , for Ministerial, coalition and departmental consultation. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Rural road with developed abutting land (and roads that pass through small rural settlement with sparsely builtup development) kmh Roads with an overall low alignment andor cross section standard, high crash risk or high crash rate kmh Unsealed road Determined after a thorough assessment of the road environment has been conducted Low crash risk, divided arterial road or freeway motorway tollway with a design speed of kmh kmh Other sealed roads kmh PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA April OC Hon Simeon Brown Action required by: Minister of Transport Thursday, May THE NEW SETTING OF SPEED LIMITS RULE: PUBLIC CONSULTATION Purpose Provide you with a draft Cabinet paper that seek s agreement to proceed to public consultation on the draft Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limit s . Following Ministerial and departmental consultation , the Cabinet paper needs to be lodged by am , Thursday May for consideration at the Economic Policy Committee on Wednesday May . Key p oints We have prepared a draft Cabinet paper and consultation document on the draft Land Transport Rule: Setting of Speed Limits (the draft Rule) , based on the policy intent outlined in our previous briefing OC and our recent discussion s with you. The draft Cabinet paper and consultation document are attached. We expect to provide you with the draft new Rule by the end of this week ( April ). The interim Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS) will be provided by next Thursday ( April ) . The RI S will not go for Ministerial and departmental consultation, but will be ready for lodgement with the final Cabinet paper. New speed limit classifications Building on our recent discussion with you, we propose to introduce a schedule of speed limit classifications into the draft new Rule. The classifications define the speed limits available for each road type and are drawn from those used in Victoria, Australia. They replace the safe and appropriate speed limits that are referenced in the current Rule and guidance . When considering speed limit changes under the new Rule , Road Controlling Authorities (RCAs) must align the proposed speed limit with in the classification , unless an exception applies (for example, to target high risk intersections) . New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) guidance will be relevant when RCAs are proposing speed limits using the new classifications . RFXPHQW PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
s ()(g)(i) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Table : Documents relating to Cabinet approval to introduce the Bill for proactive release
s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of Focus areas for Ministers The report on pages three and four contains a section articulating focus areas for Ministers, and it highlights items requiring passage through Cabinet or ministerial level support such as. Suggested talking point You may wish to provide guidance as to the relative priority of these focus areas. Road to Zero Forecast Trajectory s ()(f)(iv) s (d) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of Road Safety Investment Delivery Review The report contains an overview of the progress being made in the addressing the agreed actions resulting from the Review conducted by Martin Jenkins. Road to Zero Action s The report contains information pertaining to the delivery of each of th e current Road to Zero Action Plan actions , grouped around each of the Road to Zero focus areas . This includes key projects and activities, the required outputs, quarterly highlights, and risks , challenges, and mitigations for each acti on. Road to Zero Infographic The meeting pack contains an infographic that articulates progress that h as been achieved in the last quarter on activit ies linked to the five Road to Zero focus areas which upon your approval is made publicly available. Agenda item : General business This item provides a chance for any general business to be raised. There is nothing we wish to bring to your attention for this ite m
s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of OIA BRIEFING March Hon Michael Wood Ac tion required by: Minister of Transport Wednesday, April OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT REQUEST FROM REGARDING CORRESPONDENCE WITH LOCAL COUNCILS RELATING TO THE GOVERNMENT POLICY STATEMENT Purpose Seek your agreement to the proposed response to an Official Information Act request. Name of Requester Request Under the Official Information Act , I wish to seek all correspondence that the Minister for Transport has sent to, andor received from, local councils, regarding the Government Policy Statement which is currently being developed. Statutory deadline Wednesday, April Risks The requester may be unsatisfied with the response as there is no information being released There may be risk of m edia interest in this OIA due to the recent media interest in the GPS . There may be a risk that the requestor believes the Minister is not considering regional views around the GPS . Document OC s ()(a) s ()(a) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Recommendations We recommend you: consider the proposed response to the request under the Official Information Act sign the attached letter to Yes No
s ()(g)(i) s ()(b)(ii) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Biographies Carrie Hurihanganui, Chief Executive, Auckland Airport Carrie Hurihanganui has been Chief Executive of Auckland Airport since February . Prior to joining Auckland Airport, Carrie was Chief Operating Officer at Air New Zealand.
s ()(g)(i) s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
s ()(g)(i) s ()(g)(i)
s ()(g)(i) s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of Appendix One: Takaanini Level Crossing Programme Maps
s ()(g)(i) s ()(g)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED
s ()(g)(i) s ()(g)(i) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of ANNEX RAIL FUNDING SNAPSHOT
s ()(h) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Appendix : ATAP Outcomes reporting ATAP O utcomes reporting . A set of key indicators were identified in the ATAP Outcomes Framework to monitor how the ATAP package of investments is contributing to agreed outcomes. These were developed by a cross agency group and endorsed by the ATAP Governance Group in May (OC refers). Public transport patronage . Public t ransport patronage has increased to . million boarding for the year ending December , but patronage remains below December levels.
s ()(j) s ()(g)(i) s ()(b)(ii) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of
s ()(j) s ()(j) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT RESTRICTED Cost ofliving Implications There are no cost ofliving implications associated with this paper as it is addressing a negotiating mandate. Financial Implications There are no financial implications associated with this paper. Implementation of measures adopted by the IMO would require the subsequent development of Rules and Regulations which may be subject to a National I nterest Assessment . This would include further analysis on the financial implications of agreeing to the final measure. Legislative Implications There are no legislative implications arising from the proposal in this paper . Regulatory Impact Statement A Regulatory Impact Analysis is not required for this paper. Implementation of measures adopted by the IMO would require the subsequent development of transport regulation that may be subject to an Impact Analysis. Climate Implications of Policy Assessment A Climate Implications of Policy Assessment is not required for this paper. However, implementation of measures adopted by the IMO may be subject to a Climate Implications of Policy Assessment. Population Implications There are no population implications associated with the proposal in this paper. Human Rights There are no inconsistencies with the Human Rights Act or the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act . Consultation The following agencies were consulted on the contents of this paper: the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, the Treasury, Ministry for the Environment, Maritime New Zealand, Ministry for Primary Industries. The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet has been informed. Communications and Proactive Release No communications are planned on this proposal as it relates to upcoming negotiations. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT RESTRICTED I propose to release this paper proactively subject to appropriate redactions , after the conclusion of the negotiations . Recommendations The Associate Minister for Transport recommends that the Committee: note that New Zealand is participating in International Maritime Organization (IMO) negotiations for the adoption of measures to meet agreed GHG targets for international shipping. note that the measures will include an economic emissions pricing mechanism and a technical element (fuel emissions intensity standard) . note that the IMO plans for the measures to be finalised in late with entry into force by . note that future IMO GHG regulations will most likely be incorporated into Annex VI of the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL) and be binding for New Zealand unless we reserve our position . note that the negotiations at the IMO will have wider implications for government with potential impacts for trade, New Zealands economy , our international relationships , and impacts for our region. Principles for New Zealands engagement at the IMO Powers to act Delegations within bounds of Cabinet guidance s ()(j) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT RESTRICTED authorise the Associate Minister of Transport, the Minister for Climate Change, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, and the Minister of Trade to take any final decisions on issues in the negotiations . Delegations outside bounds of Cabinet guidance note that should the negotiations move outside the bounds of existing Cabinet decisions, any final decisions with regards to New Zealands position would, where possible, be considered by Cabinet . note where there are fast moving developments in the negotiations and time constraints, it may not be possible to convene Cabinet to take final decisions . authorise in such situations, the Prime Minister, the Minister of Finance, the Associate Minister of Transport, the Minister for Climate Change, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, and the Minister of Trade, to take together any final decisions on other issues in the negotiations . Next steps invite the Associate Minister of Transport to report back to ECO on the outcomes of the October IMO negotiations .
s ()(j) s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of The funding model for the Fullers Waiheke Island ferry service changed in from per passenger reimbursement to a flat funding arrangement In , Te Manat Waka renegotiated the agreement with Fullers to introduce flat funding arrangements for the Waiheke ferry service. A term of the SuperGold Funding Agreement (the Agreement) is that Fullers would receive a payment of one twelfth of the total cap each month to prevent it from reaching its cap b efore the end of the financial year. Other exempt services have remained subject to a bulk funding model tied to reimbursement per fare. s ()(j) s ()(j) s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of We have consulted with Waka Kotahi and AT s ()(j) s ()(g)(i) s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE Page of Next steps Annex one and two withheld under Section ()(j) s ()(j) s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of March OC Hon Kiri Allan Action required by: Associate Minister of Transport Wednesday, March cc Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport PROACTIVE RELEASE OF REGULATORY SYSTEMS (TRANSPORT) AMENDMENT BILL NO CABINET PAPER POLICY APPROVALS Purpose This briefing seeks your approval to proactively publish the following papers in relation to the Regulatory Systems (Transport) Amendment Bill No : Cover Briefing, titled Regulatory Systems (Transport) Amendment Bill No. Policy Approval (OC) Cabinet Paper, titled Regulatory Systems (Transport) Amendment Bill Policy Approval Talking points to the Cabinet paper Cabinet Minute, referenced CABMIN Cabinet Economic Development Committee Minute, referenced DEVMIN Appendix One to the Cabinet paper, referenced Summary of land proposals and consultation feedback Appendix Two to the Cabinet paper, referenced Summary of maritime proposals and consultation feedback Appendix Three to the Cabinet paper, referenced Regulatory Impact Statement Director of Land Transport powers during emergency and time critical events Appendix Four to the Cabinet paper, referenced Regulatory Impact Statement Maritime (Offences) Regulations and Marine Protection (Offences) Regulations These documents will be on the Ministry of Transport website. Number of papers Deadline March Risks There are minimal risks associated with the release of this information. The previous Cabinet paper package seeking approval to publicly consult has already been proactively released, and minimal changes to policy proposals occurred following consultation. Proposed redactions to the listed papers are aimed at protecting the privacy of an individual, or are subject to further decision by Cabinet on timing to progress this work. Document RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Recommendations We recommend you: note that this paper is delayed in being proactively released, and therefore has not met the timeliness required by Cabinet Office circular () approve the Ministry of Transport publishing documents with redactions as marked on the Ministrys website Yes No
s ()(j) s ()(j) s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of s ()(j) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of Annex One: Fare costs for Auckland ferry services Auckland Contracted ferry services Auckland contractor ferry fares information is presented in Table . Note these are the full prices (not the half price fares which are currently in effect until June ). Table : Fares for Auckland contracted ferry services Service Adult fare Child fare Accessible fare Tertiary fare Monthly pass Cash AT HOP Cash AT HOP Inner Harbour Services: Bayswater, Birkenhead, Devonport and Northcote Pt. . . . . . . . Mid Harbour Services: West Harbour, Beach Haven, Half Moon Bay and Hobsonville . . . . . . . Outer Harbour Services: Gulf Harbour and Pine Harbour . . . . . . . Rakino Bespoke set of fares on a largely commercial basis. Service is not co funded by Waka Kotahi. Adult single fare is ., child single fare is . Note: Inner Harbour Services are subject to a cap. All services, excluding Rakino, attract a off peak discount . Exempt ferry services Fullers Waiheke service p assenger fares can be seen in Table overleaf . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of Table : Fullers Waiheke service passenger fares Fare Product Adult Child Tertiary AT HOP Adult AT HOP Child Single Trip . . NA . . Return . . NA NA NA Waiheke Return Deal . NA NA NA NA Waiheke Return Family ( adults children) . NA NA NA NA Monthly Pass . . . . NA trip ticket . . NA NA NA Flexipass ( trip ticket) . . . NA NA Note: Under the Quality Partner ship Agreement between Auckland Transport and Fullers, Auckland Transport are subsidising the Fullers monthly pass fare by to align with Auckland Transports outer harbour services monthly pass. SeaLink operate an exempt vehicular ferry service from Half M oon B ay to Kennedy Point on Waiheke. Fare prices for this service are subject to variable pricing depending on demand. The Price for an adult single ticket varies between . and .. Unlike other ferry services, users can pre book a ticket on a trip .
s ()(j), s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(j), s ()(f)(iv) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA Page of Project: KiwiRail Rail freight Network Monday September
safety audit closer to the time.
safety improvements to be delivered as part of
safety outcomes of the current Class (driver) and Class (motorcyclist) licensing systems
safetyrelated effects of selected recent changes to the GDLS, including changes to penalties for driver licensing breaches, raising the minimum age, strengthening the practical tests, and the introduction of Competency Based Training and Assessment.
schemes and seeks Cabinet approval of the schemes as proposed by NZTA. Should you
school children spend less time walking or cycling to school
secondary legislation (such as rules, regulations and notices) and standards.
secondary legislation in relation to offences that are inconsistent with the intent of the
secondary legislation in relation to offences under section of the Act is
section () of the LTMA, which:
security, both of which can affect the aviation sector.
services that operate outside of PTOM (exempt and excluded services)
services to smaller centres. In addition, some regional airlines have indicated they are struggling ,
servicesUpper , , , , , , , ,
set out a structure under which officials would work together to undertake the project.
sets out the rate of tax, how long it is in place for and the transport projects it will fund.
settings foster competition. Competition encourages airlines to provide passengers with lower
shaping regulatory stewardship mechanisms
shortterm funding arrangements for the rail network through the annual Budget process, which are inadequate for a longterm network asset.
simplify and standardise the driver licensing system
simplifying the list of vehicles exempt from paying RUC
six agency Chief Executives who sit on the Border Executive Board (BEB). The other agencies are:
so long as the enforcement authority complies with the security system agreed between the
social and environmental aspects
social costs of . billion.
socialmediatransport.govt.nz
some activities (eg, walking and cycling topics for road improvements). These results are also affected by some classification errors, eg, some of the road impro vement activities where the roads topic was detected with low probability may be incorrect.
some show consistently strong support for mode shift promoting activities and consistent reductions in roading activities and increases in mode shift promoting activities, other regions show higher percentages of roading activities and less mode shift promotin g activities, and less noticeable trends over time. This Regional data can provide insights for the regions to look at patterns over time and provide prompts to review activities when unexpected occur. Comparing prioritisation stages Figure shows how t he percentage of roadingother and mode shift promoting activities (active and public transport) has changed over time, based on the weighted categories separated into two groups those that have been approvedcommitted for funding in the NLTP and those t hat are probablepossible in the NLTP. Over the three GPS periods, the percentage of roadingother and mode shift promoting activities that have been approvedcommitted for funding has increased, while the percentage that is probablepossible has decreased . Across all three periods, roading activities were more likely to be approved for funding than mode shift promoting activities, however, the gap between the two is closing over time. In both types of projects, the percentage approved increased, but this i ncrease was much greater for the activePT activities compared with the roadingother activities.
some vehicle suppliers would have difficulty meeting the proposed implementation dates
source, and it is in the public
specific view. The development of the NAPS has strong buy in from the sector.
speed management has been reallocated from
spending. Exploring efficiency and effectiveness will require a more granular analysis of ke y aspects of implementation and drawing on benefits realisation analysis and ex post investment reviews, which are not yet well embedded in the transport system. Stakeholders identified broad impacts from GPS when reflecting on the complexities and t imeframes of the investment process. However, they were often unable to provide more detailed or specific analyses. As noted earlier, there was a broad heterogeneity of respondents, reflecting different perspectives of central and regional government and s ectors with often diverging priorities with transport funding. This evaluation could bring these different perspectives to bear but did not seek to resolve nor validate them. . Reflections for Value for Money Framework In a new VfM assessment model was developed by Te Manat Waka, which is in the process of being introduced to the sector. The model is intended to support greater emphasis on transparent investment decision making, consistency in assessment approaches, and enhanced reporting on the outcomes achieved by investments. The model acknowledges that cost benefit analysis isnt always feasible and that wider considerations beyond the benefit cost ratio (BCR) should inform transport investment appraisals. It indicates that decision makers sh ould consider the full range of benefits and costs over the whole life of investments and be cognisant of possible future changes and uncertainty so that investments are made in options that perform across a wide range of possible scenarios. As summarised in Figure , when appraising potential VfM of proposed transport investments, the model prompts analysts and decision makers to consider whether: strategic government policy has been translated into identified investment impactsoutcomes business requi rements (technical, operational, and functional) are systematically applied to translate outcomes into output solutions value indicators (including BCRs and non monetised benefits, based on Waka Kotahi guidelines) indicate the investment is a good use of f unds the benefits gap factor (a check against optimism bias, informed by an agencys past performance in successfully delivering benefits) suggests outcomes are achievable, and there is sufficient capacity and capability to deliver, given the complexity o f the investment. Different implementation tools apply for each of the five above elements. The GPS is particularly well suited towards identifying the outcomes sought from transport investment, but the VfM model also flows through into a range of other areas of activity, i ncluding RLTPs (outcomes), procurement (business requirements), IDMF (business requirements), monetised and non monetised benefits (value indicators) and benefits realisation reviews (benefits realisation). Ministry of Transport. . Value for Money Framework Review: Implementation Plan. Wellington: Ministry of Transport. APPENDIX TRENDS OBSERVED IN GPS OUTCOMES MONITORING
stakeholder engagement, and
stakeholders and provide long range principles, strategic objectives, and outcomes. The roles of
stakeholders to inform next GPSGPS closed for
stakeholders, including your Office. This ensures operational agencies can focus on delivering their
standardising requirements for specialtype vehicles and reducing compliance costs
standards for safety, security, and environmental performance. IMO members (including New
statistically significant in our analysis ( pvalue .). The odds of crash invo lvement for drivers with an advanced certificate and a time discount were not statistically significantly different from the odds for drivers without an advanced certificate ( p value .). . We found no evidence that having an advanced driving certificate ( with or without a time discount) was predictive of the drivers odds of being involved in a crash during the first months of having a full licence ( pvalue . for drivers with an advanced certificate and a time discount, and . for drivers with an a dvanced certificate and no time discount). . We analysed the long term relationship between advanced certificates and crash involvements by predicting crashes while on a full licence for all drivers who obtained a full licence between and and who were aged under years old at the time. This model estimated that the odds of crash involvement for drivers with an advanced certificate (with or without a time discount) were not statistically significantly different from the odds of crash involvement f or drivers without advanced certificates ( pvalue . for drivers with an advanced certificate and a time discount, and . for drivers with an advanced certificate and no time discount). Overall, these results indicate no clear relationship between advanced certificate status and crash rates among drivers aged under years old, and suggest that at least some of the differences in crash rates between drivers with and without advanced cert ificates can be accounted for by differences in characteristics of drivers in these two groups. There is evidence that drivers with advanced certificates and no time discount were involved in fewer crashes in the period from to , but it is not cle ar whether this is caused by advanced driver training, or is due to characteristics of drivers who chose to do advanced training but choose not to take a time discount at the restricted stage (or some combination of these effects). Given this, it would b e useful to further investigate the link between advanced driver training and crash rates. If clear evidence of a link can be established, it may be useful to examine whether alternative incentives for uptake of advanced certificates aside from time discou nts at the restricted stage could lead to better safety outcomes. .. Relationships between progression through the driver licensing stages, driver demographics, and crash rates We analysed how progression through the driver licensing stages depends on observ ed driver characteristics (gender, age, and region of residence), and relationships between progression and crash rates. Progression was defined in terms of whether or not drivers had progressed from a learner to a restricted or a full licence in a given p eriod of time. Since the definition of progressing vs non processing drivers at any point in time is arbitrary, for the purpose of analysis we defined a drivers fouryear progression status as whether they remained on a learner licence, progressed to a re stricted licence but had not yet received a full licence, or progressed to a full licence on the fourth anniversary of obtaining their learner licence. For any given cohort of learner drivers, progression occurs gradually over time. Given this, and since the licensing dataset stops at the end of , we can only analyse progression for cohorts of drivers who received their licence in earlier years. Figure shows a snapshot
statutory tolling criteria in section of the LTMA, whether you are satisfied : The Ministry
strategic advice on the policy and regulatory settings for the aviation system. The Ministrys policy
strategic guidance and oversight of the work programme to achieve the safe integration of UAS into New Zealands airspace.
strategy, but the question remains as to whether a dry dock is something that the Government should formally support. We are seeking to undertake a business case process to inform future decision making.
streamlines the funding of transport recovery works in parts of New Zealand affected by Cyclones Gabrielle and Hale and the Auckland flood events. The Order is made under the
streamlining the progression between heavy vehicle licence classes
strengthen driver training and testing.
strengthening New Zealands ability to play a credible role in IMO negotiations on climate change by pushing for global action and improving New Zealands ability to protect its trade and economic interests
strengthening what ID evidence licence applicants need
strong support for lower speed limits around schools and giving RCAs the flexibility to determine how lower speed limits around schools are put in place
strong, evidencebased projects and programmes
subject to Joint Ministers consideration of parameters and a CIPA
submission to the Executive Council, except that the Orders will come into
substantially safer for all.Integrated freight system
successfully manage the project;
summarises public feedback on the Bill and other matters to improve the legislation
supergoldtransport.govt.nz
supplied in Auckland but then transported outside Auckland for commercial distribution
supplied or who is the subject of the information
supply.chaintransport.govt.nz
support economic activity, including maintaining the core transport network and critical supply chain
support inclusive access including enabling all people to access social and economic opportunities, or
support recovery and rebuild works by KiwiRail, with realignment at two sites (Awatoto and Esk Valley).
support repair and recovery works by KiwiRail within the legal rail corridor and outside of those boundaries, with realignment at two sites (Awatoto and Esk Valley).
support repair and recovery works by Waka Kotahi within the legal road boundaries or within m of the legal boundary
support research and development which can benefit drones and a range of other sectors.
support the continuous improvement of the GPS and the transport investment appraisal system to achieve effective transport outcomes.
support the development of an integrated transport system
support the growth of advanced aviation
support the productivity of the commercial driving sector
supporting economic recovery, planning processes, rebuild and recovery of land, infrastructure, people and built and natural environments
supporting faster travel times: Less congestion means that traffic is flowing freer making travel faster for everyone.
supporting the development of identified indicators where data is not yet collected
supporting the uptake of lowcarbon liquid fuels by implementing a sustainable aviation fuel mandate and a sustainable biofuels obligation.
sustainable urban development
system. In July, ICAO will carry out a safety audit of New Zealand s aviation system. The audit will
system. T he NLTF can be used both to maintain a level of service and drive change on the land transport network, while delivering value for money. This is done through applying the Ministrys value for money assessment model in the appraisal and evaluation process and establishing funding ranges for activity classes. Each GPS sets out the priorities for the following year period and is reviewed and every three years. The LTMA gives Waka Kotahi statutory independence to select projects for the National Land Transport Programme ( NLTP) . However, the GPS can set an expectation for Waka Kotahi to consider government programmes and priorities when allocating funding through the NLTP.
take advantage of innovation in vehicle technology, design and use, to ensure it contributed positively to productivity, safety and environmental outcomes
taken all available and reasonable operational and commercial measures to ride out the impact of COVID or adjust the size of their business
taking a broad approach to penalties, including nonenforcement options and healthbased initiatives.
targets against those of other countries
targets for and later years may be set later by regulation.
targets for vehicle importers apply from and will strengthen significantly each year through to . CO
technology service providers.
technology, clarify intent, and reconcile inconsistencies. The remade rules will come
term planning for their area. A transport
that all public transport users, including those who are blind, deafblind or have low vision, can travel independently and safely. The Draft Government Policy Statement on Land Transport must consider accessibility beyond simply the availability of services. . Without a safe, accessible public transport, individuals who are blind, deafblind or have low vision have reduced independence, higher rates of unemployment, limited recreational opportunities, and increased social isolation. . There are many facets to public transport, and each may present accessibility barriers. People with vision loss are disproportionately more reliant on public transport than other New Zealanders. It is essential that they are able to pan journeys, access timetables, locate boarding positions, identify destinations and travel to and from these locations safely and independently. In other cases, audible stopping and destination signals and other passenger information systems are either not installed or not consistently used on buses, trains and at stations when they should be. . The definition and the use of the word Inclusive Access seem tokenistic when the document clearly does not consider the experiences of people who are blind, deafblind, have low vision or other disabilities when accessing public transport. . We believe that the definition of Inclusive Access needs to be more refined. The definition should include people who are blind, deafblind, have low vision or other disabilities. . Blind Low Vision NZ has questons regarding whether current infrastructure spending will affect the Draft Government Policy Statement on Land Transport . a. Does it include the billion in extra infrastructure investment announced by the Government end of last year b. What effects does this have on Draft Government Policy Statement c. Will any projects be brought forward
that the actual funding provided from the Protection of Transport Sector Agency Core Functions appropriation will be the differen ce between forecast expenditure for core functions, and revenue forecast to be received in , up to a specified amount agreed by the Minister of Transport and the Associate Minister of Transport (which will be no more than the total amount of the a ppropriation available) Further financial recommendations for Budget explain that this specified amount should be set by Transport Ministers prior to the finalisation of the entitys Statement of Performance Expectations , and that the setting of the specified amoun t will take into account the latest available information on actual expenditure and revenue for and forecast expenditure and revenue for . Te Manat Waka is working with MNZ and CAA to ascertain what the specified amount for each entity in should be. We will provide you with advice on a recommended amounts by May .
that the offences will be ) on its website, and by emailing stakeholders.
thats better for the environment by reducing the cost of fuelefficient vehicles imported into New Zealand.
the cents per litre reduction to petrol excise duty is extended until midAugust
the percent reduction to legislated rates of road user charges is extended until midSeptember , and
the Accident Compensation Act, particularly section , which covers accidents and injuries, and
the Climate Change Commissions report recommending that internationa l aviation and maritime
the Direction, amended using section () of the CEA, here
the Executive Council and on my recommendation as Minister of Transport.
the GPS (reviewed every three years). For GPS , the strategic priorities were safety, access, environment, and value for money. These priorities form a framework that provides a mechanism to track inputs, outputs, and outcomes annually. However, there is a need to understand more about how the GPS interacts with the transport system, particularly in the mode shift space. The primary focus of the evaluation is on the GPS and NLTF while recognising that for mode shift, other policies, investments, and factors will be important influences. This evaluation, ther efore, seeks to note how the GPS and NLTF interact with them rather than identifying their direct impact on mode shift. This evaluation report evaluates how the changes in the GPS relating to mode shift have been interpreted and implemented at national, Regional, and local levels. It aims to improve our understanding of how the GPS supports mode shift and where improvements can be made to enhance future iterations of the GPS in this area. The key objectives of the evaluation are: Assess the impa ct of the GPS investment and direction regarding the intended benefits of mode shift (as outlined in the GPS) and inter related consequences (intended or unintended). Consider how the impactsfindings from the GPS review translate into the implem entation of GPS and the development of GPS concerning mode shift. Engage with stakeholders to ensure their views are reflected in the findings about what was delivered on mode shift in GPS , any relevant issuesfindings relating to implementi ng GPS and its influence on mode shift, and how GPS could better provide for mode shift. Provide recommendations on how Te Manat Waka (the Ministry of Transport) and Waka Kotahi (the New Zealand Transport Agency) may improve and supplement exist ing data collection and management practices relating to monitoring and evaluating mode shift impact. The methodology was developed around the key purpose of this evaluation to understand how the GPS supports mode shift and where improvements can be made to enhance future iterations. The methodology recognises and explores the limits of the available data and the complex pathways between the GPS and mode shift, seeking to advise how best to empirically observe the influence of the GPS and identify cr itical gaps in knowledge. Our approach involved analysing quantitative and qualitative data additional to those available for annual reporting. It was divided into five phases as follows: orientation and design data gathering and assessment in depth insigh ts analysis and interpretation recommendations for GPS and reporting. The following report presents the five phases of the study, describing how each phase was undertaken and what was found, recommendations, and conclusions. . STUDY PHASES
the Government will fund the remaining of the capital and operational costs from the National Land Transport Fund, bringing its share to NZD. billion over years.
the Governments plan to increase the number of public electric vehicle chargers across New Zealand, with a goal of , charging points by .
the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO)
the Land Transport Act on the advice and with the consent of the
the Minister of Climate Change;
the New Zealand Threat Classification System administered by the Department of Conservation as At Risk and Recovering, Relict, or Naturally Uncommon
the OIA has been noted and no public interest has been identified that would outweigh
the Party carrying out the ramp inspection shall, for the purposes of Article of the Convention, be free to conclude that the requirements under which the certificate or licenses in respect of that aircraft or in respect of the flight crew of that aircraft have been issued or rendered valid, or that the requirements under which that aircraft is operated, are not equal to or above the minimum standards established pursuant to the Convention. . In the event that access for the purpose of undertaking a ramp inspection of an aircraft operated by or on behalf of the airline or airlines of one Party in accordance with paragraph is denied by the representative of that airline or airlines, the other Party shall be free to infer that serious concerns of the type referred to in paragraph arise and draw the conclusions referred in that paragraph.
the Privacy Act which safeguards the privacy of individuals, data storage and management, and other uses of personal information. The Privacy Act is currently under revision and is to be replaced by the Privacy Bill.
the Responsible Minis ter that outlines success factors sought from the entity. Progress against
the South Auckland project and those new projects programmes to be funded from the
the ability of people to use Total Mobility services in different regions and how this may impact disabled people travelling to different regions that deliver the services under the scheme.
the aviation sector including Airways, the Civil Aviation Authority and Unmanned Aerial Vehicle New Zealand (UAVNZ) which represents many interests in the sector
the best way to successfully deliver the proposal.
the costsharing agreement
the course of drafting secondary legislation in relation to offences that are inconsistent
the current state of the rail network, which is facing a state of managed decline due to longterm underinvestment, and
the , time and duration of your visit to the site
the decisions we take on transport investments will affect the location of economic activity in New Zealand
the delivery and implementation of GPS
the development of the Orders in Council, in line with the above decisions.
the draft amendment Rule did not exempt some vehicles from the requirement to have ESC fitted
the end dates for the temporary transport measures. It has been announced:
the end of , New Zealand has a world class regulatory environment that allows rapid iteration
the fact that we can raise more revenue does not mean we should, and
the focus for the next stage of work.
the fuel consumption of the vehicles.
the governments ability to commit funding and financing over to years, and
the implementation dates were based on the of first registration
the importance of raising public awareness about the risks of drugimpaired driving
the information is to be used in a way that will not identify you, or it is to be used for statistical or research purposes and will not be in a way that will identify you.
the interviewer returning shortly after the assigned travel days to interview people about their travel
the interviewer returning to gather additional information on their travel as well as general information.
the interviewer returns shortly after the assigned travel days to interview people about their travel
the labour market in the public transport bus sector
the lack of a financial assurance requirement for the costs of containing oil well spills
the largest bulk export port, while Northport (Whangrei) is the largest bulk import port.
the low level of assurance required for cleanup and compensation, and
the maritime regulator and national agency responsible for marine oil pollution spill preparedness
the maximum rate of regional fuel tax and how this could be amended
the new offence was proven to have been committed in court within months of the charge outcome for the first prosecution for the year reoffending measure for all AIO and matched offen ders, reoffending is only counted if: the new offence occurred within years of the charge outcome for the first prosecution AND the new offence was proven to have been committed in court within years and months of the charge outcome for the first prosecution. United Kingdom Ministry of Justice (). Reoffending of adults: new measures of reoffending .
the next version of the paper. The recommendations in the draft Cabinet paper include
the number of vehicles they own, and
the pages you accessed and the documents you downloaded
the potential for new or innovative funding mechanisms.
the potential impact of drones on aspirational drone uses, such as parcel delivery, and
the premature deaths of more than , adult New Zealanders,
the process for implementing the tax
the proposed introduction dates for used vehicles should be changed to avoid the implementation falling in the middle of a holiday period.
the protection of safety information based on Just Culture principles
the provision of meteorological services in New Zealand, through weather forecasts and warnings
the reasons for withholding it.
the revenue collected from rail customers, and
the scope of the financial assurance if an installation is decommissioned or abandoned.
the search terms you used
the significant medium to longterm strategic and resilience value
the standard rates of road user charges will apply on February
the supply of Total Mobility services, including the availability of specialist wheelchair accessible vehicles and drivers, and options to increase service supply if needed
the tagged capital contingency being made available when required;
the type of browser you used
the vehicles we use for public transport will be more comfortable
the views of key stakeholders.
the wider improvements programme.How does it work
there will be a wider range of transport providers.
these factors is assessed as part of our monitoring advice .
these with involvement from transport agencies and SOEs, and the NZ Police depending on the subject. Regulations must be approved by Cabinet. Transport instruments help support a more flexible regulator system Transport instruments improve the flexibility of the rule making process by having more customised consultation requirements, meaning that changes that only affect a small number of transport users can be progressed quickly. Transport instruments can also be more easily amended in response to technological innovation. Transport instruments are outlined in a rule made by you as Minister of Transport, with the design and management delegated to a specified official (such as the Director of the relevant transport agency). For example, several transport instruments now exis t in Maritime legislation, with more planned in other modes as part of work on secondary legislation. The Civil Aviation Act (which comes into force in ) also empowers the Minister to enable the creation of a transport instrument. The regulatory system, through legislation, rules, and regulation implements requirements under international conventions and agreements There are some international transport related agreements. However, only a small number require regular updates of our regulatory system. Crown monitoring, assurance, and oversight You have a role in appointing Board members to the transport agencies, setting their expectations and monitoring their performance. Crown entity monitoring and oversight is a key mechanism to deliver your priorities The Ministry and the transport Crown entities work collaboratively to develop and deliver a multi year programme of work which will progress your priorities and the delivery of transport outcomes, and other priority actions to maintain and renew the system . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT THE FIVE TRANSPORT LEVERS
they give effect to the strategic priorities
those new projectsprogrammes to be funded from the reallocated Northern Pathway
threats to the sector. We also work with other agencies on related matters such as fuel and energy
three years (. billion), increasing forecast
threeyear horizon: a collaborative approach to sequencing implementation in the first three years, which identifies initial priorities to focus on to meet the strategic goals.
ties the blood infringement thresholds to the relevant infringement offence provisions throughout the Bill
time performance and is currently exploring options to introduce public reporting on airfares.
time since obtaining a licence, and this diffe rence is statistically significant (p value .). This suggests that the restricted and full licence stages make distinct contributions to drivers progression from novice to experienced drivers beyond any effects of simply getting older and gaining mor e driving experience. A plausible reason for this is that the full licence practical test encourages drivers to improve their driving skills to pass the test andor inhibits less competent drivers from progressing through the GDLS. Further analysis of cra sh rates for drivers who pass this test on their first attempt versus those who do not would be useful to better understand the impact of the full licence practical test on road safety outcomes. Effectiveness of the night time driving restriction Restricte d drivers crash more often at night than fully licensed drivers of the same age, despite the supervision requirement Drivers aged to with restricted licences are involved in around . times as many crashes as fully licensed drivers of the same age b etween the hours of pm and am, despite being required to have a fully licensed supervisor when driving during these times, and this difference is statistically significant in our analysis (p value .). Other studies have found good evidence that r estrictions on night time driving and carrying passengers reduce crashes among drivers with restricted licences, but compliance with, and enforcement of, these restrictions is difficult (Begg et al, ; Curry et al, ; Fell, Todd Voas, ; Karaca Mandic Ridgeway, ; McKnight Peck, ; Williams, ). While the difference in crash rates may partly reflect factors unrelated to driver licensing, if the night time crash rate for restricted drivers aged to could be reduced to that of ful ly licensed drivers of the same age, around crashes per year could be prevented. A possible next step is to investigate whether changes to the night driving restriction could reduce the crash rate for restricted drivers to be closer to that of fully li censed drivers. Advanced driving certificates Drivers who complete approved advanced driver training and obtain an advanced driving certificate are able to reduce the minimum time at the restricted licence stage from months to months for drivers aged under and from months to months for drivers aged and over. Crash rates for fully licensed drivers with advanced certificates are similar to those without Our analysis found no statistically significant differences in crash rates for fully licensed drivers with advanced certificates and who received time discounts at the restricted stage, compared to drivers without advanced certificates, after controlling for differences in driver age, gender, region of residence, and length of time holding a licence (p values between . and .).
times of day or days; and travel in different directions;
to Climate Implications of Policy Assessments (CIPAs) being completed for individual
to Zero. Funding for safety infrastructure and
to achieve from NLTF investment are
to allow the rapid iteration and testing of ideas and technology
to an island excluded from the regional fuel tax for example, Great Barrier Island.
to certify lowemissions freight routes throughout the country is a feasible and achievable option.
to coordinate government activity at New Zealands border. The Secretary for Transport is one of
to create quality Regional Land
to create the National Land Transport
to ensure your submissions are correctly recognised and considered.
to examine specific aspects of the GPS in more detail.
to lead work exploring the case for Government supporting the development of a dry dock in Northland. This business case process will identify the strategic benefits of a dry dock for New Zealand, and what wider benefits it would bring to Northland and New Zealand as a whole. Considerations around ownership structures and financing are of interest to us too.
to limit cost pressures on household and
to playing its part in the multilateral system.
to receive Russia sanctions updates. You will also be notified when the sanctions register is with new sanctioned individuals or entities, and if there are new or trade measures. These emails are sent by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT), who have a coordination role for the Russia sanctions system.
to sign the Speed Rule by September .
to support and grow the advanced aviation industry in New Zealand, while
to understand which industries are making, and could make use of drones
toll operator and the Minister;
tolls in respect of different classes of person motor vehicles; travel at different
tourism projections from the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment
traffic to tolling, and any traffic management method used to vary the response;
transitioning to safe speed limits around schools
transport corridors and hubs that
transport disadvantage resulting from a lack of transport choices
transport investigation and search and rescue systems are safe, support economic growth and
transport investments (including
transport options. Sustainable urban
transport policy developments
transport poverty resulting from when people pay more for transport than what they can reasonably afford.
transport system is efficiently
transport system over years.
transport system. These outcomes are described in the Transport Outcomes
transportrelated climate response actions
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Annex : Documents in scope of the request Doc Title of Document Proposed decision on request Attachment Budget rail portfolio view Proposal partially withheld on the grounds of: ()(f)(iv) Under active consideration ()(g)(i) Free and frank Rail Funding Capital Pipeline Review Proposal partially withheld on the grounds of: ()(a) Protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) protect commercial position of the information supplier ()(f)(iv) Under active consideration ()(g)(i) Free and frank Document Proposal withheld in full on the grounds of: ()(a) Protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) protect commercial position of the information supplier ()(f)(iv) Under active consideration ()(g)(i) Free and frank ()(i) Prevent disadvantage to governments commercial activities Final RNIP advice for your approval Briefing Policy Proposal withheld in full on the grounds of: ()(a) Protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) protect commercial position of the information supplier ()(f)(iv) Under active consideration Document Proposal withheld in full on the grounds of: ()(a) Protect the privacy of natural persons ()(b)(ii) protect commercial position of the information supplier ()(f)(iv) Under active consideration ()(i) Prevent disadvantage to governments commercial activities
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz HEAD O FFICE: PO Box , Wellington , New Zealand. PH: AUCKLAND OFFICE: NZ Government Auckland Policy Office, PO Box , Auckland , New Zealand. PH:
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz HEAD OFFICE: PO Box , Wellington , New Zealand. PH: AUCKLAND OFFICE: NZ Government Auckland Policy Office , PO Box , Auckland , New Zealand. PH:
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz HEAD OFFICE: PO Box , Wellington , New Zealand. PH: AUCKLAND OFFICE: NZ Government Auckland Policy Office, PO Box , Auckland , New Zealand. PH:
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz HEAD OFFICE: PO Box , Wellington , New Zealand. PH: AUCKLAND OFFICE: NZ Government Auckland Policy Office, PO Box , Auckland , New Zealand. PH: O C J anuary Tn k oe I refer to your email dated December , requesting the following under the Official Information Act (the Act): All information produced for the Minister of Transport and his office, or for Waka Kotahi, on increasing the private share of public transport operating expenditure documents fall within the scope of your request and are detailed in the document schedule attached as Annex . The schedule outlines how the documents you requested have been treated under the Act. C ertain information is withheld under the following sections of the Act: ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their duty ()(k) to prevent the disclosure or use of official information for improper gain or advantage. W ith regard to the information that has been withheld under section of the Act, I am satisfied that the reasons for withholding the information at this time are not outweighed by public interest considerations that would make it desirable to make the information available. Four documents have been supplied to you as excerpts from a larger document, as provided for by section ()(e) of the Act. This has been done because the relevant material to your request is only a small section of the overall document. Documents supplied as excerpts are clearly identified in Annex k, MINISTRX. OF TRANSPORT p TE MANATU WAKA transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of You have the right to seek an investigation and review of this response by the Ombudsman, in accordance with section () of the Act. The relevant details can be found on the Ombudsmans website www.ombudsman.parliament.nz The Ministry publishes our Official Information Act responses, and the information contained in our reply to you may be on the Ministry website. Before publishing we will remove any personal or identifiable information. N ku noa, n Li z Anderson Acting Manager , Urban Development and Public Transport
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz HEAD OFFICE: PO Box , Wellington , New Zealand. PH: AUCKLAND OFFICE: NZ Government Auckland Policy Office, PO Box , Auckland , New Zealand. PH: OC
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz HEAD OFFICE: PO Box , Wellington , New Zealand. PH: AUCKLAND OFFICE: NZ Government Auckland Policy Office, PO Box , Auckland , New Zealand. PH: OC February Tn koe I refer to your email to the Ministr y for the Environment dated November , requesting the following under the Official Information Act (the Act): I request under the Official Information Act any communications from the Ministry, or prepared by the Ministry, to iwihap in relation to the extension of port coastal permits or proposed changes to the regime around port coastal permits. I also request any communications received back from iwi or hap in relation to any such communications from or prepared by the Ministry. This request has been partially transferred to the Ministry of Transport. documents fall within the scope of your request and are detailed in the document schedule attached as Annex . The schedule outlines how the documents you requested have been treated under the Act. Certain information is withheld under the following sections of the Act: ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their duty With regard to the information that has been withheld under section of the Act, I am satisfied that the reasons for withholding the information at this time are not outweighed by public interest considerations that would make it desirable to make the information avail able. You have the right to seek an investigation and review of this response by the Ombudsman, in accordance with section () of the Act. The relevant details can be found on the Ombudsmans website www.ombudsman.parliament.nz MINISTRX. OF TRANSPORT iiIP TE MANATU WAKA transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of The Ministry publishes our Official Information Act responses and the information contained in our reply to you may be on the Ministry website. Before publishing we will remove any personal or identifiable information.
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz HEAD OFFICE: PO Box , Wellington , New Zealand. PH: AUCKLAND OFFICE: NZ Government Auckland Policy Office, PO Box , Auckland , New Zealand. PH: Page of UNCLASSIFIED Meeting Road to Zero Ministerial Oversight Group March Time Venue .pm .pm : Online Attendees Hon Michael Wood, Minister of Transport, Hon Kiri Allan, Associate Minister of Transport and Minister of Justice , Hon Willie Jackson, Associate Minister for ACC, Hon Stuart Nash , Minister of Police In attendance Audrey Sonerson (Te Manat Waka), Bryan Sherritt (Road to Zero), Nicole Rosie (Waka Kotahi), Kane Patena (Waka Kotahi), Andrew Coster (NZ Police), Phil Parkes (Worksafe), Megan Main (ACC), Rajesh Chhana (Ministry of Justice), Bronwyn T urley (Te Manat Waka), John Baillie (Waka Kotahi), Rebecca Ellery (Minutes) Apologies To Be Advised
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of Annex Document Schedule
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of The Ministry publishes our Official Information Act responses and the information contained in our reply to you may be on the Ministry s website. Before publishing we will remove any personal or identifiable information.
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of The Ministry publishes our Official Information Act responses, and the information contained in our reply to you may be on the Ministry s website. Before publishing we will remove any personal or identifiable information.
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their duty
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of With regard to the information that has been withheld under section of the Act, I am satisfied that the reasons for withholding the information at this time are not outweighed by public interest considerations that would make it desirable to make the inf ormation available. Three documents are being withheld in full under the following sections:
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of With regard to the information that has been withheld under section of the Act, I am satisfied that the reasons for withholding the information at this time are not outweighed by public interest considerations that would make it desirable to make the information available. You have the right to seek an investigation and review of this response by the Ombudsman, in accordance with section () of the Act. The relevant details can be found on the Ombudsmans website www.ombudsman.parliament.nz
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of You have the right to seek an investigation and review of this response by the Ombudsman, in accordance with section () of the Act. The relevant details can be found on the Ombudsmans website www.ombudsman.parliament.nz The Ministry publishes our Official Information Act responses, and the information contained in our reply to you may be on the Ministry s website. Before publishing we will remove any personal or identifiable information.
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of prejudice the supply of similar information, or information from the same source, and it is in the public interest that such information should continue to be supplied ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their duty ()(k) to prevent the disclosure or use of official information for improper gain or improper advantage (d) the info r mation requested is or will soon be publicly available
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of disadvantage, negotiations (including commercial and industrial negotiations) ()(k) to prevent the disclosure or use of official information for improper gain or improper advantage (d) the information requested is or will soon be publicly available
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of ()(ba)(i) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence or which any person has been or could be compelled to provide under the authority of any enactment, where the making available of the information would be likely to prejudice the supply of sim ilar information, or information from the same source, and it is in the public interest that such information should continue to be supplied ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their duty ()(h) to maintain legal professional privilege ()(j) to enable a Minister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry on, without prejudice or disadvantage, negotiations (including commercial and industrial negotiations) (d) the information requested is or will soon be publicly available
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of Annex Document Schedule
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of Annex Document Schedule Doc Document Decision on release January OC Briefing to the Incoming Minister January Refused under section (d). When , it will be found here: https:www.transport.govt.nzab outuswhat wedoproactive releasesresults January Table of upcoming decisions through to February Withh eld in full under section ()(f)(iv). January Roadmap as at December Withh eld in full under section ()(f)(iv). January MoT Group Managers Chart with contact details Released with some information withheld under sections ()(a), ()(b)(ii) and ()(f)(iv).
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of Annex Document Schedule Doc Reference Document Decision on release OC Independent Review Function Update on Scope and Cost Recovery: Next Steps Refused under section (d). Once , it will be available here: https:www.transport.govt.nzabout uswhat wedoproactivereleasesresults OC GPS Implementation Update for the Month Ending September Released with some information withheld under sections ()(a) and ()(f)(iv). OC Meeting with CentrePort and Greater Wellington Regional Council Released with some information withheld under sections ()(a), ()(b)(ii), ()(f)(iv) and ()(g)(ii). OC Auckland Light Rail Land Disposal Released with some information withheld under sections ()(a), ()(b)(ii) and ()(f)(iv). OC Toll Road Proposals Refused under section (d). This briefing is on the Ministrys website and is available here: www.transport.govt.nzassetsUploadsDoc OCTollingProposals BriefingPolicy Redacted.pdf OC Cost Allocation Model and Road User Charges Released with some information withheld under section ()(a).
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of Annex : Document Schedule Doc Reference number Title of Document Decision on request OC Maritime New Zealand and TAIC Monitoring Plans Released with some information withheld under sections (a), ()(a), ()(f)(iv) and ()(g)(i). OC Meeting with the Chief Executive and Board Members of Auckland Airport Released with some information withheld under sections ()(a), ()(b)(ii) and ()(g)(i). OC Meeting with the Icelandic Minister of Finance and Economic Affairs Released with some information withheld under sections ()(a) and ()(g)(i). OC Aide Memoire: NIWE Funding Approach Released with some information withheld under sections ()(a) , ()(f)(iv) and ()(g)(i). OC Aide Memoire: Appropriateness of Current Maritime Offences and Penalties Regime Released with some information withheld under sections ()(a) and ()(f)(iv). OC Meeting with Martin Kearney Chief Executive Officer, Auckland One Rail Released with some information withheld under sections ()(a), ()(b)(ii), ()(f)(iv) and ()(g)(i). OC Submission of the Initial Performance Plan for Transport Withh eld under section ()(f)(iv). OC NZTAs Rail Safety Regulatory Function Withh eld under section ()(f)(iv).
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of Annex Document schedule
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of Annex Document Schedule Doc Reference Document Decision on release OC Supporting the Ongoing Financial Sustainability of Maritime New Zealand and Civil Aviation Authority Supporting Information for Cabinet Paper Refused under Section (d). When , it will be available on the Ministrys website: https:www.transport.govt.nzabout uswhat wedoproactivereleasesSearchForm OC InPrinciple Expense Transfer Reques ts From to for Vote Transport Withheld in full under Section ()(f)(iv). OC Approach to Upcoming International Maritime Organiz ation (IMO) G reenhouse Gas (GHG) N egotiations Released with some information withheld under Sections (a), ()(a) and ()(g)(i). OC Estimates Examination Supplementary Questionnaire Draft Response Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). The attachment is refused under Section (d) as the Standard Estimates responses will soon be available on Parliament s website: https:www.parliament.nzenpbscsclfinance andexpendituretabsubmissionsandadvice OC Maritime New Zealand Liquidity Funding in Released with some information withheld under Sections ()(a) and ()(f)(iv). OC Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency Board: Paperwork for Cabinets Appointment and Honours Committee Withh eld in full under Section ()(f)(iv). OC Key Issues Briefing Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a) . The annex is refused under Section (d) as it will soon be available on the Ministrys website: https:www.transport.govt.nzabout uswhat wedoproactivereleasesSearchForm OC Estimates Post Budget Questions Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a) . The attachment s and are refused under Section (d) as the Standard Estimates responses will soon be available on Parliament s website: https:www.parliament.nzenpbscsclfinance andexpendituretabsubmissionsandadvice OC Ports of Auckland Li mited Constitution Amendments Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). OC Seeking Direction on GPS Release Refused under Section (d). The GPS will be in August . All background material, including this briefing,
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of Annex Document Schedule Doc Reference Document Decision on request NA Info sheet Extending the duration of existing port coastal permits Released in full . NA Tauranga Moana The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). NA Te Mtau a Maui The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). NA Te Wai Harakeke The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). NA Te Wai Pounamu ki Motu Phue The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). NA Te Wai Pounamu ki tepoti The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). NA Te Wai Pounamu ki Timaru The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). NA Te Whanganui a Tara The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). NA FW Tmakimakaurau The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). NA FW Taranaki The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). NA FW Te Tai Tokerau The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years NA FW Te Tau Ihu The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). NA FW Tranga nuiaKiwa The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA for an additional years Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). NA FW Tranga nuiaKiwa The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). NA Port Permit engagement Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). NA FW Port Permit engagement Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). NA RE Te Wai Pounamu ki tepoti The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). NA Ngti Rarua krero on Ports Permits extension proposal Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a) and Section ()(g)(i). NA RE List of permits captured by the Port extension section A Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). NA RE Tranga nuiaKiwa The Government intends to extend the coastal permits granted to port companies under section A of the RMA Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). NA Maps Gisborne Released in full. NA Coastal permit extension under section A of the RMA Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). NA Feedback Te R nanga o Arowhenua on Extending existing port coastal permits under RMA signed Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). NA TAKAHIWAI MAORI COMMITTEE SUBMISSION TO MIN TRANSPORT MAY Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of NA Te Rnanga o tkou feedback on sA port coastal permit year extension Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a).
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of Doc Reference Document Decision on release will be shortly thereafter on the Ministrys website: https:www.transport.govt.nzabout uswhat wedoproactivereleasesSearchForm OC Proposed Orders in Council under the Severe Weather Emergency Recovery Legislation Act KiwiRail and Waka Kotahi Repair and Rec overy Works, and Land Transport Management Act Amendments Released with some information withheld under Sections ()(a), ()(f)(iv) and ()(h).
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of New Zealand Transport Agency Email: Nov BIM development correspondence with NZTA (was FW NZT RESPONSE () Transport metrics Withheld some information under section ()(a) of the Act privacy of natural persons. Email: RE Draft System BIM NZTA comments Withheld some information under section ()(a) of the Act privacy of natural persons. Transport Accident Investigation Commission Email: RE Draft System BIM TAIC comments Withheld some information under section ()(a) of the Act privacy of natural persons. Draft System BIM comments from TAIC None. Email: FW Draft Strategic BIM TAIC comments Withheld some information under section ()(a) of the Act privacy of natural persons. Strategic BIM Fourth Draft SLT October Withheld some information some information under section ()(g)(i) of the Act. This includes advice the Transport Accident Investigation Commission has provided on transport safety and security.
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of Doc Reference Document Decision on release OC Draft GPS : Revised Draft For Review Withheld in full under Section ()(f)(iv). OC Wellington Regional Leadership Committee Meeting on March Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). Attachment Refused under Section (d) as it can be found on the Ministrys website here: https:www.gw.govt.nzassetsDocuments WellingtonRegional Leadership Committee March order paper.pdf OC Land Transport Management (Regional Fuel Tax Scheme Auckland) Amendment Order Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a) and the attachment is withheld under Section ()(h). The final version of the Amendment Order can be found here on legislation.govt.nz. OC Civil Aviation Authority Board Membership Withheld in full under Section ()(f)(iv). OC Official Information Act request from Name Withheld Regarding Meetings and Correspondence Between the Ministers Office a nd the Vehicle Industry on the Clean Car Standard and Clean Car Discount Released with some information withheld under Sections ()(a), ()(b)(ii) . Attachments The f inal response sent to the request er has been included , not the draft version that was sent with the briefing. We believe this satisfies the request. OC Road to Zero Ministerial Oversight Group Meeting March Released with some information withheld under Sections () (a), ()(f)(iv) and ()(g)(i) and refused under (d). The information refused under Section (d) will soon be available on the Ministrys website: https:www.transport. govt.nz area ofinterestsafetyroadto zero OC New Zealand Rail Plan Progress, Priorities, Cost Pressures, and Next Steps Released with some information withheld under Section s ()(a) and ()(f)(iv). OC Electric vehicle (EV) Charging Work Programme Options for Implementation and Governance Following Publication of National Strategy Released with some information withheld under Sections ()(a) and ()(f)(iv). OC Implications of Permanent Half Price Total Mobility Funding Refused under Section (d) Once , the briefing will be available on the Ministrys website here: https:www.transport.govt.nzabout uswh at wedoproactivereleasesSearchForm OC Event Briefing Meeting with Z Energy Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). OC Congestion Charging Outstanding Policy Advice Withheld in full under Section ()(f)(iv). OC Update on Lets Get Wellington Moving Released with some information withheld under Section s ()(a) , ()(f)(iv) and ()(g)(i).
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of Doc Reference Document Decision on release https:www.transport.govt.nzabout uswhat wedoproactivereleasesSearchForm
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of Annex : Draft BIMs in scope Version Title Description of information withheld System BIM Draft Master System BIM.. for SLT Released in full. . System BIM Master Copy .. Released in full. System BIM Master Copy .. Released in full. . System BIM Master Copy .. For Audrey Released in full. Draft System BIM .. Released in full. System BIM Close to Final Nov Released in full. System BIM Master Version November Released in full. Strategic BIM Strategic BIM First Draft SLT September Released with redactions under sections ()(g)(i) and ()(f)(iv) of the Act. . Strategic BIM Second Draft SLT October Released with redactions under sections ()(g)(i) and ()(f)(iv) of the Act. . Strategic BIM Third Draft SLT October Released with redactions under sections ()(g)(i) and ()(f)(iv) of the Act. . Strategic BIM Fourth Draft SLT October Released with redactions under sections ()(g)(i) and ()(f)(iv) of the Act. Strategic BIM Fifth Draft SLT October Released with redactions under sections ()(g)(i) and ()(f)(iv) of the Act. Strategic BIM Sixth Draft SLT October Released with redactions under sections ()(g)(i) and ()(f)(iv) of the Act.
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of Doc Reference Document Decision on release OC Official Information Act request from Name Withheld Requesting Briefing Titled Update on NZ Freight and Supply Chain Strategy Released with some information withheld under Sections ()(a) and ()(f)(iv). You were sent the final response on March , therefore only the cover briefing has been released under this request. OC Additional Funding for the Auckland City Rail Link Project Cabinet Paper Refuse d under Section (d). OC Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency Board Next Steps Withheld in full under Section ()(f)(iv) . OC Transport Chapter ERP Dashboard as at January Released with some information withheld under Section ()(f)(iv). OC Approval of Transport and Public Works Legislation to be Included in Severe Weather Emergency Response Bill Released with some information withheld under Sections ()(a) and ()(f)(iv). OC Proactive release of the Infringement and Reminder Notices Amendment Regulations Cabinet paper Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). The attachments are refused under Section (d) as they are available on the Ministry s website here: Cabinet paper Amendment to the Land Transport (Infringement and Reminder Notices) Regulations https:www.transport.govt.nzassetsUpl oadsAmendment totheLand Transport Infringement andReminder Notices Regulations .pdf Cabinet minute LEG MIN https:www.transport.govt.nzassetsUpl oadsLEG MINMinute.pdf OC Electric Vehicle Charger Connection Costs Released with some information withheld under Sections ()(a) , ()(ba)(i) and ()(f)(iv). OC Ferry Stakeholder Meeting Released with some information withheld under Sections ()(a) , ()(f)(iv) and ()(j). OC Official Information Act Request From Name Withheld Relating to Marpol Annex VI Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a) . Attachments The f inal response sent to the request er has been included, not the draft version that was sent with the briefing. We believe this satisfies the request. OC Sustainable Aviation Aotearoa Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). OC Official Information Act request from Name Withheld Regarding Random Roadside Drug Testing Released with some information withheld under Sections ()(a) and ()(g)(i). You were sent the final response on April , therefore only the cover briefing has been released under this request.
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of Version Title Description of information withheld Strategic BIM Nov Released with redactions under sections ()(g)(i) and ()(f)(iv) of the Act. Strategic BIM Master Version November Released with redactions under sections ()(g)(i) and ()(f)(iv) of the Act.
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of Doc Reference Document Decision on release OC Official Information Act request from Name Withheld Regarding Correspondence with Local Councils Relating to the Government Policy Statement Released with some information withheld under Section ()(a). You were sent the final response on April , therefore only the cover briefing has been released under this request. OC T New Zealand Upgrade Programme: Overarching Advice Released with some information withheld under Sections ()(a), ()(b)(ii), ()(f)(iv) and ()(j) . OC Auckland Transport Alignment Project (ATAP) Implementation Report July December Released with some information withheld under Sections ()(a) and ()(j). OC Speed Management Committee Appointments Withheld in full under Sections ()(a) and ()(f)(iv). OC Draft Estimates and Supplementary Estimates for Vote Transport Refused under Section (d) Once , the briefing will be available on the Ministrys website here: https:www.transport.govt.nzabout uswh at wedoproactivereleasesSearchForm OC Transport Regulatory Work Programme Update December and March Refused under Section (d). The briefing is available on the Ministry s website here: https:www.transport.govt.nzassetsUploads OCAnnexes Redacted.pdf OC Reshaping Streets Policy approvals Withheld in full under Section ()(f)(iv). OC BRI Transport Choices Ministerial Briefing March Withheld in full under Section ()(f)(iv). OC Proactive release of Cabinet paper for approval to introduce the Land Transport Management (Regulation of Public Transport) Amendment Bill Released with some information withheld under Sections ()(a), ()(f)(iv) and ()(g)(i). The attachments are refused under Section (d) as they are available on the Ministrys website here: Briefing Draft paper seeking approval to introduce the Land Transport Management (Regulation of Public Transport) Amendment Bill https:www.transport.govt.nzasset sUploadsB RIEFING PAPERDraft paper seeking approval to introduce theLand Transport Management Regulation ofPublic Transport Amendment BillWith Cover Page.pdf Cabinet paper seeking approval to introduce the Land Transport Mana gement (Regulation of Public Transport) Amendment Bill https:www.transport.govt.nzasset sUploadsCABINET PAPERLand Transport Management Regulation
transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of Doc Reference Document Decision on release ofPublic Transport Amendment Billapprovalfor Introduction.pdf LEGMIN https:www.transport.govt.nzasset sUploadsCABINET MINUTES LandTransport Management Regulation ofPublic Transport Amendment BillApproval for Introduction.pdf OC Cyclone Gabrielle and Upper North Island Flooding Transport Recovery and Rebuild Released with some information withheld under Sections ()(a) and ()(f)(iv). OC Updates to Output Plan Released with some information withheld under Sections ()(a) and ()(f)(iv).
transportrecoverytransport.govt.nz
travel on demandresponsive buses and shuttles if they live in lowdensity suburban areas
travel the first and last legs to or from public transport stations using shared shuttles, bikes and scooters
travel times will be shorter, and
travelling along Takitimu North Link in the same trip;
travelsurveytransport.govt.nz
two similar colours or tones sitting sidebyside. Try to distribute similar colours and tones throughout the sequence. Be aware of accessibility. Eg, light tints or c olours like yellow may not be appropriate to use in instances when legibility could be an issue. If a graph has small components, use different
under the Governments Emission Reduction Plan.
undermine the integrity of the refund and rebate system due to the risk of fraud in many cases it would be difficult for fuel users to provide proof they had bought fuel for offroad use.
underpinned by zero emissions freight transport
understanding the extent of the costs and benefits,
undertaking transport modelling.
until they are ready to certify their product for use in mainstream aviation.
up to , or a , infringement fee, which aligns with a similar rule,
minimum standards for new vehicles imported into New Zealand
to refer to the Act and the remade rules.
upgrades to the Capital Connection, to make services north of the city more reliable and better able to meet growing demand.
use personalised apps to plan and pay for their travel
used wheeldrive SUVs and offroad vehicles classified as MC inspected at the border from March
used exclusively or mainly offroad that is, farm vehicles and other vehicles that are listed in the Schedule of the Road User Charges (Classes of RUC Vehicles) Exemption Order
used passenger cars classified as MA with engine capacity greater than litres inspected at the border from March
using the new Rule for experimental and developmental operations (above).
value added dairy products, and fresh produce. Efficient a ir freight services transport these
values are in gkm and refer to phase WLTP (where available; where not, available values have been converted as accurately as possible).
values are the sum of the gkm values for each vehicle.
vehicles currently only need to meet Euro VI and can continue to do so until the Euro VI noted above. New vehicles already must meet Euro VI.
volume, and . percent by value (based on figures). Our container trade is concentrated in
vs number of registrations (of top models).
w ithout directional or geographic limitation and without loss of any right to carry traffic otherwise permissible under this Agreement; provided that the service serves a point in the territory of the Party designating the airline and all the points served are international airports.
was that provisional drivers identified P plates as an enforcement tool for police, and that this requirement resulted in them driving more carefully, however the study did not examine actual involvement in crashes. Estimating i mpacts other than crash rates Masten and Foss () evaluated the effectiveness of introducing a GDLS in North Carolina in terms of hospital admissions, medical costs, and severity of injuries from crashes involving and yearold drivers. They estim ated autoregressive integrated moving average models of monthly rates per capita and per licensed driver, controlling for seasonal effects and trends in corresponding rates for to yearold drivers. Masten and Foss () estimated that introducing a GDLS in North Carolina reduced the per capita incidence for yearold drivers of crash related hospitalisation and associated costs by . and . respectively, and a reduction in per capita hospitalisation was estimated for yearold drivers. However, in both cases no improvements were found in rates per licensed driver, and there was some evidence that the severity of injuries increased among those hospitalised after the GDLS was introduced. Masten and Foss () conclude that the benefits o f graduated licensing in North Carolina appear to have mainly come from reduced exposure to driving, rather than better driving by and year olds. Does a GDLS make young people safer drivers Fohr et al () focussed on the question of whether int roducing a GDLS in Wisconsin led to safer driving behaviour by young drivers. To answer this question, they needed to control for all changes in exposure to driving risk (whether induced by the GDLS or other external factors) and all external changes in ri sk that were not due to the GDLS (e.g. improvements in vehicle safety and road design). As seen above, other studies have generally controlled for external changes in exposure and risk by adjusting crash rates observed for young drivers by changes in rates observed for drivers aged over . However, this means that the estimated effect of introducing a GDLS on crash rates for young drivers includes any changes in exposure that are induced by the GDLS itself (e.g. prohibiting driving at night, and the overal l reduction in licensed drivers among young people typically observed after the introduction of a GDLS). That is appropriate if the objective is to estimate the overall impact of a GDLS on crash rates for young drivers, but if the objective is to focus on driving behaviour then all changes in exposure among young drivers need to be controlled for. Fohr et al () solved this problem by using changes in the rate of not atfault crashes among young drivers to adjust for all changes in exposure and risk tha t were not due to introducing a GDLS. As the authors note, determination of who is at fault in a crash is not always clear cut, however this adjustment method has the advantage of capturing both external factors that affect crash rates for young drivers, a nd changes in exposure induced by the GDLS. Using this method, Fohr et al () found that crash rates declined for and yearold drivers following the introduction of a GDLS, but all of the reduction could be explained by reductions in driving expo sure (measured by reductions in the rate of not at fault crashes for and yearold drivers). The authors conclude that introducing a GDLS led to lower crash rates among young drivers by reducing their exposure to risk rather than making them safer dr ivers. The links between a GDLS and driver behaviour were also explored by Poirier et al () who analysed the relationship between license type and stated intention to violate road rules, and the social control mechanisms by which GDLS could reduce suc h intentions. Based on a survey of young drivers in Quebec, Canada, Poirier et al () found that
we are looking at how to fund the land transport system in the future, including options such as a distancebased charge to replace PED if this new approach to charging for road use was implemented it would effectively resolve issues relating to the offroad use of fuel.
we need to think carefully, not just about tools central government can use in the future to collect transport revenue, but also the needs of local government and the role that pricing tools can play in bringing about the transport system New Zealand wants.
weather authority and the exclusive provider of severe weather warnings, operating under a
webmastertransport.govt.nz
website have been soon to reflect these upcoming changes.
weeks preceding the proposed toll commencement ;
wellused public transport services reduce the environmental and health impact of land transport, including by reducing reliance on singleoccupancy vehicles and by using zeroemission technology
were made and in May . These bring policy changes into effect beginning July .
were made on November and prescribe formulas for the weight adjustment of targets, specify the types of vehicles excluded from the policy, and other details related to CO accounts.
what information was available and useful
what it expects to be achieved from its direct investment in land transport
what it expects to be achieved from its investment in land transport through the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF)
what the commercial viability of the proposal was
what the implications of increasing automation and shared mobility might be for our public transport systems.
what the purpose of Total Mobility is and how it fits with other government initiatives to support transport accessibility for disabled people.
when a driver has passed the first oral fluid test, or failed the first and passed the second, but the police officer has good cause to suspect the driver has consumed drugs the device may not be able to test for
when more than drug is identified on the first oral fluid test.
when we invest in transport it is important to look at access as well as mobility
where this ground is used, information must be made publicly available within six to eight weeks of the refusal. . The Ministry will provide the Office a minimum of five days for review of material proposed for release. . In cases where a substantial amount of information is being released, the Ministry will advise the Office ahead of time. . The Office accepts they will respond within the stated timeframes to ensure statutory deadlines are met. Disputes . Where disputes arise between the parties regarding the proper application of the Act, the proactive release of information, or this protocol, these should be referred to the Ministr ys Deputy Chief Executive, Corporate Services, and the Ministerial Advis or in the Office of the Minister of Transport.
where you have greater discretion on timing of decisions.
whether any changes are needed to make the schemes delivery more consistent and equitable across regions that deliver the scheme, and opportunities to innovate
whether eligibility criteria and assessment processes are benefiting those who use Total Mobility the most
whether or not financial security should cover all of an owners liabilities under the Act
whether or not such items are used or consumed wholly within the territory of the Party granting the exemption, provided the ownership of such items is not transferred in the territory of the said Party.
whether the current methods of driver training are adequately preparing novice drivers for the risks they face on New Zealands roads
whether the licensing system is simple and equitable
whether the preferred option represented the best value for money
whether the upper limit of NZD. billion is appropriate, and
which come into force on April .
which it uses to create the National Land
which significantly contributed to transport funding for the region and enabled additional investment in the transport priority areas. The inte nt of ATAP was that it would be an agreement between Council and Government on how much funding was available and then where that funding should be aligned. It was intended to influence not only the RLTP but also the NLTP, the Auckland Plan and the GPS. Similarly, GPS enabled a significant increase in safety investment. However, this also reflected a longstanding concern with crashes, deaths and serious injuries, which had peaked in . The alignment of the RLTP with the value for money dimension o f GPS was principally seen as occurring through its prioritisation process, which is intended to select the projects that best deliver outcomes from the investment available. This is supported by alliancing processes on key projects and procurement ap proaches that similarly seek efficiencies and a range of outcomes related to the RLTP priorities. These developments suggest that the influence of GPS was a more complex relationship that reflected interactions between central and regional government over some time and reflected an alignment of priorities between Auckland Council and Government that both the GPS and the RLTP were able to adopt. They reflect evolving transport priorities, set in the context of international shifts in planning and urban design that focus on the intensification of cities, mixed use development, and a shift towards offering greater transport choice through public and active transport mode investment. I wouldnt necessarily describe the GPS on its own as causative. Its mo re like it enables things that may already be there The key funding shifts established by the RLTP were a larger proportion of funding being directed towards public transport, active modes and safety, with relatively less funding going to roading and corr idor projects. Together, the GPS and the RLTP provided an aligned direction and jointly agreed on policy objectives, which together provided funding signals to Waka Kothai to support investment in prioritised initiatives. For the most part, the view of int erviewees was that these signals were subsequently acted upon in investment decisions. .. Areas of tension between national and regional priorities Interviewees noted that, at times, national priority projects could drive investment decision making and reduce funding available for regional initiatives. For Auckland transport planners, one key area of tension is an investment in maintenance and renewal s, comprising of the capital budget, where it was argued less is being invested compared to that signalled by asset management projections. Failure to invest in renewals in a timely manner generally increases the costs of renewals over time. A challen ge noted of the GPS process is the relatively short term funding signals that it sends, during a ten year RLTP process, and alongside a year plan guiding the regions development. Some funding certainty was seen to be needed to enable the delivery of regional priorities and to overcome ongoing challenges of reprioritising the face of funding constraints. APPENDIX TRENDS O BSERVED IN GPS OUTCOMES MONITORING
which the tolling revenue will be applied ; and
which will come into force on October .
who should be eligible to operate as a Total Mobility provider
whole (for consideration by Joint Ministers and the Minister of Climate
will be implemented by the end of and
will be set according to CO
will remain in force (with some amendments) for a further five years, until April .
wish to not progress some schemes, or to amend them, the Ministry will update the draft
with the intent of the current regime, or of minor or consequential policy detail ECO
with these recommendations and seeking Cabinet agreement for these toll schemes is
withheld as it is under active con sideration . The final Cabinet paper seeking approval to introduce the Bill seeks agreement to the revised approach that was taken in the version of the Bill introduc ed. No Cabinet paper seeking approval to introduce the Land Transport Management (Regulation of Public Trans port) Amendment Bill Release in full. None identified. NA. No. LEGMIN : Land Transport Management (Regulation of Public Transport) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction Release in full. None identified. NA. No. s ()(g)(i) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of March OC Hon Michael Wood Minister of Transport Hon Kiri All an Associate Minister of Transport CYCLONE GABRIELLE AND UPPER NORTH ISLAND FLOODING TRANSPORT RECOVERY AND REBUILD Purpose This paper seek s your agreement to coordination and oversight arrangements , and updates you on delivery arrangements for the rebuild of transport infrastructure impacted by the cyclone and flooding events . Key points Work to reopen S tate highways is progressing well and work is progressing on rail corridors that can be more readily repaired and re opened To ensure Ministers have oversight of the work across the transport sector and are well supported to make decisions on the rebuild, we have established a sector coordination group to ensure activities are organised, and key emerging issues are addressed. The sector coordination group includes representatives from transport agencies and across government. We anticipate where infrastructure can be repaired quickly this happens and is funded via the National Land Transport Fund. . million has already been made available, Document s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Page of
within sectors and to other stakeholders, including Ministers.
within the civil aviation system to promote aviation safety and security and ensure that New
work out to what extent the Governments transport priorities, objectives and results are being achieved
work, they consider there is a risk this will not be given sufficient consideration by the L eadership Committee when forming a preferred option and that the FDS will broadly roll over the current growth strategy (the Wellington Regional Growth Framework). Recent modelling undertaken of the Urban Growth Partnership spatial plans indicate Wellin gtons current growth strategy will result in VKT growing by by , and by ). This suggests significant changes to the current growth strategy will be required to achieve the governments VKT reduction targets. Areas proposed for development in the current growth strategy that are highly reliant on private vehicle use (particularly proposed greenfield areas in Kapiti, Horowhenua and Wairarapa) may need to be removed from the FDS. We suggest you remind the Leadership Committee that the Governm ent is committed to reducing New Zealands emissions as set out in the Emissions Reduction Plan. Reducing VKT is expected to contribute towards achieving New Zealand emission reduction goals. Sub national targets for VKT reduction are still being finalised , but the large cities with established public transport networks will need to make a large contribution towards achieving these. Councils in Tier areas will need to work with government to develop VKT reduction programmes to demonstrate how these targets will be achieved. We suggest it would be beneficial to remind councils of the important role urban form will play in achieving emissions reduction targets, and in particular the need to ensure growth occurs in a way that will reduce reliance on private vehicle use (to reduce VKT). RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE Page of You may like to note the Future Development Strategy is a key tool for directing the change in growth pattern s and urban form that will be needed to achieve emission reduction targets. This mean s we ca nnot continue to grow as we have in the past and will need to be open minded about reconsidering our current plans and strategies to be sure they are fit for the fu ture. You could express interest in proposed analysis of the growth scenarios and seeing what impact the different growth scenarios will have on VKT and emissions from transport, and whether these will achieve the Governments expectations for VKT reductio n. It would be desirable for the proposed transport objective (objective ) to be amended to remove the reference to multi modal (which includes private vehicles) and only refer to prioritising growth in locations that can be serviced with high quality pu blic transport and active modes. This would remove measures relating to access from private vehicles and congestion from the evaluation framework for the scenarios and place greater emphasis on access by public transport and active modes. This will provid e a clearer signal of the change needed in growth planning and urban form to achieve emission reduction targets. . Programme Directors report No comments for Minister of Transport . . Programme reporting No comments for Minister of Transport. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT IN CONFIDENCE Page of Attachment : Biographies
would be more crashes by restricted drivers at night if the night driving restriction did not apply. Instead, there may be an opportunity for improved safety outcomes if the night time crash rate for restricted drivers can be reduced to be closer to that for fully licensed drivers of the same age. If the night time crash rate of restricted drivers aged to years old could be reduced from the current rate (. crashes per , licensed drivers per year) to the equivalent rate for fully licensed drivers (. crashes), around crashes per year could be prevented. Further analysis including studying the factors involved in night time crashes by restricted drivers is needed to determine if some or all of this potential reduction can be achieved. .. Demographics of advanced certificate uptake and comparison of crash rates for drivers with and without advanced certificates Drivers who complete an approved advanced driving course and obtain an advanced driving certificate can reduce the minimum time they must drive on their restricted licence from months to months for drivers aged under and from months to months for drivers aged and older. W e analysed and compared demographic characteristics and crash rates of fully licensed drivers with and without advanced driving certificates (see section . of the Technical Report for more detail). For drivers with advanced certificates we also distingui shed between those who obtained a time discount at the restricted stage and those who did not. However, since almost all drivers with an advanced certificate used it to get a time discount, crash rates for drivers with advanced certificates but without tim e discounts have wider confidence intervals (i.e. are estimated less accurately). Our analysis in this section is based on full licences issued between and to drivers aged under years old at the time. There are around , such drivers in the licensing dataset, of which are recorded as having an advanced driving certificate at the time of obtaining their full licence. For drivers with an advanced certificate whose restricted licence is also recorded in the licensing dataset, obtaine d a time discount. Demographics of advanced certificate uptake and time discounts The proportion of full licences issued to drivers aged under where the driver held an advanced certificate has been relatively stable over time at around one third, aside from a temporary reduction between and that was likely caused by changes to the minimum driving ages in ( Figure ). Historically, males were slightly more likely than females to obtain advanced certificates, but in most years since upta ke has been almost equal across genders ( Figure ).
would introduce compulsory random oral fluid testing for drug driving
written approval of the Minister;
www.maritimenz.govt.nzMARPOL
www.nzta.govt.nzcleancar
year contract with the Minister that runs from July to , with renewal options
year about , will pay in between NZD and extra a year, or to cents additional each week.
year, helping make it a . billion industry.
years. We are also still confirming whether the update to the Penlink proposal requi res
you about the trade off between gaining revenue and reducing project
you are satisfied with the consultation undertaken and with the schemes
you have given authority to share the information
young drivers and motorcyclists are most likely to be involved in fatal crashes.
your service address (IP address)
Senior Strategy Advisor Te Whakaariki (Strategy Influence) Te Rnanga o Ngi Tahu Te Whare o Te Waipounamu Show Place Addington PO Box Christchurch Aotearoa
Value for Money Review Summary
k, MINISTRX. OF TRANSPORT p TE MANATU WAKA transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of With regard to the information that has been withheld under section of the Act, I am satisfied that the reasons for withholding the information at this time are not outweighed by public interest considerations that would make it desirable to make the information available.
MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT p TE MANATU WAKA transport.govt.nz heiarataki.nz Page of
TE MANATU WAKA p MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT August Dear I refer to your request dated Monday, July , pursuant to the Official Information Act (the Act), seeking a copy of any Briefings to the Incoming Minister, prepared or provided to the Minister of Transport or the Associate Minister of Transport , in There are four documents within scope of your request: One document is partially withheld, One document is available online, And two documents are withheld under section B(d) of the Act on the grounds that the information within the scope of your request will soon be publicly available. More information as well as any further detail can be found in the appendix. The Ministry publishes our Official Information Act responses and the information contained in our reply to you will be on the Ministry website. Before publishing we will remove any personal or identifiable information. Yours sincerely Alec Morrison Acting Manager, Strategy
Beca (unless Beca has expressly agreed otherwise with the Client in writing). This report has been prepared by Beca on the specific instructions of our Client. It is solely for our Clients use for the p urpose for which it is intended in accordance with the agreed scope of work. Any use or reliance by any person contrary to the above, to which Beca has not given its prior written consent, is at that persons own risk. Overview
uara matua o Hei Arataki Our guiding principles
mtau mtpono hei arataki Our guiding principles
mtou kupu toru tekau Our words
mokoroa. Stage is Crown funded and the toll will cover tolling
tira Tunnel Centenary On August , current and former rail workers will join the local community to celebrate the centenary of the tira Tunnel, which has linked the West Coast to the rest of the South Island for the past years. The tunnel, opened in , travels . kilometres through the Southern Alps, completing the Christchurch to Greymouth rail link. The tunnel remains a vital link on the Midland Line and a gateway to the West Coast. Each week, around trains travel throug h the tunnel, carrying freight for our customers and visitors on TranzAlpine. Although the rail tunnel is now only the third longest in the country, it remains an engineering marvel. During its construction, tunnellers contended with harsh conditions, using basic tools to drive through wet shale and rotten rock, and with the steep track grade required (ascending in from tira to Arthurs Pass). As part of the commemoration events planned, a special themed TranzAlpine service will be taking guests to tira township and tunnel, alongside speeches, guided walks, lunch, historical displays and celebratory cake, along with live entertainment. The tira township itself is steeped in rail history. During the tunnels construction, more than men and their families were housed at tira village, with some of the original rail cottages still dotted along the roadside today. KiwiRail continues to invest in the tunnel and over the past four years weve carried out considerable work to improve the condition and safety of the tunnel. We currently employ permanent staff based at tira who support ongoing maintenance and upgrade s to the tunnel and rail operations on this section of the Midland Line. More information about the special TranzAlpine service and the tira celebration is available at: https:www.greatjourneysnz.comgifts andspecialsotira tunnel commemorations
A dynamic picture of how travel has changed over time.
A static picture of travel patterns at a particular time.
Trips to support others have increased from to a week. Shopping trips have increased from to a week. Trips for social or personal business are down from a week to . The average numbers of trips to work and education are essentially unchanged, at and respectively.
Why people undertake a trip (journey), including whether to visit the shops, get to and from work or help someone else get where they need to go (accompany others).
importers can either be assessed on an annual or pervehicle basis.
imposed on vehicle importers who fail to achieve targets, and which rise over time.
limited methods that a vehicle importer can avoid charges if they cannot reach their CO target
Alliance Sectors being sectors operated by either airline directly between New Zealand and China (i.e. Auckland Shanghai and Auckland Beijing). Cooperation on direct services between New Zealand and China will include revenue sharing, codesharing and coordination of capacity and pricing.
Feeder Routes comprising domestic services within New Zealand and China which include an Alliance Sector. Cooperation on these services will include codesharing, coordination of pricing, revenue management and marketing.
Reason project included in the Output Plan: Timelines for this work have been brought forward and delivery outputs clarified since the earlier version of the output plan s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Taking Flight has helped to inform the crossgovernment work programme on drones. We have since commissioned a study to quantify the benefits that drones could have for New Zealand.
Any correspondence since June between SOC NZ Limited andor TUV SUD (or their officers) and the Ministry of Transport regarding accepting or rejecting A, C, or D vehicle emissions codes (used vehicles from Japan) as suitable for compliance for entry to the NZ fleet. Any correspondence since June between VTNZ Limited andor DEKRA (or their officers) and the Ministry of Transport regarding accepting or rejecting A, C, or D vehicle emissions codes (used vehicles from Japan) as suitable for compliance for entry to the NZ fleet. Any correspondence since June between the Motor Industry Association (or their officers) and the Ministry of Transport regarding accepting or rejecting A, C, or D vehicle emissions codes (used vehicles from Japan) as suitable for compliance for entry to the NZ fleet.
Any documents and communications between the DepartmentMinistryAgency and anyone else, relating to content to be contained in (or excluded within) the relevant Briefing to the Incoming Minister. Any Draft copies of the Briefing to the Incoming Minister that had been prepared. We interpreted your reference to any documents and communications between the DepartmentMinistryAgency and anyone else to include emails and their attachments between Ministry of Transport staff and any external party that include discussion on content for the Ministrys Strategic and System B riefings to the Incoming Minister (BIM s). This does not include emails that solely relate to procedural matters such as timing for provision of contentfeedback or organisation of meetings. We interpreted your reference to any Draft copies of the Briefing to the Incoming Minister that had been prepared to include complete draft versions of the Strategic and System BIMs that had been prepared for review by the Ministry s Senior Leadership Team. Drafts prepared by Ministry staff for the purposes of proof reading and quality assessment have been excluded. Eleven emails (and their associated papers) and fifteen draft BIMs fall within scope and are detailed in Annex es and , which outline how these documents have been treated under the Act. The emails provided to you are combined with their respective attachments. Certain information is withheld under the following sections of the Act: ()(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons ()(f)(iv) to maintain the constitutional conventions for the time being which protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials ()(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their duty b TE MANATU WAKA pi MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT
Doocey OC Maritime New Zealand and TAIC Monitoring Plans Brown OC Meeting with the Chief Executive and Board Members of Auckland Airport Brown OC Meeting with the Icelandic Minister of Finance and Economic Affairs Brown OC Aide Memoire: NIWE Funding Approach Brown OC Aide Memoire: Appropriateness of Current Maritime Offences and Penalties Regime Brown OC Meeting with Martin Kearney Chief Executive Officer, Auckland One Rail Brown OC Submission of the Initial Performance Plan for Transport Brown OC NZTAs Rail Safety Regulatory Function On January , we advised you of an extension to the time period for responding to your request. The extension was due to consultations necessary to make a decision on your request being such that a proper response could not reasonably be made within the original time limit. We have now completed the necessary consultations. Of the eight briefings requested, six are released with some information withheld and two are withheld in full.
I came across the webpage titled Drones in New Zealand on your website (https:www.transport.govt.nzarea ofinteresttechnology andinnovationdrones innew zealand), but I noticed that the last update was provided in May . Given the rapid advancements in drone technology and its increasing importance across various sectors, I was wondering if there have been any significant developments since then. Specifically, I am keen to learn about: Any updates on the progress or revisions to the . Airspace sub rules concerning property or landowner consent .(a)()(i) and .(a)()(ii) Progress on collaborative efforts between the Ministry, CAA, and industry stakeholders. Future directions or policies under consideration for enabling innovation while ensuring public safety.
Im working on a story about climate policy and would like to request under OIA
NZTA technical specification for alcohol interlock equipment installed in vehicles Under the Land Transport Act , the Minister of Transport, in consultation with the Science Minister, is responsible for approving alcohol interlock devices, by notice, for use in New Zealand. To , four alcohol interlock devices have been approved for use and the Ministry of Transport has led these approval processes. New Zealand does not have its own standard or technical specifications relating to alcohol interlock equipment installed in vehicles . The device approval process generally considers whether a device meets relevant international alcohol interlock standards , which are seen as appropriate evidence of quality (such as the European Standard for alcohol interlock devices (EN )).
Share means a share issued, or to be issued, by the Company, as the case may require. Shareholder means: (a) a person whose name is entered in the Share Register as the holder for the time being of one or more Shares; and (b) until the persons name is entered in the Share Register, a person who is entitled to have that persons name entered in the Share Register as a Shareholder under a registered amalgamation proposal in respect of which the Company is the amalgamated company. Shareholding Local Authority means any harbour board (as defined in the Port Companies Act ), any territorial authority or regional council (as defined in the Local Government Act ) and includes Auckland Regional Holdings as defined in the Local Government (Auckland) Amendment Act or any united council that holds any Shares of any Class that confers rights to vote at any meeting of the Company. Share Register means the share register for the Company kept in accordance with the Act. Special Resolution means a resolution approved by a majority of or more of the votes of those Shareholders entitled to vote and voting on the question. Working Day has the meaning set out in section of the Act. . Interpretation : In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires: (a) the table of contents, headings, and descriptions relating to sections of the Act, are inserted for convenience only and shall be ignored in construing this Constitution; (b) the singular includes the plural and vice versa; (c) one gender includes the other genders; (d) reference to any legislation or to any provision of any legislation (including regulations and orders) includes: (i) that legislation or provision as from time to time amended, reenacted or substituted; (ii) any statutory instruments, regulations, rules and orders issued under that legislation or provision; (e) written and in writing include any means of reproducing words, figures and symbols in a tangible and visible form; RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT (f) references to c lauses and sections (other than sections of the Act) are references to clauses and sections in this Constitution, unless stated otherwise; (g) where any word or expression is defined in this Constitution, any other grammatical form of that word or expression has a corresponding meaning; RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT v(h) words and exp ressions defined or explained in the Act have the same meaning in this Constitution. . Constitution to prevail over Act : If there is any conflict between: (a) a provision in this Constitution and a provision in the Act which is expressly permitted to be altered by this Constitution; or (b) a word or expression defined or explained in the Act and a word or expression defined or explained in this Constitution, the provision, word or expression in this Constitution prevails. . GENERAL . Companies Act : The Company, the Board, each Director and each Shareholder have the rights, powers, duties and obligations set out in the Act except to the extent that they are negated or modified by this Constitution. . SHARES . Existing Shares : At the time of adoption of this Constitution, the Company has ,, issued Shares. . Classes of Shares: Different Classes of Shares may be issued by the Company in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. Without limiting the Classes which may be issued, any Share may be issued upon the basis that it: (a) confers preferential rights to distributions of capital or income; (b) confers special, limited or conditional voting rights;(c) does not confer voting rights; or(d) is redeemable in accordance with section of the Act. . Consolidation and subdivision of Shares : The Board may with the approval of Shareholders by Special Resolution: (a) consolidate and divide the Shares or any Class; and(b) subdivide the Shares or any Class, in each case in proportion to those Shares or the Shares in that Class, as the case may be. . ISSUE OF NEW EQUITY SECURITIES . Board may issue Shares and other securities : Notwithstanding anything in clause ., the Board may issue Shares, securities that are convertible into or exchangeable for Shares, or options to acquire Shares (together referred to in this clause as New Equity Securities ) to such persons and on such terms as the Shareholders may by Special Resolution approve. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
Source: the Ministry of Transport and licensed by the Ministry of Transport for reuse under the name of and link to or URL for applicable Creative Commons licence
We seek any written correspondence, and any record or recollection of verbal direction or discussion, received or sent tofrom the Minister of Transport, any representatives from his office, or through proxies in regarding these projects and programm es: . Level crossing Removal in Auckland
a copy of all reports, briefings and advice but excluding OIA requests and proactive release briefings, that the Ministry provided to the Minister of Transport in June , excluding Weekly Reports. On July we advised you of an extension to the time period for responding to your request. The extension was due to consultations necessary to make a decision on your request being such that a proper response could not reasonably be made within the original time limit. We have now completed the necessary consultations.
a list of all briefings provided to Ministers from Dec Feb
evidencedata of royal assent by way of written declarationsignature of the Sovereign, or more likely that of the Governor general, or of an official representative of the Crown, whichever was the case in the aforementioned two Acts; Land Transport Act Transport Vehicle and Driver Registration and Licensing Act
mobile. Examples: Phone Mobile
principal Minister (Cabinet Manual .) and states th at you should take particular care to avoid
the actual money spent for testing every person with mild or early diagnosed altzheimers once a year for a intensive yearly driving test. This includes ALL money spent on the test including tests forced on victims by occupational therapists, police, medical professionals and other professionals not mentioned. Can this include any statistics on the benefit in wasting this money
the most recent Briefing to the Incoming Minister of Transport. There are two briefings in scope of your request. One is released with some information withheld or refused and one is refused.
an emailed copy of all submissions made by organisations to the public consultation which was taking feedback in March May on the draft Government Policy Statement on land transport
a copy of all reports, briefings and advice, but excluding OIA request and proactive release briefings, that the Ministry provided to the Minister of Transport in May , excluding Weekly Reports.
copies of any advice MNZ provided to the Minister about the application of Marpol Annex VI, Chapter in NZ And a copy of the relevant Cabinet paper (if any) if MNZ holds a copy of the Cabinet paper . Your request was transferred to Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transport (the Ministry) on March . Six documents fall within the s cope of your request . Three are enclosed and three are already publicly available. The documents are listed in the document schedule attached as Annex . I am refusing document s , and under section (d) of the Act as these document s are already publicly available on Te Manat Waka Ministry of Transports website. Document can be found here: https:www.transport.govt.nzassetsUploadsCabinetAccession toInternational Maritime Organization Treaty MARPOL Annex VIApproval toConsult redacted.pdf . Document can be found here: https:www.transport.govt.nzassetsUploadsCabinetMARPOL Cabinet Paper Annex VI Regulations forthePrevention ofAirPolluition fromShips Approval toAccede v.pdf .
years and days after the charge outcome for the first prosecution for year reoffending rates years and days after the charge outcome for the first prosecution for year reoffending rates years and days after the charge outcome for the first prosecution for year reoffending rates Offending history only relates to imprisonable offences, and includes all offences going back a maximum of years. . Propensity Score Matching A propensity score matching method has been used to compare reoffending percentages for those who received an AIO sentence with a matched control group of offenders who were eligible for the AIO sentence but did not receive the sentence . In the absence of a randomized contr ol trial, the matching process is essential to ensure that those who received an AIO sentence and matched offenders were as similar as possible across multiple characteristics. Those who received an AIO sentence were matched with eligible offenders who did not receive the sentence by year of charge outcome , and the predicted probability of receiving an AIO interlock sentence. Predicted probabilities for propensity score matching were calculated from a logistic regression model of factors most related to offenders receiving an AIO sentence. All of these factors chosen are known to be related to reoffending and are based upon those used by the United Kingdom Ministry of Justice, with modification for reoffending for drink driving. These factors included a wide range of demographic (e.g. age, gender, ethnicity, region), prior offending (e.g. number of previous drink driving convictions), and current offending (e.g. number of convicted charges in the case) variables. A matched comparison group has been created based on the same predicted probabilities of receiving an AIO to: the nearest decimal places (.) if the probability of receiving an AIO is .; the nearest . if the probability of receiving an AIO is .; the nearest decimal places (.) if the probability of receiving an AIO is .; and, the same year of charge outcome with up to matches per offender who received an AIO sentence.
. Enhanced reporting, monitoring and evaluation of GPS investment o A. A monitoring and evaluation system is in place for investment decisions o B. Release of an annual GPS assessment report . Better integrated transport research across government o A. alignment of funded research to the NZ Transport Research Strategy
Access (including access to economic and social opportunities, enabling transport choice and access, and resilience) Environment (including reduced greenhouse gas emissions) Value for money (delivering the right infrastructure and services to the right level, at the right cost). In GPS , Safety and Access are positioned as leading priorities and Environment and Value for money as supporting priorities that und erpin decision making across transport decisions. GPS marked a shift in priorities from earlier GPS publications, the and GPS both focused on economic growth and productivity, value for money and road safety. In addition, the inclusion of a ccess and environment significantly broadened the scope of GPS from its earlier versions. It is also worth noting that each GPS is a ten year investment strategy that can be refreshed every three years. Although each GPS has a long term view, since i ts first GPS was produced, it has been refreshed every three years. As noted above, however, there was strong consistency between the and GPS which provided some policy certainty. The changing priorities in GPS could set the scene for longer term changes in transport investment, with some flow on effects to implementation, delivery, and outcomes yet to be seen. In planning for this evaluation, we developed a theory of change to describe how change and outcomes from GPS were expected to occur. Figure sets out the theorised process, summarised below. Te Manat Waka, working with the Minister of Transport and Associate Minister(s) of Transport, developed the GPS and the key outcomes agreed upon by the government through investment stra tegy, strategic priorities and objectives, and activity classes. The GPS then guides investment decision making by Waka Kotahi and regional councils. Waka Kotahi, through its independent board and commissioning functions, and regional councils decide the i nvestment mix nationally and regionally, respectively. Waka Kotahi, along with regional councils, territorial authorities and council controlled organisations (CCOs), deliver on transport investments through planning, procurement processes, and contractin g. These same organisations, and their contracted providers, then implement the GPS direction through design, consultation processes, construction, and service delivery. However, it is important to note the limitations of any individual GPS. Figure prov ides a conceptual diagram that highlights the following: The legacy effects of previous investment decisions that are fully completed and can be some years in the making (eg, the Roads of National Significance Funnel, S.C., Rogers P.J. (). Purposeful program theory: Effective use of theories of change and logic models . Hoboken: Wiley. INTRODUCTION
Advancing progress on the projects as expeditiously as possible in order to meet sponsors expectations Have an extended Interim Alliance period in order to establish key scope outcomes Proceed with the Project Alliance agreement when scope and risks have been better understood.
Air New Zealand, Auckland Airport. Major ports such as Auckland and Tauranga Public transport operators, freight companies (such as Mainfreight), mobility services provides (such as Uber, Mevo) Iwi and hap Government has responsibilities under Te Tiriti o Waitangi to acknowledge Mori as partners and their status as tangata whenua the indigenous people of Aotearoa. Effective, meaningful partnership with Mori is key to improving transport and broader social outcomes for Mori, and to ensure the transport system serves all New Zealanders equitably. Mori are disproportionately represented in transport statistics such as drink driving, and Mori in regional New Zealand are strongly impacted by investment in infrastructure like roads. Government has a responsibility to improve transport outcomes for al l New Zealanders including Mori, while Mori and iwi groups will also have an expectation that they are meaningfully consulted on transport decisions that impact their everyday lives. Iwi and hap also have access to local peoples, connections, and expertise that may otherwise be missing from a Crown and central government perspective in policy development. Non government organisations, industry associations, or other groups advocate for the perspectives and interests of particular parts of the sector. This includes groups advocating for particular types of transport (e.g., cycling advocacy groups), neighbourhood groups (e.g., for a public road) and other groups that may be established to support or oppose a specific policy or initiative. Engaging with these groups is a critical aspect of a democratic process and good policy development, as they can bring important perspectives, data and evidence to the policy process, and draw attention to issues that might otherwise be overlooked.
Although the communication with ETU was hugely beneficial, assignment of a Project Advisor was not communicated clear, hence it is hard to evaluate this practice.
Annex V Prevention of Pollution by Garbage from Ships ; and Annex VI Prevention of Air Pollution from Ships . Two annexes are compulsory for all states party to MARPOL. New Zealand acceded to MARPOL and the compulsory annexes in and is now party to four of the six annexes. In November , Cabinet CABMIN agreed to New Zealands accessio n to MARPOL Annex VI. MARPOL Annex VI seeks to address the impact of shipping emissions on human health and environments in and around port communities, as well as on climate change and ozone layer depletion. GHG emissions from international shipping are not covered under the Paris Agreement The share of shipping emissions in global anthropogenic emissions has increased from . percent in to . percent in . Emissions are projected to increase from about percent of emissions in to to percent of emissions by . Emissions from international shipping and aviation are not covered by the Paris Agreement and not included in national targets. Instead, efforts to reduce GHG emissions from international shipping are coordinat ed through an IMO sub committee the Marine Environment Protection Committee (MEPC). Intersessional Working Groups may be convened between meetings of the MEPC. This includes the Intersessional Working Group on the Reduction of Greenhouse Gas Emissions ( ISWG GHG), which meets to discuss technical matters and coalesce views outside of the committee meetings. In MEPC adopted a package of technical measures for new ships and energy efficiency measures to reduce emissions from existing ships This added a new chapter to MARPOL Annex VI entitled Regulations on energy efficiency for ships. The two measures included are: . the Energy Efficiency Design Index (EEDI), which requires new ships to comply with minimum mandatory energy efficiency performance levels, increasing over time through different phases; and . the Ship Energy Efficiency Plan (SEEMP), which establishes a mechanism for ship owners to improve the energy efficiency of both new and existing ships using operational measures. These measures we re the first ever mandatory global GHG reduction regime for an entire industry sector.
Any advice given on the suitability of A, C, and D emissions codes to be acceptable from New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA)
Any minutes of meetings between MOT and any or all of the entities mentioned above (physical or virtual) where this subject is discussed (it need not be the only topic of discussion).
Any minutes of meetings between Ministry of Transport and New Zealand Transport Agency to discuss the suitability of A, C, or D emission codes
As New Zealands most complex transport infrastructure project, the fees paid to the board members will set a precedent. We consider that it would be appropriate to benchmark the fees members of the ALR Board to that of similar boards in the sector. The individuals sought to for the ALR Board are of a similar level of skill and experience to the boards we have benchmarked against.
As with all written communication, do a thorough proofread yourself, and get your speech or presentation peer reviewed. Images and image copyright It is tempting to fill your presentation with striking images downloaded from the internet. With the ease of grabbing images, clipart, logos and photos via Google and other websites, people often forget that many of those images are copyrighted, or not to be used without express permission of the content owner. Including the source URL of an image does not discharge your obligation to seek permission to use it. When developing presentations that will be sent or shown externally, please respect and be aware of image copyrights. See our guidance around sourcing images or photographs , or (with some advance notice) ask one of the Engagement and Communications tea m to help or advise. If you are using images or graphs outside the Ministry (including sourced from Google), ensure you have received permission from copyright holders to use each image. This is a legal requirement. If permissions are not obtained, the Ministry is vulnerable to copyright litigation.
As you are aware, the proposed threshold for retaining lower speed limits includ es a positive benefit cost ratio, public acceptance demonstrated through a consultation process and percent of drivers complying with the lower speed limit. We note this is a higher threshold than required for speed limits going forward. We expect some RCAs may push back on this criteria , and the costs associated with meeting these requirements . We will keep you on feedback received on this, and other aspects of the draft new Rule, once consultation is underway. The next step is Ministerial and departmental consultation Subject to your agreement, we will undertake consultation with the following departments concurrently with Ministerial consultation : NZTA, New Zealand Police, Treasury, WorkSafe, Accident Compensation Corporation, Department of Internal Affairs and Ministry of Education. We will inform the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Department of Corrections and Department of Conservation (the latter two departments set speed limits for roads under the Rule, for example, in prison grounds and conservation areas) . Timeline and next steps Ministerial and departmental consultation Wedne sday April Tuesd ay April Cabinet Office lodgement deadline am, Thursday May
Communication improved with the addition of the project advisor. We were able to discuss and anticipate regulatorycompliance issues that were outside the scope of an immediate Part amendment application in progress. I think this helped make the immedi ate application more efficient for the CAA.
Confident presentation skills come with experience and practice. Run through your presentationspeech out loud at least once. This will help you get an idea of timing and allow you to tweak the length of the presentationspeech if necessary. If you can run through the presentationspeech with a live audience, even better. Ask a colleague to listen or use a team meeting or another internal meeting as an opportunity to practice and take on board feedback.
Conflict of interest management policies will be put in place for the ALR Board. Members will recuse themselves from decision making for any issues which may conflict with their other roles. Appointments Process I can confirm that an appropriate process has been followed in making the proposed appointment decision s. This process included: public advertisement of the roles, shortlisting and interviews, a conflict s of interest check, a background check , consultation with Auckland Council on the Chair candidate and in developing the position descriptions , as well as caucus and M inisterial cons ultation. The Independent Mori Statutory Board also provided support across Chair and member interviews, and an independent Chair was also contracted to provide support for the Chair interviews. The Mayor of Auckland Council has indicated his support of Hon Dame Wildes appointment. Fees The ALR Board is classified as a Group , Level Governance Board under the Cabinet Fees Framework. The range for the Chair is between and , per day, and members is between and per day.
First quarterly report delivered November
Given the ALR Projects scale and complexity, the significant skills and experience required to govern and the high profile of the ALR Project, Sponsor Ministers propose a fee exception from the Cabinet Fees Framework. The proposed fee is , per day for the Chair and , per day for Members.
How has the GPS changed priorities regarding what is negotiated, put forward, and funded What other factors are helping or hindering mode shift, and how does the GPS interact with them What are the most useful tools and methods for observing the impact of the GPS on mode shift Are there barriers and opportunities to increasing mode shift through NLTF decision making The fo llowing themes were concluded from the breakout group discussions. There was an overall agreement with the findings and implication statements a No new data sources were identified but TIO analyses were recommended. b The implication statements are necessarily simplified and therefore, only provide partial explanations, and come with caveats. Funding more work for mode shift a Along with the requirement of the NLTF to give effect to the GPS, the GPS and signals new ways of allo cating funds have led to more mode shift promoting work being funded. b Funding shorter term, project based work as currently done can contribute to mode shift when they are connected coordinated over spatial and time scales and modes. However, it was uncl ear to participants whether there were sufficiently effective mechanisms to promote coordination and to look beyond the three year cycles. c Look for an increase in the whole pie and how it is divided both considerations matter. Geography matters a Mode sh ift means different things in different places and times and will therefore be responsive to different signals. b The bottom up nature of decision making affects what is put forward or even considered in the first place. Local politics and priorities matter over and above the GPS. Time matters a There are significant time lags to see the impact of a shift in what is talked about at local levels, what is put forward, funded, and built, and then to see outcomes. b Differing timelines between the GPS and other non transport planning that affect mode shift make it difficult to tease out the influence of the GPS specifically. Account for other significant factors impacting mode shift a While out of the scope of this evaluation, other factors, such as housing plans, fuel price changes, and so on, are critical to understanding the influence of the GPS on mode shift. Enabling evaluation and analysis a The tools to enable better analysis will help with evaluation and insights. b Data quality needs to be improved to be a trusted, accessible, and used source of information and allow trends to be observed. . STUDY PHASES
However, roadingother activities are sti ll more likely to be approved for funding than mode shift promoting activities. .. Triangulation of results Following the completion of all analyses, a triangulation exercise was conducted and determined the following: The overall pattern of increasing mode shift promoting activity in the NLTP following the GPS supports the interview and workshop discussions. While not a substantial change, we observed consistent differences following the introduction of GPS in the proportion of activities and costs categorised as supporting mode shift and the proportion of mode shift promoting activities staying relatively steady between and . The small change observed is in line with two observations from in depth enquiry analyses. Firstly, councils capacities to enable mode shift were constrained by their willingness and ability to co fund and resource more substantial work, even when NLTP funds were available. Secondly, turning the ship will be slow because each GPS period includes previous phase s of work. The priorities set in motion by the GPS will limit what was available for funding in the GPS (and beyond). However, interviewees explained that the phased nature of many big activities allows new priorities to take precedence, with new phases not progressing to having funding approved. The weighting exercise confirmed the interviewees recommendations to go beyond the formal GPS Activity Classes. This ensured appropriate counting and allowed for reporting of the work undertaken by coun cils to enable mode shift across their network. The Regional variation observed in the TIO analyses was in keeping with what was reported in interviews. Regional projects will respond to specific drivers and needs within Regional and local networks and the national priorities expressed in the GPS. A higher proportion of active and public transport activities were categorised in the uncertain possibleprobable category compared to roadingother activities. The uncertainty of this group of activities may m ean they are less likely to be funded and implemented in times of rising costs and funding constraints. From these analyses, it is impossible to ascertain why the difference occurs, however, the and periods saw an increase in the proportion of the more certain approved categorisation. One reason for the increase may be a growing maturity for mode shift promoting proposals as the sector becomes more proficient at planning, developing, and implementing non roading projects. Indicators of mode shi ft outcomes were generally more readily available than inputs and output. Still, it was recognised that it would take longer to see a change in outcomes, and the ability to attribute change to the GPS (compared to other factors) will be more difficult. Changes in priorities can be seen in what activities get included and funded through the NLTP, which can provide an early indication of the degree of influence of the GPS. . STUDY PHASES
If a number begins a sentence, page name, image title, or subheading, write the number out in full. Or try to reword the text so it doesnt begin with a number.
If representatives from other agencies are speaking, again try to co ordinate the presentations, so that messaging is aligned. If there is a question and answer session after your presentationspeech, anticipate any questions, and prepare appropriate answers.
Increasing the efficiency of transport spend : o Supporting you to issue the next Government Policy Statement on land transport (GPS) by June , including improving the evidence base o Increasing our focus on value for money through the NZTA Performance and Efficiency Plan . We recommend you continue to progress these workstreams over the next months. We will support you to: seek further policy decisions from Cabinet on these items progress the relevant Bills through the House successfully implement the reforms, and develop and issue the next GPS, setting out planned land transport expenditure to . These changes are important foundations we can build on , but there are further opportunities to improve long term performance of the land transport system The above reforms will help to address key issues in the roading system for example by providing greater flexibility in revenue raising , and by helping to make road use more efficient . However, longer term challenges remain . The land transport system is a key fiscal risk to the Crown Land transport investments are intended to be fully funded by users, primarily through road user charges (RUC) and fuel excise duty (FED) which are collated in the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) . However, investment has outstripped revenue since the s (see Figure ). The primary sources of revenue into the NLTF are FED and RUC which have not had rate increases since , resulting in an increasing reliance on Crown grants and loans (with a corresponding repayment obligation on the NLTF). Of the billion of funded expenditure across the three year GPS period, . billion is funded by revenue (which also includes Motor Vehicle Registration fees), and the remainder through a combination of time limited Crown loans (. billion) and grants (. billion) with both due to be exhausted in mid . Even after planned FED and RUC increases from , forecast revenue drops (due to time limited Crown capital contributions ending) , and there is still expected to be a shortfall between revenue and expenditure. These factors, in combination with expenditure ambitions, are contributing to an increasingly unsustainable NLTF. In the absence of additional revenue increases there will eithe r need to be a corresponding decrease in expenditure, andor additional direct Crown funding . s ()(i) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
International Transport Forum (ITF) Annual Ministerial Summit. AsiaPacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Ministerial meeting Delivering your priorities As the transport system steward, the Ministry can help to embed your priorities and connect them with whole of government priorities and advise you on how to use the available levers to achieve your short , medium , and longer term goals. This includes working with the transport agencies to develop a coherent strategic view of the longer term needs for the transport system. Medium term strategies that use a package of interventions to address specific issues may be developed or amended. For example, to respond to a sustained high level of deaths and serious injuries on New Zealand roads, the Road to Zero strategy has been developed. This aims to reduce road user death and serious injuries by percent by . The strategy supports a package of inter related measures which can be monitored and adjusted over time
International Transport Forum (ITF) Annual Ministerial Summit. AsiaPacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Ministerial meeting Delivering your priorities As the transport system steward, the Ministry can help to embed your priorities and connect them with whole of government priorities and advise you on how to use the available levers to achieve your short , medium , and longer term goals. This includes working with the transport agencies to develop a coherent strategic view of the longer term needs for the transport system. Medium term strategies that use a package of interventions to address specific issues may be developed or amended. For example, to respond to a sustained high level of deaths and serious injuries on New Zealand roads, the Road to Zero strategy has been developed. This aims to reduce road user death and serious injuries by percent by . The strategy supports a package of inter related measures which can be monitored and adjusted over time . Transport sector agencies also support a range of cross government strategies. For example, the Ministry and the CAA also have important roles in supporting the implementation of the Aotearoa New Zealand Aerospace Strategy, led by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment.
It is expected that the Total Mobility review will be completed in mid . Recommendations We recommend you: agree to the finalised Terms of Reference for the Total Mobility Review (Annex ) Yes No Document s ()(f)(iv) s ()(ba)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of TOTAL MOBILITY REVIEW (TERMS OF REFERENCE) The purpose of the Total Mobility Scheme is to ensure disabled people can participate in their communities in a safe and dignified manner The Total Mobility Scheme provides disabled New Zealanders with a percent discount on taxi rides up to a regionally adjusted cap. Th e funding of this subsidy is made up of : percent through a combination of the National Land Transport Fund (NLTF) and loc al governments regional rates ( percent NLTF and percent through local government ). funded by the Crown in December , Cabinet announced a permanent additional percent subsidy for Total Mobility to begin at the end of universal half price fares in line with Community Connect . Budget included funding to allow for the extension of this permanent additional percent subsidy. Eligibility for Total Mobility is targeted at those who are unable to use buses, trains or ferries in a safe and dignified manner because of a physical, intellectual, psychological, sensory or neurological disability. Assistance is offered in the form of subsidised door todoor transport services wherever providers of Total Mobility operate. There is substantial regi onal variation in the level of the maximum cap for subsidised Total Mobility trips. Currently percent of the total fare is covered, ranging from a maximum fare of . In there were approximately , Total Mobility cardholders . In , there were approximate ly . million subsidised Total Mobility trips made across New Zealand . The review of Total Mobility aims to improve the effectiveness of th e scheme across Aotearoa In August , Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency the research report Transport experiences of disabled people in Aotearoa New Zealand . This research included an examination of Total Mobility and found that Total Mobility costs time and effort and is sometimes an unreliable or unavailable transport option. The Total Mobility review allows for the examination of how key issues with the scheme can be addressed to improve the effectiveness and enhance the wellbeing of disabled people across Aotearoa. Some of the key issues that have been identified to include: Demand for Total Mobility exceeds the current supply of services Shortage of w heelchair accessible vehicles RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of Cost to user although this has been partly mitigated by the permanent percent discount for Total Mobility announced in December Regional variation in subsidy caps and supply of services Funding mechanisms , including PTAs having difficulties meeting their share of costs within their budgets These issues, which are expanded on in the Terms of Reference, prevent Total Mobility from making its full contribution to improving accessibility for disabled people in New Zealand. It is timely to review Total Mobility and identify improvements to ensure that it is fit for purpose. The draft Terms of Reference has been shared with stakeholde rs, and their feedback has been incorporated into a finalised version In April , we shared the draft Terms of Reference for the review with you and sought your feedback before sharing it with key stakeholders OC Refers . Since then, the draft Te rms of Reference has been shared with the following stakeholders: Disabled Peoples Organisations (DPO) Coalition Office for Disability Issues (Whaikaha Ministry for Disabled People) Age Concern NZ Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency Public transport authori ties (PTAs) Transport Special Interest Group Ministry of Education Service operators (including independent operators and the Small Passenger Services Association) Payment service providers and existing payment technology providers (e.g. Ridewise platform ) s ()(ba)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED Page of The Total Mobility review gives effect to New Zealands commitments under the UNCRPD and the New Zealand Disability Strategy Next steps s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(ba)(i) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) s ()(ba)(i) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of We will keep you regularly through the weekly report of progress of the review, including if there are any changes to expected timeframes Annex (the remaining pages) of this briefing has been withheld under Section ()(f)(iv) s ()(f)(iv) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of The Ministry understands that there has been no public engagement on variable road pricing or this study, and that it is currently being led by the Tauranga Commissioners rather than SmartGrowth leads. You are meeting with the Tauranga Commissioners on July to discuss growth and dynamic network pricing plans. Updates on key projects Tauriko West Enabling Work These are three intersection improvements on State Highway in Tauriko, to enable housing and industrial growth in Tauriko West, improve saf ety, and provide enhanced multi modal facilities. The enabled growth includes the first , homes in Tauriko West, primarily from three key developers including Kinga Oras Ferncliffe Farm. While Waka Kotahi has met all its deliverables on this project, the project is currently facing some challenges, with TCC facing hurdles to confirm the developer funding stack and delays in the processing of approvals under the Resource Management Act (RMA). Submissions on the southern Redwood Lane intersection closed on May . TCC is working with the Redwood Lane landowners to try to proactively resolve concerns the landowners have raised, particularly around providing development potential for these properties, to remove consenting risk and allow the proc urement to proceed for this part of the project TCC have asked for the final decision (to be made jointly by TCC and Waka Kotahi) on whether to complete the current procurement process to be held until mid June , to allow TCC time to reach these agree ments with the Redwood Lane landowners. The northern access has yet to be publicly notified, with submissions open until September . Therefore, it is very unlikely procurement for this section will continue as planned. Tauriko Network Connections Detai led Business Case This refers to the longer term package of improvements in and around Tauriko, including a new offline State Highway and significant improvements to State Highway A. This project is the TCC Commissioners top priority as it unlocks f urther industrial and housing growth in the western corridor (up State Highway ) and provides reliable and safe access for freight to and from the Port of Tauranga. The Detailed Business Case is expected to go to the Waka Kotahi Board for endorsement in the second half of . The total project cost is approximately billion, making it a very significant investment. Waka Kotahi is proposing the staged delivery of the project, with the last stage being the new offline SH section which would ideally be opened in . The RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of Commissioners have indicated they continue to support immediate delivery of the full project. Funding for future stages of the project is not confirmed and will be considered as part of the National Land Transport Progr amme prioritisation process. Connecting Mount Maunganui Waka Kotahi and TCC are currently developing an Indicative Business Case exploring transport improvements on State Highway Hewletts Road and surrounding areas, including around the Port of Tauranga. This project is currently focused on engaging with local hap, including those based at Whareroa Marae. The Indicative Business Case is due to be formally endorsed by Waka Kotahi and TCC by the end of , and the project will then move into the Detailed Business Case phase. Funding for future stages of the project is not confirmed and will be considered at part of the National Land Transport Programme prioritisation process. Takitimu North Link Stage is in construction, funded through the N ew Zealand Upgrade Programme (NZUP). While construction is progressing at pace Stage is currently facing cost increases and potential delays due to an appeal against an Archaeological Authority by a local hap, related to their desire for exclusive mana whenua over the affected area. Stage is funded through NZUP for route protection only, with RMA applications due to be lodged later in . Funding for future phases of Stage of the project is not confirmed and will be considered at part of the National Land Transport Programme prioritisation process . Recent funding matters s ()(g)(i) s ()(b)(ii) RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
It would be great to have better transparency on the range of challenges the ETU is working through amongst all emerging technology innovators and how the CAA prioritizes effort spent on each. Right now, there are a number of issues that could use further ETU support but its hard to know if we are overindexing or under indexing on engagement.
Jenny Smith, Senior Adviser then the senior adviser .
Last year, New Zealand successfully pushed for the st ICAO Assembly to adopt a long term global aspirational goal for international aviation of net zero carbon emissions by in support of the UNFCCC Paris Agreements temperature goal. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT UNCLASSIFIED Page of Reflective of t he need to take this journey together, some of you were in Montreal to witness this historic agreement. Within the SAA group, we are not short on ambition. o For example, Air New Zealand has set a interim science based target, validated by the Science Based Targets initiative, to reduce carbon intensity by . by , from a baseline. o Air NZ and Qantas both have an ambitious and major goal of reaching SAF use by . I was pleased to hear that, to his end, Air NZ procured its first SAF shi pment last year. However, ambition alone will not carry us. I cant understate the importance of collaboration to deliver. No one of us can go it alone. We need to pull our sleeves up and work together now to make net zero a reality.
Make sure that you use the latest Ministry PowerPoint template. See the guidance on Discover about how to find the template. The Engagement and Communications team have also developed a generic PowerPoint presentation that gives an overview of the Ministry and its work programme. The presentation has been designed so you can use all or some of the presentation, depending on what you need find the latest version of our PowerPoint template here. When preparing your PowerPoint, make sure the slides contain only key points, and do not repeat the whole content of your speaking notes. Aim for no more than six key points per slide. Follow the Ministrys style for fonts, bullet points and colours. If you are going to include a graph or an image, make sure they are the right size dont use a graph or an image that is too small for your audience to view. If possible, test your slides. Run the slide show can you read your slides from the last row of the room where you will be presenting Time yourself to make sure your presentation is the right length. Its better to run under time than overtime.
Make sure that your speechpresentation is saved in the correct Tardis folder. After you have presented, you may get requests for copies of your presentation. Before sending out your presentation, check that your presentation does not contain any sensitive material. Remove your speaking notes from the version that you send. If your presentation has many images, it may be a large file. Many organisations have a size limit for incoming email messages. Talk to IT Helpdesk about how you can reduce the file size before emailing ext ernally.
Mary, who has two young children, has a parttime job . Mary has a parttime job as a teachers aide.
Motor vehicle registration and annual licensing fees.
Ms Tukua offers significant experience in both serving as mana whenua and working closely with mana whenua, communities and Treaty Partners to improve outcomes across Tmaki Makaurau. Her experiences include working to establish governance and operations for mana whenua partnership at Eke Panuku, and leading a number of regeneration projects; chairing mana whenua forums; and working with a wide range of iwi to deliver plans and programmes.
My initial Part engagement was frustrating. The ETU addressed this and was able to provide answers to enable my team to make necessary decisions. In particular before our Application came up for review.
Once you have reviewed NZTAs advice, you will have to assess , in accordance with the
Pacific peoples are a diverse population made up of cultures from many different Pacific Islands. For the purposes of comparing high level ethnic groups in New Zealand they are referred to collectively as Pacific peoples.
Phase substantially complete by June
Phase complete by December
Preparing for the transition of the Board and the trans ition of funding from NLTF to core Crown funding Working with the Ministry of Transport, Treasury and MHUD to scope up the policy workstreams Developing a partnering strategy at the project layer PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Securing new premises for the project to move into by Septem ber, so that we can accommodate the alliance Developing workstreams for Thriving Infrastructure and care for people (incorporating workforce capacity) and Sustainability Developing the property and consenting strategies Developing our thinking on early wor ks opportunities. .Figure is a high level schedule for the next two years. This will obviously be refined once the UEP is procured. Figure Key risks .The appendix shows key risks identified in the last sponsors paper with commentary on the risk trend. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Appendix is withheld in full. Item Draft Investment Management System Letter May Purpose The purpose of this paper is to provide Sponsors with a draft Investment Manageme nt S ystem Letter and seek endorsement and any feedback before the Minister of Tr ansport sends the letter The draft Investment Management System Letter provides the Auckland Light Rail Board and Unit with clarity on Sponsor expectations related to the business case an d i nvestment decisionmaking process Recommendation s A LR Sponsors are invited to: Note that Sponsoring Ministers were delegated responsibility to confirm the appr oach to investment management by Cabinet in December Note that officials intend for Sponsoring Ministers to send the Investm ent M anagement System Letter to the Auckland Light Rail Unit Board Chair following any feedback from this Sponsors meeting Note that the draft Investment Management System Letter has been draf ted on behal f of Crown and Council ALR Sponsors Note that officials from Sponsoring agencies , as well as the Auckland Li ght R ail Unit and Te Waihanga have been consulted on the Investm ent M anagement System Letter Endorse the draft Investment Management System approach outlined in this briefing and the Investment Management System Letter B ackground In December , Cabinet authorised the Minister of Transport, Minister of Finance and Minister of Housing, in consultation with Auckland Council and mana whenua, to take decisions as required in relation to the detailed parameters of the next phase, the scope of the business case and the mandate to the new ALR Unit. While Ministers of Transport, Finance and Housing (Sponsoring Ministers) are accountable and responsible for decision making in this area, the intent of the collaborative governance arrangements consistent with Cabinet direction and in the Heads of Terms of the ALR Sponsors Agreement, is to seek the views of the current ALR Sponsors before providing direction to the ALR Board, and to speak to the ALR Board as onesponsor. In doing so we note that the mana whenua Sponsors have not yet been appointed. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Item Confirming the Investment Management System and associated processes Auckland Light Rail (ALR) is a unique project that sits outside of Governments traditional transport project Investment Management System (IMS) for transport projects . This includes different approaches to governance, investment decision making, business case, funding and financing. Officials recommend that Sponsors clarify with the Auckland Light Rail Board (the Board) expectations around the IMS to be applied, specific areas the business case is expected to include, and to direct the ALR Unit to consult with Crown officials as work progresses. A draft letter to effect this is attached to this briefing (appendix ) . T here are two sections of the Investment Management System Letter officials would like to direct Sponsors attention to: The point of entry for the business case the range of options and decisions that are expected to be within scope of the b usiness case to be ex plored further Funding and financing options confirming a public service delivery model which rules out Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) and other programme level private financing options ALR business case point of entry The Tunnelled Light Rail (TLR) option with indicative Sandringham Road alignment was one of three options assessed in the Indicative B usiness Case. Cabinet agreed that the TLR option would be taken forward into the detailed planning phase with further work required to confirm the scope of the project in advance of a final investment decision. This section of the letter seeks to provide expectations on what options and decisions are in scope for exploration in the business case and those that do not require revisiting given the decisions made by Cabinet. The presentation of options in the business case will be critical to allow Sponsors to be properly exposed to the trade offs across important aspects of the project and wider programme. Officials recommend that a wide set of options are explored in the business case , in order to help ensure the best possible outcomes are considered for the final investment decision. This approach is reflected in the attached draft IMS Letter. Ahead of finalising the IMS letter for signing and sharing with the Auckland Light Rail Board Chair, officials seek feedback from Sponsors on its content. The areas of optioneering expected in the business case and included in the draft IMS Letter are described in the following sections . Mode options T he Cabinet decision and subsequent announcements specifically highlighted TLR as the preferred mode to be taken forward. The choice of mode defines the speed, capacity and design requirements for the tunnels and other structures, materially impacting costs and benefits . PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Item W hile it is not the purpose of the business case to relitigate the Cabinet decision on the TLR mode and other aspects , it is vital that it contains sufficient analysis to confirm the final recommended mode is the best value investment option for New Zealand and provides a robust evidence base that stands up to challenge. To this end officials recommend in the business case: if any information is identified that challenges the Light Rail m ode r ecommendation from the IBC we expect this to be raised with Sponsors assessing the range of mode options within the Light Rail definition. Route alignment T he TLR option recommended through the IBC and approved by Cabinet assumed an alignment that followed Sandringham Road. Limited analysis of different route options within the Sandringham and Dominion corridor was undertaken due to the breadth of options already under consideration and associated time constraints. Tunnelling, as opposed to surface running, allows for variations to the TLR alignment that may serve different locations, optimising costs and benefits both for the trans port and urban development components . Officials recommend that flexibility is provided to develop the optimum alignment, noting the associated impact on station locations (described in the following section), along the identified corridor, particularly for the tunnelled sections. Station locations The Cabinet decision did not include specific recommendations about station locations but did note the need for alignment with the Kinga Ora Large Scale Projects being delivered within the corridor to maximise benefits, with particular reference to Mt Roskill and Mangere. Station locations and route alignment are highly dependent, but there are some separate points to note, for instance t here may be benefit to providing early certainty to Auckland Counci l and Kainga Ora (as well as the wider market) , about the general location of stations to avoid suboptimal development in these areas, particularly where investment decisions are made ahead of the Auckland Light Rail Final Investment Decision (FID). Officials recommend that flexibility is provided for station location options to be developed along the identified corridor, leaving the number and location open to more detailed analysis, with particular consideration given to how certainty can be provided to planned developments. Staged approach to delivery Cabinet did not make specific recomme ndations about staging other than to explore staging options as part of the FID for both the transport and urban development components. A staged or phased approach to delivery could improve the risk profile, increase speed of benefits realisation and ena ble optionality to work within any identified constraints, such as affordability . PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Item Officials recommend that flexibility is provided to the Board to explore staging options. G rade separation Cabinet did not make specific recommendations about grade separation but did note the importance of tunnelling to support connection in to the rapid transit network and to reduce disruption to business and residents. While t he need for a tunnelled section through the central isthmus was integral to Cabinets decision, there may be benefits in reducing the extent of tunnelling, such as potentially reducing costs and emissions . Officials recommend that the Unit notes the importance of tunnelling through the central business district and explore grade separation options further south. Integration with Auckland Waitemata Harbour Connections (AWHC) The Cabinet decision noted the need to align and integrate decision making on the ALR and AWHC projects , but did not define the approach. This section of the IMS letter clari fies that the projects are separate, but that there is an expectation that information will be shared and the business case s should clearly demonstrate how the projects will integrate with each other and the rapid transit network more broadly . Other i ntegration options will be provided when policy decisions are sought on the parameters of the delivery entity for ALR later in . Urban development and local bulk infrastructure Cabinet recommended that the project be planned as an integrated transport and urban development programme but did not make specific decisions, such as in relation to the location and density options to be incorporated. It is critical that urban development as well as transport options are developed to optimise investment across both areas. Officials recommend that the importance of providing a range of urban development options is made clear and that these are incorporated into the business case work . Funding and financing options Ministry and Treasury officials understand that by agreeing to progress the Auckland Light Rail project using a Public Service Delivery model in June CAB MIN refers Cabinet was explicitly ruling out delivering the project under the New Zealand Public Private Partnership Model or private financing options similar to the model presented by CDPQ and the New Zealand Super Fund. Subsequent to this, a range of funding and financing options were examined in the indicative business case, with further work to be done through the detailed planning phase. The December Cabinet decisions that confirmed progressing to the DBC stage CAB MIN, included continuing work to recommend a funding and financing package including exploring Crown, Council and value capture PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Item sources. No specific funding or financing sources were ruled in or out in Cabinets decision. In setting its expectations for development of the business case, officials recommend reconfirming, for the avoidance of doubt, Sponsors expectations of a public service delivery model. This will ensure that the ALR Board has clarity around the scope of their work and as they progress with procuring advisory services. Officials do not recommend ruling out the business case investigating other opportunities to utilise a broader range of funding and financing tools at this stage. Some of these options will include private sector financing, such as the use of the IFF levy SPV model, and the urban development funding tools under the Urban Development Act, and development partnerships. Further policy work on funding and financing including development of specific guidance and expectations is continuing as part of the ALR policy programme, and officials will seek Sponsor guidance on options, including smaller scale commercial arrangements , in the near term. Further guidance to the Unit on Sponsor preferences to inform the business case can be provided subsequently. Consultation Sponsoring agencies , have been involved in related discussions and the development of this letter over the preceding months including consultation on the draft letter attached. Te Waihanga and the Auckland Light Rail Unit have also been provided with the draft letter and have provided comment. N ext steps Feedback from Sponsors will inform a final draft of the letter which will be given to Sponsoring Ministers for approval. This is expected to take place in May. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT Item APPENDIX Appendix released separately . PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT
Recognise and value the accessibility benefits of mode shift in regional and provincial settings, alongside the emissions and congestion reduction benefits in urban areas. Improve the ability to monitor progress towards mode shift within the transport investment and operations system and respond to opportunities to optimise mode shift within the existing network . Investment evaluations need to account for the time lag between investment and const ruction and use and include measures of inputs and outputs . Consider how decision making about transport investment can better reflect the integrated transport and land use approach and technical skills required for change .
Speak clearly and confidently. Make sure that you stick to your allotted time. Always take a hard copy of your presentationspeech with you. If you are delivering a PowerPoint presentation, print out your speaking notes as a back up and reference. If you are not presenting using PowerPoint, consider writing your speech notes on A paper or postcard sized papercard. Conferences may ask you to send your presentationspeech electronically beforehand, and this should be emailed as a PDF version. Remove your speaking notes from the version that you send. Discuss with the Engagement and Communications team the most appropriate way to take an electronic back up of your presentation (for example, stored on an IronKey or USB drive).
Sport Waitkere and Healthy Families Waitkere acknowledge the important place of mana whenua and their whakapapa links to Hikurangi the Waitkere Ranges. Therefore, mana whenua and all Mori are a priority in the planning of programmes, workshops, activations, mentoring, resources and events so as to ensure they continue to lead healthy and active lives We recommend Mori governance and leadership at every level to support Mori to achieve their aspirations. Guidelines outlining expectations that L ocal and Regional Transport Plans need to meet would help achieve this outcome. It would also create a framework for accountability against measurable deliverables.
Supports flexibility and innovation Uncertainty of scope (having to refine the scope further would delay the procurement) Transparent pricing mechanism Supports flexibility and innovation A requirement to achieve non cost outcomes and achieve col laboration with the ALR group, Sponsors and Partners
Talk to your manager find out about training opportunities for PowerPoint and presentation skills. If you are new to presenting, you may want to join a local Toastmasters group to gain more confidence and experience. The Write Group have produced a useful guide to making a speech . Think about presentations and presenters that you have liked or not liked. What aspects made them great or not so great The internet is full of examples of effective speakers the TED talk series is a good place to start: www.ted.com .
Thanks to CentrePort for the work their tug crews have done in challenging circumstances to help prevent maritime incidents escalating. Acknowledging also the impact this has had and the concerns raised in their letter. Cabinet will be considering this matter in coming weeks and we hope to be able to make an announcement shortly after about next steps. There is considerable work going into finding solutions for this issue. We recognise that we need to consider both the short and long term provision of EORC services and how we can mitigate risk now and in the future, given the pressing nature of these issues. However we are also aware that the right solution has to be found. Thank them for their input into the scoping and discovery work last year which has formed the basis for the business case work. Does CentrePort have any suggestions about how this risk can be managed now Or how it can be managed in the future
The ALR Board will benefit from Ms Tukuas experience and relationships in working with mana whenua in Tmaki Makaurau. While Ms Tukua is not appointed to represent mana whenua in Tmaki Makaurau (mana whenua will be represented alongside the Crown and Auckland Council as project Sponsors), her appointment will ensure te ao Mori is embedded into the Board from its inception.
The Crown Parliament The House (of Representatives) The Cabinet An Act A Bill A Budget A Minister .
The ETU project advisor construct has been an excellent development that has improved communication with the CAA significantly, particularly in the novel areas.
The Muslim community is Muslim communities (note the plural) . Ethnic communities are ethnically diverse communities . If were talking about both, its Muslim and other ethnically diverse communities .
The TIO data analysis complemented the interview findings. While the trend is towards more mode shift activities, it is a gradual shift over time. Many NLTP investment activities support multiple modes, but this is not visible using the TIO activity class categories alone. Noticeable differences were seen when comparing the manually categorised activities with the TIO activity class categories. Figure . Compa ring regional variation in the percentage of activities and percentage of cost by weighted category Percentage of activities Percentage of cost for activities (a) (b) Roadingother activities (c) (d) Active transport activities (e) (f) Public transpport activities
The core of the Rail Plan remains fit for purpose. The r ecent adverse weather impacts on the transport n etwork have reinforced the requirement for a resilient and reliable network. A full, first principles update of the Rail Plan alongside GPS would not be feasible given the short timeframe until the publication of the GPS. More importantly, it would no t result in any substantive changes to the long term strategy outlined in the Rail Plan. Officials recommend that the next Rail Plan is developed and released before public consultation of GPS , which would require work to start in late or early (to allow months to update the Rail Plan).
The extent to which the GPS can influence projects was considered limited by a councils political willingness, funding and resourcing capacity. Implication: the scope of change will be constrained. Specific active and public transport activity classes with increased funding allocations made it easier to approve mode shift promoting projects. Implication: more mode shift promoting projects should be observable in what was funded. . Analysis and interpretation Phase The analysis and interpretation phase focused on investment priorit isation using data extracted from Transport Investment Online (TIO). The analysis was informed firstly by synthesising findings from Phases and stakeholder feedback and guidance on that synthesis. .. Findings synthesis The results from the data asse ssment, quantitative and qualitative information gathered in Phases were brought together into synthesis to guide subsequent analysis and interpretation and were derived from: the framework development (including the Orientation workshop) applying the framework through a data scan of available information, including exploratory TIO analyses, and in depth interview insights on the influence pathways between GPS and mode shift. The synthesis resulted in a summary of findings from work up to this poin t (Table ). In addition, the synthesis identified opportunities and barriers for enhancing the impact of the GPS on mode shift that is relevant to how the impact can be observed and evaluated. Table Summary of findings from Phases Overall impact of the GPS Was there a shift in priority from government Overall, yes. There was a shift towards non vehicle modes. Some councils were already on the way. For others, it was a bigger change in focus.
The interviewees experience with RLTPs and NLTPs. Their response to the changes in GPS . The approach they took when interpreting and applying the GPS investment signals. How that approach has changed (or not) following the intr oduction of GPS . How they navigated through the process of prioritising projects and funding allocations. Any evidence they see of change supporting mode shift, such as decisions about priorities, how funds are allocated, political support, and the visibility of mode shift goals in policies and plans. Their thoughts on how the GPS will impact mode shift and how future iterations could be improved to further support mode shift. The interviews represent the experiences and perceptions of people involve d in different ways in prioritising mode shift promoting activities. They were semi structured, with the topics above used as prompts to direct the conversation flow. We used narrative methods to help reduce the participants burden to recall specific deta ils by allowing them to focus on the events and processes that were significant to them. To gain additional insights, we also encouraged interviewees to discuss relevant examples, such as the process a particular project went through to be included in an R LTP submission. This allowed us to draw a rich picture documenting the application of GPS investment signals and the linkage between the inputs, outputs, and outcomes relating to mode shift. Interviews were reviewed to identify common themes summarised be low with quotes (in italics) to illustrate points. The overall impact of the GPS Registering a change in the signal on the importance of non private vehicle modes The GPS was considered a strong departure from previous iterations by all interview participants, who recognised its increased emphasis on mode shift. Participants in some locations (particularly the metro areas) spoke about how the changes aligned with their councils direction. In contrast, others in regional areas found that it was a more abrupt change away from a focus on safety and efficiency. The importance of a change in activity classes and fund allocations Participants noted that before and after the GPS , walking and cycling projects were often funded through local road acti vity classes, so there was little change in some respects. However, the new activity classes were generally seen as enabling mode shift promoting projects (such as rapid transit and transitional rail in and adding a second public transport activity cl ass to separate infrastructure and services in ). The change in direction made these participants consider different types of projects. The more funding that went into those activity classes where were pushing a lot of our program, the easier it is to get it through. The term packaging was used frequently to describe how projects were made to fit a particular funding class to fund necessary work. Packaging was a means of aligning projects with the GPS priorities through the strategic selection of activity class and terminology. . STUDY PHASES
The majority of respondents assessed that a Project Advisor added value to their engagement with the CAA.
The majority of respondents considered that a Project Advisor improved engagement with the CAA.
The majority of respondents considered that they had gained improved communication with CAA from assignment of a Project Advisor.
The progress we have made would be almost impossible without our Project Advisor. This is a huge acceleration for enabling emerging technologies to progress in New Zealand and is a major factor in our continued operations in the country.
The recommendations outlined in the draft Cabinet paper align with the approach taken
The recommended fees are lower than some Government infrastructure boards in the transport and urban sector (Kinga Ora, City Rail Link Limited) and equivalent to the daily rates for appointees to the Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency Board. This middle grou nd balances the complexity, scale and risk associated with the ALR Board in the context of Government pay restraint. The Minister for the Public Service has been consulted on this proposal, and has confirmed his support for the proposed fee exception. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT
The use of the interlock sentence for all detected drink driving offending A study to assess why the interlock sentence is not being fully utilised at Court A scoping study to ascertain what types of data can be utilised and from what agencies for: o The construction of an inter agency evaluation framework o A longitudinal evaluation study
This briefing provides a draft Cabinet paper for your consideration, should you wish to
Though Word inserts underlines automatically, remove this function by right clicking on them and selecting Remove Hyperlink . Only use underline in electronic Word documents . If a website or email address ends a sentence, use a full stop as normal.
Three categories each was assigned a value of . Two categories each was assigned a value of . One category assigne d a value of . These values were added to represent the approximate share of the activity associated with each category. For example, if an activity were categorised as roading and public transport, each component would be assigned a value of to indicat e that half of the activity supported roading and half supported public transport. Ideally, a more nuanced weighting would be preferred based on the exact share associated with each category. However, because this information was not consistently available , a cruder but pragmatic equal weighting was the most appropriate way to divide the activity between the categories. The weighting values were then multiplied by the activitys total cost to calculate the share of the cost associated with each category. Fo r example, if an activity cost , and had two categories, , would be assigned to each. It was recognised that this approach could place more weight on active modes when this is split between roading and active this was a limitation. In four c ases, the total cost of the activity included a negative value. These negative values were zeroed out to prevent issues with the analysis. The overall analysis focused on all activities included in the RLTPNLTP of each GPS period. This included all acti vities marked in the status column as included in RLTP, included in NLTP, funding approved, under review included in RLTP, under review included in NLTP, and under review funding approved. Draft activities and those included in previous R LTPs and NLTPs were excluded. Regional comparisons assessed differences in the weighted proportions of activities and costs in each category across seven regions: Northland, Auckland, Waikato, Bay of Plenty, Wellington, Canterbury, and Otago. For the prior itisation stages analysis, the funding priority attribute was used to filter the data into two groupings to identify the activities approved and committed for funding in the NLTP and the activities marked as possible or probable in the NLTP. Note : this analysis stage did not include RLTP activities (these were deselected using the status column). Table summarises the number of activities by weighted category included in the RLTPNLTP for each GPS period and the number of activities with multiple categories. Table Number and percentage of activities included in RLPTNLTP by weighted category, and number and percentage of activities with multiple categories Category (n) () (n) () (n) () Roadingother . . . Active transport . . . Negative payments were due to payments back to Waka Kotahi for projects where funding had been front loaded or council buy back of land. . STUDY PHASES
Three dimensional, full time, long service, long term, up to
To expedite the procurement process for both projects To ensure the most suitable market resources are applied to each project PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT
To facilitate innovative solutions across the transport system , we recommend meaningful engagement with communit ies as part of implementation . By presenting RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT the voice of community as of equal value to the voice of experts, our spaces and places will be better for everyone.
To reduce the tendering burden on the professional services market given current market conditions To attract specialist adviser resource that can support both projects where appropr iate.
We acknowledge many outcomes include creating safer roads, footpaths and cycleways throughout the GPS . These are key to deliver on the Strategic focuses of Safety, Better Travel Options, and Climate Change. They will also help meet the key outcomes of this Proposal.
We have also provided you w ith a draft letter for you to share with your Cabinet colleagues updating them on progress with LGWM. Recommendations We recommend you: discuss this briefing with officials YesNo
We recommend funding and resource be prioritised in areas with high deprivation and low levels of active travel, particularly in communities with higher numbers of Maori, Pasifika and Asian people .
We recommend that highly productive land should be given adequate consideration and prioritised in areas where planned transport infrastructure may occur . We see this land as a precious taonga that builds adaptive resilient communities , improves our local food systems and needs to be maintained. The Covid pandemic has also raised questions over current practices around growing food. Planning local food systems, where highly productive land is available, into communities and neighbourhoods will help create better and more equitable access to food. We hope you can consider our say in your feedback discussions on the draft Government Policy Statement for Land Transport .
We see an opportunity for the transport system to shape land use, urban form and design streets that create more playable neighbourhoods and communities with child friendly streets . Play Streets are one example of this, leading to equitable access to streets , increased physical activity, social connection within neighbourhoods, and increased perceptions of safety. The benefits of social RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT interaction for mental and physical wellbeing can also reduce the rates of preventable chronic disease and reduce the burden on our health system.
We support the GPS guiding the transport sector to work with housing and urban authorities to ensure active travel . We recommend taking a Healthy Streets approac h. This internationally recognised framework outlines key measures to check the health of a street and offers design criteria to creating streets that encourage multi modal use. This aligns well with the key outcomes of this framework outlined in this Draft Government Policy Statement on Land Transport Inclusive access, Healthy and Safe people, Economic Prosperity, Environmental Sustainabilit y, and Resilience and Security.
We support the Government Policy Statement on Land Transport to ensure consistent direction at a national level to facilitate policy and assist in good decision making around investment. It will align the Regional and Local Transport plans to ensure a consistent nationwide transport network that will help New Zealand be ready to meet the objectives outlined in the Road to Zero strategy and Zero Carbon Act.
We support the Strategic focuses o f Safety, Better Travel Options , and Climate Chang e. This further reinforc es the critical need to create spaces for people over vehicles and encourage active modes of transport to improve people s wellbeing.
What type of event is it What is the make up of the audience Who else will be presentingattending Is a Minister or anyone else from the Ministry presenting at the same event Will there be any media attending the event What have I been asked to presentspeak on How long have I been asked to presentspeak for How formal or informal is the presentationspeech expected to be How much will the audience already know about my topic What will the audience want to know about, and what will be relevant and interesting to them Will my presentationspeech be made available to the public (for example, on a conference website), or to meeting participants Will I be expected to respond to question and answers Will it be onlinein person or a mix Will it be recorded and where will it be shared
While the ALR Board will not be responsible for a comparably significant budget or organisational environment during the detailed planning phase, its responsibility is to plan a complex project that will provide the parameters for how a significant budget will be spent over the next ten years a decision which carries significant economic, political, social and reputational risks. Progressing the project requires the ALR Board to oversee an integrated transport and urban development work programme, and the alignment of decision making across central government and Auckland Council. Navigating the relationships and decisions s ()(a) PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY TE MANAT WAKA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT required to progress the project across partner agencies and elected members will be a significant challenge. In addition, the ALR Board will need to build and maintain support for the project among communities and businesses in Auckland.
Writing Style Guide . Te Manat Waka Brand Guidelines .
Under the ERP cut in VKT as a goal by clear that for the first time, the Government underst ands that in the future we need to drive less to meet our climate and liveability goals (Sector stakeholder) Finally, others saw GPS as a prelude to the renewed commitment to Road to Zero and the current safer speed programme, GPS was noticeably stronger in its emphasis on road safety, although this may have also been due to Ministers looking to send stronger safety signals in . an increased emphasis on safety Road to Zero proposals for setting safer speed limits (Sector stakeholder) .. More integrated investment response As noted, GPS was a catalyst for new thinking about the role of the GPS and NLTF within a wider set of change levers and revenue sources. A government official reported that work had continued further definin g more integrated, programmatic investment responses. Informed by this work, the Emissions Reduction Plan identified the need for VKT reduction programmes within the next NLTP, GPS was also expected to continue the momentum towards a more joined up investment approach : thats the change that were now trying to drive how do we better think about what the best mix of interventions is for a place to deliver the outcomes that were seeking, and we need to do that in a more delivery programme based ap proach than we have done in the past (Government official) Ensuring critical dependencies are identified so value for money isnt squandered because there arent those supporting mechanisms around managing demand through urban form and other measures (Government official) Note, however, that another official suggested that after the more aspirational GPS , the land transport investment system now needed to move back towards a more feasible scope: probably now need to bring it back into what w e can deliver against Its great having ambitious statements of intent, but the funding that underpins that and activities that relate to that funding are very definitive, and the remit of what they can do is limited from the road controlling authori ties perspective there are limitations on what the State Highway can do (Government official) .. New investment decision framework Consistent with Waka Kotahi accounts, interviewees noted that GPS established an expectation of a significant review of the Investment Decision Making Framework (IDMF) and business case approach. The review conducted in led to an IDMF, Ministry for the Environment. . Te hau mrohi ki anamata Towards a productive, sustainable and inclusive economy: Aotearoa New Zealands first emissions reduction plan . Ministry for the Environment, May https:environment.govt.nzpublicationsaotearoa newzealands firstemissions reduction plan https:www.nzta.govt.nzplanning andinvestmentfunding andinvestinginvestment decision making framework review Under the Strategic Priority Value for Money GPS stated that the appropriateness of current economic eval uation approaches should be prioritised to ensure they are fit for purpose eg, account for the full range of costs and benefits. This included investment policies, processes, tools, and guidance, including updates to the business case approach , criteria for prioritisation and assessment, and evaluation methodologies. APPENDIX TRENDS OBSERVED IN GPS OUTCOMES MONITORING
airline capacity levels of airline competition prices paid in the New Zealand m arket for both international travel and domestic travel
allow ALRL and NZTA with Auckland Council to proceed with the land swap proposal . Yes No
avoid complex sentence structures.
changes the deliverables for some projects
chicken and avocado. bacon, lettuce and tomato . pastrami, cheese and pickle on rye.
childlike egovernment enewsletter socioeconomic sublevel email.
is sensitive or controversial in nature; relates to a matter of significance within his portfolio responsibilit ies; relates to where the Minister has been previously briefed on a matter, to ensure they are kept up to; is likely to be in the news media or debated in the House. . The Ministry will provide the Minister with all information necessary for notification, including the request, the information at issue, and the decision the Ministry is taking. . Notification to the Minister will be provided on the working day before the decision is communicated to the requester, unless the circumstances of the particular request demand it to be carried out on the same day. It will be for the Ministers information only and no feedback is sought. Sending a copy of a sent response for information . The Ministry will work with the office of the Minister to identify responses where it is appropriate that a copy of a sent response be shared with the Minister for his information only. . The Ministry will provide the Minister with all the information provided to the requester. A copy of the response will be sent to the office of the Minister only after the response has been sent to the requester. Record keeping . The Ministry and the Minister will keep full and accurate records of interactions in relation to OIA requests, in accordance with normal prudent business practice, as required by section () of the Public Records Act . Assistance . The Office of the Ombudsman offers an advisory service on the operation of the Act. They can be contacted by email infoombudsman.parliament.nz or freephone . The Office should be contacted as early as possible to ensure it can answer any queries without delaying the response to an OIA request. Part Two: Proactive release of information Background . Cabinet Office Circular CO() mandates that Cabinet papers and associated minutes be proactively released within business days of decisions being made by Cabinet unless it is indicated it is not for publishing, or only partial material is to be . RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT
monitor and understand what is happening internationally, and how it affects, or may affect, New Zealands transport system influence relevant international standards to protect and promote New Zealands interests ensure New Zealand meets its international transport commitments . A wide range of international organisations influence New Zealands transport settings. Some of the key organisations the Ministry and transport agencies work with , and their role, are: International Civil Aviation Organi zation (ICAO) : sets standards and regulations for the aviation sector international safety, security, and environmental protections (under the Chicago Convention). International Maritime Organi zation (IMO): sets standards and regulations for the maritime sector (international safety, security, and environmental protections). International Labour Organi zation (ILO) : sets conditions of work and employment on ships (under the Maritime Labour Convention). United Nations working parties: New Zealand has obligations as a party to two United Nations Agreements relating to road vehicle and road vehicle standards. Under these agreements, regulations and standards are set to improve road safety and facilitate international trade. World Meteorological Organi zation (WMO) : fulfils New Zealands obligations under the World Meteorological Organi zation, the United Nations specialised agency for weather, climate, and water, by way of the Ministrys contract with MetService . Your engagement at the international level is important The Ministry will provide advice on where we consider there will be good value in your engagement in Ministerial level forums. Key opportunities over the next year may include: t he Transport and Infrastructure Council Pacific Transport Ministerial level meetings International Transport Forum (ITF) Annual Ministerial Summit AsiaPacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Ministerial meeting. Delivering your priorities As your Ministry, we can help to embed your priorities and connect them with whole ofgovernment priorities and advise you on how to use the available levers to achieve your short , medium , and longer term goals. This includes working with the transport agencies to develop a coherent strategic view of the longer term needs for the transpor t system.
road improvements road maintenance, operation renewals public transport im provements public transport services, maintenance, operation renewals walking cycling improvements walking cycling maintenance, operation renewals, road safety promotion, road policing demand management investment management, planning sector r esearch . Of the , activities included in the analysis, () had phases that fall into more than one of the eight analysis groups above. For simplicity, in subsequent analyses broken down by analysis group, each activity was included in all relevan t analysis groups if there was more than one for the activity. Figure summarises the total number of activities in each of the eight groups. Few activities in the maintenance, operation and renewals groups reflect the criteria from the Criteria list above as most such activities were classified as baseline activities and excluded from the analysis. In addition, we understand that between and , walking and cycling maintenance, operation and renewals were funded by the maintenance, operation an d renewals of local roads. In any case, most of our analysis below is focused on improvement activities. Most maintenance, operation and renewals activities are considered baseline activities less likely to be influenced by GPS policy priorities.
separate words in compound words prefixes and suffixes to words .
the licensing authority to grant scheduled international air services licences to New Zealand international airlines responsible for designating countries or territories for open aviation market licences responsible for authorising airline alliances . Under the Maritime Transport Act, you are responsible for authorising the carriage of coastal cargo by foreign ships, if you are satisfied that there are no New Zealand ships or ships under demise charter to a New Zealand based operator capable to carry the domestic cargo. In addition to the statutory functions exercised by you as Minister, statutory functions are exercised directly by the Secretary for Transport. The Secretary for Transport is: the licensing authority for foreign international airlines operating tofrom New Zealand the licensing authority for open aviation market licences (after the designation by the Minister) responsible for authorising commercial non scheduled international flights. Waka Kotahi, the CAA and MNZ also have statutory positions (Director of Land Transport, Director of Civil Aviation and Director of Maritime NZ) who have statutory functions, powers and duties in relation to regulatory activities in their sectors. In some cases, those functions, powers and duties must be exercised independently, such as enforcement. These are known as statutorily independent functions. Crown monitoring, assurance, and oversight You have a role in appointing board members to the transport agencies and transport Crown entities , setting expectations for them and monitoring their performance. Crown entity monitoring and oversight is a key mechanism to deliver your priorities The majority of service delivery and regulation in the transport sector is carried out through the transport Crown entities and companies: Waka Kotahi, MNZ, the CAA, Auckland Light Rail (ALR) Limited and City Rail Link Limited (CRLL) . The Transport Accident Investigation Commission delivers independent, no blame safety investigations of accidents and incidents. Because of the nature of their roles and functions, Crown entities and companies operate with varying levels of statutory independence from their Responsible Minister. Note that MetService, KiwiRail and Airways fall within the State Owned Enterprises portfolio instead of your Transport portfolio. Monitoring over all three is undertaken by the Treasury. RELEASED UNDER THE OFFICIAL INFORMATION ACT KEY TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES
use and or or on the second tolast point place a comma after the last word before the and or or.
Draft Cabinet paper to Minister on review of the scheme in Q
Further work, if any, to be determined after Cabinet has taken its decisions in Q.
Independent Review Function Update on Scope and Cost Recovery: Next Steps GPS Implementation Update for the Month Ending September Meeting with CentrePort and Greater Wellington Regional Council Auckland Light Rail land disposal Toll Road Proposals Cost Allocation Model and Road User Charges Titles taken from here: https:www.transport.govt.nzassetsUploadsBriefing L istNovember .pdf
Minister is always capitalised but ministerial is not. When naming Ministers, Ambassadors, Mayors, High Court Judges, Justices, Chief Justice and Councillors, in the first instance use their full name and title and then use TITLE SURNAME thereafter. For example: Transport Minister, Hon Michael Wood in the first instance and Minister Wood thereafter . The Ministers portfolio should be referred to as Transport.
New Zealands Maritime Rules place no obligations on recreational boat users to demonstrate before going out on the water that they understand and practise safe boating behaviour. In that Inquiry the Commission made recommendations that the Ministry of Transport reconsider skipper licensing and undertake research on the merits of introducing a system for regulating recreational boating, incorporating licensing, registration, and boat design standards. In relation to licensing, the Ministry of Transport responded: .the Ministry remains of the view that safety education campaigns are the most appropriate way to share maritime knowledge with recreational boat users. The Ministry considers that the introduction of skipper licensing would be a blunt instrument for dealing with a basic safety issue. This notwithstanding, the Ministry has consulted afresh with Maritime New Zealand on this recommendation and, as time and resources permit, Maritime New Zealand will explore the merits of initiatives such as skipper education and a licensing regime as potential mechanisms for achieving public safety objectives. If new evidence suggests that introducing skipper licensing, in addition to educational campaigns, would make a material difference to recreational boating safety, the Ministry will reconsider its position. In relation to the recommendation that research be undertaken to determine the merits of a regulatory system for the recreational maritime sector, the Ministry of Transport responded: The Ministry accepts this recommendation. The Ministry routinely reviews regulatory systems overseas and will continue to do this for the recreational maritime sector. In the Commissions Watchlist, which draws attention to those transport related concerns of high social, economic, or environmental risk, recreational boat users essential knowledge and skills was highlighted as a matter of concern. The Commission noted: Strategies to promote safety in New Zealands recreational sector focus on encouraging selfreliance and skipper responsibility through safety awareness and education. The Transport Accident Investigation Commissions view is that the system is flawed bec ause it relies on users knowing the rules, regulations, and bylaws, but does not require them to demonstrate such knowledge before taking a craft on water. This situation is anomalous with the aviation and road sectors. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
New Zealands Maritime Rules place no obligations on recreational boat users to demonstrate before going out on the water that they understand and practise safe boating behaviour. In that Inquiry the Commission made recommendations that the Ministry of Transport reconsider skipper licensing and undertake research on the merits of introducing a system for regulating recreational boating, incorporating licensing, registration, and boat design standards. In relation to licensing, the Ministry of Transport responded: .the Ministry remains of the view that safety education campaigns are the most appropriate way to share maritime knowledge with recreational boat users. The Ministry considers that the introduction of skipper licensing would be a blunt instrument for dealing with a basic safety issue. This notwithstanding, the Ministry has consulted afresh with Maritime New Zealand on this recommendation and, as time and resources permit, Maritime New Zealand will explore the merits of initiatives such as skipper education and a licensing regime as potential mechanisms for achieving public safety objectives. If new evidence suggests that introducing skipper licensing, in addition to educational campaigns, would make a material difference to recreational boating safety, the Ministry will reconsider its position. In relation to the recommendation that research be undertaken to determine the merits of a regulatory system for the recreational maritime sector, the Ministry of Transport responded: The Ministry accepts this recommendation. The Ministry routinely reviews regulatory systems overseas and will continue to do this for the recreational maritime sector. In the Commissions Watchlist, which draws attention to those transport related concerns of high social, economic, or environmental risk, recreational boat users essential knowledge and skills was highlighted as a matter of concern. The Commission noted: Strategies to promote safety in New Zealands recreational sector focus on encouraging selfreliance and skipper responsibility through safety awareness and education. The Transport Accident Investigation Commissions view is that the system is flawed because it relies on users knowing the rules, regulations, and bylaws, but does not require them to demonstrate such knowledge before taking a craft on water. This situation is anomalous with the aviation and road sectors. PROACTIVELY RELEASED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT TE MANAT WAKA
Though I live in Petone, I am originally from Mt Cook Wellington . Do not use angle or curly brackets .
We have started a Metro Operating Model Review to resolve the funding issue in the long term but suggest at least million to support metro rail through . Please note that depending on the finalisation of underspend estimates,
Outline of transport work programme for Extreme Weather Recovery Committee included in briefing to Minister in Q
Crown funding and financing (. billion)
Ministry for Primary Industries ( MPI Biosecurity New Zealand)
Ministry of Business , Innovation and Employment (Immigration New Zealand)
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
New Zealand Customs Service (Chair)
Small, semiregular increases in fuel taxes for
The New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) is recommending three new roads be tolled ,
The proposals have been developed by NZTA . The Ministry has provided input and
just need to get into action go back in time the words might look different, but theres no change road s afety, modal share, use of public transport, it has been around since the mid s if you stood back and said what the real substantive changes or shifts areapart from environment, there arent any (Sector stakeholder) . Future GPS system stability Reflecting on the disruptive nature of GPS , several interviewees believed there might be greater stability in the investment direction signalled by future GPS. A range of factors was suggested as likely to contribute to this. A foundation laid by GPS that supports future GPS priority setting and building on the momentum established in . Each GPS sets a ten year strategy, and while refreshed every three years, a broadly consistent framework will support system stability and direction. The Trans port Outcomes Framework and definition of the core long term outcomes sought by the transport sector, the GPS is then able to signal the funding levers for achieving the longer term outcomes. Future focused, year strategic planning recently begun by W aka Kotahi. The new IDMF and a broader range of criteria used to inform investment decisions. Longer term policy stability and alignment required on land transport investment responses to climate change and emissions reductions, which is expected to del iver further alignment of GPS with broader policy settings . Increasing fiscal constraint, and within this, greater clarity of fiscal priorities. . Case study: Te Huia train service .. Alignment with GPS Te Huia is a commuter train service connecting Hamilton with Auckland on weekdays and Saturdays. The service had been advocated for some time and was supported by alignment with GPS . The project was led by Waikato Regional Council, which was an approved organisation for receiving NLTP funded via Waka Kotahi and delivered by KiwiRail. Te Huia train service business case was approved by Waka Kotahi in December , six months following the publication of GPS . Te Huia is significant for offering a tr ansitional rail model, signalled in GPS , which could potentially herald a new interregional rail approach. A transitional rail activity class was signalled in GPS to enable some beneficial passenger rail projects to progress, including interreg ional commuter rail services. The unambiguous support given by GPS in this space was a key factor in the business case approval. Other key factors that supported the business case approval were its strategic fit, alignment with transport access and c hoice, and access to social and economic opportunities, https:www.transport.govt.nzarea ofintereststrategy anddirectio ntransport outcomes framework https:www.nzta.govt.nzplanning andinvestmentplanning yearplan APPENDIX TRENDS OBSERVED IN GPS OUTCOMES MONITORING
partly due to current policy settings Unlike in other network infrastructure sectors, Cabinet has broad discretion when setting investment levels for land transport (via the GPS ) and setting prices . Prices are one way to signal to users about how to use the roading network efficiently , and to guide efficient investment decisions. Without these signals, individuals may choose to use networks in ways that end up increasing overall costs for all users (e.g. congestion). The Infrastructure Commission notes that when prices and investment are both set through policy, rather than allowed to adjust as needed to meet demand, it tends to undermine cost recovery from user charges . These issues have played out in the transport sector : indirect and below cost user charges do not fully cover expenditure. This creates an effective subsidy to users , which artificially inflates demand (creating congestion ) as well as expectations for new and improved routes which users may not have actually been willing to pay for . As a result, successive Governments have chosen to top up the NLTF with additional Crown funding for specific investments. which appear inconsistent with Government priorities . The Governments Funding and Financing Framework outlines expectations for economically efficient pricing and charging and more appropriate and effective use of Crown capital . It states that user charges should be linked to benefits obtained and be cost reflective , and that Crown capital should only be drawn on when user charging is not feasible . As outlined above, c urrent policy settings around road pricing and investment are inconsistent with this framework . These issues are exacerbated by inefficiencies in delivery and poor cost control Current policy and institutional settings do not incentivise efficient roading delivery , which exacerbates fiscal sustainability issues . A range of data shows the challenge of controlling costs and maintaining quality: in relation to state highway maintenance: o of activities were delivered to the agreed programme against a target of o maintenance c osts per lane kilometre were almost , against a target of , , almost million was spent on temporary traffic management (excluding local roads) over three years , and approximately one fifth of temporary traffic management sites were found not to be necessary your quarterly investment report ing to Cabinet has found that : o of NZTAs investments are tracking to the original timeframe , o of NZTAs investments are tracking to the original budget , and o onethird of high risk projects were delivered within budget over the last three years . our transport infrastructure compares poorly internationally, being rated th out countries assessed by the World Economic Forums Global Competitiveness report. A contributing factor is that NZTA has a broad range of functions ranging from regulation to project approval and project delivery . The aggregation of these functions has made it difficult to sustain a focus on disciplined asset management and project delivery, resulting in a diseconomy of scope.
please improve (and communicate with industry) the link between the great ETU team and the rule making function. Industry needs to see tangible process in rule making based on the work were doing with the ETU. The ETU could provide greater transparency on the issues it is addressing.
Reallocating some existing road space to active transport infrastructure, like the temporary pop ups for increasing physical distancing for covid . Allowing local governments to directly influence travel behaviour, such as road user charging or congestion charging and use that money for improving low emission and accessible travel options. Incentivising car share schemes and ride sharing that reduce cars on the road and increasing passenger numbers. Lowering speed limits on all urban roads and closing through roads. When a new road or more lanes are proposed, alternatives, like increasing active transport infrastructure and public transport be MUST explored first.
A comment from the upda ted Otago Southland RLTP nicely picks up how the notion of what constitutes value for money needs to take diverse customer needs into account. The shift in emphasis away from asset management to activity management, guided by adoption of the business ca se approach and the ONRC system, has led to a focus on providing transport systems that meet customer needs. Local government in New Zealand has made a lot of progress over the last years or more to understand and link their communities desired outcom es (or levels of service), their willingness to pay, and the trade offs they are willing to make. This outcome and customer benefit story is not always so clear when applied nationally (due to inconsistent use of measures) or for nationally funded activit ies where the value for individual customers or local communities is harder to articulate .
And lastly, given that there is already a lot of good guidance available, it highlights there is an ongoing need for sector training and building capability across the transport sector. Our observation is that sector training and building capability to be effective needs to be shared across the industry in partnership. Literature Summary
At times there appears to be a disconnect between a broad interpretation of value for money based on policy measures such as the Intervention Hierarchy or the focus at a GPS level on outcomes and the Overview
In the Ministry of Transport was asked to develop a comprehensive, mode neutral transport assessment and evaluation system consisting of four main component s. These include: o System performance measures develop measures that can be applied across different transport modes, to show how well strategies and initiatives across the transport system are performing and where intervention is required to deliver on the Governments priorities and desired outcomes for the transport system. This could include measures for areas in which transports impact is currently not comprehensively measured, for example, public health. o System values and parameters build a set of quantified system values and parameters across different transport modes that go across a range of transport outcomes, particularly for those that have not been traditionally sought from transport, such as inclusive access, environmental effects, wellbe ing and liveability. o System and strategic modelling develop a system and strategic modelling suite that can be used to design, estimate and evaluate the impacts of changes to policy settings alongside choices for investment, especially related to revenu e and investment policy o System appraisal methodologies create a consistent, integrated transport system wide approach to assessment, which addresses current deficiencies in cost benefit analysis and expands the range of outcomes that can be considered.
There has been a significant progress in defining VFM to be about achieving outcomes rather than just delivering a series of outputs. And while the VFM concepts are relatively simple there is still a short term engineering solutions focused culture in the transport sector, combined with inconsistent implementation that makes it hard to tell value for money and benefit realisation stories.
While there has clearly been an enormous effort go into developing and implementing processes to identify and deliver VFM, there are a number of areas, particularly in post implementation stages, that could be focused on more: o Assessment of non transport related outcomes, including jobs created and incremental growth in GDP. o Monitoring Benefit realisation o Assessment at a Programme or package level including across staged delivery of multi year programmes o Understanding customer user expectations .
Ashburton Bridge State Highway
Changes to the GDLS were associated with a net reduction in the rate of all driving related offences by notice drivers, ex cept for drink driving offences. This seems to be due to improvements in enforcement of the zero blood alcohol limit on provisional license holders due to them being more easily identified by displaying P plates. Another evaluation of the changes t o the Queensland GDLS by Senserrick et al () found the changes were associated with significant declines in crash related casualties among novice drivers relative to the trends among the overall population of licensed drivers in Queensland. However, Se nserrick et al () found mixed results when comparing trends in crashes for novice drivers who completed the learner and provisional stages after the licensing system was changed versus those who progressed through the system before it was changed. A si gnificantly lower rate of night time crashes was found, but overall they found only a small and statistically insignificant difference in crashes. The authors noted that their ability to determine statistically significant differences in crash rates betwee n these two groups was limited by the data available for those who started to learn to drive after the GDLS was changed, and they suggested that statistically significant differences may be found with better data. Senserrick et al () also found that th e changes to the GDLS were not associated with any increase in offences associated with violating driver licensing conditions, that is, the changes do not appear to have reduced compliance. An earlier evaluation of the changes to the Queensland GDLS by Scott Parker et al () found that the changes significantly increased the amount of driving experience of learner drivers progressing through the licensing stages, and that most learners did not have difficulty obtaining the required amount of superv ised driving practice. Williams et al () review studies of the impacts of the introduction of and subsequent changes to state level GDLS laws in the United States. They find strong evidence that the introduction of GDLS led to a reduction in crashes am ong teenage drivers, and evidence of the effectiveness of restrictions on carrying passengers and night time driving at reducing crashes. In terms of changes to driver licensing aimed at further reducing crashes relative to existing licensing laws in US st ates, Williams et al () conclude that the policies most likely to be beneficial are older learner and intermediate starting ages (noting that in many US states the learner starting age remains at years old), longer minimum learner licence durations, increased requirements for supervised driving hours, and introducing night time driving and passenger restrictions (where these do not already apply). Relationship between driving test attempts and crash risk Boufous et al () examined the relationship between the number of attempts a driver made at the practical driving test and hazard perception test required to obtain a provisional (restricted) licence versus subsequent crash involvements among drivers aged to years old in New South Wales, Aust ralia. Controlling for driver demographic and behavioural factors, and factors related to the drivers learning experience, Boufous et al () found that drivers who failed the practical driving test at least four times were around . times more likely to be involved in a crash compared to drivers who passed the test on their first attempt. Similarly, drivers who failed the hazard perception test at least twice were around . times more likely to be involved in a crash than those who passed the test on their first attempt.
Deliver the right infrastructure and services o The development of the Investment Assessment Framework (IAF) ensures NLTF investment aligns with the GPS and investment is consistent across the country for all modes of travel. Investments are at the best costs o Using frameworks and practices of procurement techniques ensures the proposed land transport activities to achieve value for money. NZTA applies cost efficiency benchmarking to assess the costs and benefits of programmes. Improved returns from maintenance o NZTA works with local governments through Road Efficiency Group (REG). To improve value for money, REG has developed the One Network Road Classification (ONRC) system and is continuously improving the ONRC to make it more fit for purpose. o In addition, REG shares examples of best practice procurement to local governments and helps them to make smart procurement decisions. o NZTA is reviewing its current investment decision making system. Innovation and technology are used to increase the net benefits from land transport investment and use o Ongoing advances in data collection and sharing will ensure a better understanding of customers experiences and needs. o NZTA will continue to invest in digital technologies and use and develop the latest traffic operations technology. Summary e NZTA NLTP Investment Assessment Framework (IAF) IAF website information:
For crashes that occurred while the driver held a restricted licence: o The odds of crash involvement for drivers who remained on a learner licence after four years were . times higher than for drivers who ha d progressed to a full licence within four years (p value .). o The odds of crash involvement for drivers who remained on a restricted licence after four years were . times higher than for drivers who had progressed to a full licence within four year s (pvalue .). These results suggest that four year progression status is predictive of crash involvement in a way that goes beyond what can be explained by the impact of driver gender, age, and region of residence on progression and crash involvemen t. There is strong evidence that drivers who have not progressed to a full licence within around four years of obtaining their learner licence are around twice as likely to be involved in a crash as drivers who have progressed to a full licence within four years, all else being equal. These results raise a question of causality, that is, whether drivers who do not progress to a full licence within four years are involved in more crashes because they do not gain the additional driving skills and experience that come with progressing through the licence stages, or whether they do not progress because they are less competent drivers who are not able to pass the tests required to progress (or a combination of both). Any licensing policy changes intended to impr ove crash rates for non progressing drivers therefore need to be based on a deeper understanding of the reasons for non progression and any relationships between those factors and crash rates. Nevertheless, there are potential safety benefits from encoura ging drivers to progress to a full licence provided that such progression is associated with greater driver competency and consequently with improved crash rates. To illustrate the potential benefits, of the , drivers who obtained a learner licence in aged under years old, remained on a learner licence and had progressed to a full licence by the end of . These drivers had crash rates while on a learner licence of . per , licensed drivers per year for those who remained on a learner licence, and . per , licensed drivers per year for those who had progressed to a full licence. If the crash rate of those who remained on a learner licence was reduced to that of those who progressed to a full licence, a total of around c rashes by learner drivers between and could have been prevented. Progression duration for drivers who do progress: Relationships to driver characteristics It is more difficult to compare progression durations for cohorts of drivers who obtained their learner licence at different points in time, as drivers who obtained their learner licence further in the past and who have progressed by the end of appear to have taken longer to progress on average simply because more time has passed. In addit ion, the changes to the minimum ages in and appear to have impacted the progression duration of many drivers who obtained their learner licence in those years (see Figure above). To simplify the analysis of progression duration we therefore fo cussed on the cohort of drivers who obtained their Class learner licence in and were aged under years old at the time. For the drivers in this cohort who progressed to at least a restricted licence by the end of , we measured how long it took them to progress at each step. Figure shows the distribution of progression durations for this cohort by gender (the labelled values are the lower quartile, median, and upper quartile of progression duration for
Fouryear progression status varies greatly depen ding on the drivers age at the time of obtaining their learner licence. For example, the odds of progressing to a full licence within four years for drivers who obtained their learner licence at years old are lower than for drivers who obtained the ir learner licence at years old. Relationships between the drivers region of residence and four year progression status are less clear but it appears that drivers located in less urbanised regions (e.g. Otago, Southland, Marlborough) are more likely to progress within four years compared to drivers located in more urbanised regions (e.g. Auckland, Wellington). Overall, these findings suggest that progression is determined by the drivers motivation to drive, and to some extent this depends on andor is reflected by the drivers characteristics such as their gender, age at the time of obtaining a learner licence, or the region in which they live. Progression vs non progression: Relationships to crash rates We analysed whether progression status was predi ctive of crash involvement in two ways: . By analysing the relationship between crashes and progression at the end of for drivers who obtained a learner licence between and and were aged under at the time. . Using data on all individual drive rs who obtained a learner licence between and and were aged under at the time, we estimated logistic regression models to test whether four year progression status is predictive of crash involvement while on a learner or a restricted licence. Figure summarises the results of the first analysis. This shows that, at both the learner and restricted stages, drivers who had not progressed to a full licence by the end of were significantly more likely than drivers who had progressed to a full licence to be involved in a crash while they were on a learner or restricted licence. In particular: The crash rate while on a learner licence is . times greater for drivers who remained on a learner licence at the end of and . times greater for drivers who remained on a restricted licence at the end of , compared to drivers who had progressed to a full licence by that time. The crash rate while on a restricted licence is . times greater for drivers who remained on a restricted licence at the end of compared to drivers who had progressed to a full licence by that time. All of these differences are statistically significant in our analysis ( pvalue . in each case) and the calculations of the crash rates account for differences in exposure t o crash risk as measured by the amount of time holding a driver licence. For example, drivers who remained on a learner licence at the end of have held a learner licence for longer (on average) than drivers who had progressed to a full licence by that time.
Maintained roads are safe roads road surface quality determines the gri p a vehicle has with the road and its risk of skidding. Poor qual ty roads increase crash rates, especial ly loss of control crashes where vehicles cross the centre line or run off the ro ad.
Masten et al () found that it was difficult to determine the effectiveness of individual restrictions but found no indication that any restriction was counterproductive for reducing crash rates among and yearold drivers. Curry et al () examined rates of compliance with and enforcement of restrictions on driving with passengers and driving at night that apply to drivers on intermediate licenc es (similar to restricted licences) in New Jersey. This was done by analysing rates of compliance with these restrictions among intermediate drivers who were involved in not at fault crashes, assuming that such drivers are representative of the general pop ulation of drivers on intermediate licences. The extent to which such drivers were also issued with citations (i.e. prosecuted) for breaching their licensing conditions was also analysed. Curry et al () found that . of intermediate drivers trips di d not comply with the passenger restrictions and . did not comply with the night time driving restriction. Furthermore, only . of drivers who were involved in a not atfault crash (and . of drivers involved in an at fault crash) and who were in breach of these restrictions at the time of the crash were issued with a citation, suggesting that enforcement of restrictions in New Jersey is relatively weak. Carpenter and Pressley () examined rates of compliance with night time driving restrictions applied to drivers aged to years old in the United States. Around of such drivers involved in fatal crashes were non compliant, and around of all road crash fatalities in this age group were associated with non compliance. Carpenter and Pres sley () also found correlations between non compliance with night time restrictions and drink driving and lack of use of seatbelts, suggesting that drivers who do not comply with driving restrictions are also more likely to engage in other risky drivin g behaviours. Masten et al () compared rates of conviction for GDL related violations versus self reported compliance with GDLS restrictions among and year old drivers in California. They found that around of learner drivers were convicted of unlicensed or unsupervised driving, and around of provisional (i.e. restricted) drivers were convicted of violating restrictions on driving at night or carrying passengers. Given that self reported noncompliance with such restrictions is generall y much higher, Masten et al () noted that it is possible that enforcement of these restrictions is generally weak. However, they also noted that most studies of self reported non compliance are based on whether drivers have ever violated their driving restrictions, which may exaggerate the prevalence of non compliance in practice. Masten et al () also found that an increase in the minimum learner licence period in California did not lead to an increase in convictions for unsupervised driving, sugge sting that changes to such restrictions may not lead to reduced compliance. Similar results for California were found by Chapman et al (). Effectiveness of targeted training for motorcycle riders Given the challenges and risks associated with riding a motorcycle, some studies have examined the effectiveness of specific training targeted at motorcyclists at reducing motorcycle crashes. While rider training is not necessarily part of the licensing sy stem per se, such studies are of interest given the introduction of CBTA in New Zealand with its emphasis on rider training. A Cochrane review (Kardamanidis, ) of studies of the relationship between rider training and crash, injury, and offence rat es found very limited reliable evidence of the effectiveness of rider training. The authors noted that in many cases this was due to the poor
New roads are safe roads how safe a road is depends to an extent on whether built in safety features have been incorporated into the roads design (straight, divided, good line markings, wide lanes and sealed shoulders, few roadside hazards and intersections). For this reason , there are much lower cr ash rates on the completed new highways around New Zealand .
Riders who progressed via the most common CBTA pathways have been involved in around . to . times as many crashes as riders who passed the traditional practical tests during the same period, but given the limited time since the introduction of CBTA, we cannot be sure that these differences are not due to random variation in crashes (relevant p values range from . to .). Given the relatively short time since CBTA was introduced, there is no clear evidence of a difference in crash rates for riders choosing CBTA versus those choosing practical tests. However, given the higher crash rates observed so far for those progressing via all CBTA pathways, it is recommended that crash rates for riders choosing CBTA are closely monitored in the coming years and further analysis undertaken to better understand the reasons for any differences.
Section summarises the findings regarding driver licensing and crash rates, including demographics, trends, progression, advanced driving certificates, and evaluation of the changes. Section summarises the findings regarding motorcycle licensing and c rash rates, including demographics, trends, progression, CBTA, and evaluation of the changes. A brief literature review is provided in the Appendix. The accompanying Technical Report gives more information about the analysis and findings.
Separate analysis of crashes involving mopeds, which can be ridden on either a Class or Class licence. C rashes involving mopeds were included in the Class analysis if the rider held any Class licence at the time of the crash, otherwise these crashes were included in the Class analysis. It was not feasible to analyse moped crashes separately due to the relatively small number of such crashes and the amount of extra analysis required. Whether licensing breaches lead to further interactions with the justice system. Analysis of crashes involving unlicensed drivers or riders (since by definition they are not included in the dataset used for the analysis). Geographic analysis of crash rates beyond the licence holders region of residence (e.g. comparing crashes in urban versus rural areas). Analysis of other factors aside from basic demographics and licens ingrelated characteristics that could play a role in crashes, for example, weather conditions, traffic conditions, vehicle type, blood alcohol level, etc. GDLS changes in scope The changes to the GDLS that were evaluated are: Changes to the penalties fo r breaching the conditions of learner and restricted licences (e.g. driving without a supervisor when required) introduced in December . Raising the minimum age for obtaining a learner licence from to years old and raising the minimum age for obtaining a restricted licence from . to . years old introduced in August . Strengthening the Class restricted practical test in February and strengthening the Class learner and restricted practical tests in October . Introducing the CBTA options for Class progression in October . Analysis of the impacts of these changes was limited to road safety outcomes measured by crash involvements of individual licence holders and crash rates of groups of licence holders. Other potential i mpacts of the changes, for example on uptake of licences or progression through licence stages, were deemed to be out of scope. GDLS changes and other changes out of scope Other changes to the GDLS and related road safety initiatives that occurred around the same time were excluded from the scope of this analysis: All changes to the GDLS prior to December . Reducing the validity of learner and restricted licences from ten years to five years in . The impacts of this will not be apparent until the f irst cohort of five year licences expire in but the dataset used for this analysis only covers the period to the end of . Introducing a zero blood alcohol limit for drivers and motorcyclists under years old. This change is related to age rather than licence type or stage and therefore determined to be outside of the GDLS.
Specific or local licensing initiatives and programmes, for example those offered by community based organisations to support young people to get a licence. This evaluation was specifically focussed on the system level, rather than on specific initiatives and programmes. Initiatives related to international visitors to New Zealand since this is outside of the GDLS. The introduction of power toweight restrictions for Class lea rner and restricted licence holders in due to data limitations. .. Literature summary There is very robust empirical evidence from New Zealand (Begg Stephenson, ; Frith Perkins, ; Langley et al, ; Reeder et al, , and) and many interna tional studies (e.g. Baker et al, ; Chen et al, ; Fell et al, ; Russell et al, ; Simpson, ; Shope, ; Williams et al ; Williams, ) that crashes are lower under a three stage (learnerrestrictedfull) graduated system compared to a two stage (learnerfull) system. Most of the reduction in crashes from a three stage GDLS appears to come from a reduction in exposu re to crash risk, that is, a reduction in the number of people who drive andor a reduction in the amount and types of driving (e.g. at night or carrying passengers) by teenage drivers (e.g. Fohr et al, ; Poirier et al, ). There is limited evidence that introducing a GDLS changes driver behaviour directly. In terms of specific features of a GDLS and impacts on road safety: There is good evidence that restrictions on night time driving and carrying passengers reduce crashes among drivers with restric ted licences, although compliance with, and enforcement of, these restrictions is generally imperfect (Begg et al, ; Curry et al, ; Fell, Todd Voas, ; Karaca Mandic Ridgeway, ; McKnight Peck, ; Williams, ). Advanced driver tra ining combined with time discounts offered at the restricted licence stage (in New Zealand) appear to be ineffective at reducing crash rates, and there is some evidence that time discounts work to offset safety related benefits of driver training (Begg B rookland, ). There is some evidence that longer minimum learner licence durations (e.g. months compared to months or months) and stricter requirements for progressing from a learner to a restricted licence (e.g. minimum supervised driving hours) are associated with lower crash rates at the restricted stage (Scully et al, ; VicRoads, ; Williams, ). A brief review of the literature on the overall relationship between driver licensing and road safety (both in New Zealand and internationa lly) is provided in the Appendix. .. Structure of this report The remainder of this report is structured as follows: Section gives a brief overview of the data, methodology, and limitations of the analysis.
The addition of major non road capital expenditure into the National Land Transport Programme has diluted the focus on value for money and transparency, led to multiple funding sources and decision making processes for land transport , and ongoing uncertainty about transport nvestments. It makes it more difficult to follow how much road users are paying and what services are being delivered.
The focus on road safety in GPS risks becoming misleading n some regards, omitting discussion of some major road safety determinants (road infrastructure, and surface maintenance) while presenting other investments as road safety investment s (for example subsidies to fund the national rail network ), without due context or caveat.
The learner licence model estimates that the odds of crash involvement on a learner licence for riders who obtained their licence after the test was strengthened are very similar to the odds of crash involvement for ride rs who obtained their learner licence earlier (the estimated odds ratio is ., p value .). The restricted licence model estimates that the odds of crash involvement on a restricted licence for riders who obtained their licence after the test was stren gthened are also very similar to the odds for riders who obtained their restricted licence earlier (the estimated odds ratio is ., p value .). Estimated effects on crash rates outcomes of rebalancing penalties for licensing breaches (December ) As with Class , this change affected all riders with learner and restricted licences from December onwards. To test the effects of this change we used similar analysis to that described in section .. above. As with Class , we found no evidence t hat changes to penalties caused any change in crash rates that cannot be explained by general safety trends and changes in rider characteristics around the same time. .. Comparison of crash rates for restricted and fully licensed riders As with Class (see section . above), we modelled crash rates for riders with restricted and full licences to investigate whether the crash rate for fully licensed riders is different from that for restricted riders in ways that cannot be explained by d ifferences in the amount of time since obtaining a learner licence and other observed characteristics such as age, gender, and region of residence. We estimated a logistic regression model of crash involvements for riders in the licensing dataset who obtai ned a learner licence and who had progressed to at least a restricted licence by the end of . There are around , such riders in the dataset. The model (see section . of the Technical Report ) predicts crash involvement of individual riders on re stricted and full licences as a function of the amount of time they have held a restricted or full licence, their age, gender, region of residence, and amount of time since obtaining a learner licence, as well as year indicators to pick up general external safety trends. The key result from this model is that, after controlling for differences in the above rider characteristics, the odds of crash involvement are higher for riders with full licences compared to riders with restricted licences, and this d ifference is statistically significant ( pvalue .). As with our other findings of higher crash rates for fully licensed riders, this may be due to various factors including that riders with full licences may be more active motorcyclists than those wi th restricted licences. Thus, while the greater crash rate for fully licensed riders may be explained by differences in their riding activity (noting we have no way to test that assumption), there is still a question of whether the Class GDLS adequately prepares fully licensed riders. .. Is the night time riding restriction for restricted riders effective Riders with restricted licences are effectively prohibited from riding between the hours of pm and am (unlike Class , supervision on a motorcycle is not possible). If the night riding restriction is fully effective, we expect to see no crashes for restricted riders between pm and am. To test this, we compared the rate of crash involvements during the day
The per rider crash rate for learner riders aged was almost times higher in the period from to compared to the period from to (p value .). The crash rate for all learner riders aged to (combined) was more than twice as high in the period from to compared to the period from to (pvalue . ). Among riders aged to (combined) with learner licences in Auckland, the per rider and per capita crash rates were around times higher in the period from to compared to the period from to (p value .). Given that the changes in per rider and per capita involvement rates for this group are similar, this suggests that the increase in crash involvements is due to an increase in risk. Implications for rider licensing As with Class , the above analysis demonstrates that there ar e relatively large variations in crash rates across riders of different genders, ages, and regions of residence, and at different licence stages, but again there are practical constraints on how finely the GDLS can be adjusted to address these issues. Howe ver, for motorcycle riders there are some areas where it would be useful to investigate if licensing changes could lead to improved safety outcomes: Fully licensed riders appear to have relatively high crash rates compared to riders with learner and restri cted licences. o This may be due to various factors including more active involvement of fully licensed riders in motorcycle riding than riders at other licence stages (noting that this difference is not captured in the data used for this analysis), return ed riders, or the fact that fully licensed riders can ride larger and more powerful motorcycles. o It would be useful to investigate whether the licensing rules for obtaining a full Class licence could be changed to better preparing this group for the r isks they will face as fully licensed riders, which could lead to improved safety outcomes. Riders with learner licences aged under also appear to have relatively high crash rates. There is a question of whether the licensing rules for obtaining a learn er Class licence could be changed to help offset this. There is evidence of relatively large increases over time in per rider crash rates among learner riders aged and under. This also raises a question of whether the criteria for obtaining a learner licence could be changed to help mitigate this trend. .. Estimated safety impacts of the to GDLS changes Context for analysis of the changes As described in section .. of the Technical Report , changes in rider demographics occurred around the same time as the changes to the GDLS: The median age of riders receiving learner licences increased gradually from around years old in to around years old in , then declined slightly to around years old by . The median age of riders r eceiving restricted licences followed
There is some evidence that crash rates for fully licensed drivers with advanced certificates who did not obtain a time discount at the restricted stage are lower than for drivers without advanced certificates. However, since drivers choose whether to obtain an advanced certificate and whether to get a time discount, it is not clear if this is caused by the advanced driver training itself or whether it reflects underlying characteristics of such drivers (or both). Another recent study (Begg Brookland, ) found that advanced driver training combined with faster progression through the GDLS appears to be ineffective at reducing crashes. It is possible that time discounts offset any safety related benefits of ad vanced driver training. Progression through the licence stages There appears to be no relationship between the length of time taken to progress to a full licence and crashes, for drivers who did progress by the end of For drivers in the dataset who pr ogressed to a full licence by the end of , we found no evidence that the amount of time taken to progress (i.e. speed of progression) had an impact on crash rates. Crash rates are high for drivers who do not progress within four years Across all drivers who obtained a learner licence between and (and controlling for differences in driver age, gender, region of residence, year of obtaining a learner licence, and amount of time since obtaining a licence), the odds of crash involvement while on a learner licence were . times higher for drivers who still remained on a learner licence after four years and . times higher for drivers who had progressed to a restricted licence but had not yet obtained a full licence after four years, compare d to crashes at the learner stage for drivers who had progressed to a full licence within four years (p values .). Similarly, the odds of crash involvement while on a restricted licence were . times higher for drivers who remained on a restricted l icence after four years, compared to crashes while on a restricted licence for drivers who had progressed to a full licence within four years (p value .). This suggests that there may be safety benefits of encouraging non progressing drivers to gain driving skills and to progress through the licence stages, provided this is done in a way that raises the competence of these drivers rather than simply increasing progression per se. There is some international evidence that drivers who have difficulty p rogressing through the licence stages are more likely to be involved in crashes (Boufous et al, ).Further analysis of the reasons for non progression and the relationship between those factors and crash rates would be useful to determine how road safet y outcomes could be improved for this cohort of drivers.
Warkworth to Whangrei State Highway , including: o Te Hana to Brynderwyns o Warkworth to Wellsford o Whangarei to Brynderwyns Auckland Northwest Rapid Transit Auckland rail third and fourth rail mains Avondale to Onehunga rail link Level crossing removal programme Golden triangle electrification Cambridge to Piarere State Highway Tauranga to Tauriko State Highway Wellington CBD to Airport State Highway Second Mt. Victoria Tunnel and Upgrades to Basin ReserveArras Tunnel Wellington CBD to Island Bay Mass Rapid Transit Napier to Hastings State Highway Nelson (Rocks Road) shared path State Highway Nelson Hope Bypass State Highway Christchurch Northern Link State Highway
We are opposed to motorists subsidising the national rail network, as the opportunity cost is direct road safety investment. There also has not been a clear case prese nted that this investment delivers value for money. This investment should be subject to a full assessment through the budget process.
We support investments aimed at mode shift where these provide demonstrable transport benefits , made through a trans parent and balanced assessment process that chooses the best mode for the task.
